HANDBOUND
AT  THE


UNIVERSITY  OF


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2008  with  funding  from

Microsoft  Corporation


http://www.archive.org/details/dictionaryofgreeOOsmituoft


^IJl^


DICTIONARY


GREEK    AND    ROMAN    ANTIQUITIES,


s


LOXDON

PRIXTED     IIY    SrOTTISWOODE     AND    CO.

NEYVSTUEET    SQUARE


HC/D
5


DICTIONARY


n


GEEEK  AND  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES.

EDITED      BY

WILLIAM    SMITH,     LL.D.

E0ITOE    OK    THE    "DICTIONARY    OF    GREEK     AND     ROMAN    BIOGRAPHY    AND    MYTHOLOGY."


ILLUSTRATED    BY    NUMEROUS    ENGRAVINGS    ON    WOOD.


^^contf  (iKrttfon,

IMPBO\'ED     AND     ENIARGED.


bK


BOSTON:
LITTLE,     BROWN,     AND     COMPANY.


M.DCCC.LXY.


LIST    OF    WRITERS.


NASrES.

Ai.EXANDER  Allen,  Ph.  D.
William  Fishburn  Donkin,  M.  A.

Fellow  of  University  College,  Oxford.
William  Alexander  Greenhill,  M.  D.

Trinity  College,  Oxford.
Benjajviin  Jowett,  M.A.

Fellow  of  Baliol  College,  Oxford.
Charles  Rann  Kennedy,  M.  A.

Late  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Thomas  Hewitt  Key,  M.  A.

Professor  of  Comparative  Grammar  in  University  Col-
lege, London.

Henry  George  Liddell,  M.A.

Head  Master  of  Westminster  School.
George  Long,  M.A.

Late  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Charles  Peter  Mason,  B.  A.

Fellow  of  University  College,  London.
John  Smith  Mansfield,  M.A.

Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
William  Ramsay,  M.  A.

Professor  of  Humanity  in  the  University  of  Glasgow
Anthony  Rich,  Jun.  B.  A.

Late  of  Caius  College,  Cambridge.
Leonhard  Schmitz,  Ph.  D.,  F.  R.  S.  E.

Rector  of  the  High  School  of  Edinburgh.
Philip  Smith,  B.A.

Of  the  University  of  London.
Robert  Whiston,  M  A.

Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge
Ralph  Nicholson  Wornum,  Esq.
James  Yates,  M.  A.,  F.  R.  S.

The  Articles  which  have  no  initials  attached  to  them  are  written  by  the  Editor.


initials.

A.  A.

W.  F.  D.

W.  A.  G.

B.  J.

C.  R.  K.

T.  H.  K.

H.  G.  L.

G.L.

C.  P.  M.

J.  S.  M.

W.  R.

A.R.

L.  S.

P.  S.

R.W.

R.  N.  W.

J.Y.

Vi\


PREFACE


THE    SECOND    EDITION,


It  was  inevitable  that  many  defects  should  be  found  in  the  first  Edition  of  a
v/ork  like  the  Dictionary  of  Greek  and  Roman  Antiquities,  embracing  a  great
variety  of  subjects,  written  by  different  persons,  and  published  periodically.
Of  these  no  one  was  more  fully  aware  than  the  Editor;  and  accordingly,
when  the  sale  of  a  very  large  impression  rendered  tlie  preparation  of  a  second
Edition  necessary,  he  resolved  to  spare  no  pains  and  exertions  to  render  the
work  still  more  worthy  of  the  approbation  with  which  it  had  been  already
received.  The  following  will  be  found  to  be  the  principal  improvements  in
the  present  Edition.

1.  Many  of  the  most  important  articles  are  rewritten.  This  is  especially
tlie  case  in  the  earlier  portion  of  the  work,  since  it  was  originally  intended  to
complete  it  in  a  much  smaller  compass  than  was  afterwards  found  advisable ;
and  accordingly  many  subjects  in  the  earlier  letters  of  the  alphabet  were  treated
in  the  first  Edition  with  a  brevity  which  prevented  the  writers  from  giving  a
full  and  satisfactory  explanation  of  several  important  points.

2.  Many  subjects  which  were  entirely  omitted  in  the  first  Edition  are  here
supplied.  Any  one  who  has  had  experience  in  the  arrangement  of  a  work  in
al})habetical  order  will  not  be  surprised  that  there  should  be  many  omissions
in  the  first  Edition  of  such  a  work.  Some  idea  may  be  formed  of  the  exten-
sive additions  made  to  the  work,  when  it  is  stated  that,  including  the  articles
which  have  been  rewritten,  the  present  Edition  contains  upwards  of  three
hundred  pages  of  entirely  new  matter.

3.  Those  articles  which  have  not  been  rewritten  have  been  carefully  revised,
and  in  many  of  them  errors  have  been  corrected,  extraneous  matter  omitted,
and  much  additional  information  given.  In  this  part  of  his  labours  the  Editor
has  received  the  most  valuable  assistance  from  Mr.  George  Long,  Dr.  Schmitz,
and  Mr.  Philip  Smith.

4.  Additional  illustrations  have  been  given  by  means  of  new  woodcuts,
wherever  the  subjects  appeared  to  require  them.     Many  of  these  new  wood-


Vlll  PREFACE   TO   THE    SECOND   EDITION.

cuts  are  of  considerable  importance,  as  the  reader  may  see  by  referring  to
the  articles  Amphitheatrum,  Aquaeductus^  Columna,  Templum,  and  many
others.

5.  An  alteration  has  been  made  in  the  arrangement  of  the  work,  which  will
tend  to  facilitate  its  use.  In  the  former  Edition  there  was  some  inconsistency
in  the  use  of  Greek,  Latin,  and  English  words  for  the  names  of  articles.  In
the  present  Edition  the  Latin  language  has  been  always  employed  for  the
heading  of  the  articles,  except  in  those  subjects  connected  with  Greek  Anti-
quities where  no  corresponding  words  existed  in  Latin;  as,  for  instance,  in  legal
terms,  and  in  the  names  of  magistrates.  In  these  cases  the  Greek  language  has
been  necessarily  employed  ;  but,  in  compliance  with  a  wish  expressed  by  many
persons,  the  Greek  words  are  given  in  Latin  letters,  with  the  Greek  characters
subjoined.

In  conclusion,  the  Editor  has  to  express  his  regret  that  he  is  unable  in  any
way  to  make  the  additions  and  alterations  in  the  present  Edition  available  to
the  purchasers  of  the  former  one.  He  had  at  one  time  thought  of  publishing
them  in  a  separate  form ;  but  he  found,  as  the  work  proceeded,  that  this  was  quite
impossible,  on  account  of  their  great  number  and  length.  In  fact,  the  present
Edition  must  be  regarded,  to  a  considerable  extent,  as  a  new  work.

WILLIAM  SMITH.

London,  August  1  at,  1848.


IX


PREFACE


THE    FIRST    EDITION,


The  study  of  Greek  and  Roman  Antiquities  has,  in  common  with  all  other
philological  studies,  made  great  progress  in  Europe  within  the  last  fifty  years.
The  earlier  writers  on  the  subject,  whose  works  are  contained  in  the  collections
of  Gronovius  and  Graevius,  display  little  historical  criticism,  and  give  no  com
prehensive  view  or  living  idea  of  the  public  and  private  life  of  the  ancients.
They  were  contented,  for  the  most  part,  with  merely  collecting  facts,  and  arrang-
ing them  in  some  systematic  form,  and  seemed  not  to  have  felt  the  want  of  any
thing  more :  they  wTote  about  antiquity  as  if  the  people  had  never  existed  j
they  did  not  attempt  to  realise  to  their  own  minds,  or  to  represent  to  those  of
others,  the  living  spirit  of  Greek  and  Roman  civilisation.  But  by  the  labours
of  modern  scholars  life  has  been  breathed  into  the  study :  men  are  no  longer
satisfied  with  isolated  facts  on  separate  departments  of  the  subject,  but  endea-
vour to  form  some  conception  of  antiquity  as  an  organic  whole,  and  to  trace
the  relation  of  one  part  to  another.

There  is  scarcely  a  single  subject  included  under  the  general  name  of  Greek
and  Roman  Antiquities,  which  has  not  received  elucidation  from  the  writings
of  the  modern  scholars  of  Germany.  The  history  and  political  relations  of  the
nations  of  antiquity  have  been  placed  in  an  entirely  different  light  since  the
publication  of  Niebuhr's  Roman  History,  which  gave  a  new  impulse  to  the
study,  and  has  been  succeeded  by  the  works  of  Bockh,  K.  O.  Miiller,  Wachs-
muth,  K.  F.  Hermann,  and  other  distinguished  scholars.  The  study  of  the
Roman  law,  which  has  been  unaccountably  neglected  in  this  country,  has  been
prosecuted  with  extraordinary  success  by  the  great  jurists  of  Germany,  among
whom  Savigny  stands  preeminent,  and  claims  our  profoundest  admiration.
The  subject  of  Attic  law,  though  in  a  scientific  point  of  view  one  of  much
less  interest  and  importance  than  the  Roman  law,  but  without  a  competent
knowledge  of  which  it  is  impossible  to  understand  the  Greek  orators,  has  also
received  much  elucidation  from  the  writings  of  Meier,  Schomann,  Bunsen,
l^latner,  Hudtwalcker,  and  others.  Nor  has  the  private  life  of  the  ancients
been  neglected.      The  discovery  of  Herculaneum  and  Pompeii  has  supplied

a


X  PREFACE   TO   THE   FIRST   EDITION.

U3  with  important  information  on  the  subject,  which  has  also  been  dis-
cussed with  ability  by  several  modern  writers,  among  whom  W.  A.  Becker,  of
Leipzig,  deserves  to  be  particularly  mentioned.  The  study  of  ancient  art  like-
wise, to  which  our  scholars  have  paid  little  attention,  has  been  diligently  cul-
tivated in  Germany  from  the  time  of  Winckelmann  and  Lessing,  who  founded
the  modern  school  of  criticism  in  art,  to  which  we  are  indebted  for  so  many
valuable  works.

While,  however,  so  much  has  been  done  in  every  department  of  the  subject,
no  attempt  has  hitherto  been  made,  either  in  Germany  or  in  this  country,  to
make  the  results  of  modern  researches  available  for  the  purposes  of  instruction,
by  giving  them  in  a  single  work,  adapted  for  the  use  of  students.  At  present,
correct  information  on  many  matters  of  antiquity  can  only  be  obtained  by
consulting  a  large  number  of  costly  works,  which  few  students  can  have  access
to.  It  was  therefore  thought  that  a  work  on  Greek  and  Roman  Antiquities,
which  should  be  founded  on  a  careful  examination  of  the  original  sources,  with
such  aids  as  could  be  derived  from  the  best  modern  writers,  and  which  should
bring  up  the  subject,  so  to  speak,  to  the  present  state  of  philological  learning,
would  form  a  useful  acquisition  to  all  persons  engaged  in  the  study  of  antiquity.

It  was  supposed  that  this  work  might  fall  into  the  hands  of  two  different  classes
of  readers,  and  it  was  therefore  considered  proper  to  provide  for  the  probable
wants  of  each,  as  far  as  was  possible.  It  has  been  intended  not  only  for  schools,
but  also  for  the  use  of  students  at  universities,  and  of  other  persons,  who  may
wish  to  obtain  more  extensive  information  on  the  subject  than  an  elementary
work  can  supply.  Accordingly  numerous  references  have  been  given,  not  only
to  the  classical  authors,  but  also  to  the  best  modern  writers,  which  will  point
out  the  sources  of  information  on  each  subject,  and  enable  the  reader  to  extend
his  inquiries  further  if  he  wishes.  At  the  same  time  it  must  be  observed,
that  it  has  been  impossible  to  give  at  the  end  of  each  article  the  whole  of  the
literature  which  belongs  to  it.  Such  a  list  of  works  as  a  full  account  of
the  literature  would  require,  would  have  swelled  the  work  much  beyond  the
limits  of  a  single  volume,  and  it  has  therefore  only  been  possible  to  refer  to  the
principal  modern  authorities.  This  has  been  more  particularly  the  case  with
such  articles  as  treat  of  the  Roman  constitution  and  law,  on  which  the  modern
writers  are  almost  innumerable.

A  work  like  the  present  might  have  been  arranged  either  in  a  systematic  or
an  alphabetical  form.  Each  plan  has  its  advantages  and  disadvantages,  but  many
reasons  induced  the  Editor  to  adopt  the  latter.  Besides  the  obvious  advantage
of  an  alphabetical  arrangement  in  a  work  of  reference  like  the  present,  it
enabled  the  Editor  to  avail  himself  of  the  assistance  of  several  scholars  who  had
made  certain  departments  of  antiquity  their  particular  study.  It  is  quite  im-
possible that  a  work  which  comprehends  all  the  subjects  included  under  Greek
and  Roman  Antiquities  can  be  written  satisfactorily  by  any  one  individual.  As
it  was  therefore  absolutely  necessary  to  divide  the  labour,  no  other  arrangement
offered  so  many  facilities  for  the  purpose  as  that  which  has  been  adopted ;  in
addition  to  which,  the  form  of  a  Dictionary  has  the  additional  advantage  of
enabling  the  writer  to  give  a  complete  account  of  a  subject  under  one  head,
which  cannot  so  well  be  done  in  a  systematic  work.  An  example  will  illustrate
wJiat  is  meant,    A  history  of  the  patrician  and  plebeian  orders  at  Rome  can


PREFACE   TO   THE   FIRST  EDITION.  xi

only  be  gained  from  a  systematic  work  by  putting  together  the  statements  con-
tained in  many  different  parts  of  the  work,  while,  in  a  Dictionary,  a  connected
view  of  their  history  is  given  from  the  earliest  to  the  latest  times  under  the
respective  words.     The  same  remark  will  apply  to  numerous  other  subjects.

Some  subjects  have  been  included  in  the  present  work  which  have  not  usually
been  treated  of  in  works  on  Greek  and  Roman  Antiquities.  These  subjects
have  been  inserted  on  account  of  the  important  influence  which  they  exercised
upon  the  public  and  private  life  of  the  ancients.  Thus,  considerable  space  has
been  given  to  the  articles  on  Painting  and  Statuary,  and  also  to  those  on  the
different  departments  of  the  Drama.  There  may  seem  to  be  some  inconsistency
and  apparent  capriciousness  in  the  admission  and  rejection  of  subjects,  but  it  is
very  difficult  to  determine  at  what  point  to  stop  in  a  work  of  this  kind.  A
Dictionary  of  Greek  and  Roman  Antiquities,  if  understood  in  its  most  extensive
signification,  would  comprehend  an  account  of  every  thing  relating  to  antiquity.
In  its  narrower  sense,  however,  the  term  is  confined  to  an  account  of  the  public
and  private  life  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  and  it  is  convenient  to  adhere  to
this  signification  of  the  word,  however  arbitrary  it  may  be.  For  this  reason
several  articles  have  been  inserted  in  the  work  which  some  persons  may  regard
as  out  of  place,  and  others  have  been  omitted  which  have  sometimes  been  im-
properly included  in  writings  on  Greek  and  Roman  Antiquities.  Neither  the
names  of  persons  and  divinities,  nor  those  of  places,  have  been  inserted  in  the
present  work,  as  the  former  will  be  treated  of  in  the  "  Dictionary  of  Greek  and
Roman  Biography  and  Mythology,"  and  the  latter  in  the  "  Dictionary  of  Greek
and  Roman  Geography."

The  subjects  of  the  woodcuts  have  been  chosen  by  the  writers  of  the  articles
which  they  illustrate,  and  the  drawings  have  been  made  under  their  superinten-
dence. *  Many  of  these  have  been  taken  from  originals  in  the  British  Museum,
and  others  from  the  different  works  which  contain  representations  of  works  of
ancient  art,  as  the  Museo  Borbonico,  Museo  Capitolino,  Millin's  Peintures  de
Vases  Antiques,  Tischbein's  and  D'Hancarville's  engravings  from  Sir  William
Hamilton's  Vases,  and  other  similar  works.  Hitherto  little  use  has  been  made  in
this  country  of  existing  works  of  art,  for  the  purpose  of  illustrating  antiquity.  In
many  cases,  however,  the  representation  of  an  object  gives  a  far  better  idea  of
the  purposes  for  which  it  was  intended,  and  the  way  in  which  it  was  used,  than
any  explanation  in  words  only  can  convey.  Besides  which,  some  acquaintance
with  the  remains  of  ancient  art  is  almost  essential  to  a  proper  perception  of  the
spirit  of  antiquity,  and  would  tend  to  refine  and  elevate  the  taste,  and  lead  to  a
just  appreciation  of  works  of  art  in  general.

Mr.  George  Long,  who  has  contributed  to  this  work  the  articles  relating  to
Roman  Law,  has  sent  the  Editor  the  following  remarks,  which  he  wishes  to
make  respecting  the  articles  he  has  written,  and  which  are  accordingly  subjoined
in  his  own  words.

"  The  writer  of  the  articles  marked  with  the  letters  G.  L.  considers  some
"  apology  necessary  in  respect  of  what  he  has  contributed  to  this  work.  He  has
"  never  had  the  advantage  of  attending  a  course  of  lectures  on  Roman  Law,  and
"  he  has  written  these  articles  in  the  midst  of  numerous  engagements,  which  left

*   The  woodcuts  have  been  executed  by  Mr,  John  Jackson.


Xll  rUEFACE    TO   THE    FIRST   EDITION.

*'  little  time  for  other  labour.  Tlie  want  of  proper  materials  also  was  often  felt,
"  and  it  would  have  been  sufficient  to  prevent  the  writer  from  venturing  on
"  such  an  undertaking,  if  he  had  not  been  able  to  avail  himself  of  the  library
"  of  his  friend,  Mr.  William  Wright,  of  Lincoln's  Inn.  These  circumstances
**  will,  perhaps,  be  some  excuse  for  the  errors  and  imperfections  which  will  be
*' apparent  enough  to  those  who  are  competent  judges.  It  is  only  those  who
"  have  formed  an  adequate  conception  of  the  extent  and  variety  of  the  matter
"  of  law  in  general,  and  of  the  Roman  Law  in  particular,  who  can  estimate  the
"  difficulty  of  writing  on  such  a  subject  in  England,  and  they  will  allow  to  him
"  who  has  attempted  it  a  just  measure  of  indulgence.  The  writer  claims  such
*'  indulgence  from  those  living  writers  of  whose  labours  he  has  availed  himself,
**  if  any  of  these  articles  should  ever  fall  in  their  way.  It  will  be  apparent
"  that  these  articles  have  been  written  mainly  with  the  view  of  illustrating
**  the  classical  writers  ;  and  that  a  consideration  of  the  persons  for  whose  use
"  they  are  intended,  and  the  present  state  of  knowledge  of  the  Roman  Law  in
*'  this  country,  have  been  sufficient  reasons  for  the  omission  of  many  important
"  matters  which  would  have  been  useless  to  most  readers  and  sometimes  unin-
"  telligible.

"  Though  few  modern  writers  have  been  used,  compared  with  the  whole
"  number  who  might  have  been  used,  they  are  not  absolutely  few,  and  many  of
"  them  to  Englishmen  are  new.  Many  of  them  also  are  the  best,  and  among
"  the  best,  of  the  kind.  The  difficulty  of  writing  these  articles  was  increased  by
"  the  want  of  books  in  the  English  language ;  for,  though  we  have  many  writers
"  on  various  departments  of  the  Roman  Law,  of  whom  two  or  three  have  been
"  referred  to,  they  have  been  seldom  used,  and  with  very  little  profit."

It  would  be  improper  to  close  these  remarks  without  stating  the  obligations
this  work  is  under  to  Mr.  Long.  It  was  chiefly  through  his  advice  and  en-
couragement that  the  Editor  was  induced  to  undertake  it,  and  during  its
progress  he  has  always  been  ready  to  give  his  counsel  whenever  it  was
needed.  It  is  therefore  as  much  a  matter  of  duty  as  it  is  of  pleasure,  to  make
this  public  acknowledgment  to  him.

WILLIAM   SMITH.
London,  April  2nd,  1842.


DICTIONiiRY


GREEK    AND   ROMAN   ANTIQUITIES,


ABACUS.

AB'ACUS  (&Sa^)  denoted  primarily  a  square
tablet  of  any  material  ;  and  was  hence  applied  in
the  following  significations  :  —

I.  In  Architecture  it  denoted  the  flat  square
Btone,  which  constituted  the  highest  member  of  a
column,  being  placed  immediately  under  the  archi-
trave. The  annexed  figure  is  drawn  from  that  in
the  British  Museum,  which  was  taken  from  the
Parthenon  at  Athens,  and  is  a  perfect  specimen  of
the  capital  of  a  Doric  column.


In  the  more  ornamented  orders  of  architecture,
Buch  as  the  Corinthian,  the  sides  of  the  abacus
were  cun-ed  inwards,  and  a  rose  or  some  other
decoration  was  frequently  placed  in  the  middle  of
each  side  ;  l)ut  the  name  Abacus  was  given  to  the
stone  thus  diversiiied  and  enriched,  as  well  as  in
its  original  form.     (Vitruv.  iii.  3,  iv.  1.  §  7.)

2.  A  painted  panel,  coffer,  or  square  compart-
ment in  the  wall  or  ceiling  of  a  chamber.  (Plin.
H.  N.  xxxiii.  56,  xxxv.  1,  13  ;  Vitruv.  vii.  3.
§  10  ;  Letronne,  Peintur.  mur.  p.  476.)

3.  A  wooden  tray,  used  for  a  variety  of  pur-
poses in  domestic  economy.  It  was,  for  instance,
the  name  given  to  the  mactra  {/xaKrpa),  or  tray  for
kneading  dough.  (Cratin.  Frag.  p.  27,  ed.  Runkel ;
Pollux,  vi.  90,  X.  105  ;  Cato,  B.  R.  10  ;  Hesych.
«.  V.  ixoLKTpa  ;  Schol.  in  Theocr.  iv.  61.)

4.  A  board,  covered  with  sand  or  dust,  used  by
mathematicians  for  drawing  diagrams  (Eustath.  in
Od.  i.  107),  and  by  arithmeticians  for  the  purposes
of  calculation.  (Pers.  xSa^.  i.  131.)  For  the  latter
purpose  perpendicular  lines  or  channels  seem  to
have  been  drawn  in  the  sand  upon  the  board  ;  but
sometimes  the  board  had  pei"pendicular  wooden  di-
visions, the  space  on  the  right  hand  being  intended
for  units,  the  next  space  for  tens,  the  next  for
hundreds,  and  so  on.      Thus  was  constructed  the


ABACUS.
&§dKiov,  i<p*  ov  rprjcpiCovcriv,  "  the  abacus  on  which
they  calculate,"  i.  e.  reckon  by  the  use  of  stones
(vf/^(/)ot,  calculi).  (Comp.  Pol.  v.  26.)  The  figure
following  represents  the  probable  form  and  appear-
ance of  such  an  abacus.  The  reader  will  observe,
that  stone  after  stone  might  be  put  into  the  right-
hand  partition  until  they  amounted  to  10,  when  it
Avould  be  necessary  to  take  them  all  out  as  repre-
sented in  the  figure,  and  instead  of  them  to  put
one  stone  into  the  next  partition.  The  stones  in
this  division  might  in  like  manner  amount  to  10,
thus  representing  10  x  10  =  100,  when  it  would  be
necessary  to  take  out  the  10,  and  instead  of  them
to  put  one  stone  into  the  third  partition,  and  so  on.
On  this  principle  the  stones  in  the  abacus,  as  de-
lineated in  the  figiu-e,  would  be  equivalent  to
3o9,310.


5.  A  board  adapted  for  playing  with  dice  or
counters,  resembling  a  draught-board  or  back-
gammon-board. (Caryst.  ap.  Ath.  x.  p.  43.%  d  ;
Suet.  Ner.  22  ;  Macrob.  Sat  I  5.)  The  Greeks  had
a  tradition  ascribing  this  contrivance  to  Palamedes,
hence  they  called  it  "  the  abacus  of  Palamedes."
(Tb  IlaXafj.'fjdeiov  a€dKiou^  Eustath.  in  Od.  i.  107.)
[Latrunculi.]

6,  A  table  or  sideboard,  chiefly  used  for  the
display  (e-xponere)  of  gold  and  silver  cups.  The
tops  of  such  tables  were  sometimes  made  of  silver,
but  more  usually  of  marble,  and  appear  in  some
cases  to  have  had  numerous  cells  or  partitions  be-
neath, in  which  the  plate  was  likewise  placed.  The
use  of  abaci  was  first  introduced  at  Rome  from  Asia
Minor  after  the  victories  of  Cn.  Manlius  Vulso,
B.  c.  187,  and  their  introduction  was  regarded  as
one  of  the  marks  of  the  growing  luxury  of  tha  age.


2


ABORTIO.


(Cic.  Verr.  iv.  16,  Ttisc.  v.  21  ;  Li  v.  xxxix.  6  ;
Plin.  H.JV.  xxxvii.  6  ;  Petron.  73  ;  Sid.  Apoll.  xvii.
7,  8.)  These  abaci  are  sometimes  called  mensae
Delphicae.  (Cic.  Verr.  iv.  59  ;  Mart.  xii.  67  ;
Becker,  Gallus,  vol.  i.  p.  1 40.)

7.  A  part  of  the  theatre  on  or  near  the  stage.

8.  The  diminutive  Abaculus  (agaKiV/cos)  de-
noted a  tile  of  marble,  glass,  or  any  other  substance
used  for  making  ornamental  pavements.  They  were
of  various  colours.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvi.  67  ;  Mos-
chion,  ap.  AtL  v.  207,  d.)  [J.  Y.J

ABACTUS  VENTER.     [Abortio.]
ABALIENA'TIO.     [Mancipium.]
ABDICA'TIO.     [Magistratus.]
ABOLLA,   the  Latin  form   of  afjL§6\\a,  i.  e.
ava€oA-f},  a  loose  woollen  cloak.     Nonius  quotes  a
passage  of  Varro  to  show  that  it  was  a  garment
worn  by  soldiers   (vestis  militaris),  and  thus  op-
posed to  the  toga.     Its  form   and   the   mode   of
wearing  it  are  seen  in  the  figures  annexed,  taken
from  the  bas-reliefs  on  the  triumphal  arch  of  Sep-
timius  Severus  at  Rome.


It  was,  however,  not  confined  to  military  occa-
sions, but  was  also  worn  in  the  city.  (Suet.  Cal.
35.)  It  was  especially  used  by  the  Stoic  philoso-
phers at  Rome  as  the  pallium  philosophicum,  just  as
the  Greek  philosophers  were  accustomed  to  dis-
tinguish themselves  by  a  particular  dress.  (Juv.
iv.  75;  Mart.  iv.  53,  viii.  48.)  Hence  the  expres-
sion of  Juvenal  (iv.  75)  facinus  majoris  abollue
merely  signifies,  "  a  crime  committed  by  a  very
deep  philosopher."  (Remrich,  ad  Juv.  l.c,  Becker,
Cfullus,  vol.  ii.  p.  99.)

ABO'RTIO.  This  word  and  the  cognate  word
abortivus,  abortus^  were  applied  to  a  child  pre-
maturely bom,  whence  it  appears  that  they  were
also  applied  to  signify  a  premature  birth  brought
about  designedly.  The  phrase  aLactus  venter  in
Paulus  {Sent.  Recep.  iv.  9)  simply  means  a  pre-
mature birth.  That  abortion  in  the  secondary  sense
of  the  word  was  practised  among  the  Romans,
appears  from  various  passages  and  from  there  being
an  enactment  against  it.  (Dig.  48.  tit.  19.  s.  38.)
It  is  not  stated  at  what  time  a  penalty  against  pro-
curing abortion  was  established.  It  is  maintained
by  some  modem  writers  that  the  practice  of  abor-
tion became  so  common  among  the  Romans,  that
combined  with  celibacy  and  other  causes  it  mate-


ACCEPTILATIO.

rially  diminished  the  population  of  Rome.  But  this
general  assertion  is  not  sufficiently  proved.  The
practice  of  abortion  appears  not  to  have  been  viewed
in  the  same  light  by  the  Greeks  and  Romans  as
by  the  Christian  nations  of  modem  times.  Aris-
totle in  his  Politik  (vii.  14),  recommends  it  on  the
condition  that  the  child  has  not  yet  got  sensation
and  life,  as  he  expresses  it.  In  Plato's  RepMlo
(v.  p.  25),  it  is  also  permitted.  At  Athens,  a  per-
son who  had  caused  the  abortion  of  a  child  by
means  of  a  potion  (afjiSXcodpldiov),  was  liable  to  an
action  (afi.§Kct>(Tecas  ypacpr]),  but  we  do  not  know
what  was  the  penalty  in  case  of  conviction  :  it  was
certainly  not  death.  There  was  a  speech  of  Lysias
on  this  subject,  which  is  lost.  {Frag.  p.  8.  ed.
Reiske.)  [G.  L.]

ABROGA'TIO.     [Lex.]

ABSOLU'TIO.     [Judex.]

ABSTINENDI  BENEFFCIUM.    [Herbs.]

ABU'SUS.     [Usus  Fructus.]

ACAENA  ('A/caij/Tj,  6,Kaiva,  or  in  later  Greek
a/ceva,in  one  place  &Kaivov)  is  a  very  ancient  Greek
word,  for  it  is  said  to  have  been  derived  from  the
Thessalians  or  from  the  Pelasgians.  It  seems  ori-
ginally to  have  meant  a  pointed  stick :  thus  it  was
applied  both  to  a  goad  and  to  a  shepherd's  stafti
Afterwards  it  came  (like  our  pole  and  perch,  and
the  German  stange)  to  mean  a  measuring  rod  of  the
length  of  ten  Greek  feet,  or,  according  to  Hesychius,
Df  7n7xe's,  which  is  the  same  thing.  It  was  used
in  measuring  land,  and  thus  it  resembles  the  Ro-
man decempeda.  It  is  doubtful  whether  there
was  a  corresponding  square  measure.  (Schol.  in
Apoll.  Rkod.  in.  1326  ;  Suid.  s.v.  ;  Hesych.  s.  v. ;
Schow,  'Hesycli.  Restit.  p.  648  ;  Olympiodor.  ad
Aristot.  Meteorolog.  p.  25  ;  Heron,  ap.  Salmas.  ad.
Solin.  p.  481  ;  Wurm,  de  Pond.  p.  93.)    Compare

ACNA.  [P.  S.]

ACA'TIUM.    [Navis.]

ACCENSI.  1.  Public  oflicers  who  attended  on
several  of  the  Roman  magistrates.  They  sum-
moned the  people  to  the  assemblies,  and  those  who
had  lawsuits  to  court ;  they  preserved  order  in  the
assemblies  and  the  courts,  and  proclaimed  the  time
of  the  day  when  it  was  the  third  hour,  the  sixth
hour,  and  the  ninth  hour.  An  accensus  anciently
preceded  the  consul  who  had  not  the  fasces,  and
lictors  without  fasces  walked  behind  him,  Avhich
custom  after  being  disused  was  restored  by  Julius
Caesar  in  his  first  consulship.  (Varr.  L.  L.  vii.  58,
ed.  MUller  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  vii.  60 ;  Suet.  Jul.  20  ;
Liv.  iii.  33.)  Accensi  also  attended  on  the  governors
of  provinces  (Cic.  ad  Fratr.  i.  1.  §  4),  and  were
commonly  freedmen  of  the  magistrate  on  whom  they
attended.

2.  A  body  of  reserve  troops,  who  followed  the
Roman  army  without  having  any  military  duties  to
perform,  and  who  were  taken  one  by  one  to  supply
anj*-  vacancies  that  might  occur  in  the  legions.
They  were  according  to  the  census  of  Servius
Tullius  taken  from  the  fifth  class  of  citizens.  They
were  placed  in  battle  in  the  rear  of  the  army,  be-
hind the  triarii,  and  seem  to  have  acted  sometimes
as  orderlies  to  the  officers.  They  were  also  called
Adseripticii  and  in  later  times  Supemumerarii.
(Fest.  s.  V.  Accensi,  Adseripticii;  Liv.  i.  43,  viii.
8,  10  ;  Veget.  ii.  19  ;  Niebuhr,  Rom.  Hist.  vol.  i.
p.  449,  &c.)

ACCEPTILA'TIO  is  defined  to  be  a  release  by
mutual  interrogation  between  debtor  and  creditor,
by  which  each  party  is  exonerated  from  the


ACCESSIO.

contract.  In  other  words  acceptilatio  is  the  form
of  words  by  which  a  creditor  releases  his  debtor
from  a  debt  or  obligation,  and  acknowledges  he  has
received  that  which  in  fact  he  has  not  received
(veluti  imaginaria  solutio).  This  release  of  debt  by
acceptilatio  applies  only  to  such  debts  as  have  been
contracted  by  stipulatio,  conformably  to  a  rule  of
Roman  law,  that  only  contracts  made  by  words
can  be  pat  an  end  to  by  words.  But  the  astuteness
of  the  Roman  lawyers  found  a  mode  of  complying
with  the  rule,  and  at  the  same  time  extending  the
acceptilatio  to  all  kinds  and  to  any  number  of  con-
tracts. This  was  the  invention  of  Gallus  Aquilius,
who  devised  a  formula  for  reducing  all  and  every
kind  of  contracts  to  the  stipulatio.  This  being
done,  the  acceptilatio  would  immediately  apply,
inasmuch  as  the  matter  was  by  such  formula
brought  within  the  general  nile  of  law  above  men-
tioned. The  acceptilatio  must  be  absolute  and  not
conditional.  A  part  of  a  debt  or  obligation  might
be  released  as  well  as  the  whole,  provided  the
thing  was  in  its  nature  capable  of  division.  A
pupillus  could  not  release  a  debt  by  acceptilatio,
without  the  auctoritas  of  his  tutor,  but  he  could  be
released  from  a  debt.  A  woman  also  could  not
release  a  debt  by  stipulatio  without  the  auctoritas
of  a  tutor.  The  phrase  by  which  a  creditor  is  said
to  release  his  debtor  by  acceptilatio  is,  debitori  ac-
ceptum,  or  accepto  fucere  or  ferre^  or  acceptum  ha-
bere. When  anything  which  was  done  on  the  behalf
of  or  for  the  state,  such  as  a  building  for  instance,
was  approved  by  the  competent  authorities,  it  was
said,  in  acceptum  ferri^  or  referri.  (Dig.  46.  tit.
4  ;  48.  tit.  11.  s.  7  ;  Gaius,  ii.  84,  &c.  iii.  169,
&c.)  [G.  L.]

ACCE'SSIO  is  a  legal  term  which  signifies  that
two  things  are  united  in  such  wise  that  one  is
considered  to  become  a  component  part  of  the  other  ;
one  thing  is  considered  the  principal,  and  the  other
is  considered  to  be  an  accession  or  addition  to  it.
Sometimes  it  may  be  doubtful  which  is  to  be  con-
sidered the  principal  thing  and  which  the  accession.
But  the  owner  of  the  principal  thing,  whichever  it
is,  became  the  owner  of  the  accession  also.  The
most  undispiited  kind  of  accessio  is  that  which
arises  from  the  union  of  a  thing  with  the  ground  ;
and  when  the  union  between  the  ground  find  the
thing  is  complete,  the  thing  belongs  to  him  Avho  is
the  owner  of  the  ground.  Thus  if  a  man  builds
on  the  ground  of  another  man,  the  building  belongs
to  the  owner  of  the  ground,  unless  it  is  a  building
of  a  moveable  nature,  as  a  tent ;  for  the  rule  of  law
is  "superficies  solo  cedit."  A  tree  belonging  to
one  man,  if  planted  in  the  ground  of  another  man,
belongs  to  the  owner  of  the  ground  as  soon  as  it
has  taken  root.  The  same  rule  applies  to  seeds
and  plants.

If  one  man  wrote  on  the  papyrus  (chartulae)  or
parchment  (membranae)  of  another,  the  material
Avas  considered  the  principal,  and  of  course  the
writing  belonged  to  the  owner  of  the  paper  or  parch-
ment. If  a  man  painted  a  picture  on  another  man's
wood  (tabula)  or  whatever  the  materials  might  be,
the  painting  was  considered  to  be  the  principal
(tabula  picturae  cedit).  The  principle  which  de-
termined the  acquisition  of  a  new  property  by  ac-
cessio was  this  —  the  intimate  and  inseparable  union
of  the  accessory  with  the  principal.  Accordingly,
there  might  be  accessio  by  pure  accident  without
the  intervention  of  any  rational  agent.  If  a  piece
of  land  was  torn  away  by  a  stream  from  one  man's


ACERRA.  "3

land  and  attached  to  the  land  of  another,  it  became
the  property  of  the  man  to  whose  land  it  was  at-
tached after  it  was  firmly  attached  to  it,  but  not
before.  This  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  case
of  Alluvio.

The  person  who  lost  his  property  by  accessio
had  as  a  general  rule  a  right  to  be  indemnified
for  his  loss  by  the  person  who  acquired  the  new
property.     The  exceptions  were  cases  of  mala  fides.

The  term  accessio  is  also  applied  to  things  which
are  the  products  of  other  things,  and  not  added  to
them  externally  as  in  the  case  just  mentioned.
Every  accessio  of  this  kind  belongs  to  the  owner
of  the  principal  thing :  the  produce  of  a  beast,  the
produce  of  a  field,  and  of  a  tree  belongs  to  the
owner.  In  some  cases  one  man  may  have  a  right
to  the  produce  (fructus)  of  a  thing,  though  the
thing  belongs  to  another.  [Usus  fructus.]

The  term  accessiones  was  also  applied  to  those
who  were  sureties  or  bound  for  others,  as  fidejussores.
(Dig.  45.  tit.  1.  s.  91.  ;  Puchta,  Cursus  der  Institu-
tionen.,  ii.  p.  661  ;  Dig.  41.  tit.  1  ;  Gaius,  il  73,
«&C.      CONFUSIO.)  [G.  L.]

ACCLAMA'TIO  was  the  public  expression  of
approbation  or  disapprobation,  pleasure  or  dis-
pleasure, &c.  by  loud  acclamations.  On  many  oc-
casions, there  appear  to  have  been  certain  forms  of
acclamations  always  used  by  the  Romans  ;  as,  for
instance,  at  marriages,  lo  Hymen.,  Hymenaee,  or
Talassio  (explained  by  Liv.  i.  9.)  ;  at  triumphs,  lo
triumphe,  lo  triumphe  ;  at  the  conclusion  of  plays
the  last  actor  called  out  Plaudite  to  the  spectators ;
orators  were  usually  praised  by  such  expressions  as
Bene  et  praeclare.,  Belle  et  festive.,  Non  potest  melius,
&c.  (Cic.  De  Oral.  iii.  26.)  Under  the  empire
the  name  of  acclamationes  was  given  to  the  praises
and  flatteries  which  the  senate  bestowed  upon  the
emperor  and  his  family.  These  acclamationes,
which  are  frequently  quoted  by  the  Scriptores  His-
toriae  Augustae,  were  often  of  considerable  length,
and  seem  to  have  been  chanted  by  the  whole  body
of  senators.  There  were  regular  acclamationes
shouted  by  the  people,  of  which  one  of  the  most
common  was  Dii  te  sei-vent.  (Capitol.  Maocim.  duo,
16,  26,  Gordian.  tres,  11  ;  Lamprid.  Alea.  Sevei.
6—12  ;  Vopisc.  Tac.  4,  5,  7,  Prob.  II.)  Other
instances  of  acclamationes  are  given  by  Ferrarius,
De  Veterum  Acclamationibus  et  Plausu,  in  Graevius,
Thesaur.  Rom.  Antiq.  vol.  vi.

ACCUBA'TIO,  the  act  of  reclining  at  meals.

[COENA.]

ACCU'BITA,  the  name  of  couches  which  were
used  in  the  time  of  the  Roman  emperors,  instead
of  the  triclinium,  for  reclining  upon  at  meals.  The
mattresses  and  feather-beds  were  softer  and  higher,
and  the  supports  (fulcra)  of  them  lower  in  pro-
portion, than  in  the  triclinium.  The  clothes  and
pillows  spread  over  them  were  called  acctthitalia.
(Lamprid.  Heliog.  19,  25  ;  Schol.  ad  Juv.  Sat.  v.
17.)  [J.  Y.]

ACCUSA'TIO.     [Judex.]

ACERRA  (KiSavooTpis),  the  incense  box  used
in  sacrifices.  (Hor.  Carm.  iii.  8.  2  ;  Virg.  Aen.  y.
745.)  The  incense  was  taken  out  of  the  acerra
and  let  fall  upon  the  burning  altar :  hence,  we  have
the  expression  de  acerra  libare.  (Ov.  ex  Pont.  iv.
8.  39  ;  Pers.  ii,  5.)  [Turibulum.]  The  acerra
represented  below  is  taken  from  a  bas-relief  in  the
museum  of  the  Capitol.

The  acerra  was  also,  according  to  Festus  (s.  ».),
a  small  altar,  placed  before  the  dead,  on  which
B  2


ACHAICUM  FOEDUS.


perfumes  were  burnt.  There  was  a  law  in  the
Twelve  Tables,  which  restricted  the  use  of  acerrae
at  funerals.     (Cic.  de  Uy.  ii.  24.)  [J.  Y.]

ACETABULUM  (oiis,  6^v€a<pov,  6^v€d(piou),
a  vinegar-cup,  which,  from  the  fondness  of  the
Greeks  and  Romans  for  vinegar,  was  probably
always  placed  on  the  table  at  meals  to  dip  the  food
in  before  eating  it.  The  vessel  was  wide  and
open  above,  as  we  see  in  the  annexed  cut,  taken
from  Panof  ka's  work  on  Greek  vases  ;  and  the
name  was  also  given  to  all  cups  resembling  it  in
size  and  form,  to  whatever  use  they  might  be  ap-
plied. They  were  commonly  of  earthenware,  but
sometimes  of  silver,  bronze,  or  gold.  (Aristoph.
^»\i3(U  ;  Athen.  vi.  p.  230,  xi.  p.  494  ;  Quintil.
viii.  6.)  The  cups  used  by  jugglers  in  their  per-
formances were  also  called  by  this  name.  (Sen.
Ep.  45.)


ACETA'BULUM,  a  Roman  measure  of  capa-
.city,  fluid  and  dry,  equivalent  to  the  Greek  6^v€a(pov.
It  was  one-fourth  of  the  hemina;  and  therefore
one-eighth  of  the  sextarius.  It  contained  the
weight  in  water  of  fifteen  Attic  drachmae.  (Plin.
H.N.  xxi.  34.8.109.)  [P.S.]

ACHAICUM  FOEDUS,  the  Achaean  league.
In  treating  of  the  Achaean  league  we  miist  dis-
tinguish between  two  periods,  the  earlier  and  the
later ;  the  character  of  the  former  w.as  pre-eminently
religious,  and  that  of  the  latter  pre-eminently  po-
litical.

1.  Tfie  earlier  period.  —  When  the  Ileracleidae
took  possession  of  Peloponnesus,  which  had  until
then  been  chiefly  inhabited  by  Achaeans,  a  portion
of  the  latter,  under  Tisamenus,  turned  northwards
and  occupied  the  north  coast  of  Peloponnesus,  which
was  called  alyia\6s,  and  from  which  the  lonians,
its  former  inhabitants,  were  expelled  and  sought
refuge  in  Attica.  The  country  which  was  thus
occupied  by  the  Achaeans  and  derived  from  them
its  name  of  Achaia,  contained  twelve  confederate
towns,  which  were  governed  by  the  descendants  of


ACHAICUM  FOEDUS.

Tisamenus,  till  at  length  they  abolished  the  kingly
rule  after  the  death  of  Ogygcs,  and  established  a
democracy.  In  the  time  of  Herodotus  (i.  145  ;
comp.  Strab.  viii.  p.  38.3,  &c.)  the  twelve  towns  of
which  the  league  consisted  were  :  Pellene,  Aegeira,
Aegae,  Bura,  Helice,  Aegium,  Rhypes  (Rhypae),
Patreis  (ae),  Phareis  (ae),  Olenus,  Dyme,  and
Tritaeeis  ('Tritaea).  After  the  time  of  Herodotus,
Rhypes  and  Aegae  disappear  from  the  number  of
the  confederated  towns,  as  they  had  become  de-
serted (Pans.  vii.  23.  25 ;  Strah.  viii.  p.  387),  and
Ceryneia  and  Leontium  stepped  into  their  place.
(Polyb.  ii.  41  ;  comp.  Pans.  vii.  6.)  The  common
place  of  meeting  was  Helice,  which  town,  together
with  Bura,  was  swallowed  up  by  the  sea  during
an  earthquake  in  b.  c.  373,  whereupon  Aegioira  was
chosen  as  the  place  of  meeting  for  the  confederates.
(Strab.  viii.  p.  384  ;  Diod.  xv.  48  ;  Paus.  vii.  24.)
The  bond  which  united  the  towns  of  the  league
was  not  so  much  a  political  as  a  religious  one,  as  is
shown  by  the  common  sacrifice  oflered  at  Helice  to
Poseidon.  This  solemn  sacrifice  was  perfectly
analogous  to  that  offered  by  the  lonians  at  the
Panionia,  and  it  is  even  intimated  by  Herodotus
that  it  was  an  imitation  of  the  Ionian  solemnity.
After  the  destruction  of  Helice,  and  when  Aegium
had  become  the  central  point  of  the  league,  the  com-
mon sacrifice  was  offered  up  to  the  principal  divini-
ties of  the  latter  town  ;  that  is,  to  Zeus,  siimamed
Homagyrius,  and  to  Demeter  Panachaca.  (Paus.
vii.  24.)  In  a  political  point  of  view  the  connec-
tion between  the  several  towns  appears  to  have
been  very  loose,  for  we  find  that  some  of  them
acted  quite  independently  of  the  rest.  (Thuc.  ii.
9.)  The  confederation  exercised  no  gi-eat  influence
in  the  affairs  of  Greece  down  to  the  time  when  it
was  broken  up  by  the  Macedonians.  The  Achaeans
kept  aloof  from  the  restless  commotions  in  the  other
parts  of  Greece,  and  their  honesty  and  sincerity
were  recognised  by  the  circumstance  of  their  being
appointed,  after  the  battle  of  Leuctra,  to  arbitrate
between  the  Thebans  and  Lacedaemonians.  (Po-
lyb. ii.  39.)  Demetrius,  Cassander  and  Antigonu?
Gonatas  placed  garrisons  in  some  of  their  towns,
and  in  others  tyrants  rose  supported  by  Macedonian
influence.  The  towns  were  thus  torn  from  one
another,  and  the  whole  confederacy  destroyed.

2.  T/ie  later  period.  —  When  Antigonus  m  B.  c.
281  made  the  unsuccessful  attempt  to  deprive
Ptolemaeus  Ceraunus  of  the  Macedonian  throne,
the  Achaeans  availed  themselves  of  the  opportunity
of  shaking  off  the  Macedonian  yoke,  and  renewing
their  ancient  confederation.  The  grand  object  how-
ever now  was  no  longer  a  common  worship,  but  a
real  political  union  among  the  confederates.  The
towns  which  first  shook  off  the  yoke  of  the  op-
pressors, were  Dyme  and  Patrae,  and  the  alliance
concluded  between  them  was  speedily  joined  by  the
towns  of  Tritaea  and  Pharae.  (Polyb.  ii.  41.)  One
town  after  another  now  expelled  the  Macedonian
garrisons  and  tyrants  ;  and  when,  in  B.  c.  277,
Aegium,  the  head  of  the  earlier  league,  followed
the  example  of  the  other  towns,  the  fotmdation  of
the  new  confederacy  was  laid,  and  the  main  prin-
ciples of  its  constitution  were  settled,  though  after-
wards many  changes  and  modifications  were  intro-
duced. The  fundamental  laws  were,  that  hence-
forth the  confederacy  should  form  one  inseparable
state,  that  each  town,  which  should  join  it,  should
have  equal  rights  with  the  others,  and  that  all
members,  in  regard  to  foreign  countries,  should  bo


ACHAICUM  FOEDUS.

regarded  as  dependent,  and  bound  to  obey  in  ever}-
respect  the  federal  government,  and  those  ofRsers
■who  were  entnisted  with  the  executive.  (Poljb.
ii.  37,  &c.)  No  towTi  therefore  was  allowed  to
treat  with  any  foreign  power  without  the  sanction
of  the  others.  Aegiran,  for  religious  reasons,  was
at  first  appointed  the  central  point  of  the  league,
and  retained  this  distinction  until  the  time  of  Phi-
lopoeinen,  who  carried  a  decree  that  the  meetings
might  be  held  in  any  of  tlie  towns  of  the  con-
federacy. (Liv.  xxxviii.  30.)  Aegium  therefore
was  the  sea>t  of  the  government,  and  it  was  there
that  the  citizens  of  the  various  towns  met  at  regular
and  stated  times,  to  deliberate  upon  the  common
affairs  of  the  league,  and  if  it  was  thought  neces-
sary, upon  those  of  separate  towns,  and  even  upon
individuals,  and  to  elect  the  officers  of  the  league.
After  having  thus  established  a  firm  union  among
themselves,  they  zealously  exerted  themselves  in
delivmng  other  towns  also  from  their  tyrants  and
oppressors.  The  league,  however,  acquired  its
great  strength  in  B.  c.  251,  when  Aratus  united
Sicyon,  his  native  place,  with  it,  and  some  years
later  gained  Corinth  also  for  it.  Megara,  Troezene,
and  Epidaurus  soon  followed  their  example.  After-
wards Aratus  persuaded  ail  the  more  important
towns  of  Peloponnesus  to  join  the  confederacy,  and
thus  Megalopolis,  Argos,  Hermione,  Phlius,  and
others  were  added  to  it.  In  a  short  period  the
leag«e  reached  the  height  of  its  power;,  for  it  em-
braced Athens,  Megara,  Aegina,  Salamis,  and  the
whole  of  Peloponnesus,  with  the  exception  of
Sparta,  Elis,  Tegea,  Orchomenos,  and  Mantineia
Greece  seemed  to  revive,  and  promised  to  become
stronger  and  more  united  than  ever,  but  it  soon
was  clear  that  its  fresh  power  was  only  employed
in  self-destruGtion  and  annihilation.  But  it  would
be  foreign  ta  the  object  of  this  warlc  to  enter  fur'-
ther  into  the  history  of  the  confederacy :  we  must
confine  ourselves  to  an  outline  of  its  constitution,
as  it  existed  at  the  time  of  its  highest  prosperity.

Polybius  (ii.  38)  remarks  that  there  was  no
other  constitution  in  the  world,  in  which  all  the
members  of  the  community  had  such  a  perfect
equality  of  rights,  and  so  much  liberty,  and,  in
short,  which  was  so  perfectly  dcmocratical  and  so
free  from  all  selfish  and  exclusive  regulations,  as
the  Achaean  league  ;  for  all  members  had  equal
rights,  whether  they  had  belonged  to  it  fo-r  many
years,  or  whether  they  had  only  just  joined  it,  and
whether  they  were  large  or  small  towns.  The
common  affairs  of  the  confederate  towns  were  regu-
lated at  general  meetings  attended  by  the  citizens
of  all  the  towns,  and  held  regularly  twice  every
year,  in  the  spring  and  in  the  autumn.  These
meetings  which  lasted  three  days,  were  held  in  a
grove  of  Zeus  Homagyrius  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Aegium,and  near  a  sanctuary  of  Demeter  Panachaea.
(Polyb.  ii.  54,  iv.  37,  v.  1,  xxix.  .9;  Liv.  xxxii.  22,
xxxviii.  32  ;  Strab.  viii.  p.  385  ;  Paus.  vii.  24.)  In
cases  of  urgent  necessity,  however,  extraordinary
meetings  might  be  convened,  either  at  Aegium  or
in  any  other  of  the  confederate  places.  (Liv.  xxxi.
25  ;  Polyb.  XXV.  1,  xxix.  8  ;  Plut.  AixtL  41.)
Every  citizen,  both  rich  and  poor,  who  had  at-
tained the  age  of  thirty,  might  attend  the  assem-
blies, f-peak  and  propose  any  measure,  to  which
they  were  invited  by  a  public  herald.  (Polyb.
xxix.  9  ;  Liv.  xxxii.  20.)  Under  these  circum-
stances the  assemblies  were  sometimes  of  the  most
tumultuous  kind,  and  a  wise  and  experienced  man


ACHAICUM  FOEDUS.  5

might  find  it  difficult  to  gain  a  hearing  among  the
crowds  of  ignorant  and  foolish  people.  (Polyb.
xxxviii.  4.)  It  is,  however,  natural  to  suppose  that
the  ordinary  meetings,  unless  matters  of  special
importance  were  to  be  discussed,  were  attended
chiefly  by  the  wealthier  claisses,  who  had  the  means
af  paying  the  expenses  of  their  journey,  for  great
numbers  lived  at  a  considerable  distance  from  the
place  of  meeting.

The  subjects  which  were  to  be  brought  before
the  assembly  were  prepared  by  a  council  (fiovX-i])^
which  seems  to  have  been  permanent.  (Polyb.
xxiii.  7,  xxviii.  3,  xxix.  9  ;  Plut.  Arat  53.)  The
principal  subjects  on  which  the  great  assembly  had
to  decide  were  —  peace  and  war  (Polyb.  iv.  IS,
&c.)  ;  the  reception  of  new  towns  into  the  con-
federacy (Polyb.  XXV.  1)  ;  the  election  of  the  ma-
gistrates of  the  confederacy  (Polyb.  iv.  37.  82  ;
Plut.  Arat.  41)  ;  the  punishment  of  crimes  com-
mitted by  these  magistrates,  though  sometimes
special  judges  were  appointed  for  that  purpose,  as
well  as  the  honours  or  distinctions  to  be  conferred
upon  them.  (Polyb.  iv.  14,  viii.  14,  xl.  5.  8  ;  Paus.
vii.  9.)  The  ambassadors  of  foreign  nations  had
to  appear  before  the  assembly,  and  to  deliver  the
messages  of  their  states,  which  were  then  discussed
by  the  assembled  Achaeaais.  (Polyb.  iv.  7,  xxiii.
7,  &c.,  xxviii.  7  ;  Liv.  xxxii.  9.)  The  assembly
likewise  had  it  in  its  power  to  decree,  as  to  whe-
ther negotiations  were  to  be  carried  on  with  any
foreign  poAver  or  not,  and  no  single  town  was  al-
lowed to  send  embassies  to  a  foreign  power  on  its
own  responsibility  even  on  matters  of  merely  local
importance,  although  otherwise  every  separate  town
managed  its  own  internal  affairs  at  its  own  dis-
cretion, SO'  long  as  it  did  not  interfere  with  the
interests  of  the  Peague.  No  town  further  was  al-
lowed to  accept  presents  from  a  foreign  power.
(Polyb.  xxiii.  8  ;  Paus.  vii.  9.)  The  votes  in  the
assembly  were  given  according  to  towns,  each  hav-
ing one  vote,  whether  th«'  town  was  large  or  small.
(Liv.  xxxii.  22,  &c.)

The  principal  officers  of  the  confederacy  were .
1.  at  first  two  strategi  (a-Tparrjyoi)^  but  after  the
yea.T  b.  c.  255,,  there  was  only  one  (Strab.  viii.
p.  385),  who  in  conjunction  with  an  hipparchus
('iinrapxos)  or  commander  of  the  cavalry  (Polyb.
V.  95,  xxviii.  6)  and  an  under-strategus  {imocrrpa^
TTjyJs,  Polyb..  iv.  59)  commanded  the  army  fui'-
nished  by  the  confederacy,  and  was  entrusted  with
the  whole  conduct  of  war  ;  2.  a  public  secretary
(ypafifiarevs)^  and  3^  ten  demiurgi  (Syj/u-iuvpyol,
Strab.  I.  c. ;  Liv.  xxxii.  22,  xxxviii.  30  ;  Polyb.  v-
1,  xxiii.  10,  who  calls  the  demiurgi  apxovres).
These  officers  seem  to  have  presided  in  the  great
assembly,  where  they  probably  formed  the  body  of
men  which  Polybius  (xxxviii.  5)  calls  the  yepovcria;
the  demiui'gi  or  the  strategus  might  convene  the
assembl}^,  though  the  latter  only  when  the  people
were  convened  in  arms  and  for  military  purposes.
(Polyb.  iv.  7 ;  Liv.  xxxv.  25.)  All  the  officers  of
the  league  were  elected  in  the  assembly  held  in
the  spring,  at  the  rising  of  the  Pleiades  (Polyb.  ii.
43,  iv.  6.  37,  V.  1),  and  legally  they  were  invested
with  their  several  offices  only  for  one  year,  though
it  frequently  happened  that  men  of  great  merit  and
distinction  were  re-elected  for  several  successive
years.  (Plut.  Arat.  24.  30,  Ckom.  15.)  If  one  of
the  officers  died  during  the  period  of  his  office,  his
place  was  filled  by  his  predecessor,  until  the  time
for  the  new  elections  arrived.  (Polyb.  xl.  2.)  The
B  3


6  ACINACES.

close  union  existing  among  the  confederate  towns
was,  according  to  Polybius  (ii.  37),  strengthened
by  their  adopting  common  weights,  measures,  and
coins.

But  the  perpetual  discord  of  the  members  of  the
league,  the  hostility  of  Sparta,  the  intrigues  of  the
Romans,  and  the  folly  and  rashness  of  the  later
sti'ategi,  brought  about  not  only  the  destruction  and
dissolution  of  the  confederacy,  but  of  the  freedom
of  all  Greece,  which  with  the  fall  of  Corinth,  in
B.  a  146,  became  a  Roman  province  under  the
name  of  Achaia.  (Comp.  Schom,  Gesch.  Griechen-
lands  von  der  Etitstelmng  des  Aetol.  u.  Ach'disch.
Bundes,  especially  pp.  49,  &c.  60,  &c.;  A.  Matthiae,
Vermischte  Schrijien,  p.  239,  &c. ;  Drumaim,  Ideen
zur  Gesch.  des  Verfalls  der  Griecli.  Staaten,  p.  447  ;
Tittmann,  Griecli.  Stcuitsverfass.  p.  673,  &c. ;  K.  F.
Hermann,  Griecli.  Staatsalterth.  §  185.)     [L.  S.]

ACHANE  (Kxavri).,  a  Persian  and  Boeotian
measure,  equivalent  to  45  Attic  medimni.  (Aris-
tot.  ap.  Sdiol.  ad  Aristoph.  Acliam.  108, 109  ;  Suid.
s.  V.)  According  to  Hesychius  a  Boeotian  axavrj
was  equal  to  one  Attic  mediranus.  [P.  S.]

A'CIES.       [EXERCITUS.]

ACI'NACES  (aKtj/a/cTjs),  a  Persian  sword,
whence  Horace  {Carm.  i.  27.  5)  speaks  of  the
Medus  acinaces.  It  was  a  short  and  straight  wea-
pon, and  thus  differed  from  the  Roman  sica,  which
was  curved.  (Pollux,  i.  138  ;  Joseph.  Ant.  Jud.
XX.  7.  §  10.  [SiCA.]  It  was  worn  on  the  right
Bide  of  the  body  (insignis  acinace  dexiro^  Val.  Flacc.
Argon,  vi.  701),  whereas  the  Greeks  and  Romans
usually  had  their  swords  suspended  on  the  left  side.

The  fonn  of  the  acinaces,  with  the  method  of
using  it,  is  illustrated  by  the  following  Persepolitan
figures.  In  all  the  bas-reliefs  found  at  Persepolis,
the  acinaces  is  invariably  straight,  and  is  com-
monly suspended  over  the  right  thigh,  never  over
the  left,  but  sometimes  in  front  of  the  body.  The
form  of  the  acinaces  is  also  seen  in  the  statues  of
the  god  Mithras,  one  of  which  is  figured  ia  the  cut
on  the  title-page  of  this  work.


A  golden  acinaces  was  fxeuucntly  worn  by  the
Persian  nobility,  and  it  was  often  given  to  indi-
viduals by  the  kings  of  Persia  as  a  mark  of  honour.
(Herod,  viii.  120 ;  Xen.  Anal),  i.  2.  §  27,  8.  §  29.)

The  acinaces  was  also  used  by  the  Caspii.
(Herod,  vii.  67.)  It  was  an  object  of  religious
worship  among  the  Scythians  and  many  of  the
northern  nations  of  Europe.  (Herod,  iv.  62  ;  Comp.
Mela,  il  1 ;  Amm.  Marc,  xxxi,  2.)         [J.  Y.]


ACROTERIUM.

ACI'SCULUS.     [AsciA.]

ACLIS.     [Hasta.]

ACNA  or  ACNUA  (also  &]i<i\t  agna  andi  agmui)
was,  according  to  Varro,  the  Italian  name,  and
according  to  Columella,  the  common  Baetican  name
of  the  actus  quadratus.  [Actus.]  An  old  writer,
quoted  by  Salmasius,  says  "agnua  habet  pedes
xiiii.  cccc,"  i.e.  14,400  square  feet.  The  name  is
almost  certainly  connected  with  the  Greek  ^/cotj'a,
though  the  measiu'e  is  different.  (Varro,  R.R.
i.  10.  §2  ;  Colum.  R.  i?.  t.  2.  §  5  ;  Schneider,
Comment,  ad  II.  cc.  ;  Salmasius,  ad  Solin.  p.
481.)  [P.  S.]

ACO'NTION  {h.K6vriov).     [Hasta.J

ACRATISMA  (aKpdrKrixa).     [Coena.]

ACROA'MA  (aKp6afia),  any  thing  heard,  and
especially  any  thing  lieard  with  pleasure,  signified
a  play  or  musical  piece  ;  hence  a  concert  of  players
on  different  musical  instruments,  and  also  an  inter-
lude, called  emholia  by  Cicero  {pro  Seed.  54),  which
was  performed  during  the  exhibition  of  the  public
games.  The  word  is  also  applied  to  the  actors  and
musicians  who  were  employed  to  amuse  guests
during  an  entertainment  (Cic.  Verr.  iv.  22  ;  pro
Arch.  9  ;  Suet.  Octav.  74  ;  Macrob.  Sat.  ii.  4)  ;  and
it  is  sometimes  used  to  designate  the  anagnostae.
[Anagnostae.]

ACROLITHI  {aKp6XieoC).,  statues,  of  which  the
extremities  (face,  feet,  and  hands,  or  toes  and
fingers)  only  were  of  marble,  and  the  remaining
part  of  the  body  of  wood  either  gilt,  or,  what  seems
to  have  been  more  usual,  covered  with  drapery.  The
word  occurs  only  in  the  Greek  Anthology  (Brunck,
Anal.  vol.  iii.  p.  155,  No.  20  ;  Antk.  Pid.  xii.
40),  and  in  Vitinivius  (ii.  8.  §  11)  ;  but  statues  of
the  kind  are  frequently  mentioned  by  Pausanias
(ii.  4.  §  1,  vi.  25.  §  4,  vii.  21.  §§  4  or  10,  vii.  23.
§  5,  viii.  25.  §  4  or  6,  viii.  31.  §  1  or  2,  and  §  3
or  6,  ix.  4.  §  1.)  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that
all  the  statues  of  this  kind  belonged  to  an  earlier
period.  They  continued  to  be  made  at  least  down
to  the  time  of  Praxiteles.  (Comp.  Jacobs,  Com-
ment.  in  Anth.  Grace,  vol,  iii.  Pt.  1.  p.  298  ;  and
Winckelmann,  Geschichte  der  Kunst,  B.  i.  c.  2.
§13.)  [P.S.]

ACRO'POLIS  {aKpoTToXis).  In  almost  all
Greek  cities,  which  were  usually  built  upon  a  hill,
rock,  or  some  natural  elevation,  there  was  a  kind  of
tower,  a  castle,  or  a  citadel,  built  upon  the  highest
part  of  the  rock  or  hill,  to  which  the  name  of
acropolis  was  given.  Thus  we  read  of  an  acropolis
at  Athens,  Corinth,  Argc3,  Messene,  and  many
other  places.  The  Capitolium  at  Rome  answered
the  same  purpose  as  the  Acropolis  in  the  Greek
cities  ;  and  of  the  same  kind  were  the  tower  of
Agathocles  at  Utica  (App.  Pun.  14),  and  that  of
Antonia  at  Jerusalem.  (Joseph.  B.  J.  v.  §  8,
Act.  Apostol.  xxi.  34.)  At  Athens,  the  Acropolis
served  as  the  treasury,  and  as  the  names  of  all
public  debtors  were  registered  there,  the  expression
of  "  registered  upon  the  Acropolis  "  (eyy^ypa/j.-
fj.4vos  if  'AKpoTr6\ei)  always  means  a  public  debtor
(iv  aKpOTrdkei  ycypafj.fj.evoi^  Dem.  c.  T/ieocr.  p.
1337.  24  ;  Biickh.  Publ.  Econ.  of  Alliens,  p.  388,
2nd  edit.).

ACROSTO'LIUM  (aKpoa-TdXiov).     [Navis.]

ACROTE  RIUM  (aKpwr^piou)  signifies  an  ex-
tremity of  any  thing.  It  is  generally  used  in  the
plural.

1.  In  Architecture  it  seems  to  have  been  used
originally  in  the  same  sense  as  the  haim  fastigium^


ACTA.

namely,  for  the  sloping  roof  of  a  building,  and  more
particularly  for  the  ornamental  front  or  gable  of  such
ii  roof,  that  is,  the  pediment.  (Pint.  Cues.  63,  com-
pared with  Cic.  Phillpp.  ii.  43,  and  Suet.  Cues.  81.)
The  usual  meaning  of  acroteria^  however,  is  the
pedestals  placed  on  the  summit  of  a  pediment  to
receive  statues  or  other  ornamental  figures.  There
were  three  acroteria,  one  above  each  angle  of  the
pediment  Vitruvius  says  that  those  over  the  outer
angles  {acrot.  angularia)  should  be  as  high  as  the
apex  of  the  tympanum,  and  the  one  over  the  high-
est angle  one-eighth  part  higher.  (Vitruv.  iii.  3,
or  iii.  5.  §  12,  ed.  Schneider.)  Some  writers  in-
clude the  statues  themselves  as  well  as  the  bases
under  the  name  ;  but  the  only  authority  for  this
seems  to  be  an  error  of  Salmasius.  {In  Ael.  Spart.
Fescen.  Nig.  1 2.)  2.  The  extremities  of  the  prow
of  a  vessel,  which  were  usually  taken  from  a  con-
quered vessel  as  a  mark  of  victory :  the  act  of  doing
so  was  called  aKpcoTrjpid^eiv.  (Xen.  Hell.  ii.  3.  §  8,
vi.  2.  §  36  ;  Herod,  iii.  59,  viii.  121.)  3.  The  ex-
tremities of  a  statue,  wings,  feet,  hands,  &c.  (Dem.
c.  Tiinocr.  p.  738  ;  Athen.  v.  p.  199,  c.)  [P.  S.]

ACTA.  1.  Signified  the  public  acts  and  orders
of  a  Roman  magistrate,  which  after  the  expiration
of  his  office  were  submitted  to  the  senate  for  ap-
proval or  rejection.  (Suet.  Caes.  19,  23  ;  Cic.
Phil.  i.  7,  &c,)  After  the  death  of  Julius  Caesar
the  triumvirs  swore,  and  compelled  all  the  other
magistrates  to  swear,  to  observe  and  maintain  all
his  acta  {in  actajurare,  comp.  Tac.  Ann.  i.  72  ;  Suet.
Tilt.  67)  ;  and  hence  it  became  the  custom  on  the
accession  of  each  emperor  for  the  new  monarch  to
swear  to  observe  and  respect  all  the  acta  of  his
predecessors  from  Julius  Caesar  downwards,  with
the  exception  of  those  who  had  been  branded  with
infamy  after  death,  such  as  Nero  and  Domitian.
Every  year  all  the  magistrates  upon  entering  upon
their  office  on  the  1st  of  January  swore  approval  of
the  acts  of  the  reigning  emperor :  this  oath  was  ori-
ginally taken  by  one  magistrate  in  each  department
on  behalf  of  his  colleagues,  but  subsequently  it  was
the  usual  practice  for  each  magistrate  to  take  the
oath  personally.  (Dion  Cass,  xlvii.  18,  liii.  28;
Tac.  Ann.  xvi.  22,  with  the  Excursus  of  Lipsius  ;
Dion  Cass.  Iviii.  17,  Ix.  25.)

2.  Acta  Forensia  were  of  two  kinds :  first,
those  relating  to  the  government,  as  leges,  ple-
biscita,  edicta,  the  names  of  all  the  magistrates,  &c.,
which  formed  part  of  the  tabulae  pMicae ;  and
secondly,  those  connected  with  the  com-ts  of  law.
The  acta  of  the  latter  kind  contained  an  account
of  the  different  suits,  with  the  arguments  of  the
advocates  and  the  decisions  of  the  court.  In  the
time  of  the  republic  the  names  of  those  who  were
acquitted  and  condemned  were  entered  on  the
records  of  the  court  {in  tahulas  ahsolutum  non
rettulit,  Cic.  ad  Fam.  viii.  8.  §.  3),  and  it  appears
from  the  quotations  of  Asconius  from  these  Acta,
that  they  must  have  contained  abstracts  of  the
speeches  of  the  advocates  as  early  as  the  time  of
Cicero.  {In  Scaur ian.  p.  1 9,  in  Milonian.  pp.  32,
44,  47,  ed.  Orelli.)  Under  the  empire  the  pro-
ceedings of  the  higher  courts  seem  to  have  been  al-
ways preserved,  and  they  are  frequently  referred  to
in  the  Digest.  They  are  sometimes  called  Gesta  ;
and  they  commenced  with  the  names  of  the  consuls
for  the  year,  and  the  day  of  the  month.  (Amm.
Marc.  xxii.  3  ;  August.  Acta  c.  Fortxm.  Manich.
lietract.  i.  16  ;  Cod.  Theod.  2.  tit.  29.  s.  3.)  Spe-
cimens of  these  Acta  are  given  by  Brissonius.    {De


ACTA.


'7


Formulis,  v.  §  113.)  They  were  taken  by  clerks
{ab  adis  fori).,  whose  titles  and  duties  occur  in
Lydus  {de  Magistr.  ii.  20,  &c.)  and  the  Notitia
Dignitatum.

3.  Acta  Militaria,  contained  an  account  of
the  duties,  numbers,  and  expences  of  each  legion
(Veget.  ii.  19),  and  were  probably  preserved  in
the  military  treasury  founded  by  Augustus  (Suet
Aug.  49  ;  Tac.  Ann.  L  78  ;  Dion  Cass.  Iv.  25.)
The  soldiers,  who  drew  up  these  acta,  are  fre-
quently mentioned  in  inscriptions  and  ancient  wri-
ters imder  various  titles,  as,  librarius  legionis  ;  ac.
tuarius  or  actarius  legionis;  tabularius  castrensis^
&c.

4.  Acta  Senatus,  called  also  Commentarii
Senatus  (Tac.  Ann.  xv.  74)  and  Acta  Patrum
{Ann.  v.  4),  contained  an  account  of  the  various
matters  brought  before  the  senate,  the  opinions  of
the  chief  speakers,  and  the  decision  of  the  house.
It  has  been  usually  inferred  from  a  passage  of
Suetonius  ("  Inito  honore  primus  omnium  instituit,
ut  fcim  senatus  quam  populi  diurna  acta  conficeren-
tur  et  p\iblicarentur,"  Caes.  20),  that  the  pro-
ceedings of  the  senate  were  not  published  till  the
first  consulship  of  Julius  Caesar,  b.  c.  59  ;  but  this
was  not  strictly  the  case  ;  for  not  only  had  the  de-
crees of  the  senate  been  written  down  and  pub-
lished long  previously,  but  the  debates  on  the
Catilinarian  conspiracy  had  been  widely  circulated
\)j  Cicero  {p.  Sull.  14,  15.)  All  that  Suetonius
means  to  say  is,  that  the  proceedings  of  the  senate,
which  had  been  only  occasionally  published  before
and  by  private  individuals,  were  for  the  first  time,
by  the  command  of  Caesar,  published  regularly
ever}''  day  {senatus  acta  diurna)  under  the  aiithority
of  government  as  part  of  the  daily  gazette.  Augustus
forbade  the  publication  of  the  proceedings  of  the
senate,  but  they  still  continued  to  be  preserved,
and  one  of  the  most  distinguished  senators,  who  re-
ceived the  title  ab  actis  senatus.,  was  chosen  by  the
emperor  to  compile  the  account  (Tac.  Ann.  v.  4 ,
Spart.  Hadr.  3;  Orelli,  Inscr.  No.  2274,  3186.)
The  persons  entrusted  with  this  office  must  not  be
confounded  with  the  various  clerks  {actuarii,  servi
publiciy  scribae,  cerisuales),  who  were  present  in  the
senate  to  take  notes  of  its  proceedings,  and  who
were  only  excluded  when  the  senate  passed  a
senatusconsultum  taciturn.,  that  is,  when  they  de-
liberated on  a  subject  of  the  greatest  importance,
respecting  which  secresy  was  necessary  or  advisa-
ble. (Capit  Gord.  12.)  It  was  doubtless  from
notes  and  papers  of  these  clerks  that  the  Acta  were
compiled  by  the  senator,  who  was  entrusted  with
this  office.  The  Acta  were  deposited  in  some  of
the  record  offices  in  particular  departments  of  the
public  libraries,  to  which  access  could  only  be  ob-
tained by  the  express  permission  of  the  praefectus
urbi.  They  were  consulted  and  are  frequently  re-
ferred to  by  the  later  historians  (Vopisc.  Froh.  2  ;
Lamprid.  Sever.  56 ;  Capitol.  Opil.  Macr.  6),  and
many  extracts  from  them  were  published  in  the
Acta  Diurna.  Tacitus  and  Suetonius  never  refer
to  the  Acta  Senatus  as  authorities,  but  only  to  the
Acta  Diurna.

5.  Acta  Diurna,  a  gazette  published  daily  at
Rome  by  the  authority  of  the  government  during
the  later Vmes  of  the  republic,  and  under  the  em-
pire, corresponding  in  some  measure  to  our  news-
papers. (Tac.  Ann.  iii.  3,  xiii.  31,  xvi.  22.)  In
addition  to  the  title  Acta  Diurna,  we  find  them
referred  to  under  the  names  of  Diurna,  Acta  Fub'

B  4


8


ACTA.


lica^  Ada  Urhana^  Acta  Rerum  UriMtiarJim,  Acta
Populi^  and  they  are  frequently  called  simply
AcUi,  The  Greek  writers  on  Roman  history  call
them  TO.  vTrofivi^fMaTa,  ra  STj/xSaia  inroiJ.V7}ixaTa,
TO  SrifiSa-ia  ypd/JL/xara  and  to.  koivo.  vTrop.vi]ixara.
The  nature  of  their  contents  will  be  best  seen  from
the  following  passage  of  Petronius  (c  53)  where
in  imitation  of  them  is  given  by  the  actuarius  of
Trimalchio  :  —  "  Actuarius  —  tamquam  acta  url)is
recitavit :  vii.  KaL  Sextilis  in  praedio  Cumano,  quod
est  Trimalchionis,  nati  sunt  pueri  xxx.,  puellae
XL.  ;  sublata  in  horrcum  ex  area  tritici  millia  nio-
dium  quingenta ;  boves  domiti  quingentL  Eodem
die  Mithridates  servus  in  cnicem  actus  est,  quia
Gaii  nostri  genio  maledixerat.  Eodem  die  in  arcam
reLitum  est,  quod  coUocari  non  potuit,  sestertium
centies.  Eodem  die  incendium  factum  est  in  hortis
Pompeianis,  ortum  ex  aedibus  Nastae  villici.  Jam
etiam  edicta  aedilium  recitabantur,  et  saltuariorum
testamenta,  qui  bus  Trimalchio  cum  elogio  exhae-
redabatur  ;  jam  nomina  villicorum  et  repudiata  a
circumitore  liberta  in  balneatoris  contubemio  depre-
hensa  ;  atriensis  Baias  relegatus  ;  jam  reus  factus
dispensator;  et  judicium  inter  cubicularios  actum."
From  this  passage,  and  from  the  numerous  passages
in  ancient  writers,  in  which  the  Acta  Diurna  are
quoted  (references  to  which  are  given  in  the  works
of  Le  Clerc  and  Liberkiihn  cited  below),  it  would  ap-
pear that  they  usually  contained  the  following  mat-
ters: • —  1.  The  number  of  births  and  deaths  in  the
city,  an  account  of  the  money  paid  into  the  treasury
from  the  provinces,  and  every  thing  relating  to  the
supply  of  com.  These  particulars  would  be  ex-
tracted from  the  tabulae  publicae.  By  an  ancient
regidation,  ascribed  to  Servius  TuUius  (Dionys.  iv.
15),  all  births  were  registered  in  the  temple  of
Venus,  and  all  deaths  in  that  of  Libitina ;  and  we
know  that  this  practice  was  continued  under  the
empire,  only  that  at  a  later  time  the  temple  of
Saturn  was  substituted  for  that  of  Venus  for  the
registration  of  births.  (Jul  Cap.  M.  Aurcl.  9.)
2.  Extracts  from  the  Acta  Forensia,  containing  the
edicts  of  magistrates,  the  testaments  of  distinguished
men,  reports  of  trials,  with  the  names  of  those  who
were  acquitted  and  condemned,  and  likewise  a  list
of  the  magistrates  who  were  electecL  3.  Extracts
from  the  acta  senatus,  especially  all  the  decrees  and
acclamationes  [Acclamatio]  in  honour  of  the
reigning  emperor.  4.  A  court  circular,  containing
an  account  of  the  births,  deaths,  festivals,  and
movements  of  the  imperial  family,  5.  An  account
of  such  public  affairs  and  foreign  wars  as  the
government  thought  proper.to  publish.  6.  Curious
and  interesting  occurrences,  such  as  prodigies  and
miracles,  the  erection  of  new  edifices,  the  confla-
gration of  buildings,  funerals,  sacrifices,  a  list  of
the  various  games,  and  especially  amatory  tales  and
adventures,  with  the  names  of  the  parties.  (Comp.
Cic.  ad  Fam.  iu  15.)  The  fragments  of  some
Acta  Diurna  have  been  published  by  Pighius  and
Dodwell,  but  their  genuineness  is  too  doubtful  to
allow  us  to  make  use  of  them  as  authorities.

It  is  certain  that  these  acta  were  published
under  the  authority  of  the  government,  but  it  is
not  stated  under  whose  superintendence  they  were
drawn  up.  It  is  probable,  however,  that  this  duty
devolved  upon  the  magistrates,  who  had  the  care
of  the  tabulae  publicae,  namely,  the  censors  under
the  republic  (Liv.  iv.  8,  xliii.  16),  and  sometimes
the  quaestora,  sometimes  the  praefecti  aerarii  under
the  empire.     (Tac  Ann.  xiil  28.)   By  a  regulation


ACTIA.

of  Alexander  Severus,  seven  of  the  fourteen  cura-
tores  urbis,  whom  he  appointed,  had  to  be  present
when  the  acta  were  drawn  up.  (Lamprid.  Alex.
Scv.  33,)  The  actual  task  of  compiling  them  was
committed  to  subordinate  officers,  called  actiuirii  or
adarii,  who  were  assisted  by  various  clerks,  and
by  reporters  {notarii),  who  took  down  in  short-hand
the  proceedings  in  the  courts,  &c.  After  the  acUi
had  been  drawn  up,  they  were  exposed  for  a  time
in  some  public  place  in  the  city,  where  persons
could  read  them  and  take  copies  of  them.  Many
scribes,  whom  Cicero  speaks  of  under  the  name
of  operoj-ii,  made  it  their  business  to  copy  them
or  make  extracts  from  them  for  the  use  of  the
wealthy  in  Rome,  and  especially  in  the  provinces,
where  they  were  eagerly  sought  after  and  exten-
sively read.  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  viil  1,  xiil  8  ;  Tac.
Ann.  xvi.  22.)  After  the  acta  had  been  ex-
posed in  public  for  a  certain  time,  they  were  de-
posited, like  the  Acta  Senatus,.  in  some  of  the  re-
cord offices,  or  the  public  libraries.

The  style  of  the  acta,  as  appears  from  the  pas-
sage in  Petronius,  was  very  simple  and  concise.
They  contained  a  bare  enumeration  of  facts  without
any  attempt  at  ornament

As  to  the  time  at  which  these  acta  Avere  first
composed,  there  is  a  considerable  variety  of  opinion
among  modem  writers.  It  is  maintained  that  the
passage  of  Suetonius  {Caes.  20),  quoted  above,
does  not  imply  that  the  acta  were  first  published
in  the  first  consulship  of  Julius  Caesar,  and  that
the  meaning  of  it  is,  "  that  he  first  ordained  that
the  acta  diuma  of  the  senate  should  be  compiled
and  published  just  as  {tarn  quam)  those  of  the
people  had  beeiu"  But  although  this  interpreta-
tion is  probably  the  correct  one,  still  there  is  no
passage  in  the  ancient  wi-iters  in  which  the  Acta
Diuma  are  decisively  mentioned,  previous  to  Caesar's
first  consulship  ;  for  the  diarium  referred  to  by
Sempronius  Asellio  (Gell.  v.  18),  which  is  fre-
quently brought  forward  as  a  proof  of  this  early  pub-
lication, is  thejoumal  of  a  private  person.  There  is
likewise  no  evidence  to  support  an  opinion  adopted
by  many  modern  writers  that  the  publication  of
the  acta  first  commenced  in  b.  c,  133  to  supply  the
place  of  the  Annales  Maximi,  which  were  discon-
tinued in  that  year  (Cic.  de  Orat.  ii.  12),  while
on  the  contrary  the  great  difference  of  their  con-
tents renders  it  improbable  that  such  was  the  case.
The  Acta  Diuma  continued  in  use  to  the  downfall
of  the  westem  empire,  or  at  least  till  the  removal
of  the  seat  of  govemment  to  Constantinople,  but
they  were  never  published  at  the  latter  city.

(Lipsius,  Excursus  ad  Tac.  Ann.  v.  4 ;  Emesti_,
Excursus  ad  Sziet.  J.  Caes.  20 ;  Schlosser,  Ueber
die  Quellen  der  sp'dtern  lutein.  Geschichtschreiber,
besonders  iiher  Zeitimgen.,  cfcc.  in  the  Arckiv  fiir  Gc-
schicJde,  pp.  80 — 106  ;  Prutze,  De  Foidibus,  quos  in
conscribcndis  rebus  inde  a  Tiberio  usque  ad  mortem
Neronis  gestis  auctores  veteres  secuti  videantur,
Halle,  1840  ;  Zell,  Ueber  die  Zeitungen  der  alten^
Friburg,  1834  ;  but  the  two  best  works  on  the
subject  are,  Le  Clerc,  Des  Joumaux  chez  les  Bo-
mains,  Paris,  1838,  and  Lieberkiihn,  De  Diumis
Romanorum  Actis,  Weimar.  1840.)

A'CTIA  ("A/cTJo),  a  festival  of  Apollo,  cele-
brated at  Nicopolis  in  Epeirus,  with  wrestling,
musical  contests,  horse-racing,  and  sea -fights.  It
was  establislied  by  Augustus,  in  commemoration
of  his  victory  over  Antony  off  Actium,  and  was
probably  the  revival  of  an  ancient  festival ;   for


ACTIO.

there  was  a  celebrated  temple  of  Apollo  at  Actium,
which  is  mentioned  by  Thucydides  (i.  29),  and
Stnibo  (vii.  p.  325),  and  which  was  enlarged  by
Augustus.  The  games  instituted  by  Augustus
were  celebrated  every  four  years  (irevrafT-npls,
ludi  qidnqucmiaks)  ;  they  received  the  title  of  a
sacred  Agon,  and  were  also  called  Olympia.  (Strab.
l.c.\  Dion  Cass.  li.  1.;  Suet.  Au'g.  18;  Bockh,
Corp.  Inscr.  No.  1720,  p.  845 ;  Krause,  Olympia,
p.  221.)

A'CTIO  is  defined  by  Celsus  (Dig.  44.  tit.  7.
8.  51)  to  be  the  right  of  pursuing  by  judicial  means
(judicio)  what  is  a  man's  due.

With  respect  to  its  subject-matter,  the  actio  was
divided  into  two  great  divisions,  the  in  personam
actio,  and  the  in  rem  actio.  The  in  personam  actio
was  against  a  person  who  was  bound  to  the
plaintiif  by  contract  or  delict,  that  is,  when  the
claim  against  such  person  Avas  '  dare,  facere,  praes-
tare  oportere  ;'  the  m  rem  actio  applied  to  those
cases  where  a  man  claimed  a  corporal  thing  {cm'-
poralis  res)  as  his  property,  or  claimed  a  right,  as
for  instance  the  use  and  enjoyment  of  a  thhig,  or
the  right  to  a  road  over  a  piece  of  ground  (actus).
The  in  rem  actio  was  called  vindicatio  ;  the  in  per-
sonam actio  was  called  in  the  later  law  condictio,
because  originally  the  plaintilF  gave  the  defendant
notice  to  appear  on  a  given  day  for  the  purpose  of
choosing  a  judex.    (Gains,  iv.  5.)

The  old  actions  of  the  Roman  law  were  called
legis  actiones,  or  legitimae,  either  because  they  were
expressly  provided  for  by  laws  (leges),  or  because
they  were  strictly  adapted  to  the  words  of  the  laws,
aud  therefore  could  not  be  varied.  In  like  manner,
the  old  writs  in  England  contained  the  matter  or
claim  of  the  plaintiiF  expressed  according  to  the
legal  rule.*

The  five  modes  of  proceeding  by  legal  action  as
named  and  described  by  Gains  (iv.  12),  were,
Sacramento,  Per  judicis  postulationem.  Per  con-
dictionem.  Per  manus  injectionem,  Per  pignoris
capionem.

But  these  forms  of  action  gradually  fell  into  dis-
use, in  consequence  of  the  excessive  nicety  required,
aud  the  failure  consequent  on  the  slightest  error
in  the  pleadings  ;  of  which  there  is  a  notable  ex-
ample given  by  Gains  himself  (iv.  11),  in  the  case
of  a  plaintiff'  who  complained  of  his  vines  (vites)
being  cut  dowTi,  and  was  told  that  his  action  was
had,  inasmuch  as  he  ought  to  have  used  the  term
trees  (arbores)  and  not  vines ;  because  the  law  of  the
Twelve  Tables,  which  gave  him  the  action  for  damage
to  his  vines,  contained  oiiiy  the  general  expression
"  trees "  (arbores).  The  Lex  Aebutia  and  two
Leges  Juliae  abolished  the  old  legitimae  actiones,
except  in  the  case  of  damiium  infectum  [Damnum
inpectum],  and  in  matters  which  fell  under  the
cognizance  of  the  Centumviri.     [Centumviri.]

In  the  old  Roman  constitution,  the  knowledge
of  the  law  was  closely  connected  with  the  insti-
tutes and  ceremonial  of  religion,  and  was  accord-
ingly in  the  hands  of  the  patricians  alone,  whose
aid  their  clients  were  obliged  to  ask  in  all  their
legal  disputes.  Appius  Claudius  Caecus,  perhaps
one  of  the  earliest  writers  on  law,  drew  up  the

*  "  Breve  quidem  cum  sit  formatum  ad  simili-
tudinem  regulae  juris,  quia  breviter  et  paucis  verbis
intentionem  proferentis  exponit  et  explanat,  sicut
regula  juris,  rem  quae  est  breviter  enarrat."  (Bracton,
£413.)


ACTIO.  &

various  forms  of  actions,  probably  for  his  own  use
and  that  of  his  friends  :  the  manuscript  was  stolen
or  copied  by  his  scribe  Cn.  Flavius,  who  made  it
public:  and  thus,  according  to  the  storj%  the  ple-
beians became  acquainted  with  those  legal  forms
which  hitherto  had  been  the  exclusive  propert}^  of
the  patricians.  (Cic.De  Oral.  i.  41,  pro  Murena,
c.  11  ;  Dig.  1.  tit.  2.  s.  2.  §7.)

Upon  the  old  legal  actions  being  abolished,  it
became  the  practice  to  prosecute  suits  according  to
certain  prescribed  forms  or  fomtiulae,  as  they  were
called,  which  will  be  explained  after  we  have
noticed  various  divisions  of  actions,  as  they  are  made
by  the  Roman  Avriters.

The  division  of  actiones  in  the  Roman  law  is
somewhat  complicated,  and  some  of  the  divisions
must  be  considered  rather  as  emanating  from  the
schools  of  the  rhetoricians  than  from  any  other
source.  But  this  division,  though  complicated,
may  be  somewhat  simplified,  or  at  least  rendered
more  intelligible,  if  we  consider  that  an  action  is  a
claim  or  demand  made  by  one  person  against
another,  and  that  in  order  to  be  a  valid  legal  claim
it  must  be  founded  on  a  legal  right.  The  main
division  of  actions  must  therefore  have  a  reference
or  analogy  to  the  main  division  of  rights ;  for  in
every  system  of  law  the  form  of  the  action  must
be  the  expression  of  the  legal  right.  Now  the
general  division  of  rights  in  the  Roman  law  is  into
rights  of  dominion  or  ownership,  which  are  rights
against  the  whole  world,  and  into  rights  arising
from  contract,  and  quasi  contract,  and  delict.  The
actio  in  rem  implies  a  complainant,  who  claims  a
certain  right  against  every  person  who  may  dis-
pute it,  and  the  object  and  end  of  the  action  are  to
compel  an  acknowledgment  of  the  right  by  the
particular  person  who  disputes  it.  By  this  action
the  plaintilf  maintains  his  property  in  or  to  a  thing,
or  his  rights  to  a  benefit  from  a  thing  (servitutes).
Thus  the  actio  in  rem  is  not  so  called  on  account
of  the  subject-matter  of  the  action,  but  the  term  is  a
technical  phrase  to  express  an  action  which  is  in  no
way  founded  on  contract,  and  therefore  has  no  de-
terminate individual  as  the  other  necessary  party
to  the  action  ;  but  every  individual  who  disputes
the  right  becomes,  by  such  act  of  disputing,  a  party
liable  to  such  action.  The  actio  in  rem  does  not
ascertain  the  complainant's  right,  and  from  the
nature  of  the  action  the  complainant's  right  cannot
be  ascertained  by  it,  for  it  is  a  right  against  all  the
world  ;  but  the  action  determines  that  the  defendant
has  or  has  not  a  claim  which  is  valid  against  the
plaintiff's  claim.  The  actio  in  personam  implies  a
determinate  person  or  persons  against  whom  the
action  lies,  the  right  of  the  plaintiflf  being  founded
on  the  acts  of  the  defendant  or  defendants :  it  is,
therefore,  in  respect  of  something  which  has  been
agreed  to  be  done,  or  in  respect  of  some  injury  for
which  the  plaintiff  claims  compensation.  The  actio
mixta  of  Justinian's  legislation  (Inst.  iv.  tit.  6,  s.  20)
was  so  called  from  its  being  supposed  to  partake  of
the  nature  of  the  actio  in  rem  and  the  actio  in  per-
sonam. Such  was  the  action  among  co-heirs  as  to
the  division  of  the  inheritance,  and  the  action  for
the  purpose  of  settling  boundaries  which  were
confused.

Rights,  and  the  modes  of  enforcing  them,  may
also  be  viewed  with  reference  to  the  sources  from
which  they  flow.  Thus,  the  rights  of  Roman
citizens  flowed  in  part  from  the  sovereign  power,
in  part  from  those  to  whom  power  was  delegated.


10


ACTIO.


That  body  of  law  which  was  founded  on,  and  flowed
from  the  edicts  of  the  praetors,  and  curule  aediles,
was  called  jus  honorarium^  as  opposed  to  the  jus
civile,  in  its  narrower  sense,  which  comprehended
the  leges,  plebiscita,  senatus  consulta,  &c.  The  jus
lionorarium  introduced  new  rights  and  modified
existing  rights  ;  it  also  provided  remedies  suitable
to  such  new  rights  and  modifications  of  old  rights,
and  this  was  eff"ected  by  the  actions  which  the
praetors  and  aediles  allowed.  On  this  jurisdiction
of  the  praetors  and  aediles  is  foimded  the  distinc-
tion of  actions  into  civiles  and  honorariae,  or,  as
they  are  sometimes  called,  praetoriae,  from  the
greater  importance  of  the  praetor's  jurisdiction.

There  were  several  other  divisions  of  actions,  all
of  which  had  reference  to  the  forms  of  procedure.

A  division  of  actions  was  sometimes  made  with
reference  to  the  object  which  the  plaintiff  had  in
view.  If  the  object  was  to  obtain  a  thing,  the
action  was  called  persecutoria.  If  the  object  was
to  obtain  damages  {poena)  for  an  injury,  as  in  the
case  of  a  thing  stolen,  the  action  was  poenalis  ;  for
the  thing  itself  could  be  claimed  both  by  the  vin-
dicatio  and  the  condictio.  If  the  object  was  to
obtain  both  the  thing  and  damages,  it  was  probably
sometimes  called  actio  miccta^  a  term  which  had
however  another  signification  also,  as  already  ob-
served. The  division  of  actiones  into  directae
and  utiles  must  be  traced  historically  to  the  actiones
fictitiae  or  fictions  by  which  the  rights  of  action
were  enlarged  and  extended.  The  origin  of  this
division  was  in  the  power  assumed  by  the  praetor
to  grant  an  action  in  special  cases  where  no  action
could  legally  be  brought,  and  in  which  an  action,  if
brought,  would  have  been  inanis  or  inutilis.  After
the  decline  of  the  praetor's  power,  the  actiones
utiles  were  still  extended  by  the  contrivances  of  the
juris  pvudentes  and  the  rescripts  of  the  emperors.
Whenever  an  actio  utilis  was  granted,  it  was
framed  on  some  analogy  to  a  legally  recognised
right  of  action.  Thus,  in  the  examples  given  b}'-
Gaius  (iv.  34),  he  who  obtained  the  honorum  pos-
sessio  by  the  praetor's  edict,  succeeded  to  the  de-
ceased by  the  praetorian  and  not  the  civil  law  :  he
had,  therefore,  no  direct  action  (directa  actio)  in
respect  of  the  rights  of  the  deceased,  and  could  only
bring  his  action  on  the  fiction  of  his  being  what  he
was  not,  namely,  Jieres.

Actions  were  also  divided  into  ordinariae  and
eoctraordinariae.  The  ordinariae  were  those  which
were  prosecuted  in  the  usual  waj',  first  before  the
praetor,  in  jure,  and  then  before  the  judex,  in
Judicio.  "VVlien  the  whole  matter  was  settled  be-
fore or  by  the  praetor  in  a  summary  way,  the  name
e-xtraordinaria  was  applicable  to  such  action.
[Interdict.]

The  tenn  condidion^s  only  applies  to  personal  ac-
tions ;  but  not  to  all  personal  actions.  It  does  not  com-
prehend actions  ex  delicto,  nor  honae  fidei  actiones.
As  opposed  to  bonae  fidei  actiones,  condictiones  were
sometimes  called  actiones  stricti  juris.  In  the  ac-
tiones stricti  juris  it  appears  that  the  formula  of  the
praetor  expressed  in  precise  and  strict  terms  the
matter  submitted  to  the  judex,  whose  authority
was  thus  confined  within  limits.  In  the  actiones
honae  fidei,  or  ex  fide  bona  (Cic.  Top.  17),  more
latitude  was  given,  either  by  the  formula  of  the
praetor,  or  was  implied  in  the  kind  of  action,  such
as  the  action  ex  empto,  vendito,  locato,  &c.,  and  the
upecial  circumstances  of  the  case  were  to  be  taken
into  consideration  by  the  judex.     The  actiones


ACTIO.

arhitrariae  wore  so  called  from  the  judex  in  such
case  being  called  an  arbiter,  probabl}-,  as  Festus
says,  because  the  whole  matter  in  dispute  was
submitted  to  his  judgment ;  and  he  could  decide
according  to  the  justice  and  equity  of  the  case,
without  being  fettered  by  the  praetor's  formula.
It  should  be  observed  also,  that  the  judex  properly
could  only  condemn  in  a  sum  of  money ;  but  the
arbiter  might  declare  that  any  particular  act  should
be  done  by  either  of  the  parties,  which  was  called
his  arhitrium,  and  was  followed  by  the  condemnatio
if  it  was  not  obeyed.

The  division  of  actions  into  perpetuae  and  tan-
porales  had  reference  to  the  time  within  which  an
action  might  be  brought,  after  the  right  of  action
had  accrued.  Originally  those  actions  which  were
given  by  a  lex,  senatus  consultum,  or  an  imperial
constitution,  might  be  brought  without  any  limi-
tation as  to  time  ;  but  those  which  were  granted
by  the  praetor's  authority  were  generally  limited
to  the  year  of  his  office.  A  time  of  limifcition  was,
however,  fixed  for  all  actions  by  the  late  imperuil
constitutions.

The  division  of  actions  into  actiones  in  jus  and
in  factum  is  properly  no  division  of  actions,  but
has  merely  reference  to  the  nature  of  the  formula.
In  the  formula  in  factum  concepta,  the  praetor
might  direct  the  judex  barely  to  inquire  as  to  the
fact  which  was  the  only  matter  in  issue  ;  and  on
finding  the  foct,  to  make  the  proper  condemnatio  :
as  in  the  case  of  a  freedman  bringing  an  action
against  his  patronus.  (Gaius,  iv,  46.)  In  the
formula  in  jus  the  fact  was  not  in  issue,  but  the
legal  consequences  of  the  fact  Avere  submitted  to
the  discretion  of  the  judex.  The  formula  in  factum
commenced  with  the  technical  expression.  Si  paret,
&c.,  "  If  it  should  appear,"  &c.;  the  fornmla  in  jus
commenced.  Quod  A.  A.,  &c.,  "  Whereas  A.  A.  did
so  and  so."     (Gaius,  iv.  47.)

The  actions  which  had  for  their  object  the
punishment  of  crimes,  were  considered  public  ;  as
opposed  to  those  actions  by  which  some  particular
person  claimed  a  right  or  compensation,  and  which
were  therefore  called  privatae.  The  former  were
properly  called  judicia  publica  ;  and  the  latter,  as
contrasted  with  them,  were  called  judicia  privata.
[Judicium.]

The  actions  called  noxales  arose  when  a  filius
familias  (a  son  in  the  power  of  his  father),  or  a
slave,  committed  a  theft,  or  did  any  injury  to
another.  In  either  case  the  father  or  o\vner  might
give  up  the  Avrong-doer  to  the  person  injured,  or
else  he  must  pay  competent  damages.  These  ac-
tions, it  appears,  ttike  their  name  either  from  the
injury  committed,  or  because  the  wrong-doer  was
liable  to  be  given  up  to  punishment  (noxae)  to  the
person  injured.  Some  of  these  actions  were  of  legal
origin,  as  that  of  theft,  which  was  given  by  the
Twelve  Tables ;  that  o(  damnum  injuriae,  which  was
given  by  the  Aquilia  Lex  ;  and  that  of  injuriarum
et  vi  bonorum  raptorum,  which  was  given  by  the
edict,  and  therefore  was  of  praetorian  origin.  This
instance  will  serve  to  show  that  the  Roman  division
and  classification  of  actions  varied  according  as  the
Roman  writers  contemplated  the  sources  of  rights
of  action,  or  the  remedies  and  the  modes  of  ob-
taining them.

An  action  was  commenced  by  the  plaintiff  sum-
moning the  defendant  to  appear  before  the  praetor
or  other  magistrate  who  had  jurisdictio :  this  pro-
cess was  called  in  jus  vocatio  ;  and,  according  to


ACTIO,
the  .laws  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  was  m  effect  a
dragging  of  the  defendant  before  the  praetor  if  he
refused  to  go  quietly.  This  rude  proceeding  was
modified  in  later  times,  and  in  many  cases  there
could  be  no  in  jus  vocatio  at  all,  and  in  other
cases  it  was  necessary  to  obtain  the  praetor's  per-
mission under  pain  of  a  penalt}'.  It  was  also
established  that  a  man  could  not  be  dragged  from
his  owTi  house  ;  but  if  a  man  kept  his  house  to
avoid,  as  we  should  say,  being  served  with  a  writ,
he  ran  the  risk  of  a  kind  of  sequestration  {actor
in  bona  mittehatur).  The  object  of  these  rules
was  to  make  the  defendant  appear  before  the
competent  jm-isdiction  ;  the  device  of  entering  an
appearance  for  the  defendant  does  not  seem  to
have  suggested  itself  to  the  Roman  lawyers.  (Dig.  2.
tit.  4.)  ,If  the  defendant  would  not  go  quietly,
the  plaintiff  aiUed  on  any  bystander  to  Avitness
(antestari)  that  he  had  been  duly  summoned,
touched  the  ear  of  the  witness,  and  dragged  the
defendant  into  court.  (Hor.  Serm.  i.  9.  75 — 78  ;
Plautus,  Curcul.  v.  2.)  The  parties  might  settle
their  dispute  on  their  way  to  the  court,  or  the  de-
fendant might  be  bailed  by  a  vindex.  (Cic.  Top.
2  ;  Gaius,  iv.  46;  GeUms,  xvi.  10.)  The  vindex
must  not  be  confounded  with  the  vades.  This
settlement  of  disputes  on  the  way  was  called  trans-
actio  in  via,  and  serves  to  explain  a  passage  in  St.
Matthew  (v.  25).*

When  before  the  praetor,  the  parties  were  said
J7i7'e  agere.  The  plaintiff  then  prayed  for  an  ac-
tion, and  if  the  praetor  allowed  it  {dabat  actionem),
he  then  declared  what  action  he  intended  to  bring
against  the  defendant,  which  was  called  edere
actionem.  This  might  be  done  in  writing,  or
orally,  or  by  the  plaintiff  taking  the  defendant  to
the  al/jum,  and  showing  him  which  action  he  in-
tended to  rely  on.  (Dig.  2.  tit.  13.)  As  the
formulue  comprehended,  or  were  supposed  to  com-
prehend, every  possible  form  of  action  that  could
be  required  by  a  plaintiff,  it  was  presumed  that  he
could  find  among  all  the  formulae  some  one  which
was  adapted  to  his  case,  and  he  was  accordingly
supposed  to  be  without  excuse  if  he  did  not  take
pfiins  to  select  the  proper  formula.  (Cic.  Pro  lios.
Com.  c.  8.)  If  he  took  the  wrong  one,  or  if  he
claimed  more  than  his  due,  he  lost  his  cause  (causa
cadebat,  Cic.  De  Orat.  i.  36)  ;  but  the  praetor  some-
times gave  him  leave  to  amend  his  c\vi\m  ovintentio.
(Gaius,  iv.  53,  &c.)  If,  for  example,  the  contract
between  the  parties  was  for  something  in  genere,
and  the  plaintiff'  claimed  something  in  specie,  he
lost  his  action :  thus  the  contract  might  be,  that
the  defendant  undertook  to  sell  the  plaintiff  a
quantity  of  dye-stuff  or  a  slave ;  if  the  plaintiff
claimed  Tyrian  purple,  or  a  particular  slave,  his
action  was  bad ;  therefore,  says  Gaius,  according
to  the  terms  of  the  contract  so  ought  the  claim  of
the  intentin  to  be.  As  the  formulae  were  so  numer-
ous and  comprehensive,  the  plaintiff  had  only  to
select  the  foi-mula  which  he  supposed  to  be  suitable
to  his  case,  and  it  would  require  no  further  valua-
tion than  the  insertion  of  the  names  of  the  parties
and  of  the  thing  claimed,  or  the  subject-matter  of
the  suit,  with  the  amount  of  damages,  &c.,  as  the
case  might  be.  When  the  praetor  had  granted  an
action,  the  plaintiff  required  the  defendant  to  give

*  It  is  not  easy  to  state  correctly  the  changes
in  procedure  Avhich  took  place  after  the  abolition
of  the  legitimae  actiones.  Compare  Gaius  iv.  25,  46.


ACTIO.  11

security  for  his  appearance  before  the  praetor  (in
jure)  on  a  day  named,  commonly  the  day  but  one
after  the  injus  vocatio,  unless  the  matter  in  dispute
was  settled  at  once.  The  defendant,  on  finding  a
surety,  was  said  vades  dare  (Yiox.  Serm.  i.  i.  11),
vadimonium  promittere,  or  facere;  the  surety,  vasy
was  said  spondere ;  the  plaintiff  when  satisfied
with  the  surety  was  said,  vadari  reum,  to  let  him
go  on  his  sui-eties,  or  to  have  sureties  from  him.
When  the  defendant  promised  to  appear  injure  on
the  day  named,  without  giving  tmy  surety,  this  was
called  vadimonium  purum.  In  some  cases  recu-
peratores  were  named,  who,  in  case  of  the  de-
fendant making  default,  condemned  him  in  the
sum  of  money  named  in  the  vadimonium.

If  the  defendant  appeared  on  the  day  appointed,
he  was  said  vadimonium  sistcre  ;  if  he  did  not  ap-
pear, he  was  said  vadimonium  desei'uisse,  and  the
praetor  gave  to  the  plaintiff  the  bonorum  possessio.
(Hor.  &erm.  i.  9.  36—41 ;  Cic.  Pro  P.  Quintio,
c.  6.)  Both  parties,  on  the  day  appointed,  were
summoned  by  a  crier  (praeco),  when  the  plaintiff
made  his  claim  or  demand,  which  was  very  briefly
expressed,  and  may  be  considered  as  corresponding
to  our  declaration  at  law.

The  defendant  might  either  deny  the  plaintiff's
claim,  or  he  might  reply  to  it  by  a  plea,  exceptio.
If  he  simply  denied  the  plamtiffs  claim,  the  cause
was  at  issue,  and  a  judex  might  be  demanded.
The  forms  of  the  exceptio  also  were  contained  in
the  praetor's  edict,  or  upon  hearing  the  facts  the
praetor  a  !apted  the  plea  to  the  case.  The  exceptio
was  the  defendant's  defence,  and  was  often  merely
an  equitable  answer  or  plea  to  the  plaintiffs  legal
demand.  The  plaintiff  might  claim  a  thing  upon
his  contract  with  the  defendant,  and  the  defendant
might  not  deny  the  contract,  but  might  put  in  a
plea  of  fraud  (dolus  malus),  or  that  he  had  been
constrained  to  come  to  such  agreement.  The
exceptio  was  in  effect  something  which  negatived
the  plaintiff's  demand,  and  it  was  expressed  by  a
negative  clause :  thus,  if  the  defendant  asserted  that
the  plaintiff  fraudulently  claimed  a  sum  of  money
which  he  had  not  given  to  the  defendant,  the  ex-
ceptio would  run  thus  :  Si  in  ea  re  nihil  dolo  mulo
Auli  Agerii  factum  sit  neqite  fiat.  Though  the
exceptio  proceeded  from  the  defendant,  it  was  ex-
pressed in  this  fonn,  in  order  to  be  adapted  for
insertion  in  the  formula,  and  to  render  the  con-
demnaiio  subject  to  the  condition.

Exceptions  were  peremptoriae  or  dilatoriae.
Peremptory  exceptions  were  a  complete  and  per-
petual answer  to  the  plaintiffs  demand,  such  as
an  exceptio  of  dolus  malus,  or  of  res  judicata.
Dilatory  exceptions  were,  as  the  name  imports,
merely  calculated  to  delay  the  plaintiffs  demand  ;
as,  for  instance,  by  showing  that  the  debt  or  duty
claimed  was  not  yet  due.  Gaius  considers  the  ex-
ceptio litis  dividuae  and  rei  residuae  (iv.  122)  as
belonging  to  this  class.  If  a  plaintiff  prosecuted
his  action  after  a  dilatory  exception,  he  lost  alto-
gether his  right  of  action.  There  might  be  dilatory
exceptions  also  to  the  person  of  the  plaintiff,  of
which  class  is  the  exceptio  cognitoria,  by  which  the
defendant  objects  either  that  the  plaintiff  is  not
mtitled  to  sue  by  a  cognitor,  or  that  the  cognitor
whom  he  had  named  was  not  qualified  to  act  as  a
cognitor.  If  the  exception  was  allowed,  the  plaintiff
could  either  sue  himself,  or  name  a  proper  cognitor,
as  the  case  might  be.  If  a  defendant  neglected  to
take  advantage  of  a  peremptory  exceptio^  the  praetor


12  ACTIO.

might  afterwai'ds  give  him  permission  to  avail  him-
self of  it ;  whether  he  could  do  the  same  in  the  case
of  a  dilatory  was  a  doubtful  question.  (Gaius,  iv.
125.)

The  plaintiff  might  reply  to  the  defendant's  ex-
ceptio,  for  the  defendant  by  putting  in  his  plea  be-
came an  actor.  [Actor.]  The  defendant's  plea
might  be  good,  and  a  complete  answer  to  the  plain-
tiiTs  demand,  and  yet  the  plaintiff  might  allege
something  that  would  be  an  answer  to  the  plea.
Thus,  in  the  example  given  by  Gaius  (iv.  126),  if
an  argentarius  claimed  the  price  of  a  thing  sold  by
auction,  the  defendant  might  put  in  a  plea,  which,
when  inserted  in  the  formula,  would  be  of  this
shape :  —  Ut  ita  demum  emptor  damnetur,  si  ei  res
gttam  emerit,  tradita  sit ;  and  this  would  be  in  fonn
a  good  plea.  But  if  the  conditions  of  sale  were  that
the  article  should  not  be  handed  to  the  purchaser
before  the  money  was  paid,  the  argentarius  might
put  in  a  replicatio  in  this  shape  :  — Nisi  praedictum
est  ne  aliter  emptori  res  traderetur  quam  si  pretium
emptor  solverit.  If  the  defendant  answered  the
replicaiio^  his  answer  was  called  duplicatio  ;  and  the
parties  might  go  on  to  the  triplicatio  and  quadrupli-
catio,  and  even  further,  if  the  matters  in  question
were  such  that  they  could  not  otherwise  be  brought
to  an  issue.

The praescriptio,  which  was  so  called  from  being
written  at  the  head  or  beginning  of  the  formula,
was  adapted  for  the  protection  of  the  plaintiff  in
certain  cases.  (Gaius,  iv.  130,  &c. ;  Cic.  De  Orat.
i.  37.)  For  instance,  if  the  defendant  was  bound
to  make  to  the  plaintiff  a  certain  fixed  payment
yearly  or  monthly',  the  plaintiff  had  a  good  cause
of  action  for  all  the  sums  of  money  already  due ;
but  in  order  to  avoid  making  his  demand  for  the
future  payments  not  yet  due,  it  was  necessary  to
use  a  praescription  of  the  following  form:  —  Ea
res  agatur  cujus  rei  diesfuit.

A  person  might  maintain  or  defend  an  action  by
his  cojnitor  or  procurator,  or,  as  we  should  say,  by
his  attorney.  The  plaintiff  and  defendant  used  a
certain  form  of  words  in  appointing  a  cognitor,  and
it  would  appear  that  the  appointment  was  made  in
the  presence  of  both  pai'ties.  The  cognitor  needed
not  to  be  present,  and  his  appointment  was  com-
plete when  by  his  acts  he  had  signified  his  assent.
(Cic.  Pro  Q.  JRoscio,  c.  2 ;  Hor.  Serm.  i.  5.  35.)
No  form  of  words  was  necessary  for  appointing  a
procurator,  and  he  might  be  appointed  without  the
knowledge  of  the  opposite  party.

In  many  cases  both  plaintiff  and  defendant
might  be  required  to  give  security  (satisdare)  ;  for
instance,  in  the  case  of  an  actio  in  rem,  the  de-
fendant who  was  in  possession  was  required  to
give  security,  in  order  that  if  he  lost  his  cause  and
did  not  restore  the  thing,  nor  pay  its  estimated
value,  the  plaintiff  might  have  an  action  against
'him  or  his  sureties.  When  the  actio  in  rem  was
prosecuted  by  the  formula  petitoria,  that  stipulatio
was  made  which  was  caX\e6.  judicatum  solvi.  As  to
its  prosecution  by  the  sponsio,  see  Spoxsio  and
Centumviri.  If  the  plaintiff  sued  in  his  own
name,  he  gave  no  security  ;  nor  was  any  security
required,  if  a  cognitor  sued  for  him,  either  from
the  cognitor  or  the  plaintiff  himself,  for  the  cog-
nitor was  personally  liable.  But  if  a  procurator
acted  for  him,  he  was  obliged  to  give  security  that
the  plaintiff  would  adopt  his  acts  ;  for  the  plaintiff
was  not  prevented  from  bringing  another  action
•when   a  procurator  acted  for  him.     Tutors  and


ACTIO.

curators  generally  gave  secmrity  like  procurators.
In  the  case  of  an  actio  in  personam,  the  same  rules
applied  to  the  plaintiff  as  in  the  actio  in  rem.  If
the  defendant  appeared  by  a  cognitor,  the  defendant
had  to  give  security ;  if  by  a  procurator,  the  pro-
curator had  to  give  security.

When  the  cause  was  brought  to  an  issue,  a
judex  or  judices  might  be  demanded  of  the  praetor
who  named  or  appointed  a  judex  and  delivered  to
him  the  formula  which  contained  his  instructions.
The  judices  were  said  dari  or  addki.  So  far  the
proceedings  were  said  to  be  in  jure  ;  the  prosecu-
tion of  the  actio  before  the  judex  requires  a  separate
discussion.     [Judicium.]

The  following  is  an  example  of  a  formula  taken
from  Gaius  (iv.  47) :  —  Judex  esto.  Si  paret  Aulum
Agerium  apud  Numerium  Negidinm  mensum
argcTUeam  deposuisse  eamque  dolo  mulo  Numerii
Negidii  Aulo  Agerio  redditam,  non  esse  quanii  ea
res  erit  tantam  pecimiamjudex  Numerium  Negidium
A  ulo  Agerio  condemnato  :  si  non  paret,  absolvito.

The  nature  of  the  formula,  however,  will  be
better  understood  from  the  following  analysis  of  it
by  Gaius  :  —  It  consisted  of  four  parts,  the  demm-
stratio,  inte?itio,  adjudicatio,  condemnatio.  The
demonstratio  is  that  part  of  the  formula  which
explains  what  the  subject-matter  of  the  action  is.
For  instance,  if  the  subject-matter  be  a  slave  sold,
the  demonstratio  would  run  thus:  —  Quod  Aulus
Agerius  Numerio  Negidio  hominem  vendidit.  The
intentio  contains  the  claim  or  demand  of  the
plaintiff: — Si  paret  hominem  ex  jure  Quiritium  Auli
Agerii  esse.  The  adjudicatio  is  that  part  of  the
formula  which  gives  the  judex  authority  to  adju-
dicate the  thing  Avhich  is  the  subject  of  dispute  to
one  or  other  of  the  litigant  parties.  If  the  action
be  among  partners  for  dividing  that  Avhich  belongs
to  them  all,  the  adjudication  would  run  thus :  —
Quantum  adjudicari  oportet  jude^  Titio  adjudicato.
The  condemtiatio  is  that  part  of  the  formula  which
gives  the  judex  authority  to  condemn  the  de-
fendant in  a  sum  of  money,  or  to  acquit  him :
for  example.  Judex  Numerium  Negidium  Aulo
Agerio  sestertium  milia  condemna:  si  non  paret,
absolve.  Sometimes  the  intentio  alone  was  requisite,
as  in  the  formulae  called  praejudiciales  (which  some
modern  writers  make  a  class  of  actions),  in  which
the  matter  for  inquiry  was,  whether  a  certain  person
was  a  freedman,  what  was  the  amount  of  a  dos,  and
other  similar  questions,  when  a  fact  solely  was  the
thing  to  be  ascertained.

Whenever  the  formula  contained  the  condem-
natio, it  was  framed  with  the  view  to  pecuniary
damages ;  and  accordingl}'-,  even  when  the  plaintiff
claimed  a  particular  thing,  the  judex  did  not
adjudge  the  defendant  to  give  the  thing,  as  was
the  ancient  practice  at  Rome,  but  condemned  him
in  a  sum  of  money  equivalent  to  the  value  of  the
thing.  The  formula  might  either  name  a  fixed
sum,  or  leave  the  estimation  of  the  value  of  the
thing  to  the  judex,  who  in  all  cases,  however,  was
bound  to  name  a  definite  sum  in  the  condemnation.

The  formula  then  contained  the  pleadings,  or
the  statements  and  counter-statements,  of  the
plaintiff  and  the-  defendant ;  for  the  intentio,  as  we
have  seen,  was  the  plaintiff's  declaration ;  and  if
this  was  met  by  a  plea,  it  was  necessary  that  this
also  should  be  inserted  in  the  formula.  The
formula  also  contained  the  directions  for  the  judex,
and  gave  him  the  power  to  act.  The  English  and
Roman   procedure  are   severally   stated    in    Mr,


ACTOR.

Spencc's  work  on  the  EquitaLle  Jurisdiction  of  the
Court  of  Chancery,  pp.  206 — 235.  The  Roman
forms  of  procedure  underwent  various  changes  in
the  course  of  time,  which  it  is  not  very  easy  to
describe  ;  but  it  has  been  remarked  by  Hollweg
{Handbuch  des  Civilprozesses,  p.  1 9)  that  the  system
of  procedure  maintained  itself  in  all  essential  par-
ticulars unaltered  for  many  centuries,  and  what
we  learn  from  Cicero  (b.  c.  70)  is  almost  the  same
as  what  we  learn  from  Gaius  (a.  d.  1 60).  Modern
writers,  however,  differ  on  various  points  ;  and  the
subject  requires  a  complete  examination  from  one
who  is  fully  acquainted  with  the  Roman  law,  and
practically  versed  in  the  nature  of  legal  proceedings
generally.

The  following  are  the  principal  actions  which
Ave  road  of  in  the  R,oman  writers,  and  which  are
briefly  described  under  their  several  heads :  —
Actio  —  Aquae  pluviae  arcendae  ;  Bonorum  vi
i-aptoram ;  Certi  et  Incerti ;  Commodati;  Com-
muni  dividundo  ;  Confessoria ;  Damni  injuria  dati ;
Dejecti  vel  effusi ;  Depensi ;  Depositi ;  De  dolo
malo ;  Emti  et  venditi ;  Exercitoria ;  Ad  Exhi-
bendum  ;  Familiae  erciscundae ;  Fiduciaria  ;  Fi-
nium  regundorum  ;  Furti ;  Hypothecaria ;  Injuria  •
rum  ;  Institoria  ;  Judicati  ;  Quod  jussu  ;  Legis
Aquiliae  ;  Locati  et  conducti ;  Mandati  ;  Mutui  ;
Negativa  ;  Negotiorum  gestorum  ;  Noxalis  ;  De
pauperie  ;  De  peculio  ;  Pignoraticia,  or  Pignora-
titia  ;  Publiciana  ;  Quanti  minoris  ;  Rationibus
distrahendis  ;  De  recepto  ;  Redhibitoria  ;  Rei
uxoriae,  or  Dotis  ;  Restitutoria  and  Rescissoria ;
Rutiliana  ;  Serviana  ;  Pro  socio ;  Tributoria ;
Tutelae.  [G.  L.]

ACTOR  signified  generally  a  plaintiff.  In  a
civil  or  private  action,  the  plaintiff  Avas  often  called
petitor  ;  in  a  public  action  {causa  puhlica),  he  was
called  accusator.  (Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  16.)  The  de-
fendant was  called  reus,  both  in  private  and  public
causes:  this  term,  however,  according  to  Cicero
{De  Orat.  ii.  43),  might  signify  either  party,  as  in-
deed we  might  conclude  from  the  Avord  itself.  In
a  pri\-ate  action,  the  defendant  was  often  called
adversarius,  but  either  party  might  be  called  ad-
versarius  with  respect  to  the  other.  Originally,  no
person  who  was  not  sui  juris  could  maintain  an
action  ;  a  Jilius  familias,  therefore,  and  a  slave,
could  not  maintain  an  action  ;  but  in  course  of
time  certain  actions  were  allowed  to  Vi  filius  familias
in  the  absence  of  his  parent  or  his  procurator,  and
also  in  case  the  parent  was  incompetent  to  act
from  madness  or  other  like  cause.  (Dig.  47.  tit.  10.
s.  1 7.)  Wards  {pvpiUi)  brought  their  actions  by
their  tutor  {tutor)  ;  and  in  case  they  wished  to
bring  an  action  against  their  tutor,  the  praetor
named  a  tutor  for  the  purpose.  (Gaius,  i.  184.)
Peregrini,  or  aliens,  originally  brought  their  action
through  their  patronus  ;  but  afterwards  in  their
own  name,  by  a  fiction  of  law,  that  they  were
Roman  citizens.  A  Roman  citizen  might  also
generally  bring  his  action  by  means  of  a  cognitor
or  procurator.  [Actio.]  A  universitas  or  cor-
porate body,  sued  and  was  sued  by  their  actor  or
syndicus.     (Dig.  3.  tit.  4.)

Actor  has  also  the  sense  of  an  agent  or  manager
of  another's  business  generally.  The  actor  puhlicus
was  an  officer  who  had  the  superintendence  or  care
of  slaves  belonging  to  the  state.  Lipsius  says  that
the  actor  pvblicus  Avas  a  slaA'e  or  freedman.  A  slave
could  acquire  property  for  others,  though  not  for
himselt     In  the  case  mentioned  by  Pliny  {Ep.  vii.


ACUS.


18),  the  actor  pzihlicus  was  the  representative  of
the  community  {respuhlica)  of  Comum.  (Tacit.
Ann.  ii.  30,  iii.  67;  Lips.  Excurs.  ad  Tacit.  Ann.  ii
30.)  [G.  Lj

ACTUA'RIAE  NAVES.  [Navis.]
ACTUA'RII,  or  ACTA'RII,  clerks  Avho  com-
piled  the  Acta  Publica.  [Acta,  p.  8,  b.]  The
name  is  also  sometimes  given  to  the  Notarii,  or
short-hand  writers,  Avho  took  down  the  speeches
in  the  senate  and  the  courts  (Suet.  Jul.  55  ;  Sen.
Ep.  33)  ;  respecting  Avhom  and  the  use  of  short-
hand among  the  Romans,  see  Notarii.

2.  Military  officers  whose  duty  it  was  to  keep
the  accounts  of  the  army,  to  see  that  the  con-
tractors supplied  the  soldiers  with  provisions  ac-
cording to  agreement,  &c.  (Amm.  Marc.  xx.  5  ;
Cod.  12.  tit.  37.  s.  5.  16  ;  12.  tit.  49.)

3.  The  title  of  certain  physicians  at  the  coiul
of  Constantinople.  [Medicus.]

ACTUS,  a  Roman  measure  of  land,  which
formed  the  basis  of  the  Avhole  system  of  land
measurement.  In  that  system  the  name  actus  (from
ago),  AA^hich  originally  meant  a  way  betAveen  fields
for  beasts  of  burthen  to  pass  (or,  as  some  say,
the  length  of  a  furrow),  Avas  given  to  such  a  way
when  of  a  definite  width  and  length,  and  also  to
a  square  piece  of  land  of  the  same  length.  The
former  Avas  called  actus  minimus  or  simplex,  and
Avas  120  feet  (Roman)  long  by  4  feet  wide.  (VaiTo,
L.  L.  iv.  4,  or  v.  34,  Miiller  ;  Colum.  v.  1.  §  5,
ed.  Schneider ;  Festus,  s.  v.  iter  inter  vicinos  IV.
pedum  latum).  The  actus  quadratus,  Avhich  Avas
the  square  unit  in  the  system  of  Roman  land-
measurement,  was  of  the  same  length  as  the  actus
minimus,  and  of  a  width  equal  to  its  length:  it
was  thus  120  feet  square,  and  contained  14,400
square  feet.  It  Avas  the  half  of  a  juger.  (Colum.
I.e. ;  Varro,  I.  c,  and  R.  R.  i.  1 0.  §  2,  ed.  Schneider).
The  following  are  the  etymological  explanations  of
the  word :  Actus  vocahatur,  in  quo  loves  agerentur
cum  aratro,  uno  impetu  justo  (Plin.  xviii.  3)  ;  Ut
ager  quo  agi  poterat,  sic  qua  agi  actus.  (Varro,  L.  L.
I.  c.)  The  actus  furnishes  an  example  of  the  use  of
the  number  twelve  among  the  Romans,  its  length
being  tAvelve  times  the  standard  decempeda.
Columella  {I.  c.  §  6)  says  that  the  Gauls  called  the
actus  quadratus,  aripennis  ;  but  this  could  only  be
an  approximate  identification,  for  the  actus  qua-
dratus is  someAvhat  smaller  than  the  great  French
arpent  and  much  larger  than  the  small  arpent.
(Compare  Acna  ;  Niebuhr,  Hist,  of  Rome,  vol.  ii.
Appendix  I.)  [P.  S.]

ACTUS.     [Servitutes.]

ACUS  {fieXSurj,  fieXovis,  pa(pis),  a  needle,  a  pin.
The  annexed  figures  of  needles  and  pins,  chiefly


14


ADLECTI.


taken  from  originals  in  bronze,  vary  in  length  ^om
an  inch  and  a  half  to  about  eight  inches.

Pins  were  made  not  only  of  metal,  but  also  of
wood,  bone,  and  ivory.  They  were  used  for  the
same  purposes  as  with  us,  and  also  in  dressing  the
hair.  (Mart.  xiv.  24.)  The  mode  of  platting  the
hair,  and  then  fastening  it  with  a  pin  or  needle,  is
shown  in  the  annexed  figure  of  a  female  nead,
taken  from  a  marble  group  which  was  found  at
Apt,  in  the  south  of  France.  (Montfaucon,  Ant.
Ejcp.   Suppl.  iii.   3.)     This  fashion  has  been  con-


tinued to  our  own  times  by  the  females  of  Italy,
and  of  some  parts  of  Germany,  as  for  instance,  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Coblenz.

ADDICTI.     [NEXI.J

ADDI'CTIO.     [Actio.]

ADDIX  (aSSi|,  65Si|is),  a  Greek  measure  of
capacity,  equal  to  four  xo'Vi/ces.  (Hesych.  s.  v.  ;
Schol.  ad  Horn.  Od.  19.)  [P.  S.]

ADEIA  (^Seta),  freedom  from  fear,  or  security,
in  any  public  action.  When  any  one  in  Athens,
who  had  not  the  full  privileges  of  an  Athenian
citizen,  such  as  a  foreigner,  a  slave,  &c.,  wished  to
accuse  a  person  of  any  oifence  against  the  people,
he  was  obliged  to  obtain  first  permission  to  do  so,
which  permission  was  called  adeia.  (Plut.  Pericl.
31.)  An  Athenian  citizen  who  had  incurred
atimia,  was  also  obliged  to  obtain  adeia  before  he
could  take  part  in  public  aifairs  (Plut.  Phoc.  26)  ;
and  it  was  not  lawful  for  any  one  to  propose  to  the
people,  that  an  atimus  should  be  restored  to  his
rights  as  a  citizen,  or  that  a  public  debtor  should
be  released  from  his  debt,  till  adeia  had  been
granted  for  this  purpose  by  a  decree  passed  in  an
assembly  of  6000  citizens  voting  secretly  by  ballot.
(Dem.  c.  Timocr.  p.  715  ;  Andoc.  de  Myst.  p.  36  ;
Bockh,  PvJ»lic  Economy  of  Atliens^  p.  392,  2d  ed.)

ADE'MPTIO.     [Legatum.]

ADGNA'TI.     [CoGNATi.]

ADGNA'TIO.     [Heres  ;  Testamentum.]

ADI'TIO  IIEREDITA'TIS.     [Heres.]

ADJUDICA'TIO.     [Actio.]

ADLECTI  or  ALLECTI.  1.  Those  who  were
chosen  to  fill  up  a  vacancy  in  any  office  or  colle-
gium, and  especially  those  who  were  chosen  to  fill
up  the  proper  number  of  the  senate.  As  these
would  be  generally  equites,  Festus  (s.  v.)  defines
the  adlecti  to  be  equites  added  to  the  senate  :  and
he  appears  in  this  passage  to  make  a  difference  be-
tween the  adlecti  and  conscripti.  But  they  were
probably  the  sama  ;  for  in  another  passage  {s.  v.
conscripti)y  he  gives  the  same  definition  of  the  con-


ADOPTIO.

scripti  as  he  had  done  of  the  adlecti,  and  Livy  (ii.
1)  says  conscriptos  in  novum  senatum  appelluhant
lectos,

2.  Those  persons  under  the  empire  who  were
admitted  to  the  privileges  and  honours  of  the  prae-
torship,  quaestorship,  aedileship,  and  other  public
offices,  without  having  any  duties  to  perform.
(Capitolin.  Pertin.  6.)  In  inscriptions  we  con-
stantly find,  adlectus  inter  tribunos,  inter  quaestores^
inter  praetores,  &c.

ADLECTOR,  a  collector  of  taxes  in  the  pro-
vinces in  the  time  of  the  Roman  emperors.  (Cod.
Theod.  12.  tit.  6.  s.  12.)

ADMISSIONA'LES  were  chamberlains  at  the
imperial  court,  who  introduced  persons  to  the
presence  of  the  emperor.  (Lamprid.  Sever.  4  ^
officium  admissionis.  Suet.  Vesp.  14.)  They  were
divided  into  four  classes  ;  the  chief  officer  of  each
class  was  called  proximus  admissionum  (Amm.
Marc.  xxii.  7)  ;  and  the  proocimi  were  under  the
magister  admissionum.  (Amm.  Marc,  xv.  5  ;  Vop.
Aurel.  12.)  The  admissionales  were  usually
freedmen.  (Cod.  Theod.  6.  tit.  2.  s.  12  ;  tit.  9.
s.  2  ;  tit.  35.  s.  3.)

Friends  appear  to  have  been  called  amid  admis-
sionis  primae,  secundae,  or  teiiiae.  According  to
some  writers,  they  were  so  called  in  consequence
of  the  order  in  which  they  were  admitted  ;  accord-
ing to  others,  because  the  atrium  was  divided  into
different  parts,  separated  from  one  another  by
hangings,  into  which  persons  were  admitted  ac-
cording to  the  different  degrees  of  favour  in  which
they  were  held.  (Sen.  de  Bene/,  vi.  33,  34,  Clem,
i.  10.)

ADOLESCENS.     [Infans.]

ADO'NIA  ('AScovm),  a  festival  celebrated  in
honour  of  Aphrodite  and  Adonis  in  most  of  the
Grecian  cities,  as  well  as  in  numerous  places  in
the  East.  It  lasted  two  days,  and  was  celebrated
by  women  exclusively.  On  the  first  day  they
brought  into  the  streets  statues  of  Adonis,  which
were  laid  out  as  corpses  ;  and  they  observed  all
the  rites  customary  at  funerals,  beating  themselves
and  uttering  lamentations.  The  second  day  was
spent  in  merriment  and  feasting  ;  because  Adonis
was  allowed  to  return  to  life,  and  spend  half  of
the  year  with  Aphrodite.  (Aristoph.  Paa^,  412,
Schol.  ad  loc.  ;  Plut.  Alcih.  18,  Nic.  13.)  For
fuller  particulars  respecting  the  worship  and  festi-
vals of  Adonis,  sec  Diet,  of  Biogr.s.  v.  Adonis.

ADO'PTIO,  adoption.  1.  Greek,  was  called
by  the  Athenians  eicnroir^ffis,  or  sometimes  simply
irolrjcris  or  ^ecris.  The  Greek  writers  use  ^eais
also  as  equivalent  to  the  Roman  adoptio.,  and  S>ctoI
as  equivalent  to  adoptivi.  (App.  i5.  C.  iii.  13,  14.)
The  adoptive  father  was  said  ironladai,  da-iroLei-
(Tdai,  or  sometimes  Troielv :  and  the  father  or  mother
(for  a  mother  after  the  death  of  her  husband
could  consent  to  her  son  being  adopted)  was  said
eKiroi€7u :  the  son  was  said  iKiroielaOai,  with  re-
ference to  the  family  which  he  left ;  and  ela-iroie?-
adai,  with  reference  to  the  family  into  which  he  was
received.  The  son,  when  adopted,  was  called
iroi-qTSs,  el(nroir]T6s,  ot^€t6s:  in  opposition  to  the
legitimate  son  born  of  the  body  of  the  father,  who
was  called  yvfja-ios.

A  man  might  adopt  a  son  either  in  his  lifetime
or  by  his  testament,  provided  he  had  no  male  off-
spring and  was  of  sound  mind.  He  might  also,  by
testament,  name  a  person  to  take  his  property,  in
case  his  son  or  sons  should  die  under  age.     (Dera.


ADOPTIO.
KoTck  "^Ticbdvov  YeuS,  13.)  If  he  had  male
oitsprhig,  he  could  not  dispose  of  his  property.
This  rule  of  law  was  closely  connected  with  the
rule  as  to  adoption  ;  for  if  he  could  have  adopted
a  son  when  he  had  male  children,  such  son  would
have  shared  his  property  with  the  rest  of  his  male
children,  and  to  that  extent  the  father  would  have
exercised  a  power  of  disposition  which  the  law  de-
nied him.

Only  Athenian  citizens  could  be  adopted  ;  but
females  could  be  adopted  (by  testament  at  least)  as
well  as  males.  (Isaeus,  IlepI  rov  'Ayviov  KAirjpou.)
The  adopted  child  was  transferred  from  his  own
family  and  demus  into  those  of  the  adoptive
father  ;  he  inherited  his  property  and  maintained
the  sacra  of  his  adoptive  fat'ner.  It  was  not
necessary  for  him  to  take  his  new  father's  name,
but  he  was  registered  as  his  son.  The  adopted
son  might  return  to  his  foiTncr  family,  in  case  he
left  a  child  to  represent  the  family  of  his  adoptive
father:  unless  he  so  returned,  he  lost  all  right
Avhich  he  might  have  had  on  his  father's  side  if  he
had  not  been  adopted  ;  but  he  retained  all  rights
which  he  might  have  on  his  mother's  side,  for
the  act  of  adoption  had  no  effect  so  far  as  concerned
the  mother  of  the  adopted  person  ;  she  still  con-
tinued his  mother  after  the  act  of  adoption.

The  next  of  kin  of  an  Athenian  citizen  were
intitled  to  his  property  if  he  made  no  disposition
of  it  by  will,  or  made  no  valid  adoption  during  his
lifetime  ;  they  were,  therefore,  interested  in  pre-
venting fraudulent  adoptions.  The  whole  com-
munity were  also  interested  in  preventing  the  in-
troduction into  their  body  of  a  person  who  was  not
an  Athenian  citizen.  To  protect  the  rights  of  the
next  of  kin  against  unjust  claims  by  persons  who
alleged  themselves  to  be  adopted  sons,  it  was  re-
quired that  the  father  should  enter  his  son,  whether
bom  of  his  body  or  adopted,  in  the  register  of  his
phratria  {<ppaTpiKbv  ypafiixar^lov)  at  a  certain
time,  the  Thargelia  (Isaeus,  Uipl  rod  'A-TroXKodccp.
K\'fipov,  3,  5),  with  the  privity  of  his  kinsmen  and
phratores  (yeuuT^Tai,  (ppdropes).  Subsequently
to  this,  it  was  necessary  to  enter  him  in  the
register  of  the  adoptive  father's  demus  (Arj^iapx^i^^^
ypaix/iaTcTov),  without  which  registration  it  ap-
pears that  he  did  not  possess  the  full  rights  of
citizenship  as  a  member  of  his  new  demus.

If  the  adoption  was  by  testament,  registration
was  also  required,  which  we  may  presume  that  the
person  himself  might  procure  to  be  done,  if  he  was
of  age,  or,  if  not,  his  guardian  or  next  friend.  If
a  dispute  arose  as  to  the  property  of  the  deceased
(Kk-fipov  SiaSi/cocri'a)  between  the  son  adopted  by
testament  and  the  next  of  kin,  there  could  properly
be  no  registration  of  the  adopted  son  until  the  tes-
tament was  established.  If  a  man  died  childless
and  intestate,  his  next  of  kin,  according  to  the
Athenian  rules  of  succession  (Dem.  Uphs  Aew^,
c.  6),  took  his  property  by  the  right  of  blood
(dyxiCTeia  Kara  yevos).  Though  registration
might  in  this  case  also  be  required,  there  was  no
adoption  properly  so  called,  as  some  modern  writers
suppose ;  for  the  next  of  kin  necessarily  belonged
to  the  family  of  the  intestate.

The  rules  as  to  adoption  among  the  Athenians
are  not  quite  free  from  difficulty,  and  it  is  not  easy
to  avoid  all  error  in  stating  them.  The  general
doctrines  may  be  mainly  deduced  from  the  orations
of  Isaeus,  and  those  of-  Demostlienes  against
Macartatus  and  Leochares.


ADOPTIO.


15


2.  Roman.  The  Roman  term  was  adoptio  or
adoptatio.  (Gell.  v.  19.)  The  Roman  relation  of
parent  and  child  arose  either  from  a  lawful  mar-
riage or  from  adoption.  Adoptio  was  the  general
name  which  comprehended  the  two  species,  adoptio
and  adrogatio  ;  and  as  the  adopted  person  passed
from  his  own  familia  into  that  of  the  person  adopt-
ing, adoptio  caused  a  capitis  diminution  and  the
lowest  of  the  three  kinds.  Adoption,  in  its  specific
sense,  was  the  ceremony  by  which  a  person  who
was  in  the  power  of  his  parent  (  in  potestate  paren-
tum)n  whether  child  or  grandchild,  male  or  female,
was  transferred  to  the  power  of  the  person  adopting
him.  It  was  effected  under  the  authority  of  a
magistrate  (magistratus),  the  praetor,  for  instance,
at  Rome,  or  a  governor  (praeses)  in  the  provinces.
The  person  to  be  adopted  was  mancipated  [Man-
ciPATio]  by  his  natural  father  before  the  com-
petent authority,  and  surrendered  to  the  adoptive
father  by  the  legal  form  caMedinjure  cessio.  (Gell.
V.  19  ;  Suet.  Aug.  64.)

When  a  person  was  not  in  the  power  of  his
parent  {sui  juris)^  the  ceremony  of  adoption  was
called  adrogatio.  Originally,  it  could  only  be
effected  at  Rome,  .and  only  by  a  vote  of  the
populus  (  popidi  audoritate)  in  the  comitia  curiata
{lege  curiata)  ;  the  reason  of  this  being  that  the
caput  or  status  of  a  Roman  citizen  could  not,
according  to  the  laws  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  be
affected  except  by  a  vote  of  the  populus  in  the
comitia  curiata.  Clodius,  the  enemy  of  Cicero,
was  adrogated  into  a  plebeian  family  by  a  lex
curiata,  in  order  to  qualify  himself  to  be  elected  a
tribunus  plebis.  (Cic.  ad  Att.  ii.  7,  p.  Dom.)
Females  could  not  be  adopted  by  the  adrogatio.
Under  the  emperors  it  became  the  practice  to  effect
the  adrogatio  by  an  imperial  rescript  {principis
audoritate,  ex  rescripto  principis)  ;  but  this  practice
had  not  become  established  in  the  time  of  Gaius,
or,  as  it  appears,  of  Ulpian.  (Compare  Gaius,  i.
98,  with  Gaius  as  cited  in  Dig.  i.  tit.  7.  s.  2  ;  and
Ulpian,  Frag.  tit.  8.)  It  would  seem,  however,
from  a  passage  in  Tacitus  {Hist.  i.  15),  that  Galba
adopted  a  successor  without  the  ceremony  of  the
adrogatio.  By  a  rescript  of  the  Emperor  Anto-
ninus Pius,  addressed  to  the  pontifices,  those  who
were  under  age  {impuberes),  or  wards  {pupilli),
could,  with  certain  restrictions,  be  adopted  by  the
adrogatio.  If  a  father  who  had  children  in  his
power  consented  to  be  adopted  by  another  person,
both  himself  and  his  children  became  in  the  power
of  the  adoptive  father.  All  the  property  of  the
adopted  son  became  at  once  the  property  of  the
adoptive  father.  (Gaius,  ii.  98.)  A  person  could
not  legally  be  adopted  by  the  adrogatio  tUl  he  had
made  out  a  satisfactory  case  {justa,  bona,  causa)
to  the  pontifices,  who  had  the  right  of  insisting  on
certain  preliminary  conditions.  This  power  of  the
pontifices  was  probably  founded  on  their  right  to
preserve  the  due  observance  of  the  sacra  of  each
gens.  {Cic.  p.  Dom.  13,  Sec.)  It  would  accord-
ingly have  been  a  good  ground  of  refusing  their
consent  to  an  adrogatio,  if  the  person  to  be  adopted
was  the  only  male  of  his  gens,  for  the  sacra  would
in  such  case  be  lost.  It  was  required  that  the
adoptive  father  also  had  no  children,  and  no  rea-
sonable hopes  of  any  ;  and  that  he  should  be  older
than  the  person  to  be  adopted.  It  is  generally
assumed  that  all  adrogations  were  made  before  the
curiae.  Gaius,  however,  and  Ulpian  use  the  ex-
pi'essions  perpoptdum^  auctoritatepxypiUi,  expressions


ADORATIO.


of  very  doiilitful  import  with  reference  to  their
period.  After  the  comitia  ciiriata  fell  into  disuse,
it  is  most  probable  that  there  was  no  formal  as-
sembly of  the  cnriae,  and  that  they  were  repre-
sented by  the  thirty  lictors.

A  woman  could  not  adopt  a  person,  for  even  her
own  children  were  not  in  her  power.

The  rules  as  to  adoption  which  the  legislation
of  Justinian  established,  are  contained  in  the  In-
stitutes (i.  tit.  11).

The  effect  of  adoption,  as  already  stated,  was  to
create  the  legal  relation  of  father  and  son,  just  as
if  the  adopted  son  were  bom  of  the  blood  of  the
adoptive  father  in  lawful  marriage.  The  adopted
child  was  intitled  to  the  name  and  sacra  privata
of  the  adopting  parent,  and  it  appears  that  the
preservation  of  the  sacra  privata,  which  by  the
laws  of  the  Twelve  Tables  were  made  perpetual,
was  frequently  one  of  the  reasons  for  a  childless
person  adopting  a  son.  In  case  of  intestacy,  the
adopted  child  would  be  the  heres  of  his  adoptive
father.  He  became  the  brother  of  his  adoptive
father's  daughter,  and  therefore  could  not  marry
her  ;  but  he  did  not  become  the  son  of  the  adoptive
father's  wife,  for  adoption  only  gave  to  the  adopted
son  the  jura  agnationis.  (Gaius,  i.  97 — 107  ;  Dig.
1.  tit.  7;  Cic.  p.  Domo.)

The  phrase  of  "  adoption  by  testament "  (Cic.
Brut.  58)  seems  to  be  rather  a  misapplication  of
the  term ;  for  though  a  man  or  woman  might  by
testament  name  a  heres,  and  impose  the  condition
of  the  heres  taking  the  name  of  the  testator  or
testatrix,  this  so-called  adoption  could  not  produce
the  effects  of  a  proper  adoption.  It  could  give  to
the  person  so  said  to  be  adopted,  the  name  or  pro-
perty of  the  testator  or  testatrix,  but  nothing  more.
Niebuhr  {Lectures^  vol.  ii.  p.  100)  speaks  of  the
testamentary  adoption  of  C.  Octavius  by  C.  Julius
Caesar,  as  the  first  that  he  knew  of ;  but  the  pas-
sage of  Cicero  in  the  Brutus  and  another  passage
i^Ad  Hiri.  viii.  8),  show  that  other  instances  had
occxuTed  before.  A  person  on  passing  from  one
gens  into  another,  and  taking  the  name  of  his  new
familia,  generally  retained  the  name  of  his  old  gens
also,  with  the  addition  to  it  of  the  termination
anus.  (Cic.  ad  Att.  iii.  20,  and  the  note  of  Vic-
torius.)  Thus,  C.  Octavius, afterwards  the  Emperor
Augustus,  upon  being  adopted  by  the  testament  of
his  uncle  the  dictator,  assumed  the  name  of  Caius
Julius  Caesar  Octavianus;  but  he  caused  the
adoption  to  be  confirmed  by  the  curiae.  As  to  the
testamentary  adoption  of  C.  Octavius,  see  Drumann,
Geschiclde  Roms,  vol.  i.  p.  337,  and  the  references
there  given.  Livia  was  adopted  into  the  Julia
gens  by  the  testament  of  Augustus  (Tac.  Ann.
i.  8)  ;  and  it  was  not  stated  that  this  required  any
confirmation.  But  things  were  changed  then.  The
Lex  Julia  et  Papia  Poppaea  gave  certain  privileges
to  those  who  had  children,  among  which  privileges
was  a  preference  in  being  appointed  to  the  praetor-
ship  and  such  offices.  This  led  to  an  abuse  of  the
practice  of  adoption ;  for  childless  persons  adopted
children  in  order  to  qualify  themselves  for  such
offices,  and  then  emancipated  their  adopted  chil-
dren. This  abuse  was  checked  by  a  senatus
consultum  in  the  time  of  Nero.  (Tac.  Ann.  xv.  19  ;
Cic.  de  Off',  iii.  18,  ad  Att.  vii.  8 ;  Suet.  Jul.  Goes.
83,  Tib.  2,  &c.;  Heinec.  Syntagmu;  Dig.  36.  tit.
1.8.63.)  [G.L.]

ADORA'TIO  (TrpoffKiirnffis)  was  paid  to  the
gods    in   the    foUomng   manner :  —  The    person


ADULTERIUM.

stretched  out  his  right  hand  to  the  statue  of  the
god  whom  he  wished  to  honour,  then  kissed  his
hand  and  waved  it  to  the  statue.  While  doing
this  he  moved  round  his  whole  body,  for  which
custom  Plutarch  {Num.  14)  gives  some  curious
reasons  ;  but  the  true  reason  probably  was,  that
the  person  might  be  the  more  sm-ely  put  into  com-
munication with  the  deity,  as  it  was  uncertain
where  he  would  reveal  himself  as  the  detis
praesens.  It  was  also  the  practice  to  have  the
head  and  ears  covered,  so  that  only  the  forepart  of
the  face  remained  uncovered.  (Plin.  A^.  H.  xxviii.
5  ;  Mimicius  Felix,  2  ;  Lucret.  v.  1197.)  The
adoratio  differed  from  the  oratio  or  prayers,  which
were  offered  with  the  hands  folded  together  and
stretched  out  to  the  gods,  the  natural  attitude  pre-
scribed by  nature  to  the  suppliant,  and  which  wo
find  mentioned  by  Homer,  (//.vii.  177;  vrrrid-
crixara  x^P^^i  JEsch.  Prom.  1004;  caelo  supinas
ferre  vmnus^  Hor.  Carm.  iii.  23. 1.)  The  adoration
paid  to  the  Roman  emperors  was  borrowed  from
the  eastern  mode  of  adoration,  and  consisted  in
prostration  on  the  ground,  and  kissing  the  feet  and
knees  of  the  emperor.

ADROGA'TIO.     [Adoptio  (Roman).]

ADSCRIPTI'VI.     [AccENsi.]

ADSERTOR.     [Assertor.]

ADSESSOR.     [Assessor.]

ADSIGNA'TIO.  [Agrariae  Leges  and
Acer.]

ADSTIPULA'TIO.     [Obligationes.]

ADSTIPULA'TOR.     [Intercessio.]

ADULTUS.     [iNFANs.]

ADULTER'IUM,  adultery.  1.  Greek.
Among  the  Athenians,  if  a  man  caught  another
man  in  the  act  of  criminal  intercourse  (juoixet'a)
with  his  wife,  he  might  kill  him  with  impunity ;
and  the  law  was  also  the  same  with  respect  to  a
concubine  (iraWaK-fi).  He  might  also  inflict  other
punishment  on  the  offender.  It  appears  that  among
the  Athenians  there  was  no  adultery,  imless  a
married  woman  was  concerned.  (Lysias,  'T-rrep  rod
'EpaTo<r64vovt  ^6vov.)  But  it  was  no  adultery  for
a  man  to  have  connection  with  a  married  woman
who  prostituted  herself,  or  who  was  engaged  in
selling  any  thing  in  the  agora.  (Demosth.  Karo
Neaipas,  c.  18.)  The  Roman  law  appears  to  have
been  pretty  nearly  the  same.  (Paulus,  Sent.  Recept.
vi.  tit.  26.)  The  husband  might,  if  he  pleased,
take  a  sum  of  money  from  the  adulterer  by  way  of
compensation,  and  detain  him  till  he  found  sureties
for  the  payment.  If  the  alleged  adulterer  liad
been  unjustly  detained,  he  might  bring  an  action
against  the  husband  ;  and,  if  he  gained  his  cause,
he  and  his  sureties  Avere  released.  If  he  failed,
the  law  required  the  sureties  to  deliver  up  the
adulterer  to  the  husband  before  the  court,  to  do
what  he  pleased  with  him,  except  that  he  was  not
to  use  a  knife  or  dagger.  (Demosth.  Kara  Neat'/).
18.)

The  husband  might  also  prosecute  the  adulterer
in  the  action  called  fioix^ias  'ypa(pi].  If  the  act  of
adultery  was  proved,  the  husband  could  no  longer
cohabit  with  his  wife  under  pain  of  losing  his
privileges  of  a  citizen  {aTifiia).  The  adulteress  was
excluded  even  from  those  temples  which  foreign
women  and  slaves  were  allowed  to  enter ;  and  if
she  was  seen  there,  any  one  might  treat  her  as  he
pleased,  provided  he  did  not  kill  her  or  mutilate
her.  (Dem.  Kara  Neaip,  c,  22 ;  Aeschin.  Karck
Ti/xapx.  c.  36.)


ADULTERIUM.

2.  RoMAX.  Adulteriirm  properly  signifies,  in
the  Roman  law,  the  offence  committed  by  a  man,
married  or  unmarried,  having  sexual  intercourse
with  another  man's  wife.  Stuprum  (called  by
the  Greeks  (pdopa)  signifies  the  commerce  with  a
widow  or  a  virgin.  It  was  the  condition  of  the
fonale  which  determined  the  legal  character  of
adultery  ;  there  was  no  adultery  unless  the  female
was  married.  It  is  stated,  however  (Dig.  48,
tit.  5.  s.  13),  that  a  woman  might  commit  adultery
whether  she  was  "  justa  uxor  sive  injusta,"  the
meaning  of  which  is  not  quite  certain ;  but  pro-
bably it  means  whether  she  was  living  in  a  mar-
riage recognised  as  a  marriage  by  the  Roman  law
or  merely  by  the  jus  gentium.  The  male  who
committed  adultery  was  adulter,  the  female  was
cuiultcra.  The  Latin  writers  were  puzzled  about
the  etymology  of  the  word  adulterium  ;  but  if  we
look  to  its  various  significations  besides  that  of
illegal  sexual  commerce,  we  may  safely  refer  it  to
the  same  root  as  that  which  appears  in  adultus.
The  notion  is  that  of  "  growing  to,"  "  fixing,"  or
"fastening  to,"  one  thing  on  another  and  extra-
neous thing:  hence,  among  other  meanings,  the
Romans  used  adulterium  and  adulteratio  as  we
use  the  word  "  adulteration,"  to  express  the  cor-
rupting of  a  thing  by  mixing  something  with  it  of
less  value.

In  the  time  of  Augustus  a  lex  was  enacted
(probably  b.  c.  17),  in  titled  Lex  Julia  de  Adul-
tcriis  cotrcetidis,  the  first  chapter  of  which  repealed
some  prior  enactments  on  the  same  subject,  with
the  provisions  of  which  prior  enactments  we  are,
however,  unacquainted.  Horace  {Carm.  iv.  5.  21)
alludes  to  the  Julian  law.  In  this  law,  the  terms
adulterium  and  stupnim  are  used  indifferently  ;  but,
strictly  speaking,  these  two  terms  differed  as  above
stated.  The  chief  provisions  of  this  law  may  be
collected  from  the  Digest  (48.  tit.  5),  from  Paulus
{Sentent.  Recept.  ii.  tit.  26.  ed.  Schulting),  and  Bris-
sonius  (Ad Legem  Juliam De  Adulteriis,  Lib.  Sing.).

It  seems  not  unlikely  that  the  enactments  re-
pealed by  the  Julian  law  contained  special  penal
provisions  against  adultery ;  and  it  is  also  not
improbable  that,  by  the  old  law  or  custom,  if  the
adulterer  was  caught  in  the  fact,  he  was  at  the
inercy  of  the  injured  husband,  and  that  the  hus-
band might  punish  with  death  his  adulterous  wife.
(Dionys.  ii.  25  ;  Suet.  7V6.  35.)  It  seems,  also,
that  originally  the  act  of  adulteiy  might  be  pro-
secuted by  any  person,  as  being  a  public  offence  ;
but  under  the  emperors  the  right  of  prosecution
was  limited  to  the  husband,  lather,  brother,  pa-
truus,  and  avunculus  of  the  adulteress.

By  the  Julian  law,  if  a  husband  kept  his  wife
after  an  act  of  adultery  was  known  to  him,  and  let
the  adulterer  off,  he  was  guilty  of  the  offence  of
lenocinium.  The  husband  or  father  in  whose
power  the  adulteress  was,  had  sixty  days  allowed
for  commencing  proceedings  against  the  wife,  after
which  time  any  other  person  might  prosecute.
(Tacit.  Ann.  ii.  85.)  A  woman  convicted  of
adultery  was  mulcted  in  half  of  her  dos  and  the
third  part  of  her  property  (bona\  and  banished
(relegata)  to  some  miserable  island,  such  as  Seri-
phos,  for  instance.  The  adulterer  was  mulcted  in
half  his  property,  and  banished  in  like  manner,
but  not  to  the  same  island  as  the  woman.  The
adulterer  and  adulteress  were  subjected  also  to
civil  incapacities  ;  but  this  law  did  not  inflict  the
piuaisliment  of  death  on  either  party  ;  and  in  those


ADVOCATUS.


17


instances  under  the  emperors  in  which  death  was
inflicted,  it  must  be  considered  as  an  extraordinary
punishment,  and  beyond  the  provisions  of  the
Julian  law.  (Tacit.  A?m.  ii.  50,  iii.  24 ;  J.  Lips.
Ex-cuts,  ad  Tacit.  Ann.  iv.  42 ;  Noodt,  Op.  Omn.  i.
286,  &c.)  But  by  a  constitution  of  Constantine
(Cod.  ix.  30,  if  it  is  genuine),  the  offence  in  the
adulterer  v/as  made  capital.  By  the  legislation  of
Justinian  (iVbw.  134.  c.  10),  the  law  of  Con-
stantine was  probably  only  confirmed;  but  the
adulteress  was  put  into  a  convent,  after  being  first
whipped.  If  her  husband  did  not  take  her  out  in
two  years,  she  was  compelled  to  assume  the  habit,
and  to  spend  the  rest  of  her  life  in  the  convent.

The  Julian  law  pennitted  the  father  (both
adoptive  and  natural)  to  kill  the  adulterer  and
adulteress  in  certain  cases,  as  to  which  there  were
several  nice  distinctions  established  by  the  law.
If  the  father  killed  only  one  of  the  parties,  he
brought  himself  within  the  penalties  of  the  Cor-
nelian law  De  Sicariis.  The  husband  might  kill
persons  of  a  certain  class,  described  in  the  law,
whom  he  caught  in  the  act  of  adultery  with  his
wife ;  but  he  could  not  kill  his  wife.  The  hus-
band, by  the  fifth  chapter  of  the  Julian  law,  could
detain  for  twenty  hours  the  adulterer  whom  he
had  caught  in  the  fact,  for  the  purpose  of  calling
in  witnesses  to  prove  the  adultery.  If  the  wife
was  divorced  for  adultery,  the  husband  was  in-
titled  to  retain  part  of  the  dos.  (Ulpian,  Fr.  vi.
12.)  The  authorities  for  the  Lex  Julia  de  Adul-
teriis,  both  ancient  and  modem,  are  collected  by
Rein,  Das  Criminalrecld  der  Homer,  1844.  [G,  L.]

ADVERSA'RIA,  note-book,  memorandum-
book,  posting-book,  in  which  the  Romans  entered
memoranda  of  any  importance,  especially  of  money
received  and  expended,  which  vsere  afterwards
transcribed,  usually  every  month,  into  a  kind  of
ledger.  {Tabulae  justae,  codex  accepti  et  eocpensi.')
They  were  probably  called  Adversaria,  because
they  lay  always  open  before  the  eyes.  {Cic. p.  Rose.
Com.  3  ;  Prop.  iii.  23.  20.)

ADVERSA'RIUS.     [Actor.]

ADU'NATI  (aSuvoToi),  persons  supported  by
the  Athenian  state,  who,  on  account  of  infirmity  or
bodily  defects,  were  unable  to  obtain  a  livelihood.
The  sum  which  they  received  from  the  state  ap-
peiU-s  to  have  varied  at  different  times.  In  the
time  of  Lysias  and  Aristotle,  one  obolus  a  day
was  given  ;  but  it  appears  to  have  been  afterwards
increased  to  two  oboli.  The  bountj'^  was  restricted
to  persons  whose  property  Avas  under  three  niinae.
It  was  awarded  by  a  decree  of  the  people  ;  but
the  examination  of  the  individuals  belonged  to  the
senate  of  the  Five  Hundred :  the  payments  were
made  by  prytaneias.  Peisistratus  is  said  to  have
been  the  first  to  introduce  a  law  for  the  mainte-
nance of  those  persons  who  had  been  mutilated  in
war  ;  but,  according  to  others,  this  provision  de-
rived its  origin  from  a  law  of  Solon.  (Plut.  Solon.
31  ;  Schol.  ad  Aesch.  vol,  iii.  p.  738,  ed.  Reiske  ;
Aesch.  c.  Tim.  p.  123  ;  Harpocrat.  Suid.  Hesych.
s.  V.  ;  Lysias,  'TTTfp  rod  'ASvj/aTov,  a  speech
written  for  an  individual  in  order  to  prove  that  he
was  intitled  to  be  supported  by  the  state  ;  Bockh,
FuIjUc  Econ.  of  Athens,  p.  242,  &c.  2nd  edit.)

ADVOCA'TUS  seems  originally  to  have  signi-
fied any  person  who  gave  another  his  aid  in  any
affair  or  business,  as  a  witness  for  instance  (Varr.
De  Re  Rust.  ii.  c.  5)  ;  or  for  the  pm-pose  of  aiding
and  protecting  him  in  taking  possession  of  a  piece
c


18


AEDILES.


of  propertj'.  (Cic.  pro  Caecin.  c.  8.)  It  was
also  iised  to  express  a  person  who  gave  his  advice
and  aid  to  another  in  the  management  of  a  cause,
as  a  juris- consul tus  did  ;  but  the  word  did  not
signify  the  orator  or  patronus  who  made  the  speech
(Cic.  de  Orat.  ii.  74)  in  the  time  of  Cicero.  Under
the  emperors,  it  signified  a  person  who  in  any  way
assisted  in  the  conduct  of  a  cause  (Dig.  50.  tit.  13.
8.  1),  and  was  sometimes  equivalent  to  orator.
(Tacit.  Ann.  x.  Q.)  The  advocate  had  then  a  fee,
which  was  called  honorarium.  [Orator,  Pa-
tronus, Lex  Cincia.]

The  advocatus  is  defined  by  Ulpian  (Dig.  50,
tit.  13)  to  be  any  person  who  aids  another  hi  the
conduct  of  a  suit  or  action  ;  but  under  the  empire
the  jurisconsulti  no  longer  acted  as  advocates,  in
the  old  sense  of  that  term.  They  had  attained  a
higher  position  than  that  which  they  held  under
the  republic.

The  advocatus  fisci  was  an  important  officer
established  by  Hadrianus.  (Spart.  Hadrian.  60.)
It  was  his  business  to  look  after  the  interests  of
the  fiscus  or  the  imperial  treasury,  and,  among
other  things,  to  maintain  its  title  to  bona  caduca.
The  various  meanings  of  advocatus  in  the  Middle
Ages  are  given  by  Du  Cange,  Gloss.  (Dig.  28.
tit.  4.  s.  3 ;  Hollweg,  Ilandbuch  des  Civilprozesses^
p.  196.)  [G.L.]

A'DYTUM.  [Templum.]
AEACEIA  (aiaKeia),  a  festival  of  the  Aegi-
netans  in  honour  of  Aeacus,  the  details  of  which
are  not  knowni.  The  victor  in  the  games  Avhich
were  solemnised  on  the  occasion,  consecrated  his
chaplet  in  the  magnificent  temple  of  Aeacus,
(Schol.  ad  Find.  01.  vii.  156,  xiii.  155;  Miiller,
Aec/inetica,  p.  140.)  [L.  S.]

AEDES.     [DoMus;  Templum.]
AEDES  VITIO'SAE,  RUINO'SAE.  [Dam-
num Infectum.]

AEDI'CUL  AE,  signifies  in  the  singular,  a  room,
but  in  the  plural,  a  small  house.  It  is,  however,
more  frequently  used  in  the  sense  of  a  shrine,  at-
tached to  the  walls  of  temples  or  houses,  in  which
the  statue  of  a  deity  was  placed.  The  aediculae
attached  to  houses,  sometimes  contained  the  pe-
natcs  of  the  house,  but  more  frequently  the
guardian  gods  of  the  street  in  which  they  were
placed.     (Liv.  xxxv.  41  ;  Petron.  29.)

AEDI'LES  (ayopauS^ioi).  The  name  of  these
functionaries  is  said  to  be  derived  from  their
having  the  care  of  the  temple  (acdes)  of  Ceres.
The  aediles  were  originally  two  in  number,  and
called  aediles  plebeii  ;  they  were  elected  from  the
plebes,  and  the  institution  of  the  office  dates  from
the  same  time  as  that  of  the  tribuni  plcbis,  b.  c.
494.  Their  duties  at  first  seem  to  have  been
merely  ministerial  ;  they  were  the  assistants  of
the  tribunes  in  such  matters  as  the  tribunes  en-
trusted to  them,  among  which  are  enumerated  the
hearing  of  causes  of  smaller  importance.  At  an
<arly  period  after  their  institution  (b.  c.  446),  we
find  them  appointed  the  keepers  of  the  senatus
consulta,  which  the  consuls  had  hithc^rto  arbitrarily
suppressed  or  altered.  (Liv.  iii.  55.)  They  were
also  the  keepers  of  the  plebiscita.  Other  functions
were  gradually  entrusted  to  them,  and  it  is  not
always  easy  to  distinguish  their  duties  from  some
of  those  which  belong  to  the  censors  ;  nor  to  dis-
tinguish all  the  duties  of  the  plebeian  and  curule
aediles,  after  the  establishment  of  the  curule
aedileship.    They  had  the  general  superintendence


AEDILES.

of  buildings,  both  sacred  and  private  :  under  this
power  they  provided  for  the  support  and  repair  of
temples,  curiae,  &c.,  and  took  care  that  private
buildings  which  Avere  in  a  ruinous  state  {aedes
vitiosae,  ruinosae)  were  repaired  by  the  owners,  or
pulled  down.  The  superintendence  over  the  supply
and  distribution  of  water  at  Rome  was,  at  an  early
period,  a  matter  of  public  administration.  Ac-
cording to  Frontinus,  this  was  the  duty  of  the
censors  ;  but  when  there  were  no  censors,  it  was
within  the  province  of  the  aediles.  The  care  of
each  particular  source  or  supply  was  farmed  to  un-
dertakers {redemptorcs).,  and  all  that  they  did  was
subject  to  the  approbation  of  the  censors  or  the
aediles.  {De  Aquaeduct.  Rom.  lib.  ii.)  The  care  of
the  streets  and  pavements,  with  the  cleansing  and
draining  of  the  city,  belonged  to  the  aediles,  and
the  care  of  the  cloacae.  They  had  the  office  of
distributing  corn  among  the  plebes,  which  was
sometimes  given  gratuitously,  sometimes  sold  at  a
cheap  rate  ;  but  this  distribution  of  com  at  Rome
must  not  be  confounded  with  the  duty  of  purchasing
or  procuring  it  from  foreign  parts,  which  was  per-
formed by  the  consuls,  quaestors,  and  praetors,  and
sometimes  by  an  extraordinary  magistrate,  as  the
praefectus  aimonae.  The  aediles  had  to  see  that
the  public  lands  were  not  improperly  used,  and
tliat  the  pasture-grounds  of  the  state  were  not
trespassed  on  ;  and  they  had  power  to  punish  by
fine  any  unlawful  act  in  this  respect.  The  fines
were  employed  in  paving  roads,  and  in  other
public  purposes.  They  had  a  general  superin-
tendence over  buying  and  selling,  and,  as  a  con-
sequence, the  supervision  of  the  markets,  of  things
exposed  to  sale,  such  as  slaves,  and  of  weights  and
measures :  from  this  part  of  their  duty  is  derived
the  name  under  which  the  aediles  are  mentioned
by  the  Greek  writers  {ayopav6ixoi).  It  was  their
business  to  see  that  no  new  deities  or  religious
rites  were  introduced  into  the  city,  to  look  after
the  observance  of  religious  ceremonies,  and  the
celebrations  of  the  ancient  feasts  and  festivals.
The  general  superintendence  of  police  compre-
hended the  duty  of  preserving  order,  decency,  and
the  inspection  of  the  baths,  and  houses  of  enter-
tainment, of  brothels,  and  of  prostitutes.  The
aediles  had  various  officers  under  them,  as  prae-
cones,  scribae,  and  viatores.

The  Aediles  Curules,  Avho  were  also  two  in
number,  were  originally  chosen  only  from  the  pa-
tricians., afterwards  alternately  from  the  patricians
and  the  plebes,  and  at  last  indifferently  from
both.  (Liv.  vii.  1.)  The  office  of  curule  aediles
was  instituted  B.  c.  365,  and,  according  to  Livy
on  the  occasion  of  the  plebeian  aediles  refusing  to
consent  to  celebrate  the  ludi  maximi  for  the  space
of  four  days  instead  of  three  ;  upon  which  a
senatus  consultum  was  passed,  by  which  two
aediles  were  to  be  chosen  from  the  patricians.
From  this  time  four  aediles,  two  plebeian  and
two  curule,  wore  annually  elected.  (Liv.  vi.  42.)
The  distinctive  honours  of  the  aediles  curules
were,  the  sella  curulis,  from  Avhence  their  title  is
derived,  the  toga  practexta,  precedence  in  speaking
in  the  senate,  and  the  jus  imaginum.  (Cic.
Vfivr.  V.  14.)  Only  the  aediles  curules  had  the
jus  (idicendi,  or  the  power  of  promulgating  edicta
(Gains,  i.  6)  ;  but  the  rules  comprised  in  their
edicta  served  for  the  guidance  of  all  the  aediles.
The  edicta  of  the  curule  aediles  were  founded  on
their  authority  as  superintendents  of  the  markets.


AEDILES.

and  of  buying  and  selling  in  general.  Accordingly,
their  edicts  had  mainly,  or  perhaps  solely,  reference
to  the  rules  as  to  buying  and  selling,  and  contracts
for  bargain  and  sale.  They  were  the  foundation
of  the  actiones  aediliciae,  among  which  are  included
the  actio  redhibitoria,  and  quanti  minor  is.  (Dig.  21.
tit.  1.  De  Aedilicio  Edicto  ;  Gell.  iv.  2.)  A  great
part  of  the  provisions  of  the  aediles'  edict  relate  to
the  buying  and  selling  of  slaves.  The  persons
both  of  the  plebeian  and  curule  aediles  were  sa-
crossncti.     (Liv,  iii.  5b.)

It  seems  that  after  the  appointment  of  the
curule  aediles,  the  functions  formerly  exercised
by  the  plebeian  aediles  were  exercised,  with  some
few  exceptions,  by  all  the  aediles  indifferently.
Within  five  days  after  being  elected  or  entering
on  office,  they  were  required  to  determine  by  lot,
or  by  agreement  among  themselves,  what  parts  of
the  city  each  should  take  under  his  superintend-
ence ;  and  each  aedile  alone  had  the  care  of
looking  after  the  paving  and  cleansing  of  the
streets,  and  other  matters,  it  may  be  presumed,  of
the  same  local  character  within  his  district.  (Tabul.
Heracl.  ed.  Mazoch.)

In  the  superintendence  of  the  public  festivals
and  solemnities,  there  was  a  further  distinction
between  the  two  sets  of  aediles.  Many  of  these
festivals,  such  as  those  of  Flora  (Cic.  Verr.  v.  14  ;
Ovid.  Fast.  v.  27^5,  &c.)  and  Ceres,  were  superin-
tended by  either  set  of  aediles  indifferently  ;  but
the  plebeian  games  {plebeii  htdi)  were  under  the
superintendence  of  the  plebeian  aediles  (Liv.  xxxi.
.50.),  who  had  an  allowance  of  money  for  that
purpose  ;  and  the  fines  levied  on  the  pccuarii,
and  others,  seem  to  have  been  appropriated  to
these  among  other  public  purposes.  (Liv.  x.  23  ;
xxvii.  6  ;  Ovid.  Fast.  v.  278,  &c.)  The  celebra-
tion of  the  Ludi  magni  or  Romani,  of  the  Ludi
scenici,  and  the  Ludi  Megalesii  or  Megalenses,
belonged  specially  to  the  curule  aediles  (Liv.
xxxi.  50  ;  and  the  Didascaliae  to  the  plays  of
Terence),  and  it  was  on  such  occasions  that  they
often  incurred  a  prodigious  expense,  with  the  view
of  pleasing  the  people  and  securing  their  rotes  in
future  elections.  This  extravagant  expenditure  of
the  aediles  arose  after  the  close  of  the  second
Punic  war,  and  increased  with  the  opportunities
which  individuals  had  of  enriching  themselves
after  the  Roman  arms  were  carried  into  Greece,
Africa,  and  Spain.  Even  the  prodigality  of  the  em-
perors hardly  sui-passed  that  of  individual  curule
aediles  under  the  republic  ;  such  as  C.  Julius
Caesar  (Plut.  Caesar,  5)  afterwards  the  dictator,
P.  Cornelius  Lentulus  Spinther  ;  and,  above  all,
M.  Aemilius  Scaurus,  whose  expenditure  was  not
limited  to  bare  show,  but  comprehended  objects
of  public  utility,  as  the  reparation  of  walls,  dock-
yards, ports,  and  aquaeducts.  (Cic.  de  Of.  ii.  1 7  ;
Plin.  //.  iV.  xxxiii.  3,  xxxvi.  15.)  An  instance  is
mentioned  by  Dion  Cassius  (xliii.  48)  of  the  Ludi
Megalesii  being  superintended  by  the  plebeian
aediles  ;  but  it  was  done  pursuant  to  a  senatus
consultum,  and  thus  the  particular  exception  con-
firms the  general  nile.

In  B.  c.  45,  Julius  Caesar  caused  two  curule
aediles  and  four  plebeian  aediles  to  be  elected  ;
and  thenceforward,  at  least  so  long  as  the  office  of
aedile  was  of  any  importance,  six  aediles  were
annually  elected.  The  two  new  plebeian  aediles
Avere  called  Cereales,  and  their  duty  was  to  look
after  the  supply  of  com.     Though  their  office  may


AEDILES.  19

not  have  been  of  any  great  importance  after  the
institution  of  a  praefectus  annonae  by  Augustus
there  is  no  doubt  that  it  existed  for  several  cen-
turies, and  at  least  as  late  as  the  time  of  Gordian.

The  aediles  belonged  to  the  class  of  the
minores  magistratus.  Dionysius  states  that  the
aediles  were  originally  chosen  at  the  comitia
curiata  (ix.  43)  ;  but  this  is  not  probable.  The
plebeian  aediles  were  originally  chosen  at  tlie
comitia  centuriata,  but  afterwards  at  the  comitia
tributa  (Dionys.  vi.  90.  ix.  4'3.  49  ;  Liv.  ii.  56,
57),  in  which  comitia  the  curule  aediles  also  were
chosen,  at  the  same  time  (Plut.  Marius,  5) ;  but
it  appears  that  there  was  a  separate  voting  for
the  curule  and  the  plebeian  aediles,  and  that  the
curule  aediles  were  elected  first.  It  appears  that
until  the  lex  annalis  was  passed,  a  Roman  citizen
might  be  a  candidate  for  any  office  after  completing
his  twenty-seventh  year.  This  lex  annalis,  which
was  passed  at  the  instance  of  the  tribune  L.
Villius  Tappulus,  B.C.  180,  fixed  the  age  at  which
each  office  might  be  enjoyed.  (Liv.  xl.  44.)
The  passage  of  Livy  does  not  mention  what  were
the  ages  fixed  by  this  law  ;  but  it  is  collected
from  various  passages  of  Roman  writers,  that  the
age  fixed  for  the  aedileship  was  thirty-six.  This,
at  least,  was  the  age  at  which  a  man  could  be  a
candidate  for  the  curule  aedileship,  and  it  does  not
appear  that  there  was  a  different  rule  for  the
plebeian  aedileship.  In  Cicero's  time,  the  aediles
were  elected  some  time  in  July,  the  usual  place  of
election  was  the  Field  of  Mars  (Campus  Martins),
and  the  presiding  magistrate  was  a  consul.

The  aediles  existed  under  the  emperors  ;  but
their  powers  were  gradually  diminished,  and  their
functions  exercised  by  new  officers  created  by  the
emperors.  After  the  battle  of  Actium,  Augustus
appointed  a  praefectus  urbi,  who  exercised  the
general  police,  which  had  fonnerly  been  one  of  the
duties  of  the  aediles.  Augustus  also  took  from
the  aediles,  or  exercised  himself,  the  office  of
superintending  the  religious  rites,  and  the  banish-
ing from  the  city  of  all  foreign  ceremonials  ;  he
also  assumed  the  superintendence  of  the  teraplee,
and  thus  may  be  said  to  have  destroyed  the  aedile-
ship by  depriving  it  of  its  old  and  original  func-
tion. This  will  serve  to  explain  the  fact  men-
tioned by  Dion  Cassius  (Iv.  24),  that  no  one
was  willing  to  hold  so  contemptible  an  office,  and
Augustus  was  therefore  reduced  to  the  necessity
of  compelling  persons  to  take  it :  persons  were  ac-
cordingly chosen  by  lot,  out  of  those  who  had
served  the  office  of  quaestor  and  tribune  ;  and  this
was  done  more  than  once.  The  last  recorded  in-
stance of  the  splendours  of  the  aedileship  is  the
administration  of  Agrippa,  who  volunteered  to  take
the  office,  and  repaired  all  the  public  buildings  and
all  the  roads  at  his  own  expense,  without  drawing
anything  from  the  treasury.  (Dion  Cass.  xlix.  43  ;
Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvi.  15.)  The  aedileship  had,
however,  lost  its  true  character  before  this  time.
Agrippa  had  already  been  consul  before  he  accepted
the  office  of  aedile,  and  his  mimificent  expenditure
in  this  nominal  office  was  the  close  of  the  splendour
of  the  aedileship.  Augustus  appointed  the  curule
aediles  specially  to  the  office  of  putting  out  fires,
and  placed  a  body  of  600  slaves  at  their  command  ;
but  the  praefecti  vigilum  afterwards  performed  this
duty.  In  like  manner  the  curatores  viarum  were
appointed  by  hiin  to  superintend  the  roads  near
the  city,  and  the  quatuorviri  to  superintend  those
c  2


20


AEGINETARUM  FEllIAE.


within  Home.  The  curatores  operum  puUicorum
and  the  curatores  alvei  Tiberis,  also  appointed  by
Jiugustus,  stripped  the  aediles  of  the  remaining
few  duties  that  might  be  called  hononi-able.  They
lost  also  the  superintendence  of  wells,  or  springs,
and  of  the  aquaeducts.  (Frontinus  ii.  De  Aqiuie-
ductibus.)  They  retained,  under  the  early  em-
perors, a  kind  of  police,  for  the  purpose  of  repress-
ing open  licentiousness  and  disorder :  thus  the
baths,  eating-houges,  and  brothels  were  still  sub-
ject to  their  inspection,  and  the  registration  of
prostitutes  was  still  within  their  dxities.  (Tacit.
Annal.  ii.  85.)  We  read  of  the  aediles  under
Augustus  makhig  search  after  libellous  books,  in
order  that  they  might  be  burnt  ;  and  also  under
Tiberius  (Tacit.  Ann.  iv.  35.)

The  coloniae,  and  the  municipia  of  the  later
period,  had  also  their  aediles,  whose  numbers  and
functions  varied  in  different  places.  They  seem,
however,  as  to  their  powers  and  duties,  to  have  re-
sembled the  aediles  of  Rome.  They  were  chosen
annually.  (De  Aedil.  Col,  Sac.  Otto.  Lips.  1732.)

The  history,  powers,  and  duties  of  the  aediles
are  stated  with  great  minuteness  by  Schubert,  De
Roma7iorum  Aedilibus,  lib.  iv.  Regimontii,  1828.
See  also  Wunder,  De  liomanorum  Comitiis  Aedi-
lium  Curulium,  in  his  edition  of  Cicero's  Oration
Pro  Cn.  Plancio,  Leipzig,  1830.  [G.  L.]

AEDFTUI,  AEDITUMI,  AEDFTIMI
(veuKSpoi,  C°'-Kopoi),  persons  who  took  care  of  the
temples,  and  attended  to  the  cleaning  of  them.
Notwithstanding  this  menial  service,  they  partook
of  the  priestly  character,  and  are  sometimes  even
called  priests  by  the  Greek  grammarians.  (Suid.
Hesych.  Etym.  M.  s.  v.  ^aKopos  ;  Pollux,  i.  14.)
In  many  cases  they  were  women,  as  Timo  in
Herodotus  (vi.  134),  who  also  speaks  of  her  as
inro(dKopos,  from  which  it  is  clear  that  in  some
places  several  of  these  priests  m'lst  have  been  at-
tached to  one  and  the  same  temple,  and  that  they
differed  among  themselves  in  rank.  Subsequently
the  menial  services  connected  with  the  office  of  the
Neocori  were  left  to  slaves,  and  the  latter  became  a
title  given  topriestly  officers  of  high  rank,  of  whom  an
accoimt  is  given  in  a  separate  article.  [Neocori.]
The  aeditui  lived  in  the  temples,  or  near  them,
and  acted  as  ciceroni  to  those  persons  who
wished  to  see  them.  (Plin.  //.  A^.  xxxvi.  4.  §  10  ;
Cic.  Verr.  iv.  44;  Liv.  xxx.  17;  Scliol.  ad  Hor.
Ep.  ii.  1.  230.)  In  ancient  times  the  aeditui  were
citizens,  but  under  the  emperors  freedmen.  (Serv.
ad  Virg.  Aen.  ix.  648.)

AEGINETA'RUM  FE'RIAE  (AlyivvrSiv
koprii\  a  festival  in  honour  of  Poseidon,  which
lasted  sixteen  days,  during  which  time  every
family  took  its  meals  quietly  and  alone,  no  slave
being  allowed  to  wait,  and  no  stranger  invited  to
partake  of  them.  From  the  circumstance  of  each
family  being  closely  confined  to  itself,  those  who
solemnised  this  festival  were  called  iiovo<l>(iyoi.
Plutarch  (Quciest.  Graec.  44)  traces  its  origin  to  the
Trojan  war,  and  says  that,  as  many  of  the  Aeginetans
had  lost  their  lives,  partly  in  the  siege  of  Troy  and
partly  on  their  return  home,  those  who  reached
their  native  island  were  received  indeed  with  joy
by  their  kinsmen  ;  but  in  order  to  avoid  hurting
the  feelings  of  thpse  families  who  had  to  lament
the  loss  of  their  friends,  they  thought  it  proper
neither  to  show  their  joy  nor  to  offer  any  sacrifices
in  public.  Every  family,  therefore,  entertained
privately  their  friends  who  had  returned,  and


AEGIS.

acted  themselves  as  attendants,  though  not  with-
out rejoicings.  [L.  S.]

AEGIS  (alyls),  the  shield  of  Zeus,  signifies
literally  a  goat-skin,  and  is  formed  on  the  same
analogy  with  v(€pis,  a  fawn-skin.  (Herod,  iv.  189.)
According  to  ancient  mythology,  the  aegis  worn  by
Zeus  was  the  hide  of  the  goat  Amaltheia,  which
had  suckled  him  in  his  infanc3%  Hyginus  relates
{Astf4n.  Poet.  13),  that,  when  he  was  preparing
to  resist  the  Titans,  he  was  directed,  if  he  wished
to  conquer,  to  wear  a  goat-skin  with  the  head  of
the  Gorgon.  To  this  particular  goat-skin  the  term
aegis  was  afterwards  confined.  Homer  always  re-
presents it  as  part  of  the  armour  of  Zeus,  whom  on
this  account  he  distinguishes  by  the  epithet  aegis-
bearing  (alyioxos).  He,  however,  asserts,  that  it
was  borrowed  on  different  occasions  both  by  Apollo
(11.  XV.  229,  307—318,  360,  xxiv.  20),  and  by
Athena  (//.  ii.  447- -449,  xviii.  204,  xxi.  400).

The  skins  of  various  quadrupeds  having  been
used  by  the  most  ancient  inhabitants  of  Greece
for  clothing  and  defence,  we  cannot  wonder  that
the  goat-skin  was  employed  in  the  same  manner.
It  must  also  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  heavy
shields  of  the  ancient  Greeks  were  in  part  sup-
ported by  a  belt  or  strap  (reKa/xd^i/,  balteus)  passing
over  the  right  shoulder,  and,  when  not  elevated
with  the  shield,  descending  transversely  to  the  left
hip.  In  order  that  a  goat-skin  might  serve  this
purpose,  two  of  its  legs  would  probably  be  tied
over  the  light  shoulder  of  the  wearer,  the  other
extremity  being  fastened  to  the  inside  of  the  shield.
In  combat  the  left  arai  would  be  passed  under  the
hide,  and  would  raise  it  together  with  the  shield,
as  IS  shown  in  a  marble  statue  of  Athena,  pre-
served in  the  museum  at  Naples,  which,  from  its
style  of  art,  may  be  reckoned  among  the  most  an-
cient in  existence.


Other  statues  of  Athena  represent  her  in  a  state
of  repose,  and  with  the  goat-skin  falling  obliquely
from  its  loose  fastening  over  her  right  shoulder,  so
as  to  pass  round  the  body  under  the  left  arm.  The
annexed  figure  is  taken  from  a  colossal  statue  of
Athena  at  Dresden.


AEGIS.


AEGIS.


21


Another  mode  of  wearing  this  garment,  also  of
peaceful  expression,  is  seen  in  a  statue  of  Athena
at  Dresden,  of  still  higher  antiquity  than  that  last
referred  to,  and  in  the  very  ancient  image  of  the
same  goddess  from  the  temple  of  Zeus  at  Aegina.
In  hoth  of  these  the  aegis  covers  the  right  as  well
as  the  left  shoulder,  the  breast,  and  the  back,  fall-
ing behind  so  as  almost  to  reach  the  feet.  Sehom
(in  Bottiger's  Anialthea,  ii.  215)  considers  this  as
the  original  form  of  the  aegis.

By  a  figure  of  speech.  Homer  uses  the  term
aegis  to  denote  not  only  the  goat-skin,  which  it
properly  signified,  but  together  with  it  the  shield
to  which  it  belonged.  By  thus  understanding  the
word,  it  is  easy  to  comprehend  both  why  Athena
is  said  to  throw  her  father's  aegis  around  her
shoulders  (11.  v.  738,  xviii.  204),  and  why  on  one
occasion  Apollo  is  said  to  hold  it  in  his  hand  and
to  shake  it  so  as  to  terrify  and  confound  the
Greeks  (II.  xv.  229.  307—321),  and  on  another
occasion  to  cover  witli  it  the  dead  body  of  Hector
in  order  to  protect  it  from  insult  (xxiv.  20).  In
these  passages  we  must  suppose  the  aegis  to  mean
the  shield,  together  with  the  large  expanded  skin
or  belt  by  which  it  was  suspended  from  the  right
shoulder.

As  the  Greeks  prided  themselves  greatly  on  the
rich  and  splendid  ornaments  of  their  shields,  they
supposed  the  aegis  to  be  adorned  in  a  style  cor-
responding to  the  might  and  majesty  of  the  father
of  the  gods.  In  the  middle  of  it  was  fixed  the
appalling  Gorgon's  head  (II.  v,  741),  and  its
border  was  surrounded  with  golden  tassels
(3-ucrayot),  each  of  which  was  worth  a  hecatomb
(ii.  446 — 449).  In  the  figures  above  exhibited,
the  serpents  of  the  Gorgon's  head  are  transferred
to  the  border  of  the  skin.

By  the  later  poets  and  artists,  the  original  con-
ception of  the  aegis  appears  to  have  been  for-
gotten or  disregarded.  They  represent  it  as  a
lireast-plate  covered  with  metal  in  the  fonn  of
scales,  not  used  to  support  the  shield,  but  extend-
ing equally  on  both  sides  from  shoulder  to
shoulder  ;  as  in  the  annexed  figure,  taken  from  a
statue  at  Florence.

With  this  appearance  the  descriptions  of  the
aegis  by  the  Latin  poets  generally  correspond.
(Virg.  Aen.  viii.  435—438  ;  Val.  Flacc.  vi.  174  ;
Sid.  Apoll.  Carm.  15  ;  Sil.  Ital.  ix.  442.)


It  is  remarkable  that,  although  the  aegis  pro-
perly belonged  to  Zeus,  yet  we  seldom  find  it  as
an  attribute  of  Zeus  in  works  of  art.  There  is,
however,  in  the  museum  at  Leyden,  a  marble  statue
of  Zeus,  found  at  Utica,  in  which  the  aegis  hangs
over  his  left  shoulder.  The  annexed  figure  is  taken
from  an  ancient  cameo.  Zeus  is  here  represented
with  the  aegis  wrapt  round  the  fore  part  of  his
left  arm.  The  shield  is  placed  underneath  it,  at
his  feet.


The  Roman  emperors  also  assumed  the  aegis,
intending  thereby  to  exhibit  themselves  in  the
character  of  Jupiter.  Of  this  the  armed  statue  of
Hadrian  in  the  British  Museum  presents  an  ex-
ample. In  these  cases  the  more  recent  Roman
conception  of  the  aegis  is  of  course  followed,  co-
inciding Avith  the  remark  of  Servius  (Aen,  viii.
435),  that  this  breast-armour  was  called  aogis
when  worn  by  a  god  ;  lorica,  when  worn  by  a  man.
(Comp.  Mart.  vii.  1.)  [j.  Y.]

c  3


23


AENUM.


AEINAUTAE  (aeivavrai),  magistrates  at
Miletus,  consisting  of  the  chief  men  in  the  state,
who  obtained  the  supreme  power  on  tlie  deposition
of  the  tyrants,  Thoas  and  Damasenor.  Whenever
they  wished  to  deliberate  on  impoiiant  matters,
they  embarked  on  board  ship  (hence  their  name),
put  out  at  a  distance  from  land,  and  did  not  return
to  shore  till  they  had  transacted  their  business.
(Plut.  Quaest.  Graec.  32.)

AEIPHU'GIA  (a^icpvyla).  [Exsilium.]
AEISITI  (ae^CT-zTot).  [Prytaneium.]
AENEATO'RES  (ahenatores,  Amni.  Marc.
xxiv.  4),  were  those  who  blew  upon  wind  instru-
ments in  the  Roman  army,  namely,  the  huc-
cinatores^  cornicines^  and  tubicines^  and  they  were
BO  called  because  all  these  instruments  were  made
of  aes  or  bronze.  (Suet.  Caes.  32.)  Aeneatores
"were  also  employed  in  the  public  games.  (Sen.  Ep.
H4.)  A  collegium  aeneatoruni  is  mentioned  in  in-
scriptions. (Orelli,  Inscr.  No.  4059.)

AENIGMA  (aXvijixa),  a  riddle.  It  appears
to  have  been  a  very  ancient  custom  among  the
Greeks,  especially  at  their  symposia,  to  amuse
themselves  by  proposing  riddles  to  be  solved.
Their  partiality  for  this  sort  of  amusement  is  at-
tested by  the  fact  that  some  persons,  such  as
Theodectes  of  Phaselis  and  Aristonymus,  acquired
considerable  reputation  as  inventors  and  writers  of
riddles.  (Athen.  x.  pp.451,  452, xii.  p. 538.)  Those
Avho  were  successful  in  solving  the  riddle  proposed
to  them  received  a  prize,  which  had  been  pre-
viously agreed  upon  loy  the  company,  and  usually
consisted  of  wreaths,  taeniae,  cakes,  and  other
sweetmeats,  or  kisses,  whereas  a  person  unable  to
solve  a  riddle  was  condemned  to  drink  in  one
breath  a  certain  quantity  of  wine,  sometimes  mixed
with  salt  water.  (Athen.  x.  p.  457  ;  Pollux,  vi.  107  ;
Hesych.  s.  v.  ypicpos.)  Those  riddles  which  have
come  down  to  us  are  mostly  in  hexameter  verse,
and  the  tragic  as  well  as  comic  writers  not  unfre-
quently  introduced  them  into  their  plays.  Pollux
{I.  c.)  distinguishes  two  kinds  of  riddles,  the
aXviyfia  and  ypi(f>os,  and,  according  to  him,  the
former  was  of  a  jocose  and  the  latter  of  a  serious
nature  ;  but  in  the  writers  whose  works  have  come
down  to  us,  no  such  distinction  is  observed  ;  and
there  are  passages  where  the  name  yoicpos  is
given  to  the  most  ludicrous  jokes  of  tiiis  kind.
(Aristoph.  Vesp.  20  ;  comp.  Becker,  CJiarides,
vol.  i.  p.  473.)  The  Romans  seem  to  have  been  too
serious  to  find  any  great  amusement  in  riddles  ;
and  when  Gellius  (xviii.  2)  introduces  some  Ro-
mans at  a  banquet  engaged  in  solving  riddles,  we
must  remember  that  the  scene  is  laid  at  Athens  ;
and  we  do  not  hear  of  any  Romans  who  invented
or  Avrote  riddles  imtil  a  very  late  period.  Appu-
leius  wrote  a  work  entitled  Liber  Ludicrorum  et
Griphorum^  which  is  lost  After  the  time  of  Ap-
puleius,  several  collections  of  riddles  were  made,
some  of  which  are  still  extant  in  MS.  in  various
libraries.  [L.  S.]

AE'NUM,  or  AHE'NUM  (sc.  ms),  a  brazen
vessel,  used  for  boiling,  is  defined  by  PauUus  to
be  a  vessel  hanging  over  the  fire,  in  which  water
was  boiled  for  drinking,  whereas  food  was  boiled
in  the  cambus.  (Dig.  33.  tit  7.  s.  18.  §  3.)  This
distinction  is  not,  however,  always  observed ;  for
we  read  of  food  being  cooked  in  the  a'tnum.  (Juv.
XV.  81  ;  Ov.  Met.  vi.  645.)  The  word  is  also
frequently  used  in  the  sense  of  a  dyer's  copper ;
and,  as  purple  was  the  most  celebrated  dye  of


AERARII.

antiquity,  we  find  the  expressions  Sidonium  a'cnum,
Tyrium  a'cnum,  &c.  (Ov.  Fast.  iii.  822 ;  Mart,
xiv.  133.)

AEO'RA,  or  EO'RA  {aldpa,  i(ipa),  a  festival
at  Athens,  accompanied  with  sacrifices  and  ban-
quets, whence  it  is  sometimes  called  euSenryos.
The  common  account  of  its  origin  is  as  follows  :  — •
Icarius  was  killed  by  the  shepherds  to  whom  he
had  given  wine,  and  who,  being  unacquainted
with  the  effects  of  this  beverage,  fancied  in  their
intoxication  that  he  had  given  them  poison.
Erigone,  his  daughter,  guided  by  a  faithful  dog,
discovered  the  corpse  of  her  father,  whom  she
had  sought  a  long  time  in  vain ;  and,  praying  to
the  gods  that  all  Athenian  maidens  might  perish
in  the  same  manner,  hung  herself.  After  this  oc-
currence, many  Athenian  women  actually  hung
themselves,  apparently  without  any  motive  what-
ever ;  and  when  the  oracle  was  consulted  respect-
ing it,  the  answer  was,  that  Icarius  and  Erigone
must  be  propitiated  by  a  festival.  (Hygin.  Poet.
Astron.  ii.  4.)  According  to  the  Etymologicum
Magnum.,  the  festival  was  celebrated  in  honour  of
Erigone,  daughter  of  Aegisthus  and  Clytaemnestra,
who  came  to  Athens  to  bring  the  charge  of  matri-
cide against  Orestes  before  the  Areiopagus  ;  and,
when  he  was  acquitted,  hung  herself,  with  the
same  wish  as  the  daughter  of  Icarius,  and  with
the  same  consequences.  According  to  Hesychius,
the  festival  was  celebrated  in  commemoration  of
the  tyrant  Temaleus,  but  no  reason  is  assigned.
Eustathius  {ad  Horn.  pp.  389,  1535)  calls  the
maiden  who  hung  herself  Aiora,  But  as  the  festival
is  also  called  'PlXtitis  (apparently  from  the  wan-
derings of  Erigone,  the  daughter  of  Icarius),  the
legend  which  ^vas  first  mentioned  seems  to  be  the
most  entitled  to  belief.  Pollux  (iv.  7.  §  55)  men-
tions a  song  made  by  Theodorus  of  Colophon,
which  persons  used  to  sing  whilst  swinging  them-
selves (eV  reus  ahipais).  It  is,  therefore,  probable
that  the  Athenian  maidens,  in  remembrance  of
Erigone  and  the  other  Athenian  women  who  had
hung  themselves,  swung  themselves  during  this
festival,  at  the  same  time  singing  the  above-
mentioned  song  of  Theodorus.  (See  also  Athen.
xiv.  p.  618.)  [L.  S.]

AERA.     [Chronologia.]

AERA'RII,  a  class  of  Roman  citizens,  who
are  said  not  to  have  been  contained  in  the  thirty
tribes  instituted  by  Servius  Tullius.  It  is,  how-
ever, one  of  the  most  difficult  points  in  the  Roman
constitution  to  determine  who  they  were  ;  since  all
the  passages  in  which  they  are  mentioned  refer  only
to  the  power  of  the  censors  to  degrade  a  citizen,
for  bad  conduct,  by  removing  him  from  his  tribe
and  making  him  an  aerarian ;  but  we  nowhere
find  any  definition  of  what  an  aerarian  was.  The
Pseudo-Asconius  (ad  Cic.  divin.  in  Caedl.  p.  103,
ed.  Orelli),  says  that  a  plebeian  might  be  degraded
by  being  transferred  to  the  tabulae  Caeritum  and
becoming  an  aerarius.  The  error  in  this  state-
ment is,  that  not  only  a  plebeian,  but  a  senator
and  an  eques  also  might  become  an  aerarian,  while
for  a  plebeian  there  was  no  other  punishment  ex-
cept that  of  becoming  an  aerarian.  From  the
Pseudo-Asconius  we  collect  that  to  have  one's
name  transferred  to  the  tables  of  the  Caerites  was
equivalent  to  becoming  an  aerarian  ;  secondly,  that
an  aerarian  no  longer  belonged  to  a  ccnturj'^ ;  and,
thirdly,  that  he  had  to  pay  the  tribute  in  a  dif-
fercnt'mann'.'r  from  the  other  citizens.   These  state-


AERARIUM.

ments  are  confirmed  by  the  Scholiasta  Cruquius
on  Horace  (Epist.  i.  6.  C2)  and  by  Gellius  (xvi.
1 3).  If  we  strictly  keep  to  what  we  tliere  learn,
we  cannot  adopt  the  opinion  that  the  aerarians
consisted  of  artizans  and  freedmen  (Niebuhr,  Hist.
of  Rome,  vol.  i.  p.  472),  for  some  artizans  had  a
very  honourable  position  in  the  Servian  constitu-
tion ;  but  there  were  certain  occupations,  especially
those  of  retail  dealers  {caupones,  /caTTTjAot),  which
were  thought  degrading,  and  which  were  carried
on  generally  by  isopolites,  who  took  up  their  abode
at  Rome,  and  the  number  of  this  class  of  persons
(municipes  or  cives  sine  suffragio)  may  have  been
very  great.  These  people  we  conceive  to  have
been  the  aerarii,  not,  indeed,  on  account  of  their
occupation,  but  because  they  were  citizens  who
did  not  enjoy  the  suffrage.  Hence  the  Caerites
were  probably  the  first  body  of  aerarians  ;  and
any  Roman  citizen  guilty  of  a  crime  punishable
by  the  censors,  might  be  degraded  to  the  I'ank  of
an  aerarian;  so  that  his  civic  rights  were  sus-
pended, at  least  for  the  time  that  he  was  an
aerarian.  But  we  cannot  suppose  that  the  fact  of
a  Roman  citizen  engaging  in  trade  brought  about
such  a  degradation ;  for  there  can  be  little  doubt
that  the  persons  constituting  the  city  tribes  {tribus
urba7iae)  were  more  or  less  all  engaged  in  trade  and
commerce.  Hence,  to  remove  a  man  from  a  country
tribe  to  a  city  tribe,  cannot  have  been  equivalent
to  making  him  an  aerarian  (Cic.  pro  Cluent.  43),
and  the  latter  can  have  been  the  case  only  when
he  was  excluded  from  all  the  tribes,  or  when  he
belonged  to  a  city  tribe  ;  so  that  moving  him  from
his  tribe  was  equivalent  to  excluding  him  from  all
tribes.  Persons  who  were  made  infames  likewise
became  aerarians,  for  they  lost  the  jus  honorum
and  the  suffragium.  ( Augustin.  de  Civ.  Dei.,  ii.  13;
Cic.  pro  Cluent.  42.)  The  two  scholiasts  above
referred  to  agree  in  stating  that  the  aemrians  had
to  pay  a  tributum  pro  capite  ;  and  that  this  tax
was  considerably  higher  than  that  paid  by  the
other  citizens,  must  be  inferred  from  Livy  (iv.
24),  who  states  that  Aemilius  Mamercus  was
made  an  aerarian  octuplicato  censu.  They  were
not  allowed  to  serve  in  the  legions ;  but  as  they
nevertheless  enjoyed  the  protection  of  the  state,
such  a  high  rate  of  taxation  cannot  be  considered
unjust.

It  has  been  asserted  that  the  libertini,  as  such,
belonged  to  the  class  of  the  aerarians ;  but  this
opinion  is  founded  upon  a  wrong  statement  of
Plutarch  (Poplic.  7),  that  freedmen  did  not  obtain
the  suffrage  till  the  time  of  Appius  Claudius  ;  for
Dionysius  (iv.  22)  informs  us  that  Servius  Tullius
incorporated  them  with  the  city  tribes.  (Comp.
Zonaras,  vii.  9 ;  Huschke,  Verfassung  des  Serv.
Tull.  p.  494,  &c. ;  Gottling,  Gesch.  der  Rom.  Staats-
ver/.  p.  260,  &c. ;  Becker,  Handbuch  der  Rom.
Alterth.  vol.  ii.  pp.  183—196.)  [L.  S.]

AERA'RII  TRIBU'NI.  [Aes  Equestre  ;
Tkibuni.]

AERA'RIUM  (rh  S-nixSaiov),  the  public  trea-
sury at  Rome,  and  hence  the  public  money  itself.
After  the  banishment  of  the  kings  the  temple  of
Saturn  was  employed,  upon  the  proposition  of
Valerius  Poplicola,  as  the  place  for  keeping  thi
public  money,  and  it  continued  to  be  so  used  till
the  later  times  of  the  empire.  (Plut.  Pop/.  12,
Quaest.  Rom.  42  ;  Festus,  s.  v.  Aerarium).*     Be-

*  Of  this  temple  three  Corinthian  pillars  with


AERARIUM.


23


sides  the  public  money  and  the  accounts  connected
with  its  receipts,  expenditure,  and  debtors,  va-
rious other  things  were  preserved  in  the  treasury  ;
of  these  the  most,  important  were ;  —  1.  The
standards  of  the  legions  (Liv.  iii.  69,  iv.  22,  vii.
23).  2.  The  various  laws  passed  from  time  to
time,  engraven  on  brazen  tables  (Suet  Caes.  28).

3.  The  decrees  of  the  senate,  which  were  entered
there  in  books  kept  for  the  purpose,  though  the
original  documents  were  preserved  in  the  temple  of
Ceres  under  the  custody  of  the  aediles.  (Joseph.
Ant.  xiv.  10.  §  10  ;  Plut.  Cat.  Min.  17  ;  Cic.
de  Leg.  iii.   4  ;  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  51.)     [Aediles.]

4.  Various  otlier  public  documents,  the  reports
and  despatches  of  all  generals  and  governors  of
provinces,  the  names  of  all  foreign  ambassadors
that  came  to  Rome  [Legatus],  &c.

The  aerarium  was  the  common  treasury  of  the
state,  and  must  be  distinguished  from  the  publicum,
which  was  the  treasury  of  the  populus  or  the  pa-
tricians. It  is  mentioned  as  one  of  the  grievances
of  the  plebeians  that  the  booty  gained  in  war
was  frequently  paid  into  the  publicum  {redigitur  in
publicum),  instead  of  being  paid  into  the  aerarium,
or  distributed  among  the  soldiers  (Liv.  ii.  42) ;
but  since  we  no  longer  read,  after  the  time  of  th«
decemvirate,  of  the  booty  being  paid  into  the  pub-
licum, but  always  into  the  aerarium,  it  is  supposed
by  Niebuhr  that  this  was  a  consequence  of  the  de-
cemviral  legislation.  (Niebuhr,  Hist.  Rom.  vol.  ii.
notes  386,  954.)  Under  the  republic  the  aerarium
was  divided  into  two  parts  :  the  common  treasury,
in  which  were  deposited  the  regular  taxes  [Tri-
butum ;  Vectigalia],  and  from  which  were
taken  the  sums  of  money  needed  for  the  ordinary
expenditure  of  the  state  ;  and  the  sacred  treasury
{aerarium  sanctum  or  sanetius,  Liv.  xxvii.  1 0  ;  Flor.
iv.  2  ;  Caes.  B.  C.  i.  14  ;  Cic.  ad  Att.  vii.  21),
which  was  never  touched  except  in  cases  of  ex-
treme peril.  Both  of  these  treasuries  were  m  the
temple  of  Saturn,  but  in  distinct  parts  of  the  temple.
The  sacred  treasury  seems  to  have  been  first  es-
tablished soon  after  the  capture  of  Rome  by  the
Gauls,  in  order  that  the  state  might  always  have
money  in  the  treasury  to  meet  the  danger  wliich
was  ever  most  dreaded  by  the  Romans,  —  a
war  with  the  Gauls.  (Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  41.)  At
first,  probably  part  of  the  pli:nder  which  the
Romans  gained  in  their  wars  with  their  neigh-
bours was  paid  into  this  sacred  treasuiy  ;  but  a
regular  means  for  augmenting  Jt  was  established
in  B.  c.  357  by  the  Lex  M-*nlia,  which  enacted
that  a  tax  of  five  per  co^it.  (vicesima)  upon  the
value  of  every  nianumi^ed  slave  should  be  paid
into  this  treasury.  As  this  money  was  to  be  pre-
served, and  therefo^  space  was  some  object,  it  had,
at  least  at  a  la^r  time,  either  to  be  paid  in  gold
or  was  kept  »i  the  treasury  in  gold,  since  Livy
speaks  of  a^rum  rieesimarium  (Liv.  vii.  16,  xxvii.
10  ;  cony.  Cic.  ad.  Att.  ii.  16).  A  portion  of  the
immense  wealth  obtained  by  the  Romans  in  their
conqv^sts  in  the  East  was  likewise  deposited  in  the
sac-'ed  treasury;  and  though  we  cannot  suppose

the  architrave  are  still  extant,  standing  on  the
Clivus  Capitolinus  to  the  right  of  a  person  as-
cending the  hill.  It  was  rebuilt  by  L.  Munatiua
Plancus  in  the  time  of  Augustus  (Suet.  Aug.  29  ;
Orelli,  Inscr.  No.  590),  and  again  restored  by  Sep-
timius  Severus.  (Becker,  Handbmli  der  Romis-
'chen  Altetih'umer,  vol.  i.  p.  315.)
c  4


24  AERARIUM.

that  it  was  spared  in  the  civil  wars  between
Marius  and  Sulla,  yet  Julius  Caesar,  when  he  ap-
propriated it  to  his  own  use  on  the  breaking  out  of
the  second  civil  war,  B.  c.  49,  still  found  in  it  enor-
mous sums  of  money.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii.  3.  s.  17  ;
Dion  Cass.  xli.  17  ;  Oros.  vi.  15  ;  Lucan,iiL  155.)

Upon  the  establishment  of  the  imperial  power
imder  Augustus,  there  was  an  important  change
made  in  the  public  income  and  expenditure.  He
divided  the  provinces  and  the  administration  of  the
government  between  the  senate,  as  the  representa-
tive of  the  old  Roman  people,  and  the  Caesjir  :  all
the  property  of  the  former  continued  to  be  called
aerariu77i,  and  that  of  the  latter  received  the  name
oijiscus.  [Fiscus.]  The  aeranum  consequently
received  all  the  taxes  from  the  provinces  belonging
to  the  senate,  and  likewise  most  of  the  taxes  which
had  formerly  been  levied  in  Italy  itself,  such  as
the  revenues  of  all  public  lands  still  remaining  in
Italy,  the  tax  on  manumissions,  the  custom-duties,
the  water-rates  for  the  use  of  the  water  brought
into  the  city  by  the  aquaeducts,  the  sewer-rates,
&c.

Besides  the  aerarium  and  the  fiscus,  Augustus
established  a  third  treasury,  to  provide  for  the  pay
and  support  of  the  army,  and  this  received  the
name  of  aerarium  militare.  It  was  founded  in  the
consulship  of  M.  Aerailius  Lepidus  and  L.  Arrun-
tius,  A.  D.  6,  in  consequence  of  the  difficulty  which
was  experienced  in  obtaining  sufficient  funds  from
the  ordinary  revenues  of  the  state  to  give  the  sol-
diers their  rewards  upon  dismission  from  service.
Augustus  paid  a  very  large  sum  into  the  treasury
upon  its  foundation,  and  promised  to  do  so  every
year.  In  the  Monumentum  Ancyranum,  Augustus
is  said  to  have  paid  into  the  treasury  in  the  con-
sulship of  Aemilius  and  Arruntius  1 70  millions  of
sesterces  ;  but  this  sum  is  probably  the  entire
amount  which  he  contributed  to  it  during  his  whole
reign.  As  he  reigned  eight  years  and  a  half  after
the  establishment  of  the  treasury,  and  would  pro-
bably have  made  the  payments  half  yearly,  he
would  in  that  case  have  contributed  ten  millions  of
sesterces  every  half  year.  He  also  imposed  several
new  taxes  to  be  paid  into  this  aerarium.  ( Suet.
Aug.id',  Dion  Cass,  Iv.  23,  24,  25,  32  ;  Monu-
mentum  Ancyranum^  pp.  32,  ^h^  ed.  Franzius  and
Zumptius,  Berol.  1845.)  Of  these  the  most  im-
portant was  the  viceslma  liereditatum  et  legatorum^
a  tax  of  five  p^ir  cent,  which  had  to  be  paid  by
every  Roman  citiv/^n  upon  any  inheritance  or  legacy
being  left  to  him,  \Tith  the  exception  of  such  as
were  left  to  a  citizen  by^is  nearest  relatives,  or  such
as  were  below  a  certain  conount.  (Dion  Cass.  Iv.
25,  IvL  28  ;  Plin.  Paneg.  ?7_40  ;  Capitol.  M.
Anton.  11.)  This  tax  was  raited  by  Caracalla  to
ten  per  cent,  but  subsequently  reluced  by  Macri-
nus  to  five  ( Dion  Cass.  Ixxvii.  9,  Ixryiii.  12),  and
eventually  abolished  altogether.  (CcyJ.  6.  tit  33.
s.  3.)  There  was  also  paid  into  the  aena-ium  mili-
tare a  tax  of  one  per  cent,  upon  every  thinj  sold  at
auctions  (centesima  rerum  venaliuni),  reduced  by
Tiberius  to  half  per  cent  (ducentesima),  and  a'lt.er-
wards  abolished  by  Caligula  altogether  for  Itiiv
(Tac.  Ann.  i.  78,  ii.  42  ;  Suet  Col.  16)  ;  and
likewise  a  tax  upon  every  slave  that  was  pur-
chased, at  first  of  two  per  cent,  (quinqziegesima),
and  afterwards  of  four  per  cent,  (quinta  et  vicesima)
of  its  value.  (Dion  Cass.  Iv.  31  ;  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.
31  ;  Orelli,  Inscr.  No.  3336.)  Besides  these  taxes,
no  doubt  the  booty  obtained  in  war  and  not  dis-


AERARIQM.

tributed  among  the  soldiers  was  also  deposited  in
the  military  treasury.

The  distinction  between  the  aerarium  and  the
fiscus  continued  to  exist  at  least  as  late  as  the
reign  of  M.  Aurelius  {rh  fiacriXiKbv  koX  rb  h'i)jx6(nov^
Dion  Cass.  Ixxi.  33  ;  Vulcat  Gallic.  Avid.  Cass.
7)  ;  but  as  the  emperor  gradually  concentrated
the  administration  of  the  whole  empire  into  his
hands,  the  aerarium  likewise  became  exclusively
under  his  control,  and  this  we  find  to  have  been
the  case  even  in  the  reign  of  M.  Aurelius,  when
the  distinction  between  the  aerarium  and  the  fiscus
was  still  retained.  (Dion  Cass.  Ixxi.  33.)  When
the  aerarium  ceased  to  belong  to  the  senate,  this
distinction  between  the  aerarium  and  fiscus  natu-
rally ceased  also,  as  both  of  them  were  now  the
treasury  of  the  Caesar  ;  and  accordingly  later
jurists  used  the  words  aerarium  and  fiscus  indis-
criminately, though  properly  speaking  there  was  no
treasury  but  that  of  the  Caesar.  The  senate,  how-
ever, still  continued  to  possess  the  management  of
the  municipal  chest  {area  publico)  of  the  cit)'.
(Vopisc.  Aurelian.  20.)

In  the  time  of  the  republic,  the  entire  management
of  the  revenues  of  the  state  belonged  to  the  senate  ;
and  under  the  superintendence  and  control  of  the
senate  the  quaestors  had  the  charge  of  the  aera-
rium. [Senatus;  Quaestor.]  With  the  excep-
tion of  the  consuls,  who  had  the  right  of  drawing
from  the  treasiu:y  whatever  sums  they  pleased,  the
quaestors  had  not  the  power  to  make  payments  to
any  one,  even  to  a  dictator,  without  a  special  order
from  the  senate.  (Polyb.  vi.  12, 13  :  Liv.  xxxviii.
55  ;  Zonar.  vii.  13.)  In  B.C.  45,  when  no  quaes-
tors were  chosen,  two  praefects  of  the  city  had
the  custody  of  the  aerarium  (Dion.  Cass,  xliii.  48) ;
but  it  doubtless  passed  again  into  the  hands  of  the
quaestors,  when  they  were  elected  again  in  the
following  year.  In  their  hands  it  seems  to  have
remained  till  B.  c.  28,  when  Augustus  deprived
them  of  it  and  gave  it  to  two  praefects,  whom  he
allowed  the  senate  to  choose  from  among  the  prae-
tors at  the  end  of  their  year  of  office  ;  but  as  he
suspected  that  this  gave  rise  to  canvassing,  he  en-
acted, in  B.  c.  23,  that  two  of  the  praetors  in  office
should  have  the  charge  of  the  aerarium  by  lot.
(Suet  Octav.  36 ;  Dion  Cass.  liii.  2,  32  ;  Tac.
Ann.  xiii.  29.)  They  were  c?i\\eA.  praetor es  aerarii
(Tac.  Ann.  i.  75  ;  Frontin.  de  Aquae  Duct.  100)  or
ad  aerarium  (Orelli,  Inscr.  n.  723).  This  arrange-
ment continued  till  the  reign  of  Claudius,  who
restored  to  the  quaestors  the  care  of  the  aerarium,
depriving  them  of  certain  other  offices  which  they
had  received  from  Augustus  (Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  29  ;
Suet  Clami.  24  ;  Dion.  Cass.  Ix.  24)  ;  but  as  their
age  seemed  too  young  for  so  grave  a  trust,  Nero
took  it  from  them  and  gave  it  to  those  who  had
been  praetors,  and  who  received  the  title  of  j)rae-
fecti  aerarii.  (Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  28,  29.)  During
the  latter  part  of  the  reign  of  Trajan,  or  the  begin-
ning of  that  of  Vespasian,  a  fresh  change  seems  to
have  been  made,  for  we  read  of  praetores  aerarii
in  the  time  of  the  latter  (Tac.  Hist.  iv.  9)  ;  but  in
the  reign  of  Trajan,  if  not  before,  it  was  again  en-
trusted to  praefects,  who  appear  to  have  held  their
office  for  two  yefirs  ;  and  henceforth  no  further
change  seems  to  have  been  made.  (Plin.  Patiey.
91,  92,  E'p.  x.  20  ;  Suet  Claud.  24.)  They  are
allied  in  inscriptions  praefecti  aerarii  Satumi^  and
they  appear  to  have  had  quaestors  also  to  assist
them  in  their  duties,  as  we  find  mention  of  quaes-


AES.

tores  aerarii  Saturni  in  inscriptions  imder  Hadrian
and  Sevenis.  (Gudius,  A nt.  Inscr.  p.  1 25.  n.  6.  p.  1 3 1 .
n.  3  ;  Gruter,  p.  1027,  n.  4.)  These  praefccts  had
jurisdiction  ;  and  before  their  court  in  the  temple
of  Satnm,  all  informations  were  laid  respecting
property  due  to  the  aerarium  and  fiscus.  (Plin.
Pamg.  36  ;  Dig.  49.  tit.  14.   ss.  13,  15.)

The  aerarium  militare  was  under  the  care  of
distinct  praefects,  who  were  first  appointed  by  lot
from  among  those  who  had  filled  the  office  of
praetor,  but  were  afterwards  nominated  by  the
emperor.  (Dion.  Cass.  Iv.  25  ;  comp.  Tac.  Ann.
V.  8.)  They  frequently  occur  in  inscriptions  luider
the  title  of  praefedi  aerarii  militaris.  (Walter,
Geschichte  des  Romischen  Bechts,  pp.  201,  &c.,  397,
&c.  2d  edition  ;  Lipsius,  ad  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  29.)

AES  (x^'^'C'^s).  These  words  signify  both
pure  copper  and  a  composition  of  metals,  in  which
copper  :s  the  predominant  ingredient.  In  the
latter  sense  they  should  not  be  translated  brass^
but  rather  bronze.  Brass  is  a  combination  of  copper
a'.id  zinc,  while  all  the  specimens  of  ancient  objects
fonned  of  the  compound  material  called  aes,  are
found  upon  analysis  to  contain  no  zinc  ;  but,  with
very  limited  exceptions,  to  be  composed  entii'ely  of
coj/per  and  tin,  which  mixture  is  properly  called
l/ronze.  Our  chief  information  about  the  copper
and  bronze  of  the  ancients  is  derived  from  Pliny
(H.  N.  xxxiv.).  Copper,  being  one  of  the  most
abundant  and  generally  distributed  of  the  metals,
was  naturally  used  at  a  very  early  period  by  the
Greeks  and  Romans.  Pliny  (//.  N.  xxxiv.  1)
mentions  three  of  its  ores  (lapides  aerosi),  namely,
cadmia,  c/ialcifis,  and  aurichalcum  or  orichalcum,
into  the  exact  nature  of  which  this  is  not  the  place
to  inquire.

In  the  most  ancient  times  we  can  ascend  to,  the
chief  supply  came  from  Cyprus,  whence  the  modern
name  of  copper  is  said  to  be  derived.  (Comp.  Hom.
Odys.  i.  184,  and  Nitzsch's  Note  ;  Plin.  //.  A^.  vii.
^^,  s.  57)  ;  but  according  to  an  old  tradition  it
was  first  found  in  Euboea,  and  the  town  of  Clialds
took  its  name  from  a  copper-mine.  (Plin.  H.  N.
iv.  12.  s.  21.)  It  was  also  found  in  Asia  and  the
south  of  Italy,  in  Gaul,  in  the  mountains  of  Spain
(comp.  Pans.  vi.  19.  §  2),  and  in  the  Alps.  The
art  of  smelting  the  ore  was  perfectly  familiar  to  the
Greeks  of  Homer's  time.  (Comp.  Hesiod.  Theog.
861—866.)

The  abundance  of  copper  sufficiently  accounts  for
its  general  use  among  the  ancients  ;  money,  vases,
and  utensils  of  all  sorts,  whether  for  domestic  or
sacrificial  purposes,  ornaments,  arms  oflfensive  and
defensive,  furniture,  tablets  for  inscriptions,  musical
instruments,  and  indeed  every  object  to  which  it
could  be  applied,  being  made  of  it.  (Hesiod,  Of.
et  Di.  150,  151  ;  Lucret.  v.  1286.)  We  have  a
remarkable  result  of  this  fact  in  the  use  oix'^^*^^^^
and  x'^^Kf'^eti/,  where  working  in  iron  is  meant.
(Hom.  Od.  ix.  391  ;  Aristot.  Po6t.  25.)  For  all
these  purposes  the  pure  metal  would  be  com-
paratively useless,  some  alloy  being  necessary  both
to  harden  it  and  to  make  it  more  fusible.  Ac-
cordingly, the  origin  of  the  art  of  mixing  copper
and  tin  is  lost  in  the  mythological  period,  being
ascribed  to  the  Idaean  Dactyli  The  proportions
in  which  the  component  parts  were  mixed  seemed
to  have  been  much  studied,  and  it  is  remarkable
how  nearly  they  agree  in  all  the  specimens  that
have  been  analysed.  Some  bronze  nails  from  the
niins   of  tho   Treasurj'-   of  Atreua   at  Mycenae  ;  |


AES.


25


some  ancient  coins  of  Corinth  ;  a  very  ancient
Greek  helmet,  on  which  is  a  boustrophedon  in-
scription, now  in  the  British  Museum  ;  portions  of
the  breastplates  of  a  piece  of  armour  called  the
Bronzes  of  Siris,  also  preserved  in  our  national  col-
lection ;  and  an  antique  sword  found  in  France,
produced  in  100  parts,

87-43  and  88  copper

12-53  and  12  tin

^'d-m  100
At  a  later  period  than  that  to  which  some  of  the
above  works  may  be  referred,  the  addition  of  a
variety  of  metals  seems  to  have  been  made  to  the
original  combination  of  copper  and  tin.  The  writers
on  art  make  particular  mention  of  certain  of  these
bronzes  which,  notwithstanding  the  changes  thov
underwent  by  the  introduction  of  novel  elements,
were  still  described  by  the  words  xaAK(is  and  aes.
That  which  appears  to  have  held  the  first  place  in
the  estimation  of  the  ancients  was  the  aes  Corinthi-
actmi,  which  some  pretended  was  an  alloy  made  ac-
cidentally, in  the  first  instance,  by  the  melting  and
running  together  of  various  metals  (especially  ^/o/rf
and  bronze),  at  the  burning  of  Corinth  by  Liicius
Mummius,  in  b.  c.  146.  (Plin.  H.N.  xxxiv.  2.  s.  3  ;
Floras,  ii.  1 6.)  This  account  is  obviously  incor-
rect, as  some  of  the  artists  whose  productions
are  mentioned  as  composed  of  this  highly  valued
metal,  lived  long  before  the  event  alluded  to.
Pliny  {I.  c.)  particularises  three  classes  of  the  Co-
rinthian bronze.  The  first,  he  says,  was  white
{candidum),  the  greater  proportion  of  silver  that
was  employed  in  its  composition  giving  it  a  light
colour.  In  the  second  sort  or  quality,  gold  was  in-
troduced, in  sufficient  quantity  to  impart  to  the
mixture  a  strong  yellow  or  gold  tint.  The  third
was  composed, of  equal  portions  of  the  different
metals.  Some,  however,  contend  that  the  ae^
Corinthiacttm  was  no  composition  of  precious  metals
at  all,  but  merely  a  very  pure  and  highly  refined
bronze.  (Fiorillo,  in  the  Kunstblatt,  1832,  No.
^7.)  The  next  bronze  of  note  among  the  ancient
Greek  sculptors  is  distinguished  by  the  title  of
hepatizon,  which  it  seems  it  acquired  from  its
colour,  which  bore  some  resemblance  to  that  of  the
liver  (vT^ap).  Pliny  says  that  it  was  inferior  to
the  Corinthian  bronze,  but  was  greatly  preferred
to  the  mixtures  of  Delos  and  Aegina,  which,  for  a
long  period,  had  the  highest  reputation.  The  colour
of  the  bronze  called  hepatizon  must  have  been  ver\'
similar  to  that  of  the  cinque  cento  bronzes  —  a  dull
reddish  brown.  Before  the  invention  of  these  sorts
of  bronze,  the  first  in  order  of  celebrity  was  the
aes  Deliacum.  Its  reputation  was  so  great  that
the  island  of  Delos  became  the  mart  to  which  all
who  required  works  of  art  in  metal  crowded,  and
led,  in  time,  to  the  establishment  there  of  some  of
the  greatest  artists  of  antiquity.  (Plin.  I.  c.  2.  s.  4.)
Next  to  the  Delian,  or  rather  in  competition
with  it,  the  aes  Aegineticum  was  esteemed.  No
metal  was  produced  naturally  in  Aegina ;  but  the
founders  and  artists  there  were  most  skilful  in
their  composition  of  bronze.  The  distinguished
sculptors,  Myron  and  Polycleitus,  not  only  vied
with  one  another  in  producing  the  finest  works  of
art,  but  also  in  the  choice  of  the  bronze  they  used.
MjTon  preferred  the  Delian,  while  Polycleitus
adopted  the  Aeginetan  mixture.  (Plin.  H.  N.
xxxiv.  2.  s.  5.)  From  a  passage  in  Plutarch  it
has   been   supposed   that  this  far-famed   Delian


26  AES  EQUESTRE,

bronze  was  of  a  light  and  somewhat  sickly  tint.
(See  Quatremere  de  Quincy,  Jupiter  Olympien ;
Plut.  De  Pyth.  Orac.  2.)  Plutarch  says,  that  in
his  time  its  composition  was  unknown.  For  fur-
ther information  on  the  composition  of  bronze,  see
L.  Savot  {Num.  Ant.  p.  ii.  c.  17),  Falbroni  (in  the
Atti  deW  Acad.  Ital.  vol.  i.  pp.  203—245,  and  Got-
ting.  Gel.  Anzeig.  1811,  No.  87),  and  Winckel-
mann  {Werke^  vol.  v.).

No  ancient  works  in  brass,  properly  so  called,
have  yet  been  discovered,  though  it  has  been  af-
firmed that  zinc  was  found  in  an  analysis  made  of
an  antique  sword  (see  Mongez,  Mem.  de  V'lnstitut.) ;
but  it  appeared  in  so  extremely  small  a  quantity,
that  it  hardly  deserved  notice  ;  if  it  was  indeed
present,  it  may  rather  be  attributed  to  some  acci-
dent of  nature  than  to  design.  On  the  subject  of
metals  and  metallurgy  in  general,  see  Metallum,
and  for  the  use  of  bronze  in  works  of  art  see
Statuaria.  [P.  S.]

AES  (money,  nummi  a'cnei  or  aerii).  Since
the  most  ancient  coins  in  Rome  and  the  old
Italian  states,  were  made  of  aes,  this  name  was
given  to  money  in  general,  so  that  Ulpian  (Dig.
50.  tit.  16.  s.  159)  says,  Etiam  aureos  nummos  aes
dicimus.  (Compare  Hor.  Ars  Poet.  345,  Ep.  i.  7.
23.)  For  the  same  reason  we  have  aes  alienum,
meaning  debt,  and  aera  in  the  plural,  pay  to  the
soldiers.  (Liv.  v.  4  ;  Plin.  //.  A^.  xxxiv.  1.)  The
Romans  had  no  other  comage  except  bronze  or
copper  (aes),  till  B.  c.  269,  five  years  before  the
first  Punic  war,  when  silver  was  first  coined  ;
gold  was  not  coined  till  sixty-two  years  after  silver.
(Plin.  H.N.  xxxiii.  13.)  For  this  reason  Argen-
tinus,  in  the  Italian  mythology,  was  made  the  son
of  Aesculanus.  {Quia  prius  aerea  pecunia  in  usu
esse  coepit  post  argentea.  August.  De  Civ.  Dei.,
iv.  21.)  Respecting  the  Roman  copper  money,  see
As,  and  respecting  the  Greek  copper  money  see
Chalcous.  [P.  S.]

AES  CIRCUMFORA'NEUM,  money  bor-
rowed from  the  Roman  bankers  {argentarii\  who
had  shops  in  porticoes  round  the  forum.  (Cic.  Ad
Attic,  ii.  1.)

AES  EQUESTRE,  AES  HORDEA'RIUM,
and  AES  MILITA'RE,  were  the  ancient  terms
for  the  pa}--  of  the  Roman  soldiers,  before  the  regu-
lar stipendium  was  introduced.  The  aes  equestre
was  the  sum  of  money  given  for  the  purchase  of
the  horse  of  an  eques  ;  the  aes  hordeai-ium.,  the
sum  of  money  paid  yearly  for  the  keep  of  the
horse  of  an  eques,  in  other  words  the  pay  of  an
eques  ;  and  the  aes  militare,  the  pay  of  a  foot
soldier.  (Gains,  iv.  27.)  None  of  this  money  seems
to  have  been  taken  from  the  public  treasury,  but
to  have  been  paid  by  certain  private  persons,  to
whom  this  duty  was  assigned  by  the  state.

The  aes  hordearium,  which  amounted  to  2000
asses,  had  to  be  paid  by  single  women  {viduae,  i.  e.
both  maidens  and  widows)  and  orphans  {orbi)^  pro-
vided they  possessed  a  certain  amount  of  property,
on  the  principle,  as  Niebuhr  remarks,  that  in  a  mili-
tary state,  the  women  and  children  ought  to  con-
tribute for  those  who  fight  in  behalf  of  them  and
the  commonwealth  ;  it  being  borne  in  mind,  that
they  were  not  included  in  the  census.  (Liv.  i.  43  ;
Cic.  de  Rep.  ii.  20.)  The  equites  had  a  right  to
distrain  {pignoris  capio)  if  the  aes  hordearium  was
not  paid.  (Gains,  l.  c.)

The  aes  e(juestre,  which  amounted  to  10,000
asses,  was  to  be  given,  according  to  the  statement


AES  UXORIUM.
of  Livy  {I.  c.\  out  of  the  public  treasmy  {ex publico) ;
but  as  Gains  says  (/.  c),  that  the  equites  had  a
right  to  distrain  for  this  money  likewise,  it  seems
impossible  that  this  account  can  be  correct  ;  for  we
can  hardly  conceive  that  a  private  person  had  a
right  of  distress  against  a  magistrate,  that  is,
against  the  state,  or  that  he  could  distrain  any  of
the  public  property  of  the  state.  It  is  more  pro-
bable that  this  money  was  also  paid  by  the  single
women  and  orphans,  and  that  it  was  against  these
that  the  equites  had  the  same  right  to  distrain,
as  they  had  in  the  case  of  the  aes  hordearium.

The  aes  militare,  the  amount  of  which  is  not
expressly  mentioned,  had  to  be  paid  by  the  trihuni
aerarii.,  and  if  not  paid,  the  foot  soldiers  had  a
right  of  distress  against  them.  (Cato,  up.  Gell.
vii.  10  ;  Varr.  L.  L.  v.  181,  ed.  Miiller ;  Festus,s.  r.
aerarii  trihuni  ;  Gains,  /.  c.)  It  is  generally  as-
sumed from  a  passage  of  the  Pseudo-Asconius  {in
Verr.  p,  1 Q7,  ed.  Orelli),  that  these  tribuni  aerarii
were  magistrates  connected  with  the  treasury,  and
that  they  were  the  assistants  of  the  quaestors  ;
but  Madvig  {De  Tribunis  Aerariis  Disjmtatio,  in
Opuscula^  vol.  ii.  pp.  258 — 261),  has  brought  for-
ward good  reasons  for  believing  that  the  tnbuiti
aerarii  were  private  persons,  who  were  liable  to  the
payment  of  the  aes  militare.,  and  upon  whose  pro-
perty a  distress  might  be  levied,  if  the  money  were
not  paid.  He  supposes  that  they  were  persons
whose  property  was  rated  at  a  certain  sum  in  the
census,  and  that  they  obtained  the  name  of  tribuni
aerarii,  either  because  they  received  money  from  the
treasury  for  the  purpose  of  paying  the  soldiers,  or
because,  which  is  the  more  probable,  they  levied
the  tributum,  which  was  imposed  for  the  purpose
of  paying  the  army,  and  then  paid  it  to  the  soldiers.
The  state  thus  avoided  the  trouble  of  collecting  the
tributum  and  of  keeping  minute  accounts,  for  which
reason  the  vectigaJia  were  afterwards  farmed,  and
the  foot-soldiers  were  thus  paid  in  a  way  similar
to  the  horse-soldiers.  These  tribuni  aerarii  were  no
longer  needed  when  the  state  took  into  its  ovm
hands  the  payment  of  the  troops  [Exercitus],
but  they  were  revived  in  b.  c.  70,  as  a  distinct
class  in  the  commonwealth  by  the  Lex  Aurelia,
which  gave  the  judicia  to  the  senators,  equites  and
tribuni  aerarii.  [Tribuni  Aerarii.]  The  opinion
of  Niebuhr  {Hist,  of  Rome.,  vol.  i.  p.  474.),  that  the
aes  militare  was  paid  by  the  aerarians  [Aerarii]
is,  it  must  be  recollected,  merely  a  conjectiu'e,
which,  however  ingenious,  is  supported  by  no  an-
cient authority.

It  has  been  well  remarked  by  Niebuhr  (Hist,
of  Rome,  vol.  ii.  p.  442),  that  the  2000  asses,  which
was  the  yearly  pay  of  a  horseman,  give  200  asses
a  month,  if  divided  by  10,  and  that  the  monthly
pay  of  a  foot  soldier  was  100  asses  a  month.  It
must  be  recollected  that  a  year  of  ten,  and  not  of
twelve  months,  was  used  in  all  calculations  of  pay-
ments at  Rome  in  very  remote  times.

AES  MANUA'RIUM  was  the  money  won  in
playing  with  dice,  manibus  collecttim.  Mamis  was
the  throw  in  the  game.  All  who  threw  certain
numbers,  were  obliged  to  put  down  a  piece  of
money ;  and  whoever  threw  the  Venus  (the  highest
throw)  won  the  whole  sum,  which  was  called  the
aesmanuarium.     (Gell.  xvii.  1 3  ;  Suet.  ^z<^.  71.)

AES  UXO'RIUM,  a  tax  paid  by  men  who
reached  old  age  without  having  married.  It  was
first  imposed  by  the  censors,  M.  Furius  Camillus
and  M.  Postumius,  in  b.  c.  403,  but   we   do  not


AETOLICUM  FOEDUS.

know  whether  it  continued  to  he  levied  afterwards.
(Festus,  s.  V. ;  Val.  Max.  ii.  9.%1;  Plut.  Camill.  2.)
[Lex  Julia  et  Papia  Poppaea.1

AESTIMA'TIO  LITIS.    [Judex.]

AESYMNE'TES  (atVu/xj/V^js,  from  alaa^^'a
just  portion,"  hence  "  a  person  who  gives  every
one  his  just  portion  "),  originally  signified  merely  a
judge  in  the  heroic  games,  but  afterwards  indicated
an  individual  who  was  occasionally  invested  volun-
tarily by  his  fellow-citizens  with  unlimited  power
in  a  Greek  state.  His  power,  according  to  Aristotle,
partook  in  some  degree  of  the  nature  both  of  kingly
and  tyrannical  authority  ;  since  he  was  appointed
legally  and  ruled  over  willing  subjects,  but  at  the
same  time  was  not  boxmd  by  any  laws  in  his  pub-
lic administration.  (Aristot.  JPolit.  iii.  9.  §  5,
iv.  8.  §  2  ;  Hesych.  s.  v.)  Hence  Theophrastus  calls
the  office  rvpavvls  alpeT-f],  and  Dionysius  (v.  73)
compares  it  with  the  dictatorship  at  Rome.  It
was  not  hereditary  ;  but  it  was  sometimes  held
for  life,  and  at  other  times  only  till  some  object
was  accomplished,  such  as  the  reconciling  of  the
various  factions  in  the  state,  and  the  like.  We
have  only  one  express  instance  in  which  a  person
received  the  title  of  Aesymnetes,  namely,  that  of
Pittacus,  in  Mytilene,  who  was  appointed  to  this
dignity,  because  the  state  had  been  long  torn
asmider  by  the  various  factions,  and  who  succeeded
in  restoring  peace  and  order  by  his  wise  regulations
and  laws.  (Dionys.  v.  73  ;  Strab.  xiii.  p.  617  ;  Plut.
So/on,  4  ;  Diog.  Laert.  i.  75  ;  Plehn,  Lesbiaca,  pp.
46, 48.)  There  were,  however,  no  doubt  many  other
persons  who  ruled  under  this  title  for  a  while  in
the  various  states  of  Greece,  and  those  legislators
bore  a  strong  resemblance  to  the  aesymnetes,  whom
their  fellow-citizens  appointed  with  supreme  power
to  enact  laws,  as  Dracon,  Solon,  Zaleucus  and
Charondas.  In  some  states,  such  as  Cyme  and
Chalcedon,  it  was  the  title  borne  by  the  regular
magistrates.  (Wachsmuth,  Ilellen.  Alterthum.
vol.  i.  pp.  423,  441,  2d  ed.  ;  Tittmann,  Griech.
Staatsv.  p.  76,  &c.  ;  Schomann,  Antiq.  Jur.  Pull.
Graec.  p.  88  ;  Hermann,  Staatsalterth.  §  63.)

AETAS.     [In fans  ;  Impubes.]

AETO'LICUM  FOEDUS.  {Koivhv  tuvAItc!,-
Xoov.)  The  inhabitants  of  the  southern  coast  of  the
country,  afterwards  called  Aetolia,  appear  to  have
formed  a  sort  of  confederacy  as  early  as  the  time
of  Homer.  {II.  ii.  638,  &c.,  xiii.  217  &c.)  In
the  time  of  Thucydides  (iii.  Ill),  the  several
Aetolian  tribes  between  the  rivers  Achelous  and
Evenus,  appear  to  have  been  quite  independent  of
one  another,  although  they  were  designated  by  the
common  name  of  Aetolians ;  but  we  nevertheless
find  that,  on  certain  occasions,  they  acted  in  concert,
as  for  example,  when  they  sent  embassies  to  foreign
powers,  or  when  they  had  to  ward  off  the  attacks
of  a  common  enemy.  (Thuc.  /.  c,  iii.  .95,  &c.)
It  may  therefore  be  admitted  that  there  did  not
exist  any  definite  league  among  the  tribes  of  Aeto-
lia, and  that  it  was  only  their  common  danger  that
made  them  act  in  concert;  but  such  a  state  of
things,  at  any  rate,  facilitated  the  formation  of  a
league,  when  the  time  came  at  which  it  was  needed.
But  the  league  appears  as  a  very  powerful  one  very
soon  after  the  death  of  Alexander  the  Great,  viz.
during  the  Lamian  war  against  Antipater.  (Diod.
xix.  QQ.,  XX.  99.)  How  far  its  organisation  was
then  regulated  is  unknown,  though  a  certain  con-
stitution must  have  existed  as  early  as  that  time,
since  we  find  that  Aristotle  wrote  a  work  on  the


AETOLICUM  FOEDUS.


27


Aetolian  constitution.  ( Strab.  vii.  p.  321.)  But  it
was  certainly  wanting  in  internal  solidity,  and  not
based  upon  any  finn  principles.  In  b.  c.  204,  two
of  the  heads  of  the  confederacy,  Dorimachus  and
Scopas,  were  commissioned  to  regulate  its  constitu-
tion, and  it  was  perhaps  in  consequence  of  their
regulation,  that  a  general  cancelling  of  debts  was
decreed  two  years  later.  (Polyb.  xiii.  1,  Fragm.
Hist.  68.)  The  characteristic  difference  between
the  Aetolian  and  Achaean  leagues,  was  that  the
fonuer  originally  consisted  of  a  confederacy  of
nations  or  tribes,  while  the  latter  was  a  confederacy
of  toAvns.  Hence  the  ancient  and  great  towns  of
the  Aetolians,  throughout  the  period  of  the  league,
are  of  no  importance  and  exercise  no  influence
whatever.  Even  Thermon,  although  it  was  the
head  of  the  league,  and  the  place  where  the  ordi-
nary meetings  of  the  confederates  were  held  (Polyb.
V.  8,  xviii.  31,  xxviii.  4  ;  Strab.  x.  p.  463),  did  not
serve  as  a  fortress  in  times  of  war,  and  whenever
the  Aetolians  were  threatened  by  any  danger,  they
preferred  withdrawing  to  their  impregnable  moun-
tains.

The  sovereign  power  of  the  confederacy  wa3
vested  in  the  general  assemblies  of  all  the  confede-
rates (koipov  rctiu  AlrdoXctiu,  concilium  Aetolorum)^
and  this  assembly  unquestionably  had  the  right  to
discuss  all  questions  respecting  peace  and  war,  and
to  elect  the  great  civil  or  military  officers  of  the
league.  It  is  however  clear,  that  those  assemblies
could  not  be  attended  by  all  the  Aetolians,  for
many  of  them  Avere  poor,  and  lived  at  a  great  dis-
tance, in  addition  to  which  the  roads  were  much
more  impassable  than  in  other  parts  of  Greece.
The  constitution  of  the  league  was  thus  in  theory
a  democracy,  but  under  the  cover  of  that  name  it
was  in  reality  an  aristocracy,  and  the  name  Fanae-
tolicum^  which  Livy  (xxxi.  29)  applies  to  the  Aeto-
lian assembly,  must  be  imderstood  accordingly,  as
an  assembly  of  the  wealthiest  and  most  influential
persons,  Avho  occasionally  passed  the  most  arbitrarj-
resolutions,  and  screened  the  maddest  and  most
unlawful  acts  of  the  leading  men  under  the  fine
name  of  a  decree  of  all  the  Aetolians.

We  have  already  mentioned  that  the  ordinary
place  of  meeting  was  Thermon,  but  on  extraordinary
occasions  assemblies  were  also  held  in  other  towns
belonging  to  the  league,  though  they  were  not
situated  in  the  country  of  Aetolia  Proper,  e.  g.  at
Heracleia  (Liv.  xxxiii.  3),  Naupactus  (xxxv.  12),
Hypata  (xxxvi.  2,  8),  and  Lamia  (xxxv.  43,  44).
The  questions  which  were  to  be  brought  before  the
assembly  were  sometimes  discussed  previously  by
a  committee,  selected  from  the  gi'eat  mass,  and
called  Apocleti  (aTr6KKT]Toi,  Suid.  s.  v.  ;  Liv.  xxxvi.
28.)  Some  writers  believe  that  the  Apocleti  formed
a  permanent  council,  and  that  the  thuty  men  sent
out  to  negotiate  with  Antiochus  were  only  a  com-
mittee of  the  Apocleti.  (Polyb.  iv.  9,  xx.  10,
xxi.  3  ;  Tittmann,  Griech.  Staatsverf.  p.  727.)

The  general  assembly  usually  met  in  the  autumn,
when  the  officers  of  the  league  were  elected.  (Polyb.
iv.  37.)  The  highest  among  them,  as  among  those
of  the  Achaean  league,  bore  the  title  of  a-rpaTTjySs,
whose  office  lasted  only  for  one  year.  The  first
whose  name  is  known,  was  Eurydamus,  who  com-
manded the  Aetolians  in  the  war  against  the  Gala-
tians.  (Paus.x.  16.  §  2.)  The  strategus  had  the
right  to  convoke  the  assembly  ;  he  presided  in  it,
introduced  the  subjects  for  deliberation,  and  levied
the  troops.     (Liv.  xxxviii.  4.)     He  had  his  share


28


AFFINES,  AFFINITAS.


of  the  booty  made  in  war,  but  was  not  allowed  to
vote  in  decisions  upon  peace  and  war.  (Liv.  xxxv.
25.)  This  was  a  wise  precaution,  as  a  sanguine
strategus  might  easily  have  involved  the  league  in
wars  which  would  have  been  ruinous  to  the  nation.
His  name  was  signed  to  all  public  documents,
treaties,  and  decrees  of  the  general  assembly.  An
exception  occurs  in  the  peace  with  the  Romans,
because  they  themselves  dictated  it  and  abandoned
the  usual  form.  (Polyb.  xxii.  15.)  Respecting
the  mode  of  election,  we  are  informed  by  Hesychius
(s.  V.  Kvdfji.(f}  Trarplw)^  that  it  was  decided  by  white
and  black  beans,  and  not  by  vothig,  but  by  draw-
ing lots,  so  that  we  must  suppose  the  assembly
nominated  a  number  of  candidates,  who  then  had
to  draw  lots,  and  the  one  who  drew  a  white  bean
v/as  strategus.

The  officers  next  in  rank  to  the  strategus  were
the  hipparchus  and  the  public  scribe.  (Polyb.  xxii.
15  ;  comp.  Liv.  xxxviii.  11.)  We  further  hear  of
or6veSpoi,  who  act  as  arbiters  (Bockh,  Corp.  Inscr.
vol.  ii.  p.  633),  and  vofioypdcjyoi.,  who  however  may
have  had  no  more  to  do  with  the  writing  down  of
laws,  than  the  Athenian  nomothetae.  (Bockh,
/.  c.  pp.  857,  858.)

With  the  exception  of  the  points  above  men-
tioned, the  constitution  of  the  Aetolian  league  is
involved  hi  great  obscurity.  There  are,  however,
two  things  which  appear  to  have  had  an  injurious
effect  upon  the  confederacy,  first  the  circumstance
that  its  members  were  scattered  over  a  large  tract
of  country,  and  that  besides  Aetolia  Proper  and
some  neighbouring  countries,  such  as  Locris  and
Thessaly,  it  embraced  towns  in  the  heart  of  Pelo-
ponnesus, the  island  of  Cephalenia  in  the  west,  and
in  the  east  the  town  of  Cius  on  the  Propontis  ;  in
the  second  place,  many  of  the  confederates  had
been  forced  to  join  the  league,  and  were  ready  to
abandon  it  again  as  soon  as  an  opportunity  offered.
(Polyb.  iv.  25  ;  comp.  xxii.  13,  15  ;  Liv.  xxxviii.
9,  11.)  The  towns  which  belonged  to  the  league
of  course  enjoyed  isopolity  ;  but  as  it  endeavoured
to  increase  its  strength  in  all  possible  ways,  the
Aetolians  also  formed  connections  of  friendship  and
alliance  with  other  states,  which  did  not  join  the
league.  (Polyb.  ii.  46.)  The  political  existence
of  the  league  was  destroyed  in  b.  c.  189  by  the
treaty  with  Rome,  and  the  treachery  of  the  Roman
party  among  the  Aetolians  themselves  caused  in
B.C.1 67  five  hundred  and  fifty  of  the  leading
patriots  to  be  put  to  death,  and  those  who  survived
the  massacre,  were  carried  to  Rome  as  prisoners.
(Liv.  xlv.  31  ;  Justin,  xxxiii.  2  ;  comp.  Tittmann,
JJarstellung  der  Griedi.  Staatsve?-/'.  p.  721,  &c. ;
Lucas,  UeLer  Polyh.  Darstelliing  des  Aetol.  Bundes,
Konigsberg,  1827,  4to.  ;  K.  F.  Hermann,  Griech.
Staatsaltertk.  §  183  ;  Schorn,  GescMchte  Griechenl.
p.  25,  &c. ;  Bra.ndsia,teT,  Die  Gesch.  des  Aetol.  Landes,
Volkes  und  Bundes,  p.  298,  &c.)  [L.  S.]

AETO'MA  (AcTw^a).     [Fastigium.]

AFFI'NES,  AFFI'NITAS,  or  ADFI'NES,
ADFirNITAS.  Affinitas  is  that  relation  into
which  one  family  comes  with  respect  to  another  by
a  marriage  between  the  members  of  the  respective
families  ;  but  it  is  used  more  particularly  to  express
the  relation  of  husband  and  wife  to  the  cognati  of
wife  and  husband  respectively.  The  husband  and
wife  were  also  affines  with  respect  to  their  being
members  of  different  families  ;  and  the  betrothed
husband  and  wife  (sponsus,  sponsa)  with  reference
to  their  intended  maniage.     Afnnitas  can  only  be


AGELA.

the  result  of  a  lawful  marriage.  There. are  no
degrees  of  affinitas  corresponding  to  those  of  cog-
natio,  though  there  are  terms  to  express  the  various
kinds  of  affinitas.  The  father  of  a  husband  is  the
socer  of  the  husband's  wife,  and  the  father  of  a
wife  is  the  socer  of  the  wife's  husband  ;  the  term
socnis  expresses  the  same  affinity  with  respect  to
the  husband's  and  wife's  mothers.  A  son's  wife
is  nurus  or  daughter-in-law  to  the  son's  parents  ;
a  wife's  husband  is  gener  or  son-in-law  to  the  wife's
parents.

Thus  the  avus,  avia  —  pater,  mater — of  the
wife  become  by  the  marriage  respectively  the  socer
magnus,  prosocrus,  or  socrus  magna — socer,  socrus
— of  the  husband,  who  becomes  withrespect  to  them
severally  progener  and  gener.  In  like  manner  the
corresponding  ancestors  of  the  husband  respectively
assume  the  same  names  with  respect  to  the  son's
wife,  who  becomes  with  respect  to  them  pronurus
and  nurus.  The  son  and  daughter  of  a  husband
or  wife  bom  of  a  prior  marriage,  are  called  privignus
and  privigna,  with  respect  to  their  step-father  or
step-mother  ;  and,  with  respect  to  such  children,
the  step-father  and  step-mother  are  severally  called
vitricus  and  noverca.  The  husband's  brother  be-
comes levir  with  respect  to  the  wife,  and  his  sister
becomes  Glos  (the  Greek  ydXois).  Marriage  was
unlawful  among  persons  who  had  become  such
affines .  as  above-mentioned  ;  and  the  incapacity
continued  even  after  the  dissolution  of  the  marriage
in  which  the  affinitas  originated.  (Gaius,  i.  63.)
A  person  who  had  sustained  such  a  capitis  diminutio
as  to  lose  both  his  freedom  and  the  civitas,  lost
also  all  his  affines.  (Dig.  38.  tit.  10.  s.  4  ;  Rocking,
Institutionen,  vol.  i.  p.  267.)  [G.  L.]

AGALMA  (SyaA/ia).     [Statuaria.]

AGAMIOU  GRAPHE  (oya/itou  ypacpi}).
[Matrimonium.]

AGA'SO,  a  groom,  a  slave  whose  business  it
was  to  take  care  of  the  horses.  The  word  is  also
used  for  a  driver  of  beasts  of  burthen,  and  is  some-
times applied  to  a  slave  who  had  to  perform  the
lowest  menial  duties.  (Liv.  xliii.  5  ;  Plin.  H.  N.
xxxv.  1 1  ;  Curt.  viii.  6  ;  Hor.  Serm.  ii.  8.  72  ;  Pers.
V.  76.)

A  G ATHOERGI  {ayaQo^pyoi).  In  time  of  war
the  kings  of  Sparta  had  a  body-guard  of  300  knights
(iTTirers),  of  whom  the  five  eldest  retired  every  year,
and  were  employed  for  one  year,  under  the  name
of  agathoergi  in  missions  to  foreign  states.  (Herod,
i.  67.)  It  has  been  maintained  by  some  writers
that  the  agathoergi  did  not  attain  that  rank  merely
by  seniority,  but  were  selected  from  the  liririis  by
the  ephors  without  reference  to  age.  (Ruhnken,
Ad  Timaei Lexic.  Plat.  s.v. ;  Hesych.  s.  v.  ;  Bekker,
Anecd.  vol.  i.  p.  209.)

A'GELA  (a7€A7j),  an  assembly  of  young  men
in  Crete,  who  lived  together  from  their  eighteenth
year  till  the  time  of  their  marriage.  Up  to  the
end  of  their  seventeenth  year  they  remained  in
their  father's  house  ;  and  from  the  circumstance  of
their  belongmg  to  no  agela,  they  were  called
airdy€\oi.  They  were  then  enrolled  in  agelae,
which  were  of  an  aristocratic  nature,  and  gave  great
power  to  particular  families.  An  agela  always
consisted  of  the  sons  of  the  most  noble  citizens,
who  were  usually  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the
father  of  the  youth  who  had  been  the  means  of  col-
lecting the  agela.  It  was  the  duty  of  this  person,
called  ayeAoTTjs,  to  superintend  the  military  and
gymnastic  exercises  of  the  youths  (who  were  called


ACER,

hyfXdfrroi),  to  accompany  them  to  the  chase,  and
to  punish  them  when  disobedient.  He  was  ac-
countable, however,  to  the  state,  which  supported
the  agda  at  the  public  expense.  All  the  members
of  an  a^ela  were  obliged  to  marry  at  the  same
time.  When  they  ceased  to  belong  to  an  agela,
they  partook  of  the  public  meals  for  men  (ai/SpeTa)
[Syssitia].  These  institutions  were  afterwards
preserved  in  only  a  few  states  of  Crete,  such  for
instance  as  Lyctus.  (Ephorus,  ap.  Strab.  x.  p.  480,
&c. ;  Heracl.  Pont.  c.  3.  ;  Hock,  Creta,  iii.  p.  100,
&c.  ;  Miiller,  Dor.  iv.  5.  §  3  ;  Hermann,  Griech.
Staatsalterthumer^  §  22  ;  Wachsmuth,  Hellen.
Alierthumskunde,  vol.  i.  p.  362,  2d  ed.;  Krause,  Die
Gt/mnastik  u.  Agonistik  d.  Hellenen^  p.  690,  &c.)
At  Sparta  the  youths  left  their  parents'  houses  at
seven  years  of  age  and  entered  the  fiovai.

AGE'MA  (&y7]ha  from  67C0),  the  name  of  a
chosen  body  of  troops  in  the  Macedonian  army,
consisting  of  horse-soldiers  and  foot-soldiers,  but
usually  of  the  former.  It  seems  to  have  varied  in
number  ;  sometimes  it  consisted  of  150  men,  at
other  times  of  300,  and  in  later  times  it  contained
as  many  as  1000  or  2000  men.  (Diod.  xix.  27,
28 :  Liv.  xxxvii.  40  ;  xliii.  51.  58  ;  Curt.  iv.  13  ;
Polyb.  v.  25,  65^  xxxi.  8  ;  Hesych.  and  Suid.  s.  v.;
Eustath.  ad  Od.  i.  p.  13^9,  62.)

AGER  is  the  general  term  for  a  district  or  tract
of  country-,  which  has  some  definite  limits,  and  be-
longs to  some  political  society.  Ager  Romanus  is
the  old  territory  of  the  Romans.  Agri,  in  the
plural,  often  means  lands  in  the  country  as  opposed  to
towii :  "  est  in  agris,"means  "he  is  in  the  country  :  "
"  mittere  in  agros,"  a  phrase  that  occurs  in  speak-
ing of  the  agrarian  laws,  means  to  assign  portions  of
the  Ager  Publicus  to  individuals.  (Liv.  vi.  17,
X.21.)

Terra  is  an  indefinite  term :  it  is  a  whole  coun-
try without  reference  to  political  limits,  as  Terra
Italia.

Ager  Publicus  was  the  property  of  the  Roman
state,  part  of  the  Publicum.  Ager  Privatus  was
the  property  of  individuals.  Some  remarks  on  tlie
general  division  of  land  into  Publicus  and  Privatus,
and  on  the  nature  of  land  that  was  Sacer  and  Reli-
giosus,  are  contained  in  the  article  on  the  Agrarian
Liuvs.  Ager  Occupatorius  is  land  occupied  by  a
victorious  people  when  the  conquered  people  had
been  driven  out  {Rei  Agrariae  Audores,  -p.  45,
ed.  Goes.)  :  the  possessiones  [Agrariae  Leges]
were  included  in  the  Ager  Occupatorius.  Such
land  as  was  restored  to  those  who  had  lost  it  by
conquest,  was  called  Redditus.  The  Ager  Occu-
patorius was  alsocalled  Ager  Arcifinius  or  Arcifinalis,
so  denominated  "  ab  arccndis  hostibus  "  (p.  38.  ed.
Goes.).  But  the  terms  Ager  Arcifinius  and  Occu-
patorius do  not  appear  to  be  exactly  equivalent,
though  some  of  the  writers  on  the  Res  Agraria
make  them  so.  Ager  Arcifinius  appears  to  express
the  whole  of  a  territory,  Avhich  had  only  some
natural  or  arbitrary  boundary,  and  was  not  defined
b}'-  measurement  (qui  nulla  mensura,  continetur ;
Frontinus.)  Such  were  the  scattered  portions  of
the  Roman  Ager  Publicus,  The  Ager  Occupatorius
might  signify  so  much  of  the  public  land  included
in  the  Arcifinius  as  was  held  by  possessors  (occu-
patus),  or,  as  Niebuhr  explains  it,  the  term  Occu-
patorius was  confined  to  the  public  land,  strictly  so
called,  and  designated  the  tenure  under  which  it
was  held.

Frontinus  divides  lands  into  three  heads  (qiiali-


AGER.


2.9


tates)  :  Ager  Divisus  et  Assignatus  ;  Ager  mensura
comprehensue  ;  Ager  Arcifinius.  He  defines  the
Arcifinius,  as  above  stated.  The  Ager  mensura
comprehensus  appears  to  signify  a  tract,  of  which
the  limits  were  defined  by  measurement,  w^hich
was  given  in  the  mass  to  some  community  (cujus
modus  universus  civitati  est  assignatus)^  of  which
he  mentions  two  examples.

Ager  Divisus  et  Assignatus  was  public  land
that  was  assigned  or  granted  to  private  persons.
The  verb  divido,  or  some  form  of  it,  is  used  by  Livy
(iv.  51,  V.  30)  to  express  the  distribution  of  the
land.  The  word  assigno  indicates  the  fixing  of
the  signa  or  boundaries.  Ager  Quaestorius  was
public  land,  which  was  sold  by  the  quaestors  (pp.
2,  14,  ed.  Goes.),  in  square  patches,  each  side  of
which  was  the  length  of  ten  linear  actus :  the  square
consequently  contained  100  quadrati  actus  or  fifty
jugera.

Ager  Limitatus  was  public  land  marked  out  by
limites  for  the  pxirpose  of  assignment  to  coloni  or
others.  The  limites  were  drawn  with  reference
to  the  heavens  (p.  150,  ed.  Goes.)  ;  and  this  mode
of  dividing  the  land  was  founded  on  the  old  Etruscan
doctrine,  for  the  Etruscans  divided  the  earth  into
parts,  following  the  course  of  the  sun  by  drawing
a  line  from  east  to  west,  and  another  from  south  to
north.  This  was  the  foundation  of  the  limites  of  a
templum,  a  term  which  means  the  celestial  vault,
and  also  so  much  of  the  earth's  surface  as  the  augur
could  comprehend  in  his  view.  This  was  the
foundation  of  the  Roman  Limitatio  of  land.  A
line  (limes)  was  drawn  through  a  given  ponit  from
east  to  west,  which  was  called  the  Decumanus,
originallj'^  Duocimanus*  (according  to  Hyginus),  be-
cause it  divides  the  earth  into  two  parts  :  another
line  was  drawn  from  south  to  north,  which  was  called
Cardo,  "  a  mundi  cardine."  The  length  of  these
two  chief  limites  would  be  determined  by  the  limits
of  the  land  which  Avas  to  be  divided.  The  points
from  which  the  two  chief  limites  were  drawn  varied
according  to  circumstances.  Those  which  were  pa-
rallel to  the  Decumanus  were  Prorsi,  direct  ;  those
which  were  parallel  to  the  Cardo  were  Transversi,
transverse.  The  limes  was  therefore  a  term  applied
to  a  boundary  belonging  to  a  tract  of  land,  and  the
centuriae  included  in  it,  and  is  different  from  finis,
which  is  the  limit  of  any  particular  property.  The
Decumani,  Cardines,  and  other  limites  of  a  district
fonn  an  imchangeable  kind  of  network  in  the  midst
of  the  changeable  properties  which  have  their  several
fines  (Rudorff  ).  The  distance  at  which  the  limites
were  to  be  drawn,  would  depend  on  the  magnitude
of  the  squares  or  centuriae,  as  they  were  called,  into
which  it  was  proposed  to  divide  the  tract.  The
whole  tract  might  not  be  square:  sometimes  the
Decumani  Limites  would  be  only  half  as  long  as  the
Cardines  (p.  154.  ed.  Goes.).  Every  sixth  limes,
reckoning  from  the  Decumanus  and  including  it,
was  wider  than  the  intermediate  limites,  and  these
wider  limites  served  as  roads,  but  they  were  not
included  under  the  term  of  Viae  Publicae,  though  a
Ihnes  and  a  via  publica  might  sometimes  coincide.
(Hyginus,  ed.  Goes.  p.  163.)  The  narrower  limites
were  called  Linearii  in  the  provinces,  but  in  Italy


*  Duocimanus,  according  to  Hyginus,  was
changed  into  Decimanus  ;  "  Decumanus,"  says
Niebuhr,  "  probably  from  making  the  figure  of  a
cross,  which  resembles  the  numeral  X,  like  decus-
satus."    Neither  explanation  is  satisfectory.


.?0


AGER.


they  were  called  Subrtmcivi.  The  limites  parallel
to  tiie  cardo  were  drawn  in  the  same  way.

The  Roman  measure  of  length  used  for  land
•was  the  actus  of  120  feet :  the  square  actus  was
1 4,400  square  feet  ;  and  a  juger  or  jugerum  was
two  actus  quadrati.  The  word  centuria  properly
means  a  hundred  of  any  thing.  The  reason  of
the  term  centuria  being  applied  to  these  divi-
sions may  be,  that  the  plebeian  centuries  contained
100  actus,  which  is  50  jugera,  the  amount  con-
tained in  the  portions  put  up  to  sale  by  tlie  quaes-
tors :  but  Siculus  Flaccus  (p.  15,  ed.  Goes.)  gives
a  different  account.  The  centuria  sometimes  con-
tained 200  jugera,  and  in  later  periods  240  and
400.  This  division  into  centuriae  only  compre-
hended the  cultivable  land.  When  a  colony  was
founded  or  a  tract  of  land  was  divided,  that  part
which  did  not  consist  of  arable  land  was  the  com-
mon pi-operty  of  the  colony  or  settlement ;  and  was
used  as  pasture.  Such  tracts  appear  to  be  the
Compascuus  Ager  of  the  Lex  Thoria  (c.  4,  &c.).
The  land  that  was  thus  limited,  would  often  have
an  irregular  boundary,  and  thus  many  centuries
would  be  incomplete.  Such  pieces  were  called
Subseciva,  and  were  sometimes  granted  to  the
colony  or  commimit}',  and  sometimes  reserved  to  the
state.  That  such  portions  existed  in  some  quantity
in  Italy  is  shown  by  the  fact  of  Vespasian  and  Titus
making  sales  of  them,  and  Bomitian  is  said  to
have  restored  them  to  the  possessors.

A  plan  of  each  tract  of  limited  land  was  engraved
on  metal  (aes),  and  deposited  in  the  tabularium.
This  plan  (forma)  showed  all  the  limites  or  cen-
turiae, and  was  a  permanent  record  of  the  original
limitation.  Descriptions  also  accompanied  the  plan,
which  mentioned  the  portions  that  belonged  to  dif-
ferent individuals,  and  other  particulars.  (Siculus
Flaccus,  De  Divis.  et  Assig.  ed.  Goes.,  p.  16  ;  and
the  passages  collected  by  Brissonius,  Select,  ex  Jur.
Civil,  iii.  c.  5.)  Some  of  these  records,  which  be-
long to  an  early  period  of  Roman  history,  are  men-
tioned by  Siculus  Flaccus,  as  existing  when  he
^vrote  (p.  24.  ed.  Goes.).  These  registered  plans
were  the  best  evidence  of  the  original  division
of  the  lands,  and  if  disputes  could  not  be  settled
otherwise,  it  was  necessary  to  refer  to  them.

As  to  the  marks  by  which  boundaries  were  dis-
tinguished, they  were  different  in  the  case  of  Ager
Arcifinius  find  Ager  Limitatus.  In  the  case  of
Ager  Arcifinius,  the  boundaries  were  either  natural
or  artifici.-il,  as  mountain  ridges,  roads,  water  sheds,
rocks,  hills,  ramparts  of  earth,  walls  of  rubble,  and
HO  forth  :  rivers,  brooks,  ditches  and  water  conduits
were  also  used  as  boundaries.  Marks  were  also
made  on  rocks,  and  trees  were  planted  for  this
purpose,  or  were  left  standing  (arbores  intactae,
antemissae).  Trees  were  often  marked :  those
Avhich  were  the  common  property  of  two  land-
owners were  marked  on  both  sides  ;  and  those
which  belonged  to  a  single  proprietor  were  marked
on  the  side  which  was  turned  from  the  proprietor's
land  (arbores  insignes,  signatae,notatae).  By  cutting
off  a  piece  of  the  bark,  a  scar  would  be  formed
Avliich  would  answer  as  a  signum.  In  angles,  such
as  a  trifinium  or  quadrifinium,  more  special  boundary
marks  were  used,  for  instance,  at  a  trifinium  three
trees  would  be  planted.  Taps,  or  pieces  of  wood,
lead  and  iron,  were  also  inserted  in  trees  to  point
to  some  pieoe  of  water  as  the  nearest  boundary.

The  Ager  Limitatus  was  marked  in  a  different
M-ay  by  boundary  stones  and  posts,  not  by  natural


AGER.

barriers.  Tlie  boundaries  of  the  territory  were
marked  by  termini,  which  received  their  names
under  the  empire  from  the  emperor  who  gave  the
commission  for  partitioning  the  land.  Accordingly,
we  find  the  expressions  Lapides  Augustales,  Tibe-
riani,  and  so  forth,  mentioned  as  the  termini  fixed
by  these  emperors  for  the  boundaries  of  the  colonies
which  they  founded.  The  Tennini  Territoriales
marked  the  limits  of  the  district,  the  Pleurici
ran  parallel  to  the  Decumani  and  Cardines,  the
Actuarii  Centuriales  were  at  the  angles  of  the
centuriae,  the  Epipedonici  in  the  centre  of  the
centuriae,  the  Proportionales  at  the  beginning  and
end  of  the  jugera.  The  boundaries  of  a  property
were  also  marked  by  termini  ;  and  the  owner  of
a  property  might  place  termini  within  it  to  mark
the  pieces  into  which  he  divided  it  for  his  chil-
dren.

The  termini  were  either  posts  of  wood  or  stones.
In  the  colonies  of  Augustus,  the  boundaries  of  the
centuriae  were  marked  by  stones  ;  those  of  the
several  allotments  by  oak  posts  (termini  robusti,
pali  roborei.)  Sometimes  pali  actuarii  are  men-
tioned, from  which  it  appears  that  the  boundaries  of
the  centuriae  were  sometimes  determined  by  wooden
posts.  The  stones  used  in  a  particular  limitatio
were  of  the  same  kind  and  colour  in  order  to  make
them  more  useful  as  boundary  stones.  The  stones
were  either  polished  (politi,  dolati)  or  rough  hewn
(taxati  a  ferro),  or  in  their  entire  rough  state.  The
size  varied  from  half  a  foot  to  two  and  a  half  feet,
and  the  larger  might  sometimes  be  mistaken  by
ignorant  people  for  mile  stones.  The  form  of  the
stones  also  varied,  as  we  see  fi:om  the  representations
contained  of  them  in  the  MSS.  of  the  Agrimensores.
The  number  of  angles  varied  in  those  which  were
angular :  some  were  cylindrical,  some  pointed,  others
of  a  pjTamidal  form.  The  head  stones  at  the  be-
ginning and  end  of  a  boundary  were  more  con-
spicuous than  those  which  lay  between  them.  In-
scriptions and  marks  were  also  put  on  the  termini.
The  termini  on  the  boundaries  of  the  limited  land
have  often  considerable  inscriptions  ;  the  centurial
and  pleurite  termini  give  the  number  of  the  century
and  the  name  of  the  limes.  Various  kinds  of
marks  were  also  devised  to  facilitate  the  ascertain-
ing of  boundaries  without  the  trouble  of  referring
to  the  plan.

These  precautions  were  not  all.  A  stone  might  be
removed  and  a  boimdary  might  thus  become  un-
certain. It  was  accordingly  the  practice  to  bury
something  under  the  stone  that  was  not  perishable,
as  bones,  embers  and  ashes  from  the  offering  made
at  the  time  when  the  stone  was  set  up.  Small
coins  were  also  put  under  it,  and  friigments  of  glass,
pottery,  and  the  like,  which  would  serve  to  deter-
mine the  place  of  the  stone.  The  same  practice  is
enjoined  by  the  laws  of  Mann  (viii.  249, 250, 251 ),
a  fact  noticed  by  Bureau  de  la  Malic.  On  the  intro-
duction of  Christianity,  the  practice  of  making  sucli
offerings  was  discontinued,  and  this  kind  of  evidence
was  lost.  Under  the  old  religion  it  was  also  the
practice  to  traverse  the  boundaries  at  the  terminalia,
in  the  month  of  February.  In  the  case  of  the
territorial  boundaries,  this  Avas  done  by  the  whole
community  ;  and  pursuant  to  this  old  custom,  the
boundaries  of  the  original  territory  of  Rome,  six
miles  from  the  city,  were  traversed  at  the  terminalia.
Private  persons  also  examined  their  boundaries  at
the  terminalia,  and  the  usual  offerings  were  made.
The  parish  perambulations  and  other  perambula-


AGGER.

tions  of  modem  times  bear  some  resemblance,  to  this
Roman  usage.

It  has  been  observed  that  finis,  a  term  which
expresses  the  boundary  of  separate  properties,  must
not  be  confounded  with  limes ;  nor  must  fundus  be
confounded  with  locus.  A  fundus  has  determinate
boundaries  ( fines) :  a  locus  is  indeterminate,  and
may  be  part  of  a  fundus  or  comprise  more  than  a
fundus.  A  dispute  about  a  fundus  is  a  question  of
property  ;  a  dispute  about  a  locus  or  finis  is  a  dis-
pute about  boundaries.

Niebuhr  conjectures  "  that  a  fundus  assigned  by
the  state  was  considered  as  one  entire  farm,  as  a
whole,  the  limits  of  which  could  not  be  changed.'"
But  he  adds,  "  This  did  not  preclude  the  division
of  estates,  nor  even  the  sale  of  duodecimal  parts  of
them  ; "  and  further,  "  The  sale  or  transfer  of  them,
when  the  whole  was  not  alienated,  was  in  parts
according  to  the  duodecimal  scale."  But  to  this  it
is  replied  by  Bureau  de  la  Malle,  that  when  there
were  five,  seven  or  nine  heredes,  there  must  be  a
fractional  division.  A  fundus  generally  had  a  par-
ticular name  which  was  not  changed,  and  it  is
stated  that  both  in  Italy  and  France  many  of  these
properties  still  have  Roman  names.  But  the  fact
of  a  fundus  generally  having  a  name,  and  the  fact
of  the  name  being  often  preserved,  does  not  prove
tliat  all  fundi  retained  their  original  limits  accord-
ing to  Roman  usage  ;  nor  does  the  fact,  that  there
were  sometimes  two,  sometimes  three  owners  of  one
fundus  (Dig.  10.  tit.  1.  s.  4.),  prove  that  a  fundus
never  had  its  limits  changed,  while  it  disproves
Niebuhr's  assertion  as  to  duodecimal  parts,  unless
the  halves  and  thirds  were  made  up  of  duodecimal
parts,  which  cannot  be  proved.  It  seems  probable
enough,  that  an  original  fundus  would  often  retain
its  limits  unchanged  for  centuries.  But  it  is  certain
that  the  bounds  (fines)  of  private  properties  often
changed.  Rudorff  remarks  :  "  The  boundary  of  a
property  is  changeable.  It  may  by  purchase,  ex-
change, and  other  alienation,  be  pushed  further,
and  be  carried  back."  The  localities  of  the  great
Cardines,  Decumani,  and  other  Limites,  as  the  same
writer  has  been  already  quoted  to  show,  are  un-
changeable.

The  difficulty  of  handling  this  subject  is  very
great,  owing  to  the  corrupted  text  of  the  writers  on
the  Res  Agraria.  The  latest  edition  of  these
writers  is  by  Goesius,  Amsterdam,  1674.  Anew
and  corrected  edition  of  these  writers  with  a  suit-
able commentary  would  be  a  valuable  contribution
to  our  knowledge  of  the  Roman  land  system.  {Rei
Agrariae  Auctores^  ed.  Goes.  ;  Rudorif,  Zeitschrift
fur  Gcschicht.  Rechlsiv.  Ueber  die  Granzscheidungs-
klage,  vol.  x.  ;  Niebiihr,  vol.  ii.  appendix  1  ;  Dureau
de  la  Malle,  Economie  Politique  des  Romains^  vol.  ii.
p.  166,  &c.)  [G.  L.]

AGER  SANCTUS  (T€>ej/os).  For  an  account
of  the  lands  in  Greece  devoted  to  the  service  of
religion,  see  Temenos:  for  an  account  of  those
in  Rome,  see  Sacerdos.

AGETO'RIA  {a.-)'riT6pia.)    [Carxkia.]

AGGER  (xoi/J-a),  from  ad  and  (/ero,  was  used
in  general  for  a  heap  or  mound  of  any  kind  which
might  be  made  of  stones,  wood,  earth  or  any  other
substance.  It  was  more  particularly  applied  to  a
mound,  usually  composed  of  earth,  which  was  raised
round  a  besieged  town,  and  which  was  gradually
increased  in  breadth  and  height,  till  it  equalled  or
overtopped  the  walls.  Hence  we  find  the  expres-
sions aggcrc  oppidutn  oppugnare,  aggere  oppidum


AGONALIA.


31


cingere  ;  and  the  making  of  the  agger  is  expressed
by  the  verbs  exsfruere,  construere,  jacere,  /acere^  &c.
Some  of  these  aggeres  Avere  gigantic  works,  flanked
with  towers  to  defend  the  workmen  and  soldiers,
and  surmounted  by  parapets,  behind  which  the
soldiers  could  discharge  missiles  upon  the  besieged
towns.  At  the  siege  of  Avaricum,  Caesar  raised  in
twenty-five  days  an  agger  330  feet  broad,  and  80
feet  high.  {B.  G.  vii.  24.)  As  the  agger  was
sometimes  made  of  wood,  hurdles,  and  similar
materials,  we  sometimes  read  of  its  being  set  on
fire.  (Liv.  xxxvi.  23  ;  Caes.  B.  G.  vii.  24,  B.  C.  ii.
14,  15.)  The  word  agger  was  also  applied  to  the
earthen  wall  surrounding  a  Roman  encampment,
composed  of  the  earth  dug  from  the  ditch  {fossa)^
Avhich  was  usually  nine  feet  broad  and  seven  feet
deep  ;  but  if  any  attack  was  apprehended,  the
depth  was  increased  to  twelve  feet,  and  the  breadth
to  thirteen  feet.  Sharp  stakes,  &c.,  were  usually
fixed  upon  the  agger,  which  was  then  called  vallum.
When  both  words  are  used  (as  in  Caesar,  B.  G.  vii.
72,  agger  ac  vallum),  the  agger  means  the  mound
of  earth  ;  and  the  vallum  the  shai-p  stakes  (valli)^
which  were  fixed  upon  the  agger.

At  Rome,  the  formidable  rampart  erected  by
Servius  Tullius  to  protect  the  western  side  of  Rome
was  called  agger.  It  extended  from  the  further
extremity  of  the  Quirinal  to  that  of  the  Esquiline,
It  was  fifty  feet  broad,  having  a  wall  on  the  top,
defended  by  towers,  and  beneath  it  was  a  ditch  a
hundred  feet  wide  and  thirty  feet  deep.  (Cic.  de
Rep.  ii.  6  ;  Dionys.  ix.  68.)  Pliny  (H.  N.  iii.  5.
s.  9)  attributes  the  erection  of  this  rampart  to  Tar-
quinius  Superbus,  but  this  is  in  opposition  to  all
the  other  ancient  writers  who  speak  of  the  matter.

AGITATO'RES.     [Circus.]

AGMEN.     [Exercitus.]

AGNA'TI.     [CoGNATi.]

AGNO'MEN.  [NoMEN.]
^  AGONA'LIA,  or  AGO'NIA  (Ov.  Fast  v.
721),  one  of  the  most  ancient  festivals  at  Rome,
celebrated  several  times  in  the  year.  Its  institu-
tion, like  that  of  other  religious  rites  and  cere-
monies, was  attributed  to  Numa  Pompilius.  (Ma-
crob.  Saturn,  i.  4.)  We  learn  from  the  ancient
calendars  that  it  was  celebrated  on  the  three  fol-
lowing days,  the  9  th  of  January,  the  21st  of  May,
and  the  1  Ith  of  December  (a.  d.  V.  Id.  Jan.;  XH.
Kal.  Jun.;  III.  Id.  Dec.)  ;  to  which  we  should
probably  add  the  17th  of  March  {a.  d.  XVI.  Kal.
Apr.).,  the  day  on  which  the  Liberalia  was  cele-
brated, since  this  festival  is  also  called  Agonia  or
Agoninm  Martiale.  (Varr.  L.  L.  vi.  14,  ed.  Mill-
ler ;  Macrob.  I.  c.  ;  Kahndarium  Vaticamim.)  The
object  of  this  festival  was  a  disputed  point  among
the  ancients  themselves  ;  but  as  Hartung  has  ob-
served {Die  Religion  der  Romer,  vol.  ii.  p.  33),  when
it  is  recollected  that  the  victim  which  was  offered
was  a  ram,  that  the  person  who  offered  it  was  the
rex  sacrificulus,  and  that  the  place  where  it  was
offered  was  the  regia  (Var.  X.  L.  vi.  1 2  ;  Ov.  Fast.
i.  333  ;  Fest.  s.  v.  Jgonium),  we  shall  not  have
much  difficulty  in  imderstanding  the  significance
of  this  festival.  The  ram  was  the  usual  victim
presented  to  the  guardian  gods  of  the  state,  and
the  rex  sacrificulus  and  the  regia  could  be  em-
plo3'^ed  only  for  such  ceremonies  as  were  connected
with  the  highest  gods  and  affected  the  weal  of  the
whole  state.  Regarding  the  sacrifice  in  this  light,
we  see  a  reason  for  its  being  offered  several  timas
in  the  year.


3-;


AGORA.


The  etymology  of  the  name  was  also  a  subject
of  much  dispute  among  the  ancients  ;  and  the  va-
rious etymologies  that  were  proposed  are  given  at
length  by  Ovid.  {Fad.  i.  319 — 332.)  ]N^one  of
these,  however,  are  at  all  satisfactory  ;  and  we
would  therefore  suggest  another.  It  is  well  known
that  the  Quirinal  hill  was  originally  called  Agonus,
and  the  Colline  gate  Agonensis.  (Fest.  s.  w.  Ago-
nium^  Quirinalis;  comp.  Dionys.  ii.  37.)  What  is
then  more  likely  than  that  this  sacrifice  should
have  been  originally  offered  on  this  hill,  and  should
thence  have  received  the  name  of  Agonal ia  ?  It
is  expressly  stated  that  the  sacrifice  was  offered  in
the  regia^  or  the  domus  regis,  which  in  the  historical
times  was  situated  at  the  top  of  the  sacra  via,  near
the  arch  of  Titus  (Becker,  Handbueh  d.  Rom,  Al-
terth.  vol.  i.  pp.  237,  238)  ;  but  in  the  earliest  times
the  regia  is  stated  by  an  ancient  vvriter  to  have
been  upon  the  Quirinal  (Solin.  i.  21),  and  this
statement  seems  to  render  oiu:  supposition  almost
cerUiin.      {Classical  Museum,  vol.  iv.   pp.  154 —

The  Circus  Agonensis,  as  it  is  called,  is  sup-
posed by  many  modern  writers  to  have  occupied
the  place  of  the  present  Piazza  Navona,  and  to
have  been  built  by  the  emperor  Alexander  Severus
on  the  spot  where  the  victims  were  sacrificed  at
the  Agonalia.  Becker  {Ibid.  pp.  668 — 670)  has
however  brought  forward  good  reasons  for  question-
ing whether  this  was  a  circus  at  all,  and  has  shown
that  there  is  no  authority  whatever  for  giving  it
the  name  of  circus  Agonensis.

AGO'NES  {aySives),  the  general  terra  among
the  Greeks  for  the  contests  at  their  great  national
games.  [Certamina.]  The  word  was  also  used
to  signify  law-suits,  and  was  especially  employed
in  the  phrase  aywves  tiixtjto'i,  and  aTifirjTOL,     ['J  i-

WEMA.]

AGONO'THETAE  {aywvoOeTai),  were  per-
sons, in  the  Grecian  games,  who  decided  disputes
and  adjudged  the  prizes  to  the  victors.  Originally,
the  person  who  instituted  the  contest  and  offered
the  prize  was  the  agonotlietes,  and  this  continued
to  be  the  practice  in  those  games  which  were  in-
stituted by  kings  or  private  persons.  But  in  the
great  public  games,  such  as  the  Isthmian,  Pythian,
&c.,  the  agonothetae  were  either  the  representatives
of  different  states,  as  the  Amphictyons  at  the
Pythian  games,  or  were  chosen  from  the  people  in
whose  country  the  games  were  celebrated.  During
the  flourishing  times  of  the  Grecian  republics,  the
Eleians  were  the  agonothetae  in  the  Olympic  games,
the  Corinthians  in  the  Isthmian  games,  the  Am-
phictyons in  the  Pythian  games,  and  the  Corin-
thians, Argives,  and  inhabitants  of  Cleonae  in  the
Nemaean  games.  The  aycouoOerai  were  also  called
alcvfivriTai,  ayuvcipxai,  ayavoS'iKai,  adKoOerai,
pa65ovxoi  or  pa§^ov6ixoi  (from  the  staff  they
carried  as  an  emblem  of  authority),  fipaSus,
fipa§(vrai.

AGORA  {ayopd),  properly  means  an  assembly
of  any  nature,  and  is  usually  employed  by  Homer
for  the  general  assembly  of  the  people.  The  agora
seems  to  have  been  considered  an  essential  part  in
the  constitution  of  the  early  Grecian  states,  since
the  barbarity  and  uncivilised  condition  of  the  C}'-
clops  is  characterised  by  their  wanting  such  an
assembly.  (Hom.  Od.  ix.  1 12.)  The  agora,  though
usually  convoked  by  the  king,  appears  to  have  been
also  summoned  at  times  by  some  distinguished
chieftain,  as  for  example,  by  Achilles  before  Troy.


AGORA.
(Horn.  II.  i.  54.)  The  king  occupied  the  most
important  seat  in  these  assemblies,  and  near  him
sat  the  nobles,  while  the  people  sat  in  a  circle
around  them.  The  power  and  rights  of  the  people
in  these  assemblies  have  been  the  subject  of  much
dispute.  Platner,  Tittman,  and  more  recently
Nitzsch  in  his  commentary  on  the  Odyssey,  main-
tain that  the  people  was  allowed  to  speak  and  vote ;
while  Miiller  {Dor.  iii.  1.  §  3),  who  is  followed
b}-  Grote  {Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  ii.  p.  91),  maintains
that  the  nobles  were  the  only  persons  who  proposed
measures,  deliberated,  and  voted,  and  that  tlie
people  was  only  present  to  hear  the  debate,  and  to
express  its  feeling  as  a  body  ;  which  expressions
might  then  be  noticed  by  a  prince  of  a  mild  dis-
position. The  latter  view  of  the  question  is  con-
firmed by  the  fact,  that  in  no  passage  in  the
Odyssey  is  any  of  the  people  represented  as  taking
part  in  the  discussion  ;  while,  in  the  Iliad,  Ulysses
inflicts  personal  chastisement  upon  Thersites,  for
presuming  to  attack  the  nol)les  in  the  agora.  {II.
ii.  211 — 277.)  The  people  appear  to  have  been
only  called  together  to  hear  what  had  been  already
agreed  upon  in  the  council  of  the  nobles,  which
is  called  ^ov\i]  {II.  ii.  53,  vi.  114,  yepoj/res
jSovAeurai),  and  ^oukos  {Od.  ii.  26),  and  some-
times even  ayopd  {Od.  ix.  112;  ayopal  fiovXtj-
(popoi).  Justice  was  administered  in  the  agora  by
the  king  or  chiefs  (Hcs.  Theog.  85  ;  Hom.  //.
xviii.  497,  &c.  Od.  xii.  439),  but  the  people  had  no
share  in  its  administration,  and  the  agora  served
merely  the  purpose  of  publicity.  The  common
phrases  used  in  reference  to  the  agora  are  els  ayop^jv
KaXeeiv ;  a,yop)]v  TTon^crQai,  ridea-Oai ;  ^Is  t'V  o.yo-
py}v  ela-ieuai,  ayelpea-Oat,  &c.  ( Wachsmuth,  Hellen.
AUerthumsk.  vol.  i.  p.  346,  2d  ed.  ;  Hermann,
Lehrhuch.  d.  Giiech.  Staatsalt.  §  55  ;  Grote,  Hist.
of  Greece,  vol.  ii.  pp.  91 — 101.)

Among  the  Athenians,  the  proper  name  for  the
assembly  of  the  people  was  iKKKrjaia,  and  among
the  Dorians  a\ia.  The  term  agora  was  confined
at  Athens  to  the  assemblies  of  the  phylae  and
demi.  (Aesch.  c.  Ctes.  §  27.  p.  50.  37  ;  Schomann,
De  Comitiis  Atheti.  p.  27,  Antiq.  Jur.  Pvbl.  Grace.
pp.  203,  205  ;  Bockh,  Co^-p.  Inscrip.  vol.  i.  p.  125.)
In  Crete  the  original  name  ayopd  continued  to  be
applied  to  the  popular  assemblies  till  a  late  period.
(Bekker,  Anecdot.  vol.  i.  p.  210.)

A'GORA  {ayopd),  was  the  place  of  public  as-
sembly in  a  Greek  city,  both  for  traffic,  and  for
the  transaction  of  all  public  business.  It  answers
to  the  Roman  forum  ;  and,  in  fact,  it  is  impossible
to  keep  these  two  subjects  entirely  separate.

In  the  earliest  times,  the  Agora  was  merely  an
open  piece  of  ground,  which  was  generally  in  front
of  the  royal  palace,  and,  in  sea-port  towns,  close  to
the  harbour.  The  Agora  of  Troy  was  in  the  cita-
del. Here,  the  chiefs  met  in  council,  and  sat  in
judgment,  and  the  people  assembled  to  witness
athletic  games.  It  was  evidently  also  the  place  of
traffic  and  of  general  intercourse  :  in  one  passage
of  Homer,  we  have  a  lively  picture  of  the  idlers
who  frequented  it.  It  was  enclosed  with  large
stones  sunk  into  the  earth,  and  seats  of  marble
were  placed  in  it  for  the  chiefs  to  sit  in  judgment,
and  it  was  hallowed  by  the  shrine  of  one  or  more
divinities.  In  the  Agora  which  Homer  particularly
describes,  —  that  of  the  Phaeacians,  —  there  was
a  temple  of  Poseidon.  (Horn.  //.  ii.  788,  vii.  345,
346,  xviii.  497—506,  Od.  vi.  263—285,  viii.  16,
109,  xvi.  361.)


AGORA.

Out  cf  this  simple  arrangement  arose  the  mag-
nificent ayopal  of  later  times,  which  consisted  of
an  open  space,  enclosed  by  porticoes  or  colonnades,
divided  into  separate  parts  for  the  various  occupa-
tions Avhich  were  pursued  in  it,  adorned  with
statues,  altars,  and  temples,  and  built  about
with  edifices  for  the  transaction  of  public  and
private  business,  and  for  the  administration  of
justice.

Our  information  respecting  these  edifices  is
rather  scanty.  The  chief  authorities  are  Pausanias
and  Vitruvius.  The  existing  ruins  are  in  such  a
state  as  to  give  us  a  very  little  help.

We  have,  first  of  all,  in  this,  as  in  other  de-
partments of  architecture,  to  distinguish  the  an-
cient style  from  that  introduced  by  the  Greeks  of
Ionia  after  the  Persian  Avar,  and  more  especially
by  Hippodamus  of  Miletus  [see  Diet,  of  Biog.  s.v.},
whose  connection  with  the  building  of  'ayopai  of  a
new  form  is  marked  by  the  name  'iTTTroSa^eta,
which  was  applied  to  the  Agora  in  the  Peiraeus.
(Harpocr.  s.v.  'iTTTroSa/xeia.)  The  general  character
of  the  Greek  ayopd  is  thus  described  by  Vitruvius
(v.  1)  :  —  "The  Greeks  arrange  their  fora  in  a
square  form,  with  very  wide  double  colonnades,
and  adorn  them  with  columns  set  near  one  another
and  with  stone  or  marble  entablatures,  and  they
make  walks  in  the  upper  stories."

Among  the  ayopai  described  by  Pausanias,  that
of  the  Eleians  is  mentioned  by  him  (vi.  24)  as
being  "  not  on  the  same  plan  as  those  of  the  lo-
nians  and  the  Greek  cities  adjoining  Ionia,  but  it
is  built  in  the  more  ancient  fashion,  with  porticoes
separated  from  one  another,  and  streets  between
them.  But  the  name  of  the  Agora  in  our  days  is
Hippodromos,  and  the  people  of  the  country  ex-
ercise their  horses  there.  But  of  the  porticoes,
the  one  towards  the  south  is  of  the  Dorian  style  of
work,  and  the  pillars  divide  it  into  three  parts  (in


AGORA.


,'53-


this  the  Hellanodicae  generally  pass  the  day)  :  but
against  these  (pillars)  they  place  altars  to  Zeus  . . .
To  one  going  along  this  portico,  into  the  Agora,
there  lies  on  the  left,  along  the  further  side  of
this  portico,  the  dwelling  of  the  Hellanodicae
(d  'EWavohiKecav)  :  and  there  is  a  street  which
divides  it  from  the  Agora  .  .  .  And  near  the  por-
tico v/here  the  Hellanodicae  pass  the  day,  is
another  portico,  there  being  one  street  between
them :  this  the  Eleians  call  the  Corcyraean  por-
tico "  (because  it  was  built  from  the  tithe  of  spoil
taken  from  the  Corcyraeans  in  war).  "  But  the
style  of  the  portico  is  Dorian  and  double,  having
columns  on  the  one  side  towards  the  Agora,  and
on  the  other  side  towards  the  parts  beyond  the
Agora  :  and  along  the  middle  of  it  is  a  wall,
which  thus  supports  the  roof:  and  images  are
placed  on  both  sides  against  the  wall."  He  then
proceeds  to  mention  the  ornaments  of  the  Agora,
namely,  the  statue  of  the  philosopher  Pyrrhon  ;
the  temple  and  statue  of  Apollo  Acesius  ;  the
statues  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  ;  the  temple  of  the
Graces,,  with  their  wooden  statues,  of  which  the
dress  was  gilt,  and  the  hands  and  feet  were  of
white  marble  ;  the  temple  of  Seilenus,  dedicated
to  him  alone,  and  not  in  common  with  Dionysus  ;
and  a  monumental  shrine,  of  peculiar  form,  with-
out walls,  but  with  oak  pillars  supporting  the  roof,
which  was  reported  to  be  the  monument  of  Oxylus.
The  Agora  also  contained  the  dwelling  of  the  six-
teen females,  who  wove  in  it  the  sacred  robe  for
Hera.  It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  several  of
these  details  confirm  the  high  antiquity  which
Pausanias  assigns  to  this  Agora.

Hirt  has  drawn  out  the  following  plan  from  the
description  of  Pausanias.  {Geschichte  der  Bau-
kujist  hei  den  Alien,  Taf.  xxi.  fig.  5.)  We  give  it,
not  as  feeling  satisfied  of  its  complete  acciu-acy,  but
as  a  useful  commentary  on  Pausanias.


d      J)

[•

C                    2>

•    ••••••

L

a

&3

a

•      •

A.

*  a

1

G

of  a

i;

i     '  a

^

jTrm:

•

•

•

•     •

GROUND    PLAN    OF    THE   OLD   AGORA    AT    ELIS.


A,  the  chief  open  space  of  the  agora,  called,  in
the  time  of  Pausanias,  hippodromus  :  a,  colonnades
Beparated  by  streets,  b :  b,  the  Stoa  in  which  the
Hellanodicae  sat,  divided  from  the  Agora  by  a
street  o  :  c,  the  house  of  the  Hellanodicae:  iv,  the
Tholus  :  D,  the  Corcyraean  Stoa,  composed  of  two
parts,  c  looking  into  the  Agora,  and  d  looking  away
from  it :  e,  g,  A,  small  temples  :  f,  statues  of  the
Sun  and  Moon  :  i,  monument  of  Oxylus  :  k,  house
of  the  sixteen  women.

In  this  Agora  the  Stoa,  B,  answers  to  the  later
basilica,  and  the  house  c,  to  the  piytaneium  in  other


Greek  ayopai.  With  respect  to  the  other  parts,  it
is  pretty  evident  that  the  chief  open  space.  A,  which
Pausanias  calls  rh  ^iraidpov  ttjs  ayopas,  was  de-
voted to  public  assemblies  and  exercise,  and  the
(TToai  (a),  with  their  intervening  streets  (6),  to
private  business  and  traffic.  Hirt  traces  a  resem-
blance of  form  between  the  Eleian  agora  and  the
Forum  of  Trajan.  It  is  evident  that  the  words  of
Vitruvius,  above  quoted,  refer  to  the  more  modem,
or  Ionian  form  of  the  Agora,  as  represented  in  the
following  plan,  which  is  also  taken  from  Hirt
{Geschichte  der  Baukunst^  xxi.  fig.  1)  :  —

D


84


AGORA.


PLAN   OF   A


GREEK    AGORA,
VITRUVIUS.


ACCORDING    TO


A,  the  open  court,  surrounded  by  double  colon-
nades and  shops:  b,  the  Curia:  c,  the  chief  temple.


AGORA.

also  used  as  a  treasury  :  D,  the  Basilica,  or  court  of
justice  :  e,  the  Tholus,  in  connection  with  the  other
rooms  of  the  Prytaneium,  c,  d.

The  cut  below,  which  is  also  from  Hirt,  re-
presents a  section  of  the  Agora  made  along  the
dotted  line  on  the  plan.

We  gain  further  information  respecting  the  build-
ings connected  with  the  Agora,  and  the  works  of
art  with  which  it  was  adorned,  chiefly  from  the
statements  of  Pausanias  respecting  those  of  par-
ticular cities,  such  as  Athens  (i.  5,  §  2),  Thebes
(ix.  17.  §  1),  Sicyon  (iL  7.  §  7,  9.  §  6),  Argos  (ii.
21),  Sparta  (iii.  11),  Tegea  (viiL  47.  §  3),  Mega-
lopolis (viii.  30.  §  2),  to  which  passages  the  reader
is  referred  for  the  details.  The  buildings  men-
tioned in  connection  with  the  Agora  are  :  —  1 .
Temples  of  the  gods  and  shrines  of  heroes  [Tem-
plum],  besides  altars  and  statues  of  divinities.
The  epithet-  ayopouos  is  often  applied  to  a  divinity
who  was  thus  worshipped  in  the  Agora  (Paus.
IL  cc.  ;  Aesch.  Eume?i.  976  ;  Soph.  Oed.  Tyr.
161,  where  mention  is  made  of  the  circular  throne
of  Artemis  in  the  Agora),  and  Aeschylus  ex-
pressly refers  to  the  i^eoi  h.'yopa.s  eiriorKdiroi  (Sept.
c.  Tkeb.  271,  272).  2.  The  Senate-house  (^SouAeu-
TTjpiov)^  and  other  places  for  the  meetings  of  the
governing  bodies,  according  to  the  constitution  of  the


SECTION   OF    THE    SAME.


particular  state :  in  the  Agora  at  Sparta,  for  ex-
ample, there  were  the  senate-house  of  the  Gerontes
and  the  places  of  meeting  of  the  Ephori,  the  No-
mophylaces,  and  the  Bidiaei.     3.  The  residence  of
the  magistrates  for  the  time  being  [Prytaneium],
4.   Courts  of  justice  [Basilica].     5.  The  public
treasury  [Thesaurus].  6.  The  prison  [Carcer].
7.  The  police  station,  if  such  a  term  may  be  ap-
plied to  an  ancient  Agora.   At  Athens,  for  example,
the  station  of  the  tliousand  Scythian  bowTnen,  who
formed  the  police  force  of  the  state,  was  in  the
middle  of  the  Agora  :  this  does  not,  however,  seem
to  have  been  a  permanent  building,  but  only  a
number  of  tents.     {{.  Buildings  used  for  the  re-
gulation of  the  standards  of  measure,  and  so  forth  ;
such  as  the  building  vulgarly  called  the  Temple  of
the  Winds  at  Athens  [Horologium],  and  the
Milliarium  Aureum  at  Rome,  wliich  seems  to  have
been  imitated  from  a  similar  standard  at  Athens
[Milliarium].     To  these  various  buildings  must
be  added  the  works  of  art,  with  which  the  open
area  and  the  porticoes  of  the  Agora  were  adomed  ;
which  were   chiefly  in   celebration   of  gods   and
heroes  who  figured  in  the  mythology,  of  men  who
had  deserved  well  of  the  state,  of  victories  and
other  memorable  events,  besides  those  which  ob-
tained a  place  there  purely  by  their  merits  as
master-pieces  of  art.      As   a   specimen  we   may
take  the  Agora  at  Athens,  a  portico  of  which,
thence  called  the  trroa  ttoikIXtj^  was  adomed  with
the  paintings  of  Polygnotus,  Micon,  and  others.


and  in  which  also  stood  the  statues  of  the  ten
heroes  (apxvy^'''ai),  after  whom  the  Phylae  of
Cleisthenes  were  named,  of  Solon,  of  Harmodius,
and  Aristogeiton,  of  the  orator  Lycurgus,  and  of
very  many  others.  It  was  customary  also  to  build
new  porticoes  out  of  the  spoils  taken  in  great  wars,
as  examples  of  which  we  have  the  Corey raean  por-
tico at  Elis,  mentioned  above,  and  the  Persian  por-
tico at  Sparta.

The  open  area  of  the  Agora  was  originally  the
place  of  public  assembly  for  all  purposes,  and  of
general  resort.  Its  use  for  political  pui-poses  is  de-
scribed in  the  preceding  article.  Here  also  were
celebrated  the  public  festivals.  At  Sparta,  the
part  of  the  Agom  in  which  stood  the  statues  of
Apollo,  Artemis,  and  Leto,  was  called  X'^pos,  be-
cause the  chonises  of  the  Ephebi  performed  their
dances  there  at  the  festival  of  the  GjTnnopaedin.
(Paus.  iii.  9.)  Lastly,  it  was  the  place  of  social
and  fashionable  resort.  At  Athens,  fashionable
loungers  were  called  aydXfiara  ay o pas.

Originally  the  Agora  was  also  the  market,  and
was  surrounded  with  shops,  as  showii  in  the  above
plan.  As  commerce  increased,  it  was  found  con-
venient to  separate  the  traffic  from  the  other  kinds
of  business  carried  on  in  the  Agora,  and  to  assign
to  each  its  distinct  place,  though  this  was  by  no
means  imiversally  the  case.  The  market,  whethet
identical  with,  or  separate  from  the  Agora  for  po-
litical and  other  assemblies,  was  divided  into  parta
for  the   different  softs   of  merchandise,  each   of


AGORA.

course  furnished  with  colonnades,  which  the  climate
rendered  necessary,  and  partly  with  shops  and
stalls,  partly  with  temporary  booths  of  wicker-
work  ((rKTjvat,  Harpocr.  s.  v.  (XK-qviTris  ;  Demosth.
'Je  Cor.  p,  284).  Each  of  these  parts  was  called  a
kvkXos.  It  is  generally  stated  that  this  term  was
applied  only  to  that  division  of  the  market  where
rneat,  fish,  and  such  things  were  sold  ;  but  Becker
has  shown  that  it  was  used  also  for  other  parts  of
the  market  (C/iarikks,  vol.  i.  pp.  268,  269).  The
several  divisions  of  the  market  were  named  ac-
cording to  the  articles  exposed  for  sale  in  them.
(Poll.  ix.  47,  X.  19.)  Of  these  divisions,  the  fol-
lowing were  the  most  important.

The  part  in  Avhich  fish  and  other  delicacies  for
the  table  were  exposed  to  sale  was  called  Ix^vs,
«V/o^,  or  Ix0v6irw\is  ayopd,  and  was  the  chief
centre  of  business.  It  was  open  only  for  a  limited
time,  the  signal  for  commencing  business  being
given  by  the  soimd  of  a  bell,  which  was  obeyed
with  an  eagerness  that  is  more  than  once  plea-
santly referred  to  by  the  ancient  writers.  (Plu-
tarch, .S^tojoos.  iv.  4,2  ;  Strab.  xiv.  p.  658.)  The
coarseness  and  impositions  of  the  fishsellers,  and
the  attempts  of  pui-chasers  to  beat  them  down,  aie
frequently  alluded  to  by  the  comic  poets.  ( Amphis,
ap.Ath.  vi.  p.  224,  e.  ;  Alexis,  ibid.  ;  Xenarch.  ibid.
p.  225,  c;  Alexis,  ibid.  p.  226,  a,  b.;  comp.  Plat.
Leg.  xi.  p.  91 7.)  It  is  not  quite  clear  whether  meat,
poultry,  and  so  forth,  were  sold  in  the  same  place
as  the  fish,  or  had  a  separate  division  of  the  market
assigned  to  them.  Bread  was  partly  sold  in  the
assigned  place  in  the  market,  which  was  per-
haps the  same  as  the  meal-market  (to  &\(piTa),
and  partly  can-ied  round  for  sale :  the  sellers
•were  generally  women,  and  were  proverbially
abusive.  (Aristoph.  i?aw.  857,  Vesp.  I'd89.)  In
another  part  of  the  market,  called  /xuppivai^  were
the  women  who  sold  garlands  of  myrtle  and
flowers  for  festivals  and  parties.  (Plut.  Arat.  6  ;
Aristoph.  Thesm.  448,  457.)  Near  these,  pro-
bably, were  the  sellers  of  ribands  and  fillets  for
the  head.  (Demosth.  in  Eubul.  p.  1308.)  The
wholesale  traffic  in  wine,  as  distinct  from  the
business  of  the  KainjXos  [Caupo],  was  carried  on
in  the  market,  the  wine  being  brought  in  from
the  country  in  carts,  from  which  it  was  transferred
to  amphoi'ae :  the  process  is  represented  in  two
pictures  at  Pompeii.  (Alexis,  ap.  Ath.  x.  p.  431,  e.;
Mus.  Borbon.  vol.  iv.  Relaz.  d.  Scav.  A.,  and  vol.  v.
p.  48.)  [Amphora.]  The  market  for  pottery  was
called  x^'^P"'^  ;  ^.nd  must  not  be  confounded  with
the  place  where  cooks  sat  and  offered  themselves
for  hire,  with  their  cooking  utensils :  this  latter
place  was  called  /layeipela.  (Poll.  ix.  48  ;  Alexis,
ap.  Ath.  iv.  p.  164,  f.)  In  short,  every  kind  of  ne-
cessary or  luxury  was  exposed  for  sale  in  its  as-
signed place.  Thus,  we  find,  besides  those  already
mentioned,  the  market  for  onions  (ra  Kpo/xva ),  for
garlick  (to  CKSpoSa),  for  nuts  (to  Kapva),  for
apples  (to  firjAa),  for  fresh  cheese  {6  x^wp^s  Tvp6s),
for  oil  (Toij\aiov\  for  perfumes  and  unguents  (to
tivpa\  for  frankincense  («3  XiSavwr6s),  for  spices
(to  apd}ixara\  for  couches  (at  kAjvoi),  for  new  and
old  clothes  {aryoph.  l/xariSTrwAis.,  or  (rireipoTTCoXis,
Poll.  vii.  78),  for  books  (/SteAtoflrj/cTj),  and  for
slaves  (to  avSpdiroSa^  Poll.  x.  19).  Lastl3^,a  part
of  the  market  was  devoted  to  the  money-changers
(TpoTre^Toi).  [Argentarii.]  Mention  is  some-
times made  of  the  women''s  market,  yvvaiKcla
ayopd,  a  terra  which  has  given  rise  to  much  doubt.


AGORA.  36

(Thcophr.  Char.  2  ;  Poll.  x.  18.)  The  common
explanation  is,  that  it  was  the  part  of  the  market
to  which  women  resorted  to  purchase  what  they
wanted  for  household  uses.  But  it  appears  clearly
that  purchases  w^ere  seldom  made  in  the  market
by  women,  and  never  by  free  women.  The  only
plausible  explanation  is,  either  that  a  distinct  part
of  the  market  was  assigned  to  those  commodities,
the  sellers  of  which  were  women,  such  as  the
dpTOTTwAiSes,  keKi0oTru)\i8es,  ttrxoSoTrwAjSes,  CTe-
^avoirdoXiSes,  and  others,  or  else  that  the  term
was  applied  to  that  part  of  the  market  where
articles  for  the  use  of  women  were  sold.  But  the
matter  is  altogether  doubtful.  The  above  list  of
commodities,  sold  in  the  respective  divisions  of  the
market,  might  be  still  further  extended.  Indeed,
with  reference  to  the  Athenian  market,  to  which
the  description  chiefly  applies,  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  every  article  of  home  produce  or  of
foreign  commerce  from  the  known  world  was  there
exposed  for  sale.  (See  Thuc.  ii.  18  ;  Xen.  Oecon.
Ath.  ii.  7  ;  Isocr.  Paneg.  64  ;  Ath.  xiv.  p.  640,
b,c.)

It  is  not  to  be  supposed,  however,  that  the  sale
of  these  various  articles  was  confined  to  the  market.
Frequent  mention  is  made  of  shops  in  other  parties
of  the  city  {e.  g.  Thuc.  viii.  9h\  and  some  articles'^
such  as  salt  fish,  seem  to  have  been  sold  outsido
the  gates.  (Aristoph.  Equit.  1246.)

The  time  during  which  the  market  was  fre-
quented was  the  forenoon  ;  but  it  is  difficult  to  de-
termine precisely  how  much  of  the  forenoon  is
denoted  by  the  common  phrases  irX-f^dovcra  ay opa^
irepl  Tr\-f]6ov(rav  ayopav,  ir\7]dwpr}  ay opas.  (Herod,
ii.  173,  vii.  223.)  Suidas  (s.  v.)  explains  irXiiQovaa
ayopd  as  &pa  Tp'irrj.,  but  elsewhere  (s.  v.  Trept  TTKijQ.
07.)  he  says  that  it  was  either  the  fourth,  or  fifth,
or  sixth  hour.  We  might  infer  that  the  whole
period  thus  designated  was  from  nine  to  twelve
o'clock  (equinoctial  time)  ;  but  Herodotus,  in  two
passages  (iii.  104,  iv.  181)  makes  a  distinction  be-
tween TTXi]6ov(Ta  ayopd  and  ix^ariix€pia.  (Comp.
Liban.  Ep.  1084.)  The  time  of  the  conclusion  of
the  market  was  called  ayopas  SidXvais  (Herod,  iii.
104,  comp,  Xenoph.  Oecon.  12,  1  ;  and  for  a  fur-
ther discussion  respecting  the  time  of  the  full  mar-
ket, see  Duker,  ad  Thuc.  viii.  92  ;  Wesseling,  ad
Died.  Sic.  xiii.  48;  Perizon.  ad  Aelian.  V.  H.  xii.
30  ;  Gesner  and  Reiz,  ad  Lucian.  Philops.  11,  vol.
iii.  p.  38  ;  Bahr,  ad  Herod,  ii.  173.)  During  these
hours  the  market  was  a  place  not  only  of  traffic
but  of  general  resort.  Thus  Socrates  habitually
frequented  it  as  one  of  the  places  where  he  had  the
opportunity  of  conversing  with  the  greatest  number
of  persons.  (Xen.  Mem.  i.  1.  §  10  ;  Plat.  Apol.  p.
1 7.)  It  was  also  frequented  in  other  parts  of  the
day,  especially  in  the  evening,  when  many  persons
might  be  seen  Avalking  about  or  resting  upon  seats
placed  under  the  colonnades.  (Demosth.  in  Con.
p.  1258;  Pseudo-Plut.  Vit.  X.  Or.  p.  849,  d.  ;
Lucian.  Jup.  Trag.  16,  vol.  ii.  p.  660.)  Even  the
shops  themselves,  not  only  those  of  the  barbers,  the
perfumers,  and  the  doctors,  but  even  those  of  the
leather-sellers  and  the  harness-makers,  were  com-
mon places  of  resort  for  conversation ;  and  it  was
even  esteemed  discreditable  to  avoid  them  alto-
gether. (Aristoph.  Plut.  337,  Av.  1439  ;  Xen.
Mem.  iv.  2.  §  1  ;  Lysias,  in  Panel,  pp.  730,  732,
de  Inval.  p.  754  ;  Demosth.  in  Aristog.  p.  786.)

The  persons  who  carried  on  traffic  in  the  market
were  the  country  people  (070^0X01),  who  brought
o  2         ^


36


AGORA.


in  their  commodities  into  the  citj',  and  the  retail
dealers  (KdirriXoi)  who  exposed  the  goods  pm*-
chased  of  the  former,  or  of  producers  of  any  kind
(ouT07rwA.(xt),  or  of  forei^jn  merchants  (tyUTropoi),  for
sale  in  the  markets.  (Plat,  de  liepub.  ii.  p.  371  ;
Xen.  Mem.  iii.  7.  §  6 ;  Plut.  And.  8  ;  Caupo.)
A  certain  degree  of  disgrace  was  attached  to  the
occupation  of  a  retail  dealer,  though  at  Athens
there  were  positive  enactments  to  the  contrary.
(Andoc.  de  Myst.  p.  68  ;  Aristot.  de  Repub.  i.  10,
iii.  5  ;  Plat.  Leg.  xi.  pp.  918,  919  ;  Diog.  Laert.  i.
1 04,  ix.  66  ;  Aristoph.  Eq.  181 ;  Demosth.  c.  Evhul.
30,  p.  1303.)  There  is  an  interesting  but  very
difficult  question  as  to  the  effect  which  the  occu-
pation of  selling  in  the  market  had  upon  the  social
position  of  women  who  engaged  in  it.  (Demosth.
ill  Neaer.  p.  1367  ;  Lys.  in  Tlieomn.  p.  361  ;  Plut.
Sol.  23  ;  Harpocr.  and  Suid.  s.v.  TlcaXuxri ;  Becker,
Cliarikles,  vol.  i.  pp.  260—266.)  The  wholesale
dealers  also  sold  their  goods  by  means  of  a  sample
(SeTyjtta),  either  in  the  market,  or  in  the  place
called  SePy/ia,  attached  to  the  port.  (Harpocr.
s.  V.  Se?7/io  ;  Poll.  ix.  34  ;  Plut.  Demosth.  23  ;
V\a.i.Leg.  vii.  p.  788  ;  Diphil.  ap.  Ath.  xi.  p.  499,  e. ;
Bockh,  Econ.  of  Ath.  p.  58,  2d  ed.)  The  retail
dealers  either  exposed  their  goods  for  sale  in  their
shops,  or  hawked  them  about.  (Aristoph.  Acliarn.
33  ;  Plut.  Apophth.  Lacon.  62,  p.  236.)  The  pri-
vilege of  freely  selling  in  the  market  belonged  to
the  citizens :  foreigners  had  to  pay  a  toll.  (De-
mosth. in  Euhul.  p.  1308  ;  Bockh,  Econ.  of  Ath.
p.  313.)

Most  citizens  either  made  their  own  purchases
in  the  market  (Aeschin.  c.  Timarch.  p.  87  ;
Aristoph.  Lysidr.  555 — 559),  or  employed  a  slave,
who  was  called,  from  his  office,  ayopaaT'fjs  (Xen.
Me7n.  i.  5.  §  2  ;  comp.  Ath.  iv.  p.  171  ;  Poll.  iii.
126  ;  Terent.  Andr.  ii.  2.  31.)  Sometimes  female
slaves  performed  this  office  (Lysias,  de  Coed.
Eratosth.  p.  18,  comp.  p.  11),  but  such  an  appear-
ance in  public  was  not  permitted  to  any  free  wo-
man, except  a  courtezan  (Machon,  ap.  Ath.  xiii.
p.  580.)  The  philosopher  Lynceus,  of  Samos,
wrote  a  book  for  the  guidance  of  purchasers  in  the
market.  (Ath.  vi.  p.  228.)  It  was  esteemed  dis-
reputable for  people  to  carry  home  their  purchases
from  the  markets,  and  there  were  therefore  porters
in  attendance  for  that  purpose,  who  were  called
TrpovueiKoi,  iraidapiwues,  and  TraiSwves.  (Theo-
phrast  CJiar.  xvii. — xxii. ;  Hesych.  s.  v.  trpoijueiKoi.)
The  preservation  of  order  in  the  market  was  the
office  of  the  Agoranomi.

Both  the  architectural  details  of  the  Agora  and
the  uses  of  its  several  parts  might  be  further  illus-
trated by  the  remains  of  the  ayopd  or  ayopai  (for
it  is  even  doubtful  whether  there  were  two  or  only
one)  at  Athens  ;  but  this  would  lead  us  too  far  into
topographical  details.  This  part  of  the  subject  is
fully  discussed  in  the  following  works:  Leake,
Topography  of  Athens  ;  Krause,  Hellas,  vol.  ii.  ;
MUller,  in  Ersch  and  Gruber's  Encyclop'ddie,  art.
Attica;  Hirt,  Lehre  d.  Geb'dude,  ch.  v.  supp.  1  ;
Wachsmuth,  HeUen.  Aherthumsk.  yo\.  i.  supp.  6,  b,
2ded.

For  the  whole  subject  the  chief  modem  au-
thorities are  the  following  :  —  Hirt,  Lehre  d.  Ge-
bfiude  d.  Griechen  und  Romern,  ch.  v.  ;  Stieglitz,
Arch'dol.  d.  Baukunst ;  Wachsmuth,  Hellenische
Alterthumskunde ;  Bockh,  Public  Oeconomy  of
Athens ;  and  especially  Becker,  Charikles,  4th
scene,  vol.  I  pp.  236 — 296,  in  the  original.    [P.S.]


AGRAPHIOU  GRAPHE.

AGORA'NOMI  (ayopavSixoi)  were  public
functionaries  in  most  of  the  Grecian  states,  whose
duties  corresponded  in  many  respects  to  those  of
the  Roman  aedilcs  ;  whence  Greek  Avriters  on
Roman  affairs  call  the  aediles  by  this  name.  Under
the  Roman  empire,  the  agoranomi  were  called
Xoyiffrai  {^c\{<A.  ad  Aristoph.  Acharn.  Q^i^):  they
enjoyed  in  later  times  great  honour  and  respect,
and  their  office  seems  to  have  been  regarded  as
one  of  the  most  honourable  in  the  Greek  states.
We  frequently  read  in  inscriptions  of  their  being
rewarded  with  crowns,  of  which  many  instances
are  given  by  MUller.  (yle^eW/icor,  p.  138)  They
were  called  by  the  Romans  curatores  reipublicae.
(Cod.  1.  tit.  54.  s.  3.)

Agoranomi  existed  both  at  Sparta  and  Athens.
Our  knowledge  of  the  Spartan  agoranomi  is  very
limited,  and  derived  almost  entirely  from  inscrip-
tions. They  stepped  into  the  place  of  the  ancient
Empelori  (ifnreXwpoi)  in  the  time  of  the  Romans.
They  formed  a  collegium  ( (Tvvapx'iot.)  with  one  at
their  head,  called  irpiaSvs  (Bockh,  Corp.  Inscr.
vol.  i.  p.  610  ;  and  Sauppe  in  Rheinisches  Museum,
vol.  iv.  p.  159,  New  Series.)  The  Athenian  ago-
ranomi were  regular  magistrates  during  the  flourish-
ing times  of  the  republic.  They  were  ten  in
number,  five  for  the  city  and  five  for  the  Peiraecus,
and  were  chosen  by  lot,  one  from  each  tribe.
(Dem.  c.  Timocr.  p.  735  ;  Aristoph.  Acharn.  689.)
The  reading  in  Harpocration  (s.  v.  ayopauSfioi),
which  mentions  twenty  agoranomi,  fifteen  for  the
city,  and  five  for  the  Peiraeeus,  is  false.  (Bockh,
Corp.  Inscr.  vol.  i.  p.  337.)

The  principal  duty  of  the  agoranomi  was,  as
their  name  imports,  to  inspect  the  market,  and  to
see  that  all  the  laws  respecting  its  regulation  were
properly  observed.  They  had  the  inspection  of  all
things  which  were  sold  in  the  market,  with  the
exception  of  com,  which  was  subject  to  the  juris-
diction of  the  (riTo<pv\aK€s.  [Sitophylaces.]
The  agoranomi  had  in  fact  chiefly  to  attend  to
retail-trade  (KairrjKda)  :  wholesale-trade  was  not
much  carried  on  in  the  market-place,  and  was
under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  eTrt^eATjToi  rod  'Efi-
TToplov.  They  regulated  the  price  and  quantity  of
all  things  which  were  brought  into  the  market,
and  pmiished  all  persons  convicted  of  cheating,
especially  by  false  weights  and  measures.  They
had  in  general  the  power  of  punishing  all  infraction
of  the  laws  and  regulations  relating  to  the  market,
by  inflicting  a  fine  upon  the  citizens,  and  personal
chastisement  upon  foreigners  and  slaves,  for  which
purpose  they  usually  carried  a  whip.  They  had
the  care  of  all  the  temples  and  fountains  in  the
market-place,  and  received  the  tax  {^eviKhi^  reXos)
which  foreigners  and  aliens  were  obliged  to  pay  for
the  privilege  of  exposing  their  goods  for  sale  in  the
market.  {Scho\.  ad  Aristoph.  Acharn.  6^9  ;  Plat.
Leg.  vi.  p.  763,  viii.  p.  849,  xi.  pp.  91 7,  918  ;  Liban.
Declam.  46  ;  ayopas  rehos,  Aristoph,  Acharn.
861,  and  Schol. ;  Phot.  s.v.  Kara  rijv  ayopdv.)
The  public  prostitutes  were  also  subject  to  their
regulations,  as  was  the  case  at  Corinth  (Justin,  xxi.
5.),  and  they  fixed  the  price  which  each  prostitute
was  to  take.  (Suid.  and  Zonar.  s.  v.  Siaypafifia.)
The  duties  of  the  agoranomi  resembled  those  of  the
astynomi.  [Astynomi.]  (Meier,  Ait.  Process,
pn.^89— 92;  Bockh,  Puhl.  Econ.  ofAtliens,  pp.  48,
333,  2nd  ed.)

AGRA'PHIOU  GRAPHE'  (aypacpiov  ypatp-f)).
The  names  of  all  persons  at  Athens  who  owed  any


AGRARIAE  LEGES.

sum  of  money  to  the  state  (ol  t^  STj/xoaiy  ocpei-
\ovTfs)  were  registered  by  the  practores  (rrpaK-
ropes),  upon  tablets  kept  for  that  purpose  in  the
temple  of  Athena, on  the  Acropolis  (Dem.  e.Aristoff.
i.  p.  791 ;  Harpocr.  and  Suidas,  s.  v.  ^evdeyypacpij);
and  hence  the  expression  of  being  registered  on  the
Acropolis  (iyycjpafjLjjLevos  iu  'AKpo7r6hei)  always
means  being  indebted  to  tlie  state.  (Dem.  c.
Theucr.  p.  1 337. )  Whoever  paid  his  fine  after  regis-
tration was  erased,  either  wholly  or  in  part,  ac-
cording to  the  amount  paid  ;  but  if  a  person's  name
was  improperly  erased,  he  was  subject  to  the  action
for  non-registration  {aypacpiov  ypa(pi)),  which  was
under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  thesmothetae.  If  an
individual  was  not  registei'ed,  he  could  only  be
proceeded  against  by  e^Setlis,  and  was  not  liable
to  the  aypacpiov  ypa<p-f).  (Dem.  in  T/ieocr,  p.  1 338. )
Ilesychius,  whose  account  has  been  followed  by
Hemsterhuis  and  Wesseling,  appears  to  have  been
mistaken  in  saying  that  the  aypacpiov  ypa<pT]  could
be  instituted  against  debtors,  who  had  not  been
registered.  (Meier,  Att  Process^  pp.  353,  354 ;
Bockh,  Puhl.  Econ.  of  Athens,  pp.  388, 389, 2nd  ed. )

AGRAPHOU  'METALLOU  GRAPHE'
(  ay pdcpov  fi^rdXXov  ypacpr])  was  an  action  brought
before  the  thesmothetae  at  Athens,  against  an  in-
dividual, who  worked  a  mine  without  having  pre-
viously registered  it.  The  state  required  that  all
mines  should  be  registered,  because  the  twenty-
fourth  part  of  their  produce  was  payable  to  the
public  treasm^'.  (Bockh,  FuU.  Econ.  of  Athens^
p.  664,  2nd  ed. ;  Meier,  Att.  Process,  p.  354.)

AGRA'RIAE  leges.  "It  is  not  exactly
true  that  the  agrarian  law  of  Cassius  was  the
earliest  that  was  so  called :  every  law  by  which  the
commonwealth  disposed  of  its  public  land,  bore
that  name  ;  as,  for  instance,  that  by  which  the
domain  of  the  kings  was  parcelled  out  among  the
commonalty,  and  those  by  Avhich  colonies  were
planted.  Even  in  the  narrower  sense  of  a  law
whereby  the  state  exercised  its  ownership  in  re-
moving the  old  possessors  from  a  part  of  its
domain,  and  making  over  its  right  of  property'-
therein,  such  a  law  existed  among  those  of  Servius
Tulliiis."  (Niebuhr,  Rom.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  p.  129.
transl.)

The  complete  history-  of  the  enactments  called
agrarian  laws,  either  in  the  larger  and  more  cor-
rect sense,  or  in  the  narrower  sense  of  the  term,
as  explained  in  this  extract,  would  be  out  of  place
here.  The  particular  objects  of  each  agrarian  law
must  be  ascertained  from  its  provisions.  But  all
these  numerous  enactments  had  reference  to  the
public  land  ;  and  many  of  them  were  passed  for
the  pui-pose  of  settling  Roman  colonies  in  con-
quered districts,  and  assigning  to  the  soldiers,  who
formed  a  large  part  of  such  colonists,  their  shares
m  such  lands.  The  true  meaning  of  all  or  any  of
these  enactments  can  only  be  imderstood  when  we
have  fonned  a  correct  notion  of  property  in  land,
as  recognised  by  Roman  law.  It  is  not  necessary,
in  order  to  obtain  this  correct  notion,  to  ascend  to
the  origin  of  the  Roman  state,  though  if  a  com-
plete history  of  Rome  could  be  written,  our  con-
ception of  the  real  character  of  property  in  land,
as  recognised  by  Roman  law,  would  be  more  en-
larged and  more  precise.  But  the  system  of
Roman  law,  as  it  existed  imder  the  emperors,
contained  both  the  tenns  and  the  notions  Avhich
belonged  to  those  early  ages,  of  which  they  are
the  most  faithful  historiciU  monuments.     In  an


AGRARIAE  LEGES.


37


inquiry  of  the  present  kind,  we  may  begin  at  any
point  in  the  historical  scries  which  is  definite,  and
we  may  ascend  from  known  and  intelligible  no-
tions which  belong  to  a  later  age,  towards  their
historical  origin,  though  we  may  never  be  able  to
reach  it.

Gains  (ii,  2,  &c.),  who  probably  wrote  under
the  Antonines,  made  two  chief  divisions  of  Roman
land  ;  that  which  was  divini  juris,  and  that  which
was  humani  juris.  Land  which  was  divini  juris
was  either  sacer  or  reliyiostis.  (Compare  Frontinus,
De  Re  Agraria,  xiii.  or  p.  42.  ed.  Goes.)  Land
which  was  sacer  was  consecrated  to  the  Dii  Su-
peri ;  land  which  Avas  religiosus  belonged  to  the
Dii  JVIanes.  Land  was  made  sacer  by  a  lex  or
senatus  consultum  ;  and,  as  the  context  shows,
such  land  was  land  which  had  belonged  to  the
state  (popuhis  Romamts).  An  mdividual  could
make  a  portion  of  his  own  land  religiosus  by  the
interment  in  it  of  one  of  his  family  :  but  it  was  the
better  opinion  that  land  in  the  provinces  could  not
thus  be  made  religiosus  ;  and  the  reason  given  is
this,  that  the  ownership  or  property  in  provincial
lands  is  either  in  the  state  ( pop.  Rom.)  or  in  the
Caesar,  and  that  individuals  have  only  the  posses-
sion and  enjoyment  of  it  {possessio  et  usus  frvc-
ttts).  Provincial  lands  were  either  stipendiaria  or
triliutaria:  the  stipendiaria  were  in  those  provinces
which  were  considered  to  belong  to  the  Roman
state  ;  the  tributaria  were  in  those  provinces  which
were  considered  as  the  property  of  the  Caesar.
Land  which  was  humani  juris,  was  divided  into
public  and  private:  public  land  belonged  to  the
state  ;  private  land,  to  individuals.

It  would  seem  to  follow  from  the  legal  form  ob-
served in  making  Innd  sacer,  that  it  thereby  ceased
to  be  publicus  ;  for  if  it  still  continued  publicus,  it
had  not  changed  its  essential  quality.  Niebuhr
(Appendix  i.  vol.  ii.)  has  stated  that  "  all  Roman
land  was  either  the  property  of  the  state  (common
land,  domain),  or  private  property,  —  azit  piMicus
aut  pritxitus ;"  and  he  adds  that  "the  landed
property  of  the  state  was  either  consecrated  to  the
gods  {sacer),  or  allotted  to  men  to  reap  its  fruits
{pro/anus,  humani  juris),"  Niebuhr  then  refers  to
the  view  of  Gains,  who  makes  the  division  into
divini  jwis-  and  humani  juris,  the  primary  divi-
sion ;  but  he  relies  on  the  authority  of  Frontinus,
supported  by  Livy  (viii.  14),  as  evidence  of  the
correctness  of  his  own  division.*

Though  the   origin   of  that  kind  of  property

*  It  is  obvious,  on  comparing  two  passages  in
Frontinus  {De  Re  Agraria  xi.  xiii.),  that  Niebuhr
has  mistaken  the  meaning  of  the  writer,  who
clearly  intends  it  to  be  inferred  that  the  sacred
land  was  not  public  land.  Besides,  if  the  meaning
of  Frontinus  was  what  Niebuhr  has  supposed  it  to
be,  his  authority  is  not  equal  to  that  of  Gaius  on  a
matter  which  specially  belongs  to  the  province  of
the  jurist,  and  is  foreign  to  that  of  the  agrimensor.
The  passage  of  Livy  does  not  prove  Niebuhr's
assertion,  Livy  merely  states  that  the  temple  and
grove  of  Sospita  Juno  should  be  common  to  the
Lanuvini  municipes  and  the  Roman  people  ;  and
in  what  other  terms  could  he  express  the  fact
that  the  temple  should  be  used  by  both  people  ?
That  does  not  prove  that  a  temple  was  considered
the  same  kind  of  public  property  as  a  tract  of
unconsecrated  land  was.  The  form  of  dedition  in
Livy  (i.  38)  may  easily  be  explained.
D  3


38


AGRARIAE  LEGES.


called  public  land  must  be  referred  to  tlie  earliest
ages  of  the  Roman  state,  it  appears  from  Gains  that
under  the  emperors  there  wai  still  land  within  the
limits  of  the  empire,  the  ownership  of  which  was
not  in  the  individuals  who  possessed  and  enjoyed  it,
but  in  the  populus  Romanus,  or  the  Caesar.  This
possession  and  enjoyment  are  distinguished  by  him
from  ownership  {dominium).  The  term  possessio
frequently  occurs  in  those  jurists  from  whom  the
Digest  was  compiled  ;  but  in  these  writers,  as  they
are  known  to  us,  it  applies  only  to  private  land,
and  the  Ager  Publicus  is  hardly,  if  at  all,  ever
noticed  by  them.  Now  this  term  Possessio,  as  used
in  the  Digest,  means  the  possession  of  private  land
by  one  who  has  no  kind  of  right  to  it ;  and  this
possessio  was  protected  by  the  praetor's  interdict,
even  when  it  was  without  bona  fides  or  justa
causa:  but  the  term  Possessio  in  the  Roman
historians,  Livy  for  instance,  signifies  the  occupa-
tion (occupatio)  and  enjoyment  of  public  land  ;  and
the  true  notion  of  this,  the  original  Possessio,  con-
tains the  whole  solution  of  the  question  of  the
Agrarian  Laws.  For  this  solution  we  are  mainly
indebted  to  Niebuhr  and  Savigny.

This  latter  kind  of  Possessio,  that  which  has
private  land  for  its  object,  is  demonstrated  by
Savigny  (the  term  here  used  can  hardly  be  said
to  be  too  strong)  to  have  arisen  from  the  first
kind  of  possessio :  and  thus  it  might  readily  be
supposed  that  the  Roman  doctrine  of  possessio,  as
applied  to  the  occupation  of  private  land,  would
throw  some  light  on  the  nature  of  that  original
possessio  out  of  which  it  grew.  In  the  imperial
period,  public  land  had  almost  ceased  to  exist  in
the  Italian  peninsula,  but  the  subject  of  possession
in  private  lands  had  become  a  well  understood
branch  of  Roman  law.  The  remarks  in  the  three
following  paragraphs  are  from  Savigny 's  valuable
work,  Das  Recht  des  Besitzes  (5th  ed.  p.  1 72)  :  —

1.  There  were  two  kinds  of  land  in  the  Roman
state,  ager  purlieus  and  ager  privatus :  in  the
latter  alone  private  property  existed.  But  con-
formably to  the  old  constitution,  the  greater  part
of  the  ager  publicus  was  occupied  and  enjoyed  by
private  persons,  and  apparently  by  the  patricians
only,  or  at  least  by  them  chiefly  till  the  enact-
ment of  the  Licinian  Rogations  ;  yet  the  state
could  lesume  the  land  at  pleasure.  Now  we  find
no  mention  of  any  legal  form  for  the  protection  of
the  occupier,  or  Possessor  as  he  was  called,  of  such
public  land  against  any  other  individual,  though
it  cannot  be  doubted  that  such  a  form  actually
existed.  But  if  we  assume  that  the  interdict
which  protected  the  possession  of  an  individual  in
private  land,  was  the  form  which  protected  the
possessor  of  the  public  land,  two  problems  are
solved  at  the  same  time,  —  an  historical  origin  is
discovered  for  possession  in  private  land,  and  a
legal  form  for  the  protection  of  possession  in  public
land.

An  hypothesis,  which  so  clearly  connects  into
one  consistent  whole,  facts  otherwise  incapable  of
such  connection,  must  be  considered  rather  as
evolving  a  latent  fact,  by  placing  other  known
facts  in  their  true  relative  position,  than  as  in-
volving an  independent  assumption.  But  there
is  historical  evidence  in  support  of  the  hypo-
thesis.

2.  The  words  possessio,  possessor,  and  possidere
are  the  technical  terms  used  by  writers  of  very
different  ages,  to  express  the  occupation  and  the


AGRARIAE  LEGES.

enjoyment  of  the  public  lands  ;  that  is,  the  notion
of  occupying  and  enjoying  public  land  was  in  the
early  ages  of  the  republic  distinguished  from  the
right  of  property  in  it.  Nothing  was  so  natural  aa
to  apply  this  notion,  when  once  fixed,  to  the  pos-
session of  private  land  as  distinct  from  the  owner-
ship ;  and  accordingly  the  same  technical  terms
were  applied  to  the  possession  of  private  land.
Various  applications  of  the  word  possessio,  with
reference  to  private  land,  appear  in  the  Roman
law,  in  the  bonorum  possessio  of  the  praetorian
heres  and  others.  But  all  the  uses  of  the  word
possessio,  as  applied  to  ager  privatus,  however
they  may  differ  m  other  respects,  agreed  in  this  :  —
they  denoted  an  actual  possession  and  enjoyment
of  a  thing,  without  the  strict  Roman  (Quiritarian)
ownership.

3.  The  word  possessio,  which  originally  signified
the  right  of  the  possessor,  was  in  time  used  to
signify  the  object  of  the  right.  Thus  ager
signified  a  piece  of  land,  viewed  as  an  object  of
Quh-itarian  ownership  ,  possessio,  a  piece  of  land,
in  which  a  man  had  only  a  bonitarian  or  beneficial
interest,  as,  for  instance,  Italic  land  not  transferred
by  mancipatio,  or  land  which  from  its  nature  could
not  be  the  subject  of  Quiritarian  ownership,  as
provincial  lands  and  the  old  ager  publicus.  Pos-
sessio accordingly  implies  usus ;  ager  implies  pro-
prietas  or  ownership.  This  explanation  of  the
tenns  ager  and  possessio  is  from  a  jurist  of  the
imperial  times,  quoted  by  Savigny  (Javolenus,
Dig.  50.  tit.  16.  s.  115)  ;  but  its  value  for  the
purpose  of  the  present  inquiry  is  not  on  that  ac-
count the  less.  The  ager  publicus,  and  all  the  old
notions  attached  to  it,  as  already  observed,  hardly
occur  in  the  extant  Roman  jurists  ;  but  the  name
possessio,  as  applied  to  private  land,  and  the  legal
notions  attached  to  it,  are  of  frequent  occurrence.
The  form  of  the  interdict,  —  uti  possidetis,  —  as  it
appears  in  the  Digest,  is  this  :  —  Uti  eas  aedes^.Tpos-
sidetis...vim  fieri  veto.  But  the  original  form  of
the  interdict  was :  Uti  nunc  possidetis  eiim/undum,
&c.  (Festus  in  Possessio)  ;  the  word  fundus,  for
which  aedes  was  afterwards  substituted,  appears  to
indicate  an  original  connection  between  the  inter-
dict and  the  ager  publicus.

We  know  nothing  of  the  origin  of  the  Roman
public  land,  except  that  it  was  acquired  by  con-
quest, and  when  so  acquired  it  belonged  to  the
state,  that  is,  to  the  populus,  as  the  name  publicus
(populicus)  imports  ;  and  the  original  populus  was
the  patricians  only.  We  may  suppose  that  in  the
early  periods  of  the  Roman  stite,  the  conquered
lands  being  the  property  of  the  populus,  might  be
enjoyed  by  the  members  of  that  body,  in  any  way
that  the  body  might  determine.  But  it  is  not  quite
clear  how  these  conquered  lands  were  originally  oc-
cupied. The  following  passage  from  Appian  (Civil
Wars,  i.  7)  appears  to  give  a  probable  account  of
the  matter,  and  one  which  is  not  inconsistent  with
such  fiicts  as  are  otherwise  known:  —  "The  Ro-
mans," he  says,  "  when  they  conquered  any  part
of  Italy,  seized  a  portion  of  the  lands,  and  either
built  cities  in  tliem,  or  sent  Roman  colonists  to
settle  in  the  cities  which  already  existed.  Such
cities  they  designed  to  be  garrison  places.  As  to
the  land  thus  acquired  from  time  to  time,  they
either  divided  the  cultivated  part  among  the
colonists,  or  sold  it,  or  let  it  to  farm.  As  to  the
land  which  had  fallen  out  of  cultivation  in  conse-
quence of  war,  and  which,  indeed,  was  the  larger


AGRARIAE  LEGES.

part,  having  no  time  to  allot  it,  they  gave  public
notice  that  any  one  who  chose  might  in  the  mean-
time cultivate  this  land,  on  payment  of  part  of  the
yearly  produce,  namely,  a  tenth  of  the  produce  of
arable  land,  and  a  fifth  of  the  produce  of  olive-
yards  and  vineyards.     A  rate  was  also  fixed  to  be
paid  b}''  those  who  pastured  cattle  (on  this  midi-
vided  land)  both  for  the  larger  and  smaller  ani-
mals.    And  this  they  did  with  a  view  to  increase
the  numbers  of  the  Italian  people,  whom  they  con-
sidered to  be  most  enduring  of  labour,  in  order
that  they   might   have   domestic   allies.     But   it
turned  out  just  the  contrary  of  their  expectations.
For  the  rich  occupied  the  greater  part  of  this  un-
divided land,  and  at  length,  feeling  confident  that
they  should  never  be  deprived  of  "it,  and  getting
hold  of  such  portions  as  bordered  on  their  lands,
and  also  of  the  smaller  portions  in  the  possession
of  the  poor,  some  by  purchase  and  others  by  force,
they  became  the  cultivators  of  extensive  districts
instead  of  farms.     And  in  order  that  their  culti-
■vators  and  shepherds  might  be  free  from  military
s<>rvice,  they  employed  slaves  instead  of  freemen  ;
and  they  derived  great  profit  from  their  rapid  in-
crease, which  was  favoured  by  the  immiuiity  of
the  slaves  from  military  service.     In  this  way  the
preat  became  very  rich,  and  slaves  were  numerous
all  through  the  country.     But  this  system  reduced
the  number  of  the  Italians,  who  were  ground  down
by  poverty,  taxes,  and  military  service  ;  and  Avhen-
ever  they  had  a  respite  from  these  evils,  they  had
nothing  to  do,  the  land  being  occupied  by  the
rich,  who  also  employed  slaves  instead  of  free-
men."    This  passage,  though  it  appears  to  contain
much  historical  truth,   does  not  distinctly  explain
the    original    mode    of  occupation  ;    for   we   can
scarcely  suppose  that  there  were  not  some  rules
prescribed  as  to  the  occupation  of  this  undivided
land.     Livy  also  gives   no  clear  account  of  the
mode  in  which  these  possessions  were  acquired  ;
though  he  states  in  some  passages  that  the  con-
quered lands  were  occupied  by  the  nobles,  and
occupation  (occupatio)  in  its  proper  sense  signifies
the   taking   possession   of  vacant   land.      As  the
immber  of  these  nobles  was  not  very  great,  we
may  easily  conceive  that  in  the  earlier  periods  of  the
republic,  they  might   regulate  among  themselves
the  mode  of  occupation.     The  complaint  against
the  nobles  (patres)  shortly  before  the  enactment  of
the  Licinian  Rogations  was,  that  they  were  not
content  with  keeping  the  land  which  they  ille-
gally possessed  (possesso  per  injuriam  agro),  but
that  they  refused  to  distribute  among  the  plebs  the
vacant  land  (vacuum  agrum)  which  had  then  re-
cently been  taken  from  the  enemy.     (Liv.  iv.  51,
vi.  5.  37  ;  Occupatio).     It  probably  sometimes
happened  that  public  land  was  occupied,  or  squatted
on  (to  use  a  North  American  phrase),  by  any  ad-
venturers.*

*  It  is  stated  in  the  American  Almanac  for
1 839,  that  though  the  new  territory  of  Iowa  con-
tains above  •20,000  inhabitants,  "  none  of  the  land
has  been  purchased,  the  people  bei«g  all  what  are
termed  squatters."  The  land  alluded  to  is  all
public  land.  The  squatter  often  makes  consider-
able improvements  on  the  land  which  he  has  oc-
cupied, and  even  sells  his  interest  in  it,  before  any
purchase  is  made  of  the  land.  The  privilege  of
pre-emption  which  is  allowed  to  the  squatter,  or
to  the  person  who  has  purchased  his  interest,  is


AGRARIAE  LEGES.  30

But  whatever  was  the  mode  in  which  these  lands
were  occupied,  the  possessor,  when  once  in  posses-
sion, was,  as  we  have  seen,  protected  by  the  praetor's
interdict.  The  patron  who  permitted  his  client  to
occupy  any  part  of  his  possession  as  tenant  at  will
{precario)^  could  eject  him  at  pleasure  by  the  in-
terdictum  de  precario  ;  for  the  client  did  not  obtain
a  possession  by  such  permission  of  his  patron.  The
patron  would,  of  course,  have  the  same  remedy
against  a  trespasser.  But  any  individual,  how-
ever humble,  who  had  a  possession,  was  also  pro-
tected in  it  against  the  aggression  of  the  rich  ;  and
it  was  "  one  of  the  grievances  bitterly  complained
of  by  the  Gracchi,  and  all  the  patriots  of  their
age,  that  while  a  soldier  was  serving  against  the
enemy,  his  powerful  neighbour,  who  coveted  his
small  estate,  ejected  his  wife  and  children."  (Nieb.)
The  state  could  not  only  grant  the  occupation  or
possession  of  its  public  land,  but  could  sell  it,  and
thus  convert  public  into  private  land.  A  remark-
able passage  in  Orosius  (Savigny,  p.  176,  note),
shows  that  public  lands,  which  had  been  given
to  certain  religious  corporations  to  possess,  were
sold  in  order  to  raise  money  for  the  exigencies  of
the  state.  The  selling  of  that  land  which  was
possessed,  and  the  circumstance  of  the  possession
having  been  a  (jrant  or  public  act,  are  both  con-
tained in  this  passage.

The  public  lands  which  were  occupied  by  pos-
sessors, were  sometimes  called,  with  reference  to
such  possession,  occitpatorii  ;  and,  with  respect  to
the  state,  coneessL  Public  land  which  became  pri-
vate by  sale  was  called  qtiaestorius ;  that  which  is
often  spoken  of  as  assigned  (assignatus),  was  marked
out  and  divided  (limitatus)  among  the  plebeians
in  equal  lots,  and  given  to  them  in  absolute  owner-
ship, or  it  was  assigned  to  the  persons  who  were
sent  out  as  a  colony.  Whether  the  land  so  granted
to  the  colony  should  become  Roman  or  not,  de-
pended on  the  nature  of  the  colony.  The  name
ager  publicus  was  given  to  the  public  lands  which
were  acquired  even  after  the  plebs  had  become  one
of  the  estates  in  the  Roman  constitution,  though
the  name  publicus,  in  its  original  sense,  could  no
longer  be  applicable  to  such  jpublic  lands.  After
the  establishment  of  the  plebs  as  an  estate,  the
possession  of  public  land  was  still  claimed  as  the
peculiar  privilege  of  the  patricians,  as  before  the
establishment  of  the  plebs  it  seems  to  have  been
the  only  way  in  which  public  lands  were  enjoyed
by  the  populus  :  the  assignment,  that  is  the  grant
by  the  state  of  the  ownership  of  public  land  in
fixed  shares,  was  the  privilege  of  the  plebs.  In
the  early  ages,  Avhen  the  populus  was  the  state,  it
does  not  appear  that  there  was  any  assignment  of
public  lands  among  the  populus,  though  it  may  be
assumed  that  public  lands  would  occasionally  be
sold  ;  the  mode  of  enjoyment  of  public  land  was
that  of  possessio,  subject  to  an  annual  payment  to
the  state.  It  may  be  conjectured  that  this  ancient
possessio,  which  we  cannot  consider  as  having  its
origin  in  anything  else  than  the  consent  of  the  state,
was  a  good  title  to  the  use  of  the  land  so  long  as
the  annual  payments  were  made.  At  any  rate,
the  plebs  had  no  claim  upon  such  ancient  posses-
sions. But  with  the  introduction  of  the  plebs  as  a
separate  estate,  and  the  acquisition  of  new  lands


the  only  security  which  either  the  squatter  or  th«
person  who  purchases  from  him,  has  for  the  im-
provements made  on  the  land.
D  4


40


*AGUARIAE  LEGES.


by  conquest,  it  would  seem  that  the  plobs  had  as
good  a  title  to  a  share  of  the  newly  conquered
lands,  as  the  patricians  to  the  exclusive  enjoyment
of  those  lands  which  had  been  acquired  by  conquest
before  the  plebs  had  become  an  estate  ;  and  ac-
cording to  Livy  (iv.  49),  the  plebs  founded  their
claim  to  the  captured  lands  on  theii*  services  in  the
war.  The  determination  of  what  part  of  newly
conquered  lands  (arable  and  vineyards)  should  re-
main public,  and  what  part  should  be  assigned  to
the  plebs,  which,  Niebuhr  says,  "  it  need  scarcely
be  observed  was  done  after  the  completion  of  every
conquest,"  ought  to  have  been  an  effectual  way  of
settling  all  disputes  between  the  patricians  and
plebs  as  to  the  possessions  of  the  former  ;  for  such
an  appropriation,  if  it  Avere  actually  made,  could
have  no  other  meaning  than  tliat  the  patricians
were  to  have  as  good  title  to  possess  their  share
as  the  plebs  to  the  ownership  of  their  assigned
portions.  The  plebs  at  least  could  never  fairly
claim  an  assignment  of  public  land,  appropriated
to  remain  such,  at  the  time  when  they  received
the  share  of  the  conquered  lands  to  which  they
were  intitled.  But  the  fact  is,  that  we  have  no
evidence  at  all  as  to  such  division  between  lands
appropriated  to  remain  public  and  lands  assigned
in  ownership,  as  Niebuhr  assumes.  All  that  we
know  is,  that  the  patricians  possessed  large  tracts
of  public  land,  and  that  the  plebs  from  time  to
time  claimed  and  enforced  a  division  of  part  of
them.  In  such  a.  condition  of  affairs,  many  diffi-
cult questions  might  arise  ;  and  it  is  quite  as  pos-
sible to  conceive  that  the  claims  of  the  plebs  might
in  some  cases  be  as  ill  founded  as  the  conduct  of
the  patricians  was  alleged  to  be  rapacious  in  ex-
tending their  possessions.  In  the  course  of  time,
ow!ng  to  sales  of  possessions,  family  settlements,
permanent  improvements  made  on  the  land,  the
claims  on  the  land  of  creditors  who  had  lent  money
on  the  security  of  it,  and  other  causes,  the  equitable
adjustment  of  rights  under  an  agrarian  law  was
impossible  ;  and  this  is  a  difficulty  which  Appian
(i.  10.  18)  particularly  mentions  as  resulting  from
the  law  of  Tib.  Gracchus.

Public  pasture  lands,  it  a,ppears,  were  not  the
subject  of  assignmenT.

The  property  (publicum)  of  the  Roman  people
consisted  of  many  things  besides  land.  The  con-
quest of  a  territory,  unless  special  terms  were
granted  to  the  conquered,  seems  to  have  implied
the  acquisition  by  the  Roman  state  of  the  conquered
territory  and  all  that  it  contained.  Thus  not  only
would  land  be  acquired,  which  was  available  for
corn,  vineyards,  and  pasture  ;  but  mines,  roads,
rivers,  harbours,  and,  as  a  consequence,  tolls  and
duties.  If  a  Roman  colony  was  sent  out  to  occupj'-
a  conquered  territory  or  town,  a  part  of  the  con-
quered lands  was  assigned  to  the  colonists  in  com-
plete ownership.  [CoLONiA.]  The  remainder,  it
appears,  was  left  or  restored  to  the  inhabitants.
Not  that  we  are  to  understand  that  they  had  the
property  in  the  land  as  they  had  before  ;  but  it
appears  that  they  were  subject  to  a  payment,  the
produce  of  which  belonged  to  the  Roman  people.
In  the  case  of  the  colony  sent  to  Antium,  Dionysius
(ix.  60)  states,  "  that  all  the  Antiates  who  had
houses  and  lands  remained  in  the  country,  and
cultivated  both  the  portions  that  were  set  aside  for
them  and  the  portions  appropriated  to  the  colonists,
on  the  condition  of  paying  to  them  a  fixed  portion
of  the  produce  ; "  in  which  case,  if  the  historian's


AGRARIAE  LEGES.

statement  is  true,  all  the  sums  paid  by  the  original
landholders  were  appropriated  to  the  colonists.
Niebuhr  seems  to  suppose,  that  the  Roman  state
might  at  any  time  resume  such  restored  lands  ;
and,  no  doubt,  the  notion  of  a  possibility  of  re-
smnption  under  some  circumstances  at  least  was
involved  in  the  tenure  by  which  these  lands  were
held  ;  but  it  may  be  doubted  if  the  resumption  of
such  lands  was  ever  resorted  to  except  in  extraor-
dinary cases,  and  except  as  to  conquered  lands
which  were  the  public  lands  of  the  conquered
state.  Private  persons,  who  were  permitted  to
retain  their  lands  subject  to  the  payment  of  a  tax,
were  not  the  possessors  to  whom  the  agrarian  laws
applied.  In  many  cases  large  tracts  of  land  were
absolutely  seized,  their  owners  having  perished  in
battle  or  been  driven  away,  and  extensive  districts,
either  not  cultivated  at  all  or  very  imperfectly  cul-
tivated, became  the  property  of  the  state.  Such
lands  as  were  unoccupied  coidd  become  the  subject
of  possessio  ;  and  the  possessor  would,  in  all  cases,
and  in  whatever  manner  he  obtained  the  land,  be
liable  to  a  pa}Tnent  to  the  state,  as  above-men-
tioned in  the  extract  from  Appian.

This  possessio  was  a  real  interest,  for  it  was  the
subject  of  sale :  it  was  the  use  (usics)  of  the  land  ;
but  it  was  not  the  ager  or  property.  The  possessio
strictly  could  not  pass  by  the  testament  of  the
possessor,  at  least  not  by  the  mancipatio.  (Gaius,
ii.  102.)  It  is  not  easy,  therefore,  to  imagine  any
mode  by  which  the  possession  of  the  heres  was
protected,  unless  there  Avas  a  legal  form,  such  as
Savigny  has  assumed  to  exist  for  the  general  pro-
tection of  possessiones  in  the  public  lands.  The
possessor  of  public  land  never  acquii-ed  the  owner-
ship by  virtue  of  his  possession  ;  it  was  not  subject
to  usucapion.  The  ownership  of  the  land  which
belonged  to  the  state,  coxdd  only  be  acquired  by
the  grant  of  the  ownership,  or  by  purchase  from
the  state.  The  state  could  at  any  time,  according
to  strict  right,  sell  that  land  which  was  only  pos-
sessed, or  assign  it  to  another  than  the  possessor.
The  possession  was,  in  fact,  with  respect  to  the  state,
precarium  ;  and  we  may  suppose  that  the  lands  so
lield  would  at  first  receive  few  permanent  improve-
ments. In  course  of  time,  and  particularly  when
the  possessors  had  been  undisturbed  for  many
years,  possession  would  appear,  in  an  equitable
point  of  view,  to  have  become  equivalent  to  o\vncr-
ship  ;  and  the  hardship  of  removing  the  possessors
by  an  agrarian  law  would  appear  the  greater,  after
the  state  had  long  acquiesced  in  their  use  and  oc-
cupation of  the  public  land.

In  order  to  form  a  correct  judgment  of  these  en-
actments which  are  specially  cited  as  agrarian  laws,
it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  possessors  of
public  lands  owed  a  yearly  tenth,  or  fifth,  as  the
case  might  be,  to  the  state.  These  annual  pay-
ments were,  it  seems,  often  withheld  by  the  pos-
sessors, and  thus  the  state  was  deprived  of  a  fund
for  the  expenses  of  war  and  other,general  purposes.

The  first  mention  by  Livy  of  conquered  land
being  distributed  among  the  plebs  belongs  to  the
reign  of  Serviu%,Tullius  (146, 47).  The  object  of  the
agrarian  law  of  Sp.  Cassius  (Li v.  ii.  41;  Dionys.
viii.  70),  B.  c.  484,  is  supposed  by  Niebuhr  to  have
been  "  that  the  portion  of  the  populus  in  the  public
lands  should  be  set  apart,  that  the  rest  should  be
divided  among  the  plebeians,  that  the  tithe  should
again  be  levied  and  applied  to  paying  the  army."
The  agrarian  law  of  C.  Licinius  Stolo  (Liv.  vi.  36  ;


AGRARUE  LEGES.
Appian,  B.  C.  i.  8)  b.  c.  365,  limited  each  indi-
vidual's possession  of  public  land  to  500  jugera,
and  imposed  some  other  restrictions  ;  but  the  pos-
sessor had  no  better  title  to  the  500  jugera  which
the  law  left  him,  than  he  fonnerly  had  to  what
the  law  took  from  him.  [Leges  Liciniae.]
The  surplus  land  was  to  be  divided  among  the
plebeians,  as  we  may  assmne  from  this  being  an
agrarian  law.  The  Licinian  law  not  effecting  its
object,  Tib.  Sempronius  Gracchus,  B.  c.  133,  re-
vived the  measure  for  limiting  the  possession  of
public  land  to  500  jugera.  The  arguments  of  the
possessors  against  this  measure,  as  they  are  stated
by  Appian  {D.  C.  i.  10),  are  such  as  might  reason-
ably be  urged  ;  but  he  adds  that  Gracchus  pro-
posed to  give  to  each  possessor,  by  way  of  com-
pensation for  improvements  made  on  the  public
land,  the  full  ownership  of  500  jugera,  and  half
that  quantity  to  each  of  his  sons  if  he  had  any.
Under  the  law  of  Tiberius  Gracchus  three  commis-
sioners (triumviri)  were  to  be  chosen  annually  by
the  thirty-five  tribes,  who  were  to  decide  all  ques-
tions that  might  arise  as  to  the  claims  of  the  state
upon  lands  in  the  occupation  of  possessors.  The
law  provided  that  the  land  which  was  to  be  re-
sumed should  be  distributed  in  small  allotments
among  the  poorer  citizens,  and  they  were  not  to
have  the  power  of  alienating  their  allotments.
Gracchus  also  proposed  that  the  ready  money
which  Attains  III.,  King  of  Pergamus,  had
with  all  liis  other  property  bequeathed  to  the
Roman  state,  should  be  divided  among  the  persons
Avho  received  allotments,  in  order  to  enable  them
to  stock  their  land.  Tiberius  Gracchus  lost  his
life  in  a  riot  b.  c.  133  ;  but  the  senate  allowed
the  commissioners  to  continue  their  labours.  After
the  death  of  Tiberius  Gracchus,  a  tragical  event
happened  at  Rome.  P.  Cornelius  Scipio,  who  had
maintained  the  cause  of  the  possessors,  both  Roman
and  Italian,  against  the  measure  of  Gracchus,  was
found  dead  in  his  bed.  Suspicion  was  strong  against
the  party  of  Caius  Gracchus,  the  younger  brother
of  Tiberius,  whose  sister  Serapronia  was  tlie  wife  of
Scipio,  but  no  inquiry  was  m.ade  into  the  cause
of  Scipio's  death.  Caius  Gracchus  became  a  tri-
bmie  of  the  plebs,  B.  c.  123,  and  he  put  the  law  of
his  brother  again  in  force,  for  it  had  virtually  been
suspended  by  the  senate,  B.  c.  129,  by  their  with-
drawing the  powers  from  the  three  commissioners,
of  whom  Gracchus  was  one,  and  giving  them  to  the
consul,  C.  Sempronius  Tuditanus,  who,  being  en-
gaged in  the  Illyrian  war,  could  not  attend  to  the
business.  Caius  Gracchus  proposed  the  establish-
ment of  various  colonics  under  the  pi-ovisions  of
the  law.  To  check  his  power,  the  senate  called
in  the  aid  of  another  tribune,  M.  Livius  Drusus,
who  outbid  Caius  in  his  popular  measures.  The
law  of  Gracchus  proposed  that  those  who  received
allotments  of  land  should  pay  tlie  state  a  small
sum  in  respect  of  each.  Drusus  released  them  from
this  payment.  Caius  proposed  to  found  two  colo-
nies :  Drusus  proposed  to  found  twelve,  each  con-
sisting of  three  thousand  men.  Caius  Gracchus
lost  his  life  in  a  civil  commotion  b.  c.  121.  Shortly
after  his  death,  that  clause  of  the  Sempronian  law
which  forbade  the  alienation  of  the  allotments,
was  repealed  ;  and  they  forthwith  began  to  fall
into  the  hands  of  the  rich  by  purchase,  or  by
alleged  purchases  as  Appian  obscurely  states  {B.  C.
i.  27).  A  tribune,  Spurius  Borius  (Borius  is  the
name  in  the  MSS.  of  Appian),  carried  a  law  to


AGRARIAE  LEGES.  41

prevent  future  divisions  of  the  public  land,  with  a
provision  that  the  sums  payable  in  respect  of  this
land  to  the  state,  should  be  fonued  into  a  fund  for
the  relief  of  the  poor.  But  another  tribune,  Spu-
rius Thorius,  B.  c.  Ill,  repealed  this  law  as  to  the
tax  from  the  public  lands,  and  thus  the  plebs  lost
everything  for  the  future,  both  lands  and  poors'
money.     [Lex  Thoria.]

Other  agrarian  laws  followed.  In  the  sixth  con-
sulship of  Marius,  B.  c.  100,  agrarian  laAvs  were
carried  by  the  tribune  L.  Appuleius  Satuminus
and  his  party,  the  object  of  which  was  chiefly  to
provide  for  the  veteran  soldiers  of  Marius.  These
measm-es  were  carried  by  violence,  but  they  were
subsequently  declared  null.  The  tribune,  M.
Livius  Drusus  the  younger,  B.  c.  91,  proposed  the
division  of  all  the  public  land  in  Italy  and  the
establishment  of  the  colonies  which  had  been  pro-
jected :  he  was  for  giving  away  everything  that
the  state  had  (Florus,  iii.  16).  This  Drusus  was
also  a  tool  of  the  senate,  whose  object  was  to
humble  the  equestrian  order  by  means  of  the  plebs
and  the  Italian  Socii.  But  the  Socii  were  also  in-
terested in  opposing  the  measures  of  Drusus,  as
they  possessed  Large  parts  of  the  public  land  in
Italy.  To  gain  their  consent,  Drusus  promised  to
give  them  the  full  Roman  citizenship.  But  he
and  the  senate  could  not  agree  on  all  these  mea-
sures, Drusus  was  murdered,  and  the  Socii,  seeing
their  hopes  of  the  citizenship  balked,  broke  out  in
open  war  (b.  c.  90).  The  measures  of  Drusus
were  declared  null,  and  there  was  no  investigation
as  to  his  death.  The  Social  or  Marsic  war,  after
threatening  Rome  with  ruin,  was  ended  by  the
Romans  conceding  what  the  allies  demanded.
[Lex  Julia.]

The  land  to  which  all  the  agrarian  laws,  prior
to  the  Thoria  Lex,  applied,  was  the  public  land
in  Italy,  south  of  the  Macra  and  the  Rubico,  the
southern  boundaries  of  Gallia  Cisalpina  on  tlie  west
and  east  coasts  respectively.  The  Thoria  Lex
applied  to  all  the  public  land  within  these  limits,
except  what  had  been  disposed  of  by  assignation
prior  to  the  year  B.  c.  133,  in  which  Tiberius
Gracchus  was  tribune,  and  except  the  Ager  Cam-
panus.  It  ap])lied  also  to  public  land  in  the  pro-
vince of  Africa,  and  in  the  territory  of  Corinth.
[Thoria  Lex.]  The  object  of  the  agrarian  law
of  P.  Servilius  RuUus,  proposed  in  the  consul-
ship of  Cicero  B.  c.  63,  was  to  sell  all  the  public
land  both  in  and  out  of  Italy,  and  to  buy  lands  in
Italy  on  which  the  poor  were  to  be  settled.  Ten
commissioners,  with  extraordinary  powers,  were  to
carry  the  law  into  effect,  and  a  host  of  surveyors,
clerks,  and  other  officers,  were  to  find  employment
in  this  agrarian  job.  The  job  Avas  defeated  by
Cicero,  whose  three  extant  orations  against  RuUus
contain  most  instructive  matter  on  the  condition
of  the  Roman  state  at  that  time.  The  tribune
Flavins,  B.C.  60,  at  the  instigation  of  Cn.  Pompeius,
brought  forward  a  measure  for  providing  the  sol-
diers of  Pompeius  with  lands.  Cicero  was  not  al-
together opposed  to  this  measure,  for  he  wished  to
please  Pompeius.  One  clause  of  the  law  provided
that  lands  should  be  bought  for  distribution  with
the  money  that  should  arise  in  the  next  five  years
from  the  new  revenues  that  had  been  created  by
the  Asiatic  conquests  of  Pompeius.  The  law  was
dropped,  but  it  was  reproduced  in  a  somewhat
altered  shape  by  C.  Julius  Caesar  in  his  consul-
ship, B.  c.  5d,  and  it  included  the  Stellatis  Ager


42


AGRARIAE  LEGES.


AGRARIAE  LEGES.


and  the  Campanus  Ager,  which  all  previous  agra-
rian laws  had  left  untouched.  The  fertile  tract  of
Capua  (Campanus  Ager)  was  distributed  among
20,000  persons,  who  had  the  qualification  that  the
law  required,  of  three  or  more  children.  After
this  distribution  of  the  Campanian  land,  and  the
abolition  of  the  port  duties  and  tolls  {poiiot-ia)^
Cicero  observes  {ad  Att.W.  16),  "there  was  no
revenue  to  be  raised  from  Italy,  except  the  five
per  cent,  (vicesima)  "  from  the  sale  and  manu-
mission of  slaves.

The  lands  which  the  Roman  people  had  acquired
in  the  Italian  peninsula  by  conquest  were  greatly
reduced  in  amount  by  the  laws  of  Gracchus  and  by
sale.  Confiscations  in  the  civil  wars,  and  conquests
abroad,  were,  indeed,  continually  increasing  the
public  lands  ;  but  these  lands  were  allotted  to  the
soldiers  and  the  numerous  colonists  to  whom  the
state  was  continually  giving  lands.  The  system  of
colonisation  which  prevailed  during  the  republic,
was  continued  under  the  emperors,  and  considerable
tracts  of  Italian  land  were  disposed  of  in  this  man-
ner by  Augustus  and  his  successors.  Vespasian  as-
signed lands  in  Samnium  to  his  soldiers,  and  grants
of  Italian  lands  are  mentioned  by  subsequent  em-
perors, though  we  may  infer  that  at  the  close  of
the  second  century  of  our  aera,  there  was  little
public  land  left  in  the  peninsula.  Vespasian  sold
part  of  the  public  lands  called  sulseciva.  Domitian
gave  the  remainder  of  such  lands  all  through  Italy
to  the  possessors  (Aggenus).  The  conquests  be
yond  the  limits  of  Italy  furnished  the  emperors
with  the  means  of  rewarding  the  veterans  by  grants
of  land,  and  in  this  way  the  institutions  of  Rome
were  planted  on  a  foreign  soil.  But,  according  to
Gains,  propertj^  in  the  land  was  not  acquired  by
such  grant  ;  the  ownership  was  stiU  in  the  state,
and  the  provincial  landholder  had  only  the  pos-
sessio.  If  this  be  true,  as  against  the  Roman
people  or  the  Caesar,  his  interest  in  the  land  was
one  that  might  be  resumed  at  any  time,  according
to  the  strict  rules  of  law,  though  it  is  easily  con-
ceived that  such  foreign  possessions  would  daily
acquire  strength,  and  could  not  safely  be  dealt
with  as  possessions  had  been  in  Italy  by  the
various  agrarian  laws  which  had  convulsed  the
Roman  state.  This  assertion  of  the  right  of  the
populus  Romanus  and  of  the  emperors,  might
be  no  wrong  '*  inflicted  on  provincial  landowners
by  the  Roman  jurispnidence,"*  as  Niebuhr  affirms.
The  tax  paid  by  the  holders  of  ager  privatus  in
the  provinces  was  the  only  thing  v/hich  dis-
tinguished the  beneficial  interest  in  such  land  from
Italic  land,  and  might  be,  in  legal  effect,  a  recog-
nition of  the  ownership  according  to  Roman  law.
And  this  was  Savigny's  earlier  opinion  with  re-
spect to  the  tax  paid  by  provincial  lands  ;  he  con-
sidered such  tax  due  to  the  Roman  people  as  the
sovereign  or  ultimate  owner  of  the  lands.  His
later  opinion,  as  expressed  in  the  Zeitschrift  fur


*  Niebuhr  observes  that  Frontinus  speaks  of
the  "  arva  puilica  in  the  provinces,  in  contradis-
tinction to  the  agri  privati  there  ; "  but  this  he
certainly  does  not.  This  contradistinction  is  made
by  his  commentator  Aggenus  who,  as  he  himself
Siiys,  only  conjectures  the  meaning  of  Frontinus  ;
and,  perhaps,  he  has  not  discovered  it.  {Rei  Agr.
Script,  pp.  38.  46,  47.)  Savigny's  explanation  of
this  passage  is  contained  in  the  Zeitschrift  fur
Gesch.  Rechtsw.  vol.  xi.  p.  24.


Geschiektlicke  Reehtsivissenscluift  (vol.  v.  p.  254),  is,
that  under  the  Caesars  a  uniform  system  of  direct
taxation  was  established  in  the  provinces,  to  which
all  provincial  land  was  subject ;  but  land  in  Italy
was  free  from  this  tax,  and  a  provincial  town  could
only  acquire  the  like  freedom  by  receiving  the
privilege  expressed  by  the  term  Jus  Italicum.  The
complete  solution  of  the  question  here  under  dis-
cussion could  only  be  effected  by  ascertaining  the
origin  and  real  nature  of  this  provincial  land-tax  ;
and  as  it  may  be  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to
ascertam  such  facts,  we  must  endeavoiu:  to  give
a  probable  solution.  Now  it  is  consistent  with
Roman  notions  that  all  conquered  land  should  be
considered  as  the  property  of  the  Roman  state  ;
and  it  is  certain  that  such  land,  though  assigned
to  individuals,  did  not  by  that  circumstance  alone
become  invested  with  all  the  characters  of  that
Roman  land  which  was  private  property.  It  had  not
the  privilege  of  the  Jus  Italicum,  and  consequently
could  not  be  the  object  of  Quiritarian  ownership,
with  its  incidents  of  mancipatio.  Sac.  All  land  in
the  provinces,  including  even  that  of  the  liberae
civitates,  and  the  ager  publicus  properly  so  called,
could  only  become  an  object  of  Quiritai'ian  owner-
ship by  having  conferred  upon  it  the  privilege  of
Italic  land,  by  which  it  was  also  released  from  the
paj'ment  of  the  tax.  It  is  clear  that  there  might
be  and  was  ager  privatus,  or  private  property,  in
provincial  land  ;  but  this  land  had  not  the
privileges  of  Italic  land,  unless  such  privilege  was
expressly  given  to  it,  and  accordingly  it  paid  a  tax.
As  the  notions  of  landed  property  in  all  countries
seem  to  suppose  a  complete  ownership  residing  in
some  person,  and  as  the  provincial  landowner,
whose  lands  had  not  the  privilege  of  the  Jus
Italicum,  had  not  that  kind  of  ownership  which,
according  to  the  notions  of  Roman  law,  was  com-
plete ownership,  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  that  the
ultimate  ownership  of  provincial  lands  (with  the
exception  of  those  of  the  liberae  civitates)  coidd
reside  any  where  else  than  in  the  populus  Romanus,
and,  after  the  establishment  of  the  imperial  power,
in  the  populus  Romanus  or  the  Caesar.  This
question  is,  however,  one  of  some  difficulty,  and
well  deserves  further  examination.  It  may  be
doubted,  however,  if  Gains  means  to  say  that
there  could  be  no  Quiritarian  ownership  of  private
land  in  the  provinces  ;  at  least  this  would  not  be
the  case  in  those  districts  to  which  the  Jus  Italicum
was  extended.  The  case  of  the  Recentoric  lands,
which  is  quoted  by  Niebuhr  (Cic.  c.  Rullum,  i.  4),
may  be  explained.  The  land  here  spoken  of  was
land  in  Sicily.  One  object  of  the  measure  of
Rullus  was  to  exact  certain  extraordmary  pay-
ments {vectigal)  from  the  public  lands,  that  is,
from  the  possessors  of  them  ;  but  he  excepted  the
Recentoric  lands  from  the  operation  of  his  measure.
If  this  is  private  land,  Cicero  argues,  the  exception
is  unnecessary.  The  argument,  of  coiu'se,  assumes
that  there  was  or  might  be  private  land  in  Sicily  ;
that  is,  there  was  or  might  be  land  which  would
not  be  affected  by  this  part  of  the  measure  of
Rullus.  Now  the  opposition  of  public  and  private
land  in  this  passage  certainly  proves,  what  can
easily  be  proved  without  it,  that  individuals  in  the
provinces  owned  land  as  individuals  did  in  Italy  ;
and  such  land  might  with  propriety  be  called
privatus,  as  contrasted  with  that  called  publicus  in
the  provinces :  in  fact,  it  would  not  be  easy  to
have  found  another  name  for  it.     But  we  know


AGRARIAK  LEGES.

that  ager  privatus  in  the  provinces,  unless  it  had
received  the  Jus  lUilioura,  was  not  the  same  thing
as  ager  privatus  in  Ital}-,  though  both  were  private
property.  Such  a  passage  then  as  that  just  re-
ferred to  in  Cicero,  leads  to  no  nccessarj^  conclusion
that  the  ultimate  ownership  or  dominion  of  this
private  land  was  not  in  the  Roman  people.

It  only  remains  briefly  to  notice  the  condition  of
the  public  land  with  respect  to  the  fructus,  or  vcc-
tigal  which  belonged  to  the  state.  This,  as  al-
ready observed,  was  generally  a  tenth,  and  hence
the  ager  publicus  was  sometimes  called  decumanus  ;
it  was  also  sometimes  called  ager  vectigalis.  The
tithes  were  generally  farmed  by  the  publicani,  who
paid  their  rent  mostly  in  money,  but  sometimes  in
grain.  The  letting  was  managed  by  the  censors,
and  the  lease  was  for  five  years.  The  form,  how-
ever, of  leasing  the  tenths  was  that  of  a  sale,
mandpatio.  In  course  of  time  the  word  locatio
was  applied  to  these  leases.  The  phrase  used  by
the  Roman  writers  was  originally  fructus  locatio,
which  was  the  proper  expression  ;  but  we  find  the
phrase,  agrum  fruendum  locare,  also  used  in  the
same  sense,  an  expression  which  might  appear
somewhat  ambiguous  ;  and  even  agrum  locare,
which  might  mean  the  leasing  of  the  public  lands,
and  not  of  the  tenths  due  from  the  possessors  of
them.  Strabo  (p.  622),  when  speaking  of  the  port
duties  of  Cume  in  Aeolis,  says  they  Avere  sold,  by
which  he  no  doubt  means  that  they  were  farmed
on  certain  terms.  It  is,  however,  made  clear  by
Niebuhr,  that  in  some  instances  at  least  the  phrase
agrum  locare,  does  mean  the  leasing  of  the  tenths ;
whether  this  was  always  the  meaning  of  the
phrase,  it  is  not  possible  to  affirm.

Though  the  term  ager  vectigalis  originally  ex-
pressed the  public  land,  of  which  the  tithe  was
leased,  it  afterwards  came  to  signify  lands  which
were  leased  by  the  state,  or  by  different  corpora-
tions. This  latter  description  would  comprehend
even  the  ager  publicus  ;  but  this  kind  of  public
property  was  gradually  reduced  to  a  small  amount,
and  we  find  the  term  ager  vectigalis,  in  the  later
period,  applied  to  the  lands  of  towns  which  were
so  leased  that  the  lessee,  or  those  who  derived  their
tithe  from  him,  could  not  be  ejected  so  long  as  they
paid  the  vectigal.  This  is  the  ager  vectigalis  of
the  Digest  (vi.  tit.  3),  on  the  model  of  which  was
formed  the  emphyteusis,  or  ager  emphyteuticarius.
[Emphyteusis.]  The  rights  of  the  lessee  of  the
ager  vectigalis  were  different  from  those  of  a  pos-
sessor of  the  old  ager  publicus,  though  the  ager
vectigalis  was  derived  from,  and  was  only  a  new
form  of  the  ager  publicus.  Though  he  had  only  a
Jus  in  re,  and  though  he  is  distinguished  from  the
owner  (dominus),  yet  he  was  considered  as  having
the  possession  of  the  land.  He  had,  also,  a  right
of  action  against  the  town,  if  he  was  ejected  from
his  land,  provided  he  had  always  paid  his  vectigal.

The  nature  of  these  agrarian  laws,  of  which  the
first  was  the  proposed  law  of  Spurius  Cassius,  and
the  last,  the  law  of  C.  Julius  Caesar,  b.  c.  59,  is
easily  understood.  The  plebs  began  by  claiming
a  share  in  those  conquered  lands  of  which  the
patricians  claimed  the  exclusive  enjoyment,  sub-
ject to  a  fixed  paj-ment  to  the  state.  It  was  one
object  of  the  Rogations  of  Licinius  to  check  the
power  of  the  nobles,  and  to  limit  their  wealth  ;
and  as  they  had  at  that  time  little  landed  property,
this  end  would  be  accomplished  by  limiting  their
enjoyment  of  the  public  land.     But  a  more  ira-


AGRARIAE  LEGES.


43


portant  object  was  to  provide  for  the  poorer  citizens.
In  a  country  where  there  is  little  trade,  and  no
manufacturing  industry,  the  land  is  the  only  source
to  which  the  poorer  classes  can  look  for  subsist-
ence. Accordingly,  at  Rome  there  was  a  continual
demand  for  allotments,  and  these  allotments  Avere
made  from  time  to  time.  These  allotments  were
just  large  enough  to  maintain  a  man  and  his
family,  and  the  encouragement  of  population  was
one  of  the  objects  contemplated  by  these  grants
of  land.  (Liv.  v.  30.)  Rome  required  a  constant
supply  of  soldiers,  and  the  system  was  well
adapted  to  give  the  suppl3^  But  this  system  of
small  holdii)gs  did  not  produce  all  the  results  that
were  anticipated.  Poverty  and  mismanagement
often  compelled  the  small  owners  to  sell  their
lands  to  their  richer  neighbours,  and  one  clause  of
the  law  of  Tib.  Gracchus  forbade  persons  selling
their  allotments.  This  clause  was  afterwards
repealed,  not,  as  some  would  suppose,  to  favour  the
rich,  but  simply  because  the  repeal  of  so  absurd
an  enactment  would  be  beneficial  to  all  parties.
In  the  later  republic  agrarian  laws  were  con-
sidered as  one  means  of  drahiing  the  city  of  the
scum  of  the  population,  which  is  only  another
proof  of  the  impolicy  of  these  measures,  for  the
worthless  populace  of  a  large  city  will  never
make  a  good  agricultural  population.  (Cic.  ad
Alt.  i.  19.)  They  were  also  used  as  means
of  settling  veteran  soldiers,  who  nmst  either  be
maintained  as  soldiers,  or  provided  for  in  some
vfSij.  Probably  from  about  the  close  of  the
second  Punic  war,  when  the  Romans  had  large
standing  armies,  it  became  the  practice  to  pro-
vide for  those  who  had  sensed  their  period  by
giving  them  a  grant  of  land  (Liv.  xxxi.  4)  ;  and
this  practice  became  common  under  the  later
republic  and  the  empire.  The  Roman  soldier  al-
ways looked  forward  to  a  release  from  service  after
a  certain  time,  but  it  was  not  possible  to  send
him  away  empty-handed.  At  the  present  day
none  of  the  powers  of  Europe  which  maintain  very
large  armies  could  safely  disband  them,  for  they
could  not  provide  for  the  soldiers,  and  the  soldiers
would  certainly  provide  for  themselves  at  the  ex-
pense of  others.  Jt  was  perhaps  not  so  much  a  sys-
tem of  policy  with  the  Romans  as  necessity,  which
led  them  from  time  to  time  to  grant  lands  in  small
allotments  to  the  various  classes  of  citizens  who
have  been  enumerated.

The  effects  of  this  system  must  be  considered
from  several  points  of  view — as  a  means  of  silenc-
ing the  clamours  of  the  poor,  and  one  of  the  modes
of  relieving  their  poverty,  under  which  aspect
they  may  be  classed  with  the  Leges  Frumentariae  ;
of  diffusing  Roman  settlers  over  Italj',  and  thus
extending  the  Roman  power  ;  as  a  means  of  pro-
viding for  soldiers  ;  and  as  one  of  the  ways  in
which  popular  leaders  sought  to  extend  their  in-
fluence. The  effects  on  agriculture  could  hardly
be  beneficial,  if  we  consider  that  the  fact  of  the
settlers  often  wanting  capital  is  admitted  by  an-
cient authorities,  that  they  were  liable  to  be  called
from  their  lands  for  military  service,  and  that
persons  to  whom  the  land  was  given  were  often
unacquainted  with  agriculture,  and  unaccustomed
to  field  labour.  The  evil  that  appears  in  course
of  time  in  all  states  is  the  poverty  of  a  large  number
of  the  people,  for  which  different  countries  attempt
to  provide  different  remedies.  The  Roman  system
of  giving  land  failed  to  remedy  thia  evil  j  but  it


44


AGRICULTURA.


was  a  system  that  developed  itself  of  necessity  in
a  state  constituted  like  Rome.

Those  who  may  choose  to  investigate  the  sub-
ject of  the  agrarian  laws,  will  find  the  following
references  sufficient  for  the  purpose  :  —  Liv.  i.  46,
47  ;  il  41,  42,  43,  44,  48,  52,  61,  63,  iii.  1,  9,
iv.  12,  36,  43,  44,  47,  48,  49,  51,  52,  58,  v.  24.
30,  vi.  5,  6,  16,  21,  35,  vii.  16,  x.  13,  47,  xxxiil
42,  xxxiv.  40  ;  Dionys.  ii.  15,  viii.  70,  &c.,  ix.
51,  &c.,  X.  36  ;  Plut.  Camillus,  c.  39,  2\  Grac-
chus^ C.  Gracchus ;  Appian,  B.  C.  i.  7,  &c  ;  Cic.
c.  liullum;  ad  Ait.  i.  19,  ii.  16  ;  Dion  Cass.
XXX viii.  1,  &c.  xlv.  9,  &c.  xlvii.  14,  xlviii.  2  ;  Veil.
Pat.  ii.  2,  6,  44  ;  Floras,  iii.  13,  &ic. ;  Zeitschri/t  fur
Geschichtliche  Rechtswissenscha/t,  Das  Ackergesetz
von  Spurius  Thorius,  vol.  x.  by  Rudorff;  Niebuhr,
Roman  Ilistort/,  vol.  ii.  p.  129,  &c.  ;  Savignj-,
DasRechtdes  liesitzes,  5th  ed. ;  Classical  Museum,
Parts  V.  VI.  VII.,  articles  by  the  author  of  this
article,  and  an  article  by  Professor  Puchta,  of
Berlin  ;  Political  Dictionary,  art.  Agrarian  Law,
by  the  author  of  this  article.  [G.  L.]

AGRAU'LIA  {aypavXia)  was  a  festival  cele-
brated by  the  Athenians  in  honour  of  Agraulos,
the  daughter  of  Cecrops.  {Diet,  of  Bioyr.  s.  v.)
We  possess  no  particulars  respecting  the  time  or
mode  of  its  celebration  ;  but  it  was,  perhaps,  con-
nected with  the  solemn  oath,  which  all  Athenians,
when  they  an-ived  at  manhood  {€(pT\Soi),  were
obliged  to  take  in  the  temple  of  xYgraulos,  that  they
Avould  fight  for  their  countr}-,  and  always  observe
its  laws.  (Lycurg.  c.  Leocr.  p.  189  ;  Dem.  de  Legal.
p.  438  ;  Plut.  Aklh.  15  ;  Stobaeus,  Serm.  xli.  141  ;
Schomann,  DeComitlis,  p.  332  ;  Wachsmuth, //c/-
len.  Alterih.  vol.  i.  p.  476,  2nd  ed.)

Agraulos  was  also  honoured  with  a  festival  in
Cyprus,  iu  the  month  Aphrodisius,  at  which  human
victims  were  offered.  (Porphyr.  De  Abstin.  ab
Anini.  i.  2.)

AGRICULTU'RA,  agriculture.

Authorities.  —  When  we  remember  that  agricul-
ture, in  the  most  extended  acceptation  of  the  teiTn,
was  for  many  centuries  the  chief,  we  may  say,  almost
the  sole  peaceful  occupation  followed  by  any  large
portion  of  the  free  population  in  those  European
nations  which  first  became  highlycivilised,  we  shall
not  be  surprised  to  find  that  the  contemporaries  of
Cicero  were  able  to  enumerate  upwards  of  fifty
Greek  writers  who  had  contributed  to  this  science.
But  although  the  Homeric  poems  are  filled  with  a
series  of  the  most  charming  pictures  derived  from
the  business  of  a  comitry  life,  although  liesiod
supplies  abundance  of  wise  saws  and  pithy  apho-
risms, the  traditional  wisdom  accumulated  during
many  successive  generations,  although  Xenophon
has  bequeathed  to  us  a  most  graceful  essay  on  the
moral  beauty  of  rustic  pursuits  interspersed  with
not  a  few  instructive  details,  and  although  much
that  belongs  to  the  Natural  History  of  the  subject
will  be  found  treasured  up  in  the  vast  storehouses
of  Aristotle  and  Theophrastus,  yet  nothing  which
can  be  regarded  in  the  light  of  a  fonnal  treatise
upon  the  art  as  exhibited  in  the  pastures  and  corn-
fields of  Hellas,  has  descended  to  us,  except  a
volume,  divided  into  twenty  books,  commonly
known  as  the  Geoponica  {r^wiroviKd),  whose  his-
tor}^  is  somewhat  obscure,  but  which,  according  to
the  account  commonly  received,  was  drawn  up  at
the  desire  of  Constantine  VI.  (a.  d,  780 — 802)
by  a  certain  Cassianus  Bassus,  and  consists  of  ex-
tiacts  from  nimierous  writers,  chiefly  Greek,  many


AGRICULTURA.

of  whom  flourished  m  the  second,  third,  and  fourth
centuries.  This  collection  is  systematically  ar-
ranged and  comprehends  all  the  chief  branches  ;
but  it  has  never  been  considered  of  much  \alue,
except  in  so  far  as  it  tends  to  confirm  or  illustrate
the  statements  found  elsewhere.  The  information
conveyed  by  it  is,  upon  many  points,  extremely
meagre,  the  materials  were  worked  up  at  a  late  period
by  an  editor  with  whose  history  and  qualifications
for  his  task  Ave  are  altogether  unacquainted,  while
the  most  important  quotations  are  taken  from  authors
of  whom  we  know  little  or  nothing,  so  that  we  can-
not tell  whether  their  precepts  apply  to  the  same
or  to  different  climates,  whether  they  give  us  the
fruit  of  their  own  experience,  or,  as  we  have  great
reason  to  suspect  in  many  instances,  were  them-
selves mere  compilers.

The  Romans,  dm'ing  the  brightest  periods  of
their  history,  were  devotedly  attached  to  the  only
lucrative  profession  m  which  any  citizen  could
embark  with  honour,  and  from  the  first  dawn  until
the  decline  of  their  literature,  raral  economy
formed  a  favourite  theme  for  composition  both  in
prose  and  verse.  The  Avorks  of  the  Sasernae,
fatlier  and  son,  those  of  Scrota  Tremellius,  of
Julius  Hyginus,  of  Cornelius  Celsus,  of  Julius
Atticus,  and  of  Julius  Graecinus  have  perished  ;
but  Ave  still  possess,  in  addition  to  Virgil,  four
"  Scriptores  de  Re  llustica,"  two,  at  least,  of  whom
Avere  practical  men.  We  have,  in  the  first  place,
162  chapters  from  the  pen  of  the  elder  Cato
(b.  c.  234 — 1 49),  a  strange  medley,  containing
many  A-aluable  hints  for  the  management  of  the
farm,  the  olive  garden,  and  the  vineyard,  thrown
together  Avithout  order  or  method,  and  mixed  i:p
with  medical  prescriptions,  charms  for  dislocated
and  broken  bones,  culinary  receipts,  and  sacred
litanies,  the  Avhole  fonning  a  remarkable  compound
of  simplicity  and  shrcAvdness,  quaint  Avisdom  and
blind  superstition,  bearing,  moreover,  a  strong  im-
press of  the  national  character;  in  the  second
place,  Ave  have  the  three  books  of  Varro  (b,  c.  1 1 6
— 28),  draAATi  up  at  the  age  of  eighty,  by  one  who
Avas  not  only  the  most  profound  scholar  of  his  age,
but  likewise  a  soldier,  a  politician,  an  enthusiastic
and  successful  farmer  ;  in  the  third  place,  the
thirteen  books  of  Columella  (a.  d.  40  [?]),  more
minute  than  the  preceding,  especially  in  all  that
relates  to  the  vine,  the  olive,  gardening,  and  fruit
trees,  but  evidently  proceeding  from  one  much  less
familiar  Avith  his  subject ;  and,  lastly,  the  fourteen
books  of  Palladius  (a  Avriter  of  uncertain  date  Avho
closely  copies  Columella),  of  Avhich  twelve  form  a
Farmer's  calendar,  the  different  operations  being
ranged  according  to  the  months  in  Avhich  they
ought  to  be  pertbmied.  Besides  the  aboA-e,  a
whole  book  of  Pliny  and  many  detached  chapters
are  devoted  to  matters  connected  with  the  labours
of  the  husbandman  ;  but  in  this,  as  in  the  other
portions  of  that  remarkable  encyclopaedia,  the
assertions  must  be  received  with  caution,  since  they
cannot  be  regarded  as  exhibiting  the  results  of
original  investigjition,  nor  even  a  very  correct  repre-
sentation of  the  opinions  of  others.

We  ought  not  here  to  pass  over  unnoticed  the
great  work  of  Mago  the  Carthaginian,  who,  as  a
native  of  one  of  the  most  fertile  and  carefully  cul-
tivated districts  of  the  ancient  Avorld,  must  have
had  ample  opportunities  for  acquiring  knoAvledge.
This  production,  extending  to  twenty-eight  books,
had  attained  such  high  fame  that,  after  the  de-


AGRICULTURA.

fstructkm  of  Carthage,  it  was  translated  into  I^atin
by  orders  of  the  senate  ;  a  Greek  version,  with  ad-
ditions and  probably  omissions,  was  executed  by
r>ionysius  of.  Utica,  and  published  in  twenty  books
during  the  century  before  the  commencement  of
our  era  ;  and  this,  again,  was  a  few  years  after-
wards condensed  into  six  books  by  Diophanes  of
Nicaea,  and  presented  to  King  Deiotarus.  In
what  follows,  Cato,  Varro,  and  Columella  will  he
our  chief  supports,  although  references  will  be  made
to  and  illustrations  drawn  from  the  other  sources
mdiaited  above.  (Varr.  R.  R.  i.  1  ;  Col.  R.  R.  i.  1  ;
I'lin,  H.  N.  xviii.  3  ;  Proleg.  ad  Geopon.  in  ed.
Niclas.)

Division  of  the  Stihject.
Rural  Economy  may  be  treated  of  under  two
distmct  heads  —

A.  Agriculture  proper  (Agricultura),  or  the  art
of  tilling  the  soil.

B.  The  management  of  stock  (Pastio).

A.    AGRICULTURA.

Agriciilture  proper  teaches  the  art  of  raising  the
various  crops  necessary  for  the  sustenance  and  com-
fort of  man  and  of  the  domestic  animals,  in  such  a
manner  that  the  productive  energies  of  the  soil
may  be  fully  developed  but  not  exhausted  nor
enfeebled,  and  teaches,  farther,  how  this  may  be
accomplished  with  the  least  possible  expenditure
of  capital.  The  crops  to  which  the  Greeks  and
Romans  chiefly  directed  their  attention  were  —
1.  Different  kinds  of  grain,  such  as  wheat  and
barley;  leguminous  vegetables  cultivated  for  their
seeds,  such  as  beans,  peas,  and  lupines  ;  herbs  cut
green  for  forage,  such  as  grass,  tares,  and  lucerne  ;
and  plants  which  furnished  the  raw  material  for
the  textile  fabrics,  such  as  hemp  and  flax.  2.  Fmit
trees,  especially  the  vine,  the  olive,  and  the  fig.
3.  Garden  stuffs.  —  For  the  second  of  these  divi-
sions we  refer  to  the  articles  Oletum  and  Vinea  ;
and  we  shall  not  touch  at  all  upon  gardening,  since
the  minute  details  connected  with  this  topic  are  of
little  or  no  service  in  illustrating  the  classics
generally.

Agriculture  in  its  restricted  sense  comprehends
a  knowledge

I.  Of  the  subject  of  our  operations,  that  is,  the
faxm(fu7idus,praedium),  which  mustbe  considered.
a.  with  reference  to  its  situation  and  soil  (qtio
Ihco  et  qmlis),  and  h.  with  reference  to  the  dwell-
ing-house and  steading  (villa  et  stabula).

II.  Of  the  instruments  {instrumenta)  required
to  perform  the  various  operations  {quae  in  fundo
opus  sint  ac  debeant  esse  cuUurae  causa)  ^  these  in-
struments being  twofold,  a.  men  {homines)  ;  and  b.
the  assistants  of  men  (adminicula  hominum)^  viz.
domestic  animals  (boves,  equi,  canes,  &c.)  together
with  tools  (instrumenta),  properly  so  called,  such
as  ploughs  find  haiTows.

III.  Of  the  operations  themselves,  such  as
ploughing,  harrowing,  and  sowing  (quae  in  fundo
colcndi  causa  sint  facienda),  and  of  the  time  when
they  are  to  be  performed  (quo  quidquid  tempore

fieri  conveniat).

IV.  Of  the  object  of  these  operations,  viz.  the
different  plants  considered  with  reference  to  their
species,  varieties,  and  habits.  Under  this  head  we
may  also  conveniently  include  what  is  termed  the
rotation  of  crops,  that  is,  the  order  in  which  they
ought  to  succeed  each  other  upon  the  same  groimd.


AGRICULTURA.
I.  a.    CoGNiTio  Fundi


45


(Knowledge  of  t'lc  Farm).  In  selecting  a  farm,
the  two  points  wliich  first  demanded  attention
were,  1.  The  healthiness  of  the  situation  (saLu-
britas),  a  matter  of  the  greatest  anxiety  in  Italy,
where  the  ravages  of  malaria  appear  to  have
been  not  less  fatal  in  ancient  than  they  have
proA^ed  in  modern  times  ;  and,  2.  The  general
fertility  of  the  soil.  It  was  essential  to  be  fiilly
satisfied  upon  both  of  these  particulars  ;  for  to
settle  in  a  pestilential  spot  was  to  gamble  with
the  lives  and  property  of  all  concerned  (non  aliud
est  atque  alea  domini  vitae  et  rei  familiaris),  and
no  man  in  his  senses  would  undertake  to  till
land  which  was  not  likely  to  yield  a  fair  return
for  his  outlay  of  money  and  labour  (fructus  pro
impensa  ac  labore).  The  next  object  of  solicitude
was  a  good  aspect.  The  property  was,  if  possible,
to  have  a  southerly  exposure,  to  be  sheltered  by  a
wooded  hill  from  the  sweep  of  boisterous  and  cut-
ting winds,  and  not  to  be  liable  to  sudden  mis-
fortunes (ne  calamitosum  siet),  such  as  inundations
or  violent  hail  storms.  It  was  highly  important
that  it  should  be  in  the  vicinity  of  a  populous  town
(a/jpidu7n  validum),  or  if  not,  that  it  should  be
readily  accessible  either  by  sea,  or  by  a  navigable
stream  (amnis  qua  naves  ambulant),  or  by  a  good
well  frequented  road  (via  bona  celebrisque)  ;  that
there  should  be  an  abundant  supply  of  water  (bo-
num  aquarium) ;  that  it  should  be  so  situated  that
the  proprietor,  if  he  did  not  live  upon  the  estate,
might  be  able  to  give  active  and  constant  personal
superintendence  ;  and,  finally,  that  it  should  bo
moderate  in  size,  so  that  every  portion  might  be
brought  into  full  cultivation  (laudato  ingentia  rura
—  Exiguuw.  colito).

These  preliminarj'-  matters  being  ascertained,
the  soil  might  be  considered  in  reference  a.  to
its  general  external  features  (forma),  fi.  to  its
internal  qualities  (quails  sit  terra).

a.  In  so  far  as  its  external  features  were  con-
cerned it  might  be  flat  (solum  campestre),  or  upland
rolling  ground  (collinum),  or  high  lying  (monta-
num),  or  might  comprise  within  its  limits  all
three,  which  was  most  desirable,  or  any  two  of
them.  These  variations  would  necessarily  exer-
cise important  influence  on  the  climate,  on  the
description  of  crops  which  might  be  cultivated
with  advantage,  and  on  the  time  chosen  for  per-
forming the  various  operations,  the  general  rule
being  that  as  we  ascend  the  temperature  falls,  that
corn  and  sown  crops  in  general  (segetes)  succeed
best  on  plains,  vineyards  (vineae)  on  genth;  slopes,
and  timber  trees  (silvae)  upon  elevated  sites,  and
that  the  different  labom-s  of  the  rustic  may  be
commenced  earlier  upon  low  than  upon  high
ground.  When  flat  it  was  better  that  it  should
incline  gently  and  unifonnly  in  one  direction
(aequabiliter  in  unam  partem  vergens)  than  be  a
dead  level  (ad  libellam  aequum),  for  in  the  latter
case  the  drainage  being  necessarily  imperfect,  it
would  have  a  tendency  to  becom(;  swampy ;  but
the  worst  form  was  when  there  were  converging
slopes,  for  there  the  water  collected  into  pools
(lacunas).

)8.  In  so  far  as  its  internal  qualities  were  con-
cerned, soil  might  be  classed  under  six  heads  form-
ing three  antagonistic  pairs. :  —

1.  The  deep  and  fat  (pingue),  2.  The  shallow
and  lean  (macrum,  jejunum) ^  3.  The  loose  (solu-


46  AGRICULTURA.

turn),  4.  The  dense  (spissum),  5.  The  wet  (humi-
thim,  aquosuTiif  vliginosum)^  6.  The  dry  (siccum)^
while  the  endless  gradations  and  combinations  of
which  the  elementary  qualities  were  susceptible
produced  all  the  existing  varieties.  These  are
named  sometimes  from  their  most  obvious  consti-
tuents, the  stony  (lapidosum)^  the  gravelly  {glareo-
aum),  the  sandy  {arenosum),  the  mortary  {sabulo-
s?im),  the  chalky  (cretosum),  the  clayey  {argiUo-
sum)  ;  sometimes  from  their  colour,  the  black
{nigrum)^  the  dark(jr>e<Z/«OT),  the  grey  (subalbum),
the  red  (rnhicundum)^  the  white  {album)  ;  some-
times from  their  consistencj',  the  crumbling  {putre^
friabile,  cineritium)^  as  opposed  to  the  tenacious
(densum^  crassum^  spissuin)  ;  sometimes  from  their
natural  products,  the  grassy  (graininosum,  lierbo-
sum),  the  weedy  {spurcum)  ;  sometimes  from  their
taste,  the  salt  (sahum)^  the  bitter  (amarum)  ;
rvhrica  seems  to  have  been  a  sort  of  red  chalky
clay,  but  what  the  epithets  rudccta  and  materina
applied  to  earth  {terra)  by  Cato  may  indicate,  it
is  hard  to  determine  (Cato  34  ;  comp.  Plin.  //.  A^.
xviii.  17).  The  great  object  of  the  cultivator  being
to  separate  the  particles  as  finely  as  possible  {neque
i-nim  aliud,  est  coJere  quarn  resolvere  et  fermentare
ierram),  high  value  was  attached  to  those  soils
which  were  not  only  rich,  but  naturally  pulveru-
lent. Hence  the  first  place  was  held  by  solum
pingtce  et  putre,  the  second  by  pinguiter  de?is2im,
while  the  worst  was  that  which  was  at  once  dry,
tenacious,  and  poor  {siccuni  pariter  et  densum  et
macrum).  The  ancients  were  in  the  habit  of  form-
ing an  estimate  of  untried  ground,  not  only  from
the  qualities  which  could  be  detected  by  sight  and
touch,  but  also  from  the  character  of  the  trees,
shrubs,  and  herbage  growing  upon  it  spontaneously,
a  test  of  more  practical  value  than  any  of  the
others  enimaerated  in  the  second  Georgic  (177 —
258.)

When  an  estate  was  purchased,  the  land  might
be  either  in  a  state  of  culture  {culta  novalia),  or  in
a  state  of  nature  {rudis  ager).

The  comparative  value  of  land  under  cultivation
(estimated  by  the  crops  which  it  was  capable  of
bearing,  is  fixed  by  Cato  (1),  according  to  the  fol.
lowing  descending  scale  :  —

1.  Vineyards  {vinea),  provided  they  j'ielded
good  wine  in  abundance.  2.  Garden  ground  well
supplied  with  water  {liortus  irriguus).  3.  Osier
beds  {salidum).  4.  Olive  plantations  {oleium).
•5.  Meadows  {prattim).  6.  Com  land  {campus
frumentarius).  7.  Groves  which  might  be  cut  for
timber  or  fire-wood  {silva  caedua).  8.  AHmstum.
This  name  was  given  to  fields  planted  with  trees
in  rcgiilar  rows.  Upon  these  vines  were  trained,
and  the  open  ground  cultivated  for  corn  or  legu-
minous crops  in  the  ordinary  manner,  an  arrange-
ment extensively  adopted  in  Campania,  and  many
other  parts  of  Italy  in  modem  times,  but  by  no
means  conducive  to  good  husbandry.  9.  Groves
yielding  acoms,  beech-mast,  and  chestnuts  {glan-
daria  silva).  The  fact  that  in  the  above  scale,  com
land  is  placed  below  meadows  may  perhaps  be  re-
garded as  an  indication  that,  even  in  the  time  of
Cato,  agriculture  was  upon  the  decline  among  the
Romans.

When  waste  land  was  to  be  reclaimed,  the  or-
dinary procedure  was  to  root  out  the  trees  and
bn'shwood  {/ruteta),  by  which  it  might  be  encum-
bered, to  remove  the  rocks  and  stones  which  would
impede  the  labours  of  men  and  oxen,  to  destroy  by


AGRICULTURA.

fire  or  otherwise  troublesome  weeds,  such  as  fenis
and  reeds  {filices,  junci),  to  drain  off  the  super-
lluous  moisture,  to  measure  out  the  ground  into
fields  of  a  convenient  size,  and  to  enclose  theso
with  suitable  fences.  The  three  last-mentioned
processes  alone  require  any  particular  notice,  and
we  therefore  subjoin  a  few  words  upon  Drains,
Land-Measures,  Fences.

Drains  {fossae,  sulci  alveati,  incilia)  were  of  two
kinds:  —

1.  Open  {patentes).     2.  Covered  {caecae).

1.  Fossae  patentes,  open  ditches,  alone  were
formed  in  dense  and  chalky  soil.  I'hey  were  wide
at  top,  and  gradually  narrowed  in  wedge  fashion
{imhricibus  supinis  similes)  as  they  descended.

2.  Fossae  caecae,  covered  drains,  or  sivers  as
they  are  termed  in  Scotland,  were  employed  where
the  soil  was  loose,  and  emptied  themselves  into  the
fossae  patentes.      They  were   usually   sunk  from

three  to  four  feet,  were  three  feet  wide  at  top  and
eighteen  inches  at  bottom  ;  one  half  of  the  depth
was  filled  up  with  small  stones  or  sharp  gravel
{nuda  glarea),  and  the  earth  which  had  been  dug
out,  was  thrown  in  above  imtil  the  surface  was
level.  Where  stones  or  gravel  could  not  readily
be  procured,  green  willow  poles  were  introduced,
crossing  each  other  in  all  directions  {qtioquoversus),
or  a  sort  of  rope  was  constructed  of  twigs  twisted
together  so  as  to  fit  exactly  into  the  bottom  of  the
drain  ;  above  this  the  leaves  of  some  of  the  pine
tribe  were  trodden  down,  and  the  whole  covered
up  with  earth.  To  prevent  the  apertures  being
choked  by  the  falling  down  of  the  soil,  the  moxiths
were  supported  by  two  stones  placed  upright,  and
one  across  {utilissimum  est ....  ova  eurum,  binis
utrimque  lapidibus  statuminari  et  alio  superintegi).
To  carry  off  the  surface-water  from  land  under
crop,  open  furrows  {sidci  aquarii,  elices)  were  left  at
intervals,  which  discharged  themselves  into  cross
furrows  {colliquiae)  at  the  extremities  of  the  fields,
and  these  again  poured  their  streams  into  the
ditches.  (Cat.  43.  155  ;  Col.  ii.  2.  8  ;  xi.  2  ;  Pallad.
vi.  3  ;  Plin.  //.  N.  xviii.  6.  19.  26;  Virg.  Georg.
i.113.)

Measures  of  Land. — The  measure  employed
for  land  in  Latium  was  the  jtegerum,  which  was
a  double  actus  quadratus,  the  actus  quadratus,  an-
ciently called  acna,  or  acnua,  or  ognua,  being  a
square,  whose  side  was  120  Roman  feet.  The
subdivisions  of  the  as  were  applied  to  the  jugerum,
the  lowest  in  use  being  the  scripidum,  a  square
whose  side  was  ten  feet.  200  jugera  formed  a
centuria^  a  term  which  is  said  to  have  arisen  from
the  allotments  of  land  made  by  Romulus  to  the
citizens,  for  these  being  at  the  rate  of  2  jugera
to  each  man,  200  jugera  would  be  assigned  to
every  hundred  men.  Lastly,  four  centuriae  made
a  saltus.     We  thus  have  the  following  table  :  —

1  scripulum  =  1 00  square  feet,  Roman  measure.
144  scripula     =  1  actus  =  14,400  square  feet.

2  actus  =  1  jugenim  =  28,800  square  feet.
200  jugera       =  I  centuria,

4  centuriae  =  1  saltus.

Now,  since  three  actus  quadrati  contained  4800
square  yards,  and  since  the  English  imperial  acre
contains  4840  square  j'ards,  and  since  the  Roman
foot  was  about  §  of  an  inch  less  than  the  im-
perial foot,  it  follows  that  the  Roman  juger  was
less  than  |  of  an  imperial  acre  by  about  500  square
yards.
.  In   Campania   the   measure   for  land  was  the


AGRICULTURA.

versus  qtiadratus,  a  square  whose  side  -was  100
feet,  the  words  actm  and  verms  marking  the  or-
dinarj'-  length  of  furrow  in  tlie  two  regions.  (Varr.
/?.  R.  i.  10,  L.  L.  iv.  4  ;  Col.  v.  1 ;  Plin.  H.  N.
xviii.  3.)

Fences  (sepes,  sepvnenta)  were  of  four  kinds  : —

1.  Sepiinentum  naturale^  the  quickset  hedge
(viva  sepes).

2.  Sepimentum  agreste^  a  wooden  paling  made
with  upright  stakes  (pali)  interlaced  with  brush-
wood {virgultis  implicatis),  or  having  two  or  more
cross-spars  (amites,  longuria)  passed  through  holes
drilled  in  the  stakes,  after  the  manner  of  what  are
now  termedyZafes  (palis  latis  perforatis  et  per  ea

foramina  trajectis  longuriis  fere  hinis  aut  temis).

3.  Sepimeiitum  militare,  consisting  of  a  ditch
(fosrn)  with  the  earth  dug  out  and  thrown  up  in-
side so  as  to  form  an  embankment  {agger),  a  fence
used  chiefly  along  the  sides  of  public  roads  or  on
the  banks  of  rivers.

4.  Sepimentum  faJxrile,  a  wall  which  might  be
formed  either  of  stones  {maceria),  as  in  the  vicinity
of  Tusculum,  or  of  baked  bricks  as  in  the  noi'th
of  Italy,  or  of  unbaked  bricks  as  in  Sabinum,  or
of  masses  of  earth  and  stone  pressed  in  between
upright   boards    (m  formis),   and   hence    termed

ftrmacii.  These  last  were  common  in  Spain,  in
Africa,  and  near  Tarentum,  and  were  said  to  last
for  centuries  uninjured  by  the  weather.  (Varr,  i.
14  ;  Plin.  //.  A^.  xxxv.  14 ;  comp.  Col.  v.  10,  x.  3;
Pallad.  i.  34  ;  vi.  3.)

Finally,  after  the  land  had  been  drained,  di-
vided, and  fenced,  the  banks  which  served  as
boundaries,  and  the  road-sides  were  planted  with
trees,  the  elm  and  the  poplar  being  preferred,  in
order  to  secure  a  supply  of  leaves  for  the  stock  and
timber  for  domestic  use.  (Cat.  6.)

I.  b.  Villa  Rustica.

In  erecting  a  house  and  offices,  great  importance
was  attached  to  the  choice  of  a  favourable  position.
The  site  selected  was  to  be  elevated  rather  than
low,  in  order  to  secure  good  ventilation  and  to
avoid  all  danger  of  exhalations  from  ninning  or
stagnant  water  ;  under  the  brow  of  a  hill,  for  the
sake  of  shelter  ;  facing  the  east  so  as  to  enjoy
sunshine  in  winter  and  sliade  in  summer  ;  near,
but  not  too  near  to  a  stream,  and  with  plenty  of
wood  and  pasture  in  the  neighbourhood.  The
structures  were  to  be  strictly  in  proportion  to  the
extent  of  the  fann  ;  for  if  too  large,  the  original
cost  is  heavy,  and  they  must  be  kept  in  repair  at
a  great  expense  ;  if  too  small,  the  various  products
would  run  the  risk  of  being  injured  by  the  want
of  proper  receptacles  (iia  edifices  ne  villa  funduin
qjiaerat  neve  fundus  villam.  Cat.  /?.  R.  3).  The
buildings  were  usually  arranged  round  two  courts,
with  a  tank  in  the  centre  of  each,  and  divided
into  three  parts,  named  according  to  the  purposes
for  which  they  were  destined.  1.  (Pars)  Urbana.
2,   (Pars)  Rustica.     3.  (Pars)  Fructuaria.

1.  Urbana.  This  comprehended  that  part  of
the  building  occupied  by  the  master  and  his  family,
consisting  of  eating  rooms  (coenaiiones)  and  sleep-
ing apartments  (cubictda),  with  different  aspects
for  summer  and  winter,  baths  (balnearia),  and
porticoes  or  promenades  (ambulaiiones).  Columella
recommends  that  this  portion  of  the  mansion  should
be  made  as  commodious  as  the  means  of  the  pro-
prietor will  peraiit,  in  order  that  he  himself  may
be  tempted  to  spend  more  time  there,  and  that  the


AGRICULTURA.


47


lady  of  the  family  (matrona)  may  be  more  willing
to  bear  her  husband  company.

2.  Rustica.  This  comprehended  that  part  of  the
building  occupied  by  the  servants,  consisting  of  a
large  and  lofty  kitchen  (culina),  to  which  they
might  at  all  times  resort,  baths  (balneae)  for  their
use  on  holidays,  sleeping  closets  (celiac)  for  the
servi  soluti,  a  gaol  (ergasiulum)  xmder  ground  for
the  servi  vincti.  In  this  division  were  included
also  the  stables,  byres,  sheds,  folds,  courts,  and
enclosures  of  every  description  (stabula,  hdjilia,
septa.,  ovilia,  cortes)  for  the  working  oxen  (domiti
boves),  and  other  stock  kept  at  home,  together  with
a  magazine  or  storehouse  (hoireum)  where  all  the
implements  of  agriculture  (omne  ncsticum  instru-
rmntum)  were  deposited,  and  within  this,  a  lock-up
room  for  the  reception  of  the  iron  tools  (ferra-
menta).  In  so  far  as  the  distribution  of  rooms
was  concerned,  the  overseer  (villicus)  was  to  have
his  chamber  beside  the  main  entrance  (Janua),  in
order  that  he  might  observe  all  who  came  in  or
went  out,  the  book-keeper  (procurator)  was  to  be
placed  over  the  gate,  that  he  might  watch  the
villicus  as  well  as  the  others,  while  the  shepherds
(opiliones),  oxmen  (bubulci),  and  such  persons  were
to  be  lodged  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  ani-
mals under  their  charge.

3.  Fructuaria.  This  comprehended  that  part  of
the  building  where  the  produce  of  the  farm  was
preserved,  consisting  of  the  oil  cellar  (cella  olearia).,
the  press-house  (cella  torcularia),  the  vault  for
wines  in  the  cask  (cella  vi7iaria),  the  boiling-room
for  inspissating  must  (defrutaria).,  all  of  which
were  on  the  ground  floor,  or  a  little  depressed  be-
low the  level  of  the  soil.  Above  were  hay-lofts
(foenilia),  repositories  for  chaff,  straw,  leaves,  and
other  fodder  (palearia),  granaries  (horrea,  gra-
naria).,  a  drying-room  for  newly  cut  wood  (fuma-
rium.)  in  connection  with  the  rustic  bath  flues,
and  store-rooms  (apothecae)  for  wine  in  the  am-
phora, some  of .  which  communicated  with  the
fum.arium.,  while  others  received  the  jars  whose
contents  had  been  sufficiently  mellowed  by  the
influence  of  heat.

In  addition  to  the  conveniences  enumerated
above,  a  mill  and  bake  house  (pistrimim  et  fur-
num)  were  attached  to  every  establishment  ;  at
least  two  open  tanks  (piscinae,  locus  sidj  dio),  one
for  the  cattle  and  geese,  the  other  for  steeping
lupines,  osiers,  and  objects  requiring  maceration  ;
and,  where  there  was  no  river  or  spring  available,
covered  reservoirs  (cistemae  sub  tectis)  into  which
rain  water  was  conveyed  for  drinking  and  culinary
purposes.  (Cat.  3,  4,  14  ;  Varr.  i.  11 — 14  ;  Col.
i.  6  ;  Geopon.  ii.  3.)

II.  Instrumenta.

The  instrumenta  employed  to  cultivate  the
ground  were  two-fold  :  a.  Persons  (homines)  ;
b.  Aids  to  human  toil  (adminicula  hominum),
namely,  oxen  and  other  animals  employed  in
work  ;  together  with  tools  (instrumenta),  in  the
restricted  sense  of  the  word.

II.  a.  Homines.

The  men  employed  to  cultivate  a  farm  might
be  either,  1.  free  labourers  (operarii),  or  2.  slaves
(senu).

1 .  Free  labourers.  Cato  considers  the  facility  of
procuring  persons  of  this  description,  whom  in  one
place  he  calls  mercenarii  politores^  as  one  of  the


48


AGRICULTURA.


circumstances  that  ought  to  weigh  with  a  purcliaser
in  rnakiiig  choice  of  a  farm  ;  for  although  a  large
proportion  of  the  work  upon  great  estates  was,
during  t]ie  later  ages  at  least  of  the  Roman  re-
public, always  perfomied  by  slaves,  it  was  con-
sidered advantageous  to  emjjloy  hirelings  for  those
operations  where  a  number  of  hands  were  re-
quired for  a  limited  period,  as  in  hay-making,
the  corn  harvest,  and  the  vintage,  or,  according  to
the  cold-blooded  recommendation  of  Varro,  in
xmhealthy  situations  where  slaves  would  have  died
off  fast,  entailing  a  heavy  loss  on  their  owner.
Operarii  consisted  either  of  poor  men  with  their
families,  who  were  hired  directly  by  the  farmer,
or  of  gangs  {conduditiae  liberorum  ojierae)  who
entered  into  an  engagement  with  a  contractor
(mercenarius),  who  in  his  turn  bargained  with  the
farmer  for  some  piece  of  work  in  the  slump,  or
lastly,  of  persons  who  had  incurred  debt  which
they  paid  off  in  work  to  their  creditors.  This,
which  was  an  ordinary  practice  in  the  earlier  ages
of  the  Roman  republic,  seems  in  later  times  to
have  been  confined  to  foreign  counti'ies,  being  com-
mon especially  in  Asia  and  Illyria.  Free  labourers
worked  under  the  inspection  of  an  overseer  (prae-
J'fvins)^  whose  zeal  was  stimulated  by  rewards  of
different  kinds.

2.  Slaves  {servi).  Rustic  slaves  were  divided
into  two  great  classes,  those  who  were  placed
under  no  direct  personal  restraint  {sei-vi  so/uti),
and  those  who  worked  in  fetters  (sei-vi  vincti)
when  abroad,  and  when  at  home  were  confined  in
a  kind  of  prison  (ergasiulum),  where  they  were
guarded  and  their  wants  supplied  by  a  gaoler  (er-
t/astularius).  Slaves,  moreover,  in  large  establish-
ments, Avere  ranked  in  bodies  according  to  the
duties  which  they  were  appointed  to  perform,  it
being  a  matter  of  obvious  expediency  that  the
same  individuals  should  be  regularly  employed  in
the  same  tasks.  Hence  there  were  the  ox-drivers
(l)uhulci)^  who  for  the  most  part  acted  as  plough-
men also  (aratores),  the  stable-men  (jiu/arii\  who
harnessed  the  domestic  animals  and  tended  them
in  their  stalls,  the  vine-dressers  (vinitores),  the
leaf-strippers  {frondatorcs)^  the  ordinary  labourers
(uiediaidini),  and  many  other  classified  bodies.
These,  according  to  their  respective  occupations
Avorked  cither  singly,  or  in  small  gangs  placed
under  the  charge  of  inspectors  {magistn  opcriim).
When  the  owner  {dominus)  did  not  reside  upon
the  property  and  in  person  superintend  the  various
operations  in  progress,  the  whole  farming  esta-
blishment was  under  the  control  of  a  general
overseer  (viUicns,  actor),  himself  a  slave  or  freedman,
who  regulated  the  wotk,  distributed  food  Jind
clothing  to  the  labourers,  inspected  the  tools,
kept  a  regular  account  of  the  stock,  performed  the
Ktated  sacrifices,  bought  what  was  necessary  for
the  use  of  the  household,  and  sold  the  produce  of
the  farm,  for  which  he  accounted  to  the  proprietor,
except  on  very  extensive  estates  where  there  was
usually  a  book-keeper  (procurator)  who  managed
the  pecuniary  transactions,  and  held  the  villicus  in
check.  "With  the  \-illicu3  was  associated  a  female
companion  {contubernalis  mulicr)  called  villica,
who  took  charge  of  the  female  slaves,  and  the  in-
door details  of  the  family.  The  duties  and  quali-
fications of  a  villicus  will  be  found  enumerated
in  Cat.  c.  5,  and  Colum.  i.  8  ;  comp.  Geopon.  ii.
4  J,  4.5.

The  food  of  the  slaves  composing  the  household


AGRICULTURA.

(/amilia)  was  classed  under  three  lieads,  1.  (Ma-
ria.   2.  Vinum.     3.  Pubnentarium.

1.  Cibaria.  The  sei'vi  conipediti^he'mg  kept  con-
stantly in  confinement,  received  their  food  in  the
shape  of  bread  at  the  rate  of  4  pounds  (Roman
pound  =  ll|oz.  avoirdupois)  per  diem  in  winter,
and  5  pounds  in  summer,  until  the  figs  came  in,
when  they  went  back  to  4  pounds.  The  servi
soluti  received  their  food  in  the  shape  of  com,  at
the  rate  of  4  modii  (pecks)  of  wheat  per  month  in
winter,  and  4^  in  summer.  Those  persons,  such
as  the  villicus,  the  villica,  and  the  shepherd  (opi-
lio),  who  had  no  hard  manual  labour  to  perform,
were  allowed  about  one  fourth  less.

2.  Vi?mm.  The  quantity  of  wine  allowed  varied
much  according  to  the  season  of  the  year,  and  the
severity  of  the  toil  imposed,  but  a  servus  solutus
received  about  8  amphorae  (nearly  48  imperisil
gallons)  a  year,  and  a  aei-vus  compeditus  about  10,
amphorae,  besides  lora  [see  Vinum]  at  discretion
for  three  months  after  the  vintage.

3.  Pulmentarium.  As  pulmentaria  they  received
olives  which  had  fallen  from  the  trees  {ohae  ca-
ducae),  then  those  ripe  olives  (oleae  tempestivae),
from  which  the  least  amomit  of  oil  could  be  ex-
pressed, and,  after  the  olives  were  all  eaten  up,
salt  fish  (halec),  and  vinegar  (acetum).  In  addi-
tion to  the  above,  each  individual  was  allowed  a
sextarius  (very  nearly  an  imperial  pint)  of  oil  per
month,  and  a  modius  of  salt  per  annum.

The  clothing  (vestimenia)  of  the  rustic  la-
boiu:ers  Avas  of  the  most  coarse  description,  but
such  as  to  protect  them  effectually  from  cold  and
wet,  enabling  them  to  pursue  their  avocations  in
all  weathers.  It  consisted  of  thick  woollen  blanket
shirts  {tunicae),  skin  coats  with  long  sleeves  {j^eUes
manicatue),  cloaks  with  hoods  (saga  cucidlata,  cu-
culiones),  patch-AVork  Avrappers  (ceiitones)  made  out
of  the  old  and  ragged  garments,  together  Avith
strong  sabots  or  Avooden  shoes  (sculponeae).  A
tunic  Avas  given  every  year,  a  sagum  and  a  pair  of
sculponeae,  every  other  year.

The  number  of  hands  required  to  cultiA-ate  a
fann,  depended  almost  entirely  on  the  nature  of
the  crops.

An  arable  farm  of  200  jugers  Avhere  the  ordi-
nary crops  of  com  and  leguminous  vegetables  Avere
raised  required  tAA^o  pairs  of  oxen,  tAvo  bubulci  and
six  ordinary  labourers,  if  free  from  trees,  but  if
laid  out  as  an  arbustum,  three  additional  hands.

An  olive  garden  of  240  jugers  required  three
pairs  of  oxen,  three  asses  for  carrying  manure
(asini  omati  clitellarii),  one  ass  for  turning  the
mill,  five  score  of  sheep,  a  villicus,  a  villica,  five
ordinary  labourers,  three  bubulci,  one  ass-driver
(asinarius),  one  shepherd  (opilio),  one  SAvineherd
(sidjidcus)  ;  in  all  twelve  men  and  one  Avoman.

A  vineyard  of  100  jugers  required  one  pair  of
oxen,  one  pair  of  draught  asses  (asi/ii  plostrarii),
one  mill  ass  (asinus  molaris),  a  villicus,  a  villica,
one  bubulcus,  one  asinarius,  one  man  to  look  after
the  plantations  of  Avillows  used  for  Avithes  (salic-
tarius),  one  subulcus,  ten  ordinary  labourers ;  m
all  fifteen  men  and  one  Avoman.  (Cat.  5,  oG — 59,
10,  11  ;  Varr.  i.  19  ;  Colum.  i.  7,  8,  ii.  12.)

In  Avhat  has  been  said  above,  we  haA-e  assumed
that  the  proprietor  Avas  also  the  farmer,  but  it  was
by  no  means  uncommon  to  let  (locare)  land  to  a
tenant  (politor,  paiiiarius.  Cat.  ;  colonus,  Varr.
Colum.),  who  paid  his  rent  either  in  money  (pen~
sio  ;  ad  permiiam  niimeratam  co?iduicit),  as  seems  to


AGRICULTUllA.

have  been  the  practice  when  Columella  wrote,  or
by  making  over  to  the  landlord  a  fixed  proportion
of  the  produce  {non  nummo  sed  partihus  locare),  ac-
cording to  the  sj-^stem  described  by  Cato,  and  al-
luded to  by  the  younger  Pliny.  These  coloni  some-
times tilled  the"^  same  farm  from  father  to  son  for
generations  (coloni  indigenae)^  and  such  were  con-
sidered the  most  desu-able  occupants,  since  they
had  a  sort  of  hereditary  interest  in  the  soil,  while
on  the  other  hand  frequent  changes  could  scarcely
fail  to  prove  injurious.  The  worst  tenants  were
those  who  did  not  cultivate  in  person,  but,  living
in  towns  {urhanus  colonus)^  employed  gangs  of
slaves.  Upon  the  whole  Columella  recommends
the  owner  of  an  estate  to  keep  it  in  his  own  hands,
except  when  it  is  very  barren,  the  climate  un-
healthy, or  the  distance  from  his  usual  place  of
abode  so  great  that  he  can  seldom  be  upon  the
spot.  Cato  gives  a  table  of  the  proportion  which
the  partiarius  ought  to  pay,  according  to  the  nature
of  the  crop,  and  the  fertility  of  the  region  ;  but  as  he
says  nothing  with  regard  to  the  manner  in  which
the  cost  of  cultivation  was  divided  between  the
parties,  his  statement  gives  us  no  practical  insight
into  the  nature  of  these  leases  (Cat.  136,  137  ;
Colum,  i.  7,  Plin.  Epp.  ix.  37,  comp.  iii.  19.)

II.  h.    Adminicula  Hominum.

The  domestic  animals  employed  in  labour,  and
their  treatment  will  be  considered  under  the  se-
cond great  division  of  our  subject,  Pastio,  or  the
management  of  stock.

The  tools  {instrumenta)  chiefly  used  by  the  farmer
were  the  plough  {aratrum)^  the  grubber  (irpex),
harrows  (crates^crates  dentatae).,  the  rake  (rastrum),
the  spade  (%o,  pala),  the  hoe  (sarculum,  bidens^
marra  [.^^J),  the  spud  or  weeding-hook  {runco)^  the
scythe  and  sickle  {falx)^  the  thrashing-machine
(plostellum  Poenicum,  tribuluni)^  the  cart  {plo-
strum),  the  axe  (securis,  dolabra).  These  will  be
described  as  we  go  along  in  so  far  as  may  be
necessary  to  render  our  observations  intelligible,
but  for  full  information  the  reader  must  consult
the  separate  articles  devoted  to  each  of  the  above
words.

III.    The  Operations  op  Agriculture.

The  most  important  operations  performed  by  the
husbandman  were :  —  1 .  Ploughing  (aratio).  2,  Ma-
imring  (stercoratio).  3.  Sowing  (satio).  4.  Harrow-
ing (occatio).  5.  Hoeing  {sarritio).  6.  Weeding
(runcatio).  7.  Reaping  (messio).  8.  Thrashing
(tritura).  9.  Winnowing  (t;eMft7ai!to).  10.  Storing
up  (conditio).

The  Flamen  who  offered  sacrifice  on  the  Cerealia
to  Ceres  and  Tellus,  invoked  twelve  celestial  patrons
of  these  labours  by  the  names  Vervactor  ;  Itepa-
rator  ;  Impordtor  ;  Insitor  ;  Oharator  ;  Occator  ;
Sarritor  ;  Sztbruncator  ;  Messor  ;  Convector ;  Con-
ditor ;  Promitor ;  significant  appellations  which
will  be  clearly  understood  from  what  follows.  The
functions  of  the  last  deity  alone  do  not  fall  within
our  limits  ;  but  we  shall  add  another  to  the  list  in
the  person  of  Stercutius.  (Serv.  ad  Virg.  Georg.  i.
21:  Plin.  H.  N.  xvii.  9  ;  Lactant.  i.  20 ;  Macrob.
Sat.  i.  7 ;  Prudent.  Peristeph.  iii.  449 ;  Augustin.
de  C.  Dei.  xviii.  15.)

1.  PUyughing  (aratio).

The  number  of  times  that  land  was  ploughed,
varying  from  two  to  nine,  as  well  as  the  season  at


AGRICULTURA.


49


which  the  work  was  performed,  depended  upon  the
natiu-e  of  the  soil  and  the  crop  for  which  it  was
prepared.  The  object  of  ploughing  being  to  keep
down  weeds,  to  pulverise  the  earth  as  finely  as
possible  (Virg.  Georg.  ii.  204),  and  to  expose  every
portion  of  it  in  turn  to  the  action  of  the  atmosphere,
the  operation  was  repeated  again  and  again  (Virg.
Georg.  i.  47),  until  these  objects  were  fully  at-
tained. When  stiff  low-lying  soil  (campus  uligi-
nosus)  was  broken  up  for  wheat,  it  was  usual  to
plough  it  four  times,  first  (proscindere)  as  early  in
spring  as  the  weather  would  permit  (Virg.  Georg.
i.  63),  after  which  the  land  was  termed  vervactum^
and  hence  the  god  Vervactor  ;  for  the  second  time
(offringere.,  iterarXy  vervada  subigere),  about  the
summer  solstice,  under  the  patronage  of  the  god
Reparator^  and  on  this  occasion  the  field  was  cross-
ploughed  (Virg.  Georg.  i.  97) ;  for  the  third  time
(tertiare).,  about  the  beginning  of  September ;  and
for  the  fourth  time,  shortly  before  the  equinox,
when  it  was  ribbed  (lirare)  for  the  reception  of  the
seed,  the  ribbing  being  executed  under  favour  of
the  god  Imporcitor,  by  adding  two  mouldboards
to  the  plough  (aratrum  auritum),  one  on  each  side
of  the  share.  (Varr.  i.  29  ;  Pallad.  i.  43.)  Rich
soil  on  sloping  ground  was  ploughed  three  times
only,  the  ploughing  in  spring  or  at  the  beginning
of  September  being  omitted  ;  light  (eocilis)  moist
soil  also  three  times,  at  the  end  of  August,  early
in  September,  and  about  the  equinox ;  whilst  the
poorest  hill  soil  was  ploughed  twice  in  rapid  suc-
cession, early  in  September,  so  that  the  moisture
might  not  be  dried  up.  by  the  summer  heat.  (Virg.
Georg.  i.  70.)

The  greatest  care-  was  taken  not  to  plough
ground  that  had  been  rendered  miry  by  rain,  nor
that  which  after  a  long  drought  had  been  wetted
by  showers  which  had  not  penetrated  beyond  the
surface  (Col.  ii.  4 ;.  Pallad.  ii.  3)  ;  but  whether
this  last  is  really  the  terra  cariosa  of  Cato,  as
Columella  seems  to  think,  is  by  no  means  clear.
(Cat.  V.  34  ;  comp.  Plin.  //.  N.  xvii.  5.)

With  regard  to  the  depth  to  which  the  share
was  to  be  driven,  we  have  no  very  precise  direc-
tions; but  Columella  recommerwis  generally  deep
ploughing  (ii.  2.  §  23.;.  comp.  Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.
1 6)  in  preference  to  mere  scratching  (scarificatio)
with  light  shares  (eociguis  vomeribus  et  dentalibun).

The  plough  was  almost  invariably  drawn  by
oxen,  although  Homer  (II.  x.  351  ;  Od.  viii.  124)
prefers  mules,  yoked  close  together  in  such  a
manner  as  to  pull  by  their  necks  and  not  by  the
horns,  guided  and  stimulated  chiefly  by  the  voice.
The  lash  was  used  very  sparingly,  and  the  younc
steer  was  never  pricked  by  the  goad  (stirr>saius),
since  it  was  apt  to  render  him  restive  and  un-
manageable. The  animals  were  allowed  to  rest
at  the  end  of  each  furrow,  but  not  to  stop  in  the
middle  of  it :  when  imhamcssed,  they  were  care-
fully rubbed  down,  allowed  to  cool,  and  watered,
before  they  were  tied  up  in  the  stall,  their  mouths
having  been  previously  washed  with  wine.  (Col.
ii.  2.)

The  ploughman  (bubulcus)  was  required  to  make
perfectly  straight  and  uniform  furrows  (sidco  vario
ne  ares).,  so  close  to  each  other  as  altogether  to  ob-
literate the  mark  of  the  share,  and  was  particularly
cautioned  against  missing  over  any  portion  of  tha
ground,  and  thus  leaving  scamna,  that  is,  masses
of  hard  unstirred  earth  (necubi  crudum  solum  et
immotum  relinquatf  quod  agricolac   scamnum  vo-


50


AGRICULTURA.


cant).  The  normal  length  of  a  furrow  was  120
feet,  and  this  is  the  original  import  of  the  word
actus.  A  distinction  is  drawn  between  versus  and
versura^  the  fonner  being  properly  ihe/urrow,  the
latter  the  extremity  of  the  furrow,  or  the  turning
point ;  but  this  is  fiar  from  being  strictly  observed.
(Col.  ii.  5.  §§  27,  28.)

Four  days  were  .allowed  for  the  four  plmighings
of  a  juger  of  rich  low-lying  land  (jugerum  talis
ogH  quatTior  operis  expeditur).  The  first  ploughing
(proscissio)  occupied  two  days,  the  second  (iteratio)
one  day,  the  third  (tertiatio  [?])  three  fourths  of  a
day,  and  ribbing  for  the  seed  one  fourth  of  a  day
(i7i  liram  satum  redigitur  quadrante  operae).  The
same  time  is  allowed  for  the  three  ploughings  of
rich  upland  soil  {colles  pinguis  soli)  as  for  the  four
ploughings  of  the  uliginosus  campus,  the  fatigue
being  much  greater,  although  the  difficulties  pre-
sented by  the  acclivity  were  in  some  measure  re-
lieved by  ploughing  hills  in  a  slanting  direction,
instead  of  straight  up  and  down.  (Cat  61 ;  Varr.
i.  27.  2.9 ;  Col.  ii.  2,  4  ;  Plin.  H.  N..  xviii.  19,  20.
26 ;  Pallad.  i.  6,  ii.  3,  viii.  1,  s;.  1  ;  Oeopon.  ii,
23 ;  and  comp.  Horn.  IL  xiii.  704  -  xviii.  370.
540  ;  Od.  V.  127.)

2.  Manuring  (stercoratio).

Manure  (fimus,  stercus).  The  manure  chiefly
employed  was  the  dung  of  birds  and  of  the  or-
dinary domestic  animals  (stercus  columbinum^  buhu-
lum,  ovillum,  capriiium^  suillum,  equinum,  asininum,
&c.).  This  diifered  considerably  in  quality,  ac-
cording to  the  source  from  which  it  was  procured  ;
and  hence  those  who  raised  different  kinds  of  crops
are  enjoined  to  keep  the  different  sorts  of  dung
separate,  in  order  that  each  might  be  applied  in
the  most  advantageous  manner.  That  derived
from  pigeon-houses  (eolumbariis),  from  aviaries
where  thrushes  were  fattened  (cxV  aviariis  iurdorum
et  merularum),  and  from  birds  in  general,  except
water-fowl,  was  considered  as  the  hottest  and  most
powerful,  and  always  placed  apart,  being  sown  by
the  hand  exactly  as  we  deal  with  guano  at  the
present  moment.  The  ancient  writers  very  em-
phatically point  out  the  necessity  of  procuring  large
supplies  of  manure,  which  the  Romans  regarded  as
under  the  especial  patronage  of  a  god  named  Ster-
cutius^  and  farmers  were  urged  to  collect  straw,
weeds,  leaves  of  all  sorts,  hedge  clippings^  and
tender  twigs,  which  were  first  used  to  litter  the
stock,  and  then,  when  mixed  with  ashes,  sweep-
ings of  the  house,  road-scrapings,  and  filth  of  every
description,  served  to  swell  the  dunghills  (slerqui-
linto,):  These  were  at  least  two  in  immber,  one
being  intended  for  immediate  use,  the  other  for
the  reception  of  fresh  materials,  which  were  allowed
to  remain  for  a  year ;  dung,  when  old  and  well
rotted,  being  accounted  best  for  all  purposes,  ex-
cept for  top-dressing  of  meadows,  when  it  was
used  as  fresh  as  possible.  The  dimghilla  were
formed  on  ground  that  had  been  hollowed  out  and
beaten  down  or  paved,  so  that  the  moisture  might
not  escape  through  the  soil,  and  they  were  covered
over  with  brushwood  or  hurdles  to  prevent  evapo-
ration. In  this  way  the  whole  mass  was  kept  con-
stantly moist,  and  fermentation  was  still  further
promoted  by  turning  it  over  very  frequently  and
incorporating  the  different  parts.

The  particular  crops  to  which  manure  was  chiefly
applied  will  be  noticed  hereafter  ;  but  in  so  far  as
regards  the  time  of  application  it  was  laid  down  in


AGRICULTURA.

September  or  October,  on  the  ground  that  was  to  be
autumn  sown  ;  and  in  the  course  of  January  or  Fe-
bruarv,  on  the  ground  that  was  to  be  spring  sown.
A  full  manuring  {stercoratio)  for  a  juger  of  land
«n  an  upland  slope  {quod  spissius  stercoratur)  was
24  loads  {vehes),  each  load  being  SO  modii  or  pecks  ;
while  for  low-lying  land  {quod  rarius  stercoratur)
1 8  loads  were  considered  sufficient.  The  dung  was
thrown  down  in  small  heaps  of  the  bulk  of  five
modii,  it  was  then  broken  small,  was  spread  out
equally  and  ploughed  in  instantly  that  it  might  not
be  dried  up  by  the  rays  of  the  stin,  great  care  being
taken  to  perform  these  operations  when  the  moon
was  waning,  and  if  possible  with  a  west  wind.  Ac-
cording to  the  calculations  of  Columella,  the  live-
stock necessary  for  a  farm  of  two  hundred  jugers
ought  to  yield  1440  loads  per  year  ;  that  is,  enough
for  manuring  60  jugers  at  the  rate  of  24  loads  to
the  juger.  In  what  proportions  this  was  distributed
is  nowhere  very  clearly  defined,  and  must  neces-
sarily have  varied  according  to  circumstances.  If
we  take  two  statements  of  Cato  in  connection  with
each  other,  we  shall  be  led  to  conclude  that  he  ad-
vises one  half  of  the  whole  manure  made  upon  a
farm  to  be  applied  to  the  raising  of  green  crops  used
as  fodder  {pabulum),  one-fourth  to  the  top-dressing
of  meadows,  and  the  remaining  fourth  to  the  olives
and  fruit-trees.  Columella  recommends  the  ma-
nuring of  light  soil  {exilis  terra)  before  the  second
ploughing  ;  but  when  rich  lands  were  summer  fal-
lowed previous  to  a  com  crop,  no  manure  was  con-
sidered requisite.  (Hom.  Od.  xvii.  297,  Theo-
phrast.  n.  *.  A.  iii.  25 ;  Cat  5,  7,  29,  36,  37,  61  ;
Varr.  i.  13,  38;  Colum.  ii.  5,  6,  9,  10,  14,  15,
xi.  2  ;  Pallad.  i.  33,  x.  i ;  Cic  de  Senect.  15  ;  Plin.
H.N.  xvii.  9,  xviii.  19,23;  Geopon.  ii.  21,  22.)

The  system  of  manuring  by  penning  and  feeding
sheep  upon  a  limited  space  of  ground  was  neither
unknown  nor  neglected,  as  we  perceive  from  the
precepts  of  Cato  (30),  Varro  (ii.  2.  §  12),  and
Pliny  {H.  N.  xviii.  53),  all  of  whom  recommend
the  practice.

The  ashes  obtained  by  burning  weeds,  bushes,
prunings,  or  any  sort  of  superfluous  wood,  were
found  to  have  the  best  effect  (Virg.  Georg.  i.  81  ;
Colum.  ii.  15 ;  Plin.  xvii.  9 ;  Geopon.  xii.  4),  and
sometimes,  as  we  know  from  Virgil  {Georg.  i.  84),
it  was  deemed  profitable  to  set  fire  to  the  stubble
standing  in  the  fields.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  30.)
Caustic  lime  was  employed  as  a  fertiliser  by  some
of  the  tribes  of  Transalpine  Gaul  in  the  time  of
Pliny,  but  in  Italy  its  application  seems  to  have
been  very  limited  and  to  have  been  confined  to
vines,  olives,  and  cherry-trees.  (Cat.  38  ;  Pallad.
i.  6  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xvii.  9,  xviii.  25,  30.)

Marl  also  {marga)  of  different  kinds  was  known
to  the  Greeks,  was  applied  by  the  Megarenses  to
wet  cold  lands,  and  was  extensively  employed  in  Gaul
and  Britain  ;  but  not  being  found  in  Italy,  did  not
enter  into  the  agricultural  arrangements  of  the
Latins.  Pliny  devotes  several  chapters  to  an  ela-
borate discussion  upon  these  earths,  of  which  he
describes  various  sorts  which  had  been  made  the
subject  of  experiment,  classifying  them  according
to  their  colour,  their  constitution,  and  their  quali-
ties ;  the  white  {alba),  the  red  {rufa),  the  dove-
coloured  {columbina),  the  clayey  {argillacea),  the
sandy  {arenacea),  the  stony  {iophacea),  tlie  fat
{pinguis),  and  the  caustic  [?]  {aspera).  Some  of
them  we  recognise  at  once,  as  for  example,  the  fat
white  clayey  marl  chiefly  used  in  Britain,  the  cf-


AGRICULTQRA.

fects  of  which  were  believed  to  endure  for  eighty
years.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xvii.  5,  8  ;  comp.  Varro,  i.  7,
In  Gallia  Transalpina  intus  ad  Rhmum  aliquot
r&)iones  accessi  . .  .  uibi  agros  stercorarent  Candida
fossicia  creta.)

Somewhat  analogous  to  the  use  of  marl  was  the
system  strongly  recommended  by  Theophrastus  and
Columella,  but  condemned  by  Pliny,  of  combining
soils  in  which  some  quality  existed  in  excess,  with
those  possessing  opposite  characters  —  dry  gravel
with  chalky  clay,  or  heavy  wet  loam  with  sand, —
the  object  being  frequently  attained  to  a  certain
extent  by  subsoil  ploughing,  which  was  greatly  ap-
proved of  as  a  means  of  renovating  fields  exhausted
by  severe  cropping.  (Theophrast.  n.  4>.  A.  iii.  25  ;
Colura.  ii.  15  ;  Plin.  H.N.  xvii.  5.)

When  ordinary  manures  could  not  be  procured
in  sufficient  quantity,  a  scheme  was  resorted  to
which  was  at  one  time  pursued  in  this  country,
and  is  still  adopted  with  considerable  success  in
many  parts  of  Italy  and  in  the  sandy  tracts  of
southern  France.  The  field  was  sown  about  the
middle  of  September  with  beans  or  lupines,  which
were  ploughed  into  the  ground  the  following
spring,  in  all  cases  before  the  pod  was  fully  formed,
and  at  an  earlier  stage  of  their  growth  on  light
than  on  stiff  soils.  Nay,  many  crops,  such  as
beans,  peas,  lupines,  vetches,  lentils  (ervilia,  ci-
cei'ula),  even  when  allowed  to  come  to  maturity,
were  supposed  to  exercise  an  ameliorating  influence,
provided  their  roots  were  immediately  buried  by
the  plough,  although  perhaps  in  this  case  the  bene-
ficial effect  may  have  resulted  from  the  manure
applied  before  they  were  sown.  On  the  other
hand,  com  in  general,  poppies,  fenugreek,  and  all
crops  pulled  up  by  the  roots,  such  as  cicer  and  flax,
were  supposed  to  exhaust  (urere)  the  soil,  which
then  required  either  repose  or  manure  to  restore  its
powers.  (Theophrast.  n.  *.  A.  viii.  9  ;  Cat.  37  ;
Varr.  i.  23  ;  Colum.  ii.  13—15,  xi.  2  ;  Pallad.  i.
6,  vi.  4,  X.  9  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xvii.  9,  xviii.  10.  14—
16.)

3.  Sowing  (satio)

May  be  considered  under  three  heads.  1.  The
time  of  sowing.  2.  The  manner  of  sowing.  3.
The  choice,  preparation,  and  quantity  of  the  seed.

1.  The  seed-time  (seme7itis)  /car'  e|ox7jv,  com-
menced at  the  autumnal  equinox,  and  ended  fifteen
days  before  the  winter  solstice.  Few,  however,
began  before  the  setting  of  the  Pleiades  (23d  Oc-
tober), unless  on  cold  wet  ground,  or  in  those  lo-
calities where  bad  weather  set  in  soon  ;  indeed,  it
was  an  old  proverb  that,  while  a  late  sowing  often
disappointed  the  hopes  of  the  husbandman,  an  early
one  never  realised  them  {maturam  sationem  saepe
decipere  solere,  seram  numquam  quin  mala  sit)  ;  and
the  Virgilian  maxim  is  to  the  same  purpose.  Spring
sowing  (trimestris  satio)  was  practised  only  in  very
deep  stiff  land,  which  would  admit  of  being  cropped
for  several  years  in  succession  (restibilis  ager),  or
where,  from  peculiar  circumstances  connected  with
the  situation  or  climate,  such  as  the  great  incle-
mency of  the  winters,  it  was  impossible  for  the
farmer  to  sow  in  autumn  ;  and  hence,  generally
speaking,  was  resorted  to  very  sparingly,  and  for  the
most  part  from  necessity  rather  than  inclination,

2.  We  can  infer  from  incidental  notices  in  agri-
cultural writers,  that  the  seed  was  committed  to
the  ground  in  at  least  three  different  modes.

a.  The  seed  was  cast  upon  a  flat  surface  finely


AGRICULTURA.


51


pulverised  by  the  plough  and  harrow,  and  then
covered  up  by  ribbing  the  land  {teHio  cum  arant^
JACTO  SEMiNE,  boves  Urare  dicuntur).  (Varr.  i.
29  ;  comp.  Colum.  ii.  13.)

b.  The  land  was  ribbed,  the  seed  was  then
dropped  upon  the  tops  of  the  lirae  or  elevated
ridges,  according  to  our  fashion  for  turnips,  liras
autem  rustici  vacant  easdem  porcas  cum  sic  aratum
est,  ut  inter  duos  latius  distantes  sulcos,  medius
cumulus  siccam  sedem  frumentis  praebeat.  (Colum.
ii.  4.  §  8.)  This  plan  was  followed  on  wet  land
to  secure  a  dry  bed  for  the  seed,  which  would
probably  be  covered  up  by  hand-rakes  (rastris).

c.  The  land  was  ribbed  as  in  the  former  case  ;
but  the  seed,  instead  of  being  dropped  upon  the
ridge  of  the  lira,  was  cast  into  the  depression  of  the
furrow,  and  might  be  covered  up  either  by  the  har-
row or  by  ploughing  down  the  middle  of  the  lira.
This  was  practised  on  light,  sloping,  and  therefore
dry,  land  (neqm  in  lira  sed  sub  sulco  talis  ager
seminandus  est,  Colum.  ii.  4.  §  11).

It  will  be  seen  clearly  that,  whichever  of  the
above  modes  was  adopted,  the  seed  would  spring
up  in  regular  rows,  as  if  sown  by  a  drill,  and  that
only  one  half  of  the  land  would  be  covered  with
seed.  In  point  of  fact,  the  quantity  of  seed  sown
on  a  given  extent  of  ground  was  not  above  half  of
what  we  employ.

Vetches,  fenugreek,  and  some  other  crops,  as
will  be  noticed  below,  were  frequently  thrown
upon  land  unprepared  {crvda  terra),  and  the  seeds
then  ploughed  in.  The  seed  seems  to  have  been
cast  out  of  a  three-peck  basket  (trimodiatn  sato-
riam,  sc.  corbem),  which  from  superstitious  motives
was  frequently  covered  over  with  the  skin  of  a
hyaena.  Pliny  points  out  how  necessary  it  was
that  the  hand  of  the  sower  should  keep  time  with
his  stride,  in  order  that  he  might  scatter  the
grains  with  perfect  xmiformity.

3.  The  points  chiefly  attended  to  in  the  choice
of  seed  corn  were,  that  it  should  be  perfectly  fresh
and  free  from  mixture  or  adulteration,  and  of  an
uniform  reddish  colour  throughout  its  substance.
When  the  crop  was  reaped,  the  largest  and  finest
ears  were  selected  by  the  hand,  or,  where  the
produce  was  so  great  as  to  render  this  impossible,
the  heaviest  grains  were  separated  by  a  sieve
(quidquid  exteratur  capisterio  eocpurgandum  erit)
and  reserved.  In  addition  to  these  precautions  it
was  not  unusual  to  doctor  seeds  of  all  sorts  {medicare
semina)  by  sprinkling  them  with  an  alkaline
liquor  (nitrum,  i.  e.  probably  carbonate  of  soda),
or  with  the  deposit  left  by  newly  expressed  oil
(amurca),  or  by  steeping  them  in  various  prepara-
tions, of  which  several  are  enumerated  by  Colu-
mella and  Pliny  ;  the  object  being  twofold,  in  the
first  place  to  increase  the  quantity  and  quality  of
the  produce,  and  in  the  second  place  to  protect  it
from  the  ravages  of  vermin,  especially  the  little
animal  called  curculio,  probably  the  same  insect
with  our  weevil.

The  quantity  of  seed  sown  varied  according  to  the
soil,  the  situation,  the  season,  and  the  weather,  the
general  rule  being  that  less  was  required  for  rich
and  finely  pulverised  {pingite  et  putre),  or  light
and  sharp  {gracile),  or  thin  poor  soil  {macrum,  exile)
than  for  such  as  was  stiff  and  heavy  (crassum,
cretosum),  or  moderately  tenacious  ;  less  for  an
open  field  than  for  an  arbustum,  less  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  season  than  towards  the  close  (although
this  is  contradicted  by  Pliny,  //.  N.  xviil  24),  and
E  2


52


AGRICULTURA.


less  in  rainy  than  in  dry  weather,  maxims  which
are  fully  explained  by  the  authorities  quoted  be-
low. The  average  amount  of  seed  used  for  the
three  prmcipal  species  of  grain  —  wheat,  spelt  and
barley — was  respectively,  five,  ten,  and  six  modii
perjuger.  (Xenoph.Oecora.  17;  Theophrast.  ii.  6.  and
iii.  25  ;  Cat.  34,  35  ;  Varr.  i.  29,  34,  40,  52  ;  Co-
lum.  iL  2,  3,  8,  9,  10,  13,  xii.  2  ;  Pallad.  i.  6,  34,
X.  2  ;  Virg.  Georg.  i.  193,  219,  225  ;  Plin.  H.  N.
xiv.  21,  xvi.  27,  xviii.  24,  73  ;  Geopon.  ii.  15—20.)

4.  Harrowing  (occatio)

Might  be  performed  at  two  different  periods :
after  the  first  or  second  ploughing,  in  order  to
powder  the  soil  completely  ;  and  after  sowing,  in
order  to  cover  up  the  seed.  When  the  land  was
encumbered  with  roots  and  deep-seated  weeds,  a
grubber  (irpex.  Cat.  10.  Varr.  L.L.  iv.  31)  formed
of  a  strong  plank  set  with  iron  spikes  was  em-
ployed, but  in  ordinary  cases  wicker  hurdles  (vi-
mineae  crates)^  sometimes  fitted  with  teeth  (den-
tatae),  were  dragged  over  the  ground  ;  or  the  clods
were  broken  with  hand-rakes  (rastra).  The  seed,
as  we  have  seen  above,  being  for  the  most  part
ploughed  in,  and  the  operation  for  that  reason  placed
under  the  patronage  of  a  god  Oharator,  the  second
harrowing  {iteratio)  was  omitted,  except  where  the
surface  still  rose  in  lumps  (Virg,  Georg.  i.  104)  ;  but
since  it  was  the  duty  of  a  good  farmer  to  have  his
fields  in  the  best  order  before  he  began  to  sow,  the
older  Roman  writers  considered  harrowing  after
sowing  as  a  proof  of  bad  husbandry. — "  Veteres
Romani  dixerunt  male  subactum  agnim,  qui  satis
frugibus  occandus  sit."  (Colum.  ii.  4,  13,  xi.  2  ;
Plm.  H.N.  xviii.  20  ;  Virg.  Georg.  i.  94,  104.)

5.  Hoeing  {sarritio).

The  next  care,  after  covering  up  the  seed,  was
to  loosen  the  earth  round  the  roots  of  the  young
blades,  in  order  that  air  and  moisture  might  gain
fi'ee  access  and  enable  them  to  send  forth  more
numerous  and  more  vigorous  shoots  and  fibres
(ut  fruticare  possint).  This  process  was  termed
(TKoAeja,  sarritio.,  or  sarculatio^  and  was  carried
on  by  hand  with  an  instrument  called  sarculum^
the  form  of  which  is  not  known.  Com  was  usu-
ally hoed  twice,  for  the  first  time  in  winter,  as
soon  as  it  fairly  covered  the  groimd  {cum  sata
sulcos  contexerint),  provided  there  was  no  frost;
and  for  the  second  time  in  spring,  before  the  stalk
became  jointed  {ant0qua7n  seges  in  articulum  eat)  ;
great  care  being  taken  a1  all  times  not  to  injure
the  root.  On  the  first  ocxasion,  and  then  only,
where  the  ground  was  dry  and  the  situation  warm,
the  plants,  in  addition  to  a  simple  hoeing  (plana
sarritio)^  were  earthed  up  (adobrtiers).  Columella
recommends  sarritio  for  almost  all  crops,  ex-
cept lupines ;  but  authorities  differed  much  as  to
the  necessity  or  propriety  of  performing  the  opera-
tion in  any  case,  and  those  who  advocated  its  ex-
pediency most  warmly,  agreed  that  the  periods  at
which  it  ought  to  be  executed,  and  the  number  of
times  that  it  ought  to  be  repeated,  must  depend
upon  the  soil,  climate,  and  a  variety  of  special
circumstances.  (Cat.  37  ;  Varr.  i.  18,  29,  36  ;
Colum.  ii.  11,  xi.  2  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  21,  26  ;
Geopon.  ii.  24  ;  comp.  Plaut.  Ckpt.  iii.  5.  3  ;
Virg.  Gewrg.  i.  155.)

6.  Weeding  (runcaiio).

Hoeing  was  followed  by  weeding  (j8oTavi(r^y,


AGRICULTURA.

runcatio),  which  in  the  case  of  grain  crops  took
place  immediately  before  they  began  to  blossom,
or  immediately  after  the  flower  had  passed  away.
The  weeds  Avere  either  pulled  up  by  the  roots
{evulsis  inutilibus  herUs),  or  cut  over  with  a  bill-
hook, which  Palladius  terms  runco.  (Cat.  37  ;
Varr.  i,  30  ;  Colum.  ii.  11,  xi.  2  ;  Pallad.  i.  sub.
fin.  ;  Plin.  //.  A^.  xviii.  21  ;  Geopon.  ii.  24.)

But  after  the  farmer  had  laboured  with  unre-
mitting zeal  in  cleaning  and  pulverising  the  soil,  in
selecting  and  medicating  the  seed,  in  hoeing  the
young  blades,  and  in  extirpating  the  common
noxious  weeds  {lolium^  tribuli,  lappae,  cardui^
rubi^  avena),  the  safety  of  the  crop  was  threatened
by  a  vast  number  of  assailants  (turn  cariae  illudant
pestes)  ;  such  as  worms  of  various  kinds  {vermiculi)
attacking  both  root  and  ear,  caterpillars  (uricae\
spiders  (phalangia)^  snails  (limaces,  cocJdeae),  mice
(mures),  moles  (talpae),  and  the  whole  race  of
birds,  besides  which,  each  kind  of  plant  was  be-
lieved to  have  its  own  special  vegetable  enemy,
which,  if  not  carefully  watched,  would  spring  up,
choke,  and  destroy  it.  The  most  formidable  of
these  pests  are  enumerated  by  Pliny  (H.  N.  xviii.
17),  who  proposes  sundry  precautions  and  remedies,
of  which  many  are  ridiculous  superstitions.  But
the  foe  dreaded  above  all  others  in  the  vineyard
and  the  cornfield  was  a  peculiar  blight  or  mildew
termed  robigo,  which  wrought  such  havoc  in  damp
low-lying  situations  that  it  was  regarded  as  a  ma-
nifestation of  wrath  on  the  part  of  a  malignant
spirit,  whose  favour  the  rustic  sought  to  propitiate
by  the  annual  festival  of  the  Robigalia.     [RoBl-

GALIA.]

Another  danger  of  an  opposite  description  arose
from  the  grain  shooting  up  so  rapidly  that  the  stalk
was  likely  to  become  immoderately  long  and  weak.
The  danger  in  this  case  was  averted  by  pastur-
ing down  the  too  luxiu-iant  herbage  with  sheep
(luxuriem  segetum  tenera  depascit  in  herha),  or  by
dragging  over  it  an  iron-toothed  harrow  (oralis  et
lu)C  genus  denlatae  slilis  ferreis),  by  which  it  was
said  to  be  combed  (peclinari).  (Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.
17-  21  ;  Virg.  Georg.  i.  151.)

7.  Reaping  (messio).

The  com  was  reaped  as  soon  as  it  had  acquired
a  uniform  yellow  tint,  without  waiting  until  it
had  become  dead  ripe,  in  order  to  avoid  the  loss
sustained  by  shaking,  and  by  the  ravages  of
animals.  The  necessity  of  pursuing  this  course
with  regard  to  barley,  is  especially  insisted  upon ;
but  is  quite  at  variance  with  modem  practice.
(Colum.  ii.  9.)

Varro  describes  three  distinct  methods  of  reap-
ing (tria  genera  messionis).

1.  That  followed  in  Umbria,  where  the  stalk
was  shorn  dose  to  the  ground  with  a  hook  (falcc) ;
each  handful  was  laid  down  ;  and  when  a  num-
ber of  these  had  accumulated,  the  ears  were  cut
off,  thrown  into  baskets  (corbes),  and  sent  to  the
thrashing-floor,  the  straw  (slramentum)  being  left
upon  the  field,  and  afterwards  gathered  into  a
heap.

2.  That  followed  in  Picenum,  where  they  used
a  small  iron  saw  (serrula  ferrea)  fixed  to  the  ex-
tremity of  a  crooked  wooden  handle  (Ugneum  in-
curvum  hatiUum)  ;  with  this  they  laid  hold  of  a
bundle  of  ears  which  were  cut  off,  the  straw  being
left  standing  to  be  mown  subsequently.

3.  That  followed  in  the  vicinity  of  Rome  and


AGRICULTURAL

most  other  places,  where  the  stalks  were  grasped
ill  the  left  hand  and  cut  at  half  their  height  from
the  ground,  the  whole  of  the  portion  detached
being  conveyed  in  baskets  to  the  thrashing-floor,
and  the  part  left  standing  being  cut  afterwards.

The  last  two  methods  only  are  particularly  no-
ticed by  Columella,  who  describes  the  instriunents
employed  in  the  second  under  the  names  oipecthies
and  mergi  [ae  ?]  (multi  mergis^  alii  pectinibus
spicam  ipsarn  legunt)  ;  and  those  employed  in  the
third  as/alces  veriaidatae  {mviti  fcdcibus  vericulatis,
atqtie  its  vel  rostratis  vel  denticulatis  medium  culmum
secant)  ;  a  series  of  terms  which  have  never  been
very  satisfactorily  explained.  In  addition  to  the
above,  Pliny  and  Palladius  describe  a  reaping-
machine  worked  by  oxen,  which  was  much  used
in  the  extensive  level  plains  of  the  Gauls.  Virgil
{Georg.  i.  316),  perhaps,  alludes  to  binding  up  the
corn  in  sheafs";  but  his  words  are  not  so  clear
upon  this  point  as  those  of  Homer  in  the  charm-
ing picture  of  a  harvest-field  contained  in  the
eighteenth  book  of  the  Hiad.  (Varr.  i.  50  ;  Colum.
ii.^20  ;  VXvuH.N.  xviii.  30  ;  Pallad.vii.2 ;  Geopon.
ii.  25  J  comp.  Hom.  II.  xi.  67,  xviii.  550.)


AGRICULTURA.


53


8.  Tkrasliing  (tritura).

After  the  crop  had  been  properly  dried  and
hardened  {torrefacta)  by  exposure  to  the  sun,  it
was  conveyed  to  the  thrashing-floor  (aAws,  dAcuTj,
or  aAco'^,  area).  This  was  an  open  space,  on  some
elevated  spot  over  which  the  wind  had  free  course,
of  a  circular  form,  slightly  raised  in  the  centre  to
allow  moisture  to  run  off.  The  earth  was  com-
])ressed  by  heavy  rollers  (gravi  cylindro,  molari
lapide),  pounded  witli  rammers  (pavicuHs),  and
reduced  to  a  solid  consistency  with  clay  and  chaff,
so  as  to  present  an  even  unyielding  surface ;  or,
better  still,  paved  with  hard  stones.  Here  the  com
was  spread  out  and  beaten  with  flails  {baculis  excu-
tere,fustihuseudere,perticisjlagellare);  or  more  com-
monly, except  when  the  ears  alone  had  been  brought
from  the  field,  trodden  out  {eocterere)  by  the  feet
pf  a  number  of  men  or  horses,  who  were  driven
backwards  and  forwards  within  the  ring.  To  pro-
duce the  effect  more  easily  and  more  perfectly,  the
cattle  were  frequently  j^oked  to  a  machine  {tribu-
lum^  tribula,  trahea,  traha)^  consisting  of  a  board
made  rough  by  attachmg  to  it  .stones  or  pieces  of
iron,  and  loaded  with  some  heavy  weight ;  or,  what
was  termed  a  Punic  wain  {plostellum  Poenicum)
was  employed,  being  a  set  of  toothed  rollers
covered  with  planks,  on  which  sat  the  driver  who
guided  the  team.

Attached  to  the  area  was  a  huge  shed  or  half-
enclosed  barn  (mililarium),  of  sufficient  dimensions
to  contain  the  Avhole  crop.  Here  the  corn  was
dried  in  unfavourable  seasons  before  being  thrashed,
and  hither  it  was  hurriedly  conveyed  for  shelter
when  the  harvest  work  was  interrupted  by  any
sudden  storm.  (Cat.  91,  129 ;  Varr.  i.  13,  51,  52;
Colum.  i.  6,  ii.  19;  Pallad.  i.  36,  viii.  1 ;  Plin.  H.
N.  xviii.  29,  30 ;  Hom.  //.  xiii.  588  ;  xx.  495  ;,  xxi.
77 ;  Virg.  Georg.  i.  178;  Geopon.  ii.  26.)

9.   Winnowing  (ventilatio).

When  the  grain  was  mixed  with  chaff,  it  was
laid  down  in  small  piles  upon  the  area,  in  order
that  the  lighter  particles  might  be  borne  away  by
the  passing  breeze  ;  but  when  the  wind  was  not
sufficiently  strong,  it  became  necessary  to  wiimow
(fiventilare)  it.     This  was  effected  by  a  Labourer


(XiKfirjT-fip,  ventilator)  who  tossed  it  up  from  a
sieve  (va?inus,  capisterium)  or  shovel  (tttuoj/,  venti-
lahrum)^  when  the  heavy  portion  fell  down  in  a
heap,  and  the  chaff  floated  off  through  the  air.
When  it  was  intended  to  keep  the  com  for  any
length  of  time,  it  was  common  to  repeat  the  pro-
cess {repurgare^  repolire),  that  it  might  be  tho-
roughly cleaned.  (Varr.  i.  52 ;  Colum.  ii.  9.  20 ;
comp.  Hom.  11.  v.  499 ;  xiii.  588.)

10.  Preservation  of  Com  {defrummto  servanda).

After  the  com  had  been  thrashed  out  and  win-
nowed, or  at  least  the  ears  separated  from  the  stalk,
the  next  care  was  to  store  up  (condere)  the  grain  in
fitting  repositories  (granaria,  horrea).  The  great
object  in  view  being  to  preserve  it  from  becoming
mouldy  or  rotten,  and  to  protect  it  from  the  ravages
of  vermin,  especially  the  weevil  (ctircidio),  we  find
that  very  great  diversity  of  opinion  existed  as  to
the  means  by  which  those  ends  might  best  be  at-
tained. By  some  the  store-houses  were  built  with
brick  walls  of  great  thickness,  for  the  purpose,  it
would  seem,  of  securing  a  imiform  temperature,
and  had  no  window  or  aperture,  except  a  hole  in
the  roof,  through  which  they  were  filled.  Others,
again,  raised  these  structures  aloft  on  wooden
columns,  and  allowed  currents  of  air  to  pass
through  on  all  sides  and  even  from  below ;  while
others  admitted  particular  winds  only,  such,  namely,
as  were  of  a  drying  character.  Many  plastered
the  walls  with  a  sort  of  hard  stucco  worked  up
with  amurca,  which  was  believed  to  act  as  a  safe-
guard against  vermin,  while  others  considered  the
use  of  lime  under  any  form  as  decidedly  injurious.
These  and  many  different  opinions,  together  with
receipts  for  various  preparations  wherewith  to
sprinkle  the  corn,  will  be  found  detailed  in  the
authorities  cited  below,  among  whom  Pliny  very
sensibly  observes  that  the  principal  consideration
ought  to  be  thc'  condition  of  the  grain  itself  when
housed  ;  since,  if  not  perfectly  dry,  it  must  of  ne-
cessity breed  mischief  In  many  countries,  as  in
Thrace,  Cappadocia,  Spain,  and  Africa,  the  com
was  laid  up  in  pits  (scrobibus)  sunk  in  a  perfectly
dry  soil  and  well  lined  with  chaff,  a  practice  now
extensively  adopted  in  Tuscany.  Wheat  in  the
ear  {cum  spica  sua)  might,  according  to  Varro,  if
the  air  was  excluded,  be  preserved  in  such  recep-
tacles for  fifty  years,  and  millet  for  an  hundred.
(Cat.  92;  Varr.  i.  57;  Cdum.  i.  6;  Pallad.  i.  19;
Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  30  ;  Geopon.  ii.  27—31.)

IV.  Crops.

Crops,  as  already  remarked,  may  be  divided
into  four  classes  : — 1.  Grain  or  com  crops.  2.  Legu-
minous crops,  or  pulse.  3.  Crops  cut  green  for  forage.
4.  Crops  which  supplied  the  raw  materials  for  the
textile  fabrics.  We  might  extend  the  number
of  classes  did  we  purpose  to  treat  of  certain  plants,
such  as  poppies  (papavera)  and  sesamum,  raised
to  a  small  extent  only,  and  confined  to  particular
localities  ;  but  our  limits  do  not  permit  us  to  em-
brace so  wide  a  field  of  inquiry.

In  addition  to  the  above,  much  attention  was
devoted  to  what  may  be  termed  secondary  crops ;
those,  namely,  which  did  not  afford  directly  food
or  clothing  for  man  or  beast,  but  which  were  re-
quired in  order  to  facilitate  the  cultivation  and
collection  of  the  primary  crops.  Thus,  beds  of
willows  (salicta)  for  baskets  and  withes,  and  of
X  3


Si  AGRICULTURA.

reeds  (arundinela)  for  vine-props,  were  frequently  in.
favourable  situations  very  profitable,  just  as  land
in  certain  districts  of  Kent  yields  a  large  return
when  planted  with  yoimg  chestnuts  for  hop-poles.

1.  Com  Crops  (Jrumenta).

The  word  applied  in  a  general  sense  to  denote
what  we  now  call  "  the  cereal  grasses  "  was  /tm-
menta  ;  but  of  these  wheat  being  by  far  the  most
important,  it  is  not  wonderful  that  the  term  in
question  should  be  employed  frequently  to  denote
wheat  specially,  and  occasionally  in  such  a  manner
as  to  exclude  other  kinds  of  grain,  as  when  Pliny
remarks,  "  calamus  altior  frumento  quam  hordeo,"
meaning  "  in  wheat  the  stalk  is  longer  than  in
barley."  The  only  frumenta  which  it  will  be
necessary  for  us  to  consider  particularly  in  this
place  are  —

a.  Triticum  a.ni  Far;  b.  Hordeum;  c.  Panicum
and  Milium.

a.  Triticum  and  Far.  No  one  entertains  any
doubt  that  triticum  (rrvphs  in  Greek,  and  by  the
later  writers  (tTtos)  is  the  generic  name  for  the
grain  which  we  denominate  wJieat ;  but  when  we
proceed  to  examine  the  different  species  or  varieties,
we  are  involved  in  many  difficulties,  for  the
botanical  descriptions  transmitted  to  us  by  the
ancients  are  in  all  cases  so  imperfect,  and  in
many  instances  so  directly  at  variance  with  each
other,  that  it  becomes  almost  impossible  to  identify
■with  certainty  the  objects  to  which  they  refer,  with
those  familiar  to  ourselves.  Columella  (ii.  6  ;  comp.
Dioscorid,  ii.  107  ;  Theophr.  H.P.  viii.  1.  4),  who
attempts  a  systematic  classification,  assigns  the  first
place  among  "frumenta"  to  Triticum  and  Semen
adoreum,  each  of  which  contained  several  species  or
varieties.  Among  many  ditferent  kinds  of  triticum
he  deems  the  following  only  deser^ing  of  particular
notice :  —

1.  Robus,  possessing  superior  weight  and  bril-
liancy (nitor).  _  *

2.  Siligo,  very  white,  but  deficient  in  weight.
(Colum.  ii.  9,  §  13  ;  Plin^  H.  N.  xviii.  8.)

3.  Trimestre  (rpLfirjVLa7os  s.  rplfxriuos),  a  sort  of
siligo,  receiving  its  name  from  lying  three  months
only  in  the  ground,  being  spring-sown.  We  find
this  kind  sometimes  denominated  difjLrjvos  also,
since  in  very  warm  situations  it  came  to  maturity
in  two  months  after  it  was  sowru

Among  the  diff"erent  kinds  of  Semen  adoreum^
the  following  are  particularly  noticed :  —

1.  Far  Clusinum,  distinguished  by  its  whiteness,

2.  Far  venueulum  rutilum.    1  Both  heavier  than

3.  Far  venueulum  candidum.  j      the  Clusinum.

4.  Halicastrum  or  Semen  trimestre^  very  heavy
and  of  fine  quality.  Here  we  must  remark  that
although  robus,  siligo.,  and  trimestre  are  set  down  as
particular  species  or  varieties  of  the  more  general
term  triticum,  which  is  used  in  contradistinction  to
semen  adoretim,  it  is  much  more  usual  to  find  triti-
cum used  in  a  restricted  sense  to  denote  ordinary
winter  wheat,  in  opposition  to  both  siligo  and  ado-
reum,  and  hence  Pliny  declares  that  the  most  com-
mon kinds  of  grain  were  '■^  Far,  called  adoreum  by
the  ancients,  siligo,  and  triticum.^''

Now,  with  regard  to  the  three  kinds  of  triticum
enumerated  above,  we  shall  have  little  difficulty  in
deciding  that  they  were  not  distinct  species,  but
merely  varieties  of  the  same  species  ;  for  we  are
assured  by  Columella  (ii.  9),  that  triticum,  when
sown  in  wet  land,  passed  in  the  course  of  three


AGRICULTURA.


years  into  siligo,  and  by  Pliny  (xviii.  8)  that  siligo,
in  most  parts  of  Gaul,  passed,  at  the  end  of  two
years,  into  triticum  ;  again.  Columella,  in  describing
trimestre,  admits  (although  contradicted  by  Plin.
H.  N.  xviii.  7)  that  it  is  a  variety  of  siligo,  while
modern  experience  teaches  us  that  winter  and  spring
wheats  are  convertible  by  subjecting  them  to  pecu-
liar modes  of  cultivation.  Hence  we  conclude  that
robus  and  siligo  were  varieties  of  what  is  now
termed  by  botanists  Triticum  ht/bernuni,  and  that
trimestre  was  a  variety  of  our  Triticum  aestivum,
which  is  itself  a  variety  of  the  hybernum.

The  question  with  regard  to  Far,  Ador,  Semen
adoreum.  Semen,  Adoreum,  names  used  indifferently
by  the  Latin  writers,  does  not  admit  of  such  an
easy  solution.  But  after  a  careftil  examination
of  the  numerous,  vague,  perplexing,  and  contradic-
tory statements  scattered  over  the  classics,  the  dis-
cussion of  which  separately  would  far  exceed  our
limits,  we  may  with  considerable  confidence  decide
that/ar  was  a  variety  of  the  Greek  C^a  or  C^ia,  and
of  the  modem  Triticum  spelta,  if  not  absolutely
identical  with  one  or  both.  Spelt,  which  is  fully
recognised  by  botanists  as  a  distinct  species  of  triti-
cum, is  much  more  hardy  than  common  wheat,  suc-
ceeding well  in  high  exposed  situations  where  the
latter  would  not  ripen,  and  its  chaff  adheres  with
singular  firmness  to  the  grain,  both  of  which  cir-
cumstances were  prominent  characteristics  of  far.
(Cohim.  ii.  8  ;  Plin.  //.  N.  xviii.  7,  8,  30.)  In-
deed, it  was  found  impossible  to  get  rid  of  the  thick
double  case  in  which  it  was  enclosed,  by  the  ordi-
nary modes  of  thrashing ;  therefore  it  was  stored
up  with  the  chaff  attached  {convenit  cum  palea  sua
condi  et  stipula  tantum  et  aristis  liberatur);  and
when  used  as  food  it  was  necessary  to  pound  it  in  a
mortar,  or  rub  it  in  a  mill  of  a  peculiar  construction,
in  order  to  separate  the  tenacious  husks  —  a  process
altogether  distinct  from  grinding,  and  indicated  by
the  words pinsere,  pistura,  pistores,  (Cat.  2  ;  Plin.
//.  N.  xviii.  10.)  The  idea  entertained  by  some  com-
mentators, that  the  distinction  between  triticum  and
far  consisted  in  the  circumstance  that  the  latter  was
awned  while  the  former  was  beardless,  is  alto-
gether untenable ;  for  not  only  does  Pliny  say  ex-
pressly in  one  passage  (xviii.  10),  far  sine  arista
est,  and  in  another  (xviiL  30),  as  distinctly  that  far
had  aristae,  but  it  is  perfectly  clear  from  Varro
(i.  48 ;  compare  Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  7),  that  ordinary
triticum  had  a  beard,  and  from  Pliny  that  siligo
was  generally,  although  not  uniformly,  without
one  —  a  series  of  assertions  whose  contradictory
nature  need  occasion  no  surprise,  since  it  is  now
well  known  that  this,  like  colour,  is  a  point  which
does  not  amount  to  specific  difference,  for  white,
red,  awned,  and  beardless  wheats  are  found  to
change  and  run  into  each  other,  according  to  soil,
climate,  and  mode  of  culture.  Another  fact  noticed
by  Pliny,  to  which,  if  correct,  botanists  seem  not
to  have  given  due  attention,  is,  that  triticum  had
four  joints  in  its  stalk,yar  six,  and  barley  eight.

All  agree  that  triticum  (we  shall  use  the  word
hereafter  in  the  restricted  sense  of  common  winter-
wheat)  succeeded  best  in  dry,  slightly  elevated,
open  ground,  where  the  full  influence  of  the  sun's
rays  was  not  impeded  by  trees,  while  siligo  and  far
were  well  adapted  for  low  damp  situations  and  stiff
clayey  soils  (Cato  34,  35  ;  Varr,  i.  9 ;  Colum.  ii.  6 ;
Plin.  xviii.  8).  The  sowing  of  winter  wheat  {satio
autumnalis)  whether  triticum,  siligo,  or  adoreum,
commenced  for  the  most  part,  according  to  the


AGRICULTURA.

Virgilian  precept,  after  the  morning  setting  of  the
Pleiades,  that  is,  by  the  Roman  calendar  (ix.  Kal.
Nov.),  after  the  24th  of  October,  and  was  always
concluded  before  the  9th  of  December,  it  being  a
maxim  strictly  observed  among  prudent  husband-
men to  abstain  from  all  field  work  for  fifteen  days
before,  and  fifteen  days  after  the  winter  solstice.
In  wet  or  light  soils,  however,  and  in  all  ex-
posed situations,  where  it  was  important  that  the
roots  should  have  a  firm  hold  of  the  ground  before
the  rains  and  frosts  set  in,  the  sowing  was  fre-
quently completed  by  the  end  of  September.

Spring  sowing  (statio  trimestris)  was  practised
only  when  the  fanner  had  been  prevented  by  ac-
cidental circumstances  from  completing  his  work  in
autumn ;  or  in  those  localities  where,  from  the  ex-
treme cold  and  heavy  snows,  it  was  feared  that  the
young  blades  would  be  destroyed  in  winter  ;  or
finally,  where,  from  the  depth  and  stiffness  of  the
soil  {crassititdine)^  it  might  be  cropped  repeatedly
without  a  fallow.  In  every  case  it  was  considered
advisable  to  throw  the  seed  as  soon  as  the  weather
would  permit,  that  is,  in  ordinary  seasons,  early  in
March.  The  quantity  of  seed  required  was  from
four  to  six  modii  of  triticum  or  siligo  to  the  juger
according  as  the  soil  was  rich  or  poor ;  and  from
nine  to  ten  modii  of  far.  To  understand  this  dif-
ference, we  must  recollect  that  the  far  was  stored
up  and  sown  out  in  its  thick  husks  ;  and,  therefore,
would  occupy  almost  twice  as  much  space  as  when
cleaned  like  the  triticum.  The  various  operations
performed  upon  the  above  quantity  of  seed  before
it  could  be  brought  to  the  thrashing-floor,  required
ten  days  and  a  half  of  work. — Four  for  the  plough-
man (bzibulcus)  ;  one  for  the  harrower  (occator)  ;
three  for  the  hoer  (sarritor)^  two  days  on  the  first
occasion,  and  one  on  the  second  ;  one  for  the  weeder
(runcator)  ;  one  and  a  half  for  the  reaper  {messor).

The  finest  Italian  wheat  weighed  from  twenty-
five  to  twenty-six  pounds  the  modius,  which  cor-
responds to  upwards  of  seventy  English  pounds
avoirdupois  to  the  imperial  bushel,  the  Roman
pound  being  very  nearly  11  "8  oz.  avoird.,  and  the
modius  '99119  of  an  imperial  peck.  The  lightest
was  that  brought  from  Gaul  and  from  the  Cherso-
nese. It  did  not  weigh  more  than  twenty  pounds
the  modius.  Intermediate  were  the  Sardinian,  the
Alexandrian,  the  Sicilian,  the  Boeotian,  and  the
African,  the  two  last  approaching  most  nearly  in
excellence  to  the  Italian.

The  proportion  which  the  produce  bore  to  the
seed  sown  varied,  when  Cicero  and  Varro  wrote,
in  the  richest  and  most  highly  cultivated  districts
of  Sicily  and  Italy  from  8  to  10  for  1  ;  15  for  1
was  regarded  as  an  extraordinary  crop  obtained  in
a  few  highly  favoured  spots  only,  while  in  the  age
of  Columella,  when  agriculture  had  fallen  into
decay,  the  average  return  was  less  than  4  for  1.
Parts  of  Egypt,  the  region  of  Byzacium  in  Afnca,
the  neighbourhood  of  Gai-ada  in  Syria,  and  the
territory  of  Sybaris  were  said  to  render  a  hundred
or  even  a  hundred  and  fifty  fold  ;  but  these  ac-
counts were  in  all  likelihood  greatly  exaggerated.
(Cic.  in  Verr.  iii.  47  ;  Varr.  i.  44  ;  Colum.  iii.  3.
§  4  ;.  Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  21.)

Fur  is  uniformly  represented  as  having  been  the
first  species  of  grain  ever  cultivated  in  Italy,  and
as  such  was  employed  exclusively  in  religious  cere-
monies. Hence  dXso  farina  became  the  generic
term  for  flo\ir  or  meal  whether  derived  from  far,
from  triticum,  or  from  any  other  cereal.     Thus  we


AGRICULTURA.


£5


read  of  triticca  farina,  siliginea  farina,  hordeacea
farina,  even  avenacea  farina  (Plin.  H.  N.  xviii,  9,
XX.  13,  xxii.  25).  In  the  expressions /ar  triticeum^
far  hordaeewm  found  in  Columella  (viii.  5,  ll),/ar
is  evidently  used  for  farina,  and  we  shall  see
that  even  siligo  is  in  like  manner  used  to  denote,  not
only  the  solid  grain,  but  the  flour  produced  by
grinding  it.  This  being  premised,  we  may  pro-
ceed to  examine  the  meaning  of  the  terms  poUen,
svmilago  s.  simila,  cibarium,  siligo,  fios,  alica,  amy-
lum,  granea,  &c.,  several  of  which  have  never  been
clearly  explained.  Here  again  we  can  give  the  re-
sult only  of  an  investigation,  in  the  course  of  which
we  are  obliged  to  thread  our  way  through  state-
ments at  once  obscure  and  irreconcilable.  Regard-
ing triticum  and  siligo  as  two  well  distinguished
varieties  of  wheat,  their  products  when  ground
were  thus  classed  by  millers :  —

From  triticum,

1.  Pollen,  the  finest  flour  dust,  double  dressed,

2.  Simila,  or  Similago,  the  best  first  flour.

3.  Cibarium  secundarium,  second  flour.

4.  Furfures,  bran.

Frran  siligo,

1.  Siligo,  the  finest  double-dressed  flour,  used
exclusively  for  pastry  and  fancy  bread.

2.  Flos  (siliginis),  first  flour.

3.  Cibarium  sem?idarium,  second  flour.

4.  Furfures,  bran.

It  would  appear  that  Celsus  (ii.  18),  consider-
ing wheat  generally  as  triticum,  called  the  finest
and  purest  flour  si%o  ;  ordinary  flour,  simila  ;  the
whole  produce  of  the  grain,  bran,  and  flour  mixed
together,  avrdirvpos.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  8,  9,
10,  11.)

Alica  is  placed  by  Pliny  among  the  different
kinds  of  corn  (xviii.  7),  and  is  probably  the  same
with  the  Halicastrum,  Alicastrum,  or  spring-sown
^r  of  Columella.  But  alica  is  also  used  to  denote,
not  only  the  grain,  but  a  particular  preparation  of
it,  most  clearly  described  in  another  passage  of
Pliny  (xviii.  11).  The  finest  was  made  from
Campanian  zea,  which  was  first  rubbed  in  a  wooden
mortar  to  remove  the  husk,  and  then  {excussis
tunicis)  the  pure  grain  (audata  medulla)  was
pounded.  In  this  manner  three  sorts  were  pro-
duced and  classed  according  to  their  fineness,  the
minimum,  the  secu7idarium,  and  the  coarsest  or
aphaerema,  and  each  was  mixed  with  a  kind  of  fine
white  chalk,  found  between  Naples  and  Puteoli,
which  became  intimately  amalgamated  with  it
{transit  in  corpus,  coloremque  et  teneritatem  ajfert).
This  compound  was  the  principle  ingredient  in  a
sort  of  porridge  also  called  alica,  while  alicarius,
signifying  properly  one  who  pounded  alica,  fre-
quently denotes  a  miller  in  general.  (Plin.  H.  N'.
xviii.  7,  11,  29,  xxii.  25  ;  Cat.  76  ;  Cels.  vi.  6  ;
Mart,  ii.  37,  xiii.  6  ;  Geopon.  iii.  7.)

Amylum  is  starch,  and  the  modes  of  preparing
it  are  described  by  Cato  (87),  and  Pliny  {H.  N.
xviii.  7).

Granea  was  wheat,  not  ground,  but  merely
divested  of  its  husk,  and  made  into  a  sort  of  por-
ridge by  boiling  it  in  water  and  then  adding  milk.
(Cat.  86.)

6.  Hordeum    s.    Ordeum   (KpiO-q  ;   Kp7,  Hom.).

Next  in  importance  to  triticum  and  adoreum,  was

hcyrdeum  or  barley,  which  was  a  more  appropriate

food  for  the  lower  animals  than  wheat,  was  better

B  4


66


AGRICULTURA.


for  man  when  made  into  polenta  than  wheat  of  an
indifferent  quality,  and  furnished  excellent  straw
and  chaff  (stramentum^  palea).

The  species  most  generally  cultivated,  termed
heocastichum  or  cantherinum,  was,  we  can  scarcely
doubt,  identical  with  what  we  now  call  bear  or
Ingg,  the  Ilordeum  lieocasticlLon  or  six-rowed
barley  of  botanists.  It  was  sown  after  the  vernal
equinox  (hence  called  rpi/xiivri^  Theophr.  //.  P.
viii.  1),  upon  land  that  had  been  twice  ploughed,
at  the  rate  of  five  modii  to  the  juger  ;  succeeded
best  in  a  dry,  loose,  rich  soil  ;  and  being  an  ex-
hausting crop,  the  land  from  which  it  had  been
reaped  was  summer  fallowed,  or  recruited  by  ma-
nure. It  was  cut  as  soon  as  it  was  ripe  ;  for  the
stalk  being  brittle,  was  liable  to  be  beaten  down  ;
and  the  grain  not  being  enclosed  in  an  outer  husk,
was  easily  shaken.

Another  species,  termed  Galaticum  or  disti-
clium^  the  same  apparently  with  the  modem  Hor-
deum  vulgare^  or  with  the  Hordeum  distichum,
varieties  of  the  common  two-rowed  barley,  was
remarkable  for  its  weight  and  whiteness,  and  an-
swered well  for  mixing  with  wheaten  flour  in
baking  bread  for  slaves.  It  was  sown  in  autumn,
winter  or  early  spring,  at  the  rate  of  six  modii  to
the  juger.  Five  modii  of  seed  hordeum  required
six  days  and  a  half  of  labour  to  bring  it  to  the
thrashing-floor ;  viz.  ploughing  three  days,  harrow-
ing (occatoria  opera)  one,  hoeing  (sarritoria)  one
and-a-half,  reaping  (messoria)  one.

Pliny  speaks  of  hordeum  as  the  lightest  of  all
frumenta,  weighing  only  15  pounds  to  the  modius
(Roman  pound=ll-8  oz.  avoird.).  In  mild  cli-
mates it  might  be  sown  early  in  autumn.  (Theophr.
H.  P.  viii.  1  ;  Cat.  35  ;  Varr.  i.  34  ;  Colum.  ii.
9.  §§  14, 15, 16  ;  Virg.  Georg.  i.  210  ;  Plin.  H.  N.
xviii.  7,  10  ;  Geopon.  ii.  14.)

c.  Panicum  and  Milium  are  commonly  spoken  of
together,  as  if  they  were  only  varieties  of  the  same
grain.  The  first  is  in  all  probability  the  Panicum
miliaceum  or  common  millet  of  botanists,  the
eAvfios  or  fJLiXivr]  of  the  Greeks  ;  the  second  is
perhaps  the  Setaria  Italica  or  Italian  millet,  which
corresponds  to  the  description  of  Kejxpos  ;  while  the
species  noticed  by  Pliny  as  having  been  brought
from  India  less  than  ten  years  before  the  period
when  he  wrote  is,  we  can  scarcely  doubt,  the
Sorghum  vulgare,  or  Durra  of  the  Arabs.

Panicum  and  milium  were  sown  in  spring
(Virg.  Georg.  i.  216),  towards  the  end  of  March,
at  the  rate  of  four  sextarii  (pints)  only  to  the
juger,  but  they  required  repeated  hoeing  and
weeding  to  keep  them  clean.  They  succeeded  well
in  light  loose  soil,  even  on  sand  if  well  irrigated  ;
and  as  soon  as  the  ears  were  fairly  formed,  they
were  gathered  by  the  hand,  hung  up  to  dry  in  the
sun,  and  in  this  state  would  keep  for  a  longer
period  than  any  other  grain.  Milium  was  baked
into  bread  or  cakes,  very  palatable  when  eaten
hot ;  and  both  panicum  and  milium  made  good
porridge  (puis).  Although  not  much  used  by  the
population  of  Italy,  except  perhaps  in  Ciimpania,
they  formed  a  most  important  article  of  food  in
the*  Gauls,  in  Pontus,  in  Sarmatia,  and  in  Ethio-
pia. (Cat.  6  ;  Colum.  ii.  9.  §17;  Plin.  H.  N.
xviii.  7,  10,  26  ;  Pallad.  iv.  3  ;  Geopon.  ii.  38  ;
Theophr.  II.  4>.  A.  ii.  1 7,  H.  P.  viii.  3  ;  Dioscor.
ii.  119.)

Secale,  rye,  the  Secale  cereale  of  botanists,  is  not
mentioned  by  any  of  the  Greek  writers  unless  it


AGRICULTURA.

be  the  /3piX"  described  by  Galen  (De  Aliment.
Fivcult.  i.  2)  as  cultivated  in  Thrace  and  Macedonia
(but  this,  in  all  probability,  was  a  coarse  variety  of
spelt),  nor  by  Cato,  VaiTo,  Columella,  nor  Palla-
dius.  Pliny  alone  (//.  A^.  xviii.  40)  speaks  of  it,
and  in  the  following  terms  : — "  Secale  Taurini  sub
Alpibus  Asiam  vocant,  deterrimum,  tt  tantum  ad
arcendam  ftimem :  foecunda  sed  gracili  stipula,
nigritia  triste,  sed  pondere  praecipuum.  Admis-
cetui*  huic  far  ut  mitiget  amaritudinem  ejus  ;  et
tamen  sic  quoque  ingratissimum  ventri  est.  Nas-
citur  qualicunque  solo  cum  centesimo  grano,  ip-
sumque  pro  laetamine  est."  In  the  previous
chapter  he  makes  it  identical  with  farrago^  that
is,  corn  sown  for  the  purpose  of  being  cut  green  as
fodder.     See  remarks  upon  Farrago  below.

Avena,  the  oat  {^p6fxos  s.  fipoi>yi.os^  Theophr.
//.  P.  viii.  4  ;  Dioscorid.  ii.  16),  the  Avena  sativa
of  botanists,  need  scarcely  be  noticed  in  this  place
since  it  cannot  be  raised  as  a  grain  with  any  ad-
vantage in  a  climate  so  wann  as  that  of  Greece  or
of  Italy.  Columella  (ii.  10.  §  9)  and  Pliny  (H.  N.
xviii.  42,  Avena  Graeca)  recommended  that  it
should  be  sown  for  green  fodder,  and  the  latter
remarks  that  it  became  a  sort  of  corn  {frumenti  fit
instar)  in  Germany,  where  it  formed  a  regular
crop,  and  where  oatmeal  porridge  was  a  national
dish  (neque  alia  pulte  vicant,  H.  N.  xviii,  44.
§  1.  comp.  iv.  27,  vi.  35).  In  another  passage
(//.  A^,  xxii.  68)  the  same  author  prescribes  oat-
meal (avenacea  farina)  steeped  in  vinegar  as  a
remedy  for  spots  on  the  skin.  The  Avena  con-
demned as  a  troublesome  weed  by  Cato  {Ii.  R.
xxxvii.  §  5)  and  Virgil  (steriles  avenae,  G.  i.  154)
is,  probably,  the  Avena  fatua  of  botanists,  al-
though Pliny  (//.  A'',  xviii.  44.  §  1 )  makes  no  dis-
tinction between  this  and  the  cultivated  kind.

Other  cereals  we  may  dismiss  very  briefly.

Oryza  (opv^a^  vpv(ou),  rice,  was  imported  from
the  East,  and  was  much  esteemed  for  making  gruel
(piisana,).

Zea  (C^a,  C'^ta),  Oli/ra  (oKvpa),  TipJie  (rltpri),
and  Arinca,  of  which  the  first  two  are  named  by
Homer,  must  be  regarded  as  varieties  of  the  Triti-
cum  Spclta  or  Far  (Herod,  ii.  36  ;  Theophr.  //.  P.
ii.  5,  viii.  9  ;  Dioscorid.  ii.  110  ;  Galen,  de  Ali-
ment. Facult.  i.  2,  13).  The  statements  found  in
the  eighteenth  book  of  Pliny's  Natural  History  in
reference  to  these  four  are  altogether  unintelligible
when  compared  with  each  other.  He  evidently
copied,  as  was  too  often  his  custom,  from  a  num
ber  of  discordant  authorities  without  attempting
to  reconcile  or  thinking  it  necessary  to  point  out
their  contradictions.  In  one  place  (xviii.  20.  §  4)
he  says  distinctly  that  Arinca  is  the  Olyra  of
Homer,  and  in  another  he  seems  to  say  (xviii..  11)
that  Olyra  in  Egypt  became  Far  {far  in  jEgypto
ex  olyra  conficitur).  Now  we  know  from  Hero-
dotus (ii.  36)  that  in  his  time  Olyra  and  Zea  were
considered  synonymous,  and  that  these  exclusively
were  cultivated  by  the  Egyptians.  Hence  we
shall  be  led  to  conclude  that  the  wheat  which
has  been  raised  recently  from  the  seeds  discovered
in  the  mummy  cases  is  in  reality  the  ancient  Zea
or  Olyra,  and  from  its  appearance  we  should  fur-
ther be  induced  to  identify  it  with  the  Triticum
ramosum  of  Pliny  {H.  N.  xviii.  21).

With  regard  to  Ino  and  Ilorminum,  of  which
the  former  seems  to  have  been  called  (pvcnjxov  by
the  Greeks,  both  enumerated  by  Pliny  among
frumenta,  although  he  afterwards  somewhat  quali-


AGRICULTURA.

fies  this  assertion,  we  do  not  hazard  a  conjecture.
(Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  10.  §  1—22,  xxii.  75.)

We  may  conclude  this  section  with  an  enumera-
tion of  the  technical  terms  employed  to  denote  the
different  parts  of  an  ear  and  stalk  of  corn.

The  whole  ear  was  named  spica;  the  beard  or
awn  arista;  the  ear,  when  beardless,  spica  viu-
tica,  the  white  solid  substance  of  the  grain,  inti-
mum  solidum  —  nudata  mcduUa — granum  ;  the
husk  which  immediately  envelopes  the  granum,
gluma^  with  which  cortex,  tunica,  folliculus,  are
used  as  synonymous  ;  the  outer  husk  acus ;  the
outer  husk  with  the  short  straw  attached,  palea  ;
the  stem,  stipula,  czdmus,  to  which  scapus,  caulis
correspond  in  leguminous  plants  ;  the  knots  or
joints  in  the  stem,  genicuU^  articuli ;  the  sheath-
like blade  in  the  stem  from  which  the  ear  issues
forth,  vagina.

2.  Leguminous  Crops  (x^^poira,  Legumina).

The  vegetables  falling  properly  under  this  head,
chiefly  cultivated  by  the  ancients,  were  :  a.  Faba;
h.  Lttpinus ;  c.  Lens  s.  Lenticula ;  d.  Cicer ;  e.
Cicercula ;  f.  PJiaseolus  ;  g.  Fisum  ;  to  which,
in  order  to  avoid  multiplying  subdivisions,  we
may  add  Napi  and  Rapa,  since  in  common  with
the  legumina  they  served  as  food  both  for  men  and
cattle.

a.  Faba.  The  ancient  faba,  the  Kvdfxos  of  the
Greeks,  notwithstanding  all  that  has  been  urged  to
the  contrary,  was  certainly  one  of  the  varieties  of
our  common  field  bean,  the  Vicia  Faba,  or  Faba
vulgaris  arvensis  of  botanists.  It  required  either
rich  and  strong,  or  well  manured  land.  If  sown  upon
moist  low-lying  ground  that  had  remained  long
uncropped  {veteretum),  no  previous  preparation  was
necessary  ;  but  the  seed  was  scattered  and  at  once
ploughed  in  ;  the  field  was  then  ribbed  and  finally
harrowed  {cum  semen  crude  solo  ingesserimus,  inara-
bimus,  imporcatumq7ie  occabimus),  the  object  being
to  bury  the  seed  as  deep  as  possible.  But  if  beans
were  to  be  sown  upon  land  from  which  a  com  crop
had  been  just  reaped  (res^zii'/zs  a</er), after  the  stubble
was  cleared  away,  manure  was  spread  at  the  rate
of  twenty  four  vehes  to  the  juger,  and  then  the  re-
maining operations  were  the  same  as  above.  Rich
land  required  from  four  to  six  modii  to  the  juger,
poorer  soil  somewhat  more.  A  portion  of  the  seed
was  committed  to  the  ground  about  the  middle
{media  sementi),  the  remainder  at  the  end  of  the
corn-sowing  season  {septimontialis  satio).  Virgil
{Georg.  \.  215),  indeed,  following  the  practice  of  his
own  district,  directs  that  beans  should  be  sown  in
spring  ;  but  this  was  disapproved  of  in  the  rest  of
Italy  because  the  stalks  {caules — fabalia),  the  pods
{siliquae),  and  the  husks  {acus  fabaginum),  all  of
which  were  of  great  value  as  food  for  cattle,  were
less  luxuriant  in  the  spring-sown  {trimestris  faba)
than  in  the  autumnal  crop.  Columella  recommends
that  beans  should  be  hoed  three  times,  in  which
case  they  required  no  weeding.  When  they  had
arrived  at  maturltj',  they  were  reaped  close  to  the
ground,  were  made  up  into  sheaves  {fasciculi),
were  thrashed  by  men  who  tossed  the  bundles  with
forks,  trampled  them  under  foot,  and  beat  them
with  flails  {baculis),  and  finally,  were  cleaned  by
winnowing.  The  harvest  took  place  in  Central
Italy  about  the  end  of  May,  and  hence  the  first  of
June  was  named  Calendae  Fabariae,  because  on
that  day  new  beans  were  used  in  sacred  rites.  From
four  to  six  modii  of  seed  required  two  days'  work


AGRICULTURA.


57


of  the  ploughman,  if  the  land  was  newly  broken
up,  but  only  one  if  it  had  been  cropped  the  previous
season  ;  harrowing  occupied  one  day  and  a  half,
the  first  hoeing  one  day  and  a  half,  the  second  and
third  each  one  day,  reaping  one  day  ;  in  all,  seven
or  eight  days.

Bean  meal  {lom£ntum,  (rfirjy/xa)  was  baked  into
bread  or  cakes  {&pTos  Kvdfiifos),  especially  if
mixed  with  the  flour  of  wheat  or  millet  ;  when
made  into  porridge  {fabacia,  puis  fd>ata),  it  was
accounted  an  acceptable  offering  to  the  gods  and
termed  Refriva,  —  a  name  properly  applied  to  the
beans  brought  home  and  set  apart  for  holy  pur-
poses. (Hom.  //.  xiii.  589  ;  Cat.  35  ;  Varr.  i.  44  ;
Colum.  ii.  10, 12  ;  Pallad.  ii.  9,  vii.  3 ;  Plin.  H.  N.
xvii.  5,  xviii.  12,  xix.  3  ;  Geopon.ii.  35  ;  Dioscorid.
ii.  127  ;  Theophr.  H.P.  iv.  2,  vii.  3,  viii,  1  ;  comp.
Fest,  s.  V.  Refriva;  Gell.  iv.  11,  x.  15;  Macrob.
Sat.i.  12;  Cic.  deDiv.  i.  30  ;  Ov.  Fast.  v.  436.)

b.  Lupinus,  the  ^ep/Jios  of  the  Greeks,  seems  to
include  the  Lupinus  alhus,  the  L.  luteus,  and  the
Tj.  pilosus  of  botanists,  the  common  white,  yellow,
and  rose  lupines  of  our  gardens.  The  first  of  the
above  species  was  that  chiefly  cultivated  by  the
Romans,  and  is  pronounced  by  Columella  to  be
the  most  valuable  of  the  legumina,  because  it  de-
manded very  little  labour,  was  a  sure  crop,  and
instead  of  exhausting,  actually  refreshed  and  ma-
nured the  land.  Steeped  in  water  and  afterwards
boiled,  it  formed  an  excellent  food  for  oxen  in
wintex',  and  might  be  used  even  for  man  during
periods  of  scarcity.  It  could  be  sown  as  soon  as
thrashed,  might  be  cast  upon  ground  unprepared
by  ploughing  or  any  other  operation  {crudis  novali-
bus),  and  was  covered  up  anyhow,  or  not  covered
up  at  all,  being  protected  by  its  bitterness  from  the
attacks  of  birds  and  other  animals.

The  proper  season  for  sowing  was  early  in  au-
tumn, in  order  that  the  stalks  might  acquire  vigour
before  the  cold  weather  set  in  ;  the  quantity  of
seed  was  ten  modii  to  the  juger,  and  the  crop  was
reaped  after  it  had  remained  a  year  in  the  ground.
It  succeeded  well  in  any  dry  light  land,  but  not  in
wet  tenacious  soil.  Ten  modii  required  in  all  only
three  days'  work  ;  one  for  covering  up,  one  for
harrowing,  and  one  for  reaping,  and  of  these  opera-
tions, the  two  first  might,  if  there  was  a  press  of
work,  be  dispensed  with.  (Cat.  v.  35  ;  Colum.  ii.
10, 16,  xi.  2  ;  Pallad.  i.  6,  ii.  9,  vi.  3,  vii.  3,  ix.  2  ;
Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  14  ;  Geopon.  ii.  39  ;  Virg.
Georg,  i.  75.)

c.  Lens  s.  Lenticula,  the  (paKds  of  the  Greeks,
the  modern  Ervum  L^ens,  Vicia  Lens,  or  Lentile,
was  sown  twice  a  year,  late  in  autumn  {per  m^diam
sementim)  and  early  in  spring,  on  dry  light  soil,  in
the  proportion  of  rather  more  than  a  modius  to  the
juger.  It  was  recommended  to  mix  the  seed  with
dry  manure,  and  after  leaving  it  in  this  state  for
four  or  five  days,  then  to  scatter  it.  A  modius  and
a  half  required  eight  days' work — ploughing,  three  ;
harrowing,  one  ;  hoeing,  two  ;  weeding,  one  ;  pul-
ling, one.  (Cat.  35  ;  Virg.  Georg.  i.  228  ;  Colum.
ii.  10,  12  ;  xi.  2.  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  12,  31  ;
Pallad.  xii.  1 1 ;  Theophr.  H.  P.  viii.  3  ;  Dioscorid.
ii.  129;  Geopon.  ii.  37;  comp.  Martial,  xiii.  9.  1 ;
Gell.  xviii.  8.)

d.  Cicer,  the  ipe€iv6os  of  the  Greeks.  The
Cicer  arietinum  {kpl6s)  and  the  Cicer  Punicum,  va-
rieties of  our  common  chick-pea,  were  sown  in
rich  soil,  during  the  month  of  March,  in  the  pro-
portion  of  three  modii   to  the  juger,  the  seeds


58


AGRICULTURA.


l)aving  been  previously  steeped  to  make  them
germinate  more  readily.  The  crop  was  considered
injurious  to  the  soil,  and  therefore  avoided  by
pnident  husbandmen.  Three  modii  of  Cicer  re-
quired foiir  days  for  ploughing  and  sowing,  two
days  for  harrowing,  one  day  for  hoeing,  one  day
for  weeding,  and  three  days  for  pulling  (veUuntur
tribus).  (Colum.  ii.  10,  12  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  12  ;
Dioscorid.  ii.  126  ;  Theophr.  viii.  1,  3,  5,  6  ;  Geo-
pon.  ii.  36.)

e.  Cicercula,  the  \ddvpos  of  the  Greeks,  the
Lathyrus  sativus  of  botanists,  which  Pliny  seems
to  regard  as  a  small  variety  of  the  Cicer^  was
sown  in  good  land  either  at  the  end  of  October  or
at  the  beginning  of  the  year,  in  the  proportion  of
three  modii  to  the  juger.  None  of  the  legumina
proved  less  hurtful  to  the  ground,  but  it  was  rarely
a  successful  crop,  for  it  suffered  most  from  the  dry
weather  and  hot  winds  which  usually  prevailed
when  it  was  in  flower.  Four  modii  of  Cicercula
required  six  days'  work — ploughing,  three ;  harrow-
ing, one  ;  weeding,  one  ;  pulling,  one.  (Colum.  ii.
10,  12  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  12  ;  Pallad.  ii.  5,  iii.  4  ;
Theophr.  H.  P.  viii.  3  ;  comp.  Plutarch.  Quaest.
Rom.)

f.  Phaselus  s,  Phaseolus  {<pa(ri]Xos  ;  <pa(r-i]o\os  ;
<pacrio\os)^  the  common  kidney-bean,  succeeded
best  in  rich  land  regularly  cropped,  and  was  sown
towards  the  end  of  October  in  the  proportion  of
four  modii  to  the  juger.  These  foiu*  modii  re-
quired three  or  four  days'  work,  —  ploughing,  one
<tr  two,  according  to  the  soil ;  harrowing,  one  ;
reaping,  one.  The  pods  of  the  phaselus  were  some-
times eaten  along  with  the  seeds,  according  to  our
own  custom.  (Virg.  Georg.  i.  227  ;  Colum.  ii.  10,
12,  xi.  2  ;  Plin.  //.  N.  xviii.  12  ;  Pallad.  ix.  12  ;
X.  1.)

c/.  Pisum  {iriiTov  ;  irlffos  ;  iriffffos)^  the  common
field  pea,  succeeded  best  in  a  loose  soil,  a  warm
situation,  and  a  moist  climate.  It  was  sowti  im-
mediately after  the  autumnal  equinox,  in  the  pro-
portion of  rather  less  than  four  modii  to  the  juger,
and  cultivated  exactly  in  the  same  manner  as  the
phaselus.  (Colum.  ii,  10,  13  ;  Plin.  H.N.  xviii.  7,
12  ;  Theophr.  //.  P.  iii.  27,  viii.  3,  5.)

Napus^  the  fiovuids  of  Dioscorides,  is  the  mo-
dem Rape,  the  Brassica  rapa  of  botanists.  Ra-
pum^  the  yoyyvKis  of  Theophrastus,  is  the  modem
Tumip,  the  Brassica  Napus  of  botanists.  The
value  of  these  plants  was  in  a  great  measure  over-
looked by  the  earlier  Roman  writers,  while  the
Greeks  regarded  them  too  much  in  the  light  of
garden  herbs ;  but  Pliny  enlarges  upon  their  merits,
and  by  the  Gaxils  beyond  the  Po,  who  wintered
their  oxen  upon  them,  their  culture  was  deemed
next  in  importance  to  that  of  com  and  wine.  They
were  highly  useful  as  food  for  man,  for  cattle,  and
even  for  birds  ;  both  the  leaf  and  bulb  were  avail-
able ;  being  very  hardy,  they  could  be  left  in  the
ground,  or  would  keep  well  if  stored  up,  and  thus
one  crop  might  be  made  to  hold  out  until  another
came  in.  They  required  loose,  well-pulverised,
and  highly-manured  soil.  Rapa  succeeded  best  in
low,  moist  situations,  .and  were  sown  at  the  end  of
June  after  five  plough ings  {quinto  sulco)  ;  napi,
which  were  more  adajted  for  dry  sloping  land,  at
the  end  of  August  or  the  beginning  of  September,
after  four  ploughings  {quarto  sulco)  ;  both,  however,
in  warm  and  well-watered  spots  might  be  sown
in  spring.  A  juger  required  four  sextarii  (about
four  imperial  pints)  of  tumip  seed  and  five  of


AGRICULTURA.

rape  seed,  because  the  napus  does  not,  like  th«
rapum,  expand  into  an  ample  bulb  (non  in  ven-
trem  latescit),  but  sends  a  thin  root  straight  down
(sed  tenicem  radicem  deorsum  offit).  Columella,
however,  distinctly  states  that  the  rapum  and
napus  passed  into  each  other,  under  the  influence
of  a  change  of  soil  or  climate.  Rapina  is  th§  term
for  a  bed  or  field  of  turnips.  (Dioscorid.  ii.  134,
136  ;  Cat.  V.  35  ;  Colum.  ii.  10  ;  Plha.  H.  N.
xviii.  13.)

3.  Green  Forage  Crops  (Pahula).

This  term  included  all  those  crops  which  were
cut  green  and  employed  exclusively  as  forage  for
the  lower  animals.  The  most  important  were :  —
a.  Medioa.  b.  Foenum  Graecum.  c.  Vicia.  d.
Cicera.  e.  Ervum^  Ervilia.  f.  Farrago,  Ocy-
mum.  g.  Foenum.  The  description  of  the  last
will  involve  an  account  of  the  system  pursued  in
the  management  of  meadows.

a.  Medica  (MTjSt/c'ij  sc.  Tr6a)  the  modem  Lu-
cerne. The  most  important  of  all  the  plants  cul-
tivated for  stock  exclusively  was  Medica,  so  called
because  introduced  into  Greece  during  the  Persian
wars.  When  once  properly  sown,  it  would  last
for  many  years,  might  be  cut  repeatedly  during
the  same  season,  renovated  rather  than  exhausted
the  soil,  was  the  best  fattener  of  lean  cattle,  the
best  restorative  for  those  that  were  sick,  and  so
nourishing  that  a  single  juger  supplied  sufficient
food  for  three  horses  during  a  whole  yeax.  Hence
the  greatest  care  was  bestowed  upon  its  culture.

The  spot  fixed  upon,  which  was  to  be  neither
dry  nor  spongy,  received  a  first  ploughing  about
the  beginning  of  October,  and  the  upturned  earth
was  allowed  to  be  exposed  to  the  weather  for  the
winter  ;  it  was  carefully  ploughed  a  second  time,
at  the  beginning  of  February,  when  all  the  stones
were  gathered  off,  and  the  larger  clods  broken  by
the  hand  ;  in  the  month  of  March  it  was  ploughed
for  a  third  time  and  harrowed.  The  ground  thus
prepared  was  divided  into  plots  or  beds  (areas)  as
in  a  garden,  each  fifty  feet  long  and  ten  feet
broad,  so  that  ready  access  might  be  gained  by
the  walks  between  for  supplying  water  and  ex-
tirpating the  weeds.  Old  dung  was  then  spread
over  the  whole,  and  the  sowing  took  place  at  the
end  of  April,  a  cyathus  (about  ^^  of  an  imperial
pint)  of  seed  being  allowed  for  each  bed  of  the
dimensions  described  above.  The  seed  was  im-
mediately covered  in  with  wooden  rakes  {ligneis
rasteUis),  and  the  operations  of  hoeing  and  weed-
ing were  performed  repeatedly  with  wooden  im-
plements. It  was  not  cut  for  the  first  time  until  it
had  dropped  some  of  its  seed,  but  afterwards
might  be  cut  as  tender  as  the  farmer  thought  fit.
After  each  cutting  it  was  well  watered,  and  as
soon  as  the  young  blades  began  to  sprout,  every
weed  was  sedulously  removed.  Managed  in  this
manner  it  might  be  cut  six  times  a  year  for  ten
(Pliny  says  thirty)  years.  It  was  necessary  to
use  caution  in  giving  it  at  first  to  cattle,  since  it
was  apt  to  inflate  them,  and  make  blood  too
rapidly,  but  when  they  were  habituated  to  its
use  it  might  be  supplied  freely.  It  is  very  re-
markable that  this  species  of  forage,  to  which  so
much  importance  was  attached  by  the  Romans,
has  altogether  disappeared  from  Italy.  We  are
assured  by  M.  Chateauvieux  that  not  a  single  plant
of  it  is  now  to  be  seen.  (Varr.  i.  42  ;  Colum.  ii.
10,  28  J  Virg.  Georg.  L  215  ;  Pallad.  iii.  6,  v.  1 ;


AGRICULTURA.

Plin.  //.  N.  xviii.  16  ;  Dioscorid.  ii.  177  ;  Theophr.
H.  P.  viii.  7.)

b.  Foenmn-Graecum,  variously  termed  ttjAjs,
BovKepws  s.  fiovK^pas,  Kepdhis  and  alySKCpas,
the  Trigonella  foemim  Graecum^  or  common  Fenu-
greek of  botanists,  was  called  Siliqua  by  coimtry
people,  and  succeeded  best  when  totally  neglected,
care  being  taken  in  the  first  place  not  to  bury  the
seed  deep  {scarificaiione  seritur).  Six  or  seven
modii,  which  was  the  allowance  for  a  juger,  re-
quired two  days  for  sowing  and  one  for  reaping.
(Cat.  35  ;  Colum.  ii.  10,  xi.  2  ;  Plin.  //.  N.  xviii.
16,  xxiv.  19  ;  Dioscorid.  ii.  124  ;  Theophr.  //.  P.
iii.  17,  viii.  8.)

c.  Vida  {(xdpaKov^  the  fiiKiSu  of  Galen),  some
one  of  the  varieties  of  the  Vida  sativa,  the  Vetch
or  Summer  (or  Winter)  Tare  of  botanists.  It
might  be  sown  on  dry  land  at  different  periods  of
the  year,  usually  about  the  autumnal  equinox  when
intended  for  green  fodder  ;  in  January  or  later,  when
raised  for  seed.  (But  see  Plin.  H.N.  xviii.  15.)
The  quantity  required  in  the  former  case  was  seven
modii  to  the  juger,  in  the  latter  six.  Particular
care  was  taken  not  to  cast  the  seed  when  there
was  dew  or  moisture  of  any  sort  upon  the  surface
of  the  ground  ;  the  period  of  the  day  selected  for
the  operation  was  therefore  some  hours  after  sun-
rise, and  no  more  was  scattered  than  could  be
covered  up  before  night.  It  required  little  labour —
ploughmg  two  days,  harrowing  one,  reaping  one  ;
ill  all,  four  days'  work  for  six  or  seven  modii.
(Cat.  35  ;  Varr.  i.  31  ;  Virg.  Georg.  i.  75  ;  Colum.
ii.  10.  §  29,  12.  §  3  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  15 ;  comp.
Ov.  Fast.  V.  267.)  ^

d.  Cicera^  the  dJxpos  of  Theophrastus,  the  La-
tliyrus  Cicera  of  botanists,  was  sown  after  one  or
two  ploughings  {primo  vel  altera  suico),  in  the
month  of  March,  the  quantity  of  seed  varying,  ac-
cording to  the  richness  of  soil,  from  two  and  a
half  to  four  modii  for  the  juger.  In  southern
Spain  it  was  given  to  the  cattle  crushed  (dcera

/resa),  steeped  in  water,  and  then  mixed  with
chaff.  Twelve  pounds  of  ervum  were  considered
equivalent  to  sixteen  of  dcera,  and  sufficient  for  a
yoke  of  oxen.

Cicera  was  cultivated  for  its  seed  also,  and  formed
a  not  unpalatable  food  for  man,  differing  little  if  at
all  in  taste  from  the  cicercula,  but  being  of  a
darker  colour.  (Colum.  ii.  11,  §  1,  12;  Pallad.  iv.
6  ;  Plin.  //.  A^.  xviii.  12  ;  Theophr.  H.  P.  iv.  2.)

e.  Ervum,  Ervilia,  the  6po§os  of  Dioscorides,  are
apparently  varieties  of  the  Ervum  Ervile,  or  Wild
Tare  of  botanists.  Ervum  succeeded  best  in  poor
dry  land  ;  might  be  sown  at  any  time  between  the
autumnal  equinox  and  the  beginning  of  March,  at
the  rate  of  five  modii  to  the  juger,  and  demanded
little  care.  The  above  quantity  required  six  days'
labour — ploughing  and  sowing  two,  harrowing  one,
hoeing  one,  weeding  one,  reaping  one.  (Varr.  i,  32  ;
Virg.  Eel.  iii.  100  ;  Colum.  ii.  10.  $  34,  11.  §  11,
12.  §  3,  13.  §  1,  vu  3,  xi.  2  ;  Pallad.  ii.  8  ;
Plin.  H.N.  xviii.  15  ;  Theophr.  HP.  ix.  22;
Dioscorid.  ii.  131  ;  comp   Plaut.  Mosiell.  i.  1.)

f.  Farrago,  Ocymum.  On  comparing  the  various
authorities  quoted  at  the  end  of  this  paragraph,  al-
though they  abound  in  contradictions,  we  shall  be
led  to  conclude  —

1.  That  yarro^o  was  the  general  term  employed
to  denote  any  kind  of  com  cut  green  for  fodder.
The  name  was  derived  from /ar,  the  refuse  of  that
grain  being  originally  sown  for  this  purpose  {Jar-


AGRICULTURA.


59


ra^o  ex  recrementis  f arris  praedensa  seritur),  but
afterwards  rye  (secale),  oats  (avenae),  and  barley,
were  employed  ;  the  last-mentioned  being,  in  the
estimation  of  Columella,  the  best  ;  and  these  grains
were  not  always  sown  alone,  but  frequently  with
an  admixture  of  the  vetch  and  various  legumina.
Hence  farrago  is  used  by  Juvenal  to  denote  a
confused  medley  of  heterogeneous  topics.

2.  That  as  farrago  properly  denoted  com  cut
green  for  fodder,  so  ocymum  was  the  name  given
to  plants  of  the  bean  kind,  when  used  in  the  same
manner,  before  they  came  to  maturity,  and  foraied
pods.  Manlius  Sura  gives  the  proportions  of  ten
modii  of  beans,  two  of  vetches,  and  two  of  erviliae
to  the  juger  ;  and  this  combination  was  said  to  be
improved  by  the  addition  of  Avena  Graeca,  sown
in  autumn  ;  it  was  the  first  crop  available  in  the
early  part  of  the  year,  and  hence,  of  the  three  forms
ocinum,  odmum,  ocymum,  we  can  scarcely  doubt
that  the  last  is  the  most  accurate,  and  that  the
name  was  given  on  account  of  the  rapidity  of  its
growth  in  spring.  From  the  expression  of  Pliny,
"  Apud  antiques  erat  pabuli  genus  quod  Cato
Ocymum  vocat,"  and  the  silence  of  Columella,
who  mentions  the  garden  herb  ocymum  (basU)
only,  we  infer  that  this  sort  of  pabulum  was  little
used  after  the  time  of  Varro.  The  notion  of
Gesner  that  ocymum  is  clover,  the  odkvOoov  Tpnre-
T7]\ov  of  Callimachus,  is  directly  at  variance  with
the  statements  of  Pliny,  who  mentions  trifolium  as
a  distinct  plant.  (Cat.  27,  53,  54  ;  Varr.  i.  23,
31  ;  Colum.  ii.  10.  §  31,  35,  xi.  3.  §  29  ;  Plin.
^.A^.  xviii.  16.)

g.  Foemim,  Praia.  So  much  importance  was  at-
tached to  stock,  that  many  considered  a  good  mea-
dow as  the  m.ost  valuable  species  of  land,  requiring
little  trouble  or  outlay,  subject  to  none  of  the  casual-
ties to  which  other  crops  were  exposed,  affording  a
sure  return  every  year,  and  that  twofold,  in  the
shape  of  hay  and  of  pasture.  The  meadows  were  of
two  kinds,  the  Dry  Meadow  (siccaneum  pratum)  and
the  Irrigated  or  Water  Meadow  (pratum  riguum).
The  hay  produced  from  a  meadow  whose  own  rich
natural  moisture  did  not  require  an  artificial
stimulus  was  the  best.  Any  land  which  declined
with  a  gentle  slope,  if  either  naturally  rich  and
moist,  or  capable  of  irrigation,  might  be  laid  down
as  a  meadow,  and  the  most  approved  method  of
procedure  was  the  following  :  —  The  land  having
been  thoroughly  ploughed  and  well  laboured  in
summer,  was  in  autumn  sown  with  rapa,  or  napi
or  beans,  the  following  year  with  wheat,  and  in
the  third  year,  all  trees,  bushes,  and  rank  weeds
having  been  extirpated,  with  the  vetch  (vida)
mixed  with  grass  seeds.  The  clods  were  broken
down  with  rakes,  the  surface  accurately  levelled
by  wicker  hurdles,  so  that  the  scythe  of  the  mower
(foeniseca)  might  nowhere  encounter  any  obstacle.
The  vetches  were  not  cut  until  they  had  arrived  at
maturity  and  begun  to  drop  their  seed  ;  and  after
they  had  been  removed,  the  grass,  when  it  had  at-
tained to  a  proper  height,  was  mown  and  made
into  hay.  Then  the  irrigation  commenced,  pro-
vided the  soil  was  stiff,  for  in  loose  earth  it  was
necessary  to  allow  the  grass  roots  to  obtain  a  firm
hold.  For  the  first  year  no  stock  were  permitted
to  graze  lest  their  feet  should  poach  up  the  soft
ground,  but  the  young  blades  were  cut  from  time
to  time.  In  the  second  year,  after  the  hay-making
was  over,  if  the  ground  was  moderately  dry  and
hard,  the  smaller  animals  were  admitted,  but  no


60  AGRICULTURA.

horses  or  oxen  until  the  third.  About  the  middle
of  February  in  each  year,  an  abundant  top-dressing
of  manm-e  mixed  with  grass-seeds  was  applied  to
the  upper  part  of  the  field,  the  benefit  of  which
was  extended  to  the  lower  portions  by  the  flow
either  of  natural  rain  or  of  artificial  streams.
When  old  meadows  became  mossy,  the  best  re-
medy was  to  sprinkle  ashes  copiously,  which  in
many  cases  killed  the  moss  ;  but  when  this  failed,
the  most  sure  plan  Avas  to  break  up  the  land  afresh,
which,  having  lain  long  undisturbed,  was  sure  to
aiford  abundant  crops.

In  making  hay,  the  grass  was  to  be  cut  (fcdd-
hus  suhsecari)  before  the  stem  had  begun  to  lose
its  natural  moisture,  while  the  seed  was  not  yet
perfectly  ripe  ;  and  in  drying,  it  was  essential  to
avoid  the  two  extremes  of  exposing  it  for  too  long
or  too  short  a  time  to  the  sun  and  air.  In  the
fonner  case,  the  juices  were  sucked  out,  and  it
became  little  better  than  straw  ;  in  the  latter,  it
was  liable  to  ferment,  heat,  and  take  fire.  After
being  properly  turned  over  with  forks  {furdllis
versari)  it  was  collected  and  laid  in  regular  swathes
(coartabimus  in  strigam),  and  then  bound  into
sheaves  or  bundles  (aique  ita  maniplos  vinciemus).
The  loose  stalks  Avere  next  raked  together  (rustellis
eradi)  and  the  whole  crop  [foenisicia)  carried  home
and  stored  in  lofts,  or,  if  this  was  not  conve-
nient, built  up  in  the  field  into  conical  ricks  (in
metas  eodinii  conveniet).  Lastly,  the  inequalities
passed  over  by  the  mowers  {quae  foeniseces  prae-
terieru?it)  were  cut  close  and  smooth  (sicilienda
prata^  id  est,  faldhus  consecta7ida),  an  operation
termed  sicilire  praiurn,  the  gleanings  thus  obtained,
which  formed  a  sort  of  aftermath,  being  called
foenum  cordum,  or  sidlimenta.  (Cat.  5,  8,  9,  29,
.50  ;  Varr.  i.  7,  49  ;  Colum.  ii.  16—18;  Pallad.
ii.  2,  iii.  1,  iv.  2,  x.  10.)


4.  Crops  affording  Materials  for  textile  FaJjrics.

Of  these,  the  most  important  were,  a.  Cannabis  :
h.  TAnum.

a.  Cannabis  {KavvaSis,  KoiuyaSos)  the  Cannalns
sativa,  or  Common  Hemp  of  botanists,  required
rich,  moist,  well-watered,  deeply  trenched,  and
highly  maniu-ed  land.  Six  grains  were  sown  in
every  square  foot  of  ground  during  the  last  week
in  Febniary,  but  the  operation  might  be  delayed
for  a  fortnight  if  the  weather  was  rainy.  Colu-
mella is  unable  to  give  any  details  with  regard  to  the
amoxmt  of  time  and  labour  necessary  for  raising  a
crop  of  hemp.  (Varr.  i.  23  ;  Colum.  ii.  10,  12,
21  ;  V\m.H.N.  xix.  9  ;  Dioscorid.  iii.  165.)

b.  Linum  {\ivov),  the  Linum  usitatissimum,  or
Common  Flax  of  botanists,  being  regarded  as  a
very  exhausting  crop,  was  altogether  avoided,  un-
less the  soil  happened  to  be  peculiarly  suitable,  or
the  price  which  it  bore  in  the  district  very  in-
viting (nisi  pretium  provitat).  It  was  sown  from
the  beginning  of  October  until  the  end  of  the  first
week  in  December,  in  the  proportion  of  eight  modii
to  the  juger,  and  sometimes  in  February  at  the  rate
of  ten  modii.  On  account  of  its  scourging  qualities
(Virg.  Georg.  i.  77),  it  was  generally  grown  upon
rich  land,  such  being  less  liable  to  be  seriously  in-
jured, but  some  sowed  it  very  thick  upon  poor
land,  in  order  that  the  stalks  might  be  as  thin,  and
therefore  the  fibres  as  delicate  as  possible.  (Virg.
Georg.  i.  212;  Colum.  ii.  10,  14;  Plin.  H.  N.
xvii.  9,  xix.  1  ;  Pallad.  xi.  2  ;  Geopon.  ii.  10  ;
Dioscorid.  ii.  125  ;  Theophr.  H.  P.  viil  7.)


AGRICULTURA.

Stuxession  or  Rotation  of  Crops.

It  is  evident  from  the  instructions  given  by
Columella  (ii.  4)  for  ploughing  the  best  land,  that
a  summer  fallow  usually  preceded  a  corn  crop.  For
since  the  first  ploughing  was  early  in  spring,  the
second  in  summer,  and  the  third  in  autumn,  it  is
impossible  that  a  crop  could  have  been  raised  upon
the  ground  during  any  portion  of  the  period  here
indicated  ;  and  the  same  author  expressly  states
elsewhere  (ii.  9),  in  accordance  with  the  Virgilian
precept  (G.  i.  71),  that  the  land  upon  which  wheat
(far,  siligo')  was  grown  ought  to  repose  every  other
year  ;  in  which  case,  however,  manure  might  be
dispensed  with.  Nor  did  this  plan  apply  to  com
alone,  for  it  would  seem  to  have  been  the  general
practice  to  permit  nearly  one  half  of  the  farm  to
remain  at  rest,  while  the  productive  energies  of  the
other  moiety  were  called  into  action.  It  will  be
seen  from  the  calculations  with  regard  to  time  and
labour  for  an  arable  farm  containing  200  jugers
(Colum.  ii.  12),  that  100  jugers  only  were  sown
in  autumn,  50  with  wheat,  50  with  leguminous  or
green  crops  ;  and  if  spring-sowing  was  resorted  to,
which  was  by  no  means  general,  30  more,  so  that
out  of  200  jugers,  at  least  70,  and  more  frequently
100,  were  left  fallowed.

There  were,  indeed,  exceptions  to  this  system.
Some  land  was  so  peculiarly  deep  and  rich  that  it
might  be  cropped  for  two  or  more  years  in  succes-
sion (terra  restibilis)  ;  but  in  this  case  it  was  re-
lieved by  varying  the  crop,  the  field  from  which
winter  wheat  (far)  had  been  reaped  being  highly
manured  and  sown  immediately  with  beans,  or  the
ground  which  had  borne  lupines,  beans,  vetches,
or  any  renovating  crop,  was  allowed  to  lie  fallow
during  winter  and  then  sown  with  spring- wheat
(far)  (Virg.  Georg.  i.  73  ;  comp,  Plin.  //.  A^.
xviii.  21),  while  a  third  rotation,  still  more  favour-
able, was  to  take  two  leguminous  or  renovating
crops  after  one  exhausting  or  com  crop.  In  Cam-
pania, the  extraordinary  fertility  of  the  soil  al-
lowed them  to  tax  its  energies  much  more  severely,
for  there  it  was  common  to  sow  barley,  millet,
turnips  (rapa),  and  then  barley  or  wheat  again,  the
land  receiving  manure  before  the  millet  and  turnips,
but  never  remaining  vacant  ;  while  that  peculiarly
favoured  district  near  Naples,  called  the  Campi
Lahorini,  or  Terrae  LaLoriae,  now  the  Ten'a  di
Lavoro,  yielded  an  uninterrupted  series  of  corn
crops,  two  of  far,  and  one  of  millet,  without  a
moment  of  repose  (seritur  toto  anno,  panico  semel,
bisfarre).  (Cat.  35  ;  Varr.  i.  44  ;  Virg.  Georg.  i.
71,  &c.  ;  Colum.  ii.  9,  10,  12  ;  Plin.  H.N.  xviii.
21,  23.)

It  will  be  proper,  before  bringing  this  part  of
the  subject  to  a  close,  to  explain  a  word  which
may  occasion  embarrassment  in  consequence  of  its
signification  being  variously  modified  by  the  Roman
agricultural  writers.  This  is  the  adjective  novalis,
which  frequently  appears  as  a  substantive,  and  in
all  the  three  genders,  according  as  ager,  terra,  or
solum  is  understood.

1.  The  original  meaning  of  novalis  or  novate,
looking  to  its  etymology,  must  have  been,  land
netvly  reclaimed  from  a  state  of  nature  ;  and  in
this  sense  it  is  used  by  Pliny  (H.N.  xvii.  5),
■Talis  (sc.  odor)  fere  est  in  novalihus  caesa  vetere
sylva.     (Comp.  Callistr.  in  Pand.  xlvii,  21.  3.)

2.  Varro,  in  his  treatise  De  TAngua  Latina  (v.
39  ;  comp.  vi.  59,  ed.  Muller),  places  novalis  ager.


AGRICULTURA.

land  which  is  allowed  occasionally  to  repose,  in
opposition  to  restibilis  ager,  land  which  is  cropped
unceasingly,  —  Ager  restibilis  qui  restituitur  ac  re-
seritur  quotfjnot  annis  ;  contra  qui  inter mittitur  a
novando  novalis,  —  and  hence  Pliny  (H.  N.  xviii.
1 9),  Novate  est  quod  altemis  annis  seritur.

3.  Varro,  in  his  Treatise  De  lie  Rustica  (i.  2.9),
defines  Segcs  to  mean  a  field  which  has  been
ploughed  and  sown  ;  arvum^  a  field  ploughed  but
not  yet  sown  ;  novalis  ubi  satum  fuit  antequam  se-
cunda  aratione  renovetur,  ambiguous  words  which
may  be  interpreted  to  denote  a  field  which  has
borne  a  crop,  but  which  has  not  been  ploughed  for
a  second  crop  ;  in  which  case  it  will  be  equivalent
to  a  fcdloto  field.

4.  Columella,  in  one  passage  (vi.  praef.  §  1),
employs  novale  solum  for  new  or  virgin  land  un-
touched by  the  plough  ;  for  in  contrasting  the
tastes  of  the  agriculturist  and  the  grazier,  he  re-
marks that  the  former  delights  quam  maxime  sub-
acto  et  puro  solo,  the  latter  novali  graminosoque  ;
and  Varro  (ii.  praef.  §  4)  in  like  manner  places  no-
valis as  pasture  land,  in  opposition  to  seges,  as  com
land,  —  bos  domitus  causa  fit  ut  commodius  nascatur
frumentum  in  segete  et  pabulum  in  novali.

5.  Columella,  in  another  passage,  places  culta
novalia,  land  under  tillage  in  a  general  sense,  in
opposition  to  rudis  ager,  land  in  a  state  of  nature  ;
and  thus  we  nuist  understand  the  haec  tam  culta
novalia  in  Virgil's  first  Eclogue  (v.  71),  and  tonsas
novales,  the  cultivated  fields  from  which  a  crop  has
been  reaped,  —  a  phrase  which  forms  the  connecting
link  between  this  meaning  and  that  noticed  above
under  3.     (Corap.  Pallad.  i.  6,  ii.  10.)

B.    PASTIO.

The  second  great  department  of  our  subject  is
Pastio,  s.  JRes  Pastoricia,  s.  Scientia  Pastoralis,
these  terms  being  all  alike  understood  to  denote
the  art  of  providing  and  feeding  stock  so  as  to
yield  the  most  ample  profit.

But  Pastio  must  be  considered  under  the  two-
fold forms  of

a.  Pastio  Agrestis  s.  Res  Pecuaria,  and

)8.  Pastio  Villatica.  ''

The  fonner  comprehending  the  managemenfof
cattle,  sheep,  horses,  &c. ;  the  latter  of  poultry,
game,  fish,  bees,  and  some  other  animals  to  be
noticed  hereafter.

a.    PASTIO    AGRESTIS  S.  RES  PECUARIA.

Contains  three  heads :

I.  Minores  Pecudes,  including,  1.  Sheep  ;  2.
Goats  ;  3.  Swine.

II.  Majores  Pecudes,  including,  1.  Kine  ;  2.
Horses  ;  3.  Asses  ;  4.  Mules.  Varro  indeed,  for
no  reason  apparently  except  to  preserve  a  sort  of
numerical  symmetry,  places  mules  in  the  third
division,  but  as  they  evidently  belong  to  the  same
class  as  horses  and  asses,  we  have  to  this  extent
departed  from  his  arrangement.

III.  Animals  provided  not  for  the  profit  which
they  yield  directly  in  the  market,  but  necessary
for  the  proper  maintenance  of  the  foregoing :  these
are  —

1.  Dogs  (canes)  ;  2.  Feeders  (pastores).

Again,  in  each  of  these  nine  subdivisions  (with
the  exception  of  mules  who  do  not  breed)  atten-
tion must  be  directed  to  nine  different  circum-
Btances,  of  which  four  are  to  be  considered  in  the
purchase  of  stock  (in  pecore  parando)^  four  in  the


AGRICULTURA.


61


feeding  of  stock  (in  pecore  pascendo),  while  the
ninth,  of  a  more  general  character,  relates  to  mmi-
ber  (de  num^ro).

The  four  circumstances  which  demand  attention
in  purchasing  stock  are,  a.  The  age  of  the  animal
(aetas).  b.  His  points  (cognitio  formae)  by  which
we  determine  whether  he  is  good  of  his  kind,
c.  His  breeding  (quo  sit  seminio),  by  which  we  de-
termine whether  he  is  of  a  good  kind.  d.  The
legal  forms  (dejure  in  parando)  essential  to  render
a  sale  valid,  and  the  warranty  which  the  buyer
may  demand  (quemadmodum  quamque  pecudem
emi  oporteat  civili  jure).

The  four  circumstances  to  be  considered  after  a
breeding  stock  has  been  acquired  are,  e.  The  mode
of  feeding  (pastio)  in  answer  to  the  questions
icJiere,  when,  and  with  what  (in  qv/i  regione,  et
quando  et  queis).  f.  The  impregnation  of  the
female,  the  period  of  gestation,  and  her  treatment
while  pregnant,  all  of  which  are  embodied  in  the
word  foetura.  g.  The  rearing  of  the  young  (wm-
tricatus).  h.  The  preservation  of  their  health,  and
treatment  when  diseased  (de  sanitate).

i.  The  ninth  and  last  inquiry  (de  numero)  re-
lates to  the  number  of  flocks  and  herds  which  can
be  maintained  with  advantage  in  a  given  space,
the  number  of  individuals  which  it  is  expedient  to
combine  into  one  flock  or  herd,  and  the  proportions
to  be  observed  with  regard  to  the  sex  and  age  of
the  members  of  each  flock  and  herd.

In  following  the  divisions  and  topics  indicated
above,  we  omit  the  discussions  on  the  diseases  of
stock  and  their  remedies,  which  abound  in  the
agricultural  writers,  and  which  form  the  subject  of,
an  elaborate  treatise  (Mul^medicina  s.  De  Arte
Veterinaria),  bearing  the  name  of  Vegetius,  which
is  probably  a  translation  or  compilation  from  the
works  of  the  Greek  iwiriarpoi,  or  veterinary  sur-
geons, executed  at  a  late  period.

I.  Minores  Pecudes.

1.  Sheep  (pecus  ovillum  s.  oviarium)  were  di-
vided into  two  classes  with  reference  to  their
wool.

(1.)  Pecus  Urtum^  whose  fleeces  were  not  pro-
tected artificially.

(2.)  Pecus  Tarentinum  s.  Pecus  Graecum  s.  Oves
pellitae  s.  Oves  tectae,  whose  fleeces  were  protected
from  all  external  injury  by  skin  jackets.  Their
wool  being  thus  rendered  finer,  and  being  more
easily  scoured  and  dyed,  brought  a  higher  price
than  any  other.

Sheep  were  likewise  divided  into  two  classes
according  as  they  were  home-fed  or  reared  in
extensive  and  distant  pastures  ;  we  first  consider
them  under  this  point  of  view.

Home-fed  sheep  (greges  villaiici)  were  allowed
to  pasture  in  the  fields  around  the  farm  during  a
portion  of  the  year,  wherever  the  nature  of  the
country  and  the  system  of  cultivation  pursued
rendered  this  practicable,  or,  more  frequently,
were  kept  constantly  confined  in  sheds  (stahida — ■
septa  —  ovilia),  built  in  warm  and  sheltered  situa-
tions, with  hard  floors  sloping  outwards  to  prevent
the  accumulation  of  moisture,  which  was  regarded
as  particularly  injurious  to  both  the  feet  and  the
fleece.  They  were  fed  upon  cytisus,  hiceme,
barley,  and  leguminous  seeds,  or  when  such  rich
and  succulent  food  could  not  be  obtained,  on  hay,
bran,  chaffs,  grape  husks,  and  dry  leaves,  espe-
cially those  of  the  elm,  oak,  and  fig,  being  at  all


G2


AGRICULTURA.


times  plentifully  supplied  with  salt.  They  were
littered  with  leaves  and  twigs,  which  were  fre-
quently changed,  and  the  pens  were  kept  care-
fully clean.

The  more  numerous  flocks  which  were  reared  in
extensive  pastures  {qui  in  saltibus  pascuntur)  usually
passed  the  winter  in  the  low  plains  upon  the  coast,
and  were  driven  by  regular  diift  roads  (calles
pnblicae)  in  summer  to  the  mountains  of  Central
Italy,  just  as  in  modem  times  vast  droves  pass
every  autumn  from  the  Abruzzi  to  seek  the  more
genial  climate  of  Puglia  or  the  Maremma.  Those
who  were  employed  to  watch  them  (ppilioiies)
being  often  at  a  great  distance  from  home  were
furnished  with  beasts  of  burden  for  transporting
the  materials  required  in  the  construction  of  folds
and  huts,  at  their  halting  places,  and  all  the  stores
necessary  for  themselves  and  their  charge.  The
sheep  were  usually  collected  every  night  to  secure
them  against  robbers  and  beasts  of  prey  ;  in  sum-
mer they  fed  in  the  morning  and  evening,  and  re-
posed during  the  noontide  heat  in  sheltered  spots,
while  in  winter  they  were  not  allowed  to  go  out
until  the  frost  was  off  the  ground.  The  flocks
were  often  very  numerous,  containing  sometimes
1 5,000  head,  one  shepherd  (opilio)  being  allowed
to  every  five  or  six  score.

The  breeds  most  prized  by  the  early  Romans
were  the  Calabrian,  the  Apulian,  which  were  short
wooUed  (breves  villo),  the  Milesian,  and,  above  all,
the  Tarentine  ;  but  in  the  time  of  Columella  those
of  Cisalpine  Gaul  from  the  vicinity  of  Altinum
(Mart  xiv.  153),  and  those  from  the  Campi  Macri
round  Parma  and  Mutina  were  especially  es-
teemed. The  system  of  crossing  was  by  no  means
unknown  ;  for  M.  Columella,  the  uncle  of  the
author,  produced  an  excellent  variety  by  crossing
the  tectae  oves  of  Cadiz  with  some  wild  rams  from
Africa,  and  again  crossing  their  progeny  with  the
Tarentines.  In  purchasing  stock  attention  was
always  paid  to  the  localities  where  they  were  to
be  maintained  ;  thus  sheep  of  large  size  (procerae
oves)  were  naturally  deemed  best  fitted  for  rich
plains,  stout  compact  animals  (quadratae)  for  light
hilly  soils,  and  the  smaller  kinds  {eocigtiae)  for
mountainous  regions,  just  as  in  this  country  the
Leicesters  are  kept  with  greatest  advantage  in  the
low-lying  luxuriant  pastures  of  Lincolnshire,
Cheviots  in  the  grass  hills  from  which  they  derive
their  name,  and  the  black-faced  on  the  lofty  moun-
tains of  Wales  and  Scotland.  As  to  colour,  pure
white  was  most  sought  after ;  but  certain  nat\u^l
tints,  such  as  the  dark  grey  (  pulltis),  which  distin-
guished the  flocks  of  Pollentia  in  Liguria  {fusciqiie
ferax  Pollentia  villi,  Silius,  viii.  599),  the  yel-
lowish brown  (/useus)  in  those  of  Corduba  (so
often  celebrated  by  Martial,  v.  37,  viiL  2.  8,  ix.
62,  xiv.  188  ;  comp.  Juv.  xii.  40),  and  the  red
brown  {ruber)  jn  some  of  the  Asiatic  varieties,
were  highly  prized.

The  points  characteristic  of  a  good  animal  and
the  warranty  usually  required  of  the  seller  will  be
found  fully  detailed  in  Varro  (il  2)  and  Columella
(vii.  2,  3).

Those  which  were  smooth  and  bare  under  the
belly  {ventre  glabro),  anciently  called  apicae,  were
always  rejected,  and  particular  care  was  taken  that
the  fleece  of  the  ram  should  be  perfectly  pure,  or
at  least  uniform  in  colour,  his  tongue  also  being
examined  in  order  to  ascertain  that  it  was  not
black  or  spotted,  smce  such  defects  would  have


AGRICULTURA.

been  transmitted  to'  his  progeny.  ( Virg.  Georg.  iiL
387 ;  Colum.  vii.  3.)

Ewes  were  not  considered  fit  for  breeding  until
they  were  two  years  old,  and  they  continued  to
produce  until  they  had  reached  the  age  of  seven :
rams  {arietes)  were  believed  to  be  in  vigour  from
three  years  old  until  eight.  The  most  favourable
period  for  impregnation  in  the  case  of  ewes  that
had  not  previously  brought  forth,  was  the  latter
end  of  April,  about  the  Palilia  (21st  April)  ;  for
others,  from  the  setting  of  Arcturus  (13th  May)  to
the  setting  of  the  Eagle  (23d  July)  ;  and,  since  the
period  of  gestation  was  about  150  days,  the  earliest
lambs  {agni,  agnae)  would  be  yeaned  in  Septem-
ber, the  latest  about  the  middle  of  December,  these
being,  as  was  remarked  by  Celsus,  the  only
animals  produced  with  advantage  in  midwinter.
Ewes  when  about  to  lamb  {incientes)  were  placed
apart,  constantly  watched,  and  assisted  in  parturi-
tion. As  soon  as  they  had  brought  forth,  the  first
milk  which  was  of  a  thick  consistence,  and  called
colostra,  was  carefully  withdrawn,  being  considered
injurious  in  all  animals,  and  productive  of  a  disease
named  cohstratio.  The  lambs  were  now  tended
with  the  greatest  solicitude,  were  generally  kept
in  the  house  near  a  fire  for  some  days,  were  not
allowed  to  go  forth  to  pasture  for  a  considerable
time,  but  were  partially  reared  by  the  hand  on
the  most  tender  and  nomishing  food,  being  finally
weaned  at  the  age  of  four  months.  Those  lambs
which  were  carried  in  the  womb  longer  than  the
regular  time  were  termed  chordi  ;  those  born  late
in  the  season,  serotini  ;  those  which,  in  consequence
of  their  mothers  being  unable  to  supply  milk,  were
suckled  by  others,  subrumi.  Castration  was  not  per-
formed upon  such  as  were  intended  for  wethers
{verveces)  until  five  months  old.  The  males  set
apart  to  supply  the  deficiencies  in  the  breeding
flock  {quos  aitetes  svbmittere  volant)  were  selected
from  the  progeny  of  such  ewes  as  usually  gave
birth  to  twins,  those  which  were  polled  {mutili)
being  preferred  on  the  whole  to  those  with  horns
{cornuti).

The  management  of  owes  jt)e?/eYae  differed  from  that
of  the  ordinary  _9/-^es  vjllatici  merely  in  the  amount
of ,  care  with  which  they  were  tended.  They  were
furnished  with  an  ample  supply  of  the  most  nu-
tritious food,  each  individual  receiving  daily  in
winter  three  sextarii  (pints)  of  barley  or  of  beans
crushed  in  their  pods  {fresae  cum  suis  valvulis
fahae),  in  addition  to  hay,  lucerne,  dry  or  green
cytisus,  and  other  fodder.  Their  stalls  were
usually  paved  with  stone,  and  kept  scrupulously
clean  ;  they  seldom  left  the  house,  and,  when  al-
lowed to  pasture,  it  was  looked  upon  as  essential
that  the  ground  should  be  free  from  bushes  and
briars  of  every  description  which  might  tear  their
fleece  or  its  covering.  The  jackets  were  frequently
taken  off  to  cool  the  animals,  the  wool  was  combed
out  at  least  thrice  a  year,  and  well  washed  and
annointed  with  oil  and  wine.  The  wethers  were
killed  at  two  years  old,  their  skin  being  then  in
perfection.

Sheep-shearing  (tonsura)  commenced  in  warm
districts  in  April  ;  but  in  cold  situations  was  de-
ferred until  the  solstice.  A  fine  day  was  chosen,
and  the  operation  was  performed  before  the  sun  had
attained  to  its  full  power,  in  order  that  the  sheep
might  not  be  hot  and  the  wool  not  moist.  The  most
careful  placed  a  rug  under  the  animal  (tegetiadis
subjectis  orci'  tondere  solent)  that  no  portion  of  the  clip


AGRICULTURA.

might  be  lost  or  damaged  (ne  qui  flocci  inlereani).
The  woo],  when  fresh  shorn  and  still  impregnated
^'ith  the  sweat  of  the  animal,  was  called  lana
fiuccida;  the  fleeces  when  rolled  up  were  termed
vellera,  or  velumina.  Oves  hirtae,  when  shorn,
were  immediately  smeared  with  wine  and  oil,  to
which  white  wax  and  hog's  lard  were  occasion-
ally added  ;  while  the  jackets  of  the  oves  pel-
litae  were  anointed  with  the  same  mixture,  and
then  replaced  on  the  animals.  Instead  of  this,
some  rubbed  in  a  wash  composed  of  equal  parts  of
boiled  lupine  juice,  lees  of  old  wine,  and  amurca.
Any  wound  inflicted  during  the  process  was  dressed
■with  tar  {pix  liquida).  On  the  fourth  day  they
were  bathed,  if  possible,  in  the  sea ;  if  not,  in  rain-
water mixed  with  salt.  In  Spain  and  some  other
places  it  was  customary  to  shear  the  sheep  twice  a
year,  under  the  belief  that  the  additional  labour
was  more  than  compensated  by  the  increased  quan-
tity of  wool.  The  ancient  practice  of  plucking  the
wool  instead  of  shearing  it,  still  lingered  in  certain
districts  even  when  Pliny  wrote.  (Varr.  ii.  1.  §  5,
16,  20,  ii.  2  ;  Colura.  i.  Praef.  §  26,  vii.  2,  3,  4,
xi.  2.  §  14  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  viii.  47,  48  ;  Pallad.  ii.
16,  V.  7,  vi.  8,  vii.  6,  viii.  4,  xii.  13.)

2.  Goats  {pecus  caprinum)  were  divided  into
two  classes,  the  genus  mutilum  et  raripilum,  the
polled  and  thin  haired,  and  the  genus  cornutum
et  setosum,  the  horned  and  shaggy ;  but  there  does
not  appear  to  have  been  any  difference  in  the  mode
of  rearing  them,  nor  indeed  do  they  seem  to  have
been  kept  distinct  ;  but  it  was  considered  advis-
able that  the  old  he-goat,  the  dux  gregis^  should
be  mutilus,  because  he  was  then  less  troublesome
and  pugnacious.

The  points  characteristic  of  a  good  animal  will
be  found  enumerated  in  Varro  (ii.  3,  §  2 — 5)  and
in  Columella  (vii.  6).  The  most  high  bred  had
always  two  long  flaps  of  skin  (verruculae^  laciniae)
depending  from  the  throat.  One  peculiarity  con-
nected with  sales  was  that  they  were  never  war-
ranted in  good  health,  for  they  were  believed  to
be  always  more  or  less  labouring  under  fever.

The  management  of  goats  was  in  most  respects
the  same  as  that  of  sheep,  except  that,  although
intolerant  of  frost  and  cold,  they  throve  better  in
mountainous  craggy  ground  or  among  copsewood,
where  they  broused  with  great  eagerness  on  the
yoimg  twigs,  than  in  open  grassy  plains.  Both
from  their  wandering  nature  and  their  liability  to
contract  disease  when  crowded  in  pens,  not  more
than  fifty  were  kept  together  in  a  flock  under  the
charge  of  the  same  goatherd  (caprarius),  the  pro-
portion of  one  male  {caper^  hircus)  to  about  fifteen
females  (caprae^  capellae)  being  commonly  ob-
served.

When  in  stalls  (caprUia)^  the  sloping  floor  was
usually  formed  out  of  the  native  rock  or  paved
with  smooth  stones,  for  no  litter  was  placed  be-
neath their  feet.  The  houses  were  swept  out
daily :  and  it  was  deemed  essential  to  their  health
that  no  moisture  or  dirt  of  any  kind  should  be  al-
lowed to  accumulate.  The  she-goat  was  capable
of  breeding  Jfrom  one  year  old  until  eight ;  but  the
progeny  of  a  mother  under  three  years  old  were
not  worth  keeping  permanently,  but  sold  off.  The
best  time  for  impregnation  was  the  end  of  autumn;
for  the  period  of  gestation  being  five  months,  the
kids  Qmedi)  were  thus  bom  in  spring.  If  the  dam
was  of  a  good  stock,  she  generally  produced  two  or
even  thi-ee  at  a  birth,  which  were  weaned  at  the


AGRICULTURA.


63


end  of  three  months,  and  then  transferred  at  once
to  the  flock  {submittuntur  et  in  grege  indpiunt  esse).

The  hair  (pili)  of  goats  was  shorn  or  plucked
(capras  vellere  is  the  technical  phrase)  out  regu-
larly, and  used  in  the  manufacture  of  coarse  stuffs
(zisum  in  castrorum  et  miseris  velamina  nautis, —
pilos  ministrant  ad  usum  nauticum  et  ad  bellica  tor-
menta).  The  cloths  woven  fi*om  this  material
were  termed  Cilicia^  because  the  goats  in  the
southern  and  central  provinces  of  Asia  Minor,  like
the  modem  Angora  species,  were  remarkable  for
the  length  of  their  hair.  {In  Cilicia  eircaque
Series  villa  tonsili  vestiuntur,  are  the  words  of
Pliny,  who  here  alludes  to  the  goats  from  the
Cinyps  in  Libya,  the  "  Cinyphii  hirci  "  of  Virgil.)
(Colum.  i.  Praef.  §  26,  vii.  6  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  viii.
50  ;  Pallad.  xii.  13  ;  Varr.  ii.  3,  ii.  1.  §  5.  28.)

3.  Swine  {pecus  suillum)  were  divided  into  two
classes,  the  sties  densae,  usually  black  in  colour,
thickly  covered  with  bristles  ;  and  the  sties  glabrae^
generally  white,  and  comparatively  smooth ;  but
there  seems  to  have  been  little  difference  in  the
management  of  the  two  breeds,  except  that  the
former  was  the  more  hardy.

The  points  characteristic  of  a  good  animal,  and
the  warranty  usually  required  by  the  purchaser,
will  be  found  in  Varro  (ii.  4),  Columella  (vii.  9),
and  Palladius  (iii.  26).

During  a  great  portion  of  the  year,  wherever  it
was  practicable,  they  were  driven  out  to  feed  early
in  the  morning  in  woods  where  acorns,  beech-
mast,  wild  fmits,  and  berries  abounded  ;  and  in
the  middle  of  the  day  they  reposed,  if  possible,  in
swampy  ground,  where  they  had  not  only  water
but  mud  also  wherein  to  wallow  ;  in  the  cool  of
the  evening  they  fed  again,  were  taught  to  assemble
when  the  swineherd  {svbtdcus)  sounded  his  hom,
and  were  then  driven  home  to  the  farm.  In  winter
they  were  not  allowed  to  go  forth  when  frost  was
hard  upon  the  ground.  When  kept  in  the  house,
their  chief  food  was  acoms,  or  when  the  supply  of
these  failed,  beans,  barley,  and  other  kinds  of  grain
and  pulse.  The  number  in  each  herd  varied  from
100  to  150,  or  even  more,  according  to  circum-
stances and  the  means  of  the  proprietor,  and  the
proportion  of  one  boar  to  ten  sows  was  usually
observed.

The  sows  were  not  considered  fit  for  breeding
until  upwards  of  a  year  old,  and  continued  prolific
to  the  age  of  seven  ;  boars  {verves)  were  in  full
vigour  fi-om  one  year  old  till  four  ;  the  best  time
for  impregnation  was  from  the  middle  of  Febraary
up  to  the  vemal  equinox,  the  period  of  gestation
was  four  months,  and  the  pigs  being  weaned  at  the
end  of  two,  a  double  farrow  might  be  procured  in
a  year.

Each  breeding  sow  {scrofa)  brought  up  her  pigs
{porcus,  porca,  porcellus)  in  a  separate  stye  {hara),
constmcted  in  such  a  manner  that  the  superintend-
ant  {custos^  porculator)  might  easily  see  into  the
interior  and  thus  be  prepared  to  relieve  the  progeny,
which  were  in  constant  danger  of  being  cmshed  by
the  weight  of  the  mother  who  was  supposed  to
bring  forth  as  many  young  as  she  had  teats,  and
was  capable  of  suckling  eight  at  first,  but  when
they  increased  in  size  it  was  deemed  advisable  to
withdraw  one  half  of  that  number.  Sucking  pigs
{lactentes)  when  ten  days  old  were  accounted  pure
for  sacrifice,  and  hence  were  anciently  termed  sacres;
after  the  suckling  time  {nutricatus,  porculatio),  which
lasted  two  months,  was  over,  they  were  denomi-


64


AGRICULTURAL


iiated  delici^  and  sometimes  nefrendes^  because  not
yet  able  to  cranch  hard  food.  The  males  not  re-
served for  breeding  were  castrated  when  from  six
to  twelve  months  old,  and  were  then  termed
majales.  (Varr.  ii.  4  ;  Colum.  vii,  9,  Praef.  i.
§  26  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  viii.  51  ;  Pallad.  iv.  26.)

II.    Majores  Pecudes.

1.  Kine  (pectis  htibulum,  armentum  hvLulum)
were  divided  into  classes,  according  as  they  were
kept  at  home  and  employed  in  the  labours  of  the
farm  (hoves  domiti),  or  pastured  in  large  herds
(armenta).

Boves  domitiy  wherever  the  nature  of  the  soil
and  the  mode  of  culture  pursued  permitted,  were
allowed  to  pasture ;  since  growing  grass  (viride
pabulum)  was  considered  the  most  suitable  of  all
food  ;  when  this  could  not  be  supplied,  it  became
necessary  to  stall-feed  them  {alere  ad  praesepia)  ;
but  they  were  allowed  to  stand  in  the  open  air
during  the  hot  weather,  while  in  winter  they  were
kept  in  spacious  byres  (stabula,  consepta)  built  with
a  southerly  aspect  so  as  to  be  sheltered  from  cold
winds,  the  floors  being  hard  and  sloping  to  prevent
moisture  from  being  absorbed,  and  to  allov/  it  to
run  off  freely,  while  to  promote  the  warmth  and
comfort  of  the  animals  they  were  bedded  with
abundance  of  litter  (stramentum  pecori  et  hvJms
diligenter  substernatur^  Cat.  5.),  usually  straw,  or
leaves,  such  as  those  of  the  ilex,  which  were  sup-
posed to  yield  little  nourishment.  Their  staple
food  from  the  middle  of  April  until  the  middle  of
June  was  vetches,  lucerne,  clover,  and  other  fodder
cut  green  ;  from  the  middle  of  June  to  the  begin-
ning of  November  the  leaves  of  trees,  those  of  the
elm,  the  oak,  and  the  poplar  being  regarded  as  the
best ;  from  the  beginning  of  November  until  April
meadow  hay  {foemim  pratense)^  and,  where  hay
could  not  be  procured,  chaff,  grape  husks,  acorns,
and  dry  leaves  were  substituted  mixed  with  barley,
or  with  some  of  the  leguminous  seeds,  such  as
beans,  lupines,  or  chick-peas  previously  steeped  in
water  (maceratae)^  or  crushed  (fresae).  When  an
ox  was  fed  upon  hay,  from  30  to  40  pounds  weight
(Roman  pound  =  1]§  oz.  avoird.)  was  an  ample
allowance,  except  during  the  months  of  November
and  December,  that  is,  during  the  ploughing  and
sowing  season,  when  they  received  from  the  feeder
(pa/julatorius)  as  much  food  of  the  most  nutritious
kind  as  they  could  consume.  Lumps  of  salt  placed
near  the  consepta  proved  very  attractive  to  the
animals  and  conduced  to  their  health.

Large  herds  were  pastured  chiefly  in  woods
where  there  was  abundance  of  grass,  leaves,  and
tender  twigs,  shifting  to  the  coast  in  winter  and  to
the  cool  shady  hills  in  summer,  under  the  charge  of
herdsmen  (annentarii),  a  class  altogether  distinct
from  the  btdmlci,  or  hinds,  who  worked  and  tended
the  boves  domestici.  The  common  number  in  a  herd
was  from  100  to  120,  the  animals  were  carefully
inspected  every  year,  and  the  least  promising  (reji-
cuUic)  weeded  out.  The  proportion  of  two  bulls,  a
yearling  and  a  two-year  old,  to  60  or  70  cows  was
usually  observed,  but  Columella  doubles  the  num-
ber of  males.  The  Umbrian  oxen,  especially  those
on  the  Clitumnus,  were  the  largest  and  finest  in
Italy  ;  those  of  Etruria,  Latium,  and  Gaul  were
smaller,  but  strongly  made  and  well  adapted  for
labour ;  those  of  Thrace  were  valued  for  sacrificial
purposes  in  consequence  of  being  for  the  most  part
pure  white ;  but  the  cattle  of  Epirus,  the  most  im-


AGRICULTURA.

portant  pastoral  district  of  the  Roman  world,  were
superior  to  all  others.

The  points  characteristic  of  a  good  animal,  and
the  warranty  usually  demanded  by  the  buyer,  will
be  found  fully  detailed  in  Varro  (ii.  5),  in  Colu-
mella, who  here  copies  the  description  of  the  Car-
thaginian Mago  (vi.  1,  20,  21),  and  in  Palladius
(iv.  11,  12).

Cows  (vaccae)  were  not  fit  for  breeding  until
they  were  upwards  of  two  years  old,  and  they  con-
tinued to  produce  until  they  had  reached  the  age
often.  Considerable  variation  is  to  be  found  in
the  agricultural  writers  as  to  the  age  at  which  the
bulls  arrived  at  full  vigour,  Varro  considering
that  they  might  be  employed  when  a  year  old,
Columella  and  Pliny  recommending  that  they
should  be  kept  until  four.  The  former,  however,
is  the  precept  of  the  practical  man,  and  is  con-
sonant with  modem  experience.  The  time  of  ges-
tation being  nearly  ten  (lunar)  months,  the  most
favourable  period  for  impregnation  was  from  the
middle  of  June  to  the  end  of  July,  for  thus  the
calves  (vituli)  would  be  bom  when  spring  was
well  advanced  (maturo  vere).  When  partiu-ition
was  approaching,  the  pregnant  cow  {horda  vacca)
was  carefully  watched,  fed  richly,  and  protected
from  the  assaults  of  the  gad-fly  and  other  tor-
menting assailants  ;  the  calf  for  some  time  after  its
birth  was  allowed  to  suck  freely,  but  as  it  in-
creased in  strength  was  tempted  with  green  food,
in  order  that  it  might  in  some  degree  relieve  the
mother,  and  after  six  months  had  elapsed,  was  fed
regularly  with  wheat  bran,  barley  meal,  or  tender
grass,  and  gradually  weaned  entirely.  Castration
was  performed  at  the  age  of  two  years.  The  vi-
tuli intended  for  labour  were  to  be  handled  (trac-
tari)  from  an  early  age  to  render  them  tame,  but
were  not  to  be  broken  in  to  work  (domari)  before
their  third,  nor  later  than  their  fifth  year.  The
method  of  breaking  (domitura)  those  taken  wild
from  the  herd  is  fully  described  by  Columella
(vi.  2),  and  Palladius  fixes  the  end  of  March  as  the
time  most  appropriate  for  commencing  the  opera-
tion. The  members  of  a  herd,  according  to  age
and  sex,  were  termed,  Vitulus,  Vitula  ;  Juvencus^
Juvenca ;  Bos  novellus^  Buculus ;  Bos  vehdtiSy
Taurus^  Vacca  ;  a  barren  cow  was  named  Taura.
(Cat.  5,  30  ;  Varr.  ii.  1,  5  ;  Colum.  vi.  1—3,  20—
24  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  viii.  45  ;  Pallad.  iv.  11, 12,  vi.  7,
viii.  4.)

2.  Horses  {pecus  equinum  s.  eq2iitium^  armentum
equiniim)  are  divided  by  Columella  into  Generosi,
blood  horses ;  Mulares,  horses  adapted  for  breeding
mules  ;   Vul/jares,  ordinary  horses.

The  points  of  a  horse,  the  method  of  ascertaining
his  age  up  to  seven  years  old,  and  the  warranty
usually  given  by  the  seller,  are  detailed  in  Varro
(ii.  7.  §  4,  5,  6  )  in  Columella  (vi.  29),  and  in
Palladius  (iv.  13).

Horses  either  pastured  in  grass  fields  or  were  fed
in  the  stable  upon  dry  hay  (in  stabulis  ac  praese-
pibus),  to  which  barley  was  added  when  the  ani-
mal was  required  to  undergo  any  extraordinary
fatigue.  Brood  mares  were  frequently  kept  in
large  troops  which  shifted,  like  sheep  and  oxen,
from  the  mountains  to  the  coast,  according  to  the
season  ;  two  mounted  men  being  attached  to  each
herd  of  fifty.  The  mare  (equa)  was  considered  fit
for  breeding  at  two  years  old,  and  continued  pro-
lific up  to  the  age  of  ten  ;  the  stallion  (admissarius)
remained  in  vigour  from  three  years  old  untU


AGRICL'LTURA.

twenty,  but  when  young  was  limited  to  tweh'e  or
fifteen  females.  The  period  of  gestation  being
twelve  lunar  months  and  ten  days,  the  best  time  for
impregnation  was  from  the  vernal  equinox  to  the
summer  solstice,  since  parturition  would  then  take
place  during  the  most  favourable  season.  High
bred  mares  were  not  allowed  to  produce  more  than
once  in  two  years.  Ten  days  after  birth  the  foal
(ptdlus  equinus,  effiuleus)  was  permitted  to  accom-
pany its  dam  to  pasture  ;  at  the  age  of  five  months,
it  was  customary  to  begin  feeding  them  with  barley-
meal  and  bran,  and  when  a  year  old,  with  plain
iinground  barley  ;  but  the  best  colts  were  allowed
to  continue  sucking  until  they  had  completed  two
years,  and  at  three  years  they  were  broken  in  for
the  toil  to  which  they  were  destined,  whether  for
racing  (ad  cursuram)^  for  draught  {a/l  rhedam),
for  carrying  burthens  (advecturam),  or  for  military
service  (ad  epUppium),  but  they  were  not  regularly
worked  until  four  off.

Race  and  war  horses  were  not  castrated  ;  but  the
operation  was  frequently  performed  on  those  des-
tined for  the  road,  from  the  conviction  that  the
gelding  (canterizcs),  while  less  bold  and  spirited  was
more  safe  and  tractable  (in  viis  habere  malunt
placidos).

It  is  to  be  observed  that  horses  were,  and  in-
deed are,  very  little  used  for  agricultural  purposes
in  Italy  and  Southern  Europe,  the  ordinary  toils
being  carried  on  almost  exclusively  by  oxen,  and
hence  they  never  were  by  any  means  objects  of
such  general  interest  to  the  farmer  as  among  our-
selves.

We  may  remark  that  Varro,  Columella,  and
many  other  writers,  repeat  the  absurd  story  em-
bellished by  the  poetry  of  Virgil,  that  mares  in
some  districts  of  Spain  became  pregnant  by  the
influence  of  a  particular  wind,  adding  that  the  colts
conceived  in  this  manner  did  not  live  beyond  the
age  of  three  years.  (Varr.  i.  Praef.  §  26,  ii.  1.
§  18,  7.  §  7  ;  Colum.  vi.  27,  29  ;  Plin.  H.N. y'ni.
42  ;  Pallad.  iv.  13.)

3.  Asses  (asinus^  aslna)  were  divided  into  two
classes,  the  Genus  mansuetum,  or  common  domestic
quadruped  (asinus,  asellus),  and  the  Genus/erum,
the  wild  ass  (onager^  onagi'us),  which  was  common
in  Phrygia  and  Lycaonia,  was  easily  tamed  and
made  an  excellent  cross.

The  most  celebrated  breeds  were  those  of  Ar-
cadia and  of  Reate,  The  latter  Avas  so  highly  es-
teemed in  the  time  of  Varro,  that  a  single  indi-
vidual of  this  stock  had  been  known  to  fetch  sixty
thousand  sesterces  (about  500/.  sterling),  and  a
team  of  four,  as  much  as  four  hundred  thousand
(upwards  of  3300Z.  sterling).  Such  animals  were
of  course  delicately  nurtured,  being  fed  chiefly  upon
/ar  and  barley  bran  (furfures  ordeacei).  The  infe-
rior description  of  asses  (mi7ior  asellus)  were  valued
by  farmers  because  they  were  very  hardy,  not
subject  to  disease,  capable  of  enduring  much  toil,
required  little  food  and  that  of  the  coarsest  kind,
such  as  the  leaves  and  twigs  of  thorny  shrubs,  and
might  be  made  serviceable  in  various  ways,  as  in
carrying  burdens  (aselli  dossuarii)^  turning  corn
mills  and  even  in  ploughing,  where  the  soil  w.as
not  stiff.  The  time  of  impregnation,  the  period  of
gestation,  and  the  management  of  the  foals  (pulli),
were  the  same  as  in  horses.  They  were  seldom
kept  in  sufficient  numbers  to  form  a  herd.  (Varr.  ii.
1.  §  14,  ii.  6.;  Colum.  vii.  1  ;  Plin.  //.  A^.  viii.  43  ;
PaUad.  iv.  14.)


AGRICULTURA.


69


4.  Mules.  MuZus  and  Mula  were  the  general
temis  for  the  hybrid  between  a  horse  and  an  ass,
but  in  practice  a  distinction  was  drawn  between
Midi  and  Hirmi.  Hinni  were  the  progeny  of  a
stallion  and  a  she-ass,  Muli  of  a  male  ass  and  a
mare.  The  latter  were  larger  in  proportion,  and
more  esteemed  than  the  former.  A  cross  some-
times was  formed  between  the  mare  and  the  onager
as  a  matter  of  curiosity.

Uncommon  care  was  taken  by  breeders  of  mules
in  the  selection  of  the  parents.  A  strong  large-
boned  mare,  powerful  rather  than  swift,  was  usu-
ally chosen.  The  male  asses  at  their  birth  were
removed  from  their  mother,  suckled  by  mares,
reared  upon  the  most  nourishing  food  (hay  and
barley),  and  attained  to  full  vigour  when  three
years  old.  A  good  admissarius  from  Arcadia  or
Reate  was  worth  from  thirty  to  forty  thousand  ses-
terces (250/.  to  330/.  sterling).  The  period  of
gestation  was  observed  to  be  a  little  longer  than
in  the  case  of  the  pure  horse  or  ass,  extending  to
thirteen  lunar  months  ;  in  all  other  respects  their
management,  habits,  and  mode  of  sale  were  the
same.

The  great  use  of  mules  was  in  drawing  travelling
carriages  Qiisce  enim  binis  conjunctis  omnia  ve-
hicula  in  viis  ducimtur) ;  they  were  also  employed,
like  asses,  in  carrying  burdens  upon  pack  saddles
(clitellae),  and  in  ploughing  light  land.  The  finer
kinds,  when  kept  in  herds,  were  driven  in  summer
from  the  rich  plains  of  Rosea  on  the  Velinus  to  the
Montes  Gurgures.  (Varr.  ii.  1 .  §  16,  ii.  8  ;  Colum.
vi.  36,  37  ;  Plin.  H.N.  viii. 44  ;  Pallad.  iv.  14.)

III.

1.  Dogs  (canes)  were  divided  into  three  classes :
a.  Canes  ViUatici,  watch-dogs,  whose  office  was  to
guard  farm-houses  against  the  aggressions  of  thieves.

b.  Canes  Pastorales  s.  Canes  Pecnarii^  to  protect
the  flocks  and  herds  from  robbers  and  wild  beasts.
Each  opilio  Avas  generally  attended  by  two  of
these,  equipped  with  spiked  collars  (mellum),  to
serve  as  a  defence  in  their  encounters  with  wolves
and  other  adversaries.

c.  Canes  Venatlci.     Sporting  dogs.

Varro  and  Columella  describe  minutely  the
points  of  the  first  two  classes,  with  which  alone  the
former  was  concerned,  and  these  seem  to  be  iden-
tical with  the  animals  employed  for  the  same  pur-
pose at  the  present  day  in  the  Abruzzi.  They
were  fed  upon  barley  meal  and  w^hey,  or  in  places
where  no  cheese  was  made,  on  wheaten  bread
moistened  with  the  warm  liquor  in  which  beans
had  been  boiled.     (Varr.  ii.  9  ;  Colum.  vii.  12.)

2.  Feeders  (pastores).

The  flocks  and  herds  Avhich  fed  in  the  imme-
diate neighboiu-hood  of  the  farms  were  usually
tended  by  old  men,  boys,  or  even  women  ;  but
those  which  were  driven  to  distant  and  moun-
tainous pastures  were  placed  under  the  care  of
persons  in  the  vigour  of  life,  who  always  went  well
armed  and  were  accompanied  by  beasts  of  burden
(jumeiita  dossuaria)^  carrying  all  the  apparatus  and
stores  required  during  a  protracted  absence  ;  the
whole  body  of  men  and  animals  being  under  the
command  of  an  experienced  and  trustworthy  in-
dividual, styled  Magister  Pecoris,  who  kept  all
the  accounts  and  possessed  a  competent  knowledge
of  the  veterinary  art.

We  may  conclude  this  part  of  the  subject  with
a  few  words  upon  the  management  of  dairy  pro-


66  AGRICULTURA.

dace,  which  was  treated  as  a  distinct  science
(rvpoTtoiia)  by  the  Greeks,  who  wrote  many-
treatises  upon  the  topic.

Cheese-making  commenced  in  Maj',  and  the
method  followed  by  the  Romans  was  substantially
the  same  as  that  now  practised.  The  milk  un-
skimmed was  used  as  fresh  as  possible,  was  slightly
warmed,  the  rennet  {coaguluin)  was  then  added  ;  as
soon  as  the  curd  formed,  it  was  transferred  to  baskets
{fiscellae^  ccdathi)  or  wooden  chesets  {formae)
perforated  with  holes,  in  order  that  the  whey
(serum)  might  drain  off  quickly,  and  was  pressed
down  by  weights  to  hasten  the  process.  The  mass
was  then  taken  out  of  the  frame,  sprinkled  with
salt,  and  placed  upon  a  wicker  crate  or  wooden
board  in  a  cool  dark  place  ;  when  partially  dried,
it  was  again  pressed  more  powerfully  than  Ijefore,
again  salted  and  again  shelved, — operations  which
were  repeated  for  several  days  until  it  had  required
a  proper  consistency.  It  might  be  flavoured  with
thyme,  with  pine  cones,  or  any  other  ingredient,
by  mixing  the  condiments  with  the  warm  milk.

The  rennet  or  coagulum  was  usually  obtained
from  the  stomach  of  the  hare,  kid,  or  lamb  {coagu-
lum leporinum,  hoedinum^  agmnum\  the  two  former
being  preferred  to  the  third,  while  some  persons
employed  for  the  same  purpose  the  milky  juice
expressed  from  a  fig-tree  branch,  vinegar,  and  a
variety  of  other  substances.

The  cheeses  from  cows'  milk  (casei  buhitli)  were
believed  to  contain  more  nourishment,  but  to  be
more  indigestible  than  those  from  ewes'  milk  {casei
ovilli)  ;  the  least  nourishing  and  most  digestible
were  those  from  goats'  milk  {ea^ei  caprim),  the
new  and  moist  cheeses  in  each  case  being  more
nourishing  {magis  alibiles),  and  less  heavy  {in
corpora  non  resides)^  than  those  which  w«re  old
and  dry.

Butter  is  mentioned  by  Varro  (ii.  2.  §  16),  but
seems  to  have  been  scaxcely  used  as  an  article  of
food  (Varr.  ii.  1.  §  28.  11  ;  Cohmi.  val  8  ;  Plin.
H.  N.  xi.  96,  xxiv.  93,  xxv.  39,  xxviiL  34  ;  Pal-
lad,  vi.  9).

)8.    VILLATICA  PASTIO-

ViUaticae  Pastiones,  from  which  many  persons
towards  the  close  of  the  republic  and  under  the
empire  derived  large  revenues,  were  separated  into
two  departments,  according  to  the  names  given  to
the  buildings  or  enclosures  adapted  to  the  different
animals :  —

I.  Aviaria  s.  OrnUhones.
II.    Vivaria.

I.  Aviaria  s.  Ornithines^  in  the  most  extended  ac-
ceptation of  the  term,  signified  receptacles  for  birds
of  every  description,  whether  wild  or  tame,  terres-
trial or  amphibious,  but  it  is  frequently  and  con-
veniently employed  in  a  more  limited  sense  to  de-
note the  structures  formed  for  birds  caught  in  their
wild  state  by  the  fowler  {auceps),  from  wh«m  they
were  purchased,  and  then  shut  up  and  sold  at  a
profit  after  they  became  fcit

In  this  way  we  may  distinguish  between,  a.
Chhors  in  piano,  b.  Columbarium,  c.  Omithon,  of
which  the  first  two  only  were  known  to  the  earlier
Romans.

a.  Cohors  in  piano,  was  the  poultry-yard  in-
cluding the  houses  and  courts  destined  for  those
domestic  fowls  which  were  bred  and  fed  on  the
fiinn,  and  which  were  not  able  or  not  pemiittcd  to
fly  abroad.     Of  these  the  chief  were,  1.  Barn-


AGRICULTURA.

door  fowls  or  chickens  {gallinae).  2.  Guinea  fowls
{galliiiae  Numidicue  s.  Africanac).  3.  Pheasants
{phasiam).  4.  Peacocks  {pavones).  5.  Geese
{anseres).  6.  Ducks  {abates),  7.  Teal  (.')  {quer-
quedulae).

b.  ColuHibariu7n,  the  dove-cote.

c.  The  Ornitlum  proper,  the  inmates  of  which
were  chiefly,  1.  Thrushes  and  blackbirds  {turdi,
merulae\  especially  the  former.  2.  Quails  {cotur-
Tiices).  3.  Turtledoves  {iwrtures).  4.  Ortolans  (?)
{miliariae\  all  of  which  are  in  Italy  birds  of  pas-
sage arriving  in  great  flocks  at  particular  seasons.

II.  In  like  manner  the  term  Vivaria,  which
may  be  employed  to  denote  all  places  contrived
for  the  reception  of  animals  used  for  food  or  which
supplied  articles  of  food  and  did  not  fell  under  the
denomination  of  pectides  or  o^jes,  mustbe  separated
into  those  designed  for  the  reception  of  land  ani-
mals, and  those  for  fishes.

a.  Leporaria,  Apiaria,  Coclearia,  Gliraria,  and
/3.  Piscinae.

a.  Leporaria.  The  animals  kept  in  lepora-
ria were  chiefly,   1.  Hares  and  rabbits  (lepores).

2.  Various  species  of  deer  {cervi,  capreae,  orygcs).

3.  Wild  boars  {apri),  and  under  the  same  cate-
gory rank,  4.  Bees  {apes).  5.  Snails  {cocMeae).
6.  Dormice  {glires).

fi.  PiscitKUi  or  fish-ponds,  divided  into  —

1.  Piscinae  aquae  dulcis,  fresh- water  ponds  ;  and

2.  Piscinae  aquae  salsae,  salt-water  ponds.

We  commence  then  with  a  description  of  the
inhabitants  of  the  Cohors  inpla7io  and  their  dwell-
ing.

I.  Aviaria.
I.  a.  CoJiors  in  piano.

In  the  science  of  rearing  poultry  {Ratio  CoJior^
talis,  opviOorpScpia),  three  precepts  were  of  general
application.  The  birds  were  to  be  kept  scrupulously
clean,  were  to  be  abundantly  supplied  with  fresh
air  and  pure  water,  and  were  to  be  protected  from
the  attacks  of  weasels,  hawks,  and  other  vermin.
The  two  former  objects  were  attained  by  the  choice
of  a  suitable  situation,  and  by  incessant  attention
upon  the  part  of  the  superintendents  {curaiores,
custodes) ;  the  latter  was  effected  by  overlaying  the
walls  of  the  houses  and  courts,  both  inside  and
out,  with  coats  of  smooth  hard  plaster  or  stucco,
and  by  covering  over  the  open  spaces  with  large
nets.

Again,  the  attention  of  those  who  desired  to  rear
poultry  with  profit  was  chiefly  occupied  by  five
considerations:  1.  The  choice  of  a  good  breeding
stock  {de  gciiere).  2.  The  impregnation  of  the
hens  {de  foetura).  3.  The  management  of  the
eggs  during  incubation  {de  ovis).  4.  The  rearing
of  the  pullets  {de  pullis).  5.  Fattening  them  for
the  market  {de  fartura),  this  last  process  being,
however,  fi-equently  conducted  not  by  the  farmer
{rusticus),  but  by  persons  who  made  it  their  sole
occupation  {fartores).

1,  2.  Chickens  {gallinae).  Of  the  different
species  of  domestic  fowls,  the  most  important  were
gaUinae,  which  were  divided  into  three  classes  :  —
a.  Gallinae  Villaticae  s.  Cohortales,  the  common
chicken,  b.  Gallinae  Africanae  s.  Numidicue,  the
s:ime  probably  with  the  fieKeaypidcs  of  the  Greeks,
the  distinctions  pointed  out  by  Columella  scarcely
amounting  to  a  specific  difference  ;  and  c.  GaUinoe
Pustlcae.  The  last  were  found  in  great  abundance
in  the  Insula  Gallinaria,  but  it  is  so  difficult  to


AGRICULTURA.

determine  from  the  descriptions  transmitted  to  us
what  they  really  were,  that  we  know  not  whether
•we  ought  to  regard  thera  as  pheasants,  as  red-
legged  partridges,  as  wood-grouse,  or  as  some
epecies  of  game  different  from  any  of  these.  The
Africanae^  always  scarce  and  dear,  were  treated
almost  exactly  in  the  same  manner  as  peacocks,
and  never  became  of  importance  to  the  farmer ;  the
Rttsticae  are  little  spoken  of  except  as  objects  of
curiosity,  and  Columella  declares  that  they  would
not  breed  in  confinement  {in  servitute  nonfoetant).
AVe  therefore  confine  our  observations  to  the  Vil-
laticae.

Among  the  breeds  celebrated  for  fighting  were
the  Tanagrian,  the  Rhodian,  and  the  Chalcidean  ;
but  these  were  not  the  most  profitable  for  the
market.  The  points  of  a  good  barn-door  fowl  are
minutely  described  by  Varro,  Columella,  and  Pal-
ladius,  who  all  agree  in  recommending  the  breeder
to  reject  such  as  were  white,  for  they  were  more
delicate  and  less  prolific  than  those  whose  plumage
was  darker.  Some  were  permitted  to  roam  about
(vagae)  diu"ing  the  day,  and  pick  up  what  they
could,  but  the  greater  number  were  constantly
shut  up  (clausae)  in  a  poultry  yard  (gallinarium,
opviQoio(TKeiov),  which  was  an  enclosed  court
(septum)  with  a  warm  aspect,  strewed  with  sand
or  ashes  wherein  they  might  wallow,  and  covered
over  with  a  net.  It  contained  hen-houses  (caveae)
to  which  they  retired  at  night  and  roosted  upon
poles  stretched  across  {perticae)  for  their  conve-
nience, nests  {cubilia)  for  the  laying  hens  being
constructed  along  the  walls.  The  whole  esta-
blishment was  under  the  control  of  a  poultry-
man  (amaritts,  custos  s.  curator  gallinarms),  who
occupied  an  adjoining  hut,  usually  assisted  by
an  old  woman  and  a  boy,  for  the  flocks  were
often  very  large,  containing  upwards  of  two  hun-
dred. The  proportion  of  one  cock  {gallus)  to
five  hens  was  commonly  observed,  the  males  not
required  for  breeding  being  killed  young  or  made
into  capons  (capi).  Their  food  consisted  of  barley
with  the  husk  removed  (hordeum  pinsitum)^  millet,
vetches,  and  lentils,  when  these  articles  could  be
procm-ed  cheap,  but  when  too  dear,  they  were
supplied  with  the  refuse  of  wheat,  bran  with  a
little  of  the  flour  adhering,  the  seeds  of  cytisus,
and  the  like.

The  laying  season  began  in  January  and  con-
tinued until  the  autumnal  equinox.  From  twenty-
five  to  thirty  eggs,  the  number  being  increased  or
diminished  according  as  the  weather  was  hot  or
cold,  were  placed  beneath  a  clocking  hen  {gallina
ghciens)  from  one  to  two  years  old,  who  was  kept
constantly  shut  up  except  at  feeding  time,  or  even
furnished  with  food  while  on  the  nest.  The  cura-
tor made  his  rounds  regularly  during  the  twenty
days  of  incubation,  turning  the  eggs,  that  they
might  all  receive  equal  heat,  and  rejecting  those
which  upon  examination  were  found  to  contain  no
embrj'os.  Such  as  were  not  required  for  hatch-
ing, were  preserved  by  rubbing  them  with  strong
brine,  and  then  storing  them  up  in  chaff  or  bran.
The  chicks  for  fifteen  days  were  fed  by  hand  on
polenta  mixed  with  nasturtium  (cress)  seed.

Chickens,  when  fattened  for  sale,  were  shut  up
in  dark  narrow  cribs,  light  and  motion  being  un-
fiivourable  to  the  process  ;  or  each  bird  was  swung
separately  in  a  basket,  with  a  small  hole  at  each
end,  one  for  the  head,  the  other  for  the  rump,  and
"bedded   upon  the   softest   hay   or   chaff,   but  so


AGRICULTURA.


67


cramped  in  space  that  he  could  not  turn  round.
In  this  state  they  were  crammed  with  wheat,
linseed,  barley  meal  kneaded  with  water  into
small  lumps  (Jturundae),  and  other  farinaceous
food,  the  operation  requiring  from  twenty  to
twenty-five  days.  (Var.  iii.  9  ;  Colum.  viii.  2,  &c.
12  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  X.  21  ;  Pallad.  i.  27,  29.)

3.  Pheasants  (phasiani)  are  not  mentioned
among  domestic  poultry  by  Varro  or  Columella,
but  find  a  place  in  the  compilation  of  Palladius,
who  directs  that  young  birds,  that  is,  those  of  a
year  old,  should  be  selected  as  breeders  in  the
proportion  of  one  cock  to  two  hens,  and  that  the
eggs  should  be  hatched  by  barn-door  fowls.  The
chicks  were  to  be  fed  for  the  first  fortnight  on  cold
boiled  barley  lightly  sprinkled  with  wine,  after-
wards upon  bniised  wheat,  locusts,  and  ant's  eggs,
and  were  to  be  prevented  from  having  access  to
water.  They  became  fat  in  thirty  days  if  shut  up
and  crammed  with  wheat  flour  made  up  into  small
lumps  (turundae)  with  oil.     (Pallad.  i.  29.)

4.  Peacocks  (pavo?ies,  pavi,  pavae)  are  said  to
have  been  first  introduced  as  an  article  of  food  by
Q.  Hortensius  at  a  banquet  on  the  installation  of
an  augur  (augurali  aditiali  coena).  They  speedily
became  so  much  in  request  that  soon  afterwards  a
single  full-gro^vn  bird  sold  for  fifty  denarii  (up-
wards of  a  guinea  and  a  half ),  and  a  single  egg
for  five  (upwards  of  three  shillings),  while  one
breeder,  M.  Aufidius  Lurco,  derived  an  income  of
60,000  sesterces  (about  500Z.  sterling)  from  this
source  alone.  The  most  favourable  situations  for
rearing  peacocks  were  aflforded  by  the  small  rocky
but  well-wooded  islets  off  the  Italian  coast,  where
they  roamed  in  freedom  without  fear  of  being  lost
or  stolen,  provided  their  own  food,  and  brought  up
their  young.  Those  persons  who  could  not  com-
mand such  advantage,  kept  them  in  small  en-
closures roofed  over,  or  under  porticoes,  perches
(perticae)  being  supplied  for  them  to  roost  upon,
with  a  large  grassy  court  in  front,  surrounded  by  a
high  wall  and  shaded  by  trees.  They  were  fed
upon  all  kinds  of  grain  but  chiefly  barley,  did  not
arrive  at  full  maturity  for  breeding  until  three  years
old,  Avhen  one  cock  was  allowed  to  five  hens,  and
care  was  taken  to  supply  each  bird  with  a  separate
nest  (discreta  cubilia).  The  hatching  process  was
most  profitably  performed  by  common  barn-door
fowls,  for  in  this  way  the  pea-hen  laid  three  times
in  a  season,  first  five  eggs  {ova  pavonina),  then
four,  and  lastly  two  or  three,  but  if  allowed  to  in-
cubate herself  could  rear  onlj'  one  brood.  In  the
time  of  Varro,  three  chicks  {ptdli  pavonini)  for
each  full-grown  bird  were  considered  a  fair  return.
(Varr.  iii.  6  ;  Colum.  viii.  II  ;  Pallad.  i.  28  ;
Plin.  X.  20  ;  comp.  Juv.  i.  143.)

5.  Geese  {anseres)  were  easily  reared,  but  were
not  very  profitable  and  somewhat  troublesome,  for
a  running  stream  or  a  pond  with  a  good  supply  of
herbage  was  essential,  and  they  could  not  be
turned  out  to  graze  in  the  vicinity  of  growing  crops,
which  they  tore  up  by  the  roots,  at  the  same  time
destroying  vegetation  by  their  dimg.  Birds  for
breeding  were  always  selected  of  a  large  size  and
pure  white,  the  grey  variety  {varii  vel  fusel)  beuig
regarded  as  inferior  on  the  supposition  that  they
were  more  nearly  allied  to  the  wild  species.  Their
food  consisted  of  clover,  fenugreek,  lettuce,  to-
gether with  leguminous  plants,  all  of  which  were
sovm  for  their  use,  and  especially  an  herb  called
at  pis  by  the  Greeks,  which  seems  to  have  been

F  2


68


AGRICULTURA.


a  sort  of  endive.  Impregnation  took  place  about
mid-winter,  one  gander  being  allowed  to  three
females,  who  when  the  laying  season,  which  was
early  in  spring,  approached,  were  shut  up  in  a  struc-
ture (xv^o€o(rKe7ov)  consisting  of  a  court  (cohois),
surrounded  by  a  high  wall  with  a  portico  inside
containing  receptacles  {harae,  cellae,  speluncae),
from  two  to  three  feet  square,  built  of  hewn  stone
or  brick,  well  lined  with  chaff,  for  the  eggs.  In-
cubation, according  to  the  weather,  lasted  from
twenty-five  to  thirty  days,  during  which  period  the
mothers  were  supplied  by  the  custos  with  barley
crushed  in  water.  The  goslings  remained  in  the
house  for  about  ten  days,  and  were  fed  upon  po-
lenta, poppy. seed,  and  green  cresses  (nasturtium)
chopped  in  water,  after  which  they  were  taken  out
in  fine*  weather  to  feed  in  marshy  meadows  and
pools.  It  was  found  in  practice  most  advantageous
to  employ  barn-door  hens  to  hatch  the  eggs,  since
they  made  more  careful  mothers  ;  and  in  this  case
the  goose  would  lay  three  times  in  a  season,  first
five  eggs,  then  four,  and  lastly  three.

Goslings,  when  from  four  to  six  months  old,
were  shut  up  to  fatten  in  dark  Avarm  coops  (sagi-
narium)^  where  they  were  fed  with  barley  pottage
and  fine  flour  moistened  with  water,  being  allowed
to  eat  and  drink  three  times  a  day  as  much  as
they  could  swallow.  In  this  way  they  became  fit
for  the  market  in  two  months  or  less.  A  flock  of
geese  furnished  not  only  eggs  but  feathers  also,  for
it  was  customary  to  pluck  them  twice  a  year,  in
spring  and  autumn,  and  the  feathers  were  worth
five  denarii  (about  three  shillings  and  foui-pence)  a
pound.  (Varro,  iii.  10  ;  Colum.  viii.  13  ;  Plin.
H.  N.  X.  22  ;  Pallad.  i.  30.)

6.  Ducks  (anates).  The  duck-house  (vrjaffo-
Tpo(pe7ou)  was  more  costly  than  the  chenoboscium,
for  within  its  limits  were  confined,  not  only  ducks,
but  querquedulae,  phalerides,  boscades  (whatever
these  may  have  been),  and  similar  birds  which
seek  their  food  in  pools  and  swamps.  A  flat  piece
of  ground,  if  possible  marshy,  was  surrounded  by  a
wall  fifteen  feet  high,  well  stuccoed  within  and
without,  along  the  course  of  which  upon  an  ele-
vated ledge  (crepido)  a  series  of  covered  nests
(tecta  cuhilia)  Avere  formed  of  hewn  stone,  the
whole  open  space  above  being  covered  over  with  a
net  or  trellice  work  {clatris  superpositis).  A  shal-
low pond  {piscina)  was  dug  in  the  centre  of  the
enclosure,  the  margin  formed  of  opus  signinum,  and
planted  round  with  shrubs  ;  through  this  flowed  a
small  stream  which  traversed  the  court  in  a  sort  of
canal  into  which  was  thrown  food  for  the  inmates,
consisting  of  wheat,  barley,  millet,  acorns,  grape
skins,  small  crabs  or  cray  fish,  and  other  water
animals.  The  eggs  v/ere  generally  hatched  hj
common  hens,  the  precautions  taken  during  incu-
bation and  the  rearing  of  the  ducklings  being  the
same  as  in  the  case  of  pullets.  (Var.  iii.  11  ;
Colum.  viii.  15.)

I.  b.  Columbarium.

Pigeons  {columbus,  columba).  Varro  distin-
guishes two  species  or  varieties,  the  one  Genus
saxatile  s.  agreste,  probably  the  Columba  livia  of
naturalists,  which  was  shy  and  wild,  living  in
lofty  tiirrets  {subliTnes  turriculae),  flying  abroad
Avithout  restraint,  and  generally  of  a  darkish  colour,
dappled,  and  without  any  admixture  of  Avhite,  the
other  kind  more  tame  {ckmentius)^  feeding  about  the
doors  of  the  farm,  and  for  the  most  part  Avhite.  Be-


AGRICULTURA.

tween  these  a  cross  breed  {miscellum)  was  usually
reared  for  the  market  in  a  lofty  edifice  (Trepto-re-
poTpofpeiov  ;  irepiarcpccbv),  constructed  for  the  pur-
pose. These  buildings,  placed  under  the  charge
of  a  columbarius^  Avere  frequently  large  enough  to
contain  5000,  Avere  vaulted,  or  roofed  in  Avith  tiles,
and  furnished  Avith  one  small  entrance,  but  well
lighted  \>y  means  of  large  barred  or  latticed  Avin-
doAvs  {fenestrae  Punicanae^  s.  reticulatae).  The
walls,  carefully  stuccoed,  were  lined  from  top  to
bottom  with  rows  of  round-shaped  nests  with  a
single  small  aperture  (columbaria)^  often  formed  of
earthenAvare  (fictilia)^  one  being  assigned  to  every
pair,  Avhile  in  front  of  each  row  a  plank  was  placed
upon  which  the  birds  alighted.  A  copious  supply  of
fresh  Avater  was  introduced  for  drinking  and  Avash-
ing  ;  their  food,  consisting  of  the  refuse  of  Avheat
(excreta  iritici)^  millet,  vetches,  peas,  kidney-beans,
and  other  leguminous  seeds,  Avas  placed  in  narrow
troughs  ranged  round  the  Avails,  and  filled  by  pipes
from  Avithout.  Those  pigeons,  Avhich  Avere  kept  in
the  country,  being  alloAved  to  go  out  and  in  at  will,
supported  themselves  for  a  great  part  of  the  year
upon  what  they  picked  up  in  the  fields,  and  were
regularly  fed  (acceptant  conditiva  cibaria)  for  two
or  three  months  only  ;  but  those  in  or  near  a  towTi
were  confined  in  a  great  measure  to  the  ii^picmpo-
Tpo(p€7ou,  lest  they  should  be  snared  or  destroyed.
They  Avere  very  fruitful,  since  one  pair  Avould  rear
eight  broods  of  two  each  in  the  course  of  a  year,
and  the  young  birds  (pulli)  very  speedily  arriA'ed
at  maturity,  and  began  forthwith  to  lay  in  their
turn.  Those  set  aside  for  the  market  had  their
Aving  feathers  plucked  out  and  their  legs  broken,
and  Avere  then  fattened  upon  white  bread  pre-
Adously  chewed  (manducato  catidido  farciunt  pane) ,
A  handsome  pair  of  breeding  pigeons  of  a  good
stock  Avould  fetch  at  Rome,  towards  the  close  of  the
republic,  two  hundred  sesterces  (upwards  of  a  guinea
and  a  half) ;  if  remarkably  fine,  as  high  as  a  thou-
sand (nearly  eight  guineas)  ;  and  as  much  as  six-
teen hundred  (more  than  thirteen  pounds)  Avas  a
price  sometimes  asked,  Avhile  CQlumella  speaks  of
four  thousand  (upwards  of  thirtj'  poimds)  having
been  given  in  his  time  ;  and  some  persons  Avere
said  to  have  a  hundred  thousand  (nearly  a  thou-
sand pounds  sterling)  invested  in  this  kind  of  pro-
perty. The  instinct  Avhich  teaches  pigeons  to  re-
turn to  the  place  where  they  haA-e  been  fed  Avas
remarked  by  the  ancients,  Avho  Avere  Avont,  for  the
sake  of  amusement,  to  bring  them  to  the  theatres
and  there  let  them  loose.  (Varr.  iii.  7  ;  Colum.
viii.  8  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  x.  52,  74,  xi.  64,  xviii.  42  ;
Pallad.  i.  24.)

I.  c.  OmitTion.,  Aviarium  (6pui6oTpo(pi7ov).

OrnitJiones^  in  the  restricted  sense,  Avere  di-
A'ided  into  two  classes:  1.  Those  constructed  for
pleasure  merely  being  designed  for  the  reception  of
nightingales  and  other  singing  birds.  2.  Those  for
profit,  in  Avhich  thousands  of  wild  birds  Avere  con-
fined and  fattened.  VaiTo  gives  a  very  curious  and
minute  description  of  an  ornithon  belonging  to  the
first  class,  which  he  himself  possessed,  and  Lu-
cuUus  endeavoured  to  combine  the  enjoyment  of
both,  for  he  had  a  triclinium  constracted  in  his
Tusculan  villa  inside  of  an  ornithon,  delighting  to
behold  one  set  of  birds  placed  upon  the  t'lble  ready
for  his  repast,  Avhile  others  Averc  fluttering  at  the
Avindows  by  which  the  room  Avas  lighted.  Orni-
thones  of  the  second  class,  with  Avhich  alone  we  are


AGRICULTURA.

at  present  concerned,  were  kept  by  poulterers  (macel-
hirii\  and  others  in  the  city,  but  the  greater  num-
ber were  situated  in  Sabinum,  because  thrushes
■were  most  abundiint  in  that  region.  These  huge
cages  were  formed  by  enclosing  a  space  of  ground
with  high  walls  and  covering  it  in  with  an  arched
roof.  Water  was  introduced  by  pipes,  and  con-
ducted in  numerous  narrow  channels,  the  windows
were  few  and  small,  that  light  might  be  excluded
as  much  as  possible,  and  that  the  prisoners  might
not  pine  from  looking  out  upon  the  open  country,
where  their  mates  Avere  enjoying  freedom.  Indeed,
80  sensitive  were  thrushes,  and  so  apt  to  despond
when  first  caught,  that  it  was  the  practice  to  shut
them  up  for  some  time  with  other  tame  individuals
of  their  own  kind  {veterani)^  who  acted  as  decoys
(alleciores),  in  reconciling  them  to  captivity.  In
the  interior  of  this  building  numerous  stakes  (pali)
were  fixed  upright,  upon  which  the  birds  might
alight  ;  long  poles  also  (periicae)  were  arranged  in
an  inclined  position  resting  against  the  walls  with
spars  nailed  in  rows  across,  and  lofts  were  con-
structed, all  for  the  same  purpose.  Two  smaller
apartments  were  attached,  one  in  which  the  super-
intendant  (curator)  deposited  the  birds  which  died
a  natural  death,  in  order  that  he  might  be  able  to
square  accounts  with  his  master,  the  other,  called
the  sechtsorinm,  communicating  with  the  groat  hall
by  a  door,  into  which  those  birds  wanted  for  the
market  were  driven  from  time  to  time,  and  killed
out  of  sight,  lest  the  others  might  droop  on  witness-
ing the  fate  of  their  companions.

Millet  and  wild  berries  were  given  freely,  but
their  chief  food  consisted  of  dry  figs  carefully
peeled  {diligenter  pinsita)  and  kneaded  with  far  or
pollen  into  small  lumps,  which  were  chewed  by  per-
sons hired  to  perfonn  this  operation.  The  birds
usually  kept  in  an  omithon  have  been  mentioned
above,  but  of  these  by  far  the  most  importfint  were
thnishes,  which  made  their  appearance  in  vast
flocks  about  the  vernal  equinox,  and  seem  to  have
been  in  great  request ;  for  out  of  a  single  establish-
ment in  Sabinum,  in  the  time  of  Varro,  five  thousand
were  sometimes  sold  in  a  single  year  at  the  rate  of
three  denarii  a  head,  thus  yielding  a  sum  of  60,000
sesterces,  about  five  hundred  pounds  sterling.

The  manure  from  omithones  containing  thrushes
and  blackbirds  was  not  only  a  powerful  stimulant
to  the  soil,  but  was  given  as  food  to  oxen  and  pigs,
who  fattened  on  it  rapidly.

Turtle  doves  (turtures^  dim.  turturiUae)  belonged
to  the  class  which  did  not  lay  eggs  in  captivity
{nee  parit  nee  ej'dmlit),  and  consequently,  as
soon  as  caught,  were  put  up  to  fatten  (volatura
ita  ut  capitur  farturac  destinatur).  They  were
not  however  confined  in  an  ordinarj'  omithon  but
in  a  building  similar  to  a  dove-cote,  with  this  dif-
ference, that  the  interior,  instead  of  being  fitted  up
with  columbaria,  contained  rows  of  brackets  [mutu-
los\  or  short  stakes  projecting  horizontally  from  the
wall  and  rising  tier  above  tier.  Over  each  row,
the  lowest  of  which  was  three  feet  from  the  ground,
l.empen  mats  {tegeticukie  can7iabinae)  were  stretched,
( n  which  the  birds  reposed  day  and  night,  while
nets  were  drawn  tight  in  front  to  prevent  them
from  flying  about,  which  would  have  rendered  them
lean.  They  fattened  readily  in  harvest  time,  de-
lighting most  in  dry  wheat,  of  which  one-half
modius  per  day  was  sufficient  for  120  turtles,  or  in
millet  moistened  with  sweet  wine.  (Varr.  iii.  8  ;
Colum.  viii.  0  ;   Pallad.  i.  25  ;  Plin.  //.  A^.  x.  24,


34,  35, 53,  58,
Juv.  vi.  38.)


AGRICULTURA.  69

74  ;  comp.  Plant.  Mostell.  i.  1.  44  ;


II.  Vivaria.
II.  a.  Lcporaria.

Leporaria  anciently  were  small  walled  paddocks,
planted  thickly  with  shrubs  to  give  shelter  ;  and  in-
tended, as  the  name  implies,  for  the  reception  of
animals  of  the  hare  kind  ;  viz.  1.  The  common  grey
hare  (lialicum  hoc  tiostrum,  sc.  (/enus).  2.  The  moun-
tain or  white  hare  from  the  Alps,  seldom  brought
to  Rome  (toti  candidi  sunt).  3.  Rabbits  {cunicidi)^
believed  to  be  natives  of  Spain,  These,  at  least
the  first  and  third,  bred  rapidly,  were  caught  occa-
sionalh^,  shut  up  in  boxes,  fattened  and  sold.  In
process  of  time,  the  name  leporarium  was  changed
for  the  more  appropriate  tenn  b7]piorpo(pi'iov,  since
a  variety  of  wild  animals,  such  as  boars  {apri)^
stags  (cervi),  and  roe  deer  {cajyreae),  were  pro-
cured from  the  hunter  (venator),  and  shut  up  in
these  parks,  which  now  embraced  several  acres
even  in  Italy,  while  in  the  provinces,  especially
Transalpine  Gaul,  they  frequently  comprehended
a  circuit  of  many  miles  of  hill  and  swamp,  glade
and  forest.  This  space  was,  if  possible,  fenced
by  a  wall  of  stone  and  lime,  or  of  unljurnt  brick
and  clay,  or,  where  the  extent  rendered  even  the
latter  too  costly,  by  a  strong  paling  {vacei-ra)  formed
of  upright  stakes  [stipites]  drilled  with  holes  {per
latus  efforantur\  through  which  poles  {amites)  were
passed  horizontally,  the  whole  of  oak  or  cork  tree
timber,  braced  and,  as  it  were,  latticed  by  planks
nailed  diagonally  {seris  transversis  clatrare),  much
in  the  fashion  of  wooden  hurdles.  Even  in  the
largest  enclosures  it  was  necessary  to  support  the
animals  in  winter,  and  in  those  of  moderate  size
they  were  frequently  tamed  to  such  an  extent,  that
they  would  assemble  at  the  sound  of  a  horn  to  re-
ceive their  food.  (Varr.  iii.  12  ;  Colum.  ix.  1  ;
Plin.  ^,A^,  viii.  52.)

Bees  {apes).  The  delight  experienced  in  the
management  of  these  creatures  is  sufficiently  proved
by  the  space  and  care  devoted  to  the  subject  in
Virgil,  and  by  the  singularly  minute  instructions
conUiined  in  the  agricultural  writers,  especially  in
Columelln,  who  derived  his  materials  from  the  still
more  elaborate  compilations  of  Hyginus  and  Cel-
sus,  the  former  being  the  author  of  a  regular  bee
calendar,  in  which  the  various  precepts  for  the
guidance  of  the  bee  fancier  {mellarius^  apiarius  /
fxeXiTovpyhs^  meliturgus)  were  arranged  in  regular
order  according  to  the  seasons  and  days  of  the  year.
The  methods  which  the  ancients  describe  differ
little,  even  in  trifling  details,  from  those  followed  by
ourselves,  although  in  some  respects  our  practice  is
inferior,  since  they  never  destroyed  a  hive  for  the
sake  of  its  contents,  but  abstracted  a  portion  of  the
honey  only,  always  leaving  a  sufficient  supply  for
the  support  of  the  insects  in  winter  ;  and  the  same
swarm,  occasionally  reinforced  by  young  recruits,
might  thus  continue  for  ten  years,  which  was  re-
garded as  the  limit.  Our  superior  knowledge  of
natural  history  has  however  enabled  us  to  deter-
mine that  the  chief  of  the  hive  is  always  a  female,
not  a  male  {rex)  as  was  the  general  belief  ;  to  ascer-
tain the  respective  duties  performed  by  the  queen,
the  working  bees,  and  drones  {fuci  s.  fures\  which
were  unkno^vn  or  confounded  ;  and  to  reject  the
absurd  fancy,  to  which  however  we  are  indebted
for  the  most  charming  episode  in  the  Georgics,
v.'hich  originated  with  the  Greeks,  and  is  repeated
F  3


70  AGRICULTURA.

with  unhesitating  faitli  by  almost  every  authority,
that  swarms  might  be  produced  by  spontaneous
generation  from  the  putrescent  carcase  of  an  ox
{ex  hubuk)  corpore  putrefwto  ;  and  hence  they  were
commonly  termed  ^ooy6vas  by  the  poets,  and  by
Archelaus  )3obs  (pdijx^i/rjs  Treirorrifxeua  rfKva).

The  early  Romans  placed  the  hives  in  niches,
hollowed  out  of  the  walls  of  the  farm-house  itself,
under  the  shelter  of  the  eaves  {svhter  suljgrundas),
but  in  later  times  it  became  more  common  to  form
a  regular  apiary  (apiarium,  alvearium^  mellarium  ;
fj.eXiTroTpo(j)e7ov^  fxeXirroovri)^  sometimes  so  exten-
sive, as  to  yield  5000  pounds  of  honey  in  a  season.
This  was  a  small  enclosure  in  the  immediate
vicinity  of  the  villa,  in  a  warm  and  sheltered  spot,
as  little  subject  as  possible  to  great  variations  of
temperature,  or  to  disturbances  of  an}'-  description
from- the  elements  or  from  animals  ;  and  carefully
removed  from  the  influence  of  foetid  exhalations,
such  as  might  proceed  from  baths,  kitchens,  stables,
dunghills,  or  the  like.  A  supply  of  pure  water  was
provided,  and  plantations  were  formed  of  those
plants  and  flowers  to  which  they  were  most  attached,
especially  the  cytisus  and  thyme,  the  former  as
being  conducive  to  the  health  of  bees,  the  latter  as
affording  the  greatest  quantity  of  honey  {ajMssimum
ad  7nelificium).  The  yew  was  carefully  avoided,
not  because  in  itself  noxious  to  the  swarm,  but  be-
cause the  honey  made  from  it  was  poisonous.  {Sic
mea  Cyrneas  fugiant  examina  tcwos.)  The  hives
{alvi,  alvei,  ulvearia,  KV(p4Xai),  if  stationary',  were
built  of  brick  {domicilia  laterUjus  facta)  or  baked
dung  {ex  Jimo),  if  moveable,  and  these  were  con-
sidered the  most  convenient,  were  hollowed  out  of
a  solid  block,  or  formed  of  boards,  or  of  wicker
Avork,  or  of  bark,  or  of  earthenware,  the  last  being
accounted  the  worst,  because  more  easily  affected
by  heat  or  cold,  while  those  of  cork  were  accounted
best.  They  were  perforated  with  two  small  holes
for  the  insects  to  pass  in  and  out,  were  covered
with  moveable  tops  to  enable  the  mellarius  to  in-
fipect  the  interior,  which  was  done  three  times  a
month,  in  spring  and  summer,  for  the  purpose  of
removing  any  filth  which  might  have  accumulated,
or  any  worms  that  might  have  found  entrance  ;  and
were  arranged,  but  not  in  contact,  in  rows  one
above  another,  care  being  taken  that  there  should
jiot  be  more  than  three  rows  in  all,  and  that  the
lowest  row  should  rest  upon  a  stone  parapet,  ele-
vated three  feet  from  the  ground,  and  coated  with
smooth  stucco  to  prevent  lizards,  snakes,  or  other
noxious  animals  from  climbing  up.

When  the  season  for  swarming  arrived,  the
movements  which  indicated  the  approaching  de-
parture of  a  colony  {examen)  were  watched  im-
remittingly,  and  when  it  was  actually  thrown  off,
they  were  deterred  from  a  long  flight  by  casting
dust  upon  them,  and  by  tinkling  sounds,  being
at  the  same  time  tempted  to  alight  upon  some
neighbouring  branch  by  rubbing  it  with  balm
{ajnastmm^  IxeXiacrScpvWov,  s.  /x4\ivov,  s.  //eXf-
<bv\Xov\  or  any  sweet  substance.  When  they
had  all  collected,  they  were  quietly  transferred  to
a  hive  similarly  prepared,  and  if  they  showed  any
disinclination  to  enter  were  urged  on  by  Biuround-
ing  them  with  a  little  smoke.

If  quarrelsome,  their  pugnacity  was  repressed
by  sprinkling  them  with  honey  water  {mella)  ;  if
lazy,  they  were  tempted  out  by  placing  the  sweets
smelling  plants  they  most  loved,  chiefly  apiastmm
or  thyme,  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  hive,


AGRICULTURA.

recourse  being  had  at  the  same  time  to  a  slight
fumigation.  If  distracted  by  sedition  in  conse*
quence  of  the  presence  of  two  pretenders  to  the
throne,  the  rivals  were  caught,  examined,  and  the
least  promising  put  to  death.  In  bad  weather,
those  stricken  down  and  disabled  by  cold  or  sudden
rain  were  tenderly  collected,  placed  in  a  spot
Avanned  by  artificial  heat,  and  as  they  revived  laid
down  before  their  hives.  When  the  weather  for
any  length  of  time  prevented  them  from  going
abroad,  they  were  fed  upon  honey  and  water,  or
upon  figs  boiled  in  must  and  pounded  into  a  paste.
The  honey  harvest  {mellatio,  mellis  vindemia^
castratio  alvoi-um,  dies  <xii>trandi,  jueAfToxris),  ac-
cording to  Varro,  took  place  three  times  a  year,
but  more  usually  twice  only,  in  June  and  October ;
on  the  first  visitation  four-fifths,  at  the  second  two-
thirds  of  the  honey  was  abstracted  ;  but  these  pro-
portions varied  much  according  to  the  season,  and
the  strength  of  the  particular  hive.  The  system
pursued  was  very  simple :  the  moveable  top  was
taken  off,  or  a  door  contrived  in  the  side  opened,
the  bees  were  driven  av/ay  by  a  smoking  apparatus,
and  the  mellarius  cut  out  with  peculiarly  formed
knives  as  much  of  the  contents  as  he  thought  fit.
The  comb  {fuvus,  Krjpiov),  which  Avas  theproduci
of  their  industry,  was  composed  of  wax  {cera,  KTjphs)
formed  into  hexagonal  cells  {sex  angulis  cella),  the
geometrical  advantages  of  which  were  soon  dis-
covered by  mathematicians,  containing  for  the  most
part  honey  {mel,  /ueAt),  but  also  the  more  solid
sweet  substance  commonly  called  bee-bread  {pro-
polis, iTp6Tro\Ls\  the  classical  name  being  derived,
it  is  said,  from  the  circumstance  that  it  is  found  in
greatest  abundance  near  the  entrance.  The  combs
were  cemented  together,  and  the  crevices  in  the
hive  daubed  over  with  a  glutinous  gum,  the  erithace
{ipiQoLKri)  of  Varro  and  his  Greek  authorities,
which  seenis  to  be  the  same  w^ith  what  is  else-
where termed  melligo  {ixeXirwixa).

Columella  and  Palladius  describe  ingenious  plans
for  getting  possession  of  wild  swarms  {apes  st/lves-
tres^  ferae,  rustkae,  as  opposed  to  urbanae,  cicures)  ;
and  Pliny  notices  the  humble  bees  which  con-
stnicted  their  nests  in  the  ground,  but  seems  to
suppose  that  they  were  peculiar  to  a  district  in
Asia  Minor.  The  marks  which  distinguish  the
A'arieties  of  the  domestic  species  will  be  found  de-
tailed by  the  different  authorities  quoted  below.
(Aristot  Hist.  Anim.  v.  ix ;  Aelian.  de  Anim.  i.
59,  60,  \,  10,  11  ;  Var.  ii.  5,  iil  .3, 16  ;  Virg.  Georg.
iv.  ;  Colnra.  ix.  3.  &c,  xi.  2  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xi.  5,
&c.  ;  Pallad.  i.  37—39,  iv.  15,  v.  8,  vi.  10,  vii.  7,
Lx.  7,  xL  13,  xii.  8.)

Snails  {cochleae).  Certain  species  of  snails  were
favourite  articles  of  food  among  the  Romans,  and
were  used  also  medicinally  in  diseases  of  the  lungs
and  intestines.  The  kinds  most  prized  were  those
from  Reate,  which  were  small  and  white  ;  those
from  Africa  of  middling  size,  and  very  fruitful  ;
those  called  solitanoje,  also  from  Africa,  larger  than
the  former  ;  and  those  from  lUyria,  Avhich  were  the
largest  of  all.  Tlie  place  where  they  were  preserved
{coddearium)  was  sheltered  from  the  sun,  kept
moist,  and  not  covered  over,  nor  walled  in,  but
surrounded  by  water,  which  prevented  the  escape
of  tlie  inmates  who  were  very  prolific,  and  required
nothing  except  a  few  laurel  leaves  and  a  little
bran.  They  were  fattened  by  shutting  th<'m  up
in  a  jar  smeared  with  boiled  must  and  flour,  and
perforated  with  holes  to  admit  air.     It  has  been


AGRICULTURA.

recorded  that  an  individual  named  Fulvius  Hir-
plnus  constructed,  near  Tarquinii,  the  first  coch-
learium  ever  formed  in  Italy,  a  short  time  before
the  civil  war  between  Caesar  and  Pompey.  (Varr.
iii.  14  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  ix.  56,  xxx.  7,  15  ;  comp.
Sallust.  Jug.  93.)

Dormice  {glires)  were  regarded  as  articles  of
such  luxury  that  their  use  as  food  was  forbidden
in  the  sumptuary  laws  of  the  more  rigid  censors  ;
but,  notwithstanding,  a  gUrariwn  became  a  com-
mon appendage  to  a  villa.  It  was  a  small  space
of  ground  surrouioded  with  a  smooth  wall  of  polished
or  stuccoed  stone,  planted  with  acorn-bearing  trees
to  yield  food,  and  containing  holes  {eavi)  for  rear-
ing the  young.  They  were  fattened  up  in  earthen
jars  {ddia)  of  a  peculiar  constniction,  upon  chest-
nuts, walnuts,  and  acorns.  (Varr.  iii.  15  ;  Plin.
H.  N.  ix.  57  ;  comp.  Martial,  iii.  58,  xiii»  BQ  ;
Petron.  31  ;  Amra.  Marc,  xxviii.  4.)

II.  &,  Piscinae.

Lastly,  we  may  say  a  few  words  upon  artificial
fish  ponds,  which  were  of  two  kinds — freshwater
ponds  {piscinae  dzilces),  and  salt  water  ponds
(piscinae  salsae  s.  marltimae).

The  former,  from  an  early  period,  had  frequently
been  attached  to  ordinary  fanns,  and  proved  a
source  of  gain  ;  the  latter  vrere  unknown  until  the
last  half  century  of  the  republic,  were  mere  ob-
jects of  luxury,  and  were  confined  for  the  most  part
to  the  richest  members  of  the  community,  to  many
of  whom,  such  as  Hirrus,  Philippus,  Lucullus,  and
Hortensius,  who  are  sneeringly  termed  pisdnarii
by  Cicero,  they  became  objects  of  intense  interest.
These  receptacles  were  constructed  at  a  vast  cost
on  the  sea-coast,  a  succession  being  frequently
formed  for  different  kinds  of  fish,  and  the  most
ingenious  and  elaborate  contrivances  provided  for
the  admission  of  the  tide  at  particular  periods,  and
for  regulating  the  temperature  of  the  water  ;  large
sums  were  paid  for  the  stock  with  which  thiy
were  filled,  consisting  chiefly  of  mullets  and  mu-
raenae  ;  and  a  heavy  expense  was  incurred  in
maintaining  them,  for  fishennen  were  regularly
employed  to  catch  small  fry  for  their  food,  and
when  the  weather  did  not  permit  such  supplies  to
be  procured,  salt  anchovies  and  the  like  were
purchased  in  the  market.  For  the  most  part  they
yielded  no  return  whatever,  during  the  lifetime  at
least  of  the  proprietors,  for  the  inmates  were  re-
garded as  pets,  and  frequently  became  so  tame  as
to  answer  to  the  voice  and  eat  from  the  hand.
When  sales  did  take  place  the  prices  were  very
high.  Thus  Hirrus,  who,  on  one  occasion,  lent
Caesar  6,000  muraenae,  at  a  subsequent  period
obtained  4,000,000  of  sesterces  (upwards  of
30,000(?.)  for  an  ordinary  villa,  chiefly  in  conse-
quence of  the  ponds  and  the  quantity  of  fish  they
contained.

A  certain  Sergius  Grata,  a  short  time  before  the
Marsic  War,  fonned  artificial  oyster-beds  {vivaria
ostrearum)  from  which  he  obtained  a  large  revenue.
He  first  asserted  and  established  the  superiority  of
the  shell-fish  from  the  Lucrine  Lake,  which  have
always  maintained  their  celebrity,  although  under
the  empire  less  esteemed  than  those  from  Britain.
(Varr.  R.  R.  iii.  17  ;  Colum.  viii.  16,  17  ;  Plin.
H.N.  ix.  54,  55  ;  Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  19.)

Of  modem  treatises  connected  with  the  subject
of  this  article  the  most  important  is  Dickson's
"  Husbandry  of  the  Ancients,"  2  vols.  8vo.  1788,


AGRIMENSORES.


71


the  work  of  a  Scotch  clergyman,  who  was  well
acquainted  with  the  practical  details  of  agriculture
and  who  had  studied  the  Latin  writers  with  great
eare,  but  whose  scholarship  was  unfortunately  so
imperfect  that  he  was  in  many  instances  unable  to
interpret  con-ectly  their  expressions.  Many  use-
ful and  acute  observations  will  be  found  in  the
"^  Economie  Politique  des  Remains  "  by  Dureau
de  la  Malle,  2  tomes,  8vo.  Paris,  1840,  but  he  also
is  far  from  being  accurate,  and  he  is  embarrassed
throughout  by  very  erroneous  views  with  regard  to
the  rate  of  interest  among  the  Romans,  and  by  the
singular  misconception  that  from  the  expulsion  of
the  kings  until  the  end  of  the  second  Punic  war,
the  law  forbade  any  Roman  citizen  to  possess  more
than  7  jugers  of  land.  (Vol.  ii.  p.  2.)  Those  who
desire  to  compare  the  agriculture  of  modern  Italy
with  ancient  usages  will  do  well  to  consult  Arthur
Young's  "  Travels  in  Italy,"  and  the  Appendix  of
Symonds  ;  the  "  Agriculture  Toscane  "  of  J.  C.  L.
Simonde,  8vo.  Geneve,  1801 ;  and  "  Lettres  ecrites
d'ltalie  a  Charles  Pictet  par  M.  LuUin  de  Cha-
teanvieux."  8vo.  Paris.  2nd  ed.  1820.     [W.  R.]

AGRIMENSOHES.  At  the  foundation  of  a
colony  and  the  assignation  of  lands  the  auspicia
were  taken,  for  which  purpose  the  presence  of  the
augur  was  necessary.  But  the  business  of  the
augur  did  not  extend  beyond  the  religious  part  of
the  ceremony:  the  division  and  measurement  of
the  land  were  made  by  professional  measurers.
These  were  the  Finitores  mentioned  in  the  early
writers  (Cic.  e.  RuUu?n,  ii.  13;  Plautus,  Poenulus,
Prolog.  49),  who  in  the  later  periods  were  called
Mensores  and  Agrimensores.  The  business  of  a
Finitor  could  only  be  done  by  a  free  man,  and
the  honourable  nature  of  his  office  is  indicated  by
the  rule  that  there  was  no  bargain  for  his  services,
but  he  received  his  pay  in  the  form  of  a  gift.
These  Finitores  appear  also  to  have  acted  as  judices,
under  the  name  of  arbitri,  in  those  disputes  about
boundaries  which  were  purely  of  a  technical,  not  a
legal,  character.

Under  the  empire  the  observance  of  the  auspices
in  the  fixing  of  camps  and  the  establishment  of
military  colonies  was  less  regarded,  and  the  prac-
tice of  the  Agrimensores  was  reduced  to  a  system
by  Julius  Ftontinus,  Hyginus,  Siculus  Flaccus,  and
other  Gromatic  writers,  as  they  are  sometimes
termed.  As  to  the  meaning  of  the  tenn  Groma,
and  the  derived  words,  see  Facciolati,  Lexicon^  and
the  Index  to  Goesius,  Rei  Agrariae  Scripiares,
The  teachers  of  geometry  in  the  large  cities  of  the
empire  used  to  give  practical  instruction  on  the
system  of  gromatice.  This  practical  geometry  was
one  of  the  liberalia  studia  (Dig.  50.  tit.  13.  s.  1)  ;
but  the  professors  of  geometry  and  the  teachers  of
law  were  not  exempted  from  the  obligation  of  being
tAtores,  and  from  other  such  burdens  {Frag.  Vat.
§  150),  a  fact  which  shows  the  subordinate  rank
which  the  teachers  of  elementary  science  then  held.

The  Agrimensor  could  mark  out  the  limits  of
the  cent\uriae,  and  restore  the  boundaries  where  they
were  confused,  but  he  could  not  assign  {assignare)
without  a  commission  from  the  emperor.  ^  Military
persons  of  various  classes  are  also  soraotunes  men-
tioned as  practising  surveying,  and  settling  disputes
about  boundaries.  The  lower  rank  of  the  profes-
sional Agrimensor,  as  contrasted  with  the  Finitor
of  earlier  periods,  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  in  the
imperial  period  th^re  might  be  a  contract  with  an
Agrimensor  for  paying  him  for  his  services.
F  4


72  AGRIONIA.

The  Agrimensor  of  the  later  period  was  merely
emplo^'cd  in  disputes  as  to  the  boundaries  of  pro-
perties. The  foundation  of  colonies  and  the  as-
signation of  lands  were  now  less  common,  though
we  read  of  colonies  being  established  to  a  late
period  of  the  empire,  and  the  boundaries  of  the
lands  must  have  been  set  out  in  due  form.  (Ily-
ginus,  p.  177,  ed.  Goes.)  Those  who  marked  out
the  ground  in  camps  for  the  soldiers'  tents  are  also
called  Mensores,  but  they  were  military  men.  ( Ve-
getius,  De  Re  Military  ii.  7.)  The  functions  of
the  Agrimensor  are  shown  by  a  passage  of  Hyginus
{De  Controvers.  p.  1  70)  :  in  all  questions  as  to  deter-
mining boundaries  by  means  of  the  marks  (sig7ia),
the  area  of  surfaces,  and  explaining  maps  and  plans,
the  services  of  the  Agrimensor  were  required :  in
all  questions  that  concerned  property,  right  of  road,
enjoyment  of  water,  and  other  easements  (sernitutes)
they  were  not  required,  for  these  were  purely  legal
questions.  Generally,  therefore,  they  were  either
employed  by  the  parties  themselves  to  settle
boundaries,  or  they  received  their  instructions  for
that  purpose  from  a  judex.  In  this  capacity  they
were  advocati.  But  they  also  acted  as  judices,
and  could  give  a  final  decision  in  that  class  of
smaller  questions  which  concerned  the  quinque
pedes  of  the  Mamilia  Lex  [Lex  Mamilia],  as  ap-
pears from  Frontinus  (pp.  6'3,  75,  ed.  Goes.).  Under
the  Christian  emperore  the  name  Mensores  was
changed  into  Agrimensores  to  distinguish  them
from  another  class  of  Mensores,  who  are  mentioned
in  the  codes  of  Theodosius  and  Justinian  (vi.  34,
xii.  28).  By  a  rescript  of  Constantine  and  Con-
stans  (a.  d.  344)  the  teachers  and  learners  of
geometry  received  immunity  from  civil  burdens.
According  to  a  constitution  of  Theodosius  and  Va-
lentinian  (a.  d.  440)  as  given  in  the  collection  of
Goesius  (p.  344),  they  received  jurisdiction  in  ques-
tions of  Alluvio  ;  but  RudorfF  observes,  "  that  the
decisive  words  '  ut  judicio  agrimensoris  finiatur,'
and  '  haec  agrimensorum  semper  esse  judicia '  are  a
spurious  addition,  which  is  not  found  either  in  Nov.
Theod.  Tit.  20,  nor  in  L.  3.  C.  De  Alluv.  (Cod.
Just  vii.  tit.  41)."  According  to  another  constitu-
tion of  the  same  emperors,  the  Agrimensor  was  to
receive  an  aureus  from  each  of  any  three  border-
ing proprietors  whose  boundaries  he  settled,  and  if
he  set  a  limes  right  between  proprietors,  he  re-
ceived an  aureus  for  each  twelfth  part  of  the  pro-
perty through  which  he  restored  the  limes.  Fur-
ther, by  another  constitution  of  the  same  emperors
(Goesius,  p.  343),  the  young  Agrimensores  were  to
be  called  "  clarissimi "  while  they  were  students,
and  when  they  began  to  practise  their  profession,
spectabiles.  All  this,  which  is  repeated  by  modem
writers,  is  utterly  incredible.  (Rudorft^  p.  420,
&c.,  and  the  notes.)

(Rudorff,  Ueber  die  Feldmesser,  Zeitschrift  fifc"
Geschicht.  Rechtsw.  vol.  x.  p.  412,  a  clear  and  exact
exposition ;  Niebuhr,  vol.  ii.  appendix  2  ;  Bureau
de  la  Malle,  JEconomie  PoUtiqtie  des  Romcmis,  vol.  i.
p.  179  ;  the  few  remarks  of  the  last  writer  are  of
no  value.)  [G.  L.]

AGRIO'NIA  (ay puiyia),  a  festival  which  was
celebrated  at  Orchomenus,  in  Boeotia,  in  honour  of
Dionysus,  surnamed  WypLctivios.  It  appears  from
Plutarch  (Quaest  Rom.  102),  that  this  festival  was
solemnised  during  the  night  only  by  women  and
the  priests  of  Dionysus.  It  con3ist:)d  of  a  kind  of
game,  in  which  the  women  for  a  long  time  acted  as
if  seeking  Dionysus,  and  at  last  called  out  to  one


AGROTERAS  THUSIA.

another  that  he  had  escaped  to  the  Muses,  and  had
concealed  himself  with  them.  After  this  they  pre-
pared a  repast ;  and  having  enjoyed  it,  amused
themselves  with  solving  riddles.  This  festival  was
remarkable  for  a  feature  which  proves  its  great
antiquity.  Some  virgins,  who  were  descended  from
the  Minyans,  and  who  probably  used  to  assemble
arotmd  the  temple  on  the  occasion,  fled  and  were
followed  by  the  priest  armed  with  a  sword,  who
was  allowed  to  kill  the  one  whom  he  first  caught
This  sacrifice  of  a  human  being,  though  originally
it  must  have  formed  a  regular  part  of  the  festival,
seems  to  have  been  avoided  in  later  times.  One
instance,  however,  occurred  in  the  days  of  Plutarch.
{Quaest.  Graec.  38.)  But  as  the  priest  who  had
killed  the  woman  was  afterwards  attacked  by  dis-
ease, and  several  extraordinary  accidents  occurred
to  the  Minyans,  the  priest  and  his  family  Avere
deprived  of  their  official  functions.  The  festival,
as  well  as  its  name,  is  said  to  have  been  derived
from  the  daughters  of  Minyas,  who,  after  having
for  a  long  time  resisted  the  Bacchanalian  fury.  Were
at  length  seized  by  an  invincible  desire  of  eating
human  flesh.  They  therefore  cast  lots  on  their
own  children,  and  as  Hippasus,  son  of  Leucippe,
became  the  destined  victim,  they  killed  and  ate
him,  whence  the  women  belonging  to  that  race
were  at  the  time  of  Plutarch  still  called  the
destroyers  {oX^lai  or  aloKalai)  and  the  men
mourners  {T^oKoils).  (MUller,  Die  Minyer^  p.  1 QQ.
&c. ;  K.  F.  Hermann,  LeJirhuch  d.  gottesdienstlichen
Alterthumer  d.  Griechen,  §  63.  n.  13.)       [L.  S.]

AGRO'NOMI  (aypou6fjLoi)^  are  described  by
Aristotle  as  the  country  police,  whose  duties  cor-
responded in  most  respects  to  those  of  the  astynorai
in  the  city  [Astynomi],  and  who  performed  nearly
the  same  duties  as  the  hylori  (vXapoi).  {Polit.  vi.
5.)  Aristotle  does  not  inform  us  in  what  state
they  existed  ;  but  from  the  frequent  mention  of
them  by  Plato,  it  appears  probable  that  they  be-
lo%ed  \o  Attica.  (Plat.  Legg.  vi.  pp.  617,  618  ;
Timaeus,  Leoc,  s.  v.  and  Ruhnken's  note,  in  which
several  passages  are  quoted  from  Plato.)

AGROTERAS  THU'SIA  {ayporepas^vaia),
a  festival  celebrated  every  year  at  Athens  in  honour
of  Artemis,  surnamed  Agrotera  (from  &ypa^  chase).
It  was  solemnized,  according  to  Plutarch  {De  Ma-
lign. Herod.  26),  on  the  sixth  of  the  month  of
Boedroraion,  and  consisted  in  a  sacrifice  of  500
goats,  which  continued  to  be  offered  in  the  time  of
Xenophon.  (Xenoph.  Amtl).  iii.  2.  §  12.)  Aelian
(  V.  H.  ii.  25)  places  the  festival  on  the  sixth  day
of  Thargelion,  and  says  that  300  goats  were  sacri-
ficed ;  but  as  the  battle  of  Mamthon  which  gave
rise  to  this  solemn  sacrifice,  occurred  on  the  sixth
of  Boedromion,  Aelian's  statement  appears  to  be
.  wrong.  (Pint.  De  Glor.  Atlien.  7.)

This  festival  is  said  to  have  originated  in  the
following  manner: — When  the  Persians  invaded
Attica,  Callimachus,  the  polemarch,  or,  according  to
others,  Miltiades,  made  a  vow  to  sacrifice  to  Artemis
Agrotera  as  many  goats  as  there  should  be  enemies
slain  at  Marathon.  But  when  the  number  of  enemies
slain  was  so  great,  that  an  equal  number  of  goats
could  not  be  found  at  once,  the  Athenians  decreed
that  500  should  be  sacrificed  every  year.  This  is
the  statement  made  by  Xenophon  ;  but  other  an-
cient authors  give  different  accounts.  The  Scholiast
on  Aristoph.  {Equit.  Q%Q)  relates  that  the  Athe-
I  nians,  before  the  battle,  promised  to  sacrifice  to
Artemis  one  ox  for  every  enemy  slain  ;  but  when


AIKIAS  DIKE.

the  number  of  oxen  could  not  be  procured,  they
substituted  an  equal  number  of  goats.       [L.  S.]

AGYRMUS  {ayvpix6s).     [Eleusinia.]

AGYRTAE  (ayvprai),  mendicant  priests,  who
•were  accustomed  to  travel  through  the  different
towns  of  Greece,  soliciting  alms  for  the  gods  whom
they  served.  These  priests  carried,  either  on  their
shoulders  or  on  beasts  of  bm'then,  images  of  their
respective  deities.  They  appear  to  have  been  of
Oriental  origin,  and  were  chiefly  connected  with
the  worship  of  Isis,  Opis  and  Arge  (Herod,  iv.  35),
and  especially  of  the  great  mother  of  the  gods  ;
whence  they  were  called  fMT]TpayvpTai.  They  were
generally  speaking,  persons  of  the  lowest  and  most
abandoned  character.  They  undertook  to  inflict
some  grievous  bodily  injury  on  the  enemy  of  any
individual  who  paid  them  for  such  services,  and
also  promised,  for  a  small  sum  of  money,  to  obtain
forgiveness  from  the  gods  whom  they  served,  for
any  sins  which  either  the  individual  himself  or
his  ancestors  had  committed.  (Plat.  JRep.  ii.  p.
364,  b.  ;  Plut.  Superst.  c.  3  ;  Zosim.  i.  11  ;  Max.
Tyr.  xix.  3 ;  Athen.  vi.  p.  266,  d  ;  Origen,  c.  Cels.
i.  p.  8;  Phil.  Leg.  ii.  p.  792  ;  Ruhnken,  oof  Timaei
Lex.  s.  vv.  ayeipovaau  and  eTraywyal  ;  K.  F.  Her-
mann, Lehrbuch  d.  gottesdienstlichen  Alterthumer  d.
Griecluen^  §  42,  n.  13.)

These  mendicant  priests  came  into  Italy,  but  at
what  time  is  imcertain,  together  with  the  worship
of  the  gods  whom  they  served.  (Cic.  De  Leg.  ii.
16;  HeindoriF,  ad  Hor.  Serm.  i.  2.  2.)

AHE'NUM.     [AsNUM.]

AIKIAS  DIKE  (aiKiasSt/cTj),  an  action  brought
at  Athens,  before  the  court  of  the  Forty  ( ol  t€t-
rapaKovTo),  against  any  individual,  who  had  stnick
a  citizen  of  the  state.  Any  citizen,  who  had  been
thus  insulted,  might  proceed  in  two  ways  against
the  ofl"ending  party,  either  by  the  aiKias  SIkti,
which  was  a  private  action,  or  by  the  vSpews  ypacpr]^
which  was  looked  upon  in  the  light  of  a  public
prosecution,  since  the  state  was  considered  to  %e
wronged  in  an  injury'  done  to  any  citizen.  It  ap-
pears to  have  been  a  principle  of  the  Athenian
law,  to  give  an  individual,  who  had  been  injured,
more  than  one  mode  of  obtaining  redress.  If  the
plaintiff  brought  it  as  a  private  suit,  the  defendant
would  only  be  condemned  to  pay  a  fine,  which  the
plaintiff  received  ;  but  if  the  cause  was  brought
as  a  public  suit,  the  accused  might  be  punished
even  with  death,  and  if  condemned  to  pay  a  fine,
the  latter  went  to  the  state.

It  was  necessary  to  prove  two  facts  in  bringing
the  aiKias  Sikt?  before  the  Forty.  First,  That  the
defendant  had  struck  the  plaintiff,  who  must  have
been  a  free  man,  with  the  intention  of  insulting
him  (6(p'  riSpei),  which,  however,  was  always  pre-
sumed to  have  been  the  intention,  unless  the  de-
fendant could  prove  that  he  only  struck  the  plain-
tiff in  joke.  ,  Thus  Ariston,  after  proving  that  he
had  been  struck  by  Conon,  tells  the  judges  that
Conon  will  attempt  to  show  that  he  had  only
struck  him  in  play.  (Dcm.  c.  Conon.  p.  1261.)
Secondly,  It  was  necessary  to  prove  that  the  de-
fendant struck  the  plaintiff'  first,  and  did  not  merely
return  the  blows  which  had  been  given  by  the
plaintiff"  (&px^iv  x^'^P^^  aSiKcav,  or  merely  aS'iKuu
ipXf"',  Dem.  c.  Eiierg.  pp.  1141,  1151.)'

In  this  action,  the  sum  of  money  to  be  paid  by
the  defendant  as  damages  was  not  fixed  by  the  laws  ;
but  the  plaintiff  assessed  the  amount  according  to
the  injury,  which  he  thought  he  had  received,  and


ALA.  73

the  judges  determined  on  the  justice  of  the  claim.
It  was  thus  an  assessed  action,  and  resembled  the
procedure  in  public  causes.  The  orations  of  De
mosthenes  againsr.  Conon,  and  of  Isocrates  against
Lochites,  were  spoken  in  an  action  of  this  kind,  and
both  of  these  have  come  down  tc^  us  ;  and  there
were  two  orations  of  Lysias,  which  are  lost,  relating
to  the  same  action,  namelj-,  against  Theopompus
and  Hippocrates,  (Harpocrat.  s.  v.  aiKias  ;  Meier,
Att.  Process,  p.  547,  &c.  ;  BiJckh,  Publ.  Econ.  of
Athens,  pp.  352,  364,  372,  374,  2nd  ed.)

AITHOUSA  (atQovaa),  a  word  only  used  by
Homer,  is  probably  for  aXdovcra  aroi,  a  portico  ex-
posed to  the  sun.  From  the  passages  in  which  it
occurs,  it  seems  to  denote  a  covered  portico,  opening
on  to  the  court  of  the  house,  ahX-i],  in  front  of  the
vestibule,  irpSdvpov.  Thus  a  chariot,  leaving  the
house,  is  described  as  passing  out  of  the  irpSdvpou
and  the  aWovcra.  ill.  xxiv.  323  ;  Od.  iii.  493,  xv.
146,  191.).  The  word  is  used  also  in  the  plural,
to  describe  apparently  the  porticoes  which  sur-
rounded the  av\r].  (11.  vi.  243  ;  Od.  viii.  57.)
It  was  in  such  a  portico  that  guests  were  lodged
for  the  night.  (Od.  iii.  399,  vii.  345).  It  was
also  the  place  of  reception  for  people  flocking  to  the
palace  on  a  public  occasion  (II.  xxiv.  239  ;  Od.
viii.  57)  ;  and  hence  perhaps  the  epithet  ipiSoviros,
which  Homer  usually  connects  with  it.     [P.  3.]

ALA,  a  part  of  a  Roman  house.     [DoMus.]

ALA,  ALARFS,  ALA'RII.  These  words,
like  all  other  terms  connected  with  Roman  war-
fare, were  used  in  different  or  at  least  modified
acceptations  at  different  periods.

Ala,  which  literally  means  awing,  was  from  the
earliest  epochs  employed  to  denote  the  wing  of  an
army,  and  this  signification  it  always  retained,  but
in  process  of  time  was  frequently  used  in  a  re-
stricted  sense.

1.  When  a  Roman  army  was  composed  of
Roman  citizens  exclusively,  the  flanks  of  the  in-
fantry when  drawn  up  in  battle  array  were  covered
on  the  right  and  left  by  the  cavalry  ;  and  hence
Ala  denoted  the  body  of  horse  which  was  attached
to  and  served  along  with  the  foot-soldiers  of  the
legion.  (See  Cincius,  de  He  Militari,  who,  al-
though he  flourished  B.  c.  200,  is  evidently  ex-
plaining in  the  passage  quoted  by  Aulus  Gellius,
xvi.  4,  the  original  acceptation  of  the  term.)

2.  When,  at  a  later  date,  the  Roman  armies
were  composed  partly  of  Roman  citizens  and  partly
of  Socii,  either  Latini  or  Italici,  it  became  the
practice  to  marshall  the  Roman  troops  in  the  centre
of  the  battle  line  and  the  Socii  upon  the  wings.
Hence  ala  and  alarii  denoted  the  contingent  fur-
nished by  the  allies,  both  horse  and  foot,  and  the
two  divisions  were  distinguished  as  dextera  ala  and
sinistra  ala.  (Liv.  xxvii.  2,  xxx.  21,  xxxi.  21  ;
Lips,  de  Milit.  Rom.  ii.  dial.  7.  We  find  in  Liv.
x.  40,  the  expression  cum  cohortibus  alariis,  and  in
x.  43,  D.  Brutum  Scaevam  legatum  cum  legione
prima  et  decern,  cohoiiibus  alariis  equitatuque  ire
....  jussit.)

3.  When  the  whole  of  the  inhabitants  of  Italy
had  been  admitted  to  the  privileges  of  Roman
citizens  the  terms  alarii,  cohortes  alariae  were  trans-
ferred to  the  foreign  troops  serving  along  with  the
Roman  armies.  In  Csesar  (B.  G.  i.  51)  we  see  the
Alarii  expressly  distinguished  from  the  legionarii,
and  we  find  the  phrase  (B.  C.  i.  73)  cohortes  alariae
et  legionariae,  while  Cicero  (ad  Fam.  ii.  1 7)  speaka
of  the  Alarii  Transpadani,


74


ALAUDA.


4.  Lastly,  under  the  empire,  the  term  ala  was
applied  to  regiments  of  horse,  raised  it  would  seem
with  very  few  exceptions  in  the  provinces,  serving
apart  from  the  legions  and  the  cavalry  of  the  le-
gions. It  is  to  troops  of  this  description  that
Tacitus  refers  •when  {An7i.  xv.  10)  he  mentions
Alares  Pannonii  robur  equiiatus.

Some  further  details  on  this  subject  are  given
under  Exercitus.  [W.  R.]

ALABARCHES  (a\a§dpxvs)^R-p^eaTsto  have
been  the  chief  magistrate  of  the  Jews  at  Alexandria;
but  whose  duties,  as  far  as  the  government  was
concerned,  chiefly  consisted  in  raising  and  paying
the  taxes,  (Joseph.  Ant.  xviii.  18.  §  1,  xix.  5.
§  1,  XX.  5.  §  2;  Euseb.  //.  E.  ii.  5.)  Hence,  Ci-
cero (ad  Ait.  ii.  17)  calls  Pompcy  alabarches  from
his  raising  the  taxes.  The  etymology  of  this  word
is  altogether  uncertain,  and  has  given  rise  to  great
disputes  ;  some  modern  writers  propose,  but  with-
out sufficient  reason,  to  change  it,  in  all  the  pas-
sages in  which  it  occurs,  into  araharclies.  The
question  is  fully  discussed  by  Stm-zius.  (Z)e  Dia-
lect. Macedon.  et  Aleoeandrin.  p.  Qb^  &c.)

ALABASTRUM  and  ALABASTER  (aXc£-
Saa-rpoy,  aXaSacrrpos)^  a  box  or  vase  for  holding
perfumes  and  ointments ;  so  called  because  they
were  originally  made  of  alabaster,  of  which  the
variety,  called  onj^x-alabaster,  was  usually  em-
ployed for  this  purpose.  (Plin.  //.  A^.  xiii.  2.  s.  3,
xxxvi.  8.  s.  12.)  They  were,  however,  subse-
quently made  of  other  materials,  as,  for  instance,
gold  (xpvcrcia  akdSacrrpa).  Such  vases  are  first
mentioned  by  Herodotus  (iii.  20),  who  speaks  of
an  "  alabaster-box  of  perfumed  ointment  "  (fivpov
aXd^aa-rpov)^  as  one  of  the  presents  sent  by
Cambyses  to  the  Ethiopian  king  ;  and  aftei*  his
time  they  occur  both  in  Greek  and  Roman  writers.
(Aristoph.  Acharn.  1053  ;  Aelian,  V.  H.  xii.  18  ;
Martial,  xi.  8  ;  Matth.  xxvi.  7  ;  Mark,  xiv,  3  ;
Luke,  vii.  37.)  These  vessels  were  of  a  tapering
shape,  and  very  often  had  a  long  narrow  neck,
which  was  sealed ;  so  that  when  the  woman  in  the
Gospels  is  said  to  break  the  alabaster-box  of  oint-
ment for  the  purpose  of  anointing  Christ,  it  ap-
pears probable  that  she  only  broke  the  extremity
of  the  neck,  which  was  thus  closed.
ALABASTRI'TES.  [Alabaster.]
ALAEA  ('AAaia),  games  which  were  annually
celebrated  at  the  festival  of  Athena,  surnamed
Alea,  near  Tegea,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the
magnificent  temple  of  the  same  goddess.  (Pans,
viii.  47.  <$  3.)  [L.  S.]

ALA'RIL     [Ala.]

ALAUDA,  a  Gaulish  word,  the  prototype  of
the  modem  French  Alouette,  denoting  a  small
crested  bird  of  the  lark  kind  which  the  Latins  in
allusion  to  its  tuft  denominated  Galerita.  The
name  alauda  was  bestowed  by  Julius  Caesar  on  a
legion  of  picked  men,  which  he  raised  at  his  own
expence  among  the  inhabitants  of  Transalpine
Gaul,  about  the  year  b.  c.  55,  not  as  erroneously
asserted  by  Gibbon,  during  the  civil  war  ;  which
he  equipped  and  disciplined  after  the  Roman
fashion  ;  and  on  which  in  a  body,  he  at  a  sub-
sequent period  bestowed  the  freedom  of  the  state.
This  seems  to  have  been  the  first  example  of  a
regular  Roman  legion  levied  in  a  foreign  country
and  composed  of  barbarians.  The  designation  was,
in  all  probability,  applied  from  a  plume  upon  the
helmet,  resembling  the  "  apex  "  of  the  bird  in
question,  or  from  the  general  shape  and  appearance


ALEA.

of  the  head-piece.  Cicero  in  a  letter  to  AlticuB,
written  in  B.  c.  44,  states  that  he  had  received  in-
telligence that  Antonius  was  marching  upon  the
city  "  cum  legione  alaudarum,"  and  from  the
Philippics  we  learn  that  by  the  Lex  Judiciaria  of
Antonius  even  the  common  soldiers  of  this  corps
{Alaudae  —  manipularcs  ex  legione  Alaudarum)
were  privileged  to  act  as  judices  upon  criminal
trials,  and  enrolled  along  with  the  veterans  in  the
third  decuria  of  judices,  avowedly,  if  we  can  trust
the  orator,  that  the  framer  of  the  law  and  his
friends  might  have  functionaries  in  the  courts  of
justice  upon  whose  support  they  could  depend.

That  the  legion  Alauda,  was  numbered  V.  is
proved  by  several  inscriptions,  one  of  them  be-
longing to  the  age  of  Domitian  in  honour  of  a  cer-
tain Cn.  Domitius,  Avho  among  many  other  titles  is
styled  TRIE.  MIL.  LEG.  V.  ALAUDAE.  It  had
however  disappeared  from  the  army  list  in  the
time  of  Dion  Cassius,  that  is,  in  the  early  part  of  the
third  century,  for  the  historian,  when  giving  a  cata-
logue of  such  of  the  twenty-three  or  twenty-five
legions  which  formed  the  establishment  of  Augustus,
as  existed  when  he  wrote,  makes  no  mention  of  any
fifth  legion  except  the  Quinia  Macedonica.  (Sueton.
Jul.  24  ;  Caesar,  B.  C.  i.  39  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xi.  44  ;
Cic.  Philip,  i.  8.  §  20,  V.  5.  §  12,  xiii.  2.  §  3,  18.
§  37  ;  Gruter,  Corp.  Inscrip.  Lat.  ccccin.  1,
DXLiv.  2,  DXLix.  4,  DLix.  7  ;  Orelli,  Inscrip.
Lat.  n.  773.)  [W.  R.]

ALBOGALE'RUS.  [Apex.]
ALBUM  is  defined  to  be  a  tablet  of  any  mate-
rial on  which  the  praetor's  edicts,  and  the  niles
relating  to  actions  and  interdicts,  were  written.
[Edictum.]  The  tablet  was  put  up  in  a  public
place  in  Rome,  in  order  that  all  persons  might
have  notice  of  its  contents.  According  to  some
authorities,  the  album  was  so  called,  because  it  was
either  a  white  material,  or  a  material  whitened,
and  of  course  the  writing  would  be  a  difibrent
colour.  According  to  other  authorities,  it  was  so
called  because  the  writing  was  in  white  letters.
If  any  person  wilfully  altered  or  erased  (raserit,
corruperit,  mutaverit)  any  thing  in  the  album,  he
was  liable  to  an  action  alLi  corrupti,  and  to  a  heavy
penalty.  (Dig.  2.  tit.  i.  s.  7,  9.)

Probably  the  word  album  originally  meant  any
tablet  containing  any  thing  of  a  public  nature.
Thus,  Cicero  informs  us  that  the  Annales  Maximi
were  written  on  the  album  by  the  pontifex  maxi-
mus.  {De  Orat.  ii.  12.)  But,  however  this  may
be,  it  was  in  course  of  time  used  to  signify  a  list
of  any  public  body  ;  thus  we  find  the  expression,
album  senatorium,  used  by  Tacitus  (Ann.  iv.  42),
to  express  the  list  of  senators,  and  corresponding
to  the  word  leucoma  used  by  Dion  Cassius  (Iv.  3).
The  phrase  album  decurionmn  signifies  the  list  of
decuriones  whose  names  were  entered  on  the
album  of  a  municipium,  in  the  order  prescribed
by  the  lex  municipalis,  so  far  as  the  provisions
of  the  lex  extended.  (Dig.  50.  tit.  3.)  Album  ju-
dicum  is  the  list  of  judices.  (Suet.  Claud.  16.)
[Judex.]  [G.  L.]

ALCATHOEA  (aXKaOoM).  The  name  of
games  celebrated  at  Megara,  in  commemoration  of
the  Eleian  hero  Alcathous,  son  of  Pelops,  who  had
killed  a  lion  which  had  destroyed  Euippus,  son  of
King  Megareus.  (Pind.  Isthm.  viii.  148  ;  Pans.  i.
42.  §1.)  _  _  [L.S.]

ALEA,  gaming,  or  playing  at  a  game  of  chance
of  any  kind.     Hence,  alea^  aleaior^  a  gamester,  a


ALEA.

gambler.  Playing  with  tali  or  tesserae  was  gene-
i-ally  xinderstood  ;  because  these  were  by  far  the
most  common  games  of  chance  among  the  !l^mans.
[Talus  ;  Tessera.]

Gaming  was  considered  disreputable  at  Rome  ;
and  hence  aleator  was  used  us  a  term  of  reproach.
(Cic.  m  Cat.  ii.  10,  ad  Att.  xiv.  5.)  It  was  also
forbidden  at  Rome  by  special  laws,  during  the
times  of  the  republic,  and  under  the  emperors
(vetita  legibus  alea).  (Hor.  Carm.  iii.  24.  58  ;  Cic.
Philip,  ii.  23;  Ov.  Trist.  ii.  470,  &c.,  Dig.  11.
tit.  5.)  We  have,  however,  no  express  inform-
ation as  to  the  time  when  these  laws  were  en-
acted or  the  exact  provisions  which  they  contained.
There  are  three  laws  mentioned  in  the  Digest
(/.c.)  forbidding  gambling,  the  Leges  Titia,  Fvh-
(icia,  and  Cornelia,  and  likewise  a  senatus  con-
sultum,  and  the  praetor's  edictum.  At  what  time
the  two  fonner  laws  were  passed  is  quite  uncer-
tain ;  but  the  Lex  Cornelia  was  probably  one  of
the  laws  of  the  dictator  Sulla,  who,  we  know,  made
several  enactments  to  check  the  extravagance  and
expense  of  private  persons.  [Sumtus.]  Some
v/riters  infer  from  a  passage  of  Plautus  {Mil
Glor.  ii.  2.  9)  that  gaming  must  have  been  for-
bidden by  law  in  his  time  ;  but  the  Iccc  talaria  in
this  passage  seems  rather  to  refer  to  the  laws  of  the
game  than  to  any  public  enactment.  Some  modern
writers,  however,  read  lex  alearia  in  this  passage.
The  only  kinds  of  gaming  allowed  by  the  law
were,  first,  playing  at  table  for  the  different  articles
of  food,  and  playing  for  money  at  games  of
strength,  such  as  hurling  the  javelin,  running,
jumping,  boxing,  &c.  (Dig.  I.  c.)  Those  who  were
convicted  of  gaming  were  condemned  to  pay  four
times  the  sum  they  had  staked  (Pseudo-Ascon.  in
Cic.  Div.  §  24.  p.  110.  ed.  Orelli),  and  became  in-
fames  in  consequence.  We  know  that  infamia
was  frequently  a  consequence  of  a  judicial  decision
[Infamia]  ;  and  we  may  infer  that  it  was  in  this
case  from  the  expression  of  Cicero.  ("  Hominem
lege,  quae  est  de  alea,  condemnatum,  in  integrum
redituit,''''  Cic.  Phil,  ii,  23.)  Justinian  forbade  all
gaming  both  in  public  and  in  private.  (Cod.  3.  tit.
43.)  Games  of  chance  were,  however,  tolerated  in
the  month  of  December  at  the  Saturnalia,  which  was
a  period  of  general  relaxation  (Mart.  iv.  14,  v.  84;
Gell.  xviii.  13;  Suet.  Aug.  71);  and  among  the
Greeks,  as  well  as  the  Romans,  public  opinion
allowed  old  men  to  amuse  themselves  in  this
manner.  (Eurip.  Med.  67  ;  Cic.  Senect.  16.)
Under  the  empire  gambling  was  carried  to  a  great
height,  and  the  laws  were  probably  little  more
than  nominal.  Many  of  the  early  emperors,
Augustus,  Caligula,  Claudius,  Vitellius,  and  Do-
mitian,  were  veiy  fond  of  gaming,  and  set  but  an
evil  example  to  their  subjects  in  this  matter.
(Suet.  Aug.  70,  71  ;  Dion  Cass.  lix.  22  ;  Suet.
Cat.  41,  Claud.  33;  Dion  Cass.  Ix.  2  ;  Suet.  Dom.
21.)  Professed  gamesters  made  a  regular  study  of
their  art ;  and  there  were  treatises  on  the  subject,
among  which  was  a  book  written  by  the  emperor
Claudius.  (Oy.  Trist.  ii.  471  ;  Suet.  Clarid.  33.)

Alea  sometimes  denotes  the  implement  used  in
playing,  as  in  the  phrase  jacta  alea  est.,  "  the  die
is  cast,"  uttered  by  Julius  Caesar,  immediately
before  he  crossed  the  Rubicon  (Suet.  Jul.  32);  and
it  is  often  used  for  chance,  or  uncertainty  in  gene-
ral. (Hor.  Carm.  ii.  1.  6;  Cic.  Div.  ii.  15.)  Re-
specting the  enactments  against .  gambling,  see
Rein,  OriminalreclU  der  RomcTy  p.  833.


ALIPTAE.


7S


ALEAIA  ('AA^ata),  a  festival  celebrated  to  the
honour  of  Athena  Alea  at  Tegea  with  games  and
contests,'  of  which  we  find  mention  in  inscriptions,
(Pans.  viii.  47,  §  3  ;  Krause,  Die  Gymnastik  u.
Agonistik  d.  Hellenen,  pp.  734—736  ;  K.  F.  Her-
mann, Lehrhuch  d.  gottesdienstlichen  A  IteHhumer  d,
Griecken.,  §  51,  n.  11  ;  comp.  Halotia.)

ALI'CULA  (&\\i^  or  6aAt]|),  an  upper  dress,
which  was,  in  all  probability,  identical  with  the
chlamys,  although  Hesychius  explains  it  as  a  kind
of  chiton  (Euphor.  Fr.  112,  ap.  Meineke,  Anal.
Alex.  p.  137  ;  Callira.  Fr.  149,  ap.  Naeke,  Opusc.
vol.  ii.  p.  86  ;  Hesych.  s.  v.  ;  Suid.  s.  v.  &\.\iKa
and  iverfcri  ;  Miiller,  Arch.  d.  Ku7ist,  §  337,  n.  6;
Martial,  xii.  83.)  [P.  S.]

ALIMENTA'RII  PUERI  ET  PUELLAE.
In  the  Roman  republic,  the  poorer  citizens  were  as-
sisted by  public  distributions  of  corn,  oil,  and  money,
which  were  called  congiaria.  [Congiarium.]
These  distributions  were  not  made  at  stated  periods,
nor  to  any  but  grown-up  inhabitants  of  Rome.  The
Emperor  Nerva  was  the  first  who  extended  them  to
children,  and  Trajan  appointed  them  to  be  made
every  month,  both  to  orphans  and  to  the  children
of  poor  parents.  The  children  who  received  them
were  called  jmen  et  puellae  alimentarii.,  and  also
(from  the  emperor)  pueri  puellaeque  Ulpiani ;  and
the  officers  who  administered  the  institution  were
called  quaestores  pecuniae  alimentariae,  quaestores
alimentorum.,  procuratores  alimentoinim^  ov  prae/ecti
alimentorum.

The  fragments  of  an  interesting  record  of  an  in-
stitution of  this  kind  by  Trajan  have  been  found
at  Velleia,  near  Placentia,  from  which  we  learn
the  sums  which  were  thus  distributed,  and  the
means  by  which  the  money  was  raised.  A
similar  institution  was  founded  by  the  younger
Pliny,  at  Comum.  (Plin.  Epist.  vii.  18,  i.  8  ;  and
the  inscription  in  Orelli,  1 1 72.)  Trajan's  benevo-
lent plans  were  carried  on  upon  a  larger  scale  by-
Hadrian  and  the  Antonines.  Under  Commodua
and  Pertinax  the  distribution  ceased.  In  the  reign
of  Alexander  Severus,  we  again  meet  with  alimen-
tariipueri  and  puellae.,\y\io  were  caWedi  Mammaeani,
in  honour  of  the  emperor's  mother.  We  learn,
from  a  decree  of  Hadrian  (Ulp.  in  Dig.  34.  tit.  1,
s.  14),  that  boys  enjoyed  the  benefits  of  this  in-
stitution up  to  their  eighteenth,  and  girls  up  to
their  fourteenth  year  ;  and,  from  an  inscription
(Fabretti,  235,  619),  that  a  boy  four  years  and
seven  months  old  received  nine  times  the  ordi-
nary monthly  distribution  of  com.  (Aurel.  Vict.
Epit.  xii.  4  ;  Capitolin.  Ant.  Pi.  8,  M.  Aur.
26,  Pert.  9  ;  Spart.  Had.  7  ;  Lamprid.  Scv.
Alex.  57  ;  Orelli,  Inscr.  3364,  3365  ;  Fabretti,
234,  617  ;  Rasche,  Lex.  Univ.  Rei  Num.  s.  v.
Tutela  Italiae ;  Eckhel,  Doct.  Num.  Vet.  vol,  vi.
p.  408  ;  F.  A.  Wolf,  Von  einer  milden  Stiftung
Trajans.)  [P.  S.]

ALI'PILUS,  a  slave,  who  attended  on  bathers,
to  remove  the  superfluous  hair  from  their  bodies.
(Sen.  Ep.  56  ;  Pignor.  de  Serv.  42.).        [P.  S.]

ALIPTAE  (dA-eiTTTat)  among  the  Greeks,
were  persons  who  anointed  the  bodies  of  the
athletae,  preparatory  to  their  entering  the  palaes-
tra. The  chief  object  of  this  anointing  was  to  close
the  pores  of  the  body,  in  order  to  prevent  excessive
perspiration,  and  the  weakness  consequent  thereon.
To  effect  this  object,  the  oil  was  not  simply  spread
over  the  surface  of  the  body,  but  also  well  rubbed
into  the  skin.      The  oil  was  mixed  with   fine


76


ALLUVIO.


African  sand,  several  jars  full  of  which  were  found
in  the  baths  of  Titus,  and  one  of  these  is  now  in
the  British  Museum.  This  preparatory  Anointing
was  called  r)  irapaffKevaaTiKT]  rpi^is.  The  athleta
was  again  anointed  after  the  contest,  in  order  to
restore  the  tone  of  the  skin  and  muscles  ;  this
anointing  was  called  t]  airodfpaireid.  He  then
hathed,  and  had  the  dust,  sweat,  and  oil  scraped
off  his  body,  by  means  of  an  instrument  smiilar  to
the  strigil  of  the  Romans,  and  called  crTX^yyis,  and
afterwards  ^ixrrpa.  The  aliptae  took  advantage
of  the  knowledge  they  necessarily  acquired  of  the
state  of  the  muscles  of  the  athletae,  and  their  gene-
ral strength  or  weakness  of  body,  to  advise  them
as  to  their  exercises  and  mode  of  life.  They
were  thus  a  kind  of  medical  trainers.  larpaXelirTai.
(Plut.  de  Tuend.  San.  16.  p.  430  ;  Celsus,  i.  1;
Plin.  H.  N.  xxix.  1,  2.)  Sometimes  they  even
superintended  their  exercises,  as  in  the  case  of
Milesias.  (Pindar, 0/j/7«.viii. 54 — 71  ;andBockh's
note.)  [Athletae.]  The  part  of  the  palaestra
in  which  the  athletae  were  anointed  was  called
a\€nrr'{]pioy.

Among  the  Romans,  the  aliptae  were  slaves  who
scrubbed  and  anointed  their  masters  in  the  baths.
They,  too,  like  the  Greek  dAe^Trrat,  appear  to
have  attended  to  their  masters'  constitution  and
mode  of  life.  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  i.  9,  35  ;  Senec.  Ep.
!)6  ;  Juvenal,  Sat  iii.  76,  vi.  422  ;  Pignor.  de
Serv.  p.  81.)  They  were  also  called  undores.
They  used  in  their  operations  a  kind  of  scraper
called  a  strigil,  towels  {Untea),  a  cruise  of  oil  (guttus),
which  was  usually  of  horn,  a  bottle  [Ampulla],
and  a  small  vessel  called  lenticula.    [Baths.]

The  apartment  in  the  Greek  palaestra  where
the  anointing  was  performed  was  called  aAenr-
r'f]piov,  that  in  the  Roman  baths  was  called
unctitarium.  [P.  S.]

ALLU'VIO.  "That,"  says  Gains  (ii.70.  Sec),
*'  appears  to  be  added  to  our  land  by  alluvio,
which  a  river  adds  to  our  land  ifiger)  so  gradually
that  we  cannot  estimate  how  much  is  added  in
each  moment  of  time  ;  or,  as  it  is  commonly  ex-
pressed, it  is  that  wliich  is  added  so  gradually  as
to  escape  observation.  But  if  a  river  (at  once)
takes  away  a  part  of  your  land,  and  brings  it  to
mine,  this  part  still  remains  your  property."  There
is  the  same  definition  by  Gaius  in  his  Res  Coti-
dianae  (Dig.  41.  tit.  1.  s.  7),  with  this  addition:  —
"  If  the  part  thus  suddenly  taken  away  should
adhere  for  a  considerable  time  to  my  land,  and  the
trees  on  such  part  should  drive  their  roots  into  my
land,  from  that  time  such  part  appears  to  belong  to
ray  land."  The  acquisitio  per  alluvionem  was  con-
sidered by  the  Roman  jurists  to  be  by  the  jus
gentium,  in  the  Roman  sense  of  that  term  ;  and  it
was  comprehended  under  the  general  head  of
Accessio.  A  man  might  protect  his  land  against
loss  from  the  action  of  a  river  by  securing  the
banks  of  his  land  (Dig.  43.  tit.  15;  De  Ripa
Munienda),  provided  he  did  not  injure  the  navi-
gation.

If  an  island  was  formed  in  the  middle  of  a  river,
it  was  the  common  property  of  those  who  possessed
lands  on  each  bank  of  the  river  ;  if  it  was  not  in
the  middle,  it  belonged  to  those  who  possessed  lands
on  that  bank  of  the  river  to  which  it  was  nearest.
(Gaius,  ii.  72.)  This  is  exj^lained  more  minutely
in  the  Digest  (41.  tit.  1.  s.  7).  A  river  means  a
public  river  (Jlumen  puUicum).

According   to  a  constitution  of  the   Emperor


AMBITUS.

Antoninus  Pius,  there  was  no  jus  alluvionis  in  the
case  of  agri  limitati,  for  a  certain  quantity  (certus
cuiqucL  modus)  was  assigned  by  the  form  of  the
centurRe.  (Dig.  41.  tit.  1.  s.  16;  comp.  Aggenus
Urbicus,  in  Frontin.  Comment.  De  Alluvions,  pars
prior,  ed.  Goes  ;  and  Acer.)  Circumluvio  differs
from  alluvio  in  this,  that  the  whole  of  the  land  in
question  is  surrounded  by  water,  and  subject  to
its  action.  Cicero  {De  Orat.  i.  38)  enumerates  the
jura  alluvionum  and  circumluvionum  as  matters  in-
cluded under  the  head  of  causae  ceiitumvirales.  *

The  doctrine  of  alluvio,  as  stated  by  Bracton  in
the  chapter  De  acquirendo  Rerum  Dominio  (fol.  9),
is  taken  from  the  Digest  (41.  tit.  1.  s.  7),  and  is
in  several  passages  a  copy  of  the  words  of  Gaius,  as
cited  in  the  Digest.  [G.  L.]

ALOA  or  HALOA  ('AAwa,  'AAwa),  an  Attic
festival,  but  celebrated  principally  at  Eleusis,  in
honour  of  Demeter  and  Dionysus,  the  inventors  of
the  plough  and  protectors  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth.
It  took  place  every  year  after  the  harvest  was  over,
and  only  fruits  were  offered  on  this  occasion,  partly
as  a  grateful  acknowledgment  for  the  benefits  the
husbandman  had  received,  and  partly  that  the  next
harvest  might  be  plentiful.  We  learn  from  De-
mosthenes (c.  Neaer.  p.  1385),  that  it  was  unlawful
to  offer  any  bloody  sacrifice  on  the  day  of  this  fes-
tival, and  that  the  priests  alone  had  the  privilege
to  offer  the  fruits.  The  festival  was  also  called
^aXvaia  (Hesych.  s.  «.),  or  (TvyKoixL(TT-i]pLa.  [L.  S.]

ALO'GIOU  GRAPHE'  {aKoyiov  ypa<p-h)  an
action  which  might  be  brought  before  tlie  logistae
(Koyia-Tai)  at  Athens,  against  all  persons  who
neglected  to  pass  their  accounts,  Avhen  their  term
of  office  expired.  (Suid.  Hesych.  Etymol.  s.  v.  ;
Pollux,  viii.  54  ;  Meier,  Att.  Process,  p.  363.)

ALTA'RE.     [Ara.]

ALU'TA.     [Calceus.]

ALYTAE  (aXirai).     [Olympia.]

AMANUENSIS,  or  AD  MANUM  SEHVUS,
a  slave,  or  freedman,  whose  office  it  was  to  write
letters  and  other  things  under  his  master's  direc-
tion. The  amanuensis  must  not  be  confounded
with  another  sort  of  slaves,  also  called  ad  manum
servi,  who  were  always  kept  ready  to  be  employed
in  any  business.  (Suet.  Caes.  74,  Atig.  67,  Ner.
44,  Tit.  3,  Vesp.  3  ;  Cic.  De  Orat.  i'ii.  60,  225  ;
Pignor.  De  Servis,  109.)  [P.  S.]

AMARY'NTHIA,  or  AMARY'SIA  {'Ana-
pwdia,  or  'A/j-apvcria),  a  festival  of  Artemis
Amarynthia,  or  Amarysia,  celebrated,  as  it  seems,
originally  at  Amarynthus  in  Euboea,  with  extra-
ordinary splendour  ;  but  it  was  also  solemnized
in  several  places  in  Attica,  such  as  Athmone
(Pans.  i.  31.  §  3)  ;  and  the  Athenians  held  a  fes-
tival, as  Pausanias  says,  in  honour  of  the  same
goddess,  in  no  way  less  brilliant  than  that  in
Euboea.  (Hesych.  s.  v.  'A[xapu<na.)  The  festival
in  Euboea  was  distinguished  for  its  splendid  pro-
cessions ;  and  Strabo  himself  (x,  p.  448)  seems  to
have  seen,  in  the  temple  of  Artemis  Amarynthia,
a  column  on  which  was  recorded  the  splendour
with  which  the  Eretrians  at  one  time  celebrated
this  festival.  The  inscription  stated,  that  the  pro-
cession was  fonned  of  three  thousand  heavy-anned
men,  six  hundred  horsemen,  and  sixty  chariots.
(Comp.  Schol.  ad  Find.  01.  xiii.  159.)    [L.  S.]

AMBARVA'LIA.     [Arvales  Fratres.]

A'MBITUS,  which  literally  signifies  "a  going
about,"  cannot,  perhaps,  be  more  nearly  expressed
than  by  our  word  canvassing.    After  the  plebs  had


AMBITUS.

formed  a  distinct  estate  at  Rome,  and  when  the
■whole  body  of  the  citizens  had  become  very  greatly
increased,  we  frequently  read,  in  the  Roman
writers,  of  the  great  efforts  which  it  was  necessary
for  candidates  to  make,  in  order  to  secure  the
votes  of  the  citizens.  At  Rome,  as  in  every  com-
munity into  which  the  element  of  popular  election
enters,  solicitation  of  votes,  and  open  or  secret
influence  and  briber}',  were  among  the  means  by
Avhich  a  candidate  secured  his  election  to  the  offices
of  state.  The  elections  recurred  annually,  and
candidates  had  plenty  of  practice  in  the  various
modes  of  corruption.

Whatever  may  be  the  authority  of  the  piece
intitled  "  Q.  Ciceronis  de  Petitione  Consulatus  ad
M.  Tullium  Fratrem,"  it  seems  to  present  a  pretty
fair  picture  of  those  arts  and  means,  by  which  a
candidate  might  lawfully  endeavour  to  secure  the
votes  of  the  electors,  and  also  some  intimation  of
those  means  which  were  not  lawful,  and  which  it
was  the  object  of  various  enactments  to  repress.

A  candidate  was  called  pet  itor;  and  his  opponent
with  reference  to  him,  competitor.  A  candidate
{candidatus)  was  so  called  from  his  appearing  in  the
public  places,  such  as  the  fora  and  Campus  Mar-
tius,  before  his  fellow-citizens,  in  a  whitened  toga.
On  such  occasions,  the  candidate  was  attended  by
his  friends-  (deductores),  or  followed  by  the  poorer
citizens  (sectatores),  who  could  in  no  other  manner
show  their  good  will  or  give  their  assistance.  (Cic.
pro  JSfurena^  c.  34.)  The  word  assiduitas  ex-
pressed both  the  continual  presence  of  the  candi-
date at  Rome,  and  his  continual  solicitations.  The
candidate,  in  going  his  rounds  or  taking  his  walk,
was  accompanied  by  a  nomenclcdor,  who  gave  him
the  names  of  such  persons  as  he  might  meet ;  the
candidate  was  thus  enabled  to  address  them  by
their  name,  an  indirect  compliment  which  could
not  fail  to  be  generally  gratifying  to  the  electors.
The  candidate  accompanied  his  address  with  a
shake  of  the  hand  {prensatlo).  The  term  benif/ni-
tas  comprelicnded  generally  any  kind  of  treating,
as  shows,  feasts,  &c.  Candidates  sometimes  left
Rome,  and  visited  the  coloniae  and  municipia,  in
which  the  citizens  had  the  suffrage  ;  thus  Cicero
proposed  to  visit  the  Cisalpine  towns,  when  he  was
a  candidate  for  the  consulship.    (Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  1.)

That  ambitus,  which  was  the  object  of  several
penal  enactments,  taken  as  a  generic  term,  compre-
hended the  two  species, — ambitus  and  largitiones
(bribery).  Liberalitas  and  benignitas  are  opposed
by  Cicero,  as  things  allowable,  to  ambitus  and
largitio,  as  things  illegal.  (Cic.  de  Orat.  ii.  25  ;
and  compare  pro  Mure?ia,  c.  36.)  The  word  for
ambitus  in  the  Greek  writers  is  deKacTfj-Ss.  Money
was  paid  for  votes  ;  and  in  order  to  insure  secrecy
and  secure  the  elector,  persons  called  interpretes
were  employed  to  make  the  bargain,  seqv^-stres  to
hold  the  money  till  it  was  to  be  paid  (Cic.  pro
Cluent.  26),  and  divisores  to  distribute  it.  (Cic.
ad  Att.  i.  16.)  The  offence  of  ambitus  was  a
matter  which  belonged  to  the  judicia  publica,  and
the  enactments  against  it  were  numerous.  The
earliest  enactment  that  is  mentioned  simply  for-
bade persons  "  to  add  white  to  their  dress,"  with
a  view  to  an  election,  (b.c.  432  ;  Liv.  iv.  25.)
This  seems  to  mean  using  some  white  sign  or
token  on  the  dress,  to  signify  that  a  man  was  a
candidate.  The  object  of  the  law  was  to  check
umbiiio,  the  name  for  going  about  to  canvass,  in
place  of  which  ambitus  was  subsequently  employed.


AMBITUS.


77


Still  the  practice  of  using  a  white  dress  on  occasion
of  canvassing  was  usual,  and  appears  to  have  given
origin  to  the  application  of  the  term  candidatus  to
one  who  was  a  petitor.  (Cretata  ambitio^  Persius,
Sat.  v.  177  ;  Polyb.  x.  4.  ed.  Bekker.)  A  Lex
Poetelia  (b.  c.  358  ;  Liv.  vii.  15)  forbade  candi-
dates canvassing  on  market  days,  and  going  about
to  the  places  in  the  country  where  people  were
collected.  The  law  was  passed  mainly  to  check
the  pretensons  of  novi  homines,  of  whom  the
nobiles  were  jealous.  By  the  Lex  Cornelia  Baebia
(B.C.  181)  those  who  were  convicted  of  ambitus
were  incapacitated  from  being  candidates  for  ten
years.  (Liv.  xl.  19  ;  Scliol.  Bob.  p.  361.)  The
Lex  Acilia  Calpumia  (b.  c.  67)  was  intended  to
suppress  treating  of  the  electors  and  other  like
matters :  the  penalties  were  fine,  exclusion  from
the  senate,  and  perpetual  incapacity  to  hold  office.
(Dion  Cass,  xxxvi.  21.)  The  Lex  Tullia  was
passed  in  the  consulship  of  Cicero  (b.  c.  63)  for
the  purpose  of  adding  to  the  penalties  of  the  Acilia
Calpumia.  (Dion  Cass,  xxxvii.  29 ;  Cic.  pro
Murena,  c.  23.)  The  penalty  imder  this  lex  was
ten  years'  exile.  This  law  forbade  any  person  to
exhibit  public  shows  for  two  years  before  he  was
a  candidate.  It  also  forbade  candidates  hiring
persons  to  attend  them  and  be  about  their  persons.
In  the  second  consulship  of  M.  Licinius  Crassus
and  Cn.  Pompeius  Magnus  (b.  c.  55)  the  Lex
Licinia  was  passed.  This  lex,  which  is  entitled
De  Sodalitiis,  did  not  alter  the  previous  laws
against  bribery ;  but  it  was  specially  directed
against  a  particular  mode  of  canvassing,  which
consisted  in  employing  agents  (sodales)  to  mark
out  the  members  of  the  several  tribes  into  smaller
portions,  and  to  secure  more  effectually  the  votes
by  this  division  of  labour.  This  distribution  of
the  members  of  the  tribes  was  called  decuriatio.
(Cic.  joro  Plancio,  c.  18.)  It  was  an  obvious  mode
of  better  securing  the  votes  ;  and  in  the  main  is
rightly  explained  by  Rein,  but  completely  mis-
understood by  Wunder  and  others.  Drumanu
(Gesc/iic/de  Roms^  vol.  iv.  p.  93)  confounds  the  de-
curiatio with  the  coitio  or  coalition  of  candidates  to
procure  votes.  The  mode  of  appointing  the  judices
in  trials  under  the  Lex  Licinia  was  also  provided
by  that  lex.  They  were  called  Judices  Editicii,
because  the  accuser  or  prosecutor  nominated  four
tribes,  and  the  accused  was  at  liberty  to  reject  one
of  them.  The  judices  were  taken  out  of  the  other
three  tribes  ;  but  the  mode  in  which  they  were
taken  is  not  quite  clear.  The  penalty  under  the
Lex  Licinia  was  exile,  but  for  what  period  is
uncertain.  The  Lex  Pompeia  (b.  C.  52),  passed
when  Pompeius  was  sole  consul  for  part  of  that
year,  appears  to  have  been  rather  a  measure  passed
for  the  occasion  of  the  trials  then  had  and  con-
templated than  any  thing  else.  It  provided  for
the  mode  of  naming  the  judices,  and  shortened  the
proceedings.  When  C.  Julius  Caesar  obtained  the
supreme  power  in  Rome,  he  used  to  recommend
some  of  the  candidates  to  the  people,  who,  of
course,  followed  his  recommendation.  As  to  the
consulship,  he  managed  the  appointments  to  that
office  just  as  he  pleased.  (Suet.  Caes.  c.  41.)  The
Lex  Julia  de  Ambitu  was  passed  (b.  c.  18)  in
the  time  of  Augustus,  and  it  excluded  from  office
for  five  years  (Dion  Cass.  liv.  1 6  ;  Suet.  Oct.  34)
those  who  were  convicted  of  bribery.  But  as  the
penalty  was  milder  than  those  under  the  former
laws,  we  must  conclude  that  they  were  repealed


78  AMBITUS.

in  whole  or  in  part.  Another  Lex  Julia  de  Am-
bitu  was  passed  (b.  c.  8  ;  Dion  Cass.  Iv.  5)  ap-
parently to  amend  the  law  of  B.  c.  18.  Candidates
were  required  to  deposit  a  sum  of  money  before
canvassing,  which  was  forfeited  if  they  were  con-
ticted  of  briber}'.  If  any  violence  was  used  by  a
candidate,  he  was  liable  to  exile  (aquae  ct  ignis
interdictio).

The  popular  forma  of  election  were  observed
during  the  time  of  Augustus.  Under  Tiberius
they  ceased.  Tacitus  {Annal.  i.  15)  observes:  —
"  The  comitia  were  transferred  from  the  campus  to
the  patres,"  the  senate.

While  the  choice  of  candidates  was  thus  partly
in  the  hands  of  the  senate,  bribery  and  corruption
still  influenced  the  elections,  though  the  name  of
ambitus  was,  strictly  speaking,  no  longer  appli-
cable. But  in  a  short  time,  the  appointment  to
public  offices  was  entirely  in  the  power  of  the  em-
perors ;  and  the  magistrates  of  Rome,  as  well  as
the  populus,  were  merely  the  shadow  of  that  which
had  once  a  substantial  form.  A  Roman  jurist,  of
the  imperial  period  (Modestinus),  in  speaking  of
the  Julia  Lex  de  Ambitu,  observes,  "  This  law  is
now  obsolete  in  the  city,  because  the  creation  of
magistrates  is  the  business  of  the  princeps,  and
does  not  depend  on  the  pleasure  of  the  populus  ;
but  if  any  one  in  a  municipium  should  offend
agjiinst  this  law  in  canvassing  for  a  sacerdotium  or
magistratus,  he  is  punished,  according  to  a  senatus
consuitum,  with  infamy,  and  subjected  to  a  penalty
of  100  aurei."  (Dig.  48.  tit.  U!)

The  laws  that  have  been  enumerated  are  pro-
bably all  that  were  enacted,  at  least  all  of  which
any  notice  is  preserved.  Laws  to  repress  bribery
were  made  while  the  voting  was  open  ;  and  they
continued  to  be  made  after  the  vote  by  ballot  was
introduced  at  the  popular  elections  by  the  Lex
Gabinia  (b.  c.  139).  Rein  observes  that  "  by  this
change  the  control  over  the  voters  was  scarcely
any  longer  possible  ;  and  those  who  were  bribed
could  not  be  distinguished  from  those  who  were
not."  One  argument  in  favour  of  ballot  in  modem
times  has  been  that  it  Avould  prevent  bribery  ;  and
probably  it  would  diminish  the  practice,  though
not  put  an  end  to  it.  But  the  notion  of  Rein  that
the  bare  fact  of  the  vote  being  secret  would  in-
crease the  difficulty  of  distinguishing  the  bribed
from  the  unbribed  is  absurd  ;  for  the  bare  know-
ledge of  a  man's  vote  is  no  part  of  the  evidence  of
bribery.  It  is  worth  remark  that  there  is  no  in-
dication of  any  penalty  being  attached  to  the
receiving  of  a  bribe  for  a  vote.  The  utmost  that
can  be  proved  is,  that  the  divisores  or  one  of  the
class  of  persons  who  assisted  in  bribery  were
punished.  (Cic.  pro  Plancio^  c.  23,  pro  Murena,
c.  23.)  But  this  is  quite  consistent  with  the  rest :
the  briber  and  his  agents  were  punished,  not  the
bribed.  When,  therefore.  Rein,  who  refers  to
these  two  passages  under  the  Lex  Tullia,  says :
*'  Even  those  who  received  money  from  the  can-
didates, or  at  least  those  who  distributed  it  in
their  names,  were  punished,"  he  couples  two  things
together  that  are  entirely  of  a  different  kind.  The
proposed  Lex  Aufidia  (Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  16)  went
80  far  as  to  declare  that  if  a  candidate  promised
money  to  a  tribe  and  did  not  pay  it,  he  should  be
unpunished  ;  but  if  he  did  pay  the  money,  he
should  further  pay  to  each  tribe  (annually  ?)
3000  sesterces  as  long  as  he  lived.  This  absurd
proposal   was   not   carried  ;  but  it  shows  clearly


AMICTUS.

enough  that  the  principle  was  to  pimish  the  briber
only.

The  trials  for  ambitus  Avere  numerous  in  the
time  of  the  republic.  A  list  of  them  is  given  by
Rein.  The  oration  of  Cicero  in  defence  of  L.
Murena,  who  was  charged  with  ambitus,  and  that
in  defence  of  Cn.  Plancius,  who  was  tried  under
the  Lex  Licinia,  are  both  extant.  (Rein,  Cnmiruil-
recht  der  Romer,  where  all  the  authorities  are  col-
lected ;  Cic.  Pro  Plancio^  ed.  Wunder.)  [G.  L.]
AMBLO'SEOS  GRAPHE'  {a{x€\d:><r€(os
ypaipii).     [Abortio.]

AMBRO'SIA  (aix§p6aia),  festivals  observed  in
Greece,  in  honour  of  Dionysus,  which  seem  to  have
derived  their  name  from  the  luxuries  of  the  table,
or  from  the  indulgence  of  drinking.  According  to
Tzetzes  on  Hesiod  (Op.  et  D.  v.  504)  these  festivals
were  solemnized  in  the  month  of  Lenaeon,  dux-ing
the  vintage.  (Etym.  M.  s.  v.  Arivaiuv,  p.  5G4.  7.  ;
G.  E.  W.  Schneider,  Ueber  das  Attische  Theater-
wcsen,  p.  43  ;  K.  F.  Hermann,  Lehrb.  d.  gottesdiensU.
AUerth.  d.  Gricchen,  §  58.  n.  7.)  [L.  S.]

AMBUBAIAE,  female  musicians  from  Syria,
who  gained  their  living  by  performing  in  public,  at
Rome,  especially  in  the  Circus.  Their  name  is
derived  from  the  Syrian  word  abub  or  anbub,  a
flute.  Their  moral  condition  was  that  which
females  of  their  class  generallj''  fall  into.  The
Bayaderes  of  India  will  perhaps  give  the  best  idea
of  what  they  were.  (Hor.  Sat.  i.  2.  1,  with  Hein-
dorf's  Note;  Juvenal,  iii.  62  ;  Suet.  A^er.  27  ;
Priapeia,  26  ;  Petron.  Ixxiv.  13.)  [P.S.J

AMBU'RBIUM,  or  AMBURBIA'LE,  a  sa-
crifice which  was  performed  at  Rome  for  the  purifi-
cation of  the  city,  in  the  same  manner  as  the
ambarvalia  was  intended  for  the  purification  of  the
country.  The  victims  were  carried  through  the
whole  town,  and  the  sacrifice  was  usually  per-
formed when  any  danger  was  apprehended  in  con-
sequence of  the  appearance  of  prodigies,  or  other
circumstances.  (Obseq.  De  Prodig.  c.  43  ;  Apul.
Metamorph.  iii,  ab  init.  p.  49,  Bipont.  ;  Lucan.  i.
593.)  Scaliger  supposed  that  the  amburbium  and
ambars'alia  were  the  same  ;  but  their  difference  is
expressly  asserted  by  Servius  (ad  Virg.  Eel.  iii.
77),  and  Vopiscus  (amburbium  celebratum,  ambar-
valia promissa  ;  Aurel.  c.  20).

AMENTUM.     [Hasta.]

AMICTO'RIUM,  a  linen  covering  for  the
breasts  of  women,  probably  the  same  as  the  stro-
phium.  [Strophium.]  (Mart.  xiv.  149.)  In  later
times  it  seems  to  have  been  used  in  the  same  sense
as  Amictus.    (Cod.  Theod.  8.  tit.  5.  s.  48.)  [Amic-

TUS,]

AMICTUS,  AMI'CULUM.  The  verb  amicire
is  commonly  opposed  to  induere.,  the  former  being
applied  to  the  putting  on  of  the  outer  garment,
the  chlamys,  pallium,  laena,  or  toga  (iixdnov,  (pa-
pas) ;  the  latter,  to  the  putting  on  of  the  inner  gar-
ment, the  tunica  (xtTwy).  In  consequence  of  this
distinction,  the  verbal  nouns,  amictus  and  indutus,
even  without  any  further  denomination  of  the  dress
being  added,  indicate  respectively  the  outer  and
the  inner  clothing.  (See  Tibull.  i.  9.  13. ;  Com.
Nep.  Cimon,  4,  Dat.  3.  §  2  ;  Virg.  Ae}i.  iii.  545,
v.  421,  compared  with  Apoll.  Rhod.  ii.  30.)  Some-
times, however,  though  rarely,  amicire  and  i/iduere
are  each  used  in  a  more  general  way,  so  as  to  refer
to  any  kind  of  clothing.

In  Greek  amicire  is  expressed  by  icpivvvaQai^
afKpifyyvcrBai,    afin4x(<rBat,    iiriSaKXftrBai,   Trept-


AMPHICTYONES.
€dh\e(r6ai :  and  mduere  by  iv^vv^iv.  Hence  came
Q<p(^aTpis,   0|W7r€x<5vT7,    iniSArifxa  and   iniSS^aioy,
Trfpi§kr)fxa  and  TrepL§6\aiou,  an  outer  garment,  and
iVSujua,  an  inner  garment,  a  tunic,  a  shirt.  [J.Y.]

AMMA  {&fj.fjia),  a  Greek  measure  of  length,
equal  to  forty  TTTjxeis  (cubits),  or  sixty  irddes  (feet).
It  was  used  in  measuring  land.  (Hero,  De  Men-
suris.)  [P'S.]

AMNE'STIA  (aixvr)<rTia),  is  a  word  used  by
the  later  Greek  writers,  and  from  them  borrowed
by  the  Romans,  to  describe  the  act  or  arrangement
by  which  offences  were  forgotten^  or  regarded  as
if  they  had  not  been  committed,  so  that  the  of-
fender could  not  be  called  to  accoimt  for  them.
The  word  is  chiefly  used  with  reference  to  the
offences  committed,  or  alleged  to  have  been  com-
mitted, against  the  laws,  during  those  conflicts  of
opposing  factions  which  so  often  occurred  in  the
Greek  republics,  and  in  which  the  victorious
party  usually  took  a  sanguinary  vengeance  upon
its  opponents.  So  rare,  indeed,  were  the  ex-
ceptions to  this  course  of  vengeance,  that  there  is
only  one  case  of  amnesty  in  Greek  history,  which
requires  any  particular  notice.  This  was  the  am-
nesty which  terminated  the  struggle  between  the
democratical  and  oligarchical  parties  at  Athens,
and  completed  the  revolution  by  which  the  power
of  the  Thirty  Tyrants  was  overthrown,  B.  c.  403.
It  was  arranged  by  the  mediation  of  the  Spartan
king  Pausanias,  and  extended  to  all  the  citizens
who  had  committed  illegal  acts  during  the  recent
troubles,  with  the  exception  of  the  Thirty  and
the  Eleven,  and  the  Ten  who  had  ruled  in  Pei-
racus  ;  and  even  they  were  only  to  be  excepted  in
case  of  their  refusal  to  give  an  account  of  their
government ;  their  children  were  included  in  the
amnesty,  and  were  permitted  to  reside  at  Athens.
An  addition  was  made  to  the  oath  of  the  senators,
binding  them  not  to  receive  any  endeixis  or  apagoge
on  account  of  anything  done  before  the  amnesty,
the  strict  observance  of  which  was  also  imposed
by  an  oath  upon  the  dicastae.  (Xen.  Hellen.  ii.
4.  §§  38— 4a  ;  Andoc.  de  Myst.  p.  44  ;  Dem.
in  Boeot.  p.  1018  ;  Nepos,  Thrasyhvl.  3,  who
makes  a  confusion  between  the  Ten  Tyrants  of
Pciraeus  and  the  Ten  who  succeeded  the  Thirty
in  the  city  ;  Taylor,  Lysiae  Vita ;  Wachsmuth,
Hellen.  Alterth.  vol.  i.  pp.  646,  647,  new  edition  ;
Hermann,  Polit.  Antiq.  of  Greece,  §  169.)

The  form  of  the  word  is  incorrectly  given  in
some  modern  works  as  afiVT^crreia.  But  even  the
genuine  form  only  belongs  to  later  Greek  ;  being
used  only  by  Plutarch  (CVc.  42,  Anton.  14),  Hero-
dian  (iii.  4.  §  17,  v.  4.  §  18,  viii.  12.  §  6),  Philo,
and  still  later  writers.  The  better  writers  used
&Seia,  and  the  verbal  form  is  ou  p.vT\(TiKaKitv.  Re  •
specting  the  supposed  allusion  to  the  word  by
Cicero,  see  Facciolati,  s.v.  [P.  S.]

AMPHIARAIA  {ajjupiapaia),  games  celebrated
in  honour  of  the  ancient  hero  Amphiaraus,  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Oropus,  where  he  had  a  temple
with  a  celebrated  oracle.  {Schol.  ad  Pind.  01.  vii.
154  ;  the  rites  observed  in  his  temple  are  de-
scribed by  Pausanias  (i.  34.  §  3.  ;  K.  F.  Hermann,
Lehrh.  d.  gottesdienstl.  Alterth.  d.  Griechen,  §  63.
n.  1.)  [L.S.]

AMPHI'CT  YONES  ( 'AfxcpiKT^ioves),  members
of  a,n  Amphictyonia  ( '  kiJ.(pLKrvoviaov^  hfj.(piKTiovia).
Institutions  called  Amphictj^onic  appear  to  have
existed  in  Greece  from  time  immemorial.  Of  their
nature  and  object  history  gives  us  only  a  general


AMPHICTYONES.


79


idea  ;  but  we  may  safely  believe  them  to  have  been
associations  of  originally  neighbouring  tribes,  formed
for  the  regulation  of  mutual  intercourse,  and  the
protection  of  a  common  temple  or  sanctuary,  at  which
the  representatives  of  the  different  mernbers  met,
to  transact  business  and  celebrate  religious  rites
and  games.  This  identity  of  religion,  coupled
with  near  neighbourhood,  and  that  too  in  ages  of
remote  antiquity,  implies  in  all  probability  a  cer-
tain degree  of  affinity,  which  might  of  itself  pro-
duce unions  and  confederacies  amongst  tribes  so
situated,  regarding  each  other  as  members  of  the
same  great  family.  They  would  thus  preserve
among  themselves,  and  transmit  to  their  children,
a  spirit  of  nationality  and  brotherhood  ;  nor  could
any  better  means  be  devised  than  the  bond  of  a
common  religious  worship,  to  counteract  the  hostile
interests  which,  sooner  or  later,  spring  up  in  all
large  societies.  The  causes  and  motives  from  which
we  might  expect  such  institutions  to  arise,  existed
in  every  neighbourhood  ;  and  accordingly  we  find
many  AmpJiidyoniae  of  various  degrees  of  import-
ance, though  our  information  respecting  them  is
very  deficient.

Thus  we  learn  from  Strabo,  that  there  was  one  of
some  celebrity  whose  place  of  meeting  was  a  sanc-
tuary of  Poseidon  (Miiller,  Dorians,  ii.  10.  §  5  ;
Strab.  viii.  p.  374)  at  Calauria,  an  ancient  settle-
ment of  the  lonians  in  the  Saronic  Gulf.  The  original
members  were  Epidaurus,  Hermione,  Nauplia,
Prasiae  in  Laconia,  Aegina,  Athens,  and  the  Boeo-
tian Orchomenus  (Thirl  wall.  Hist,  of  Greece,  \o\.  i.
p.  375);  whose  remoteness  from  each  other  makes  it
difficult  to  conceive  what  could  have  been  the  mo-
tives for  forming  the  confederation,  more  especially
as  religious  causes  seem  precluded  by  the  fact,  that
Troezen,  though  so  near  to  Calauria,  and  though
Poseidon  was  its  tutelary  god,  was  not  a  member.
In  after  times,  Argos  and  Sparta  took  the  place  of
Nauplia  and  Prasiae,  and  religious  ceremonies  were
the  sole  object  of  the  meetings  of  the  association.
There  also  seems  to  have  been  another  in  Argolis
(Strab.  I.  c.  ;  Pausan.  iv.  5)  distinct  from  that  of
Calauria,  the  place  of  congress  being  the  'Upaiov,
or  temple  of  Hera.  Delos,  too,  was  the  centre  of
an  Amphictyony  —  the  religious  metropolis,  or
'laTiTj  vqaciov  of  the  neighbouring  Cyclades,  where
deputies  and  embassies  {^fupol)  met  to  celebrate
religious  solemnities,  in  honour  of  the  Dorian  Apollo,
and  apparently  without  any  reference  to  political
objects.    (Miiller,  ii.  3.  §  7  ;  Callira.  Hymn.  325.)

The  system  indeed  was  by  no  means  confined  to
the  mother  countrj^ ;  for  the  federal  unions  of  the
Dorians,  lonians,  and  Aeolians,  living  on  the  west
coast  of  Asia  Minor,  seem  to  have  been  Amphic-
tyonic  in  spirit,  although  modified  by  exigencies  of
situation.  Their  main  essence  consisted  in  keep-
ing periodical  festivals  in  honour  of  the  acknow-
ledged gods  of  their  respective  nations.  Thus  the
Dorians  held  a  federal  festival,  and  celebrated  re-
ligious games  at  Triopium,  uniting  with  the  worship
of  their  national  god'  Apollo  that  of  the  more  an-
cient and  Pelasgic  Demeter.  The  lonians  met  for
similar  purposes  in  honour  of  the  Heliconian  Po-
seidon *  at  Mycale, — their  place  of  assembly  being
called  the  Panionium,  and  their  festival  Panionia.
The  twelve  towns  of  the  Aeolians  assembled  at
Grynea,  in  honour  of  Apollo.    (Herod,  i.  144,  148,


*  Poseidon   was   the   god    of  the    lonians,   as
Apollo  of  the  Dorians.     Miiller,  Doi:  ii.  10.  g.  5.


80


AMPHICTYONES.


149  ;  Dionys.  iv.  25.)  That  these  confederacies
Avere  not  merely  for  offensive  and  defensive  pur-
poses, may  be  inferred  from  their  existence  after
the  subjugation  of  these  colonics  by  Croesus ;  and
we  know  that  Halicarnassus  was  excluded  from  the
Dorian  union,  merely  because  one  of  its  citizens
had  not  made  the  usual  offering  to  Apollo  of  the
prize  he  had  won  in  the  Triopic  contests,  A  con-
federation somewhat  similar,  but  more  political  than
religious,  existed  in  Lycia  (Strab.  xiv.  p.  664)  :
it  was  called  the  "  Lycian  system,"  and  was
composed  of  twenty-three  cities.

But  besides  these  and  others,  there  was  one
Amphictyony  of  greater  celebrity  than  the  rest,
and  much  more  lasting  in  its  duration.  This  was
by  way  of  eminence  called  the  Amphictyonic
league  ;  and  differed  from  the  other  associations  in
having  two  places  of  meeting,  the  sanctuaries  of
two  divinities.  These  were  the  temple  of  De-
meter,  in  the  village  of  Anthela,  near  Thermopylae
(Herod,  vii.  200),  where  the  deputies  or  repre-
sentatives met  in  autumn  ;  and  that  of  Apollo  at
Delphi,  where  they  assembled  in  spring.  The  con-
nection of  this  Amphictyony  with  the  latter  not
only  contributed  to  its  dignity,  but  also  to  its  per-
manence. With  respect  to  its  early  history,  Strabo
(ix.  p.  420)  says,  that  even  in  his  days  it  was  im-
])ossible  to  learn  its  origin.  We  know,  however,
that  it  was  originally  composed  of  twelve  ti-ibcs  (not
cities  or  states,  it  must  be  observed),  each  of  which
tribes  contained  various  independent  cities  or  states.
We  learn  from  Aeschines  {De  F.  L.  §  122,  ed.
Bekker),  a  most  competent  authority  (b.  c.  343),
that  eleven  of  these  tribes  were  as  follows  : — The
Thessalians,  Boeotians  (not  Thebans  only),  Do-
rians, lonians,  Perrhaebians,  Magnetes,  Locrians,
Oetaeans  or  Ainianes,  Phthiots  or  Achaeans  of
Phthia,  Malians,  or  Melians,  and  Phocians  ;  other
lists  (Paus.  X.  8.  §  2)  leave  us  in  doubt  whether  the
remaining  tribe  were  the  Dolopes  or  Delphians ;
but  as  the  Delphians  could  hardly  be  called  a  dis-
tinct tribe,  their  nobles  appearing  to  have  been
Dorians,  it  seems  probable  that  the  Dolopes  were
originally  members,  and  afterwards  supplanted  by
the  Delphians.  (Titmann,  pp.  39,  43.)  The  pre-
ponderance of  the  Thessalian  and  northern  nations
of  Greece  proves  the  antiquity  of  the  institution,
no  less  than  eight  of  the  twelve  tribes  being  of  the
Pelasgic  race  :  and  the  fact  of  the  Dorians  stand-
ing on  an  equality  with  such  tribes  as  the  Malians,
shows  that  it  must  have  existed  before  the  Dorian
conquest  of  the  Peloponnesus  which  originated
several  states  more  powerful,  and  therefore  more
likely  to  have  sent  their  respective  deputies,  than
the  tribes  mentioned.  The  Thessalians  indeed  in
all  probability  joined  the  league  about  twenty  years
before  that  event,  when  they  settled  in  Thessaly,
after  quitting  Thesprotia  in  Epeirus,  and  the  date  of
the  origin  of  the  league  itself  has  been  fixed  (Clinton,
F.  H.  vol.  i.  p.  66)  between  the  60th  and  80th  years
from  the  Call  of  Troy.  That  it  existed  moreover
before  the  Ionian  migration,  may  be  inferred  from
the  lonians  of  Asia  having  a  vote,  acquired  without
doubt  when  in  the  country,  and  from  the  statement
of  Tacitus  (Annal.  iv.  14)  :  "  Satnii  decreto  Am-
phictyonum  nitebantur,  quis  prsecipuum  fuit  rerum
omnium  judicium,  qua  tempestate  Graeci,  conditis
per  Asiam  urbibus,  ora  maris  potiebantur."

We  learn  from  Aeschines  (Z.  c),  that  each  of
the  twelve  Amphictyonic  tribes  had  two  votes  in
congress,  and  that  deputies  from  such  towns  as


AMPHICTYONES.

(Dorium  and)*  Cytinium  had  equal  power  with
the  Lacedaemonians,  and  that  Erctria  and  Priene,
Ionian  colonies,  were  on  a  par  with  Athens  {IctS^t]-
(poi  Tots  'AOrjualois).  It  seems  therefore  to  follow,
either  that  each  Amphictyonic  tribe  had  a  cycle
(Strab.  ix.  p.  420  ;  Pausan.  x.  8.  §  2),  according
to  which  its  component  states  returned  deputies,
or  that  the  vote  of  the  tribe  was  determined  by
a  majority  of  votes  of  the  different  states  of  that
tribe.  The  latter  supposition  might  explain  the
fact  of  there  being  a  larger  and  smaller  assembly  —
a  ^ovA-f]  and  iKKX-qaia — at  some  of  the  congresses,
and  it  is  confirmed  by  the  circumstance  that  there
was  an  annual  election  of  deputies  at  Athens,  un-
less this  city'  usurped  functions  not  properly  its
own.

The  council  itself  was  called  Pylnea  (TIvAaia}
from  its  meeting  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Pylae
(Thermopylae),  but  the  same  name  was  given  to
the  session  at  Delphi  as  well  as  to  that  at  Ther-
mopylae. It  was  composed  of  two  classes  of  re-
presentatives, one  called  Pylagorae  (U.v\ay6pai)y
the  other  Ilieromnemones  {'lepofjLvfjfxoves).  Of  the
former,  three  were  annually  elected  at  Athens  to
act  with  one  Hieromneraon  appointed  by  lot.  ( Aris-
toph.  Nnhes,  v.  607.)  That  his  office  was  highly
honourable  we  may  infer  from  the  oath  of  the
Heliasts  (Dem.  c.  Tlmocr.  §  170,  ed.  Bekker),  in
which  he  is  mentioned  with  the  nine  archons.  On
one  occasion  we  find  that  the  president  of  the
council  was  a  Hieromnemon,  and  that  he  was
chosen*  general  of  the  Amphictyonic  forces,  to  act
against  the  Amphissians.  (Titmann,  p.  87.)  Hence
it  has  been  conjectured  that  the  Hieromnemones,
also  called  Upoypafiixarels,  were  superior  in  rank
to  the  pylagorae.  (Titmann,  pp.  84, 86.)  Aeschines
also  contrasts  the  two  in  such  a  way  as  to  warrant
the  inference  that  the  former  office  was  the  more
permanent  of  the  two.  Thus  he  says  (c.  Ctes.
§115,  ed.  Bekker),  "  When  Diognetus  was  Hiero-
mnemon, ye  chose  me  and  two  others  Pylagorae."
He  then  contrasts  "  the  Hieromnemon  of  the
Athenians  with  the  Pylagorae  for  the  time  being."
There  is  even  good  reason  for  supposing  that  the
Hieromnemon  was  elected  for  life  (Clinton,  F.  H.
vol.  iii.  p.  621  ;  Titmann,  I.  c),  although  some
writers  are  of  a  different  opinion.  (Schomann,  de
Comit.  p.  392.)  Again,  we  find  inscriptions  (Bockh,
Inscr.  1171 ),  containing  surveys  by  the  Hieromne-
mones, as  if  they  formed  an  executive  ;  and  that
the  council  concluded  their  proceedings  on  one
occasion  (Aesch.  c.  Ctes.  §  124),  by  resolving  that
there  should  be  an  extraordinary  meeting  previously
to  the  next  regular  assembly,  to  which  the  Hiero-
mnemones should  come  with  a  decree  to  suit  the
emergency,  just  as  if  they  had  been  a  standing
committee.  Their  name  implies  a  more  immediate
connection  with  the  temple  ;  but  whether  they
voted  or  not  upon  matters  in  general  is  doubtful :
fi-om  the  two  Amphictyonic  decrees  quoted  below,
we  might  infer  that  they  did  not,  Avhile  the  in-
scriptions (1688  and  1699),  quoted  by  Schomann
(p.  392),  and  the  statement  of  Demosthenes  {pro
Coron.  §277,  ed.  Bekker),  lead  to  a  contrary  con-
clusion. The  narrative  of  Aeschines  (c.  Ctes.
§121)  implies  that  they  were  more  peculiarly  the
representatives  of  their  constituent  states.  Pro-
bably ihii  respective  functions  of  the  two  classes

*  There  is  a  doubt  about  the  reading. — Seo
Thuc.  iii.  95  ;  Titmann,  p.  52.


AMPHICTYONES.

of  representatives  were  not  strictly  defined,  and
varied  at  different  times,  if  indeed  they  are  always
correctly  distinguished  by  the  authors  who  allude
to  them.  The  iKKXrjcria,  or  general  assembly,  in-
cluded not  only  the  classes  mentioned,  but  also
those  who  had  joined  in  the  sacrifices  and  were
consulting  the  god,  and  as  there  was  a  large  mul-
titude annually  collected  at  the  Amphictyonic  ses-
sion at  Thermopylae,  it  was  probably  numerously
attended.  (Hesychius,  ad  Soph.  Track,  v.  639.)
It  was  convened  on  extraordinary  occasions  by
the  chairman  of  the  council  ('O  ras  yvciixas
€Tri\pr](pl(a}y,  Aesch.  I.  c).

Of  the  duties  of  this  latter  body  nothing  will
give  us  a  clearer  view  than  the  oaths  taken  and
the  decrees  made  by  it.  The  oath  was  as  follows
(Aesch.  De  F.  L.  §  121)  :  "  They  would  destroy
no  city  of  the  Amphictyons,  nor  cut  off  their
streams  in  war  or  peace  ;  and  if  any  should  do  so,
they  would  march  against  him  and  destroy  his
cities  ;  and  should  any  pillage  the  property  of  the
god,  or  be  privy^  to  or  plan  any  thing  against  Avhat
was  in  his  temple  at  Delphi,  they  would  take
vengeance  on  him  with  hand  and  foot,  and  voice,
and  all  their  might."  There  are  two  decrees  given
by  Demosthenes,  both  commencing  thus  (Dem.  de
Cor.  §  197):  —  "When  Cleinagoras  was  priest
(tepevs),  at  the  spring  meeting,  it  was  resolved  by
the  pylagorae  and  the  assessors  of  the  Amphictyons,
and  the  general  body  of  them,"  &c.  The  resolution
in  the  second  case  was,  that  as  the  Amphissians  con-
tinued to  cultivate  '*  the  sacred  district^''''  Philip  of
Macedon  should  be  requested  to  help  Apollo  and  the
Amphictyons,  and  that  he  was  thereby  constituted
absolute  general  of  the  Amphictyons.  He  ac-
cepted the  office,  and  soon  reduced  the  offending
city  to  subjection.  From  the  oath  and  the  decrees,
we  see  that  the  main  duty  of  the  deputies  was  the
preservation  of  the  rights  and  dignity  of  the  temple
at  Delphi.  We  know,  too,  that  after  it  was  burnt
down  (b.  c.  548),  they  contracted  with  the  Alcmae-
onidae  for  the  rebuilding  (Herod,  ii.  180,  v.  62) ;  and
Athenaeus  (b.  c.  160)  informs  us  (iv.  p.  1 73,  b)  that
in  other  matters  connected  with  the  worship  of  the
Delphian  god  they  condescended  to  the  regula-
tion of  the  minutest  trifles.  History,  moreover,
teaches  that  if  the  council  produced  any  palpable
effects,  it  was  from  their  interest  in  Delphi  ;  and
though  it  kept  up  a  standing  record  of  what  ought
to  have  been  the  international  laAV  of  Greece,  it
sometimes  acquiesced  in,  and  at  other  times  was  a
party  to,  the  most  iniquitous  and  cniel  acts.  Of
this  the  case  of  Crissa  is  an  instance.  This  town
lay  on  the  Gulf  of  Corinth,  near  Delphi,  and  was
much  frequented  by  pilgrims  from  the  West.
The  Crissaeans  were  charged  by  the  Delphians  with
xnidue  exactions  from  these  strangers,  and  Avith
other  crimes.  The  council  declared  war  against
them,  as  guilty  of  a  wrong  against  the  god.  The
war  lasted  ten  years,  till,  at  the  suggestion  of
Solon,  the  waters  of  the  Pleistus  were  turned  off,
then  poisoned,  and  turned  again  into  the  city.
The  besieged  drank  their  fill,  and  Crissa  was  soon
razed  to  the  ground  ;  and  thus,  if  it  were  an  Am-
phictyonic city,  was  a  solemn  oath  doubly  violated.
Its  territory — the  rich  Crissaean  or  Cirrhaean  plain
—  was  consecrated  to  the  god,  and  curses  impre-
cated upon  any  one  who  should  till  or  dwell  in  it.
Thus  ended  the  First  Sacred  War  (b.  c.  586),  in
Avhich  the  Athenians  and  Amphictyons  were  the  in-
Btruments  of  Delphian  vengeance.  (Paus.  x,  37.  §  4  ;


AMPHICTYONES.


81


Clinton,  F.  II.  vol.  ii.  p.l  96  ;  Aeschin.  c.  Oes.  §  109.)
The  Second,  or  Phocian  War  (b.  c.  356),  was  the
most  important  in  which  the  Amphictyons  were
concerned  (Thirl wall,  Hid.  of  Greece,  vol.  v.  p.  263
— 372)  ;  and  in  this  the  Thebans  availed  them-
selves of  the  sanction  of  the  council  to  take  ven-
geance on  their  enemies,  the  Phocians.  To  do
this,  however,  it  was  necessary  to  call  in  Philip  of
Macedon,  who  readily  proclaimed  himself  the
champion  of  Apollo,  as  it  opened  a  pathway  to  his
own  ambition.  The  Phocians  were  subdued  (b.  c.
346),  and  the  coimcil  decreed  that  all  their  cities,
except  Abae,  should  be  rased,  and  the  inhabitants
dispersed  in  villages  not  containing  more  than  fifty
inhabitants.  Their  two  votes  were  given  to  Philip,
who  thereby  gained  a  pretext  for  interfering  with
the  aifairs  of  Greece  ;  and  also  obtained  the  recog-
nition of  his  subjects  as  Hellenes.  To  the  causes
of  the  Third  Sacred  War  allusion  has  been  made
in  the  decrees  quoted  by  Demosthenes.  The  Am-
phissians tilled  the  devoted  Cirrhaean  plain,  and
behaved,  as  Strabo  (ix.  p.  41 9)  says,  worse  than  the
Crissaeans  of  old  (x^ipovs  ^crav  irepl  robs  |eVovs).
Their  submission  to  Philip  Avas  immediately  fol-
lowed by  the  battle  of  Chaeroneia  (b.  c.  338),  and
the  extinction  of  the  independence  of  Greece.  In
the  following  year,  a  congress  of  the  Amphictyonic
states  was  held  ;  in  which  war  was  declared  as  if
by  united  Greece  against  Persia,  and  Philip  elected
commander-in-chief.  On  this  occasion  the  Am-
phictyons assumed  the  character  of  national  repre-
sentatives as  of  old,  when  they  set  a  price  upon  the
head  of  Ephialtes,  for  his  treason  to  Greece  at
Thermopylae,  and  erected  monuments  in  honour  of
the  Greeks  who  fell  there.  Herodotus  indeed
(vii.  214,  228),  speaking  of  them  in  reference  to
Ephialtes,  calls  them  ol  twv  'Y-Kkiivuv  TlvXaySpoi.

We  have  sufficiently  shown  that  the  Amphic-
tyons themselves  did  not  observe  the  oaths  they
took  ;  and  that  they  did  not  much  alleviate  the
horrors  of  war,  or  enforce  what  they  had  sworn  to
do,  is  proved  by  many  instances.  Thus,  for  in-
stance, Mycenae  was  destroyed  by  Argos  ( B.  c.  468),
Thespiae  and  Plataeae  by  Thebes,  and  Thebes  her-
self swept  from  the  face  of  the  earth  by  Alexander
(eK  ix4(XT]s  TTJs'EAXdSos  avTjpiracr^Tj,  Aeschin,  c.  Ctes.
§133).  Indeed,  we  may  infer  from  Thucydides
(i.  112),  that  a  few  years  before  the  Peloponnesian  '
war,  the  council  was  a  passive  spectator  of  what
he  calls  6  lephs  TrJAe/xos,  when  the  Lacedaemonians
made  an  expedition  to  Delphi,  and  put  the  temple
into  the  hands  of  the  Delphians,  the  Athenians,
after  their  departure,  restoring  it  to  the  Phocians  ;
and  yet  the  council  is  not  mentioned  as  interfering.
I  twill  not  be  profitable  to  pursue  its  history  further  ;
it  need  only  be  remarked,  that  Augustus  wished
his  new  city,  Nicopolis  (a.  d.  31),  to  be  enrolled
among  its  members  ;  and  that  Pausanias,  in  the
second  century  of  our  era,  mentions  it  as  still  ex-
isting, but  deprived  of  all  power  and  influence.
In  fact,  even  Demosthenes  (DePace,  p.  63),  spoke
of  it  as  the  shadow  at  Delphi  ( v  iv  AeKcpoh  (XKid).
In  the  time  of  Pausanias,  the  number  of  Amphic-
tyonic deputies  was  thirty.

There  are  two  points  of  some  interest,  which
still  remain  to  be  considered  ;  and  first,  the  ety-
mology of  the  word  Amphictyon.  We  are  told
(Harpocrat.  s.  v.)  that  Theopnmpus  thought  it  de-
rived from  the  name  of  Amphictyon,  a  prince  of'
Thessaly,  and  the  supposed  author  of  the  institution.
Others,  as  Anaximenes  of  Lampsacus,  connected  it

G


82  AMPHICTYONS.

with  the  •word  a}i<piKriov^s^  or  neighbours.  Verj-
few,  if  any,  modern  scholars  doubt  that  the  latter
view  is  correct ;  and  that  Aniphictj'on,  with  Hellen,
Dorus,  Ion,  Xuthus,Thessalu6,Larissa  the  daughter
of  Pelasgus,  and  others,  are  not  historical,  but  mythic
personages  —  the  representatives,  or  poetic  personi-
fications, of  their  alleged  foimdations,  or  offspring.
As  for  Amphictj'on  (Thirlwall,  Hist,  of  Greece^
vol.  i.  p.  373),  it  is  too  marvellous  a  coincidence
that  his  name  should  be  significant  of  the  institu-
tion itself  ;  and,  as  he  was  the  son  of  Deucalion
and  Pyrrha,  it  is  difficult  to  guess  of  whom  his
council  consisted.  {PhiloL  Museum^  vol.  iL  p.  359.)
B.^sides,  though  Herodotus  (i.  56)  and  Thucydides
(i.  3)  had  the  opportunity,  they  yet  make  no  men-
tion of  him.  VVe  may  conclude  therefore,  that  the
word  should  be  written  amphictiony  *,  from  d^u^t-
KTLoves,  or  those  that  dwelt  around  some  particular
locality.

The  next  question  is  one  of  greater  difficulty ;
it  is  this  :  —  Where  did  the  association  originate  ?
—  were  its  meetings  first  held  at  Delphi,  or  at
Thermopylae  ?  There  seems  a  greater  amount  of
evidence  in  favour  of  the  latter.  In  proof  of  this,
we  may  state  the  preponderance  of  Thessalian
tribes  from  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Maliac  bay,
and  the  comparative  insignificance  of  many  of
them  ;  the  assigned  birthplace  and  residence  of
the  mythic  Amphictyon,  the  names  Pylagorae  and
p3'laea.  Besides,  we  know  that  Thessaly  was  the
theatre  and  origin  of  many  of  the  most  important
events  of  early  Greek  history :  whereas,  it  was
only  in  later  times,  and  after  the  Dorian  conquest
of  Peloponnesus,  that  Delphi  became  important
enough  for  the  meetings  of  such  a  body  as  the
Amphictyonic  ;  nor  if  Delphi  had  been  of  old
the  only  place  of  meeting,  is  it  easy  to  account
for  what  must  have  been  a  loss  of  its  ancient
dignity.  But  whatever  was  the  cause,  we  have
still  the  fact,  that  there  wore  two  places  of  con-
gress ;  to  account  for  which,  it  has  been  supposed
that  there  were  originally  two  confederations,
afterwards  united  by  the  growing  power  of  Delphi,
as  connected  with  the  Dorians,  but  still  retaining
the  old  places  of  meeting.  We  must,  however,
admit  that  it  is  a  matter  of  mere  conjecture  whether
this  were  the  case  or  not,  there  being  strong  reasons
in  support  of  the  opinion  that  the  Dorians,  on
migrating  southwards,  combined  the  worship  of  the
Hellenic  Apollo  with  that  of  the  Pelasgian  Demeter,
as  celebrated  by  the  Amphictyons  of  Thessaly.
Equally  doubtful  is  the  question  respecting  the
influence  of  Acrisius,  king  of  Argos  (Schol.  ad
JEurip.  Orest.  1094  ;  CaWvca.  Epig.-xW.  ;  Strab.  ix.
p.  420)  ;  and  how  far  it  is  true  that  he  first  brought
the  confederacy  into  order,  and  detennined  other
points  connected  with  the  institution.  We  may
however  remark  that  his  alleged  connection  with
it,  is  significant  of  a  Pelasgic  element  in  its  con-
formation. (Thirlwall,  Hist,  of  Greece^  cc.  x.  xliii. ;
Heeren,  Polit.  Hist,  of  Greece^  c.  7  ;  St.  Croix,
Des  Anciens  Gouwrnemens  Federatifs  ;  Tittmann,
Ueber  den  Bund  der  Amphictyonen ;  MUller,
Dorians.,  book  ii.  3.  §.5  ;  Phil.  Mus.  vol.  i.  p.  324  ;
Hermann,  Mantial  of  tlie  Polit.  Antiq.  of  Greece,
§  11 — 14  ;  Wachsmuth,  Hellenische  Alterthunti,-
kunde;  Niebuhr,  Hist,  of  Rome,  vol.  i.  p.  31.
transl.)  [R.  W.]


*  Thus  Pindar  (Nem.  vi.  42),  'Ev  afx<piKTi6vu}v
ravpo<p6vcp  TpjgTJj/jiSt:  see  Bockh  ad  locum.


AMPHITHEATRUM.

AMPHIDRO'MIA  (afi<l>iBp6fj.ia\  a  family  fes-
tival  of  the  Athenians  at  which  the  newly  bom
child  was  introduced  into  the  fcimily,  and  received
its  name.  No  particular  day  was  fixed  for  this
solemnity  ;  but  it  did  not  take  place  very  soon  after
the  birth  of  the  child,  for  it  was  believed  that  most
children  died  before  the  seventh  day,  and  the
solemnity  was  therefore  generally  deferred  till
after  that  period,  that  there  might  be  at  least  some
probability  of  the  child  remaining  alive.  According
to  Suidas,  the  festival  was  held  on  the  fifth  daj',
when  the  women  who  had  lent  their  assistance
at  the  birth  Avashed  their  hands,  but  this  purifi-
cation preceded  the  real  solemnity.  The  friends
and  relations  of  the  parents  were  invited  to  the
festival  of  the  amphidromia,  which  was  held  in  the
evening,  and  they  generally  appeared  with  pre-
sents, among  which  are  mentioned  the  cuttle-fish
and  the  marine  polyp.  (Hesych.  and  Harpocr.
s.  V.)  The  house  was  decorated  on  the  outside  with
olive  branches  when  the  child  was  a  boj',  or  with
garlands  of  wool  when  the  child  was  a  girl  ;  and
a  repast  was  prepared,  at  which,  if  we  may  judge
from  a  fragment  of  Ephippus  in  Athenaeus  (ix.  p.
370  ;  comp.  ii.  p,  65),  the  guests  must  have  been
i-ather  merry.  The  child  was  then  carried  round
the  fire  by  the  nurse,  and  thus,  as  it  were,  pre-
sented to  the  gods  of  the  house  and  to  the  family,
and  at  the  same  time  received  its  name,  to  which
the  guests  were  witnesses.  (Isaeus,  De  Pyrrhi
Hatred,  p.  34.  s.  30.  Bekker.)  The  carrying  of  the
child  roxmd  the  hearth  was  the  principal  part  of
the  solemnity,  from  which  its  name  was  derived.
But  the  Scholiast  on  Aristophanes  (Lysistr.  758)
derives  its  name  from  the  fact  that  the  guests,
AvhUst  the  name  was  given  to  the  child,  walked  or
danced  around  it.  This  festival  is  sometimes
called  from  the  day  on  which  it  took  place  :  if  on
the  seventh  day,  it  is  called  cS^ofiat.  or  eSdofjLas :
if  on  the  tenth  day,  SejcaxTj,  &c.  (Hesj'ch.  and
Aristoph.  Av.  923  ;  K.  F.  Hermann,  Lehrb.  d.
gottcsdie7istUchen  alterihumer  d.  Griechen,  §  48.
n.  6.)  [L.  S.j

AMPHIMALLUM.     [Tapes.]

AMPHIO'RCIA  or  AMPHOMO'SIA  (d/x-
(piopKia  or  aficpcofjioaia),  the  oath  which  Avas  taken,
both  by  the  plaintiff  and  defendant,  before  the
trial  of  a  cause  in  the  Athenian  courts,  that  they
would  speak  the  truth.  (Hesych.  Suid.)  Ac-
cording to  Pollux  (viii.  10),  the  amphiorcia  also
included  the  oath  which  the  judges  took,  that  they
would  decide  according  to  the  laAVs  ;  or,  in  case
there  was  no  express  law  on  the  subject  in  dispute,
that  they  would  decide  according  to  the  principles
of  justice.

AMPHIPROSTYLOS.     [Templum].

AMPHISBETE'SIS  {afxcpKre-liT-nais.)     [He-

AMPHITAPAE.     [Tapes].

AMPHITHALAMUS.     [Domus]

AMPHITHEA'TRUM  {aix^pieiarpov)  was  a
description  of  building  arranged  for  the  exhibition
of  combats  of  gladiators,  and  wild  beasts,  and
ships,  which  constituted  the  Itidi  amphitheatrales.
[Gladiatores  ;  Venatio  ;  Naumachia.]

I.  Its  History.  —  Such  exhibitions  —  which
were  peculiar  to  the  Romans,  and  which  were  un-
known to  the  Greeks  till  the  Romans  introduced
them — originally  took  place  in  the  Forum  and
the  Circus,  the  shows  of  gladiators  being  given
in  the  former,  and  those  of  wild  beasts  in  the


AMPHITHEATRUM.

latter  ;  indeed  the  amphitheatre  itself  is  sometimes
called  circus.  The  shape  of  the  circus,  however,  was
much  better  fitted  for  the  chariot  races,  for  which  it
was  at  first  designed,  than  for  the  gladiatorial  com-
bats, and  the  more  wholesale  slaughter  of  animals,
which,  in  process  of  time,  came  to  be  the  favourite
amusements  of  the  Romans.  For  these  purposes,
the  circus  was  too  long  and  too  narrow,  and  the
spina  was  a  great  impediment,  so  that  a  new  form
of  building  was  required,  which  should  accom-
modate a  multitude  of  spectators  in  such  a  manner
as  that  all  might  have  a  good  view  of  the  space
occupied  by  the  combatants,  which  space  too  re-
quired to  be  of  quite  a  different  shape  from  the
circus,  as  the  combatants  were  to  be  kept  as  much
as  possible  in  the  same  place.  The  idea  of  such
a  building  was  suggested,  as  the  name  (from  afA.(pi,
on  both  sides,  ^earpou,  a  theatre)  seems  to  imply,
by  the  existing  theatre :  indeed,  the  first  am-
phitheatre of  which  we  have  any  account  —  that
of  C.  Scribonius  Curio  —  was,  literally,  a  dovLle
tlieatre  *,  being  composed  of  two  theatres,  placed
on  pivots,  so  that  they  could  be  turned  round,
spectators  and  all,  and  placed  either  back  to  back,
fonning  two  separate  theatres  for  dramatic  ex-
hibitions, or  face  to  face,  forming  an  amphitheatre,
for  the  shows  of  gladiators  and  wild  beasts.  This
edifice,  which  was  erected  by  Curio  (the  cele-
brated partisan  of  Caesar),  for  the  celebration  of
his  father''s  funeral  games,  is  described  and  some-
v/hat  vehemently  commented  upon  by  Pliny.
(//.  N.  xxxvi.  15.  s.  24.  §  8.)  The  next  amphi-
theatre, and  apparently  the  first  to  which  the
name  Avas  applied,  was  built  by  Julius  Caesar  him
self,  durijig  his  perpetual  dictatorship,  in  B.  c.  46
(Dion  Cass,  xliii.  22,  who  thus  describes  the  build-
ing :  Qiarpov  ri  KvuTfyeriKhu,  S  koI  afxcptdearpov
6/c  Tov  Tre'ptl  iravrax6Q*iV  eSpas  &pev  (r;c7)vf/y  e%eii/
■irpo(repp497]).  This,  however,  was  still  only  of
wood,  a  material  which  was  frequently  used  for
theatres,  and  which  was,  therefore,  naturally
adopted  for  amphitheatres,  but  which  sometimes
proved  inadequate  to  support  the  weight  of  the
immense  body  of  spectators,  and  thus  occasioned
serious  accidents.  For  example,  we  are  told  that
a  wooden  amphitheatre,  which  was  built  at
Fidenae  in  the  reign  of  Tiberius  by  Atilius,  a
freed)  nan,  gave  way,  in  consequence  of  the  im-
perfections in  the  foundation  and  in  the  joints  of
the  timbers,  and  buried  either  20,000  or  50,000
spectators  in  its  ruins.  (Suet.  Tiber.  40  ;  Tac.
Ann.  iv.  63.)  These  wooden  buildings  were,  of
course,  also  exposed  to  great  danger  from  fire  ;
thus  a  wooden  amphitheatre  at  Placentia  was
burned  in  the  civil  war  between  Otho  and  Vitel-
lius.     (Tac.  Hist.  ii.  20.)

It  was  not,  however,  till  the  fourth  consulship  of
Augustus,  B.  c.  30,  that  a  more  durable  amphitheatre,
of  stone,  was  erected  by  Statilius  Taurus,  in  the  Cam-
pus Martius.  (Dion  Cass.  li.  23  ;  Suet.  Octav.  29  ;
Tac,  Ami.  iii.  72  ;  Strab.  vi.  p.  236.)  But,  since
this  building  was  destroyed  by  fire,  it  must  be  sup-
posed that  only  the  shell  was  of  stone,  and  the  seats
and  staircases  of  wood.     This  edifice  was  the  only


AMPHITHEATRUM.


03


*  As  a  mer6  matter  of  etymology,  the  word
biarpov  (a  place  for  beholding).,  would  more  strictly
apply  to  the  aviphitheatre,  which  was  intended
exclusively  for  spectacle,  while  the  theatre,  which
was  for  recitations  accompanied  by  music,  might
be  at  least  as  fitly  described  by  the  word  if>^<uov.


.  one  of  the  kind  until  the  building  of  the  Flavian
I  amphitheatre.  It  did  not  satisfy  Caligula,  who
commenced  an  amphitheatre  near  the  Septa  ;  but
the  work  was  not  continued  bv  Claudius.  (Dion
Cass.  lix.  10  ;  Suet.  Cal.  18,  21.)  Nero  too,  in
his  second  consulship,  a.  d.  57,  erected  a  vast  am-
phitheatre of  wood,  but  this  was  only  a  temporary
building.  (Suet.  Ner.  12  ;  Tac.  Atm.  xiii.  31.)
The  amphitheatre  of  Taurus  was  destroyed  in  the
burning  of  Rome,  a.d.  64  (Dion  Cass.  Ixii.  18),
and  was  probably  never  restored,  as  it  is  not  again
mentioned.  It  is  still  a  question  with  the  topo-
graphers whether  any  traces  of  it  are  now  visible.
(Comp.  Becker,  Handb.  d. Rom.  Alter,  vol. i.  pp.  642,
643,  and  Urlichs,  Beschreiburg  Roms.  pp.  53,  54.f )

The  erection  of  an  amphitheatre  in  the  midst  of
Rome,  proportioned  to  the  magnitude  of  the  city,
was  among  the  designs  of  Augustus,  who  delighted
in  the  spectacles  of  the  renatio,  and  especially  in
the  uncommon  species  and  immense  number  of  the
animals  exhibited  in  them  j  so  that,  as  he  himself
informs  us,  in  one  of  his  venaiiones  there  were
no  less  than  3500  animals  slaughtered.  (Suet.
Vesp.  9  ;  Aur.  Vict.  Epit.  1  ;  Mo7ium.  Ancyr.)
It  was  not,  however,  till  the  reigns  of  Vespasian
and  Titus,  that  the  design  of  Augustus  was  carried
into  effect  by  the  erection  of  the  Amphitheatrum
Flavium,  or,  as  it  has  been  called  since  the  time
of  Rede,  the  Colosseum  or  Colisaeum,  a  name  said
tc  be  derived  from  the  Colossus  of  Nero,  which
stood  close  by.

This  wonderful  building,  which  for  magnitude
can  only  be  compared  to  the  pyramids  of  Egypt,
and  which  is  perhaps  the  most  striking  monument  at
once  of  the  material  greatness  and  the  moral  degra-
dation of  Rome  under  the  empire,  was  commenced
by  Vespasian,  but  at  what  precise  time  is  uncertain ;
for  the  genuineness  of  the  medal,  which  is  quoted  by
Lipsius,  as  placing  its  commencement  in  his  eighth
consulship,  a.  d.  77,  is  more  than  doubtful.  (Rasche,
Le^.  Univ.  Rei  Num.  vol.  v.  pt.  2.  p.  1017;
Eckhel,  Doctr.  Nwn.  Vet.  vol.  vi.  p.  840.)  It
was  completed  by  Titus,  Avho  dedicated  it  in
A,  D.  80,  when  5000  animals  of  different  kinds
were  slaughtered.  (Suet.  Tit.  7  ;  Dion  Cass.  Ixvi.
25.)  From  the  somewhat  obscure  account  of  an
old  writer  (Catal.  Imp.  Vienn.  p.  243,  Rone),  we
learn  that  Vespasian  carried  the  building  so  far  as
to  dedicate  the  first  three  ranges  of  seats,  that
Titus  added  two  ranges  more,  and  that  Domitian
completed  the  building  usque  ad  clypea.  Without
professing  to  be  able  to  explain  these  statements
fully,  we  may  observe  that  it  is  extremely  pro-
bable, as  will  be  seen  more  clearly  from  the  de-
scription of  the  building,  that  Titus  would  dedi-
cate the  amphitheatre  as  soon  as  it  was  fit  for  use,
without  waiting  for  the  final  completion  of  the
upper  ai^  less  essential  parts.

There  is  an  ecclesiastical  tradition,  but  not  en-
titled to  much  credit,  that  the  architect  of  the  Co-
lisaeum  was  a  Christian,  and  afterwards  a  martyr,
named  Gaudentius,  and  that  thousands  of  the
captive  .Tews  were  employed  in  its  erection.

The  Flavian  amphitheatre,   from  its  enormous


+  In  the  lower  eastern  angle  of  the  walls  of
Aurelian,  near  the  church  of  S.  Croce,  are  the  re-
mains of  an  amphitheatre,  of  brick,  called  in  the
Notitia,  the  Amphitlieatrum  Castrense.  Its  date  is
very  uncertain.  (See  further  Becker,  Handb.  d.
Rom.  Alter,  vol.  i.  pp.  549,  &c.)
G  2


84  AMPHITIIEATRUM.

size,  rendersd  the  subsequent  erection  of  any  other
such  building  in  Rome  perfectly  imnecessary.  It
became  the  spot  where  prince  and  people  met  to-
gether to  witness  those  sanguinary  exhibitions,  the
degrading  effects  of  which  on  the  Roman  character
can  hardly  be  over-estimated.  It  was  thoroughly
repaired  by  Antoninus  Pius.  (Capit.  A?iL  Pi.  8.)
In  the  reign  of  Macrinus,  on  the  day  of  the  Vulca-
nalia,  it  was  struck  by  lightning,  by  which  the
upper  rows  of  benches  were  consumed,  and  so  much
damage  was  done  to  other  parts  of  the  structure,
that  the  games  were  for  some  years  celebrated  in  the
Stadium.  (Dion  Cass.  Ixxviii.  25.)  Its  restora-
tion was  commenced  by  Elagabalus  and  completed
by  Alexander  Sevcrus.  (Lamprid.  Fleliog.  17  ;
Alex.  Sev.  24.)  It  Avas  again  struck  by  lightning
in  the  reign  of  Decius  (Hieron.  p.  475),  but  was
soon  restored,  and  the  games  continued  to  be  cele-
brated in  it  down  to  the  sixth  century.  The  latest
recorded  exhibition  of  wild  beasts  was  in  the
reign  of  Theodoric.  Since  that  time  it  has  been
used  sometimes  in  war  as  a  fortress,  and  in  peace
as  a  quarry,  whole  -palaces,  such  as  the  Cancellaria
and  the  Palazzo  Farnese,  having  been  built  out  of
its  spoils.  At  length  the  popes  made  efforts  to
preserve  it :  Sixtus  V.  attempted  to  use  it  as  a
woollen  factory,  and  to  convert  the  arcades  into
shops  ;  Clement  XI.  enclosed  the  lower  arcades,
and,  in  1750,  Benedict  XIV.  consecrated  it  to
Christians  who  had  been  martyred  in  it.  The  best
accounts  of  the  building  are  contained  in  the  follow-
ing works  :  Lipsius  de  Ampfdtheatro  ;  Nibby,  deW
Anfiteatro  Flavio,  a  supplement  to  Nardini,  vol.  i.
p.  233,  in  which  we  have  the  most  complete  his-
torical account  ;  Fea,  Notizie  deyli  scavi  neW
Anfiteatro  Flavio;  Bunsen,  Beschrcibung  d.  Stadt
Rom.  vol.  iii.  p.  31.9,  &c.  ;  Cressy  and  Taylor,
The  Architectural  Antiquities  of  Rome;  Maffei,
Verona  Illustrata  ;  Stieglitz,  Arch'dol.  d.  Baukimst ;
Hirt,  Geschichte  d.  Baiikunst  hei  den  Alien.

II,  Description  of  the  Flavian  Amphitheatre.  —
Notwithstanding  tlie  damages  of  time,  war,  and
spoliation,  the  Flavian  amphitheatre  still  remains
complete  enough  to  give  us  a  fair  idea,  excepting
in  some  minor  details,  of  the  structure  and  ar-
rangements of  this  description  of  building.  The
notices  of  the  ancient  authors  are  extremely  scanty  ;
and  Vitruvius  of  course  fails  us  here  altogether  ;
indeed,  this  description  of  building  was  so  com-
pletely new  in  his  time,  that  only  once  does  the
bare  word  amphitheatrum  occur  in  his  book  (i.  7).
We  derive  important  aid  from  the  remains  of
amphitheatres  in  the  provinces  of  the  ancient
Roman  empire.  We  shall  first  describe  the  Co-
lisaeum,  and  then  mention  the  chief  points  of  dif-
ference between  it  and  these  other  amphitheatres.

The  very  site  of  the  Flavian  amphitheatre,  as  of
most  others,  furnishes  an  example  of  th#  prodigal
contempt  of  labour  and  expense  which  the  Roman
cmT)eror3  displayed  in  their  great  works  of  archi-
tectuie.  The  Greeks,  in  choosing  the  sites  of  their
theatres,  almost  always  availed  themselves  of  some
natural  hollow  on  the  side  of  a  hill ;  but  the  Roman
amphitheixtres,  with  few  exceptions,  stand  upon  a
])lain.  The  site  of  the  Colisaeum  was  in  the  mid-
dle of  the  city,  in  the  valley  between  the  Caelius,
the  Esquiline,  and  the  Velia,  on  the  marshy  ground
which  was  previously  the  pond  of  Nero's  palace,
stagnum  Neronis  (Suet.  Vesp.  9  ;  Martial,  de  Sped.
ii.  5).  No  mere  measures  can  give  an  adequate
conception  of  this'  vast  structure,  the  dimensions


AMPHITIIEATRUM.

and  arrangements  of  which  were  such  as  to  furnish
seats  for  87,000  spectators,  round  an  arena  largo
enough  to  afford  space  for  the  combats  of  several
hundred  animals  at  once,  for  the  evolutions  of
mimic  sea-fights,  and  for  the  exhibition  of  artifi-
cial forests;  with  passages  and  staircases  to  give
ingress  and  egress,  without  confusion,  to  the  im-
mense mass  of  spectators,  and  others  for  the  at-
tendants on  the  arena ;  dens  for  the  thousands  of
victims  devoted  to  destruction  ;  channels  for  the  ra-
pid influx  and  outlet  of  water  when  the  arena  was
used  for  a  naumachia ;  and  the  means  for  the  re-
moval of  the  carcasses,  and  the  other  abominations
of  the  arena.  Admirable  pictures  of  the  magni-
tude and  magnificence  of  the  amphitheatre  and  its
spectacles  are  drawn  in  the  Essays  of  Montaigne
(iii.  6,),  and  in  the  latter  part  of  Gibbon's  twelfth
chapter.  As  a  general  description  of  the  building
the  following  passage  of  Gibbon  is  perfect:  —  "  It
AAtis  a  building  of  an  elliptic  figure,  founded  on  four-
score arches,  and  rising,  with  four  successive  orders
of  architecture,  to  the  height  of  1 40  [  1 57]  feet.  The
outside  of  the  edifice  was  incrusted  with  marble,
and  decorated  Avith  statues.  The  slopes  of  the  vast
concave,  which  formed  the  inside,  were  filled  and
surrounded  with  sixty  or  eighty  rows  of  seats,  of
marble  likewise,  covered  with  cushions,  and  capable
of  receiving  with  ease  about  80,000  spectators.
Sixty -four  vomitories  (for  by  that  name  the  doors
Avere  A'ery  aptly  distinguished),  poured  forth  the
immense  multitude ;  and  the  entrances,  passages,
and  staircases,  Avere  contrived  with  such  exquisite
skill,  that  each  person,  whether  of  the  senatorial,
the  equestrian,  or  the  plebeian  order,  arrived  at
his  destined  place  Avithout  trouble  or  confusion.
Nothing  Avas  omitted,  Avhich,  in  any  respect,  could
be  subserA'ient  to  the  convenience  and  pleasure  of
the  spectators.  They  were  protected  from  the  smi
and  rain  by  an  ample  canopy,  occasionally  drawn
over  their  heads.  The  air  Avas  continually  re-
freshed by  the  playing  of  fountains,  and  pro-
fusely impregnated  by  the  grateful  scent  of  aro-
matics.  In  the  centre  of  the  edifice,  the  arena.,  or
stage,  Avas  strewed  with  the  finest  sand,  and  suc-
cessively assumed  the  most  different  forms.  At
one  moment  it  seemed  to  rise  out  of  the  earth,  like
the  garden  of  the  Hesperidcs,  and  Avas  afterwards
broken  into  the  rocks  and  caverns  of  Thrace.
The  subterraneous  pipes  conveyed  an  inexhaustible
supply  of  Avater;  and  what  had  just  before  ap-
peared a  IcA-el  plain,  might  be  suddenly  converted
into  a  Avide  lake,  covered  Avith  armed  vessels,  and
replenished  with  the  monsters  of  the  deep.  In
the  decoration  of  these  scenes,  the  Roman  em-
perors displayed  their  wealth  and  liberality ;  and
Ave  read  on  various  occasions  that  the  Avhole  furni-
ture of  the  amphitheatre  consisted  either  of  silver,
or  of  gold,  or  of  amber.  The  poet  who  describes
the  games  of  Carinus,  in  the  character  of  a  shep-
herd, attracted  to  the  capital  by  the  fam.e  of  their
magnificence,  affirms  that  the  nets  designed  as  a
defence  against  the  wild  beasts  Avere  of  gold
wire ;  that  the  porticoes  were  gilded ;  and  that
the  belt  or  circle  which  divided  the  several  ranks
of  spectators  from  each  other,  was  studded  with  a
precious  mosaic  of  beautiful  stones."

The  following  ground-plan,  external  eleA-ation,
and  section,  are  from  Hirt,  and  contain  of  course
some  conjectural  details.  The  ground  plan  is  so
aiTangod  as  to  exhibit  in  each  of  its  quarters  the
plan  of  each  of  the  stories :  thus,  the  loAver  right


AMPHITHEATRUM.

hand  quarter  shows  the  tnie  ^^/•owwd'-plan,  or  that
of  the  lowest  Itory  ;  the  next  on  the  left  shows  a
plan  of  the  erections  on  the  level  of  the  second  row
of  exterior  columns,  as  well  as  the  seats  which
sloped  down  from  that  level  to  the  lower  one  ;  the
next  quarter  shows  a  similar  plan  of  the  third  order,


AMPHITHEATRUM.  85

and  the  upper  right-hand  quarter  exhibits  a  view
of  the  interior  as  it  would  appear  to  an  eye  looking
vertically  down  upon  it.  The  dotted  lines  on  the
arena  are  the  radii,  and  their  points  of  intersection
the  centres,  of  the  several  arcs  which  make  up  the
ellipses.


GKOUND    PLAN    OF    THE    FLAVIAN    AMPHITHEATRE.


LONGITUDINAL    ELEVATION    OF  THE    FLAVIAN    AMPHITHEATRE.


LOXOITUDIXAL    SECTION    OF    THE    FLAVIAN    AMPHITHEATRE.

G   3


86


AMPHITHEATRUM.


This  structure,  like  all  the  other  existing  am-
phitheatres, is  of  an  elliptical  form.  It  covers
nearly  six  acres  of  ground.  The  plan  divides  it-
self naturally  into  two  concentric  ellipses,  of  whioh
the  inner  constituted  the  arena  or  space  for  the
combats,  while  the  ring  between  this  and  the  outer
circumference  was  occupied  by  the  seats  for  the
spectators.  The  lengths  of  the  major  and  minor
axes  of  these  ellipses  are,  respectively,  287  feet  by
180,  and  620  feet  by  313.  The  width  of  the
space  appropriated  to  spectators  is,  therefore,  166^
feet  all  round  the  building.  The  ratio  of  the
diameters  of  the  external  ellipse  is  nearly  that
of  6  to  5,  which  becomes  exactly  the  proportion,
if  we  take  in  the  substructions  of  the  foundation.
Of  coiu-se,  the  ratio  of  the  diameters  of  the  arena  is
different,  on  account  of  the  diminished  size  :  it  is,
in  fact,  nearly  as  8  to  5.  The  minor  axis  of  the
arena  is  here,  and  generally,  about  one-third  of
that  of  the  outer  ellipse.  The  material  used  was
stone,  in  large  blocks,  fastened  together,  where
necessary,  by  metal  clamps.  The  exterior  was
faced  with  marble  and  adorned  with  statues.
The  external  elevation  requires  little  description.
It  is  divided  into  four  stories,  corresponding  to  the
tiers  of  corridors  by  which  access  was  gained  to
the  seats  at  different  levels.  These  corridors  are
connected  with  the  external  air  by  eighty  arched
openings  in  each  of  the  three  lower  stories.  To
the  piers  which  divide  these  arches  are  attached
three-quarter  columns,  that  is,  columns  one-fourth
of  whose  circumference  appears  to  be  buried  in
the  wall  behind  them.  Thus,  each  of  the  three
lower  stories  presents  a  continuous  fa9ade  of  eighty
columns  backed  by  piers,  with  eighty  open  arches
between  them,  and  with  an  entablature  continued
unbroken  round  the  whole  building.  The  width  of
the  arches  is  as  nearly  as  possible  the  same
throughout  the  building,  namely,  1 4  feet  6  inches,
except  at  the  extremities  of  the  diameters  of  the
ellipse,  where  they  are  two  feet  Avider.  Each  tier
is  of  a  different  order  of  architecture,  the  lowest
being  a  plain  Roman  Doric,  or  perhaps  rather
Tuscan,  the  next  Ionic,  and  the  third  Corinthian.
The  columns  of  the  second  and  third  stories  are
placed  on  pedestals  j  those  of  the  lowest  story
are  raised  from  the  ground  by  a  few  steps.  The
highest  tier  is  of  quite  a  different  character,  as  it
merely  consists  of  a  wall,  without  corridors,  against
which,  instead  of  columns,  are  placed  pilasters  of
the  Corinthian  order  ;  and  the  wall  between  them
is  pierced  with  windows,  in  the  alternate  interco-
lumniations  only,  and  therefore,  of  course,  forty  in
number.  The  whole  is  crowned  with  a  bold  en-
tablature, which  is  pierced  with  holes  above  the
brackets  which  supported  the  feet  of  the  masts
upon  which  the  velarium  or  awning  was  extended :
and  above  the  entablature  is  a  small  attic.  The  total
height  of  that  part  of  the  building  which  remains
entire,  namely,  about  three-eighths  of  the  whole
circumference,  is  157  feet:  the  stories  are  respec-
tively about  30,  38,  38,  and  44  feet  high.  The
massiveness  of  the  crowning  entablature,  the  height
of  the  upper  story,  and  the  great  surface  of  blank
wall  in  its  intercolumniations,  combine  to  give  the
elevation  a  somewhat  heavy  appearance  ;  while
the  projecting  cornices  of  each  story,  intercepting
the  view  from  below,  take  off  very  much  from  the
apparent  height  of  the  building.  Indeed,  it  would
be  a  waste  of  words  to  attempt  to  specify  all  the
architectural  defects  of  the  composition.


AMPHITHEATRUM.

The  stone  used  in  the  building  is  a  species  of
travertine  :  some  of  the  blocks  are  a^much  as  five
feet  high,  and  eight  or  ten  feet  long  ;  and  it  is
remarkable,  that  all  those  which  fonn  the  exterior
have  inscribed  upon  them  small  numbers  or  signs,
which  evidently  indicate  the  place  of  each  in  the
building,  and  which  prove  how  great  was  the
care  taken  to  adapt  every  single  stone  to  the  form
of  the  whole  edifice.  In  some  parts  of  the  interior
large  masses  of  brickwork  and  tufa  are  seen :  and
in  the  upper  part  there  are  fragments  of  other
buildings  worked  in  ;  but  this,  no  doubt,  happened
in  some  of  the  various  repairs.

There  are  coins  extant,  bearing  on  the  reverse  a
view  of  the  amphitheatre,  so  arranged  as  to  show
not  only  the  outside,  but  a  portion  of  the  interior
also.  It  is  from  them  that  we  learn  the  fact,  that
the  outer  arches  of  the  second  and  third  stories
were  decorated  with  statues  in  their  openings,  un-
less, indeed,  the  figures  shown  in  the  arches  are
meant  for  rude  representations  of  the  people  pass-
ing through  the  outer  colonnade.  These  coins
also  show,  on  the  highest  story,  in  the  alternate
spaces  between  the  pilasters,  circles  against  the
wall,  corresponding  to  the  windows  in  the  other
alternate  spaces  ;  they  are,  perhaps,  the  dy})ea
mentioned  by  the  old  author  cited  above,  that  is,
ornamental  metal  shields,  hung  there  to  decorate
the  building.  There  are  several  coins  of  Titus
and  Domitian  of  this  type  (Eckhel,  Doctr.  Num.
Vet.  vol.  vi.  pp.  357—359,  375).  There  are  similar
coins  of  Gordian,  which  are,  however,  very  inferior
in  execution  to  those  of  Titus  and  Domitian.
(Eckhel,  vol.  vii.  p.  271.)  The  coins  of  Titus
and  Domitian  also  show  a  range  of  three  stories  of
columns  by  the  side  of  the  amphitheatre,  which
(though  the  matter  is  doubtful)  is  supposed  to  re-
present a  colonnade  which  ran  from  the  palace  of
Titus  on  the  Esquiline  to  the  amphitheatre,  to
which  it  gave  access  at  the  northern  extremity  of
its  minor  axis,  as  shown  on  the  plan.  At  the  other
extremity  of  this  axis  was  the  entrance  from  the
Palatine.

The  eighty  arches  of  the  lower  story  (except
the  four  at  the  extremities  of  the  axes)  formed  the
entrances  for  the  spectators,  and  gave  admission
to  a  corridor,  running  uninterruptedly  round  the
building,  behind  which  again  is  another  precisely
similar  corridor.  (See  the  plan  and  section.)  The
space  behind  the  second  corridor  is  divided  by
eighty  walls,  radiating  inwards  from  the  inner  piers
of  the  second  corridor  ;  which  support  the  struc-
ture, and  between  which  are  partly  staircases  lead-
ing to  the  upper  stories,  and  partly  passages  lead-
ing into  a  third  corridor,  which,  like  the  first  and
second,  runs  round  the  whole  building.  Be-
yond this  corridor  the  radiating  walls  are  again
continued,  the  spaces  between  them  being  occu-
pied, as  before,  partly  by  staircases  leading  on  the
one  side  to  the  podium,  and  on  the  other  to  the
lower  range  of  seats  {maenianum),  and  partly  by
passages  leading  to  a  fourth  continuous  corridor
much  lower  and  smaller  than  the  others,  which
was  divided  from  the  arena  by  a  massive  wall
(called  podium),  the  top  of  which  formed  the  place
assigned  to  the  spectators  of  the  highest  rank.
From  this  fourth  corridor  there  are  several  en-
trances to  the  arena  ;  and  it  is  most  probable  that
the  whole  of  the  corridor  was  subservient  to  the
aixangements  of  the  arena.  (See  the  lower  right-
hand  quarter  of  the  plan,  and  the  section.)     On


AMPHITHEATRUM.

the  second  story  we  have  the  two  outer  colon-
nades repeated,  and  the  radiating  walls  of  the
first  block  are  continued  up  through  this  story  ;
and  between  them  are  staircases  leading  out  on  to
the  second  range  of  seats,  and  passages  leading
into  a  small  inner  conidor,  from  which  access  is  ob-
tained to  a  sort  of  terrace  (praednctw)  which  runs
round  the  building  between  the  first  and  second
ranges  of  seats,  and  increases  the  facilities  for  the
spectators  getting  to  their  proper  places.  Sloping
down  from  this  praecindio  to  the  level  of  the  top  of
the  podium^  and  supported  by  the  inner  series  of
radiating  walls,  are  the  lower  series  of  seats.  On
the  third  story  (above  the  floor  of  which  the  details
are  almost  entu-ely  conjectural),  we  have  again
the  double  colonnade,  the  inner  wall  of  which
rises  immediately  behind  the  top  of  the  second
range  of  seats,  with  only  the  interval  of  a  narrow
praecinctio,  to  which  access  was  given  by  nu-
merous doors  in  the  wall  just  mentioned,  which


AMPHITHEATRUM.  87

was  also  pierced  with  windows.  Above  the  outer
corridor  of  this  story  is  a  mezzanine,  or  small
middle  story,  in  front  of  which  and  above  the
inner  colonnade  were  a  few  tiers  of  wooden
benches  for  the  lowest  class  of  spectators.  Above
this  mezzanine  was  a  galleiy,  which  ran  right
round  the  building,  and  the  front  of  which  is  sup-
posed to  have  been  formed  by  a  range  of  columns.
It  seems  that  the  terrace  formed  by  the  top  of
this  gallery  would  be  also  available  for  spectators.
And,  lastly,  the  very  summit  of  the  wall  was
formed  into  a  sort  of  terrace  which  was,  no  doubt,
occupied  by  the  men  who  worked  the  ropes  of  the
velarium.  The  doors  which  opened  from  the  stair-
cases and  corridors  on  to  the  interior  of  the  am-
phitheatre were  designated  by  the  very  appropriate
name  of  vomitoria.  The  whole  of  the  interior  was
called  cavea.  The  following  section  (from  Hirt)
exhibits  these  arrangements  as  clearly  as  they  can
be  shown  without  the  aid  of  perspective.


SECTION   OP   THK    CORRIDORS,    STAIRS,    AND    SEATS.


I.  II.  III.  IV.  The  four  stories  of  the  exterior.

A.  The  arena.

B.  The  podium.

C.  D.  E.  F.     The  four  corridors.
G.  H.  I.     The  three  maeniana.

K.  The  upper  gallery  ;  L.  The  terrace  over  it


R.  The  space  on  the  summit  of  the  wall  for  the
managers  of  the  velarium.

Z.  The  steps  which  surrounded  the  building  on
the  outside.

a.  Stairs  from  the  third  colonnade  to  the  po-
dium.

G  4


38  AMPHITHEATRUM."

h.  Short  transverse  steps  from  the  podium  to  the
Jirst  maeiiianum.     (Compare  the  plan.)

c,  d.  Stairs  from  the  ground  story  to  the  second  ;
whence  the  second  maenianura  was  reached  in
two  ways,  e.  and  g.

e.  Steps  to  the  first  praecinctio,  from  which  there
were  short  transverse  steps  {f.)  to  the  second  mae-
iiianum.

g.  Stairs  leading  direct  from  the  corridors  of  the
second  story  to  the  second  maenianum,  through
the  vomitorium  a.

h.  Stairs  leading  from  the  floor  of  the  second
story  to  the  small  upper  story,  whence  other  stairs
(5)  led  to  the  third  story,  from  which  access  was
obtained  to  the  upper  part  of  the  second  maenia-
num by  doors  (/3)  in  the  inner  wall  of  the  second
corridor  q.

k.  Stairs  from  the  second  story  to  the  mezza-
nine, or  middle  story,  whence  access  was  obtained
to  the  third  maenianum  by  passages  (7).

I.  Stairs  in  the  mezzanine,  leading  to  the  upper
part  of  the  third  maenianum,  and  to  the  gallery  K.

m.  Steps  from  the  gallery  to  the  terrace  over  it.

n.  Steps  from  that  terrace  to  the  summit.

o.  p.  Grated  openings  to  light  the  two  inner
corridors.

q.  See  under  Ji.

s.  Windows  to  light  the  mezzanine.

t.  Windows  of  the  gallery.

V.  Rest,  and  w.  loop,  for  the  masts  of  the  vela-
rium g.

The  arena  was  surrounded  by  a  wall  of  sufH-
cient  height  to  guard  the  spectators  against  any
danger  from  the  wild  beasts,  namely  about  fifteen
feet,  A  further  protection  was  afforded,  at  least
sometimes,  by  a  network  or  trellis  of  metal  ;
and  it  is  mentioned,  as  an  instance  of  the  profuse
ostentation  which  the  emperors  were  so  fond  of
displaying,  that  Nero,  in  his  amphitheatre,  had  this
trellis  gilt,  and  its  intersections  ornamented  with
bosses  of  amber.  (Plin.  //.  N.  xxxvii.  3.  s.  1 1.
§  2).  The  wall  just  mentioned  appears  to  have
been  faced  with  marble,  and  to  have  had  rollers
suspended  against  it  as  an  additional  protection
against  the  possibility  of  the  wild  beasts  climbing
it.  (Lips,  de  AmpL  12.)  The  terrace  on  the  top
of  this  wall,  which  was  called  podium,  (a  name
sometimes  also  applied  to  the  wall  itself),  was
no  wider  than  to  be  capable  of  containing  two,
or  at  the  most  three  ranges  of  moveable  seats,  or
chairs.  This,  as  being  by  far  the  best  situation
for  distinctly  viewing  the  sports  in  the  arena,  and
also  more  commodiously  accessible  than  the  seats
higher  up,  was  the  place  set  apart  for  senators
and  other  persons  of  distinction,  such  as  the  am-
bassadors of  foreign  states  (Suet.  Octav.  44  ;
Juv.  Sat  ii.  143,  &c.)  ;  the  magistrates  seem  to
have  sat  here  in  their  cumle  chairs  (Lipsius  de
Amph.  11)  ;  and  it  was  here,  also,  that  the  emperor
himself  used  to  sit,  in  an  elevated  place  called
suggestus  (Suet.  Caes.  76  ;  Plin.  Paneg.  51),  or
cubicidum  (Suet.  Nero^  12)  ;  and  likewise  the  per-
son who  exhibited  the  games,  on  a  place  elevated
like  a  pulpit  or  tribunal  {editoris  tribunal).  The
vestal  virgins  also  appear  to  have  had  a  place
allotted  to  them  on  the  podium.  (Suet.  Octav.  44).

Above  the  podium  were  the  gradus.,  or  seats  of
the  other  spectators,  which  were  divided  into  stories
called  maeniana.  The  whole  number  of  seats  is
supposed  to  have  been  about  eighty.  The  first
maenianum^  consisting  of  fourteen  rows  of  stone  of


AMPHITHEATRUM.

marble  scats,  was  appropriated  to  the  equestrian
order.  The  seats  appropriated  to  the  senators
and  equites  were  covered  with  cushions  {pul-
villis),  which  were  first  used  in  the  time  of  Ca-
ligula. (Juv.  Sat  iii.  154  ;  Dion,  lix.  7.)  Then,
after  a  horizontal  space,  termed  a  praecifictio,  and
forming  a  continued  landing-place  from  the  seve-
ral staircases  which  opened  on  to  it,  succeeded  the
second  maenianum,  where  were  the  seats  called
popularia  (Suet.  Domitian.  4),  for  the  third  class
of  spectators,  or  the  populus.  Behind  this  was  the
second  praecinctio,  bounded  by  the  high  wall  al-
ready mentioned  ;  above  which  Avas  the  third
maenianum,  where  there  were  only  wooden  benches
for  the  pulkiti,  or  common  people.  (Suet.  Octav.
44.)  The  open  gallery  at  the  top  was  the  only
part  of  the  amphitheatre,  in  which  women  were
permitted  to  witness  the  games,  except  the  vestal
virgins,  and  perhaps  a  few  ladies  of  distinction  and
influence  who  were  suffered  to  share  the  space
appropriated  to  the  vestals  (Suet.  Octav.  44).  The
seats  of  the  maeniana  did  not  run  in  unbroken  lines
round  the  whole  building,  but  were  divided  into
portions  called  cunei  (from  their  shape),  by  short
flights  of  stairs  which  facilitated  the  access  to  the
seats.  (Suet.  Oct.  44  ;  Juv.  Sat.  vi.  61.)  See
the  plan,  and  the  annexed  section  of  a  small  portion
of  the  seats.  ♦


^

^

"S

Not  only  were  the  different  ranges  of  seats  ap-
propriated to  different  classes  of  spectators,  but  it
is  pretty  certain  also  that  the  different  cunei  of
each  maenianum  were  assigned  to  specific  portions
of  the  people,  who  v/ere  at  once  guided  to  their
places  by  numbers  placed  over  the  external  arches
by  which  the  building  was  entered  :  these  numbers
still  exist.  The  office  of  preserving  order  in  the
distribution  of  the  places  was  assigned  to  attend-
ants called  locarii,  and  the  whole  management  was
under  the  superintendence  of  the  villicus  amphi-
tkeatri.

It  only  remains  to  describe  the  arena,  or
central  open  space  for  the  combatants,  which  de-
rived its  name  from  the  sand  with  which  it  was
covered,  chiefly  for  the  purpose  of  absorbing  the
blood.  Such  emperors  as  Caligula,  Nero,  and
Carinus,  showed  their  prodigality  by  using  cinna-
bar and  borax  instead  of  the  common  sand.  It
was  bounded,  as  already  stated,  by  the  wall  of  the
podium,  but  in  the  earlier  amphitheatres,  in  which
the  podium  was  probably  not  so  lofty,  there  were
ditches  (curipi)  between  it  and  the  arena,  which
were  chiefly  meant  as  a  defence  against  the  ele-
phants. The  curipi  were  first  made  by  Julius
Caesar,  and   were   dispensed  with  by   Nero,  in


AMPHITHEATRUM.

Older  to  gain  space  for  the  spectators.  (Suet.  Caes.
:\\)  ;  Plin.  //.  N.  viii.  7  ;  Lipsius  de  AmpL  12.)

The  space  of  the  arena  was  entirely  open,  ex-
I  cpt  that  perhaps  there  was,  in  the  centre,  an  altar
ot'  Diana,  or  Pluto,  or  of  Jupiter  Latiaris,  on  which,
it  is  inferred  from  some  passages  of  the  ancient
authors,  that  a  bestiarius  was  sacrificed  at  the  open-
ing of  the  games  ;  but  the  evidence  is  very  slight.
( Lips,  de  Amph.  4.)  There  were  four  principal
entrances  to  it,  at  the  extremities  of  the  axes  of
the  ellipse,  by  passages  which  led  directly  from
the  four  corresponding  arches  of  the  exterior:
there  were  also  minor  entrances  through  the  wall
of  the  podium.  There  is  a  difficulty  about  the
position  of  the  dens  of  the  wild  beasts.  The
rapidity  with  wliich  vast  numbers  of  animals  were
let  loose  into  the  arena  proves  that  the  dens  must
have  been  close  to  it.  The  spaces  under  the  seats
seem  to  have  been  devoted  entirely  to  the  passage
of  the  spectators,  with  only  the  exception  of  the
innermost  corridor,  the  entrances  from  which  to
the  arena  suggest  the  probability  that  it  was  sub-
sidiary to  the  arena  ;  but,  even  if  so,  it  was  pro-
bably used  rather  for  the  introduction  and  removal
of  the  animals,  than  for  their  safe  keeping.  Some
liave  supposed  dens  in  the  wall  of  the  podium  :
but  this  is  quite  insufficient.  In  the  year  1813,
the  arena  was  excavated,  and  extensive  substruc-
tions were  discovered,  which,  it  has  been  supposed,
were  the  dens,  from  which  the  animals  were  let
loose  upon  the  arena  through  trap-doors.  The
chief  difficulty  is  to  reconcile  such  an  arrange-
ment with  the  fact  that  the  aretia  was  frequently
flooded  and  used  for  a  naval  combat,  and  that  too
in  the  intervals  between  the  fights  of  Avild-beasts.
(Calpurn.  Eclog.  vii.  64,  73 :  the  whole  poem  is  a
very  interesting  description  of  the  games  of  the
amphitheatre.)  [Naumachia.]  All  that  can  be
said  with  any  approach  to  certainty  is,  that  these
substructions  were  either  dens  for  the  animals,  or
channels  for  water,  and  possibly  they  may  have
been  so  arranged  as  to  combine  both  uses,  though
it  is  difficult  to  underst<md  how  this  could  have
been  managed.  The  only  method  of  solving  the
difficulty  in  those  cases  in  which  a  naumachia  took
place  between  the  venationes,  appears  to  be,  to
assume  that  the  animals  intended  for  the  second
venatio  were  kept  in  the  innermost  colonnade,  or
in  dens  in  its  immediate  vicinity  during  the  nau-
machia ;  unless,  which  seems  to  us  quite  incredi-
ble, there  was  any  contrivance  for  at  the  same
time  admitting  the  air  to,  and  excluding  the  water
I'rom,  their  cells  beneath  the  arena.  In  the  am-
phitheatre at  Verona,  there  are  remains  of  channels
for  water  under  the  arena,  communicating  with  an
opening  in  its  centre  ;  but  some  antiquaries  believe
that  these  were  only  intended  for  draining  off  the
rain  water.

It  is  unnecessary  to  attempt  a  detailed  descrip-
tion of  the  statues  and  other  ornaments  with  which
the  amphitheatre  was  adorned  ;  but  the  velarium,
or  awning,  by  which  the  spectators  were  sheltered
from  the  sun,  requires  some  explanation,  which
will  be  found  under  Velum.  The  space  required
for  the  working  of  the  velarium,  and  the  height
necessary  for  keeping  it  from  bending  down  by
its  own  weight  so  low  as  to  obstruct  the  view  from
the  upper  benches,  are  probably  the  reasons  for
the  great  disproportion  between  the  height  of  the
upper  part  of  the  amphitheatre,  and  the  small
number  of  spectators  accomm.odated  in  that  part.


AMPHITHEATRUM.  89

The  luxurious  appliances  of  fountains  of  scented
water  to  refresh  the  spectators,  and  so  forth,  are
sufficiently  described  in  the  passage  already  quoted
from  Gibbon.     (Comp.  Lucan.  ix.  808).

III.  Other  Amphitheatres.  —  The  Flavian  am-
phitheatre, as  has  been  already  stated,  was,  from
the  time  of  its  erection,  the  only  one  in  Rome  ;
for  the  obvious  reason  that  it  was  sufficient  for  the
whole  population.  The  little  Amphitlieairum  Cas-
trense  was  probably  only  intended  for  the  soldiers
of  the  guard,  who  amused  themselves  there  with
fights  of  gladiators.  But  in  the  provincial  cities,
and  especially  the  colonies,  there  were  many  am-
phitheatres. Indeed,  it  is  not  a  little  interesting
to  observe  the  contrast  between  the  national  tastes
of  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  which  is  indicated  by
the  remains  of  theatres  in  the  colonies  of  the
former,  and  of  amphitheatres  in  those  of  the  latter.
The  immense  expense  of  their  construction  would,
however,  naturally  prevent  the  erection  of  many
such  buildings  as  the  Colisaeum.  (Cassiod.  jEjo.
V.  42.)  The  provincial  amphitheatres  were,  pro-
bably, like  the  earlier  ones  at  Rome  itself,  gene-
rally built  of  wood,  such  as  those  at  Placentia
and  Fidenae,  already  mentioned.  Of  these  wooden
amphitheatres  there  are  of  course  no  remains  ;
but  in  several  of  the  larger  cities  of  the  Roman
empire  there  are  important  ruins  of  large  am-
phitheatres of  stone.  The  principal  are  those  at
Verona,  Paestum,  Pompeii,  and  Capua,  in  Italy  ;
at  Nimes,  Aries,  and  Frejus,  in  France  ;  at  Pola,
in  Istria  ;  at  Syracuse,  Catania,  and  some  other
cities  in  Sicily.  They  are  all  constructed  on  the
same  general  principles  as  the  Colisaeum,  from
which,  again,  they  all  differ  by  the  absence  of«
the  outermost  corridor  ;  and,  consequently,  their
height  could  not  have  exceeded  three  stories  ;
while  some  of  them  an\j  had  two.  Of  the  Vero-
nese amphitheatre,  the  outer  wall  and  colonnade
are  entirely  gone,  excepting  four  arches  ;  but  the
rest  of  the  building  is  almost  perfect.  When
complete,  it  had  seventy-two  arches  in  the  outer
circle,  and,  of  course,  the  same  number  of  radiating
walls,  with  their  passages  and  staircases ;  the
lengths  of  the  axes  of  the  outer  ellipse  were  500
and  404  feet,  those  of  the  arena,  242  and  146.
It  was  probably  built  under  Domitian  and  Nerva.
(Maffei,  Verona  Illustrata.)  The  next  in  import-
ance is  that  at  Nimes,  the  outer  dimensions  of
which  are  computed  at  434  by  340  feet.  "  The
exterior  wall,  which  is  nearly  perfect,  consists  of
a  ground  story  and  upper  story,  each  pierced  with
sixty  arches,  and  is  surmounted  by  an  attic.  Its
height,  from  the  level  of  the  ground,  is  above  70
English  feet.  The  lower  or  ground  story  is
adorned  Avith  pilasters,  and  the  upper  with  Tuscan
or  Doric  columns.  The  attic  shows  the  holes
destined  to  receive  the  posts  on  which  was  stretched
the  awning  that  covered  the  amphitheatre.  The
rows  of  seats  are  computed  to  have  been  originally
32  in  number.  There  were  foiu-  principal  en-
trances. The  amphitheatre  has  been  computed  to
hold  17,000  persons:  it  was  built  with  great
solidity,  without  cement."  (Pen.  Cyclop,  art.
Nimes.)  That  at  Aries  was  three  stories  high,
and  has  the  peculiarity  of  being  built  on  uneven
ground,  so  that  the  lowest  story  is,  for  the  most
part,  below  the  level  of  the  surface,  and  the  prin-
cipal entrances  are  on  the  second  story.  (For  a
detailed  description,  see  Guis,  Descii}tion  de
rAmphitheatre  d'ArlcSf   1665;  and  Pen,  Cyclop,


90


AMPHORA.


art.  Aries.)  Both  these  amphitheatres  belong  pro-
bably to  the  time  of  the  Antonines.  (Maffei,  de
Amph.  Gall.)  The  amphitheatre  at  Pola  stands
on  the  side  of  a  hill,  and  is  higher  on  one  side  than
on  the  other.  There  is  little  to  remark  respecting
the  other  amphitheatres,  except  that  a  fragment  of
an  inscription,  foimd  in  that  at  Capua,  informs  us
that  it  was  built  under  Hadrian,  at  the  cost  of
the  inhabitants  of  the  city,  and  was  dedicated  by
Antoninus  Pius  ;  and,  concerning  that  of  Pompeii,
that  the  earthquake,  which  preceded  the  eruption
by  which  the  city  was  buried,  injured  the  amphi-
theatre so  much,  that  antiquarians  have  been  dis-
appointed in  looking  for  any  new  information  from
it  ;  there  is  an  excellent  description  of  it  in  the
work  entitled  Pompeii,  vol.  i.  c.  9.  There  are  traces
of  amphitheatres  of  a  ruder  kind,  chiefly  of  earth,
in  various  parts  of  our  own  country,  as  at  Dor-
chester, Silchester,  Caerleon,  and  Rednith.

IV.  Uses  of  tlie  A  mphitlieatre.  —  This  part  of
the  subject  is  treated  of  under  Gladiatores,
Naumachia,  and  Venationks.  This  is  not  the
place  to  discuss  the  influence  of  the  spectacles  of
the  amphitheatre  on  the  character  and  destinies
of  the  Roman  people  :  some  good  remarks  on  the
subject  will  be  found  in  the  Library  of  Entertain-
ing Knowledge.^  Menageries.,  vol.  ii.  c.  12.  [P.  S.]
AMPHOMO'SIA.  [Amphioricia.]
AM'PHORA  {a/xcpopsiis,  old  form  afKpKpopevs,
Hom.  //.  xxiii.  107  ;  Od.  x.  164,  et  alih.  ;  Scliol.
in  Apoll.  Rhod.  iv.  1187  ;  Simon,  in  Anth.  Pal.
xiii.  19).  A  lai'ge  vessel,  which  derived  its  name
from  its  being  made  with  a  handle  on  each  side  of
the  neck  (from  afxtpi,  on  both  sides,  and  <p4pca  to
carry),  whence  also  it  was  called  diota,  that  is,  a
vessel  with  two  ears  (Sicaros,  dluTos  crdfxvos  or
koZktkos,  Plat.  Hipp.  Maj.  p.  288,  d.  ;  Ath.  xi.
p.  473  ;  Moeris  s.  v.  afi(popea  ;  Hor.  Carm.  i.  9.
8).  The  form  and  size  varied,  but  it  was  generally
made  tall  and  narrow,  and  terminating  in  a  point,
which  could  be  let  into  a  stand  or  into  the  ground,
to  keep  the  vessel  upright ;  several  amphorae  have
been  found  in  this  position  in  the  cellars  at  Pom-
peii. The  following  cut  represents  amphorae  from
the  Townley  and  Elgin  collections  in  the  British
Museum.


AMPHORA.

The  usual  material  of  the  amphora  was  earthen-
ware (Hor.  de  Ar.  Poet.  21),  whence  it  was  also
called  testa  {Carm.  i.  20.  2)  :  but  Homer  mentions
them  of  gold  and  of  stone  {II.  xxiii.  92  ;  Od.  xxiv.
74,  xiii.  105)  :  and  in  later  times  glass  amphorae
were  not  uncommon  (Petron.  34)  ;  several  have
been  found  at  Pompeii :  Nepos  mentions,  as  a  great
rarity,  amphorae  of  onyx,  as  large  as  Chian  cadi
{ap.  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvi.  7.  s.  12).  The  amphora
was  often  made  without  handles.  The  name  of
the  maker,  or  of  the  place  of  manufacture,  was  some-
times stamped  upon  them  :  this  is  the  case  with
two  in  the  Elgin  collection,  Nos.  238  and  244.
[Fictile.]

Amphorae  were  used  for  the  preservation  of
various  things  which  required  careful  keeping,
such  as  wine,  oil,  honey,  grapes,  olives,  and
other  fruits  (Horn.  R.  xxiii.  170  ;  Cato,  R.  R.  x.
2  ;  Colum.  R.R.  xii.  16,  47  ;  Hor.  Epod.  ii.  15  ;
Cic.  c.  Verr.  iv.  74);  for  pickled  meats  (Xen.  Anab.
V.  4.  §  28)  ;  and  for  molten  gold  and  lead  (Herod,
iii.  QQ  ;  Nepos,  Hann.  9).  There  is  in  the  British
Museum  a  vessel  resembling  an  amphora,  which
contains  the  fine  African  sand  used  by  the  athle-
tao.  It  was  found,  with  seventy  others,  in  the
baths  of  Titus,  in  1772.  Respecting  the  use  of
the  amphora  in  the  streets  of  Rome,  see  Petron.
70,  79  ;  Propert.  iv.  5.  73  ;  Macrob.  Sat.  ii.  12  ;
and  the  commentators  on  Lucretius,  iv.  1023.
Homer  and  Sophocles  mention  amphorae  as  used
for  cinerary  urns  {R.  xxiii.  91,  92  ;  Soph.  Fr.
303,  Dind.)  ;  and  a  discovery  was  made  at  Salona,
in  1825,  which  proves  that  they  were  used  as
coflins  :  the  amphora  was  divided  in  half  in  the
direction  of  its  length  to  receive  the  corpse,  and
the  two  halves  were  put  together  again  and  buried
in  the  earth :  the  skeletons  were  found  still  entire.
(Steinbiichel,  Alterthum.  p.  67.)  Amphorae  of  par-
ticular kinds  were  used  for  various  other  pur-
poses, such  as  the  amphora  nasiterna  for  irrigation
(Cato,  R.  R.  11.  §  3),  and  the  ampliora  spaHea,
which  was  perhaps  a  wicker  amphora  for  gather-
ing grapes  in.     {Ibid.  §  2.)

The  most  important  employment  of  the  amphora
was  for  the  preservation  of  wine  :  its  use  for  this
purpose  is  fully  described  imder  Vinum.  The
following  woodcut,  taken  from  a  painting  on  the
wall  of  a  house  at  Pompeii,  represents  the  mode  of
filling  the  amphora  from  a  wine-cart.


There  is  an  interesting  account  of  the  use  of
the  amphora  among  the  Egyptians,  in  Sir  G.  Wil-
kinson's Ancient  Egyptians,  vol.  iL  pp.  157 — 160.


AMPYX.

The  name  amphora  was  also  applied  both  by
the  Greeks  and  the  Romans  to  a  definite  measure
of  capacity,  which,  however,  was  diiferent  among
the  two  peoples,  the  Roman  amphora  being  only
two-thirds  of  the  Greek  afj.(popevs.  In  both  cases
the  word  appears  to  be  an  abbreviation,  the  full
phrase  being  in  Greek  a/xcpopevs  fM€Tpr]r-i}5  {the
standard  ampJiora),  and  in  Latin  ampJiora  qua-
drantal  {Hie  cubic  amphora).  Respecting  the  mea-
sures themselves,  see  Metretes,  Quadrantal.
At  Rome  a  standard  amphoiu,  called  amphora
Capitolina^  was  kept  in  the  temple  of  Jupiter  on
the  Capitol  (Rhemn.  Fann.  de  Pond.  61  ;  Capitol.
Maxim.  4).  The  size  of  ships  was  estimated  by
amphorae  (Cic  ad  Fam.  xii.  15  ;  Liv.  xxi.  63)  ;
and  the  produce  of  a  vineyard  was  reckoned  by
the  number  of  amphorae.,  or  of  cuhi  (of  twenty
amphorae  each),  which  it  yielded.  [P-S.]

AMPLIA'TIO.  [Judicium.]
AMPULLA  {\T]Kveos,  fioix€v\ios\  a  bottle,
usually  made  either  of  glass  or  earthenware,  rarely
of  more  valuable  materials.  Bottles  both  of  glass
and  earthenware  are  preserved  in  great  quantities
in  our  collections  of  antiquities,  and  their  forms
are  very  various,  though  always  narrow-mouthed,
and  generally  more  or  lass  approaching  to  globular.
From  their  round  and  swollen  shape,  Horace  ap-
plies the  word,  as  the  Greeks  did  X^fcu0os,  to
indicate  grand  and  turgid,  but  empty,  language.
(Hor.  Ep.  i.  3.  14,  de  Ar.  Poet.  97.)  Bottles  were
used  for  holding  all  kinds  of  liquids,  and  are  men-
tioned especially  in  connection  with  the  bath.
Every  Roman  took  with  him  to  the  bath  a  bottle
of  oil  {ampulla  olearia\  for  anointing  the  body
after  bathing,  and  as  such  bottles  frequently  con-
tained perfumed  oils  we  read  of  ampullae  cosmianae.
(Mart  iii.  82.  26.)  A  bottle  of  this  kind  is  figured
under  Balneum.

The  dealer  in  bottles  was  called  ampullarius.,
and  part  of  his  business  was  to  cover  them  with
leather  (corium).  A  bottle  so  covered  was  called
ampulla  rubida.  (Plant.  Rod.  iii.  4.  51,  Stich.  ii.  1.
77,  compared  with  Festus,  «.  v.  Rubida.)

AMPYX,  AMPYCTER  (&fnrv^,  annvicr-f^p),
called  by  the  Romans  frontale,  was  a  broad  band
or  plate  of  metal,  which  Greek  ladies  of  rank  wore
upon  the  forehead  as  part  of  the  head-dress.  {II.
xxii.  468—470  ;  Aeschyl.  Supp.  431  ;  Theocr.  i.
33.)  Hence  it  is  attributed  to  the  female  divinities,
Artemis  wears  a  frontal  of  gold  {xpvcriav  &fjLTn)Ka,
Eurip.  Hec.  464)  ;  and  the  epithet  xp^'^'aMTu/ces  is
applied  by  Homer,  Hesiod,  and  Pindar  to  the
Muses,  the  Hours,  and  the  Fates.  From  the  ex-
pression rau  KvavifxirvKa  &f)€av  in  a  fragment  of
Pindar,  we  may  infer  that  this  ornament  was
sometimes  made  of  blue  steel  (juvavos)  instead  of
gold  ;  and  the  Scholiast  on  the  above  cited  passage
of  Euripides  asserts,  that  it  was  sometimes  en-
riched with  precious  stones.

The  frontal  of  a  horse  was  called  by  the  same
name,  and  was  occasionally  made  of  similar
rich  materials.  Hence,  in  the  Iliad,  the  horses
which  draw  the  chariots  of  Hera  and  of  Ares  are
called  xp^^^F^''^'^^^'

The  annexed  woodcut  exhibits  the  frontal  on  the
head  of  Pegasus,  taken  from  one  of  Sir  William
Hamilton's  vases,  in  contrast  with  the  coiTespond-
ing  ornament  as  shown  on  the  heads  of  two  females
in  the  same  collection.

Frontals  were  also  worn  by  elephants.     (Liv.
j       jcxxvii.  40.)     Hesychius  (s.  v.  AuSty  NtJ^y)  sup-


AMUSSIS.


yi


the  men  to  have  worn  frontals  in  Ly-
dia.  They  appear  to  have  been  worn  by  the
Jews  and  other  nations  of  the  East.  (Deut.  vi.  8,
xi.  18.)  [J.Y.]

AMULE'TUM  {Trepiatrrov,  'rrepiafifji.a^  (pvAa-
Kri)piov),  an  amulet.  This  word  in  Arabic  (Hama-
let)  means  tliat  which  is  suspended.  It  was  probably
brought  by  Arabian  merchants,  together  with  the
articles  to  which  it  was  applied,  when  they  were
imported  into  Europe  from  the  East.  It  first  occurs
in  the  Natural  History  of  Pliny.

An  amulet  was  any  object  —  a  stone,  a  plant,
an  artificial  production,  or  a  piece  of  writing  —
which  was  suspended  from  the  neck,  or  tied  to
any  part  of  the  body,  for  the  purpose  of  counteract-
ing poison,  curing  or  preventing  disease,  warding
off  the  evil  eye,  aiding  women  in  childbirth,  or
obviating  calamities  and  securing  advantages  of
any  kind.

Faith  in  the  virtues  of  amulets  was  almost  uni-
versal in  tlie  ancient  world,  so  that  the  whole  art
of  medicine  consisted  in  a  very  considerable  degree
of  directions  for  their  application  ;  and  in  propor-
tion to  the  quantity  of  anmlets  preserved  in  our
collections  of  antiquities,  is  the  frequent  mention  of
them  in  ancient  treatises  on  natural  history,  on  the
practice  of  medicine,  and  on  the  virtues  of  plants
and  stones.  Some  of  the  amulets  in  our  museums
are  merely  rough  unpolished  fragments  of  such
stones  as  amber,  agate,  cornelian,  and  jasper;
others  are  wrought  into  the  shape  of  beetles,  quad-
rupeds, eyes,  fingers,  and  other  members  of  the
body.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  selection
of  stones  either  to  be  set  in  rings,  or  strung  to-
gether in  necklaces,  was  often  made  with  reference
to  their  reputed  virtues  as  amulets.  (Plin.  H.  N.
XXV.  9.  s.  67,  xxix.  4.  s.  19,  xxx.  10.  s.  24.,  xxxvii.
8.  s.  37.)     [Fascinus.]  [J.  Y.]

AMUSSIS  or  AMUSSIUM,  a  carpenter's
and  mason's  instrument,  the  use  of  which  was  to
obtain  a  true  plane  surface  ;  but  its  construction
is  difficult  to  make  out  from  the  statements  of  the
ancient  writers.  It  appears  clearly  from  Vitruvius
(i.  6.  §  6)  that  it  was  different  from  the  regtda
(straight  rule),  and  from  the  liheUa  (plumbline  or
square),  and  that  it  was  used  for  obtaining  a  truer
surface,  whether  horizontal  or  perpendicular,  than
those  two  instruments  together  would  give.  It  is
defined  by  the  grammarians  as  a  regula  or  tabula^
made  perfectly  plane  and  smooth,  and  used  for
making  work  level  and  for  smoothing  stones  {Regula
ad  quam  aliquid  exaequatur,  Festus,  s.  v. ;  amussis  est
aequamcntum  levigatum,  et  est  apud  fabros  tabula
quaedam,  qua  utuntur  ad  saxa  leviganda,  Varr.  ap.
Nan.  i.  28)  ;   and  another  grammarian  very  clearly


92


ANAKEIA.


describes  it  as  a  plane  surface,  covered  with  red
ochre,  which  was  placed  on  work,  in  order  to
test  its  smoothness,  which  it  of  course  did  by
leaving  the  mark  of  the  red  ochre  on  any  pro-
jections. (Ainussis  est  tahula  rubricata  quae  de-
mittitur  examinandi  operis  gratia^  an  rectum  opus
surgat,  Sisenna,  ap.  Charis.  ii.  p.  178,  Putsch).
There  was  also  a  difference  of  opinion  among  the
grammarians,  whether  the  amussis  was  only  an
instrument  for  trying  a  level,  or  a  tool  for  actually
making  one  (Festus,  s.  v.  Examussim).  The  amus-
sis was  made  sometimes  of  iron  (Fest.  ibid.),  and
sometimes  of  marble  (Vitriiv.  I.  c).  It  gives  rise
to  the  adverbs  amussim,  adamussim,  and  examus-
sim, meaning  with  perfect  regularity  and  exact-
ness,    (See  Forcellini,  Lexicon.)  [P.  S.]

AMU'SSIUM.     [Amussis.]

ANADE'MA.     [Mitra.]

ANADI'KIA  (avaSiKla).     [Apellatio.]

ANA'GLYPHA  or  ANAGLYPTA  {ai^d-
•yXv(pa,  dv6.y\vi:Ta),  chased  or  embossed  vessels
made  of  bronze  or  of  the  precious  metals,  which
derived  their  name  from  the  work  on  them  being
in  relief,  and  not  engraved.  (Plin.  H.  N,  xxxiii.
11.  s.  49  ;  Virg.  Aen.  v.  267  ;  Martial,  iv,  39  ;
Caelatura  ;  ToREUTicE.)  The  name  was  also
applied  to  sculptured  gems.  [P.  S.]

ANAGLYPTA.      [Anaglypha.]

ANAGNOSTAE,  also  called  Lectores,  were
tslaves,  who  were  employed  by  the  educated  Romans
in  reading  to  them  during  meals  or  at  other  times.
(Cic.  adAtt.\.V2;  Corn.  Nep.  AU.U;  Plin.  Ep.
i.  15,  iii.  5,  ix.  36.)

ANAGO'GES  DIKE'  {hvayuyris  S'lkv).  If
an  individual  sold  a  slave  Avho  had  some  secret
disease  —  such,  for  instance,  as  epilepsy — without
informing  the  purchaser  of  the  circumstance,  it
was  in  the  power  of  the  latter  to  bring  an  action
against  the  vendor  within  a  certain  time,  which
was  fixed  by  the  laws.  In  order  to  do  this,  he  had
to  report  (avdyeiv)  to  the  proper  authorities  the
nature  of  the  disease  ;  whence  the  action  was  called
avayuyns  SfwTj.  Plato  supplies  us  with  some  inform-
ation on  this  action ;  but  it  is  uncertain  whether
his  remarks  apply  to  the  action  which  was  brought
in  the  Athenian  courts,  or  to  an  imaginary  form  of
proceeding.  (Plat.  Leg.  xi.  p.  916  ;  Hesych,  s.  v.
apaywyf] :  Suid.  s.  v.  ivayuyi],  ivdy^aQai :  Meier,
Att.  Process,  p.  525.)

ANAGO'GIA  {avaydiyia),  a  festival  celebrated
at  Eryx,  in  Sicily,  in  honour  of  Aphrodite.  The
inhabitants  of  the  place  believed  that,  during  this
festival,  the  goddess  went  over  into  Africa,  and
that  all  the  pigeons  of  the  town  and  its  neigh-
bourhood likewise  departed  and  accompanied  her.
(Aelian,  Hist.  An.  iv.  2,  V.  H.  i.  14  ;  Athen.  ix.
p.  394.)  Nine  days  afterwards,  at  the  so-called
Karayujyia  (return),  one  pigeon  having  returned
and  entered  the  temple,  the  rest  followed.  This  was
the  signal  for  general  rejoicing  and  feasting.  The
Avhole  district  was  said  at  this  time  to  smell  of
butter,  which  the  inhabitants  believed  to  be  a
sign  that  Aphrodite  had  returned.  (Athen.  ix.
p.  395  ;  com  p.  K.  F.  Hermann,  T^hrb.  d.  gottes-
dienst.  Alterth.  d.  Griechen,  §  68.  n.  29.)       [L.  S.]

ANAKEIA  (avdK€ia)  or  ANAKEION  (di/cC-
Keiov),  a  festival  of  the  Dioscuri,  or  "AuaKzes,  as
they  were  called,  at  Athens.  (Hesych.  vol.  i.
p.  325  ;  Pollux,  i.  37.)  Athenaeus  (vi.  p.  235)
mentions  a  temple  of  the  Dioscuri  called  'Am/cetoj/,
at  Athens;  he  also  informs  us  (iv.  p.  137)  that


ANAKRISIS.

the  Athenians,  probably  on  the  occasion  of  this
festival,  used  to  prepare  for  these  heroes  in  the
Prytaneium  a  meal  consisting  of  cheese,  a  barley-
cake,  ripe  figs,  olives,  and  garlic,  in  remembrance
of  the   ancient   mode    of  living.      These    heroes
however,  received  the  most  distinguished  honours
in  the  Dorian  and  Achaean  states,  where  it  may
be  supposed  that  every  town  celebrated  a  festival
in  their  honour,  though  it  may  not  have  be(?n  under
the  name  of  di'o/ceia.     Pausanias  (x.  38.  3)  men-
tions a  festival  held  at  Amphissa,  called  that  of  the
avaKrwv  iraiScav :  but  adds  that  it  was  disputed
whether  they  were  the  Dioscuri,  the  Curetes,  or  the
Cabeiri.  (K.  F.  Hermann, Lehrb.  d.  gottesdiemt.  Al-
terth. d.  GriecJien,  §  62.  n.  27.)  [L.  S.]
ANAKEI'MENA  (auaK^ifxeva).    [Donaria.]
ANAKLETE'RIA   (avaKX-nrripia),  the   name
of  a  solemnity  at  which  a  young  prince  was  pro-i
claimed  king,  and  ascended  the  throne.    The  name
was  chiefly  applied  to  the  accession  of  the  Ptolemaic
kings  of  Egypt.     (Polyb.  Jieliq.  xviii.  38,  xxviii.
10.)     The   prince    went    to    Memphis,    and  was
there   adorned   by   the    priests    with    the   sacred
diadem,  and  led  into  the  temple  of  Phtha,  where
he  vowed  not  to  make  any  innovations  either  in
the  order  of  the  year  or  of  the  festivals.     He  then
carried  to  some  distance  the  yoke  of  Apis,  in  order
to  be  reminded  of  the   sufferings  of  -man.     Re-
joicings  and   sacrifices   concluded   the  solemnity.
(Diod.  Fragm.  lib.  xxx.)  [L.  S.]
ANAKLYPTE'RIA.     [Matrimonium.]
ANA'KRISIS     (oLPUKpiais),    the   preliminary
investigation  of  a  case  by  a  magistrate  or  archon,
before  it  was  brought  before  the  courts  of  justice
at  Athens.     For  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  whe-
ther the  action  would  lie,  both  parties,  the  com-
plainant  and   defendant,   were    summoned,    sepa-
rately, and  if  either  of  them  did  not  appear  with  ■
out  a  formal  request  to  have  the  matter  delayed
(virwfxoa-ia),  he  tacitly  pleaded  guilty,  and  accord-
ingly lost  the  suit.    (Demosth.  c.  T/ieocr.  p.  1324.)
The  anacrisis  began  by  both  the  plaintiff  and  the
defendant  taking  an  oath,  the  former  thereby  at-
testing that  he  had  instituted  the  prosecution  with
truth  and  conscientioiisness  (irpowfioa-ia),  and  the
latter,  that  to  the  best  of  his  knov/ledge  he  was
innocent  (avTWfxocrla).  (Timaeus,  Lex.  Flat.  p.  38,
with  Ruhnken's  note  ;  Diog.  Laert.  ii.  40  ;  Plat.
Apol.  Socr.  3.)     It  was  further  promised  by  both,
that    the    subsequent    prosecution    and    defence
should   be   conducted   with  fairness  and  justice.
(Harpocrat.,    Suid.,    Hesych.    s.  v.    apruixoala :
Pollux,  viii.    122.)      If  the   defendant   did   not
bring  forward  any  objection  to  the  matter  being
brought  before  a  court  of  justice,  the  proceeding
was  termed  evOvBiKia.  (Demosth.  c.  Fhorm.  p.  908,
c.   Steph.   p.  1103.)      Such   objections   might   be
raised  in  regard  to  the  incompetency  of  the  court
to  which  the  matter  was  to  be  referred,  or  in  regard
to  the  form  in  which  the  accusation  was  brought
forward,  and   the   like    (Lys.  c.  Fancl.   p.  732  ;
Pollux,  viii.  57)  ;  they  were  always  looked  upon
with   suspicion   (Demosth.  c.  Leoch.    p.   1097,  p.
Fhorm.  p.  944)  ;  but,  nevertheless,  they  were  not
unfrequently  resorted  to  by  defendants,  either  in
the  form  of  a  dia/xaprvpla,  or  that  of  a  irapaypa<pi\.
In  the  case  of  a  dia/xaprvpia,  the  plaintiff  had  to
bring  forward   witnesses   to   show   that  the   ob-
jections raised  by  the  defendant  were  unfounded  ;
and  if  this  could  nqt  be  done,  the  defendant  had  a
right  to  brin^  witnesses  to  show  that  his  objections


ANAKRISIS.
were  founded  on  justice,  and  in  accordance  witli
the  laws.  But  each  of  the  litigant  parties  might
denounce  the  witnesses  of  his  opponent  as  false
Avitnesses,  and  thus  a  secondary  lawsuit  might  be
interwoven  with  the  principal  one.  If  the  Siafxap-
Tvpia  was  resorted  to  in  a  civil  case,  the  party  who
made  use  of  it  had  to  deposit  a  sum  of  money
(■!rapaKaTa€o\7}),  and  when  the  plaintiff  lost  his
suit,  he  had  to  pay  to  the  defendant  a  fine  for
having  raised  an  accusation  without  foundation.
In  lawsuits  about  the  succession  to  the  property  of
a  person,  the  SiafiapTvpia  was  the  only  form  in
which  objections  could  be  raised.  (Bekker,
Anecdot.  p.  236.)  The  irapaypacpi]  was  an  ob-
jection in  writing,  which  was  made  by  the  de-
fendant, Avithout  his  employing  any  witnesses,
and  which  was  decided  upon  in  court ;  and  in
this,  also,  the  loser  had  to  pay  a  fine  to  the  party
that  gained  the  suit.  (Pollux,  viii.  58.)  When
the  plaintiff  gained  his  case,  the  prosecution  pro-
ceeded in  its  regular  course.  The  avTiypa(p'f],
however,  might  be  something  more  than  a  mere
objection,  inasmuch  as  the  defendant  might  turn
against  the  plaintiff,  and  raise  an  accusation  against
him.  Such  an  accusation  very  commonly  con-
sisted in  the  defendant  charging  his  accuser  with
having  no  right  to  claim  the  privileges  of  an
Athenian  citizen,  in  consequence  of  which  the
latter  was  prevented  from  exercising  those  privi-
leges until  he  had  established  his  claims  to  them.
I'his  kind  of  avriypacpi]  was  frequently  a  mere
device  to  annoy  the  plaintiff.

These  are,  in  general,  the  proceedings  in  the
avoLKpicris :  and  from  what  thus  took  place,  it  is
clear  that  the  main  part  of  the  evidence  on  both
sides  was  brought  out  in  the  avaKpiais,  and  at  the
regular  trial  in  court  the  main  object  was  to  work
upon  the  minds  of  the  judges  through  the  in-
fluence of  the  orators,  with  reference  to  the  evi-
dence brought  out  in  the  avaKpiais.  The  latter,
therefore,  consisted  of  the  simple  evidence  which
required  no  oratorical  discussion,  and  which  was
contained, —  1.  in  laws  ;  2.  in  documents  ;  3.  in
the  atatenicnt  of  free  witnesses  ;  4.  in  the  state-
ment of  slaves  ;  and  5.  in  oaths.  In  all  these
kinds  of  evidence,  one  party  might  have  recourse
to  the  Trp6K\r](ns,  that  is,  call  upon  the  other
party  to  bring  forward  such  other  evidence  as  was
not  already  given.  (Demosth.  c.  Steph.  p.  1006,
c.  T/ieocr.  p.  987,  c.  Pantaen.  p.  978.)  There  was,
however,  no  strict  obligation  to  comply  with  such
a  demand  (Demosth.  c.Olymp.  p.  1181),  and  in
certain  cases  the  narty  called  upon  might,  in  ac-
cordance with  established  laws,  refuse  to  comply
with  the  demand  ;  for  instance,  persons  belonging
to  the  same  family  could  not  be  compelled  to  ap-
pear as  witnesses  against  one  another.  (Demosth.
t'.  Tim.  p.  1195.)  But  if  the  reading  of  a  docu-
ment, throwing  light  upon  the  point  at  issue,  was
refused,  the  other  party  might  bring  in  a  SiKij  iis
ifjL(pava}u  KaTaaraaip.

In  regard  to  the  laws  which  either  party  might
adduce  in  its  support,  it  must  be  observed,  that
copies  of  them  had  to  be  read  in  the  anacrisis,
since  it  would  have  been  difficult  for  any  magis-
gistrate  or  judge  to  fix,  at  once,  upon  the  law  or
laws  bearing  upon  the  question  at  issue.  In  what
manner  the  authorities  were  enabled  to  insure
faithful  and  correct  copies  being  taken  of  the  laws,
is  not  known  ;  but  it  is  highly  probable  that  any
one  who  took  a  copy  in  the  archives,  had  to  get


ANAKRISIS.  «>3

the  signature  of  some  public  officer  or  scribe   to
attest  the  correctness  of  the  copy.

Other  legal  documents,  such  as  contracts  (aiv-
eriKai,  (Tvyypacpai),  wills,  books  of  accounts,  and
other  records  (Demosth.  p.  Phonn.  p.  950),  not
only  required  the  signature  and  seal  of  the  party
concerned,  but  their  authenticity  had  to  be  attested
by  witnesses.     (Demosth.  c.  Onet  p.  869).

Evidence  {fj.apTvpia)  was  given  not  only  by  free-
born  and  grown-up  citizens,  but  also  by  strangers
or  aliens  (Demosth.  c.  Lacrit.  pp.  927,  929,  930,
937),  and  even  from  absent  persons  evidence
might  be  procured  (iKixapTvpia^  Demosth.  c.  Steph.
p.  1130  ;  Pollux,  viii.  36),  or  a  statement  of  a
deceased  person  might  be  referred  to  {uKoy^v
fxaprvpetv,  Demosth.  c.  Steph.  p.  1130,  c.  Leoch.
p.  1097).  If  any  one  was  called  upon  to  bear
witness  (KXrjTev^iv),  he  could  not  refuse  it;  and
if  he  refused,  he  might  be  compelled  to  pay  a  fine
of  1000  drachmae  (Demosth.  de  Fals.  Leg.  pp.  396,
403  ;  Aeschin.  c.  Timocr.  p.  71),  imless  he  could
establish  by  an  oath  (i^co/jLoaia),  that  he  was
unable  to  give  his  evidence  in  the  case.  Any  one
who  had  promised  to  bear  Avitness,  and  afterwards
failed  to  do  so,  became  liable  to  the  action  of  SUri
XeiTToixaprvpiov  or  fi\d§r]s.  The  evidence  of  an
avowed  friend  or  enemy  of  either  party  might  be
rejected.  (Aeschin.  c.  Timocr.  p.  72.)  All  evi-
dence Avas  either  taken  down  in  writing  as  it  was
given  by  the  Avitnesses,  or  in  case  of  its  having
been  sent  in  previously  in  writing,  it  was  read
aloud  to  the  Avitness  for  his  recognition,  and  he
had  generally  to  confirm  his  statement  by  an  oath.
(Demosth.  c.  Steph.  pp.  1115,  11 19,  1130,  c.  Con.
p.  1269  ;  comp.  Diog.  Laert.  iv.  7.)  The  testi-
mony of  slaA^es  Avas  valid  only  Avhen  extorted  by
instruments  of  torture,  to  which  either  one  party
might  offer  to  expose  a  slave,  or  the  other  might
demand  the  torture  of  a  slave.  (Demosth.  c.  Ni-
costr.  p.  1254,  c.  Aphob.  p.  855,  c.  Onet.  p.  874,
c.  Steph.  p.  1135.)

A  distinct  oath  Avas  required  in  cases  where
there  Avere  no  Avitnesses  or  documents,  but  it  has
been  remarked  above  that  oaths  Avere  also  taken  to
confirm  the  authenticity  of  a  document,  or  the  truth
of  a  statement  of  a  witness.     [Jusjurandum.J

If  the  evidence  produced  Avas  so  clear  and  sa-
tisfactory, that  there  A\'as  no  doubt  as  to  who  Avas
right,  the  magistrate  could  decide  the  case  at
once,  Avithout  sending  it  to  be  tried  in  a  court.
During  the  anacrisis  as  well  as  afterwards  in  the
regular  court,  the  litigant  parties  might  settle
their  dispute  by  an  amicable  arrangement.  (De-
mosth. c.  Theocrin.  p.  1323,  e.  Mid.  p.  529  ;  Aeschin.
de  Fals.  Leg.  p.  269  ;  Pollux,  viii.  143.)  But  if
the  plaintiff,  in  a  public  matter,  dropped  his  accu-
sation, he  became  liable  to  a  fine  of  1000  drach-
mae, and  inciuTcd  partial  atimia  ;  in  later  times,
however,  this  punishment  Avas  not  always  inflicted,
and  in  civil  cases  the  plaintiff"  only  lost  the  sum
of  money  Avhich  he  had  deposited.  When  the
parties  did  not  come  to  an  imderstanding  during
the  anacrisis,  all  the  various  kinds  of  evidence
brought  forward  were  put  into  a  vessel  called
^x^vos^  Avhich  Avas  sealed  and  entrusted  to  some
officer  to  be  kept  until  it  Avas  wanted  on  the  day
of  trial.  (Demosth.  c.  Ohjmp.  p.  1173  ;  Schol.  ad
Aristoph.  Vesp.  1427.)  The  period  between  the
conclusion  of  the  preliminary  investigation  and  imtil
the  matter  was  brought  before  a  court,  Avas  con-
sidered to  belong  to  the  anacrisis,  and  that  period


!)4


ANAXAGOREIA.


was  differently  fixed  by  law,  according  to  the
nature  of  the  charge.  In  cases  of  murder,  the
period  was  never  less  than  three  months,  and  in
others  the  trial  in  court  commenced  on  the
thirtieth  day  after  the  beginning  of  the  anacrisis,
as,  e,  g.  in  the  Si'/cai  ipaviKal,  eixiropiKal,  fMeraWi-
Kai,  and  irpoiKSs  (Harpocrat.  s.  v.  e/j.ix7)voi  BiKai  ;
Pollux,  viii.  63,  101),  and  the  day  fixed  for  the
trial  was  called  Kvpia  rov  vSfxov.  (Demosth.  c.
Mid.  p.  544.)  In  other  cases,  the  day  was  fixed
by  the  magistrate  who  conducted  the  anacrisis.
But  either  party  might  petition  for  a  postponement
of  the  trial,  and  the  opposite  party  might  oppose
the  petition  by  an  oath  that  the  ground  on  which
the  delay  was  sought  for,  was  not  valid,  or  un-
satisfactor}\  (Harpocrat.  s.v.a.vQvTV(afio(Tia  ;  Pollux,
viii.  60.)  Through  such  machinations,  the  deci-
sion of  a  case  might  be  delayed  to  the  detriment  of
justice  ;  and  the  annals  of  the  Athenian  courts  are
not  wanting  in  numerous  instances,  in  which  the
ends  of  justice  were  thwarted  in  this  manner  for  a
number  of  years.  (Demosth.  c.  Mid.  p.  541  ;
comp.  Meier  and  Schomann,  DerAtt.  Proc.  p.  622  ;
C.  F.  Hermann,  Griech.  StaatsaWi.  §  141  ;  Scho-
man,  Antiquit.  Jur.  puhl.  Graec.  p.  279  ;  Wachs-
muth,  Hellen.  Alterthumskunde,  ii.  p.  262,  &c.
2nd  edit.)  The  examination  which  an  archon  un-
derwent before  he  entered  on  his  office,  was  like-
wise called  avaKpiais.  [L.  S.]

ANALEMMA  (dud\r}iJiixa),  in  its  original
meaning,  is  any  thing  raised  or  supported ;  it  is
applied  in  the  plural  to  walls  built  on  strong
foundations.  (Hesych.  Suid.  s.  v.)  Vitruvius  uses
the  word  to  describe  an  instrument  which,  by
marking  the  lengths  of  the  shadows  of  a  fixed
gnomon,  showed  the  different  altitudes  of  the  sun
at  the  different  periods  of  the  year.  (Vitruv.  ix.
7,  8.  8.  6,  7,  Schneider.)  It  must  not  be  con-
foimded  with  the  modern  analemma,  which  is  much
more  complicated  and  precise  than  the  instrument
described  by  Vitruvius.  [P.  S.]

ANAPIE'SMATA.     [Theatrum.]

ANATHE'MATA  {avae-i^fxara.)    [Donaria.]

ANATOCISMUS.     [Fenus.]

ANAUMACHIOU  GRAPHE'  {kvavixaxiov
'ypa<p'i]),  was  an  impeachment  of  the  trierarch
who  had  kept  aloof  from  action  while  the  rest
of  the  fleet  was  engaged.  From  the  personal  na-
ture of  the  offence  and  the  punishment,  it  is
obvious  that  this  action  could  only  have  been  di-
rected against  the  actual  commander  of  the  ship,
whether  he  was  the  sole  person  appointed  to  the
office,  or  the  active  partner  of  the  perhaps  many
avvTiKfTLS.,  or  the  mere  contractor  {6  fiicrda)-
ffdixevos).  In  a  cause  of  this  kind,  the  strategi
would  be  the  natural  and  official  judges.  The
punishment  prescribed  by  law  for  this  offence
was  a  modified  atimia,  by  which  the  criminal  and
his  descendants  were  deprived  of  their  political
fiunchise ;  but,  as  we  learn  from  Andocides,  were
allowed  to  retain  possession  of  their  property.
(De  Myst.  p.  10.  22,  cd.  Steph.  ;  Petit  Leq.  Att.
p.  667.)  [J.  S.  M.]

ANAXAGOREIA  (ava^aySpeiu),  a  day  of
recreation  for  all  the  youths  at  Lampsacus,  which
took  place  once  every  year,  in  compliance,  it  was
said,  with  a  wish  expressed  by  Anaxagoras,  who,
after  being  expelled  from  Athens,  spent  the  re-
mainder of  his  life  here.  This  continued  to  be  ob-
served even  in  the  time  of  Diogenes  Laertius.
{Anaxag.  c.  10.)  [L.  S.j


ANGARIA.

ANCHISTEIA  (^ayxKrreia).     [Heres.]
ANCFLE.     [Salii.]
ANCILLA.     [Servus.]
A'NCORA.     [Navis.]
A'NKULE  iajKiK-n).     [Hasta.]
ANDABATAE.     [Gladiator.]
ANDREIA  (d^eTa).     [Syssitia.]
A'NDRIAS  (avdpias).     [Statuaria.]
ANDROGEO'NIA  CAvSpoyedlivia),  a  festival
with  games,  held  every  year  in  the  Cerameicus  at
Athens,  in  honour  of  the  hero  Androgens,  son  of
Minos,  who  had  overcome  all  his  adversaries  in  the
festive  games  of  the  Panathenaea,  and  was  after-
wards killed  by  his  jealous  rivals.     (Pans.  i.  27.
§  9  ;  Apollod.  iii.  15.  §  7  ;  Hygin.  Fab.  41 ;  Diod.
iv.  60,  61.)    According  to  Hesychius,  the  hero  also
bore  the  name  of  Eurygyes  (the  possessor  of  ex-
tensive lands),  and  under  this  title  games  were
celebrated  in  his  honour,  6   eTr'   Evpuyuri  ayoov.
(Hesych.  vol.  i.  p.  1332  ;  K.  F.  Hermann^  Goites-
dienst.  Alterth.  d.  Griechen,  §  62,  n.  22.       [L.  S.]

ANDROLE'PSIA  {avSpoK-nTpia  or  audpoAf]-
^lov),  a  legal  means  by  which  the  Athenians  were
enabled  to  take  vengeance  upon  a  community  in
which  an  Athenian  citizen  had  been  murdered.
For  when  the  state  or  city  in  whose  territory  the
murder  had  been  committed,  refused  to  bring  the
murderer  to  trial,  the  law  allowed  the  Athenians
to  take  possession  of  three  individuals  of  that
state  or  city,  and  to  have  them  imprisoned  at
Athens,  as  hostages,  until  satisfaction  was  given,
or  the  murderer  delivered  up,  and  the  property
found  upon  the  persons  thus  seized  was  confiscated.
(Demosth.  c.  Aristocr.  p.  647  ;  Harpocrat.  s.  v.  ;
Pollux,  viii,  40  ;  Suid.  and  Etym.  M.  s.  v.  ;
Bekker,  Anecdot.  p.  213.)  The  persons  entrusted
Avith  the  office  of  seizing  upon  the  three  hos-
tages, were  usuall}^  the  trierarchs,  and  the  com-
manders of  ships  of  war.  (Demosth.  De  Coron.
Trier,  p.  1232.)  This  Athenian  custom  is  analo-
gous to  the  clarigatio  of  the  Romans.  (Liv.  viii.
14.)  [L.  S.]

ANDRONFTIS.  [Domus,  Greek.]
ANGARI'A  (ayyapeia,  Hdt  ayyap-fjioy)  is  a
word  borrowed  from  the  Persians,  signifying  a
system  of  posting,  which  was  used  among  that
people,  and  which,  according  to  Xenophon,  was
established  by  Cyrus.  Horses  were  provided,  at
certain  distances,  along  the  principal  roads  of  the
empire  ;  so  that  couriers  {&yyapoi),  who  also,  of
course,  relieved  one  another  at  certain  distances,
could  proceed  without  interruption,  both  night  and
day,  and  in  all  weathers.  (Herod,  viii.  98  ;  iii.  126  ;
Xen.  Cyrop.  viii.  6.  §  1 7 ;  Suid.  s.  v.)  It  may  easily
be  supposed  that,  if  the  government  arrangements
failed  in  any  point,  the  service  of  providing  horses
was  made  compulsory  on  individuals  ;  and  hence
the  word  came  to  mean  compulsory  service  in  for-
warding royal  messages  ;  and  in  this  sense  it  was
adopted  by  the  Romans  under  the  empire,  and  is
frequently  found  in  the  Roman  laws.  The  Roman
angaria.,  also  called  angariarum  exhibitio  or  jorae-
statio^  included  the  maintenance  and  supply,  not
only  of  horses,  but  of  ships  and  messengers,  in  for-
warding both  letters  and  burdens  ;  it  is  defined  as
a  personate  munus ;  and  there  was  no  ground  of
exemption  from  it  allowed,  except  by  the  favour
of  the  emperor.  (Dig.  50.  tit.  4.  s.  18.  §§  4,  29  ;
tit  5.  8.  10, 11;  49,  tit  18.  s.  4.  §  1  ;  Cod.  Theod.
8.  tit.  5  ;  Cod.  Justin.  12.  tit  51.)

According  to  Suidas,  the  Persian  word  was  ori-


ANNULUS.

ginally  applied  to  any  bearers  of  burdens,  and
next,  to  compulsory  service  of  any  kind.  [P.  S.]
ANGIPORTUS,  or  ANGIPORTUM,  a  nar-
row lane  between  two  rows  of  houses  ;  such  a  lane
might  have  no  issue  at  all,  or  end  in  a  private
house,  so  as  to  be  what  the  French  call  a  cul-de-
sac,  or  it  might  tenninate  at  both  ends  in  some
public  street.  The  ancients  derived  the  word
from  angiistus  and  partus,  and  explain  it  as  mean-
ing, originally,  the  narrow  entrance  to  a  port.
(Fest.  p.  17.  ed.  Muller  ;  Varro,  De  L.  L.  v.  145,
■n.  41  ;  Ulpian,  in  Dig.  De  Signif.  Verb.  59.)  The
number  of  such  narrow  courts,  closes,  or  lanes  seems
to  have  been  considerable  in  ancient  Rome.  (Cic.
de  Div.  i.  32,  p.  Mil.  24,  ad  Heren.  iv.  51  ;
Plaut.  Pseud,  iv.  2.  6,  ap.  Non.  iii.  1  ;  Ter.
Adelph.ix.  2.  39  ;  Horat.  Carm.\.  25.  10  ;  Catull.
58.  4.)  [L.  S.]

ANGUSTUS  CLAVUS.  [Clavus.]
ANNA'LES  MA'XIMI.  [Pontifex.]
ANNO'NA  is  used  to  signify,  1.  The  produce
of  the  year  in  corn,  fruit,  wine,  &c.,and  hence,  2.
Provisions  in  general,  especially  the  com  which,  in
the  latter  years  of  the  republic,  was  collected  in
the  storehouses  of  the  state,  and  sold  to  the  poor  at
a  cheap  rate  in  times  of  scarcity  ;  and  which,  under
the  emperors,  was  distributed  to  the  people  gra-
tuitously, or  given  as  pay  and  rewards.       [CoN-

GIARIUM  ;     FrUMENTATIO  ;     PraEFECTUS     An-
NONAE.]  [P.  S.]

A'NNULUS  (Sa/CTJ^Aios),  a  ring.  Every  free-
man in  Greece  appears  to  have  used  a  ring  ;  and,
at  least  in  the  earliest  times,  not  as  an  ornament,
but  as  an  article  for  use,  as  the  ring  always  served
as  a  seal.  How  ancient  the  custom  of  wearing
rings  among  the  Greeks  was,  cannot  be  ascertained  ;
though  it  is  certain,  as  even  Pliny  {H.  N.  xxxiii.
4)  observes,  that  in  the  Homeric  poems  there  are
no  traces  of  it.  In  works  of  fiction,  however,  and
in  those  legends  in  which  the  customs  of  later  ages
are  mixed  up  with  those  of  the  earliest  times,  we
find  the  most  ancient  heroes  described  as  wearing
rings.  (Pans.  i.  17.  §  3,  x.  30.  §  2  ;  Eurip.  Iphig.
Aid.  154,  Hippol.  859.)  But  it  is  highly  probable
that  the  custom  of  wearing  rings  was  introduced
into  Greece  from  Asia,  where  it  appears  to  have
been  almost  universal.  (Herod,  i.  195  ;  Plat,  de
Re  Puhl.  ii.  p.  359.)  In  the  time  of  Solon  seal-
rings  {(r(ppay1^(:s\  as  well  as  the  practice  of  coun-
terfeiting them,  seem  to  have  been  rather  com-
mon, for  Diogenes  Laertius  (i.  57)  speaks  of  a  law
of  Solon  which  forbade  the  artist  to  keep  the  form
of  a  seal  (crcppayls)  which  he  had  sold.  (Instances
of  counterfeited  seals  are  given  in  Becker's  Chari-
Icles,  ii,  p.  217.)  Whether,  however,  it  was  cus-
tomary as  early  as  the  time  of  Solon  to  wear  rings
with  precious  stones  on  which  figures  were  en-
graved, may  justly  be  doubted  ;  and  it  is  much
more  probable  that  at  that  time  the  figures  were
cut  in  the  metal  of  the  ring  itself,  a  custom  which
was  never  abandoned  altogether.  Rings  without
precious  stones  were  called  6.i\n\^oi,  the  name  of  the
gem  being  i|/^</)os  or  (T<ppayis.  (Artemidor.  Oiieiro-
crit.  ii.  5.)  In  later  times  rings  were  worn  more
as  ornaments  than  as  articles  for  use,  and  persons
j  now  were  no  longer  satisfied  with  one,  but  wore
t  two,  three,  or  even  more  rings  ;  and  instances  are
r'-corded  of  those  who  regularly  loaded  their  hands
with  rings.  (Plat.  Hipp.  Min.  p.  368  ;  Aristoph.
Ecchs.  632,  Nub.  332,  with  the  Schol. ;  Dinarch.
in  Demosth.  p.  29  ;   Diog.   Laert,  v.  1.)     Greek


ANNULUS.


95


women  likewise  used  to  wear  rings,  but  not  so  fre-
quently as  men  ;  the  rings  of  women  also  appear
to  have  been  less  costly  than  those  of  men,  for
some  are  mentioned  which  were  made  of  amber,
ivory,  &c.  (Artemid.  I.  c.)  Rings  were  mostly
worn  on  the  fourth  finger  {Trapdfxcaos,  Plut.  Sym-
pos.  Fragm.  lib.  iv.  ;  Gellius,  x.  1 0).  The  Lace-
daemonians are  said  to  have  used  iron  rings  at  all
times.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii.  4.)  With  the  excep-
tion perhaps  of  Sparta,  the  law  does  not  appear  to
have  ever  attempted  in  any  Greek  state  to  counter-
act the  great  partiality  for  this  luxury  ;  and  no-
where in  Greece  does  the  right  of  wearing  a  gold
ring  appear  to  have  been  confined  to  a  particular
order  or  class  of  citizens.

The  custom  of  wearing  rings  was  believed  to
have  been  introduced  into  Rome  by  the  Sabines,
who  are  described  in  the  early  legends  as  wear-
ing gold  rings  Avith  precious  stones  {gemmati
annuli)  of  great  beauty.  (Liv.  i.  11  ;  Dionys.  ii.
38.)  Florus  (i.  5)  states  that  it  was  introduced
from  Etruria  in  the  reign  of  Tarquinius  Prisons,
and  Pliny  (I.  c.)  derives  it  from  Greece.  The
fact  that  among  the  statues  of  the  Roman  kings
in  the  capitol,  two,  Nuraa  and  Servius  Tullius,
were  represented  with  rings,  can  scarcely  be  ad-
duced as  an  argument  for  their  early  use,  as  later
artists  would  naturally  represent  the  kings  with
such  insignia  as  characterized  the  highest  magi-
strates in  later  times.  But  at  whatever  time
rings  may  have  become  customary  at  Rome,  thus
much  is  certain,  that  at  first  they  were  always  ot
iron,  that  they  were  destuied  for  the  same  purpose
as  in  Greece,  namely,  to  be  used  as  seals,  and  that
every  free  Roman  had  a  right  to  use  such  a  ring.
This  iron  ring  was  used  down  to  the  last  period
of  the  republic  by  such  men  as  loved  the  simplicity
of  the  good  old  times.  Marius  wore  an  iron  ring
in  his  triumph  over  Jugurtha,  and  several  noble
families  adhered  to  the  ancient  custom,  and  never
wore  gold  ones.     (Plin.  //.  N.  xxxiii.  6.)

When  senators  in  the  early  times  of  the  republic
were  sent  as  ambassadors  to  a  foreign  state,  they
wore  during  the  time  of  their  mission  gold  rings,
which  they  received  from  the  state,  and  which
Avere  perhaps  adorned  with  some  symbolic  repre-
sentation of  the  ]"epublic,  and  might  serve  as  a
state-seal.  But  ambassadors  used  gold  rings  only
in  public  ;  in  private  they  wore  their  iron  ones.
(Plin.  xxxiii.  4.)  In  the  course  of  time  it  be-
came customary  for  all  the  senators,  chief  magi-
strates, and  at  last  for  the  equites  also,  to  wear
a  gold  seal-ring.  (Liv.  ix.  7.  46,  xxvi.  36  ;  Cic.
c.  Verr.  iv.  25  ;  Liv.  xxiii.  12 ;  Flor.  ii.  6.)  This
right  of  wearing  a  gold  ring,  which  was  subse-
quently called  the  jus  annuli  aurei,  or  the  jus
annulorum,  remained  for  several  centuries  at  Rome
the  exclusive  privilege  of  senators,  magistrates,
and  equites,  while  all  other  persons  continued  to
use  iron  ones.  (Appian,  de  Reb.  Pun.  104.)  Ma-
gistrates and  governors  of  provinces  seem  to  have
had  the  right  of  conferring  upon  inferior  officers,  or
such  persons  as  had  distinguished  themselves,  the
privilege  of  wearing  a  gold  ring.  Verres  thus
presented  his  secretary  with  a  gold  ring  in  the
assembly  at  Syracuse.  (Cic.  c.  Verr.  iii.  76,  80,
ad  Fam.  x.  32  ;  Suet.  Goes.  39.)  During  the
empire  the  right  of  granting  the  annulus  aureus
belonged  to  the  emperors,  and  some  of  them  were
not  very  scrupulous  in  conferring  this  privilege.
Augustus  gave  it  to  Mena,  a  freedman,  and  to


9(?  ANNULUS.

Antonius  Musa,  a  physician.  (Dion  Cass,  xlviii.
48,  liii.  30.)  In  a.  d.  22  the  emperor  Tiberius
ordained  that  a  gold  ring  should  only  be  worn
by  those  ingenui  whose  fathers  and  grandfathers
liad  had  a  property  of  400,000  sestertia,  and  not
by  any  freedman  or  slave.  (PI in.  //.  A^.  xxxiii.  8.)
But  this  restriction  was  of  little  avail,  and  the
ambition  for  the  annul  us  aureus  became  greater
than  it  had  ever  been  before.  (Plin.  Epist.  vii.  26,
viii.  6  ;  Suet.  Galh.  12.  14  ;  Tacit.  Hist.  i.  13  ;
Suet.  Vitell.  12 ;  Stat.  Silv.  iii.  3.  143,  &c.)  The
emperors  Severus  and  Aurelian  conferred  the  right
of  wearing  gold  rings  upon  all  Roman  soldiers
(Herodian.  iii.  8  ;  Vopisc.  Aurel.  7)  ;  and  Jus-
tinian at  length  allowed  all  the  citizens  of  the  em-
pire, whether  ingenui  or  libertini,  to  wear  such
rings.

The  status  of  a  person  who  had  received  the  jus
.iiinuli  appears  to  have  differed  at  different  times.
During  the  republic  and  the  early  part  of  the  em-
pire the  jus  annuli  seems  to  have  made  a  person
ingenuus  (if  he  was  a  libertus),  and  to  have  raised
him  to  the  rank  of  cques,  provided  he  had  the
requisite  equestrian  census  (Suet.  Galb.  10,  14  ;
Tacit.  Hist.  i.  13,  ii.  57),  and  it  was  probably
jicvcr  granted  to  any  one  who  did  not  possess  this
census.  Those  who  lost  their  property,  or  were
found  gxiilty  of  a  criminal  offence,  lost  the  jus  an-
nuli. (Juv.  Sat.  xi.  42  ;  Mart.  viii.  5,  ii.  57.)
Afterwards,  especially  from  the  time  of  Hadrian,
the  privilege  was  bestowed  upon  a  great  many
frcedmen,  and  such  persons  as  did  not  possess  the
equestrian  census,  who  therefore  for  this  reason
alone  could  not  have  become  equites  ;  nay,  the  jus
annuli  at  this  late  period  did  not  even  raise  a
freedman  to  the  station  of  ingenuus :  he  only  be-
came, as  it  were,  a  half  ingenuus  (cjuasi  ingenuus)^
that  is,  he  was  entitled  to  hold  a  public  office,  and
might  at  any  future  time  be  raised  to  the  rank  of
cques.  (Jul.  Capitol.  Macrin.  4.)  The  Lex  Visel-
lia  (Cod.  9.  tit.  21)  pimished  those  freedmen,  who
sued  for  a  public  office  without  having  the  jus
annuli  aurei.  In  many  cases  a  libertus  might
through  the  jus  annuli  become  an  eques,  if  he  had
the  requisite  census,  and  the  princeps  allowed  it  ;
but  the  annulus  itself  no  longer  included  this
honour.  This  difference  in  the  character  of  the
annulus  appears  to  be  clear  also  from  the  fact,  tliat
women  received  the  jus  annuli  (Dig.  40.  tit.  10.
s.  4),  and  that  Alexander  Severus,  though  he
allowed  all  his  soldiers  to  wear  the  gold  ring,
yet  did  not  admit  any  freedmen  among  the  equites.
(  Lamprid.  Al.  Sev.  9.)  The  condition  of  a  libertus
Avho  had  received  the  jus  annuli  was  in  the  main
as  follows  :  —  Hadrian  had  laid  down  the  general
maxim,  that  he  should  be  regarded  as  an  ingenuus,
salro  jure  padroni.  (Dig.  40.  tit.  10.  s.  6.)  The
pjitronus  had  also  to  give  his  consent  to  his  freed-
man accepting  the  jus  annuli,  and  Commodus  took
the  annulus  away  from  those  who  had  received  it
without  this  consent.  (Dig.  40.  tit.  10.  s.  3.)  Hence
a  libertus  with  the  annulus  might  be  tortured,  if,
e.  g.  his  patron  died  an  unnatural  death,  as  in  case
of  such  a  libertus  dying,  his  patron  might  succeed
to  his  property.  The  freedman  had  thus  during
his  lifetime  only  an  imago  libertatis,  he  was  a
quasi  ingenuus  but  had  not  the  status  of  an  in-
genuus (Cod.  6.  tit.  8.  s.  2  ;  Dig.  40.  tit.  10.  s.  5),
and  he  died  quasi  libertus.  In  the  reign  of  Jus-
tinian these  distinctions  were  done  away  with.
Isidorus  (xix.  32)  is  probably  alluding  to  the  pe-


ANNULUS.

riod  preceding  the  reign  of  Justinian,  when  he
says,  that  freemen  wore  gold,  freedmen  silver,
and  slaves  iron  rings.

The  practical  purposes,  for  which  rings,  or  rather
the  figures  engraved  upon  them,  were  used  at  all
times,  were  the  same  as  those  for  which  we  use
our  seals.  Besides  this,  however,  persons,  when
they  left  their  houses,  used  to  seal  up  such  parts
as  contained  stores  or  valuable  things,  in  order  to
secure  them  from  thieves,  especially  slaves.  (Plat.
de  Leg.  xii.  p.  954  ;  Aristoph.  Thesmoph.  414,
&c.  ;  Plant.  Cas.  ii.  1.  1  ;  Cic.  ad  Fum.  xvi.  2G,
da  Orat.  ii.  Gl  ;  Mart.  ix.  88.)  The  ring  of  a  Ro-
man emperor  was  a  kind  of  state-seal,  and  the  em-
peror sometimes  allowed  the  use  of  it  to  such
persons  as  he  wished  to  be  regarded  as  his  repre-
sentiitives.  (Dion  Cass.  Ixvi.  2.)  The  keeping  of
the  imperial  seal-ring  was  entrusted  to  an  especial
officer  {c7^ra  annuli^  Just.  Hist,  xliii.  5).  The
signs  engraved  upon  rings  were  very  various,  as  we
may  judge  from  the  specimens  still  extant :  they
were  portraits  of  ancestors,  or  friends,  subjects  con-
nected with  the  mythology,  or  the  worship  of  the
gods  ;  and  in  many  cases  a  person  had  engraved
upon  his  seal  symbolical  allusions  to  the  real  or
mythical  history  of  his  family.  (Cic.  in  Catil.  iii.
5  ;  Val.  Max.  iii.  5.  1  ;  Cic.  de  Finih.  v.  1  ;  Suet.
Tib.  58.  63;  Plin.  //.  N.  ii.  7,  &c.)  Sulla
thus  wore  a  ring  with  a  gem,  on  which  Jugurtha
was  represented  at  the  moment  he  was  made
prisoner.  (Plin.  //.  N.  xxxvii.  4  ;  Plut.  Mar.  10.)
Pompey  used  a  ring  on  which  three  trophies  were
represented  (Dion  Cass,  xliii.  18),  and  Augustus
at  first  sealed  with  a  sphinx  afterwards  with  a
portrait  of  Alexander  the  Great,  and  at  last  with
his  own  portrait,  which  was  subsequently  done  by
several  emperors.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvii.  4  ;  Suet.
Aug.  50;  Dion  Cass.  Ii.  3  ;  Spartian.  Hadr.  26.)
The  principal  value  of  a  ring  consisted  in  the  gera
framed  in  it,  or  rather  in  the  workmanship  of  the
engraver.  The  stone  most  frequently  used  was
the  onyx  (crapSwros,  capSoVyl),  on  account  of  its
various  colotirs,  of  which  the  artists  made  the
most  skilful  use.  In  the  art  of  engraving  figures
upon  gems,  the  ancients  in  point  of  beauty  and
execution  far  surpass  every  thing  in  this  depart-
ment that  modern  times  can  boast  of.  The  ring
itself  (cr^ei/SoVT}),  in  which  the  gem  was  set,  was
likewise  in  many  cases  of  beautiful  workmanship.
The  part  of  the  ring  which  contained  the  gem  was
called  pala.  In  Greece  we  find  that  some  persons
fond  of  show  used  to  wear  hollow  rings,  the  inside
of  which  was  filled  up  with  a  less  valuable  sub-
stance.    (Artemid.  I.  c.)

With  the  increasing  love  of  luxury  and  show,
the  Romans,  as  well  as  the  Greeks,  covered"  their
fingers  with  rings.  Some  persons  also  wore  rings
of  immoderate  size,  and  others  used  different  rings
for  summer  and  winter.  (Quinctil.  xi.  3  ;  Juv.  i.
28  ;  Mart.  xi.  59,  xiv.  123.)

Much  superstition  appears  to  have  been  con-
nected with  rings  in  ancient  as  well  as  in  more
modern  times  ;  but  this  seems  to  have  been  the
case  in  the  East  and  in  Greece  more  than  at  Rome.
Some  persons  made  it  a  lucrative  trade  to  sell
rings,  which  were  believed  to  possess  magic  powers,
and  to  preserve  those  who  wore  them  from  external
dangers.  Such  persons  are  Eudamus  in  Aristo-
phanes {Phit.  883,  with  the  Schol.),  and  Phertatus
in  Antiphanes  {ap.  Athen.  iii.  p.  123).  These
rings  were  for  the.  most  part  worn  by  the  lower


ANTAE.

classes,  and  then  not  made  of  costly  material,  as  may-
be inferred  from  the  price  (one  drachma)  in  the  two
instances  above  referred  to.  There  are  several
celebrated  rings  with  magic  powers,  mentioned
by  the  ancient  writers,  as  that  of  Gyges  which
he  found  in  a  grave  (Plat,  de  Republ.  ii.  p.
359,  &c. ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii.  4),  that  of  Chari-
cleia  (Heliod,  Aeth.  iv.  8),  and  the  iron  ring  of
Eucrates  (Lucian,P/«7oj»s.  17).  Compare  Becker,
ChariUes^  vol.  ii.  p.  398,  &c.  ;  Kirchmann,  de  An-
nulis,  Slesvig.  1657  ;  P.  Burmami,  de  Jure  Auuu-
lorum,  Ultraject.  1734.  [L.  S.]

ANNUS.     [Calendarium.]
ANQUISI'TIO.     [Judex.]
ANSA'TAE  HASTAE.     [Hasta.]
ANTAE  (Trapao-TctSes),  were  originally  posts  or
pillars  flanking  a  doorway.     (Festus,  s.  v.  Antes.)
They  were  of  a  square  form,  and  are,  in  fact,  to  be
regarded   rather  as  strengthened  terminations   of
the  walls  than  as  pillars  affixed  to  them.     There
is  no  clear  case  of  the  application  of  the  word  to
detached  square  pillars,  although  Noniiis  explains
it  by  cjuadrae  columnae  (1.  §  124).

The  chief  use  of  antae  was  in  that  form  of
temple,  which  was  called,  from  them,  in  antis  (vabs
iv  Trapxcrrda-i)^  which  Vitnivius  (iii.  1.  s.  2  §  2,
Schn.)  describes  as  having,  in  front,  antae  attached
to  the  walls  which  enclosed  the  cc-lla  ;  and  in  the
middle,  between  the  antae,  two  columns  supporting
the  architrave.  The  ruins  of  temples,  corresponding
to  the  description  of  Vitruvius,  are  found  in  Greece
and  Asia  Minor  ;  and  we  here  exhibit  as  a  speci-
men a  restoration  of  the  front  of  the  temple  of
Artemis  Propylaea,  at  Eleusis,  together  with  a
plan  of  the  pronaos :


A,  A,  the  antae  ;  B,  B.  the  cella,  or  ya6s.

Vitruvius  gives  the  following  rules  for  a  temple
in  antis  of  the  Doric  order  :  —  The  breadth  should
be  half  the  length  ;  five-eighths  of  the  length  should
be  occupied  by  the  cella,  including  its  front  walls,
the  remaining  three-eighths  by  the  pronaos  or
portico  ;  the  antae  should  be  of  the  same  thickness


ANTEFIXA.  97

as  the  eolnmns  ;  in  the  intercolumniations  there
should  be  a  marble  balustrade,  or  some  other  kind
of  railing,  with  gates  in  it ;  if  the  breadth  of  the
portico  exceeds  forty  feet,  there  should  be  another
pair  of  columns  behind  those  between  the  antae^
and  a  little  thinner  than  they  ;  besides  other  and
minor  details.  (Vitruv.  iv.  4.)

In  the  pure  Greek  architecture,  the  antae  have
no  other  capitals  than  a  succession  of  sinipl  ■  mou'd-
ings,  sometimes  ornamented  with  leaves  and  ara-
besques, and  no  bases,  or  very  simple  ones  ;  it  is
only  in  the  later  (Roman)  style,  that  they  have
capitals  and  bases  resembling  those  of  the  columns
between  them.  The  antae  were  generally  of  the
same  thickness  throughout  ;  the  only  instance  of
their  tapering  is  in  one  of  the  temples  of  Paestum.
In  a  Greek  private  house  the  entrance  was
flanked  by  a  pair  of  antae  with  no  colunins  be-
tween them  ;  and  the  space  thus  enclosed  was  itself
called  Trapaa-Tas.  (Vitruv.  vi.  10.  s.  7.  §  1.  Schn.)
So  also  Euripides  uses  the  term  to  denote  either
the  pronaos  of  a  temple  {Iph.  vi  Taur.  1126),  or
the  vestibule  of  a  palace.     {I'hocji.  415.)

The  following  are  the  chief  of  the  other  passages
in  which  antae  or  iro^paffrdZ^s  are  mentioned :  —
Eurip.  Androm.  1121,  where  TrapacrTaSos  Kpe/jiaa'TcL
signifies  the  arms  suspended  from  one  of  the  antae
of  the  temple  ;  Cratin.  Dionys.  Fr.  9,  ap.  PoUuc.
vii.  1 22,  x.  25,  Meineke,  Fr.  Com.  Graec.  a'oI.  ii.
p.  42  ;  Xen.  Hier.  xi.  2 :  Hero,  Autom.  p.  269  ;
Itiscripi.  ap.  Gruter.  p.  207.  See  also  Stieglitz,
Arch'dologie  der  Bauktmst,  vol.  i.  pp.  236 — 242.
[Templum.]  [P.  S.]

ANTEAMBULO'NES,  were  slaves  who  were
accustomed  to  go  before  their  masters,  in  order  to
make  way  for  them  through  the  crowd.  (Suet.
Vesp.  2.)  They  usually  called  out  date  locum
do7niuo  meo ;  and  if  this  were  not  sufficient  to
clear  the  way,  they  used  their  hands  and  elbows
for  that  purpose.  Pliny  relates  an  amusing  tale  of
an  individual  who  was  roughly  handled  by  a
Roman  knight,  because  his  slave  had  presumed  to
touch  the  latter,  in  order  to  make  way  for  his
master.  {Ep.  iii.  14.)  The  term  anteamhuJones
was  also  given  to  the  clients,  who  were  accustomed
to  walk  before  their  patroni  when  the  latter  ap-
peared in  public.     (Martial,  ii.  18,  iii.  7,  x,  74.)

ANTECESSO'RES,  called  also  ANTECUR-
SO'RES,  were  horse-soldiers,  who  were  accustomed
to  precede  an  army  on  the  march,  in  order  to  choose
a  suitable  place  for  the  camp,  and  to  make  the
necessary  provisions  for  the  army.  They  were  not
merely  scouts,  like  the  speculaiores.  (Hirt.  Bell.
Afr.  12,  who  speaks  of  speculaiores  et  aniecessores
equites ;  Suet.  Viiell.  17;  Caes.  B.  G.  v.  47.)
This  name  was  also  given  to  the  teachers  of  the
Roman  law.     (Cod.  1.  tit.  17.  s.  2.  §  9.  11.)

ANTECOENA.     [Coena.]

ANTEFIXA,  terra-cottas,  which  exhibited  va-
rious ornamental  designs,  and  were  used  in  archi-
tecture, to  cover  the  frieze  (zophorus)  or  cornice
of  the  entablature.  (Festus,  s.v.)  These  terra-
cottas do  not  appear  to  have  been  used  among  tho
Greeks,  but  were  probably  Etrurian  in  their  origin^
and  were  thence  taken  for  the  decoration  of  Roman
buildings.

The  name  antefioca  is  evidently  derived  from  the
circumstance  that  they  were  fixed  before  the
buildings  which  they  adorned  ;  and  in  many  in-
stances they  have  been  found  fastened  to  the
frieze  with  leaden  nails.  They  were  formed  in
II


98


ANTEFIXA.


moulds,  and  then  baked  by  fire  ;  so  that  the  num-
ber of  them  might  be  increased  to  any  extent.
Of  the  great  variety  and  exquisite  beauty  of  the
workmanship,  the  reader  may  best  form  an  idea  by
inspecting  the  collection  of  them  in  the  British
Museum.

The  two  imperfect  antefixa,  here  represented,
are  among  those  found  at  Velletri,  and  described
by  Carloni.     {Roma,  1785.)


The  first  of  them  must  have  formed  part  of  the
upper  border  of  the  frieze,  or  rather  of  the  cornice.
It  contains  a  panther's  head,  designed  to  serve  as  a
spout  for  the  rain-water  to  pass  through  in  de-
scending from  the  roof.  Similar  antefixa,  but  witb
comic  masks  instead  of  animals'  heads,  adorned
the  temple  of  I  sis  at  Pompeii.  The  second  of  the
above  specimens  represents  two  men  who  have  a
dispute,  and  who  come  before  the  sceptre-bearing
kings,  or  judges,  to  have  their  cause  decided.  The
style  of  this  bas-relief  indicates  its  high  antiquity,
and,  at  the  same  time,  proves  that  the  Volsci  had
attained  to  considerable  taste  in  their  architecture.
Their  antefixa  are  remarkable  for  being  painted  :
the  ground  of  that  here  represented  is  lalue  ;  the
hair  of  the  six  men  is  black,  or  broAvn  ;  their  flesh
red  ;  their  garments  white,  yellow,  and  red :  the
chairs  are  white.  The  two  holes  may  be  observed,
by  which  this  slab  was  fixed  upon  the  building.

Cato  the  Censor  complained  that  the  Romans  of
his  time  began  to  despise  ornaments  of  this  de-
scription, and  to  prefer  the  marble  frieaes  of
Athens  and  Corinth.  (Liv.  xxxiv.  4.)  The  rising
taste  which  Cato  deplored  may  account  for  the  su-


lyMyyyMuiomp


ANTIDOSIS.
perior  beauty  of  the  antefixa  preserved  in  the  Bri-
tish  Museum,  which  were  discovered  at  Rome.  A
specimen  of  them  is  given  at  the  foot  of  the  pre-
ceding column  It  represents  Athena  superintend-
ing the  construction  of  the  ship  Argo.  The  man
with  the  hammer  and  chisel  is  Argus,  who  built  the
vessel  under  her  direction.  The  pilot  Tiphys  is
assisted  by  her  in  attaching  the  sail  to  the  yard.
Another  specimen  of  the  antefixa  is  given  mider
the  article  Antyx.

ANTENNA.     [Navis.]

ANTEPAGMENTA,  doorposts,  the  jambs  of
a  door.  Vitruvius  (iv.  6.)  gives  minute  instruc-
tions respecting  the  form  and  proportions  of  the
antcpagmenta  in  the  doors  of  temples ;  and  these
are  found  in  general  to  correspond  with  the  ex-
amples preserved  among  the  remains  of  Grecian
architecture.  (See  Hirt,  Daukunst  nach  den  Grund-
s'dtzen  der  Alien,  xvi.)     [Janua.]  [J.  Y.]

ANTEPILA'NI.     [Exercitus.]

ANTESIGNA'NI.     [Exercitus.]

ANTESTA'RI.     [Actio.]

ANTHESPHO'RIA  {h.vQs(T(p6pia\  a  flower-
festival,  principally  celebrated  in  Sicily,  in  honour
of  Demeter  and  Persephone,  in  commemoration  of
the  retm-n  of  Persephone  to  her  mother  in  the  be-
ginning of  spring.  It  consisted  in  gathering  flowers
and  twining  garlands,  because  Persephone  had
been  carried  off  by  Pluto  while  engaged  in  this
occupation.  (Pollux,  i.  37.)  Strabo  (vi.  p.  256)
relates  that  at  Hipponium  the  women  celebrated  a
similar  festival  in  honour  of  Demeter,  which  was
probably  called  anthesphoria,  since  it  was  derived
from  Sicily.  The  women  themselves  gathered  the
flowers  for  the  garlands  which  they  wore  on  the
occasion,  and  it  would  have  been  a  disgrace  to  buy
the  flowers  for  that  purpose.  Anthesphoria  were
also  solemnized  in  honour  of  other  deities,  especi-
ally in  honour  of  Hera,  surnamed  'Av^efo,  at  Argos
(Pans.  ii.  22.  §  1),  where  maidens,  carrying  baskets
filled  with  flowers,  went  in  procession,  whilst  a  tune
called  hpiKiov  was  played  on  the  flute.  (Comp.
Etym.  Gud.  p.  57.)  Aphrodite,  too,  was  wor-
shipped at  Cnossus,  under  the  name  ^Avdeia
(Hesych.  s.  v.),  and  has  therefore  been  compared
with  Flora,  the  Roman  deity,  as  the  anthesphoria
have  been  with  the  Roman  festival  of  the  FloH-
fertum,  or  Florcdia.  [L.  S.]

ANTHESTK'RIA.     [Dionysia.]

ANTI'DOSIS  (aj/Tt'Soo-ts),  in  its  literal  and
general  meaning,  "an  exchange,"  was,  in  the
language  of  the  Attic  courts,  peculiarly  applied  to
proceedings  under  a  law  which  is  said  to  have  ori-
ginated with  Solon.  (Demosth.  c.  Phaenipp.  init.)
By  this,  a  citizen  nominated  to  perform  a  leiturgia,
such  as  a  trierarchy  or  choregia,  or  to  rank  among
the  property-tax  payers  in  a  class  disproportioned
to  his  means,  was  empowered  to  call  upon  any
qualified  person  not  so  charged  to  take  the  office
in  his  stead,  or  submit  to  a  complete  exchange  of
property  —  the  charge  in  question,  of  course,  at-
taching to  the  first  party,  if  the  exchange  were
finally  efl^ected.  For  these  proceedings  the  courta
were  opened  at  a  stated  time  every  year  by  the
magistrates  that  had  official  cognizance  of  the
particular  subject  ;  such  as  the  strategi  in  cases  of
trierarchy  and  rating  to  the  property-taxes,  and
the  archon  in  those  of  choregia  ;  and  to  the  tri-
bunal of  such  an  officer,  it  was  the  first  step  of  the
challenger  to  summon  his  opponent.  (Dem.  c.
Phaenipp.  p.  1040  ;  Meier,  Att.  Process,  p.  471  J


ANTIGONEIA.

irpoffKoKelaQat  Tiva  els  avTidocnv,  Lysias  'Virep
Tov  'ASumrou,  p.  745.)  It  may  be  presumed
that  he  then  formally  repeated  his  proposal,  and
that  the  other  party  stated  his  objections,  which,
if  obviouslj'-  sufficient  in  law,  might,  perhaps,
authorise  the  magistrate  to  dismiss  the  case  ;  if
otherwise,  the  legal  resistance,  and  preparations
for  bringing  the  cause  before  the  dicasts,  would
naturally  begin  here.  In  the  latter  case,  or  if  the
exchange  were  accepted,  the  law  directed  the
challenger  to  repair  to  the  houses  and  lands  of  his
antagonist,  and  secure  himself,  as  all  the  claims  and
liabilities  of  the  estate  were  to  be  transferred,  from
fraudulent  encumbrances  of  the  real  property,  by
observing  what  mortgage  placards  (o/?ot),  if  any,
were  fixed  upon  it,  and  against  clandestine  removal
of  the  other  effects,  by  sealing  up  the  chambers  that
contained  them,  and,  if  he  pleased,  by  putting
bailiffs  in  the  mansion.  (Dem.  c.  Phaenipp.
pp.  1040,  1041.)  His  opponent  was,  at  the  same
time,  informed,  that  he  was  at  liberty  to  deal  in
like  manner  with  the  estate  of  the  challenger,
and  received  notice  to  attend  the  proper  tribunal
on  a  fixed  day,  to  take  the  usual  cath.  The
entries  here  described  seem,  in  contemplation  of
law,  to  have  been  a  complete  effectuation  of  the
exchange.  (Dem.  c.  Mid.  p.  540,  c.  Phaenipp.
p.  1041.  25),  and  it  docs  not  appear  that  primarily
there  was  any  legal  necessity  for  a  further  ratifi-
cation by  the  dicasts  ;  but,  in  practice,  this  must
always  have  been  required  by  the  conflict  of
interests  between  the  parties.  The  next  pro-
ceeding was  the  oath,  which  was  taken  by  both
parties,  and  purported  that  they  would  faithfully
discover  all  their  property,  except  shares  held  in
the  silver  mines  at  Laurion  ;  for  these  were  not
rated  to  leiturgiae  or  property-taxes,  nor  conse-
quently liable  to  the  exchange.  In  pursuance  of
this  agreement,  the  law  enjoined  that  they  should
exchange  correct  accounts  of  their  respective  assets
(oTTo^acrets)  within  three  days  ;  but  in  practice
the  time  might  be  extended  by  the  consent  of  the
challenger.  After  this,  if  the  matter  were  still
uncompromised,  it  would  assume  the  shape  and
follow  the  course  of  an  ordinary  lawsuit  [Dick'],
under  the  conduct  of  the  magistrate  within  whose
jurisdiction  it  had  originally  come.  The  verdict  of
the  dicasts,  when  adverse  to  the  challenged,  seems
merely  to  have  rendered  imperative  the  first  de-
mand of  his  antagonist,  viz.  that  he  should  submit
to  the  exchange  or  undertake  the  charge  in  ques-
tion ;  and  as  the  alternative  was  open  to  the  former,
and  a  compromise  might  be  acceded  to  by  the  lat-
ter, at  any  stage  of  the  proceedings,  we  may  infer
that  the  exchange  was  rarely,  if  ever,  finally  ac-
complished. The  irksomeness,  however,  of  the  se-
questration, during  which  the  litigant  was  pre-
cluded from  the  use  of  his  own  property,  and  dis-
abled from  bringing  actions  for  embezzlement  and
the  like  against  others  (for  his  prospective  reim-
j  bursement  was  reckoned  a  part  of  the  seques-
trated estate,  Dem.  c.  Aphob.  ii.  p.  841,  c.  Mid.
p.  540),  would  invariably  cause  a  speedy,  perhaps,
in  most  cases,  a  fair  adjustment  of  the  burdens
incident  to  the  condition  of  a  wealthy  Athenian.
(Bockh,  Ptthl.  Ecm.  of  Athens,  pp.  580—583,
2nd  ed.)  ^  [J.  S.  M.]

ANTIGONEIA  {avTi'y6veia),  sacrifices  insti-
tuted by  Aratus  and  celebrated  at  Sicyon  with
paeans,  processions,  and  contests,  in  honour  of
Antigonus  Doson,  with  Avhom  Aratus  formed  an


ANTIGRAPHE.


99


alliance  for  the  purpose  of  thwarting  the  plans  of
Cleomenes.  (Plut.  C'/eoni.  iQ^Arat,  45  ;  Polyb.
xxviii.  16,  XXX,  20.)  [L.  S.]

ANTIGRAPHE'  {h.vTiypa<p)]\  originally  sig-
nified the  writing  put  in  by  the  defendant,  in  all
causes,  whether  public  or  private,  in  answer  to  the
indictment  or  bill  of  the  prosecutor.  From  this
signification,  it  was  applied  by  an  easy  transition
to  the  substance  as  well  as  the  form  of  the  reply,
both  of  which  are  also  indicated  by  avroifioaia,
which  means,  primarily,  the  oath  corroborating  the
statement  of  the  accused.  Harpocration  has  re-
marked that  antigraphe  might  denote,  as  antomosia
does  in  its  more  extended  application,  the  bill  and
affidavit  of  either  party  ;  and  this  remark  seems
to  be  justified  by  a  passage  of  Plato.  {Apolog.
Soc.  p.  27.  c.)  Schbmann,  however,  maintains
{Att  Process,  p.  465)  that  antigraphe.  was  only
used  in  this  signification  in  the  case  of  persons
who  laid  claim  to  an  unassigned  inheritance.
Here,  neither  the  first  nor  any  other  claimant
could  appear  in  the  character  of  a  prosecutor  ;
that  is,  no  Si'ktj  or  ejKX'qf/.a  could  be  strictly  said
to  be  directed  by  one  competitor  against  another,
when  all  came  forward  voluntarily  to  the  tribunal
to  defend  their  several  titles.  This  circumstance
Schomann  has  suggested  as  a  reason  why  the
documents  of  each  claimant  were  denoted  by  the
term  in  question.

Perhaps  the  word  "  plea,"  though  by  no  means
a  coincident  term,  may  be  allowed  to  be  a  tolerably
proximate  rendering  of  antigraphe.  Of  pleas  there
can  be  only  two  kinds,  the  dilatory,  and  those  to
the  action.  The  former,  in  Attic  law,  comprehends
all  such  allegations  as,  by  asserting  the  incom-
petency of  the  court,  the  disability  of  the  plaintiff,
or  privilege  of  the  defendant,  and  the  like,  would
have  a  tendency  to  show  that  the  cause  in  its
present  state  could  not  be  brought  into  court  {fi^
slaayuyifjiau  elvai  r^v  SiKrjy)  ;  the  latter,  every-
thhig  that  could  be  adduced  by  way  of  denial,  ex-
cuse, justification,  and  defence  generally.  It  must
be,  at  the  same  time,  kept  in  mind,  that  the  process
called  "  special  pleading,"  was  at  Athens  supplied
by  the  magistrate  holding  the  anacrisis,  at  which
both  parties  produced  their  allegations,  with  the
evidence  to  substantiate  them  ;  and  that  the
object  of  this  part  of  the  proceedings  was,  imder
the  directions,  and  with  the  assistance  of  the
magistrate,  to  prepare  and  enucleate  the  question
for  the  dicasts.  The  following  is  an  instance  of
the  simplest  form  of  indictment  and  plea :  — ■
"  Apollodorus,  the  son  of  Pasion  of  Acharnae,
against  Stephanus,  son  of  Menecles  of  Acharnae,
for  perjurj"-.  The  penalty  rated,  a  talent.  Ste-
phanus bore  false  witness  against  me,  when  he
gave  in  evidence  the  matters  in  the  tablets.  Ste-
phanus, son  of  Menecles  of  Acharnae.  I  Avitnessed
truly,  when  I  gave  in  evidence  the  things  in  the
tablet."  (Dem.  m  Steph.  i.  p.  1115.)  The  plead-
ings might  be  altered  during  the  anacrisis  ;  but
once  consigned  to  the  echinus,  they,  as  well  as
all  the  other  accompanying  documents,  were  pro-
tected by  the  official  seal  from  any  change  by  the
litigants.  On  the  day  of  trial,  and  in  the  presence
of  the  dicasts,  the  echinus  was  opened,  and  the
plea  was  then  read  by  the  clerk  of  the  court,  toge-
ther with  its  antagonist  bill.  Whether  it  was
preserved  afterwards  as  a  public  record,  which  we
know  to  have  been  the  case  with  respect  to  the
7pa*7j  in  some  causes,  we  are  not  informed,
H  2


100


ANTLIA.


From  what  has  been  already  stated,  it  will
have  been  observed,  that  questions  requiring  a  pre-
vious decision,  would  frequently  arise  upon  the  al-
legations of  the  plea  ;  and  that  the  plea  to  the  ac-
tion in  particular  would  often  contain  matter  that
would  tend  essentially  to  alter,  and,  in  some  cases,
to  reverse  the  relative  positions  of  the  parties.  In
the  first  case,  a  trial  before  the  dicasts  would  be
granted  by  the  magistrate  whenever  he  was  loth
to  incur  the  responsibility  of  decision  ;  in  the  se-
cond, a  cross-action  might  be  instituted,  and  car-
ried on  separately,  though,  perhaps,  simultaneously
with  the  original  suit.  Cases  would  also  some-
times occur  in  which  the  defendant,  from  consider-
ing the  indictment  as  an  unwarrantable  aggres-
sion, or,  perhaps,  one  best  repelled  by  attack,  would
be  tempted  to  retaliate  upon  some  delinquencj'  of
his  opponent,  utterly  unconnected  with  the  cause
in  hand,  and  to  this  he  would  be,  in  most  cases,
able  to  resort.  An  instance  of  each  kind  will  be
briefly  given,  by  citing  the  common  paragraphe,  as
a  cause  arising  upon  a  dilatory  plea  ;  a  cross-action
for  assault  (alKias)  upon  a  primary  action  for  the
same  (Dem.  in  Ev.  et  Mnesib.  p.  1153)  ;  and  a
SoKifxaaia^  or  "judicial  examination  of  the  life  or
morals  "  of  an  orator  upon  an  impeachment  for
misconduct  in  an  embassy  {irapatrp^aSeia).  (Aesch.
in  Timarch.)  All  causes  of  this  secondary  nature
(and  there  was  hardly  one  of  any  kind  cognisable
by  the  Attic  courts,  that  might  not  occasionally
rank  among  them)  were,  when  viewed  in  their
relation  with  the  primary  action,  comprehended
by  the  enlarged  signification  of  antigrapht,  or,  in
other  words,  this  term,  inexpressive  of  form  or
substance,  is  indicative  of  a  repellent  or  retaliative
qualitj%  that  might  be  incidenttil  to  a  great  variety
of  causes.  The  distinction,  however,  that  is  im-
plied by  antiyraphe^  was  not  merely  verbal  and
unsubstantial  ;  for  we  are  told,  in  order  to  prevent
frivolous  suits  on  the  one  hand,  and  unfair  elusion
upon  the  other,  the  loser  in  aparagraphe,  or  cross-
action  upon  a  private  suit,  was  condemned  by  a
special  law  to  pay  the  eVcogeAia,  rateable  upon  the
valuation  of  the  main  cause,  if  he  failed  to  obtain
the  votes  of  one-fifth  of  the  jury,  and  certain
court  fees  (-rrpvTaveia)  not  originally  incident  to
the  suit.  That  there  was  a  similar  provision  in
public  causes,  we  may  presume  from  analogy,
though  we  have  no  authority  to  determine  the
matter.  (Meier,  Att.  Process,  p.  625.)  [J.S.  M.]

ANTIGRAPHEIS  (^wTiypa^peh).     [Gram-

MATEUS.]

ANTINOEIA  {ayrivSeia),  annual  festivals  and
quinquennial  games,  which  the  Roman  emperor
Hadrian  instituted  in  honour  of  his  favourite,
Antinous,  after  he  was  drowned  in  the  Nile,  or,
according  to  others,  had  sacrificed  himself  for  his
sovereign,  in  a  fit  of  religious  fanaticism.  The
festivals  were  celebrated  in  Bithynia,  and  at  Man-
tineia,  in  which  places  he  was  worshipped  as  a
god.  (Spartian.  Hadrian,  c.  14  ;  Dion  Cass.
Ixix.  10  ;  Paus.  viii.  9.  §  4.)  [L.  S.]

ANTIPHERNA  (avTt^epj/a).     [Dos.]

ANTIQUA'RII.     [LiBRARii.]

A'NTLIA  (ovtA/o),  any  machine  for  raising
water  ;  a  pump.  The  annexed  figure  shows  a
machine  which  is  still  used  on  the  river  Eissach
in  the  Tyrol,  the  ancient  Atagis.  As  the  current
puts  the  wheel  in  motion,  the  jars  on  its  margin
are  successively  immersed  and  filled  with  water.
When  they  reach  the  top,  the  water  is  sent  into


ANTLIA.

a  trough,  from  which  it  is  conveyed  to  a  distance,
and  chiefly  used  for  irrigation,

Lucretius  (v.  517)  mentions  a  machine  con-
tructed  on  this  principle :  —  "  Ut  fluvios  versare
rotas  atque  haustra  vidcmus."


In  situations  where  the  water  was  at  rest,  as  in
a  pond  or  a  well,  or  where  the  current  was  too
slow  and  feeble  to  put  the  machine  in  motion,  it
was  constructed  so  as  to  be  wrought  by  animal
force,  and  slaves  or  criminals  were  commonh*  em-
ployed for  the  purpose  (eis  avrXiav  /caraStKo-
ffdrjvai,  Artemid.  Oneiroc.  i.  50  ;  in  antliam  con-
demnare.  Suet.  Tib.  51.)  Five  such  machines  are
described  by  Vitruvius,  in  addition  to  thatwhich  has
been  already  explained,  and  which,  as  he  observes,
was  turned  sine  operarum  calcatura,  ipsius  Jluminis
impulsu.  These  five  were,  1.  the  tympanum  ;  a
tread- wheel,  wrought  hominibus  calcantibus :  2.  a
wheel  resembling  that  in  the  preceding  figure  ;  but
having,  instead  of  pots,  wooden  boxes  or  buckets
{modioli  quadrati\  so  arranged  as  to  form  steps  for
those  who  trod  the  wheel :  3.  the  chain-pump :
4.  the  cochlea,  or  Archimedes'  screw :  and  5.  the
ctesibica  machina,  or  forcing-pump.  (Vitruv.  x.
4 — 7 ;  Drieberg,  Pneum.  Erfiiidungen  der  Griechen,
p.  44—50.)

On  the  other  hand,  the  antlia  with  which  Mar-
tial (ix.  19)  watered  his  garden,  was  probably  the
pole  and  bucket  universally  employed  in  Italy,
Greece,  and  Egypt.  The  pole  is  curved,  as  shown
in  the  annexed  figure  ;  because  it  is  the  stem  of  a


I


APATURIA.
fir,  or  some  other  tapering  tree.  The  bucket,  being
attached  to  the  top  of  the  tree,  bends  it  by  its
weiglit  ;  and  the  thickness  of  the  other  extremity-
serves  as  a  counterpoise.  The  great  antiquity  of
this  method  of  raising  water  is  proved  by  repre-
sentations of  it  in  Egyptian  paintings.  (Wilkin-
son, Manners  and  Cust.  of  Anc.  Egypt,  ii.  1 — 4  ;
see  also  Pitt.  cfErcolano,  vol.  i.  p.  257.)      [  J.  Y.]

ANTOMO'SIA  {oLVTwyioa-la).  [Anakrisis,
p.  92,  a  ;  Paragraphe.]

ANTYX  i&vrv^,  probably  allied  etjTUologically
to  S/iTi;|),  the  rim  or  border  of  any  thing,  espe-
cially of  a  shield,  or  chariot.  The  rim  of  the  large
round  shield  of  the  ancient  Greeks  was  thinner
than  the  part  which  it  enclosed.  Thus  the  orna-
mental border  of  the  shield  of  Achilles,  fabricated
by  Hephaestus,  was  only  threefold,  the  shield  itself
being  sevenfold.  {11.  xviii,  479  ;  comp.  xx.  275.)
See  examples  of  the  antyjc  of  a  shield  in  woodcuts
to  Antefixa,  Arma,  Clipeus.

On  the  other  hand,  the  antyx  of  a  chariot  must
have  been  thicker  than  the  body  to  which  it  was
attached,  and  to  which  it  gave  both  form  and
strength.  For  the  same  reason,  it  was  often  made
double,  as  in  the  chariot  of  Hera.  (Aotai  Se  Trept-
^pojxoi  avTvyes  etVt,  Jl.  v.  728.)  It  rose  in  front
of  a  chariot  in  a  curved  form,  on  which  the  reins
might  be  hung.  (II.  v.  262,  322.)  A  simple  fonn
of  it  is  exhibited  in  the  annexed  woodcut  from  the


APATURIA.


101


rrrri  ITI


work  of  Carloni.      Sometimes   antyx  is  used  to
signify  the  chariot  itself.  [J.  Y.]

APA'GELI  (airdjiXoi).  [Agela.]
APAGO'GE  (aTra-ycay-h).  [Endeixis.]
APATU'RIA  (airaTovpia),  was  a  political  festi-
val, which  the  Athenians  had  in  common  with  all
the  Greeks  of  the  Ionian  name  (Herod,  i.  147),
with  the  exception  of  those  of  Colophon  and
Ephesus.  It  was  celebrated  in  the  month  of
Pyanepsion,  and  lasted  for  three  days.  The  ori-
gin of  this  festival  is  related  in  the  following  man-
ner :  — About  the  year  1100  b.  c,  the  Athenians
were  carrying  on  a  war  against  the  Boeotians,  con-
cerning the  district  of  Cilaenae,  or,  according  to
others,  respecting  the  little  town  of  Oenoe.
The  Boeotian  Xanthiiis,  or  Xanthus,  challenged
Thymoetes,  king  of  Attica,  to  smgle  combat  ;
and  when  he  refused,  Melanthus,  a  Messenian
exile  of  the  house  of  the  Nelids,  offered  himself
to  fight  for  Thymoetes,  on  condition  that,  if  vic-
torious, he  should  be  the  successor  to  Thymoetes.
The  offer  was  accepted  ;  and  when  Xanthius  and
Melanthus  began  the  engagement,  there  appeared
behind  Xanthius  a  man  in  the  rpayrj,  the  skin  of  a
black  she-goat.  Melanthus  reminded  his  adversary
that  he  was  violating  the  laws  of  single  combat  by


having  a  companion,  and  while  Xanthius  looked
around,  Melanthus  slew  the  deceived  Xanthius.
From  that  time,  the  Athenians  celebrated  two  fes-
tivals, the  Apaturia,  and  that  of  Dionysus  Melan-
aegis,  who  was  believed  to  have  been  the  man
who  appeared  behind  Xanthius.  This  is  the  story
related  by  the  Scholiast  on  Aristophanes.  (Acham.
146.)  This  tradition  has  given  rise  to  a  false  ety-
mology of  the  name  aTraToupjo,  which  was  formerly
considered  to  be  derived  from  aTroraj/,  to  deceive.
All  modCTn  critics,  however  (Mliller,  Dorians,  i.
5.  4  ;  Welcker,  Aesckyl.  Tril.  p.  288),  agree  that  the
name  is  composed  of  o=  aiia,  and  Trart^piot,  which  is
perfectly  consistent  with  what  Xenophon  (Hellen.
i.  7.  §  8)  says  of  the  festival :  'E;/  o^s  {airarovpiois)
o'l  re  irarepes  Kal  ot  avyyevils  ^vveicri  ccpia-iu
avTo7s.  According  to  thia  derivation,  it  is  the
festival  at  which  the  phratriac  met,  to  discuss  and
settle  their  own  affairs.  But,  as  every  citizen  was
a  member  of  a  phratria,  the  festival  extended
over  the  whole  nation,  who  assembled  according  to
phratriae.  Welcker  (Anhang  z.  Trilog.  p.  200),
on  account  of  the  prominent  part  which  Dionysus
takes  in  the  legend  respecting  the  origin  of  the
Attic  Apaturia,  conceives  that  it  arose  from  the
circumstance  that  families  belonging  to  the  Dio-
nysian  tribe  of  the  Aegicores  had  been  registered
among  the  citizens.

The  first  day  of  the  festival,  which  probably  fell
on  the  eleventh  of  the  month  of  Pyanepsion,  was
called  Sopirla,  or  SSpireia  ( Athen.  iv.  p.  1 7 1 ;  Hesych.
and  Suid,  s.  v.)  ;  on  which  every  citizen  went  in
the  evening  to  the  phratrium,  or  to  the  house  of
some  wealthy  member  of  his  own  phratria,  and
there  enjoyed  the  supper  prepared  for  him.  (Aris-
toph.  Acham.  146.)  That  the  cup-bearers  (olvS-
nrai)  were  not  idle  on  this  occasion,  may  be  seen
from  Pbotius  (Lexic.  s.  v.  AopTria).

The  second  day  was  called  av6,pf)vais  (auap-
pvsiv)  from  the  sacrifice  offered  on  this  day  to
Zeus,  surnamed  ^pdrpios,  and  to  Athena,  and
sometimes  to  Dionysus  Melanaegis.  This  was  a
state  sacrifice,  in  which  all  citizens  took  part.  The
day  was  chiefly  devoted  to  the  gods,  and  to  it
must,  perhaps,  be  confined  what  Harpocration  (s.
V.  AafiTrds)  mentions,  from  the  Atthis  of  Istrus,
that  the  Athenians  at  the  apaturia  used  to  dress
splendidly,  kindle  torches  on  the  altar  of  Hephae-
stus, and  sacrifice  and  sing  in  honour  of  him.
Proclus  on  Plato  (Tim.  p.  21.  6.),  in  opposition  to
all  other  authorities,  calls  the  first  day  of  the  Apa-
turia avdppvffis,  and  the  second  Sopiria,  which  is,
perhaps,  nothing  more  than  a  slip  of  his  pen.

On  the  third  day,  called  Kovpewris  (Kovpos),
children  bom  in  that  year,  in  the  families  of  the
phratriae,  or  such  as  were  not  yet  registered,  were
taken  by  their  fathers,  or  in  their  absence  by  their
representatives  (Kvpioi),  before  the  assembled
members  of  the  phratria.  For  every  child  a
sheep  or  goat  was  sacrificed.  The  victim  waa
called  fieTov,  and  he  who  sacrificed  it  jmeiayuySs
(ix^Layayye'iv).  It  is  said  that  the  victim  was  not
allowed  to  be  below  (Harpocrat.  Suid.  Phot.  s.  v.
Melou),  or,  according  to  Pollux  (iii.  52),  above,  a
certain  weight.  Whenever  any  one  thought  he
had  reason  to  oppose  the  reception  of  the  child
into  the  phratria,  he  stated  the  case,  and,  at  the
same  time,  led  away  the  victim  from  the  altar.
(Demosth.  c.  Macart.  p.  1U34.)  If  the  mem-
bers of  the  phratria  found  the  objections  to  the
reception  of  the  child  to  be  sufficient,  the  vic-
H  3


102


APEX.


lira  was  removed  ;  when  no  objections  were
raised,  the  father,  or  he  who  supplied  his  place,
was  obliged  to  establish  by  oath  that  the  child  was
the  offspring  of  free-born  parents,  and  citizens  of
Athens.  (Isaeus,  De  Haered.  Ciroti.  p.  100.  §19  ;
Demosth.  c.  Evhid.  p.  1315.)  After  the  victim
was  sacrificed,  the  phratores  gave  their  votes,
which  they  took  from  the  altar  of  Jupiter  Phra-
trius.  When  the  majority  voted  against  the  re-
ception, the  cause  might  be  tried  before  one  of  the
courts  of  Athens ;  and  if  the  claims  of  the  child
were  found  unobjectionable,  its  name,  as  well  as
that  of  the  father,  was  entered  in  the  register  of
the  phratria,  and  those  who  had  wished  to  effect
the  exclusion  of  the  child  were  liable  to  be  punished.
(Demosth.  c.  Macart.  p.  1078.)  Then  followed
the  distribution  of  wine,  and  of  the  victim,  of
which  every  phrator  received  his  share  ;  and  poems
were  recited  by  the  elder  boys,  and  a  prize  was
given  to  him  who  acquitted  himself  the  best  on  the
occasion.  (Plat.  Tim.  p.  21,  b.)  On  this  day,  also,
illegitimate  children  on  whom  the  privileges  of
Athenian  citizens  were  to  be  bestowed,  as  well  as
children  adopted  by  citizens,  and  newly  created
citizens  were  introduced  ;  but  the  last,  it  appears,
€ould  only  be  received  into  a  phratria  when  they
Had  previously  been  adopted  by  a  citizen ;  and
their  children,  when  born  by  a  mother  who  was
a  citizen,  had  a  legitimate  claim  to  be  inscribed  in
the  phratria  of  their  grandfather,  on  their  mother's
side.  (Platner,  Beitr'dge,  p.  168.)  In  later  times,
however,  the  difficulties  of  behig  admitted  into  a
phratria  seem  to  have  been  greatly  diminished.

Some  writers  have  added  a  fourth  day  to  this
festival,  under  the  name  of  cTrigSa  (Hesych.  s.  v.
'AiraTovpia :  and  Simplicius  on  Aristot  Phi/s.  iv.
p.  167.  a.);  but  this  is  no  particular  day  of  the
festival,  for  eirtgSa  signifies  nothing  else  but  a  day
subsequent  to  any  festival.  (See  Rhunken,  Ad
Tim.  Lex.  Plat.  p.  119.)  [L.  S.]

APAU'LIA.     [Matrimonium.]

APELEU'THERI  (aireKeidepoi.).    [Libertl]

APERTA  NAVIS.     [Navis.]

APEX,  a  cap  worn  by  the  flamines  and  salii  at
Rome.  The  essential  part  of  the  apex,  to  which
alone  the  name  properly  belonged,  Avas  a  pointed
piece  of  olive-wood,  the  base  of  which  was  sur-
rounded with  a  lock  of  wool.  This  was  worn  on
the  top  of  the  head,  and  was  held  there  either  by
fillets  only,  or,  as  was  more  commonly  the  case,
by  the  aid  of  a  cap,  which  fitted  the  head,  and
was  also  fastened  by  means  of  two  strings  or  kinds,
which  were  called,  apicula  (Festus,  s.  v.),  or  qf-
fendices  (Festus,  s.  «.),  though  the  latter  word  is
also  interpreted  to  mean  a  kind  of  button,  by
which  the  strings  were  fastened  under  the  chin,
(Comp.  Serv.  ad  Virg.  Aen.  ii.  683,  viii.  664,  x.
270.)

The  flamines  were  forbidden  by  law  to  go  into
public,  or  even  into  the  open  air  without  the  apex
(Gell.  X.  IS),  and  hence  we  find  the  expression  of
idicui  apicem  dicdem  imponere  used  as  equivalent  to
the  appointment  of  a  flamen  dialis.  (Liv.  vi.  41.)
Sulpicius  was  de;  rived  of  the  priesthood,  only  be-
cause the  apex  fell  from  his  head  whilst  he  was
fiacrificing.     (Val.  Max.  i.  1.  §  4.)

Dionysius  (ii.  70 )  describes  the  cap  as  being  of
a  conical  form.  On  ancient  monuments  we  see  it
round  as  well  as  conical.  From  its  various  forms,
as  shown  on  bas-reliefs  and  on  coins  of  the  Roman
tanperors,  who  as  priests  were  entitled  to  wear  it,


APHRODISIA.
we  have  selected  six  for  the  annexed  woodcut.  The
middle  figure  is  from  a  bas-relief,  showing  one  of
the  salii  with  a  rod  in  his  right  hand.  The
All)ogah'rus,  or  albus  galerus  was  a  white  cap  worn
by  the  flamen  dialis,  made  of  the  skin  of  a  white
victim  sacrificed  to  Jupiter,  and  had  the  apex
fastened  to  it  by  means  of  an  olive-twig.  (Festus,
s.  r>.  alUtgalerus :  Gell.  x.  15.)


From  apex  was  formed  the  epithet  apieatus,
applied  to  the  flamen  dialis  by  Ovid  (^Fast.  iii.
197).

APHLASTON  (S^Xao-roj/).     [Navis.]

APHORMES  DIKE'  {acpopfiris  St/cTj),  was  the
action  brought  against  a  banker  or  money-lender
(TpaTreQrTfs),  to  recover  funds  advanced  for  the
purpose  of  being  employed  as  banking  capital.
Though  such  moneys  were  also  styled  TrapaKaraOi)'
Kai,  or  deposits,  to  distinguish  them  from  the  pri-
vate capital  of  the  banker  (Ma  acpop/ni])^  there  is
an  essential  difference  between  the  actions  a.(popp.ri5
and  irapaKaTadrjKTjs,  as  the  latter  implied  that  the
defendant  had  refused  to  return  a  deposit  intrusted
to  him,  not  upon  the  condition  of  his  paying  a
stated  interest  for  its  use,  as  in  the  former  case,
but  merely  that  it  might  be  safe  in  his  keeping
till  the  affairs  of  the  plaintiff  should  enable  him  to
resume  its  possession  in  security.  [Paracata-
thece'.]  The  former  action  was  of  the  class  npds
riva^  and  came  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  thesmo-
thetae.  The  speech  of  Demosthenes  in  behalf  of
Phormio  was  made  in  a  irapaypacp'f)  against  an
action  of  this  kind.  [J.  S.  M.]

APHRACTUS.     [Navis.]

APHRODI'SIA  i'AcppoSicria),  festivals  cele-
brated in  honour  of  Aphrodite,  in  a  great  number
of  towns  in  Greece,  but  particularly  in  the  island
of  C}'prus.  Her  most  ancient  temple  was  at  Paphos,
Avhich  was  built  by  Aerias  or  Cinyras,  in  whose
family  the  priestly  dignity  was  hereditary.  (Tacit.
Hist.  ii.  3,  Annal.  iii.  62  ;  Maxim.  Tyr.  Serm.  83.)
No  bloody  sacrifices  were  allowed  to  be  offered  to
her,  but  only  pure  fire,  flowers,  and  incense  (Virg.
Aen.  i.  1 1 6)  ;  and  therefore,  when  Tacitus  {Hist.
ii.  3)  speaks  of  victims,  we  must  either  suppose,
with  Emesti,  that  they  were  killed  merely  that  the
priest  might  inspect  their  intestines,  or  for  the  pur-
pose of  affording  a  feast  to  the  persons  present  at
the  festival.  At  all  events,  however,  the  altar  of
the  goddess  was  not  allowed  to  be  polluted  with
the  blood  of  the  victims,  which  were  mostly  he-
goats.  Mysteries  were  also  celebrated  at  Paphos
in  honour  of  Aphrodite  ;  and  those  who  were  ini-


APOGRAPHE.

tiated  offered  to  the  goddess  a  piece  of  money,  and
received  in  return  a  measure  of  salt  and  a  phallus.
In  the  mysteries  themselves,  they  received  instnic-
tiniis  iy  TT)  T^x^V  i^o'X"^??'  -A-  second  or  new
Paphos  had  been  built,  according  to  tradition,  after
tlie  Trojan  war,  by  the  Arcadian  Agapenor  ;  and,
according  to  Strabo  (xiv.  p.  683),  men  and  women
from  other  towns  of  the  island  assembled  at  New
Paphos,  and  went  in  solemn  procession  to  Old
Paphos,  a  distance  of  sixty  stadia  ;  and  the  name
of  the  priest  of  Aphrodite,  ayrjTwp  (Hesych,  s.  r.),
eccms  to  have  originated  in  his  heading  this  prn-
CL'ssion.  Aphrodite  was  worshipped  in  most  towns
oi  Cyprus,  and  in  other  parts  of  Greece,  such  as
Cytliera,  Sparta,  Thebes,  Elis,  &c.  ;  and  though
no  Aphrodisia  are  mentioned  in  these  places,  we
have  no  reason  to  doubt  their  existence  ;  we  find
them  expressly  mentioned  at  Corinth  and  Athens,
where  they  were  chiefly  celebrated  by  the  numerous
prostitutes.  (Athen.  xiii.  pp.  574,  579,  xiv.  p.  659.)
Another  great  festival  of  Aphrodite  and  Adonis  in
Sestus  is  mentioned  by  Musaeus.  (Hero  and
Leand.  42.)  '  [L.  S.]

APLUSTRE.     [Navis.]

APOCLE'TI  (aTroKKijTol).  [Aetolicum  Foe-
Dus,  p.  27.  b.].

APODECTAE  (oiroSeKrat),  the  Receivers, were
public  officers  at  Athens,  who  were  introduced  by
Cleisthenes  in  the  place  of  the  ancient  colacretae
(/cwAa/cpeVaj).  They  were  ten  in  number,  one  for
each  tribe,  and  their  duty  was  to  receive  all  the
ordinary  taxes  and  distribute  them  to  the  separate
branches  of  the  administration,  which  were  enti-
tled to  them.  They  accordingly  kept  lists  of
persons  indebted  to  the  state,  made  entries  of  all
moneys  that  were  paid  in,  and  erased  the  names  of
the  debtors  from  the  lists.  They  had  the  power
to  decide  causes  connected  with  the  subjects  mider
their  management  ;  though  if  the  matters  in  dis-
pute were  of  importance,  they  were  obliged  to
bring  them  for  decision  into  the  ordinaiy  courts.
(Pollux,  viii.  97;  Etymolog.  Mag.  Harpocrat.  Suid.
Hesych.  s.  v.  ;  Aristot.  PoL  vi.  8  ;  Dem.  c.  Timocr.
pp.  750,  762  ;  Aesch.  c.  Ctes.  p.  375  ;  Bockh,  Pid)l.
Econ.  of  Athens,  p.  159,  2nd  ed.)

APOGRAPHE'  {aTToypacpr}),  is  literally  "  a
list,  or  register  ;"  but  in  the  language  of  the  Attic
courts,  the  terms  aivoypdcpeiv  and  airoypdcpeadai
had  three  separate  applications: — 1. 'Atroypacp'f]
was  used  in  reference  to  an  accusation  in  public
matters,  more  particularly  when  there  were  several
defendants  ;  the  denunciation,  the  bill  of  indict-
ment, and  enumeration  of  the  accused,  would  in
this  case  be  termed  apographe,  and  differ  but  little,
if  at  all,  from  the  ordinary  ^ropAe.  (Andoc.  de
Mybt.  13  ;  Antiph.  de  Ckoreut.  783.)  2.  It  im-
plied the  making  of  a  solemn  protest  or  assertion
before  a  magistrate,  to  the  intent  that  it  might  be
preserved  by  him,  till  it  was  required  to  be  given
in  evidence.  (Dem.  in  Phaen.  1040.)  3.  It  Avas
a  specification  of  property,  said  to  belong  to  the
state,  but  actually  in  the  possession  of  a  private
person  ;  which  specification  Avas  made,  with  a  view
to  the  confiscation  of  such  property  to  the  state.
(Lys.  de  Aristoph.  Bonis.)

The  last  case  only  requires  a  more  extended
illustration.  There  would  be  two  occasions  upon
which  it  would  occur  ;  first,  when  a  person  held
public  property  without  purchase,  as  an  intruder  ;
and  secondly,  when  the  substance  of  an  individual
was  liable  to  confiscation  in  consequence  of  a  judi-


APOKERUXIS.  103

cial  award,  as  in  the  case  of  a  declared  state
debtor.  If  no  opposition  were  offered,  the  apo-
graphc  would  attain  its  object,  under  the  care  of
the  magistrate  to  whose  office  it  was  brought ;
otherwise,  a  public  action  arose,  which  is  also  de-
signated by  the  same  title.

In  a  cause  of  the  first  kmd,  which  is  said
in  some  cases  to  have  also  borne  the  name  irod^v
exet  rh  xp^fJ-ara  Kal  ir6<Ta  ravra  ttt],  the  claimant
against  the  state  had  merely  to  prove  his  title  to
the  property  ;  and  with  this  we  must  class  the
case  of  a  person  that  impugned  the  apographe,
whereby  the  substance  of  another  was,  or  was  pro-
posed to  be,  confiscated,  on  the  ground  that  he  had
a  loan  by  way  of  mortgage  or  other  recognised
security  upon  a  portion  of  it ;  or  that  the  part  in
question  did  not  in  any  way  belong  to  the  state
debtor,  or  person  so  mulcted.  This  kind  of  oppo-
sition to  the  apographe,  is  illustrated  in  the  speech
of  Demosthenes  against  Nicostratus,  in  which  we
learn  that  ApoUodorus  had  instituted  an  apographe
against  Arethusius,  for  non-payment  of  a  penalty
incurred  in  a  former  action.  Upon  this,  Nico-
stratus attacks  the  description  of  the  property,  and
maintains  that  three  slaves  were  Avrongly  set  down
in  it  as  belonging  to  Arethusius,  for  they  were  in
fact  his  own.

In  the  second  case,  the  defence  could  of  course
only  proceed  upon  the  alleged  illegality  of  the  former
penalty  ;  and  of  this  Ave  have  an  instance  in  the
speech  of  Lysias,  for  the  soldier.  There  Polyaenus
had  been  condemned  by  the  generals  to  pay  a  fine
for  a  breach  of  discipline  ;  and,  as  he  did  not  pay
it  within  the  appointed  time,  an  apographe  to  the
amount  of  the  fine  was  directed  against  him,
which  he  opposes,  on  the  ground  that  the  fine  Avas
illegal.  The  apographe  might  be  instituted  by  an
Athenian  citizen  ;  but  if  there  were  no  prJAate
prosecutor,  it  became  the  duty  of  the  demarchi  to
proceed  with  it  officially.  Sometimes,  however,
extraordinary  commissioners,  as  the  avWoye'is  and
Cr]Tr)Tai,  were  appointed  for  the  purpose.  The
suits  instituted  against  the  apographe  belonged  to
the  jurisdiction  of  the  Eleven,  and  for  a  while  to
that  of  the  Syndici.  (Uphs  to7s  avvdiKois  cLtvo-
ypa<pas  diroypd<l>(av,  Lycurg.  quoted  by  Hai-po-
cration.)  The  further  conduct  of  these  causes
would,  of  course,  in  a  great  measure  depend  upon
the  claimant  being,  or  not  being,  in  possession
of  the  proscribed  property.  In  the  first  case  the
diroypd^wu,  in  the  second  the  claimant,  Avould
appear  in  the  character  of  a  plaintiff.  In  a  case
like  that  of  Nicostratus  above  cited,  the  claimant
AA'ould  be  obliged  to  deposit  a  certain  sum,  Avhich
he  forfeited  if  he  lost  his  cause  (TrapaKara^oArj)  ;
in  all,  he  Avould  probably  be  obliged  to  pay  the
costs  or  court  fees  (TrpvTave7a)  upon  the  same  con-
tingency.

A  private  citizen,  Avho  prosecuted  an  indivi-
dual by  means  of  aTroypacprj,  forfeited  a  thousand
drachmae,  if  he  failed  to  obtain  the  votes  of  one-
fifth  of  the  dicasts,  and  reimbursed  the  defendant
his  prj'taneia  upon  acquittal.  In  the  former  case,
too,  he  would  probably  incur  a  modified  atimia,
i.  e.  a  restriction  from  bringing  such  actions  for
the  future.  [J.  S.  M.]

APOKERUXIS  (aTTOKvpv^is),  implies  the
method  by  which  a  father  could  at  Athens  dissolve
the  legal  connection  betAveen  himself  and  his  son  ;
but  as  it  is  not  mentioned  by  any  of  the  orators
or  the  older  wiitcrs,  it  could  rarely  have  taliea
H  4


104  APOPHORA.

place.  According  to  the  author  of  the  dcclarna
tion  on  the  subject  ('ATroKTjpvTTo/ievos),  which  has
generally  been  attributed  to  Lucian,  substantial
reasons  were  required  to  insure  the  ratification  of
such  extraordinary  severity.  Those  suggested  in
the  treatise  referred  to  are,  deficiency  in  filial
attention,  riotous  living,  and  profligacy  generally.
A  subsequent  act  of  pardon  might  annul  this
solemn  rejection  ;  but  if  it  were  not  so  avoided,
the  son  was  denied  by  his  father  while  alive,  and
disinherited  afterwards.  It  does  not,  however,
appear  that  his  privileges  as  to  his  tribe  or  the
state  underwent  any  alteration.  The  court  of  the
archon  must  have  been  that  in  which  causes  of
this  kind  were  brought  forward,  and  the  rejection
would  be  completed  and  declared  by  the  voice  of
the  herald  (diroK'fjpv^aL),  '  It  is  probable  that  an
adoptive  father  also  might  resort  to  this  remedy
against  the  ingratitude  of  a  son.  (Meier,  Att.
Process,  p.  432,  &c.)  [J.  S.  M.]

APOLEIPSIS  (aTTt^Xe^is).  [DivoRTiUM.]
APOLLINA'RES  LUDI.  [Ludi.]
APOLLO'NIA  {'AttoWwuio)  is  the  name  of  a
propitiatory  festival  solemnized  at  Sicyon,  in  honour
of  Apollo  and  Artemis,  of  which  Pausanias  (ii.  7.
§7)  gives  the  following  account:  —  Apollo  and
Artemis,  after  the  destruction  of  the  Python,  had
wished  to  be  purified  at  Sicyon  {Aegialea)  ;  but
being  driven  away  by  a  phantom  (whence  in  after-
times  a  certain  spot  in  the  town  was  called  ^6§os),
they  proceeded  to  Carmanos  in  Crete.  Upon  this
the  inhabitants  of  Sicyon  were  attacked  by  a  pesti-
lence, and  the  seers  ordered  them  to  appease  the
deities.  Seven  boys  and  the  same  number  of  girls
were  ordered  to  go  to  the  river  Sythas,  and  bathe
in  its  waters  ;  then  to  cany  the  statues  of  the  two
deities  into  the  temple  of  Peitho,  and  from  thence
back  to  that  of  Apollo.  Similar  rites,  says  Pausa-
nias, still  continue  to  be  observed  ;  for  at  the  fes-
tival of  Apollo,  the  boys  go  to  the  river  Sythas,
and  carry  the  two  deities  into  the  temple  of  Peitho,
and  thence  back  to  that  of  Apollo.

Although  festivals  under  the  name  of  ApoUonia,
in  honour  of  Apollo,  are  mentioned  in  no  other
place,  still  it  is  not  improbable  that  they  existed  un-
der the  same  name  in  other  towns  of  Greece.  [L.  S.]
APOPEMPSIS  (o7r(f7re;u\|/£s).  [Divortium.]
APOPHANSIS,  or  APOPHASIS  {airScpav-
ffis  or  airotpacns),  was  the  proclamation  of  the  de-
cision which  the  majority  of  the  judges  came  to  at
the  end  of  a  trial,  and  was  thus  also  used  to  signify
the  day  on  which  the  trial  took  place.  (Dem.  c.
Euerget.  p.  1153  ;  Lex  Rhetor,  p.  210.)  The  word
was  also  employed  to  indicate  the  account  of  a
person's  property,  which  was  obliged  to  be  given
when  an  antidosis  was  demjinded.  [Antidosis.]
APO'PHORA  (oTToc^opa),  which  properly  means
"  produce  or  profit "  of  any  kind,  was  used  at
Athens  to  signify  the  profit  which  accrued  to  mas-
ters firom  their  slaves.  It  thus  signified  the  sum
Avhich  slaves  paid  to  their  masters  when  they  la-
boured on  their  own  account,  and  the  sum  which
masters  received  when  they  let  out  their  slaves  on
hire  either  for  the  mines  or  any  other  kind  of
.abour,  and  also  the  money  which  was  paid  by  the
state  for  the  use  of  the  slaves  who  served  in  the
fleet.  (Dem.  c.  Apluih.  i.  p.  819,  c.  Nicostr.  p.
12.53  ;  Andoc.  De Myster.  p.  19  ;  Xen.  Reji.  Ath.
i.  1 1 ;  Biickh,  Puhl.  Econ.  of  Athens,  p.  72,  2nd  ed.)
I'he  tei-m  apophora  was  ako  applied  to  the  money
which  was  paid  by  the  allied  states  to  Sparta,  for


APOSTOLEIS.

the  purpose  of  carrying  on  the  war  against  the
Persians.  When  Athens  acquired  the  supremacy,
these  moneys  were  called  ^6poi.  (Bcickh,  Ibid,
p.  3.96.)

APOPIIORE'TA  {a-KQcpSp-nra),  presents  which
were  given  to  friends  at  the  end  of  an  entertain-
ment, to  tiike  home  with  them.  These  presents
were  usually  given  on  festival  days,  especially
during  the  Saturnalia.  Martial  gives  the  title  of
Apophoreta  to  the  fourteenth  book  of  his  Epigrams,
which  contains  a  number  of  epigrams  on  the  things
usually  given  away  as  apophoreta.  (Suet.  Fesp.
19  ;  Cal.  55  ;  Octav.  75.)

^  APOPHRADES  HEMERAI  (aTro<ppdSes
rifxipai),  unlucky  or  unfortunate  days  {dies  nefasti)^
on  which  no  public  business,  nor  any  important
aflFairs  of  any  kind,  were  transacted  at  Athens.
Such  were  the  last  three  days  but  one  of  every
month,  and  the  twenty-fifth  day  of  the  month
Thargclion,  on  which  the  Plynteria  were  cele-
brated. {Etym.  Mag.  p.  131  ;  Plut.  Alcib.  34  ;
Lucian,  Psevdolog.  13  ;  Schomann,  De  Comitiis,
p.  50.)

APORRHE'TA  (airop^riTa),  literally  "  things
forbidden,'"  has  two  peculiar,  but  widely  different,
acceptations  in  the  Attic  dialect.  In  one  of  these
it  implies  contraband  goods,  an  enumeration  of
which  at  the  different  periods  of  Athenian  history,
is  given  by  Bockh  (Publ.  Econ.  of  At/tens,  p.  53,
2nd  ed.)  ;  in  the  other,  it  denotes  certain  contu-
melious epithets,  from  the  application  of  which
both  the  living  and  the  dead  were  protected  by
special  laws.  (Meier,  Att.  Process,  p.  482.)
Among  these,  avd:)6<poi/os,  TrarpaXoias,  and  fji.f]rpa-
Xoias  are  certainly  to  be  reckoned  ;  and  other
words,  as  pi^acrins,  though  not  forbidden  nomi-
natim  by  the  law,  seem  to  have  been  equally
actionable.  The  penalty  for  using  these  words
was  a  fine  of  500  drachmae  (Isoc.  m  Loch.  p.  396),
recoverable  in  an  action  for  abusive  language
(KaKTjyoplas).  It  is  surmised  that  this  fine  was  in-
curred by  Meidias  in  two  actions  on  the  occasion
mentioned  by  Demosthenes  (in  Mid.  pp.  540,  543  ;
see  also  Hudtwalcker,Z)e  Diaetet.  p.  1 50).   [ J.S.M.]

APOSTA'SIOU  DIKE'  {aivoaTaaiov  Slkt]).
This  is  the  only  private  suit  which  came,  as  far  as
we  know,  under  the  exclusive  jurisdiction  of  the
polemarch.  (Aristot.  De  Ath.  Pep.  quoted  by
Harpocrat.)  It  could  be  brought  against  none
but  a  freedman  (aTreXevOepos),  and  the  only  pro-
secutor permitted  to  appear  was  the  citizen  to
whom  he  had  been  indebted  for  his  liberty,  imless
this  privilege  was  transmitted  to  the  sons  of  such
former  master.  The  tenor  of  the  accusation  was,
that  there  had  been  a  default  in  duty  to  the  pro-
secutor ;  but  what  attentions  might  be  claimed
from  the  freedman,  we  are  not  informed.  It  is
said,  however,  tliat  the  greatest  delict  of  this  kind
was  the  selection  of  a  patron  {irpocrTd.T'qs)  other
than  the  former  master.  If  convicted,  the  defend-
ant was  publicly  sold  ;  but  if  acquitted,  the  un-
prosperous  connection  ceased  for  ever,  and  the
freedman  was  at  liberty  to  select  any  citizen  for
his  patron.  The  patron  could  also  summarily
punish  the  above-mentioned  delinquencies  of  hia
freedman  by  private  incarceration  without  any
legal  award.   (Petit.  Leg.  Attic,  p.  261.)   [J.  S.M.]

APOSTOLEIS  (dTToo-ToXers),  ten  public  officers
at  Athens,  whose  duty  it  was  to  see  that  the  ships
were  properly  equipped  and  provided  by  those
who   were    bound    to   discharge    the   trierarchy.


APOTHEOSIS.

They  had  the  power,  in  certain  cases,  of  imprison-
ing the  trierarchs  who  neglected  to  fiu-nish  the
chips  properly  (Deni.  pro  Cor.  p.  262)  ;  and  they
constituted  a  board,  in  conjunction  with  the  in-
spectors of  the  docks  (ot  rthv  yecvpiav  eTn/xeATjTat),
for  the  prosecution  of  all  matters  relating  to  the
equipment  of  the  ships.  (Dem.  c.  Euerg.  p.  1147  ;
Meier,  Att.  Process,  p.  112  ;  Bockh,  Ficbl.  Econ.
of  Athens^  p,  543.)

APOTHE'CA  (aTToe^KTj),  a  place  in  the  upper
part  of  the  house,  in  which  the  Romans  frequently
placed  the  earthen  amphorae  in  which  their  wines
were  deposited.  This  place,  which  was  quite
different  from  the  cella  vinaria,  was  above  the
fumarium  j  since  it  was  thought  that  the  passage
of  the  smoke  through  the  room  tended  greatly  to
increase  the  flavour  of  the  wir.e.  (Colum.  i.  6.
§  20;  Hor.  Carm.  iii.  8.  11,  Sat.  ii.  5.  7,  and
Heindorf 's  note.)  The  position  of  the  apotheca
explains  the  expression  in  Horace  {Carm.  iii,  21.
7),  Descende^  testa.  (Comp.  Becker,  Gallus,  vol.  ii.
p.  169.)

APOTHEO'SIS  (aTToe^wfTLs),  the  enrolment  of
a  mortal  among  the  gods.  The  mythology  of
Greece  contains  numerous  instances  of  the  deifica-
tion of  mortals  ;  but  in  the  republican  times  of
Greece  we  find  few  examples  of  such  deification.
The  inhabitants  of  Amphipolis,  however,  offered
sacrifices  to  Bnisidas  after  his  death  (Thuc.  v.
11)  ;  and  the  people  of  Egcste  built  an  heroum  to
Philippus,  and  also  offered  sacrifices  to  him  on  ac-
count of  his  personal  beaut}'.  (Herod,  v.  47.)  In
the  Greek  kingdoms,  which  arose  in  the  East  on
the  dismemberment  of  the  empire  of  Alexander,  it
does  not  appear  to  have  been  uncommon  for  the  suc-
cessor to  the  throne  to  have  offered  divine  honours
to  the  former  sovereign.  Such  an  apotheosis  of
Ptolemy,  king  of  Egypt,  is  described  by  Theo-
critus in  his  17th  Idyl.  (See  Casaubon's  note  on
Suet.  Jul.  Cacs.  88.)

The  term  apotheosis,  among  the  Romans,  pro-
perly signified  the  elevation  of  a  deceased  emperor
to  divine  honours.  This  practice,  which  was  com-
mon upon  the  death  of  almost  all  the  emperors,
appears  to  have  arisen  from  the  opinion,  which  was
generally  entertained  among  the  Romans,  that  the
souls  or  manes  of  their  ancestors  became  deities  ;
and  as  it  was  common  for  children  to  worship  the
manes  of  their  fathers,  so  it  was  natural  for  divine
honouj-s  to  be  publicly  paid  to  a  deceased  emperor,
who  was  regarded  as  the  parent  of  his  country.
This  apotheosis  of  an  emperor  was  usually  called
consecratio ;  and  the  emperor  who  received  the
honour  of  an  apotheosis,  was  said  in  deorum  nu-
merum  referri,  or  consecrari.  In  the  earliest  times
Romulus  is  said  to  have  been  admitted  to  divine
honours  imder  the  name  of  Quirinus  (Plut.  Itotn.
27,28  ;  Liv.  i.  16  ;  Cic.  de  Bep.  ii.  10)  ;  but  none
of  the  other  Roman  kings  appears  to  have  received
this  honour,  and  in  the  republican  times  we  also
read  of  no  instance  of  an  apotheosis.  Julius  Caesar
was  deified  after  his  death,  and  games  were  insti-
tuted to  his  honour  by  Augustus  (Suet.  Jul.  Caes.
88)  ;  and  the  example  thus  set  was  followed  in
the  case  of  the  other  emperors.

The  ceremonies  oljserved  on  the  occasion  of
an  apotheosis  have  been  minutely  described  by
Herodian  (iv.  2)  in  the  following  passage:  —
"  It  is  the  custom  of  the  Romans  to  deify  those
of  their  emperors  who  die,  leaving  successors  ;
and    this    rite    they    call    apotheosis.       On    this


APOTHEOSIS.


105


occasion  a  semblance  of  mourning,  combinrd
with  festival  and  religious  observances,  is  visible
throughout  the  city.  The  body  of  the  dead  they
honour  after  human  fashion,  with  a  splendid
funeral  ;  and  making  a  waxen  image  in  all  respects
resembling  him,  thej"-  expose  it  to  view  in  the
vestibule  of  the  palace,  on  a  lofty  ivon,'-  couch  of
great  size,  spread  with  cloth  of  gold.  The  figure
is  made  pallid,  like  a  sick  man.  During  most  of
the  day  senators  sit  romid  the  bed  on  the  left  side,
clothed  in  black  ;  and  noble  women  on  the  right,
clothed  in  plain  white  garments,  like  mourners,
wearing  no  gold  or  necklaces.  These  ceremonies
contuuie  for  seven  days  ;  and  the  physicians  seve-
rally approach  the  couch,  and  looking  on  the  sick
man,  say  that  he  grows  worse  and  worse.  And
when  they  have  made  believe  that  he  is  dead,  the
noblest  of  the  equestrian  and  chosen  youths  of  the
senatorial  orders  take  up  the  couch,  and  bear  it
along  the  Via  Sacra,  and  expose  it  in  the  old
forum.  Platforms  like  steps  are  built  upon  each
I  side  ;  on  one  of  which  stands  a  chorus  of  noble
j  youths,  and  on  the  opposite,  a  chorus  of  women  of
high  rank,  who  sing  hymns  and  songs  of  praise
to  the  deceased,  modulated  in  a  solemn  and  mourn-
ful strain.  Afterwards  they  bear  the  couch
through  the  city  to  the  Campus  Martius,  in  the
broadest  part  of  which  a  square  pile  is  constnicted
entirely  of  logs  of  timber  of  the  largest  size,  in  the
shape  of  a  chamber,  filled  with  faggots,  and  on  the
outside  adorned  with  hangings  interwoven  with
gold  and  ivory  images  and  pictures.  Upon  this,  a
similar  but  smaller  chamber  is  built,  with  open
doors  and  windows,  and  above  it,  a  third  and
fourth,  still  diminishing  to  the  top,  so  that  one
might  compare  it  to  the  light-houses  which  are
called  Phari.  In  the  second  story  they  place  a
bed,  and  collect  all  sorts  of  aromatics  and  incense,
and  every  sort  of  fragrant  fruit  or  herb  or  juice  ;
for  all  cities,  and  nations,  and  persons  of  eminence
emulate  each  other  in  contributing  these  last  gifts
in  honour  of  the  emperor.  And  when  a  vast  heap
of  aromatics  is  collected,  there  is  a  procession  of
horsemen  and  of  chariots  around  the  pile,  with  the
drivers  clothed  in  robes  of  office,  and  wearing
masks  made  to  resemble  the  most  distinguished
Roman  generals  and  emperors.  When  all  this  is
done,  the  others  set  fire  to  it  on  every  side,  which
easily  catches  hold  of  the  fcggots  and  aromatics  ;
and  from  the  highest  and  smallest  story,  as  from
a  pinnacle,  an  eagle  is  let  loose  to  mount  into  the
sky  as  the  fire  ascends,  which  is  believed  by  the
Romans  to  carry  the  soul  of  the  emperor  from
earth  to  heaven  ;  and  from  that  time  he  is  wor-
shipped with  the  other  gods."

In  conformity  with  this  account,  it  is  common
to  see  on  medals  struck  in  honour  of  an  apotheosis
an  altar  with  fire  on  it,  and  an  eagle,  the  bird  of
Jupiter,  taking  flight  into  the  air.  The  number  of
medals  of  this  description  is  very  numerous.  We
can  from  these  medals  alone  trace  the  names  of
sixty  individuals,  who  received  the  honours  of  an
apotheosis,  from  the  time  of  Julius  Caesar  to  that
of  Constantine  the  Great.  On  most  of  them  the
word  Consecratio  occurs,  and  on  some  Greek
coins  the  word  A*IEPnCl2.  The  following  wood-
cut is  taken  from  an  agate,  which  is  supposed  to
represent  the  apotheosis  of  Germanicus.  (Mont-
faucon,  A7it.  E.rpl.  Suppl.  vol.  v.  p.  137.)  In  his
left  hand  he  holds  the  cornucopia,  and  Victory  is
placing  a  laurel  crown  upon  him.


106


APPELLATIO.


A  very  similar  representation  to  the  above  is
found  on  the  triumphal  arch  of  Titus,  on  which
Titus  is  represented  as  being  carried  up  to  the
skies  on  an  eagle.  There  is  a  beautiful  represen-
tation of  the  apotheosis  of  Augustus  on  an  onyx-
stone  in  the  royal  museum  of  Paris.

Many  other  monuments  have  come  down  to  us,
which  represent  an  apotheosis.  Of  these  the  most
celebrated  is  the  bas-relief  in  the  Townley  gallery
in  the  British  Museum,  which  represents  the
apotheosis  of  Homer.  It  is  clearly  of  Roman  work-
manship, and  is  supposed  to  have  been  executed  in
the  time  of  the  Emperor  Claudius.

The  wives,  and  other  female  relations  of  the
emperors,  sometimes  received  the  honour  of  an
apotheosis.  This  was  the  case  with  Livia  Augusta,
with  Poppaea  the  wife  of  Nero,  and  with  Faustina
the  wife  of  Antoninus.  (Suet.  Claud.  1 1 ;  Dion
Cass.  xl.  5  ;  Tac.  Ann.  xvi.  21  ;  Capitolin.  Anton.
Philos.  26.)

APPARITO'RES,  the  general  name  for  the
public  servants  of  the  magistrates  at  Rome,  namely,
the  AccENsr,  Carnifex,  Coactores,  Inter-
pretes,Lictores,Praecones,  ScRiBAE,  Stator,
Strator,  Viatores,  of  whom  an  account  is  given
in  separate  articles.  They  were  called  apparitores
because  they  were  at  hand  to  execute  the  com-
mands of  the  magistrates  {qxiod  Us  apparebant  ei
praesto  erant  ad  obsequium,  Serv.  Ad  Virg.  Aen.  xii.
«50  ;  Cic.  pro  Chtent.  53;  Li  v.  i.  8).  Their
service  or  attendance  was  called  apparitio.  (Cic.
ad  Fam.  xiii.  54,  ad  Qji.  Fr.  i.  1.  §  4.)  The
servants  of  the  military  tribunes  were  also  called
apparitores.  We  read  that  the  Emperor  Severus
forbade  the  military  tribunes  to  retain  the  appari-
tores, whom  they  were  accustomed  to  have.
(Lamprid.  Sever.  52.)

Under  the  emperors,  the  apparitores  were  di-
vided into  numerous  classes,  and  enjoyed  peculiar
privileges,  of  which  an  account  is  given  in  Just.
Cod.  12.  tit.  52— 59.

APPELLA'TIO.  1.  Greek  (^c^etrts,  or  ava-
SiKia).  Owing  to  the  constitution  of  the  Athenian
tribunals,  each  of  which  was  generally  appropriated
to  its  particular  subjects  of  cognisance,  and  therefore
could  not  be  considered  as  homogeneous  with  or
subordinate  to  any  other,  there  was  little  oppor-
tunity for  bringing  appeals  properly  so  called.  It
is  to  be  observed  also,  that  in  general  a  cause  was
finally  and  irrevocably  decided  by  the  verdict  of
the  dicasts  (S1/C77  avTOTe\i}s).  There  were,  how-
ever, some  exceptions,  in  which  appeals  and  n"ew
trials  might  be  resorted  to.

A  new  trial  to  annul  the  previous  award  might


APPELLATIO.

be  obtained,  if  the  loser  could  prove  that  it  was
not  owing  to  his  negligence  that  judgment  had
gone  by  default,  or  that  the  dicasts  had  been  de-
ceived by  false  witnesses.  And  upon  the  expul-
sion of  the  thirty  tyrants,  a  special  law  annulled
all  the  judgments  that  had  been  given  during
the  usurpation.  (Dem.  c.  Timocr.  p.  718.)  The
peculiar  title  of  the  above-mentioned  causes  was
avdZiKoi  d'lKai,  Avhich  was  also  applied  to  all  causes
of  which  the  subject-matter  was  by  any  means
again  submitted  to  the  decision  of  a  court.

An  appeal  from  a  verdict  of  the  heliasts  was
allowed  only  when  one  of  the  parties  was  a  citizen
of  a  foreign  state,  between  which  and  Athens
an  agreement  existed  as  to  the  method  of
settling  disputes  between  individuals  of  the  re-
spective countries  (diKai  arrh  (rvfi§6\ct}y).  If  such
a  foreigner  lost  his  cause  at  Athens,  he  was  per-
mitted to  appeal  to  the  proper  court  in  another
state,  which  (ck/cAtjtos  ttSAis)  Bockh,  Schomann,
and  Hudtwalcker  suppose  to  have  been  the  native
country  of  the  litigant.  Platner,  on  the  other
hand,  arguing  from  the  intention  of  the  regulation,
viz.  to  protect  both  parties  from  the  partiality  of
each  other's  fellow-citizens,  contends  that  some
disinterested  state  would  probably  be  selected  for
this  purpose.  The  technical  words  employed  upon
this  occasion  are  eKKaKeiv,  eKKoK^lcrQai,  and  t)
eKK\7}Tos,  the  last  used  as  a  substantive,  probably
by  the  later  writers  only,  for  ecpecris.  (Harpocr.
Hudtw.  De  Diaet.  p.  125.)  This  as  well  as  the
other  cases  of  appeal  are  noticed  by  Pollux  (viii.
62,  63)  in  the  following  words: — ""Ec^jecrts  is
when  one  transfers  a  cause  from  the  arbitrators
(PiaiTiirai)^  or  archons,  or  men  of  the  township
{Sr]iJ.6Tai)  to  the  dicasts,  or  from  the  senate  to  the
assembly  of  the  people,  or  from  the  assembly  to  a
court  (SLKacTT-fipiov),  or  from  the  dicasts  to  a  Ibreign
tribunal  ;  and  the  cause  was  then  termed  icp^trifios.
Those  suits  were  also  called  %KK\r)Tai  S'lKai.  The
deposit  staked  in  appeals,  which  we  now  call
ivapaS6Xiov,  is  by  Aristotle  styled  irapdSoKov.''
The  appeals  from  the  diaetetae  are  generally  men-
tioned by  Dem.  c.  Aphob.  p.  862  ;  c.  Boeot.  de
Dote,  pp".  1013,  1017,  1024  ;  and  Hudtwalcker
supposes  that  they  were  allowable  in  all  cases
except  when  the  fi-^  ovaa  S'ikt]  was  resorted  to.
[Dike.]

It  is  not  easy  to  determine  upon  what  occasions
an  appeal  from  the  archons  could  be  preferred  ;  for
after  the  time  of  Solon  their  power  of  deciding
causes  had  degenerated  into  the  mere  presidency  of
a  court  (rjyefx.oyia  htKaa-rripiov),  and  the  conduct
of  the  previous  examination  of  causes  {avaKpicis).
It  has  been  also  remarked  (Platner,  Proc.  und
Klag.  vol.  i.  p.  243),  that  upon  the  plaintiff's  suit
being  rejected  in  this  previous  examination  as
unfit  to  be  brought  before  a  court,  he  would  most
probably  proceed  against  the  archon  in  the  assem  -
bly  of  the  people  for  denial  of  justice,  or  would
wait  till  the  expiration  of  his  year  of  oifice,  and
attack  him  when  he  came  to  render  the  account  of
his  conduct  in  the  magistracy  {(vQvvai).  (Antiph.
De  Choreut.  p.  788.)  An  appeal,  however,  from  the
archons,  as  well  as  from  all  other  officers,  was  very
possible  when  they  imposed  a  fine  of  their  own
authority  and  without  the  sanction  of  a  court ;  and
it  might  also  take  place  when  the  king  archon  had
by  his  sole  voice  made  an  award  of  dues  and  privi-
leges (y^pa)  contested  by  two  priesthoods  or  sacer-
dotal races.     {Lex.  Rhetoricuniy  pp.  219,  19.)


APPELLATIO.

The  appeal  from  the  demotae  would  occur,  when
a  person  hitherto  deemed  one  of  their  members,
had  been  declared  by  them  to  be  an  intruder  and
no  genuine  citizen.  If  the  appeal  were  made,  the
demotae  appeared  by  their  advocate  as  plaintiff,
and  the  result  was  the  restitution  of  the  franchise,
or  thenceforward  the  slavery  of  the  defendant.

It  will  have  been  observed,  that  in  the  three
last  cases,  the  appeal  was  made  from  few  or  single
or  local  judges  to  the  heliasts,  who  were  con-
sidered the  representatives  of  the  people  or  country.
With  respect  to  the  proceedings,  no  new  documents
seem  to  have  been  added  to  the  contents  of  the
echinus  upon  an  appeal  ;  but  the  anacrisis  would
be  confined  merely  to  an  examination,  as  far  as
was  necessary,  of  those  documents  which  had  been
already  put  in  by  the  litigants.

There  is  some  obscurity  respecting  the  two  next
kinds  of  appeal  that  are  noticed  by  Pollux.  It  is
conjectured  by  Schomann  (AtL  Process,  p.  771)
that  the  appeal  from  the  senate  to  the  people  refers
to  cases  which  the  former  were  for  various  reasons
disinclined  to  decide,  and  by  Platner  (vol.  L  p.  427),
that  it  occurred  when  the  senate  was  accused  of
having  exceeded  its  powers.

Upon  the  appeal  from  the  assembly  to  court,  there
is  also  a  difference  of  opinion  between  the  two  last-
mentioned  critics,  Schomann  maintaining  {Att.
Process,  p.  771)  that  the  words  of  Pollux  are  to  be
applied  to  a  voluntary  reference  of  a  cause  by  the
assembly  to  the  dicasts,  and  Platner  suggesting
the  possible  case  of  one  that  incurred  a  praejudicium
of  the  assembly  against  him  (irpo§oXT],  Karaxeipo-
Tovia)  calling  upon  a  court  {SiKacrrr^piov)  to  give
him  the  opportunity  of  vindicating  himself  from  a
charge  that  his  antagonist  declined  to  follow  up.
Platner  also  supposes  the  case  of  a  magistrate  sum-
marily deposed  by  the  assembly,  and  demanding
to  prove  his  innocence  before  the  heliasts.   [J.S.M.]

2.  Roman.  The  word  appellatio,  and  the
corresponding  verb  appellare,  are  used  in  the  early
Roman  writers  to  express  the  application  of  an
individual  to  a  magistrate,  and  particularly  to
a  tribune,  in  order  to  protect  himself  from  some
wrong  inflicted,  or  threatened  to  be?  inflicted.  It
is  distinguished  from  provocaiio,  which  in  the  early
writers  is  used  to  signify  an  appeal  to  the  populus
in  a  matter  aflfecting  life.  It  would  seem  that  the
provocatio  was  an  ancient  right  of  the  Roman
citizens.  The  surviving  Horatius,  who  murdered
his  sister,  appealed  from  the  duumviri  to  the
populus.  (Liv.  i.  26.)  The  decemviri  took  away
the  provocatio  ;  but  it  was  restored  by  a  lex  con-
sulaxis  de  provocatione,  and  it  was  at  the  same
time  enacted  that  in  future  no  magistrate  should
be  made  from  whom  there  should  be  no  appeal.
On  this  Livy  (iii.  55)  remarks,  that  the  plebes
were  now  protected  by  the  provocatio  and  the
tribunidum  aiiocilium;  this  latter  term  has  reference
to  the  appellatio  properly  so  called  (iii.  13.  5Q).
Appius  (Liv.  iii.  bQ)  applied  (appellavit)  to  the
tribunes  ;  and  when  this  produced  no  effect,  and
he  was  arrested  by  a  viator,  he  appealed  {pmvo-
cavit).  Cicero  (De  Orat.  ii.  48)  appears  to  allude
to  the  re-establishment  of  the  provocatio,  which  is
mentioned  by  Livy  (iii.  55).  The  complete  phrase
to  express  the  provocatio  ia  provocare  adpopulum;
and  the  phrase  which  expresses  the  appellatio,  is
appellare,  and  in  the  later  writers  appcllare  ad.
It  appears  that  a  person  might  appellare  from  one
magistrate  to  another  of  eq^ual  rank  ;  and,  of  course,


APPELLATIO.


107


from  an  inferior  to  a  superior  magistrate  ;  and  from
one  tribune  to  another.

The  appeals  which  have  here  been  referred  to,
were  limited  to  criminal  matters.  In  civil  suits  there
was  not,  and  could  not  be  any  appeal  under  the  re-
public, for  the  purpose  of  revising  and  altering  a
decision,  for  each  magistrate  had  power  to  decide
finally  within  the  limits  of  his  jurisdiction  :  and  as
a  general  rule,  the  sentence  of  a  judex  could  not
be  reversed  by  the  magistrate  who  appointed  the
judex.  The  only  mode  in  which  a  person  could
have  relief,  in  such  cases,  was  by  the  intercessio
of  a  superior  magistrate,  or  the  appellatio  of  the
tribunes  which  would  be  in  the  nature  of  a  stay  of
execution.  The  In  integram  restitutio  also  existed
under  the  republic.

When  the  supreme  power  became  vested  in  the
emperors,  the  terms  provocatio  and  appellatio  lost
their  original  signification.  Thus  Gellius  (iv,  14)
has  used  provocatio  for  appellatio.  In  the  Digest
(49.  tit.  1.  De  Appellatio7iibus)  provocatio  and  ap-
pellatio are  used  indiscriminatel}',  to  express  what
we  call  an  appeal  in  civil  matters :  but  provocatio
seems  so  far  to  have  retained  its  original  meaning
as  to  be  the  only  term  used  for  an  appeal  in
criminal  matters.  The  emperor  centred  in  him-
self both  the  power  of  the  populus  and  the  veto  of
the  tribunes ;  but  the  appeal  to  him  was  properly
in  the  last  resort.  Augustus  (Sueton.  Octaviamis^
33)  established  a  system  of  regular  appeals  from
litigant  parties  at  Rome  to  the  Praetor  Urbanus,
as  in  the  provinces  to  the  governors.  Nero  (Sueton.
N'ero,  17)  enacted  that,  all  appeals  from  privati
(Tacit.  Annal.  xiv.  '28)judices  should  be  to  the  senate.
Appellatio  among  the  later  Roman  jurists,  then,  sig-
nifies an  application  for  redress  from  the  decision
of  an  inferior  to  a  superior,  on  the  ground  of  wrong
decision,  or  ether  suflicient  ground.  According  to
Ulpian  (Dig.  49.  tit.  1),  appeals  were  common
among  the  Romans,  "  on  account  of  the  injustice
or  ignorance  of  those  who  had  to  decide  (Judi-
cantes),  though  sometimes  an  appeal  alters  a  pro-
per decision,  as  it  is  not  a  necessary  consequence
that  he  who  gives  the  last  gives  also  the  best  deci-
sion." This  remark  must  be  taken  in  connection
with  the  Roman  sj^stem  of  procedure,  by  which
such  matters  were  referred  to  a  judex  for  his  deci-
sion, after  the  pleadings  had  brought  the  matter
in  dispute  to  an  issue.  From  the  emperor  himself
there  was,  of  coiu'se,  no  appeal ;  and  by  a  constitu-
tion of  Hadrian,  there  was  no  appeal  from  the
senate  to  the  emperor.  The  emperor,  in  appoint-
ing a  judex,  might  exclude  all  appeal  and  make
the  decision  of  the  judex  final.  M.  Aurelius  by  a
rescript  (Dig.  49.  tit.  1.  s.  1,  21)  directed  an  ap-
peal from  the  judgment  of  a  judex  to  the  magis-
trate who  had  appointed  the  judex.  The  appeal,
or  libellus  appellatorius,  showed  who  was  the  ap-
pellant, against  whom  the  appeal  was,  and  what
was  the  judgment  appealed  from.

Appellatio  also  means  to  summon  a  party  before
a  judex,  or  to  call  upon  him  to  perform  something
that  he  has  undertaken  to  do.  (Cic.  Ad  Ait.  i.  8.)
The  debtor  who  was  summoned  (appellatus)  by
his  creditor,  and  obeyed  the  summons,  Avas  said
respo7idere.

The  system  of  appellationes  as  established  imder
the  empire  was  of  very  extensive  application,  and
was  not  limited  to  matters  of  criminal  and  civil
procedure.  A  person  might  appeal  in  matters  that
related  to  the  fiscus,  to  penalties  and  fines,  and


108  AQUAEDUCTUS.

to  civil  offices  and  burdens.  This  subject  is  fully
treated  by  HoUweg,  Handbuch  des  Civilprozesses,
p.  350.  [G.  L.]

APPLICATIO'NIS  JUS.     [Exsilium.]

APROSTA'SIOU  GRAPHE'  {aTrpo(rra<Tiov
ypacp-f}),  an  action  falling  under  the  jurisdiction  of
the  polemarch,  which  was  brought  against  those
metoeki,  or  resident  aliens,  who  had  neglected  to
provide  themselves  with  a  patron  (irpoffTaTr^s).
This  action  is  stated  to  have  been  also  brought
against  those  metoeki,  who  exercised  the  rights  of
full  citizens,  or  did  not  pay  the  ix^tolkiov^  a  tax
of  twelve  drachmae  exacted  from  resident  aliens  ;
but  Meier  has  remarked  that  this  action  was  only
applicable  in  such  cases,  provided  that  the  metoeki
had  no  patron.  (Harpocrat.  ;  Zonar.  ;  Suid.  and
the  other  grammarians ;  Meier,  Att.  Process^
p.  315,  &c.)

APSIS  or  ABSIS  (ai|/is),  in  its  literal  meaning
from  aTTTw,  is  a  fastening  of  any  kind  ;  for  example,
the  meshes  of  a  net.  (Hom.  //.  v.  487.)  It  was  ap-
plied specially  to  the  joining  together  the  extremities
of  a  piece  of  wood,  so  as  to  give  it  the  shape  of  a
bow  ;  and  hence  it  came  to  signify  anything  of
that  shape,  such  as  a  bow,  an  arch,  or  a  wheel.
(Hes.  Op.  424  ;  Herod,  iv.  72.)  A  potter's  wheel
is  described,  in  the  Anthology,  as  kvkXos  h\n8os.
The  next  transition  of  meaning  is  to  anything
vaulted  (for  example,  t]  imovpavia  a^is^  the  vault
of  heaven.  Plat.  Phaedr.  p.  247,  b.)  ;  and  in  this
sense  it  was  adopted  in  architecture,  first,  for  any
building  or  portion  of  a  building  of  a  circular  form,
or  vaulted  (Plin.  Epist.  ii.  17.  §  18),  and  more
especially  for  the  circular  and  vaulted  end  of  a
Basilica.  (Paul.  Nol.  Ep.  12  ;  Augustin,  Ep.  203  ;
Isid.  Orig.  xv.  8.)  For  other  applications  of  it,  all
with  the  general  meaning  of  a  vault  or  curve,  see
Forcellini.  fP.  S.]

AQUAEDUCTUS  {h^payuyia),  literally,  a
water-conduit,  would,  of  course,  properly  describe
any  channel  for  the  passage  of  water  ;  but  the
word  is  used  especially  for  the  magnificent  struc-
tures by  means  of  which  Rome  and  other  cities
of  the  Roman  empire  were  supplied  with  water,
and  which  may  be  described  in  general  terras  as  a
channel,  constructed  as  nearly  as  possible  with  a
regular  declivity  from  the  source  whence  the
water  was  derived  to  the  place  where  it  was  de-
livered, earned  through  hills  by  means  of  tunnels,
and  over  valleys  upon  a  substruction  of  solid
masonry  or  arches.

The  aqueduct  is  mentioned  by  Strabo  as  among
the  structures  which  were  neglected  by  the  Greeks,
and  first  brought  into  use  by  the  Romans  (v.
p.  235).  It  will  presently  be  seen  that  this  state-
ment requires  some  slight  modification  ;  but,  if
understood  of  the  grand  structures  we  have  referred
to,  it  is  true  enough  that  the  Greeks  (before  the
Roman  conquest)  had  none  such,  and  for  the
obvious  reason,  that  they  had  no  need  of  them.
Tliere  is  no  occasion  to  discuss  the  possibility  or
impossibility  of  constructing  aqueducts  without
arches,  which  is  the  reason  alleged  by  some
writers  for  their  not  being  used  by  the  Greeks  ;
there  is  reason  enough  in  the  physical  geography
of  the  country.  Springs  (/cpTji/a*,  Kpovvoi)  were
sufficiently  abundant  to  supply  the  great  cities
with  v/ater  ;  and  great  attention  was  paid  to  the
preservation  and  adornment  of  them  ;  they  were
converted  into  public  fountains  by  the  formation  of
a  head  for  their  waters,  and  the  erection  of  an


AQUAEDUCTUS.

ornamental  superstracture  ;  and  were  dedicated  to
some  god  or  hero.  Pausanias  (x.  4.  §  1)  considers
no  place  to  deserve  the  name  of  city,  which  has
not  such  a  foxmtain.  We  are  indebted  to  the
same  author  and  other  Greek  writers  for  accounts
of  some  of  the  most  celebrated  fountains  ;  such  as
that  of  Theagenes,  at  Megara  (Paus.  i.  40.  §  1)  ;
those  of  Peirene  and  Lerna  at  Corinth,  where
there  were  many  other  fountains,  as  well  as  a
Roman  aqueduct  erected  by  Hadrian  (ii.  3.  §§  2,
3,  5  ;  4.  §  5)  ;  that  in  the  grove  of  Aesculapius  at
Epidaui'us  (ii.  17.  §  5)  ;  and  several  others  (iv.  31,
32,  34,  vii.  5,  21,  viii.  13),  of  which  we  need
only  mention  the  Enneakrounos  at  Athens,  which
was  constructed  by  Peisistratus  and  his  sons,  and
of  which  Thucydides  records  the  interesting  fact,
marking  the  transition  from  the  natural  springs  to
the  artificial  fountain,  and  showing  the  importance
attached  even  to  the  former,  that  "  it  was  called
Callirhoe  formerly,  ichen  the  springs  were  visible
((pavepcau  Tcov  TT7]ycov  ovaav,  Thuc.  ii.  15  ;  Paus.  i.
14.  §  1)  :  to  this  enumeration  might  be  added  the
springs  of  salt-water  in  certain  temples  ;  as  in
those  of  Erechtheus  at  Athens,  and  of  Poseidon
Hippius  at  Mantineia.  (Paus.  i.  26.  §  5,  viii.  10.
§4.)

In  these  cases  we  have  no  reason  to  suppose  that
there  was  any  thing  more  than  a  fountain  over  or
close  to  the  springs,  forming  a  head  for  the  water
derived,  either  immediately,  or  by  very  short
channels,  from  them.  But  we  are  not  without
examples  of  constructions  more  nearly  approaching
the  Roman  aqueducts  in  kind,  though  not  in
degree.  That  the  Greeks,  at  a  very  early  period,
had  some  powers  of  hydraulic  engineering  is  shown
by  the  drainage  tunnels  of  the  lake  Copai's,  and
the  similar  works  of  Phaeax  at  Agrigentum
[Eimissarium]  ;  and  we  have  an  instance  of  a
channel  for  water  being  carried  through  a  moun-
tain, to  supply  the  city  of  Samos.  The  height  of
the  mountaui  was  150  orguiae  (900  Greek  feet)  ;
the  length  of  the  tunnel  was  seven  stadia  (7-8ths
of  a  Roman  mile,  or  about  1420  yards)  ;  its  section
was  a  square  of  eight  Greek  feet.  The  actual
channel  for  the  water  was  cut  below  this,  and  was,
if  the  text  is  right,  thirty  Greek  feet  deep,  and
three  wide  ;  the  water  passed  through  pipes  (5ia
(r(i}Ki]vwp)  from  a  copious  spring,  and  was  thus
brought  to  the  city.  (Herod,  iii.  60.)  M'liller
conjectures  that  the  work  was  one  of  those  executed
by  Poly  crates  (Arch'dol.  d.Kunst,  §  81).

The  chief  regulations  among  the  Greeks  respect-
ing fountains  and  springs,  whether  in  town  or
coimtry,  were  the  following :  —  Water  might  be
fetched  from  the  public  fountains  or  wells  to  a
distance  of  four  stadia  ;  beyond  this,  persons  must
dig  their  own  wells  ;  but  if  any  one  dug  to  a
depth  of  ten  orguiae  (or,  according  to  Plato,  /ie'xpi
rris  Kepafj-iSos  yris)  without  finding  water,  he  was
permitted  to  take  from  his  neighbour's  well  a
j)itcher  of  six  chots  twice  a  day  (Plut.  Sol.  23  ;
Plat.  Leg.  viii.  p.  844,  a,b).

The  Romans  were  in  a  very  diflferent  position,
with  respect  to  the  supply  of  water,  from  most  of
the  Greek  cities.  They,  at  first,  had  recourse  to
the  Tiber,  and  to  wells  sunk  in  the  city  ;  but
the  water  obtained  from  those  sources  was  very
unwholesome,  and  must  soon  have  proved  insuf-
ficient, from  the  growth  of  the  population,  to  say
nothing  of  the  supplies  afterwards  required  for  the
naumachiae  and  public  baths.     It  was  this  neccs-


AQUAEDUCTUS.

Bity  that,  led  to  the  invention  of  aqueducts,  in
order  to  bring  pure  water  from  a  considerable
distance,  from  the  hills,  in  fact,  which  surround  the
Carapagna.  The  date  of  the  first  aqueduct  is  as-
signed by  Frontinus  to  the  year  a.  u.  c.  441,  or
B.  c.  313  {De  Aquaed.  Urb,  Rom.  4,  p.  14,  ed.
Adler)  ;  and  the  number  of  aqueducts  was  gra-
dually increased,  partly  at  the  public  expense,  and
partly  by  the  munificence  of  individuals,  till,  in  the
time  of  Procopius,  they  amounted  to  fourteen  ;
and,  even  before  they  were  all  erected,  they  might
well  excite  the  admiration  which  Pliny  expresses
with  respect  to  the  Claudian  aqueduct,  in  the  fol-
lowing passage  {H.  N.  xxxvi.  15.  s.  24)  :  — "  But
if  any  one  will  carefully  calculate  the  quantity  of
the  public  supply  of  water,  for  baths,  reservoirs,
houses,  trenches  (euripi),  gardens,  and  suburban
villas  ;  and,  along  the  distance  which  it  traverses,
the  arches  built,  the  mountains  perforated,  the
valleys  levelled  ;  he  will  confess  that  there  never
>vas  any  thing  more  wonderful  in  the  whole  world."
But  why  did  the  Romans  waste  so  much
money  and  labour  on  works,  the  purpose  of  which
might  have  been  effected  much  more  scientifically
by  the  simple  plan  of  laying  pipes  along  the
ground  ?  01  course,  it  is  easy  to  give  the  unthink-
ing answer,  that  they  were  ignorant  of  the  laws  of
hydrostatics,  and  did  not  know  that  water  finds
its  own  level !  It  is  traly  marvellous  that  such
an  absurd  notion  should  ever  have  been  enter-
tained, and  yet  it  is  the  common  explanation  of
the  fact  of  their  building  aqueducts  instead  of
laying  down  water-pipes.  If  it  were  at  all  neces-
cessary  to  prove  that  a  nation,  so  far  advanced  in
civilisation  as  the  Romans,  or  indeed  that  any  in-
dividual arrived  at  years  of  discretion,  had  dis-
covered that  water  finds  its  own  level,  the  proof
might  be  supplied  from  passages  in  Latin  authors  *,
from  the  whole  arrangements  for  the  distribution
of  the   water   of  the   aqueducts,   and  from   the


AQUAEDUCTUS.


109


a,  a,  The  ascending  pipe.

b.  b.  The  basin,  made  of  blocks  of  travertine.


*  Vitruvius  not  only  expressly  states  the  law
(viii.  6,  8.  5),  but  describes  one  form  of  the  aque-
duct in  which  it  was  practically  applied  (viii.  7.
s.  6),  as  will  be  seen  below.  Pliny  also,  in  de-
scribing the  passage  of  water  through  pipes,  states
the  law  in  these  very  distinct  terms  :  —  "  Subit
altitudinem  exortus  sui."     (H.  N.  xxxi.  6.  s.  31.)


very  existence  of  their  numerous  fountains  ;  as  a  de-
cisive ocular  demonstration,  we  have  given  above  a
section  of  one  of  the  many  fountains  still  existing
at  Pompeii.  Another  reason  assigned  for  the
construction  of  aqueducts  by  the  Romans  is  their
want  of  the  materials,  and  the  manufacturing  skill,
to  make  pipes  of  a  sufficient  size  ;  combined,  on
the  other  hand,  with  the  love  of  magnificence  and
the  ostentatious  disregard  of  expense,  by  which
the  architectural  works  of  the  empire  are  cha-
racterised. Some  weight  should  doubtless  be  as-
signed to  these  considerations,  although,  in  fact,
the  Romans  made  use  of  pipes  as  well  as  aqueducts :
but  the  great  point  is,  that  it  has  been  too  hastily
assumed  that  the  aqueduct  is  an  unscientific  mode
of  conveying  water  to  a  large  city  from  distant
sources  ;  oi;  that  it  is  peculiar  to  the  ancients.
London  itself  is  chiefly  supplied  by  an  aqueduct,
for  such  is  the  New  River  in  principle,  although
the  country  through  v,rhich  it  flows  is  such  as  not
to  require  arches  and  tunnels  like  those  of  the
Roman  aqueducts  ;  and  the  remark  would  apply  to
several  other  great  cities.  The  whole  matter  is  a
question  of  the  balance  of  advantages.  On  the
one  hand  there  is  the  expense  of  the  aqueduct :
on  the  other,  the  enormous  pipes  which  would  be
required  for  the  conveyance  of  an  equal  quantity
of  water,  their  liability  to  get  obstructed,  and  to
yield  at  the  joints,  the  loss  by  friction,  especially
in  the  bends,  and  the  unequal  pressure  of  the
water.  In  fact,  the  most  recent  feat  of  engineer-
ing science  in  this  department  is  exactly  a  return
to  the  Roman  aqueduct,  which  has  been  preferred
to  any  other  plan  for  conveying  water  in  large
quantities  a  considerable  distance,  over  great  in-
equalities of  ground:  we  refer  to  the  aqueduct,
begun  in  1837  and  finished  in  1842,  by  which
the  water  of  the  river  Croton  is  conveyed  a  dis-
tance of  forty  miles,  for  the  supply  of  New  York,
and  which  is  thus  described  :  —  "  An  artificial
channel,  built  with  square  stones,  supported  on
solid  masonry,  is  carried  over  valleys,  through
rivers,  under  hills,  on  arches  and  banks,  or  through
tunnels  and  bridges,  over  these  forty  miles.  Not
a  pipe,  but  a  sort  of  condensed  river,  arched  over
to  keep  it  pure  and  safe,  is  made  to  flow  at  the
rate  of  a  mile  and  a  half  an  hour  towards  New
York."  A  more  exact  description  of  an  ancient
Roman  aqueduct  could  not  easily  be  given.  (See
lUustrations  of  the  Croton  Aqueduct,  by  F.  B.
Tower,  1843.)

The  detailed  description  of  the  arrangements  of
the  aqueduct  will  be  better  understood,  after  an
enumeration  of  the  principal  aqueducts  by  which
water  was  conveyed  to  Rome  across  the  Cam-
pagna.

They  were  fourteen  in  number  ;  and  only  four
of  them  belong  to  the  time  of  the  republic,  while
five  were  built  in  the  reigns  of  Augustus  and
Claudius.  Our  knowledge  of  the  subject  is  de-
rived almost  entirely  from  the  treatise  De  Aquite-
ductihus  Urbis  Romae,  by  S.  Julius  Frontinus,  who
was  curator  aquarum  (keeper  of  the  aqueducts)
under  Nerva  and  Trajan.  It  should  be  observed
that  the  Aqzuieductus  is  often  called  simply  Aqua.

1.  The  Aqua  Appia  was  begun  by  the  censor
Appius  Claudius  Caecus  (to  whom  also  Rome  was
indebted  for  her  first  great  road),  in  B.C.  313.  Its
sources  were  near  the  Via  Praenestina,  between
the  seventh  and  eighth  milestones,  and  its  ter-
mmation  was  at  the  salinaCi  bif  the  Porta  Trigemina,


ilO  AQUAEDUCTITS.

Its  length  was  11,190  passus,  for  11,130  of  which
it  was  carried  under  the  earth,  and  for  the  remaining
60  passus,  within  the  city,  from  the  Porta  Capena
to  the  Porta  Trigemina,  it  was  on  arches.  The
distribution  of  its  water  began  from  the  Clivus
Publicius.  (Frontin.  5  ;  Liv,  ix.  29  ;  Diod.  xx.  36  ;
Aiir.  Vict,  Vir.  Illust.  34,  who  confounds  it  with
the  Anio.)     No  traces  of  it  remain.

2.  Tlie  Anio  Vetus  was  commenced  forty  years
later,  B.  c.  273,  by  the  censor  M.  Curius  Dentatus,
and  was  finished  by  M.  Fulvius  Flaccus.  The  ex-
pense was  defrayed  out  of  the  spoils  taken  from
Pyrrhus.  The  water  was  derived  from  the  river
Anio,  above  Tibur,  at  a  distance  of  twenty  Roman
miles  from  the  city ;  but,  on  account  of  its  wind-
ings, its  actual  length  was  forty-three  miles,  of
which  length  less  than  a  quarter  of  a  mile  only
(namely,  221  passus)  was  above  the  ground.
There  are  considerable  remains  of  this  aqueduct  on
the  Aurelian  wall,  near  the  Porta  Magr/iore,  and
also  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Tivoli.  It  was  built
of  blocks  of  peperino  stone,  and  the  water-course
was  lined  with  a  thick  coating  of  cement.  (Front.  6 ;
Aur.  Vict.  Vir.  III.  43.)

3.  The  AquaMarcia,  one  of  the  most  important
of  the  whole,  was  built  by  the  praetor  Q.  Marcius
Rex,  by  command  of  the  senate,  in  B.  c,  1 44.
The  want  of  a  more  plentiful  supply  of  water  had
been  long  felt,  especially  as  that  furnished  by  the
Anio  Fetus  was  of  such  bad  quality  as  to  be  al-
most unfit  for  drinking;  and,  in  B.C.  179,  the
censors,  M.  Aemilius  Lepidus  and  M.  Flaccus
Nobilior,  had  proposed  the  erection  of  a  new
aqueduct ;  but  the  scheme  had  been  defeated,  in
consequence  of  Licinius  Crassus  refusing  to  let  it
be  carried  through  his  lands.  (Liv.  xl.  51.)  The
two  existing  aqueducts  had  also  fallen  into  decay
by  neglect,  and  had  been  much  injured  by  private
persons  drawing  off  the  water  at  different  parts  of
their  course.  The  senate  therefore  commissioned
the  praetor  Marcius  to  repair  the  old  aqueducts,
and  to  build  a  third,  which  was  named  after  him.
Some  writers  have  pretended  that  the  original
construction  of  this  aqueduct  is  to  be  ascribed  to
Ancus  Marcius,  alleging  a  passage  of  Pliny  (H.N.
xxxi,  3.  s.  2i),  and  a  medal  of  the  Marcian  gens,
family  Philippus,  which  bears  on  the  obverse  a
head  with  the  legend  Ancvs,  and  on  the  reverse
a  representation  of  an  aqueduct,  with  the  letters
AQVAMi  between  the  arches,  supporting  an
equestrian  statue  with  the  legend  Phillippvs  :
but  those  who  know  any  thing  of  the  history  of
Roman  family  records  will  understand  that  this
medal  bears  no  evidence  to  the  point  in  question,
and  is  simply  a  perpetuation  of  two  of  the  greatest
distinctions  of  the  Marcia  gens,  their  alleged  de-
scent from  Ancus,  and  the  aqueduct  which  bore
their  name  ;  and  Pliny's  opinion  is  simply  one  of
his  ludicrous  blunders,  arising  probably  from  his
confounding  Marcius  Rex  with  the  king  Ancus
Marcius.  (Eckhel,  Doctr.  Num.  Vet.  vol.  v.  p.  248.)


This  aqueduct  commenced  at  the  side  of  the
Via.    Valeria,  thirty-six  miles   from   Rome  j    its


AQUAEDUCTUS.

length  was  61,710i  joossms,  of  which  only  7463
were  above  ground  ;  namely,  528  on  solid  sub-
structions, and  6935  on  arches.  It  was  high
enough  to  supply  water  to  the  summit  of  the
Capitolinc  Mount.  It  was  repaired  by  Agrippa
in  his  aedileship,  b.c.  33  (see  below,  No.  5.),  and
the  volume  of  its  water  was  increased  by  Au-
gustus, by  means  of  the  water  of  a  spring  800
passus  from  it:  the  short  aqueduct  which  con-
veyed this  water  was  called  the  Aqua  Angiista,
but  is  never  enumerated  as  a  distuict  aqueduct.
Pliny  states  that  the  water  of  the  Aqua  Marcia
was  the  coldest  and  most  wholesome  of  all  which
was  brought  to  Rome  ;  and  Vitruvius  and  other
writers  refer  to  the  excellence  of  the  water  as  being
proverbial.  Several  arches  of  the  Aqua  Marcia
are  still  standing.  (Frontin.  12  ;  Plin.  U.N.  xxxi.
3.  8.  24,  who  differs  from  Frontinus  in  some  of  the
details  ;  Strab.  v.  p.  240  ;  Vitruv.  viii.  3.  §  1  ;
Dion  Cass.  xlix.  42 ;  Pint.  Coriol.  1  ;  Properu  iii.
22,  24  ;  Martial,  vi.  42.  16  ;  Stat.  Silv.  i.  5,
25.)

4.  The  Aqua  TepuJa,  which  was  built  by  the
censors  Cn.  Servilius  Caepio  and  L.  Cassius  Lon-
ginus  in  b.  c.  127,  began  at  a  spot  in  the  Lucullan
or  Tusculan  land,  two  miles  to  the  right  of  the
tenth  milestone  on  the  Via  Latina.  It  was  after-
wards connected  with

5.  ThQ  Aqua  Julia.  Among  the  splendid  public
works  executed  by  Agrippa  in  his  aedileship,
B.  c.  33,  was  the  formation  of  a  new  aqueduct,  and
the  restoration  of  all  the  old  ones.  From  a  source
two  miles  to  the  right  of  the  twelfth  milestone  of
the  Via  Latina,  he  constnicted  his  aqueduct  (the
Aqua  Julia)  first  to  the  Aqua  Tepula,  in  which
it  Avas  merged  as  far  as  the  reservoir  {piscina)
on  the  Via  Latina,  seven  miles  from  Rome.
From  this  reservoir  the  water  was  carried  along
two  distinct  channels,  on  the  same  substructions
(which  were  probably  the  original  substructions
of  the  Aqua  Tepula,  newly  restored),  the  lower
channel  being  called  the  Aqua  Tepula,  and  the
upper  the  Aqua  Julia  ;  and  this  double  aqueduct
again  was  united  with  the  Aqua  Marcia,  over  the
watercourse  of  which  the  other  two  were  carried.
The  monument  erected  at  the  junction  of  these
three  aqxieducts,  is  still  to  be  seen  close  to  the
Porta  S.  I^orenzo.  It  bears  an  inscription  refemng
to  the  repairs  under  Caracalla,  (See  the  woodcut
below,  p.  112.)  The  whole  course  of  the  Aqua
Julia,  from  its  source,  amounted  to  \5,A2Q passtts,
partly  on  massive  substructions,  and  partly  on
arches.     (Frontin.  8,  9,  19.)

6.  The  Aqua  Virgo  was  built  by  Agrippa,  to
supply  his  baths.  From  a  source  in  a  marshy
spot  by  the  eighth  milestone  on  the  Via  Collatina,
it  was  conducted  by  a  very  circuitous  route,  chiefly
under  the  ground,  to  the  M.  Pincius,  whence  it
was  carried  on  arches  to  the  Campus  Martins.  Its
length  was  14,105  passus,  of  which  12,865  were
underground  ;  in  its  subterranean  course  it  re-
ceived the  water  of  numerous  springs  ;  and  its
water  was  as  highly  esteemed  for  bathing  as  that
of  the  Aqtia  Marcia  was  for  drinking.  It  is  one
of  the  two  aqueducts  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Tiber,
which  are  still  in  use,  though  on  a  much-diminished
scale.  (See  below.)  The  origin  of  its  name  is
variously  explained.  (Frontin.  10  ;  Dion  Cass.  liv.
1 1  ;  Plin.  //.  N.  xxxi.  3.  s.  25  ;  Cassiod.  Var.
vii.  6  ;  Ovid,  Trisf.  iii.  12.  22  ;  Martial,  v.  20.  9,
vi.  42.  18,  xi.  47.  6.)


AQUAEDUCTUS.

7.  The  Aqua  Alsietina  (sometimes  called  also
Aqaa  Augusta),  on  the  other  side  of  the  Tiber,
was  constnicted  by  Augustus  from  the  Locus
Alsietinus  {Lago  di  Martignano),  which  lay  6500
passus  to  the  right  of  the  fourteenth  milestone  on  the

Via  Ciciudia,  to  the  part  of  the  Regio  Transtiherina
below  the  Janiculus.  Its  length  was  22,172
passus,  of  which  only  358  were  on  arches  ;  and
its  water  was  so  bad  that  it  could  only  have  been
intended  for  the  supply  of  Augustus's  Naumachia,
and  for  watering  gardens.  Its  reservoir  was  1800
feet  long  by  1200  wide.    (Frontin.  11.)

8,  9.  The  two  most  magnificent  aqueducts  were
the  Aqua  Clavdia  and  the  Anio  Novm  (or  Aqua
Aniena  Nova),  both  commenced  by  Caligula  in
A.  D.  36,  and  finished  by  Claudius  in  a.  d.  50.
The  water  oi  the  Aqua  Claudia  was  derived  from  two
copious  and  excellent  springs,  called  Caerulus  and
Curtius,  near  the  thirty-eighth  milestone  on  the  Via
SuUacensis,  and  it  was  afterwards  increased  by  a
third  spring,  Albudinus.  Its  water  was  reckoned
the  best  after  the  Marcia.  Its  length  was  46,406
-passus  (nearly  46|  miles),  of  which  9567  were  on
arches.  Of  a  still  greater  length  was  the  Anio
Novus,  which  began  at  the  forty-second  milestone,
on  the  Via  Stdtlacensis,  and  received  in  addition,  at
the  thirty-eighth  milestone,  opposite  the  sources  of
the  Aqua  Claudia,  a  stream  called  the  Rivus  Her-
culaneus.  It  was  the  longest  and  the  highest  of
all  the  aqueducts,  its  length  being  nearly  59  miles
(58,700  passus),  and  some  of  its  arches  109
feet  high.  In  the  neighbourhood  of  the  city  these
two  aqueducts  were  united,  forming  two  channels
on  the  same  arches,  the  Claudia  below  and  the
Anio  Norms  above.  An  interesting  monument
connected  with  these  aqueducts,  is  the  gate  now
called  Porta  Maggiore,  which  was  originally  a
magnificent  double  arch,  by  means  of  which  the
aqueduct  was  carried  over  the  Via  Lahicana  and
the  Via  Praenestina.  The  Porta  Lahicana  was
blocked  up  by  Honorius  ;  but  the  arch  has  been
lately  cleared  of  his  barbarous  constructions.  Over
the  double  arch  are  three  inscriptions,  which  re-
cord the  names  of  Claudius  as  the  builder,  and  of
Vespasian  and  Titus  as  the  restorers  of  the  aque-
duct, (See  the  woodcut  below.)  By  the  side
of  this  arch  the  aqueduct  passes  along  the  wall  of
Aurelian  for  some  distance,  and  then  it  is  con-
tinued upon  the  Arcus  Neroniani  or  Caelimontani,
which  were  added  by  Nero  to  the  original  struc-
ture, and  which  terminated  at  the  temple  of
Claudius,  which  was  also  built  by  Nero,  on  the
Caelius,  where  the  water  was  probably  conveyed
to  a  castellum  already  built  for  the  Aquxi  Julia,
and  for  a  branch  of  the  Aqua  Marcia,  which  had
been  at  some  previous  time  continued  to  the
Caditis :  the  monument  called  the  Arch  of  Dola-
bella  is  probably  a  remnant  of  this  common  castel-
lum. (Becker,  Ilandb.  d.  Rom.  Alterth.  vol.  i.
pp.  499—502.)

These  nine  aqueducts  were  all  that  existed  in
the  time  of  Frontinus,  who  thus  speaks  of  them
collectively,  in  terms  which  can  hardly  be  thought
exaggei-ated  :  —  "  Tot  aquarum  tarn  multis  neces-
sariis  molibus  pyramidas  videlicet  otiosas  compares,
aid  inertia  sed  fama  celebrata  opera  Graecoi-um.''''
It  has  been  calculated  that  these  nine  aqueducts
furnished  Rome  with  a  supply  of  water  equal  to
that  carried  down  by  a  river  thirty  feet  broad  by
six  deep,  flowing  at  the  rate  of  thirty  inches  a
second.     There  was  also  another  aqueduct,  not


AQUAEDUCTUS.  Ill

reckoned  with  the  nine,  because  its  waters  were
no  longer  brought  all  the  way  to  Rome  :

10.  This  was  the  Aqua  Crabra,  which  had  its
source  near  that  of  the  Julia,  and  which  was  ori-
ginally carried  right  through  the  Circus  Maximus  ;
but  the  water  was  so  bad,  that  Agrippa  would  not
bring  it  into  the  Julia,  but  abandoned  it  to  the
people  of  the  Tusculan  land  ;  hence  it  was  called
Aqua  Damnata.  At  a  later  period,  part  of  its
water  was  brought  into  iheAqua  Julia.  (Frontin.  9.)
Considerable  traces  of  it  remain.

There  are  still  four  aqueducts  of  later  con-
stniction  to  be  added  to  the  list.

11.  The  Aqua  Trajana  was  brought  by  Trajan
from  the  Lacus  Sahutinus  (now  Bracviano),  to
supply  the  Janicidus  and  the  Regio  Transtiberina.
Its  construction  is  recorded  on  coins  of  gold,  silver,
and  bronze,  of  the  years  111  and  112  A.  D.
(Eckhel,  Doctr.  Num.  Vet.  vi.  pp.  425,  428).
Trajan  also  restored  and  improved  the  other  aque-
ducts, especially  the  Anio  Novus.  (Frontin.  92,  93.)

12.  The  Aqua  Alexandrina  was  constructed  by
Alexander  Severas  ;  its  source  was  in  the  lands  of
Tusculura,  about  fourteen  miles  from  Rome,  be-
tween Gabii  and  the  Lake  Regillus.  Its  small
height  shows  that  it  was  intended  for  the  baths  of
Severus,  which  were  in  one  of  the  valleys  of  Rome.
(Lamprid.  Alex.  Sev.  25  ;  Fabretti,  Diss.  i.  §  23.)

13.  The  Aqua  Septimiana,  built  by  Septimius
Severus,  was,  perhaps,  only  a  branch  of  the  Aqua
Julia,  formed  by  the  emperor  to  bring  water  to  his
baths.     (Fabretti,  Diss.  iii.  §  285.)

14.  The  Aqu^  Algentia  had  its  source  at  A/.
Algidus  by  the  Via  Tusculana,  9000  passus  from
Rome,  according  to  Fabretti ;  but  more  probably
15,000.     Its  builder  is  unknown.

These  seem  to  have  been  the  fourteen  aqueducts,
which  were  still  preserved  in  use  at  Rome  in  the
time  of  Procopius  {Goth.  i.  19)  ;  but  there  is  a
doubt  respecting  some  of  the  last  five.  Thus  the
Epilogus  to  the  Notitia  mentions  the  Cirainia,  the
Severiana,  and  the  Antonia,  and  makes  the  whole
number  nineteen  ;  while  Aurelius  Victor  enu-
merates twenty.  The  account  of  Procopius  seems
the  most  exact,  and  the  excess  in  the  other  state-
ments may  be  explained  from  the  enumeration  of
the  small  accessory  branches  of  the  chief  aqueducts :
for  the  Aqua  Jovia  of  Bunsen  there  is  no  sufficient
authority.  (Becker,  Handb.  d.  R'6m.  Alterth.  vol.  i.
p.  707.)

Great  pains  were  taken  by  successive  emperors
to  preserve  and  repair  the  aqueducts.  From  the
Gothic  wars  downwards,  they  have  for  the  most
part  shared  the  fate  of  the  other  great  Roman
works  of  architecture  ;  their  situation  and  purpose
rendering  them  peculiarly  exposed  to  injury  in
war  ;  but  still  their  remains  form  the  most  striking
features  of  the  Campagna,  over  which  their  lines
of  ruined  arches,  clothed  with  ivy  and  the  wild
fig-tree,  radiate  in  various  directions.  Tliree  of
them  still  serve  for  their  ancient  use  ;  and  these
three  alone,  according  to  Tournon,  supply  the
modem  city  with  a  quantity  of  water  much  greater
than  that  which  is  furnished  to  Paris  by  the  Canal
de  I'Ourcq,  for  a  population  six  times  as  large.
They  are  :  — (1.)  The  Acqua  Vergi?ie,  the  ancient
Aqua  Virgo,  which  was  restored  by  Pope  Pius  IV.
and  further  embellished  by  Benedict  XIV.  and
Clement  XIII.  The  chief  portion  of  its  waters
gush  out  through  the  beautiful  Fontima  di  Trevi,
but  it  also  supplies  twelve  other  public  fountains,


112  AQUAEDUCTUS.

and  the  greater  part  of  the  lower  city.  (2.)  The
Acqua  Felice,  named  after  the  conventual  name  of
its  restorer  Sixtus  V.  (Fra  Felice)  is,  probably,  a
part  of  the  ancient  Aqua  Claudia,  though  some
take  it  for  the  Alexandrina.  It  supplies  twenty-
seven  public  fountains,  and  the  eastern  part  of  the
city.  (3.)  The  Acqua  Paola,  the  ancient  Alsictina,
supplies  the  Transtevere  and  the  Vatican,  and
feeds,  among  others,  the  splendid  fountains  before
St.  Peter's.  Of  the  ruins  of  the  other  aqueducts
the  most  extensive,  within  Rome,  are  those  of  the
Arcus  Neroniani,  and  of  the  Aqua  Crabra  ;  the
most  interesting  are  the  Porta  Maggiore,  with  the
two  channels  of  the  Aqiia  Claudia  and  Afiio  Novus,
and  the  remains  of  the  triple  aqueduct  of  Agrippa
by  the  Porta  S.  Lorenzo.  The  following  woodcut
(after  Hirt)  represents  restored  sections  of  them,
preserving  their  relative  proportions :  —


Fig.  1.  —  Section  of  the  Porta  Ma^giore  at
Rome:  a.  the  Aqua  Claudia;  b.  the^mo  Novus ;
c.  openings  to  give  vent  to  the  air.

Fig.  2.  —  Section  of  the  triple  aqueduct  of
Agrippa:  a.  the  Aqua  Marcia;  b.  the  Aqua
Tepula;  c.  the  Aqua  Julia.  The  two  latter  are
of  brick  and  vaulted  over.  The  air-vents  are  also
shown.

The  magnificence  displayed  by  the  Romans  in
their  public  works  of  this  class,  was  by  no  means
confined  to  the  capital  ;  for  aqueducts  more  or  less
stupendous  were  constructed  by  them  in  various
and  even  very  remote  parts  of  the  empire,  —  at
Athens,  Corinth,  Catana,  Salona,  Nicoraedia,
Ephesus,  Smyrna,  Alexandria  in  the  Troad,  Syra-
cuse, Metz,  Clermont  in  Auvergne,  Niraes  (the
Pont  du  Gard),  Lyon,  Evora,  Merida,  and  Segovia.
Those  at  Ephesus  and  Alexandria  were  built  by


AQUAEDUCTUS.

Hadrian  and  Herodes  Atticus,  and  that  at  Athena
was  commenced  by  Hadrian  and  finished  by  Anto-
ninus Pius,  who  also  built  those  at  Corinth  and
Nicomedia.  That  at  Evora,  which  was  built  by
Quintus  Sertorius,  is  still  in  good  preservation ;
and  at  its  termination  in  the  city  has  a  very  ele-
gant castellum  in  two  stories,  the  lower  one  of
which  has  Ionic  columns.  Merida  in  Spain,  the
Augusta  Emerita  of  the  Romans,  who  established
a  colony  there  in  the  time  of  Augustus,  has  among
its  other  antiquities  the  remains  of  two  aqueducts,
of  one  of  which  thirty-seven  piers  are  standing,
with  three  tiers  of  arches  ;  while  of  the  other
there  are  only  two  which  form  part  of  the  original
constructions,  the  rest  being  modern.  But  that  of
Segovia,  for  which  some  Spanish  writers  have
claimed  an  antiquity  anterior  to  the  sway  of  the
Romans  in  Spain,  is  one  of  the  most  perfect  and
magnificent  works  of  the  kind  anywhere  remain-
ing. It  is  entirely  of  stone,  and  of  great  solidity,
the  piers  being  eight  feet  wide  and  eleven  in
depth  ;  and,  where  it  traverses  a  part  of  the  city,
the  height  is  upwards  of  a  hundred  feet,  and  it  has
two  tiers  of  arches,  the  lowermost  of  which  are
exceedingly  lofty.

We  proceed  to  describe  in  detail  the  construc-
tion and  arrangements  of  Roman  aqueducts.  There
are  three  matters  to  be  considered  :  the  source
from  which  the  water  was  derived  ;  the  aqueduct
itself,  by  which  it  was  conveyed  ;  and  the  reser-
voir in  which  it  was  received,  and  from  which  it
was  distributed  for  use.

(1.)  The  Sources.  —  It  is  unnecessary  to  follow
Vitruvius  into  the  minute  rules  which  he  lays
down  for  the  discovery  of  springs,  where  they
were  not  naturally  visible,  and  for  testing  the
quality  of  the  water :  it  is  enough  to  refer  to  his
statements  as  showing  the  importance  attached  to
these  points.  (Vitruv.  viii.  1.)  It  was  also  neces-
sary that  the  springs  should  have  such  an  eleva-
tion, as  that,  after  allowing  for  the  fall  necessary
to  give  the  channel  its  proper  inclination,  the  water
should  enter  the  final  reservoir  at  a  sufficient
height  to  permit  of  its  distribution  for  public  and
private  use  ;  for  there  were  no  engines  used,  as  in
modem  waterworks,  to  raise  the  water  to  a  higher
elevation  than  that  at  which  it  was  required.
When  the  source  had  been  fixed  upon,  whether  it
was  an  open  spring  {fons),  or  one  got  at  by  sink-
ing a  well  (puteus),  a  head  was  dug  for  the  water,
and  inclosed  with  a  wall ;  and,  if  necessary,  the
supply  was  increased  by  digging  channels  from
neighbouring  springs :  the  rules  for  these  opera-
tions also  are  minutely  laid  down  by  Vitruvius
(viii.  7.  s.  6.  §§  12—15).

(2.)  TTw  Channel,  orAqiceduct  itself.''' — In  order
to  convey  the  water  from  its  source  to  its  destina-
tion, a  channel  was  constructed,  having  a  slight,
and,  as  nearly  as  possible,  a  uniform  declivity.
An  elaborate  description  of  the  means  adopted  to
secure  this  object  is  quite  needless  for  readers  of
the  present  day,  as  they  were  almost  precisely

*  Though  the  word  aquaeductus  is  applied  gene-
rally to  the  whole  structure,  yet  in  its  special  and
proper  meaning  it  seems  only  to  have  signified
that  part  of  the  work  in  which  the  water-channel
was  carried  over  a  valley,  on  arches  or  on  solid
substructions :  a  channel  on  the  surface  of  the
ground  was  properly  called  rivus;  and  one  beneath
the  smface,  rivus  ^ierrancus^  or  cunioulus.


AQTJAEDUCTUS.
Bimilar  to  those  with  which  we  are  familiar  in  oirr
mil  ways:  hills  were  pierced  through  by  tunnels,
and  valleys  crossed  either  by  solid  substructions
or  arches  of  masonry,  according  to  the  height  re-
quired ;  and  of  these  arches  there  were  often  two
tiers,  and  sometimes  even  three.  The  channel
itself  {speats^  canalis)  was  a  trough  of  brick  or
stone,  lined  with  cement,  and  covered  with  a
coping,  which  was  almost  always  arched  ;  and  the
water  either  ran  directly  through  this  trough,  or  it
was  carried  through  pipes  laid  along  the  trough.
When  the  channel  was  carried  beneath  the  sur-
face, if  the  hill  through  which  it  passed  was  of
rock,  it  was  merely  cut  in  the  rock  ;  but  if  of  earth
or  sand,  it  was  constructed  of  blocks  of  stone.

The  following  woodcut  represents  a  portion  of
a  double-arched  aqueduct,  and  shows  a  section  of
the  speeus  («)  :  b  b  are  projecthig  blocks,  which
are  often  seen  in  such  positions,  and  which  were
doubtless  the  supports  for  the  centerings  used  in
building  the  arches.


AQUAEDUCTUSw


13


The  object  of  covering  the  speeus  was  to  exclude
the  sun  and  rain,  and  other  corruptions  and  ob-
structions ;  but  it  was  necessary  to  provide  a  vent
for  the  air,  which  otherwise  would  have  been
compressed  to  such  a  degree  as  to  burst  the  walls
or  roof  of  the  speeus.  These  vent-holes  were
made  at  regular  intervals  in  the  roof  of  the  speeus.,
or,  when  another  channel  passed  over  It,  in  the
side.  They  are  represented  in  the  sections,  given
above,  of  the  Jq?ui  Clazulia,  Marda.,  &c.  To
ventilate  the  subterranean  channel  of  an  aqueduct,
a  shaft  (ptHeus)  of  masonry  was  carried  to  the
surface  of  the  ground  at  intervals  of  an  actus,  or
120  Roman  feet  (or  two  actus.,  according  to  Pliny,
who  calls  them  lumina),  as  shown  in  the  following
woodcut  (after  Hirt),  which  represents  the  plan,
longitudinal  section,  and  transverse  section,  of
part  of  a  rwus  subterraneus,  the  ruins  of  wliich
Btill  exist  at  Palmyra.

The  rivus  subterraneits  possessed  the  advantage
over  the  aquaeductus  of  being  less  exposed  to
variations  of  temperature,  and  more  secure  from
injury  ;  on  the  other  hand,  it  was  of  course  more
difficult  to  get  at  when  it  required  repairs.  A
reference  to  the  account  given  above,  of  the  Roman


aquedu'cts,  will  show  bow  large  «t  portion  of  them
was  swbtemtnean.


It         1         1         !         1         i         1

II       1    rfi      ;      1       i       1

1      1       1       1       i       i       1      1

'   1   '    1       1       1      1      1       1      1

0

a

IllFI


m


a.  The  water-course  ;  b,  steps  givnig  access  to
it ;  c, .  the  shaft  ;  o?,  e,  section  of  the  sjkcus  and
shaft  ;  /,  transverse  section  of  them.

Instead  of,  or  within,  the  speeus.,  pipes  {fistulae,
tub/di),  were  often  used  for  the  passage  of  the
water.  They  were  of  lead,  or  terra-cotta  {fictiles)^
and  sometimes,  for  the  sake  of  economy,  of  leather.
The  ndes  which  Vitruvius  lays  down  apply  par-
ticularly to  leaden  pipes,  although  he  gives  the
preference  to  the  earthen  ones,  chiefly  on  the
ground  that  the  water  which  passed  tlirough  them
was  more  wholesome.  The  pipes  were  made  in
lengths  not  less  than  ten  feet,  and  of  various
widths,  which  were  denominated  in  the  manner
explained  under  Fistula.  They  were  cemented
together  at  the  joints,  which  in  earthen  pipes  were
made  to  overlap,  and  when  the  water  was  first  let
in,  ashes  were  mixed  with  it,  in  order  that  they
might  settle  in  the  joints  and  stop  them  more  com-
pletely. The  use  of  pipes  permitted  variations  to
be  made  in  the  construction  of  the  aqueduct :
namely,  the  water  could  be  carried  round,  instead
of  through  a  hill,  if  the  circuit  was  not  too  great ;
and  in  very  wide  vaDeys,  the  costly  stnicture  of
arches  eonld  be  dispensed  with.  In  this  case,  a
low  horizontal  substruction  was  made  across  the
bottom  of  the  valley,  and  the  pipe  was  brought
down  the  one  slope,  along  this  substruction,  and
up  the  opposite  slope,  to  a  height,  of  course,
somewhat  less  than  that  of  the  opposite  side.  The
horizontal  part  of  the  pipe  across  the  bottom  of  the
valley  {venter).,  had  ventilating  openings  for  the
escape  of  the  air.  At  the  bendings,  instead  of  the
pipe,  an  elbow  was  bored  in  a  solid  piece  of  stone,
into  which  the  ends  of  the  adjacent  pieces  of  pipe
were  securely  cemented.  (For  further  details,  see
Vitruvius.)  In  those  places  v/here  the  pipes
were  laid  on  the  surface,  reservoirs  were  sometimes
made,  at  intervals  of  200  actus  (24,000  feet),  in
order  that,  if  a  part  of  the  pipe  needed  repair,  the
supply  of  water  might  not  be  entirely  cut  off.  The
advantage  in  the  use  of  pipes,  according  to  Vitruvius,
was  the  facility  of  repairing  them.

The  slope  {fastigium\  on  which  the  aqueduct
was  built,  in  order  to  give  the  water  a  proper  fall
ilibramentum),  ought  not,  says  Vitruvius,  to  be
less  than  half  a  foot  in  every  "l  00  feet  (1  in  200)  ;
but  Pliny  only  allows  a  sidlicus  (a  quarter  of  an
inch)  in  100  feet.  The  great  circuit,  which  most
of  the  aqueducts  of  Rome  made,  was  taken  chiefly
(as  is  the  case  with  the  New  River),  to  prevent
the  too  rapid  descent  of  the  water.  There  is,
however,  a  considerable  variation  in  their  de-
clivities :  for  example,  the  Aqua  Marcia  and  the


JU


AQUAEDUCTUS.


AqtKi  Claudia,  though  of  such  different  heights  at
Rome,  have  their  sources  at  the  same  elevation.

At  convenient  points  on  the  course  of  the  aque-
duct, and  especially  near  the  middle  and  end,
there  was  generally  a  reservoir  (jnscina,  piscina
iimosa)  in  which  the  water  might  deposit  any
sediment  that  it  contained.  The  construction  of
these  reservoirs  will  be  understood  from  the  follow-
ing woodcut,  which  represents  a  restored  section  of
one  which  still  exists.


The  water  flowed  from  the  aqueduct  a  into  the
first  upper  chamber,  thence  down  and  up  again
through  the  openings  b,  c,  e,  into  the  second  upper
chamber,  out  of  which  it  passed  into  the  continua-
tion of  the  aqueduct  /,  having  deposited  its  sedi-
ment in  the  two  lower  chambers,  which  could  be
cleaned  out  by  the  door  d.  The  piscina  was  not
always  vaulted :  Hirt,  from  whose  work  the  above
cut  is  taken,  gives  also  an  engraving  of  an  open
piscina.  These  reservoirs  were  not  always  used :
for  example,  the  Aqua  Virgo  and  the  Alsietina
were  without  them.  They  were  especially  neces-
sary when  the  water  was  conveyed  through  pipes.
They  were  also  used  as  reservoirs  for  the  supply
of  the  neighbouring  country,  chiefly  for  the  pur-
poses of  irrigation.

The  details,  which  we  have  now  been  noticing,
are  minutely  described  by  Frontinus,  and  by
Vitruvius*  (viii.  c.  7.  s.  6),  and  briefly  by  Pliny
(H.N.xxxi.  6.  s.  31).

(3.)  Tfie  Termination  of  the  Aquedjict^  and  the
Arrangements  for  the  Distribution  of  its  Water.
—  The  water  thus  conducted  to  the  city  was  re-
ceived, when  it  reached  the  walls,  in  a  vast  reser-
voir called  castellum.,  which  formed  the  head  of
water  and  also  served  the  purpose  of  a  ineter.
The  more  ancient  name  in  use,  when  the  aque-
ducts were  first  constructed,  was  dividic?ilum.
(Fast.  s.  V.)  From  this  principal  castellum  the
water  flowed  into  other  castella,  whence  it  was
distributed  for  public  and  private  use.  The  term
castellum  is  sometimes  also  applied  to  the  inter-
mediate reservoirs  already  mentioned.

The  chief  castellum  was,  externally,  a  highly
decorated  building  ;  for  example,  that  of  Hadrian,
at  Athens,  was  adorned  with  Ionic  pillars,  and
that  at  Evora,  in  Portugal,  had  the  form  of  a  cir-
cular temple.  Internally,  there  was  generally  one
vast  chamber,  with  a  vaulted  roof  supported  by
massive  pillars,  into  which  the  water  flowed  from


*  The  particular  attention  which  Vitruvius
pays  to  the  conveyance  of  water  through  pipes,
warrants  the  supposition  that  in  his  time,  when
some  of  the  most  important  of  the  aqueducts  were
not  yet  erected,  that  method  was  very  largely
employed.


AQUAEDUCTUS.

the  aqueduct,  and  from  which  it  was  conducted
through  pipes  of  fixed  dimensions,  into  three  smaller
reservoirs,  which  were,  however,  so  arranged,  that
the  middle  one  was  only  supplied  from  the  over-
flow of  the  other  two.  Of  these  three  reservoirs,
the  two  outer  supplied  respectively  the  public  baths
and  the  private  houses,  and  the  middle  one  the
public  ponds  and  fountains  {locus  et  salientes)  :
so  that,  in  case  of  a  deficient  supply  for  useful
purposes,  none  would  be  wasted  on  the  fountains  _
the  arrangement  also  enabled  a  proper  account  to
be  kept  of  the  quantity  supplied  for  private  use,
for  the  protection  of  the  revenue  derived  from  this
source.     (Vitruv.  viii.  7.  s.  6.  §§  1,  2.)

The  minor  castella^  which  received  the  water
from  this  chief  head,  were  distributed  over  the
city,  in  such  a  manner  that  the  Aqua  Appia  sup-
plied seven  regiones  by  means  of  twenty  casteUa ;
the  Anio  Vetus,  ten  regiones  through  thirty-five
castella  ;  the  Marda,  ten  regiones  through  fifty-one
castella  ;  the  Tepula,  four  regio7ies  through  fourteen
castella  ;  the  Julia.,  seven  regiones  through  seven-
teen castella;  the  Virgo.,  three  regiones  through
eighteen  castella  ;  the  Claudia  and  i}\eAnio  Vetus.,
ninety-two  castella.  (Frontin.  79 — 86.)  For  an
account  of  the  parts  of  the  city  supplied  by  the
different  aqueducts,  see  Becker,  Handb.  d.  Horn,
Alterth.  vol.  i.  pp.  707,  708.

The  subjoined  plan  and  elevation  represent  a
niin  still  remaining  at  Rome,  commonly  called  the
"  Trophies  of  Marius,"  which  is  generally  con-
sidered to  have  been  the  castellum  of  an  aqueduct.


It  is  now  much  dilapidated,  but  was  tolerably
entire  about  the  middle  of  the  16th  century,  as
may  be  seen  by  the  drawing  published  by  Gamucci
(Antichiid  di  Roma,  iii.  p.  100),  from  which  this
restoration  is  made.  The  trophies,  then  remain-
ing in  their  places,  from  which  the  monument
derives  its  modem  appellation,  are  now  placed  on
the  Capitol.  The  ground  plan  is  given  from  an
excavation  made  some  years  since  by  the  students
of  the  French  Academy  ;  it  explains  part  of  the
internal  construction,  and  shows  the  arrangement
adopted  for  disposing  of  the  superfluous  water  of
an  aqueduct.  The  general  stream  of  water  is  first
divided  by  the  round  projecting  buttress  into  two
courses,  which  subdivide  themselves  into  five  minor
streams,  and  finally  fall  into  a  reservoir.

The  castella  were  divided  into  two  classes,  th«
publica  and  privata.


AQUAEDUCTUS.

The  casteUa  puhlica  were  again  subdirided  into
Bix  classes,  which  furnished  water  for  the  following
uses:  —  (1.)  The  Praetorian  camp  (eastra)  ;  (2.)
the  ponds  and  fountains  (lacus  et  salientes)  ;  (3.)
the  circus,  naumachiae^and  amphitheatres  {mtmera)  ;
(4.)  the  baths,  and  the  service  of  certain  im-
portant handicrafts,  snch  as  the  fullers,  dyers,  and
tarmeTs  (opera  piMica)  ;  (5.)  irregular  distributions
made  by  the  special  order  of  the  emperor  (nomine
Cuexaris)  ;  (ti.)  extraordinary  grants  to  privaie
individuals  by  the  favour  of  the  prince  (heneficia
Caesaris).  The  distribution  under  each  of  these
heads  is  described  by  Frontinus  (3,  78).

The  castella  privata  were,  as  the  name  implies,
for  the  supply  of  private  houses.  When  a  supply
of  water  from  the  aqueducts  was  first  granted  for
private  uses,  each  person  obtained  his  quantum  by
inserting  a  branch  pipe,  as  we  do,  into  the  main  ;
which  was  probably  the  custom  in  the  age  of
Vitruvius,  as  he  makes  no  mention  of  private  re-
servoirs. Indeed,  in  early  times,  all  the  water
brought  to  Rome  b}'  the  aqueducts  was  applied  to
public  purposes  exclusively,  it  being  forbidden  to
the  citizens  to  divert  any  portion  of  it  to  their  own
use,  except  such  as  escaped  by  flaws  in  the  ducts
or  pipes,  which  was  termed  aqua  cadwca.  (Frontin.
94.)  But  as  even  this  permission  opened  a
door  for  great  abuses  from  the  fraudulent  conduct
of  the  aquarii,  who  damaged  the  ducts  for  the
purpose  of  selling  the  a<]?ia  caduca,  and  as  the  sub-
sequent method  of  supply  required  the  main-pipe
to  be  punctured  in  too  many  places  (Frontin.  27),
a  remedy  was  sought  by  the  institution  of  castella
privata,  and  the  public  Avere  henceforward  for-
bidden to  collect  the  aqua  caduca,  unless  permission
was  given  by  special  favour  (beneficium)  of  the
emperor.  (Frontin.  IIL)  The  castella  privata
were  built  at  the  joimt  expense  of  the  families
supplied  by  them  ;  but  they  were  considered  as
public  property,  and  were  under  the  control  of  the
curatores  aquartnn.  (Frontin.  106.)  The  right  of
water  (jus  aquae  impetratae)  did  not  follow  the
iieir  or  purchaser  of  the  property,  bat  was  renewed
by  grant  upon  every  change  in  the  possession.
(Frontin.  107.)

The  leaden  cisterns,  which  eaefe  person  had  in
his  own  house  to  receive  the  water  laid  on  from
the  castellum  privatum,  were  called  castella  do-
mestica.

All  the  water  which  entered  the  easielhmn  was
measured,  at  its  ingress  and  egress,  by  the  size  of
the  tube  through  which  it  passed.  The  former
was  called  modulus  acceptorius,  the  latter  erogato-
rius.  To  distribute  the  water  was  termed  evogare  ;
the  distribution,  erogatio  j  the  size  of  the  tube,
fistularum  or  modulorum  capacitas,  or  Itemen.  The
smaller  pipes  which  led  from  the  main  to  the
houses  of  private  persons,  were  called  pttndae ;
those  inserted  by  fraud  into  the  duct  itself,  or  into
the  main  after  it  had  left  the  castellum,  fistulae
illicitae.

The  erogatio  was  regulated  by  a  tube  called
calix,  of  the  diameter  required,  and  not  less  than  a
foot  in  length,  attached  to  the  extremity  of  each
pipe,  where  it  entered  the  castellum  ;  it  was  pro-
bably of  lead  in  the  time  of  Vitruvius,  such  only
being  mentioned  by  him  ;  but  was  made  of  bronze
(aeneus)  when  Frontinus  wrote,  in  order  to  check
the  roguery  of  the  aquarii,  who  were  able  to  in-
crease or  diminish  the  flow  of  water  from  the
reservoir  by  compressing  or  extending  the  lead.


AQUAE  PLUVIAE.  115

As  a  further  security,  the  calix  was  stamped.
Pipes  which  had  no  calix,  were  termed  solutae.
Frontinus  also  observes  that  the  velocity  of  the
water  passing  through  the  caliie,  and,  consequently,
the  quantity  given  out,  could  be  varied  according
to  the  angle  which  the  calix  made  with  the  side  of
the  reservoir :  its  proper  position  was,  of  course,
horizontal.

It  is  evident  how  watchful  an  oversight  must
have  been  required  to  keep  the  aqueducts  in  repair,
to  regulate  their  use,  and  to  prevent  the  fraudulent
abstraction  of  their  water.  Under  the  republic,
this  office  was  discharged,  sometimes,  by  the
censors,  but  more  generally  by  the  aediles  (Cic.
ad  Div.  viii.  6),  and  sometimes  a  special  over-
seer was  appointed.  (Frontin.  95,  119.)  Augustus
first  established  the  ofiice  of  curator  (or  prae-
fectus)  aquarum  (Suet.  Ocfav.  37),  the  duties
of  which  are  minutely  described  by  Frontinus  (99),
who  seems,  while  he  held  the  office,  to  have  per-
formed it  with  the  utmost  zeal:  among  other
cares,  he  had  plans  and  models  made  of  the  whole
course  of  all  the  aqueducts  (17,  64).  The  cu-
ratores aquarum  were  invested  with  considerable
authority.  They  were  attended  outside  the  city
by  two  lictors,  three  public  slaves,  a  secretary,  and
other  attendants.

In  the  time  of  Nerva  and  Trajan,  a  body  of  four
hundred  and  sixty  slaves  were  constantly  emploj'ed
under  the  orders  of  the  curatores  aquarum  in  at-
tending to  the  aqueducts.  They  were  divided
into  two  families,  the  familia  publica,  established
by  Agrippa,  and  the  familia  Caesaris,  added  bv
Claudius  ;  and  they  were  subdivided  into  the  fol-
lowing classes  :  —  1.  The  villici,  whose  duty  it  was
to  attend  to  the  pipes  and  calices.  2.  The  castel-
larii,  who  had  the  superintendence  of  all  the
castella,  both  within  and  without  the  city.  3.  The
circuitores,  so  called  because  they  had  to  go  from
post  to  post,  to  examine  into  the  state  of  the  works,
and  also  to  keep  watch  over  the  labourers  em-
ployed upon  them,  4.  The  silicarii,  or  paviours,
who  had  to  remove  and  relay  the  pavement  when
the  pipes  beneath  it  required  attention.  5.  The
:  tectores,  who  had  charge  of  the  masonry  of  the
aqueducts.  These  and  other  workmen  appear  to
have  been  included  under  the  general  term  of
Aquaru.  (Cod.  xii.tit.  42  or  43.  s.  10  ;  Frontin.
116,  117.)  The  following  are  the  most  important
works  on  the  Roman  aqueducts  :  —  Frontinus,  de
Aqttaedwetibus  Urbis  Romae  ;  Fabretti,  o?e  Aquis
et  Aqucteductibus  Veteris  Romae;  Stieglitz,  Ar-
chaologie  der  Baukunst ;  Hirt,  Geschichte  d.  Bau-
hunsi  ;  Plainer  and  Bun  sen,  Beschreibung  d.  Stadt
Rom;  Becker,  Handbuch  d.  Romisehen  Altcr-
thutner,  vol.  i.)  [P.  S.]

AQUAE  DUCTUS.     [Servitutes.]

AQUAE     ET     IGNIS     INTERDICTIO.

[EXSILIUM.]

AQUAE  HAUSTUS.     [Servitutes.]
AQUAE  PLUVIAE  ARCENDAE  ACTIO.

That  water  was  called  aqmt  pluvia  which  fell  from
the  clouds,  and  overflowed  in  consequence  of
showers,  and  the  prevention  of  injury  to  land  from
such  water  was  the  object  of  this  action.  The  action
aquae  pltcviae  was  allowed  between  the  owners  of
adjoining  land,  and  might  be  maintained  either  by
the  owner  of  the  higher  land  against  the  owner  of
the  lower  land,  in  case  the  latter  by  any  thing  done
to  his  land  (manu  facto  opere)  prevented  the  water
from  flowing  natiurally  from  the  higher  to  the  lower
I  2


16


ARA;


land  ;  or  by  the  owner  of  the  lower  land  against
th«  owner  of  the  higher  land,  in  case  the  latt  r  did
any  thing  to  his  land  by  which  the  water  flowed
from  it  into  the  lower  land  in  a  diifcrent  way  from
what  it  natnrally  would.  In  the  absence  of  any
special  custom  or  law  to  the  contrary,  tlic  lower
land  was  subject  to  receive  the  water  which  flowed
naturally  from  the  upper  land  ;  and  this  rule  of
law  was  thus  expressed, —  ager  inferior  superiori
sennt.  The  fertilising  materials  carried  down  to
the  lower  land  were  considered  as  an  ample  com-
pensation for  any  damage  which  it  might  sustain
from  the  water.  Many  difficult  questions  occurred
h\  the  application  to  practice  of  the  general  rules
of  law  as  to  aqua  pluvia  ;  and,  among  others,  this
(juestion, — What  things  done  by  the  owners  of  the
land  were  to  be  considered  as  preventing  or  alter-
ing the  natural  flow  of  the  waters  ?  The  conclusion
of  Ulpian  is,  that  acts  done  to  the  land  for  the  pur-
poses of  cultivation  were  not  to  be  considered  as  acts
interfering  with  the  natural  flow  of  the  waters.
Water  which  increased  from  the  falling  of  rain,  or
in  consequence  of  rain  changed  its  colour,  was  con-
sidered within  the  definition  of  aqua  pluvia  ;  ior
it  was  not  necessary  that  th ;  water  in  question
should  be  only  rain  water,  it  vvas  sufficient  if  there
was  any  rain  water  in  it.  Thus,  when  water
naturally  flowed  from  a  pond  or  marsh,  and  a  per-
son did  something  to  exclude  such  water  from
coming  on  his  land,  if  such  marsh  received  any
increase  from  rain  water,  and  so  injured  the  land  of
a  neighbour,  the  person  would  be  compelled  by
this  action  to  remove  the  obstacle  which  he  had
created  to  the  free  jKissage  of  the  water.

This  action  ^vas  allowed  for  th4  special  pro-
t'^ction  of  land  (ctger)  :  if  the  water  injured  a  town
or  a  building,  the  case  then  belonged  to  flumina  and
stillicidia.  The  action  was  only  allowed  to  prevent
damage,  and  therefore  a  person  could  not  have
this  remedy  against  his  neighbour,  who  did  any
thing  to  his  OAvn  land  by  which  he  stopped  the
water  which  would  otherwisr3  flow  to  that  person's
land  and  be  profitable  to  it.  The  title  in  the
Digest  contains  many  curious  cases.  (Dig.  39.
tit.  3  ;  Cic.  Pro  Muren.  10,  Topic.  9  ;  Boethius,
Comment,  in  Cic.  Top.  iv.  9.)  [G.  L.]

AQUA'RIl,  were  slaves  who  carried  water  for
bathing,  &c.  into  the  female  apartments :  they  were
also  called  aquarioli.,  and  were  held  in  great  con-
tempt. (Juv.  vi.  332  ;  Festus,  s.  v.  and  Muller's
Note  ;  Hieron.  Ep.  27;  Jul.  Paul.  iii.  7.)  Becker
imagines  that  the  name  was  also  applied  to  slaves
who  had  the  care  of  the  fountains  and  ponds  in
gardens.  {Gallus^  vol.  i,  p.  288.)  The  aquarii
were  also  public  officers  who  attended  to  the  aque-
ducts under  the  aediles,  and  afterwards  under  the
curatores  aquarum.  (Cic.  cul  Fam.  viii.  6  ;  Zeno,
Cod.  Just.  xi.  tit.  42;  Aquaeductus.)     [P.  S.]

A'QUILA.       [SiGNA  MiLITARlA.]

ARA  (^Mfj.6s^  4(Tx<i-pa,  ^vT7]ptov\  an  altar.
Altars  were  in  antiquity  so  indispcnsa])le  a  part  of
the  worship  of  the  gods,  that  it  seemed  impossible
to  conceive  of  the  worship  of  the  gods  without
altars.  Thus  we  have  the  amusing  syllogism  in
Lucian,  €t  yap  elcrl  ^w^ioi,  ilcrX  Kal  l^io'r  dA.Aa
Hr]U  ilarl  ^a^wiy  claXv  &pa  Kal  ^eoi  {.Jupiter  Trag.
c.  51).  In  reference  to  the  terms,  Pw/uios  properly
signifies  any  elevation,  and  hence  we  find  in
Homer  Uphs  fi(0fjL6s,  but  it  afterwards  came  to  be
applied  to  an  elevation  used  for  the  worship  of  the
god;,  and  hence  an  ?iltar.     'Ecrxapa  was  used  in


ARA.

the  limited  sense  of  an  altar  for  burnt-ofi"enngs.
In  Latin  ara  and  altare  are  often  used  without
any  distinction,  but  prop-Tly  ara  was  lower  than
allare  :  the  latter  was  erected  in  honour  of  the
superior  gods,  the  former  in  honour  of  the  inferior,
heroes  and  demigods.  Thus  we  read  in  Virnl
{EcL  V.  65) :  —

"  En  quattuor  anis :
Ecce  duas  tibi,  Daphni ;  duas,  altaria,  Phoebo."

On  the  other  hand,  sjvcrifices  were  offered  to  the
infernal  gods,  not  upon  altars,  but  in  cavities
(scrohes,  scro/nculi,  ^odpoi,  Xolkkoi)  dug  in  the
ground.     (Festus,  s.  v.  Altaria.)

As  among  the  ancients  almost  every  religious
act  was  accompanied  by  sacrifice,  it  was  often
necessary  to  provide  altars  on  the  spur  of  the  oc-
casion, and  they  were  then  constnicted  of  earth,
sods,  or  stones,  collected  on  the  spot.  When  the
occasion  was  not  sudden,  they  were  built  with
regular  courses  of  masonry  or  brickwork,  as  is
clearly  shown  in  several  examples  on  the  column
of  Trajan  at  Rome.  See  the  left-hand  figure  in
the  woodcut  annexed.  The  first  deviation  from
this  absolute  simplicity  of  form  consisted  in  the
addition  of  a  base,  and  of  a  corresponding  projec-
tion at  the  top,  the  latter  being  intended  to  hold
the  fire  and  the  objects  offered  in  sacrifice.  These
two  parts  are  so  common  as  to  ho.  almost  uniform
types  of  the  form  of  an  altar,  and  will  be  foiuid  in
all  the  figures  inserted  underneath.


%
i

1.  J  1

!— L__

1    1    i

Tl

1    1    1

^^

!   1    1

Altars  were  either  square  or  round.  The  latter
form,  which  was  the  less  common  of  the  two,  is
exemplified  in  the  following  figures.


In  later  times  altars  were  ornamented  with  fes-
toons and  garlands  of  flowers  ;  and  the  altar  repre-
sented in  the  next  cut  shows  the  manner  in  which
these  festoons  were  suspended.  They  were  also
adorned  with  sculpture  ;  and  some  were  covered
with  the  works  of  the  most  celebrated  artists  of
antiquity.  The  first  cut  above  exhibits,  a  specimen
of  the  elaborate  style,  the  outline  of  an  Etniscau
altar,  in  contrast  with  the  unadorned  altar.  If  an
altar  was  erected  before  a  statue  of  a  god,  it  was
always  to  be  lower  than  the  statue  before  which  it


ARATEIA.

was  placed  (Vitruv.  iv.  9).  Of  this  wo  have  an
example  in  a  medallion  on  the  Arch  of  Coiistantine
at  Rome,  representing  an  altar  erected  before  a
stiitue  of  Apollo.     See  the  annexed  cut.


ARATRUM.


117


It  was  necessary  that  an  altar  should  be  built
in  the  open  air,  in  order  that  the  steam  of  the
sacrifice  might  be  wafted  up  to  heaven,  and  it
might  be  built  in  any  place,  as  on  the  side  of  a
mountain,  on  the  shore  of  the  sea,  or  in  a  sacred
grove.  But  as  the  worship  of  the  gods  was  in
later  times  chiefly  connected  with  temples,  altars
became  an  indispensable  part  of  the  latter,  and
though  there  coidd  be  altars  without  temples,  there
could  hardly  be  temples  without  altars.  The  altars
of  burnt-offerings,  at  which  animal  sacrifices  were
presented,  were  erected  before  the  temples  (^co^oi
ivpovdoi^  Aesch.  Suppl.  497),  as  shown  in  the  wood-
cut in  the  article  Antae  ;  but  there  were  also
altars,  on  which  incense  was  burnt  and  bloodless
sacrifices  offered,  within  the  temple,  and  principally
before  the  statue  of  the  divinity  to  whom  they  were
dedicated.  All  altars  were  places  of  refuge.  The
supplicants  were  considered  as  placing  themselves
under  the  protection  of  the  deities  to  whom  the
altars  were  consecrated  ;  and  violence  to  the  unfor-
tunate, even  to  slaves  and  criminals,  in  such  cir-
cumstances, was  regarded  as  violence  towards  the
deities  themselves.  It  was  also  the  practice  among
the  Greeks  to  take  solemn  oaths  at  altars,  either
taking  hold  of  the  altar  or  of  the  statue  of  the  god.
Cicero  {pro  Balb.  5)  expressly  mentions  this  as  a
Greek  practice.  (Comp.  K.  F.  Hermann,  Gottes-
dienst.  Alterth.  d.  Griec/ien,  §  17,  and  §  22.  n.  9.)
ARAEOSTYLOS.  [Templum.]
ARATEIA  (dpdT€ia\  two  sacrifices  offered
every  year  at  Sicyon  in  honour  of  Aratus,  the
general  of  the  Achaeans,  who  after  his  death  was
honoured  by  his  countrymen  as  a  hero,  in  consequence
of  the  command  of  an  oracle.  (Paus.  ii.  9.  §  4.)
The  full  account  of  the  two  festive  days  is  pre-
served in  Plutarch's  Life  of  Aratus  (c.  5;^>).  The
Sicyonians,  says  he,  offer  to  Aratus  two  sacrifices


every  year:  the  one  on  the  day  on  which  lie
delivered  his  native  town  from  tyranny,  which
is  the  fifth  of  the  month  of  Daisius,  the  same
which  the  Athenians  call  Anthesterion  ;  and  this
sacrifice  they  call  a-uT-fjpia.  The  other  they  cele-
brate in  the  month  in  which  they  believe  that  he
was  bom.  On  the  first,  the  priest  of  Zeus  offered
the  sacrifices  ;  on  the  second,  the  priest  of  Aratus,
wearing  a  white  ribbon  Avith  purple  spots  in  the
centre,  songs  being  sung  to  the  lyre  by  the
actors  of  the  stage.  The  public  teacher  (yvixva-
alapxos)  led  his  boys  and  youths  in  procession,
probably  to  the  heroum  of  Aratus,  followed  by  the
senators  adorned  with  garlands,  after  whom  came
those  citizens  who  wished  to  join  the  procession.
The  Sicyonians  still  observe,  he  adds,  some  parts
of  the  solemnity,  but  the  principal  honours  have
been  abolished  by  time  and  other  circumstances.
(Wachsmuth,  Hellen.  Alterth.  voLii.  p. 528.)  [L.S.]

ARA'TRUM  {&poTpov\  a  plough.  The
Greeks  appear  to>  have  had  from  the  earliest
times  diversities  in  the  fashion  of  their  ploughs.
Hesiod  (Op.  et  Dies,  432)  advises  the  farmer  to
have  always  two  ploughs,  so  that  if  one  broke  the
other  might  be  ready  for  use  ;  and  they  were  to  be
of  two  kinds,  the  one  called  avrdyvov,  because  in  it
the  plough-tail  (7^175,  buris,  bura)  was  of  the  same
jiiece  of  timber  with  the  share-beam  (i\v/xa,  dens^
dentale)  and  the  pole  (pv/xos,  tVToSoeus,  temo)  ;  and
the  other  called  tttj/ct^Jj/,  i.  e.  compacted,  because  in
it  the  three  above-mentioned  parts,  which  were
moreover  to  be  of  three  different  kinds  of  timber,
were  adjusted  to  one  another,  and  fastened  to-
gether by  means  of  nails  {y6fx(l>oL(Tiu).  (Comp.
Plom.  II.  X.  353,  xiii.  703.)

The  method  of  forming  a  plough  of  the  former
kind  was  by  taking  a  yoimg  tree  with  two  branches
proceeding  from  its  trunk  in  opposite  directions,  so
that  whilst  in  ploughing  the  trunk  was  made  to
serve  for  the  pole,  one  of  the  two  branches  stood
upwards  and  became  the  tail,  and  the  other  pene-
trated the  ground,  and,  being  covered  sometimes
with  bronze  or  iron,  fulfilled  the  purpose  of  a  share.
This  form  is  exhibited  in  the  uppermost  figure  of
the  annexed  woodcut,  taken  from  a  medal.     The


next  figure  shows  the  plough  still  used  in  Mysia,
as  described  and  delineated  by  Sir  C.  Fellows.  It
is  a  little  more  complicated  than  the  first  plough,
inasmuch  as  it  consists  of  two  pieces  of  timber  in-
stead of  one,  a  handle  (exeVATj,  stiva)  being  inserted
into  tlie  larger  piece  at  one  side  of  it.  Sir  C.  Fellows
I  3


J18


ARATRUM.


{Excursion  in  Asia  Minor ^  1838,  p.  71)  observes
that  each  portion  of  this  instrument  is  still  called
by  its  ancient  Greek  name,  and  adds,  that  it  seems
suited  only  to  the  light  soil  prevailing  where  he
observed  it,  that  it  is  held  by  one  hand  only,  tliat  i
the  form  of  the  share  {iivvis)  varies,  and  that  the  ;
plough  is  frequently  used  without  any  share.  "  It
is  drawn  by  two  oxen,  yoked  from  the  pole,  and
guided  by  a  long  reed  or  thin  stick  (Kdrfiivos),
which  has  a'spud  or  scraper  at  the  end  for  cleaning
the  share."     See  the  lowest  figure  in  the  woodjcut.

Another  recent  traveller  in  Greece  gives  the
following  account  of  the  plough  which  he  saw  in
that  countrj- — ^a  descnption  approaching  still  nearer
to  the  TT-qKrhu  &poTpov  of  Homer  and  Hesiod.  "  It
is  composed,"  says  he,  "  of  two  curved  pieces  of
wood,  one  longer  than  the  other.  The  long  piece
fonns  the  pole,  and  one  end  of  it  being  joined  to
the  other  piece  about  a  foot  from  the  bottom,
divides  it  into  a  share,  which  is  cased  with  iron,
and  a  handle.  The  share  is,  besides,  attached  to
the  pole  by  a  short  cross-bar  of  wood.  Two  oxen,
with  no  other  harness  than  yokes,  are  joined  to  the
pole,  and  driven  by  the  ploughman,  who  holds  the
handle  in  his  left  hand,  and  the  goad  in  his  right."
(llobhouse.  Journey  through  Albania,  &C.,  vol.  i.
p.  140.)  A  view  of  the  plain  of  Elis,  representing
this  plough  in  use,  is  given  by  Mr.  S.  Stanhope  in
his  Olympia  (p.  42).

The  yoke  and  pole  used  anciently  in  ploughing
did  not  differ  from  those  employed  for  draught  in
general.  Consequently  they  do  not  here  require
any  further  description.  [Jugum.]  To  the  bottom
of  the  pole,  in  the  compacted  plough,  was  attached
the  plough-tail,  which,  according  to  Hesiod,  might
be  made  of  any  piece  of  a  tree  (especially  the
irp'iuos,  i.  e,  the  ilex,  or  holm-oak),  the  natural
curvatufe  of  which  fitted  it  to  this  use.  But  in
the  time  and  country  of  Virgil  pains  were  taken
to  force  a  tree  into  that  form  which  was  most  ex-
actly adapted  to  the  purpose.  {Georg.  i.  169, 170.)
The  upper  end  of  the  buris  being  held  by  the
ploughman,  the  lower  part,  below  its  junction  with
the  pole,  was  used  to  hold  the  sliare-heain,  which
was  either  sheathed  with  metal,  or  driven  bare  into
the  ground,  according  to  circumstances.

To  these  three  continuous  and  most  essential
parts,  the  two  following  are  added  in  the  descrip-
tion of  the  plough  by  Virgil :  —

1.  The  earth-hoards,  or  mould-hoards  (atires),
rising  on  each  side,  bending  outwardly,  in  such  a
manner  as  to  throw  on  either  hand  the  soil  which
had  been  previously  loosened  and  raised  by  the
share,  and  adjusted  to  the  share-beam  which  was
anade  double  for  the  purpose  of  receiving  them :  —

*'  Binae  aures,  duplici   aptantur  dentalia   dorso."

Aoeording  to  Palladius  (i.  43),  it  was  desirable  to
have  ploughs  both  with  earth-boards  (aurita)  and
withoHt  them  {simplicia).

2.  The  Iiandle  (stiva),  which  is  seen  in  Fcl-
iows's  weedcut,  and  likewise  in  the  following  re-
presentJition  of  an  ancient  Italian  plough.  Virgil
considers  ihig  part  as  used  to  turn  the  plough  at
the  end  of  ,tlhe  farrow,  "  Stivaque,  quae  currus  a
tergo  torqueat  imos."  Servius,  however,  in  his
note  on  this  line  explains  stiva  to  mean  "  the
handle  by  which  the  plough  is  directed."  It  is  pro-
bable that,  as  the  d&ntalia^  i.  e.  the  two  share-beams,
which  Virgil  supposes  were  in  the  form  of  the
i/reek  letter  A,  tt'hich  he  describes  by  duplici  dorso.


ARATRUM.

the  buris  was  fostened  to  the  left  share-beam,  and
the  stiva  to  the  right,  so  that,  instead  of  the  simple
plough  of  the  Greeks,  that  described  by  Virgil,  and
used,  no  doubt,  in  his  country  (see  the  following
woodcut),  was  more  like  the  modem  Lancashire
plough,  which  is  commonly  held  behind  with  both
hands.  Sometimes,  however,  the  stiva  (e'xeTAT;,
Hes-  Op.  et  Dies,  467)  was  used  alone  and  instead
of  the  tail,  as  in  the  Mysian  plough  above  repre-
sented. To  a  plough  so  constructed  the  language
of  Columella  was  especially  applicable,  "  Arator
stivae  paene  rectus  innititur"  (i.  9)  ;  and  the  ex-
pressions of  Ovid,  "  Stivaeque  innixus  arator"
{Mei.  viii.  218),  and  "  Inde  premens  stivam  de-
signat  moenia  sulco."  (Fast.  iv.  825.)  In  place  of
"  stiva,"  Ovid  also  uses  the  less  appropriate  term
"  capulus"  (Ep.  de  Ponto,  i.  8.  61)  ;  "Ipse  manu
capulum  prensi  moderatus  aratri."  When  the  plough
was  held  either  by  the  stiva  alone,  or  by  the  buris
alone,  a  piece  of  wood  {inanicula)  was  fixed  across
the  summit,  and  on  this  the  labourer  pressed  with
both  hands.  Besides  guiding  the  plough  in  a
straight  line,  his  duty  was  to  force  the  share  to  a
sufficient  depth  into  the  soil.  Virgil  alludes  to  this
in  the  phrase  "  Depress©  aratro  "  {Georg.  i.  45).
The  cross-bar,  which  is  seen  in  Mr.  Fellows's
drawing,  and  mtmtioned  in  Sir  J.  C.  Hobhouse's
description,  and  which  passes  from  the  pole  to  the
share  for  the  purpose  of  giving  additional  strength,
was  called  a-irddr},  in  Latin  fulcrum.  The  coulter
{culter,  Plin,  //.  A^.  xviii.  48)  was  used  by  the
Romans  as  it  is  with  us.  It  was  inserted  into  the
pole  so  as  to  depend  vertically  before  the  share,
cutting  through  the  roots  which  came  in  its  way,
and  thus  preparing  for  the  more  complete  loosening
and  overtui'ning  of  the  soil  by  the  share.

About  the  time  of  Pliny  two  small  wheels  {rotae,
rotulae)  were  added  to  the  plough  in  Rhaetia  ;  and
Servius  (/.  c.)  mentions  the  use  of  them  in  the
country  of  Virgil.  The  annexed  woodcut  shows
the  form  of  a  wheel-plough,  as  represented  on  a
piece  of  engraved  jasper,  of  Roman  workmanship.
It  also  shows  distinctly  the  temo  or  pole,  the
coulter  or  culter,  the  dentcde  or  share -beam,  the
buris    or    plough-tail,    and    the   handle   or   stiva.


(Caylus,  Rec.  d'Ant.  v.  pi.  83.  No.  6.)     It    cor.
responds,   in   all   essential  particulars,   witli    the


ARCHTATER.

plougli  now  used  about  Mantua  and  Venice,  of
which  an  engraving  is  given  above.  1.  Buris.
*2.  Temo.  '6.  Dentitle.  4.  Culter.  5.  Vomer.
6.  Aures.

Respecting  the  operation  of  ploughing,  see
Agricultura,  p.  49.  [J.  Y.]

A'RBITER.     [Judex.]

ARBITRA'RIA  A'CTIO.     [Actio.]

ARC  A,  a  chest  or  coffer.  —  LA  chest,  in  which
the  Romans  were  accustomed  to  place  their  mone}- :
the  phrase  ece  arm  solvere  had  the  meaning  of
paying  in  ready  money.  (Comp.  Cic.  ad  Att.  i.
9.)  These  chests  were  either  made  of  or  bound
with  iron,  or  other  metals.  (Juv.  xi.  26,  xiv.  259.)
The  name  area  was  usually  given  to  the  chests
in  which  the  rich  kept  their  money,  and  was  op-
posed to  the  smaller  loculi  (Juv.  i.  89),  saceulu*
(Juv.  xi.  26),  and  crumena.

2.  Area  publica  was  used  under  the  empire  to
signify  the  city-funds,  which  were  distnict  from
the  aerarium  and  the  fiscus,  and  the  administra-
tion of  which  belonged  to  the  senate.  (Vopisc.
Aurel.  20.)  The  name  a7'ca  was,  however,  also
used  as  equivalent  to  focus,  that  is,  the  imperial
treasiiry :  thus,  we  read  of  the  area  /htineiitaria,
area  oleuria,  area  vinaria,  d'c.  (Symm.  x.  33  ;
compare  Dig.  50.  tit.  4.  s.  1.)

3.  Area  also  signified  the  coffin  in  which  persons
were  buried  (Aur.  Vict.  De  Vir.  III.  42  ;  Lucan,
viii.  736),  or  the  bier  on  which  the  corpse  was
placed  previousl}'  to  burial.      (Dig.  11.  tit.  7.  s.  7.)

4.  It  was  also  a  strong  cell  made  of  oak,  in  which
criminals  and  slaves  were  confined.  (Cic.  Pro
Milan,  c.  22  ;  Festus,  s.  v.  liobum.)

A'RCERA,  a  covered  carriage  or  litter,  spread
with  cloths,  which  was  used  in  ancient  times  in
Rome,  to  carry  the  aged  and  infirm.  It  is  said  to
have  obtained  the  name  of  arcera  on  account  of  its
resemblance  to  an  area.  (Varr.  L.  L.  v.  140,  ed.
Muller  ;  Gell.  xx.  1.)

ARCHEION  (dpxf'oi/)  properly  moans  any
public  place  belonging  to  the  magistrates  (comp.
Herod,  iv.  62),  but  was  more  particularly  applied
at  Athens  to  the  archive  office,  where  the  decrees
of  the  people  and  other  state  documents  were  pre-
served. This  office  is  sometimes  called  merely  rb
SrifiSaiov.  (Dem.  de  Cor.  p.  275.)  At  Athens  the
archives  were  kept  in  the  temple  of  the  mother  of
the  gods  (/j.'t^Tpcfou).,  and  the  charge  of  it  was  in-
trusted to  the  president  (iiria-T arris)  of  the  senate
of  the  Five-hundred.  (Dem.  de  Fals.  Leg.  p.  381,
in  Arisfoff.  i.  p.  799  ;  Paus.  i.  3.  §  4.)

ARCHIA'TER  (apxiarpos,  compounded  of
apxhs  or  &px<^^,  a  chief,  and  larpos,  a  physician),
a  medical  title  under  the  Roman  emperors,  the
exact  signification  of  which  has  been  the  subject
of  much  discussion  ;  for  while  some  persons  in-
terpret it  "  the  chief  of  the  physicians  "  (qtiasi
&PXUV  Tuv  laTpS>v)  others  explain  it  to  mean  "  the
physician  to  the  prince "  {quasi  tov  &pxovTos
larpoi).  Upon  the  whole  it  seems  tolerably  cer-
tain that  the  former  is  the  true  meaning  of  the
word,  and  for  these  reasons :  —  1.  From  its  ety-
mology it  can  hardly  have  any  other  sense,  and
of  all  the  words  similarly  formed  (apxiriKTuy,
apxiTpiKhivos,  apxt-^Tr'i'CKOTTos.,  &c.)  there  is  not
one  that  has  any  reference  to  "  the  priiice.''''  2.  We
find  the  title  applied  to  physicians  who  lived  .at
Edessa,  Alexandria,  &c.,  where  no  king  was  at
that  time  reigning.  3.  Galen  {de  Ther.  ad  Pis.  c.  I ,
vol.  xiv.  p.  21 1,  cd.  Kiihn)  speaks  of  Andromachus


ARCHIATER.


119


being  appointed  "to  rule  over''"'  the  physicians
(opxe'")?  i-  «••)  in  fact,  to  be  "  archiatcr."  4.  Au-
gustine {De  Civit.  Dei,  iii.  17)  applies  the  word  to
Aesculapius,  and  St.  Jerome  (metaphorically  of
course)  to  our  Saviour  (xiii.  Homil.  in  S.  Luc.\
in  both  Avhich  cases  it  evidently  means  "  the  chief
physician."  5.  It  is  apparently  synonymous  with
proiomedicus,  supra  medicos,  dominus  medicoruvi,
and  superpositus  medicorum,  all  which  expressions
occur  in  inscriptions,  &c.,  and  also  with  the  title
Rais  ''ala  H-aiebbd,  among  the  Arabians.  6.  We
find  the  names  of  several  persons  who  were  phy-
sicians to  the  emperor,  mentioned  without  the  ad-
dition of  the  title  archiater.  7.  The  archiatri  were
divided  into  Archiatri  sancti  palatii,  who  attended
on  the  emperor,  and  Archiatri  populares,  who  at-
tended on  the  people ;  so  that  it  is  certain  that  all
those  who  bore  this  title  were  not  "  physicians  to
the  prince.'''  The  chief  argument  in  favour  of  the
contrary  opmion  seems  to  arise  from  the  fact,  that
of  all  those  who  are  known  to  have  held  the  office
of  Archiatri  the  greater  part  certainly  were  also
physicians  to  the  emperor  ;  but  this  is  only  what
might  a  priori  be  expected,  viz.  that  those  who
had  attained  the  highest  rank  in  their  profession
would  be  chosen  to  attend  upon  the  prince.  *

The  first  person  whom  we  find  bearing  this  title
is  Andromachus,  physician  to  Nero,  and  inventor
of  the  Theriaca  (Galen.  /.  c.  ;  Erotian.  Lex.  Voc.
Llippocr.  Praef.)  :  but  it  is  not  known  whether  he
had  at  the  same  time  any  sort  of  authority  over  the
rest  of  the  profession.  In  fact,  the  history  of  the
title  is  as  obscure  as  its  meaning,  and  it  is  chiefly
by  means  of  the  laws  respecting  the  medical  pro-
fession that  we  learn  the  rank  and  duties  attached
to  it.  In  after  times  (as  was  stated  above)  the
order  appears  to  have  been  divided,  and  we  find
two  distinct  classes  of  archiatri,  viz.  those  of  the
palace  and  those  of  the  people.  (Cod.  Theodos.
xiii.  tit.  3  ;  De  Medicis  et  Pro/essoribus.)  The
archiatri  sancti  palatii  were  persons  of  high  rank,
who  not  only  exercised  their  profession,  but  were
judges  on  occasion  of  any  disputes  that  might  occur
among  the  physicians  of  the  place.  They  had
certain  privileges  granted  to  them,  e.  g.  they  were
exempted  from  all  taxes,  as  were  also  their  wives
and  children  ;  they  were  not  obliged  to  lodge
soldiers  or  others  in  the  provinces ;  they  could  not
be  put  in  prison,  &c.  ;  for  though  these  privileges
seem  at  first  to  have  been  common  to  all  physicians
(Cod.  Just.  X.  tit,  52.  s.  6.  Medicos  et  maocime
Archiatros),  yet  afterwards  they  were  confined  to
the  archiatri  of  the  palace,  and  to  those  of  Rome.
When  they  obtained  their  dismissal  from  attend-
ance on  the  emperor,  either  from  old  age  or  any
other  cause,  they  retained  the  title  ex-archiatri,
or  ex-archiatris.  (Cod.  x.  tit.  52.  leg.  6.)  The
archiatri  populares  were  established  for  the  relief
of  the  poor,  and  each  city  was  to  be  provided  with
five,  seven,  or  ten,  according  to  its  size.  (Dig.
27.  tit.  1.  s.  6.)  Rome  had  fourteen,  besides  one
for  the  vestal  virgins,  and  one  for  the  gymnasia,
(Cod.  Theodos.  /.  c.)  They  were  paid  by  the  go-
vernment, and  were  therefore  obliged  to  attenc)
their  poor  patients  gratis  ;  but  were  allowed  to  re-
ceive fees  from  the  rich.  (Cod.  Theodos.  /.  c.)  Th©
archiatri   populares    were   not   appointed    by   the

*  Just  as  in  England  the  President  of  the-  Col-
lege of  Physicians  is  (or  used  to  be)  eX'ftfficiGs  phy  •
sician  to  the  sovereign,

I  4


120  ARCHITECTURA.

governors  of  the  provinces,  but  were  elected  by  the
people  themselves.  (Dig.  50.  tit.  9.  s.  L)  Tlie
office  appears  to  have  been  more  lucrative  than  th;iit
of  archiatri  sancti  palatii,  though  less  honoumble.
]n  later  times,  we  find  in  Cassiodorus  (see  Mcihom.
Comment,  in  Cass.  Formnl.  Archiatr,  Ilelmst.  1668)
the  title  "  comes  archiatrorum,"  "coimt  of  the  arch-
iatri," together  with  an  account  of  his  duties,  by
which  it  appears  that  he  was  the  arbiter  and  judge
of  all  disputes  and  difficulties,  and  ranked  among
the  officers  of  the  empire  as  a  vicarius  or  dute.
(See  Le  Clerc,  and  Sprengel,  Hist,  de  la  Med.
Further  information  on  the  subject  may  be  found
in  several  works  referred  to  in  the  Oxford  edition
of  Theophilus  De  Coip.  Hum.  Faltr.  p.  275  ;  and
in  Goldhom,  De  Arcliiatris  Romanis  et  eorum  Ori-
t/ine  usque  ad  finem  imperii  Ramaaii  Occide7italis,
Lips.  1841.)  [W.A.G.]

i\RCHIMI'MUS.  [MiMus.]
ARCHITECTU'RA  {hpx^r^Krovia,  apxircK-
TovLKi])^  in  its  widest  sense,  signifies  all  that  we
understand  by  architodure,  and  by  civil  and  mili-
tart/  eiujineervng :  in  its  more  restricted  meaning,  it
is  the  science  of  building  according  to  the  laws  of
proportion  and  the  principles  of  beauty.  In  the
former  sense,  it  has  its  foundation  in  necessity :  in
the  latter,  upon  aii  taking  occasion  from  necessity.
The  hut  of  a  savage  is  not,  properly  speaking,  a
work  of  architecture;  neither,  on  the  other  hand,
is  a  building  in  which  dift'e<rent  and  incongruous
stylos  are  exhibited  side  by  side.  An  architectural
construction,  in  the  artistic  sense,  must  possess  not
only  utility^  but  beauty.,  and  also  unity :  it  must  be
suggestive  of  some  idea.,  and  referable  to  souie
inoild.

The  architecture  ■of  every  people  is  not  only  a
most  interesting  bnuicli  of  its  antiquities,  but  also
a  most  important  feature  in  its  history ;  as  it  forms
one  of  the  most  durable  and  most  intelligible  evi-
dences of  advancement  in  civilization.  If  the
Greek  and  Roman  literature  and  historj'^  had  been
u  blank,  what  ideas  of  their  knowledge,  and  power,
tnd  social  -condition  would  their  monuments  have
still  suggested  to  us !  What  a  store  of  such  idesis
is  even  now  being  developed  from  the  moimments
of  A.siii,  Egypt,  and  America  !

U'he  object  of  the  present  article  is  to  give  a  very
compendious  account  of  the  history  and  principles
of  the  art,  as  practised  by  the  Greeks  and  Romans.
The  details  of  the  subject  will  be,  for  the  most
part,  referred  to  theii'  separate  and  proper  heads.
The  lives  of  the  architects  will  be  found  in  the
Didvomvry  of  Greek  and  Roman  Mytltxdogy  and
liioiiraphy.

1 1  is  well  observed  by  Stieglitz  that  architecture
has  its  origin  in  nature  and  religion.  The  neces-
sity for  a  habitation,  and  the  attempt  to  adorn  those
habitations  which  were  intended  for  the  gods,  are
the  two  causes  from  which  the  art  derives  its  ex-
istence, in  early  times  we  have  no  reason  to  sup-
pose that  much  attention  was  paid  to  domestic
architecture,  but  we  have  nuich  evideaco  to  the
contrary.  The  resources  of  the  iirt  were  lavished
upon  the  tem|iles  of  the  gods  ;  and  hence  the
greater  part  of  the  history  of  Grecian  architecture
is  inseparably  connected  with  that  of  the  temple,
and  has  its  proper  pliice  under  Tkmplum,  and  the
Bubordinate  headings,  such  as  Columnar  under
which  heads  also  the  diflferent  orders  are  described.
But,  though  the  first  rise  of  architecture,  as  a
fine  art,  id  connected  with  the  temple,  yet,  viewed


ARCHITECTURA.

as  the  science  of  constniction,  it  must  liave  been
empkyed,  even  earlier,  for  other  puiposes,  such  as
the  ei-ection  of  ftw-tifications,  pjilaces,  treasuries,  and
other  works  of  utility.  Accordingly,  it  is  the
general  opinion  of  antiquaries,  that  the  very  earliest
edifices,  of  which  we  have  anj^  remains,  are  the  so-
called  Cyclopean  works,  in  which  we  see  huge
unsquared  blocks  of  stone  built  together  in  the  best
way  that  their  shapes  would  allow  ;  although  it
can  be  proved,  in  some  instances,  that  the  rudeness
of  this  sort  of  work  is  no  sufficient  proof  of  its  very
early  date,  for  that  it  was  adopted,  not  from  want
of  skill,  but  on  account  of  the  object  of  the  work,
and  the  nature  of  the  materials  employed.  (Bun-
bury,  On  Cyclopean  Remains  in  Central  Italy,  in  the
Classical  Museum,  \o\.i\.)  [MuRUS.]  Theaccoimt
of  the  early  palaces  cannot  well  be  separated  from
that  of  domestic  architecture  in  general,  and  is
therefore  given  under  Domus  ;  that  of  erections  in-
tended, or  supposed  to  be  intended,  for  treasuries,
will  be  found  under  Thesaurus.

In  addition  to  these,  however,  there  are  other
purposes,  for  which  architecture,  still  using  the
term  in  its  lower  sense,  would  be  required  in  a
very  early  stage  of  political  society  ;  such  as  the
general  arrangement  of  cities,  the  provision  of
a  place  for  the  transaction  of  public  business,
with  the  necessary  edifices  appertaining  to  it
[Agora,  Forum],  and  the  whoJe  class  of  works
which  we  embrace  under  the  head  of  civil  en-
gineering, such  as  those  for  drainage  [Cloaca,
Emissarius],  for  communication  [Via,  Pons],
and  for  the  supply  of  water  [  Aquaeductus].  The
nature  of  these  several  works  among  the  Greeks
and  Romans,  and  the  periods  of  their  development,
are  described  under  the  several  articles.  Almost
equally  necessary  are  phices  devoted  to  public  ex-
ercise, healih,  and  amusement.  Gymnasium,  Sta-

DIUAI,  HiPPGDROMUS,  CiRCUS,  BaLNEUM,  ThEA-

TRUM,  Amphitheatrum.  Lastly,  the  skill  of
the  architect  has  been  from  the  earliest  times  em-
ployed to  preserve  the  memory  of  departed  mea
and  past  events  ;  and  hence  we  have  the  various
works  of  monumental  and  triumphal  architecture,
which  aj'e  described  under  the  heads  Funus,
Aik;^7s,  Columna.

The  materials  employed  by  the  architect  were
marble  or  stone,  wood,  and  various  kinds  of  earth,
possessing  the  property  of  being  plastic  while  moist
and  hardening  in  drying,  with  cement  and  metai
clamps  for  fastenings  :  the  various  meUds  were  also
extensively  used  in  the  way  of  ornament.  The  de-
tails of  this  branch  of  the  subject  are  given  in  the
descriptions  of  tlie  several  kinds  of  building.

The  principles  of  architectui^il  science  are  utility^
proportio7i,  and  the  imitation  of  nature.  The  first
requisite  is  that  every  detail  of  a  building  should
be  subordinate  to  its  general  purpose.  Next,  tiie
form  of  the  whole  and  of  its  parts  must  be  derived
from  simple  geometrical  figures;  namely,  the  straight
line,  the  plane  surface,  and  regular  or  symmetrical
rectilinear  figures,  as  the  equilateral  or  isosceles
triangle,  the  square  or  rectangle,  and  the  regular
polygons  ;  symmetrical  curves,  as  the  circle  and
ellipse  ;  and  the  solids  arising  out  of  these  varioiia
figures,  such  as  the  cube,  the  pyramid,  the  cylinder,
the  cone,  the  hemisphere,  &c.  I^astly,  the  orna-
ments, by  which  these  forms  are  relieved  and
beautified,  must  all  be  founded  either  on  geo-
metrical ftxrras  or  on  the  imitation  of  nature.

To  this  oatline  of  the  purposes  and  principles  of


ARCHITECTURA.

the  art,  it  only  remains  to  subjoin  a  brief  sketch  of
its  history,  which  Hirt  and  Miiller  divide  into  five
periods  :  the  first,  which  is  chiefly  mythical,  comes
down  to  the  time  of  Cypselus,  01.  30,  B.  c.  660
(Miiller  brings  this  period  down  to  the  50th  Olym-
piad, B.  c.  580)  :  the  second  period  comes  down  to
the  termination  of  the  Persian  war,  01.  75.  2,  b.  c.
.478  (Miiller  brings  it  down  to  01.  80,  B.  c.  460) :
the  third  is  the  brilli.ant  period  from  the  end  of  the
Persian  war  to  the  death  of  Alexander  the  Great,
OL  114,  B.C.  323  (MUlkr  closes  this  period  with
the  death  of  Philip,  01.  1 1 1,  b.  c.  336)  :  the  fourth
period  is  brought  down  by  Hirt  to  the  battle  of
Actium,  B.  c.  31,  but  by  Miiller  only  to  the
Roman  conquest  of  Greece,  B.C.  146;  the  latter
division  has  the  convenience  of  marking  the  tran-
sition from  Greek  to  Roman  architecture :  Hirt's
fifth  period  is  that  of  the  Roman  empire,  down  to
the  dedication  of  Constantinople,  A.  D.  330  ;  while
MiiJler's  fifth  period  embraces  the  whole  history  of
Roman  architecture,  from  the  time  when  it  began
to  imitate  the  Greek,  down  to  the  middle  ages,
when  it  became  mingled  with  the  Gothic :  Hirfs
division  requires  us  to  drciw  a  more  definite  line  of
demarcation  than  is  possible,  between  the  Roman
and  Byzantine  styles,  and  also  places  that  luie  too
early.

The  chai-acteristics  of  these  several  periods  will
be  developed  under  the  articles  which  describe  the
several  classes  of  buildings :  they  are  therefore
noticed  in  this  place  with  the  utmost  possible
brevity.  Our  information  respecting  the  first  period
is  derived  from  the  Homeric  poems,  the  tradi-
tions preserved  by  other  writers,  and  the  most
ancient  monuments  of  Greece,  Central  Italy,  and
the  coast  of  Asia  Minor.  Strongly  fortified  cities,
palaces,  and  treasuries,  are  the  chief  works  of
the  earlier  part  of  this  period ;  and  to  it  may  be
referred  most  of  the  so-called  Cyclopean  remains  ;
wliile  the  era  of  the  Dorian  invasion  marks,  in
all  probability,  the  commencement  of  the  Dorian
style  of  tcmpie  architecture.  The  principal  names
of  artists  belonging  to  this  period  are  Daedalus,
Euryalus,  Hyperbius,  Docius,  and  some  others.  In
the  second  period  the  art  made  rapid  advances
under  the  powerful  patronage  of  the  aristocracies
ill  some  cities,  as  at  Sparta,  and  of  the  tyrants  in
others^ as  Cypselus  at  Corinth,  Theagnes  at  Megiira,
Cleisthenes  at  Sicyon,  the  Peisistratids  at  Athens,
and  Polycrates  at  Sainos.  Architecture  now  as-
sumed decidedly  the  character  of  a  fine  art,  and
became  associated  with  the  sister  arts  of  sculpture
and  painting,  which  are  essential  to  its  develop-
ment. The  temples  of  particular  deities  were  en-
riched and  adorned  by  presents,  such  as  those
which  Croesus  sent  to  the  Pythian  Apollo.  Mag-
nificent temples  sprung  up  in  all  the  principal
Greek  cities  ;  and  while  the  Doric  order  was
brought  almost,  if  not  quite,  to  perfection,  in  Greece
Proper,  in  the  Doric  colonics  of  Asia  Minor,  and
in  Central  Italy  and  Sicily,  the  Ionic  order  ap-
peared, already  perfect  at  its  first  invention,  in  the
great  temple  of  Artemis  at  Ephesus.  The  ruins
fitill  existing  at  Paestum,  Syracuse,  Agrigentum,
Selinus,  Aegina,and  other  places,  are  imperishable
monuments  of  this  period.  Nor  were  works  of
utility  neglected,  as  we  see  in  the  fountain  of  the
Peisistratids  at  Athens,  the  aqueduct  at  Samos
[AQUAEi)UCTUS],the  sewers  (inrouuiLioi)  and  baths
(ico\vii€r]9pa)  at  Agrigentum.  To  this  period  also
belong  the  great  works  of  the  Roman  kings.     The


ARCHON.


121


commencement  of  the  third  and  most  brilliant
period  of  the  art  was  sigjialized  by  the  rebuilding
of  Athens,  the  establishment  of  regular  principles
for  the  laying  out  of  cities  by  Hippodamus  of  Mile-
tus, and  the  great  works  of  the  age  of  Pericles,  by
the  contemporaries  of  Pheidias,  at  Athens,  Eleusis,
and  Olympia  ;  during  its  course  every  city  of
Greece  and  her  colonies  was  adorned  with  splendid
edifices  of  every  description  ;  and  its  termination
is  marked  by  the  magnificent  works  of  Deinocrates
and  his  contemporaries  at  Alexandria,  Antioch,
and  other  cities.  The  first  part  of  the  fourth  pe-
riod saAv  the  extension  of  the  Greek  architecture
over  the  countries  conquered  by  Alexander,  and,
in  the  West,  the  commencement  of  the  new  style,
which  arose  from  the  imitation,  with  some  alter-
ations, of  the  Greek  forms  by  Roman  architects,
to  which  the  conquest  of  Greece  gave,  of  course,
a  new  impulse.  By  the  time  of  Augustus,  Rome
was  adorned  with  every  kind  of  public  and  pri-
vate edifice,  surrounded  by  villas,  and  furnished
with  roads  and  aqueducts  ;  and  these  various
erections  were  adorned  by  the  forms  of  Grecian
art  ;  but  already  Vitruvius  begins  to  complain  that
the  purity  of  that  art  is  coriiipted  by  the  intermix-
ture of  heterogeneous  forms.  This  process  of  dete-
rioration went  on  rapidly  during  the  fifth  period,
though  combined  at  first  with  increasing  mag-
nificence in  the  scale  and  number  of  the  buildings
erected.  The  early  part  of  this  period  is  made  illus-
trious by  the  numerous  works  of  Augustus,  and  his
successors,  especially  the  Flavii,  Nerva,  Trajan,
Hadrian,  and  the  Antonines,  at  Rome  and  in  the
provinces  ;  but  from  the  time  of  the  Antonines  the
decline  of  the  art  was  rapid  and  decided.  In  one
department,  a  new  impulse  was  given  to  architec-
ture by  the  rise  of  Christian  churches,  which  were
generally  built  on  the  model  of  the  Roman  Basilica.
One  of  the  most  splendid  specimens  of  Christian
architecture  is  the  church  of  S.  Sophia  at  Constan-
tinople, built  in  the  reign  of  Justinian,  a.  d.  537,
and  restored,  after  its  partial  destruction  by  an
earthquake,  in  554.  But,  long  before  this  time,
the  Greco-Roman  style  had  become  thoroughly
corrupted,  and  that  new  style,  which  is  called  the
Byzantine,  had  arisen  out  of  the  mixture  of  Roman
architecture  with  ideas  derived  from  the  Northern
nations.  It  is  beyond  our  limits  to  pursue  the
history  of  this  and  later  stylos  of  the  art.

Of  the  ancient  writers,  from  whom  our  knowledge
of  the  subject  is  derived,  the  most  important  is,  of
course,  Vitruvius.  The  following  are  the  principal
modern  works  on  the  general  subject :  —  Winckel-
mann,  Anmerkunyen  uber  die  Bauhmst  der  Alien ^
1762;  ^i\e^\\iz^  Arcluiologie  der  Baukujist,  1801,
and  Geschichte  der  Bauku7ist,1^27  ;  Hirt,  Baukmist
naeh  den  Grunds'dtzen  der  Alien,  1809,  and  (>es-
chichte  der  Baukunst  bei  den  Alien,  1821 ;  Miiller,
Haiulhuch  der  Arch'dologie  der  Kunsi,  1 825  ;  the
various  works  of  travels,  topography,  and  anti-
quities, such  as  those  of  Stuart,  Chandler,  Clarke,
Dodwell,  &c.,  all  the  most  important  of  which
will  be  found  cited  by  the  authorities  referred  to  ;
and,  for  Central  Italy,  Muller's  Etruxker,  and
Abeken's  Mitieliialien  vor  der  Romiscchen  Ilerr-
schaji.  [P.  S.]

ARCHITHEO'RUS.     [Delia.]

ARCHON  {&px(>'y)'  The  government  of
Athens  appears  to  have  gone  through  the  cycle  of
changes,  which  ancient  history  records  as  the  lot  of
many  other  stjitcs.    It  began  with  monarchy  ;  and


ARCHON.


after  passing  through  a  dynasty  *  and  aristocracy,
ended  in  democracy.  Of  the  kings  of  Athens,  con-
sidered as  the  capital  of  Attica,  Theseus  may
be  said  to  have  been  the  first ;  for  to  him
whether  as  a  real  individual  or  a  representative
of  a  certain  period,  is  attributed  the  union  of  the
different  and  independent  states  of  Attica  under
one  head.  (Thuc.  ii.  15.)  The  last  was  Codrus  ;
in  acknowledgment  of  whose  patriotism  in
meeting  death  for  his  coimtry,  the  Athenians
are  said  to  have  determined  that  no  one  should
succeed  him  with  the  title  of  jSatnAeus,  or  king.
It  seems,  however,  equally  probable,  that  it  was
the  nobles  who  availed  themselves  of  this  oppor-
tunity to  serve  their  own  interests,  by  abolish-
ing the  kingly  power  for  another,  the  possessors  of
which  they  called  &pxovrcs,  or  rulers.  These  for
some  time  continued  to  be,  like  the  kings  of  the
house  of  Codrus,  appointed  for  life  :  still  an  impor-
tant point  was  gained  by  the  nobles,  the  office
being  made  vircvdwos,  or  accountable  (Pans.  iv.  5.
§  4  ;  Dem.  c.  Neaer.  p.  1370  ;  Aristot.  Polit.  ii.
9  ;  Bockh,  Ptifj.  Econ.  of  Athens,  vol.  ii.  p.  27.
1st  ed.),  which  of  course  implies  that  the  nobility
had  some  control  over  it  ;  and  perhaps,  like  the
barons  of  tha  feudal  ages,  they  exercised  the  power
of  deposition.

This  state  of  things  lasted  for  twelve  reigns  of
archons.  The  next  step  was  to  limit  the  continu-
ance of  the  office  to  ten  years,  still  confining  it  to
the  Medontidae,  or  house  of  Codrus,  so  as  to  esta-
blish what  the  Greeks  called  a  dj'nasty,  till  the
archonship  of  Eryxias,  the  last  archon  of  that  family
elected  as  such,  and  the  seventh  decennial  archon.
(Clinton,  F.  //.,  vol.  i.  p.  182.)  At  the  end  of  his
ten  years  (b.  c.  684),  a  much  greater  change  took
place  :  the  archonship  was  made  annual,  and  its
various  duties  divided  among  a  college  of  nine,
chosen  by  suffrage  {x^ipoTov'ia)  from  the  Eupa-
tridao,  or  Patricians,  and  no  longer  elected  from  the
Medontidae  exclusively.  This  arrangement  con-
tinued till  the  timocracy  established  by  Solon,  who
made  the  qualification  for  office  depend  not  on
birth,  but  property,  still  retaining  the  election  by
suffrage,  and,  according  to  Plutarch,  so  far  im-
pairing the  authority  of  the  archons  and  other
magistrates,  as  to  legalise  an  appeal  from  them
to  the  courts  of  justice  instituted  by  himself.
("Oao  Tcus  apxO'^s  eTa|e  Kpheiv,  S/xolws  Kal  Trcpl
iKcivcou  (is  rh  BiKao-r-fipiou  ecpecreLS  eSw/cei/,
Plut.  Solon.  18.)  The  election  by  lot  is  believed
to  have  been  introduced  by  Cleisthenes  (b.  c.
508  ;  Herod,  vi.  109)  ;  for  we  find  this  practice
existing  shortly  after  his  time  ;  and  Aristotle
(Polit.  ii.  9)  expressly  states  that  Solon  made  no
alteration  in  the  a'lpeais^  or  mode  of  election,  but
only  in  the  qualification  for  office.  If,  however,
there  be  no  interpolation  in  the  oath  of  the
Heliasts  (Dem.  c.  Timocr.  p.  747),  we  are  forced
to  the  conclusion  that  the  election  by  lot  was
as  old  as  the  time  of  Solon  ;  but  the  authority
of  Aristotle  and  other  evidence  strongly  incline
us  to  some  such  supposition,  or  rather  leave
no  doubt  of  its  necessity.  The  last  change  is  sup-
posed to  have  been  made  by  Aristeides  (rp<i(pei
^p^cpifffxa  Koiv^y  elvai  t^v  iroXireiau,  Kol  rovs  &pxou-
'ras  e'i  ' AOrfvaluv  it6lvtwv  alpiiaQai,  Plut.  Arist.
22),  who,  after  the  battle  of  Plataea  (b.  c.  479),


*  By  this  is  meant  that  thesupreme  power,  though
not  monarchical,  was  confined  to  one  family.


ARCHON.

abolished  the  property  qualification,  throwing  open
the  archonship  and  other  magistracies  to  all  the  citi-
zens, that  is,  to  the  Thetes,  as  well  as  the  other
classes,  the  former  of  Avhom  were  not  allowed  by
Solon's  laws  to  hold  any  magistracy  at  all ;  in  con-
formity with  which,  we  find  that,  even  in  the  time
of  Aristeides,  the  archons  were  chosen  by  lot  from
the  wealthiest  class  of  citizens  (joi  •KivraKoaio-
fieSifjLvoi,  Plut.  Arist.  ad  init.).

Still,  after  the  removal  of  the  old  restrictions,
some  security  was  left  to  insure  respectability  ;
for,  previously  to  an  archon  entering  on  office,  he
underwent  an  examination  called  the  avaKpicris
(Pollux,  viii.  85  ;  Deinar.  c.  Aristog.  p.  107  ;  tovs
eVi/eo  ^pxovras  auaKpivere  el  youeas  ed  iroiovaiv.
Dem.  c.  Euhul.  p.  1320),  as  to  his  being  a  legi-
timate and  a  good  citizen,  a  good  son,  and  qualified
in  point  of  property :  el  t^  riyurj^ci  i^Tiv  avrw  ;
was  the  question  put.  Now,  there  are  (Scho-
mann,  De  Comitiis,  p.  312.  ;  Bockh,  vol.  ii.  p.  277)
strong  reasons  for  supposing  that  this  form  of  ex-
amination continued  even  after  the  time  of  Ari-
steides ;  and  if  so,  it  would  follow  that  the  right
in  question  Avas  not  given  to  the  Thetes  pro-
miscuously, but  only  to  such  as  possessed  a  cer-
tain amount  of  property.  But  even  if  it  were  so,
it  is  admitted  that  this  latter  limitation  soon  be-
came obsolete  ;  for  we  read  in  Lysias  ('TTrep  rov
'ASwaTov,  p.  169),  that  a  needy  old  man,  so
poor  as  to  receive  a  state  allowance,  was  not  dis-
qualified from  being  archon  by  his  indigence,  but
only  by  bodily  infirmity  ;  freedom  from  all  such
defects  being  required  for  the  office,  as  it  was  in
some  respects  of  a  sacred  character.  Yet,  even  after
passing  a  satisfactory  avaKpiais,  each  of  the  archons,
in  common  with  other  magistrates,  was  liable  to
be  deposed,  on  complaint  of  misconduct  made  be-
fore the  people,  at  the  first  regular  assembly  in  each
prj'tany.  On  such  an  occasion,  the  iirixeipo-
rovia,  as  it  was  called,  took  place  ;  and  we
read  (Dem.  c.  Theocrin.  p.  1330  ;  Pollux,  viii.  95  ;
Harp,  in  Kvpia  "EKuX-qaia)  that,  in  one  case,  the
whole  body  of  Qea/xoderai  was  deprived  of  office
(aTrexeiporovfidri),  for  the  misbehaviour  of  one  ol*
their  body :  they  were,  however,  reinstated,  on
promise  of  better  conduct  for  the  future.

With  respect  to  the  later  ages  of  Athenian
historj'^,  we  learn  from  Strabo  (ix.  1),  that  even
in  his  day,  the  Romans  allowed  the  freedom
of  Athens  ;  and  we  may  conclude  that  the  Athe-
nians would  fondly  cling  to  a  name  and  office
associated  with  some  of  their  most  cherished
remembrances.  That  the  archonship,  however,
though  still  in  existence,  was  merely  honorary,  we
might  expect  from  the  analogy  of  the  consulate  at
Rome  ;  and,  indeed,  we  learn  that  it  was  some-
times filled  by  strangers,  as  Hadrian  and  Plutarch.
Such,  moreover,  was  the  democratical  tendency  of
the  assembly  and  courts  of  justice  established
by  Solon,  that,  even  in  earlier  times,  the  archons
had  lost  the  great  political  power  which  they  at
one  time  possessed  (Thuc.  i.  126),  and  that,  too,
after  the  division  of  their  functions  amongst  nine.
They  became,  in  fact,  not  as  of  old,  directors  of  the
government  ;  but  merely  municipal  magistrates,
exercising  functions  and  bearing  titles  which  Ave
will  proceed  to  describe.

It  has  been  already  stated,  that  the  duties  of  the

single  archon  were  shared  by  a  college  of  nine,

The   first   or   president  of  this  body  was  called

,  6  ^px^^i  ^y  '^'^y  of  pre-eminence  ;  and  sometimes


I


ARCHON.

b  iiTwvvixos  &px<i^''  from  the  year  being  distinguished
by  and  registered  in  his  name.  The  second  was
styled  6  ^a(n\evs,  or  the  king  archon  ;  the  third,
6  TvoXe/xapxos,  or  commander-in-chief  ;  the  remain-
ing six,  01  b^crixoOerai,  or  legislators.  As  regards  the
duties  of  the  archons,  it  is  sometimes  difficult  to
distinguish  what  belonged  to  them  individually
and  what  collectively.  It  seems,  however,  that  a
considerable  portion  of  the  judicial  functions  of
the  ancient  kings  devolved  upon  the  Archon  Epo-
nymus,  who  Avas  also  constituted  a  sort  of  state
protector  of  those  who  were  unable  to  defend  them-
selves. (Dem.  c.  Macar.  N({jitos,  p.  1076  ;  Pollux,
viii.  89.)  Thus  he  had  to  superintend  orphans
and  their  estates,  heiresses,  families  losing  their
representatives  {qIkoi  ol  i^eprnaovfievoi)^  widows
left  pregnant,  and  to  see  that  they  were  not
wronged  in  any  way.  Should  any  one  do  so,  he
Avas  empowered  to  inflict  a  fine  of  a  certain
amount,  or  to  bring  the  parties  to  trial.  Heiresses,
indeed,  seem  to  have  been  under  his  peculiar
care ;  for  we  read  (Dem.  c.  Macar.  p.  1069),
that  he  could  compel  the  next  of  kin  either  to
marry  a  poor  heiress  himself,  even  though  she  were
of  a  lower  class,  or  to  portion  her  in  marriage  to
another.  Again  we  find  {Id.  p.  1055  ;  Pollux,
viii.  62)  that,  when  a  person  claimed  an  inhe-
ritance or  heiress  adjudged  to  others,  he  sum-
moned the  party  in  possession  before  the  archon
eponj'mus  ('ETrtSj/catria)  who  brought  the  case  into
court,  and  made  arrangements  for  trying  the  suit.
We  must,  however,  bear  in  mind  that  this  autho-
rity was  only  exercised  in  cases  where  the  parties
were  citizens,  the  polemarch  having  corresponding
duties  when  the  heiress  was  an  alien.  It  must  also
be  understood  that,  except  in  very  few  cases,  the
archons  did  not  decide  themselves,  but  merely
brought  the  causes  into  court,  and  cast  lots  for  the
dicasts  who  were  to  try  the  issue.  (Dem.  c.
Steph.  ii.  p.  1136.)  Another  duty  of  the  archons
was  to  receive  clffayyeKiai  (Harpocr.  s.  v.),  or  in-
formations against  individuals  who  had  wronged
heiresses,  children  who  had  maltreated  their  parents,
guardians  who  had  neglected  or  defrauded  their
wards.  (KaKoxris  iiriKKrjpovy  yovewv,  opcpavciv.
Dera.  c.  Alacar.  p.  1069  ;  Schomann,  p.  IfJl.)  In-
formations of  another  kind,  the  evdei^LS  and  cpdais,
were  also  laid  before  the  eponymus,  though  De-
mosthenes (c.  Timocr.  p.  707)  assigned  the  fonuer
to  the  thesmothetae.  (Endeixis.)  The  last  office
of  the  archon  which  we  shall  mention  was  of  a
sacred  character  ;  we  allude  to  his  superintendence
of  the  greater  Dionysia  and  the  Thargelia,  the
latter  celebrated  in  honour  of  ApoUo  and  Artemis.
(Pollux,  viii.  89.)

The  functions  of  the  fiaa-iXfvs,  or  King  Archon,
■were  almost  all  connected  with  religion :  his  dis-
tinguishing title  shows  that  he  was  considered  a
representative  of  the  old  kings  in  their  capacity  of
high  priest,  as  the  Rex  Sacrificulus  was  at  Rome.
Thus  he  presided  at  the  Lenaean,  or  older  Dionysia;
superintended  the  mysteries  and  the  games  called
XaiJ.iTahri(popiai,  and  had  to  offer  up  sacrifices  and
prayers  in  the  Eleusinium,  both  at  Athens  and
Eleusis.  Moreover,  indictments  for  impiety,  and
controversies  about  the  priesthood,  were  laid  before
him  ;  and,  in  cases  of  murder,  he  brought  the  trial
into  the  court  of  the  Areiopagxis,  and  voted  with  its
members.  His  wife,  also,  who  was  called  jSao't-
Aicro-o  or  ^aa-'iKivva,  had  to  oflfer  certain  sacrifices,
and  therefore  it  was  required  that  she  should  be  a


ARCHON.


123


citizen  of  pure  blood,  without  stain  or  blemish.
His  court  was  held  in  what  was  called  t]  roZ
fiaaiXews  ffrod.  (Dem.  c.  Lacr.  p.  940  ;  c.  An-
drot.  p.  601  ;  c.  Neaer.  p.  1370  ;  Lysias,  c.  Andoc.
p.  1 03,  where  the  duties  are  enumerated  ;  Elmsley,
Ad  Aristoph.Achar.  1 143,  et  Scholia  ;  Harpocr.  s.v.
'Eirifj.e\r}T^s  tuv  fxvffTqp'iwv  ;  Plato,  Euthyphr.
ad  init.  et  Theaet.  ad  fin.  ;  Pollux,  viii.  90.)

The  Polemarch  was  originally,  as  his  name  de-
notes, the  commander-in-chief  (Herod,  vi.  109,
111  ;  Pollux,  viii.  91)  ;  and  we  find  him  dis-
charging military  duties  as  late  as  the  battle  of
Marathon,  in  conjunction  with  the  ten  arparriyol :
he  there  took,  like  the  kings  of  old,  the  command  of
the  right  wing  of  the  army.  This,  however,  seems  to
be  the  last  occasion  on  record  of  this  magistrate  ap-
pointed by  lot,  being  invested  with  such  important
functions  ;  and  in  after  ages  we  find  that  his
duties  ceased  to  be  military,  having  been  in  a  great
measure  transferred  to  the  protection  and  superin-
tendence of  the  resident  aliens,  so  that  he  resembled
in  many  respects  the  praetor  peregrinus  at  Rome,  In
fact,  we  learn  from  Aristotle,  in  his  "  Constitution  of
Athens,"  that  the  polemarch  stood  in  the  same
relation  to  foreigners  as  the  archon  to  citizens.
(Demosth.  c.  Lacr.  p,  940  ;  Arist.  apud  Harpocr.
s.  V.  ;  Pollux,  viii.  91,  92.)  Thus,  all  actions  affect-
ing aliens,  the  isoteles  and  proxeni,  were  brought
before  him  previously  to  trial  ;  as,  for  instance,
the  S'lKri  airpocTTaalov  against  a  foreigner,  for
living  in  Athens  without  a  patron  ;  so  was  also
the  5t/c77  aTTOffTacriov  against  a  slave  who  failed  in
his  duty  to  the  master  who  had  freed  him.  More-
over, it  was  the  polemarch's  duty  to  offer  the
yearly  sacrifice  to  Artemis,  in  commemoration  of
the  vow  made  by  Callimachus,  at  Marathon,  and
to  arrange  the  funeral  games  in  honour  of  those
who  fell  in  war.  These  three  archons,  the
iirdcpvfios,  fiaaiKevs,  and  iroXefiapxos,  were  each
allowed  two  assessors  to  assist  them  in  the  dis-
charge of  their  duties.

The  T/iesmothctae  were  extensively  connected
with  the  administration  of  justice,  and  appear  to
have  been  called  legislators  (Thirlwall,  liist.  of
Greece,  vol.  ii.  p.  17),  because  in  the  absence  of  a
written  code,  they  might  be  said  to  make  laws,  or
ideo-juoj,  in  the  ancient  language  of  Athens,
though  in  reality  they  only  declared  and  ex-
plained them.  They  were  required  to  review,
every  year,  the  whole  body  of  laws,  that  they
might  detect  any  inconsistencies  or  superfluities,
and  discover  whether  any  laws  which  were  abro-
gated were  in  the''  public  records  amongst  the  rest.
(Aeschin.  c.  Ctesiph.  p.  59.)  Their  report  was  sub-
mitted to  the  people,  who  referred  the  necessary
alterations  to  a  legislative  committee  chosen  for
the  purpose,  and  called  vofxoOfrai.

The  chief  part  of  the  duties  of  the  thesmothetae
consisted  in  receiving  informations,  and  bringing
cases  to  trial  in  the  courts  of  law,  of  the  days  of
sitting  in  which  they  gave  public  notice.  (Pollux,
viii.  87,  88.)  They  did  not  try  them  themselves  ;
but  seem  to  have  constituted  a  sort  of  grand  jury,
or  inquest.  Thus  they  received  ivSei^eis  against
parties  who  had  not  paid  their  fines,  or  owed  any
money  to  the  state  ;  and  in  default  of  bringing
the  former  parties  to  trial,  they  lost  their  right  of
going  up  to  the  Areiopagus  at  the  end  of  their  year
of  office.  (Dem.  c.  Meid.  p.  529 ;  c.  Macar.  p.
1075  ;  c.  Timocr.  707;  Bockh,  vol.  i.  p.59,  vol.ii.
p.  72.)     Again,  indictments  for  personal    icjuriea


124  ARCHON.

(v€pf(i}S  ypa<pai)  were  laid  before  them,  as  well  as
informations  against  olive  growers,  for  rooting  up
more  trees  than  was  allowed  to  each  proprietor
by  law.  So,  too,  were  the  indictments  for  bribing
the  Heliaea,  or  any  of  the  courts  of  justice  at
Athens,  or  the  senate,  or  fonning  clubs  for  the
overthrow  of  the  democracy,  and  against  retained
advocates  {(rwi)yopoi)  who  took  bribes  either  in
public  or  private  causes.  Again,  an  information
was  laid  before  them  if  a  foreigner  cohabited  with
a  citissen,  or  a  man  gave  in  marriage  as  his  own
daughter  the  child  of  another,  or  confined  as  an
adulterer  one  who  was  not  so.  They  also  had  to
refer  informations  (ila-ayyeKiai)  to  the  people  ;
and  where  an  information  had  been  laid  before  the
senate,  and  a  condemnation  ensued,  it  was  their
duty  to  bring  the  judgment  into  the  courts  of
justice  for  confirmation  or  revision.  (Dem.  c.  Steph.
ii.  p.  1137;  c.  l^eaer.  pp.  1351,  1363,  1368,
c.  Timocr.  p.  720  ;  Pollux,  viii.  88  ;  Bockh,  vol  L
pp.259,  317.)

A  different  office  of  theirs  was  to  draw  up  and
ratify  the  a-vixSoXa,  or  agreements,  with  foreign
states,  settling  the  terms  on  which  their  citizens
should  sue  and  be  sued  by  the  citizens  of  Athens.
In  their  collective  capacity,  the  archons  are  said  to
have  had  the  power  of  death  in  case  an  exile  re-
turned to  an  interdicted  place :  they  also  superin-
tended the  iirix^ipoTovia  of  the  magisti^ates,  held
everv  prvtany  {iirepwrciai  et  So/cet  Ka\ws  6px^"')»
and  brought  to  trial  those  whom  the  people  de-
posed, if  an  action  or  indictment  were  the  con-
sequence of  it.  Moreover,  they  allotted  the  dicasts
or  jurymen,  and  probably  presided  at  the  annual
election  of  the  stratcgi  and  other  military  officers.
(Pollux, viii.  87, 88  ;  Harpocr.s.  v.  KaTax^tpoTo/ia:
Schumann,  p.  231  ;  Dem.  c.  Aris.  p.  630.)

We  may  here  remark,  that  it  is  necessary
to  be  cautious  in  our  intei-pretation  of  the  words
apXT]  and  ^pxavres,  since  in  the  Attic  orators
they  have  a  double  meaning,  sometimes  refer-
ring to  the  archons  peculiarly  so  called,  and
sometimes  to  any  other  magistracy.  Thus  in
Isaeus  (De  Cleonymi  Haered.)  we  might  on  a
cursoiy  perusal  infer,  that  when  a  testator  left
his  property  away  from  his  heir-at-law,  by  what
was  technically  called  a  h6(ns  (Harpocr.  s.  v.;
Isaeus,  TTcpl  KK-fipeav),  the  archon  took  the  original
will  into  custody,  and  was  required  to  be  present
at  the  making  of  any  addition  or  codicil  to  it.  A
more  accurate  observation  proves  that  by  els  rau
apx^t^TOJU  is  meant  one  of  the  aaTuvd/xoi,  who
formed  a  magistracy  {o.px'h)  as  well  as  the  nine
archons.

A  few  words  will  suffice  for  the  privileges  and
honours  of  the  archons.  The  greatest  of  the  former
was  the  exemption  from  the  trierarchies  —  a  boon
not  allowed  even  to  the  successors  of  Harmodius
and  Aristogeiton.  As  a  mark  of  their  office,  they
wore  a  chaplet  or  crown  of  myrtle  ;  and  if  any
one  struck  or  abused  one  of  the  thesmothetae  or
the  archon,  when  wearing  this  badge  of  office,  he
})ecame  Urtnos,  or  infamous  in  the  fullest  extent,
therel)V  losing  his  civic  rights.  (Bockh,  vol.  ii.
p.  322"^;  Dem.  c.  Lept.  pp.  462,  464,  465,  c.  MeM.
p.  524  ;  Pollux,  viii.  86.)  The  archons,  at  the  close
of  their  year  of  service,  were  admitted  among  the
members  of  the  Areiopagus.      [Areiopagus.]

The  Archon  Eponymus  being  an  animal  magis-
trate at  Athens,  like  th'^  consul  at  Rome,  it  is
manifest  that  a  correct   list  of  the  archons   is   an


ARCUS.
important  element  in  the  determination  of  Athe-
nian chronology.  Now  from  Creon  (b.c.  684),  the
first  annual  archon,  to  Comias  (b.  c.  560),  we  have
the  names  of  about  twenty-four.  From  b.  c.  560
to  the  invasion  of  Xerxes  (b.  c.  480),  the  names
and  years  of  about  twenty-four  more  have  been
determined.  From  B.  c.  480  to  292,  Diodonis  and
Dionysius  Halicamassus  furnish  an  almost  un-
broken succession  for  a  period  of  nearly  200  years.
The  names,  so  far  as  they  are  known,  are  given  by
Clinton  (F.  H.)^  who  remarks  that  the  compiler
of  the  Parian  marbles  places  the  annual  archons  one
year  too  high  respectively.  He  also  states  (vol.  ii.
p.  12)  that  the  best  list  is  that  of  Corsini,  who
however  is  surpassed  by  Wesseling  within  the  period
embraced  by  the  remains  of  Diodorus.  [R.W.]
ARCHO'NES  (apxcivvs).  [Telones.]
ARCIFPNIUS  AGER.  [Ager.]
ARCUS  (also  fornix,  Virg.  Aen.  vi.  631  ;  Cic.
in  Verr.  i.  7  ;  Kafxdpa\  an  arch.  It  is  possible  to
give  an  arched  form  to  the  covering  of  any  opening
by  placing  horizontal  courses  of  stones  projecting
over  one  another,  from  both  sides  of  the  opening,
till  they  meet  at  top,  and  then  cutting  the  ends  of
the  projecting  stones  to  a  regular  curve,  as  shown
below.  This  form  is  found  in  the  most  ancient
architecture  of  nearly  all  nations,  but  it  does  not
constitute  a  true  arch.  A  true  arch  is  formed  of
a  series  of  wedge-like  stones,  or  of  bricks,  support-
ing each  other,  and  all  bound  firmly  together  by
their  mutual  pressure.

It  would  seem  that  the  arch,  as  thiis  defined,
and  as  used  by  the  Romans,  was  not  known  to  the
Greeks  in  the  early  periods  of  their  history,  other-
Avise  a  language  so  copious  as  theirs,  and  of  such
ready  application,  would  not  have  wanted  a  name
properly  Greek  by  which  to  distinguish  it.  But
the  constructive  principle,  by  which  an  arch  is
made  to  hold  together,  and  to  afford  a  solid  re-
sistance against  the  pressure  upon  its  circumference,
was  known  to  them  even  previously  to  the  Trojan
war,  and  its  use  is  exemplified  in  two  of  the
earliest  buildings  now  remaining  —  the  chamber
built  at  Orchomenus,  by  Minyas,  king  of  Boeotia,
described  by  Pausanias  (ix.  38),  and  the  treasury*
of  Atreus  at  Mj^cenae.  (Pans.  ii.  16.)  Both
these  works  are  constructed  under  ground,  and
each  of  them  consists  of  a  circular  chamber  formed
by  regular  courses  of  stones  laid  horizontally  over
each  other,  each  course  projecting  towards  the  in-
terior, and  beyond  the  one  below  it,  till  they  meet
in  an  apex  over  the  centre,  which  was  capped  by  a
large  stone,  and  thus  resembled  the  inside  of  a
dome.  Each  of  the  horizontal  courses  of  stones
formed  a  perfect  circle,  or  two  semicircular  arches
joined  together,  as  the  subjoined  plan  of  one  of
these  courses  will  render  evident.

It  will  be  observed  that  the  innermost  end  of
each  stone  is  bevelled  off  into  the  shape  of  a  wedge,
the  apex  of  which,  if  continued,  would  meet  in  the
centre  of  the  circle,  as  is  done  in  forming  an  arch  ;
while  the  outer  ends  against  the  earth  are  left  rough,
and  their  interstices  filled  up  with  small  irregular-
shaped  stones,  the  immense  size  of  the  principal
stones  rendering  it  unnecessary  to  continue  the
sectional  cutting  throughout  their  whole  length.
Indeed,  if  these  chambers  had  been  constructed
upon  any  other  principle,  it  is  clear  that  the  pres-
sure of  earth  all  around  them  would  have  caused
them  to  collapse.  The  method  of  constniction
here  described  was  commimicated   to  the  writer


ARCUS

of  the  present  article  by  the  hite  Sir  William
Gell.  Thus  it  seems  that  the  Greeks  did  under-
stand the  constructive  principle  upon  which  arches


ARCUS  TRIUMPHALIS.


Ul


are  formed,  even  in  the  earliest  times  ;  although
it  did  not  occur  to  them  to  divide  the  circle  by  a
diameter,  and  set  the  half  of  it  upright  to  bear  a
Buperincimibent  weight.  But  they  made  use  of  a
contrivance  even  before  the  Trojan  war,  by  which
they  were  enabled  to  gain  all  the  advantages  of  our
archway  in  making  corridors,  or  hollow  galleries,
and  which  in  appearance  resembled  the  pointed
arch,  such  as  is  now  termed  Gothic.  This  was
effected  by  cutting  away  the  superincumbent  stones
in  the  manner  already  described,  at  an  angle  of
about  4.5°  with  the  horizon.  The  mode  of  con-
struction and  appearance  of  such  arches  is  repre-
sented in  the  annexed  drawing  of  the  walls  of
Tiryns,  copied  from  Sir  William  Gell's  Argolis.
The  gate  of  Signia  (Segni)  in  Latium  exhibits  a
similar  example.


The  principle  of  the  true  arch  seems  to  have
"been  known  to  the  Romans  from  the  earliest
period :  it  is  used  in  the  Cloaca  Maxima.  It  is
most  probably  an  Etruscan  invention.  The  use  of
it  constitutes  one  leading  distinction  between
Greek  and  Roman  architecture,  for  by  its  applica-
tion the  Romans  were  enabled  to  execute  works
of  far  bolder  construction  than  those  of  the  Greeks


—  to  erect  bridges  and  aqueducts,  and  the  most
durable  and  massive  structures  of  brick.  The
Romans,  however,  never  used  any  other  form  of
arch  than  the  semicircle.  [A.  R.]

ARCUS  TRIUMPH  A'LIS  (a  triumphal  arch),
was  a  structure  peculiar  to  the  Romans,  among
whom  it  seems  to  have  taken  its  origin  from  the
Porta  Triumphalis,  the  gate  by  which  a  general
celebrating  a  triumph  led  his  anny  into  the  citj',  on
which  occasions  the  gate  was  adorned  with  trophies
and  other  memorials  of  the  particular  victory  cele-
brated. In  process  of  time  other  arches  were
erected,  both  at  Rome  and  in  the  provinces,  to
celebrate  single  victories,  the  memorials  of  which
were  carved  upon  them  or  fixed  to  them,  and  these
remained  as  permanent  monuments.  They  even
came  to  be  erected  in  memory  of  a  victory  for
which  there  had  been  no  triumph  ;  nay,  even  to
commemorate  other  events  than  victories.  That
at  Ancona,  for  example,  was  erected  in  honour  of
Trajan,  when  he  had  improved  the  harbour  of  the
city  at  his  own  expense.

Triumphal  arches  were  insulated  stnictures
built  across  the  principal  streets  of  the  city,
and,  according  to  the  space  of  their  respective
localities,  consisted  of  either  a  single  arch-way,
or  of  a  central  one  for  cairiages,  with  two  smaller
ones  on  each  side  for  foot  passengers,  which
sometimes  have  side  communications  with  the
centre  arch.  Sometimes  there  were  two  arches  of
equal  height,  side  by  side.  Each  front  was  orna-
mented with  trophies  and  bas-reliefs,  which  were
also  placed  on  the  sides  of  the  passages.  Both
facades  had  usually  columns  against  the  piers,
supporting  an  entablature,  surmounted  by  a  lofty
attic,  on  the  front  of  which  Avas  the  inscription,
and  on  the  top  of  it  bronze  chariots,  war-horses,
statues,  and  trophies.

Stertinius  is  the  first  upon  record  who  erected
.any  thing  of  the  kind.  He  built  an  arch  in  the
Forum  Boarium,  about  B.  c.  196,  and  another
in  the  Circus  Maximus,  each  of  which  was  sur-
mounted by  gilt  statues.  (Liv.  xxxiii.  27.)  Six
years  afterwards,  Scipio  Africanus  built  another  on
the  Clivus  Capitolinus,  on  which  he  placed  seven
gilt  statues  and  two  figures  of  horses  (Liv.  xxxvii.
3)  ;  and  in  B.  c.  121,  Fabius  Maximus  built  a
fourth  in  the  Via  Sacra,  which  is  called  by  Cicero
{in  Verr.  i.  7)  the  Fornix  Fahiarms.  None  of
these  remain,  the  Arch  of  Aiigustus  at  Rimini
being  one  of  the  earliest  among  those  still  stand-
ing. That  these  erections  were  either  temporary
or  very  insignificant,  may  be  inferred  from  the
silence  of  Vitruvius,  who  says  nothing  of  triumphal
arches.  We  might  be  sure,  from  the  nature  of
the  case,  that  such  stnictures  would  especially
mark  the  period  of  the  empire.

There  are  twenty-one  arches  recorded  by  dif-
ferent writers  as  having  been  erected  in  the  city
of  Rome,  five  of  which  now  remain  :  —  1.  J  reus
Drusi,  Avhich  Avas  erected  to  the  honour  of  Nero
Claudius  Drusus  on  the  Appian  way.  (Suet.
Claiid.  1.)  2.  A  reus  Titi^  at  the  foot  of  the
Palatine,  which  was  erected  to  the  honour  of
Titus,  after  his  conquest  of  Judaea,  but  was  not
finished  till  after  his  death  ;  since  in  the  inscrip-
tion upon  it  he  is  called  Divus,  and  he  is  also
represented  as  being  carried  up  to  heaven  upon  an
eagle.  The  bas-reliefs  of  this  arch  represent  the
spoils  from  the  temple  of  Jerusalem  carried  in
triumphal  procession  ;   and  are  among  the  best


126


ARCUS.


AREIOPAGUS.


specimens  of  Roman  sculpture.  This  arch  has
only  a  single  opening,  with  two  columns  of  the
Roman  or  composite  order  on  each  side  of  it.  3.
Arcus  Septimii  Severi,  which  was  erected  by  the
senate  (a.  d.  203)  at  the  end  of  the  Via  Sacra,
in  honour  of  that  emperor  and  his  two  sons,
Caracalla  and  Geta,  on  account  of  his  victories
over  the  Parthians  and  Arabians.  4.  Arcus  Gal-
lie?iiy  erected  to  the  honour  of  Gallienus  by  a  pri-
vate individual,  M.  Aurelius  Victor.  5.  Arcus
Comtantini,  which  is  larger  and  more  profusely
ornamented  than  the  Arch  of  Titus.  It  was
erected  by  the  senate  in  honour  of  Constantine,
after  his  victory  over  Maxentius.  It  consists  of
three  arches,  with  columns  against  each  front,  and
statues  on  the  cntablaturtis  over  them,  which,  with
the  other  sculptured  ornaments,  originally  de-
corated the  arch  of  Trajan.  [P.  S.]

ARCUS  {^i6s,  t6^ou)^  the  bow  used  for  shoot-
ing arrows,  is  one  of  the  most  ancient  of  all  wea-
pons, but  is  characteristic  of  Asia  rather  than  of
Europe.  Thus  in  the  description  given  by  Hero-
dotus (vii,  61 — 80)  of  the  various  nations  com-
posing the  army  of  Xerxes,  we  observe  that  nearly
all  the  troops  Avithout  exception  used  the  bow.
The  Scythians  and  Parthians  were  the  most  cele-
brated archers  in  the  East,  and  among  the  Greeks
the  Cretans,  who  frequently  served  as  a  separate
corps  in  the  Greek  armies,  and  subsequently  also
among  the  auxiliary  troops  of  the  Romans.  (Comp.
Xen.  Ajiab.  i.  2.  §  9  ;  Liv.  xlii.  35.)

The  form  of  the  Scythian  and  Paithian  bow
differed  from  that  of  the  Greeks.  The  fonuer  was
in  the  shape  of  a  half-moon,  and  is  shown  in  the
upper  of  the  two  figures  here  exhibited,  which  is
taken  from  one  of  Sir  W.  Hamilton's  fictile  vases.
(Comp.  Amm.  Marc.  xxii.  8.)  The  Greek  bow,  on
the  other  hand,  the  usual  form  of  which  is  shown


in  the  lower  of  the  preceding  figures,  has  a  double
curvature,  consisting  of  two  circular  portions  united
in  the  middle  (tttjxus).  According  to  the  descrip-
tion in  Homer  (ll.  iv.  105 — 126),  the  bow  was
made  of  two  pieces  of  horn,  hence  frequently  called
Kepas  and  cornu.  The  bow-string  (vevpd)  was
twisted,  and  was  frequently  made  of  thongs  of
leather  (vevpa  fi6eia).  It  was  always  fastened  to
one  end  of  the  bow,  and  at  the  other  end  there
hung  a  ring  or  hook  {Kop'Jivri),  usually  made  of
raetal  (xpva-erj),  to  which  the  string  was  attached,
when  the  bow  was  to  be  used.  In  the  same  pas  •
sage  of  Homer  we  have  a  description  of  a  man
*  preparing  to  shoot,  and  this  account  is  illustrated
by  the  following  outline  of  a  statue  belonging  to
the  group  of  the  Aeginetan  marbles.  The  bow,
placed  in  the  hands  of  this  statue,  was  probably
of  bronze,  and  has  been  lost.


When  not  used,  the  bow  was  put  into  a  case
(To|o0irj«:77,  yocpvrSs,  Corytus),  which  was  made  ot
leather,  and  sometimes  ornamented  (^aeivcJy,  Horn.
Od.  xxi.  54).  The  bow-case  is  very  conspicuous
in  the  sculptured  bas-reliefs  of  Persepolis.  It
frequently  held  the  arrows  as  well  as  the  bow,
and  on  this  account  is  often  confounded  with  the
Pharetra  or  quiver.  Though  its  use  was  com-
paratively rare  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans,
we  find  it  exhibited  in  a  bas-relief  in  the  Museo
Pio-Clementino  (vol.  iv.  tav.  43),  which  is  copied
in  the  annexed  cut.


ARDA'LION  {apUxiov).     [Funus.]

A'REA.     [Agricultura,  p.44.]

AREIO'PAGUS.  The  Areiopagus  (6''Apem
■nayos^  or  hill  of  Ares),  at  Athens,  was  a  rocky
eminence,  lying  to  the  west  of,  and  not  far  from  the
Acropolis.  To  account  for  the  name,  various  stories
were  told.  Thus,  some  said  that  it  was  so  called  from
the  Amazons,  the  daughters  of  Ares,  having  encamped
there  when  they  attacked  Athens  ;  others  again,  as
Aeschylus,  from  the  sacrifices  there  oflfered  by  them
to  that  god  ;  while  the  more  received  opinion  con-
nected the  name  with  the  legend  of  Ares  having
been  brought  to  tricvl  there  by  Poseidon,  for  the
murder  of  his  son  Halirrhotius.  (Dcm.  c.  Aristocr.
p.  642  ;  Aeschyl.  Eiim.  659.)  To  none,  however,
of  these  legends  did  the  place  owe  its  fame,  but
rather  to  the  council  ('H  iv  'Apelcp  -rrdyq}  fiov\-(i).
which  held  its  sittings  there,  and  was  sometimes


AREIOPAGUS.

called  'H  &VCO  ^ovX-f},  to  distinguish  it  from  the
senate  of  Five  Hundred,  which  sat  in  the  Cerameicus
within  the  city.  That  it  was  a  body  of  very  remote
antiquitj'^,  acting  as  a  criminal  tribunal,  was  evi-
dently believed  by  the  Athenians  themselves.  In
proof  of  this,  we  may  refer  to  the  express  assertions
of  the  orators,  and  the  legend  of  Orestes  having
been  tried  before  the  council  for  the  murder  of  his
mother  —  a  trial  which  took  place  before  Athena,
and  which  Aeschylus  represents  as  the  origin  of
the  court  itself.  Again,  we  find  that  even  before
the  first  Messenian  war  (b.  c.  740)  began,  the
Messenians  offered  to  refer  the  points  in  dispute  to
the  Argive  Amphictiony,  or  the  Athenian  Areio-
pagus  (Paus.  iv.  5.  §  1 ;  Thirlwall,  Hist.  Greece,
vol.  i.  p.  345),  because  this  body  was  believed  to
have  had  jurisdiction  in  cases  of  manslaughter
(S'lKas  (poviKcis),  "  from  of  old."

There  is  sufficient  proof,  then,  that  the  Areiopa-
gus  existed  before  the  time  of  Solon,  though  he  is
admitted  to  have  so  far  modified  its  constitution
and  sphere  of  duty,  that  he  might  almost  be  called
its  founder.  What  that  original  constitution  was,
must  in  some  degree  be  left  to  conjecture,  though
there  is  every  reason  to  suppose  that  it  was
aristocratical,  the  members  being  taken,  like
the  Ephctae,  from  the  noble  patrician  families
{apicrriu^rjv).  We  may  remark  that,  after  the  time
of  Solon,  the  Ephetae,  fifty-one  in  number,  sat
collectively  in  foiu"  different  courts,  and  were
charged  with  the  hearing  of  such  cases  of  acci-
dental or  justifiable  homicide  as  admitted  of  or  re-
quired expiation,  before  the  accused  could  resume
the  civil  and  religious  rights  he  had  lost:  a  re-
sumption impossible  in  cases  of  wilful  murder,  the
capital  punishment  for  which  could  only  be  escaped
b}'  banishment  for  life,  so  that  no  expiation  was
required  or  given.  (MUller,  Eumen.  §  64  ;  Pollux,
viii.  125.)  Now  the  Ephetae  formerly  adminis-
tered justice  in  five  courts,  ajid  for  this  and  other
reasons  it  has  been  conjectured  that  they  and  the
Areiopagus  then  formed  one  court,  which  decided
in  all  cases  of  murder,  whether  wilful  or  accidental.
In  support  of  this  view,  it  has  been  urged  that  the
separation  of  functions  was  rendered  necessary  by
that  change  of  Solon  which  made  the  Areiopagus
no  longer  an  aristocratic  body,  while  the  Ephetae
remained  so,  and  as  such  were  competent  to  ad-
minister the  rights  of  expiation,  forming,  as  they
did,  a  part  of  the  sacred  law  of  Athens,  and  there-
fore left  in  the  hands  of  the  old  patricians,  even
after  the  loss  of  their  political  privileges.  On  this
point  we  may  remark,  that  the  connection  insisted
on  may  to  a  great  extent  be  true  ;  but  that  there
was  not  a  complete  identity  of  functions  is  proved
by  Plutarch  {Solon,  c.  19),  in  a  quotation  from  the
laws  of  Solon,  showing  that  even  before  that  legis-
lator the  Areiopagites  and  Ephetae  were  in  some
cases  distinct.

It  has  been  observed,  in  the  article  Archon',
that  the  principal  change  introduced  by  Solon  in
the  constitution  of  Athens,  was  to  make  the  quali-
fication for  office  depend  not  on  birth  but  property  ;
also  that,  agreeably  to  his  reforms,  the  nine  archons,
after  an  unexceptionable  discharge  of  their  duties,
"  went  up  "  to  the  Areiopagus,  and  became  mem-
bers of  it  for  life,  unless  expelled  for  misconduct,
(Deinar.  c.  Demosth.  p.  97  ;  Plut^o/.  c.  18.)

The  council  then,  after  his  time,  ceased  to  be
aristocratic  in  constitution  ;  but,  as  we  learn  from
Attic  writers,  continued   so   in   spirit;      In   fact,


AREIOPAGUS.


127


Solon  is  said  to  have  formed  the  two  councils,  the
senate  and  the  Areiopagus,  to  be  a  check  upon  the
democracy  ;  that,  as  he  himself  expressed  it,  "  the
state,  riding  upon  them  as  anchors,  might  be  less
tossed  by  storms."  Nay,  even  after  the  archons
were  no  longer  elected  by  suffrage  but  by  lot,  and
the  office  was  thrown  open  by  Aristeidcs  to  all  the
Athenian  citizens,  the  "  upper  council "  still  re-
tained its  former  tone  of  feeling.  We  learn,  in-
deed, from  Isocrates  (^j-e/op.  p.  147),  that  no  one
was  so  bad  as  not  to  put  off"  his  old  habits  on  be-
coming an  Areiopagite ;  and  though  this  may  refer
to  private  rather  than  public  conduct,  we  may  not
unreasonably  suppose  that  the  political  principles
of  the  younger  would  always  be  modified  by  the
older  and  more  numerous  members — a  modification
which,  though  continually  less  in  degree,  would
still  be  the  same  in  direction,  and  make  the  Areio-
pagus what  Pericles  found  it,  a  counteracting  force
to  the  democracy.  Moreover,  besides  these  changes
in  its  constitution,  Solon  altered  and  extended  its
functions.  Before  his  time  it  was  only  a  criminal
court,  trying  cases  of  "  wilful  murder  and  wound-
ing, of  arson  and  poisoning"  (Pollux,  viii.  117  ;
Dem.  c.Arist.  p.  627),  whereas  he  gave  it  extensive
powers  of  a  censorial  and  political  nature.  Thus
we  learn  that  he  made  the  council  an  "  overseer
of  everything,  and  the  guardian  of  the  laws,"  em-
powering it  to  inquire  how  any  one  got  his  living,
and  to  punish  the  idle.  (Plutarch.  Solon,  c.  22  ;
Isoc.  /.  c.)

We  learn  from  other  authorities  that  the
Areiopagites  were  "  superintendents  of  good  order
and  decency,"  terms  rather  unlimited  and  unde-
fined, as  it  is  not  improbable  Solon  wished  to
leave  their  authority.  There  are,  however,  re-
corded some  particular  instances  of  its  exertion.
(Athen.iv.  pp.167,  c. — 168,  b.  vi.p.  245,  c.  ed.  Din-
dorf ;  Pollux,  viii.  112.)  Thus  we  find  that  they
called  persons  to  account  for  extravagant  and  dis-
solute living,  and  that  too  even  in  the  later  days
of  Athenian  history.  On  the  other  hand,  they  oc-
casionally rewarded  remarkable  cases  of  industry,
and,  in  company  with  certain  officers  called
'YV}/aiKov6fi.oi,  made  domiciliary  visits  at  private  en-
tertainments, to  see  that  the  number  of  gyests
was  not  too  large,  and  also  for  other  purposes.
But  their  censorial  and  political  authority  was  not
confined  to  matters  of  this  subordinate  character.
We  learn  from  Aristotle  (Plut.  Themis,  c.  10  ;  see
Bockh,  vol.  i.  p.  208),  that  at  the  time  of  the
Median  invasion,  when  there  v/as  no  money  in
the  public  treasury,  the  Areiopagus  advanced  eight
drachmae  a  man  to  each  of  the  sailors — a  statement
which  proves  that  they  had  a  treasury  of  their
own,  rather  than  any  control  over  the  public
finances,  as  some  have  inferred  from  it.  (Thirlwall,
I/ist.  Greece,  vol.  iii.  app.  1.)  Again,  we  are  told
(Lycurg.  c.  Leoc,  p.  154)  that  at  the  time  of  the
battle  of  Chaeroneia,  they  seized  and  put  to  death
those  who  deserted  their  country,  and  that  they
were  thought  by  some  to  have  been  the  chief  pre-
servation of  the  city.

It  is  probable  that  public  opinion  supported
them  in  acts  of  this  kind,  without  the  aid  of  which
they  must  have  been  powerless  for  any  such  ob-
jects. In  connection  with  this  point,  we  may  add
that  when  heinous  crimes  had  notoriously  been
committed,  but  the  guilty  parties  were  not  known,
or  no  accuser  appeared,  the  Areiopagus  inquired
into  the  subject,  and  reported  {atro^advuv)  to  the


128


ARETOPAGUS.


demus.  The  report  or  information  was  called
a,Tr6<pa(Tis.  This  was  a  duty  which  they  sometimes
undertook  on  their  own  responsibility,  and  in  the
exercise  of  an  old-established  right,  and  sometimes
on  the  order  of  the  demus.  (Deinarch.  c.  Detn.  p.  97 ;
Schomann,  De  Comitm^  p.  217,  transl.)  Nay,
to  such  an  extent  did  they  cai-ry  this  power,  that
on  one  occasion  they  apprehended  an  individual
(Antiphon)  who  had  been  acquitted  by  the
general  assembly',  and  again  brought  him  to  a
trial,  which  ended  in  his  condemnation  and  death.
(Dem.  De  Cor.  pp.271,  272;  Deinarch.  c.  Dem.
p.  98.)  Again,  we  find  them  revoking  an  appoint-
ment of  the  people  whereby  Aeschines  was  made
the  advocate  of  Athens  before  the  Amphictionic
council,  and  substituting  Hyperides  in  his  room.
In  these  two  cases  also,  they  were  most  probably
supported  by  public  opinion,  or  by  a  strong  party
in  the  state.     (Dem.  l.  c.)

They  also  had  duties  connected  with  religion,
one  of  which  was  to  superintend  the  sacred  olives
growing  about  Athens,  and  try  those  who  were
charged  with  destroying  them.  (Lysias,  Uepl  roii
Stj/coO,  p.  110.)  We  read,  too,  that  in  the  dis-
charge of  their  duty  as  religious  censors,  they  on
one  occasion  examined  whether  the  wife  of  the
king  archon  was,  as  required  by  law,  an  Athenian  ;
and  finding  she  was  not,  imposed  a  fine  upon  her
husband.  (Dem.  c,  Neaer.  p.  1372.)  We  learn
Irom  the  same  passage,  that  it  was  their  office
generally  to  punish  the  impious  and  irreligious.
Again  we  are  told,  though  rather  in  a  rhetorical
way,  that  they  relieved  the  needy  from  the  re-
sources of  the  rich,  controlled  the  studies  and
education  of  the  young,  and  interfered  with  and
punished  public  characters  as  such.  (Isocr,  Areiop.
p.  151.)

Independent,  then,  of  its  jurisdiction  as  a
criminal  court  in  cases  of  wilful  murder,  which
Solon  continued  to  the  Areiopagus,  its  influence
must  have  been  sufficiently  great  to  have  been  a
considerable  obstacle  to  the  aggrandisement  of  the
democracy  at  the  expense  of  the  other  parties  in
the  state.  In  fact,  Plutarch  (Solo72.  c.  18),  ex-
pressly states  that  Solon  had  this  object  in  view
in  its  reconstniction  ;  and  accordingly,  we  find
that  Pericles,  who  never  was  an  archon  or  Areio-
pagite,  and  who  was  opposed  to  the  aristocracy  for
many  reasons,  resolved  to  diminish  its  power  and
circumscribe  its  sphere  of  action.  His  coadjutor
in  this  work  was  Ephialtes,  a  statesman  of  inflexible
integrity,  and  also  a  military  commander.  (Plut.
Cim.7,Peric.  10,  13.)  They  experienced  much  op-
position in  their  attempts,  not  only  in  the  assembly,
but  also  on  the  stage,  where  Aeschylus  produced
his  tragedy  of  the  Eiimenides,  the  object  of  which
was  to  impress  upon  the  Athenians  the  dignity,  the
sacredness,  and  constitutional  worth  of  the  insti-
tution which  Pericles  and  Ephialtes  wished  to  re-
form. He  reminds  the  Athenians  that  it  was  a
tribunal  instituted  by  their  patron  goddess  Athena,
and  puts  into  her  mouth  a  popular  harangue  full
of  warnings  against  innovations,  and  admonishing
them  to  leave  the  Areiopagus  in  possession  of  its
old  and  well  grounded  rights,  that  under  its  watch-
ful guardianship  they  might  sleep  in  security.
(MUUer,  Enm.  §  35.)  Still  the  opposition  failed :
a  decree  was  carried,  about  b.  c.  458,  by  which,  as
Aristotle  says,  the  Areiopagus  was  "  mutilated,"  and
many  of  its  hereditaiy  rights  abolished.  (Arist.  Pol.
il  9 ;  Cic.  De  Nat.  Dear.  ii.  29,  De  Rep.  i.  27.)


AREIOPAGUS.

Cicero,  who  in  one  place  speaks  of  the  council  as
governing  Athens,  observes  in  another  that  from  that
time  all  authority  was  vested  in  the  ecclesia,  and
the  state  robbed  of  its  ornament  and  honour.  Plu-
tarch (Chnon,  15)  tells  us  that  the  people  deprived
the  Areiopagus  of  nearly  all  its  judicial  authority
(tos   Kpiaeis  ttX^v  oXiywv  aird(ras),  establishing
an   unmixed    democracy,  and  making  themselves
supreme  in  the  courts  of  justice,  as  if  there  had
formerly  been  a  superior  tribunal.     But  we  infer
from  another  passage,  that  the  council  lost  con-
siderable  authority  in  matters  of  state  ;   for  we
learn  that  Athens  then  entered  upon  a  career  of
conquest  and   aggrandisement  to  which  she  had
previously  been  a  stranger ;  that,  "  like  a  rampant
horse,  she  would  not  obey  the  reins,  but  snapped
at  Euboea,    and  leaped    upon    the    neighbouring
islands."     These  accounts  in  themselves,  and  as
compared  with  others,  are   sufficiently  vague  and
inconsistent  to   perplex   and   embairass  ;    accord-
ingly, there  has  been  much  discussion  as  to  the
precise   nature  of  the  alterations  which  Pericles
eflected ;  some,  amongst  whom  we  may  mention
MUller  (Eu?n.  §  37),  are  of  opinion  that  he   de-
prived the  Areiopagus  of  their  old  jiu-isdiction  in
cases  of  wilful  murder,  and  one  of  his  chief  argu-
ments is  that  it  was  evidently  the  design  of  Aes-
chylus to  support  them  in  this  prerogative,  which
therefore  must  have  been  assailed.     For  a  suffi-
cient answer  to  this,  we  would  refer  our  readers
to   Bishop   Thirl  wall's  remarks  (Hist,  of  Greece,
vol.  iii.  p.  24),   merely  stating  in  addition,   that
Demosthenes     (c.  Aristocr.    p.  641)  *    expressly
affinns,  that  neither  tyrant   nor   democracy  had
ever  dared  to  take  away  from  them  this  jurisdic-
tion.    In  addition  to  which  it  may  be  remarked,
that  the  consequences  ascribed  to  the  innovation
do    not  indicate  that  the  Areiopagus  lost  its  au-
thority as  a  criminal  tribunal,  but  rather  that  it
was    shorn    of  its   power   as    superintending   the
morals  and  conduct  of  the  citizens,  both  in  civil
and   religious    matters,   and   as   exercising   some
control  over  their  decisions.     Now  an  authority
of  the  former  kind  seems  far  removed  from  any
political  influence,  and  the  popular  belief  as  to  its
origin  would  have  made  it  a  dangerous  object  of
attack,  to  say  nothing  of  the  general  satisfaction
the  verdicts  had  always  given.     We  may  observe,
too,  that  one  of  the  chief  featm-es  of  a  democracy
is  to  make  all  the  officers  of  the  state  responsible ;
and   that  it  is  not  improbable    that  one  of  the
changes  introduced  by  Ephialtes  was,  to  make  the
Areiopagus,  like  other  functionaries,  accountable
to  the  demus  for  their  administration,  as,  indeed,
we  know  they  afterwards  were.     (Aesch.  c.  Ctes.
p.  56  ;  Bockh,  vol.  i.  p.  353.)      This  simple  re-
gulation would  evidently  have  made  them  subser-
vient, as  they  seem  to  have  been,  to  public  opinion ;
whereas    no    such    subserviency   is    recorded   in
criminal  matters,  their  tribunal,  on  the  contrary,
being  always  spoken  of  as  most  just  and  holy ;  so
much  so,  that  Demosthenes  says  (c.  Arist.  pp.  641,
642)  that  not  even  the  condemned  whispered  an
insinuation    against    the    righteousness    of    their
verdicts.      Indeed,   the    proceedings    before    the
Areiopagus,  in  cases   of  murder,   were   by  their
solemnity  and  fairness  well  calculated  to  insure


*  For  an  able  vindication  of  this  statement  of
Demosthenes,  the  reader  is  referred  to  Hermann,
Opusc.  voLiv.  p.  299.


AREIOPAGUS.

just  decisions.  The  process  Avas  as  follows  :  —  The
king  arclion  (Polhix,  viii.  90)  brought  the  case
into  court,  and  sat  as  one  of  the  judges,  who  were
assembled  in  the  open  air,  probably  to  guard
against  any  contamination  from  the  criminal.  (An-
tiphon,  l)e  Caede  Herod,  p.  130;  Dem.  c.  Arisi.
/.  c. ;  Pollux,  viii.  33.)  The  accuser,  who  was
said  c-ts^Apetof  -nayou  i7ri(rKr}Tmiv,  first  came  for-
ward to  make  a  solemn  oath  (StcofjLoa-ia)  that  his
accusation  Avas  true,  standing  over  the  slaughtered
victims,  and  imprecating  extirpation  upon  himself
and  his  whole  family,  were  it  not  so.  The  accused
then  denied  the  charge  with  the  same  solemnity
and  form  of  oath.  Each  party  then  stated  his
ca.se  with  all  possible  plainness,  keeping  strictly  to
the  subject,  and  not  being  allowed  to  appeal  in
any  way  to  the  feelings  or  passions  of  the  judges
j  (irpooifiid^fadai  ovk  e|7jj/  ovbe  olKTi^eadai.
;  Aristot.  lihet.  i.  1  ;  Pollux,  viii.  117.)  After  the
first  speech  (/tera  rbv  irpor^pov  X6yov)^  a  criminal
accused  of  nuirder  might  remove  from  Athens,
j  and  thus  avoid  the  capital  punishment  fixed  by
!  Draco's  0e<r/ioj,  which  on  this  point  were  still  in
force.  Except  in  cases  of  parricide,  neither  the
accuser  nor  the  court  had  power  to  prevent  this ;
but  the  party  who  thus  evaded  the  extreme  punish-
nuMit  was  not  allowed  to  return  home  {(p^vy^i
a^i(pvyiav\  and  when  any  decree  was  passed  at
,  Athens  to  legalise  the  return  of  exiles,  an  exception
j  was  always  made  against  those  who  had  thus  left
their  country  (ot  i^  'Apetou  irdyou  (pivyovr^s).
'^('i^.  Plato,  Leges^  ix.  11.

The  reputation  of  the  Areiopagus  as  a  criminal
court  was  of  long  continuance,  as  we  may  leani
from  an  anecdote  of  Aulus  Gellius,  who  tells  us
(xii,  7)  that  C  Dolabella,  proconsul  of  the  Ro-
man province  of  Asia,  referred  a  case  which  per-
plexed himself  and  his  council  to  tlie  Areiopagus
(id  ad  Judiccs  graviores  ejrercitaiioresque)  ;  they
ingeniously  settled  the  matter  by  ordering  the
parties  to  appear  that  day  100  years  {cerdesimo
unno  adesse).  They  existed  in  namo,  indeed,  till
a  very  late  period.  Thus  wc  find  Cicero  mentions
the  council  in  his  letters  (Ad  Fum.  xiii.  1  ;  Ad
Att.  i.  14,  V.  11) ;  and  under  the  emperors  Gratian
and  Theodosius  (a.  n.  380),  'Poixpios  ^rjaros  is
called  proconsul  of  Greece,  and  an  Areiopagite.
(Meursius,  Areiop.)

Of  the  respectability  and  moral  worth  of  the
council,  and  the  respect  that  was  paid  to  it,  Ave
have  abundant  proof  in  the  Avritings  of  the  Athe-
nian orators,  Avhere,  indeed,  it  would  be  difficult  to
find  it  mentioned  except  in  terms  of  praise.
Thus  Lysias  speaks  of  it  as  most  righteous  and
venerable  (c.  Andoc.  p.  104  ;  compare  Acsch.  c.
Timar.  12  ;  Isocr.  Areinp.  148)  ;  and  so  great  Avas
the  respect  paid  to  its  members,  that  it  was  con-
sidered rude  in  the  demus  laughing  in  their  pre-
sence, Avhile  one  of  them  was  making  an  address
to  the  assembly  on  a  subject  they  had  been  de-
puted to  investigate.  This  respect  might,  of  course,
facilitate  the  resumption  of  some  of  their  lost
power,  more  especially  as  they  were  sometimes
intrusted  with  inquiries  on  behalf  of  the  state,
as  on  the  occasion  to  which  we  have  just  alluded,
when  they  were  made  a  sort  of  commissioners,  to
inquire  into  the  state  of  the  buildings  about  the
Pnyx,  and  decide  upon  the  adoption  or  rejection
of  some  proposed  alterations.  Isocrates,  indeed,
cA'cn  in  his  time,  when  the  previous  inquiry  or
5oKtp.a(rla   had  fallen  into  disuse,  speaks  Avell  of


ARGEI.  129

their  moral  influence  ;  but  shortly  after  the  age  of
Demetrius  Phalereus,  a  change  had  taken  place ;
they  had  lost  much  of  their  respectability,  and
were  but  ill  fitted  to  enforce  a  conduct  in  others
which  they  did  not  observe  themseh-es.  (Athen.
iv.  p.  167.)

The  case  of  St.  Paul  (Act.  xvii.  22.)  is  generally
quoted  as  an  instance  of  their  authority  in  religious
matters  ;  but  the  words  of  the  sacred  historian  do
not  necessarily  imply  that  he  was  brought  before  the
council.  It  may,  however,  be  remarked,  that  they
certjiinly  took  cognizance  of  the  introduction  of
noAv  and  unauthorized  forms  of  religious  worship,
called  iirldcTa  lepd,  in  contradistinction  to  the
TruTpta  or  older  rites  of  the  state.  (Harpocrat.  s.  vv.
"'EirideToi  'EopTai ;  Schomann,  De  Coniitiis,  p.  286.
transl.)  There  AA'as  also  a  tradition  that  Plato  was
deterred  from  mentioning  the  name  of  Moses  as  a
teacher  of  the  unity  of  the  Godhead,  by  his  fear  of  the
Areiopagus.  (Justin  Martyr,  Cohor.  ad  Gruec.  p.  22.)

With  respect  to  the  number  of  the  Areiopagus
in  its  original  form,  a  point  of  no  great  moment,
there  are  various  accounts ;  but  it  is  plain  that
there  could  have  been  no  fixed  number  Avhen  the
archons  became  members  of  this  body  at  the  ex-
piration of  their  year  of  office.  Lysias,  indeed,
speaks  of  them  (Flept  toG  'Xtikov,  pp.  1 1 0,  111  ;  see
A  rgum.  Oral.  c.  A  ndrot.)  as  forming  a  part  of  the
Areiopagus  even  during  that  time;  a  statement
which  can  only  be  reconciled  with  the  general
opinion  on  the  subject,  by  supposing  that  they
foi-med  a  part  of  the  comicil  during  their  year  of
office,  but  were  not  permanent  members  till  the
end  of  that  time,  and  after  passing  a  satisfactory
examination.  [R.  W.]

ARENA.     [Amphitheatrum.]

ARETA'LOGI,  a  class  of  persons  Avhose  con-
versation formed  one  of  the  entertainments  of  the
Roman  dinnor-tables.  (Suet.  Ociav.  74.)  The
Avord  litcrJilly  signifies  persons  who  discourse  about
virtue  ;  and  the  class  of  persons  intended  seem  to
have  been  poor  philosophers,  chiefly  of  the  Cynic
and  Stoic  sects,  who,  unable  to  gain  a  living  by
their  public  lectures,  obtained  a  maintenance  at
the  tables  of  the  rich  by  their  philosophical  con-
versation. Such  a  life  Avould  naturally  degenerate
into  that  of  the  parasite  and  bufibon  ;  and  accord-
ingly we  find  these  persons  spoken  of  contemp-
tuously by  Juvenal,  who  uses  the  phrase  mendax
aretalogus :  they  became  a  ^ort  of  sairrae.  (Jua-.
Sat.  XV.  15,  16;  comp.  Casaubon.  ad  Suet.  I.  c.  ;
and  Ruperti  and  Heinrich,  ad  Juv.  I.  c.)      [P.  S.]

A'RGEI.  We  learn  from  Livy  (i.  22)  that
Numa  consecrated  places  for  the  celebration  of
religious  services,  which  were  called  by  the  ponti-
fices  "  argei."  Varro  calls  them  the  chapels  of  the
argei,  and  says  they  were  twenty-seven  in  num-
ber, distributed  in  the  diflferent  districts  of  the
city.  We  know  but  little  of  the  particular  uses
to  Avhich  they  were  applied,  and  that  little  is  un-
important. Thus  we  are  told  that  they  were
solemnly  visited  on  the  Liberalia,  or  festival  of
Bacchus  ;  and  also,  that  whenever  the  flamen
dialis  went  {ivit)  to  them,  he  was  to  adhere  to
cei-tain  obserA'ances.  They  seem  also  to  have  been
the  depositaries  of  topographical  records.  Thus
Ave  read  in  Varro, — In  sacreis  Argeorum  scriptum
est  sic:  Oppius  mons  princeps,  &c.,  Avhich  is  fol-
ioAA'ed  by  a  description  of  the  neighbourhood.  There
was  a  tradition  that  these  argei  were  named  from
the  chieftains  Avho  came  with  Hercules,  the  Argive,

K


130  ARGENTARII.

to  Rome,  and  occupied  the  Capitoline,  or,  ns  it  was
anciently  called,  Saturniau  hill.  It  is  impossible  to
say  what  is  the  historical  value  or  meaning  of  this
legend  ;  we  may,  however,  notice  its  conformity
with  the  statement  that  Rome  was  foimdcd  by
the  Pelasgians,  with  whom  the  name  of  Argos  was
connected.  (Varr.  L.  L.  v.  45,  ed.  Muller  ;  Ov.
Fast.  iii.  791  ;  Gell.  x.  15  ;  Niebuhr,  Rom.  Hist.
vol.  i.  p.  214.)     ^

The  name  argei  was  also  given  to  certain  figures
thrown  into  the  Tiber  from  the  Sublician  bridge,
on  the  Ides  of  May  in  every  year.  This  was
done  by  the  pontifices,  the  vestals,  the  praetors,
and  other  citizens,  after  the  performance  of  the
customary  sacrifices.  The  images  were  thirty  in
number,  made  of  bulrushes,  and  in  the  form  of
men  (jdhoiXa  avdpeiK€\a,priscorum  simulacra  viro-
rum).  Ovid  makes  various  suppositions  to  account
for  the  origin  of  this  rite  ;  we  can  only  conjecture
that  it  was  a  symbolical  offering  to  propitiate  the
gods,  and  that  the  number  was  a  representative
either  of  the  thirty  patrician  curiae  at  Rome,  or
perhaps  of  the  thirty  Latin  townships.  Dionysius
of  Halicamassus  states  (i.  19,  38)  that  the  custom
continued  to  his  times,  and  was  instituted  by  Her-
cules to  satisfy  the  scruples  of  the  natives  when
he  abolished  the  human  sacrifices  formerly  made
to  Saturn.  (Varr.  L.  L.  vii.  44  ;  Ov.  Fast.  v.  G21 ;
Plut.  Quaest.  Rom.  p.  102,  Reiske  ;  Arnold,  Rom.
Hist.  vol.  i.  p.  67  ;  Bunsen  and  Platner,  Beschrei-
hung  Rams,  vol.  i.  p.  688—702.)  [R.  W.J

ARGENTA'RII  (rpaTreCirai),  bankers  or
money  changers.  1.  Greek.  The  bankers  at
Athens  were  called  Tpa-neQrai  from  their  tables
(rpan-e^at)  at  which  they  sat,  while  carrjang  on
their  business.  Public  or  state  banks  seem  to
have  been  a  thing  unknown  in  antiquity,  though
the  state  must  have  exercised  some  kind  of  super-
intendence, since  without  it  it  is  scarcely  possible
to  conceive  how  persons  could  have  placed  such
imlimited  confidence  in  the  bankers,  as  they  are
known  to  have  done  at  Athens.  Thej'^  had  their
stands  or  tables  in  the  market  place  (Plat.  Apol.
p.  17,  Hipp.  Min.  p.  368),  and  although  the  bank-
ing and  money  changing  business  was  mostly
carried  on  by  fxeToiKoi,  or  resident  aliens  and  freed-
men,  still  these  persons  do  not  seem  to  have  been
looked  upon  with  any  disrespect,  and  the  business
itself  was  not  disreputable.  Their  principal  occu-
pation was  that  of  changing  money  at  an  agio
(Isocrat.  Trapez.  21  ;  Dem.  De  fals.  Leg.  p.  376,
c.Polycl.  p.  1218  ;  Pollux,  iii.  84,  vii.  170)  ;  but
they  frequently  took  money,  at  a  moderate  pre-
mium, from  persons  who  did  not  like  to  occupy
themselves  with  the  management  of  their  own
affairs.  Thus  the  father  of  Demosthenes,  e.  g.,
kept  a  part  of  his  capital  in  the  hands  of  bankers.
(Dem.  c.  Aphoh.  i.  p.  816.)  These  persons  then  lent
the  money  with  profit  to  others,  and  thus,  to  a
certain  degree,  obtained  possession  of  a  monopoly.
The  greater  part  of  the  capital  with  which  they
did  business  in  this  waj',  belonged  to  others  (Dem.
p.  Pliorm.  p.  948),  but  sometimes  they  also  em-
ployed capital  of  their  own.  Although  their  sole
object  was  pecuniary  gain  (Dem.  p.  Phorm,.  p.  953),
and  not  by  any  means  to  connect  themselves  with
wealthy  or  illustrious  families,  yet  they  acf^uircd
great  credit  at  Athens,  and  formed  business  con-
nections in  all  the  principal  towns  of  Greece,
whereby  their  business  was  effectually  supported.
(Dem.  p.  Phoi-m.  p.  958,  e,  Pdyd.  p.  1 224.)    They


ARGENTARII.

even  maintained  so  great  a  reputation  that  not  only
were  they  considered  as  secure  merely  by  virtue  of
their  calling,  but  such  confidence  was  placed  in
them,  that  sometimes  business  was  transacted  with
them  without  witnesses  (Isocr.  Trapez.  2),  and
that  money  and  contracts  of  debt  were  deposited
with  them,  and  agreements  were  concluded  or  can-
celled in  their  presence.  (Dem.  c.  CaUip.  p.  1 243,
c.  Dionysod.  p.  1287.)  The  great  importance  of
their  business  is  clear  from  the  immense  Avealth  of
Pasion,  whose  bank  produced  a  net  annual  profit
of  100  minae.  (Dem.  p.  Phorm.  p.  946.)  There
are,  however,  instances  of  bankers  losing  every-
thing they  possessed,  and  becoming  utterly  bank-
rupt. (Dem.  p.  Phorm,.  p.  959,  e.  Sfeph.  i.  p.  1 120.)
That  these  bankers  took  a  high  interest  when  they
lent  out  money,  scarcely  needs  any  proof,  their
loans  on  the  deposits  of  goods  are  sufficient  evi-
dence. (Dem.  c.  Nicostr.  p.  1249.)  Their  usual
interest  was  36  per  cent.,  an  interest  that  scarcely
occurs  any  where  except  in  cases  of  money  lent  on
bottomry.  The  only  instance  of  a  bank  recognized
and  conducted  on  behalf  of  the  state  occurs  at
Byzantium,  where  at  one  time  it  was  let  by  the
republic  to  capitalists  to  fann.  (Arist.  Oecon.  ii.
p.  283;  comp.  Bockh,  Puhl.  Econom.  of  Athens^
p.  126,  &c.  2d  edit.)

2.  Roman.  The  Argentarii  at  Rome  w^ere  also
called  argenteae  vicnsae  ea-ercitores,  argenti  dis-
tractores  and  negotiatores  stipis  argentariae.  (Orelli,
Inscript.  n.  4060.)  They  must  be  distinguished
from  the  mensarii  or  public  bankers,  though  even
the  ancients  confound  the  terms,  as  the  mensarii
sometimes  did  the  same  kind  of  business  as  the
argentarii,  and  they  must  also  be  distinguished
from  the  nummularii.  [Men-sakii  ;  Nummu-
LARii.]  The  argentarii  were  private  persons,  who
carried  on  business  on  their  own  responsibility,  and
were  not  in  the  service  of  the  republic  ;  but  the
shops  or  tabernae  which  they  occupied  and  in
which  they  transacted  their  business  about  the
forum,  were  state  property.  (Dig.  18.  tit.  1.
s.  32  ;  Liv.  xl.  51.)  As  their  chief  business  was
that  of  changing  money,  the  argentarii  probably
existed  at  Rome  from  very  early  times,  as  the  in-
tercourse of  the  Romans  with  other  Italian  nations
could  not  well  exist  without  them  ;  the  first  men-
tion, however,  of  their  existing  at  Rome  and
having  their  shops  or  stalls  around  the  forum,  oc-
curs about  B.  c.  350,  in  the  wars  against  the  Sara-
nites.  (Liv.  vii.  21.)  The  business  of  the  argen-
tarii, with  which  that  of  the  mensarii  coincided
in  many  points,  was  very  varied,  and  comprised
almost  every  thing  connected  with  money  or  mer-
cantile transactions,  but  it  may  be  divided  into
the  following  branches.  1.  Permtitatio,  or  the
exchange  of  foreign  coin  for  Roman  coin,  in
which  case  a  small  agio  (collybus)  was  paid  to
them.  (Cic.  in  Verr.  iii.  78.)  In  later  times
when  the  Romans  became  acquainted  with  the
Greek  custom  of  using  bills  of  exchange,  the
Roman  argentarii,  e.  g.,  received  sums  of  money
which  had  to  be  paid  at  Athens,  and  then  drew
a  bill  payable  at  Athens  by  some  banker  in
that  city.  This  mode  of  transacting  business
is  likewise  called  permutatio  (Cic.  ad  Att.  xii.
24,  27,  XV.  15;  comp.  v.  15,  xi.  1,  24,  ad
Fam.  ii.  1 7,  iii.  5,  ad  Quint.  Frai.  i.  3,  p.  Ra-
hir.  14),  and  rendered  it  necessary  for  the  argen-
tarii to  be  acquainted  with  the  current  value  of
the  same  coin  in  different  places  and  at  different


I
i


ARGENTARll.

times.  (See  the  comment,  on  Cic.  pro  Qu'inct.  4.)
2.  The  keeping  of  sums  of  money  for  other  per-
sons. Such  money  ?aight  be  deposited  by  the
owner  merely  to  save  lihnself  the  trouble  of  keep-
ing it  and  making  payments,  and  in  this  case  it
was  called  depositum ;  the  argentai'ius  then  paid
no  interest,  and  the  money  was  called  vacua  pe-
cunia.  When  a  payment  was  to  be  made,  the
owner  either  told  the  argcntarius  personally  or  he
drew  a  cheque.  (Plant.  Cxircul.  ii.  3.  60",  &c.,  iii.
^^^  iv.  3.  3,  &c.)  Or  the  money  was  deposited  on
condition  of  the  argentarins  paying  interest ;  in
this  case  the  money  was  called  creditum,  and  the
argentarius  might  of  course  employ  the  money
himself  in  any  lucrative  manner.  (Suet.  Aiig.  39.)
The  argentaritts  thus  did  almost  the  same  sort  of
business  as  a  modem  banker.  Many  persons  en-
trusted all  their  capital  to  them  (Cic.  p.  Caec.  6),
and  instances  in  which  the  argentarii  made  pay-
ments in  the  name  of  those  whose  money  they  had
in  hand,  are  mentioned  very  frequently.  A  pay-
ment made  through  a  banker  was  called  per  men-
sain,  de  mensa,  or  per  mensae  scripturam,  while  a
payment  made  by  the  debtor  in  person  was  a  pay-
ment ex  area  or  de  domo.  (Plant  Curcul.  v.  3.
7,  &c.,  43,  Cuptiv.  ii.  3.  89  ;  Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  9,
Top.  3  ;  Schol.  ad  Horat.  Sat.  ii.  3.  69  ;  Senec.
Epist.  26  ;  Gaius,  iii.  131.)  An  argentarius
never  paid  away  any  person's  money  without
being  either  authorised  by  him  in  person  or  re-
ceiving a  cheque  which  was  called  perscriptio,
and  the  payment  was  then  made  either  in  cash,
or,  if  the  person  who  was  to  receive  it,  kept  an
account  with  the  same  banker,  he  had  it  added
in  the  banker's  book  to  his  own  deposit.  This  was
likewise  called  perscribere  or  simply  scribere.  (Plant.
Asin.  ii.  4.  30,  &c,  Curcul.  v.  2.  20  ;  Donat.  ad
Terent.  Phorm.  v.  7.  28,  &c.,  ad  Adelph.  ii.  4.  13  ;
Cic.  ad  Att.  iv.  18,  ix.  12,  xii.  51,  Philip,  v.  4,
in  Verr.  v.  19  ;  Horat.  6a^.  ii.  3.  76.)  It  also  oc-
curs that  argentarii  made  payments  for  persons  who
had  not  deposited  any  money  with  them  ;  this
was  equivalent  to  lending  money,  which  in  fact
they  often  did  for  a  certain  per  centage  of  interest.
(Plant.  Cure.  iv.  1.  19,  2.  22,  True.  i.  1.  51,  &c.,
Epid.  i.  2.  40  ;  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  17.)  Of  all  this
business,  of  the  receipts  as  well  as  of  the  expen-
diture, the  argentarii  kept  accurate  accounts  in
books  called  codices,  tabulae  or  rationes  (Plin.  //.  A^.
ii.  7),  and  there  is  every  reason  for  believing  that
they  were  acquainted  with  what  is  called  in  book-
keeping double  entry.  When  an  argentarius  set-
tled his  accounts  with  persons  with  whom  he  did
business,  it  was  done  either  in  writing  or  orally,
both  parties  meeting  for  the  purpose  (Dig.  2.
tit.  14.  s.  47.  §1,  14.  tit.  3.  s.  20  ;  Plant,  ^w-
lid.  iii.  5.  53,  &c.),  and  the  party  found  to  be  in
debt  paid  what  he  owed,  and  then  had  his  name
effaced  {nomen  cocpedire  or  expungere)  from  the
banker's  books.  (Plant.  Cist.  i.  3.  41  ;  Cic.  ad
Att.  xvi.  6.)  As  the  books  of  the  argentarii  were
generally  kept  with  great  accuracy,  and  particu-
larly in  regard  to  dates,  they  were  looked  upon  as
documents  of  high  authority,  and  were  appealed
to  in  the  courts  o'"  justice  as  unexceptionable  evi-
dence. (Cic.  p.  Caec.  6  ;  Gellius,  xiv.  2.)  Hence
the  argentarii  were  often  concerned  in  civil  cases,
as  money  transactions  were  rarely  concluded  with-
out their  influence  or  co-operation.  Their  codices
or  tabulae  could  not  be  withheld  from  a  person
who  in  court  refen-ed  to  them  for  the  purpose  of


ARGENTARII.  131

maintaining  his  cause,  and  to  produce  them  was
called  cohere  (Dig.  2.  tit.  13.  s.  1.  §  1),  ov  proferre
codicem  (2.  tit.  13.  s.  6.  §§  7,  8).  3.  Their  con-
nection with  commerce  and  public  auctions.  This
branch  of  their  business  seems  to  have  been  one  of
the  most  ancient.  In  private  sales  and  purchases,
they  sometimes  acted  as  agents  for  either  party
{interpretes.  Plant.  Cure.  iii.  1.  61),  and  sometimes
they  undertook  to  sell  the  whole  estate  of  a  person,
as  an  inheritance.  (Dig.  5.  tit.  3.  s.  18,  46.  tit.
3.  s.  88.)  At  public  auctions  they  were  almost
invariably  present,  registering  the  articles  sold,
their  prices,  and  purchasers,  and  receiving  the  pay-
ment from  the  purchasers.  (Cic.  p.  Caec.  4,  6 ;
Quinctil,  xi.  2  ;  Suet.  Ner.  5  ;  Gaius,  iv.  126  ;
Capitolin.  Antott.  9.)  At  auctions,  however,  the
argentarii  might  transact  business  through  their
clerks  or  servants,  who  were  called  coactores  from
their  collecting  the  money.  4.  The  testing  of  the
genuineness  of  coins  (probatio  nummorum).  The
frequent  cases  of  forgerj^,  as  well  as  the  frequent
occurrence  of  foreign  coins,  rendered  it  necessary
to  have  persons  to  decide  upon  their  value,  and  the
argentarii,  from  the  nature  of  their  occupation,  were
best  qualified  to  act  as  probatores  ;  hence  they
were  present  in  this  capacity  at  all  payments  of
any  large  amount.  This,  however,  seems  originally
to  have  been  a  part  of  the  duty  of  public  officers,
the  mensarii  or  nummularii,  until  in  the  course  of
time  the  opmion  of  an  argentarius  also  came  to  be
looked  upon  as  decisive  ;  and  this  custom  was
sanctioned  by  a  law  of  Marius  Gratidianus.  (Plin.
//.  A^.  xxiii.  9  ;  comp.  Cic.  ad  Att.  xii.  5  ;  Dig.
46.  tit.  3.  s.  39.)  5.  The  solidortim  venditio,  that
is,  the  obligation  of  purchasing  from  the  mint  the
newly  coined  money,  and  circulating  it  among  the
people.  This  branch  of  their  functions  occurs  only
under  the  empire.  (Symmach.  Epist.  ix.  49  ;
Procop.  Anecd.  25 ;  comp.  Salmasius,  De  Usur.  c.
17.  p.  504.)

Although  the  argentarii  were  not  in  the  service
of  the  state,  they  existed  only  in  a  limited  number,
and  formed  a  collegium,  which  was  divided  into
societates  or  corpomtions,  which  alone  had  the  right
to  admit  new  members  of  their  guild.  (Orelli,
J?iscript.  n.  913,  995.)  It  appears  that  no  one
but  free  men  could  become  members  of  such  a  cor-
poration, and  whenever  slaves  are  mentioned  as
argentarii,  they  must  be  conceived  as  acting  only
as  servants,  and  in  the  name  of  their  masters,  who
remained  the  responsible  parties  even  if  slaves  had
transacted  business  with  their  own  peculium.  (Dig.
2.  tit.  13.  s.  4.  §  3,  14.  tit.  3.  s.  19.)  With  regard
to  the  legal  relation  among  the  members  of  the
corporations,  there  existed  various  regulations  ;  one
member  (socius),  for  example,  was  responsible  for
the  other.  (Auct.  ad  Herenn.  ii.  13;  Dig.  2.  tit.
14.  ss.  9,  25,  27.)  They  also  enjoyed  several
privileges  in  the  time  of  the  empire,  and  Justinian,
a  particular  patron  of  the  argentarii,  greatly  in-
creased these  privileges  (Justin.  Nov.  136);  but
dishonest  argentarii  were  always  severely  punished
(Suet.  Galb.  10  ;  Auson.  Epigr.  15),  and  in  the
time  of  the  emperors,  they  were  under  the  super-
intendence of  the  praefectus  urbi.  (Dig.  1.  tit.  12.
s.  1.  §  9.)

As  regards  the  respectability  of  the  argentarii,
the  passages  of  the  ancients  seem  to  contradict  one
another,  for  some  writers  speak  of  their  occupation
as  respectable  and  honourable  (Cic.  p.  Caec.  4  ;
Aiu-el.  Vict.  72;  Suet.  Vesp.  1 ;  Acrou.  ad  Horat.
K  2


32


ARGKNTUM.


Sat.  i.  6.  86),  while  olliers  speak  of  them  with
contempt  (Plant.  C7irc.  iv.  2.  20,  Casiji.  Prol.  25,
&c. ;  Trucul.  i.  1.  47)  ;  hut  this  contmdiction  may
be  easily  reconciled  by  distincriiishing  between  a
lower  and  a  higher  class  of  argentarii.  A  wealthy
argentarius  who  carried  ,on  business  on  a  large
scale,  was  undoubtedly  as  much  a  person  of  re-
spectability as  a  banker  in  modern  times ;  but
others  who  did  business  only  on  a  small  scale,
or  degraded  their  calling  by  acting  as  usurers,  can-
not have  been  held  in  any  esteem.  It  has  already
been  observed  that  the  argentarii  had  their  shops
round  the  forum  (Liv.  ix.  40,  xxvi.  11,  27 ;  Plant.
True.  i.  1.  51  ;  Terent.  Phorm.  v.  8.  28,  Adelpli.
ii.  4.13);  hence  to  become  banknipt,  was  expressed
l>y  foro  ccdere,  or  abire,  or  Jbfo  merqi.  (Plant.
Epld.  i.  2.  16  ;  Dig.  16.  tit.  3.  s.  7.  §  2.)  The
shops  or  booths  were  public  property,  and  built  by
the  censors,  who  sold  the  use  of  them  to  the  argen-
tarii. (Liv.  xxxix.  44,  xl.  51,  xli.  27,  xliv.  16;
comp.  J.  G.  Sieber,  DisscrtcU.  de  Arqentariis.,  Lip-
siae,  1737;  H.  Hubert,  Diqmt.  juridicae  III.  de
Argentaria  veteruin,  Trajcct.  1739;  W.  T.  Kraut,
De  Argentariis  et  Nummulariis,  Gottingen,
1826.)  [L.  S.]

ARGENTUM  {apyvpos)^  silver,  one  of  the  two
metals  which,  on  account  of  their  beauty,  their  du-
rability, their  densitj^  and  their  rarity,  have  been
esteemed  in  all  civilised  countries,  and  in  all  ages, as
precious,  and  which  have,  on  accouwt  o'f  the  above
qualities  and  the  facility  of  working  them,  been  used
for  monej\  The  ancients  were  acquainted  with  silver
from  the  earliest  known  periods.  (Pliny  ascribes  its
discovery  to  Erichthonius  or  to  Aeacus,  H.  N.  vii.
6Q.  s.  57.)  It  is  constantly  mentioned  in  Homer  ;
Irat  in  a  manner  which  proves  tliat  it  was  com-
paratively scarce.  It  was  much  more  abundant  in
Asia  than  in  Greece  Proper,  where  there  were  not
many  silver  mines.  The  accounts  we  have  of  the
revenues  of  the  early  Lydian  and  Persian  kings,
and  of  the  presents  of  some  of  them,  such  as  Gyges
and  Croesus,  to  Pytho  and  other  shrines,  prove
the  great  abundance  of  both  the  precious  metals  in
Western  Asia.  Of  this  Avealth,  however,  a  very
large  proportion  was  laid  up  in  the  royal  and
sacred  treasuries,  both  in  Asia  and  in  Grreece.  But
in  time,  and  chiefly  by  the  eflfects  of  wars,  these
accumulations  were  dispersed,  and  the  precious
metals  became  commoner  and  cheaper  throughout
Greece.  Thus,  the  spoils  of  the  Asiatics  in  the
Persian  wars,  and  the  payment  of  Greek  merce-
nari-.>8  by  the  Persian  kings,  the  expenditure  of
Pericles  on  war  and  works  of  art,  the  plunder  of
the  temple  of  Delphi  by  the  Phocians,  the  military
expenses  and  wholesale  bribery  of  Philip,  and,
above  all.  the  conquests  of  Alexander,  caused  a
vast  increase  in  the  amount  of  silver  and  gold  in
actual  circulation.  The  accounts  we  have  of  the
treasures  possessed  by  the  successors  of  Alexander
would  be  almost  incredible  if  they  were  not  per-
fectly well  attested.

It  was  about  this  time  also  that  the  riches  of
the  East  began  to  be  familiar  to  the  Romans,
among  whom  the  precious  metals  were,  in  early
times,  extremely  rare.  Very  little  of  them  was
found  in  Italy ;  and  though  Cisalpine  Gaul  fur-
nished some  gold,  which  was  carried  down  by  the
Alpine  torrents,  it  contained  but  a  very  small  pro-
portion of  silver.  The  silver  mines  of  Spain  had
been  wrought  by  the  Carthaginians  at  a  very
early  period  ;   and  from  this  source,  as  avcU  as


ARGENTUM,

from  the  East,  the  Romans  no  doubt  obtained  most
of  their  silver  as  an  article  of  commerce.  But
when  first  Spain  and  thpn  Greece,  Asia  Minor,
and  Syria,  were  brought  beneath  the  Roman
power,  they  obtained  that  abundant  supply  both
of  silver  and  gold  which  formed  the  instrument  of
the  extravagance  and  luxury  of  the  later  republic
and  the  empire.  "  The  value  of  the  precious
metals  did  not,  however,  fall  in  proportion  to  their
increase,  as  large  quantities,  wrought  for  works  of
art,  were  taken  out  of  circulation."  (Bockh.)

The  relative  value  of  gold  and  silver  differed
considerably  at  different  periods  in  Greek  and
Roman  history.  Herodotus  mentions  it  (iii.  ^5)
as  13  to  1 ;  Plato  {Hipp.  c.  6.  p.  231),  as  12  to  1 ;
Menander  {ap.  Politic,  ix.  76),  as  10  to  I  ;  and
Livy  (xxxviii,  11),  as  10  to  1,  about  b.  c.  189.
According  to  Suetonius  {Jul.  Caes.  54),  Julius
Caesar,  on  one  occasion,  exchanged  silver  for  gold
in  the  proportion  of  9  to  1  ;  but  the  most  usual
proportion  under  the  early  Roman  emperors  wfis
about  12  to  1  ;  and  from  Constantine  to  Justinian
about  14  to  1,  or  15  to  1.  The  proportion  in  mo-
dern times,  since  the  discovery  of  the  American
mines,  has  vai-ied  between  17  to  1  and  14  to  1.

Silver  Mines  and  Ores.  —  In  the  earliest  times
the  Greeks  obtained  their  silver  chiefly  as  an
article  of  commerce  from  the  Phocaeans  and  the
Samians;  but  they  soon  began  to  work  the  rich  mines
of  their  own  country  and  its  islands.  The  chief
mines  were  in  Siphnos,  Thessaly,  and  Attica.  In
the  last-named  countr}',  the  silver  mines  of  Laurion
furnished  a  most  abundant  supply,  and  were  gene-
rally regarded  as  the  chief  source  of  the  wealth  of
Athens.  We  learn  from  Xenophon  {Vectig.  iv.
2 ),  that  these  mines  had  been  worked  in  remote
antiquity ;  and  Xenophon  speaks  of  them  as  if  he
considered  thera  inexhaustible.  In  the  time  of
Demosthenes,  however,  the  profit  arising  from
them  had  greatly  diminished ;  and  in  the  second
century  of  the  Christian  era  they  were  no  longer
worked.  (Paus.  i.  1.  §  1.)  The  Romans  obtained
most  of  their  silver  from  the  veiy  rich  mines  of
Spain,  which  had  been  previously  worked  by  the
Phoenicians  and  Carthaginians,  and  which,  though
abandoned  for  those  of  Mexico,  are  still  not  ex-
hausted. The  ore  from  which  the  silver  was  ob-
tained was  called  silver  earth  {apyvplris  yrj,  or
simply  apyvp7TLS,  Xen.  Vectig.  i.  5,  iv.  2).  The
same  term  {terra)  was  also  applied  to  the  ore  by
the  Romans.

A  full  account  of  all  that  is  known  respecting
the  ores  of  silver  known  to  the  ancients,  their
mining  operations,  and  their  processes  for  the  re-
duction of  the  ores,  is  given  by  Bockh.  {Disserta-
tion on  the  Silver  Mines  of  Laurion.,  §§  3,  4,  5.)

Uses  of  Silver.  —  By  i'ar  the  most  important  use
of  silver  among  the  Greeks  was  for  money.  It
was  originally  the  universal  currency  in  Greece.
Mr.  Knight,  however,  maintains  {Prol.  Horn.)  that
gold  was  coined  first  because  it  was  the  more
readily  found,  and  the  more  easily  worked ;  but
there  are  sufficient  reasons  for  believing  that,  un-
til somo  time  after  the  end  of  the  Peloponnesian
war,  the  Athenians  had  no  gold  currency.  [Au-
RUM.]  It  may  be  remarked  here  that  all  the
words  connected  with  money  are  derived  from
&pyupos,  and  not  from  XP^^^^^  «^s  KarapyvpSw,
"  to  bribe  with  money  ;"  apyvpa/xoigSs,  "a money-
changer," &c,  ;  and  6.pyvpos  is  itself  not  unfre-
qucntly  used  to  signify  money  in  general   (Soph,


ARC  IAS  GRAPIIE.

.Aniig.  295),  as  aes  is  in  Latin.  At  Romo,  on  the
contrary,  silver  was  not  coined  till  u.  c.  269,  before
which  period  Greek  silver  was  in  circnlation  at
Rome ;  and  the  principal  silver  coin  of  the  Ro-
mans, the  denarius,  was  borrowed  from  the  Greek
drachma.  For  further  details  respecting  silver
money,  see  Nummus,  Denarius,  Drachma.

From  a  very  early  period,  silver  was  used  also
in  works  of  art.  Its  employment  for  ornamenting
arms,  so  often  referred  to  by  Homer,  belongs  to
this  head.  The  use  of  it  for  mere  purposes  of
luxury  and  ostentation,  as  in  plate,  seems  to  have
become  generally  prevalent  about  the  close  of  the
Peloponnesian  wars  (Ath-n.  vi.  p.  229,  f.),  but
much  more  so  from  the  time  of  Alexander,  after
which  it  becomes  so  common  as  hardly  to  need
any  proof  or  illustration, — more  common  indeed
than  with  us.  (Cic.  in  Verr.  iv.  21.)  The  Ro-
mans distinguished  between  plain  and  chased  silver
vessels  by  calling  the  former  pe^ra  or  levia  (Plin.
Ep.  iii.  1  ;  Juv.  ix.  141,  xiv.  62  ;  Mart.  iv.  38),
and  the  latter  caelata,  asfera,  or  toreumata.  [Cae-

LATURA  ;   TOREUTICE.]

The  chief  ancient  authorities  respecting  silver,
as  well  as  gold,  are  the  3d,  4th,  and  5th  books  of
Strabo,  the  5th  of  Diodorus,  especially  cc.  27  and
36,  and  the  o3d  of  Plinj-,  from  c.  6.  s.  31  ;  of  mo-
dern works  the  most  important  are  Bockh's  Ptddlc
Eco7iomy  of  Athens,  Bk.  i.  cc.  1 — 3,  with  the  sup-
plementary Dissertation  on  the  Sih'cr  Mines  of
Laurion,  and  Jacob's  History  of  the  Precious  Me-
tals. [P.  S.J

A'RGIAS  GRAPHE'  {apyias  ypacp-l]),  that  is,
an  action  for  idleness.  Vagrants  and  idlers  were
not  tolerated  at  Athens  from  very  earlj^  times,  and
every  person  was  obliged  to  be  able  to  state  by
what  means  he  supported  himself.  (Herod,  ii.
177;  Diod.  i.  77.)  According  to  some  (Plut.
Sol.  37,  Pollux,  viii.  42),  even  Draco  had  enacted
laws  against  idleness,  while,  according  to  others,
Solon,  in  his  legislation,  borrowed  these  laws  from
the  Egj'ptians,  and  others  again  state  that  Peisis-
tratus  was  the  first  who  introduced  them  at  Athens.
(Plut.  Sol.  31.)  In  accordance  with  this  law,
which  is  called  apylas  vSfios,  all  poor  people  were
obliged  to  signify  that  they  were  carrying  on  some
honourable  business  by  which  they  gained  their
livelihood  (Dam.  c.  Eubtd.  p.  1308  ;  Isocrat.  Areo-
jmg.  1 7  ;  Dionys.  xx.  2)  ;  and  if  a  person  by  his
idleness  injured  his  family,  an  action  might  be
brought  against  him  before  the  archon  eponymus
not  only  by  a  member  of  his  family,  but  by  any
one  Avho  chose  to  do  so.  {Lexic.  Segmr.  p.  310.)
At  the  time  when  the  Areiopagus  was  still  in  the
full  possession  of  its  powers,  the  archon  seems  to
have  laid  the  charge  before  the  court  of  the  Areio-
pagus. If  the  action  was  brought  against  a  person
for  the  first  time,  a  fine  might  be  inflicted  on  him,
and  if  he  was  found  guilty  a  second  or  third  time,
he  might  be  punished  with  aTijxia.  (Pollux,  viii.
42.)  Draco  had  ordained  atimia  as  the  penalty
even  for  the  first  conviction  of  idleness.  (Plut.,
Poll.  II.  cc.)  This  law  was  modified  by  Solon,
who  inflicted  atimia  only  when  a  person  was  con-
victed a  third  time,  and  it  is  doubtful  as  to  whe-
ther in  later  times  the  atimia  was  inflicted  at  all
for  idleness.  As  the  Areiopagus  was  entrusted
with  the  general  superintendence  of  the  moral  con-
duct of  citizens,  it  is  probable  that  it  might  inter-
fere in  cases  of  apyia,  even  when  no  one  came  for-
ward to  bring  an  action  against  a  person  guilty  of


ARIES.


133


it.  (Val.  Max.  ii.  6;  Platner,  Process,  ii.  p.  150,
&c. ;  Meier  und  Schocmann,  Att.  Proc.  pp.  193,
298,  &c.  ;  Bijckh,  PuU.  Eco7i.  p.  475,  2d  edit.)
According  to  Aelian  {V.  II.  iv.  1),  a  similar  la\>
existed  also  at  Sardes.  [L.  S.]

ARGU'RIOU  DIKE'  (hpyvpiov  S/ktj),  a  civil
suit  of  the  class  irpos  riva,  and  within  the  juris-
diction of  the  thesmothetae,  to  compel  the  defend-
ant to  pay  monies  in  his  possession,  or  for  which
he  was  liable,  to  the  plaintiff.  This  action  is
casually  alluded  to  in  two  speeches  of  Demos-
thenes {in  Boeot.  p.  1002,  in  Olympiodor.  p.  1179),
and  is  treated  of  at  large  in  the  speech  against
Callippus.  [J.  S.  M.]

ARGYRA'SPIDES  {apyvpdffin^es),  a  division
of  the  Macedonian  army  of  Alexander  the  Great,
who  were  so  called  because  they  carried  shields
covered  with  silver  plates.  They  were  picked
men,  and  were  commanded  by  Nicanor,  the  son  ot
Parmenion,  and  were  lield  in  high  honour  by
Alexander.  After  the  death  of  Alexander  they
followed  Eumenes,  but  afterwards  they  deserted  to
Antigonus,  and  delivered  Eumenes  up  to  him.
Antigonus,  however,  soon  hroke  up  the  corps,  find-
ing it  too  turbulent  to  manage.  (Diod.  xvii.  57,
58,  59,  xviii.  63,  xix.  12,  41,  43,  48  ;  Justin,  xii.
7  ;  Curtius,  iv.  13  §  27  ;  Plutarch,  ii^MweM.  13,&c, ;
Dvoysen^N'achfolg.  Alejc.  passim.)  The  Greekkings
of  Syria  seem  to  have  had  a  corps  of  the  same  name
in  tlieir  army:  Livy  mentions  them  as  the  royal
cohort  in  the  army  of  Antiochus  the  Great.  (Liv.
xxxvii.  40;  Polyb.  v.  79.)  The  Emperor  Alex-
ander Severus,  among  other  things  in  which  he
imitated  Alexander  the  Great,  had  in  his  army
bodies  of  men  who  were  called  argyroaspides  and
chrysoaspides.  (Lamprid.  Aleoc.  Sev.  50.)    [P.  S.]

ARGYROCOPEION  (apyvpoKOTre7ou%  the
place  where  money  was  coined,  the  mint,  at  Athens.
It  appears  to  have  been  in  or  adjoining  to  the
chapel  (ripwoy)  of  a  hero  named  Stephanephorus,
in  which  were  kept  the  standard  weights  for  the
coins,  just  as  at  Rome  in  the  sanctuary  of  Juno
Moneta.  [Moneta.]  (Pollux,  vii.  i03;  Har-
pocrat. ;  Suid. ;  Bockh,  Co7-p.  Inscr.  vol.  i.  p.  164,
and  the  explanation  of  that  inscription  in  his
Public  Economy  of  Athens,  p.  144,  2nd  ed. ;  comp.
Talentum.)  [P.  S.]

ARIADNEIA  {apiaZveia),  festivals  solemnized
in  the  island  of  Naxos  in  honour  of  Ariadne,  who,
according  to  ona  tradition,  had  died  here  a  natural
death,  and  was  honoured  with  sacrifices,  accom-
panied by  rejoicing  and  merriment.  (Plut.  Thes.
20.)  Another  festival  of  the  same  name  was
celebrated  in  honour  of  Ariadne  in  Cyprus,  which
was  said  to  have  been  instituted  by  Theseus  in
commemoration  of  her  death  in  the  month  of  Gor-
piaeus.  The  Amathus"ans  called  the  grove  in
which  the  grave  of  Ariadne  was  shown,  that  of
Aphrodite- Ariadne.  This  is  the  account  given  by
Plutarch  {Thes.  20)  from  Paeon,  an  Amathusian
writer.  (Comp.  C.  F.  Hermann,  Lehrb.  des  Gottes-
dienstl.  Alterthiimer,  §  65.  n.  12.)  [L.  S.]

A'RIES  {Kpi6s),  the  battering-ram,  Avas  used  to
shake,  perforate,  and  batter  down  the  walls  of  be-
sieged cities.  It  consisted  of  a  large  beam,  made
of  the  trunk  of  a  tree,  especially  of  a  fir  or  an  ash.
To  one  end  was  fastened  a  mass  of  bronze  or  iron
(KecpaX-f],  iiJ.§o\r],  Trporo/xT}),  which  resembled  in
its  form  the  head  of  a  'ram.  The  upper  figure  in
the  annexed  woodcut  is  taken  from  the  bas-reliefs
on  the  column  of  Trajan  at  Rome.  It  shows  the
K   3


134


ARISTOCRATIA.


aries  in  its  simplest  state,  and  as  it  was  borne  and
impelled  by  human  hands,  without  other  assistance.
In  an  improved  form,  the  ram  was  surrounded  with
iron  bands,  to  which  rings  were  attached  for  the
purpose  of  suspending  it  by  ropes  or  chains  from  a
beam  fixed  transversely  over  it.  See  the  lower
figure  in  the  woodcut.  By  this  contrivance  the
soldiers  were  relieved  from  the  necessity  of  sup-
porting the  weight  of  the  ram,  and  they  could  with
ease  give  it  a  rapid  and  forcible  motion  backwards
and  forwards.


U


E


itr


O


The  use  of  this  machine  was  further  aided  by
placing  the  frame  in  which  it  was  suspended  upon
wheels,  and  also  by  constructing  over  it  a  wooden
roof,  so  as  to  form  a  "  testudo  "  (x^^i^t^V  Kf)io(p6pos,
Appian,  Bell.  Mitk.  73  ;  testudo  arietarki.^  Vitruv.  x.
]  9),  which  protected  the  besieging  party  from  the
defensive  assaults  of  the  besieged.  Josephus,  who
gives  a  description  of  the  machine  {D.  J.  iii.  7.  §  19),
adds,  that  there  was  no  tower  so  strong,  no  wall
so  thick,  as  to  resist  the  force  of  this  machine,  if
its  blows  were  continued  long  enough.  The  beam
of  the  aries  was  often  of  great  length,  e.^.  80,  100,
or  even  120  feet.  The  design  of  this  was  both  to
act  across  an  intervening  ditch,  and  to  enable  those
who  worked  the  machine  to  remain  in  a  position  of
comparative  security.  A  hundred  men,  or  even  a
greater  number,  were  sometimes  emploj-ed  to  strike
with  the  beam.

The  aries  first  became  an  important  military
engine  in  the  hands  of  the  Macedonians,  at  the
time  of  Philip  and  Alexander  the  Great,  though
it  was  known  at  a  much  earlier  period.  (Comp.
Thuc.  ii.  76.)  Vitruvius  speaks  (I.  c.)  of  Polydus,
a  Thessalian,  in  the  time  of  Philip,  who  greatly
improved  the  machine,  and  his  improvements  were
carried  out  still  further  by  Diades  and  Chaereas,
who  served  in  the  campaigns  of  Alexander  the
Great.  'Jhe  Romans  learnt  from  the  Greeks  the
art  of  building  these  machines,  and  appear  to  have
employed  them  for  the  first  time  to  any  considerable
extent  in  the  siege  of  Syracuse  in  the  second  Punic
war.     [Hblepolis.]

ARISTOCRA'TIA  (apiffroKparla),  a  term
in  common  use  among  Greek  writers  on  politics,
though  rarely  employed  by  historians,  or  otherwise
than  in  cotmection  with  political  theories.  It  sig-
nifies literally  "  the  government  of  the  best  men,"
and  as  used  by  Plato,  Aristotle,  Polybius,  &c.,  it
meant  (in  reference  to  a  state  where  political
power  was  not  shared  by  the  bulk  of  the  commu-
nity, but  was  in  the  hands  of  a  privileged  class,


ARISTOCRATIA.

existing  along  with  a  class  personally  free,  and
possessed  of  civil  rights,  but  excluded  from  the
exercise  of  the  highest  political  functions)  the  go-
vernment of  a  class  whose  supremacy  was  founded
not  on  wealth  mcreh'-,  but  on  personal  distinction
((iwov  fi^  fiSvov  TT\ovTivhi]v  ctAAa  /co)  a.pi(nivhT]v
alpovvrai  tcls  apxds,  Aristot.  Pol.  iv.  5.  p.  127,
ed.  Gtittl.  'H  apia-TOKparia  Bov\erai  t^i/  virfpoxvf
aTrou€/x€iv  rdis  api(TTOis  rSiu  iroKnwv^  Ibid.  p.
128 ).  That  there  should  be  an  aristocracy,  more-
over, it  was  essential  that  the  administration  of
aflfairs  should  be  conducted  with  a  view  to  the
promotion  of  the  general  interests,  not  for  the  ex-
clusive or  predominant  advantage  of  the  privileged
class.  (Aristot.  Pol.  iii.  5,  p.  83,  ed.  Gottl.  ;  Plat.
Polit.  p.  301,  a.)  As  soon  as  the  government
ceased  to  be  thus  conducted,  or  whenever  the  only
title  to  political  power  in  the  dominant  class  was  the
possession  of  superior  wealth,  the  constitution  was
termed  an  oligarchy  (oAi7apx'«),  which,  in  the
technical  use  of  the  term,  was  always  looked  upon
as  a  corraption  (TrapeK§a(ris,  Aristot.  Pol.  iii.  5.
p.  84,  ed.  Gottl.)  of  an  aristocracy.  (Comp.  Plat.
I.  c. ;  Arist.  Pol.  iv.  3.  pp.  1 1 7,  H  8,  ed.  Gottl.  iv.  6,
apicrTOKparias  yap  opos  aperi],  oXi-yap-x}o.s  Se  ttAov-
Tos.)  In  the  practical  application  of  the  term  aris-
tocracy, however,  the  personal  excellence  which  was
held  to  be  a  necessary  element  was  not  of  a  higher
kind  than  what,  according  to  the  deeply-seated
ideas  of  the  Greeks,  was  commonly  hereditary  in
families  of  noble  birth  (Plat.  Menex.  p.  237,  a.,
Craitjl.  p.  394,  a.  ;  Aristot.  Pol.  iv.  6,  r)  yap  ew-
yei/eia.  itrriv  apxouos  izKovros  Kou  aperr}.  v.  1,
euyej/eTs  yap  elvai  SoKovaiv  oh  viroipx^i  irpoySvcov
aper})  koI  ttKovtos),  and  in  early  times  would
be  the  ordinary  accompaniments  of  noble  rank,
namely,  wealth,  military  skill,  and  superior  edu-
cation and  intelligence  (comp.  Aristot.  2^ol.  iv.  6,
eiwOaai  KaXelv  ....  apLcrTOKparias  5ia  rh  /jluWov
aKoXovQiiu  iraiSeiav  Ka\  evyeveiav  ro7s  eviropure-
pois).  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  word  apiaro-
Kparia  is  never,  like  the  English  term  aristocracy,
the  name  of  a  class,  but  only  of  a  particular  political
constitution.

On  tracing  the  historical  development  of  aris-
tocratical  government,  we  meet  with  a  condition
of  things  which  may  almost  be  called  by  that
name  in  the  state  of  society  depicted  in  the
Homeric  poems,  where  we  already  see  the  power
of  the  kings  limited  by  that  of  a  body  of  princes
or  nobles,  such  as  would  naturally  arise  in  the  in-
fancy of  society,  especially  among  tribes  in  which,
from  the  frequency  of  wars,  martial  skill  would
be  a  sure  and  speedy  method  of  acquiring  supe-
riority. When  the  kingly  families  died  out,  or
were  stripped  of  their  peculiar  privileges,  the  su-
preme power  naturally  passed  into  the  hands  of
these  princes  or  chieftains,  who  fonned  a  body  of
nobles,  whose  descendants  would  of  course  for  the
most  part  inherit  those  natural,  and  be  also  alone  in
a  position  to  secure  those  acquired  advantages,  espe-
cially warlike  skill,  which  would  form  their  title
to  political  superiority.  Some  aristocracies  thus
arose  from  the  natural  progress  of  society  :  others
arose  from  conquest.  The  changes  consequent  on
the  rise  of  the  Hellenes,  and  the  Thessalian,
Boeotian  and  Dorian  conquests  in  Greece,  esta-
blished pretty  generally  a  state  of  things  in  which
we  find  the  political  power  in  the  hands  of  a  body
of  nobles  consisting  chiefly  or  entirely  of  the  con-
querors, beneath  whom  is  a  free  population  not


ARMA.

possessed  of  political  rights,  consisting  of  the  older
inhabitants  of  the  land,  together  with,  in  most
instances,  a  body  of  seifs  attached  to  the  domains
of  the  nobles.  These  last  are  described  under
various  names,  as  EvirarplSai  in  Attica,  or  Fajj-upoi
as  in  Syracuse  and  several  of  the  Doric  states.
f'rom  the  superior  efficiency  of  the  cavahy  in  early
times,  we  also  find  the  nobles  as  a  class  bearing
the  name  'lirirdTai,  'lirireTs,  or  'Iinro§6Tai  (as  in
Chalcis,  Herod,  v.  77),  since,  generally  speaking,
they  alone  had  wealth  sufficient  to  enable  them  to
equip  themselves  for  that  kind  of  service  ;  and  in
most  states  the  first  great  advance  of  the  com-
monalty in  power  arose  from  their  gaining  greater
efficiency  as  heavy-armed  foot  soldiers  ;  that  force,
when  properly  organised  and  armed,  being  found
more  than  a  match  for  cavalry.  (See  especially
Arist.  Fol.  iv.  3,  10  ;  K.  F.  Hermann,  Griec/i.
StaatsalteHh.  c.  iii.  §§  h5—59  ;  Wachsmuth,  Hel-
len.  Alterthumsk.  vol.  i.  c.  3.  §§  30,  31  ;  Thirl-
wall,  Hist,  of  Greece^  vol.  i.  c.  10.  p.  394,  &c.)
Compare  the  articles  Eupatridae,  Geomori,
Patricii.  [C.P.  M.]

ARMA,  ARMATU'RA  (oirXa,  Horn,  rvrea,
Tevx^a)^  ai-ms,  anuour.  Homer  describes  in  various
passages  the  entire  suit  of  anuour  of  some  of  his
greatest  Avarriors,  viz.  of  Achilles,  Patroclus,  Aga-
memnon, Menelaus  and  Paris  (//.  iii.  328 — 339,
iv.  132— 138,  xi.  15—45,  xvi.  130—142,  xix.  364
— 391)  ;  and  we  observe  that  it  consisted  of  the
same  portions  which  were  used  by  the  Greek  soldiers
ever  after.  Moreover,  the  order  of  putting  them  on
is  always  the  same.  The  heavy-armed  warrior,
having  already  a  tunic  around  his  bod)^,  and  pre-
paring for  combat,  puts  on, — first,  his  greaves  {Kv-r)-
/uSis,  ocreae)  ;  secondly,  his  cuirass  (^wpa^,  lorica),
to  which  belonged  the  filrp-)]  underneath,  and  the
zone  {^(ivr),  ^wffT^p,  cingulum)  above  ;  thirdly,  las
sword  (^i(j)os^  ensis^  gladius)  hung  on  the  left  side  of
his  body  by  means  of  a  belt  which  passed  over  the
right  shoulder;  fourthly,  the  large  round  shield
((Tci/fos,  atrTrts,  clipeus,  scutum),  supported  in  the
same  manner ;  fifthly,  his  helmet  (Kdpvs,  Kvuer],  cas-
sis, galea)  ;  sixthly  and  lastly,  he  took  his  spear
(eyxos,  S6pv,  hasta),  or,  in  many  cases,  two  spears
(SoOpe  Zvu)).  The  form  and  use  of  these  portions
are  described  in  separate  articles  under  their  Latin
names.  The  annexed  woodcut  exhibits  them  all  in
the  form  of  a  Greek  warrior  attired  for  battle,  as
shown  in  Hope's  Costume  of  the  Ancients  (i.  70).

Those  who  were  defended  in  the  manner  which
has  now  been  represented,  are  called  by  Homer
aa-TTicrrai,  from  their  great  shield  {acnris)  ;  also
ayx^lJ-dxoi,  because  they  fought  hand  to  hand
witli  their  adversaries  ;  but  much  more  commonly
Trp6fj.axoi  because  they  occupied  the  front  of  the
arm}'- :  and  it  is  to  be  observed  that  these  terms,
especially  the  last,  were  honourable  titles,  the  ex-
pense of  a  complete  suit  of  annour  {ivavoirXir),
Herod,  i.  60)  being  of  itself  sufficient  to  prove  the
wealth  and  rank  of  the  wearer,  while  his  place  on
the  field  was  no  less  indicative  of  strength  and
braveiy.

In  later  times,  the  heavy-armed  soldiers  were
called  dTrXirai,  because  the  tenn  SvrAa  more  espe-
cially denoted  the  defensive  armour,  the  shield  and
thorax.  By  wearing  thcss  thej'-  were  distinguished
from  the  light-armed,  whom  Herodotus  (ix.  62,
63),  for  the  reason  just  mentioned,  calls  &voir\oi,
and  who  are  also  denominated  i^iXoi,  and  yvixvoi,
yvfjLvrJTai,  or  yvixi/QTes.    Instead  of  being  defended


ARMA.


135


by    the    shield   and   thorax,   their   bodies    had  a
much   slighter  covering,   sometimes   consisting  of


skins,  and  sometimes  of  leather  or  cloth  ;  and  in-
stead of  the  sword  and  lance,  they  commonly  fought
with  darts,  stones,  bows  and  arrows,  or  slings.

Besides  the  heavy  and  light-armed  soldiers,  the
oTrXlrai  and  i/'iAoi,  who  in  general  bore  towards
one  another  the  intimate  relation  now  explained,
another  description  of  men,  the  TreXTcurrai,  also
formed  a  part  of  the  Greek  army,  though  we  do
not  hear  of  them  in  early  times.  Instead  of  the
large  round  shield,  they  carried  a  smaller  one  called
the  TreATTj,  and  in  other  respects  their  armour  was
much  lighter  than  that  of  the  hoplites.  The  weapon
on  which  they  principally  depended  was  the  spear.

The  Roman  soldiers  had  different  kinds  of  arms
and  arnioiir ;  but  an  account  of  the  arms  of  the
different  kinds  of  troops  cannot  be  separated  from  a
description  of  the  troops  of  a  Roman  army,  and  the
reader  is  therefore  referred  to  Exercitus.  We
need  only  give  here  the  figure  of  a  Roman  soldier
tixken  from  the  arch  of  Septimus  Severus  at  Rome.
On  comparing  it  with  that  of  the  Greek  hoplite  in
the  other  cut,  we  perceive  that  the  several  parts  of
the  armour  correspond,  excepting  only  that  the
Roman  soldier  wears  a  dagger  (fidxaipa,  pugio)
on  his  right  side  instead  of  a  sword  on  his  left,  and
instead  of  greaves  upon  his  legs,  has  femoralia  and
caligae.  All  the  essential  parts  of  the  Roman
heavy  anuour  (lorica,  ensis,  clipeus,  galea,  hasta)
are  mentioned  together  in  an  epigram  of  Martial
(ix.  57)  ;  and  all  except  the  spear  in  a  well  known
passage  {Eph.  vi.  14 — 17)  of  St.  Paul,  whose  enu-
meration exactly  coincides  with  the  figures  on  the
arch  of  Severus,  and  who  makes  mention  not  only
of  greaves,  but  of  shoes  or  sandals  for  the  feet.

The  soft  or  flexible  parts  of  the  heavy  armour
were  made  of  cloth  or  leather.  The  metal  princi-
pally used  in  their  formati<^n  was  that  compound  of
copper  and  tin  which  we  call  bronze,  or  more
K  4


136  ARMILLA.

properly  bell-metal.     [Aes.]     Hence  the  names
for  this  metal  (xoAk(Js,  aes)  are  often  used  to  mean


armour^  and  the  light  reflected  from  the  arms  of  a
warrior  is  called  auy^  X'^^'^^'^V  by  Homer,  and  lux
ai'na  by  Virgil.  (Aen.  ii.  470. )  Instead  of  copper,
iron  afterwards  came  to  be  very  extensively  used
in  the  manufacture  of  arms,  although  articles  made
of  it  are  much  more  rarely  discovered,  because  iron
is  by  exposure  to  air  and  moisture  exceedingly  liable
to  corrosion  and  decay.  Gold  and  silver,  and  tin
unmixed  with  copper,  were  also  used,  more  espe-
cially to  enrich  and  adorn  the  armour.     [J.  Y.]

ARMA'RIUM,  originally  a  place  for  keeping
arms,  afterwards  a  cupboard,  set  upright  in  the
wall  of  a  room,  in  which  were  kept  not  only  arms,
but  also  clothes,  books,  money,  ornament's,  small
images  and  pictures,  and  other  articles  of  value.
The  armarium  was  generall}--  placed  in  the  atrium
of  the  house.  (Dig.  3,3.  tit.  10.  s.  3  ;  Cic.  Pro
Chmit  64  ;  Petron.  Sat.  29  ;  Plin.  //.  ,V.  xxix.
5.  s.  32,  XXXV.  2.)  The  divisions  of  a  library
were  called  arwwWa.  (Vitruv.  vii.  7^m<y';;  Vopisc.
Tiic.  8.)  We  find  armarium  distet/um  mentioned
as  a  kind  of  sepulchre  in  an  inscription  in  Grutor
(p.  383.  No.  4).  For  other  passages  see  Forcel-
lini,  s.v.  rp^  g  i

ARMILLA  (\pd\iov,  yp4\iou^  or  \pf?\^iot',  x^j-
B(at/,  cLfKpiSeai),  a  bracelet  or  armlet,  worn  both  by
men  and  women.  It  was  a  favourite  ornament  of
the  Medes  and  Persians  (Herod,  viii.  1 1 3,  ix.  80  ;
Xen.  AnulK  i.  2.  §  27)  ;  and  in  Europe  was  also'
wom  by  the  Gauls  and  Sabines.  (Gell.  ix.  13  ;
Liv.  L  11.)  Bracelets  do  not  appear  to  have  been
worn  among  the  Greeks  by  the  male  sex,  but  Greek
ladies  had  bracelets  of  various  materials,  shapea,
and  styles  of  ornament.  The  bracelet  was  some-
times called  (T(piyKT-f]p  (from  (rcpiyyco),  in  Latin
spint/ier  or  sphiter  (Plant.  Menacch.  iii.  3),  which
derived  its  name  from  its  keeping  its  place  by  com-
pressing the  arm  of  the  wearer.  Bracelets  seem  to
have  been  frequently  made  without  having  their
ends  joined  ;  they  were  then  curved,  so  as  to  require.


ARMILLA.
when  put  on,  to  be  slightly  expanded  by  having
their  ends  drawn  apart  from  one  another  ;  and,  ac-
cording to  their  lengtli,  they  went  once,  twice,  or
thrice  round  the  arm,  or  even  a  greater  number  of
times.  As  they  frequently  exhibited  the  form  of
serpents,  they  were  in  such  cases  called  snalccs
(u^€is)  by  the  Athenians  (Hesych.  «.  v.  v(peis).
Twisted  bracelets  of  the  kind  described  above  often
occur  on  Greek  painted  vases.  See  the  annexed
cut  from  Sir  William  Hamilton's  great  work,
vol.  ii.  pi.  35.


Bracelets  were  likewise  wom  at  Rome  by  ladies
of  rank,  but  it  was  considered  a  mark  of  effeminacy
for  men  in  an  ordinary  way  to  use  such  female
ornaments.  (Suet.  Cal.  52,  Ner.  30.)  They  were,
however,  publicly  conferred  by  a  Roman  general
upon  soldiers  for  deeds  of  extraordinary  merit
(Liv.  X.  44  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii.  2  ;  Festus,  s.v.);
in  which  case  they  were  worn  as  a  mark  of  lumour,
and  probably  differed  in  form  from  the  ordinary
ornaments  of  the  kind.     See  the  cut  below.

The  following  cuts  exhibit  Roman  bracelets.
The  first  figure  represents  a  gold  bracelet  dis-
covered at  Rome  on  the  Palatine  Mount.  (Caylus,
liec.  d\4nt.  vol.  v.  pi.  93.)  The  rosette  in  the
middle  is  composed  of  distinct  and  very  delicate
leaves.  The  two  starlike  flowers  on  each  side  of
it  have  been  repeated  where  the  holes  for  securing
them  are  still  visible.    The  second  figure  represents


ARRA.

K  gold  bracelet  found  in  Britain,  and  preserved  in
the  British  Museum.    It  appears  to  be  made  of  two


ARTABA.


13/


gold  wires  twisted  together,  and  the  mode  of  fas-
tening it  upon  the  arm,  by  a  clasp,  is  worthy  of  ob-
servation.   It  has  evidently  been  a  lady's  ornament.
The  third  figure  represents  an  armilla,  which  must
have  been  intended  as  a  reward  for  soldiers,  for  it
I  would  be  ridiculous  to  suppose  such  a  massive  or-
I  nanient  to  have  been  designed  for  women.     The
j  original,    of  pure  gold,   is  more    than   twice   the
i  length  of  the   figure,  and  was  found  in  Cheshire.
I  (Arckaeoluc/ia,  xxvii.  400.)

ARMILU'STRIUM,  a  Roman  festival  for  the
purification  of  arms.  It  was  celebrated  every  year
on  the  14th  before  the  calends  of  November  (Oct.
ID),  when  the  citizens  assembled  in  arms  and
offered  sacrifices  in  the  place  called  Armilustrura,
or  Vicus  Armilustri,  in  the  13th  region  of  the  city.
(Festus,  s.v.;  Varro,  De  Ling.  Lat  iv.  32,  v.  3;
Liv.  xxvii.  37;  P.  Vict.  De  Regionihus  U.  R.;
Inscrip.  in  Gruter,  p.  250.)  [P.  S.]

ARRA,A'RRABO,orARRHA,A'RRHABO,
Gaius  (iii.  139.)  says:  "  What  is  given  as  arra,  is
a  proof  of  a  contract  of  buying  and  selling;"  but
it  also  has  a  more  general  signification.  That  thing
was  called  arrha  which  one  contracting  party  gave
to  another,  whether  it  was  a  sum  of  money  or  any
thing  else,  as  an  evidence  of  the  contract  of  sale
being  made:  it  was  no  essential  part  of  the  con-
I  tract  of  buying  and  selling,  but  only  evidence  of
agreement  as  to  price.  (Gaius,  Dig.  1 8.  tit.  1 .  s.  35).
An  arrha  might  be  given  before  the  completion
of  a  contract,  when  the  agreement  Avas  that  some
formal  instrument  in  writing  should  be  made,
before  the  contract  should  be  considered  perfect.
If  he  who  gave  the  arrha  refused  to  perfect  the
contract,  he  forfeited  it :  if  he  who  had  received
the  arrha,  refused  to  perfect  the  contract,  he  was
obliged  to  return  double  the  amoimt  of  the  arrha.  If
the  arrha  was  given  as  evidence  of  a  contract  abso-
lutely made,  it  was  evidence  of  the  unalterable
obligation  of  the  contract,  which  neither  party
alone  could  rescind ;  \inless  the  arrha  was  ex-
pressly given  to  provide  for  the  case  of  either
party  changing  his  mind,  on  the  condition  that  if
the  giver  receded  from  his  bargain,  he  should  for-
feit the  arrha,  and  if  the  receiver  receded  from
his  bargain,  he  should  forfeit  double  its  value.
When  the  contract  was  completely  performed,  in
all  cases  where  the  arrha  was  money,  it  was  re-
stored, or  taken  as  part  of  the  price,  unless  special
customs  determined  otherwise ;  when  the  arrha
was  a  ring  or  any  other  thing,  not  money,  it  was
restored.  The  recovery  of  the  arrha  was  by  a
personal  action.  ^

The  arrha  in  some  respects  resembles  the  deposit


of  money  which  a  purchaser  of  land  in  England
generally  pays,  according  to  the  conditions  of  sale,
on  contracting  for  his  purchase ;  and  the  earnest
money  sometimes  paid  on  a  sale  of  moveable
things.

The  term  an-ha,  in  its  general  sense  of  an  evi-
dence of  agreement,  was  also  used  on  other  oc-
casions, as  in  the  case  of  betrothment  (sponsalia).
[Matrimonium.]  Sometimes  the  word  arrha  is
used  as  synonymous  with  pignus  (Terent.  Heautont.
iii.  3.  42),  but  this  is  not  the  legal  meaning  of
the  tenn.  (Thibaut,  System  des  Pandekten-Rechts,
§  144  ;  Inst.  iii.  tit.  23  ;  Dig.  18.  tit.  1.  s.  35  ;  tit  3.
8.  6 ;  14.  tit.  3.  s.  5.  §  15 ;  19,  tit.  1.  s.  11.  §  6 ;
Cod.  4.  tit.  21.  s.  17;  Gellius,  xvii.  2;  compare
Bracton,  ii.  c.  27,  De  acquirendo  Renim  Domi-
nio  in  causa  Emptionis^  and  what  he  says  on  the
arrha,  with  the  passage  in  Gaius  already  referred
to.)  [G.  L.]

ARRHEPHO'RIA  (apl>r]<p6pLa),  a  festival
which,  according  to  the  various  ways  in  which  the
name  is  written  (for  we  find  fp(rr](p6pia  or  eppTi<p6pia)
is  attributed  to  different  deities.  The  first  form  is
derived  from  &p[>r]Ta,  and  thus  would  indicate  a
festival  at  which  mysterious  things  were  carried
about.  The  other  name  would  point  to  Erse  or
Herse,  a  daughter  of  Cecrops,  and  whose  worship
was  intimately  connected  with  that  of  Athena.
And  there  is,  indeed,  suflScient  groimd  for  believ-
ing that  the  festival  was  solemnized,  in  a  higher
sense,  in  honour  of  Athena.  {EtymoL  Mag.  s.  v.
' KppT}(p6poi.)  It  was  held  at  Athens,  in  the  month
of  Skirophorion.  Foiir  girls,  of  between  seven  and
eleven  years  (appr\^6pot,  ip(ri]<p6poi,  ippr\<p6poi :
Aristoph.  Lysist.  642),  were  selected  every  year
by  the  king  archon  from  the  most  distinguished
families,  two  of  whom  superintended  the  weaving
of  the  sacred  peplus  of  Athena,  which  was  begun
on  the  last  day  of  Pyanepsion  (Suid.  s.  v.  Xa\-
Ke7a)  ;  the  two  others  had  to  carry  the  mysterious
and  sacred  vessels  of  the  goddess.  These  latter
remained  a  whole  year  on  the  Acropolis,  either  in
the  Parthenon  or  some  adjoining  building  (Har-
pocrat.  s.  V.  Aeiiruocpdpos :  Pans.  i.  27.  §  4)  ;  and
when  the  festival  commenced,  the  priestess  of  the
goddess  placed  vessels  upon  their  heads,  the  con-
tents of  which  were  neither  known  to  them  nor  to
the  priestess.  With  these  they  descended  to  a
natural  grotto  within  the  district  of  Aphrodite  in
the  gardens.  Here  they  deposited  the  sacred  ves-
sels, and  carried  back  something  else,  which  was
covered  and  likewise  unknown  to  them.  After
this  the  girls  were  dismissed,  and  others  were
chosen  to  supply  their  place  in  the  acropolis.  The
girls  wore  white  robes  adorned  with  gold,  which
were  left  for  the  goddess  ;  and  a  peculiar  kind  of
cakes  was  baked  for  them.  To  cover  the  expenses  of
the  festival,  a  peculiar  liturgy  was  established,  called
app'i]<popia.  All  other  details  concerning  this  fes-
tival are  unknown.  (Comp.  C.  F.  Hermann,  Leltrb.
der  gottesdienstl.  Alteiih.  §  61.  n.  9.)         [L.  S.]

ARROGA'TIO.     [Adoptio.]

A'RTABA  (apragTj),  a  Persian  measure  of
capacity,  principally  used  as  a  coni-measure,  which
contained,  according  to  Herodotus  (i.  192),  1  me-
dimnus  and  3  choenices  (Attic),  i.e.  51  choenices
=102  Roman  sextarii=12i  gallons  neai-ly  ;  but,
according  to  Suidas,  Hesychius,  Polyaenus  (Strut.
iv,  3,  32),  and  Epiphanius  (Pond.  24)  only  1
Attic  medimnus  =96  sextarii  =  12  gallons  nearly:
the  latter  is,  however,  only  an  approximate  value*


138


ARVALES  FRATRES.


There  was  an  Egj^ptian  measure  of  the  same  name,
of  which  there  were  two  sorts,  the  old  and  the  new
artaba.  (Didymus,  c.  19.)  The  old  artaba  con-
tained 4^  Roman  modii  =  72  sextarii  =  9  gallons
nearly,  according  to  most  writers ;  but  Galen
(c.  5)  makes  it  exactly  5  modii.  It  was  about
equal  to  the  Attic  metretes  ;  and  it  was  half  of
the  Ptolemaic  medimnus,  which  was  to  the  Attic
medimnus  as  3  :  2.  The  later  and  more  common
Egyptian  arbata  contained  3.\  modii  =  53J  sex-
tarii =6^  gallons  about, which  is  so  nearly  the  half
of  the  Persian,  that  we  may  fairly  suppose  that  in
reality  it  was  the  half.  It  was  equal  to  the
Olympic  cubic  foot.  (Rhemn.  Fann.  Carmen  de
Pond,  et  Mens.  v.  89,  90  ;  Hieron.  Ad  Ezech.  5  ;
Bockh,  Metrolog.  Untersuch.  pp.  242,  &c.,  285  ;
Publ.Econ.  ofAth.  p.  93,  2nd  ed. ;  Wurm,  De
Pont^.,  &c.  p.  133.)^  [P.S.]

ARTEMI'SIA  {apTefiicria),  one  of  the  great  fes-
tivals celebrated  in  honour  of  Artemis  iu  various
parts  of  Greece,  in  the  spring  of  the  year.  We  find  it
mentioned  at  S}Tacuse  in  honour  of  Artemis  Po-
tamia  and  Soteria.  (Pind.  Pyth.  ii.  12.)  It  lasted
three  days,  which  were  principally  spent  in  feasting
and  amusements.  (Liv.  xxv.  23  ;  Pint.  Marcell.
18.)  Bread  was  offered  to  her  under  the  name  of
Aox/a.  (Hesych.  s.  v.)  But  these  festivals  occur  in
many  other  places  in  Greece,  as  at  Delphi,  where,
according  to  Hegesandcr  (Athen.  vii.  p.  325),  they
offered  to  the  goddess  a  mullet  on  this  occasion  ;
because  it  appeared  to  hunt  and  kill  the  sea«hare,
and  thus  bore  some  resemblance  to  Artemis,  the
goddess  of  himting.  The  same  name  was  given  to
the  festivals  of  Artemis  in  Cyrcne  and  Ephesus,
though  in  the  latter  place  the  goddess  was  not  the
Grecian  Artemis,  but  a  deity  of  Eastern  origin.
(Dionys.  iv.  25  ;  Achill.  Tat.  vi.  4,  vii.  12,  viii.
1 7  ;  Xenoph.  Eplies.  i.  2.)  [L.  S.]

ARU'RA  {&povpa)^  a  Greek  measure  of  surface,
which  would  appear,  from  its  name,  to  have  been
originally  the  chief  land-measure.  It  was,  accord-
ing to  Suidas,  the  fourth  part  of  the  irXddpov.
The  TTXeOpoy^  as  a  measure  of  length,  contained
100  Greek  feet;  its  square  therefore  =10,000
feet,  and  therefore  the  arura  =2500  Greek  square
feet,  or  the  square  of  50  feet.

Herodotus  (ii.  168)  mentions  a  measure  of  the
same  name,  but  apparently  of  a  different  size.  He
says  that  it  is  a  hundred  Egyptian  cubits  in  every
direction.  Now  the  Egyptian  cubit  contained
nearly  17|  inches  (Hussey,  Ancient  Weights,  &c.
p.  237)  ;  therefore  the  square  of  100  x  17f  inches,
i.e.  nearly  148  feet,  gives  approximately  the  num-
ber of  square  feet  (English)  in  the  arura,  viz.
21,904.     (Wurm,  De  Pond.  &c.  p.  94.)    [P.  S.]

ARUSPEX.     [Haruspex.]

ARVA'LES  FRATRES.  The  fratres  arvales
formed  a  college  or  company  of  twelve  in  number,
and  were  so  called,  according  to  Varro  {De  Ling.
Lat.  V.  85,  Miiller),  from  offering  public  sacri-
fices for  the  fertility  of  the  fields.  That  they  were
of  extreme  antiquity  is  proved  by  the  legend  which
refers  their  institution  to  Romulus,  of  whom  it  is
said,  that  when  his  nurse  Acca  Laurentia  lost  one  of
her  twelve  sons,  he  allowed  himself  to  be  adopted
by  her  in  his  place,  and  called  himself  and  the
remaining  eleven  "  Fratres  Arvales."  (Gell.  vi.  7.)
We  also  find  a  college  called  the  Sodales  Titii,  and
as  the  latter  were  confessedly  of  Sabine  origin,  and
instituted  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  up  the  Sabine
religious  rites  (Tac.  Ann.    i.  53),   there   is   some


ARVALES  FRATRES.

reason  lor  the  supposition  of  Niebuhr  (/?o»i.  Hist
vol.  i.  p.  303),  that  these  colleges  corresponded  one
to  the  other  —  the  Fratres  Arvales  being  connected
with  the  Latin,  and  the  Sodales  Titii  with  the
Sabine,  element  of  the  Roman  state,  just  as  there
were  two  colleges  of  the  Luperci,  namely,  the  Fabii
and  the  Quinctilii,  the  former  of  whom  seem  to
have  belonged  to  the  Sabines.

The  office  of  the  fratres  arvales  was  for  life.,
and  was  not  taken  away  even  from  an  exile  oi
captive.  They  wore,  as  a  badge  of  office,  a  chaplet
of  ears  of  com  (spicea  corona)  fastened  on  their
heads  with  a  white  band.  (Plin.  //.  A^.  xviii.  2.)
The  number  given  by  inscriptions  varies,  but  it  is
never  more  than  nine  ;  though,  according  to  the
legend  and  general  belief,  it  amounted  to  twelve.
One  of  their  annual  duties  was  to  celebrate  a  three
days'  festival  in  honour  of  Dea  Dia,  supposed  to  be
Ceres,  sometimes  held  on  the  xvi.,  xiv.,  and  xiir.,
sometimes  on  the  vi.,  iv.,  and  iii.  Kal.  Jun.,  i.  e.
on  the  17th,  19th,  and  20th,  or  the  27th,  29th,
and  30th  of  May.  Of  this  the  master  of  the
college,  appointed  annuall}',  gave  public  notice
(indicebat)  from  the  temple  of  Concord  on  the
capitol.  On  the  first  and  last  of  these  days,  the
college  met  at  the  house  of  their  president,  to  make
offerings  to  the  Dea  Dia  ;  on  the  second  they  as-
sembled in  the  grove  of  the  same  goddess,  about
five  miles  south  of  Rome,  and  there  offered  sacri-
fices for  the  fertility  of  the  earth.  An  account  of
the  different  ceremonies  of  this  festival  is  preserved
in  an  inscription,  which  was  written  in  the  first
year  of  the  Emperor  Elagabalus  (a,  d.  218),  who
was  elected  a  member  of  the  college  under  the
name  of  M.  Aurelius  Antoninus  Pius  Felix.  The
same  inscription  contains  a  hymn,  which  appears
to  have  been  sung  at  the  festival  from  the  most
ancient  times.  (Marini,  Aiti  e  Monumenti  degli
Arvali,  tab.  xli.  ;  Orelli,  Corp.  Inscrip.  nr.  2270  ;
Klausen,  De  Carmine  Fratrum  Arvalium.)

Besides  this  festival  of  the  Dea  Dia,  the  fratres
arvales  were  required  on  various  occasions,  under
the  emperors,  to  make  vows  and  offer  up  thanks-
givings, an  enumeration  of  which  is  given  in  For-
Cellini.  (Lex.  s.  v.)  Strabo,  indeed  (v.  3),  informs
us  that,  in  the  reign  of  Tiberius,  these  priests
(lepofxyfjixoves)  performed  sacrifices  called  the  Am-
harvalia  at  various  places  on  the  borders  of  the
ager  Romanus,  or  original  territory  of  Rome  ;  and
amongst  others,  at  Festi,  a  place  between  five  and
six  miles  from  the  city,  in  the  direction  of  Alba.
There  is  no  boldness  in  supposing  that  this  was  a
custom  handed  down  from  time  immemorial,  and,
moreover,  that  it  was  a  duty  of  this  priesthood  to
inviike  a  blessing  on  the  whole  territory  of  Rome.
It  is  proved  by  inscriptions  that  this  college  ex-
isted till  the  reign  of  the  Emperor  Gordian,  or  A.  D.
325,  and  it  is  probable  that  it  was  not  abolished
till  A.  D.  400,  together  with  the  other  colleges  of
the  Pagan  priesthoods.

The  private  ambarvalia  were  certainlj"-  of  a
different  nature  from  those  mentioned  by  Strabo,
and  were  so  called  from  the  victim  (hostia  ambar-
valis)  that  was  slain  on  the  occasion  being  led  three
times  round  the  cornfields,  before  the  sickle  was
put  to  the  corn.  This  victim  was  accompanied  by
a  crowd  of  merry-makers  (chorus  et  socii\  the
reapers  and  farm-servants  dancing  and  singing,  as
they  marclied  along,  the  praises  of  Ceres,  and
praying  for  her  favour  and  presence,  while  they
offered  her  the  libations  of  milk,  honey,  and  wine.


AS.

(V  irg.  Georg.  \.  338.)  This  ceremony  was  also  called
a  ludratio  (Virg.  Ed.  v.  83),  or  purification  ;  and
for  a  beautiful  description  of  the  holiday,  and  the
])niyers  and  vows  made  on  the  occasion,  the  reader
is  referred  to  Tibullus  (ii.  1).  It  is,  perhaps,
worth  while  to  remark  that  Polybius  (iv,  21.  §  9)
usos  language  almost  applicable  to  the  Roman  am-
1  )a  rvalia  in  speaking  of  the  Mantineans,  who,  he  says
(specifying  the  occasion),  made  a  purification,  and
curried  victims  round  the  city,  and  all  the  countiy.

There  is,  however,  a  still  greater  resemblance  to
the  rites  we  have  been  describing,  in  the  cere-
monies of  the  rogation  or  gang  week  of  the  Latin
chinch.  These  consisted  of  processions  through
tlie  fields,  accompanied  with  prayers  (rogationes)
f(  r  a  blessing  on  the  fniits  of  the  earth,  and  were
(oi, tinned  during  three  days  in  Whitsun-week.
Tlic  custom  was  abolished  at  the  Reformation  in
ci)iisequence  of  its  abuse,  and  the  perambulation  of
the  parish  boundaries  substituted  in  its  place.
(Hooker,  Eccl.  Pol.  v.  61.  2  ;  Wheatley,  Com.
iVf/;/.  V.  20.)  [R.W.]

ARX  {6.Kpa),  signified  a  height  within  the  walls
of  a  city,  but  which  was  never  closed  by  a  wall
ai,niinst  the  city  in  earlier  times,  and  very  seldom
in  later  times.  The  same  city  may  have  had
se\'eral  arces,  as  was  the  case  at  Rome ;  and  hence
Yh-g'il  says  with  great  propriety  {Georg.  ii.  535)  : —

"  Septemque  una  sibi  muro  circumdedit  arces."

As,  however,  there  was  generally  one  principal
iicitrht  in  the  city,  the  wordara  came  to  be  used  as
(ijuivalent  to  acropolis  [Acropolis],  (Niebuhr,
Ilid  of  Borne,  vol.  iii.  note  411.)  At  Rome,  one
of  the  summits  of  the  Capitoline  hill  was  specially
called  Jriv,  but  which  of  them  was  so  called  has
been  a  subject  of  great  dispute  among  Roman  topo-
graphers. The  opinion  of  the  best  modem  writers
is,  that  the  Capitolium  was  on  the  northern  summit,
and  the  Arx  on  the  southern.  The  Arx  was  the
regular  place  at  Rome  for  taking  the  auspices,  and
was  hence  likewise  called  auguraculum,  according
to  Paulus  Diaconus,  though  it  is  more  probable
that  the  Auguraculum  was  a  place  in  the  Arx.
(Li v.  i.  18,  X.  7;  Paul.  Diac.  s.v.  Auguraculum;
Becker,  Romisch.  Alterth.  vol.  i.  p.  386,  &c.,  vol.  ii.
part  i.  p.  313.)

AS,  or  Libra,  a  pound,  the  unit  of  weight
among  the  Romans.   [Libra.]

AS,  the  earliest  denomination  of  money,  and
the  constant  unit  of  value,  in  the  Roman  and  old
Italian  coinages,  was  made  of  the  mixed  metal
called  Aes.  Like  other  denominations  of  money,
it  no  doubt  originally  signified  a  pound  weight  of
copper  uncoined :  this  is  expressly  stated  by  Ti-
raaeus,  who  ascribes  the  first  coinage  of  aes  to
Servius  Tullius.  (Plin.  II.  N.  xxxiii.  3.  s.  13,
xviii.  3  ;  Varro,  De  Re  Rust.  ii.  1  ;  Ovid.  Fast
V.  281.)  According  to  some  accounts,  it  was
coined  from  the  commencement  of  the  city  (Plin.
//.  A^.  xxxiv.  1),  or  from  the  time  of  Numa  (Epiph.
Mens,  et  Pond.;  Isidor.  Etym.  xvi.  18)  ;  and  ac-
cording to  others,  the  first  coinage  was  attributed
to  Janus  or  Saturn.  (Macrob.  Saturn,  i.  7.)  This
mythical  statement  in  fact  signifies,  what  we  know
also  on  historical  evidence,  that  the  old  states  of
Etruria,  and  of  Central  Italy,  possessed  a  bronze
or  copper  coinage  from  the  earliest  times.  On
the  other  hand,  those  of  Southern  Italy,  and
the  coast,  as  far  as  Campania,  made  use  of  silver
money      The  Roman  monetary  system  was  pro-


AS.


139


bably  derived  from  Etruria.  (Niebuhr,  Hist,  of
Rome,  vol.  i.  p.  457,  3d  ed.  ;  Abeken,  MitteC-
Italicn,  pp.  284,  326.)

The  earliest  copper  coins  were  not  struck,but  cast
in  a  mould.  [Forma.]  In  the  collection  of  coins  at
the  British  Museum  there  are  four  ases  joined  to-
gether, as  they  were  taken  from  the  mould  in  which
many  were  cast  at  once.  In  most  ases  the  edge
shows  where  they  were  severed  from  each  other.

Under  the  Roman  empire,  the  right  of  coining
silver  and  gold  belonged  only  to  the  emperors  ;  but
the  copper  coinage  was  left  to  the  aerarium,  which
was  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  senate.     [Comp.

NUMMUS  ;   MONETA.]

The  as  was  originally  of  the  weight  of  a  pound
of  twelve  ounces,  Avhence  it  was  called  as  lihralis
in  contradistinction  to  the  reduced  ases  which  have
now  to  be  spoken  of,  and  which  give  rise  to  one
of  the  most  perplexing  questions  in  the  whole
range  of  archaeology.

Pliny  (//.  A^.  xxxiii.  3.  s.  1 3)  informs  us  that
in  the  time  of  the  first  Punic  war  (b.  c.  264 — 241 ),
in  order  to  meet  the  expenses  of  the  state,  the  full
weight  of  a  pound  was  diminished,  and  ases  were
struck  of  the  same  weight  as  the  sextans  (that  is,
two  ounces,  or  one  sixth  of  the  ancient  weight)  ;
and  that  thus  the  republic  paid  off"  its  debts,  gaining
five  parts  in  six  :  that  afterwards,  in  the  second
Punic  war,  in  the  dictatorship  of  Q,  Fabius  Maxi-
mus  (about  b.  c.  217),  ases  of  one  ounce  were
made,  and  the  denarius  was  decreed  to  be  equal
to  sixteen  ases,  the  republic  thus  gaining  one  half  ;
but  that  in  military  pay  the  denarius  was  always
given  for  ten  ases  :  and  that  soon  after,  by  the
Papirian  law  (about  B.C.  191),  ases  of  half  an
ounce  were  made.  Festus  also  {s.  v.  Sextantarii
Asses)  mentions  the  reduction  of  the  as  to  two
ounces  at  the  time  of  the  first  Punic  war.  There
seem  to  have  been  other  reductions  besides  those
mentioned  by  Pliny,  for  there  exist  ases,  and  parts
of  ases,  which  show  that  this  coin  was  made  of
every  number  of  ounces  from  twelve  down  to  one,
besides  intermediate  fractions  ;  and  there  are  cop-
per coins  of  the  Terentian  family  which  show  that
it  was  depressed  to  ^  and  even  ^  of  its  original
weight.  Though  some  of  these  standards  may  be
rejected  as  accidental,  yet  on  the  whole  they  clearly
prove,  as  Niebuhr  observes  (Hist,  of  Rome,  vol.  i.
p.  461),  that  there  must  have  been  several  re-
ductions before  the  first  which  Pliny  mentions.
Niebuhr  maintains  further,  that  these  varioua
standards  prove  that  Pliny's  account  of  the  reduc-
tions of  the  coin  is  entirely  incorrect,  and  that
these  reductions  took  place  gradually  from  a  very
early  period,  and  were  caused  by  a  rise  in  the
value  of  copper  in  comparison  with  silver,  so  that
the  denarius  was  in  the  first  Punic  war  really
equal  in  value  to  only  twenty  ounces  of  copper,
and  in  the  second  Punic  war  to  sixteen  ounces,  in-
stead of  120,  which  was  its  nominal  value.  He
admits,  however,  that  the  times  when  these  reduc-
tions were  resolved  upon  were  chiefly  those  when
the  state  was  desirous  of  relieving  the  debtors  ;
and  thinks  that  we  might  assign,  with  tolerable
accuracy,  the  periods  when  these  reductions  took
place.  On  the  other  hand,  Bockh  argues  that
there  is  no  proof  of  any  such  increase  in  the  value
of  copper,  and  on  this  and  many  other  grounds  his
conclusion  is,  that  all  the  reductions  of  the  weight
of  the  as,  from  a  pound  down  to  two  ounces,  took
place  during  the  first  Punic  war,  and  that  they


140


AS.


were  accompanied  by  a  real  and  correspondinp;  dimi-
nution in  the  value  of  the  as.  (MetrologiscJte  Un-
tcrsuchungen^  §  28.)  It  is  impossible  to  give  here
even  a  summary  of  the  arguments  on  both  sides :
the  remarks  of  Niebuhr  and  Bockh  must  them-
selves be  studied.  It  is  by  no  means  improbable
that  there  was  some  increase  in  the  value  of  copper
during  the  period  before  the  first  Punic  war,  and
also  that  the  fixing  of  the  sextantal  standard  arose
partly  out  of  the  relation  of  value  between  copper
and  the  silver  coinage  which  had  been  very  lately
introduced.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  impossible
entirely  to  reject  Pliny's  statement  that  the  im-
mediate object  of  the  reductions  he  mentions  was
the  public  gain.  Mr.  Grote,  who  sides  with  Bockh,
remarks,  that  "  such  a  proceeding  has  been  so
nearly  universal  with  governments,  both  ancient
and  modem,  that  the  contrary  may  be  looked  upon
as  a  remarkable  exception."  {Classical  Museum^
vol.i.  p.  32.)

These  variations  make  it  impossible  to  fix  any
value  for  the  as,  except  with  reference  to  some
more  specific  standard  ;  and  this  we  find  in  the
denarius.  Taking  the  value  of  this  coin  at  about
8^  pence  [Denarius],  the  as,  at  the  time  of  the
first  coinage  of  the  denarius  (b.  c.  269),  was  one-
tenth  of  this  value,  that  is,  about  '85  of  a  penny  or
3*4  farthings  ;  and  in  the  time  of  the  second  Punic
war,  when  16  ases  went  to  the  denarius,  the  as  was
worth  about  2g  farthings.  When  the  silver  coinage
got  thoroughly  established,  the  reckoning  was  no
longer  by  ases,  but  by  sestertii.  [Sestertius.]
Also,  during  the  period  or  periods  of  reduction,
the  term  aes  grave,  which  originally  signified  the
old  heavy  coins,  as  opposed  to  the  reduced  ases,
came  to  mean  any  quantity  of  copper  coins,  of
whatever  weight  or  coinage,  reckoned  not  by  tale,
but  by  the  old  standard  of  a  pound  weight  to  the
as  ;  and  this  standard  was  actually  maintained  in
certain  payments,  such  as  military  paj-^,  fines,  &c.
(Liv.  iv.  41,  60,  v.  2,  xxxii.  26  ;  Plin.  I.  c.  ;  Sen.
ad  Helv.  12  ;  Niebuhr,  Hist,  of  Rome,  vol.  i.  pp.
466,  467).  This  mode  of  reckoning  also  supplied
a  common  measure  for  the  n^ney  of  Rome,  and
the  other  states  of  Italy,  which  had  ases  of  very
various  weights,  most  of  them  heavier  than  the
Roman.  The  name  of  aes  grave  was  also  applied
to  the  uncoined  metal.  (Servius,  ad  Virg.  Aen.
vi.  862  ;  Massa,  aes  rude,  metalhim  infectum,
Isidor.  xvi.  18.  13.)

The  oldest  form  of  the  as  is  that  which  bears
the  figure  of  an  animal  (a  bull,  ram,  boar,  or  sow)  ;
whence  the  ancient  writers  derived  the  word  for
money,/)ecMwza,  from  joecas,  an  etymology  on  which
no  opinion  need  be  pronounced ;  but  whether  this
impress  was  intended  to  represent  property  by  that
form  of  it  which  was  then  most  common,  or  had
some  mythological  meaning,  is  doubtful.  Niobuhr
denies  the  antiquity  of  this  type,  but  his  sole  ob-
jection is  satisfactorily  answered  by  Bockh.  The
type  seems  however  to  have  been  much  less  used
in  the  Roman  than  in  some  other  old  Italian  coin-
ages ;  and  most  of  the  pieces  which  bear  it  are  of
a  rude  oblong  shape.  The  next  form,  and  the
common  one  in  the  oldest  Roman  ases,  is  round,
and  is  that  described  by  Fliny  (//.  A'^  xxxiii.  3.
s.  1 3),  as  having  the  two-faced  head  of  Janus  on
one  side,  and  the  prow  of  a  ship  on  the  other
(whence  the  expression  used  by  Roman  boys  in
tossing  up,  capita  aut  navim^  Alacrob.  Sat.  i.  7).
The  annexed  specimen,  from  the  British  Museum,


AS.

weiglis  4000  grains :  the  length  of  the  diameter  in
this  and  the  two  following  cuts  is  half  that  of  the
original  coins.


The  as  was  divided  into  parts,  which  were
named  according  to  the  number  of  ounces  they
contained.  They  ft^ere  the  deunx,  dextans,  dodrans,
hes,  septunx,  semis,  quincunx,  triens,  quadruns  or
teruncius,  sextans,  sescunx  or  sescimcia,  and  un-cia,
consisting  respectively  of  11,  10,  9,  8,  7,  6,  5,  4,
3,  2,  1^,  and  1  ounces.  Of  these  divisions  the
following  were  represented  by  coins  ;  namely,  the
semis,  quincunx,  triens,  quadrans,  sextans,  and  uncia.
There  is  a  solitary  instance  of  the  existence  of  the
dodrans,  in  a  com  of  the  Cassian  family,  bearing
an  S  and  three  balls.  We  have  no  precise  inform-
ation as  to  the  time  when  these  divisions  were
first  introduced,  but  it  was  probably  nearly  as
early  as  the  first  coinage  of  copper  money.

The  semis,  semissis,  or  semi-as,  half  the  as,  or  six
ounces,  is  always  marked  with  an  S  to  represent
its  value,  and  very  commonly  with  heads  of  Jupi-
ter, Juno,  and  Pallas,  accompanied  by  strigils.
The  quincunx,  or  piece  of  five  ounces,  is  ver)^  rare.
There  is  no  specimen  of  it  in  the  British  Museum.
It  is  distinguished  by  five  small  balls  to  represent
its  value.  The  triens,  the  third  part  of  tlie  as,  or
piece  of  four  ounces,  is  marked  with  four  balls.
In  the  annexed  specimen,  from  the  British  Mu-
seum,   the  balls   appear   on   both   sides,    with  a


thunderbolt  on  one  side,  and  a  dolphin  with  a  strigil
above  it  on  the  other.     Its  weight  is  1.571  grains.


AS.

The  quadrans  or  ieruncius^  the  fourth  part  of
the  as,  or  piece  of  three  ounces,  has  three  balls  to
denote  its  value.  An  open  hand,  a  strigil,  a  dol-
phin, grains  of  com,  a  star,  heads  of  Hercules,
Ceres,  &c.,  are  common  devices  on  this  coin.  Pliny
(//.  N.  xxxiii.  3.  s.  13)  says  that  both  the  triens
and  quadrans  bore  the  image  of  a  ship.  The
sextans,  the  sixth  part  of  the  as,  or  piece  of  two
ounces,  bears  two  balls.  In  the  annexed  specimen,
from  the  British  Museum,  there  is  a  caduceus  and
Btrigil  on  one  side,  and  a  cockle-shell  on  the  other.
Its  weight  is  779  grains.


ASCOLIASMUS.  141

Roma,  1839,  4to.  ;  and  in  Lepsius's  review  of  it
appended  to  his  treatise  Ueber  die  Tyrrhe7icr-Pelas-
ger.)  [P.S.]

ASCAULES.     [Tibia.]

ASCIA  {(TKfTrapvov^  Hom.  Od.  v.  235),  an  adze,
Muratori  {Ins.  Vet.  Thes.  i.  534 — 536)  has  pub-
lished numerous  representations  of  the  adze,  as  it
is  exhibited  on  ancient  monuments.  We  select  the
three  following,  two  of  which  show  the  instrument
itself,  with  a  slight  variety  of  fonn,  while  the  third
represents  a  ship-builder  holding  it  in  his  right
hand,  and  using  it  to  shape  the  rib  of  a  vessel.


The  uncia,  one  ounce  piece,  or  twelfth  of  the  as,
is  marked  by  a  single  ball.  There  appear  on  this
coin  heads  of  Pallas,  of  Roma,  and  of  Diana,  ships,
frogs,  and  ears  of  barley.  (For  other  devices,  see
Eckhel,  Doctr.  Num.  Vet.)

After  the  reduction  in  the  weight  of  the  as,
coins  were  struck  of  the  value  of  2,  3,  4,  and  even
10  ases,  which  were  called  respectively  dussis  or
dupondliis,  tressis,  quadrussis,  and  decussis.  Other
multiples  of  the  as  were  denoted  by  words  of  similar
forn)ation,  up  to  centussis,  100  ases  ;  but  most  of
them  do  not  exist  as  coins.

It  is  a  very  remarkable  fact  that,  while  the
duodecimal  division  of  the  as  prevailed  among  the
nations  of  Italy  south  of  the  Apennines,  the  deci-
mal division  was  in  use  to  the  north  of  that  chain  ;
so  that,  of  the  former  nations  no  quincunx  has  been
discovered,  of  the  latter  no  semis.  In  Sicily  the
two  systems  were  mixed.  [Pondera.]  For  further
details  respecting  the  coinage  of  the  other  Italian
suites,  see  Bockh,  Metrol.  Untersuch.  §  27  ;  Abeken,
Miitel-Itulien,  and  Lepsius,  Ud)er  die  Verbreitung
des  Italisdum  Munzsystems  von  Etrurien  aus.

In  certain  forms  of  expression,  in  which  aes  is
used  for  money  without  specifying  the  denomina-
tion, we  must  understand  the  as.  Thus  deni  acris,
mille  aeris,  decies  aeris,  mean  respectively  10, 1000,
1,000,000  ases.

The  word  as  was  used  also  for  any  whole  which
was  to  be  divided  into  twelve  equal  parts ;  and
those  parts  were  called  unciae.  Thus  the  nomen-
clature of  the  duodecimal  division  of  the  as  was  ap-
lied  not  only  to  weight  and  money,  but  to  measures
of  length,  surface,  and  capacity,  to  inheritances,
interest,  houses,  farms,  and  many  other  things.
Hence,  for  example,  the  phrases  haeres  ex  a^se,  the
heir  to  a  whole  estate  ;  haeres  ex  dodrante,  the  heir
to  three-fourths,  &c.  (Cic.  Pro  Caecin,  6  ;  Corn.
Nep.  Attic.  5.)  Pliny  even  uses  the  phrases  semis-
lem  Africae  (//.  A^.  xviii.  6.  s.  7),  and  dodrantes  et
aemiuncias  horarum  (H.N.  ii,  14.  s.  11).

The  as  was  also  called,  in  ancient  times,  assarius
(sc.  nummus),  and  in  Greek  rb  aa-ardpiov.  Accord-
ing to  Polybius  (ii.  15)  the  assarius  was  equal  to
half  the  obolus.  On  the  coins  of  Chios  we  find
aa-crdpiov,  aacrapiov  ^fiiav,  acr(rdpia  Su&>,  aaadpia
rpia.  (In  addition  to  the  works  referred  to  in  this
article,  and  those  of  Hussey  and  Wurm,  much
valuable  information  will  be  found  in  the  work
entitled,  Acs  Grave  del   Museo  Kircheriano,  d'c


We  also  give  another  instalment  in  the  above  cut
taken  from  a  coin  of  the  Valerian  family,  and
ailed  acisculus.  It  was  chiefly  used  by  masons,
whence,  in  the  ancient  glossaries,  Aciscularius  is
translated   Xar6ixns,  a  stone-cutter.

As  to  the  reason  why  Ascia  is  represented  on
sepulchral  monuments,  see  Forcellini,  Leoncon,
s.v.  [J.Y.]

ASCLEPIEIA  (ao-H:A777rf€ia),  the  name  of  festi-
vals which  were  probably  celebrated  in  all  places
where  temples  of  Asclepius  (Aesculapius)  existed.
The  most  celebrated,  however,  was  that  of  Epi-
daurus,  which  took  place  every  five  years,  and
was  solemnized  with  contests  of  rhapsodists  and
musicians,  and  with  solemn  processions  and  games.
{^q\\o\.  ad  Pind.  Nem.  iii.  145  ;  Paus.  ii.  20".  §.  7.)
' hcrKX'iiTrifia  are  also  mentioned  at  Lampsacus
(Biickh,  Corp.  Inscr.  vol.  ii.  p.  1131),  and  at
Athens  (Aeschin,  c.  Ctesiph.  p.  455),  which  were,
probably,  like  those  of  Epidaunis,  solemnized  with
musical  contests.  They  took  place  on  the  eighth
day  of  the  month  of  E'aphebolion.  [L.  S.]

ASCOLIASMUS  (dtr/cajAtao-yut^s,  the  leaping
upon  the  leathern  bag,  a.(TK6s)  was  one  of  the
many  kinds  of  amusements  in  which  the  Athenians
indulged  during  the  Anthesteria  and  other  festivals
in  honour  of  Dionysus.     The  Athenians  sacrificed


142  ASEBEIAS  GRAPHE.

a  hc-goat  to  the  god,  made  a  bag  out  of  the  skin,
smeared  it  with  oil,  and  then  tried  to  dance  upon
it.  The  various  accidents  accompanying  this  at-
tempt afforded  great  amusement  to  the  spectators.
He  who  succeeded  was  victor,  and  received  the
ekin  as  a  reward.  (Scliol.  ad  Aristoph.  Pint.  1130  ;
Plat.  Symj).  p.  190  ;  Virg.  Georg.  ii.  384  ;  Pollux,
ix.  121  ;  Hesych.  s.  s.  'AcrKwKid^ovTes  ;  Ki^ause,
Gymnastik  und  Agonistik  d.  Ilellenen^  p.  399,  who
gives  a  representation  of  it  from  an  ancient  gem,
which  is  copied  in  the  above  cut.)

ASEBEIAS  GRAPHE  (ao-egefos  7pa<^l7),  was
one  of  the  many  forms  prescribed  by  the  Attic
laws  for  the  impeachment  of  impiety.  From  the
various  tenor  of  the  accusations  still  extant,  it  may
be  gathered  that  this  crime  was  as  ill-defined  at
Athens,  and  therefore  as  liable  to  be  made  the
pretext  for  persecution,  as  it  has  been  in  all  other
countries  in  which  the  civil  power  has  attempted
to  reaph  offences  so  much  beyond  the  natural  limits
of  its  jurisdiction.  The  occasions,  however,  upon
which  the  Athenian  accuser  professed  to  come  for-
Avard  may  be  classed  as,  first,  breaches  of  the  cere-
monial law  of  public  worship  ;  and,  secondlj'^,
indications  of  that,  which  in  analogous  cases  of
modern  times  would  be  called  heterodoxy,  or
heresy.  The  former  comprehended  encroachment
upon  consecrated  grounds,  the  plunder,  or  other
injury  of  temples,  the  violation  of  asylums,  the  in-
terruption of  sacrifices  and  festivals,  the  mutilation
of  statues  of  the  gods,  the  introduction  of  deities
not  acknowledged  by  the  state,  and  various  other
transgressions  peculiarly  defined  by  the  laws  of  the
Attic  sacra,  such  as  a  private  celebration  of  the
Eleusinian  mysteries  and  their  di\ailgation  to  the
uninitiated,  injury  to  the  sacred  olive  trees,  or
placing  a  suppliant  bough  (iKiTripia)  on  a  particular
altar  at  an  improper  time.  ( Andoc.  DeMyst.  p.  1 1 0.)
The  heretical  delinquencies  may  be  exemplified
by  the  expulsion  of  Protagoras  (Diog.  Laert.  ix.
51,  52)  for  writing  "  that  he  could  not  learn
whether  the  gods  existed  or  not,"  in  the  persecu-
tion of  Anaxagoras  (Diog.  Laert.  ii.  12),  like  that
of  Galileo  in  after  times,  for  impugning  the  received
opinions  about  the  sun,  and  the  condemnation  of
Socrates  for  not  holding  the  objects  of  the  public
worship  to  be  gods.  (Xen.  Apol.  Soc.)  The  va-
riety of  these  examples  will  have  shown  that  it
is  impossible  to  enumerate  all  the  cases  to  v/hich
this  sweeping  accusation  might  be  extended  ;  and,
as  it  is  not  upon  record  that  religious  Athens
(Xen.  Rep.  Ath.  iii.  8)  was  scandalised  at  the  pro-
fane jests  of  Aristophanes,  or  that  it  forced  Epicu-
rus to  deny  that  the  gods  were  indifferent  to  hu-
man actions,  it  is  difficult  to  ascertain  the  limit  at
which  jests  and  scepticism  ended,  and  penal  im-
piety began.

With  respect  to  the  trial,  any  citizen  that  pleased
6  ^ovXSfJLevos  —  which,  however,  in  this  as  in  all
other  public  actions,  must  be  understood  of  those
only  who  did  not  labour  under  an  incapacitating
disfranchisement  (aTifiia)  —  seems  to  have  been  a
competent  accuser  ;  but  as  the  nine  archons,  and
the  areiopagites,  were  the  proper  guardians  of  the
sacred  olives  (fJLopiai^  (r7}Kol,  Lysias,  Uepl  tov
Stj/coi),  p.  282),  it  is  not  impossible  that  they  had
also  a  power  of  official  prosecution  upon  casually
discovering  any  injury  done  to  their  charge.

The  cases  of  Socrates,  Aspasia,  and  Protagoras,
may  be  adduced  to  show  that  citizens,  resident
aliens,  and  strangers,  were  equally  liable  to  this


ASILLA.
accusation.  And  if  a  minor,  as  represented  in  the
declamation  of  Antiphon,  could  be  prosecuted  for
murder  {(p6uov),  a  crime  considered  by  the  early
Greeks  more  in  reference  to  its  ceremonial  pol-
lution than  in  respect  of  the  injury  inflicted  upon
society,  it  can  hardly  be  concluded  that  per-
sons under  age  were  incapable  of  committing,  or
suffering,  for  this  olFence.  (Antiph.  Tetral.  ii.
p.  674.)

The  magistrate,  who  conducted  the  previous  ex-
amination [avAKpiais)  was,  according  to  Meier
{Att.  Proc.  pp.  300,  304,  n.  3^)  invariably  the  king
archon,  but  whether  the  court  into  which  he  brought
the  causes  were  the  areiopagiis,  or  the  common
heliastic  court,  of  both  of  which  there  are  several
instances,  is  supposed  (Meier,  AU.  Proc.  p.  305)
to  have  been  determined  by  the  form  of  action
adopted  by  the  prosecutor,  or  the  degree  of  com-
petency to  which  the  arciopagus  rose  or  fell  at  the
different  periods  of  Athenian  history.  From  the
Apology  of  Socrates  we  learn  that  the  forms  of  the
triat  upon  this  occasion  were  those  usual  in  all
public  actions,  and  that,  generally.,  the  amount  of
the  penalty  formed  a  separate  question  for  the  di-
casts  after  the  conviction  of  the  defendant.  For
some  kinds  of  impiet}'-,  however,  the  punishment
was  fixed  by  special  laws,  as  in  the  case  of  persons
injuring  the  sacred  olive  trees,  and  in  that  men-
tioned by  Andocides  {De  Myst.  p.  110).

If  the  accuser  failed  to  obtain  a  fifth  of  the  votes
of  the  dicasts,  he  forfeited  a  thousand  drachmae,
and  incurred  a  modified  arifila.  The  other  forms
ol  prosecution  for  this  offence  were  the  aTTay<a')i\
(Dem.  c.  Androt.  p.  601.  26),  i<piiyr](ns  (Meier,  AU.
Proc.  p.  246),  ei/Setlts  (Andoc.  De  Myst.  p.  8),
irpo§o\7)  (Libanius,  Argum.  ad  Dem.  in  Mid.  509,
10),  and  in  extraordinary  cases  ilcrayyiKia  (Andoc.
De  Myst.  p.  43)  ;  besides  these,  Demosthenes  men-
tions (c.  Androt.  p.  601)  two  other  courses  that  an
accuser  might  adopt,  ZiKa^^crdai  irphs  Ev/jLoXniSas,
and  (ppd^eiv  irpos  rhu  fiaai\4a,  of  which  it  is  diffi-
cult to  give  a  satisfactory  explanation.      [J.  S.  M.]

ASIARCHAE  (aa-idpxai),  were,  in  the  Roman
province  of  Asia,  the  chief  presidents  of  the  re-
ligious rites,  whose  office  it  was  to  exhibit  games
and  theatrical  amusements  every  year,  in  honour  of
the  gods  and  the  Roman  emperor,  at  their  own
expense,  like  the  Roman  •  aediles.  As  the  exhi-
bition of  these  games  were  attended  with  great
expense,  wealthy  persons  were  always  chosen  to
fill  this  office  ;  for  which  reason,  Strabo  says,
some  of  the  inhabitants  of  Tralles,  which  was  one
of  the  most  wealthy  cities  in  Asia,  were  always
chosen  asiarchs.  They  were  ten  in  number,  se-
lected annuall)'  by  the  different  towns  of  Asia,
and  approved  of  by  the  Roman  proconsul  ;  of
these,  one  was  the  chief  asiarch,  and  frequently
but  not  always,  resided  at  Ephesus.  Their  office
lasted  only  for  a  year  ;  but  they  appear  to  have
enjoyed  the  title  as  a  mark  of  courtesy  for  the  rest
of  their  lives.  In  the  other  Roman  provinces  in
Asia,  we  find  similar  magistrates  corresponding  to
the  Asiarchae  in  proconsular  Asia,  as  for  instjince
the  Bithyniarchae,  Galatarchae,  Lyciarchae,  &c.
(Strab.  xiv.  p.  649  ;  Acts,  xix.  31.,  with  the
notes  of  Wetstein  and  Kuinoel  ;  Euseb.  //.  E.  iv.
1 5  ;  Winer,  Diblischcs  Realworterbuch,  art.  Asiaf'
clien.)

ASILLA  (&(Ti\\a),  a  wooden  pole,  or  yoke,
held  by  a  man  either  on  his  two  shoulders,  or
more  commonly  on  one  shoulder  only,  and  used  for


I


I


ASSESSOR.

carrying  'burthens.  (Aristot.  Rhct.  i.  7.)  It  is
call<'d  am(popoy  by  Aristophanes  {liati.  B).  It  de-
serves mention  here  chiefly  from  its  frequent  oc-
currence in  works  of  Grecian  art,  of  which  some
epecimens  are  given  in  the  annexed  cut.


ASSA'RIUS  NUMMUS.    [As.]

ASSERTOR,  or  ADSERTOR,  contains  the
game  root  as  the  verb  adserere,  which,  when  coupled
with  the  word  manu,  signifies  to  lay  hold  of  a  thing,
to  draw  it  towards  one.  Hence  the  phrase  adserere
in  libertatem^  or  liberali  adserere  manu,  applies  to
him  who  lays  his  hand  on  a  person  reputed  to  be
a  slave,  and  asserts,  or  maintains  his  freedom.  The
person  who  thus  maintained  the  freedom  of  a  re-
puted slave  was  called  adserior  (Gains,  iv.  14),  and
by  the  laws  of  the  Twelve  Tables  it  was  enacted
in  favour  of  liberty,  that  such  adsertor  should  not
be  called  on  to  give  security  in  the  sacramenti  actio
to  more  than  the  amount  of  L.  asses.  The  person
whose  freedom  was  thus  claimed,  was  said  to  he
adsertus.  The  expressions  liberalis  causa,  and
liberalis  manus,  which  occur  in  classical  authors,
ui  connection  with  the  verb  adserere,  will  easily
be  understood  from  what  has  been  said.  (Terent.
Adelph.  ii.  1.  40  ;  Plant.  Poen.  iv.  2.  83  ;  see
also  Dig,  40.  tit.  12.  De  liherali  Causa.)  Some-
times the  word  adserere  alone  was  used  as  equiva-
lent to  adserere  in  lilmrtatem.  (Cic.  Pro  Flacco,
c.  17.)

The  expression  asserere  in  servihdem,  to  claim  a
person  as  a  slave,  occurs  in  Livy  (iii.  44,  xxxiv.
18.)  [G.  L.]

ASSESSOR,  or  ADSESSOR,  literally,  one  who
sits  by  the  side  of  another.  The  duties  of  an
assessor,  as  described  by  Paulus  (Dig.  1.  tit,  21.
8.  1.)  related  to  "  cognitiones,  postulationes,  libelli,
edicta,  decreta,  epistolae;"  from  which  it  appears
that  they  were  employed  in  and  about  the  adminis-
tration of  law.  The  consuls,  praetors,  governors  of
provinces,  and  the  judices,  were  often  imperfectly
acquainted  with  the  law  and  the  forms  of  proce-
dure, and  it  was  necessary  that  they  should  have
the  aid  of  those  who  had  made  the  law  their  study,
(Cic.  de  Oratore,  i.  37,  In  Verrem,  ii.  29).  The
pracfectus  praetorio,  and  pracfectus  urbi,  and  other


ASTRAGALUS.  143

civil  and  military  functionaries,  had  their  assessors.
An  instance  is  mentioned  by  Tacitus  {Ann.  i.  75)
of  the  Emperor  Tiberius  assistmg  at  the  judicia
(judiciis  adsidebat),  and  taking  his  scat  at  the
comer  of  the  tribunal ;  but  this  passage  cannot
be  interpreted  to  mean,  as  some  persons  interpret
it,  that  the  emporor  sat  there  in  the  character
of  an  assessor  properly  so  called:  the  remark  of
Tacitus  shows  that,  though  the  emperor  might  have
taken  his  seat  under  the  name  of  assessor  and
affected  to  be  such,  he  could  be  considered  in  no
other  light  than  as  the  head  of  the  state.  (Compare
Sueton.  Tib.  Nero,  33,  Tib.  Claudius,  12).

Under  the  empire  the  practice  of  having  as-
sessors continued  (Plin.  Ep,  i.  20,  vi.  11,  x.  19;
Gellius,i.  22).  Suetonius  {Ckdba,  14)  mentions  the
case  of  an  assessor  being  named  to  the  office  of
praefectus  praetorio.  The  Emperor  Alexander
Severus  gave  the  assessores  a  regular  salarj^
(Lamprid.  Alex.  Sev.  46.)  Freedmen  might  be
assessores.  In  the  later  writers  the  assessores  axe
mentioned  under  the  various  names  of  consiliarii,
juris  studiosi,  comites,  &c.  The  juris  studiosi,  men-
tioned by  Gellius  (xii.  13),  as  assistant  to  the
judices  (quos  adhibere  in  consilium  jttdicaturi  so-
lent),  were  the  assessores.  Sabinus,  as  it  appears
from  Ulpian  (Dig.  47.  tit.  10.  s.  5),  wrote  a  book
on  the  duties  of  assessors.  The  assessors  sat  on  the
tribunal  with  the  magistrate.  Their  advice,  or  aid,
was  given  during  the  proceedings  as  well  as  at
other  times,  but  they  never  pronounced  a  judicial
sentence.  As  the  old  forms  of  procedure  gradually
declined,  the  assessores,  according  to  the  conjec-
ture of  Savigny  {Gesdiichte  des  Rom.  RecMs  im
Mittelalter,  vol,  i,  p.  79),  took  the  place  of  the  judices.
For  other  matters  relating  to  the  assessores,  see  Holl-
weg,  Handhucli  des  Civilprozesses,  p.  1 52.     [G.  L.]

ASSI'DUI.       [LOCUPLETES]

ASTRA'GALUS  (do-rpoyaAos),  literally  sig-
nifies that  particular  bone  in  the  ankles  of  certain
quadrupeds,  which  the  Greeks,  as  well  as  the  Ro-
mans, used  for  dice  and  other  purposes,  as  described
under  the  corresponding  Latin  word  Talus.

As  a  Latin  word,  astragalus  is  used  by  Vitruvius,
who  of  course  borrowed  it  from  the  Greek  writers
on  architecture,  for  a  certain  moulding  (the  astragal)
which  seems  to  have  derived  its  name  from  its  re-
semblance to  a  string  or  chain  of  tali;  and  it  is  in
fact  always  used  in  positions  where  it  seems  in-
tended to  bind  together  the  parts  to  which  it  is
applied.  It  belongs  properly  to  the  more  highly
decorated  forms  of  the  Ionic  order,  in  which  it
appears  as  a  lower  edging  to  the  larger  mouldings,
especially  the  echinus  (ovolo),  particularly  in  the
capital,  as  shown  in  the  following  woodcut,  which
represents  an  Ionic  capital  found  in  the  ruins  of  the
temple  of  Dionysus  at  Teos.  Still  finer  examples
occur  in  the  capitals  of  the  temples  of  Erechtheus
and  Athene  Polias,  at  Athens,  where  it  is  seen,  too,
on  the  sides  of  the  volutes.  It  is  also  often  used
in  the  entablature  as  an  edging  to  the  divisions  of
the  cornice,  frieze,  and  architrave.  The  lower
figure  in  the  woodcut  represents  a  portion  of  the
astragal  which  runs  beneath  the  crowning  moulding
of  the  architrave  of  the  temple  of  Erechtheus.  It
is  taken  from  a  fragment  in  the  British  Museum,
and  is  drawn  of  the  same  size  as  the  original.

The  term  is  also  applied  to  a  plain  convex
moulding  of  the  same  sectional  outline  as  the
former,  but  without  the  division  into  links,  just
like  a  torus  on  a  small  scale  :  in  this  form  it  is  used


144  ASTROLOGIA.

in  the  Ionic  base  [Spira].     In  the  orders  subse.
qxient   to    the    Ionic


Doric,  and   Composite,


the    Corinthian,    Roman
the   astragal    was  very


freely  used.  The  rules  for  the  use  of  the  moulding
are  given  by  Vitruvius  (iii.  5.  §  3,  iv.  6.  §§  2,  3.
Schn(?id.).  Niimcrous  fine  examples  of  it  will  be
found  in  the  plates  of  Mauch  {Die  Grlechischen  und
Romisdten  Dau-Ordnungm,  Potsdam,  1 845.)  [P.S.]

ASTRATEIAS  GRAPHE'  {aarpaT^ias
ypa<p7]\  was  the  accusation  instituted  against  per-
sons who  failed  to  appear  among  the  troops  after  thej'-
had  been  enrolled  for  the  campaign  by  the  generals.
(Lys.  171  Ale.  pp.  521,  571.)  We  may  presume  that
the  accuser  in  this,  as  in  the  similar  action  for  leaving
the  ranks  (A6£7roTa|iou),  was  any  citizen  that  chose
to  come  forward  {p  PovXSfieuos,  oTs  elecTi),  and  that
the  court  was  composed  of  soldiers  who  had  served
in  the  campaign.  The  presidency  of  the  court,  ac-
cording to  Meier,  belonged  to  the  generals.  The
defendant,  if  convicted,  incurred  disfranchisement
—  aTtjut'o,  both  in  his  own  person  and  that  of  his
descendants,  and  there  were  very  stringent  laws  to
punish  them  if  they  appeared  at  the  public  sacra,
to  which  even  women  and  slaves  were  admitted.
(Andoc.  de  Mi/st.  p.  35  ;  Aesch.  in  Ctes.  p.  59  ;
Dem.  in  Timocr.  p.  732  ;  Meier,  Att.  Process,
p.  363,  &c.)  [J.  S.  M.]

ASTROLO'GIA.  This  word  is  occasionallj--
employed  by  the  best  Latin  writers  (e.  g.  Cic.  de
Divin.  ii.  42.)  to  denote  astronomy  in  general,  and
indeed  is  found  in  that  sense  more  frequently  than
astronomia,  which  is  of  rare  occurrence.  In  the
present  article,  however,  we  confine  ourselves  to
what  is  strictly  termed  judicial  astrology,  and
treat  of  astronomy  under  Astronomia.

At  a  period  far  beyond  the  records  of  authentic
history  a  belief  arose,  which  still  prevails  un-
shaken in  the  East,  that  a  mysterious  but  close
connection  subsisted  between  the  relative  position
and  movements  of  the  heavenly  bodies  and  the
fate  of  man.  In  process  of  time  it  was  maintained
that  the  fortunes  of  each  individual  throughout
life  depended  upon  the  aspect  of  the  sky  at  the
moment  of  his  birth,  and  especially  upon  the  star
Avhich  was  rising  above  the  horizon  at  the  instant
when  he  saw  the  light,  and  upon  those  which
were  in  its  immediate  vicinity  (conjunctae),  or  re-
moved from  it  by  a  sixth,  a  fourth,  or  a  third  part
of  a  great  circle  of  the  sphere,  or,  finally,  upon
those  which  were  at  the  opposite  extremity  of  the
6i\me  diameter  (ojrpositae).  Few  doubted  that  by
observation  and  deep  study  persons  might  acquire
the  power  of  expounding  these  appearances,  that


ASTROLOGIA.

the  destiny  of  the  child  might  be  predicted  with"
certainty  by  those  who  were  skilled  to  interpret'
the  language  of  the  stars,  and  tluit  the  result  of
any  undertaking  might  be  foretold  from  the  aspect'
of  the  firmament  when  it  was  commenced.  Hence
a  numerous  and  powerful  class  of  men  arose  who
were  distinguished  by  various  designations.  From
the  country  where  astronomy  was  first  studied,  and
their  science  was  first  developed,  they  were  called
Chaldaei  or  Bdiyhmii ;  from  observing  the  stars,
astronomi,  astrologi,  plandarii ;  from  employing
diagrams  such  as  were  used  by  geometricians,  ma-
thematici ;  from  determining  the  lot  of  man  at  his
natal  hour,  geiiethliaci ;  from  prophesying  the  con-
summation of  his  struggles,  airoTiX^fffxariKoi ;
while  their  art  was  known  as  acrTpoXoyia,  fie-
r^wpoKoyia,  y€ved\iaXoyia,  dTroTeXeo-jiiaTifC'^,  Jrs
Chaldaeorum,  Mathesis,  or,  from  the  tables  they
consulted,  irivaKiic-t].  Their  calculations  were
termed  Bahylonii  numeri,  XaXdaiav  fieOodoi,  Xa\-
daiasy  ^r)<pidis,  Rationes  Chaldaicae ;  their  re-
sponses when  consulted  Clialdaeorum  monita,
Chaldaeonim  nutalicia  praedicta,  Astrologorum
praedicta.

The  stars  and  constellations  to  which  attention
was  chiefly  directed  were  the  planets  and  the
signs  of  the  zodiac,  some  of  which  were  supposed
to  exert  uniformly  a  benign  influence  {ayaQoiroioi
acnepes),  such  as  Venus,  Jupiter,  Luna,  Virgo,
Libra,  Taurus  ;  others  to  be  unifonnly  malign
(KaKoiroLol  acrrepes),  such  as  Saturnus,  Mars,
Scorpio,  Capricornus  ;  others  to  be  doubtful  (iiri-
Koivoi  atxr^p^s),  such  as  Mercurius.  By  the  com-
bination and  conjunction  ((rw5pofjt.-fi,  constellatio)
or  opposition,  however,  of  those  benign  with  those
malign,  the  power  of  the  latter  might  be  neu-
tralised or  even  reversed,  and  a  most  happy
horoscope  be  produced,  as  in  the  case  of  Augustus
who  was  born  under  Capricornus  (Suet.  Aiig.  94),
and  hence  that  figure  frequently  appears  on  his
medals.  For  the  sake  of  expediting  calculations,
the  risings,  settings,  movements,  and  relative  posi-
tions {ortus,  occasus,  motus,  viae,  discessiones,
coetus,  cojiventus,  concursiones,  circuitus,  transitus,
habitus,  forma,  positura,  positus  siderum  et  sjKitia)
were  carefully  registered  in  tables  (TriVo/ces,
((pTjixepiSis).  In  so  far  as  the  planets  were  con-
cerned, it  was  of  especial  importance  to  note
through  what  sign  of  the  zodiac  they  happened  to
be  passing,  since  each  planet  had  a  peculiar  sign,
called  the  domus  or  house  of  the  planet,  during
its  sojourn  in  which  it  possessed  superior  power.
Thus  Libra,  Capricornus,  and  Scorpio  were  re-
spectively the  houses  of  Venus,  Saturn,  and  Mars.

The  exact  period  of  birth  {hora  genitalis)  being""
the  critical  moment,  the  computations  founded,
upon  it  were  styled  yevecris  {genitura),  wpoa-KSiros  I
(horoscopus),  or  simply  ^ffxa,  and  the  star  orl
stars  in  the  ascendant  sidus  natalitium,  sidera  na-
talitia.

Astrologers  seem  to  have  found  their  way  to]
Italy  even  before  a  free  communication  was  opened]
up  with  the  East  by  the  Roman  conquests  in]
Greece  and  Asia,  since  they  are  mentioned  con-
temptuously by  Ennius.  (ap.  Cic.  De  Div.  i.  58.)
About  a  century  later  the  government  seem  to  have
become  sensible  of  the  inconvenience  and  danger
likely  to  arise  from  the  presence  of  such  impostors,
for  in  B.C.  139  an  edict  was  promulgated  by  C
Comelius  Ilispallus,  at  that  time  praetor,  l)y  which
the  Chaldaeans  were  banished  from  the  city,  and


ASTRONOMLA.

prdcred  to  quit  Italy  within  ten  days  (Val.  Max.  i.
'.\.  §  2),  and  they  were  again  banished  from  tke  city
in  B.C.  33,  by  M. Agrippa,  who  was  then  aedile.
(Dion  Cass.  xlix.  1.)  Another  severe  ordinance  was
levelled  by  Augustus  against  this  class  (Dion  Cass.
Ixv.  1,  txvi.  25),  but  the  frequent  occurrence  of
such  phrases  as  "  expulit  et  mathematicos  "  (Suet.
Tib.  36),  "pulsis  Italia  mathematicis  "  {Tac.  Hist.
ii,  62),  in  the  historians  of  the  empire  prove  how
firm  a  hold  these  pretenders  must  have  obtained
over  the  public  mind,  and  how  profitable  the  oc-
cupation must  have  been  which  could  induce  them
to  brave  disgrace,  and  sometimes  a  cruel  death
(Tac.  Ann.  ii.  32).  Notwithstanding  the  number
and  stringent  character  of  the  penal  enactments  by
which  they  were  denounced,  they  appear  to  have
kept  their  ground,  and  although  from  time  to
time  crushed,  or  terrified  into  silence,  to  have  re-
vived with  fresh  vigour  in  seasons  of  confusion
and  anarchy,  when  all  classes  of  the  community
hanging  in  suspense  between  hope  and  fear,  were
predisposed  to  j'ieM  to  every  swperstltious  im-
pulse. It  raHst  be  remembered  also,  that  the  most
austere  princes  did  not  disdain,  when  agit<ited  by
doubts  or  excited  by  ambitious  longings,  to  ac-
quire the  principles  of  the  art  and  to  consult  its
professors,  as  we  may  perceive,  not  to  multiply
examples,  from  the  well-known  story  of  Til>erius
and  Thrasyllus  (Tac.  Ann.  vi.  20,  21).  Hence
Tacitus,  after  recounting  the  high  promises  by
which  the  "  mathematici "  stimulated  Otho  to
assume  the  puijple,  adds  in  a  tone  of  sorrowful
resignation,  "  genus  hominitm  potentibus  infidum,
spcrantibus  fallax,  quod  in  civitate  nostra  et  veta-
bitur  seiivper  et  retinebitur."  (See  Cic.  Div.  ii.
42,  &c. ;  Gell.  xiv.  1  ;  Hor.  Carm.  ii.  17.  17  ;  Pers.
V.  46  ;  Juv.  iii.  43,  vii.  194,  xiv.  248,  vi.  553
—581  ;  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  27,  32,  iii.  22,  iv.  58,  vi.
20,  xiL22,  52,  68,  xvi.  14,  Hist.  i.  22,  ii.  62;
Suet.  Tib.  14,  36,  ViteU.  14,  Nero,  40  ;  Gcll  i.  9  ;
Dion  Cass.  xlix.  43,  Ivi.  25,  Ivii.  15,  Ixv.  1  ;
Zonar.  ii,  p.  142;  Lips.  Excurs.  vii.  ad  Tac.  Ann.
ii.  ;  Jani,  Excurs.  ad  Hor^  Cavm.  ii.  17.  17  ;  Ku-
perti.  Not.  ad  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  27.  For  the  penal
enactments,  see  Rein,  Das  Criminalrecht  der
Homer,  p.  901,  &c.  Leipzig,  1844.  Those  who
woidd  acquire  a  knowledge  of  the  technical  de-
tails of  astrology,  as  practised  by  the  ancients,
must  peruse  the  works  of  Manilius,  Julius  Fir-
micus,  and  Ptolemy.)  [W.  R.]

ASTRONO'MIA,  astronomy.  It  is  not  pro-
posed in  the  present  article  to  gi-ve  a  technical  his-
tory of  the  rise  and  progress  of  astronomy  among
the  ancients,  but  to  confine  ourselves  to  what  may
be  regarded  as  the  popular  portion  of  the  science,
the  observations,  naanely,  upon  the  relntive  position
and  apparent  movements  of  the  celestial  bodies,
especially  the  fixed  stars,  which  from  the  earliest
epoch  engaged  the  attention  of  those  classes  of  men
who  as  shepheifds  or  mariners  were  wont  to  pass
their  nights  in  the  open. air.    We  shall  consider :  —

1.  The  dififereat  names  by  which  the  constella-
tions were  distinguished  among  the  Greeks  and
Romans,  and  the  legends  attached  to  each  ;  but
we  shall  not  attempt  to  investigate  at  length  the
origin  of  these  names  nor  the  times  and  places
when  and  where  they  were  first  bestov.'cd.  The
materials  for  this  first  section  have  been  carefully
collected  by  Ideler  in  his  essay  entitled  Unter-
suchungen  uber  den  Ursprumj  und  die  Bedentu7ig  der
Stemamcn  (Berlin,  18()9),  a  work  which  Ave  now


ASTRONOMIA.


145


mention  specially  once  for  all  to  avoid  the  necessity
of  constant  references  ;  in  the  HistoHsche  Unter-
suvJmngen  uber  die  astronomischen  lieobachtungen  der
Alien,  by  the  same  author  (Berlin,  1806)  ;  in  a
paper  by  Buttmann  Uber  die  Entstehung  der  Stern-
hilder  aufder  griechischen  S/'dre,  contained  in  the
Transactions  of  the  Berlin  Academy  for  1826;  and
in  the  Gesehichte  der  Astronomie  of  Schaubach.

2.  The  risings  and  settings  of  the  fixed  stars
considered  with  reference  to  the  position  of  the  sun
in  the  ecliptic,  —  a  series  of  phenomena  which  re-
curring regalarfy  every  tropical  year,  served  in
the  most  remote  ages  as  the  sole  guides  for  the
operations  of  the  husbandman,  and  which,  being
in  later  times  frequently  appealed  to  by  the  poets,
are  sometimes  designated  the  "  Poetical  Risings
and  Settings  of  the  Stars."  Here  we  chiefly  de-
pend upon  the  compilations  and  dissertations,
ancient  and  modern,  brought  together  in  the
Uranohgion  of  Petavius  ;  upon  the  disquisition  by
J.  F.  Pfaft'  entitled  Commentatio  de  Ortibus  et  Oc-
easibiis  Siderum  apud  audores  classicos  commemora-
tos(Gotting.  1786)  ;  upon  a  paper  by  Ideler,  UeUr
den  astronomischen  Theil  der  Easti  des  Ovid,  in  the
Transactions  of  the  Berlin  Academy  for  1822 —
1 823,  and  on  the  Handbuch  der  Chronalogie  by  the
same  author.

3.  The  division  of  the  year  into  two,  three,  or
more  seasons,  according  to  the  risings  and  settings
of  particular  stars  or  clusters  of  stars.  The  Hand-
buck  der  Chrondogie  contains  a  full  examination  of
all  the  most  important  passages  from  the  Greek  and
Roman  author^  which  bear  upon  these  points.

The  determination  of  the  length  of  the  year  and
the  distribution  of  time  into  months,  days,  hours,
and  other  periods,  which  in  some  degree  belong  to
the  same  subject,  are  treated  of  separately  imdcr
tlie  heads  of  Ga£endarium  and  Dies,  and  con-
fining our  attention  for  the  present  to  the  fixed
stars  (erroTies,  stellae  erraticae,  see  Gell.  xiv.  1),
we  shall  make  a  few  remarks  on  the  bodies  of  the
solar  system  mider  Planetae.

I.  The    History  and  Names    of   the  Con-
stellations.

To  boiiin  with  the  two  earliest  among  profaiie
writers,  Homer  and  Hesiod,  the  former  notices  the
Bear  or  Waggon;  Bootes;  Orion;  the  Dog  of
Orion  ;  the  Pleiades,  and  the  Hyades :  the  latter,
Orion ;  Siri^is  ;  the  Pleiades  ;  the  Hyades  ;  and
Ardurus^  We  are  not  entitled  to  conclude  from
this  that  they  were  not  acquainted  with  the  names
or  fonns  of  any  qther.  constellations,  but  it  seems
certain  that  neither  i\\Q.Li0e  Bear  nor  the  Dragon
were  known  to  Homer,  for  although  these  remain
always  above  the  horisi^oni  ip  the  latitude  of  Greece
and  Asia  Minor,  he  speaks  of  the  (Great)  Bear  as
the  only  constellation  which  never  plunges  into
Ocean's  baths  ;  and  we  are  elsewhere,  as  will  be
seen  below,  distinctly  told  tliat  the  Little  Bear  was
introduced  into  Greece  from  the  East  by  Thales.

Pliny  {H.N.  ii.  6)  attributes  the  invention  of  the
signs  of  the  zodiac  to  Cleostratus  of  Tenedos  (fl.  B.  c.
500),  and  asserts  that  Aries  and  Sagittarius  were
marked  out  before  the  rest.  The  first  distinct  in-
foniiation,  however,  with  regard  to  the  Grecian
heavens  was  contained  in  the^EvoTTTpoi/ and  the
Oaiv^juevoofEudoxusof  Cnidus, who  died  B.C.  352.
Both  of  these  works  are,  it  is  true,  lost  with  the  ex-
ception of  a  few  fragments,  but  their  contents  are
known  to  us  from  the  poem  of  Aratus  (fl.  B.  c.  260),


146  ASTRONOMIA.

which,  as  wc  are  assured  in  the  comnientan'^  which
bears  the  name  of  Hipparchus,  does  little  more  than
represent  in  verse,  with  verj-  few  variations,  the
matter  contained  in  the  two  treatises  named  above,
especially  in  the  latter.  The  great  popularity  en-
joyed by  the  production  of  Aratus  {Cum  sole  et
luna  semper  A  ruUis  erit)  must  have  depended  upon
the  attractions  presented  by  his  theme,  and  cer-
tainly not  upon  the  spirit  or  grace  with  which  that
theme  was  handled.  Wc  know  the  names  of
thirty-five  Greeks  who  composed  commentaries
upon  it,  and  we  are  acquainted  with  no  less  than
three  translations  into  Latin  verse — o?ie  by  Cicero,
of  which  fragments  only  remain  ;  another  by  Caesar
Germanicus,  of  which  a  considerable  portion  has
been  preserved  ;  and  a  third  by  Rufus  Festus
Avienus,  which  is  entire.  Virgil  borrowed  largely
from  this  source  in  those  portions  of  his  Georgics
which  contain  references  to  the  heavenly  bodies,
and  particularly  in  that  section  which  is  devoted
to  prognostics  of  the  weather.  There  are  also
valuable  Greek  scholia  ascribed  to  the  younger
Theon,  but  manifestly  compounded  of  materials
derived  from  manj'^  different  quarters.  The  v;ork
itself  is  divided  into  three  parts  :

1 .  A  description  of  the  constellations,  extending
to  line  454.

2.  A  short  account  of  the  Planets,  of  the  Milky
Way,  of  the  Tropical  Circles,  and  of  the  Equator,
followed  from  v.  bod  by  a  full  detail  of  the  stars
which  rise  and  set  as  each  sign  of  the  zodiac  ap-
pears in  succession  {(TwavaroXai).

3.  At  line  733  commences  what  is  frequently
regarded  as  a  separate  poem,  and  placed  apart
under  the  title  AjocTj^eia,  consisting  of  a  collection
of  the  various  appearances  which  enable  an  ob-
server of  nature  to  predict  the  weather.  It  will
be  seen  below  that  the  constellations  described  by
Aratus  still  retain,  with  a  few  variations,  the  names
by  which  he  distinguishes  them.

In  a  little  tract  ascribed  to  Eratosthenes  (fl.  B.  c.
230},  entitled  KaTaa-TepKTfioL,  probably  an  abridg-
ment of  a  more  complete  treatise,  in  which  he
details  the  mythological  origin  of  the  constellations,
together  with  the  number  and  place  of  the  stars  in
each,  we  find  the  same  forms  arranged  in  the  same
order  as  in  Aratus,  who  is  followed  step  b}'^  step.
The  Bird,  however,  is  here  tenned  the  Srcan  ;  the
Centaur  is  individualised  into  CJiiron  ;  and  the
Hair  of  Berenice  appears  for  the  first  time,  having
been  introduced  by  Conon  in  honour  of  the  sister-
wife  of  Ptolemy  Euergetes.

Scientific  astronomy  commenced  at  Alexandria
in  the  early  part  of  the  third  century  before  our
era  ;  and  the  first  steps  were  made  by  Timocharis
and  Aristyllus,  who  llourished  about  b.  c.  290.
They  invented  the  method  of  determining  the
places  of  the  fixed  stars,  by  referring  them  to  one
of  the  great  circles  of  the  heavens,  and  for  this
purpose  selected  the  equator.  By  them,  as  we
learn  fi:om  Ptolemj',  the  right  ascension  and  de-
clination of  many  stars  were  observed,  among
others  of  Spica  in  the  Virgin,  which  ihcy  found
to  be  8°  from  the  equinox  of  autumn.

Hipparchus,  about  150  years  later,  followed  up
the  track  which  they  had  indicated  :  his  observ-
ations extended  from  b.  (•.  162  to  b.  c.  127  ;  and,
Avhether  we  regard  the  originality,  the  magnitude,
or  the  importance  of  his  labours,  he  is  well  entitled
to  be  regarded  as  the  father  of  the  science.  (See
Plin.  //.  N.  ii.  26.)     In  addition  to  many  other


ASTRONOMIA.

services,  he  first  drew  up  a  regular  catalogue  of
the  fixed  stars,  pointing  out  their  position  and
magnitude,  he  first  delineated  accurately  the  shape
of  the  constellations,  and  he  first  discovered  the
precession  of  the  equinoxes  by  comparing  his  own
observations  with  those  of  Timochaiis  and  Aris-
tyllus. It  is  much  to  be  lamented  that  all  the
works  of  so  great  a  man  should  have  perished,
with  the  exception  of  a  commentary  in  three  books
upon  the  description  of  the  fixed  stars  by  Jludoxus
and  Aratus  ('E|i97770'is  twv  'Apdrou  koX  EuSd|ou
(paiyofidvav),  the  least  valuable  perhaps  of  all  his
productions.  We  have,  however,  every  reason  to
believe  that  the  substance  of  his  most  valuable  ob-
servations has  been  preserved  in  the  Almagest  of
Ptolemy,  which  long  enjoyed  such  high  fame  that  all
fonner  authors  were  allowed  to  sink  into  oblivion.

The  catalogue  of  the  fixed  stars  b}"-  Ptolemy
(fl.  A.  D.  100),  contained  in  the  seventh  and  eighth
books  of  the  Almagest  and  derived  in  all  pro-
bability in  a  groat  measure  from  that  compiled  by
Hipparchus,  long  served  as  the  model  for  all  sub-
sequent labours  in  the  same  field,  and  little  more
than  two  centuries  have  elapsed  since  any  attempt
was  made  to  supersede  it  by  something  more  per-
fect. It  embraces  48  constellations  (21  northern,
15  southern,  and  the  12  signs  of  the  zodiac),  com-
prising 15  stars  of  the  first  magnitude,  45  of  the
second,  208  of  the  third,  474  of  the  fourth,  217
of  the  fifth,  49  of  the  sixth,  9  obscure,  and  5
nebulous,  in  all  1022.  These  are  the  constella-
tions, usually  denominated  the  Old  Constellaiio7is^
to  distinguish  them  from  the  additions  made  in
modern  times,  and  these  we  shall  consider  in  re-
gular order.  The  stars  are  enumerated  according
to  the  place  which  they  occupy  in  the  figures,  the
latitude,  longitude,  and  magnitude  of  each  being
specified.  In  connection  with  many  constellations,
sevei-al  stars  are  mentioned  as  afxopcpuTol,  that  is,
not  included  within  the  limits  of  any  one  of  the
figures  ;  among  those  near  the  Lion  he  notices  the
Ilair  of  Berenice,  among  those  near  the  Eagle  the
Antinotis.  The  single  stars  and  small  groups  to
which  particular  names  are  assigned,  are,  A  rclurus,
the  Lt/re,  Capella,  the  Kids,  the  Eagle,  the  Il?/ades,
the  Pleiades,  the  Manger,  the  Asses,  Be.gvlm
ifia.(nK[(XKQs),  Vindemiatrix,  Spica,  Aniarcs,  the  h
Hound  (he  does  not  give  the  \mmQ  Sir ius'),Canopus^  S
and  Procyon.  W

Among  our  Greek  authorities  wc  must  not  p.iss
over  Geminus,  whose  work  Et(ra7a>7^  €is  ra
'taivofj.iva  contains  in  sixteen  chapters  an  exposi-
tion of  the  most  striking  facts  in  Astronomy  and
Mathematical  Geography.  We  know  nothing  of
him  personally ;  but  it  has  been  inferred  from  his
book  that  he  was  a  native  of  Rhodes,  and  that  be
flourished  about  B.  c.  70,  at  Rome,  or  at  some
place  under  the  same  parallel.  The  second  chapter
treats  of  the  constellations  and  of  those  stars  and
small  clusters  distinguished  by  particular  nameg.
The  Coma  Berenices,  which  is  not  included  in  the
21  northern  constellations  of  Ptolemy,  has  here
an  independent  place  assigned  to  it  ;  the  Foal,  or
Little  Horse,  is  tenned  vpoTOfi.T)  'iwirov  KaB'  "lir-
irapxov,  which  seems  to  indicate  that  it  was  in-
troduced by  Hipparchus  ;  in  addition  to  the  15
Southern  Constellations  of  Ptolemy,  we  find  the
Stream  (x'^<'''s  CSoTos)  issuing  from  tiie  urn  of
Aquarius,  and  the  Thyrsus  of  the  Centaur.  The
sixteenth  chapter  is  particularly  interesting  and
valuable,  since  it  contains  a  parapegraa  or  calendar


I


ASTRONOMIA

of  the  risings  and  settings  of  the  fixed  stars,  with
prognostics  of  the  weather,  according  to  Meton,
Euctemon,  Eudoxus,  Calippus,  and  others,  the  ob-
servations of  each  being  quoted  separately.

The  Romans  adopted  the  knowledge  of  the  stars
communicated  by  the  Greeks  without  in  the
slightest  degree  extending  it.  Only  two  Latin
writers  discourse  specially  on  the  subject,  Manilius
and  Julius  Fimiicus,  and  their  treatises  belong
rather  to  Judicial  Astrology.  The  poets,  however,
especially  Ovid  and  Virgil,  make  frequent  allu-
sions to  the  risings  and  settings  of  the  fixed  stars,
to  the  most  remarkable  constellations  and  to  the
legends  attached  to  them.  Cicero,  Germanicus,
and  Avienus,  as  we  have  stated  above,  executed
translations  of  Aratus,  while  in  Vitruvius,  Pliny,
Columella,  Martianus  Capella,  the  Scholiast  on
Germanicus,  and  Ilyginus,  we  find  a  multitude  of
details.  Manilius,  it  is  clear,  took  Aratus  for  his
guide  in  so  far  as  the  constellations  were  con-
cerned ;  for  he  does  not  notice  the  Hair  of  Berenice,
the  Foal,  nor  the  Southern  Crotcn.

Pliny  speaks  of  the  constellations  as  seventy-two
in  number  ;  but  he  seems  to  have  eked  out  the  sum
by  counting  separately  portions  of  figures,  such
as  the  Pleiades,  the  Hyades,  the  Urn  and  the
Stream  of  Aquarius,  the  Tliyrsus  of  the  Centaur,
the  Head  of  Medusa,  the  Scymeiar  of  Perseus,
the  Manger,  the  Two  Asses,  Capella,  the  Kids,
the  Hair  of  Berenice,  the  Throne  of  Caesar,  and
probably  the  more  conspicuous  among  the  indivi-
dual stars,  such  as  Arctunis  and  Sirius.  He  sets
down  the  number  of  observed  stars  at  1600,  which
far  exceeds  the  catalogue  of  Ptolemy.

The  Scholia  on  Germanicus  do  not  constitute  a
regular  commentary  like  the  Scholia  on  Aratus,
but  are  translations  from  Eratosthenes,  with  some
excerpts,  added  subsequently  perhaps,  from  the
Sphaera  Graeca  et  Barbara  of  Nigidius  Figulus  and
other  works  on  astronomical  myths.

The  Poeticon  Astronomicon,  which  bears  the
name  of  Hyginus,  is  written  in  the  style  of  Era-
tosthenes, and  is  in  a  great  measure  borrowed  from
him.  No  notice  is  here  taken  of  the  Focd  nor  of
the  Southern  Crown,  which  proves  that  at  the
time  when  it  was  composed,  whenever  that  may
have  been,  more  attention  was  paid  to  Aratus  than
to  Hipparchus  and  Ptolem}'.

Names  of  the  Constellations.

In  what  follows  we  arrange  the  constellations,
with  one  or  two  trifling  exceptions,  in  the  order
adopted  by  Ptolemy,  enumerating  first  the  twenty-
one  northern  signs ;  secondly,  the  twelve  zodiacal
eigns ;  .tnd  lastly,  the  fifteen  southern  signs.  In
each  case  we  give,  first,  the  name  by  which  the
constellation  is  known  among  ourselves;  secondly,
the  name  ascribed  to  it  by  Aratus ;  and  lastly,  the
other  Greek  and  Latin  names  which  most  fre-
quently occur  or  which  deserve  particular  notice.

Northern  Signs.

1.  Thk  GreatBear,  The  Plough,  Charles'
Wain,  "ApKTos  (/xeyaKri),  'EXIkt)  (Arat.  27,
&c.),  Major  Arctus,  Major  Ursa  (German.),  He-
lice  (Cic,  Manil.  i.  303).  The  most  remarkable
cluster  in  the  northern  hemisphere  both  on  account
of  its  brilliancy  and  from  the  circumstance  that  it
never  sinks  below  the  horizon  in  Europe  and  those
pjirts  of  Asia  known  to  the  ancients,  is  that  which
as  early  as  the  time  of  Homer  was  known  by  the


ASTRONOMIA.  147

names  of  "ApKTos,  The  She  Bear,  or  "Afia^a,  The
Waggon  (11.  xviii.  487,  Od.  v.  275),  which  the
Romans  translated  by  the  equivalent  terms  Ursa
and  Plaustrum  or  Currus.  At  a  later  period  when
the  Lesser  Bear  had  been  added  to  the  number  of
the  celestial  signs,  the  epithets  iJ.eyd\ri  and  fxiKpci
\yere  applied  to  them  respectively  by  way  of  dis-
tinction, and  in  like  manner  Ovid  \Tnst.  iv.  3)
speaks  of  them  as  magna  minorque  ferae.  The
ancient  Italian  name  for  the  seven  bright  stars
which  form  the  most  conspicuous  portion  of  the
group  was  Septem  Triones  (Cic),  that  is,  according
to  the  interpretation  of  Varro  {L.  L.  vi.  4  ;  Gell.
ii.  21  ;  Fcstus,  s.  v.  Triones),  The  Seven  Ploughing
Oxen,  an  appellation  which  as  well  as  that  of  ajtia^a
was  extended  to  the  Lesser  Bear.  Thus  Aratus
commences  his  description

"ApKToi  a/xa  rpox^cacri,  rh  St?  KaXeovrai  a/xa^ai,

deriving  a/xa^ai,  absurdly  enough,  from  o/xa;  Virgil
celebrates

Arcturum,  pluviasque  Hyadas,  geminosque  Triones,

and  Vitruvius  (ix.  3)  not  only  employs  Septem-
trio  simply  for  the  Greater  Bear,  but  distinguishes
between  Septemtrio  major  and  Septemtrio  minor,
and  again  speaks  of  the  Arctos,  qui  Septemtriones
dicuntur.

In  addition  to  the  above  designations  we  find
'EAiKT},  applied  to  the  Greater  Bear  alone,  derived
from  its  sweeping  round  in  a  curve  {airh  rov  eAtcr-
(Tea-Oai,  Schol.  ad  Arat.  37),  while  from  the  mythi-
cal connection  established  between  this  constella-
tion and  Callisto,  daughter  of  the  Arcadian  monarch
Lycaon,  the  Latin  poets  constantly  refer  to  it  as
Lycaonis  Arctos ;  Parrhasis  Arctos  ;  Parrhasides
stellae  ;  Maenalis  Ursa,  &c.  The  term  Boves  Icarii
employed  by  Propertius  (ii.  24.  24),  is  explained
below  (No.  5)  under  Arctophylax.  For  the  story  of
Callisto  and  her  transformation  see  Ovid.  Met.  ii.
409,  Fast.  ii.  155;  Serv.  ad  Virg.  Gcorg.  i.  24G ;
Hygin.  Poet.  Astron.  ii.  1.  2.

2.  The  Lesser  or  Little  Bear,  "Ap/tros
{fiiKpi),  Kvv6(Tovpa,  Kvv6(rovpis  (Arat.  27 — 308),
Arctus  nmior  (Cic),  Cynosura  (Cic  Manil. i.  306).
This  constellation,  we  are  assured  by  many  au-
thorities (Schol.  ad  Horn.  11.  xviii,  187  ;  Achill.
Tat,  Isagog.  in  Arat.  Phaen.  c  1  ;  Diog.  Lacrt.  i.
23;  Hygin.  Poct.  Astron.  ii.  2),  was  first  added  to
the  Grecian  catalogues  by  Thales  by  whom  it  may
possibly  have  been  imported  from  the  East ;  and
while  from  its  close  resemblance  in  form,  it  shared
tlie  names  of  "Ap/cros  and  a^a^a  with  its  more  an-
cient and  majestic  companion,  it  enjoj^ed  exclu-
sively the  appellations  of  ^oivikt]  and  Kvv6aovpa.
The  former  was  derived  from  the  circumstance
that  it  was  selected  by  the  Phoenicians  as  the
guide  by  which  they  shaped  their  course  at  sea,
the  Grecian  mariners  with  less  judgment  employ-
ing Helice  for  the  same  purpose  (Arat.  37  ;  Erat.
Cat.  2 ;  Schol.  ad  German,  p.  89 ;  Hygin.  P.  A.
ii.  2).  The  latter,  signifying  canis  cauda,  applied
by  the  ancients  to  the  whole  figure,  and  not  as  in
modem  times  merely  to  the  pole  star,  seems  to
have  been  suggested  by  the  appearance  presented
by  three  of  the  stars  which  form  a  circular  sweep,
bearing  some  resemblance  to  the  upturned  curl  of
a  dog's  tail,  and  will  thus  be  an  expression  analo-
gous to  that  of  Helice.  The  early  astronomers
seem  to  have  generally  considered  that  one  of  the
L  2


146  ASTRONOMIA.

Ftiirs  in  tV.f  Little  Bear  marked  the  position  of  the
pole,  hut  it  is  difficult  to  determine  from  their
words  to  which  they  severally  refer.  Accord-
ing to  Hyginus  who,  however,  seems  not  to
have  clearly  understood  Eratosthenes  whom  he
quotes,  one  of  the  three  stars  forming  the  tail  was
called  l^oLus  and  the  two  others,  from  circling
round  it,  Xo/)euTai,  The  Dancers^  the  same  appa-
roitly  with  the  Ludentes  of  the  Scholiast  on  Ger-
manicus.

Those  poets  who  regarded  the  Great  Bear  as
Callisto  represented  the  Little  Bear  as  her  dog;  but
according  to  another  legend  commonly  received,
the  two  bears  were  the  two  njTnphs  who  acted  as
nurses  in  Crete  to  infant  Jove  (Arat,  31),  and
hence  the  phrase  CretaPMe  Arcti  (German.).

3.  The  Dragon,  ApdKwy  (Arat.  45),  trans-
lated by  the  Latins  Dmco  (Cic.  German.  Vitruv.),
Serf^ens  (German.  Vitruv.  Manil.  Ovid),  and  Jnguis
(Virgil.  Ovid.  Manil.).  Servius  {ad  Virg.  Georg.
i.  205)  remarks  that  there  are  three  Angues  in  the
sky,  one  lying  between  the  Bears :

Maximus  hie  fl^u  sinuoso  elabitur  Anguis
Circum  perque  duas  in  morem  flumii^s  Arctos  :

(comp.  Vitruv.  ix.  3) :  the  second  grasped  by
Ophiiicus:  the  third,  to  the  south,  around  the  Crater
and  Corvus.  The  superior  richness  of  the  Greek
language  distinguished  these  as  ApaKwr,  "O^is,  and
"TSpj].  The  description  of  Aratus  has  been  ren-
dered almost  verbatim  and  with  great  spirit  by
Virgil  in  the  lines  quoted  above.  Mythological ly,
the  dragon  was  regarded  as  the  snake  which  once
guarded  the  apples  of  the  Hesperides,  pr  as  a  snake
snatched  by  Minerva  from  the  giants  aiid  whirled
by  her  aloft  to  the  pole.  (Hygin.  P.  A.  ji.  3,  iii.
2  ;  Serv.  ad  Virg.  Georg.  i.  244t  )

4.  Cepheus,  Krj^suy  (Aiat.  183),  Ceplieus
(Cic.  Vitruv.  Manil.),  lasides  Ccpheu.s  (German.).
The  legends  respecting  this  ill-fated  iponarch  and
the  other  members  of  his  family  who  beamed  in
the  heavens,  Cassiopeia^  Perseus^  and  Andromeda,
ai"e  detailed  at  lejigtii  in  the  Catast^risms  of  Era-
tosthenes and  in  Hyginus.

5.  The  Bear-Warden,  Bootes,  The  V^''ag-
GONER,  'ApKTocpvXa^  (Arat.  91),  Arctophyhix
(Cic.  German.  Manil.  i.  323),  translated  by  Ovid
{Trist.  i.  10.  15)  Custos  Ursae,  and  by  Vitruvius
(ix.  3.)  Custos  Arcti,  or  sirapi}'  Custos  (l.  c),  was
denominated  also  Boccttjs  (Ai-at.  I.  c),  Bootes  (Cic.
German.  Manil.),  i.  e,  Bubidcus,  the  ox-driver,  and
according  to  the  Scholiast  on  Aratus  (I.  c.)Tpvy7]T'f]s,
the  vintager.  The  first  name  which  supposes  the
constellations  to  represent  a  man  upon  the  watch
denotes  simply  the  position  of  the  figure  with  re-
gard to  the  Great  Bear,  or  when  the  latter  was
regarded  as  Callisto,  then  Arctophylax  became
her  son  Areas,  by  whom  she  was  hunted  and
slain  ;  the  second  name,  which  is  found  in  Homer
(Od.  V.  272)  refers  to  the  ajLta|a,  the  imaginary
form  of  BocoTTjs  being  fancied  to  occupy  the  place
of  the  driver  of  the  team  ;  the  third  name  is  con-
nected with  the  period  of  the  heliacal  rising  of  the
group  which  indicated  the  season  of  the  vintage.

The  chief  star  in  the  constellation  is  Arcturus,
*ApKTovpos  (Arat.  95),  Arcturus  (Cic.  German.
Vitruv,  Manil.),  a  word  of  similar  import  with
Arctophylax.  It  is  twice  mentioned  by  Hesiod
(Erg.  566,  610),  and,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter,
occupied  a  prominent  place  in  the  calendars  of
Greece  and  Rome.     Some  late  writers,  such  as  the


ASTRONOMIA.

Scholiast  on  Germanicus,  Hyginus  and  MartLaun*
Capella,  use  the  name  Arcturus  for  the  whole  con-
stellation, but  Aratus,  Gcminus,  and  Ptolemy  con-
sider it  as  a  single  star.

The  legends  with  regard  to  Bootes  present  many
different  aspects  ;  by  the  Greeks  he  was  usually
represented,  as  Areas,  the  son  of  Callisto  ;  Ovid  in
one  passage  {Fast.  vi.  235)  calls  him  Lycion,  the
father  of  the  hapless  damsel  ;  by  others  he  was
pronounced  to  be  Icarius  (or  Icarus)  to  whom
Bacchus  taught  the  use  of  the  vine,  and  then  the
constellation  Virgo  was  his  daughter ;  Erigone,
and  either  the  greater  or  the  lesser  hound,  was  her
dog  Maera  {Canis  Icarius,  Ov.  Fast.  iv.  939).
Hence,  too,  the  Septemtriones  are  styled  Doves
Icarii  by  Properties  (ii.  24.  24).

Homer  {Od.  v.  272)  calls  Bootes  t>i|/e  hvoov,  from
his  descending  below  the  horizon  in  an  upright
position,  and  therefore  very  gradually.  Compare
Ov.  Fast.  iii.  405  ;  Claud.  Rapt.  Proserp.  ii.  190,
and  the  "  pigi'i  san-aca  Bootae  "  of  Juvenal,  v.  23.

6.  The  Northern  Crown,  Sre^aj/os  (Arat.
71),  Coro7ia  (Cic.  Vitruv.  Manil.),  Ariadnes  corona,
Minoa  corona,  German.).  Ptolemy  distinguishes  be-
tween the  Northern  and  the  Southern  Crown  (Stp.
</>a^'oy  fiopnos,  vStios),  and  hence  the  modern  name.
According  to  the  legend  commonly  adopted  this  was
the  chaplet  of  Ariadne  placed  by  Biicchus  in  the
firmament  to  do  honour  to  h^s  mistress,  and  hence
the  epithets  applied  by  Germanicus  as  quoted
above.  (Comp.  Virg.  Georg.  i.  222 ;  Ov.  Fast.  iii.
460  ;  Manil.  i.  330.)

The  name  ■Gemma,  now  given  to  the  most  re-
splendent star  in  the  circle,  was  not  known  to  the
Romans.

7.  Hercules.  The^onstelljttion  now  known  by
this  name  is  described  by  Aratus  (v.  63)  as  an  un-
known or  nameless  form  (eiSwAoi/  iCicTTOV ;  airevdeos
€tSwAo<o),  which  from  its  resemblance  to  a  man
toiling  {fxoyeovTi  avSpl  ioiKhs  etScoAoi')  on  his
knees,  was  usually  called  'EvySvuaiv,  which  the
Romans  either  exi)re6sed  in  the  same  letters,  Eu'
gonasi  (Manil.  v.  645),  Engonasin  (Cic),  or  by  the
translations  Geniculatus,  Ingeniadaius  (Vitruv.  ix.
3),  Ingeniculus  (Jul.  Firm.  viii.  17),  Nicms  in
genihus  (Vitruv.  ibid.),  Nixa  genu  species  (Gennan.
Manil.  i.  322,  v.  645),  Deatro  genu  niaus  (Ger-
man.), or  simply  Nisus  s.  Nionis  (Cic.  German.),
Innixus  (Ayien.  205),  or  with  reference  to  the
labouring  attitude  Defectum  sidus.  Effigies  de/ecta
labore  (German.).

According  to  Avienus  (v.  175),  the  appellation
of  Hercules  was  bestowed  by  Panj'asis,  by  others
it  was  regarded  as  Theseus,  by  others  as  Ceteus,
son  of  Lycaon,  bj^  others  as  Prometheus  chained  to
Caucasus.     (Hygin.  J^.A.  ii.  6,  iii.  5.)

8.  The  Lyre,  Xe'Aus,  Avpa  (Arat.  268),  Lyra
(German.  Vitruv.  Manil.  i.  331),  Fides  (Cic),
Fidis  (Col.  xi.  2.  §  43,  &c),  FMicida  (Plin.  //.  N.
xviii.  64,  &c.).  Ptolemy  (*.  A.)  designates  as
6  Aa/xTrphs  ttjs  Xvpas,  the  peculiarly  bright  star
(a  Lyrae),  which  renders  this  constellation  so  con-
spicuous ;  but  it  appears  probable  that  the  simple
Avpa  among  the  Greek  astronomers,  as  well  as
Fidis  and  Fidicula  among  the  Latins,  was  fre-
quently employed  to  denote  this  single  star,  as
well  as  the  whole  sign.  Manilius  seems  to  speak
of  Fides  as  a  constellation  distinct  ?rom  Lyra,  but
the  passages  are  very  confused  (i.  409  ;  comp.  324,
337).  The  invention  of  the  Lyre  being  ascribed
to  Mercury,  we  naturally  find  the  epithets  'Ep/xahj


J


ASTRONOMIA.

'Arrvt.  674),  KuXK-nvai-n  (597),  Mercunalis  (Ger-
.),  Cyllenia  (Cic.)  attached  to  it.

9.  The  Swan,  "Opj/is,  atoKos  Upvis  (Arat.
273,  275),  Ales  (Cic),  Volucris,  Avis  (Vitruv.
ix.  4).     The  Bird  is  the  name  given  by  Aratus

d  Geminus  to  the  constellation  termed  by  Era-
tosthenes (c.  25)  KvKvos^  rendered  Cycnus  by
Germanicus  and  Manilius,  for  which  the  synonym
Olor  is  frequently  substituted.  By  niythologists  it
was  regarded  as  the  swan  of  Leda.

10.  Cassiopeia,  l^aaaikima.  (Arat.  189),  Cas-
siepeia  (Cic.  Gennan.  Manil.  i.  361),  Casslopea
(Vitruv,).  For  the  myth  regarding  her,  see  Hygin.
P.  A.  ii.  10  ;  comp.  Arat.  654  ;  Manil.  v.  504;
Propert.  i.  1 7.  3 ;  Columell.  xi.  2.  §  78.

11.  Perseus,  Ilepo-eus  (Arat.  248),  Perseus
(Cic.  Gennan.  Vitruv.  Manil.  i.  357,  365),  was
pictured  as  bearing  in  one  hand  a  crooked  sword
(fipTTT/,  falx),  and  in  the  other  the  head  of  the
Gorgon  Medusa,  ropySviov  (G€min.  Ptolem.),  Go7--

eum  caput  (Vitruv.  ix.  3),  Gorgonis  ora  (Manil,
i.  366),  Caput  Gorgonis.     (Hygin.  P.  A.  iii.  1 1 ).

12.  The  Charioteer,  "kvioxos  (Arat.  156),
Heniochus  (Manil.  i.  369),  Auriga  (Cic.  German.
Vitruv.),  Aurigator  (Avien,),  was,  according  to
one  legend  (German,),  Eridhonius^

Quem  primura  cursu  volitantem  Jupiter  alto
Quadrijugis  conspexit  equis.         Manil.  i.  370.

According  to  another  (German,  ibid.)  Myrtilus  the
charioteer  of  Oenomaus,  who  betrayed  his  master
to  Pelops.  (Hygin.  Fab.  84.)

The  brightest  star  in  this  constellation  (a')  was
termed  h1^  (Arat.  157)  by  the  Greeks,  who
pictured  a  goat  supported  upon  the  upper  part  of  the
left  arm  of  the  figure,  and  by  the  Romans  Capella
(Ovid,  Manil.  Plin.)  or  Capra  (Cic.  Vitruv,  Hor,
German,  Columel.).    The  epithet  'nxevi-q  in  Aratus

1(164),  according  to  the  explanation  of  his  Scholiast,
was  applied  because  the  at^  rested  eVI  ttjs  wXevris
rov  'Hj/k^Xou,   and  hence  Olenie,   Oleniitm  pecus^
I   Ole7iium  astrum.     Its  heliacal   rising   took    place
soon  before  the   winter  solstice,  and  thus  it  was
termed    signum  piuviaLe,   while    the   legends   de-
clared that  this  was  the  very  goat  Amaltheia  who
nursed  Jupiter  upon   Mount  Ida.     Both   of  these
points  are  touched  upon  in  the  couplet  of  Ovid :
Nascitur  Oleniae  signum  pluviale  Capcllae,
Ilia  dati  coelum  pi-aemia  lactis  habet.

The  two  stars  (C,  v')  placed  by  Aratus  (166)
and  Ptolemy  on  the  wrist  of  Auriga  were

The  Kids,  "Epicpoi  (Arat.  158),  Iloedi  (Cic.
Vitruv.  Manil.  i.  372),  and  are  said  to  have  been
first  named  by  Cleostratus  of  Tcnedos  about  B,  c.
500  (Hygin.  P.  A.  ii.  13).  They,  as  well  as
Capella,  are  spoken  of  as  heralds  of  the  storm.
(Manil.  i.  372 ;  Virg.  Geoy.  i.  205,  Aen.  ix.  663  ;
Hor.  Carm.  iii,  1.  28.)  The  star  which  marks  the
northern  horn-tip  of  the  Bull  was,  according  to
Vitruvius  (ix.  3),  called  Aurigue  Ma?ius,  since  he
was  supposed  to  hold  it  in  his  hand.

13.  The  Serpent  Holder,  'Ocpiovxos  (Arat.
75),  Ophiucus  (German.  Vitruv.),  Anguitenens
(Cic.  Manil.  v.  384),  Anguifer  (Colinnel.  xi.  2.
§  49),  So-pentarius  (Schol.  German.),  was  com-
monly regarded  by  mythical  writers  and  poets  as
Aesculapius  (Erat^sth.  c,  6  ;  Ov.  Fast.  vi.  735),  and
by  some  as  Hercules,  not  to  mention  other  more
obscure  legends.    (Hygin.  P.  A.  ii.  14,  iii.  13.)

14.  The  Snake,  grasped  by  and  surrounding


ASTRONOMIA.  149

the  figure,   w\as  tenned  v(pis  (Arat.  86),  Avgtm
(Cic.  German.),  or  Sei-pens  (Cic.  Vitruv.),

Serpentem  Graiis  Ophiv^hus  nomine  dictus
Dividit,  «Scc.  Manil.  i.  338.

and  is  reckoned  as  a  separate  constellation.

15.  The  Arrow,  'Oio-Tds  (Arat.  311),  T<J|ov
(Eratosth.),  Sagitta  (German.  Vitruv.),  Clara
sa^^itta,  Fulgens  sagitta  (Cic),  is  distinct  from  the
arrow  fitted  to  the  bow  of  Sagittarius,  the  archer,
in  the  zodiac  Hence  Aratus,  after  describing  the
latter,  adds

*'Eo-Tt  Se  Tis  TrpoT€pa}  fieShrifxevos  &\\os  oiarSs
Avrhs  &T€p  t6^ov.

(Comp.  Cic  325  ;  German.  683 ;  Manil.  i.  349.)

16.  The  Eagle,  'A^tSs  (otjWs,  Arat,  315),
Aqnila  (Cic.  Vitruv.),  or,  in  poetical  circumlocu-
tion, Jovis  ar'migcr  (German.  Avien  ),  Jovis  ales
(German.  Manil.  i.  350),  Armiger  unois  unguilms
ales  (German,),  Praepes  adunca  Jovis  (Ov.  Fast.
vi.  196),  The  principal  star  is  named  specially
a.€T6s  by  Ptolemy ;  but  from  the  circumstance  of
his  placing  it  among  those  of  the  second  magnitude,
it  has  been  conjectured  that  it  was  less  bright  in
his  day  than  at  present.

Antjinous.  Ptolemy,,  when  noticing  the  stars
around  the  Eagle  not  properly  included  within  the
limits  of  the  constellation,  remarks,  i<f>'  wu  6
'AvTiuoos,  which  corroborates  the  statement  of
Dion  Cassius,  that  Hadrian  assigned  a  star  to  his
favourite.  Antinous,  as  a  separate  constellation,
was  first  introduced  by  Tycho  Brahe.

17.  The  Dolphin,  AeXcpis  (Arat.  313),  s.
AeA^iV,  Delphi7ius  (Cic  German.  Vitruv.  Manil.
i.  353),  Delphin  (Germaru)  was  regarded  by
mythologists  as  the  dolphin  which  bore  Arion,

18.  The  Little  Horse, "Ittttou  irporofjL'f]^  lite-
rally, the /ore  qztariers  of  a  horse,  was  unknown  to
Aratus  and  Eratosthenes  ;  but  appears  from  the
words  of  Geminus  to  have  been  introduced  by
Hipparchus.  It  is  not  Hoticed  by  Vitruvius  nor
by  Manilius.

19.  Pegasus,  "Ittttos  (Arat.  205),  Equus  (Cic.
Vitruv.  Manil.  i.  355),  Sonipes,  Sonipes  ales
(German.).  The  legends  having  declared  that  this
was  the  steed  of  Bellerophon,  the  name  Pegasus
(German.  505)  was  employed  as  early  as  Eratos-
thenes to  distinguish  the  constellations,  but  Aratus
speaks  of  it  simply  as  the  horse.  (Ov,  Fast.  iii.
450.)  The  figure  was  supposed  to  represent  the
fore  quarters  only.

20.  Andromeda,  'AvSpofieSr]  (Arat.  197),
Andromeda  a.  Andromede  (Cic.  German.  Vitruv.
Manil.  i.  357,  363).  Andromeda  was  the  daugh-
ter of  Cepheus  and  Cassiopeia,  and  hence  the  con-
stellation is  termed  Cepheis  by  Manilius  and
Germanicus  (i.  443),  while  in  consequence  of  her
deliverance  from  the  sea  monster  by  Perseus  we
find  Persea  in  the  scholiast  on  Germanicus.

21.  The  Triangle,  A^\Ta>r6v  (Arat.  235  ;
Cic),  Ddtotum  (Gennan,  Manil.  i,  360),  the  rpi-
'ycavov  of  Ptolemy,  and  hence  Vitruv.  ix.  3,  "  In-
super  Arietis  signum  facientes  stellae  sunt  triyonum
paribus  lateribus."

Signs  of  the  Zodiac.
1.  The   Ram,  Kpi6s    (Arat.  225),  Aries  (Cic
German.    Vitruv.    Manil.    i.  263),   Laniger  (Ger-
man, 699  ;  Manil.  ii.  546).     This  was  the  very
golden-fleeced  ram  which  bore  away  Phrvxus  aiid
I,  3


150  ASTRONOMIC

Helle  fiom  tne  v/rath  of  Ino,  and  lionce  the  de-
signations in  Ovid  of  Phryocea  Oris,  Pecus  Atha-
mantidos  Helles.

2.  'i'liE  Bull,  Tavpos  (Arat.  1G7),  Taurus
(Cic.  German.  Vitruv,  Manil.  i.  264),  Bos  (Ger-
man. IHl),  was  by  some  mythologers  regarded  as
the  bull  into  which  Jupiter  transformed  himself  to
gain  Europa ;  according  to  others  as  the  cow  into
which  lo  was  metamorphosed  ;  in  either  case  an
object  of  jealousy  to  Juno,  as  indicated  by  Ovid
(Fast.  iv.  7.  7).  In  another  passage  (vi.  712),  in
reference  to  the  fomier  idea,  he  speaks  of  him  as
Affenoreus,  v/hile  Martial  (x.  51)  applies  the  epi-
thet Tyrius.

This  constellation  is  chiefly  remarkable  from
including  within  its  limits  two  small  but  closely
packed  clusters  of  stars,  which  attracted  attention
at  a  very  early  period,  and  are  distinguished  by
Homer  (//.  xviii.  486)  and  Hesiod  {Erg.  615)  as
the  Hyades  and  Pleiades,  names  which  they
still  retain  unchanged.

The  Hyades,  'TaSes  (Arat.  173),  Hyades
(German.  &c.),  situated  in  the  forehoiid  of  the
figure  {itrl  vavrX  ^erwTrw,  Arat.  ;  eirX  rov  fiov-
Kpdvov,  Gemin.),  derived  their  name  cnrh  rod  veiv,
because  the  period  of  their  setting  in  the  morning
twilight  (the  end  of  November)  marked  the  most
wet  and  stormy  period  of  the  year.  By  the  Ita-
lian peasants  they  were  denominated  the  suculae,
i.  e.  the  little  swine,  and  hence  it  has  been  ima-
gined, but  probably  erroneously,  that  'TaSes  is  ety-
mologioally  connected  with  "Ts  (Plin.  //.  A^.  xviii.
26  ;  Gcll.  xiii.  9).  They  set  in  the  evening
twilight  at  Rome,  towards  the  close  of  the  re-
public, about  the  20th  of  April,  and  hence  were
known  as  the  sidus  PaHlicmm  (or  Falilicium),  the
Parilia  (or  Palilia\  the  festival  which  marked  the
birth-day  of  the  city,  being  kept  upon  the  21st-
Ancient  astronomers  were  not  agreed  as  to  the
number  of  stars  included  in  the  Hyades  (see
Schol.  ad  Arat).  Thales  reckoned  two  only  (viz.
a  and  €),  the  two  eyes  of  the  bull  ;  Euripides
three  ;  Achaeus  four  ;  Hesiod  five  ;  Pherecydes
seven.  The  latter  made  nymphs  of  them,  and  the
names  have  been  preserved  by  Hyginus.  One  of
these,  Thyene,  is  put  by  Ovid  {Fast.  vi.  711)  for
the  whole  group,  which  elsewhere  (v.  734)  he
terms  the  Sidus  Hyaniis^  in  allusion  to  a  legend
which  he  had  previously  (v.  169)  recounted.

Still  more  important  were  the  Pleiades,
IlAetaScs,  n\7jia5es  (Ploni.  I.  e.  Arat.  255  regards
them  as  a  distinct  constellation),  Pleiades  (Ger-
man. &c.  &c.),  a  word  for  which  various  etymo-
logies have  been  proposed,  the  most  reasonable
being  the  verb  -KKeiv^  their  heliacal  rising  and.
setting  in  the  first  half  of  May  and  the  beginning
of  November  having  been  the  signal  in  the  early
ages  of  Greece  for  the  mariner  to  commence  and  to
discontinue  his  voyages.  The  fonn  TreA.€taSes,  i.  e.
the  flock  of  pigeons^  probably  originated  in  a  cor-
ruption. The  Italian  name  was  Vergiliae  (Cic),
Sidus  Vergiliarum  (Vitruv.  ix.  2),  derived  mani-
festly from  their  heliacal  rising  in  spring.  Aratus
notices  the  circumstance  that  they  are  commonly
spoken  of  as  the  seven  stars,  although  six  only  are
visible,  and  thus  Ovid  also

"  Quae  septem  dici  sex  tamen  esse  solent."

The  fact  is  that  the  duster  consists  of  six  stars,
which  can  be  distinctly  seen  by  the  naked  eye,
ftiid  of  several  very  small  ones,  which  are  tele-


ASTRONOMIA.

scopic.  Under  very  fiivourable  circumstances,  how-
ever, one  of  these  may  liave  occasionally  been
discerned,  as  Ilipparchus  states,  or,  possiblj^  as
we  know  to  have  been  the  case  with  other  fixed
stars,  one  of  them  may  have  lost  a  portion  of  the
lustre  which  it  at  one  period  possessed,  and  have
become  nearly  or  totally  invisible.  Be  this  as  it
may,  the  disappearance  of  the  seventh  Pleiad  gave
rise  to  a  multitude  of  legends.  By  Hesiod  they
are  styled  ^ArXay^veis^  Children  of  Atlas,  from
whom  the  Roman  poets  adopted  the  expression
Atlantides,  the  name  of  the  damsels  (Arat.  262)
being  Alcyone,  Merope,  Celaeno,  Electra,  Sterope
(or  Asterope,  German.),  Taygete  and  Maia.  Of
these  six  wedded  divinities,  the  seventh  a  mortal
man,  and  thus  her  brilliancy  became  dimmed  by
the  nifluence  of  the  debasing  alliance.  One  or
other  of  the  above  names  is  frequently  employed
to  denote  the  whole,  as  Taygete  (Virg.  Georg.  iv.
232  ;  Ov.  Met.  iii.  594),  Maia  (Virg.  Georg.  i.
225),  Sterope  (Ov.  Trist.  x.  14),  and  in  like
manner  HAetCis  or  Pleias  is  often  used  in  the
singular.

3.  The  Twins,  Al^vp.ui  (Arat.  147),  Gemini
(Cic.  German.  Vitruv.  Manil.  i.  265),  The  two
brightest  stars,  being  supposed  to  represent  Castor
and  Pollux.

4.  The  Crab,  KapKivos  (Arat.  147),  Cancer
(Cic.  Vitruv.  German.  Manil.  i.  265),  called
Lertioeus  hy  Columella  (x.  313),  because,  according
to  the  legend,  it  crawled  out  of  the  Lemaean
swamp  to  attack  Herciiles  while  he  was  doing
battle  with  the  Hydra.  The  epithet  Littoreus  in
Ovid  {Met.  x.  127)  and  Manilius  (iii.  316)  pro-
bably refers  merely  to  the  ordinary  habits  of  the
animal,  and  not,  as  Ideler  supposes,  to  the  same
contest.

Two  small  stars  in  this  constellation  (7,  S)  were
called  "Ovoi,  Asini  s.  Aselli,  the  Donkeys,  one  being
distinguished  as  the  northern  (fidpeios),  the  other
as  the  southern  {v6tios),  and  a  nebular  bright-
ness between  them,  ^arvt),  Praesepe,  the  Stall  or
Manger,  (Arat.  894,  &c. ;  Plin.  //.  A^.  xviii.  35  ;
Ptolem.)  These  seem  to  form  what  Manilius  calls
Jngidae^  (v,  174,  and  note  of  Scalig.),  although
Jugula  is  a  name  sometimes  applied  to  Orion.

5.  The  Lion,  Actav  (Arat.  149),  Leo  (Cic.
German.  Vitruv.  Manil.  i.  266),  regarded  as  the
Nemean  lion  slain  by  Hercules,  and  hence  con-
stantly termed  simply  Nemaeus  (e.  g.  Manil.  iiL
409).  The  bright  star  now  known  as  Regidus,  a
name  introduced  by  Copernicus,  was  anciently,  as  we
learn  from  the  scholiast  on  Aratus,  called  fiatriXia-
Kos,  and  marked  the  heart  of  the  animal  (eVi  tTjs
Kapdias).  In  Pliny  it  is  Regia  {H.  N.  xviii.  26,  28),
in  the  scholiast  on  Germanicus,  Tyberone,  which  is
either  a  corruption,  or  arose  from  his  mistaking  the
meaning  of  the  word  in  Pliny,  who  saj's,  "  Stella
Regia  appeilata  Tuberoni  in  pectore  Leonis,"  i.  e.
The  star  on  the  Lion's  heart  called  Regia  by
Tubero.

6.  The  Virgin,  Tlape4vos  (Arat  dG,  &c.),
Virgo  (Cic.  German.  Vitniv.  Manil.  i.  266),  Eri-\

go)ie  (Manil.  ii.  552,  et  pass.),  was  mythically  re-
garded as  AtK77,  Justitia,  or  Astraea,  or  as  Erigone^
or  as  Ceres,  or  as  Isis,  or  as  Fortuna,  the'  last
name  being  given  to  her,  according  to  the  scholiast
on  Germanicus,  "  because  she  is  a  headless  constel-
lation."

The  brightest  star  in  the  constellation  is  called
by    Aratus   2t<£xvs,    Spica    (German.    Vitruv.),


ASTRONOMIA.

Spicum    (Cic),    TiiK  Corn  Ear,   and    this    the
figure  is  supposed  to  grasp  in  her  left  hand.

The  star  which  marks  the  right  wing  (e)  was
vpoTpvyriTrjp  (Arat.  138)  s.  TrpoTpuyijrrjs  s.  rpv-
yvTTip,  translated  Provindemiator,  Vindeniiator  s.
Vindemitor,  and  is  now  known  as  Vindemiatfix^
names  which  it  received  in  consequence  of  rising
shortly  before  the  period  of  the  vintage.  (Arat.  138
and  schol.  ;  Columell.  xi.  2.  §  24  ;  Ov.  Fast,  iii,
407;  Plin.  IL'N.  xviii.  26,  31  ;  Vitruv.  ix.  3,
says  that  the  Greek  name  was  irporpvyeros,  and
the  Roman,  Provindemia  Major.)

7.  The  Balance  wjis  by  the  earlier  Greek  as-
tronomers invariably  denominated  XrjXai  (Anit.
89),  Chelae  (Cic.  German.  Manil.  ii.  544,  et  pass.),
The  Claws,  i.e.  of  the  Scorpion,  which  stands
next  in  the  Zodiac.  Geminus,  who  flourished,  it  is
believed,  about  B.  c.  80,  is,  as  far  as  we  know,  the
first  Greek  writer  who  distinguishes  the  seventh
sign  as  Zvy6s,  which  is  used  by  Ptolemy  indif-
ferently with  XrjXai.  The  term  Libra^  for  which
Cicero  in  one  passage  employs  Jugum,  was  first
formally  adopted  by  the  Romans  in  the  Calendar
of  Julius  Caesar,  to  whom  it  was  very  probably
suggested  by  Sosigenes.  The  figure,  it  would  seem,
was  derived  from  the  East,  and  mxist  be  regarded
aa  a  symbol  of  equality  introduced  into  the  heavens
at  the  period  when  the  entrance  of  the  sun  into
that  constellation  marked  the  Autumnal  Equinox.
The  scientific  Latin  writers,  such  as  Vitruvius,
Columella,  and  Pliny,  unifonnly  distinguish  this
sign  by  the  name  Libra  alone  ;  the  poets  use
either  Libra  or  Chelae^  as  may  suit  their  purpose.
Manilius  combines  both  into  one  phrase  {Jtiga
C%elarum,  i.  609),  while  the  ingenious  conceit  by
which  Virgil  represents  the  Scorpion  as  drawing
in  his  claws  in  order  to  make  room  for  Augustus,
is  known  to  every  reader  of  the  first  Georgic.
(Comp.  Ov.  Met.  ii.  195.)

In  the  commentary  of  Theon  on  the  Almagest,
Libra  is  frequently  represented  by  Airpa  or  Airpai,
a  word  originally  borrowed  by  the  Romans  from
the  Sicilians,  transformed  into  Libra,  and  then
restored  to  the  later  Greeks  in  the  now  sense  of  a
Balance.

8.  The  Scorpion,  SwopTn'oy  (Arat.  85.  304),
Scorpius  (Cic.  German.),  Scorpios  (Manil.  i.  268,
et  pass.),  Scorpio  (Vitruv.).  Cicero,  in  his  trans-
lation of  Aratug,  and  Manilius,  both  make  use  also
of  the  term  N'epa,  a  word,  according  to  Festus,  of
African  origin,  sometimes  employed  to  denote  a
Scorpio7i  and  sometimes  a  Crab  (Plant.  Cas.  ii.  8.  7 ;
Cic.  de  Fin.  v.  15)  ;  and  thus  Cicero,  in  line  460
of  his  Aratus,  distinctly  indicates  the  fourth  sign  by
the  word  Nepa,  which  elsewhere  is  put  for  the
Scorpion.  Aratus  names  this  constellation  fiiya
Sf<i)piov  and  T^pas  p.eya  (84,402),  because,  according
to  the  Grecian  arrangement,  as  explained  in  the  last
paragraph,  it  occupied,  together  with  its  claws,  the
ppace  of  two  signs.     (Ov.  AJet.  ii.  195.)

'AvTopTjs,  now  Antares,  the  name  given  to  the
brightest  star,  is  first  found  in  the  works  of  Ptolem}^,
and  probably  refers  to  its  colour  and  brilliancy,  ri-
valling that  o/'(the  planet)  Mars.

9.  The  Archer,  ro^euri^s,  ro^fVT-fip,  and
simply  Td|oj/(Arat.  306,  400,  664,  665),  Sagittarius
(Vitruv.),  Sagittipotens  (Cic),  Sagitti/er  (German.),
A rciienens (Cic),  and  simply  Arczis  (Cic.  Genuan.).
This  bowman  was  supposed  to  be  in  the  shape  of
a  centaur  {Mixtus  e(j/!o,  Manil.  i.  270),  hence  is
frequently  tenned  Centaurus^  and  sometimes  indi-


ASTRONOMIA.  151

vidualised  into  Chiron  {Flaemonii  arcus,  Ov.  Mei.
ii.  81),  thus  giving  rise  to  a  confusion  between  this
sign  and  the  Centaur  among  the  southern  constel-
lations. (Comp.  Columell.  x.  56;  Uygm.  P.  A.
ii.  27.)

10.  The  Goat  (i.e.  the  Chamois),  Aly6K€pui
(Arat.  284),  Aegoceros  (Gennan.)^  Capricomus
(Cic.  German.  Vitruv.  Manil.  i.  271),  Caper
(Manil.  ii.  Q6d),  called  also  Udv  by  Ei-atosthenes.
Hyginus,the  scholiast  on  Germanicus,  and  Isidorus,
inform  us  that  some  of  the  ancients  represented
this  creature  with  the  tail  of  a  fish,  and  in  this
form  it  is  actually  figured  on  several  coins  of  Au-
gustus, who  was  born  imder  the  sign.  No  notice
of  such  a  peculiarity  in  shape  is  taken  by  Aratus,
Eratosthenes,  or  Ptolemy.

11.  The  Waterman,  "TZpox^os  (Arat.  283),
Hydrochoos  (German.),  Aquarius  (Cic.  Vitruv.
German.  Manil.  i.  472),  Aquitenens  (German.  560),
Fundens  latices  (German.  388),  Aequoreus  juvenis
(Manil.  ii.  558),  Juvenis  gere7is  aquam  (Ov.  Fast.
i.  652),  and  simply  Juveyiis  (Manil.  iv.  709),  was
regarded  by  those  who  connected  the  figure  with
mythical  legends  sometimes  as  Deucalion  (German.
568),  sometimes  as  Ganymedes.  (Manil.  v.  487  ;
comp.  Schol.  ad  Arat.  283.)

The  four  stars  (7,  C>  '?>  "■)  on  the  right  hand
were,  according  to  Geminus,  named  koXitis,  which
is  equivalent  to  the  Latin  Situla,  an  Urn.

The  Water  Stream,  "Towp  (Arat.),  X'^'^'^
vSaros,  Aqua  (Cic),  Ejf'usio  Acjtiae  (Schol.  Germ.
119),  which  ends  v/ith  the  bright  star,  now  known
by  the  Arabic  name  Fomahajid  or  Fomalhant,  in
the  mouth  of  the  Piscis  Australis  (see  Manil.  i.
446,  and  comp.  Vitruv.  ix.  4,  qitae  vero  ab  Aquario
fundi  memoratur  Aqua  prcfluit  inter  Piscis  Austrini
caput  et  caudam  Ceti),  is  regarded  as  a  separate
constellation  under  the  name  of  "TSwp  by  Aratua
(389 — 399),  anft  also  by  Geminus,  who  distin-
guishes it  as  the  "TScup  rh  airh  tov  'Tdpox^ov,  "  the
Water  flowing  from  the  Waterman,"  in  order  that
it  may  not  be  confounded  with  the  constellation
Eridanus,  the  Uorafihs  &  aTrh  tov  ^Cipiavos,  "  the
River  flowing  from  Orion."

12.  The  Wishes,  'Ix^ues  (Arat.  240)  or  in
the  dual  'Ix^'^e,  Pisces  (Cic.  Vitruv.),  Gemini
Pisces,  Imbriferi  duo  Pisces  (Gennan.).  One  of
these  was  entitled  the  Northern  (Aquilonaris Piscis,
Vitruv.  ix.  3),  the  other  the  Southern  Fish  (Schol.
ad  Arat.  240  ;  Ov.  Fast.  iii.  401  ;  Schol.  German.
Hygin.  P.  A.  iii.  29)  ;  but  in  order  to  prevent  the
embarrassment  which  might  arise  from  identifying
the  latter  with  the  "ix^vs  yorios,  or  Piscis  Aus-
tralis, a  constellation  of  the  southern  hemisphere,
Ptolemy  names  the  northern  of  the  two  inS/xevos,
and  the  other  7)yovp.evos,  a  precaution  by  no  means
unnecessary  since  Manilius  actually  confounds  (i.
272)  the  fishes  of  the  Zodiac  with  the  Piscis
Australis.  The  Scholiast  on  Aratus  remarks  that
the  Northern  Fish  was  represented  with  a  swal-
low's head,  and  on  that  account  styled  x^^'Soy/oy
(i.  e.  hirundininus)  by  the  Chaldacans,  a  circum-
stance for  which  Scaliger  accounts  by  supposing
that  the  name  was  given  in  consequtnce  of  the
entrance  of  the  sun  into  this  constellation,  when
the  swallow  appeared  in  Greece  as  the  herald  of
Spring.

The  legends  connected  with  this  constellatiou
(Eratosth.  58  ;  Hygin.  P.  A.  ii.  30.  41)  bear  re-
ference to  a  Syrian  divinity,  termed  by  the  Greeks
sometimes  Atargatis)  a  Semitic  word  signifying  The
L  4


152


ASTRONOMIA.


Great  Fish),  sometimes  Derceto,  sometimes  Derce.
This  power  the}--  confounded  with  another  Syrian
goddess  Astarte,  wliom  again  they  identified  with
their  own  Aphrodite.  The  story  ran  that  when
fleeing  in  terror  from  the  violence  of  Typhon,  she
plunged  into  the  Euphrates,  and  was  transformed
into  a  fish.  (Manil,  ii.  33,  iv.  580.)  Avienus
terms  these  fishes  Bomhycii,  for  which  Grotius  has
rightly  proposed  to  substitute  Bambyeii,  for  Atar-
gatis  was  specially  worshipped  at  Bamhyce  or
Hierapolis  in  Cyrrhesti^a.  (Strab.  xvi.  p.  517;
Plin.  //.  A^.  V.  23  ;  Selden,  de  Diis  Syrik,  ii.  3.)

The  bright  star  (a)  which  is  supposed  to  form
the  knot  of  the  two  bands  which  connects  the
fishes  by  their  tails,  is  by  Aratus  (245)  named
'SiVvSeoTfXos  vTTOvpouos,  by  his  scholiast  Secr/xhs  ov-
paios^  by  Geminus  and  Germanicus  simply  Suj/Sec-
ixos,  terms  variously  translated  Nodus  (Cic),
Nodus  Piscium  (Vitruv.),  Nodus  coelestis  (Avien.),
C-ommissura  piscium  (Plin.  xviii.  31).  The  bands
themselves  are  called  in  one  passage  of  Aratus
(362)  A^fffxol  ovpaloi,  more  commonly  Aiuoi  or
AiVo,  the  Vincla  of  Cicero  and  Germanicus,  the
Alligamentum  linteum  of  the  scholiast  on  the  latter.

From  Vitruvius  (ix.  4)  it  appears  that  the
sprinkling  of  indistinct  stars  between  the  Fishes
and  the  Whale,  was  called  by  the  Greeks  'Epfir}-
d6uri,  a  word  explained  Vjy  Hesychius  to  mean  Tcar
afivSpuv  aCTepwv  X"^<^'^'

Southern  &f/ft$.

1.  Thk  Whale,  Ktjtos  , (Arat.  353),  'Op^i^s
(Jul.  Firm.  Astron.  viii.  1 7),  Cetus  (Vitruv.  ix.  4  ;
Manil.  i.  440),  Pristis  (German.  644  ;  Manil.  L
363),  Nereid  Pistris  (Gernmn.  714  >,  Neptunia
Pistrix  (Cic,  comp.  German.  709).  The  last  three
designations  are  different  forms  of  the  Greek
llprjo-Tis,  which  Suidas  interprets  to  signify  dSos
Ki]Tovs  ^aXaaalov.  This  was  the  sea-monster,  ac-
cording to  Aratus,  sent  to  devour  Andromeda.

2.  Orion,  'npiwy  (Arat.  322),  'Clapiwv  (Find.
Callim.),  Orion  (Cic.  German.  Vitruv.  Manil.  i.
399),  Oario7i  (Catull.  Ixv.  sub  fin.),  Proles  Hyriea
(Ov.  Fast.  vi.  719,  comp.  v.  495).  Argion  in  Julius
Firmicus  (viiL  9),  is  probal)ly  a  corrupt  form  of
Oarion.

This  is  one  of  the  oldest  constellations,  being
noticed  in  Homer  (xviii.  .406)  and  Hesiod  (JErg.
598,  615,  619),  both -of  whom  employ  the  expres-
sion (r64vos  ^npiavos.  The  figure  was  supposed  to
represent  an  armed  w^arrior  {^i<peos  l<pii  vieiroidcos,
Arat.),  grasping  a  shield  in  his  left  hand  and  a
club  in  his  right  {manu  laeva  tenens  elipetuM^  cla-
rum  altera,  Vitruv.  ix.  4),  with  a  glittering  belt,
from  which  a  sword  depended  {Balteiis  Oriotiis^
Vagina,  German,  ;  Ensis,  Cic).  The  origin  of  the
name  is  quite  unknown,  the  ordinary  derivation
from  olpov,  to  which  a  mythical  legend  was
adapted,  bcuig  altogether  unworthy  of  attention.
The  morning  setting  of  this  remarkable  cluster,
about  the  beginning  of  November,  pointed  out  in
ancient  times  to  the  husbandman  and  the  mariner
the  approach  of  the  most  stormy  period  of  the  year.
(Hor.  Carm.  i.  28.  21,  Epod.  xv.  7,  Carm.  iii.
27.  18,  Epod.  X.  9  ;  Virg.  Aen.  i.  535,  iv.  52.)

An  anonymous  Greek  writer  quoted  by  Scaliger
declares  that  the  popular  name  for  Orion  was
'AA€Tpo7r({5ioj/,  which  seems  a  corruption  of  'AAe/c-
rpoirdSioy,  i.  e.  Cocks-foot,  and  Ideler  thinks  that
we  can,  without  any  great  stretch  of  fancy,  trace  a
resemblance  to  a  fowl  strutting  along.


AfeTRONOMIA,

Amoog  the  Romans  Jugula  or  Jugulae  seems  to
have  been  the  indigenous  appellation  ;  the  former
is  noticed  by  Varro  and  Festus,  the  latter  occur*
in  Plautus  {Amph.  i.  1.  119)  —

"  Nee  Jugulae,  ^eque  Vespcrugo,  neque  Vergiliae
occidunt:"

but  no  satisfactory  explanation  has  been  proposed.
The  iwo  bright  stars  (a,  7)  under  the  bead  were
called  Humeri.     (Var.  L.  L.  vi.  3.y

3.  The  Eridanus,  Uorands  (Arat.  358),  Am-
nis  (Cic.  German.).  Aratus  remarks  that  it  was
considered  as  a  jemnant  of  the  Eridanus,

Aei^avov  ^HpiZavolo  TroKvKKavffrov  iroTafn&io,
that  mythical  non-existent  (rbv  firiSa/xou  y^s  uvtoi^
Strab.)  stream  which  proved  a  fruitful  source  of
speculation  in  ancient  as  it  has  done  in  modem
times.  The  Romans  identified  the  Eridanus  with
the  Po  ;  and  hence  while  Cicero  employs  the  former,
Germanicus  uses  Eridanus  and  Padus  indifferently.
(Comp.  Vitruv.  ix.  4.)  From  Eratosthenes,  the
Scholiast  on  Germanicus  and  .Hyginus  {P.  A.  ii,
32),  we  leaiTi  that  this  constellation  was  by  others
called  the  Nile,  that  beiqg  the  only  earthly  river
which  flowed  from  the  south  towards  the  north,  as
this  stream  of  stars  appciirs.to  do  when  rising  above
the  horizon.

4.  The  Hare,  \ay(i>6'i  (Arat.  338),  Aoywy,
Lepus  (Vitruv.  ix.  4),  Levij>es  Lepus  (Cic.),  Auritm
Lepus  (German.),  Velox  Lepus  (Manil.).

5.  The  Great  Dog,  Kvau,  2etpios  (Arat.  326),
Canis  (Cic),  Canis  Sirius  (German.).  Aratus  (342)
employs  the  phrase  fji.eyd\oio  Kvuo^  but  the  epithet
must  be  here  understood  to  refer  to  the  magnitude
of  the  principal  star  and  not  to  the  constellation
Procyon,  which  the  Greeks  nevex  call  the  Little  or
I^esser  Dog.

The  most  important  star  in  the  Gjeat  D-og,  per-
haps the  brightest  in  the  heavens,  was  frequently
specially  named  Kxxav,  sometimes  emphatically
TO  &(rrpov,  and  by  the  Romans  Ca7iis  or  Canicula,
but  is  more  frequently  designated  by  the  appellation
'S.eipios,  Sirius,  which  occurs  four  times  in  Hesiod
(Erg.  417,  587,  619,  Sciit.  397),  although,  in  the
first  of  these  passages,  the  suii,  and  not  a  fixed
star,  is  probably  indicated.  Indeed  the  word  seems
to  be  properly  an  adjective,  signifying  (/littering  or
bright;  and  Eratosthenes  remarks  (c  33),  that
astronomers  were  in  the  habit  of  denominating  other
stars  Seipt'oys  Sta  ttju  rrjs  ^\oyhs  Kivtiaiv.  Homer
twice  {11.  v.  5,  xxii.  25)  alludes  to  this  star  with-
out naming  it,  in  one  passage  with  the  epithet
birapivSs,  which  will  be  discussed  hereafter.

About  four  hundred  years  before  our  era,  the
heliacal  rising  of  Sirius  at  Athens,  corresponding
with  the  entrance  of  the  sun  into  the  sign  Leo,
marked  the  hottest  season  of  the  year,  and  this  j
observation  being  taken  on  trust  by  the  Romans  I
of  a  later  epoch  without  considering  whether  it
suited  their  age  and  country,  the  Dies  Caniculares
became  proverbial  among  them,  as  the  Dog  Days
are  among  ourselves,  and  the  poets  constantly  refer
to  the  Lion  and  the  Dog  in  connection  with  the
heats  of  midsummer.

6.  The  Little  Dog,  UpoKvau/  (Arat  450),
Procyon  (German.),  or,  literally  translated,  Ante-
canem  (Cic.),  Antecanis  (schol.  German.),  so  called
because  in  Greece  the  constellation  in  question
rises  heliacally  before  the  (Great)  Dog.  The  names
Antecanis  and  Antecanem^  however,  do  not  appear


ASTRONOMIA.

to  have  been  gcneraHy  adopted,  for  Pliny  {H.  N.
rviiL  2^),   when   speaking   of  Procyon,  remarks,
"quod   sidus  apud   Romanos   non    habet  nomen,
nisi  Caniculam  hanc  velimus  inteliigi,  hoc  est,  mino-
rera  caneni  ut  in  astris  pingitur,'"  Avords  which  do
not  necessarily  imply  that  Procyon  ever  was  ac-
tually  termed  Canicuia  by   the    Korman  writers,
although  this  was  «ertain(ly  semetimes  the  case  if
we  can  trust  the   express  assertion  of  Hyginus,
"  Canem  (sc.  Icarii)    autem   sua   adpellatione    et
specie  Caniculam  dixerunt,  quae  a  Graccis,  quod
ante  majorem  canem  exoritur,  irpoKvwv  adpellatur  "
|(P.  A.ii.  4).     A  passage  in  Pliny  {IT.  N.  xviii.
J  (i.9.  §  3),  would  at  first  sight  appear  to  be  decisive :
1  "  IV.  Kalendas   Mail,  Canis  occidit,  sidus  et  per
!  se  vehemens,  et  cut  prcceoccidere  Ca?ucula?7i  necesse
'  «iV."     But  since  we  know  that  in  Northern  lati-
I  tildes  the  Great  Dog  not  only  rises  after,  but  also
bets  before  the  Little  Dog,  it  is  evident  that,  unless
Ave  suppose  Pliny  to  be  involved  in  inextricable
( ontusion,   Canicula  cannot  here  signify  the  sign
Trocyon.     The  explanation  generally  adopted,  al-
!  though  somewhat  forced,   is   that   a   reference  is
i  made  to  the  practice  of  offering  a  dog  in  sacri-
lice   on  the  Robigalia.      (See  Ov,  Fast.  iv.  936,
iScc.  ;  Columell.  x.  342,  and  the  commentators  on
Piiny.)

While,  as  on  the  whole  seems  probable,  Procyon
\v;is  sometimes  termed  Canicula  by  the  Romans,  so
o;i  the  other  hand,  the  star  Sirius  seems  to  have
been  occasionally  called  IIpoKvwv  by  the  Greeks
because  he  rose  before  the  rest  of  the  constellation
to  which  he  belonged.  (See  Galen.  Comment,  in
Ifippocrat.  Epidem.  I)  We  cannot,  however,
attach  this  meaning  to  the  words  of  Horace  (Carm.
iii.29.  18)  —

jam  Procyon  furit
Et  Stella  vesani  Leonis  —

for  the  appearance  of  Procyon  would  to  his  country-
men be  in  reality  a  more  sure  indication  of  the
hottest  season  than  the  rising  of  the  Greater  Dog.

We  have  alread}"-  intimated  that  the  Greeks
designate  the  two  constellations  simply  as  Kvcav
and  MpoKvav,  not  as  the  Greater  and  Lesser  Dog,
a  distinction  which  prevailed  among  the  Romans,
as  we  perceive  clearly  from  Vitruvius  (ix.  4) :
"  Geminos  autem  minusculus  Canis  sequitur  contra
Anguis  caput:  Major  item  sequitur  Minorem."

When  Bootes  was  regarded  as  Icarius,  and
Virgo,  as  his  daughter  Erigone,  Procyon  became
Maera,  the  dog  of  Icarius.  (Hygin.  P.  A.  ii.  4  ;
comp.  Ov.  Fast.  iv.  940.)

7.  The  Ship  Argo,  'Apyd)  (Arat.  342),  Argo
(Cic.  Manil.  i.  420),  Navis  (Cic),  Argo  Navis
(Cic),  Navis  quae  nominatur  Argo  (Vitruv.),
Argoa  puppis  (German.).  Ratis  Heroum  (Miinih
V.  13).  Like  Pegasus  and  the  Bull,  it  was  sup-
posed to  represent  only  one  half  of  the  object
(r]fMiTofjLos),  the  portion  namel}--  of  the  vessel  be-
hind the  mast  (IcrThu  Six^axra  /caT*  avrhv,  Arat.
605.  Puppe  trahitar,  German.).  The  brightest
star  was  by  Eudoxus  and  Aratus  (351,  368)  dis-
tinguished as  TTTjSdkiov  (gubernaculum,  Cic),  the
rudder,  instead  of  which  KdvwSos  (stella  Canopi
qime  his  regionibus  est  ignoia,  Vitruv.  ix.  4),  a  name
which  appears  first  in  Eratosthenes  (c.  37),  and
Hipparchus,  became  general.  According  to  the
Sf  holiast  on  Gemianicus,  it  was  called  also  Ptole-
vumm,  or,  as  Martianus  Capella  has  it,  Ptclemaeus,
in  honour,  evidently,  of  some  Egyptian  monarch.


ASTRONOMIA.  J5.3

This  star,  as  the  words  of  Vitruvius  indicate,  wa.s
not  visible  in  Italian  latitudes.

Cicero,  in  addition  to  the  rudder,  distinguishes
the  mast  (malum)  also,  -"  radiato  stipite  malum."

8.  The  Water  Snake,  "TSp?;  (Arat  444),
"rhpos  (Eratosth.  Gemin.  Ptolem),  H^dra  (Cic
Germ.  Hygin.  Avien.),  Hydros  (Germ.),  Anguis
(Vititiv.  ix-  4 ;  Ov.  Fast.  ii.  243  ;  Manil.  i.  422.
See  also  Serv.  ad  Virg.  Georg.  i.  205  ;  Hyrin.
P.  A.  ii.  40,  iiL39).

9.  The  Cup,  Kpa'rTjp  (Arat.  448),  Crater  (Ger-
man. Vitruv.  Manil.  i.  424),  Fulgens  Cratera
(Cic),   Urna  (Schol.  Gernian.).

10.  The  Raven  or  Crow,  EI'SwAoi/  KSpaKos
(Arat.  449),  Corvvs  (Cic  German  Vitruv.),
Phoebo  sucer  ales  (Manil.  i.  424).

The  Cup  and  the  Raven  were  represented  as
standing  upon  the  back  of  the  Water  Saake,  and
the  whole  three  are  grouped  together  by  Ovid
(Fast.  ii.  243)  in  the  couplet :  —

Continuata  loco  tria  sidera,  Corvns  et  Anguis,
Et  medius  Crater  inter  utrumqiie  jacet.

1 1-  The  Centaur,  KeVroi/pos  (Anit.  431, 436),
"iTTTr^Ta  <pi]p  (Arat.  664),  Xdpuv  (Eratosth.),  Cen~
iaurus  (Cic.  Vitruv.  German.),  Ceminus  Biformis
(German.),  Sonipes  (German.),  Duplici  Centaurua
imagine  (Manil.  i.  425),  Chiron  (German.  418,
624).  By  Ptolemy  he  is  represented  with  a  thyr-
sus in  his  hand,  and  these  stars  were,  as  we  are
told  by  Geminus,  formed  by  Hipparchus  into  a  dis-
tinct constellation  under  the  name  &vp<T6\oyx^^-

12.  The  Wolf,  &7]piov  (Arat.  442),  Bestia
(Vitruv.  ix.  4),  Hostia  (Hygin.  P.  A.  ii.  38),
This,  according  to  Aratus  (/.  c.)  was  a  wild  beast
grasped  in  the  hand  of  the  Centaur,  but  it  received
no  name  from  the  Greeks  or  Romans.

13.  The  Altar,  @vri]piov  (Arat.  403),  Ara
(Cic.  German.  Manil.  i.  428),  Apia  Altaria  saci-in
(^83),  according  to  Geminus  and  Ptolemy  Qvfiia-
rijpiov,  translated  Turibulum  by  Germanicus  and
Vitruvius  (ix.  4).  The  scholiast  on  Germanicus
furnishes  two  other  names,  Saerariwn  and  Pharus.
In  the  legend  preserved  by  Manilius  (L  428),  it
was  the  altar  erected  by  Jove  when  heaven  was
invaded  by  the  giants.

14.  The  Southern  Crown.  Not  named  by
Aratus,  who  merely  remarks  (401)  that  under  the
fore-feet  of  Sagittarius  are  some  stars  sweeping
round  in  a  circle  (^lvostoX  KVK\(f>),  but  to  these
Geminus  and  Ptolemy  give  the  specific  name  of
2T4(pavos  v6tios.  In  consequence  of  no  legend
being  attached  to  the  group,  Germanicus  (388)  de-
scribes it  as

sine  Jionore  Corona
Ante  Sagittiferi  multum  pcrnicia  crura.

(Comp.  Hygin.  P.  A.  ii.  28.  Manilius  takes  no
notice  of  it.)  Geminus  has  preserved  two  other
names,  OvpauicKos  and  KrjpvKeiov  ;  the  former
Martianus  Capella  renders  by  Coelulum,  the  latter,
used  by  Hipparchus,  denotes  a  herald's  wand  of
peace.  Others,  according  to  the  scholiast  on  Ara-
tus, regarded  it  as  Ixion's  wheel  CUi6vos  rpoxSi/).

15.  The  Southern  Fish,  'Ix&vs  p6tios
(Arat.  387),  Piscis  Notius  (Manil  i.  445  ;  Hygin.
P.  A.  iii.  40),  Piscis  Australis  (Cic),  Piscis
Austrinus  (Vitruv.  ix.  4  ;  Columell.  xi.  2).

It  appears  from  Eratosthenes  (38),  and  the
scholiast  on  Germanicus,  that  it  was  styled  also
'IX^vs  p-fyas,  Piscis  magnus.


154


ASTRONOMIA.


Before  quitting  this  part  of  our  subject,  we
must  add  a  few  words  on

Coma  Berenices;  Berenices  Crinis.    Milvus.

1.  The  Hair  of  Berknice,  UKSkuixos  s.
BSo^pvxosBepoviKTjs  (Callim.  Schol.  ad  Aixtt.  14G),
CoTna  Berenices  (see  Catull.  Ixv.)  was,  as  we  have
seen  above,  formed  by  Conou  out  of  certain  unap-
propriated (a/xopcpuTol)  stars  behind  the  Lion's
Tail,  in  honour  of  Berenice,  the  wife  of  Ptolemy
Euergetes,  and  afforded  a  theme  for  a  compli-
mentary elegy  by  Callimachus,  of  which  'we  pos-
sess a  translation  by  Catullus.  The  constellation
being  unknown  to  Aratus,  is  not  alluded  to  by  his
translators,  Cicero  and  Genuanicus,  nor  is  it
noticed  by  Manilius.  When  Pliny  (//.vV.  ii.  71)
observes  "  Septemtriones  non  cernit  Troglodytice,
et  confinis  ^gyptus :  nee  Canopum  Italia,  et
quem  vocant  Berenices  Crinem  ;  item  qucm  sub
Divo  Augusto  cognominavere  Caesaris  Thronon,
insignes  ibi  Stellas,"  it  is  much  more  probable  that
he  committed  a  positive  blunder,  than  that,  as
some  have  supposed,  he  intended  to  indicate  under
the  name  of  Berenices  Crinem  some  southern  sign
to  which  no  one  else  makes  any  allusion.

2.  We  find  in  Ovid  (Fast.  ii.  793)  the  following
couplet  in  reference  to  the  night  of  the  17th  of
March :  —

Stella  Lycaoniam  vergit  declivis  ad  Arcton
Miluus.     Haec  ilia  nocte  videnda  venit,

and  in  Pliny  {H.  N.  xviii.  65.  §  1),  "  Caesar  et
Idus  Martias  ferales  sibi  annotavit  Scorpionis  oc-
casu :  XV.  vero  Kalendas  Aprilis  Italiae  Milvum
ostendi :  duodecimo  Kalendas  Equum  occidere  ma-
tutino."  In  the  first  of  these  passages  we  find  a
constellation  named  Milvus  or  the  Kite  described
as  one  of  the  northern  signs,  or  at  least  as  a  sign
visible  in  Italj',  and  the  period  of  its  rising  fixed
to  the  1 7th  of  March.  The  words  of  Pliny,  al  though
more  ambiguous  than  those  of  Ovid,  would  lead  us
to  suppose  that  he  was  quoting  this,  as  well  as  the
preceding  observation,  from  the  Calendar  of  Caesar ;
but  the  abruptness  of  his  ordinary  stj-le  is  such  as
to  prevent  us  from  affirming  this  v/ith  certainty.

Now  no  Greek  and  no  other  Roman  writers
mention  any  constellation  bearing  the  above  name,
nor  can  we  adopt  the  explanation  of  Grotius,  who
supposes  that  the  Swan  or  the  Eagle  is  indicated,
for  the  rising  of  these  signs  is  removed  by  three
months  from  the  period  here  fixed.  Ideler  has,  in
all  probability,  discovered  the  solution  of  the
enigma.  In  the  Parapegma  of  Geminus,  a  phae-
nomenon  described  by  the  words  ^IktIvos  ^aivcTai^
i.e.  Milvus  apparet,  is  placed  by  Eudoxus  thirteen
da3-s  before  the  vernal  equinox,  and  by  Euctemon
and  Calippus  respectively,  eight  days  and  one  daj*-
before  the  same  epoch,  while  Ptolemy,  in  his
^dcreis  itirXaviov^  marks  under  the  12th  of  Phame-
noth  (i.  e.  according  to  Ideler  8th  March),  EuSd|(^
X^^i-^^v  KciX  Ikt7vos  (paiuerai.  But  the  IktIuos^
rendered  milvus  by  the  Latins,  was,  as  we  are
told  by  Aristotle  (//.  A.  viii.  16),  a  bird  of  pas-
sage, and  hence  the  arrival  of  the  Iktwos^  like  that
of  the  swallow,  took  place  at  and  served  to  mark  a
particular  sea;;ou  of  the  year.  Ovid  and  Pliny,
being  ignorant  of  this  fact,  and  fmdin?;  in  the
calendars  which  they  consulted  the  words  Milvus
apparet^  took  it  for  granted,  without  further  in-
quiry, that  Milvus  was  the  name  of  a  constellation;
tor  wb.n  we  consider  the  context  of  the  naturalist.


ASTRONOMIA.
as  well  as  the  date,  but  one  day  later  than  that
fixed  by  Ovid,  we  can  scarcely  doubt  that  he,  as
well  as  the  poet,  believed  Milvus  to  be  a  "  Stella.'*

II.  Risings  and  Settings  op  the  Fixed
Stars.

A  nation  like  the  Greeks,  whose  climate  per-
mitted them  to  watch  their  flocks  by  night  during
a  considerable  part  of  the  year,  could  not  fail  to
remark  that  certain  fixed  stars  appeared  and  dis-
appeared in  regular  succession,  as  the  sun  passed
through  the  different  stages  of  his  annual  career.
Accordingly,  we  find,  that  as  early  as  the  time  of
Hesiod,  the  changes  of  the  seasons,  and  the  more
importJint  operations  of  agriculture,  were  fixed  with
reference  to  the  risings  and  settings  of  Orion,  the
Pleiades,  the  Hyades,  Arcturus,  and  Siriiis.  Such
observations  were  in  the  first  instance  extremely
rude  ;  but  after  Thales  had  turned  the  attention
of  his  countrymen  to  scientific  astrononi}',  these
celestial  phenomena  v/ere  determined  with  great
care  and  accuracy  :  tables  were  drawn  up  in  which
the  risings  and  settings  of  the  more  brilliant  stars,
with  reference  to  the  sun,  were  fully  detailed,  to-
gether with  such  notices,  touching  the  winds  and
weather  to  be  expected  at  the  different  epochs,  as
experience  suggested.  Copies  were  engraved  on
stone  or  brass,  and,  being  nailed  or  hung  up  in  the
market-places  of  large  towns  and  other  places  of
public  resort,  received  the  name  of  Trapair-ljyfxaTa.
Two  catalogues  of  this  description  have  been  pre-
served which  are  valuable,  inasmuch  as  they
frequently  quote  the  authority  of  the  early  Greek
astronomers,  Meton,  Euctemon,  Eudoxus,  Calippus,
&c.  for  their  statements.  The  one  was  drawn  up
by  Geminus  (fl.  b.  c.  80),  the  other  by  the  famous
Ptolemy  (a.  d.  140).  In  the  former  the  risings
and  settings  of  the  stars  are  fixed  according  to
the  passage  of  the  sun  through  the  signs  of  the
zodiac  ;  in  the  latter  they  are  ranged  under  the
months  and  years  of  the  Julian  Calendar.

The  practice  commenced  by  Hesiod  was  followed
by  subsequent  writers  upon  rural  economy,  and
we  accordingly  find  numerous  precepts  in  Virgil,
Columella,  and  Pliny  delivered  with  reference  to
the  risings  and  settings  of  the  stars,  fomiing  a
complete  Calendarium  Rusticum.  Ovid  has  com-
bined the  Fasti  of  the  city  with  these  Rural  Al-
manacs, and  has  thus  gained  an  opportunity  of
enlivening  his  poem  by  recounting  the  various
myths  attached  to  the  constellations.  Indeed  it
would  appear  that  Caesar,  when  he  reconstructed
the  Fasti  of  Rome,  included  the  risings  and  set-
tings of  the  stars,  since  Pliny  frequently  quotes  the
authority  of  Caesar  for  his  statements  on  these
points.  Thus  the  Fasti  of  Ovid  may  be  considered
as  a  commentary  upon  the  almanac  in  common
use.

The  early  Grecian  parapegmala  were  undoubt-
edly constructed  from  actual  observation  in  the
countries  where  they  were  first  exhibited,  and  must
therefore  have  completely  answered  the  purpose
for  which  they  were  intended.  But  this  does  not
by  any  means  hold  good  of  the  corresponding
compilations  of  the  Romans,  who,  being  little
versed  in  astronomy  themselves,  copied  blindly
from  othere  without  knowledge  or  discrimination.

It  is  necessary  to  attend  to  two  facts  :  —

1.  The  time  of  the  risings  and  settings  of  the
fixed  stars  varies  for  the  sjime  place  at  different
epochs.     Thus  the  Pleiades  which  at  Rome  rose


ASTRONOMIA.

alonw  with  the  sun  on  the  1  Cth  of  April,  a  c.  44,
rose  with  the  sun  at  Rome  several  days  earlier  in
the  age  of  Meton,  and  do  not  now  rise  with  the
sun  at  Rome  until  several  days  later.  This  is
caused  by  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes.

2,  The  time  of  the  risings  and  settings  of  the
fixed  stars  is  different  on  the  same  day  in  places
whose  latitude  is  different.  Thus,  in  the  year
when  the  Pleiades  rose  along  with  the  sun  at
Rome  on  the  IGth  of  April,  they  did  not  rise  along
with  the  sun  at  Athens  until  the  22d  of  April.

Too  little  attention  was  paid  to  these  consider-
ations by  the  Roman  writers ;  and  consequently
we  not  unfrequently  discover  that  they  combined
the  observations  of  astronomers  who  lived  at  times
and  places  remote  from  them  and  from  each  other
—  that  calculations  made  for  the  latitude  of  Athens,
or  of  Rhodes,  or  of  Alexandria,  300  years  before,
were  adopted  at  once  and  transferred  to  their
calendars  without  change  or  modification.

Another  source  of  confusion  is  a  want  of  pre-
cision in  specifying  the  different  kinds  of  risings
and  settings,  which  ought  always  to  be  most  care-
fully distinguished  from  each  other  by  appropriate
scientific  terms.

The  risings  and  settings  of  the  fixed  stars,  when
considered  with  reference  to  the  sun's  place  in  his
orbit,  may  be  arranged  under  eight  heads :  —

(a)  When  a  star  rises  at  sunrise.

(b)  When  a  star  rises  at  sunset.

(c)  When  a  star  sets  at  sunrise.

(d)  When  a  star  sets  at  sunset.

(a)  When  a  star  rises  shortly  before  the  sun  so
as  to  be  just  visible  in  the  morning  twilight  as  it
ascends  above  the  horizon  before  its  rays  are  over-
powered by  the  light  of  the  more  brilliant  lu-
niinarj'.

()3)  When  a  star  rises  shortly  after  sunset  so  as
to  be  just  visible  in  the  evening  twilight  as  it
ascends  above  the  horizon.

(7)  When  a  star  sets  shortly  before  sunrise  so
as  to  be  just  visible  in  the  morning  twilight  as  it
sinks  below  the  horizon.

(S)  When  a  star  sets  shortly  after  sunset  so  as
to  be  just  visible  in  the  evening  twilight  as  it
sinks  below  the  horizon.

The  names  by  which  these,  taken  in  order,  are
discriminated  bj'  the  Greek  astronomers  Geminus
{hagog.  cap.  xi.)  and  Ptolemy  {Math. Syntax,  viii.
4)  are  the  following :  —

(a)  'ETTtToA^  k(fia  aXridiv^,  G.  —  'Eyo  (Tvvava-
ro\i}  aXfiQivi],  P.  —  Ortus  Matutinus  Verus.  True
morning  rising.

(/;)  'EttjtoA.);  ka-nepia  aXTjOtvi}^  G.  —  'E(nr€pia
avvavaruKT]  a\7,0Lvr}^  P. — Ortus  Vespertinus  Vencs.
True  evening  rising.

(c)  AixTis  icfa  a.\'t]divi]y  G.  —  'Eya  GvyKaTO,-
hvffis  a.\-r\Qiv)]^  P.  —  Occasus  Matutinus  Verus.
Tnie  morning  setting.

(d)  Avffis  ((Tirepia  a.\.7)BivT],  G.  —  'ECTrfpt'o
crvyKaraSvffis  dXTjdivf),  P.  —  Occasus  Vespertinus
Venis.     True  evening  setting.

(a)  'EiriToX^  ecfa  (paivo/xevrfy  G. — 'E^'a  irpoava-
To\^  (paivoixevr],  P.  —  Ortus  AIatuti7ius  Apparens
B.  OHus  Heliacus,  Heliacal  rising,  i.  e.  First  visible
rising  of  a  star  in  the  morning  twilight.

(j8)  'EttjtoA'Jj  lairepla  <paivofi4uT],  G. — 'Effirepta
iifavaToX}]  (patvoficvri ,  P.  —  Ortus  Vespertinus
Apparens.  Last  visible  rising  of  a  iitar  after
sunset.

(7)  AuiTis  k(ia  (j)aiyojx4vrj,  G.  —  'E(fa  -n-pSSvais


ASTRONOMIA.  1.55

(^oti/o.ueVjj,  P.  —  Occasus  Matutinus  Appirensr.
First  visible  setting  of  a  star  before  sunrise.

(5)  Avffis  ka-irepia  (paivofxeyrjy  G.  —  'Ecrirepia
imKaTaSva-is  (paiyo/xdi^T],  P.  —  Occasus  Vespertinus
Apparens  s.  Occasus  Ileliacus.  Heliacal  setting,
i.  e.  Last  visible  setting  of  a  star  iii  the  evening
twilight.

With  regard  to  the  above  technicalities  we  must
observe

L  That  Geminus  (^.  c.)  draws  a  distinction  b©-
tween  the  words  avaroX-i]  and  iviroXii.  Bv
dvaroXi]  he  understands  the  rising  of  a  star  con-
sidered simply  with  reference  to  its  elevation  above
the  horizon,  which  takes  place  once  in  twenty-four
hours  in  consequence  of  the  diunial  motion  ;  by
iiTiToX-r],  the  rising  of  the  star  considered  with  re-
ference to  its  distance  from  the  sun,  which  depends
upon  the  sun's  place  in  the  ecliptic.  As  to  the
settings  of  the  stars,  he  would  make  Svcris  the  cor-
relative of  dyaroATj  and  Kpinpts  of  iiriroX-f}  ;  but  to
this  last  definition  he  does  not  himself  adhere,
since  he  constantly  employs  Svais  to  denote  the
setting  of  a  star,  when  considered  with  reference
to  its  distance  from  the  sun.  Ptolemy,  while  he
includes  all  the  risings  and  settings  under  the
general  designation  of  ^dcreis  airXauiav,  endeavours
to  introduce  an  improved  nomenclature,  by  vaiy-
ing  the  preposition  according  as  the  star  rises  or
sets  along  with  (ffuv),  or  before  (Trp6)  or  after
(ctt/)  the  sun,  but  pays  no  regard  to  the  nile  of
Geminus  with  respect  to  avaroX^  and  IniraXi).

2.  Two  terms,  in  addition  to  those  set  down
above,  are  commonly  employed  by  writers  on
these  topics,  the  Cosmic al  rising  and  setting
(Oiius  Cosmicus,  Oceastis  C.X  and  the  Acronv-
CHAL  rising  and  setting  (Ortus  Acronychus^  Oc-
casus A.).

The  epithet  Cosmicus,  as  applied  to  this  subject,
first  occurs  in  a  note  of  Servius  on  Virg.  Georg.  i.
218,  "ortus  et  occasus  duo  sunt:  unus  r)XiaK6s^
id  est,  Solaris  ;  et  alter  ko(xixik6s,  id  est,  jnmidanus :
unde  fit  ut  ea  signa  quae  cum  sole  oriuntur  a  nobis
non  possint  videri  ;  et  ea,  quae  videmus,  quantum
ad  solis  rationem  pertinet,  videantur  occidere."
Modern  astronomers  have  for  the  most  part  (see
Pctavlus,  Varr.  Diss.  p.  3,  ed.  1630)  adopted  the
phrase  Ortus  Cosmicus  to  indicate  the  rising  marked
(«),  that  is,  the  Ortiis  Matutinus  Verus,  and  Oc-
casus Cosmicus  to  indicate  the  setting  marked  (c),
that  is,  the  Occasus  Alaiutinus  Verus,  but  Idcler
{Ilisiorische  Untersuchungcn,  &.C.  p.  311),  while  he
interprets  Ortus  Cosmicus  in  the  sense  usually  re-
ceived, applies  Occasus  Cosmicus  to  the  setting
marked  (7),  that  is,  to  the  Occasus  Matutinus
Apparens.

Again,  the  epithet  aKpSuvxos  appears  to  be
first  used  by  Theophrastus  (De  Signis  Pluv.  et  Vent.
cap.  i.  §  2)  where  dvaroXal  dKp6vvxoi  are  alone
mentioned,  and  are  distinctly  explained  to  mean
the  rising  of  a  star  at  sunset,  that  is,  the  Ortus
Vespertinus  Verus  marked  (6),  and  in  this  sense
the  phrase  Ortus  Acronychus  is  found  in  the  trea-
tises of  Petavius  and  others  who  employ  also  the
expression  Occasus  Acronychus  to  indicate  the  set-
ting marked  (J),  that  is,  the  Occasus  Vespertinus
Verus.  Ideler  concurs  in  the  latter,  but  interprets
Ortus  Acronychus  to  mean  the  rising  marked  ()3),
that  is,  the  Ortus  Vespertinus  Ajyparens.  This  view
is  certainly  at  variance  with  the  words  of  Theo-
phrastus, which  are  quite  explicit  and  are  cor-
roborated by  Julius  Firmicus  (ii.  8)  ;  but  on  the


156


ASTRONOMIA.


other  liand  in  the  Parapegma  of  Geminus,  in  the
observations  ascribed  to  Eudoxus,  a.npow'xos  is
the  general  term  applied  to  all  evening  settings,  and
most  of  these  unquestionably  refer  to  the  apparent
phenomena.  Euctemon  again  makes  use  of  e(r7re,
pios  to  express  the  same  meaning.  The  words
'ApKTovpos  aKpSvvxos  Trpmas  8vuei  under  Scorpius
d.  8.  are  probably  corrupt.

Under  these  circumstances  to  prevent  all  con-
fusion or  ambiguity,  we  have  altogether  passed  over
the  terms  Cosmicus  and  Acronydius  in  our  table,
but  have  retained  Ileliacus,  which,  like  Cos7nicus,
first  occurs  in  the  passage  quoted  from  Servius,
hut  is  applied  imifonuly  by  subsequent  writers  to
the  phenomenon  marked  (a)  and  (S),  and  to  no
others.

3.  Pliny  (FT.  N.  xviii.  25)  proposes  to  desig-
nate by  Emersus,  what  we  have  called  the  He-
liacal Rising  (a),  because  the  star  then  for  the
first  time  emerges  from  the  sun's  rays,  and  by
OccuItatiOf  what  we  have  called  the  Heliacal  Setting
(8),  because  this  is  the  last  appearance  of  the  star,
which  is  forthwith  obscured  by  the  sun's  rays,  but
these  terms  do  not  appear  to  have  been  ever  gene-
rally received.

4.  It  is  manifest  that  of  the  eight  phenomena,
named  above,  the  first  four  are  purely  matters  of
calculation,  since  the  true  risings  and  settings  never
can  be  visible  to  the  naked  eye.  These  then
ought  alwaj^s  to  have  been,  and  for  some  time  al-
ways were,  excluded  from  rural  calendars  intended
for  the  use  of  practical  men.  We  find,  however,
from  the  fragments  of  Calippus,  preserved  in  the
Parapegma  of  Geminus,  when  verified  by  compu-
tation, that  this  astronomer  had  substituted  the
true  risings  and  settings  for  the  apparent  risings
and  settings,  which  were  there  marked  in  the  tables
of  Euctemon,  Meton  and  Eudoxus.  Hence,  great
caution  would  become  indispensable  in  quoting
from  dift'erent  authorities,  or  in  advancing  an  ori-
ginal statement.  If  the  rising  of  a  star  was  named,
it  would  be  necessary  not  only  to  specify  whether
it  was  the  morning  or  the  evening  rising,  but  also
whether  the  true  or  the  apjarent  rising  was  indi-
cated, and  to  proceed  in  like  manner  for  the  setting
of  a  star.  Now  and  then  we  find  in  Columella  and
Pliny  some  attempt  to  preserve  accuracy  in  one  or
other  of  these  essential  points,  as  when  the  latter  ob-
serves (xviii.  74):  " Pridie Kalendas  (Nov.)  Caesari
Arcturus  occidit  et  Suculae  exoriuniur  cum  sole  ;  "
"  XVI.  Kal.  Octob.  ^gypto  Spica,  quam  tenet  Virgo,
exoritur  matutino,  Etesiaeque  desinunt.  Hoc  idem
Caesari  XIV.  Kalendas  XIII.  Assyriae  signifi-
cant;" and  even  in  Virgil,  as  when  he  defines
the  morning  setting  of  the  Pleiads  :  "  Ante  tibi
Eoae  Atlantides  abscondantur  ;"  but  for  the  most
part  both  in  prose  writers  and  in  poets,  every-
thing is  vague  and  unsatisfactory ;  risings  and
settings  of  all  descriptions,  calculated  for  different
epochs  and  for  different  latitudes,  are  thrown  to-
gether at  random.  In  order  to  substantiate  these
charges,  we  may  examine  the  statements  contained
in  Columella,  Ovid,  and  Pliny  with  regard  to  Lyra^
a  constellation  to  which  considerable  importance
was  attached  by  the  Romans,  since  the  beginning
of  Autumn  in  the  calendar  of  Caesar  was  marked
l)y  its  (true)  morning  setting.  It  will  suit  our
purpose  particularly  well,  because  from  its  limited
extent  every  portion  of  the  constellation  became
visible,  within  two  or  three  days  after  the  appear-
ance  of   the  first  star ;  and  hence  no  ambiguity


ASTRONOMIA.

could  arise  from  the  heliacal  risings  of  the  extreme
portions  being  separated  by  an  interval  of  some
weeks,  as  was  the  case  with  Orion  and  others
stretching  over  a  large  space  in  the  heavens,  in
treating  of  which  it  became  necessary  to  specify
particular  portions  of  the  figure,  as  when  we  read
"  Orionis  humerus  oritiu"  ; "  "  Gladius  Orionis  oc
cidere  incipit ; "  Orion  totus  oritur,"  and  so  forth.
In  the  following  quotations,  the  words  Fidis  and
Fidicula  seem  to  be  absolutely  synonymous,  there
being  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  latter  was  ap-
plied exclusively  to  the  peculiarly  bright  star  which
in  the  catalogues  of  modem  astronomers  is  a  Lyrae^
the  b  XajULTTphs  rrjs  \vpas  of  Ptolemy,  although  to
this  in  all  probability  most  of  the  observations  were
directed.  We  shall  set  down  in  regular  order
first  the  settings  and  then  the  risings.

Settings  of  Lyra^

(1.)  Pridie  Id.  Aug.  (12  August)  Fidis  occidit
mane  et  Auctumnus  incipit.     Col.  xi.  2.  §  57.

According  to  Pliny  (xviii.  59),  the  setting  of
Fidicula  (JFidicidae  occasus )  marked  the  commence-
ment of  autumn,  and  took  place  on  the  fortj'-sixth
day  after  the  solstice,  that  is,  on  the  8th  of  August,
if  we  include,  according  to  the  Roman  method  of
computation,  the  24th  of  June,  the  day  from  vi'hich
he  reckoned.  In  a  subsequent  chapter  (68.  §  2)  he
states  that  the  phenomenon  in  question  took  place,
according  to  the  Calendar  of  Caesar,  on  the  11th  of
August,  but  that  more  accurate  observations  had
fixed  it  to  the  8th,  and  this  he  soon  after  repeats
(69.  §4).

(2.)  XIII.  Kal.  Sept.  (i.e.  20  August)  Sol  in
Virginem  transitum  facit . . .  hoc  eodem  die  Fidis
occidit.  —  X.  Kal.  Sept.  (23  August)  ex  eodem
sidere  tempestas  plerumque  oritur  et  pluvia.  Co-
lutnelL  xi.  2.  §  58.

(3.)  XI.  Kal.  Feb.  (22d  January)  Fidicula  Ves-
pere  occidit,  dies  pluvius.     Columell.  x.  2.  §  5.

Ovid  places  the  setting  on  23rd  of  January.

Fulgebit  toto  jam  Lyra  nulla  polo.   Fast.  i.  653.

(4.)  III.  Kal.  Feb.  (30  January)  Fidicula  oc-
cidit.    Columell.  xi.  2.  §  6.

(5.)  Kal.  Feb.  (1  February)  Fidis  incipit  oc-
cidere.  Ventus  Eurinus  et  interdum  Auster  cum
grandine  est.     Columell.  xi.  2.  §  14.

III.  Non.  Febr.  (3rd  February)  Fidis  tota  oc-
cidit.    Columell.  Ibid.

Ovid,  without  alluding  to  what  he  had  said  be-
fore, remarks  on  the  2nd  of  February  {Fast.
ii.73):

Ilia  nocte  aliquis  tollens  ad  sidera  vultum,
Dicet,  ubi  est  hodie,  quae  Lyra  fulsit  heri  ?

Pliny  has  (xviii.  64)  "  Et  pridie  Nonas  Febni-
arias  (4th  February)  Fidicula  vesperi  (sc.  occidit).

Risings  of  Lyra.

(6.)  IX.  Kal.  Mai.  (23rd  April)  prima  nocte
Fidicula  apparet,  terapestatem  significat.  Columell.
xi.  2.  §  37.

VI.  Kal.  Mai.  (26th  April)  Baeotiae  et  Atticae-
Canis   Vesperi   occultatur,  Fidicula  mane   oritur.
Plin.  xviii.  GQ.  §  1.

(7.)  Ovid  {Fast.  v.  415)  names  the  5th  of  May
as  the  day  on  which  Lyra  rises.

(8.)  III.  Id.  Mai.  (13th  May)  Fidis  mane  ex-
oritur, significat  tempestatem.  Columell.  xi.  2.  §  40l


ASTRONOMIA.

III.  Id,  Mai,  Fidiculae  exortus.  PUru  xviii.  67.
§3.

Id.  Mai.  (15th  May)  Fidis  mane  exoritur.
ColumelL  xi.  2.  §  43.

(9.)  III.  Non.  Novemb.  (3rd  November)  Fi-
dicuk  mane  exwitur,  hiemat  et  pluit.  ColumelL
xi.  2.  §  84.

(10.)  VIII.  Id.  Novemb.  <6tli  November)  idem
sidus  totum  exoritur,  Ajuster  vel  Favonius,  hiemat.
ColumelL  Ibid.

(11.)  XVI.  Kal.  Dec.  (16th  November)  Fidis
exoritur  mane,  Auster,  interdum  Aquilo  magnus.
ColumeU.  xi.  2.  §  88.

(12.)  Non.  Jamtar.  (5th  January)  Fidis  ex-
oritur mane :  tempestas  varia.  ColumelL  xi.  2.
§97.

Inatiteriut  Nonae,  mis-is  tibi  nubibus  atris,
Signa  dabunt  imbres  exoriente  Lyra.

OYi^.Fast.  i.  315.

Pridie  Nonas  Januarias  (4  th  January)  Caesari
Delphinus  matutino  exoritui:  et  postero  die  Fi-
dicula,     Plin.  xviii.  €4.

The  total  disregard  of  precision  in  the  phraseo-
logy employed  in  describing  the  above  appearances
is  evident  in  almost  every  assertion,  but  the  con-
fusion may  be  considered  to  have  reached  a  climax
when  we  read  the  words  "  Fidis  (or  Fidicula)  ex-
oritur mane,"  used  without  variation  or  explanation
to  denote  a  phenomenon  assigned  to  the  26th  of
April,  the  3d  and  15th  of  May,  the  3d  and  16th
of  November.  By  examining  ea^ch  paragraph
separately,  we  shall  be  still  more  fully  convinced
of  the  carelessness  and  ignorance  displayed.

(1.)  The  true  morning  setting  of  Lucida  Lyrae  \
took  place  at  Rome  in  the  age  of  Caesar,  on  the
12th  or  13th  of  August,  and  therefore  the  Calendar
of  Caesar  here  followed  by  Columella  was  more  ac-
curate than  the  authorities  quoted  by  Pliny,  unless
these  referred  to  a  different  latitude.      Remark,
however,  that  no  hint  is  dropped  by  either  to  in-
dicate that  the  true^  and  not  the  apparent  morning
j  setting  is  meant  ;  and  it  ought  to  be  borne  in  mind
'  that  the  latter  happened,  at  the  epoch  in  question,
■  on  that  very  day  at  Alexandria.     In  the  Para-
1  pegma  of  Geminus  also,   we  find,   under   11th  of
I  August  (17  Leo),  EvKTrj/xovi  \vpa  SueVot.
}       (2.)  This  must  be  the  apparent  morning  setting
which  took  place  at  Rome  on  24th  of  August  for
!  the  Julian  epoch.

I  (3.)  The  trm  evening  setting,  calculated  for
Alexandria  at  the  same  epoch,  took  place  on  23d
of  January,  the  very  day  named  by  Ovid.

(4.)  This  is    the   heliacal   setting,    which,    for
Lucida  Lyrae,  took  place   at  Rome  on  28th  of
I  January.

(5.)  These  notices  seem  to  be  borrowed  from
;  old  Greek  calendars.     Eudoxus,  as  quoted  by  Ge-
;  minus,  assigns  the  evening  (aKp6vvxos)  setting  of
i   Lyra  to  the  11th  degree  of  Aquarius,  that  is,  the
j  4  th  of  February  according  to  the  Julian  calendar.
I       It  will  be  seen  that  the  three  last  paragraphs
;   (3.),  (4.),  (5.),  without  any  change  of  expression,
i   spread  the  setting  of  Lyra  over  a  space  extending
from  23d  of  January  to  4th  February,   the   ap-
parent and  true  settings  for  Rome  being  on  the
28th  January  and  9th  February  respectively.
I        (6.)  T\\c  apparent  evening  rising,  which  seems
I   clearly  pointed  out   by  the   words  of  Columella,
j   took  place  at  Rome  for  the  Julian  era  on  14th  of
[   April,  at  Alexandria  on  26th  of  April :  the  true


ASTRONOMIA.


157


evening  rising  at  Rome  on  22d  April,  and  to  this,
therefore,  the  statement  of  Columella,  from  what-
ever source  derived,  must,  if  accurate,  apply.
Pliny  has  here  fallen  into  a  palpable  blunder,  and
has  written  mane  for  vesperi.  In  fact  he  has
copied,  perhaps  at  second  hand,  the  observation  of
Eudoxus  with  regard  to  the  Lyre  and  Dog  (see
Parapeg.  of  Gem.),  except  that  he  has  inserted  tha
word  mane  where  the  Greek  astronomer  simply
says  Xvpa  iiriTeWei.

(7-)  This  will  agree  tolei-ably  well  with  the
true  evening  rising  at  Alexandria  for  the  Julian
era,  but  is  twenty- one  days  too  late  for  the  appa-
rent evening  seMing  at  Rome,  and  thirteen  days  too
late  for  the  ti~ue  evening  setting.

(8.)  Here  all  is  error.  We  must  manifestly
substitute  vespere  for  mane  in  both  passages  of
Columella  ;  but  even  thus  the  observation  will
not  give  anything  like  a  close  approximation  to  any
rising  of  Lyra  either  at  Rome  or  Alexandria  in  the
Julian  age.

(9,)  Copied  verbatim  along  v/ith  the  accom-
panying prognostic  of  the  weather,  from  the  Para-
pegma  of  Geminus,  where  it  is  ascribed  to  Euc-
temon.  The  day,  however,  corresponds  closely
with  the  heliacal  rising,  which  took  place  at  Rome
on  5  th  of  November.

(10.)  Copied  along  with  the  prognostic  "hie-
mat" {koX  6  d^p  x^^H-^P'^os  yiuerai  oos  iirl  ra
voWa)  from  the  same  compilation  where  it  is  as-
cribed to  Democritus,  who  fixed  upon  this  day  for
the  true  morning  rising  (\vpa  iiriSdWei  oifia  ijXIm
dvlcrxovTi).  At  Rome  this  rising  fell  upon  23d
of  October.

(11.)  Copied  again  from  the  same  source,  where
it  is  ascribed  to  Eudoxus.  Here  the  observation  can
in  no  way  be  stretched  so  as  to  apply  to  Rome.

(12.)  This,  like  the  last,  can  in  no  way  be  made
applicable  to  Rome  ;  but  the  heliacal  setting  at
Alexandria  took  place,  for  that  epoch,  about  four
days  later,  on  the  9th  or  10th  of  January.

Having  now  pointed  out  the  difficulties  which
the  student  must  expect  to  encounter  in  prosecuting
his  inquiries  in  this  department,  we  proceed  briefly
to  examine  the  most  remarkable  passages  in  the
classical  writers,  where  particular  periods  of  the
year  are  defined  by  referring  to  the  risings  and
settings  of  the  stars.  We  begin  with  the  most
important,  —  the  Pleiades,  Arcturus,  and  Sirius,
which  we  shall  discuss  fully,  and  then  add  a  few
words  upon  others  of  less  note.

The  Pleiades.

Hesiod.  —  Hesiod  indicates  the  period  of  har-
vest by  the  rising  of  the  Atlas-born  Pleiads  (Jt'rg.
384)  after  they  had  remained  concealed  for  forty
days  and  forty  nights.  Now  in  the  age  of  Hesiod
(b.  c.  800),  the  heliacal  rising  of  the  Pleiads  took
place  at  Athens,  according  to  the  computation  of
Ideler,  on  the  19th  of  May  of  the  Julian  Calendar,
which  is  just  the  season  when  the  wheat  crop
comes  to  maturity  in  that  climate.  Again  (L  c),
he  indicates  the  commencement  of  the  ploughing-
season,  and  the  close  of  the  season  for  navigating,
by  the  morning  setting  of  the  Pleiads,  which  in
that  age  and  latitude  fell  about  the  third  of  the
Julian  November.  In  these  and  all  other  passages
where  Hesiod  speaks  of  the  risings  and  settings  of
the  stars,  we  must  unquestionably  assume  that  he
refers  to  the  apparent  phenomena.  Indeed  it  is
by  no  means  improbable  that  the  precepts  which


H8


ASTRONOMIA.


he  inculcates  may  be  the  result  of  the  personal  ob-
Rervations  of  himself  and  his  contemporaries.

Varro,  Columella,  Plinv.  — Morning  Ris-
inrj.  —  (I.)  Varro,  where  he  describes  the  distribu-
tion of  the  year  into  eight  divisions,  according  to
the  calendar  of  Caesar,  states  that  there  was  a
space  of  forty-six  days  from  the  vernal  equinox
(■25th  March)  to  the  rising  of  tlie  Pleiades  (  Vergi-
liaritm  exortum),  which  is  thus  fixed  to  the  8th  or
9th  of  May.  {R.  R.  i.  28.)

(2.)  Pliny  (xviii.  QQ.  §  1)  names  the  10th  of
May.

Columella  has  three  distinct  notices  (/?.  R.  xi.
2.  §§  36,  39).

(3.)  X.  Kal.  Mai.  (22d  April)  Vergiliae  aim
sole  oriuntur,

(4.)  NonisMaiis  (7th  May)  Vergiliae  caoritmtur
inane.

(5.)  VI.  Tdus  sc.  Mai  (10th  May)  Vergiliae
iotae  apparent ;  and  this  last  corresponds  with  his
assertion  elsewhere,  that  the  phenomenon  takes
place  forty-eight  days  after  the  venial  equinox
(ix.  14.  §  4).

Now  the  true  morning  rising  of  the  Pleiads
took  pla-je  at  Rome  in  the  age  of  the  above
writers,  who  are  all  embraced  within  the  limits  of
a  century,  about  the  16th  of  April,  the  apparent
or  heliacal  rising  about  the  28th  of  May.  Hence,
not  one  of  the  above  statements  is  accurate.  But
(1)  (2)  (4)  (5)  approach  closely  to  the  observ-
ation of  Euctemon  (b.  c.  430),  according  to  whom
the  Pleiad  rises  on  the  13th  of  Taurus  (8th  of
May),  and  (3),  which  expressly  refers  to  the  tine
rising,  although  inapplicable  to  Rome,  will  suit  the
latitude  of  Athens  for  the  epoch  in  question.

Morning  Setting.  —  (1.)  Varro  places  the  setting
of  the  Pleiades  {Vergiliarum  occasum)  forty-five
days  after  the  autumnal  equinox  (24th  Sept.),  that
is,  on  the  6th  or  7th  of  November  (R.  R.  i.  28).

(2.)  Pliny  names  the  11th  of  November  (xviii.
60,  74  ;  the  text  in  c.  59  is  corrupt).

Columella,  as  before,  has  a  succession  of  notices.

(3.)  XriI.etXIL  Kal.  Nov.  (20th  and  21st
Oct.)  Solis  exortu  Vergiliae  indpiunt  occidere.

(4.)  V.  Kid.  Nov.  '(28th  Oct.)  Vergiliae  occi-
dunt.

(5.)  VJ.  Id.  Nov.  (8th  Nov.)  Virgiliae  mane
vceidunt.

(6.)  IV.  Id.  Nov.  (10th  Nov.)  hiemis  initium.

These  are  all  taken  from  his  calendar  in  xi.  2  ;
but  in  ix.  14.  §  11,  "-46  aequinoctio .  ...  ad  Ver-
giliarum  occasum  diebus  XL.''''  i.  e.  2d  or  3d  of
November.     Compare  ii.  8.  §  1.

Now  the  true  morning  setting  of  the  Pleiads
took  place  for  Rome  at  that  epoch  on  the  29lh  of
October,  the  apparent  moniing  setting  on  the  9th
of  November.  Hence,  it  appears  that  (5)  may  be
regarded  as  an  accurate  determination  of  the  ap-
parent morning  setting,  and  that  (1)  and  (2)  ap-
proach nearly  to  the  truth,  especially  when  we
bear  in  mind  that  variations  to  the  extent  of  two
or  even  three  days  must  be  allowed  in  regard  to
a  phenomenon  which  depends  in  some  degree  on
the  state  of  the  atmosphere.  We  perceive  also
that  (4)  is  correct  for  the  true  morning  setting,
while  (3),  which  is  inapplicJible  to  Rome,  cor-
responds to  the  horizon  of  Athens  in  the  time  of
Meton.  In  the  passage  from  Colum.  ix.  14,  we
ought  probably  to  adopt  the  conjecture  of  Pon-
tedera,  and  read  xliv,  for  xl.

Evening  Setting  and  Evening  Rising.  —  The  even-


AST  RONOMI  A.

Ing  setting  of  the  Pleiades  took  place,  according  to
Columella,  on  the  6th  of  April  (  VIII.  Idas  Aprilit
Vergiliae  Vespere  celantur)  ;  according  to  the  ca-
lendar of  Caesar  on  the  5th.  (Colum.  xi.  2.  §  34  ;
Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  QQ.)  These  statements  are  not
far  from  the  truth,  since  the  apparent  evening  set-
ting took  place  at  Rome  for  the  Julian  epoch  on
the  8th  of  April.  The  apparent  evening  rising
belonged  to  the  25th  of  September.

ViiiGiL.  —  Virgil  (Georg.  i.  221)  enjoins  the
husbandman  not  to  sow  his  wheat  until  after  the
morning  setting  of  the  Pleiades  :  —

Ante  tibi  Eoae  Atlantides  abscondantur
Gnosiaque  ardentis  decedat  Stella  Coronae
Debita  quam  sulcis  committas  semina.

llesicd,  as  we  have  seen  above,  fixes  the  com-
mencement of  tlie  ploughing  season,  Avithout  making
any  distinction  as  to  the  particular  crop  desired,
by  the  (apparent)  morning  setting  of  the  Pleiades,
that  is,  for  his  age,  the  beginning  of  November.
But  it  is  impossible  to  tell  whether  Virgil  intended
merely  to  repeat  this  precept  or  had  in  his  eye  the
calendar  of  Caesar  or  some  similar  compilation.
Columella  (ii.  8.  §  1),  in  commenting  upon  these
lines,  understands  him  to  mean  the  true  morning
setting,  which,  he  says,  takes  place  thirty-two  days
after  the  equinox,  that  is,  on  the  25th  or  26th  of
October,  a  calculation  not  far  from  the  truth,  since
we  have  pointed  out  above  that  the  28th  was  the
real  day.

There  is  another  passage  where  both  the  rising
and  the  setting  of  the  Pleiades  are  mentioned  in
connection  with  the  two  periods  of  the  honey  har-
vest. {Georg.  iv.  231)

Bis  gravidos  cogunt  foetus,  duo  tempera  messis,
Taygete  simul  os  terris  ostendit  honestum
Pleias  et  oceani  spretos  pede  rcpulit  amnes.
Aut  eadem  sidus  fugiens  ubi  Piscis  aquosi
Tristior  hybernas  coelo  descendit  in  undas.

Here,  again,  there  is  nothing  in  the  context  by
which  we  can  ascertain  the  precise  periods  which
the  poet  desired  to  define,  we  can  only  make  a
guess  by  comparing  his  injunction  with  those  of
others.  Columella  (xi.  2)  recommends  that  the
combs  should  be  cut,  if  full,  about  the  22nd  of
April  ;  but,  since  he  adds  that  if  they  are  not  full
the  operation  ought  to  be  deferred,  the  matter  is
left  quite  indefinite.  Now,  the  words  of  Virgil
seem  clearly  to  point  to  the  heliacal  rising  which
took  place  in  his  time  at  Rome  about  the  28th  of
May,  more  than  five  weeks  after  the  day  given  by
Columella.  In  like  manner  the  last-named  writer
advises  (xi.  2.  §  57)  that  the  autumnal  collection
of  honey  should  be  put  off  until  the  month  of  ^
October,  although  others  were  in  the  habit  of  be-
ginning earlier.  The  true  morning  setting  was,
already  stated,  on  the  28th  of  October,  the  ap-^j
parent  on  the  9th  of  November.

As  to  the  expression  "  sidus  fugiens  ubi  Piscis]
aquosi,"  it  will  be  sufficient  to  observe  that  al-
though the  "  Piscis  "  in  question  has  been  vari-
ously supposed  to  be  —  one  of  the  fishes  in  the
zodiac — the  Southern  Fish — the  Hydi-a — the
Dolphin — or  even  the  Scorpion,  no  one  has  yet
succeeded  in  proposing  a  reasonable  or  intelligibld
interpretation,  which  can  be  reconciled  Avith  any
delineation  of  the  heavens  with  which  we  are
acquainted.

OviD.  —  We  arc  told  in  the  Fasti  (iv.   165)


I


ASTIIONOMIA.

that  at  daybreak  on  the  morning  which  follows  the
1st  of  April :  —

Pleiades  incipiunt  humeros  relevare  patcrnos
Quae  septem  dici,  sex  tamen  esse  solent.

According  to  the  legend,  the  Pleiades  were  the
daughters  of  Atlas,  who  supported  the  heavens  on
his  shoulders,  and  hence,  when  they  disappeared
from  the  sky,  they  might  be  said  to  remove  a
portion  of  their  father's  burden  '*  humeros  relevare
patcrnos."  The  apparent  morning  setting  is  there-
fore clearly  denoted.  But  this  took  place  at  Rome
on  the  9th  of  November,  while,  on  the  other  hand,
the  apparent  evening  (or  heliacal)  setting  fell  upon
the  8th  of  April,  only  six  days  after  the  date  men-
tioned. Hence,  the  poet  blundered  between  the
morning  setting  and  the  evening  setting,  which  are
many  months  apart.

Again  (v.  599),  the  Pleiades  are  said  to  rise
visibly  in  the  morning  on  May  14th,  marking  the
end  of  spring  and  the  beginning  of  summer.  licw
the  heliacal  rising  of  the  Pleiades  did  not  take
place  at  Rome  when  Ovid  wrote  until  May  28th  ;
but  the  phenomenon  in  question  took  place  at
Athens  on  May  1 6th  in  the  age  of  Meton.  Hence
this  observation  was  evidently  copied  from  a  Greek
I  calendar  computed  for  the  fifth  century  b.  c.

Arcturus.

Considerable  difficulty  arises  in  the  discussion  of
the  passages  which  refer  to  Arcturus,  from  the  cir-
cumstance that  this  name  is  sometimes  applied
generally  to  the  whole  of  the  wide-spreading  con-
stellation of  Bootes,  and  sometimes  confined  to  the
briglit  star  in  the  knee  of  the  figure.

Homer.  —  Homer  (Od.  v.  29)  speaks  of  Arc-
turus as  w»|/e  SvovTa^  because  the  apparent  evening
or  heliacal  setting  took  place  late  in  the  year  when
winter  was  nigh  at  hand,  and  hence  the  phrase
vvKTCs  eV  ^ApKTovpu)  for  lofig  nights.  (See  Arat.
.585.)  Another  explanation  of  the  phrase  has  been
given  above  when  discussing  the  constellation
Bootes.

Hesiod.  —  Hesiod  {Erg.  564)  dates  the  com-
mencement of  Spring  from  the  evening  rising  of
Arcturus  (eiriTeWeTai  aKpoKuecpaios)  sixty  days
after  the  solstice.  Now  the  apparent  evening  rising
for  the  age  and  country  of  Hesiod  fell  upon  the
24  th  of  February,  therefore  his  statement  is  correct
in  round  numbers.

Again,  in  the  same  poem  (659)  he  marks  the
period  of  the  vintage  by  the  morning  (heliacal)
rising  of  Arcturus,  which,  according  to  Ideler,  fell
in  that  age  on  the  18  th  of  September.

Columella,  Pliny. — Afoming  Rising.  Colu-
mella (ix.  14.  §  10)  places  the  rising  of  Arcturus
about  fifty  days  after  the  rising  of  Canicula ;  and
since  the  heliacal  rising  of  the  latter  fell  on  the
2d  of  August  at  Rome  in  the  Julian  era,  and  of  the
former  on  the  2l8t  of  September,  the  computation
is  exact.

Pliny  (xviii.  74),  Arcturus  vero  medius  pridie
Idus  (so.  Septembr.  oritur),  i.  e.  12th  of  September,
where  the  middle  portion  of  the  whole  constellation
is  indicated,  and  the  observation  is  very  accurate.

Morning  Setting.  —  (1.)  XI.  et  X.  Kal.  Jan.
(22d  and  23d  May)  Arcturus  matte  occidit.  Col.
xi.  2.  §  43.

(2.)  VIL  Id.  Jun.  (9th  June)  Arcturus  occidit.
Id.  §  45.


ASTRONOMIA.


159


(3.)  Piiny  (xviii.  67.  §  3)  ascribes  the  Arcturi
occaaus  matutinus  to  V.  Id.  Mai,  i.e.  11th  Maj-.

(4.)  Again,  in  the  same  section  we  find  that
Arcturus  matutino  occidit  on  the  8th  of  June.

Now  the  true  morning  setting  of  Arcturus  for
Rome  at  this  epoch  belongs  to  28th  of  May,  the
apparent  morning  setting  to  10th  of  June.

But  (1)  seems  to  be  copied  from  the  observation
of  Euctemon  in  the  Parapegma  of  Geminus  ;  (2)  is  a
close  approximation  to  the  apparent  morning  setting
for  Rome  ;  (3)  is  altogether  eiToneous,  and  must
be  a  tme  morning  setting  extracted  from  some  old
Greek  calendar  ;  (4)  corresponds  with.  (2),  and  is
nearly  correct.

Evening  Rising. —  (1.)  IX.  Kal.  Mart.  (21st
Feb.)  Arcturus  prima  node  oritur.    Col.  xi.  2.  §  21 .

(2.)  Ortus  Arcturi  qui  est  ab  Idihus  Fehruariis
(13th  Feb.).     Col.  ix.  14.

(3.)  VIII.  Kal.  Mart.  (22d  Feb.)  hirundinis
visu  et  postero  die  (23d  Feb.)  Arcturi  exortu  ves-
pertino.     Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  65.

Now  the  apparent  evening  rising  of  Arcturus
took  place  for  Rome  at  the  Julian  epoch  on  the
27th  of  February',  the  tme  evening  rising  on  the
6th  of  March.  But  since  it  is  evident  from  (2)
that  Columella  here  employed  Arcturus  to  denote
not  merely  the  star  properly  so  called,  but  the
whole  figure  of  Bootes,  a  latitude  of  several  days
must  be  allowed  in  the  case  of  this  as  of  all  the
larger  constellations.  See  below  the  remarks  on
Ov.  Fast.  ii.  153.  We  may  remark,  however,  that
21st — 23d  of  February  will  answer  for  the  appa-
rent evening  rising  of  the  star  Arcturus  at  Athens
in  the  age  of  Meton.

Evening  Setting.  —  IV.  Kal  Nov.  .(29th  Oct.)
Arcturus  vespere  occidit,  ventosus  dies.  Col.  xi.  2.
§78.

This  is  taken  verbatim  from  an  observation  of
Euctemon  quoted  in  the  Parapegma  of  Geminus.
The  heliacal  setting  for  Rome  Avas  a  few  days
later,  about  the  4th  of  November.  But  the  ob-
servation of  Euctemon  is  not  accurate  for  the  lati-
tude of  Athens  in  his  own  age,  for  the  phenomenon
ought  to  have  been  placed  about  five  days  earlier,
which  proves,  as  Pfaff  remarks,  that  the  Greek
astronomers  are  not  always  to  be  depended  upon  in
thcsG  iiicittGrs

We  find  in  Pliny  (xviii.  68.  §  2),  VIII.  Id.
Aug.  (6th  August)  Arcturus  medius  occidit.  This
is  so  far  removed  from  any  setting  of  the  star  in
question  that  Harduin  pronounces  the  text  corrupt,
and  substitutes  VII.  Id.  Aug.  Aquanus  occidit  me-
dius, while  PfafF  endeavours  to  refer  the  expression
to  the  culmination,  an  explanation  vvhich  is  both
in  itself  forced  and  completely  at  variance  with  the
ordinary  usage  of  Pliny.

Again,  Pliny  (xviii.  §  74),  Pridie  Kalendas
(Nov.)  Caesari  Arcturus  occidit,  i.e.  31st  of  Oc-
tober, and  a  few  lines  farther  on  IV.  Nonas  Arc-
turus occidit  vesperi.  The  latter  is  not  far  from
the  truth  ;  the  former,  unless  it  refers  to  the  con-
stellation in  general,  must  have  been  borrowed
from  a  foreign  source.

Virgil. — Virgil  (Georg.  i.  229)  instructs  the
husbandman  to  sow  vetches,  kidney  beans  and  len-
tiles,  when  Bootes  sets,  by  which  he  probably
intends  to  indicate  the  heliacal  setting  of  Arcturus
on  the  4th  of  November.  In  like  manner  Pliny
(xviii.  15.  §  24)  orders  the  vetch  to  be  sown  about
the  setting  of  Arcturus,  the  kidney  bean  at  the
setting  of  Bootes   (xviii.  24),  the  lentile   in  the


160  ASTRONOMIA.

month  of  November  (xviii.  12).  Columella  assigns
the  sowing  of  vetches  and  kidney  beans,  and  Palla-
dius  of  kidney  beans  to  the  month  of  October  ;  if
the  end  of  the  month  is  meant,  then  the  precept
may  be  considered  as  identical  with  those  of  Virgil
and  Pliny  ;  if  the  middle  of  the  month  is  intended^
this  will  correspond  with  the  heliaail  setting  ef
Arcturus  for  the  latitude  of  Alexandria.

jAgain,  in  Georg.  i.  67.  when  tpeating  of  plough-
ing, the  words

At  si  non  fuerit  telTus  fecunda,  sub  ipsum
Arcturum  tenul  sat  erit  suspendere  suico,,

refer  to  the  morning  rising.  The  true  morning
rising  was  on  the  8  th  of  September,  the  apparent
on  the  21st.  The  former  agrees  best  with  the  di-
rections given  by  Columella  (ii.  4.  §  11)  for  the
ploughing  of  very  light  land,  "  graciles  clivi  non
sunt  aestate  arandi,sed  circa  SeptembresKalendas,"
and  a  little  lower  down,  when  treating  of  the  same
kind  of  soil,  "  itaque  optime  inter  Kalendas  et  Idus
Septembres  aratur  et  subinde  iteratur.''

Ovid. —  In  the  second  book  of  the  Fasti  (153)
we  read,

Tertia  nox  reniat:  custodem  protinus  Ursae
Adspicies  geminos  exseruisse  pedes,

that  is,  the  constellation  Arcturus  displays  both  his
feet  on  the  11th  of  February,  where  it  ought  to
be  observed  that  from  the  posture  in  which  Bootes
rises  his  two  legs  appear  above  th€  horizon  nearly
at  the  same  time.  The  apparent  evening  rising
of  the  star  Arcturus  took  place  at  Rome,  on  27th
February,  the  true  evening  rising  on  the  6th  of
March  ;  but  the  calendar  to  which  Ovid  was  in-
debted probably  recorded  the  appenrance  of  the  first
star  in  the  figure  which  became  visible.

In  three  passages,  the  morning  setting  is  clearly
described  {Fast.  iii.  403,  v.  733,  vi.  235).  In  the
first,  it  is  placed  on  4th  or  5th  of  March,  according
as  we  adopt  the  reading  quartae  or  qutntae  ;  in  the
second,  on  the  26th  of  May  ;  in  the  third,  on  the
7th  of  June.  Now  there  is  no  doubt  that  the
setting  of  Bootes  is  spread  over  a  considerable  pe-
riod ;  and  hence,  the  epithet  piger,  applied  to  him
here  and  elsewhere,  but  in  no  way  could  it  be  made
to  occupy  three  months.  The  star  Arcturus  is  one
of  the  first  which  sets  in  this  constellation :  its  true
morning  setting  took  place  on  28th  May,  its  ap-
parent morning  setting  on  10th  June  ;  thus  the
second  and  third  of  the  above  passages  will  apply
to  these  two.  In  the  first  passage  he  has  erroneously
substituted  the  apparent  morning  setting  for  the
trtie  evening  rising^  which  really  took  place,  as  we
iave  seen,  on  the  6  th  of  March.

SiRius.     Canis.    Canicitla.

Homer,  Hesiod.  —  Homer  {11.  v.  5,  xxii.  25)
alludes  to  Sirius  as  the  star  of  oiri&pa,  that  is,  of  the
hottest  portion  of  summer,  as  will  be  explained
more  fully  below  in  treating  of  the  ancient  divi-
sion of  the  year  into  seasons.  The  heliacal  rising
of  Sirius  in  Southern  Greece  would  take  place  in
the  age  of  Homer  about  the  middle  of  July.

The  culmination  of  Sirius  spoken  of  by  Hesiod
{Erg.  60.9),  as  marking  along  with  the  morning
rising  of  Arcturus  the  period  of  the  vintage,  would
take  place  in  that  age  about  the  20th  of  September.
The  passage  {Erg.  417),  where  ^eipios  da-riip  is
supposed  to  denote  the  sun,  has  been  already  noticed.
Sec  above  p.  152,  b.


ASTRONOMIA.

VaRRO,  CoLUM  ELLA,  PlIN  Y. Momijtg  liisii/f^

—  (1.)  Varro,  following  the  calendar  of  Caesau,
reckons  an  interval  of  twenty-four  days  from  the
summer  solstice  to  the  rishig  of  Sirius  {ad  Canicukus
sigmtm)  which,  according  to  this  calculation,  would
faH  on,  the  17th  or  l&h  of  July  {R.  R.  i.  28.)

(2.)  Columella  (xi.  2.  §  5a)  fixes  upon  the  26th
of  July  (  VII.  Kal.  A  ug.  Canicula  apparet),  and  in
another  passage  (ix.  15.  §  5)  makes  the  interval
between  the  solstice  and  the  rising  of  Sirius  about
thirty  days  {peracto  solstiiio  usque  ad.  orbum,  Cant-
culae,  qui  fere  dies  triginta  sunt),  that  is,  on  the
24th  of  July.

(3.)  Pliny  (xviii.  38.  §  2),  says,  that  the  epoch
''^quod  canis.  ori/wn  vocamus  "  corresponded  with  the
entrance  of  the  s\m  into  Leo,  that  is,  according  to
the  Julian  calendar,  which  he  professes  to  follow,
the  24th  of  July.

(4.)  In  the  very  next  clause  he  says,  that  it  fell
twenty-three  days  after  the  solstice,  that  is,  on  the
17  th  of  July.

(5.)  And  a  little  farther  on  (§  4),  he  refers  the
same  event  specifically  to,  the  17th  of  July  {XVI.
Kal.  Aug.).,

(6.)  Finally,  in  a  different  part  of  his.  work  (xi.
14),  he  places  the  rising  of  Sirius  thirty  days  after
the  solstice  :  ipso  Sirio  ejrplcTulescente  post  solstitiuiii
die/ms  tricenis  fere,  a  passage  in  which  it  will  be
seen  upon  referring  to  the  original,  that  he  must
have  be  n  consulting  Greek  authorities,  and  in
which  the  words  necessarily  imply  a  visible  rising
of  the  star.

The  whole  of  the  above  statements  may  be  re-
duced to  two.  In  (1),  (4),  (5),  the  rising  of  Sirius
is  placed  on  the  17th  or  18th  of  July,  twenty -three
days  after  the  solstice,  in  (2),  (3),  (6),  about  thirty
days  after  the  solstice  ;  that  is,  24th — 26th  of  July.

Now  the  true  morning  rising  of  Sirius  for  R,ome
at  the  Julian  era  fell  upon  the  19th  of  July,  the
apparent  morning  or  heliacal  rising  on  the  2d  of
August,  thirty-eight  or  thirty-nme  days  after  th.»
solstice.

Hence  (1),  (4),  (5),  are  close  approximations  to
the  truth,  while  (2),  (3),  (6)  are  inapplicable  to
Rome,  and  borrowed  from  computations  adapted  to
the  horizon  of  Southern  Greece.

Some  words  in  Pliny  deserve  particular  notice :
"  XVI.  Kal.  Aug.  Assyriae  Procyon  exoritur ;  dein
postridie  fere  ubique,  confessum  inter  omnes  sidus
indicans,  quod  canis  ortum  vocamus,  sole  partem
primam  Leonis  ingresso.  Hoc  fit  post  solstitiuni
XXIII.  die.  Sentiunt  id  maria,  et  teirae,  multao
vero  et  ferae,  lit  suis  locis  diximus.  Neque  est
minor  ei  veneratio  quam  descriptis  in  deos  stellis."
Although  the  expressions  employed  here  are  far
from  being  distinct,  they  lead  us  to  infer  that
certain  remarkable  periods  in  the  year  were  from
habit  and  superstition  so  indissolubly  connected
in  the  public  mind  with  certain  astronomical  phe-
nomena, that  even  after  the  periods  in  question
had  ceased  to  correspond  with  the  phenomena,  na
change  was  introduced  into  the  established  phra-
seology. Thus  the  period  of  most  intense  heat,
which  at  one  time  coincided  with  the  heliacal  rising
of  Sirius,  would  continue  to  be  distinguished  in  the
language  of  the  people,  and  in  almanacs  intended
for  general  use,  as  the  Ca7iis  Exortus,  long  after
the  two  epochs  were  removed  to  a  distance  from
each  other,  just  as  among  ourselves  the  term  dog-
daj's  having  onco  obtained  a  firm  footing,  is  used
and  prob:ibly  will  continue  to  be  used  for  centuries


I


1


ASTRONOMIA.

without  the  slightest  regard  to  tlie  actual  position
of  the  constellation  at  the  time  in  question.  An
example  still  more  striking,  because  it  involves  an
anomaly  universally  recognised  by  scientific  men,
is  the  practice  of  denominating  the  position  of  the
sun  at  the  vernal  equinox,  as  the  first  point  of  A  rics,
although  two  thousand  years  have  elapsed  since
the  intersection  of  the  ecliptic  with  the  equator
corresponded  with  the  commencement  of  the  con-
stellation Aries.  A  necessity  has  thus  arisen  of
drawing  a  distinction,  which  proves  most  em-
barrassing to  the  unlearned,  between  the  signs  of
tJie  zodiac  and  the  constellations  of  the  zodiac,
and  thus  the  sun  is  said  to  be  in  the  sign  Aries
while  he  is  actually  traversing  the  constellation  of
Pisces,  and  enters  the  sign  Taurus  long  before  he
(jiiits  the  constellation  Aries.  Now  something  of
this  sort  may  to  a  certain  extent  explain  some  of
tiK!  anomalies  which  recur  so  perpetually  in  the
calendar  of  Columella  or  Pliny.  Certain  remark-
ahlo  appearances  fixed  upon  at  a  very  early  period
to  mark  the  approach  of  summer  and  winter,  such
{IS  the  rising  and  setting  of  the  Pleiades,  may
have  by  cA'stom  or  tradition  become  so  com-
pletely identified  in  the  minds  of  the  people  with
particular  days,  that  the  compilers  of  calendars  in-
tended for  general  use,  while  they  desired  to  re-
gister accui-ate  observations,  were  compelled  at  the
same  time  to  include  those  which,  belonging  to
remote  ages  and  foreign  lands,  had  nevertheless
acquired  a  prescriptive  claim  to  attention.  We
may  thus  account  for  inconsistencies  so  numerous
and  glaring,  that  they  could  scarcely  have  been  al-
together overlooked  by  the  writers  in  whose  works
they  occur,  although  it  is  impossible  to  forgive
their  carelessness  in  withholding  the  necessary  ex-
planations, or  the  gross  ignorance  which  they  so
often  manifest.

Evening  Setting,  Columella  places  the  evening
setting  of  the  Dog  on  the  30th  of  April  (Prid.
Kal.  Mai.  Canis  se  Vespere  celat\  xi.  2.  §  37.
Pliny  on  the  •28th  (IV.  Kal.  Mai.  Canis  occidit,
stilus  et  per  se  vehemcns  et  cui  praeoccidere  Canicu-
lam  vecesse  sit)^  xviii.  69.

The  heliacal  setting  at  Rome  for  the  Julian
era  was  on  the  1st  of  May,  which  proves  the  above
statements  to  be  nearly  correct.  The  expression  aii
praeoccidere  Canictdam  necesse  sit  has  been  already
commented  on.     See  above,  p.  153,  a.

Morning  Setting.  Evening  Rising.  —  (1).  VII.
Kal.  Dec.  (25  Nov.)  Canicula  occidit  solisortu.  Col.
xi.  2.  §  89.

(2.)  ///.  Kal  Jan.  (30  Dec.)  Canicula  vespere
occidit.  Ibid.  §  94.

(3.)  ///.  Kal.  Jan.  (30  Dec.)  Matutino  canis
occidens.  Plin.  xviii.  64.

( 1 )  is  accurate  for  the  apparent  morning  setting
at  Rome,  b.  c.  44.

(2)  and  (3)  are  directly  at  variance  with  each
other,  and  are  both  blunders.  The  apparent  even-
ing rising  took  place  at  Rome  on  the  30th  of  De-
cember, not  the  evening  setting  as  Columella  would
have  it,  nor  the  morning  setting  as  Pliny  has  re-
corded.

Virgil.  —  Virgil  instnicts  the  farmer  to  sow
beans,  lucerne,  and  millet :  —

Candidus  auratis  aperit  cum  comibus  annum
Taiurus  et  adverso  cedens  Canis  occidit  astro.

Georg.  i.  217.

The  sun  entered  Taurus,  according  to  the  Julian


ASTRONOMIA.


161


calendar,  on  the  24tli  of  April :  the  heliacal  setting
of  Sirius  was  on  the  1  st  of  Ma}',  six  days  after-
wards. Many  interpretations  have  been  proposed
for  the  words  "adverso  cedens  Canis  occidit  astro ; "
of  these  the  most  plausible  is  that  which  explains
them  with  reference  to  the  fonii  and  attitude  under
which  the  constellation  of  the  Dog  was  depicted,
which  made  him  set  backwards  facing  the  signs
which  follow.

Again,  in  Georg.  iv.  425,  we  find

Jam  rapidus  torrens  sitientes  Sirius  Indos
Ardebat  coelo  et  medium  sol  igneus  orbera
Hauserat,

words  which  are  intended  to  indicate  the  hottest
portion  of  the  day  in  the  hottest  season  of  the
year.  Here  the  separate  mention  of  "  Sol "  is
quite  sufficient  to  confute  those  who  would  con-
sider Sirius  as  equivalent  in  this  passage  to  the
sun.  See  above,  p.  1 52,  b.  Comp.  Lucan.  Phar.
X.  209.

Ovid.  —  In  the  fourth  book  of  the  Fasti  (x.
901)  the  rising  of  Sirius  is  assigned  to  the  25th  of
April,  is  made  coincident  with  the  disappearance
of  Aries,  and  marks  the  epoch  of  mid-spring  :  —

Sex  ubi  quae  restant  luces  Aprilis  habebit
Tn  medio  cursu  tempora  Veris  erunt ;

Et  frustra  pecudem  quaeres  Athamantidos  Helles
Signaque  dant  imbrcs  exoriturque  Canis.

A  notorious  blunder  has  been  here  committed  by
the  poet.  No  rising  of  Sirius,  either  real  or  ap-
parent, in  the  morning  or  in  the  evening,  cor-
responds to  this  season.  But  this  is  the  very  day
fixed  by  Euctemon  (ap.  Gemin.  Parapeg.)  for  the
heliacal  setting  (kvwv  KpvTvnrai)  of  the  Dog,  which
fell  at  Rome  for  the  Julian  era  on  the  1st  of  May.

Again,  in  Fast.  v.  723,  we  read  —

Nocte  sequente  diem  Canis  Erigoneius  exit,

that  is,  on  the  22d  of  May.  Now,  it  is  clear
from  a  former  passage  (iv.  939)  that  by  Canis
Erigoneius  he  means  the  Great  Dog ;  but  the  true
rising  of  Sirius  took  place  for  Rome  at  this  period
on  the  1 9th  of  July,  the  apparent  on  the  2d  of
August.

Not  much  will  be  gained  by  supposing  that
Procyon  is  here  alluded  to  ;  for  the  risings  of  that
star  precede  those  of  Sirius  by  about  eight  days
only.  Here,  again,  therefore,  we  have  a  gross
mistake.

Palladius.  —  Palladius  (vii.  9)  :  "  In  ortu
Caniculae, qui  apud  RomanosXIV.  Kal.  Aug.  (19th
July)  die  tenetur,  cxplorant  (sc.  Aegypti)  quae
semina  oxortum  sidus  exurat,  quae  illaesa  custo-
diat."  Now  this  is  the  exact  period  of  the  heliacal
rising  in  Egypt  for  the  Julian  epoch  ;  hence  the
words  "  apud  Romanes  "  must  refer  to  a  notice  in
some  Roman  Calendar,  and  not  to  the  real  period
of  the  phenomenon.

Orion.
It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that,  from  the  great
size  of  this  constellation,  its  risings  and  settings
are  spread  over  a  considerable  space  ;  while  the
brilliant  stars  which  it  contains  are  so  numerous
that  no  one  can  be  fixed  upon  as  a  representative
of  the  whole,  as  in  the  case  of  Bootes,  where  the
different  appearances  are  usually  referred  to  Arc-
turus  alone.  Hence  those  writers  who  aim  at
precision  use  such  phrases  as  "  Orion  incipit  oriri,"


162


ASTRONOMIA.


"■Orion  totus  oritur,"  "Orion  incipit  occidcre  ;"
and  wherever  such  qualifications  are  omitted  the
statements  are  necessarily  vague.

Hesiod.  —  Ilesiod  (Erg.  598)  orders  the  corn
to  be  thrashed  eSr'  t.v  irpara  (pavrj  aOevos  'Clpiavos.
For  that  age  and  country  the  apparent  morning  or
heliacal  rising  of  Orion  would  be  completed  about
the  yth  of  July.

The  setting  of  Orion  was  one  of  the  tokens
which  gave  notice  to  the  farmer  that  the  season
for  ploughing  had  arrived,  and  to  the  mariner  that
he  must  no  longer  brave  the  perils  of  the  deep,
{Enu  615.)  The  apparent  morning  setting  ex-
tended over  the  whole  month  of  November.

The  culmination  of  Orion,  which  coincided  iwith
the  vintage  {Erg.  609)  took  place  about  the  J 4th
of  September.

Aristotle.  —  Aristotle  (Meteorolog.  ii.  5,
Profdem.  xiv.  26)  places  the  rising  of  Orion  at  the
commencement  of  Opora,  and  the  setting  at  the  be-
ginning of  winter,  or  rather  in  the  transition  from
summer  to   winter  {iv  jxeraSoAf  rod  ^dpavs  Koi

Now  the  two  limits  which  included  the  be-
ginning and  end  of  the  apparent  moniing  or
heliacal  rising,  which  alone  can  be  here  indicated,
were,  for  the  age  and  country  of  the  writer,  l/th
of  June — 14th  July;  those  which  embraced  the
apparent  morning  setting  vi^cre,  8th  of  November —
8th  of  December  ;  while  the  true  morning  setting
continued  from  27th  of  October — 20th  of  No-
vember.

Upon  examining  the  passages  in  question  a  very
curious  contradiction  will  be  perceived,  which  has
long  exercised  the  ingenuity  of  the  commentators.
Aristotle  distinctly  asserts  in  one  place  that  the
rising  of  Orion  is  characterised  by  unsteady  stormy
weather,  and  offers  an  explanation  of  the  fact:
in  another  place  he  as  distinctly  avers  that  the
rising  of  Orion  is  characterised  by  the  absence  of
wind  (Tepi  'D-picovos  avoaoK^iV  fidKiara  yivirai
urfve/xia).

Pliny.  —  (1)  VIII.  Idus  (Mart.)  Jqui/onn
piscis  exortu,  et  postero  die  Orionis.  xviii.  65.  §  1.

(2)  Nonis  (Apr.)  Aegypto  Orion  et  gladius  ejus
incipiunt  aJjscondi.  xviii.  66.  §  1.

(1)  The  first  date,  8th  of  March,  is  so  far  re-
moved from  the  rising  of  Orion,  whether  in  the
morning  or  the  evening,  that  Ideler  is  probably
correct  when  he  supposes  that  either  the  text  is
corrupt  or  that  Pliny  himself  inserted  Orion  by
mistake  instead  of  the  name  of  some  other  constel-
lation.

(2)  Here  also  the  date,  5th  of  April,  is  wide  of
the  truth.  The  apparent  evening  setting  of  the
middle  star  in  the  belt  fell  at  Alexandria  on  the
26th  of  April,  seven  days  later  than  at  Rome,  the
true  evening  setting  about  the  9th  or  1 0th  of  May.

Virgil,  Horace.  —  Both  Virgil  and  Horace
frequently  allude  to  the  tempests  which  accom-
panied the  winter  setting  of  Orion  (Saevus  ithi
Orion  hibernis  conditur  undis.,  Virg.  Aeu.  vii.  719  ;
see  also  iv.  52  ;  Hor.  Carm.  i.  28.  21,  iii.  27.  17,
Epod.  X.  9,  XV.  7),  just  as  Hesiod  {Erg.  617)
eight  hundred  years  before  had  warned  the  mariner
that  when  the  Pleiades,  fleeing  from  the  might  of
Orion,  plunge  into  the  dark  main  :

a)}  rdn  Travroiwv  dyefuify  ^vovffiv  driTai.

The  apparent  morning  setting  of  Orion,  which
in  the  time  of  Hesiod  commenced  early  in  No-


ASTRONOMIA.

vcmber,  soon  after  the  moniing  setting  of  the
Pleiades,  thus  became  connected  in  traditional
lore  with  the  first  gales  of  the  rainy  season,  and
the  association  continued  for  centuries,  although
the  phenomenon  itself  became  gradually  further
and  further  removed  from  the  beginning  of  the
stormy  perfod.  In  the  Parapegma  of  Geminus  we
find  notices  by  three  different  astronomers,  in  which
the  setting  of  the  Pleiades  and  of  Orion  are  men-
tioned as  attended  by  tempests,  although  each  of
the  three  fixes  upon  a  different  day.  For  Rome,
at  the  Julian  era,  the  apparent  morning  setting
commenced  about  the  12th  or  13th  of  November.
In  Pliny  (xviiL  74)  we  find,  "  V.  Idus  Novembr.
(8  Novemb.)  gladius  Orionis  occidere  incipit,"
which  is  the  true  morning  setting  for  Alexandria
at  that  epoch.

Ovid.  —  Ovid  refers  twice  in  his  Fasti  to  the
setting  of  Orion.  In  one  passage  (iv,  387)  he
places  it  on  the  day  before  the  termination  of  the
Megalesia,  that  is,  on  the  10th  of  April  ;  in
another  (v,  493),  where  the  complete  disappearance
of  the  figure  is  expressly  noted,  on  the  11th  of
May.

Now  the  apparent  evening  setting  of  Rigel,  the
bright  star  which  marks  the  left  foot,  took  place
for  Rome  in  the  age  of  the  poet  on  11th  April,
while  the  smaller  star,  now  known  as  k.  set  on  the
previous  day,  the  true  evening  setting  of  Betelgeux,
which  marks  the  right  shoulder,  fell  on  the  11th  of
May,  Hence  it  is  clear  that  Ovid  derived  his  in-
formation from  two  very  accurate  calendars,  one  of
which  gave  the  date  of  the  commencement  of  the
apparent  evening  setting  ;  the  other,  the  date  of  the
termination  of  the  true  cA^ening  setting.

He  refers  twice  to  the  rising  of  Orion  also  — ■
in  the  sixth  book  of  the  Fasti  (717),  on  the  16th
of  June:

At  pater  Heliadum  radios  ubi  tinxerit  undis,

Et  cinget  geminos  stella  serena  polos.
Toilet  humo  validos  proles  Hj^riea  lacertos,

and  on  the  festival  of  Fortuna  Fortis,  on  the  24th
of  June :

Zona  latet  tua  nunc,  et  eras  fortasse  latebit,
Dehinc  erit,  Orion,  adspicicnda  mihi,

that  is,  on  the  26th  of  June.

With  regard  to  the  first,  the  date  is  nearly  cor-
rect for  the  true  morning  {not  evening,  as  the
words  denote)  rising  of  the  two  stars  (o  o)  at  the
extremity  of  the  left  hand  ;  with  regard  to  the
second,  the  true  morning  rising  of  the  middle  star
in  the  belt  fell  on  the  21st  of  June,  the  apparent
on  the  13th  of  July,  There  is  a  mistake,  there-
fore, here  of  five  days,  as  far  as  Rome  is  con-
cerned.

Hvades.

In  Hesiod  [Erg.  615),  the  setting  of  the  Plei-
ades, of  the  Hyades,  and  of  mighty  Orion,  warn
the  husbandman  that  the  season  has  arrived  for
ploughing  the  earth,  and  the  mariner,  that  naviga-
tion must  cease.  The  apparent  morning  setting
of  the  Hyades  took  place,  according  to  the  cal-
culation of  Ideler,  for  the  age  and  country  of
Hesiod,  on  the  7th  of  the  Julian  November,  four
days  after  that  of  the  Pleiades,  and  eight  before
that  of  Orion,

Virgil  {Aen.l  744,  iii.  516)  terms  this  cluster
"  pluvias  Ilyadas,"  and  Horace  (Carm.  i.  3.  14)


ASTRONOMIA.

I"  tristes  Hyadas,"  in  reference  to  their  morning
Betting  at  tlie  most  rainy  and  stormy  season  of  the
3'ear.  The  true  morning  setting  for  Rome  at  the
Julian  era  iiappened  on  the  3d  of  November,  the
apparent  on  the  14th  of  November.  The  ap-
parent evening  rising,  which  fell  upon  the  25th  of
October,  would  likewise  suit  these  epithets.

Ovid,  in  his  Fasti  (iv.  677)^  places  the  evening
setting  of  the  Hyades  on  the  17th  of  April,  the
■day  fixed  in  the  Calendar  of  Caesar  (Plin.  xviii.  66.
§  1),  while  Columella  names  the  18th  (R.  R.  xi.  2.

36).  These  statements  are  nearly  accurate,  since
the  apparent  evening,  or  heliacal  setting,  took  place
for  Rome  at  that  epoch  on  the  20th  of  April.

In  the  same  poem,  the  morning  rising  is  alluded
to  five  times.

(1.)  It  is  said  (v.  163)  to  take  place  on  the  2nd
of  May,  which  was  the  day  fixed  in  the  Calendar
of  Caesar  (Plin.  xviii.  66.  §  1),  and  adopted  by
Columella  (xi.  2.  §  39),  whose  words,  Siccula  cum
sole  oritur^  indicate  the  true  morning  rising.

(2.)  On  the  14th  of  May  (v.  603),  while  Co-
lumella (Ibid.  §  43)  has,  XII.  Kal.  Jun.  (21st
May)  Suculae  exoriuntur.

(3.)  On  the  27th  of  May  (v.  &c.).

(4.)  On  the  second  of  June  (vi.  197).

(5.)  On  the  15th  of  June  (vi.  71 1).

Now  the  true  morning  rising  of  the  Hyades  for
Rome  at  that  epoch  was  on  the  16th  of  May,  the
iq)parent  or  heliacal  rising  on  the  9th  of  June,
the  true  evening  setting  on  the  3d  of  May.

Hence  it  is  clear  that  Ovid,  Columella,  and
Pliny,  copying  in  (1)  a  blunder  which  had  found
its  way  into  the  Calendar  of  Caesar,  assigned  the
morning  rising  to  the  2nd  of  May  instead  of  the
true  evening  setting.  The  true  evening  rising  lay
between  the  days  named  in  (2).  The  heliacal
rising  was  thirteen  days  after  (3),  seven  days  after
(4),  six  days  before  (5).

The  Cretan  Crown,

We  have  seen  above  that  Virgil  {Georg.  i.  222),
instructs  the  farmer  not  to  commence  sowing  wheat
until  after  the  Pleiades  have  set  in  the  morning  :

Gnosiaque  ardentis  decedat  stella  Coronae,

words  which  must  signify  the  setting  a/the  Cretan
Crmnn.  The  apparent  evening  (or  heliacal)  setting
of  tliis  constellation  fell  at  Rome  for  this  epoch
njK.n  the  9th  of  November,  the  very  day  after  the
apparent  morning  setting  o!'  the  Pleiades.

Ovid  (Fust.  iii.  459),  after  having  spoken  of  the
rising  of  Pegasus  on  the  night  of  March  7th,  adds,

Protenus  adspicies    venienti   nocte  Coronam  =
Gnosida,

words  which  denote  the  evening  rising  ;  and,  in
reality,  the  appiirent  evening  rising  took  place  on
the  tenth  of  March,  only  two  days  later  than  the
date  here  fixed.

The  Kids.

Virgil  (^eoTv/.  i.  205)  when  inculcating  the
utility  of  observing  the  stars,  declares  that  it  is  no
less  necessary  for  the  husbandman  than  for  the
matber  to  watch  Arcturus  and  the  glistening  Snake,
and  tl/e  days  of  the  Kids  {haedorumque  dies  ser-
vandi).  Elsev/here  {Aen.  ix.  658)  he  compares  a
dense  flight  of  arrows  and  javelins  rattling  against
shields  and  helmets  to  the  toi'rents  of  rain  proceed-
ing from  the  west  under  the  influence  oi  the  icatcry


ASTRONOMIA.  1G3

kids  (pluvialibus  Jiaedis).  Horace  (Cann.  iii.  I.
27)  dwells  on  the  terrors  of  setting  Arcturus  and
the  rising  Kid,  while  Ovid  (Trisi.  i.  ].  13)  and
Theocritus  (C-  53.  See  Schol.)  speak  in  the  same
strain.  In  Columella's  Calendar  (xi.  2.  §  66)  we
find  V.  Kal.  Odd).  (27th  Sept.)  Haedi  exoriuntur,
and  a  little  farther  on  (§  73)  Fridie  Non.  Octob.
(4th  Nov.)  Haedi  oriuntur  vespere.  The  former
date  marks  the  precise  day  of  the  true  evening  rising
of  the  foremost  kid  at  Rome  for  the  Julian  era  ;
and  hence  the  apparent  evening  rising,  which  would
fall  some  days  earlier,  would  indicate  the  approach
of  those  storms  which  commonly  attend  upon  the
autumnal  equinox.

III.  Division  op  the  Year  into  Seasons.

As  early  as  the  age  of  Hesiod  the  commence-
ment of  diiferent  seasons  was  marked  by  the  risings
and  settings  of  certain  stars  ;  but  before  proceeding
to  determine  these  limits  it  will  be  necessary  to
ascertain  into  how  many  compartments  the  year
was  portioned  out  b}^  the  earlier  Greeks.

Homer  clearly  defines  three:  —  1.  Spring  (eap),
at  whose  return  the  nightingale  trills  her  notes
among  the  greenwood  brakes  (Od.  xix.  519).  2.
Winter  (x^i/xwp,  x^^"/""),  at  whose  approach,  ac-
companied by  deluges  of  rain  (dQ^acparov  up-Spov),
the  cranes  fly  screaming  awaj'-  to  the  streams  of
ocean  {11.  iii.  4,  comp.  Hesiod.  Erg.  448).  3.
Summer  (.^e'pos),  to  which  x^'A"  is  directly  opposed
(  Od.  vii,  118).  4.  Three  lines  occur  in  the  Odyssey
(xi.  191.  avrap  iivijveKdriai  ^epos rf:da\vtaT  oirdipr,,
and  also  xii.  76,  xiv.  384)  where  the  word  oivwpa
seems  to  be  distinguished  from  ^ipos,  and  is  in
consequence  generally  translated  autumn.  Ideler,
however,  has  proved  in  a  satisnictory  manner
{Flandbuch  der  Chron.  i.  p.  243)  that  the  term
originally  indicated  not  a  season  separate  from  and
following  after  summer,  but  the  hottest  part  of
summer  itself;  and  hence  Sirius,  whose  heliacal
rising  took  place  in  the  age  of  Homer  about  the
middle  of  July,  is  designated  as  aar^io  otrwpivhs
{II.  V.  5  ;  see  Schol.  and  Eustath.  ad  loc. ;  compare
also  //.  xxii.  26),  while  Aristotle  in  one  passage
(Meteorolog.  ii.  5)  makes  the  heliacal  rising  of
Sirius,  which  he  notes  as  coinciding  with  the  en-
trance of  the  sun  into  Leo,  i.  e.  24th  July  of  the
Julian  calendar,  the  sign  of  the  commencement  of
OTTwpa  ;  and  in  another  passage  {Problem,  xxv.  26,
xxvi.  14)  places  the  rising  of  Orion  at  the  begin-
ning of  oTTciopa,  and  the  setting  of  the  same  con-
stellation at  the  beginning  of  winter — eV  /iera^oAp
rov  S>€povs  Kal  x^ '/"^ros  —  an  expression  which
clearly  indicates  that  oirdopa  was  included  within
the  more  general  ^epos.

Hesiod  notices  eap  (Erg.  462),  i^epos  {I.  c).
Xc7/ia  (450),  and  in  his  poem  we  find  the  trace  of
a  fourfold  division,  for  he  employs  the  adjective
fMeTOTToopiySs  (Erg.  415)  in  reference  to  the  period
of  the  first  rains,  when  the  excessive  heat  had  in
some  degree  abated.  These  rains  he  elsewhere
calls  the  oirwpiyhs  v/xSpos,  and  notices  them  in  con-
nection with  the  vintage,  when  he  enjoins  the
mariner  to  hasten  home  to  port  before  the  serene
weather  has  passed  away  —  jUTjSe  p4veiy  olvov  re
v€ov  Kal  oTTwpLvov  up€pov.  Moreover,  by  making
^ephs  proper  end  fifty  days  after  the  solstice  (Erg.
663)  he  leaves  a  A^acant  space  from  the  middle  of
August  to  the  end  of  October,  which  he  must  have
intended  to  fill  by  a  fourth  season,  which  he  no-
v.'here  specifically  names.  As  late,  however,  as
M  2


164


ASTRONOMIA.


Aeschylus  {Pmm.  453)  .ind  Aristophanes  {Av.
710)  the  seasons  are  spoken  of  as  three,  x^'M'*'''*
cap,  i&epos  by  the  former  ;  x^'A^^^^j  fap^  birwpa  by
the  latter.  Nor  can  we  avoid  attaching  some
Aveight  to  the  fact  that  the  most  ancient  poets  and
artists  recognised  the  "Clpai  as  three  only,  bearing,
according  to  the  Thcogony  (901)  the  symbolical
appellation  of  Order  {Y.vvQ}i'ia\  Justice  (At/cTj),
and  blooming  Peace  {Y.lpi\v7\).  Indeed  Pausanias
has  preserved  a  record  of  a  time  when  the  "Clpai
were  known  as  two  goddesses  only  —  KapTrcb,  the
patroness  of  fruits,  and  ©oAAo),  the  guardian  of
blossoms  (ix.  35.  §  2).  We  may  hence  safely
conclude  that  the  Greeks  for  many  ages  discrimi-
nated three  seasons  onl}'-.  Winter,  Spring,  and
Summer,  that  the  general  name  for  the  whole  of
summer  being  ^epos,  the  hottest  portion  was  dis-
tinguished as  oTTwpa,  and  that  the  latter  term  was
gradually  separated  from  the  former,  so  that  ^epos
was  commonly  employed  for  early  summer,  and
hirdipa  for  late  summer.

The  first  direct  mention  of  autumn  is  contained
in  the  treatise  De  Diaeta  (lib.  iii.  &c.),  commonly
ascribed  to  Hippocrates  (b.  c  420),  where  we  are
told  that  the  year  is  usually  divided  into  four  parts,
Winter  (x^'M'^''),  Spring  (cap),  Summer  (Sf'pos),
Autumn  (cpdivStrupov)  ;  and  this  word  with  its
synonjTn  fx^rStrapov  occurs  regularly  from  this  time
forward,  proving  that  those  by  whom  they  were
framed  considered  6wdl>pa,  not  as  autumn,  but  as  the


ASTRONOMIA.

period  which  immediately  preceded  autumn  and
merged  in  it.

We  discover  also  in  the  Greek  medical  writers
traces  of  a  sevenfold  division,  although  there  is  no
evidence  to  prove  that  it  was  ever  generally
adopted.  According  to  this  distribution,  summer
is  divided  into  two  parts,  and  winter  into  three,
and  we  have,  1.  Spring  (eap).  2.  Early  summer
(^epos).  3.  Late  summer  {oTrdcpa).  4.  Autumn
((pdipS-rrccpov  s.  fxeroTrcopov).  5.  The  ploughing  or
sowing  season  {&poTos  a.  (Tiropr]T6s).  6.  Winter
proper  (x^ifidov).  7.  The  planting  season  {<pv.
Ta\ia  ).

From  Varro  (R.  R.  i.  28),  Columella  (ix.  14.
xi,  2),  and  Pliny  (xviii.  25)  we  infer  that  Julius
Caesar,  in  his  Calendar,  selected  an  eight-fold
division,  each  of  the  four  seasons  being  subdivided
into  two,  after  this  manner :  1 .  Veris  Initium.
2.  Aequinoctium,  Vemum.  3.  Aesiatis  Liitium.  4.
Solstitium.  5,  Autumni  Initium.  6.  Aequinoctium
Autumni.     7.  Hiemis  Initium.     8.   Bruma.

We  find  no  trace  in  Homer  of  any  connection
having  been  established  between  the  recurrence  of
particular  astronomical  phenomena,  and  the  return
of  the  seasons.  But  in  Hesiod,  as  remarked
above,  and  in  subsequent  writers,  the  limits  of  the
divisions  which  they  adopt  are  carefully  defined  by
the  risings  and  settings  of  particular  stars  or  con-
stellations. The  following  tabular  arrangement
will  afford  a  view  of  the  most  important  systems :


Commencement  of  spring

Commencement  of  summer
(^jUTjTos)  or  reaping  time

Thrashing  time

Period  of  most  oppressive  heat

End  of  summer  (^epos)

Period  of  the  vintage

Commencement  of  winter,
Avhich  coincides  with
ploughing  time  {&poTOs),
and  the  close  of  navigation


Division  of  the  Seasons  accoi'ding  to  Hesiod.

The  evening  (&KpoKV€<paios)  rising  of  Arcturus  60  days  after  the  winter

solstice  {JSrff.  564).
(Heliacal)  rising  of  the  Pleiads  after  they  have  remained  concealed  for

40  days  and  40  nights  {Erg.  383).
(Heliacal)  rising  of  the  first  star  in  Orion  {Erff.  595).
(Heliacal)  rising  of  Sirius  (Erg.  582,  &c.).
Fifty  days  after  the  solstice  {Erg.  663).

(Heliacal)  rising  of  Arcturus.  Culmination  of  Sirius  and  Orion  (Erg.  609),
The  (morning)  setting  of  the  Pleiades  (Erg.  383),  of  the  Hyades,  and  of

Orion  (^r^.  615).


According  to  the  Author  oftlie  Treatise  "  De  Diaeta.''''


Commencement  of  spring
*'  summer

"  autumn

"  winter


The  vernal  equinox.
Heliacal  rising  of  the  Pleiades.
Heliacal  rising  of  Arcturus.
Morning  setting  of  Pleiades.


Sevenfold  Division,  according  to  Hippocrates  and  otlier  Medical  Writers.


Commencement  of  spring  -         _         -

"  early  summer  (^ipos)     -

**  late  summer  (6ira>pa)

"  autumn         .         _         -

**  ploughing     and    sowing

season  (&poTOs  aTroprjThs).

Commencement  of  winter  proper  (x^t/ucbr)  -
"  planting  season  (<pvTa\ia)


The  vernal  equinox.
Heliacal  rising  of  the  Pleiades.
Heliacal  rising  of  Sirius.
Heliacal  rising  of  Arcturus.
Morning  setting  of  Pleiades.

Winter  solstice.

Evening  rising  of  Arcturus.


Seasons  according  to  Euctemon,  Eudoxus,  and  other  Aut/iors  quoted  in  the  Parapegma  o/Gemimia,


First  breezes  of  Zephyrus
Appearance  of  the  swallow
Appearance  of  kite  (mrivhs  <paivirai)
Commencement  of  summer
Midvk-inter      -         -         -         -         .


16°  or  17°  of  Aquarius.

2°  of  Pisces.

17°  of  Pisces  (Eud.)  — 22°  of  Pisces  (Euctem.).

1 3°  of  Taurus.

14**  of  Capncomus.


ASYLUM.


ASYLUM.


l.K-S


According  to  the  Calendar  of  Julius  Caesar,


Commencement  t)f  spring  -
Vernal  equinox
Commencement  of  summer
Summer  solstice  (solstitium)
Commencement  of  autumn
Autumnal  equinox  -
Commencement  of  winter
Winter  solstice  (Jrruma)  -


The  breezes  of  Favonius  begin  to  blow
Heliacal  rising  of  the  Pleiades  (Vergiliae)
Morning  setting  of  Fidicula
Morning  setting  of  the  Pleiades


VIL  Id.  Feb.  (7  Febi-uarjO-
VIII.  Kal.  Apr.  (25  March).

VII.  Kal.  Mai.  (9  May).

VIII.  Kal.  Jun.  (24  June).
III.  Id.  Aug.  (11  August).
VIII.  Kal.  Oct.  (24  September).
IIL  Id.  Nov.  (11  November).
VIII.  Kal.  Jan.  (25  December).


Thus  assigning  to  spring,  ninety-one  days  ;  to  summer,  ninety-four  days  ;  to  autumn,  ninety-one  days

to  winter,  eighty-four  days.  [W.  R.J


ASTY'NOMI  {a<TTvv6yLoi),  public  officers  in
most  of  the  Greek  states,  who  had  to  preserve  order
in  the  streets,  to  keep  them  clean,  and  to  see  that  all
bu  Idings,  both  public  and  private,  were  in  a  safe
state,  and  not  likely  to  cause  injury  by  falling
down.  (Aristot.  Polit.  vi.  5,  ed,  Schneider  ;  Plat.
Leg.  vi.  pp.  759,  763  ;  Dig.  43.  tit.  10.  s.  1.)  At
Athens  there  were  ten  astynomi,  five  for  the  city
and  five  for  the  Peiraeeus,  and  not  twenty,  fifteen
for  the  city  and  five  for  the  Peiraeeus,  as  is  stated
in  some  editions  of  Harpoci-ation.  (Harpocrat.
Suid.  s.  V.  ;  Bekker,  Anecd.  p.  455  ;  Bcckh,
Corp.  Inscrip.  vol.  i.  p.  337.)  A  person  was
.obliged  to  discharge  this  biu-densome  office  only
once  in  his  life.  (Dem.  Proem,  p.  1461.)  The  ex-
tent of  the  duties  of  the  Athenian  astynomi  is
uncertain.  Aristotle  states  {ap.  Harpocr.  I.  c.)
that  they  had  the  superintendence  of  the  scavengers
{KoiTpo\6yoi),  which  would  naturally  belong  to
them  on  account  of  their  attending  to  the  cleansing
of  the  streets,  and  he  likewise  informs  us  that
they  had  the  superintendence  of  the  female  musi-
cians. It  is  probable,  however,  that  they  had
only  to  do  with  the  latter  in  virtue  of  their  duty
of  preserving  order  in  the  streets,  since  the  regu-
lation of  fill  the  public  prostitutes  belonged  to  the
agoranomi.  [Agoranomi.]  It  would  likewise
appear  from  a  circumstance  related  by  Diogenes
Laertius  (vi.  90)  that  they  could  prevent  a  person
from  appearing  in  the  streets  in  luxurious  or  in-
decent apparel.  It  is  mentioned  on  one  occasion
that  a  will  was  deposited  with  the  astynomi
(Isaeus,  de  Cleonym.  Hered.  p.  36,  ed.  Steph.),  a
circumstance  which  does  not  seem  in  accordance
with  the  duties  of  their  office.  (Meier,  A  tf.  Pro-
cess, p.  93,  &c.)

ASY'LUM  (oiffvXov).  In  the  Greek  states
the  temples,  altars,  sacred  groves,  and  statues  of
the  gods  generally  possessed  the  privileges  of  pro-
tecting slaves,  debtors,  and  criminals,  who  fled  to
them  for  refuge.  The  laws,  however,  do  not  ap-
pear to  have  recognised  the  right  of  all  such  sacred
places  to  afford  the  protection  which  was  claimed  ;
but  to  have  confined  it  to  a  certain  number  of
temples,  or  altars,  which  were  considered  in  a  more
especial  manner  to  have  the  aav\ia,  or  Jus  asyli.
(Servius  ad  Virg.  Aen.  ii.  761.)  There  were
several  places  in  Athens  which  possessed  this  pri-
vilege ;  of  which  the  best  known  was  the  The-
scium,  or  temple  of  Theseus,  in  the  city,  which
was  chiefly  intended  for  the  protection  of  the  ill-
treatid  slav(?s,  who  could  take  refuge  in  this  place,
and  compel  their  masters  to  sell  them  to  some
otlier  person.  (Plut  Theseus,  36  ;  Schol.  ad
Aristoph.  Equit.  1309  ;'  Hesych.  and  Suidas,  s.  v.
©Tjo-^ov.)     The  other  places  in  Athens  which  pos-


sessed the  jus  asyli  were  :  the  altar  of  pit}-,  in  the
agora,  the  altar  of  Zeus  'Kyopalos,  the  altars  of
the  twelve  gods,  the  altar  of  the  Eumenides  on
the  Areiopagus,  the  Theseum  in  the  Peiraeeus,
and  the  altar  of  Artemis,  at  Munychia  (Meier,
Att.  Proc.  p.  404).  Among  the  most  celebrated
places  of  asylum  in  other  parts  of  Greece,  we  may
mention  the  temple  of  Poseidon,  in  Laconia,  on
Mount  Taenai-us  (Thuc.  i.  128,  133  ;  Com.  Nep.
Pans.  c.  4)  ;  the  temple  of  Poseidon,  in  Calauria
(Plut.  Demosth.  29)  ;  and  the  temple  of  Athena
Alea,  in  Tegea  (Pans.  iii.  5.  §  6).  It  would  ap-
pear, however,  that  all  sacred  places  were  sup-
posed to  protect  an  individual  to  a  certain  extent,
even  if  their  right  to  do  so  was  not  recognised  by
the  laws  of  the  state,  in  which  they  were  situated.
In  such  cases,  however,  as  the  law  gave  no  pro-
tection, it  seems  to  have  been  considered  lawful  to
use  any  means  in  order  to  compel  the  individuals
who  had  taken  refuge  to  leave  the  sanctuary,  ex-
cept dragging  them  out  by  personal  violence.
Thus  it  was  not  uncommon  to  force  a  person  from
an  altar  or  a  statue  of  a  god,  by  the  application  of
fire.  (Eurip.  Androm.  256,  with  Schol.  ;  Plant.
MosteJl  v.  1.  65.)

In  the  time  of  Tiberius,  the  number  of  places
possessing  the  jus  asyli  in  the  Greek  cities  in
Greece  and  Asia  Minor  became  so  numerous,  as
seriously  to  impede  the  administration  of  justice.
In  consequence  of  this,  the  senate,  by  the  com-
mand of  the  emperor,  limited  the  jus  asyli  to  a
few  cities,  but  did  not  entirely  abolish  it,  as
Suetonius  (Tib.  37)  has  erroneously  stated.  (See
Tacit.  Ann.  iii.  60 — 63,  iv.  14  ;  and  Ernesti's  Ex-
cursus to  Suet.  Tib.  37.)

The  asylum  which  Romulus  is  said  to  have
opened  at  Rome  on  the  Capitoline  hill,  between
its  two  summits,  in  order  to  increase  the  popula-
tion of  the  city  (Liv.  i.  8  ;  Veil.  Pat.  i.  8 ;  Dionys.
ii.  15),  was,  according  to  the  legend,  a  place  of
refuge  for  the  inhabitants  of  other  states,  rather
than  a  sanctuary  for  those  who  had  violated  the
laws  of  the  city.  In  the  republican  and  early  im-
perial times,  a  right  of  asA'lum,  such  as  existed  in
the  Greek  states,  docs  not  appear  to  have  been
recognised  by  the  Roman  law.  Livy  seems  to
speak  of  the  right  (xxxv.  51)  as  peculiar  to  the
Greeks:  —  Templum  est  ApoUinis  Delium — eo
jure  sancto  quo  sunt  templa  quae  usyla  Graeci  ap-
pellant. By  a  constitutio  of  Antoninus  Pius,  it  was
decreed  that,  if  a  slave  in  a  province  fled  to  the
temples  of  the  gods  or  the  statues  of  the  emperors,
to  avoid  the  ill-usage  of  his  master,  the  praeses
could  compel  the  master  to  sell  the  slave  (Gains,
i.  53)  ;  and  the  slave  was  not  regarded  by  the  law
as  a  runaway — fugitivus  (Dig.  21.  tit.  1.  s.  17.
M  3


1G6  ATELEIA.

§  12).  This  constitutio  of  Antoninus  is  quoted
in  Justinian's  Institut-s  (1.  tit.  8.  s.  2),  with  a
slight  alteiation  ;  the  words  ad  aedem  sucrain  are
substituted  for  ad  /'ana  deorum,  since  the  jus  asyli
was  in  his  time  extended  to  churches.  Those
slaves  who  took  refuge  at  the  statue  of  an  em-
peror were  considered  to  inflict  disgrace  on  their
master,  as  it  was  reasonably  supposed  that  no
slave  would  take  such  a  step,  unless  he  had  re-
ceived very  bad  usage  from  his  master.  If  it
could  be  proved  that  an}-  individual  had  instigated
the  slave  of  another  to  flee  to  the  statue  of  an  em-
peror, he  was  liable  to  an  action  corrupti  servi.
(Dig.  47.  tit.  11.  s.  5.)  The  right  of  asylum
seems  to  have  been  generally,  but  not  entirely,
confined  to  slaves.  (Dig.  A\i  tit.  19.  s.  28.  §  7.
Comp.  Osiander,  De  Asylis  Ge?itilium,  in  Gronov.
Thesaur.  vol.  vi.  ;  Simon,  Sur  les  Asi/les,  in  Mem.
de  l\4cad.  des  hiscnpt.  vol.  iii.  ;  Bringer,  De  Asy-
lorum  Origine,  Utsu,  ei  Abusu,  Lugd.  Bat.  1828  ;  C.
Neu,  De  Asylis,  Gott.  1837  ;  respecting  the  right
of  asylum  in  the  churches  vmder  the  Christian
emperors,  see  Rein,  Das  diminalrecld  der  Roiner,
p.  89b-.)

The  term  acrvXia  was  also  applied  to  the  secu-
rity from  plunder  {aavXia  koL  Kara  yr]v  koL  Kara
Snx\aaaay),  which  was  sometimes  granted  by  one
state  to  another,  or  even  to  single  individuals.  (See
Bockh,  Corp.  Inscrip.  i.  p.  725.)

ATELEIA  (areAefa),  is  generally  immunity  or
exemption  from  some  or  all  the  duties  which  a
person  has  to  perform  towards  the  state.  Im-
munities may  be  granted  either  as  a  privilege  to
the  citizens  of  a  state,  exempting  them  from  certain
duties  which  would  otherwise  be  incumbent  on
them,  or  they  are  given  as  honorary  distinctions  to
foreign  kings,  states,  communities  or  even  private
individuals.  With  regard  to  the  latter  the  ate-
leia  was  usually  an  exemption  from  custom  duties
on  the  importation  or  exportation  of  goods,  and
was  given  as  a  reward  for  certain  good  services.
Thus  Croesus  received  the  ateleia  at  Delphi
(H  Tod.  i.  54),  the  Deceleans  at  Sparta  (Herod,
ix.  73),  and  Lcucon,  the  ruler  of  Bosporus,  at
Athens.  (Dem.  c.  Lept.  p.  466,  &c.)  It  appears
that  if  a  person  thus  distinguished,  or  a  citizen  of  a
foreign  community  possessing  the  ateleia,  took  up  his
residenc3  in  the  state  which  had  granted  it,  he  also
enjoyed  other  privileges,  such  as  the  exemption
from  the  protection  money,  or  tax  which  resident
aliens  had  to  pay  at  Athens.  (Harpocrat.  s.  v.
tVoTcA.'/js)  Nay  this  ateleia  might  even  become
equivalent  to  the  full  franchise,  as,  e.  g.  the  Byzan-
tines gave  the  exemption  from  liturgies,  and  the
franchise  to  all  Athenians  that  might  go  to  B3'zan-
tium.  (Dem.  De  Coron.  p.  256.)  In  many  in-
stances a  partial  ateleia,  or  an  exemption  from
custom  duties,  was  granted  for  the  purpose  of  en-
couraging commerce.  (Theophr.  Char.  23  ;  Schol.
ad  Aristoph.  Plut.  905,  with  Bockh 's  remarks, PwiZ.
Econ.  p.  87.)  With  regard  to  the  inhabitants  of  a
state,  we  must,  as  in  the  case  of  Athens,  again  dis-
tinguish between  two  classes,  viz.  the  resident
aliens  and  real  citizens.  At  Athens  all  resident
aliens  had  to  pay  a  tax  (fieToiKiov)  which  we  may
term  protection-tax,  because  it  was  the  price  for
the  protection  they  enjoyed  at  Athens ;  but  as  it
was  the  interest  of  the  state  to  increase  commerce,
and  for  that  purpose  to  attract  strangers  to  settle  at
Athens,  many  of  them  were  exempted  from  this
lax,  i.  e.  enjoyed  the  areAem  /ifToiidov  (Dem.  c.


ATHLETAE.

Aristocr.  p.  691),  and  some  were  even  exempted
from  custom  duties,  and  the  property  tax  or  c/o--
(popcL,  from  which  an  Athenian  citizen  could  nev(^r
be  exempted.  The  ateleia  enjoyed  by  Athenian
citizens  was  either  a  general  immunity  (aT^Keia
andvTwv),  such  as  was  granted  to  persons  who  had
done  some  great  service  to  their  country,  and  even
to  their  descendants,  as  in  the  case  of  Harmodiua
and  Aristogeiton  ;  or  it  was  a  partial  one  exempting
a  person  from  all  or  certain  liturgies,  from  certain
custom  duties,  or  from  service  in  the  army.  The
last  of  these  immunities  was  legally  enjoyed  by  alJ
members  of  the  council  of  the  Five  Hundred  (Ly-
curg.  c.  Leocr.  11),  and  the  archons  for  the  time
being,  by  the  farmers  of  the  custom  duties  (Dem.
c.  Neaer.  1353),  and  by  those  who  traded  by  sea,
although  with  them  the  exemption  must  have  been
limited.  (Schol.  ad  A  rist.  Plut.  905,  .4  cham.  399 ;
Suid.  s.  V.  ifx-Kopds  elfii.)  Most  information  re-
specting the  ateleia  is  derived  from  Demosthenes'
speech  against  Leptlnes.  But  compare  also  Wolf's
Prolegom.  ad  Lept.  p.  Ixxi.  &c. ;  Bockh,  Publ.  Econ.
p.  85,  «Scc. ;  Westermann,  De  puUicis  Atheniensium
Honoribus  et  Praemiis,  p.  6,  &c.  [L.  S.]

ATELLA'NAE  FA'BULAE.  [Comokdia.]
ATHENAEUM  {ad-f]vaiou),  a  school  (hulus)
founded  by  the  Emperor  Hadrian  at  Rome,  for  the
promotion  of  literary  and  scientific  studies  {iiigeiiu-
arum  artium),  and  called  Athenaeum  from  the  ,
town  of  Athens,  which  was  still  regarded  as  the
seat  of  intellectual  refinement.  The  Athenaeum
was  situated  on  the  Capitoline  hill.  It  was  a  kind
of  university  ;  and  a  staff  of  professors,  for  the
various  branches  of  study,  Avas  regularly  engaged.
Under  Theodosius  II.,  for  example,  there  were
three  orators,  ten  grammarians,  five  sophists,  one
philosopher,  two  lawyers,  or  jurisconsults.  Besides
the  instruction  given  by  these  magistri,  poets,  ora-
tors, and  critics  were  accustomed  to  recite  their
compositions  there,  and  these  prelections  were  some-
times honoured  with  the  presence  of  the  emperors
themselves.  There  were  other  places  where  such
recitations  were  made,  as  the  Library  of  Trajan
[Bibliotheca]  ;  sometimes  also  a  room  \vas  hired,
and  made  into  an  auditorium,  seats  erected,  &c.
The  Athenaeum  seems  to  have  continued  in  high
repute  till  the  fifth  century.  Little  is  known  of
the  details  of  study  or  discipline  in  the  Athenaeum,
but  in  the  constitution  of  the  year  370,  there  are
some  regulations  respecting  students  in  Rome,  from
which  it  would  appear  that  it  must  have  been  a.
very  extensive  and  important  institution.  And
this  is  confirmed  by  other  statements  contained  in
some  of  the  Fathers  and  other  ancient  authors,
from  which  we  learn  that  young  men  from  all
parts,  after  finishing  their  usual  school  and  college
studies  in  their  own  town  or  province,  used  to  re-
sort to  Rome  as  a  sort  of  higher  university,  for  the
purpose  of  completing  their  education.  (Aur.  Vict.
Caes.  14  ;  Dion  Cass.  Ixxiii.  17  ;  Capitolin.  Pertln.
11,  Gordian.  Sen.  3  ;  Lamprid.  Alex.  Sever.  35  ;
Cod.  Theod.  14.  tit.  9.  s.  1.)  [A.  A.]

ATHLE'TAE  (aehmal,  aOXriTripes),  were  per-
sons who  contended  in  the  public  games  of  the
Greeks  and  Romans  for  the  prizes  {a9\a,  whence
the  name  of  aOKTjTai),  which  were  given  to  those
who  conquered  in  contests  of  agility  and  strength.
This  name  was,  in  the  later  period  of  Grecian  his-
tory and  among  the  Romans,  properly  confined  to
those  persons  who  entirely  devoted  themselves  to
a  course  of  training  which  might  fit  them  to  excel


I


ATHLETAE.

?n  such  contests,  and  who,  in  fact,  made  athletic
exercises  their  profession.  The  athletae  differed,
therefore,  from  the  agonistae  {aycavKXTai),  who
only  pursued  gj-mnastic  exercises  for  the  sake  of
improving  their  health  and  bodily  strength,  and
who,  though  they  sometimes  contended  for  the
prizes  in  the  public  games,  did  not  devote  their
whole  lives,  like  the  athletae,  to  preparing  for
these  contests.  In  early  times  there  does  not  ap-
pear to  have  been  any  distinction  between  the
athletae  and  agonistae  ;  since  we  find  that  many
individuals,  who  obtained  prizes  at  the  great  na-
tional gcunes  of  the  Greeks,  were  persons  of  con-
siderable political  importance,  who  were  never  con-
sidered to  pursue  athletic  exercises  as  a  profession.
Thus  we  read  that  Phayllus,  of  Crotona,  who  had
thrice  conquered  in  the  P^-thian  games,  commanded
a  vessel  at  the  battle  of  Salamis  (Herod,  viii.  47  ;
Pans.  X.  9.  §  1)  ;  and  that  Dorieus,  of  Rhodes,
who  had  obtained  the  prize  in  all  of  the  four  great
festivals,  was  celebrated  in  Greece  for  his  opposition
to  the  Athenians.  (Pans.  vi.  7.  §  1,2.)  But  as
the  individuals,  who  obtained  the  prizes  in  these
games,  received  great  honours  and;  rewards,  not
only  from  their  fellow-citizens,,  but  also  from
foreign  states,  those  persons  who  intended  to  con-
tend for  the  prizes  made  extraordinary  efforts  to
prepare  themselves  for  the  contest  ;  and  it  was
soon  found  that,  unless  they  subjected  themselves
to  a  severer  course  of  training  than  was  afforded  by
the  ordinary  exercises  of  the  gymnasia,  they  would
not  have  any  chance  of  gaining  the  victory.  Thus
arose  a  class  of  individuals,,  to  whom  the  term
athletae  was  appropriated,  and  who  became,  in
course  of  time,  the  only  persons  who  contended  m
the  public  games.

Athletae  were  first  introduced  at  Rome,  B.  c.
186,  in  the  games  exhibited  by  M.  Fulvius,  on
the  conclusion  of  the  Aetolian  war.  (Liv.  xxxix.
22.)  Aemilius  Paulus,  after  the  conquest  of  Per-
seus, B.C.  1()7,  is  said  to  have  exhibited  games  at
Amphipolis,  at  which  athletae  contended.  ( Liv.  xlv.
32.)  A  certamen  athletarum  (Val.  Max.  ii.  4.
§  7)  was  also  exhibited  by  Scaurus,  in  b,  c.  B9  ;
and  among  the  various  games  with  which  Julius
Caesar  gratified  the  people,  we  read  of  a  contest  of
athletae,  which  lasted  for  three  days,  and  which
was  exhibited  in  a  temporary  stadium  in  the
Campus  Martins.  (Suet.  Jul.  39.)  Under  the
Roman  emperors,  and  especially  under  Nero,
who  was  passionately  fond  of  the  Grecian  games,
the  number  of  athletae  increased  greatly  in  Italy,
Greece,  and  Asia  Minor  ;  and  many  inscriptions
respecting  them  have  come  down  to  us,  which
show  that  professional  athletae  were  very  numer-
ous, and  that  they  enjoyed  several  privileges.
They  formed  at  Rome  a  kind  of  corporation,  and
possessed  a  tabularium,  and  a  common  hall  —
cti}-ia  athletarum  (Orelli,  Inscrip.  2588),  in  which
they  were  accustomed  to  deliberate  on  all  m.atters
which  had  a  reference  to  the  interests  of  the  body.
AVe  find  that  they  were  called  Herculanei,  and
also  xysiici,  because  they  were  accustomed  to  ex-
ercise, in  winter,  in  a  covered  place  called  xystus
( Vitruv.  vi.  1 0)  ;  and  that  they  had  a  president,
Avho  was  called  sri/starclms,  and  also  apx^^p^^s.

Those  athletae  who  conquered  in  any  of  the
great  national  festivals  of  the  Greeks  were  called
hieronicae  (lepou'cKai),  and  received,  as  has  been  al-
ready remarked,  the  greatest  honours  and  rewards.
Such  a  conqueror  was  considered  to  confer  honour


ATHLETAE.  167

upon  the  state  to  which  he  belonged  ;  he  entered
his  native  city  in  triumph,  through  a  breach  made
in  the  walls  for  his  reception,  to  intimate,  says
Plutarch,  that  the  state  which  possessed  such  a
citizen  had  no  occasion  for  walls.  He  usually  passed
through  the  walls  in  a  chariot  drawn  by  four  white
horses,  and  went  along  the  principal  street  of  the
city  to  the  temple  of  the  guardian  deity  of  the
state,  where  hymns  of  victory  were  sung.  Those
games,  which  gave  the  conquerors  the  right  of  such
an  entrance  into  the  city,  were  called  iselasUci
(from  dae\avv6iv).  This  term  was  originally  con-
fined to  the  four  great  Grecian  festivals,  the
Olympian,  Isthmian,  Nemean,  and  Pythian  ;  but
was  afterwards  applied  to  other  public  games,  as,
for  instance,  to  those  instituted  in  Asia  Minor.
(Suet.  Ner.  25  ;  Dion  Cass.  Ixiii.  20  ;  Plut.  Si/7iip.
ii.  5.  §  2  ;  Plin.  JSp.  X.  1 19,  120.)  In  the  Greek
states  the  victors  in  these  games  not  only  obtained
the  greatest  glory  and  respect,  but  also  substantial
rewards.  They  were  generally  relieved  from  the
payment  of  taxes,  and  also  enjoyed  the  first  seat
(TrpoeSpia)  in  all  public  games  and  spectacles.  Their
statues  were  frequently  erected  at  the  cost  of  the
state,  in  the  most  frequented  part  of  the  city,  as
the  market-place,  the  gymnasia,  and  the  neigh-
bourhood of  the  temples.  (Pans.  vi.  13.  §  1,  vii.
17.  §  3.)  At  Athens,  according  to  a  law  of  Solon,
the  conquerors  in  the  Olympic  games  were  re-
warded with  a  prize  of  500  drachmae,  and  the
conquerors  in  the  Isthmian,  with  one  of  100
drachmae  (Diog.  Laq?t.  i.  55  ;  Plut.  Sol.  23)  ;
and  at  Sparta  they  ha^gt  the  privilege  of  fighting
near  the  person  of  the  king.  (Plut.  Lye.  22.)
The  privileges  of  the  athletae  were  preserved  and  in-
creased by  Augustus  (Suet,  ^m^,  45)  ;  and  the  fol-
lowing emperors  appear  to  have  always  treated  them
with  considerable  favour.  Those  who  conquered
in  the  games  called  iselastici  received,  in  the  time
of  Trajan,  a  sum  from  the  state,  termed  opsonia.
(Plin.  Ep.  X.  1 19, 120  ;  compare  Vitruv.  ix.  Praef.)
I3y  a  rescript  of  Diocletian  and  Maximian,  those
athletae  who  had  obtained  in  the  sacred  games
{sacri  certaminis,  by  which,  is  probably  meant  the
iselastici  ludi)  not  less  than  three  crowns,  and  had
not  bribed  their  antagonists  to  give  them  the  vic-
tory, enjoyed  immunity  from  all  taxes.  (Cod.  10.
tit.  53.)  "■  ■

The  term  athletae,  though. sometimes  applied
metaphorically  to  other  combatants,  was  properly
limited  to  those  who  contended  for  the  prize  in  the
five  following  contests:  —  1.  Running  {dpSfios^
cursus).  2.  Wrestling  (irdKr],  lucta).  3.  Iioxi7ig
(irvy/j,r},pt/gilatus).  4.  The  pentathlon  (irevradAoy),
or,  as  the  Romans  called  it,  quinquertium.  5.  The
pancratium  {irayKpaTiov).  Of  all  these  an  account
is  given  in  separate  articles.  [Stadium  ;  Lucta  ;
PuGiLATUS ;  Pentathlon  ;  Pancratium.]
These  contests  were  divided  into  two  kinds  —  the
severe  {^apea,  jSapilrepa),  and  the  light  {Kovcpa^
KovcpSrepa).  Under  the  former  were  included
wrestling,  boxing,  and  the  exercises  of  the  pancra-
tium, which  consisted  of  wrestling  and  boxing  com-
bined, and  was  also  called  pammachion  ;  and  under
the  latter,  running,  and  the  separate  parts  of  the
pentathlon,  such  as  leaping,  throwing  the  discus,
&c.     (Plat.  Leg.  viii.  p.  833,  Euthi/d.  p.  271.)

Great  attention  was  paid  to  the  training  of  the

athletae.      They   were   generally   trained   in  the

palaestrae,   which,    in  the    Grecian  states,    were

distinct  places    from   the  gymnasia,  though  they

M  4


i


163  ATIMIA.

have  been  frequently  confounded  by  modern  I
writers.  [Palaestra.]  Their  exercises  Avere  |
superintended  by  the  gymnasiarch  (■yv/j.i'aa-idpxvs),
and  their  diet  was  regulated  by  the  aliptes  (aAeln-
rr)s).  [Aliptae.]  According  to  Pausanias  (vi.
7.  §  3),  the  athletae  did  not  anciently  eat  meat,
but  principally  lived  upon  fresh  cheese  {rvphv  4k
ruv  raXapcov)  ;  and  Diogenes  Laertius  (viii.  12,
13)  informs  us  that  their  original  diet  consisted
of  dried  figs  (icrxao-i  |r)paiy),  moist  or  new  cheese
(rvpo^s  irypols),  and  wheat  {irvpoTs).  The  eating
of  meat  by  the  athletae  is  said,  according  to  some
writers  (Paus.  I.  c),  to  have  been  first  introduced
by  Dromeus  of  Stymphalus,  in  Arcadia  ;  and,  ac-
cording to  others,  by  the  philosopher  Pythagoras,
or  by  an  aliptes  of  that  name.  (Diog.  Laert.  I.e.)
According  to  Galen  {De  Val.  Tuend.  iii.  1),  the
athletae,  who  practised  the  severe  exercises  (^apeTs
hOKrjTai),  ate  pork  and  a  particular  kind  of  bread  ;
and  from  a  remark  of  Diogenes  the  Cynic  (Diog.
Laert.  vi.  49),  it  would  appear  that  in  his  time
beef  and  pork  formed  the  ordinary  diet  of  the
athletae.  Beef  is  also  mentioned  by  Plato  (De
Rep.  i.  p.  33B)  as  the  food  of  the  athletae ;  and
a  writer  quoted  by  Athenaeus  (ix.  p.  402,  c.  d.)  ;
relates  that  a  Thel)an  who  lived  upon  goats'  flesh
became  so  strong,  that  lie  was  enabled  to  over-
come all  the  athletae  of  his  time.  At  the  end
of  the  exercises  of  each  da}^  the  athletae  were
obliged  to  take  a  certain  quantity  of  food,  which
was  usually  called  auayKOfpayia  and  avayKOTpo^ia^
or  ^iaios  rpocp'f}  (Ai'ist.  Pol.  viii.  4)  ;  after  which,
they  were  accustomed  to  sleep  for  a  long  while.
The  quantity  of  animal  food  which  some  celebrated
athletae,  such  as  Milo,  Theagenes,  and  Astydamas,
are  said  to  have  eaten,  appears  to  us  quite  incre-
dible. ( Athen.  x.  pp.  4 1 2,  4 1 3. )  The  food  which
they  ate  was  usually  dry,  and  is  called  by  Juvenal
coUphia  (ii.  53).

The  athletae  were  anointed  wuth  oil  by  the
aliptae,  previously  to  entering  the  palaestra  and
contending  in  the  public  games,  and  were  accus-
tomed to  contend  naked.  In  the  description  of
the  games  given  in  the  twenty-third  book  of  the
Iliad  (l.  685,  710),  the  combatants  are  said  to  have
worn  a  girdle  about  their  loins  ;  and  the  same
practice,  as  v/e  learn  from  Thucydides  (i.  6),
anciently  prevailed  at  the  Olympic  games,  but
was  discontinued  afterwards.

This  subject  is  one  of  such  extent  that  nothing
but  an  outline  can  here  be  given  ;  further  particu-
lars are  contained  in  the  articles  Istiimia,  Nemea,
Olympia,  and  Pvthia  ;  and  the  whole  subject
is  treated  most  elaborately  by  Krause,  Die  Gym-
nastik  und  Agotustik  der  Hellenen.,  Leipzig,  1841.

ATHLOTHETAE.     [Agonothetae.]

ATIMIA  {artfxia).  A  citizen  of  Athens  had
the  power  to  exercise  all  the  rights  and  privileges
of  a  citizen  as  long  as  he  was  not  suflfering  under
any  kind  of  atimia,  a  word  which  in  meaning
nearly  answers  to  our  outlawry,  in  as  much  as  a
person  forfeited  by  it  the  protection  of  the  laws  of
his  country,  and  mostly  all  the  rights  of  a  citizen
also.  The  atimia  occurs  in  Attica  as  early  as  the
legislation  of  Solon,  without  tlie  term  itself  being
in  any  way  defined  in  the  laws  (Dem.  c.  Aris-
tocrat, p.  640),  which  shows  that  the  idea  con-
nected with  it  must,  even  at  that  time,  have  b^'en
familiar  to  the  Athenians,  and  this  idea  was  pro-
bably that  of  a  complete  civil  death  ;  that  is,  an
individual  labouring  under  atimia,  together  with


ATIMIA.

all  that  belonged  to  him  (his  children  as  well  as  ]'n
property),  had,  in  the  eyes  of  the  state  and  th«
laws,  no  existence  at  all.  This  atimia,  undoubt-
edly the  onl}^  one  in  early  times,  may  be  termed  a
total  one,  and  in  cases  where  it  was  intlicted  as  a
punishment  for  any  particular  crime,  was  gene-
rally also  perpetual  and  hereditar}'- ;  hence  Demo-
sthenes, in  speaking  of  a  person  suffering  under  it,
often  uses  the  expression  KaQana^  6.riiJ.os,  or  aw\&s
aTifj-arai  (c.  Mid.  p.  542,  c.  Aristog.  p.  779,  c.  Mid.
p.  546).  A  detailed  enumeration  of  the  rights  of
which  an  atimos  was  deprived,  is  given  by  Aes-
chines  (c.  Timarch.  pp.  44,  46).  He  was  not
allowed  to  hold  any  civil  or  priestly  office  Avhat-
ever,  either  in  the  city  of  Athens  itself,  or  in  any
town  within  the  dominion  of  Athens;  he  could  not
be  employed  as  herald  or  as  ambassador  ;  he  could
not  give  his  opinion  or  speak  either  in  the  public
assembly  or  in  the  senate,  he  was  not  even  allowed
to  appear  within  the  extent  of  the  agora ;  he  was
excluded  from  visiting  the  public  sanctuaries  as
weli  as  from  taking  part  in  any  public  sacrifice  ;  he
could  neither  bring  an  action  against  a  person  from
whom  he  had  sustained  an  injury,  nor  appear  as  a
witness  in  any  of  the  courts  of  justice ;  nor  could,
on  the  other  hand,  any  one  bring  an  action  against
him.  (Compare  Dem.  c.  Neaer.  p.  1353,  c.  Timo-
crat.  p.  739,  De  Lib.  Rhod.  p.  200,  Pkilip.  lii.
p.  122,  c.  Mid.  p.  542,  Lys.  c.  Andoc.  p.  222.)
The  right  which,  in  point  of  lact,  included  most  of
those  which  we  have  here  enumerated,  was  that
of  taking  part  in  the  popular  assembly  {X^yeiv
and  ypd<peiv).  Hence,  this  one  right  is  most  fre-
quently the  only  one  which  is  mentioned  as  being
forfeited  by  atimia.  (Dem.  c.  Timocmt.  pp.  715,
717;  Aeschin.  jc.  Timarch.  p.  54,  &c. ;  Andocid.
De  Myst.  p.  36  ;  Dem.  c.  Androt.  pp.  602,  604.)
The  service  in  the  Athenian  armies  was  not  only
regarded  in  the  light  of  a  duty  whicli  a  citizen
had  to  perform  towards  the  state,  but  as  a  right
and  a  privilege ;  of  whicli  therefore  the  atimos  was
likewise  deprived.  (Dem.  c.  Timocrat.  p.  715.)
When  we  hear  that  an  atimos  had  no  right  to
claim  the  protection  of  the  laws,  when  suffering
injuries  from  others,  we  must  not  imagine  that
it  was  the  intention  of  the  law  to  expose  the
atimos  to  the  insults  or  ill-treatment  of  his  former
fellow-citizens,  or  to  encourage  the  people  to  mal-
treat him  with  impunity,  as  might  be  inferred  from
the  expression  oi  &TtiJLoi  rod  idtXovTos  (Plat.
Gorff.  p.  508)  ;  but  all  that  the  law  meant  to  do
was,  that  if  any  such  thing  happened,  the  atimos
had  no  right  to  claim  the  protection  of  the  laws.
We  have  above  referred  to  two  laws  mentioned  by
Demosthenes,  in  which  the  children  and  the  property
of  an  atimos  were  included  in  the  atimia.  As  re-
gards the  children  or  heirs,  the  infamy  came  to
them  as  an  inheritance  which  they  could  not
avoid.  [Heres.]  But  when  we  read  of  the  pro-
perty of  a  man  being  included  in  the  atimia,  it
can  only  mean  that  it  shared  the  lawless  charac-
ter of  its  owner,  that  is,  it  did  not  enjoy  the  pro-
tection of  the  law,  and  could  not  be  mortgaoed.
The  property  of  an  atimos  for  a  positive  "crime,
such  as  those  mentioned  below,  was  probably  never
confiscated,  but  only  in  the  case  of  a  publicdebtor,
as  we  shall  see  hereafter  ;  and  when  Andocides  (de
Myst.  p.  36)  uses  the  expression  ^ri/iot  iiaav  to.  <rw-
fiara,  to.  Se  xP^/^aro  e/x<»'>  the  contrary  which  ho
had  in  view  can  only  have  been  the  caseof  a  public
debtor.     On  the  whole,  it  appears  to  have  been


1


ATIMIA.

foreign  to  Athenian  notions  of  justice  to  confiscate
the  property  of  a  person  who  had  incurred  per-
sonal atimia  by  some  illegal  act.  (Dem.  c.  LepL
p.  504.)

The  crimes  for  which  total  and  perpetual  ati-
mia was  inflicted  on  a  person  were  as  follow :  —
The  giving  and  accepting  of  bribes,  the  embezzle-
ment of  public  money,  manifest  proofs  of  cowardice
in  the  defence  of  his  country,  false  witness,  false
accusation,  and  bad  conduct  towards  parents  (An-
docid.  /.  c.)  :  moreover,  if  a  person  either  by  deed
or  by  word  injured  or  insulted  a  magistrate  while
he  was  perfonning  the  duties  of  his  office  (Dem.
€.  Mid.  p.  524,  Pro  Megalop.  p.  200)  ;  if  as  a  judge
be  had  been  guilty  of  partiality  {c.  Mid.  p.  543);
if  he  squandered  away  his  paternal  inheritance,  or
was  guilty  of  prostitution  (Diog.  Laert.  i.  2.  7),  &c.
We  have  above  called  this  atimia  perpetual ;  for  if
a  person  had  once  incurred  it,  he  eould  scarcely
ever  hope  to  be  lawfully  released  from  it.  A  law,
mentioned  by  Demosthenes  (c.  Timocrat.  p.  715),
ordained  that  the  releasing  of  any  kind  of  atimoi
sliould  never  be  proposed  in  the  public  assembly,
ui.less  an  assembly  consisting  of  at  least  6000
citizens  had  previously,  in  secret  deliberation,
agreed  that  such  might  be  done.  And  even  then
the  matter  could  only  be  discussed  in  so  far  as  the
senate  and  people  thought  proper.  It  was  only  in
times  when  the  republic  was  threatened  by  great
(huiger  that  an  atimos  might  hope  to  recover  his
lost  rights,  and  in  such  circumstances  the  atimoi
were  sometimes  restored  en  masse  to  their  former
rights.     (Xen.  Hellen.  ii.  2.  §  11  ;  Andocid.  I.  c.)

A  second  kind  of  atimia,  which  though  in  its
extent  a  total  one,  lasted  only  until  the  person
subject  to  it  fulfilled  those  duties  for  the  neglect
of  which  it  had  been  inflicted,  was  not  so  much  a
punishment  for  any  particular  crime  as  a  means  of
compelling  a  man  to  submit  to  the  laws.  This  was
the  atimia  of  public  debtors.  Any  citizen  of  Athens
who  owed  money  to  the  public  treasury,  whether
his  debt  arose  from  a  fine  to  which  he  had  been
condemned,  or  from  a  part  he  had  taken  in  any
branch  of  the  administration,  or  from  his  having
pledged  himself  to  the  republic  for  another  person,
was  in  a  state  of  total  atimia  if  he  refused  to  pay  or
could  not  pay  the  sum  which  was  due.  His  chil-
dren during  his  lifetime  were  not  included  in  his
atimia  ;  they  remained  ^ttIti^o/.  (Dem.  c.  Theocrin.
p.  1 322.)  If  he  persevered  in  his  refusal  to  pay
beyond  the  time  of  the  ninth  prytany,  his  debt
was  doubled,  and  his  property  was  taken  and  sold.
(Andocid.  /.  c. ;  Dem.  c.  Nicostrat.  p.  1255,  c.
Neaer.  p.  1347.)  If  the  sura  obtained  by  the
sale  was  sufficient  to  pay  the  debt,  the  atimia
appears  to  have  ceased  ;  but  if  not,  the  atimia  not
only  continued  to  the  death  of  the  public  debtor,
but  was  inherited  by  his  heirs,  and  lasted  until  the
debt  was  paid  oif.  (Dem.  c.  Androt.  p.  603,  com-
pare Bockh,  Ptihl.  Econ.  of  Athens,  p.  391,  2d
edit. ;  and  Heres.)  This  atimia  for  public  debt
Avas  sometimes  accompanied  by  imprisonment,  as
in  the  case  of  Alcibiades  and  Cimon  ;  but  whether
in  such  a  case,  on  the  death  of  the  prisoner,  his
children  were  likewise  imprisoned,  is  uncertain.
If  a  person  living  in  atimia  for  public  debt  peti-
tioned to  be  released  from  his  debt  or  his  atimia,
he  became  subject  to  ivh^i^is :  and  if  another  per-
son made  the  attempt  for  him,  he  thereby  forfeited
his  own  property  ;  if  the  proedros  even  ventured
to  put  the  question  to  the  vote,  he  himself  became


ATIMIA.  160

atimos.  The  only  but  almost  impracticable  mode
of  obtaining  release  was  that  mentioned  above  in
connection  with  the  total  and  perpetual  atimia.

A  third  and  only  partial  kind  of  atimia  deprived
the  person  on  whom  it  was  inflicted  only  of  a  por-
tion of  his  rights  as  a  citizen.  (Andocid.  de  Myst.
p.  17  and  36.)  It  Avas  called  the  ariixia  Kara
irpdcTTa^iu,  because  it  was  specified  in  every  sinj^le
case  what  particular  right  Avas  forfeited  by  the
atimos.  The  following  cases  are  expresslj'inen-
tioned  :  —  If  a  man  came  forward  as  a  public  ac-
cuser, and  afterwards  either  dropped  the  charge  or
did  not  obtain  a  fifth  of  the  votes  in  favour  of  his
accusation,  he  Avas  not  only  liable  to  a  fine  of
1000  drachmae,  but  Avas  subjected  to  an  atimia
which  deprived  him  of  the  right,  in  future,  to  ap-
pear as  accuser  in  a  case  of  the  same  nature  as
that  in  Avhich  he  had  been  defeated  or  Avhich  he
had  given  up.  (Dem.  c.  Aristog.  p.  803 ;  Har-
pocrat.  s.  V.  Awpwu  •ypa.^i}.)  If  his  accusation  had
been  a  ypuipr}  do-eoems,  he  also  lost  the  right  of
visiting  particular  temples.  (Andocid.  de  Myst.  p,
17.)  Some  cases  are  also  mentioned  in  which  an
accuser,  though  he  did  not  obtain  a  fifth  of  the
votes,  vv-as  not  subjected  to  any  pimishment  Avhat-
ever.  Such  Avas  the  case  in  a  charge  brought  be-
fore the  first  archon  respecting  the  ill-treatment  of
parents,  orphans,  or  heiresses.  (Meier,  de  Bon.
Damnat.  p.  133.)  In  -other  cases  the  accuser
Avas  merely  subject  to  the  fine  of  1 000  drachmae,
without  incurring  any  degree  of  atimia.  (Pollux,
viii.  53.)  But  the  law  docs  not  appear  to  haA-e
ahvays  been  strictly  observed.  (Bockh,  Publ.
Econ.  of  Athens,  p.  381,  2d  ed.)  Andocides  men-
tions some  other  kinds  of  partial  atimia,  but  they
seem  to  have  had  only  a  temporary  application  at
the  end  of  the  Peloponnesian  war  ;  and  the  pas-
sage {De  Myst.  p.  36)  is  so  obscure  or  cornipt,
that  nothing  can  be  inferred  from  it  Avith  an}'  cer-
tainty. (Wachsmuth,  Hellen.  AlteHh,  vol.  ii.  p.
1.98,  2d  ed.)  Partial  atimia,  when  once  inflicted,
lasted  during  the  whole  of  a  man's  life.

The  children  of  a  man  who  had  been  put  to
death  by  the  laAV  Avere  also  atimoi  (Dem.  c.  AHs-
tog.  p.  779  ;  compare  Heres)  ;  but  the  nature  or
duration  of  this  atimia  is  unknown.

If  a  person,  under  Avhatever  kind  of  atimia  be
Avas  labouring,  continued  to  exercise  any  of  the
rights  Avhich  he  had  forfeited,  he  might  immedi-
ately be  subjected  to  caraytayi]  or  tv^eil^is :  and  if
his  transgression  Avas  proved,  he  might,  Avithout
any  further  proceedings,  be  punished  immediately.

The  offences  which  Avere  punished  at  Sparta
Avith  atimia  are  not  as  Avell  knoAvn  ;  and  in  many
cases  it  does  not  seem  to  have  been  expressly
mentioned  by  the  laAv,  but  to  have  depended  en-
tirely upon  public  opinion,  whether  a  person  Avas
to  be  considered  and  treated  as  an  atimos  or  not.
In  general,  it  appears  that  CA-ery  one  Avho  refused
to  live  according  to  the  national  institutions  lost
the  rights  of  a  full  citizen  ('d/xoios,  Xenoph.  de
Rep.  Laced.,  x.  7  ;  iii.  3).  It  was,  hoAvever,  a
positive  law,  that  Avhoever  did  not  give  or  could
not  give  his  contribution  towards  the  syssitia,  lost
his  rights  as  a  citizen.  (Aristot.  Polit.  ii.  6.  p.
!)9,  ed.  Gottling.)  The  highest  degree  of  infamy
fell  upon  the  coward  {rpeaas)  Avho  either  ran  aAvay
from  the  field  of  battle,  or  returned  home  Avithout
the  rest  of  the  army,  as  Aristodemus  did  after  the
battle  of  Thermopylae  (Herod,  vii.  231),  though
in  this  case  the  infamy  itself,  as  Avell  as  its  humi-


170


ATLANTES.


liating  consequences,  were  manifestly  the  mere
effect  of  public  opinion,  and  lasted  until  the  person
labouring  under  it  distinguished  himself  by  some
signal  exploit,  and  thus  wiped  off  the  stain  from
his  name.  ■  The  Spartans,  who  in  Sphacteria  had
surrendered  to  the  Athenians,  were  punished  with
a  kind  of  atimia  which  deprived  them  of  their
claims  to  public  offices  (a  punishment  common  to
all  kinds  of  atimia),  and  rendered  them  incapable
of  making  any  lawful  pm-chase  or  sale.  After-
wards, however,  they  recovered  their  rights.
(Thuc.  V.  34.)  Unmarried  men  were  also  sub-
ject to  a  certain  degree  of  infamy,  in  so  far  as  they
were  deprived  of  the  customary  honours  of  old  age,
were  excluded  from  taking  part  in  the  celebration  of
certjiin  festivals,  and  occasionally  compelled  to  sing
defamatory'-  songs  against  themselves.  No  atimos
was  allowed  to  marry  the  daughter  of  a  Spartan
citizen,  and  was  thus  compelled  to  endure  the
ignominies  of  an  old  bachelor.  (Plut.  Agesil.  30;
Muller,  Dor.  iv.  4.  §  3.)  Although  an  atimos  at
Sparta  was  subject  to  a  great  many  painful  restric-
tions, yet  his  condition  cannot  be  called  outlawry  ;
it  was  rather  a  state  of  infamy  properly  so  called.
Even  the  atimia  of  a  coward  cannot  be  considered
equivalent  to  the  civil  death  of  an  Athenian  atimos,
for  we  find  him  still  acting  to  some  extent  as  a
citizen,  though  always  in  a  manner  which  made
his  infamy  manifest  to  every  one  who  saw  him.

(Lelyveld,  De  Infamia  ex  Jure  Aitico,  Amstelod.
1835  ;  'Wachsmuth,  Hellen.  Alterth.  &c.  vol.  ii.  p.
1 .95,  &c.,  2d  edit. ;  Meier,  De  Bonis  Damnat.  p.
101,  &c.  ;  Schomann,  De  Comit.  Afh.  p.  67,  &c.
transl.  ;  Hermann,  Polit.  Ant.  of  Greece,  §  124  ;
Meier  und  Schomann,  Att.  Proc.  p.  563.  On  the
Spartan  atimia  in  particular,  see  Wachsmuth,  &c.,
vol.  ii.  p.  155,  &c.,  2d  ed.  ;  Muller,  Dor.  iii.  10.
§  3.)  [L.  S.]

ATLANTES  {^TXavr^s)  and  TELAMO'NES
(TeAa/tftives),  are  terms  used  in  architecture,  the
former  by  the  Greeks,  the  latter  by  the  Romans,
to  designate  those  male  figures  which  are  sometimes
fancifully  used,  like  the  female  Caryatides,  in  place
of  columns  (Vitruv.  vi.  7.  §  6,  Schneid.).  Both
words  are  derived  from  T\r\vai,  and  the  former
evidently  refers  to  the  fable  of  Atlas,  who  sup-
ported the  vault  of  heaven,  the  latter  perhaps  to  the
strength  of  the  Telamonian  Ajax.

The  Greek  architects  used  such  figures  sparingly,
and  generally  with  some  adaptation  to  the  character


ATRAMENTUM.

of  the  building.    They  were  much  more  freely  used
in  tripods,  thrones,  and  so  forth.

They  were  also  applied  as  ornaments  to  the  sides
of  a  vessel,  having  the  appearance  of  supporting  the
upper  works  ;  as  in  the  ship  of  Hiero,  described  by
Athenaeus  (v.  p.  208.  b).

A  representation  of  suxh  figures  is  given  in  the
preceding  woodcut,  copied  from  the  icpidarium  in
the  baths  at  Pompeii :  another  example  of  them  is
in  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Olympius  at  Agrigentum.

(Muller,  Arch'dol.  d.  Ktmst,  §  279  ;  Mauch,  die
Griech.  u.  Bom.  Bau-Ordnungen,  p.  88.)        [P.  S.]

ATRAMENTUM,  a  term  applicable  to  any
black  colouring  substance,  for  wliatever  purpose  it
may  be  used  (Plant.  Mostell.  i.  3.  102  ;  Cic.  de
Nat.  Deor.  ii.  50),  like  the  fxiXav  of  the  Greeks.
(Dem.  de  Cor.  p.  313.)  There  were,  however,
three  principal  kinds  of  atramcntum,  one  called
librarium,  or  scriptorium  (in  Greek,  ypcupiKhv
fj.4\av),  another  called  sutorimn,  the  third  tectorium.
Atramenizim  Uhrarium  was  what  we  call  writing-
ink.  (Hor.  Ep.  ii.  1.  236 ;  Petron.  102 ;  Cic.  ad
Qu.  Fr.  ii.  15.)  Atramcntum  sutorium  was  used
by  shoemakers  for  dyeing  leather.  (Plin.  //.  iV".
xxxiv.  12.  s.  32.)  This  atiximentum  sutorium  con-
tained some  poisonous  ingredient,  such  as  oil  of
vitriol  ;  whence  a  person  is  said  to  die  of  atramen-
tum  sutorium,  that  is,  of  poison,  as  in  Cicero  (ad
Fam.  ix.  21.)  Atramentum  tectorium,  or  pictorium^
was  used  by  painters  for  some  purposes,  apparently
as  a  sort  of  varnish.  (Plin.  //.  A^.  xxxvi.  5.  s.  25,
&c.)  The  Scholiast  on  Aristophanes  (Plut.  277)
says  that  the  courts  of  justice,  or  ^LKaariipia,  in
Athens  were  called  each  after  some  letter  of  the
alphabet :  one  alpha,  another  beta,  a  third  gamma,
and,  so  on,  and  that  against  the  doors  of  each
SiKua-T-fjpiov,  the  letter  which  belonged  to  it  was
written  irvp^xp  ^dfifxart,  in  "  red  ink."  This  "  red
ink,"  or  "  red  dye,"  could  not  of  course  be  called
atramentum.  Of  the  ink  of  the  Greeks,  however,
nothing  certain  is  known,  except  what  may  be
gathered  from  the  passage  of  Demosthenes  above
referred  to,  which  will  be  noticed  again  below.
The  ink  of  the  Egyptians  was  evidently  of  a  very
superior  kind,  since  its  colour  and  brightness  re-
main to  this  day  in  some  specimens  of  papyri.
The  initial  characters  of  the  pages  are  often  written
in  7'ed  ink.  Ink  among  the  Romans  is  first  found
mentioned  in  the  passages  of  Cicero  and  Plautus
above  referred  to,  Pliny  informs  us  how  it  was
made.  He  says,  "It  was  made  of  soot  in  various
ways,  with  burnt  resin  or  pitch  :  and  for  this  pur-
pose," he  adds,  "  they  have  built  furnaces,  which
do  not  allow  the  smoke  to  escape.  The  kind  most
commended  is  made  in  this  way  from  pine- wood :
— It  is  mixed  with  soot  from  the  furnaces  or  baths
(that  is,  the  hypocausts  of  the  baths)  ;  and  this
they  use  ad  volumina  sa'ibenda.  Some  also  make
a  kind  of  ink  by  boiling  and  straining  the  lees  of
wine,"  &c.  (Plin.  //.  A',  xxxvi.  5.  s.  25.)  With
this  account  the  statements  of  Vitruvius  (vii.  10,
p.  197,  ed.  Schneider)  in  the  main  agree.  Thai
black  matter  emitted  by  the  cuttle-fish  {sepia)
and  hence  itself  called  sepia,  was  also  used  foi
atramentum.  (Cic.  de  Nat.  Deor.  ii.  50  ;  Persiu
Sat.  iii.  12, 13  ;  Ausonius,  iv.  76.)  Aristotle,  hoW'
ever,  in  treating  of  the  cuttle-fisli,  does  not  refei
to  the  use  of  the  matter  {^o\hs)  which  it  emits,  a
ink.  (Aelian,  H.  A.  i.  34.)  Pliny  observes  (xxvii.
7.  s.  28)  that  an  infusion  of  wormwood  with  ink
preserves  a  manuscript  from  mice.     On  the  whole,


ATRAMENTUM.
jjerhnps,  it  may  be  said  that  tlie  inks  of  the  an-
cients Avere  mere  durable  than  our  own  ;  that  the\'
M-ere  thicker  and  more  imctuous,  in  substance  and
durability  more  resembling  the  ink  now  used  by
printers.  An  inkstand  was  discovered  at  Hercu-
laneum,  containing  ink  as  thick  as  oil,  and  still
usable  for  writing.

It  would  appear  also  that  this  gummy  character
of  the  ink,  preventing  it  from  running  to  the  point
of  the  pen,  was  as  much  complained  of  by  the  an-
cient Romans  as  it  is  by  ourselves.  Persius  (Sat.
iii.  12)  represents  a  foppish  writer  sitting  down  to
compose,  but,  as  the  ideas  do  not  run  freely, —

"Tunc  queritur,crassus  calamoquod  pendeat  humor;

Nigra  quod  infusa  vanescat  sepia  lympha."
They  also  added  water,  as  we  do  sometimes,  to
thin  it.

From  a  phrase  used  by  Demosthenes,  it  would
appear  as  if  the  colouring  ingredient  was  obtained
by  rubbing  from  some  solid  substance  (rh  fieXau
rpi§€iv,  Dem.  de  Cor.  p.  313),  perhaps  much  as  we
rub  Indian  ink.  It  is  probable  that  there  were
inany  ways  of  colouring  ink,  especially  of  different
cd!  mrs.  Red  ink  (made  of  mmium,  vermilion)
V.  as  used  for  writing  the  titles  and  beginnings  of
ks  (Ovid,  Trist.  i.  1.  7),  so  also  was  ink  made
'hrica.,  "  red  ochre"  (Sidon.  vii.  12)  ;  and  bc-
tci  a.-,e  the  headings  of  laws  were  written  with  ruhrica,
\  the  word  nibric  came  to  be  used  for  the  civil  law.
j  (Quintil.  xii.  3.)  So  alburn^  a  white  or  Avhited
I  table,  on  which  the  praetors'  edicts  were  written,
was  used  in  a  similar  way.  A  person  devoting
himself  to  album  and  rubrica.,  was  a  person  devoting
himself  to  the  law.  [Album.]  There  was  also  a
very  expensive  red-coloured  ink  with  which  the
emperor  used  to  write  his  signature,  but  which  any
one  else  was  by  an  edict  (Cod.  1.  tit.  23.  s.  6)
forbidden  to  wia.,  excepting  the  sons  or  near  rela-
tions of  the  emperor,  to  whom  the  privilege  was  ex-
pressly granted.  But  if  the  emperor  was  under  age,
his  guardian  used  a  green  ink  for  writing  his  signa-
ture. (Montfaucon,  Palaeog.  p.  3.)  On  the  banners
of  Crassus  there  were  purple  letters  —  (poiviKa
ypd/jifxaTa.  (Dion  Cass.  xl.  18.)  On  pillars  and
monuments  letters  of  gold  and  silver,  or  letters
covered  with  gilt  and  silver,  were  sometimes  used.
(Cic.  Verr.  iv.  27;  Suet.  Aug.  7.)  In  writing  also
this  was  done  at  a  later  period.  Suetonius  (A'er.
1 0)  says,  that  of  the  poems  which  Nero  recited  at
Rome  one  part  was  written  in  gold  (or  gilt)  letters
{aureis  litteris),  and  consecrated  to  Jupiter  Capi-
tolinus.  This  kind  of  illuminated  writing  was
more  practised  afterwards  in  religious  compositions,
which  were  considered  as  worthy  to  be  written
in  letters  of  gold  (as  we  say  even  now),  and  there
fore  were  actually  written  so.  Something  like
■what  we  call  sympathetic  ink,  which  is  invisible
till  heat,  or  some  preparation  be  applied,  appears  to
lave  been  not  uncommon.  So  Ovid  (Art.  Am.  iii.
627,  &c.)  advises  writing  love-letters  with  fresh
milk,  which  would  be  unreadable,  until  the  letters
were  sprinkled  with  coal-dust.  Ausonius  {Epixt.
xxiii.  21)  gives  the  same  direction.  Pliny  (xxvi.
8)  suggests  that  the  milky  sap  contained  in  some
jilants  might  be  used  in  the  same  way.

An  inkstand  {irv^iou,  fieXavdoxoy,  Pollux,  iv.
1  !5,  x.  59)  was  either  single  or  double.  The  double
inkstands  were  probably  intended  to  contain  both
black  and  red  ink,  much  in  the  modern  fashion.
They  were  also  of  various  shapes,  as  for  example,


ATTICURGES.  171

roimd  or  hexagonal.  They  had  covers  to  keep  the
dust  from  the  ink.  The  annexed  cuts  represent
inkstands  found  at  Pompeii.  [Calamus.]  (Cane-
parius,  De Atramentis cujusque.  Generis,  Lond.  1660;
Beckmann,  History  of  Inventions.^  vol.  i.  p.  106,
vol.  ii.  p.  266,  London,  1846;  Becker,  Charikles^
vol.  ii.  p.  222,  &c.,  GaUas,  vol.  i.  p.  166,  &c.)

[A.  A.]


A'TRIUM  is  used  in  a  distinctive  as  well  as
collective  sense,  to  designate  a  particular  part  in  the
private  houses  of  the  Romans  [Dow us],  and  also
a  class  of  public  buildings,  so  called  from  their
general  resemblance  in  construction  to  the  atrium
of  a  private  house.  There  is  likewise  a  distinction
between  atrium  and  area ;  the  former  being  an
open  area  surrounded  by  a  colonnade,  whilst  the
latter  had  no  such  ornament  attached  to  it.  The
atrium,  moreover,  was  sometimes  a  building  by  it-
self, resembling  in  some  respects  the  open  basilica
[Basilica],  but  consisting  of  three  sides.  Such
was  the  Atrium  Publicum  in  the  capitol,  which ,
Livy  informs  us,  was  stnick  Avith  lightning,  B.  c,
214.  (Liv.  xxiv.  10.)  It  was  at  other  times  at-
tached to  some  temple  or  other  edifice,  and  in  such
case  consisted  of  an  open  area  and  surrounding
portico  in  front  of  the  stnicture,  like  that  before
the  church  of  St.  Peter,  in  the  Vatican.  Sevei-al
of  these  buildings  are  mentioned  by  the  ancient
historians,  two  of  which  were  dedicated  to  the  same
goddess,  Libertas  ;  but  an  account  of  these  build-
ings belongs  to  Roman  topography,  which  is  treated
of  in  the  Dictionary  (f  Geography.  [A.  R.]

ATTICURGES  ("ATTiKovpyh,  in  the  Attic
style),  is  an  architectural  term,  which  ori\y  occurs
in  Vitmvius  (iii.  5.  §  2,  iv.  6.  §§  1.  6,  Schn. :  as
a  common  adjective,  the  word  only  occurs  in  a
fragment  of  Menander,  No.  628,  Meineke).  The
word  is  evidently  used  not  to  describe  a  distinct
order  of  architecture,  but  any  of  those  variations
which  the  genius  of  the  Athenian  architects  made
upon  the  established  forms.  In  the  former  pas-
sage,   Vitruvius   applies  it  to  a  sort    of  base   of


a  column,  which  he  describes  as  consisting  of  two
tori  divided  by  a  scotia  or  trochilus,  with  a  fillet


172


AUCTIO.


above  and  below,  and  beneath  all  vi.  plinth:  but
in  several  of  the  best  examples  the  plinth  is
wanting.  (For  the  exact  proportions,  sec  Vitruvius.)
This  form  of  base  seems  to  have  been  originally
an  Athenian  simplification  of  tlie  Ionic  base  ;  but
it  was  afterwards  used  in  the  other  orders,  especi-
ally the  Corinthian  and  the  Roman  Doric  ;  and  it
is  usually  regarded  as  being,  from  its  simple  ele-
gance, the  most  generally  applicable  of  all  the
bases  [Spira].

In  the  second  of  the  passages  above  referred  to,
Vitruvius  applies  the  tenn  Atticurges  to  a  particular
form  of  door-way,  but  it  differed  very  little  from  that
which  he  designates  as  the  Doric :  in  fact,  though
Vitruvius  enumerates  three  kinds  of  do  rways  to
temples,  the  Doric,  Ionic,  and  Attic,  we  only  find
in  the  existing  building  two  really  distinct  forms.
(Mauch,  die  Griech.  u.  Rojn.  Bau-Ordnungen.
p.  97.)  -According  to  Pliny  {H.  N.  xxxvi.  23,
s.  6Q)  square  pillars  were  called  Atticite  colum-
nae.)  _  [P.S.]

AU'CTIO  signifies  generally  "  an  increasing,  an
enhancement,"  and  hence  the  name  is  applied  to  a
public  sale  of  goods,  at  which  persons  bid  against
one  another.  The  term  auctio  is  general,  and  com-
prehends the  species  auctio,  honorum  emtio  and
sectio.  As  a  species,  auctio  signifies  a  public  sale
of  goods  by  the  owner  or  his  agent,  or  a  sale  of
goods  of  a  deceased  person  for  the  purpose  of  di-
viding the  money  among  those  entitled  to  it,  which
was  called  auctio  hereditaria.  (Cic.  Pro  Caecin.  5.)
The  sale  was  sometimes  conducted  by  an  argen-
tarius,  or  by  a  magister  auctionis  ;  and  the  time,
place,  and  conditions  of  sale,  were  announced
either  by  a  public  notice  {tabula,  album.  Ace),  or
by  a  crier  (praeco).

The  usual  phiases  to  express  the  giving  notice
of  a  sale  are  auctionem  proscribere,  praedicare;  and
to  determine  on  a  sale,  auctionem  constituere.  The
purchasers  (emtores),  when  assembled,  were  some-
times said  ad  tcdmlam  adesse.  The  phrases  signi-
fying to  bid  are,  liccri,  Ucitari,  which  Avas  done
either  by  word  of  mouth,  or  by  such  significant
hints  as  are  known  to  all  people  who  have  attended
an  auction.  The  property  was  said  to  be  knocked
down  (addici)  to  the  purchaser  who  either  en-
tered into  an  engagement  to  pay  the  money  to
the  argentarius  or  magister,  or  it  was  sometimes  a
condition  of  sale  that  there  should  be  no  delivery  of
the  thing  before  payment.  (Gaius  iv.  126  ;  Actio,
pp.  9,  10.)  An  entry  was  made  in  the  books  of  the
argentarius  of  the  sale  and  the  money  due,  and
credit  was  given  in  the  same  books  to  the  purchaser
when  he  paid  the  money  {eocj^ensa  pecunia  lata,
accepta  relata).  Thus  the  book  of  the  argentarius
might  be  used  as  evidence  for  the  purchaser,  both
of  his  having  made  a  purchase,  and  having  paid  for
the  thing  purchased.  If  the  money  was  not  paid
according  to  the  conditions  of  sale,  the  argentarius
could  sue  for  it.

The  praeco,  or  crier,  seems  to  have  acted  the  part
of  the  modern  auctioneer,  so  far  as  calling  out  the
biddings  (Cic,  De  Offic.  li,  23),  and  amusing  the
company.  Slaves,  Avhen  sold  by  auction,  were
placed  on  a  stone,  or  other  elevated  thing,  as  is
sometimes  the  case  when  slaves  are  sold  in  the
United  States  of  North  America  ;  and  hence  the
phrase  homo  de  lapide  emtus.  It  was  usual  to  put
up  a  spear,  hasta,  in  auctions,  a  symbol  derived,  it
is  said,  from  the  ancient  practice  of  selling  iinder
a  spear  the  booty  acquired  in  war.     Hence  the


AUCTOR.

phrase  "  sub  hasta  vendere  "  (Cic.  De  Off.  ii.  8)

signified  an  auction.  The  expression  *'  asta  jmb-
blica  "  is  now  used  in  It;ily  to  signify  an  auction :
the  expression  is  "  vendere  all'  asta  pubblica,"  or
"  vendere  per  subasta."  By  the  auctio,  the  Quiri-
tarian  ownership  in  the  thing  sold  was  trans-
ferred to  the  purchaser.  [Bonorum  Emtio  ;
Sectio.]  [G.  L.]

AUCTOR,  a  word  which  contains  the  same
element  as  aug-eo,  and  signifies  generally  one  who
enlarges,  confirms,  or  gives  to  a  thing  its  complete-
ness and  efficient  form.  The  numerous  technical
significations  of  the  word  are  derivable  from  this
general  notion.  As  he  who  gives  to  a  thing  that
which  is  necessary  for  its  completeness,  may  in  this
sense  be  viewed  as  the  chief  actor  or  doer,  the
word  auctor  is  also  used  in  the  sense  of  one  who
originates  or  proposes  a  thing  ;  but  this  cannot  be
viewed  as  its  primary  meaning.  Accordingly,  the
word  auctor,  when  used  in  connection  with  lex  or
senatus  consultum,  often  means  him  who  originates
and  proposes,  as  appears  from  numerous  passages.
(Liv.  vi.  36  ;  Cic.  Pro  Dom.  c.  30.)  When  a
measure  was  approved  by  the  senate  before  it  was
confirmed  by  the  votes  of  the  people,  the  senate
were  said  auctores  fieri,  and  this  preliminary  ap-
proval was  called  senatus  aucioritas.  (Cic.  Brutus,
c.  14.)

The  expressions  "  patres  auctores  fiunt,"  "  pa-
tres  auctores  facti,"  have  given  rise  to  much  dis-
cussion. In  the  earlier  periods  of  the  Roman
state,  the  word  "patres"  was  equivalent  to  "pa<
tricii ; "  in  the  later  period,  when  the  patricians  had
lost  all  importance  as  a  political  body,  the  tei-m
patres  signified  the  senate.  But  the  writers  of
the  age  of  Cicero,  when  speaking  of  the  early
periods,  often  used  the  word  patres,  when  they
might  have  used  patricii,  and  thus  a  con'usiou
arose  between  the  early  and  the  later  signification
of  the  word  patres.

The  expression  "  patres  auctores  fiunt "  means
that  the  determinations  of  the  populus  in  the  comitia
centuriata  were  confirmed  by  the  patricians  in  the
comitia  curiata.  To  explain  this  fully,  as  to  the
earliest  periods,  it  is  necessary  to  show  what  the
lex  curiata  de  imperio  was.

After  the  comitia  curiata  had  elected  a  king
(crcavit),  the  king  proposed  to  the  same  body  a
lex  curiata  de  imperio.  (Cic.  De  Rep.  ii.  13,  17,  Ifi,
20.)  At  first  it  might  appear  as  if  there  were
two  elections,  for  the  patricians,  that  is  the  po-
pulus, first  elected  the  king,  and  then  they  had
to  vote  again  upon  the  imperium.  Cicero  {De  Ijcg.
Agr.  ii.  11)  explains  it  thus — that  the  populus  had
thus  an  opportunity  to  reconsider  their  vote  (re-
prehendendi  potestas).  But  the  chief  reason  was
that  the  imperium  was  not  conferred  by  the  bare
election,  and  it  was  necessary  that  the  king  should
have  the  imperium  :  consequently  there  must  be  a
distinct  vote  upon  it.  Now  Livy  says  nothing  of
the  lex  curiata  in  his  first  book,  but  he  uses  the
expression  "  patres  auctores  fierent,"  "  patres  auc-
tores facti."  (Liv.  i,  17,  22,  32.)  In  this  sense
the  patres  were  the  "  auctores  comitiorum,"  an  ex-
pression analogous  to  that  in  which  a  tutor  is  said  to
be  an  auctor  to  his  pupillus.  In  some  passages  the
expression  "  patricii  auctores  "  is  used,  which  is  an
additional  proof  that  in  the  expression  "  patres
auctores,"  tlie  patrician  body  is  meant,  and  not  the
senate,  as  some  have  supposed.

Cicero,  in  the  passages  quoted,  does  not  use  the


AUCTUU.
expression  "  patres  auctores  fiunt,"  nor  docs  Livy,
in  the  passages  quoted,  speak  of  the  lex  curiata  de
imperio.  But  they  speak  of  the  same  thing,  though
they  use  different  expressions.  This  explains  why
Dionysius  sometimes  uses  an  expression  equivalent
to  "  patricii  auctores  fiunt,"  for  patricii  of  course
means  the  curiae,  and  not  the  senate.  {Antiq.
Rom.  ii.  60,  vi.  90.)

Till  the  time  of  Servius  Tullius  there  were  only
the  comitia  curiata,  which,  as  already  explained,  first
elected  a  king,  and  then  by  another  vote  conferred
the  impcrium.  The  imperium  could  only  be  con-
ferred on  a  determinate  person.  It  was,  therefore,
necessar}'^  to  determine  first  who  was  to  be  the  per-
son who  was  capable  of  receiving  the  imperium  ;
and  thus  there  were  two  separate  votes  of  the  pa-
tres. Servius  TiUlius  established  the  comitia  cen-
turia.ta,  in  which  the  plebs  also  voted.  When  his
constitution  was  in  full  force  after  the  exile  of  the
last  Tarquin,  the  patres  had  still  the  privilege  of
confirming  at  the  comitia  curiata  the  vote  of  the
comitia  centuriata,  that  is,  they  gave  to  it  the
*'  patrum  auctoritas  "  (Cic.  De  Repub.  ii.  30)  ;  or,
in  other  words,  the  "  patres  "  were  "  auctores  facti.""
(Cic.  Pro  Plancio^  c.  3.)  That  this  was  the  prac-
tice under  the  early  Republic,  we  see  from  Livy
(ix.  38,  39).

In  the  fifth  century  of  the  city  a  change  was
made.  By  one  of  the  laws  of  the  plebeian  dic-
tator Q.  Publilius  Philo,  it  was  enacted  (Li v.  viii.
12)  that  in  the  case  of  leges  to  be  enacted  at  the
comitia  centuriata,  the  patres  should  be  auctores,
that  is,  the  curiae  should  give  their  assent  before
the  vote  of  the  comitia  centuriata.  If  we  take
this  literall}',  the  comitia  curiata  might  still  reject
a  proposed  law  by  refusing  their  previous  sanction  ;
and  this  might  be  so :  but  it  is  probable  that  tbe
previous  sanction  became  a  matter  of  form.  By  a
lex  Maenia  of  uncertain  date  (Cic.  Brutus,  c.  14),
the  same  change  was  made  as  to  elections,  which
the  Publilia  lex  had  made  as  to  the  enacting  of
leges.  This  explains  the  passage  of  Livy  (i.  17).
Accordingly,  after  the  passing  of  the  lex  Maenia,
the  "  patrum  auctoritas  "  was  distinct  from  the  lex
curiata  de  imperio,  while,  before  the  passing  of  the
lex  Maenia,  they  were  the  same  thing.  Thus  the
lex  Maenia  made  the  lex  curiata  de  imperio  a  mere
form,  for  the  imperium  could  not  be  refused,  and  so
in  the  later  Republic,  in  order  to  keep  up  a  shadow
of  a  substance,  thirty  lictors  exhibited  the  cere-
mony of  holding  the  curiata  comitia  ;  and  the  auc-
toritas patrum,  which  was  the  assent  of  the  senate,
appears  as  the  mode  in  which  the  confirmation  of
the  people's  choice,  and  the  conferring  of  the  im-
perium, were  both  included.

This  explanation  which  is  founded  on  that  of
Becker  {Handhuch  der  Rom.  AUerthUmer),  and  ap-
pears to  be  what  he  understands  by  the  phrase
"  patres  auctores,"  is  at  least  more  consistent  with
all  the  authorities  than  any  other  that  has  been
proposed.

In  the  imperial  time,  auctor  is  often  said  of  the
emperor  (princeps)  who  recommended  any  thing  to
the  senate,  and  on  which  recommendation  that
body  passed  a  senatus-consultum.  (Gains,  i.  30,
80;Sueton.  Vesp.  11.)

When  the  word  auctor  is  applied  to  him  who
recommends,  but  does  not  originate  a  legislative
measure,  it  is  equivalent  to  suasor.  (Cic.  Ad.  Aft.
i.  19  ;  Brutus.,  c.  25,  27.)  Sometimes  both  auctor
and  suasor  are  used  in  the  same  sentence,  and


AUCTORITAS.  173

the  meanmg  of  each  is  kept  distinct.  (Cic.  Of-
iii.  30.)

With  reference  to  dealings  between  individuals,
auctor  has  the  sense  of  o^vner  (Cic.  Pro  Caeeln,
10),  and  is  defined  thus  (Dig.  50.  tit.  17.  s.  175) :
Auctor  meus  a  quo  Jus  in  me  transit.  In  this  sense
auctor  is  the  seller  {venditor).^  as  opposed  to  the
buyer  (emtor)  :  the  person  who  joined  the  seller  in
a  warranty,  or  as  security,  was  called  auctor  se-
cundus,  as  opposed  to  the  seller  or  auctor  primus.
(Dig.  19.  tit.  1.  s.  4,  21  ;  tit.  2.  s.  4,  51.)  The
phrase  a  malo  auctore  emere  (Cic.  Verr.  5.  c.  22)  ;
auctorem  laudare  (Gell.  ii.  10)  will  thus  be  intel-
ligible. The  testJitor,  with  respect  to  his  heir,
might  be  called  auctor.  (Ex  Corp.  Hermogen.
Cod.  tit.  11.)

Consistently  with  the  meanings  of  auctor  as  al-
!  eady  explained,  the  notion  of  consenting,  approv-
ing, and  giving  validity  to  a  measure  affecting  a
person's  status  clearly  appears  in  the  following  pas-
sage.    (Cic.  Pro  Dom.  c.  29.)

Auctor  is  also  used  generally  to  express  any  per-
son under  whose  authority  any  legal  act  is  done.
In  this  sense,  it  means  a  tutor  who  is  appointed
to  aid  or  advise  a  woman  on  account  of  the  in-
firmity of  her  sex  (Liv.  xxxiv.  2  ;  Cic.  Pro  Caecin.
c.  25  ;  Gains,  i.  190,  195)  :  it  is  also  applied  to  a
tutor  whose  business  it  is  to  approve  of  certain  acts
on  behalf  of  a  ward  {pupillus).  (Paulus,  Dig.  26.
tit.  8.  s.  3.)

The  term  auctores  juris  is  equivalent  to  juris-
periti  (Dig.  1.  tit.  2.  s.  2.  §  13  ;  Gellius,  ii.  c.  10)  :
and  the  law  writers  or  leaders  of  particular  schools  of
law  were  called  scholae  auctores.  It  is  unnecessary
to  trace  the  other  significations  of  this  word.  [G.  L.]

AUCTORAMENTUM.     [Gladiatores.]

AUCTO'RITAS.  The  technical  meanings  of
this  word  correlate  with  those  of  auctor.

The  auctoritas  senatus  was  not  a  senatus-con-
sultum ;  it  was  a  measure,  incomplete  in  itself,
which  received  its  completion  by  some  other  au-
thority.

Auctoritas,  as  applied  to  property,  is  equivalent
to  legal  ownership,  being  a  correlation  of  auctor.
(Cic.  Top.  c.  4  ;  Pro  Caecin.  c.  26.)  It  was  a
provision  of  the  laws  of  the  Twelve  Tables  that
there  could  be  no  usucapion  of  a  stolen  thing
(Gaius,  ii.  45),  w^hich  is  thus  expressed  by  Gellius
in  speaking  of  the  Atinian  law  (xvii.  c.  7)  :  Qwod
suhrepjtum  ent  ejus  rci  aeterna  auctoritas  esto  ;  the
ovniership  of  the  thing  stolen  was  still  in  the  ori-
ginal owner.  (Cic.  De  Off.  i.  c.  12  ;  Dirksen,
Uebersicht.,  drc.  der  Zwolf-Tafel-Fragmente.,  p.  417.)
(As  to  the  expression  Usus  Auctoritas,  see  Usu-

CAPIO.)

Auctoritas  sometimes  signifies  a  warranty  or
collateral  security  ;  and  thus  correlated  to  auctor
secundus.  Auctoritatis  actio  means  the  action  of
eviction.  (Paulus,  Sentent.  Rccept.  lib.  2.  tit.  1 7.)
The  instnimenta  auctoritatis  are  the  proofs  or  evi-
dences of  title.

The  auctoritas  of  the  praetor  is  sometimes  used
to  signify  the  judicial  sanction  of  the  praetor,  or
his  order,  by  which  a  person,  a  tutor  for  instjmce,
might  be  compelled  to  do  some  legal  act  (Gaius,  i.
190  ;  Dig.  27.  tit.  9.  s.  5),  or,  in  other  words,
"  auctor  fieri."  The  tutor,  with  respect  to  his
wards  both  male  and  female  (pttpiUi,  pupiUae),  was
said  negotimn  gerere,  and  auctoritatem  inteiponere  :
the  former  phrase  is  applicable  where  the  tutor  does
the  act  himself ;  the  latter,  where  he  gives  his  ap-


174


AUGUR.


probation  and  confirmation  to  the  act  of  his  ward.
Though  a  pupillus  had  not  a  capacity  to  do  any  act
which  was  prejudicial  to  him,  he  had  a  capacity  to
receive  or  assent  to  any  thing  which  was  for  his
benefit,  and  in  such  case  the  auctoritas  of  the  tutor
was  not  necessary.

The  authority  of  decided  cases  was  called
similiter  judicatorum  audoritus.  The  other  mean-
ings of  auctoritas  may  be  easily  derived  from  the
primaiy  meaning  of  the  word,  and  from  the  ex-
planations here  given.  [G.  L.]

AUDITO'RIUM,  as  the  name  implies,  is  any
place  for  hearing.  It  was  the  practice  among  the
Romans  for  poets  and  others  to  read  their  composi-
tions to  their  friends,  who  were  sometimes  called
the  auditorium  (Plin.  Ep.  iv.  7)  ;  but  the  word
was  also  used  to  express  any  place  in  which  any
thing  was  heard,  and  under  the  empire  it  was
applied  to  a  court  of  justice.  Under  the  republic
the  place  for  all  judicial  proceedings  was  the  comi-
tium  and  the  forum.  (Ni  pagunt  in  comitio  aut
in  foro  ante  meridiem  causam  coniicito  quum  per-
oi-ant  ambo  praesentes.  Dirksen,  Uebersickt,  &c.
J).  725.)  But  for  the  sake  of  shelter  and  conve-
nience, it  became  the  practice  to  hold  courts  in  the
Basilicae,  which  contained  halls,  which  were  also
called  auditoria.  In  the  dialogue  de  Oratoribus
(c.  39),  the  writer  observes  that  oratory  had  lost
much  by  cases  being  generally  heard  in  "  auditoria
et  tabularia."  It  is  first  imder  M.  Aurelius  that
the  auditorium  principis  is  mentioned,  by  which
we  must  understand  a  hall  or  room  in  the  imperial
residence  ;  and  in  such  a  hall  Septimius  Severus
and  the  later  emperors  held  their  regular  sittings
when  they  presided  as  judges.  (Dig.  36.  tit.  1.
s.  22,  49.  tit.  9.  s.  1;  Dion  Cass.  Ixxvi.  11;  Dig.  4.
tit.  4.  8.  18.)  The  provincial  governors  also  under
the  empire  sometimes  sat  on  their  tribunal  as  in  the
republic,  and  sometimes  in  the  praetorium  or  in  an
auditorium.  Accordingly,  the  latest  jurists  use  the
word  generally  for  any  place  in  which  justice  was
administered.  (Dig.  1.  tit.  22,  s.  5.)  In  the  time
of  Diocletian,  the  auditorium  had  got  the  name  of
secretariinn  ;  and  in  a  constitution  of  Constantine
(Cod.  Th,  i.  tit.  16.  s.  6),  the  two  words  seem  to
be  used  as  equivalent,  when  he  enacts  that  both
criminal  and  civil  cases  should  be  heard  openly
(before  the  tribunal),  and  not  in  auditoria  or
eecretaria.  Valentinianus  and  Valens  allowed
causes  to  be  heard  either  before  the  tribunal  or  in
the  secretarium,  but  yet  with  open  doors.  From
the  fifth  century,  the  secretarium  or  secretum  was
the  regular  place  for  hearing  causes,  and  the  people
were  excluded  by  lattice-work  {cancellae)  and
curtains  {vela)  ;  but  this  may  have  been  as  much
for  convenience  as  for  any  other  purpose,  though  it
appears  that  at  this  late  period  of  the  empire  there
were  only  present  the  magistrate  and  his  officers,
and  the  parties  to  the  cause.  Only  those  whom
the  magistrate  invited,  or  who  had  business,  or
persons  of  certain  rank  (honorati)  had  admission
to  the  courts,  under  the  despotic  system  of  the  late
empire.  (Cod.  1.  tit.  48.  s.  3  ;  HoUweg,  Handlntch
ties  Civilprozesses,  p.  215.)  [G.  L.]

AUGUR,  AUGU'RIUM  ;  AUSPEX,  AUS-
PI'CIUM.  Atiffur  or  auspex  meant  a  diviner  by
birds,  but  came  in  course  of  time,  like  the  Greek
iii(au6s,  to  be  applied  in  a  more  extended  sense :
his  art  was  called  augurium  or  auspicium.  Plutarch
relates  that  the  atigures  were  originally  termed
auspices  (Quaest.  Rom.  c.  72),  and  there  seems  no


AUGUR.

reason  to  doubt  this  statement  as  Plartung  does
(Die  Religion  der  Romcr,  vol.  i.  p.  99),  on  the
authority  of  Scrvius  (ad  Virg.  Aen.  i.  402,  iii.  20).
The  authority  of  Plutarch  is  further  supported  by
the  fact,  that  in  Roman  marriages  tiie  person  who
represented  the  diviner  of  ancient  times,  was
called  auspex  and  not  augur.  (Cic.  de  Div.  i.  1 6).
Rubino  (Romisch.  Ver/assung,  p.  45)  draws  a  dis-
tinction between  the  meaning  of  the  words  auspea}
and  augur,  though  he  believes  that  they  were  used
to  indicate  the  same  person,  the  former  referrin<r
simply  to  the  observation  of  the  signs,  and  the  latter
to  the  interpretation  of  them.  This  view  is  cer-
tainly supported  by  the  meaning  of  the  verbs
auspicari  and  augurari,  and  the  same  distinction
seems  to  prevail  between  the  words  auspicium  and
augurium,  when  they  are  used  together  (Cic.  de
Div.  ii.  48,  de  Nat.  Deor.  ii.  3),  though  they  are
often  applied  to  the  same  signs.  The  word  amqiex
was  supplanted  by  augur,  but  the  scientific  term
for  the  observation  continued  on  the  contrary  to  be
auspicium  and  not  augurium.  The  etymology  of
auspex  is  clear  enough  (from  avis,  and  the  root
spec  or  spic),  but  that  of  augur  is  not  so  cer-
tain. The  ancient  grammarians  derived  it  from
avis  and  gero  (Festus,  s.  v.  augur ;  Serv.  ad
Virg.  Aen.  v.  523),  while  some  modem  writers
suppose  the  root  to  be  aug,  signifying  "  to  see,"
and  the  same  as  the  Sanscrit  akshi,  the  Latin
oculus,  and  the  German  auge,  and  ur  to  be  a  ter-
mination ;  the  word  would  thus  correspond  to  the
English  seer.  Others  again  believe  the  word  to
be  of  Etruscan  origin,  which  is  not  incompatible
with  the  supposition,  as  we  shall  show  below,  that
the  auspices  were  of  Latin  or  Sabine  origin,  since
the  word  augur  may  thus  have  been  introduced
along  with  Etniscan  rites,  and  thus  have  superseded
the  original  terra  auspex.  There  is,  however,  no
certainty  on  the  point ;  and,  although  the  first
mentioned  etymology  seems  improbable,  yet  from
the  analogy  of  au-spex  and  au-ceps,  we  are  inclinod
to  believe  that  the  former  part  of  the  word  is  of
the  same  root  as  avis,  and  the  latter  ?way  he  con-
nected with  gero,  more  especially  as  Priscian  (i.  6.
§  36)  gives  auger  and  atigeratus,  as  the  more  an-
cient forms  of  augur  and  auguratus.  By  Greek
writers  on  Roman  afi"airs,  the  augurs  are  called
ol<auoir6\oi,  oi(»vo(TK6TTOi,  oluviffrai,  ol  in  olwvoTs
Upe7s.  The  augurs  formed  a  collegium  at  Rome,
but  their  histor}^,  functions,  and  duties  will  be  better
explained  after  we  have  obtained  a  clear  idea  of
what  the  auspices  were,  and  who  had  the  power
of  taking  them.

An  acquaintance  with  this  subject  is  one  of
primary  importance  to  every  student  of  Roman  his-
tory and  antiquities.  In  the  most  ancient  times,
no  transaction  took  place,  either  of  a  private  or  a
public  nature,  without  consulting  the  auspices,  and
hence  we  find  the  question  asked  in  a  well-known
passage  of  Livy  (vi.  14),  "  Auspiciis  banc  lurbera
conditam  esse,  auspiciis  bello  ac  pace,  domo  mili-
tiaeque  omnia  geri,  quis  est,  qui  ignoret  ? "  An
outline  of  the  most  important  facts  connected  with
the  auspices,  which  is  all  that  our  limits  will  allow,j
therefore,  claims  our  attentive  consideration.

All  the  nations  of  antiquity  were  impressed  witt
the  firm  belief,  that  the  will  of  the  gods  and  future]
events    were    revealed  to  men  by  certain   signs,]
which  were  sent  by  the  gods  as  marks  of  their|
favour  to  their  sincere  worshippers.     Hence,  the
arguments    of  the   Stoics  that  if  there  arc  gods.


AUGUR.

lliry  care  for  men,  and  that  if  they  care  for  men
tlii'V  must  send  them   signs  of  their  will  (Cic.  de
Jyi.  ii.  13),  expressed  so  completely  the  popular
Inlicf,   that    whoever  questioned   it,    would  have
liocii  looked  upon  in  no  other  light  than  an  atheist.
r>;it  vv-hile  all  nations  sought  to  become  acquainted
V,  itli  the  will  of  the  gods  by  various  modes,  which
uave  rise  to  innumerable  kinds  of  divination,  there
!  arose   in  each    separate  nation  a  sort  of  national
'belief  that  the  particular  gods,  who  watched  over
j  them,  revealed  the  future  to  them  in  a  distinct  and
1  pectiliar  manner.     Hence,  each  people  possessed  a
j  national  ixovtikt]  or  divincUia,  which  was  supported
I  \)y  the  laws  and  institutions  of  the  state,  and  was
I  guarded  from  mixture  with  foreign  elements   by
j  stringent  enactments.     Thus,  the  Romans  looked
j  upon  astrology  and  the  whole  prophetic  art  of  the
j  Chaldaeans  as  a  dangerous  innovation  ;  they  paid
I  little  attention  to  dreams,  .and  hardly  any  to  in-
j  spired  prophets  and  seers.     They  had  on  the  con-
!  trary  learnt  from  the  Etruscans  to  attach  much
I  importance  to  extraordmary  appearances  in  nature
j  —  Prodiyia  ;  in  common  with  other  neighbouring
nations  they  endeavoured  to  learn  the  future,  espe-
cially in  war,  by  consulting  the  entrails  of  victims;
I  they  laid  great  stress  upon  favourable  or  unfavour-
[  able  onihia,  and  in  times  of  danger  and  difficulty
!  were  accustomed  to  consult  the   Sibylline  books,
j  which  they  had  received  from  the  Greeks  ;  but  the
I  mode  of  divination,  which  was  peculiar  to  them,
I  and  essentially  national,  consisted  in  those  signs
j  included  under  the  name  of  auspicia.     The   ob-
j  servation  of  the  auspices  was,  according  to    the
unanimous  testimony  of  the  ancient  writers,  more
I  ancient  even  than  Rome  itself,  which  is  constantly
represented  as  founded  under  the  sanction  of  the
auspices,  and  the  use  of  them  is    therefore  asso-
ciated with  the  Latins,  or  the  earliest  inhabitants
of  the  city.     There  seems  therefore  no  reason  to
assign  to  them  an  Etruscan  origin,  as  many  modern
writers  are  inclined  to  do,  while  there  are  several
facts  pointing  to  an  opposite  conclusion.     Cicero,
who  was  himself  an  augur,  in  his  work  De  Divi-
tiatione,  constantly  appeals  to  the  striking  difference
between  the  auspicia  and  the  Etruscan  system  of
divination  ;    and,  while  he    frequently   mentions
other  nations  which  paid  attention  to  the  flight  of
birds  as   intimations  of  the  divine  will,  he  never
once  mentions  this  practice  as  in  existence  among
the  Etruscans.     (Cic.  de  Div.  i.  41,  ii.  35,  38  ;  de
Nat.  Deor.  ii.  4.)      The  belief  that  the  flight  of
birds  gave  some  intimation  of  the  will  of  the  gods
Bccms  to  have  been  prevalent  among  many  nations
of  antiquity,  and  was  common  to  the  Greeks,  as
well  as  the  Romans  ;  but  it  was  only  among  the
latter  people  that  it  was  reduced  to  a  complete
system,  governed  by  fixed  rules,  and  handed  down
from   generation  to  generation.      In   Greece,  the
oracles  supplanted  the  birds,  and  the  future  was
learnt  from   Apollo  and  other  gods,  rarely  from
Zeus,  who  possessed  very  few  oracles  in  Greece.
The  contrary  was  the  case  at  Rome :  it  was  from
Jupiter  that  the  futuie  was  learnt,  and  the  birds
were  regarded  as  his  messengers.     {Axes  internun-
tiae  Jovis,  Cic.  de  Divin.  ii.  34  ;    Interpretes  Jovis
optimi  maximi  pttblici  auffures,  Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  8).
It  must  be  remarked  in  general,  that  the  Roman
auspices  were  essentially  of  a  practical  nature  ;  they
gave  no  information  respecting  the  course  of  future
events,  thej"-  did  not  inform  men  idtat  icas  to  hajrpen,
but  simply  taught  them  ivMt  they  icerc  to  do^  or  not


AUGUR.  175

to  do  ;  they  assigned  no  reason  for  the  decision  of
Jupiter,  —  they  simply  amiounced,  yes  or  no.

The  words  uugurium  and  auspicium  came  to  be
used  in  course  of  time  to  signify  the  observation
of  various  kinds  of  signs.  They  were  divided  into
five  sorts  :  ex  caelo,  ex  avibus.,  ex  tripudiis,  e-x  qua-
dritpedibiis,  ex  diris.  Of  these,  the  last  three
formed  no  part  of  the  ancient  auspices.  The  ob-
servation of  signs  in  the  heavens,  such  as  light-
ning, was  naturally  connected  with  observing  the
heavens  in  order  to  watch  the  birds  ;  and  there-
fore, must  in  early  times  have  formed  part  of  the
auspices  ;  for  in  an  early  stage  of  society,  light-
ning and  similar  phenomena  have  been  always
looked  upon  as  sent  by  the  gods.  A  few  words
must  be  said  on  each  of  these  five  kinds  of  augury.

1.  Ex  caelo.  This  included  the  observation  of
the  various  kinds  of  thunder  and  lightning,  and
was  regarded  as  the  most  important,  maximum
auspicium.  (Serv.  ad  Virg.  Aen.  ii.  693  ;  Cic.  de
Div.  ii.  18,  &c.  ;  Festus,  s.v.  Coelestia.)  The  in-
terpretation of  these  phenomena  was  i-ather  Etrus-
can than  Roman  ;  and  the  only  point  connected
with  them  which  deserves  mention  here,  is,  that
whenever  it  was  reported  by  a  person  authorised
to  take  the  auspices,  that  Jupiter  thundered  or
lightened,  the  comitia  could  not  be  held.  (Cic.  de
Div.  ii.  14,  Fhilipp.  v.  3.)

2.  Ex  avibus.  It  was  only  a  few  birds  which
could  give  auguries  among  the  Romans.  (Cic.  de
Div.  ii.  34.)  They  were  divided  into  two  classes  :
Osci?ies,  those  which  gave  auguries  by  singing,  or
their  voice,  and  Alites,  those  which  gave  auguries
by  their  flight.  (Festus,  s.v.  Oscines).  To  the
former  class,  belonged  the  raven  (corvus)  and  the
crow  {cornioc)^  the  first  of  these  giving  a  favourable
omen  {auspicium  ratum)  Avhen  it  appeared  on  the
right,  the  latter,  on  the  contrary,  when  it  was  seen
on  the  left  (Plant.  Asiu.  ii.  1.  12  ;  Cic.  de  Div.  i.
39);  likewise  the  owl  (wodzia,  Festus,  s.  v.  Oscines\
and  the  hen  {gallina,  Cic.  de  Div.  ii.  26).  To  the
aves  alites  belonged  first  of  all  the  eagle  {aquila).,
who  is  called  pre-eminently  the  bird  of  Jupiter
{Jovis  ales),  and  next  the  vulture  {vultur),  and
with  these  two  the  avis  sanqualis,  also  called  ossi-

fraga,  and  the  immussulus  or  immuscidus  are  pro-
bably also  to  be  classed.  (Comp.  Virg.  Aen.  i.  394  ;
Liv.  i.  7,  34  ;  Festus,  s.  v.  sanqualis  ;  Plin.  H.  N.
X.  7.)  Some  birds  were  included  both  among  the
oscmcs and  the  alites:  such  were  the  Picus Mai-tius,
and  Feronius,  and  the  Parrhcc  (Plin.  //.  A'",  x.  18.
s.  20  ;  Hor,  Carm.  iii.  27.  15  ;  Festus,  s.v.  Osci-
num  tripudium).  These  were  the  principal  birds
consulted  in  the  auspices.  Every  sound  and  mo-
tion of  each  bird  had  a  different  meaning,  accord-
ing to  the  different  circumstances,  or  times  of  the
year  when  it  was  observed,  but  the  particulars  do
not  deserve  further  notice  here.  When  the  birds
favoured  an  undertaking,  they  were  said  addicere,
admittere  or  secundare,  and  were  then  csdled  addic-
iivae,  admissivae,  secundae,  or  praepetes:  when  un-
favourable they  were  said abdicere^arcere,  re/ragari,
&c.,  and  were  then  called  adversae  or  alterae.  The
birds  which  gave  unfavourable  omens  were  tenned
/unebres,  inhibilae,  lugubres,  malae,  &c.,  aJid  such
auspices  were  called  clivia  and  clamatoria.

3.  Ex  Tripudiis.  These  auspices  were  taken
from  the  feeding  of  chickens,  and  were  especially
employed  on  military  expeditions.  It  was  the
doctrine  of  the  augurs  that  any  bird  could  give
a  tripudiiun  (Cic.  de  Div.  ii.  34)  ;   but   it   be-


176


AUGUi{.


ciiiie  the  practice  in  later  times  to  employ  onlj'^
chickens  (puUi)  for  the  purpose.  They  were
kept  in  a  cage,  under  care  of  a  person  called
puiiar'ms ;  and  when  the  auspices  were  to  be
taken,  the  pullarius  opened  the  cage  and  threw
to  the  chickens  pulse  or  a  kind  of  soft  cake.  If
they  refused  to  come  out  or  to  eat,  or  uttered  a
cry  (occinerent)^  or  beat  their  wings,  or  flew  away,
the  signs  v/ere  considered  unfavourable.  (Liv.  x.
40 ;  Val.  Max.  i.  4.  §  3.)  On  the  contrary,  if
they  ate  greedily,  so  that  something  fell  from  their
mouth  and  struck  the  earth,  it  was  called  tnpu-
dium  solistimum,  {tripudium  quasi  terripavium,
solisfimum,  from  solum^  according  to  the  ancient
writers,  Cic.  de  Div.  ii.  34),  and  was  held  a
favourable  sign.  Two  other  kinds  of  tripudia  are
mentioned  by  Festus,  the  tripudium  oscinum,  from
the  cry  of  birds,  and  soniviu?n^  from  the  sound  of
the  pulse  falling  to  the  ground :  in  what  respects
the  latter  differed  from  the  tripudium  solistimum^
we  are  not  informed.  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  vi.  6 ;  see
also  Festus,  s.  w.  puis,  tripudium,  oscinum  tripu-
dium.)

4.  Ex  quadrupedihus.  Auguries  could  also  be
taken  from  four-footed  animals  ;  but  these  formed
no  part  of  the  original  science  of  the  augurs,  and
were  never  employed  by  them  in  taking  auspices
on  behalf  of  the  state,  or  in  the  exercise  of  their
art  properly  so  called.  They  must  be  looked  upon
simply  as  a  mode  of  private  divination,  which  was
naturally  brought  under  the  notice  of  the  augurs,
and  seems  by  them  to  have  been  reduced  to  a
kind  of  system.  Thus,  we  are  told  that  when  a
fox,  a  wolf,  a  horse,  a  dog,  or  any  other  kind  of
quadruped  ran  across  a  person's  path  or  appeared  in
an  unusual  place,  it  formed  an  augury.  (See  e.g.
Hor.  Carm.  iii.  27.)  The  juge  auspicium  belonged
to  this  class  of  auguries.  (Cic.  de  Div.  ii.  36  ;  Fest
s.v.juges  auspicium  ;  Serv.  ad  Virg.  Aen.  iii.  537.)

5.  Ex  diris,  sc.  signis.  Under  this  head  was
included  every  kind  of  augury,  which  does  not  fall
under  any  of  the  four  classes  mentioned  above,
such  as  sneezing,  stumbling,  and  other  accidental
things.  (Comp.  Serv.  at/  Virg.  Aen.  iv.  453.)  There
was  an  important  augury  of  this  kind  connected
with  the  army,  which  was  called  ex  acuminibus,
that  is,  the  flames  appearing  at  the  points  of  spears
or  other  weapons.  (Cic.  de  Div.  ii.  36,  de  Nat.
Deor.  ii.  3 ;  Dionys.  v.  46.)

The  ordinary  manner  of  taking  the  auspices,
properly  so  called  (i.  e.  ex  caelo  and  ex  avibus),  was
as  follows :  The  person  who  was  to  take  them  first
marked  out  with  a  wand  (lituus)  a  division  in
the  heavens  called  templum  or  tescum,  within
which  he  intended  to  make  his  observations.  The
station  where  he  was  to  take  the  auspices  was
also  separated  by  a  solemn  formula  from  the  rest
of  the  land,  and  was  likewise  called  templum  or
tescum.  He  then  proceeded  to  pitch  a  tent  in  it
(taJ)ernaculum  capere),  and  this  tent  again  was
also  called  templum,  or,  more  accurately,  templum
minus.  [Templum.]  Within  the  walls  of  Rome,
or,  more  properly  speaking,  within  the  pomoerium,
there  was  no  occasion  to  select  a  spot  and  pitch  a
tent  on  it,  as  there  was  a  place  on  the  Arx  on  the
summit  of  the  Capitoline  hill,  taWedi  Auguraculum,
which  had  been  consecrated  once  for  all  for  this
purpose.  (Festus,  s.  v.  Augjiraculum  ;  comp.  Liv.
i.  1»,  iv.  18  ;  Cic.  de  Of.  iii.  16.)  In  like  manner
there  was  in  every  Roman  camp  a  place  called
uitgurale  (Tac.  Ann.   ii.   13,  xv.   30),   which   an-


AUGUR,

swered  the  same  purpose  ;  but  on  all  other  occa-
sions a  place  had  to  be  consecrated,  and  a  tent  to
be  pitched,  as,  for  instance,  in  the  Campus  Mar-
tins, when  the  comitia  centuriata  were  to  be  held.
The  person  who  was  then  taking  the  auspices
waited  for  the  favourable  signs  to  appear  ;  but  it
was  necessary  during  this  time  that  there  should
be  no  interruption  of  any  kind  whatsoever  {silen-
tium\  and  hence  the  word  silentium  was  used  in
a  more  extended  sense  to  signify  the  absence  of
every  thing  that  was  fault3\  Every  thing,  on  the
contrarj'-,  that  rendered  tlie  auspices  invalid  was
called  vitium  (Cic.  de  Div.  ii,  34  ;  Festus,  s.  v.  si-
lentio  siirgere)  ;  and  hence  we  constantly  read  in
Livy  and  other  writers  of  vitio  magistratus  crcati,
vitio  lex  lata,  &c.  The  watching  for  the  auspices
was  called  spedio  or  servare  de  coelo,  the  declara-
tion of  wliat  was  observed  nuntiatio,  or,  if  they
were  unfavourable,  olmujitiatio.  In  the  latter  case,
the  person  who  took  the  auspices  seems  usually  to
have  said  alio  die,  by  which  the  business  in  hand,
whether  the  holding  of  the  comitia  or  any  thing
else,  was  entirely  stopped.   (Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  12.)

Having  explained  what  the  auspices  were  and
how  they  were  taken,  we  have  now  to  determine
who  had  the  power  of  taking  them.  In  the  first
place  it  is  certain  that  in  ancient  times  no  one  but
a  patrician  could  take  the  auspices,  and  that  a
plebeian  had  no  power  of  doing  so.  The  gods  of
the  Roman  state  were  the  gods  of  the  patricians
alone,  and  it  was  consequently  regarded  as  an  act
of  profanation  for  any  plebeian  to  attempt  to  in-
terpret the  will  of  these  gods.  Hence  the  posses-
sion of  the  auspices  {habere  auspicia)  is  one  of  the
most  distinguished  prerogatives  of  the  patricians  ;
they  are  said  to  be  penes  pairum,  and  are  called
auspicia  patrum.  (Liv,  vi.  41,  x.  8  *,  comp.  iv.  6.)
It  would  further  appear  that  every  patrician  might
take  the  auspices  ;  but  here  a  distinction  is  to  be
observed.  It  has  already  been  remarked  that  in  the
most  ancient  times  no  transaction,  whether  private
or  public,  was  performed  without  consulting  the
auspices  (nisi  auspicato,  Cic.  de  Div.  i.  16  ;  Val.
Max.  ii.  1.  §  1)  ;  and  hence  arose  the  distinction  ol
auspicia  privata  and  auspicia  pvhlica.  One  of  the
most  frequent  occasions  on  which  the  auspicia
privata  were  taken,  was  in  case  of  a  marriage
(Cic,  Val.  Max.  II.  cc.)  ;  and  hence  after  private
auspices  had  become  entirely  disused,  the  Romans,
in  accordance  with  their  usual  love  of  preserving
ancient  forms,  were  accustomed  in  later  times  to
employ  auspices  in  marriages,  who,  however,  acted
only  as  friends  of  the  bridegroom,  to  witness  the
payment  of  the  dowry  and  to  superintend  the
various  rites  of  the  marriage.  (Plant.  Cas.  prol.
85  ;  Suet.  Claud.  26  ;  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  27.)  The
emploj^ment  of  the  auspices  at  marriages  was  one
great  argument  used  by  the  patricians  against
connubium  between  themselves  and  the  plebeians,
as  it  would  occasion,  they  urged,  perturbationem
auspiciorum  publicorum  privatommgue.  (Liv,  iv.
2.)  The  possession  of  these  private  auspicia  is
expressed  in  another  passage  of  Livy  by  privatim
auspicia  hab&re.  (Liv.  vi.  41.)  In  taking  these
private  auspices,  it  would  appear  that  any  patrician


I


*  There  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that  by
patres  in  these  passages  the  whole  body  of  thei
patricians  is  meant,  and  not  the  senators,  asi
Rubino  assints.  (Co;rp,  Becker,  Horn  Altertk.  voL.
ii.  part  i.  p.  304,  &c.)


AUGUR.

s  employed,  who  knew  how  to  form  te»ipla  and
was  acquainted  with  the  art  of  augury,  and  was
therefore  called  au:ipex  or  augicr :  it  does  not  ap-
J»ear  to  have  been  necessary  nor  usual  in  such
cases  to  have  recourse  to  the  public  augurs,  the
members  of  the  collegium,  who  are  therefore
frequently  called  augures  publici,  to  distinguish
them  from  the  private  augurs.  (Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  8,
ad  Fam.  \'\.  Q  ;  Fcstiis,  s.  v.  q7d7?qiie  genera.)  The
case,  however,  was  very  different  with  respect  to
the  auspicia  ptiblica,  generally  called  auspicia
simply,  or  those  which  concerned  the  state.  The
latter  could  only  be  taken  by  the  persons  who  re-
presented the  state,  and  who  acted  as  mediators
between  the  gods  and  the  state  ;  for  though  all
the  patricians  were  eligible  for  taking  the  auspices,
yet  it  was  onlj'  the  magistrates  who  were  in  actual
possession  of  them.  As  long  as  there  were  any
patrician  magistrates,  the  auspices  were  exclusively
ija  their  hands  ;  on  their  entrance  upon  office,  they
received  the  auspices  (accipiehaiit  auspicia.,  Cic.  de
Div.  ii.  36)  ;  while  their  office  lasted,  they  were
in  possession  of  them  (Jiabebant  or  erant  eorum
auspicia,  Gell.  xiii.  15)  ;  and  at  the  expiration  of
their  office,  they  laid  them  down  {ponehant  or  de-
ponebant  auspicia.,  Cic.  de  Nat.  Deor.  ii.  3).  In
case,  however,  there  was  no  patrician  magistrate,
the  auspices  became  vested  in  the  whole  body  of
the  patricians,  which  was  expressed  b}^  the  words
auspicia  ad  paires  redetmt  (Cic.  Brttt.  5.)  This
happened  in  the  kingly  period  on  the  demise  of  a
king,  and  the  patricians  then  chose  an  interrex,
who  was  therefore  invested  by  them  with  the
right  of  taking  the  auspices,  and  was  thus  enabled
to  mediate  between  the  gods  and  the  state  in  the
election  of  a  new  king.  In  like  manner  in  the
republican  period,  when  it  was  believed  that  there
had  been  something  faulty  {vitium)  in  the  auspices
in  the  election  of  the  consuls,  and  they  were
obliged  in  consequence  to  resign  their  office,  the
auspices  returned  to  the  whole  body  of  the  pa-
tricians, who  had  recourse  to  an  inten-egyium  for
the  renewal  of  the  atispices,  and  for  handing  them
over  in  a  perfect  state  to  the  new  magistrates  :
hence  we  find  the  expressions  repetere  de  integro
auspicia  and  renovare  per  interregnum  auspicia.
(Liv.  V.  17,  31,  vi.  1.)

It  will  be  seen  from  what  has  been  said  that
the  Roman  state  was  a  species  of  theocracy,  that
the  gods  were  its  rulers,  and  that  it  was  by  means
of  the  auspices  that  they  intimated  their  will  to  the
representatives  of  the  people,  that  is,  the  magis-
trates. It  follows  from  this,  as  has  been  already
remarked,  that  no  public  act  could  be  perfoiTncd
without  consulting  the  auspices,  no  election  could
be  held,  no  law  passed,  no  war  waged  ;  for  a  ne-
glect of  the  auspices  would  have  been  equivalent  to
a  declaration  that  the  gods  had  ceased  to  rule  the
Roman  state.

There  still  remain  three  points  in  connection  with
the  auspices  which  require  notice:  —  1.  The  rela-
tion of  the  magistrates  to  the  augurs  in  tsiking  the
auspices.  2.  The  manner  in  which  the  magistrates
received  the  auspices.  3.  The  relation  of  the  dif-
ferent magistrates  to  one  another  with  respect  to
the  auspices.  We  can  only  make  a  few  brief  re-
marks upon  each  of  these  important  matters,  and
must  refer  our  readers  for  fuller  information  to  the
masterly  discussion  of  Rubino  (Rom.  Ver/assung,
p.  48,  &c.),  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  a  great
part  of  the  present  article.


AUGUR.  177

1.  The  distinction  between  the  duties  of  the
magistrates  and  the  augurs  in  taking  the  auspicefi
is  one  of  the  most  difficult  points  connected  with
this  subject,  but  perhaps  a  satisfactory  solution  of
these  difficulties  may  be  found  by  taking  an  his-
torical view  of  the  question.  We  are  told  not  only
that  the  kings  were  in  possession  of  the  auspices,
but  that  they  themselves  were  acquainted  with
the  art  and  practised  it.  Romulus  is  represented
to  have  been  the  best  of  augurs,  and  from  him  all
succeeding  augurs  received  the  chief  mark  of  their
office,  the  litims,  with  which  that  king  exercised
his  calling.  (Cic.  de  Div.  i.  2,  ii.  17;  Liv.  i.  1 0.)
He  is  further  stated  to  have  appointed  three  augurs,
but  only  as  his  assistants  in  taking  the  auspices,
a  fact  which  is  important  to  bear  in  mind.  (Cic.
de  Rep.  ii.  9.)  Their  dignity  gradually  increased
in  consequence  of  their  being  employed  at  the
inauguration  of  the  kings,  and  also  in  consequence
of  their  becoming  the  preservers  and  depositaries
of  the  science  of  augury.  Fonned  into  a  collegium,
they  handed  down  to  their  successors  the  various
rules  of  the  science,  while  the  kings,  and  subse-
quently the  magistrates  of  the  republic,  were  liable
to  change.  Their  duties  thus  became  twofold,  to
assist  the  magistrates  in  taking  the  auspices,  and
to  preserve  a  scientific  knowledge  of  the  art.  They
were  not  in  possession  of  the  auspices  themselves,
though  they  understood  them  better  than  the  ma-
gistrates ;  the  lightning  and  the  birds  were  not
sent  to  them  but  to  the  magistrates  ;  they  dis-
charged no  independent  functions  either  political
or  ecclesiastical,  and  are  therefore  described  by
Cicei-o  as  privati.  (De  Divin.  i.  40.)  As  the
augurs  were  therefore  merely  the  assistants  of  the
magistrates,  they  could  not  take  the  auspices
without  the  latter,  though  the  magistrates  on  the
contrary  could  dispense  with  their  assistance,  as
must  frequently  have  happened  in  the  appointment
of  a  dictator  by  the  consul  on  military  expeditions
at  a  distance  from  the  city.  At  the  same  time  it
must  be  borne  in  mind,  that  as  the  augurs  were
the  interpreters  of  the  science,  they  possessed  the
right  of  declaring  whether  the  auspices  were  valid
or  invalid,  and  that  too  whether  they  were  present
or  not  at  the  time  of  taking  them  ;  and  whoever
questioned  their  decision  was  liable  to  severe
punishment.  (Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  8.)  They  thus  pos-
sessed in  reality  a  veto  upon  every  important  public
transaction.  It  was  this  power  which  made  the
office  an  object  of  ambition  to  the  most  distin-
guished men  at  Rome,  and  which  led  Cicero,  him-
self an  augur,  to  describe  it  as  the  highest  dignity
in  the  state  (de  Leg.  ii.  12).  The  augurs  frequently
employed  this  power  as  a  political  engine  to  vitiate
the  election  of  such  parties  as  were  unfavourable
to  the  exclusive  privileges  of  the  patricians.  (Liv.
vi.  27,  viii.  23.)

But  although  the  augurs  could  declare  that  there
was  some  fault  in  the  auspices,  yet,  on  the  other
hand,  they  could  not,  in  favour  of  their  office,  de-
clare that  any  unfavourable  sign  had  appeared  to
them,  since  it  waa  not  to  them  that  the  auspices
were  sent.  Thus  we  are  told  that  the  augurs  did
not  possess  the  spectio,  that  is,  the  right  of  taking
the  state-auspices.  This  sjyectio.,  of  which  we  have
already  briefly  spoken,  was  of  two  kinds,  one
more  extensive  and  the  other  more  limited.  In
the  one  case  the  person,  who  exercised  it,  could
put  a  stop  to  the  proceedings  of  any  other  magis-
trate by  his  obnuntiatio  :  this  was  called  spectio  et

N


178


AUGUR.


nuntiatto  (perhaps  also  spectio  cum  mmfiatmie),  and
belonged  only  to  the  highest  magistrates,  the  con-
suls, dictators,  interreges,  and,  with  some  modifica-
tions, to  the  praetors.  In  the  other  case,  the  person
who  took  the  causes  only  exercised  the  spectio  in
reference  to  the  duties  of  his  own  office,  and  could
not  interfere  with  any  other  magistrate :  this  was
called  spectio  sine  7itintiatione,  and  belonged  to  the
other  magistrates,  the  censors,  aediles,  and  quaes-
tors. Now  as  the  augurs  did  not  possess  the
auspices,  they  consequently  could  not  possess  the
spectio  {habere  spectionem) ;  b\at  as  the  augurs  were
constantly  employed  by  the  magistrates  to  take  the
auspices,  they  exercised  the  spectio,  though  they
did  not  possess  it  in  virtue  of  their  office.  When
they  were  employed  by  the  magistrates  in  taking
the  auspices,  they  possessed  the  right  of  the  ntin-
tiatio^  and  thus  had  the  power,  by  the  declaration
of  unfavourable  signs  (obnuntiatio)^  to  put  a  stop
to  all  important  public  transactions  (Cic.  de  Leg.
ii.  12).  In  this  way  we  are  able  to  understand
the  assertion  of  Cicero  {Philipp.  ii.  32),  that  the
augurs  possessed  the  nufitiatio,  the  consuls  and  the
other  (higher)  magistrates  both  the  spectio  and
nuntiatio ;  though  it  must,  at  the  same  time,  be
borne  in  mind  that  this  right  of  nuntiatio  only  be-
longed to  them  in  consequence  of  their  being  em-
ployed by  the  magistrates.  (Respecting  the  passage
of  Festus,  s.  V.  spectio^  which  seems  to  teach  a  dif-
ferent doctrine,  see  Rubino,  p.  58.)

2.  As  to  the  manner  in  which  the  magistrates
received  the  auspices,  there  is  no  reason  -to  suppose,
as  many  modern  writers  have  done,  that  they  were
conferred  upon  them  in  any  special  manner.  It
was  the  act  of  their  election  which  made  them  the
recipients  of  the  auspices,  since  the  comitia,  in
which  they  were  appointed  to  their  office,  were
held  auspicato,  and  consequently  their  appointment
was  regarded  as  ratified  by  the  gods.  The  auspices,
therefore,  passed  immediately  into  their  hands
upon  the  abdication  of  their  predecessors  in  office.
There  are  two  circumstances  which  have  given
rise  to  the  opinion  that  the  magistrates  received
the  auspices  by  some  special  act.  The  first  is,  that
the  new  magistrate,  immediately  after  the  midnight
on  which  his  office  began,  was  accustomed  to  observe
the  heavens  in  order  to  obtain  «,  happy  sign  for
the  commencement  of  his  duties  (Dionys.  ii.  6).
But  he  did  not  do  this  in  order  to  obtain  the
auspices  ;  he  already  possessed  them,  and  it  was
in  virtue  of  his  possession  of  them,  that  he  was  able
to  observe  the  heavens.  The  second  circumstance
to  which  we  have  been  alluding,  was  the  inatufn-
ratio  of  the  kings  on  the  Arx  after  their  election
in  the  comitia  (Liv.  i.  18).  But  this  inauguration
had  reference  simply  to  the  priestly  office  of  the
king,  and,  therefore,  did  not  take  place  in  the  case
of  the  republican  magisti-ates,  though  it  continued
in  use  in  the  appointment  of  the  rex  sacrouum  and
the  other  priests.

3.  The  auspices  belonging  to  the  different  magis-
trates were  divided  into  two  classes,  called  auspicia
viaxima  or  majora  and  minora.  The  former,  which
belonged  originally  to  the  kings,  passed  over  to  the
consuls  on  the  institution  of  the  republic,  and  like-
wise to  the  extraordinary  magistrates,  the  dictators,
interreges,  and  consular  tribunes.  When  the  con-
suls were  deprived  in  course  of  time  of  part  of  their
duties,  and  separate  magistrates  were  created  to
discharge  them,  they  naturally  received  the  auspi-
cia majora  also :  this  was  the  case  with  the  cen-


AUGUR

sors  and  praetoi's.  The  quaestors  and  the  airula
aediles,  on  the  contrar}',  had  only  the  auspicia
minora^  because  they  received  them  from  the  con-
suls and  praetors  of  the  year,  and  their  auspices
were  derived  from  the  majora  of  the  higher  ma-
gistrates.    (Messalla,  ap.  Gell.  xiii.  15.)

It  remains  to  trace  the  history  of  the  college  of
augurs.  We  have  already  seen  that  it  was  a  com-
mon opinion  in  antiquity  that  the  augurship  owed
its  origin  to  the  first  king  of  Rome,  and  it  is  ac-
cordingly stated,  that  a  college  of  three  augurs  was
appointed  by  Romulus,  answering  to  the  number
of  the  early  tribes,  the  Ramnes,  Titles,  and  Lu-
cerenses.  This  is  the  xaccount  of  Cicero  {de  Rep.
ii.  9),  who  supposed  Numa  to  have  added  two
more  (ii.  14),  without,  however,  stating  in  what
way  these  latter  corresponded  to  the  tribes.  On
the  other  side  stand  different  statements  of  Livy,
first,  one  (iv.  4)  which  is  probably  an  error,  in
which  the  first  institution  of  augurs  is  attributed
to  Numa,  seemingly  on  the  theory  that  all  the
Roman  religion  was  derived  from  the  second  king:
secondly,  a  statement  of  far  more  importance  (x.  6),
that  at  the  passing  of  the  Ogulnian  law  the  augurs
were  but  four  in  number,  which  lAxy  himself,  who
recognised  the  principle  of  the  number  of  augurs
corresponding  to  that  of  the  tribes,  supposes  to
have  been  accidental.  This  is  improbable,  as
Niebuhr  has  shown  {Hist,  of  Rome,  vol.  iii.  p.
352),  who  thinks  the  third  tribe  was  excluded
from  the  college  of  augurs,  and  that  the  four,
therefore,  represented  the  Ramnes  and  Titles  only.
It  is  hard  to  suppose,  however,  that  this  supe-
riority of  the  Ramnes  and  Titles  over  the  third
tribe  could  have  continued  down  to  the  time  of
the  Ogulnian  law  (b.  c.  300) :  moreover,  as  two
augurs  apiece  were  appointed  from  each  of  the  two
first  tribes,  and  the  remaining  five  from  the  plebs,
it  does  not  appear  how  the  Luceres  (X)uld  ever  have
obtained  the  privilege.  A  different  mode  of  re-
conciling the  contradictory  numbers  four  and  three
is  sought  for  in  another  statement  of  Cicero  {de
Div.  i.  40),  that  the  kings  were  augurs,  so  that
after  their  expulsion  another  augur  may  have  been
added  instead  of  them  to  the  original  number
which  represented  the  tribes.  Probably  this  is
one  of  the  many  cases  in  early  Roman  history  in
which  the  only  ^conclusion  we  can  come  to  is,  that
the  theory  of  what  ought  to  have  been  according
to  antiquarians  of  a  later  age  differed  from  what
actually  was  according  to  the  earliest  accounts  to
which  Livy  had  recourse.

The  Ogulnian  law  (b.c,  SOO),  which  increased
the  number  of  pontiffs  to  eight,  by  the  addition  of
four  plebeians,  and  that  of  the  augiu's  to  nine  by
the  addition  of  five  plebeians,  may  be  considered  a
sort  of  aera  in  Roman  historj'.  The  religious  dis-
tinction between  the  two  orders  which  had  been  so
often  insisted  upon  was  now  at  an  end,  and  it  was
no  longer  possible  to  use  the  auspices  as  a  political
instrument  against  the  plebeians.  The  number  of
nine  augurs  which  this  law  fixed,  lasted  down  to
the  dictatorship  of  Sylla,  who  increased  them  to
fifteen,  a  multiple  of  the  original  three,  probably
with  a  reference  to  the  early  tribes,  (Liv,  Epit.
89,)  A  sixteenth  number  was  added  by  Julius
Caesar  after  his  return  from  Egvpt.  (Dion  Cass,
xlii.  51.)

The  members  of  the  college  of  augurs  possessed
self-election  {cooptati).  At  first  they  were  ap-
pointed by  the  king,  but. as  the  king  himself  was


I


I


AUGUR.

augur,  their  appointment  by  him  was  not  con-

iidered  contrary  to  this  principle.     {Romulus  coo})-

avit  augures,  de  Rep.  ii.  9.)     They  retained  the

right  of  co-optation   until   B.  c.  103,  the  year  of

the  Domitian  law.     By  this  law  it  was  enacted

that  vacancies  in  the  priestly  colleges  should  be

filled  up  by  the  votes  of  a  minority  of  the  tribes,

w.  e.  seventeen  out  of  thirty-five    chosen  by  lot.

^(Cic.  de  Leg.  Aqr.  ii.  7  ;  Veil.  Pat.  ii.  12  ;  Suet,

\Ner.  2.)      The    Domitian   law   was   repealed   by

[SuUa  B.  c.  81  (Pseudo-Ascon.  in  Cic.  Div.  p.  102,

led.  Orelli),  but  again  restored  B.C.  63,  during  the

! consulship  of  Cicero,  by  the  tribune  T.  Annius

I  Labienus,  with  the  support  of  Caesar  (Dion  Cass.

[xxxvii.  37).     It  was  a  second  time  abrogated  by

Antony  B.C.  44  (Dion  Cass.  xliv.  53)  ;  whether

I  again   restored   by   Hirtius   and   Pansa    in  their

i  general  annulment  of  the  acts  of  Antony,  seems

j  uncertain.     The  emperors  possessed  the  right  of

electing  augurs  at  pleasure.

The  augurs  were  elected  for  life,  and  even  if
capitally  convicted,  never  lost  their  sacred  charac-
I  ter.  (Plin.  Ep.  iv.  8.)  When  a  vacancy  occurred,
I  the  candidate  was  nominated  by  two  of  the  elder
I  members  of  the  college  (Cic.  Phil.  ii.  2),  the  electors
•were  sworn,  and  the  new  member  was  then  so-
lemnly inaugurated.  (Cic.  Brut.  1.)  On  such
;  occasion  there  was  always  a  splendid  banquet  given,
at  which  all  the  augurs  were  expected  to  be  present.
(Cic.  ad  Fam.  vii.  26,  ad  Att.  xii.  13,  14,  15.)
The  only  distinction  in  the  college  was  one  of  age  ;
an  elder  augur  alwiiys  voted  before  a  younger,  even
if  the  latter  filled  one  of  the  higher  offices  in  the
Btate.  (Cic.  de  Sen.  1 8.)  The  head  of  the  college
was  called  magister  collegii.  It  was  expected  that
all  the  augurs  should  live  on  friendly  terms  with
one  another,  and  it  was  a  rule  that  no  one  was
to  be  elected  to  the  office,  who  was  known  to  be  an
enemy  to  any  of  the  college.  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  iii.  10.)
The  augur,  who  had  ii>attgttrated  a  younger  member,
was  always  to  be  regarded  by  the  latter  in  the  light
of  a  parent  (in  parentis  ewm  loco  colere,  Cic.
Brut.  1).

As  insignia  of  their  office  the  augurs  wore  the
trabea,  or  public  dress  (Serv.  ad  A&u.  vii.  612),
and  carried  in  their  hand  the  litaus  or  curved  wand.
[LiTUUs.]  On  the  coins  of  the  Romans,  who
filled  the  office  of  augur,  we  constantly  find  the
lituus,  and  along  with  it,  not  unfrequently,  the
capis,  an  earthen  vessel  Avhich  was  used  by  them
in  sacrifices.  (Li v.  x.  7  ;  Varr.  Z.  L.  v.  121,  ed.
Miiller.)  Both  of  these  instruments  are  seen  in
the  annexed  coin  of  Lentulus.


The  science  of  the  augurs  was  called  Jm*  augurum
and  jus  augurium.,  and  was  preserved  in  books
{libri  augumles)^  which  are  frequently  mentioned
in  the  ancient  writers.  The  expression  for  con-
sulting the  augurs  was  re/erre  ad  augures,  and
their  answers  were  called  decreta  or  responsa  augu-
rum. The  science  of  augury  had  greatly  declined
in  the  time  of  Cicero  ;  and  although  he  frequently
deplores  its  neglect  in  h\%  De  Divinaiione,  yet  neither


AUGUSTALES.  17.9

he  nor  any  of  the  educated  classes  appears  to  have
had  any  faith  in  it.  What  a  farce  it  had  become
a  few  years  later  is  evident  from  the  statement  of
Dionysius  (ii.  6),  who  informs  us  that  a  new
magistrate,  who  took  the  auspices  upon  the  first
day  of  his  office,  was  accustomed  to  have  an  augui
on  his  side,  who  told  him  that  lightning  had  ap-
peared on  his  left,  which  was  regarded  as  a  good
omen,  and  although  nothing  of  the  kind  had
happened,  this  declaration  was  considered  suffi-
cient. (Mascov,  De  Jure  Auspicii  apud  Romanos^
Lips.  1721  ;  Werther,  De  Auguriis  Romatiis,
Lemgo,  1835  ;  Creuzer,  Spnbolik,  vol.  ii.  p.  935,
&c.  ;  Miiller,  Etrusker,  vol.  ii.  p.  110,  &c.  ;  Har-
tung.  Die  Religion  der  Romer,  vol.  i.  p.  98,  &c.  ;
Gottling,  Geschichte  der  Rom.  Staatsverf.  p.  1 98,  &c. ;
Becker,  Rom.  Alterth.  vol.  ii.  part  i.  p.  304  ;  but
above  all  Rubino,  Rom.  Ver/assutig,  p.  34,  &c.)
AUGURA'CULUM.  [Augur,  p.  176,  a.]
AUGURA'LE.  [Augur,  p.  176,  a.]
AUGUSTA'LES  (sc.  ludi,  also  called  Augus-
lalia^  sc.  certamina,  ludicra,  and  by  the  Greek
writers  and  in  Greek  inscriptions,  2^§aaTa,  2e-
Sdcn/j-a,  KvyovaraXia)^  were  games  celebrated  in
honour  of  Augustus,  at  Rome  and  in  other  parts
of  the  Roman  empire.  After  the  battle  of  Actium,
a  quinquennial  festival  (Travr]yvpis  TrevTerripls)
was  instituted  ;  and  the  birthday  (yeve6\ia)  of
Augustus,  as  well  as  that  on  which  the  victory  was
announced  at  Rome,  were  regarded  as  festival  days.
(Dion  Cass.  Ii.  19.)  In  the  provinces,  also,  in
addition  to  temples  and  altars,  quinquennial  games
were  instituted  in  almost  every  town.  (Suet.  Aug.
59.)  The  Roman  equites  were  accustomed  of  their
own  accord  to  celebrate  the  birthday  of  Augustus
in  every  alternate  year  (Suet.  Aug.  57)  ;  and  the
praetors,  before  any  decree  had  been  passed  for  the
purpose,  were  also  in  the  habit  of  exhibiting  games
every  year  in  honour  of  Augustus.  (Dion  Cass,
iiv.  26,  30).  It  was  not,  however,  till  b.  c.  1 1,  that
the  festival  on  the  bii'th-day  of  Augustus  was  for-
mally established  by  a  decree  of  the  senate  (Dion
Cass.  Iiv.  34),  and  it  is  this  festival  Avhich  is
usually  meant  when  the  Augustales  or  Augustalia
are  mentioned.  It  was  celebrated  iv.  Id.  Octobr.
At  the  death  of  Augustus,  this  festival  assumed  a
more  solemn  character,  was  added  to  the  Fasti,
and  celebrated  to  his  honour  as  a  god.  (Tac.  Atin.
i.  13  ;  Dion  Cass.  Ivi.  46.)  Hence,  Tacitus  speaks
of  it  as  first  established  in  the  reign  of  Tiberius
(A7in.  i.  54.)  It  was  henceforth  exhibited  annually
in  the  circus,  at  first  by  the  tribunes  of  the  plebs,
at  the  commencement  of  the  reign  of  Tiberius,  but
afterwaixis  by  the  praetor  peregrinus.  (Tacit.  Ann.
i.  15  ;  Dion  Cass.  Ivi.  46.)  These  games  con-
tinued to  be  exhibited  in  the  time  of  Dion  Cassius,
that  is,  about  a.  d.  230  (Iiv.  34).

The  augustales,  or  augustalia,  at  Neapolis
(Naples),  were  celebrated  with  great  splendour.
They  were  instituted  in  the  lifetime  of  Augustus
(Suet.  Aug.  98),  and  were  celebrated  every  five
years.  According  to  Strabo  (v.  p.  246),  who
speaks  of  these  games  without  mentioning  their
name,  they  rivalled  the  most  magnificent  of  the
Grecian  festivals.  They  consisted  of  gymnastic
and  musical  contests,  and  lasted  for  several  days.
At  these  games  the  Emperor  Claudius  brought
forward  a  Greek  comedy,  and  received  the  prize.
(Suet.  Claud.  1 1  ;  compare  Dion  Cass.  Ix.  6.)

Augustalia  (Segao-ra)  were    also  celebrated  at
Alexandria,   as  appears  from    an   inscription   in
N  2


1»0


AUGUST  ALES.


Gruter  (316.  2)  ;  and  in  this  city  there  vras  a  mag-
nificent temple  to  Augustus  {^eSaareTov^  Auffus-
tale).  We  find  mention  of  augustalia  in  numerous
other  places,  as  Pergamus,  Nicomcdia,  &c.

AUGUSTA'LES,  the  name  of  two  classes  of
priests,  one  at  Rome  and  the  other  in  the  muni-
cipia,  frequently  mentioned  in  inscriptions.

I.  The  Auffustales  at  Rome,  properly  called  so-
dales  Augustales,  which  is  the  name  they  always
bear  in  inscriotions,  were  an  order  of  priests  {Atigus-
talium  sacerdotiuni)  instituted  by  Tiberius  to  attend
to  the  worsliip  of  Augustus  and  the  .Julia  gens.
They  were  chosen  by  lot  from  among  the  principal
persons  of  Rome,  and  were  twent}-^  one  in  number,
to  which  were  added  Tiberius,  Drusus,  Claudius,
and  Germanicus,  as  members  of  the  imperial
family.  (Tacit,  i.  54.)  They  were  also  called
sacerdotes  Augustales  (Tacit.  Ann.  ii.  83)  ;  and
fionietimes  simply  Augustales.  (Tacit.  Hist.  ii.  9b.)
Similar  priests  were  appointed  to  attend  to  the
worship  of  other  emperors  after  their  decease  ;  and
Ave  accordingly  find  in  inscriptions  mention  made
of  the  sodiUes  Flavii,  Uadrianales,  Aeliani,  Anto-
nini,  &c.  It  appears  that  the  Jlamines  Augustales
ought  to  be  distinguished  from  the  sodales  Augus-
tales. We  find  that  flamines  and  sacerdotes  were
appointed,  in  the  lifetime  of  Augustus,  to  attend  to
his  worship  ;  but  we  have  the  express  statements
of  Suetonius  and  Dion  Cassius  that  this  worship
was  confined  to  the  provinces,  and  was  not  prac-
tised in  Rome,  or  in  any  part  of  Italy,  during  the
lifetime  of  Augustus.  (Tacit.  ^«w.  i.  10  ;  Suet.
Atig.  52  ;  Dion  Cass.  Ii.  20.)  Women  even  were
appointed  priestesses  of  Augustus,  as  appears  from
an  inscription  in  Gruter  (320.  10):  this  practice
probably  took  its  origin  from  the  appointment  of
Livia,  by  a  decree  of  the  senate,  to  be  priestess  to
lier  deceased  husband.  (Dion  Cass.  Ivi.  46.)  Ii
seems  probable  that  the  sodales  Augustales  were
entrusted  with  the  management  of  the  worship  ;
but  that  the  flamines  Augustales  were  the  person-s
Avlio  actually  offered  the  sacrifices  and  performed
the  other  sacred  rites.  A  member  of  the  sodales
Augustiiles  was  sometimes  a  flamen  also  (Orelli,
Jnscrip.  2366, 2368)  ;  and  it  is  not  improbable
that  the  flamines  were  appointed  by  the  sodales.

II.  The  Augustales  in  the  municipia  are  sup-
posed by  most  modern  writers,  in  consequence  of  the
statement  of  the  scholiast  on  Horace  {Sat.  ii.  3.  281),
to  have  been  a  class  of  priests  selected  bj-  Augustus
from  the  libertini  to  attend  to  the  religious  rites
connected  with  the  worship  of  the  Lares,  which
that  emperor  was  said  to  have  put  up  in  places^
where  two  or  more  ways  met.  (Orelli,  hiscrip.
vol.  ii.  p.  1 97.)  But  A.  W.  Zumpt,  in  an  excellent
essay  on  this  subject,  brings  forward  good  reasons
for  rejecting  this  opinion.  [Compar.  Comi-italia.]
He  thinks  it  much  more  probable  that  this  order
of  priests  was  instituted  in  the  municipia  in  imita-
tion of  the  Augustales  at  Rome,  and  for  the  same
object,  namely,  to  attend  to  the  worship  of  Augustus.
From  the  numerous  inscriptions  in  which  they  are
mentioned,  we  learn  the  following  facts  respecting
them.  They  formed  a  collegium  and  were  ap-
pointed by  the  decuriones,  or  senate  of  the  muni-
cipia. They  were  generally  libertini,  which  is
easily  accoimted  for  by  the  fact,  that  none  but  the
freebom  (ingenui),  could  obtain  admission  into  the
curia  of  the  municipia;  and  as  there  seem  to  have
been  many  expences  connected  with  the  discharge
of  the  duties  of  the  Augustales,  the  decuriones


AURUM.

would  not  be  anxious  to  obtain  this  distinction!
while  the  libertini  on  the  contrary,  who  were
generally  a  wealthy  class  and  were  not  invested
with  any  honour,  Avould  naturally  covet  it.  The
Augustales  ranked  next  in  dignity  to  the  decu-
riones ;  and  as  they  were  mostly  men  of  property,
they  came  in  course  of  time  to  form  a  middle  class
between  the  decuriones  and  plebs,  like  the  eques-
trian order  at  Rome.  Thus,  in  the  inscriptions  of
many  municipia,  we  find  the  decuriones,  Augus-
tales, and  plebs,  mentioned  together  as  the  three
classes  into  which  the  community  was  divided.
The  six  principal  members  of  the  college  were
called  Seviri,  a  title  which  seems  to  have  been
imitated  from  the  Seviri  in  the  equestrian  order
at  Rome.  (Egger,  Examen  Critique  des  Historiens
anciens  de  la  Vie  et  du  Regne  d''A  uguste,  Paris,  1 844^
Appendix  II  ,  treats  of  the  Augustales  ;  but  see
especially  A.  W.  Zumpt,  De  Atigustalibus  et  Sevirig
Atigustalibus  Commentatio  Epigraphica,  Berols
1846.)

AUGUSTUS,  a  name  bestowed  upon  Octa-
vianus  in  b.  c.  27,  by  the  senate  and  the  Roman
people.  It  was  a  word  used  in  connection  with
religion,  and  designated  a  person  as  sacred  and
worthy  of  worship  ;  hence  the  Greek  writers  trans'-
late  it  by  :S,€€a(TT6s.  (Dion  Cass.  liii.  16,  18;
Suet.  Aug.7;  Veil.  Pat.  ii.  91  ;  Flor.  iv.  12  •
Oros.  vi.  20  ;  Censorin.  22  ;  Ov.  Fast.  i.  607.)  It
was  not  a  title  indicative  of  power,  but  simply  a
surname  ;  and  is  hence  called  by  Suetonius  (Tib.  26)
nomen  hereditarium.  It  was,  however,  borne  not
only  by  Tiberius  and  the  other  emperors  com
nected  with  the  family  of  Augustus,  but  was  like*
wise  adopted  by  all  succeeding  emperors,  as  if
descended,  either  by  birth  or  adoption,  from  tho
first  emperor  of  the  Roman  world  {in  ejus  nomen
veltti  quadam  adoptione  aut  jure  hereditario  succe-
dere,  Lamprid.  Alecc.  Sever.  10).  The  name  of
Augusta  was  frequently  bestowed  upon  females  of
the  imperial  family,  the  first  instance  of  which
occurs  in  the  case  of  Livia,  who  received  this  title
upon  her  adoption  into  the  Julia  gens  on  the  death
of  her  husband  Octavianus  (Tac.  Ann.  i.  8)  ;  but
Augustus  belonged  exclusively  to  the  reigning  em^
peror  till  towards  the  end  of  the  second  century
of  the  Christian  aera,  when  M.  Aurelius  and  L.  X
Verus  both  received  this  surname  (Spartian.  Ael.  ■
Verus,  5,  M.  Ant.  Phil.  7).  From  this  time  we  *'
frequently  find  two  or  even  a  greater  number  of
Augusti;  and  though  in  that  and  in  all  similar  cases
the  persons  honoured  with  the  title  were  regarded
as  participators  of  the  imperial  power,  still  the  one
who  received  the  title  first  was  looked  upon  as  the
head  of  the  empire.  When  there  were  two  Au-
gusti we  find  on  coins  and  inscriptions  A  V  G  G, '
and  when  three  A  V  G  G  G.  From  the  time  of
Probus  the  title  became  perpetuus  Augustus,  and  i
from  Philippus  or  Claudius  Gothicus  semper  Au-
guf>tus,  the  latter  of  which  titles  was  bome  by  the
so-called  Roman  emperors  in  Gennany.  (Eckhel,
vol.  viii.  p.  354,  &c.)     [Caesau.]

AVI A'RIUM.     [Agricultura,  p.  68,  b.]

AULA.     [DoMus.]

AULAEUM.     [SiPARiuM.]

AU'REUS.     [AuRUM.]

AURI'GA.     [Circus.]

AURUM  (xpy<r6s),  gold.  Tlie  remarks  madfl
under  Argentum  apply  to  a  great  extent  to  gold
as  well  as  silver,  and  the  sources  of  information
respecting  both  the  precious  metals  are  specified  in


AURUM.

,liat  article.    It  would  appear  from  a  passage  in  the

Antigone  (v.  1038),  that  in  the  time  of  Sophocles

fold  was  rare  at  Athens.     Indeed  throughout  the

whole  of  Greece,  though  gold  was  by  no  means  un-

nown,  it  appears  to  have  been  obtained  chiefly

hrougli  the  Greek  cities  of  Asia  Minor,  and  the

djacent  islands,  which  possessed  it  in  abundance.

he  Homeric  poems  speak  constantly  of  gold  as

ing  laid  up  in  treasuiies,  and  used  in  large  quan-

ities  for  the  purposes  of  ornament ;    but  this  is

'sufficiently  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  Homer

was    an  Asiatic  Greek.     The   chief  places   from

which  the  Greeks  procured  their  gold  were  India,

Arabia,   Armenia,    Colchis,   and    Troas.     It   was

found  mixed  with  the  sands  of  the  Pactolus  and

other  rivers.

Almost  the  only  method  of  purifying  gold,  known

t>i  tlie  ancients,  seems  to  have  been  that  of  grinding

arid  then  roasting  it,  and  by  this  process  they  suc-

cicded  in  getting  it  ver}'  pure.     This  is  what  we

are  to  understand  by  the  phrase  xp^^^'^ov  airecpdov

ill  Thucydides  (ii.  13),  and  by  the  word  ohrussam

lin  Pliny  {H.  N.  xxxiii.  3.  s.  19),   and   elsewhere

(Forcellini  s.  v.  obrussa).      Respecting  the  use  of

gold  in  the  fine  arts,  especially  in  the  chrysele-

;  pbantine    statues,    see   Toreutice.       The  art  of

{_gilding  was  known  to  the  Greeks  from  the  earliest

I  times  of  which  we  have  any  information.     (Hom.

I  Od.  iii.  425,  vi.  232  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii.  3.  s.  \9,

'  6'.  s.  32.)

Greek  Gold  Money.  —  The  time  when  gold
was   first    coined    at   Athens   is   very   uncertain.
I  Aristophanes  speaks  in  the  Frogs  (406  B.  c.)  of  t6
j  Kaiuhv  xP'-'<'''<"'»  "the  new  gold  money  "  (v.  719),
!  which   he    immediately   afterwards    calls   irovripa.
j  x«^'<^ia  (v.  724).     The  Scholiast  on  this  passage
states  that  in  the  preceding  year  the  golden  statues
of  Victory  had  been  coined  into  money,  and  he
quotes  Hellanicus  and   Philochorus  as  authorities
for  this  statement.     It  would  appear  from  the  lan-
guage both  of  Aristophanes  and  the  Scholiast,  and
it  is  probable  from  the  circumstances  of  Athens  at
I  the  time    (it  was   the  year  before  the   battle  of
j  Aegospotami),  that  this  was  a  greatly  debased  gold
I  coinage,  or  perhaps  only  gilt  mone)',  struck  to  meet
j  a  particular  exigency.    This  matter  is  distinct  from
^   the  general  question  respecting  the  Athenian  gold
i   coinage,  for  the  Attic  money  was  proverbial  for  its
I  purity,  and  the  grammarians,  who  state  that  Athens
i   had  a  gold  coinage  at  an  early  period,  speak  of  it
j   as  very  pure.     There  are  other  passages  in  Aristo-
I   phanes  in  which  gold  money  is  spoken  of;  but  in
I    them  he  is  referring  to   Persian  money,  which  is
I   known  to  have  been  imported  into  Athens  before
the  Athenians  had  any  gold  coinage  of  their  own,
and  even  this  seems  to  have  been  a  rarity.     (See
Aristoph.   Acharn.  v.    102,    108,    Equit.  v.   470,
Av.  V.  374.)     Demosthenes  always  uses  apyvpiov
for  money,  except  when  he  is  speaking  of  foreign
gold.     In  the  speech  against  Phormio,  Avhere  he
repeatedly  uses  the  word  XP^^'-'^^-)  we  are  expressly
told  what  was  the  money  he  refeiTed  to,  namely,
120  staters  of  Cyzicus  (p.  914  ;  compare  his  speech
vphs  AaKp'iT.  p.  935).      Isocrates,   who   uses    the
word  in  the  same  way,  speaks  in  one  passage  of
buying  gold  money   (xpy^'w^/eTj/)    in  exchange  for
silver  {Traficzit.  p.  367).     In  many  passages  of  the
orators,  gold  money  is  expressly  said  to  have  been
imporied  from  Persia  and  Macedonia.     If  we  look
at  the  Athenian  history,  we  find  that  the  silver
mine*    at   Laurion    were  regarded  as  one  of  the


AURUM.


181


greatest  treasures  possessed  by  the  state  ;  but  no
such  mention  is  made  of  gold.  Thucydides  (ii.  13)
in  enumerating  the  money  in  the  Athenian  trea-
sury at  the  beginning  of  the  Peloponnesian  war,
does  not  mention  gold ;  and  Xenophon  speaks  of
the  money  of  Athens  in  a  manner  which  would
lead  us  to  suppose  that  it  had  no  gold  coinage  in
his  time  {Vedigul,  iv.  10).  The  mines  of  Scapte-
hyle,  in  Thrace,  were  indeed  worked  some  years
before  this  period  (Thucyd.  iv.  105)  ;  but  the  gold
procured  from  them  does  not  appear  to  have  been
coined,  but  to  have  been  laid  up  in  the  treasury  in
the  form  of  counters  (<pOo7S€s^  Bockh,  hiscrip.  vol.  i.
pp.  145, 146).  Foreign  gold  coin  was  often  brought
into  the  treasury,  as  some  of  the  allies  paid  their
tribute  in  money  of  Cyzicus.  The  gold  money  thus
introduced  may  have  been  allowed  to  circulate,
while  silver  remained  the  current  money  of  the  state.

The  character  of  the  Attic  gold  coins  now  in
existence,  and  their  small  immber  (about  a  dozen),
is  a  strong  proof  against  the  existence  of  a  gold
currency  at  Athens  at  an  early  period.  There  are
three  Attic  staters  in  the  British  Museum,  and  one
in  the  Hunterian  Museum  at  Glasgow,  which  there
is  good  reason  to  believe  are  genuine  ;  their  weights
agree  exactly  with  the  Attic  standard.  In  the
character  of  the  impression  they  bear  a  striking
resemblance  to  the  old  Attic  silver  ;  but  they  differ
from  it  by  the  absence  of  the  thick  bulky  form,  and
the  higJi  relief  of  the  impression  which  is  seen  in
the  old  silver  of  Athens,  and  in  the  old  gold  coins
of  other  states.  In  thickness,  volume,  and  the
depth  of  the  die  from  which  they  were  struck,  they
closely  resemble  the  Macedonian  coinage.  Now,
as  upon  the  rise  of  the  Macedonian  empire,  gold
became  plentiful  m  Greece,  and  was  coined  in
large  quantities  by  the  Macedonian  kings,  it  is  not
improbable  that  Athens,  like  other  Grecian  states,
may  have  followed  their  example,  and  issued  a  gold
coinage  in  imitation  of  her  ancient  silver.  On  the
whole,  it  appears  most  probable  that  gold  money
was  not  coined  at  Athens  in  the  period  between
Pericles  and  Alexander  the  Great,  if  we  except  the
solitary  issue  of  debased  gold  in  the  year  407.

A  question  similar  to  that  just  discussed  arises
with  respect  to  other  Greek  states,  which  we  know
to  have  had  a  silver  currency,  but  of  which  a  few  gold
coins  are  also  found.  This  is  the  case  with  Aegina,
Thebes,  Argos,  Cary-stus  in  Euboea,  Acarnania,
and  Aetolia.  But  of  these  coins  all,  except  two,
bear  evident  marks,  in  their  weight  or  workman-
ship, of  belonging  to  a  period  not  earlier  than
Alexander  the  Great.  There  is  great  reason,  there-
fore, to  believe  that  no  gold  coinage  existed  in
Greece  Proper  before  the  thne  of  that  monarch.

But  from  a  very  early  period  the  Asiatic  nations,
and  the  Greek  cities  of  Asia  Minor  and  the  adja-
cent islands,  as  well  as  Sicily  and  Cyrene,  possessed
a  gold  coinage,  which  was  more  or  less  current  in
Greece.  Herodotus  (i.  94)  says  that  the  Lydians
v/ere  the  first  who  coined  gold,  and  the  stater  of
Croesus  appears  to  have  been  the  earliest  gold  coin
known  to  the  Greeks.  The  Daric  was  a  Persian
coin.  Staters  of  Cyzicus  and  Phocaea  had  a  con-
siderable currency  in  Greece.  There  was  a  gold
coinage  in  Samos  as  early  as  the  time  of  Polycrates.
(Herod,  iii.  56.)  The  islands  of  Siphnos  and
Thasos,  which  possessed  gold  mines,  appear  to  have
had  a  gold  coinage  at  an  early  period.  In  most  of
the  coins  of  the  Greek  cities  of  Asia  Minor  the
metal  is  very  base.  The  Macedonian  gold  coinage
N  3


182  AURUM.

came  into  circulation  in  Greece  in  the  time  of
Philip,  and  continned  in  use  till  the  subjection  of
Greece  to  the  Romans.     [D^iRicus;  Stater,]

Roman  Gold  Money.  —  The  standard  gold
coin  of  Rome  was  the  aureus  nummtts^  or  denarius
aureus,  which,  according  to  Pliny  {H.  N.  xxxiii.  3.
s.  1 3)  was  first  coined  62  years  after  the  first  silver
coinage  [ARGENTUiM],  that  is  in  the  year  207  B.C.
The  lowest  denomination  was  the  scnipulwn,  which
was  made  equal  to  20  sestertii.  The  weight  of  the
scrupulum,  as  determined  by  Mr.  Hussey  (Ancient
WeiffJiis  and  Mmiey)  was  1 8'06  grs.  In  the  British
Museum  there  are  gold  coins  of  one,  two,  three,
and  four  scrupula,  the  weights  of  which  are  17'2,
34"5,  51 '8,  and  Q^'Q  grains  respectively.  They
bear  a  head  of  Mars  on  one  side,  and  on  the  other
an  eagle  standing  on  a  thunderbolt,  and  beneath
the  inscription  "  Roma."  The  first  has  the  mark
XX  (20  sestertii) ;  the  second,  xxxx  (40  sestertii)  ;
the  third,  sj/  x  (60  sestertii).  Of  the  last  we  sub-
join an  engraving:  —


AUSPICIUM.


Pliny  adds  that  afterwards  aurei  were  coined  of
40  to  the  pound,  which  weight  was  diminished,
till  under  Nero  (the  reading  of  this  word  is  doubt-
ful) they  were  45  to  the  pound.  This  change  is
supposed,  from  an  examination  of  extant  specimens,
to  have  been  made  in  the  time  of  Julius  Caesar.
The  estimated  full  weight  of  the  aurei  of  40  to  the
pound  is  130"1  grains,  of  those  of  45  to  the  pound
11 5 '64  grains.  No  specimens  exist  which  come
up  to  the  130*1  grains ;  the  heaviest  known  is  one
of  Pompej^,  which  weighs  128*2  grains.  The  aver-
age of  the  gold  coins  of  Julius  Caesar  is  fixed  by
Letronne  at  125-66  grains,  those  of  Nero  115*39
grains.  Though  the  weight  of  the  aureus  was
diminished,  its  proportion  to  the  weight  of  the  de-
narius remained  about  the  same,  namely,  as  2  :  1
(or  rather,  perhaps,  as  2*1  :  1).  Therefore  since
the  standard  weight  of  the  denarius,  xmder  the
early  emperors,  was  60  grains,  that  of  the  aureus
should  be  120.  The  average  weight  of  the  aurei
of  Augustus,  in  the  British  Museum,  is  121*26
grains :  and  as  the  w^eight  was  afterwards  dimi-
nished, we  may  take  the  average  at  120  grains.
There  seems  to  have  been  no  intentional  alio}'  in
the  Roman  gold  coins,  but  they  generally  conbiined
a  small  portion  of  native  silver.  The  average  alloy
is  g^.  The  aureus  of  the  Roman  emperors,  therefore,
contained  ^  =  '4  of  a  grain  of  alloy,  and  there-
fore 1 1  Q'Q  grains  of  pure  gold.  Now  a  sovereign
contains  113*12  grains  of  pure  gold.  Therefore  the
value  of  the  aureus  in  terms  of  the  sovereign  is
1^%:^;^=  1-0564  =  U.  Is.  Id.  and  a  little  more
than  a  halfpenny.  This  is  its  value  according  to
the  present  worth  of  gold  ;  but  its  current  value  in
Rome  was  different  from  this,  on  account  of  the  dif-
ference in  the  worth  of  the  metal.  The  aureus
passed  for  25  denarii;  therefore,  the  denarius
being  8^i.,  it  was  worth  1 7s.  8^.  The  ratio  of  the
value  of  gold  to  that  of  silver  is  given  in  the  article
Argkntum.  The  following  cut  represents  an
aureus  of  Augustus  in  the  British  Museum,  which
weighs  121  grains.


Alexander  Severus  coined  pieces  of  one-half  and
one  third  of  the  aureus,  called  Semissis  and  tremis'
sis  (Laraprid.  Alex.  Sev.  c.  39),  after  which  time
the  aureus  was  called  solidtis.

Constantino  the  Great  coined  aurei  of  72  to  the
pound  ;  at  which  standard  the  coin  remained  to
the  end  of  the  empire.  (Cod.  x.  tit.  70.  s.  5  j
Hussey,  On  Ancient  Weights  and  Money ;  Wurm,
DePond.Sic.)  [P.S.]

AURUM  CORONA'RIUM.  When  a  general
in  a  Roman  province  had  obtained  a  victory,  it
was  the  custom  for  the  cities  in  his  own  provinces,
and  for  those  from  the  neighbouring  states,  to  send
golden  crowns  to  him,  which  were  carried  before
him  in  his  triumph  at  Rome.  (Liv.  xxxviii.  37,
xxxix.  7;  Festus,  s.  V.  Triumphales  Coronae.)  This
practice  appears  to  have  been  borrowed  from  the
Greeks  ;  for  Chares  related,  in  his  history  of  Alex-
ander (ap.  Athen.  xii.  p.  539.  a.),  that  after  the
conquest  of  Persia,  crowns  were  sent  to  Alex-
ander, which  amounted  to  the  weight  of  10,500
talents.  The  number  of  crowns  which  were  sent
to  a  Roman  general  was  sometimes  very  great.
Cn.  Manlius  had  200  croAvns  carried  before  him  in
the  triumph  which  he  obtained  on  account  of  his
conquest  of  the  Gauls  in  Asia.  (Liv.  xxxix.  7.)
In  the  time  of  Cicero,  it  appears  to  have  been
usual  for  the  cities  of  the  provinces,  instead  of
sending  crowns  on  occasion  of  a  victorj'-,  to  pay
money,  which  was  called  awum  coronarium.  (Cic.
Leg.  Agr.  ii.  22  ;  Gell.  v.  6  ;  Monum.  Anc}T.)
This  offering,  which  was  at  first  voluntarj',  came
to  be  regarded  as  a  regular  tribute,  and  seems  to  m
have  been  sometimes  exacted  by  the  governors  of  9
the  provinces,  even  when  no  victory  had  been  i
gained.  By  a  law  of  Julius  Caesar  (Cic.  m  Pis.
37),  it  was  provided  that  the  aurum  coronarium
should  not  be  given  unless  a  triumph  was  decreed ;
but  under  the  emperors  it  was  presented  on  many
other  occasions,  as,  for  instance,  on  the  adoption  of
Antoninus  Pius.  (Capitolin.  Anton.  Pius,  c.  4.)  It
continued  to  be  collected,  apparently  as  a  part  of
the  revenue,  in  the  time  of  Valentinian  and  Theo-
dosius.     (Cod.  10.  tit.  74.)

Servius  says  {ad  Virg.  Aen.  viii.  721),  that
aurum  coronarium  was  a  sum  of  money  exacted
from  conquered  nations,  in  consideration  of  the
lives  of  the  citizens  being  spared  ;  but  this  state-
ment does  not  appear  to  be  correct.  '.

AURUM  LUSTRA'LE  was  a  tax  imposed  by
Constantino,  according  to  Zosimus  (ii.  38),  upon
all  merchants  and  traders,  which  was  pa3'able  at
every  lustrum,  or  every  four  years,  and  not  at  every
five,  as  might  have  been  expected  from  the  original
length  of  the  lustrum.  This  tax  was  also  called
auri  et  argenti  collatio  or  pra/istatio,  and  thus  in
Greek  t]  avvreXeia  7]  rod  xpvcra^yvpov.  (Cod.  11.
tit.  1  ;  Cod.  Theod.  13.  tit.  1.)

AURUM  VICESIMA'RIUM.  [Aerarium.
p.  23,  b.l

AUSPEX.     [Augur.]

AUSPrCIUM.     [AuGUR.J


AX  ONES.

AUTHK'NTICA.     [Novellae.]

AUTHEPSA  (au0€'4'i7s),  which  literally  means
*'  self-boiling"  or  "  self-cooking,"  was  the  name  of
a  vessel,  which  is  supposed  by  Bottiger  to  have
been  used  for  heating  water,  or  for  keeping  it  hot.
Its  form  is  not  known  for  certam  ;  but  Bottiger
(Sabitia,  vol.  ii.  p.  30)  conjectures  that  a  vessel,
which  is  engraved  in  Caylus  [RecuciL  d''Antiquites,
vol.  ii.  tab.  27),  is  a  specimen  of  an  authepsa.
Cicero  {pro  Rose.  Anieria.  46)  speaks  of  authepsae
among  other  costly  Corinthian  and  Delian  vessels.
In  later  times  they  were  made  of  silver.  (Lam-
prid.  Heliogab.  19 ;  but  the  reading  is  doubtful.)
The  cacabzis  seems  to  have  been  a  vessel  of  a
similar  kind.

AUTOMOLIAS  G  RAPHE'  (abrofxaXias
ypacpT}),  the  accusation  of  persons  chai-ged  with
having  deserted  and  gone  over  to  the  enemy  daring
war  (Pollux,  vi.  151),  There  are  no  speeches
extant  upon  this  subject.  Petitus,  however,  col-
lects (Leff.  A  it  p.  674)  from  the  words  of  a  com-
mentator upon  Demosthenes  (Ulpian),  that  the
punishment  of  this  crime  was  death.  Meier  {AU.
Proc.  p.  365)  awards  the  presidency  of,  the  court  in
which  it  was  ti'ied  to  the  generals  ;  but  the  circum-
stance of  persons  who  left  the  city  in  times  of
danger  without  any  intention  of  going  over  to  the
«nemy,  being  tried  by  the  Areiopagus  as  traitors
(Lycurg.  c.  Leocrat.  p.  17 7),  will  make  us  pause
before  we  conclude  that  persons  not  enlisted  as
soldiers  could  be  indicted  of  thia  offence  before  a
military  tribunal.  [J.  S.  M.]

AUTO'NOMI  (avT6voixoi),  the  name  given
by  the  Greeks  to  those  states  which  were  governed
by  their  own  laws,  and  were  not  subject  to  any
foreign  power.  (Thuc,  v.  18,  27  ;  Xen.  Hell.  v.  1.
§31.)  This  name  was  also  given  to  those  cities
subject  to  the  Romans,  which  were  permitted  to
enjoy  their  owai  laws,  and  elect  their  own  magis-
trates {Omnes^  suls  legibus  et  judieiis  usae,  avTouo-
fjLiav  adeptae,  revixemnt^  Cic.  Ad  Alt.  vi.  2).
This  permission  was  regarded  as  a  great  privilege,
and  mark  of  honour  ;  and  we  accordingly  find  it
recorded  on  coins  and  medals,  as,  for  instance,  on
those  of  Antioch  ANTIOXEHN  MHTPOnOA.
ATTONOMOT,  on  those  of  Halicaniassus  AAIKAP-
NACCEriN  ATTONOMflN,  and  on  those  of  many
other  cities.  (Spanheim,  De  Praest.  et  Usu  Nu-
mism.  p.  789.  Amst.  1671.)

AVU'LSIO.     [CoNrusio.]

AUXILIA'RES.     [SociL.]

AXAMENTA.     [Salii.]

AXINE  (a|iVrj).      [Securis.]

AXIS.       [CURRUS.]

A'XONES  (6|oyes),  also  called  htrbeis  (Kvp-
6ety),  wooden  talilets  of  a  square  or  pyramid ical
form  made  to  turn  on  an  axis,  on  which  were
written  the  laws  of  Solon.  According  to  some
writers  the  Axones  contained  the  civil,  and  the
Kurheis  the  religious  laws  ;  according  to  others  the
Kurlms  had  four  sides  and  the  Axones  three  sides.
But  at  Athens,  at  all  events,  they  must  have  been

.identical,  since  such  is  the  statement  of  Aristotle
{ap.  Plut.  Sol.  25).     They  were  at  first  preserved

•in  the  acropolis,  but  were  afterwards  placed,
through  the  advice  of  Ephialtes,  in  the  agora,  in
order  that  all  persons  might  be  able  to  read  them.

-A  small  portion  of  them  was  preserved  in  the  time

•of  Plutarch  in  the  prytaneium.     (Plut.  Sol.  25  ;

;Schol.  ad  Aristopk.  Av.  1360;    Schol.   ad  Apoll.

^.Rhod.  iv.  280;  Hai-pocrat.  6  Karcadcu  v^^ios ;  Her-


BALNEAE.


183


mann,  Griech.  Stautsalterlh.  §  107,  n.  1  ;  Wachs-
muth   Hell.  Alienhumsk.  vol.  i.  p.  491,  2nd  ed.)


B.


BACCHANA'LTA.     [DioNysiA.]

BAKTE'RI A  i^aKr-qpia),  a  staff  borne  by  the
dieasti.  at  Athens.     [Digastes.]

BA'LATRO,  a  professional  jester,  buffoon,  or
parasite.  (Hor,  SaL  i.  2.  2.)  In  Horace  (Sat  ii.
8.  21)  Balatro  is  used  as  a  proper  name  —  Serviliua
Balatro.  An  old  Scholiast,  in  commenting  on  this
word,  derives  the  common  word  from  the  proper
names  ;  buffoons  being  called  balatrones,  because
Servilius  Balatro  was  a  buffoon :  but  this  is  op-
posed to  the  natural  inference  from  the  fonner  pas-
sage, and  was  said  to  get  rid  of  a  difficulty,  Festua
derives  the  word  from  blatea,  and  supposes  buffoons
to  have  been  called  balatrones,  because  they  were
djrty  follows,  and  were  covered  with  spots  of  mud
(blicteae),  with  which  they  got  spattered  in  walking;
but  this  is  opposed  to  sound  etymology  and  com-
mon sense.  Another  writer  has  derived  it  from
barathrum,  and  supposes  buffoons  to  have  been
called  balatrones,  because  they,  so  to  speak,  carried
their  jesting  to  market,  even  into  the  very  depth
{barathrum)  of  the  shambles  (buratkrujn  macelli^
Hor.  Ep.  i.  15.  31).  Perhaps  balatro  may  be
connected  with  bala-re  (to  bleat  like  a  sheep,  and
hence)  to  speak  sillily.  It  is  probably  connected
with  blatero^  a  busy-body.  (Gell.  i.  15.)  Baia-
trones  were  paid  fer  their  jests,  and  the  tables  of
the  wealthy  were  'generally  open  to  them  for  the
sake  of  the  amusement  they  afforded.      [A.  A.]

BALISTA.     [ToiiMENTUM.]

BA'LNEAE,  Balineae.,  Balneum,  Balineum,
Thermae  {aadfiiyOos,  ^a\auc7oi',  \oeTp6y,\ovTf>6v).
These  words  are  all  commonly  translated  by  our
general  term  bath  or  baths  ;  but  in  the  writings
of  the  earlier  and  better  authors  they  are  used
with  discrimination.  Balneum  or  balineum,  which
is  derived  from  the  Greek  jSaAaveTov  ( Varro,  De
Ling.  Lat.  ix.  68,  ed.  MUller)',  signifies,  in  its
primary  sense,  a  bath  or  bathing-A-essel,  such  as
most  persons  of  any  consequence  amongst  the  Ro-
mans possessed  in  their  own  houses  (Cic.  Ad  Alt.
ii.  3),  and  hence  the  chamber  which  contained  the
bath  (Cic.  Ad  Fam.  xiv.  20),  which  is  also  the
proper  translation  of  the  word  balnearium.  The
diminutive  balneolu,m  is  adopted  by  Seneca  {Ep.
86)  to  designate  the  bath-r^om  of  Scipio,  in  the
villa  at  Litcrnum,  and  is  expressly  used  to  cha-
racterise the  modesty  of  republican  manners  as
compared  with  the  luxury  of  his  own  times.  But
when  the  baths  of  private  individuals  became  more
sumptuous,  and  comprised  many  rooms,  instead  of
the  one  small  chamber  described  by  Seneca,  the
plural  balnea  or  balinea  was  adopted,  which  still,
in  correct  language,  had  reference  only  to  the  baths
of  private  persons.  Thus  Cicero  terms  the  baths
at  the  villa  of  his  brother  Quintus  {Ad  Q.  Frat.  iii.
1.  §  1)  balnearia.  Balneae  and  balineae,  which
according  to  Varro  {De  Ling.  Lat.  viii.  25,  ix.  41,
ed.  MUirer)  have  no  singular  number  *,  were  the
public  baths.  Thus  Cicero  {Pro  Gael.  '2b)  speaks
of  balneas  Sentas,  balneas publicus,  and  in  vestibulo


*  Balnea  is,  however,  used  in  the  singular  to  de-
signate a  private  bath  in  an  inscription  quoted  by
Ileinesius.     {Inser.  xi.  115.)


184


BALNEAE.


balnearum  (lb.  26),  and  Aulus  Gclllns  (ili.  I,  x.  3)
oihabieas  Sitias.  But  this  accuracy  of  diction  is
neglected  by  many  of  the  subsequent  writers,  and
particularly  by  the  poets,  amongst  whom  Inxlnea  is
not  uncommonly  used  in  the  plural  number  to  sig-
nify the  public  baths,  since  the  word  balneae  could
not  be  introduced  in  an  hexameter  verse.  Pliny
also,  in  the  same  sentence,  makes  use  of  the  neuter
plural  balnea  for  public,  and  of  balneum  for  a  private
bath.  {Ep.  ii.  1 7.)  Thei-mae  {^ipfxai,  hot  springs)
meant  properly  warm  springs,  or  baths  of  warm
water  ;  but  came  to  be  applied  to  those  magnificent
edifices  which  grew  up  under  the  empire,  in  place
of  the  simple  balneae  of  the  republic,  and  which
comprised  within  their  range  of  buildhigs  all  the
appurtenances  belonging  to  the  Greek  gymnasia,
as  well  as  a  regular  establishment  appropriated  for
bathing.  (Juv.  Sat.  vii.  233).  Writers,  however,
use  these  terms  without  distinction.  Thus  the
baths  erected  by  Claudius  Etruscus,  the  freedman
of  the  Emperor  Claudian,  are  styled  by  Statins
{Sylv.  i.  5.  13)  balnea,  and  by  Martial  (vi.  42)
Etrusci  thermulae.  In  an  epigram  by  Martial  (ix.
76)  —  subice  balneum  thermis — the  terms  are  not
applied  to  the  whole  building,  but  to  two  different
chambers  in  the  same  edifice.

Greek  Baths.  —  Bathing  was  a  practice  familiar
to  the  Greeks  of  both  sexes  from  the  earliest  times,
both  in  fresh  water  and  salt,  and  in  the  natural
Avarm  springs,  as  well  as  vessels  artificially  heated.
Thus  Nausicaa,  daughter  of  Alcinous,  king  of
Phaeacia,  goes  out  with  her  attendants  to  wash
her  clothes  ;  and  after  the  task  is  done,  she  bathes
herself  in  the  river,  {Od.  vi.  58,  Q5.)  Ulysses,
who  is  conducted  to  the  same  spot,  strips  and  takes
a  bath,  whilst  Nausicaa  and  her  servants  stand
.iside.  {Od.  vi.  210 — 224.)  Europa  also  bathes
in  the  river  Anaurus  (Mosch.  Id.  ii.  31 X  a^d  Helen
and  her  companions  in  the  Eurotas.  (Theocr.  Id.
vii.  22.)  Wann  springs  were  also  resorted  to  for
the  purpose  of  bathing.  The  'Hpct/cAeto  Xovrpa
shown  by  Hephaestus  or  Athena  to  Hercules  are
celebrated  by  the  poets.  Pindar  speaks  of  the  hot
baths  of  the  nymphs — ^ep/ia  Nu/z^aj/  Xovrpa
{Olymp.  xii.  27),  and  Homer  {II.  xxii.  149)  cele-
brates one  of  the  streams  of  the  Scamander  for  its
warm  temperature.  The  artificial  warm  bath  was
taken  in  a  vessel  called  cKxafiiifBos  by  Homer,  and
e/xSaa-is  by  Athenaeus  (i.  p.  2S).  It  would  ap-
pear from  the  description  of  the  bath  administered
to  Ulysses  in  the  palace  of  Circe,  that  this  vessel
did  not  contain  water  itself,  but  was  only  used  for
the  bather  to  sit  in  while  the  warm  water  was
poured  over  him,  which  was  heated  in  a  large
caldron  or  tripod,  under  which  the  fire  was  placed,
and  when  sufficiently  warmed,  was  taken  out  in
other  vessels  and  poured  over  the  head  and
shoulders  of  the  person  who  sat  in  the  aad/xivdos.
(Od.  X.  359 — 365.)  Where  cleanliness  merely  was
the  object  sought,  cold  bathing  was  adopted,  which
was  considered  as  most  bracing  to  the  nerves
(Athen.  I.  c.)  ;  but  after  violent  bodily  exertion  or
fatigue  warm  water  was  made  use  of,  in  order  to
refresh  the  body,  and  relax  the  over  tension  of  the
muscles,  (Id.  ib. ;  comp.  Horn.  //.  x.  576,  Od.  iv.
48,  et  alibi.  >

The  aa-dfiivdos  was  of  polished  marble,  like  the
basins  (labra)  which  have  been  discovered  in  the
Roman  baths,  and  sometimes  of  silver.  Indul-
gence in  the  warm  bath  was  considered,  in  Homer's
time,  a  mark  of  effeminacy  (Od.  viii.  248).


BALNEAE.

The  use  of  the  warm  bath  was  preceded  by  bath-
ing in  cold  water  (//.  x.  576).  The  later  custom  of
plunging  into  cold  water  a-fter  the  warm  bath  men-
tioned by  Aristcides  (vol.  i.  Oral.  2.  Sacr.  Scrm.
p.  515),  who  wrote  in  the  second  centuiy  of  om-
era,  was  no  doubt  borrowed  from  the  Romans.

After  bathing,  both  sexes  anointed  themselves
with  oil,  in  order  that  the  skin  might  not  be  left
harsh  and  rough,  especiall}--  after  warm  water.
(Od.  vi.  96  ;  Athen.  I.e.  ;  Plin.  //.  A^.  xiii.  I.  ;
see  also  11.  xiv.  172,  xxiii.  186.)  The  use  of  pre-
cious unguents  (fJ-vpa)  was  unknown  at  that  early
period.  In  the  heroic  ages,  as  well  as  later  times,
refreshments  were  usually  taken  after  the  bath.
(Od.  vi.  97.)

The  Lacedaemonians,  who  considered  warm
water  as  enervating  and  effeminate,  us"d  two
kinds  of  baths  ;  namely,  the  cold  dailv  bath  in  the
Eurotas  (Xen.  Hell.  v.  4.  §  28  ;  Plut.  Jlc.  23),
and  a  diy  sudorific  bath  in  a  chamber  heated  with
warm  air  by  means  of  a  stove  (Dion  Cass.  liii.
p.  515,  ed.  Hannov.  1606)  ;  and  from  them  the
chamber  used  by  the  Romans  for  a  similar  purpose
was  termed  Laconicum  (compare  Strabo,  iii.  p.  413,
ed.  Siebenkees,  and  Casaub.  ad  loc.).

At  Athens  the  frequent  use  of  the  public  baths
was  regarded  in  the  time  of  Socrates  and  De-
mosthenes as  a  mark  of  luxury  and  effeminacy.
(Dcmosth.  c.  Polycl.  p.  1217.)  Accordingly  Pho-
cion  was  said  to  have  never  bathed  in  a  { ublic
bath  (eV  fiaXavdw  drjfjLoa-ievouTi,  Plut.  PIioc.  4),
and  Socrates  to  have  made  use  of  it  very  seldom.
(Plato,  Symp.  p.  174.)  It  was,  however,  onlj'  the
warm  baths  (JSoAaveTa,  called  by  Homer  b^pfxh
Kovrpd)  to  which  objection  was  made,  and  which
in  ancient  times  were  not  allowed  to  be  built
within  the  city.  (Athen.  i.  p.  18,  b.)  The  esti-
mation in  which  such  baths  were  held,  is  ex-
pressed in  the  following  lines  of  Hermippus  (apb
Athen.  I.  c.)

Ma  rhv  Af,  oh  fieuroi  fxsOveiv  rhv  &vdpa  xp'fl
rhf  ayaOhy,  ovSh  ^epfioXovre^v,  &  av  Troiets.

In  the  Clouds  of  Aristophanes  the  Si/catos  x6yos
warns  the  young  man  to  abstain  from  the  baths
($aXaueio}v  OTrexecOat,  1. 978),  which  passage,  com-
pared with  1.  1028 — 1037,  shows  that  warm  baths
are  intended  by  the  word  fiaXaueTa.

The  baths  (fiaXavcTa)  were  either  public  (Stj-
fjt.6a-ia,  dr]fj.ocri€vouTa)  or  private  (fSia,  ISiutiko).
The  former  were  the  property  of  the  state,  but  the
latter  were  built  by  p-ivate  individuals,  and  were
opened  to  the  public  on  the  payment  of  a  fee
(iirlXovTpou).  Such  private  baths  are  mentioned
by  Plutarch  (Demetr.  24)  and  Isaeus  (De  Dicaeog.
her.  p.  101),  who  speaks  of  one  which  was  sold  for
3000  drachmae.  (De  Philoct.  Jier.  p.  140.)  Baths
of  this  kind  may  also  have  been  intended  some-
times for  the  exclusive  use  of  the  persons  to  whom
they  belonged.  (Xen.  Rep.  Ath.  ii.  10.)  A  small
fee  appears  to  have  been  also  paid  by  each  person
to  the  keeper  of  the  public  baths  (^aXavevs\  which
in  the  time  of  Lucian  was  two  oboli.  (Lucian,
Leodph.  2.  vol.  ii.  p.  320.)

We  know  very  little  of  the  baths  of  the  Athe-
nians during  the  republican  period  ;  for  the  account
of  Lucian  in  his  Hippias  relates  to  baths  con-
structed after  the  Roman  model.  On  ancient  vases,
on  which  persons  are  represented  bathing,  we  never
find  any  thing  corresponding  to  a  modem  bath  in
which  persons  can  stand  or  sit ;  but  there  is  ahvay4


f


BALNEAE.

A  round  or  oval  basin  (\ovT-f}p  or  XovT-fipiov),  rest-
ing on  a  stand  (inrSaTarou),  by  the  side  of  which
those  who  are  bathing  are  represented  standing
undressed  and  washnig  themselves,  as  is  seen  in
the  following  woodcut  taken  from  Sir  W.  Hamil-
ton's vases.  (Tischbein,  i.  pi.  58.)  The  word
^HMOSIA  upon  it  shows  that  it  belonged  to  a
{Niblic  bath.


•  The  next  woodcut  is  also  taken  from  the  same
work  (i.  pi.  59),  and  represents  two  women  bath-
ing, 'J'he  one  on  the  right  hand  is  entirely  naked,
and  holds  a  looking  glass  in  her  right  hand  ;  the  one
on  the  left  wears  only  a  short  kind  of  x^'rwi'tov.  Eros
is  represented  hovering  over  the  bathing  vessel.


Besides  the  Xovrripes  and  Xovr^jpia  there  were
also  the  vessels  for  bathing,  large  enough  for  per-
sons to  sit  in,  which,  as  stated  above,  are  called
aaA^ivOoi  by  Homer  and  irveXoi  by  the  later
Greeks  (Schol.  ad  Aiistoph.  Equit.  1055  ;  Hesych.
s.  V.  TlvaXos  ;  Pollux,  vii.  16"6,  168).  In  the
baths  there  was  also  a  kind  of  sudorific  or  vapour
bath  called  Trvpia  or  irvpiaT-iipiov,  which  is  men-
tioned as  early  as  the  time  of  Herodotus  (iv.  75).
(Compare  Pollux,  vii.  168  ;  Athen.  v.  p.  207,  f.,
xii,  p.  519,  e. ;  Plut.  Cim.  1.)

The  persons  who  bathed  probably  brought  with
them  strigils,  oil,  and  towels.  The  strigil,  which
was  called  by  the  Greeks  (rrXf^yyis  or  \v<Trpa,
was  usually  made  of  iron,  but  sometimes  also  of
other  materials.  (Plut.  Inst.  Lac.  32  ;  Aelian,
xii.  29.)  One  of  the  figures  in  the  preceding
woodcut  is  represented  with  a  strigil  in  his  hand  ;


BALNEAK  185

several  strigils  are  figiured  below.  The  Greeks
also  used  different  materials  for  cleansing  or  wash-
ing themselves  in  the  bath,  to  which  the  general
name  of  piixiia.  was  given,  and  which  were  sup-
plied by  the  fiaXavevs.  (Aristoph.  Lysistr.  377.)
This  pvfx.fxa  usually  consisted  of  a  lye  made  of  lime
or  wood-ashes  (/coj/i'o),  of  nitrum,  and  of  fuller's
earth  (7^  KifxcoXia,  Aristoph.  lian.  710  and  Schol. ;
Plat.  Bep.  iv.  p.  430).

The  bath  was  generally  taken  shortly  before  the
SuTTi/ov  or  principal  meal  of  the  day.  It  was  the
practice  to  take  first  a  wann  or  vapour,  and  after-
wards a  cold  bath  (Plut.  de  primo  frig.  10  ;  Paus.
ii.  34.  §  2),  though  in  the  time  of  Homer  the  cold
bath  appears  to  have  been  taken  first  and  the  warm
afterwards.  The  cold  water  was  usually  poured
on  the  back  or  shoulders  of  the  bathei's  by  the
^aXavevs  or  his  assistants,  who  are  called  irapax^-
rai.  (Plat.  Rep.  i,  p.  344  ;  Lucian,  Demosth.  En-
cow.  1 6.  vol.  iii.  p.  503  ;  Plut.  de  Invid.  G,  Apophth.
Lac.  49.)  The  vessel,  from  which  the  water  was
poured,  was  called  apvraiva.  (Aristoph.  Equit.
1 087  ;  Theophr.  Char.  9.)  In  the  first  of  the  pre-
ceding woodcuts  a  irapaxx'iTiis  is  represented  with
an  apvTatua  in  his  hands.

Among  the  Greeks  a  person  was  always  bathed
at  birth,  marriage,  and  after  death  [Funlis]  ;
whence  it  is  said  of  the  Dardanians,  an  Illy-
rian  people,  that  they  bathe  only  thrice  in  their
lives,  at  birth,  marriage,  and  after  death.  (Nicol.
Damasc.  ap.  Stab.  v.  51.  p.  152,  Gaisf.)  The
water  in  which  the  bride  was  bathed  {Xoirrpbv
vvfx(j)iK6u,  Aristoph.  I^ysistr.  378)  at  Athens,  was
taken  from  the  fountain  of  Kallirrhoe,  which  was
called  from  the  time  of  Peisistratus  '^vvi6.Kpovvos.
(Thucyd.  ii.  15.)  Compare  Pollux,  iii.  43  ;  Har-
pocrat.  s.  V.  AovTpo(p6pos,  who  says  that  the  water
was  fetched  by  a  boy,  who  was  the  nearest  rela-
tion, and  that  this  boy  was  called  XovTpo<p6pos.
He  also  states  that  water  was  fetched  in  the  same
way  to  bathe  the  bodies  of  those  who  had  died  un-
married, and  that  on  the  monuments  of  such,  a  boy
was  represented  holding  a  water-vessel  (vSpia),
Pollux  (l.  c),  however,  states  that  it  was  a  female
who  fetched  the  water  on  such  occasions,  and  De-
mosthenes (c.  Leochar.  p.  1089.  23  ;  compare  p.
1086,  14.  &c.)  speaks  of  r)  Xovrpoipopos  on  the
monument  of  a  person  who  had  died  unmarried.
In  remains  of  ancient  art  we  find  girls  represented
as  XovTpo<p6poi,  but  never  boys.  (Bronsted,  Brief
Description  of  thirty-tico  ancient  Greek  Vases,  pi.
27.  The  best  account  of  the  Greek  baths  is  given
by  Becker,  C/iariMes,  vol.  ii.  pp.135 — 146,  pp.
459—462.)

Roman  Baths.  —  The  Romans,  in  the  earlier
periods  of  their  history,  used  the  l3ath  but  seldom,
and  only  for  health  and  cleanliness,  not  as  a
luxury.  Thus  we  learn  from  Seneca  (Ep.  86)
that  the  ancient  Romans  washed  their  legs  and
arms  daily,  and  bathed  their  whole  body  once  a
week.  (Comp.  Cat.  de  Lib.  Educ.  ap.  Non.  iii.
s.  V.  Ephijypium  ;  Colum.  7?.  R.  i.  6.  §  20.)

It  is  not  recorded  at  what  precise  period  the  use
of  the  wann  bath  was  first  introduced  amongst  the
Romans  ;  but  we  learn  from  Seneca  (/.  c.)  that
Scipio  had  a  warm  bath  in  his  villa  at  Litemum  ;
which,  however,  was  of  the  simplest  kind,  consist-
ing of  a  single  chamber,  just  sufficient  for  the
necessary  purposes,  and  without  any  pretensions
to  luxury.  It  was  "  small  and  dark,"  he  says
"  after  the  manner  of  the  ancients."     Seneca  also


186


BALNEAE.


describes  the  public  baths  as  ohscura  et  gregali
teclorio  indticla^  and  as  so  simple  in  their  arrange-
ments that  the  aedile  judged  of  the  proper  tem-
perature by  his  hands.  These  were  baths  of  warm
water;  but  the  practice  of  heating  an  apartment
with  warm  air  by  flues  placed  immediately  under
it,  so  as  to  produce  a  vapour  bath,  is  stated  by  Va-
lerius Maximus  (ix.  1 .  §  1)  and  by  Pliny  (H.  N.  ix.
54.  s.  79)  to  have  been  invented  by  Sergius  Grata,
who  lived  in  the  age  of  L.  Crassus,  the  orator,
before  tlie  Marsic  war.  The  expression  used  by
Valerius  Maximus  is  balnea  pensilia,  and  by  Pliny
balineas  pensiles,  which  is  differently  explained  by
different  commentators  ;  but  a  single  glance  at  the
plans  inserted  below  will  be  sufficient  in  order  to
comprehend  the  manner  in  which  the  flooring  of
the  chambers  was  suspended  over  the  hollow  cells
of  the  hypocaust,  called  by  Vitruvius  suspensura
caldariorum  (v.  11),  so  as  to  leave  no  doubt  as  to
the  precise  meaning  of  the  invention',  which  is  more
fully  exemplified  in  the  following  passage  of  Au-
'337):—


"  Quid  (memorem)  quae  sulphurea  substructa  cre-
pidine  fumant
Balnea,  ferventi  cum  Mulciber  haustus  operto,
Volvit  anhelatas  tectoria  per  cava  flammas,
Inclusum  glomerans  aestu  exspirante  vaporem  ?  "

By  the  time  of  Cicero,  the  use  of  baths,  both
public  and  private,  of  warm  water  and  hot  air,  had
become  general  {Epist.  ad  Q.  Frat  iii.  1 ) ;  and  we
learn  from  one  of  his  orations  that  there  were
already  baths  (balneas  Senias)  at  Rome,  which
were  open  to  the  public  upon  payment  of  a  small
sura  {Pro  Gael.  25,  26).

In  the  earlier  ages  of  Roman  history  a  much
greater  delicacy  was  observed  with  respect  to  bath-
ing, even  amongst  the  men,  than  was  usual  among
the  Greeks  ;  for  according  to  Valerius  Maximus
(ii.  1.  §  7)  it  was  deemed  indecent  for  a  father  to
bathe  in  company  with  his  own  son  after  he  had
attained  the  age  of  puberty,  or  a  son-in-law  with
his  father-in-law.  (Gomp.  Cic.  De  Of-  i-  35,  De
Orai.  ii.  55.)  But  virtue  passed  away  as  wealth
increased  ;  and  when  the  thermae  came  into  use,
not  only  did  the  men  bathe  together  in  numbers,
but  even  men  and  women  stripped  and  bathed
promiscuously  in  the  same  bath.  It  is  true,  how-
ever, that  the  public  establishments  often  con-
tained separate  baths  for  both  sexes  adjoining  to
-each  other  (Vitruv.  v.  10  ;  Varro,Z)e  Ling.  Lat.  ix.
68),  as  will  be  seen  to  have  been  the  case  at  the
baths  of  Pompeii.  Aulus  Gellius  (x.  3)  relates  a
story  of  a  consurs  wife  who  took  a  whim  to  bathe
■at  Teanum  (Teano),  a  small  provincial  town  of
.Campania  in  the  men's  baths  (balneis  virilibits)  ;
probably,  because  in  a  small  town,  the  female  de-
partment, like  that  at  Pompeii,  was  more  confined
and  less  convenient  than  that  assigned  to  the  men  ;
and  an  order  was  consequently  given  to  the  Quaes-
tor, M.  Marius,  to  turn  the  men  out.  But  whether
the  men  and  women  were  allowed  to  use  each
other's  chambers  indiscriminately,  or  that  some  of
the  public  establishments  had  only  one  common
set  of  baths  for  both,  the  custom  prevailed  under
.the  Empire  of  men  and  women  bathing  indiscrimi-
nately together.  (Plin.  //.  A^.  xxxiii.  12.  s.  54.)
This  custom  was  forbidden  by  Hadrian  (Spart.
Hadr.  c.  1),  and  by  M.  Aurelius  Antoninus  (Capi-
tolin.  Anton,  c.  23)  ;  and  Alexander  Severus  pro-
hibited any  baths,  common  to  both  sexes  {balnea


BALNEAE.

mixta)^  from  being  opened  in  Rome.  (Lamprid.
Alex.  Sev.  c.  42.)

When  the  public  baths  (balneae)  were  first  in-
stituted, they  were  only  for  the  lower  orders,  who
alone  bathed  in  public ;  the  people  of  wealth,  as
well  as  those  who  formed  the  equestrian  and  sena-
torian  orders,  used  private  baths  in  their  own
houses.  But  as  early  even  as  the  time  of  Julius
Caesar  we  find  no  less  a  personage  than  the  mother
of  Augustus  making  use  of  the  public  establish-
ments (Suet.  Aug.  94)  ;  and  in  process  of  time
even  the  emperors  themselves  bathed  in  public
with  the  meanest  of  the  people.  (Spart.  Hu4r.
c.  1 7  ;  Trebell.  PoUio,  De  Gallien.  duob.  c.  1 7.)

The  baths  were  opened  at  sunrise,  and  closed
at  sunset ;  but  in  the  time  of  Alexander  Severus,
it  would  appear  that  they  were  kept  open  nearly
all  night.  (Lamp.  Alex.  Sev.  I.  c.)  The  allusion
in  Juvenal  {balnea  node  subit.  Sat.  vi.  419)  pro-
bably refers  to  private  baths.

The  price  of  a  bath  was  a  quadrans,  the  smallest
piece  of  coined  money,  from  the  age  of  Cicero
do \vn wards  {Q,\c.  Pro  Gael.  26  ;  Yiov.Sat.  i.  3.  137;
Juv.  Sat.  vi.  447),  which  was  paid  to  the  keeper
of  the  bath  {balneal or)  ;  and  hence  it  is  termed  by
Cicero,  in  the  oration  just  cited,  quadrautaria  per-
mutalio,  and  by  Seneca  {Ep.  86)  res  quadrautaria.
Children  below  a  certain  age  were  admitted  free.
(Juv.  Sat.  ii.  152.)

Strangers,  also,  and  foreigners  were  admitted  to
some  of  the  baths,  if  not  to  all,  without  pa}nnent,
as  we  learn  from  an  inscription  found  at  Rome,
and  quoted  by  Pitiscus.     {Lex  Antiq.)

L.    OCTAVIO.  L.  F.  CAM.
RUFO.  TRIB.  MIL

QUI    LAVATIONEM    GRATUITAM    MUNICIPIBUS,

INCOLIS

HOSPITIBUS    ET    ADVENTORIBUS.

The  baths  were  closed    when  any  misfortune
happened  to  the  republic  (Fabr.  Descr.  Urb.  Rom.
c.  1 8) ;  and  Suetonius  says  that  the  Emperor  Caligula
made  it  a  capital  offence  to  indulge  in  the  luxury
of  bathing  upon  any  religious  holiday.  {lb.)    They
were  originally  placed  under  the  superintendence
of  the  acdiles,  whose  business  it  was  to  keep  them
in  repair,  and  to  sec  that  they  were  kept  clean  and
of  a  proper  temperature.  {lb. ;  Sen.  Ep.  86.)  In  the    _
provinces  the  same  duty  seems  to  have  devolved    jflj
upon  the  quaestor,  as  may  be  inferred  from  the    ";
passage  already  quoted  from  Aulus  Gellius  (x.  3).

The  time  usually  assigned  by  the  Romans  for
taking  the  bath  was  the  eighth  hour,  or  shortly
afterwards.  (Mart.  Ep.  x.  48,  xi.  52.)  Before
that  time  none  but  invalids  were  allowed  to  bathe
in  public.  (Lamprid.  Alex.  Sev.  24.)  Vitruvius
reckons  the  hours  best  adapted  for  bathing  to  be
from  mid-day  until  about  sunset  (v.  10).  Pliny
took  his  bath  at  the  ninth  hour  in  summer,  and  at
the  eighth  in  winter  {Ep.  iii.  1,8);  and  Martial
speaks  of  taking  a  bath  when  fatigued  and  weary,  at
thetenthhour,and  even  later.  {Epig.  iii.  36,  x.70.)

When  the  water  was  ready,  and  the  baths  pre-
pared, notice  was  given  by  the  sound  of  a  bell  —
aes  themnarum.  (Mart.  Ep.  xiv.  163.)  One  of
these  bells,  with  the  inscription  Firmi  Balnea-
TORis,  was  found  in  the  thennae  Diocletianae,  in
the  year  1548,  and  came  into  the  possession  of  the
learned  Fulvius  Ursinus.  {Append,  ad  Ciaccon.
de  Triclin. )

Whilst  the  bath  was  used  for  health  merely  of
clcanhness,  a  siiigle  one  was  considered  sufficient


I


I


BALNEAE.

at  a  time,  and  that  only  wlien  requisite.  But  the
luxuries  of  the  empire  knew  no  such  bounds,  and
the  daily  bath  was  sometimes  repeated  as  many  as
«even  and  eight  times  in  succession  —  the  number
which  the  Emperor  Commodus  indulged  himself
with.  (Lan-.prid.  Com.  c.  2.)  Gordian  bathed  seven
times  a  day  in  summer,  and  twice  in  winter.  The
Emperor  Gallienus  six  or  seven  times  in  summer,
and  twice  or  thrice  in  winter.  (Capitolin.  Gall.
c  1 7.)  Commodus  also  took  his  meals  in  the  bath
(Lamprid.  I.  c.)  ;  a  custom  which  was  not  confined
to  a  dissolute  Emperor  alone.  (Comp.  Martial,
■  Epig.  xii.  10.)

It  was  the  usual  and  constant  habit  of  the  Ro-
mans to  take  the  bath  after  exercise,  and  pre-
viously to  their  principal  meal  {coma?)  ;  but  the
debauchees  of  the  empire  bathed  after  eating  as
well  as  before,  in  order  to  promote  digestion,  so  as
to  acquire  a  new  appetite  for  fresh  delicacies.  Nero
is  related  to  have  indulged  in  this  practice.  (Suet.
Nero^  27  ;  comp.  Juv.  Sat.  i.  142.)

Upon  quitting  the  bath  it  was  usual  for  the
Romans  as  well  as  the  Greeks  to  be  anointed  with
oil ;  but  a  particular  habit  of  body,  or  tendency  to
certain  complaints,  sometimes  required  this  order
to  be  reversed ;  for  which  reason  Augustus,  who
suffered  from  nervous  disorders,  was  accustomed  to
anoint  himself  before  bathing  (Suet.  Aug.  82)  ;
and  a  similar  practice  was  adopted  by  Alexander
Severus.  (Lamprid.  Alex.  Sev.  I.  c.)  The  most
usual  practice,  however,  seems  to  have  been  to
take  some  gentle  exercise  (exercitatio),  in  the  first
instance,  and  then,  after  bathing,  to  be  anointed


BALNEAE.  187

either  in  the  sun,  or  in  the  tepid  or  thermal  cham-
ber, and  finally  to  take  their  food.
_  The  Romans  did  not  content  themselves  with  a
single  bath  of  hot  or  cold  water ;  but  they  went
through  a  course  of  baths  in  succession,  in  which
the  agency  of  air  as  Avell  as  water  was  applied.
It  is  difficult  to  ascertain  the  precise  order  in
which  the  course  was  usually  taken,  if  indeed
there  was  any  general  practice  beyond  the  whim
of  the  individual.  Under  medical  treatment,  the
succession  would,  of  course,  be  regulated  by  the
nature  of  the  disease  for  which  a  cure  was  sought,
and  would  vary  also  according  to  the  different
practice  of  different  physicians.  It  is  certain,
however,  that  it  was  a  general  practice  to  close
the  pores,  and  brace  the  body  after  the  excessive
perspiration  of  the  vapour  bath,  either  by  pouring
cold  water  over  the  head,  or  by  plunging  at  once
into  the  piscina,  or  into  a  river.  (Auson.  Mosell.
341.)  Musa,  the  physician  of  Augustus,  is  said  to
have  introduced  this  practice  (Vim.  H.N.  xxv.  7.
s.  38),  which  became  quite  the  fashion,  in  con-
sequence of  the  benefit  which  the  emperor  derived
from  it,  though  Dion  (liii.  p.  517)  accuses  Musa  of
having  artfully  caused  the  death  of  Marcellus  by
an  improper  application  of  the  same  treatment.  In
other  cases  it  was  considered  conducive  to  health
to  pour  warm  water  over  the  head  before  the
vapour  bath,  and  cold  water  immediately  after  it
(Plin.  //.  A^.  xxviii.  4.  s.  14 ;  Cels.  De  Med.  i.
3)  ;  and  at  other  times,  a  succession  of  warm,
tepid,  and  cold  water  was  resorted  to.

The  two  physicians  Galen  and  Celsus  differ  in


Bome  respects  as  to  the  order  in  which  the  baths
should  be  taken  ;  the  former  recommending  first  the
hot  air  of  the  Laconicum  {hipi  b^pp.^),  next  the
bath  of  warm  water  {vhoxp  ^epfihv  and  Xovrpou*),
afterwards  the  cold,  and  fiually  to  be  well  rubbed

*  AovTpou.  In  this  passage  it  is  plain  that  the
word  XovTpov  is  used  for  a  warm  bath,  in  which
sense  it  also  occurs  in  the  same  author.  Vitruvius
(v.  11),  on  the  contrary,  says  that  the  Greeks  used
tlie  same  word  to  signify  a  cold  bath  (/rigida
lavatio,  quam  Graeci  Kovrpov  vocitant).  The  con-
tradiction between  the  two  authors  is  here  pointed
out,  for  the  purpose  of  showing  the  impossibility,
as  well  as  impropriety,  of  attempting  to  affix  one
precise   meaning  to  each  of  the  different  terms


(Ga\en,DeMethodoMedendi,  x.  10.  p.  708,  709,  ed.
KUhn)  ;  whilst  the  latter  recommends  his  patients
first  to  sweat  for  a  short  time  in  the  tepid  chamber
(tepidarium),  without  undressing  ;  then  to  proceed
into  the  thermal  chamber  (calidartum),  and  after
having  gone  through  a  regular  course  of  perspir-
ation there,  not  to  descend  into  the  warm  bath
(solium),  but  to  pour  a  quantity  of  warm  water
over  the  head,  then  tepid,  and  finally  cold  ;  after-
wards to  be  scraped  with  the  strigil  (per/ricari),
and  finally  rubbed  dry  and  anointed.  (Cels.  JM
Med.  i.  4.)  Such,  in  all  probability,  was  the  usual
habit  of  the  Romans  when  the  bath  was  resorted


made  use  of  by  the  ancient  writers  in  reference  to
their  bathing  establishments.


188


BALNEAE.


to  as  a  daily  source  of  pleasure,  and  not  for  any
particular  medical  treatment ;  the  more  so,  as  it
resembles  in  many  respects  the  system  of  bathing
etiU  in  practice  amongst  the  Orientals,  wlio,  as
Sir  W.  Gell  remarks,  "  succeeded  by  conquest  to
the  luxuries  of  the  enervated  Greeks  and  Romans."
(Gell's  Pompeii,  vol.  i.  p.  86,  ed.  1832.)

Having  thus  detailed  from  classical  authorities
the  general  habits  of  the  Romans  in  connection
with  their  system  of  bathing,  it  now  remains  to
examine  and  explain  the  internal  arrangements
of  the  structures  which  contained  their  baths  ;
which  will  serve  as  a  practical  commentary  upon
all  that  has  been  said.  Indeed  there  are  more
ample  and  better  materials  for  acquiring  a  thorough
insight  into  Roman  manners  in  this  one  particular,
than  for  anj'^  other  of  the  usages  connected  with
their  domestic  habits.  The  principal  ancient  au-
thorities are  Vitruvius  (v.  10),  Lucian  (liririas  ^
fiakdyeiov,  a  detailed  description  of  a  set  of  baths
erected  by  an  architect  named  Hippias),  Pliny  the
Younger,  in  the  two  letters  describing  his  villas  (ii.
17,  v.  6),  Statins  {Balneum  Etrusci,  Silv.  i.  5),
Martial    (vi.   42,  and  other  epigrams),  Sidonius


BALNEAE.

Apollinarls  {Epist.  ii,  2),  and  Seneca  (Epist.  5],
56,  86).

But  it  would  be  almost  hopeless  to  attempt  to
arrange  the  infonnation  obtained  from  these
writers,  were  it  not  for  the  help  alforded  us  by  the
extensive  ruins  of  ancient  baths,  such  as  the
Thermae  of  Titus,  Caracalla,  and  Diocletian,  but
above  all  the  public  baths  (halneae)  at  Pompeii,
which  were  excavated  in  1824 — 25,  and  were
found  to  be  a  complete  set,  constructed  in  all  their
important  parts  upon  iiiles  very  similar  to  those
laid  down  by  Vitruvius.  and  in  such  good  preserv-
ation that  many  of  the  chambers  were  complete,
even  to  the  ceilings.

In  order  to  render  the  subjoined  remarks  more
easily  intelligible,  the  woodcut  on  the  preceding
page  is  inserted,  which  is  taken  from  a  fresco
painting  upon  the  walls  of  the  thermae  of  Titus  at
Rome.

The  annexed  woodcut  represents  the  ground
plan  of  the  baths  of  Pompeii,  which  are  nearly
surrounded  on  three  sides  by  houses  and  shops,
thus  forming  what  the  Romans  termed  an  imula.

The  whole  building,  which  comprises  a  double


»et  of  baths,  has  six  different  entrances  from  the
street,  one  of  which  A,  gives  admission  to  the
smaller  set  only,  which  are  supposed  to  have  been
appropriated  to  the  women,  and  five  others  to  the
male  department ;  of  which  two,  B  and  C,  com-
municate directly  with  the  furnaces,  and  the  other
three  D,  E,  F,  with  the  bathing  apartments,  of
which  F,  the  nearest  to  the  forum,  was  the  prin-
cipal one ;  the  other  two,  D  and  E,  being  on  dif-
ferent sides  of  the  building,  served  for  the  conve-
nience of  those  who  lived  on  the  north  and  east
sides  of  the  citj\  To  have  a  variety  of  entrances
(^loSoJS  TToWais  TiOvpcafxeyov)  is  one  of  the  quali-
ties enumerated  by  Lucian  as  necessary  to  a  well-
constructed  set  of  baths.  (Hippias,  8.)  Passing
through  the  principal  entrance  F,  which  is  re-
moved from  the  street  by  a  narrow  footv.ay  sur-


rounding the  insula  (the  outer  curb  of  which  is
marked  upon  the  plan  by  the  thin  line  drawn
round  it),  and  after  descending  three  steps,  the
bather  finds  upon  his  left  hand  a  small  chamber
(1),  which  contained  a  convenience  (latrina*),  and.
proceeds  into  a  covered  portico  (2),  which  ran
round  three  sides  of  an  open  court — atrium  (3),
and  these  together  formed  the  vestibule  of  the
baths  —  vestibulum  balnearum  (Cic.  Pro  Cael.  26),
in  which  the  servants  belonging  to  the  establish-
ment, as  well  as  the  attendants  of  the  bathers,
waited.     There  are  seats  for  their  accommodation

*  Latrina  was  also  used  previously  to  the  time
of  Varro  for  the  bathing- vessel,  quasi  lavatrirta.
(Varro,  De  Ling  Lat.  ix.  68.  ed.  MuUer;  compare
Lucill.  ap.  Non.  c  3.  n.  131.)


BALNEAE.

placed  underneath  the  portico  («,  a).     This  com-
partment answers  exactly  to  the  first,  which  is  de-
scribed by  Lucian  (1.  c.  5).     Within  this  court  the
keeper  of  the  baths  (balneator)  who  exacted  the
quadrans  paid  by  each  visitor,  was  also  stationed ;
and  the  box  for  holding  the  money  was  found  in
it.     The  room  (4),    Avhich   runs    back   from  the
portico,  might  have  been  appropriated  to  him  ;  or,
if  not,  it  might  liave  been  an  oecus  or  exedra,  for
the  convenience  of  the  better  classes  whilst  await-
ing the  return  of  their  acquaintances  from  the  in-
terior, in  which  case  it  will  correspond  with  the
chambers  mentioned  by  Lucian  (/.  c.  5),  adjoining
to  the  servants'  waiting-place  (cV  apitTTcpS.  8e  Tcav
is  Tpv(p7]v  TrapecK^vacTfiivav  oiKrjfxdTwv).     In  this
court  likewise,  as   being  the  most  public  place,
advertisements  for  the  theatre,  or  other  announce-
ments of  general  interest,  were  posted  up,  one  of
which,   announcing  a  gladiatorial  show,  still    re-
mains.    (5)   Is  the  corridor  which  conducts  from
the  entrance  E,  into  the  same  vestibule.     (6)  A
small  cell  of  similar  use  as  the  corresponding  one
in  the  opposite  corridor  (1).      (7)  A  passage  of
commmiication  which  leads  into  the  chamber  (8),
thi:  friffidarmm,  which  also  served  as  an  apodyte-
n'am,  or  spoliatorium,  a  room  for  undressing  ;  and
which  is  also  accessible   from  the  street  by  the
door  D,  through  the  corridor  (9),  in  which  a  small
niche  is  observable,  which  probably  served  for  the
j  station   of  another  balneator,  who   collected   the
J  money  from  those  entering  from  the  north  street.
i  In  this  room  all  the  visitors  must  have  met  before
'  entering  into  the  interior  of  the  baths  ;  and  its
j  locality,  as  well  as    other  characteristic   features
I  in  its  fittings  up,  leave  no  room  to  doubt  that  it
j  served  as  an  undressing  room.     It  does  not  appear
1  that  any  general  rule  of  construction  was  followed
I  by  the  architects  of  antiquity,  Avith  regard  to  the
I  locality   and    temperature    best    adapted    for   an
apodyterium.      The  word   is   not   mentioned    by
Vitmvius,  nor  expressly  by  Lucian ;  but  he  says
enough  for  us  to   infer  that  it  belonged  to  the
\  friffidarium    in    the    baths    of   Hippias    (L  c.   5).
!  "  After  quitting    the  last   apartment  there  are  a
!  sufficient  number  of  chambers  for  the  bathers  to
j  undress,  in  the  centre  of  which  is  an  oecus  con-
1  taining  three  baths  of  cold  water."      Pliny  the
younger  says  that  the  apodytermm  at  one  of  his
own   villas  adjoined  the  frigidarium   (Ep.  v.  6),
and  it  is  plain  from  a  passage  already  quoted,  that
the  apodyterium  was   a  warm  apartment  in  the
baths  belonging  to  the  villa  of  Cicero's  brother,
Quintus  {asm  in  alteriim  apodi/terii  angtdum  pro-
wovi),  to  which  temperature  Celsus  also  assigns  it.
In  the  thermae  at  Rome  the  hot  and  cold  depart-
ments had  probably  each  a  separate  apodyterium
attached  to  it ;  or  if  not,  the  ground  plan  was  so
arranged  that  one  apodyteriitm  would  be  contiguous
to,  and  serve  for  both,  or  cither  ;  but  where  space
and  means  were  circumscribed,  as  in  the  little  city
of  Pompeii,  it  is  more  reasonable  to  conclude  that
iho,  frifjidarium  served  as  an  apodyterium  for  those
who  confined  themselves  to  cold  bathing,  and  the
tepidarium  for  those  who  commenced  their  ablutions
in  the  warm  apartments.     The  bathers  were  ex-
pected to  take  off  their  garments  in  the  apodyterium,
it  not  being  permitted  to  enter  into  the  interior
unless  naked.     (Cic.  Pro  Gael.  26.)      They  were
then  delivered  to  a  class  of  slaves,  called  capsarii
(from  capsa,  the  small  case  in  which  children  car-
ried their  books  to  school),  whose  duty  it  was  to


BALiNEAE.  I8d

take  charge  of  them.  These  men  were  notorious
for  dishonesty,  and  leagued  with  all  the  thieves  of
the  city,  so  that  they  connived  at  the  robberies
they  were  placed  there  to  prevent.  Hence  the  ex-
pression of  Catullus  —  O /urum,  optume  halneari-
orum  I  {Cann.  xxxiii.  1 )  and  Trachilo  in  the  Ru-
dens  of  Plautus  (ii.  33.  51),  complains  bitterly
of  their  roguerj-,  which,  in  the  capital,  was  carried
to  such  an  excess  that  very  severe  laws  were  en-
acted against  them,  the  crime  of  stealing  in  the
baths  being  made  a  capital  offence.

To  return  into  the  chamber  itself —  it  is  vaulted
and  spacious,  with  stone  seats  along  two  sides  of
the  wall  (6,  i),  and  a  step  for  the  feet  below,
slightly  raised  from  the  floor  {pulvinus  et  grudus,
Vitruv.  y.  10).  Holes  can  still  be  seen  in  the
walls,  which  might  have  served  for  pegs  on  which
the  garments  were  hung  when  t<iken  oft'.  It  was
lighted  by  a  window  closed  with  glass,  and  orna-
mented with  stucco  mouldings  and  painted  yellow.
A  sectional  drawing  of  this  interior  is  given  in  Sir,
W.  Gell's  Pompeii.  There  are  no  less  than  six
doors  to  this  chamber ;  one  led  to  the  entrance  E,
another  to  the  entrance  D,  a  third  to  the  small
room  (11),  a  fourth  to  the  furnaces,  a  fifth  to  the
tepid  apartment,  and  the  sixth  opened  upon  the
cold  bath  (10),  named  indiiferently  by  the  ancient
authors,  natatio,  natatorium,  piscina,  baptisterium  *,
puteus,  Kovrpov.  The  bath,  which  is  coated  with
white  marble,  is  12  feet  10  inches  in  diameter,
and  about  3  feet  deep,  and  has  two  marble  steps
to  facilitate  the  descent  into  it,  and  a  seat  sur-
rounding it  at  the  depth  of  10  inches  from  the
bottom,  for  the  purpose  of  enabling  the  bathers  to
sit  down  and  wash  themselves.  The  ample  size  of
this  basin  explains  to  us  what  Cicero  meant  when
he  wrote — Latiorem  piscinam  voluissem,  ubijactata
brachia  non  offenderentur.  It  is  probable  that
many  persons  contented  themselves  with  the  cold
bath  only,  instead  of  going  through  the  severe
course  of  perspiration  in  the  warm  apartments ;
and  as  ihe  frigidarium  alone  could  have  had  no
effect  in  baths  like  these,  where  it  merely  served-
as  an  apodytei'ium,  the  natatio  must  be  referred  to
when  it  is  said  that  at  one  period  cold  baths  were
in  such  request  that  scarcely  any  others  were  used.
(Gell's  Pompeii,  I.  c.)  There  is  a  platform,  or  am-
bulatory {scJiola,  Vitruv.  v.  10)  round  the  bath,
also  of  marble,  and  four  niches  of  the  same  mate-
rial disposed  at  regular  intervals  round  the  walls,
with  pedestals,  for  statues  probablj'',  placed  in
them.f  The  ceiling  is  vaulted,  and  the  cham-
ber lighted  by  a  window  in  the  centre.  I'he
annexed  woodcut  represents  a  frigidarium  with
its  cold  bath  (puteus,  Plin.  JEp.  v.  6)  at  one  ex-
tremity, supposed  to  have  foiTned  a  part  of  the
Formian  villa  of  Cicero,  to  whose  age  the  style  of


*  The  word  baptisterium  (Plin.  Ep.  v.  6)  is
not  a  bath  sufficiently  large  to  immerse  the  whole
body,  but  a  vessel,  or  labrum,  containing  cold
water  for  pouring  over  the  head.  Compare  also
Plin.  Ep.  xvii.  2.

+  According  to  Sir  W.  Gell  {I.  c.)  with  seats,
which  he  interprets  scholae,  for  the  accommodation
of  persons  waiting  an  opportunity  to  bathe  —  but
a  passage  of  Vitmvius  (v.  10),  hereafter  quoted,
seems  to  contradict  this  use  of  the  tenn  —  and
seats  were  placed  in  tha  frigidarium  adjoining,  for
the  express  purpose  of  accommodating  those  vho
were  cbli^red  to  wait  for  thcii-  turn.


190  BALNEAE.

construction,   and   the   use   of  the
order,  undoubtedly  belong.


simple   Doric
The  bath  itself,  into


which  the  water  still  continues  to  flow  from  a
neighbouring  spring,  is  placed  under  the  alcove,
and  the  two  doors  on  each  side  opened  into  small
chambers,  which  probably  served  as  apodyteria.
It  is  still  to  be  seen  in  the  gardens  of  the  Villa
Caposeli,  at  Mola  di  Gaeta,  the  site  of  the  ancient
Formiae.

In  the  cold  bath  of  Pompeii  the  water  ran  into
the  basin  through  a  spout  of  bronze,  and  was
carried  off  again  through  a  conduit  on  the  opposite
side.  It  was  also  furnished  with  a  waste-pipe
under  the  margin  to  prevent  it  from  running  over.
No.  11  is  a  small  chamber  on  the  opposite  side  of
the  frigidarium,  Avhich  might  have  served  for
shaving  {tonstrina\  or  for  keeping  unguents  or
strigiles;  and  from  the  side  of  the  frigidarium,  the
bather,  who  intended  to  go  through  the  process  of
warm  bathing  and  sudation,  entered  into  (12)  the
tepidarium.

This  chamber  did  not  contain  water  either  at
Pompeii  or  at  the  baths  of  Hippias,  but  was  merely
heated  with  warm  air  of  an  agreeable  temperatiu:e
in  order  to  prepare  the  body  for  the  great  heat  of
the  vapoiu-  and  warm  baths,  and,  upon  returning,
to  obviate  the  danger  of  a  too  sudden  transition  to
the  open  air.  In  the  baths  at  Pompeii  this  chamber
served  likewise  as  an  apodyteriwn  for  those  who
took  the  warm  bath  ;  for  which  purpose  the  fit-
tings up  are  evidently  adapted,  the  walls  being  di-
vided into  a  number  of  separate  compartments  or
recesses  for  receiving  the  garments  when  taken  off,
by  a  series  of  figures  of  the  kind  called  Atlantes  or
Telamones,  which  project  from  the  walls,  and  sup-
port a  rich  cornice  above  them.  One  of  these  di-
visions, with  the  Telumones^  is  represented  in  the
article  Atlantes.  Two  bronze  benches  were  also
found  in  the  room,  Avhich  was  heated  as  well  by
its  contiguity  to  the  hypocaust  of  the  adjoining
chamber,  as  by  a  brazier  of  bronze  (/oculus),  in
which  the  charcoal  ashes  were  still  remaining
when  the  excavation  was  made.  A  representation
of  it  is  given  in  the  annexed  woodcut.  Its  whole
length  was  seven  feet,  and  its  breadth  two  feet  six
inches.

In  addition  to  this  service  there  can  be  little
doubt  that  this  apartment  was  used  as  a  depository
for  unguents  and  a  room  for  anointing  (aXenrr-f^ipiov,


BALNEAE.

ufictuanum,  elaeothesium),  the  proper  place  for  which
is  represented  by  Lucian  (/.  c.)  as  adjoining  to  the


tepidarium,  and  by  Pliny  (Ep.  ii.  1 7)  as  adjoining
to  the  hypocaust ;  and  for  which  purpose  some  o1
the  niches  between  the  Telamones  seem  to  be  pe-
culiarly adapted.  In  the  larger  establishments  a
separate  chamber  was  allotted  to  these  purposes,
as  may  be  seen  by  referring  to  the  drawing  taken
from  the  Thermae  of  Titus  ;  but  as  there  is  no
other  spot  within  the  circuit  of  the  Porapeian  baths
which  could  be  applied  in  the  same  manner,  we
may  safely  conclude  that  the  inhabitants  of  this
city  were  anointed  in  the  tepidarium  ;  which  ser-
vice was  perfoimed  by  slaves  called  undores  and
aliptac.  [Aliptae.]  For  this  purpose  the  coniraon
people  used  oil,  sometimes  scented  ;  but  the  more
wealthy  classes  indulged  in  the  greatest  extrava-
gance with  regard  to  their  perfumes  and  unguents.
These  they  either  procured  from  the  elaeothesium  of
the  baths,  or  brought  with  them  in  small  glass
bottles  ampullae  oleariae  ;  hundreds  of  which  have
been  discovered  in  different  excavations  made  in
various  parts  of  Italy.  [Ampulla.]  The  fifth
book  of  Athenaeus  contains  an  ample  treatise  upon
the  numerous  kinds  of  ointments  used  by  the
Romans  ;  which  subject  is  also  fully  treated  by
Pliny  {H.  N.  xiii.).

Caligula  is  mentioned  by  Suetonius  {Cal  37)  aa
having  invented  a  new  luxury  in  the  use  of  the
bath,  by  perfuming  the  water,  whether  hot  or  cold,
by  an  infusion  of  precious  odours,  or  as  Pliny  states
{l.  c),  by  anointing  the  walls  with  valuable  un-
guents ;  a  practice,  he  adds,  which  was  adopted  by
one  of  the  slaves  of  Nero,  that  the  luxury  might
not  be  confined  to  royalty  {ne  principale  videatur
hoc  bonum).

From  this  apartment,  a  door,  which  closed  by  its
own  weight,  to  prevent  the  admission  of  the  cooler
air,  opened  into  No.  13,  the  thermal  chamber  or
concamerata  sudatio  of  Vitruvius  (v.  11);  and
which,  in  exact  conformity  with  his  directions,
contains  the  warm  bath — balneum^  ov  calda  lavatio
(Vitruv.  I.  a),  at  one  of  its  extremities  ;  and  the
semicircular  vapour-bath,  or  Laconicum  at  the
other  ;  whilst  the  centre  space  between  the  two
ends,  termed  sudatio  by  Vitruvius  (l.  c),  and  stu/a-
toriwn  by  Seneca,  is  exactly  twice  the  length  of  its
width,  according  to  the  directions  of  Vitruvius.
The  object  in  leaving  so  raikh  space  between  the
warm  bath  and  the  Laconicum  was  to  give  room
for  the  gymnastic  exercises  of  the  persons  within
the  chamber,  who  were  accustomed  to  promote  a
full  flow  of  perspiration  by  ra])id  movements  of  the
arms  and  legs,  or  by  lifting  weights.  ( Juv.  Sat.  vi.
420.)  In  larger  establishments  the  conveniences
contained  in  this  apartment  occupied  two  separate
cells,  one  of  which  was  appropriated  to  the  warm
bath,  which  apartment  was  then  termed  caldariutn,
cella  caldaria,  or  balneum,  and  the  other  comprised
the  Laconicum  and  sudatory-  —  Laconicum  suda-
tionesque  (Vitruv.  /.  c),  which  part  alone  was  then
designated  under  the  name  of  concamerata  sudatio.


BALNEAE.

Tins  distribution  is  represented  in  the  painting  on
thv  walls  of  the  Thermae  of  Titus  ;  in  which  there
is  also  another  peculiarity  to  be  observed,  viz.,  the
}>assage  of  communication  (intercapedo)  between  the
two  chambers,  the  flooring  of  which  is  suspended
over  the  hypocaust.  Lucian  informs  us  of  the  use
for  which  this  compartment  was  intended,  where
}ic  mentions  as  one  of  the  characteristic  conveni-
ences in  the  baths  of  Hippias,  that  the  bathers  need
not  retrace  their  steps  through  the  whole  suite  of
apartments  by  which  they  had  entered,  but  might
return  from  the  thermal  chamber  by  a  shorter  cir-
cuit tlirough  a  room  of  gentle  temperature  (5i*  r]p4ij.a
^epfxov  oiKTjfJiaTos,  I.  c.  7),  which  communicated
inunediately  with  the  frigidarium.

T\\Q  warm- water  bath,  which  is  termed  calda
I'lV'iiio  by  Vitruvius  (/.  c),  halineum  by  Cicero
( ./'/  Alt.  ii.  3),  piscina  or  calida  piscina  by  Pliny
{F.p,  ii.  17)  and  Suetonius  {Nero,  27),  as  well
as  labrum  (Cic.  Ad  Fam.  xiv.  16),  and  solium  by
Cicero  (m  Pison.  27),  appears  to  have  been  a  capa-
cious marble  vase,  sometimes  standing  upon  the
W  )or,  like  that  in  the  picture  from  the  Thermae  of
Titus  ;  and  sometimes  either  partly  elevated  above
the  floor,  as  it  was  at  Pompeii,  or  entirely  sunk  into
it,  as  directed  by  Vitruvius  (v.  10).  His  words  are
those: — "  The  bath  {labrum)  should  be  placed
underneath  the  window,  in  such  a  position  that  the
persons  who  stand  around  may  not  cast  their  sha-
dows upon  it.  The  platform  which  surrounds  the
ball)  {scholae  lahrorum)  must  be  sufficiently  spa-
cious to  admit  of  the  surrounding  observers,  who
are  waiting  for  their  turn,  to  stand  there  without
crowding  each  other.  The  width  of  the  passage  or
chamiel  {alveus),  which  lies  between  the  parapet
(/>/uteus),  and  the  -wall,  should  not  be  less  than  six
feet,  so  that  the  space  occupied  by  the  seat  and  its
step  below  {pulvinus  et  gradus  inferior)  may  take
ofl^just  two  feet  from  the  whole  width."  The  sub-
joined plans  given  by  Marini,  will  explain  his
meaning.


EALNEAE.


ua


TH


sina


A,  labrum,  or  bath  ;  B,  schola,  or  platform ;  C,
pfumib',  or  parapet  ;  D,  alveus,  passage  between  the
pluteus  and  wall  ;  F,  pulvinus,  or  seat  ;  and  E,  the


lower  step  (gradus  inferior),  which  together   take
up  two  feet.

The  warm  bath  at  Pompeii  is  a  square  basin  of
marble,  and  is  ascended  from  the  outside  by  two
steps  raised  from  the  floor,  which  answered  to  the
parapet  or  pluteus  of  Vitruvius.  Around  ran  a
narrow  platform  {schda) ;  but  which,  in  consequence
of  the  limited  extent  of  the  building,  would  not  ad-
mit of  a  seat  {pulvinus)  all  around  it.  On  the  in-
terior another  step  allowed  the  bathers  to  sit  down
and  wash  themselves.  The  annexed  section  will
render  this  easily  intelligible.


A,  labrum  ;  B,  scliola;  C,  pluieus  ;  D,  the  step
on  the  inside,  probably  called  solium.  (Fulv.  Ur-
sinus,  Append,  in  Ciaccon.  de  Tridin.)  In  the
women's  baths  of  the  opulent  and  luxurious  capital,
the  solia  were  sometimes  made  of  silver.  (Plin.
H.  N.  xxxiii.  12.  s.  54.)

Wq  now  turn  to  the  opposite  extremity  of  the
chamber  which  contains  the  Laoonicum  or  va-
pour bath,  so  called  because  it  was  the  custom  of
the  Lacedaemonians  to  strip  and  anoint  themselves
without  using  warm  water  after  the  perspiration
produced  by  their  .athletic  exercises.  (Dion  Cass,  liii,
p.  516  ;  comp.  Martial.  Epig.  vi.  42.  16.)  It  is
termed  assa  by  Cicero  {^Ad  Quint.  Frat.  iii.  1.  §  1),
from  &^o},  to  dry  ;  because  it  produced  perspira-
tion by  means  of  a  dry,  hot  atmosphere  ;  which
Celsus  (iii.  cap.  ult.)  consequently  terms  sudatione.
assas,  '*  dry  sweating,"  which  he  afterwards  adds
(xi.  17)  was  produced  by  dry  warmth  {colore
sicco).  It  was  called  by  the  Greeks  irvpiairi}piou
(Voss.  Lea'.  Etym.  s.  v.)  from  the  fire  of  the  hypo-
caust, which  was  extended  under  it ;  and  hence  by
Alexander  Aphrodis.  ^riphv  ^o\6v,  "  a  dry  vaulted
chamber."

Vitruvius  says  that  its  width  should  be  equal


to  its  height,  reckoning  from  the  flooring  (suspen-
sura)  to  the  bottom  of  the  thole  (imam  curvaturam.


]92


ralnkae:


hemispluterii).  over  the  centre  of  which  an  orifice  is
left  from  which  a  hronze  shield  (dipeus)  was  sus-
pended. This  regulated  the  temperature  of  the
apartment,  being  raised  or  lowered  by  means  of
chains  to  which  it  was  attached.  The  form  of  the
cell  was  required  to  be  circular,  in  order  that  the
warm  air  from  the  hj'^pocaust  might  encircle  it  with
greater  facility.  (Vitruv.  v.  10.)  In  accordance
with  these  rules  is  the  Laconicum  at  Pompeii,  a
section  of  which  is  given  in  the  previous  page,
the  clipeus  only  being  added  in  order  make  the
meaning  more  clear.

A,  The  suspended  pavement,  suspensura  ;  B.  the
junction  of  the  hemisphaerium  with  the  side  walls,
ima  curvatura  hemisphaerii ;  C,  the  shield,  clipeus  ;
E  and  F,  the  chains  by  which  it  is  raised  and
lowered  ;  D,  a  labrum^  or  flat  marble  vase,  into
which  a  supply  of  water  was  introduced  by  a  single
pipe  running  through  the  stem.  Its  use  is  not  ex-
actly ascertained  in  this  place,  nor  whether  the
water  it  contained  was  hot  or  cold.

It  would  not  be  proper  to  dismiss  this  account
of  the  Laconicum  without  alluding  to  an  opinion
adopted  by  some  writers,  amongst  whom  are  Gali-
ano  and  Cameron,  that  the  Laconicum  was  merely
a  small  cupola,  with  a  metal  shield  over  it,  rising
above  the  flooring  (suspensura)  of  the  chamber,  in
the  manner  represented  by  the  drawing  from  the
Thermae  of  Titus,  which  drawing  has,  doubtless,
given  rise  to  the  opinion.  But  it  will  be  observed
that  the  design  in  question  is  little  more  than  a
section,  and  that  the  artist  may  have  resorted  to
the  expedient  in  order  to  show  the  apparatus  be-
longing to  one  end  of  the  chamber,  as  is  frequently
done  in  similar  plans,  where  any  part  which  re-
quired to  be  represented  upon  a  larger  scale  is  in-
serted in  full  development  within  the  general  sec-
tion ;  for  in  none  of  the  numerous  baths  which
have  been  discoA'ered  in  Italy  or  elsewhere,  even
where  the  pavements  were  in  a  perfect  state,  has
any  such  contrivance  been  observed.  Besides  which
it  is  manifest  that  the  clipeus  could  not  be  raised
or  lowered  in  the  design  alluded  to,  seeing  that  the
chains  for  that  purpose  could  not  be  reached  in  the
situation  represented,  or,  if  attained,  could  not  be
handled,  as  they  must  be  red-hot  from  the  heat  of
the  hypocaust  into  which  they  were  inserted.  In
addition  to  which,  the  remains  discovered  tally  ex-
actly with  the  directions  of  Vitruvius,  which  this
does  not.

After  having  gone  through  the  regular  course  of
perspiration,  the  Romans  made  use  of  instruments


called  strigiles  (or  strigles^  Juv.  Sat.  iii.  263),  to
scranc  off  the  perspiration,  much  in  the  same  way
as  we  are  accustomed  to  scrape  the  sweat  off  a
hcree  with  a  piece  of  iron  hoop,  after  he  has  nm  a


BALNEAE.

heat,  or  comes  in  from  violent  exercise.  These  in-
struments, some  specimens  of  which  are  represented
in  the  previous  woodcut,  and  many  of  which  have
been  discovered  amongst  the  ruins  of  the  various
baths  of  antiquity,  were  made  of  bone,  bronze,  iron,
and  silver  ;  all  corresponding  in  form  with  the
epithet  of  Martial,  "  curvo  distringere  ferro "
{Epig.  xiv.  51).  The  poorer  classes  were  obliged
to  scrape  themselves,  but  the  more  wealthy  took
their  slaves  to  the  baths  for  the  purpose  ;  a  fact
which  is  elucidated  by  a  curious  story  related  by
Spartianus  {Hadrian,  c.  17).

The  strigil  was  by  no  means  a  blunt  instniment,
consequently  its  edge  was  softened  by  the  applica-
tion of  oil,  which  was  dropped  upon  it  from  a  small
vessel  called  ijuUus*,  which  had  a  narrow  neck,  so
as  to  discharge  its  contents  drop  by  drop,  from
whence  the  name  is  taken.  A  representation  of  a
guttus  is  given  in  the  preceding  woodcut.  Augus-
tus is  related  to  have  suffered  from  an  over-violent
use  of  the  strigil.  (Suet,  ^w^.  30.)  Invalids  and
persons  of  a  delicate  habit  made  use  of  sponges,
which  Plinj^  says  answered  for  towels  as  well  as
strigils.  They  were  finally  dried  with  towels
(lintea),  and  anointed.  (Juv.  Sat.  iii.  262  ;  Apu-
leius.  Met  ii.  ;  Plin.  //.  A^.  xxxi.  11.  s.  47.)

The  common  people  were  supplied  with  these
necessaries  in  the  baths,  but  the  more  wealthy  car-
ried their  own  with  tliem  (Pers.  Sat.  v.  126).
Lucian  (Leaiph.  vol.  ii.  p.  320.  ed.  Reiz.)  adds  also
soap  and  towels  to  the  list.

After  the  operation  of  scraping  and  rubbing  diy,
they  retired  into,  or  remained  in,  the  tepidarium-
until  they  thought  it  prudent  to  encoxmter  the
open  air.  But  it  does  not  appear  to  have  been
customary  to  bathe  in  the  water,  when  there  was
any,  which  was  not  the  case  at  Pompeii,  nor  in  the
baths  of  Hippias  (Lucian,  I.  c),  either  of  the  tepi-
darium  ov  frigidarium  ;  the  temperature  only  of  the
atmosphere  in  these  two  chambers  being  of  conse-
quence to  break  the  sudden  change  from  the  ex-
treme of  hot  to  cold.  a

Returning  now  back  into  the  frigidarium  (8),  «
which,  according  to  the  directions  of  Vitruvius  (v.  ^1
11),  has  a  passage  (14)  communicating  with  the
mouth  of  the  furnace  (e),  which  is  also  seen  in  the
next  woodcut  under  the  boilers,  called /)rae/w/7?m;«,
propnigeum  (  Plin.  jG^jo.ii.  17),  Tpu7rj/t76io»' (from  7rp((,
before,  and  ■nvvy^vs,  a  furnace),  and  passing  down:
that  passage,  we  reach  the  chamber  (15)  into  which
the  pmefurnium  projects,  and  which  has  also  an
entrance  from  the  street  at  B.  It  was  appropri-
ated to  the  use  of  those  who  had  charge  of  the
fires  {fomacatores).  There  are  two  staircases  in  ,||
it  ;  one  of  which  leads  to  the  roof  of  tlie  baths,  ill
and  the  other  to  the  coppers  which  contained
the  water.  Of  these  there  were  three :  one  of
which  contained  the  hot  water  —  caldarium  (so.
vas,  or  ahenum)  ;  the  second  the  tepid  —  tepida-
rium  ;  and  the  last  the  cold  — frigidarium.  The
warm  water  was  introduced  into  the  warm  bath  by
means  of  a  conduit  pipe,  marked  on  the  plan,
and  conducted  through  the  wall.  Underneath  the
caldarium  was  placed  the  furnace  (jTumus,  Hot.  Ep.
i.  11.  12),  which  served  to  heat  the  water,  and
give  out  streams  of  wann  air  into  the  hollow  cells
of  the   /iyj>ocaustum    (from    inrh   and   Kaiw).     It


*  It  was  also  called  ampuUa^  X-fjKvOos^  ixvpo-
O-fiKiot'y  i\aio<p6pov.  (Ruperti,  Ad  Juv.  Sat.  iU.
262.)     [Ampulla.]


I


BALNEAE.

passed  from  the  furnace  under  the  first  and  last

I  of  the  caldrons  hj  two  flues,  which  are  marked
upon  the  plan.     These  coppers  were  constructed
in  the  same  manner  as  is  represented  in  the  en-
graving from  the  Thennae  of  Titus  ;  the  one  con-
taining hot  water  being  placed  immediately  over
the  furnace  ;  and,  as  the  water  was   drawn  out
from  thence,  it  was  supplied  from  the  next,  the
tepidarium,  which  was  already  considerably  heated
from  its  contiguity  to  the  furnace  and  the  hypo-
caust  below  it,  so  that  it  supplied  the  deficiency  of
the  former  without  materially  diminishing  its  tem-
perature ;  and  the  vacuum  in  this  last  was  again
filled  up  from  the  farthest  removed,  which  contained
the  cold  water  received  directly  from  the  square
H  reservoir  seen  behind  them  ;   a   principle  which
I  has  at  length  been  introduced  into  the  modern
^  bathing  establishments,  where  its  efficacy,  both  in
savhig  time  and  expense,  is  full^y  acknowledged.
'   The  boilers  themselves  no  longer  remain,  but  the
impressions  which  they  have  left  in  the  mortar  in
which  they  were  embedded  are  clearly  visible,  and
I    enable  us  to  ascertain  their  respective  positions  and
I    dimensions,  the  first  of  which,  the  caldcu-itcm,  is
'    represented  in  the  annexed  cut.


Behmd  the  coppers  there  is  another  corridor  ( 1 G),
leading  into  the  court  or  atrium  (17)  appropriated
to  the  servants  of  the  bath,  and  which  has  also  the
convenience  of  an  immediate  communication  with
the  street  by  the  door  at  C.

We  now  proceed  to  the  adjoining  set  of  baths,
which  were  assigned  to  the  women.  The  entrance
is  by  the  door  A,  which  conducts  into  a  small
vestibule  (18),  and  thence  into  the  apodyterium
(19),  which,  like  the  one  in  the  men's  bath,  has  a
seat  {■pnhmius  et gradus)  on  either  side  built  up
against  the  wall.  This  opens  upon  a  cold  bath
(20),  answering  to  the  7iatatio  of  the  other  set,  but
of  much  smaller  dimensions,  and  probably  similar  to
the  one  denominated  by  Pliny  (/.  c.)  puteus.  There
are  four  steps  on  the  inside  to  descend  into  it.
Opposite  to  the  door  of  entrance  into  the  apodyte-
rium is  another  doorway  which  leads  to  the  tepi-
darium  (21),  which'  also  communicates  with  the
thermal  chamber  (22),  on  one  side  of  which  is  a
wann  bath  in  a  square  recess,  and  at  the  further
extremity  the  Laconicum  with  its  labrum.  The
floor  of  this  chamber  is  suspended,  and  its  walls
perforated  for  flues,  like  the  corresponding  one  in
the  men's  baths.

The  comparative  smallness  and  inferiority  of  the
fittings-up  in  this  suite  of  baths  has  induced  some
Italian  antiquaries  to  throw  a  doubt  upon  the  fact
of  their  being  assigned  to  the  women  ;  and  amongst


BALNEAE.  193

these  the  Abbate  Torio  {Plan  de  Pompeii)  ingeni-
ously suggests  that  they  were  an  old  set  of  baths,
to  which  the  larger  ones  were  subsequently  added
when  they  became  too  small  for  the  increasing
wealth  and  population  of  the  city.  But  the  story,
already  quoted,  of  the  consul's  wife  who  turned  the
men  out  of  their  baths  at  Teanum  for  her  con-
venience, seems  sufficiently  to  negative  such  a  sup-
position ;  and  to  prove  that  the  inhabitants  of
ancient  Italy,  if  not  more  selfish,  were  certainly
less  gallant  than  their  successors.  In  addition  to
this,  Vitruvius  expressly  enjoins  that  the  baths  of
the  men  and  v/omen,  though  separate,  should  bo
contiguous  to  each  other,  in  order  that  they  might
be  supplied  from  the  same  boilers  and  hypocaust
(v.  10)  ;  directions  which  are  here  fulfilled  to  the
letter,  as  a  glance  at  the  plan  will  demonstrate.

It  does  not  come  within  the  scope  of  this  article
to  investigate  the  source  from  whence,  or  the  man-
ner in  which,  the  water  was  supplied  to  the  baths
of  Pompeii.  But  it  may  be  remarked  that  the
suggestion  of  Mazois,  who  wrote  just  after  the  ex-
cavation was  commenced,  and  which  has  been
copied  from  him  by  the  editor  of  the  volumes  on
Pompeii  published  by  the  Society  for  the  Diffu-
sion of  Useful  Knowledge,  was  not  confirmed  by
the  excavation  ;  and  those  who  are  interested  in  the
matter  may  consult  the  fourth  appendix  to  the
Pliin  de  Pompeii,  by  the  Abbate  lorio.

Notwithstanding  the  ample  account  which  has
been  given  of  the  plans  and  usages  respecting  baths
in  general,  something  yet  remains  to  be  said  about
that  particular  class  denominated  Thermae  ;  of
Avhich  establishments  the  baths  in  fact  constituted
the  smallest  part.  The  thermae,  properly  speaking,
were  a  Roman  adaptation  of  the  Greek  gymnasium
[Gymnasium],  or  palaestra,  as  described  by  Vitru-
vius (v.  11)  ;  both  of  which  contained  a  system  of
baths  in  conjunction  with  conveniences  for  athletic
games  and  youthful  sports,  exedrae  in  which  the
rhetoricians  declaimed,  poets  recited,  and  philoso-
phers lectured  —  as  well  as  porticoes  and  vestibules
for  the  idle,  and  libraries  for  the  learned.  They
were  decorated  with  the  finest  objects  of  art,  both
in  painting  and  sculpture,  covered  with  precious
marbles,  and  adorned  with  iountains  <ind  shaded
walks  and  ])lantations,  like  the  groves  of  the  Aca-
demy. It  may  be  said  that  they  began  and  ended
with  the  Empire,  for  it  was  not  until  the  time  of
Augustus  that  these  magnificent  structures  were
commenced.  M.  Agrippa  is  the  first  who  afforded
these  luxuries  to  his  countrymen,  by  bequeathing
to  them  the  thermae  and  gardens  which  he  had
erected  in  the  Campus  Martins.  (Dion  Cass.  liv.
vol.  i.  p.  759  ;  Plin.  //.  A^.  xxxvi.  25.  s.  64.)  The
Pantheon,  now  existing  at  Rome,  served  originally
as  a  vestibule  to  these  baths  ;  and,  as  it  was  con-
sidered too  magnificent  for  the  purpose,  it  is  sup-
posed that  Agrippa  added  the  portico  and  conse-
crated it  as  a  temple.  It  appears  from  a  passage
in  Sidonius  Apollinaris  {Carm.  xxiii.  '^Qo)^  that
the  whole  of  these  buildings,  together  with  the
adjacent  Thermae  Neronianae,  remained  entire  in
the  year  A.  d.  AQQ.  Little  is  now  left  beyond  a
few  fragments  of  ruins,  and  the  Pantheon.  The
example  set  by  Agrippa  was  followed  by  Nero,
and  afterwards  by  Titus ;  the  niins  of  whose
thermae  are  still  visible,  covering  a  vast  extent,
partly  under  ground  and  partly  above  the  Esquiline
Hill.  Thermae  were  also  erected  by  Trajan,  Ca-
racalla,  and  Diocletian,  of  the  two  last  of  which


194  BALNEAE.

ample  remains  still  exist ;  and  even  as  late  as  Con-
stantine,  besides  several  which  were  constructed
l)y  private  individuals,  P.  Victor  enumerates  six-
teen, and  Panvinus  {Lfrb.  Rom.  Descript.  p.  10(j)
has  added  four  more.

Previously  to  the  erection  of  these  establishments
for  the  use  of  the  population,  it  was  customary  for
those  who  sought  the  favour  of  the  people  to  give
them  a  day's  bathing  free  of  expense.  Thus,  ac-
cording to  Dion  Cassius  (xxxvii.  p.  143),  Faus-
tus,  the  son  of  Sulla,  furnished  warm  baths  and
oil  gratis  to  the  people  iox  one  day  ;  and  Augustus
on  one  occasion  furnished  warm  baths  and  barbers
to  the  people  for  the  same  period  free  of  expense
{Id.  liv.  p.  755),  and  at  another  time  for  a  whole
year  to  the  women  as  well  as  the  men.  {Id.  xlix.
p.  600.)  Hence  it  is  fair  to  infer  that  the  quadrans
paid  for  admission  into  the  balneae  was  not  exacted
at  the  thermae^  which,  as  being  the  works  of  the
emperors,  would  naturally  be  opened  with  imperial
generosity  to  all,  and  without  any  charge,  other-
wise the  whole  city  would  have  thronged  to  the
establishment  bequeathed  to  them  by  Agrippa ;
and  in  confirmation  of  this  opinion  it  may  be  re-
marked that  the  old  establishments,  which  were
probably  erected  by  private  enterprise  (comp.  Plin.
H.  N.  ix.  54.  8.  79),  were  termed  meritoriae.  (Plin.
Ep.  ii.  1 7.)  Most,  if  not  all,  of  the  other  regula-
tions previously  detailed  as  relating  to  the  economy
of  the  baths,  apply  equally  to  the  thermae  ;  but  it


BALNEAE.

is  to  these  establishments  especially  that  the  disso-
lute conduct  of  the  emperors,  and  other  luxurious
indulgences  of  the  people  in  general,  detailed  in
the  compositions  of  the  satirists  and  later  writers,
must  be  considered  to  refer.

Although  ccmsiderable  remains  of  the  Roman
thermae  are  still  visible,  yet,  from  the  very  ruui-
ous  state  in  which  they  are  found,  we  are  far  from
being  able  to  arrive  at  the  same  accurate  know-
ledge of  their  component  parts,  and  the  usages  to
which  they  were  applied,  as  has  been  done  with
respect  to  the  balneae;  or  indeed  to  discover  a
satisfactory  mode  of  reconciling  their  constructive
details  with  the  description  which  Vitruvius  has
left  of  the  baths  appertaining  to  a  Greek  palaestra,
or  to  the  description  given  by  Lucian  of  the  baths
of  Hippias.  All,  indeed,  is  doubt  and  guess-work  ;
the  learned  men  who  have  pretended  to  give  an
account  of  their  contents  differing  in  almost  all  the
essential  particulars  from  one  another.  And  yet
the  great  similarity  in  the  ground-plan  of  the  three
which  still  remain  cannot  fail  to  convince  even  a
superficial  observer  that  they  were  all  constructed
upon  a  similar  plan.  Not,  however,  to  dismiss
the  subject  without  enabling  our  readers  to  form
something  like  a  general  idea  of  these  enormous
edifices,  which,  for  their  extent  and  magnificence,
have  been  likened  to  provinces  —  {in  modum  proviu'
ciarum  exstructae,  Amm.  Marc.  xvi.  6)  —  a  ground-
plan  is  annexed  of  the  Thermae  of  Caracalla,  which


I


BALNEAE.

are  the  best  preserved  amongst  those  remaining,
and  which  were  perhaps  more  splendid  than  all
the  rest.  Those  apartments,  of  which  the  use
is  ascertained  with  the  appearance  of  probability,
are  alone  marked  and  explained.  The  dark  parts
represent  the  remains  still  visible,  the  open  lines
are  restorations.

A,  Portico  fronting  the  street  made  by  Caracalla
■when  he  constructed  his  thermae.  —  B,  Separate
bathing-rooms,  either  for  the  use  of  the  common
people,  or  perhaps  for  any  persons  who  did  not
wish  to  bathe  in  public.  —  C,  Apodyteria  attached
to  them. — D,  D,  and  E,  E,  the  porticoes.  (Vitruv.
V.  II.) — F,  F,  Exedrae,  in  which  there  were  seats
for  the  philosophers  to  hold  their  conversations.
(Vitruv.  ^.  c. ;  Cic.  De  Oral.  ii.  5.)  —  G,  Hypae-
thrae,  passages  open  to  the  air  —  Hypaethrae  am-
bulationes  quas  Graeci  TrcpiSpo/xiSas,  nostri  xystos
appellant.  (Vitruv.  I.  c.)  —  H,  H,  Stadia  in  the
palaestra  —  quadrata  sive  ohlonga.  (Vitruv,  I.  c.)
• — I,  I,  Possibly  schools  or  academies  where  public
lectures  were  delivered.  — J,  J,  and  K,  K,  Rooms
appropriated  to  the  servants  of  the  baths  (balnea-
tores).  In  the  latter  are  staircases  for  ascending
to  the  principal  reservoir.  —  L,  Space  occupied  by
walks  and  shrubberies  —  amhulationes  inter  pla-
ianones.  (Vitruv.  I.  c.)  —  M,  The  arena  or  stadium
in  which  the  youth  performed  their  exercises,  with
seats  for  the  spectators  (Vitruv.  I.  c),  called  the
theatridium.  —  N,  N,  Reservoirs,  with  upper  stories,
sectional  elevations  of  which  are  given  in  the  two
subsequent  woodcuts.  —  0,  Aqueduct  which  sup-
plied the  baths.  —  P,  The  cistern  or  piscina.  This
external  range  of  buildings  occupies  one  mile  in
circuit.

We  now  come  to  the  arrangement  of  the  interior,
for  which  it  is  very  difficult  to  assign  satisfactory
destinations.  — Q,  represents  the  principal  entrances,
of  which  there  were  eight.  —  R,  the  natatio^  piscina,
or  cold-water  bath,  to  which  the  direct  entrance
from  the  portico  is  by  a  vestibule  on  either  side
marked  S,  and  which  is  surrounded  by  a  set  of
chambers  which  served  most  probably  as  rooms  for
undressing  (apodyteria),  anointmg  {unctuaria),  and
stations  for  the  capsarii.  Those  nearest  to  the
peristyle  were  perhaps  the  conisteria,  where  the
powder  was  kept  which  the  wrestlers  used  in  order
to  obtain  a  firmer  grasp  upon  their  adversaries  :  —

"  Ille  cavis  hausto  spargit  me  pulvere  palm  is,
Inque  vicera  fulvae  tactu  flavescit  arenae."
(Ovid,  Met.  ix.  35.)

(See  also  Salmas.  Ad  Tertull.  Pall  p.  217,  and
Mercurialis,  De  Art.  Gymn.  i.  8.)  The  inferior
quality  of  the  ornaments  which  these  apartments
have  had,  and  the  staircases  in  two  of  them,  afford
evidence  that  they  were  occupied  by  menials.
T,  is  considered  to  be  the  tepidariwn,  with  four
warm  baths  (u,  u,  u,  u)  taken  out  of  its  four  angles,
and  two  labra  on  its  two  flanks.  There  are  steps
for  descending  into  the  baths,  in  one  of  which
traces  of  the  conduit  aie  still  manifest.  Thus  it
would  appear  that  the  centre  part  of  this  apartment
served  as  a  tepidarium,  having  a  balneum  or  caMa
lavatio  in  four  of  its  corners.  The  centre  part,  like
that  also  of  the  preceding  apartment,  is  supported
"by  eight  immense  columns.

The  apartments  beyond  this,  which  are  too  much
dilapidated  to  be  restored  with  any  degree  of  cer-
tainty, contained  of  course  the  laconicum  and
sudatories,  for  which  the  round  chamber  W,  and


BALNEAE.


1.05


its  appurtenances  seem  to  be  adapted,  and  which
are  also  contiguous  to  the  reservoirs,  Z,  Z.  (Vitruv.
v.  11.)

e,  e,  probably  comprised  the  ephebia,  or  places
where  the  youth  were  taught  their  exercises,  with
the  appurtenances  belonging  to  them,  such  as  the
spkaeristerium  and  corycaeum.  The  first  of  these
takes  its  name  from  the  game  at  ball,  so  much  in
favour  with  the  Romans,  at  which  Martial's  friend
was  playing  when  the  bell  sounded  to  announce
that  the  water  was  ready.  (Mart.  xiv.  163.)  The
latter  is  derived  from  KcopvKos,  a  sack  (Hesych.
A\  v.),  which  was  filled  with  bran  and  olive  husks
for  the  young,  and  sand  for  the  more  robust,  and
then  suspended  at  a  certain  height,  and  swimg
backwards  and  forwards  by  the  players.  (Aulis,
De  Gymn.  Const,  p.  9 ;  Antill.  ap.  Oribas.  Coll.
Med.  6.)

The  chambers  also  on  the  other  side,  which  are
not  marked,  probably  served  for  the  exercises  of
the  palaestra  in  bad  weather.     (Vitruv.  v.  II.)

These  baths  contained  an  upper  story,  of  which
nothing  remains  beyond  what  is  just  sufficient  to
indicate  the  fact.  They  have  been  mentioned  and
eulogized  by  several  of  the  Latin  authors.  (Spar-
tian.  Caracall.  c.  9  ;  Lamprid.  Heliogab.  c.  17,
Alex.  Sever,  c.  25;  Eutropius,  viii.  II  ;  Olvmp.
apud  Phot,  p.  114,  ed.  Aug.  Vindel.  1601.)

It  will  be  observed  that  there  is  no  part  of  the
bathing  department  separated  from  the  rest,  which
could  be  assigned  for  the  use  of  the  women  ex-
clusively. From  this  it  must  be  inferred  either
that  both  sexes  always  bathed  together  promiscu-
ously in  the  thermae,  or  that  the  women  Avere
excluded  altogether  from  these  establishments,  and
only  admitted  to  the  balneae.

It  remains  to  explain  the  manner  in  which  tlie
immense  body  of  water  required  for  the  supply  of
a  set  of  baths  in  the  thermae  was  heated,  which
has  been  performed  very  satisfactorily  by  Piranesi
and  Cameron,  as  may  be  seen  by  a  reference  to  the
two  subjoined  sections  of  the  castellum  aqtiaeductus
and  piscina  belonging  to  the  Thermae  of  Caracalla.


A,  Arches  of  the  aquaeduct  which   conveyed

the   water   into   the  piscifia   B,  from   whence    it

flowed  into  the  upper  range  of  cells  through  the

aperture  at  C,  and  thence  again  descended  into

0  2


196


BALTEUS.


the  lower  ones  by  the  apertura  at  D,  which  were
placed  immediately  over  the  hypocaust  E  ;  the
praefiirnion  of  which  is  seen  in  the  transverse
section,  at  F  in  the  lower  cut.  There  were
thirtj-^-two  of  these  cells  arranged  in  two  rows
over  the  hypocaust,  sixteen  on  each  side,  and  all
communicating  with  each  other  ;  and  over  these  a
similar  number  similarly  arranged,  which  com-
municated with  those  below  by  the  aperture  at  D.
The  parting  walls  between  these  cells  were  like-
wise perforated  with  flues,  w^hich  served  to  dis-
seminate the  heat  all  around  the  whole  body  o'f
water.  When  the  water  was  sufficiently  warm,  it
was  turned  on  to  the  baths  through  pipes  conducted
likewise  through  flues  in  order  to  prevent  the  loss
of  temperature  during  the  passage,  and  the  vacuum
was  supplied  by  tepid  water  from  the  range  above,
which  was  replenished  from  the  piscina  ;  exactly
•upon  the  principle  represented  in  the  drawing  from
the  Thermae  of  Titus,  ingeniously  applied  upon  a
much  larger  scale.  (The  most  important  modern
Avorks  on  the  Roman  baths  are  the  following :
Winckelmann,  numerous  passages  in  his  works  ;
the  descriptions  of  the  Roman  baths  by  Cameron,
Lond.  1772,  and  Palladio  and  Scamozzi,  Vicenza,
1785  ;  Stieglitz,  Arch'doloijie  der  Baukunst,  vol.  ii.
p.  207,  &c. ;  Hirt,  Lehre  der  Geh'dtide,  p.  233,  &c.  ;
Wcinbrenner,  Entw'urfe  und  Erg'dnzungcn  antiker
Gebdude,  Carlsruhe,  1822,  part  1  ;  the  editors  of
Vitruvius,  especially  Schneider,  vol.  ii.  pp.  375 —
391  ;  for  the  baths  of  Pompeii,  Bechi,  Mas.  Bor-
bon.  vol.  ii.  pp.  49 — 52  ;  Gell,  Pompeiana ;  Pom-
peii in  the  Lib.  Ent.  Know.  ;  and  for  the  best
summary  of  the  whole  subject,  Becker,  Gallus,  vol.
ii.  p.  11,  &c.)  [A.  R.]

RA'LTEUS,  or  BA'LTEA  in  the  plural
(r^Xaixdiv).,  a  belt,  a  shoulder-belt,  a  baldric,
was  used  to  suspend  the  sword  ;  and,  as.  the
sword  commonly  hung  beside  the  left  hip,  its  belt
was  supported  by  the  right  shoulder,  and  passed
obliquely  over  the  breast,  as  is  seen  in  the  beauti-
ful cameo  here  introduced  from  the  Florentine
Museum.     lu  the  Homeric  times  the  Greeks  also


%^^i^^^'


used  a  belt  to  support  the  shield  ;  and  this  second
belt  lay  over  the  other,  and  was  larger  and  broader
than  it  {II.  xiv.  404 — 406)  ;  but  as  this  shield-
belt  was  found  inconvenient,  it  was  superseded  ])y
the  invention  of  the  Carian  oxavov  [Ci.iPEUS.]
The  veiy  early  disuse  of  the  shield-belt  accounts


BARBA.

for  the  fact,  that  this  part  of  the  ancient  armour
is  never  exhibited  in  paintings  or  sculpturets.  A
third  use  of  the  balteus  was  to  suspend  the  quiver,
and  sometimes  together  with  it  the  bow.  (Nemes.
Cyneg.  91.)  The  belt  was  usually  made  of  leather,
but  was  ornamented  with  gold,  silver,  and  precious
stones,  and  on  it  subjects  of  ancient  art  were  fre-
quently embroidered  or  embossed.  (Herod,  i.
171  ;  XP^^^^^  TeAa//,wv,  Od.  xi.  610;  ^aetj/Js,
//.  xii.  401  ;  Virg.  ^e«.v.  312.)  The  belts  of
the  Roman  emperors  were  also  magnificently
adorned,  and  we  learn  from  inscriptions  that  there
was  a  distinct  officer  —  the  haltearius  —  who  had
the  charge  of  them  in  the  imperial  palace.  (Tre-
bell.  Poll.  Gallien.  16.)

BA'LTEUS,  in  architecture.  Vitruvius  ap-
plies the  term  "  baltei "  to  the  bands  surrounding
the  volute  on  each  side  of  an  Ionic  capital.  {De
Arch.  iii.  5.  ed.  Schneider  ;  GenelJi,  Brief e  iiber
Vitniv.  ii.  p.  35.)  [Colujmna.]  Other  writers
apply  it  to  the  praecinctiones  of  an  amphitheatre.
(Calpurn.  Ed.  vii.  47  ;  Tertullian,  De  Spectac.  3  ;
Amphitheatkum).  In  the  amphitheatre  at
Verona  the  baltei  are  found  by  measurement  to  be
2|-  feet  high,  the  steps  which  they  enclose  being
one  foot  two  inches  high.  [J.  Y.]

BAPTISTE'RIUM.     [Balneum.]

BARATHRON  (^dpaOpou),  also  called  ORUG-
MA  (tjpu7jua),  was  a  deep  pit  at  Athens,  with
hooks  on  the  sides,  into  which  criminals  were  cnst.
It  was  situate  in  the  demus  KeipidSai.  It  is  men-
tioned as  early  as  the  Persian  wars,  and  continued
to  be  employed  as  a  mode  of  punishment  in  the
time  of  the  orators.  The  executioner  was  called
6  iirl  TO)  opvyfiart.  (Schol.  ad  Aristoph.  Pint.  431 ;
Harpocrat.  s.vv.;  Herod,  vii.  133  ;  Xen.  Hell.  i.  7.
§  21  ;  Lycurg.  c.  Leocrat.  p.  221  ;  Deinarch.  e.
Dem.  p.  49  ;  Wachsmuth,  Hellen.  Altertlmm^k.  vol.
ii.  p.  204, 2nd  edit.)  It  corresponded  to  the  Spartan
Ceadas.     [Ceadas.]

BARBA  (7rw7coi/,  yiveiov,  vir-qvi],  Aristoph.
Lysist.  1072),  the  beard.  The  fashions  which
have  prevailed  at  different  times,  and  in  different
countries,  with  respect  to  the  beard,  have  been  very
various.  The  most  refined  modern  nations  re
the  beard  as  an  encumbrance,  without  beauty
meaning  ;  but  the  ancients  generally  cultivated  i:
growth  and  form  with  special  attention  ;  and  tl:
the  Greeks  were  not  behind-hand  in  this,  an;
more  than  in  other  arts,  is  sufficiently  shown  by
the  statues  of  their  philosophers.  The  phrase
7ro}yccvorpo(pe7v,  which  is  applied  to  letting  the
beard  grow,  implies  a  positive  culture.  Generally
speaking,  a  thick  beard,  'ird!)ya}v  fiaOvs,  or  Saavs,
was  considered  as  a  mark  of  manliness.  The
Greek  philosophers  were  distinguished  by  their
long  beards  as  a  sort  of  badge,  and  hence  the  terra
which  Persius  (Sat.  iv.  1)  applies  to  Socrates
magister  harlxitus.  The  Homeric  heroes  were
bearded  men.  So  Agamemnon,  Ajax,  Menelaus,
Ulysses  (//.  xxii.  74,  xxiv.  516,  OaJ.  xvi.  176).
According  to  Chrysippus,  cited  by  Athenaeus
(xiii.  p.  5u5),  the  Greeks  wore  the  beard  till  the
time  of  Alexander  the  Great,  and  he  adds  that  the
first  man  who  was  shaven  was  called  ever  after
kJ/jo-tjv,  "  shaven"  (from  Kei'pw).  Plutarch  {The^,
c.  5)  says  that  the  reason  for  the  shaving  was  that
they  might  not  be  pulled  by  the  beard  in  battle.
The  custom  of  shaving  the  beard  continued  among
the  Greeks  till  the  time  of  Justir.ian,  and  diu'ing
that  period  even   the  statues  of  the  philosopher^


^i


BAKBA.

-'    'V  without  the  beard.     The  philosophers,  how-
,  generally  continued  the  old  badge  of  their
ssion,  and  their  ostentation  in  so  doing  gave
to  the  saying  that  a  long  beard  does  not  make
ilosophcr  (ncaywyoTpotpia  <pi\6(TO(pov  oi)  Troiei),
;i   .1  a  man,  whose  wisdom  stopped  with  his  beard,
v.iis  called  e/c  '7rd>'y(cvo';  aocpos.     (Compare  Gell.  ix.
■2  :  Quint,   xi.  1).     The  Romans  in   early  times
' •  the  beard  uncut,  as  we  learn  from  the  insult
■cd  by  the  Gaul  to  M.  Papirius  (Li v.  v.  41),
;!  1.1    from   Cicero   (Fro  Gael.  14)  ;  and  according
i,>  Varro  {Do  Re  Rzist.  ii.  11)  and  Pliny  (vii.  59),
till'  Roman  beards  were  not  shaven  till  B.  c.  300,
\,  lion  P.  Ticinius  IMaenas  brought  over  a  barber
1'(i!n  Sicily  ;  and  Pliny  adds,  that  the  first  Roman
v.iio  was  shaved    (rasus)  every  day   was   Scipio
AtVicanus.     His  custom,  however,  was   soon  fol-
lowed, and  shaving  became  a  regular  thing.    The
lower  orders,  then  as  now,  were  not  always  able  to
do  the  same,  and   hence  the  jeers  of  Martial  (vii.
95,  xii.  59).     In  the  later  times  of  the  republic
there  were  many  who  shaved  the  beard  only  par-
tially, and  trimmed  it,  so  as  to  give  it  an  orna-
mental form  ;  to  thcni  the  terms  bene  harbati  (Cic.
aifd.  ii.  10)  and  burbatuli  (Cic.  ad  Aft.  i.   14,  16,
Pro  Cael.  14)  are  applied.     When  in  mourning  all
the  higher  as  well  as  the  lower  orders  let  their
beards  grow.

In  the  general  way  in  Rome  at  this  time,  a
long  beard  (barba  prnmissa,  Liv.  xxvii.  34)  was
considered  a  mark  of  slovenliness  and  squalor.
The  censors,  L,  Veturius  and  P.  Licinius,  com-
pelled M.  Livius,  who  had  been  banished,  on  his
restoration  to  the  city,  to  be  shaved,  and  to  lay
aside  his  dirty  appearance  (tonderi  et  squalorem
dc.ponere)^  and  then,  but  not  till  then,  to  come  into
the  senate,  &c.  (Liv.  xxvii.  34.)  The  first  time  of
shaving  was  regarded  as  the  beginning  of  manhood,
and  the  day  on  which  this  took  place  was  cele-
brated as  a  festival.  (Juv.  Sat.  iii.  186.)  There
was  no  particular  time  fixed  for  this  to  be  done.
Usually,  however,  it  was  done  when  the  young
Roman  assumed  the  toga  virilis  (Suet.  Culig.  10).
Augustus  did  it  in  his  24th  year  ;  Caligula  in  his
20th.  The  hair  cut  off  on  such  occasions  was  con-
secrated to  some  god.  Thus  Nero  put  his  up  in  a
gold  box,  set  with  pearls,  and  dedicated  it  to  Jupi-
ter Capitolinus.    (Suet.  Ner.  12.)

With  the  emperor  Hadrian  the  beard  began  to
revive  (Dion  Cass.  Ixviii.  15).  Plutarch  says  that
the  emperor  wore  it  to  hide  some  scars  on  his  face.
The  practice  afterwards  became  common,  and  till
the  time  of  Constantino  the  Great,  the  emperors
appear  in  busts  and  coins  with  beards.  The  Ro-
mans let  their  beards  grow  in  time  of  mourning  ;
so  Augustus  did  (Suet,  Auy.  23)  for  the  death  of
Julius  Caesar,  and  the  time  when  he  had  it  shaved
off  he  made  a  season  of  festivity.  (Dion  Cass.
xlviii.  34  ;  comp.  Cic.  in  Verr.  ii.  12.)  The
Greeks,  on  the  other  hand,  on  such  occasions
shaved  the  beard  close.  Tacitus  (Germ.  c.  3)  says
that  the  Catti  let  their  hair  and  beard  grow,  and
would  not  have  them  cut  till  they  had  slain  an
enemy  (Compare  Becker,  Charikles,  vol.  ii.
p.  387,  &c.)

. .  Barbers.  The  Greek  name  for  a  bai'ber  was
Koupeus,  and  the  Latin  tonsor.  The  term  em-
ployed in  modem  European  languages  is  derived
from  the  low  Latin  barbatorius,  which  is  found  in
Petronius.  The  barber  of  the  ancients  was  a  far
more  important  personage  than  his  modern  rej)re-


BARBA.  197

sentative.     Men  had  not  often  the  necessary  im-
plements for  the  various  operations  of  the  toilet  ;
combs,  mirrors,  perfumes,  and  tools  for  clipping,
cutting,  shaving,  &c.     Accordingly  the  whole  pro-
cess had  to  be  performed  at  the  barber's,  and  hence
the  great  concourse  of  people  who  daily  gossipped
at  the  tonsirhia.,  or  barber's    shop.     Besides  the
duties   of  a   barber  and   hairdresser,   strictly   so
called,  the  ancient  tmisor  discharged  other  offices.
He  was  also  a  nail-parer.     He  was,  in  fact,  much
what  the  English  barber  was  when  he  extracted
teeth,  as  well  as  cut  and  dressed  hair.     People
who  kept  the  necessary   instruments  for  all  the
diiferent  operations,  generally  had  also  slaves  ex-
pressly for  the  purpose  of  performing  them.     The
business  of  the  barber  was  threefold.     First  there
was  the  cutting  of  hair :  hence  the  barbpr's  ques-
tion, TroJs  o-e   Keipco   (Pint.  De  Garrul.  13).     For
this  purpose  he  used  various  knives  of  different
sizes  and  shapes,  and  degrees  of  sharpness  :  hence
Lucian  (Adv.  Indoct  c.  29),  in  enumerating  the
apparatus   of  a   barber's    shop,   mentions  irKriQos
jj-axaipiSicov   (fidxaipa,  fxaxaipis,  Kovpis  are  used
also,  in   Latin  culter)  ;  but  scissors,  ^a\is,  SiirKy)
fxaxaipa  (Pollux,  ii.  32 ;  in  Latin  /or/ex,  aocicia)
were  used  too.     (Compare  Aristoph,  Acharn.  848  ;
Lucian,  Pis.  c.  46.)     'M.a.xaipa  was  the  usual  word.
Irregularity  and  unevenncss  of  the  hair  was  con-
sidered a  great  blemish,  as  appears  generally,  and
from  Horace  (Sat.'i.  3.  31,  ax\di  Epist.  i.  1.  94\  and
accordingly  after  the  hair-cutting  the  uneven  hairs
were  pulled  out  by  tweezers,  an  operation  to  which
Pollux    (ii.    34)  applies    the  term  TrapaAe^ecr^at.
So  the  hangers-on  on  great  men,  who  wished  to
look  young,  were  accustomed  to  pull  out  the  grey
hairs  for  them.     (Arist.  Eq.  908.)     This  was  con-
sidered, however,  a  mark  of  eflfeminacy.     (Gell.
vii.  12  ;  Cic.  Pro  Rose.  Com.  7.)     The  person  who
was  to  be  operated  on  by  the  barber  had  a  rough
cloth   (ufJioKu/ou,  involucre  in  Plautus,  Gapt.  ii.  2.
17)  laid  on  his  shoulders,  as  now,   to  keep  the
hairs  off  his  dress,  &c.     The  second  part  of  the
business    was    shaving    (7-adere,  rasitare,  ^vp(7i/).
This  was  done  with  a  ^vp6v,  a  novacula  (Lamprid.
Ileliog.  c.  31),  a  i-azor  (as  we,  retaining  the  Latin
root^   call  it),   which    he   kept   in  a  case,   ^i]KT],
|i;po0r}/c77,  |ypoSo/c7js,    "  a  razor- case  "   (Aristoph.
Thesm.  220  ;  Pollux,  ii.  32  ;  Petron.  94).     Some
who  would  not  submit  to  the  operation  of  the  razor
used  instead  some  powerful  depilatory  ointments,
or  plasters,    as  psi/othron.      (Plin.   xxxii.  10.  47  ;
acida  Greta,    Martial,  vi.    93.  9  ;    Venetum  lulum,
iii.  74  ;  dropaoc,  iii.  74  ;  x.  Qo.)    Stray  hairs  which
escaped  the    razor  were    pulled  out   with    small
pincers  or  tweezers  (volscUae,  Tpixo\d§iov).      The
third  part  of  the  barber's  work  was  to  pare  the
nails  of  the  hands,  an  operation  which  the  Greeks
expressed  by  the  words  ovyxi^eij/  and  aTrovi'xl^iftJ'
(Aristoph.    Eq.    706  ;   and    Schol.  ;   Theophrast,
G/iaract.  c.  26  ;   Pollux,  ii.   146).     The    instru-
ments used  for  this  purpose  were  called  oyvxio'TVp^c^
sc.  fiaxaipia.     (Pollux,  x.  140.)     This  practice  of
employing  a  man  expressly  to  pare  the  nails  ex-
plains Plautus's  humorous  description  of  the  miserly
Euclio  (Aulul.  ii.  4.  34)  :  —

"  Qnin  ipsi  quidem  tonsor  ungues  dempserat,
Collegit,  omnia  abstulit  praesegmina."

Even  to  the  miser  it  did  not  occur  to  pare  his  nails

himself,  and  save  the  money  he  would  have  to  pay;

but  only  to  collect  the  parings  in  hope  of  making

o  3


]9,«?


BASILICA.


sometliing  by  them.  So  Martial,  in  rallying  a  fop,
who  had  tried  to  dispense  with  the  barber's  ser-
vices, by  using  different  kinds  of  plasters,  &c.,
asks  him  {Epig.  iii.  74),  Quid  facieut  ungues'
What  will  your  nails  do  ?  How  will  you  get  your
nails  paved?  So  Tibullus  says  (i.  8.  11),  quid
(prodest)  uiumes  artificis  docta  subsecuisse  manu ;
irom  which  it  appears  that  the  person  addressed
Avas  in  the  habit  of  employing  one  of  the  more
fashionable  tonsors.  The  instruments  used  are
referred  to  by  Martial.  i^Epig.  xiv.  36,  Instru-
menia  tonsoria.)  [A.  A.]

BA'RBITOS,  or  BA'RBITON.     [Lyra.]
BASANOS  (fidiTavos).     [Tormextum.]
BASCA'NIA  (i8ao-/caWa).     [Fascinum.J
BASCx\UDA,  a  British   basket.     This  terra,
which  re^^iains  with  very  little  variation  in  the
Welsh   "  basgawd,""  and  the  English   "  basket,"
was  conveyed  to  Rome  together  with  the  articles
denoted  by  it.     We  find  it  used  by  Juvenal  (xii.
46)  and  by  Martial  (xiv.  99)  in  connections  which
imply  that  these  articles  were  held  in  much  esteem
by  the  luxurious  Romans.  [J.  Y.]

BASILEIA  (iSao-iAeta),  a  festival  celebrated
at  Lebadeia,  in  Boeotia,  in  honour  of  Trophonius,
who  had  the  surname  of  BaaiXcvs.  This  festival
was  also  called  Trophonia  —  Tpo(poi>uia  (Pollux,  i.
37)  ;  and  was  first  observed  under  the  latter  name
as  a  general  festival  of  the  Boeotians  after  the  battle
of  Leuctra.    (Diod.  xv.  53.)

BA'SILEUS  {^affiXevs).  [Rex.]
BASI  Lie  A  (sc.  aedes,  aula,  porticus  —  fiaffi-
\iKr},  also  regia,  Stat.  Silv.  i.  1.  30  ;  Suet,  Aug.
31),  a  building  which  served  as  a  court  of  law  and
an  exchange,  or  place  of  meeting  for  merchants  and
men  of  business.  The  two  uses  are  so  mixed  up
together  that  it  is  not  always  easy  to  say  which
was  the  principal.  Thus  the  basilica  at  Fanum,
of  which  Vitruvius  himself  was  the  architect,  was
entirely  devoted  to  business,  and  the  courts  were
held  in  a  small  building  attached  to  it,  —  the
temple  of  Augustus.  The  term  is  derived,  ac-
cording to  Philander  {Comment  in  Vitruv.').,  from
fia(TL\€vs,  a  king,  in  reference  to  early  times,  when
the  chief  magistrate  administered  the  laws  he  made ;
but  it  is  more  immediately  adopted  from  the  Greeks
of  Athens,  whose  second  archon  was  stj-led  i-px^v
ySao-iAeuy,  and  the  tribunal  where  he  adjudicated
(TToa  jSaa-tXcios  (I'aus.i.  3.  §  1  ;  Demosth.  c.  Aristo-
geit.  p.  776),  the  substantive  aula  ov porticus  in  Latin
being  omitted  for  convenience.  The  Greek  writers
who  speak  of  the  Roman  basilicae,  call  them  some-
times CToaX  fiaaiMical^  and  sometimes  merely
(TToai.

The  name  alone  would  make  it  highly  probable
that  the  Romans  were  indebted  to  the  Greeks  for
the  idea  of  the  building,  which  was  probably  bor-
rowed from  the  (TToa  fiaalXeios  at  Athens,  In
its  original  form  it  may  be  described  as  an  insulated
portico,  detached  from  the  agora  or  forum,  for  the
more  convenient  transaction  of  business,  which
formerly  took  place  in  the  porticoes  of  the  agora
itself  ;  in  fact,  a  sort  of  agora  in  miniature.  The
court  of  the  Hellanodicae,  in  the  old  agora  of  Elis,
was  exactly  of  the  foim  of  a  basilica.    [Agora].

The  first  edifice  of  this  description  was  not
erected  until  B  c.  184  (Liv.  xxxix.  44)  ;  for  it  is
expressly  stated  by  the  historian,  that  there  were
no  basilicae  at  the  time  of  the  fire,  which  de-
stroyed 80  many  buildings  in  the  fonim,  under  the
consulate  of  Marcellus  and  Laevinus,  B.C.  210.


BASILICA.
(Liv.  xxvi.  27.)  It  was  situated  in  the  forum  ad-
joining the  curia,  and  was  denominated  basilica
Porcia,  in  commemoi-ation  of  its  founder,  M.
Porcius  Cato.  Besides  this,  there  were  twenty
others,  erected  at  different  periods,  within  the  city
of  Rome  (Pitisc.  Lex.  Ant.  s.  v.  Basilica),  of  which
the  following  are  the  most  frequently  alluded  to  by
the  ancient  authors  :  —  1 .  Basilica  Sempronia,  con-
structed by  Titus  Sempronius,  B.  c.  171  (Liv.  xliv.
16) ;  and  supposed,  by  Donati  and  Nardini,  to  have
been  between  the  vicus  Tuscus  and  the  Velabrura.

2.  Basilica  Opimia,  which  was  above  the  comitium.

3.  Basilica  Pauli  Aemilii,  or  Basilica  Aemilia,
called  also  Regia  Pauli  by  Statins  {I.  c).  Cicero
{Ad  Att.  iv.  16)  mentions  two  basilicae  of  this
name,  of  which  one  was  built,  and  the  other  only
restored,  by  Paulus  Aemilius.  Both  these  edifices
were  in  the  forum,  and  one  was  celebrated  for  its
open  peristyle  of  Phrygian  columns.  A  repre-
sentation of  this  one  is  given  below  from  a  coin  of
the  Aemilia  gens.  (Plin.  //.  A^.  xxxvi.  24  ;  Appian,
B.  C.  ii.  26  ;  Plut.  Caes.  29.)  The  position  of
these  two  basilicae  has  given  rise  to  much  con-
troversy, a  brief  account  of  which  is  given  in  the
Diet,  of  Biog.  Vol.  IL  p.  766.  4.  Basilica  Pom-
peii, called  also  regia  (Suet.  Aiig.  31),  near  the
theatre  of  Pompey.  5.  Basilica  Julia,  erected  by
Julius  Caesar,  in  the  forum,  and  opposite  to  the
basilica  Aemilia.  (Suet.  Calig.  37.)  <'.  Basilica
Caii  et  Lucii,  the  grandsons  of  Augustus,  by  whom
it  was  founded.  (Suet.  Aug.  29.)  7.  Basilica
Ulpia,  or  Trajani,  in  the  forum  of  Trajan.  8.
Basilica  Constantini,  erected  by  the  emperor  Con-
stantine,  supposed  to  be  the  ruhi  now  remaining
on  the  via  sacra,  near  the  temple  of  Rome  and
Venus,  and  commonly  called  the  temple  of  Peace.
Of  all  these  magnificent  edifices  nothing  now  re-
mains beyond  the  ground-plan,  and  the  bases  and
some  portion  of  the  cohmins  and  superstructure
of  the  two  last.  The  basilica  at  Pompeii  is  in
better  preservation  ;  the  external  walls,  ranges  of
columns,  and  tribunal  of  the  judges,  being  still  W
tolerably  perfect  on  the  ground-floor.  I

The  forum,  or,  where  there  was  more  than  one,  *
the  one  which  was  in  the  most  frequented  and
central  part  of  the  city,  was  always  selected  for  the
site  of  a  basilica  ;  and  hence  it  is  that  the  classic
writers  not  unfrequently  use  the  ievms  forum  and
basilica  synonymously,  as  in  the  passage  of  Clau-
dian  {De  Honor.  Cons.  vi.  645):  —  Desuetaque
cingit  Regius  auratis  fora  fascibus  Ulpia  lictor,
where  the  forum  is  not  meant,  but  the  basilica
which  was  in  it,  and  which  was  surrounded  by  the
lictors  who  stood  in  the  forum.  (Pitisc.  Lex.  Ant.
I.  c.  ;  Nard.  Rom.  Ant.  v,  9.)

Vitruvius  (v.  1)  directs  that  the  most  sheltered
part  of  the  forum  should  be  selected  for  the  site  of
a  basilica,  in  order  that  the  public  might  suffer  as
little  as  possible  from  exposure  to  bad  weather,
whilst  going  to,  or  returning  from,  their  place  of
business  ;  he  might  also  have  added,  for  their
greater  convenience  whilst  engaged  within,  since
many  of  these  edifices,  and  all  of  the  more  ancient
ones,  were  entirely  open  to  the  external  air,  being
surrounded  and  protected  solely  by  an  open  peri-
style of  columns,  as  the  annexed  representation  of
the  basilica  Aemilia  from  a  medal  of  Lepidus,  with
the  inscription,  clearly  shows.

When,  however,  the  Romans  became  wealthy
and  refined,  and  consequently  more  effeminate,  a
wall  was  substituted  for  the  external  peristyle,  and


BASILICA.


the  columns  were  confined  to  the  interior  ;  or,  if
used  externally,  it  was  only  in  decorating  the
irp6vaos^  or  vestibule  of  entrance.  This  was  the
only  change  which  took  place  in  the  form  of  these
buildings,  from  the  time  of  their  first  institution,
until  they  were  converted  into  Christian  churches.
The  ground  plan  of  all  of  them  is  rectangular,  and
their  width  not  more  than  half,  nor  less  than  one-
third  of  the  length  (Vitruv.  I.  c.)  ;  but  if  the  area
on  which  the  edifice  was  to  be  raised  was  not  pro-
portionall}^  long,  small  chambers  (chalcidica)  were
cut  off  from  one  of  the  ends  (Vitruv.  /.  c),
which  served  as  offices  for  the  judges  or  mer-
chants. This  area  was  divided  into  three  parts,
consisting  of  a  central  nave  (media  porticus),  and
two  side  aisles,  each  separated  from  the  centre  by
a  single  row  of  columns  —  a  mode  of  construction
particularly  adapted  to  buildings  intended  for  the
reception  of  a  large  concourse  of  people.  At  one
end  of  the  centre  aisle  was  the  tribunal  of  the
judge,  in  form  either  rectangular  or  circular,  and
sometimes  cut  off  from  the  length  of  the  grand
nave  (as  is  seen  in  the  annexed  plan  of  the  basilica
at  Pompeii,  which  also  affords  an  example  of  the
chambers  of  the  judices,  or  chalcidica,  above  raen-

riif?iT~i~jfp

i       I         "• • i— r— 1 1 . , r


<

^
i

JL_i


T —


tioned),  or  otherwise  thrown  out  from  the  hinder
wall  of  the  building,  like  the  tribune  of  some  of
the  most  ancient  churches  in  Rome,  and  then  called
the  hemicycle  —  an  instance  of  which  is  afforded
in  the  basilica  Trajani,  of  which  the  plan  is  given
below.  It  will  be  observed  that  this  was  a  most
sumptuous  edifice,  possessing  a  double  tribime,  and
double  row  of  columns  on  each  side  of  the  centre
aisle,  dividing  the  whole  into  five  aisles.

The  internal  tribune  was  probably  the  original
constmction,  when  the  basilica  was  simply  used  as
a  court  of  justice  ;  but  when  those  spacious  halls
were  erected  for  the  convenience  of  traders  as  well
as  loungers,  then  the  semicircular  and  external  tri-
bune was  adopted,  in  order  that  the  noise  and  con-
fusion in  the  basilica  might  not  interrupt  the
proceedings  of  the  magistrates.  (Vitruv.  l.  c.)  In
the  centre  of  this  tribune  was  placed  the  curule
chair  of  the  pmetor,  and  seats  for  the  judices,  who
sometimes  amounted  to  the  number  of  180  (Plin.
Ep.  vi.  33),  and  the  advocates  ;  and  round  the
sides  of  the  hemicycle,  called  the  wings  {cornna)^
were  seats  for  persons  of  distinction,  and  for  the
parties  engaged  in  the  proceedings.  It  was  in  the
wing  of  the  tribune  that  Tiberius  sat  to  overawe
the  judgment  at  the  trial  of  Granius  Marcellus.


BASILICA.  199

(Tacit.  Ann.  i.  75.)  The  two  side  aisles,  as  has
been  said,  were  separated  from  the  centre  one  by  a
row  of  columns,  behind  each  of  which  was  placed
a  square  pier  or  pilaster  (parastata,  Vitruv.  l.  c),
which  supported  the  llooring  of  an  upper  portico,
similar  to  the  gallery  of  a  modern  church.  The
upper  gallery  was  in  like  manner  decorated  with


columns  of  smaller  dimensions  than  those  below  ;
and  these  served  to  support  the  roof,  and  were
connected  with  one  another  by  a  parapet-wall  or
balustrade  (phiteus,  Vitruv.  /.  c),  which  served  as
a  defence  against  the  danger  of  falling  over,  and
screened  the  crowd  of  loiterers  above  {sidthasilicani.,
Plant.  Capt.  iv.  2.  35)  from  the  people  of  business
in  the  area  below.  (Vitruv.  I.  c.)  This  gallery
reached  entirely  round  the  inside  of  the  building,
and  was  frequented  by  women  as  well  as  men,  the
women  on  one  side  and  the  men  on  the  other,  who
went  to  hear  and  see  what  was  going  on.  (Plin.
/.  c.)  The  staircase  which  led  to  the  upper  portico
was  on  the  outside,  as  is  seen  in  the  plan  of  the
basilica  of  Pompeii.  It  is  similarly  situated  in  the
basilica  of  Constantine.  The  whole  area  of  these
magnificent  structures  was  covered  in  with  three
separate  ceilings,  of  the  kind  called  testudinatum^
like  a  tortoise-shell  ;  in  technical  language  now
denominated  coved^  an  expression  used  to  distin-
guish a  ceiling  which  has  the  general  appearance  of
a  vault,  the  central  part  of  which  is,  however,  flat,
while  the  margins  incline  by  a  cylindrical  shell
from  each  of  the  four  sides  of  the  central  square  to
the  side  walls  ;  in  which  form  the  ancients  ima-
gined a  resemblance  to  the  shell  of  a  tortoise.

From  the  description  which  has  been  given,  it
will  be  evident  how  much  these  edifices  were
adapted  in  their  general  ffirm  and  construction  to
the  uses  of  a  Christian  church  ;  to  which  purpose
many  of  them  were,  in  fact,  converted  in  the  time
of  Constantine.  Hence  the  later  writers  of  tlie
o  4


200


BASILICA.


empire  apply  the  term  basilicac  to  all  cliurchcs
built  after  the  model  just  described  ;  and  such  were
the  earliest  editices  dedicated  to  Christian  worship,
which,  with  their  original  designation,  continue  to
this  day,  being  still  called  at  Rome  basiliche.  A
Christian  basilica  consisted  of  four  principal  parts  :
—  1.  Tlpovaos,  the  vestibule  of  entrance.  2.  NaCs,
navis,  and  sometimes  f/remium,  the  nave  or  centre
aisle,  which  was  divided  from  the  two  side  onfes  by
a  row  of  columns  on  each  of  its  sides.  Here  the
people  assembled  for  the  purposes  of  worship.  3.
"kixSuiu  (from  avaSaivsiv^  to  ascend),  chorus  (the
choir),  and  suggestum,  a  part  of  the  lower  extremity
of  the  nave  raised  above  the  general  level  of  the
floor  by  a  flight  of  steps.  4.  'Icpartlov,  lephu
)3r?|tta,  sancluarium,  which  answered  to  the  tribune
of  the  ancient  basilica.  In  the  centre  of  this
sanctuary  was  placed  the  high  altar,  under  a  taber-
nacle or  canopy,  such  as  still  remains  in  the  basilica
of  St.  John  of  Lateran,  at  Rome,  at  which  the
priest  officiated  with  his  face  turned  towards  the
people.  Around  this  altar,  and  in  the  wings  of  the
sanctuarium,  were  seats  for  the  assistant  clergy,
Avith  an  elevated  chair  for  the  bishop  at  the  bottom
of  the  circle  in  the  centre.  (T/ieutr.  Bad!,  Plsan.
cura  Josep.  Marl.  Canon,  iii.  p.  8  ;  Ciamp.  Vet.
Men.  i.  ii.  et  De  Sacr.  Ed.  ;  Stieglitz,  Arch'dol.  d.
Daukunst,  vol.  iii.  pp.  19,  &c  ;  Ilirt.  Lehre  d.  Ge-
b'diide,  pp.  180,  &c  ;  Bunsen,  Die  Basiliken  des
Christlichen  Roms.,  Munich,  1844.)  [A.  R.]

BASl'LICA.  x\bout  a.  d.  876,  the  Greek
emperor  Basilius,  the  Macedonian,  commenced
this  work,  which  was  completed  by  his  son  Leo,
the  philosopher,  who  reigned  from  a.  d.  886  to
911.  Before  the  reign  of  Basilius,  there  had  been
several  Greek  translations  of  the  Pandect,  the
Code,  and  the  Institutes  ;  but  there  was  no  autho-
rised Greek  version  of  them.  The  numerous  Con-
stitutions of  Justinian's  successors,  and  the  contra-
dictory interpretations  of  the  jurists,  were  a  further
reason  for  publishing  a  revised  Greek  text  under
the  imperial  authority.  This  great  work  was
called  'AvaKaQapcns  twv  iraXaiSiv  vSfxwy.,  rh  e^rj-
KovTd§i§\iov,6  jSacnAiKus  (v6/j.os)  and  ra  ^acriXiKo..
It  was  revised  by  the  order  of  Constantinus  Por-
phyrogenneta,  about  a.  d.  945.  The  Basilica  com-
prised the  Institutes,  Pandoct,  Code,  the  Novellae,
and  the  imperial  Constitutions  subsequent  to  the
time  of  Justinian,  in  sixty  books,  which  are  subdi-
vided into  titles.  For  the  Institutes  the  paraphrase
of  Theophilus  was  used,  for  the  Digest  the  TrAaros
of  Stephanus,  and  the  commentary  of  Cyrillus  and
of  an  anonymous  author,  for  the  Code  the  Kara.
TrdSas  of  Thalelaeus  and  the  work  of  Theodoras,
and  for  the  Novellae,  except  the  168,  the  Summae
of  Theodorus,  Athanasius,  and  Philoxenus.  The
publication  of  this  authorised  body  of  law  in  the
Greek  language  led  to  the  gradual  disuse  of  the
original  compilations  of  Justinian  in  the  East.  But
the  Roman  law  was  thus  more  firmly  established
in  Eastern  Europe  and  Western  Asia,  where  it
has  maintained  itself  among  the  Greek  population
to  the  present  day.

The  arrangement  of  the  matter  in  the  Basilica
is  as  follows :  — All  the  matter  relating  to  a  given
subject  is  selected  from  the  Corpus  Juris  ;  the
extracts  from  the  Pandect  are  placed  first  under
"iach  title,  then  the  constitutions  of  the  Code,  and
next  in  order  the  provisions  contained  in  the  Insti-
tutes and  the  Novellae,  which  confirm  or  complete
the  provisions  of  the  Pandect.     The  B;isilica  docs


BAXA.

I  not  contain  all  that  the  Corpus  Juris  contains ;  but
it  contains  numerous  fnigments  of  the  opinions  of
ancient  jurists,  and  of  imperial  Constitutions,  which
are  not  in  the  Corpus  Juris.

The  Basilica  were  published,  with  a  Latin  ver-
sion, by  Fabrot,  Paris,  1647,  seven  vols,  folio.
Fabrot  published  only  thirty-six  books  complete,
and  six  others  incomplete :  the  other  books  were
made  up  from  an  extract  from  the  Basilica  and  the
Scholiasts.  Four  of  the  deficient  books  were  after-
wards found  in  MS.,  and  published  by  Gerfiaid
Meerman,  with  a  translation  by  M.  Otto  Reitz,  in
the  fifth  volume  of  his  Thesaurus  Juris  Civilis  et
Canonici  ;  and  they  were  also  published  separately
m  London,  in  1765,  folio,  as  a  supplement  to
Fabrot's  edition.  A  new  critical  edition,  by
C.  Guil.  E.  Heimbach,  Leipzig,  1833,  &c.,  4to.,
has  been  commenced.  (Rocking,  Iiistitutionen,  vol.
i.  p.  105.)

BASTERNA,a  kind  of  litter  (/ed«c«)  in  which
women  were  carried  in  the  time  of  the  Roman  em-
perors. It  appears  to  have  resembled  the  lectica
[Lectica]  very  closely  ;  and  the  only  difference
apparently  was,  that  the  lectica  was  carried  by
slaves,  and  the  bastcrna  by  two  mules.  Several
etymologies  of  the  word  have  been  proposed.  Sal-
masius  supposes  it  to  be  derived  I'roni  the  Greek
^aard^co  (Salm.  ad  Lamprid.  Heliog.  21).  A  de-
scription of  a  bastema  is  given  by  a  poet  in  the
Antli.  Laf.  iii.  183.

BAXA,  or  BAXEA,  a  sandal  made  of  vege-
table leaves,  twigs,  or  fibres.  According  to  Isidore
{Orig.  xix.  33),  this  kind  of  sandal  was  worn  on
the  stage  by  comic,  whilst  the  cothurnus  was  ap-
propriate to  tragic  actors.  When,  therefore,  one  of
the  characters  in  Plautus  {Men.  ii.  3.  40)  says.
Qui  extergentur  haxae  ?  we  may  suppose  him  to
pohit  to  the  sandals  on  his  feet.  Philosophers  also
wore  sandals  of  this  description,  at  least  in  the
time  of  Tertullian  (De  Pallio.,  4)  and  Appuleiiis
{Met.  ii.  and  xi.),  and  probably  for  the  sake  of  sim-
plicity and  cheapness.  Isidore  adds,  that  baxcae
were  made  of  willow  {ex  salice),  and  that  they
were  also  called  calones ;  and  he  thinks  that  the
latter  term  was  derived  from  the  Greek  kSAov,
wood.  From  numerous  specimens  of  them  dis-
covered in  the  catacombs,  we  perceive  that  the
Egyptians  made  them  of  palm-leaves  and  papyrus.
(Wilkinson,  Manners  and  Customs,  vol.  iii.  p.  336.)
They  are  sometimes  observable  on  the  feet  of
Egyptian  statues.  According  to  Herodotus,  san-
dals of  papyrus  (uTroSrj/xara  I3v€\iva,  ii.  37)  were
a  part  of  the  required  and  characteristic  dress  of
the  Egyptian  priests.  We  may  presume  that  he
intended  his  words  to  include  not  only  sandals
made,  strictly  speaking,  of  papyrus,  but  those  also
in  which  the  leaves  of  the  date-palm  were  an  in-
gredient, and  of  v/hich  Appuleius  makes  distinct
mention,  when  he  describes  a  young  priest  covered
with  a  linen  sheet  and  wearing  sandals  of  palm
{lintcis  amiculis  intectum,  pedcsque  palmeis  baxeis
i7idictum.  Met.  ii).  The  accompanying  woodcut
shows  two  sandals  exactly  answering  to  this  de-  .
scription,  from  the  collection  in  the  British  Museum.
The  upper  one  was  worn  on  the  right  foot.  It  has
a  loop  on  the  right  side  for  fastening  the  band  ,
which  went  across  the  instep.  This  band,  together  |
with  the  ligature  connected  with  it,  which  was  in-  i
sorted  between  the  great  and  the  second  toe,  is
made  of  the  stem  of  the  papyrus,  undivided  and
unwrought.     The  lower  figure  shows  a  sandal  in


I


BENDIDEIA.

»vTi!cli  the  portions  of  the  palm-leaf  are  interlaced
vith  great  neatness  and  reirularity,  the  sewing  and
nding  being  effected  by  fibres  of  papyrus.  The
three  holes  may  be  observed  for  the  passage  of  the
jand  and  ligature  already  mentioned.        [J.  Y.]


BhIBAIO'SEOS  DIKE'  {^eSaiwaeas  Zlkti),
an  action  to  compel  the  vendor  to  make  a  good
title,  was  had  recourse  to  when  the  right  or  pos-
session of  the  purchaser  was  impugned  or  disturbed
by  a  third  person.  A  claimant  under  these  cir-
cumstances, unless  the  present  owner  were  inclined
to  fight  the  battle  himself  (auroyuaxetJ'),  was  re-
ferred to  the  verdor  as  the  proper  defendant  in  the
cause  (ets  rrparripa  avdyeiv).  If  the  vendor  were
then  unwilling  to  appear,  the  action  in  question
was  the  legal  remedy  against  him,  and  might  be
resorted  to  by  the  purchaser  even  when  the  earnest
only  had  been  paid.  (Harpocrat.  s.  v.  AvTOjxax^'iv,
Be§aiw(ns.)  From  the  passages  in  the  oration  of
Demosthenes  against  Pantaenetus  that  bear  upon
the  subject,  it  is  concluded  by  Heraldus  (Atiimad.
in  Salm.  iv.  3.  6)  that  the  liability  to  be  so  called
upon  was  inherent  in  the  character  of  a  vendor,
and  therefore  not  the  subject  of  specific  warranty
or  covenants  for  title.  The  same  critic  also  con-
cludes, from  the  glosses  of  Plesychius  and  Suidas,
that  this  action  might  in  like  manner  be  brought
against  a  fraudulent  mortgager.  (Animad.  in  Salm.
iv.  3.  in  fin.)  If  the  claimant  had  established  his
right,  and  been  by  the  decision  of  the  dicasts  put  in
legal  possession  of  the  property,  whether  movable
or  otherwise,  as  appears  from  the  case  in  the
speech  against  Pantaenetus,  the  ejected  purchaser
was  entitled  to  sue  for  reimbursement  from  the
vendor  by  the  action  in  question.  (Pollux,  viii.
Q)  The  cause  is  classed  by  Meier  {Alt.  Process.
p.  .526)  among  the  SiKai  irp6s  riua,  or  civil  actions
that  fell  within  the  cognizance  of  the  thesmo-
thctac.  ■  [J.  S.  M.]

BEMA  (^?]ixa),  the  platform  from  which  the
orators  spoke  in  the  Athenian  e'/CKATjcrta,  is  de-
scribed under  Ecclesia.  It  is  used  by  the  Greek
writers  on  Roman  affairs  to  indicate  the  Roman
tribunal.     (See  e.g.  Plut.  J'o7np.  41.)

BENDIDEIA  (BeudiSeia),  a  festival  celebrated
in  the  port  town  of  Peiraeeus  in  honour  of  Bendis,
a  Thracian  divinity,  whose  worship  seems  to  have
been  introduced  into  Attica  about  the  time  of
Socrates,  for  Plato  (De  Re  Publ.  init.)  introduces
Socrates  giving  an  opinion  on  the  Bendideia,  and
saying  that  it  was  then  celebrated  for  the  first
time.  It  was  celebrated  on  the  ^Oth,  or  according
to  others,  on  the  19th  of  Thargclion.  (Schol.  ad
Plat.  liepuh.  i.  p.  354  ;  Proclus,  ad  Plat.  Tim.
pp.  3 — 27.)     The  festival  resembled,  in  its  cha-


BENEFICIUM.  201

racter,  those  celebrated  in  honour  of  Dionvsus
(Strab.  X.  p.  470),  though  Plato  (/.  c.  p.  354)  men-
tions only  feasting  ;  but  the  principal  solemnities
seem  to  have  consisted  in  a  proc?ssion  held  by  the
Thracians  settled  in  Peiraeeus,  and  another' held
by  the  Peiraeans  themselves,  which,  according  to
Plato  {De  Re  Publ.  init.),  were  held  with  great
decorum  and  propriety,  and  a  torch  race  on  horse-
back in  the  evening.  The  Athenians  identified
Bondis  with  their  own  Artemis  (Ilesych.  s.  v.
BeVSts),  but  the  temple  of  Bendis  (Bei'SjSctoi')  at
Peiraeeus  was  near  that  of  Artemis,  whence  it  is
clear  that  the  two  divinities  must  have  been  dis-
tinct. (Xenoph.  Heilen.  ii.  4.  §  11  ;  comp.  Liv.
xxxviii.  41  ;  Ruhnken,  ad  Tim.  Gloss,  p.  62  ;  Clin-
ton, F.  H.  vol.  ii.  p.  402,  3d  edit.)  [L.'s.]
BENEFI'CIUM  ABSTINENDI.  [Heres.]
BENEFPCIUM,  BENEFICIA'RIUS.  The
word  beneficium  is  equivalent  to  feodum  or  fief,  in
the  writers  on  the  feudal  law,  and  is  an  interest
in  land,  or  things  inseparable  from  the  land,  or
things  immovable,  {Feud.  lib.  2.  tit.  1.)  The
beneficiarius  is  he  who  has  a  beneficium.  The
word  beneficium  often  occurs  in  French  historical
documents  from  the  fifth  to  the  ninth  century,  and
denotes  the  same  condition  of  landed  property,
which  at  the  end  of  the  ninth  century  is  denoted
by  feodum.  From  the  end  of  the  ninth  century  the
two  words  are  often  used  indifferently.  (Guizot^
Histoire  de  la  Civilisation  en  France.,  vol.  iii.  p.  247.)
The  term  benefice  is  also  applied  to  an  ecclesiastical
preferment.     (Ducange,  Gloss.)

The  term  beneficium  is  of  frequent  occurrence  in
the  Roman  law,  in  the  sense  of  some  special  privi-
lege or  favour  granted  to  a  person  in  respect  of  age,
sex,  or  condition.     But  the  word  was  also  used  in
other  senses,  and  the  meaning  of  the  term,  as  it
appears  in  the  feudal  law,  is  clearly  derivable  from
the  signification  of  the  term  among  the  Romans  of
the  later  republican  and  earlier  imperial  times.  In
the  time  of  Cicero  it  was  usual  for  a  general,  or  a
governor  of  a  province,  to  report  to  the  treasury  the
names  of  those  under  his  command  who  had  done
good  service  to  the  state:  those  who  were  included
in  such  report  were  said  in  beneficiis  ad  aerarium
deferri.    (Cic.  Pro  Arch.  c.  5,  Ad  Fam.  v.  20,  and
the  note  of  Manutius.)      It  was  required   by   a
Lex  Julia  that  the  names  should  be  given  in  within
thirty  days  after  the  accounts  of  the  general  or
governor.    In  beneficiis  in  these  passages  may  mean
that  the  persons  so  reported  were  considered  as
persons  who  had  deserved  well  of  the  state,  and  so
the  word   beneficium  may  have  reference  to  the
services  of  the  individuals ;  but  as  the  object  for
which  their  services  were  reported,  was  the  benefit
of  the  individuals,  it  seems  that  the  term  had  re-
ference also  to  the  reward,  immediate  or  remote,
obtained   for   their   services.      The   honours   and
offices  of  the  Roman  state,  in  the  republican  period,
were  called  the  beneficia  of  the  Populus  Romaims.
Beneficium  also    signified   any  promotion   con-
ferred on  or  grant  made   to  soldiers,  who  were
thence  called  beneficiarii ;  this  practice  was  com-
mon, as  we  see  from  inscriptions  in  Gruter  (11.  4,
cxxx.  5),  in  some  of  which  the  word  beneficiarius
is  represented  by  the  two  letters  B,  F.     In  this
sense  we  must  understand  the  passage  of  Caesar
{De  Bell.  Civ.  ii,  18)  when  he  speaks  of  the  magna
beneficia  and  the  magnae  ciientelae  of  Pompeius  in
Citerior   Spain,      Beneficiarius   is   also   used   by
Caesar  {De  Bell.  Civ.  i.  75),  to  express  the  per-


•20{!


BIBLIOTIIECA.


son  who  had  received  a  beneficium.  It  does  not,
however,  appear  from  these  passages,  what  the
beneficium  actually  was.  It  might  be  any  kind
of  honour,  or  special  exemption  from  service.  {De
Bell.  Civ.  iii.  88  ;  Sueton.  Tib.  12  ;  Vegetius,  De
Re  Militari,  ii.  7.)

Beneficiarius  is  opposed  by  Festus  (s.  v.)  to
niunifex,  in  the  sense  of  one  who  is  released  from
military  service,  as  opposed  to  one  who  is  bound  to
do  militfiry  service.     »

Grants  of  land,  and  other  things,  made  by  the
Roman  emperors,  were  called  beneficia,  and  were
entered  in  a  book  called  Liber  Beneficiorum  (Ily-
ginus,  De  Limitibus  Constit.  p.  193,  Goes.).  The
secretary  or  clerk  who  kept  this  book  was  called
a  commentariis  benejiciarum,  as  appears  from  an  in-
scription in  Gniter  (dlxxviii.  1.)  [G.  L.]

BESTIA'RII  (^-npioixaxoi),  persons  who  fought
with  wild  beasts  in  the  games  of  the  circus.
They  were  either  persons  who  fought  for  the  sake
of  pay  (auctoramentum),  and  who  were  allowed
arms,  or  they  were  criminals,  who  were  usually
permitted  to  have  no  means  of  defence  against  the
wild  beasts.  (Cic.  pro  Send.  64  ;  Sen,  De  Benef.
ii.  19,  Ep.  70;  Tertull.  Apol.  9.)  The  bestiarii,
who  fought  with  the  beasts  for  the  sake  of  pay,
and  of  whom  there  were  great  numbers  in  the
latter  daj's  of  the  republic  and  under  the  empire,
are  always  spoken  of  as  distinct  from  the  gladiators,
who  fought  with  one  another.  (Cic.  in  Vatin.  1 7 ;
ad  Qu.  Fr.  ii.  6.  §  5.)  It  appears  that  there  were
schools  in  Rome,  in  which  persons  were  trained  ta
fight  with  wild  beasts  (scholae  bestiaruni  or  besiia-
riorurn,  Tertull.  Apol.  35.)

BIAION  DIKE'  (fiialwv  St'/cTj).  This  action
might  be  brought  whenever  rapes  of  free  persons,
or  the  illegal  and  forcible  seizure  of  property  of  any
kind  were  the  subject  of  accusation  (Harpocrat.)  ;
and  we  learn  from  Demosthenes  (c.  Pantaen.  p.  976.
11)  that  it  came  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the
Forty.  According  to  Plutarch  {Solon,  23)  the  law
prescribed  that  ravishers  should  pay  a  fine  of  100
drachmae  ;  but  other  accounts  merely  state  gene-
rally that  the  convict  was  mulcted  in  a  sum  equal
to  twice  that  at  which  the  damages  were  laid
(SittAtji/  r))U  ^\d§w  6(pei\eiv,  Lys.  De  Caede
Eratosth.  p.  33  ;  Dem.  c.  Mid.  p.  528.  20  ;  Harpo-
crat.^ ;  and  the  plaintiff  in  such  case  received  one
half  of  the  fine  ;  and  the  state,  as  a  party  medi-
ately injured,  the  other.  To  reconcile  these  ac-
counts Meier  {Alt.  Proc.  p.  545)  supposes  the  rape
to  hare  been  estimated  by  law  at  100  drachmae,
and  that  the  plaintiff  fixed  the  damages  in  refer-
ence to  other  injuries  simultaneous  with,  or  conse-
quent upon,  the  perpetration  of  the  main  offence.
With  respect  to  aggressions  upon  property,  the
action  fiiaiuv  is  to  be  distinguished  from  6|ouA.t7s,
in  that  the  former  implies  the  employment  of
actual  violence,  the  latter  merely  such  detention  of
property  as  amounted  to  violence  in  the  contempla-
tion of  law  (Meier,  Att.  Proc.  p.  546),  as  for  in-
stance the  nonpayment  of  damages,  and  the  like,
to  the  successful  litigant  after  an  award  in  his
favour  by  a  court  of  justice.  (Dem.  c.  Mid.  540.
24.)  [J.  S.  M.]

BI'BASIS  (fileaffis).     [Saltatio.]

BIBLIOPO'LA.     [Liber.]

BIBLIOTHE'CA  ($ie\iod-f]Krf,  or  iwoe-fiKv
PiS^lwi'),  primarily,  the  place  where  a  collection
of  books  was  kept ;  secondarily,  the  collection
itselfl     (Festus,  s.  v.)     Little  as  the  states  of  an-


BIBLIOTHECA.

tiquity  dealt  with  the  instruction  of  the  people,
public  collections  of  books  appear  to  have  been
very  ancient.  That  of  Peisistratus  was  intended
for  public  use  (Gell.  vi.  1  7  ;  Athen.  i.  p.  3)  ;  it
was  subsequently  removed  to  Persia  by  Xerxes.
About  the  same  time,  Polycrates,  tyrant  of  Sanios,
is  said  to  have  founded  a  library.  In  the  best
days  of  Athens,  even  private  persons  had  large
collections  of  books ;  the  most  important  of  which
we  know  any  thing,  belonged  to  Euclid,  Euripides,
and  Aristotle.  Strabo  says  (xiii.  1)  that  Aristotle
was  the  first  who,  to  his  knowledge,  made  a  col-
lection of  books,  and  taught  the  Egyptian  kings
the  arrangement  of  a  library.  The  most  important
and  splendid  public  library  of  antiquity  was  that
founded  by  the  Ptolemies  at  Alexandria,  begun
under  Ptolemy  Soter,  but  increased  and  re-arranged
in  an  orderly  and  systematic  manner  by  Ptolemy
Philadelphns,  who  also  appointed  a  fixed  librarian
and  otherwise  provided  for  the  usefulness  of  the
institution.  The  library  of  the  Ptolemies  con-
tained, according  to  A.  Gellius  (vi.  17),  700,000
A'olumes  ;  according  to  Josephus,  500,000  ;  and  ac-
cording to  Seneca  (De  Tranq.  An.  9),  400,000.
The  different  reckoning  of  different  authors  may
be  in  some  measure,  perhaps,  reconciled  by  sup-
posing that  they  give  the  number  of  books  only  in
a  part  of  the  library  ;  for  it  consisted  of  two  parts,
one  in  the  quarter  of  the  city  called  Brucheion,
the  other  in  the  part  called  Serapeion.  Ptolemy
Philadelphns  bought  Aristotle's  collection  to  add
to  the  library,  and  Ptolemy  Euergetes  continued
to  add  to  the  stock.  A  great  part  of  this  splendid
library  was  consumed  by  fire  in  the  siege  of
Alexandria  by  Julius  Caesar :  some  writers  say
that  the  whole  was  burnt;  but  the  discrepancy
in  the  numbers  stated  above  seems  to  confirm  the
opinion  that  the  fire  did  not  extend  so  far.  At
any  rate,  the  library  was  soon  restored,  and
continued  in  a  flourishing  condition  till  it  was  de-
stroyed by  the  Arabs  a.  d.  640.  (See  Gibbon,
c.  51.)  Connected  with  the  greater  division  of
the  library,  in  the  quarter  of  Alexandria  called
Brucheion,  was  a  sort  of  college  to  which  the  name
of  Mouseion  (or  Museum)  was  given.  Here  many
favoured  literati  pursued  their  studies,  transcribed
books,  and  so  forth ;  lectures  also  were  delivered.
The  Ptolemies  were  not  long  without  a  rival  in
zeal.  Eumenes,  king  of  Pergamus,  became  a  patron
of  literature  and  the  sciences,  and  established  a
library,  which,  in  spite  of  the  prohibition  against
exporting  papyrus  issued  by  Ptolemj',  jealous  of
his  success,  became  very  extensive,  and  perhaps
next  in  importance  to  the  library  of  Alexandria.
It  remained,  and  probably  continued  to  increase,
till  Antonius  made  it  a  present  to  Cleopatra.
(Pint.  Anton.  58.)

The  first  public  library  in  Rome  was  that
founded  by  Asinius  PoUio  (Plin.  H.  N.  vii.  30 ;
Isid.  Orig.  vi.  5),  and  was  in  the  atrium  Libertatis
on  Mount  Aventine.  Julius  Caesar  had  projected
a  grand  Greek  and  Latin  library,  and  had  com-
missioned Varro  to  take  measures  for  the  establish-
ment of  it ;  but  the  scheme  was  prevented  by  his
death.  (Suet.  Jul.  44.)  The  library  of  Pollio
was  followed  by  that  of  Augustus,  in  the  temple
of  Apollo  on  the  Mount  Palatine  (Suet.  Aug.  29  :
Dion  Cass.  liii.  1),  and  another,  bibliothecae  Oc-
tavianae  (so  called  from  Augustus's  sister  Octavia),
forming  part  of  the  Porticus  Octavia.  (Dion  Cass,
xlix.  43 ;  Plut.  Marccll.  30.)      There    were   also


BIDENTAL.

libraries  on  the  capitol  (Suet,  Dom.  20),  in  the
temple  of  Peace  (Gell.  xvi.  8),  in  the  palace  of
Tiberius  (Gell.  xiii.  18),  besides  tlie  Ulpian  librarj-,
which  -.vas  the  most  famous,  founded  by  Trajan
(Gell.  yi.  17  ;  Dion  Cass.  Ixviii.  16),  called  Ulpian
from  his  own  name,  Ulpius.  This  library  was
attached  by  Diocletian,  as  an  ornament,  to  his
thermae.     (Vopisc.  Prob.  2.)

Private  collections  of  books  were  made  at  Rome
.soon  after  the  second  Punic  war.  The  zeal  of
Cicero,  Atticus,  and  others  in  increasing  their
libraries  is  well  known.  (Cic.  Ad  Att.  i.  7,  10,
iv.  5  ;  Ad  Quint.  Fr.  iii.  4.)  The  library  of  Lu-
cullus  was  very  extensive,  and  he  allowed  the
public  free  access  to  it.  (Pint.  Lucull.  42.)  To-
wards the  end  of  the  republic  it  became,  in  fact,
the  fashion  to  have  a  room  elegantly  furnished  as
a  library,  and  reserved  for  that  purpose.  However
ignorant  or  unstudious  a  person  might  be,  it  was
fashionable  to  appear  learned  by  having  a  library,
though  he  might  never  even  read  the  titles  of  the
books.  Seneca  {De  Tranq.  An.  9)  condemns  the
rage  for  mere  book-collecting,  and  rallies  those  who
were  more  pleased  with  the  outside  than  the  in-
side. Lucian  wrote  a  separate  piece  to  expose
this  common  folly  {irphs  ctTraiSeuroj'  koX  iroWii
fiiSXia  wvovueuov).

A  library  generally  had  an  eastern  aspect.
(Vitruv.  vi.  7.)  In  Herculaneum  a  library  fully
furnished  was  discovered.  Round  the  walls  it  had
cases  containing  the  books  in  rolls  [Liber]  ;  these
cases  were  numbered.  It  was  a  very  small  room  ;
so  small  that  a  person  by  stretching  out  his  arms
could  touch  both  sides  of  it.  The  cases  were
called  either  armaria  (Plin.  Ep.  ii.  17  ;  Vopisc.
Tacit.  8),  or  loculamenta  (Seneca,  De  Tranq.  An.
9),  or  foruli  (Juv.  Sat.  iii.  219),  or  nidi  (Mart.  i.
118.  15,  vii.  17.  5).  Asinius  Pollio  had  set  the
fashion  in  his  public  library  of  adorning  the  room
with  the  portraits  and  busts  of  celebrated  men,  as
well  as  statues  of  Minerva  and  the  Muses.  This
example  was  soon  followed  in  the  private  labraries
of  the  rich.  (Juv.  iii.  219  ;  Plin.  Ep.  iii.  7,  iv.
28 ;  Cic.  ad  Fam.  vii.  23 ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.  2 ;
Suet.  Tib.  70  ;  Mart.  ix.  Ep.  ad  Turan.  ;  Lipsius,
De  Bihliothecis  Syntagma,  in  Opera,  vol.  iii. ;  Becker,
Gallus,  vol.  i.  p.  160,  &c.)  [A.  A.]

BICOS  {PIkos).,  the  name  of  an  earthen  vessel
in  common  use  among  the  Greeks.  (Pollux,  vi.
14,  vii.  162,  X.  73.)  Hesychius  {s.v.)  defines  it
as  a  (Trdfivos  with  handles.  It  was  used  for
holding  wine  (Xen.  Anab.  i.  9.  §  25),  and  salted
meat  and  fish.  (Athen.  iii,  p.  116,  f.)  Herodotus
(i.  194)  speaks  of  jSi/cous  (^oiviKritovs  Kardyovai
otvov  TrXeovs,  which  some  commentators  interpret
by  "  vessels  made  of  the  wood  of  the  palm  tree  full
of  wine."  But  as  Eustathius  {in  Od.  p.  1445)
speaks  of  dtuov  (poiviKivov  ^7kos,  we  ought  pro-
bably to  read  in  Herodotus  ^'ikovs  <poiviKr]'iov,  k.  t.
A.,  "  vessels  full  of  palm  wine."

BIDENS.     [Rastrum.]

BIDE  NT  AL,  the  name  given  to  a  place  where
any  one  had  been  struck  by  lightning  (Festus,
s.  V.  fu/guriium),  or  where  any  one  had  been  killed
by  lightning  and  buried."  Such  a  place  was  con-
sidered sacred.  Priests,  who  were  called  biden-
tales  (i.  e.  sacerdotes),  collected  the  earth  which
had  bten  torn  up  by  the  lightning,  and  everything
that  had  been  scorched,  and  burnt  it  in  the  ground
with  a  sorrowful  murmur.  (Lucan,  i.  606.)  The
officiating  priest  was  said  condere /ulgur  (Juv.  Sat.


BLABES  DIKE.


203


vi.  587  ;  compare  Orelli,  Inscr.  vol.  i.  p.  431.  No.
2482) ;  he  further  consecrated  the  spot  by  sacri-
ficing a  two-year-old  sheep  (bidens),  whence  the
name  of  the  place  and  of  the  priest,  and  also
erected  an  altar,  and  surrounded  it  with  a  wall  or
fence.  It  was  not  allowable  to  tread  on  the  place
(Persius,  ii.  27),  or  to  touch  it,  or  even  to  look  at
it.  (Amm.  Marc,  xxiii.  5.)  Sometimes  a  bidental
which  had  nearly  fallen  to  decay  from  length  of
time  was  restored  and  renovated  (Orelli,  Inscr.
No.  2483) ;  but  to  remove  the  bounds  of  one
(movere  bidental),  or  in  any  way  to  violate  its
sacred  precincts,  was  considered  as  sacrilege.  (Hor.
Art.  Poet.  471.)  From  the  passage  in  Horace,  it
appears  to  have  been  believed  that  a  person  who
was  guilty  of  profaning  a  bidental,  would  be  pu-
nished by  the  gods  with  frenzy ;  and  Seneca  {Nat.
Quaesi.  ii.  53)  mentions  another  belief  of  a  similar
kind,  that  wine  which  had  been  struck  by  lightning
would  produce  in  any  one  who  drank  it  death  or
madness.  Persons  who  had  been  struck  by  light-
ning {fulguriti)  were  not  removed,  but  were  biu^ied
on  the  spot.  (Pers.  Sat.  ii.  27 ;  Plin.  H.  N.
ii.  54 ;  Hartung,  Religion  der  Romei',  vol.  ii.  p.
13.)  ^  [A.  A.]

BIDIAEI  ()8jSta?oj),  called  in  inscriptions
pideoi  or  fiidvoi,  were  magistrates  in  Sparta,  whose
business  was  to  inspect  the  gymnastic  exercises.
Their  house  of  meeting  {apx^^ov)  was  in  the
market-place.  (Pans.  iii.  11.  §  2.)  They  were
either  five  (Pans.  /.  c.)  or  six  in  number  (Bockh,
Corp.  Imcrip.  nr.  1271.  1364),  and  had  a  presi-
dent who  is  called  in  inscriptions  irpeVSus  fiidecov.
(Bbckh,  Corp.  Inscrip.  vol.  i.  p.  611.)  Bockh  con-
jectures that  /BtSeot  or  )8i5uoi  is  the  Laconian  form
for  YSuot  or  FiSvoi,  and  signifies  witnesses  and
judges  among  the  youth.  (Comp.  MUller,  Dorians^
iii.  7.  §  8.)  Valckenaer  {ad  Herod,  vi.  57)  sup-
poses that  the  bidiaei  were  the  same  as  the  voixo'
^v\aKes  ;  but  the  inscriptions  given  by  Bockh
show  that  the  bidiaei  and  vop.o(pv\aKes  were  two
separate  classes  of  officers.

BIGA  or  BIGAE.     [Currus.]

BIGA'TUS.     [Denarius.]

BIPA'LIUM.     [Pala.]

BIPENNIS.     [Securis.]

BIREMIS.     [Navis.]

BIRRUS  {^ippos),  a  cape  or  hood,  which  was
worn  out  of  doors  over  the  shoulders,  and  was
sometimes  elevated  so  as  to  cover  the  head.  On  the
former  account  it  is  classed  by  an  ancient  gram,
marian  with  the  lacema,  and  on  the  latter  with  the
cowl,  or  cucullus.  It  had  a  long  nap,  which  was
commonly  of  sheep's  wool,  more  rarely  of  beaver's
wool.  It  probably  derived  its  name  from  the  red
colour  {irvp^os)  of  the  wool  of  which  it  was  made-
It  is  only  mentioned  by  the  later  writers.  (Vopisc.
Carin.  20  ;  Claudian,  Epigr.  37.)

BISE'LLIUM.     [Sella.]

BISSEXTUM.     [Calendarium.]

BLABES  DIKE'  {PXaS-qs  SU-n).  This  action
was  available  in  all  cases  in  which  one  person  had
sustained  a  loss  by  the  conduct  of  another ;  and
from  the  instances  that  are  extant,  it  seems  that
whether  the  injury  originated  in  a  fault  of  omission
or  commission,  or  impaired  the  actual  fortune  of  the
plaintiff,  or  his  prospective  advantage,  the  action
would  lie,  and  might  be  maintained,  against  the
defendant.  It  is  of  course  impossible  to  enumerate
all  the  particular  cases  upon  which  it  would  ai'isc,
but  the  two  great  classes  into  which  $\d€ai  may


204


BOEOTARCHES.


"be  divided  are  the  ^vOecr/ioi  and  the  i.Bi(rp.oi.  The
lirst  ot  these  will  include  all  causes  arising  from
the  nonfulfihnent  of  a  contract  to  which  a  penal
bond  was  annexed,  and  those  in  which  the  law
specified  the  penalty  to  be  paid  by  the  defendant
tipon  conviction  ;  the  second,  all  injuries  of  property
which  the  law  did  not  specify  nominatim,  but
generally  directed  to  be  punished  by  a  fine  equal
to  twice  the  estimated  damage  if  the  offence  was
intentional,  if  otherwise  by  a  bare  compensation.
(Meier,  Att.  Proc.  p.  188,  &c.,  p.  475,  &c.  ;  Dem.
c.  Mid.  p.  528.)  Besides  the  general  word  fi\d§ris^
others  more  specific,  as  to  the  nature  of  the  case,
are  frequently  added  to  the  names  of  actions  of
this  kind,  as  avSpaTrddwy,  nTpaiToSwv,  fieraKXiK^,
and  the  like.  The  declaration  of  the  plaintiff
seems  always  to  have  begun  with  the  words
*EeAai|/e  fie,  then  came  the  name  of  the  defendant,
and  next  a  description  of  the  injury,  as  ovk  airoSiSovs
i/xol  TO  apyvpiov  in  Demosthenes  {Pro  Phorm.
p.  950.  21).  The  proper  court  was  determined
by  the  subject  of  litigation  ;  and  when  we  con-
sider that  the  damagd  done  by  Philocleon  to  the
cake- woman's  basket  (Aristoph.  Vesp,),  and  sup-
posititious testimony  given  in  the  name  of  another,
thereby  rendering  such  person  liable  to  an  action,
xpevdofiapTvpicou  (Dem,  c.  Aphob.  iii.  p.  849.  20),
were  equally  &\d§ai  at  Attic  law,  the  A-ariety  of
the  actions,  and  consequently  of  the  jurisdictions
under  which  they  fell,  will  be  a  sufficient  excuse
for  the  absence  of  fiu:ther  specification  upon  this
point.  [J.  S.  M.]

BOEDRO'MIA  (/SoijSpoVa),  a  festival  cele-
brated at  Athens  on  the  seventh  day  of  the  month
of  Boedromion,  in  honour  of  Apollo  Boedromius.
(Miiller,  Dor.  ii.  8.  §  5.)  The  name  Boedromius,
by  which  Apollo  was  called  in  Boeotia  and  other
parts  of  Greece  (Paus.  ix.  17.  §  1  ;  Callimach.
Hymn.  Apoll.  G9\  seems  to  indicate  that  by  this
festival  he  was  honoured  as  a  martial  god,  who
either  by  his  actual  presence  or  by  his  oracles
afforded  assistance  in  the  dangers  of  war.  The
origin  of  the  festival  is,  however,  traced  by  dif-
ferent authors  to  diffx^rent  events  in  Grecian  stor3^
Plutarch  {Thes.  27)  says  that  Theseus,  in  his  war
against  the  Amazons,  did  not  give  battle  till  after
he  had  offered  a  sacrifice  to  Phobos  ;  and,  that  in
commemoration  of  the  successful  battle  which  took
place  in  the  month  of  Boedromion,  the  Athenians,
down  to  his  own  time,  continued  to  celebrate  the
festival  of  the  Boedromia.  According  to  Suidas,
the  Etymol.  Magn.  and  Euripides  {Ion.  59),  the
festival  derived  its  name  and  origin  from  the  cir-
cumstance that  when,  in  the  reign  of  Erechtheus,
the  Athenians  were  attacked  by  Eumolpus,  Xuthus
or  (according  to  Philochorus  in  Harpocration,  s.  v.)
bis  son  Ion  came  to  their  assistance,  and  procured
them  the  victor}^  Respecting  the  particulars  of
this  festival  nothing  is  known  except  that  sacrifices
were  offered  to  Artemis.  (Comp.  Spanheim,  ad
Callim.  Hymn,  in  Apoll.  69.)  [L.  S.]

BOEOTARCHES  {BoiuTdpxils,  or  Boiurdp.
Xos).  It  is  proposed  under  this  head  to  give  a  brief
account  of  the  Boeotian  constitution  as  well  as  of
the  Boeotarchs.

The  Boeotians  in  ancient  times  occupied  Ame
in  Thessaly.  (Thuc.  i.  12.)  Sixty  years  after
the  taking  of  Troy  they  were  expelled  by  the  Thcs-
salians,  and  settled  in  the  country  then  called  Cad-
meis,  but  afterwards  Boeotia.  This  country,  during
their  occupation  of  it,  was  divided  into  several


BOEOTARCHES.

states,  containing  each  a  principal  city,  with  ittj
|uKTeAei$  or  ^ufx/jLopoi  (inhabitants  of  the  same
fiolpa,  or  district)  living  around  it.  Of  these
greater  states,  with  dependent  territories,  there
seem  to  have  been  in  fonner  times  fourteen,  —  a
number  which  frequently  occurs  in  Boeotian  le-
gends. (Paus.  ix.  3,  §  4.)  The  names  are  dif-
ferently given  by  different  writers  on  the  subject  ;
we  know,  however,  for  certain  that  they  formed  a
confederacy  called  the  Boeotian  league,  with  Thebes
at  its  head,  the  dependencies  of  which  city  formed
about  a  third  part  of  the  whole  of  Boeotia.  These
dependent  towns,  or  districts,  were  not  immedi-
ately connected  with  the  national  confederacy,  but
witii  the  neighbouring  chief  city,  as  Cynoscephalae
was  with  Thebes.  In  fact,  they  were  obliged  to
furnish  troops  and  mone}^  to  make  up  the  con-
tingent furnished  by  the  state  to  which  they  be-
longed, to  the  general  confederacy.  (Arnold,
ad  Thuc.  iv.  76.)  Of  the  independent  states  Thu-
cydides  (iv.  93)  mentions  seven  by  name  ;  and
gives  us  reasons  for  concluding  that,  in  the  time  of
the  Peloponnesian  Avar  they  were  ten  or  twelve  in
number,  Thebes  being  the  chief.  Plataea  had
withdrawn  from  them,  and  placed  itself  under  the
protection  of  Athens  as  early  as  B.C.  519  ;  and  in
B.  c.  374,  Thespiae,  another  member  of  the  league,
was  destroyed  by  the  Thebans.  (Clinton,  F.  H.
vol.  ii.  p.  396  ;  Thuc.  iii.  55.)

Each  of  the  principal  toAvns  of  Boeotia  seems  to
have  had  its  /SouAtj  and  S/j/ioy.  (Xen.  Hell.  v.  2.
§  29.)  The  ^ovXt)  was  presided  over  by  an  archon,
who  probably  had  succeeded  to  the  priestly  func-
tions of  the  old  kings  ;  but  possessed  little,  if  any,
executive  authority.  The  polemarchs,  who,  in
treaties  and  agreements  are  mentioned  next  to  the
archon,  had  some  executive  authority,  but  did  not
command  forces  ;  e.g.  they  could  imprison  (Xen.
Hell.  I.e.),  and  they  directed  the  levies  of  troops
But  besides  the  archon  of  each  separate  state,  there
was  an  archon  of  the  confederacy  —  ^px'»"'  ^^
Koivca  BotoTwj',  most  probably  always  a  Theban.
( Bdckh, /«scr.  1593.)  His  name  was  affixed  to  all
alliances  and  compacts  which  concerned  the  whole
confederacy,  and  he  was  president  of  what  Thucy-
dides  (v.  38)  calls  the  four  councils,  Avho  directed
the  affairs  of  the  league  {'dirav  rh  Kvpos  exou<ri).
On  important  questions  they  seem  to  have  been
united  ;  for  the  same  author  speaks  of  them  as  ?;
fiovK-i].,  and  informs  us  that  the  determinations  of
the  Boeotarchs  required  the  ratification  of  this
body  before  they  were  valid.  The  Boeotarchs
themselves  were  properly  the  military  heads  of  the
confederac)',  chosen  by  the  different  states  ;  but  we
also  find  them  discharging  the  functions  of  an  ex-
ecutive in  various  matters.  In  fact,  they  are  re-
presented by  Thucydides  (v.  38)  as  forming  an
alliance  with  foreign  states  ;  as  receiving  ambassa-
dors on  their  return  home  ;  as  negotiating  Avith
envoys  from  other  countries  ;  and  acting  as  the
representatives  of  the  whole  league,  though  the
fiovXi]  refused  to  sanction  the  measures  they  had
resolved  on  in  the  particular  case  to  Avhich  we  are
noAV  alluding.  Another  instance  in  which  the
Boeotarchs  appear  as  executive  is  their  interference
with  Agesilaus,  on  his  embarking  trum  Aulis  for
Asia  (B.C.  396),  when  they  prevented  him  of-
fering sacrifice  as  he  Avished.  {^\\\t.  Ages.  6  ;  Xen.
Hell.  iii.  4.  §  4.)  Still  the  principal  duty  of  the
Boeotarchs  was  of  a  militarj-  nature :  thus  they  led
into  the  field  the  troops  of  their  respective  states  ;


BONA,
and  when  at  home,  they  took  whatever  measures
weiv  requisite  to  forward  the  military  operations  of
the  league,  or  of  their  own  state :  for  example,  we
read  of  one  of  the  Theban  Boeotarchs  ordering  the
Thebans  to  come  in  arms  to  the  ecclesia  for  the
purpose  of  being  ready  to  attack  Plataea.  (Paus.
ix.  1.  §  3.)  Each  state  of  the  confederacy  elected
one  Boeotarch,  the  Thebans  two  (Thuc.  ii.  2,  iv.
91,  vii.  30  ;  Diod.  xv.  51)  ;  although  on  one  occa-
sion, u  e.  after  the  return  of  the  exiles  with  Pelo-
pidas  (b,  c.  379),  we  read  of  there  being  three  at
Thebes.  (Plut.  Pelop.  13).  The  total  number
from  the  whole  confederacy  varied  with  the  number
of  the  independent  states.  Mention  is  made  of  the
Boeotarchs  by  Thucydides  (iv.  91),  in  connection
with  the  battle  of  Delium  (b.  c.  424).  There  is,
however,  a  difference  of  opinion  with  respect  to  his
meaning  :  some  understand  him  to  speak  of  eleven,
some  of  twelve,  and  others  of  thirteen  Boeotarchs.
Dr.  Arnold  is  disposed  to  adopt  the  last  number;  and
we  think  the  context  is  in  favour  of  the  opinion
that  there  were  then  thirteen  Boeotarchs,  so  that
the  number  of  free  states  was  twelve.  At  the  time
of  the  battle  of  Leuctra  (b.  c.  371),  we  find  seven
Boeotarchs  mentioned  (Diod,  xv.  52,  53  ;  Paus.  ix.
13.  §3);  on  another  occasion,  when  Greece  was
invaded  by  the  Gauls  (b.  c.  279),  we  read  of  four.
Livy  (xlii.  43)  states  that  there  were  twelve,  but
before  the  time  (b.  c.  171)  to  which  his  statement
refers,  Plataea  had  been  reunited  to  the  league.
Still  the  number  mentioned  in  any  case  is  no  test
of  the  actual  number,  inasmuch  as  we  are  not  sure
that  all  the  Boeotarchs  were  sent  out  by  their  re-
spective states  on  every  expedition  or  to  every
battle.

The  Boeotarchs,  when  engaged  in  military  ser-
vice, formed  a  council  of  war,  the  decisions  of  which
were  determined  by  a  majority  of  votes,  the  pre-
sident being  one  of  the  two  Theban  Boeotarchs
who  commanded  alternately.  (Thuc.  iv.  9 1  ;  Diod.
XV,  51.)  Their  period  of  service  was  a  year,  be-
ginning about  the  winter  solstice  ;  and  whoever
continued  in  office  longer  than  his  time,  was  punish-
able with  death  both  at  Thebes  and  in  other  cities
(Plut,  Pciop.  24  ;  Paus,  ix,  14.  §  3.)  Epameinondas
and  Pelopidas  did  so  on  their  invasion  of  Laconia
(u.  c.  3G9),  but  their  eminent  services  saved  them  ;
in  fact  the  judges  did  not  even  come  to  a  vote  re-
specting the  former.  At  the  expiration  of  the  year
a  Boeotarch  was  eligible  to  office  a  second  time,  and
Pelopidas  was  repeatedly  chosen.  From  the  case
of  Epameinondas  and  Pelopidas,  who  were  brought
before  Theban  judges  (SiKaarai),  for  transgression
of  the  law  which  limited  the  time  of  office,  we  may
conclude  that  each  Boeotarch  was  responsible  to
his  own  state  alone,  and  not  to  the  general  body  of
the  four  councils.

Mention  is  made  of  an  election  of  Boeotarchs  by
Livy  (xxxiii.  27,  xlii.  44).  He  furthei  infonns
us  that  the  league  {concilium)  was  broken  up  by
the  Romans  B,  c,  171.  (Compare  Polyb.  xxviii.  2.
§  10  — T^  BoioiTwv  edvos  icareXvdr].)  Still  it  must
have  been  partially  revived,  as  we  are  told  of  a
second  breaking  up  bj'  the  Romans  after  the  de-
struction of  Corinth  B.  c,  146.  (Paus.  vii,  16.
§  6.)  [R.  W.]

BOMBYCINUM.     [Sericum.]

BONA,  The  word  bona  is  sometimes  used  to
express  the  whole  of  a  man's  property  (Paulus,
Jtecept.  Sentent.  v,  6,  16;  Dig.  37.  tit.  1.  s,  3  ;
60.  tit.  16.  s.  49)  ;   and  in  the  phrases   bonorum


BONA.  205

emtio,  cessio,  possessio,  ususfructus,  the  word
"  bona  "  is  equivalent  to  property.  It  expresses
all  that  a  man  has,  whether  as  owner  or  merely  as
possessor ;  and  every  thing  to  which  he  has  any
right.  But  it  is  said  (Dig.  50.  tit.  16.  s.  83)  :
"  Proprie  bona  dici  non  possunt  quae  plus  incom-
modi  quam  commodi  habent."  However,  the  use
of  the  word  in  the  case  of  universal  succession
comprehended  both  the  commodum  and  incoramo-
dum  of  that  which  passed  to  the  imiversal  suc-
cessor. But  the  word  bona  is  simply  the  property
as  an  object ;  it  does  not  express  the  nature  of  the
relation  between  it  and  the  person  who  has  the
ownership  or  the  enjoyment  of  it,  any  more  than
the  words  "  all  that  I  have,"  "  all  that  I  am
worth,"  "  all  my  property,"  in  English  show  the
legal  relation  of  a  man  to  that  which  he  thus  de-
scribes. The  legal  expression  in  bonis,  as  opposed
to  dominium,  or  Qiiiritarian  ownership,  and  the
nature  of  the  distinction  will  be  easily  apprehended
by  any  person  who  is  slightly  conversant  with
English  law.

"There is,"  says  Gains  (ii.  40),  "amongforeigners
{peregriyii)  only  one  kind  of  ownership  {dominium),
so  that  a  man  is  either  the  owner  of  a  thing  or  he
is  not.  And  this  was  formerly  the  case  among  the
Roman  people  ;  for  a  man  was  either  owner  ex
jure  Quiritium,  or  he  was  not.  But  afterwards  the
ownership  was  split,  so  that  now  one  man  may  be
the  owner  {dominus)  of  a  thing  ex  jure  Quiritium,
and  yet  another  may  have  it  in  bonis.  For  instance,
if,  in  the  case  of  a  res  mancipi,  I  do  not  transfer
it  to  3'ou  by  mancipatio,  nor  by  the  form  in  jure
cessio,  but  merely  deliver  it  to  you,  the  thing  in-
deed becomes  your  thing  {in  bonis),  but  it  will  re-
main mine  ex  jure  Quiritium,  until  by  possession
you  have  it  by  usucapion.  For  when  the  usuca-
pion is  once  complete,  from  that  time  it  begins  to
be  yours  absolutely  {plena  jure),  \h?ii  is,  it  is  j-ours
both  in  bonis  and  also  yours  ex  jure  Quiritium,
just  as  if  it  had  been  mancipated  to  you,  or  trans-
ferred to  you  by  the  in  jure  cessio."  In  this  pas-
sage Gains  refers  to  the  three  modes  of  acquiring
property  which  were  the  peculiar  rights  of  Roman
citizens,  mancipatio,  in  jure  cessio,  and  usucapion,
which  are  also  particularly  enumerated  by  him  in
another  passage  (ii,  65).

From  this  passage  it  appears  that  the  ownership
of  certain  kinds  of  things  among  the  Romans,
called  res  mancipi  [Mancipium],  could  only  be
transferred  from  one  person  to  another  with  certain
formalities,  or  acquired  by  usucapion.  But  if  it
was  clearl}'^  the  intention  of  the  owner  to  transfer
the  ownership,  and  the  necessarj-  forms  only  were
wanting,  the  purchaser  had  the  thing  in  bonis,
and  he  had  the  enjoyment  of  it,  though  the  original
owner  was  legally  the  owner  until  the  usucapion
was  completed,  notwithstanding  he  had  parted  with
the  thing.

It  thus  appears  that  Quiritarian  ownersliip  of
res  mancipi  originally  and  properly  signified  that
ownership  of  a  thing  which  the  Roman  law  re-
cognised as  such ;  it  did  not  express  a  compound
but  a  simple  notion,  which  was  that  of  absolute
ownership.  But  when  it  was  once  established
that  one  man  might  have  the  Quiritarian  owner-
ship, and  another  the  enjoyment,  and  the  sole
right  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  same  thing,  the  com-
plete notion  of  Quiritarian  ownership  became  a
notion  compounded  of  the  strict  legal  notion  of
ownership,  and  that  of  the  right  to  enjoy,  as  united


208


BONA.


in  tlie  same  person.  And  as  a  man  might  have
both  the  Quiritarian  ownership  and  the  right  to  the
enjoyment  of  a  thing,  so  one  might  have  the  Quiri-
tarian ownership  only,  and  another  might  have  the
enjoyment  of  it  onl}^  This  bare  ownership  was
sometimes  expressed  by  the  same  terms  {ex  jure
Quiritium)  as  that  ownership  which  was  complete,
but  sometimes  it  was  appropriately  called  nudum
Jus  Quiritium  (Gaius,  iii.  100),  and  yet  the  person
who  had  such  bare  right  was  still  called  dominus,
and  by  this  term  he  is  contrasted  with  the  usu-
fructuarius  and  the  bonae  fidei  possessor.

The  historical  origin  of  this  notion,  of  the  sepa-
ration of  the  ownership  from  the  right  to  enjoy  a
thing,  is  not  known  ;  but  it  may  be  easily  conjec-
tured. When  nothing  was  wanting  to  the  transfer
of  ownership  but  a  compliance  with  the  strict
legal  form,  we  can  easily  conceive  that  the  Roman
jurists  would  soon  get  over  this  difficulty.  The
strictness  of  the  old  legal  institutions  of  Rome
was  graduall}'  relaxed  to  meet  the  wants  of  the
people,  and  in  the  instance  already  mentioned,  the
jurisdiction  of  the  praetor  supplied  the  defects  of
the  law.  Thus,  that  interest  which  a  man  had
acquired  in  a  thing,  and  which  only  wanted  certain
forms  to  make  it  Quiritarian  ownership,  was  pro-
tected by  the  praetor.  The  praetor  could  not  give
Quiritarian  ownership,  but  he  could  protect  a  man
in  the  enjoyment  of  a  thing  —  he  could  maintain
his  possession :  and  this  is  precisely  what  the
praetor  did  with  respect  to  those  who  were  pos-
sessors of  public  land  ;  they  had  no  ownership,  but
only  a  possession,  in  which  they  were  protected
by  the  praetor's  interdict.  [Agrariae  Leges,
p.  38.]

That  which  was  in  bonis,  then,  was  that  kind  of
interest  or  ownership  which  was  protected  by  the
praetor,  which  interest  may  be  called  bonitarian  or
beneficial  ownership,  as  opposed  to  Quiritarian  or
bare  legal  ownership.  It  does  not  appear  that  the
word  dominium  is  ever  applied  to  such  bonitarian
ownership  except  it  may  be  in  one  passage  of
Gaius  (i.  54),  the  explanation  of  which  is  not  free
from  difficulty.

That  interest  called  in  bonis,  which  arose  from
a  bare  tradition  of  a  res  mancipi,  was  protected  by
the  exceptio,  and  the  actio  utilis  in  rem.  (Dig.  41.
tit.  1.  s.  52.)  Possessio  is  the  general  name  of  the
interest  which  was  thus  protected.  The  person
who  had  a  thing  in  bonis  and  ex  justa  causa  v/as
also  entitled  to  the  actio  Publiciana,  in  case  he
lost  the  possession  of  the  thing  before  he  liad
gained  the  ownership  by  usucapion.  (Gaius,  iv.
36.)

The  phrases  bonorum  possessio,  bonorum  posses-
sor, might  then  apply  to  him  who  has  had  a  res
mancipi  transferred  to  him  by  tradition  only ;  but
the  phrase  applies  also  to  other  cases  in  which  the
praetor  by  the  help  of  fictions  gave  to  persons  the
beneficial  interest  to  whom  he  could  not  give  the
ownership.  When  the  praetor  gave  the  goods  of
the  debtor  to  the  creditor,  the  creditor  was  said
in  possessionem  rerum,  or  bonorum  debitoris  mitti.
(Dig.  \2.  tit. 5.  8.  14,  &c.)  [Bonorum  Emtio;
Bonorum  Possessio.]

As  to  things  nee  mancipi,  the  ownership  might
be  transfeiTed  by  bare  tradition  or  delivery,  and
such  ownership  was  Quiritarian,  inasmuch  as  the
Roman  law  required  no  special  form  to  be  ob-
served in  the  transfer  of  the  ownership  of  res  iiec
mancipi.      Such  transfer  was  made  according  to


BONA  CADUCA.

the  jus  gentium  (in  the  Roman  sense  of  that  term).
(Gaius,  ii.  26,  41,  20  ;  Ulp.  Frag.  i.  16.)

(Zimmern,  Ueherdas  Wesen  des sogenannten  honi-
tarischen  Eigenthums^  RJieintsch.  Mus.fur  .Jurispr.
iii.  3.)  [G.  L.]

BONA  CADU'CA.  Caducum  literally  signifies
that  which  falls  :  thus,  glans  caduca^  according  to
Gaius  (Dig.  50.  tit.  16.  s.  30),  is  the  mast  which
falls  from  a  tree.  Caducum,  in  its  general  sense,
might  be  any  thing  without  an  owner,  or  what  the
person  entitled  to  neglected  to  take  (Cic.  De  Or.
iii.  31,  P/iil.  X.  5)  ;  but  the  strict  legal  sense  of  ca-
ducum and  bona  caduca,  is  that  stated  by  Ulpian
(Frag.  xvii.  De  Caducis\  which  is  as  follows  :  —

If  a  thing  is  left  by  testament  to  a  person,  so
that  he  can  take  it  by  the  jus  civile,  but  from  some
cause  has  not  taken  it,  that  thing  is  called  cadu-
cum, as  if  it  had /alien  from  him ;  for  instance,  if
a  legacy  was  left  to  an  unmarried  person,  or  a
Latinus  .Junianus  ;  and  the  unmarried  person  did
not  within  a  hundred  days  obey  the  law,  or  if
within  the  same  time  the  Latinus  did  not  obtain
the  Jus  Quiritium,  or  had  become  a  peregrinus
(see  Cujacius,  ad  Ulpiani  TituLos  XXIX.  vol.  i.  ed.
Neapol.  1758),  the  legacy  was  caducum.  Or  if  a
heres  ex  parte,  or  a  legatee,  died  before  the  opening
of  the  will,  the  thing  was  caducum.  The  thing
which  failed  to  come  to  a  person  in  consequence
of  something  happening  in  the  life  of  the  testator
was  said  to  be  in  causa  caduci;  that  which  failed
of  taking  effect  between  the  death  of  the  testator
and  the  opening  of  the  will,  was  simply  called
caducum.  (Comp.  Dig.  28.  tit.  5.  s.  62,  and  Dig.
31.  s.  51 ;  Code  Civil,  Art.  1039,  &c.)

The  law  above  alluded  to  is  the  Lex  Julia  et
Papia  Poppaea,  which  is  sometimes  simply  called
Julia,  or  Papia  Poppaea.  This  law,  which  was
passed  in  the  time  of  Augustus  (a.  d.  9),  had  the
double  object  of  encouraging  marriages  and  enrich-
ing the  treasury — aerarium  (Tacit.  An7t.  iii.  25),
and  contained,  with  reference  to  these  two  objects,
a  great  number  of  provisions.  Martial  (v.  Fp.  75)
alludes  to  a  person  who  married  in  order  to  comply
with  the  law.

That  which  was  caducum  came,  in  the  first
place,  to  those  among  the  heredes  who  had  chil-
dren ;  and  if  the  heredes  had  no  children,  it  came
among  those  of  the  legatees  who  had  children.  The
law  gave  the  jus  accrescendi,  that  is,  the  right  to
the  caducum  as  far  as  the  third  degree  of  con-
sanguinity, both  ascending  and  descending  (Ulp.
Frag.  18),  to  those  who  were  made  heredes  by  the
will.  Under  the  provisions  of  the  law,  the  cadu-
cum, in  case  there  was  no  prior  claimant,  bel  ^nged
to  the  aerarium  ;  or,  as  Ulpian  (xxviii.  7)  exTjresses
it,  if  no  one  was  entitled  to  the  bonorum  possessio,
or  if  a  person  was  entitled,  but  did  not  assert  his
right,  the  bona  became  public  property  (populo
deferuntur),  according  to  the  Lex  Julia  caducaria ;
but  by  a  constitution  of  the  Emperor  Antoninus
Caracalla  it  was  appropriated  to  the  fiscus:  the  jus
accrescendi  above  mentioned  was,  however,  still
retained.  The  lawyers,  however  {viri  prudentis-
simi),  by  various  devices,  such  as  substitutions,
often  succeeded  in  making  th*^  law  of  no  effect.
A  case  is  mentioned  in  the  Digest  (28.  tit.  4.  s.  3),
in  which  bona  caduca  were  claimed  by  the  fiscus
in  the  time  of  Marcus  Antoninus,  and  another  in
which  the  fiscus  is  mentioned  even  under  Hadrian,
where  one  would  expect  to  find  the  tenn  aerarium
used.     (Savigny,  System,  &c.  ii.  273,  note  qq.)


i


BONA  FIDES.

He  who  took  the  portion  of  a  heres,  which
became  caducum,  took  it  by  universal  succession :
in  the  case  of  a  legacy,  the  caducum  was  a  singular
succession.  But  he  who  took  an  hcreditas  caduca,
took  it  with  the  bequests  of  freedom,  of  legacies,
and  fidei  commissa  with  which  it  was  burthened  :
if  the  legata  and  fidei  commissa  became  caduca,  all
charges  with  which  they  were  burthened  became
caduca  also.  In  the  time  of  Constantine,  both  the
caelebs,  and  the  orbus,  or  childless  person  (who  was
under  a  limited  incapacity),  obtained  the  fiill  legal
capacity  of  taking  the  inheritance,  (Cod.  viii.  58.)
Justinian  {Cod.  vi.  51)  put  an  end  to  the  caducum,
Avith  all  its  legal  consequences.  In  this  last-men-
tioned title  {De  Caducis  tollendis)  it  is  stated  both
that  the  name  and  the  thuig  {nomen  et  materia
caducorum)  had  their  origin  in  the  civil  Avars,  that
many  provisions  of  the  law  were  evaded,  and  many
had  become  obsolete.  (Juv.  Sat.  ix.  88 ;  Gains,
i.  150,  ii.  207,  iii.  144,  286;  Lipsius,  Excurs.  ad
Tacit.  Ann.  iii.  25;  MavezoW,  Lekrbuch  der  Jnstitnt.
des  Rom.  Eechts.)  As  to  the  Dos  Caduca,  see
Dos.  [G.  L.]

BONA  FIDES.  This  term  frequently  occurs
in  the  Latin  writers,  and  particularly  in  the  Roman
jurists.  It  can  only  be  defined  with  reference  to
things  opposed  to  it,  namely,  mala  fides,  and  dolus
malus,  both  of  which  terms,  and  especially  the
latter,  are  frequently  used  in  a  technical  sense.
[Dolus  Malus.]

Generally  speaking,  bona  fides  implies  the  ab-
sence of  all  fraud  and  unfair  dealing  or  acting.  In
this  sense,  bona  fides,  that  is,  the  absence  of  all
fraud,  whether  the  fraud  consists  in  simulation  or
dissimulation,  is  a  necessary  ingredient  in  all  con-
tracts.

Bona  fide  possidere  applies  to  him  who  has  ac-
quired the  possession  of  a  thing  under  a  good  title,
as  he  supposes.  He  who  possessed  a  thing  bona
fide,  had  a  capacity  of  acquiring  the  ownership
by  usucapion,  and  had  the  protection  of  the  actio
Publiciana.  Thus  a  person  who  received  a  thing
either  mancipi,  or  nee  mancipi,  not  from  the  owner,
but  from  a  person  whom  he  believed  to  be  the
owner,  could  acquire  the  ownership  by  usucapion.
(Gains,  ii.  43  ;  Ulp.  Frag.  xix.  8.)  A  thing  which
was /urtiva  or  vi  possessa,  or  the  res  mancipi  of  a
female  who  was  in  the  tutela  of  her  agnati,  unless
it  was  delivered  by  her  under  the  auctoritas  of  her
tutor,  was  not  subject  to  usucapion,  and  therefore
in  these  cases  the  presence  or  absence  of  bona  fides
was  immaterial,  (Gains,  i.  192,  ii.  45,  &c.  ;  Cic.
Ad  Att.  i.  5,  Pro  Flacco^  c.  34.)  A  person  who
bought  from  a  pupillus  without  the  auctoritas  of
his  tutor,  or  with  the  auctoritas  of  a  person  whom
he  knew  not  to  be  the  tutor,  did  not  purchase
bona  fide  ;  that  is,  he  was  guilty  of  a  legal  fraud.
A  sole  tutor  could  not  purchase  a  thing  bona  fide
from  his  pupillus ;  and  if  he  purchased  it  from
another  to  whom  a  non  bona  fide  sale  had  been
made,  the  transaction  was  null.     (Dig.  26.  tit.  8.

In  various  actions  arising  out  of  mutual  dealings,
such  as  buying  and  selling,  lending  and  hiring,
partnership,  and  others,  bona  fides  is  equivalent  to
aequum  and  justum  ;  and  such  actions  were  some-
times called  bonae  fidei  actiones.  The  formula  of
the  praetor,  which  was  the  authority  of  the  judex,
empowered  him  in  such  cases  to  inquire  and  deter-
mhie  ex  bona  fide.,  that  is  according  to  the  real
merits  of  the  case :  sometimes  aequius  melius  was


BONORUM  CESSIO.


207


used  instead  of  ex  bona  fide.  (Gains,  iv.  6'?. ;  Oic
Off',  iii.  1 7,  Topic,  c.  1 7  ;  Brissonius,  De  FarmuUs,
&c.  lib.  V.)

BONA  RAPTA.     [Furtum,]

BONA  VACA'NTIA  were  originally  the  pro-
perty which  a  person  left  at  his  death  without
having  disposed  of  it  by  will,  and  without  leaving
any  heres.  Such  property  was  open  to  occupancy,
and  so  long  as  the  strict  laws  of  inheritance  ex-
isted, such  an  event  must  not  have  been  uncom-
mon. A  remedy  was,  however,  found  for  this  by
the  bonorum  possessio  of  the  praetor.

It  does  not  appear  that  the  state  originally
claimed  the  property  of  a  person  who  died  intes-
tate and  without  lieredes  legilimi.  The  claim  of
the  state  to  such  property  seems  to  have  been  first
established  by  the  Lex  Julia  et  Papia  Poppaea.
[Bona  Caduca.]  The  state,  that  is,  in  the  earlier
periods  the  aerarium,  and  afterwards  the  fiscus,
did  not  take  such  property  as  heres,  but  it  took  it
per  universitatem.  In  the  later  periods  of  the
empire,  in  the  case  of  a  soldier  dying  without
heredes,  the  legion  to  which  he  belonged  had  a
claim  before  the  fiscus  ;  and  various  corporate
bodies  had  a  like  preference  in  the  case  of  a  mem-
ber of  the  corporation  dying  without  heredes.
(Marezoll,  Lehrbuch  der  Inntit.  des  Rom.  Redds ;
Sa^■ignv,  System.,  <tc.  vol,  ii.  p,  300.)         [G,  L.]

BONO'RUM  CE'SSIO.  There  were  two  kinds
of  bonorum  cessio,  in  jure  and  extra  jus.  The  In
jure  cessio  is  treated  under  its  proper  head.

The  lx)7iorum  cessio  eoetrajus  was  introduced  by
a  Julian  law,  passed  either  in  the  time  of  Julius
Caesar  or  Augustus,  which  allowed  an  insolvent
debtor  to  give  up  his  property  to  his  creditors.
The  debtor  might  declare  his  willingness  to  give
up  his  property  by  letter  or  by  a  verbal  message.
The  debtor  thus  avoided  the  infamia  consequent
on  the  bonorum  emtio,  which  was  involuntarj-,
and  he  was  free  from  all  personal  execution.  He
was  also  allowed  to  retain  a  small  portion  of  his
property  for  his  support.  An  old  gloss  describes
the  bonorum  cessio  thus  :  Cedere  bonis  est  ab  uni-
versitaie  rerum  suarum  recedere.

The  property  thus  given  up  Avas  sold,  and  the
proceeds  distributed  among  the  creditors.  The
purchaser  did  not  obtain  the  Quiritarian  ownership
of  the  property  by  the  act  of  purchase.  If  the
debtor  subsequently  acquired  property,  this  also
Avas  liable  to  the  payment  of  his  old  debts,  with
some  limitations,  if  they  were  not  already  fully
satisfied.  A  constitution  of  Alexander  Severus
(Cod.  7.  tit.  71.  s.  1)  declares  that  those  Avho  made
a  bonorum  cessio  were  not  released,  unless  the
creditors  were  fully  paid  ;  but  they  had  the  privi-
lege of  not  being  imprisoned,  if  judgment  was  given
against  them  in  an  action  by  one  of  their  old  cre-
ditors.

The  benefit  of  the  lex  Julia  was  extended  by
imperial  constitutions  to  the  provinces.

The  history  of  the  bonorum  cessio  does  not
seem  quite  clear.  The  Julian  laAV,  however,  was
not  the  oldest  enactment  Avhich  relieved  the  person
of  the  debtor  from  being  taken  in  execution.  The
lex  Poetelia  Papiria  (b,  c.  327)  exempted  the  per-
son of  the  debtor  {nisi  qui  noxam  meruissei).,  and
only  made  his  property  {bond)  liable  for  his  debts.
It  does  not  appear  from  the  passage  in  Livy  (viii.
28)  whether  this  Avas  a  bonorum  cessio  in  the
sense  of  the  bonorum  cessio  of  the  Julian  law.  or
only  a  bonorum  emtio  Avith  the  privilege  of  freedom


208


BONORUM  EMTIO.


from  arrest.  The  Tablet  of  Heraclea  (Mazocchi,
p,  42."ij  speaks  ol  these  qui  in  jure  bonam  copiam
Juraoant ;  a  phrase  which  appears  to  be  equivalent
to  the  bonorum  cessio,  and  was  a  declaration  on
oath  in  jure^  that  is,  before  the  praetor,  by  the
debtor  that  his  property  was  sufficient  to  pay  his
debts.  But  this  was  still  accompanied  with  in-
lamia.  So  far  as  we  can  learn  from  Livy,  no  such
declaration  of  solvency  was  required  from  the
debtor  by  the  Poetelia  lex.  The  Julian  law  ren-
dered the  process  of  the  cessio  bonorum  more
simple,  by  making  it  a  procedure  extra  jus,  and
giving  further  privileges  to  the  insolvent.  Like
several  other  Julian  laws,  it  appears  to  have  con-
solidated and  extended  the  provisions  of  previous
enactments.  The  term  bonorum  cessio  is  used  in
the  Scotch  law,  and  the  early  practice  was  derived
from  the  Roman  system,  (Gains,  iii,  28  ;  Dig.  42.
tit  3  ;  Cod,  vii,  tit.  71.)  [G.  L,]

BONO'RUM  COLLA'TIO.  By  the  strict
rules  of  the  civil  law  an  emancipated  son  had  no
right  to  the  inheritance  of  his  father,  whether  he
died  testate  or  intestate.  But,  in  course  of  time,
the  praetor  granted  to  emancipated  children  the
privilege  of  equal  succession  with  those  who  re-
mained in  the  power  of  the  father  at  the  time  of
his  death  ;  and  this  grant  might  be  either  contra
ta/ndas  or  «/»  intestato.  But  this  favour  was  granted
to  emancipated  children  only  on  condition  that
they  should  bring  into  one  common  stock  with
their  father's  property,  and  for  the  purpose  of  an
equal  division  among  all  the  father's  children,  what-
ever property  they  had  at  the  time  of  the  father's
death,  and  which  would  have  been  acquired  for
the  father  in  case  they  had  still  remained  in  his
power.  This  was  called  bonorum  collatio.  It  re-
sembles the  old  English  hotchpot,  upon  the  prin-
ciple of  which  is  framed  the  provision  in  the  statute
22  and  23  Charles  II.  c.  10,  s.  5,  as  to  the  distri-
bution of  an  intestate's  estate,  (Dig,  37.  tit.  6  ;
Cod.  vi,  tit,  20  ;  Thibaut,  System  des  Pandekten
JRecJds,  §  901,  &c.,  9th  ed,,  where  the  rules  appli-
cable to  the  bonorum  collatio  are  more  particularly
stated,)  [G,  L,]

BONO'RUM  E'MTIO  ET  EMTOR.  The
expression  bonorum  emtio  applies  to  a  sale  of  the
property  either  of  a  living  or  of  a  dead  person.  It
was  in  effect,  as  to  a  living  debtor,  an  execution.
In  the  case  of  a  living  person,  his  goods  were
liable  to  be  sold  if  he  concealed  himself  for  the
purpose  of  defrauding  his  creditors,  and  was  not
defended  in  his  absence  ;  or  if  he  made  a  bononmi
cessio  according  to  the  .Julian  law  ;  or  if  he  did  not
pay  any  sum  of  money  which  he  was  by  judicial
sentence  ordered  to  pay,  within  the  time  fixed  by
the  laws  of  the  Twelve  Tables  (Aul,  Gell.  xv,  13,
XX.  1)  or  by  the  praetor's  edict.  In  the  case  of  a
dead  person,  his  property  was  sold  when  it  was
ascertained  that  there  was  neither  heres  nor  bono-
rum possessor,  nor  any  other  person  entitled  to
succeed  to  it.  In  this  case  the  property  belonged
to  the  state  after  the  passing  of  the  J^ex  Julia  et
Papia  Poppaea.  If  a  person  died  in  debt,  the  prae-
tor ordered  a  sale  of  his  property  on  the  application
of  the  creditoi-s.  (Gains,  ii,  154,  167.)  In  the
case  of  the  property  of  a  living  person  being  sold,
the  praetor,  on  the  application  of  the  creditors,  or-
dered it  to  be  possessed  {jHjssideri)  by  the  creditors
for  thirty  successive  days,  and  notice  to  be  given
of  the  sale.  This  explains  the  expression  in  Livy
(ii.  24)  :  "  ne  quis  militis,  donee  in  castris  essct,


BONORUM  POSSESS!  0.
\iOT)?i  possiderct  aut  venderet,"  The  creditors  were
said  in  possessionem  rerum  debitoris  miiti :  8om(>-
times  a  single  creditor  obtained  the  possessio.
When  several  creditors  obtained  the  possessio,  it
was  usual  to  entrust  the  management  of  the  busi-
ness to  one  of  them,  who  was  chosen  by  a  majority
of  the  creditors.  The  creditors  then  met  and  chose
a  jnagister,  that  is,  a  person  to  sell  the  property
(Cic.  Ad  Att.  i.  9,  vi.  1  ;  Pro  P.  Q^iintio,  c.  15),
or  a  curator  bonorum  if  no  immediate  sale  was
intended.  The  purchaser,  emtor^  obtained  by  the
sale  only  the  bonorum  possessio :  the  property  was
his  In  bonis,  imtil  he  acquired  the  Quiritarian
ownership  by  usucapion.  The  foundation  of  this
rule  seems  to  be,  that  the  consent  of  the  owner  was
considered  necessary  in  order  to  transfer  the  owner-
ship. Both  the  bonorum  possessores  and  the  em-
tores  had  no  legal  rights  (directae  actiones)  against
the  debtors  of  the  person  whose  property  was  pos-
sessed or  purchased,  nor  could  they  be  legally
sued  by  them  ;  but  the  praetor  allowed  utiles  ac-
tiones both  in  their  favour  and  against  them.
(Gains,  iii.  77  ;  iv.  35,  65  and  111 ;  Dig.  42.  tit.
4,  5  ;  Savigny.  Das  Pecht  des  Besitzes,  p.  410,
5th  ed.)  [G.  L,]

BONO'RUM  POSSE'SSIO  is  defined  by
Ulpian  (Dig,  37,  tit,  1.  s,  3)  to  be  "  the  right  of
suing  for  or  retaining  a  patrimony  or  thing  which
belonged  to  another  at  the  time  of  his  death,"  The
strict  laws  of  the  Twelve  Tables  as  to  inheritance
were  gradually  relaxed  by  tlie  praetor's  edict,  and
a  new  kind  of  succession  was  introduced,  by  which
a  person  might  have  a  bonorum  possessio  who
could  have  no  hereditas  or  legal  inlieritance.

The  bonorum  possessio  was  given  by  the  edict
both  contra  iabulas^  secundum  tabulas,  and  intes-
tati.

An  emancipated  son  had  no  legal  claim  on  the
inheritance  of  his  father  ;  but  if  he  was  omitted  in
his  father's  will,  or  not  expressly  exheredated,  the
praetor's  edict  gave  him  the  bonorum  possessio
contra  tabulas,  on  condition  that  he  would  bring
into  hotchpot  {bonorum  collatio)  with  his  brethren
who  continued  in  the  parent's  power,  whatever
property  he  had  at  the  time  of  the  parent's  death.
The  bonorum  possessio  was  given  both  to  children
of  the  blood  (naturales)  and  to  adopted  children,
provided  the  former  were  not  adopted  into  any
other  family,  and  the  latter  were  in  the  adoptive
parent's  power  at  the  time  of  his  death.  If  a
frcedman  made  a  will  without  leaving  his  patron
as  much  as  one  half  of  his  property,  the  patron
obtained  the  bonorum  possessio  of  one  half,  unless
the  freedman  appointed  a  son  of  his  own  blood  as
his  successor.

The  bonorum  possessio  secundum  tabulas  was
that  possession  which  the  praetor  gave,  conform-
ably to  the  words  of  the  will,  to  those  named  in  it
as  heredes,  when  there  was  no  person  intitlcd  to
make  a  claim  against  the  will,  or  none  who  chose
to  make  such  a  claim.  It  was  also  given  secundum
tabulas  in  cases  where  all  the  requisite  legal  form-
alities had  not  been  observed,  provided  there  were
seven  proper  witnesses  to  the  will,  (Gains,  ii.
147,  "  si  modo  defunctus,"  &c,)

In  the  case  of  intestacy  (intestati)  there  were
seven  degrees  of  persons  who  might  claim  the
bonorum  possessio,  each  in  his  order,  upon  there
being  no  claim  of  a  prior  degi-ee.  The  three  first
class  were  children,  lepitimi  heredes  and  proximi
cojnati.     Emancipated  children  could  chiim  as  well


BOONAE.

as  those  w^ho  were  n^t  emancipated,  and  adoptive
as  well  as  children  of  the  blood  ;  but  not  children
who  had  been  adopted  into  another  family.  If
a  freedman  died  intestate,  leaving  only  a  wife  (in
manu)  or  an  adoptive  son,  the  patron  was  entitled
to  the  bonorum  possessio  of  one  half  of  his  property.

The  bonorum  possessio  was  given  either  cum  re
or  sine  re.  It  was  given  cum  re,  when  the  person
to  whom  it  was  given  thereby  obtained  the  pro-
perty or  inheritance.  It  was  given  sine  re,  when
another  person  could  assert  his  claim  to  the  in-
heritance by  the  jus  civile  :  as  if  a  man  died  intes-
tate leaving  a  suus  heres,  the  grant  of  the  bonorum
possessio  would  have  no  effect ;  for  the  heres  could
maintain  his  legal  right  to  the  inheritance.  Or  if
a  person  who  was  named  heres  in  a  valid  will  was
satisfied  with  his  title  according  to  the  jus  civile,
and  did  not  choose  to  ask  for  the  bonorum  possessio
(which  he  was  entitled  to  if  he  chose  to  have  it),
those  who  would  have  been  heredes  in  case  of  an  in-
testacy might  claim  the  bonorum  possessio,  which,
however,  would  be  unavailing  against  the  legal  title
of  the  testamentary  heres,  and  therefore  sine  re.

Parents  and  children  might  claim  the  bonorum
possessio  within  a  year  from  the  time  of  their  being
able  to  make  the  claim  ;  others  were  required  to
make  the  claim  within  a  himdred  days.  On  the
failure  of  such  party  to  make  his  claim  within  the
proper  time,  the  right  to  claim  the  bonorum  pos-
sessio devolved  on  those  next  in  order,  through
the  seven  degrees  of  succession.

He  who  received  the  bononim  possessio  was  not
thereby  made  Iieres,  but  he  was  placed  heredis  loco;
for  the  praetor  could  not  make  a  heres.  The  pro-
perty of  which  the  possession  was  thus  given  was
only  In  bonis,  until  by  usucapion  the  possession
was  converted  into  Quiritarian  ownership  (domi-
nium). All  the  claims  and  obligations  of  the  de-
ceased person  were  transferred  with  the  bonorum
possessio  to  the  possessor  or  praetorian  heres  ;
and  he  was  protected  in  his  possession  by  the  in-
terdictum  Quorum  bonorum.  The  benefit  of  this
interdict  was  limited  to  cases  of  bonorum  possessio,
and  this  was  the  reason  why  a  person  who  could
claim  the  inheritance  in  case  of  intestacy  by  the
civil  law  sometimes  chose  to  ask  for  the  bonorum
possessio  also.  The  praetorian  heres  could  only
Bue  and  be  sued  in  respect  of  the  property  by  a
legal  fiction.  He  was  not  able  to  sustain  a  directa
actio  ;  but  in  order  to  give  him  this  capacity,  he
was  by  a  fiction  of  law  supposed  to  be  what  he
was  not,  heres ;  and  he  was  said  jvAo  se  herede
agere.,  or  intendere.  The  actions  which  he  could
sustain  or  defend  were  actiones  utiles.  (Cic.  Ad
Fam.  vii.  21  ;  Gaius,  iii.  25—38,  iv.  34  ;  Ulp.
Frag.  tit.  28,  2.9  ;  Dig.  37.  tit.  4.  s.  19  ;  tit.  11  ;
Dig.  38.  tit.  6 ;  a  good  general  view  of  the  bonorum
possessio  is  given  by  Marezoll,  Lehrhuch  der  In-
stitutionen  des  Rom.  Rechts,  §  174  ;  Thibaut,  Sys-
tem des  Pandekien  Rechts,  §  843,  9th  ed.)    [G.  L.]

BONO'RUM  POSSESSIO.  [Interdictum.]

BONO'RUM  RAPTO'RUM  ACTIO.   LFur-

TUM,]

BOO'NAE  (jSowvoi),  persons  in  Athens  who
purchased  oxen  for  the  public  sacrifices  and  feasts.
They  are  spoken  of  by  Demosthenes  (c.  Mid.  p.
570)  in  conjunction  with  the  lepoiroioi  and  those
who  presided  over  the  mysteries,  and  are  ranked
by  Libanius  (Declam.  viiL )  with  the  sitonae,  gene-
rals, and  ambassadors.  Their  office  is  spoken  of  as
honourable  by  Hai-pocr.ition  (s.c.)  ;   but  Pollux


BOULE.  209

(viii.  114)  includes  them  among  the  inferior  offices
or  offices  of  service  (inrrjpecriai,  Bockh,  Fu(/l.  Fcon.
of  Athens, -p.  216,  2d  ed.)

BOREASMI  or  BOREASMUS  (fiopeaanol
or  fiopeaafi6s),  a  festival  celebrated  by  the  Athe-
nians in  honour  of  Boreas  (Hesych.  s.  v.),  which,
as  Herodotus  (vii.  189)  seems  to  think,  was  insti-
tuted during  the  Persian  war,  when  the  Athenians,
being  commanded  by  an  oracle  to  invoke  their
ya/xSphs  iirlKovpos,  prayed  to  Boreas.  The  fleet
of  Xerxes  was  soon  afterwards  destroyed  by  a
north  wind,  near  Cape  Sepias,  and  the  grateful
Athenians  erected  to  his  honour  a  temple  on  the
banks  of  the  llissus.  But  considering  that  Boreas
was  intimately  connected  with  the  early  history  of
Attica,  since  he  is  said  to  have  carried  off  and
married  Oreithya,  daughter  of  Erechtheus  (Herod.
I.  c.  ;  Pans.  i.  19.  §  6),  and  that  he  was  familiar  to
them  under  the  name  of  brother-in-law,  we  have
reason  to  suppose  that  even  previous  to  the  Persian
wars  certain  honours  were  paid  to  him,  which  were
perhaps  only  revived  and  increased  after  the  event
recorded  by  Herodotus.  The  festival,  however,
does  not  seem  ever  to  have  had  any  great  celebrity  ;
for  Plato  (Fhaedr.  p.  229)  represents  Phaedrus  as
unacquainted  even  with  the  site  of  the  temple  of
Boreas.  Particulars  of  this  festival  are  not  known,
except  that  it  was  celebrated  with  banquets.

Pausanias  (viii.  36.  §  4)  mentions  a  festival  cele-
brated with  annual  sacrifices  at  Megalopolis  in
honour  of  Boreas,  who  was  thought  to  have  been
their  deliverer  from  the  Lacedaemonians.  (Comp.
Aelian,  V.  H.  xii.  61.)

Aelian  Q,.  c.)  says  that  the  Thurians  also  offered
an  annual  sacrifice  to  Boreas,  because  he  had  de-
stro^^ed  the  fleet  with  which  Dionysius  of  Syra-
cuse attacked  them  ;  and  adds  the  curious  remark,
that  a  decree  was  made  which  bestowed  upon  him
the  right  of  citizenship,  and  assigned  to  him  a
house  and  a  piece  of  land.  This,  however,  is  per-
haps merely  another  way  of  expressing  the  fact,
that  the  Thurians  adopted  the  worship  of  Boreas,
and  dedicated  to  him  a  temple,  with  a  piece  of
land.  [L.  S.]

BOULE'  (PovK'fi),  a  deliberate  assembly  or
council.  In  the  heroic  ages,  represented  to  us  by
Homer,  the  ^ovXi]  is  simply  an  aristocratical
council  of  the  nobles,  sitting  under  their  king  as
president,  who,  however,  did  not  possess  any  greater
authority  than  the  other  members,  except  what  that
position  gave  him.  The  nobles,  thus  assembled,
decided  on  public  business  and  judicial  matters,
frequently  in  connection  with,  but  apparently  not
subject  to,  nor  of  necessity  controlled  by,  an  ayopd,
or  meeting  of  the  freemen  of  the  state.  (//.  ii.  53,
143,  xviii.  503,  Od.  ii.  239.)  This  form  of  govern-
ment, though  it  existed  for  some  time  in  the  Ionian,
Aeolian,  and  Achaean  states,  was  at  last  wholly  abo-
lished. Amongst  the  Dorians,  however,  especially
with  the  Spartans,  this  was  not  the  case  ;  for  it  is
well  known  that  they  retained  the  kingly  power  of
the  Heracleidae,  in  conjunction  with  the  yepovala
[Gerousia],  or  assembly  of  elders,  of  which  the
kings  were  members.  At  Athens,  there  were  two
councils,  one  usually  called  the  Areiopagus  from
its  meeting  on  the  hill  of  Ares  (^  ^v  'Apdcp  irdytp
)8oi/\Tj),  which  was  more  of  an  aristocratical  cha-
racter, and  is  spoken  of  under  Areiopagus,  and
the  other  called  T/ie  Council  or  Senate  of  the  Five
Hundred  (rj  twv  ircvTaKoaiau  fiov\i)),  or  simply
Tlie  Council  or  Senate  (^   PovKi]\   which  was  a


210


BOULE.


representative,  and  in  most  respects  a  popular  body
(5r)uoTiK6y).  It  is  of  the  latter  council  that  the
folio  iving  article  treats.

Its  first  institution  is  generally  attributed  to
Solon.  There  are,  however,  strong  reasons  for  sup-
posing that,  as  in  the  case  of  the  areiopagus,  he
merely  modified  the  constitution  of  a  body  which
he  found  already  existing.  In  the  first  place  it  is
improbable,  and  in  fact  almost  inconsistent  with
the  existence  of  any  government,  except  an  abso-
lute monarchy,  to  suppose  that  there  was  no
such  council.  Besides  this,  Herodotus  (v.  71)
tells  us  that  in  the  time  of  Cylon  (b.  c.  620),
Athens  was  under  the  direction  of  the  presidents
of  the  Naucraries  (vavKpapiai),  the  number  of
which  was  forty-eight,  twelve  out  of  each  of  the
four  tribes.  Moreover,  we  read  of  the  case  of  the
Alcmaeonidae  being  referred  to  an  aristocratical
tribunal  of  300  persons,  and  that  Isagoras,  the
leader  of  the  aristocratic  party  at  Athens,  endea-
voured to  suppress  the  council,  or  fiovKi],  which
Cleisthenes  had  raised  to  600  in  number,  and  to
vest  the  government  in  the  hands  of  300  of  his
o%\Ti  party.  (Herod,  v.  72  ;  Plut.  Sol.  12.)  This,
as  Thirl  wall  {Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  ii.  p.  41)  re-
marks, can  hardly  have  been  a  chance  coincidence  :
and  he  also  suggests  that  there  may  have  been  two
councils,  one  a  smaller  body,  like  the  Spartan
yepovcria,  and  the  other  a  general  assembly  of  the
Eupatrids  ;  thus  corresponding,  one  to  the  senatus,
the  other  to  the  comitia  curiata,  or  assembly  of  the
burghers  at  Rome.  But  be  this  as  it  may,  it  is
admitted  that  Solon  made  the  number  of  his  ^ovKi]
400,  taking  the  members  from  the  three  first  classes,
100  from  each  of  the  four  tribes.  On  the  tribes
being  remodelled  by  Cleisthenes  (b.  c.  510),  and
laised  to  ten  in  number,  the  council  also  was  in-
creased to  500,  fift}^  being  taken  from  each  of  the
ten  tribes.  It  is  doubtful  whether  the  jSouAeurat,
or  councillors,  were  at  first  appointed  by  lot,  as
they  were  afterwards  ;  but  as  it  is  stated  to  have
been  Solon's  wish  to  make  the  ^ovKi]  a  restraint
upon  the  people,  and  as  he  is,  moreover,  said  to
have  chosen  {iiriX^^dix^vos,  Plut.  SoL  19)  100
members  from  each  of  the  tribes,  it  seems  reason-
able to  suppose  that  they  were  elected,  more  espe-
cially when  there  is  no  evidence  to  the  contrary.
(Thirlwall,  vol.  ii.  p.  42.)  It  is  at  any  rate  cer-
tain  that  an  election,  where  the  eupatrids  might
have  used  influence,  would  have  been  more  favour-
able to  Solon's  vicAvs,  than  an  appointment  by  lot.
But  whatever  was  the  practice  originally,  it  is  well
known  that  the  appointment  was  in  after  times
made  by  lot,  as  is  indicated  by  the  title  (oi  airh
rov  Kvifiov  PovKevrai),  suggested  by  the  use  of
beans  in  drawing  the  lots.  (Thuc.  viii.  69.)  The
individuals  thus  appointed  were  required  to  submit
to  a  scrutiny,  or  SoKifxacria,  in  which  they  gave
evidence  of  being  genuine  citizens  (yvija-toi  i^
6,fjL<po7u),  of  never  having  lost  their  civic  rights  by
aTifxla,  and  also  of  being  above  30  years  of  age.
They  remained  in  office  for  a  year,  receiving  a
drachma  (fJnaOhs  ^ovXcvtikSs)  for  each  day  on
which  they  sat:  and  independent  of  the  general
account,  or  (vdvvai,  which  the  whole  body  had  to
give  at  the  end  of  the  year,  any  single  member  was
liable  to  expulsion  for  misconduct,  by  his  colleagues.
(Harpocr.  s.  v.  'EK(pvWo<f>opLa  ;  Aesch.  c.  Timarch.
p.  15,  43,  ed.  Steph.)

This  senate  of  500  was  divided  into  ten  sections
of  fifty  each,  the  members  of  which  were  called


BOULE.

Prytanes  {irpvraveis),  and  were  all  of  the  same
tribe  ;  they  acted  as  presidents  both  of  the  council
and  the  assemblies  during  35  or  36  days,  as  the
case  might  be,  so  as  to  complete  the  lunar  year  of
354  days  (12  x  29g).  Each  tribe  exercised  these
functions  in  turn,  and  the  period  of  office  was  called
a  Frytany  (TrpvTaveia).  The  turn  of  each  tribe
was  determined  by  lot,  and  the  fom-  supernumerary
days  were  given  to  the  tribes  which  came  last  in
order.  (Clinton,  F.  H.  vol.  ii.  p.  346.)  Moreover,
to  obviate  the  difficulty  of  having  too  many  in
office  at  once,  every  fifty  was  subdivided  into  five
bodies  of  ten  each  ;  its  prytany  also  being  portioned
out  into  five  periods  of  seven  days  each :  so  that
only  ten  senators  presided  for  a  week  over  the  rest,
and  were  thence  called  Froedri  (TrpSeSpoi).  Again,
out  of  these  proedri  an  Epistates  (iTriaraTTis)  was
chosen  for  every  day  in  the  week  to  preside  as  a
chairman  in  the  senate,  and  the  assembly  of  the
people  ;  during  his  day  of  office  he  kept  the  pub-
lic records  and  seal.

The  prytanes  had  the  right  of  convening  the
council  and  the  assembly  (e/fKArjcia).  The  duty
of  the  proedri  and  their  president  was  to  propose
subjects  for  discussion,  and  to  take  the  votes  both
of  the  councillors  and  the  people  ;  for  neglect  of
their  duty  they  were  liable  to  a  fine.  (Dem.  c.
Timocr.  p.  703 — 707.)  Moreover,  whenever  a
meeting,  either  of  the  council  or  the  assembly,
was  convened,  the  chairman  of  the  proedri  selected
by  lot  nine  others,  one  from  each  of  the  non-pre-
siding tribes :  these  also  were  called  proedri  and
possessed  a  chairman  of  their  OAvn,  likewise  ap-
pointed by  lot  from  among  themselves.  On  their
functions,  and  the  probable  object  of  their  appoint-
ment, some  remarks  are  made  in  the  latter  part  of
this  article.

We  now  proceed  to  speak  of  the  duties  of  the
senate  as  a  body.  It  is  observed  under  the  Akeio-
PAGUS  that  the  chief  object  of  Solon  in  forming  the
senate  and  the  areiopagus  was  to  control  the  de-
mocratical  powers  of  the  state  ;  for  this  purpose
Solon  ordained  that  the  senate  should  discuss  and
vote  upon  all  matters  before  they  Avere  submitted
to  the  assembly,  so  that  nothing  could  be  laid  be-
fore the  people  on  Avhich  the  senate  had  not  come
to  a  previous  decision.  This  decision,  or  bill,  was
called  Frohouleuma  {npo€ov\^vfMa),  and  if  the  as-
sembly had  been  obliged  either  to  acquiesce  in  any
such  proposition,  or  to  gain  the  consent  of  the  senate
to  their  modification  of  it,  the  assembly  jvnd  the
senate  would  then  have  been  almost  equal  powers
in  the  state,  and  nearly  related  to  each  other,  as
our  two  houses  of  parliament.  But  besides  the
option  of  adopting  or  rejecting  a  TrpoSovK^vfx.a,  or
^■i]<pi(Tixa  as  it  was  sometimes  called,  the  people
possessed  and  exercised  the  power  of  coming  to  a
decision  completely  different  from  the  will  of  the
senate,  as  expressed  in  the  irpo€ov\ev/xa.  Thus  in
matters  relating  to  peace  and  war,  and  confederacies,
it  was  the  duty  of  the  senators  to  watch  over  the
interests  of  the  state,  and  they  could  initiate  what-
ever measures,  and  come  to  whatever  resolutions
they  might  think  necessary  ;  but  on  a  discussion
before  the  people  it  was  competent  for  any  in-
dividual to  move  a  different  or  even  contrary  pro-
position. To  take  an  example  :  —  In  the  Euboean
war  (b.  c.  350),  in  which  the  Thebans  were  opposed
to  the  Athenians,  the  senate  voted  that  all  the
cavalry  in  the  city  should  be  sent  out  to  assist  the
forces  then  besieged  at  Tamynae  ;  a  Trpo€ov\tvua


BOULE.

to  this  effect  was  proposed  to  the  people,  but  they
decided  that  the  cavalry  were  not  wanted,  and  the
expedition  was  not  undertaken.  Other  instances
of  this  kind  occur  in  Xenophon.  {Hell.  i.  7.  §  9,
vii.  1  §  2.)

In  addition  to  the  bills  which  it  was  the  duty  of
the  senate  to  propose  of  their  own  accord,  there  were
others  of  a  different  character,  viz.,  such  as  any
private  individual  might  wish  to  have  submitted  to
the  people.  To  accomplish  this  it  was  first  neces-
sary for  the  party  to  obtain,  by  petition,  the  privi-
lege of  access  to  the  senate  (irpSaoSuu  ypdi^a(rdai),
and  leave  to  propose  his  motion  ;  and  if  the  mea-
sure met  with  their  approbation,  he  could  then
submit  it  to  the  assembly.  (Dem.  c.  Timocr.  p.
715.)  Proposals  of  this  kind,  which  had  the
sanction  of  the  senate,  were  also  called  irpoSovXev-
/jLara,  and  frequently  related  to  the  conferring  of
some  particular  honour  or  privilege  upon  an  indi-
vidual. Thus  the  proposal  of  Ctesiphon  for  crown-
ing Demosthenes  is  so  styled,  as  also  that  of  Aris-
tocrates  for  conferring  extraordinary  privileges  on
Charidemus,  an  Athenian  commander  in  Thrace.
Any  measure  of  this  sort,  which  was  thus  approved
of  by  the  senate,  was  then  submitted  to  the  people,
and  by  them  simply  adopted  or  rejected  ;  and  "  it
is  in  these  and  simihir  cases,  that  the  statement  of
the  grammarians  is  true,  that  no  law  or  measure
could  be  presented  for  ratification  by  the  people
Avithout  the  previous  approbation  of  the  senate,  by
which  it  assumed  the  form  of  a  decree  passed  by
that  body."  (Schomann,  De  Comitiis,  p.  103,
transl.)

In  the  assembly  the  bill  of  the  senate  was  first
read,  perhaps  by  the  crier,  after  the  introductory
ceremonies  were  over  ;  and  then  the  procdri  put
the  question  to  the  people,  whether  they  approved
of  it,  or  wished  to  give  the  subject  further  delibera-
tion. (Aristoph.77ies.290.)  The  people  declared  their
will  by  a  show  of  hands  (ivpox^i-poTovia).  Some-
times, however,  the  bill  was  not  proposed  and  ex-
})lained  by  one  of  the  proedri,  but  by  a  private  in-
dividual—  either  the  original  applicant  for  leave
to  bring  forward  the  measure,  or  a  senator  distin-
guished for  oratorical  power.  Examples  of  this
are  given  by  Schomann  {De  Com.  p.  106,  transl.).
If  the  TTpoSovAeufia  of  the  senate  were  rejected  by
the  people,  it  was  of  course  null  and  void.  If  it  hap-
pened that  it  was  neither  confirmed  nor  rejected,
it  was  eTreVeiOj',  that  is,  only  remained  in  force
during  the  year  the  senate  was  in  office.  (Dem.
c.  Aris.  p.  651.)  If  it  was  confirmed  it  became  a
\i/-fl(pi(rfJLa^  or  decree  of  the  people,  binding  upon  all
classes.  The  form  for  drawing  up  such  decrees
varied  in  different  ages.  Before  the  archonship  of  '
Eucleides  (b.  c.  403),  they  were  generally  headed
by  the  fonnula  — "ESo^e  rfj  fiovAy  Kal  t(j5  Stj/u^  :
then  the  tribe  was  mentioned  in  whose  prytany
the  decree  was  passed  ;  then  the  names  of  the
ypafj-iLLaTevs  or  scribe,  and  chairman  ;  and  lastly  that
of  the  author  of  the  resolution.  Examples  of  this
form  occur  in  Andocides  (De  Myst.  p.  13)  :  thus —
*'E5o|€  TTj  ^ov\rj  Kol  T(f  S-^jU^j,  klavrXs  iTrpyrdueue,
KXeoyevTis  iypafi/xaTeve,  BoT}6hs  eireardTei,  rdSe
AriiJ.6<pavos  (rvv4ypa\p€v.  (Comp.  Thuc.  iv.  118.)
From  the  archonship  of  Eucleides  till  about  b.  c.
325,  the  decrees  commence  with  the  name  of  the
archon  ;  then  come  the  day  of  the  month,  the  tribe
in  office,  and  lastly  the  name  of  the  proposer.  The
motive  for  passing  the  decree  is  next  stated  ;  and
then  follows  the  decree  itself,  prefaced  with  the


BOULE.  211

formula  SedSxdai  rij  /SouA?;  Kal  rep  hr]fx.u>.  The
reader  is  referred  to  Demosthenes,  De  Corona,  for
examples.  After  b.  c.  325,  another  form  was  used,
which  continued  unaltered  till  the  latest  times.
(Schomann,  p.  1 36,  transl.)

Mention  has  just  been  made  of  the  ypaixfiaTcvst
whose  name  was  afiixed  to  the  ^pr}({H(riJ.aTa,  as  in
the  example  given  above.  He  was  a  clerk  chosen
by  lot  by  the  senate,  in  ever}^  prytany,  for  the  pur-
pose of  keeping  the  records,  and  resolutions  passed
dui-ing  that  period  ;  he  was  called  the  clerk  ac-
cording to  the  prytany  (6  Kara  Trpyrauelau),  and
the  name  of  the  clerk  of  the  first  prj-tany  was
sometimes  used  to  designate  the  year.  (Pollux,
viii.  98;  Bockh,  Fubl.  Econ.  of  Athens,  p.  186,
2nd  ed.)

With  respect  to  the  power  of  the  senate,  it  must
be  clearly  understood  that,  except  in  cases  of  small
importance,  they  had  only  the  right  of  originating,
not  of  finally  deciding  on  public  questions.  Since,
however,  the  senators  were  convened  by  the  pry-
tanes  every  day,  except  on  festivals  or  oKperoi
r)/xepai  (Pollux,  viii.  95),  it  is  obvious  that  they
would  be  fit  recipients  of  any  intelligence  affect-
ing the  interests  of  the  state,  and  it  is  admitted
that  they  had  the  right  of  proposing  any  measure
to  meet  the  emergency  ;  for  example,  we  find  that
Demosthenes  gives  them  an  account  of  the  conduct
of  Aeschines  and  himself,  when  sent  out  as  ambas-
sadors to  Philip,  in  consequence  of  which  they  pro-
pose a  bill  to  the  people.  Again,  when  Philip  seized
on  Elateia  (b.  c.  338),  the  senate  was  immediately
called  together  by  the  prytanes  to  determine  what
was  best  to  be  done.  (Dem.  De  Fed.  Leg.  p.
346,  De  Cor.  p.  284.)  But,  besides  possessing  the
initiatory  power  of  which  we  have  spoken,  the
senate  was  sometimes  delegated  by  the  people  to
determine  absolutely  about  particular  matters,  with-
out reference  to  the  assembly.  Thus  we  are  told
(Dem.  De  Fal.  Leg.  p.  389)  that  the  people  gave
the  senate  power  to  decide  about  sending  ambas-
sadors to  Philip  ;  and  Andocides  (Ilepi  Muo-ttj-
pioov)  informs  us  that  the  senate  was  invested
with  absolute  authority  (^f  yap  avroKparcop),  to
investigate  the  outrages  committed  upon  the  statues
of  Hermes,  previously  to  the  sailing  of  the  Sicilian
expedition.

Sometimes  also  the  senate  was  empowered  to
act  in  conjunction  with  the  nomothetae  {(rvvvo-
fjLoOeTe^v),  as  on  the  revision  of  the  laws  after
the  expulsion  of  the  Thirty  by  Thrasybulus  and
his  party,  b.  c.  403.  (Andoc.  De  Myst.  p.  12  ;
Dem.  e.  Timocr.  p.  708.)  Moreover,  it  was  the
province  of  the  senate  to  receive  elaayycXiai,  or
informations  of  extraordinary  crimes  committed
against  the  state,  and  for  which  there  was  no  spe-
cial law  provided.  The  senate  in  such  cases  either
decided  themselves,  or  referred  the  case  to  one  of
the  courts  of  the  heliaea,  especially  if  they  thought
it  required  a  higher  penalty  than  it  was  competent
for  them  to  impose,  viz.,  500  drachmae.  It  was
also  their  duty  to  decide  on  the  qualification  of
magistrates,  and  the  character  of  members  of  their
own  body.  But  besides  the  duties  we  have  enu-
merated, the  senate  discharged  important  functions
in  cases  of  finance.  All  legislative  authority,  in-
deed, in  such  matters  rested  with  the  people,  the
amount  of  expenditure  and  the  sources  of  revenue
being  determined  by  the  decrees  which  they
passed  ;  but  the  administration  was  entrusted  to
the  senate,  as  the  executive  power  of  the  state,
p  2


212


BOULE.


and  responsible  (uirevOwos)  to  the  people.  Tlius
Xenophon  {De  Rep.  Ath.  iii.  2)  tells  us  that  the
senate  was  occupied  with  providing  money,  with
receiving  the  tribute,  and  with  the  management  of
naval  affairs  and  the  temples  ;  and  Lysias  (c.
Nicom.  p.  185)  makes  the  following  remark:  —
"  When  the  senate  has  sufficient  money  for  the
administration  of  affairs,  it  does  nothing  wrong  ;
but  when  it  is  in  want  of  funds,  it  receives  in-
formations, and  confiscates  the  property  of  the
citizens,"  The  letting  of  the  duties  {r^Kwvai)  was
also  imder  its  superintendence,  and  those  who
were  in  possession  of  any  sacred  or  public  moneys
{'iepa  KoX  offia)  were  bound  to  pay  them  into
the  senate-house  ;  and  in  defavilt  of  payment,  the
senate  had  the  power  of  enforcing  it,  in  conformity
with  the  laws  for  the  farming  of  the  duties  (ot
TiXaviKoX  vdfioi).  The  accounts  of  the  moneys
that  had  been  received,  and  of  those  still  re-
maining due,  were  delivered  to  the  senate  by  the
apodectae,  or  public  treasurers.  [Apodectae.]
*'  The  senate  arranged  also  the  application  of  the
public  money,  even  in  trifling  matters,  such  as  the
salary  of  the  poets  ;  the  superintendence  of  the
cavalry  maintained  by  the  state,  and  the  ex-
amination of  the  infirm  (dSworot)  supported  by
the  state,  are  particularly  mentioned  among  its
duties  ;  the  public  debts  were  also  paid  under  its
direction.  From  this  enumeration  we  are  justified  in
inferring  that  all  questions  of  finance  were  confided
to  its  supreme  regulation."  (Bockh,  Publ.  Econ.
of  Athens,  p.  154,  2nd  ed.)  Another  very  im-
portant duty  of  the  senators  was  to  take  care  that
a  certain  number  of  triremes  was  built  every  year^
for  which  purpose  they  were  supplied  with  money
by  the  state  ;  in  default  of  so  doing,  they  were  not
allowed  to  claim  the  honour  of  wearing  a  crown,
or  chaplet  {arecpavos),  at  the  expiration  of  their
year  of  office.     (Arg.  Orat.  c.  Androt.)

It  has  been  already  stated  that  there  were  two
classes  or  sets  of  proedri  in  the  senate,  one  of
which,  amounting  to  ten  in  number,  belonged  to
the  presiding  tribe  ;  the  other  consisted  of  nine,
chosen  by  lot  by  the  chairman  of  the  presiding
proedri  from  the  nine  non-presiding  tribes,  one
from  each,  as  often  as  either  the  senate  or  the  peo-
ple were  convened.  It  must  be  remembered  that
they  were  not  elected  as  the  other  proedri,  for
seven  days,  but  only  for  as  many  hours  as  the
session  of  the  senate,  or  meeting  of  the  people,
lasted.  Now  it  has  been  a  question  what  were
the  respective  duties  of  these  two  classes :  but  it
appears  clear  to  us  that  it  was  the  proedri  of  the
presiding  tribe  who  proposed  to  the  people  in
assembly,  the  subjects  for  discussion  ;  recited,  or
caused  to  be  recited,  the  previous  bill  {irpokov-
Aevywa)  of  the  senate  ;  officiated  as  presidents  in
conjunction  with  their  iTrKrrdTrjs,  or  chairman,  and
discharged,  in  fact,  all  the  functions  implied  by  the
words  xP^H-o-TiC^iV  irp^s  rhv  Stj/jlop.  For  ample
arguments  in  support  of  this  opinion  the  reader  is
referred  to  Schomann.  (De  Com.  p.  83.  transl.)
It  does  indeed  appear  from  decrees  furnished  by
inscriptions,  and  other  authorities,  that  in  later
time  the  proedri  of  the  ni?ie  tribes  exercised  some
of  those  functions  which  the  orations  of  Demos-
thenes, and  his  contemporaries,  justify  us  in  assign-
ing to  the  proedri  of  the  presiding  tribe.  It  must,
however,  be  remarked  that  all  such  decrees  were
passed  after  b.  c.  308,  when  there  were  twelve
tribes  ;  and  that  we  cannot,  from  the  practice  of


BOULE.

those  days,  arrive  at  any  conclusions  relative  to  the
customs  of  former  ages.

If  it  is  asked  what,  then,  were  the  duties  of  these
proedri  in  earlier  times,  the  answer  must  be  in  a
great  measure  conjectural  ;  but  the  opinion  oi
Schomann  on  this  point  seems  very  plausible.  He
observes  that  the  prytanes  had  extensive  and  im-
portant duties  entrusted  to  them  ;  that  they  were
all  of  one  tribe,  and  therefore  closely  connected  ;
that  they  officiated  for  35  days  as  presidents  of  tlie
representatives  of  the  other  tribes  ;  and  that  they
had  ample  opportunities  of  combining  for  the  bene-
fit of  their  own  tribe  at  the  expense  of  the  commu-
nity. To  prevent  this,  and  watch  their  conduct
whenever  any  busmess  was  brought  before  the
senate  and  assembly,  may  have  been  the  reason  for
appointing,  by  lot,  nine  other  quasi -presidents,  re-
presentatives of  the  non-presiding  tribes,  who  would
protest  and  interfere,  or  approve  and  sanction  as
they  might  think  fit.  Supposing  this  to  have  been
the  object  of  their  appointment  in  the  first  instance,
it  is  easy  to  see  how  they  might  at  last  have  been
united  with  the  proper  proedri,  in  the  perfonnance
of  duties  originally  appropriated  to  the  latter.

In  connection  with  the  proedri  we  meet  with
the  expression  r]  TrpoeSpevovaa  (pvKi].  Our  in-
formation on  this  subject  is  derived  from  the  speech
of  Aeschines  against  Timarchus,  who  informs  us,
that  in  consequence  of  the  unseemly  conduct  of
Timarchus,  on  one  occasion,  before  the  assembly,
a  new  law  was  passed,  in  virtue  of  which,  a  tribe
was  chosen  by  lot  to  keep  order,  and  sit  as  presi-
dents under  the  iSaj^a,  or  platform  on  which  the
orators  stood.  No  remark  is  made  on  the  subject
to  warrant  us  in  supposing  that  senators  only  were
elected  to  this  office  ;  it  seems  more  probable  that
a  certain  number  of  persons  was  chosen  from  the
tribe  on  which  the  lot  had  fallen,  and  commissioned
to  sit  along  with  the  prytanes  and  the  proedri,  and
that  they  assisted  in  keeping  order.  We  may
here  remark  that  if  any  of  the  speakers  {pi]rop^s)
misconducted  themselves  either  in  the  senate  or
the  assembly,  or  were  guilty  of  any  act  of  violence
to  the  4iTi(rraT7}s^  after  the  breaking  up  of  either,
the  proedri  had  the  power  to  inflict  a  summary
fine,  or  bring  the  matter  before  the  senate  and
assembly  at  the  next  meeting,  if  they  thought  the
case  required  it.

The  meetings  of  the  senate  were,  as  we  learn
from  various  passages  of  the  Attic  orators,  open  to
strangers  ;  thus  Demosthenes  {DeFal.  Leg.  p.  346)
says  that  the  senate-house  was,  on  a  particular  oc-
casion, full  of  strangers  (ixearhu  9iv  idiuTuv)  :  in
Aeschines  (c.  Ctes.  p.  71.  20)  we  read  of  a  motion
"  that  strangers  do  withdraw  "  (fieraaTiqadficvos
Tovs  i5i(i>Tas,  Dobree,  Advers.  vol.  i.  p.  542).  Nay,
private  individuals  were  sometimes,  by  a  special
decree,  authorised  to  come  forward  and  give  advice
to  the  senate.  The  senate-house  was  called  rh
^ov\evTr]piov,  and  contained  two  chapels,  one  of
Zeus  fiov\aios,  another  of  'Adr]va  fiov\ala,  in
which  it  was  customary  for  the  senators  to  offer
up  certain  prayers  before  proceeding  to  business.
(Antiph.  De  Oior.  p.  787.)

The  prytanes  also  had  a  building  to  hold  their
meetings  in,  where  they  were  entertained  at  the
public  expense  during  their  prytany.  This  was
called  the  irpvTavelou,  and  was  used  for  a  variety
of  purposes.  [Prytaneion.]  Thucydides  (ii.
15),  indeed,  tells  us  that  before  the  time  of  The-
seus every  city  of  Attica  had  its  fiovX^vTripiov  and


BRACAE.

irpvraveiov:  a  statement  which  gives  additional
support  to  the  opinion  that  Solon  did  not  originate
the  senate  at  Athens.

The  number  of  tribes  at  Athens  was  not  always
ten  ;  an  alteration  took  place  in  B.  c.  306,  when
Demetrius  Poliorcetes  had  liberated  the  city  from
the  usurpation  of  Cassander.  Two  were  then
added,  and  called  Demetrias,  and  Antigonis,  in
honour  of  Demetrius  and  his  father.  It  is  evident
that  this  change,  and  the  consequent  addition  of
100  members  to  the  senate,  must  have  varied  the
order  and  length  of  the  prytanes.  The  tribes  just
mentioned  v/ere  afterwards  called  Ptolemais  and
Attalis  ;  and  in  the  time  of  Hadrian,  who  beau-
tified and  improved  Athens  (Pans.  i.  18.  §  6),  a
thirteenth  was  added,  called  from  him  Hadrianis.
An  edict  of  this  emperor  has  been  preserved,  which
proves  that  even  in  his  time  the  Athenians  kept  up
the  show  of  their  former  institutions.  (Hermann,
Griech.  Staatsalterth.  §  125,  &c.  ;  Schdmann,  De
Comitiis  Atheniensium.)  [R.  W.]

BOULEU'SEOS  GRAPHE'  (/SowAei^o-ews
ypa(p-{]),  an  impeachment  for  conspiracy.  BouA.6u-
creus,  being  in  this  case  the  abbreviated  form  of
eVigovAeuo-ews,  is  the  name  of  two  widely  different
actions  at  Attic  law.  The  first  was  the  accusation
of  conspiracy  against  life,  and  might  be  instituted
by  the  person  thereby  attacked,  if  competent  to
bring  an  action  ;  if  otherwise,  by  his  or  her  legal
patron  (Kvpios).  In  case  of  the  plot  having  suc-
ceeded, the  deceased  might  be  represented  in  the
prosecution  by  near  kinsmen  {oi  iyrhs  aveipidTTjTos),
or,  if  they  were  incompetent,  by  the  Kvptos,  as
above  mentioned.  (Meier,  Att.Proc.  p.  164.)  The
criminality  of  the  accused  was  independent  of  the
result  of  the  conspiracy  (Harpocrat.),  and  the
penalty,  upon  conviction,  was  the  same  as  that
incurred  by  the  actual  murderers.  (Andoc.  De
My  St.  p.  46.  5.)  The  presidency  of  the  court  upon
a  trial  of  this  kind,  as  in  most  Z'lKai  <poviKai,  be-
longed to  the  king  archon  (Meier,  Att.  Proc.
p.  312),  and  the  court  itself  was  composed  of  the
ephetae,  sitting  at  the  Palladium,  according  to
Isaeus  and  Aristotle,  as  cited  by  Harpocration,
who,  however,  also  mentions  that  the  areiopagiis
is  stilted  by  Deinarchus  to  have  been  the  proper
tribunal.

The  other  action,  jSouAeucrecos,  was  available
upon  a  person  finding  himself  wrongfully  inscribed
as  a  state  debtor  in  the  registers,  or  rolls,  which
were  kept  by  the  different  financial  officers.  Meier
{Att.  Proc.  p.  339),  however,  suggests  that  a  ma-
gistrate that  had  so  offended,  would  probably  be
j)roceeded  against  at  the  evOuuai,  or  iirixeiporoviai,
the  two  occasions  upon  which  the  public  conduct  of
magistrates  was  examined ;  so  that  generally  the
defendant  in  this  action  would  be  a  private  citizen
that  had  directed  such  an  insertion  at  his  own
peril.  From  the  passage  in  Demosthenes,  it  seems
doubtful  whether  the  disenfranchisement  {ari/ila)
of  the  plaintiff  as  a  state-debtor  was  in  abeyance
while  this  action  was  pending.  Demosthenes  at
first  asserts  {c.  Aristog.  i.  p.  778.  19),  but  after-
wards (p.  792.  1)  argtces  that  it  was  not.  (See,
however,  Meier,  Att.  Proc.  p.  340,  and  Bockh's
note.)  The  distinction  between  this  action  and
the  similar  one  t|/euSe77pa^^s,  is  explained  under
the  latter  title.  [J.  S.  M.]

BOULEUTE'RION.     [Boule,  p.  212,  i.]

BRACAE  or  BRACCAE  (ava^vpiSes),  trow-
sers,  pantaloons.     These,  as  well  as  various  other


BRASIDEIA.


213


articles  of  armour  and  of  dress  [Acinaces,  Arcus,
Arm  ILL  a],  were  common  to  all  the  nations  which
encircled  the  Greek  and  Roman  population,  ex-
tending from  the  Indian  to  the  Atlantic  ocean.
Hence  Aristagoras,  king  of  Miletus,  in  his  inter-
view  with  Cleomenes,  king  of  Sparta,  described
the  attire  of  a  large  portion  of  them  in  these  terms :
— "  They  carry  bows  and  a  short  spear,  and  go
to  battle  in  trowsers  and  with  hats  upon  their
heads."  (Herod,  v.  49.)  Hence  also  the  phrase
Braccati  militis  arcus,  signifying  that  those  who
wore  trowsers  were  in  general  armed  with  the
bow.  (Propert.  iii.  3.  17.)  In  particular,  we
are  informed  of  the  use  of  trowsers  or  pantaloons
among  the  following  nations:  —  the  Medes  and
Persians ;  the  Parthians ;  the  Phrygians ;  the
Sacae ;  the  Sarmatae ;  the  Dacians  and  Getae  ;
the  Teutones ;  the  Belgae ;  the  Britons  ;  and  the
Gauls.

The  Latin  word  braccae  is  the  same  as  the
Scottish  "  breeks  "  and  the  English  "  breeches."
Corresponding  terms  are  used  in  all  the  northern
languages.  Also  the  Cossack  and  Persian  trowsers
of  the  present  day  differ  in  no  material  respect
from  those  which  were  anciently  worn  in  the  same
countries.  In  ancient  monuments  we  find  the
above-mentioned  people  constantly  exhibited  in
trowsers,  thus  clearly  distinguishing  them  from
Greeks  and  Romans.  An  example  is  seen  in  the
annexed  group  of  Sarmatians,  taken  from  the  co-
lumn of  Trajan.


Trowsers  were  principally  woollen  ;  but  Agathias
states  (Hist.  ii.  5)  that  in  Europe  they  were  also
made  of  linen  and  of  leather  ;  probably  the  Asiatics
made  them  of  cotton  and  of  silk.  Sometimes  they
were  striped  [virgatae,  Propert.  iv.  11.  43),  and
ornamented  with  a  woof  of  various  colours  {iroiKiXai^
Xen.  Anab.  i.  5.  §  8).  The  Greeks  seem  never  to
have  worn  them.  They  were  also  unknown  at
Rome  during  the  republican  period  ;  and  in  A.  D.
69  Caecina  gave  great  offence  on  his  march  into
Italy,  because  he  wore  braccae,  which  were  re-
garded as  tegmen  barbarum.  (Tac.  Hist.  ii.  20.)
In  the  next  century,  however,  they  gradually  came
into  use  at  Rome  ;  but  they  would  appear  never  to
have  been  generally  worn.  It  is  recorded  of
Alexander  Severus  that  he  wore  white  braccae,
and  not  crimson  ones  (coccineae),  as  had  been  the
custom  with  preceding  emperors.  The  use  of  them
in  the  city  was  forbidden  by  Honorius.  (Lamprid,
Alex.  Sever.  40.)  [J.  Y.]

BRASIDEIA  (PpaaiSeia),  a  festival  celebrated
p  3


214


BRAURONIA.


at  Sparta  in  honour  of  their  great  general  Brasidas,
who,  after  his  death,  in  B.  c,  422,  received  the
honours  of  a  hero.  (Paus.  iii.  14.  §  1  ;  Aristot.
Eih.  Nic.  V.  7.)  It  was  held  every  year  with
orations  and  contests,  in  which  none  but  Spartans
were  allowed  to  partake.

Brasideia  were  also  celebrated  at  Amphipolis,
which,  though  a  colony  of  Athens,  transferred  the
honour  of  ktiVttjs  from  Hagnon  to  Brasidas,  who
was  buried  there,  and  paid  him  heroic  honours  by
an  annual  festival  with  sacrifices  and  contests.
(Thucyd.  V.  11.)  [L.  S.]

BRAURO'NIA  {fipavpci>via\  a  festival  cele-
brated in  honour  of  Artemis  Brauronia,  in  the
Attic  town  of  Brauron  (Herod,  vi.  138),  where,
according  to  Pausanias  (i.  23.  §  9,  33.  §  1,  iii.  16.
§  6,  viii.  46.  §  2),  Orestes  and  Iphigeneia,  on  their
return  from  Tauris,  were  supposed  by  the  Athenians
to  have  landed,  and  left  the  statue  of  the  Taurian
goddess.  (See  Miiller,  Z)or.  i.  9.  §5  and  6.)  It
Avas  held  every  fifth  year,  under  the  superintend-
ence of  ten  UpoTTOiol  (Pollux,  viii.  9,  31) ;  and  the
chief  solemnity  consisted  in  the  circiunstance  that
the  Attic  girls  between  the  ages  of  five  and  ten
years,  dressed  in  crocus-coloured  garments,  went  in
solemn  procession  to  the  sanctuary  (Suidas,  s.  v.
"ApKTos  ;  Schol.  on  Aristoph.  Lysistr.  646),  where
they  were  consecrated  to  the  goddess.  During
this  act  tlie  lepoiroioi  sacrificed  a  goat  and  the
girls  performed  a  propitiatory  rite  in  which  they
imitated  bears.  This  rite  may  have  arisen  simply
from  the  circumstance  that  the  bear  was  sacred  to
Artemis,  especially  in  Arcadia  (Miiller,  Dor.  ii.  9.
§  3);  but  a  tradition  preserved  in  Suidas  {s.v.
"ApKTos)  relates  its  origin  as  follows :  —  In  the
Attic  town  of  Phanidae  a  bear  was  kept,  which
was  so  tame  that  it  was  allowed  to  go  about  quite
freely,  and  received  its  food  from  and  among  men.
One  day  a  girl  ventured  to  play  with  it,  and,  on
treating  the  animal  rather  harshly,  it  turned  round
and  tore  her  to  pieces.  Her  brothers,  enraged  at
this,  went  out  and  killed  the  bear.  The  Athenians
now  were  visited  by  a  plague ;  and,  when  they
.consulted  the  oracle,  the  answer  was  given  that
they  would  get  rid  of  the  evil  which  had  befallen
them  if  they  would  compel  some  of  their  citizens
to  make  their  daughters  propitiate  Artemis  by  a
rite  called  apwreweiv,  for  the  crime  committed
against  the  animal  sacred  to  the  goddess.  The
command  was  more  than  obeyed  ;  for  the  Athenians
decreed  that  from  thenceforth  all  women,  before
they  could  marrj--,  should  have  taken  part  once  in
this  festival,  and  have  been  consecrated  to  the
goddess.  Hence  the  girls  themselves  were  called
HpKTot,  the  consecration  apKreia,  the  act  of  con-
secrating apKTeveiv^  and  to  celebrate  the  festival
apKT€V6(rdai.  (Hesych.  and  Harpocrat.  s.  v.  ;
Schol.  on  Aristoph.  I.  c.)  But  as  the  girls  when
they  celebrated  this  festival  were  nearly  ten  years
old,  the  verb  SeKareveiv  was  sometimes  used  in-
stead of  apKTeueiu.  (Comp.  C.  F.  Hermann,  Handb.
der  gottesdienstl.  Alterth.  §  62.  note  9.)

There  was  also  a  quinquennial  festival  called
Brauronia,  which  was  celebrated  by  men  and  dis-
solute women,  at  Brauron,  in  honour  of  Dionysus.
(Aristoph.  Pax^  870,  with  the  note  of  the  Scho-
liast; and  Suidas  s.  t7.  Bpaupcoj'.)  "Whether  its
celebration  took  place  at  the  same  time  as  that  of
Artemis  Brauronia  (as  has  been  supposed  by
Miiller,  Dor.  ii.  9.  §  5,  in  a  note,  which  has,  how-
eyer,  been  omitted  in  the  English  translation),  must


BREVIARIUM.

remain  uncertain,  although  the  very  different  cha-
racters of  the  two  festivals  incline  us  rather  to
believe  that  they  were  not  celebrated  at  the  same
time.  According  to  Hesychius,  whose  statement,
however,  is  not  supported  by  any  ancient  authority,
the  Iliad  was  recited  at  the  Brauronian  festival  of
Dionysus  by  rhapsodists.  (Comp.  Hemsterh.  ad
Pollucem^  ix.  74 ;  Welcker,  Der  Episdie  Cyclus^
p.  391.)  [L.  S.]

BREVIA'RIUM,  or  BREVIA'RIUM  ALA-
RICIA'NUM.  Alaric  the  Second,  king  of  the
Visigoths,  who  reigned  from  a.  d.  484  to  a.  d.  507,
in  the  twenty  second  year  of  his  reign  (a.  d.  506)
commissioned  a  body  of  jurists,  probably  Romans,
to  make  a  selection  from  the  Roman  laws  and  the
Roman  law  writers,  which  should  form  a  code  for
the  use  of  his  Roman  subjects.  The  code,  when
made,  was  confirmed  by  the  bishops  and  nobility  at
Aduris  (Aire  in  Gascony) ;  and  a  copy,  signed  by
Anianus,  the  referendarius  of  Alaric,  was  sent  to
each  comes,  with  an  order  to  use  no  other  law  or
legal  form  in  his  court  {ut  in  faro  tuo  nulla  alia  lea:
neque  juris fonntda  proferri  vcl  recipi  praesumatur).
The  signature  of  Anianus  was  for  the  purpose  of
giving  authenticity  to  the  ofl[icial  copies  of  the  code  ;
a  circumstance  which  has  been  so  far  misunderstood
that  he  has  sometimes  been  considered  as  the  com-
piler of  the  code,  and  it  has  been  called  Breviarium
Aniani.  This  code  has  no  peculiar  name,  so  far
as  we  know :  it  was  called  Lex  Romana  Visi-
gothorum,  and  at  a  later  period,  frequently  Lex
Theodosii,  from  the  title  of  the  first  and  most  import-
ant part  of  its  contents.  The  name  Breviarium,  or
Breviarium  Alaricianum,  does  not  appear  before
the  sixteenth  century.

The  following  are  the  contents  of  the  Breviarium,
with  their  order  in  the  code:  —  1.  Codex  Theo-
dosianus,  xvi  books.  2.  Novellae  of  Theodosius  ii,
Valentinian  iii,  Marcian,  Majorian,  Sevcrus.  3.
The  Institutions  of  Gaius,  ii  books.  4,  Pauli
Receptae  Sententiae,  v  books.  5.  Codex  Grego-
rianus,  v  books.  6.  Codex  Hermogenianus,  i
book.     7.  Papinianus,  lib.  i.  Responsorum.

The  code  was  thus  composed  of  two  kinds  of
materials,  imperial  constitutions,  which,  both  in  the
code  itself  and  the  commonitorium  or  notice  pre-
fixed to  it,  are  called  Leges  ;  and  the  writings  of
Roman  jurists,  which  are  called  Jus.  Both  the
Codex  Gregorianus  and  Hermogenianus,  being
compilations  made  without  any  legal  authority,
are  included  under  the  head  of  Jus.  The  selec-
tions are  extracts,  which  are  accompanied  with
an  interpretiition,  except  in  the  case  of  the  In-
stitutions of  Gaius  ;  as  a  general  rule,  the  text,  so
far  as  it  was  adopted,  was  not  altered.  The  Insti-
tutions of  Gaius,  however,  are  abridged  or  epito-
mised, and  such  alterations  as  were  considered
necessary  for  the  time  are  introduced  into  the
text :  this  part  of  the  work  required  no  interpre-
tation, and  accordingly  it  has  none.  There  are
passages  in  the  epitome  which  are  not  taken  from
Gaius.    (Gaius,  iii.  127,  ed.  Goeschen.)

This  code  is  of  considerable  value  for  the  history
of  Roman  law,  as  it  contains  several  sources  of  the
Roman  law  which  are  otherwise  unknown,  especi-
ally Paulus  and  the  five  first  books  of  the  Theo-
dosian  code.  Since  the  discovery  of  the  Institu-
tions of  Gaius,  that  part  of  this  code  is  of  less
value.

The  author  of  the  Epitome  of  Gaius  in  tho
Breviarium  paid  little  attention  to  retaining  the


BUCCINA.

words  of  the  original,  and  a  comparison  of  the
Epitome  and  the  MS.  of  Gains  is  therefore  of  little
advantage  in  this  point  of  view.  The  Epitome  is,
however,  still  useful  in  showing  what  subjects  were
discussed  in  Gains,  and  thus  filling  up  (so  far  as
the  material  contents  are  concerned)  some  of  the
lacunae  of  the  Verona  MS.

A  complete  edition  of  this  code  was  published
by  Sichard,  in  his  Codex  Theodosianus,  Basileae,
1528,  small  folio.  (Schulting,  Jurisprudentia  Veins
Ante-Juslinianea^  Lugd.  Bat.  1717;  Jus  Civile
Antejustinianeum,  Berlin,  1815  ;  Julii  Paulli  lie-
ce.pt.  Sentent.  Lib.  v.  ed.  Arndts,  Bonn,  1833  ;
Savigny,  Gescldchte  des  Rom.  Redds  im  Mittelalter.
ii,  c.  8  ;  Bocking,  Institutionen,  i.  90,  &c.  ;  Gains,
Praefatio  Primae  Editioni  Praemissa.)       [G.  L.]

BRUTTIA'NI,  slaves  whose  duty  it  was  to
wait  upon  the  Roman  magistrates.  They  are  said
to  have  been  originally  taken  from  among  the
Bruttians,  because  this  people  continued  from  first
to  last  faithful  to  Hannibal  {Yesiu^^s.v.Bruttiani;
Gell.  X.  3)  ;  but  Niebuhr  (Hist,  of  Rome,  vol.  iii.
note  944)  is  disposed  to  think  that  these  servants
bore  this  name  long  before,  since  both  Strabo  (vi.
p.  255)  and  Diodorus  (xvi.  15)  state  that  this  word
signified  revolted  slaves.

BU'CCINA  (^vKdv7]\  a  kind  of  horn-trumpet,
anciently  made  out  of  a  shell.  It  is  thus  happily
described  by  Ovid  (Met.  i.  335):  —

"  Cava  buccina  sumitur  illi
Tortilis,  in  latum  quae  turbine  crescit  ab  imo :
Buccina,  quae  in  medio  concepit  ut  aera  ponto,
Littora  voce  replet  sub  utroque  jaccntia  Phoebo."

The  musical  instrument  Imccina  nearly  resembled
in  shape  the  shell  hucdnum,  and,  like  it,  might
almost  be  described  from  the  above  lines  (in  the
language  of  conchologists),  as  spiral  and  gibbous.
The  two  drawings  in  the  annexed  woodcut  agree
with  this  account.  In  the  first,  taken  from  a  frieze
(Burney's  History  of  Music,  vol.  i.  pi.  6),  the
buccina  is  curved  for  the  convenience  of  the  per-
former, with  a  very  wide  mouth,  to  diffuse  and
increase  the  sound.  In  the  next,  a  copy  of  an
ancient  sculpture  taken  from  Blanchini's  work  (De
Musicis  histrum.  Veterum,  p.  15.  pi.  2,  18),  it  still
retains  the  original  form  of  the  shell.


The  inscriptions  quoted  by  Bartholini  (De  Tihiis,
p.  226)  seem  to  prove  that  the  buccina  was  distinct
from  the  coniu;  but  it  is  often  (as  in  Aen.  yii.
519)  confounded  with  it.  The  buccina  seems  to
have  been  chiefly  distinguished  by  the  twisted
form  of  the  shell,  from  which  it  was  originally


BULLA.  2i5

made.  In  later  times  it  was  carved  from  horn,
and  perhaps  from  wood  or  metal,  so  as  to  imitate
the  shell.  The  buccina  was  chiefly  used  to  pro-
claim the  watches  of  the  day  (Senec.  Thyest.  798)
and  of  the  night,  hence  called  buccina  prima,  se-
cunda,  &c.  (Polyb.  xiv.  3;  Liv.  xxvi.  15;  Sil.
Ital.  vii.  154  ;  Propert.  iv.  4.  63  ;  Cic.  Pro  Mur.
9.)  It  was  also  blown  at  funerals,  and  at  festive
entertainments  both  before  sitting  down  to  table
and  after.  (Tacit.  Ann.  xv.  30.)  Macrobius(i.  8)
tells  us  that  tritons  holding  buccinae  were  fixed  on
the  roof  of  the  temple  of  Saturn.

The  musician  who  played  the  buccina  was  called
buccinator,  [B.  J.]

BULLA,  a  circular  plate  or  boss  of  metal,  so
called  from  its  resemblance  in  form  to  a  bubble
floating  upon  water.  Bright  studs  of  this  descrip-
tion were  used  to  adorn  the  sword-belt  (aurea
bullis  dngula,  Virg.  Aen.  ix..  359  ;  bullis  asper
balteus,  Sid.  ApoU.  Carm.  2).  Another  use  of
them  was  in  doors,  the  parts  of  which  were  fas-
tened together  by  brass-headed,  or  even  by  gold-
headed  nails.  (Plaut.  Asin.  ii.  4,  20 ;  Cic.  Verr.
iv.  M.)  The  magnificent  bronze  doors  of  the
Pantheon  at  Home  are  enriched  with  highly  orna-
mented bosses,  some  of  which  are  here  shown.


We  most  frequently  read,  however,  of  bullae  as
ornaments  worn  by  children  suspended  from  the
neck,  and  especially  by  the  sons  of  the  noble  and
wealthy.  Such  a  one  is  called  heres  bullatus  by
Juvenal  (Sat.  xiv.  4).  His  bulla  was  made  of  thin
plates  of  gold.  Its  usual  form  is  shovra  in  the
annexed  woodcut,  which  represents  a  fine  bulla
preserved  in  the  British  Museum,  and  is  of  the
size  of  the  original.


The  use  of  the  bulla,  like  that  of  tlie  praetexta,
was  derived  from  the  Etruscans,  whence  it  is
called  by  Juvenal  (v.  164)  aurum  Etruscum.  It
was  originally  worn  only  by  the  children  of  the
patricians,  but  subsequently  by  all  of  free  birth  (Cic.
p  4


216


BYSSUS.


Verr.  i.  58) ;  while  children  of  the  libertini  were
only  permitted  to  wear  an  ornament  of  the  same
kind  made  of  leather  (nodus  tantum  et  sigmim  de
paupere  loro,  Jiiv.  v.  165  ;  lihertinis  scortea,  A  scon.
ad  Cic.  I.  c).  The  bulla  was  laid  aside,  together
with  the  praetexta,  and  was  consecrated  on  this
occasion  to  the  Lares.  (Pers.  v.  31.)  Examples
of  boys  represented  with  the  bulla  are  not  unfre-
quent  in  statues,  on  tombs,  and  in  other  works  of
art.  (Spon,  Misc.  p.  2.99  ;  Middleton,  Ant.  Mon.
tab.  3.)  [J.  Y.]

BURIS.     [Aratrum.]

BUSTUA'RII.     [FuNus.]

BUSTUM.     [FuNUs.]

BUXUM  (Tru|os),  properly  means  the  wood  of
the  box  tree,  but  was  given  as  a  name  to  many
things  made  of  this  wood.  The  tablets  used  for
writing  on,  and  covered  with  wax  {tabulae  ceratae).,
were  usually  made  of  this  wood.  Hence  we  read
in  Propertius  (iii.  22.  8),  "  Vulgari  buxo  sordida
cera  fuit."  These  tabeUae  were  sometimes  called
cerata  huxa.  In  the  same  way  the  Greek  irv^iov^
formed  from  7ru|os,  "  box-wood,"  came  to  be  ap-
plied to  any  tablets,  whether  they  were  made  of
this  wood  or  any  other  substance  ;  in  which  sense
the  word  occurs  in  the  Septuagint  {ra.  irv^ia  to,
Xldiva,  Exod.  xxiv.  12  ;  compare  Is.  xxx.  8  ;  Hub.
ii.  2).

Tops  were  made  of  box-wood  {volubih  huxum.,
Virg.  Aen.  vii.  382  ;  Pers.  iii.  51)  ;  and  also  all
wind  instruments,  especially  the  flute,  as  is  the  case
in  the  present  day  (Ov.  Ex  Pont.  i.  1.  45,  Met.  xii.
158,  Fast,  vi.  697  ;  Virg.  Aen.  ix.  619).  Combs
also  were  made  of  the  same  wood ;  whence  Juvenal
(xiv.  194)  speaks  of  captit  intactum  buxo.

BYSSUS  (^va-ffos).  It  has  been  a  subject  of
some  dispute  whether  the  byssus  of  the  ancients
was  cotton  or  linen.  Herodotus  (ii.  86)  says  that
the  mummies  were  wrapped  up  in  bt/ssine  sindon
{(nvZ6vos  fiv(r<riv't]S  nAafiSxTL),  which  Rosellini
and  many  modem  writers  maintain  to  be  cotton.
The  only  decisive  test,  however,  as  to  the  material
of  mummy  cloth  is  the  microscope  ;  and  from  the
numerous  examinations  which  have  been  made,  it
is  quite  certain  that  the  mummy  cloth  was  made
of  flax  and  not  of  cotton,  and  therefore  whenever
the  ancient  writers  apply  the  term  byssus  to  the
mummy  cloth,  we  must  rmderstand  it  to  mean
linen.

The  word  byssus  appears  to  come  from  the
Hebrew  butz,  and  the  Greeks  probably  got  it
through  the  Phoenicians.  (See  Gesenius's  77^-
saurus.)  Pausanias  (vi.  26.  §  4)  says  that  the
district  of  Elis  was  well  adapted  for  growing
byssus,  and  remarks  that  all  the  people,  whose
land  is  adapted  for  it,  sow  hemp,  flax,  and  byssus.
In  another  passage  (v.  5.  §  2)  he  says  that  Elis  is
the  only  place  in  Greece  in  which  byssus  grows,
and  remarks  that  the  byssus  of  Elis  is  not  inferior
to  that  of  the  Hebrews  in  fineness,  but  not  so  yel-
low {l^avdi]).  The  women  in  Patrae  gained  their
living  by  making  head-dresses  {KeKpixpdKoi),  and
weaving  cloth  from  the  byssus  grown  in  Elis.
(Paus.  vii.  21.  §  7.)

Among  later  writers,  the  word  byssus  may  per-
haps be  used  to  indicate  either  cotton  or  linen
cloth.  Bottiger  (iSoiina,  vol.  ii.  p  105)  supposes
that  the  byssus  was  a  kind  of  muslin,  which  was
employed  in  making  the  celebrated  Coan  garments.
It  is  mentioned  in  the  Gospel  of  St.  Luke  (xvi.  9)
as  part  of  the  dress  of  a  rich  man.    (Compare  Rev.


CACABUS.

xviii.  12.)  It  was  sometimes  dyed  of  a  purple  or
crimson  colour  {^vaaivov  iTop<pvpovv^  Hesych.),
Pliny  (xix.  4)  speaks  of  it  as  a  species  of  flax
(linuin)^  and  says  that  it  served  mulierum  maxdme
deliciis.  (Yates,  Textri?iwn  Antiquorum^  p.  267,
«&c.)


C.K.

CABEI'RI  A  (/toSel/Jio), mysteries,  festivals,  and
orgies  solemnised  in  all  places  in  which  the  Pelas-
gian  Cabeiri,  the  most  mysterious  and  perplexing
deities  of  Grecian  mytho^logy,  were  worshipped,
but  especially  in  Samothrace,  Imbros,  Lenmos,
Thebes,  Anthedon,  Pergamus,  and  Bcrvtos.  (Paus.
ix.  25.  §  5,  iv.  ] .  §  5,  ix.  22.  §  5,  i.  4.  §  6  ;  Euseb.
Praep.  Evang.  p.  31.)  Little  is  known  respecting
the  rites  observed  in  these  mysteries,  as  no  one  was
allowed  to  divulge  them.  (Strabo,  x.  p.  470,  &c  ;
Apollon.  Rhod.  i.  917;  Orph.  Argon.  469;Valer.
Flacc.  ii.  435.)  Diagoras  is  said  to  have  provoked
the  highest  indignation  of  the  Athenians  by  his
having  made  these  and  other  mysteries  public.
(Athenag.  Leg.  ii.  5.)  The  most  celebrated  were
those  of  the  island  of  Samothrace,  which,  if  we
may  judge  from  those  of  Lemnos,  were  solemnised
every  year,  and  lasted  for  nine  days.  The  admis-
sion was  not  confined  to  men,  for  we  find  instances
of  women  and  boys  being  initiated.  (Schol.  ad
Eurip.  Phoen.  7 ;  Plut.  Alex.  2  ;  Donatus  ad  Terent.
Phorin.  i.  15.)  Persons  on  their  admission  seem
to  have  undergone  a  sort  of  examination  respect-
ing the  life  they  had  led  hitherto  (Plut.  LaceA.
Apophth.  Antalcid.  p.  141.  ed.  Tauchnitz),  and
were  then  purified  of  all  their  crimes,  even  if  they
had  committed  mm-der.  (Livy.  xlv.  5  ;  Schol.  ad
T/ieocrit.  ii,  12  ;  Hesych.  s.  v.  Koirjs.)  The  priest
who  undertook  the  purification  of  murderers  bore
the  name  of  Koirjs.  The  persons  who  were  ini-
tiated received  a  purple  ribbon,  which  was  worn
around  their  bodies  as  an  amulet  to  preserve  them
against  all  dangers  and  storms  of  the  sea.  (Schol.
ad  Apollon.  I.  c.  ;  Diodor.  v.  49.)

Respecting  the  Lemnian  Cabeiria  we  know  that
their  annual  celebration  took  place  at  night  (Cic.
De  Nat.  Deor.  i.  42),  and  lasted  for  nine  days,
during  which  all  fires  of  the  island,  which  were
thought  to  be  impure,  were  extinguished,  sacrifices
were  oflTered  to  the  dead,  and  a  sacred  vessel  was
sent  out  to  fetch  new  fire  from  Delos.  During  these
sacrifices  the  Cabeiri  were  thought  to  be  absent  with
the  sacred  vessel  ;  after  the  retum  of  which,  the
pure  fire  was  distributed,  and  a  new  life  began,
probably  with  banquets.  (Schol,  ad  Apollon.  Rhod.
i.  608.)

The  great  celebrity  of  the  Samothracian  mys-
teries seem  to  have  obscured  and  thrown  into  ob-
livion those  of  Lemnos,  from  which  Pythagoras  is
said  to  have  derived  a  part  of  his  wisdom.  (lam-
blich.  Vit.  Pyth.  c.  151  ;  compare  Miiller's  Pro/er/o
mena.,  p.  150.)  Concerning  the  celebration  of  tho
Cabeiria  in  other  places  nothing  is  known,  and  they
seem  to  have  fallen  into  decay  at  a  very  early
period.  (Comp.  Guthberlet,  De  Mysteriis  Deorum
CaUrorum^  Franequerae,  1704,  4to. ;  Welcker,  Z>ze
Aeschyl.  Tril.  p.  160,  &c.  ;  E.  G.  Haupt,  De  Reli.
gione  CaJnriaca^  1834,  4to.  ;  Lobeck,  Aglaophamus,
p.  1 281,  &c. ;  Kenrick,  Tfie  Egypt  of  Herod,  p,  264,
&c.)  [L.  S.]

CACABUS.     [AuTHEPSA.]


KAKOSIS.

KAKEGO'RIAS  DIKE'  (KUKvpoyias  SIkv\
was  an  action  for  abusive  language  in  the  Attic
courts.  This  action  is  likewise  called  KaKriyopiov
St/cTj  (Dem.  c  Mid.  p.  544),  AoiSopias  5t/c7j  (SidKoov
AoiSopias,  Aristoph.  Vesp.  1207),  and  KaKo\oylas
5/ktj.  This  action  could  be  brought  against  an
individual  who  applied  to  another  certain  abusive
epithets,  such  as  auSpScpovos,  TrarpoAoias,  &c.,
which  were  included  under  the  general  name  of
air6ppr\Ta.  [Aporrheta.]  It  was  no  justifica-
tion that  these  words  were  spoken  in  anger.  (Lys.
c.  Tfieomn.  pp.  372,  373.)  By  a  law  of  Solon  it
was  also  forbidden  to  speak  evil  of  the  dead  ;  and  if
a  person  did  so,  he  was  liable  to  this  action,  which
could  be  brought  against  him  by  the  nearest  rela-
tion of  the  deceased.  (Dem.  c.  Leptin.  p.  488,  c.
Boeot.  p.  1022  ;  Plut.  Sol.  c.  21.)  If  an  individual
abused  any  one  who  was  engaged  in  any  public
office,  the  offender  not  only  suffered  the  ordinary
punishment,  but  incun-ed  the  loss  of  his  rights  as  a
citizen  (aTifiia),  since  the  state  was  considered  to
have  been  insulted.     (Dem.  c.  Mid.  p.  524.)

If  the  defendant  was  convicted,  he  had  to  pay  a
fine  of  500  drachmae  to  the  plaintiff.  (Isoc.  c.
Loch.  p.  396  ;  Lys.  c.  Tlieomn.  p.  354.)  Plutarch,
however,  mentions  that,  according  to  one  of  Solon's
laws,  whoever  spoke  evil  of  a  person  in  the  temples,
courts  of  justice,  public  offices,  or  in  public  festi-
vals, had  to  pay  five  drachmae  ;  but  as  Platner
{Process  bet  den  Attlhem^  vol.  ii.  p.  192)  has  ob-
served, the  law  of  Solon  was  probably  changed,
and  the  heavier  fine  of  500  drachmae  substituted
in  the  place  of  the  smaller  sum.  Demosthenes,
in  his  oration  against  Meidias  (p.  543)  speaks  of  a
fine  of  1000  drachmae  ;  but  this  is  probably  to  be
explained  by  supposing  that  Demosthenes  brought
two  actions  KaKrjyopias  ;  one  on  his  own  account,
and  the  other  on  account  of  the  insults  which
Meidias  had  committed  against  his  mother  and
sister.  This  action  was  probably  brought  before  the
thesmothetae  (Dem.  c.  Mid.  p.  544),  to  whom  the
related  vSpecos  ypacp-f}  belonged.  The  two  speeches
of  Lysias  against  Theomnestus  were  spoken  in  an
action  of  this  kind.

KAKOLO'GIAS  DIKE'.  [Kakegorias
Dike.]

KAKO'SIS  (KdKW(ris\  in  the  language  of  the
Attic  law,  does  not  signify  every  kind  of  ill-treat-
ment, but

1.  The  ill-treatment  of  parents  by  their  children
(kolkuxtis  yovewv).  2.  Of  women  by  their  hus-
bands (kukuo-is  yvvaMuv).  3.  Of  heiresses  («o-
KucrisTuv  iTTiKK^pwv).  4.  Of  orphans  and  widows
by  their  guardians  or  any  other  persons  {K^Kwais
Twv  6p(pauuv  Kal  X'jpeuo'ouo'cu;/  yvvaiKwv).

1.  KaKwffis  yoveuu  was  committed  by  those  who
struck  their  parents,  or  applied  abusive  epithets  to
them,  or  refused  them  the  means  of  support  when
they  were  able  to  afford  it,  or  did  not  bury  them
after  their  death  and  pay  them  proper  honours.
(Aristoph.  Av.  757, 1356  ;  Suidas,  s.  v.  UeXapytKhs
v6fxos.)  It  was  no  justification  for  dhildren  that
their  parents  had  treated  them  badly.  If,  however,
they  were  illegitimate,  or  had  not  received  a  proper
education  from  their  parents,  they  could  not  be
prosecuted  for  KaKwais.  (Meier,  Att.  Process,  p.
288.)

2.  K(£/cw(rjs  yvvaiKwv  was  committed  by  hus-
bands who  ill-treated  their  wives  in  any  manner
or  had  intercourse  with  other  women  (Diog.  Laert.
iv.  17;  compare  Plut.   Alcib.  8),  or  denied  their


KAKOTECHNION  DIKE.  217

wives  the  marriage  duties  ;  for  by  a  law  of  Solon,
the  husband  was  bound  to  visit  his  wife  three
times  every  month,  at  least  if  she  was  an  heiress.
(Plut.  Sol.  20,  Erotic.  23.)  In  the  comedy  of
Cratinus,  called  the  "  Wine  Flask "  (Jlvrlvi))^
Comedy  was  represented  as  the  wife  of  Cratinus,
who  brought  an  action  against  him  because  he  neg-
lected her  and  devoted  all  his  attention  to  the
wine  flask.     (Schol.  ad  Aristoph.  Equit.  399.)

3.  KdKucris  Twv  hriKX-npuv  was  committed  by
the  nearest  relatives  of  poor  heiresses,  who  neither
married  them  themselves,  nor  gave  them  a  dowry
in  order  to  marry  them  to  persons  of  their  own
rank  in  life  (Dem.  c.  Macart.  p.  1076  ;  Harpocr.  s.  s.
'EiriSiKos,  ©Tjres  ;  Suid.  Phot.  s.  v.  ®rjrevs)  ;  or,  if
they  married  them  themselves,  did  not  perform  the
marriage  duties.     (Plut.  Sol.  20.)

4.  KaKwcts  TWV  opcpavoou  Koi  x'OP^vffovffwv  yv-
vaiKwv  was  committed  by  those  who  injured  in
any  way  either  orphans  or  widows,  both  of  whom
were  considered  to  be  in  an  especial  manner  under
the  protection  of  the  chief  archon.  (Dem.  c.  Macart.
p.  l076;  6  Hpxoov^  HcTTis  itreixeXe^TO  twu  X^^P^^
Kal  r&v  6p(l)avwv,  Ulpian.  ad  Demosth.  c.  Timocr.)
The  speech  of  Isaeus  on  the  Inheritance  of  Hagnias,
is  a  defence  against  an  el(rayye\ia  KaKttxreais  of
this  kind.

All  these  cases  of  KaKcacris  belonged  to  the
jurisdiction  of  the  chief  archon  (&.px(>>v  iiruuvfios).
If  a  person  wronged  in  any  way  orphans,  heiresses,
or  widows,  the  archon  could  inflict  a  fine  upon  them
himself ;  or  if  he  considered  the  person  deserving
of  greater  punishment,  could  bring  him  before  the
heliaea.  (Dem.  c.  Macaii.  p.  1076.  Lex.)  Any
private  individual  could  also  accuse  parties  guilty
of  KOLKwa-is  by  means  of  laying  an  information
(etVa776A.(a)  before  the  chief  archon,  though  some-
times the  accuser  proceeded  by  means  of  a  regular
indictment  (ypacp-fj),  with  an  avdKpiais  before  the
archon.  (Dem.  c.  Pantaenet.  p.  980.)  Those  who
accused  persons  guilty  of  kolkwo-is  incurred  no
danger,  as  was  usually  the  case,  if  the  defendant
was  acquitted,  and  they  did  not  obtain  the  fifth
part  of  the  votes  of  the  dicasts.  (Harpocr.  s.  v.
El(rayy€\ia.)

The  punishment  does  not  appear  to  have  been
fixed  for  the  different  cases  of  kolkuxtis,  but  it  was
generally  severe.  Those  found  guilty  of  KaKuaif
yov4wv  lost  their  civil  rights  {arifxia),  but  were  al-
lowed to  retain  their  property  (outoi  &Tifj.oi  ^aav
TO.  (TU'fMaTa,  TO  Se  xP'^/^ara  elx'^^i  Andoc.  JJe
Myst.  36  ;  Xen.  Mem.  ii.  2.  §  13)  :  but  if  the
KdKoxris  consisted  in  beating  their  parents,  the
hands  of  the  offenders  might  even  be  cut  off.
(Meursius,  Them.  Attic,  i.  2.)

KAKOTECHNION  DIKE  (KaKorexyii^y
Si/cTj),  corresponds  in  some  degree  with  an  action
for  subornation  of  perjury.  It  might  be  instituted
against  a  party  to  a  previous  suit,  whose  witnesses
had  already  been  convicted  of  falsehood  in  an  action
rpcvSofjiafjrvpiwv.  (Harpocr.  s.  v.  ;  Dem.  c.  Ev.
and  Mnes.  p.  1139.  11.)  It  has  been  also  sur-
mised that  this  proceeding  was  available  agamst
the  same  party,  when  persons  had  subscribed  them-
selves falsely  as  suramoners  in  the  declaration  or
indictment  in  a  previous  suit  (Meier,  Att.  Proc.
p.  385) ;  and  if  Plato's  authority  with  respect  to
the  terms  of  Attic  law  can  be  considered  conclu-
sive, other  cases  of  conspiracy  and  contrivance  may
have  borne  this  title.  (Plat.  Leg.  xi.  p.  936,  e.)
With  respect  to  the  court  into  which  these  cuuse.s


218


CADUS.


■were  brought,  and  the  advantages  obtained  by  the
successful  party,  we  have  no  information.  (Meier,
Att.  Proc.  pp.  45,  386.)  [J.  S.  M.

CADA'VER.  [FuNus.]
CADISCI  (KaSla-Koi).  [Psephus.]
CADU'CEtFS  (KrjpvKeiou,  KTfpvKiov^  Thucyd.
53  ;  KtipvK-niov,  Herod,  ix.  100)  was  the  staff  or
mace  carried  by  heralds  and  ambassadors  in  time
of  war.  (Pollux,  viii.  138.)  This  name  is  also
given  to  the  staff  with  which  Hermes  or  Mercury
is  usually  represented,  as  is  shown  in  the  following
figure  of  Hennes,  taken  from  an  ancient  vase,
which  is  given  in  Millin's  Peintures  de  Vases  An-
tiques^ vol.  i.  pi.  70.

The  caduceus  was  originally  only  an  olive  branch
with  the  (TTiixfiara  which  were  afterward  formed
into  snakes.  (Miiller,  Arch'dologie  der  Kunst,  p.
504.)      Later  mythologists  invented  tales  about


these  snakes.  Hyginus  tells  us  that  Mercury  once
found  two  snakes  fighting,  and  divided  them  with
his  wand  ;  from  which  circumstance  they  were
ysed  as  an  emblem  of  peace.  (Compare  Plin.  H.  N.
xxix.  3.)

From  caduceus  was  formed  the  word  Caduceator^
which  signified  a  person  sent  to  treat  of  peace.  (Liv.
xxxii.  32  ;  Nep.  Hannih.  1 1  ;  Amm.  Marc.  xx.  7  ;
Gell.  x.  27.)  The  persons  of  the  Caduceatores
were  considered  sacred.  (Cato,  ap.  Fest.  s.  v.  ;  Cic.
De  Orat.  ii.  46.)  The  Caduceus  was  not  used  by
the  Romans.  They  used  instead  verbena  and
sagmina,  which  were  carried  by  the  Fetiales.  (Dig.
i.  tit.  8.  8.  8.)     [Fetiales.]

CADU'CUM.     [Bona  Caduca.]

CADUS  (koSos,  /ca85os),  a  large  vessel  usually
made  of  earthen-ware,  which  was  used  for  several
purposes  among  the  ancients.  Wine  was  fre-
quently kept  in  it ;  and  we  learn  from  an  author
quoted  by  Pollux  that  the  amphora  was  also  called
cadus  (Pollux,  X.  70,  71  ;  Suidas,  s.v.  K6Zos).
The  vessel  used  in  drawing  water  from  wells  was
called  cadus  (Aristoph.  Eccles.  1003  ;  Pollux,  x.
31 ),  or  yav\6s,  (Suidas,  s.  v.  FavXSs.)  The  name
of  cadus  was  sometimes  given  to  the  vessel  or  urn
in  which  the  counters  or  pebbles  of  the  dicasts  were
put,  when  they  gave  their  vote  on  a  trial,  but  the


CAELATURA.

diminutive  /coSiVkos  was  more  commonly  used  in
this  signification.     [Psephus.]

CAELATU'RA  (ropevriKi)),  a  branch  of
the  fine  arts,  under  which  all  sorts  of  ornamental
work  in  metal,  except  actual  statues,  appear  to
be  included.  The  principal  processes,  which  these
words  were  used  to  designate,  seem  to  have  been
of  three  kinds :  hammering  metal  plates  into
moulds  or  dies,  so  as  to  bring  out  a  raised  pat-
tern ;  engraving  the  surface  of  metals  with  a  sharp
tool  ;  and  working  a  pattern  of  one  metal  upon  or
into  a  surface  of  another:  in  short,  the  various
processes  which  we  describe  by  the  words  chasi?ig,
damascening^  &c.  MiUingen,  who  is  one  of  the
best  authorities  on  such  subjects,  says  "  The  art  of
working  the  precious  metals  either  separately,  or
uniting  them  with  other  substances,  was  called
toreutice.  It  Avas  known  at  a  very  early  epoch,  as
may  be  inferred  from  the  shield  of  Achilles,  the
ark  of  Cypselus,  and  other  productions  of  the
kind."  There  is,  however,  some  doubt  whether,
in  their  original  meaning,  the  words  ropevriK-i]  and
caelaiura  described  the  first  or  the  second  of  the
above  processes :  but  both  etymology  and  usage
are  in  favour  of  the  latter  view.  The  word  ropevu}
means  originally  to  bore,  to  pierce  by  cutting,  and
the  cognate  substantives  ropevs  and  Top6s  are  ap-
plied to  any  pointed  instrument,  such  as  the  tool
of  the  engraver  (Top^vri]s:  see  Seller  u.  Jacobitz,
Handworterbuch  d.  Griech.  Sprache,  s.  w.).  So  in
Latin,  caelo  (to  chase),  and  caelum  (the  chasing
tool),  are  undoubtedly  connected  v/ith  caedo  (to
cut).  It  may  also  be  observed  that  for  working
metals  by  hammering  other  words  are  used,  eA.au-
yeiv,  a(pvp7]\aT^'iv,  iKKpoveiv,  X'*^'^^'^^'''»  excu-
dere,  and  that  works  in  metal  made  by  hammer-
ing plates  into  a  raised  pattern  are  called  ava-
yXv^a,  and  eKrvira  [Anaglypha].  With  regard
to  the  usage  of  the  terms,  it  is  enough  to  remark,
that  a  very  large  proportion  of  the  ornamental
works  in  metal,  alluded  to  by  the  ancient  writers,
from  Homer  downwards,  must  have  been  executed
by  the  process  of  engraving,  and  not  of  hammering.
But,  whichever  process  the  terms  may  have  been
originally  intended  to  designate,  in  practice  both
processes  were  frequently  imited.  For  all  vessels
made  out  of  thin  plates  of  metal,  the  process  seems
to  have  been  first  to  beat  out  the  plate  into  the
raised  pattern,  and  then  to  chase  it  with  the
graving  tool.  There  is  an  example  of  this  kind
of  work  in  the  British  Museum,  noticed  by  Mil-
lingen.

Another  question  has  been  raised,  whether
ropevriKT}  and  caelatura  are  precisely  equivalent :
but  it  is  the  opinion  of  the  best  writers  on  art
that  they  are  so,  though  Quatremere  de  Quincy  and
others  suppose  Topeurt/cVj  to  refer  to  any  work  in
relief,  and  even  to  chryselephantine  statues.  (See
Garatom,  in  Cic.  Verr.  iv.  23  ;  Salmas.  Eocerc.  ad
Solin.  p.  736,  foil.  ;  Heyne,  Antiquar.  Au/s'dize,
ii.  p.  127.)  Quintilian  (ii.  21)  expressly  dis-
tinguishes c&elatura  and  sculptura  by  saying  that
the  former  includes  works  in  gold,  silver,  bronze,
and  iron,  while  the  latter  embraces,  besides  these
materials,  also  loood,  ivory,  marble,  glass,  and  gems.
It  must  therefore  be  understood  as  an  accommo-
dated use  of  the  term  when  Pliny  says  of  glass,  —
"  argenti  modo  caelatur."  (H.  N.  xxxvi.  26.  s.  60.)

The  fact  which  is  implied  in  the  words  just
quoted,  that  silver  was  the  chief  material  on
which  the  caelator  worked,  is  expressly  stated  by


CAELATURA.

Pliny,  at  the  commencement  of  the  passage  which
forms  one  of  our  chief  authorities  on  the  subject
{H.  N.  xxxiii.  12.  s.  55)  ;  where  he  mentions  it
as  a  remarkable  fact,  that  many  had  gained  re-
nown for  chasing  in  silver,  but  none  for  chasing  in
gold :  it  is  not  however  to  be  inferred  that  gold
was  not  chased,  for  works  in  gold  are  frequently
mentioned  by  other  authors.  From  the  same  sec-
tion, and  from  other  authorities,  we  learn  that
works  of  this  kind  were  also  executed  in  bronze
and  iron  (Quint.  I.  c.  ;  Forcellini,  s.  v.).  Two  ex-
amples of  chasing  in  iron  deserve  especial  notice,
the  one  for  its  antiquity,  the  other  for  its  beauty :
the  former  is  the  iron  base  of  the  vase  dedicated
by  Alyattes,  king  of  Lydia,  at  Delphi,  which  was
the  work  of  Glaucus  of  Chios,  and  was  chased
with  small  figures  of  animals,  insects,  and  plants
(Herod,  i.  25  ;  Pans.  x.  16.  §  1  ;  Ath.  v.  p.
210,  b.  c.  ;  Diet,  of  Biog.  s.  v.  Glaucus)  :  the  latter
is  the  iron  helmet  of  Alexander,  the  work  of
Theophilus,  which  glittered  like  silver  (Plut.  Alex.
32) :  Strabo,  moreover,  mentions  the  people  of
Cibyra,  in  Asia  Minor,  as  noted  for  their  skill  in
chasing  iron  (Strab.  xiii.  p.  631).

The  objects  on  which  the  caelator  exercised  his
art  were  chiefly  weapons  and  armour  —  especially
shields,  chariots,  tripods,  and  other  votive  offerings,
quoits,  candelabra,  thrones,  curule  chairs,  mirrors,
goblets,  dishes,  and  all  kinds  of  gold  and  silver
plate.  Arms  were  often  ornamented  with  patterns
in  gold  {"ypairra  iv  OTrK(f  iyxP^^V  etKWJ/  {Corp.
Tnscr.  vol.  i.  No.  124  ;  scutum  chrysographatum,
Trebell.  Claud.  14).  Chased  bronze  helmets  and
greaves  have  been  found  at  Pompeii  and  elsewhere.
{Mus.  Borb.  iii.  60,  iv.  13,  v.  29  ;  Bronsted,  die
Bronzen  vo?i  Siris.)  Chariots,  especially  those
used  in  the  chariot-races  and  triumphal  process,
were  often  made  of  bronze  richly  chased  [Cur-
Rus]  :  under  the  Roman  emperors  private  carriages
{cunnicae)  were  often  covered  with  plates  of  chased
bronze,  silver,  and  even  gold  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii.  11.
s.  49  ;  Suet.  Claud.  16  ;  Martidl.  iii.  72  ;  Lamprid.
Alex.  Sev.  43  ;  Vopisc.  Aurel.  46  ;  Carruca).
In  candelabra,  mirrors,  and  so. forth,  the  remains
of  Etniscan  art  are  very  rich.  An  elaborate  ac-
count of  ancient  tripods  is  given  in  Miillcr's  essay,
Ueber  die  Tripoden,  in  the  AmaWiea^  vols.  i.  and
iii.  Respecting  vessels  of  gold  and  silver  plate,  and
other  ornaments,  among  the  numerous  references
of  the  ancient  authors,  those  of  Cicero  {in  Verr.
iv.),  and  Pliny  (//.  A^.  xxxiii.  11,  12.  s.  50—54)
are  among  the  most  important  and  interesting.

The  ornamental  work  Avith  which  the  chaser
decorated  such  objects  consisted  either  of  simple
running  patterns,  chiefly  in  imitation  of  plants  and
flowers,  or  of  animals,  or  of  mythological  subjects,
and,  for  armour,  of  battles.  To  the  first  class  belong
tlie  lances  jUicatae.,  pajnpinatae.,  patinae  hederatae.,
and  disci  corymhiati  (Cic.  I.  c. ;  Trebell.  Claud.  17)  :
ornaments  of  the  second  class  were  common  on  the
bronze  and  gold  vases  of  Corinth  (Ath.  v.  p.  199,  e.)
and  on  tripods  {Anialtk.  vol.  iii.  p.  29)  ;  and  the
mythological  subjects,  which  were  generally  taken
from  Homer,  were  reserved  for  the  works  of  the
greatest  masters  of  the  art :  they  were  generally
executed  in  verj'  high  relief  {anagh/phd).  In  the
finest  works,  the  ornamental  pattern  was  frequently
distinct  from  the  vessel,  to  which  it  was  either
fastened  pennanently,  or  so  that  it  could  be  re-
moved at  pleasure,  the  vessel  being  of  silver,  and
the  ornaments  of  gold,  crustae  aut  emblemata.  (Cic.


CAELATURA.


219


in  Verr.  iv.  23  ;  Juv.  i.  76  ;  Martial,  viii.  51  ;
Ovid.  Met.  v.  81  ;  Ath.  v.  p.  199  ;  VauW.Sejit.  iii.
6,  8  ;  Senec.  Ep.  5  ;  comp.  Chrysendeta).

The  art  of  ornamental  metal-work  was  in  an
advanced  stage  of  progress  among  the  Greeks  of  the
heroic  period,  as  we  see  from  numerous  passages  of
Homer.  In  Italy,  also,  the  Etruscans,  as  above
stated,  had  early  attained  to  great  proficiency  in  it.
In  the  time  of  the  last  djnaasty  of  Lydian  kings,  a
great  impulse  was  given  to  the  art,  especially  by
their  magnificent  presents  to  the  Delphian  temple*;
and  belonging  to  this  period,  we  have  the  names  of
Glaucus,  as  already  mentioned,  and  of  Theodoras  of
Stimos,  who  made  a  great  silver  vessel  for  Croesus,
the  ring  of  Polycrates,  and  a  golden  vessel  which
afterwards  adorned  the  palace  of  the  Persian  kings.
But  its  perfection  would  of  course  depend  on  that  of
the  arts  of  design  in  general,  especially  of  sculpture  ;
and  thus  we  can  readily  accept  the  statement  of
Pliny  that  its  origin,  in  the  high  artistic  sense,  is  to
be  ascribed  to  Pheidias,  and  its  complete  develop-
ment to  Polycleitus.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiv.  8.  s.  1 9.  §  1,
primusque  [Phidiasi  artem  toreuticen  aperuisse  atque
demonstrassemeritojudicatur:  ibid.  §2,  Hic  {Poly-
cletus) . .  .judicatur  toreuticen  sic  erudisse,  ut  Phidias
aperuisse).  There  can,  indeed,  be  no  doubt  that
the  toreutic  art  was  an  important  accessory  to  the
arts  of  statuary  and  sculpture,  especially  in  works
executed  in  bronze  and  in  ivory  and  gold.  In  fact,
in  the  latter  class  of  works,  the  parts  executed  in
gold  belonged  properly  to  the  department  of  the
caelator :  and  hence  has  arisen  the  error  of  several
modem  writers  who  have  made  the  chryselephan-
tine statues  a  branch  of  the  toreutic  art.  The  in-
timate connection  of  this  art  with  statuary  and
sculpture  is  further  shown  by  the  fact  that  several
of  the  great  artists  in  these  departments  were  also
renowned  as  silver-chasers,  such  as  Myron  and
Pasiteles.  In  the  age  of  Pheidias,  the  most  dis-
tinguished name  is  that  of  Mys,  who  engraved  the
battle  of  the  Lapithae  with  the  Centaurs  on  the
shield  bf  Pheidias's  colossal  bronze  statue  of  Athena
Promachus  in  the  Acropolis,  and  who  is  said  to  have
worked  from  designs  drawn  by  the  hand  of  Par-
rhasius  ;  but  the  latter  point  involves  a  chronological
difliculty.  (See  Diet,  of  Biog.  s.  vv.  Mys,  Prax-
iteles.) In  the  period  from  the  time  of  Pheidias
to  that  of  the  Roman  conquest  of  Greece,  the  fol-
lowing names  are  preserved:  Acragas,  Boethus,
and  Mentor,  the  most  distinguished  of  all  the  artists
in  this  department  ;  the  sculptor  Myron  and  his  son
Lycius  ;  after  them,  Calamis,  Antipater  ;  and  the
maker  of  a  work  mentioned  with  especial  admira-
tion by  Pliny,  Stratonicus  ;  a  little  later,  Tauriscus
of  Cyzicus,  Ariston  and  Eunicus  of  Mytilene,  and
Hecataeus.  The  Greek  kings  of  Syria,  especially
Antiochus  Epiphanes,  were  great  patrons  of  the  art.
(Ath.  v.  p.  293,  d.)  In  the  last  age  of  the  Ro-
man Republic,  the  prevailing  wealth  and  luxury,
and  the  presence  of  Greek  artists  at  Rome,  com-
bined to  bring  the  art  more  than  ever  into  requi-
sition. Silver-chasers  seem  to  have  been  regularly
employed  in  the  establishments  of  the  great  men
of  Rome  ;  and  Pliny  mentions,  as  belonging  to  the
age  of  Pompey  the  Great,  Pasiteles,  Posidonius  of
Ephesus,  Leostratides,  Zopyrus,  Pytheas,  and
lastly  Teucer.  After  this  period,  the  art  suddenly
fell  into  disuse,  so  that,  in  the  time  of  Pliny,  chased
vessels  were  valued  only  for  their  age,  though  the
chasing  was  so  worn  down  by  use  that  even  the
figures  could  not  be  distinguished.     (//.  N.  xxxiii.


220


CALATHUS.


12.  s.  55,  xxxiv.  8.  s.  19  ;  see  the  articles  on  the
artists  above  mentioned  in  the  Dictionary  of
Biofiraphy.)

The  principal  ancient  writers  on  this  art,  whose
works  Pliny  used,  were  Antigonus,  Menaechmus,
Xenocrates,  Duris,  Menander,  and  especially
Pasiteles,  who  wrote  mirabilia  opera.  (Plin.  H.  N.
Elench.  lib.  xxxiii.)  The  most  important  modem
works  on  the  subject  are  the  following  :  Winckel-
mann,  Werke,  passim  ;  Millingen,  Unedited  Monu-
ments^ ii.  12  ;  Veltheim,  Etivas  uber  Memnon''s
Bilds'dtde^  Nero''s  Smaragd^  Toreutik^  &c. ;  Quatre-
mere  de  Quincy,  Le  Jupiter  Olympien ;  Welcker,
Zeitsch.  f.  Gesch.  u.  Ausleg.  d.  alt.  Kunst,  vol.  i.
part  2.  p.  280  ;  Hirt,  Ueber  das  Material,  die
Technik,  &c.,  in  the  Amalthea,  vol.  i.  p.  239.
foil. ;  Miiller,  Handh.  d.  Arch'dologie  der  Kunst,
§311)  [P.S.]

CAELIBA'TUS.  [Aes  Uxorium  ;  Lex
Julia  et  Papia  Poppaea.]

CAERITUM  TA'BULAE.     [Aerarii.]

C AESA  R,  a  title  of  the  Roman  emperors,  was
originally  a  family  name  of  the  Julia  gens  ;  it  was
assumed  by  Octavianus  as  the  adopted  son  of  the
great  dictator,  C.Julius  Caesar,  and  was  by  him
handed  down  to  his  adopted  son  Tiberius.  It  con-
tinued to  be  used  by  Caligula,  Claudius,  and  Nero,
as  members  either  by  adoption  or  female  descent  of
Caesar's  family  ;  but  though  the  family  became
extinct  with  Nero,  succeeding  emperors  still  retained
the  name  as  part  of  their  titles,  and  it  was  the
practice  to  prefix  it  to  their  own  names,  as  for  in-
stance, Imperator  Caesar  Domitianus  Aiigustus.
When  Hadrian  adopted  Aelius  Varus,  he  allowed
the  latter  to  take  the  title  of  Caesar  ;  and  from  this
time,  though  the  title  of  Aiigustus  continued  to  be
confined  to  the  reigning  emperor,  that  of  Caesar
was  also  granted  the  second  person  in  the  state
and  the  heir  presumptive  to  the  throne.  (Eckhel,
vol.  viii.  p.  367,  &c.)     [Augustus.]

CALAMISTRUM,  an  instrument  made  of  iron,
and  hollow  like  a  reed  {calamus),  used  for  curling
the  hair.  For  this  purpose  it  was  heated,  the  per-
son who  performed  the  office  of  heating  it  in  wood-
ashes  (cinis)  being  called  ciniflo,  or  cinerarius,  (Hor.
Sat.  i.  2.  98;  Heindorf,  ad  loc.)  This  use  of  heated
irons  was  adopted  very  early  among  the  Romans
(Plant  Asin.  iii.  3.  37),  and  became  as  common
among  them  as  it  has  been  in  modem  times.  ( Virg.
Aen.  xii.  1 00.)  In  the  age  of  Cicero,  who  frequently
alludes  to  it,  the  Roman  youths,  as  well  as  the
matrons,  often  appeared  with  their  hair  curled  in
this  manner  (calamistrati).  We  see  the  result  in
many  antique  statues  and  busts.  [J.  Y.]

CA'LAMUS  (/caAa/xoy,  Pollux,  x.  15),  a  sort
of  reed  which  the  ancients  used  as  a  pen  for  writing.
(Cic.  ad  Alt.  vl  8  ;  Hor.  De  Art.  Poet.  447.)  The
best  sorts  were  got  from  Aegypt  and  Cnidus.  (  Plin.
//.  N.  xvl  36,  64.)  So  Martial  (xiv.  38),  «  Dat
chartis  habiles  calamos  Memphitica  tellus."  When
the  reed  became  blunt,  it  was  sharpened  with  a
knife,  scalprum  librarium  (Tac.  Ann.  v.  8  ;  Suet
VitelL  2)  ;  and  to  a  reed  so  sharpened  the  epithet
temperatus,  used  by  Cicero,  probably  refers  (Cic.
Ad  Qu.  F.  ii.  15,  "calamo  et  atramento  temperato
res  agetur  ").  One  of  the  inkstands  given  under  the
article  Atramkntum  has  a  calamus  upon  it.  The
calamus  was  split  like  our  pens,  and  hence  Ausonius
(vii.  49)  calls  it  fissipes  or  clovenfooted.     [A.  A.]

CALA'NTICA.     [Coma.]

CA'LATHUS,  dim.  CALATHISCUS  (k(£Ao-


CALCEUS.

dus,  KaXaOiaKos),  also  called  rdkapos  usually  sig  ■
nified  the  basket  in  which  women  placed  their
work,  and  especially  the  materials  for  spinning.
Thus,  Pollux  (x.  125)  speaks  of  both  raAapos  and
KdXados  as  t^s  yvvaiKwviriZos  orKevTj :  and  in  an-
other passage  (vii.  29),  he  names  them  in  connec-
tion with  spinning,  and  says  that  the  rdXapos  and
KaKa9i(TKOs  were  the  same.  These  baskets  were
made  of  osiers  or  reeds  ;  whence  we  read  in  Pollux
(viL  173)  irXeKciv  raXdpovs  Koi,  KoXadicKOvs,  and
in  Catullus  (Ixiv.  319)  —

*'  Ante  pedes  autem  candentis  mollia  lanae
Vellera  virgati  custodiebant  calathisci.''''

They  appear,  however,  to  have  been  made  in  earlier
times  of  more  valuable  materials,  since  we  read  in
Homer  {Od.  iv.  125)  of  a  silver  rdKapos.  They
frequently  occur  in  paintings  on  vases,  and  often
indicate,  as  Bottiger  ( Vasengem.  iii.  44)  has  re-
marked, that  the  scene  represented  takes  place  in
the  gynaeconitis,  or  women ''s  apartments.  In  the
following  woodcut,  taken  from  a  painting  on  a  vase
(Millin,  Peintures  de  Vases  Antiques,  vol.  i.  pi.  4),
a  slave,  belonging  to  the  class  called  quasillariae,  is
presenting  her  mistress  with  the  calathus,  in  which
the  wool  was  kept  for  embroidery,  «SlC


Baskets  of  this  kind  were  also  used  for  other  pur-
poses (Bottiger,  Saifina,  vol.  ii.  pp.  252,  258),  such
as  for  carrying  fruits,  flowers,  &c.  (Ovid.  Art.  Am.
ii.  264.)  The  name  of  calathi  was  also  given  to
cups  for  holding  wine  (Virg.  Eel.  v.  71).

Calathus  was  properly  a  Greek  word,  though
used  by  the  Latin  writers.  The  Latin  word  cor-
responding to  it  was  qttalus  (Hor.  Carm.  iii.  12.
4),  or  qttasillus  (Festus  s.  Calatlius  ;  Cic.  Philipp.  iii.
4  ;  Prop.  iv.  7.  37).  From  quasillus  came  quasillaria,
the  name  of  the  slave  who  spim,  and  who  was  con-
sidered the  meanest  of  the  female  slaves.  (Petron.
132  ;  TibuU.  iv.  10.  3.)     [Fusus  ;  Tela.]

CALCAR  (ynuwi//,  iyKcyrpis,  Pollux,  x.  12),  a
spur.  The  Greek  name  for  spurs  was  taken  from
the  flies,  which  infest  horses  with  their  stings  :  hence
the  verb  fivwiri^eiv,  to  spur.  (Xen.  de  Re  Eq.  viii.  5,
X.  1,  2  ;  Heliodor.  ix.  p.  432,  ed.  Commelin.)  The
Athenian  gentry  sometimes  showed  their  conceit
by  walking  about  the  Agora  in  spurs  after  riding
(Theophrast.  Cliar.  xxi.)  Spurs  were  early  used
by  the  Romans,  as  appears  from  the  mention  of
them  in  Plautus  {Asin.  iii.  3.  118)  and  Lucretius  (v.
1074).  They  are  likewise  often  alluded  to  by  Cicero
{De  Oral.  iii.  9,  ad  Ail.  vi.  1),  Ovid  {Da  Pmdo,  ii.
9.  38  ;  iv.  2.  35),  Virgil  {/errata  cake,  Aen.  xi.
714),  and  subsequent  Roman  authors.     [J.  Y.]

CA'LCEUS,  CALCEAMEN,  CALCEA-
MENTUM   {inro5i}fj.a,  TreStAoi'),  a  shoe  or  boot,


CALCEUS.
any  thing  adapted  to  cover  and  presen'e  the  feet  in
wiilking.  The  use  of  shoes  was  by  no  means  uni-
versal among  the  Greeks  and  Romans.  The
Homeric  heroes  are  represented  without  shoes
when  armed  for  battle.  According  to  the  institu-
tions of  Lycurgus,  the  young  Spartans  were  brought
up  without  wearing  shoes  {avvTrodrjala^  Xen.  Rep.
Lac.  2),  in  order  that  they  might  have  the  full  use
of  their  feet  in  running,  leaping,  and  climbing.
Socrates,  Phocion,  and  Cato  frequently  went  bare-
foot (dvuTToS^Tos,  Aristoph.  Nub.  103,  362  ;  Xen.
Mem.].  6.  §  2,  pede  nudo,  Hor.  Ep.i.  19.  12).
The  Roman  slaves  had  no  shoes  (nudo  talo,  Juv.
vii.  16),  their  naked  feet  being  marked  with  chalk
or  gypsum.  The  covering  of  the  feet  was  removed
before  reclining  at  meals.  [Coena.]  To  go  bare-
foot also  indicated  haste,  grief,  distraction  of  mind,
or  any  violent  emotion,  as  when  Venus  goes  in
quest  of  Adonis  {aaav^aKos,  Bion.  i.  21),  and  when
the  Vestals  flee  from  Rome  with  the  apparatus  of
sacred  utensils.  (Flor,  i.  1 3.)  For  similar  reasons
sorceresses  go  with  naked  feet,  when  intent  upon
the  exercise  of  magical  arts  (Sen.  Medea,  iv.  2.  14  ;
nuda  pedem,  Ovid.  Mei.  vii.  183  ;  pedibus  nudis,
Hor.  Sat.  i.  8.  24),  although  sometimes  one  foot
only  was  unshod  (unum  exuta  pedem  vinclis.,  Virg.
Aen.  iv.  518),  and  is  so  painted  on  fictile  vases.
That  it  was  a  very  rare  thing  at  Rome  to  see  a
respectable  fiemale  out  of  doors  without  shoes,  is
clear  from  the  astonishment  experienced  by  Ovid
{Fast.  vi.  397),  until  he  was  informed  of  the  reason
of  it,  in  a  particular  instance.

"  Hue  pede  matronam  vidi  descendere  nudo :
Obstupui  tacitus,  sustinuique  gradum."

The  feet  were  sometimes  bare  in  attendance  on
funerals.  Thus  the  remains  of  Augustus  were  col-
lected from  the  pyra  by  noblemen  of  the  first  rank
with  naked  feet.  (Suet.  Aug.  100.)  A  picture
found  at  Herculaneum  exhibits  persons  with  naked
feet  engaged  in  the  worship  of  Isis  {Ant.  d''Ercol.
ii.  320)  ;  and  this  practice  was  observed  at  Rome
in  honour  of  Cybele  (Prudent.  Peris.  154).  In
case  of  drought,  a  procession  and  ceremonies,  called
Nudipedalia,  were  performed  with  a  view  to  pro-
pitiate the  gods  by  the  same  token  of  grief  and
humiliation.    (TertuU.  Apol.  40.)

The  idea  of  the  defilement  arising  from  contact
Avith  any  thing  that  had  died,  led  to  the  entire  dis-
use of  skin  or  leather  by  the  priests  of  Egypt.
Their  shoes  were  made  of  vegetable  materials
(ccdceos  ex  papyro.  Mart.  Cap.  2.)     [Baxa.]

Those  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans  who  wore
shoes,  including  generally  all  persons  except  youths,
slaves,  and  ascetics,  consulted  their  convenience,
and  indulged  their  fancy,  by  inventing  the  greatest
possible  variety  in  the  forms,  colours,  and  materials
of  their  shoes.  Hence  we  find  a  multitude  of
names,  the  exact  meaning  of  which  it  is  impossible
to  ascertain  ;  but  which  were  often  derived  either
from  the  persons  who  were  supposed  to  have
brought  certain  kinds  of  shoes  into  fashion,  or  from
the  places  where  they  were  procured.  We  read,
for  example,  of  "  shoes  of  Alcibiades  ;"  of  "  Sicyo-
nian,"  and  "Persian,"  which  were  ladies'  shoes
(Cic.  De  Orat.  i.  54  ;  Hesych.)  ;  of  "  Laconian,"
which  were  mens'  shoes  (Aristoph.  Thes.  149)  ;  and
of  "  Cretan,"  "  Milesian,"  and  "  Athenian  "  shoes.

The  distinctions  depending  upon  form  may  be
generally  divided  into  those  in  which  the  mere  sole
of  a  shoe  was  attached  to  the  sole  of  the  foot  bv


CALCEUS.


221


ties  or  bands,  or  by  a  covering  for  the  toes  or  the
instep  [SoLEA  ;  Crepida  ;  Sandahum  ;  Soc-
cus]  ;  and  those  which  ascended  higher  and  higher,
according  as  they  covered  the  ankles,  the  caJf,  or
the  whole  of  the  leg.  To  calceamenta  of  the  latter
kind,  i.  e.  to  shoes  and  boots  as  distinguished  from
sandals  and  slippers,  the  term  "  calceus  "  was  ap-
plied in  its  proper  and  restricted  sense.

Besides  the  difference  in  the  intervals  to  which
the  calceus  extended  from  the  sole  upwards  to  the
knee,  other  varieties  arose  from  its  adaptation  to
particular  professions  or  modes  of  life.  Thus  the
CALiGA  was  principally  worn  by  soldiers  ;  the  pero,
by  laboiu-ers  and  rustics  ;  and  the  cothurnus,  by
tragedians,  hunters,  and  horsemen.

Understanding  "  calceus  "  in  its  more  confined
application,  it  included  all  those  more  complete
coverings  for  the  feet  which  were  used  in  walking
out  of  doors  or  in  travelling.  As  most  commonly
worn,  these  probably  did  not  much  differ  from  our
shoes,  and  are  exemplified  in  a  painting  at  Hercu-
laneum {Ant.  d''Ercolano,  i.  Tav.  21),  which  repre-
sents a  female  wearing  bracelets,  a  wreath  of  ivy, .
and  a  panther's  skin,  while  she  is  in  the  attitude  of
dancing  and  playing  on  the  cymbals.


On  the  other  hand,  a  marble  foot  in  the  British
Museum  exhibits  the  form  of  a  man's  shoe.  Both
the  sole  and  the  upper  leather  are  thick  and  strong.
The  toes  are  uncovered,  and  a  thong  passes  between
the  great  and  the  second  toe  as  in  a  eandal.


£23


CALENDARIUM.


The  form  and  colour  of  the  calceus  were  also
among  the  insignia  of  rank  and  office.  Those  who
were  elevated  to  the  senate  wore  high  shoes  like
buskins,  fastened  in  front  with  four  black  thongs
{nigris  pellibus,  Hor.  Sat.  i.  6,  27)  and  adorned
with  a  small  crescent.  (Mart  ii.  29  ;  Juv.  vii.
192.)  Hence  Cicero  (Phil.  xiii.  13),  speaking  of
the  assumption  of  the  senatorial  dignity  by  Asinius,
says  mutavit  calceos.  Among  the  calcei  worn  by
senators,  those  called  viuUei^  from  their  resemblance
to  the  scales  of  the  red  mullet  (Isid.  Or.  xix.  14),
were  particularly  admired ;  as  well  as  others  c<alled
cdutae^  because  the  leather  was  softened  by  the
use  of  alum.  (  Mart.  Juv.  II.  cc. ;  Lydus,  de  Mag.
1.  32 ;  Ovid,  De  Art.  Am.  iii.  2/1.)         [J.  Y.]

CALCULA'TOR  (Xoyia-r-hs)  signifies  a  keeper
of  accounts  in  general,  but  was  also  used  in  the
signification  of  a  teacher  of  arithmetic ;  whence
Martial  (x.  62)  classes  him  with  the  ?iotarius  or
writing-master.  The  name  was  derived  from  cal-
culi^ which  were  commonly  used  in  teaching  arith-
metic, and  also  in  reckoning  in  general.  [Abacus.]
Among  the  Greeks  the  Xoyaniis  and  ypafj-yLaTia-riis
appear  to  have  been  usually  the  same  person.

In  Roman  families  of  importance  there  was  a
calculator  or  account-keeper  (Dig.  38.  tit.  1.  s.  7),
who  is,  however,  more  frequently  called  by  the
name  of  dispensator  or  procurator,  who  was  a  kind
of  steward  (Cic.  ad  Att.  xi.  1  ;  Plin.  Ep.  iii.  19  ;
Suet.  Galb.  12,  Vesp.  22;  Becker,  Gallus,  yo\.  i.
p.  109.)

CA'LCULI  were  little  stones  or  pebbles,  used
for  various  purposes ;  such,  for  example,  as  the
Athenians  used  in  voting,  or  such  as  Demosthenes
put  in  his  mouth  when  declaiming,  in  order  to
mend  his  prommciation.  (Cic.  De  Oral.  i.  61.)
Calculi  were  used  in  playing  a  sort  of  draughts.
[Latrunculi.]  Subsequently,  instead  of  pebbles,
ivory,  or  silver,  or  gold,  or  other  men  (as  we  call
them)  were  used ;  but  still  called  calculi.  The
calculi  were  bicolores.  (Sidon.  Epist.  viii.  1 2 ;
Ovid.  Trist.  ii.  477  ;  Mart.  Epig.  xiv.  17.  2,  xiv.
20.)  Calculi  were  also  used  in  reckoning,  and
hence  the  phrases  calculum  ponere  (Colum.  iii.  3),
calculum  subducere.  (Cic.  De  Fin,  ii.  19,  &c.)
[Abacus.]  [A.  A.]

CALDA.     [Calida.]

CALDA'RIUM.     [Balneae.]

CALENDA'RIUM,  or  rather  KALENDA'-
RIUM,  is  the  account-book,  in  which  creditors
entered  the  names  of  their  debtors  and  the  sums
which  they  owed.  As  the  interest  on  borrowed
money  was  due  on  the  Calendae  of  each  month,
the  name  of  Calendarhim  was  given  to  such  a  book.
(Senec.  De  Bemf.  i.  2,  vii.  10.)  The  word  was
subsequently  used  to  indicate  a  register  of  the
days,  weeks,  and  months,  thus  corresponding  to  a
modem  almanac  or  calendar.

1.  Greek  Calendar.  —  In  the  earliest  times
the  division  of  the  year  into  its  various  seasons
appears  to  have  been  very  simple  and  rude,  and
it  would  seem  that  there  was  no  other  divi-
sion except  that  of  summer  (^e'pos)  and  winter
(x^ifKtu/).  To  these  strongly  marked  periods  there
were  afterwards  added  the  periods  of  transi-
tion, viz.  spring  (^ap)  and  autumn  (oirwpa),  with
certain  subdivisions  according  to  the  diflFerent  agri-
cultural pursuits  peculiar  to  each  of  them.  As,
however,  the  seasons  of  the  year  were  of  great
importance  in  regard  to  agriculture,  it  became
necessary  to  fix  their  beginning  and  end  by  con-  j


CALENDARIUM.

necting  them  with  the  rising  or  setting  of  certain
stars.  Thus  Hesiod  (Op.  et  Dies,  381)  describes
the  tmie  of  the  rising  of  the  Pleiades  as  the  time
for  harvesting  (&p.r]Tos),  and  that  of  their  setting
as  the  time  for  ploughing  (6,poTos)  ;  the  time  at
which  Arcturus  rose  in  the  morning  twilight  as  the
proper  season  for  the  vintage  (l.  c.  607),  and  other
phenomena  in  nature,  such  as  the  arrival  of  birds
of  passage,  the  blossoming  of  certain  plants,  and  the
like,  indicated  the  proper  seasons  for  other  agri-
cultural occupations  ;  but  although  they  may  have
continued  to  be  observed  for  centuries  by  simple
rustics,  they  never  acquired  any  importance  in  the
scientific  division  of  the  year.     [Astronomia,]

The  moon  being  that  heavenly  body  whose
phases  are  most  easily  observed,  formed  the  basis
of  the  Greek  calendar,  and  all  the  religious  festi-
vals were  dependent  on  it.  The  Greek  year  was
a  lunar  year  of  twelve  months,  but  at  the  same
time  the  course  of  the  sun  also  was  taken  mto
consideration,  and  the  combination  of  the  two
(Gemin.  Isag.  6  ;  comp.  Censorin.  De  Die  Nat.  18  ;
Cic.  in  Verr.  ii.  52)  involved  the  Greeks  in  great
difficulties  which  rendered  it  almost  impossible  for
them  to  place  their  chronology  on  a  sure  founda-
tion. It  seems  that  in  the  early  times  it  was  be-
lieved that  12  revolutions  of  the  moon  took  place
within  one  of  the  sun  ;  a  calculation  which  was
tolerably  correct,  and  with  Avhich  people  were  satis-
fied. The  time  during  which  the  moon  revolved
around  her  axis,  was  calculated  at  an  average  or
round  number  of  30  days,  which  period  was  called
a  month  (Gemin.  I.  c.)  ;  but  even  as  early  as  the
time  of  Solon,  it  was  well  known  that  a  lunar
month  did  not  contain  30  days,  but  only  29|.  The
error  contained  in  this  calculation  could  not  long
remain  unobserved,  and  attempts  were  made  to
correct  it.  The  principal  one  was  that  of  creating
a  cycle  of  two  years,  called  rpierripis,  or  annus
magnus,  and  containing  25  months,  one  of  the.  two
years,  consisting  of  12  and  the  other  of  13  months.
The  months  themselves,  which  in  the  time  of
Hesiod  (Op.  et  Dies,  11^)  had  been  reckoned  at
30  days,  afterwards  alternately  contained  30  days
(full  months,  -rrX-fipeis)  and  29  days  (hollow  months,
KoiXoi.)  According  to  this  aixangement,  one  year
of  the  cycle  contained  354,  and  the  other  384  days,
and  the  two  together  were  about  7.'  days  more
than  two  tropical  or  solar  years.  (Gemin.  6  ;
Censorin.  18).  When  this  mode  of  reckoning  was
hitroduced,  is  unknown  ;  but  as  Herodotus  (i.  32)
mentions  it,  it  is  clear  that  it  must  have  been  before
his  time.  The  7|  days,  in  the  course  of  4  years,
made  up  a  month  of  30  days,  and  such  a  month
was  accordingly  inserted  in  everj'-  fourth  year,  and
the  cycle  of  four  years  was  called  a  irepTaeTrfpis.
(Censorin.  l.  c.)  But  a  far  more  important  cycle
was  the  ivveaerr^pls,  or  the  cycle  of  8  years,  for
it  was  practically  applied  by  the  Greeks  to  the
affairs  of  ordinary  life.  The  calculation  was  this  :
as  the  solar  year  is  reckoned  at  3655-  days,  8
such  years  contain  2922  days,  and  eight  lunar
years  2832  days  ;  that  is,  90  days  less  than  8
solar  years.  Now  these  90  days  were  constituted
as  three  months,  and  inserted  as  three  intercalary
months  into  three  different  years  of  the  ipveafrripis,
that  is,  into  the  third,  fifth,  and  eighth.  (Censorin. ;
Gemin.  U.  cc.)  It  should,  however,  be  observed
that  Macrobius  (Sat.  i.  13)  and  Solinus  (Pohjhisl.
iii.)  state  that  the  three  intercalary  months  were
all  added  to  the  last  year  of  the  enneaeteris,  which


CALENDARIUM.

would  accordingly  have  contained  444  days.  But
this  is  not  very  probable.  The  period  of  8  solar
years,  further,  contains  99  revolutions  of  the
moon,  which,  with  the  addition  of  the  three  inter-
calary months,  make  2923^  days ;  so  that  in  every
8  years  there  is  IJ  day  too  many,  which  in
the  coiurse  of  100  years,  again  amoimts  to  one
month.  The  enneaeteris,  accordingly,  again  was
incorrect  The  time  at  which  the  cycle  of  the  en-
neaeteris was  introduced  is  uncertain,  but  its  inac-
curacy called  forth  a  number  of  other  improvements
or  attempts  at  establishing  chronology  on  a  sound
l)ftsis,  the  most  celebrated  among  which  is  that  of
Meton.  The  number  of  these  attempts  is  a  suf-
ficient proof  that  none  of  them  was  ever  sanctioned
or  adopted  by  law  in  any  of  the  Greek  republics.
These  circumstances  render  it  almost  impossible  to
reduce  any  given  date  in  Greek  history  to  the  exact
date  of  our  calendar.

The  Greeks,  as  early  as  the  time  of  Homer,  ap-
pear to  have  been  perfectly  familiar  with  the  divi-
sion of  the  year  into  the  twelve  lunar  months
mentioned  above ;  but  no  intercalary  month  (/iV
4ixg6\iiJLos)  or  day  is  mentioned.  Independent  of
the  division  of  a  month  into  days,  it  was  divided
mto  periods  according  to  the  increase,  and  decrease
of  the  moon.  Thus,  the  first  day  or  new  moon  was
called  vovfjLTjuia.  (Hom.  Od.  x.  14,  xii.  325,  xx.
156,  xxi.  258;  Hes.  Op.  et  Dies,  770.)  The
period  from  the  vovixTjvia  until  the  moon  was  full,
was  expressed  by  fiw^s  laTajxivov,  and  the  latter
part  during  which  the  moon  decreased  by  [jltiv^s
(pelvopTos.  (Hom.  Orf.xiv.  162.)  The  30th  day
of  a  month,  ^.  e.  the  day  of  the  conjunction,  was
called  rpiaKOLS,  or,  according  to  a  regulation  of
Solon  (Plut.  Sol.  25),  evr)  /cat  v4a,  because  one
part  of  that  day  belonged  to  the  expiring,  and  the
other  to  the  beginning  month.  The  day  of  the
full  moon,  or  the  middle  of  the  month,  is  some-
times designated  by  SLx^fj-w^s.  (Find.  01.  iv.
34.)


CALENDARIUM.


223


The  month  in  which  the  year  began,  as  well
as  the  names  of  the  months,  differed  in  the  dif-
ferent countries  of  Greece,  and  in  some  parts  even
no  names  existed  for  the  months,  they  being  dis-
tinguished only  numerically,  as  the  first,  second,
third,  fourth  month,  &c.  In  order,  therefore,  to
acquire  any  satisfactory  knowledge  of  the  Greek
calendar,  the  different  states  must  be  considered
separately.

The  Attic  year  began  with  the  summer  solstice,
and  each  month  was  divided  into  three  decads,  from
the  1st  to  the  10th,  from  the  10th  to  the  20th,  and
from  the  20th  to  the  29th  or  30th.  The  first  day
of  a  month,  or  the  day  after  the  conjunction,  was
uovfirjula ;  and  as  the  first  decad  was  designated  as
l(TTafj.4vov  iir]v6s,  the  days  were  regularly  counted
as  Seurepo,  rpir-q^  Tera^TTj,  &c.,  fiiquhs  ia-rafie^
vov.  The  days  of  the  second  decad  were  dis-
tinguished as  c'ttI  Scku^  or  [xecrovvTos^  and  were
counted  to  20  regularly,  as  it  peart],  Seurc'pa,  TptTTj,
TeTrdprri,  &c.,  iirl  Sewa.  The  20th  itself  was
called  €t/cas,  and  the  days  from  the  20th  to  the
30th  Avere  counted  in  two  different  ways,  viz.
either  onwards,  as  irpdoTn],  ScvTcpa,  rpirt],  &c.,
en-1  ei/cciSi,  or  backwards  from  the  last  day  of  the
month  with  the  addition  of  (pQivovros,  iravo/xdvov,
\il'YOVTos,  or  aTriovros,  as  iuudrr],  SeKdrr},  &c,,
(pOivovTos,  which,  of  course,  are  different  dates  in
hollow  and  in  full  months.  But  this  mode  of  count-
ing backwards  seems  to  have  been  more  commonly
used  than  the  other.  With  regard  to  the  hollow
months,  it  must  be  observed,  that  the  Athenians,
generally  speaking,  counted  29  days,  but  in  the
month  of  Boedromion  they  counted  30,  leaving
out  the  second,  because  on  that  day  Athena  and
Poseidon  were  believed  to  have  disputed  about  the
possession  of  Attica.  (Plut.  De  Frat.  Am.  p.  489,
Sympos.  ix.  7.)  The  following  table  shows  the
succession  of  the  Attic  months,  the  number  of  days
they  contained,  and  the  corresponding  months  of
our  year.


1.  Hecatombaeon  ('EKaTOyu.gatcov)  contained  30  days,  and  corresponds  nearly  to  our  July.


2.  Metageitnion  {'M.^ra'yiLrviwv)

3.  Boedromion  (BoTjSpo/xtwj/)

4.  Pyanepsion  (J\vavii\ii(av)

5.  Maimacterion  (Majjtta/cTeptwj')

6.  Poseideon  (ITocreiSewv)

7.  Gamelion  (TafX'nXiwv)

8.  Anthesterion  {'AvdeaTepiwv)

9.  Elaphebolion  {'EXacp-ngoMwu)

10.  Munychion  (M.owvxi(^v)

11.  Thargelion  (Qapyr^Aiwu)

12.  Scirophorion  (^Kipo(popi<i>v)
At  the  time   when  the   Julian  Calendar  was

adopted  by  the  Athenians,  probably  about  the
time  of  the  Emperor  Hadrian,  the  lunar  year  ap-
pears to  have  been  changed  into  the  solar  year ;  and
it  has  further  been  conjectured,  that  the  beginning

1.  Herasius    ('Hpao-tos),

2.  Apellaeus  ('ATreAAaios)

3.  Diosthyus  (At(5fr0uos)

4.  Unknown.

5.  Eleusinius  ('EAeutrfi'tos)

6.  Gerastius  (V^pdcrrios)

7.  Artemisius  ('ApTefiia-ios)

8.  Delphinius  (AeA^fj/tos)

9.  Phliasius  {^Kidanos)

10.  Hecatombeus  ('EKaTOfiS^vs)

11.  Cameius  (Kopj/eios)

12.  Panamus  (IldvafMs)


August.

—  —  September

—  —  October

—  —  November

—  ' —  December.

—  —  January

—  —  February.

—  —  March.

—  —  April.

—  —  May.

—  —  June.
of  the  year  was  transferred  from  the  summer  sol-
stice to  the  autunmal  equinox.

The  year  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  which  is  be-
lieved to  have  begun  at  the  time  of  the  autumnal
equinox,  contained  the  following  months  :  —
nearly  corresponding  to  our  October.

■ —  —  November.

—  —  December.

—  —  February.

—  —  March.

—  —  ApriL

—  —  May.

—  —  June.
July.
August.
September.


224  CALENDARIUM.

It  should  be  observed  that  the  order  of  most  of
these  months  is  merely  conjectural,  and  of  some  it
is  not  even  certain  as  to  whether  they  really  were
Lacedaemonian  months.  But  here,  as  in  the  other
lists,  we  follow  Hermann's  view,  which  he  has

1.  Bucatius  (BovKttTJos),

2.  Hermaeus  ('EpixaTos)

3.  Prostaterius  (UpoaTaT-fjpios)

4.  Unknown.

5.  Theiluthius  (QuXovdios)

6.  Unknown.

7.  Unknown.

8.  Hippodromius  ('IwodpSixios)

9.  Panaraus  (Ildvafios)

10.  Unknown.

11.  Damatrius  (Aa/xdrpios)

12.  Alalcomenius  ('AAoA/co/ieVios)


CALENDARIUM.

fully  explained  in  the  work  referred  to  at  the  end
of  this  article.

Of  the  year  of  the  Boeotians,  which  began  at
the  winter  solstice,  the  following  months  are
known :  —

nearly  corresponds  to  our  January.

—  —         Febniary.

—  —         March.

—  —         May.


August.
September,

November.
December.


1.  Bucatius  (BovKarios)^

2.  Heraeus  ('Hpotos)

3.  Apellaeus  (*A7reA.Ao7os)

4.  Unknown.

5.  Dadaphorius  (Ac^5a<p6pio5)

6.  Poetropius  (UoiTp6irios)

7.  Bysius  (Bva-tos)

8.  Artemisius  ('Aprefxiartos)

9.  Heracleius  ('Hpa/cAetos)

10.  Boathous  (BoadSos)

11.  Ilaeus  ('IAo?os)

12.  Theoxenius  (06o|eVjos)

The  names  of  the  months  at  Cyzicus  are  given
in  the  following  order,  though  the  first  of  them  is

1.  Boedromion  (BoT^Spofiidv)^

2.  Cyanepsion  (Kvave^iccv)

3.  Apaturion  {'AiraTovpiwv)

4.  Poseideon  (IlocrejSewy)

5.  Lenaeon  (ATjvaidiv)

6.  Anthesterion  {'AvdearTipiwy)

7.  Artemision  ('ApT€fii(ri(i)v)

8.  Calamaeon  (KaXafxaidv)

9.  Paneraus  (Udvrjfios)
10.  Taureon  (Tavpedu)

]  1  and  12.  are  unknown.


The  months  of  the  year  at  Delphi  were  —

nearly  answers  to  our  September.
—  —         October.


—  —  November.

—  —  January.

—  —  February.

—  —  March.

—  —  April.

—  —  May.

—  —  June.

—  —  July.

—  —  August.

founded  only  on  a  conjecture,  and  the  last  may  be
either  the  lOth,  11th,  or  12th  :  —

nearly  answers  to  our  October.

—  —  November.

—  —  December.

—  —  January.

—  —  February.

—  —  March.

—  —  April.

—  —  May.

—  —  June.

—  —  July.


Among  the  Sicilian  months  the  following  are  known :  ■
1.  Thesmophorius  (&e(rfio<p6pios)f  probably  answers  to  our  October.


2.  Dalius  (AdKios)

3.  Unknown.

4.  Agrianius  ('Aypidpios)

5.  Unknown.

6.  Theudasius  (®€vdd<Tios)

7.  Artamitius  ('Aprafiinos)

8.  Unknown.

9.  Badromius  (Badp6fitos)

10.  Hyacinthius  ('Ta/ciV0JOs)

11.  Cameius  (KapveTos)

12.  Panamus  (Ildvafios)

We  further  know  the  names  of  several  isolated
months  of  other  Greek  states  ;  but  as  it  is  as  yet
impossible  to  determine  what  place  they  occupied
in  the  calendar,  and  with  which  of  our  months
they  correspond,  their  enumeration  here  would  be
of  little  or  no  use.  We  shall  therefore  confine
ourselves  to  giving  some  account  of  the  Macedonian
months,  and  of  some  of  the  Asiatic  cities  and
islands,  which  are  better  known.

On  the  whole  it  appears  that  the  Macedonian
^car  agreed  with  that  of  the  Greeks,  and  that  ac-


—  November.

—  —  January.

—  —  March.

—  —  April,

—  —  June.

—  —  July.

—  —  August.

—  —  September.

cordingly  it  was  a  lunar  year  of  twelve  months,
since  we  find  that  Macedonian  months  are  described
as  coincident  with  those  of  the  Athenians.  (Soe
a  letter  of  King  Philip  in  Demosth.  De  Coron.
p.  280  ;  Plut.  Camil.  19,  Alex.  3,  16.)  All  chro-
nologers  agree  as  to  the  order  and  succession  of
the  Macedonian  months  ;  but  we  are  altogether
ignorant  as  to  the  name  and  place  of  the  intercalar}'
month,  which  must  have  existed  in  the  Macedonian
yec-ir  as  well  as  in  that  of  the  Greek  states.  The
order  is  as  follows :  —  1.  Dius  (A7os),  2.  Apellaeus


CALENDARIUM.

('AireAAaTos),  3.  Audynaeus  (AuSvva.Tos)y  4.  Peri-
tius  (IleptTtos),  5.  Dystrus  (Aixrrpos),  6.  Xan-
thicus  (HoLV0tKJs),  7.  Artemisius  ('ApTefiia-ios)^
8.  Daesirrs  (Aaicnas),  9.  Panemirs  (fldvTriJ.os),
]  0.  Lous  (Awos),  11.  Gorpiaeus  (ropTriaios)^  12.
Hyperberetaeus  {"TirepSepeTalos).  The  difficulty
is  to  identffy  the  Macedonian  months  with  those
of  the  Athenians.  From  Plutarch  {Camil.  19,
comp.  with  Alex.  1 6)  we  learn  that  the  Macedonian
Daesius  was  identical  with  the  Athenian  Tharge-
lion  ;  but  while,  according  to  Philip,  the  Mace-
donian Lous  was  the  same  as  the  Athenian
Boedromion,  Plutarch  {Alex.  3)  identifies  the
Lous  with  the  Attic  Hecatorabaeon.  This  dis-
crepancy has  given  rise  to  various  conjectures,  some
supposing  that  between  the  time  of  Philip  and
Phitarch  a  transposition  of  the  names  of  the  months
had  taken  place,  and  others  that  Plutarch  made  a


1.  Caesarius  {Kaicrdpios)

2..  Tiberius  {TL§4pios)

3.  Apaturius  ('Anarovpios)

4.  Posidaon  (Hoa-iSadcu)

5.  Lenaeus  (Atjvc^ov)

6.  Hierosebasttis  {'Upo<re§a(rTos)

7.  Artemisius.  {'Apre/jiifTios)

8.  Evangelius.  (Eya776Aios)

9.  Stratonicus  {^rparouiKos)

10.  Hecatombaeus  {'EKarS/j.SataS')

11.  Anteus  ("Avreos)

12.  Laodicius  {AooS'ikios)


CALENDARIUM.


225


mistake  in  identifying  the  Lous  Avith  the  Heca-
tombaeon.  But  no  satisfactory  solution  of  the
difficulty  has  yet  been  offered.  We  know  that
the  Macedonian  year  began  with  the  month  of
Dius,  commencing  with  the  autumnal  equinox.
When  Alexander  conquered  Asia,  the  Macedonian
calendar  was  spread  over  many  parts  of  Asia,
though  it  underwent  various  modifications  in  the
different  countries  in  which  it  was  adopted.  When
subsequently  the  Asiatics  adopted  the  Julian  Ca-
lendar, those  modifications  also  exercised  their  in-
fluence and  prod'uced  differences  in  the  names  of
the  months,  although,  generally  speaking,  the  solar
year  of  the  Asiatics  began  with  the  autumnal
equinox.  During  the  time  of  the  Roman  emperors,
the  following  calendars  occur  in  the  province  of
Asia:  —


had  30  day

3,  and

began  on

the  24th  of  September.

31

—

—

24th  of  October.

31

—

—

24th  of  November.

30

—

—

25th  of  December.

29

—

—

24th  of  January.

30

—

—

22d  of  February.

31

—

—

24th  of  March.

30

—

—

24th  of  April.

31

— .

—

24th  of  May.

31

—

—

24th  of  June.

31

—

—

25th  of  July.

30

—

—

25th  of  August.

Among  the  Ephesians  we  find  the  following  months  ;  —

1 — 4.  Unknown.

5.  Apatureon  ('AiraTovpewv),  nearly  answers  to  our  November.


6.  Poseideon  (UoffuSewu)

7.  Lenaeon  (ATjvatdap)

8.  Unknown.

9.  Artemision  ('ApreiMKridv)
10.  Calamaeon  (KaXanaiwv)
11 — 12.  Unknown.


December.
January.

March.
April.


At  a  later  time  the  Ephesians  adopted  the  same  |  with  the  month  of  Dius   on   the   24th   of  Sep-
names  as  the  Macedonians,  and  began  their  year  |  tember.

The  following  is  a  list  of  the  Bithynian  months  :  —  ,


1.  Heraeus  {'UpaTos),

2.  Hermaeus  ("Ep/xaiof)

3.  Metrous  (MrjTp^os)

4.  Dionysius  {Aioi'iktios)

5.  Heracleius  ('Hpi/cAetos)

6.  Dius  (ATos)

7.  Bendidaeus  (Bej/JtSaTos)

8.  Strateius  {'S.rpdTetos)

9.  Periepius  {UepieTrtos)

10.  Areius  ("Apeios)

11.  Aphrodisius  ('AippoSicrios)

12.  Demetrius  (Ar]iJ.'f}Tpios)


contained  31  days,  and  began  on  the  23rd  of  September.

—  30  —  24th  of  October.

—  31  —  23rd  of  November.

—  31  —  24th  of  December.

—  28  —  24th  of  January.

—  31  —  21st  of  Februaiy.  •

—  30  —  24th  of  March.

—  31  —  23rd  of  April.

—  30  —  24th  of  May.

—  31  —  23rd  of  June.

—  30  —  24th  of  July.

—  31  —  23rd  of  August.


The  following  system  was  adopted  by  the  Cyprians  :  —
Aphrodisius  (*A</)po5io-tos),  contained  31  days,  and  began  on  the  23rd  of  September.

Apogonicus  ('AiroyouiKds)


20

Aenicus  {AIuikSs)  —  31

Julius  ('IouAjos)  —  31

Caesarius  (Kaia-dpios)  —  28

Sebastus  (Z^Soo-tSs)  —  30

Autocratoricus  (AvTOKpaTopiK6s)  —  31

Demarchexusius  (Arifjiapx^^oixnos)  —  31

Plethypatus  (IlATj^yTraTos)  —  30

Archiereus  {'Apxi^fpevs)  —  31

Esthius  ("Eo-eios)  —  30

Romaeus  ('PccjwaTos)  —  31


24th  of  October.
23rd  of  November.
24th  of  December.
24  th  of  January.
21st  of  February.
23rd  of  March.
23rd  of  April.
24th  of  May.
23rd  of  June.
24th  of  July.
23rd  of  Au^jst


226


CALENDARIUM.


CALENDARIUM.


The  system  of  the  Cretans  was  the  same  as  that  used  by  most  of  the  inhabitants  of  Asia  Minor,
viz.—

1.  Thesmophorion  (Qea-fiocpopLwu)^  contained  31  days,  and  began  on  the  23rd  of  September.


2.  Hermaeus  {'Ep/xalos)

3.  Einian  (E'^/xav)  —

4.  Metarchius  (MeTdpxios)  —

5.  Agyius  CAyvios)  —

6.  Dioscurus  (AtJcr/covpos)  —

7.  Theodosius  (QeoSdaios)  —

8.  Pontus  (nSvTos)  —

9.  Rhabinthius  ('?a€lveios)  —

10.  Hyperberetus  ("Tirep€4peTos)  —

11.  Necysius  (Ne/cvo-ioy)  —

12.  Basilius  (BaaiKios)  —

It  should  be  observed  that  several  of  the  Eastern
nations,  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  confusion  in
their  calculations  with  other  nations,  dropped  the
names  of  their  months,  and  merely  counted  the
months,  as  the  first,  second,  third,  &c.  month.
For  further  information  see  Corsini,  Fast.  Att.^
which  however  is  very  imperfect  ;  Ideler,  Hand-
huch  der  MatJiem.  u.  technischen  ChronoL  vol.  i.  p.
227,  &c,  ;  Clinton,  Fast.  HeUen.  vol.  ii.  Append,
xix ;  and  more  especially  K.  F.  Hermann,  Udjer
Griechische  Monatskunde^  Gottingen,  1844,  4to,,
and  Th.  Bergk,  Beitr'dge  zur  Griechisclmi  Monats-
kunde.,  Giessen,  1845,  8vo.  [L.  S.]

2.  Roman  Calendar.  —  TJie  Year  of  Romulus.
■ — The  name  of  Romulus  is  commonly  attached  to
the  year  which  is  said  to  have  prevailed  in  thej
earliest  times  of  Rome ;  but  tradition  is  not  con-
sistent with  regard  to  the  form  of  it.  The  his-
torians Licinius  Macer  and  Fenestella  maintained
that  the  oldest  yeai:  consisted  of  twelve  months,
and  that  it  was  already  in  those  days  an  antms
vertens^  that  is,  a  year  which  coincided  with  the
period  of  the  sun's  course,  Censorinus,  however,
in  whose  work  this  statement  occurs  {De  Die
Natali,  c.  20  ;  compare  also  the  beginning  of  c.  1.9),
goes  on  to  say  that  more  credit  is  due  to  Grac-
canus,  Fulvius  (Nobilior),  Van-o,  and  others,  ac-
cording to  whom  the  Romans  in  the  earliest  times,
like  the  people  of  Alba  from  whom  they  sprang,
allotted  to  the  year  but  ten  months.  This  opinion
is  supported  by  Ovid  in  several  passages  of  his
Fasti  (i.  27,  4S,  iil  99,  119,  151);  by  Gellius
{Noct.  Att.  iii.  16),  Macrobius  (Saturn,  i.  12),
Solinus  {Polyh.  i.),  and  Servius  (ad  Georg.  i.  43).
Lastly,  an  old  Latin  year  of  ten  months  is  implied
in  the  fact,  that  at  Laurentum  (Macrob.  i.  15)  a
sacrifice  was  offered  to  Juno  Kalendaris  on  the
first  of  every  month  except  February  and  January.
These  ten  months  were  called  Martius,  Aprilis,
Mains,  Junius,  Quinctilis,  Sextilis,  September,
October,  November,  December.  That  March  was
the  first  month  in  the  year  is  implied  in  the  last
six  names  ;  and  even  Plutarch,  who  ascribes  twelve
months  to  the  Romulian  year  (Numa,  c.  18),
places  Januarius  and  Februarius  at  the  end.  The
fact  is  also  confirmed  by  the  ceremony  of  rekindling
the  sacred  fire  in  the  temple  of  Vesta  on  the  first
day  of  March,  by  the  practice  of  placing  fresh
laurels  in  the  public  buildings  on  that  day,  and  by
many  other  customs  recorded  by  Macrobius  (i.
12).  With  regard  to  the  length  of  the  months,
Censorinus,  Macrobius,  and  Solinus  agree  in  ascrib-
ing thirty -one  days  to  four  of  them,  called  pleni
menses  ;  thirty  to  the  rest  called  eavi  menses.  The
four  longer  months  were  Martius,  Mains,  Quinc-
tilis, and  October ;  and  these,  as  Macrobius  ob-


30
31
31
28
31
30
31
30
31
30
31


24th  of  October.
23rd  of  November.
24  th  of  December.
24th  of  January.
21st  of  February.
23rd  of  March.
23rd  of  April.
24th  of  May.
23rd  of  June.
24th  of  July.
23rd  of  August


serves,  were  distinguished  in  the  latest  form  of
the  Roman  calendar  by  having  their  nones  two
days  later  than  any  of  the  other  months.  The
symmetry  of  this  arrangement  will  appear  by
placing  the  numbers  in  succession:  —  31,  30  ;  31,
30;  31,  30,  30  ;  31;  30,  30.  Ovid,  indeed,  ap-
pears to  speak  of  the  months  as  coinciding  with  the
lunar  period :  —

"Annus  erat  decimum  cum  luna  repleverat annum :"
but  the  language  of  a  poet  must  not  be  pressed  too
closely.  On  the  other  hand,  Plutarch,  in  the  pas-
5page  already  referred  to,  while  he  assigns  to  the  old
year  twelve  months  and  365  days,  speaks  of  the
months  as  varying  without  system  between  the
limits  of  twenty  and  thirty-five  days.  Such  an
irregularity  is  not  incredible,  as  we  find  that  even
when  Censorinus  wrote  (a.  d.  238),  the  Alban
calendar  gave  36  days  to  March,  22  to  May,  18  to
Sextilis,  and  16  to  September;  while  at  Tusculum
Quinctilis  had  36  days,  October  32 ;  and  again  at
Aricia  the  same  month,  October,  had  no  less  than
39.  (Censorinus,  c.  22.)  The  Romulian  year,  if
we  follow  the  majority  of  authors,  contained  but
304  daj's  ;  a  period  differing  so  widely  from  the  real
length  of  the  sun's  course,  that  the  months  would
rapidly  revolve  through  all  the  secisons  of  the  year.
This  inconvenience  was  remedied,  says  Macrobius
(i.  13),  by  the  addition  of  the  proper  number  of
days  required  to  complete  the  year  ;  but  these  days,
he  goes  on  to  say,  did  not  receive  any  name  as  a
month.  Servius  speaks  of  the  intercalated  period
as  consisting  of  two  months,  which  at  first  had  no
name,  but  were  eventually  called  after  Janus  and
Februus.  That  some  system  of  intercalation  was
employed  in  the  Romulian  year,  was  also  the
opinion  of  Licinius  Macer.  (Macrob.  i.  13.)  This
appears  to  be  all  that  is  handed  down  with  regard
to  the  earliest  year  of  the  Romans.

As  a  year  of  ten  months  and  304  days,  at  once
falls  greatly  short  of  the  solar  year,  and  contains
no  exact  number  of  lunations,  some  have  gone  so
far  as  to  dispute  the  truth  of  the  tradition  in  whole
or  part,  while  others  have  taxed  their  ingenuity  to
account  for  the  adoption  of  so  anomalous  a  year.
Puteanus  (De  Nundinis,  in  Graevius'  Thesaurus,
vol.  viii.),  calling  to  mind  that  the  old  Roman  or
Etruscan  week  contained  eight  days  *,  every  eighth


*  Hence  there  are  found  attached  to  the  suc-
cessive days  in  the  old  calendars  the  recurring
series  of  letters  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  F,  G,  H,  no  doubt
for  the  purpose  of  fixing  the  nundines  in  the  week
of  eight  days  ;  precise!}'  in  the  same  way  in  which
the  first  seven  letters  are  still  employed  in  eccle-
siastical calendars,  to  mark  the  days  of  the  Chris-
tian week.


CALENDARIUM.

(lay  Ijeing  specially  devoted  to  religious  and  other
public  purposes,  under  the  name  of  nonae  or  nmi-
dinae,  was  the  first  to  point  out  that  the  number
304  is  a  precise  multiple  of  eight.  To  this  observ-
ation, in  itself  of  little  moment,  Niebuhr  has  given
some  weight,  by  further  noticing  that  the  38  nun-
dines  in  a  year  of  304  days  tally  exactly  with  the
number  of  dies  fasti  afterwards  retained  in  the
Julian  calendar.  Another  writer,  Pontedera,  ob-
served that  304  bore  to  365  days  nearly  the  ratio
of  5  to  6,  six  of  the  Romulian  years  containin^ar
1824,  five  of  the  longer  periods  1825  days;  and
Niebuhr  (Rom.  Hist.  vol.  i.  p.  271),  who  is  a  warm
advocate  of  the  ten-month  year,  has  made  much  use
of  this  consideration.  He  thus  explains  the  origin
of  the  well-known  quinquennial  period  called  the
lustrum,  which  Censorinus  (c.  18)  expressly  calls
an  annus  magnus^  that  is,  in  the  modern  language
of  chronology,  a  cycle.  Moreover,  the  year  of  ten
months,  says  the  same  writer  (p.  279),  was  the
term  for  mourning,  for  paying  portions  left  by  will,
for  credit  on  the  sale  of  yearly  profits ;  most  pro-
bably for  all  loans ;  and  it  was  the  measure  for
the  most  ancient  rate  of  interest.  [Fenus.]
Lastly,  he  finds  in  the  existence  of  this  short  year
the  solution  of  certain  historical  difficulties.  A
peace,  or  rather  truce,  with  Veii  was  concluded
in  the  year  280  of  Rome,  for  40  years.  In  316
Fidenae  revolted  and  joined  Veii,  which  implies
that  Veii  was  already  at  war  with  Rome  ;  yet
the  Veientines  are  not  accused  of  having  broken
their  oaths.  (Liv.  iv.  1 7.)  Again,  a  twenty-years'
tmce,  made  in  329,  is  said,  by  Livy,  to  have  ex-
pired in  347  (iv.  58.)  These  facts  are  explained
by  supposing  the  years  in  question  to  have  been
those  of  ten  months,  for  40  of  these  are  equal
to  33  J  ordinary  years,  20  to  16f  ;  so  that  the
former  truce  terminated  in  314,  the  latter  in  346.
Similarly,  the  truce  of  eight  years  concluded  with
the  Volscians  in  323,  extended  in  fact  to  no  more
than  6|-  full  years  ;  and  hence  the  Volscians  re-
sumed the  war  in  331,  without  exposing  them-
selves to  the  charge  of  perjury.

These  ingenious  and  perhaps  satisfactory  specu-
lations of  the  German  critic,  of  course  imply  that
the  decimestrial  year  still  survived  long  after  the
regal  government  had  ceased  ;  and  in  fact  he  be-
lieves that  this  year,  and  the  lunar  j^ear,  as  deter-
mined by  Scaliger's  proposed  cycle  of  22  years,
co-existed  from  the  earliest  times  down  to  a  late
period.  The  views  of  Niebuhr  do  not  require  that
the  months  should  have  consisted  of  31  or  30  days  ;
indeed  it  would  be  more  natural  to  suppose  that
each  month,  as  well  as  the  year,  contained  a  precise
number  of  eight-day  weeks  ;  eight  of  the  months,
for  instance,  having  four  such  weeks,  the  two  others
but  three.  Even  in  the  so-called  calendar  of  Nnma
we  find  the  Etruscan  week  affecting  the  division
of  the  month,  there  being  eight  days  between  the
nones  and  ides,  from  which  circumstances  the  nones
received  their  name  ;  and  again  two  such  weeks
from  the  ides  to  the  end  of  the  month  ;  and  this,
whether  the  whole  month  contained  31  or  29  days.

The  Year  of  Numa-.  —  Having  described  the
Romulian  j'-ear,  Censorinus  (c.  20)  proceeds  thus  :
—  "  Afterwards,  either  by  Numa,  as  Fulvius  has
it,  or  according  to  Junius  by  Tarquin,  there  was
instituted  a  year  of  twelve  months  and  355  days,
although  the  moon  in  twelve  lunations  appears  to
complete  but  354  days.  The  excess  of  a  day  was
owing,  either  to  error,  or  what  I  consider  more


CALENDARIUM.  227

probable,  to  that  superstitious  feeling,  according  to
which  an  odd  number  was  accounted  full  (plenus)
and  more  fortunate.  Be  this  as  it  may,  to  the
year  which  had  previously  been  in  use  (that  of
Romulus)  one-and-fifty  days  were  now  added  ;  but
as  these  were  not  sufficient  to  constitute  two  months,
a  day  was  taken  from  each  of  the  before-m.entioned
hollow  months,  which  added  thereto,  made  up  57
days,  out  of  which  two  months  were  formed,  Janu-
arius  with  29,  and  Februarius  with  28  days.  Thus
all  the  months  henceforth  weire-  full,  and  contained
an  odd  number  of  days,  save  Februarius,  which
alone  was  hollow,  and  hence  deemed  more  unlucky
than  the  rest."  In  this  passage  it  is  fitting  to  ob-
serve that  the  terms  ple7ii  and  cavi  menses  are  ap-
plied in  a  sense  precisely  opposite  to  the  practice  of
the  Greek  language  in  the  phrases  /xrives  irXrfpeTs
and  KoTXoi.  The  mysterious  power  ascribed  to  an
odd  number  is  familiar  from  the  Numero  deus  im-
pare  gaudet  of  Virgil.  Pliny  also  (//.  A^.  xxviii.
5)  observes, — Impares  numeros  ad  omnia  veJiemen-
tiores  credimus.  It  was  of  course  impossible  to
give  an  odd  number  of  days  at  the  same  time  to
the  year  on  the  one  hand,  and  to  each  of  the  twelve
months  on  the  other  ;  and  yet  the  object  was  in
some  measure  effected  by  a  division  of  February
itself  into  23  days,  and  a  supernumerary  period  of
five  days.  (See  the  mode  of  intercalation  below.)
The  year  of  Numa  then,  according  to  Censorinus,
contained  355  days.  Plutarch  tells  us  that  Numa
estimated  the  anomaly  of  the  sun  and  moon,  by
which  he  means  the  difference  between  twelve
lunations  and  the  sun's  annual  course  at  eleven
days,  i.  e.  the  difference  between  365  and  354  days.
Macrobius,  too,  says  that  the  year  of  Numa  had  at
first  354,  afterwards  355  days.  Compare  herewith
Liv.  i.  19  ;  Ovid.  Fasti,  C  43,  iii.  151  ;  Aurel.
Vict.  c.  3  ;  Floras,  i.  2  ;  Solinus,  c.  1.

Twelve  lunations  amount  to  354  days,  8h.  48'
36",  so  that  the  so-called  year  of  Numa  was  a
tolerably  correct  lunar  year  ;  though  the  months
would  have  coincided  more  accurately  with  the
single  lunations,  if  they  had  been  limited  to  30  and
29  days,  instead  of  31,  29,  and  28  days.  That  it
was  in  fact  adapted  to  the  moon's  course  is  the  con-
current assertion  of  ancient  writers,  more  particu-
larly of  Livy,  who  says  :  {Numa)  omnium  primum
ad  cursum  lunae  in  duodeeim  mensis  discribit  annum.
Unfortunately  however,  many  of  the  same  writers
ascribe  to  the  same  period  the  introduction  of  such
a  system  of  intercalation  as  must  at  once  have  dis-
located the  coincidence  between  the  civil  month
and  the  lunar  period.  At  the  end  of  two  years
the  year  of  Ntuna  would  have  been  about  22  days
in  arrcar  of  the  solar  period,  and  accordingly  it  is
said  an  intercalary  month  of  that  duration,  or  else
of  23  days,  was  inserted  at  or  near  the  end  of  Feb-
ruary, to  bring  the  civil  year  into  agre -ment  with
the  regular  return  of  the  seasons.  Of  this  system
of  intercalation  a  more  accurate  account  shall  pre-
sently be  given.  But  there  is  strong  reason  for
believing  that  this  particular  mode  of  intercalation
was  not  contemporary  in  origin  with  the  year  of
Numa.

In  antiquarian  subjects  it  will  generally  be  found
that  the  assistance  of  etymology  is  essential  ;  be-
cause the  original  names  that  belong  to  an  institu-
tion often  continue  to  exist,  even  after  such  changes
have  been  introduced,  that  they  are  no  longer
adapted  to  the  new  order  of  things  ;  thus  they
survive  as  useful  memorials  of  the  past  In  thia
Q  2


228


CALENDARIUM.


way  we  are  enabled  by  the  original  meaning  of
words,  aided  by  a  few  fragments  of  a  traditional
character,  to  state  that  the  Romans  in  early  times
poss?ssed  a  year  which  altogether  depended  upon
the  phases  of  the  moon.  The  Latin  word  metisis
(Varro,  De  Ling.  Lat.  vi.,  or  in  the  old  editions,  v.
54),  like  the  Greek  fiiiv  or  ywets,  and  the  English
month,  or  German  monath,  is  evidently  connected
with  the  word  moon.  Again,  while  in  the  Greek
language  the  Rame  uovixrjuia  (new-moon),  or  cVtj
Kal  vea,  given  to  the  first  day  of  a  month,  betrays
its  lunar  origin,  the  same  result  is  deduced  from
the  explanation  of  the  word  kalendae.,  as  found  in
Macrobius  (i.  15),  "  In  ancient  times,"  says  that
writer,  "  before  Cn.  Flavins  the  scribe,  against  the
v,  pleasure  of  the  patricians,  made  the  fasti  known  to
the  whole  people  (the  end  of  the  4th  century  b.  c),
it  was  the  duty  of  one  of  the  pontifices  minores  to
look  out  for  the  first  appearance  of  the  new  m-oon  ;
find  as  soon  as  he  descried  it,  to  carry  word  to  the
rex  sacrificulus.  Then  a  sacrifice  was  oifered  by
these  priests,  after  wjiich  the  same  pontifex  having
summoned  the  plebs  {calata  plebe)  to  a  place  in  the
capitol,  near  the  Curia  Calabra,  which  adjoins  the
Casa  Romuli,  there  announced  the  number  of  days
which  still  remained  to  the  nones,  whether  five
or  seven,  by  so  often  repeating  the  word  /caA.o).'''
There  was  no  necessity  to  write  this  last  word  in
Greek  characters,  as  it  belonged  to  the  old  Latin.
In  fact,-  in  this  very  passage,  it  occurs  in  both
calata  and  calabra  ;  and  again,  it  remained  to  tlie
latest  times  in  the  word  nomcnclator.  In  regard
to  the  passage  here  quoted  from  Macrobius,  it  must
be  recollected  that  while  the  moon  is  in  the  imme-
diate vicinity  of  the  sun,  it  is  'impossible  to  see  it
with  the  naked  eye,  «o  that  the  day  on  v/hich  it  is
first  seen  is  not  of  necessity  the  day  of  the  actual
conjunction.  We  learn  elsewhere  that  as  soon  as
the  pontifex  discovered  the  thin  disc,  a  hymn  was
»ung,  beginning  Jana  novella.,  the  word  Jfina  (Ma-
crob.  Sat.  \.  9  ;  Varro,  De  Re  Rust.  i.  37)  being
only  a  dialectic  variety  of  Diana,  just  as  Diespiter
or  Diupiter  corresponds  to  Jupiter  ;  and  other  ex-
amples might  readily  be  given,  for  the  change  occurs
in  almost  every  word  which  has  the  syllables  de  or
or  di  before  a  vowel.  Again,  the  consecration  of
the  kalends  to  Juno  (Ovid.  Fasti.,  i.  55,  vi.  39  ;
Macrob.  Sat.  i.  9.  15)  is  referred  by  the  latter
writer  to  the  fact  that  the  months  originally  began
with  the  moon,  and  that  Juno  and  Luna  are  the
same  goddess  ;  and  the  poet  likewise  points  at  the
same  coimection  in  his  explanation  ef  Juno's
epithet  Lueina.  Moreover,  at  Laurentum  Juno
was  worshipped  as  Juno  Kalendaris.  Even  so  late
as  448  B.  c.  strictly  lunar  months  were  still  in  use  ;
for  Dionysiufi  {Antiq.  x.  59)  says  that  Appius,  in
that  year,  received  the  consular  authority  on  the
ides  of  May,  being  the  day  of  full  moon,  for  at
that  time,  he  adds,  the  Romans  regulated  their
months  by  the  moon.  In  fact,  so  completely  was
the  day  of  the  month,  which  they  called  the  ides,
associated  with  the  idea  of  the  full  moon,  that
some  derived  the  word  airh  rod  etoovs,  quod  eo  die
plenum  speciem  luna  demonstret.  (Macrob.  ibid.)
Quietly  to  insert  the  idea  of  plenam,  when  the
Greek  word  signified  merely  speciem,  is  in  accord-
ance with  those  loose  notions  which  prevailed  in
all  ancient  attempts  at  etymology.  But  though
the  derivation  is  of  course  groundless,  it  is  of  his-
torical value,  as  showing  the  notion  connected  with
the  term  ides.


CALENDARIUM.

For  the  same  reason  probably  the  ides  of  March
were  selected  for  the  sacrifice  to  the  goddess  Anna
Percnna,  in  whose  name  we  have  nothing  more
than  the  feminine  form  of  the  word  acinus,  which,
whether  written  with  one  n  or  two,  whether  in  its
simple  form  annus,  or  dimiuutive  an?iulus,  still
always  signifies  a  circle.  Hence,  as  the  masculine
form  was  easily  adopted  to  denote  the  period  of
the  sun's  course,  so  the  feminine  in  like  manner
might  well  be  employed  to  signify,  first  the  moon's
revolution,  and  then  the  moon  herself,  The  ten-
dency among  the  Romans  to  have  the  same  word
repeated,  first  as  a  male  and  then  as  a  female  deity,
has  been  noticed  by  Niebuhr ;  and  there  occurs  a
complete  parallel  in  the  name  Dianus,  afterwards
Janus,  for  the  god  of  dies,  or  light,  the  sun  ;  Diana,
afterwards  Jana,  for  the  goddess  of  light,  the  moon  ;
to  say  nothing  of  the  words  Jupiter  and  Juno.
That  the  month  of  March  should  have  been
selected  arose  from  its  being  the  first  of  the  year,
and  a  sacrifice  to  the  moon  might  well  take  place
on  the  day  when  her  power  is  fully  displayed  to
man.  The  epithet  Perenna  itself  means  no  more
than  ever-circling.  ■  Nay,  Macrobius  himself  (c.  1 2)
connects  the  two  words  with  annus,  when  he  states
the  object  of  the  sacrifice  to  be — ut  annare  peren-
nareque  commode  liceat.

Another  argument  in  favour  of  the  limar  origin
of  the  Roman  month,  is  deducible  from  the  practice
of  counting  the  days  backward  from  the  Kalends,
Nones,  and  Ides  ;  for  the  phrases  will  then  amount
to  saying  —  "  It  wants  so  many  days  to  the  new
moon,  to  the  first  quarter,  to  full  moon."  It  would
be  difficult,  on  uny  other  hypothesis,  to  account  for
the  adoption  of  a  mode  of  calculation,  which,  to  our
notions  at  least,  is  so  inconvenient  ;  and  indeed  it
is  expressly  recorded  that  this  practice  was  derived
from  Greece,  under  which  term  the  Athenians
probably  are  meant ;  and  by  these  we  know  that
a  strictly  lunar  year  was  employed  down  to  a  late
period.     (Macrob.  i.  16.)

But  perhaps  the  most  decisive  proof  of  all  lies
in  the  simple  statement  erf  Livy  (i.  19),  that  Nmna
so  regulated  his  lunar  year  of  twelve  months  by
the  insertion  of  intercalary  months,  that  at  the  end
of  every  nineteenth  year  it  again  coincided  with
the  same  point  in  the  sun's  course  from  which  it
started.  His  words  are  —  Quem  (a7inum)  inter-
calaribtis  mensibus  interponendis  ita  dispensavit  ut
vicensimo  anno  ad  metam  eandem  solis  unde  orsi
sunt,  plenis  annorum  omnium  spatiis,  dies  con-
gruerent.  We  quote  the  text ;  because  editors,  in
support  of  a  theor\%  have  taken  the  liberty  of  alter-
ing it  by  the  insertion  of  the  word  quario,  forget-
ting too  that  the  words  quarto  et  vioensimo  amio
signify,  not  ever?/  twenty-fourth  year,  which  their
theory  requires,  but  every  twenty-third,  according
to  that  peculiar  view  of  the  Romans  which  led
them  to  count  both  the  extremes  in  defining  the
interval  from  one  point  to  another ;  and  which  still
survives  in  the  medical  phrases  tertian  and  quartan
a<jue,  as  well  as  in  the  French  expressions  huit
jours  for  a  week,  and  quinze  jours  for  a  fortnight.
Accordingly,  it  is  not  doing  violence  to  v/ords,  but
giving  the  strict  and  necessary  meaning  to  them,
when,  in  our  own  translation  of  the  passage  in
Livy,  we  express  vicensimo  anno  by  every  nineteenth
year.

Now  1 9  years,  it  is  well  known,  constitute  a  most
convenient  cycle  for  the  conjunction  of  a  lunar  and
solar  year.    A  mean  Umation,  or  synodic  month,  ac«


CALENDARIUM.

cording  to  modem  astronomy,  is  29d.  12h..  44'  3",
and  a  mean  tropical  year  365d.  5h.  48'  4{J".  Hence
it  will  be  found,  tliat  235  lunations  amount  to
6939d.  16h,  31'  45",  while  19  tropical  years  give
6939d.  14k  27'  12",  so  tl^at  the  difference  is  only
2h.  4'  33".  Although  it  was  only  in  the  second
century  b.g.  that  Hipparchus  gave  to  astronomical
observations  a  nicety  which  could  pretend  to  deal
with  seconds  * ;  yet  even  in  the  regal  period  of
Rome,  the  Greek  towns  in  the  south  of  Italy  must
already  have  possessed  astronomers,  from  whom  the
inhabitants  of  Latiura  could  have  borrowed  such  a
rough  practical  knowledge  of  both  the  moon  and
sun's  period,  as  was  sufficient  to  show  that  at  the
end  of  19  solar  years  the  moon''s  age  would  be
nearly  what  it  was  at  the  commencement ;  and  it
should  be  recollected  that  the  name  of  Numa  is
often  connected  by  tradition  with  the  learning  of
Magna  Graecia.  At  any  rate  a  cycle  of  1 9  j-ears
was  introduced  by  Meton  at  Athens,  in  the  year
432  B.C.;  and.  the  knowledge  of  it  among  the
learned  may  probably  have  preceded  by  a  long
period  its  introduction  into  popular  use,  the  more
so  as  religious  festivals  are  generally  connected
with  the  various  divisioris  of  time,  and  superstition
therefore  would  be  most  certainly  opposed  to  in-
novations of  the  almanack.  How  the  Romans  may
have  intercalated  in.  their  19  lunar  years  the  seven
additional  months-  which  are  requisite  to  make  up
the  whole  number  of  235  (  =  12  x  19  +  7)  lunations,
is  a  subject  upon  which  it  would  be  useless  to
speculate.  From  a  union  of  these  various  consider-
ations, it  must  be  deemed  higlily  probable  that  the
Romans  at  one  period  possessed  a  division  of  time
dependent  upon  the  moon's  course.

Year  of  the  Decemviri  (so  called  by  Ideler).  —
The  motives  which  induced  the  Romans  to  abandon
the  lunar  year  are  no  where  recorded  ;  nor  indeed
the  date  of  the  change.  We  have  seen,  however,,
that  even  in  the  year  448  B.  c,  the  year  was  still
regulated  by  the  moon's  course.  To  this  must  be
added  that,  according  to  Tuditanus  and  Cassius
Hemina,  a  bill  on  the  subject  of  intercalation  was
brought  before  the  people  by  those  decemviri,  who
added  the  two  new  tables  to  the  preceding  Ten
(Macrob.  i.  13),  that  is  in  the  year  450  b.  c.  That
the  attention  of  these  decemviri  was  called  to  the
calendar  is  also  proved  by  the  contents  of  the
Eleventh  Table,  wherein  it  is  decreed  that  "  the
festivals  shall  be  set  down  in  the  calendars."  We
have  the  authority  of  Varro  indeed,  that  a  system
of  intercalation  already  existed  at  an  earlier  date  ;
for  he  says  that  there  was  a  very  ancient  law  en-
graved on  a  bronze  pillar  by  L.  Pinarius  and  Furius
in  their  consulate  cui  mentio  interealaris  ascribitur.
We  add  the  last  words  in  Latin  from  the  text  of
Macrobius  (c._13),  because  their  import  is  doubtful.
If  we  are  right  in  interpreting  them  thus — "the
date  upon  which  is  expressed  by  a  month  called
intercalary^''  all  that  is  meant  may  be  one  of  the
intercalary  lunations,  which  must  have  existed
even  in  the  old  lunar  year.  At  the  period  of  the
decemviral  legislation  there  was  probably  instituted
that  form  of  the  year  of  354  days,  which  was  cor-
rected by  the  short  intercalary  month,  called  Mer-
cedonius,  or  Mercidinus  ;  but  so  corrected  as  to
deprive  the  year  and  months  of  all  connection  with
the  moon's  course.     The  length  of  the  several  or-


CALENDARIUM.


229


*  His  valuation  of  the  synodic  month  was  29d.
12h.  44'  3^".     (Ptolem.  Almag.  iv.  2.)


dinary  months  was  probably  that  which  Censorinua
has  erroneously  allotted  to  the  months  of  Numa's
lunai-  vear,  viz. :  —


Martins

Aprilis

Mains

Junius

Quinetilis31

Sextilis     29


31  days.
29    „
31    „
29    ..


September  29  days*
October  31  „
November  29  „
December  29  „
Januarius  29  „
Februarius  28     ,.


Such,  at  any  rate,  was  the  number  of  days  in
each  month  immediately  prior  to  the  Julian  correc-
tion ;  for  both  Censorinus  and  Macrobius  say  that
Caesar  added  two  days  to  Januarius,  Sextilis,  and
December,  and  one  to  Aprilis,  Junius,  September,
and  November.  Hence  Niebuhr  appears  to  have
made  an  error  when  he  asserts  (vol.  ii.  note  1  1  79)
that  July  acquired  two  more  days  at  the  refonn-
ation  of  the  calendar,  and  founds  thereon  a  charge
of  carelessness  against  Livy.  Moreover  that  No-
vember had  but  29  days  prior  to  the  correction,  in
other  words,  that  the  XVII.  Kal.  Dec.  immediately
followed  the  Idus  Nov.,  appears  from  a  comparison
of  Cicero's  letters  to  Tiro  {Ad  Fam.  xvi.  7.  9);
for  he  reaches  Corcyra  a.  d.  V.  Id.  Nov.,  and  on
the  XV.  Kal.  Dec^  complains — Septumum  jam  diem
tenebamur.  The  seven  daj's  in  question  would  be
IV.  Id.,  III.  Id.,  Prid.  Id.,  Id.  Nov.,  XVII.  Kal.
Dec,  XVI.  Kal.  Dec,  XV.  Kal.  Dec  That  the
place  of  the  nones  and  ides  was  in  each  month  the
same  before  the  Julian  correction  as  afterwards,  is
asserted  by  Macrobius.  „

The  main  difficulty  ia  with  regard  to  the  mode
of  intercalation.  Plu<;«^ch,  we  have  already  ob-
served, speaks  of  an  intercalation,  by  him  referred
to  Numa,  of  22  days  in  alternate  years  in  the
month  of  February.  Censorinus,  with  more  pre-
cision, says  that  the  number  of  days  in  each  inter-
calation was  either  22  or  23,  and  Macrobius  agrees
with  him  in  substance.  Of  the  point  at  which  the
supernumerary  month  was  inserted,  the  accounts
are  these  :  —  Varro  {De  Ling.  Lat.  vi.  6B)  says,  the
twelfth  month  was  February ;  and  when  intercala-
tions take  place,  the  five  last  days  of  this  month
are  removed.  Censorinus  agrees  herewith,  wheal
he  places  the  intercalation  generally  (potissimum)
in  the  month  of  February,  between  the  Terminalia
and  the  Regifugium,  that  is  immediately  after  the
day  called  by  the  Romans  a.  d.  VI.  Kal.  Mart,  or
by  us  the  24th  of  February.  This,  again,  is  con-
firmed by  Macrobius.  The  setting  aside  of  the  last
five  days  agrees  with  the  practice  which  Herodotus
ascribes  to  the  Egyptians  of  considering  the  five
days  over  the  360  as  scarcely  belonging  to  the
year,  and  not  placing  them  in  any  month.  So
completely  were  these  five  days  considered  by  the
Romans  to  be  something  extraneous,  that  the
soldier  appears  to  have  received  pay  only  for  360
days.  For  in  the  time  of  Augustus  the  soldier  re-
ceived deni  asses  per  day,  i.  e.  |g  of  a  denarius ;
but  Domitian  (Suet.  Dom.  7)  addidit  quartum  sli-
pendium  aureos  ternos.  Thus,  as  25  denarii  made
an  aureus,  the  annual  pay  prior  to  Domitian  was
(360x10)-=- 16  denarii=  (360  x10)t-(  16x25)
aurei  =  9  aurei ;  and  thus  the  addition  of  three
aurei  was  precisely  a  fourth  more.  Lastly,  the  fes-
tival Terminalia,  as  its  name  implies,  marked  the
end  of  the  year,  and  this  by  the  way  again  proves
that  March  was  originally  the  first  month.

The  intercalary  month  was  called  'M.epKiZivoSyQX
Mf pK-ridSyios.  (Plutarch,  Nvma,  1 9  ;  Caes.  69.)
U  3


230


CALENDARIUM.


"We  give  it  in  Greek  characters,  because  it  happens
somewhat  strangely  that  no  Latin  author  has  men-
tioned the  name,  the  term  mensis  interkalaris  or
interkahirius  supplying  its  place.  Thus,  in  the  year
of  intercalation,  the  day  after  the  ides  of  February
was  called,  not  as  usual  a.  d.  XVI.  Kalendas
Martias,  but  a.  d.  XI.  Kalendas  interkalares.  So
also  there  were  the  Nonae  interkalares,  and  Idus
interkalares,  and  after  this  last  came  either  a.  d.
XV.  or  XVI.  Kal.  Mart.,  according  as  the  month
had  22  or  23  days,  or  rather,  if  we  add  the  five
remaining  days  struck  off  from  Febniarj',  27  or  28
days.  In  either  case  the  Regifugium  retained  its
ordinary  designation  a.  d.  VI.  Kal.  Mart.  (See
Asconius,  Ad  Oral,  pro  Milone,  and  the  i^o^i  Tri-
umphale.%  493,  A.  u.  c.)-  When  Cicero  writes  to
Atticus  (vi.  1 ),  Accepitttas litteras a.d.  V.  Terminalia
(i.  e.  Feb.  19)  ;  he  uses  this  strange  mode  of  de-
fining a  date,  because,  being  then  in  Cilicia,  he  was
not  aware  whether  any  intercalation  had  been  in-
serted that  year.  Indeed,  he  says,  in  another  part
of  the  same  letter,  £^a  sic  observed^,  quasi  interka-
latum  non  sit.

Besides  the  intercalary  month,  mention  is  occa-
sionally made  of  an  intercalary  day.  The  object
of  this  was  solely  to  prevent  the  first  day  of  the
year,  and  perhaps  also  the  nones,  from  coinciding
with  the  nundinae,  of  which  mention  has  been  al-
ready made.  (Macrob.  i.  1 3.)  Hence  in  Livy  (xlv.
44),  Intercalatum  eo  anno ;  postridie  Terminalia
intcrcaJares  fuerimt.  This  would  not  have  been
said  had  the  day  of  intercalation  been  invariably
the  same  ;  and  again  Livy  (xliii.  II),  Hoc  anno
intercalatum  est.  Tertvo  die  post  Terminalia  Calen-
dae  intercalares  fuere.,  i.  e.  two  days  after  the  Ter-
minalia, so  that  the  dies  intercalaris  was  on  this
occasion  inserted,  as  well  as  the  month  so  called.
Nay,  even  after  the  reformation  of  the  calendar,
the  same  superstitious  practice  remained.  Thus,
in  the  jiear  40  B.C.,  a  day  was  inserted  for  this
purpose,  and  afterwards  an  omission  of  a  day  took
place,  that  the  calendar  might  not  be  disturbed.
(Dion  Cass,  xlviii,  33.)

The  system  of  intercalating  in  alternate  years
22  or  23  days,  that  is  ninetj'^  days  in  eight  years,
VA1S  borrowed,  we  are  told  by  Macrobius,  from  the
Greeks ;  and  the  assertion  is  probable  enough,  first,
because  from  the  Greeks  the  Romans  generally  de-
rived all  scientific  assistance  ;  and  secondly,  because
the  decemviral  legislation  was  avowedly  drawn
from  that  quarter.  Moreover,  at  the  very  period
in  question,  a  cycle  of  eight  years  appears  to  have
been  in  use  at  Athens,  for  the  Metonic  period  of
19  years  was  not  adopted  before  432  b.  c.  The
Romans,  however,  seem  to  have  been  guilty  of
Bome  clumsiness  in  applying  the  science  they  de-
rived from  Greece.  The  addition  of  ninety  days
in  a  cycle  of  eight  years  to  a  lunar  year  of  354
days,  would,  in  substance,  have  amounted  to  the
addition  of  II;!-  (=a90-r8)  days  to  each  year,  so
that  the  Romans  would  virtually  have  possessed
the  Julian  calendar.  As  it  was,  they  added  the
intercalation  to  a  year  of  t55  days  ;  and  conse-
quently, on  an  average,  every  year  exceeded  its
proper  length  by  a  day,  if  we  neglect  the  inaccu-
racies of  the  Julian  calendar.  Accordingly  we  find
that  the  civil  and  solar  years  were  greatly  at  vari-
ance in  the  year  564  a.v.c.  On  the  11th  of
Quinctilis,  in  that  year,  a  remarkable  eclipse  of  the
Bun  occurred.  (Liv.  xxxvii.  4.)  This  eclipse,  says
Ideler,  can  have  been  no  other  than  the  one  which


CALENDARIUM.

occurred  on  the  14th  of  March,  190  B.  c.  of  the
Julian  calendar,  and  which  at  Rome  was  nearly
total.  Again,  the  same  historian  (xliv.  37)  men-
tions an  eclipse  of  the  moon  which  occurred  in  the
night  between  the  3rd  and  4th  of  September,  in
the  year  of  the  city  586.  This  must  have  been
the  total  eclipse  in  the  night  between  the  21gtand
22nd  of  June,  168  B.C.

That  attempts  at  legislation  for  the  purpose  of
correcting  so  serious  an  error  were  actually  made,
appears  from  Macrobius,  who,  aware  himself  of  the
cause  of  the  error,  says  that,  byway  of  correction,  in
every  third  octoennial  period,  instead  of  90  inter-
calary days,  only  QG  were  inserted.  Again  it  ap-
pears that  M'.  Acilius  Glabrio,  in  his  consulship
169  B.  c,  that  is,  the  very  year  before  that  in
which  the  above-mentioned  lunar  eclipse  occurred,
introduced  some  legislative  measure  upon  the  sul)-
ject  of  intercalation.  (Macrob.  i.  13.)  Accord-
ing to  the  above  statement  of  Macrobius,  a  cycle
of  24  years  was  adopted,  and  it  is  this  very
passage  which  has  induced  the  editors  of  Livy
to  insert  the  word  quaiio  in  the  text  already
quoted.

As  the  festivals  of  the  Romans  were  for  the  most
part  dependent  upon  the  calendar,  the  regulation
of  the  latter  was  intrusted  to  the  college  of  ponti-
fices,  who  in  early  times  were  chosen  exclusively
from  the  body  of  patricians.  It  was  therefore  in
the  power  of  the  college  to  add  to  their  other  means
of  oppressing  the  plebeians,  by  keeping  to  them-
selves the  knowledge  of  the  days  on  which  justice
could  be  administered,  and  assemblies  of  the  people
could  be  held.  In  the  year  304  b.  c,  one  Cn.
Flavius,  a  secretary  (scriba)  of  Appius  Claudius,  is
said  fraudulently  to  have  made  the  Fasti  public.
(Liv.  xL  46;  Cic.  Pro  Murena,  c.  11  ;  Plin.
H.  N.  xxxiii.  1  ;  Val.  Max.  ii.  5  ;  A.  Gellius,  vi.  9 ;
Macrob.  i.  15  ;  Pomponius,  De  Origins  Juris  in  the
Digest  1.  tit.  2  ;  and  Cicero,  Ad  Alt.  vL  1.)  It  ap-
pears however  from  the  last  passage  that  Atticus
doubted  the  truth  of  the  story.  In  either  case,  the
other  privilege  of  regulating  the  year  by  the  inser-
tion of  the  intercalary  month  gave  them  great
political  power,  which  they  were  not  backward  to
employ.  Every  thing  connected  with  the  matter
of  intercalation  was  left,  says  Censorinus  (c.  20),  to
the  unrestrained  pleasure  of  the  pontifices  ;  and  the
majority  of  these,  on  personal  grounds,  added  to  or
took  from  the  year  by  capricious  intercalations,  so
as  to  lengthen  or  shorten  the  period  during  which
a  magistrate  remained  in  office,  and  seriously  to
benefit  or  injure  the  farmer  of  the  public  revenue.
Similar  to  this  is  the  language  employed  by  Ma-
crobius (i.  4),  Ammianus  (xxvL  1),  Solinus  (c.  i.),
Plutarch  {Caes.  c.  59),  and  their  assertions  are  con-
firmed by  the  letters  of  Cicero,  written  during  his
proconsulate  in  Cilicia,  the  constant  burthen  of
which  is  a  request  that  the  pontifices  will  not  add
to  his  year  of  government  by  intercalation.

In  consequence  of  this  licence,  says  Suetonius
(Cues.  40),  neither  the  festivals  of  the  harvest
coincided  with  the  summer,  nor  those  of  the  vin-
tage with  the  autumn.  But  we  cannot  desire  a
better  proof  of  the  confusion  than  a  comparison  of
three  short  passages  in  the  third  book  of  Caesar's
BeU.  Civ.  (c.  6),  Fridie  nonas  Januarias  navis  solvit
— (c.  9)Jamqtte  hiemsadproptnquabat — (c.  25)  7nulii
Jam  menses  transierant  et  hiemsjam  praecipitacerat.

Year  of  Julius  Caesar.  —  In  the  yeai*  46  B.  c.
Caesar,  now  master  of  the  Roman  world,  crowned


J


CALENDARIUM.

his  other  great  8ervice3  to  his  country  by  employ-
ing his  authority,  as  pontifex  maximus,  in  the  cor-
rection of  this  serious  evil.  For  this  purpose  he
availed  himself  of  the  services  of  Sosigenes,  the
peripatetic,  and  a  scriba  named  M.  Flavins,  though
lie  himself  too,  we  are  told,  was  well  acquainted
with  astronomy,  and  indeed  was  the  author  of  a
work  of  some  merit  upon  the  subject,  which  was
still  extant  in  the  time  of  Pliny.  The  chief  autho-
rities upon  the  subject  of  the  Julian  reformation
are  Plutai'ch  {Cues,  c  59)^  Dion  Cassius  (xliii.
2G),  Appian  {De  Dell.  Civ.  ii.  ad  extr.),  Ovid
(Fasti,  iii.  155),  Suetonius  (Cues.  c.  40),  Pliny
(//.  N.  xviii.  57),  Censorinus  (c.  20),  Macrobius
(Sat.  i.  14),  Ammianus  Marcellinus  (xxvi.  1),
Solinus  (i.  45).  Of  these  Censorinus  is  the  most
precise  :  —  "  The  confusion  was  at  last,"  says  he,
"  carried  so  far  that  C.  Caesar,  the  pontifex  maxi-
mus, in  his  third  consulate,  with  Lepidus  for  his
colleague,  inserted  between  November  and  Decem-
ber two  uitercalary  months  of  67  days,  the  month
of  February  having  already  received  an  intercala-
tion of  23  days,  and  thus  made  the  whole  year
to  consist  of  445  days.  At  the  same  time  he  pro-
vided against  a  repetition  of  similar  errors  by  cast-
ing aside  the  intercalary  month,  and  adapting  the
year  to  the  sun's  course.  Accordingly,  to  the  355
days  of  the  previously  existing  year,  he  added  ten
days,  which  he  so  distributed  between  the  seven
months  having  29  days,  that  January,  Sextilis,  and
December  received  two  each,  the  others  but  one  ;
and  these  additional  days  he  placed  at  the  end  of
tlie  several  months,  no  doubt  with  the  wish  not  to
remove  the  various  festivals  from  those  positions  in
the  several  months  which  they  had  so  long  occu-
pied. Hence  in  the  present  calendar,  although
there  are  seven  months  of  31  days,  yet  the  four
months,  which  from  the  first  possessed  that  num-
ber, are  still  distinguishable  by  having  their  nones
on  the  seventh,  the  rest  having  them  on  the  fifth
of  the  month.  Lastly,  in  consideration  of  the
quarter  of  a  day,  which  he  considered  as  com-
pleting the  true  year,  he  established  the  mle  that,
at  the  end  of  every  four  years,  a  single  day  should
be  intercalated,  where  the  month  had  been  hitherto
inserted,  that  is,  immediately  after  the  Terminalia  ;
which  day  is  now  called  the  Bissextum.''''

This  year  of  445  days  is  commonly  called  by
chronologists  the  year  of  confusion  ;  but  by  Macro-
bius, more  fitly,  the  last  year  of  confusion.  The
kalends  of  Januarj%  of  the  year  708  A.  u,  c,  fell  on
the  13th  of  October,  47  B.C.  of  the  Julian  calen-
dar ;  the  kalends  of  March,  708  a.  u.  c,  on  the  1st
of  January,  46  B.  c.  ;  and  lastly,  the  kalends  of
January,  709  A.  u.  c,  on  the  1st  of  January,  45
B.  c.  Of  the  second  of  the  two  intercalary  months
inserted  in  this  year  after  November,  mention  is
made  in  Cicero's  letters  (Ad  Fam.  vi.  14).

It  was  probably  the  original  intention  of  Caesar
to  commence  the  year  with  the  shortest  day.  The
winter  solstice  at  Rome,  in  the  year  46  B.  c,  occur-
red on  the  24th  of  December  of  the  Julian  calendar.
His  motive  for  delaying  the  commencement  for  seven
days  longer,  instead  of  taking  the  following  day,  was
probably  the  desire  to  gratify  the  superstition  of  the
Romans,  by  causing  the  first  year  of  the  reformed
calendar  to  fall  on  the  day  of  the  new  moon.  Accord-
ingly, it  is  found  that  the  mean  new  moon  occurred
at  Rome  on  the  1  st  of  January,  45  b.  c,  at  6h.  1 6'
P.M.  In  this  way  alone  can  be  explained  the  phrase
xised  by  Macrobius  :  Annum  civi/em  Caesar,  hahitis


CALENDARIUM.  231

ad  lunain  dimensionihus  constitutum,  edicto  palam
proposiio  publicavit.  This  edict  is  also  mentioned
by  Plutarch  where  he  gives  the  anecdote  of  Cicero,
who,  on  being  told  by  some  one  that  the  constel-
lation Lyra  would  rise  the  next  morning,  observed,
"  Yes,  no  doubt,  in  obedience  to  the  edict."

The  mode  of  denoting  the  days  of  the  month
will  cause  no  difficulty,  if  it  be  recollected,  that  the
kalends  always  denote  the  first  of  the  month,  that
the  nones  occur  on  the  seventh  of  the  four  months
March,  May,  Quinctilis  or  July,  and  October,  and
on  the  fifth  of  the  other  months  ;  that  the  ides
always  fall  eight  days  later  than  the  nones  ;  and
lastly,  that  the  intermediate  days  are  in  all  cases
reckoned  backwards  upon  the  Roman  principle
already  explained  of  counting  both  extremes.

For  the  month  of  January  the  notation  will  be
as  follows  :  — •


1  Kal.  Jan.

17  a.  d.  XVLKal.  Feb.

2  a.  d.  IV.  Non.  Jan.

18  a.  d.    XV.  Kal.  Feb

3  a.  d.  III.  Non.  Jan.

19  a.  d.  XIV.  Kal.  Feb

4  Prid.  Non.  Jan.

20  a.  d.  XIII.  Kal.  Feb

5  Non.  Jan.

21  a.  d.  XII.  Kal.  Feb

6  a.  d.  VIII.  Id.  Jan.

22  a.  d.     XI.  Kal.  Feb

7  a.  d.    VII.  Id.  Jan.

23  a.  d.       X.  Kal.  Feb.

8  a.  d.      VI.  Id.  Jan.

24  a.  d.    IX.  Kal.  Feb

9  a.  d.        V.  Id.  Jan.

25  a.  d.  VIII.  Kal.  Feb

10  a.  d.      TV.  Id.  Jan.

26  a.  d.  VII.  Kal.  Feb

11  a.  d.      in.  Id.  Jan.

27  a.  d.     VI.  Kal.  Feb.

12  Prid.  Id.  Jan.

28  a.  d.      V.  Kal.  Feb.

13  Id.  Jan.

29  a.  d.     IV.  Kal.  Feb,

14  a.  d.  XIX.  Kal.  Feb.

30  a.  d.    IIL  Kal.  Feb

15a.d.XVIILKal.Feb.

31  Prid.  Kal.  Feb.

1 6  a.  d.  XVII.  Kal.  Feb.

The  letters  a  d  are  often,  through  error,  written
together,  and  so  confounded  with  the  preposition
f,d,  which  would  have  a  diiferent  meaning,  for  ad
kalendas  would  signify  by,  i.  e.  on  or  be/ore  the
kalends.  The  letters  are  in  fact  an  abridgement
of  ante  diem,  and  the  full  phrase  for  "  on  the  second
of  January  "  would  be  ante  diem  quartum  nonas
Januarias.  The  word  ante  in  this  expression  seems
really  to  belong  in  sense  to  nonas,  and  to  be  the
cause  why  nonas  is  an  accusative.  Hence  occur
such  phrases  as  (Cic.  Phil.  iii.  8),  in  ante  diem  quar-
tum Kal.  Decembris  distulit,  "  he  put  it  off  to  the
fourth  day  before  the  kalends  of  December,"  (Caes.
Bell.  Gall.  \.  6)  Is  dies  erat  ante  diem  V.  Kal.  Apr.,
and  (Caes.  Bell.  Civ.  i.  11)  ante  quem  diem  iturus
sit,  for  quo  die.  The  same  confusion  exists  in  the
phrase  jt>05^ /(awcos  dies,  which  means  "  a  few  days
after,"  and  is  equivalent  to  paucis  post  diebus.
Whether  the  phrase  Kalendae  Januarii  was  ever
used  by  the  best  writers  is  doubtful.  The  words
are  commonly  abbreviated  ;  and  those  passages
where  Aprilis,  Decembris,  «&c.  occur,  are  of  no
avail,  as  they  are  probably  accusatives.  The  ante
may  be  omitted,  in  which  case  the  phrase  will  be
die  quarto  nonarum.  In  the  leap  year  (to  use  a
modem  phrase),  the  last  days  of  February  were
called  —

Feb.  23.=  a.  d.  VII.  Kal.  Mart.


Feb.  24.=  a.  d.
Feb.  25.=  a.  d.
Feb.  26.=  a.  d-
Feb.  27.  =  a.  d.
Feb.  28.  =  a.  d.


VI.  Kal.  Mart,  postenorem.
VI.  Kal.  Mart,  priorem.
V.  Kal.  Mart.
IV.  Kal.  Mart.
III.  Kal.  Mart


Feb.  29.  =  Prid  Kal.  Mart.

In  which  the  words  prior  find  posterior  are  used  in
a  4


232


CALENDARIUM.


reference  to  the  retrograde  direction  of  the  reckon-
ing. Such  at  least  is  the  opinion  of  Ideler,  who
refers  to  Celsus  in  the  Digest  (50.  tit.  1 6.  s.  98).

Flora  the  fact  that  the  intercalated  year  has  two
days  called  ante  diem  seoctum,  the  name  of  bissextile
has  been  applied  to  it.  The  term  annus  hissextilis,
however,  does  not  occur  in  any  writer  prior  to
Beda,  but  in  place  of  it  the  phrase  annns  bissextus.

It  was  the  intention  of  Caesar  that  the  bissex-
tum  should  be  inserted  ■peracio  qnadriennii  circuitu,
as  Censorinns  says,  or  (fuinto  qnoqne  incipieiite  anno,
to  use  the  words  of  Macrobius.  The  phrase,  how-
ever, which  Caesar  used  seems  to  have  been  qtiarto
quoque  anno,  which  was  interpreted  by  the  priests
to  mean  every  third  year.  The  consequence  was,
that  in  the  year  8  b.  c.  the  Emperor  Augustus,
finding  that  three  more  intercalations  had  been
made  than  was  the  intention  of  the  law,  gave
directions  that  for  the  next  twelve  years  there
should  be  no  bissextile.

The  services  which  Caesar  and  Augustus  had
conferred  upon  their  country  by  the  reformation
of  the  year,  seem  to  have  been  the  immediate
causes  of  the  compliments  paid  to  them  by  the  in-
sertion of  their  names  in  the  calendar.  Julius  was
substituted  for  Quinctilis,  the  month  in  which
Caesar  was  bom,  in  the  second  Julian  year,  that  is,
the  year  of  the  dictator's  death  (Censorinus,  c.  22) ;
for  the  first  Julian  year  was  the  first  year  of  the
corrected  Julian  calendar,  that  is,  45  b.  c.     The


C.\LENDARIUM.

name  Augustus,  in  place  of  Sextilis,  was  introduced
by  the  emperor  himself,  at  the  time  when  he  recti-
fied the  error  in  the  mode  of  intcjcalating  (Suet.
Auff.  c.  31),  anno  Augnstano  xr.  The  first  year
of  the  Augustan  era  was  27  b.  -c.,  viz.,  that  in
which  he  first  took  the  name  of  Augustus,  se  vii.  et
M.  Vipsanio  Agrippa  coss.  He  was  bom  in  Sep-
tember ;  but  gave  the  preference  to  the  preceding
month,  for  reasons  stated  in  the  senatus-consultum,
preserved  by  Macrobius  (i.  1 2).  "  Whereas  the
Emperor  Augustus  Caesar,  in  the  month  of  Sex-
tiiis,  was  first  admitted  to  the  consulate,  and  thrice
entered  the  city  in  triumph,  and  in  the  same
month  the  legions,  from  the  Janicuium,  placed
themselves  under  his  auspices,  and  in  the  same
month  Egjqjt  was  brought  under  the  authority  of
the  Roman  people,  and  in  the  same  month  an  end
was  put  to  the  civil  wars  ;  and  whereas  for  these
reasons  the  said  month  is,  and  has  been,  most  for-
tunate to  this  empire,  it  is  hereby  decreed  by  the
senate  that  the  said  month  shall  be  called  Augus.
tus."  "  A  i^ebiscitum,  to  the  same  eftfect,  was
passed  on  the  motion  of  Sextus  Pacuvius,  tribune
of  the  plebs.'"

The  month  of  September  in  like  manner  received
the  name  of  Germanicus  from  the  general  so  called,
and  the  appellation  appears  to  have  existed  even  in
the  time  of  Macrobius.  Domitian,  too,  conferred
his  name  upon  October  ;  but  the  aid  word  was  re-
stored upon  the  death  of  the  tyrant.


Our  days  of  the
Month.

March,  May,  July,

January,  August,

April,  June,  Sep-

February has  28

Ootobcr,  have  31

December,  have  31

tember,  November,

days,  and  in  Leap

days.

days.

have  30  days.

Year  29.

1.

Kalkndis.

Kalendis.

Kalendis.

Kalendis.

2.

VI.  1

IV.    \       ante
III.   J     Nonas.

IV.     \     ante
III.    J"    Nonas.

IV.      \    Ante
III.     j"  Nonas.

3.

V.      1        ante

4.

IV.     f      Nonas.

Pridie  Nonas.

Pridie  Nonas.

Pridie  Nonas.

5.

III.  J

NONIS.

NONIS.

NONIS.

6.

Pridie  Nonas.

VIII.  •]

Vlll.    1

VIII.

7.

NONIS.

VII.

VII.

VI L

8.

VIII.    "

VI.

ante

VI.

ante

VI.

a

VII.

V.

Idus.

V.

Idus.

V.

10.

VI.

ante

IV.

IV.

IV.

Ih

V.

'    Idufi.

III.     J

III.

III.

12*

IV.

Pridie  Idus.

Pridie  Idus.

Pridie  Idus.

13.

III.

Idibus.

Idibus.

Idibus.

14.

Pridie  Idus.

XIX.       "

XVIII.

XVI.   "

15.

Idibus.

XVIII.

XVII.

XV.

16.

XVII.  "^

XVII.

^

XVI.

^

XIV,

n

17.

XVI.

J3

XVI.

s

XV.

o

XIII.

.2

18.

XV.

^

XV.

o

XIV

s

XII.

B5

19.

XIV.

c

XIV.

2J

XIII.

XI.

s

2a

XIII.

2    -

XIII.

XII.

Cm

X.

s

21.
22.

XII.
XL

■5  ^

"s.r

XII.
XI.

XI.
X.

IX.
VIII.

C
tu
13

23.

X.

•"sS

X.

4s.

IX.

'^^

VII.

W

24.

IX.

c4  .a

IX.

g^g

viir.

-3

VI.

-2

25.

VIII.

J'^

VIH.

9)

VII.

^

V.

<

26.

VI L

VII.

VI.

2

IV.

27.

VI.

0)

VI.

a

V.

<

III.

28.

V.

a.

V.

<

IV,

Pridie  I

Calendas

29.

IV.

<

IV.

III.

Martias.

30.

III.        J

III.

Pridie  Kalendas

31.

Pridie  Kalendas

Pridie  Kal

en  das

(of  the  month

(of  the  month

(of  the  month

following).

following).

following).

.

I


CAUDA.

The.  Fasti  of  Caesar  have  not  come  down  to  us
in  their  entire  form.  Such  fragments  as  exist  may
be  seen  in  Gruter's  Inscriptiones^  or  more  com-
pletely in  Foggini's  work,  Fastorum  Anni  liomani
.  .  Reliquiae.  See  also  some  papers  by  Ideler  in
the  Berlin  Transactions  for  1822  and  1823.

The  Gregonan  Year. — The  Julian  calendar  sup-
poses the  mean  tropical  year  to  be  365d.  6h.  ;  but
this,  as  we  have  already  seen,  exceeds  the  real
amount  hy  11'  12",  the  accumulation  of  which,
yeiir  after  year,  caused  at  last  considerable  incon-
venience. Accordingly,  in  the  year,  1582,  Pope
Gregory  the  XIII.,  assisted  by  Aloysius,  Lilius,
Cliristoph.  Clavius,  Petrus  Ciaconius,  and  others,
again  reformed  the  calendar.  The  ten  days  by
which  the  year  had  been  unduly  retarded  were
struck  out  by  a  regulation  that  the  day  after  the
fourth  of  October  in  that  year  should  be  called  the
fifteenth  ;  and  it  was  ordered  that,  whereas  hitherto
an  intercalary  day  had  been  inserted  everj-  four
years,  for  the  future  three  such  intercalations  in
the  course  of  four  hundred  years  sliould  be  omitted,
viz.,  in  those  years  which  are  divisible  without
remainder  by  100,  but  not  by  400.  Thus,  accord-
ing to  the  .Julian  calendar,  the  years,  1600,  1700,
1 800, 1 900,  and  2000  were  to  have  been  bissextile  ;
l)ut,  by  the  regulation  of  Gregory,  the  years  1700,
loOO,  and  1900,  were  to  receive  no  intercalation,
while  the  years  1 600  and  2000  were  to  be  bissextile,
as  before.  The  bull  which  effected  this  change,  was
issued  Feb.  24,  1582.  The  fullest  account  of  this
correction  is  to  be  found  in  the  work  of  Clavius,
entitled  Romani  Calendarii  a  Gregorio  XIII.  P.  M.
restituti  Ewjdicatio.  As  the  Gregorian  calendar  has
only  91  leap-years  in  a  period  of  400  years,  the
mean  Gregorian  vear  is  (303  x  365  +  97  x  366)
—  400,  that  is  365d.  5h.  49'  12",  or  only  24"
more  than  the  mean  tropical  year.  This  difference
in  60  years  would  amount  to  24',  and  in  60  times
60,  or  3600  years,  to  24  hours,  or  a  day.  Hence
the  French  astronmnei,  Delambre,  has  proposed
that  the  years  3600,  7200,  10,800,  and  all  multi-
ples of  3600  should  not  be  leap  years.  The  Gre-
gorian calendar  was  introduced  in  the  greater  part
of  Italy,  as  well  as  in  Spain  and  Portugal,  on  the
day  named  in  the  bull.  In  France,  two  months
afti^r,  by  an  edict  of  Henry  III.,  the  9th  of  De-
cember was  followed  by  the  20th.  The  Catholic
parts  of  Switzerland,  Germanj'-,  and  the  Low
Countries,  adopted  the  correction  in  1583,  Poland
in  1586,  Hungary  in  1587.  The  Protestant  parts
of  Europe  resisted  what  they  called  a  Papistical  in-
vention for  more  than  a  century.  At  last,  in  1 700,
Protestant  Germany,  as  well  as  Denmark  and  Hol-
land, allowed  reJison  to  prevail  over  prejudice  ;  and
the  Protestant  cantons  of  Switzerland  copied  their
example  the  following  year.

In  England  the  Gregorian  calendar  was  first
adopted  in  1752,  and  in  Sweden  in  1753.  In
Russia,  and  those  countries  which  belong  to  the
Greek  church,  the  Julian  year,  or  old  style  as  it  is
called,  still  prevails.

In  this  article  free  use  has  been  made  of  Ideler's
work  Lehrhuch  der  Chronologic..  For  other  inform-
ation connected  with  the  Roman  measurement  of
time,  see  Astronomia  ;  Di£S  ;  Horologium  ;
Lustrum;  Nundinae  ;  Saeculum.    [T.H.K.]

CA'LIDA,  or  CALDA,  the  warm  drink  of  the
Greeks  and  Romans,  which  consisted  of  warm
water  mixed  with  wine,  with  the  addition  probably
of  spices.     This  was  a  very  favourite  kind  of  drink


CALIGA.


233


with  the  ancients,  and  could  always  be  procured  at
certain  shops  or  taverns,  called  thermopolia  (Plant.
Cur.  ii.  3.  13,  Trin.  iv.  3.  6,  Rud.  ii.  6.  45),  which
Claudius  commanded  to  be  closed  at  one  period
of  his  reign  (Dion  Cass.  Ix.  6).  The  vessels,  in
which  the  wine  and  water  were  kept  hot,  appear  to
have  been  of  a  very  elegant  form,  and  not  unlike
oiu"  tea-urns  both  in  appearance  and  construction.
A  representation  of  one  of  these  vessels  is  given  in
the  Museo  Borbonico  (vol.  iii.  pi.  63),  from  which
the  following  woodcut  is  taken.  In  the  middle
of  the  vessel  there  is  a  small  cylindrical  furnace,
in  which  the  wood  or  charcoal  was  kept  for
heating  the  water  ;  and  at  the  bottom  of  this
furnace,  there  are  four  small  holes  for  the  ashes
to  fall  through.  On  the  right  hand  side  of  the
vessel  there  is  a  kind  of  cup,  communicating  with
the  part  surrounding  the  furnace,  by  Avhich  the
vessel  might  be  filled  without  taking  off  the  lid  ;
and  on  the  left  hand  side  there  is  in  about  the
middle  a  tube  with  a  cock  for  drawing  off  the
liquid.  Beneath  the  conical  cover,  and  on  a  level
with  the  rim  of  the  vessel,  there  is  a  moveable  flat
cover,  with  a  hole  in  the  middle,  which  closes  the
whole  urn  except  the  mouth  of  the  small  furnace.

Though  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  vessel
was  used  for  the  pui^pose  which  has  been  mentioned.


it  is  difficult  to  determine  its  Latin  name  ;  but  it
was  probably  called  authepsa  [Authepsa. j  Pol-
lux (x.  66)  mentions  several  names  which  were
applied  to  the  vessels  used  for  heating  water,  of
which  the  lirvoKiS-qs,  which  also  occurs  in  Lucian
{Leociph.  8),  appears  to  answer  best  to  the  vessel
which  has  been  described  above.  (Bottiger,  Sabi-
na.,  vol.  ii.  p.  34  ;  Becker,  Gallus.,  vol.  ii.  p.  1 75.)

CALIENDRUM,  a  peruque  or  wig,  mentioned
by  Horace.     {Serm.  i.  8.  48.)

CA'LIGA,  a  strong  and  heavy  shoe  worn  by
the  Roman  soldiers.  Although  the  use  of  this
species  of  calceamentum  extended  to  the  ccntu-


234


CALLISTEIA.


rions,  it  was  not  worn  hy  the  superior  officers.
Hence  the  common  soldiers,  including  centui'ions,
were  distinguished  by  the  name  of  caligati  (Suet
Aug.  25,  Vitell.  7)  ;  when  Cicero  therefore  says  of
Pompey"mihi  caligae  ejus  non  placebant "  {Ad
Att.  ii.  3),  he  merely  uses  the  words  to  indicate
his  military  power.  Service  in  the  ranks  was  also
designated  alter  this  article  of  attire.  Thus  Marius
was  said  to  have  risen  to  the  consulship  a  caliga,
i.  e.  from  the  ranks  (Sen.  De  Benef.  v.  16),  and
Ventidius  juventam  ifiopem  in  caliga  militari  tole-
rasse  (Plin  H.  N".  vii.  44).  The  Emperor  Caligula
received  that  cognomen  when  a  boy,  in  conse-
quence of  wearing  the  caliga,  which  his  iather  Ger-
manicus  put  on  his  son  in  order  to  please  the  sol-
diers. (Tacit.  Ann.  i.  41  ;  Suet.  C'cdig.9.)  The
triumphal  monuments  of  Rome  show  most  dis-
tinctly the  difference  between  the  caliga  of  the
common  soldier  [Arma]  and  the  calceus  worn  by
men  of  higher  rank.  [Abolla  ;  Ara.]  The
sole  of  the  caliga  was  thickly  studded  with  hob-
nails (clavi  caligarii,  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiv.  41,
ix.  18  ;  Juv.  Sai.  iii.  232,  xvi.  25).

The  caliga  speculatoria  (Suet.  Calig.  52),  made
for  the  use  of  spies  {speculator es)^  was  probably
much  lighter  than  the  ordinary  shoe  worn  by  the
soldiers.  [J.  Y.]

CALIX  {kvKl^,  comp.  Macrob.  Sat.  v.  21).
1.  A  small  drinking-cup,  constantly  used  at  sym-
posia and  on  similar  occasions.  It  is  frequently
seen  in  paintings  on  ancient  vases  which  represent
drinking-scenes,  and  when  empty  is  usually  held
upright  by  one  of  its  handles,  as  sho^vn  in  the  cut
under  Symposium.  (Xen.  Symp.  ii,  26  ;  Cic.
Tusc.  iii.  19;  Hor.  Serm.  ii.  8.  35,  &c.)  2.  A
vessel  used  in  cooking  (Varr.  L.  L.  v.  127,  ed.
Miiller  ;  Ov.  Fast.  v.  509,)  3,  A  tube  in  the
aqiiaeducts  attached  to  the  extremity  of  each  pipe,
where  it  entered  the  castellum.  [Aquakductus,
p.  115,  a.]

CALLIS,  a  beaten  path  or  track  made  by  the
feet  of  cattle.  (Serv.  ad  Virg.  Aen.  iv.  405  ;  Isidor.
Orig.  XV.  16.  §  20.)  The  sheep-walks  in  the
mountainous  parts  of  Campania  and  Apulia  were  the
property  of  the  Roman  state  ;  and  as  they  were  of
considerable  value,  one  of  the  quaestors  usually
had  these  calles  assigned  to  him  as  his  province,
whence  we  read  of  the  CalUum  provincia.  His
principal  duties  were  to  receive  the  scripiura,  or
tax  paid  for  the  pasturage  of  the  cattle,  and  to
protect  life  and  property  in  these  wild  and  moun-
tainous districts.  When  the  senate  wished  to  put
a  slight  upon  the  consuls  on  one  occasion  they  en-
deavoured to  assign  to  them  as  their  provinces,
the  care  of  the  woods  {silvae)  and  sheep-walks
{calks).  (Tac.  Ann.  iv.  27  ;  Suet.  Caes.  19,
Claud.  29 ;  in  the  last  passage  the  reading  is
doubtful.)

CALLISTEIA  (KaWicrTeTa),  a  festival,  or  per-
haps merely  a  part  of  one,  held  by  the  women  of
Lesbos  ;  at  which  they  assembled  in  the  sanc-
tuarj'  of  Hera,  and  the  fairest  received  the  prize  of
beauty.  (Schol.  ad  II.  ix.  128  ;  Suidas,  s.  v.  ;
Antholog.  Pal.  ix.  189  ;  Athen.  xiii.  p.  610.)

A  similar  contest  of  beauty,  instituted  by  Cyp-
selus,  formed  a  part  of  a  festival  celebrated  by  the
Parrhasians  in  Arcadia,  in  honour  of  the  Eleusi-
nian  Demeter,  The  women  taking  part  in  it  were
called  Xpv(ro<p6poi.  (Athen.  xiii.  p.  609.)

A  third  contest  of  the  same  kind,  in  which,
'  however,  men  only  partook,  is  mentioned  by  Athe-


CALUMNIA.

naeus  {I.  c.  ;  compare  Etymol.  Magji.  s.  v.)  as  oc-
curring among  the  Eleans  in  honour  of  Atliena.
The  fairest  man  received  as  prize  a  suit  of  armour
which  he  dedicated  to  Athena,  and  was  adorned
by  his  friends  with  ribbons  and  a  myrtle  wreath,
and  accompanied  to  the  temple.  From  the  words
of  Athenaeus  (xiii.  p.  610),  who,  in  speakuig  of
these  contests  of  beauty,  mentions  Tenedos  along
with  Lesbos,  we  must  infer  that  in  the  former
island  also  Callisteia  were  celebrated.       [L.  S,]

CALO'NES,  the  servants  of  the  Roman  sol-
diers, said  to  have  been  so  called  from  carrj'ing
wood  {kclXo)  for  their  use.  (Festus,  s.  v.  ;  Serv.
ad  Virg.  Aen.  vi.  1.)  They  are  generally  supposed
to  have  been  slaves,  and  they  almost  formed  a  part
of  the  army,  as  we  may  learn  from  many  passages
in  Caesar  :  in  fact,  we  are  told  by  Josephus  that,
from  always  living  with  the  soldiers  and  being
present  at  their  exercises,  they  were  inferior  to
them  alone  in  skill  and  valour.  The  word  calo,
however,  was  not  confined  to  this  signification,  but
was  also  applied  to  farm-servants,  instances  of  which
usage  are  found  in  Horace  {Epist.  i.  14.  42  ;
Sat.  i,  6.  103).

In  Caesar  this  term  is  generally  found  by  itself  ;
in  Tacitus  it  is  coupled  and  made  almost  identi-
cal with  lioca.  Still  the  calones  and  lixae  were  not
the  same  :  the  hitter,  in  fact,  were  freemen,  who
merely  followed  the  camp  for  the  })urposes  of  gain
and  merchandise,  and  were  so  far  from  being  in-
dispensable to  an  anny,  that  they  were  sometimes
forbidden  to  follow  it  (we  lixae  sequerentur  eocer-
dtum.  Sail.  Bell.  Jug.  45).  Thus  again  we  read
of  the  lixae  mercatoresque.,  qui  plaustris  merces  por-
tahant  (Hirtius,  De  Bell.  Afr.  75),  words  which
plainly  show  that  the  lixae  were  traders  and
dealers.  Livy  also  ( v,  8)  speaks  of  them  as
carrying  on  business.  The  term  itself  is  supposed
to  be  connected  with  lixa,  an  old  word  signifying
water,  inasmuch  as  the  lixae  supplied  this  article
to  the  soldiers :  since,  however,  they  probably
furnished  ready-cooked  provisions  (elixos  cibos),  it
seems  not  unlikely  that  their  appellation  may  have
some  allusion  to  this  circumstance.  (See  Sail.
I.  c.)  [R.  W.]

CALU'MNIA.  Calumniari  is  defined  by
Marcian  (Dig.  48,  tit,  16.  s,  1),  Falsa  crimina  in-
tendere  ;  a  definition  Avhich,  as  there  given,  was
only  intended  to  apply  to  criminal  matters.  The
definition  of  Paulus  {Seident.  Recept.  i.  tit.  5)  ap-
plies to  matters  both  criminal  and  civil :  Calumni-
osus  est  qui  sciens  prudensque  per  fraudem  negoiium
alicui  comparat.  Cicero  {de  Of',  i.  10)  speaks  of
"  calumnia,"  and  of  the  7iimis  callida  et  vialitiosa
juris  interpretation  as  things  related.  Gains  says,
Calumnia  in  adfectu  est,  sicutfurti  crimen;  the
criminality  was  to  be  determined  by  the  intention.

When  an  accuser  failed  in  his  proof,  and  the
reus  was  acquitted,  there  might  be  an  inquiry  into
the  conduct  and  motives  of  the  accuser.  If  the  per-
son who  made  this  judicial  inquiry  {qui  cognovit),
found  that  the  accuser  had  merely  acted  from  error
of  judgment,  he  acquitted  him  in  the  form  non  pro-
basti ;  if  he  convicted  him  of  evil  intention,  he  de-
clared his  sentence  in  the  words  calumniatus  es,
which  sentence  was  followed  by  the  legal  punish-
ment.

According  to  Marcian,  the  punishment  for  ca-       J
lumnia  was  fixed  by  the  lex  Remmia,  or,  as  it  is       ^
sometimes,  perhaps   incorrectly,   named,   the   lex
Memmia.     (Val.  Max.  iii.  7.  §  9.)     But  it  is  not


CAMARA.

kno  wni  when  this  lex  was  passed,  nor  what  were  its
penalties.  It  appears  from  Cicero  {Pro  Seat.
liosc.  Amci-ino^  c.  20),  that  the  false  accuser  might
be  branded  on  the  forehead  with  the  letter  K,  the
initial  of  Kalumnia  ;  and  it  has  been  conjectured,
though  it  is  a  mere  conjecture,  that  this  punish-
ment was  inflicted  by  the  lex  Remmia.

The  punishment  for  calumnia  was  also  exsilium,
i-elegatio  in  insulani,  or  loss  of  rank  {ordinis  amis-
sio)  ;  but  probably  only  in  criminal  cases,  or  in
matters  relating  to  a  man's  civil  condition.  (Paulus,
Seivletd.  Receyit.  v.  I.  5,  v.  4. 11.)

In  the  case  of  actiones,  the  calumnia  of  the  actor
was  checked  by  the  calumniae  judicium,  the  judi-
cium contrarium,  the  jusjurandum  calumniae,  and
the  restipulatio ;  which  are  particularly  described
by  Gains  (iv.  174—181).  The  defendant  might
in  all  cases  avail  himself  of  the  calumniae  judicium,
by  which  the  plaintiff,  if  he  was  found  to  be  guilty
of  calumnia,  was  mulcted  to  the  defendant  in  the
tenth  part  of  the  value  of  the  object-matter  of  the
suit.  But  the  actor  was  not  mulcted  in  this  action,
unless  it  was  shovra  that  he  brought  his  suit  with-
out foundation,  knowingly  and  designedly.  In  the
contrarium  judicium,  of  which  the  defendant  could
onl}'  avail  himself  in  certain  cases,  the  rectitude  of
the  plaintift"''s  purpose  did.  not  save  him  from  the
penalty.  Instead  of  adopting  either  of  these  modes
of  proceeding,  the  defendant  might  require  the
plaintiff  to  take  the  oath  of  calumnia,  which  was
to  the  effect,  Se  von  calumniae  causa  agere.  In  some
cases  the  defendant  also  was  required  by  the
praetor  to  swear  that  he  did  not  dispute  the
plaintiff's  claim,  calumniae  causa.  Generally  speak-
ing, if  the  plaintiff  put  the  defendant  to  his  oath
{jusjurandum  ei  deferehat\  the  defendant  might
put  the  plaintiff  to  his  oath  of  calumny.  (Dig.  12.
tit.  2.  s.  37.)  In  some  actions,  the  oath  of  ca-
lumny on  the  part  of  the  plaintiff  was  a  necessary
preliminary  to  the  action.  In  all  judicia  publica,
it  seems  that  the  oath  of  calumnia  was  required
from  the  accuser.

If  the  rcstipulationis  poena  was  required  from
the  actor,  the  defendant  could  not  have  the  benefit
of  the  calumniae  judicium,  or  of  the  oath  of  calumny  ;
and  the  judicium  contrarium  was  not  applicable  to
such  cases.

The  edict  De  Calumniatoribus  (Dig.  3.  tit.  6.)
applied  generally  to  those  who  received  money,
calumniae  causa,  for  doing  an  act  or  abstaining
from  doing  an  act.  The  edict  applied  as  well  to
publica  crimina  as  to  pecuniariae  causae  ;  for  in-
stance in  the  matter  of  repetundae  the  edict  ap-
plied to  him  who  for  calumnia  received  money
on  the  terms  of  prosecuting  or  not  prosecuting  a
person.  This  edict  provided  for  some  cases,  as
threats  of  procedure  against  a  man  to  extort
money,  which  were  not  within  the  cases  provided
for  by  the  edict.  Quod  metus  causa  (Dig.  4.
tit.  2.)  [G.  L.J

CA'MARA  (Kc^ctpa),  or  CAMERA,  properly
signifies  any  arched  or  vaulted  covering,  and  any
thing  with  such  a  covering :  Herodotus,  for  in-
stance, calls  a  covered  carriage  Kajxapa  (i.  199).
It  is  chiefly  used  in  the  two  following  senses :  —

1.  An  arched  or  vaulted  ceiling  fonned  by  semi-
circular bands  or  beams  of  wood,  over  the  intervals
of  which  a  coating  of  lath  and  plaster  was  spread,
resembling  in  construction  the  hooped  awnings  in
use  amongst  us.  (Vitruv.  vii.  3  ;  Sail.  Cat.  58  ;
Cic.  ad  Q.  Fr.  iii.  1.  §  1  ;    comp.  Plin.  //.  A^.


CANATHRON


235


xvi.  36.  s.  64.)  Under  the  em^perors  camarae  were
formed  with  plates  of  glass  (Plin.  //.  A'',  xxxvi.  25.
8.  64)  ;  sometimes  also  the  beams  were  gilt,  and
the  ceiling  between  them  was  made  of  ivory.
(Propert.  iii.  2.  10.)

2.  Small  boats  used  in  early  times  by  the  people
who  inhabited  the  shores  of  the  Euxine  and  the
Bosporus,  and  called  Kafj-dpai,  from  their  having
a  broad  arched  deck.  They  were  made  with  both
ends  alike  so  as  to  work  in  either  direction  without
turning  ;  and  were  put  together  without  iron.  They
continued  in  use  until  the  age  of  Tacitus,  by  whom
their  construction  and  uses  are  described.  (Strab.
xi.  p.  495  ;  Eustath.  adDionys.  Ferieg.  700  ;  Aul.
Gell.  X.  25  ;  Tac.  Hist.  iii.  47.  Respecting  the
other  uses  of  the  word  see  Seller  and  Jacobitz,
Handworterlmcli  d.  GriecJi.  Sprache.)  [P.  S.]

CAMILLI,  CAMILLAE,  boys  and  girls,  em-
ployed in  the  religious  rites  and  ceremonies  of  the
Romans.  They  were  required  to  be  perfect  in
form,  and  sound  in  health,  free  born,  and  with
both  their  parents  alive ;  or,  in  other  words,  ac-
cording to  the  expression  of  the  Romans,  pueri  seu
puellae  ingenui.,  /elicissi?rn,  patrimi  matrimique.
The  origin  of  these  words  gave  rise  to  various
opinions  among  the  ancients.  Dionysius  supposed
them  to  correspond  to  the  KadfiiXoi  among  the
Curetes  and  Corybantes  ;  others  connected  them
with  Cadmilus  or  Casmilus,  one  of  the  Samothra-
cian  Cabeiri ;  but  we  know  nothing  certain  on  the
matter.  Respecting  the  employment  of  the  Camil-
lus  at  Roman  marriages,  see  Matrimonium.
(Dionys.  ii.  21,  22  ;  Varr.  L.  L.  vii,  34,  ed.  Mul-
ler ;  Macrob.  Sat.  iii.  8  ;  Serv.  ad  Virg.  A  en.  xi.
543 ;  Festus,  s.  vv.  Camillus,  Cuinera,  FlaminiuH
Camillus  ;  Ilartung,  Die  Religion  der  Rmner,  vol.  i.
p.  157,  vol.  ii.  p.  71.)

CA'MPAGUS,  a  kind  of  shoe  worn  by  the  later
Roman  emperors.  (Trebell.  Poll.  G allien.  16,  with
the  note  of  Salmasius.)

CAMI'NUS.     [DoMus]

CAMPESTRE  (sc.  subligar)  was  a  kind  of  girdle
or  apron,  which  the  Roman  youths  wore  around
their  loins,  when  they  exercised  naked  in  the
Campus  Martins  (Augustin.  De  Civ.  Dei^  xiv.  17).
The  campestre  was  sometimes  worn  in  wann  wea-
ther in  place  of  the  tunic  under  the  toga  {campestri
sub  toga  cinctus,  Ascon.  ad  Cic.  pro  Scauro^  p.  30.
ed.  Orell.;  Hor.  Ep.  i.  II.  18.)

CAMPIDOCTO'RES  were  persons  who  taught
soldiers  their  exercises.  (Veget.  i.  13.)  In  the
times  of  the  republic  this  duty  was  discharged  by
a  centurion,  or  veteran  soldier  of  merit  and  distinc-
tion.    (Comp.  Plin.  Pan.  13.)

CA'NABUS  (/ca>'agos),  was  a  figure  of  wood
in  the  form  of  a  skeleton,  round  which  the  clay  or
plaster  was  laid  in  forming  models.  Figures  of
a  similar  kind,  fonned  to  display  the  muscles  and
veins,  were  studied  by  painters  in  order  to  acquire
some  knowledge  of  anatomy.  (Arist.  Flist.  Anim.
iii.  5,  De  Gen.  Anim.  ii.  6;  Pollux,  vii.  164,  x.
189  ;  Suid.  and  Hesych.  s.  v. ;  Miiller,  Arch'dol.
der  Kunst,  §  305.  n.  7.)

CANA'LIS,  and  the  diminutive  CanaliculuSy
which  signify  a  water-pipe  or  gutter,  are  used  also
in  architecture  for  any  channel,  such  as  the  flutings
of  a  column,  and  the  channel  between  the  volutes
of  an  Ionic  capital  (Vitruv.  x.  14,  iii.  3).     [P.  S.]

CANATHRON  (KavaOpov),  a  carriage,  the  up-
per part  of  which  was  made  of  basket-work,  or
more  properly  the  basket  itself,  which  was  fixed  in


:36


CANDELABRUM.


the  carriage.  (Xen.  Ages.  viii.  7;  Plut.  Ages.  c.  19.)
Homer  calls  this  kind  of  basket  neipivs.  (II.  xxiv.
]  90,  267  ;  and  Eustath.  ad  loc.  Compare  Sturtz,
Zejp.  Xenoph.  s.  v.  KavaQpov ;  SchefFer,  De  Re
Vehic.  p.  68.)

CANCELLA'RIUS.     [Cancklli.]

CANCELLI,  lattice-work,  placed  before  a  win-
dow, a  door-way,  the  tribunal  of  a  judge,  or  any-
other  place.  (See  e.  g.  Cic.  -pro  Sest.  58  ;  Varr.
Ji.  R.  iii.  5  ;  Ov.  Am.  iii.  2.  64  ;  Dig.  30.  tit.  41.
8.  10  ;  33.  tit.  7.  s.  10.)  Hence  was  derived  the
word  Caiicellarius,  which  originally  signified  a
porter,  who  stood  at  the  latticed  or  grated  door  of
the  emperor's  palace.  The  emperor  Carinus  gave
great  dissatisfaction  by  promoting  one  of  his  Can-
cellarii  to  be  Praefectus  urbi.  (Vopisc.  Carin.  16.)
The  cancellarius  also  signified  a  legal  scribe  or
secretary,  who  sat  within  the  amcelli  or  lattice-
work, by  which  the  crowd  was  kept  off  from  the
tribunals  of  the  judges.  (Cassiod.  Var.  xi.  6.)
The  chief  scribe  or  secretary  was  called  Cancellarius
Kar'  e^oxfiv,  and  was  eventually  invested  with
judicial  power  at  Constantinople  ;  but  an  account
of  his  duties  and  the  history  of  this  office  do  not
fall  within  the  scope  of  the  present  work.  From
this  word  has  come  the  modern  Chancellor.

CANDE'LA,  a  candle,  made  either  of  wax
(cerea)  or  tallow  (sebacea)^  was  used  universally
by  the  Romans  before  the  invention  of  oil  lamps
(lucernae).  (Varr.  De  Ling.  Lai.  v.  119,  ed.  Mul-
ler;  Martial,  xiv.  43  ;  Athen.  xv.  p.  700.)  The}--
used  for  a  wick  the  pith  of  a  kind  of  rush  called
scirpus  (Plin.  ff.  N.  xvi.  70).  In  later  times  can-
dela?  were  only  used  by  the  poorer  classes ;  the
houses  of  the  moi-e  wealthy  were  always  lighted
bv  lucernae  (Juv.  Sat.  iii.  287  ;  Becker,  Gallus^
vol.  ii.  p.  201).

CANDELA'BRUM,  was  originally  a  candle-
stick, but  was  afterwards  used  to  support  lamps
{\vxvovxos),  in  which  signification  it  most  com-
monly occurs.  The  candelabra  of  this  kind  were
usually  made  to  stand  upon  the  ground,  and  were
of  a  considerable  height.  The  most  common  kind
were  made  of  wood  (Cic.  ad  Qn.  Fr.  iii.  7  ;  Martial,
xiv.  44;  Petron.  95  ;  Athen.  xv.  p.  700)  ;  but  those
which  have  been  found  in  Herculaneum  and  Pom-
peii are  mostly  of  bronze.  Sometimes  they  were
made  of  the  more  precious  metals  and  even  of
jewels,  as  was  the  one  which  Antiochus  intended
to  dedicate  to  Jupiter  Capitolinus.  (Cic.  Verr.  iv.
28.)  In  the  temples  of  the  gods  and  palaces  there
were  frequently  large  candelabra  made  of  marble,
and  fastened  to  the  ground.  (Museo  Pio-Clem.  iv.
1.  5,  v.  1.  3.)

There  is  a  great  resemblance  in  the  general  plan
and  appearance  of  most  of  the  candelabra  which
have  been  found.  They  usually  consist  of  three
parts:  —  1.  the  foot  {fi6.ais) ;  2.  the  shaft  or  stem
{Kav\6s)  ;  3.  the  plinth  or  tray  {hi(TK6s),  large
enough  for  a  lamp  to  stand  on,  or  with  a  socket  to
receive  a  wax  candle.  The  foot  usually  consists
of  three  lions'  or  griffins'  feet,  ornamented  with
leaves ;  and  the  shaft,  which  is  either  plain  or
fluted,  generally  ends  in  a  kind  of  capital,  on
which  the  tray  rests  for  supporting  the  lamp.
Sometimes  we  find  a  figure  between  the  capital  and
the  tray,  as  is  seen  in  the  candelabrum  on  the
right  hand  in  the  annexed  woodcut,  which  is  taken
from  the  Museo  Borhonico  (iv.  pi.  57),  and  repre-
bents  a  candelabrum  folind  in  Pompeii.  The  one
on  the  left  hand  is  also  a  representation   of  a


CANDELABRUM.

candelabrum  found  in  the  same  city  {Mus.  Borh.
vi.  pi.  61),  and  is  nmde  with  a  sliding  shaft,  by
Avhich  the  light  might  be  raised  or  lowered  at
pleasure.


The  best  candelabra  were  made  at  Aegina  and
Tarentum.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiv.  6.)

There  are  also  candelabra  of  various  other  fonns,
though  those  which  have  been  given  above  are  by
far  the  most  common.     They  sometimes  consist  of


CANDYS.

a  figure  supporting  a  lamp  {Mus.  Borh.  vii.  pi.  J  5),
or  of  a  figure,  by  the  side  of  which  the  shaft  is
jilaccd  with  two  branches,  each  of  which  termi-
nates in  a  flat  disc,  upon  which  a  lamp  was  placed.
A  candelabrum  of  the  latter  kind  is  given  in  the
preceding  woodcut  {Mus.  Borb.  iv.  pi.  BQ).  The
stem  is  formed  of  a  liliaceous  plant  ;  and  at  the
base  is  a  mass  of  bronze,  on  which  a  Silenus  is
seated  engaged  in  trying  to  pour  wine  from  a  skin
which  he  holds  in  his  left  hand,  into  a  cup  in  his
right.

There  was  another  kind  of  candelabrum,  entirely
different  from  those  which  have  been  described,
which  did  not  stand  upon  the  ground,  but  was
placed  upon  the  table.  These  candelabra  usually
consist  of  pillars,  from  the  capitals  of  which  several
lamps  hang  down,  or  of  trees,  from  whose  branches
lamps  also  are  suspended.  The  following  wood-
cut represents  a  very  elegant  candelabrum  of  this
kind,  found  in  Pompeii.  {Mus.  Borh.  ii.  pi.  13.)

The  original,  including  the  stand,  is  three  feet
high.  The  pillar  is  not  placed  in  the  centre,  but
at  one  end  of  the  plinth,  which  is  the  case  in  al-
most  every  candelabrum   of  this  description  yet


CANTHARUS.


237


found.  The  plinth  is  inlaid  in  imitation  of  a  vine,
the  leaves  of  which  are  of  silver,  the  stem  and  fruit
of  bright  bronze.  On  one  side  is  an  altar  with
wood  and  fire  upon  it ;  and  on  the  other  a  Bacchus
riding  on  a  tiger.  (Becker,  Gallus^  vol.  ii.  p.  206,
Sec.)

CANDIDATUS.     [Ambitus.]

CANDYS  (/caySus),  a  gown  worn  by  the  Medes
and  Persians  over  their  trowsers  and  other  gar-
ments. __  (Xen.  Ci/r.  I  '6.  §  2,  Anal,,  i.  5.  §  8  ;  Diod.
Sic.  xvii.  77.)  It  had  wide  sleeves,  and  was  made
of  woollen  cloth,  which  was  either  purple  or  of
some  other  splendid  colour.  In  the  Persepolitan
sculptures,  nearly  all  the  principal  personages
are  clothed  in  it.  The  three  here  shown  are
taken  from  Sir  R.  K.  Porter's  Travels  (vol.  i.  pi.
."4).  [J.  Y.J


CANETHOROS  (KaurjcpSpos).  When  a  sacri-
fice was  to  be  offered,  the  round  cake  {rpoxia
(pdois,  irSivavov^  oXij,  mola  salsa).,  the  chaplet
of  flowers,  the  knife  used  to  slay  the  victim,  and
sometimes  the  frankincense,  were  deposited  in  a
flat  circular  basket  {Kdveov,  canistrum),  and  this
was  frequently  carried  by  a  virgin  on  her  head  to
the  altar.  The  practice  was  observed  more  espe-
cially at  Athens.  When  a  private  man  sacrificed,
either  his  daughter,  or  some  unmarried  female  of
his  family,  officiated  as  his  canephoros  (Aristoph.
Ac/iani.  241 — 252)  ;  but  in  the  Panathenaea,  the
Dionysia,  and  other  public  festivals,  two  virgins  of
the  first  Athenian  families  were  appointed  for  the
purpose.  Their  fimction  is  described  by  Ovid
{Met.  ii.  713—715).

That  the  office  was  accounted  highly  honourable
appears  from  the  fact,  that  the  resentment  of  Har-
modius,  which  instigated  him  to  kill  Hipparchus,
arose  from  the  insult  offered  by  the  latter  in  for-
bidding the  sister  of  Harmodius  to  walk  as  cane-
phoros in  the  Panathenaic  procession.  (Thucyd.
vi.  56  ;  Aelian,  V.  H.  xi.  8.)  An  antefixa  in  the
British  Museum  (see  woodcut)  represents  the  two
canephoroe  approaching  a  candelabrum.  Each  of
them  elevates  one  ai-m  to  support  the  basket,  while


she  slightly  raises  her  tunic  with  the  other.  This
attitude  was  much  admired  by  ancient  artists.
Pliny  {H.  N.  xxxvi.  4.  s.  7)  mentions  a  marble
canephoros  by  Scopas,  and  Cicero  (  Verr.  iv.  3)
describes  a  pair  in  bronze,  which  were  the  exquisite
work  of  Polvcletus.     [Caryatis.]  [J.  Y.]

CANISTRUM.     [Canephoros.]

CANTABRUM,  a  standard  used  at  the  time
of  the  Roman  empire,  and  carried  in  festive  pro-
cessions.    (Tertull.  Apol.  16  ;   Minuc.  Felix,  29.)

CANTE'RII  is  used  by  Vitnivius  (iv.  2)  for
the  rafters  of  the  roof,  extending  from  the  ridge  to
the  eaves.  [?•  ^-J

CA'NTHARUS  {K6.vQapo^)  was  a  kind  of
drinking-cup,  furnished  with  handles  {caniharus
ansa,  Virg.  L'cl.  vi.  17  ;  Hor.  Carm.  i.  20).  It  is
said  by  some  writers  to  have  derived  its  name
from  one  Cantharus,  who   first  made  cups  of  this


238  CAPISTRUM.

foi-ra.  (Athen.  xi.  p.  474,  e  ;  Pollux,  vi.  96  ;
Plin.  //.  A^.  xxxiv.  19.  §  25.)  The  cantharus  was
the  cup  sacred  to  Bacchus  (Macrob.  Sat.  v.  21  ;
PHn.  H.  N.  xxxiii.  53),  who  is  frequently  repre-
sented on  ancient  vases  holding  it  in  his  h.and,  as
in  the  following  woodcut,  which  is  taken  from  a
painting  on  an  ancient  vase.  (Millingen,  Pein-
tures  Antiques,  pi.  53.)


CAPSA.

thej'  are  seen  on  the  bas-relief  of  a  sarcophagus  in
the  Vatican  representing  her  nuptial  processioiL
See  the  annexed  woodcut.


CA'NTICUM.  In  the  Roman  theatre,  between
the  first  and  second  acts,  flute  music  appears  to
have  been  introduced  (Plant.  Pseudol.  i.  5.  160),
which  was  accompanied  by  a  kind  of  recitative,
performed  by  a  single  actor,  or  if  there  were  two,
the  second  was  not  allowed  to  speak  with  the  first.
Thus  Diomedes  (iii.  p.  489.  ed.  Putsch.)  says:  —
"  In  canticis  una  tantum  debet  esse  persona,  aut  si
duae  fuerint,  ita  debent  esse,  ut  ex  occulto  una
audiat  nee  colloquatur,  sed  secum,  si  opus  fuerit,
verba  faciat."  In  the  canticum,  as  violent  gesti-
culation was  required,  it  appears  to  have  been  the
custom,  from  the  time  of  Livius  Andronicus,  for
the  actor  to  confine  himself  to  the  gesticulation,
while  another  person  sang  the  recitative.  (Liv.
viii.  2  ;  Lucian,  De  Saltat.  30  ;  Isidor.  On^.xviii.
44.)  The  canticum  always  formed  a  part  of  a
Roman  comedy.  Diomedes  observes  that  a  Roman
comedy  consists  of  two  parts,  dialogue  and  canticum
(Latinae  comoediae  duobus  tantum  membris  constant,
divcrbio  et  cantico).  Wolf  (Z)e  Canticis,  p.  11 )
endeavours  to  show  that  cantica  also  occurred  in
tragedies  and  the  Atellanae  fabulae.  There  can
be  no  doubt  that  they  did  in  the  latter  ;  they
were  usually  composed  in  the  Latin,  and  sometimes
in  the  Greek  language,  whereas  the  other  parts  of
the  Atellane  plays  were  written  in  Oscan.

CAPISTRUM  {(pop8ii6.),  a  halter,  a  tie  for
horses,  asses,  or  other  animals,  placed  round  the
head  or  neck,  and  made  of  osiers  or  other  fibrous
materials.  In  representations  of  Bacchanalian  pro-
cessions the  tigers  or  panthers  are  attached  to  the
yoke  by  capistra  made  of  vine-branches.  Thus  we
read  of  the  vite  capistraiae  tujres  of  Ariadne  (Ovid,
Epid.  ii.  80  ;    Sidon.  ApoU.  Carm.  xxii.  23),  and


The  term  (popSeid  was  also  applied  to  a  contriv-
ance used  by  pipers  (auATjrai)  and  trumpeters  to
compress  their  mouths  and  cheeks,  and  thus  to  aid
them  in  blowing.  It  is  often  seen  in  works  of
ancient  art  [Chiridota],  and  was  said  to  be  the
invention  of  Marsyas.  (Simonides,  Brunch  An.
i.  122  ;  Sophocles,  ap.  Cic.  ad  ^^.  ii.  16  ;  Aris-
toph.  ^u.  862,  Vesp.  580,  Eq.  1147  ;  Schol.  ad
11.)  [J.  Y.]

CAPITA'LIS.     [Caput.]

CA'PITE  CENSI.     [Caput.]

CA'PITIS  DEMINU'TIO.     [Caput.]

CAPI'TIUM,  a  portion  of  a  woman's  dress,
said  by  Varro  to  be  so  called,  because  it  covers
(capit)  the  breast,  (Varr.  L.  L.  v.  131,  ed.  Muller,
and  De  Vita  P.  R.  iv.  ap.  Nonium,  s.  v.  capitia  ;
comp.  Gell.  xvi.  7  ;  Dig.  34.  tit.  2.  s.  24.)  But
the  word  itself  would  rather  lead  us  to  suppose
that  it  was  originally  a  covering  for  the  head
(caput).

CAPITOLI'NI  LUDI.     [Ludi.]

CAPI'TULUM.     [Columna.]

CAPSA  {dim.  CATSULA),  or  SCRI'NIUM,
the  box  for  holding  books  among  the  Romans.
These  boxes  were  usually  made  of  beech-wood
(Plin.  H.  N.  xvi.  43.  s.  84),  and  were  of  a  cylin-
drical form.  There  is  no  doubt  respecting  their
form,  since  they  are  often  placed  by  the  side  of
statues  dressed  in  the  toga.  The  following  wood-
cut, which  represents  an  open  capsa  with  six  rolls
of  books  in  it,  is  from  a  painting  at  Pompeii.


There  does  not  appear  to  have  been  any  dif-
ference between  the  capsa  and  the  scrinium,  except
that  the  latter  word  was  usually  applied  to  those
boxes  which  held  a  considerable  number  of  rolls
{scrinia  da  magnis.  Mart.  i.  3).  Boxes  used  for
preserving  other  things  besides  books,  were  also
called  capsae  (Plin.  //.  N.  xv.  17.  s.  18  ;  Mart.  xi.
8),  while  in  the  scrinia  nothing  appears  to  have
been  kept  but  books,  letters,  and  other  writings.


CAPUT.

The  slav(3s  who  had  the  charge  of  these  book-
chests  were  called  capsarii,  and  also  custodes  scri-
niorurn;  and  the  slaves  who  carried  in  a  capsa
behind  their  young  masters  the  books,  &c.  of
the  sons  of  respectable  Romans,  when  they  went
to  school,  were  also  called  capsarii.  ( Juv.  x.  1 1 7.)
We  accordingly  find  them  mentioned  together  with
the  paedagogi.     (Suet.  Ner.  36.)

When  the  capsa  contained  books  of  importance,
it  was  sealed  or  kept  under  lock  and  key  (Mart.  i.
67)  ;  whence  Horace  (Ep.  i.  20.  3)  says  to  his
work,  Odisti  claves^  et  grata  sigilla  pudico.  ( Becker,
GaUuSy  vol.  i.  p.  191  ;  Bottiger,  Sabina^  vol.  i.
p.  102,  &c.)

CAPSA'RII,  the  name  of  three  different  classes
of  slaves:  —  1.  Of  those  who  took  care  of  the
clothes  of  persons  while  bathing  in  the  public
baths.  [Balneae,  p.  189,]  In  later  times  they
were  subject  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  praefectus
vigilum.  (Dig.  1.  tit.  15.  s.  3.)  2.  Of  those  who
had  the  care  of  the  capsae,  in  which  books  and
letters  were  kept.  [Capsa.]  3.  Of  those  who
carried  the  books,  &c.  of  boys  to  school.  [Capsa.]

CA'PSULA.     [Capsa.]

CA'PULUS  (kwtttj,  Aag77).  1.  The  hilt  of  a
sword,  which  was  frequently  much  ornamented.
[Gladius.]  The  handles  of  knives  were  also
much  ornamented  ;  and  of  the  beautiful  work-
manship sometimes  bestowed  on  them,  a  judgment


CAPUT.


239


may  be  formed  from  the  three  specimens  here  in-
troduced. (Montfaucon,  Afit.  Expliquee,  iii.  122.
pi.  61.)

2.  A  bier  or  coffin.     [FuNUS.]

CAPUT,  the  head.  The  term  "  head  "  is  often
used  by  the  Roman  writers  as  equivalent  to  "  per-
son," or  "  human  being."  (Caes.  Bell.  Gall,  iv,  15.)
By  an  easy  transition,  it  was  used  to  signify  "  life : "
thus,  capite  damnari^  plecti,  &c.  are  equivalent  to
capital  punishment.

Caput  is  also  used  to  express  a  man's  civil  con-
dition ;  and  the  persons  who  were  registered  in  the
tables  of  the  censor  are  spoken  of  as  capita,  some-
times with  the  addition  of  the  word  civium,  and
sometimes  not.  (Liv.iii.  24,  x.  47.)  Thus  to  be
registered  in  the  census  was  the  same  thing  as
caput  habere  :  and  a  slave  and  a  filius  familias,  in
this  sense  of  the  word,  were  said  to  have  no  caput.
The  lowest  century  of  Servius  Tullius  comprised
the  proletarii  and  the  capite  censi,  of  whom  the


latter,  having  little  or  no  property,  were  barely
rated  as  so  many  head  of  citizens.  (Gell.  xvi.  10;
Cic.  De  Rep.  ii.  22.)

He  who  changed  his  condition  for  an  inferior
one  was  said  to  be  capite  minutus,  deminutus,  or
capitis  minor.  (Hor.  Car?«.  iii,  5.  42.)  The  phrase
se  capite  deminuere  was  also  applicable  in  case  of  a
voluntary  change  of  condition,  (Cic  Top.  c.  4,)
The  definition  of  Festus  (s,  v.  deminutus)  is,  "  De-
minutus  capite  appellatur  qui  civitate  mutatus  est  ;
et  ex  alia  familia  in  aliam  adoptatus,  et  qui  liber
alteri  mancipio  datus  est :  et  qui  in  hostium  potes-
tatem  venit :  et  cui  aqua  et  igni  interdictum  est."
There  has  been  some  discussion  whether  we  should
use  capitis  deminutio  or  diminutio,  but  it  is  indif-
ferent which  we  write.

There  were  three  divisions  of  Capitis  deminutio
—  Maxima,  Media,  sometimes  called  Minor,  and
Minima.  The  maxima  capitis  deminutio  consisted
in  the  loss  of  libertas  (freedom),  in  the  change  of
the  condition  of  a  free  man  (whether  ingenuus  or
libertinus)  into  that  of  a  slave.  The  media  con-
sisted in  the  change  of  the  condition  of  a  civis
into  that  of  a  peregrinus,  as,  for  instance,  in  the
case  of  deportatio  under  the  empire  ;  or  the
change  of  the  condition  of  a  civis  into  tliat  of  a
Latinus.  The  minima  consisted  in  the  change  of
the  condition  of  a  pater  familias  into  that  of  a  filius
familias,  as  by  adrogation,  and,  in  the  later  law,
by  legitimation  ;  and  in  a  wife  in  manu,  or  a
filius  familias  coming  into  mancipii  causa  ;  con-
sequently, when  a  filius  familias  was  emancipated
or  adopted,  there  was  a  capitis  deminutio,  for  both,
these  ceremonies  were  inseparably  connected  with
the  mancipii  causa  (cum  emancipari  nemo  possit
nisi  in  imaginariam  servilem  causam  deductus.
Gains,  i.  134,  162).  This  explains  how  a  filius
familias,  who  by  emancipation  becomes  sui  juris,
and  thus  improves  his  social  condition,  is  still  said
to  have  undergone  a  capitis  deminutio  ;  which  ex-
pression, as  observed,  applies  to  the  form  by  which
the  emancipation  is  effected.

Capitis  minutio,  which  is  the  same  as  deminutio,
is  defined  by  Gains  (Dig.  4.  tit.  5.  s.  1)  to  be
status  perrautatio ;  but  this  definition  is  not  suf-
ficiently exact.  That  capitis  deminutio  which  had
the  most  consequence  was  the  maxima,  of  which,
the  media  or  minor  was  a  milder  form.  The
minima,  as  already  explained,  was  of  a  technical
character.  The  maxima  capitis  deminutio  was
sustained  by  those  who  refused  to  be  registered  at
the  census,  or  neglected  the  registration,  and  were
thence  called  incensi.  The  incensus  was  liable  to
be  sold,  and  so  to  lose  his  liberty'-  ;  but  this  being
a  matter  which  concerned  citizenship  and  freedom,
such  penalty  could  not  be  inflicted  directly,  and
the  object  was  only  effected  by  the  fiction  of  the
citizen  having  himself  abjured  his  freedom.  Those
who  refused  to  perform  military  service  might  also
be  sold.  (Cic.  Fro  Caecina,  34  ;  Ulp.  Fra^.  xi.  11.)
A  Roman  citizen  who  was  taken  prisoner  by  the
enemy,  lost  his  civil  rights,  together  with  his
liberty,  but  he  might  recover  them  on  returning  to
his  countrj\  [Postliminium,]  Persons  con-
demned to  ignominious  punishments,  as  to  the
mines,  sustained  the  maxima  capitis  deminutio.  A
free  woman  who  cohabited  with  a  slave,  after
notice  given  to  her  by  the  owner  of  the  slave,  be-
came an  ancilla,  by  a  senatus-consultum,  passed  in
the  time  of  Claudius.  (Ulp.  Frag.  xi.  11  ;  com-
pare Tacit.  Ann.  xii.  53,  and  Suet.  Vesp.  11.)


240


CARCER.


A  judicium  capitale,  or  poena  capitalis,  was  one
which  affected  a  citizen's  caput.  The  subject  of
the  Capitis  deminutio  is  fully  discussed  by  Becker,
JIandbuch  der  Romischen  Altert/iumer,  vol.  ii.
p.  1 00  ;  and  by  Savigny,  System,  &c.  vol.  ii.  p.  68,
&c.  [G.  L.]

CAPUT.     [Fenus.!

CAPUT  EXTORUM.  The  Roman  sooth-
sayers {harttspices)  pretended  to  a  knowledge  of
coming  events  from  the  inspection  of  the  entrails  of
victims  slain  for  that  purpose.  The  part  to  which
they  especially  directed  their  attention  was  the
liver,  the  convex  upper  portion  of  which  seems  to
have  been  called  the  caput  eoctorum.  (Plin.  //.  N.  xi.
37.  8.  73.)  Any  disease  or  deficiency  in  this  organ
was  considered  an  unfavourable  omen  ;  whereas,
if  healthy  and  perfect,  it  was  believed  to  indicate
good  fortune.  The  haruspices  divided  it  into  two
parts,  one  called /a/nz'/mm,  the  other  hostilis :  from
the  fonner,  they  foretold  the  fate  of  friends  ;  from
the  latter,  that  of  enemies.  Thus  we  read  (Liv.
viii.  9),  that  the  head  of  the  liver  was  mutilated
by  the  knife  of  the  operator  on  the  "  familiar  "
part  {caput  jecinoris  a  familiari  parte  caesum),
which  was  ahvays  a  bad  sign.  But  the  word
"  caput  "  here  seems  of  doubtful  application  ;  for  it
may  designate  either  the  convex  upper  part  of  the
liver,  or  one  of  the  prominences  of  the  various  lobes
which  form  its  lower  and  u-regularl}'-  concave  part.
It  is,  howevei-,  more  obvious  and  natural  to  under-
stand by  it  the  upper  part,  which  is  formed  of  two
prominences,  called  the  great  and  small,  or  right
and  left  lobes.  If  no  caput  was  found,  it  was  a
bad  sign  (nihil  tristius  accidere  potuit)  ;  if  well  de-
fined or  double,  it  was  a  lucky  omen.  (Cic.  De
Div.  ii.  12,  13  ;  Liv.  xxvii.  26.)  [R.  W.]

CARACALLA  was  an  outer  garment  used  in
Gaul,  and  not  unlike  the  Roman  lacema.  [La-
CERNA.]  It  was  first  introduced  at  Rome  by  the
emperor  Aurelius  Antoninus  Bassianus,  who  com-
pelled all  the  people  who  came  to  court  to  wear  it,
Avhence  he  obtained  the  surname  of  Caracalla.
(Aurel.  Vict.  Epit.  21.)  This  garment,  as  worn
in  Gaul,  does  not  appear  to  have  reached  lower
than  the  knee,  but  Caracalla  lengthened  it  so  as  to
reach  the  ankle.  It  afterwards  became  common
among  the  Romans,  and  garments  of  this  kind
were  called  caracallae  Antonianae,  to  distinguish
them  from  the  Gallic  caracallae.  (Aurel.  Vict.  Z)e
Cues.  21  ;  Spartian.  Sev.  21,  Anton.  Car.  9.)  It
usually  had  a  hood  to  it,  and  came  to  be  worn  by
the  clergy.  Jerome  {Ep.  128)  speaks  oipulliolum
mirae  pulchrittulinis  in  modum  caracallarum  sed
absque  cucullis.

CARBATINA.    [Pero.]

CARCER  (kerker,  German  ;  yopyvpa^  Greek),
a  prison.  This  word  is  connected  with  epxos  and
fipyco,  the  guttural  being  interchanged  with  the
fispiratc.

1.  Greek. — Imprisonment  was  seldom  used
among  the  Greeks  as  a  legal  punishment  for
offences  ;  they  preferred  banishment  to  the  expense
of  keeping  prisoners  in  confinement.  We  do,  in-
deed, find  some  cases  in  which  it  was  sanctioned
by  law  ;  but  these  are  not  altogether  instances  of
its  being  used  as  a  punishment.  Thus  the  farmers
of  the  duties,  and  their  bondsmen,  were  liable  to
imprisonment  if  the  duties  were  not  paid  by  a
specified  time ;  but  the  object  of  this  was  to  pre-
vent the  escape  of  defaulters,  and  to  insure  regu-
larity of  payment    (Bockh,  Publ,  Econ.  of  Athens,


CARCER.

p.  339,  &c.)  Again,  persons  who  had  been  mulcted
in  peaalties  might  be  confined  till  they  had  paid
them.  (Dem.  c.  Mid.  p.  529.  26.)  the  &tiixoi
also,  if  they  exercised  the  rights  of  citizenship,
were  subject  to  the  same  consequences.  (Dem.
c.  Timocr.  p.  732.  17.)  Moreover,  we  read  of  a
Seo'/zc^s  for  theft ;  but  this  was  a  irpoo'TLfMrifx.a,  or
additional  penalty,  the  infliction  of  which  was  at
the  option  of  the  court  which  tried  the  case  ;  and
the  Se(TiJ.6s  itself  was  not  an  imprisonment,  but  a
public  exposure  in  the  TroSo/ca/c/CTj,  or  stocks,  for
five  days  and  nights  —  the  rh  eu  |uA.cj)  SeSeadai.
Still  the  idea  of  imprisonment  per  se,  as  a  punish-
ment, was  not  strange  to  the  Athenians.  Thus  we
find  that  Plato  (Leg.x.  p.  908)  proposes  to  have  three
prisons :  one  of  these  was  to  be  a  (T(a<ppovi(ni]piov,
or  penitentiary,  and  another  a  place  of  punishment
—  a  sort  of  penal  settlement  away  from  the  city.

The  prisons  in  different  countries  were  called  by
diflferent  names :  thus  there  was  the  'KvayKolov,
in  Boeotia  ;  the  KepafjLos.,  at  Cyprus  ;  the  KoJs,  at
Corinth  ;  and,  amongst  the  lonians,  the  yopyvpa,
as  at  Samos.  (Herod,  iii.  145;  Pollux,  ix.  45.)
The  prison  at  Athens  was  in  former  times  called
5€(riJ.(aTr)pioy,  and  afterwards,  by  a  sort  of  euphe-
mism, o^KT^fxa.  It  was  chiefly  used  as  a  guard-house,
or  place  of  execution,  and  was  under  the  charge  of
the  public  officers  called  the  eleven,  ol  eVSewa.
One  gate  in  the  prison,  through  which  the  con-
demned were  led  to  execution,  was  called  rh
Xapcouelou.  (Pollux,  viii.  103  ;  Wachsmuth,  HcU.
Alterthumsk.  vol.  ii.  pp.  141,  201,  2d  ed.)

The  Attic  expression  for  imprisonment  was  56?^'.
Thus  in  the  oath  of  the  /SouAeurai,  or  senators,
occurs  the  phrase  ouSe  Stjcw  'Adriuaiau  ovBeva.
Hence  we  have  the  phrase  ^Secr/xos  cpvXaKi]  (Thuc
iii.  34),  the  "  libera  custodia  "  of  the  Romans,  sig-
nifying that  a  party  was  under  strict  surveillance
and  guard,  though  not  confined  within  a  prison.

2.  Roman. — A  career,  or  prison,  was  first  built
at  Rome  by  Ancus  Martins,  overhanging  the
forum.  (Liv.  i.  33.)  This  was  enlarged  by
Servius  Tullius,  who  added  to  it  a  souterrain,  or
dungeon,  called  from  him  the  Tullianum.  Sallust
{Cat.  55)  describes  this  as  being  twelve  feet  under
ground,  walled  on  each  side,  and  arched  over  with
stone  worlc  For  a  long  time  this  was  the  only
prison  at  Rome  (Juv.  Sat.  iii.  312),  being,  in  fact,
the  "  Tower,"  or  state  prison  of  the  city,  which
was  sometimes  doubly  guarded  in  times  of  alann,
and  was  the  chief  object  of  attack  in  many  con-
spiracies. (Liv.  xxvi.  27,  xxxii.  26.)  Varro
(L.  L.y.  151,  ed.  Mullcr)  tells  us  that  the  Tul-
lianum was  also  named  "  Lautumiae,"  from  some
quarries  in  the  neighbourhood  ;  or,  as  others  think
in  allusion  to  the  "  Lautumiae "  of  Syracuse,  a
prison  cut  out  of  the  solid  rock.  In  later  times
the  whole  building  was  called  the  "  Mamertine.""
Close  to  it  Avere  the  Scalae  Gemoniae,  or  steps,
down  which  the  bodies  of  those  who  had  been
executed  were  thrown  into  the  Forum,  to  be  ex-
posed to  the  gaze  of  the  Roman  populace.  ( Cramer,
Ancient  Italy,  vol.  i.  p.  430.)  There  were,  how-
ever, other  prisons  besides  this,  though,  as  we
might  expect,  the  words  of  Roman  historians  gene-
rally refer  to  this  alone.  One  of  these  was  built  by
Appius  Claudius,  the  decemvir,  and  in  it  he  was
himself  put  to  death.  (.Liv.  iii.  57 ;  Plin.  //.  A'.
vii.  36.)

The  career  of  which  we  are  treating,  was  chiefly
used  as  a  place  of  confinement  for  persons  under


I


CARDO.

accusation,  till  the  time  of  trial  ;  and  also  as  a
place  of  execution,  to  which  purpose  the  Tullianura
was  specially  devoted.  Thus,  Sallust  (I.  c.)  tells
us  that  Lentulus,  an  accomplice  of  Catiline,  was
hanged  there.'  Livy  also  (xxix.  22)  speaks  of  a
conspirator  being  delegatus  in  TuUianum,  which
in  another  passage  (xxxiv.  44),  is  otherwise  ex-
pressed by  the  words  in  inferiorem  demissus  car-
cerem^  necatusque.

The  same  part  of  the  prison  was  also  called
"robur,"  if  we  may  judge  from  the  words  of
Festus  :  —  Rolmr  in  carcere  dicitur  is  hcus^  quo
praecipitatur  makficorum  penus.  This  identity  is
further  shown  by  the  use  made  of  it  ;  for  it  is
spoken  of  as  a  place  of  execution  in  the  following
passages  :  —  In  rohore  et  tenebris  exspirare  (Liv.
xxxviii.  69 ;  Sallust,  I.  c. ).  Robur  et  saocum  (sc.
Tarpeium)  minitari  (Tacit.  Ann.  iv.  29).  So  also
we  read  of  the  catenas  —  et  Italum  robur.  (Hor.
C«m.  ii.  13.  18.)  [R.W.]

CA'RCERES.     [Circus.]

CARCHE'SIUM  {Kapxh(Tiov).  1,  A  beaker
or  drinking-cup,  which  was  used  by  the  Greeks  in
verj^  early  times,  so  that  one  is  said  to  have  been
given  by  Jupiter  to  Alcmena  on  the  night  of  his
visit  to  her.  (Pherccydes,  p.  97 — 100,  ed.  Sturtz. )
It  was  slightly  contracted  in  the  middle,  and  its
two  handles  extended  from  the  top  to  the  bottom.
(Athen.  xi.  p.  474  ;  Macrob.  Sat.  v.  21.)  It  was
much  employed  in  libations  of  blood,  wine,  milk,
and  honey.  (Sappho,  Frag.  70,  ed.  Neue  ;  Virg.
Georg.  iv.  380,  Aen.  v.  77  ;  Ovid,  Met.  vii.  246 ;
Stat.  Achill.  ii.  6.)  The  annexed  woodcut  repre-
sents a  magnificent  carchesiura,  which  was  pre-
sented by  Charles  the  Simple  to  the  Abbey  of
St.  Denys.     It  was  cut  out  of  a  single  agate,  and


CARNEIA.  241

behind    the    antepagmentum    {inarmoreo    aeratus


richly  engraved  with  representations  of  bacchana-
lian subjects.  It  held  consideralily  more  than  a
pint,  and  its  handles  were  so  large  as  easily  to
admit  a  man's  hand.

2.  The  upper  part  of  the  mast  of  a  ship.
[Navis.]

CARDO  {baip6s,  (TTpocpevs,  <TTp6(()Ly^.,  yiyyXv-
IJ-os),  a  hinge,  a  pivot.  The  first  figure  in  the  an-
nexed woodcut  is  detiigned  to  show  the  general
form  of  a  door,  as  we  find  it  with  a  pivot  at  the
top  and  bottom  («,  b)  in  ancient  remains  of  stone,
marble,  wood,  and  bronze.  The  second  figure  re-
presents a  bronze  hinge  in  the  Egyptian  collection
of  the  British  Museum :  its  pivot  (i)  is  exactly
cylindrical  Under  these  is  drawn  the  threshold
of  a  temple,  or  other  large  edifice,  with  the  plan  of
the  folding  doors.  The  pivots  move  in  holes  fitted
to  receive  them  (b,  b),  each  of  which  is  in  an  angle


stridens  in  limine  cardo^  ^'^irg-  Ciris,  222 ;  Eurip.
Phoen.  114—116,  Schol.  ad  lac).

The  Greeks  and  Romans  also  used  hinges  ex-
actly like  those  now  in  common  use.  Four  Roman
hinges  of  bronze,  preserved  in  the  British  Museum,
are  here  shown.


The  fonn  of  the  door  above  delineated  makes  it
manifest  why  the  principal  line  laid  down  in  sur-
veymg  land  was  called  "  cardo  "  (Festus,  s.  v.  De-
cumanus  ;  Isid.  Orig.  xv.  14);  and  it  further  ex-
plains the  application  of  the  same  term  to  the
North  Pole,  the  supposed  pivot  on  which  the
heavens  revolved.  (Varr.  De  Re  Rust.  i.  2  ;  Ovid,
Fx  Ponio,  ii.  10.  45.)  The  lower  extremity  of
the  universe  was  conceived  to  turn  upon  another
pivot,  corresponding  to  that  at  the  bottom  of  the
door  (Cic.  De  Nat.  Deor.  ii.  41  ;  Vifruv.  vi.  1,
3x.  1)  ;  and  the  conception  of  these  two  principal
points  in  geography  and  astronomy  led  to  the  ap-
plication of  the  same  tenn  to  the  East  and  West
also.  (Lucan.  V.  71.)  Hence  our  "four  points  of
the  compass  "  are  called  by  ancient  writers  quatuor
cardines  orbis  terraj'nm,  and  the  four  principal
winds,  N.  S.  E.  and  W.,  are  the  cardinales  venti.
(Serv.  ad  Aen.  i.  85.)  [J.  Y.]

CARFNA.     [Navis.]

CARMENTA'LIA,  an  old  Roman  festival  ce-
lebrated in  honour  of  the  nymph  Carmenta  or
Carmentis,  for  an  accoimt  of  whom  see  Did.  of
Biog.  s.  V.  Camenae.  This  festival  was  celebrated
annually  on  the  11th  and  the  15th  of  January,
and  no  other  particidars  of  it  are  recorded  except
that  Carmenta  was  invoked  in  it  as  Postvorta  and
Antevorta.,  epithets  which  had  reference  to  her
power  of  looking  back  into  the  past  and  forward
into  the  future.  The  festival  was  chiefly  observed
by  women.  (Ov.  Fast.  i.  634  ;  Macrob.  Sat.  i.  7;
Gelh  xvi.  16  ;  Serv.  ad  Virg.  Aen.  ym.  339  ;  Har-
tung,  Die  Religion  der  Romer,  vol.  ii.  p.  1 99.)

CARNEIA  {Kapvi7a)^  a  great  national  festival,
celebrated  by  the  Spartans  in  honour  of  Apollo


242


CARNIFEX.


Cameios,  which,  according  to  Sosibius  (ap.  Athen.
xiv.  p.  635),  was  instituted  Olymp.  xxvi. ;  although
Apollo,  under  the  name  of  Cameios,  was  worshipped
in  various  places  of  Peloponnesus,  particularly  at
Amyclae,  at  a  very  early  period,  and  even  before
the  Dorian  migration.  (Miiller,  Dor.  i.  3.  §  8.  and
ii.  8,  §  15.)  Wachsmuth  {Hellen.  Alterthumsk.  ii,
p.  582,  2d  ed.),  referring  to  the  passage  of  Athe-
naeus,  above  quoted,  thinks  that  the  Carneia  had
long  before  been  celebrated ;  and  that  when,  in
Olymp.  xxvi.,  Therpander  gained  the  victory,
musical  contests  were  only  added  to  the  martial
solemnities  of  the  festival.  But  the  words  of
Athenaeus,  who  is  the  only  authority  to  which
Wachsmuth  refers,  do  not  allow  of  such  an  inter-
pretation, for  no  distinction  is  there  made  between
earlier  and  later  solemnities  of  the  festival,  and
Athenaeus  simply  says,  the  institution  of  the
Carneia  took  place  Olymp.  xxvi.  ('E7eVeTo  Se
7}  ^ecris  Twu  Kapuelcou  /cara  tV  '^kttjv  Kal  elKoar^v
*0\vixind5a,  as  ^o)(ri§L65  (prfffiu,  ev  rcf  irepl
XP^vwv.)  The  festival  began  on  the  seventh  day
of  the  month  of  Cameios  =  Metageitnion  of  the
Athenians,  and  lasted  for  nine  days.  (Athen.  iv.
p.  141  ;  Eustath.  ad  II.  xxiv.  sub  fin.;  Plut,  Symp.
■.•iii.  I.)  It  was,  as  far  as  we  know,  a  warlike
festival,  similar  to  the  Attic  Boedromia.  During
the  time  of  its  celebration  nine  tents  were  pitched
near  the  city,  in  each  of  which  nine  men  lived  in
the  manner  of  a  military  camp,  obeying  in  every-
thing the  commands  of  a  herald.  Miiller  also  sup-
poses that  a  boat  was  carried  round,  and  upon  it
a  statue  of  the  Cameian  Apollo  (^AirSXhwu  cr^fx-
uarias\  both  adorned  with  lustratory  garlands,
called  h'lKfiKou  (TTeiJ.ixaTiaiov,  in  allusion  to  the
passage  of  the  Dorians  from  Naupactus  into  Pelo-
ponnesus. (Dorians,  i.  3.  §  8.  note  s.)  The  priest
conducting  the  sacrifices  at  the  Cameia,  was  called
'A7TjTi^s,  whence  the  festival  was  sometimes  de-
signated by  the  name  'AyrjTSpia  or  'AyrjrSpeiov
(Hesych.  s.  v.  'AyrjTSpeiov) ;  and  from  each  of  the
Spartan  tribes  five  unmarried  men  (Kapvedrai)
were  chosen  as  his  ministers,  whose  office  lasted
four  years,  during  which  period  they  were  not  al-
lowed to  marry.  (Hesych.  s.  v.  Kapvedrai.)  Some
of  them  bore  the  name  of  lS,Ta(pv\odp6iJ.oi.  (Hesych.
s.  V.  ;  compare  Bekker,  Anecd.  p.  205.)  Ther-
jrnnder  was  the  first  who  gained  the  prize  in  the
musical  contests  of  the  Carneia,  and  the  musicians
of  his  school  were  long  distinguished  competitors
for  the  prize  at  this  festival  (Miiller,  Dor.  iv.  6.
§  3),  and  the  last  of  this  school  who  engaged  in
the  contest  was  Pericleidas.  (Plut.  De  Mus.  6.)
When  we  read  in  Herodotus  (vi.  106,  vii.  206)
and  Thucydides  (v.  54,  and  in  other  places)  that
the  Spartans  during  the  celebration  of  this  festival
were  not  allowed  to  take  the  field  against  an
enemy,  we  must  remember  that  this  restriction  was
not  peculiar  to  the  Cameia,  but  common  to  all  the
great  festivals  of  the  Greeks:  traces  of  it  are  found
even  in  Homer.     {Od.  xxi.  258,  &c.)

Cameia  were  also  celebrated  at  Cyrene  (Calli-
mach.  Hymn,  in  Apoll.  72.  seq.),  in  Thera  (Calli-
mach.  I.  c.  ;  Pindar,  Pyth.  v.  99.  seq.),  in  Gythion,
Messene,  Sicyon,  and  Sybaris  (Paus.  iii.  21.  §  7,
and  24.  §  5,  iv.  33.  §  5,  ii.  10.  §  2 ;  Theocrit  v.  83;
compare  Miiller's  Orchom.  p.  327).  [L.  S.]

CA'RNIFEX,  the  public  executioner  at  Rome,
who  put  slaves  and  foreigners  to  death  (Plant.
Bacch.  iv.  4.  37  ;  Copt.  v.  4.  22),  but  no  citizens,
who   were  punished  in  a  manner  different  from


CARPENTUM.

slaves.  It  was  also  his  business  to  administer  the
torture.  This  office  was  considered  so  disgraceful,
that  he  was  not  allowed  to  reside  within  the  city
(Cic  Pro  Rabir.  5),  but  he  lived  without  the  Porta
Metia  or  Esquilina  (Plant.  Psevd.  i.  3.  98),  near
the  place  destined  for  the  punishment  of  slaves
(Plant.  Cas.  ii,  6.  2 ;  Tacit.  Ann.  xv.  60 ;  Hor.
Epod.  V.  99),  called  Sestertium  under  the  emperors.
(Plut.  Galb.  20.)

It  is  thought  by  some  writers,  from  a  passage
in  Plautus  {Rud.  iii.  6.  19),  that  the  camifex  was
anciently  keeper  of  the  prison  under  the  triumviri
capitales ;  but  there  does  not  appear  sufficient
authority  for  this  opinion.  (Lipsius,  Excurs.  ad
Tacit.  Ann.  ii.  32.)

CARPENTUM,  is  one  of  the  eariiest  kind  of
Roman  carriages,  of  which  we  find  mention.  (Liv.
i.  34.)  It  was  the  carriage  in  which  Roman  matrons
were  allowed  to  be  conveyed  in  the  public  festal  pro-
cessions (Liv.  V.  25  ;  Isid.  Orig.  xx.  12)  ;  and  that
this  was  a  considerable  privilege  is  evident  from
the  fact,  that  the  use  of  carriages  in  the  city  was
entirely  forbidden  during  the  whole  of  the  republic.
The  privilege  of  riding  in  a  carpentum  in  the  public
festivals,  was  sometimes  granted  as  a  special  pri-
vilege to  females  of  the  imperial  family.  (Dion
Cass.  Ix.  22,  33;  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  42.)  The  form
of  this  carriage  is  seen  in  the  following  medal
strack  in  honour  of  the  elder  Agrippina  after  her
death.


The  carpentum  was  also  used  by  private  persons
for  journeys  ;  and  it  was  likewise  a  kind  of  state
carriage,  richly  adomed  and  omamented.  (Prop.  iv.
8.  23  ;  Juv.  viii.  147,  ix.  132.)

This  carriage  contained  seats  for  two,  and  some-
times for  three  persons,  besides  the  coachman.  (Liv.
i.  34  ;  Medals.)  It  was  commonly  drawn  by  a  pair
of  mules  {carpentum  mulare,  Lamprid.  Heliog.  4)  ;
but  more  rarely  by  oxen  or  horses,  and  sometimes
by  four  horses  like  a  quadriga.  For  grand  occa-
sions it  was  very  richly  adomed.  Agrippina's
carriage,  as  above  represented,  shows  painting  or
carving  on  the  panels,  and  the  head  is  supported
by  Caryatides  at  the  four  corners.

When  Caligula  instituted  games  and  other  so-
lemnities in  honour  of  his  deceased  mother  Agrip-
pina, her  carpentum  went  in  the  procession.  (Suet.
Calig.  15.)  This  practice,  so  similar  to  ours  of
sending  carriages  to  a  funeral,  is  evidently  alluded
to  in  the  alto-rilievo  here  represented,  which  is
preserved  in  the  British  Museum.  It  has  been
taken  from  a  sarcophagus,  and  exhibits  a  close
carpentum  drawn  by  four  horses.  Mercury,  the
conductor  of  ghosts  to  Hades,  appears  on  the  front,
and  Castor  and  Pollux  with  their  horses  on  the
side  panel.

Carpenta,  or  covered  carts,  were  much  used  by


CARRUCA.

the  Britons,  the  Gauls,  tlie  Cimbri,  the  AUobroges,
and  other  northern  nations.     (Florus,  i.  18,  iii.  2,


GARY  Airs.


243


3,  and  10.)  These,  together  with  the  carts  of  the
more  common  form,  including  baggage-waggons,
appear  to  have  been  comprehended  under  the  term
carri^  or  carra,  which  is  the  Celtic  name  with  a
Latin  termination.  The  Gauls  and  Helvetii
took  a  great  multitude  of  them  on  their  military
expeditions  ;  and,  when  they  were  encamped,  ar-
ranged them  in  close  order,  so  as  to  form  extensive
lines  of  circumvallation.  (Caes.  Bell.  Gail.  i.  24,
26.)  [J.  Y.]

CARPOU  DIKE'  (/capTToD  Si'ktj),  a  civil  action
under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  thesmothetae,  might
be  instituted  against  a  farmer  for  default  in  pay-
ment of  rent.  (Meier,  Alt.  Proc.  p.  531.)  It  was
also  adopted  to  enforce  a  judicial  award  when  the
unsuccessful  litigant  refused  to  surrender  the  land
to  his  opponent  (Hudtwalcker,  p.  144  ;  Meier,  Alt.
Proc.  p.  750),  and  might  be  used  to  determine  the
right  to  land  (Harpocrat.  s.  «.,  and  Ovmas  AIkt]),
as  the  judgment  would  determine  whether  the
plaintiff  could  claim  rent  of  the  defendant.  [J.  S.  M.]

CARRA'GO,  a  kind  of  fortification,  consisting
of  a  great  number  of  waggons  placed  round  an
army.  It  was  employed  by  barbarous  nations,  as,
for  instance,  the  Scythians  (Trebell.  Poll,  Gallien.
13),  Gauls  [Carpkntum],  and  Goths  (Amm.
Marc.  xxxi.  20).     Compare  Veget.  iii.  10.

Carrago  also  signifies  sometimes  the  baggage  of
an  army.  (Trebell.  Poll.  Claud.  8  ;  Vopisc,  Aure-
Uan.  11.)

CARRU'CA,  a  carriage,  the  name  of  which
only  occurs  under  the  emperors.  It  appears  to
have  been  a  species  of  rheda  [Rheda],  whence
Martial  in  one  epigram  (iii,  47)  uses  the  words  as
synonymous.  It  had  four  wheels,  and  was  used
in  travelling.  Nero  is  said  never  to  have  travelled
with  less  than  1000  carnicae.  (Suet.  Ner.  30.)
These  carriages  were  sometimes  used  in  Rome  by
persons  of  distinction,  like  the  carpenta  [Car-
pentum],  in  which  case  they  appear  to  have  been
covered  with  plates  of  bronze,  silver,  and  even  gold,
which  were  sometimes  ornamented  with  embossed
work.  Alexander  Severus  allowed  senators  at
Rome  to  use  carrucae  and  rhedae  plated  with  silver
(Lamprid.  Alex.  Sev.  43)  ;  and  Martial  (iii.  72)
speaks  of  an  aurea  carruca  which  cost  the  value
of  a  farm.  We  have  no  representations  of  carriages
in  ancient  works  of  art  which  can  be  safely  said  to
be  carrucae  ;  but  we  have  several  representations
of  carriages  ornamented  with  plates  of  metal.  (See
Inghirami,  Monuni.  Etrusch.  iii.  18.  23  ;  Millingen,
lined.  Mon.  ii.  14.)  Carrucae  were  also  used  for
carrying  women,  and  were  then,  as  well,  perhaps,
as  in  other  cases,  drawn  by  mules  (Dig.  34.   tit.  2.


s.  13)  ;  whence  Ulpian  (Dig.  21.  tit.  1.  s.  38.  §  8)
speaks  of  midae  carrucariae.

CARRUS.     [Carpentum.]

CA'RYA  or  CARYA'TIS  (/capita,  Kapvaris),
a  festival  celebrated  at  Caryae,  in  Laconia,  in
honoiu- of  Artemis  Carj'atis.  (Hesych.  s.u.  Kapvai.)
It  was  celebrated  every  year  by  Lacedaemonian
maidens  (Ka/Juari'Ses)  with  national  dances  of  a
very  lively  kind  (Paus.iii.  10.  §  8  ;  iv.  16.  §5  ;  Pol-
lux, iv.  104),  and  with  solemn  hymns.     [L.  S.]

CARYATIS  {Kapvaris),  pi.  CARYATIDES.
From  the  notices  and  testimonies  of  ancient  au-
thors, we  may  gather  the  following  account : — That
Caryae  was  a  city  in  Arcadia,  near  the  Laconian
border  ;  that  its  inhabitants  joined  the  Persians
after  the  battle  of  Thermopylae  (Herod,  viii.  26  ;
Vitruv.  i.  1,  §  5) ;  that  on  the  defeat  of  the  Persians
the  allied  Greeks  destroyed  the  town,  slew  the
men,  and  led  the  women  into  captivity  ;  and  that,
as  male  figures  representing  Persians  were  after-
wards employed  with  an  historical  reference  instead
of  columns  in  architecture  [Atlantes  ;  Persae],
so  Praxiteles  and  other  Athenian  artists  employed
female  figures  for  the  same  purpose,  intending
them  to  express  «the  garb,  and  to  commemorate  the
disgrace  of  the  Caryatides,  or  women  of  Carvae.
(Vitruv.  I.  c.  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvi.  45  and  11.)
Figures  of  Caryatides  are  exceedmgly  common  in
the  remains  of  ancient  architecture.  The  following
specimen  is  taken  from  MUUer's  Denkm'dler  der
alien  Kunst.


After  the  subjugation  of  the  Caryatae,  their
territory  became  part  of  Laconia.  The  fortress
(Xt^pLou,  Steph.  Byz.)  had  beon  consecrated  to
Artemis  (Diana  Caryatis.,  Serv.  in  Virg.  Ed.  viii.
30),  whose  image  was  in  the  open  air,  and  at  whose
annual  festival  (Kapvaris  ioprr},  Hesych.)  the  La-
conian virgins  continued,  as  b  afore,  to  perform  a
dance  of  a  peculiar  kind,  the  execution  of  which
was  called  KapuariCeiu.  (Paus.  iii.  10.  §  8  ;  iv.  16.
§  5  ;  Lucian,  De  Salt.)  [J.  Y.]

i{  2


244


CASTRA.


CASSIS.     [Galea  ;  Rete.]

CASTELLUM  AQUAE.     [Aquaeductus.]

CASTRA.  It  is  well  known  that  Roman
armies  never  halted  for  a  single  night  without
forming  a  regular  entrenchment,  termed  castra,
capable  of  receiving  within  its  limits  the  whole
body  of  fighting  men,  their  beasts  of  burden,  and
the  baggage.  So  essential  was  this  operation  con-
sidered, that  even  when  preparing  for  an  immediate
engagement,  or  when  actually  assailed  by  a  hostile
force,  it  was  never  omitted,  but  a  portion  of  the
soldiers  were  employed  in  constructing  the  neces-
sary works,  while  the  remainder  were  standing  to
their  arms  or  resisting  the  enemy :  and  so  com-
pletely was  it  recognised  as  a  part  of  the  ordinary
duties  of  each  march,  that  pei-venire  ad  locum  ter-
tiis  .  .  .  qttartis  .  .  .  sejytuagesimis  castris  are  the
established  phrases  for  expressing  the  number  of
days  occupied  in  passing  from  one  point  to  another.
Whenever  circumstances  rendered  it  expedient  for
a  force  to  occupy  the  same  ground  for  any  length
of  time,  then  the  encampment  was  distinguished
as  castra  stativa.  (Liv.  xxvii.  12  ;  Caes.  B.  G.
viii.  15,  B.  a  i.  42  ;  Hirt.  B.  A/.  51,  B.  Al.  74.)

When  the  protracted  and  distant  wars  in  which
the  republic  became  engaged,  as  its  sway  was
gradually  extended  first  over  the  whole  of  Italy,
and  subsequently  over  Greece,  Asia,  and  Africa,
rendered  it  impossible  for  the  legions  to  return
liome  in  winter,  they  usually  retired  during  the
months  when  active  military  operations  were  sus-
pended, into  some  city  where  they  could  be  pro-
tected from  the  inclemency  of  the  season,  and
where  the  comforts  of  the  men  could  be  readily
secured  ;  or  they  were  dispersed  up  and  down  in
detachments  among  friendly  villages  (in  hiberna
concedere ;  exerdtum  in  hiberna  dimittere ;  exer-
cihim  per  dvitates  in  hiberna  dividere).  It  is  true
that  extraordinary  emergencies,  such  as  a  protracted
blockade,  or  the  necessity  of  maintaining  a  constant
watch  upon  the  movements  of  a  neighbouring  and
vigorous  foe,  might  compel  a  commander  to  keep
the  field  for  a  whole  year  or  even  longer,  but  to
order  an  army,  except  in  case  of  necessity,  to  winter
under  canvass  (hiemare  sub  pellibus ;  hiemem  sub
tentoriis  exigere)  was  long  regarded  as  a  severe
punishment,  inflicted  only  in  consequence  of  grievous
misconduct.  (Frontin.  Strat  iv.  1.  §  24.)  As
the  boundaries  of  the  empire  were  gradually  pushed
forward  into  wild  and  barbarian  lands,  where  there
were  no  large  towns  and  no  tribes  on  whose  faith
reliance  could  be  placed,  such  arrangements  became
impracticable,  and  armies,  whether  of  invasion  or
occupation,  were  forced  to  remain  constantly  in
camps.  They  usually,  however,  occupied  different
groimd  in  summer  and  in  winter,  whence  arose  the
distinction  between  castra  aestiva  and  castra  hi-
berna^ both  alike  being  stativa.  Such  posts  were
frequently,  if  situated  advantageously,  garrisoned
permanently  ;  and  the  peaceful  natives  who  sought
to  enrich  themselves  by  trading  with  their  con-
querors, settled  for  security  in  the  immediate  vi-
cinity. (Caes.  B.  G.  vi.  37.)  Thus  in  the  distant
provinces,  these  forts  formed  a  centre  round  which
a  numerous  population  gradually  clustered  ;  and
many  important  towns,  still  existing  in  our  own
country,  indicate  their  origin  by  the  termination


But  whether  a  camp  was  temporary  or  perma-
nent, whether  tenanted  in  summer  or  in  winter,
the  main  featiu-es  of  the  work  were  always  the


CASTRA.
same  for  the  same  epoch.  In  hiberna,  huts  of
turf  or  stone  would  be  substituted  for  the  open
tents  of  the  aestiva  (hence  aedijicare  Ubema\  and
in  stativa  held  for  long  periods  the  defences  would
present  a  more  substantial  and  finished  aspect,  but
the  general  outline  and  disposition  of  the  parts
were  invariable  :  a  camp  was  laid  down,  arranged
and  fortified  according  to  a  fixed  and  well-known
plan,  modified  only  by  the  numbers  for  whom  it
was  required  to  provide  accommodation,  but  alto-
gether independent  of  the  nature  of  the  ground  or
of  the  fancy  of  the  general,  so  that  each  battalion,
each  company,  and  each  individual,  had  a  place
assigned  to  which  thej^  could  at  once  repair  without
order,  question,  delay,  or  conftision.

At  what  period  the  practice  of  throwing  up
elaborate  field-works  for  the  protection  of  an  army
engaged  in  active  service  was  first  commenced  by
the  Romans,  it  is  impossible  to  determine  ;  but  we
may  safely  conclude  that,  like  all  other  parts  of
their  military  tactics,  it  was  matured  by  a  slow  and
gradual  process.  Livy  and  Dionysius,  indeed,
would  lead  us  to  suppose  that  regular  camps  existed
from  the  most  remote  epoch  to  which  their  annals
extend  ;  but  the  language  of  these  historians  is  in
general  so  loose  upon  all  matters  of  antiquarian  re-
search, and  they  are  so  much  in  the  habit  of  trans-
ferring to  the  earliest  ages  the  usages  of  their  own
contemporaries,  that  no  safe  inference  regarding
points  of  this  nature  can  be  drawn  from  their  words.
Frontinus,  on  the  other  hand,  declares  that  the
idea  of  a  fortified  enclosure,  calculated  to  contain  a
whole  army,  was  first  suggested  to  the  Romans  by
the  camp  of  Pyrrhus,  which  they  captmred  near
Beneventum  ;  but  the  statements  of  this  author
have  never  been  deemed  to  possess  much  weight,
and  in  this  particular  instance  many  considerations
preclude  us  from  admitting  his  testimony  as  credible.
It  is  evident,  however,  from  the  facts  detailed  in
the  article  Exercitus  that  a  camp,  such  as  the
earliest  of  those  of  which  we  possess  any  detailed
accoimt,  could  not  have  assiuned  that  shape  until
the  tactics  of  the  phalanx  were  superseded  by  the
manipular  divisions  ;  and  it  maybe  held  as  certain
that  each  of  the  great  wars  in  which  the  Common-
wealth was  successively  engaged  for  more  than  a
century — with  the  Samnites,  with  P\Trhus,  with  the
Cisalpine  Gauls,  and  with  the  Carthaginians,  must
have  led  to  a  series  of  improvements.  The  system
was  probably  brought  to  perfection  in  the  cam-
paigns against  Hannibal,  and  underwent  no  ma-
terial alteration  until  the  organic  changes  in  the
constitution  of  the  army,  which  took  place  not  long
before  the  downfal  of  the  constitution,  during  the
civil  broils,  and  under  the  earlier  emperors,  rendered
a  corresponding  change  in  the  internal  economy  of
the  camp  unavoidable.  Hence,  although  it  would
be  at  once  vain  and  unprofitable  to  attempt  an  in-
vestigation of  the  various  changes  through  which  a
Roman  camp  passed  before  it  assximed  what  may
be  called  its  normal  shape,  it  is  evidently  absolutely
necessary  for  all  who  desire  to  obtain  even  a  slight
knowledge  of  the  Roman  art  of  war,  to  make  them-
selves acquainted  with  this  important  feature  in
their  system  during  the  best  days  of  the  republic
and  the  empire.  And  fortunately  the  records  of
antiquity  enable  us  to  supply  such  information  with
considerable  minuteness.  Polybius,  the  friend  and
companion  of  the  younger  Scipio,  has  transmitted
to  us  a  description  of  a  Roman  camp,  such  as  he
must  have  often  seen  with  his  ovvu  eyes,  and  a  cer-


CASTRA.

tain  Hyginus,  a  gromaticus  or  land  surveyor,  who
flourished  under  Trajan  and  Hadrian,  has  left  us  a
technical  memoir  on  the  art  of  castrametation  as
practised  in  his  own  day.  To  these  some  might
feel  inclined  to  add  the  remarks  of  Vegetius,  who
lived  during  the  reign  of  Valentinian,  but  for
reasons  which  are  stated  elsewhere  [Exercitus]
it  will  be  more  safe  to  neglect  him  altogether.

We  shall  proceed  to  describe  these  two  camps
in  succession,  it  being  understood  that  the  leading
statements  with  regard  to  the  first  are  taken  di-


C  ASTRA.


24i


rectly  from  Polybius,  and  those  with  regard  to  the
second,  from  Hyginus,  unless  when  the  contrary  Ls
distinctly  indicated.  But  while  we  endeavour  to
explain  clearly  all  the  parts  of  the  camps  themselves,
we  must  refer  to  the  article  Exercitus  for  every-
thing that  concerns  the  different  kinds  of  troops,
their  divisions,  their  discipline,  and  their  officers.

I.  Camp  op  Polybius.

The   camp  described  by  Polybius  is  such  as
would  be  formed  at  the  close  of  an  ordinary  day's


(Fij

A

A

1

20

Qo

o

K2

Ki>A

teKi

KS

11

BIO

El

Id

D4

H2

Ds             M        ~Dz.    -A!s  Dz

D6

D7

Hi

[)0

T-|_

r

Di

3o

^

D^

~i

r

Bi

Co

C4

C

5                                 C3     A

2     C2                                 C

6                              C

7

(tx

Eo

z

Es

E5                                        I
^V       T       SRQ       P

P'     O'KS*     T*    "V^

E5

Z

El

Fo

A

6

rx"

A

6

A

7

A

8

A

9

A

.0

A

1

A

2

A

a

A

U

A

5

^0

A

IS

(5x,

z

■  A

7

Z/

Ao


246


CASTRA.


march  by  a  regular  consular  army  consisting  of  two
Roman  legions  with  the  full  contingent  of  Socii.
Each  legion  is  calculated  at  4200  infantry  and  300
cavalry,  the  Socii  furnished  an  equal  numl)er  of
infantry  and  twice  as  many  cavalry,  so  that  the
whole  force  would  amount  to  1 6,800  foot  and  1800
horse,

Clioice  of  the  Ground.  —  Although,  as  stated
ahove,  the  general  outline,  the  defences,  and  the
internal  economy  of  a  camp  were  altogether  inde-
pendent of  the  nature  of  the  ground,  yet  great
importance  was  attached  to  the  choice  of  a  fitting
situation  which  should  admit  of  being  readih'  laid
out  in  the  required  form,  which  should  afford  no
facilities  for  attack  or  annoyance,  which  should  be
convenient  for  procuring  wood,  water,  and  forage,
and  which  the  army  might  enter  and  quit  without
danger  of  surprise.  Skill  in  the  selection  of  such
a  spot  (capere  locum  castris)  was  ever  considered  as
a  high  quality  in  a  general,  and  we  find  it  recorded
among  the  praises  of  the  most  renowned  com-
manders that  they  were  wont  in  person  to  perform
this  duty  {e.g.  Liv.  ix.  17,  xxxv.  14,  28  ;  Tacit.
Hist.  ii.  5,  Agric.  20  ;  comp.  Quintil.  /.  O.  xii.  3.
§  5).  Under  ordinary  circumstances,  however,  the
task  was  devolved  upon  one  of  the  military  tribunes,
and  a  certain  number  of  centurions  appointed  from
time  to  time  for  the  purpose.  These  having  gone
forward  in  advance  of  the  army  until  they  reached
the  place  near  which  it  was  intended  to  halt,  and
having  taken  a  general  survey  of  the  ground,  se-
lected a  spot  from  whence  a  good  view  of  the  whole
proposed  area  might  be  obtained,  that  spot  being
considerably  within  the  limits  of  the  contemplated
enclosure.

Construction.  —  The  spot  answering  these  con-
ditions and  which  we  shall  call  A  (fig.  1.)  was
marked  by  a  small  white  flag.  The  next  object
was  to  ascertain  in  what  direction  water  and  fodder
might  be  most  easily  and  securely  provided  —
this  direction  we  indicate  by  the  arrow  in  the  sub-
joined figure.  Upon  the  position  of  A  and  the
direction  of  the  arrow  depended  the  disposition  of
all  the  other  parts  of  the  work  ;  for  these  two  pre-
liminary points  being  decided,  the  business  of  mea-
suring out  the  ground  (metari  castrd)  commenced,
and  was  executed,  as  we  learn  from  various  sources,
with  graduated  rods  {decempedae)  by  persons  de-
nominated metatores.  The  different  steps  of  the
process  may  be  most  briefly  and  distinctly  set
down  in  the  ordinary  language  of  a  geometrical
construction.

Through  A  draw  a  straight  line  Aq  A^,  parallel
to  the  direction  of  the  arrow,  a  straight  line  Bq  B^
at  right  angles  to  A^  A^.  These  two  straight
lines  Aq  Aj,  and  Bq  Bj,  served  as  the  bases  by
which  the  position  of  all  the  different  divisions  of
the  camp  were  determined.

Along  A  Aq  set  off  AA2  =  100  feet;  A^  A^
=  50  feet;  A^  A^  ;  A^A^;  A^  A,  ;  A,  A,  ;
Ag  Ag;  Ag  Aioeach=i00feet;  A^o  Aii  =  50
feet;  A„  Ajo  ;  A^,  Ai3;  Ai3  A,^;  A,^  Ai5;
A,5  Aje  each  =  100  feet;  A^g  Aj7  =  200  feet.

Along  A  Aj  set  off  A  A3  ;  A3  A^  g,  each=  100
feet;  A,  8  Ai  9=  167  feet;  A,  9  A2o=200  feet.

Through  A,  ;  A^  ;  A^  ;  A^  ;  A, ,  ;  Aj  ^  ;  A,  9  ;
A.odrawCoC, ;  D^D,  ;£„£,;  Y^Y,  ;  GoG,  ;
HqHi  ;  KqK,  ;  LqLi  straight  lines  parallel  to
Bo  B^,  and  in  like  manner  draw  through  A^;  A,;
.  .  .  .  A,g  straight  lines  parallel  to  Bg  Bj,  as
marked  in  the  figure.


CASTRA.

On  Bq  Bj  make  A  B^  ;  A  B3  each=100  feet.

Through  B.^  and  B3  draw  straight  lines  parallel  to
Aq  Aj  cutting  CoCi  in  C,  and  C3,  and  cutting
Dg  D,  in  D^  and  Dy  ;  in  this  manner  a  square
area  C^  C3  D^  D^  is  determined,  each  side  of
which  =  200  feet.

Along  A5  Fq  set  off  A^  P  =  25  feet ;  'P  Q  =
100  feet;  Q  R  =  50  feet ;  R  S  =  50  feet ;  S  T
=  100  feet ;  T  V  =  100  feet ;  V  W  =  50  feet  ;
W  X  =  133^ feet ;  X  Y=  200  feet ;  Y  Z  =  200
feet.

Along  A5  Fj  set  off  A5  P' ;  P'  Q' ;  Q'  R'

Y'  Z',  equal  respectively  to  A.  P  ;  P  Q  ;  OR;
. . .  .  Y  Z.

Through  Z  Z'  draw  straight  lines  parallel  to
Aq  Aj,  cutting  Gq  Gj  in  z  and  z',  and  cutting  Lg
Lj  in  0  and  0'.  The  square  area  0  0'  z'  z  thus
determined  was  the  camp.

Again,  through  P  ;  Q  ;  R . , .  .  Y,  and  through
P' ;  Q' ;  R' .  .  .  .  Y'  draw  straight  lines  parallel  to
Aq  Aj,  cutting  the  parallels  to  Bq  Bj  in  the  points
marked  in  the  figure.

Finally,  on  Hq  Hj  lay  off  Aj  g  H3  and  A^  g  H^
each  :=  25  feet,  and  through  Hg  ;  H^  ;  draw
straight  lines  parallel  to  Aq  A^,  cutting  Kg  K^  in
K3  and  K^.

This  construction  being  completed  we  now  pro-
ceed to  explain  the  arrangement  of  the  different
parts  referring  to  figure  2,  in  which  the  lines  no
longer  necessary  are  obliterated,  the  spaces  occu-
pied by  the  troops  or  ofiicers  enclosed  by  dark
lines,  and  the  streets  (viae)  distinctly  laid  down.
In  practice  the  most  important  points  were  marked
by  white  poles,  some  of  which  bore  flags  of  various
colours,  so  that  the  different  battalions  on  reaching
the  ground  could  at  once  discover  the  place  as-
signed to  them.

The  white  flag  A,  which  served  as  the  starting
point  of  the  whole  constniction,  marked  the  position
of  the  consul's  tent,  or  praetorium^  so  called  because
praetor  was  the  ancient  term  for  any  one  invested
with  supreme  command.  The  square  area  C2  D3
was  left  open  extending,  as  we  have  seen,  a  hun-
dred feet  each  way  from  the  praetorium.  That
portion  of  the  camp  which  lay  in  the  direction  of
the  arrow  {irphs  r^v  eKrhs  iivKpdueiav)  from  the
line  Eg  E^  (fig.  1)  was  termed  the  front  or  fore-
part of  the  camp   (toD    iravrhs   irx^l^aTOS  Karh

1Tp6(T(aTT0V).

The  number  of  legions  being  two  and  the  num-
ber of  tribunes  in  each  being  six,  their  tents  were
arranged  six  and  six  at  equal  distances  along  the
line  Eq  Ej  (fig.  1)  exactly  opposite  to  and  looking
towards  the  legions  to  which  they  belonged.  Hence,
as  will  be  seen  from  what  follows,  they  did  not
extend  beyond  the  points  E3  and  E^,  but  whether
they  were  distributed  at  equal  distances  along  the
whole  of  the  line  E3  E^^,  or  whether  the  space  in
front  of  the  praetorium  was  left  vacant,  as  in  our
figiu-e,  as  seems  most  probable,  may  admit  of  doubt.
The  space  of  fifty  feet  included  between  the  pa-
rallels Cq  Cj  and  E^  Ej  (fig.  1 ),  immediately  be-
hind the  tents  of  the  tribunes,  was  appropriated
to  their  horses,  beasts  of  burden  and  baggage.

The  ten  areas  marked  1  were  set  apart  for  the
cavalry  of  one  legion,  and  the  corresponding  ten
areas  marked  1'  for  the  cavalry  of  the  other  legion.
These  all  faced  towards  the  street  P  P',  and  each
area,  containing  a  space  of  10,000  square  feet,
was  allotted  to  one  turma  or  troop  of  30  dragoons^
with  their  horses  and  baggage.


CASTRA.


CASTRA.


247


(Fig.  2.)

2017


A20


PORTA  PRAETORIA


Ka


50


312

P4t —


o  ils  H*


14'

"•

:;    C


J>S


.7


Cs


D6


C6


10'

12'

9'

11'

Ks


p7


C7


E2-


T*


PRiNCIPIA  "  o  g  ^"^  PRINCIPIA

"T 3C    ^w^  -y"    T     s  r_qJ1p  p'    q'  h'  s'     t'    V  ^sr'    x:  "y


ISS/s


50

100

2

18

2

l§

2

^§

a

^^i

100

50

2'

2"

2*

2'

2'

■loo
&'

lOO

4'

3'

4"

&'

4

a'

4.*

5'

4"

035^6
5'


©n


VIAQUINTANA


VIA  QUINTANA


6  5

e  5

6  5

e  s

G  e


4>  3

*  3

4  5

-a-  3

4-  S


1     ^^
3       1  o


r  2

1'  2

l'  2

l'  2

1'  2


5'  4<

3'  4;

3'  4

3'  *

3'  *


PORTA  DECUMANA

a  03  7


Back  to  back  with  the  cavalry,  and  looking  out
upon  the  streets  R  S,  R'  S',  the  Triarii  of  the
two  legions  were  quartered  in  the  areas  2  and  2'.
Each  area  contained  5000  square  feet,  and  was
allotted  to  a  maniple  of  60  men  ;  hence,  according
to  the  calculation  here  followed,  a  dragoon  and
his  horse  were  allowed  as  much  space  as  4  foot
soldiers.

In  the  areas  marked  3  and  3'  facing  the  Triarii
were  quartered  the  principes  of  the  two  legions  ;
each  of  these  areas  contained  10,000  square  feet,
and  was  allotted  to  a  maniple  of  two  centuries,
that  is,  120  men.

In  the  areas  marked  4  and  4',  back  to  back
with  the  principes,  and  looking  out  upon  the
streets  V  W,  V  W,  were  quartered  the  Hastati
of  the  two  legions,  the  number  of  men  being  the
same  as  in  the  Principes,  and  an  equal  space  being
assigned  to  them.

Facing  the  legionary  Kastati,  in  the  areas
marked  5  and  5',  were  the  cavalry  of  the  allies.


The  total  number  was  600  to  each  legion,  but  of
these  ^  or  200  were  separated  under  the  name  of
eoctraordinarii^  and  quartered  in  a  different  part  of
the  camp.  Consequently,  each  of  the  spaces  5  and
5'  was  calculated  to  accommodate  40  dragoons  with''
their  horses  ;  and  allowing  them  the  same  space
as  the  legionary  cavalry,  each  of  these  areas  must
have  contained  somewhat  more  than  13,333  square
feet.

Back  to  back  with  the  cavalry  of  the  allies,  and
looking  towards  the  rampart  which  enclosed  the
camp,  the  infantry  of  the  allies  were  quartered  in
the  areas  marked  6  and  6'.  The  total  number
was  3000  for  each  legion,  but  of  these  \  or  600
were  separated  as  extraordinarii  and  quartered  in
a  different  part  of  the  camp.  Hence  there  would
remain  2400,  or  240  for  each  of  the  spaces  6  and  6',
and  these  accordingly  contained  20,000  square
feet.

The  open  space  immediately  behind  the  tents
and  baggage  of  the  tribunes,  extending  to  the  right
R  4


248


CASTRA.


and  left  of  the  space  allotted  to  the  general,  was  as-
signed on  one  side  to  a  forum,  and  on  the  other,  to
the  quaestor  and  his  department  (tw  re  rajxia^  koX
Tois  a/uLa  tovtw  xopvy'^^^^)-  These  are  marked  7
and  8,  but  we  are  not  told  on  which  side  they  re-
speciively  stood.

Still  further  to  the  right  and  left  of  the  praeto-
rium  in  9,  10,  and  9',  10',  looking  respectively  to-
wards the  forum  and  the  quaestorium,  were  a
body  of  cavalrj',  selected  from  the  extraordinarii
equites  {ot  ra>u  i-TriXeKTwu  l-mretav  airoXeKTOi),  and
a  body  of  cavalry  serving  as  volunteers  out  of  com-
pliment to  the  general  (kuI  rives  ruu  ideXovrridhv
(TTpaTevofieuwu  rrj  rwv  imdTwv  xap'T'),  analogous,
probably,  to  the  Evocati  of  later  times.  Back  to
back  with  these,  looking  towards  the  rampart,  in
11,  12  and  11'  12',  were  quartered  the  foot-soldiers
belonging  to  the  same  classes  as  the  cavalry  just
named.  On  the  march,  these  troops  were  always
near  the  person  of  the  consul  and  of  the  quaestor,
and  served  as  a  sort  of  body-guard  to  tham.  Their
number  is  nowhere  specified,  and  hence  the  exact
space  required  for  their  accommodation  cannot  be
determined.

In  13  and  13',  looking  towards  the  quaestorium,
praetorium,  and  forum,  were  quartered  the  re-
mainder of  the  extraordinarii  equites.  Back  to
back  with  these,  facing  the  ramparts  in  14  and  14',
were  the  remainder  of  the  extraordinarii  pedites.
The  spaces  marked  15,  15'  on  the  flanks  of  13,  14,
13',  14',  were  assigned  to  foreign  troops  or  to  allies
not  included  in  the  regular  contmgent,  who  might
chance  to  be  present  {rols  oKXotpvKois  kcu  to7s  e/c
rod  icaipov  irpoffyiyvofxivois  (Tv/j-ixaxois).

The  form  of  the  camp  was  an  exact  square  (rerpd-
ycauou  laSirXevpov),  the  length  of  each  side  being
2017  Roman  feet.

The  clear  space  between  the  ramparts  and  the
tents  {intervallum)  was  200  feet,  and  this  was  of
the  greatest  service  in  facilitating  the  marching  in
and  out  of  the  soldiers  without  crowding  or  confu-
sion. Here,  also,  cattle  and  other  booty  were  kept
and  guarded  ;  and  the  breadth  was  sufficient  to
prevent  any  ordinary  missile  or  fire-brand  hurled
into  the  camp  from  doing  serious  injiu-y.

The  principal  street,  stretching  right  across  in
front  of  the  tents  of  the  tribunes,  was  100  feet
wide  and  was  named  Principia.  It  will  be  ob-
served that  the  lengthened  lines  of  the  ten  tunuae
and  manipuli  in  each  division  is  intersected  at  the
termination  of  the  first  five  by  a  road  fifty  feet
wide,  called  the  Via  Quintana.  The  position  of
the  remaining  five  viae  in  the  fore-part  of  the
camp,  all  of  which  intersect  the  Via  Quintana  at
bright  angles,  will  be  understood  at  once  by  in-
specting the  plan,  the  width  of  each  being  50  feet.

When  two  consular  amaies  encamped  together
within  the  same  rampart,  two  ordinary  camps  were,
it  may  be  said,  applied  to  each  other  at  the  ends
nearest  to  their  respective  praetoria.  The  two  prae-
toria  faced  in  opposite  directions,  and  the  legions  of
the  two  consuls  stretched  their  lines  in  front  of
each  praetorium,  so  that  the  figure  of  the  camp  was
now  no  longer  a  square,  but  a  rectangle,  whose
length  was  twice  that  of  an  ordinary  camp,  the
breadth  being  the  same.

Although  the  words  of  Polybius  are,  as  a  whole,
so  full  and  clear  that  we  can  have  little  difficulty
in  forming  a  distinct  conception  of  the  camp  which
he  describes  and  in  delineating  the  different  parts,  it
must  not  be  concealed  that  he  has  altogether  passed


CASTRA.

over  many  important  points  on  which  we  should
desire  information,  and  that  occasionally  his  lan-
guage is  not  entirely  free  from  ambiguity.

Under  the  head  of  omissions,  we  must  note  —

1.  The  absence  of  all  information  with  regard
to  the  manner  in  which  the  Velites  were  disposed
of.  These,  at  the  time  when  Polybius  wrote,
amounted  to  1200,  or,  at  the  lowest  computation,
to  1000  for  each  legion;  and  taking  the  same
number  for  the  contingent  of  the  Socii,  we  shall
thus  have  a  body  of  at  least  4000  men  unprovided
for.  It  is  true  that  he  subsequently  states,  in  a
passage  which  we  quote  below,  that  the  velites
kept  guard  by  night  and  by  day  along  the  whole
extent  of  the  rampart,  and  that  they  were  stationed
in  bodies  of  ten  to  watch  the  gates.  Hence  some
have  supposed  that  the  light-armed  troops  always
bivouacked  outside  the  camp  ;  others,  that  they
occupied  the  intervallum  ;  others,  that,  just  as  in
the  line  of  battle,  they  did  not  form  a  distinct
corps,  but  were  distributed  among  the  hastati,
principes,  and  triarii,  according  to  a  given  ratio,  so
in  like  manner  they  were,  in  the  camp,  quartered
along  with  those  divisions  to  which  they  were  at-
tached in  the  field.  The  velites  ceased  to  fonn
a  portion  of  the  legion  about  the  time  of  Marius,
and  consequently  the  later  Koman  writers  throw  no
light  upon  the  question.  It  is  remarkable,  also,
that  while  Polybius  passes  them  over  completely  in
the  internal  arrangements  of  his  camp,  so  also  he
takes  no  notice  whatsoever  of  them  when  describing
the  agmen  or  the  order  of  march  in  which  an  army
usually  advanced.

2.  No  mention  is  made  of  the  legati.  Lipsius,
in  his  plan  of  a  Roman  camp  after  Polybius,  assigns
to  them  a  compartment  next  to  the  praetorium  on
the  side  opposite  to  that  where  the  quaestorium
stood ;  but  this  is  merely  a  conjecture.

3.  The  pi-aefecti  sociorum  likewise  are  passed
over.  Since  they  corresponded  among  the  troops
of  the  allies  to  the  tribuni  in  the  legions,  it  seems
highly  probable  that  their  tents  were  ranged  along
a  prolongation  of  the  line  on  which  the  latter  stood,
and  thus  they  also  would  be  placed  immediately
opposite  to  and  looking  towards  the  soldiers  under
their  immediate  command.

4.  The  number  of  tents  allowed  to  each  maniple
or  century  is  nowhere  stated,  and  consequently
the  number  of  men  in  each  tent  is  unknown,  nor
are  we  very  distinctly  told  how  the  centurions  and
other  officers  of  the  infantry  and  cavalry  inferior  to
the  tribunes  were  provided  for  ;  it  is  merely  said
that  the  ra^iapxoi  in  each  maniple  took  the  first
tents  on  each  side,  that  is,  probably,  at  each  end
of  the  row  which  held  one  maniple,

5.  With  regard  to  the  fortifications  of  the  camp
it  is  stated  that  the  digging  of  the  ditch  (racppeia)
and  the  fonnation  of  the  rampart  (xapaKOTroua)
upon  two  sides  of  the  camp  was  assigned  to  the
socii,  each  division  taking  that  side  along  which  it
was  quartered  ;  while  the  two  remaining  sides
were  in  like  manner  completed  by  the  legionaries,
one  by  each  legion.  The  work  upon  each  side
was  portioned  out  among  the  maniples,  the  cen-
turions acted  as  inspectors  of  the  tasks  performed
by  their  respective  companies,  and  the  general
superintendence  was  undertaken  by  two  of  the
tribunes.  The  nature  and  the  dimensions  of  the
defences  are  not,  however,  specified.  These  con-
sisted of  a  ditch  (fossa),  the  earth  from  which  was
thrown  inwards,  and  formed,  along  with  turf  and


CASTRA.

stones^  into  a  mound  {agger),  on  the  summit  of
ivhich  a  strong  palisade  of  wooden  stalces  (sudes,
valli)  was  fixed  forming  the  rampart  ( Vallum  s.
Vallus  —  X'^P°'^)'  We  can  scarcely  doubt  that
the  depth  of  the  ditch,  together  with  the  height
and  breadth  of  the  agger,  were,  under  ordinary
circumstances,  fixed ;  but  the  measurements  in-
cidentally mentioned  in  isolated  passages  do  not
perfectly  accord  with  each  other.  Among  the
works  at  Dyrrhachium  (Caes.  B.  C.  iii.  63)  we
read  of  a  ditch  15  feet  deep,  and  a  vallum  10  feet
high  and  1 0  feet  broad  ;  in  the  war  against  the
Bellovaci  and  other  Gaulish  tribes  we  find  Caesar
(B.  G.  viii.  9)  fortifying  his  camp  with  a  double
ditch,  15  feet  deep,  with  perpendicular  sides
(diredis  lateribus),  and  a  vallum  1 2  feet  high,  on
the  top  of  which  was  a  breast-work  (loricula)  and
numerous  towers  three  stories  high  connected  with
each  other  by  bridges,  the  sides  of  these  bridges
next  to  the  enemy  being  protected  by  a  breast-
work of  fascines  (vimineu  loricula).  Both  of  these,
however,  as  well  as  several  others  which  we  might
quote,  must  be  regarded  as  special  cases.  The
practice  of  a  later  period  is,  as  we  shall  see  below,
more  clearly  defined  by  Hyginus  and  others.

6.  Neither  the  number  nor  the  names  of  the
openings  in  the  vallum  are  given.  We  have
abundant  evidence  to  prove  that  there  were  four :
—  (1)  Porta  Principalis  dextra  and  (2)  Porta
Principalis  sinistra  at  the  two  extremities  of  the
wide  street  called  Princi-pia  ;  (3)  Porta  Praetoria
s.  Extraordinaria,  so  called  from  being  situated  on
that  side  of  the  camp  nearest  to  the  praetorium
and  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  quarters  of
the  extraordinarii  ;  (4)  Porta  Decujnana,  &o  called
from  being  situated  on  that  end  where  the  tenth
turmae  and  tenth  maniples  in  each  division  were
quartered.  Tliis  gate  was  also  called  Porta  Quaes-
toria,  in  consequence,  it  would  seem,  of  the  Quaes-
torittm  and  the  Forum  having  been  at  one  time
placed  in  its  vicinity,  and  here  unquestionably
stood  the  Quaestorium  in  the  camp  of  Hyginus,  as
we  shall  see  below.  Festus  likewise  has  the  gloss
*'  Quintana  appellatur  porta  in  castris  post  praeto-
rium, ubi  rerum  utensilium  forum  sit,"  and  from
Quintana  in  the  sense  of  Forum  comes  the  modem
Canteen.  The  perplexity  caused  by  these  state-
ments has  induced  some  critics  to  reverse  the  posi-
tions of  the  Porta  Praetoria  and  the  Porta  De-
cumana  as  marked  in  our  plan  ;  but  this  alteration
will  give  rise  to  difficulties  still  more  serious,  as
may  be  seen  from  consulting  Polybius  and  the
authorities  referred  to  at  the  end  of  this  paragraph;
for  we  find  it  expressly  stated  that  the  Porta  De-
cumana  was  on  that  side  of  the  camp  most  remote
from  the  enemy  {abs  tergo  castrorum ;  aversa  cas-
trorum;  dexiumana  maxime  petebatur  aversa  hosti
et  fugientihus  tutior)^  leading  out,  as  will  be  seen
from  the  construction,  in  the  direction  from  which
wood,  water,  and  other  necessary  supplies  would
be  most  easily  and  securely  provided.  (Liv.  xl.
27,  iii.  5,  X.  32,  xxxiv.  47 ;  Tacit.  Ann.  i.  QQ.,  iv.
30 ;  Festus,  s.  w.  Praetoria  porta.  Principalis,
Quintana  ;  Sueton.  Ner.  26.)

We  can  scarcely  doubt  that  the  Portae  must
have  been  always  defended  by  barriers  of  some
kind  ;  but  when  special  precautions  were  required
they  were  closed  by  regular  gates  defended  by
towers  {portis  fores  altioresque  turres  imposuit,  Caes.
B.  G.  viii.  9).

7.  In  which  direction  did  the  Praetorium  face .'


CASTRA.


249


towards  the  Porta  Praetoria  or  towards  the  legions
and  the  Porta  Decumana  ^  On  the  reply  to  this
question,  which  can  be  answered  from  conjecture
only,  depends  the  solution  of  the  problem  as  to
which  was  the  Porta  Principalis  decdra  and  the
P.  P.  sinistra.  In  like  manner  we  cannot  ascertain
on  which  side  of  the  Praetorium  the  Quaestorium
was  placed.  But  these  are  matters  of  small  moment.
The  above  are  the  most  important  omissions  in
the  description  of  Polybius.  Our  limits  will  not
permit  us  to  do  more  than  simply  to  indicate  one
important  point  where  a  certain  degree  of  am-
biguity in  his  phraseology  has  given  rise  to  doubt,
discussion,  and  an  irreconcilable  difference  of  opi-
nion. After  detailing  the  arrangements  adopted
when  two  consular  armies  encamp  together,  he
adds  these  remarkable  words — oTav  Se  x«p^s  t'
it.Wa  fjLev  uaavTus,  r^v  S"  ayopav,  Ka\  rh  ra/xielov^
Kal  rb  (TTpaT'lj'yiov,  /x4<Tov  riQiaai  rwv  duo7v  orrpa-
TOTTe'Swi/.  Taking  this  sentence  by  itself,  if  the
text  be  pure,  and  if  the  word  (rrparoTreSuv  be
rendered,  as  apparently  it  must  be  rendered,
legions,  then  we  should  be  led  to  the  conclusion
that  in  a  single  camp,  the  Praetorium,  the  Quaesto-
rium and  the  Forum  were  all  situated  somewhere
about  the  middle  of  the  Via  Quintana ;  and  this
conclusion  Schelius,  one  of  the  most  acute  and
learned  writers  on  the  military  affairs  of  the  Ro-
mans, has  actually  adopted.  This,  however,  is  so
completely  at  variance  with  the  whole  previous
narrative  of  the  historian  who  occupies  himself
from  the  commencement  with  a  single  consular
camp,  and  lays  down  the  site  of  the  praetorium,
as  we  have  done  above,  in  a  manner  so  clear  as
to  admit  of  no  cavil,  the  whole  construction,  in
fact,  depending  upon  the  spot  thus  assigned  to  the
praetorium,  that  we  are  driven  to  make  choice  of
one  of  these  alternatives,  either  that  there  is  a
corruption  lurking  in  the  text,  or  that  Polybius  is
here  alluding  to  some  peciUiar  expedient  which
was  resorted  to  when  two  consular  armies  en-
camped beside  each  other,  but  were  not  actually
included  within  the  lines  of  a  single  camp.  For  a
full  and  fair  examination  of  this  and  of  other  dif-
ficulties which  suggest  themselves  upon  a  close  ex-
amination of  Polybius  and  an  impartial  review  of
the  chief  arguments  adduced  by  contending  critics,
the  student  may  consult  a  tract  entitled  "  Polybii
Castrorum  Romanorum  formae  interpretatio,  scrip-
sit  G.  F.  Rettig,"  4to.  Hannov.  1828.

We  now  proceed  to  notice  various  particulars  con-
nected with  the  internal  discipline  of  the  camp.

I7ie  Camp  Oath. — When  an  army  encamped  for
the  first  time,  the  tribunes  administered  an  oath
to  each  individual  quartered  or  employed  within
its  limits,  including  slaves  as  well  as  freemen,  to
the  effect  that  he  would  steal  nothing  out  of  the
camp,  but  if  he  chanced  to  find  any  property  that
he  would  bring  it  to  the  tribunes.  We  must  sup-
pose that  the  solemn  promise  being  once  made,  was
considered  as  binding  during  the  whole  campaign,
for  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  have  repeated
a  ceremony  so  tedious  at  the  close  of  each  march.

Distribution  of  Duty  among  tlie  Officers. — In  each
legion  the  tribunes  divided  themselves  into  three
sections  of  two  each,  and  each  section  in  turn  un-
dertook for  two  months  the  superintendence  of  all
matters  connected  with  the  camp.  It  is  not  im-
probable that  one  tribune  in  each  section  assumed
the  chief  command  upon  alternate  days,  or  perhaps
during  alternate  months,  and  hence  Polybius  gene-


250


CAST  R  A.


rally  speaks  of  one  tribune  only  as  acting,  or  of
two  when  reference  is  made  to  both  legions.

Officers  parade.  —  Every  morning  at  day -break
the  centurions  and  the  equites  presented  them-
selves before  the  tents  of  the  tribunes,  and  the
tribunes  in  like  manner,  attended  perhaps  by  the
centurions  and  equites,  presented  themselves  at  the
praetorium.  The  orders  for  the  day  were  then
issued  by  the  consul  to  the  tribunes,  communicated
by  the  tribunes  to  the  centurions  and  equites,  and
through  the  centurions  and  equites  reached  the
soldiers  at  the  proper  time.

Guards,  Sentinels.,  <L'c.  —  Out  of  the  twenty
maniples  of  Principes  and  Triarii  in  each  legion,
two  were  appointed  to  take  charge  of  the  broad
passage  or  street  called  Principia,  extending  right
across  tlie  camp  in  front  of  the  tents  of  the  tribunes.
This  being  the  place  of  general  resort  during  the
day,  and,  as  we  know  from  various  sources,  the
part  of  the  camp  in  which  the  altars  and  the  eagles
stood,  great  pains  were  taken  that  it  should  be  kept
perfectly  clean  and  regularly  watered,  a  labour
which  would  fall  very  light  when  portioned  out
among  four  maniples.

Of  the  remaining  eighteen  maniples  of  Prin-
cipes and  Hastati  in  each  legion,  three  were
assigned  by  lot  to  each  of  the  six  tribunes,  and  of
these  three  maniples  one  in  turn  rendered  each
day  certain  services  to  the  tribune  to  whom  it  was
specially  attached.  It  took  charge  of  his  tent  and
baggage,  saw  that  the  former  was  properly  pitched
upon  ground  duly  levelled  all  round,  and  pro-
tected the  latter  from  damage  or  plunder.  It  also
furnished  two  guards  (^vKaKeia)  of  four  men
each,  who  kept  watch,  some  in  front  of  the  tent
and  some  behind,  among  the  horses.  We  may
remark  in  passing,  that  four  was  the  regular  num-
ber for  a  Roman  guard  {(pvXaK^iov)  ;  of  these  one
always  acted  as  sentinel,  while  the  others  enjoyed
a  certain  'degree  of  repose,  ready,  however,  to  start
up  at  the  first  alarm.  Compare  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles,  cap.  xii.  TrapaZovs  T^craapffi  rerpaSiois
trTpaTicaTci'v  <pvK6.(T(TiLV  avrou.

The  Triarii  were  exempted  from  those  duties
imposed  upon  the  Principes  and  Hastati,  but  each
maniple  of  the  Triarii  furnished  daily  a  guard  of
four  men  to  that  turma  of  the  Equites  which  was
quartered  immediately  behind  them,  in  order  to
watch  the  horses,  and  to  take  care  that  they  did
not  sustain  any  injury  from  getting  entangled  with
their  halters  and  heel  ropes,  or  break  loose  and
cause  confusion  and  mischief.

One  maniple  was  selected  each  day  from  the
whole  legionary  force,  to  keep  guard  beside  the
tent  of  the  general,  that  he  might  be  secured
alike  from  open  danger  and  hidden  treachery  ;
this  honourable  task  being  devolved  upon  every
maniple  in  rotation.  Three  sentinels  were  usually
posted  at  the  tents  of  the  quaestor  and  of  the  le-
gati  ;  and  by  night  sentinels  kept  watch  at  every
maniple,  being  chosen  out  of  the  maniple  which
they  guarded.

The  Velites  mounted  guard  by  day  and  by
night  along  the  whole  extent  of  the  vallum :  to
them  also  in  bodies  of  ten  was  committed  the
charge  of  the  gates,  while  strong  bodies  of  infantry
and  cavalry  were  thrown  forward  in  advance  of
each  gate,  to  resist  any  sudden  onset,  and  give
timely  notice  of  the  approach  of  the  enemj-.

Excitlnae ;  excuhias  agere ;  excubare ;  are  the
general  terms  used  with  reference  to   moxmting


CASTRA

guard  whether  by  night  or  by  day.  Vigiliae  •
vigilias  agere ;  vigilare ;  are  restricted  to  night
duty :  Excvhiae  and  Vigiliae  frequently  denote  not
only  the  service  itself,  but  also  the  individuals
who  performed  it.  Stationes  is  used  specially  to
denote  the  advanced  posts  thrown  forward  in  front
of  the  gates,  Custodes  or  Custodiae  the  parties
who  watched  the  gates  themselves,  Praesidia  the
sentinels  on  the  ramparts,  but  all  these  words  are
employed  in  many  other  significations  also.

Going  llie  Rounds.  —  In  order  to  ascertain  the
vigilance  of  the  night  sentinels  {vvKTepivaX  (pv\a-
Kai)  an  ingenious  scheme  was  devised.  Each
guard  ((pvKaKeiou)  consisted,  as  we  have  seen,  of
four  men,  and  each  of  these  in  turn  stood  sentinel
for  one  of  the  four  watches  into  which  the  night
was  divided.  The  sentinels  to  whom  it  fell  to  go
upon  duty  in  the  first  watch,  were  conducted  in
the  afternoon  to  the  tent  of  the  tribune  by  lieute-
nants of  the  maniples  to  which  they  belonged.
Each  of  these  men  received  from  the  tribune  four
small  tokens  (^vXijcpia)^  numbered  from  one  to
four  for  the  four  watches,  and  bearing  also  marks
indicating  the  legion,  and  maniple  or  century  from
which  the  guard  was  taken.  The  individual  who
received  these  tokens  retained  the  one  which  an-
swered to  his  own  watch,  and  distributed  the  rest
among  his  three  comrades.  The  duty  of  going  the
rounds  (  Vigilias  circuire  s.  drcumire,  comp.  Fest.
s.  V.  fraxare)  was  committed  to  the  Equites,  and
for  this  purpose  each  legion  supplied  daily  four,
picked  out  from  each  turma  in  rotation  by  the
commander  of  the  troop.  The  eight  persons  thus
selected  decided  by  lot  in  which  watch  they  should
make  their  rounds,  two  being  assigned  to  each
watch.  They  then  repaired  to  the  tribune,  and
each  individual  received  a  written  order  specifying
the  posts  which  he  was  to  visit,  every  post  being
visited  in  each  watch  by  one  or  other  of  the  two
to  whom  the  watch  belonged.  They  then  repaired
in  a  body  to  the  first  maniple  of  the  Triarii,  and
there  took  up  their  quarters,  because  it  was  the
duty  of  one  of  the  centurions  of  that  maniple  to  give
notice  of  the  commencement  of  each  watch  by  a
trumpet  blast.  At  the  appointed  time  each  eques,
accompanied  by  some  friends,  who  acted  as  wit-
nesses, visited  all  the  posts  named  in  his  written
order,  from  each  sentinel  whom  he  found  on  the
alert  he  received  one  of  the  tokens  described
above,  but  if  the  sentinel  was  asleep  or  absent,
then  the  eques  of  the  rounds  called  upon  his  com-
panions to  witness  the  fact,  and  departed.  The
same  process  was  followed  by  all  the  others,  and
on  the  following  morning  the  officers  of  the  rounds
repaired  to  the  tent  of  the  tribune  and  delivered
up  the  tokens.  If  the  number  of  these  was  found
to  be  complete,  then  all  was  well,  but  if  any  one
was  wanting,  then  it  could  be  at  once  ascertained
to  what  guard  and  to  what  watch  the  missing
token  belonged.  The  centurion  of  the  company
was  ordered  to  bring  forward  the  men  implicated,
and  they  were  confronted  with  the  officer  of  the
rounds.  If  the  latter  could  prove  by  means  of  his
witnesses,  that  he  had  actually  visited  the  post  in
question,  and  found  the  sentinel  asleep  or  absent,
then  the  guilt  of  the  sentinel  could  not  be  a  matter
of  doubt ;  but  if  the  officer  failed  to  establish  this,
then  the  blame  fell  upon  himself,  and  in  either
case  the  culprit  was  forthwith  made  over  to  a
court  martial.  Sometimes  we  find  centurions,  tri-
bunes, and  even  the  general  in  chief  represented


J


CASTRA.

as  going  the  rounds,  but  under  ordinary  circum-
stances, the  duty  was  performed  as  we  have  de-
scribed. (Liv.  xxii.  1,  xxviiL  24  ;  Sail.  Jtig  45.  ;
Tacit.  Hist,  ii,  29.)

Watchword.  —  The  watchword  for  the  night  was
not  communicated  verbally,  but  by  means  of  a
small  rectangular  tablet  of  wood  (TrKarelou  iirtye-
ypa/xixevov — tessera  —  to  be  carefully  distinguished
from  the  ^vKr]<piov  of  the  last  paragraph),  upon
which  it  was  WTitten.  One  man  was  chosen  out
of  each  of  those  maniples  and  tui-mae  which  were
quartered  at  that  extremity  of  the  lines  most  remote
from  the  Principia.  Each  of  these  individuals
(tcsserarius)  repaired  towards  sunset  to  the  tent  of
the  tribune,  and  received  from  him  a  tessera,  on
which  the  password  and  also  a  certain  number  or
mark  were  inscribed.  With  this  he  returned  to
the  maniple  or  turma  to  which  he  belonged,  and
taking  witnesses,  delivered  it  to  the  officer  of  the
next  adjoining  maniple  or  turma,  and  he  to  the
next  until  it  had  passed  along  the  whole  line,  when
it  was  returned  by  the  person  who  received  it  last
to  the  tribune.  The  regulation  was  that  the  whole
of  the  tesserae  should  be  restored  before  it  was
dark,  and  if  any  one  was  found  Avanting  at  the
appointed  time,  the  row  to  which  it  belonged  could
be  at  once  discovered  by  means  of  the  number  or
mark  noticed  above,  an  investigation  took  place  at
once  into  the  cause  of  the  delay,  and  punishment
was  inflicted  upon  the  parties  found  to  be  in  fault.

Not  only  mere  passwords  were  circulated  in  this
manner,  but  also,  occasionally,  general  orders,  as
when  we  read  in  Livy,  xxvii.  46,  "  Tessera  per
castra  ab  Livio  consule  data  erat,  ut  tribunum  tri-
buims,  centurio  centurionem,  eques  equitem,  pedes
peditem  acciperet."

Although  the  tesserarius  received  the  tessera  from
the  tribune,  it  proceeded  in  the  first  instance  from
the  commander-in-chief,  as  we  may  perceive  from
the  passage  just  quoted,  and  many  others.  Under
the  empire  it  was  considered  the  peculiar  function
of  the  prince  to  give  the  watchword  to  his  guards.
(Tacit  Ann.  i.  7  ;  comp.  Suet.  Claud.  42,  Ner.  9.)

Breaking  up  a  Camp.  —  On  the  first  signal  being
given  by  the  trumpet,  the  tents  were  all  struck  and
the  baggage  packed,  the  tents  of  the  general  and
the  tribunes  being  disposed  of  before  the  others
were  touched.  At  the  second  signal  the  baggage
was  placed  upon  the  beasts  of  burden ;  at  the  third,
the  whole  army  began  to  move.

II.  Camp  of  Hyginus.

Passing  over  a  space  of  about  250  years,  we
find  ourselves  amidst  an  order  of  things  altogether
new.  The  name  Legimies  still  remains,  but  all  the
ancient  divisions,  with  the  exception  of  the  Cen-
turiae,  have  disappeared.  The  distribution  of  the
soldiers  into  Velites,  Hastati,  Principes,  and  Triarii
did  not  endure  more  than  half  a  century  after  the
era  of  Polybius  ;  the  organization  by  maniples  was
about  the  same  period  in  a  great  measure  super-
seded by  the  cohorts,  and  the  cavalry  were  de-
tached from  the  infantry  and  formed  independent
corps.  In  like  maimer  the  Socii^  after  the  admis-
sion of  the  Italian  states  to  the  Roman  franchise,
ceased  to  form  a  separate  class,  and  their  place  is
now  occupied  by  a  motley  crew  of  foreigners  and
barbarians  serving  in  bands,  designated  by  strange
titles.  We  are  reminded  also  that  the  republican
form  of  government  had  given  way  to  the  dominion
of  a  single  individual  by  the  appearance  of  a  mul-


CASTRA.  251

titude  of  "household  troops  and  imperial  body-
guards, distinguished  by  various  appellations,  and
invested  with  peculiar  privileges.  A  complete
Roman  army  did  not  now  consist  of  Romanae
Legiones  cum  Sociis,  or  of  Legiones  cum  Sociis  et
Auociliis,  but  of  Legiones  cum  Supplementis,  the
term  Supplementa  including  the  whole  of  the  various
denominations  alluded  to  above.  In  what  follows,
we  shall  attempt  to  delineate  a  summer  camp  {cas-
tra aestivalia),  intended  to  contain  three  legions,
with  their  supplements,  a  force,  which  in  the  time
of  Hyginus  corresponded  to  the  regular  consular
army  of  the  sixth  and  seventh  centuries  of  the  city.
It  is  but  right,  however,  to  call  attention  to  the
fiict,  that  we  do  not  here  tread  upon  ground  so
firm  as  when  Polybius  was  our  guide.  The  text
of  Hyginus  presents  many  difficulties  and  many
corruptions  ;  and  there  are  not  a  few  passages  in
which  we  are  thrown  too  much  upon  conjecture.
This,  however,  be  it  understood,  applies  almost
exclusively  to  the  minute  details,  for  the  general
outline  of  the  whole  is  clear  and  well  ascertained.
The  plan  sketched  below,  is  taken  almost  entirely
from  Schelius,  and  the  proportions  of  the  different
parts  are  carefully  preserved.  Omitting  in  this
case  the  geometrical  construction,  we  proceed  at
once  to  explain  the  figure.

The  point  from  which  the  whole  of  the  measure-
ments proceeded  is  marked  with  a  small  cross,  and
was  called  Groma,  that  being  the  name  of  an  in-
strument employed  by  surveyors,  analogous,  in  its
uses  at  least,  to  the  modem  cross  stafi^  plane  table
and  level.

The  general  form  of  the  inclosure  was  an  oblong,
the  two  longer  sides  being  at  equal  distances  from
the  Groma,  rounded  off  at  the  angles  (angulos  cas-
trorum  circi7iare  oportet),  2320  feet  in  length  by
1620  feet  in  breadth,  the  general  rule  being  that
the  length  should  exceed  the  breadth  by  one  third
{castra  in  quaiitum  fieri  potuei'it  tertiata  esse  debe-
bunt) ;  when  larger  it  was  called  Castra  Classica,
because,  says  Hyginus,  the  ordinary  Buccinum  or
bugle  could  not  be  heard  distinctly  from  one  ex  -
tremity  to  the  other.

The  Groma  stood  in  the  middle  of  the  principal
street  ( Via  l^rincipalis),  which  was  sixty  feet
wide,  extending  right  across  the  camp,  with  the
two  PoHae  Principales  at  its  extremities.  The
two  remaining  gates,  which,  like  the  fonner,  re-
tained their  ancient  names,  were  the  Porta  Prae-
ioria,  which  was  nearest  to  the  enemy  {porta
praetoria  semper  hostem  spectare  debet),  and  the
Porta  Decumana,  and  these  were  placed  in  the
centre  of  the  two  shorter  sides  of  the  oblong.
Immediately  behind  the  Groma,  a  rectangular
space,  720  feet  long  by  180  broad,  was  set  apart
for  the  emperor  or  commander-in-chief,  and,  as  in
the  consular  camp,  termed  the  Praetorium.  Im-
mediately behind  the  Praetorium,  that  is  to  say,
at  the  extremity  most  distant  from  the  Groma,  a
street  called  the  Via  Quintana,  40  feet  wide,  ex-
tended across  the  camp  parallel  to  the  Via  Prin-
cipalis. When  the  camp  exceeded  the  ordinary
dimensions,  then  two  additional  gates  were  formed
at  the  extremities  of  the  Via  Quintana,  the  breadth
of  which  was  in  that  case  increased  to  50  feet.

It  will  be  seen  at  a  glance  that  the  camp  was
divided  into  three  segments  by  the  Via  Principalis
and  the  Via  Quintana.  Each  of  these  segments
had  a  name.  The  whole  of  the  middle  segment,
lying  to  the  right  and  the  left  of  the  Praetorium,


252


CASTRA.


CASTRA.


(Fig.  3.)

PORTA     PRAETORIA


r.


INTERVALLUM


INTERVALLUM


CQh.:mi


Coh..vr


^


CohT


Colt.VTl


90

^.  t


37


ISO

ColLlF


ISO

coiLTir


VIA      SACULARI5


180

CotJt


(PORTA  PRIM  CI  PALIS
INISTERIOR


17


+      PRINCIPALIS


90


O        PORTA  PRINCIPAUSl
O  DEXTERIOR        J


i^


25


22


VIA    QUINTANA


20


22


25


2*


24*


24


2^


\


~~Sf5o —

cohjx:


3«0

Cdh.X


VIA    SACUIXRiS


24


300

ToIlX


INTERVALLUM


360

Co]bi.IX,


INTERVALLUM


PORTA    DECUMANA


fonned  the  Laixra  Praetorii.  The  segment  included
between  the  Via  Principalis  and  that  side  of  the
camp  in  which  the  Porta  Praetoria  stood  formed  the
Praetenlura.  The  segment  included  between  the
Via  Quintana  and  that  side  of  the  camp  in  which
the  Porta  Decumana  stood  formed  the  Retentura,


The  legiones  hemg  the  most  trustworthy  of  the
troops  in  the  provinces,  were  quartered  by  cohorts
next  to  the  rampart  all  round  the  camp,  encircling
completely  with  their  lines  the  masses  of  foreigners,
who,  together  with  the  imperial  guards,  fonned
the  supplementa.


CASTRA.

A  clear  space  of  60  feet  (intervallum)  was  left
between  the  tents  of  the  legionaries  and  the  ram-
parts, and  they  were  separated  from  the  quarters
of  the  other  troops,  whom  they  surrounded,  by  a
street  called  the  Via  Sagtdaris,  which  ran  com-
pletely round  the  camp,'  so  that  the  whole  of  the
legionaries,  with  the  exception  of  the  first  cohort
in  each  legion,  and  three  ordinary  cohorts  for  whom
there  is  not  room  in  the  outer  ring,  were  bounded
on  one  side  by  the  intervallum  and  on  the  other
by  the  Via  Sagularis.  The  remaining  streets  not
particularly  specified  were  comprehended  under  the
general  name  Viae  Vidnariae  s.  Vicinales,  and
their  breadth  was  20  feet.

The  defences  of  a  camp  might  be  fourfold  : —  1.
Fossa.     2.    Valium..     3.  Cervoli.     4.  Arma.

1.  The  Fossa  might  be  of  two  kinds,  a.  The
Fossa  fastigata^  with  both  sides  sloping,  so  as  to
form  a  wedge  ;  or,  h.  the  Fossa  Punica,  of  which
the  outer  side  was  perpendicular,  the  inner  side
sloping,  as  in  the  fossa  fastigata.  The  breadth  in
either  case  was  to  be  at  least  5  feet,  the  depth
3  feet.  Outside  of  each  gate  a  ditch  was  dug  ex-
tending on  both  sides  somewhat  beyond  the  gate  :
this,  on  account  of  its  shortness,  was  called  Titulus,
and  in  front  of  the  titulus  was  a  small  semicircular
redoubt  (clavicula).

2.  The  Vallum  was  formed  of  earth  and  turf,  or
of  stone,  6  feet  in  height,  8  feet  broad.

3.  When  the  nature  of  the  ground  did  not
admit  of  the  construction  of  a  sufficient  vallum,
then  a  chevaux  de  frise  (cervoli)  was  substituted.

4.  When  neither  a  Vallum  nor  Cervoli  could  be
employed,  then  the  camp  was  surrounded  by  a
ring  of  armed  men  four  deep,  numerous  sentries
were  posted  in  each  line,  and  the  cavalry  patrolled
in  turn  in  every  direction.

The  words  of  Hyginus  would  lead  us  to  sup-
pose that  when  no  danger  was  apprehended,  a
ditch  alone  was  considered  sufficient ;  and  even
this  was  excavated  merely  for  the  sake  of  exercis-
ing the  men  (causa  disciplinae).

We  can  now  proceed  to  point  out  in  what
manner  the  three  segments  were  occupied,  refer-
ring to  *he  numbers  on  the  figure,  it  being  under-
stood that,  as  before,  we  shall  not  enter  here  into
any  discussions  regarding  the  origin  and  character
of  the  diiferent  battalions  named,  all  information
upon  such  matters  being  given  in  the  article  Ex-

ERCITUS.

A.  Praetorium  et  Latera  Praetorii.

1.  Praetorium.  2.  Arae^  on  which  public  sa-
crifice was  offered.  The  position  assigned  to  them
is  conjectural ;  but  they  were,  at  all  events,  in  the
immediate  vicinity  of  this  spot.  3.  Auguratorium,
in  which  the  Imperator  took  the  auspices  —  the
altars  were  perhaps  erected  in  front  of  this  place,
at  least  such  was  the  case  sometimes.  (See  Tacit.
Ann.  XV.  30,  where  the  form  Augurale  is  em-
ployed.) 4.  Tribunal.,  the  elevated  platform  from
which  addresses  were  delivered*  to  the  troops.
Close  to  the  praetorium  was  a  guardhouse  (stationi
dart  opoHet  secundum,  praetorium  pedes  viginti).
5.  Comites  Lnperatoris,  the  personal  staff"  of  the
Imperator,  among  whom  the  chief  place,  next  to
the  Via  Principalis,  was  assigned  to  the  Praefectus
Praeterio.  6.  Equitcs  singulares  Imperatoris  et
Equites  Praetoriani :  the  number  of  these  was
variable  ;  but  Hyginus  gives  as  an  average  450
of  the  former  and  400  of  the  latter.     7.  Cuhorlcs


CASTRA.


253


praetoriae  quatuor.  Primipilares.  Eeocati.  Offi-
dales.  The  praetorians  were  allowed  twice  as
much  space  as  the  troops  of  the  line.  8.  Aloe
quingenariae  quattior.  9.  In  each  of  the  spaces
marked  9,  on  the  extreme  right  and  left  of  the
Praetorium,  bordering  on  the  Via  Sagularis  (per
rigorem  viae  sagularis)  was  placed  the  first  co-
hort and  the  veocillarii  of  one  legion.  The  first
cohort  and  the  vexillarii  of  the  remaining  legion
will  be  found  in  the  Praetentura.  The  first  co-
hort of  a  legion  contained  960  men,  being  twice  as
numerous  as  the  others  ;  the  vexillarii  of  a  legion
amoimted  to  about  500.

B.  Praetentura.

10.  Scamnum  Legatorum.  The  quarters  of  the
legati.  11.  Scamnum  Tribunorum.  Immediately
behind  the  legati,  were  the  legionary  tribunes  and
the  tribunes  of  the  praetorian  cohorts.

In  the  language  of  surveyors,  scamnum  was  a  rec-
tangular figure,  vvhose  breadth  exceeded  its  length,
striga  a  rectangular  figure,  whose  length  exceeded
its  breadth.  So,  Signa  and  Tabulinum  are  the  terms
used  with  reference  to  the  direction  of  the  length
and  breadth  respectively :  thus,  "  Cohors  prima
causa  signorum  et  aquilae  intra  viam  sagulariam,  et
quoniam  duplum  numerum  habet,  duplam  pedatu-
ram  accipiet,  ut,  puta,  signis  pedes  centum  viginti,
tabulino  pedes  trecentos  sexaginta,  vel  signis  centum
octoginta  tabid.ino  pedes  ducentos  quadraginta.''''  It
is  the  more  necessary  to  call  attention  to  this,  be-
cause these  significations  have  been  passed  over
by  the  best  lexicographers,  and  we  find  that  some
modern  expounders  of  Hyginus  imagine  Tabulinum
to  have  been  an  office  where  the  books  and  ac-
counts of  the  legion  were  kept.  Another  example
of  the  use  of  these  words  will  be  given  below.
12.  Aloe  milliariae  quatuor,  one  in  each  of  these
four  compartments.  13.  Valetudinarium,  the  hos-
pital for  the  sick  soldiers.  14.  Veterinarium,  the
hospital  for  the  sick  horses.  15,  16.  Classici,
marines  employed  as  pioneers.  Mauri  equites
sexcenti.  Pannonii  Veredarii  octingenti.  These
two  bodies  of  light  cavalry  were  quartered  near
the  classici,  because,  when  the  latter  were  sent  in
advance  to  clear  the  way,  they  wer«  guarded  by
the  former.  1 7.  Exploratores.  General  Roy  in  his
plan  places  them  in  these  two  small  compartments,
but  it  appears  more  probable  from  the  words  of
Hyginus,  that  they  were  quartered  all  together
on  the  side  next  to  19.  18  and  19.  The  first
cohort  of  the  remaining  legion  and  its  Vexillarii.

On  the  opposite  side  of  the  Via  Praetoria,  three
legionary  cohorts,  for  whom  there  was  not  sufficient
space  outside  of  the  Via  Sagularis.

In  the  Praetentura  stood  also  the  Fabrica  or
workshop  of  the  carpenters  and  armourers,  erected
at  a  distance  from  the  Valetudinarium,  so  that
the  noise  might  not  disturb  the  patients.

Within  the  scamnum  of  the  legati  were  the
Scholae  of  the  first  cohorts,  the  places  apparently
where  the  superior  officers  of  the  legions  assembled
in  order  to  receive  the  general  orders  of  the  day.

C.  Retentura.
20.  Quaestoriiim.  This  space  corresponded  in
name  only  with  the  Quaestorium  of  the  Polybian
camp,  for  it  was  no  longer  assigned  to  a  quaestor
(Quaestorium  dicitur  quod  aliquando  ibi  quaestores
pedaturam  acceperint).  It  was  occupied  partly  by
prisoners  of  rank,  hostages,  and  plunder,  and  here


254


CASTRA.


,  perhaps  the  Praefectus  Castronim  may  have  been
quartered,  unless  we  are  to  look  for  him  among
the  Comites  Tmperatoris.

21.  Statorum  centuriae  dtuxe,  who  guarded  the
rear  of  the  praetorium,  and  always  kept  close  to
the  person  of  the  Imperator.  These,  like  the  prae-
toriiins,  had  double  space  assigned  to  them,

22.  Cohortes  equitafae  milliariae  duae.  Cohortes
equitcdae  quingenaHae  quatuor.

23.  Cohortes  peditatae  milliariae  tres.  Cohortes
peditatae  qiiingenariae  tres.

24.  Nationes.  Barbarian  troops.  Palmyreni
quingenti.  Gaetae  nongenti.  Dad  septingenti.  Bri-
fo7,es  quingenti.  Cantabri  septingenti.  Among
these  we  find  enumerated  Sumactares,  a  word
which  no  one  has  succeeded  in  explaining,  but  it
is  in  all  probability  a  corrupt  form.

Camels  with  their  riders  (cameli  cum  suis  epi-
hatis)  were  frequpintly  included  among  the  con-
stituents of  an  army,  being  used  both  in  offensive
operations,  and  also  in  carrying  plunder.

Tvvo  points  strike  us  forcibly  when  we  compare
the  camp  of  Hyginus  with  that  of  Polybius  ;  first,
the  flimsy  character  of  the  fortifications,  which
must  be  attributed  to  the  disinclination  felt  by
the  soldiers  to  perform  regularly  and  steadily  the
same  amount  of  labour  which  was  cheerfully  exe-
cuted by  soldiers  of  the  republic  ;  and,  secondly,
the  desire  everj'-  where  visible  to  economise  space,
and  compress  every  thing  within  the  narrowest
possible  limits.  Although  the  numbers  of  an  army,
such  as  we  have  been  considering  above,  cannot  be
determined  with  absolute  precision,  they  must,
on  the  lowest  computation,  have  exceeded  40,000
men,  and  these  were  crowded  together  into  less
than  one  half  the  space  which  they  would  have
occupied  according  to  the  ancient  system,  the  pro-
portion of  cavalry,  moreover,  being  much  larger  in
the  imperial  force.  The  camp  of  Polybius,  calcu-
lated for  less  than  20,000,  contains  upwards  of
four  millions  of  square  feet,  while  the  camp  of
Hyginus  embraces  little  more  than  three  millions
and  seven  hundred  thousand.

We  may  conclude  with  a  few  words  upon  a
topic  entirely  passed  over  by  Polybius,  but  on
which  Hyginus  affords  ample  information  in  so  far
as  the  usages  of  his  own  day  are  concerned  —  the
number  and  arrangement  of  the  tents.

A  double  row  of  tents  (papiliones)  facing  each
other,  with  a  space  between  for  piling  the  arms  of
the  soldiers,  and  for  receiving  the  beasts  of  burden
and  the  baggage,  was  termed  Striga;  a  single  row,
with  a  corresponding  space  in  front,  Hemistrigium.
The  normal  breadth  of  a  Striga  was  60  feet,  of  a
Hemistrigium  30  feet,  made  up  as  follows :  —
10  feet  were  allowed  for  the  depth  of  each  tent,
6  feet  for  a  passage  behind  the  tent,  5  feet  for
the  arms  piled  in  front  of  the  tent,  9  feet  for  the
jum,enta  and  baggage  ;  total  30  feet  for  the  hemi-
strigium, which  doubled  for  the  striga  gives  60,  the
space  between  the  rows  being  28  feet.  The  length
of  the  striga  or  hemistrigium  varied  according  to
circumstances.

A  fr.U  legionary  century  {plena  centuria),  when
Hyginus  wrote,  consisted  of  80  men,  who  occu-
pied 1 0  papiliones.  The  length  alloAved  for  each
papilio  was  12  feet,  10  feet  for  the  papilio  itself,
and  2  feet  for  lateral  passages  (incrementum  ten-
gurae),  and  thus  the  length  of  the  line  along
which  the  papiliones  of  a  century  stretched  was
10x12  =  120  feet.     Out   of  this   the  centurion


CASTRA.

had  a  space  allotted  to  him  equal  to  that  required
for  2  tents,  so  that  the  privates  of  the  century  oo-
cupied  8  tents  only,  that  is,  they  were  quartered
at  the  rate  of  1 0  men  to  each  tent.  But  since  ]  6
men  or  4  guards  (rerpaS^o)  in  each  century  were
always  out  upon  duty,  there  were  never  more
than  8  men  actually  in  a  tent  at  the  same  time.

(Fig.  4.)

Sir  iff  a  of  two  centuries

320


nnannnnnnna


Dnnnnnnnnna


Since  a  striga  120  feet  in  length  and  60  feet  in
breadth,  containing  7200  square  feet,  was  allotted
(Fig.  5.)


2&mistrl(famt  ofomCerUuru

120

nnnnnnnnnSia


to  2  centuries,  and  since  an  ordinary  legionary
cohort  contained  6  centuries,  it  follows  that  the
space  required  for  each  cohort  {pedaiura  cohortis)
of  480  men  was  21,600  square  feet.

The  troops  were  usually  quartered  in  cohorts,
and  these  might  be  variously  disposed,  it  being
always  desirable  that  a  whole  century  should
always  be  ranged  in  an  unbroken  line.

If  the  striga  was  equal  to  one  century  in  length,
then  the  cohort  would  occupy  three  strigae  in
breadth,  that  is,  a  space  120  feet  long,  by  180
broad  =  21,600  square  feet.    See  fig.  (6.)

(Fig.  6.)

020

nnnnnnnnnni


nnnnnnnnDDj
DDnnnnnnnn!


nnDDnnnnnn


nnnnnnnnnni


8<  t


nnnDnnnann


If  the  striga  was  equal  in  length  to  two  centuries,
then  the  cohort  would  occupy  one  whole  striga
and  a  hemistrigium,  that  is,  a  space  240  feet  long  by
90  feet  broad  =  21,600  square  feet     See  fig.  (7.)


C  ASTRA.


CASTRA.


255


(Fig.  7.)


iDnnnDDDDDDDDDDDDnnnni


DDDgnmnnggDnfmngnni

o^z


If  the  striga  was  equal  in  length  to  three  cen-  I  only,  or  a  space  360  feet  long  by  60  feet  broad
turies,  then  the  cohort  would  occupy  one  striga  1  =21,600  square  feet.    See  fig.  (8.)

(Fig.  8.)

.V)«>


nnnnnnaDDDDnannnnDnnnnnDnnDnnn


iDDizonDnnnDnnnnnnnnnnnnaDnnnnnn


It  is  to  be  observed  that  in  the  plan  of  the  camp
given  above,  the  legionary  cohorts  on  the  longer
sides  are  in  strigae  of  240  feet  in  length,  those  on
the  shorter  sides  in  strigae  of  360  feet  in  lengtli.

When  the  number  of  legions  in  an  army  was
greater  in  proportion  to  the  suppl  omenta  than  in
the  array  which  we  have  reviewed,  then  in  order
that  they  might  still  be  ranged  outside  of  the  Via
Sagularis,  the  strigae  presented  their  breadth  to
the  vallum  instead  of  their  length,  or  to  use  the
technical  phrase,  the  length  which  in  the  former
case  had  been  assigned  to  the  Stgna,  was  now
given  to  the  Tabulinum  (Quodsi  legiones  plures  ac-
ceperimus  et  supplementa  pauciora  ut  necessarium
sit  cohories  circa  vallum  crebrius  ponere  convertemus
pedaturam,  quod  fuerat  signis  tabulino  da-

BliMUS).

If  A  B  be  the  line  of  the  vallum,  C  will  repre-
sent the  position  of  the  cohort  in  the  one  case,  D
in  the  other.


Josephus,  in  his  account  of  the  Jewish  war,
takes  special  notice  of  the  Roman  encampments,
and,  although  he  does  not  enter  into  minute  details,
his  observations,  with  which  we  shall  conclude
this  article,  form  a  useful  supplement  to  Hyginus.
It  is  evident  from  the  numerous  artizans  for  whom
workshops  are  provided,  from  the  towers  with
which  the  vallum  was  strengthened,  and  from  the
precaution  of  setting  fire  to  every  thing  left  behind,
that  the  words  of  the  historian  refer  chiefly  to
Castra  Stativa.'  He  begins  by  remarking  (B.  J.
iii.  5)  that  the  Romans  when  invading  an  enemy's
country  never  hazard  an  engagement  until  they
have  fortified  a  camp  (ov  irplv  airroprai  fx^xn^  ^
TftxtVai  cTTpaTt^TreSoj/),  which,  in  form,  is  a  square
(SiafieTpcTrai  Se  -rrapefMSoXi]  rcTpdyocivos)^  with  four
gates,  one  on  each  side.  The  rampart  by  which
it  is  surrounded  exhibits  the  appearance  of  a  wall
furnished  with  towers  at  equal  distances,  and  in
the  spaces  between  the  towers  is  placed  the  artillery
ready  for  immediate  service  (rovs  re  olvgeA-ets,
Kal  /caTOTreAray,  koL  \ido§6\a,  /col  Tray  atperiipioif
opyavov  Tiddaariu,  airavra  irphs  ras  ^o\hs  eVoj/xa).
The  camp  is  divided  conveniently  by  streets,  in
the  middle  are  the  tents  of  the  officers,  and  in  the
very  centre  of  all  the  praetorium  (rh  (Trpar-fiyiov)  ;
there  is  also  a  forum  (ayopd  ris  a'lroSdKvvTai)^
and  a  place  for  artificers  (xetporexya'S  X^P^'^^\
of  whom  a  great  number  follow  the  army  with
building  tools,  and  seats  for  the  tribunes  and  cen-
turions {^wKol  re  \oxayois  Kal  Ta^idpxois\  where
they  decide  any  disputes  which  may  arise.  When
necessary  (et  Se  eVei^oi)  a  ditch  is  dug  all  round,
four  cubits  deep  and  four  cubits  broad.

At  day  dawn  (inrh  Se  t^p  ea)  all  the  soldiers
repair  to  the  tents  of  their  respective  centurions
(^Tri  Tovs  eKarovrapxas)  and  salute  them :  the
centurions  repair  to  the  tribunes  (vphs  robs  x*-
\idpxovs),  along  with  whom  all   the  centuriona


'ZftG


CATAPHRACTI.


(Tafmpx«0  repair  to  the  commander-in-chief,  from
whom  they  receive  the  watchword  {a-qfi^lov)  and
the  general  orders  of  the  day,  to  be  conveyed  by
them  to  their  respective  divisions.

When  a  camp  is  broken  up,  at  the  first  blast  of
the  trumpet  the  soldiers  strike  the  tents,  and  pack
up  the  utensils  ;  at  the  second  they  load  the  mules
and  other  beasts  of  burden,  set  fire  to  every  thing
which  coxild  prove  serviceable  to  an  enemy,  and
stand  like  coursers  ready  to  start  forward  on  a
race  ;  the  third  gives  the  last  warning  that  all
things  being  now  prepared  every  man  must  be  in
his  place.  Then  the  herald,  standing  at  the  right
hand  of  the  general,  demands  thrice  if  they  are
ready  for  war,  to  which  they  all  respond  with  loud
and  repeated  cheers  that  they  are  ready,  and  for
the  most  part,  being  filled  with  martial  ardour,
anticipate  the  question,  and  raise  their  right  hands
on  high  with  a  shout.  {B.  J.  iii.  5.  §  4.)  [W.  R.]

CATAGO'GIA  {Karaydoyia).  [Anagogia.]

CATAGRAPHA.     [Pictura.]

CATA'LOGUS  {KardXoyos),  the  catalogue  of
those  persons  in  Athens  who  were  liable  to  regular
military  service.  At  Athens,  those  persons  alone
who  possessed  a  certain  amount  of  property,  were
ullowed  to  serve  in  the  regular  infantry,  whilst  the
lower  class,  the  thetes,  had  not  this  privilege.  Thus
the  former  are  called  oi  e'/c  KaTa\6yov  (rTparevov-
res,  and  the  latter  ot  e|w  tov  KaraXdyov.  (Xen.
Hell.  ii.  3.  §  20.)  Those  who  were  exempted  by
their  age  from  military  service,  are  called  by
Demosthenes  (De  Synt.  p.  167.)  ot  virep  rhu
KaToXoyov.  It  appears  to  have  been  the  duty  of
the  generals  (or/joTTjyoi)  to  make  out  the  list  of
persons  liable  to  service  [Astrateias  Graphe],
in  which  duty  they  were  probably  assisted  by  the
demarchi,  and  sonietimes  by  the  fiovXeural.  (Dem.
c.  Polycl.  p.  1208.)

CATALU'SEOS  TOU  DEMOU  GRAPHE'
{tcixTaKva^cas  rov  Sij/xov  ypacpi]),  was  an  action
brought  against  those  persons  who  had  altered,  or
attempted  to  alter,  the  deraocratical  form  of  go-
vernment at  Athens.  A  person  wa^  also  liable  to
this  action  who  held  any  public  office  in  the  state
after  the  democracy  had  been  subverted.  (An doc.
de  Myst.  p.  48.)  This  action  is  closely  connected
with  the  irpotoaias  ypa(pi\  {iirX  irpoSoaia  ttjs
iroXeas,  ^  cttI  KaraKixTci  rov  ^'fj/jLou,  Demosth.
c.  Timocr.  p.  748),  with  which  it  appears  in  some
cases  to  have  been  almost  identical.  The  fonn  of
proceeding  was  the  same  in  both  cases,  namely,  by
flffayyiXia.  In  the  case  of  KaToXvaeas  tov  S^yuoi;,
the  punishment  was  death  ;  the  property  of  the
offender  was  confiscated  to  the  state,  and  a  tenth
part  dedicated  to  Athena.  (Andoc.  De  Myst.
p.  48.)

CATAPHRA'CTI  (KardcppaKToi).  1.  Hea\y-
armed  cavalry,  the  horses  of  which  were  also  co-
vered  with  defensive  armour  (Serv.  ad  Virg.  Aen.
xi.  771),  whence  they  are  called  by  Pollux  (i,  140)
•irepirr€(ppayfji.evoi.  The  annour  of  the  horses  con-
sisted either  of  scale  armour,  or  of  plates  of  metal,
which  had  different  names  according  to  the  pans  of
the  body  which  they  protected.  Pollux  (i.  140)
speaks  of  the  TrpOjueTWTriSioj/,  Trapcoirtou,  irapiyCou,
irpoffTepviZiov^  irapaTrXevpidLOV,  -TrapafjLTjpldiou,  ira-
paKVTjfjilSiov.  Among  many  of  the  Eastern  nations,
who  placed  their  chief  dependence  upon  their
cavalrj',  we  find  horses  protected  in  this  manner  ;
but  among  the  Romans  we  do  not  read  of  any
troops  of  this  description  till  the  later  times  of  the


CATARACTA.

empire,  when  the  discipline  of  the  legions  was  de-
stroyed, and  the  chief  dependence  began  to  be
placed  on  the  cavalry.

This  species  of  troops  was  common  among  the
Persians  from  the  earliest  times,  from  whom  it  was
adopted  by  their  Macedonian  conquerors.  (Liv.
XXXV.  48  ;  xxxvii.  40.)  In  the  army  of  the  elder
CjTus,  Xenophon  (Cyr.  vi.  4.  §  1)  says  that  the
horses  were  protected  by  coverings  for  the  forehead
and  chest  (irpo/xercoinSiois  koL  irpo(TT€pvidiois)  ;
and  the  same  was  the  case  with  the  army  of  Arta-
xerxes,  when  he  fought  Avith  his  younger  brother.
(Xen.  Anab.  i.  8.  §  7.)  Troops  of  this  description
were  called  dibanarii  by  the  Persians  (cataphracti
equites,  quos  clibanarios  dictitant  Persae^  Amm.
Marc,  xvi,  10  ;  compare  I.amprid.  Alex.  Sev.  56)
We  first  read  of  cataphracti  in  the  Roman  anny  in
the  time  of  Constantine.     (Amm.  Marc.  I.  c.)

2.  The  word  was  also  applied  to  ships  which
had  decks,  in  opposition  to  Aphracti.     [Navis.]

CATAPIRA'TER  {KaraireipaTvpia,  ^oXis),  the
lead  used  in  sounding  (iv  t(^  fioXi(eiv),  or  fathom-
hig  the  depth  of  water  in  navigation.  The  mode
of  employing  this  instrument  appears  to  have  un-
dergone no  change  for  more  than  two  thousand
years,  and  is  described  with  exactness  in  the  ac-
count of  St.  PauPs  voyage  and  shipwreck  at  Me-
lite.  (Acts,  xxvii.  28.)  A  cylindrical  piece  of
lead  was  attached  to  a  long  line,  so  as  to  admit  of
being  thrown  into  the  water  in  advance  of  the
vessel,  and  to  sink  rapidly  to  the  bottom,  the  line
being  marked  with  a  knot  at  each  fathom,  to  mea-
sure the  depth.  (Isid.  Orif/.  xix.  4 ;  Eustath.  in
II.  V.  396.)  By  smearing  the  bottom  of  the  lead
with  tallow  (unctu77i,  Lucilius,  ap.  Isid.  I.  c),  spe-
cimens of  the  ground  were  brought  up,  showing
whether  it  was  clay  (Herod,  ii.  5),  gravel,  or  hard
rock.  [J.  Y.]

CATAPULTA.     [Tormentum.]

CATARACTA  (Karap^aKTrjs),  a  portcullis,  so
called  because  it  fell  with  great  force  and  a  loud
noise.  According  to  Vegetius  (De  Be  Mil.  iv.  4),
it  was  an  additional  defence,  suspended  by  iron


CATENA.

rings  and  ropes,  before  the  gates  of  a  city,  in  such
a  manner  that,  when  the  enemy  had  come  up  to
the  gates,  the  portcullis  might  be  let  do\vn  so  as  to
shut  them  in,  and  to  enable  the  besieged  to  assail
them  from  above.  In  the  accompanying  plan  of
the  principal  entrance  to  Pompeii,  there  are  two
sideways  for  foot  passengers,  and  a  road  between
them,  fourteen  feet  wide,  for  carriages.  The  gates
were  placed  at  A,  A,  turning  on  pivots  [Cardo],
as  is  proved  by  the  holes  in  the  pavement,  which
still  remain.  This  end  of  the  road  was  nearest  to
the  town ;  in  the  opposite  direction,  the  road  led
into  the  country.  The  portcullis  was  at  B,  B,  and
was  made  to  slide  in  grooves  cut  in  the  walls.  The
sideways,  secured  with  smaller  gates,  were  roofed
in,  whereas  the  portion  of  the  main  road  between
the  gates  (A,  A)  and  the  portcullis  (B,  B)  was  open
to  the  sky.  When,  therefore,  an  attack  was
made,  the  assailants  were  either  excluded  by  the
portcullis :  or,  if  they  forced  their  way  into  the
barbican  and  attempted  to  break  down  the  gates,
the  citizens,  surrounding  and  attacking  them  from
above,  had  the  greatest  possible  facilities  for  im-
peding and  destroying  them.  Vegetius  speaks  of
the  "  cataracta  "  as  an  ancient  contrivance  ;  and
it  appears  to  have  been  employed  by  the  Jews  at
Jei-usalera  as  early  as  the  time  of  David.  (Psal.
xxiv.  7,  9  ;  comp.  Jer.  xx.  2.  Sept.)  [J.  Y.]

KATASKOPES  GRAPHS'  (KaracrKoirris
ypacp-f}),  an  action  brought  against  spies  at  Athens.
If  a  spy  was  discovered,  he  was  placed  on  the
rack,  in  order  to  obtain  information  from  him,  and
afterwards  put  to  death.  (Antiphanes,  ap.  Athen.
ii.  p.  66,  d.  ;  Dem.  De  Cor.  p.  272;  Aeschin.
c.  Ctesiph.  p.  616;  Plut.  Vit  dec.  Orat.  p.  848,  a.)
It  appears  that  foreigners  only  were  liable  to  this
action ;  since  citizens,  who  were  guilty  of  this
crime,  were  accused  of  irpodocria.

CATASTA.     [Servus.]

CAT  EI  A,  a  missile  used  in  war  by  the  Ger-
mans, Gauls,  and  some  of  the  Italian  nations  ( Virg.
Jen.  vii.  741  ;  Val.  Flac.  vi.  83  ;  Aul.  Gell.  x.
25),  supposed  to  resemble  the  aclis.  (Serv.  in
Aen.  I.  c. ;  Isid.  Orig.  xviii.  7.)  It  probably  had
its  name  from  cutting  ;  and,  if  so,  the  Welsh  terms
cutai^  a  weapon,  cateia,  to  cut  or  mangle,  and
catau^  to  fight,  are  nearly  allied  to  it.       [J.  Y.""

CATELLA.     [Catena.]

CATE'NA,^  dim.  CATELLA  (^Auo-zs,  dim.
aXvaiov,  a\v(TiSiou),  a  chain.  The  chains  which
were  of  superior  value,  either  on  account  of  the
material  or  the  workmanship,  are  commonly  called
catellae  {aXvaia)^  the  diminutive  expressing  their
fineness  and  delicacy  as  well  as  their  minuteness.
The  specimens  of  ancient  chains  which  we  have  in
bronze  lamps,  in  scales  [Libra]  ,and  in  ornaments
for  the  person,  especially  necklaces  [Monile],  show
a  great  variety  of  elegant  and  ingenious  patterns.
Besides  a  plain  circle  or  oval,  the  separate  link  is
often  shaped  like  the  figure  8,  or  is  a  bar  with  a
circle  at  each  end,  or  assumes  other  forms,  some  of


CAUPO.


257


which  are  here  shown.     The  links  are  also  found
80    closely   entwined,   that  the   chain   resembles


platted  wire  or  thread,  like  the  gold  chains  now
manufactured  at  Venice.  This  is  i-epresented  in
the  lowest  figure  of  the  woodcut.

These  valuable  chains  were  sometimes  given  as
rewards  to  the  soldiers  (Liv.  xxxiv.  31)  ;  but  they
were  commonly  worn  by  women  (Hor.  Ep.  i.  17.
55),  either  on  the  neck  (irepl  rhu  rpaxv^ov
d\v(riov,  Menander,  p.  92,  ed.  Mein.),  or  round
the  waist  (Plin.  H.N.  xxxiii.  12);  and  were  used
to  suspend  pearls,  or  jewels  set  in  gold,  keys,
lockets,  and  other  trinkets.  [J.  Y.J

CATERVA'RII.  [Gladiatores.]
CA'THEDRA,  a  seat ;  but  the  term  was  more
particularly  applied  to  the  soft  seats  used  by  wo-
men, whereas  sella  signified  a  seat  common  to  both
sexes  {inter  femineas  cathedras.  Mart.  iii.  63,  iv.
79  ;  Hor.  Sat.  i.  10.  91  ;  Prop.  iv.  5.  37).  The
cathedrae  were,  no  doubt,  of  various  forms  and
sizes  ;  but  they  usually  appear  to  have  had  backs
to  them,  as  is  the  case  in  the  one  represented  in
the  annexed  woodcut,  which  is  taken  from  Sir
William  Hamilton's  work  on  Greek  vases.  On
the  cathedra  is  seated  a  bride,  who  is  being  fanned
by  a  female  slave  with  a  fan  made  of  peacock's
feathers.


Women  were  also  accustomed  to  be  carried
abroad  in  these  cathedrae  instead  of  in  lecticae,
which  practice  was  sometimes  adopted  by  effemi
nate  persons  of  the  other  sex  (seorta  cervicc  ferutur
cathedra^  Juv.  Sat.  i.  65  ;  compare  ix.  51).  The
word  cathedra  was  also  applied  to  the  chair  or
pulpit  from  which  lectures  were  read.  (Juv.  Sat.
vii.  203  ;  Mart.  i.  77.)  Compare  Bottiger,  Sabina^
vol.  i.  p.  35  ;  Scheflfer,  De  Re  Vehicul.  ii.  4.

CATILLUS.     [Catinus.]  '

CATINUS,  or  CATINUM,  a  large  dish,  on
which  fish  and  meat  Avere  served  up  at  table.
Hence  Horace  speaks  of  an  aiigustus  patimts  as  an
indication  of  niggardliness  on  the  part  of  the  host
(Hor.  Ep.  ii  4.  77  ;  Pers.  iii.  11.)  From  this
word  came  the  diminutive  catillus  or  catUluniy  a
small  dish.

CAVAE'DIUM.     [DoMus.]

CAVEA.     [Theatrum.]

CAUPO.  The  nature  of  the  business  of  a
caupo  is  explained  by  Gaius  {Ad  Edict.  Provinc.
Dig.  4.  tit.  9.  s.  5)  :  *'  caupo  .  . .  mercedem  accipit


258


CAUPOXA.


non  pro  custodia,  sed  ...  lit  viatorcs  manere  in
caiipnna  patintur  .  .  .  et  tarnen  custodiae  nomine
tenetur."  The  caupo  lodged  travellers  in  his
house,  and,  though  his  house  was  not  opened  for
the  safe  keeping  of  travellers'  goods,  yet  he  was
answerable  for  their  goods  if  stolen  out  of  his
house,  and  also  for  damage  done  to  them  there.
The  praetor's  edict  was  in  this  form :  "  Nautae
(carriers  by  sea),  caupones,  stabularii  (persons  who
kept  stables  for  beasts),  quod  cujusque  salvum
fore  receperint,  nisi  restituent,  in  cos  judicium
dabo."  By  this  edict  such  persons  were  made  ge-
nerally liable  for  the  things  which  came  into  their
care  ;  for  the  words  "quod  cujusque  salvura  fore
receperint,"  are  explained  thus,  "  quamcunque  rem
sive  mercem  receperint."  But  if  the  goods  of  the
traveller  were  lost  or  damaged  owing  to  any  un-
avoidable calamity,  as  robbery,  fire,  or  the  like,  the
caupo  was  not  answerable.  The  action  which  the
edict  gave  was  "  in  factum,"  or  an  action  on  the
case  ;  and  it  was  Honoraria,  that  is,  gi-vien  by  the
praetor.  The  reason  why  an  Honoraria  actio  was
allowed,  though  there  might  be  actiones  civiles,  is
explained  by  Pomponius  (quoted  by  Ulpian,  Ad
Edictum,  Dig.  4.  tit.  9.  s.  3.  §  1 ) :  in  certain  cases
there  might  be  an  actio  locati  et  conduct!,  or
an  actio  depositi,  against  the  caupo  ;  but  in  the
actio  locati  et  conducti,  the  caupo  would  be  an-
swerable only  for  culpa,  and  in  the  actio  depositi
he  would  be  answerable  only  for  dolus,  whereas  in
this  honoraria  actio  he  was  liable  even  if  there  was
no  culpa,  except  in  the  excepted  cases.  The  Eng-
lish law  as  to  liability  of  an  innkeeper  is  the  same.
(Kent  V.  Shuckard,  2  B.  &  Ad.  803. )      [G.  L.]

CAUPO  NA,  signified,  1.  An  inn,  where  tra-
vellers obtained  food  and  lodging ;  in  which  sense
it  answered  to  the  Greek  words  TraydoKelou^
Karaywyiov,  and  KaTaKvaris.  2.  A  shop,  where
wine  and  ready-dressed  meat  were  sold,  and  thus
coiTcsponded  to  the  Greek  KairrikeTov.  The  per-
son who  kept  a  caupona  was  called  caupo.

It  has  been  maintained  by  many  writers  that
the  Greeks  and  Romans  had  no  inns  for  the  ac-
commodation of  persons  of  any  respectability,  and
that  their  cauponae  and  iraudoKeTa  were  mere
houses  of  shelter  for  the  lowest  classes.  That  such,
however,  was  not  the  case,  an  attentive  perusal  of
the  classical  authors  will  sufficiently  show ;  though
it  is,  at  the  same  time,  very  evident  that  their
houses  of  public  entertainment  did  not  correspond,
either  in  size  or  convenience,  to  similar  places  in
modern  times.

G'reek  Inns.  —  The  hospitality  of  the  earliest
times  of  Greece  rendered  inns  unnecessary  ;  but  in
later  times  they  appear  to  have  been  very  nume-
rous. The  public  ambassadors  of  Athens  were
sometimes  obliged  to  avail  themselves  of  the  ac-
commodation of  such  houses  (Aeschin.Z)e  Feds.  Leg.
p.  273),  as  well  as*private  persons.  (Cic.  De  Div.
i.  27,  Inv.  ii.  4.)  In  addition  to  which,  it  may
be  remarked,  that  the  great  number  of  festivals
which  were  celebrated  in  the  different  towns  of
Greece,  besides  the  four  great  national  festivals,
to  which  persons  flocked  from  all  parts  of  the
Hellenic  world,  must  have  required  a  considerable
number  of  inns  to  accommodate  strangers,  not  only
in  the  places  where  the  festivals  were  celebrated,
but  also  on  the  roads  leading  to  those  places.
(Becker,  Cfiarikles,  vol.  i.  p.  134.)

The  word  KairriKelov  signified,  as  has  been  al-
ready remarked,  a  place  where  mne  and  ready-


caupona:

dressed  provisions  were  sold.  KdirriXos  signifies
in  general  a  retail  trader,  who  sold  goods  in  small
quantities,  whence  he  is  sometimes  called  iraXiy-
/caTTTjAos,  and  his  business  TraXiyKcnnjXiveiv  (Dem.
c.  Dioni/sodor.  p.  1285  ;  Aristoph,  Plut.  1156;
Pollux,  vii.  12)  ;  but  the  term  is  more  particularly
applied  to  a  person  who  sold  ready-dressed  provi-
sions, and  especially  wine  in  small  quantities.
(Plat.  Gorg.  p.  518.)  When  a  retail  dealer  in
other  commodities  is  spoken  of,  the  name  of  his
trade  is  usually  prefixed ;  thus  Ave  read  of  irpoSa-
TOKairrjAos  (Plut.  Pericl.  24),  o-nXwv  KaivTiXos
(Aristoph.  Par,  1175),  oLcrTTihwv  KdirrjXos  (Id.
439),  PL§\LOKdTrr}\os,  &c.  In  these  KaTrrjAera
only  persons  of  the  very  lowest  class  were  accus-
tomed to  eat  and  drink.  (Isocr,  Areiop.  c.  18  ;
Becker,  Charikles,  vol.  i.  p.  259,  &c.)

2.  Roman  Inns.  —  A  Roman  inn  was  called  not
only  caupona.,  but  also  taberna  and  taberna  diver-
soria,  or  simply  diversorium  or  deversorium.  Along
all  the  great  roads  of  Italy  there  were  inns,  as  we
see  from  the  description  which  Horace  gives  of  his
journey  from  Rome  to  Brundisium  {Sat.  i.  5),
though  the  accommodation  which  they  ofi^ered  was
generally  of  a  poor  kind.  We  also  find  mention
of  public  inns  in  Italy  in  other  passages.  (Cic.
pro  Cluent.  59,  Phil.  ii.  31  ;  Hor.  Ep.  i.  11.  11  ;
Propert.  iv.  8.  19;  ^c^s  of  the  Apostles,  xxviii,
15.)  At  Rome,  there  must  have  been  many  inns
to  accommodate  strangers,  but  they  are  hardly  ever
spoken  of.  We,  however,  find  frequent  mention
of  houses  where  wine  and  ready-dressed  provisions
were  sold,  and  which  appear  to  have  been  nume-
rous in  all  parts  of  the  cit3^  The  houses  where
persons  were  allowed  to  eat  and  drink  were  usually
called  Popinae  and  not  cauponae  ;  and  the  keepers
of  them,  Popae.  They  were  principally  fi-equentcd
by  slaves  and  the  lower  classes  (Cic.  Pro  Alii.  24),
and  were  consequently  only  furnished  with  stools
to  sit  upon  instead  of  couches,  whence  Martial  (v.
70)  calls  these  places  sellariolas  popinas.  This
circumstance  is  illustrated  by  a  painting  found  at
Pompeii  in  a  wine-shop,  representing  a  drinking-
scene.  There  are  four  persons  sitting  on  stools
round  a  tripod  table.  The  dress  of  two  of  tiie
figures  is  remarkable  for  the  hoods,  which  resemble


those  of  the  capotes,  worn  by  the  Italian  sailors
and  fishermen  of  the  present  day.  They  use  cups
made  of  horn  instead  of  glasses,  and  from  their
whole  appearance  evidently  belong  to  the  lower
orders.  Above  them  are  different  sorts  of  eatables
hung  upon  a  row  of  pegs.

The  Themiopolia,  which  are  spoken  of  in  the
article  Calida,  appear  to  have  been  the  same  as
the  popinae.  Many  of  these  popinae  were  little
better  than  the  Lwpanarixi  or  brothels  ;  whence


CAUTIO.

Horace  (Sat.  ii.  4.  62)  calls  them  immundus
popinas.  The  wine-shop  at  Pompeii,  where  the
painting  described  above  Avas  found,  seems  to  have
been  a  house  of  this  description ;  for  behind  the
shop  there  is  an  inner  chamber  containing  paint-
ings of  every  species  of  indecency.  (Cell's  Po7n-
peiana,  vol.  ii.  p.  10.)  The  Ganeae,  which  are
sometimes  mentioned  in  connection  with  tlie
popinae  (Suet.  Tib.  34),  were  brothels,  whence
they  are  often  classed  with  the  lustra.  (Liv.  xxvi.
2;  Cic.  Phil.  xiii.  11,  Pro  Seat  9.)  Under  the
emperors  many  attempts  were  made  to  regulate  the
popinae,  but  apparently  with  little  success.  Ti-
berius forbad  all  cooked  provisions  to  be  sold  in
these  shops  (Suet.  Tib.  34)  ;  and  Claudius  com-
manded them  to  be  shut  up  altogether.  (Dion
Cass.  Ix.  6.)  Tbey  appear,  however,  to  have  been
soon  opened  again,  if  they  were  ever  closed  ;  for
Nero  commanded  that  nothing  should  be  sold  in
them  but  different  kinds  of  cooked  pulse  or  vege-
tables (Suet.  Ner.  16  ;  Dion  Cass.  Ixii.  14)  ;  and
an  edict  to  the  same  effect  was  also  published  by
Vespasian.     (Dion  Cass.  Ixvi.  10.)

Persons  who  kept  inns  or  houses  of  public  enter-
tainment of  any  kind,  were  held  in  low  estimation
both  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans  (Theophr.
Char.  6  ;  Plat.  Leg.  xi.  pp.  918,  919)  ;  and  though
the  epithets  of  perfidi  and  maligni^  which  Horace
gives  to  them  {Sat.  i.  1.  29,  i.  5.  4),  may  refer
only  to  particular  innkeepers,  yet  they  seem  to  ex-
press the  common  opinion  entertained  respecting
the  whole  class.  (Zell,  Die  Wirthshauser  d.  Alien;
Stockmann,  De  Popinis ;  Becker,  Gallus,  vol.  i.
pp.  227—236.)

CAUSA  LIBERA'LIS.  [Assertor.]
CAUSAE  PROBATIO.  [Civitas.]
CAUSIA  (/cauo-ia),  a  hat  with  a  broad  brim,
Avhich  was  made  of  felt  and  worn  by  the  Mace-
donian kings.  (Valer.  Max.  v.  1.  §  4.)  Its  form
is  seen  in  the  annexed  figures,  which  are  taken
from  a  fictile  vase,  and  from  a  medal  of  Alexander


I,  of  Macedon.  The  Romans  adopted  it  from  the
Macedonians  (Plaut.  Mil.  Glor.  iv.  4.  42,  Pers.
i.  3.  75  ;  Antip.  Thess.  in  Brunckii  Anal.  ii.  Ill),
and  more  especially  the  Emperor  Caracalla,  who
used  to  imitate  Alexander  the  Great  in  his  cos-
tume.    (Herodian.  iv.  8.  §  5.)  [J.  Y.]

CAU'TIO,  CAVE'RE.  These  words  are  of
frequent  occurrence  in  the  Roman  classical  writers
and  jurists,  and  have  a  great  variety  of  significa-
tions according  to  the  matter  to  which  they  refer.
Their  general  signification  is  that  of  security  given
by  one  person  to  another  ;  also  security  or  legal
safety  which  one  person  obtains  by  the  advice  or
assistance  of  another.  The  general  term  (cautio)
is  distributed  into  its  species  according  to  the  par-
ticular kind  of  the  security,  which  may  be  by
satisdatio,  by  a  fidejussio,  and  in  various  other
ways.     The  general  sense  of  the   word  cautio  is


CAUTIO.  259

accordingly  modified  by  its  adjuncts,  as  cautio
fidejussoria,  pigneraticia,  or  hypothecaria,  and  so
on.  Cautio  is  used  to  express  both  the  security
which  a  magistratus  or  a  judex  may  require  one
party  to  give  to  another,  which  applies  to  cases
where  there  is  a  matter  in  dispute  of  which  a
court  has  already  cognizance  ;  and  also  the  secu-
rity which  is  given  and  received  by  and  between
parties  not  in  litigation.  The  words  cautio  and
cavere  are  more  particularly  used  in  the  latter
sense.

If  a  thing  is  made  a  security  from  one  person  to
another,  the  cautio  becomes  a  matter  of  pignus  or
of  hypotheca  ;  if  the  cautio  is  the  engagement  of  a
surety  on  behalf  of  a  principal,  it  is  a  cautio  fide-
jussoria.

The  cautio  was  most  frequently  a  writing,  which
expressed  the  object  of  the  parties  to  it ;  accord-
ingly the  word  cautio  came  to  signify  both  the  in-
strument {cliirographum  or  instrumentum)  and  the
object  which  it  was  the  purpose  of  the  instrument
to  secure.  (Dig.  47.  tit.  2.  8.27.)  Cicero  {Ad
Div.y'n.  18)  uses  the  expression  cautio  chirographi
mei.  The  phrase  cavere  aliquid  alicui  expressed
the  fact  of  one  person  giving  security  to  another  as
to  some  particular  thing  or  act.  (Dig.  29.  tit.  2.
s.  9;  35.  tit.  1.  s.  18.)

Ulpian  (Dig.  46.  tit.  5)  divides  the  praetoriae
stipulationes  into  three  species,  judiciales,  cautio-
nales,  communes  ;  and  he  defines  the  cautionales
to  be  those  which  are  equivalent  to  an  action
{instar  actionis  hahent)  and  are  a  good  ground  for
a  new  action,  as  the  stipulationes  de  legatis,  tutela,
ratam  rem  habere,  and  damnum  infectum.  Cau-
tiones  then,  which  were  a  branch  of  stipulationes,
were  such  contracts  as  would  be  ground  of  actions.
The  following  examples  will  explain  the  passage  of
Ulpian.

In  many  cases  a  heres  could  not  safely  pay
legacies,  unless  the  legatee  gave  security  (cautio)
to  refund  in  case  the  will  under  which  he  claimed
should  turn  out  to  be  bad.  (Dig.  5.  tit.  3.  s.  17.)
The  Muciana  cautio  applied  to  the  case  of  testa-
mentary conditions,  which  consisted  in  not  doing
some  act,  which,  if  done,  would  deprive  the  heres
or  legatarius  of  the  hereditas  or  the  legacy.  In
order  that  the  person  who  could  take  the  hereditas
or  the  legacy  in  the  event  of  the  condition  being
broken,  uiight  have  the  property  secured,  he  was
entitled  to  have  the  Muciana  cautio.  (Dig.  35.
tit.  1.  s.  7,  18,  73.)  The  heres  was  also  in  some
cases  bound  to  give  security  for  the  payment  of
legacies,  or  the  legatee  was  entitled  to  the  Bonorum
Possessio.  Tutores  and  curatores  were  required  to
give  security  (satisdare)  for  the  due  administration
of  the  property  intrusted  to  them,  unless  the  tutor
was  appointed  by  testament,  or  unless  the  curator
was  a  curator  legitimus.  (Gaius,  i.  199.)  A  pro-
curator who  sued  in  the  name  of  an  absent  party,
might  be  required  to  give  security  that  the  absent
party  would  consent  to  be  concluded  by  the  act  of
his  procurator  (Id.  iv.  d9) ;  this  security  was  a
species  satisdationis,  included  under  the  genus
cautio.  (Dig.  46.  tit.  8.  s.  3,  13,  18,  &c.)  In  the
case  of  damnum  infectum,  the  owner  of  the^  land  or
property  threatened  with  the  mischief,  might  claim
security  from  the  person  who  was  threatening  the
mischief.  (Cic.  Top.  4 ;  Gaius,  iv.  31  ;  Dig.  43.
tit.  8.  s.  5.)

If  a  vendor  sold  a  thing,  it  was  usual  for  him
to  declare  that  he  had  a  good  title  to  it,  and  tliat
s  2


260


CELLA.


if  any  person  recovered  it  from  the  purchaser  by  a
better  title,  he  would  make  it  good  to  the  pur-
chaser ;  and,  in  some  cases,  the  cautio  was  for
double  the  value  of  the  thing.  (Dig.  21.  tit.  2.
8.  60.)     This  was,  in  fact,  a  warranty.

The  word  cautio  was  also  applied  to  the  release
which  a  debtor  obtained  from  his  creditor  on  satis-
fying his  demand :  in  this  sense  cautio  is  equiva-
lent to  a  modem  receipt ;  it  is  the  debtor''s  security
against  the  same  demand  being  made  a  second
time.  (Cic.  Brut.  5  ;  Dig.  46.  "tit.  3.  s.  89,  94.)
Thus  cavere  ab  aliquo  signifies  to  obtain  this  kind
of  security.  A  person  to  whom  the  usus  fructus
of  a  thing  was  given,  might  be  required  to  give
security  that  he  would  enjoy  and  use  it  properly,
and  not  waste  it.     (Dig.  7.  tit.  9.)

Cavere  is  also  applied  to  express  the  professional
advice  and  assistance  of  a  lawj^er  to  his  client  for
his  conduct  in  any  legal  matter.  (Cic.  Ad  Fam.
iii.  1,  vii.  6,  Pro  Murena,  c.  10.)

The  word  cavere  and  its  derivatives  are  also
used  to  express  the  provisions  of  a  law,  by  which
any  thing  is  forbidden  or  ordered,  as  in  the  phrase,
• — Cautum  est  lege,  principalibus  constitutionibus,
&c.  It  is  also  used  to  express  the  words  in  a  will,
by  which  a  testator  declares  his  wish  that  certain
things  should  be  done  after  his  death.  The  pre-
paration of  the  instruments  of  cautio  was,  of  course,
the  business  of  a  lawyer.  [G.  L.]

CEADAS  (KeaSas)  or  CAEADAS  (Katt£5as),
was  a  deep  cavern  or  chasm,  like  the  Barathron  at
Athens,  into  which  the  Spartans  were  accustomed
to  thrust  persons  condemned  to  death.  (Thuc.  i.
134  ;  Strab.  viii.  p.  367  ;  Pans.  iv.  18.  §  4 ;  Suidas,
s.v.  BdpaBpov,  KoiciSas,  KectSas.)

CEDIT  DIES.     [Legatum.]

CE'LERES,  are  said  to  have  been  three  hun-
dred horsemen,  who  formed  the  body-guard  of
Romulus  both  in  peace  and  war  (Liv.  i.  15  ;  Dio-
nys.  ii.  13  ;  Plut.  Rom.  26).  There  can,  however,
be  little  doubt  that  these  Celeres  were  not  simply
the  body-guard  of  the  king,  but  were  the  same  as
the  equites,  or  horsemen,  a  fact  which  is  expressly
stated  by  some  writers  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii.  2.  s.  9),
and  implied  by  others  (Dionys.  I.  c).  [Equites.]
The  etymology  of  Celeres  is  variously  given.  Some
writers  derived  it  from  their  leader  Celer,  who  was
said  to  have  slain  Remus,  but  most  writers  con-
nected it  with  the  Greek  KeArjs,  in  reference  to  the
quickness  of  their  service.  (Serv.  ad  Virg.  Aen.
xi.  603.)  Niebuhr  supposes  celeres  to  be  identical
with  patricii,  and  maintains  that  the  former  word
was  the  name  of  the  whole  class  as  distinguished
from  the  rest  of  the  nation  {Hist,  of  Rome^  vol.  i.
p.  331)  ;  but  although  the  equites  were  at  first
unoubtedly  chosen  from  the  patricians,  there  seems
no  reason  for  believing  that  the  word  celeres  was
synonymous  with  patridi.

The  Celeres  were  under  the  command  of  a  Tri-
bunus  Celerum,  who  stood  in  the  same  relation  to
the  king,  as  the  magister  eqiiitum  did  in  a  subse-
quent period  to  the  dictator.  He  occupied  the
second  place  in  the  state,  and  in  the  absence  of  the
king  had  the  right  of  convoking  the  comitia.
"Whether  he  was  appointed  by  the  king,  or  elected
by  the  comitia,  has  been  questioned,  but  the  former
is  the  more  probable.  (Lyd.  De  Mag.  i.  14  ;  Pom-
pon, de  Orig.  Jur.  in  Dig.  1.  tit.  2.  s.  2.  §§  15,
19  ;  Dionys.  iv.  71  ;  corap.  Becker,  Handbuch  der
Romisch.  AUerth.  vol  ii.  part  L  pp.  239,  338.)
CELLA,  in  its  primary  sense,  means  a  store-


CENSOR.

room  of  any  kind.  (Varr.  De  Ling.  Lai  v.  162,
ed.  Muller.)  Of  these  there  were  various  de-
scriptions, which  took  their  distinguishing  deno-
minations from  the  articles  they  contained,  as,  for
instance,  the  cella  penuaria  or  penaria,  the  ccUa
olearia  and  cella  vinaria.  The  slave  to  whom  the
charge  of  these  stores  was  intrusted,  was  called
ce/larius  (Plaut.  Capt.  iv.  2.  115  ;  Senec.  Ep.  122),
or  promus  (Colum.  xii.  3),  or  condus,  "  quia  prowz7
quod  conditum  est "  (compare  Hor.  Ctirm.  i.  9.  7,
iii.  21.  8),  and  sometimes  promus- condus  and  pro-
curator peni.  (Plaut.  Pseud,  ii.  2.  14.)  This  an-
swers to  our  butler  and  housekeeper.

Any  number  of  small  rooms  clustered  together
like  the  cells  of  a  honeycomb  (Virg.  Ge<>rg.  iv.  164)
were  also  termed  cellae  ;  hence  the  dormitories  of
slaves  and  menials  are  called  cellae  (Cic.  Phil.
ii.  27  ;  Columella,  i.  6),  and  celhm  faviiliaricae
(Vitruv.  vi.  10.  p.  182)  in  distinction  to  a  bed-
chamber, which  was  cuhiculum.  Thus  a  sleeping-
room  at  a  publichouse  is  also  temied  cella.  (Petron.
55.)  For  the  same  reason  the  dens  in  a  brothel
are  cellae.  (Petron.  8  ;  Juv.  Sat.  vi.  128.)  Each
female  occupied  one  to  herself  (Ibid.  122),  over
which  her  name  and  the  price  of  her  favours  were
inscribed  (Senec.  Controv.  i.  2)  ;  hence  cella  in-
scripia  means  a  brothel.  (Mart.  xi.  45.  1.)  Cella
ostiarii  (Vitruv.  vi.  10  ;  Petron.  29),  or  janitoris
(Suet.  Vitell.  16),  is  the  porter's  lodge.

In  the  baths  the  cella  caldaria,  tepidaria,  and
frigidaria,  were  those  which  contained  respectively
the  warm,  tepid,  and  cold  bath.     [Balneae.]

The  interior  of  a  temple,  that  is  the  part  in-
cluded within  the  outside  shell,  (ttikSs  (see  the
lower  woodcut  in  Antae),  was  also  called  cella.
There  was  sometimes  more  than  one  cella  within
the  same  peristj'le  or  under  the  same  roof;  in
which  case  they  were  either  turned  back  to  back,
as  in  the  temple  of  Rome  and  Venus,  built  by
Hadrian  on  the  Via  Sacra,  the  remains  of  which
are  still  visible  ;  or  parallel  to  each  other,  as  in  the
temple  of  Jupiter  Optimus  Maximus  in  the  CapitoL
In  such  instances  each  cell  took  the  name  of  the
deity  whose  statue  it  contained,  as  cella  Jovis,  cella
Junonis,  cella  Minervae.  [A.  R.]

CELLA'RIUS.     [Cella.]

CENOTA'PHIUM,  a  cenotaph  (Keuhs  and
rdcpos)  was  an  empty  or  honorary  tomb,  erected  as
a  memorial  of  a  person  whose  body  was  buried
elsewhere,  or  not  found  for  burial  at  all.  (Comp.
Thuc.  ii.  34  ;  Virg.  Aen.  iii.  303.)

Cenotaphia  were  considered  as  religtosa,  and
therefore  divini  juris,  till  a  rescript  of  the  em-
perors Antoninus  and  Verus  pronounced  them  not
to  be  so.  (Heinec.  Ant.  Rom.  ii.  1.)        [R.  W]

CENSITOR.     [Censor.]

CENSUA'LES.     [Censor.]

CENSOR  (Tifxr]Tiis),  the  name  of  two  magis-
trates of  high  rank  in  the  Roman  republic.  Their
office  was  called  Censura  (rtjitTjTeto  or  rjjUTjrfo).
The  Census,  which  was  a  register  of  Roman
citizens  and  of  their  property,  was  first  estab-
lished by  Servius  TuUius,  the  fifth  king  of  Rome.
After  the  expulsion  of  the  kings  it  was  taken
by  the  consuls  ;  and  special  magistrates  were  not
appointed  for  the  purpose  of  taking  it  till  the
year  B.  c.  443.  The  reason  of  this  alteration
was  owing  to  the  appointment  in  the  preceding
year  of  tribuni  militum  with  consular  power  in
place  of  the  consuls ;  and  as  these  tribunes  might
be  plebeians,  the  patricians  deprived  the  consuls,


CENSOR.

and  consequently  their  representatives,  the  tri-
bunes, of  the  right  of  taking  the  census,  and  en-
trusted it  to  two  magistrates,  called  Censores^  who
were  to  be  cliosen  exclusively  from  the  patricians.
The  magistracy  continued  to  be  a  patrician  one
till  B.  c.  351,  when  C.  Marcius  Rutilus  was  the
first  plebeian  censor  (Liv.  vii.  22).  Twelve  years
afterwards,  B.  c.  339,  it  was  provided  by  one  of
the  Publilian  laws,  that  one  of  the  censors  must
necessarily  be  a  plebeian  (Liv.  viii.  12),  but  it  was
not  till  B.  c.  280  that  a  plebeian  censor  performed
the  solemn  purification  of  the  people  (lustrum  con-
didit^  Liv.  Epit.  13).  In  B.  c.  131  the  two  censors
were  for  the  first  time  plebeians.

There  were  always  two  censors,  because  the  two
consuls  had  previously  taken  the  census  together.
If  one  of  the  censors  died  during  the  time  of  his
office,  another  had  at  first  to  be  chosen  in  his
stead,  as  in  the  case  of  the  consuls.  This,  how-
ever, happened  only  once,  namely,  in  b,  c.  393  ;
because  the  capture  of  Rome  by  the  Gauls  in  this
lustrum  excited  religious  fears  against  the  practice
(Liv.  V.  31).  From  this  time,  if  one  of  the  censors
died,  his  colleague  resigned,  and  two  new  censors
were  chosen.  (Liv.  vi.  27,  ix.  34,  xxiv.  43,
xxvii.  6.)

The  censors  were  elected  in  the  comitia  cen-
turiata  held  under  the  presidency  of  a  consul.
(Gell.  xiii.  15  ;  Liv.  xl.  45.)  Niebuhr  supposes
that  they  were  at  first  elected  by  the  comitia
curiata,  and  that  their  election  was  confirmed  by
the  centuries  ;  but  there  is  no  authority  for  this
supposition,  and  the  truth  of  it  depends  entirely
upon  the  correctness  of  his  views  respecting  the
election  of  the  consuls.  [Consul.]  It  was  ne-
cessary that  both  censors  should  be  elected  on  the
same  day  ;  and  accordingly  if  the  voting  for  the
second  was  not  finished,  the  election  of  the  first
went  for  nothing,  and  new  comitia  had  to  be  held,
(Liv.  ix.  34.)  The  comitia  for  the  election  of  the
censors  were  held  under  different  auspices  from
those  at  the  election  of  the  consuls  and  praetors  ;
and  the  censors  were  accordingly  not  regarded  as
tlieir  colleagues,  although  they  likewise  possessed
the  maxima  auspicia  (Gell.  xiii.  15).  The  comitia
were  held  by  the  consuls  of  the  year  very  soon
after  they  had  entered  upon  their  office  (Liv.  xxiv.
10,  xxxix.  41)  ;  and  the  censors,  as  soon  as  they
were  elected  and  the  censorial  power  had  been
granted  to  them  by  a  lex  centuriata,  were  fully
installed  in  their  office.  (Cic.  de  Leg.  A(jr.  ii.  11;
Liv,  xl.  45.)  As  a  general  principle  the  only
persons  eligible  to  the  office  were  those  who  had
previously  been  consuls  ;  but  a  few  exceptions
occur.  At  first  there  was  no  law  to  prevent  a
person  being  censor  a  second  time  ;  but  the  only
person,  who  was  twice  elected  to  the  office,  was
C.  Marcius  Rutilus  in  B.  c.  265  ;  and  he  brought
forward  a  law  in  this  year,  enacting  that  no  one
should  be  chosen  censor  a  second  time,  and  re-
ceived in  consequence  the  surname  of  Censorinus.
(Plut.  Coriol  1  ;  Val.  Max.  iv.  1.  §  3.)

The  censorship  is  distinguished  from  all  other
Roman  magistracies  by  the  length  of  time  during
which  it  was  held.  The  censors  Avere  originally
chosen  for  a  whole  lustrum,  that  is,  a  period  of
five  years  ;  but  their  office  was  limited  to  eighteen
months,  as  early  as  ten  years  after  its  insti-
tution (b.  c.  433),  by  a  law  of  the  dictator
Mam.  Aemilius  Mamercinus  (Liv.  iv.  24,  ix.  33).
The  censors  also   held  a   very    peculiar   position


CENSOR.


261


with  respect  to  rank  and  dignity.  No  imperiura
was  bestowed  upon  them,  and  accordingly  they
had  no  lictors.  (Zonar.  vii.  19.)  Ihe  jus  censurae
was  granted  to  them  by  a  lex  centuriuta^  and  not
by  the  curiae,  and  in  that  respect  they  were  in-
ferior in  power  to  the  consuls  and  praetors.  (Cic.
de  Leg.  Agr.  ii.  11.)  But  notwithstanding  this,
the  censorship  was  regarded  as  the  highest  dignity
in  the  state,  with  the  exception  of  the  dictatorship  ;
it  was  an  tepo  apxh-)  a  sanctus  magistratus,  to  which
the  deepest  reverence  was  due.  (Plut.  Cat.  Maj,
16,  Flamin.  18,  Camill.  2,  14,  Aemil.  Paul.  38  ;
Cic.  ad  Fam.  iii.  10.)  The  high  rank  and  dignity
which  the  censorship  obtained,  Avas  owing  to  the
various  important  duties  gradually  entrusted  to  it,
and  especially  to  its  possessing  the  regimen  moruwy
or  general  control  over  the  conduct  and  morals  of
the  citizens  ;  in  the  exercise  of  which  power  they
were  regulated  solely  by  their  own  views  of  duty,
and  were  not  responsible  to  any  other  power  in  the
state.  (Dionys.  in  Mai,  Nova  ColL  vol.  ii.  p.  516  ;
Liv.  iv.  24,  xxix.  37;  Val.  Max.  vii  2.  §  6.)  The
censors  possessed  of  course  the  sella  curulis  (Liv.
xl.  45),  but  with  respect  to  their  official  dress  there
ts  some  doubt.  From  a  well-known  passage  of
Polybius  (vi.  53),  describing  the  use  or  the
imagines  at  funerals,  we  may  conclude  that  a  con-
sul or  praetor  wore  the  praetexta,  one  who  triumphed
the  toga  picta,  and  the  censor  a  purple  toga  pecu-
liar to  him  ;  but  other  writers  speak  of  their
official  dress  as  the  same  as  that  of  the  other
higher  magistrates.  (Zonar.  viii.  19;  Athen.  xiv.
p.  660,  c.)  The  funeral  of  a  censor  was  always
conducted  with  groat  pomp  and  splendour,  and
hence  a  funus  eensorium  was  voted  even  to  the
emperors.     (Tac.  Ann.  iv.  15,  xiii.  2.)

The  censorship  continued  in  existence  for  421
years,  namely,  from  b.  c.  443  to  b.  c.  22  ;  but
during  this  period  many  lustra  passed  by  without
any  censor  being  chosen  at  all.  According  to  one
statement  the  office  was  abolished  by  Sulla
(Schol.  Gronov.  ad  Cic.  Div.  in  Caecil.  3,  p.  384,
ed.  Orelli),  and  although  the  authority,  on  which
this  statement  rests,  is  not  of  much  weight,  the
fact  itself  is  probable  ;  for  there  was  no  census
during  the  two  lustra  which  elapsed  from  Sulla's
dictatorship  to  the  first  consulship  of  Pompey
(b.  c.  82 — 70),  and  any  strict  regimen  morum
would  have  been  found  very  inconvenient  to  the
aristocracy  in  whose  favour  Sulla  legislated.  If
the  censorship  was  done  away  with  by  Sulla,  it
was  at  any  rate  restored  in  the  consulship  of
Pompey  and  Crassus.  Its  power  was  limited  by
one  of  the  laws  of  the  tribune  Clodius  (b.  c.  58),
which  prescribed  certain  regular  forms  of  proceed-
ing before  the  censors  in  expelling  a  person  from
the  senate,  and  the  concurrence  of  both  censors  in
inflicting  this  degradation.  (Dion  Cass,  xxxviii.
1 3  ;  Cic.  pro  Sext.  25,  de  Prov.  Cons.  15.)  This
law,  however,  was  repealed  in  the  third  consulship
of  Pompey  (b.  c.  52),  on  the  proposition  of  his  col-
league Caecilius  Metellus  Scipio  (Dion  Cass.  xl.
57),  but  the  censorship  never  recovered  its  former
power  and  influence.  During  the  civil  wars  which
followed  soon  afterwards  no  censors  were  elected  ;
and  it  was  only  after  a  long  interval  that  they
were  again  appointed,  namely  in  B.  c.  22,  when
Augustus  caused  L.  Munatius  Plancus  and  Paulus
Aemilius  Lepidus  to  fill  the  office.  (Suet.  Aug.
37,  Claud.  16  ;  Dion  Cass.  liv.  2.)  This  was  the
last  time  that  such  magistrates  were  appointed;
s  3


262


CENSOR.


the  emperors  in  future  discharged  the  duties  of
their  office  under  the  name  of  Praefedura  Moriim.
Some  of  the  emperors  sometimes  took  the  name  of
censor  when  they  actually  held  a  census  of  the
Roman  people,  as  was  the  case  with  Claudius,  who
appointed  the  elder  Vitellius  as  his  colleague  (Suet.
Claud.  16  ;  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  4,  Hist.  i.  9),  and  with
Vespasian,  who  likewise  had  a  colleague  in  his  son
Titus.  (Suet.  Vesp.  8,  Tit.  6.)  Domitian  assumed
the  title  of  censor  perpetuus  (Dion  Cass.  liii.  1 8),
but  this  example  was  not  imitated  by  succeeding
emperors.  In  the  reign  of  Decius  we  find  the
elder  Valerian  nominated  to  the  censorship  without
a  colleague  (Trebell.  Pollio,  Valer.  1,  2)  ;  and
towards  the  end  of  the  fourth  century  it  was  pro-
posed to  revive  the  censorship  (Symmach.  Ep.  iv.
29,  V.  9),  but  this  design  was  never  earned  into
effect.

The  duties  of  the  censors  may  be  divided  into
three  classes,  all  of  which  were  however  closely
connected  with  one  another :  I.  The  Census,  or
register  of  the  citizens  and  of  their  property,  in
which  were  included  the  lectio  senatus,  and  the
recocpiitio  eq?iitum  ;  11.  The  Regimen  Morum  ;  and
III.  77^6  administration  of  the  finances  of  the  state,
under  which  were  classed  the  superintendence  of
the  public  buildings  and  the  erection  of  all  new
public  works.  The  original  business  of  the  censor-
ship was  at  first  of  a  much  more  limited  kind  ;  and
was  restricted  almost  entirely  to  taking  the  census
(Liv.  iv.  8)  ;  but  the  possession  of  this  power
gradually  brought  with  it  fresh  power  and  new
duties,  as  is  shown  below.  A  general  view  of
these  duties  is  briefly  expressed  in  the  following
passage  of  Cicero  {de  Leg.  iii.  3) :  — "  Censores
populi  aevitates,  soboles,  familias  pecuniasque  cen-
sento :  urbis  templa,  vias,  aquas,  aerarium,  vecti-
galia  tuento :  populique  partes  in  tribus  distri-
buunto  :  exin  pecunias,  aevitates,  ordines  partiunto  :
equitum,  peditumque  prolem  describunto  :  caelibes
esse  prohibento:  mores  populi  regunto :  probrum
in  senatu  ne  relinquunto."

I.  The  Census,  the  first  and  principal  duty
of  the  censors,  for  which  the  proper  expression  is
censum  agere  (Liv.  iii.  3,  22,  iv.  8),  was  always
held  in  the  Campus  Martins,  and  from  the  year
B.  c.  435  in  a  special  building  called  Villa  Puhlica,
which  was  erected  for  that  purpose  by  the  second
pair  of  censors,  C.  Furius  Pacilus  and  M.  Geganius
Macerinus.  (Liv.  iv.  22  ;  Varr.  R.  R.  iii.  2.)  An
account  of  the  formalities  with  which  the  census
was  opened  is  given  in  a  fragment  of  the  Tabulae
Censoriae,  preserved  by  Varro  {L.  L.  vi.  86,  87,
ed.  Miiller).  After  the  auspicia  had  been  taken,
the  citizens  were  summoned  by  a  public  cryer
(praeco)  to  appear  before  the  censors.  Each  tribe
was  called  up  separately  (Dionys.  v.  75)  ;  and  the
names  in  each  tribe  were  probably  taken  according
to  the  lists  previously  made  out  by  the  tribunes  of
the  tribes.  Every  paterfamilias  had  to  appear  in
person  before  the  censors,  who  were  seated  in  their
curule  chairs ;  and  those  names  were  taken  first
which  were  considered  to  be  of  good  omen,  such
as  Valerius,  Salvias,  Statorius,  &c.  (Festus,  s.  v.
Locus  Lucrinus ;  Schol.  Bob.  ad  Cic.  pro  Scaur.
p.  374,  ed.  Orelli.)  The  census  was  conducted  ad
arhitrium  censoris  ;  but  the  censors  laid  down  cer-
tain rules  (Liv.  iv.  8,  xxix.  15),  sometimes  called
leges  censui  censendo  (Liv.  xliii.  14),  in  which
mention  waa  made  of  the  different  kinds  of  pro-
perty subject  to   the   census,  and  in  what  way


CENSOR.

their  value  was  to  be  estimated.  According  to
these  laws  each  citizen  had  to  give  an  account  of
himself,  of  his  family,  and  of  his  property  upon
oath,  ex  animi  sententia.  (Dionys.  iv.  15  ;  Liv.
xliii.  14.)  First  he  had  to  give  his  full  name
{praenomen,  nomen,  and  cognomen)  and  that  of
his  father,  or  if  he  were  a  freedman  that  of  liis
patron,  and  he  was  likewise  obliged  to  state  his
age.  He  was  then  asked,  Tu,  ex  animi  tui  sen-
tentia, uxorem  hubes  1  and  if  married  he  had  to
give  the  name  of  his  wife,  and  likewise  the  num-
ber, names,  and  ages  of  his  children,  if  an}-.  (Gell.
iv.  20  ;  Cic.  de  Orat.  ii.  64  ;  Tab.  Heracl]  142
(68)  ;  Dig.  50.  tit.  15.  s.  3.)  Single  women  (viduae)
and  orphans  (orbi  orbaeque),  were  represented  by
their  tutores  ;  their  names  were  entered  in  separate
lists,  and  they  were  not  included  in  the  sum  total
of  capita,  (Comp.  Liv.  iii.  3,  Epit.  59.)  After
a  citizen  had  stated  his  name,  age,  family,  &c.,  he
then  had  to  give  an  account  of  all  his  property,  so
far  as  it  was  subject  to  the  census.  In  making
this  statement  he  was  said  censere  or  censeri,  as  a
deponent,  "  to  value  or  estimate  himself,"  or  as  a
passive  "  to  be  valued  or  estimated  : "  the  censor,
who  received  the  statement,  was  also  said  censere,
as  well  as  accipere  censum.  (Comp.  Cic.  pro  Place.
32  ;  Liv.  xxxix.  15.)  Only  such  things  were  liable
to  the  census  (censui  censendo)  as  were  property
ex  jure  Quiritium.  At  first  each  citizen  appears
to  have  merely  given  the  value  of  his  whole  pro-
perty in  general  without  entering  into  details
(Dionys.  iv.  15  ;  Cic.  de  Leg.  iii.  3  ;  Festus,  *.  v.
Censores)  ;  but  it  soon  became  the  practice  to  give
a  minute  specification  of  each  article,  as  well  as  the
general  value  of  the  whole.  (Comp.  Cic.  pro  Place.
32  ;  Gell.  vii.  11  ;  Plut.  Cat.  Maj.  18.)  Land
formed  the  most  important  article  in  the  census  ;
but  public  land,  the  possessio  of  which  only  be-
longed to  a  citizen,  was  excluded  as  not  being
Quiritarian  property.  If  we  may  judge  from  the
practice  of  the  imperial  period,  it  was  the  custom
to  give  a  most  minute  specification  of  all  such  land
as  a  citizen  held  ex  jure  Quiritium.  He  had  to
state  the  name  and  situation  of  the  land,  and  to
specify  what  portion  of  it  was  arable,  what  meadow,
what  vineyard,  and  what  olive-ground :  and  to
the  land  thus  minutely  described  he  had  to  affix
his  own  valuation.  (Dig.  50.  tit.  15.  s.  4.)  Slaves
and  cattle  formed  the  next  most  important  item.
The  censors  also  possessed  the  right  of  calling  for  a
return  of  such  objects  as  had  not  usually  been  given
in,  such  as  clothing,  jewels,  and  carriages.  (Liv.
xxxix.  44  ;  Plut.  Cat.  Maj.  18.)  It  has  been
doubted  by  some  modem  writers  whether  the  cen-
sors possessed  the  power  of  setting  a  higher  valu-
ation on  the  property  than  the  citizens  themselves
iiad  put ;  but  when  we  recollect  the  discretionary
nature  of  the  censors'  powers,  and  the  necessity
almost  that  existed,  in  order  to  prevent  fraud,  that
the  right  of  making  a  surcharge  should  be  vested
in  somebody's  hands,  we  can  hardly  doubt  that
the  censors  had  this  power.  It  is  moreover  ex-
pressly stated  that  on  one  occasion  they  made  an
extravagant  surcharge  on  articles  of  luxury  (Liv.
xxxix.  44  ;  Plut.  Cat.  Maj.  18);  and  even  if  they
did  not  enter  in  their  books  the  property  of  a  person
at  a  higher  value  than  he  returned  it,  they  accom-
plished the  same  end  by  compelling  him  to  pay  '
down  the  tax  upon  the  property  at  a  higher  rate
than  others.  The  tax  (trilmtum)  was  usually  one
per  thousand  upon  the  property  entered  in  the  books


CENSOR.

of  the  censors ;  but  on  one  occasion  the  censors,  as
a  punishment,  compelled  a  person  to  pay  eight  per
thousand  {octuplicato  censu,  Liv.  iv.  24).

A  person,  who  voluntarily  absented  himself
fr»m  the  census,  and  thus  became  incensus^  was
subject  to  tlie  severest  punishment.  Servius  TuUius
is  said  to  have  threatened  the  incensus  with  im-
prisonment and  death  (Liv.  i.  44)  ;  and  in  the  re-
publican period  he  might  be  sold  by  the  state  as  a
slave.  (Cic.  pro  Cae-cin.  34.)  In  the  later  times
of  the  republic  a  person  who  was  absent  from  the
census,  might  be  represented  by  another,  and  thus
be  registered  by  the  censors.  (Varr.  L.  L.  vi.  86.)
Whether  the  soldiers  who  were  absent  on  service
had  to  appoint  a  representative,  may  be  questioned.
In  anci  nt  times  the  sudden  breaking  out  of  a
war  prevented  the  census  from  being  taken  (Liv.
vi.  3 1 ),  because  a  large  number  of  the  citizens
would  necessarily  be  absent.  It  is  supposed  from
a  passage  in  Livy  (xxix.  37),  that  in  later  times
the  censors  sent  commissioners  into  the  provinces
with  full  powers  to  take  the  census  of  the  Roman
soldiers  there  ;  but  this  seems  to  have  been  only  a
special  case.  It  is,  on  the  contrary,  probable  from
the  way  in  which  Cicero  pleads  the  absence  of
Archias  from  Rome  with  the  army  under  Lucullus,
as  a  sufficient  reason  for  his  not  having  been  en-
rolled in  the  census  {pro  Arch.  .5),  that  service  in
the  army  was  a  valid  excuse  for  absence.

After  the  censors  had  received  the  names  of  all
the  citizens  with  the  amount  of  their  property,  they
then  had  to  make  out  the  lists  of  the  tribes,  and
also  of  the  classes  and  centuries  ;  for  by  the  legis-
lation of  Servius  Tullius  the  position  of  each  citizen
in  the  state  was  determined  by  the  amount  of  his
property.  [Comitia  Centuriata.]  These  lists
fonned  a  most  important  part  of  the  Tabulae  Cen-
soriae,  under  which  name  were  included  all  the
documents  connected  in  any  way  with  the  discharge
of  the  censors'  duties.  (Cic.  de  Leg.  iii.  3  ;  Liv.
xxiv.  18  ;  Plut.  Cat.  Maj.  16  ;  Cic.  de  Leg.  Agr.
i.  2.)  These  lists,  as  far  at  least  as  they  were  con-
nected Avith  the  finances  of  the  state,  were  deposited
in  the  aerarium,  which  was  the  temple  of  Saturn
(Liv.  xxix.  37)  ;  but  the  regular  depositary  for  all
the  archives  of  the  censors  was  in  earlier  times  the
Atrium  Libertatis,  near  the  Villa  publica  (Liv.
xliii.  16,  xlv.  15),  and  in  later  times  the  temple  ol
the  Nymphs.     (Cic.  pro  Mil.  27.)

Besides  the  ^arrangement  of  the  citizens  into
tribes,  centuries,  and  classes,  the  censors  had  also
to  make  out  the  lists  of  the  senators  for  the  en-
suing lustrum,  or  till  new  censors  were  appointed  ;
striking  out  the  names  of  such  as  they  considered
unworthy,  and  making  additions  to  the  body  from
those  who  were  qualified.  This  important  part  of
their  duties  is  explained  under  Senatus.  In  the
same  manner  they  held  a  review  of  the  equites
equo  publico,  and  added  and  removed  names  as
they  judged  proper.    [Equites.]

After  the  lists  had  been  completed,  the  number
of  citizens  was  couifted  up,  and  the  sum  total  an-
nounced ;  and  accordingly  we  find  that,  in  the
account  of  a  census,  the  number  of  citizens  is  like-
wise usually  given.  They  are  in  such  cases  spoken
of  as  capita.,  sometimes  with  the  addition  of  the
word  civium,  and  sometimes  not  ;  and  hence  to  be
registered  in  the  census  was  the  same  thing  as
caput  habere.     [Caput.]

II.  Regimen  Morum.  This  was  the  most
important  branch  of  the  censors'  duties,  and  the


CENSOR.  263

one  which  caused  their  office  to  be  the  most  re-
vered and  the  most  dreaded  in  the  Roman  state.
It  naturally  grew  out  of  the  right  which  they  pos-
sessed of  excluding  unworthy  persons  from  the
lists  of  citizens  ;  for,  as  has  been  well  remarked,
"  they  would,  in  the  first  place,  be  the  sole  judges
of  many  questions  of  fact,  such  as  whether  a
citizen  had  the  qualifications  required  by  law  or
custom  for  the  rank  which  he  claimed,  or  whether
he  had  ever  incurred  any  judicial  sentence,  which
rendered  him  infamous  :  but  from  thence  the  transi-
tion was  easy,  according  to  Roman  notions,  to  the
decision  of  questions  of  right  ;  such  as  whether  a
citizen  was  really  worthy  of  retaining  his  rank,
whether  he  had  not  committed  some  act  as  justly
degrading  as  those  which  incurred  the  sentence  of
the  law."  In  this  manner  the  censors  gradually  be-
came possessed  of  a  complete  superintendence  over
the  whole  public  and  private  life  of  every  citizen.
They  were  constituted  the  conservators  of  public
and  private  virtue  and  morality  ;  they  were  not
simply  to  prevent  crime  or  particular  acts  of  im-
morality, but  their  great  object  was  to  maintain
the  old  Roman  character  and  habits,  the  mos
mujorum.  The  proper  expression  for  this  branch
of  their  power  was  regimen  morum  (Cic.  de  I^eg.
iii.  3  ;  Liv.  iv.  8,  xxiv.  18,  xl.  46,  xli.  27,  xlii.
3  ;  Suet.  Aiuj.  27),  which  was  called  in  the  times
of  the  empire  cura  or  praefectura  murum.  The
punishment  inflicted  by  the  censors  in  the  exercise
of  this  branch  of  their  duties  was  called  Nota  or
Nctutio.,  or  Animadcersio  Censoria.  In  inflicting  it
they  were  guided  only  by  their  conscientious  con-
victions of  duty  ;  they  had  to  take  an  oath  that  they
would  act  neither  through  partiality  nor  favour  ;
and,  in  addition  to  this,  they  were  bound  in  every
case  to  state  in  their  lists,  opposite  the  name  of  the
guilty  citizen,  the  cause  of  the  punishment  inflicted
on  him,  —  Stibscriptio  censoria.  (Liv,  xxxix.  42  }
Cic.  pro  Cluent.  42—48  ;  Gell.  iv.  20.)

This  part  of  the  censors'  office  invested  them
with  a  peculiar  kind  of  jurisdiction,  which  in  many
respects  resembled  the  exercise  of  public  opinion
in  modern  times  ;  for  there  are  innumerable
actions  which,  though  acknowledged  by  every  one
to  be  prejudicial  and  immoral,  still  do  not  come
within  the  reach  of  the  positive  laws  of  a  country.
Even  in  cases  of  real  crimes,  the  positive  laws  fre-
quently punish  only  the  particular  ofibnce,  while
in  public  opinion  the  oifender,  even  after  he  has
undergone  punishment,  is  still  incapacitated  for
certain  honours  and  distinctions  which  are  granted
only  to  persons  of  unblemished  character.  Hence
the  Roman  censors  might  brand  a  man  with  their
nota  censoria  in  case  he  had  been  convicted  of  a
crime  in  an  ordinary  court  of  justice,,  and  had
alreadjr  suff'ered  punishment  for  it.  The  conse-
quence of  such  a  nota  was  only  ignominia  and  not
infamia  (Cic.  de  Rep.  iv.  6)  [Infamia],  and  the
censorial  verdict  was  not  a  judicium  or  res  judi-
cata (Cic.  -pro  Cluent.  42),  for  its  eifects  were  not
lasting,  but  might  be  removed  by  the  following  cen-
sors, or  by  a  lex.  A  nota  censoria  was  moreover  not
valid,  unless  both  censors  agreed.  The  ignominia
was  thus  only  a  transitory  capitis  diminutio,  which
does  not  even  appear  to  have  deprived  a  magis-
trate of  his  office  (Liv.  xxiv.  18),  and  certainly
did  not  disqualify  persons  labouring  under  it  for
obtaining  a  magistracy,  for  being  appointed  as
judices  by  the  praetor,  or  for  serving  in  the  Roman
armies.  Mam.  Aemilius  was  thus,  notwithstand-
s  4  •


264.  CENSOR.

ing  the  animadversio  censoria,  made  dictator.  (Liv.
iv.  31.)

A  person  might  be  branded  with  a  censorial
nota  in  a  variety  of  cases,  which  it  would  be  im-
possible to  specify,  as  in  a  great  many  instances  it
depended  upon  the  discretion  of  the  censors  and
the  view  they  took  of  a  case  ;  and  sometimes  even
one  set  of  censors  would  overlook  an  oifence  which
was  severely  chastised  by  their  successors.  (Cic.
de  Seiiect.  12.)  But  the  oiTences  which  are  re-
corded to  have  been  punished  by  the  censors  are
of  a  threefold  nature,

1.  Such  as  occurred  in  the  private  life  of  indi-
viduals, e.  g.  (a)  Living  in  celibacy  at  a  time
when  a  person  ought  to  be  married  to  provide  the
state  with  citizens.  (Val.  Max.  ii.  9.  §  1.)  The
obligation  of  marrying  was  frequently  impressed
upon  the  citizens  by  the  censors,  and  the  refusal  to
fulfil  it  was  punished  with  a  fine  [Aes  Uxorium].
(6)  The  dissolution  of  matrimony  or  betrothment  in
an  improper  way,  or  for  insufficient  reasons.  (Val.
Max.  ii.  9.  §  2.)  (c)  Improper  conduct  towards
one's  wife  or  children,  as  well  as  harshness  or  too
great  indulgence  towards  children,  and  disobedi-
ence of  the  latter  towards  their  parents.  (Plut.
Cat.  Maj.  17  ;  compare  Cic.  de  Rep.  iv.  6  ;  Dionys.
XX.  3.)  {d)  Inordinate  and  luxurious  mode  of
living,  or  an  extravagant  expenditure  of  money.
A  great  many  instances  of  this  kind  are  recorded.
(Liv.  Epit.  14,  xxxix.  44  ;  Plut.  Cat.  Maj.  18  ;
Gellius,  iv.  8  ;  Val.  Max.  ii.  9.  §  4.)  At  a  later
time  the  leges  sumtuariae  were  made  to  check  the
growing  love  of  luxuries,  (e)  Neglect  and  care-
lessness in  cultivating  one-s  fields.  (Gell.  iv.  12  ;
Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  3.)  (/)  Cruelty  towards  slaves
or  clients.  (Dionys.  xx.  3.)  {g)  The  carrying  on
of  a  disrepufcible  trade  or  occupation  (Dionys.  I.  c),
such  as  acting  in  theatres.  (Liv.  vii.  2.)  Qi)  Le-
gacy-hunting, defrauding  orphans,  &c.

2.  Offences  committed  in  public  life,  either  in
the  capacity  of  a  public  ofticer  or  against  magis-
trates, (a)  If  a  magistrate  acted  in  a  manner  not
befitting  his  dignity  as  an  officer,  if  he  was  acces-
sible to  bribes,  or  forged  auspices.  (Cic.  de  Senect.
12  ;  Liv.  xxxix.  42  ;  Val.  Max.  ii.  9.  §  3  ;  Plut.
Cat.  Maj.  17  ;  Cic.  de  Divin.  i.  16.)  (6)  Im-
proper conduct  towards  a  magistrate,  or  the  attempt
to  limit  his  power  or  to  abrogate  a  law  which  the
censors  thought  necessary.  (Liv.  iv.  24  ;  Cic.  de
Orat.  ii.  64 ;  Val.  Max.  ii.  9.  §  5  ;  Gellius,  iv.  20.)
(c)  Perjury.  (Cic.  de  Of.  i.  13  ;  Liv.  xxiv.  18  ;
Gell.  vii.  18.)  {d)  Neglect,  disobedience,  and
cowardice  of  soldiers  in  the  army.  (Val.  Max.  ii.  9.
§  7  ;  Liv.  xxiv.  18,  xxvii.  11.)  (e)  The  keeping  of
the  equus  publicus  in  bad  condition.   [Equites.]

3.  A  variety  of  actions  or  pursuits  which  were
thought  to  be  injurious  to  public  morality,  might
be  forbidden  by  the  censors  by  an  edict  (Gellius,
XV.  11),  and  those  who  acted  contrary  to  such
edicts  were  branded  with  the  nota  and  degraded.
For  an  enumeration  of  the  offences  that  might  be
punished  by  the  censors  with  ignominia,  see  Nie-
buhr.  Hist,  of  Rome.,  vol.  ii.  p.  399,  &c.

The  punishments  inflicted  by  the  censors  gene-
rally differed  according  to  the  station  which  a  man
occupied,  though  sometimes  a  person  of  the  highest
rank  might  suffer  all  the  punishments  at  once,  by
being  degraded  to  the  lowest  class  of  citizens.  But
they  are  generally  divided  into  four  classes :  —

1.  Motio  or  ejedio  e  senatu,  or  the  exclusion  of  a
man  from  the  number  of  senators.     This  punish-


CENSOR.

ment  might  either  be  a  simple  exclusion  from  the
list  of  senators,  or  the  person  might  at  the  same
time  be  excluded  from  the  tribes  and  degraded  to
the  rank  of  an  aerarian.  (Liv.  xxiv.  18.)  The
latter  course  seems  to  have  been  seldom  adopted. ;
the  ordinary  mode  of  inflicting  the  punishment  was
simply  this :  the  censors  in  their  new  lists  omitted
the  names  of  such  senators  as  they  wished  to  ex-
clude, and  in  reading  these  new  lists  in  public,
passed  over  the  names  of  those  who  were  no  longer
to  be  senators.  Hence  the  expression  praeteriti
senatores  is  equivalent  to  e  senatu  ejecti.  (Liv.
xxxviii.  28,  xxvii.  11,  xxxiv.  44  ;  Fest.  s.  v.
Praeteriti.)  In  some  cases,  however,  the  censors
did  not  acquiesce  in  this  simple  mode  of  proceed-
ing, but  addressed  the  senator  whom  they  had
noted,  and  publicly  reprimanded  him  for  his  con-
duct. (Liv.  xxiv.  18.)  As,  however,  in  ordinary
cases  an  ex-senator  was  not  disqualified  by  his
ignominia  for  holding  any  of  the  magistracies  which
opened  the  way  to  the  senate,  he  might  at  the  next
census  again  become  a  senator.  (Cic.  pro  Cluent.
42,  Plut.  Cic.  17.)

2.  The  ademptio  equi,  or  the  taking  away  the
equus  publicus  from  an  eques.  This  punishment
might  likewise  be  simple,  or  combined  with  the  ex-
clusion from  the  tribes  and  the  degradation  to  the
rank  of  an  aerarian.  (Liv.  xxiv.  18,  43,  xxvii.
11,  xxix.  37,  xliii.  16.)    [Equites.]

3.  The  motio  e  trihu,  or  the  exclusion  of  a  person
from  his  tribe.  This  punishment  and  the  degra-
dation to  the  rank  of  an  aerarian  were  originally
the  same  ;  but  when  in  the  course  of  time  a  dis-
tinction was  made  between  the  tribus  rusticae  and
the  tribus  urbanae,  the  motio  e  tribu  transferred  a
person  from  the  rustic  tribes  to  the  less  respectable
city  tribes,  and  if  the  further  degradation  to  the
rank  of  an  aerarian  was  combined  with  the  motio
e  tribu,  it  was  always  expressly  stated.  (Liv.  xlv.
]5;Plin.^.A^.  xviii.  3.)

4.  The  fourth  punishment  was  called  referre  in
aerarios  (Liv.  xxiv.  18  ;  Cic.  pro  Cluent.  43)  or

facere  aliquem  aerarium  (Liv.  xxiv.  43),  and  might
be  inflicted  on  any  person  who  was  thought  by
the  censors  to  deserve  it.  [Aerarii.]  This  de-
gradation, properly  speaking,  included  all  the
other  punishments,  for  an  eques  could  not  be  made
an  aerarius  unless  he  was  previously  deprived  of
his  horse,  nor  could  a  member  of  a  rustic  tribe  be
made  an  aerarius  unless  he  was  previously  excluded
from  it.     (Liv.  iv.  24,  xxiv.  18,  &c.)

A  person  who  had  been  branded  with  a  nota
censoria,  might,  if  he  considered  himself  wronged,
endeavour  to  prove  his  innocence  to  the  censors
(causam  agere  apvd  ce?isores,  Varr.  de  Re  Rust.  i.
7),  and  if  he  did  not  succeed,  he  might  try  to  gain
the  protection  of  one  of  the  censors,  that  he  might
intercede  on  his  behalf.

Ill,  The  Administration  of  the  Finances
OF  the  State,  was  another  part  of  the  censors'
office.  In  the  first  place  the  tributum,  or  propert}'--
tax,  had  to  be  paid  by  each  citizen  according  to  the
amount  of  his  property  registered  in  the  census,  and,
accordingly,  the  regulation  of  this  tax  naturally  fell
under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  censors.  (Comp.  Liv.
xxxix.  44)  [Tributum.]  They  also  had  the
superintendence  of  all  the  other  revenues  of  the
state,  the  vectigalia,  such  as  the  tithes  paid  for  the
public  lands,  the  salt  works,  the  mines,  the  cus-
toms, &c.  [Vectigalia.J  All  these  branches  of
the  revenue  the  censors  were  accustomed  to  let  out


CENSOR.

to  the  highest  bidder  for  the  space  of  a  lustrum  or
five  years.  The  act  of  letting  was  called  venditio
or  locatio,  and  seems  to  have  taken  place  in  the
month  of  March  (Macrob.  Sat.  i.  12),  in  a  public
place  in  Rome  (Cic.  de  Leg.  Agr.  i.  3,  ii.  21).
The  terms  on  which  they  were  let,  together  with
the  rights  and  duties  of  the  purchasers,  were  all
specified  in  the  leges  censoriae,  which  the  censors
published  in  every  case  before  the  bidding  com-
menced. (Cic.  ad  Qu.  Fr.  i.  1.  §  12,  Verr.  iii.  7,
de  Nat.  Deor.  iii.  19,  Varr.  de  Re  Rust.  ii.  1.)
For  further  particulars  see  Publicani.  The  cen-
sors also  possessed  the  right,  though  probably  not
without  the  concurrence  of  the  senate,  of  imposing
new  vectigalia  (Liv.  xxLx.  37,  xl.  51),  and  even
of  selling  the  land  belonging  to  the  state  (Liv.
xxxii.  7).  It  would  thus  appear  that  it  was  the
duty  of  the  censors  to  bring  forward  a  budget  for
a  lustrum,  and  to  take  care  that  the  income  of  the
state  was  sufficient  for  its  expenditure  during  that
time.  So  far  their  duties  resembled  those  of  a
modern  minister  of  finance.  The  censors,  how-
ever, did  not  receive  the  revenues  of  the  state.
All  the  public  money  was  paid  into  the  aerarium,
which  was  entirely  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the
senate  ;  and  all  disbiu-sements  were  made  by  order
of  this  body,  which  employed  the  quaestors  as  its
officers.     [Aerarium  ;  Senatus.]

In  one  important  department  the  censors  were
entrusted  with  the  expenditure  of  the  public  money  ;
though  the  actual  payments  were  no  doubt  made  by
the  quaestors-  The  censors  had  the  general  super-
intendence of  all  the  public  buildings  and  works
(opera  pul/liea)  ;  and  fo  meet  the  expenses  connected
with  this  part  of  their  duties,  the  senate  voted  them
a  certain  sum  of  money  or  certain  revenues,  to  which
they  were  restricted,  but  which  they  might  at  the
same  time  employ  according  to  their  discretion.
(Polyb.  vi.  13  ;  Liv.  xl.  4G,  xliv.  16.)  They  had
to  see  that  the  temples  and  all  other  public  build-
ings were  in  a  good  state  of  repair  (aedes  sacras
tiieri  and  sarta  iecta  eocigere,  Liv.  xxiv.  18,  xxix.
37,  xlii.  3,  xlv.  15),  that  no  public  places  were  en-
croached upon  by  the  occupation  of  private  persons
(/oca  tueri,  Liv.  xlii.  3,  xliii.  16),  and  that  the
aquaeducts,  roads,  drains,  &c.  were  properly  at-
tended to.  [Aquakductus  ;  Viae  ;  Cloacae.]
The  repairs  of  the  public  works  and  the  keeping
of  them  in  proper  condition  were  let  out  by  the
censors  by  public  auction  to  the  lowest  bidder,  just
as  the  vectigalia  were  let  out  to  the  highest  bidder.
These  expenses  were  called  ultrotrihuta  ;  and  hence
we  frequently  find  vectigalia  and  idtrotributa  con-
trasted with  one  another.  (Liv.  xxxix.  44,  xliii.
16.)  Tlie  persons  who  undertook  the  contract
were  called  eonductores^  maneipes^  redeniptores,  sus-
ceptores,  &c.  ;  and  the  duties  they  had  to  discharge
were  specified  in  the  Leges  Censoriae.  The  censors
had  also  to  superintend  the  expenses  connected
with  the  worship  of  the  gods,  even  for  instance  the
feeding  of  the  sacred  geese  in  the  Capitol,  which
were  also  let  out  on  contract.  (Plut.  Qzuiest.  Rom.
98  ;  PUn.  H.  N.  x.  22  ;  Cic.  pro  Rose.  Am.  20.)
Besides  keeping  existing  public  works  in  a  proper
state  of  repair,  the  censors  also  constructed  new
ones,  either  for  ornament  or  utilitj^  both  in  Rome
and  in  other  parts  of  Italy,  such  as  temples,
basilicae,  theatres,  porticoes,  fora,  walls  of  towns,
aqueducts,  harboiu-s,  bridges,  cloacae,  roads,  &c.
These  works  were  either  performed  by  them  jointly,
or  they  divided  between  them  the  money,  which


CENSOR.


265


had  been  granted  to  them  by  the  senate.  (Liv.
xl.  51,  xliv.  16.)  They  were  let  out  to  contractors,
like  the  other  works  mentioned  above,  and  when
they  were  completed,  the  censors  had  to  see  that
the  work  was  performed  in  accordance  with  the
contract :  this  was  called  opus  probare  or  in  accep-
tum  referre,  (Cic.  Verr.  i.  57  ;  Liv.  iv.  22,  xlv.
15  ;  Lex  Puteol.  p.  73,  Spang.)

The  aediles  had  likewise  a  superintendence  over
the  public  buildings  ;  and  it  is  not  easy  to  define
with  accuracy  the  respective  duties  of  the  censors
and  aediles :  but  it  may  be  remarked  in  general
that  the  superintendence  of  the  aediles  had  more
of  a  police  character,  while  that  of  the  censors  had
reference  to  all  financial  matters.

After  the  censors  had  performed  their  various
duties  and  taken  the  census,  the  lustrum  or  solemn
purification  of  the  people  followed.  When  the
censors  entered  upon  their  office,  they  drew  lots  to
see  which  of  them  should  perform  this  purification
(lustrum  facere  or  condere.,  Varr.  L.  L.  vi.  86  ;  Liv.
xxix.  37,  XXXV.  9,  xxxviii.  36,  xlii.  1 0)  ;  but  both
censors  were  obliged  of  course  to  be  present  at  the
ceremony.     [Lustrum.]

In  the  Roman  and  Latin  colonies  and  in  the
municipia  there  were  censors,  who  likewise  bore
the  name  of  quinqtieti7iales.  They  are  spoken  of
under  Colonia.

A  census  was  sometimes  taken  in  the  provinces,
even  under  the  republic  (Cic.  Verr.  ii.  53,  56)  ;  but
there  seems  to  have  been  no  general  census  taken
in  the  provinces  till  the  time  of  Augustus.  This
emperor  caused  an  accurate  account  to  be  taken  of
all  persons  in  the  Roman  dominion,  together  with
the  amount  of  their  property  (Ev.  Lucae.,  ii.  1 ,  2  ;
Joseph.  Ant.  Jud.  xvii.  13.  §  5,  xviii.  1.  §  1.
2.  §  1.)  ;  and  a  similar  census  was  taken  from  time
to  time  by  succeeding  emperors,  at  first  every
ten,  and  subsequently  every  fifteen  years.  (Sa-
\\ga.y.,R'6mischeSteuerverfassung^  in  Zeitschri/l^  \ol.
vi.  pp.  375 — 383.)  The  emperor  sent  into  the
provinces  especial  officers  to  take  the  census,  who
were  called  Censitores  (Dig.  50.  tit.  15.  s.  4.  §  1  ;
Cassiod.  Var.  ix.  1 1  ;  Orelli,  l7iscr.  No.  3652)  ;
but  the  duty  was  sometimes  discharged  by  the  im-
perial legati.  (Tac.  Ann.  i.  31,  ii.  6.)  The  Censi-
tores were  assisted  by  subordinate  officers,  called
Censuules,  who  made  out  the  lists,  &c.  (Capitol.
Gordian.  12  ;  Symmach.  Ep.  x.  43  ;  Cod.  Theod.
8.  tit.  2.)  At  Rome  the  census  still  continued  to
be  taken  under  the  empire,  but  the  old  ceremonies
connected  with  it  were  no  longer  continued,  and  the
ceremony  of  the  lustration  was  not  performed  after
the  time  of  Vespasian.  The  two  great  jurists,
Paulus  and  Ulpian,  each  wrote  works  on  the
census  in  the  imperial  period  ;  and  several  extracts
from  these  works  are  given  in  a  chapter  in  the
Digest  (50.  tit.  15),  to  which  we  must  refer  our
readers  for  further  details  respecting  the  imperial
census.

The  word  census^  besides  the  meaning  of  "  valua-
tion "  of  a  person's  estate,  has  other  significations,
which  must  be  briefly  mentioned  :  >1.  It  signified
the  amount  of  a  person's  property,  and  hence  we
read  of  census  senatorius,  the  estate  of  a  senator  ;
census  equestris.,  the  estate  of  an  eques.  2.  The  lists
of  the  censors.  3.  The  tax  which  depended  upon
the  valuation  in  the  census.  The  Lexicons  will
supply  examples  of  these  meanings.

(A  considerable  portion  of  the  preceding  article
has  been  talcen   from   Becker's  excellent  account


266  CENSUS.

of  the  censorship  in  his  Handbucli  der  Romischen
Alterthumer,  vol.  ii.  part  ii.  p.  191.,  &c.  Compare
Niebuhr,  History  of  Rome,  vol.  ii.  p.  397  ;  Arnold,
History  of  Rome,  vol.  i,  p.  346,  &c. ;  Gottling,
Romische  Staatsverfassung,  p.  328,  &c.  ;  Gerlach,
Die  Romische  Censur  in  ihrem  Verh'dltnisse  zur
Verfassiing,  Basel,  1842  ;"  Diireau  de  la  Malle,
Economie  Politique  dcs  Romuins,  vol.  i.  p.  159,  &c.)

CENSUS.— 1.  Greek.  — The  Greek  term  for
a  man's  property  as  ascertained  by  the  census,  as
well  as  for  the  act  of  ascertaining  it,  is  riiJLrjfia.
The  only  Greek  state  concerning  whos^  arrange-
ment of  the  census  we  have  any  satisfactory  in-
formation, is  Athens  ;  for  what  we  know  of  the
other  states  is  only  of  a  fragmentary  nature,  and
does  not  enable  us  to  form  an  accurate  notion  of
their  census.  Previous  to  the  time  of  Solon  no
census  had  been  instituted  at  Athens,  as  a  citizen's
rights  were  always  determined  by  birth  ;  but,  as
Solon  substituted  property  for  birth,  and  made  a
citizen's  rights  and  duties  dependent  upon  his  pro-
perty, it  became  a  matter  of  necessity  to  ascertain
by  a  general  census  the  amount  of  the  property  of
the  Athenian  citizens.  According  to  his  census,
all  citizens  were  divided  into  four  classes :  1.
UevTaKoa-ioix^Sifivoi,  or  persons  possessing  landed
property  which  yielded  an  annual  income  of  at
least  500  medimni  of  dry  or  liquid  produce.  2.
'iTTTrets,  i.  e.  knights  or  persons  able  to  keep  a
war-horse,  were  those  whose  lands  yielded  an  an-
nual produce  of  at  least  300  medimni,  whence
they  are  also  called  rpiaKocnoix^Zi^voL.  3.  Zev-
yiTai,  i.  e.  persons  able  to  keep  a  yoke  of  oxen
(^eyyos),  were  those  wliose  annual  income  con-
sisted of  at  least  150  medimni.  4.  The  &7]t^s
contained  all  the  rest  of  the  free  population,  whose
income  was  below  that  of  the  Zeugitae.  (Pint.
Sol.  18,  and  the  Lexicographers,  s.vv.)  These
classes  themselves  were  called  rifjA^^ara  ;  and  the
constitution  of  Athens,  so  long  as  it  was  based
upon  these  classes,  Avas  a  timocracy  (TifioKparia  or
airh  TLix7]fj.dTwu  ■KoXinia).  The  highest  magistracy
at  Athens,  or  the  archonship,  was  at  first  ac-
cessible only  to  persons  of  the  first  class,  xmtil
Aristides  threw  all  the  state  offices  open  to  all
classes  indiscriminately.  (Pint.  ^m^.  1,  22.)  The
maintenance  of  the  republic  mainly  devolved  upon
the  first  three  classes,  the  last  being  exempted  from
all  taxes.  Sometimes  we  indeed  find  mention  of  a
b-qriKbv  reXos,  and  the  expression  ^7]tikou  reXelu,
to  pay  the  tax  of  i^/jres  (Dem.  c.  Macart.  p.  1067;
Bekker,  Atiecd.  Graec.  p.  261  ;  Etym.  M.  s.  v.)  ;
but  this  cannot  be  understood  of  a  special  tax
which  the  fourth  class  had  to  pay,  but  must  be  ex-
plained in  a  more  general  sense,  for  reAos  rehuv
means  generally,  to  perform  the  duties  arising  out
of  persons  being  connected  with  one  or  other  of  the
classes.

In  regard  to  the  duties  which  the  above-men-
tioned census  imposed  upon  the  first  three  of  the
classes,  we  must  distinguish  certain  personal  obli-
gations or  liturgies  {KuTovpyiai)  which  had  to  be
performed  by  individuals  according  to  the  class  to
which  they  belonged  [Leiturgiae],  and  certain
taxes  and  burdens  which  were  regulated  according
to  the  classes  ;  so  that  all  citizens  belonging  to  the
.same  class  had  the  same  burdens  imposed  upon
them.  As  the  land  in  the  legislation  of  Solon  was
regarded  as  the  capital  which  yielded  an  annual
income,  he  regulated  his  system  of  taxation  by  the
value  of  the  land  which  was  treated  as  the  taxable


CENSUS,
capital.  There  is  a  passage  in  Pollux  (viii.  130.
132)  in  which  he  says  that  a  pentacosiomedimnns
expended  one  talent  on  the  public  account,  a  i-mreus
thirty  minae,  and  a  Cevyir-ns  ten  minae.  Now  this
seems  to  be  impossible  ;  for,  as  Solon  (Plut.  Sol.
23)  reckoned  the  medimnus  of  dry  produce  at  one
drachma,  we  must  suppose  that  a  member  of  the
first  class  was  reckoned  to  have  an  annual  income
of  500  drachmae,  or  the  twelfth  part  of  a  talent.
But  the  difficulty  may  be  solved  in  this  manner.
The  valuation  which  Solon  put  upon  the  land  of  an
Athenian  citizen  was  in  reality  neither  the  real
value  of  the  property,  nor  the  amount  of  the  pro-
perty tax,  but  only  a  certain  portion  of  the  real
property  which  was  treated  as  the  taxable  capital.
Solon  in  his  census  ascertained  a  person's  landed
property  from  its  net  annual  produce  ;  and  the
number  of  medimni  which  it  was  supposed  to  pro-
duce were  reckoned  as  so  many  drachmae.  But
the  produce  was  probably  not  calculated  higher
than  was  done  when  the  estate  was  let  out  to  farm.
The  rent  paid  by  a  farmer  was  probably  not  nuich
more  than  eight  per  cent,  as  it  was  in  "the  time  of
Isaeus.  (De  Magn.  Hered.  §  42.)  Now,  if  we
suppose  that  in  the  time  of  Solon  it  was  8^  per
cent,  the  net  produce  of  an  estate  was  exactly  ^  of
the  value  of  the  property,  and  accordingly  the  value
of  the  property  of  a  person  belonging  to  the  first
class  was  one  talent ;  in  the  second,  3600  drachmae  ;
and  in  the  third,  1800  drachmae.  Solon,  in  taxing
the  citizens,  was  wise  enough  to  see  that  the  same
standard  could  not  be  applied  to  all  the  three  classes,
for  the  smaller  a  person's  income  is,  the  smaller
ought  to  be  the  standard  of  taxation.  Accordingly,
a  person  belonging  to  the  first  class,  being  the
wealthiest,  had  to  pay  a  tax  of  his  entire  propertj-,
while  only  a  portion  of  the  property  of  the  persons
belonging  to  the  two  other  classes  was  regarded  as
taxable  capital  ;  viz.  persons  of  the  second  paid  the
tax  only  of  |,  and  persons  of  the  third  class  only  of
f  of  their  property.  Lists  of  this  taxable  property
(aTToypacpai)  were  kept  at  first  by  the  naucrari,
who  also  had  to  conduct  the  census  (Hesych,  s.  v.
uavKXapos),  and  afterwards  by  the  demarchi  (Har-
pocrat.  s.  V.  S'fj/j.apxoi).  As  property  is  a  fluctuating
thing,  the  census  was  repeated  from  time  to  time,
but  the  periods  differed  in  the  various  parts  of
Greece,  for  in  some  a  census  was  held  every  year,
and  in  others  every  two  or  four  years.  (Aristot.
Rolit.  V.  8.)  Every  person  had  conscientiousl_y  to
state  the  amount  of  his  property,  and  if  there  was
any  doubt  about  his  honesty,  it  seems  that  a  counter-
valuation  (auTiTi/xTjais)  might  be  made.  Now,
supposing  that  all  the  taxable  capital  of  the  Athe-
nian citizens  was  found  to  be  3000  talents,  and
that  the  state  wanted  60  talents,  or  ^g  part  of  it,
each  citizen  had  to  pay  away  j'jj  part  of  his  tax-
able property  ;  that  is,  a  person  of  the  first  class
paid  120  drachmae  (the  50th  part  of  6000),  a  per-
son of  the  second,  60  drachmae  (the  50th  part  of
3000),  and  a  person  of  the  third  class,  20  drachmae
(the  50th  part  of  1000).  It  is,  however,  not  im-
probable that  persons  belonging  to  the  same  class
had  to  pay  a  different  amount  of  ta,xes  according
as  their  property  was  equal  to  the  minimum  or
above  it  ;  and  Bbckh,  in  his  Public  Economy  of
Athens,  has  made  out  a  table,  in  which  each  class
is  subdivided  into  three  sections.

This  system  of  taxation  according  to  classes,
and  based  upon  the  possession  of  productive  estates,
underwent  a  considerable  change  in  the  time  of  the


CENTUMVIRI.

Poloponncsian  war,  though  the  divisions  into  classes
themselves  continued  to  be  observed  for  a  consider-
able time  after.  As  the  wants  of  the  republic  in-
creased, and  as  many  citizens  were  possessed  of
large  property  without  being  landed  proprietors,
the  original  land-tax  was  changed  into  a  property-
tax.  In  this  manner  we  must  explain  the  proposal
of  Euripides,  shortly  before  B.  c.  393,  to  raise  500
talents  by  imposing  a  tax  of  one  fortieth  part.
(Aristoph.  Ercics.  823,  &c.)  For  the  taxable
capital,  viz.  20,000  talents,  far  exceeds  the  amount
of  all  the  lauded  property  in  Attica.  This  property
tax,  which  was  substituted  for  the  land  tax,  was
called  (lacpopd,  concerning  which  see  Eisphora.
Compare  Leiturgiae  ;  and  for  the  taxes  paid  by
resident  aliens,  Metoici.  (Bockh,  Fubl.  Ecan.  of
Athens^  p,  493,  &c.,  2d  edit.)
2.  Roman.     [Censor.]  [L.  S.]

CENTE  SIMA,  namely  ^^ars,  or  the  hundredth
part,  also  called  vectigal  rerum  venalium^  or  (xn-
tesima  rerum  venalium,  was  a  tax  of  one  per  cent,
levied  at  Rome  and  in  Italy  upon  all  goods  that
were  exposed  for  public  sale  at  auctions.  It  was
collected  by  persons  called  coactores.  (Cic.  ad
Brut.  18,  pro  Rabir.  Post.  II  ;  Dig.  1.  tit.  16.
s.  17.  §  2.)  This  tax,  as  Tacitus  {Ann.  i.  78)
says,  was  introduced  after  the  civil  wars,  though
its  being  mentioned  by  Cicero  shows,  that  these
civil  wars  cannot  have  been  those  between  Octa-
vian  and  Antony,  but  must  be  an  earlier  civil
war,  perhaps  that  between  Marius  and  Sulla.  Its
produce  was  assigned  by  Augustus  to  the  aera-
riuni  militare.  Tiberius  reduced  the  tax  to  one
half  per  cent,  (duceniesima),  after  he  had  changed
Cappadocia  into  a  province,  and  had  thereby  in-
creased the  revenue  of  the  empire.  (Tac.  Ann.  ii.
42.)  Caligula  in  the  beginning  of  his  reign
abolished  the  tax  altogether  for  Italy,  as  is  at-
tested by  Suetonius  {Calig.  16)  and  also  by  an
ancient  medal  of  Caligula  on  which  we  find  C.  C.  R.
(i,  e.  ducentesima  remissa.)  But  Dion  Cassius  (Iviii.
16),  whose  authority  on  this  point  cannot  outweigh
that  of  Suetonius  and  Tacitus,  states  that  Tiberius
increased  the  ducentesima  to  a  ceniesima,  and  in
another  passage  he  agrees  with  Suetonius  in  stating
tfiat  Caligula  abolished  it  altogether  (lix.  9  ;  comp.
Burmann,  De  Vectig.  Pop.  Rom.  p.  70).  [L.  S.]
CENTE  SIMAE  USU'RAE.  [Fenus.]
CENTU'MVIRL  The  origin,  constitution,  and
powers  of  the  court  of  centumviri  are  exceedingly
obscure,  and  it  seems  almost  impossible  to  com-
bine and  reconcile  the  various  passages  of  Roman
writers,  so  as  to  present  a  satisfactory  view  of  this
subject.  The  essay  of  HoUweg,  Uher  die  Com-
penienz  des  Centumviralgericlds  {Zeitschrift^  &c.,  v.
358),  and  the  essay  of  Tigerstrom,  De  Judidbus
apud  Romanos^  contain  all  the  authorities  on  this
matter ;  but  these  two  essays  do  not  agree  in  all
their  conclusions.

The  centumviri  were  judices,  who  resembled
other  judices  in  this  respect,  that  they  decided
cases  under  the  authority  of  a  magistratus  :  but
they  differed  from  other  judices  in  being  a  definite
body  or  collegium.  This  collegium  seems  to  have
been  divided  into  four  parts,  each  of  which  some-
times sat  by  itself.  The  origin  of  the  court  is  un-
known ;  but  it  is  certainly  prior  to  the  Lex  Aebutia,
which  put  an  end  to  the  legis  actiones,  except  in
the  matter  of  Damnum  Infectum,  and  in  the  causae
centumvirales.  (Gaius,  iv.  31  ;  Cell.  xvi.  10.)
According  to    Festus    (s.  Centumviralia  Judicia),


CENTUMVIRI.  207

three  were  chosen  out  of  each  tribe,  and  conse-
quently the  whole  number  out  of  the  35  tribes
would  be  1 05,  who,  in  round  numbers,  were  called
the  hundred  men ;  and  as  there  were  not  35  tribes
tills,  c.  241,  it  has  been  sometimes  inferred  that
to  this  time  we  must  assign  the  origin  of  the  cen-
tumviri. But,  as  it  has  been  remarked  by  HoU-
weg, we  cannot  altogether  rely  on  the  authority  of
Festus,  and  the  conclusion  so  drawn  from  his  state-
ment is  by  no  means  necessary.  If  the  centumviri
were  chosen  from  the  tribes,  this  seems  a  strong
presumption  in  favour  of  the  high  antiquity  of  the
court.

The  proceedings  of  this  court,  in  civil  matters,
were  per  legis  actionem,  and  by  the  sacramentum.
The  process  here,  as  in  the  other  judicia  privata,  con-
sisted of  two  parts,  injure,  or  before  the  praetor,
and  in  judicio,  or  before  the  centumviri.  The
praetor,  however,  did  not  instruct  the  centumviri
by  the  formula,  as  in  other  cases,  which  is  further
explained  by  the  fact  that  the  praetor  presided  in
the  judicia  centumviralia.     (Plin.  Ep.  v.  21.)

It  seems  pretty  clear  that  the  powers  of  the  cen-
tumviri were  limited  to  Rome,  or  at  any  rate  to
Italy.  Hollweg  maintains  that  their  powers  were
also  confined  to  civil  matters  ;  but  it  is  impossible
to  reconcile  this  opinion  with  some  passages  (Ovid,
Trist.  ii.  91  ;  Phaedr.  iii.  10,  35,  &c.),  from  which
it  appears  that  crimina  came  under  their  cogni-
zance. The  substitution  of  aut  for  ut  in  the  passage
of  Quintilian  {Inst.  Orat.  iv.  1.  §  57),  even  if
supported  by  good  MSS.  as  Hollweg  affirms,  can
hardly  be  defended.

The  civil  matters  which  came  under  the  cogni-
zance of  this  court  are  not  completely  ascertained.
Many  of  them  (though  we  have  no  reason  for  say-
ing all  of  them)  are  enumerated  by  Cicero  in  a
well-kno^vn  passage  {De  Orat.  i.  38).  Hollweg  men-
tions that  certain  matters  only  came  under  their
cognizance,  and  that  other  matters  were  not  withiii
their  cognizance  ;  and  further,  that  such  matters  as
were  within  their  cognizance,  were  also  within  the
cognizance  of  a  single  judex.  Hollweg  maintains
that  actiones  in  rem  or  vindicationes  of  the  old
civil  law  (with  the  exception,  however,  of  actiones
praejudiciales  or  status  quaestiones)  could  alone  be
brought  before  the  centumviri  ;  and  that  neither  a
personal  action,  one  arising  from  contract  or  delict,
nor  a  status  quaestio,  is  ever  mentioned  as  a  causa
centumviralis.  It  was  the  practice  to  set  up  a
spear  in  the  place  where  the  centumviri  were  sit-
ting, and  accordingly  the  word  hasta,  or  hasta  cen  -
tumviralis,  is  sometimes  used  as  equivalent  to  tha
words  judicium  centumvirale.  (Suet.  Octaxrian.
36  ;  Quintil.  Inst.  Orat-  v.  2.  §  1.)  The  spear
was  a  symbol  of  quiritarian  ownership:  for  "a
man  was  considered  to  have  the  best  title  to  that
which  he  took  in  war,  and  accordingly  a  spear  is
setup  in  the  centumviralia  judicia."  (Gaius,  iv.
16.)  Such  was  the  explanation  of  the  Roman
jurists  of  the  origin  of  an  ancient  custom,  from
which  it  is  argued,  that  it  may  at  least  be  inferred,
the  centumviri  had  properly  to  decide  matters  re-
lating to  quiritarian  ownership,  and  questions  con-
nected therewith.

It  has  been  already  said  that  the  matters  which
belonged  to  the  cognizance  of  the  centumviri  might
also  be  brought  before  a  judex  ;  but  it  is  conjec-
tured by  Hollweg  that  this  was  not  the  case  till
after  the  passing  of  the  Aebutia  Lex.  He  considers
that  the  court  of  the  centumviri  was  established


268


CEREALIA.


in  early  times,  for  the  special  purpose  of  deciding
questions  of  quiritarian  ownership  ;  and  the  im-
portance of  such  questions  is  apparent,  when  we
consider  that  the  Roman  citizens  were  rated  ac-
cording to  their  quiritarian  property,  that  on  their
rating  depended  their  class  and  century,  and  con-
sequently their  share  of  power  in  the  public  as-
semblies. No  private  judex  coidd  decide  on  a
right  which  might  thus  indirectly  affect  the  caput
of  a  Roman  citizen,  but  only  a  tribunal  selected  out
of  all  the  tribes.  Consistently  with  this  hypothesis
we  find  not  only  the  rei  vindicatio  within  the
jurisdiction  of  the  centumviri,  but  also  the  heredi-
tatis  petitio  and  actio  confessoria.  Hollweg  is  of
opinion  that,  with  the  Aebutia  Lex  a  new  epoch  in
the  history  of  the  centumviri  commences  ;  the  legis
actiones  were  abolished,  and  the  formula  [Actio]
was  introduced,  excepting,  however,  as  to  the
causae  centumvirales.  (Gaius,  iv.  30,  31  ;  Gell.  xvi,
10.)  The  formula  is  in  its  nature  adapted  only
to  personal  actions ;  but  it  appears  that  it  was  also
adapted  by  a  legal  device  to  vindicationes  ;  and
Hollweg  attributes  this  to  the  Aebutia  Lex,  by
which  he  considers  that  the  twofold  process  was
introduced  :  —  1.  per  legis  actionem  apud  centum-
viros  ;  2.  per  formulam  or  per  sponsionem  before  a
judex.  Thus  two  modes  of  procedure  in  the  case
of  actiones  in  rem  were  established,  and  such
actions  were  no  longer  exclusively  within  the  jui-is-
diction  of  the  centumviri.

Under  Augustus,  according  to  Hollweg,  the
functions  of  the  centumviri  were  so  far  modified
that  the  more  important  vindicationes  were  put
under  the  cognizance  of  the  centumviri,  and  the
less  important  were  determined  per  sponsionem
and  before  a  judex.  Under  this  emperor  the  court
also  resumed  its  former  dignity  and  impoi'tance.
{Dial,  de  Cans.  Corrupt.  Eloq.  c.  38.)

The  younger  Pliny,  who  practised  in  this  court
(Ep.  ii.  14),  makes  frequent  allusions  to  it  in  his
letters.  {Ep.  i.  5,  v.  1,  ix.  23.)  The  centumviri
are  mentioned  in  two  excerpts  in  the  Digest  (5.
tit.  2.  s.  13,  17)  and  perhaps  elsewhere  ;  one  ex-
cerpt is  from  C.  Scaevola  and  the  other  from
Paulus.

The  foregoing  notice  is  founded  on  Hollweg's
ingenious  essay  ;  his  opinions  on  some  points,  how-
ever, are  hardly  established  by  authorities.  Those
who  desire  to  investigate  this  exceedingly  obscure
matter  may  compare  the  two  essays  cited  at  the
head  of  this  article.  [G.  L.]

CENTU'RIA.    [CoMiTiA  ;  Exercitus.]

CENTURIA'TA  COMI'TIA.    [Comitia.]

CENTU'RIO.    [Exercitus.]

CENTUSSIS.     [As.]

CERA  (Kr]p6s),  wax.  For  its  employment  in
painting,  see  Pictura,  No.  7  ;  and  for  its  ap-
plication as  a  writing  material,  see  Tabulae  and
Testamentum.

CEREA'LIA,  a  festival  celebrated  at  Rome  in
honour  of  Ceres,  whose  wanderings  in  search  of
her  lost  daughter  Proserpine  were  represented
by  women  clothed  in  white,  running  about  with
lighted  torches.  (Ov.  Fast.  iv.  494.)  During  its
continuance,  games  were  celebrated  in  the  Circus
Maximus  (Tacit  A7in.  xv.  53),  the  spectators  of
which  appeared  in  white  (Ov,  Fast.  iv.  t)20)  ;  but
on  any  occasion  of  public  mourning  the  games  and
festivals  were  not  celebrated  at  all,  as  the  ma-
trons could  not  appear  at  them  except  in  white.
(Liv.  xxii.  56y  xxxiv.  6.)   Tlie  day  of  the  Cerealia


CERTL

is  doubtful  ;  some  think  it  was  the  ides  or  1 3th
of  April,  others  the  7th  of  the  same  month.  (Ov.
Fast.  iv.  389.)  [R.  W.]

CEREVFSIA,  CERVI'SIA  (Cvdos),  ale  or
beer,  was  almost  or  altogether  unknown  to  the
ancient,  as  it  is  to  the  modern  inhabitants  of
Greece  and  Italy.  But  it  was  used  very  generally
by  the  surrounding  nations,  whose  soil  and  climate
were  less  favourable  to  the  growth  of  vines  {in
Gallia,  aliisque  provinciis,  Plin.  H.  N.  xxii.  82  ;
Theophrast.  De  Causis  Plant,  vi.  11  ;  Diod.  Sic.
iv.  2,  V.  26  ;  Strab.  xvii.  2.  5  ;  Tacit.  Germ.  23).
According  to  Herodotus  (ii.  77),  the  Egyptians
commonly  drank  "  barley-wine,"  to  which  custom
Aeschylus  alludes  (e/c  Kpidcov  fi4dv,  Suppl.  954  ;
Pelusiaci  pociila  zythi,  Colum.  x.  116).  Diodorus
Siculus  (i.  20,  34)  says,  that  the  Egyptian  beer
was  nearly  equal  to  wine  in  strength  and  flavour.
The  Iberians,  the  Thraciaiis,  and  the  people  in  the
north  of  Asia  Minor,  instead  of  drinking  their  ale
or  beer  out  of  cups,  placed  it  before  them  in  a  large
bowl  or  vase  (KpoTTjp),  which  was  sometimes  of
gold  or  silver.  This  being  full  to  the  brim  with
the  grains,  as  well  as  the  fermented  liquor,  the
guests,  when  they  pledged  one  another,  drank  to-
gether  out  of  the  same  bowl  by  stooping  down  to
it,  although,  when  this  token  of  friendship  was
not  intended,  they  adopted  the  more  refined  method
of  sucking  up  the  fluid  through  tubes  of  cane.
(Archil.  Frag.  p.  67,  ed.  Liebel  ;  Xen.  Anab.  iv.
§  5,  26  ;  Athen.  i.  28  ;  Virg.  Georg.  iii.  380  ;
Serv.  ad  loc.)  The  Suevi,  and  other  northern
nations,  offered  to  their  gods  libations  of  beer,
and  expected  that  to  drink  it  in  the  presence  of
Odin  would  be  among  the  delights  of  Valhalla,
(Keysler,  Antiq.  Sepient.  p.  150 — 156.)  BpCroj',
one  of  the  names  for  beer  (Archil.  /.  c.  ;  Hella-
nicus,  p.  91,  ed.  Sturtz  ;  Athen.  x.  67),  seems  to
be  an  ancient  passive  participle,  from  the  verb  to
brew.  [J.  Y.]

CE'RNERE  HEREDITA'TEM.    [Heres.]

CERO'MA  {KTipaixa)  was  the  oil  mixed  with
wax  {KT]p6s)  with  which  wrestlers  were  anointed.
After  they  had  been  anointed  with  this  oil,  they
were  covered  with  dust  or  a  soft  sand  ;  whence
Seneca  {Ep.  57)  says  —  A  ceromate  nos  haphe
{a(p7))  excepit  in  crypta  Neapolitana.

Ceroma  also  signified  the  place  where  wrestlers
were  anointed  (the  elaeothesium,  Vitruv.  v.  11),
and  also,  in  later  times,  the  place  where  they
wrestled.  This  word  is  often  used  in  connection
•w\ih. palaestra  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.  2),  but  we  do  not
know  in  what  respect  these  places  diff"ered.  Seneca
{De  Drev.  Vit.  12)  speaks  of  the  ceroma  as  a
place  which  the  idle  were  accustomed  to  frequent,
in  order  to  see  the  gymnastic  sports  of  boys.  Ar-
nobius  {Adv.  Gent.  iii.  23)  informs  us  that  the
ceroma  was  under  the  protection  of  Mercury.
(Krause,  Gymnastik  und  Agonistik  der  Hellenen^
vol.  i.  p.  106,  &c.)

CERTA'MINA.     [Athletae.]

CERTI,  INCERTI  ACTIO,  is  a  name  which
has  been  given  by  some  modem  writers  to  those
actions  in  which  a  determinate  or  indeterminate
sum,  as  the  case  may  be,  is  mentioned  in  the  for-
mula {condemnatio  certae  pecuniae  vel  incertaey
Gaius,  iv.  49,  &c.).

The  expression  incerta  formula,  which  occurs  in
Gaius  (iv.  54),  implies  a  certa  fonnula.  With
respect  to  the  intentio,  it  may  be  called  certa
when   the  demand   of  the  actor  is  detenniuate,


I


CESTUS.
whether  it  be  a  certain  thing  that  he  demands,  or
a  certain  sum  of  money  (Gains,  iv.  45,  47).  The
intentio  is  incerta  when  the  claim  is  not  of  a  de-
finite thing  or  something,  but  is  expressed  by  the
words  quidquid,  &c.  (Gains,  iv.  47,  136,  137.)
If  the  intentio  is  incerta,  the  condemnatio  must
be  incerta.  If  the  intentio  was  certa,  the  con-
demnatio might  be  either  certa  or  incerta  (Gaius,
iv.  50,  51).  In  the  compilations  of  Justinian,
where  the  expressions  incerti  actio,  incerta  actio,
incertum  judicium  occur,  they  specially  apply  to
the  actio  praescriptis  verbis,  which  contained  an
incerta  intentio  and  condemnatio.  (Actio  ;  Sa-
vigny.  System^  &c.  vol.  v.  p.  74.)  [G.  L.]

CERU'CHI.    [Navis.]
KERUX  {KTjpvl).    [Caduceus  ;  Fetialis.]
CE'SSIO  BONO'RUM.   [Bonorum  Cessio.]
CE'SSIO  IN  JURE.    [In  Jure  Cessio.]
CESTRUM.     [PicTURA,  No.  6.]
CESTUS.     1.  The  thongs  or  bands  of  leather,
which  were  tied  round  the  hands  of  boxers,  in
order  to  render  their  blows  more  powerful.     These
bands  of  leather,   which  were  called  ludures,  or
ifjLoivres  ■TTUKTiKot,  in  Greek,  were  also  frequently
tied  roimd  the  arm  as  high  as  the  elbow,  as  is
shown   in  the  following  statue  of  a  boxer,  the
original  of  which  is  in  the  Louvre  at  Paris.     (See
Clarac,  Musee  d.  Sculpt.  Ant.  et  Mod.  vol.  iii.  pi.
327.  n.  2042.)


CETRA.


>69


The  cestus  was  used  by  boxers  from  the  earliest
times.  "When  Epeius  and  Euryalus,  in  the  Iliad
(xxiii.  684),  prepare  themselves  for  boxing,  they
put  on  their  hands  thongs  made  of  ox-hide  {iixdv-
ras  evr iJui\Tovs  ^ohs  aypavKoio)  •  but  it  should  be
recollected,  that  the  cestus  in  heroic  times  appears
to  have  consisted  merely  of  thongs  of  leather,  and
differed  materially  from  the  frightful  weapons,
loaded  with  lead  and  iron,  which  were  used  in
later  times.  The  different  kinds  of  cestus  were
called  by  the  Greeks  in  later  times  /ueiAt'xai,
(TTT^'ipai  $odai,  (T<poupai.,  and  iJ.x)pfir\K^s :  of  which
the  jxeiXixai  gave  the  softest  blows,  and  the
fiipfir^Kes  the  most  severe.  The  ixeiXixai,  which
were  the  most  ancient,  are  described  by  Pausanias
(viii.  40.  §  3)  as  made  of  raw  ox-hide  cut  into


thin  pieces,  and  joined  in  an  ancient  manner  ;  they
were  tied  under  the  hollow  or  palm  of  the  hand,
leaving  the  fingers  uncovered.  The  athletae  in
the  palaestrae  at  Olympia  used  the  fi^iXlxat  in
practising  for  the  public  games  (IjxavTau  tcDj/
fiahaKUTfpwu,  Pans.  vi.  23.  §  3)  ;  but  in  the  games
themselves,  they  used  those  which  gave  the  se-
verest blows.

The  cestus,  used  in  later  times  in  the  public
games,  was,  as  has  been  already  remarked,  a  most
formidable  weapon.  It  was  frequently  covered
with  knots  and  nails,  and  loaded  with  lead  and
iron  ;  whence  Virgil  (Aen.  v.  405),  in  speaking  of
it,  says,

*'  Ingentia  septem
Terga  boum  plumbo  insuto  ferroque  rigebant."

Statins  {Theh.  vi.  732)  also  speaks  of  nigrantia
plumbo  tegmina.  Such  weapons  in  the  hands  of  a
trained  boxer,  must  have  frequently  occasioned
death.  The  fivpfJiJiKes  were,  in  fact,  sometimes
called  yvLOT6poi,  or  "  limb-breakers."  Figures
with  the  cestus  frequently  occiu*  in  ancient  monu-
ments. They  were  of  various  forms,  as  appears
by  the  following  specimens,  taken  from  ancient
monuments,  of  which  drawings  are  given  by
Fabretti  (De  Column.  TraJ.  p.  261).


2.  Cestus  also  signified  a  band  or  tie  of  any
kind  (Varr.  De  Re  Rust.  i.  8)  ;  but  the  term  was
more  particularly  applied  to  the  zone  or  girdle  of
Venus,  on  which  was  represented  every  thing
that  could  awaken  love.  (//.  xiv.  214  ;  Val.  Flacc.
vi.  470.)  When  Juno  wished  to  win  the  affec-
tions of  Jupiter,  she  borrowed  this  cestus  from
Venus  (II.  I.  c.)  ;  and  Venus  herself  employed
it  to  captivate  Mars.  (Mart.  vi.  13,  xiv.  206,
207.)

CETRA,  or  CAETRA  (Kairpea,  Hesych.),  a
target,  i.  e.  a  small  round  shield,  made  of  the  hide
of  a  quadruped.  (Isid.  Orig.  xviii.  12  ;  Q.  Curt,
iii.  4.)  It  was  also  worn  by  the  people  of  Spain
(cetratae  Hispaniae  coliortes,  Caes.  D.  C.  i.  39,  48)
and  Mauritania.  By  the  latter  people  it  wag
sometimes  made  from  the  skin  of  the  elephant.
(Strab.  xvii.  p.  828.)  From  these  accounts,  and
from  the  distinct  assertion  of  Tacitus  (Agric.  36)
that  it  was  used  by  the  Britons,  we  may  with  con-
fidence identify  the  cetra  with  the  target  of  the
Scottish  Highlanders,  of  which  many  specimens  of
considerable  antiquity  are  still  in  existence.  It  is
seen  "  covering  the  left  arms  "  (comp.  Virg.  Aen.
vii.  732)  of  the  two  accompanying  figures,  which
are  copied  from  a  MS.  of  Prudentius,  probably
written  in  this  country,  and  as  early  as  the  ninth
century.    (Cod.  Cotton.  Cleop.  c.  8.)

It  does  not  appear  that  the  Romans  ever  wore
the  cetra.  But  Livy  compares  it  to  the  pelta  of
the  Greeks  and  Macedonians,  which  was  also  a


CHALCIDICU.M.


small  light  shield  (cetratos^  quos  peltastas  vacant^
xxxi.  36).     [Pklta.]  [J-Y.]

CHALCEIA  (xaA-feTa),  a  very  ancient  festival
celebrated  at  Athens,  which  at  different  times
seems  to  have  had  a  different  character,  for  at  first
it  was  solemnised  in  honour  of  Athena,  surnamed
Ergane,  and  by  the  whole  people  of  Athens,
whence  it  was  called  ' h.Qi\vaia.  or  Ilaj/STj^os.
(Suidas,  s.  V.  ;  Etymol.  Magn. ;  Eustath.  ad  II.  ii.
p.  284,  36.)  At  a  later  period,  however,  it  was
celebrated  only  by  artisans,  especially  smiths,  and
in  honour  of  Hephaestus,  whence  its  name  was
changed  into  XaXwera.  (Pollux,  vii.  105.)  It  was
kept  on  the  30th  day  of  the  month  of  Pyanepsion.
(Suidas,  Harpocrat  Eustath.  I.  c.)  Menander  had
written  a  comedy  called  XaXKe7a,  a  fragment  of
which  is  preserved  in  Athen.  xi.  p.  502.  (Comp.
Welcker,  Die  Aeschyl.  Trilog.  p.  290.)     [L.  S.]

CHALCFDICUM  is  merely  defined  by  Festus
(s.  V.)  as  a  sort  of  building  {genus  aedificii),  so
called  from  the  city  of  Chalcis,  but  what  sort  is
not  explained  ;  neither  do  the  inscriptions  or  the
passages  of  ancient  writers,  in  which  the  word  oc-
curs, give  any  description  from  which  a  conclusion
can  be  drawn  with  certainty  respecting  the  form,
use,  and  locality  of  such  buildings.

Ckalcidica  were  certainly  appurtenances  to  some
hasilicae  (Vitmv.  v.  1),  in  reference  to  which  the
following  attempts  at  identification  have  been
suggested :  —  1.  A  mint  attached  to  the  basilica,
from  x«''^K^sand  St/crj,  which,  though  an  ingenious
conjecture,  is  not  supported  by  sufficient  classical
authority.  2.  That  part  of  a  basilica  which  lies
directly  in  front  of  the  tribune^  corresponding  to
the  nave  in  a  modern  church,  of  which  it  was  the
original,  where  the  lawyers  stood,  and  thence
termed  navis  causidica.  3.  An  apartment  thrown
out  at  the  back  of  a  basilica,  either  on  the  ground
floor  or  at  the  extremity  of  the  upper  gallery,  in  the
form  of  a  balcony.  4.  Internal  chambers  on  each
side  of  the  tribune  for  the  convenience  of  the
Jzulices,  as  in  the  basilica  of  Pompeii.  5.  The
vestibule  of  a  basilica,  either  in  front  or  rear  ;
which  interpretation  is  founded  upon  an  inscription
discovered  at  Pompeii,  in  the  building  appropriated
to  the  fullers  of  cloth  (fullonica)  :  —

EuMACHiA.  L.  F.  Sacerd.  Pub.  *  *  *  *
******  Chalcidicum.  Cryptam  Porticus
** *sua.  pequnia.  fecit.  eademque.  dedicavit.

By  comparing  the  plan  of  the  building  with  this
inscription,  it  is  clear  that  the  chalcidicum  men-
tioned can  only  be  referred  to  the  vestibule.     Its


CIIAllISTIA.
decorations  likewise  correspond  in  richness  and
character  with  the  vestibule  of  a  basilica  described
by  Procopius  (De  Aedific.  Justin,  i.  10),  which  is
twice  designated  by  the  term  x°-^^^-  The  vesti-
bule of  the  basilica  at  Pompeii  is  shown  upon  the
plan  on  page  1 99,  a.

In  another  sense  the  word  is  used  as  a  synonyme
with  coenaculum.  "  Scribuntur  Dii  vestri  in
tricliniis  coelestibus  atque  in  chalcidicis  aureis
coenitare  "  (Arnobius,  p.  149).  These  words,  com-
pared with  Horn.  Od.  xxiii.  1,

Vpr)vs  S'  ets  vtr^p^"  ave§7]aaTo  KayxaXSuara,
and    the    translation    of    virep^oy   by   Ausonius
{Perioch.  xiii.  Odyss.)^

"  Chalcidicum  gressu  nutrix  superabat  anili,"
together  with  the  known  locality  of  the  ancient
coenacula,  seem  fully  to  authorise  the  interpreta-
tion given.     (Tumeb.  Advers.  xviii.  34  ;  Salmas.
inSpart.  Pescen.  Nigr.  c.  12.  p.  677.)

Finally,  the  word  seems  also  to  have  been  used
in  the  same  sense  as  maenianum,  a  balcony.  (Isid.
De  Orig.  ;  Reinesius,  Var.  Led.  iii.  5.)  [A.  R.]
CHALCIOrCIA  (xaXKio'iKia)^  an  annual  fes-
tival, with  sacrifices,  celebrated  at  Sparta  in  honour
of  Athena,  surnamed  XaAKioiKos,  i.  e.  the  goddess
of  the  brazen-house.  (Pans.  iii.  17.  §  3,  x.  5.  §5;
and  Goeller  ad  Thucyd.  i.  1 28,  »^c.)  Young  men
marched  on  the  occasion  in  full  armour  to  the
temple  of  the  goddess  ;  and  the  ephors,  althoiigh
not  entering  the  temple,  but  remaining  within  its
sacred  precincts,  were  obliged  to  take  part  in  the
sacrifice.     (Polyb.  iv.  35.  §  2.)  [L.  S.]

CHALCUS  {x^-^^^'^^^^t  ^  denomination  of  Greek
copper -money.

Bronze  or  copper  {x'xKk6s)  was  verj'-  little  used
by  the  Greeks  for  money  in  early  times.  Silver
was  originally  the  universal  currency,  and  copper
appears  to  have  been  seldom  coined  till  after  the
time  of  Alexander  the  Great.  The  x«^'^'«  "Towqpa
at  Athens  issued  in  B.  c.  406  {Schol.  ad  Aristoph.
Ran.  737)  were  a  peculiar  exception  ;  and  they  were
soon  afterwards  called  in,  and  the  silver  currency
restored.  (Aristoph.  Ecclesiaz.  815 — 822  ;  Au-
RUM.)  It  is  not  improbable,  however,  that  the
copper  coin  called  x^'^'^oGs  was  in  circulation  in
Athens  still  earlier.  The  smallest  silver  coin  at
Athens  was  the  quarter  obol,  and  the  x^'^'^oi^y
was  the  half  of  that,  or  the  eighth  of  an  obol.  Its
value  was  somewhat  more  than  3-4ths  of  a  farthing.
It  seems  to  have  been  used  on  accoimt  of  the  dif-
ficulty of  coining  silver  in  such  minute  pieces.  The
XoO^Kovs  in  later  times  was  divided  into  lepta^  of
which,  according  to  Suidas  (a ?;'y.TaA.aj/To?','0§oAJs),
it  contained  seven.  There  was  another  copper  coin
current  in  Greece,  called  (rvyiSoXov^  of  which  the
value  is  not  known.  Pollux  (iii.  9)  also  mentions
k6Wv§os  as  a  copper  coin  of  an  earlier  age  ;  but,
as  Mr,  Hussey  has  remarked,  this  may  have  been
a  common  name  for  small  money  ;  since  k6\Xv§os
signified  generally  "  changing  money,"  and  ko\-
\v§i<TTi}s,  "  a  money  changer."  In  later  times,
the  obol  was  coined  of  copper  as  well  as  silver.  The
Greek  states  of  Sicily  and  Italy  had  a  copper  coin-
age at  a  very  early  period  [Litra].  (Hussey,
Ancient  Weights  and  Money,  c.  8  ;  Bockh,  PuLl.
Econ.  of  Athens,  p.  592,  2nd  ed. ;  Ueber  Gewichte,
Munzfilsse,  &c.,  pp.  142,  342.  &c.)  [P.  S.]

CHARI'STIA  (from  x^p'^CofJ-ai,  to  grant  a
favour  or  pardon),  a  Roman  feast,  to  which  none
but  relations  and  members  of  the  same  family  were
invited,  in  order  that  any  quarrel  or  disagreement


CHELIDONT^

which  had  arisen  amongst  them  might  be  made
up,  and  a  reconciliation  eifected.  It  was  celebrated
every  year  on  the  19th  of  February.  (Ov.  Fast.  ii.
617;  Val.  Max.  ii.  1.  §  8 ;  Mait.  ix.  bo.)  [  R.W.]
CHART  A.     [Liber.]

CHEIRONO'MIA  {x^ip<)von.ia\  a  mimetic
movement  of  the  hands,  which  formed  a  part  of
the  art  of  dancing  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans.
The  word  is  also  used  in  a  wider  sense,  both  for
the  art  of  dancing  in  general,  and  for  any  signs  made
with  the  hands  in  order  to  convey  ideas.  In
gjnnnastics  it  was  applied  to  the  movements  of
the  hands  in  pugilistic  combat  ;  and  it  is  used  in
connection  with  the  term  (Txta^uoxe*"".  ( Athen.  xiv.
p.  629.  b. ;  Hesych.  vol.  ii.  p.  1547.  Alb. ;  Herod,
vi.  129  ;  Aelian.  F. //.  xiv.  22  ;  Dion  Cass,  xxxvi.
13  ;  Paus.  vi.  10.  §  1 ;  Heliod.  Aethiop.  iv.  p.  73  ;
Krause,  Gymnastik  und  Agonistik,  vol.  i.  c.  6,  §  33,
vol.  ii.  c.  3.  §  I.)  [P.  S.]

CHEIROTO'NIA  (x^iporovia).  In  the  Athe-
nian assemblies  two  modes  of  voting  were  practised,
the  one  by  pebbles  [Psephus],  the  other  by
a  show  of  hands  {x^i^porovelv).  The  latter  was
employed  in  the  election  of  those  magistrates  who
were  chosen  in  the  public  assemblies  (dpxatpe-
triaj),  and  who  were  hence  called  x^'Potoj/tjtoi,
in  voting  upon  laws,  and  in  some  khids  of  trials
on  matters  which  concerned  the  people,  as  upon
irpoSoXai  and  €lcra''/ye\iai.  We  frequently  find,
however,  the  word  \l/r](pi(€(T6ai  used  where  the
votes  were  really  given  by  show  of  hands.  (Lys.
c.  Eratosth.  p.  124.  16.  and  p.  127.  8.  ed.  Steph.  ;
Dem.  Olynth.  i.  p.  9.)

The  manner  of  voting  by  a  show  of  hands  is
said  by  Suidas  {s.  v.  KoTexeipordj'Tjffei')  to  have  been
as  follows  :  —  The  herald  said  :  "  Whoever  thinks
that  Meidias  is  guilty,  let  him  lift  up  his  hand."
Then  those  who  thought  so  stretched  forth  their
hands.  Then  the  herald  said  again  :  "  Whoever
thinks  that  Meidias  is  not  guilty,  let  him  lift  up
his  hand  ;"  and  those  who  were  of  this  opinion
stretched  forth  their  hands.  The  number  ol'
hands  was  counted  each  time  by  the  herald  ;  and
the  president,  upon  the  herald's  report,  declared
on  which  side  the  majority  voted  (avayopeveiu  ras
X^tpoTovias^  Aesch.  c.  Ctesiph,  §  2).

It  is  important  to  imderstand  clearly  the  com-
pounds of  this  word.  A  vote  condemning  an
accusvd  person  is  KaraxeipoTovia  :  one  acquitting
him,  anox^ipoTovia  (Dem.  c.  Meid,  pp.  516,
553,  583)  ;  iirix^ipoTouelv  is  to  confirm  by  a  ma-
jority of  votes  (Dem.  De  Coron.  pp.  235,  261)  ;
eTTixeipoTovia  rwv  vojxuv  was  a  revision  of  the
laws,  which  took  place  at  the  beginning  of  every
year  ;  iirix^iporovia  ruv  apxiHv  was  a  vote  taken
in  the  first  assembly  of  each  Prytany  on  the  con-
duct of  the  magistrates  :  in  these  cases,  those  who
voted  for  the  confinnation  of  the  law,  or  for  the
continuance  in  office  of  the  magistrate,  were  said
firix^ipoTovuv,  those  on  the  other  side  airox^tpoTo-
velv   (Dem.  c.  Timocr.   p.  706  ;    Harpocrat.    and

I  Suidas  s.  v.  Kvpia  iKK\r}<Tia  ;  Dem.  c.  Tlieocrin.
p.  1330)  :    SiaxetpoToj'ia   is    a   vote   for   one    of

j  two  alternatives  (Dem.  c.  Androtion.  p.  6^Q  ;  c.
Timocr.  p.  707  ;  c.  Neaer.  p.  1346)  :  avTix^iporo-
»'€?*',  to  vote  against  a  proposition.  The  com-
pounds of  ^'i]^i(i(rQat  have  similar  meanings.
(Scbomann,  De  Comitiis  AtMniensium^  pp.  120,
125,  231,  251,  330.)  [P.  S.]

CHELIDO'NIA  (xeXiSoVm),  a  custom  ob-
served in  the  island  of  Rhodes,  in  the  month  of


CHIROGRAPHUM.  271

Boedromion,  the  time  when  the  swallows  returned.
During  that  seasan  boys,  called  xeAiSoj/io-rat,  went
from  house  to  house  collecting  little  gifts,  ostensibly
for  the  returning  swallows  {x^Ki^ovi^eiv).,  and  sing-
ing a  song  which  is  still  extant.  (Athen.  viii.  p.  360  ;
compare  Ilgen,  Opusc.  Phil.  i.  p.  164,  and  Eustath.
ad  Odyss.  xxi.  suh  fin.)  It  is  said  to  have  been  in-
troduced by  Cleobulus  of  Lindus,  at  the  same  period
when  the  town  was  in  great  distress.  The  cheli-
donia,  which  have  sometimes  been  called  a  fes-
tival, seem  to  have  been  nothing  but  a  peculiar
mode  of  begging,  which  on  the  occasion  of  the  re-
turn of  the  swallows  was  carried  on  by  boys  in  the
manner  stated  above.  Many  analogies  'may  still
be  observed  in  various  countries  at  the  various
seasons  of  the  year.  [L.  S.]

CHELYS  {x^hvs).     [Lyra.]

CHEME  ixwh)-,  a  Greek  liquid  measure,  the
capacity  of  which  (as  is  the  case  with  most  of  the
smaller  measures)  is  differently  stated  by  different
authorities.  There  was  a  small  cheme,  which  con-
tained two  cochlearia,  or  two  drachmae,  and  was
the  seventy-second  part  of  the  cotyle,  =  "0068  of
a  pint  English,  (Rhem.  Fann.  v.  77.)  The  large
cheme  was  to  the  small  in  the  proportion  of  3  to  2.
Other  sizes  of  the  cheme  are  mentioned,  but  they
differ  so  much  that  we  cannot  tell  with  certainty
what  they  reallv  were.  (Hussey,  Ancient  Weights^
&c.  ;  Wurm,  De  Pond.  &c.)  [P.  S.]

CHENISCUS.     [Navis.]

CHERNIPS  {x^pviy\>).     [Lustratio.]

CHEROSTAE  (xTjpwo-Tat).    [Heres.]

CHILIARCHUS.     [Exercitus.]

CHIRAMA'XIUM  (from  x^'^P  and  SM«),  a
sort  of  easy  chair  or  "  go-cart,"  used  for  invalids
and  children.    (Petron.  28.)

CHIRIDO'TA.    [Tunica.]

CHIRO'GRAPHUM  {x^ip6ypa<pov)^  meant
first,  as  its  derivation  implies,  a  hand-writing
or  autograph.  (Cic.  P/«7.  ii.  4.)  In  this  its  simple
sense,  x^'^P  in  Greek  and  manus  in  Latin  are  often
substituted  for  it.

Like  similar  words  in  all  languages,  it  acquired
several  technical  senses.  From  its  first  meaning
was  easily  derived  that  of  a  signature  to  a  will  or
other  instrument,  especially  a  note  of  hand  given
by  a  debtor  to  his  creditor.  In  this  latter  case,  it
did  not  constitute  the  legal  obligation  (for  the
debt  might  be  proved  in  some  other  way)  ;  it  was
only  a  proof  of  the  obligation.

According  to  Asconius  {in  Verr.  iii.  36)  cldro-
graphum^  in  the  sense  of  a  note-of-hand,  was  dis-
tinguished from  sijngraplia  ;  the  former  was  always
given  for  money  actually  lent,  the  latter  might  be
a  mere  sham  agreement  (something  like  a  bill  of
accommodation,  though  with  a  different  object),  to
pay  a  debt  which  had  never  been  actually  in-
curred. The  cidrographum  was  kept  by  the
creditor,  and  had  only  the  debtor's  signature  ;  the
syngrapha.^  on  the  contrary,  was  signed  and  kept
by  both  parties.

In  the  Latin  of  the  middle  ages  (see  Du  Fresne,
s.  V.)  chirographum  was  used  to  signify  tribute  col-
lected under  the  sign-manual  of  a  person  in  autho-
rity, similar  to  the  briefs  and  benevolences  of
former  times  in  our  own  country.  It  was  also
used  (see  Blackstone,  b.  ii.  c.  20),  till  very  lately,
in  the  English  law  for  an  indenture.  Duplicates  of
deeds  were  written  on  one  piece  of  parchment,  with
the  word  chirographum  between  them,  whicli  was
cut  in  two  in  a  straight  or  wavy  line,  and  the  parts


J7':


CHIRURGIA.


given  to  the  care  of  the  persons  concerned.  By
the  Canonists,  Blackstone  remarks,  the  word  syn-
grapha  or  syngraphus  was  employed  in  the  same
way,  and  hence  gave  its  name  to  these  kind  of
writings.  [B.  J.]

CHIRU'RGIA  (x^ipovpyla),  surgery.  The
practice  of  surgery  was,  for  a  long  time,  considered
by  the  ancients  to  be  merely  a  part  of  a  physician's
duty ;  but  as  it  is  now  almost  universally  allowed
to  be  a  separate  branch  of  the  profession,  it  will
perhaps  be  more  convenient  to  treat  of  it  under  a
separate  head.  It  will  not  be  necessary  to  touch
upon  the  disputed  questions,  which  is  the  more
ancient,  or  which  is  the  more  honourable  branch  of
the  profession  ;  nor  even  to  try  to  give  such  a
definition  of  the  word  cliirurgia  as  would  be  likely
to  satisfy  both  the  physicians  and  surgeons  of  the
present  day ;  it  will  be  sufficient  to  determine  the
sense  in  which  the  word  was  used  \y^  \kiG.  ancients ;
and  then,  adhering  closely  to  that  meaning,  to  give
an  account  of  this  division  of  the  science  and  art
of  medicine,  .is  practised  among  the  Greeks  and
Romans,  referring  to  the  article  Mkdicina  for
further  particulars.

The  word  chirurgia  is  derived  from  x^^P  the
hand,  and  epyoj'  a  work,  and  is  explained  by
Celsus  {De  Med.  lib.  vii.  Praefat.)  to  mean  that
pjirt  of  medicine  quwe  manu  curat,  "  which  cures
diseases  by  means  of  the  hand  ;"  in  Diogenes
Laertius  (iii.  85)  it  is  said  to  cure  Sjcfc  tov  refjLueiv
Kal  Kat'ejv,  "  by  cutting  and  burning  ; "  nor  (as  far
as  the  writer  is  aware)  is  it  ever  used  by  ancient
authors  in  any  other  sense.  Omitting  the  fabulous
and  mythological  personages,  Apollo,  Aesculapius,
Chiron,  &c.,  the  only  certain  traditions  respecting
the  state  of  surgery  before  the  establishment  of
the  republics  of  Greece,  and  even  until  the  time  of
the  Peloponnesian  war,  are  to  be  found  in  the
Iliad  and  Odyssey.  There  it  appears  that  surgery
was  almost  entirely  confined  to  the  treatment  of
wounds ;  and  the  imaginary  power  of  enchantment
was  joined  with  the  use  of  topical  applications.
(//.  iii.  218,  xi.  515,  828,  843,  &c.  &c.)  The
Greeks  received  surgery,  together  with  the  other
branches  of  medicine,  from  the  Egyptians;  and
from  some  observations  made  by  the  men  of
science  who  accompanied  the  French  expedition  to
Egj-pt  in  1 798,  it  appears,  that  there  are  docu-
ments fully  proving  that  in  very  remote  times  this
extraordinary  people  had  made  a  degree  of  pro-
gress of  which  few  of  the  moderns  have  any  con-
ception :  upon  the  ceilings  and  walls  of  the  temples
at  Tentyra,  Kamack,  Luxor,  &c.,  basso-relievos
are  seen,  representing  limbs  that  have  been  cut  off
with  instruments  very  analogous  to  those  which
are  employed  at  the  present  day  for  amputations.
The  same  instruments  are  again  observed  in  the
hieroglj-phics,  and  vestiges  of  other  surgical  opera-
tions may  be  traced,  which  afford  convincing  proofs
of  the  skill  of  the  ancient  Egyptians  in  this  branch
of  medical  science.  (Larry,  quoted  in  Cooper's
Surg.  Diet.)

The  earliest  remaining  surgical  writings  are
those  of  Hippocrates,  who  was  bom  B.  c.  460,  and
died  B.  c.  357.  Among  his  reputed  works  there
are  ten  treatises  on  this  subject,  only  one  of  which
however  is  considered  undoubtedly  genuine.  Hip-
pocrates far  surpassed  all  liis  predecessors  (and
indeed  most  of  his  successors)  in  the  boldness  and
success  of  his  operations  ;  and  though  the  scanty
knowledge  of  anatomy  possessed  in  those  times


CHIRURGIA.

prevented  his  attaining  any  very  great  perfection,
still,  we  should  rather  admire  his  genius,  which
enabled  him  to  do  so  much,  than  blame  him  be-
cause, with  his  deficient  information,  he  was  able
to  do  no  more.  The  scientific  skill  in  reducing
fractures  and  luxations  displayed  in  his  works,
De  Fracturis,  De  Articulis,  excites  the  admira-
tion of  Haller  {Biblioth.  Chirurg.),  and  he  was
most  probably  the  inventor  of  the  amlje,  an  old
chirurgical  machine  for  dislocations  of  the  shoulder,
which,  though  now  fallen  into  disuse,  for  a  long
time  enjoyed  a  great  reputiition.  In  his  work  Be
Capitis  Vulneribus  he  gives  minute  directions
about  the  time  and  mode  of  using  the  trephine,
and  warns  the  operator  against  the  probability  of
his  being  deceived  by  the  sutures  of  the  cranium,
as  he  confesses  happened  to  himself.  {De  Morh.
Vulgar,  lib.  v.  p.  561,  ed.  KUhn.)  The  author  of
the  Oath,  commonly  attributed  to  Hippocrates,
binds  his  pupils  not  to  perform  the  operation  of
lithotomy,  but  to  leave  it  to  persons  accustomed  to
it  (ipyaTrjai  avZpaai  irprq^ios  TTjcrSe) ;  from  which
it  would  appear  as  if  certain  persons  confined  them-
selves to  particular  operations.

The  names  of  several  persons  are  preserved  who
practised  surgery  as  well  as  medicine,  in  the  times
immediately  succeeding  those  of  Hippocrates  ;  but,
with  the  exception  of  some  fragments,  inserted  in
the  writings  of  Galen,  Oribasius,  Aetius,  &c,,  all
their  writings  have  perished.  Archagathus  de-
serves to  be  mentioned,  as  he  is  said  to  have  been
the  first  foreign  surgeon  that  settled  at  Rome
B.C.  219.  (Cassius  Heraina,  apud  Plin.  H.  N.
xxix.  6.)  He  was  at  first  very  well  received,  the
jus  Quiritium  was  conferred  upon  him,  a  shop  was
bought  for  him  at  the  public  expense,  and  he  re-
ceived the  honourable  title  of  Vuhierarius.  This,
however,  on  account  of  his  frequent  use  of  the
knife  and  cautery,  was  soon  changed  by  the  Ro-
mans (who  were  unused  to  such  a  mode  of  prac-
tice) into  that  of  Carnifex.  Asclepiades,  who
lived  at  the  beginning  of  the  first  century  b.  c,  is
said  to  have  been  the  first  person  who  proposed
the  operation  of  bronchotomy,  though  he  himself
never  performed  it  (Cacl.  Aurel.  De  Morb.  A  cut.
i.  14.  iii.  4) ;  and  Ammonius  of  Alexandria,  sur-
named  A.iQot6}xos,  who  is  supposed  to  have  lived
rather  later,  is  celebrated  in  the  annals  of  surgery
for  having  been  the  first  to  propose  and  to  perform
the  operation  of  Lithotrity,  or  breaking  a  calculus
in  the  bladder,  when  foimd  to  be  too  large  for
safe  extraction.  Celsus  has  minutely  described
his  mode  of  operating  (De  Med.  vii,  26.  §  3.  p.
436),  which  very  much  resembles  that  lately  in-
troduced by  Civiale  and  Heurteloup,  and  which
proves,  that  however  much  credit  they  may  de-
serve for  bringing  it  again  out  of  oblivion  into
public  notice,  the  praise  of  having  originally
thought  of  it  belongs  to  the  ancients.  "  A  hook,"
says  Celsus,  "  is  to  be  so  insinuated  behind  the
stone  as  to  resist  and  prevent  its  recoiling  into  the
bladder,  even  when  struck ;  then  an  iron  instru-
ment is  used,  of  moderate  thickness,  flattened
towards  the  end,  thin,  but  blunt  ;  which  being
placed  against  the  stone,  and  stnick  on  the  further
end,  cleaves  it ;  great  care  being  taken,  at  the
same  time,  that  neither  the  bladder  itself  be  in-
jured by  the  instrument,  nor  the  fragments  of  the
stone  fall  back  into  it."  The  next  surgical  writer
after  Hippocrates,  whose  works  are  still  extant,
is  Celsus,  who  lived  at  the  beginning  of  the  first


'


CHIRURGIA.

cer.tury  a.  d.,  and  who  has  devoted  the  four  last
books  of  his  work,  De  Medicina,  and  especially  the
seventh  and  eighth,  entirely  to  surgical  matters.
It  appears  plainly  from  reading  Cels  s,  that  since
the  time  of  Hippocrates  surgery  had  made  very
great  progress,  and  had,  indeed,  reached  a  high
degree  of  perfection.  He  is  the  first  author  who
gives  directions  for  the  operation  of  lithotomy  (De
Med.  vii.  26.  §  2.  p.  432),  and  the  method  de-
scribed by  him  (called  the  apparatus  minor ^  or
Celsiis^s  method^)  continued  to  be  practised  till  the
commencement  of  the  sixteenth  century.  It  was
performed  at  Paris,  Bordeaux,  and  other  places  in
France,  upon  patients  of  all  ages,  even  as  late  as  a
hundred  and  fifty  years  ago  ;  and  a  modem  author
(Allan  On  Lithotomy^  p.  12)  recommends  it  always
to  be  preferred  on  boys  under  fourteen.  (Cooper's
Did.  of  Prac.  Surg.,  art.  Lithotomy.)  He  de-
scribes (vii.  25.  §  3.  p.  428)  the  operation  of  In-
fUndatio,  which  was  so  commonly  performed  by  the
ancients  upon  singers,  &c,,  and  is  often  alluded  to
in  classical  authors.  (See  Juv.  vi.  73,  379  ;  Senec.
apud  Lactant.  Divin.  Instit.  i.  16;  Mart.  Epigr.
vii.  82.  1,  ix.  28.  12,  xiv.  215.  I  ;  Tertull.  De
Corona  Mil.  11.)  He  also  describes  (vii.  25.  §  1.
p.  427)  the  operation  alluded  to  by  St.  Paul  (1
Cor.  vii.  18)  ireptTeT/ATj/ieVos  t\s  iK\iidri :  fi^  iir  i-
a-ird<rd(o.  CJompare  Paulus  Aegineta  (De  Be
Med.  vi.  53),  v/ho  transcribes  from  Antyllus  a  se-
cond method  of  performing  the  operation.

The  following  description,  given  by  Celsus,  of
the  necessary  qualifications  of  a  surgeon,  deserves
to  be  quoted :  —  "A  surgeon,"  says  he  (lib.  vii.
Praefat.)  "  ought  to  be  j'^oung,  or,  at  any  rate,  not
very  old  ;  his  hand  should  be  firm  and  steady,  and
never  shake ;  he  should  be  able  to  use  his  left
hand  with  as  much  dexterity  as  his  right  ;  his
eye-sight  should  be  acute  and  clear  ;  his  mind  in-
trepid, and  so  far  subject  to  pity  as  to  make  him
desirous  of  the  recovery  of  his  patient,  but  not
Bo  far  as  to  suifer  himself  to  be  moved  by  his  cries;
he  should  neither  hurry  the  operation  more  than
the  case  requires,  nor  cut  less  than  is  necessary,
but  do  every  thing  just  as  if  the  other's  screams
made  no  impression  upon  him."

Perhaps  the  only  surgical  remark  worth  quoting
from  Aretaeus,  who  lived  in  the  first  century  a.  d.,
is  that  he  condemns  the  operation  of  bronchotoray,
and  thinks  "  that  the  wound  would  endanger  an
inflammation,  cough,  and  strangling  ;  and  that  if
the  danger  of  being  choked  could  be  avoided  by
this  method,  yet  the  parts  would  not  heal,  as  being
cartilaginous."  {De  Morb.  Acut.  Cur.  i.  7.  p.  227,
ed.  KUhn.)

Omitting  Scribonius  Largus,  Moschion,  and  So-
ranus,  the  next  author  of  importance  is  Caelius
Aurelianus,  who  is  supposed  to  have  lived  about
the  beginning  of  the  second  century  A.  d.,  and
in  whose  works  there  is  a  good  deal  relating  to
surgery,  though  nothing  that  can  be  called  original.
He  rejected  as  absurd  the  operation  of  broncho-
tomy  {De  Morb.  Chron.  iil  4).  He  mentions
a  case  of  ascites  that  was  cured  by  paracentesis
(Ibid.  iii.  8),  and  also  a  person  who  recovered
after  being  shot  through  the  lungs  by  an  arrow.
(Ibid.  iii.  12.)

Galen,  the  most  voluminous  and  at  the  same
time  the  most  valuable  medical  writer  of  antiquity,
18  less  celebrated  as  a  surgeon  than  as  an  anatomist
nnd  physician.  He  appears  to  have  practised
turgery  at  Pergamus,  but,  upon  his   removal    to


CHIRURGL-^.  273

Rome  (a.  d.  1 65),  he  entirely  confined  himself
to  medicine,  following,  as  he  says  himself  {De
Meth.  Med.  vi.  20),  the  custom  of  the  place.  His
writings  prove,  however,  that  he  did  not  entirely
abandon  surgery.  His  Commentaries  on  the
Treatise  of  Hippocrates,  De  Officina  Medici,  and
his  treatise  De  Fasctis,  shows  that  he  was  well
versed  even  in  the  minor  details  of  the  art.  He
appears  also  to  have  been  a  skilful  operator,  though
no  great  surgical  inventions  are  attributed  to  him.

Antyllus,  who  lived  some  time  between  Galen
and  Oribasius,  is  the  earliest  writer  whose  direc-
tions for  performing  bronchotomy  are  still  extant,
though  the  operation  (as  was  stated  above)  was
proposed  by  Asclepiades  about  three  hundred  years
before.  Only  a  few  fragments  of  the  writings  of
Antyllus  remain,  and  among  them  the  following
passage  is  preserved  by  Paulus  Aegineta  {De  Be
Med.  vi.  33): — "  Our  best  surgeons  have  described
this  operation,  Antyllus  particularly,  thus :  '  We
think  this  practice  useless,  and  not  to  be  attempted
where  all  the  arteries  and  the  lungs  are  afi^ected  ;
but  when  the  inflammation  lies  chiefly  about  the
throat,  the  chin,  and  the  tonsils  which  cover  the
top  of  the  windpipe,  and  the  artery  is  unaff"ected,
this  experiment  is  very  rational,  to  prevent  the
danger  of  suffocation.  When  we  proceed  to  per-
form it,  we  must  cut  through  some  part  of  the
windpipe,  below  the  larynx,  about  the  third  or
fourth  ring  ;  for  to  cut  quite  through  would  be
dangerous.  This  place  is  the  most  commodious,
because  it  is  not  covered  with  any  flesh,  and  be-
cause it  has  no  vessels  near  it.  Therefore,  bend-
ing the  head  of  the  patient  backward,  so  that  the
windpipe  may  come  more  forward  to  the  view,  we
make  a  transverse  section  between  two  of  the
rings,  so  that  in  this  case  not  the  cartilage,  but  the
membrane  which  incloses  and  unites  the  cartilages
together,  is  divided.  If  the  operator  be  a  little
fearful,  he  may  first  divide  the  skin,  extended  by
a  hook  ;  then,  proceeding  to  the  windpipe,  and
separating  the  vessels,  if  any  are  in  the  way,  he
must  make  the  incision.'  Thus  far  Antyllus,  who
thought  of  this  way  of  cutting,  by  observing  (when
it  was,  I  suppose,  cut  by  chance)  that  the  air
rushed  through  it  with  great  violence,  and  that  the
voice  was  interrupted.  When  the  danger  of  suifo-
cation  is  over,  the  lips  of  the  wound  must  be  united
by  suture,  that  is,  by  sewing  the  skin,  and  not  the
cartilage  ;  then  proper  vulnerary  medicines  are  to
be  applied.  If  these  do  not  agglutinate,  an  incar-
nant  must  be  used.  The  same  method  must  be
pursued  with  those  who  cut  their  throat  with  a
design  of  committing  suicide."  *

Oribasius,  physician  to  the  Emperor  Julian  (a.d.
361),  professes  to  be  mere'y  a  compiler;  and
though  there  is  in  his  great  work,  entitled  :iuva-
7wyat  'laTfiKal,  Collecta  Medicinalia,  much  sur-
gical matter,  there  is  nothing  original.  The  same
may  be  said  of  Aetius  and  Alexander  Trallianus,
both  of  whom  lived  towards  the  end  of  the  sixth
century  a.  d.,  and  are  not  famous  for  any  surgical
inventions.  Paulus  Aegineta  has  given  up  the
fifth  and  sixth  books  of  his  work,  De  Be  Medica,


*  This  operation  appears  to  have  been  very
seldom,  if  ever,  performed  by  the  ancients  upon  a
human  being.  Avenzoar  (p.  1 5)  tried  it  upon  a
goat,  and  found  it  might  be  done  without  much
danger  or  difficulty  ;  but  he  says  he  should  not
like  to  be  the  first  person  to  try  it  upon  a  tnan.


374  CHIEURGIA.

entirely  to  surgery,  and  has  inserted  in  them
much  useful  matter,  the  fruits  chiefly  of  his  own
observation  and  experience.  Ke  was  particularly
celebrated  for  his  skill  in  midwifery,  and  female
diseases,  and  was  called  on  that  account,  by  the
Arabians,  Al-Kawabeli,  "  the  Accoucheur,"  (Abul-
pharaj,  Hint.  Dynast,  p.  181,  ed.  Pococke).  Two
pamphlets  were  published  in  1768  at  Gottmgen,
4to.  by  Rud.  Aug.  Vogel,  entitled  De  Patdi
Aeginetae  Mentis  in  Medicinam,  imprimisque
Chirurgiam.  Paulus  Aegineta  lived  probably  to-
wards the  end  of  the  seventh  century,  a.  d.,  and
is  the  last  of  the  ancient  Greek  and  Latin  medical
writers  whose  surgical  works  remain.  The  names
of  several  others  are  recorded,  but  they  are  not  of
sufficient  eminence  to  require  any  notice  here.
For  further  information  on  the  subject  both  of
medicine  and  surgery,  see  Medicina  ;  and  for  the
legal  qualifications,  social  rank,  &c.,  both  of  phy-
sicians and  surgeons,  among  the  ancient  Greeks
and  Romans,  see  Medicus.

The  surgical  instruments,  from  which  the  ac-
companjnng  engravings  are  made,  were  found  by  a
physician  of  Petersburg,  Dr.  Savenko,  in  1819,  at
Pompeii,  in  Via  Consularis  {Strada  Consufare\  in
a  house  which  is  supposed  to  have  belonged  to  a
surgeon.  They  are  now  preserved  in  the  museum
at  Portici.  The  engravings,  with  an  account  of
them  by  Dr.  Savenko,  were  originally  published
in  the  Revue  Medicate  for  1821,  vol.  iii.  p.  427,
&c.  They  were  afterwards  inserted  in  Froriep's
Notizen  aus  dem  Gebiete  der  Natur-und- Heilkunde,
for  1822,  vol.  ii.  n.  26.  p.  57,  &c.  The  plate
containing  these  instruments  is  wanting  in  the
copy  of  the  Revue  Medicale  in  the  library  of  the
College  of  Surgeons,  so  that  the  accompanying
figures  are  copied  from  the  German  work,  in  which
some  of  them  appear  to  be  drawn  very  badly.
Their  authenticity  was  at  first  doubted  by  Kiihn
(De  Instrum.  Chirurg.,  Veteribus  cognitis,  et  nuper
effbssis.  Lips.  1823,  4to.),  who  thought  they  were
the  same  that  had  been  described  by  Bayardi  in
his  Catal.  Antiq.  Monument.  Herculani  ejfbs..  Nap.
1754.  fol.  n.  236 — 294;  when,  however,  his  dis-
sertation was  afterwards  republished  (Opusc.
Academ.  Med.  et  PhiloL,  Lips.  1827,  1828,  8vo.
vol.  ii.  p.  309)  he  acknowledged  himself  to  be  com-
pletely satisfied  on  this  point,  and  has  given  in
the  tract  referred  to,  a  learned  and  ingenious  de-


CHIRURGIA.

scription  of  the  instruments,  and  their  supposed
uses,  from  which  the  following  account  is  chiefly
abridged.  It  will,  however,  be  seen  at  once,  that
the  form  of  most  of  them  is  so  simple,  and  their
uses  so  obvious,  that  very  little  explanation  is
necessary.

1,  2.  Two  probes  (specillum, /jL-fiXri)  made  of  iron  ;
the  larger  six  inches  long,  the  smaller  four  and  a
half.  3.  A  cautery  (KavT-f^piov)  made  of  iron,
rather  more  than  four  inches  long.  4,  5.  Two
lancets  (scalpellum,  o-/it\7j),  made  of  copper,  the
former  two  inches  and  a  half  long,  the  other  three
inches.  It  seems  doubtful  whether  thej'  were
used  for  blood-letting,  or  for  opening  abscesses,
&c.  6.  A  knife,  apparently  made  of  copper,  the
blade  of  which  is  two  inches  and  a  half  long,  and
in  the  broadest  part  one  inch  in  breadth  ;  the  back
is  straight  and  thick,  and  the  edge  much  curved  ;
the  handle  is  so  short  that  Savenko  thinks  it  must
have  been  broken.  It  is  uncertain  for  what  par-
ticular purpose  it  was  used :  Kiihn  conjectures  that
(if  it  be  a  surgical  instrument  at  all)  it  may  have
been  made  with  such  a  curved  edge,  and  such  a
straight  thick  back,  that  it  might  be  struck  with  a
hammer,  and  so  amputate  fingers,  toes,  &c.  7.
Another  knife,  apparently  made  of  copper,  the
blade  of  which  is  of  a  triangular  shape,  two  inches
long,  and  in  the  broadest  part  eight  lines  in  breadth;
the  back  is  straight  and  one  line  broad,  and  this
breadth  continues  all  the  way  to  the  point,  which,
therefore,  is  not  sharp,  but  guarded  by  a  sort  of
button.  Kiihn  thinks  it  may  have  been  used  for
enlarging  wounds,  &c.,  for  which  it  would  be  par-
ticularly fitted  by  its  blunt  point  and  broad  back.

8.  A  needle,  about  three  inches  long,  made  of  iron.

9.  An  elevator  (or  instrument  for  raising  depressed
portions  of  the  skull),  made  of  iron,  five  inches
long,  and  very  much  resembling  those  made  use  of


in  the  present  day.  10 — 14.  Different  kinds  of
forceps  (vulsella).  No.  10  has  the  two  sides  sepa-
rated from  each  other,  and  is  Ave  inches  long.
No.  11  is  also  five  inches  long.  No.  12  is  tliree
inches  and  a  half  long.     The  sides  are  narrow  a,t


CHLAMYS

the  point  of  union,  and  become  broader  by  degrees
towards  the  other  end,  where,  when  closed,  they
form  a  kind  of  arch.  It  should  be  noticed  that  it
is  furnished  with  a  moveable  ring,  exactly  like  the
tenaculum  forceps  employed  at  the  present  day.
No.  13  was  used  for  pulling  out  hairs  by  the  roots
(rpixoKagis).  No.  14  is  six  inches  long,  and  is
bent  in  the  middle.  It  was  probably  used  for  ex-
tracting foreign  bodies  that  had  stuck  in  the  oeso-
phagus ( or  gullet),  or  in  the  bottom  of  a  wound.
15.  A  male  catheter  (aenea  fistula),  nine  inches  in
length.  The  shape  is  remarkable  from  its  having
the  double  curve  like  the  letter  S,  which  is  the
form  that  was  re-invented  in  the  last  century  by
the  celebrated  French  surgeon,  J.  L.  Petit.  16.
Probably  a  female  catheter,  four  inches  in  length.
Celsus  thus  describes  both  male  and  female  cathe-
ters {De  Med.  vii.26.  §  1.  p.  429)  :  — "  The  surgeon
should  have  three  male  catheters  {aeneas  fistulas),
of  which  the  longest  should  be  fifteen,  the  next
twelve,  and  the  shortest  nine  inches  in  length  ;
and  he  should  have  two  female  catheters,  the  one
nine  inches  long,  the  other  six.  Both  sorts  should
be  a  little  curved,  but  especially  the  male  ;  they
should  be  perfectly  smooth,  and  neither  too  thick
nor  too  thin."  17.  Supposed  by  Froriep  to  be  an
instrument  for  extracting  teeth  (hhovrdypa,  Pol-
lux, iv.  §  181)  ;  but  Kiihn,  with  much  more  pro-
bability, conjectures  it  to  be  an  instrument  used
in  amputating  part  of  an  enlarged  uvula,  and
quotes  Celsus  {De  Med.  vii.  12.  §  3.  p.  404),
who  saj^s,  that  "no  method  of  operating  is
more  convenient  than  to  take  hold  of  the  uvula
with  the  forceps,  and  then  to  cut  off  below  it
as  much  as  is  necessary."  18,  19.  Probably  two
spatulae.  [W.  A.  G.]

CHITON  (x'TcSv).  [Tunica.]
CHITO'NIA  (xirdvia),  a  festival  celebrated
in  the  Attic  town  of  Chitone  in  honour  of  Artemis,
fiurnamed  Chitona  or  Chitonia.  (Schol.  ad  Calli-
mach.  Hymn,  in  Artein.  78.)  The  Syraeusans  also
celebrated  a  festival  of  the  same  name,  and  in
honour  of  the  same  deity,  which  was  distinguished
by  a  peculiar  kind  of  dance,  and  a  playing  on  the
flute.  (Athen.  xiv.  p.  629  ;  Steph.  Byz.  s.  v.  Xi-
T<avn.)  [L.  S.]

CHLAINA  (xA.orm).     [Laena  ;  Pallium.]
CHLAMYS  (xAa/u-ws,  dim.  x^afivSiov),  a  scarf.
This  term,  being  Greek,  denoted  an  article  of  the
Amictus,  or  outer  raiment,  which  was  in  general
characteristic  of  the  Greeks,  and  of  the  Oriental
races  with  which  they  were  connected,  although
both  in  its  form  and  in  its  application  it  approached
very  much  to  the  Lacerna  and  Paludamentum
of  the  Romans,  and  was  itself  to  some  extent
adopted  by  the  Romans  under  the  emperors.     It
was  for  the  most  part  woollen  ;  and  it  diifered
from  the  ifidriov,  the  usual  amictus  of  the  male
sex,  in  these  respects,  that  it  was  much  smaller  ;
j    also  finer,  thinner,  more  variegated  in  colour,  and
;    more  susceptible  of  ornament.     It  moreover  dif-
I    fered  in  being  oblong  instead  of  square,  its  length
being  generally  about  twice  its  breadth.     To  the
;    regular  oblong  a,  6,  c,  d  (see  woodcut),  goars  were
added,  either  in  the  form  of  a  right-angled  triangle
o*  «»/»  producing  the  modification  a,  e,  g,  rf,  which
is  exemplified  in  the  annexed  figure  of  Mercury  ;
j    or  of  an  obtuse-angled  triangle  a,  e^  b,  producing  the
I    modification  a,  e,  b,  c,  p,  rf,  which  is  exemplified  in
'    the  figure  of  a  youth  from  the  Panathenaic  frieze
in  the  British  Museum.     These  goars  were  called


CHLAMYS.


275


TTTcpvyes,  tvings,  and  the  scarf  with  these  additions
was  distinguished  by  the  epithet  of  Thessalian  or
Macedonian  {Etym.  Mag.),  and  also  by  the  name
oi''A\\i^  or  A licula.  [Alicula.]  Hence  the  an-
cient geographers  compared  the  form  of  the  in-
habited earth  (v  oIkovixcvt])  to  that  of  a  chlamys.
(Strabo,  ii.  5  ;  Macrobius,  De  Somn.  Scip.  ii.)

The  scarf  does  not  appear  to  have  been  much
worn  by  children,  although  one  was  given  with  its
brooch  to  Tiberius  Caesar  in  his  infancy.  (Suet.
Tib,  6.)  It  was  generally  assumed  on  reaching
adolescence,  and  was  worn  by  the  ephebi  from
about  seventeen  to  twenty  years  of  age.  (Philemon,
p.  367,  ed.  Meineke  ;  ephebica  chlamy'de,  Apuleius,
Met.  X  ;  Pollux,  x.  1 64.)  It  was  also  worn  by  the
military,  especially  of  high  rank,  over  their  body-
armour  (Aelian,  V.  H.  xiv.  10  ;  Plaut.  Pseud,  ii.
4.  45,  Epid.  iii.  3.  55),  and  by  hunters  and  tra-
vellers, more  particularly  on  horseback.  (Plaut.
Poen.  iii.  3.  6,  31.)

The  scarfs  worn  by  youths,  by  soldiers,  and  by
hunters,  differed  in  colour  and  fineness,  according
to  their  destination,  and  the  age  and  rank  of  the
wearer.  The  X'"^"/^"*  ipr]§iK^  was  probably  yel-
low or  saflfron-coloured  ;  and  the  x^a/*^s  (TTpariu-
TiK^,  scarlet.  On  the  other  hand,  the  hunter  com-
monly went  out  in  a  scarf  of  a  dull  unconspicuous
colour,  as  best  adapted  to  escape  the  notice  of  wild
animals.  (Pollux,  v.  18.)  The  more  ornamental
scarfs,  being  designed  for  females,  were  tastefully
decorated  with  a  border  (limbus,  Virg.  Aen.  iv.
137;  maeander,  v.  251);  and  those  worn  by
Phoenicians,  Trojans,  Phrj-gians,  and  other  Asiatics,
were  also  embroidered,  or  interwoven  with  gold.
(Virg.  II.  cc.  ;  iii.  483,  484,  xi.  775  ;  Ovid,  Met.
v.  51  ;  Val.  Flaccus,  vi.  228.)  Actors  had  their
chlamys  ornamented  with  gold.    (Pollux,  iv.  1 1 6.)

The  usual  mode  of  wearing  the  scarf  was  to  pass
one  of  its  shorter  sides  (a,  d)  round  the  neck,  and
to  fasten  it  by  means  of  a  brooch  ( fibula),  either
over  the  breast,  in  which  case  it  hung  down  the
back,  reaching  to  the  calves  of  the  legs  ;  or  over
the  right  shoulder,  so  as  to  cover  the  left  arm,  as
is  seen  in  the  cut  on  p.  259,  and  in  the  well-known
example  of  the  Belvidere  Apollo.  In  other  in-
stances it  was  made  to  depend  gracefully  from  the
left  shoulder,  of  which  the  bronze  Apollo  in  the
British  Museum  (see  the  annexed  woodcut)  pre-
sents an  example  ;  or  it  was  thro\vn  lightly  behind
the  back,  and  passed  over  either  one  arm  or
shoulder,  or  over  both  (see  the  second  figure  in  the
last  woodcut,  taken  from  Hamilton's  Vases,  i.  2)  ;
or,  lastly,  it  was  laid  upon  the  throat,  carried  be-
hind the  neck,  and  crossed  so  as  to  hang  down  the
back,  as  in  the  figure  of  Achilles  (p.  196),  and
sometimes  its  extremities  were  again  brought  for-
ward over  the  arms  or  shoulders.  In  short,  the
T  2


CHLAMYS.


remains  of  ancient  art  of  every  description,  show
in  how  high  a  degree  the  scarf  contributed,  by  its
endless  diversity  of  arrangement,  to  the  display  of
the  human  form  in  its  greatest  beauty  ;  and  Ovid
has  told  us  how  sensible  the  ephebi  were  of  its
advantages  in  the  account  of  the  care  bestowed
upon  this  part  of  his  attire  by  Mercury.  {Met.  ii.
735.)  The  aptitude  of  the  scarf  to  be  turned  in
ever}'  possible  form  around  the  body,  made  it  use-
ful even  for  defence.  The  hunter  used  to  wrap
his  chlamys  about  his  left  arm  when  pursuing  wild
animals,  and*  preparing  to  fight  with  them.  (Pol-
lux V  18;  Xen.  Cyneg.  vi,  17.)  Alcibiades  died
lighting  with  his  scarf  rolled  round  his  left  hand
instead  of  a  shield.  The  annexed  woodcut  exhibits
a  figiu"e  of  Neptune  armed  with  the  trident  in  his
right  hand,  and  having  a  chlamys  to  protect  the
left.  It  is  taken  from  a  medal  which  was  struck
in  commemoration  of  a  naval  victory  obtained  by
Demetrius  Poliorcetes,  and  was  evidently  designed
to  express  his  sense  of  Neptune's  succour  in  the
conflict.     When  Diana  goes  to  the  chase,  as  she


does  not  require  her  scarf  for  purposes  of  defence,
she  draws  it  from  behind  over  her  shoulders,  and
twists  it  round  her  waist,  so  that  the  belt  of  her
quiver  passes  across  it,  as  shown  in  the  statues  of
this  goddess  in  the  Vatican  (see  woodcut).

It  appears  from  the  bas-reliefs  on  marble  vases
that  dancers  took  hold  of  one  another  by  the
chlamys,  as  the  modem  Greeks  still  do  by  their
scarfs  or  handkerchiefs,  instead  of  taking  one  an
other's  hands.

Among  the  Romans  the  scarf  came  more  into
use  under  the  emperors.  Caligula  wore  one  en-
riched with  gold.  (Suet.  Calig.  19.)  Alexander
Severus,  when  he  was  in  the  country  or  on  an
e.]q>9ditiop,  wore  a  scarf  d^'ed  with   the  coccus


CHOREGUS.

(cMamyde  coccinea^  Lamprid.  Al.  Sev.  40  ;  compare
Matt  xxvii.  28,  31).  [J.  Y.]

CHLOEIA  or  CHLOIA  (x^Seta  or  x^oic£),  a
festival  celebrated  at  Athens  in  honour  of  Demeter
Chloe,  or  simply  Chloe,  whose  temple  stood  near
the  Acropolis.  (Hesych.  s.  v.  x^oia  ;  Athen.  xiv.
p.  618  ;  Sophocl.  Oed.  Col.  1600,  with  the  Scho-
liast ;  Pans.  i.  22.  §  3.)  It  was  solemnized  in
spring,  on  the  sixth  of  Thargelion,  when  the  blos-
soms began  to  appear  (hence  the  names  x^^V  and
XA.Jeta),  with  the  sacrifice  of  a  goat  and  much
mirth  and  rejoicing.  (Eupolis,  apud  Schol.  ad
Soph.  Oed.  Col.  I.  c.)  [L.  S.]

CHOENIX  (xotvil),  a  Greek  measure  of  ca-
pacity, the  size  of  which  is  differently  given  ;  it
was  probably  of  different  sizes  in  the  several  states.
Pollux  (iv.  23),  Suidas,  Cleopatra,  and  the  frag-
ments of  Galen  (c.  7,  9)  make  it  equal  to  three
cotylae,  or  nearly  \\  pints  English  ;  another  frag-
ment of  Galen  (c.  5),  and  other  authorities  (Pauc-
ton,  Metrolog.  p.  233)  make  it  equal  to  four  cotylae,
or  nearly  2  pints  English  ;  Rhemnius  Fannius  (v.
QQ)^  and  another  fragment  of  Galen  (c.  8)  make  it
eight  cotylae,  or  nearly  4  pints  English.  (Wurm,
De  Pond,  et  Mens.  &c.,pp.  132,  142, 199;  Hussey,
Ancient  Weights,  dhc.  pp.  209,  214.  [P.  S.]  '

CHOES  (x<^es).  [DioNYSiA.]
CHORE'GIA.  [Choregus.]
CHORE'GUS  (xopvyds),  one  who  had  to  dls
charge  the  duties  of  the  Choregia  ( xopvy'^c-)-  The
Choregia  was  one  of  the  most  expensive  of  the  or-
dinary or  encyclic  liturgies  at  Athens.  [Leitur-
GiA,]  The  choregus  was  appointed  by  his  tribe,
though  we  are  not  informed  according  to  what
order.  The  same  person  might  serve  as  choregus
for  two  tribes  at  once  (Antiph.  de  Choreutcxy
p.  768  ;  Dem.  c.  Lept.  p.  467)  ;  and  after  B.  c.  412
a  decree  was  passed  allowing  two  persons  to  imite
and  undertalce  a  choregia  together.  (Schol.  ad
Arist.  Ran.  406.)  The  duties  of  the  choregia
consisted  in  providing  the  choruses  for  tragedies
and  comedies,  the  lyric  choruses  of  men  and  boys,
the  p5Trhicists,  the  cyclic  choruses,  and  the
choruses  of  flute-players  for  the  different  religious
festivals  at  Athens.  When  a  poet  intended  to
bring  out  a  play,  he  had  to  get  a  chorus  assigned
him  by  the  archon  [Chorus],  who  nominated  a
choregus  to  fulfil  the  requisite  duties.  The
choregus  had  in  the  first  place  to  get  the  choreutae."
In  the  case  of  a  chorus  of  boys  this  was  some-
times a  difficult  matter,  since,  in  consequence  of  the
prevalent  paederastia  of  the  Greeks,  i)arents  were
frequently  unwilling  to  suffer  their  boys  to  be
choreutae,  lest  they  should  be  exposed  to  corrupt-
ing influences  during  their  training.  Solon,  with
the  view  of  lessening  the  dangers  to  which  they
might  be  exposed,  had  enacted  that  choregi  should
be  more  than  forty  years  of  age.  But  the  law
was  by  no  means  rigidly  observed.  (Acsch..
c.  Timarch.  p.  391.)  If  the  boys  could  be  obtained
in  no  other  way,  compulsion  was  allowable.  (An-
tiph. I.  c.)  Having  procured  the  choreutae,  the
choregus  had  next  to  provide  a  trainer  for  them
(Xopo5idd(TKa\os).  It  was  of  course  a  matter  of
great  importance  to  get  a  good  trainer.  The  ap-
portionment of  the  trainers  was  decided  by  lot,
that  is,  as  Bdckh  imagines,  the  choregi  decided  by
lot  in  what  order  they  were  to  select  the  trainers,
which  was  in  fact  the  mode  of  proceeding  with
respect  to  the  flute-player.  (Dem.  c.  Meid.  p.
519.)     The  choregus  had  to  pay,   not  only  tho


CHORUS.

trainer,  but  the  choreutae  themselves,  and  main-
tain them  while  they  were  in  training,  providing
them  with  such  food  as  was  adapted  to  strengthen
the  voice  *;  and  to  provide  a  suitable  training
place  (xopr]ye7ov)  if  he  had  no  place  in  his  own
house  adapted  for  the  purpose.  (Antiph.  I.  c.  ;
Athen.  xiv.  p.  61 7,  b. ;  Schol.  ad  Arist.  Nub.  338,
Acham.  1154;  Plut.  rfe  C/or.  ^^A.  p.  349,  a;  Xen.
de  RepvU.  Ath.  i.  13  ;  Poll.  iv.  106,  ix.  41.)  He
had  also  to  provide  the  chorus  with  the  requisite
dresses,  crowns,  and  masks.  (Dem.  c.  Meid.  p.
519;  Athen.  iii.  p.  103,  f.)  It  is  not  to  be  sup-
posed, however,  that  the  choregus  defraj^ed  the
■whole  expense  of  the  play  to  be  represented.
The  choregus  who  was  judged  to  have  performed
his  duties  in  the  best  manner  received  a  tripod  as
a  prize,  the  expense  of  which,  however,  he  had  to
defray  himself;  and  this  expense  frequently  in-
cluded the  building  of  a  cell  or  chapel  in  which
to  dedicate  it.  A  street  at  Athens  was  called  the
Street  of  the  Tripods,  from  being  lined  with  these.
The  tribe  to  which  the  choregus  belonged  shared
the  honours  of  the  victory  with  him,  and  the  names
of  both  were  inscribed  upon  the  tripod  or  monu-
ment. (Paus.  i.  20.  §  1  ;  Plat.  Gorg.  p.  472  ;
Plut.  Nic.  3.)  The  sums  expended  by  choregi
were  doubtless  in  most  cases  larger  than  was  abso-
lutely necessary.  Aristophanes  (Lys.  pro  Arist.
bon.  pp.  633,  642)  spent  5000  drachmae  upon  two
tragic  choruses.  From  the  same  orator  we  learn
that  another  person  spent  3000  drachmae  upon  a
single  tragic  chorus  ;  2000  for  a  chorus  of  men  ;
5000  for  a  chorus  of  men  on  another  occasion,
when,  having  gained  the  prize,  he  had  to  defray
the  expense  of  the  tripod  ;  800  drachmae  for  a
chorus  of  pyrrhicists  ;  300  drachmae  for  a  cyclic
chorus.     (Lys.  uttoK.  SwpoS.  pp.  698,  ed.  Reiske.)

A  chorus  of  flute-players  cost  more  than  a  tragic
chorus.  (Dem.  c.  Meid.  p.  565.)  In  times  of
public  distress,  tRe  requisite  number  of  choregi
could  not  always  be  procured.  Thus  the  tribe
Pandionis  had  furnished  no  choregus  for  three
years,  till  Demosthenes  voluntarily  undertook  the
office.  (Dem.  c.  Meid.  pp.  578,  579  ;  comp.  Bockh.
Publ.  Econ.  of  Athens,  book  iii.  c.  22.)     [C.  P.  M.]

CHOROBATES,  an  mstrumentfor  determining
the  slope  of  an  aqueduct  and  the  levels  of  the
country  through  which  it  was  to  pass.  From  the
description  given  of  it  by  Vitruvius,  it  appears  to
have  diifered  but  very  slightly  from  a  common
carpenter's  level,  which  consists  of  a  straight  rule
supporting  a  perpendicular  piece,  against  which
hangs  a  plumb-line.  The  chorobates  had  two  per-
pendiculars and  plumb  lines,  one  at  each  end,  in-
stead of  a  single  one  in  the  middle.  The  derivation
of  the  word  is  from  X'^P"-  and  fiaivca,  from  its  use
in  surveying  land  minutely.  [P.  S.  j

CHORUS  (xop6s ),  a  word,  the  original  meaning
and  derivation  of  which  are  somewhat  uncertain.
According  to  Hesychius  the  word  is  equivalent  to
kukXos  or  (TTecpavos.  If  so,  the  word  probably
signified  originally  a  company  of  dancers  dancing
in  a  ring.  Those  who  adopt  that  view  of  the
origin  of  the  word  connect  it  with  x^P'^^^^  X'^P^^^^t


*  The  speech  of  Antiphon,  ircp).  rov  xop^vrov.,
was  composed  for  a  trial  which  arose  out  of  an
action  brought  by  the  father  of  a  choreutes  against
the  choregus  under  whose  charge  he  was,  because
the  boy  had  died  from  drinking  some  mixture
given  him  to  improve  his  voice.


CHORUS.  277

and  KopwvSs.  Others  suppose  that  the  earliest
signification  of  the  word  is  that  of  a  level,  open
space,  such  as  would  be  suited  for  dancing,  and
connect  it  with  x<^pa  and  x^pos,  so  that  the  later
and  ordinary  signification  of  the  word  would  be
derived  from  such  places  being  employed  for  danc-
ing. This  seems  a  less  likely  account  of  the  word
than  the  other.  If  the  name  x^pot  was  given  to
such  places  with  reference  to  their  use  for  dancing.,
we  should  still  have  to  look  to  this  latter  idea  lor
the  origin  of  the  name  of  the  place  ;  if  the  name
was  a  genei-al  one,  like  x^P^"^-,  it  seems  very  un-
likely that  a  body  of  dancers  should  derive  their
name  from  what  is  so  very  little  distinctive  of
them,  namely  their  meeting  in  an  open  space.  On
the  other  hypothesis  it  is  easy  to  understand  how
a  word  signifying  a  body  of  dancers  should  come
to  signify  the  place  where  they  danced,  and  then,
more  generally,  any  place  suited  for  the  purpose.
As  regards  the  usage  of  the  word,  in  Homer  it
commonly  means  a  troop  of  dancers  ;  in  the
Odyssey  (viii.  260,  264,  xii.  4)  passages  are  found
where  it  means  a  place  for  dancing  ;  evpvxopos  is
found  both  in  Homer  and  in  later  writers  as  an
epithet  of  cities  having  large  open  squares  or  places
suited  for  choral  performances.  A  comparison  with
the  corresponding  word  KaAAixopos  shows  that  the
notion  of  danci?ig  must  not  be  lost  sight  of.  At
Sparta  the  agora  was  called  x^P^^  (Paus.  iii.  11.
§  9).  _

In  later  times,  a  choric  performance  always  im-
plies the  singing  or  musical  recitation  of  a  poetical
composition,  accompanied  by  appropriate  dancing
and  gesticulation,  or  at  least  by  a  measured  march.
The  choruses  that  we  read  of  in  Homer  are  merely
companies  of  dancers,  who  move  to  the  music  of  a
song  sung  by  the  minstrel,  who  accompanies  him  •
self  on  the  cithara  or  phorminx.  In  the  palace  of
Alcinous  the  dancers  perform  their  evolutions,
while  Demodocus,  to  the  music  of  the  phorminx,
sings  the  loves  of  Ares  and  Aphrodite  (Od.  viii.
256,  &c,).  In  the  chorus  represented  on  the  shield
of  Achilles  (//.  xviii.  590,  &c.)  a  band  of  youths
and  maidens  dance,  holding  each  other  by  the
hand,  sometimes  in  a  ring,  sometimes  in  parallel
lines  opposite  to  each  other.  In  the  midst  of  the
dancers  are  two  /cu§io-T7jT^pey,  or  tumblers,  who,
apparently,  by  their  gesticulations  direct  and  lead
oJf((^apxouTes)  the  measured  movements  (/xoKir-f])
of  the  dancers.  So  in  the  Homeric  hymn  to  the
Pythian  Apollo  (10,  &c.)  a  company  of  goddesses
dance,  while  the  Muses  sing,  and  Apollo  plays  the
cithara.  The  part  of  the  nvSiaTrtTripes  is  per-
formed by  Ares  and  Hermes,  who  gesticulate
(Trai^ova-i)  in  the  midst  of  the  dancers.  In  the
description  of  the  nuptial  procession  in  Hesiod
(Shield  of  Here.  272,  &c.)  it  is  not  quite  clear
whether  the  chorus  of  youths  are  singing  and  danc-
ing to  the  sound  of  the  pipe,  or  playing  the  pipe
themselves.  The  band  of  revellers  (/cw/zoy)  who
follow  both  dance  and  sing.  That  the  chonis,  in
the  earliest  times,  consisted  of  the  whole  population
of  a  city  assembled  for  dances  and  hymns  in  honour
of  their  guardian- god,  might  be  tioie  if  the  whole
population  joined  in  the  dance,  but  not  otherwise,
for  the  term  chorus  never  included  the  spectators.

Whether  the  Dorians  were  the  first  who  had
choruses  at  festive  or  religious  celebrations,  or
whether  Apollo  was  the  deity  in  connection  with
whose  worship  choruses  first  made  their  appear-
ance, are  points  which,  iji  the  absence  of  all  evi-
T  3


^8


CHORUS,


dence,  are  best  left  undecided.  The  war-dances
of  the  Curetes  in  Crete  in  honour  of  Zeus,  seem  to
be  quite  as  ancient  as  any  that  we  know  of  in
honoiu"  of  Apollo.  However  dances  may  have
originated,  it  was  natural  that,  like  music  and
poetry,  they  should  at  a  very  early  period  be  con-
nected with  the  worship  of  the  gods  ;  and  in  that
connection  it  is  certainly  true  that  it  was  among
the  Dorians,  and  connected  with  the  worship  of
Apollo,  that  the  chorus  received  its  earliest  de-
velopment, though  there  does  not  appear  sufficient
evidence  to  support  the  conclusion  that  the  worship
of  Apollo  existed  nowhere  without  having  been
introduced  by  the  Dorians.

The  imperfect  type  of  the  later  chorus  appears
in  the  earliest  period  in  the  paean,  as  sung  by
a  company  either  sitting  still  (//.  i.  473),  or  moving
along  with  a  measured  step  {II.  xxii.  391).  In
the  Homeric  hymn  to  the  Pythian  Apollo  we  have
the  god  himself  as  leader  of  the  chorus,  playing
the  phorminx,  while  the  chorus  of  Cretans  follow
him  at  a  measured  pace,  and  sing  the  Paean.
[Paean].  This  exhibits  the  Paean  in  a  some-
what later  stage  of  development.  In  Homer  it
appears  as  a  less  formal  and  systematic  perform-
ance. Dancing  was  very  early  connected  with  the
worship  of  Apollo  in  Delos  (Hymn.  Apoll.  Del.
1.  149,  &c.),  and  in  Crete.  (Hesiod.  Fr.  94.
Gottl.)  It  was  in  Crete  that  the  mimetic  dance,
called  Hyporchema,  took  its  origin  [Hyporchkma;
SaltatioJ,  and  it  was  thence  also  that  the  sub-
sequent innovations  upon  the  staid  gravity  of  the
Paean  were  derived,  traces  of  the  origin  of  which
were  preserved  in  the  name  of  the  rhythms  and
dances.  (Miiller,  Dorians,  ii.  8.  §  1 4.)  To  Tha-
letas  are  attributed  the  most  important  improve-
ments. He  cultivated  the  art  of  dancing  no  less
than  that  of  music,  and  adapted  the  evolutions  of
the  chorus  to  the  more  spirited  movements  of  the
Phrygian  style  of  music.  He  is  said  to  have  com-
posed both  paeans  and  hyporchemes,  the  latter  of
which  he  adapted  for  the  Pyrrhic  or  war- dance  ;
and  from  having  given  them  a  more  artistic  form,
he  came  to  be  regarded  by  some  as  the  inventor  of
them.  (Miiller,  History  of  the  Literature  of  An-
cient Greece,  p.  160,  &c.)  Paeans  began  to  be
sung  with  an  orchestic  accompaniment  on  the  part
of  the  chorus,  especially  at  the  festival  of  the
Gymnopaedia  [Gymnopaedia],  and  by  degrees
became  scarcely  distinguishable  from  the  hypor-
cheme.  (Miiller,  I.  c.  p.  160  ;  Bode,  Gesch.  der
Helkn.  Dichtk.  vol.  ii.  part  i.  p.  46.)  That  com-
bination of  singing  and  dancing  which  we  find
in  the  choruses  of  later  times,  to  which  the  remark
of  Lucian  applies  {de  Salt.  30),  ir<£\at  ij.hv  ykp  oi
avTol  Koi  ^8ov  Kal  wpxovvTo,  was  probably  intro-
duced by  degrees.  It  had  taken  place  before  the
time  of  Alcman,  who  introduced  into  his  choral
compositions  an  antistrophic  character.  A  large
nmnber  of  these  he  composed  for  choruses  of  vir-
gins :  in  some  there  was  a  dialogue  between  the
chorus  and  the  poet.  (Miiller,  I.  c.  p.  194,  &c.)
In  his  compositions  strophes  and  antistrophes  of
the  same  measure  usually  succeeded  each  other  in
indefinite  number.  Stesichorus  introduced  the  im-
provement of  adding  an  epode,  during  which  the
chorus  were  to  stand  still,  to  the  strophe  and  anti-
strophe.  (Suidas,  s.  v.  Tpio  STTjff-ix^pou ;  Miiller,
/.  c.  p.  199.)  In  the  arrangement  of  his  choruses
he  seems  to  have  had  a  great  partiality  for  the
octagonal  form,  or  for  certain  combinations  of  eight,


CHORUS.

whence  arose  the  proverb  vavra  oKrdt).  At  Catana
there  was  erected  to  him  an  octagonal  monument
with  8  columns  and  8  steps.  (Suidas,  s.  v  Trdvra
0KT(i}  and  ^TTjalxopos.)

In  all  the  Dorian  states,  especially  among  the
Spartans,  these  choral  perfonnances  were  cultivated
with  great  assiduity.  Various  causes  contributed
to  this,  as  for  example,  their  universal  employment
in  the  worship  of  Apollo,  the  fact  that  they  were
not  confined  to  the  men,  but  that  women  also  took
part  in  them,  and  that  many  of  the  dances  had  a
gymnastic  cliaracter  given  them,  and  were  em-
ployed as  a  mode  of  training  to  martial  exercises.
[Saltatio.  1  Hence  it  arose  that  the  Dorian  lyric
poets  directed  their  labours  almost  entirely  to  sup-
ply the  demand  for  songs  and  hymns  to  be  sung  as
accompaniments  to  the  dances,  and  that  Doric  lyric
poetry  became  almost  exclusively  choral,  which
was  not  the  case  with  the  other  great  school  of
Greek  lyric  poetry,  the  Aeolian  ;  so  that  the  Doric
dialect  came  to  be  looked  upon  as  the  appropriate
dialect  for  choral  compositions,  and  Doric  forms
were  retained  by  the  Athenians  even  in  the  choral
compositions  which  were  interwoven  with  their
dramas.  (MuUer,  Dorians,  iv.  7.  §  9.)  Still  it  is
not  to  be  supposed  that  there  was  no  choral  poetry
which  was  not  Doric.  Several  Lesbian  lyric  poems
appear  to  have  had  a  choral  character.  (Miiller,
Hist,  of  Lit.  of  Greece,  p.  165.)

The  Spartans  had  various  kinds  of  dances
(Miiller,  Dor.  iv.  6.  §  8,  &c.)  ;  but  the  three  prin-
cipal styles  were  the  Pyrrhic,  the  Gymnopaedic,
and  the  Hyporchematic  (Athenaeus,  xiv.  p.  631,
XV.  p.  678),  in  all  of  which  something  of  a  mimetic
character  was  to  be  found,  but  more  especially
in  the  last.  Miiller  {Lit.  of  Gr.  p.  161)  expresses
an  opinion  that  the  gymnopaedic  style,  to  which
the  i/j-ixeKeia  of  tragedy  corresponded,  is  not  to  be
confounded  with  the  dances  of  the  gymnopaedic
festival.  The  Pyrrhic  or  war  dai^e  (irpvKis.  Homer
calls  hoplites  irpuAe'es)  was  made  subservient  to
gymnastic  and  martial  training.  Hence  the  analogy
that  may  be  traced  between  the  construction  and
evolution  of  the  chorus  and  of  the  lochus.  (Miiller,
Dor.  iii.  12.  §  10  ;  Lucian,  de  Saltat.  7.)  At  the
Gymnopaedia  large  choruses  of  men  and  boys  ap-
peared, in  which  great  numbers  of  the  citizens
would  have  to  take  part.  (Miiller,  Dor.  iv.  6.  §  4.)
At  several  of  the  festivals  there  were  distinct
choruses  of  boys,  men,  and  old  men.  (Plut.  Lt/-
curg.  21  ;  Pollux,  iv.  107  ;  Miiller,  Dor.  iv.  6.  §  5,
Hist,  of  the  Lit  of  Gr.  p.  194.)  Dances  in  which
youths  and  maidens  were  intermingled  were  called
'6pixoi.  (Lucian,  deSalt.  12.)  It  was  in  the  hypor-
chematic dance  especially  that  the  chorus  both
sang  and  danced.    (Athen.  xiv.  p.  631.)

The  instrument  commonly  used  in  connection
with  the  Doric  choral  poetry  was  the  cithara.  In
the  Pyrrhic  dance,  however,  the  flute  was  em-
ployed. (Muller,  Dor.  iv.  6.  §  7,  Hist.  Gr.  Lit.
p.  161.)  In  the  hyporchematic  performances  at
Delos,  described  by  Lucian  (de  Salt.  6),  both  the
cithara  and  the  flute  were  used.  Archilochus
speaks  of  the  flute  as  an  accompaniment  to  the
Lesbian  paean  (ap.  Athen.  v.  p.  180).  It  is  not,
therefore,  quite  correct  to  say  that  wherever  we
find  the  flute  employed,  we  have  not  a  proper
chorus  but  a  comus.  (Comp.  Bode,  vol.  ii.  part  i.  pp.
47,  208.)  Thaletas,  who  introduced  the  Phrygian
style,  probably  made  use  of  the  flute  as  well  as
the  cithara.     It  was  in  coimection  with  the  by-


CHORUS.

porcheme  that  llute  music  was  first  introduced  into
the  worship  of  Apollo.  (Bode,  vol.  ii.  part  ii.  pp.  13,
16,  17,33,34,244.)  For  the  k«/ios,  however,
which  was  a  mirthful  and  irregular  procession,  in
which  those  who  took  part  in  it  both  sang  and
danced  (as  in  the  ku/jlos  part  of  the  marriage  pro-
cession described  by  Hesiod,  Shield  of  Here.  281,
&c.),  the  flute  was  the  regular  instrument.

A  great  impetus  was  given  to  choral  poetry  by
its  application  to  the  dithyramb.  This  ancient
Bacchanalian  performance,  the  origin  of  which  is
at  any  rate  earlier  than  Aichilochus,  who  in  one  of
the  fragments  of  his  poetry,  says  that  "  he  knows
how  to  lead  off  the  dithyramb,  the  beautiful  song
of  Dionysus,  when  his  mind  is  inflamed  with  wine"
(Athen.  xiv.  p.  628),  seems  to  have  been  a  hymn
Bung  by  one  or  more  of  a  kcD/ios,  or  irregular  band
of  revellers,  to  the  music  of  the  flute.  Arion  was
the  first  who  gave  a  regular  choral,  or  antistrophic
form  to  the  dithyramb.  This  improvement  was
introduced  at  Corinth.  (Herod,  i.  24  ;  Pindar,  01.
xiii.  18  or  25,  with  the  notes  of  the  commenta-
tors.) The  choruses,  which  ordinarily  consisted
of  fifty  men  or  youths  (Simonides,  Epigr.  58,  Br.  ;
Tzetzcs,  proleg.  ad  Lycophr.  vol.  i.  p.  251,  ed.
Miiller),  danced  in  a  ring  round  the  altar  of
Dionysus.  Hence  they  were  termed  cyclic  choruses
(kvk\ioi  x^poi),  and  dithyrambic  poets  were  un-
derstood by  the  term  KVK\io5iSd(rKa\oi.  This  also
explains  the  name  Cycleus,  given  to  the  lather  of
Arion  (Muller,  Hist.  Gr.  Lit.  p.  204).  With  the
introduction  of  a  regular  choral  character,  Arion
also  substituted  the  cithara  for  the  flute.  The
statement  that  he  was  the  inventor  of  the  tragic
style  (jpayiKhs  Tp6iros\  means  probably  that  he
introduced  dithyrambs  of  a  gloomy  character,
having  for  their  subject  the  sorrows  of  Dionysus,
as  well  as  the  more  gay  and  joyous  song  (Miiller,
Lc.  pp.204,  290).  Arion  is  also  said  to  have  been
the  first  to  introduce  into  these  choruses  satyrs
speaking  in  verse.  Lasus,  of  Henuione,  gave  a
freer  form  to  the  dithyramb,  by  divesting  it  of  its
antistrophic  character,  and  set  the  example  cf  in-
troducing the  dithyrambic  style  into  compositions
not  immediately  connected  with  the  worship  of
Dionysus.  He  also  united  with  the  representation
of  the  dithyramb  taunting  jests.  It  was  through
him  that  dithyrambic  contests  were  introduced
at  Athens,  at  which  the  prize  for  the  successful
poet  was  a  tripos,  and  for  the  chorus  a  bull.  (See
the  epitaph  on  Simonides,  Anthol.  Pal.  vi.  213,
Fr.  p.  190,  ed.  Jacobs  ;  Schol.  ad  Aristoph.  Ran.
3G0,  Vesp.  1403.)  The  dance  of  the  cyclic  chorus
was  the  Dionysiac  variety  of  the  Pyrrhic  (Aris-
toph. Av.  153  ;  Athen.  xiv.  p.  631,  a.).  In  the
time  of  Simonides,  through  the  innovations  of  La-
sus, Crexus,  Phrynis,  and  others,  the  citharoedic
character  which  Arion  had  given  to  the  dithy-
ramb had  passed  into  the  auloedic.  As  the  di-
thyramb lost  its  antistrophic  character,  it  became
more  and  more  thoroughly  mimetic  or  dramatic,
and  as  its  performance  required  more  than  ordinary
skill,  dithyrambs  came  to  be  performed  by  ama-
teurs (Aristot.  PrM.  xv.  9,  Rhet.  iii.  9  ;  Plut.  de
Mus.  29.  p.  1 141,  b. ;  Proclus,  ap.  Phot.  cod.  239.
p.  320,  ed.  Bekker  ;  Bode,  ii.  part  ii.  p.  312,  &c,)
For  ordinary  choruses  the  universal  cultiure  of  music
and  dancing  would  make  it  no  difficult  matter  to
find  a  chorus.  Wealthy  men  or  tyrants  no  doubt
maintained  choreutae,  as  they  maintained  poets
and  musicians.     Poets  of  distinction  would  have


CHORUS.


279


choreutae  attached  to  them.  There  were  also  pro-
fessed chorus-trainers,  whose  services  wery  in  re-
quisition when  the  poet  was  unable  to  drill  the
chorus  himself,  and  these  often  had  a  body  of
choreutae  attached  to  them.  The  recitation  of
Pindar's  second  Isthmian  ode  was  undertaken  in
this  way  by  Nicesippus,  with  an  Agrigentine
chorus.  The  sixth  Olympian  ode  was  undertaken
by  Aeneas,  a  Boeotian,  with  a  trained  chorus
which  he  brought  with  him  (Schol.  ad  Pind.
Isthm.  ii.  6,  Olymp.  vi.  148).  Most  of  Pindar's
epinicia  were  comus-songs,  though  not  all  (Bode,
ii.  2.  p.  255 — 257),  and  the  comuses  which  sang
them  must  frequently  have  been  of  a  somewhat
artificial  construction.

Respecting  the  mode  in  which  tragedy  was  de-
veloped Irom  the  dithyramb,  and  the  functions  of
the  chorus  in  tragedy,  the  reader  is  referred  to
the  article  Tragoedia.

From  the  time  of  Sophocles  onwards  the  regular
number  of  the  chorus  in  a  tragedy  was  15.  (Schol.
ad  Aristoph.  Equit.  586,  Jv.  298  ;  Pollux,  iv.
108.)  The  account  given  by  Suidas  (*•.  v.  'Zocpo-
KKrjs),  that  Sophocles  raised  the  number  from
12  to  15  is  deserving' of  attention,  though  there  are
great  difficulties  connected  with  it.  Pollux  (iv.
110)  has  an  absurd  story  that  the  number  of  the
chonis  was  50  before  the  representation  of  the  Eu-
menides  of  Aeschylus,  and  that  the  number  was
then  reduced  by  a  law  on  account  of  the  terror  pro-
duced by  the  appearance  of  the  50  Eumenides.  It
seems  scarcely  possible  to  arrive  at  any  definite  con-
clusion with  regard  to  the  number  of  the  chorus  in
the  early  dramas  of  Aeschylus.  The  fact  that  the
number  of  the  dithyrambic  chorus  was  50,  and
that  the  mythological  number  of  the  Oceanides
and  Danaides  was  the  same,  tempts  one  to  suppose
that  the  chorus  in  the  Prometheus  and  the  Sup-
plices  consisted  of  50.  Most  writers,  however,
agree  in  thinking  that  such  a  number  was  too
large  to  have  been  employed  (Welcker,  Aeschyl.
Trilogie^  p.  27,  &c.  ;  Hermann,  Dissert,  de  Choro
Eumen.  i.  and  ii.  Opusc.  vol.  ii.)  Muller  {DiS'
sertations  on  the  Eumenides  of  Aeschylus.,  I.  A.  ;
Hist,  of  Gr.  Lit.  p.  300)  propounds  the  theory
that  the  dithyrambic  chonis  of  50,  when  trans-
ferred to  tragedy,  was  reduced  to  48,  and  that  a
chorus  of  that  number  was  assigned  to  the  poet
for  four  plays,  the  trilogy  and  the  satyric  drama,
and  was  subdivided  into  sections  of  12,  each  of
which  was  the  chorus  for  one  play.  In  support
of  this  he  endeavours  to  point  out  instances  of
choruses  of  this  number  being  found  in  Aeschylus,
as  that  in  the  Agamemnon,  which  re-appcars  as
the  Areopagites  in  the  Eumenides,  and  that  in
the  Persae.  But  the  insufficiency  of  the  evidence
brought  forward  to  establish  this  has  been  satis-
factorily pointed  out  by  Hermann  in  his  review  of
MUller's  edition  of  the  Eumenides  {Opusc.  vol.
vi.).  The  idea  that  the  chorus  of  the  Eumenides  con-
sisted of  three  (Blomfield,  Proe/C  ad  Aesch.  Pers.)^
has  met  with  very  little  favour  among  German
scholars,  though  the  arguments  brought  against  it
are  not  all  of  the  most  convincing  kind,  and  it  is
to  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  introduction  of  the
Areopagites,  &c.  into  the  play,  would  render  the
fewness  of  such  a  chorus  less  striking  than  would
otherwise  have  been  the  case.  The  later  chorus
of  15  was  the  only  one  that  the  grammarians
knew  any  thing  about.  It  was  arranged  in  a
quadrangular  form  (reTpdycovoi,  Etym.  Magn.  *.  t'.
T  4


280


CHORUS.


Tpoy^Sfo ;  Villoison's  Anecdota,  ii,  p.  178),  in  rank
(C^d)  and  file  (o-Ti'xot,  (TtoIxoi).  It  entered
the  theatre  by  the  passage  to  the  right  of  the
spectators  [Theatrum].  When  it  entered  three
abreast  it  was  said  to  come  in  Kara.  C^ya,  when
five  abreast,  kotoi  tnoixovs  (Pollux,  iv.  108).  Its
entrance  was  termed  trApo^os ;  its  leaving  the  stage
in  the  course  of  the  play  fi^Tatrracns  ;  its  re-
entrance  iirnrdpoSos  ;  its  exit  &(poBos.  (In  the
Eumenides  the  chorus  entered  in  an  irregular
manner  (nTopa5r\v.)  As  it  entered  in  three  lines,
with  the  spectators  on  its  left,  the  stage  on  its
right,  the  middle  choreutes  of  the  left  row  (rplros
apiffrepov)  was  the  Corj'phaeus  or  Hegemon,  who
in  early  times  at  least  was  not  unfrequently  ihe
choragus  himself.  (Athen.  xiv.  p.  633  ;  Suid.
s.  V.  X'^pc-y^^-)  When  they  had  taken  their  sta-
tions in  this  order,  the  row  nearest  to  the  specta-
tors bore  the  name  apicrTepoa-Tdrai^  that  towards
the  stage  8e^io(TTdTai,  and  the  middle  row  Kavpoc-
rdrai.  The  choreutae  at  the  ends,  farthest  from
the  Coryphaeus,  were  called  Kpaa-Tredlrai.  These
places  were  also  called  viroK6\Triov  rov  X'^P^^-
(Pollux,  ii.  161,  iv.  107;  Photius,  p.  210,  ed.
Bekker  ;  Plut.  Symp.  v.  5.  p.  678,  d.  ;  Hesych.
«.  w.)  Miiller  arranges  them  so  that  the  Cory-
phaeus stands  upon  the  Thymele,  or  at  least  upon
the  steps  of  it  (Eumen.  Dissert.),  and  so  conversed
with  the  actors  over  the  heads  of  the  chorus.  Her-
mann (Rev.  of  Muller'^s  Eumen.  Opusc.  vol.  vi.
p.  143,  &c.)  denies  this,  and  infers  from  the  ac-
counts of  Vitruvius  and  other  ancient  authorities
that  the  chorus  took  its  station  and  performed  its
evolutions  upon  a  platform  one  or  two  feet  lower
than  the  stage,  and  reaching  from  the  stage  to  the
Thymele  which  stood  in  the  middle  of  the  entire
space  called  Koviarpa.  On  the  steps  of  the  Thy-
mele, and  therefore  below  the  opxiia'Tpa^  properly
so  called,  were  stationed  the  musicians  and  cer-
tain police-officers  to  keep  order.  Of  course  the
positions  first  taken  up  by  the  choreutae  were  only
retained  till  they  commenced  their  evolutions.  To
guide  them  in  these,  lines  were  marked  upon  the
boards  with  which  the  orchestra  was  floored.  The
flute  as  well  as  the  cithara  was  used  as  an  accom-
paniment to  the  choric  songs.  The  dance  of  the
tragic  chorus  waa  called  i/jL/xeXeia,  answering  to
the  gymnopaedic  dance  of  the  Dorian  choruses
(Athen.  l.  c).

The  ordinary  number  of  the  chorus  in  a  comedy
was  24  (Schol.  ad  Arist.  Av.  298,  Acharn.  210,
Equit.  586  ;  Pollux,  iv.  109  ;  Tzetzes,  proleff.  ad
Lycophr.  p.  1).  Like  the  tragic  chorus  it  was
arranged  in  a  quadrangular  form,  and  entered  the
orchestra  from  opposite  sides,  according  as  it  was
supposed  to  come  from  the  city  or  from  the
country.  It  consisted  sometimes  half  of  male  and
half  of  female  choreutae.  It  seems  to  be  a  mis-
take of  the  scholiast  on  Aristophanes  (Equit.  1.
586)  that  in  such  cases  the  former  were  13,  the
latter  11  in  number.  At  least  in  the  Birds  of
Aristophanes  the  chorus  consists  of  12  male  and
12  female  birds.  (297—304.)  The  dance  of  the
comic  chorus  was  the  K6pSa^,  which  answered
to  the  Hyporchematic  style  of  the  Doric  chonis.
In  the  Satyric  drama  the  chorus  consisted  of  Sa-
tyrs. Of  how  many  it  consisted  cannot  be  deter-
mined with  any  certainty.  Its  dance  was  called
friKLvvis.  It  answered  to  the  Pyrrhic.  (Athen.  i.
p.  20,  xiv.  p.  630.)

When  a  poet  intended  to  bring  forward  a  play,


CHRONOLOGIA.

he  had  to  apply  for  a  chorus  (x<^phv  ahelv)  to  th«»
archons,  to  the  king  archon  if  the  play  was  to  be
brought  forward  at  the  Lenaea,  to  the  archon
eponymus  if  at  the  great  Dionysia.  If  the  play
were  thought  to  deserve  it,  he  received  a  chorus
(xophu  Kajx€dv^iv),  the  expenses  of  which  were
borne  by  a  choregus  [Choregus].  The  poet
then  either  trained  (SiScio-Keti/)  the  chorus  himself,
which  Aeschylus  often  did  (Athen.  i.  p.  21),  or
entrusted  that  business  to  a  professed  chorus  trainer
(Xo/)oSt5c{jr/caAos),  who  usually  had  an  assistant
(uTToStSdo-KoAos,  Pollux,  iv.  106).  For  training
tlie  chorus  in  its  evolutions  there  was  also  an
opxTjCToSiSda-KoKos.  The  chorus  in  comedies  at
first  consisted  of  amateurs  (ideKovrai,  Arist.
Pott.  5).  ^  [C.  P.  M.]

CHOUS  (xoe^yj  XO'^Oi  ^  Greek  liquid  measure
which  is  stated  by  all  the  authorities  to  be  equal
to  the  Roman  congius,  and  to  contain  six  ^eVrat
or  sextarii,  nearly  6  pints  English.  Suidas  alone
makes  a  distinction  between  the  X'^^^  ^•nd  the
Xoeuy,  making  the  former  equal  to  two  sextarii,
and  the  latter  equal  to  six.  Now  when  we  re-
member that  the  x^^^  was  commonly  used  as  a
drinking  vessel  at  Athenian  entertainments  (Ari-
stoph.  Acharn.  v.  1086),  that  on  the  day  of  the
X<^es  [Dionysia],  a  prize  was  given  to  the  person
who  first  drank  off  his  X^i^s,  and  that  Milo  of
Croton  is  said  to  have  dnink  three  x<^es  of  wine
at  a  draught,  it  is  incredible  that  in  these  cases
the  large  x^^^  mentioned  above  could  be  meant.
It  seems,  therefore,  probable  that  there  was  also  a
smaller  measure  of  the  same  name,  containing,  as
Suidas  states,  two  sextarii,  or  nearly  2  pints  Eng-
lish. At  first  it  was  most  likely  the  common
name  for  a  drinking  vessel.  According  to  Crates
(Ap.  Athen.  xi.  p.  496),  the  xo'^^  had  originally  a
similar  form  to  the  Panathenaic  amphorae,  and  was
also  called  ireAf/crj.  (Pollux,  x.  73  ;  Wurm,  De
Pond.  Mens.  &c.,  pp.  127, 136, 141, 198  ;  Hussey,
Ancient  Weights,  &c   p.  2 1 1—2 1 3.)  [P.  S.]

CHREOtlS  DIKE  (xp^ovs  Siktj),  a  simple
action  for  debt,  was,  like  most  of  the  other  cases
arising  upon  an  alleged  breach  of  contract,  referred
to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  thesmothetae,  when  the
sum  in  question  amounted  to  more  than  ten
drachmae.  If  otherwise,  it  fell  under  the  cogni-
zance of  those  itinerant  magistrates,  who  were
originally  thirty  in  number,  and  styled  accordingly
ol  rpidKovra:  but  afterwards,  in  consequence  of
the  odium  attaching  to  this  name,  which  had  also
served  to  designate  the  oligarchic  tyrants,  received
an  accession  of  ten  colleagues  and  a  corresponding
change  of  title.  (Pollux,  viii.  100.)  If  the  cause
could  be  classed  among  the  efifjuqvoi  St/cat,  as,  for
instance,  when  the  debt  arose  upon  a  mercantile
transaction,  the  thesmothetae  would  still  have
jurisdiction  in  it,  though  one  of  the  parties  to  the
suit  were  an  alien,  otherwise  it  seems  that  when
such  a  person  was  the  defendant,  it  was  brought
into  the  court  of  the  polemarch.  (Meier,  Att.
Proc.  p.  55.)  If  the  cause  were  treated  as  a
SiK-n  'E/JLTTopiK^,  as  above  mentioned,  the  plaintiff
would  forfeit  a  sixth  part  of  the  sum  contested,
upon  failing  to  obtain  the  votes  of  one-fifth  of  the
dicasts  (Suid.  s.  v.  'ETrwSeXia)  ;  but  we  are  not
informed  whether  this  regulation  was  applicable,
under  similar  circumstances,  in  all  prosecutions  for
debt.  The  speech  of  Demosthenes  against  Timo-
theus  was  made  in  a  cause  of  this  kind.  [J.S.  M.]

CHRONOLO'GIA  (x.ooJ'oAoTta),  is  the  acienco


CHRONOLOniA.

by  which  time  is  measured  according  to  the  courses
of  the  stars,  and  more  especially  of  the  sun  and
moon  ;  but  in  the  more  limited  sense  in  which
we  have  to  treat  of  chronology  here,  it  is  a  part
of  historj',  and  teaches  us  to  assign  each  historical
event  to  the  date  to  which  it  belongs.  The  reduc-
tion of  any  given  date  in  antiquity  to  the  cor-
responding year,  month,  or  day,  in  our  modem
computation  of  time,  is  sometimes  a  matter  of
great  difficulty,  and  often  of  absolute  impossi-
bility ;  for  nearly  all  the  nations  of  antiquity  be-
gan their  year  at  a  different  time,  some  used  solar
and  other  lunar  years,  and  others  again  a  com-
bination of  the  two  ;  nearly  all,  moreover,  had
different  eras,  that  is,  points  of  time  from  which
subsequent  and  preceding  years  are  counted  ;  and
in  addition  to  this  there  occur  a  great  many
changes  and  fluctuations  in  one  and  the  same
nation  ;  and  the  historians  whose  works  have  come
down  to  us,  are  not  always  very  precise  in  mark-
ing the  time  to  which  the  events  belong,  so  that
we  must  have  recourse  to  all  manner  of  combina-
tions, or  are  left  to  conjectures.

For  the  manner  in  which  the  Greeks  and  Ro-
mans calculated  their  years  and  months  we  refer
to  the  article  Calenuarium,  and  we  shall  here
confine  ourselves  to  an  account  of  the  manner  in
which  those  nations  calculated  and  stated  the
events  of  their  history.  The  Greeks  reckoned
their  years  generally  according  to  their  magis-
trates, in  the  early  times  according  to  the  years  of
the  reign  of  their  kings,  and  afterwards  according
to  their  annual  magistrates.  At  Athens  the  year  was
called  by  the  name  of  one  of  the  nine  archons,  who
from  this  circumstance  was  called  apxcv  iTrwvvfj.os
or  the  archon  par  excellence  ;  and  at  Sparta  the
years  were  called  after  one  of  the  five  ephors,  who
for  this  reason  was  likewise  termed  i-nwwixos.
(Thucyd.  ii.  2  ;  Xenoph.  Anab.  ii.  3.  §  10  ;  Polyb.
xii.  12  ;  Pans.  iii.  1 1.  §  2.)  But  the  years  of  the
Athenian  archons  and  the  Spartan  ephors,  coin-
ciding with  the  civil  year  in  those  states,  did  not
coincide  with  each  other,  for  the  ephors  entered
upon  their  office  in  the  Attic  month  of  Boedro-
mion,  while  the  archons  originally  entered  upon
theirs  in  the  beginning  of  Gamelion,  and  ever
since  the  year  b.  c.  490,  at  the  beginning  of  He-
catombaeon.  In  Argos  time  was  counted  accord-
ing to  the  years  of  the  high  priestess  of  Hera,  who
held  her  office  for  life  {vpeais  ;  Thucyd.  ii.  2  ;
Suid.  s.  V.  'HpetrlSes)  ;  and  the  mhabitants  of  Elis
probably  reckoned  according  to  the  Olympic  games,
which  were  celebrated  every  fifth  year  during  the
first  full  moon  which  followed  after  the  summer
solstice.  In  this  manner  every  Greek  state  or  city
calculated  time  according  to  its  own  peculiar  or  local
era,  and  there  was  no  era  which  was  used  by  all
the  Greeks  in  common  for  the  ordinary  purposes  of
life.  Historians,  therefore,  down  to  the  middle  of
the  third  century  b.  c,  frequently  made  use  of  the
average  age  attained  by  men,  in  order  to  fix  the
time  in  a  manner  intelligible  to  all  Greeks.  The
average  age  attained  by  man  (yeved,  aetas),  is
calculated  by  Herodotus  (vi.  98)  at  33^  years.
Timaeus,  who  flourished  about  B.  c.  260,  was  the
first  historian  who  counted  the  years  by  Olym-
piads, each  of  which  contained  four  years.  The
beginning  of  the  Olympiads  is  commonly  fixed  in
the  year  3938  of  the  Julian  period,  or  in  B.  c.  776.
If  we  want  to  reduce  any  given  Olympiad  to  years
before  Christ,  e.  g.  01.  87,  we  take  the  number  of


CHRONOLOGIA.


2ni


the  Olympiads  actually  elapsed,  that  is,  86,  mul-
tiply it  by  4,  and  deduct  the  number  obtained
from  776,  so  that  the  first  year  of  the  87th  01.
will  be  thd  same  as  the  year  432  B.  c.  If  the
number  of  Olympiads  amounts  to  more  than  776
years,  that  is,  if  the  Olympiad  falls  after  the  birth
of  Christ,  the  process  is  the  same  as  before,  but
from  the  sum  obtained  by  multiplying  the  OljTn-
piads  by  4,  we  must  deduct  the  number  776,  and
what  remains  is  the  number  of  the  years  after
Christ.  This  calculation  according  to  Ol^'mpiads,
however,  does  not  seem  to  have  been  ever  applied
to  the  ordinary  business  of  life,  but  to  have  been
confined  to  literature,  and  more  especially  to  his-
tory. Some  writers  also  adopted  the  Trojan  era,
the  fall  of  Troy  being  placed  by  Eratosthenes  and
those  who  adopted  this  era,  in  the  year  b.  c.  11 84.
After  the  time  of  Alexander  the  Great,  seveml
other  eras  were  introduced  in  the  kingdoms  that
arose  out  of  his  empire.  The  first  was  the  Philip-
pic era,  sometimes  also  called  the  era  of  Alexander
or  the  era  of  Edessa  ;  it  began  on  the  1 2th  of  No-
vember B.  c.  324,  the  date  of  the  accession  of
Philip  Arrhidaeus.  The  second  was  the  era  of  the
Seleucidae,  beginning  on  the  1  st  of  October  B.  c.
312,  the  date  of  the  victory  of  Seleucus  Nicator  at
Gaza,  and  of  his  re-conquest  of  Babylonia.  This
era  was  used  very  extensively  in  the  East.  The
Chaldaean  era  differed  from  it  only  by  six  months,
beginning  in  the  spring  of  B.c.  311.  '  Lastly,  the
eras  of  Antioch,  of  which  there  were  three,  but
the  one  most  commonlj-^  used  began  in  Novem-
ber B.  c.  49.  In  Europe  none  was  so  generally
adopted,  at  least  in  literature,  as  the  era  of  the
Olympiads  ;  and  as  the  Olympic  games  were  cele-
brated 293  times,  we  have  293  Olympic  cycles,
that  is,  1172  years,  776  of  which  fall  before,  and
396  after  Christ.  But  when  the  Greeks  adopted
Christianity,  they  probably  ceased  to  reckon  by
Olympiads,  and  adopted  the  Julian  year.  (Cor-
sini.  Fasti  Attid,  Florence,  1744 — 5Q^  4  vols.  4to. ;
Ideler,  Handbuch  der  mathem.  und  technisch.  Chro-
nol.  Berlin,  1 825,  2  vols,  8vo. ;  Clinton,  Fasti  Uel-
lenici,  Oxford,  1830—1834,  3  vols.  8vo.)

The  Romans  in  the  earliest  times  counted  their
years  by  their  highest  magistrates,  and  from  the
time  of  the  republic  according  to  their  consuls,
whose  names  were  registered  in  the  Fasti.  This
era,  which  may  be  termed  the  aera  consularisy
however  did  not  begin  at  all  times  at  the  same
point,  for  in  the  earliest  times  of  the  republic,  the
consuls  entered  upon  their  office  on  the  calendae
of  Sextilis,  at  the  time  of  the  decemvirate  on  the
ides  of  May,  afterwards  on  the  ides  of  December,
and  at  a  still  later  time  on  the  ides  of  March,
until  in  b.c.  1 53  the  consuls  began  regularly  to  enter
upon  their  office  on  the  1st  of  January.  This  con-
stant shifting  was  undoubtedly  one  of  the  causes
that  produced  the  confusion  in  the  consular  era,  of
which  Livy  (ii.  18,  21,  &c.)  complains.  The  con-:
sular  era  was  the  one  commonly  used  by  the
Romans  for  all  practical  purposes,  the  date  of  an
event  being  marked  by  the  names  of  the  consuls,
in  whose  year  of  office  it  had  happened.  But
along  with  this  era  there  existed  another,  which
as  it  was  never  introduced  into  the  affairs  of  com-
mon life,  and  was  used  only  by  the  historians,
may  be  termed  the  historical  era.  It  reckoned  the
years  from  the  foundation  of  the  city  {ab  urbe  con-
dita)  ;  but  the  year  of  the  foundation  of  the  city
was  a  question  of  uncertainty  among  the  Romans


282


CHTHONIA.


themselves.  M.  Terentius  Varro  placed  it  on  the
21st  of  April  in  the  third  year  of  the  6th  Olym-
piad, that  is,  B.C.  753.  (Plut.  Rom.  12  ;  Dionys.
i.  88  ;  Cic.  De  Div.  ii.  47  ;  Veil.  Pat.  i.  8  ;  Cen-
sorin.  De  Die  Nat.  1 7.)  This  era  was  adopted  by
Velleius  Paterculus,  Pliny,  Tacitus,  A.  Gellius,
Dion  Cassius,  Eutropius,  and  others.  Next  to
the  Varronian  era,  the  most  celebrated  was  that
of  M.  Porcius  Cato,  who  placed  the  foundation  of
Rome  in  the  first  year  of  the  7th  Olympiad,  or
in  the  spring  of  b.  c.  752.  (Dionys.  i.  74  ;  Syncell.
Chronog.  p.  194,  a.)  The  date  fixed  upon  in  the
aera  Capitolina  (so  called  from  the  Fasti  Capi-
tolini),  by  Polybius  (Dionys.  I.  c.  ;  Cic.  De  Rep.
ii,  10)  and  Cornelius  Nepos,  was  one  year  later  ;
Q.  Fabius  Pictor  placed  the  foundation  in  the  first
year  of  the  8th  Olympiad,  i.  e.  747  b.  c.  (Dionys.
/.  c),  and  Cincius  Alimentus  even  placed  it  in  the
fourth  year  of  the  r2th  Olympiad,  i,  e.  B.  c.  729.
Ennius,  on  the  other  hand,  placed  the  building  of
Rome  about  100  or  110  years  earlier  than  most
other  writers  (Varro,  De  Re  Rust.  iii.  1)  ;  and
Timaeus  went  so  far  as  to  regard  the  foundation
of  Rome  contemporaneous  with  that  of  Carthage,
placing  it  38  years  before  the  first  Olympiad.
But  no  reliance  can  be  placed  on  any  of  these
statements  ;  as  however  it  is  necessary  to  have  one
point  to  start  from,  the  Varronian  era  has  been
most  commonly  adopted  by  modem  writers.  (Comp.
Fischer,  Romische  Zeitta/eln,  p.  4,  &c.)      [L.  S.]

CHRYSE'NDETA,  costly  chased  dishes  used
by  the  Romans  at  their  entertainments.  They  are
mentioned  several  times  by  Martial  (ii.  43,  11,  vi.
94,  xiv.  97),  and  from  the  epithet^ua  which  he
applies  to  them,  as  well  as  from  the  etymology
of  the  name,  they  appear  to  have  been  of  silver,
with  golden  ornaments.  Cicero  (  Verr.  iv.  21 — 23)
mentions  vessels  of  this  kind.  He  calls  their
golden  ornaments  in  general  sigilla,  but  again  dis-
tinguishes them  as  crustae  and  emblemata  (c.  23)  ;
the  former  were  probably  embossed  figures  or
chasings  fixed  on  to  the  silver,  so  that  they  could
be  removed  and  transferred  to  other  vessels,  and
the  latter  inlaid  or  wrought  into  it  (comp.  c.  24  :
lUa^  ex  patellis  et  turibulis  quae  vellerat^  ita  scite  in
aureis  poculis  illigabat,  ita  apte  in  sa/phis  aureis
includebat,  &c.).  The  embossed  work  appears  to
be  referred  to  by  Paullus  {cymhia  argenteis  crtistis
iUigata,  Dig.  34.  tit.  2.  s.  33),  and  the  inlaid  orna-
ments by  Seneca  (argentum^  in  quod  solidi  auri
caelatura  descenderit^  Ep.  v.).  [Comp.  Caela-
TURA.]  [P.  S.]

CRYSOA'SPIDES.  [Argyraspidbs.]
CHRYSOUS  {x?^<Tovs).  [AuRUM.]
CHTHO'NIA  (x0<^»"a),  a  festival  celebrated
at  Hermione  in  honour  of  Demeter,  surnamed
Chthonia.  The  following  is  the  description  of  it
given  by  Pausanias  (ii.  35.  §  4,  &c.) :  —  "  The  in-
habitants of  Hermione  celebrate  the  Chthonia
every  year,  in  summer,  in  this  manner :  —  They
form  a  procession,  headed  by  the  priests  and  ma-
gistrates of  the  year,  who  are  followed  by  men
and  women.  Even  for  children  it  is  customary  to
pay  homage  to  the  goddess  by  joining  the  proces-
sion. They  wear  white  garments,  and  on  their
heads  they  have  chaplets  of  flowers,  which  they
call  KoaiuxxiivhaXoi^  which,  however,  from  their
size  and  colour,  as  well  as  from  the  letters  in-
Bcribed  on  them  recording  the  premature  death  of
Hyacinthus,  seem  to  me  to  be  hyacinths.  Behind
the   procession   there   follow   persons  leading  by


CIPPUS.

strings  an  untamed  heifer  just  taken  from  the  herd,
and  drag  it  into  the  temple,  where  four  old  wonscn
perform  the  sacrifice,  one  of  them  cutting  the
animal's  throat  with  a  scythe.  The  doors  of  the
temple,  which  during  this  sacrifice  had  been  shut,
are  thrown  open,  and  persons  especially  appointed
for  the  purpose,  lead  in  a  second  heifer,  then  a
third  and  a  fourth,  all  of  which  are  sacrificed  by
the  matrons  in  the  manner  described.  A  curious
circumstance  in  this  solemnity  is,  that  all  the
heifers  must  fall  on  the  same  side  on  which  the
first  fell."  The  splendour  and  rich  offerings  of
this  festival  are  also  mentioned  by  Aelian  i^Hist
Animal,  xi.  4),  who,  however,  makes  no  mention
of  the  matrons  of  whom  Pausanias  speaks,  but
says  that  the  sacrifice  of  the  heifers  was  performed
by  the  priestess  of  Demeter.

The  Lacedaemonians  adopt'.-d  the  worship  of
Demeter  Chthonia  from  the  Hermioneans,  some  of
whose  kinsmen  had  settled  in  Messenia  (Pans.  iii.
14.  §  5)  ;  hence  we  may  infer  that  they  celebrated
either  the  same  festival  as  that  of  the  Hermioneans,
or  one  similar  to  it.  [L.  S.]

CHYTRA  (xJ^Tpa).     [Olla.]

CI'DARIS.  [Tiara.]
^  CILI'CIUM  (Seppis),  a  hair-cloth.  The  mate-
rial of  which  the  Greeks  and  Romans  almost
universally  made  this  kind  of  cloth,  was  the  hair
of  goats.  The  Asiatics  made  it  of  camePs-hair.
Goats  were  bred  for  this  purpose  in  the  greatest
abundance,  and  with  the  longest  hair,  in  Cilicia  ;
and  from  this  country  the  Latin  i.  me  of  such
cloth  was  derived.  Lycia,  Phrygia,  Spain,  and
Libya  also  produced  the  same  article.  The  cloth
obtained  by  spinning  and  weaving  goat's-hair  was
nearly  black,  and  was  used  for  the  coarse  habits
which  sailors  and  fishermen  wore,  as  it  was  tlie
least  subject  to  be  destroyed  by  being  wet ;  also
for  horse-cloths,  tents,  sacks,  and  bags  to  hold
workmen's  tools  {fahrilia  vasa),  and  for  the  pur-
pose of  covering  military  engines  and  the  walls
and  towns  of  besieged  cities,  so  as  to  deaden  the
force  of  the  ram,  and  to  preserve  the  woodwork
from  being  set  on  fire.  (Aristot  Hist.  Anim.  viii.
28  ;  Aelian,  xvi.  30  ;  Varr.  De  Re  Rust.  ii.  1 1  ;
Virg.  Georg.  iii.  312;  Avien.  Ora  Mar.  218 —
221  ;  Veget.  Ars  Vet.  i.  42.)  [J.  Y.]

CINCTUS  GABI'NUS.     [Toga.]

CI'NGULUM.     [Zona.]

CINERA'RIUS.     [Calamistrum.]

CPNERES.     [FuNus.]

CI'NIFLO.     [Calamistrum.]

CIPPUS.  1.  A  low  column,  sometimes  round,
but  more  frequently  rectangular,  used  as  a  se-
pulchral monument.  (Pers.  Sat.  i.  36.)  Several
of  such  cippi  are  in  the  Townly  collection  in  the
British  Museum,  one  of  which  is  given  in  the
woodcut  annexed.  The  inscription  is  to  the  me-
mory of  Viria  Primitiva,  the  wife  of  Lucius  Virius
Helius,  who  died  at  the  age  of  eighteen  years,  one
month,  and  twenty-four  days.  Below  the  tablet,
a  festoon  of  fruits  and  flowers  is  suspended  from
two  rams'  heads  at  the  comers  ;  and  at  the  lower
comers  are  two  sphinxes,  with  a  head  of  Pan  in
the  area  between  them.  On  several  cippi  we  find
the  letters  S.  T.  T.  L.,  that  is,  Sit  tibi  terra  levis.,
whence  Persius,  in  the  passage  already  referred
to,  says,  Non  levior  cippus  nunc  imprimit  ossa.  It
was  also  usual  to  place  on  the  cippus  the  extent  of
the  burying-ground  both  along  the  road  (in
fronte)^  and  backwards  to  the  field  (in  agrjim).


CIRCIXUS.

and  likewise  the  inscription  hoc  monumentum
heredes  non  sequitur ;  in  order  that  it  might  not
pass  over  to  the  heredes  and  be  sold  by  them  at


T


^


any  time.     {YLor.Sat.  i.  8.  12,  13  ;  Orelli, /wscnjo.
No.  4379,  4557,  &c.)

2.  A  boundary-stone  set  up  by  the  Agrimensores
to  mark  the  divisions  of  lands.  (Scriptores  Ret
Agr.  p.  88,  ed.  Goesius.)

3.  A  military  entrenchment  made  of  the  trunks
of  trees  and  palisades.     (Caes.  B.  G.  vii.  73.)

CIRCENSES  LUDI.  [Circus.]
CI'RCINUS  (StagV^s),  a  compass.  The  com-
pass used  by  statuaries,  architects,  masons,  and
carpenters,  is  often  represented  on  the  tombs  of
such  artificers,  together  with  the  other  instruments
of  their  profession  or  trade.  The  annexed  wood-
cut is  copied  from  a  tomb  found  at  Rome.  (Gruter,
Corp.  Inscrip.  t.  i.  part  ii.  p.  644.)  It  exhibits  two
kinds  of  compasses :  viz.  the  common  kind  used


fot  drawing  circles  and  measuring  distances,  and
one  with  curved  legs,  probably  intended  to  mea-
sure the  thickness  of  columns,  cylindrical  pieces  of
wood,  or  similar  objects.  The  common  kind  is
described  by  the  scholiast  on  Aristophanes  {Ntib.
178),  who  compares  its  form  to  that  of  the  letter  A.
[See  cut  under  Norma.]     The  mythologists  sup-


CIRCUS.  283

this  instrument  to  have  been  invented  by
Perdix,  wlio  was  the  nephew  of  Daedalus,  and
through  envy  thrown  by  him  over  the  precipice  of
the  Athenian  acropolis.  (Ovid,  Met.  viii.  241  —
251.)  Compasses  of  various  forms  were  discovered
in  a  statuary's  house  at  Pompeii.  [J.  Y.l

CIRCITO'RES.     [Castra.]

CIRCUMLFTIO.     [Pictura.I

CIRCUMLU'VIO.     [Alluvio.]

CIRCUITO'RES.     [Castra.]

CIRCUS  (tTTTrdS/jo/ios),  a  place  for  chariot-
races  and  horse-races,  and  in  which  the  Roman
races  {Circenses  Ludi)  took  place.  When  Tar-
quinius  Priscus  had  taken  the  town  of  Apiolae
from  the  Latins,  as  related  in  the  early  Roman
legends,  he  commemorated  his  success  by  an  ex-
hibition of  races  and  pugilistic  contests  in  the
Murcian  vallej-,  between  the  Palatine  and  Aven-
tine  hills  ;  around  which  a  number  of  temporary
platforms  were  erected  by  the  patres  and  equites,
called  spedacula,  fori^  or  foruli.,  from  their  resem-
blance to  the  deck  of  a  ship ;  each  one  raising  a
stage  for  himself,  upon  which  he  stood  to  view  the
games.  (Liv.  i.  35  ;  Festus.  «.  v.  Formre  ;  Dionys.
iii.  p.  1 92,  &c.)  This  course,  with  its  surrounding
scaffoldings,  was  tenned  circus  ;  either  because  the
spectators  stood  round  to  see  the  shows,  or  because
the  procession  and  races  went  round  in  a  circuit.
(Varr.  De  Ling.  Lat.  v.  153,  154,  ed.  Muller.)
Previously,  however,  to  the  death  of  Tarquin,  a
permanent  building  was  constructed  for  the  pur-
pose, with  regular  tiers  of  seats  in  the  form  of  a
theatre.  (Compare  Liv.  and  Dionys.  II.  cc.)  To
this  the  name  of  Circus  Maximus  was  subsequently
given,  as  a  distinction  from  the  Flaminian  and
other  similar  buildings,  which  it  surpassed  in  ex-
tent and  splendour ;  and  hence,  like  the  Campus
Martius,  it  is  often  spoken  of  as  the  Circus,  without
any  distinguishing  epithet.

Of  the  Circus  Maximus  scarcely  a  vestige  now
remains,  beyond  the  palpable  evidence  of  the  site
it  occupied,  and  a  few  masses  of  rubble-work  in  a
circular  form,  which  may  be  seen  under  the  walls
of  some  houses  in  the  Via  de''  Cerchi,  and  which
retain  traces  of  having  supported  the  stone  seats
(Dionys.  I.  c.)  for  the  spectators.  This  loss  is  for-
tunately supplied  by  the  remains  of  a  small  circus
on  the  Via  Appia,  commonly  called  the  Circus  of
Caracalla,  the  ground-plan  of  which,  together  with
much  of  the  superstructure,  remains  in  a  state  of
considerable  preservation.  The  ground-plan  of  the
circus  in  question  is  represented  in  the  annexed
woodcut ;  and  may  be  safely  taken  as  a  model  of
all  others,  since  it  agrees  in  every  main  feature,
both  of  general  outline  and  individual  parts,  with
the  description  of  the  Circus  Maximus  given  by
Dionysius  (iii.  p.  192).

Around  the  double  lines  (A,  A)  were  arranged
the  seats  (gradus,  sedilia,  std)sellia)^  as  in  a  theatre,
termed  collectively  the  cavea  ;  the  lowest  of  which
were  separated  from  the  ground  by  a  podium^  and
the  whole  divided  longitudinally  by  praecinctiones,
and  diagonally  into  cunei,  with  their  vomitoria
attached  to  each.  Towards  the  extremity  of  the
upper  branch  of  the  cavea,  the  general  outline  is
broken  by  an  outwork  (B),  which  was  probably
the  jmhinar,  or  station  for  the  emperor,  as  it  is
placed  in  the  best  situation  for  seeing  both  the
commencement  and  end  of  the  course,  and  in  the
most  prominent  part  of  the  circus.  (Suet  Clattd.  4.'>
In  the  opposite  branch,  is  observed  another  in-


284


CIRCUS.


CIRCUS.


\»..


^1


12  DE


:  c


ici


5


temiption  to  the  uniform  line  of  seats  (C),  be-
tf'kening  also,  from  its  construction,  a  place  of
distinction ;  which  might  have  been  assigned  to
the  person  at  whose  expense  the  games  were  given
{editor  spectaculorum).

In  the  centre  of  the  area  was  a  low  wall  (D)


running  lengthways  down  the  course,  which,
from  its  resemblance  to  the  position  of  the  dorsal
bone  in  the  human  frame,  was  termed  spina.  (Cas-
siodor.  Var.  Ep.  iii.  51.)  It  is  represented  in  the
wood-cut  subjoined,  taken  from  an  ancient  bas-
relief.


At  each  extremity  of  the  spina  were  placed,
upon  a  base  (E,  E),  three  wooden  cylinders,  of  a
coniail  shape,  like  cypress  trees  (metasqtte  imitata
cupressus,  Ovid,  Met.  x.  106;  compare  Plin.  ^.  M
xvi.  60),  which  were  called  metae  —  the  goals.
Their  situation  is  distinctly  seen  in  the  preceding
woodcut,  but  their  form  is  more  fully  developed  in
the  one  annexed,  copied  from  a  marble  in  the
British  Museum.


spina.  Their  use  was  to  enable  the  spectators  to
count  the  number  of  rounds  which  had  been  run ;
for  which  purpose  they  are  said  to  have  been  first
introduced  by  Agrippa  (Dion  Cass.  xlix.  p.  600),
though  Livy  (xli.  27)  speaks  of  them  long  before.
They  are,  therefore,  seven  in  number,  such  being
the  number  of  the  circuits  made  in  each  race ;  and
as  each  round  was  run,  one  of  the  o\-a  was  put  up
(Cassiodor.  Var.  Ep.  iii.  51)  or  taken  down,  ac-
cording to  Varro  {De  Re  Rust.  i.  2.  §  11).  An  egg
was  adopted  for  this  purpose,  in  honour  of  Castor
and  Pollux.  (Tertull.  De  Spedac.  c.  8.)  At  the
other  extremity  of  the  spina  were  two  similar
columns  (G),  represented  also  in  the  v/oodcut,
over  the  second  chariot,  sustaining  seven  dolphins,
termed  delphinae,  or  delphinarum  columnae  (Juv.
Sat.  vi.  590),  which  do  not  appear  to  have  been
intended  to  be  removed,  but  only  placed  there  as
corresponding  ornaments  to  the  ova  * ;  and  the
figure  of  the  dolphin  was  selected  in  honour  of
Neptune.  (Tertull.  I.  c.)  Some  writers  suppose
the  columns  which  supported  the  otn  and  delpldnae
to  be  the  phalae  or  fulae^  which  Juvenal  men-
tions {I.  c).  But  the  phalae  were  not  columns,
but  towers,  erected  as  circumstances  required,  be-
tween the  metae  and  euripus,  or  extreme  circuit  of
the  area,  when  sham-fights  were  represented  in  the
circus.  (Compare  Festus,  s.  v.  Phalae;  Serv.  ad
Virg.  Aen.  ix.  705.)  Besides  these,  the  spina  was
decorated  with  many  other  objects,  such  as  obe-


The  most  remarkable  object  upon  the  spina  were
two  columns  (F)  supporting  seven  conical  balls,
•which,  from  their  resemblance  to  eggs,  were  called
otHi.  ( Varr.  De  Re  Rust.  i.  2.  §  ]  1  ;  Liv.  xli.  27.)
11)686  are  seen  in  the  woodcut  representing  the


*  In  the  Lyons  mosaic,  subsequently  noticed  ill
the  text,  the  delphinae  are  represented  as  fountains
spouting  water  ;  but  in  a  bas-relief  of  the  Palazzo
Barberini  (Fabretti,  Syntagm.  de  Column.  Trajani^
p.  144),  a  ladder  is  placed  against  the  column*
which  support  the  dolphins,  apparently  for  the  pur-
pose of  ascending  to  take  them  up  and  down.


CIRCUS.

iisks,  statues,  altars,  aiid  temples,  which  do  not
appear  to  have  had  any  fixed  locality.
«  It  will  be  observed  in  the  ground  plan  that  there
is  a  passage  between  the  metae  and  spina^  the  ex-
treme ends  of  the  latter  of  which  are  hollowed  out
into  a  circular  recess  :  and  several  of  the  ancient
sculptures  afford  similar  examples.  This  might  have
been  for  performing  the  sacrifice,  or  other  offices
of  religious  worship,  with  which  the  games  com-
menced ;  particularly  as  small  chapels  can  still  be
seen  under  the  metae,  in  which  the  statues  of  some
divinities  must  have  been  placed.  It  was  probably
under  the  first  of  these  spaces  that  the  altar  of  the
god  Consus  was  concealed  (TertuU.  De  Spedac.
c.  5),  which  was  excavated  upon  each  occasion  of
these  games.     (Dionys.  ii.  p.  97.)

At  the  extremity  of  the  circus  in  which  the  two
horns  of  the  cavea  terminate,  were  placed  the  stalls
for  the  horses  and  chariots  (H,  H),  commonly
called  carceres  at,  and  subsequently  to,  the  age  of
Varro  :  but  more  anciently  the  whole  line  of  build-
ings which  confined  this  end  of  the  circus  was
termed  oppidum ;  because,  with  its  gates  and
towers,  it  resembled  the  walls  of  a  town  (Festus,
»,  V. ;  Varro,  De  Ling.  Lat.  v.  153)  ;  which  is  forci-
bly illustrated  bj'  the  circus  under  consideration,
where  the  two  towers  (I,  I)  at  each  end  of  the
carceres  are  still  standing.  The  number  oicarceres
is  supposed  to  have  been  usually  twelve  (Cassiodor.
Var.  Ep.  iii.  51),  as  they  are  in  this  plan  ;  but  in
the  mosaic  discovered  at  Lyons,  and  published  by
Artaud  {Description  d'un  Mosaique,  &c.  Lyon,
1806),  there  are  only  eight.*  They  were  vaults,
closed  in  front  by  gates  of  open  wood-work
(cancelli),  which  were  opened  simultaneously  upon
the  signal  being  given  (Dionys.  iii.  p.  1 92  ;  Cas-
siodor. I.e.  ;  compare  Sil.  Ital.  xvi.  316),  by  re-
moving a  rope  {va-rrXTiy^,  Dionys.  I.  c.  ;  compare
Schol.  ad  Theocr.  Idyl  viii.  57)  attached  to  pilas-
ters of  the  kind  called  Hermae,  placed  for  that  pur-
pose between  each  stall  ;  upon  which  the  gates
were  immediately  thrown  open  by  a  number  of  men,
probably  the  armentarii,  as  represented  in  the  an-
nexed woodcut,  taken  from  a  very  curious  marble
in  the  Museo  Borgiano,  at  Velletri  ;  which  also
represents  most  of  the  other  peculiarities  above-
mentioned  as  appertaining  to  the  carceres.


CIRCUS.


In  the  mosaic  of  Lyons  the  man  is  represented
apparently  in  the  act  of  letting  go  the  rope
{va-rrXri'yl)  in  the  manner  described  by  Dionysius
(l.  c).  The  cut  below,  which  is  from  a  marble  in
the  British  Museum,  represents  a  set  of  four  carceres,
with  their  Hermae,  and  cancelli  open,  as  left  after

*  This  mosaic  has  several  peculiarities.  Most
of  the  o])iects  are  double.  There  is  a  double  set
of  ova  and  delphinae,  one  of  each  sort  at  each  end
of  the  spina  —  and  eight  chariots,  that  is  a  double
act,  for  each  colour,  are  inserted


the  chariots  had  started  ;  in  which  the  gates  are
made  to  open  inwards.

The  preceding  account  and  woodcuts  will  be
sufficient  to  explain  the  meaning  of  the  various
words  by  which  the  carceres  were  designated  in
poetical  language,  namely,  claustra  (Stat,  llieh.  vi.
399  ;  Hor.  Epist.  i.  14.  9),  crypta  (Sidon  Cann.
xxiii.  319),/aMces  (Cassiodor.  Var.  Epist.  iii.  51),
ostia  (Auson.  Epist.  xviii.  1 1  ),fores  carceiis  (Ovid,
Trist.y.  9.  29),  repagula  (Ovid,  il/e^.  ii.  155  ;  Sil.
Ital.  xvi.  318),  limina  equorum  {Id.  xvi.  317).

It  will  not  fail  to  be  observed  that  the  line  of
the  carceres  is  not  at  a  right  angle  with  the  spina,
but  forms  the  segment  of  a  circle,  the  centre  of
which  is  a  point  on  the  right  hand  of  the  arena  ;  the
reason  for  which  is  obviously  that  all  the  chariots
might  have,  as  nearly  as  possible,  an  equal  dis-
tance to  pass  over  between  the  carceres  and  mouth
of  the  course.  Moreover,  the  two  sides  of  the
circus  are  not  parallel  to  each  other,  nor  the  spina
to  either  of  them  ;  but  they  are  so  planned  that
the  course  diminishes  gradually  from  the  mouth  at
(J),  until  it  reaches  the  corresponding  line  at  the
opposite  side  of  the  spina  (K),  where  it  is  narrower
by  thirty-two  feet.  This  might  have  proceeded
from  economy,  or  be  necessary  in  the  present  in-
stance on  account  of  the  limited  extent  of  the  circus;
for  as  all  the  four,  or  six,  chariots  would  enter  the
mouth  of  the  course  nearly  abreast,  the  greatest
width  would  be  required  at  that  spot  ;  but  as  they
got  down  the  course,  and  one  or  more  took  the  lead,
the  same  width  would  be  no  longer  necessary.

The  carceres  Avere  divided  into  two  sets  of  six
each,  accurately  described  by  Cassiodonis  {I.  c.)  as
bissena  ostia,  by  an  entrance  in  the  centre  (L),
called  porta  pompae ;  because  it  was  the  one
through  which  the  Circensian  procession  entered,
and  which,  it  is  inferred  from  a  passage  in
Ausonius  {Epist.  xviii.  12),  was  always  open,
forming  a  thoroughfare  through  the  circus.  Be-
sides this  entrance,  there  were  four  others,  two  at
the  termination  of  the  seats  between  the  carea  and
the  oppidum  (M,  M),  another  at  (N),  and  the
fourth  at  (0),  under  the  vault  of  which  the  fresco
decorations  are  still  visible.  This  is  supposed  to  be
the  Porta  Triumphalis,  to  which  its  situation  seems
adapted.  One  of  the  others  was  the  Porta  Liln~
tinensis  (Lamiirid.  Commod.  16),  so  called  because
it  was  the  one  through  which  the  dead  bodies  of
those  killed  in  the  games  were  carried  out.  (Diou
Cass.  Ixxii.  p.  1222.)

Such  were  the  general  features  of  a  circus,  as
far  as  regards  the  interior  of  the  fabric.  The  area
had  also  its  divisions  appropriated  to  particular
purposes,  with  a  nomenclature  of  its  own  attached
to  each.  The  space  immediately  before  the  oppi'
dum  was  termed  circus  primus  ;  that  near  the  meta
prima,  circus  interior  or  intimus  (Varr.  De  Ling.
Lat.  V.  154),  which  latter  spot,  in  the  Circus
Maximus,  was   also  termed    ad   Murctrn^    or   ad


2B6


CIRCUS.


Murciam,  from  the  altar  of  Venus  Murtia,  or
Murcia,  placed  there.  (Compare  Apuleius,  Met.  vi.
p.  395,  ed.  Oudendorp  ;  Tertull.  de  Spedac.  8  ;
Miiller,  ad  Varron.  I.  c.)  The  term  arewa  belongs
to  an  amphitheatre  ;  and  it  is  therefore  probable
that  it  was  applied  in  the  circus  to  the  large  open
space  between  the  carceres  and  prima  meta,  when
the  circus  was  used  for  the  exhibition  of  athletic
games,  for  which  the  locality  seems  best  adapted  ;
but  in  Silius  Italicus  (xvi.  415)  it  is  put  for  the  part
down  the  spina.  When  the  circus  was  used  for
racing,  the  course  was  termed  spatium  (Juv.  Sat.
vi.  582)  or  spatia^  because  the  match  included  more
than  one  circuit  (Virg.  Aen.  v.  316,  325,  327,
Georg.  i.  513  ;  Stat.  Tlieb.  vi.  594  ;  Hor.  Epist.  i.
14.  9  ;  compare  Sil.  Ital.  xvi.  336.)  It  is  also  called
campus  (Sil.  xvi.  391),  and  poetically  aeqjtor  {Id.
414).

At  the  entrance  of  the  course,  exactly  in  the
direction  of  the  line  (J,  K),  were  two  small  pe-
destals (Iiermuli)  on  each  side  of  the  podium,  to
which  was  attached  a  chalked  rope  {alba  linea,
Cassiodor.  Lc.\  for  the  purpose  of  making  the
start  fair,  precisely  as  is  practised  at  Rome  for  the
horse-races  during  Cameval.  Thus,  when  the
doors  of  the  carceres  were  thrown  open,  if  any  of
the  horses  rushed  out  before  the  others,  they  were
brought  up  by  this  rope  until  the  whole  were  fairly
abreast,  when  it  was  loosened  from  one  side,  and
all  poured  into  the  course  at  once.  In  the  Lyons
mosaic  the  alha  linea  is  distinctly  traced  at  the
spot  just  mentioned,  and  one  of  the  chariots  is
observed  to  be  upset  at  the  very  place,  whilst  the
others  pursue  their  course.  The  writer  has  often
seen  the  same  accident  happen  at  Rome,  when  an
over-eager  horse  rushes  against  the  rope  and  gets
thrown  down.  This  line,  for  an  obvious  reason
(Plin.  H.  N.  XXXV.  58),  was  also  called  calx,  and
creta  (Cic.  de  Am.  27  ;  Senec.  Epist.  108),  from
whence  comes  the  allusion  of  Persius  {Sat.  v.  177),
cretata  amhitio.  The  metae  served  only  to  regulate
the  turnings  of  the  course,  the  alba  linea  answered
to  the  starting  and  winning  post  of  modem  days  —
**peracto  legitimo  cursu  ad  cretam  stetere."  (Plin.
II.  N.  viii.  65  ;  and  compare  xxxv.  58.)  Hence
the  metaphor  of  Cicero  {Sened.  23),  "  quasi  decurso
spatio  ad  carceres  a  calce  revocan  ; "  and  of  Horace
{Epist.  i.  16.  79),  "mors  ultima  linea  rerum."
(Comp.  Lucret.  vi.  92.)

From  this  description  the  Circus  Maximus  dif-
fered little,  except  in  size  and  magnificence  of  em-
bellishment. But  as  it  was  used  for  hunting  wild
beasts,  Julius  Caesar  drew  a  canal  called  Euripus,
ten  feet  wide,  around  the  bottom  of  the  podium,  to
protect  the  spectators  who  sat  there  (Dionys.  iii.

&192  ;  Suet,  Jul.  39),  which  was  removed  by
ero  (Plin.  H.  N.  viii.  7),  but  subsequently  re-
stored by  other  princes.  (Lamprid.  Heliogab.  23.)
It  possessed  also  another  variety  in  three  open
galleries,  or  balconies,  at  the  circular  end,  called
meniana  ov  maeniana.  (Suet.  C«Z.  18.)  The  num-
bers which  the  Circus  Maximus  was  capable  of
containing,  are  computed  at  1 50,000  by  Dionysius
(iii.  p.  192),  260,000  by  Pliny  {H.  N.  xxxvi.  24.
§  1),  and  385,000  by  P.  Victor  {Regio  xi.),  all  of
which  are  probably  correct,  but  have  reference  to
different  periods  of  its  history.  Its  verj'  great  ex-
tent is  indicated  by  Juvenal  {Sat.  xi.  195).  Its
length,  in  the  time  of  Julius  Caesar,  was  three
stadia,  the  width  one,  and  the  depth  cf  the  build-
ings occupied  half  a  stadium  (Plin.  I.  c.\  which  is


CIRCUS.

included  in  the  measurements  given  by  Dionysius
(iii.  p.  192),  and  thus  exactly  accounts  for  the
variation  in  his  computation.  4

When  the  Circus  Maximus  was  permanently
formed  by  Tarquinius  Priscus,  each  of  the  thirty
curiae  had  a  particular  place  assigned  to  it  (Dionys.
iii.  p.  1 92)  ;  but  as  the  plebeians  had  no  right  to  a
seat  in  this  circus,  the  Circus  Flaminius  was  after-
wards built  for  their  games.  (Comp.  Niebuhr,  Hist.
o/Rome,\o\.  i.  p.  362,  vol.  ii.  p.  360.)  Of  course,  in
the  latter  days  of  the  republic,  when  the  distinction
between  patricians  and  plebeians  had  practically
ceased  to  exist,  the  plebeians  sat  in  the  Circus
Maximus.  (Suet.  Aug.  44.)  The  seats  were  then
marked  off  at  intervals  by  a  line  or  groove  drawn
across  them  {linea),  so  that  the  space  included  be-
tween two  lines  afforded  sitting  room  for  a  certain
number  of  spectators.  Hence  the  allusion  of  Ovid
{Amor.  iii.  2.  19):  —

Quid  frustra  refugis  ?  cogit  nos  linea  jungi.
(Compare  Ovid.  Art.  Amat.  i.  141.)  As  the  seats
were  hard  and  high,  the  women  made  use  of  a
cushion  {pulvinus),  and  a  footstool  {scamnum,  soa-
bellum,  Ovid.  Art.  Amat.  i.  160,  162),  for  which
purpose  the  railing  which  ran  along  the  upper  edge
of  each  praecinctio  was  used  by  those  who  sat  im-
mediately above  it.  (Ovid.  Amor,  iii,  2.  64.)  But
xmder  the  emperors,  when  it  became  necessary  to
give  an  adventitious  rank  to  the  upper  classes  by
privileges  and  distinctions,  Augustus  first,  then
Claudius,  and  finally  Nero  and  Domitian,  separated
the  senators  and  equites  from  the  common  people.
(Suet.  Aug.  44,  Claud.  21,  Nero,  11,  Domit.  8.)
The  seat  of  the  emperor— />M/t?t«ar  (Suet.  Aug.  44,
Claud.  4),  cubiculum  (Id.  Aero,  12),  was  most
likely  in  the  same  situation  in  the  Circus  Maximus,
as  in  the  one  above  described.  It  was  generally
upon  the  podium,  unless  when  he  presided  himself,
which  was  not  always  the  case  (Suet,  A^ero,  I.  c.)  ;
but  then  he  occupied  the  elevated  tribunal  of  the
president  {stiggestus),  over  the  porta  pompae.  The
consuls  and  other  dignitaries  sat  above  the  carceres
(Sidon.  Carm.  xxiii.  317),  indications  of  which
seats  are  seen  in  the  woodcut  on  page  285,  a.
The  rest  of  the  oppidum  was  probably  occupied  by
the  musicians  and  persons  who  formed  part  of  the
pompa.

The  exterior  of  the  Circus  Maximus  was  sur-
rounded by  a  portico  one  story  high,  above  which
were  shops  for  those  who  sold  refreshments.
(Dionys.  iii.  p.  192.)  Within  the  portico  were
ranges  of  dark  vaults,  which  supported  the  seats
of  the  cavea.  These  were  let  out  to  women  of  the
town.  (Juv.  Sat.  iii.  65 ;  Lamprid,  Heliogab.  26,)

The  Circensian  games  {Ludi  Circenses)  were  first
instituted  by  Romulus,  according  to  the  legends,
when  he  wished  to  attract  the  Sabine  population  to
Rome,  for  the  purpose  of  furnishing  his  own  people
with  wives  (Val.  Max.  ii.  4.  §  3),  and  were  cele-
brated in  honour  of  the  god  Consus,  or  Neptunus
Equestris,  from  whom  they  were  styled  Consuales.
(Liv.  i.  9.)  But  after  the  construction  of  the
Circus  Maximus,  they  were  called  indiscriminately
Circenses  (Servius,  ad  Virg.  Georg.  iii.  \^),  Romam,
or  Magni.  (Liv.  i.  35.)  They  embraced  six  kinds
of  games:  —  I.  CuRsus  ;  II.  Ludus  Trojae  ;
III.  PuGNA  Equestris  ;  IV.  Certamen  Gym-
NicuM  ;  V.  Venatio  ;  VI.  Naumachia.  The
two  last  were  not  peculiar  to  the  circus,  but  were
exhibited  also  in  the  amphitheatre,  or  in  buildings
appropriated  for  them.


I


CIRCUS.

The  games  commenced  with  a  grand  procession
{Fompa  Circensis)^  in  which  all  those  who  were
about  to  exhibit  in  the  circus,  as  well  as  persons  of
distinction,  bore  a  part.  The  statues  of  the  gods
formed  the  most  conspicuous  feature  in  the  show,
which  were  paraded  upon  wooden  platforms,  called
/ercula  and  tkensae.  (Suet.  Jul.  76.)  The  former
were  borne  upon  the  shoulders,  as  the  statues  of
saints  are  carried  in  modem  processions  (Cic.  de
Of.  i.  36)  ;  the  latter  drawn  along  upon  wheels,
and  hence  the  thensa  which  bore  the  statue  of
Jupiter  is  termed  Jovis  plaustrum  by  Tertullian
(De  Speciac.  7),  and  Aihs  oxcs,  by  Dion  Cassius
(p.  608).  The  former  were  for  painted  images,  or
those  of  light  material  ;  the  latter  for  the  heavy
statues.  The  whole  procession  is  minutely  de-
scribed by  Dionysius  (vii.  pp.  457,  458  ;  comp.
Ovid,  Amor.  iii.  2,  43,  &c,).

I.  CuRSUS,  the  races.  The  carriage  usually
employed  in  the  circus  was  drawn  by  two  or  four
horses  (biga,  qiuxdriga).     [CuRRUS.]

The  usual  number  of  chariots  which  started  for
each  race  was  four.     The  drivers  (aurigae,  agi-
tatores)   were   also  divided  into  four   companies,
each  distinguished  by  a  diiferent  colour,  to  repre-
sent the  four  seasons  of  the  year,  and  called  a
f actio    (Festus,  s.  v.)  :    thus  /actio  prasina,   the
green,  represented  the  spring,  whence  (Juv.  Sat.
xi.  196)   "  Eventum  viridis  quo  colligo  panni;''^
/actio   russata^   red,   the    summer  ;  /actio  veneta^
azure,   the   autumn  ;   and  /actio   oIIm  or  albata,
white,  the  winter.  (TertuU.  de  Spectac.  9  ;  compare
the  authorities  quoted  by  Ruperti,  ad  Juv.  vii.
112.)     Originally  there    were   but   two  factions,
albata  and  russata  (TertuU.  I.  c),  and  consequently  \
only  two  chariots  started  at  each  race.     Domitian
subsequently  increased  the  whole  number  to  six,
by  the  addition  of  two  new  factions,  aurata  and
purpurea  (Suet.  Dom.  7)  ;  but  this  appears  to  have
been  an  exception  to  the  usual  practice,  and  not  in
general  use.     The  driver  stood  in  his  car  within
the   reins,    which  went   round   his   back.      This
enabled  him  to  throw  all  his  weight  against  the
hrjrses,  by  leaning  backwards  ;  but  it  greatly  en-
hanced his  danger  in  case  of  an  upset,  and  caused
the  death  of  Hippolytus.     (Eur.  Hipp.  1230,  ed.
Monk  ;  compare  Ovid,  Met.  xv.  524.)     To  avoid
this  peril  a  sort  of  knife  or  bill-hook  was  carried
1    at  the  waist,  for  the  purpose  of  cutting  the  reins
:    in  a  case  of  emergency,  as  is  seen  in  some  of  the
I   ancient  reliefs,  and  is  more  clearly  illustrated  in
j   the  annexed  woodcut,  copied  from  a  fragment  for-
I   merly  belonging  to  the  Villa  Negroni,  which  also
I   affords  a  specimen  of  the  dress  of  an  auriga.     The
1   torso  only  remains  of  this  statue  ;  but  the  head  is
j   supplied   from   another   antique,   representing   an
(  auriga,  in  the  Villa  Albani.

I        When  all  was  ready,  the  doors  of  the  carceres

j  were  flung  open,  and  the  chariots  were  formed

j  abreast  of  the  allxi  linea  by  men  called  moratores

I  from  their  duty  ;  the  signal  for  the  start  was  then

!  given  by  the  person  who  presided  at  the  games,

i  sometimes   by  sound  of  tnimpet  (Ovid.  Met.  x.

652  ;  Sidon.  Cartn.  xxiii.  341),  or  more  usually  by

letting   fall  a  napkin    (mappa.   Suet.   Nero,  22  ;

Mart.  Ep.  xii.  29.  9),  whence  the  Circensian  games

I  are  called  spectacula  mappae.  (Juv.  Sat.  xi.  191.)

The  origin  of  this  custom  is  founded  on  a  story

j  that  Nero,  while  at  dinner,  hearing  the  shouts  of

I  the  people  who  were  clamorous  for  the  course  to

begin,  threw  down  his  napkin  as  the  signal.  (Cas-


CIRCUS.


287


siodor.  Var.  Ep.  iii.  51.)  The  alia  linea  was
then  cast  off,  and  the  race  commenced,  the  extent
of  which  was  seven  times  round  the  spina  (Varro,
ap.  Gell.  iii.  10),  keeping  it  always  on  the  left.
(Ovid.  Amor.  iii.  2.  72  ;  Sil.  Ital.  xvi.  362.)  A
course  of  seven  circuits  was  tenned  unus  missus^
and  twenty-five  was  the  number  of  races  ran  in
each  day,  the  last  of  which  was  called  missus  aera^
rius,  because  in  early  times  the  expense  of  it  was
defrayed  by  a  collection  of  money  (aes)  made
amongst  the  people.  (Serv.  ad  Virg.  Georg.  iii.
18  ;  compare  Dion  Cass.  lix.  p.  908.)  Upon  one
occasion  Domitian  reduced  the  number  of  circuits
from  seven  to  five,  in  order  to  exhibit  100  missus
in  one  day.  (Suet.  Dom.  4.)  The  victor  descended
from  his  car  at  the  conclusion  of  the  race,  and
ascended  the  spina,  where  he  received  his  re-
ward (bravium,  from  the  Greek  fipa§e7ov,  Paul.
1  Corinth,  ix.  24),  which  consisted  in  a  considerable
sum  of  money  (Juv.  Sat.  vii.  113,  114,  243;
Suet.  Claud.  21),  which  accounts  for  the  great
wealth  of  the  charioteers  to  which  Juvenal  alludes,
and  the  truth  of  which  is  testified  by  many  sepul-
chral inscriptions.

A  single  horseman,  answering  to  the  iceArjs  of
the  Greeks,  attended  each  chariot,  the  object  of
which  seems  to  have  been  twofold  ;  to  assist  his
companion  by  urging  on  the  horses,  when  his  hands
were  occupied  in  managing  the  reins,  and,  if  neces-
sary, to  ride  forward  and  clear  the  course,  as  seen
in  the  cut  from  the  British  Museum  representing  the
metae,  which  duty  Cassiodorus  (Var.  Ep.  iii.  51)
assigns  to  him,  with  the  title  of  equus  desultorius.
Other  writers  apply  that  term  to  those  who  prac-
tised feats  of  horsemanship  in  the  circus,  leaping
from  one  to  another  when  at  their  speed.  (Compare
Suet.  Jul.  39  ;  Cic.  Pro  Muren.  27  ;  Dionys.  p.
462  ;  Panvin.  De  Lvd.  Circens.  i.  9.)  In  other
respects,  the  horse-racing  followed  the  same  rules
as  the  chariots.  ,

The  enthusiasm  of  the  Romans  for  these  races
exceeded  all  bounds.  Lists  of  the  horses  (libelU),
with  their  names  and  colours,  and  those  of  the
drivers,  were  handed  about,  and  heavy  bets  made
upon  each  faction  (Ovid,  Art.  Amat.  i.  167,  168  ;
Juv.  Sat.  xi.  200  J  Mart.  Ep.  xi.  1.  15) ;  and  some-


2S3


CISTA.


times  the  contests  between  two  parties  broke  out
into  open  violence  and  bloody  quarrels,  until  at
last  the  disputes  which  originated  in  the  circus,
had  nearly  lost  the  Emperor  Justinian  his  crown.
(Gibbon,  c.  40.)

II.  LuDUS  Trojae,  a  sort  of  sham-fight,  said
to  have  been  invented  by  Aeneas,  performed  by
young  men  of  rank  on  horseback  (Tacit.  Ann.  xi.
11),  often  exhibited  by  Augustus  and  succeeding
emperors  (Suet.  Jug.  43,  Nero^  7),  which  is  de-
.'.cribed  by  Virgil  (Aen.  v.  553,  &c.).

III.  PuGNA  Equestris  et  Pedestris,  a  re-
presentation of  a  battle,  upon  which  occasions  a
camp  was  formed  in  the  circus.  (Suet  Jul,  39,
Dom.  4.)

IV.  (^ERTAMEN  GYMNICUM.      See  AtHLETAE,

and  the  references  to  the  articles  there  given.

V.  [Venatio.]     VI.  [Naumachia.]

The  pompa  circensis  was  abolished  by  Con-
stantine,  upon  his  conversion  to  Christianity  ;
and  the  other  games  of  the  circus  by  the  Goths
(a.  D.  410)  ;  but  the  chariot  races  continued  at
Constantinople  until  that  city  was  besieged  by
the  Venetians  (a.  d.  1204).  [A.  R.]

CIRRUS.     [CoMA.J

CI'SIUM,  a  gig,  i.e.  a  light  open  carriage  with
two  wheels,  adapted  to  carry  two  persons  rapidly
from  place  to  place.  Its  fonn  is  sculptured  on
the  monumental  column
at  Igel,  near  Treves  (see
woodcut).  It  had  a  box
or  case,  probably  under
the  seat.  (Festus,  s.v.  Plo-
xinum.)  The  cisia  were
quickly  drawn  by  mules
(ciid  volantis,  Virg.  Catal.
viii,  3  ;  Cic.  Phil.  ii.  31).  Cicero  mentions  the
case  of  a  messenger  who  travelled  56  miles  in  10
hours  in  such  vehicles,  which  were  kept  for  hire  at
the  stations  along  the  great  roads  ;  a  proof  that  the
ancients  considered  six  Roman  miles  per  hour  as
an  extraordinary  speed.  (Pro  Roscio  Amer.  7.)
The  conductors  of  these  hired  gigs  were  called
eisiarii,  and  were  subject  to  penalties  for  care-
less or  dangerous  driving.  (Dig.  19.  tit.  2.  s.
13.)  ^  [J.Y.]

CISTA  (KtVrrj),  a  small  box  or  basket,  com-
monly made  of  wicker-work,  in  which  any  thing
might  be  placed.    (Cic.  Verr.  iii.  85  ;  Hor.  Ep.  i.
1 7.  54.)     In  the  Roman  comitia  the  cista  was  the
ballot-box  into  which  the  voters  cast  their  tabellae
(PI in.  ff.  N.  xxxiii.  2.  s.  7  ;  Auctor,  ad  Herenn.
i.  12  ;  Pseudo- Ascon.  a«?  Cic.  Divin.  7.  p.  108,  ed.
Orelli).     The  form  of  the  cisu  is  preserved  on  a
coin  of  the  Cassia  gens,  which  is  represented  in
the  annexed  cut,  and  which  is  evidently  made  of
wicker  or  similar  work.     The  material
of  which  it  was  made  is  alluded  to  by        ^^
Tibullus  in  the  line  (i.  7.  48)  "  et  levis        ^P
occultis  conscia  cista  sacris."     The  cista        ^^
has  been  frequently  confounded  with  the
sitella,  but  the  latter  was  the  urn  from  which  the
names  of  the  tribes  or  centuries  were  drawn  out  by
lot.     [Sitella.]

The  name  of  cistae  was  also  given  to  the  small
boxes  which  were  carried  in  procession  in  the
Greek  festivals  of  Demeter  and  Dionysus.  These
boxes,  which  were  always  kept  closed  in  the  public
processions,  contained  sacred  things  connected  with
the  worship  of  these  deities.  (Ovid,  De  Art.
Amat.  ii.  609  ;  Catull.  Ixiv.  260  ;  Tibull.  i.  7.  48.)


CIVITAS.

In  the  representations  of  the  Dionysian  proct's-
sions,  which  frequently  form  the  subject  of  paint-
ings on  ancient  vases,  women  carrying  cistae  are
constantly  introduced  ;  they  are  usually  of  an  ob-
long form,  and  thus  differ  completely  from  the
cistae  used  in  the  Roman  comitia.  From  one
of  these  paintings,  given  by  Millin  in  his  Pein-
tures  de  Vases  Antiques^  the  following  woodcut  is
taken.


CISTO'PHORUS  (KiffTocpdpos),  a  silver  coin,
which  belonged  to  the  kingdom  of  Pergamus,  and
which  was  in  general  circulation  in  Asia  Minor  at
the  time  of  the  conquest  of  that  country  by  the
Romans.  (Liv.  xxxvii.  46,  58,  xxxix.  7  ;  Cic.  ad
Att.  ii.  6,  xi.  1.)  Its  value  is  extremely  uncer-
tain, as  the  only  information  we  possess  on  the
subject  is  in  two  passages  of  Festus,  which  are  at
variance  with  each  other,  and  of  which  certainly
one,  and  probably  the  other,  is  corrupt.  (Festus,
s.  w.  Euboicum  Talentum,  and  Talentorum  non,
&c.  ;  see  MUUer's  notes) :  and,  with  respect  to  the
existing  specimens,  it  is  doubtful  whether  they  are  'I
double  or  single  cistophori.  Bbckh  supposes  them  ll
to  have  been  originally  didrachms  of  the  Aeginetan  ■'
standard :  others  take  them  for  tetradrachms.  Mr.
Hussey  (pp.74,  75),  from  existing  coins,  which  he
takes  for  cistophori,  determines  it  to  be  about  ^  of
the  later  Attic  drachma,  or  Roman  denarius  of  the
republic,  and  worth  in  our  money  about  7^.  The  :,
existing  specimens  are  extremely  scarce.  The
general  device  is,  on  the  one  side,  the  sacred  chest  J
(cista,  whence  the  name)  of  Dionysus,  half  open,
with  a  serpent  creeping  out  of  it,  surrounded  by
an  ivy  wreath,  and  on  the  reverse,  the  car  of  De-
meter,  drawn  by  serpents.  The  period  during
which  cistophori  were  struck,  is  supposed  to  have
been  from  about  B.  c.  200,  down  to  the  battle  of
Actium.  (Panel,  de  Cistopkoris,  Lugd.  1734;
Eckhel,  vol.  iv.  pp.  352—368  ;  Bbckh,  MetroL
Untersuch.  pp.  101,  107.)  [P.S.J

CI'THARA.     [Lyra.1

CIVI'LE  JUS.     [Jus  Civile.]

CI VI 'LIS  ACTIO.     [Actio.]

CIVIS.       [CiVITAS.]

Cr VITAS  (iro\iTfia\  citizenship.    1.  Grkek.


CIVITAS.

In  the  third  book  of  the  Politics,  Aristotle  com-
inences  his  inquiry  into  the  nature  of  states  with
the  question,  "  What  constitutes  a  citizen  ?  "  (tto-
XtTTjs).  He  defines  a  citizen  to  be  one  who  is  a
partner  in  the  legislative  and  judicial  power  (fifro-
Xos  Kpicrews  Koi  apxvs).  No  definition  will
equally  apply  to  all  the  different  states  of  Greece,
or  to  any  single  state  at  different  times  ;  the
above  seems  to  comprehend  more  or  less  properly
all  those  whom  the  common  use  of  language  en-
titled to  the  name.

A  state  in  the  heroic  ages  was  the  government
of  a  prince  ;  the  citizens  were  his  subjects,  and
derived  all  their  privileges,  civil  as  well  as  reli-
gious, from  their  nobles  and  princes.  Nothing
could  have  been  funher  from  the  notions  of  those
times,  than  the  ideas  respecting  the  natural
equality  of  freemen  which  were  considered  self-
evident  axioms  in  the  democracies  of  an  after-
period.  In  the  early  governments  there  were  no
formal  stipulations  ;  the  kings  were  amenable  to
the  gods  alone.  The  shadows  of  a  council  and
assembly  were  already  in  existence,  but  their
business  was  to  obey.  Community  of  language,
of  religion,  and  of  legal  rights,  as  far  as  they  tlion
existed,  was  the  bond  of  union  ;  and  their  pri-
vileges, such  as  they  were,  were  readily  granted
to  naturalised  strangers.  Upon  the  whole,  as
Wachsmuth  has  well  observed,  the  notion  of
citizenship  in  the  heroic  age  only  existed  so  far
as  the  condition  of  aliens  or  of  domestic  slaves
was  its  negative.

The  rise  of  a  dominant  class  gradually  over-
threw the  monarchies  of  ancient  Greece.  Of  such
a  class,  the  chief  characteristics  were  good  birth
and  t!ie  hereditary  transmission  of  privileges,
the  possession  of  land,  and  the  performance  of
niilitaiy  service.  To  these  characters  the  names
yd/jiopoi,  iTTTrers,  dnrarpiSai,  &c.,  severally  corre-
spond. Strictly  speaking,  these  were  the  only
citizens  ;  yet  the  lower  class  was  quite  distinct
from  bondmen  or  slaves.  It  commonly  happened
that  the  nobility  occupied  the  fortified  towns,
while  the  Stj^os  lived  in  the  country  and  followed
agricultural  pursuits :  whenever  the  latter  were
gathered  within  the  walls  and  became  seamen  or
handicraftsmen,  the  difference  of  rank  was  soon
lost,  and  wealth  made  the  only  standard.  The
quarrels  of  the  nobility  among  themselves,  and  the
admixture  of  population  arising  from  immigrations,
all  tended  to  raise  the  lower  orders  from  their
political  subjection.  It  must  be  remembered,  too,
that  the  possession  of  domestic  slaves,  if  it  placed
them  in  no  new  relation  to  the  governing  body,  at
any  rate  gave  them  leisure  to  attend  to  the  higher
duties  of  a  citizen,  and  thus  served  to  increase  their
political  efficiency.

During  the  convulsions  which  followed  the
heroic  ages,  naturalisjition  was  readily  granted  to
all  who  desired  it  ;  as  the  value  of  citizenship  in-
creased, it  was,  of  course,  more  sparingly  bestowed.
The  ties  of  hospitality  descended  from  the  prince
to  the  state,  and  the  friendly  relations  of  the
Homeric  heroes  were  exchanged  for  the  irpo^eviai
of  a  later  period.  In  political  intercourse,  the  im-
portance of  these  last  soon  began  to  be  felt,  and  the
Tfpo^evos  at  Athens,  in  after  times,  obtained  rights
only  inferior  to  actual  citizenship.  [Hospitium.]
The  isopolite  relation  existed,  hov/ever,  on  a  much
more  extended  scale.  Sometimes  particular  privi-
I'sges  were  granted :  as  iiriyajxia,  the  right  of  inter-


CI  VITAS.


289


marriage  ;  tyKTtjoris^  the  right  of  acquiring  landed
property  ;  dreAeia,  immunity  from  taxation,  espe  •
cially  aT€\6ia  /.(.eroiKiov,  from  the  tax  imposed  on
resident  aliens.  All  these  privileges  were  included
luider  the  general  term  laoreXeia,  or  iVoTToAireia,
and  the  class  who  obtained  them  were  called
iVoreAeis.  They  bore  the  same  burthens  with  the
citizens,  and  could  plead  in  the  courts  or  transact
business  with  the  people,  without  the  intervention
of  a  TrpoardTTis.  (  Bockh,  Pu/dic  Econ.  of  A  thens,
p.  540,2nded.;  Niebuhr,iy/*1  Rom.  ii.  p.  53  ;  Her-
man, Lehrhitch  d.  Griech.  StaatsaUh.  §  1 1 6.)  If  the
right  of  citizenship  was  conferred  for  services  done
to  the  state,  the  rank  termed  irpoeSpia  or  eifepyecria
might  be  added.  Naturalised  citizens  even  of  the
highest  grade  were  not  precisely  in  the  same  con-
dition Avith  the  citizen  by  birth,  although  it  is  not
agreed  in  what  the  difference  consisted.  Some
think  that  they  were  excluded  from  the  assembly
(Niebuhr,  /.  c),  others  that  they  were  only  in-
eligible to  offices,  or  at  any  rate  to  the  archonship.
The  candidate  on  whom  the  citizenship  was  to
be  conferred  was  proposed  in  two  successive  assem-
blies, at  the  second  of  which  at  least  six  thousand
citizens  voted  for  him  by  ballot :  even  if  he  suc-
ceeded, his  admission,  like  every  other  decree,
was  liable  during  a  whole  year  to  a  ypa(f)7]
iTapav6jj.(av.  He  was  registered  in  a  phyle  and
deme,  but  not  enrolled  in  the  phratria  and  genos  ;
and  hence  it  has  been  argued  that  he  was  ineligible
to  the  office  of  archon  or  priest,  because  unable  to
participate  in  the  sacred  rites  of  'ATrdAAwv  Uarp^os
or  Zei;s  'Ep/cetos.

The  object  of  the  phratriae  (which  were  retained
in  the  constitution  of  Cleisthenes,  when  their  num-
ber no  longer  corresponded  to  that  of  the  tribes)
was  to  preserve  purity  and  legitimacy  of  descent
among  the  citizens.  Aristotle  says  {Pol.  iii.  2)
that  for  practical  purposes  it  was  sufficient  to  de-
fine a  citizen  as  the  son  or  grandson  of  a  citizen,
and  the  register  of  the  phratriae  was  kept  chiefly
as  a  record  of  the  citizenship  of  the  parents.  If
any  one's  claim  was  disputed,  this  register  was  at
hand,  and  gave  an  answer  to  all  doubts  about  the
rights  of  his  parents  or  his  own  identity.  Every
newly  married  woman,  herself  a  citizen,  was  en-
rolled in  the  phratriae  of  her  husband,  and  every
infant  registered  in  the  phratriae  and  genos  of  its
father.  All  who  were  thus  registered  must  have
been  bom  in  lawful  wedlock,  of  parents  who  were
themselves  citizens ;  indeed,  so  far  was  this  car-
ried, that  the  omission  of  any  of  the  requisite
formalities  in  the  marriage  of  the  parents,  if  it
did  not  wholly  take  away  the  rights  of  citizen-
ship, might  place  the  offspring  under  serious  dis-
abilities. This,  however,  was  only  carried  out  in
its  utmost  rigour  at  the  time  when  Athenian
citizenship  was  most  valuable.  In  Solon's  time,  it
is  not  certain  that  the  offspring  of  a  citizen  and  of
a  foreign  woman  incurred  any  civil  disadvantage  ;
and  even  the  law  of  Pericles  (Plut.  Perie.  37),
which  exacted  citizenship  on  the  mother's  side,
appears  to  have  become  obsolete  very  soon  after-
wards, as  we  find  it  re-enacted  by  Aristophon  in
the  archonship  of  Eucleides,  B.  c.  403.  (Athen.  xiii.
p.  .577.)

It  is  evident  then,  from  the  very  object  of  the
phratriae,  why  the  newly-admitted  citizen  was  not
enrolled  in  them.  As  the  same  reason  did  not
apply  to  the  children,  these,  if  boni  of  women  who
were  citizens,  were  enrolled  in  the  phratria  of  their
u


290


CIVITAS.


maternal  grandfather.  (Isaeus,  De  ApoL  Hered.
c  15.)  Still  an  additional  safeguard  was  provided
by  the  registry  of  the  derae.  At  the  age  of  six-
teen, the  son  of  a  citizen  was  required  to  devote
two  years  to  the  exercises  of  the  gjTnnasia,  at  the
expiration  of  which  terra  he  was  enrolled  in  his
denie  ;  and,  after  taking  the  oath  of  a  citizen,  was
armed  in  the  presence  of  the  assembl}^  He  was
then  of  age,  and  might  marry ;  but  was  required
to  spend  two  years  more  as  a  irepliroAos  in  frontier
service,  before  he  was  admitted  to  take  part  in  the
assembly  of  the  people.  The  admission  into  the
phratria  and  deme  were  alike  attended  with  oaths
and  other  solemn  formalities:  when  a  SoKifiaa-ia
or  general  scrutiny  of  the  claims  of  citizens  took
place,  it  was  entrusted  to  both  of  them ;  indeed
the  registry  of  the  deme  was  the  only  check  upon
the  naturalised  citizen.

These  privileges,  however,  were  only  enjoyed
while  the  citizen  was  iiririixos :  in  other  words,
did  not  incur  any  sort  of  aTifiia,  which  was  of
two  sorts,  either  partial  or  total,  and  is  spoken  of
at  length  elsewhere.     [Atimia.]

Recurring  then  to  Aristotle's  definition,  we  find
the  essential  properties  of  Athenian  citizenship  to
have  consisted  in  the  share  possessed  by  every
citizen  in  the  legislature,  in  the  election  of  magis-
trates, in  the  doKi/jLaaia,  and  in  the  courts  of
justice.

The  lowest  unity  under  which  the  citizen  was
contained,  was  the  yevos  or  clan  ;  its  members
were  termed  yevi/rjToi  or  6fjLoyd\aKT€s.  Thirty
7ej/7j  formed  a  ^puTpla,  which  latter  division,  as
was  observed  above,  continued  to  subsist  long
after  the  four  tribes,  to  which  the  twelve  phratries
anciently  corresponded,  had  been  done  away  b}'-
the  constitution  of  Cleisthenes.  There  is  no  reason
to  suppose  that  these  divisions  originated  in  the
common  descent  of  the  persons  who  were  included
in  them,  as  they  certainly  did  not  imply  any  such
idea  in  later  times.  Rather  they  are  to  be  con-
sidered as  mere  political  unions,  yet  formed  in
imitation  of  the  natural  ti«s  of  the  patriarchal
eystera.

If  we  would  picture  to  ourcelves  the  true  notion
which  the  Greeks  embodied  in  the  word  ttoAjs,
we  must  lay  aside  all  modern  ideas  respecting  the
nature  and  object  of  a  state.  With  us  practically,
if  not  in  theory-,  the  object  of  a  state  hardly  em-
braces more  than  tlie  protection  of  life  and  pro-
perty. The  Greeks,  on  the  other  hand,  had  the
most  vivid  conception  of  the  state  as  a  whole,
every  part  of  which  was  to  co-operate  to  some
great  end  to  which  all  other  duties  were  considered
as  subordinate.  Thus  the  aim  of  democmcy  was
said  to  be  liberty  ;  wealth,  of  oligarchy  ;  and  edu-
cation, of  aristocracy.  In  all  governments  the
endeavoiu:  was  to  draw  the  soci.al  union  as  close
as  possible,  and  it  seenis  to  have  been  with  this
view  that  Aristotle  laid  down  a  principle  which
answered  well  enough  to  the  accidental  circum-
stances of  the  Grecian  states,  that  a  Tr6\is  must  be
of  a  certain  size.  (Pol.  vii.  4 ;  Nic.  Eth.  ix.  1 0.
Ow  yap  iK  SeKa  fivpidSuv  7r6\is  en  iarlv.)

This  unity  of  purpose  was  nowhere  so  fully
carried  out  as  in  the  government  of  Sparta  ;  and,  if
Sparta  is  to  be  looked  upon  as  the  model  of  a
Dorian  state,  we  may  add,  in  the  other  Dorian  go-
vernments. Whether  Spartan  institutions  in  their
essential  parts  were  the  creation  of  a  single
inaster>inind,  or  the  result  of  circumstances  modi-


CI  VITAS,

fled  only  by  the  genius  of  Lycurgus,  their  design
was  evidently  to  unite  the  governing  body  among
themselves  against  the  superior  nun  bers  of  the
subject  population.  The  division  of  lands,  the
sj'ssitia,  the  education  of  their  youth,  all  tended  to
this  great  object.  The  most  important  thing  next
to  union  among  themselves,  was  to  divide  the  sub-
ject class,  and  accordingly  we  find  the  government
conferring  some  of  the  rights  of  citizenship  on  the
helots.  Properly  speaking,  the  helots  cannot  be
said  to  have  had  any  political  rights  ;  yet  being
serfs  of  the  soil,  they  were  not  absolutely  under
the  control  of  their  masters,  and  were  never  sold
out  of  the  country  even  by  the  state  itself.  Their
condition  was  not  one  of  hopeless  servitude  ;  a  legal
way  was  open  to  them,  by  which,  through  many
intermediate  stages,  they  might  attain  to  liberty
and  citizenship.  (Miiller,  Dorians,  iii.  3.  §  5.)
Those  who  followed  their  masters  to  war  were
deemed  worthy  of  especial  confidence ;  indeed,
when  they  served  among  the  heavy-armed,  it
seems  to  have  been  usual  to  give  them  their
liberty.  The  deo-rrotnovavTai,  by  whom  the
Spartan  fleet  was  almost  entirely  manned,  were
freedmen,  who  were  allowed  to  dwell  where  thej'
pleased,  and  probably  had  a  portion  of  land  al-
lotted them  by  the  state.  After  they  had  been
in  possession  of  their  liberty  for  some  time,  they
appear  to  have  been  called  reoSajuc^Sets  (Thuc.  vii.
58),  the  number  of  whom  soon  came  near  to  that
of  the  citizens.  The  fiddtoves  or  fi6QaKes  (as  their
name  implies)  were  also  emancipated  helots  ;  their
descendants,  too,  must  have  received  the  rights  of
citizenship  as  Callicratidas,  Lysander,  and  Gylip-
pus  were  of  Mothacic  origin.  (Miiller,  Dorians,
ii.  3.  §  6.)  We  cannot  suppose  that  they  passed
necessarily  and  of  course  into  the  full  Spartan
franchise  ;  it  is  much  more  probable  that  at  Sparta,
as  at  Athens,  intermarriage  with  citizens  might
at  last  entirely  obliterate  the  badge  of  former  ser-
vitude.

The  perioeci  are  not  to  be  considered  as  a  sub-
ject class,  but  rather  as  a  distinct  people,  separated
by  their  customs  as  well  as  by  their  origin  from
the  genuine  Spartans.  It  seems  unlikely  that  they
were  admitted  to  vote  in  the  Spartan  assembly  ;
yet  they  undoubtedly  possessed  civil  rights  in  the
communities  to  which  they  belonged  (Miiller,
Dorians,  iii.  2.  §  4),  and  which  would  hardly  have
been  called  tt6X^is  unless  they  had  been  in  some
sense  independent  bodies.  In  the  army  they  com-  ■
monh--  served  as  hoplites,  and  we  find  the  com-  fl
mand  at  sea  intrusted  to  one  of  this  class.  (Thuc.  *
viii.  22.)  In  respect  of  political  rights,  the  perioeci
were  in  the  same  condition  with  the  plebeians  in
the  early  history  of  Rome,  although  in  every  other
respect  far  better  off,  as  they  participated  in  the
division  of  lands,  and  enjoyed  the  exclusive  pri-
vilege of  engaging  in  trade  and  commerce.  What
confirms  the  view  here  taken,  is  the  fact,  that,  as
far  as  we  know,  no  individual  of  this  class  was
ever  raised  to  participate  in  Spartan  privileges.
Nothing,  however,  can  be  more  erroneous  than  to
look  upon  them  as  an  oppressed  race.  Even  their
exclusion  from  tlfc  assembly  cannot  be  viewed  in
this  light ;  for,  had  they  possessed  the  privilege,
their  residence  in  the  country  would  have  de-
barred them  from  its  exercise.  It  only  remains
to  consider  in  what  the  superiority  of  the  genuine
Spartan  may  have  consisted.  In  the  first  place,
besides  the  right  of  voting  in  the  assembly  and


CIVITAS.

becoming  a  candidate  for  the  magistracies,  he
was  possessed  of  lands  and  slaves,  and  was  thus
exempt  from  all  care  about  the  necessaries  of  life ;
secondly,  on  the  field  of  battle  he  always  served
amongst  the  hoplites ;  thirdly^  he  participated  in
the  Spartan  education,  and  in  all  other  Dorian
institutions,  both  civil  and  religious.  The  re-
luctance which  Sparta  showed  to  admit  foreigners
was  proportioned  to  the  value  of  these  privileges.:
indeed  Herodotus  (ix.  35)  says  that  Sparta  had
only  conferred  the  full  franchise  in  two  instances.
In  legal  rights  all  Spartans  were  equal ;  but  there
were  yet  several  gradations,  which,  when  once
formed",  retained  their  hold  on  the  aristocratic
feelings  of  the  people.  (Miiller,  Dorians,  iii.  5.
§  7.)  First,  as  we  should  naturally  expect,  there
was  the  dignity  of  the  Pleraclide  families ;  and,
connected  with  this,  a  certain  pre-eminence  of  the
Hyllean  tribe.  Another  distinction  was  that  be-
tween the  o^ioioi  and  virofieioves,  which,  in  later
times,  appears  to  have  been  considerable.  The
latter  term  probably  comprehended  those  citizens
who,  from  degeneracy  of  manners  or  other  causes,
had  undergone  some  kind  of  civil  degradation.  To
these  the  bfioioi  were  opposed,  although  it  is  not
certain  in  what  the  precise  difference  consisted.  It
reed  hardly  be  added,  that  at  Sparta,  as  elsewhere,
the  union  of  wealth  with  birth  always  gave  a  sort
of  adventitious  rank  to  its  possessor.

All  the  Spartan  citizens  were  included  in  the
three  tribes,  Hylleans,  Dymanes  or  Dymanatae,
and  Pamphiiians,  each  of  which  were  divided  into
ten  obes  or  phratries.  Under  these  obes  there  must
undoubtedly  have  been  contained  some  lesser  sub-
division, which  Miiller,  with  great  probability,
supposes  to  have  been  termed  rpiaKas.  The  citizens
of  Sparta,  as  of  most  oligarchical  states,  were  land-
owners, although  this  does  not  seem  to  have  been
looked  upon  as  an  essential  of  citizenship.

It  would  exceed  the  limits  of  this  work  to  give
an  account  of  the  Grecian  constitutions,  except  so
far  as  may  illustrate  the  rights  of  citizenship.
What  perversions  in  the  form  of  government,  ac-
cording to  Greek  ideas,  were  sufficient  to  destroy
the  essential  notion  of  a  citizen,  is  a  question
which,  following  Aristotle's  example  {Pol.  iii.  5),
we  may  be  content  to  leave  undecided.  He  who,
being  personally  free,  enjoyed  the  fullest  political
privileges,  participated  in  the  assembly  and  courts
of  judicature,  was  eligible  to  the  highest  offices,
and  received  all  this  by  inheritance  from  his  an-
cestors, most  entirely  satisfied  the  idea  which  the
Greeks  expressed  in  the  word  TroKiTT^s.     [B.  J.]

2.  Roman.  Civitas  means  the  whole  body  of
cives,  or  members,  of  any  given  state.  Civitates
are  defined  by  Cicero  {Soinn.  Scip.  c.  3)  to  be  "  con-
cilium coetusque  hominumjWe  sociati."  A  civitas
is,  therefore,  properly'  a  political  community,  so-
vereign and  independent.  The  word  civitas  is
frequently  used  by  the  Roman  writers  to  express
the  condition  of  a  Roman  citizen,  as  disthiguished
from  that  of  other  persons  not  Roman  citizens,  as
in  the  phrases  dare  civitatem,  donare  civitaie,
usurpare  civitutem.
i  If  we  attempt  to  distinguish  the  members  of  any
I  given  civitas  from  all  other  people  in  the  world,
we  can  only  do  it  by  enumerating  all  the  rights
and  duties  of  a  member  of  this  civitas,  which  are
not  rights  and  duties  of  a  person  who  is  not  a
member  of  this  civitas.  If  any  rights  and  duties
which  belong  to  a  member  of  this  civitas,  and  do


CIVITAS.  291

not  belong  to  any  person  not  a  member  of  thin
civitiis,  are  omitted  in  the  enumeration,  it  is  an
incomplete  enumeration  ;  for  the  rights  and  duties
not  expressly  included  must  be  assumed  as  common
to  the  members  of  this  civitas  and  to  all  the  world,
or,  to  use  a  Roman  expression,  they  exist  jure
gentium.  Having  enumerated  all  the  character-
istics of  the  members  of  any  given  civitas,  we  have
then  to  show  how  a  man  acquires  them,  and  how
he  loses  them,  and  the  notion  of  a  member  of  such
civitas  is  then  complete.

Some  members  of  a  political  community  {cives)
may  have  more  political  rights  than  others  ;  a
principle  by  the  aid  of  which  Savigny  {GeschicUe
des  Bom.  lieehts  im  Mitielalter,  c.  ii.  p.  22)  has
expressed  briefly  and  clearly  the  distinction  be-
tween the  two  gi-eat  classes  of  Roman  citizeng
under  the  republic :  —  "In  the  free  republic
there  wove  two  classes  of  Roman  citizens,  one
that  had,  and  another  that  had  not,  a  share  in
the  sovereign  power  {optima  jure,  non  optimo  jure
cives).  That  which  peculiarly  distinguished  the
higher  class  was  the  right  to  vote  in  a  tribe,  and
the  capacity  of  enjoying  magistracies  {svffragium
et  honores).''''  According  to  this  view,  the  jus  civi-
tatis  comprehended  part  of  that  which  the  Romans
called  jus  publicum,  and  aiso,  and  most  particularly,
that  which  they  called  jus  privatum.  The  jus
privatum  comprehended  the  jus  connubii  and  jus
commercii,  and  those  who  had  not  these  had  no
citizenship.  Those  who  had  the  jus  suffragiorum
and  jus  honorum  had  the  complete  citizenship,  or,
in  other  words,  they  were  optimo  jure  cives.  Those
who  had  the  privatum,  but  not  the  publicum  jus,
were  citizens,  though  citizens  of  an  inferior  class.
The  jus  privatum  seems  to  be  equivalent  to  the
jus  Quiritium,  and  the  civitas  Romana  to  the  jus
publicum.  Accordingly,  we  sometimes  find  the
jus  Quiritium  contrasted  with  the  Romana  civitas.
(Plin.  Ep.  X.  4.  22  ;  Ulp.  Frag.  tit.  3.  §  2.)  Livy
(xxxviii.  36)  says  that  until  b.  c.  188,  the  Formiani,
Fundani,  and  Arpinates,  had  the  civitas  without
the  suffragium  ;  and,  at  an  earlier  time,  the  people
of  Anagnia  received  the  "  Civitas  sine  suffragii  la-
tione."     (Liv.  ix.  43.)

Ulpian  {Froff.  tit.  5.  §  4  ;  1.9.  §  4  ;  20.  §  8  ;
11.  §  6)  has  stated  a  distinction,  as  existing  in  his
time  among  the  free  persons  who  were  within  the
political  limits  of  the  Roman  state,  which  it  is  of
great  importance  to  apprehend  clearly.  There  were
three  classes  of  free  persons,  Cives,  Latini,  and
Peregrini.  Gaius  (i.  12)  points  to  the  same  divi-
sion, where  he  says  that  a  slave,  when  made  free,
might  become  a  Civis  Romanus,  or  a  Latinus,  or
might  be  in  the  number  of  the  peregrini  dediticii,
according  to  circumstances.  Civis,  according  to
Ulpian,  is  lie  who  possesses  the  complete  rights  of
a  Roman  citizen.  The  Peregrinus  had  not  com-
mercium  and  connubium,  which  were  the  charac-
teristic rights  of  a  Roman  citizen,  not  viewed  in
his  political  capacity  ;  but  the  Peregrinus  had  a
capacity  for  making  all  kinds  of  contracts  which
were  allowable  by  the  jus  gentium.  The  Latinus
was  in  an  intermediate  state  ;  he  had  not  the  con-
nubium, and  consequently  he  had  not  the  patria
potestas  nor  rights  of  agnatio  ;  but  he  had  the
commercium  or  the  right  of  acquiring  quiritarian
ownership,  and  he  had  also  a  capacity  for  all  acts
incident  to  quiritarian  owmership,  as  vindicatio,  in
jure  cessio,  mancipatio,  and  testamenti  factio,  which
last  comprises  the  power  of  making  a  will  in  Roman
V  2


292


CIVITAS.


fomi,  of  becoming  heres  or  legatee  under  a  will,
and  of  being  a  witness  to  a  will  ;  also  he  could
contract  many  obligationes  which  a  Peregrinus
could  not.  These  were  the  general  capacities  of  a
Latinus  and  peregrinus  ;  but  a  Latinus  or  a  pere-
grinus might  obtain  by  special  favour  certain  rights
which  he  had  not  by  virtue  of  his  condition  onlj-.
The  legitima  hereditas  was  not  included  in  the
testamenti  factio  ;  for  the  legitima  hereditas  pre-
supposed agnatio,  and  agnatic  presupposed  connu-
bium,  or  the  capacity  to  contract  a  Roman  marriage.

According  to  Savigny,  the  notion  of  civis  and
civitas  had  its  origin  in  the  union  of  the  patricii
and  the  plebes  as  one  estate.  The  peregrinitas,  in
the  sense  above  stated,  originated  in  the  conquest
of  a  state  by  the  Romans,  when  the  conquered
state  did  not  obtain  the  civitas  ;  and  he  conjectures
that  the  notion  of  peregrinitas  was  applied  originally
to  all  citizens  of  foreign  states  who  had  a  foedus
with  Rome.

The  civitas  then,  historically  viewed,  was  in
brief  as  follows  :  —  Originally,  the  Romans  divided
rU  persons  into  Gives  and  Peregrini :  the  cives,  con-
sidered as  non-political  persons  and  simply  as  indi-
viduals, had  connubium  and  commercium  ;  the
peregrini  had  neither.  But  this  merely  negative
description  of  a  peregrinus  would  apply  also  to
slaves,  and  to  the  members  of  states  with  which
Rome  never  had  any  connection,  and  consequently
it  is  requisite  to  give  to  the  notion  of  peregrinus
Bomething  of  a  positive  character  in  order  to  de-
termine what  it  is,  A  peregrinus  then  was  one
who  had  no  legal  capacity  according  to  the  jus
civile  Romanorum,  but  had  a  capacity  of  acquiring
rights  according  to  the  jus  gentium,  which  rights
the  Roman  courts  of  justice  acknowledged.  The
following  persons  then  would  be  included  imder
Peregrini :  1.  Before  the  time  of  Antoninus  Cara-
calla,  the  inhabitants  of  almost  all  the  Roman
provinces.  2.  The  citizens  of  foreign  states  which
were  in  friendly  relation  with  Rome.  3.  Romans
who  had  lost  the  civitas  in  consequence  of  some
legal  penalty,  as  deportatio.  (Dig.  48.  tit.  19.  s.
17.  §1.)  4.  Libertini,  who  were  dediticiorum
numero.     (Ulpian,  Frag,  tit,  20,  §  14,)

The  later  division  of  persons  was,  this  —  Cives,
Latini,  and  Peregrini.  The  condition  of  cives  and
peregrini  was  unchanged  ;  but  a  third  class,  that
of  Latini,  was  formed,  who  had  a  limited  civitas,
which  consisted  in  having  commercium  without
connubium.  By  possessing  commercium  they  ap-
proached to  the  class  of  cives  ;  by  not  having  con-
nubium they  approached  the  class  of  peregrini.
Yet  persons  who  belonged  to  the  class  of  Latini  or
Peregrini  might,  by  grant,  receive  a  higher  legal
capacity  than  that  which  belonged  to  persons  of
this  class.     (Ulpian,  Frag.  tit.  5.  §  4,  11).  §  4.)

Thus  then  there  were  at  one  time  in  the  Roman
state  only  two  classes  of  persons  with  different
legal  capacities — Cives  and  Peregrini.  At  another
and  a  later  time  there  were  three  classes  —  Cives,
Latini,  and  Peregrini.  It  remains  to  explain  when
the  third  class,  Latini,  was  established,  and  what
persons  were  included  in  the  term  Peregrini  at  the
two  several  times.

Before  the  Social  war  u.  c.  90,  the  Romans  had
acquii'ed  the  dominion  of  all  Italy,  and  the  state
then  comprehended  the  following  persons :  —
\.  Cives  Romani,  that  is,  the  inhabitants  of  Rome,
the  citizens  of  the  coloniae  civium,  and  the  citizens
cf  the  municipia  without  respect  to  their  origin.


CIVITAS.

2.  Latini,  that  is,  the  citizens  of  the  old  Latin
towns,  except  those  which  were  raised  to  the  rank
of  municipia  ;  the  term  Latini  also  included  the
numerous  Coloniae  Latinae.  'A.  Socii,  that  is,  the
i'ree  inhabitants  of  Italy,  who  were  not  included
in  1  or  2.  4.  Provinciales,  or  tjie  free  subjects  of
Rome  beyond  the  limits  of  Italy.  But  these  four
descriptions  of  persons  were  all  comprehended  under
Cives  and  Peregrini  ;  for  the  term  peregrini  com-
prehended numbers  2,  3,  and  4.

After  the  Social  war,  and  in  B.  c.  90,  by  a  lex
Julia  the  Roman  citizenship  was  extended  to  all
Italy,  properly  so  called,  and  even  to  Gallia  Cis-
padana.  The  consequence  of  this  change  was  that
the  Socii  and  Latini  were  merged  in  the  class  of
cives  Romani,  and  there  remained  only  cives  and
provinciales,  but  the  provinciales  were  still  pere-
grini. It  was  at  this  time  apparently  that  the
class  of  Latini  was  established,  which  did  not,  as
formerly,  denote  a  people,  but  an  artificial  class  of
persons  with  a  particular  legal  capacity.  This
legal  capacity  or  half  citizenship,  as  already  ex-
plained, consisted  in  the  possession  of  the  Com-
mercium without  the  Connubium.  One  object  of
forming  this  new  class  was  apparently  to  prepare  a
gradual  transition  to  the  full  civitas  for  such  pere-
grini as  the  state  might  wish  to  favour.  The  con-
dition of  the  class  of  Latini  was  expressed  by  the
term  Latinitas  or  Jus  Latii,     [Latinitas.]

From  this  time  there  existed  the  three  classes,
described  by  Gains  and  Ulpian — Cives,  Latini,  and
Peregrini :  cives  with  commercium  and  connubium,
Latini  with  commercium  only,  and  peregrini  with-
out either.  Only  the  cives  had  the  political  rights,
the  sufiragium  and  honores.  The  names  of  the
three  chisses  existed  to  the  time  of  Justinian's
legislation.

The  rights  of  a  Roman  citizen  were  acquired  in
several  ways,  but  most  commonly  by  a  person
being  born  of  parents  who  were  Roman  citizens.
A  Roman  pater  familias,  filius  familias,  mater
familias,  and  filia  familias  were  all  cives,  though
the  first  only  was  sui  juris  and  the  rest  were  not.
If  a  Roman  citizen  married  a  Latina  or  a  pere-
grina,  believing  her  to  be  a  Roman  citizen,  and
begot  a  child,  this  child  was  not  in  the  power  of
his  father,  because  he  was  not  a  Roman  citizen,
but  the  child  was  either  a  Latinus  or  a  peregrinus
according  to  the  condition  of  his  mother ;  and  no
child  followed  the  condition  of  his  father  without
there  was  connubium  between  his  father  and
mother.  By  a  senatus-consultum,  the  parents  were
allowed  to  prove  their  mistake  (causam  crroris
probare)  ;  and,  on  this  being  done,  both  the  mother
and  the  child  became  Roman  citizens,  and,  as  a
consequence,  the  son  was  in  the  power  of  the
father.  (Gaius,  i.  67.)  Other  cases  relating  to  the
matter  called  causae  probatio  are  stated  by  Gaius
(i.  29,  &c. ;  i.  QQ^  &c.),  from  which  it  appears  that
the  facilities  for  obtaining  the  Roman  civitas  were
gradually  extended.  (See  also  Ulp.  Frag,  tit  3.
De  Latinis.)

A  slave  might  obtain  the  civitas  by  manumis-
sion {vindicfa\  by  the  census,  and  by  a  testa-
mentum,  if  there  was  no  legal  impediment ;  but  it
depended  on  circumstances,  as  already  stated,
whether  he  became  a  Civis  Romanus,  a  Latinus,
or  in  the  number  of  the  peregrini  dediticii.
[Manumissio.]

Under  the  republic  and  before  the  Social  war,  the
civitas  could,  of  course,  be  conferred  by  a  lex,  and


C I  VITA  a

upon  such  temis  as  the  lex  declared.  (Liv.  vi.  4  ;
and  in  the  case  of  the  Ferentinates,  Liv.  xxxiv.  42;
Cicero,  p7-o  Balho,  13.)  The  Julia  lex,  b.  c.  90,
was  a  comprehensive  measure.  Cicero,  however
(pro  Balbo,  c.  8),  remarks  that  many  of  the  people
of  Heracleia  and  Neapolis  made  some  opposition  to
accepting  the  terms  oifered  by  the  lex,  and  would
have  preferred  their  former  relation  to  Rome  as
civitates  foederatae  (foederis  sui  libertatem)  to  the
Roman  civitas.  The  lex  gave  the  Roman  civitas
not  only  to  the  natives  of  the  Italian  towns,  but
also  to  natives  of  towns  out  of  Italy,  who  had  be-
come citizens  of  Italian  towns  before  the  lex  was
enacted.  Thus  L.  Manlius  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  xiii.  30),
a  native  of  Catina,  in  Sicily,  obtained  the  Roman
civitas  by  virtue  of  having  been  enrolled  as  a  citizen
of  Neapolis  (erat  enim  in  id  municipium  adscrip'
tus)  before  the  passing  of  the  lex.  The  lex
Plautia  Papiria,  which  was  proposed  by  the  tri-
bunes M.  Plautius  Silvanus  and  C.  Papirius  Carbo,
u.  c.  89,  contained  a  provision  that  persons,  who
had  been  enrolled  as  citizens  of  the  foederatae
civitates,  and  who  had  a  domicile  in  Italy  at  the
time  when  the  law  was  passed,  should  have  the
Roman  civitas,  if  they  gave  in  their  names  to  the
praetor  within  sixty  days  (apud  praetorem  cssent
pro/essi,  Cic.  pro  Archia,  c.  4).  Archias  claimed
the  benefit  of  this  lex  as  having  been  enrolled  a
citizen  of  Heraclea,  and  having  in  the  other  re-
spects complied  with  the  lex.  The  case  of  L.
Manlius  appears  to  show  that  the  lex  Julia  applied
to  persons  not  natives  of  an  Italian  town  if  they
had  become  citizens  of  sucli  town  before  the  pass-
ing of  the  lex  ;  and  it  is  not  clear  Avhat  was  the
precise  object  of  the  lex  Plautia  Papiria,  whether
merely  to  explain  or  to  limit  the  operation  of  the
Julia  lex.  If  the  Julia  lex  merely  declared  that
those  who  were  adscripti  in  the  Italian  towns
before  the  passing  of  the  lex  should  acquire  the
Roman  civitas,  it  would  be  necessary  to  provide
some  security  against  fraudulent  registrations  which
might  be  made  after  the  passing  of  the  -lex,
and  this  would  be  eifected  by  requiring  adscripti
to  give  in  their  names  at  Rome  within  the  sixty
day  3.^

With  the  establishment  of  the  imperial  pbwer,
the  political  rights  of  Roman  citizens  became  in-
significant, and  the  commercium  and  the  connu-
bium  were  the  only  parts  of  the  civitas  that  were
valuable.  The  constitution  of  Antoninus  Caracalla,
which  gave  the  civitas  to  all  the  Roman  world,  ap-
plied only  to  communities  and  not  to  individuals  ;
its  effect  was.  to  make  all  the  cities  in  the  empire
municipia,  and  all  Latini  into  cives.  The  distinc-
tion of  cives  and  Latini,  from  this  time  forward,
only  applied  to  individuals,  namely,  to  freedmen
and  their  children.  The  peregrinitas  in  like  man-
ner ceased  to  be  applicable  to  communities,  and
only  existed  in  the  dediticii  as  a  class  of  individuals.
The  legislation  of  Justinian  finally  put  an  end  to
what  remained  of  this  ancient  division  into  classes,

I    and  the  only  division  of  persons  was  into  subjects

!    of  the  Caesar  and  slaves.

I  The  word  civitas  is  often  used  by  the  Roman
writers  to  express  any  political  community,  as
Civitas  Antiochiensium,  &c.

(&a,\ignj,Ze{tschri/i,  &c.  vol.  v.,  Ueher  die  Entste-
hung,&.c.,derLatinitat;  \ol  {x.,DerR'6inische  Volks-
scMuss  der  Tafel  von  Heraklea;  vol.  xi.,  NacMr'dc/e
zufriiherenArbeitcji;  and  Savigny, ^Vs^evtt  des  Imi-

I    tigen  Romischcn  Redds,  vol.  ii.  p.  23,  &c.     [G.  L.]


CLAVUS  LATUS..  2D3

CLANDESTI'NA   POSSE'SSIO.     [Inter-

OICTUM.]

CLARIGA'TIO.     [Fktiales.]

CLASSES.     [CoMiTiA.]

CLASSIA'RIL     [ExERciTUS.]

CLA'SSICUM.     [CoRNu.]

CLATHRI.     [DoMUs.]

CLAVIS.     [Janua.]

CLAUSTRUM.     [Janua.]

CLAVUS  ANNA'LIS.  In  the  early  agea  of
Rome,  when  letters  were  yet  scarcely  in  use,  the
Romans  kept  a  reckoning  of  their  years  by  driving
a  nail  (clavus),  on  the  ides  of  each  September,  into
the  side  wall  of  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Optimus
Maximus,  which  ceremony  Avas  performed  by  the
consul  or  a  dictator.  (Festus,  s.  v.  Clav.  AnnaL;
Liv.  vii.  3,  viii.  18,  ix.  28  ;  Cic.  ad  Ati.  v.  15.)

CLAVUS  GUBERNA'CULI.     [Navis.]

CLAVUS  LATUS,  CLAVUS  ANGUSTUS.
The  meaning  of  these  words  has  given  rise  to
much  dispute  ;  but  it  is  now  established  beyond
doubt  that  the  clavus  laius  was  a  broad  purple
band,  extending  perpendicularly  from  the  neck
down  the  centre  of  the  tunica,  and  that  the  clavus
angushis  consisted  of  two  narrow  purple  slips,  run-
ning parallel  to  each  other  from  the  top  to  the
bottom  of  the  tunic,  one  from  each  shoulder.  Hence
we  find  the  tunic  called  the  tunica  laticlavia  and
angustidavia.  These  purple  stripes  were  woven
into  the  tunic  (Plin.  //.  N.  viii.  48) ;  and  this  cir-
cumstance accounts  for  the  fact  that  the  clavus  is
never  represented  in  works  of  sculpture.  It  only
occurs  in  paintings,  and  those  too  of  a  very  late
period.  The  davus  laius  is  represented  in  the  an-
nexed cut,  which  is  copied  from  a  painting   of


Rome  personified,  formerly  belonging  to  the  Bar-
berini  family.  The  davus  angustus  is  seen  m  the
three  figures  introduced  below,  all  of  which  are
taken  from  sepulchral  paintings  executed  subse-
quently to  the  introduction  of  Christianity  at
Rome.  The  female  figure  on  the  left  hand,  which
is  copied  from  Buonarotti  (Osservazioni  sopra
alcuni  Frammenti  di  Vast  antidii  di  Vetro,  tav.
xxix.  fig.  1),  represents  the  goddess  Moneta,  The
one  on  the  right  hand  is  from  a  cemetery  on  the
Via  Salara  Nova,  and  represents  Priscilla,  an  early
martyr.  The  next  figure  is  selected  from  three  of
a  similar  kind,  representing  Shadrach,  Meshach,
u  3


294


CLAVUS  LATUS.


and  Abednego,  from  the  tomb  of  Pope  Callisto  on
the  Via  Appia.


The  latus  clavus  was  a  distinctive  badge  of  the
senatorian  order  {latum  demisit  peciore  clavum^
Hor.  Sat.  i.  6.  28;  Ovid,  Trist.  iv.  10.  35):  and
hence  it  is  used  to  signify  the  senatorial  dignity-
(Suet.  Tih.  35,  Vesp.  2,  4)  ;  and  laticlavius,  for
the  person  who  enjoys  it.  (Suet.  Atig.  38.)  In
distinction  to  the  angustus  clavus,  it  is  termed
purpura  major  (Juv.  Sat.  i.  106),  purpura  latior
(Plin.  //.  iV".  xxxiii.  7)  ;  and  the  garment  it  de-
corated, tunica  potens  (Stat.  Si/Iv.  v.  2.  29).  The
tunica  latidavia  was  not  fastened  round  the  waist
like  the  common  timic,  but  left  loose,  in  order  that
the  clavus  might  lie  flat  and  conspicuously  over
the  chest.     (Quinctil.  xi.  3.  §  138.)

The  angustus  clavus  was  the  decoration  of  the
equestrian  order  ;  but  the  right  of  wearing  the
latus  clavus  was  also  given  to  the  children  of
equestrians  (Ovid.  Trist.  iv.  10.  29),  at  least  in
the  time  of  Augustus,  r.s  a  prelude  to  entering  the
senate-house.  This,  however,  was  a  matter  of
personal  indulgence,  and  not  of  individual  right  ;
for  it  was  granted  only  to  persona  of  very  ancient
family,  and  corresponding  wealth  (Stat.  Si/lv.  iv.  8.
59  ;  Dig.  24.  tit.  1 .  s.  42),  and  then  by  special
favour  of  the  emperor.  (Suet.  Vesp.  2;  Tacit.  Ann.
xvi.  1 7 ;  Plin.  Epist.  ii.  9.)  In  such  cases  the
latus  clavus  was  assumed  with  the  toga  virilis,  and
worn  until  the  age  arrived  at  which  the  young
equestrian  was  admissible  into  the  senate,  when  it
was  relinquished  and  the  angustus  clavus  resumed,
if  a  disindination  on  his  part,  or  any  other  circum-
stances, prevented  him  from  entering  the  senate,  as
was  the  case  with  Ovid  (oompare  Inst.  iv.  10.  27,


CLIENS.

with  35).  But  it  seems  that  the  latus  clavus  could
be  again  resumed  if  the  same  individual  subse-
quently wished  to  become  a  senator  (Hor.  Sat.  i.  6.
25),  and  hence  a  fickle  character  is  designated  as
one  who  is  alwavs  changing  his  cla^-us  (Hor.  Sat.
ii.7.  10).

The  latus  clavus  is  said  to  have  been  introduced
at  Rome  by  Tullus  Hostilius,  and  to  have  been
adopted  by  him  after  his  conquest  of  the  Etruscans
(Plin.  H.N.  ix.  63)  ;  nor  does  it  appear  to  have
been  confined  to  any  particular  class  during  the
earlier  periods,  but  to  have  been  worn  by  all  ranks
promiscuously.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii.  7.)  It  was
laid  aside  in  public  mourning.    (Liv.  ix.  7.)  [A.  R.]

CLEPSYDRA.     [Horologium.]

CLERU'CHI  {KX-npovxoi).    [Colonia.]

CLERUS  {KKripos).    [Heres.]

CLETE'RES  or  CLE'TORES  (kXtitvp^s  or
K\r}Top€s),  summoners.  The  Athenian  summoners
were  not  official  persons,  but  merely  witnesses  to
the  prosecutor  that  he  had  served  the  defendant
with  a  notice  of  the  action  brought  against  him,
and  the  day  upon  which  it  would  be  requisite  for
him  to  appear  before  the  proper  magistrate,  in  order
that  the  first  examination  of  the  case  might  com-
mence. (Harpocrat.)  In  Aristophanes  {Nub.  1246,
Vesp.  1408)  we  read  of  one  summoner  only  being
employed,  but  two  are  generally  mentioned  by  the
orators  as  the  usual  number.  (Dem.  e.  Nicost.
p.  1251.  5,  pro  Coron.  244.  4,  c.  Boeot.  p.  1017.
6.)  The  names  of  the  sinnmoners  were  subscribed
to  the  declaration  or  bill  of  the  prosecutor,  and
were,  of  course,  essential  to  the  validity  of  all  pro-
ceedings ibunded  upon  it.  What  has  been  hitherto
stated  applies  in  general  to  all  causes,  whether  Si/coi
or  ypacpai :  but  in  some  which  commenced  with  an
information  laid  before  magistrates,  and  an  arrest  of
the  accused  in  consequence  (as  in  the  case  of  an
evSgjIts  or  eiVa776Ata),  there  would  be  no  occasion
for  a  summons,  nor,  of  course,  witnesses  to  its  ser-
vice. In  the  ivQvvai  and  SoKifj-aaiai  also,  when
held  at  the  regular  times,  no  summons  was  issued,
as  the  persons  whose  character  might  be  affected
by  an  accusation  were  necessarily  present,  or  pre-
sumed to  be  so  ;  but  if  the  prosecutor  had  let  the
proper  day  pass,  and  proposed  to  hold  a  special
eiiOvuT}  at  any  other  time  during  the  year  in  which
the  defendant  was  liable  to  be  called  to  account  for
his  conduct  in  office  {inrevOvvos),  the  agency  of
summoners  was  as  requisite  as  in  any  other  case.
Of  the  SoKifxacriai  that  of  the  orators  alone  had  no
fixed  time  ;  but  the  first  step  in  the  cause  was  not
the  usual  legal  summons  (TrpJcr/cATjo-ts),  but  an
announcement  from  the  prosecutor  to  the  accused
in  the  assembly  of  the  people.  (Meier,  Att.  Pro-
cess, pp.  212,  575.)  In  the  evert  of  persons  sub-
scribing themselves  falsely  as  summoners,  they
exposed  themselves  to  an  action  {tl/€vSoK\r)Telas)
at  the  suit  of  the  party  aggrieved.         [J.  S.  M.]

CLIBANA'RII.     [Cataphracti.]

CLIENS  is  supposed  to  contain  the  same  ele-
ment as  the  verb  cluere,  to  "  hear  "  or  "  obey,'"  and
is  accordingly  compared  by  Niebuhr  with  the  Ger-
man word  hoeriger^  "  a  dependant.'"

In  the  time  of  Cicero,  we  find  patronus  in  the
sense  of  adviser,  advocate,  or  defender,  opposed  to
cliens  in  the  sense  of  the  person  defended,  or  the
consultor  ;  and  this  use  of  the  word  must  be  re-
ferred, as  we  shall  see,  to  the  original  character  of
the  patronus.  (Ovid.  Art.  Am.  i.  88  ;  Hor.  Sat.  i.
1.  10,  Ep.  i.  5.  31,  ii.  1.  104.)     The  relation  of  a


I


CLIENS.

master  to  his  liberated  slave  (libertus)  was  also  ex-
pressed by  the  word  patronus,  and  the  libertus  was
the  cliens  of  his  patronus.  Any  Roman  citizen
who  wanted  a  protector,  might  attach  himself  to  a
patronus,  and  v/ould  thenceforward  be  a  cliens.
Strangers  who  came  into  exilium  at  Rome  might
do  the  same  (jus  opplicationisy  Cic.  de  Or.  i.  39).
Distinguished  Romans  were  also  sometimes  the
patroni  of  states  and  cities,  which  were  in  a  cer-
tjiin  relation  of  subjection  or  friendship  to  Rome
(Sueton.  Oetavian.  Caesar^  17)  ;  and  in  this  re-
spect they  may  be  compared  to  colonial  agents,  or
persons  among  us,  who  are  employed  to  look  after
the  interests  of  the  colony  in  the  mother  country  ;
except  that  among  the  Romans  such  services  were
never  remunerated  directly,  though  there  might  be
an  indirect  remuneration.  (Cic.  Div.  20,  Pro
Sulla,  c.  21  ;  Tacit.  Or.  36.)  This  relationship
between  patronus  and  cliens  was  expressed  by  the
word  Clientda  (Cic.  ad  Att.  xiv.  12),  which  also
expressed  the  whole  body  of  a  mane's  clients.
(Tacit.  ^m«.  xiv.  61.)  In  the  Greek  writers  on
Roman  history,  patronus  is  represented  by  irpocfTd-
TTjs :  and  client,  by  ireAciTTjs.  (Pint.  Til>.  Gracch.
13,  Marius,  5.)

The  clientela,  but  in  a  different  form,  existed  as
far  back  as  the  records  or  traditions  of  Roman
history  extend  ;  and  the  following  is  a  brief  notice
of  its  origin  and  character,  as  stated  by  Dionysius
(Antiq.  Bom,,  ii.  9),  in  which  the  writer's  tenns
are  kept :  —

Romulus  gave  to  the  evTrarpidai  the  care  of  re-
ligion, the  honores  (apx^"')*  the  administration  of
justice,  and  the  administration  of  the  state.  The
STjfiOTiKol  (whom  in  the  preceding  chapter  he  has
explained  to  be  the  TrATj&eiot)  had  none  of  these
privileges,  and  they  were  also  poor  ;  husbandry
and  the  necessary  arts  of  life  were  their  occupation.
Romulus  thus  entrusted  the  ZyifxoriKoi  to  the  safe
keeping  of  the  iraTpiKioi  (who  are  the  einrarpiSai),
and  permitted  each  of  them  to  choose  his  patron.
This  relationship  between  the  patron  and  the  client
was  called,  says  Dionysius,  patronia.  (Compare
Cic.  Rep.  ii.  9.)

The  relative  rights  and  duties  of  the  patrons  and
the  clients  were,  according  to  Dionysius,  as  follow
(Dionys.  ii.  1 0,  and  other  passages)  :  —

The  patron  was  the  legal  adviser  of  the  cliens  ;
he  was  the  client's  guardian  and  protector,  as  he
was  the  guardian  and  protector  of  his  own  children  ;
he  maintained  the  client's  suit  when  he  was  wronged,
and  defended  him  when  another  complained  of
being  wronged  by  him:  in  a  word,  the  patron  was
the  guardian  of  the  client's  interest,  both  private
and  public.  The  client  contributed  to  the  marriage
portion  of  the  patron's  daughter,  if  the  patron  was
poor  ;  and  to  his  ransom,  or  that  of  his  children,  if
they  were  taken  prisoners  ;  he  paid  the  costs  and
damages  of  a  suit  which  the  patron  lost,  and  of
any  penalty  in  which  he  was  condemned  ;  he  bore
a  part  of  the  patron's  expenses  incurred  by  his  dis-
charging public  duties,  or  filling  the  honourable
places  in  the  state.  Neither  party  could  accuse  the
other,  or  bear  testimony  against  the  other,  or  give
his  vote  against  the  other.  The  clients  accom-
panied their  patroni  to  war  as  vassals.  (Dionys.  x.
43.)  This  relationship  between  patron  and  client
subsisted  for  many  generations,  and  resembled  in
all  respects  the  relationship  by  blood.  It  was  a
<;onnection  that  was  hereditary  ;  the  cliens  bore  the
gentile  name  of  the  patronus,  and  he  and  his  de-


CLIENS.


2S5


scendants  were  thus  connected  with  the  gens  of  the
patronus.  It  was  the  glory  of  illustrious  families  to
have  many  clients,  and  to  add  to  the  number
transmitted  to  them  by  their  ancestors.  But  the
client_s  were  not  limited  to  the  St^/jlotiko'i  :  the
colonies,  and  the  states  connected  with  Rome  bv
alliance  and  friendship,  and  the  conquered  states,
had  their  patrons  at  Rome  ;  and  the  senate  fre-
quently referred  the  disputes  between  such  states
to  their  patrons,  and  abided  by  their  decision.

Dionysius  gives  a  tolerably  intelligible  statement,
whether  true  or  false,  of  the  relation  ofa  patron  and
client.  What  persons  actually  composed  the  body
of  clients,  or  what  was  the  real  historical  origin  of
the  clientela,  is  immaterial  for  the  purpose  of  un-
derstanding what  it  was.  It  is  clear  that  Dio-
nysius understood  the  Roman  state  as  originally
consisting  of  patricii  and  plebeii,  and  he  has  said
that  the  clients  were  the  plebs.  Now  it  appears,
from  his  own  work  and  from  Livy,  that  there  were
clientes  who  were  not  the  plebs,  or,  in  other  words,
clientes  and  plebs  were  not  convertible  terms.  This
passage,  then,  has  little  historical  value  as  ex-
plaining the  origin  of  the  clients.  Still  something
may  be  extracted  from  the  passage,  though  it  is
impossible  to  reconcile  it  altogether  with  all  other
evidence.  The  clients  were  not  servi :  they  had
property  of  their  own,  and  freedom  (Jibertas).  Con-
sistently with  what  Dionysius  says,  they  might  be
Roman  citizens  in  the  wider  sense  of  the  terra  civis,
enjoying  only  the  commercium  and  connubium,  but
not  the  suffragium  and  honores,  which  belonged  to
their  patroni.  [Civitas.]  It  would  also  be  con-
sistent with  the  statement  of  Dionysius,  that  there
were  free  men  in  the  state  who  were  not  patricii,
and  not  clientes ;  but  if  such  persons  existed  in
the  earliest  period  of  the  Roman  state,  they  must
have  laboured  under  great  civil  disabilities,  and
this  also  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  testimony  of
histoiy.  Such  a  body,  if  it  existed,  must  have
been  powerless  ;  but  such  a  body  might  in  various
Avays  increase  in  numbers  and  wealth,  and  grow
up  into  an  estate,  such  as  the  plebs  afterwards  was.
The  body  of  clientes  might  include  freedmen,  as  it
certfiinly  did :  but  it  seems  an  assumption  of  what
requires  proof,  to  infer  (as  Niebuhr  does)  that,
because  a  patronus  could  put  his  freedman  to  death,
he  could  do  the  same  to  a  client ;  for  this  involves
a  tacit  assumption  that  the  clients  were  originally
slaves  ;  and  this  may  be  true,  but  it  is  not  known.
Besides,  it  cannot  be  true  that  a  patron  had  the
power  of  life  and  death  over  his  freedman,  who
had  obtained  the  civitas,  any  more  than  he  had
over  an  emancipated  son.  There  is  also  no  proof
that  the  clientela  in  which  libcrti  stood  was  here-
ditary' like  that  of  the  proper  clients.  The  body
of  clientes  might,  consistently  with  all  that  we
know,  contain  peregrini,  who  had  no  privileges  at
all  ;  and  it  might  contain  that  class  of  persons  who
had  the  commercium  only,  if  the  commercium  ex-
isted in  the  early  ages  of  the  state.  [Civitas.]
The  latter  class  of  persons  would  require  a  patronus
to  whom  they  might  attach  themselves  for  the  pro-
tection of  their  property,  and  who  might  sue  and
defend  them  in  all  suits,  on  accoimt  of  the  (here
assumed)  inability  of  such  persons  to  sue  in  their
own  name  in  the  early  ages  of  Rome.

The  relation  of  the  patronus  to  the  cliens,  as  re-
presented by  Dionysius,  has  an  analogy  to  the
patria  potestas,  and  the  form  of  the  word  patronus,
is  consistent  with  this.

17  4  I


296


CLIENS.


It  is  stated  by  Niebuhr,  that  "  if  a  client  died
without  heirs,  his  patron  inherited  ;  and  tliis  law
extended  to  the  case  of  freedmen  ;  the  power  of
the  patron  over  whom  must  certainly  have  been
founded  originally  on  the  general  patronal  right."
This  statement,  if  it  be  correct,  would  be  consistent
with  the  quasi  patria  potestas  of  the  patronus.

But  if  a  cliens  died  with  heirs,  could  ho  make  a
will  ?  and  if  he  died  loithout  heirs,  could  he  not
dispose  of  his  property  by  will  ?  and  if  he  could
not  make,  or  did  not  make  a  will,  and  had  heirs,
who  must  they  be  ?  must  they  be  mi  heredes  ?
had  he  a  familia,  and  consequently  agnati  ?  had
he,  in  fact,  that  connubium,  by  virtue  of  which  he
could  acquire  the  patria  potestas  ?  He  might  have
all  this  consistently  with  the  statement  of  Diony-
sius,  and  yet  be  a  citizen  non  optimo  jure  ;  for  he
had  not  the  honores  and  the  other  distinguishing
privileges  of  the  patricii  ;  and  consistently  with
the  statement  of  Dionysius  he  could  not  vote  in
the  comitia  curiata.  It  is  not  possible  to  prove
that  a  cliens  had  all  this,  and  it  seems  equally  im-
possible, from  existing  evidence,  to  show  what  his
rights  really  were.  So  far  as  our  extant  ancient
authorities  show,  the  origin  of  the  clientela,  and  its
true  character,  were  unknown  to  them.  There
was  a  body  in  the  Roman  state,  at  an  early  period
of  its  existence,  which  was  neither  patrician  nor
client,  and  a  body  which  once  did  not,  but  ulti-
mately did,  participate  in  the  sovereign  power :
this  v/as  the  plebs.  The  clientes  also  existed  in  the
earliest  period  of  the  Roman  state,  but  our  know-
ledge of  the  true  condition  of  this  body  must  re-
main inexact,  for  the  want  of  sufficient  evidence  in
amount,  and  sufficiently  trustworthy.

It  is  stated  by  Livy  (ii.  56)  that  the  clientes
had  votes  in  the  comitia  of  the  centuries :  they
Avere  therefore  registered  in  the  censors'  books,
and  could  have  quiritarian  ownership.  [Centum-
VIRI.]  They  had  therefore  the  commercium,  pos-
sibly the  connubium,  and  certainly  the  suffragium.
It  may  be  doubted  whether  Dionysius  understood
them  to  have  the  suffragium  at  the  comitia  centu-
riata  ;  but  if  such  was  the  legal  condition  of  the
clientes,  it  is  impossible  that  the  exposition  of  their
relation  to  the  patricians,  as  given  by  some  modern
writers,  can  be  altogether  correct.

It  would  appear,  from  what  has  been  stated,
that  patronus  and  patricius  were  originally  con-
vertible terms,  at  least  until  the  plebs  obtained
the  honores.  From  that  time,  many  of  the  reasons
for  a  person  being  a  cliens  of  a  patricius  would
cease  ;  for  the  plebeians  had  acquired  political  im-
portance, had  become  acquainted  with  the  law  and
the  legal  forms,  and  were  fully  competent  to  advise
their  clients.  This  change  must  have  contributed
to  the  destruction  of  the  strict  old  clientela,  and
was  the  transition  to  the  clientela  of  the  later  ages
of  the  republic.  ( Hugo,  Tjihrhuch^  &c.  vol.  i.  p.  45 8.)

It  has  been  conjectured  (Becker,  Handhucli  der
Rojnischen  Allerthiimer,  vol.  ii.  p.  125)  that  the
clientela  was  an  old  Italian  institution,  which  ex-
isted among  some  of  those  people,  out  of  which  the
Romanus  Populug  arose.  When  Tatius  and  his
Sabines  settled  in  Rome,  their  clients  settled  there
with  them  (Dionys.  ii.  46)  ;  and  Attius  Clausus
brought  to  Rome  a  large  body  of  clients.  (Li v.  ii.
16  ;  Dionys.  v.  40).  It  is  further  conjectured,
and  it  is  not  improbable,  that  the  clientes  were
Italians,  who  had  been  conquered  and  reduced  to
fi,  ftate  of  subjection.


CLIMA.

Admitting  a  distinction  between  the  plebs  and
the  old  clientes  to  be  fully  established,  there  is
still  room  for  careful  investigation  as  to  the  real
condition  of  the  clientes,  and  of  the  composition  of
the  Roman  state  before  the  estate  of  the  plebs  was
made  equal  to  that  of  the  patricians.        [G.  L.]

CLIENTE'LA.     [Cliens.]

CLIMA  {K\l/xa),  literally  a  slope  or  inclination,
was  used  in  the  mathematical  geography  of  the
Greeks*  with  reference  to  the  inclination  of  various
parts  of  the  earth's  surface  to  the  plane  of  the
equator.  Before  the  globular  figure  of  the  eartli
was  knoAVTi,  it  was  supposed  that  there  was  a
general  slope  of  its  surface  from  south  to  north,
and  this  was  called  Khifia.  But  as  the  science  of
mathematical  geography  advanced,  the  word  was
applied  to  different  belts  of  the  earth's  surface,
which  were  determined  by  the  different  lengths  of
the  longest  day  at  their  lines  of  demarcation.
This  division  into  climates  was  applied  only  to
the  northern  hemisphere,  as  the  geographers  had
no  practical  knowledge  of  the  earth  south  of  the
equator.

Hipparchus  (about  b.  c.  160)  seems  to  have
been  the  first  who  made  use  of  this  division  ;  his
system  is  explained  at  length  by  Strabo  (ii.
p.  132).  Assuming  the  circumference  of  a  great
circle  of  the  earth  to  be  252,000  stadia,  Hipparchus
divided  this  into  360  degrees,  of  700  stadia  to
each  ;  and  then,  beginning  at  the  parallel  of  Meroe,
and  proceeding  northwards,  he  undertook  to  de-
scribe the  astronomical  phenomena  observed  at  each
degree  of  latitude,  or  every  700  stadia:  among
these  phenomena,  he  observed  that  the  length  of
the  longest  day  at  Meroe  was  13  hours,  and  at
Syene  13^.  The  observations  of  later  astronomers
and  geographers,  such  as  Geminus,  Strabo,  Pliny,
and  Ptolemy,  are  described  in  the  works  cited
below.  The  following  table,  from  Ukert,  shows
the  climates,  as  given  by  Ptolemy  {Geogr.  i.  23).
It  will  be  obserN'ed  that  there  are  nineteen  climates,
the  beginning  and  middle  of  which  are  marked  by
lines  called  parallels,  of  which  the  first  marks  the
equator,  and  the  thirty-third  the  arctic  circle.  Up
to  this  point,  there  are  sixteen  climates,  of  which
twelve  are  determined  by  the  increase  of  half-aii-
hour  in  the  length  of  the  longest  day,  the  1 3th
and  14th  1  hour,  and  the  15th  and  16th  2  hours.
In  the  remaining  climates,  within  the  arctic  circle,
the  days  no  longer  increase  by  hours  but  by
months.  Elsewhere  {Almag.  ii.  6)  he  makes
ten  climates  north  of  the  equator,  beginning  at  the
parallel  of  Tnprobane  in  lat.  4°  15',  and  ending  at
that  of  Thule,  in  lat.  63°  ;  and  one  to  the  south,
beginning  at  the  equator,  or  the  parallel  of  Cape
Raptum,  and  ending  at  the  parallel  of  Antimeroe
in  lat.  16°  25'.

The  term  KXlfxa  was  afterwards  applied  to  the
average  temperature  of  each  of  these  regions,  and
hence  our  modern  use  of  the  word.  (Strab.  /.  c.  ;
Dion.  Hal.  i.  9  ;  Plut.  Mar.  11,  Aem.  Paul.  5,
Moral,  p.  891  ;  Polyb.  vii.  6.  §  1,  x.  1,  §  3  ;
Ath.  xii.  p.  523,  e.  ;  Gemin.  Elem.  Astron.  5  ;
Plin.  //.  A^.  ii.  70—75,  s.  73—77  ;  Agathem.  i.  3  ;
Cellar.  Geng.  i.  6  ;  Ukert,  Geog.  vol,  i.  pt.  2,
pp.  182,  &c.)  [P.  S.]


*  The  corresponding  Latin  word  is  inclinatio
(Vitruv.  i.  1),  also  declinatio,  devergentia  (comp.
Aul.  Gell.  xiv.  1  ;  Colum.  iii.  19).'  CUma  was
only  used  at  a  late  period.


<


CLIPEUS.


CLIPEUS.


2.07


Climate.

Parallel.

Longest  Day.

Latitude.

Passing  through

I.

1

o

12h.    Om.
12     15

0°
4

(y

15

Taprobane.

11.

3
4

12     30
12     4.5

8
12

25
30

Sinus  Avalites.
Adule  Sinus.

III.

5
6

13       0
13      15

16
20

27
14

Meroe.
Napata.

IV.

7
8

13     SO
13     45

23
27

51
12

Syene.

Ptolemais  in  Egypt.

V.

9

10

14       0
14     15

30
33

2
18

Lower  Egypt.

Middle  of  Phoenicia.                         1

VI.

11
12

14     30
14     45

36
38

0
35

Rhodus.
Smyrna.

VII.

13
14

15       0
15     15

40
43

56
41

Hellespont.
Massilia.

VIII.

15

16

15     30
15     45

45

46

1
51

Middle  of  the  Euxine.
Sources  of  the  Danube.

1     IX.

1

17
18

16       0
16      15

48
50

32
4

Mouth  of  the  Borysthenes.
Middle  of  the  Palus  Maeotis.

X.

19
20

16     30
16     45

51

52

40
50

Southern  Britain.
Mouths  of  the  Rhine.

XL

21
22

17       0
17     15

54
55

30
0

Mouths  of  the  Tanais.
The  Brigantes  in  Britain.

XII.

23
24

17     SO
17     45

56

51

0
0

Britannia  Magna.
Caturactonium  in  Britain.

XIII.

2.5

26

18       0
18     30

58
59

0

30

South  of  Britannia  Parva.
Middle  of  ditto

XIV.

27
28

J9       0
19     30

62

0

0

North  of  ditto
Ebudcs  Insulae.

XV.

29
SO

20  0

21  0

63
64

0
30

Thule.

Unknown  Scythian  Tribes.

XVI.

31
32

22  0

23  0

65
66

30
0

Unknown  Scythian  Tribes.

XVII.

33
34

24       0
1  month  about

66^
67°

8' 40"
15'

XVIII.

35
36

2

3

69
73

30
20

1

XIX.

1

37
38
39

4

5

6

78
84
90

20
0
0

1

CLI'PEL^S  (dflnri's),  the  large  shield  worn  by
the  Greeks  and  Romans,  which  was  originally  of  a
circular  form,  and  is  said  to  have  been  first  used  by
Proetus  and  Acrisius  of  Argos  (Paus.  ii.  25.  §  6),
and  therefore  is  called  clipeus  Argolicus  (Virg.  Aen.
iii.  637),  and  likened  to  the  sun.  (Compare  also
ao-TFiSa  TrauTocr'  itcniv,  Hom.  11.  iii.  347,  v.  453,
atririSas  (vkvkXovs,  xiv.  428  ;  Varr.  De  Ling.  Lat.
V.  1 9,  ed.  MUller  ;  Festus,  s.  v.)  According  to
other  accounts,  however,  the  Greeks  obtained  the


shield,  as  well  as  the  helmet,  from  the  Egyptians
(Herod,  iv.  180  ;  Plat.  Tim.  p.  24,  b.)

The  shield  used  by  the  Homeric  heroes  was
large  enough  to  cover  the  whole  man.  It  was
sometimes  made  of  osiers  twisted  together,  called
tVeo,  or  of  wood:  the  wood  or  wicker  was  then
covered  over  with  ox  hides  of  several  folds  deep,
and  finally  bound  round  the  edge  with  metal.
(Hom.  //.  xii.  295.)  The  outer  rim  is  termed
&vTv^  {11.  xviii.  479),  "irvs  (Eur.  Troad.  1203),


298  CLIPEUS.

7rept<f>4peia  oi  tvK\os  (IL  xi.  o3),    [Antyx.]


the  centre  was  a  projection  called  oix<pd\os  or
u€crofi<(>d\iov,  timlH),  which  served  as  a  sort  of
weapon  by  itself,  or  caused  the  missiles  of  the
enemy  to  glance  oiF  from  the  shield.  It  is  seen  in
the  next  woodcut,  from  the  column  of  Trajan.  A
spike,  or  some  other  prominent  excrescence,  was
sometimes  placed  upon  the  6fi<p<i\os,  which  was
called  itrofJi<lKi\iov,


In  the  Homeric  times,  the  Greeks  used  a  belt
to  support  the  shield  ;  but  this  custom  was  subse-
quently discontinued  in  consequence  of  its  great
inconvenience  [Balteus],  and  the  following  me-
thod was  adopted  in  its  stead :  —  A  band  of
metal,  wood,  or  leather,  termed  Kavwv,  was  placed
across  the  inside  from  rim  to  rim,  like  the  diameter
of  a  circle,  to  which  were  affixed  a  number  of


CLIPEUS.

small  iron  bars,  crossing  each  other  somewhat  in
the  form  of  the  letter  X,  which  met  the  arm  below
the  inner  bend  of  the  elbow  joint,  and  served  lo
steady  the  orb.  This  apparatus,  which  is  said  to
have  been  invented  by  the  Carians  (Herod,  i.  171),
was  termed  ^xavoj/  or  oxavv-  Around  the  inner
edge  ran  a  leather  thong  (TrJp7ra|),  fixed  by  nails
at  certain  distances,  so  that  it  formed  a  succession
of  loops  all  round,  which  the  soldier  grasped  with
his  hand  (ifJi€aX(i}V  TrSpiraKi  -yevvaiav  x^P"?  Eur.
Hd.  1 396).  The  preceding  woodcut,  which  shows
the  whole  apparatus,  will  render  this  account  in-
telligible. It  is  taken  from  one  of  the  terra  cotta
vases  published  by  Tischbein  (vol.  iv.  tab.  20).

At  the  close  of  a  war  it  was  customary  for  the
Greeks  to  suspend  their  shields  in  the  temples
when  the  irJpTraKes  Avere  taken  off,  in  order  to
render  them  unserviceable  in  case  of  any  sudden  or
popular  outbreak  ;  which  custom  accounts  for  the
alarm  of  Demosthenes  in  the  Knights  of  Aristo-
phanes (859),  when  he  saw  them  hanging  up  with
their  handles  on.

The  atnris  was  carried  by  the  heavy-armed  men
{birKtrai)  during  the  historical  times  of  Greece,
and  is  opposed  to  the  lighter  ttcAttj  and  ycpftov :
hence  we  find  the  word  acrirls  used  to  signify  a
body  of  6ir}uTai  (Xen.  Anab.  i.  7.  §  10).

According  to  Livy  (i.  43),  when  the  census  was
instituted  by  Servius  TuUius,  the  first  class  only
used  the  clipeus^  and  the  second  were  armed  with
the  scutum  [Scutum]  ;  but  after  the  Roman  sol-
dier received  pay,  the  clipeus  was  discontinued
altogether  for  the  Sabine  scutum.  (Liv,  viii.  8  ;
compare  ix.  19  ;  Plut.  Rom.  21  ;  Diod.  Eclog.
xxiii.  3,  who  asserts  that  the  original  form  of  the
Roman  shield  was  square,  and  that  it  was  subse-
quently changed  for  that  of  the  Tyn-henians,  which
was  round.)


The  practice  of  emblazoning  shields  with  various
devices,  the  origin  of  armorial  bearings,  is  of  con-
siderable antiquity.  It  is  mentioned  as  early  as
the  time  of  Aeschylus,  who  represents  the  seven
chiefs  who  marched  against  Thebes  with  such
shields  (Aeschyl.  Sept.  c.  llieh.  387,  &c.  ;  comp.
Virg.  Am.  viiL  658  ;  Sil.  Ital.  viii.  386).     This


CLOACA.

custom  is  illustrated  by  the  preceding  beautiful
gem  from  the  antique,  in  which  the  figure  of  Vic-
toiy  is  represented  inscribing  upon  a  dipeus  the
name  or  merits  of  some  deceased  hero.

Each  Ptoman  soldier  had  also  his  own  name  in-
scribed upon  his  shield,  in  order  that  he  might
readily  find  his  own  when  the  order  was  given  to
unpile  arms  (Veget.  ii.  17)  ;  and  sometimes  the
name  of  the  commander  under  whom  he  fought.
(Hirt.  Bell.  Alex.  58.)

The  dipeus  was  also  used  to  regulate  the
temperature  of  the  vapour  bath.  [Balneae,  p.
192,  a.]  [A.R.]

CLITELLAE,  a  pair  of  panniers,  and  there-
fore only  used  in  the  plural  number.  (Hor.  Sat.  i.
5.  47  ;  Plant.  Most.  iii.  2.  91.)  In  Italy  they
Avere  commonly  used  with  mules  or  asses,  but  in
other  countries  they  were  also  applied  to  horses,  of
which  an  instance  is  given  in  the  annexed  wood-
cut from  the  column  of  Trajan  ;  and  Plautus  {lb.
94)  figuratively  describes  a  man  upon  whose
shoulders  a  load  of  any  kind,  either  moral  or  phy-
sical, is  charged,  as  homo  ditellarius.       [A.  R.J


CLOACA.


299


CLOA'CA,  a  common  sewer.  The  term  cloaca
i.s  generally  used  in  reference  only  to  those  spacious
subterraneous  vaults,  either  of  stone  or  brick,
through  which  the  foul  waters  of  the  city,  as  well
as  all  the  streams  brought  to  Rome  by  the  aque-
ducts, finally  discharged  themselves  into  the
Tiber  ;  but  it  also  includes  within  its  meaning
any  smaller  drain,  either  wooden  pipes  or  clay
tubes  (Ulpian,  Dig.  43.  tit.  23.  s.  1),  with  which
almost  every  house  in  the  city  was  furnished  to
carry  off  its  impurities  into  the  main  conduit.
The  whole  city  was  thus  intersected  by  subter-
laneous  passages,  and  is  therefore  called  urbs
pensilis^  in  Pliny's  enthusiastic  description  of  the
doacae.  (77.  A^.  xxxvi.  15.  s.  24.)

The  most  celebrated  of  these  drains  was  the
doaca  viaxima,  the  construction  of  which  is  as-
cribi:;d  to  Tarquinius  Priscus  (Liv.  i.  38  ;  Plin.
I.  c),  and  which  was  formed  to  carry  off  the
waters  brought  down  from  the  adjacent  hills  into
the  Velabrura  and  valley  of  the  Forum.  The
stone  of  which  it  is  built  is  a  mark  of  the  great
antiquity  of  the  work  ;  it  is  not  the  peperino  of
Gabii  and  the  Alban  hills,  which  was  the  common
building- stone  in  the  time  of  the  commonwealth  ;
but  it  is  the  "  tufa  litoide  "  of  Brocchi,  one  of  the
volcanic  formations  which  is  found  in  many  places
in  Rome,  and  which  was  afterwards  supplanted  in
public  buildings  by  the  finer  quality  of  the  peperino.
(Arnold,  Hist.  Rom.  vol.  i.  p.  52.)  This  cloaca
was  formed  by  three  arches,  one  within  the  other,
the  innermost  of  which  is  a  semicircular  vault  of


18  Roman  palms,  about  14  feet  in  diameter,  each
of  the  hewn  blocks  being  7.i  palms  long  and  4J-
high,  and  joined  together  without  cement.  The
manner  of  construction  is  shown  in  the  annexed
woodcut,  taken  on  the  spot,  where  a  part  of  it  is
uncovered  near  the  arch  of  Janus  Quadrifrons.


The  mouth  where  it  reaches  the  Tiber,  nearly
opposite  to  one  extremity  of  the  insula  Tilierina^
still  remains  in  the  state  referred  to  by  Pliny  (/.  c).
It  is  represented  in  the  annexed  woodcut,  with  the
adjacent  buildings  as  they  still  exist,  the  modem
fabrics  only  which  encumber  the  site,  being  left
out.


The  passages  in  Strabo  and  Pliny  which  state
that  a  cart  {ayLala^  vehes)  loaded  with  hay,  could
pass  down  the  cloaca  maxima,  will  no  longer  ap-
pear incredible  from  the  dimensions  given  of  this
stupendous  work  ;  but  it  must  still  be  borne  in
mind  that  the  vehicles  of  the  Romans  were  much
smaller  than  our  own.  Dion  Cassius  also  states
(xlix.  43)  that  Agrippa,  when  he  cleansed  the
sewers,  passed  through  them  in  a  boat,  to  which
Pliny  probably  alludes  in  the  expression  urbs
subter  navigata;  and  their  extraordinary  dimen-
sions, as  well  as  that  of  the  embouchures  through
which  the  waters  poured  into  them,  is  still  further
testified  by  the  exploits  of  Nero,  who  threw  down
the  sewers  the  unfortunate  victims  of  his  nightly
riots.  (Suet.  Nero,  26  ;  compare  Dionys.  x.  53  ;
Cic.  Pro  Seoct.  35.)

The  doaca  maxima,  formed  by  Tarquin,  ex-
tended only  from  the  forum  to  the  river,  but  was
subsequently  continued  as  far  up  as  the  Subura,  of
which  branch  some  vestiges  were  discovered  in  the


300


KLOPES  DIKE.


year  1742.  (Venuti,  Antichita  di  Roma,  vol.  i.
p.  9S  ;  Ficoroni,  Vestigie  di  Roina,  pp.  74,  75.)
This  was  the  crypia  Suhurae  to  which  Juvenal
refers  {Sat.  v.  106.  Comp.  Did.  of  Gr.  and  Rom.
Geog.  art.  Roma.)

The  expense  of  cleansing  and  repairing  these
cloacae  was,  of  course,  very  great,  and  was  de-
frayed partly  by  the  treasury,  and  partly  by  an
assessment  called  cloacariwn.  (Ulpian,  Dig.  7.
tit.  1.  S.27.  §3.)  Under  the  republic,  the  ad-
ministration of  the  sewers  was  entrusted  to  the
censors  ;  but  under  the  empire,  particular  officers
Avere  appointed  for  that  piu^ose,  doacarum  cura-
tores,  mention  of  whom  is  found  in  inscriptions
(ap.  Grid.  p.  cxcvii.  5,  p.  cxcviii.  2,  3,  4,  5  ;
p.  cclii.  1  ;  Ulpian,  Dig.  43.  tit.  23.  s.  2).  The
emperors  employed  condemned  criminals  in  the
task.     (Plin.  Epist.  x.  41.)

Rome  was  not  the  only  city  celebrated  for
works  of  this  kind.  Diodorus  (xi.  25)  makes
special  mention  of  the  sewers  {inrSvo/xoL)  of  Agri-
gentura,  which  were  constructed  about  B.  c.  480,
by  an  architect  named  Phaeax,  after  whom  they
were  called  (paiaKes.  [A.  R.]

KLOPES  DIKE'  (icXoTrris  SiKTj),  the  action  for
theft  was  brought  in  the  usual  manner  before  a
diaetetes  or  a  court,  the  latter  of  which  Meier
(Ait.  Process,  p.  67)  infers  to  have  been  under
the  presidency  of  the  thesmothetae,  whether  the
prosecutor  preferred  his  accusation  by  way  of
ypacpi}  or  Sikt?.  We  learn  from  the  law  quoted
by  Demosthenes  (c.  Timocr.  p.  733),  that  the  cri-
minal upon  conviction  was  obliged  to  pay  twice
the  value  of  the  theft  to  the  plaintiff  if  the  latter
recovered  the  specific  thing  stolen  ;  that  failing  of
this,  he  was  bound  to  reimburse  him  tenfold,  that
the  court  might  inflict  an  additional  penalty,
and  that  the  criminal  might  be  confined  in  the
stocks  (TToSoKa/cKTj)  five  days  and  as  many  nights.
In  some  cases,  a  person  that  had  been  robbed  was
permitted  by  the  Attic  law  to  enter  the  house  in
which  he  suspected  his  property  was  concealed,
and  institute  a  search  for  it  {(pwpav,  Aristoph.
Nubes,  497  ;  Plat.  De  Leg.  xii.  p.  954)  ;  but  we
are  not  informed  what  powers  he  was  supplied
with  to  enforce  this  right.  Besides  the  above
mentioned  action,  a  prosecutor  might  proceed  by
way  of  ypa(pT),  and  when  the  delinquent  was  de-
tected in  the  act,  by  airayccy-f)  or  icp-f^yr^ais.  To
these,  however,  a  penalty  of  1000  drachmae  was
attached  in  case  the  prosecutor  failed  in  establish-
ing his  case  ;  so  that  a  diffident  plaintiff  would
often  consider  them  as  less  eligible  means  of  ob-
taining redress.  (Demosth.  c.  Androt.  p.  601.)  In
the  aggravated  cases  of  stealing  in  the  day  time
property  of  greater  amount  than  50  drachmae,  or
by  night  any  thing  whatsoever  (and  upon  this  oc-
casion the  owner  was  permitted  to  wound  and
even  kill  the  depredator  in  his  flight),  the  most
trifling  article  from  a  gymnasium,  or  any  thing
worth  1 0  drachmae  from  the  ports  or  public  baths,
the  law  expressly  directed  an  cnraydjyi]  to  the
Eleven,  and,  upon  conviction,  the  death  of  the
offender.  (Demosth.  c.  Timocr.  p.  736.  1.)  Tf  the
ypa<p'f]  were  adopted,  it  is  probable  that  the  punish-
ment was  fixed  by  the  court  ;  but  both  in  this
case,  and  in  that  of  conviction  in  a  d'lKr],  besides
restitution  of  the  stolen  property,  the  disfran-
chisement (ctTifxla)  of  the  criminal  would  be  a
necessary  incident  of  conviction.  (Meier,  Ait.
Promsh  p.  358.)  [J.  S.  M.J


COCHLEA.

COA  VESTIS,  the  Coan  cloth,  is  mentioned
by  various  Latin  authors,  but  most  frequently  and
distinctly  by  the  poets  of  the  Augustan  age.
(Tibull.  ii.  4,  ii.  6  ;  Propert.  i.  2,  ii.  1,  iv.  2,  iv.  5 ;
Hor.  Carm.  iv.  13.  13,  Sat.  i.  2.  101  ;  Ovid,  Ars
Am.  ii.  298.)  From  their  expressions  we  learn
that  it  had  a  great  degree  of  tnmsparency,  that  it
was  remarkably  fine,  that  it  was  chiefly  worn  by
women  of  loose  reputation,  and  that  it  was  some-
times dyed  purple  and  enriched  with  stripes  of
gold.  It  has  been  supposed  to  have  been  made  of
silk,  because  in  Cos  silk  was  spun  and  woven  at  a
very  early  period,  so  as  to  obtain  a  high  celebrity
for  the  manufactures  of  that  island.  ( Aristot.  Hist.
Anim.  v.  19.)  In  the  woodcut  under  Coma,  a
female  is  represented  wearing  a  robe  of  this
kind.  [J.  Y.J

COACTOR.  This  name  was  applied  to  col-
lectors of  various  sorts,  e.  g.  to  the  servants  of  the
publicani,  or  farmers  of  the  public  taxes,  who  col-
lected the  revenues  for  them  (Cic.  Pro  Rah.  Post.
11)  ;  also  to  those  who  collected  the  money  from
the  purchasers  of  things  sold  at  a  public  auction.
The  father  of  Horace  was  a  collector  of  the  taxes
farmed  by  the  publicani.  (Hor.  Sat.  i.  6.  86  ;
Suet.  Vit.  Hor.  init.)  Moreover,  the  servants
of  the  money-changers  were  so  called,  from  col-
lecting their  debts  for  them.  (Cic.  Pro  Cluent.
64.)  [R.  W.]

CO'CHLEA  {Kox><ia.s),  which  properly  means
a  snail,  was  also  used  to  signify  other  things  of  a
spiral  form.

1.  A  screw.  The  woodcut  annexed  represents
a  clothes-press,  from  a  painting  on  the  wall  of  the
Chalcidicum  of  Eumachia,  at  Pompeii,  which  is
worked  by  two  upright  screws  {cochleae)  precisely
in  the  same  manner  as  our  own  linen  presses.
(Mus.  Borbonico,  iv.  50.)


A  screw  of  the  same  description  was  also  used
in  oil  and  wine  presses.  (Vitruv,  vi.  9.  p.  180,  ed.
Bipont.  ;  Palladius,  iv.  10.  §  10,  ii.  19  §  1.)  The
thread  of  the  screw,  for  which  the  Latin  language
has  no  appropriate  term,  is  called  ir€piK6xf^iov  in
Greek.

2.  A  spiral  ptimp  for  raising  water,  invented  by
Archimedes  (Diod.  Sic.  i.  34,  v.  37  ;  compare
Strab.  xvii.  30),  from  whom  it  has  ever  since  been
called  the  Archimedean  screw.  It  is  described  at
length  by  Vitruvius  (x.  11).


CODEX.

3.  A  peculiar  kind  of  door,  through  which  the
wild  beasts  passed  from  their  dens  into  the  arena
of  the  amphitheatre.  (Varr.  De  Re  Rrtst.  iii.  5.
§  3.)  It  consisted  of  a  circular  cage,  open  on  one
side  like  a  lantern,  which  worked  upon  a  pivot
and  within  a  shell,  like  the  machines  used  in  the
convents  and  foundling  hospitals  of  Italy,  termed
rote^  so  that  any  particular  beast  could  be  removed
from  its  den  into  the  arena  merely  by  turning  it
round,  and  without  the  possibility  of  more  than
one  escaping  at  the  same  time  ;  and  therefore  it  is
recommended  by  Varro  {I.  c.)  as  peculiarly  adapted
for  an  aviary,  so  that  the  person  could  go  in  and
out  without  affording  the  birds  an  opportunity  of
flying  away.  Schneider  {in  Ind.  Script.  R.  R.  s.  v.
Cavea),  however,  maintains  that  the  cochlea  in
question  was  nothing  more  than  a  portcullis  (cafa-
phracta)  raised  by  a  screw,  which  interpretation
does  not  appear  so  probable  as  the  one  given
above.  [A..  R.]

COCHLEAR  (fcox^'ftp'O'')  was  a  kind  of  spoon,
which  appears  to  have  terminated  with  a  point  at
one  end,  and  at  the  other  was  broad  and  hollow
like  our  own  spoons.  The  pointed  end  was  used
for  drawing  snails  (cocMeae)  out  of  their  shells,  and
eating  them,  whence  it  derived  its  name  ;  and  the
broader  part  for  eating  eggs,  &c.  Martial  (xiv.
121)  mentions  both  these  uses  of  the  cochlear, —
•'  Sura  cochleis  habilis  nee  sum  minus  utilis  ovis."
(Compare  Plin.  //.  N.  xxviii.  4  ;  Petron.  33.)

Cochlear  was  also  the  naroe  given  to  a  small
measure  like  our  spoonful.  According  to  Rhemnius
Fannius,  it  was  -o^  of  the  cyathus.

COCHLIS,  which  is  properly  a  diminutive  of
cochlea,  is  used  as  an  adjective  with  columna^  to
describe  such  columns  as  the  Trajan  and  An-
tonine  ;  but  whether  the  term  was  used  with  re-
ference to  the  spiral  staircase  within  the  column,
or  to  the  spiral  bas-relief  on  the  outside,  or  to
both,  cannot  be  said  with  certainty.  (P.  Vict,  de
Repion.  Urb.  Rom.  8,  9.)

Pliny  applies  the  word  also  to  a  species  of
gem  found  in  Arabia.  (H.  N.  xxxvii.  12.
8.74.)  [P.S.]

CODEX,  dim.  CODICILLUS,  is  identical  with
caii/leoCf  as  Claudius  and  Chdius,  claustrum  and
clostnim,  Cauda  and  coda.  Cato  {ap.  Front.  Epist.
ud  M.  Anton,  i.  2)  still  used  the  form  cattdex  in
the  same  sense  in  which  afterwards  codex  was  used
exclusively.  (Compare  Ovid.  Metam.  xii.  432.)
The  word  originally  signified  the  trunk  or  stem  of  j
a  tree  (Virg.  Georp.  ii.  30  ;  Columella,  xii.  19  ;
Plin.  //.  N.  xvi.  30),  and  was  also  applied  to
designate  anything  composed  of  large  pieces  of
wood,  whence  the  small  fishing  or  ferrv  boats  on
the  Tiber,  which  may  originally  have  been  like
the  Indian  canoes,  or  were  constructed  of  several
roughly  hewn  planks  nailed  together  in  a  rude  and
simple  manner,  were  called  naces  caudlcariae,  or
codicariae,  or  caudkeae.  (Fest.  and  Varro,  ap.
Nonium.,  xiii.  12  ;  Gellius,  x.  2.5.)  The  surname
of  Caudex  given  to  Appius  Claudius  must  be
traced  to  this  signification.  But  the  name  codex
was  especially  applied  to  wooden  tablets  bound
together  and  lined  with  a  coat  of  wax,  for  the
pnq)ose  of  writing  upon  them,  and  when,  at  a  later
age,  parchment  or  paper,  or  other  materials  were
substituted  for  wood,  and  put  together  in  the
shape  of  a  book,  the  name  of  codex  was  still  ap-
plied to  them.  (Cic.  Verr.  ii.  1,36  ;  Dig.  32.  tit.  1.
^52;  Sueton.  Aug.  101.)     In  the  time  of  Cicero


CODEX.  .'JOl

we  find  it  also  applied  to  the  tablet  on  which  a
bill  was  written  ;  and  the  tribune,  Cornelius,  Avhen
one  of  his  colleagues  forbade  his  bill  to  be  read  by
the  herald  or  scribe,  read  it  himself  (legit  codicem
suum ;  see  Cic.  in  Vat.  2,  and  Ascon.  Ped.  in
Argum.  ad  Cornel,  p.  58.  ed.  Orelli).  At  a  still
later  period,  during  the  time  of  the  emperors,  the
word  was  used  to  express  any  collection  of  laws
or  constitutions  of  the  emperors,  whether  made  by
private  individuals  or  by  public  authority.  See
the  following  articles.

The  diminutive  codidllus^  or  rather  codicilli.,  was
used  much  in  the  same  way  as  codex.  It  originally
signified  tablets  of  the  kind  described  above,  and
was  subsequently  employed  to  indicate  any  small
book  or  document,  made  either  of  parchment  or
paper.  (Cic.  PM.  viii.  10,  ad  Fam.  vi.  18;  Suet.
Claud.  2.9.)  Respecting  its  meaning  in  connec-
tion with  a  person's  testament,  see  Testamen-
TUM.  [L.  S.]

CODEX  GREGORIA'NUS  and  HERMO-
GENIA'NUS.  It  does  not  appear  quite  certain
if  this  title  denotes  one  collection  or  two  collec-
tions. The  general  opinion,  however,  is,  that  there
were  two  codices  compiled  respectively  by  Grego-
rianus  and  Hermogenianus,  who  are  sometimes,
though  incorrectly,  called  Gregorius  and  Hermo-
genes.  The  codex  of  Gregorianus  was  divided
into  books  (the  number  of  which  is  not  known),  and
the  books  were  divided  into  titles.  The  fragments
of  this  codex  begin  with  constitutions  of  Septimius
Severus,  a.  d.  196,  and  end  with  those  of  Diocletian
and  Maximian,  A.  D.  285 — 305.  The  codex  of
Hermogenianus,  so  far  as  we  know  it,  is  only
quoted  by  titles,  and  it  only  contains  constitutions
of  Diocletian  and  Maximian,  with  the  exception  of
one  by  Antoninus  Caracalla  ;  it  may  perhaps  have
consisted  of  one  book  only,  and  it  may  have  been
a  kind  of  supplement  to  the  other.  The  name  Her-
mogenianus is  always  placed  after  that  of  Gregori-
anus when  this  code  is  quoted.  According  to  the
Consultationes,  the  codex  of  Hermogenianus  also
contained  constitutions  of  Valens  and  Valentinian
II.,  which,  if  true,  would  bring  down  the  compiler
to  a  time  some  years  later  than  the  reign  of  Con-
stantino the  Great,  under  whom  it  is  generally  as- '
sumed  that  he  lived.  These  codices  Avere  not
made  by  imperial  authority  ;  they  were  the  work
of  private  individuals,  but  apparently  soon  came  to
be  considered  as  authority  in  courts  of  justice,  as  is
shown  indirectly  by  the  fact  of  the  Theodosian  and
Justinian  codes  being  formed  on  the  model  of  the
Codex  Gregorianus  and  Hermogenianus.  (Zini-
mern,  Geschlchte  des  Romisclien  Privatrechts,  Heidel.
1826;  Hugo,  Lehrbuch  der  GescMcMe  des  Rom.
Rechts,  Berlin,  1832;  Frag.  Cod.  Greg,  et  Her m.
in  Sclmlting''s  Jurisprudentia  Vet.  &c.,  and  in  the
Jus  Civile  Antejustin.  Berol.  1815  ;  Bbcking,  /«-
stit?itionen.)  [G.  L.]

CODEX  JUSTINIANE'US.  In  February  of
the  year  A.  D.  528,  Justinian  appohited  a  commis-
sion, consistmg  of  ten  persons,  to  make  a  new  col-
lection of  imperial  constitutions.  Among  these  ten
were  Tribonianus,  who  was  afterwards  employed
on  the  Digcsta  and  the  Institutiones,  and  Theo-
philus,  a  teacher  of  law  at  Constantinople.  The
commission  was  directed  to  compile  one  code  from
those  of  Gregorianus,  Hennogenianus,  and  Theo-
dosius,  and  also  from  the  constitutions  of  Then-
dosius  made  subsequently  to  his  code,  from  those
of  his  succcssoi's,  and    from    the  const! tuticns   of


302


CODEX.


Justinian  himself.  The  instructions  given  to  the
commissioners  empowered  them  to  omit  unneces-
san--  preambles,  repetitions,  contradictions,  and
obsolete  matter ;  to  express  the  laws  to  be  derived
from  the  sources  above  mentioned  in  brief  lan-
guage, and  to  place  them  under  appropriate  titles  ;
to  add  to,  take  from,  or  vary,  the  words  of  tlie  old
constitutions,  when  it  might  be  necessarj' ;  l)ut  to
retain  the  order  of  time  in  the  several  constitutions,
by  preserving  the  dates  and  the  consuls'  names,
and  also  by  arranging  them  under  their  several
titles  in  the  order  of  time.  The  collection  was  to
include  rescripts  and  edicts,  as  well  as  constitu-
tiones  properly  so  called.  Fourteen  months  after
the  date  of  the  commission,  the  code  was  completed
and  declared  to  be  law  (16th  April,  529)  under
the  title  of  the  Justinianeus  Codex  ;  and  it  was  de-
clared that  the  sources  from  which  this  code  was
derived  were  no  longer  to  have  any  binding  force,
and  that  the  new  code  alone  should  be  referred  to
as  of  legal  authority.  (Constit.  de  Justin.  Cod.
Confinnando.)

The  Digesta  or  Pandectae,  atid  the  Institutiones,
were  compiled  after  the  publication  of  this  code,
subsequently  to  which  fifty  decisiones  and  some
new  constitutiones  also  were  promulgated  by  the
emperor.  This  rendered  a  revision  of  the  code
necessar}' ;  and  accordingly  a  commission  for  that
purpose  was  given  to  Tribonianus,  to  Dorotheus,  a
distinguished  teacher  of  law  at  Berytus  in  Phoenicia,
and  three  others.  The  new  code  was  promulgated
at  Constantinople,  on  the  16th  November  534,  and
the  use  of  the  decisiones,  the  new  constitutiones,
and  of  the  first  edition  of  the  Justinianeus  Codex,
was  forbidden.  The  second  edition  (secujida  editio^
repetita  praelectio,  Codeoo  repetitae  praelectionis)  is
the  code  that  we  now  possess,  in  twelve  books,
each  of  which  is  divided  into  titles:  it  is  not  known
how  many  books  the  first  edition  contained.  The
constitutiones  are  arranged  under  their  several  titles,
in  the  order  of  time  and  with  the  names  of  the  em-
perors by  whom  they  were  respectively  made,  and
their  dates.

The  constitutions  in  this  code  dp  not  go  further
back  than  those  of  Hadrian,  and  those  of  the  im-
mediate successors  of  Hadrian  are  few  in  number;
a  circumstance  owing  in  part  to  the  use  made  of
the  earlier  codes  in  the  compilation  of  the  Justinian
code,  and  also  to  the  fact  of  many  of  the  earlier
constitutions  being  incorporated  in  the  writings  of
the  jurists,  from  which  alone  any  knowledge  of
many  of  them  could  be  derived.  {Constit.  De
Emendatione  Cod.  Dom.  Justin.)

The  constitutions,  as  they  appear  in  this  code,
have  been  in  many  cases  altered  by  the  compilers,
and  consequently,  in  an  historical  point  of  view,
the  code  is  not  always  trustworthy.  This  fact
appears  from  a  comparison  of  this  code  with  the
Theodosian  code  and  the  Novellae.  The  order  of
the  subject-matter  in  this  code  corresponds,  in  a
certain  way,  with  that  in  the  Digest.  Thus  the
seven  parts  into  which  the  fifty  books  of  the
Digest  are  distributed,  correspond  to  the  first  nine
books  of  the  Code.  The  matter  of  the  three  last
books  of  the  Code  is  hardly  treated  of  in  the
Digest.  The  matter  of  the  first  book  of  the  Digest
is  placed  in  the  first  book  of  the  Code,  after  the
law  relating  to  ecclesiastical  matters,  which,  of
course,  is  not  contained  in  the  Digest ;  and  the
three  following  books  of  the  first  part  of  the  Digest
correspond  to  the  second  book  of  the  Code.     The


CODEX.

following  books  of  the  Code,  the  ninth  included,
correspond  respectively,  in  a  general  way,  to  the
following  parts  of  the  Digest.  Some  of  tlie  con-
stitutions which  were  in  the  first  edition  of  the
Code,  and  are  referred  to  in  the  Institutiones,  have
been  omitted  in  the  second  edition.  (Instit.  2.  tit.
20.  s.  27  ;  4.  tit.  6.  s.  24.)  Several  constitutions,
which  have  also  been  lost  in  the  course  of  time,
have  been  restored  by  Charondas,  Cujacius,  and
Contiufi,  from  the  Greek  version  of  them.  (Zim-
mern,  &c. ;  Hugo,  Leiirbucli  der  Geschichte  des  Rom.
Rec/ds,  &c. ;  Bocking,  Tnstitutionen.)        [G.  L.]

CODEX  THEODOSIA'NUS.  In  the  year
429,  Theodosius  II.,  commonly  called  Theodosius
the  younger,  appointed  a  commission,  consisting  of
eight  persons,  to  form  into  a  code  all  the  edicta  and
generales  constitutiones  from  the  timeof  Constantine,
and  according  to  the  model  of  the  Codex  Grego-
rianus  and  Hermogenianus  {ad  similitudinem  Gre-
goriani  et  Hermogeniani  Codicis).  In  435,  the
instructions  were  renewed  or  repeated  ;  but  the
commissioners  were  now  sixteen  in  number.  Anti-
ochus  was  at  the  head  of  both  commissions.  It
seems,  however,  to  have  been  originally  the  design
of  the  emperor  not  only  to  make  a  code  which
should  be  supplementary  to,  and  a  continuation  of,
the  Codex  Gregorianus  and  Hermogenianus  ;  but
also  to  compile  a  work  on  Roman  law  from  the
classical  jurists,  and  the  constitutions  prior  to  those
of  Constantine.  However  this  may  be,  the  first
commission  did  not  accomplish  this,  and  what  we
now  have  is  the  code  which  was  compiled  by  the
second  commission.  This  code  was  completed,  and
promulgated  as  law  in  the  Eastern  empire  in  438,
and  declared  to  be  the  substitute  for  all  the  consti-
tutions made  since  the  time  of  Constantine.  In
the  same  year  (438)  the  code  was  forwarded  to
Valentinian  III.,  the  son-in-law  of  Theodosius,  by
whom  it  was  laid  before  the  Roman  Senate,  and
confirmed  as  law  in  the  Western  empire.  Nine
years  later  Theodosius  forwarded  to  Valentinian
his  new  constitutions  {novellae  constitutiones)^  which
had  been  made  since  the  publication  of  the  code ;
and  these  also  were  in  the  next  year  (448)  pro-
mulgated as  law  in  the  Western  empire.  So  long
as  a  connection  existed  between  the  Eastern  and
Western  empires,  that  is,  till  the  overthrow  of  the
latter,  the  name  Novellae  was  given  to  the  con-
stitutions subsequent  to  the  code  of  Theodosius.
The  latest  of  these  Novellae  that  have  come  down
to  us  are  three  of  the  time  of  Leo  and  Anthemius,
A.  D.  468.

The  Codex  Theodosianus  consists  of  sixteen
books,  the  greater  part  of  which,  as  well  as  his
Novellae,  exist  in  their  genuine  state.  The  books
are  divided  into  titles,  and  the  titles  are  sub-
divided into  constitutiones  or  laws.  The  valuable
edition  of  J.  Gothofredus  (6  vols,  fol,  Lugd.  1665,
re-edited  by  Ritter,  Lips.  1736 — 1745,  6  vols,  fol.)
contains  the  code  in  its  complete  form,  except  th«
first  five  books,  for  which  it  was  necessary  to  use
the  epitome  contained  in  the  Breviarium  [Brevia-
rium].  This  is  also  the  case  with  the  edition  of
this  code  contained  in  the  Jus  Civile  Antejustininia-
neum  of  Berlin,  1815.  But  the  recent  discovery
of  a  MS.  of  the  Breviarium,  at  Milan,  by  Clossius,
and  of  a  Palimpsest  of  the  Theodosian  code  at
Turin  by  Peyron,  has  contributed  largely  both  to
the  critical  knowledge  of  the  other  parts  of  tliis
code,  and  has  added  numerous  genuine  constitu-
tions to  the  first  five  books,  particularly   to  the


i


COENA.

first.  Haners  discoveries  also  have  added  to  our
knowledge  of  the  later  books,  and  his  edition  of  the
Theodosian  Code,  Bonn,  1837,  4to,  is  the  latest
and  the  best.

The  extract  or  epitome  of  the  first  five  books  in
the  Breviarium  is  very  scanty  ;  262  laws,  or  frag-
ments of  laws,  were  omitted,  which  the  discoveries
of  Clossius  and  Peyron  reduced  to  200.  More  re-
cent discoveries  by  Carlo  Baudi  a  Vesme  at  Turin
•will  add  to  the  6th,  8th,  9th,  10th,  and  16th  books.

The  Novellae  Constitutiones  anterior  to  the  time
of  Justinian  are  collected  in  six  books  in  the  Jus
Civile  Antejustinianeum^  Berlin,  1815,  and  in
HanePs  more  recent  edition.

The  commission  of  Theodosius  was  empowered
to  arrange  the  constitutiones  according  to  their
subject,  and  under  each  subject  according  to  the
order  of  time ;  to  separate  those  which  con-
tained different  matter,  and  to  omit  what  was  not
essential  or  superfluous.  The  arrangement  of  the
Theodosian  code  differs  in  the  main  from  that  of
the  code  of  Justinian,  which  treats  of  jus  ecclesi-
asticum  in  the  beginning,  while  that  of  Theodosius
in  the  first  book  treats  chiefly  of  offices  ;  and  the
second,  third,  fourth,  and  beginning  of  the  fifth  book
treat  of  jus  privatum.  The  order  here  observed,
as  well  as  in  the  code  which  it  professed  to  follow
as  a  model,  was  the  order  of  the  writers  on  the
praetorian  edict.  The  eighth  book  contains  the
laws  as  to  gifts,  the  penalties  of  celibacj',  and  that
relating  to  the  jus  liberorum.  The  ninth  book
begins  with  crimes.  The  laws  relating  to  the
Christian  church  are  contained  in  the  sixteenth
and  last  book.  It  is  obvious  from  the  circum-
stiinces  under  which  the  Theodosian  and  Justinian
codes  were  compiled,  and  from  a  comparison  of  them,
that  the  Justinian  code  was  greatly  indebted  to  the
Theodosian.  The  Theodosian  code  was  also  the  basis
of  the  edict  of  Theodoric  king  of  the  Ostrogoths  ;
it  was  epitomised,  with  an  interpretation,  in  the
Visigoth  Lex  Romana  [Breviarium]  ;  and  the
Burgundian  Lex  Romana,  commonly  called  Papiani
Liber  Responsorum,  was  founded  upon  it.  [G.  L.]

CODICILLUS.     [Codex.]

CODON  (/coJScov),  a  bell.    [Tintinnabulum.]

COE'MPTIO.     [Matrimonium.]

COENA  (Sern-voj/),  the  principal  meal  of  the
Greeks  and  Romans,  corresponding  to  our  dinner,
rather  than  supper.  As  the  meals  are  not  always
clearly  distinguished,  it  will  be  convenient  to  give
a  brief  account  of  all  of  them  under  the  present
head.

1.  Greek. — The  materials  for  an  account  of
the  Greek  meals,  during  the  classical  period  of
Athens  and  Sparta,  are  almost  confined  to  in-
cidental allusions  of  Plato  and  the  comic  writers.
Several  ancient  authors,  termed  henrvdXoyoi^  are
mentioned  by  Athenaeus  ;  but,  unfortunately,  their
writings  only  survive  in  the  fragments  quoted  by
him.  His  great  work,  the  Deipnosopliists,  is  an
inexhaustible  treasury  of  this  kind  of  knowledge,
but  ill  arranged,  and  with  littU^  attempt  to  dis-
tinguish the  customs  of  different  periods.

The  poems  of  Homer  contain  a  real  picture  of
early  manners,  in  every  way  worthy  of  the  anti-
quarian's attention.  As  they  stand  apart  from  all
other  writings,  it  will  be  convenient  to  exliil)it  in
one  view  the  state  of  things  which  they  describe.
It  is  not  to  be  expected  that  the  Homeric  meals  at
all  agree  with  the  customs  of  a  later  period  ;  in-
deed it  would  be  a  mere  waste  of  time  to  attempt


COENA.


303


adapting  the  one  to  the  other.  Athenaeus  (i.  p.  8)
who  has  entered  fully  into  the  subject,  remarks  ou
the  singular  simplicity  of  the  Homeric  banquets,
in  which  kings  and  private  men  all  partake  of  the
same  food.  It  was  common  even  for  royal  person-
ages to  prepare  their  own  meals  (//.  ix.  206 — 218  ;
compare  Gen.  xxvii.  31),  and  Ulysses  {Od.  xv.
322)  declares  himslf  no  mean  proficient  in  the
culinary  art  —

Tlvp  t'  eS  vr\ri(rai,  hih.  Se  i,vXa  5am  Kiacraai
AaiTpeva'al  re  Kai  OTTTrjcrai  kol  olvoxoriacu.

Three  names  of  meals  occur  in  the  Iliad  and  Odyssey
— ^pLffTov,  SeTirvov,  SSpnov.  This  division  of  the
meals  is  ascribed,  in  a  fragment  of  Aeschylus
quoted  by  Athenaeus  ( i.  p.  11),  to  Palamcdes.
The  word  &pi(TTov  uniformly  means  the  early  (a^u,'
7]oi,  Od.  xvi.  2)  as  hdpivov  does  the  late  meal  ;  but
SeTTri/oi',  on  the  other  hand,  is  used  for  either  (//.
ii.  381,  Od.  xvii.  170),  apparently  without  any
reference  to  time.  We  should  be  careful,  how-
ever, how  we  argue  from  the  unsettled  habits  of  a
camp  to  the  regular  customs  of  ordinary  life.

From  numerous  passages  in  the  Iliad  and  Odyssey
it  appears  to  have  been  usual  to  sit  during  meal-
times. In  the  palace  of  Telemachus,  before  eating
a  servant  brings  Minerva,  who  is  habited  as  a
stranger,  the  x^'/""^  or  lustral  Avater  "  in  a  golden
pitcher,  pouring  it  over  a  silver  vessel."  {Od.  i.
136.)  Beef,  mutton,  and  goafs  flesh  were  the
ordinary  meats,  usually  eaten  roasted  ;  yet  from  the
lines  {IL  xxi.  363)
'D.S  Se  \4§r]S  (el  evdov,  iTretyofievos  irvp]  ttoAA^,
Kvi(T(TT)  fx^XSofx^vos  aira\oTpe(p4os  (TidXoio,

we  learn  that  boiled  meats  were  held  to  be  far  from
unsavoury.  Cheese,  flour,  and  occasionally  fruits,
also  formed  part  of  the  Homeric  meals.  Bread,
brought  on  in  baskets  (11.  ix.  217),  and  salt  (&A.s,
to  which  Homer  gives  the  epithet  i^eTos),  are  men-
tioned :  from  Od.  xvii.  455,  the  latter  appears,
even  at  this  early  period,  to  have  been  a  sign  of
hospitality  ;  in  Od.  xi.  122,  it  is  the  mark  of  a
strange  people  not  to  know  its  use.

Each  guest  appears  to  have  had  his  own  table,
and  he  who  was  first  in  rank  presided  over  the
rest.  Menelaus,  at  the  marriage  feast  of  Hermione,
begins  the  banquet  by  taking  in  his  hands  the  side
of  a  roasted  ox  and  placing  it  before  his  friends.
(Od.  iv.  65.)  At  the  same  entertainment  music
and  dancing  are  introduced  :  —  "  The  divine  min-
strel h}anned  to  the  sound  of  the  lyre,  and  two
tumblers  {Kv€iaTr}TTJpe)  began  the  festive  strain,
wheeling  round  m  the  midst."  It  was  not  beneath
the  notions  of  those  earl}'  days  to  stimulate  the
heroes  to  battle  (Jl.  xii,  311),

"ESpr)  re,  Kpiaaiv  re,  i5e  ivX^iois  deirafcrffiu^

and  Ajax  on  his  return  from  the  contest  with
Hector   is   presented    by    Agamenmon    with   the

The  names  of  several  articles  of  the  festive  board
occur  in  the  Iliad  and  Odyssey.  Knives,  spits,
cups  of  various  shapes  and  sizes,  bottles  made  of
goat-skin,  casks,  &c.,  are  all  mentioned.  Many
sorts  of  wine  were  in  use  among  the  heroes  ;  some
of  Nestor's  is  remarked  on  as  being  el.ven  years
old.  The  Maronean  wine,  so  called  from  Maron,
a  hero,  was  especially  cs'lebrated,  and  would  bear
mingling  with  twenty  times  its  own  quantity  of
water.  It  may  be  observed  that  wine  was  seldom,
if  ever,  drunk  pure.     When  Nestor  and  Machaon .


.^04  COENA.

»!t  down  together,  "  a  woman,"  like  unto  a  god-
dess, sets  before  them  a  polished  table,  with  a
brazen  tray,  iirl  5e  Kpdfiiwv  ttc^t^  o\pou.  Then  she
mingles  a  cup  of  Pramnian  wine  in  Nestor's  own
gobk't,  and  cuts  the  cheese  of  goat's  milk  with  a
stfel  knife,  scattering  white  flour  over  it.  The
guests  drank  to  one  another :  thus  the  gods  (II.  iv.
4)  SetSe'xar'  a\X'f}\ovs,  and  Ulysses  pledged
Achilles,  saying,  X"'P'»  'Ax'Aei)  (11.  ix.  225).  Wine
was  drawn  from  a  larger  vessel  [Crater]  into
the  cups  from  which  it  was  drunk,  and  before
drinking,  libations  were  made  to  the  gods  by  pour-
ing some  of  the  contents  on  the  groimd.  (II.  vii.
480.)

The  interesting  scene  between  Ulysses  and  the
swineherd  (Od.  xiv.  420 )  gives  a  parallel  view  of
early  manners  in  a  lower  grade  of  life.  After  a
welcome  has  been  given  to  the  stranger,  "  The
swineherd  cleaves  the  wood,  and  they  place  the
swine  of  five  years  old  on  the  hearth.  In  the
goodness  of  his  heart,  Eumaeus  forgets  not  the  im-
mortal gods,  and  dedicates  the  firstling  lock  with  a
prayer  for  Ulysses's  return.  He  next  smites  the
animal  with  a  piece  of  cleft  oak,  and  the  attend-
ants singe  off  the  hair.  He  then  cuts  the  raw  meat
all  round  from  the  limbs,  and  laying  it  in  the  rich
fat,  and  sprinkling  flour  upon  it,  throws  it  on  the
fire  as  an  oftering  (airapxh)  to  the  gods,  the  rest
the  attendants  cut  up  and  pierce  with  spits,  and
having  cooked  it  with  cunning  skill,  draAV  off  all,
and  lay  the  mess  on  the  tables.  Then  the  swine-
herd stands  up  to  divide  the  portions,  seven  por-
tions in  all,  five  for  himself  and  the  guests,  and
one  apiece  to  Mercurj'  and  the  nymphs."

There  is  nothing  more  worthy  of  remark  in  the
Homeric  manners  than  the  hospitality  shown  to
strangers.  Before  it  is  known  who  they  are,  or
whence  they  come,  it  is  the  custom  of  the  times  to
give  them  a  welcome  reception.  (Od.  i.  125,  &c.)
When  Nestor  and  his  sons  saw  the  strangers,
*'  They  all  came  in  a  crowd  and  saluted  them  Avith
the  hand,  and  made  them  sit  down  at  the  feast  on
the  soft  fleeces  by  the  sea  shore."

The  Greeks  of  a  later  age  usually  partook  of
three  meals,  called  d/cpaTitr/ia,  apiarov.,  and  ^eiivvov.
The  last,  which  corresponds  to  the  BdpTrov  of  the
Homeric  poems,  was  the  evening  meal  or  dinner  ;
the  &pi(rTov  was  the  luncheon  ;  and  the  aKparia-fxa^
which  answers  to  the  apiarov  of  Homer,  was  the
early  meal  or  breakfast.

The  aKpaTiajJia  was  taken  immediately  after
rising  in  the  moniing  (e|  ciVtjs,  eo^ej/,  Aristoph.
Aves,  1 286).  It  usually  consisted  of  bread,  dipped
in  unmixed  wme  (hcparos)^  whence  it  derived
its  name.  (Plut.  Symp.  viii.  0\  §  4  ;  Schol.  ad
Tli£ocr.  i.  51  ;  Athcnaeus,  i.  p.  11.)

Next  followed  the  &pi<XTov  or  luncheon ;  but  the
time  at  which  it  was  taken  is  uncertain.  It  is
frequently  mentioned  in  Xenophon's  Anabasis,
smd  appears  to  have  been  taken  at  different  times,
as  would  naturall}''  be  the  case  with  soldiers  in
active  service.  Suidas  (s.  v.  Aelirvov)  says  that  it
was  taken  about  the  third  hour,  that  is  about  nine
o'clock  in  the  morning  ;  but  this  accoimt  does  not
agree  with  the  statements  of  other  ancient  writers.
We  may  conclude  from  many  circumstances  that
this  meal  was  taken  about  the  middle  of  the  day,
and  that  it  answered  to  the  Roman  prandium^  as
Plutarch  (Symp.  viii.  6.  §  5)  asserts.  Besides
which  the  time  of  the  irXiiQovara  ayopd,  at  which
provisions   seem    to   have    been    bought   for   the


COENA.

6.picrrov,  was  from  nine  o'clock  till  noon.  This
agrees  with  the  account  of  Aristophanes  (Vesp.
605 — 612),  who  introduces  Philocleon  describing
the  pleasure  of  returning  home  after  attending  the
courts,  and  partaking  of  a  good  &pi(TTov.  The
courts  of  justice  could  scarcely  have  finished  their
sittings  by  nine  o'clock.  Timaeus  also  defines
Set'ATj  irpxia,  which  we  know  to  have  been  thii
early  part  of  the  afternoon  [Dies],  as  the  time
before  the  ^picrrov.  The  &pi<TTov  was  usually  a
simple  meal,  but  of  course  varied  according  to  the
habits  of  individuals.  Thus  Ischomachus,  in  de-
scribing his  mode  of  life  to  Socrates,  who  greatly
approves  of  it,  says,  ^ApiffT^  ocra  pA]Te.  Kivhs  /x-l^re
^.yav  nX-ffprjs  di-q/xepeveiv  (Xen.  Oecon.  xi.  18).

The  principal  meal,  however,  was  the  ^^Ittvop.
It  was  usually  taken  rather  late  in  the  day,  fre-
quently not  before  sunset.  (Lysias,  c.  Eratosth.
p.  26.)     Aristophanes  (Ecd.  652)  says,

2oi  Se  fieXijaei,
oTojf  y    ZiKaiTovv  rh    ffroix^lov  Kiiraphv   X'^P^^^
eVl  huTTvov.

But  in  order  to  ascertain  the  time  meant  by
SeKaTTouj'  rh  aroix^^ov,  the  reader  is  referred  to
the  article  Horologium.

The  Athenians  were  a  social  people,  and  were
very  fond  of  dining  in  companj'.  Entertainments
were  usually  given,  both  in  the  heroic  ages  and
latter  times,  when  sacrifices  were  offered  to  the
gods,  either  on  public  or  private  occasions  ;  and
also  on  the  anniversary  of  the  birthdays  of  mem-
bers of  the  family,  or  of  illustrious  persons,  whether
living  or  dead.  Plutarch  (Symp.  viii.  1.  §  1)
speaks  of  an  entertainment  being  given  on  the
anniversary'  of  the  birthdays  both  of  Socrates  and
Plato.

When  young  men  wished  to  dine  together  they
frequently  contributed  each  a  certain  sum  of  money,
called  (Tu/i&oArj,  or  brought  their  ovm  provisions
with  them.  When  the  first  plan  was  adopted,
they  were  said  anh  (rvp-QoXuv  denrv^Tv,  and  one
individual  was  usually  entrusted  with  the  money
to  procure  the  provisions,  and  make  all  the  neces-
sary preparations.  Thus  we  read  in  Terence
(Eunuch,  iii.  4)  • — ■

"  Heri  aliquot  adolescentuli  coimus  in  Piraeo,
In  hunc  diem  ut  de  symbolis  essemus.  Chaeream

ei  rei
Praefccimus  :  dati  annuli :  locus,  tempus  consti-

tutum  est."

This  kind  of  entertainment  in  which  each  guest
contributed  to  the  expense,  is  mentioned  in  Homer
(Od.  i.  226)  under  the  name  of  tpauos.

An  entertainment  in  which  each  person  brought
his  own  provisions  with  him,  or  at  least  con-
tributed something  to  the  general  stock,  was  called
delTTVuv  airo  cnrvpiBos,  because  the  provisions  were
brought  in  baskets.  (Athen.  viii.  p.  365.)  This  kind
of  entertainment  is  also  spoken  of  by  Xenophon
(Mem.  iii.  14.  §  1).

The  most  usual  kind  of  entertainments,  how-
ever, were  those  in  which  a  person  invited  his
friends  to  his  own  house.  It  was  expected  that  they
should  come  dressed  with  more  than  ordinary  care,
and  also  have  bathed  shortly  before  ;  hence,  when
Socrates  was  going  to  an  entertainment  at  Aga-
thon's,  we  are  told  that  he  both  washed  and  put
on  his  shoes,  —  things  which  he  seldom  did.  (Plato,
Symp.  c.  2.  p.  17-1.)    As  soon  as  the  guests  arrived


COENA.

at  the  house  of  their  host,  their  shoes  or  sandals
wore  taken  off  by  the  slaves,  and  their  feet  washed
(uTToA.uejj'  and  a.Troui(eiy.)  In  ancient  works  of
art  we  frequeretly  see  a  slave  or  other  person  re
presented  in  the  act  of  taking  off  the  shoes  of  the
guests,  of  which  an  example  is  given,  from  a  teiTa
cotta  in  the  British  Museum,  in  p.  308.  After
their  feet  had  been  washed,  the  guests  reclined  on
the  KAiVot  or  couches  (Koi  e  fJLfu  i<pif]  airovi^civ  rhv
iraiSay  'iva  KaraK^oiTo,  Plato,  Symp.  c.  3.  p.  175).

It  has  already  been  remarked  that  Homer  never
describes  persons  as  reclining,  but  always  as  sitting
at  their  meals  ;  but  at  what  time  the  change  was
introduced  is  uncertain.  Miiller  {Dorians,  iv.  3.
§  1)  concludes  from  a  fragment  of  Alcman,  quoted
by  Athenaeus  (iii.  p.  Ill),  that  tlie  Spartans  were
accustomed  to  recline  at  their  meals  as  early  as  the
time  of  Alcman.  The  Dorians  of  Crete  always
sat ;  but  the  Athenians,  like  the  Spartans,  were
accustomed  to  recline.  The  Greek  women  and
children,  however,  like  the  Roman,  continued  to
sit  at  their  meals,  as  we  find  them  represented  in
.ancient  works  of  art.

It  was  usual  for  only  two  persons  to  recline  on
each  couch.  Thus  Agathon  says  to  Aristodemus,
'^v  S',  'ApiCTTJSrj/xe,  Trap'  'Epv^ifxaxov  KaraKKivov;
and  to  Socrates,  Aei/po,  Si^/cpares,  irap  e'/xe  kotci-
Ksiao  (Plato,  Symp.  c.  3,  4.  p.  l/o).  Also  at  a
banquet  given  by  Attaginus  of  Thebes  to  fifty
Persians  and  fifty  Greeks,  we  are  told  that  one
Persian  and  one  Greek  reclined  on  each  couch.
In  ancient  works  of  art  we  usually  see  the  guests
represented  in  this  way  ;  but  sometimes  there  is  a
larger  number  on  one  long  KXivr\ :  see  the  cut
under  the  article  Symposium.  The  manner  in
which  they  reclined,  the  crxVH-a  ttJs  /caro/cAiVecos,
as  Plutarch  {Symp.  v.  6)  calls  it,  will  be  under-
stood by  referring  to  the  woodcut  already  men-
tioned, where  the  guests  are  represented  reclining
with  their  left  arms  on  striped  pillows  {virajKuuia),
and  having  their  right  free  ;  whence  Lucian
{Leociph.  c.  6)  speaks  of  ctt'  ayKwvos  Senrvelv.

After  the  guests  had  placed  themselves  on  the
KXivai,  the  slaves  brought  in  water  to  wash  their
hands  {vdwp  Kara  xejpbs  iSSOr)).  The  subsequent
proceedings  of  the  dinner  are  briefly  described  in
two  lines  of  Aristophanes  {Vesp.  1216),

"TSwp  Kara  x^'^P^^'  '''"^  rpa-rre^as  elacpepeiv
AeiirvovfiiU-  anovevifx.iu.eO'''  •^Stj  (TTreVSojuej/.

The  dinner  was  then  served  up  ;  whence  we  read
in  Aristophanes,  and  elsewhere,  of  tcls  rpaire^as
(Itrcpepciy,  by  which  expression  we  are  to  under-
stand not  merely  the  dishes,  but  the  tables  them-
selves. (Philoxen.  up.  Athen.  iv.  p.  146,  f.)  It  ap-
pears that  a  table,  with  provisions  upon  it,  was
placed  before  each  kAiVtj  :  and  thus  we  find  in  all
ancient  works  of  art,  which  represent  banquets  or
symposia,  a  small  table  or  tripod  placed  before  the
K\iurj,  and  when  there  are  more  than  two  persons
on  the  kAiVtj,  several  of  such  tables.  These  tables
are  evidently  small  enough  to  be  moved  with
ease.

In  eating,  the  Greeks  had  no  knives  or  forks,
but  made  use  of  their  fingers  only,  except  in  eat-
ing soups  or  other  liquids,  which  they  partook  of
by  means  of  a  spoon,  called  ixvcrriKri,  fivcTTpov,  or
/jLvffTpos.  Sometimes  they  used  instead  of  a  spoon,
a  hollowed  piece  of  bread,  also  called  ^i.v<ni\r].
(Pollux,  vL  87,  X.  80  ;  Aristoph.  Equit.  1164  ;
Suidas,  s.  v.  ixvariKr).)     After  eating  they  wiped


COENA.


305


their  fingers  on  pieces  of  bread,  called  aTro/j.ay5aXiai.
(Pollux,  vi.  93.)  They  did  not  use  any  cloths  or
napkins  ;  the  x^^P^l^°'-i^'^P^  and  iKfj.ayc7a,  which
are  sometimes  mentioned  (Pollux,  I.  c),  were  towels,
which  were  only  used  when  they  washed  their
hands.

It  appears  that  the  arrangement  of  the  dinner
was.  entrusted  to  certain  slaves.  (Plato,  Symp.  c.  3.
p.  175.)  The  one  who  had  the  chief  management
of  it  was  called  Tpaire^oiraiSs  or  TpaTreQ)K6ixos
(Athen.  iv.  p.  170,  e.  ;  Pollux,  iii.  41,  vi.  13).

It  would  exceed  the  limits  of  this  work  to  give
an  account  of  the  different  dishes  which  were  in-
troduced at  a  Greek  dinner,  though  their  number
is  far  below  those  which  were  usually  partaken
of  at  a  Roman  entertainment.  The  most  common
food  among  the  Greeks  was  the  fj.d^a  (Dor.  juaSSo),
a  kind  of  frumenty  or  soft  cake,  which  was  pre-
pared in  different  ways,,  as  appears  by  the  various
names  which  were  given  to  it.  (Pollux,  vi.  76.)
The  fid^a  is  frequently  mentioned  by  Aristophanes.
The  (pva-T^  p-a-Ca,  of  which  Philocloon  partakes  on
returning  home  from  the  courts  (Aristoph.  Vesp.
610),  is  said  by  the  Scholmst  to  have  been  made
of  barley  and  wine^  The  (xdQi  continued  to  the
latest  times  to  be  the  common  food  of  the  lower
classes.  Wheatcn  or  barley  bread  was  the  second
most  usual  species  of  food  j  it  was  sometimes  made
at  home,  but  more  usually  bought  at  the  market  of
the  aproTTuhai  or  dpTOTrojAiSes.  The  vegetables
ordinarily  eaten  were  mallows  {iiaKaxv),  lettucei
(3^piSa|),  cabbages  {pdcpavoi.},  beans  {Kvafioi),
lentils  (^a/caT),  &c.  Pork  was  the  most  favourite
animal  food,  as  was  the  case  among  the  Romans  ;
Plutarch  {Symp.  iv.  5.  §  1)  calls  it  rh  SiKaiSraToy
Kp4as.  Sausages  also  were  very  commonly  eaten.
It  is  a  curious  fact,  which  Plato  {De  Rep.  iii.
c.  13.  p.  404)  has  remarked,  that  we  never  read
in  Homer  of  the  heroes  partaking  of  fish.  In  later
times,  ho-wever,.  fish  was  one  of  the  most  favourite
foods  of  the  Greeks,  insomuch  so  that  the  name  of
oiS^ov  was  applied  to  it  /car'  e'lox^v.  (Athen.  vii.
p,  276,  e.)  A  minute  account  of  the  fishes  which
the  Greeks  were  accustomed  to  eat,  is  given  at  the
end  of  the  seventh  book  of  Athenaeus,  arranged  in
alphabetical  order.

The  ordinary  meal  for  the  family  was  cooked
by  the  mistress  of  the  house,  or  by  the  female
slaves  under  her  direction  ;  but  for  special  occa-
sions professional  cooks  {fidy^ipoi)  were  hired,  of
whom  there  appear  to  have  been  a  great  number.
(Diog.  Laert.  iL  72.)  They  are  frequently  men-
tioned in  the  fragments  of  the  comic  poets  ;  and
those  who  were  acquainted  with  all  the  refine-
ments of  their  art  were  in  great  demand  in  other
parts  of  Greece  besides  their  own  country.  The
Sicilian  cooks,  however,  had  the  greatest  reputa-
tion (Plato,  De  Rep.  iii.  c.  13.  p.  404),  and  a
Sicilian  book  on  cookery  by  one  Mithaecus  i»
mentioned  in  the  Gorgias  of  Plato  (c.  \5Q.  p.  518.
Compare  Maxim.  Tyr.  Diss.  iv.  5)  ;  but  the  most
celebrated  work  on  the  subject  was  the  Vaarpo-^
\oyia  of  Archestratus.     (Athen.  iii,  p.  104.  b.)

A  dinner  given  by  an  opulent  Athenian  usually
consisted  of  two  courses,  called  respectively  trpcoTai
rpdire^ai  and  Sevrepai  rpdire^ai.  Pollux  (vi.  83),
indeed,  speaks  of  three  courses,  which  wjis  the
number  at  a  Roman  dinner;  and  in  the  same
way  we  find  other  writers  under  the  Roman
empire  speaking  of  three  courses  at  Greek  din-
ners ;  but  before  the  Roman  conquest  of  Greece


306


COENA.


and  the  introduction  of  Roman  customs,  we  only
read  of  two  courses.  The  first  course  embraced
the  whole  of  what  we  consider  the  dinner,  namely,
fish,  poultry,  meat,  &c.  ;  the  second,  which  cor-
responds to  our  dessert  and  the  Roman  bellaria^
consisted  of  different  kinds  of  fruit,  sweetmeats,
confections,  &c.

When  the  first  course  was  finished  the  tables
were  taken  away  (aypetv,  airaipeiv,  eiraipeLv,
acpaipuv,  iK^epsiu,  $a(TTa.(eiv  ras  TpoTre^os),  and
water  was  given  to  the  guests  for  the  purpose  of
washing  their  hands.  Crowns  made  of  garlands  of
flowers  were  also  then  given  to  them,  as  well  as
various  kinds  of  perfumes.  (Philyll.  ap.  Athe7i.  ix.
p.  408,  e.)  Wine  was  not  drunk  till  the  first
course  was  finished  ;  but  as  soon  as  the  guests
had  washed  their  hands,  unmixed  wine  was  intro-
duced in  a  large  goblet,  called  /jLeTdunrrpoy  or  /xera-
vnrrpis,  of  which  each  drank  a  little,  after  pouring
out  a  small  quantity  as  a  libation.  This  liba-
tion was  said  to  be  made  to  the  "  good  spirit "
(ayadov  SaliJ.ovos\  and  was  usually  accompanied
with  the  singing  of  the  pa?an  and  the  playing  of
flutes.  After  this  libation  mixed  wine  was
brought  in,  and  with  their  first  cup  the  guests
drank  to  Aths  2wT7]pos.  (Xen.  Spnp.  ii.  1  ;  Plato,
Syrnp.  c.  4.  p.  176  ;  Diod,  Sic.  iv.  3 ;  Suidas,  s.  v.
*AyaBov  Aaifiovos.)  With  the  cnrovSai,  the  S€7irvov
closed  ;  and  at  the  introdTacdon  of  the  dessert
(SiVTfpai  TpaTre^ai)  the  TrtJros,  (TVfnroaiou^  or
Rujxos  commenced,  of  which  an  account  is  given  in
the  article  Symposium.  (Becker,  Charikles^  vol.  i.
pp.  411—450.)

2.  Roman.  In  the  following  account  of  Roman
meals,  we  take  the  ordinary  life  of  the  middle  ranks
of  society  in  the  Augustan  age,  noticing  incidentally
the  most  remarkable  deviations,  either  on  the  side
of  primitive  simplicity  or  of  late  refinement.

The  meal  with  which  the  Roman  sometimes  be-
gan the  day  was  the  jentaaulum,  a  word  derived,
as  Isidore  would  have  us  believe,  ajcjunio  sohendo^
and  answering  to  the  Greek  aKpiriafxa.  Festus
tells  us  that  it  was  also  called  prandicula  or  silatum.
Though  by  no  means  uncommon,  it  does  not  ap-
pear to  have  been  usual,  except  in  the  case  of
children,  or  sick  persons,  or  the  luxurious,  or,  as
JJonius  adds  (De  Re  Cib.  i.  4),  of  labouring  men.
An  irregular  meal  (if  we  may  so  express  it)  was
not  likely  to  have  any  very  regular  time :  two  epi-
grams of  Martial,  however,  seem  to  fix  the  hour  at
about  three  or  four  o'clock  in  the  morning.  (Mart.
Ep.  xiv.  233,  viii.  67.  9.)  Bread,  as  we  learn
from  the  epigram  just  quoted,  formed  the  substan-
tial part  of  this  early  breakfast,  to  which  cheese
(Apul.  Met.  i.  p.  110,  ed.  Francof.  1  621X  or  dried
fruit,  as  dates  and  raisins  (Suet,  Aug.  76)  were
sometimes  added.  The  jmtaculum  of  Vitellius
(Suet.  Vit.  c.  7.  c  13)  was  doubtless  of  a  more
solid  character ;  but  this  was  a  case  of  monstrous
luxury.

Next  followed  the  prandmm  or  luncheon,  with
persons  of  simple  habits  a  frugal  meal  —

"  Quantum  interpellet  inani
Ventre  diem  durare."

Hor.  Sat.  i.  6.  127,  128.

As  Horace  himself  describes  it  in  another  place
{Sat.  il  2.  17),

"  Cum  sale  panis
Latrantem  stomachum  bene  leniet,^'


COENA.

agreeably  with  Seneca's  account  (Ep.  84),  Pams
deinde  siccus  et  sine  mensa  prandium,  post  qiwd
non  sunt  l(wandae  manns.  From  the  latter  pas-
sage we  learn  incidentally  that  it  was  a  hasty
meal,  such  as  sailors  (Juv.  Sat.  vi.  101)  and  soldiers
(Liv.  xxviii,  14)  partook  of  when  on  dutj^,  with-
out sitting  down.  The  prandium  seems  to  have
originated  in  these  military  meals,  and  a  doubt  has
been  entertained  whether  in  their  ordinary  life  the
Romans  took  food  more  than  once  in  the  day.
Pliny  {Ep.  iii.  5)  speaks  of  Aufidius  Bassus  as  fol-
lowing the  ancient  custom  in  taking  luncheon  ;  but
again  {Ep.  iii.  1 ),  in  describing  the  manners  of  an
old-fashioned  person,  he  mentions  no  other  meal
biit  the  coena.  The  following  references  (Sen.  Ep.
87  ;  Cic.  ad  Att.  v.  1  ;  Mart.  vi.  64)  seem  to  prove
that  luncheon  Avas  a  usual  meal,  although  it  can-
not be  supposed  that  there  were  many  who,  like
Vitellhis,  could  avail  themselves  of  all  the  various
times  which  the  diffiM^ent  feshions  of  the  day  al-
lowed (Suet.  Vit.  13).  It  would  evidently  be
absurd,  however,  to  lay  down  uniform  rules  for
matters  of  individual  caprice,  or  of  fashion  at  best.
The  prandium,  called  by  Suetonius  {Aug.  78)
cibits  meridianus,  was  usually  taken  about  twelve
or  one  o'clock.  (Suet.  Col.  58,  Claud.  34.)  For
the  luxurious  palate,  as  we  gather  incidentally
from  Horace  8  satires,  very  different  provision  was
made  from  what  was  described  above  as  his  own
simple  repast.  Fish  was  a  requisite  of  the  table
{Sat.  ii.  2.  16)  —

"  Foris  est  promus,  et  atrum
Defendens  pisces  hyemat  mare,"

to  which  the  choicest  wines,  sweetened  with  the
finest  honey,  were  to  be  added  —

"  Nisi  Hymettia  mella  Falemo
Ne  biberis  diluta,"

which  latter  practice  is  condemned  by  the  learned
gastronomer  {Sat.  ii.  4.  26),  who  recommends  a
weaker  mixture  —  ^

"  Leni  praecordia  mulso
Prolueris  melius,"

and  gravely  advises  to  finish  with  mulberries  fresh
gathered  in  the  morning  {Ibid.  21 — 23  ;  see  Tate's
Horace.,  2nd  ed.  pp.  97 — 106).

The  words  of  Festus,  coena  apud  antiquos  dice-
batur  quod  mmc prandium^  have  given  much  trouble
to  the  critics,  perhaps  needlessly,  when  we  remem-
ber the  change  of  hours  in  our  ovm  country.  If
we  translate  coena^  as  according  to  our  notions  we
ought  to  do,  by  "  dinner,"  they  describe  exactly
the  alteration  of  our  own  manners  during  the  last
century.  The  analogy  of  the  Greek  word  SeiTrj/oj/,
which,  according  to  Athenaeus,  was  used  in  a
similar  way  for  SpicrToi',  also  affords  assistance.
Another  meal,  termed  mcrenda,  is  mentioned  by
Isidore  and  Festus,  for  which  several  refined  dis-
tinctions are  proposed  ;  but  it  is  not  certain  that
it  really  differed  from  the  prandium.

The  table,  which  was  made  of  citron,  maple-wood,
or  even  of  ivory  (Juv.  Sat.  xi. ),  was  covered  with
a  mantele,  and  each  of  the  different  courses,  some-
times amounting  to  seven  (Juv.  Sat.  i.  95),  served
upon  a  ferculum  or  waiter.  In  the  "  munda
sapellex  "  of  Horace,  great  care  was  taken

"  Ne  turpe  toral,  ne  sordida  mappa
Comiget  nares  ;  ne  non  et  cantharus  et  lanx
Ostendat  tibi  te."  Ep.  i,  5.  22—24.


COENA.

And  on  the  same  occasion,  the  whole  dinner,  which
consisted  of  vegetables,  was  served  up  on  a  single
platter  (v.  2).

To  return  to  our  description,  the  dinner  usually
consisted  of  three  courses :  first,  the  pramulsis  or
antecoena  (Cic.  txdFam.  ix.  20),  called  also  gustatio
(Petron.  Sat.  31),  made  up  of  all  sorts  of  stimu-
lants to  the  appetite,  such  as  those  described  by
Horace  {Sat.  ii.  8.  9),
"  Rapula,  lactucae,  radices,  qualia  lassum
Pen-ellunt  stomachum,  siser,  alec,  faecula  Coa."

Eggs  also  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  ix.  20 ;  Hor.  Sat.  i.  3.  6)
were  so  indispensable  to  the  first  course  that
they  almost  gave  a  name  to  it  {ab  ovo  Usque  ad
mala).  In  the  promulsis  of  Trimalchio's  supper
(Petron.  31)  —  probably  designed  as  a  satire  on
the  emperor  Nero  —  an  ass  of  Corinthian  brass  is
introduced,  bearing  two  panniers,  one  of  white,
the  other  of  black  olives,  covered  with  two  large
dishes  inscribed  with  Trimalchio's  name.  Next
come  dormice  {glires)  on  small  bridges  sprinkled
with  poppy-seed  and  honey,  and  hot  sausages  (toma-
cula)  on  a  silver  gridiron  (craticula),  with  Syrian
prunes  and  pomegranate  berries  underneath.  These,
however,  were  imperial  luxuries  ;  the  frugality  of
Martial  onl}^  allowed  of  lettuce  and  Sicenian  olives  ;
indeed  he  himself  tells  us  that  the  promulsis  was
a  refinement  of  modern  luxury  {Bp.  xiii.  14.  1).
Macrobius  {Sat.  ii.  9)  has  left  an  authentic  record
of  a  coena  pontificum  (see  Hor.  Carm.  ii.  14.  28),
given  by  Lentulus  on  his  election  to  the  office  of
flamen,  in  which  the  first  course  alone  was  made
up  of  the  following  dishes :  —  Several  kinds  of
shell-fish  {echini^  ostreae.  crtidae,  pelorides,  spondyli,
glycomarides^  murices  purpuras^  balani  ulbi  et
nigri)^  thrushes,  asparagus,  a  fatted  hen  {gallina
altilis\  beccaficoes  {ficedulae)^  nettles  {urticae),
the  haunches  of  a  goat  and  wild  boar  {lumbi  capra-
gini,  aprugni)^  rich  meats  made  into  pasties  {altilia
ew  farina  involuta),  many  of  which  are  twice  re-
peated in  the  inventory.

It  would  far  exceed  the  limits  of  this  work  even
to  mention  all  the  dishes  which  formed  the  second
course  of  a  Roman  dinner,  which,  whoever  likes,
may  find  minutely  described  in  Bulengerus.  {De
Conviviis,  ii.  and  iii.)  Of  birds,  the  Guinea  hen
{J/ra  avis\  the  pheasant  {phasiana,  so  called  from
Phasis,  a  river  of  Colchis),  and  the  thrush,  were
most  in  repute  ;  the  liver  of  a  capon  steeped  in
milk  (Pliny),  and  beccaficoes  {ficednlae)  dressed
with  pepper,  were  held  a  delicacy.  (Mart.  iii.  5.)
The  peacock,  according  to  Macrobius  {Sat.  ii.  9),
was  first  introduced  by  Hortensius  the  orator,  at
an  inaugural  supper,  and  acquired  such  repute
among  the  Roman  gourmands  as  to  be  com-
monly sold  for  fifty  denarii.  Other  birds  are
mentioned,  as  the  duck  {anas.  Mart.  xiii.  52),
especially  its  head  and  breast  ;  the  woodcock
{attagen),  the  turtle,  and  flamingo  { phoenicopterus.
Mart.  xiii.  71),  the  tongue  of  which.  Martial  tells
us,  especially  commended  itself  to  the  delicate
palate.  Of  fish,  the  variety  was  perhaps  still
greater :  the  charr  {scarus),  the  turbot  {rhombus),
the  sturgeon  {acipenser),  the  mullet  (mullus),
■.  were  highly  prized,  and  dressed  in  the  most
*  various  fashions.  In  the  banquet  of  Nasidienus,
an  eel  is  brought,  garnished  with  prawns  swim-
ming in  the  sauce.  (Mart.  Xenia,  xiii.)  Of  solid
meat,  pork  seems  to  have  been  the  favourite  dish,
especially  sucking-pig  (Mart.  xiii.  41)  ;  the  paps


COENA.  30r

of  a  sow  served  up  in  milk  {sumen.  Ibid.  Ep.  44),
the  flitch  of  bacon  {petaso,  Ep.  55),  the  womb  of
a  sow  {vulva,  Ep.  56),  are  all  mentioned  by
Martial.  Boar's  flesh  and  venison  were  also  in
high  repute,  especially  the  former,  described  by
Juvenal  {Sat.  i.  141)  as  animal  propter  convivia
natum.  Condiments  were  added  to  most  of
these  dishes :  such  were  the  muria^  a  kind  of
pickle  made  from  the  tunny  fish  (Mart.  xiii.  103)  ;
the  gai-um  sociorum,  made  from  the  intestines  of
the  mackerel  {scomber),  so  called  because  brought
from  abroad  ;  alec,  a  sort  of  brine  ;  faejc,  the  sedi-
ment of  wine,  &c.,  for  the  receipts  of  v/hich  we
must  again  refer  the  reader  to  Catius's  learned
instructor.  (Hor.  Sat.  ii.  4.)  Several  kinds  of
fungi  {Ibid.  v.  20)  are  mentioned,  trufles  (boleti)^
mushrooms  {tuberes),  which  either  made  dishes  by
themselves,  or  formed  th'.>  garniture  for  larger  dishes.
It  must  not  be  supposed  that  the  aHistes  of  im-
perial Rome  were  at  all  behind  ourselves  in  the
preparation  and  arrangements  of  the  table.  In  a
large  household,  the  functionaries  to  whom  this
important  part  of  domestic  economj-  was  entrusted
v/ere  four,  the  butler  ( promus),  the  cook  {archi-
magirus),  the  arranger  of  the  dishes  {structor),
and  the  carver  {carptor  or  scissor).  Carving  was
taught  as  an  art,  and,  according  to  Petronius  (35,
36),  performed  to  the  sound  of  music,  with  appro-
priate gesticulations  (Juv.  Sat.  v.  121),

"  Nee  minimo  sane  discrimine  refert
Quo  vultu  lepores  et  quo  gallina  secetur."

In  the  supper  of  Petronius,  a  large  round  tray
{ferculum,  reposUorium)  is  brought  in,  with  the
signs  of  the  zodiac  figured  all  round  it,  upon  each
of  which  the  artiste  {structor)  had  placed  some  ap-
propriate viand,  a  goose  on  Aquarius,  a  pair  of
scales  with  tarts  {scriblitae)  and  cheesecakes  {pla-
centae) in  each  scale  on  Libra,  &c.  In  the  middle
was  placed  a  hive  supported  by  delicate  herbage.
Presently  four  slaves  come  forward  dancing  to  the
sound  of  music,  and  take  away  the  upper  part  of
the  dish  ;  beneath  appear  all  kinds  of  dressed
meats  ;  a  hare  with  wings,  to  imitate  Pegasus,
in  the  middle  ;  and  four  figures  of  Marsyas  at  the
comers,  pouring  hot  sauce  {garum  piperatum)  over
the  fish,  that  were  swimming  in  the  Euripus  be-
low. So  entirely  had  the  Romans  lost  all  shame
of  luxury,  since  the  days  when  Cincius,  in  support-
ing the  Fannian  law,  charged  his  own  age  with
the  enonnity  of  introducing  the  porcus  Trojnnus
(a  sort  of  pudding  stuffed  with  the  flesh  of  other
animals,  Macrob.  Sat.  ii.  2).

The  bellaria  or  dessert,  to  which  Horace  alludes
when  he  says  of  Tigellius  ab  ovo  Usque  ad  mala
citaret,  consisted  of  fniits  (which  the  Romans
usually  ate  uncooked), such  as  almonds  {amygdalae\
dried  grapes  {uvae  passae),  dates  {palmulae,  laryo-
tae,  dactyli)  ;  of  sweetmeats  and  confections,  called
edulia  mellita,  dulciaria,  such  as  cheesecakes  {cu-
pediae,  crustula,  liba,  placentae,  artologani),  almond
cakes  {eoptae),  tarts  {scriblitae),  whence  the  maker
of  them  was  called  pistor  dulciarius,  placentariusy
libarius,  &c.

We  will  now  suppose  the  table  spread  and  the
guests  assembled,  each  with  his  mappa  or  napkin
(Mart.  xii.  29),  and  in  his  dinner  dress,  called
coenatoria  or  cubitoria,  usually  of  a  bright  colour
(Petron.  c.  21),  and  variegated  with  flowers.  First
they  took  off  their  shoes  for  fear  of  soiling  the
couch  (Mart.  iii.  30),  which  was  often  inlaid  with
X  2


308


COENA.


ivory  or  tortolsesliell,  and  covered  with  cloth  of
gold.  Next  they  laid  down  to  eat  (Hor.  Sat.
L  4.  39),  the  head  resting  on  the  left  elbow  and
supported  by  cushions.  (Mart.  iii.  8.)  There
were  usually,  but  not  always,  three  on  the  same
couch  (Hor.  Sat.  i.  4.  86'),  the  middle  place  being
esteemed  the  most  honourable.  Around  the  tables
stood  the  servants  (ministri)  clothed  in  a  tunic
(Hor.  Sat.  ii.  6.  107),  and  girt  with  napkins  (Suet.
Cal.  2tj) :  some  removed  the  dishes  and  wiped  the
tables  with  a  rough  cloth  (gausape,  Hor.  Sat.  ii.
8.  11),  others  gave  the  guests  water  for  their
hands,  or  cooled  the  room  with  fans.  (Mart.  iii.
82.)  Here  stood  an  Eastern  youth  (Juv.  Sat.  v.
55)  behind  his  master's  couch,  ready  to  answer
the  noise  of  the  fingers  {digiti  crepitus.,  Mart.  vi.
89),  while  others  bore  a  large  platter  {viazonomum)
of  different  kinds  of  meat  to  the  guests.  (Hor.  Sat.
ii.  8.  86.)

Whatever  changes  of  fashion  had  taken  place
since  primitive  times,  the  coena  in  Cicero's  day
{ad  Att.  ix.  7)  was  at  all  events  an  evening  meal.
It  was  usual  to  bathe  about  two  o'clock  and  dine
at  three,  hours  which  seem  to  have  been  observed,
at  least  by  the  higher  classes,  long  after  the  Au-
gustan age.  (Mart.  iv.  8.  6,  xi.  53.  3 ;  Cic.  ad
Fam.  ix.  26  ;  Plin.  Ep.  iii.  1.)  When  Juvenal
mentions  two  o'clock  as  a  dinner  hour,  he  evi-
dently means  a  censure  on  the  luxury  of  the  person
named  {Sat.  i,  49,  50),

"  Exul  ah  octava  Marius  bibit."

In  the  banquet  of  Nasidienus,  about  the  same  hour
is  intended  when  Horace  says  to  Fundanius,

*'  Nam  mihi  quaerenti  convivam  d  ictus  here  illic
De  7nedio  potare  die."

Horace  and  Maecenas  used  to  dine  at  a  late
hour  about  simset.  (Hor.  Sat.  ii.  7.  33,  Ep.  i.
5.  3.)  Perhaps  the  various  statements  of  classical
authors  upon  this  subject  can  only  be  reconciled  by
supposing  that  with  the  Romans,  as  with  ourselves,
there  was  a  great  variety  of  hours  in  the  different
ranks  of  society.

Dinner  was  set  out  in  a  room  called  coenatio  or
diaeta  (which  two  words  perhaps  conveyed  to  a
Roman  ear  nearly  the  same  distinction  as  our
dining-room  and  parlour).  The  coenatio.,  in  rich
men's  houses,  Avas  fitted  up  with  great  magnificence.
(Sen.  Ep.  90.)  Suetonius  {Nero.,  31)  mentions  a
supper-room  in  the  golden  palace  of  Nero,  con-
structed like  a  theatre,  with  shifting  scenes  to
change  with  every  course.  In  the  midst  of  the
coenatio  were  set  three  couches  {triclinia)^  answer-
ing in  shape  to  the  square,  as  the  long  semicircular
couches  {sigmata)  did  to  the  oval  tables.  An
account  of  the  disposition  of  the  couches,  and  of
the  place  which  each  guest  occupied,  is  given  in
the  article  Triclinium.

The  Greeks  and  Romans  were  accustomed,  in
later  times,  to  recline  at  their  meals  ;  though  this
practice  could  not  have  been  of  great  antiquity  in
•  Greece,  since  Homer  never  describes  persons  as
reclining,  but  always  as  sritting,  at  their  meals.
Isidore  of  Seville  {Orig.  xx  11)  also  attributes
the  same  practice  to  the  ancient  Romans.  Even
in  the  time  of  the  early  Roman  emperors,  children
in  families  of  the  highest  rank  used  to  sit  together
at  an  inferior  table,  while  their  fathers  and  elders
reclined  on  couches  at  the  upper  part  of  the  room.
(Tacit,  Ann.  xiii.  16;  Suet.  Attg.  GB^  Claud.  32.)


COENA.

Roman  ladies  continued  the  prartice  of  sitting
at  table,  even  after  the  recumbent  position  had
become  common  with  the  other  sex.  (Varro,  ap.
Isid.  Orig.  xx.  11  ;  Val.  Max.  ii.  1.  §  3.)  It  ap-
pears to  have  been  considered  more  decent,  and
more  agreeable  to  the  severity  and  pmity  of  ancient
manners,  for  women  to  sit,  more  especially  if  many
persons  were  present.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  Ave
find  cases  of  women  reclining,  where  there  was
conceived  to  be  nothing  bold  or  indelicate  in  their
posture.  In  some  of  the  bas-reliefs,  representing
the  visit  of  Bacchus  to  Icarus,  Erigone,  instead  of
sitting  on  the  couch,  reclines  upon  it  in  the  bosom
of  her  father.  In  Juvenal  {Sat.  ii.  120)  a  bride
reclines  at  the  marriage  supper  on  the  bosom  of
her  husband  ;  which  is  illustrated  by  the  following
woodcut,  taken  from  Montfaucon  {Ant.  Exp.Suppl.
m.  66).


It  seems  intended  to  represent  a  scene  of  perfect
matrimonial  felicity.  The  husband  and  wife  re-
cline on  a  sofa  of  rich  materials.  A  three-legged
table  is  spread  with  viands  before  them.  Their
two  sons  are  in  front  of  the  sofa,  one  of  them  sit-
ting, in  the  manner  above  described,  on  a  low
stool,  and  playing  with  the  dog.  Several  females
and  a  boy  are  performing  a  piece  of  music  for  the
entertainment  of  the  married  pair.

It  has  been  already  remarked  that,  before  lying
down,  the  shoes  or  sandals  were  taken  off.  In  all
the  ancient  paintings  and  bas-reliefs  illustrative  of
this  subject,  Ave  see  the  guests  reclining  with  naked
feet :    and  in  those    of  them  which  contain  the


I
(


COGNATI.

favourite  subject  of  the  visit  of  Bacelius  to  Icarus,
we  observe  a  faun  performing  for  Bacchus  this
office.  The  preceding  woodcut,  taken  from  a  terra
cotta  in  the  Britisli  Museum,  representing  this
subject,  both  shows  the  naked  feet  of  Icarus,  who
has  partly  raised  hnnself  from  his  couch  to  welcome
his  guest,  and  also  that  Bacchus  has  one  of  his
feet  already  naked,  whilst  the  faun  is  in  the  act  of
removing  the  shoe  from  the  other.  [B.  J.J

COENA'CULUM.     [Domus.]
•    COENA'TIO.     [CoENA,  p.  308,a.]

COENATO'RIA.  [Coena,  p.  307,  b.  ;  Syn-
thesis.]

COGNA'TI.  The  following  passage  of  Ulpian
{Frag.  tit.  26.  §  1 )  will  explain  the  meaning  of
this  terra  :  —

"  The  hereditates  of  intestate  ingenui  belong  in
the  first  place  to  their  sui  heredes,  that  is,  children
Avho  are  in  the  power  of  the  parent,  and  those  who
are  in  the  place  of  children  (as  grandchildren  for
instance)  ;  if  thei-e  are  no  sui  heredes,  it  belongs  to
the  consanguinei,  that  is,  brothers  and  sisters  by
the  same  father  (it  was  not  necessary  that  they
should  be  by  the  same  mother)  ;  if  there  are  no
consanguinei,  it  belongs  to  the  remaining  nearest
agnati,  that  is,  to  the  cognati  of  the  male  sex,  who
trace  their  descent  through  males,  and  arc  of  the
same  familia.  And  this  is  provided  by  a  law
of  the  Twelve  Tables  :  —  Si  intesiato  moritur  cut
suus  /teres  nee  escit,  agnatus  proojimus  familiam
Jiubeto.''''

Cognati  are  all  tliose  who,  according  to  the  Jus
Gentium  or  Jus  Naturale,  are  sprung  from  one  per-
son, whether  male  or  female  (cognati .  .  quasi  ex
uno  nati.  Dig.  38.  tit.  8.  s.  1.  §  1.).  Pure  Naturalis
Cognatio  exists  between  a  woman,  who  is  not  in
manu,  and  her  children,  whether  born  in  marriage
or  not  ;  and  among  all  persons  who  are  akin  merely
through  the  mother,  without  any  respect  to  mar-
riage. Consequently,  children  of  one  mother  be-
gotten ill  marriage  and  not  begotten  in  marriage,
and  children  of  one  mother  begotten  in  marriage  by
different  fathers,  are  cognati.  The  natural  relation-
ship by  procreation  was  called  naturalis,  as  op-
posed to  cognatio  civilis  or  legitima,  which,  though
founded  on  the  naturalis  cognatio,  received  from
positive  law  a  distinct  character.  This  naturalis
cognatio  was  often  simply  called  cognatio,  and  the
civilis  or  legitima  was  called  agnatio.  Naturalis
cognatio  then,  simply  in  itself,  was  no  civilis  cog-
natio ;  but  agnatio  was  both  cognatio  naturalis  and
civilis.

A  correct  notion  of  the  term  agnatus  cannot  be
had  without  referring  to  the  notion  of  the  patria
potestas,  and  to  one  of  the  senses  of  the  word
familia.  In  one  sense,  then,  familia  signifies  all
those  free  persons  who  are  in  the  power  (in  patria
potestate  manuve)  of  the  same  Roman  citizen,  who
was  paterfamilias,  or  head  of  a  familia  ;  and  in
this  sense  familia  signifies  all  those  who  are  united
in  one  body  by  this  common  bond.  It  is  a  general
term  which  comprehends  all  the  agnati.  The
legitimate  children  of  sons  who  were  not  eman-
cipated were  in  the  patria  potestas,  consequently
formed  part  of  the  familia,  and  were  agnati.
Adopted  children  were  also  in  the  adoptive  father's
power  ;  and  consequently  were  agnati,  though  they
were  not  naturales  cognati.  Accordingly,  if  the
-legal  agnatio,  which  arose  from  adoption,  was  dis-
solved by  emancipation,  there  remamed  no  cognatio  :
but  if  the  agnatio,  which  arose  from  cognatio,  was


COLLEGIUM.


309


dissolved  by  emancipation,  there  still  remained  the
naturalis  cognatio.  The  paterfamilias  maintained
his  power  over  his  familia  so  long  as  he  lived,  ex
cept  over  those  who  were  emancipated,  or  passed
into  another  familia,  or  in  any  way  sustained  a
deminutio  capitis.  On  his  death,  the' common  bond
of  the  patria  potestas  was  dissolved,  and  his  sons
became  respectively  heads  of  families  ;  that  is,  of
persons  who  were  in  their  power,  or,  with  respect
to  one  another,  were  agnati.  But  all  these  persons
continued  to  be  members  of  the  same  familia  ;  that
is,  they  were  still  agnati,  and  consequently  the
agnatio  subsisted  among  persons  so  long  as  they
could  trace  back  their  descent  through  malea  to  one
common  paterfamilias,

Agnati,  then,  may  be  briefly  explained  to  be
those  "  who  would  be  in  the  patria  potestas,  or  in
jus,  as  a  wife  in  manus  vin,  or  in  the  manus  of  a
son  who  is  in  the  father's  power,  if  the  paterfami-
lias were  alive  ;  and  this  is  true  whether  such
persons  ever  were  actually  so  or  not."  (Hugo,
Lehrbuch,  &c,)

The  imperfection  of  an  individual,  as  a  living
being,  is  completed.  First,  by  marriage,  which  unites
two  persons  of  dilferent  sexes  in  a  society  for  life.
Second,  the  imperfection  of  an  individual  which
arises  from  his  limited  existence,  is  completed  in
the  institution  of  Roman  law  in  the  patria  potestas,
to  which  is  attached,  partly  as  a  further  develop-
ment, partly  as  a  more  natural  or  less  legal  analogy,
kinship  :  "  as  a  further  development  in  agnatio,
which  is  only  the  residuum  of  a  previous  existing
patria  potestas  with  constant  continuation  ;  as  a
natural  analogy  in  cognatio,  in  which  the  jus  gen-
tium recognises  the  community  of  individuals
which  rests  on  descent,  as  the  jus  civile  in
agnatio."    (Savigny,  System^  &c,  vol.  i,  p.  341,  &c.)

We  must  suppose  then,  in  order  to  obtain  a
clear  notion  of  agnatio,  that  if  the  male  from
whom  the  agnati  claim  a  common  descent  were
alive,  and  they  were  all  in  his  power,  or  in  his
manus,  or  in  the  manus  of  those  who  are  in  his
power,  they  Avould  all  be  agnati.  In  order,  then,
that  agnatio  may  subsist  among  persons,  the
male  from  whom  the  descent  is  claimed  must  have
lost  his  patria  potestas  by  death  only,  and  not  by
any  capitis  deminutio,  and  conseqUvUtly  not  by
any  of  his  children  passing  into  any  other  patria
potestas,  or  into  the  manus  viri,  which  would  in
effect  be  passing  into  another  agnatio  ;  for  a  {)erson
could  not  at  the  same  time  be  an  agnatus  of  two
altogether  different  families.  Accordingly,  adoption
destroyed  the  former  agnatio,  and  the  emancipa-
tion of  a  son  took  away  all  his  rights  of  agnatio,
and  his  former  agnati  lost  all  their  rights  against
him.  •

The  legal  definition  (Gaius,  iii.  1 0)  that  agnati
are  those  who  are  connected  by  legitima  cognatio,
and  that  legitima  cognatio  is  the  cognatio  through
persons  of  the  male  sex,  must  be  viewed  solely
with  reference  to  the  natural  relation  ;  for  agnatio,
as  a  civil  institution,  comprehended  those  who  were
adopted  into  the  familia  ;  and  further,  those  who
were  adopted  out  of  the  familia  lost  their  former
agnatio.

The  meaning  of  consanguinei  has  already  been
given  by  Ulpian.  Those  who  were  of  the  same
blood  by  both  parents,  Avere  sometimes  called
germani  ;  and  consanguinei  were  those  who  had  a
common  father  only  ;  and  uterini  those  who  had  a
common  mother  only.


310

COGNATT.

vi.

Tritavus,
Tritavia.

6.

1

V.

Atnvus,
Atavia—
5.

il.

Abavus,
Abavia —

4.
1

r.

— Ahpatruus,

Abamita,

Abavunt  ulus,

Abmaierlera.

6.

i/i.

Proavus,
Proavia.—

3.

iv.
— Propatruus,

Proamita,

Proavunculus

Promatert.—

5.

i

Avus,
Avia.  —

2.

J.

Pater,
Mater.  —

1.

1

iii.

—  Patruus,

Amita,

Avunculus,

Mater.  Mag.-

iv.

—Horum,
Filius,
Filia.
6.

ii.

—  Patruus,

Ainita,

Avunculus,

Mater  tera. —

3.

iii.

— Propior,
Sobrino,
Sobrinave  —
5.

IS  BATE

de  cujus
cognatione
\  qua-riiur.

i.

—  Frater,

Soror,

2.

1

ii.         1         iti.
ConsohrinusI— Sobrinus,
Consobrina.      Sobrina.

4.                    6.

1

1

Filius,
Filia.

I.
1

i!.
Horum,
Filius,
Filia.

3.
1

1

iii.

Horum,

Filius,

Filia.

5.

1

i!.

Nepos,
Neptis.

2.

I

Pronepos,
Proneptis.

a

1

i!i.

Horum,

Nepos,

Neptis.

4.

.J.

Horum,

Pronepos,

Proneptis.

5.

1

ii.
Horum,
Nepos,
Neptis.

it.

Abnepos,
AbneptM.

4.

1

v.

Horum,

Abnepos,

Abneptis.

6.

Adnepos.

Adneptii.

5.

1

vi.
Trijepos,
Trineptis.

This  table  sliovirs  all  the  degrees  of  cognatio.
The  degree  of  relationship  of  any  given  person  in
this  stemma,  to  the  person  witli  respect  to  whom
the  relationship  is  inquired  after  (is  eave,  &c.),  is
indicated  by  the  figures  attached  to  the  several
words.  The  Roman  numerals  denote  the  degree
of  cognatio  in  the  canon  law  ;  and  the  Arabic
numerals,  the  degrees  in  the  Roman  or  Civil  law.
The  latter  mode  of  reckoning  is  adopted  in  Eng-
land, in  ascertaining  the  persons  who  are  entitled
as  next  of  kin  to  the  personal  estate  of  an  intestate.
In  the  canon  law,  the  number  which  expresses  the
collateral  degree  is  always  the  greater  of  the  two
numbers  (when  they  are  different)  which  express


COLLEGIUM.

the  distance  of  the  two  parties  from  the  common
ancestor  ;  but  in  the  civil  law,  the  degree  of  re-
lationship is  ascertained  by  counting  from  either  of
the  two  persons  to  the  other  through  the  common
ancestor.  All  those  words  on  which  the  same
Roman,  or  the  same  Arabic,  numerals  occur,  re-
present persons  who  are  in  the  same  degree  of
cognatio,  according  to  these  respective  laws,  to  the
person  is  eave,  &c.  (lixigo^  Lehrbueh^  Sec. ;  Mare-
zoll,  Lehrhuch,  &c. ;  Dig.  38.  tit.  10,  De  Gradi/ms,
See.  ;  Ulpianus,  Froff.  ed.  Bocking  ;  Bocking,  7«-
stituiionen.)  [G.  L.J

CO'GNITOR.     [Actio.]

COGNO'MEN.     [NoMEN.]

COHERES.     [Heres.]

COHORS.     [ExERciTus.]

COLA'CRETAE  {KtaKaKpirai,  also  called
Ka)\ayperai),  the  name  of  very  ancient  magistrates
at  Athens,  who  had  the  management  of  all  financial
matters  in  the  time  of  the  kings.  They  are  said
to  have  derived  their  name  from  collecting  certain
parts  of  the  victims  at  sacrifices  (^/c  rod  ayeipeip
TCLs  KuKas).  The  legislature  of  Solon  left  the
ColacretJie  untouched ;  but  Cleisthenes  deprived
them  of  the  charge  of  the  finances,  which  he  trans-
ferred to  the  Apodectae,  who  were  established  in
their  stead.  [Apodectae.]  From  this  time  the
Colacretae  had  only  to  provide  for  the  meals  in  the
Prytaneium,  and  subsequently  had  likewise  to  pay
the  fees  to  the  dicasts,  when  the  practice  of  paying
the  dicasts  was  introduced  b}--  Pericles.  (Aristopb,
Vesp.  693,  724,  with  Schol. ;  Etym.  M.  Phot.  He-
sych.  Suid.  Tim. ;  Ruhnk.  ad  Tim.  Plat.  Lex.  p.  1 71  ;
Bockh,  PM.  Econ.  ofAtlmis,^.  173.  &c.,  2nd  ed.)

COLLATIO  BONO'RUM.  [Bonorum  Col-
la  tic]

COLLEGATA'RIUS.     [Legatum.]

COLLE'GIUM.  The  persons  who  formed  a
collegium,  were  called  collegae  or  sodales.  The
word  collegium  properly  expressed  the  notion  of
several  persons  being  united  in  any  office  or  for
any  common  purpose  (Liv.  x.  13,  22  ;  Tacit.  Ann.
iii.  31)  ;  it  afterwards  came  to  signify  a  body  of
persons,  and  the  union  which  bound  them  together.
The  collegium  was  the  kraipia  of  the  Greeks.

The  notion  of  a  collegium  was  as  follows  :  —
A  collegium  or  corpus,  as  it  was  also  called,  must
consist  of  three  persons  at  least.  (Dig.  50.  tit.  16.
s.  85.)  Persons  who  legally  formed  such  an  asso-
ciation were  said  corpus  habere^  which  is  equiva-
lent to  our  phrase  of  being  incorporated  ;  and  in
later  times  they  were  said  to  be  corporati,  and  the
body  was  called  a  corporatio.  Those  who  farmed
the  public  revenues,  mines,  or  salt  works  (salinae)
might  have  a  corpus.  The  power  of  forming  such
a  collegium  or  societas  (for  this  term  also  was
used),  was  limited  by  various  leges,  senatuscon-
sulta,  and  imperial  constitutions.  (Dig.  3.  tit.  4.)
Associations  of  individuals,  who  were  entitled
to  have  a  corpus,  could  hold  property  in  com-
mon ;  they  could  hold  it,  as  the  Roman  jurists
remark,  just  as  the  state  held  property  (res  com-
munes). These  collegia  had  a  common  chest,  and
could  sue  and  be  sued  by  their  syndicus  or  actor.
That  which  was  due  to  the  collegium  or  universitas
(for  this  was  a  still  more  general  term),  Avas  not
due  to  the  individuals  of  it  ;  and  that  which  the
collegium  owed,  was  not  the  debt  of  the  individuals.
The  property  of  the  collegium  was  liable  to  be
seized  and  sold  for  its  debts.  The  collegium  or
universitas  was  governed  by  its  own  regulations,


COLLEGIUM.

which  might  be  any  regulations  that  the  members
agreed  upon,  provided  they  were  not  contrary  to
law :  this  provision,  as  Gaius  conjectures  (Dig.
47.  tit.  '22),  was  derived  from  a  law  of  Solon,
which  he  quotes.  The  collegium  still  subsisted,
though  all  the  original  members  were  changed.
Collegia  of  all  kinds  may  be  viewed  under  two
aspects,  —  as  having  some  object  of  administration
either  public  or  not  public,  which  object  is  often
the  main  purpose  for  which  they  exist,  or  as  being
capable  of  holding  property  and  contracting  and
owing  obligations.  As  having  some  object  of  ad-
ministration, they  are  viewed  as  units  (magistratus
municipales  cum  unum  magistratnm  administrent,
etiam  unius  hominis  vicem  sustinent  (Dig.  50.  tit.  1.
8.  25).  As  having  a  capacity  to  hold  property,  they
are  purely  fictitious  or  artificial  personages,  and,
consequently,  thus  conceived,  it  is  not  all  the  mem-
bers who  are  supposed  to  compose  this  artificial
person,  but  the  members  are  the  living  persons  by
whose  agency  this  artificial  person  does  the  acts
which  are  necessary  for  the  acquisition  and  admi-
nistration of  its  property.  It  is  only  with  reference
to  the  purposes  of  ovvnership  and  contracts,  that  an
artificial  person  has  an  existence  as  a  person.  There
are  some  further  remarks  under  Univehsitas.

A  lawfully  constituted  collegium  was  legiti-
mum.  Associations  of  individuals,  which  affected
to  act  as  collegia,  but  Avere  forbidden  by  law,  were
called  illicita.

It  does  not  appear  how  collegia  were  formed,
except  that  some  were  specially  established  by  legal
authority.  (Liv.  v.  50,  52  ;  Suet.  Cues.  42,  Aug.
32  ;  Dig.  3.  tit.  4.  s.  1.)  Other  collegia  were
probably  formed  by  voluntary  associations  of  indi-
viduals under  the  provisions  of  some  general  legal
authority.  This  supposition  would  account  for  the
fact  of  a  great  number  of  collegia  being  formed  in
the  course  of  time,  and  many  of  them  being  occa-
sionally suppressed  as  not  legitima.

Some  of  these  corporate  bodies  resembled  our
companies  or  guilds  ;  such  were  the  fabrorum,  pis-
torum,  &c.  collegia.  (Lampridius,  Alex.  Severus,
33.)  Others  were  of  a  religious  character  ;  such
as  the  pontificum,  augurum,  fratrum  arvalium
collegia.  Others  were  bodies  concerned  about
government  and  administration  ;  as  tribunorum
plebis  (Liv.  xlii.  32),  qiuiestorum,  decurionum
collegia.  The  titles  of  numerous  other  collegia
may  be  collected  from  the  Roman  writers,  and
from  inscriptions.

According  to  the  definition  of  a  collegium,  the
consuls  being  only  two  in  number  were  not  a  col-
legium, though  each  was  called  collega  with  re-
spect to  the  other,  and  their  union  in  office  was
called  collegium.  The  Romans  never  called  the
individual  who,  for  the  time,  filled  an  office  of
perpetual  continuance,  a  universitas  or  collegium,
for  that  would  have  been  a  contradiction  in  terms,
which  it  has  been  reserved  for  modern  times  to
introduce,  under  the  name  of  a  corporation  sole.
But  the  notion  of  one  person  succeeding  to  all  the
rights  of  a  predecessor  was  familiar  to  the  Romans
in  the  case  of  a  single  heres,  and  the  same  notion
must  have  existed  with  respect  to  individuals  who
held  any  office  in  perpetual  succession.

According  to  Ulpian,  a  universitas,  though  re-
duced to  a  single  member,  was  still  considered  a
universitas  ;  for  the  individual  possessed  all  the
rights  of  the  universitas,  and  used  the  name  by
which  it  was  distinguished.     (Dig.  3.  tit.  4.  s.  7.)


COLONATaS.


311


When  a  new  member  was  taken  into  a  colle-
gium, he  was  said  co-optari,  and  the  old  members
were  said  with  respect  to  him,  recipere  in  collcgiuin.
The  mode  of  filling  up  vacancies  would  vary  in  dif-
ferent collegia.

Civitates  and  res  publicae  (civil  communities)
and  municipia  (in  the  later  sense  of  the  term)
were  viewed  as  fictitious  persons.

According  to  Pliny  {Ep.  v.  7  ;  Ulp.  Fr.  tit.  22.
s.  5)  res  publicae  and  municipia  could  not  take
as  heres  ;  and  the  reason  given  is,  that  they  were  a
corpus  incertum,  and  so  could  not  cemere  heredita-
tern  ;  that  is,  do  those  acts  which  a  heres  himself
must  do  in  order  to  show  that  he  consents  to  be  a
heres,  for  the  heres  could  not  in  this  matter  act
by  a  representative.  A  res  publica,  therefore,  as
being  a  fictitious  person,  could  not  do  the  necessary
act.  Municipia,  like  other  fictitious  persons,
could,  however,  acquire  property  in  other  ways,
and  by  means  of  other  persons,  whether  bond  or
free  (Dig.  4 1 .  tit.  2.  s.  1.  §22):  and  they  could
take  fideicommissa  under  the  senatusconsultum
Apronianum  which  was  passed  in  the  time  of
Hadrian,  and  extended  to  licita  collegia  in  the
time  of  M.  Aurelius.  (Dig.  34.  tit.  5.  s.  21.)  By
another  senatusconsultum,  the  liberti  of  municipia
might  make  the  municipes  their  heredes.  The  gods
could  not  be  made  heredes,  except  such  deities  as
po.«sessed  this  capacity  by  special  senatuscon-
sulta  or  imperial  constitutions,  such  as  Jupiter
Tarpeius,  &c.  (UJp.  Fr.  tit.  22.  s.  6.)  By  a  con-
stitution of  Leo  (Cod.  vi.  tit.  24.  s.  1 2)  civitates
obtained  the  capacity  to  take  property  as  heredes.
As  early  as  the  time  of  Nerva  and  Hadrian,  civi-
tates could  take  legacies.

Though  civitates  within  the  Roman  empire
could  not  originally  receive  gifts  by  will,  yet  in-
dependent states  could  receive  ^ifts  in  that  way
(Tacit.  Ann.  iv.  43),  a  case  which  furnishes  no
objections  to  the  statement  above  made  by  Pliny
and  Ulpian.  In  the  same  way  the  Roman  state
accepted  the  inheritance  of  Attalus,  king  of  Per-
gamus,  a  gift  which  came  to  them  from  a  foreigner.
The  Roman  lawyers  considered  such  a  gift  to  be
accepted  by  the  jus  gentium.  (Dig.  3.  tit.  4  ;  47.
tit.  22  ;  Savigny,  System,  &c.  vol.  ii.  p.  235.  &c.)
[Universitas.]  [G.  L.]

COLONA'TUS,  COLO'NL  The  Coloni  of
the  later  Imperial  period  formed  a  class  of  agri-
culturists, whose  condition  has  been  the  subject  of
elaborate  investigation.

These  Coloni  were  designated  by  the  various
names  of  Coloni,  Rustici,  Originarii,  Adscriptitii,
Inquilini,  Tributarii,  Censiti.  A  person  might  be-
come a  Colonus  by  birth,  with  reference  to  which
the  term  Originarius  was  used.  When  both  the
parents  were  Coloni  and  belonged  to  the  same
master,  the  children  were  Coloni.  If  the  fiither
was  a  Colonus  and  the  mother  a  slave,  or  con-
versely, the  children  followed  the  condition  of  the
mother.  If  the  father  was  free  and  the  mother  a
Colona,  the  children  were  Coloni  and  belonged  to
the  master  of  the  mother.  If  the  father  was  a
Colonus  and  the  mother  free,  the  children  before
the  time  of  Justinian  followed  the  condition  of  the
father:  afterwards  .Justinian  declared  such  chil-
dren to  be  free,  but  finally  he  reduced  them  to  the
condition  of  Coloni.  If  both  parents  were  Coloni
and  belonged  to  different  masters,  it  was  finally
settled  that  the  masters  should  divide  the  children
between  them,  and  if  there  was  an  odd  one,  it
X  4


312


COLONATUS.


should  go  to  the  owner  of  the  mother.  If  a  man
lived  for  thirty  years  as  a  Colonus,  he  became  the
Colonus  of  the  owner  of  the  land  on  which  he
lived  ;  and  though  he  was  still  free,  he  could
not  leave  the  land :  and  a  man  who  had  pos-
sessed for  thirty  years  a  colonus  belonging  to
another,  could  defend  himself  against  ths  claims  of
the  former  owner  by  the  Praescriptio  triginta  an-
norum.  A  constitution  of  Valentinian  III.  de-
clared how  free  persons  might  become  Coloni  by
agreement ;  and  though  there  is  neither  this  nor
any  similar  regulation  in  the  Code  of  Justiniaa,
there  is  a  passage  which  apparently  recognizes
that  persons  might  become  Coloni  by  such  agree-
ment.    (Cod.  xi.  tit.  47.  s.  22.)

The  Coloni  were  not  slaves,  though  their  con-
dition in  certain  respects  was  assimilated  to  that
of  slaves  ;  a  circumstance  which  will  explain  their
being  called  serNT  terrae,  and  sometimes  being  con-
trasted with  liberi.  They  had,  however,  connn- '
bium,  which  alone  h  a  characteristic  that  dis-
tinguishes them  clearly  from  slaves.  (Cod.  xi.  tit.
47.  8.  24.)  But,  like  slaves,  they  were  liable  to
corporal  punishment,  and  they  had  no  right  of
action  against  their  master,  whose  relation  to
them  was  expressed  by  the  term  Patronus.  (Cod.
Theod.  V.  tit.  11.)  The  colonus  was  attached
to  the  soil,  and  he  could  not  be  permanently
separated  from  it  by  his  own  act,  or  by  that
of  his  patronus,  or  by  the  consent  of  the  two.
The  patronus  could  sell  the  estate  with  the  coloni,
but  neither  of  them  without  the  other.  (Cod.  xi.
tit.  47.  s.  2.  7-)  He  could,  however,  transfer
•superabundant  coloni  from  one  to  another  of  his
own  estates.  When  an  estate  held  in  common
was  divided,  married  persons  and  relations  were
not  to  be  separated.  The  ground  of  there  being
no  legal  power  of  separating  the  coloni  and  the
estate  was  the  opinion  that  such  an  arrangement
was  favourable  to  agriculture,  and  there  were  also
■financial  reasons  for  this  rule  of  law,  as  will  pre-
sently appear.  The  only  case  in  which  the  colonus
could  be  separated  from  the  land  was  that  of  his
■becoming  a  soldier,  which  must  be  considered  to
be  done  with  the  patron's  consent,  as  the  burden
of  recruiting  the  army  was  imposed  on  him,  and  in
this  instance  the  state  dispensed  with  a  general
rule  for  reasons  of  pnblic  convenience.

The  colonus  paid  a  certain  yearly  rent  for  the
land  on  which  he  lived :  the  amount  was  fixed  by
custom  and  could  not  be  raised  ;  but  as  the  land-
owner might  attempt  to  raise  it,  the  colonus  had  in
such  case  for  his  protection  a  right  of  action
against  him,  which  was  an  exception  to  the  gene-
ral rule  above  stated.  (Cod.  xi.  tit.  47.  s.  5.)
There  were,  however,  cases  in  which  the  rent  was
fixed  by  agreement.

A  further  analogy  between  the  condition  of
Servi  and  Coloni  appears  from  the  fact  of  the  pro-
perty of  Coloni  being  called  their  Peculium.  It  is
however,  distinctly  stated  that  they  could  hold  pro-
perty (Cod.  Theod.  v.  tit.  11)  ;  and  the  expressions
which  declare  that  they  could  have  nothing  "  pro-
pria "  (Cod.  xi.  tit.  49.  s.  2)  seem  merely  to  de-
clare that  it  was  not  propria  in  the  sense  of  their
having  power  to  alienate  it,  at  least  without  the
:  consent  of  their  patroni.  It  appears  that  a  co-
lonus could,  make  a  will,  and  that  if  he  made
none,  his  property  went  to  his  next  of  kin  ;  for  if
a  bishop,  presbyter,  deacon,  &c.,  died  intestate
and  without  kin,  his  property  went  to  the  church


COLONATUS.

or  convent  to  which  he  belonged,  except  such  as  he
had  as  a  colonus,  which  went  to  his  patronus,  who
with  respect  to  his  ownership  of  the  land  is  called
Dominus  poesessionis.  (Cod.  Theod.  v.  tit.  3.)
Some  classes  of  Coloni  had  a  power  of  alienating
their  property.  (Cod.  xi.  tit.  47.  s.  23.)

The  land-tax  due  in  respect  of  the  land  occupied
by  the  colonus  was  paid  by  the  dominus  ;  but  the
•coloni  were  liable  to  the  payment  of  the  poll-tax,
though  it  was  paid  in  the  first  instance  by  the
dominus  who  recovered  it  from  the  colonus.  The
liability  of  the  coloims  to  a  poll-tax  explains  why
this  class  of  persons  was  so  important  to  the  state,
and  why  their  condition  could  not  be  changed
without  the  consent  of  the  state.  It  was  only
when  the  colonus  had  lived  as  a  free  man  for
thirty  years  that  he  could  laaintain  his  freedom  by
a  praescriptio,  but  Justinian  abolished  this  prae-
scriptio, and  thus  empowered  the  dominus  to  assert
his  right  after  any  lapse  of  time.  (Cod.  xi.  tit.  47.
s.  23.)  With  respect  to  their  liability  to  the  poll-
tax,  the  coloni  were  called  tributarii^  censiti  or
ccnsibus  ofmoxii,  oflscriptiiii,  adscriptitiae  conditionis,
and  censihus  cidscripti.  This  terra  adscriptio  ap-
pears to  have  no  reference  to  their  being  attached
to  the  land,  but  it  refers  to  their  liability  to  the
poll-tax  as  being  rated  in  the  tax-books,  and  ac-
cordingly we  find  that  the  Greek  term  for  Ad-
scrrptitius  is  'Y.uaTT6ypa(pos.

As  the  Coloni  were  not  servi,  and  as  the  class
of  Latini  and  peregrini  hardly  existed  in  the  later
ages  of  the  Empire,  we  must  consider  the  Coloni
to  have  had  the  Ci vitas,  such  as  it  then  was  ;  and
it  is  a  consequence  of  this  that  they  had  connubium
generally.  A  Constitution  of  Justinian,  however
{Nov.  22.  c.  17),  declared  the  marriage  of  a  colonus,
who  belonged  to  another  person,  and  a  free  woman
to  be  void.  The  Constitution  does  not  seem  to
mean  any  thing  else  than  that  in  this  case  the
Emperor  took  away  the  Connubium,  whether  for
the  reasons  stated  by  Savigny,  or  for  other  reasons,
is  immaterial.  This  special  exception,  however,
proves  the  general  rule  as  to  Connubium.

The  origin  of  these  Coloni  is  uncertain.  They
appear  to  be  referred  to  in  one  passage  of  the
Digest  (Dig.  30.  s.  112),  under  the  name  of  In-
quilinus,  a  terra  which  certainly  was  sometimes
applied  to  the  whole  class  of  Coloni.  The  passage
states,  that  if  a  man  bequeaths,  as  a  legacy,  the
inquilini  without  the  praedia  to  which  they  adhere
{sine  praediis  quibiis  adhaerent)^  it  is  a  void  legacy.
Savigny  conceives  that  this  passage  may  be  ex-
plained without  considering  it  to  refer  to  the
Coloni  of  whom  we  are  speaking  ;  but  the  ex-
planation that  he  suggests,  seems  a  very  forced
one,  and  the  same  remark  applies  to  his  explanation
of  another  passage  in  the  Digest  (oO.  tit.  15.  s.  4).
The  condition  of  the  old  Clients  seems  to  bear
some  relation  to  that  of  the  Coloni,  but  all  historical
traces  of  one  class  growing  out  of  the  other  are
entirely  wanting.

Savigny  observes  that  he  does  not  perceive  any
historical  connection  between  the  villeins  (viUani)
of  modem  Europe  and  the  Coloni,  though  there  is
a  strong  resemblance  between  their  respective  con-
ditions. Th:Te  were,  however,  many  important
distinctions  ;  for  instance,  the  villein  services  duo
to  the  lord  had  nothing  corresponding  to  them  in
the  case  of  the  Coloni,  so  far  as  we  know.  Some
modern  writers  would  hastily  infer  an  historical
counection  of  institutions  which  happen  to  have


COLONATUS.

resemblances.  Littleton's  Tenures,  section  172,
&c.,  and  Bracton  (foL  6.  24),  may  be  consulted  as
to  the  incidents  of  Villeinage.

This  view  of  the  condition  of  the  Coloni  is  from
Savigny's  Essay  on  the  subject,  which  is  translated
in  the  Philological  Museum,  voL  ii.

The  question  of  the  origin  of  these  Coloni  is
exammed  at  great  length  by  A.  W.  Zumpt,  Ueber
die  Entstehung  und  historische  Entwickelung  des
Colonats  {Rheinisches  Museum  fiir  Philologie,  Neue
Folge,  1845).  The  author  is  of  opinion  that  the
origin  of  the  institution  is  to  be  traced  to  the
settlement  of  Germanic  people  by  the  Roman  em-
perors within  the  limits  of  the  empire.  The
earliest  mention  of  Coloni,  in  the  sense  in  which
his  essay  treats  of  them,  is,  as  he  states,  a  consti-
tution of  Constantino  a.  d.  321  (Cod.  Theod.  9.
tit.  21.  s.  1,  2)  which,  however,  gives  no  inform-
ation about  their  condition.  But  a  later  consti-
tution of  Constantine,  a.  d.  332  (Cod.  Theod.  5.
tit.  9,  de  fugitivis  colonis)  does  give  some  inform-
ation. The  condition  of  these  foreign  settlers
being  once  established,  the  author  supposes  that
poor  Roman  citizens  might  enter  into  this  condition,
partly  induced  by  the  advantage  of  getting  land,
and  pai-tly,  as  he  states,  though  it  is  not  clearly
explained,  by  legal  compulsion.  A  constitution  of
Theodosius  the  Younger  (Cod.  Theod.  5.  tit.  4,  de
bonis  militum,  s.  3,  ed.  Wenck),  contains  some
valuable  information  on  the  colonization  or  settle-
ment of  the  barbarians,  and  declares  them  to
belong  to  the  condition  expressed  by  the  term
Colonatus.  The  term  colonus  often  occurs  in  the
writers  who  are  excerpted  in  the  Digest  (41.  tit.  2.
s.  30.  §  5  ;  19.  tit.  2.  s.  3,  9.  §  3  ;  19.  tit.  1.
s.  13.  §  30,  and  elsewhere)  ;  but  these  Coloni  are
supposed  to  be  merely  a  kind  of  tenants.  The
passage  in  the  Digest  (30.  s.  112)  which  cites  a
constitution  of  Marcus  Aurelius  and  Commodus,
is  supposed,  by  Zumpt,  to  mean  ordinary  tenants
(miether,  piichter)  ;  but  it  must  be  admitted,  that
it  is  rather  difficult  to  accept  this  explanation,  as
already  observed.  The  word  Colonatus,  it  is
stated,  does  not  occur  in  the  Digest ;  but  that
negative  fact  proves  little.  The  most  probable
solution  of  the  question  is,  that  the  condition  of
the  Coloni  mentioned  in  the  Digest  was  the  model
of  the  condition  of  the  barbarians  who  were  settled
in  the  Roman  empire  ;  and.  it  is  no  objection  to
this,  that  the  condition  of  the  barbarians  might  be
made  more  burdensome  and  less  free  than  that  of
the  Coloni,  who  already  existed.  Nor  is  it
against  this  supposition,  if  the  condition  of  the
barbarian  Coloni  gradually  became  the  condition
of  all  the  Coloni.  The  reasons  for  fixing  the  bar-
barian settlers  to  the  soil  are  obvious  enough.
The  policy  of  the  emperors  was  to  people  the
countrj^,  and  to  disperse  many  of  the  tribes  whose
union  would  have  been  dangerous.  If  the  results
of  Zumpt's  inquiry  cannot  be  admitted  to  their
full  extent,  it  must  be  allowed,  that  he  has  thrown
great  light  on  the  subject,  and  probably  approached
as  near  as  possible  to  the  solution  of  the  difficulty,
with  the  exception  of  his  hypothesis,  that  the  co-
lonatus originated  entirely  in  the  settlement  of  these
barbarians.  It  seems  much  more  probable  that
the  Romans  modelled  the  barbarian  settlements
upon  some  institution  that  already  existed,  though
this  existing  institution  might  not  be  precisely  the
same  as  that  subsequent  institution  to  which  the
term  Colonatus  was  peculiarly  applied.    [G.  L.]


COLONIA.


313


COLO'NIA,  a  colony.  1.  Greek.  The  com-
mon Greek  word  for  a  colony  is  airoiKia  and  for
a  colonist  diroiKos.  We  also  find,  but  not  com-
monly, iiroLKia  and  eiroiKos.  (Thuc.  ii.  27 ;
Aristoph.  ^v.  1307.)  The  former  words  have
reference  to  their  being  wanderers  from  their  own
home  ;  the  latter  words  to  their  settling  in  a  new
home.  The  tenn  Khrjpovxia  indicates  a  division
of  conquered  lands  among  Athenian  citizens,  and
those  who  occupied  such  lands  were  called  kXtj-
povxoi :  but  as  they  were  thus  colonists,  we  some-
times find  the  general  term  of  &TroiKoi  applied  to
them.  (Thuc  v.  116.)  (Vomel,  De  Discrimine
Vocabulorum  K\r]povxos,  &TroiKos,  eiroiKos,  Frank-
fort, 1839.)

The  earlier  Greek  colonies  were  usually  com-
posed of  mere  bands  of  adventurers,  who  left  their
native  country,  with  their  families  and  property,
to  seek  a  new  home  for  themselves.  Some  of  the
colonies,  which  arose  in  consequence  of  foreign
invasion  or  civil  wars,  were  undertaken  without
any  formal  consent  from  the  rest  of  the  com-
munity ;  but  usually  a  colony  was  sent  out  with
the  approbation  of  the  mother  country,  and  under
the  management  of  a  leader  (olKKTTrjs)  appointed
bj--  it.  But  whatever  may  have  been  the  origin
of  the  colony,  it  was  always  considered  in  a
political  point  of  view  independent  of  the  mother
country  (called  by  the  Greeks  firiTpdnoXis),  and
entirely  emancipated  from  its  control.  At  the  same
time,  though  a  colony  was  in  no  political  subjection
to  its  parent  state,  it  was  united  to  it  by  the  ties
of  filial  affection ;  and,  according  to  the  generally
received  opinions  of  the  Greeks,  its  duties  to  the
parent  state  corresponded  to  those  of  a  daughter  to
her  mother.  (Dionys.  iii.  7  ;  Polyb.  xii.  1 0.  §  3.)
Hence,  in  all  matters  of  common  interest,  the
colony  gave  precedence  to  the  mother  state ;  and
the  founder  of  the  colony  (oIkktttjs),  who  might
be  considered  as  the  representative  of  the  parent
state,  was  usually  worshipped,  after  his  death,  as  a
hero.  (Herod,  vi.  38  ;  Thuc.  v.  II ;  Diod.  xi.  66,
XX.  102.)  Also,  when  the  colony  became  in  its
turn  a  parent,  it  usually  sought  a  leader  for  the
colony  which  it  intended,  to  found  from  the  ori-
ginal mother  country  (Thuc.  i.  24)  ;  and  the  same
feeling  of  respect  was  manifested  by  embassies
which  were  sent  to  honour  the  principal  festivals
of  the  parent  state  (Diod.  xii.  30 ;  Wesseling,  ad
loc.\  and  also  by  bestowing  places  of  honoui'  and
other  marks  of  respect  upon  the  ambassadors  and
other  members  of  the  parent  state,  when  they
visited  the  colony  at  festivals  and  similar  occasions.
(Thuc.  i.  25.)  The  colonists  also  worshipped  in
their  new  settlement  the  same  deities  as  they  had
been  accustomed  to  honour  in  their  native  country  ;
the  sacred  fire,  which  was  constantly  kept  burn-
ing on  their  public  hearth,  was  taken  from  the
Prytaneium  of  the  parent  city  ;  and,  according  to
one  account,  the  priests  who  ministered  to  the  gods
in  the  colony,  were  brought  from  the  parent  st<ite.
(Schol.  ad  Thuc.  i.  25  ;  compare  Tacit.  Ann.  ii.  54.)
In  the  same  spirit,  it  was  considered  a  violation
of  sjicred  ties  for  a  mother  country  and  a  colony
to  make  war  upon  one  another.  (Herod,  viii.  22 ;
Thuc.  i.  38.)

The  preceding  account  of  the  relations  between
the  Greek  colonies  and  the  mother  country  is
elucidated  by  the  history  which  Thucydides  gives
us  of  the  quarrel  between  Corcyra  and  Corinth.
Corcyra  was  a  colony  of  Corinth,  and  Epidamnus


314


COLONIA,


a  colony  of  Corcyra ;  but  the  leader  {oIkkxttis)  of
the  colony  of  Epidamnus  was  a  Corinthian  who
was  invited  from  the  metropolis  Corinth.  In
course  of  time,  in  consequence  of  civil  dissensions
and  attacks  from  the  neighbouring  barbarians,  the
Epidamnians  applied  for  aid  to  Corcyra,  but  their
request  was  rejected.  They  next  applied  to  the
Corinthians,  who  took  Epidamnus  under  their
protection,  thinking,  says  Thucydides,  that  the
colony  was  no  less  theirs  than  the  Corinthians' :
and  also  induced  to  do  so  through  hatred  of  the
Corcyraeans,  because  they  neglected  them  though
they  were  colonists ;  for  they  did  not  give  to  the
Corinthians  the  customary  honours  and  deference
in  the  public  solemnities  and  sacrifices  as  the  other
colonies  were  wont  to  pay  to  the  mother  country.
The  Corcyraeans  who  had  become  very  powerful
by  sea,  took  offence  at  the  Corinthians  receiving
Epidamnus  imder  their  protection,  and  the  result
was  a  war  between  Corcyra  and  Corinth.  The
Corcyraeans  sent  ambassadors  to  Athens  to  ask
assistance ;  and  in  reply  to  the  objection  that  they
were  a  colony  of  Corinth,  they  said  "  that  every
colony,  as  long  as  it  is  treated  kindly,  respects  the
mother  country :  but  when  it  is  injured,  is  alienated
from  it ;  for  colonists  are  not  sent  out  as  subjects,
but  that  they  may  have  equal  rights  with  those
that  remain  at  home."     (Thuc.  i.  34.)

It  is  true  that  ambitious  states,  such  as  Athens,
sometimes  claimed  dominion  over  other  states  on
the  ground  of  relationship  ;  but,  as  a  general  rule,
colonies  may  be  regarded  as  independent  states,
attached  to  their  metropolis  by  ties  of  sympathy
and  common  descent,  but  no  further.  The  case  of
Potidaea,  to  which  the  Corinthians  sent  annually
the  chief  magistrates  (Sry/ijoupyoi),  appears  to  have
been  an  exception  to  the  general  rule.     (Thuc.  i.

The  K\7ipovxi-ai,  of  which  mention  was  made
above,  were  colonies  of  an  entirely  different  kind
from  the  airoiKiai,  of  which  we  have  hitherto  been
speakmg.  They  belonged  exclusively  to  the
Athenians ;  and  the  earliest  example  to  which  the
term,  in  its  strict  sense,  is  applicable,  is  the  occu-
pation of  the  domains  of  the  Chalcidian  knights
(iKTro§6Tai)  by  four  thousand  Athenian  citizens,
B.  c.  506.     (Herod,  v.  77  ;  comp.  vi.  100.)

In  assigning  a  date  to  the  commencement  of
this  system  of  colonisation,  we  must  remember
that  the  principle  of  a  division  of  conquered  lands
had  existed  from  time  immemorial  in  the  Grecian
states.  Nature  herself  seemed  to  intend  that  the
Greek  should  rule  and  the  barbarian  obey ;  and
hence,  in  the  case  of  the  barbarian,  it  wore  no  ap-
pearance of  harshness.  Such  a  system,  however,
was  more  rare  between  Greek  and  Greek.  Yet
the  Dorians  in  their  conquest  of  the  Peloponnese.
and  still  more  remarkably  in  the  subjugation  of
Messenia,  had  set  an  example.  In  what  then  did
the  Athenian  K\7]povxiai  differ  from  this  division
of  territory,  or  from  the  ancient  colonies  ?  In  the
first  place  the  name,  in  its  technical  sense,  was  of
later  date,  and  the  Greek  would  not  have  spoken
of  the  KXrjpovx'iai  of  Lycurgus,  any  more  than
the  Roman  of  the  "  Agrarian  laws  "  of  Romulus
or  Ancus.  Secondly,  we  should  remember  that
the  term  was  always  used  with  a  reference  to  the
original  allotment :  as  the  lands  were  devised  or
transferred,  and  the  idea  of  the  first  division  lost
sight  of,  it  would  gradually  cease  to  be  applied.
The  distinction,  however,  between  KKiipovxoi  and


COLONIA.

&TroiKoi  was  not  merely  one  of  words  but  of  things.
The  earlier  colonies  usually  originated  in  private
enterprise,  and  became  independent  of,  and  lost
their  interest  in,  the  parent  state.  On  the  other
hand,  it  was  essential  to  the  very  notion  of  a
K\7]povxia  that  it  should  be  a  public  enterprize,
and  should  always  retain  a  connection  more  or  less
intimate  with  Athens  herself.  The  word  KX-npovxia
conveys  the  notion  of  property  to  be  expected  and
fonnally  appropriated :  whereas  the  anoiKoi  of
ancient  times  went  out  to  conquer  lands  for  them-
selves, not  to  divide  those  which  were  already
conquered.

The  connection  with  the  parent  state  subsisted,
as  has  been  just  hinted,  in  all  degrees.  Some-
times, as  in  the  case  of  Lesbos,  the  holders  of  land
did  not  reside  upon  their  estates,  but  let  them  to
the  original  inhabitJ^nts,  while  themselves  remained
at  Athens.  (  Bockh,  Public  Econ.  of  A  thens^  p.  4  3 1 ,
2nd  ed.)  The  condition  of  these  KKrjpovxoi  did
not  differ  from  that  of  Athenian  citizens  who  had
estates  in  Attica.  All  their  political  rights  they
not  onl}^  retained,  but  exercised  as  Athenians ;  in
the  capacity  of  landholders  of  Lesbos  they  could
scarcely  have  been  recognised  by  the  state,  or  have
borne  any  corporate  relation  to  it.  Another  case
was  where  the  KXripovxoi.  resided  on  their  estates,
and  either  with  or  without  the  old  inhabitants,
formed  a  new  community.  These  still  retained
the  rights  of  Athenian  citizens,  which  distance
only  precluded  them  from  exercising :  they  used
the  Athenian  courts ;  and  if  they  or  their  chil-
dren wished  to  return  to  Athens,  naturally  and  of
course  they  regained  the  exercise  of  their  former
privileges.  Of  this  we  have  the  most  positive
proof  (Bcickh,  3id.  p.  42,9):  as  the  object  of  these
KAT]povxiai  was  to  form  outposts  for  the  defence  of
Athenian  commerce,  it  was  the  interest  of  the
parent  state  to  unite  them  by  a  tie  as  kindly  as
possible  :  and  it  cannot  be  supposed  that  indi-
viduals would  have  been  found  to  risk,  in  a  doubt-
ful enterprise,  the  rights  of  Athenian  citizens.

Sometimes,  however,  the  connection  might  gra-
dually dissolve,  and  the  KXrjpovxoi  sink  into  the
condition  of  mere  allies,  or  separate  wholly  from
the  mother  country.  In  Aegina,  Scione,  Potidaea,
and  other  places,  where  the  original  community
was  done  away,  the  colonists  were  most  completely
under  the  control  of  Athens.  Where  the  old  in-
habitants were  left  unmolested,  we  may  conceive
their  admixture  to  have  had  a  twofold  effect :
either  the  new  comers  would  make  common  cause
with  them,  and  thus  would  arise  the  alienation
alluded  to  above  ;  or  jealousy  and  dread  of  the
ancient  inhabitants  might  make  the  colonists  more
entirely  dependent  on  the  mother  state.  It  seems
impossible  to  define  accurately  when  the  isopolite
relation  with  Athens  may  have  ceased,  although
such  cases  undoubtedly  occurred.

A  question  has  been  raised  as  to  whether  the
KXfipnvxoi  were  among  the  Athenian  tributaries.
Probably  this  depended  a  good  deal  upon  the  pros-
perity of  the  colony.  We  cannot  conceive  that
colonies  which  were  established  as  military  out-
posts, in  otherwise  unfavourable  situations,  would
bear  such  a  burthen  :  at  the  same  time  it  seem«
improbable  that  the  state  would  unnecessarily
forego  the  tribute  which  it  had  previously  received,
where  the  lands  had  formerly  belonged  to  tributary
allies.

It  was  to  Pericles  Athens  was  chiefly  indebted


COLONIA.

for  the  extension  and  permanence  of  her  colonial
fiettlements.  His  principal  object  was  to  provide
for  the  redundancies  of  population,  and  raise  the
poorer  citizens  to  a  fortune  becoming  the  dignity
of  Athenian  citizens.  It  was  of  this  class  of
persons  the  settlers  were  chiefly  composed ;  the
state  provided  them  with  arms,  and  defrayed  the
expenses  of  their  journey.  The  principle  of  divi-
sion, doubtless,  was,  that  all  who  wished  to  par-
take in  the  adventure,  applied  voluntarily  ;  it  was
then  determined  by  lot  who  should  or  should  not
receive  a  share.  Sometimes  they  had  a  leader  ap-
pointed, who,  after  death,  received  all  the  honours
of  the  founder  of  a  colony  (oIki(Tt-{}s).

The  Cleruchiae  were  lost  by  the  battle  of  Aegos-
potami,  but  partially  restored  on  the  revival  of
Athenian  power.

(Spanheim,  De  Usu  et  Praest.  Numism.  vol.  i,
p.  5o9,  &c.  ;  Bougainville,  Quels  etoient  les  droits
des  mttropoles  Grecques  sur  les  colonies,  <fcc.,  Paris,
J  745;  Heyne,  De  Veterum  Coloniarum  Jure
ejusque  Causis,  Gott.  1766,  also  in  Opuscula,  vol.  i.
p.  290;  Sainte  Croix,  Del'' Etatetdti  Sort  des  Colonies
desanciensPeuples,  Philadelphie,  1 779 ;  Hegewisch,
Geogr.  und  Hist.  Nachrichten,  die  Colonien  der
Griechen  betref  end,  Altoua,  1808  ;  Raoul-Rochette,
Histoire  critique  de  V Etcdilissement  des  Colonies
Grecques,  Paris,  1815,  4  vols.;  Wichers,  De
Coloniis  Veterum,  Groningae,  1 825  ;  Pfefferkom,
Die  Colonien  der  Alt-Griechen,  Konigsberg,  1838  ;
Hermann,  Lehrhuch  der  Gi'iech.  Staatsalth.  §  73.
&c. ;  Wachsmuth,  Hellen.  Alterthumsk.  vol.  i.  p.  95,
2nd  ed. ;  Schbmann,  Antiq.  Juris  Puhlici  Grace.
p.  414,  &c. ;  Bockh,  Public  Econ.  of  Athens,  p.
424,  &c.)  ^  [B.J.]

2.  Roman.  The  word  colonia  contains  the  same
element  as  the  verb  colere,  "  to  cultivate,"  and  as
the  word  colonus,  which  probably  originally  signified
a  "  tiller  of  the  earth."  The  English  word  colony,
which  is  derived  from  the  Latin,  perhaps  expresses
the  notion  contained  in  this  word  more  nearly
than  is  generally  the  case  in  such  adopted  terms.

A  kind  of  colonisation  seems  to  have  existed
among  the  oldest  Italian  nations,  who,  on  certain
occasions,  sent  out  their  superfluous  male  popu-
lation, with  arms  in  their  hands  {Upa  veor-qs),  to
seek  for  a  new  home.  (Dionys.  Antiq.  Rom.  i.  16.)
But  these  were  apparently  mere  bands  of  adven-
turers, and  such  colonies  rather  resembled  the  old
Greek  colonies,  than  those  by  which  Rome  ex-
tended her  dominion  and  her  name.

Colonics  were  established  by  the  Romans  as  far
back  as  the  annals  or  traditions  of  the  city  extend,
and  the  practice  was  continued  during  the  republic
and  under  the  empire.  Sigonius  {De  Antiquo
Jure  Italiae,  p.  215,  &c.)  enumerates  six  main
causes  or  reasons  which,  from  time  to  time,  induced
the  Romans  to  send  out  colonies  ;  and  these
causes  are  connected  with  many  memorable  events
in  Roman  history.  Colonies  were  intended  to
keep  in  check  a  conquered  people,  and  also  to
repress  hostile  incursions,  as  in  the  case  of  the
colony  of  Narnia  (Liv.  x.  10),  which  was  founded
to  check  the  Umbri  ;  and  Minturnae  and  Sinuessa
(x.  21),  Cremona  and  Placentia  (xxvii.  46),  which
were  founded  for  similar  purposes.  Cicero  {De
Leg.  Agr.  ii.  27)  calls  the  old  Italian  colonies  the
"  propugnacula  imperii  ;  "  and  in  another  passage
{Pro  Font.  c.  1)  he  calls  Narbo  Martins  (Nar-
bonne),  which  was  in  the  provincia  Gallia,  "  Co-
lonia nostronim  civium,  specula  populi  Romani  et


COLONIA.


315


propugnaculum."  Another  object  was  to  increase
the  power  of  Rome  by  increasing  the  population.
(Liv.  xxvii.  9.)  Sometimes  the  immediate  object
of  a  colony  was  to  carry  off  a  number  of  turbulent
and  discontented  persons.  Colonies  were  also
established  for  the  purpose  of  providing  for  veteran
soldiers,  a  practice  which  was  begun  under  the
republic  (Liv.  xxxi.  4),  and  continued  under  the
emperors  :  these  coloniae  were  called  militares.

It  is  remarked  by  Strabo  (p.  216.  ed.  Casaub.),
when  speaking  of  the  Roman  colonies  in  the  north
of  Italy,  that  the  ancient  names  of  the  places  were
retained,  and  that  though  the  people  in  his  time
were  all  Roman,  they  were  called  by  the  names  of
the  previous  occupiers  of  the  soil.  This  fact  is  in
accordance  with  the  character  of  the  old  Roman
colonies,  which  were  in  the  nature  of  garrisons
planted  in  conquered  towns,  and  the  colonists  had
a  portion  of  the  conquered  territory  (usually  a  third
part)  assigned  to  them.  The  inhabitants  retained
the  rest  of  their  lands,  and  lived  together  with  the
new  settlers,  who  alone  composed  the  proper  co-
lony. (Dionys.  A7itiq.  Rom.  ii.  53.)  The  conquered
people  must  at  first  have  been  quite  a  distinct
class  ftora,  and  inferior  to,  the  colonists.  The
definition  of  a  colonia  by  Gellius  (xvi.  1 3)  will
appear,  from  what  has  been  said,  to  be  sufficiently
exact :  —  "Ex  civitate  quasi  propagatae  —  populi
Romani  quasi  effigies  parvae  simulacraque."

No  colonia  was  established  without  a  lex,  ple-
biscitum,  or  senatusconsultum  ;  a  fact  which  shows
that  a  Roman  colony  was  never  a  mere  body  of
adventurers,  but  had  a  regular  organisation  by  the
parent  state.  According  to  an  ancient  definition
quoted  by  Niebuhr  (Serv.  ad  Virg.  A  en.  i.  12),  a
colony  is  a  body  of  citizens,  or  socii,  sent  out  to
possess  a  commonwealth,  with  the  approbation  of
their  own  state,  or  by  a  public  act  of  that  people
to  whom  they  belong  ;  and  it  is  added,  those  are
colonies  which  are  founded  by  public  act,  not  by
any  secession.  Many  of  the  laws  which  relate  to
the  establishment  of  coloniae  were  leges  agrariae,
or  laws  for  the  division  and  assignment  of  public
lands,  of  which  Sigonius  has  given  a  list  in  his
work  already  referred  to.

When  a  law  was  passed  for  founding  a  colony,
persons  were  appointed  to  superintend  its  forma-
tion {coloniam  deducere).  These  persons  varied  in
number,  but  three  was  a  common  number  {trium-
viri ad  colonos  deducendos,  Liv.  xxxvii.  46,  vi.  21 ).
We  also  read  of  duumviri,  quinqueviri,  vigintiviri
for  the  same  purpose.  The  law  fixed  the  quantity
of  land  that  was  to  be  distributed,  and  how  much
was  to  be  assigned  to  each  person.  No  Roman
could  be  sent  out  as  a  colonist  without  his  free
consent,  and  when  the  colony  was  not  an  inviting
one,  it  was  difficult  to  fill  up  the  number  of  volun-
teers.    (Liv.vi.  21,  X.  21.)

Roman  citizens  who  were  willing  to  go  out  as
members  of  a  colony  gave  in  their  names  at  Rome
{nomina  dederunt,  Liv.  i.  11,  the  first  time  that  he
has  occasion  to  use  the  expression).  Cicero  {Pro
Dom.  c.  30)  says  that  Roman  citizens  who  chose
to  become  members  of  a  Latin  colony  must  go  vo-
luntarily {au£tores  facti),  for  this  was  a  capitis
deminutio  ;  and  in  another  passage  {Pro  Caecin,
33)  he  alleges  the  fact  of  Roman  citizens  going
out  in  Latin  colonies  as  a  proof  that  loss  of  civitas
must  be  a  voluntary  act.  It  is  true  that  a  mem!  er
of  a  Roman  colony  would  sustain  no  capitis  de-
minutioj  but  jn  this  case  also  there  seems  no  reason


316  COLOKIA.

for  supposing  that  he  ever  joined  such  a  colony,
without  his  consent.

The  colonia  proceeded  to  its  place  of  destination
in  the  form  of  an  army  (sub  veaillo),  which  is  in
dicated  on  the  coins  of  some  coloniae.  An  urbs,  if
one  did  not  already  exist,  was  a  necessary  part  of
a  new  colony,  and  its  limits  were  marked  out  by
a  plough,  which  is  also  indicated  on  ancient  coins.
The  colonia  had  also  a  territory,  which,  whether
marked  out  by  the  plough  or  not  (Cic.  P/iil.  ii.  40),
was  at  least  marked  out  by  metes  and  bounds.
Thus  the  urbs  and  territory  of  the  colonia  re-
spectively corresponded  to  the  urbs  Roma  and  its
territory.  Religious  ceremonies  always  accom-
panied the  foundation  of  the  colony,  and  the  an-
niversary was  afterwards  observed.  (Plutarch,
C.  Gracchus^  11  ;  Servius,  ad  Aen.  v.  755  ;  Cic.
ad  Attic,  iv.  1).  It  is  stated  that  a  colony  could
not  be  sent  out  to  the  same  place  to  which  a
colony  had  already  been  sent  in  due  fonn  {auspi-
cato  dedticta).  This  merely  means  that  so  long  as
the  colony  maintained  its  existence,  there  could  be
no  new  colony  in  the  same  place  ;  a  doctrine  that
would  hardly  need  proof,  for  a  new  colony  implied
a  new  assignment  of  lands  ;  but  new  settlers  {novi
culscrlpti)  might  be  sent  to  occupy  colonial  lands
not  already  assigned.  (liiv.  vi.  30  ;  Cic.  Phil.  ii.
40.)  Indeed  it  was  not  unusual  for  a  colony  to
receive  a  supplementum^  as  in  the  case  of  Venusia
(Liv.  xxxi.  49),  and  in  other  cases  (Tacit.  Ann.
xiv.  27)  ;  and  a  colony  might  be  re-established,  if
it  seemed  necessary,  from  any  cause  ;  and  under
the  emperors  such  re-establishment  might  be
entirely  arbitrary,  and  done  to  gratify  personal
vanity,  or  from  any  other  motive.  (Tacit,  Ann.
xiv.  27.  Puteoli ;  and  the  note  in  Oberlin's
Tacitus.)

The  commissioners  appointed  to  conduct  the
colony  had  apparently  a  profitable  office,  and  the
establishment  of  a  new  settlement  gave  employ-
ment to  numerous  functionaries,  among  whom
Cicero  enumerates  —  apparitores,  scribae,  librarii,
praecones,  architects  The  foundation  of  a  colony
might  then,  in  many  cases,  not  only  be  a  mere
party  measure,  carried  for  the  purpose  of  gaining
popularity,  but  it  would  give  those  in  power  an
opportunity  of  providing  places  for  many  of  their
friends.

A  colonia  was  a  part  of  the  Roman  state,  and  it
bad  a  res  publica;  but  its  relation  to  the  parent  state
might  vary.  In  Livy  (xxxix.  bo)  the  question
was  whether  Aquileia  should  be  a  colonia  civium
Romanorum,  or  a  Latina  colonia  ;  a  question  that
had  no  reference  to  the  persons  who  should  form
the  colony,  but  to  their  political  rights  with  respect
to  Rome  as  members  of  the  colonj'.  The  members
of  a  Roman  colony  {colonia  civium  Romanorum)
must,  as  the  term  itself  implies,  have  always  had
the  same  rights,  which,  as  citizens,  they  would  have
at  Rome.  [Civitas,]  They  were,  as  Niebuhr
remarks,  in  the  old  Roman  colonies,  "  the  populus  ;
the  old  inhabitants,  the  commonalty."  These  two
bodies  may,  in  course  of  time,  have  frequently
formed  one  ;  but  there  could  be  no  political  union
between  them  till  the  old  inhabitants  obtained  the
commercium  and  connubium,  in  other  words,  the
civitas  ;  and  it  is  probable  that  among  the  various
causes  which  weakened  the  old  colonies,  and  ren-
dered new  supplies  of  colonists  necessary,  we
should  enumerate  the  want  of  Roman  women  ;  for
the  children  of  a  Roman  were  not  Roman  citizens


COLONIA.

unless  his  wife  was  a  Roman,  or  unless  she  belonged
to  a  people  with  which  there  was  connubium.

It  is  important  to  form  a  precise  notion  of  the
relation  of  an  ancient  Roman  colonia  to  Rome.
That  the  colonists,  as  already  observed,  had  all  the
rights  of  Roman  citizens,  is  a  fact  capable  of  per-
fect demonstration  ;  though  most  writers,  following
Sigonius,  have  supposed  that  Roman  citizens,  by
becoming  members  of  a  Roman  colony,  lost  the
sufFragium  and  honores,  and  did  not  obtain  them
till  after  the  passing  of  the  Julia  lex.  Such  an
opinion  is  inconsistent  with  the  notion  of  Roman
citizenship  [Civitas],  which  was  a  personal,  not  a
local  right ;  and  it  is  also  inconsistent  with  the  very
principle  of  Roman  polity  apparent  in  the  establish-
ment of  Roman  colonies.  Further,  the  loss  of  the
suiFragium  and  honores  woiild  have  been  a  species
of  capitis  deminutio,  and  it  is  clear,  from  what
Cicero  says  of  the  consequences  of  a  Roman  volun-
tarily joining  a  Latin  colony,  that  no  such  conse-
quences resulted  from  becoming  a  member  of  a
Roman  colonj'.  If  a  Roman  ever  became  a  member
of  a  Roman  colony  without  his  consent,  it  must
have  been  in  the  early  ages  of  the  state,  when  the
colonies  still  retained  their  garrison  character,  and
to  join  a  colony  was  a  kind  of  military  service  ;  but
such  a  duty  to  protect  the  state,  instead  of  imply-
ing any  loss  of  privilege,  justifies  quite  a  different
conclusion.

Puteoli,  Salemum,  Buxentum  were  coloniae
civium  Romanorum  (Liv.  xxxiv.  45)  ;  the  Feren-
tinates  made  a  claim,  that  Latini  wlio  should  give
in  their  names  as  willing  to  join  a  colonia  civiuni
Romanorum,  should  thereby  become  cives  Roman  i.
Some  Latini  who  had  given  in  their  names  for
the  coloniae  of  Puteoli,  Salemum,  and  Buxentum,
thereupon  assumed  to  act  as  cives  Romani,  but  the
senate  would  not  allow  their  claim.  This  shows,
if  it  requires  showing,  that  the  cives  of  Romanae
coloniae  continued  to  be  cives  Romani.  (Liv.
xxxiv.  42.)

It  is  somewhat  more  difficult  to  state  what  was
the  condition  of  those  conquered  people  among
whom  the  Romans  sent  their  colonists.  They
were  not  Roman  citizens,  nor  yet  were  they  socii  ;
still  they  were  in  a  sense  a  part  of  the  Roman
state,  and  in  a  sense  they  were  cives,  though  cer-
tainly they  had  not  the  suffragium,  and  perhaps
originally  not  the  connubium.  It  is  probable
that  they  had  the  commercium,  but  even  this  is
not  certain.  They  might  be  a  part  of  the  Roman
civitas  without  being  cives,  and  the  difficulty  of
ascertaining  their  precise  condition  is  increased  by
the  circumstance  of  the  word  civitas  being  used
loosely  by  the  Roman  writers.  If  they  were  cives
in  a  sense,  this  word  imported  no  privilege  ;  for  it
is  certain  that,  by  being  incorporated  in  the  Roman
state  as  a  conquered  people,  they  lost  all'  power  of
administering  their  own  affairs,  and  obtained  no
share  in  the  administration  of  the  Roman  state  ;
they  had  not  the  honourable  rank  of  socii,  and
they  were  subject  to  military  service  and  taxation.
T^ey  lost  all  jurisdictio,  and  it  is  probable  that
they  were  brought  entirely  within  the  rules  and
procedure  of  the.  Roman  law,  so  far  as  that  was
practicable.  Even  the  commercium  and  connu-
bium with  the  people  of  their  own  stock,  were  some-
times taken  from  them  (Liv.  ix.  43,  viii.  14),  and
thus  they  were  disunited  from  their  own  nation
and  made  a  part  of  the  Roman  state,  without  having
the  full  civitas.    So  far,  then,  was  the  civitas  (with-


COLONIA.

\nit  the  Kuffragium)  from  being  always  a  desirable
a-ndition,  as  some  writers  have  supposed,  that  it
■was  ill  fact  the  badge  of  servitude  ;  and  some  states
even  preferred  their  former  relation  to  Rome,  to
being  incorporated  with  it  as  complete  citizens.  It
appears  that,  in  some  cases  at  least,  a  praefectus
jtiri  dicundo  was  sent  from  Rome  to  administer
justice  among  the  conquered  people,  and  between
them  and  the  coloni.  It  appears  also  to  be  clearly
proved  by  numerous  instances,  that  the  condition
of  the  conquered  people  among  whom  a  colony  was
sent,  was  not  originally  always  the  same  ;  some-
thing depended  on  the  resistance  of  the  people,
and  the  temper  of  the  Romans,  at  the  time  of  the
conquest  or  surrender.  Thus  the  conquered  Italian
towns  might  originally  have  the  civitas  in  different
degrees,  until  they  all  finally  obtained  the  complete
civitas  by  receiving  the  suifragium  ;  some  of  them
obtained  it  before  the  social  war,  and  others  by
the  Julia  lex.

The  nature  of  a  Latin  colony  will  appear  suffi-
ciently from  what  is  said  here,  and  in  the  articles
Civitas  and  Latinitas.

Besides  these  coloniae,  there  were  coloniae  Italici
juris,  as  some  writers  term  them  ;  but  which  in  fact
were  not  colonies.  Sigonius,  and  most  subsequent
writers,  have  considered  the  Jus  Italicum  as  a  per-
sonal right,  like  the  Civitas  and  Latinitas  ;  but
Savigny  has  shown  it  to  be  quite  a  different  thing.
The  jus  Italicum  was  granted  to  favoured  provincial
cities  ;  it  was  a  grant  to  the  community,  not  to  the
individuals  composing  it.  This  right  consisted  in
quiritarian  ownership  of  the  soil  (commercium),
and  its  appurtenant  capacity  of  mancipatio,  usu-
capion, and  vindicatio,  together  with  freedom  from
taxes  ;  and  also  in  a  municipal  constitution,  after
the  fashion  of  the  Italian  towns,  with  duumviri,
quinquennalos,  aediles,  and  a  jurisdictio.  Many
provincial  towns  which  possessed  the  jus  Italicum,
have  on  their  coins  the  figure  of  a  standing  Silenus,


COLONIA.


317


IMP.  M.  IVL.  PHILIPr.  A  EL.  MVNICIP.  CO.

Philip,  A.  D.  243—249.  Cocla  or  Coelos  (Plin.
iy.  11, 12)  intheThra-
cian  Chersonesiis.

with  the  hand  raised,  which  was  the  peculiar
symbol  of  municipal  liberty.  (Obeundus  Marsya,
Horat.  Sat.  i.  6.  120.)  Pliny  (iii.  3  and  21 )  has
mentioned  several  towns  that  had  the  jus  Italicum  ;
and  Lugdunum,  Vienna  (in  Dauphine),  and  colonia
Agrippinensis  had  this  privilege.  It  follows  from
the  nature  of  this  privilege,  that  towns  which  had
the  Latinitas  or  the  Civitas,  which  was  a  personal
privilege,  might  not  have  the  jus  Italicum  ;  but  the
towns  which  had  the  jus  Italicum  could  hardly  be
any  other  than  those  which  had  the  civitas  or
Latinitas,  and  we  cannot  conceive  that  it  was  ever
given  to  a  town  of  Peregrini.

The  colonial  system  of  Rome,  which  originated
in  the  earliest  ages,  was  well  adapted  to  strengtlicn
and  extend  her  power  — "  By  the  colonies  the


empire  was  consolidated,  the  decay  of  population
checked,  the  unity  of  the  nation  and  of  the  lan-
guage diffused."  (Machiavelli,  quoted  by  Niebuhr.)
The  countries  which  the  Romans  conquered  within
the  limits  of  Italy,  were  inhabited  by  nations  that
cultivated  the  soil  and  had  cities.  To  destroy  such  a
population  Avas  not  possible  nor  politic  ;  but  it  was
a  wise  policy  to  take  part  of  their  lands,  and  to
plant  bodies  of  Roman  citizens,  and  also  Latinae
coloniae,  among  the  conquered  people.  The  power
of  Rome  over  her  colonies  was  derived,  as  Niebuhr
has  well  remarked,  "  From  the  supremacy  of  the
parent  state,  to  which  the  colonies  of  Rome,  like
sons  in  a  Roman  family,  even  after  they  had  grown
to  maturity,  continued  unalterably  subject."  In
fact,  the  notion  of  the  patria  potestas  will  be  found
to  lie  at  the  foundation  of  the  institutions  of  Rome.
The  principles  of  the  system  of  colonisation  were
fully  established  in  the  early  ages  of  Rome  ;  but  the
colonies  had  a  more  purely  militaiy  character,  that
is,  were  composed  of  soldiers,  in  the  latter  part  of
the  republic,  and  under  the  earlier  emperors.  The
first  colony  established  beyond  the  limits  of  Italy
was  Carthago  (Veil.  ii.  15)  ;  Narbo  Martins  was
the  next.  Nemausus  (Nimes)  was  made  a  colony
by  Augustus,  an  event  which  is  commemorated  by
medals  (Rasche,  Leaicon  Rei  Numariac),  and  an
extant  inscription  at  Nimes.


In  addition  to  the  evidence  from  written  books  of
the  numerous  colonies  established  by  the  Romans
in  Italy,  and  subsequently  in  all  parts  of  the  empire,
we  have  the  testimony  of  medals  and  inscriptions,
in  which  COL.,  the  abbreviation  of  colonia,  indi-
cates this  fact,  or,  as  in  the  case  of  Sinope,  the  Greek
inscription  KOAHNEIA.  Septimius  Severus  made
Tyre  a  colonia  Veteranorum  (Rasche,  Lexicon  Rei
Numariae.,  Tyrus).  The  prodigious  activity  of  Rome
in  settling  colonies  in  Italy  is  apparent  from  the  list
given  by  Frontinus  or  the  Pseudo-Frontinus  {De
Coloniis).,  most  of  which  appear  to  have  been  old
towns,  which  were  either  walled  when  the  colony
was  founded,  or  strengthened  by  new  defences.

Colonies  were  sometimes  established  under  the
late  republic  and  the  empire  with  circumstances
of  great  oppression,  and  lands  were  assigned  to  the
veterans  without  regard  to  existing  rights.

Under  the  emperors,  all  legislative  authority
being  then  virtually  in  them,  the  foundation
of  a  colony  was  an  act  of  imperial  grace,  and
often  merely  a  title  of  honour  conferred  on  some
favoured  spot.  Thus  M.  Aurelius  raised  to  the
rank  of  colonia  the  small  town  (vicus)  of  Halale,
at  the  foot  of  Taurus,  where  his  wife  Faustina
died.  (Jul.  Capitol.  M.  Ant.  Philos.  c  26.)  The
old  military  colonies  were  composed  of  whole
legions,  with  their  tribunes  and  centurions,  who
being  united  by  mutual  afi^ection,  composed  a
political  body  {respuhlica)  ;  but  it  was  a  com-
])laint  in  the  time  of  Nero,  that  soldiers,  wlio  were


318


COLONIA.


strangers  to  .one  another,  without  anj^  head,  with-
out any  bond  of  union,  were  suddenly  brought  to-
gether on  one  spot,  "  nuraerus  magis  quam  colonia  ''
(Tacit.  Ann.  xiv.  27).  And  on  the  occasion  of  the
mutiny  of  the  legions  in  Pannonia,  upon  the  ac-
cession of  Tiberius,  it  was  one  ground  of  complaint,
that  the  soldiers,  after  serving  thirty  or  forty
years,  were  separated,  and  dispersed  in  remote
pai'ts  ;  where  they  received,  under  the  name  of  a
grant  of  lands  (per  nomen  agrorum),  swampy  tracts
and  barren  mountains.     (Tacit.  Ann.  i.  17.)

It  remains  briefly  to  state  what  was  the  internal
constitution  of  a  colonia.

In  the  later  times  of  the  republic,  the  Roman
state  consisted  of  two  distinct  organised  parts,
Italy  and  the  Provinces.  "  Italy  consisted  of  a
great  number  of  republics  (in  the  Roman  sense  of
the  term),  whose  citizens,  after  the  Italian  war,  be-
came members  of  the  sovereign  people.  The  com-
munities of  these  citizens  were  subjects  of  the
Roman  people,  yet  the  internal  administration  of
the  communities  belonged  to  themselves.  This
free  municipal  constitution  was  the  fundamental
characteristic  of  Italy  ;  and  the  same  remark  will
apply  to  both  principal  classes  of  such  constitu-
tions, municipia,  and  coloniae.  That  distinction
which  made  a  place  into  a  praefectura,  is  men-
tioned afterwards  ;  and  fora,  conciliabula,  castella,
are  merely  smaller  communities,  with  an  incom-
plete organisation."  (Savigny.)  As  in  Rome,  so
in  the  colonies,  the  popular  assembly  had  originally
the  sovereign  power  ;  they  chose  the  magistrates,
and  could  even  make  laws.  (Cic.  De  Leg.  iii.  1 6.)
When  the  popular  assemblies  became  a  mere  form
in  Rome,  and  the  elections  were  transferred  by
Tiberius  to  the  senate,  the  same  thing  happened
in  the  colonies,  whose  senates  then  acquired  what-
ever power  had  once  belonged  to  the  communit}^

The  common  name  of  this  senate  was  ordo  de-
curionum  ;  in  later  times,  simply  ordo  and  curia  ;
the  members  of  it  were  decuriones  or  curiales.
(Dig.  50.  tit.  2.  De  Decurionibus.,  &c.)  Thus,
in  the  later  ages,  curia  is  opposed  to  senatus,
the  former  being  the  senate  of  a  colony,  and  the
latter  the  senate  of  Rome.  But  the  terms  senatus
and  senator  were  also  applied  to  the  senate  and
members  of  the  senate  of  a  colony,  both  by  his-
torians, in  inscriptions,  and  in  public  records  ;  as,  for
instance,  in  the  Heracleotic  Tablet,  which  contained
a  Roman  lex.  After  the  decline  of  the  popular
assemblies,  the  senate  had  the  whole  internal  ad-
ministration of  a  city,  conjointly  with  the  magis-
tratus  ;  but  only  a  decurio  could  be  a  magistratus,
and  the  choice  was  made  by  the  decuriones.
Augustus  seems  to  have  laid  the  foundation  for
this  practical  change  in  the  constitution  of  the
colonies  in  Italy.  All  the  citizens  had  the  right
of  voting  at  Rome ;  but  such  a  privilege  would  be
useless  to  most  of  the  citizens  en  account  of  their
distance  from  Rome.  Augustus  (Sueton.  c.  46)
devised  a  new  method  of  voting :  the  decuriones
sent  the  votes  in  writing,  and  under  seal,  to
Rome ;  but  the  decuriones  only  voted.  Though
this  was  a  matter  of  no  importance  after  Tiberius
had  transferred  the  elections  at  Rome  from  the
pppular  assemblies  to  the  senate,  this  measure  of
Augustus  would  clearly  prepare  the  way  for  the
pre-eminence  of  the  decuriones,  and  the  decline  of
the  popular  power.

The  highest  magistratus  of  a  colonia  were  the
duumviri  (Cic.  Agr.  Leg.  ii.  34,  ad  Attic,  ii.  6),


COLONIA.

or  quattuorvlri,  so  called,  as  the  numbers  might
vary,  whose  functions  may  be  compared  with  those
of  the  consulate  at  Rome  before  the  establishment
of  the  praetorship.  The  name  duumviri  seems  to
have  been  the  most  common.  Their  principal
duties  were  the  administration  of  justice,  and  ac-
cordingly we  find  on  inscriptions  "Duumviri  J.
D."  {juri  dicundo),  "  Quattuorviri  J.  D."  They
were  styled  magistratus  pre-eminently,  though  the
name  magistratus  was  properly  and  originally  the
most  general  name  for  all  persons  who  filled  similar
situations.  The  name  consul  also  occurs  in  in-
scriptions to  denote  this  chief  magistracy;  and
even  dictator  and  praetor  occur  under  the  empire
and  under  the  republic.  The  office  of  the  duumviri
lasted  a  year.  Savigny  shows  that  under  the  re-
public tiie  jurisdictio  of  the  duumviri  in  civil
matters  was  unlimited,  and  that  it  was  only  under
the  empire  that  it  was  restricted  in  the  manner
which  appears  from  the  extant  Roman  law.

In  some  Italian  towns  there  was  a  praefectus
juri  dicundo ;  he  was  in  the  place  of,  and  not  co-
existent with,  duumviri.  The  duumviri  were,  as
we  have  seen,  originally  chosen  by  the  people  ;
but  the  praefectus  was  appointed  annually  in
Rome  (Livy,  xxvi.  16),  and  sent  to  the  town
called  a  praefectura,  which  might  be  either  a  mu-
nicipium  or  a  colonia,  for  it  was  only  in  the  matter
of  the  praefectus  that  a  town  called  a  praefect«ra
differed  from  other  Italian  towns.  Capua,  which
was  taken  b}'-  the  Romans  in  the  second  Punic
war,  was  made  a  praefectura.  (Veil.  ii.  44,  and
the  note  of  Reimarus  on  Dion  Cassius,  xxxviii.  7. )
Arpinum  is  called  both  a  municipium  and  a  prae-
fectura (Cic.  ad  Fam.  xiii.  1 1 ;  Festus,  s.  v.
Praefectura) ;  and  Cicero,  a  native  of  this  place,
obtained  the  highest  honours  that  Rome  could
confer.

The  censor,  curator,  or  quinquennalis,  all  which
names  denote  the  same  functionarj',  was  also  a
municipal  magistrate,  and  coiTesponded  to  the
censor  at  Rome,  and  in  some  cases,  perhaps,  to
the  qiiaestor  also.  Censors  are  mentioned  in  Livy
(xxix.  15)  as  magistrates  of  the  twelve  Latin
colonies.  The  quinquennales  were  sometimes
duumviri,  sometimes  quattuorviri ;  but  they  arc
always  carefully  distinguished  from  the  duumviri
and  quattuorviri  J.  D. ;  and  their  functions  are
clearly  shown  by  Savigny  to  have  been  those  of
censors.  They  held  their  office  for  one  year,  and
during  the  four  intermediate  years  the  functions
were  not  exercised.  The  office  of  censor  or  quin-
quennalis was  higher  in  rank  than  that  of  the
duumviri  J,  D.,  and  it  could  only  be  filled  by  those
who  had  discharged  the  other  offices  of  the  muni-
cipality.

For  a  more  complete  account  of  the  organisation
of  these  municipalities,  and  of  their  fate  under  the
empire,  the  reader  is  referred  to  an  admirable
chapter  in  Savigny  {Geschichte  des  Rom.  Bechts,
&c.  vol.  i.  p.  1 6,  &c.).

The  terms  municipium  and  municipes  require
explanation  in  connection  with  the  present  subject,
and  the  explanation  of  them  will  render  the  nature
of  a  praefectura  still  clearer.  One  kind  of  munici-
pium was  a  body  of  persons  who  were  not  (Festus,
s.  V.  Municipium)  Roman  citizens,  but  po'ssessed  all
the  rights  of  Roman  citizens  except  the  suffragium
and  the  honorcs.  But  the  communities  enumerated
as  examples  of  this  kind  ot  municipium  are  the
Fundani,  Formiani^  Cumani,  Acerrani,  Lanuvini,


COLON  I  A.

ftnd  Tusculaiii,  which  were  conquered  states  (Liv.
viii.  14;,  and  received  the  civitas  without  the  suf-
fraifiuni ;  and  all  these  places  received  the  com-
plete civitas  before  the  social  war,  or,  as  Festus
expresses  it,  "  Post  aliquot  annos  cives  Romani
eifecti  sunt."  It  is  singular  that  another  ancient
definition  of  this  class  of  municipia  says,  that  the
persons  who  had  the  rights  of  Roman  citizens,
except  the  honores,  were  cives ;  and  among  such
communities  are  enumerated  the  Cumani,  Acer-
rani,  and  Atellani.  This  discrepancy  merely
shows  that  the  later  Roman  writers  used  the  word
civis  in  a  very  loose  sense,  which  we  cannot  be
surprised  at,  as  they  wrote  at  a  time  when  these
distinctions  had  ceased.  Another  kind  of  muni-
cipium  was,  when  a  civitas  was  completely  incor-
porated with  the  Roman  state ;  as  in  the  case  of
the  Anagnini  (Liv.  ix.  23),  Caerites,  and  Aricini,
who  completely  lost  all  internal  administration  of
their  cities  ;  while  the  Tusculani  and  Lanuvini  re-
tained their  internal  constitution,  and  their  magis-
trate called  a  dictator.  A  third  class  of  municipia
was  those  whose  inhabitants  possessed  the  full
privileges  of  Roman  citizens,  and  also  the  internal
administration  of  their  own  cities,  as  the  Tiburtes,
Praenestini,  Pisani,  Urbinates,  Nolani,  Bononi-
enses,  Placentini,  Nepesini,  Sutrini,  and  Lucrenses,
(Lucenses  ?).  The  first  five  of  these  were  civitates
Bociorura ;  and  the  second  five,  coloniae  Latinae  :
they  all  became  municipia,  but  only  by  the  effect
of  the  Julia  Lex,  B.C.  90.

It  has  also  been  already  said  that  a  pracfectura
was  so  called  from  the  circumstance  of  a  praefectus
J.  D.  being  sent  there  from  Rome.     Those  towns
in  Italy  were  called  praefecturae,  says  Festus,  "  In
quibus  et  jus  dicebatur  et  nundinae  agebantur,  et
erat   quaedam    eanim    respubiica,    neque    tamen
magistratus  suos  habebant ;  in  quas  legibus  prae-
fecti   raittebantur   quotannis,   qui    jus    dicerent."
Thus  a  praefectura  had  a  respubiica,  but  no  magis-
tratus.   Festus  then  makes  two  divisions  of  praefec-
turae.   To  the  first  division  were  sent  four  praefecti
chosen  at  Rome  {populi  suffragio)  ;  and  he  enu-
merates ten  places  in   Campania  to  which  these
quattuorviri  were  sent,  and  among  them  Cumae  and
Acerra,   which  were  municipia;  and  Voltumum,
Liternum,  and  Puteoli,  which  were  Roman  colonies
established   after   the   second   Punic    war.      The
second   division  of  praefecturae   comprised  those
places  to  which  the  praetor  urbanus  sent  a  prae-
fectus every  year,  namely.  Fundi,  Formiae,  Caere,
Vcnafrum,  Allifae,  Privernum,  Anagnifi,  Frusino,
Reate,  Saturnia,  Nursia,  Arpinum^  aliaqne  com-
plura.     Only  one  of  them,  Saturnia,  was  a  colony
of  Roman  citizens  (Liv.  xxxix.  55)  ;  the  rest  are
municipia.     It  is  the  conclusion  of  Zumpt  that  all
the  municipia  of  the  older  period,  that  is,  up  to  the
time  when  the  complete  civitas  was  given  to  the
Latini  and  the  socii,  were  praefecturae,  and  that
some  of  the  colonies  of  Roman  citizens  were  also
praefecturae.      Now   as    the   praefectus    was    ap-
pointed for   the  purpose  of  administering  justice
{juri  dicundo\  and  was  annually  sent  from  Rome,
it  appears  that  this  was  one  among  the  many  ad-
mirable parts  of  the  Roman  polity  for  maintaining
harmony  in  the  whole  political  system  by  a  uni-
formity of  law  and  procedure.     The  name  prae-
fectura continued  after  the  year  B.C.  90  ;  but  it
seems  that,  in  some  places  at  least,  this  functionary
ceased  to  be  sent  from  Rome,  and  various  praefec-
turae acquired  the  privilege  of  having  magistratus


COLONIA.


319


of  their  own  choosing,  as  in  the  case  of  Puteoli,
B.C.  63.  (Cic.  De  Leg.  Agr.  ii.  31.)  The  fii-st
class  or  kind  of  praefecti,  the  quattuorviri,  who
were  sent  into  Campania,  was  abolished  by  Au-
gustus, in  conformity  with  the  general  tenor  *of  his
policy,  B.C.  13.  After  the  passing  of  the  Julia
Lex  de  Civitate,  the  cities  of  the  socii  which  re-
ceived the  Roman  civitas,  still  retained  their  in-
ternal constitution ;  but,  with  respect  to  Rome,
were  all  included  under  the  name  of  municipia ;
thus  Tibur  and  Praeneste,  which  were  Latinae
civitates,  then  became  Roman  municipia.  On  the
other  hand,  Bononia  and  Luca  which  were  origin-
ally Latinae  coloniae,  also  becam?  Roman  mu-
nicipia in  consequence  of  receiving  the  Roman
civitas,  though  they  retained  their  old  colonial
constitution  and  the  name  of  colonia.  Thus
Cicero  (m  Pis.  c.  23)  could  vv^ith  propriety  call
Placentia  a  municipium,  though  in  its  origin  it
was  a  Latin  colonia ;  and  in  the  oration  Pro  Sext.
(c.  14)  he  enumerates  municipia,  coloniae,  and
praefecturae,  as  the  three  kinds  of  towns  or  com-
munities under  which  were  comprehended  all  the
towns  of  Italy.  The  testimony  of  the  Heracleotic
tablet  is  to  the  like  effect ;  for  it  speaks  of  muni-
cipia, coloniae,  and  praefecturae  as  the  three  kinds
of  places  which  had  a  magistratus  of  some  kind,  to
which  enumeration  it  adds  fora  and  conciliabula,  as
comprehending  all  the  kinds  of  places  in  which
bodies  of  Roman  citizens  dwelt.

It  thus  appears  that  the  name  municipium,
which  originally  had  the  meanings  already  given,
acquired  a  narrower  import  after  B.C.  90,  and  in
this  narrower  import  signified  the  civitates  sociorura
and  coloniae  Latinae,  which  then  became  complete
members  of  the  Roman  state.  Thus  there  was
then  really  no  difference  between  these  municipia
and  the  coloniae,  except  in  their  historical  origin,
and  in  their  original  internal  constitution.  The
Roman  law  prevailed  in  both.

The  following  recapitulation  may  be  useful :  —
The  old  Roman  colonies  {civiuin  JRomanorum)  were
placed  in  conquered  towns  ;  and  the  colonists  con-
tinued to  be  Roman  citizens.  These  colonies  were
near  Rome  (Liv.  i.  11,  27,  56,  ii.  21,  39),  and  few
in  number.  Probably  some  of  the  old  Latinae  colo-
niae were  established  by  the  Romans  in  conjunction
with  other  Latin  states  (Antium).  After  the  con-
quest of  Latium,  Latinae  coloniae  were  established
by  the  Romans  in  various  parts  of  Italy.  These
colonies  should  be  distinguished  from  the  colonies
civium  Romanorum,  inasmuch  as  they  are  some-
times calltd  coloniae  populi  Romani,  though  they
were  not  coloniae  civium  Romanonim.  (Liv.  xxvii.
9,  xxix.  15.)  Roman  citizens  who  chose  to  join
such  colonies,  gave  up  their  civic  rights  for  the
more  solid  advantage  of  a  grant  of  land.

When  Latin  colonies  began  to  be  established,
few  Roman  colonies  were  founded  until  after  the
close  of  the  second  Punic  war  (b.  c.  201),  and
these  few  were  chiefly  maritime  colonies  (Ana^Vf
&c.).  These  Latin  colonies  were  subject  to  and
part  of  the  Roman  state ;  but  they  had  not  the
civitas  :  they  had  no  political  bond  among  them-
selves ;  but  they  had  the  administration  of  their
internal  affairs.  The  colonies  of  the  Gracchi  were
Roman  colonies  ;  but  their  object,  like  that  of  sub-
sequent Agrarian  laws,  vvas  merely  to  provide  for
the  poorer  citizens  :  the  old  Roman  and  the  Latin
colonies  had  for  their  object  the  extension  and
conservation  of  the  Roman  empire  in  Italy.    After


S20


COLORES.


the  passing  of  the  Lex  Julia,  which  gave  the
civitas  to  the  socii  and  the  Latin  colonies,  the
object  of  establishing  Roman  and  Latin  colonies
ceased  ;  and  military  colonies  were  thenceforward
settled  in  Italy,  and,  under  the  emperors,  in  the
provinces.  (Plin.  Nat.  Hist.  iii.  4.)  These  military
colonies  had  the  civitas,  such  as  it  then  was  ;  but
their  internal  organisation  might  be  various.

The  following  references,  in  addition  to  those
already  given,  will  direct  the  reader  to  abundant
sources  of  information  :  —  (Sigonius,  De  Jtire  An-
tiqiio,  &c.  ;  Niebuhr,  Roman  History ;  Savigny,
Uebe.r  das  Jus  Italicum,  Zeitschr.  vol.  v.  ;  Tabulae
Heracleenses.  Mazochi^  Neap.  1754  ;  Savigny,  Z>er
Romische  Volkssdduss  der  Tafel  von  Heradea ;
and  Rudorff,  Ueber  die  Lex  Mamilia  de  Coloniis^
Zeitsdir.  vol.  ix.  ;  RudoriF,  Das  Ackergesetz  von
Sp.  Tliorius^  and  Puchta,  Ueber  den  Inhalt  der
Lex  Rvbrla  de  Gallia  Cisalpina,  Zeitsdir.  vol.  x.  ;
Beaufort,  Rep.  Rom.  v.  p.  278—308  ;  Madvig,
Opus(rula^  De  Jure  et  Conditione  Coloniarum  Populi
Rom,ani,  Hauniae,  1834  ;  Zumpt,  Ueber  den
Untersdiied  der  Benennungen^  Munidpium^  Colonia,
Praefectura,  Berlin,  1840.)  [G.  L.]

COLO'RES.  The  Greeks  and  Romans  had
a  very  extensive  acquaintance  with  colours  as
pigments.  Book  vii.  of  Vitruvius  and  several
chapters  of  books  xxxiii.  xxxiv,  and  xxxv.  of
Pliny's  Natural  History,  contain  much  interesting
matter  upon  their  nature  and  composition  ;  and
these  works,  together  with  what  is  contained  in
book  V.  of  Dioscorides,  and  some  remarks  in
Theophrastus  (De  Lapviibus\  constitute  the  whole
of  our  infonnation  of  any  importance  upon  the
subject  of  ancient  pigments.  From  these  sources,
through  the  experiments  and  observations  of  Sir
Humphry  Davy  {Phil.  Trans,  of  the  Royal  Sodety^
1815)  on  some  remains  of  ancient  colours  and
paintings  in  the  baths  of  Titus  and  of  Li  via,  and
in  other  ruins  of  antiquity,  we  are  enabled  to  col-
lect a  tolerably  satisfactory  account  of  the  colour-
ing materials  employed  by  the  Greek  and  Roman
painters.

The  painting  of  the  Greeks  is  very  generally
considered  to  have  been  inferior  to  their  sculpture ;
this  partially  arises  from  very  imperfect  inform-
ation, and  a  very  erroneous  notion  respecting  the
resources  of  the  Greek  painters  in  colouring.  The
error  originated  apparently  with  Pliny  himself,
who  says  (xxxv.  32),  "  Quatuor  coloribus  solis
immortalia  ilia  opera  fecere,  ex  albis  Melino,  ex
silaceis  Attico,  ex  rubris  Sinopide  Pontica,  ex
nigris  atramento,  Apelles,  Echion,  Melanthius,
Necomachus,  clarissimi  pictores  ;"  and  (xxxv.  36),
"  Legentes  meminerint  omnia  ea  quatuor  coloribus
facta."  This  mistake,  as  Sir  H.  Davy  has  sup-
posed, may  have  arisen  from  an  imperfect  recollec-
tion of  a  passage  in  Cicero  {Brutus,  c.  18),  which,
however,  directly  contradicts  the  statement  of
Pliny:  — "  In  pictura  Zeuxim  et  Polygnotum,  et
Timanthem,  et  eonim,  qui  non  sunt  usi  plusquara
quattuor  coloribus,  formas  et  lineamenta  laudamus :
at  in  Echione,  Nicomacho,  Protogene,  Apelle  jam
perfecta  sunt  omnia."  Here  Cicero  extols  the
design  and  drawing  of  Polygnotus,  Zeuxis,  and
Timanthes,  and  those  who  used  but  four  colours  ;
and  observes  in  contradistinction,  that  in  Echion,
Nicomachus,  Protogenes,  and  Apelles,  all  things
were  perfect.  But  the  remark  of  Pliny,  that
Apelles,  Echion,  Melanthius,  and  Nicomachus  used
but  four  colours,  including  both  black  and  white


CULORES.

to  the  exclusion  of  all  blue  (unless  we  understan(?
by  "  ex  nigris  atramento  "  black  and  indigo),  if?
evidently  an  error,  independent  of  its  contradiction
to  Cicero  ;  and  the  conclusion  drawn  by  some  front
it  and  the  remark  of  Cicero,  that  the  early  Greek
painters  were  acquainted  with  but  four  pigments,
is  equally  without  foundation.  Pliny  himself
speaks  of  two  other  colours,  besides  the  four  in
question,  wliich  were  used  b}'^  the  earliest  painters ;
the  testa-trita  (xxxv.  5)  and  cinnabaris  or  vermilion,
which  he  calls  also  minium  (xxxiii.  36).  He
mentions  also  (xxxv.  21)  the  Eretrian  earth  used
by  Nicomachus,  and  the  elephantinum,  or  ivory-
black,  used  by  Apelles  (xxxv.  25),  thus  contra-
dicting himself  when  he  asserted  that  Apelles  and
Nicomachus  used  but  four  colours.  The  above
tradition,  and  the  simplex  color  oi  Quintilian  {Orat.
Instit.  xii.  1 0),  are  our  only  authorities  for  defining
any  limits  to  the  use  of  colours  by  the  early  Greeks,
as  applied  to  painting ,  but  we  have  no  authority
whatever  for  supposiug  that  they  were  limited  in
any  remarkable  way  in  their  acquaintance  Avith
them.  That  the  painters  of  the  earliest  period
had  not  such  abundant  resources  in  this  depart-
ment of  art  as  those  of  the  later,  is  quite  consistent
with  experience,  and  does  not  require  demonstra-
tion ;  but  to  suppose  that  they  were  confined  to
four  pigments  is  quite  a  gratuitous  supposition,
and  is  opposed  to  both  reason  and  evidence.
[Pictura.]

Sir  H.  Davy  also  analysed  the  colours  of  the
so-called  "  Aldobrandini  marriage,"  all  the  reds
and  yellows  of  which  he  discovered  to  be  ochres ;
the  blues  and  greens,  to  be  oxides  of  copper  ;  the-
blacks  all  carbonaceous  ;  the  browns,  mixtures  of
ochres  and  black,  and  some  containing  oxide  of
manganese  ;  the  whites  were  all  carbonates  of
lime.

The  reds  discovered  in  an  earthen  vase  contain-
ing a  variety  of  colours,  were,  red  oxide  of  lead
{minium).,  and  two  iron  ochres  of  different  tints,  a
dull  red,  and  a  purplish  red  nearly  of  the  same
tint  as  prussiate  of  copper  ;  they  were  all  mixed
with  chalk  or  carbonate  of  lime.  The  yellows
were  pure  ochres  with  carbonate  of  lime,  and
ochre  mixed  with  minium  and  carbonate  of  lime.
The  blues  were  oxides  of  copper  with  carbonate
of  lime.  Sir  H.  Davy  discovered  a  frit  made  by
means  of  soda  and  coloured  with  oxide  of  copper,
approaching  ultramarine  in  tint,  which  he  sup-
posed to  be  the  frit  of  Alexandria  ;  its  composition,
he  says,  was  perfect  —  "that  of  embodying  the
colour  in  a  composition  resembling  stone,  so  as  to
prevent  the  escape  of  elastic  matter  from  it,  or  the
decomposing  action  of  the  elements  ;  this  is  a
species  of  artificial  lapis  lazuli,  the  colouring  matter
of  which  is  naturally  inherent  in  a  hard  siliceous
stone."

Of  greens  there  were  many  shades,  all,  however,
either  carbonate  or  oxide  of  copper,  mixed  with
carbonate  of  lime.  The  browns  consisted  of  ochres
calcined,  and  oxides  of  iron  and  of  manganese,  and
compounds  of  ochres  and  blacks.  Sir  H.  Davy
could  not  ascertain  whether  the  lake  which  he  dis-
covered was  of  animal  or  of  vegetable  origin  ;  if  of
animal,  he  supposed  that  it  was  very  probably  the
Tyrian  or  marine  purple.  He  discovered  also  a
colour  which  he  supposed  to  be  black  wad,  or,
hydrated  binoxide  of  manganese  ;  also  a  black
colour  composed  of  chalk,  mixed  with  the  ink  of
the  sepia  officinalis  or  cuttle-fish.     The  transparent


COLORES.

Wue  glass  of  the  ancients  he  found  to  he  stained
Avith  oxide  of  cobalt,  and  the  purple  with  oxide  of
manganese.

The  following  list,  compiled  from  the  different
sources  of  our  information  concerning  the  pigments
known  to  the  ancients,  will  serve  to  convey  an
idea  of  the  great  resources  of  the  Greek  and  Ro-
man painters  in  this  department  of  their  art ;  and
which,  in  the  opinion  of  Sir  H.  Davy,  were  fully
equal  to  the  resources  of  the  great  Italian  painters
in  the  sixteenth  century:  —

Red.  The  ancient  reds  were  very  numerous.
KivudSapi,  fx.i\Tos,  cinnabaris,  cinnabar,  veraiilion,
bisulphuret  of  mercury,  called  also  by  Pliny  and
Vitruvius  minium.

The  KLvvdSapi  'Ii/St/ctJv,  cinnaharis  Indica,  men-
tioned by  Pliny  and  Dioscorides,  was  what  is
vulgarly  called  dragon's-blood,  the  resin  obtained
from  various  species  of  the  calamus  palm.

MI\tos  seems  to  have  had  various  significa-
tions ;  it  was  used  for  cinnaharis,  minium,  red  lead,
and  rubrica,  red  ochre.  There  were  various  kinds
of  rubricae,  the  Cappadocian,  the  Egyptian,  the
Spanish,  and  the  Lemnian  ;  all  were,  however,
red  iron  oxides,  of  which  the  best  were  the
Lemnian,  from  the  isle  of  Lemnos,  and  the  Cap-
padocian, called  by  the  Romans  rubrica  Sinopica,
by  the  Greeks  StvcoTrfs,  from  Sinope  in  Paphlagonia,
whence  it  was  first  brought.  There  was  also  an
African  rubrica  called  cicerculum.

Minium,  red  oxide  of  lead,  red  lead,  was  called
by  the  Romans  cerussa  usta,  and,  according  to
Vitruvius,  sandaracha;  by  the  Greeks,  fxiXros,
and,  according  to  Dioscorides  (v.  122),  (XavSapaKr}.
Pliny  tells  us  that  it  was  discovered  through  the
accidental  calcination  of  some  cerussa  (white  lead)
by  a  fire  in  the  Peiraeeus,  and  was  first  used  as  a
pigment  by  Nicias  of  Athens,  about  330  B.  c.

The  Roman  sandaracha  seems  to  have  had
various  significations,  and  it  is  evidently  used
differently  by  the  Greek  and  Roman  writers.
Pliny  speaks  of  different  shades  of  sandaracha,
the  pale  or  massicot  (yellow  oxide  of  lead),  and  a
mixture  of  the  pale  with  minium ;  it  apparently
also  signified  realgar  or  the  red  sulphuret  of  arsenic :
there  was  also  a  compound  colour  of  equal  parts  of
sandaracha  and  rubrica  calcined,  called  sandyx,
adv^v^.  Sir  H.  Davy  supposed  this  colour  to  ap-
proach our  crimson  in  tint ;  in  painting  it  was
frequently  glazed  with  purple  to  give  it  additional
lustre.

Pliny  speaks  of  a  dark  ochre  from  the  isl'e  of
Syros,  which  he  calls  Syricum  ;  but  he  says  also
that  it  was  made  by  mixing  sandyx  with  rubrica
Sinopica.

Yellow.  Yellow  ochre,  hydrated  peroxide  of
iron,  the  siL  of  the  Romans,  the  ^XP^'-  of  the  Greeks,
formed  the  base  of  many  other  yellows  mixed  with
various  colours  and  carbonate  of  lime.  Ochre  was
procured  from  different  parts  ;  the  Attic  was  con-
sidered the  best ;  it  was  first  used  in  painting,  ac-
cording to  Pliny,  by  Polygnotus  and  Micon,  at
Athens,  about  460  B.  c.

^^.P<t^vik6v,  auripigmcntum,  orpiment  (yellow
sulphuret  of  arsenic),  was  also  an  important  yel-
low ;  but  it  has  not  been  discovered  in  any  of  the
ancient  paintings.  The  sandaracha  has  been  al-
ready mentioned.

Green.  ChrysocoUa,  xP''"^<^'<^oA\o,  which  ap-
pears to  have  been  green  carbonate  of  copper  or
malachite  (green  verditer),  was  the  green  most  ap-


COLORES.


321


proved  of  by  the  ancients  ;  its  tint  depended  upon
the  quantity  of  carbonate  of  lime  mixed  with  it.

Pliny  mentions  various  kinds  of  verdigris  (dia-
cetate  of  copper),  aerugo,  I6s,  I6s  x^-^i^ov,  ci/pria
aerugo,  and  aeruca,  and  a  particular  preparation  of
verdigris  called  scolecia.  Sir  H.  Davy  supposes
the  ancients  to  have  used  also  acetate  of  copper
(distilled  verdigris)  as  a  pigmont.  Besides  the
above  were  several  green  earths,  all  cupreous
oxides  :  Theodotion  {QeoSSriou),  so  called  from
being  found  upon  the  estate  of  Theodotius,  near
Smyrna  ;  Appiannm ;  and  the  creta  viridis,  com-
mon green  earth  of  Verona.

Blue.  The  ancient  blues  were  also  very
numerous  ;  the  principal  of  these  was  caeruleum^
Kvavos,  azure,  a  species  of  verditer  or  blue  carbo-
nate of  copper,  of  which  there  were  many  varieties.
It  was  gen'erally  mixed  with  carbonate  of  lime.
Vitruvius  and  Pliny  speak  of  the  Alexandrian,
the  Cyprian,  and  the  Scythian  ;  the  Alexandrian
was  the  most  valued,  as  approaching  nearest  to
ultramarine.  It  was  made  also  at  Pozzuoli  by  a
certain  Vestorius,  who  had  learnt  the  method  of  its
preparation  in  Egypt  ;  this  was  distinguished  by
the  name  of  coelon.  There  was  also  a  washed
caeruleum  called  lomentum,  and  an  inferior  descrip-
tion of  this  called  tritum.

It  appears  that  ultramarine  (lapis  lazuli)  was
known  to  tlie  ancients  under  the  name  of  Arme-
nium,  ^Apfieviov,  from  Armenia,  whence  it  was
procured.  Sulphuret  of  sodium  is  the  colouring
principle  of  lapis  lazuli,  according  to  M.  Gmelin  of
Tubingen.

Indigo,  Indicwn,  'IvSiKoVy  was  well  known  to
the  ancients.

Cobalt.  The  ancient  name  for  this  mineral  is
not  known  ;  but  it  has  been  supposed  to  be  the
Xa^K6s  of  Tlieophrastus,  which  he  mentions  was
used  for  staining  glass.  No  cobalt,  however,  has
been  discovered  in  any  of  the  remains  of  ancient
painting.

Purple.  The  ancients  had  also  several  kinds
of  purple,  purpurissum,  ostrum,  liysginum,  and
various  compound  colours.  The  most  valuable  of
these  was  the  purpurissum,  prepared  by  mixing
the  creta  argentaria  with  the  purple  secretion  of
the  murex  (iropcpvpa).

Hysgirium,  vtryivou  {vcryr,,  woad?),  according  to
Vitruvius,  is  a  colour  between  scarlet  and  purple.

The  Roman  ostrum  was  a  compound  of  red
ochre  and  blue  oxide  of  copper.

Vitruvius  mentions  a  purple  which  was  obtained
by  cooling  the  ochra  usta  with  wine  vinegar.

Rubiae  radiv,  madder-root.

Brown.  Och-a  usta,  burnt  ochre.  The  browns
were  ochres  calcined,  oxides  of  iron  and  of  manga-
nese, and  compounds  of  ochres  and  blacks.

Black,  atramentum,  p.4Kav.  The  ancient
blacks  were  mostly  carbonaceous.  The  best  for
the  purposes  of  painting  were  elephantimtm,  e'Ae.
(pdvTivov,  ivory-black  ;  and  tryginum,  rpvyivoy^
vine-black,  made  of  burnt  vine  twigs.  The  former
was  used  by  Apelles,  the  latter  by  Polygnotus  and
Micon.

The  atramentum  Indicum,  mentioned  by  Pliny
and  Vitruvius,  was  probably  the  Chinese  Indian
ink.  The  blacks  from  sepia,  and  the  black  woad,
have  been  already  mentioned.

White.  The  ordinary  Greek  white  was  mdinum^
/.i-nXids,  an  earth  from  the  isle  of  Melos ;  for  fresco
painting    the  best  was  the  African  paraetonium.


S22


COLOSSUS.


•irapair6viov,  so  called  from  the  place  of  its  origin
(in  the  coast  of  Africa,  not  far  from  Egypt.  There
was  also  a  white  earth  of  Eretria,  and  the  annu-
larian  white,  creta  anuluria  or  anulare,  made  from
the  glass  composition  worn  in  the  rings  of  the
poor.

Carbonate  of  lead  or  white  lead,  certtssa,  ^i/xv-
Giov,  was  apparently  not  much  used  by  the  ancient
painters  ;  it  was  nowhere  found  amongst  the  Ro-
man ruins.

Sir  H.  Davy  is  of  opinion  that  the  azure,  the
red  and  yellow  ochres,  and  the  blacks,  have  not
imdergone  any  change  of  colour  whatever  in  the
ancient  fresco  paintings  ;  but  that  many  of  the
greens,  which  are  now  carbonate  of  copper,  were
originally  laid  on  in  a  state  of  acetate.

Pliny  divides  the  colours  into  colores  floridi  and
colores  austeri  (xxxv.  1 2)  ;  the  colores  floridi  were
those  which,  in  his  time,  were  supplied  by  the
employer  to  the  painter,  on  account  of  their  ex-
pense, and  to  secure  their  being  genuine  ;  they  were
minium,  Armenium,  cinnabaris,  chrysocolla,  Indi-
cum,  and  purpurissum  ;  the  rest  were  the  austeri.

Both  Pliny  (xxxv.  12)  and  Vitruvius  (vii.  7)
class  the  colours  into  natural  and  artificial  ;  the
natural  are  those  obtained  immediately  from  the
earth,  which,  according  to  Pliny,  are  Sinopis,
rubrica,  paraetonium,  melinum,  Eretria,  and  auri-
pigmentum  ;  to  these  Vitruvius  adds  ochra,  san-
daracha,  minium  (vermilion)^  and  chrysocolla,
being  of  metallic  origin.  The  others  are  called
artificial,  on  account  of  requiring  some  particular
preparation  to  render  them  fit  for  use.

To  the  above  list  of  colours,  more  names  might
still  be  added  ;  but  being  for  the  most  part  merely
compounds  or  modifications  of  those  already  men-
tioned, they  would  only  take  up  space  without
giving  us  any  additional  insight  into  the  resources
of  the  ancient  painters  ;  those  which  we  have
already  enumerated  are  sufficient  to  form  an  in-
finite variety  of  colour,  and  conclusively  prove
that  the  ancient  painters,  if  they  had  not  more,
had  at  least  equal  resources  in  this  most  essential
branch  of  painting  with  the  artists  of  our  own
times.  [R.  N.  W.]

COLOSSUS  {Ko\o(T(r6s).  The  origin  of  this
word  is  not  known,  the  suggestions  of  the  gram-
ftiarians  being  either  ridiculous,  or  imperfect  in
point  of  etymology.  {Etym.  Mag.  p.  526.  16  ;
Festus,  s.  f.)  It  is,  however,  very  ancient,  pro-
bably of  Ionic  extraction,  and  rarply  occurs  in  the
Attic  writers.  (Blomf.  Gloss,  ad  Aesch.  Agam.
406.)  It  is  used  both  by  the  Greeks  and  Romans
to  signify  a  statue  larger  than  life  (Hesych.  s.  v.  ;
Aesch.  Agam.  406  ;  Schol.  ad  Juv.  Sat.  viii.  230),
and  thence  a  person  of  extraordinary  stature  is
termed  colosseros  (Suet.  Calig.  35)  ;  and  the  archi-
tectural ornaments  in  the  upper  members  of  lofty
buildings,  which  require  to  be  of  large  dimensions
in  consequence  of  their  remoteness,  are  termed
colnssicotera  {KoKoaaiKwrcpa,  Vitruv.  iii.  3,  com-
pare Id.  X.  4).  Statues  of  this  kind,  simply
colossal,  but  not  enormously  large,  were  too
common  amongst  the  Greeks  to  excite  observation
merely  from  their  size,  and  are,  therefore,  rarely
referred  to  as  such  ;  the  word  being  more  fre-
quently applied  to  designate  those  figures  of  gi-
gantic dimensions  (moles  kiatuarum^  turribus  pares^
Plin.  //.  A^.  xxxiv.  7.  s.  18)  which  were  first
executed  in  Egj'^pt,  and  afterwards  in  Greece  and
Italy.


COLUM.

Among  the  colossal  statues  of  Greece,  the  most
celebrated,  according  to  Pliny,  was  the  bronze
colossus  at  Rhodes  by  Chares  of  Lindus,  a  pupil  of
Lysippus.  (See  Did.  of  G.  and  R.  Biog.  art.
Chares.)  Pliny  mentions  another  Greek  colossus
of  Apollo,  the  work  of  Calamis,  which  cost  500
talents,  and  was  twenty  cubits  high,  in  the  city  of
Apollonia,  whence  it  was  transferred  to  the  capitol
by  M.  Lucullus  ;  and  also  those  of  Jupiter  and
Hercules,  at  Tarentum,  by  Lysippus.  {Diet,  of
G.  and  R.  Biog.  art.  Lysippus.)  To  the  list  of
Pliny  must  be  added  the  more  important  colossal
statues  of  Pheidias,  the  most  beautiful  of  which
were  his  chryselephantine  statues  of  Zeus,  at
Olympia,  and  of  Athena,  in  the  Parthenon  at
Athens  ;  the  largest  was  his  bronze  statue  of
Athena  Promachus,  on  the  Acropolis.

Amongst  the  works  of  this  description  made  ex-
pressly by  or  for  the  Romans,  those  most  fre-
quently alluded  to  are  the  following  :  —  1.  A  statue
of  Jupiter  upon  the  capitol,  made  by  order  of  Sp.
Carvilius,  from  the  armour  of  the  Samnites,  which
was  so  large  that  it  could  be  seen  from  the  Alban
mount.  (Plin.  I.  c.)  2.  A  bronze  statue  of  Apollo
at  the  Palatine  library  (Plin.  I.e.),  to  which  the
bronze  head  now  preserved  in  the  capitol  probably
belonged.  3,  A  bronze  statue  of  Augustus,  in  the
forum,  which  bore  his  name.  (Mart.  Ep.  viii.  44.
7.)  4.  The  colossus  of  Nero,  which  was  executed
by  Zenodorus  in  marble,  and  therefore  quoted  by
Pliny  in  proof  that  the  art  of  casting  metal  was
then  lost.  Its  height  was  110  or  120  feet.  (Plin.
/.  c.  ;  Suet.  Nero,  31.)  It  was  originally  placed  in
the  vestibule  of  the  domus  aurea  (Mart.  Spect.  ii.
1,  Ep.  i.  71.  7  ;  Dion  Cass.  Ixvi.  15)  at  the  bottom
of  the  Via  Sacra,  where  the  basement  upon  which
it  stood  is  still  to  be  seen,  and  from  it  the  con-
tiguous amphitheatre  is  supposed  to  have  gained
the  name  of  "  Colosseum."  Having  suffered  in  the
fire  which  destroyed  the  golden  house,  it  was
repaired  by  Vespasian,  and  by  him  converted  into
a  statue  of  the  sun.  (Hieronym.  in  Hab.  c.  3  ;
Suet.  Vesp.  18  ;  Plin.  /.  c.  ;  compare  Lamprid.
Commod.  17  ;  Dion  Cass.  Ixxii.  15.)  Twenty-
four  elephants  were  employed  by  Hadrian  to  re-
move it,  when  he  was  about  to  build  the  temple  of
Rome.  (Spart.  Iladr.  19.)  5.  An  equestrian
statue  of  Domitian,  of  bronze  gilt,  which  was
placed  in  the  centre  of  the  forum.  (Stat.  Sylv.  L
1.  1  ;  Mart.  Ep.  i.  71.  6.)  [A.  R.]

COLUM  (iidfj.6s),  a  strainer  or  colander,  was
used  for  straining  wine,  milk  olive-oil,  and  other


COLUMNA.

liquids.  Thus  we  find  it  employed  in  the  making
of  olive-oil  to  receive  the  juice  of  the  berry  vi^hen
pressed  out  by  the  prelum.  Such  cola  were  made
of  hair,  broom  or  rushes  (Virg.  Geovg.  ii.  242  ;
Colum.  R.R.  xii.  19).  Those  that  were  used  as
articles  of  luxury  for  straining  wine  were  fre-
quently made  of  some  metal,  such  as  bronze  or
silver  (Athen.  p.  470,  d.)  Various  specimens  of
cola  have  been  found  at  Pompeii.  The  preceding
woodcut  shows  the  plan  and  profile  of  one  which
is  of  silver  {Mus.  Borb.  vol.  viii.  14.  fig.  4,  5).

The  Romans  filled  the  strainer  with  ice  or  snow
(cola  nivaria)  in  order  to  cool  and  dilute  the  wine
at  the  same  time  that  it  was  cleared.  fNix.]   [J.  Y.]

COLUMBA'RIUM,  literally  a  dove-cote  or
pigeon-house,  is  used  to  express  a  variety  of  ob-
jects, all  of  which  however  derive  their  name  from
their  resemblance  to  a  dove-cote.

1.  A  sepulchral  chamber.     [FuNUS.]

2.  In  a  machine  used  to  raise  water  for  the  pur-
pose of  irrigation,  as  described  by  Vitruvius  (x.  9),
the  vents  through  which  the  water  was  conveyed
into  the  receiving  trough,  were  termed  Columbaria.
This  will  be  understood  by  referring  to  the  wood-
cut at  p.  100.  [Antlia.]  The  difference  between
that  representation  and  the  machine  now  under
consideration,  consisted  in  the  following  points  :  —
The  wheel  of  the  latter  is  a  solid  one  {tympa-
num)^ instead  of  radiated  (rota)  ;  and  was  worked
as  a  treadmill,  by  men  who  stood  upon  platforms
projecting  from  the  flat  sides,  instead  of  being
turned  by  a  stream.  Between  the  intervals  of
each  platform  a  series  of  grooves  or  channels  {co-
lumbaria) were  formed  in  the  sides  of  the  tympa-
num, through  which  the  water  taken  up  by  a
number  of  scoops  placed  on  the  outer  margin  of
the  wheel,  like  the  jars  in  the  cut  referred  to,  was
conducted  into  a  wooden  trough  below  {labrum
ligneum  suppositum,  Vitruv.  I.e.).

3.  The  cavities  which  receive  the  extreme  ends
of  the  beams  upon  which  a  roof  is  supported  {tig-
norum  cubilia)^  and  which  are  represented  by
triglyphs  in  the  Doric  order,  were  termed  Colum-
baria  by  the  Roman  architects  ;  that  is,  whilst
they  remained  empty,  and  until  filled  up  by  the
head  of  the  beam.  The  corresponding  Greek  term
was  onai  (from  ottt],  a  hole)^  and  hence  the  space
between  two  such  cavities,  that  is,  in  the  com-
plete building,  between  two  triglyphs,  was  called
IxctSitti,  a  metope.  (Vitruv.  iv.  2  ;  Marquez,  DeW
Ordine  Dorico,  vii.  37.)  [A.  R.]

COLUMEN,  which  is  the  same  word  as  cul-'
men^  is  used  in  architecture,  either  generally  for
the  roof  of  a  building,  or  particularly  for  a  beam
in  the  highest  part  of  the  slope  of  a  roof.  By  this
description  Vitruvius  seems  to  mean  either  the  col-
lar-beam, or  the  king-post.,  -but  more  probably  the
latter,  as  he  derives  columna  from  columen  (Vi-
truv. jv.  2.  §  \.  Schn. ;  Festus).  [P.  S.]

COLUMNA  (kiwi/,  dim.  Kiovis,  Ki6viou,  Kiovi-
(TKos'  ariiKos,  dim.  (rruAts,  <rTv\iaKos),  a  pillar  or
column.  •

The  us6  of  the  trunks  6f  trees  placed  upright
for  supporting  buildings  unquestionably  led  to  the
adoption  of  similar  -supports  wrought  in  stone.
Among  the  agricultural  Greeks  of  Asia  Minor,
whose  modes  of  life  appear  to  have  suffered  little
change  for  more  than  two  thousand  years.  Sir  C.
Fellowes  observed  an  exact  conformity  of  style  and
arrangement  between  the  wooden  huts  now  occu-
pied by  the  peasantry,  of  one  of  which  he  has


COLUMNA.  S23

given  a  sketch  {Journal,  p.  234  ;  see  woodcut),
and  the  splendid  tombs  and  temples,  which  were
hewn  out  of  the  rock,  and  constructed  at  the  ex-
pense of  the  most  wealthy  of  the  ancient  inhabit-
ants. We  have  also  direct  testimonies  to  prove
that  the  ancients  made  use  of  wooden  columns  in
their  edifices.  Pausanias  (vi.  24.  §  7)  describes  a
very  ancient  monument  in  the  market-place  at
Elis,  consisting  of  a  roof  supported  by  pillars  of


rfsi^M>^^'


oak.  A  temple  of  Juno  at  Metapontum  was  sup-
ported by  pillars  made  from  the  trunks  of  vines.
(Plin.  H.  N.  xxiv.  1.)  In  the  Egyptian  architec-
ture, many  of  the  greatest  stone  columns  are  mani-
fest imitations  of  the  trunk  of  the  palm.  (Herod,
ii.  169.)

As  the  tree  required  to  be  based  upon  a  flat
square  stone,  and  to  have  a  stone  or  tile  of  similar
form  fixed  on  its  summit  to  preserve  it  from  decay,
so  the  column  was  made  with  a  square  base,  and
was  covered  with  an  abacus.  [Abacus,]  Hence
the  principal  parts  of  which  every  column  consists
are  three,  the  base,  the  shaft,  and  the  capital.

In  the  Doric,  which  is  the  oldest  style  of  Greek
architecture,  we  must  consider  all  the  columns  in
the  same  row  as  having  one  common  base  (podium),
whereas  in  the  Ionic  and  Corinthian  each  column
has  a  separate  base,  called  (nzeipa.  [Spira.]  The
capitals  of  these  two  latter  orders  show,  on  com-
parison with  the  Doric,  a  greater  degree  of  com-
plexity and  a  much  richer  style  of  ornament ;
and  the  character  of  lightness  and  elegance  is
further  obtained  in  them  by  their  more  slender
shaft,  its  height  being  much  greater  in  proportion
to  its  thickness.  Of  all  these  circumstances  some
idea  may  be  formed  by  the  inspection  of  the  three
accompanying  specimens  of  pillars  selected  from


\  2


324


<50LUMNA.


each  of  the  principal  orders  of  ancient  architcctm'e.
The  first  is  from  a  column  of  the  Parthenon  at
j\thens,  the  capital  of  which  is  showTi  on  a  larger
scale  at  p.  1.  The  second  is  from  the  temple  of
Bacchus  at  Teos,  the  capital  of  which  is  introduced
at  p.  144.  The  third  is  from  the  remains  of  the
temple  of  Jupiter  at  Labranda.

In  all  the  orders  the  shaft  (scapus)  tapers  from
the  bottom  towards  the  top,  thus  imitating  the
natural  form  of  the  trunk  of  a  tree,  and  at  the
same  time  conforming  to  a  general  law  in  regard
to  the  attainment  of  strength  and  solidity  in  all
upright  bodies.  The  shaft  was,  however,  made
with  a  slight  swelling  in  the  middle,  which  was
called  the  entasis.  It  was,  moreover,  almost  uni-
versally, and  from  the  earliest  times,  channelled
or  fluted,  i.  e.  the  outside  was  striped  with  inci-
sions parallel  to  the  axis.  (Vitruv.  iv.  4.)  These
incisions,  called  striae,  were  always  worked  with
extreme  regularity.  The  section  of  them  by  a
plane  parallel  to  the  base  was,  in  the  Ionic  and
Corinthian  orders,  a  eemicircle  ;  in  the  Doric,  it
■was  an  arc  much  less  than  a  semicircle.  Their
number  v/as  20  in  the  columns  of  the  Parthenon,
above  represented  ;  in  other  instances,  24,  28,
or  32.

The  capital  was  commonly  wrought  out  of  one
block  of  stone,  the  shaft  consisting  of  several
cylindrical  pieces  fitted  to  one  another.  When
the  column  was  erected,  its  component  parts  were
finnly  joined  together,  not  by  mortar  or  cement,
but  by  iron  cramps  fixed  in  the  direction  of  the
axis.  The  annexed  woodcut  is  copied  from  an
engraving  in  Swinburne's  Tour  in  the  Two
Sicilies  (vol.  ii.  p.  301),  and  represents  a  Doric
column,  which  has  been  thrown  prostrate  in  such
a  manner  as  to  show  the  capital  lying  separate,
and  the  five  drums  of  the  shaft,  each  four  feet
long,  with  the  holes  for  the  iron  cramps  by  which
they  were  xmited  together.


Columns  of  an  astonishing  size  were  nevertheless
erected,  in  which  the  shaft  was  one  piece  of  stone.
For  this  purpose  it  was  hewn  in  the  quarry  into
the  requisite  form  (Virg.  Aen.  i.  428),  and  was
then  rolled  over  the  ground,  or  moved  by  the  aid
of  various  mechanical  contrivances,  and  by  im-
mense labour,  to  the  spot  where  it  was  to  be  set
up.  The  mausoleum  of  the  Emperor  Hadrian,  a
circular  building  of  such  dimensions  that  it  serves
as  the  fortress  of  modem  Rome,  was  surrounded
by  forty-eight  lofty  and  most  beautiful  Corinthian
pillars,  the  shaft  of  each  pillar  being  a  single  piece
of  marble.  About  the  time  of  Constantine,  some
of  these  were  taken  to  support  the  interior  of  a
church  dedicated  to  St.  Paul,  which  a  few  years
ago  was  destroyed  by  fire.  The  interest  attached
to  the  working  and  erection  of  these  noble  co-
lumns, the  undivided  shafts  of  which  consisted  of
the  most  valuable  and  splendid  materials,  led  mu-


COLUMNA.

nificent  individuals  to  employ  their  wealth  in  pre-
senting them  to  public  structures.  Thus  Croesus
contributed  the  greater  part  of  the  pillars  to  the
temple  at  ICphesus.  (Herod,  i.  92.)  In  the  ruins
at  Labranda,  now  called  Jackly,  in  Caria,  tablets
in  front  of  the  columns  record  the  names  of  the
donors,  as  is  shown  in  the  specimen  of  them  above
exhibited.

Columns  were  used  in  the  interior  of  buildings,
to  sustain  the  beams  which  supported  the  ceiling.
As  both  the  beams  and  the  entire  ceiling  were
often  of  stone  or  marble,  which  could  not  be  ob-
tained in  pieces  of  so  great  a  length  as  wood,  the
columns  were  in  such  circumstances  frequent  in
proportion,  not  being  more  than  about  ten  or  twelve
feet  apart.  The  opisthodomos  of  the  Parthenon  of
Athens,  as  appears  from  traces  in  the  remaining
ruins,  had  four  columns  to  support  the  ceiling.  A
common  arrangement,  especially  in  buildings  of  an
oblong  form,  was  to  have  two  rows  of  columns
parallel  to  the  two  sides,  the  distance  from  each
side  to  the  next  row  of  columns  being  less  than
the  distance  between  the  rows  themselves.  This
construction  was  adopt-d  not  only  in  temples,  but
in  palaces  (o'lkoi).  The  great  hall  of  the  palace
of  Ulysses  in  Ithaca,  that  of  the  king  of  the
Phaeacians,  and  that  of  the  palace  of  Hercules  at
Thebes  (Eurip.  Here.  Fur.  975 — 1013),  are  sup-
posed to  have  been  thus  constructed,  the  seats  of
honour  both  for  the  master  and  mistress,  and  for
the  more  distinguished  of  their  guests,  being  at
the  foot  of  certain  pillars.  (Od.  vi.  307,  viii.  66.
473,  xxiii.  90.)  In  these  regal  halls  of  the  Ho-
meric era,  we  are  also  led  to  imagine  the  pillars
decorated  with  arms.  When  Telemachus  enters
his  father's  hall,  he  places  his  spear  against  a
column,  and  "  within  the  polished  spear-holder,"
by  which  we  must  imderstand  one  of  the  striae  or
channels  of  the  shaft.  (Od.  i.  127—129,  xvii.  29  ;
Virg.  Aen.  xii.  92.)  Around  the  base  of  the
columns,  near  the  entrance,  all  the  warriors  of  the
family  were  accustomed  to  incline  their  spears  ;  and
from  the  upper  part  of  the  same  they  suspended
their  bows  and  quivers  on  nails  or  hooks.  (Horn.
Hymn,  in  Ap.  8.)  The  minstrel's  Ij^e  hung  upon
its  peg  from  another  column  nearer  the  top  of  the
room.  (Od.  viii.  67  ;  Pind.  01.  i.  1 7.)  The  co-
lumns of  the  hall  were  also  made  subservient  to
less  agreeable  uses.  Criminals  were  tied  to  them
in  order  to  be  scourged,  or  otherwise  tormented.
(Soph.  Ajasc,  108  ;  Lobeck  ad  loc.  ;  Diog.  Laert.
viii.  21  ;  Hesiod,  Theog.  521.)  According  to  the
description  in  the  Odyssey,  the  beams  of  the  hall
of  Ulysses  were  of  silver-fir  ;  in  such  a  case,  the
apartment  might  be  very  spacious  without  being
overcrowded  with  columns.  (Od.  xix.  38,  xxii.
176,  193.)

Rows  of  columns  were  often  employed  within  a
building,  to  enclose  a  space  open  to  the  sky.
Beams  supporting  ceilings  passed  from  above  the
columns  to  the  adjoining  walls,  so  as  to  form
covered  passages  or  ambulatories  ((xroai).  Such
a  circuit  of  columns  was  called  a  peristyle  (irepL
(TTuA.ov),  and  the  Roman  atrium  was  built  upon
this  plan.  The'largest  and  most  splendid  temples
enclosed  an  open  space  like  an  atrium,  which  was
accomplished  by  placing  one  peristyle  upon  another.
In  such  cases,  the  lower  rows  of  columns  being
Doric,  the  upper  were  sometimes  Ionic  or  Corin-
thian, the  lighter  being  properly  based  upon  the
heavier.     (Paus.  viii.  45.  §  4.)     A  temple  so  con-


COLUMNA.
i^tructed  was  called  hypacthral  (viraiOpos).    [Tem-

PLUM.]

But  it  was  on  the  exterior  of  public  buildings,
and  especially  of  temples,  that  columns  were  dis-
played in  the  most  beautiful  combinations,  either
surrounding  the  building  entirely,  or  arranged  in
porticoes  on  one  or  more  of  its  fronts.  (For  the
A'arious  arrangements  of  columns  see  Templum.)
Their  original  and  proper  use  was,  of  course,  to
support  the  roof  of  the  building  ;  and,  amidst  all
the  elaborations  of  architectural  design,  this  object
was  still  kept  in  view.  The  natural  arrangement
in  such  a  case  is  obvious.  A  continuous  beam  (or
series  of  beams )  would  be  laid  on  the  tops  of  a
row  of  columns.  On  this  beam  would  rest  the
ends  of  the  cross-beams  ;  which  would  be  tied
together  by  another  continuous  piece,  parallel  to
the  first  ;  and  above  this,  if  the  columns  were  at
one  end  of  the  building,  would  rise  the  pitch  of  the
roof.  Now  in  the  actual  parts  of  an  architectural
order,  we  see  the  exact  counterpart  of  these  ar-
rangements. On  the  summit  of  the  row  of  columns
rests  the  architruve,  i.  e.  chief  beam  {iTriaTvXiov^
eplstylium :  above  this  is  the  frieze  {^(ao(p6pos,
(w(p6pos,  zophorus),  in  which  the  most  ancient
order,  namely  the  Doric,  shows,  in  its  triglyphs,
what  were  originally  the  ends  of  the  cross-beams :
in  the  other  orders  these  ends  are  generally  con-
cealed, and  the  frieze  forms  a  flat  surface,  which  is
frequently  ornamented  by  figures  in  relief,  whence
its  Greek  name.  Above  the  frieze  projects  the
cornice  (Kopwtns,  coronis,  or  corona),  forming  a
handsome  finish  to  the  entablature  (for  so  these
three  members  taken  together  are  called),  and
also,  on  the  sides  of  the  building,  serving  to  unite
the  ends  of  the  rafters  of  the  roof.  The  triangular
gable-end  of  the  roof,  abave  tlie  entablature,  is
caWed  the  pediment.  [Fastigium.]  The  detailed
description  of  the  various  portions  of  the  column
and  entablature,  in  each  of  the  orders,  will  be
best  understood  by  reference  to  the  following
wood-cuts,  which  are  taken  from  Mauch's  Grie-
ckisc/ien  und  liomisclien  Bav-Ord,nungen.

I.  The  Doiic  Order  is  characterized  by  the
absence  of  a  base,  the  thickness  and  rapid  diminu-
tion of  the  shaft,  and  the  simplicity  of  the  capital,
which  consists  of  a  deep  abacus,  supported  by  a
very  flat  oval  moulding,  called  ccldnm,  beneath
which  are  from  three  to  five  steps  or  channel^
(ijUctvTes,  annuli).  Instead  of  the  hypotrachelium
(a  sort  of  neck  which  unites  the  shaft  to  the
capital  in  the  other  orders)  there  is  merely  a  small
portion  of  the  shaft  cut  off  by  one  or  more  narrow
channels.  In  the  entablature,  the  architrave  is  in
one  surface,  and  quite  plain :  the  frieze  is  orna-
mented by  triglyphs  (so  called  from  the  three  flat
bands  into  which  they  are  divided  by  tlie  inter-
vening channels),  one  of  which  is  found  over  each
column,  and  one  over  each  intercolumniation,  ex-
cept that  the  triglyph  over  a  corner  column  is
placed,  not  over  the  centre  of  the  column,  but  at
the  extremity  of  the  architrave,  —  a  decisive  proof,
as  Vitruvius  remarks,  that  the  triglyphs  do  not
represent  windows.  The  metopes  between  the
triglyphs  were  ornamented  with  sculptures  in  high
relief.  The  cornice  is  flat,  and  projects  far,  and  on
its  under  side  are  cut  several  sets  of  drops,  called
mutules  (mutuli),  one  over  each  triglyph  and  each
metope,  the  surfaces  of  which  follow  the  slope  of
the  roof,  and  which  are  said  by  Vitruvius  to  repre-
sent the  ends  of  the  rafters  of  the  roof.     In  the


COLUMNA.


325


most  ancient  examples  of  the  order  the  columns  are
very  short  in  proportion  to  their  greatest  thickness.
In  the  temple  at  Corinth,  which  is  supposed  to  be
the  oldest  of  all,  the  height  of  the  columns  is  only
7f  modules  (i.  e.  semi-diameters),  and  in  the  great
temple  at  Paestum  only  8  modules  ;  but  greater
lightness  was  afterwards  given  to  the  order,  so
that,  in  the  Parthenon,  which  is  the  best  example,
the  height  of  the  columns  is  12  modules.  The  fol-
lowing profile  is  from  the  temple  of  Apollo  Epi-
curius  at  Phigaleia,  built  by  the  same  architect  as
the  Parthenon.  For  a  comparison  of  the  other
chief  examples,  see  the  work  of  Mauch.


The  Roman  architects  made  considerable  vari-
ations in  the  order,  the  details  of  which  are  shown
in  the  engraving  on  the  following  page,  from  an  ex-
ample at  Albano  near  Rome.  In  the  later  examples
of  the  Roman  Doric,  a  base  is  given  to  the  column.

II.  The  Ionic  Order  is  as  much  distinguished
by  simple  gracefulness  as  the  Doric  by  majestic
strength.  The  column  is  much  more  slender
than  the  Doric,  having,  in  the  earliest  known  ex-
ample, namely,  the  temple  of  Artemis  at  Ephesus,
a  height  of  16  modules,  which  was  afterwards  in-
creased to  18.  The  shaft  rests  upon  a  base,  which
was  either  the  elaborate  Ionic  or  the  Attic  [Spira;
Atticurges].  The  capital  either  springs  di-
rectly from  the  shaft,  or  there  is  a  hypotrachelium^
separated  from  the  shaft  by  an  astragal  moulding
V  3


32(3


COLUMXA.


'f

and  sometimes,  as  in  the  Erechtheinm,  adorned
with  leaf- work  (avdefxiov).  The  capital  itself  con-
sists of,  first,  an  astragal  moulding,  above  which
is  an  echinus,  sculptured  into  eggs  and  serpents'
tongues,  and  above  this  (sometimes  with  a  torus
intervening)  the  canalis,  from  which  spring  the
spiral  volutes,  which  are  the  chief  characteristics
of  the  order.  There  is  generally  an  ornamented
abacus  between  the  capital  and  the  entablature.
The  architrave  is  in  three  faces,  the  one  slightly
projecting  beyond   the   other  ;    there  is  a  small


COLUMNA.

cornice  between  the  architrave  and  the  frieze,  and
all  three  members  of  the  entablature  are  more  or
less  ornamented  with  mouldings.  The  finest  spe-
cimens of  the  order  in  its  most  simple  form  are
those  in  the  temple  of  the  Ilissus,  and  the  temple
of  Athena  Polias  at  Priene  ;  the  latter  is  usually
considered  the  best  example  of  all.  The  portico
of  the  temple  of  Athena  Polias,  adjoining  to  the
Erechtheium,  at  Athens,  displays  a  greater  profusion
of  ornament,  but  is  equally  pure  in  its  outlines.
It  is  shown  in  the  preceding  engraving.

The  use  of  the  Ionic  Order  presented  one  im-
portant difficulty.  In  the  side  view  of  the
capital,  the  volutes  did  not  show  their  beautiful
spiral  curl,  but  only  a  roll,  bound  together  by
astragals ;  so  that,  where  the  order  had  to  be  car-
ried round  a  comer,  it  was  necessary  that  the
capital  of  the  comer  column  should  present  two
faces.  This  was  accomplished  by  giving  the  outer
volute  an  inclination  of  45°  to  the  surfaces,  and
sculpturing  the  spiral  on  each  of  its  sides,  as  shown
in  the  following  engraving  ;  in  which  the  upper
figure  shows  an  elevation,  viewed  from  the  inner
side,  and  the  lower  figure  a  plan,  of  a  comer  capital
of  the  Ionic  Order.


The  Romans,  with  the  usual  infelicity  of  imita-
tors, frequently  made  all  the  capitals  witli  comer
volutes.  Their  volutes  also  are  usually  stiflf  and
meagre,  and  the  order,  as  a  whole,  remarkably  in-
ferior to  the  Grecian  examples.  For  a  collection  of
specimens  of  the  order,  see  the  plates  of  Mauch.

III.  The  Corinthian  Order  is  still  more  slender
than  the  Ionic,  and  is  especially  characterised  by
its  beautiful  capital,  which  is  said  to  have  been
suggested  to  the  mind  of  the  celebrated  sculptor
Callimachus  by  the  sight  of  a  basket,  covered  by
a  tile,  and  overgrown  by  the  leaves  of  an  acanthusj
on  which  it  had  accidentally  been  placed.  The
lowest  member  of  the  capital,  answering  to  the
hypotrachelium^  is  a  sort  of  calyx  (calathus)^  from


COLUMNA.

which  spring  generally  two  rows  of  acanthus
leaves,  surmounted  at  each  corner  by  a  small
volute,  the  spaces  between  the  volutes  being  oc-
cupied by  flowers,  masks,  or  arabesques,  or  by  an-
other pair  of  volutes  intertwining  with  each  other.
In  the  earlier  examples,  however,  there  is  fre-
quently only  one  row  of  acanthus  leaves  ;  and  in
the  so-called  Tower  of  the  Winds  the  volutes  are
wanting,  and  the  capital  consists  only  of  an
astragal,  a  single  row  of  acanthus  leaves,  and  a
row  of  tongue-shaped  leaves.  In  all  the  examples,
except  the  last-men iioned,  the  abacus,  instead  of
being  square,  as  in  the  other  orders,  is  hollowed  at
the  edges,  and  the  middle  of  each  edge  is  orna-
mented with  a  flower.  The  ornaments  of  the
capital  were  sometimes  cast  in  bronze.  The  order
seems  to  have  been  invented  about  the  time  of  the
Peloponnesian  War;  but  it  did  not  come  into  general
use  till  some  time  afterwards.  The  earliest  known
example  of  its  use  throughout  a  building  is  in  the
choragic  monument  of  Lysicrates,  which  was  built
in  B.C.  335  (see  Diet,  of  Biog.  art.  Lysicrates) ^sax^
from  which  the  following  engraving  is  taken.


COLUMNA.


327


To  those  three  orders  the  Roman  architects
added  two  others,  which  have,  however,  no  claim
to  be  considered  as  distinct  orders.  The  Tuscan
is  only  known  to  us  by  the  description  of  Vitru-
vius,  as  no  ancient  example  of  it  has  been  pre-
served. It  was  evidently  nothing  more  than  a
modification  of  the  Roman  Doric,  stripped  of  its
ornaments.  The  Roman  or  Composite  Order  is
only  a  sort  of  mongrel  of  the  Corinthian  and  Ionic;
the  general  character  being  Corinthian,  except
that  the  upper  part  of  the  capital  is  formed  of  an
Ionic  capital  with  angular  volutes :  and  both
capital  and  entablature  are  overloaded  with  orna-
ments. The  engraving  is  from  the  triumphal  arch
of  Titus,  which  is  considered  the  best  example.


^^^^m''^^r


For  further  details  respecting  the  orders  and
their  supposed  history,  see  the  hd  and  4th  books
of  Vitmvius,  the  work  of  Mauch,  and  Stieglitz's
Archxiologie  der  Baukunst.

It  only  remains  to  mention  some  other  uses  of
columns,  besides  their  ordinary  employment  for
supporting  buildings  either  within  or  without.

Columns  in  long  rows  were  used  to  convey
water  in  aqueducts  (Crates,  ap.  Athen.  vi.  94)  ;
and  single  pillars  were  fixed  in  harbours  for  moor-
ing ships.  {Od.  xxii.  466.)  Some  of  these  are
found  yet  standing.

Single  columns  were  also  erected  to  commemo-
rate persons  or  events.  Among  these,  some  of  the
most  remarkable  were  the  columnae  rostratae,
called  by  that  name  because  three  ship-beaks  pro-
ceeded from  each  side  of  them,  and  designed  to
record  successful  engagements  at  sea  (Virg.  Georg.
iii.  29  ;  Servius,  ad  he).  The  most  important
and  celebrated  of  those  which  yet  remain,  is  one
erected  in  honour  of  the  consul  C.  Duillius,  on
occasion  of  his  victory  over  the  Carthaginian  fleet,
B.  c  261  (see  the  annexed  woodcut).  It  was
originally  placed  in  the  forum  (Plin.  //.  A^.  xxxiv.
1  ] ),  and  is  now  preserved  in  the  museum  of  the
Y  4


COLUMNARIUM.


capitol.  The  inscription  upon  it,  in  great  part
effaced,  is  written  in  obsolete  Latin,  similar  to
that  of  the  Twelve  Tables.  (Quinctil.  i.  7.)
When  statues  were  raised  to  ennoble  victors  at
the  Olympic  and  other  games,  or  to  commemorate
persons  who  had  obtained  any  high  distinction,  the
tribute  of  public  homage  was  rendered  still  more
notorious  and  decisive  by  fixing  their  statues  upon
pillars.  They  thus  appeared,  as  Pliny  observes
{H.  N.  xxxiv.  12),  to  be  raised  above  other
mortals.

But  columns  were  much  more  commonly  used
to  commemorate  the  dead.  For  this  purpose  they
varied  in  size,  from  the  plain  marble  pillar  bearing
a  simple  Greek  inscription  (Leon.  Tarcnt.  in  Br.
Anal.  i.  239)  to  those  lofty  and  elaborate  columns
which  are  now  among  the  most  wonderful  and  in-
structive monuments  of  ancient  Rome.  The
column  on  the  right  hand  in  the  last  woodcut
exhibits  that  which  the  senate  erected  to  the
honour  of  the  Emperor  Trajan,  and  crowned  with
his  colossal  statue  in  bronze.  In  the  pedestal  is  a
door  which  leads  to  a  spiral  staircase  for  ascending
to  the  summit.  Light  is  admitted  to  this  staircase
through  numerous  apertures.  A  spiral  bas-relief
is  folded  round  the  pillar,  which  represents  the
emperor's  victories  over  the  Dacians,  and  is  one
of  the  most  valuable  authorities  for  archaeological
inquiries.  Including  the  statue,  the  height  of  this
monument,  in  which  the  ashes  of  the  emperor  were
deposited,  was  not  less  than  130  feet.  A  similar
column,  erected  to  the  memory  of  the  Emperor
Marcus  Aurelius,  remains  at  Rome,  and  is  com-
monly known  by  the  appellation  of  the  Antonine
column.  This  sort  of  column  was  called  cochlis  or
columna  cochlis.  [CocHLis.]  After  the  death  of
Julius  Caesar,  the  people  erected  to  his  memory  a
column  of  solid  marble,  20  feet  high,  in  the  forum,
with  tlie  inscription  parenti  patriae.  (Suet.
Jul.  85.)  Columns  still  exist  at  Rome,  at  Con-
stantinople, and  in  Egypt,  which  were  erected  to
other  emperors.  [P-  S.]

COLUMNA'RIUM,  a  tax  imposed  in  the  time
of  Julius  Caesar  upon  the  pillars  that  supported  a
house.  (Cic.  ad  Att.  xiii.  6.)    It  was  probably  im-


COMA.

[  posed  by  the  lex  sumtuaria  of  Julius  Caesar,  and
was  intended  to  check  the  passion  for  the  building
of  palaces,  which  then  prevailed  at  Rome.  The
Odiarium  was  a  similar  tax.    [Ostiarium.]

The  columnarium  levied  by  Metellus  Scipio  in
Syria  in  b.  c.  49 — 48,  was  a  tax  of  a  similar  kind,
but  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  tax  to  whicli
Cicero  alludes  in  the  passage  quoted  above.  This
colnrnnarium  was  simply  an  illegal  means  of  ex-
torting money  from  the  provincials.  (Caes.  B.  C.
iii.  32.)

COLUS,  a  distaff.  [Fusus.]
COMA  {K6fn},  Kovpd)^  the  hair.  1.  Greek.
In  the  earliest  times  the  Greeks  wore  their  hair
long,  and  thus  they  are  constantly  called  in  Homer
Kapr)KoiJ.6uvTes  'Axaiui.  This  ancient  practice  was
preserved  by  the  Spartans  for  many,  centuries.
The  Spartan  boys  always  had  their  hair  cut  quite
short  (eV  XP^  Keipovres.,  Pint.  Lt/c.  16)  ;  but  as
soon  as  they  reached  the  age  of  puberty  (ecpr]-
§ot),  they  let  it  grow  long.  They  prided  them-
selves upon  their  hair,  calling  it  the  cheapest  of
ornaments  (tuv  KSafiuu  adairavcaTaros),  and  be-
fore going  to  battle  they  combed  and  dressed  it
with  especial  care,  in  which  act  Leonidas  and  his
followers  were  discovered  by  the  Persian  spj'  be-
fore the  battle  of  Thermopylae  (Plerod.  vii.  208,
209).  It  seems  that  both  Spartan  men  and
women  tied  their  hair  in  a  knot  over  the  crown  of
the  head  (comp.  Aristoph.  Lys.  1316,  KOfiav  irap-
a/xTTUKiSSe,  with  Hor.  Carm.  ii.  11,  in  comptum
Lacenae  more  comas  religata  nodum :  Miiller,  Dor.
iv.  3.  §  1).  At  a  later  time  the  Spartans  aban-
doned this  ancient  custom,  and  wore  their  hair
short,  and  hence  some  writers  erroneously  attribute
this  practice  to  an  earlier  period.  (Paus.  vii.  14.
§  2  ;  Philostr.  VU.  Apoll.  iii.  15.  p.  106,  ed.  Olear. ;
Plut.  Ale.  23.)

The   custom  of  the   Athenians    was    different.
They  wore  their  hair  long  in  childhood,  and  cut  it
off  when  they  reached  the  age  of  puberty.     The
cutting  off  of  the  hair,  which  was  always   done
when  a  boy  became  an  e^Tjgos,  was  a  solemn  act,
attended  with  religious   ceremonies.     A  libation
was  first  offered  to  Hercules,  which  was  called
olvKTriipia   or   oivia(TT7]pia    (Hes5'ch.    and   Phot.
s.  V.)  ;  and  the  hair  after  being  cut  off  was  dedi-
cated to  some  deity,  usually  a  river -god.  (Aeschyl.
Cliocph.  6  ;   Paus.  i.  37.  §  2.)      It   was  a  very
ancient  practice  to  repair  to  Delphi  to  perform  this
ceremony,  and  Theseus  is  said  to  have  done  so.
(Plut.  rhes.  5 ;  Theophr.  Char.  21.)     The  ephebi
are  always  represented  on  works  of  art  with  their
hair  quite    short,   in   which  manner  it  was  also
worn  by  the   Athletae   (Lucian,  Dial.  Mer.  5).
But  when  the  Athenians  passed  into  the  age  of
manhood,   they   again   let   their   hair   grow.     In
ancient  times  at  Athens  the  hair  was  rolled  up
into  a  kind  of  knot  on  the  crown  of  the  head  ;  and
fastened  with  golden  clasps  in  the  shape  of  grass-
hoppers.    This  fashion  of  wearing  the  hair,  which
I  was  called  KpwSuAos,  had  gone  out  just  before  the
I  time  of  Thucydides  (i.  6)  ;  and  what  succeeded  it
I  in  the  male  sex  we  do  not  know  for  certain.     The
I  Athenian  females  also  wore  their  hair  in  the  same
j  fashion,  which  was  in  their  case  called  K6pvfj.§oSf
and  an  example  of  which  is  given  in  the  follow-
!  ing   figure   of    a   female    taken    from    Millingen
I  {Peintnres  Antiques.,  plate  40).     The  word  Cort/ni'
i  bium   is   used   in  a  similar  sense  by  Petroniua

Kciio).


COMA.


COMA.


329


On  vases,  however,  we  most  frequently  find  the
heads  of  females  covered  with  a  kind  of  band  or  a
coif  of  net-work.  Of  these  coiifures  one  was  called
cr^€vS6]/T],  wliich  was  a  broad  band  across  the  fore-
head, sometimes  made  of  metal,  and  sometimes  of
leather,  adorned  with  gold:  to  this  the  name  of
(TTKeyyis  was  also  given,  and  it  appears  to  have
been  much  the  same  as  the  &(.nrv^  (Pollux,  vii.
1 79  ;  Bottiger,  Vasengem'dlde,  iii.  p.  225  ;  Ampyx).
But  the  most  common  kind  of  head-dress  for
females  was  called  by  the  general  name  of  KeKpv-
^aAos,  and  this  was  divided  into  the  three  species
of  KiKpv^aXos,  (TOLKKOS,  and  fiirpa.  The  KeKpu-
^aAos,  in  its  narrower  sense,  was  a  caul  or  coif  of
net-work,  corresponding  to  the  Latin  reticulum.  It
was  worn  during  the  day  as  well  as  the  night,  and
has  continued  in  use  from  the  most  ancient  times
to  the  present  day.  It  is  mentioned  by  Homer
(//.  xxii.  469),  and  is  still  worn  in  Italy  and
Spain.  These  hair-nets  were  frequently  made  of
gold-threads  (Juv.  ii.  9Q  ;  Patron.  Ql\  sometimes


of  silk  (Salmas.  Exerc.  ad  Solin.  p.  392),  or  the
Elean  byssus  (Pans.  vii.  21.  §  7),  and  probably
of  other  materials,  which  are  not  mentioned  by
ancient  writers.  The  persons  who  made  these
nets  were  called  KeKpv<pa\oir\6Koi  (Pollux,  vii.
1 79).  Females  with  this  kind  of  head-dress  fre-
quently occur  in  paintings  found  at  Pompeii,  from
one  of  which  the  preceding  cut  is  taken,  represent-
ing a  woman  wearing  a  Coa  Vestis.  [CoA
Vestis.]     {Museo  Borhon.  vol.  viii.  p.  5.)

The  admos  and  the  ixlrpa  were,  on  tlie  con-
trar)%  made  of  close  materials.  The  colkkos  covered
the  head  entirely  like  a  sack  or  bag  ;  it  was  made
of  various  materials,  such  as  silk,  byssus,  and
wool.  (Comp.  Aristoph.  Thcsm.  257.)  Some-
times, at  least  among  the  Romans,  a  bladder  was
used  to  answer  the  same  purpose.  (Mart.  viii.  33.
19.)  The  iJ-iTpa  was  a  broad  band  of  cloth  of
different  colours,  which  was  wound  round  the
hair,  and  was  worn  in  various  ways.  It  was
originally  an  Eastern  head-dress,  and  may,  there-
fore, be  compared  to  the  modem  turban.  It  is
sometimes  spoken  of  as  characteristic  of  the  Phry-
gians. (Herod,  i.  195,  vii.  62  ;  Virg.  Am.  ix.
616,  617  ;  Juv.  iii.  QQ.)  It  was,  however,  also
worn  by  the  Greeks,  and  Polygnotus  is  said  to
have  been  the  first  who  painted  Greek  women
with  mitrae  (Plin.  //.  A^.  xxxv.  9.  s.  35).  The
Roman  cahintica  or  culvatica  is  said  by  Servius
{ad  Virg.  Aen.  ix.  616)  to  have  been  the  same  as
the  7nitra,  but  in  a  passage  in  the  Digest  (34.
tit.  2.  s,  25.  §  10)  they  are  mentioned  as  if  they
were  distinct.  In  the  annexed  cut,  taken  from
Millin  (Peintztres  de  Vases  Antiques^  vol.  ii.  pi.  43),
the  female  on  the  right  hand  wears  a  oraKKos  and
that  on  the  left  a  fiirpa.


AVith  respect  to  the  colour  of  the  hair,  black
was  the  most  frequent,  but  blo?ide  {^avdi]  KSfxri)
was  the  most  prized.  In  Homer,  Achilles,  Ulys-
ses, and  other  heroes  are  represented  with  blonde
hair  (II.  i.  197,  Od.  xiii.  399,  &c.)  At  a  later
time  it  seems  to  have  been  not  unfrequent  to  dye
hair,  so  as  to  make  it  either  black  or  blonde,  and
this  was  done  by  men  as  well  as  by  women,  espe-
cially when  the  liair  was  growing  gray.  (Pollux,
ii.  35  ;  Aelian,  V.  II.  vii.  20  ;  Athen.  xii.  p.
542,  d.  ;  Lucian,  Amor.  40.)

Roman.  Besides  the  generic  coma  we  also
find  the  following  words  signifying  the  hair :  ca-


330  COMES.

piUus,  caesartes,  crmes^  cincimms,  aiid  cirrus^  the
two  last  words  being  used  to  signify  curled  hair.
In  early  times  the  Romans  wore  their  hair  long,  as
was  represented  in  the  oldest  statues  in  the  age  of
Varro  {De  Re  Rtist.  ii.  11.  §  10),  and  hence  the
Romans  of  the  Augustan  age  designated  theii
ancestors  intonsi  (Ov.  Fast.  ii.  30)  and  capillati
(Juv.  vi.  30).  But  after  the  introduction  of  bar-
bers into  Italy  about  B.  c.  300,  it  became  the
practice  to  wear  their  hair  short.  The  women  too
originally  dressed  their  hair  with  great  simplicity,
but  in  the  Augustan  period  a  variety  of  different
head-dresses  came  into  fashion,  many  of  which  are
described  by  Ovid  {de  Art.  Am.  iii.  136,  &c.).
Sometimes  these  head-dresses  were  raised  to  a
great  height  by  rows  of  false  curls  (Juv.  Sat.  vi.
502).  The  dressing  of  the  hair  of  a  Roman  lady
at  this  period  was  a  most  important  affair.  So
much  attention  did  the  Roman  ladies  devote  to  it,
that  they  kept  slaves  especially  for  this  purpose,
called  omatrices,  and  had  them  instructed  by  a
master  in  the  art  (Ov.  de  Art.  Am.  iii.  239  ;  Suet.
Claiid.  40  ;  Dig.  32.  tit.  1.  s.  65).  Most  of  the
Greek  head-dresses  mentioned  above  were  also
worn  by  the  Roman  ladies  ;  but  the  mitrae  appear
to  have  been  confined  to  prostitutes  (Juv.  iii.  Q<^).
One  of  the  simplest  modes  of  wearing  the  hair
was  allowing  it  to  fall  down  in  tresses  behind,  and
only  confining  it  by  a  band  encircling  the  head
[Vitta].  Another  favourite  plan  was  platting  the
hair,  and  then  fastening  it  behind  with  a  large
pin,  as  is  shown  in  the  figure  on  p.  14.

Blonde  hair  was  as  much  prized  by  the  Romans
as  by  the  Greeks,  and  hence  the  Roman  ladies
used  a  kind  of  composition  or  wash  to  make  it  ap-
pear this  colour  {spuma  caustica.  Mart.  xiv.  26  ;
Plin.  H.  N.  xxviii.  12.  s.  51).

False  hair  or  wigs  {(pevdicr],  ■jrr]viK'n,  galerus)
were  worn  both  by  Greeks  and  Romans.  (See
e.  g.  Juv.  vi.  120.)  Among  both  people  likewise
in  ancient  times  the  hair  was  cut  close  in  mourn-
ing [FuNus]  ;  and  among  both  the  slaves  had
their  hair  cut  close  as  a  mark  of  servitude.
(Aristoph.  Aves^  911  ;  Plaut.  Amph.  i.  1.  306  ;
Becker,  Charicles,  vol.  ii.  p.  380,  &c.  ;  Bottiger,
Sabina,  vol.  i.  p.  138,  &c.)

COMES,  first  signified  a  mere  attendant  or
companion,  distinguished  from  socius,  which  always
implied  some  bond  of  union  between  the  persons
mentioned.  Hence  arose  several  technical  senses
of  the  word,  the  connection  of  which  may  be  easily
traced.

It  was  applied  to  the  attendants  on  magistrates,
in  which  sense  it  is  used  by  Suetonius  (Jul.  Caes.
42).  In  Horace's  time  (Epist.  i.  8.  2)  it  was  cus-
tomary for  young  men  of  family  to  go  out  as  contubcr-
nales  to  governors  of  provinces  and  commanders-in-
chief,  under  whose  eye  they  learnt  the  arts  of  war
and  peace.  This  seems  to  have  led  the  way  for
the  introduction  of  the  comites  at  home,  the  main-
tenance of  whom  was,  in  Horace's  opinion  {Sat.  i.  6.
101),  one  of  the  miseries  of  wealth.  Hence  a  person
in  the  suite  of  the  emperor  was  termed  comes.  As
all  power  was  supposed  to  flow  from  the  imperial
will,  the  term  was  easily  transferred  to  the  various
offices  in  the  palace  and  in  the  provinces  {comites
palatini.,  provinciales).  About  the  time  of  Con-
stantine  it  became  a  regular  honorary  title,  includ-
ing various  grades,  answering  to  the  comites  ordinis
primi,  secundi^  teiiii.  The  power  of  these  officers,
especially  the  provincial,  varied  with  time  and  place;


COMITIA.

some  presided  over  a  particular  department,  with
a  limited  authority,  as  we  should  term  them,  com-
missiojiers ;  others  were  invested  with  all  the
powers  of  the  ancient  proconsuls  and  praetors.

The  names  of  the  following  officers  explain
themselves : — Comes  Orientis  (of  v/hom  there  seem
to  have  been  two,  one  the  superior  of  the  other),
comes  Aegj-pti,  comes  Britamiiae,  comes  Africae,
comes  rei  militaris,  comes  portuum,  comes  stabuli,
comes  domesticorum  equitum,  comes  clibanarius,
comes  linteae  vestis  or  vestiarii  (master  of  the
robes).  In  fact  the  emperor  had  as  many  comites
as  he  had  duties :  thus,  comes  consistorii,  the  em-
peror's privy-comicillor  ;  comes  largitionum  priva-
tarum,  an  officer  who  managed  the  emperor's  pri-
vate revenue,  as  the  comes  largitionum  sacrarum
did  the  public  exchequer.  The  latter  office  united
in  a  great  measure  the  functions  of  the  aedile  and
quaestor.  The  four  comites  commerciorum,  to
whom  the  government  granted  the  exclusive  privi-
lege of  trading  in  silk  with  barbarians,  were  under
his  control.  An  account,  however,  of  the  duties
and  functions  of  the  comites  of  the  later  empire
does  not  fall  within  the  scope  of  the  present
work.  [B.  J.]

COMISSATIO  (from  kuixos,  Varr.  De  Ling.
Lat.  vii.  89,  ed.  Muller),  the  name  of  a  drinking
entertainment,  which  took  place  after  the  coena,
from  which,  however,  it  must  be  distinguished.
Thus  Demetrius  says  to  his  guests,  after  they  had
taken  their  coena  in  his  own  house,  "■  Quin  co-
missatum  ad  fratrem  imus  ?  "  (Liv.  xl.  7);  and
when  Habinnas  comes  to  Trimalchio's  house  after
taking  his  coena  elsewhere,  it  is  said  that  "  Comis-
sator  intravit"  (Petron.  Qb).  It  appears  to  have
been  the  custom  to  partake  of  some  food  at  the
comissatio  (Suet.  Vitell.  1 3),  but  usually  only  as  a
kind  of  relish  to  the  wine.

The  comissatio  was  frequently  prolonged  to  a
late  hour  at  night  (Suet.  Tit.  7) ;  whence  the  verb
oomman  means  "to  revel"  (Hor.  Carm.  iv.  1.  11),
and  the  substantive  comissator  a  "  reveller "  or
"  debauchee."  Hence  Cicero  {Ad  Att.  i.  16)  calls
the  supporters  of  Catiline's  conspiracy  comissatores
conjurationis.     (Becker,  Gallus,  vol.  ii.  p.  235.)

COMI'TIA.  This  word  is  fonned  from  co^  cum,
or  con,  and  ire,  and  therefore  comitium  is  a  place  of
meeting,  and  comitia  the  meeting  itself,  or  the
assembled  people.  In  the  Roman  constitution  the
comitia  were  the  ordinary  and  legal  meetings  or
assemblies  of  the  people,  and  distinct  from  the
condones  and  concilia;  or,  according  to  the  still
more  strict  definition  of  Messala  {ap.  Gell.  xiii.  15),
comitia  were  those  assemblies  convened  by  a
magistrate  for  the  purpose  of  putting  any  subject  to
their  vote.  This  definition  does  not  indeed  com-
prehend all  kinds  of  comitia,  since  in  the  comitia
calata  no  subjects  were  put  to  the  vote  of  the
people,  certain  things  being  only  announced  to
them,  or  they  being  only  witnesses  to  certain
solemn  acts,  but  with  this  single  exception  the  de-
finition is  satisfactory.  The  Greek  writers  on
Roman  affairs  call  the  comitia  ai  apxaip^o-^o-h  "^^
apxatpfcia,  iKKK-qaia  and  ^rjcpotpopia.

All  the  powers  of  government  were  divided  at
Rome  between  the  senate,  the  magistrates,  and
the  people  in  their  assemblies.  Properly  speak-
ing, the  people  alone  (the  populus)  was  the  real
sovereign  by  whom  the  power  v/as  delegated  to
the  magistrates  and  the  senate  ;  and  the  magis-
trates in  particular  could  not  perfonn  any  public


COMITIA.

act,  unless  tliey  were  authorised  by  the  senate  and
people.  The  sovereign  people  or  populus,  however,
was  not  the  same  at  all  times.  In  the  earliest
times  of  Rome  the  populus  consisted  of  the  patri-
cians (or  patres)  only,  the  plebs  and  the  clients
I'orming  no  part  of  the  populus,  but  being  without
the  pale  of  the  state.  The  original  populus  was
divided  into  thirty  curiae^  and  the  assembly  of
these  curiae,  or  the  comitia  curiata,  therefore,  were
the  only  assembly  in  which  the  populus  was  re-
presented. A  kind  of  amalgamation  of  the  patri-
cians and  the  plebs  afterwards  appeared  in  the
comitia  of  the  centuries,  instituted  by  king  Servius
TuUius,  and  henceforth  the  term  populus  was  ap-
plied to  the  united  patricians  and  plebeians  assem-
bled in  the  comitia  centuriata.  But  Servius  had
also  made  a  local  division  of  the  whole  Roman  ter-
ritory into  thirty  tribes,  which  held  their  meetings
in  assemblies  called  comitia  tributa^  which,  in  the
course  of  time,  acquired  the  character  of  national
assemblies,  so  that  the  people  thus  assembled  were
likewise  designated  by  the  term  populus.  We
shall  examine  in  order  the  nature,  power,  and  busi-
ness of  each  of  these  different  comitia.

I.  Comitia  calata.  These  and  the  comitia
curiata  were  the  only  assemblies  that  met  and  were
recognized  at  Rome  previous  to  the  time  of  Servius
Tullius,  and  inasmuch  as  the  populus  of  which
they  consisted  was  the  same  as  the  populus  in  the
comitia  curiata,  they  might  also  be  called  comitia
curiata,  but  they  differed  in  their  objects,  in  the
persons  presiding  at  them,  and  in  the  place  of
meeting.  The  comitia  calata  were  held  under  the
presidencj'  of  the  college  of  pontiffs  (Gellius,  xv.
27),  who  also  convened  them.  They  derived  their
name  calata  (from  calare^  i.  e.  vocare)  from  the  cir-
cumstance that  the  attendants  or  servants  of  the
pontiffs,  who  were  probably  employed  in  calling
them  together,  were  termed  calutores.  (Serv.  ad
Virg.  Georg.  i.  268.)  Their  place  of  meeting  was
probably  always  on  the  Capitol  in  front  of  the
curia  Calabra,  which  seems  to  have  been  an  official
building  of  the  pontiffs,  and  to  have  been  destined
for  this  purpose,  (Paul.  Diac.  p.  49,  ed.  Miiller  ;
Varro,  De  Ling.  Lot.  v.  ] .  p.  24.)  With  regard
to  the  functions  of  the  comitia  calata,  all  writers
are  agreed  that  the  people  assembled  acted  merely
a  passive  part,  that  they  met  only  for  the  purpose
of  hearing  what  was  announced,  and  of  being  wit-
nesses to  the  actions  there  performed.  One  of  the
things  which  were  ma(?e  known  to  the  people  in
these  comitia,  was  that  on  the  calends  of  every
month  it  was  proclaimed  on  what  day  of  the  new
month  the  nones  fell,  and  perhaps  also  the  ides
as  well  as  the  nature  of  the  other  days,  namely,
whether  they  were  fasti  or  nefiisti,  comitiales,
feriae,  &c.,  because  all  these  things  were  known
in  the  early  times  to  the  pontiffs  exclusively.  (Li v.
ix.  46  ;  Macrob.  Sat  i.  15  ;  Serv.  ad  Aen.  viii.
654  ;  Varro,  De  Ling.  Lat.  vi.  4.)  Another  func-
tion of  the  comitia  calata  was  the  inauguration  of
the  flamines,  and  after  the  banishment  of  the  kings,
also  that  of  the  rex  sacrorum.  (Gellius,  /.  c.)  A
third  business  which  was  transacted  in  them  was
the  testamenti  factio^  or  the  making  of  a  will.  The
object  of  this  was  probably  to  prevent,  after  the
death  of  the  testator,  any  dispute  concerning  his
will,  to  which  the  whole  assembly  of  the  populus
had  been  a  witness  ;  and  it  is  not  improbable  that,
as  the  art  of  writing  was  not  sufficiently  known  in
those  times,  it  was  thought  a  matter  of  importance


COMITIA.  331

to  have  the  whole  populus  as  a  witness  to  such  an
act,  which  perhaps  consisted  in  an  oral  declaration.
The  populus  thus  did  not  vote  upon  the  validity
or  invalidity  of  a  will,  but  solely  acted  the  part  of
a  witness.  (Gellius,  xv.  27  ;  Theophil.  ii.  10.)
Assemblies  for  the  express  purpose  of  making  the
populus  witness  to  a  will  were  in  the  earliest  times
held  twice  in  every  year  (Gaius,  ii.  §  101)  ;  but
this  (nistom  afterwards  fell  into  desuetude.  (Gaius,
ii.  §  103.)  A  fourth  business  transacted  in  the
comitia  calata  was  the  detestatio  sacrorum,  which
was  in  all  probabilitj'-  an  act  connected  with  the
testamenti  factio,  that  is,  a  solemn  declaration,  by
which  the  heir  was  enjoined  to  undertake  the  sacra
privata  of  the  testator  along  with  the  reception  of
his  property.  (Gellius,  xv.  27,  comp.  vi.  12.)  It
has  already  been  observed  that  originally  only  the
members  of  the  curiae  formed  the  comitia  calata,
so  that  they  were  the  same  as  the  comitia  curiata,
in  this  respect  ;  but  from  the  words  of  Gellius
(eorum  autem  alia  esse  curiata.,  alia  centuriata),  it
is  clear  that  after  the  time  of  Servius  Tullius,  there
must  have  been  two  kinds  of  comitia  calata,  the
one  convened  according  to  curiae  by  a  lictor,  and
the  other  according  to  centuries  by  a  comicen.  As
regards  the  business  of  the  latter,  we  have  no  in-
formation whatever,  though  it  is  not  impossible,
that  in  them  all  announcements  respecting  the
calendar  were  made  by  the  pontiffs,  as  this  was  a
matter  of  interest  to  the  whole  people,  and  not  to
the  populus  alone  (Macrob.  and  Serv.  II.  cc.)  ;
and  it  may  further  be,  that  in  the  calata  centuriata
the  testamenta  of  plebeians  were  laid  before  the
assembled  people  ;  as  in  the  calata  curiata,  they
were  laid  before  the  assembled  curies.

II.  Comitia  curiata  (iKKXrjcria  (pparpiK-f)
or  (poTpiaKi))  were  of  far  greater  importance  than
the  comitia  calata,  inasmuch  as  the  populus  here
was  not  present  in  a  mere  passive  capacity,  but
had  to  decide  by  its  votes  as  to  whether  a
measure  brought  before  it  was  to  be  adopted
or  rejected.  As  the  populus  was  at  first  only
the  body  of  real  citizens,  that  is,  the  patri-
cians, or  those  contained  in  the  curiae,  none  but
members  of  the  curiae,  that  is,  patricians,  had  a
right  to  take  part  in  these  assemblies.  It  is  a
disputed  point,  as  to  whether  the  clients  of  the
patricians  had  a  right  to  vote  in  the  comitia  curiata ;
but  it  is  highly  probable  that,  when  they  appeared
in  them,  they  could  not  act  any  other  part  than
that  of  listeners  and  spectators.  They  were  con-
vened, in  the  kingly  period,  by  the  king  himself,
or  by  his  tribunus  celerum,  and  in  the  king's  ab-
sence by  the  praefectus  urbi.  (Liv.  i.  59.)  After
the  death  of  a  king  the  comitia  were  held  by  the
interrex.  In  the  republican  period,  the  president
was  always  one  of  the  high  patrician  magistrates,
viz.  a  consul,  praetor  or  dictator.  (Cic.  De  Leg.
Agr.  ii.  11,  12  ;  Liv.  ix.  38.)  They  were  called
together  by  lictors  or  heralds.  (Gellius,  xv.  27 ;
Dionys.  ii.  7.)  The  votes  were  given  by  curiae,
each  curia  having  one  collective  vote  ;  but  within
a  curia  each  citizen  belonging  to  it  had  an  inde-
pendent vote,  and  the  majority  of  the  members  of
a  curia  determined  the  vote  of  the  whole  curia.
(Gell.  I.  c.  ;  Liv.  i.  43  ;  Dionys.  ii.  14,  iv.  20,  84,
V.  6.)  Now  as  the  curiae  were  thirty  in  number,
it  was  impossible  to  obtain  a  simple  majority,
which  must  always  have  consisted  of  16  curiae.
How  matters  were  decided  in  case  of  15  curiae
voting  for  and  15  against  a  measure,  is  quite  un-


832


COMITIA.


certain  ;  and  the  fact  tliat  the  awkward  number
30  was  chosen  or  retJilned  for  the  assembly  can  be
accounted  for  only  by  the  fact  that  the  number
three  and  its  multiples  had  a  certain  sacred  import
in  all  matters  connected  with  the  constitution.
The  order  in  which  the  curiae  voted,  was  not  fixed
by  any  regulation,  but  it  appears  that  the  one
which  gave  its  vote  first,  and  was  called  principium^
was  determined  by  lot.  (Liv.  ix.  38.)  Further
particulars  regarding  the  method  of  voting,  how-
ever, are  not  known.  The  president  in  the  comitia
curiata  was  always  the  person  that  had  convoked
them,  that  is,  in  the  kingly  period,  either  the  king
himself,  or  the  person  that  acted  as  his  vicegerent,
and  the  meeting  was  always  held  in  the  comitium.
As  regards  the  powers  and  functions  of  the
comitia  curiata,  it  must  first  of  all  be  borne  in  mind,
that  in  the  early  times  no  comitia,  of  whatever
kind  they  were,  had  the  right  to  originate  any
measure,  to  introduce  amendments,  or  to  discuss
the  merits  and  demerits  of  any  subject  that  was
brought  before  them.  All  they  could  do  was  to
accept  or  reject  any  measure  which  was  brought
before  them,  so  that  all  proposals  were  in  fact  no-
thing but  rogationes  (populus  rogatur),  which  the
people  passed  by  the  formula  uti  rogas^  or  rejected
by  the  formula  antiquo.  Whatever  was  thus  de-
creed became  law  for  the  king  and  senate  no  less
than  for  the  people.  The  main  points  upon  which
the  populus  had  to  decide,  were  the  election  of  the
magistrates,  including  the  king  himself,  the  pass-
ing of  laws,  peace  and  war,  the  capital  punishment
of  Roman  citizens  (Dionys.  ii.  14,  iv.  20,  ix.  41),
and,  lastly,  upon  certain  affiiirs  of  the  curiae  and
gentes.  In  the  kingly  period,  the  only  magistrate
in  whose  person  all  the  powers  of  the  republican
officers  were  concentrated,  was  the  king  himself.
All  the  other  officers  were  appointed  by  him,  with
the  exception  of  the  quaestores,  who  were  elected
by  the  people  (Ulpian,  Dig.  ii.  13  ;  but  comp.  Tac.
Ann.  xi.  22  ;  Quaestor).  With  regard  to  the
election  of  the  king,  the  assembly,  as  in  all  other
matters,  was  limited  to  the  persons  proposed  by
the  senate  through  the  president  in  the  assembly,
that  is,  when  the  senate  had  passed  a  decree  re-
specting the  election,  the  interreges  determined
upon  the  candidates,  from  among  whom  he  was  to
be  chosen,  and  then  proposed  them  to  the  curiae.
(Dionys.  iv.  34,  40,  80,  ii.  58,  60,  iii.  36  ;  Liv.  i.
17  ;  Cic.  De  Re  Pvhl.  ii.  13  ;  comp.  Interrex
and  Rex.)  The  priestly  officers,  such  as  the  Cu-
riones,  Flamines  Curiales,  were  likewise  either
elected  by  the  curiae,  or  at  least  inaugurated  by
them  (Dionys.  ii.  22  ;  Gell.  /.  c),  until  in  later
times,  B.  c.  104,  the  Domitian  law  transferred  the
whole  appointment  of  the  priestly  colleges  to  the
comitia  of  the  tribes.  Legislative  proposals  were
laid  before  the  curiae  by  the  king  or  the  senate,
and  they  might  either  pass  them  as  laws  or  reject
them.  Such  laws  belonging  to  the  kingly  period
were  the  so-called  leges  regiae;  their  number  cannot
have  been  great,  as  custom  and  religion  had  hal-
lowed and  fii-mly  established  the  principal  rules  of
conduct  without  there  being  any  necessity  for
formal  legal  enactments.  The  right  of  finally  de-
ciding  upon  the  life  of  Roman  citizens  (judicia  de
capite  civis  Romani)  is  said  to  have  been  given  to
the  populus  by  king  Tullus  Hostilius  (Liv.  i.  26,
viii.  33  ;  Dionys.  iii.  22)  ;  and  previous  to  the  con-
Btitution  of  Servius  TuUius  this  privilege  was  of
course  confined  to  the  patriciar^,  for  whom  it  was


COMITIA.

nothing  else  but  the  right  of  appoalijig  from  the
sentence  of  the  king  or  judge  to  the  assembly  of
their  peers.  When  Valerius  Publicola  renewed
this  law,  it  must  have  been  extended  to  the  ple-
beians also.  The  fourth  right  of  the  assembly  of
the  populus  was  that  of  deciding  upon  \v<ir  and
peace,  but  this  decision  again  could  only  be  made
when  it  was  proposed  by  the  king.  With  regard
to  the  declaration  of  war  there  is  no  doubt  (Liv.
i.  32  ;  Gellius,  xvi.  4  ;  Dionys.  viii.  .91,  ix.  Q9)  ;
but  there  is  no  instance  on  record  of  the  populus
ever  having  had  any  thing  to  do  with  the  conclu-
sion of  treaties  of  peace  ;  no  trace  of  it  occurs  till
long  after  the  establishment  of  the  republic,  so  that
we  may  fairly  presume  that  in  early  times  the
conclusion  of  peace  was  left  to  the  king  (or  the
consuls)  and  the  senate,  and  that  Dionysius,  as  in
many  other  instances,  transferred  a  later  custom  to
the  early  times.  Besides  these  great  functions  the
curiae  had  unquestionably  many  others  relating  to
their  own  internal  administration  ;  and  among
them  we  may  mention,  that  no  new  members
could  be  admitted  into  a  curia,  either  by  the  co-
optatio  of  strangers  or  by  the  adlectio  of  plebeians,
without  the  consent  of  the  assembly  of  the  curies  ;
and  that  no  arrogatio  could  take  place  without  the
concurrence  of  the  assembled  curiae  under  the  pre-
sidency of  the  pontiffs.  The  consent  of  the  curiae
in  such  cases  is  expressed  by  the  term  lex  curiata.
(Gellius,  V.  19  ;  Tac.  Hist.  i.  15.)  It  must  further
be  remarked,  that  when  a  magistrate  (such  as  the
king)  proposed  to  the  assembly  had  been  elected,
the  populus  held  a  second  meeting,  in  which  he
was  foi-mally  inducted  in  his  new  office.  This
formality  was  called  lex  curiata  de  imperio,  where-
by the  magistrate  received  his  imperium^  together
with  the  right  of  holding  the  comitia.  (Liv.  v.  52  ;
Dion  Cass,  xxxix.  1 9,  xli.  43  ;  Cic.  De  Leg.  Agr.
ii.  12.)  It  was  not  till  a  magistrate  had  tlms  been
solemnly  installed,  that  he  was  a  magistr'atus  op-
tima lege  or  optimojure,  that  is,  in  the  full  posses-
sion of  all  the  rights  and  privileges  of  his  office.

Down  to  the  time  of  Servius  TuUius,  the  comitia
curiata  were  the  only  popular  assemblies  of  Rome,
and  remained  of  course  in  the  undiminished  pos-
session of  the  rights  above  described  ;  but  the  con-
stitution of  that  king  brought  about  a  great  change,
by  his  transferring  the  principal  rights  which  had
hitherto  been  enjoyed  by  the  curiae  to  this  new
national  .assembly  or  the  comitia  centuriata.  The
power  of  electing  the  magistrates,  the  decision
upon  war,  the  passing  of  laws  and  jurisdiction  in
cases  of  appeal  to  the  body  of  the  Roman  people,
were  thus  transferred  to  the  comitia  of  the  cen-
turies. But  while  the  patricians  were  obliged  to
share  their  rights  with  the  plebeians,  they  reserved
for  themselves  the  very  important  right  of  sanc-
tioning or  rejecting  any  measure  which  had  been
passed  by  the  centuries.  Even  independent  of
their  right  finally  to  decide  upon  these  questions,
they  seem,  for  a  time  at  least,  to  have  exercised  a
considerable  power  in  several  departments  of  the
government :  thus,  the  abolition  of  royalty  and  the
establishment  of  the  republic  are  said  to  have  been
decreed  by  the  curiae  (Dionys.  iv.  75,  84)  ;  in
like  manner  they  decided  upon  the  property  of  the
last  king  (Dionys.  v.  6),  and  upon  the  rewards  to
be  given  to  those  who  had  given  information  re-
specting the  conspiracy  (v.  57).  The  sanction  of
decrees  passed  by  the  centuries  is  often  expressed
by  2^atres  auctoresjiunt,  and  down  to  the  time  of  tho


COMITIA.

Piiblilian  law  no  decree  of  the  centuries  or  tribes
could  become  law  without  this  sanction.  It  need
hardly  be  remarked  that  the  curiae,  as  long  as  they
existed,  retained  the  exercise  of  such  rights  as  af-
fected the  welfare  of  their  own  corporations  and
the  religious  rites  connected  with  them.  We  sub-
join a  list  of  the  powers  and  functions  which  the
curiae  continued  to  exercise  down  to  the  end  of
the  republic.

1.  They  conferred  the  imperium  and  the  right
of  taking  the  auspices  upon  magistrates  after  their
election  ;  this  was  done  by  the  kx  curiata  de  im-
perio.  This  right  however  must,  in  the  course  of
time,  have  become  a  mere  matter  of  form,  and
in  the  time  of  Cicero  (ad  Att.  iv.  18,  oo?  Fam.
xiii.  1),  persons  even  might  form  the  plan  of
gaining  over  three  augurs  to  declare  that  they
had  been  present  in  the  comitia  of  the  curiae,  at
which  the  imperium  had  been  conferred,  although
in  reality  no  such  comitia  had  taken  place  at  all.
This  fact  warrants  the  conclusion  that  at  that
time  few  persons,  if  any,  noticed  such  comitia  or
the  granting  of  the  imperium  in  them.  (Comp.
Cic.  ad  Fam.  i.  9,  ad  Q.  Fratr.  iii.  2.)  2.  The
inauguration  of  certain  priests,  such  as  the  Fla-
mines  and  the  Rex  Sacronim,  though  this  took
place  in  those  comitia  of  the  curiae,  which  were
called  calata.  The  curio  maximus  was  in  all  pro-
bability consecrated,  if  not  elected,  in  the  comitia
curiata.  (Liv.  xxvii.  8.)  3.  The  internal  affairs
of  the  curiae  themselves  and  of  the  families  con-
nected with  them ;  but  most  of  them  came  only
before  the  comitia  calata.  (See  above.)  The  real
comitia  curiata  began  to  be  a  mere  formality  as
early  as  the  time  of  the  Punic  wars,  and  the  ancient
division  into  curiae,  as  it  gradually  lost  its  im-
portance, fell  into  oblivion :  the  place  of  the  patri-
cians was  filled  by  the  nobiles  or  optimatcs,  and
the  comitia  of  the  former  became  a  mere  empty
show  (Cic.  De  Leg.  Ayr.  ii.  12),  and,  instead  of
the  thirty  curiae  themselves  giving  their  votes,  the
ceremony  was  performed  by  thirty  lictors.  The
patrician  comitia  calata  were  continued  much  longer,
especially  for  the  purpose  of  arroyationes^  which
under  the  empire  again  became  a  matter  of  some
consequence.     fAnopxio.]

III.  Comitia  centuriata  (ji  Xoy^TLs  eV
KKr,cria).  The  object  of  the  legislation  of  Ser-
vius  TuUius  was  to  unite  the  different  elements
of  which  the   Roman  people  consisted,   into  one


COMITIA.  338

great  political  body,  in  which  power  and  in-
lluence  were  to  be  determined  by  property  and
age.  For  this  purpose,  he  divided,  in  his  census,
the  whole  body  of  Roman  citizens  into  six  pro-
perty classes,  and  193  centuriae  {\6xoi)  or  votes,
from  which  the  assemblies  in  which  the  people
gave  their  votes  were  called  comitia  centuriata.
[Census.]  By  this  means,  Servius  brought  about
an  amalgamation  of  timocracy  and  aristocracy ;  and
the  poor  citizens,  though  they  met  their  wealthier
brethren  on  a  footing  of  equality,  yet  were  un-
able to  exercise  any  great  influence  upon  public
affairs,  for  the  wealthier  classes  voted  first,  and  if
they  agreed  among  themselves,  they  formed  a  majo-
rity before  the  poorer  classes  would  be  called  upon
to  vote  at  all.  In  order  to  render  these  general
observations  more  intelligible,  it  is  necessary  to
give  some  account  of  the  census  which  Servius  in-
stituted, and  of  the  manner  in  which  the  votes
were  distributed  among  the  several  divisions  of  the
people.  The  whole  people  was  conceived  as  an
anny  (exercitus,  or,  according  to  the  more  ancient
term,  classis),  and  was  therefore  divided  into  two
parts  :  the  cavalry  (equites),  and  infantr}'-  (pedites),
though  it  is  not  by  any  means  necessary  to  sup-
pose that  the  people  assembled  in  arms.  The  in-
fantry was  divided  into  five  classes,  or,  as  Dionysius
has  it,  into  six  classes,  for  he  regards  the  whole
bod}^  of  people,  whose  property  did  not  come  up
to  the  census  of  the  fifth  class,  as  a  sixth.  The
class  to  which  a  citizen  belonged,  determined  the
tributum,  or  war  tax,  he  had  to  pay,  as  well  as  the
kind  of  service  he  had  to  perform  in  the  army  and
the  armour  in  which  he  had  to  serve.  But  for  the
purpose  of  voting  in  the  comitia,  each  class  was
subdivided  into  a  number  of  centuries  {centuriae,
probably  because  each  was  conceived  to  contaui
100  men,  though  the  centuries  may  have  greatly
differed  in  the  number  of  men  they  contained),
one  half  of  which  consisted  of  the  seniores,  and  the
other  of  the  juniores.  Each  century,  further,  was
counted  as  one  vote,  so  that  a  class  had  as  many
votes  as  it  contained  centuries.  In  like  manner,
the  equites  were  divided  into  a  number  of  centuries
or  votes.  The  two  principal  authorities  on  these
subdivisions  are,  Livy  (i.  43),  and  Dionysius  (iv.
1 6,  &c.,  vii.  59)^  and  the  annexed  table  will  show
the  census  as  well  as  the  number  of  centuries  or
votes  assigned  to  each  class,  and  the  order  in  which
they  voted.


According  to  Livy.

I.  Classis.     Census:   100,000  asses.
40  centuriae  seniorum.

40  centuriae  juniorum.
2  centuriae  fabrum.

II.  Classis.     Census :  75,000  asses.
10  centuriae  seniorum.

10  centuriae  juniorum.


III.  Classis.     Census :  50,000  asses.
10  centuriae  seniorum.

10  centuriae  juniorum.

IV.  Classis.     Census :  25,000  asses.
i  0  centuriae  seniorum.

]  0  centuriae  juniorum.


According  to  Dionysius.

I.  Classis.     Census:   100  minae.
40  centuriae  seniorum.

40  centuriae  juniorum.

II.  Classis.     Census :  75  minae.
10  centuriae  seniorum.

10  centuriae  juniorum.

2  centuriae  fabrum  (one  voting  with  the  seniorea
and  the  other  with  the  juniores).

III.  Classis.     Census :  50  minae.
10  centuriae  seniorum.

10  centuriae  juniorum.

IV.  Classis.     Census  :  25  minae.
10  centuriae  seniorum.

10  centuriae  juniorum.

2  centuriae  cornicinum  and  tubicinum  (one  voting

with  the  seniores,  and  the  other  with  the

juniores). ,


334


COMITIA.


According  to  Livy.
V".  Classis.     Census:   11,000  asses.
15  centuriae  seniorum.
15  centuriae  juniorum.
3  centuriae  accensorum,  cornicinum,  tubicinura.
1  centuria  capite  censomm.


COMITIA.

According  to  Dionysin9.

V.  Classis.     Census  :  12^  minae.
15  centuriae  seniorum.

15  centuriae  juniorum.

VI.  Classis.     Census :  below  12^  minae.
1  centuria  capite  censorum


According  to  both  Diom'^sius  and  Livy,  tlie  equites
voted  in  eighteen  centuries  before  the  seniores  of
the  first  class  ;  and  hence,  there  were  according  to
Livy,  altogether  194,  and,  according  to  Dionysius,

193  centuries  or  votes.     Livy's  even  number  of

194  centuries  wculd  have  rendered  it  impossible  to
obtain  an  absolute  majority  in  the  comitia  ;  and  it
has  been  assumed,  that  he  made  a'  mistake  in  the
three  centuriae  accensorum,  cornicinum,  tubicinum,
which  he  adds  to  the  fifth  class.  Dionysius  seems
to  have  represented  the  matter  in  its  right  light,
and  is  also  born  out  by  Cicero  {De  Re  Puhl.  ii.
22),  who  describes  ninety-six  as  the  minority  ;  but
in  other  respects,  Cicero  is  irreconcileable,  both
with  Livy  and  Dionysius :  a  difficulty  which  will
probably  never  be  solved  satisfactorily,  as  the  text
is  corrupt.  The  other  discrepancies  between  Livy
and  Dionysius  are  not  of  great  importance.  They
consist  in  the  places  assigned  to  the  two  centuriae
fabrum,  the  two  of  the  comicines  and  tubicines,
and  in  the  census  of  the  fifth  class.  With  regard
to  the  last  point,  Dionysius  is  at  any  rate  more
consistent  in  his  gradation,  and  in  so  far  deserves  to
be  preferred  to  Livy.  As  for  the  places  assigned  to
the  four  centuries,  it  is  impossible  to  determine
whether  Livy  or  Dionysius  is  right ;  and  we  can
only  say,  that  Cicero  agrees  with  neither  of  them,
assigning,  as  he  does,  only  one  century  of  the  fabri
tignarii  to  the  first  class.

In  this  manner  all  Roman  citizens,  whether
patricians  or  plebeians,  who  had  property  to  a  cer-
tain amount,  were  privileged  to  take  part  and  vote
in  the  centuriata  comitia,  and  none  were  excluded
except  slaves,  peregrini,  women  and  the  aerarii.
The  juniores  were  all  men  from  the  age  of  seven-
teen to  that  of  forty-six,  and  the  seniores,  all  men
from  the  age  of  forty-six  upwards.  The  order  of
voting  was  arranged  in  such  a  manner,  that  if  the
eighteen  centuries  of  the  equites  and  the  eighty
centuries  of  the  first  class  were  agreed  upon  a
measure,  the  question  was  decided  at  once,  there
being  no  need  for  calling  upon  the  other  classes  to
vote.  Hence,  although  all  Roman  citizens  ap-
peared in  these  comitia  on  a  footing  of  equality,
yet  by  far  the  greater  power  was  thrown  into  the
hands  of  the  wealthy.

As  regards  the  functions  of  the  comitia  centuriata,
it  must  be  observed  in  general,  that  all  the  business
which  had  before  belonged  to  the  comitia  curiata,
was  transferred  by  Servius  to  the  comitia  centu-
riata, that  is,  they  received  the  right  of  electing
the  higher  magistrates,  of  making  laws  and  of  de-
ciding upon  war,  and  afterwards  also  of  concluding
peace  with  foreign  nations.

(a.)  The  ekcticm  of  magistrates.  After  the  pre-
siding magistrate  had  consulted  with  the  senate
about  the  candidates  who  had  offered  themselves,
he  put  them  to  the  vote.  The  magistrates  that
were  elected  by  the  centuries  are  the  consuls
(whence  the  assembly  is  called  comitia  consularia,
Liv.  i.  60,  X.  11),  the  praetors  (hence,  comitia
praetoria.  Liv.  vii.  1,  x.  22),  the  military  tribunes
with  consular  power  (Liv.  v.  52),  the  censors  (Liv.


vii,  22,  xl.  45),  and  the  decemvirs.  (Liv.  iii.  33,  35.)
There  are  also  instances  of  proconsuls  being  elected
by  the  centuries,  but  this  happened  only  in  extra-
ordinary cases.     (Liv.  xxxiii.  30,  xxxiv.  18.)

(b.)  Legislation.  The  legislative  power  of  the
centiu"ies  at  first  consisted  in  their  passing  or  re-
jecting a  measure  which  was  brought  before  them
by  the  presiding  magistrate  in  the  form  of  a  senatus
consultum,  so  that  the  assembly  had  no  right  of
originating  any  legislative  measure,  but  voted  only
upon  such  as  were  brought  before  them  as  resolu-
tions of  the  senate.  When  a  proposal  was  passed
by  the  centuries  it  became  law  (lex).  The  first
law  passed  by  the  centuries  of  which  we  have  any
record,  was  the  lex  Valeria  de  provocatione  (Cic.
DeJte  Publ.  ii,  31),  and  the  laws  of  the  twelve
tables  were  sanctioned  by  the  centuries,

(c.)  The  decision  upon  war,  on  the  ground  of  a
senatus  consultum,  likewise  belonged  to  the  cen-
turies and  is  often  mentioned.  It  is  generally
believed  that  they  had  also  to  decide  upon  the  con-
clusion of  peace  and  treaties,  but  it  has  been  satis-
factorily proved  by  Rubino  (  Ueber  Rom.  Staatsverf.
p.  259,  &c.)  that  in  the  early  part  of  the  republic,
and  perhaps  down  to  the  peace  of  Caudium,  this
was  not  the  case,  but  that  peace  was  concluded  by
a  mere  senatus  consultum,  and  without  any  co-
operation of  the  people.

(d.)  The  highest  judicial  power.  The  comitia
centuriata  were  in  the  first  place  the  highest  court
of  appeal  (Dion  Cass,  xxxix.  27,  &c.  ;  com  p.  Ap-
pellatio),  and  m  the  second,  they  had  to  try  all
offences  committed  against  the  state  ;  hence,  all
cases  of  perduellio  and  majestas,  and  no  case  in-
volving the  life  of  a  Roman  citizen  could  be  de-
cided by  any  other  court.  (Cic.  p.  Sext.  30,  34,
De  Re  Publ.  ii,  36,  De  Leg.  iii,  4  ;  Polyb.  vi.  4,  14.)
This  last  right  was  revived  or  introduced  by  the
Valerian  law  ( Plat.  Publ.  11),  and  Spurius  Cassius
was  condemned  by  the  comitia  of  the  centuries.
There  is  no  reason  for  believing  that  the  laws  of
the  twelve  tables  increased  the  power  of  the  cen-
turies in  this  respect  ;  and  Servius  Tullius  seems,
in  consistency  with  his  principles,  to  have  been
obliged  to  constitute  his  national  assembly  at  the
same  time  as  the  high  court  of  justice.

All  the  powers  which  we  have  here  mentioned  as
possessed  by  the  centuries,  had  to  be  sanctioned,
when  exercised,  by  the  curies,  and  through  this  sanc-
tion alone  they  became  valid  and  binding.  The  elec-
tion of  a  magistrate,  or  the  passing  of  a  law,  though
it  was  made  on  the  ground  of  a  senatus  consultum,
yet  required  the  sanction  of  the  curies.  But,  in
the  course  of  time,  the  assembly  shook  oft'  this
power  of  the  curiae,  which  became  merely  a  for-
mality, and,  in  the  end,  the  curiae  were  obliged  to
give  their  sanction  beforehand  to  whatever  the
centuries  might  determine.  This  was  effected  by
the  Publilian  law,  in  B.C.  337.  (Liv.  viii.  12.)  As
thus  the  centuries  gradually  became  powerful
enough  to  dispense  with  the  sanction  of  the  curiae,
so  they  also  acquired  the  right  of  discussing  and.
deciding  upon  matters  which  were  not  brought  be-


COMITIA

fore  them  in  the  form  of  a  senatns  constiltum  ;  that
is,  they  acquired  the  power  of  originating  measures.
In  reference  to  the  election  of  magistrates,  the
coniitia  originally  were  not  allowed  to  elect  any
other  except  those  who  were  proposed  hy  the  pre-
sident, who  himself  was  entirely  guided  by  the
resolution  of  the  senate  ;  hut  in  the  course  of  time,
the  people  asserted  their  right  so  far  as  to  oblige
the  president  to  propose  any  candidate  that  might
offer  himself,  without  the  previous  sanction  of  the
senate.  This  change  took  place  about  B.  c.  482.
In  legislative  measures  a  senatns  consul  turn  was
indispensable,  and  this  senatus  consultum  was
brought  before  the  people  by  the  consul  or  the
senator  who  had  originated  the  measure,  after
it  had  previously  been  exhibited  in  public  for
seventeen  days,  to  give  the  people  an  opportunity
of  becoming  acquainted  with  the  nature  of  the  pro-
posed law.  (Appian,  de  Dell.  Civ.  i.  59  ;  Cic.  p.
Sext.  51,  in  Pison.  15.)  Whether  the  comitia
required  a  senatus  consultum  in  cases  where  they
acted  as  the  supreme  court  of  justice,  is  uncertain,
at  least  we  have  no  example  of  a  senatus  consultum
in  such  a  case  on  record.

The  comitia  centuriata  could  be  held  only  on
dies  comitiales  or  fasti,  on  which  it  was  lawful  to
transact  business  with  people,  and  the  number  of
such  daj's  in  every  year  was  about  1.90  (Varro,
De  L.  L.  vi.  29  ;  Fest.  s.  v.  Comitiales  dies ;
Macrob.  Sat.  i,  16)  ;  but  on  dies  nefasti  (that  is,
dies  festi,  feriaii ;  comp.  Dies),  and,  at  first,  also
on  the  nundinae,  no  comitia  could  be  held,  until
in  B.  c.  287  the  Hortensian  law  ordained  that
the  nundinae  should  be  regarded  as  dies  fasti
(Macrob.  Sat.  i.  16),  so  that  henceforth  comitia
might  be  held  on  the  nundines,  though  it  was  done
rarely.  (Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  14.)  Comitia  for  the  pur-
pose of  passing  laws  could  not  even  be  held  on  all
dies  fasti.  (Cic.  De  prov.  Cons.  19.)  The  comitia
for  elections  took  place  every  year  at  a  certain
period,  though  it  depended  upon  the  senate  and  the
consuls,  as  to  whether  they  wished  the  elections  to
take  place  earlier  or  later  than  usual.  (Cic.  p.  Mil.
9,  ad  Fam.  viii.  4,  p.  Muren.  25.)

The  place  where  the  centuries  met,  was  the
Campus  Martius  (Cic.  ad  Q.  Frat.  ii.  2  ;  Dionys.
iv.  84,  vii.  5d),  which  contained  the  septa  for  the
voters,  a  tabernaculum  for  the  president,  and  the
villa  publica  for  the  augurs.  (Cic.  p.  Rab.  Perd.
4  ;  Gellius,  xiv.  7  ;  Varro,  De  Ling.  Lot.  vi.  87.)
The  president  at  the  comitia  was  the  same  magis-
trate who  convoked  them,  and  this  right  was  a
privilege  of  the  consuls,  and,  in  their  absence,  of
the  praetors.  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  x.  12.)  An  interrex
and  dictator  also,  or  his  representative,  the  magister
equitum,  might  likewise  convene  and  preside  at  the
comitia.  (Liv.  viii.  23,  xxv.  2  ;  Cic.  De  Leg.  ii.  4.)
At  the  beginning  of  the  republic,  the  praefcctus
urbi  held  the  comitia  for  the  election  of  the  first
consuls  (Liv.  i.  60)  ;  and  the  censors  assembled
the  people  only  on  account  of  the  census  and  the
lustrum.  (Varro,  De  L.  L.  vi.  86.)  In  cases
when  the  assembly  was  constituted  as  a  court  of
justice,  inferior  magistrates,  after  having  obtained
the  permission  of  the  consuls,  might  likewise  pre-
side. (Liv.  xxvi.  3.)  One  of  the  main  duties  de-
volving upon  the  president,  and  which  he  had  to
perform  before  holding  the  comitia,  was  to  consult
the  auspices.  {Auspicari.)  For  this  purpose,  the
magistrate  accompanied  by  an  augur  went  out  of
the  city  early  in  the  morning,  and  chose  a  taber-


COMITIA.


335


naculum  or  templum.  There  the  augur  began  his
observations,  and  gave  his  opinion  either  that  the
comitia  might  be  held,  or  that  they  must  be  defen-ed
till  another  day.  This  declaration  was  given  to
the  magistrate  ;  and  when  the  auspices  were  favour-
able, the  people  were  called  together,  which  was
done  by  three  successive  and  distinct  acts:  the
fiirst  was  quite  a  general  invitation  to  come  to  the
assembly  (inlicium^  Varro,  De  L.  L.  vi.  94,  comp.
86,  88).  At  the  same  time  when  this  invitation
was  proclaimed  circum  moeros  or  de  moeris,  a  horn
was  blown,  which  being  the  more  audible  signal,
is  mentioned  by  some  writers  alone,  and  without
the  inlicium.  (Gellius,  xv.  27  ;  Varro,  De  L.  L.
v.  91.)  When  upon  this  signal,  the  people  as-
sembled in  irregular  masses,  there  Ibllowed  the
second  call  by  the  accensus,  or  the  call  ad  concionem
or  conventionem ;  that  is,  to  a  regular  assemblj^,
and  the  crowd  then  separated,  grouping  themselves
according  to  their  classes  and  ages.  (Varro,  De
L.  L.  vi.  88.)  Hereupon  the  consul  appeared,
ordering  the  people  to  come  ad  comitia  centuriata  ;
and  led  the  whole  exercitus  —  for,  in  these  comitia,
the  Roman  people  are  always  conceived  as  an
exercitus  —  out  of  the  city,  to  the  Campus  Martius.
(Varro,  Z.C.;  Liv.  xxxix.  15.)  It  was  customary
from  the  earliest  times  for  an  armed  force  to  occupy
the  Janiculum,  when  the  people  were  assembled  in
the  Campus  Martius,  for  the  purpose  of  protecting
the  city  against  any  sudden  attack  of  the  neighbour-
ing people  ;  and  on  the  Janiculum,  a  vexillum  was
hoisted  during  the  whole  time  that  the  assembly
lasted.  This  custom  continued  to  be  observed  even
at  the  time  when  Rome  had  no  longer  any  thing
to  fear  from  the  neighbouring  tribes.  (Liv.  I.  c.  ;
Gell.  XV.  27  ;  Macrob.  Sat.  i.  1 6  ;  Dion  Cass,
xxxvii.  27,  &c.  ;  ^ev\.  ad  Aen.  viii.  1.)  When
the  people  were  thus  regularly  assembled,  the  busi-
ness was  commenced  with  a  solemn  sacrifice,  and  a
prayer  of  the  president,  who  then  took  his  seat  on
his  tribunal.  (Dionys.  vii.  59,  x.  32  ;  Liv.  xxxi.
7,  xxxix.  15  ;  Cic.  p.  Muren.  1  ;  Liv.  xxvi.  2.)
The  president  then  opened  the  business  by  laying
before  the  people  the  subject  for  the  decision,  upon
which  they  had  been  convened,  and  concluded  his
exposition  with  the  words :  velitis,  jubeatis  Quirites,
e.  g.  bellum  indici,  or  tit  M.  Tullio  aqua  igni  inter-
dictum  sit,  or  whatever  the  subject  might  be.  This
formula  was  the  standing  one  in  all  comitia,  and
the  whole  exposition  of  the  president  was  called
rogatio  (Liv.  iv.  5,  vi.  40,  xxi.  17,  xxii.  10,  xxx.  43  ;
Cic.  De  Fin.  ii.  16,  in  Pison.  29,  p.  Dom.  17,  30  ;
Gell.  V.  19.)  When  the  comitia  were  assembled
for  the  purpose  of  an  election,  the  presiding
magistrate  had  to  read  out  the  names  of  the  can-
didates, and  might  exercise  his  influence  by  re-
commending the  one  whom  he  thought  most  fit  for
the  office  in  question.  (Liv.  x.  22,  xxii.  35.)  He
was,  however,  not  obliged  to  announce  the  names  of
all  the  candidates  that  offered  themselves  ;  as,  for
example,  if  a  candidate  had  not  atUiined  the  legi-
timate age,  or  when  he  sued  for  one  office  without
having  been  invested  with  those  through  which  he
had  to  pass  previously,  or  if  there  was  any  other
legal  obstacle  ;  nay,  the  president  might  declare,
that  if  a  person,  to  whom  he  had  any  sucii  objection,
should  yet  be  elected,  he  would  not  recognise  his
election  as  valid.  (Liv.  iii.  21,  xxiv.  7  ;  Val.  Max.
iii.  8.  §  3.)  If  the  assembly  had  been  convened
for  the  purpose  of  passing  a  legislative  measure,
the  president  usually  recommended  the  proposal,  or


336


COMITIA.


he  might  grant  to  others,  if  they  desired  it,  per-
mission to  speak  about  the  measure,  either  in  its
favour  or  against  it.  {Concionem  dare^  Liv.  iii.  71,
xxxi.  6,  &c,,  xlii.  34  ;  Appian,  Dc  B.C.  i.  1 1  ;
Dion  Cass,  xxxviii.  4  ;  Quintil,  ii.  4.  §  3.)  In  this
case,  however,  it  was  customary  for  private  per-
sons to  speak  before  any  magistrate,  and  the  orators,
until  the  time  of  Gracchus,  while  speaking  turned
their  face  towards  the  comitium  and  the  senate
house.  (Dion  Cass,  xxxix.  35  ;  Cic.  Lael.  25  ;
Plut.  C.  Gracch.  5,  Tib.  Gracck  14.)  When  the
comitia  acted  as  a  court  of  justice,  the  president
stated  the  crime,  proposed  the  punishment  to  be
inflicted  upon  the  offender,  and  then  allowed  others
to  speak  either  in  defence  of  the  accused  or  against
him.

When  the  subject  brought  before  the  assembly
was  sufficiently  discussed,  the  president  called
upon  the  people  to  prepare  for  voting  by  the  words  :
ite  in  S7ifrcu^ium,  bene  juvantibus  diis.  (Liv.  xxxi.
7.)  He  then  passed  the  stream  Petronia,  and
went  to  the  septa.  If  the  number  of  citizens
present  at  the  assembly  was  thought  too  small,
the  decision  might  be  deferred  till  another  day,
but  this  was  rarely  done,  and  a  question  was
usually  put  to  the  vote,  if  each  century  was  but
represented  by  a  few  citizens.  (Liv.  vii,  18  ;  Cic.
p.Sext.  51,  de  I^g.  Agr.  ii.  9  ;  Plut.  Tib.  Gracch.
16  ;  Dion  Cass,  xxxix.  30.)  Respecting  the
manner  in  which  the  votes  were  given  in  the  ear-
liest times,  opinions  are  divided :  some  think  that
they  were  given  viva  voce,  and  others  by  means
of  calculif  or  in  both  ways,  though  it  seems  to
be  more  probable  that  calculi  were  used.  The
leges  tabellariae  introduced  a  change  in  this
respect,  ordaining  that  the  votes  should  be  given
in  writing.  [Leges  tabellariae.]  But  pre-
vious to  the  leges  tabellariae,  the  rogatores,
who  subsequently  collected  the  written  votes,
stood  at  the  entrance  of  the  septa,  and  asked
every  citizen  for  his  vote,  which  was  taken  down,
and  used  to  determine  the  vote  of  each  century.
(Dionys.  vii.  64.)  In  legislative  assemblies,  the
voter,  probably  from  the  earliest  times,  signified
his  disapproval  by  the  word  antiqiw^  and  his  ap-
proval by  tUi  rogas.  (Liv.  vi.  38,  x.  8,  xxx.  43,
xxxi,  8,  xxxiii.  25  ;  Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  10.)  At
elections,  the  name  of  the  successful  candidate
was  mentioned  to  the  rogator,  who  had  to  mark
the  favourable  votes  by  dots  which  he  made  by
the  side  of  the  name :  hence  puncta  ferre^  to  be
successful.  (Liv.  x.  13,  22,  xxix.  22.)  The
custom  of  voting  at  elections  by  tablets  with  the
name  of  the  candidates  written  on  them,  was  in-
troduced in  B.  c.  139,  by  the  lex  Gabinia  tabellaria
(Cic.  De  Leg.  iii.  16)  ;  two  years  later  L.  Cassius
introduced  the  same  custom,  in  cases  of  the
comitia  acting  as  a  court  of  justice  (Cic.  Brut.
27),  and,  afterwards,  it  was  established  also  in
legislative  assemblies,  and  in  cases  where  the
comitia  tried  persons  for  perduellio.  [Leges  ta-
bellariae.] The  two  tablets  which  were  given
to  each  person  for  the  purpose  of  voting  on  legis-
lative measures,  were  marked  the  one  with  U
and  the  other  mth  A  {lUi  rogas  and  antiquo.  Cic.
ad  Att.  i.  14).  At  elections,  the  citizens  obtained
blank  tablets,  that  they  might  write  upon  them
the  name  of  the  candidate  for  whom  they  voted.
(Cic.  Phil.  xi.  8  ;  Plut.  C.  Gracch.  5,  Cat.  Min.  46  ;
Plin.  Epist.  iv.  25.)  In  judicial  assemblies,  every
citizen  received  two  tablets  marked  A  (ubsolvo)


COMITIA.

and  C  (condemno).,  and  there  was,  perhaps,  a
third  tablet  containing  the  letters  N.  L.  {non
liquet).,  but  this  is  an  uncertain  point.  There  were
in  the  Campus  Martins  septa  or  inclosures  (whether
they  existed  from  the  earliest  times  is  unknown),
into  which  one  class  of  citizens  Avas  admitted  after
another  for  the  purpose  of  voting.  The  first  that
entered,  were  the  eighteen  centuries  of  the  equites,
then  followed  the  first  class  and  so  on.  It  very
rarely  happened  that  the  lowest  class  was  called
upon  to  vote,  as  there  was  no  necessity  for  it,
unless  the  first  class  did  not  agree  with  the
equites.  (Dionys.  iv.  20,  vii.  59,  viii.  82,  x.  17  ;
Liv.  i.  43.)  After  the  time  when  the  comitia  of
the  centuries  became  amalgamated  with  those  of
the  tribes,  previous  to  each  assembly,  a  large  space
near  the  villa  publica  was  surrounded  with  an  en-
closure, and  divided  into  compartments  for  the
several  tribes.  The  whole  of  this  enclosure  was
called  ovile.,  septa.,  carceres,  or  cancelli ;  and  in
later  times  a  stone  building,  containing  the  whole
people,  was  erected  ;  it  was  divided  into  com-
partments for  the  classes  as  well  as  the  tribes  and
centuries  ;  the  access  to  these  compartments  was
formed  by  narrow  passages  called  pontes  or  ponti-
culi.  On  entering,  the  citizens  received  their
tablets  (Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  14,  de  Leg.  iii.  17,  in  Pis.
15,  p.  Pla7ic.  6)  ;  and  when  they  had  consulted
within  the  enclosures,  they  passed  out  of  them
again  by  a  pons  or  ponticulus,  at  which  they  threw
their  vote  into  a  chest  (cista)  which  was  watched
by  rogatores.  Hereupon  the  rogatores  collected  the
tablets,  and  gave  them  to  the  diribitores,  who  clas-
sified and  counted  the  votes,  and  then  handed  them
over  to  the  custodes,  who  again  checked  them  off  by
points  marked  on  a  tablet.  (Comp.  Cic.  in  Pis.  1 5
— "  vos  rogatores,  vos  diribitores,  vos  custodes
tabellarum.")  The  order  in  which  the  centuries
voted,  was  determined  in  the  Servian  constitution,
in  the  manner  described  above  ;  but  after  the  union
of  the  centuries  and  tribes,  the  order  was  determined
by  lot ;  and  this  was  a  matter  of  no  slight  import-
ance, since  it  frequently  happened  that  the  vote  of
the  first  determined  the  manner  in  which  subse-
quent ones  voted.  The  voting,  of  course,  was  con-
tinued, until  the  majority  was  ascertained.  In  the
case  of  elections,  the  successful  candidate  was  pro-
claimed twice,  —  first,  by  the  praeco,  and  then  by
the  president,  and  without  this  renuntiatio  the
election  was  not  valid.  After  all  the  business  was
done,  the  president  pronounced  a  prayer  (Cic.  p.
Plane.  6,  p.  Muren.  l),and  dismissed  the  assembly
with  the  word  discedite.

Cases  are  frequently  mentioned  in  which  the
proceedings  of  the  assembly  were  disturbed,  so
that  it  was  necessary  to  defer  the  business  till
another  day.  This  occurred — I.  when  it  was  dis-
covered that  the  auspices  had  been  unfavourable,
or  when  the  gods  manifested  their  displeasure  by
rain,  thunder,  or  lightning  ;  2.  when  a  tribune
interceded  (Liv.  xlv.  21  ;  Dionys.  vi.  89  ;  Cic.  in
Vat.  2)  ;  3.  when  the  sun  set  before  the  business
was  over,  for  it  was  a  principle  that  the  auspices
were  valid  only  for  one  day  from  simrise  to  sunset
(Varro,  De  L.  Z.  vii.  51  ;  Dion  Cass,  xxxix.  65  ;
Liv.  x.  22,  xli.  17  ;  Dionys.  ix.  41)  ;  4.  when  a
morbus  comitialis  occurred,  i.  e.  when  one  of  the
assembled  citizens  was  seized  with  an  epileptic  fit
(Dion  Cass.  xlvi.  33  ;  Gellius,  xix.  2  ;  Macrob.
Sat.  ii.  8)  ;  5.  when  the  vexillum  was  taken  away
from  the  Janiculxmi,  this  behig  a  signal  which  all


COMITIA.

citizens  liad  to  obey  (Liv,  xxxix.  15  ;  Dion  Cass,
xxxvii.  27  ;  Macrob.  Sat.  i.  Iff);  6.  Avhen  any
tumult  or  insTurection  broke  out  in  the  city,  as
happened  now  and  then  during  the  latter  period
of  the  republic.  [Cic.  p.  Sejct.  '66.)  In  all  these
cases,  the  assembly  had  to  continue  its  business  on
some  other  day,  sometimes  on  the  next.  The
only  exception  seems  to  have  been  in  the  case  of
the  election  of  the  censors,  for  if  both  could  not  be
elected  on  the  same  day,  it  was  necessary  to  begin
the  election  afresh,  and  if  one  had  been  elected,
his  election  was  not  valid.  (Liv.  ix.  34.)

IV.    CoMITIA    TRIBUTA    {iKKXl](xia    (pV\eTlKi]).

These  assemblies  likewise  were  called  into  existence
by  the  constitution  of  Servius  Tullius,  who  divided
the  Ptoraan  territory  into  thirty  local  tribes.  As  these
divisions  were  originally  a  purely  topographical  ar-
rangement, they  were  of  little  or  no  importance  to
the  state  ;  but  in  the  course  of  time,  these  local
divisions  were  foi*med  into  a  political  union,  and  the
assemblies  of  the  tribes  became  most  fonnidable
rivals  of  those  of  the  centuries.  The  decision  upon
the  question  as  to  what  portion  of  the  Roman
population  had  the  right  to  take  part  in  the  comitia
tributa,  depends  upon  the  question,  as  to  whether
the  tribes  were  instituted  as  a  local  organisation
of  the  whole  people  (patricians  and  plebeians),  or
whether  they  were  intended  for  the  plebeians
only.  Most  modem  writers  have  adopted  the
opinion  of  Niebuhr,  that  the  patricians  were  not
considered  as  members  of  the  tribes,  and  that  ac-
cordingly, they  had  no  right  to  take  part  in  their
assemblies,  until  the  time  of  the  decemviral  legis-
lation. The  question  is  not  one  that  can  be  proved
with  satisfactory  evidence  ;  but  at  any  rate  no
sufficient  argument  has  yet  been  brought  forward
to  upset  Niebuhr's  view,  for  the  fact  of  patricians
and  their  clients  being  present  at  the  place  of
meeting  (Liv.  ii.  56),  for  the  purpose  of  disturbing
the  comitia  tributa  and  preventing  their  coming  to
a  decision,  does  not  prove  that  they  possessed  the
right  of  voting.  After  the  time  of  the  decemvirate,
the  patricians  had  the  right  of  voting  in  the  as-
semblies of  the  tribes,  which  were  then  also  con-
vened by  the  higher  magistrates.  (Liv.  iii.  71  ;
comp.  Tribus.)

The  assemblies  of  the  tribes  had  originally
only  a  local  power  ;  they  were  intended  to  col-
lect the  tributum,  and  to  furnish  the  contingents
for  the  army  (Dionys.  iv.  14,  &c.)  ;  they  may
further  have  discussed  the  internal  affairs  of  each
tribe,  such  as  the  making  or  keeping  up  of  roads,
wells,  and  the  like.  But  their  influence  gradually
increased,  for  the  commonalty  being  more  nume-
rous than  the  patricians,  and  being  in  a  state  of
growth  and  development,  and  guided  by  active
and  energetic  tribunes,  the  internal  administration
of  the  tribes  gradually  assumed  the  character  of  an
administration  of  the  internal  affairs  of  the  republic,
while  the  comitia  of  the  centuries  were  more  cal-
culated to  represent  the  state  in  its  relations  to
foreign  countries.  As  the  commonalty  grew  in
strength,  it  made  greater  claims  ;  each  victory  gave
it  fresh  courage,  and  thus  the  comitia  tributa
gradually  acquired  the  following  powers  :  —

1.  The  election  of  the  inferior  ma rjistraies^  whose
office  it  was  to  protect  the  commonalty  or  to  super-
intend the  affairs  of  the  tribes.  The  Publilian
law  in  B.  c.  471,  secured  to  the  comitia  tributa  the
right  of  electing  the  tribunes  of  the  plebs.  (Liv.  ii.
5li  ;  Dionys.  ix.  49.)      In  like  manner,  the  aedilcs


COMITIA.  337

were  elected  by  them,  though  the  curule  acdilea
were  elected  at  a  different  time  from  the  plebeian
aediles  and  under  the  presidency  of  a  consul.
(Gell.  xiii.  15,  vi.  9  ;  Cic.  p.  Plane.  4,  20,  22,  ad
Att.  iv,  3,  ad  Fam.  viii.  4  ;  Liv.  ix,  46,  xxv.  2.)
At  a  still  later  time,  the  quaestors  and  tribunes  of
the  soldiers,  who  had  before  been  appointed  by
the  consuls,  were  appointed  in  the  assemblies  of  the
tribes.  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  vii.  30,  in  Vat.  5  ;  Liv.  iv.
54,  vii.  5,  ix.  30  ;  Sail.  Jug.  63.)  The  proconsuls
to  be  sent  into  the  provinces,  and  the  prolongation
of  the  imperium  for  a  magistrate  who  was  already
in  a  province,  were  likewise  points  which  were
determined  bv  the  tribes  in  later  times.  (Liv.  viii,
23,  26,  ix.  42,  X.  22,  xxvii.  22,  xxix.  13,  xxx.
27,  xxxi.  50.)  The  inferior  magistrates  elected
by  the  tribes  are :  —  the  triumviri  capitales,
triumviri  raonetales,  the  curatores  viarum,  decem-
viri litibus  judicandis,  tribuni  aerarii,  magistri
vicorum  et  pagonxm,  praefecti  annonae,  duumviri
navales,  quinqueviri  muris  turribusque  reficiendis,
triumviri  coloniae  deducendae,  triumviri,  quatuor-
viri,  &c.,  mensarii,  and  lastly,  after  the  Domitian
law,  B.  c.  1 04,  also  the  members  of  colleges  of
priests.  The  pontifex  maximus  had  been  elected
by  the  people  from  an  earlier  time.  (Liv.  xxv.  5  ;
Cic.  de  Leg.  Agr.  ii.  7.)

2.  The  tegislative  power  of  the  comitia  tributa
was  at  first  very  insignificant,  for  all  they  could
do  was  to  pass  resolutions  and  make  regulations
concerning  the  local  affairs  of  the  tribes,  but  they
did  not  in  any  way  affect  the  state  as  a  whole.
But  after  a  time  when  the  tribes  began  to  be  the
real  representatives  of  the  people,  matters  affecting
the  whole  people  also  were  brought  before  them
by  the  tribunes,  Avhich,  framed  as  resolutions,  were
laid  before  the  senate,  where  they  might  either  be
sanctioned  or  rejected.  This  practice  of  the  tri-
buta comitia  gradually  acquired  for  them  the  right
of  taking  the  initiative  in  any  measure,  or  the
right  of  originating  measures,  until  in  b.  c.  449
this  right  was  recognised  and  sanctioned  by  a  law
of  L.  Valerius  Publicola  and  M.  Horatius  Bar-
batus.  (Liv.  iii.  5B,  67  ;  Dionys.  xi.  45.)  This
law  gave  to  the  decrees  passed  by  the  tribes  the
power  of  a  real  lex,  binding  upon  the  whole  people,
provided  they  obtained  the  sanction  of  the  senate
and  the  populus,  that  is,  the  people  assembled  in
the  comitia  curiata  or  in  the  comitia  centuriata.
(Dionys.  x.  4,  32.)  At  first  the  tribes  acted  with
considerable  moderation  and  modesty,  discussing
only  those  subjects  which  affected  their  own  order
or  individual  plebeians,  such  as  the  amnesty  after
the  secession,  plebeian  magistrates,  usurj'-  and  the
like.  In  b.  c.  339,  the  Publvlian  law  enacted  ut
pleUscita  omnes  Quirites  tenerent.  (Liv.  viii.  12.)
This  law  was  either  a  re-enactment  of  the  one
passed  in  d.  c.  449,  or  contained  a  more  detailed
specification  of  the  cases  in  v/hich  plebiscita  should
be  binding  upon  the  whole  nation,  or,  lastlj',  it
made  their  validity  independent  of  the  sanction  of
other  comitia,  so  that  nothing  would  be  required
except  the  assent  of  the  senate.  In  B.  c.  287,  the
Hortensian  law  was  passed,  which  seems  to  have
been  only  a  revival  and  a  confirmation  of  the  two
preceding  laws,  for  it  was  framed  in  almost  the
same  terms  (Plin.  H.  N.  xvi.  10  ;  Gell.  xv.  27  ;
Gaius,  i.  3)  ;  but  it  may  also  be,  that  the  Horten-
sian law  made  the  plebiscita  independent  of  the
sanction  of  the  senate,  so  that  henceforth  the
comitia  tributa  were  quite  independent  in  their
z


338  COMITL\.

legislative  ctaractcr.  Senatus  consulta  preceding
a  plebiscitura,  it  is  true,  occur  after  this  time  in
many  instances,  but  it  does  not  follow  that  for  this
reason  a  senatus  consultum  was  necessary  for  every
plebiscitum  (Dionys.  ix.  41),  for  we  must  dis-
tinguish between  those  plebiscita  which  affected
the  rights  of  the  people,  and  those  which  touched
upon  the  administration  of  the  republic  ;  the
former  of  these  are  constantly  mentioned  with-
out a  senatus  consultum,  but  the  latter  never,
[Plebiscitum.]

3.  The  judicial  power  of  theoomitia  tributa  was
much  more  limited  than  that  of  the  comitia  cen-
turiata,  inasmuch  as  they  could  take  cognizance
only  of  offences  against  the  majesty  of  the  people,
while  all  crimes  committed  against  the  state  were
brought  before  the  centuries.  Even  patricians,
when  they  had  offended  against  the  commonalty
or  its  members,  were  tried  and  fined  by  the  tribes.
This  again  constitutes  a  difference  between  the
judicial  power  of  the  centuries  and  that  of  the
tribes,  for  the  former  could  inflict  capital  punish-
ment, but  the  latter  only  fines.  There  are,  in-
deed, cases  in  which  the  tribes  might  appear  to
have  sentenced  persons  to  exile  ;  but  such  exile  is
not  the  result  of  a  real  verdict,  but  only  a  measure
taken  against  those  who  during  the  trial  went  into
voluntary  exile,  which  might  then  be  made  a  ne-
cessary exile,  by  the  inierdidio  aquae  et  ignis  being
added.  (Liv.  xxv.  3,  xxvi.  3  ;  Cic.  OraL  p.  Dom.
16,  &c.)  When  the  tribes  acquired  this  right  is
uncertain,  for  that  it  was  not  originally  possessed
by  them,  is  clear  from  the  expressions  used  by  our
authorities.  The  offences  for  which  persons  were
summon-'d  before  the  tribes,  were  l)ad  conduct  of  a
magistrate  in  the  performance  of  his  duties,  neglect
of  duty,  ill  management  of  a  war,  embezzlement  of
the  public  money,  and  a  variety  of  offences  of  pri-
vate individuals,  such  as  disturbance  of  the  public
peace,  usury,  adultery,  and  the  like.  The  comitia
tributa  also  acted  as  courts  of  appeal,  e.  g.  when  a
person  protested  against  a  fine  imposed  by  a  magi-
strate. (Dionys.  vii.  17  ;  Cic.  De  Leg.  iii.  3  ;  Liv.
xl.  42  ;  Zonar.  vii.  17.)  The  persons  who  acted
as  accusers  in  the  comitia  tributa  were  the  tribunes
and  aediles.

With  regard  to  the  time  at  which  these  comit'a
were  or  could  be  convened,  the  same  regulations
were  observed  as  at  the  comitia  centuriata.  They
might  assemble  either  within  or  without  the  city,
but  not  further  from  it  than  1000  paces,  because
the  power  of  the  tribunes  did  not  extend  further.
For  elections  the  Campus  Martius  Avas  usually
chosen  (Cic.  ad  Att.  iv.  3,  ad  Fain.  vii.  30  ;  Plut.
C.  Gracch.  3),  but  sometimes  also  the  forum,  the
Capitol,  or  the  Circus  Flaminius.  (Cic.  ad  Att.  i.
16  ;  Liv.  xxxiii.  10,  xxvii.  21.)  The  presidents
were  commonly  the  tribunes  who  were  supported
by  the  aediles,  and  no  matter  could  be  brought  be-
fore the  tribes  without  the  knowledge  and  consent
of  the  tribunes  (Liv.  xxvii.  22,  xxx.  41  ;  Cic.  de
Leg.  Agr.  il  8)  ;  even  the  aediles  could  not  bring
a  proposal  before  them  without  the  permission  of
the  tribunes.  (Gell.  iv.  4  ;  Dionys.  vi.  90.)  One
of  them  wa«  chosen  either  by  lot  or  by  common
agreement  to  act  as  president  (Liv.  ii.  b^^  iii.  64,
iv.  57,  V.  17)  ;  but  his  colleagues  usually  had  to
fiign  the  j«oposal  which  he  brought  before  the
eomraonalty.  (Cic.  p.  Seat.  33,  de  Leg.  Agr.  ii.  9.)
As  the  comitia  tributa,  however,  more  and  more
assumed  the  character  of  national  assemblies,  the


COMITIA.

higher  magistrates  also  sometimes  acted  as  presi-
dents, though  perhaps  not  without  previously  ob-
taining the  permission  of  the  tribunes.  There  are
only  a  few  instances  of  higher  magistrates  presiding
in  the  comitia  tributa  when  assembled  for  purposes
of  legislation  (Plin.  H.  N.  xvi.  15  ;  Cic.  p.  Balh.
24  ;  Dion  Cass,  xxxviii.  6,  xxxix.  65  ;  Appian,  De
Bdl.  Civ.  iii.  7,  27)  ;  but  the  consuls  and  praetors
often  appear  as  presidents  at  the  elections  of  tri-
bunes, aediles,  and  quaestors  (Liv.  iii.  55,  64  ;
Dionys.  ix.  41,  43,  49  ;  Appian,  De  Dell.  Civ.  i.  14  ;
Cic.  /).  Plane.  20,  ad  Att.  iv.  3,  in,  Vat.  5,  ad  Fam.
vii.  30)  ;  as  well  as  when  the  comitia  tributa  wore
assembled  as  a  court  of  justice.  (Liv.  xxv.  4  ;
Appian,  De  Bell.  Civ.  i.  31  ;  Dion  Cass,  xxviii.  1 7.)
The  preparations  for  the  comitia  tributa  were
less  formal  and  solemn  than  for  those  of  the  cen-
turies. In  the  case  of  elections,  the  candidates  had
to  give  in  their  names,  and  the  president  com-
municated them  to  the  people.  (Liv.  iii.  64  ;  Ap-
pian, De  Bell.  Civ.  i.  14.)  When  a  legislative
measure  Avas  to  be  brought  before  the  assembly,  a
tribune  (the  proposer  of  the  bill  was  called  rogatory
and  the  others  adscriptores)  made  the  people  ac-
quainted with  it  in  condones^  and  that  on  the  three
preceding  nundines.  The  same  was  the  case  when
the  people  were  to  meet  as  a  court  of  justice.  The
auspicia  were  not  consulted  for  the  comitia  of  the
tribes,  but  the  spectio  alone  was  sufficient,  and  the
tribunes  had  the  right  of  ob7iuntiaiio.  The  con-
vening of  these  assemblies  Avas  likewise  less  solemn
than  that  of  the  centuries,  for  the  tribune  who  had
been  chosen  to  preside  either  at  an  election  or
brought  forward  a  rogation,  simply  invited  the
citizens  by  his  viatores,  who  were  also  sent  into
different  parts  of  the  country  to  invite  the  people
living  at  a  distance.  (Appian,  De  Bell.  Civ.  i.  29.)
At  the  meeting  itself,  he  sat  on  the  tribunal  sup-
ported by  his  colleagues  (Liv.  xxv,  3  ;  Dion  Cass,
xxxix.  G5\  and  laid  before  the  people  his  bill,  the
name  of  the  candidate,  or  made  them  acquainted
with  the  nature  of  the  offence  on  which  they  had
to  pass  sentence,  concluding  with  the  words  velitis^
jvl)eatis  Qairites.  The  bill  was  never  read  by  the
tribune  himself,  but  by  a  pracco,  and  then  began
the  debates,  in  which  persons  might  either  oppose
or  recommend  the  measure,  though  private  persons
had  to  ask  the  tribunes  for  permission  to  speak.
When  the  discussion  was  over  the  president  called
upon  the  people  ite  in  svjf-'ragium.,  as  at  the  comitia
centuriata.  They  then  formed  themselves  into  their
tribes,  which,  like  the  centuries,  ascertained  their
own  votes  in  enclosures  (septa).  Which  of  the
35  tribes  was  to  give  its  vote  first,  was  determined
by  lot,  and  that  tribe  was  called  praerogativa  or
principium  (the  others  were  termed  J«re  vocatae).
The  vote  of  the  first  tribe  was  given  by  some  per-
son of  distinction  whose  name  was  mentioned  in
the  plebiscitum,  if  it  was  of  a  legislative  nature.
The  manner  of  collecting  the  votes  was,  on  the
whole,  the  same  as  in  the  comitia  centuriata.  The
announcing  of  the  result  of  the  votes  was  the  re-
nuntiatio.  If  it  so  happened  that  two  candidates
had  the  same  number  of  votes,  the  question  was
decided  by  drawing  lots.  The  circumstances  which
might  cause  the  meeting  to  break  up  and  defer  its
business  till  another  day,  are  the  same  as  those
which  put  an  end  to  the  comitia  centuriata.  If,
however,  the  people  were  assembled  as  a  court,  the
breaking  up  of  the  assembly  was  to  the  accused
equivalent  to  an  acquittal  (Cic.  p.  Dom.  17).     If


COMITIA.

after  the  comitia  the  augurs  declared  that  some
formality  had  been  neglected,  the  decree  of  the
assembly  thereby  became  void,  and  persons  who
had  been  elected  to  an  office  were  obliged  to  with-
draw.

V.  TJie  comitia  centuriafa  mixed  with  the  coinitia
trihttta.  —  The  Servian  constitution  was  retained
unaltered  so  long  as  no  great  change  took  place  in
the  republic,  but  when  the  coinage  and  the  standard
of  property  had  become  altered,  when  the  constitu-
tion of  the  army  had  been  placed  on  a  different
footing,  and  above  all,  when  the  plebeians  began
to  be  recognized  as  a  great  and  essential  element
in  the  Roman  state,  it  must  have  been  found  in-
convenient to  leave  to  the  equites  and  the  first
class  so  great  a  preponderance  in  the  comitia  of  the
centuries,  and  it  became  necessary  to  secure  more
power  and  influence  to  the  democratic  element
which  had  grown  in  strength  and  was  still  growing.
It  may  have  been  the  intention  to  combine  the
comitia  centuriata  and  tributa  in  such  a  manner
as  to  make  only  one  assembly  of  them,  but  this
was  not  done.  A  change  however  took  place,
though  no  writer  mentions  either  the  time  when  it
was  made  nor  in  what  it  consisted,  so  that  we  are
left  to  form  our  opinion  from  incidental  allusions.
First,  as  to  the  time  of  the  change.  From  Livy
(i.  43)  and  Dionysius  (iv.  "21)  it  would  appear  that
the  change  did  not  take  place  till  after  the  com-
pletion of  the  35  tribes,  i.  e  after  b.  c.  241.  Some
modem  writers,  therefore,  refer  the  change  to  the
censorship  of  C.  Flaminius,  B.  c.  220,  who  is  said
to  have  made  the  constitution  more  democratic  ;
while  Niebuhr  and  others  date  the  change  from
the  censorship  of  Q.  Fabius  and  P.  Decius,  b.  c.
304.  But  there  is  evidence  that  it  must  be  assigned
to  even  an  earlier  date  than  this,  for  the  (tribus)
praerogativa  is  mentioned  as  early  as  b.  c.  396  in
the  election  of  the  consular  tribunes  (Liv.  v.  18),
where  the  pure  comitia  tributa  cannot  be  meant,
and  acenturia  praerogativa  is  a  thing  unknown.

The  question  about  the  manner  in  which  the
combination  of  the  two  kinds  of  comitia  was  ef-
fected, has  been  the  subject  of  even  much  more
discussion  and  doubt  than  that  about  the  time
when  it  was  brought  about.  The  most  probable  of
the  numerous  opinions  which  have  been  advanced
on  this  subject  is  that  of  0.  Pantagathus  (Fulv.
Ursinus,  ad  Liv.  i.  43),  which  has  been  very  ela-
borately worked  out  by  Gottling.  (Gesch.  d.  R'ovi.
Staatsverf.  pp.  380,  &c.,  506,  &c.)  Pantagathus
believes  that  the  citizens  of  each  tribe  were  divided
into  five  property  classes,  each  consisting  of  seniores
and  janiores,  so  that  each  of  the  35  tribes  con-
tained ten  centuries,  and  all  the  tribes  together
350  centuries,  a  number  which  corresponds  with
that  of  the  days  of  a  Roman  lunar  year.  Accord-
ing to  this  new  arrangement,  the  five  ancient
classes,  divided  into  seniores  and  juniores,  con-
tinued to  exist  as  before  (Liv.  xliii.  16  ;  Cic.
Phil.  ii.  33,  p.  Place.  7,  de  Re  Puhl.  iv.  2,  Acadcm.
ii.  33  ;  Sail.  Jug.  86),  but  henceforth  they  were
most  closely  united  with  the  tribes,  whereas  before
the  tribes  had  been  mere  local  divisions  and  en-
tirely independent  of  property.  The  union  now
effected  was  that  the  classes  became  subdivisions
of  the  tribes,  and  that  accordingly  centuries  occur
both  in  the  classes  and  in  the  tribes.  (Cic.  p.
Plane.  20,  de  Leg.  Agr.  ii.  2.)  Each  tribe  con-
tained ten  centuries,  two  of  the  first  class  (one  of
the  seniores  and  one  of  the  juniores),  two  of  the


COMITIA.


339


second  (likewise  seniores  and  juniores),  two  of  the
third,  two  of  the  fourth,  and  two  of  the  fifth  class.
The  equites  were  likewise  divided  according  to
tribes  and  centuries  (Dionys.  vi.  13,  vii.  72),  and
they  seem  to  have  voted  with  the  first  class,  and
to  have  been  in  iiact  included  in  it,  so  as  to  be
called  centuries  of  the  first  class.  (Cic.  Phil.  ii.
33,  Liv.  xliii.  16;  Axxrel.  Vict,  de  Vir.  Illustr.  57  ;
Val.  Max.  yi.  5.  §  3.)  The  centuries  of  the  cor-
nicines,  tubicines  and  fabri,  which  are  no  longer
mentioned,  probably  ceased  to  exist  as  distinct  cen-
turies. (Comp.  Cic.  de  Re  Puhl.  ii.  22.)  Respect-
ing the  manner  in  which  the  votes  were  given,
there  are  two  opinions :  according  to  the  first,  a
whole  tribe  was  chosen  by  lot  to  give  its  vote  (10
centuries)  first,  and  according  to  the  second,  one
century  of  the  first  class,  having  been  determined
by  lot.  If  we  adopt  the  former  opinion,  the  votes
of  the  ten  centuries  contained  in  a  tribe  would  have
been  given  one  after  another,  and  the  majorit}^,  six,
would  have  constituted  the  result  or  vote  of  the
tribe.  Now  as  18  out  of  the  35  tribes  constituted
a  majority,  it  is  evident  that  108  centuries  might
have  constituted  a  majority  against  the  remaining
242.  This  is  an  absurdity  of  which  we  cannot
conceive  the  Romans  to  have  been  guilty.  The
voting  by  tribes,  therefore,  cannot  be  conceived  as
rational,  except  in  those  cases  in  which  the  ten
centtiries  of  every  tribe  were  unanimous  ;  this  may
have  been  the  case  very  often,  and  when  it  was  so,
the  tribus  praerogativa  was  certainly  the  tribe
chosen  by  lot  to  give  its  unanimous  vote  first.  But
if  there  was  any  difference  of  opinion  among  the
centuries  making  up  a  tribe,  the  true  majority  could
only  be  ascertained  by  choosing  by  lot  one  of  the
70  centuriae  of  the  first  class  to  give  its  vote  first,
or  rather  it  was  decided  by  lot  from  which  tribe
the  two  centuries  of  the  first  class  were  to  be  taken
to  give  their  vote  first.  (Hence  the  plural  praero-
gativae^  Pseud.  Ascon.  ad  Cic.  in  Verr.  p.  139;
Liv.  x.  20.)  The  tribe,  moreover,  to  which  those
centuries  belonged  which  voted  first,  was  itself  like-
wise called  tribus  praerogativa.  Of  the  two  cen-
turies, again,  that  of  seniores  gave  its  vote  before
the  juniores,  and  in  the  documents  both  were  called
by  the  name  of  their  tribe,  as  Galeria  juniorum
(Liv.  xxvii.  6,  i.  e.  the  juniores  of  the  first  class  in
the  tribus  Galeria),  Aniensis  juniorum  (Liv.  xxiv.
7),  Veturia  juniorum  (Liv.  xxvi.  22  ;  comp.  Cic.
p.  Plane.  20,  Phil.  ii.  33,  DeDiv.  ii.  35).  As  soon
as  the  praerogativa  had  voted,  the  renuntiatio  took
place,  and  the  remaining  centuries  then  deliberated
whether  they  should  vote  the  same  way  or  not.
When  this  was  done  all  the  centuries  of  the  first
tribe  proceeded  to  vote  at  once  (Dionys.  iv.  21),  for
there  would  not  have  been  time  for  the  350  cen-
turies to  vote  one  after  another,  as  was  done  by
the  193  centuries  in  the  comitia  centuriata.  (Cic.
p.  Plane.  20,  in  Verr.  v.  15,  p.  Red.  in  Senat.  11,
ad  Quir.  7  ;  Liv.  x.  9,  22,  xxiv.  7,  xxvi.  22,
xxvii.  24  ;  Suet.  Caes.  19.)

These  comitia  of  the  centuries  combined  with
the  tribes,  were  far  more  democratical  than  the
comitia  of  the  centuries  ;  they  continued  to  be
held,,  and  preserved  their  power  along  with  the
comitia  tributa,  even  after  the  latter  had  acquired
their  supreme  importance  in  the  republic.  During
the  time  of  the  moral  and  political  corruption  of
the  Romans,  the  latter  appear  to  have  been  chiefly
attended  by  the  populace,  which  was  guided  by
the  tribunes,  and. the  wealthier  and  more  respect-


S40  COMITIA.

able  citizens  had  little  influence  in  thera.  When
the  libertini  and  all  the  Italians  were  incorporated
in  the  old  thirty-five  tribes,  and  when  the  political
corruption  had  reached  its  height,  no  trace  of  the
sedate  and  moderate  character  wjis  left  by  which
the  comitia  tributa  had  been  distinguished  in
former  times.  (Sail.  Cat  37  ;  Suet.  Caes.  41  ;  Cic.
ad  Att.  i.  ]  6.)  Violence  and  bribery  became  the
order  of  the  day,  and  the  needy  multitude  lent
willing  ears  to  any  instigations  coming  from
wealthy  bribers  and  tribunes  who  were  mere  de-
magogues. Sulla  for  a  time  did  away  with  these
odious  proceedings  ;  since,  according  to  some,  he
abolished  the  comitia  tributa  altogether,  or,  ac-
cording to  others,  deprived  them  of  the  right  of
electing  the  sacerdotes,  and  of  all  their  legislative
and  judicial  powers.  (Cic.  in  Verr.  i.  13,  15,  de
Legg.  iii.  9  ;  I.iv.  Epit.  89  ;  Appian,  de  Bell.  Civ.
i.  59,  98  ;  comp.  Tribunus.)  But  the  constitu-
tion, such  as  it  had  existed  before  Sulla,  was  re-
stored soon  after  his  death  by  Pompey  and  others,
with  the  exception  of  the  jurisdiction,  which  was
for  ever  taken  firom  the  people  by  the  legislation
of  Sulla.  The  people  suffered  another  loss  in  the
dictatorship  of  J.  Caesar,  who  decided  upon  peace
and  war  himself  in  connection  with  the  senate.
(Dion  Cass.  xlii.  20.)  He  had  also  the  whole  of
the  legislation  in  his  hands,  through  his  influence
with  the  magistrates  and  the  tribunes.  The
people  thus  retained  nothing  but  the  election  of
magistrates  ;  but  even  this  power  was  much  li-
mited, as  Caesar  had  the  right  to  appoint  half  of
the  magistrates  himself,  with  the  exception  of
the  consuls  (Suet.  Couis.  41  ;  Cic.  Philip,  vii.  6  ;
Dion  Cass,  xliii.  51),  and,  as  in  addition  to  this,
he  recommended  to  the  people  those  candidates
whom  he  wished  to  be  elected  :  and  who  would
have  opposed  his  wish  ?  (Dion  Cass,  xliii.  47  ;
Appian,  de  Bell.  Civ.  ii.  18.)  After  the  death
of  Caesar  the  comitia  continued  to  be  held,  but
were  always  more  or  less  the  obedient  instruments
in  the  hands  of  the  rulers,  whose  unlimited  powers
were  even  recognised  and  sanctioned  by  them.
(Appian,  de  Bell.  Civ.  iv.  7  ;  Dion  Cass.  xlvi.  55,
xlvii.  2.)  Under  Augustus  the  comitia  still  sanc-
tioned new  laws  and  elected  magistrates,  but  their
whole  proceedings  were  a  mere  farce,  for  they
could  not  venture  to  elect  any  other  persons  than
those  recommended  by  the  emperor.  (Suet.  Atig.
40,  &c.  ;  Dion  Cass.  liii.  2,  21,  Iv.  34,  Ivi.  40.)
Tiberius  deprived  the  people  even  of  this  shadow
of  their  former  power,  and  conferred  the  power  of
election  upon  the  senate.  (Tacit.  Jwwa/.  i,  15,  81,
ii.  36,  51  ;  Veil.  Pat.  ii.  126.)  When  the  elec-
tions were  made  by  the  senate  the  result  was
announced  to  the  people  assembled  as  comitia  cen-
turiata  or  tributa.  (Dion  Cass.  Iviii.  20.)  Legis-
lation was  taken  away  from  the  comitia  entirely,
and  was  completely  in  the  hands  of  the  senate  and
the  emperor.  Caligula  placed  the  comitia  again
upon  the  same  footing  on  which  they  had  been  in
the  time  of  Augustus  (Dion  Cass.  lix.  9  ;  Suet.
Cal.  16)  ;  but  this  regulation  was  soon  abandoned,
and  every  thing  was  left  as  it  had  been  arranged
by  Tiberius.  (Dion  Cass.  lix.  20.)  From  this  time
the  comitia  may  be  said  to  have  ceased  to  exist,
as  all  the  sovereign  power  formerly  possessed  by
the  people  was  conferred  upon  the  emperor  hy  the
lex  regia.  [Lex  Rkgia.]  The  people  only  as-
sembled in  the  Campus  Martins  for  the  purpose  of
receiving  information  as  to  who  had  been  elected


COMMISSORIA  LEX.
or  appointed  as  its  magistrates,  until  at  last  even
this  announcement  (renuntiatio)  appears  to  have
ceased.

In  addition  to  the  works  on  Roman  history  in
general,  the  reader  may  consult  Unterholzner,
De  Mutata  Centuriatorum  Comit.  a  Servio  Tullio
liege  histitidorum  Raiione,  Breslau,  1835;  G.  C.
Th.  Francke,  De  Tribuum^  de  Curiarum  utque  Cen-
turiarum  Rations,  Schleswig,  1824  ;  Huschke,
Die  Verfassung  des  Servius  Tullius,  1838  ;  Hiill-
mann,  Romische  Grwidverfassung ;  Rubino,  Un-
tersuchungen  iiber  die  Rom.  Verfassung,  ]  839  ;
Zumpt,  Ueber  die  Abstimmung  des  Rom.  VoUces  in
Cefituriatcomitien.  [L.  S.]

COMITIA'LIS  DIES.     [Dies.]

COxMI'TIUM.     [Forum.]

C0MMEA'TU3,  a  furlough,  or  leave  of  absence
from  the  army  for  a  certain  time.  (Tacit.  Ann.  xv.
10  ;  Liv.  iii.  46.)

COMMENT ARIENSIS.    [Commentarius.]

COMMENTA'RIUS,  or  COMMENTA'-
RIUM,  meant  a  book  of  memoirs  or  memorandum-
book,  whence  the  expression  Caesa?-is  Commentarii
("  Hinc  Caesar  libros  de  bellis  a  se  gestis  commen-
tarios  inscripsit,  quod  nudi  essent  omni  ornatu  ora-
tionis,  tanquam  veste  detracto,"  Cic.  Brutus,  c.  75).
Hence  it  is  used  for  a  lawyer's  brief,  the  notes  of
a  speech,  &c.     (Sen.  Controv.  lib.  iii.  Proem.)

In  the  imperial  period  the  word  commentariensis
occurs  in  the  sense  of  a  notary  or  clerk  of  the
Fiscus  (40.  tit.  14.  s.  45),  and  also  of  a  keeper
of  a  prison  (Walter,  Geschichte  des  Romischen
Rechts,  §§  818,  819,  2d  ed.)  A  military-  officer  so
called  is  mentioned  by  Asconius  {in  Ver.  iii.  28),
who  probably  had  similar  duties.  The  word  is
also  employed  in  the  sense  of  a  notary  or  secretary
of  any  sort.  Most  of  the  religious  colleges  had
books  called  commentarii,  as  commentarii  augxirum^
po7itificum.  [B.  J.]

COMME'RCIUM.     [Civitas.]

COMMISSO'RIA  LEX  is  the  term  applied  to
a  clause  often  inserted  in  conditions  of  sale,  by
which  a  vendor  reserved  to  himself  the  privilege  of
rescinding  the  sale,  if  the  purchaser  did  not  pay
his  purchase-money  at  the  time  agreed  on.  The
lex  commissoria  did  not  make  the  transaction  a
conditional  purchase  ;  for  in  that  case,  if  the  pro-
perty were  damaged  or  destroyed,  the  loss  would
be  the  loss  of  the  vendor,  inasmuch  as  the  pur-
chaser, by  non-payment  of  the  money  at  the  time
agreed  on,  would  fail  to  perform  the  condition  ,
but  it  was  an  absolute  sale,  subject  to  be  rescinded
at  the  sole  pleasure  of  the  vendor,  if  the  money
was  not  paid  at  the  time  agreed  on  ;  and  conse-
quently if  after  this  agreement  the  property  was
lost  or  destroyed  before  the  day  agreed  on  for  pay-
ment, the  loss  fell  on  the  purchaser.  If  the  vendor
intended  to  take  advantage  of  the  lex  commissoria,
it  was  necessary  that  he  should  declare  his  intention
as  soon  as  the  condition  was  broken.  If  he  re-
ceived or  claimed  any  part  of  the  purchase  money
after  the  day  agreed  upon,  he  thereby  waived  the
advantage  of  the  lex  commissoria.  It  was  usual
to  insert  in  the  commissoria  lex  an  agreement  that
if  the  vendor  had  to  sell  the  property  again,  the
first  purchaser  should  make  up  any  deficiency  in
the  price,  that  is,  the  difference  between  the  amount
for  which  it  was  first  sold,  and  the  less  amount
which  it  produced  at  the  second  sale.  [Pignus.]
(Dig.  18,  tit  3;  Thibaut,  System^  &c.  §548,
9th  ed.)  G.L.J


COMMUNI  DIVIDUNDO,  ACTIO.

COMMFSSUM.  One  sense  of  this  word  is
that  of  "  forfeited,""  which  apparently  is  derived
from  that  sense  of  the  verb  commiliere^  which  is
*'  to  commit  a  crime,"  or  "  to  do  something  wrong."
Asconius  says,  that  those  things  are  commissa
which  are  either  done  or  omitted  to  be  done  by  a
heres  against  the  will  of  a  testator,  and  make  him
subject  to  a  penalty  or  forfeiture  ;  thus,  commissa
hereditas  would  be  an  inheritance  forfeited  for
some  act  of  commission  or  omission.  Cicero  (Ad
Fam.  xiii.  56)  speaks  of  an  hypothecated  thing
becoming  commissa  ;  that  is,  becoming  the  abso-
lute property  of  the  creditor  for  default  of  pay-
ment. A  thing  so  forfeited  was  said  m  commis-
sum  inddere  or  cadere,  Commissum  was  also  ap-
plied to  a  thing  -in  respect  of  which  the  vectigal
was  not  paid,  or  a  proper  return  made  to  the  pub-
licani.  A  thing  thus  forfeited  (vectigulium  nomine)
ceased  to  be  the  property  of  the  owner,  and  was
forfeited,  under  the  empire,  to  the  fiscus.  (Dig.  39.
tit.  4  ;  Suet.  Calig.  c.  41.)  [G.  L.]

COMMI'XTIO.     [CoNFUsio.]

COMMODA'TUM  is  one  of  those  obligationes
which  are  contracted  re.  He  who  lends  to  another
a  thing,  for  a  definite  time,  to  be  used  for  a  definite
purpose,  without  any  pay  or  reward,  is  called  by
modern  writers  eommoilans ;  the  person  who  re-
ceives the  thing  is  called  commodatarius ;  and  the
contract  is  called  commodatum.  The  genuine  Roman
name  for  the  lender  is  commodator  ( Dig.  1 3.  tit.  6.
s.  7),  and  the  borrower  (commodatarius)  is  "is  qui
rem  commcdatam  acccpit."  It  is  distinguished
from  mutuura  in  this,  that  the  thing  lent  is  not  one
of  those  things  quae  pondere.,  numero^  mcnsurave
constant,  as  wine,  corn,  &c. ;  and  the  thing  commo-
data  does  not  become  the  property  of  the  receiver,
who  is  therefore  bound  to  restore  the  same  thing.
Tiie  lender  retains  both  the  ownership  of  the  thing
and  the  possession.  It  differs  from  locatio  et  con-
ductio  in  this,  that  the  use  of  the  thing  is  gratuitous.
The  commodatarius  is  liable  to  the  actio  commodati,
if  he  does  not  restore  the  thing  ;  and  he  is  bound
to  make  good  all  injury  which  befalls  the  thing
while  it  is  in  his  possession,  provided  it  be  such
injury  as  a  careful  person  could  have  prevented,
or  provided  it  be  an  injury  which  the  thing  has
sustained  in  being  used  contrary  to  the  conditions
or  purpose  of  the  lending.  If  a  thing  was  lent  to
two  persons,  each  was  severally  liable  for  the  whole
(in  solidum).  In  some  cases  the  commodatarius
had  an  actio  contraria  against  the  commodans,  who
was  liable  for  any  injury  sustained  by  the  commo-
datarius through  his  dolus,  or  culpa ;  as,  for  instance,
if  he  knowingly  lent  him  bad  vessels,  and  the  wine
or  oil  of  the  commodatarius  was  thereby  lost  or
injured.  The  actio  commodati  was  one  of  those
in  which  there  were  two  formulae,  in  jus  and  in
factum.  (Gains,  iv.  47  ;  Dig.  13.  tit.  6  ;  Instit.
iii.  14.  §  2;  Thibaut,  Sijstem,  &c.  §  477,  &c.
9th  ed.  [G.  L.]

COMMU'NI  DIVIDU'NDO,  A'CTIO,is  one
of  those  actiones  which  have  been  called  raixtae,
from  the  circumstance  of  their  being  partly  m  rem
and  partly  iw  personam  ;  and  duplicia  judiciji,  from
the  circumstance  of  both  plaintiff  and  defendant
being  equally  interested  in  the  matter  of  the  suit
(Garus,  iv.  160),  though  the  person  who  instituted
the  legal  proceedings  was  properl}^  the  actor.  It
is  said  in  the  institutions  of  Justinian,  of  the  three
actions  for  a  division,  "mixtam  causam  obtinere
videntur,  tarn  in  rem  quam  in  personam  "  (Inst.  4.


COMOEDIA.


341


tit.  6.  §  20).  They  were,  however,  properly  per-
sonal actions  (Dig.  10.  tit.  1.  s.  1),  but  distinguished
from  other  personal  actions  by  this,  that  in  these  ac-
tions disputed  ownership  could  also  be  determined.
(Savigny,  System,  &c.  vol.  v.  p.  36.)  This  action
was  maintainable  between  those  who  were  owners
in  common  of  a  corporeal  thing,  which  accordingly
was  called  res  communis  ;  and  it  was  maintainable
whether  they  were  owners  (domini),  or  had  merely
a  right  to  the  publiciana  actio  in  rem  ;  and  whether
they  were  socii,  as  in  some  cases  of  a  joint  purchase,
or  not  socii,  as  in  the  case  of  a  thing  bequeathed  to
them  (Jegata)  by  a  testament ;  but  the  action  could
not  be  maintained  for  the  division  of  an  hereditas.
In  this  action  an  account  might  be  taken  of  any
injury  dons  to  the  common  property,  or  anything
expended  on  it,  or  any  profit  received  from  it,  by
any  of  the  joint  owners.  Any  corporeal  thing,  as
a  piece  of  land,  or  a  slave,  might  be  the  subject  of
this  action.

It  seems  that  division  was  not  generally  effected
by  a  sale  ;  but  if  there  were  several  things,  the
judex  would  adjudicate  {adjudicare)  them  sever-
ally (Gaius,  iv.  42)  to  the  several  persons,  and
order  {condemnare)  the  party  who  had  the  more
valuable  thing  or  things  to  pay  a  sum  of  money  to
the  other  by  way  of  equality  of  partition.  It  fol-
lows from  this  that  the  things  must  have  been
valued  ;  and  it  appears  that  a  sale  might  be  made,
for  the  judex  was  bound  to  make  partition  in  the
way  that  was  most  to  the  advantage  of  the  joint
owners,  and  in  the  way  in  which  they  agreed  that
partition  should  be  made  ;  and  it  appears  that  the
joint  owners  might  bid  for  the  thing,  which  was
common  property,  before  the  judex.  If  the  thing
was  one  and  indivisible,  it  was  adjudicated  to  one
of  the  parties,  and  he  was  ordered  to  pay  a  fixed
sum  of  money  to  the  other  or  others  of  the  parties.
This  action,  so  far  as  it  applies  to  land,  and  that
of  familiae  erciscundae,  bear  some  resemblance  to
the  now  abolished  English  writ  of  partition,  and
to  the  bill  in  equity  for  partition.  (Dig.  10.  tit.  3  ;
Cod.  3.  tit.  37  ;  Cic.  Ad  Fam.  vii.  12  ;  Bracton,
fol.  443.)  ^  [G.  L.]

COMOE'DIA  (/cwjuqpSi'a),  corned}'-.  1.  Greek.
The  early  stages  of  the  history  of  comedy  are
involved  in  great  indistinctness,  as  they  never
formed  the  subject  of  much  inquiry  even  when  in-
formation was  extant.  This  was  the  case  even
among  the  Athenians,  and  to  a  still  larger  extent
among  the  Dorians.  The  ancient  Greeks  seldom
showed  much  aptitude  for  antiquarian  research,
and  for  a  long  time  comedy  was  scarcely  thought
deser\'ing  of  attention  (Aristot.  Poet.  5),  for,
though  springing  out  of  the  Dionysiac  festivals,
it  had  not  that  predominantly  religious  character
which  tragedy  had.

That  comedy  took  its  rise  at  the  vintage  festi-
vals of  Dionysus  is  certain.  It  originated,  as
Aristotle  says  {Poet.  4),  with  those  who  led  off
the  phallic  songs  (ciirb  ruv  i^apx^VTUv  rh  <paK-
XiKo)  of  the  band  of  revellers  {Kcbfxos),  who  at  the
vintage  festivals  of  Dionysus  gave  expression  to
the  feelings  of  exuberant  joy  and  merriment  which
were  regarded  as  appropriate  to  the  occasion,  by
parading  about,  partly  on  foot,  partly  in  wagons,
with  the  symbol  of  the  productive  powers  of  na-
ture, singing  a  wild,  jovial  song  in  honour  of
Dionysus  and  his  companions.  These  songs  were
commonly  interspersed  with,  or  followed  by  petu-
lant, extemporal  (auroo-xeSiao-TiK^,  Arist.  Poet,  i
z  3


342  COMOEDIA.

witticisms  with  which  the  revellers  assailed  tlic
bystanders  (see  the  description  of  the  phallophori
at  Sicyon  in  Athen.  xiv.  p.  622),  just  as  the  chorus
in  the  Frogs  of  Aristophanes,  after  their  song  to
lacchus,  begin  ridiculing  Archedemus  (417,  &c.).
This  origin  of  comedy  is  indicated  by  the  name
Kw/xcpSia,  which  undoubtedh'-  means  "•  the  song  of
the  Kw/ios."  This  appears  both  from  the  testimony
of  Aristotle  that  it  arose  out  of  the  phallic  songs
and  from  Demosthenes  (c.  Meid.  p.  517),  where
we  find  mentioned  together  6  Kuifxos  koX  oi  Kaynfi-
Sol.  (Comp.  MuUer,  Hist,  of  Gr.  Lit.  vol.  ii.  p,  4,
Dor.  iv.  7.  §  1  ;  Bode,  Gesch.  der  Hdlen.  Dicldk.
vol.  ii,  part  2.  p.  4,  &c.  ;  Kanngiesser,  die  alte
Komische  Buhne  zu  Athe?i,  p.  32.)  Other  deriva-
tions of  the  name  were  however  given  even  in
antiquity.  The  Megarians,  conceiving  it  to  be
connected  with  the  word  /ccc//rj,  and  to  mean  "  vil-
lage-song," appealed  to  the  name  as  an  evidence
of  the  superiority  of  their  claim  to  be  considered
as  the  originators  of  comedy  over  that  of  the
Athenians  (Arist.  Poet.  3).  This  derivation  was
also  adopted  by  several  of  the  old  grammarians
(see  Tzetzes,  in  Cramer's  Afiecd.  Gr.  vol.  iii.  pp.
335,  337  ;  Anonym.  Trepl  KOJixcpSias  in  Meineke,
Hist.  Crit.  Comic.  Graec.  pp.  535,  538,  558,  and  in
Bekker's  Anecd.  Gr.  p.  747,  where  a  very  absurd
account  of  the  origin  of  comedy  is  given),  and
has  the  sanction  of  Bentley,  W.  Schneider,  and
even  Bernhardy  {Grwidrlss  d.  Griech.  Lit.  vol.  IL
p.  892).

It  was  among  the  Dorians  that  comedy  first  as-
sumed any  thing  of  a  regular  shape.  The  Mega-
rians, both  in  the  mother  country  and  in  Sicily,
claimed  to  be  considered  as  its  originators  (Arist.
Poet.  3),  and  so  far  as  the  comedy  of  Athens  is
concerned,  the  claim  of  the  former  appears  well
founded.  They  were  always  noted  for  their  coarse
humour  (Aristoph.  Vesp.  57,  with  the  schol.  ;
Anthol.  Pal.  xi.  440  ;  Suidas,  s.  v.  yeXais  ;  Bode,
vol.  ii.  pt.  2,  p.  27),  and  their  democratical  con-
stitution, which  was  established  at  an  early  period,
favoured  the  development  of  comedy  in  the  proper
gense  of  the  word.  In  the  aristocratical  states  the
mimetic  impulse,  as  connected  with  the  laughable
or  absurd,  was  obliged  to  content  itself  with  a  less
unrestrained  mode  of  manifestation.  The  Lace-
daemonians, who  had  a  great  fondness  for  mimetic
and  orchestic  amusements,  had  their  Set/cTjAi/crai,
whose  exhibitions  appear  to  have  been  burlesques
of  characters  of  common  life.  The  favourite  per-
sonages were  the  fruit-stealer  and  the  foreign
quack,  for  the  representation  of  which  they  had  a
peculiar  mimetic  dance.  (Pollux,  iv.  §  105  ;  Athen.
xiv.  p.  621  ;  Plut.  Ages.  21.  p.  607,  d,  Apophth.
Lac.  p.  212,  &c.  ;  Schol.  ad  Apollon.  i.  746  ;
Muller,  Dor.  iv.  6.  §  9  ;  Benihardy,  I.  c.  p.  894.)
Analogous  to  the  5eiKr)\iKTal  were  the  fipvaX-
\iKTai  (Hesych.  s.  v.).  Among  the  forenmncrs  of
comedy  must  be  mentioned  the  Phallophori  and
Ithyphalli  at  Sicyon.  It  was  here,  where  at  an
early  period  the  "dithyramb  also  was  dramatised,
that  the  kw/j-os  first  assumed  a  more  dramatic
form,  and  Dionysus  was  even  said  to  have  in
vented  comedy  at  Sicyon  (Anthol.  Pal.  xi.  32).
The  Phallophori  had  no  masks,  but  covered  their
faces  with  chaplets  of  wild  thyme,  acanthus,  ivy,
and  violets,  and  threw  skins  round  them.  After
singing  a  hymn  to  Dionysus,  they  flouted  and
jeered  at  any  one  of  the  bystanders  whom  they
selected.     The  Ithyphalli  wore  maska  reprcsent-


COMOEDIA.

ing  drunken  persons,  and  were  equipped  in  other
respects  in  a  manner  which,  if  not  very  decent,
was  appropriate  to  the  part  they  had  to  sustain.
(Athen.  /.  c.)  It  was  the  iambic  improvisations
of  the  exarchi  of  such  choruses  which  gave  rise  to
the  later  comedy.  Anthcas  of  Lindus  is  spoken
of  as  a  poet  who  composed  pieces  for  such  comuses
of  phallus -bearers,  which  were  called  comedies
(x\then.  X.  p.  445).  Such  pieces  have  been  styled
lyrical  comedies  by  many  scholars  (as  Bockh,
Cor}}.  Inscript.  No.  1584,  note  ;  and  Muller,  Hist.
of  the  IJt.  of  Greece^  vol.  ii.  p.  5),  to  distinguish
them  from  the  comedj  proper.  Lobeck  and  Her-
mann however  stoutly  deny  that  there  was  any
such  thing  as  lyrical  tragedy  or  comedy  distinct
from  dramatical  tiagedy  and  comedy,  and  yet  not
the  same  with  dithyrambs  or  phallic  songs,  and
affirm  that  the  tragedies  and  comedies  which  we
hear  of  before  the  rise  of  the  regular  drama  were
only  a  species  of  dithyramb  and  phallic  song.
(Hennann,  de  Tragoedia  Comoedicujue  Lyrica,  in
Opusc.  vol.  vii.  p.  211,  &c.)  The  dispute  is  more
about  names  than  about  things  ;  and  there  seems
no  great  objection  to  applying  the  term  lyrical
tragedy  or  comedy  to  pieces  intended  to  be  per-
formed by  choruses,  without  any  actors  distinct  from
the  chonis,  and  having  a  more  dramatic  cast  than
other  purely  lyrical  songs.  This,  apparently,  was
the  point  to  which  comedy  attained  among  the
Megarians  before  Susarion  introduced  it  into  At-
tica. It  arose  out  of  the  union  of  the  iambic
lampoon  with  the  phallic  songs  of  the  comus,  just
as  tragedy  arose  out  of  the  union  of  rhapsodical
recitations  with  the  dithyramb.

Among  the  Athenians  the  first  attempts  at
comedy,  according  to  the  almost  unanimous  ac-
counts of  antiquity,  were  made  at  Icaria  by  Su-
sarion, a  native  of  Tripodiscus  in  Megara.  (Schol.
ad  Dionys.  TJirac.  in  Bekker's  Anecd.  Gr.  p.  748  ;
Aspasius,  Ad  Aristot.  Eth.  Nic.  iv.  2.  20.  fol.
53,  B.)  Icaria  was  the  oldest  seat  of  the  worship
of  Dionysus  in  Attica  (Athen.  ii.  p.  40),  and
comus  processions  must  undoubtedly  have  been
known  there  long  before  the  time  of  Susarion.
lambistic  raillery  was  also  an  amusement  already
known  in  the  festivals  of  Bacchus  and  Den'ieter
(Muller,  Hist,  of  Lit.  of  Gr.  vol.  i.  p.  132  ;
Hesych ius,  s.  v.  Tecpvpiarai  ;  Suidas,  s.  v.  yecpv-
pi((i}U ;  Schol.  Arist.  Acharn.  708).  From  the
jests  and  banterings  directed  by  the  Bacchic  co-
mus, as  it  paraded  about,  against  the  bystanders,
or  any  others  whom  they  selected,  arose  the
proverb  to  €|  a/xa^r]s  (Schol.  Arist.  Equit.  544,
Nub.  296  ;  Suidas,  s.  v.  ;  Ulpianus  ad  Demosth.
de  Cor.  p.  268,  ed.  lleiske  ;  Bode,  I.  c.  p.  22  ;
Photius,  Lex.  s.  v.  ra  6K  tuv  afia^uv).  This
amusement  continued  customary  not  only  at  the
rural  Dionysia,  but  at  the  Anthesteria,  on  the
second  day  of  the  festival  [Dionysia].  It  was  in
the  third  year  of  the  50th  Olympiad  (b.  c.  578),
that  Susarion  introduced  at  Icaria  comedy  in  that
stage  of  development  to  which  it  had  attained
among  the  Megarians  (Mar.  Par.  ep.  40.  in
Bockh's  Corpus  Inscript.  vol.  ii.  p.  301).  It  is
not  however  easy  to  decide  in  what  his  improve-
ments consisted.  Of  course  there  were  no  actors
beside  the  chorus  or  comus  ;  whatever  there  was
of  drama  must  have  been  performed  by  the  latter.
The  introduction  of  an  actor  separate  from  the
choinis,  was  an  improvement  not  yet  made  in  the
drama.  According  to  one  grannnarian,  Susarion  was


COMOEDIA

the  first  to  give  to  the  iambistic  performances  of  the
comus  a  regular  metrical  form  (Schol.  ad  Dionys.
Throe,  ap.  Bekker,  Aneai.  Gr.  p.  748  ;  Meineke,
I.  c.  p.  549).  He  no  doubt  substituted  for  the
more  ancient  improvisations  of  the  chorus  and  its
leader  premeditated  compositions,  though  still  of
the  same  general  kind  ;  for,  as  Aristotle  says
{Poet.  c.  5),  Crates  was  the  first  who  ^plev,
CKpifi^vos  TTJy  lafx€iKris  tSeos  Ka66\ou  iroieTv
A6yovs  ^  fivdovs.  There  would  seem  also  to  have
been  some  kind  of  poetical  contest,  for  we  leam
that  the  prize  for  the  successful  poet  \vas  a  basket
of  figs  and  a  jar  of  wine  (Marm.  Par.  /.  c. ;  Bentley,
Dissert,  on  tlie  Ep.  of  Phal.  vol,  i.  p.  259,  ed.
Byce).  It  was  also  the  practice  of  those  who
took  part  in  the  comus  to  smear  their  faces  with
wine-lees,  either  to  prevent  their  features  from
being  recognised,  or  to  give  themselves  a  more
grotesque  appearance.  Hence  comedy  came  to  be
called  TpvycfSia,  or  lee-song.  Others  connected
the  name  with  the  circumstance  of  a  jar  of  new
wine  (Tpv^)  being  the  prize  for  the  successful
poet.  (A then.  ii.  p.  40  ;  Anon.  ap.  Meineke,  I.  c.
p.  535  ;  Aristoph.  Acham.  1.  473,  &c.  ;  Fragra.
ap.  Athen.  xii.  p.  551  ;  Acham.  851,  603,  Vesp.
650,  1534  ;  Schol.  ad  Arist.  Acham.  397,  498  ;
Schol.  ad  Plat,  de  Rep.  iii.  p.  928,  ed.  Bait,  et
Orell.  ;  Bentley,  Dissert,  on  the  Ep.  of  Phal.  vol.  i.
p.  341,  &c.  ed.  Dyce  ;  Bode,  I.  c.  p.  22.)  There
can  be  but  little  question  that  Susarion's  pieces
were  merely  intended  for  the  amusement  of  the
hour,  and  were  not  committed  to  writing  (Bentley,
/.  c.  p.  250,  &c.  ;  Anonym,  de  Com.  ap.  Meineke,
I.  c.  p.  540  ;  Bode,  l.  c).  The  comedy  of  Susarion
doubtless  partook  of  that  petulant,  coarse,  and
unrestrained  personality  for  which  the  Megarian
comedy  was  noted.  For  entertainments  of  such  a
character  the  Athenians  were  not  yet  prepared.
They  required  the  freedom  of  a  democracy.  Ac-
cordingly, comedy  was  discouraged,  and  for  eighty
years  after  the  time  ol  Susarion  we  hear  nothing
of  it  in  Attica.

It  was,  however,  in  Sicily,  that  comedy  was
earliest  brought  to  something  like  perfection.  The
Greeks  in  Sicily  always  exhibited  a  lively  tempera-
ment, and  the  gift  of  working  up  any  occurrence
into  a  spirited,  fluent  dialogue.  (Cic.  Verr.  iv.  43,
Divin.  in  Caecil.  9,  Orat.  ii.  54  ;  Quintil.  vi.  3.
§  41.)  This  faculty  finding  its  stimulus  in  the
excitement  produced  by  the  political  contests,  which
Avere  so  frequent  in  the  diflferent  cities,  and  the
opportunity  for  its  exercise  in  the  numerous  agra-
rian festivals  connected  with  the  worship  of  Demeter
and  Bacchus,  it  was  natural  that  comedy  should
early  take  its  rise  among  them.  Yet  before  the  time
of  the  Persian  wars,  we  only  hear  of  iambic  com-
positions, and  of  a  single  poet,  Aristoxenus.  The
performers  were  called  ouTo/cagSaAoi,  i.  e.  impro-
visatores  (Athen.  xiv.  p.  622.  ;  Etym.  Magn.  s.  v.
avTOKa§S.  ;  Eustath.arf  11.  xi.  p.  884.  45  ;  Hesych,
s.  V.  ;  Aristot.i?Ae^.  iii.  7.  §  1  ;  Bode,  I.  c.  p.  8,  &c.),
and,  subsequently,  tafj.§oi.  Their  entertainments
being  of  a  choral  character  were,  doubtless,  ac-
companied by  music  and  dancing.  Athenaeus
(xiv.  p.  629)  mentions  a  dance  called  the  lajxSiK-i],
which  he  ranks  with  the  KSpSa^  and  (riKivvis.
Afterwards,  the  comic  element  was  developed
partly  into  travesties  of  religious  legends,  partly
into  delineations  of  character  and  manners  ;  the
former  in  the  comedy  of  Epicharmus,  Phormis,  and
Deinolochus  ;  the  latter  in  the  mimes  of  Sophron


COMOEDIA.  34S

and  Xcnarchns.  Epicharmus  is  very  commonly
called  the  inventor  of  comedy  by  the  grammarians
and  others  (Theocr.  Epig.  17  ;  Suidas  s.  v.
'Eirixapf^os  ;  Solinus,  5,  13)  ;  this,  however,  is
tnie  only  of  that  more  artistical  shape  which  he
gave  to  it.  (Bernhardy,  ?.  e.  p.  900.)  In  his  efforts
he  appears  to  have  been  associated  with  Phormis,
a  somewhat  older  contemporary.  The  Megarians
in  Sicily  claimed  the  honour  of  the  invention  of
comedy,  on  account  of  his  having  lived  in  Megara
before  he  went  to  Syracuse.  (Dictionary  of  Biog.
and  Myth.  art.  Epicharmus.)  According  to
Aristotle  {Poet.  5)  Kpichannus  and  Phormis
were  the  first  who  began  fivdovs  iroielv  ;  which
Bernhardy  (/.  c.  p.  898)  understands  to  mean  that
they  were  the  first  to  introduce  regular  plots.  The
subjects  of  his  plays  were  mostly  mythological,
i.  e.  were  parodies  or  travesties  of  mythological
stories.  (MUller,  Dorians,  book  iv.  c.  7.)  Whether
in  the  representation  there  was  a  choi-us  as  well  as
actors  is  not  clear,  though  it  has  been  assumed
(Grysar,  de  Dor.  Com.  p.  200,  &c.)  that  he  and
Phormis  were  the  earliest  comic  poets  whose  works
reached  posterity  in  a  written  form.  (Bentley,  l.  c.
p.  451.)  But  the  comedy  of  Epicharmus  was  of
brief  duration.  "We  hear  of  no  successors  to  him
except  liis  son  or  disciple  Deinolochus.

In  Attica,  the  first  comic  poet  of  an})-  import-
ance whom  we  hear  of  after  Susarion  is  Chionides,
who  is  said  to  have  brought  out  plays  in  B.  c.  488
(Suidas  s.  V.  Xicauidris).  Euetes,  Euxenides,  and.
Myllus  were  probably  contemporaries  of  Ciiionides  ;
he  was  followed  by  Magnes  and  Ecphantides.
Their  compositions,  however,  seem  to  have  been
little  but  the  reproduction  of  the  old  Megaric  farce
of  Susarion,  differing,  no  doubt,  in  form,  by  the
introduction  of  an  actor  or  actors,  separate  from
the  chorus,  in  imitation  of  the  improvements  that
had  been  made  in  tragedy.  (Bode,  I.  c.  p.  29 — 36.)
That  branch  of  the  Attic  drama  which  was  called
the  old  comedy,  begins  properly  with  Cratinus,
who  was  to  comedy  verj-  much  what  Aeschylus
was  to  tragedy.  Under  the  vigorous  and  liberal
administration  of  Pericles  comedy  found  Iree
scope,  and  rapidly  reached  its  peifection.  Cratinus
is  said  to  have  been  the  first  who  introduced  three
actors  in  a  comedy,  (Anonym,  de  Com.  ap.  Mei-
neke, p.  540.)  But  Crates  is  spoken  of  as  the  first
who  began  KaQoXov  iroielv  \6yuvs  fj  jxvdovs  (Arist.
Poet.  5),  i,  e.  raised  comedy  from  being  a  mere
lampooning  of  individuals,  and  gave  it  a  character
of  universality,  in  which  subjects  drawn  from
reality,  or  stories  of  his  own  invention  received
a  free,  poetic  treatment,  the  characters  introauced
being  rather  generalisations  than  particular  indi-
viduals. (See  Aristotle's  distinction  between  to
KaG"  'tEKacTTov  and  ra  KadoXov,  Poet.  9.)  In  what
is  known  of  his  pieces  no  traces  appear  of  anything
of  a  personal  or  political  kind.  He  was  the  first
who  introduced  into  his  pieces  the  character  of  a
drunken  man.  (Anonym,  de  Com.  ap.  Meineke,
p.  536.)  Though  Crates  was  a  younger  contem.
porary  of  Cratinus,  and  at  first  an  actor  in  his
pieces,  yet,  except  perhaps  his  earlier  plays,  the
comedies  of  Cratinus  were  an  improvement  upon
those  of  Crates,  as  they  united  with  the  universality
of  the  latter  the  pungent  personal  satire  and  earnest
political  purpose  which  characterised  the  old  comedy
(Bernhardy,  ;.  c,  pp.  942,  946.)  Crates  and  his
imitator  Pherecrates  seem  in  the  character  of  theip
pieces  to  have  had  more  affinity  with  the  middle
z  4


344  COMOEDIA.

than  with  the  old  comedy.  The  latter  has  been
described  as  the  comedy  of  caricature,  a»d  such
indeed  it  was,  but  it  was  also  a  great  deal  more.
As  it  appeared  in  the  hands  of  its  great  masters
Cratinus,  Hermippus,  Eupolis,  and  especially  Aiis-
tophanes,  its  main  characteristic  was  that  it  was
throughout  political.  Everything  that  bore  upon
the  political  -or  social  interests  of  the  Athenians
furnished  materials  for  it.  It  assailed  everything
that  threatened  liberty,  religion,  and  the  old  esta-
blished principhis  of  social  morality  and  taste,  and
tended  to  detract  from  the  true  nobleness  of  the
Greek  character.  It  performed  the  functions  of
a  public  censorship.  (Hor.  Serm.  i.  4.  1,  &c.  ;
Isocrat.  de  Pace,  p.  161  ;  Dion  Chrysost.  vol.ii.
p.  4,  ed.  Bsk.  ;  Cic.  de  Rep.  iv.  10.)  Though
merely  personal  satire,  having  no  higher  object
than  the  sport  of  the  moment,  was  by  no  means
excluded,  yet  commonly  it  is  on  political  or  general
grounds  that  individuals  are  brought  forwai'd  and
satirised.  A  groundwork  of  reality  usually  lay  at
the  basis  of  the  most  imaginative  forms  which  its
wild  licence  adopted.  All  kinds  of  phantastic
impersonations  and  mythological  beings  were  mixed
up  with  those  of  real  life.  With  such  imbounded
stores  of  materials  for  the  subject  and  form  of
comedies,  complicated  plots  were  of  course  un-
necessary, and  were  not  adopted.  Though  the
old  comedy  could  only  subsist  under  a  democracj^
it  deserves  to  be  remarked  that  its  poets  were
usually  opposed  to  tliat  democracy  and  its  leaders.
Some  of  the  bitterest  assailants  even  of  Pericles
were  to  be  found  among  the  comic  poets.

In  the  year  B.  c.  440,  a  law  was  passed  tov  /x^
Kw/xcfiSelv  (Schol.  Arist.  Acharn.  67),  which  re-
mained in  force  for  three  years,  when  it  was  re-
pealed. Some  (e.^r.  Clinton,  F.  II.  s.  a.)  under-
stand the  law  to  have  been  a  prohibition  of  comedy
altogether,  others  (Meineke,  L  c.  p.  40  ;  Bernhardy,
p.  943)  a  prohibition  against  bringing  forward  in-
dividuals in  their  proper  historical  personality  and
under  their  own  name,  in  order  to  ridicule  them
{fx)^  Kwfx.(fdi7u  ovoixacTTl).  To  the  same  period
probably  belongs  the  law  that  no  Areopagite  should
write  comedies.  (Pint,  de  Glor.  Ath.  p.  348,  c.)
About  B.  c.  415,  apparently  at  the  instigation  of
Alcibiades,  the  law  of  440,  or  at  all  events  a  law
fx)]  KUjxcfdeTu  oyo/xaaTi,  was  again  passed  on  the
motion  of  one  Syracosius  (Schol.  Arist.  Aves,  1297).
But  the  law  only  remained  in  force  for  a  short
time  (Meineke,  p.  41).  The  nature  of  the  political
events  in  the  ensuing  period  would  of  itself  act
as  a  check  upon  the  licence  of  the  comic  poets.  A
man  named  Antimachus  got  a  law  like  that  of
Syracosius  passed,  but  the  date  of  it  is  not  known,
(Schol.  Arist,  Acharn.  1149.)  With  the  over-
throw of  the  democracy  in  411,  comedy  would  of
course  be  silenced,  but  on  the  restoration  of  the
democracy,  comedy  again  revived.  It  was  doubt-
less again  restrained  by  the  thirty  tyrants.  During
the  latter  part  of  the  Peloponnesian  war  also  it
became  a  matter  of  difficulty  to  get  choregi  ;  and
hindrances  were  sometimes  thrown  in  the  way  of
the  comic  poets  by  those  who  had  been  attacked  by
them.  (Schol,  Arist. /^a«,  153,)  Agyrrhius,  though
when  is  not  known,  got  the  pay  of  the  poets
lessened.  (Schol,  Arist,  Eccl.  102.)  The  old
Attic  comedy  lasted  from  01.  80  to  01.  94  (b,  c,
458 — 404).  From  Cratinus  to  Theopompus  there
were  forty-one  poets,  fourteen  of  whom  preceded
Aristophanes.     The  number  of  pieces  attributed  to


COMOEDIA.

them  amounted  altogether  to  365.  (Anon.  d«
Com.  ap.  Meineke,  p.  535  ;  Bode,  I.  c.  p,  108,)  Au
excellent  and  compendious  account  of  these  poets
is  given  by  Bernhardy.  {Grundriss  der  Griex:1u
Lit.  vol.  ii.  p.  945 — 954.)  A  more  extended  account
will  be  found  in  Meineke  {Hist.  Crit.  Comic.  Grace.
forming  vol.  i.  of  his  Fragm.  Com.  Graec),  and  in
Bode  (Gesch.  der  Hellen.  Diditk.  vol.  iii.  pt.  ii.  p.
108,  &c.  &c.).  The  reader  is  also  referred  to  the
articles  Crates,  Cratinus,  Pherecrates,  Hermippus,
Eupolis  and  Aristophanes  in  the  Dictionary  of
Greek  and  Roman  Biography  and  Mythology.  (Comp.
Rotscher,  Aristophanes  und  sein  Zeitaiter ;  and
Schlegel's  Lectureson  Dramatic  Art  and  Literature.)
The  later  pieces  of  Aristophanes  belong  to  the
Middle  rather  than  to  the  Old  Comedy,  The  old
Megaric  comedy,  which  was  improved  by  Maeson,
by  the  introduction  of  standing  characters  (Athen.
xiv.  p.  659,  a.)  continued  for  some  time  to  subsist
by  the  side  of  the  more  artistically  developed  Attic
comedy,  as  did  the  ancient  lambistic  entertain-
ments both  in  Syracuse  and  in  the  Dorian  states
of  Greece.     (Arist.  Poet.  4  ;  Bode,  I.  c.  p,  28,)

It  was  not  usual  for  comic  poets  to  bring  forward
more  than  one  or  two  comedies  at  a  time  ;  and
there  was  a  regulation  according  to  which  a  poet
could  not  bring  forward  comedies  before  he  was  of
a  certain  age,  which  is  variously  stated  at  thirty  or
forty  years.  (Aristoph.  Nub.  530,  with  the  scho-
liast.) To  decide  on  the  merits  of  the  comedies
exhibited,  five  judges  were  appointed,  which  was
half  the  number  of  those  who  adjudged  the  prize
for  tragedy.  (Schol-  ad  Arist.  Av.  445  ;  Hesych.
s.  V.  irevTe  Kpnai.)

The  chorus  in  a  comedy  consisted  of  twentjr-
four.     [Chorus.]

The  dance  of  the  choras  was  the  K&p5a^,  the
movements  of  which  were  capricious  and  licentious,
consisting  partly  in  a  reeling  to  and  fro,  in  imitation
of  a  drunken  man,  and  in  various  unseemly  and
immodest  gestures.  For  a  citizen  to  dance  the
KSpBa^  sober  and  without  a  mask,  was  looked
upon  as  the  height  of  shamelessness.  (Theophrast.
Charact.  6,)  The  choreutae  were  attired  in  the
most  indecent  manner.  (Schol,  ad  Arist.  Nub.
537.)  Aristophanes,  however,  and  probably  other
comic  poets  also,  frequently  dispensed  with  the
K6pBa^.  (Arist.  Nub.  537,  &c.  553,  &c. ;  Schneider,
das  Attisclie  Iheatcrwesen,  p.  229,  &c.)  Comedies
have  choric  songs,  but  no  (TTOicnfia,  or  songs  between
acts.  The  most  important  of  the  choral  parts  was
the  Parabasis,  when  the  actors  having  left  the?  stage,
the  chorus,  which  was  ordinarily  divided  into  four
rows,  containing  six  each  (Pollux,  iv.  108  ;  Schol.
ad  Arist.  Pac.  733),  and  v/as  turned  towards  the
stage,  turned  round,  and  advancing  towards  the
spectators  delivered  an  address  to  them  in  the
name  of  the  poet,  either  on  public  topics  of  general
interest,  or  on  matters  which  concemed  the  poet
personally,  criticising  his  rivals  and  calling  attention
to  his  merits  ;  the  address  having  nothing  what-
ever to  do  with  the  action  of  the  plav.  (Schol.  ad
Arist.  Nub.  518,  Pac.  733,  E<juit.  505,)  The
grammarians  speak  of  it  as  being  divided  into  the
following  portions  : —  1.  A  short  introduction  (the
KOfxp-ariov)  ;  2.  The  irapdSaais  in  the  narrower
sense  of  the  word,  or  avaTvaiaTos,  which  was  the
principal  part  ;  and  usually  consisted  of  a  system
of  anapaestic  or  trochaic  tetrameters,  in  which  case
it  was  the  practice  for  it  to  close  witli  what  was
called  the  ixaKp6y  or  irplyos^  a  number  of  short


COMOEDIA.

verses,  which  the  speaker  had  to  utter  in  a  breath,
and  by  which  he  was  to  appear  to  be  choked  ;  3.
The  (TTpofpi]  ;  4.  The  iTvlpprjixa  •  5.  The  avri-
CTpotpi],  answering  to  the  (TTpocpi]  ;  6.  The  6.vt-
€iripf>r]fxa^  answering  to  the  iTripprifia.  The  strophe
and  antistrophe  were  sung  by  half  choruses,  and
were  probably  accompanied  by  dancing,  being  the
only  parts  of  the  parabasis  that  were  so  accom-
panied. (Bode  I.e.  p. 273.)  The  rhema  and  epir-
rhema  were  uttered  by  single  choreutae.  The  para-
basis, however,  did  not  always  contain  all  these
parts  complete.  The  origin  of  the  parabasis  is  not
quite  clear.  Possibly  in  the  earlier  •  stages  of
comedy,  the  poet  went  with  the  comus  procession,
and  in  the  course  of  its  performance  addressed  a
speech  in  his  own  person  to  the  spectators.  (Etym.
Magn.  p.  528  ;  Pollux,  iv.  ill  ;  Schol.  ad  Arist.
Nub.  518,  1113,  Pac.733  ;  Hypothes.  ad  Arist.
Nub.  ;  Hennann,  Elem.  Doct.  Metr.  iii.  21,  p.  720,
&c.  ;  Kanngiesser,  Alte  Kom.  Bulme^  p.  356,  &c.  ;
Kolster,  de  Parabasi.)  The  parabasis  was  not
universally  introduced  :  three  plays  of  Aristophanes,
the  Ecclesiazusae,  Lysistrata,  and  Plutus  have
none.

As  the  old  Attic  comedy  was  the  ofrspring  of  the
political  and  social  vigour  and  freedom  of  the  age
during  which  it  flourished,  it  naturally  declined
and  ceased  with  the  decline  and  overthrow  of  the
freedom  and  vigour  which  were  necessary  for  its
development.  Tt  was  replaced  by  a  comedy  of
a  somewhat  diflerent  style,  which  was  known  as
the  Middle  comedy,  the  age  of  which  lasted
from  the  end  of  the  Peloponnesian  war  to  the
overthrow  of  liberty  by  Philip  of  Macedon.  (01.  94
— 110.)  During  this  period,  the  Athenian  state
had  the  form,  but  none  of  the  spirit  of  its  earlier
democratica]  constitution,  and  the  energy  and  pub-
lic spirit  of  earlier  years  had  departed.  The
comedy  of  this  period  accordingly  found  its  mate-
rials in  satirizing  classes  of  people  instead  of  indi-
viduals, in  criticising  the  systems  and  merits  of
philosophers  and  literary  men,  and  in  parodies  of
the  compositions  of  living  and  earlier  poets,  and
travesties  of  mythological  subjects.  It  formed  a
transition  from  the  old  to  the  new  comedy,  and
approximated  to  the  latter  in  the  greater  attention
to  the  construction  of  plots  which  seem  frequently
to  have  been  founded  on  amorous  intrigues  (Bode,
p.  396),  and  in  the  absence  of  that  Avild  grotesque-
ness  which  marked  the  old  comedy.  As  regards
its  external  form,  the  plays  of  the  middle  comedy,
generally  speaking,  had  neither  parabasis  nor  chorus.
(Platonius,  de  Differ.  Com.  ap.  Meineke,  p.  532.)
The  absence  of  the  chorus  was  occasioned,  partly
by  the  change  in  the  spirit  of  comedy  itself,  partly
by  the  increasing  difficulty  of  finding  persons  capable
of  undertaking  the  duties  of  choregus.  As  the
change  in  comedy  itself  was  gradual,  so  it  is  most
likely  that  the  alterations  in  form  were  brought
about  by  degrees.  At  first  showing  the  want  of
proper  musical  and  orchestic  training,  the  chorus
was  at  last  dropped  altogether.  Some  of  the  frag-
ments of  pieces  of  the  middle  comedy  which  have
reached  us  are  of  a  lyrical  kind,  indicating  the
presence  of  a  chorus.  The  poets  of  this  school  of
comedy  seem  to  have  been  extraordinarily  prolific.
Athenaeus  (viii,  p.  336,  d.)  says,  that  he  had  read
above  800  dramas  of  the  middle  comedy.  Only  a
few  fragments  are  now  extant.  Meineke  {Hist.
Crit.  Com.  Gr.  p.  303)  gives  a  list  of  thirty-nine
poets  of  the  middle  comedy.     The  most  celebrated


COMOEDIA.


346


were  Antiphanes  and  Alexis.  (Bode,  I.  c.  p.  393,
&c.  ;  Bernhardy,  p.  1000,  &c.)

The  new  comedy  was  a  further  development  of
the  last  mentioned  kind.  It  answered  as  nearly
as  may  be  to  the  modem  comedy  of  manners  or
character.  Dropping  for  the  most  part  personal
allusions,  caricature,  ridicule,  and  parody,  which,
in  a  more  general  form  than  in  the  old  comedy,
had  maintained  their  ground  in  the  middle  comedy,
the  poets  of  the  new  comedy  made  it  their  business
to  reproduce  in  a  generalized  form  a  pictmre  of  the
every-day  life  of  those  by  whom  they  were  sur-
rounded. Hence  the  grammarian  Aristophanes
asked :  5  MeVoi/5pe  koX  ;8ie,  TrSrepos  &p'  vfiuv
irSTepou  aTrffiL/jL^craTO  (Meineke,  praef.  Men.  p.
33).  The  new  comedy  might  be  described  in  the
words  of  ^Cicero  (de  Rep.  iv.  11),  as  "  imitationem
vitae,  speculum  consuetudinis,  imaginem  veritatis."
The  frequent  introduction  of  sententious  maxims
was  a  point  of  resemblance  with  the  later  tragic
poets.  There  were  various  standing  characters
which  found  a  place  in  most  plays,  such  as  we
find  in  the  plays  of  Plautus  and  Terence,  the  leno
perjuruSf  amator  fervidus,  servulus  callidus,  arnica
illudens,  sodulis  opitulator,  miles  proeliator,  para-
situs  edaxy  parentes  tenaces^  meretrices  procaces.
(Appul.  Flor.  16  ;  Ovid,  Amor.  i.  15,  17.)  In  the
new  comedy  there  was  no  chorus,  and  the  dramas
were  commonly  introduced  by  prologues,  spoken
by  allegorical  personages,  such  as  "EXeyxos,  ^6§05,
'Ar]p.  The  new  comedy  flourished  from  about
B.  c.  340  to  B.  c.  260.  The  poets  of  the  new  comedy
amounted  to  64  in  number.  The  most  distinguished
was  Menander.  Next  to  him  in  merit  came  Phile-
mon, Diphilus,  Philippides,  Posidippus,  and  Apol-
lodorus  of  Carystus.  (Bernhardy,  p.  1008,  &c.  ;
Meineke,  I.  c.  p.  435,  &c.)

Respecting  the  masks  used  in  comedy  the  reader
is  referred  to  the  article  Persona.  The  ordinary
costume  was  the  6|w/iis,  which  for  old  men  was
unfulled.  Peasants  carried  a  knapsack,  a  cudgel,
and  a  skin  of  some  kind  (Bicpdepa).  Young  men
had  a  purple  tunic  ;  parasites  a  black  or  grey  one,
with  a  comb  and  a  box  of  ointment.  Courtezans
had  a  coloured  tunic,  and  a  variegated  cloak  over
it,  with  a  wand  in  their  hand.  Slaves  wore  a
small  variegated  cloak  over  their  tunic  ;  cooks  an
unfulled  double  mantle  ;  old  women  a  yellow  or
blue  dress  ;  priestesses  and  maidens  a  white  one  ;
heiresses  a  white  dress  with  a  fringe  ;  bawds  and
the  mothers  of  hetaerae  had  a  purple  band  round
the  head  ;  panderers  a  dyed  tunic,  with  a  varie-
gated cloak  and  a  straight  staff,  called  6.pecrK05.
(Pollux,  iv.  118,  iScc,  vii.  47  ;  Etymol.  Magn.  p.
349.  43  ;  A.  Gell.  vii.  12.)  The  authorities,
however,  on  these  points  are  not  very  full,  and  not
quite  accordant.

2.  Roman.  —  The  accounts  of  the  early  stages
of  comic  poetry  among  the  Romans  are  scanty,  and
leave  many  points  unexplained,  but  they  are  pro-
bably trustworthy  as  far  as  they  go.  Little  is
known  on  the  subject  but  what  Livy  tells  us  (vii.
4).  According  to  his  account  in  the  year  B.  c.  363,
on  the  occasion  of  a  severe  pestilence,  among  other
ceremonies  for  averting  the  anger  of  the  deities
scenic  entertainments  were  introduced  from  Etruria,
where  it  would  seem  they  were  a  familiar  amuse-
ment. Tuscan  players  (ludiones),  who  were  fetched
from  Etruria,  exhibited  a  sort  of  pantomimic  dance
to  the  music  of  a  flute,  without  any  song  accom-
panying their  dance,  and  without  regular  dramatic


346:


COMOEDIA.


gesticulation.  The  amusement  tecame  popular,  and
was  imitated  by  the  young  Romans,  who  (though
how  soon  is  not  stated)  improved  upon  the  original
entertainment  by  uniting  with  it  extemporaneous
mutual  raillery,  composed  in  a  rude  irregular  mea-
sure, a  species  of  diversion  which  had  been  long
known  among  the  Romans  at  their  agrarian  fes-
tivals under  the  name  of  Fescennina  [Fescen-
nina].  They  regulated  their  dances  so  as  to  ex-
press the  sense  of  the  words.  Those  who  had  an
aptitude  for  this  sort  of  representation  set  them-
selves to  improve  its  form,  supplanting  the  old
Fescennine  verses  by  more  regular  compositions,
which  however  had  not  as  yet  any  thing  like
dramatic  unity  or  a  regular  plot,  but  from  the  mis-
cellaneous nature  of  the  subjects  introduced  were
called  saturae  [Satura].  Those  who  took  part
in  these  exhibitions  were  called  Mstriones,  hister
being  the  Etruscan  word  which  answered  to  the
Latin  ludio  [Histrio].  It  was  123  years  after
the  first  introduction  of  these  scenic  performances
before  the  improvement  was  introduced  of  having
a  regular  plot.  This  advance  was  made  by  Livius
Andronicus,  a  native  of  Magna  Graecia,  in  B.  c.
240.  His  pieces,  which  were  both  tragedies  and
comedies,  were  merely  adaptations  of  Greek  dramas.
His  popularity  increasing,  a  building  on  the  Aven-
tine  hill  was  assigned  to  him  for  his  use,  which
served  partly  as  a  theatre,  partly  as  a  residence  for
a  troop  of  players,  for  whom  Livius  wrote  his
pieces.  The  representation  of  regular  plays  of  this
sort  was  now  left  to  those  who  were  histriones  by
profession,  and  who  were  very  commonly  either
foreigners  or  slaves  ;  the  free-born  youth  of  Rome
confined  their  own  scenic  performances  to  the
older,  irregular  farces,  which  long  maintained  their
ground,  and  were  subsequently  called  exodia,  being,
as  Livy  says,  conserta  fidjellis  potismnum  AteUanis.
[ExoDiA  ;  Satura.]  Livius,  as  was  common  at
that  time,  was  himself  an  actor  in  his  own  pieces.
His  Latin  adaptations  of  Greek  plays,  though  they
had  no  chorus,  were  interspersed  with  monodies,
which  were  more  lyrical  in  their  metrical  form,
and  more  impassioned  in  their  tone  than  the  ordi-
nary dialogue  parts.  In  the  musical  recitation  of
these  Livius  seems  to  have  been  very  successful,
and  was  frequently  encored.  The  exertion  being
too  much  for  his  voice,  he  introduced  the  practice
in  these  monodies,  or  cantica,  of  placing  a  slave
beside  the  flute  player  to  recite  or  chaunt  the  words,
while  he  himself  went  through  the  appropriate
gesticulation.  This  became  the  usual  practice  from
that  time,  so  that  in  the  cantica  the  histriones  did
nothing  but  gesticulate,  the  only  parts  where  they
used  their  voice  being  the  dialogues  {diverbia).
Livy's  account  has  been  absurdly  misunderstood
as  implying  that  the  introduction  of  this  slave  to
chaunt  the  cantica  led  to  the  use  of  dialogue  in  the
Roman  dramas,  as  though  there  had  been  no  dia-
logue before  ;  in  which  case,  as  there  was  certainly
no  chorus,  Livius  must  have  adapted  Greek  dramas
so  as  to  admit  of  being  represented  in  a  series  of
monologues,  a  supposition  which  is  confuted  by  its
own  absurdity.  It  is  perfectly  clear  that  the  plays
of  Livius  were  an  improvement  on  the  old  scenic
saturae,  which  consisted  of  dialogue,  and  that  the
improvement  was  simply  that  of  adapting  the  dia-
logue to  a  regular  plot.  Hermann  {Dissert,  de
Cant,  in  Fab.  scenic.  Opusc.  vol.  i.  p.  290,  &c.)  has
sufficiently  shown  that  the  cantica  were  not  mere
musical  interludes  accompanied  by  dancing  or  ges-


COMOEDIA.

ticulation,  introduced  between  the  acts,  but  the
monodial  parts  of  the  plays  themselves  ;  though
(as  is  clear  from  Plautus,  Pseud,  i,  5.  160)  there
were  cases  in  which  the  flute-player  filled  up  the
intervals  between  acts  with  music,  as  in  the  iiav-
Kiov  in  the  Greek  theatre.  But  there  is  nothing
to  show  that  such  musical  interludes  were  accom-
panied with  gesticulation  bj''  any  actor  ;  and  it  is
not  merely  without  but  against  all  authority  to  call
such  interludes  cantica.  Hermann  has  also  shown
that  it  is  quite  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  lead-
ing actors  only  gesticulated  in  the  cantica,  and
took  no  part  in  the  ordinary  dialogue.  The  can-
tica were  only  monodies  put  into  the  mouth  of  one
or  other  of  the  dramatis  personae.  There  is  a  use-
ful treatise  on  this  subject  by  G.  A.  B.  Wolff"  {de
Canticis  in  Romanorum  Fahulis  scenicis),  in  which
the  author  has  endeavoured  to  point  out  which  are
the  cantica  in  the  remaining  plays  of  Plautus  and
Terence.

The  first  imitator  of  the  dramatic  works  of  Livius
Andronicus  was  Cn.  Naevius,  a  native  of  Cam-
pania. He  composed  both  tragedies  and  comedies,
which  were  either  translations  or  imitations  of
those  of  Greek  writers.  In  comedy  his  models
seem  to  have  been  the  writers  of  the  old  comedy.
{Diet,  of  Gr.  and  Rom.  Biog.  and  Myth.  art.  Nae-
vitis.)  The  most  distinguished  successors  of  Nae-
vius were  Plautus  (Ibid.  art.  Plautus),  who  chiefly
imitated  Epicharmus,  and  Terence  (Ibid.  art.  Te-
RENTius),  whose  materials  v/ere  drawn  chiefly
from  Menander,  Diphilus,  Philemon,  and  ApoUo-
dorus.  The  comedy  of  the  Romans  was  through-
out but  an  imitation  of  that  of  the  Greeks,  and
chiefly  of  the  new  comedy.  Where  the  characters
were  ustensibly  Greek,  and  the  scene  laid  in  Athens
or  some  other  Greek  town,  the  comedies  were
termed  palliaiae.  All  the  comedies  of  Terence  and
Plautus  belong  to  this  class.  When  the  story  and
characters  were  Roman,  the  plays  were  called
togatae.  But  the  fabulae  togutae  were  in  fact  littlo
else  than  Greek  comedies  clothed  in  a  Latin  dress.
(As  Horace  says  :  "  dicitur  Afrani  toga  convenisse
Menandro."  Epist.\i.\.57.)  They  took  their  name
because  the  costume  was  the  toga.  The  togatae
were  divided  into  two  classes,  the  trabeatae  and
tahernariae,  according  as  the  subject  was  taken
from  high  or  from  low  life  (Euanthius,  de  Fabula).
In  the  comediae  palliatae,  the  costume  of  the
ordinary  actors  was  the  Greek  pallium.  The
plays  which  bore  the  name  of  praetextatae^  Avere
not  so  much  tragedies  as  historical  plays.  It  is  a
mistake  to  represent  them  as  comedies.  There
was  a  species  of  tragi-comedy,  named  from  the
poet  who  introduced  that  style  Rhinthonica.  A
tragedy  the  argument  of  which  was  Greek  was
termed  crepidata.  The  mimes  are  sometimes
classed  with  the  Latin  comedies.  (Hermann,  de
Fabula  iogata.  Opusc.  vol.  v.  p.  254,  &c.)  Re-
specting them,  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  article
MiMUS.  The  mimes  differed  from  the  comedies  in
little  more  than  the  predominance  of  the  mimic
representation  over  the  dialogue,  which  was  only
interspersed  in  various  parts  of  the  representation.

Latin  comedies  had  no  chorus,  any  more  than
the  dramas  of  the  new  comedy,  of  which  they
were  for  the  most  part  imitations.  Like  them,
too,  they  were  introduced  by  a  prologue,  which
answered  some  of  the  purposes  of  the  parabasis  of
the  old  comedy,  so  far  as  bespeaking  the  good  will
of  the  spectators,  and  defending  the  poet  against


COMOEDIA.

liis  rivals  and  enemies.  It  also  communicated  bo
much  information  as  was  necessary  to  understand
the  story  of  the  plaj^.  The  prologue  was  com-
monly spoken  by  one  of  the  plaj-ers,  or,  perhaps,
by  the  manager  of  the  troop.  Occasionally  the
speaker  of  it  assumed  a  separate  mask  and  costume,
for  the  occasion  (Plaut.  Poen.  prol.  126  ;  Terent.
Prol.  ii.  1).  Sometimes  the  prologue  is  spoken
by  one  of  the  dramatis  personae  (Plant.  Amph. ;
Mil.  CUor. ;  Merc),  or  by  some  supernatural  or
personified  being,  as  the  Lar  familiaris  in  the  Au-
lularia  of  Plautus,  Arcturus  in  the  Rudens,  Auxi-
lium  in  the  Cisiellaria,  Luxuria  and  Inopia  in  the
Trinuramus.  (Baden,  von  dem  Prologe  ini  Rmi.
Lustsp.  in  Jahn's  ^1  rc/wr.  i.  3.  p.  441,  &c.  ;  Bekker,
de  com.  Roman.  Fcdmlis,  p.  89,  &c.  ;  Wolff,  de  Pro-
logis  Plautinis.)  The  rest  of  the  piece  consisted
(as  Diomedes  says,  iii.  p.  489)  of  diverhium  and
canticum.  This  division,  however,  must  not  be
taken  too  stringently,  as  it  was  not  every  mono-
logue which  was  a  catiticum.  The  composition  of
the  music,  which  is  spoken  of  in  the  didascaliae,
appears  to  have  had  reference  to  these  cantica.
Respecting  the  use  of  masks,  see  the  article  Per-
sona. When  they  were  first  introduced,  is  a
disputed  point  (Wolff,  de  Canticis,  p.  22,  &t.  ;
Holscher,  de  Personarum  Usu  in  Ludis  seen.  ap.
Rom.  ;  Stieve,  de  Rei  scenicae  ap.  Rom.  Origine.)
The  characters  introduced  were  much  the  same
as  in  the  new  comedy,  and  their  costume  was  not
very  different.  Donatus  gives  the  following  ac-
count of  it :  "  comicis  senibus  candidus  vestis  in-
ducitur,  quod  is  antiquissimus  fuisse  memoratur,
adolescentibus  discolor  attribuitur.  Servi  comici
amictu  exiguo  contegxmtur  paupertatis  antiquae
gratia,  vel  quo  expeditiores  agant.  Parasiti  cum
intortis  palliis  veniunt.  Laeto  vestitus  candidus,
aerumnoso  obsoletus,  purpureus  diviti,  pauperi
phoeniceus  datur,  Militi  chlamys  purpurea,  puel-
lae  habitus  peregrinus  inducitur,  leno  pallio  varii
coloris  utitur,  meretrici  ob  avaritiam  luteum  datur."
A  word  remains  to  be  said  on  the  Atellanae
fahvlae.  These  were  not  of  Roman,  but  of  Italian
origin,  and  were  not  introduced  among  the  Romans
till  the  latter  came  into  contact  with  the  Cam-
panians.  These  pieces  took  their  name  from  the
town  of  Atella  in  Campania.  From  being  always
composed  in  the  Oscan  dialect,  they  were  also
called  ludi  Osci,  or  ludicrum  Oscum.  At  first,  and
amongst  the  Oscans,  they  appear  to  have  been
rude,  improvisatory  farces,  without  dramatic  con-
nection, but  full  of  raillery  and  satire.  So  far
they  resembled  the  earlier  scenic  entertainments
of  the  Romans.  But  the  Oscan  farces  had  not
tlie  dancing  or  gesticulation  which  formed  a  chief
part  of  the  latter,  and  those  who  took  part  in
them  personated  characters  representing  various
classes  of  the  country  people,  like  the  Maschere  of
the  modern  Italians.  These  had  regular  names  ;
there  was  Mace  us,  a  sort  of  clown  or  Ibol  ;  Buc-
cones,  i.  e.  babblers  ;  Pappus ;  Simus  or  Simius,
the  baboon.  The  Greek  origin  of  some  of  these
names  would  seem  to  indicate  that  the  Greek
settlers  in  Italy  had  some  influence  in  the  deve-
lopment of  this  species  of  amusement.  The  Atel-
lanae fabulae  were  distinguished  from  the  mimes
by  the  absence  of  low  buffoonery.  They  were
marked  by  a  refined  humour.  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  ix.
16;  Val.  Max.  ii.  1.)  They  were  commonly
divided  into  five  acts.  (Macrob.  Saturn,  iii.)  Re-
epecting  the  exodia,   see   the  article    Exodium.


COMPITALIA.  847

The  Oscan  dialect  was  preserved,  even  when  they
were  introduced  at  Rome.  (Strabo,  v.  p.  356,  a.)
Though  at  first  improvisatory,  after  the  regular
drama  acquired  a  more  artistic  character,  the
Atellanae  came  to  be  written.  Lucius  Pomponiua
of  Bononia  and  Q.  Novius  are  mentioned  as  writers
of  them.  Regular  histriones  were  not  allowed  to
perform  in  them.  They  were  acted  by  free-born
Romans,  who  were  not  subjected  to  any  civil  de-
gradation for  appearing  in  them.  In  later  times,
they  degenerated,  and  became  more  like  the  mimes,
and  were  acted  by  histriones  ;  but  by  that  time
they  had  fallen  into  considerable  neglect.  (C.  E.
Schober,  uber  die  Atellanen,  Lips.  1825  ;  Weyer,
iiber  d.  Atell.  Mannheim  1826  ;  Neukirch,  de  Fa^
hula  togata,  pp.  20,  51,  &c.  ;  Bahr,  Gesch.  der  Rom.
Litteratur.)  [C.  P.  M.]

COMPENSA'TIO  is  defined  by  Modestinus  to
be  debiti  et  crediti  inter  se  contributio.  Compen-
satio,  as  the  etymology  of  the  word  shows  (petid-o),
is  the  act  of  making  things  equivalent.  A  person
who  was  sued,  might  answer  his  creditor's  demand,
who  was  also  his  debtor,  by  an  offer  of  compen-
satio  (si  paratus  est  compensare^  ;  which  in  effect
was  an  offer  to  pay  the  difference,  if  any,  which
should  appear  on  taking  the  account.  The  object
of  the  compensatio  was  to  prevent  unnecessary
suits  and  payments,  by  ascertaining  to  which  party
a  balance  was  due.  Originally  compensatio  only
took  place  in  bonae  fidei  judiciis,  and  ex  eadem
causa  ;  but  by  a  rescript  of  M.  Aurelius  there  could
be  compensatio  in  strict!  juris  judiciis,  and  ex  dis-
pari  causa.  When  a  person  made  a  demand  in
right  of  another,  as  a  tutor  in  right  of  his  pupillus,
the  debtor  could  not  have  compensatio  in  respect
of  a  debt  due  to  him  from  the  tutor  on  his  own
account.  A  fidejussor  (surety)  who  was  called
upon  to  pay  his  principal's  debt,  might  have  com-
pensatio, either  in  respect  of  a  debt  due  by  the
claimant  to  himself  or  to  his  principal.  It  was  a
rule  of  Roman  law  that  there  could  be  no  compen-
satio where  the  demand  could  be  answered  by  an
exceptio  peremptoria  ;  for  the  compensatio  admitted
the  demand,  subject  to  the  proper  deduction,
whereas  the  object  of  the  exceptio  was  to  state
something  in  bar  of  the  demand.  Set-off  in  Eng-
lish law,  and  compensation  in  Scotch  law,  corre-
spond to  compensatio.  (Dig.  16.  tit.  2  ;  Thibaut,
System,  &c.  §  606,  9th  ed.  contains  the  chief
rules  as  to  compensatio.)  [G.  L.]

COMPERENDINA'TIO.     [Judex.]

COMPETFTOR.     [Ambitus.]

CO'MPITA.       [COMPITALIA.]

COMPITA'LIA,  also  called  LUDI  COMPI-
TALI'CII,  a  festival  celebrated  once  a  year  in
honour  of  the  lares  compitales,  to  whom  sacrifices
were  offered  at  the  places  where  two  or  more  ways
met  {compita,  Varro,  De  Ling.  Lat.  vi.  25,  ed.
Miiller  ;  Festus,  s.  v.).  This  festival  is  said  by
some  writers  to  have  been  instituted  by  Tarquinius
Priscus  in  consequence  of  the  miracle  attending  the
birth  of  Scrvius  TuUius,  who  was  supposed  to  be
the  son  of  a  lar  familiaris.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvi.
70.)  Dionysius  (iv.  14)  ascribes  its  origin  to
Servius  Tullius,  and  describes  the  festival  as  it  was
celebrated  in  his  time.  He  relates  that  the  sacri-
fices consisted  of  honey-cakes  (■n-e'Aai/ot),  which
were  presented  by  the  inhabitants  of  each  house,
and  that  the  persons,  who  assisted  as  ministering
servants  at  the  festival,  were  not  free-men,  b'lt
slaves,  because  the  lares  took  pleasure  in  the  ser-


348


CONCILIUM.


vice  of  slaves  :  he  further  adds  that  the  compitalia
were  celebrated  a  few  days  after  the  Saturnalia
with  great  splendour,  and  that  the  slaves  on  this  oc-
casion had  full  libertj'-  given  them  to  do  what  they
pleased.  We  further  learn  from  Macrobius  {Saturn.
i.  7)  that  the  celebration  of  the  compitalia  was
restored  by  Tarquinius  Superbus,  who  sacrificed
bo3's  to  Mania,  the  mother  of  the  lares  ;  but  this
practice  was  changed  after  the  expulsion  of  the
Tarquins,  and  garlic  and  poppies  offered  in  their
stead.

The  persons,  who  presided  over  the  festival
were  the  Magistri  vici,  who  were  on  that  occasion
allowed  to  wear  the  praetexta  (Ascon.  ad  Cic.  in
Pis.  p.  7,  ed.  Orelli).  Public  games  were  added
at  some  time  during  the  republican  period  to  this
festival,  but  they  were  siippressed  by  command  of
the  senate  in  B.  c.  68  ;  and  it  was  one  of  the
charges  brought  forward  by  Cicero  against  L.  Piso
that  he  allowed  them  to  be  celebrated  in  his  con-
sulship, B.  c.  58  (Cic.  in  Pis.  4  ;  Ascon.  I.  c.)  But
that  the  festival  itself  still  continued  to  be  observed,
though  the  games  were  abolished,  is  evident  from
Cicero  {ad  Att  iii.  3).  During  the  civil  wars  the
festival  fell  into  disuse,  and  was  accordingly  re-
stored by  the  emperor  Augustus.  (Suet.  Aug.  31  ;
comp.  Ov.  Fast.  v.  128 — 148.)  As  Augustus  was
now  the  pater  patriae,  the  worship  of  the  old  lares
was  discontinued,  and  the  lares  of  the  emperor
consequently  became  the  lares  of  the  state.  Hence,
the  Scholiast  on  Horace  {ad  Sat.  ii.  3.  281),  tells
us  that  Augustus  set  up  lares  or  penates  at  places
where  two  or  more  waj^s  met,  and  instituted  for
the  purpose  of  attending  to  their  worship  an  order
of  priests,  who  were  taken  from  the  Libertini,  and
were  called  Augustales.  These  Augustales  are  en-
tirely different  from  the  Augustales,  who  were
appointed  to  attend  to  the  worship  of  Augustus  after
his  decease,  as  has  been  well  shown  by  A.  W.
Zumpt  in  his  essay  on  the  subject.  {De  Aiigus-
talihus.  Sec,  Berol.  1846.)     [Augustales.]

The  compitalia  belonged  to  the  feriae  concep-
iirae,  that  is,  festi-yals  which  were  celebrated  on
days  appointed  annually  by  the  magistrates  or
priests.  The  exact  day  on  which  this  festival  was
celebrated,  appears  to  have  varied,  though  it  was
always  in  the  winter.  Dionysius  relates  (iv.  14),
as  we  have  already  said,  that  it  was  celebrated  a
few  days  after  the  Satumalia,  and  Cicero  {in  Pison.
4)  that  it  fell  on  the  Kalends  of  January  ;  but  in
one  of  his  letters  to  Atticus  (vii.  7)  he  speaks  of  it
as  falling  on  the  fourth  before  the  nones  of  January.
The  exact  words,  with  which  the  festival  was  an-
nounced, are  preserved  by  Macrobius  {Saturn,  i.  4)
and  Aulus  Gellius  (x.  24).

COMPLU'VIUM.     [DoMus.]

COMPROMISSUM.  [Judex  ;  Recepta
Actio.]

COMUS  {KWfjLos).     [Chorus  ;  Comoedia.]

CONCHA  (/c<{7X'7),  a  Greek  and  Roman  liquid
measure,  of  which  there  were  two  sizes.  The
smaller  was  half  the  cyathus  (  =  '0412  of  a  pint
English)  ;  the  larger,  which  was  the  same  as  the
oxybaphum,  was  three  times  the  former  (="1238
of  a  pint).  (Hussey,  pp.  207,  209  ;  Wurm,  p.
129.)  [P.S.]

CONCILTA'BULUM.    [Colonia,  p.318,a.]

CONCILIA'RII.     [Assessor.]

CONCFLIUM  generally  has  the  same  meaning
as  conventus  or  conventio,  but  the  technical  import
of  concilium   in  tlie  Roman  constitution  was  an


CONCIO.

assembly  of  a  jDor^/ow  of  the  people  (Gell.  xv.  27),
as  distinct  from  the  general  assemblies  or  comitia.
(Fest.  p.  50  ;  Ck.De  Leg.  ii.  1,  p.  Red.  in  Sen.  5.)
Accordingly,  as  the  comitia  tributa  embraced  only
a  portion  of  the  Roman  people,  viz.  the  plebeians,
these  comitia  are  often  designated  by  the  term
concilia  plcbis.  (Liv.  vii.  5,  xxviii.  53,  xxxix.
15.)  Upon  the  same  principle,  it  might  be  sup-
posed that  the  comitia  curiata  might  be  called
concilia,  and  Niebuhr  (Hist,  of  Rome,  i.  p.  425)
believes  that  the  concilia  populi  which  are  men-
tioned now  and  then,  actually  were  the  comitia
curiata  ;  but  there  is  no  evidence  of  those  patrician
assemblies,  which  in  the  early  times  certainly
never  looked  upon  themselves  as  a  mere  part  of
the  nation,  having  ever  been  called  by  that  name.
In  fact,  all  the  passages  in  which  concilia  populi
occur,  clearly  show  that  none  other  but  the  comitia
tributa  are  meant.  (Liv.  i.  36,  ii.  7,  60,  iii.  13,  16,
64,  71,  XXX.  24,  xxxviii.  53,  xxxix.  15,  xliii.  16,
Cic.  in  Vat.  7.)  As  concilium,  however,  has  the
meaning  of  an  assembly  in  general,  we  cannot
wonder  that  sometimes  it  is  used  in  a  loose  way  to
designate  the  comitia  of  the  centuries  ( Liv.  ii.  28)
or  any  concio.  (Liv.  ii.  7,  28,  v.  43  ;  Gell.  xviii.  7  ;
comp.  Becker,  Handb.  der  Ratn.  Alterth.  vol.  ii.
part  i.  p.  359,  note  693.)

We  must  here  notice  a  peculiar  sense  in  which
concilium  is  used  by  Latin  writers  to  denote  the
assemblies  or  meetings  of  confederate  towns  or
nations,  at  which  either  their  deputies  alone  or
any  of  the  citizens  met  who  had  time  and  in-
clination, and  thus  formed  a  representative  as-
sembly. (Liv.  i.  50.)  Such  an  assembly  or  diet
is  commonly  designated  as  commune  coiicUium  or
rh  Koiv6v,  e.  g.  Achaeorum,  Aetolorum,  Boeotoruin,
Macedoniae,  and  the  like.  (Liv.  xxxvi.  31,
xxxviii.  34,  xlii.  43,  xlv.  18  ;  Gell.  ii.  6.)  Of  the
same  kind  were  the  diets  of  the  Latins  in  the
grove  of  Ferentina  (Liv,  i.  51,  vi.  33,  vii.  25,
viii.  3),  the  meetings  of  the  Etruscans  near  the
temple  of  Voltumna  (Liv.  iv.  23,  25,  61,  v.  17,
vi.  2),  of  the  Hernicans  in  the  circus  of  Anagnia
(ix.  42),  of  the  Aequians  and  Samnites  (iii.  2,  iv.
25,  X.  12).  [L.  S.]

CO'NCIO  or  CO'NTIO,  a  contraction  for  con-
ventio,  that  is,  a  meeting,  or  a  conventus.  (Festus,
p.  QQ,  ed.  Miiller.)  In  the  technical  sense,  how-
ever, a  concio  was  an  assembly  of  the  people  at
Rome  convened  by  a  magistrate  for  the  purpose  of
making  the  people  acquainted  with  measures  which
were  to  be  brought  before  the  next  comitia,  and  of
working  upon  them  either  to  support  or  oppose  the
measure.  But  no  question  of  any  kind  could  be
decided  by  a  concio,  and  this  constitutes  the  differ-
ence between  condones  and  comitia.  (Gell.  xiii.
14  ;  Cic.  p.  Sext.  50,  53  ;  Liv.  xx.xix.  15.)  Still
condones  were  also  convened  for  other  purposes,
e.g.  of  persuading  the  people  to  take  part  in  a
war  (Dionys.  vi.  28),  or  of  bringing  complaints
against  a  party  in  the  republic.  (Dionys.  ix.  25  ;
Plut.  C.  Gracdi.  3.)  Meetings  of  this  kind  naturally
were  of  very  frequent  occurrence  at  Rome.  The
earliest  that  is  mentioned,  is  one  held  immediately
after  the  death  of  Romulus  by  Julius  Proculus  in
the  Campus  Martins  (Liv.  i.  16  ;  Plut.  Rom.  27)  ;
the  first,  after  the  expulsion  of  the  kings,  was  held
by  Brutus.  (Liv.  ii.  2  ;  Dionys.  v.  10,  «&.c.)  Every
magistrate  had  the  right  to  convene  condones,  but
it  was  most  frequently  exercised  by  the  consuls
and  tribunes,  and  the  latter  more  especially  ex-


CONCUBINA.

ercised  a  great  influence  over  the  people  in  and
through  these  conciones.  A  magistrate  who  was
higher  in  rank  than  the  one  who  had  convened  a
concio,  had  the  right  to  order  the  people  to  dis-
perse, if  he  disapproved  of  the  object  {avocare,
Gell.  xiii.  14)  ;  and  such  a  command  and  the  vehe-
mence of  the  haranguing  tribunes  rendered  con-
ciones often  very  tumultuous  and  riotous,  especially
during  the  latter  period  of  the  republic.  The
convening  magistrate  either  addressed  the  people
himself,  or  he  introduced  other 'persons  to  Avhom
he  gave  permission  to  speak,  for  no  private  person
was  allowed  to  speak  without  this  permission,  and
the  people  had  nothing  to  do  but  to  listen.  (Dionys.
V.  11  ;  Liv.  iii.  71,  xlii.  34  ;  Cic.  ad  Ait.  iv.  2.)
The  place  Avhere  such  meetings  were  held,  does
not  seem  to  have  been  fixed,  for  we  find  them  in
the  forum,  the  Capitol,  the  Campus  Martius,  and
the  Circus  Flaminius.  (Cic.  p.  Sea^.  14,  ad  Att.  i.
1.)  It  should  be  remarked,  that  the  term  concio
is  also  used  to  designate  the  speeches  and  harangues
addressed  to  the  people  in  an  assembly  (Liv.  xxiv,
22,  xxvii.  13  ;  Cic.  in  Vat.  1),  and  that  in  a  loose
mode  of  speaking,  concio  denotes  any  assembly
of  the  people.  (Cic.  p.  Place.  7  ;  comp.  the
Lexica.)  [L.  S.]

CONCUBI'NA  (iraWaK-ff,  iraWaKis).  1.
Greek. — The  iraWaK-l],  or  7roA\a/cts,  occupied  at
Athens  a  kind  of  middle  rank  between  the  wife
and  the  harlot  (kraipa).  The  distinction  between
the  kraipa,  iraWaK^,  and  legal  wife,  is  accurately
described  by  Demosthenes  (c.  Neaer.  p.  1386),  ras
uey  yap  krai^as  7]hovr\s  eVe/c'  exo/xev  ras  Se  iraA-
KaKas,  TTjs  KaQ'  rj/jLepav  ^epaireias  tov  aufxaTOS :
ras  Se  'yvva'iKas^  rov  irai^oiroielcrdai  ypr](ri(as  Kal
ruv  evSou  (pv\aKa  ttio-t^u  exeti'.  Thus  Antiphon
speaks  of  the  iraWaK-f]  of  Philoneos  as  following
him  to  the  sacrifice,  and  also  waiting  upon  him  and
his  guest  at  table.  (Antiph.  Ace.  de  Venef.  pp.  613,
•)14  ;  comp.  Becker,  Ckarikles,  vol.  ii.  p.  438.)  If
her  person  were  violated  by  force,  the  same  penalty
was  exigible  from  the  ravisher  as  if  the  offence  had
been  committed  upon  an  Attic  matron  ;  and  a  man
surprised  by  the  quasi-husband  in  the  act  of  crimi-
nal intercourse  with  his  TraAAa/c^,  might  be  slain
by  him  on  the  spot,  as  in  the  parallel  case  (Lys.
De  Caede  Eratosth.  p.  ^5).  [Adulterium.]  It
does  not,  however,  appear  very  clearly  from  what
political  classes  concubines  were  chiefly  selected,
as  cohabitation  with  a  foreign  (I^Vyj)  woman  was
strictly  forbidden  by  law  (Demosth.  c.  Neaer.  p.
1350),  and  the  provisions  made  by  the  state  for
virgins  of  Attic  lamilies  must  in  most  cases  have
prevented  their  sinking  to  this  condition.  Some-
times certainly,  where  there  were  several  destitute
female  orphans,  this  might  take  place,  as  the  next
of  kin  was  not  obliged  to  provide  for  more  than
one  ;  and  we  may  also  conceive  the  same  to  have
taken  place  with  respect  to  the  daughters  of  fami-
lies so  poor  as  to  be  unable  to  supply  a  dowry.
(Demosth.  c.  Neaer.  p.  1384  ;  Plaut.  Trinumimis.,  iii.
2,  63.)  The  dowry,  in  fact,  seems  to  have  been  a
decisive  criterion  as  to  whether  the  connection  be-
tween a  male  and  female  Athenian,  in  a  state  of
cohabitation,  amounted  to  a  marriage  :  if  no  dowTy
had  been  given,  the  child  of  such  union  would  be
illegitimate  ;  if,  on  the  contrary,  a  dowry  had
been  given,  or  a  proper  instrament  executed  in
acknowledgment  of  its  receipt,  the  female  was
fully  entitled  to  all  conjugal  rights.  (Petit.  Leij.
Att.  p.  548,  and  authors  there  quoted.)     It  does


CONFARREATIO.


349


not  appear  that  the  slave  that  was  taken  to  her
master's  bed  acquired  any  political  rights  in  conse-
quence; the  concubine  mentioned  by  Antiphon  is
treated  as  a  slave  by  her  master,  and  after  his
death  undergoes  a  servile  punishment  {Id.  p.  615).
[Hetaira.]  [J.  S.  M.]

2.  Roman.  According  to  an  old  definition,  an
unmarried  woman  who  cohabited  with  a  man  was
originally  called  pellex,  but  afterwards  by  the  more
decent  appellation  of  concubina.  (Massurius,  ap.
Paul.  Dig.  50.  tit.  16.  s.  144.)  This  remark  has
apparently  reference  to  the  Lex  Julia  et  Papia
Poppaea,  by  which  the  concubinatus  received  a
legal  character.  This  legal  concubinatus  consisted
in  the  permanent  cohabitation  of  an  unmarried  man
with  an  unmarried  woman.  It  therefore  differed
from  adulterium,  stuprum,  and  incestus,  which  were
legal  offences  ;  and  from  contubernium,  which  was
the  cohabitation  of  a  free  man  with  a  slave,  or  the
cohabitation  of  a  male  and  female  slave,  between
whom  there  could  be  no  Roman  marriage.  Before
the  passing  of  the  Lex.  Jul.  et  P.  P.,  the  name  of
concu})ina  would  have  applied  to  a  woman  who
cohabited  with  a  mamed  man,  who  had  not  divorced
his  first  Avife  (Cic.  De  Orat.  i.  40)  ;  but  this  was
not  the  state  of  legal  concubinage  which  was  after-
wards established.  The  offence  of  stuprum  was
avoided  in  the  case  of  the  cohabitation  of  a  free
man  and  an  ingenua  by  this  permissive  concubinage  ;
but  it  would  seem  to  be  a  necessary  inference  that
there  should  be  some  formal  declaration  of  the  in-
tention of  the  parties,  in  order  that  there  might  be
no  stuprum.  (Dig.  48.  tit.  5.  s.  34.)  Heineccius
{Syntag.  Ap.  lib.  i.  39)  denies  that  an  ingenua
could  be  a  concubina,  and  asserts  that  those  only
could  be  concubinae  who  could  not  be  uxores  ;  but
this  appears  to  be  a  mistake  (Dig.  25.  tit.  7.  s.  3),
or  perhaps  it  may  be  said  that  there  was  a  legal
doubt  on  this  subject  {Id.  s.  1) ;  Aurelian  prohibited
the  taking  of  ingenuae  as  concubinae.  (Vopiscus,
Aurelian.  49.)  A  constitution  of  Constantine
(Cod.  V.  tit.  27.  s.  5)  treats  of  ingenuae  concubinae.

This  concubinage  was  not  a  marriage,  nor  were
the  children  of  such  marriage,  who  were  sometimes
called  liberi  naturales,  in  the  power  of  their  father,
and  consequently  they  followed  the  condition  of
the  mother.  There  is  an  inscription  in  Fabretti
(p.  337)  to  the  memory  of  Paullianus  by  Aemilia
Prima  "  concubina  ejus  et  heres,"  which  seems  to
show  that  the  terra  concubina  was  not  a  name  that
a  woman  was  ashamed  of.  Under  the  Christian
emperors  concubinage  was  not  favoured,  but  it
still  existed,  as  we  see  from  the  legislation  of  Jus-
tinian.

This  legal  concubinage  resembled  the  morganatic
marriage  {ad  morganatieam).,  in  Avhich  neith-er  the
wife  enjoys  the  rank  of  the  husband,  nor  the
children  the  rights  of  children  by  a  legal  marriage.
{Lib.  Peud.  ii.  29.)  Among  the  Romans,  widowers
who  had  already  children,  and  did  not  wish  to
contract  another  legal  marriage,  took  a  concubina,
as  we  see  in  the  case  of  Vespasian  (Suet.  Vesp.  3),
Antoninus  Pius,  and  M.  Aurelius  (Jul.  Cap.  Vit.
Ant.  c.  8  ;  Aurel.  c.  29  ;  Dig.  25.  tit.  7  ;  Cod.  v.
tit.  26  ;  Paulus,  Recept.  Sentent.  ii.  tit  19,  20  ;
Nov.  18,  c.  5;  89.  c.  12.)  [G.  L.]

CONDEMNA'TIO.     [Actio  ;  Judex.]

CONDI'CTIO.     [Actio.]

CONDITO'RIUM.     [Funus.]

CONDU'CTIO.     [LocATio.]

CONFARREATIO.     [Matrimonium.J


350


CONFUSIO.


CONFESSO'RIA  ACTIO.     If  a  man  has  a

servitus  [Servitus],  and  the  exercise  of  his  right
'  is  impeded  by  any  person,  he  can  maintain  it  by
an  actio  in  rem,  which  is  a  servitutis  vindicatio.
Accordingly,  when  a  man  claims  a  jus  ntendi,
fruendi,  eundi,  agendi,  &c.,  the  actio  is  called  con-
lessoria  de  usufructu,  Sec.  If  the  owner  of  a  thing
was  interrupted  in  his  exclusive  enjoyment  of  it  by
a  person  claiming  or  attempting  to  exercise  a  servitus
in  it,  his  claim  or  ground  of  action  was  negative,
"jus  illi  non  esse  ire,  agere,"  &c.,  whence  the  action
was  called  negativa  or  negatoria  in  rem  actio.

The  confessoria  actio  and  the  negativa,  which
was  founded  on  a  negative  servitus,  are  discussed
under  Servitus.

In  the  negatoria  in  rem,  which  must  be  dis-
tinguished from  the  negative  actio  founded  on  a
negative  servitus,  the  plaintiff  claimed  restitution  of
the  thing,  as,  for  instance,  when  the  defendant  had
usurped  the  usus  fructus  ;  or  removal  of  the  cause  of
complaint ;  also  damages  for  injury  done,  and  security
(cautio)  against  future  acts  of  the  like  kind.  (Gaius,
iv.  3  ;  Dig.  8.  tit.  5  ;  Brissonius,  De  Formulis;
Puchta,  airsiis,  «Scc.  vol.  ii.  pp.  563,  771.)    [G.  L.]

CONFU'SIO  properly  signifies  the  mixing  of
liquids,  or  the  fusing  of  metals  into  one  mass.  If
things  of  the  same  or  of  diiferent  kind  were  con-
fused, cither  by  the  consent  of  both  owners  or  by
accident,  the  compound  was  the  property  of  both.
If  the  confusio  was  caused  by  one,  without  the
consent  of  the  other,  the  compound  was  only  joint
property  in  case  the  things  were  of  the  same  kind  :
but  if  the  things  were  different,  so  that  the  com-
pound was  a  new  thing,  this  was  a  case  of  what,
by  modern  writers,  is  called  specification,  which
the  Roman  writers  expressed  by  the  term  novara
speciem  facere,  as  if  a  man  made  mulsum  out  of
his  own  wine  and  his  neighbour's  honey.  In  such
a  case  the  person  who  caused  the  confusio  became
the  owner  of  the  compound,  but  he  was  bound  to
make  good  to  the  other  the  value  of  his  property.

Commixtio  is  used  by  modem  writers  to  signify
the  mixture  of  solid  things  Avhich  belonged  to  dif-
ferent owners  ;  but  Commixtio  and  Confusio  are
used  by  the  Roman  writers  to  express  the  union
of  things  either  solid  or  fluid  (Dig.  41.  tit.  1.  s.  7.
§  8  ;  6.  tit.  1.  s.  3.  §  2.  s.  5.).  Still,  Commixtio  is
most  generally  applied  to  mixtm-e  of  solids.  If
the  mixture  takes  place  with  mutual  consent,  the
compound  is  common  property  ;  if  by  chance,  or
by  the  act  of  one,  each  retains  his  former  property,
and  may  separate  it  from  the  mass.  If  separation
is  impossible,  as  if  two  heaps  of  com  are  mixed,
each  owner  is  entitled  to  a  part,  according  to  the
proportion  of  his  separate  property  to  the  whole
mass.  It  is  a  case  of  commixtio  when  a  man's
money  is  paid,  without  his  knowledge  and  consent,
and  the  money,  when  paid,  is  so  mixed  with  other
money  of  the  receiver  that  it  cannot  be  recognised;
otherwise,  it  remains  the  property  of  the  person  to
whom  it  belonged.     (Dig.  46.  tit.  3.  s.  78.)

Specification  (which  is  not  a  Roman  word)  took
place  when  a  man  made  a  new  thing  (nova  species)
cither  out  of  his  own  and  his  neighbour's  material,
or  out  of  his  neighbour's  only.  In  the  former  case
such  man  acquired  the  ownership  of  the  thing.  In
the  latter  case,  if  the  thing  could  be  brought  back
to  the  rough  material  (which  is  obviously  possible
in  very  few  cases),  it  still  belonged  to  the  original
owner,  but  the  specificator  had  a  right  to  retain
the  thing  till  he  was  paid  the  value  of  his  labour.


CONGIARIUM.

if  he  had  acted  bona  fide.  If  the  new  species
could  not  be  brought  back  to  its  original  form,  tlie
specificator  in  all  cases  became  the  owner,  if  he
designed  to  make  the  new  thing  for  himself ;  if  he
had  acted  bona  fide  he  was  liable  to  the  owner  of
the  stuff  for  its  value  only  ;  if  mala  fide,  he  was
liable  as  a  thief.  The  cases  put  by  Gains  (ii.  29)
are  those  of  a  man  making  wine  of  another  man's
grapes,  oil  of  his  olives,  a  ship  or  bench  of  his
timber,  and  so  on.  Some  jurists  (Sabinus  and
Cassius)  were  of  opinion  that  the  ownership  of
the  thing  was  not  changed  by  such  labour  being
bestowed  on  it  ;  the  opposite  school  were  of  opi-
nion that  the  new  thing  belonged  to  him  who  had
bestowed  his  labour  on  it,  but  they  admitted  that
the  original  owner  had  a  legal  remedy  for  the
value  of  his  property.

Two  things,  the  property  of  two  persons,  might
become  so  united  as  not  to  be  separable  without
injury  to  one  or  both  ;  in  this  case  the  owner  of
the  principal  thing  became  the  owner  of  the  acces-
sory. Thus,  in  the  case  of  a  man  building  on  an-
other man's  ground,  the  building  belonged  to  the
owner  of  the  ground  (superficies  solo  cedit)  ;  or  in
the  case  of  a  tree  planted,  or  seed  sown  on  another
man's  ground,  the  rule  was  the  same,  when  the
tree  or  seed  had  taken  root.  If  a  man  wrote,  even
in  letters  of  gold,  on  another  man's  parchment  or
paper,  the  whole  belonged  to  the  owner  of  the
parchment  or  paper  ;  in  the  case  of  a  picture
painted  on  another  man's  canvass,  the  canvass  be-
came the  property  of  the  owner  of  the  picture.
(Gaius,  ii.  73,  &c.)  If  a  piece  of  land  was  torn
away  by  a  stream  (avulsio)  from  one  man's  land
and  attached  to  another's  land,  it  became  the  pro-
perty of  the  latter  when  it  was  firmly  attached  to
it.  This  is  a  different  case  from  that  of  Alluvio.
But  in  ail  these  cases  the  losing  party  was  entitled
to  compensation,  with  some  exceptions  as  to  cases
of  mala  fides.

Confusio  occurs  in  the  case  of  rights  also.  If
the  right  and  the  duty  of  an  obligatio  become
united  in  one  person,  there  is  a  confusio  by  which
the  obligatio  is  extinguished  (Dig.  46.  tit.  3,  s.  75).
If  he  who  has  pledged  a  thing  becomes  the  heres
of  the  pledgee,  the  rights  and  duties  of  two  persons
are  united  (confunduntur)  in  one.  If  a  man  who
has  a  praedial  servitus  in  another  man's  land,  be-
comes the  owner  of  the  servient  land,  the  servitus
ceases :  servitutes  praediorum  confunduntur,  si
idem  utriusque  praedii  dominus  esse  coeperit.
(Dig.  8.  tit.  6.  s.  1.)

The  rules  of  Roman  law  on  this  subject  are
stated  by  Brinkman,  Instit.  Jur.  Rom.  §  398,  &c. ;
Mackeldey,  Lehrhuch,  &c.  §§  246,  251,  &c.  r2th
ed.  ;  Inst.  2.  tit.  1  ;  Gaius,  ii.  70,  Rosshirt,  Grund'
linien,  &c.  §  62.  [G.  L.]

CONGIA'RIUM  (sa7.  vas.,  from  congius),  a
vessel  containing  a  congius.  [Congius,]

In  the  early  times  of  the  Roman  republic,  the
congius  was  the  usual  measure  of  oil  or  wine  which
was,  on  certain  occasions,  distributed  among  the
people  (Liv.  xxv.  2)  ;  and  thus  congiarium,  as
Quintilian  (vi.  3.  §  52)  says,  became  a  name  for
liberal  donations  to  the  people,  in  general,  whether
consisting  of  oil,  wine,  com,  or  money,  or  other
things  (PWn.  H.N.  xiv.  14,  17,xxxi.  7,  41  ;  Suet.
^M^.  41,  Tih.  20,  Ner.  7  ;  Plin.  Paneg.  25  ;  Tacit.
Ann.  xii.  41,  xiii.  31  ;  Liv.  xxxvii.  57),  while
donations  made  to  the  soldiers  Avere  called  do7iativa,
though  they  were  sometimes  also  termed  congiaria


CONSTITUTIONES.

(Cic.  ad  Ait.  xvi.  8  ;  Curt.  vi.  2).  Cong-iarium
was,  moreover,  occasionally  used  simply  to  desig-
nate a  present  or  a  pension  given  by  a  person  of  high
rank,  or  a  prince,  to  his  friends  ;  and  Fabius  Maxi-
mus  called  the  presents  which  Augustus  made  to
his  friends,  on  account  of  their  smallness,  heminaria^
instead  of  congiaria,  because  hemina  was  only  the
twelfth  part  of  a  congius.  (Quintil.  I.  c;  compare
Cic.  ad  Fam.  viii.  1  ;  Seneca,  De  Brevit.  Vit.^  De
Ben.  ii.  16  ;  Suet.  Ve^.  18,  Caes.  27.)     [L.  S.]

CO'NGIUS,  a  Roman  liquid  measure,  which
contained  six  sextarii  (Rhem.  Fann.  v.  72),  or  the
eighth  part  of  the  amphora,  that  is,  not  quite  six
pints.  It  was  equal  to  the  larger  chous  of  the
Greeks.     [Chous.]

There  is  a  congius  in  existence,  called  the  con-
gius of  Vespasian,  or  the  Farnese  congius,  bearing
an  inscription,  which  states  that  it  was  made  in
the  year  75  A.  d.,  according  to  the  standard  mea-
sure in  the  capitol,  and  that  it  contained,  by
weight,  ten  pounds.  (/?«/>.  Caes.  vi.  T.  Caes.  Aug.
F.  iiii.  Cos.  Mensurae  exadae  in  Capitolio,  P.  x.  ;
see  also  Festus,  s.  v.  Pvhiica  Pondera.)  This  congius
is  one  of  the  means  by  which  the  attempt  has  been
made  to  fix  the  weight  of  the  Roman  pound.
[Libra.]

Cato  tells  us  that  he  was  wont  to  give  each  of
his  slaves  a  congius  of  wine  at  the  Saturnalia  and
Compitalia.  {De  R.  R.  c.  .57.)  Pliny  relates,  among
other  examples  of  hard  drinking  (//.  A^.  xiv.  22.
8.  28),  that  Novellius  Torquatus  Mediolanensis  ob-
tained a  cognomen  {tricongius^  a  nine-bottle-man)
by  drinking  three  congii  of  wine  at  once.

A  congius  is  represented  in  Fabretti  (Inscript.
p.  536).  [P.  S.J

CONNU'BIUM.     [Matrimonium.]

CONOPE'UM  (KwvciiTrcluv),  a  gnat  or  mus-
quito-curtain,  i.  e.  a  covering  made  to  be  expanded
over  beds  and  couches  to  keep  away  gnats  and
other  flying  insects,  so  called  from  Kcavu^^  a  gnat.

The  gnat-curtains  mentioned  by  Horace  (Epod.
ix.  1 6)  were  probably  of  linen,  but  of  the  texture
of  gauze.  The  use  of  them  is  still  common  in
Italy,  Greece,  and  other  countries  surrounding  the
Mediterranean.  Conopemn  is  the  origin  of  the
English  word  canopy.  (See  Jitdith^  x.  21,  xiii.  9,
xvi.  19;  Juv.  vi.  80  ;  Vaxr.  De  Re  Rust.  ii.  10.
§  8.)  [J.  Y.]

CONQUISITO'RES,  persons  employed  to  go
about  the  country  and  impress  soldiers,  when  there
was  a  difficulty  in  completing  a  levy.  (Liv.  xxi.
11  ;  Cic.  pro  Mil.  25  ;  Hirt,  B.  Alex.  2.)  Some-
times commissioners  were  appointed  by  a  decree  of
the  senate  for  the  purpose  of  making  a  conquisitio.
(Liv.  XXV.  5.)  [R.  W.]

CONSANGUFNEI.     [Cognati.]

CONSCRIPTI.     [Senatus.]

CONSECRA'TIO.       [Apotheosis  ;     Inau-

GURATIO.]

CONSENSUS.     [Obligationes.]
CONSILIA'RIL     [CONVENTUS.J
CONSI'LIUM.     [CoNVENTus.]
CONSTITU'TA  PECU'NIA.     [Pecunia.]
CONSTITUTIO'NES.     "  Constitutio   princi-
pis,"   says  Gaius  (i.  5),  "  is  that  which  the  im-
perator  has  constituted  by  decretum,  edictum,  or
epistola  ;  nor  has  it  ever  been  doubted  that  such
constitutio   has  the  force  of  law,  inasmuch  as  by
law  the  imperator  receives  the  imperium."    Hence
such  laws  were  often  called  principales  constitii-
tioncs.     The  word  constitutio  is  used  in  the  Digest


CONSUALIA.


351


(4.  tit.  2.  s.  9.  §  3)  to  signify  an  interlocutory  of
the  praetor.

An  imperial  constitutio  in  its  widest  sense  might
mean  everything  by  which  the  head  of  the  state
declared  his  pleasure,  either  in  a  matter  of  legis-
lation, administration,  or  jurisdiction.  A  decretum
was  a  judgment  in  a  matter  in  dispute  between
two  parties  which  came  before  him,  either  in  the
way  of  appeal  or  in  the  first  instance.  Edicta,  so
called  from  their  analogy  to  the  old  edict  (Gaius,
i.  93),  edictales  leges,  generales  leges,  leges  per-
petuae,  &c.  were  laws  binding  on  all  the  emperor's
subjects.  Under  the  general  head  of  rescripta
(Gaius,  i.  72,  73,  &c.)  were  contained  epistolae,
subscriptiones,  and  annotationes  (Gaius,  i.  94,  96,
104),  which  were  the  answers  of  the  emperor  to
those  who  consulted  him  either  as  public  function-
aries or  individuals.  (Plin.  Ep.  x.  2.)  The  epis-
tola, as  the  name  implies,  was  in  the  form  of  a
letter  :  subscriptiones  and  annotationes  were  short
answers  to  questions  propounded  to  the  emperor,
and  written  at  the  foot  or  margin  of  the  paper
which  contained  the  questions.  In  the  time  of
Tiberius,  the  Avord  rescriptum  had  hardly  obtained
the  legal  signification  of  the  time  of  Gaius.  (Tacit.
Ann.  vi.  9.)  It  is  evident  that  decreta  and  re-
scripta could  not  from  their  nature  have  the  force
of  leges  generales,  but  inasmuch  as  these  detemii-
nations  in  particular  cases  might  be  of  general
application,  they  might  gradually  obtain  the  force
of  law.

Under  the  early  emperors,  at  least  in  the  time
of  Augustus,  many  leges  were  enacted,  and  in  his
time,  and  that  of  his  successors,  to  about  the  time
of  Hadrian,  we  find  mention  of  numerous  senatus-
consulta.  In  fact  the  emperor,  in  whom  the  su-
preme power  was  vested  from  the  time  of  Augustus,
exercised  his  power  through  the  medium  of  a
senatus-consultum,  which  he  introduced  by  an
oratio  or  libellus,  and  the  senatus-consultum  was
said  to  be  made  "  imperatore  auctore."  Probably,
about  the  time  of  Hadrian,  senatus-consulta  became
less  common,  and  finally  imperial  constitutiones
became  the  common  form  in  which  a  law  was
made.

At  a  later  period,  in  the  Institutes,  it  is  de-
clared that  whatever  the  imperator  determined
{constituit)  by  epistola,  or  decided  judicially  {cog-
noscens  decrevit),  or  declared  by  edict,  was  law  ;
with  this  limitation,  that  those  constitutions  were
not  laws  which  in  their  nature  were  limited  to
special  cases.

Under  the  general  head  of  constitutiones  we
also  read  of  mandata,  or  instructions  by  the  Caesar
to  his  officers.

Many  of  these  constitutions  are  preserved  in
their  original  form  in  the  extant  codes.  [Codex
Theodosianus,  &c.]  [G.  L.]

CONSUA'LIA,  a  festival,  with  games,  cele-
brated by  the  Romans,  according  to  Festus,  Ovid
(Fast.  iii.  199),  and  others,  in  honour  of  Consus,
the  god  of  secret  deliberations,  or,  according  to  Liv)'
(i.  9),  of  Neptunus  Equestris.  Plutarch  (Quaesc.
Rom.  45),  Dionysius  of  Halicarnassus  (ii.  31),
and  the  Pseudo  Asconius,  however  (ad  Cic.  in  Verr.
p.  142.  ed.  Orelli),  say  that  Neptunus  Equestris  and
Consus  were  only  different  names  for  one  and  the
same  deity.  It  was  solemnised  every  year  in  the
circus,  by  the  symbolical  ceremony  of  uncovering
an  altar  dedicated  to  the  god,  which  was  buried  in
the  eiu'th.     For  Romulus,  who  was  considered  as


352  CONSUL.

the  founder  of  the  festival,  was  said  to  have  dis-
covered an  altar  in  the  earth  on  that  spot.  (Com-
pare Niebuhr,  Hist.  Rom.  vol.  i.  notes  629  and
630.)  The  solemnity  took  place  on  the  21st  of
Au2;ust  with  horse  and  chariot  races,  and  libations
were  poured  into  the  flames  which  consumed  the
Bacrifices.  During  these  festive  games,  horses  and
mules  were  not  allowed  to  do  any  work,  and  were
adorned  with  garlands  of  flowers.  It  was  at  their
first  celebration  that,  according  to  the  ancient
legend,  the  Sabine  maidens  were  carried  oif.
(Varro,  De  Ling.  Lat.  vi.  20  ;  Dionj^s.  i.  2  ;  Cic.
Dc  Rep.  ii.  7.)  Virgil  {Aen.  viii.  636),  in  speaking
of  the  rape  of  the  Sabines,  describes  it  as  having
occurred  during  the  celebration  of  the  Circensian
(james.,  which  can  only  be  accounted  for  by  sup-
posing that  the  great  Circensian  games,  in  subse-
quent times,  superseded  the  ancient  Consualia  ;  and
that  thus  the  poet  substituted  games  of  his  own
time  for  ancient  ones  —  a  favourite  practice  with
Virgil  ;  or  that  he  only  meant  to  say  the  rape  took
place  at  the  well-known  festival  in  the  circus  (the
Consualia),  without  thinking  of  the  ludi  Circenses,
properly  so  called.  [L.  S.]

CONSUL  (^Traros),  the  highest  republican
magistrate  at  Rome.  The  name  is  probably  com-
posed of  con  and  sul  which  contains  the  same  root
as  salio  ;  so  that  consules  are  those  who  "  go  to-
gether," just  as  exul  is  "  one  who  goes  out,"  and
praesul,  is  "■  one  who  goes  before."

There  was  a  tradition  that  King  Servius,  after
regulating  the  constitution  of  the  state,  intended  to
abolish  the  kingly  power,  and  substitute  for  it  the
annual  magistracy  of  the  consulship  ;  and  what-
ever we  may  think  of  the  tradition,  the  person  who
devised  it  must  have  had  a  deep  insight  into  the
nature  of  the  Roman  state  and  its  institutions  ;  and
the  fact  that  on  the  abolition  of  royalty,  it  was  in-
stituted forthwith,  seems,  at  any  rate,  to  show  that
it  had  been  thought  of  before.  Thus  much  is  also
certain,  that  the  consulship  was  not  a  Latin  institu-
tion, for  in  Latiura  the  kingly  power  was  succeeded
by  the  dictatorship,  a  magistracy  invested  with  the
same  power  as  that  of  a  king,  except  that  it  lasted
only  for  a  time.

The  consulship  which  was  established  as  a  re-
publican magistracy  at  Rome  immediately  after
the  abolition  of  royalty,  showed  its  republican
character  in  the  circumstance  that  its  power  was
divided  between  two  individuals  (imperium  duplex),
and  that  it  was  only  of  one  year's  duration  (annuum).
This  principle  was,  on  the  whole,  observed  through-
out the  republican  period  ;  and  the  only  exceptions
are,  that  sometimes  a  dictator  was  appointed  in-
stead of  two  consuls,  and  that,  in  a  few  instances,
when  one  of  the  consuls  had  died,  the  other  re-
mained in  office  alone,  either  because  the  remaining
portion  of  the  year  was  too  short,  or  from  religious
scruples  (Dionys.  v.  57  ;  Dion  Cass.  xxxv.  4),  for
otherwise  the  rule  was,  that  if  either  of  the  con-
suls died  in  the  year  of  his  office,  or  abdicated  be-
fore its  expiration,  the  other  was  obliged  to  con-
vene the  comitia  for  the  purpose  of  electing  a  suc-
cessor {subroyare  or  sujfficere  coUegam.)  It  is  only
during  the  disturbances  in  the  last  century  of  the
republic,  that  a  Cinna  maintained  him&elf  as  sole
consul  for  nearly  a  whole  year  (Appian,  De  Bell.
Civ.  i.  78  ;  Veil.  Pat.  ii.  24  ;  Liv.  Epit.  83) ;  and
that  Pompey  was  appointed  sole  consul,  in  order
to  prevent  his  becoming  dictator.  (Ascon.  ad
Cic.  p  Mil.  p.  37  ;  Liv,  Epit.  107  ;   Appian.  De


CONSUL.

Bell.  Civ.  ii.  23,  25.)  Naj'-,  in  those  troubled
times,  it  even  came  to  pass  that  Cinna  and  Marius,
without  any  election  at  all,  usurped  the  power  of
the  consulship.

In  the  earliest  times,  the  title  of  the  chief  magis-
trates was  not  consules  hnt  praetores ;  characterising
them  as  the  commanders  of  the  armies  of  the  re-
public, or  as  the  officers  who  stand  at  the  head  of
the  state.  Traces  of  this  title  occur  in  ancient
legal  and  ecclesiastical  documents  (Liv.  vii.  3  ;
Plin.  //.  N.  viii.  3  ;  Fest.  p.  161),  and  also  in  the
names  praetorium  (the  consul's  tent),  and  porta
praetoria  in  the  Roman  camp.  (Paul.  Diac.  p.  123  ;
Pseudo-Ascon.  ad  Cic.  in  Verr.  i.  14.)  Some-
times also  they  are  designated  by  the  l\i\Q  judicesy
though  it  perhaps  never  was  their  official  title,  but
was  given  them  only  in  their  capacity  of  judges.
(Varro,  De  L.  L.  vi.  9  ;  Liv.  iii.  55.)  The  name
consules  was  introduced  for  the  highest  magistrates
in  B.  c.  305  (Zonar.  vii.  19),  and  henceforth  re-
mamed  the  established  title  until  the  final  over-
throw of  the  Roman  empire.  Upon  the  establish-
ment of  the  republic,  after  the  banishment  of  Tar-
quin,  all  the  powers  which  had  belonged  to  the
king,  were  transferred  to  the  consuls,  except  that
which  had  constituted  the  king  high  priest  of  the
state  ;  for  this  was  kept  distinct  and  transferred  to
a  priestly  dignitary,  called  the  rex  sacrorum,  or  rex
sacrificulus.

As  regards  the  election  of  the  consuls,  it  inva-
riably took  place  in  the  comitia  centuriata,  under
the  presidency  of  a  consul  or  a  dictator ;  and  in
their  absence,  by  an  interrex.  The  consuls  thus
elected  at  the  beginning  of  a  year,  were  styled
consules  ordinarii,  to  distinguish  them  from  the
sujfecii.,  or  such  as  were  elected  in  the  place  of
those  who  had  died  or  abdicated,  though  the  privi-
leges and  powers  of  the  latter  were  in  no  Avay  in-
ferior to  those  of  the  foraier.  (Liv.  xxiv.  7,  &c.;
comp.  xli.  18.)  At  the  time  when  the  consulship
was  superseded  by  the  institution  of  the  trilnini
militarcs  consulari  potestate,  the  latter,  of  course,
presided  at  elections,  as  the  consuls  did  befor'?  and
after,  and  must  in  general  be  regarded  as  the  repre-
sentatives of  the  consuls  in  every  respect.  It  was,
however,  a  rule  that  the  magistrate  presiding  at  an
election  should  not  be  elected  himself,  though  a
few  exceptions  to  this  rule  are  recorded.  (Liv.  iii.
35,  vii.  24,  xxiv.  9,  xxvii.  6.)  The  day  of  the
election  which  was  made  known  by  an  edict,  three
nundines  beforehand  (Liv.  iii.  35,  iv.  6,  xlii.  28),
naturally  depended  upon  the  day  on  which  the
magistrates  entered  upon  their  office.  The  latter,
however,  Avas  not  the  same  at  all  times,  but  was
often  changed.  In  general  it  was  observed  as  a
rule,  that  the  magistrates  shotxld  enter  upon  their
office  on  the  kalendae  or  idus,  unless  particular
circumstances  rendered  it  impossible ;  but  the
months  themselves  varied  at  different  limes,  and
there  are  no  less  than  eight  or  nine  months  in
which  the  consuls  are  known  to  have  entered  upon
their  functions,  and  in  many  of  these  cases  we
know  the  reasons  for  which  the  change  was  made.
The  real  cause  appears  to  have  been  that  the  con-
suls, like  other  magistrates,  were  elected  for  a  whole
year  ;  and  if  before  the  close  of  that  year  the  magis-
tracy became  vacant  either  by  death  or  abdication,
their  successors,  of  course,  undertook  their  office  on
an  irregular  day,  which  then  remained  the  dies  so-
lennis,  until  another  event  of  a  similar  kind  rendered
another  change  necessary.     The  first  consuls,  as


CONSUL.

far  as  vre  know,  entered  upon  their  office  on  the
ides  of  September.  (Dionys.  t.  1  ;  Li  v.  vii.  S.)
The  first  change  seeras  to  have  "been  brought  about
\>y  the  secession  of  the  plebs,  B.  c.  493,  when  the
consuls  entered  on  the  kalends  of  September.
(Dionys.  yi.  49.)  In  B.  c.  479,  the  day  was  thrown
a  whole  month  backward  ;  for  of  the  consuls  of  the
preceding  year  one  had  fallen  in  battle,  and  the
other  abdicated  two  months  before  the  end  of  his
year ;  hence  the  new  consuls  entered  on  the
kalends  of  Sextilis.  (Dionys.  ix.  13  ;  Liv.  iii.  6.)
This  day  remained  until  B.  c.  451,  when  the  con-
suls abdicated  to  make  room  for  the  decemvirs,
who  entered  upon  their  office  on  the  ides  of  May.
The  same  day  remained  for  the  two  following  years
(Dionys.  x.  56  ;  Zonar.  vii.  18  ;  Fast.  Cap.)  ;  but
when  the  decemvirate  was  abolished,  another  day
must  have  become  the  dies  solennis,  but  which  it
was  is  unknown,  until  in  B.  c.  443,  we  find  that  it
was  the  ides  of  December.  (Dionys.  xi.  63.)  This
change  had  been  occasioned  by  the  tribuni  militares
who  had  been  elected  the  year  before,  and  had  been
compelled  to  abdicate.  (Liv.  iv.  7  j  Dionys.  xi.  62.)


CONSUL.


353


Henceforth  the  ides  of  December  remained  for  a
long  time  the  dies  solennis.  (Liv.  iv.  37,  v.  9,  11.)
In  B.  c.  401,  the  military  tribunes,  in  consequence
of  the  defeat  at  Veii,  abdicated,  and  their  successors
entered  upon  their  office  on  the  kalends  of  October.
In  B.  c.  391,  the  consuls  entered  upon  their  office
on  the  kalends  of  Quintilis.  (Ljv.  v.  32  ;  conip.  31,
vii.  25,  viii.  20.)  From  this  time  no  further  change
is  mentioned,  though  several  events  are  recorded
which  must  have  been  accompanied  by  an  alter-
ation of  the  dies  solennis,  until  in  b.  c.  217,  we
learn  that  the  consuls  entered  upon  their  office
on  the  ides  of  March,  which  custom  remained  un-
altered for  many  years  (Liv.  xxii.  1,  xxiii.  30,
xxvi.  1,  26,  xliv.  19),  until  in  B.  c.  154  it  was  de-
creed that  in  future  the  magistrates  should  enter
upon  their  office  on  the  1st  of  January,  a  regulation
which  began  to  be  observed  the  year  after,  and
remained  in  force  down  to  the  end  of  the  republic.
(Liv.  Epit.  47  ;  Fast.  Praenest.)  The  changes  in
the  time  at  which  the  consuls  entered  upon  their
office  at  diiferent  times,  may  therefore  be  given  in
the  following  tabular  view  :  —


From  B.  c.  509  to  493  on  the  Ides  of  September.

—  —  493  —  479     —     Kalends  of  September.

—  —  479  —  451      —     Kalends  of  Sextilis.
_  __  451—449     _     Ides  of  May.

—  _  449  —  443  or  400  Ides  of  December,

_  —  400  —  probably  till  397,  Kalends  of  October.

~  — -  397  —  329  (perhaps  327),  Kalends  of  Quintilis.

—  —  327  —  223  unknown.

_  —223  —  153  Ides  of  March.

—  —  153  —  till  the  end,  the  Kalends  of  January.


The  day  on  which  the  consuls  entered  on  their
office  determined  the  day  of  the  election,  though
there  was  no  fixed  rule,  and  in  the  earliest  times
the  elections  probably  took  place  very  shortly  be-
fore the  close  of  the  official  year,  and  the  same  was
occasionally  the  case  during  the  latter  period  of  the
republic.  (Liv.  xxxviii.  42,  xlii.  28,  xliii.  11.)
But  when  the  first  of  January  was  fixed  upon  as
the  day  for  entering  upon  the  office,  the  consular
comitia  were  usually  held  in  July  or  even  earlier,
at  least  before  the  Kalends  of  Sextilis.  (Cic.  ad
Att.\.\6;  ad  Fam.  viii.  4.)  But  even  during  that
period  the  day  of  election  depended  in  a  great
measure  upon  the  discretion  of  the  senate  and  con-
suls, who  often  delayed  it.  (Cic.  ad  Ait.  ii.  20,  iv.
16, />.  Leg.  Man.  1.)

Down  to  the  year  b.  c.  366,  the  consulship  was
accessible  to  none  but  patricians,  but  in  that  year
L.  Sextius  was  the  first  plebeian  consul  in  conse-
quence of  the  law  of  C.  Licinius.  (Liv.  vi.  42,
vii.  1.)  The  patricians  however,  notwithstanding
the  law,  repeatedly  contrived  to  keep  the  plebeians
out  (Liv.  vii.  17,  18,  19,  22,  24,  28),  until  in
B.  c.  342  the  insurrection  of  the  anny  of  Capua
Avas  followed,  among  other  important  consequences,
by  the  firm  establishment  of  the  plebeian  consul-
ship ;  and  it  is  even  said  that  at  that  time  a  ple-
biscitum  was  passed,  enacting  that  both  consuls
might  be  plebeians.  (Liv.  vii.  42.)  Attempts  on
the  part  of  the  patricians  to  exclude  the  plebeians,
occur  as  late  as  the  year  b.  c.  297  (Liv.  x.  15  ;
Cic.  Brut.  14)  but  they  did  not  succeed,  and  it
remained  a  principle  of  the  Roman  constitution
that  both  consuls  should  not  be  patricians.  (Liv.
xxvii.  34,  xxxix.  42.)  The  candidates  usually  were
divided  into  two  sets,  the  one  desirous  to  obtain
the  patrician,  and  the  other  to  obtain  the  plebeian


place  in  the  consulship  (m  unum  locum  petebant,
Liv.  XXXV.  10).  But  as  in  the  course  of  time  the
patricians  were  thrown  into  the  shade  by  the  rising
power  of  the  nobiles,  it  came  to  pass  that  both  con-
suls were  plebeians.  In  B.  c.  215,  the  augurs  in-
deed opposed  the  election  of  two  plebeians  (Liv.
xxiii.  31)  ;  but  not  long  after,  in  B.c.  172,  the  fact
of  both  consuls  being  plebeians  actually  occurred,
and  after  this  it  was  often  repeated,  the  ancient
distinction  between  patricians  and  plebeians  falling
completely  into  oblivion.

The  consulship  was  throughout  the  republic
regarded  as  the  highest  office  and  the  greatest
honour  that  could  be  conferred  upon  a  man  (Cic.
p.  Plane.  25  ;  Paul.  Diac.  p.  136  ;  Dionys.  iv.  76),
for  the  dictatorship,  though  it  had  a  majus  imperium.,
was  not  a  regular  magistracy;  and  the  censorship,
though  conferred  only  upon  consulars,  was  yet  far
inferior  to  the  consulship  in  power  and  influence.
It  was  not  till  the  end  of  tlie  republic,  and  especially
in  the  time  of  J.  Caesar,  that  the  consulship  lost  its
former  dignity  ;  for  in  order  to  honour  his  friends,
he  caused  them  to  be  elected,  sometimes  for  a  few
months,  and  sometimes  evenfor  a  few  hours.  (Sueton.
Caes.  76,  80,  Aero,  15  ;  Dion  Cass,  xliii.  46  ;
Macrob.  Sat.  ii.  3.)

The  power  of  the  consuls  was  at  first  equal  to
that  of  the  kings  into  whose  place  they  stepped,  with
the  exception  of  the  priestly  power  of  the  rex  sacro-
rum,  which  was  detached  from  it.  Even  after  the
Valerian  laws  and  the  institution  of  the  tribuneship,
the  consuls  who  alone  were  invested  with  the
executive,  retained  the  most  extensive  powers  in  all
departments  of  the  government.  But  in  the  gradual
development  of  the  constitution,  some  important
functions  Avere  detached  from  the  consulship  and
assigned  to  new  officers.     This  was  the  case  first

A   A


354


CONSUL.


■w^ith  the  census,  in  B.  c.  443,  an  office  which  at
first  was  confined  to  holding  tne  census  and  regis-
tering the  citizens  according  to  their  different
classes,  but  afterwards  acquired  very  extensive
powers.  [Cknsor.]  The  second  function  that  was
in  this  manner  taken  from  the  consuls,  was  their
judicial  power,  which  was  transferred  in  B.  c.  366,
to  a  distinct  magistracy  under  the  title  of  the
praetorship  [Praetor]  ;  and  henceforth  the  con-
suls appeared  as  judges  only  in  extraordinary  cases
of  a  criminal  nature,  when  they  were  called  upon
by  a  senatus  consultum.  (Cic.  Brut.  32  ;  Liv.
xxxix.  17,  &c.,  xli.  9.)  But,  notwithstanding  these
curtailings,  the  consulship  still  continued  to  be  re-
garded as  the  representative  of  regal  power.  (Polyb.
vi.  11  ;  Cic.  De  Leg.  iii.  3.)

In  regard  to  the  nature  of  the  power  of  the  con
suls,  we  must  in  the  outset  divide  it  into  two
parts,  inasmuch  as  they  were  the  highest  civil
authority,  and  at  the  same  time  the  supreme  com-
manders of  the  armies.  So  long  as  they  were  in
the  city  of  Rome,  they  were  at  the  head  of  the
government  and  the  administration,  and  all  the
other  magistrates,  with  the  exception  of  the  tribunes
of  the  people,  were  subordinate  to  them.  They
convened  the  senate,  and  as  presidents  conducted
the  business ;  they  had  to  carry  into  effect  the  de-
crees of  the  senate,  and  sometimes  on  urgent  emer-
gencies they  might  even  act  on  their  own  authority
and  responsibility.  They  were  the  medium  through
which  foreign  affairs  were  brought  before  the  senate ;
all  despatches  and  reports  were  placed  in  their
hands,  before  they  were  laid  before  the  senate  ;  by
them  foreign  ambassadors  were  introduced  into  the
senate,  and  they  alone  carried  on  the  negotiations
between  the  senate  and  foreign  states.  They  also
convened  the  assembly  of  the  people  and  presided
in  it ;  and  thus  conducted  the  elections,  put  legis-
lative measures  to  the  vote,  and  had  to  carry  the
decrees  of  the  people  into  effect.  (Polyb.  vi.  12  ;
CoMiTiA  ;  Senatus.)  The  whole  of  the  internal
machinery  of  the  republic  was,  in  fact,  under
their  superintendence,  and  in  order  to  give  weight
to  their  executive  power,  they  had  the  right  of
summoning  and  arresting  the  obstreperous  (vocaiio
and  prensio,  Cic.  i»  Vat.  9,  p.  Dom.  41),  which
was  limited  only  by  the  right  of  appeal  from  their
judgment  (yorovocaiio)  ;  and  their  right  of  inflicting
punishment  might  be  exercised  even  against  in-
ferior magistrates.

The  outward  signs  of  their  power,  and  at  the
same  time  the  means  by  which  they  exercised
it,  were  twelve  lictors  with  the  fasces,  without
whom  the  consul  never  appeared  in  public  (Liv.
XXV.  17,  xxvii.  27  ;  Val.  Max.  i.  1.  §  9  ;  comp,
Liv.  vi.  34,  xxxix.  12),  and  who  preceded  him  in
a  line  one  behind  another.  (Liv,  xxiv.  44  ;  Val.
Max.  ii.  2.  §  4.)  In  the  city,  however,  the  axes
did  not  appear  in  the  fasces ;  a  regulation  said
to  have  been  introduced  by  Valerius  Publicola
(Dionys.  v.  2,  19,  75,  x.  59),  and  which  is  in-
timately connected  with  the  right  of  appeal  from
a  consul's  sentence,  whence  it  did  not  apply  to
the  dictator  nor  to  the  decemvirs.  Now  as  the
provocatio  coxild  take  place  only  within  the  city
and  a  thousand  paces  in  circumference,  it  must  be
supposed  that  the  axes  did  not  appear  in  the  fasces
within  the  same  limits,  an  opinion  which  is  not
contradicted  by  the  fact  that  the  consuls  on  return-
ing from  war  appeared  with  the  axes  in  their  fasces
in  the  Campus  Martins,  at  the  very  gates  of  Rome ;


CONSUL.

for  they  had  the  imperium  militare,  which  ceased
as  soon  as  they  had  entered  the  city.

But  the  powers  of  the  consuls  were  far  more
extensive  in  their  capacity  of  supreme  commanders
of  the  armies,  when  they  were  without  the  pre-
cincts of  the  city,  and  were  invested  with  the  full
imperium.  When  the  levying  of  an  army  was
decreed  by  the  senate,  the  consuls  conducted  the
levy,  and,  at  first,  had  the  appointment  of  all  the
subordinate  officers  —  a  right  which  subsequently
they  shared  with  the  people  ;  and  the  soldiers  had
to  take  their  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  consuls.
They  also  determined  the  contingent  to  be  fur-
nished by  the  allies  ;  and  in  the  province  assigned
to  them  they  had  the  unlimited  administration,
not  only  of  all  military  afiEairs,  but  of  every  thing
else,  even  over  life  and  death,  excepting  only
the  conclusion  of  peace  and  treaties.  (Polyb.  vi.
12  ;  compare  Exercitus.)  The  treasury  was,
indeed,  under  the  control  of  the  senate  ;  but  in
regard  to  the  expenses  for  war,  the  consuls  do  not
appear  to  have  been  bound  down  to  the  sums
granted  by  that  body,  but  to  have  availed  them-
selves of  the  public  money  as  circumstances  re-
quired ;  the  quaestors,  however,  kept  a  strict  ac-
count of  the  expenditure  (Polyb.  vi.  12,  13,  15  ;
Liv,  xliv.  16).  But  when  in  times  of  need  money
was  to  be  taken  from  the  aerarium  sandius^  of
which  the  keys  seem  to  have  been  in  the  exclusive
possession  of  the  consuls,  they  had  to  be  authorised
by  a  senatus  consultum.  (Liv.  xxvii.  10.)  In  the
early  times,  the  consuls  had  the  power  to  dispose
of  the  booty  in  any  way  they  pleased  ;  sometimes
they  distributed  the  whole  or  a  part  of  it  among
the  soldiers,  and  sometimes  they  sold  it,  and  de-
posited the  produce  in  the  public  treasurj^,  which
in  later  times  became  the  usual  practice.

Abuse  of  the  consular  power  was  prevented,
first  of  all,  by  each  of  the  consuls  being  dependent
on  his  colleague  who  was  invested  with  equal
rights  ;  for,  if  we  except  the  provinces  abroad
where  each  was  permitted  to  act  with  unlimited
power,  the  two  consuls  could  do  nothing  unless
both  were  unanimous  (Dionys.  x,  1 7  ;  Appian,  De
Bell.  Civ.  ii.  11),  and  against  the  sentence  of  one
consul  an  appeal  might  be  brought  before  his  col-
league ;  nay,  one  consul  might  of  his  o^vn  accord
put  his  veto  on  the  proceedings  of  the  other.  (Liv.
ii.  18,  27,  iii.  34  ;  Dionys.  v.  9  ;  Cic.  De  Leg.  in.
4.)  But  in  order  to  avoid  every  unnecessary  dis-
pute or  rivalry,  arrangements  had  been  made  from
the  first,  that  the  real  functions  of  the  office  should
be  performed  only  by  one  of  them  every  alternate
month  (Dionys.  ix.  43)  ;  and  the  one  who  was  in
the  actual  exercise  of  the  consular  power  for  the
month,  was  preceded  by  the  twelve  lictors,  whence
he  is  commonly  described  by  the  words  perns  quern
fasces  erant.  (Liv.  viii.  12,  ix.  8.)  In  the  early
times,  his  colleague  was  then  not  accompanied  by
the  lictors  at  all,  or  he  was  preceded  by  an  accensus,
and  the  lictors  followed  after  him.  (Cic.  De  Re
Publ.  ii.  31  ;  Liv.  ii.  1,  iii.  33  ;  comp.  Dionys.  v.
2,  X.  24.)  As  regards  the  later  times,  it  is  certain
that  the  consul,  when  he  did  not  perfonn  the
functions  of  the  office,  was  followed  by  the  twelve
lictors  (Suet.  Caes.  20)  ;  when  this  custom  arose  is
uncertain,  and  we  only  know  that,  in  the  time  of
Polybius,  the  dictator  had  twenty-four  lictors.  It
is  commonly  believed,  that  the  consul  who  for  the
month  being  performed  the  functions  of  the  office,
was  designated  as  the  consul  major ;  but  the  an-


CONSUL.

cients  themselves  were  doubtful  as  to  whether  the
term  applied  to  the  one  who  had  the  fasces,  or  to
the  one  who  had  been  elected  first  (Fest.  p.  161)  ;
and  there  seems  to  be  good  reason  for  believing
that  the  word  major  liad  reference  only  to  the  age
of  the  consul,  so  that  the  elder  of  the  two  was
called  consul  major.  (Liv.  xxxvii.  47  ;  Cic.  De,
Re  Publ  ii.  31  ;  Val.  Max.  iv.  1.  §  I  ;  Pint.
Publ.  12  ;  Dionys.  vi.  57.)  Owing  to  the  respect
paid  to  the  elder,  he  presided  at  the  meeting  of
the  senate  which  was  held  immediately  after  the
election.  (Li»%  ix.  8  ;  Gellius,  ii.  15.)  Another
point  which  acted  as  a -check  upon  the  exercise  of
the  consular  power,  was  the  certainty  that  after
the  expiration  of  their  office  they  might  be  called
to  account  for  the  manner  in  which  they  had  con-
ducted themselves  in  their  official  capacity.  Many
cases  are  on  record,  in  which  after  their  abdication
they  were  accused  and  condemned  not  only  for  il-
legal or  unconstitutional  acts,  but  also  for  misfortunes
in  war,  which  were  ascribed  either  to  their  care-
lessness or  want  of  abilit3\  (Liv.  ii.  41,  52,  54,  61,
iii.  31,  xxii.  40.  49,  xxvi.  2,  3,  xxvii.  34  ;  Cic.
De  Nat  Deor.  ii.  3  ;  Val.  Max.  viii.  1.  §  4.)  The
ever  increasing  arrogance  and  power  of  the  tribunes
did  not  stop  here,  and  we  not  imfrequently  find
that  consuls,  even  during  the  time  of  their  office,
were  not  only  threatened  with  punishment  and
imprisonment,  but  were  actually  subjected  to
them.  (Liv.  iv.  26,  v.  9,  xlii.  21,  Epit.  48,  55  ;
Cic.  De  Leg.  iii.  9,  in  Vat  9  ;  Val.  Max.  ix.  5.  §  2  ;
Dion  Cass,  xxxvii.  50,  xxxviii.  6,  xxxix.  39.)
Sometimes  the  people  themselves  opposed  the
consuls  in  the  exercise  of  their  power.  (Liv.  ii.  55,
59.)  Lastly,  the  consuls  were  dependent  upon  the
senate.  [Senatus.]  There  occurred,  however,
times  when  the  power  of  the  consuls  thus  limited
by  republican  institutions  was  thought  inadequate
to  save  the  republic  from  perils  into  which  she
was  thrown  by  circumstances  ;  and  on  such  occa-
sions a  senatus  consultum  viderent  or  darent  operant
consules,  ne  quid  respublica  detrimenti  caperet,  con-
ferred upon  them  full  dictatorial  power  not  re-
strained either  by  the  senate,  the  people,  or  the
tribunes.  In  the  early  times,  such  senatus  con-
sulta  are  rarely  mentioned,  as  it  was  customary  to
appoint  a  dictator  on  such  emergencies  ;  but  when
the  dictatorship  had  fallen  into  disuse,  the  senate
by  the  above  mentioned  formula  invested  the
consuls,  for  the  time,  with  dictatorial  power.
[Dictator.]

On  entering  upon  their  office,  the  consuls,  and
afterwards  the  praetors  also,  agreed  among  one
another  as  to  the  business  which  each  had  to  look
after,  so  that  every  one  had  his  distinct  sphere  of
action,  which  was  termed  his  provincia.  The  or-
dinary way  in  which  the  provinces  were  assigned
to  each,  was  by  lot  (^sortiri  provincias),  unless  the
colleagues  agreed  among  themselves,  without  any
such  means  of  decision  (comparare  inter  se  provin-
cias,  Liv.  xxiv.  10,  xxx.  1,  xxxii.  8  ;  Cic.  ad  Fam.
i.  9).  The  decision  by  lot  was  resorted  to  for  no
other  reason  than  because  the  two  consuls  had
equal  rights,  and  not,  as  some  believe,  because  it
was  thereby  intended  to  leave  the  decision  to  the
gods.  If  it  was  thought  that  one  of  the  consuls
was  eminently  qualified  for  a  particular  province,
either  on  account  of  his  experience  or  personal
character,  it  frequently  happened,  that  a  commis-
sion was  given  to  him  extra  sortem  or  ectira  ordinem,
L  e.  by  the  senate  and  without  any  drawing  of


CONSUL.  35.5

lots.  (Liv.  iii.  2,  viii.  16,  xxxvii.  1  ;  Cic.  adJtt.  is
19  ;  comp.  Liv.  xxxv.  20,  xli.  8.)  In  the  earliest
times,  it  seems  to  have  been  the  custom  for  only
one  of  the  consuls  to  march  out  at  the  head  of  th'e
army,  and  for  the  other  to  remain  at  Roiue  for
the  protection  of  the  city,  and  to  carry  on  the  ad-
ministration of  the  civic  affairs,  unless,  indeed,
wars  were  carried  on  in  two  different  quarters
which  rendered  it  necessary  for  both  consuls  to
take  the  field.  (Dionys.  vi.  24,  91  ;  comp.  Liv.
iii.  4,  22,  vii.  38.)  Nay,  we  find  that  even  when
Rome  had  to  contend  with  one  formidable  enemy,
the  two  consuls  marched  out  together  (Liv.  ii.  44,
iii.  8,  66,  viii.  6,  &c.)  ;  but  the  forces  were  equally
divided  between  them,  in  such  a  manner  that  each
had  the  command  of  two  legions,  and  had  the
supreme  command  on  every  alternate  day.  (Polyb.
iii.  107,  110,  vi.  26  ;  Liv.  iv.  46,  xxii.  27,  41,
xxviii.  9  ;  comp.  iii.  70.)

When  the  Roman  dominion  extended  beyond
the  natural  boundaries  of  Italy,  the  two  consuls
were  not  enough  to  undertake  the  administration
of  the  provinces,  and  praetors  were  appointed  to
undertake  the  command  in  some,  while  the  more
important  ones  were  reserved  for  the  consuls.
Hence  a  distinction  was  made  between  provinciae
co7isulares  and  praetoriae.  (Liv.  xli.  8.)  [Pro-
vincia.] It  remained  with  the  senate  to  deter-
mine into  which  provinces  consuls  were  to  be  sent,
and  into  which  praetors,  and  this  was  done  either
before  the  magistrates  actually  entered  upon  their
office  (Liv.  xxi.  17),  or  after  it,  and  on  the  proposal
of  the  consuls.  (Liv.  xxv.  1,  xxvi.  28,  xxvii.  7,  &c.)
Upon  this,  the  magistrates  either  agreed  among
themselves  as  to  which  province  each  was  to
undertake,  or  they  drew  lots,  first,  of  course,  the
consuls,  and  after  them  the  praetors.  One  of  the
laws  of  C.  Gracchus,  however,  introduced  the  re-
gulation, that  every  year  the  senate,  previous  to
the  consular  elections,  should  determine  upon  the
two  consular  provinces,  in  order  to  avoid  partiality,
it  being  yet  unknown  who  were  to  be  the  consuls.
It  had  been  customary  from  the  earliest  times  for
the  consuls  to  enter  their  province  in  the  year  of
their  consulship,  either  at  the  very  beginning  or
afterwards  ;  but  in  the  latter  period  of  the  republic,
the  ordinary  practice  of  the  consuls  was  to  remain
at  Rome  during  the  year  of  their  office,  and  to  go
into  their  province  in  the  year  following  as  pro-
consuls, until  at  length  in  B.C.  53,  a  senatus  con-
sultum, and  the  year  after  a  law  of  Pompey
enacted  that  a  consul  or  praetor  should  not  go  into
any  province  till  five  years  after  the  expiration  of
their  office.  (Dion  Cass.  xl.  46,  56.)  When  a
consul  was  once  in  his  province,  his  imperiura  was
limited  to  it,  and  to  exercise  the  same  in  any  other
province  was,  at  all  times,  considered  illegal.  (Liv.
X.  37,  xxix.  19,  xxxi.  48,  xliii.  1.)  In  some  few
cases,  this  rule  was  overlooked  for  the  good  of  the
republic.  (Liv.  xxvii.  43,  xxix.  7.)  On  the  other
hand,  a  consul  was  not  allowed  to  quit  his  pro-
vince before  he  had  accomplished  the  purpose  for
which  he  had  been  sent  into  it,  or  before  the  arrival
of  his  successor,  unless,  indeed,  he  obtained  the
special  permission  of  the  senate.  (Liv.  xxxvii.  47.)
Other  functions  also  were  sometimes  divided  be-
tween the  consuls  by  lot,  if  they  could  not  agree,
for  example,  which  of  them  was  to  preside  at  the
consular  elections  or  those  of  the  censors  (Liv.
xxiv.  1 0,  xxxv.  6,  20,  xxxix.  32,  xli.  6),  which  of
them  was  to  dedicate  a  temple  (Liv.  ii.  8,  27),  or
A  a  2


356  CONSUL.

nominate  a  dictator.  (Li v.  it.  2t5.)  So  long  as  the
consuls  had  to  hold  the  censns,  they,  nndoiiTatedly,
drew  lots,  which  of  them  ccmderet  lustrum^  and
even  when  they  went  out  on  a  common  expedition,
they  seem  to  have  determined  by  lot  in  what  di-
rection each  should  exert  Ws  activity.  (Lrv.  xli.
18.)

The  entering  of  a  consul  upon  his  office  was
connected  with  great  solemnities  :  before  daybreak
each  consulted  the  auspices  for  himself,  which  in
the  early  times  was,  undoubtedly,  a  matter  of
great  importance,  thougb,  at  a  later  period,  we
know  it  to  have  been  a  mere  formality.  (Dlonys.
ii.  4,  6.)  It  must,  however,  be  observed,  that
whatever  the  nature  of  the  auspices  were,  the
entering  upon  the  office  was  never  either  rendered
impossible  or  delayed  thereby,  whence  we  must
suppose  that  the  object  merely  was  to  obtain  fa-
vourable signs  from  the  gods,  and  as  it  were  to
place  under  the  protection  of  the  gods  the  office
on  which  the  magistrate  entered.  After  the
auspices  were  consulted,  the  consul  returned  home,
put  on  the  toga  •praeUoda  (Liv.  xxi.  63  ;  Ov.  ex
Pont.  iv.  4.  25,  Fast.  i.  81),  and  received  the
salutatio  of  his  friends  and  the  senators,  (Dion
Cass.  Iviii.  5  ;  Ov.  ex  Pont.  iv.  4.  27,  &c.)  Ac-
companied by  these  and  a  host  of  curious  spectators,
the  consul  clad  in  his  official  robes,  proceeded  to
the  temple  of  Jupiter  in  the  Capitol,  where  a  solemn
sacrifice  of  white  bulls  was  oflfered  to  the  god.
It  seems  that  in  this  procession,  the  sella  curulis,
as  an  emblem  of  his  office,  was  carried  before  the
consul.  (Ov.  I.  c.  iv.  4.  '29,  &c.,  9,  17,  &c.  ;  Liv.
xxi.  63  ;  Cic.  De  Leg.  Agr.  ii.  34.)  After  this,  a
meeting  of  the  senate  took  place,  at  which  the
elder  of  the  two  consuls  made  his  report  concern-
ing the  republic,  beginning  with  matters  referring
to  religion,  and  then  passing  on  to  other  affiiirs
(referre  ad  senatum  de  rebus  divinis  et  humanis^
Liv.  vi.  1,  ix.  8,  xxxvii.  1  ;  Cic.  ad  Quir.post  Red.
5.)  One  of  the  first  among  the  religious  things
which  the  consuls  had  to  attend  to,  was  the  fixing
of  the  feriae  Latinae,  and  it  was  not  till  they  had
performed  the  solemn  sacrifice  on  the  Alban
mount,  that  they  could  go  into  their  provinces.
(Liv.  xxi.  63,  xxii.  1,  xxv.  12,  xlii.  10.)  The
other  affairs  upon  which  the  consuls  had  to  report
to  the  senate  had  reference  to  the  distribution  of
the  provinces,  and  many  other  matters  connected
with  the  administration,  which  often  were  of  the
highest  importance.  After  these  reports,  the
meeting  of  the  senate  broke  up,  and  the  members
accompanied  the  consuls  to  their  homes  (Ov.  ex
Pont.  iv.  4.  41),  and  this  being  done,  the  consuls
were  installed  in  their  office,  in  which  they  had  to
exert  themselves  for  the  good  of  their  country.

Respecting  the  various  offices  which  at  different
times  were  temporary  substitutes  for  the  consul-
ship, such  as  the  dictatorship,  the  decemvirate,
and  the  office  of  the  tribuni  militares  consular!
I  potestate,  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  separate
articles.  Towards  the  end  of  the  republic,  the
consulship  lost  its  power  and  importance.  Caesar,
in  his  dictatorship,  gave  it  the  first  severe  blow,
for  he  himself  took  the  office  of  consul  along  with
that  of  dictator,  or  he  arbitrarily  caused  persons  to
be  elected,  Avho  in  their  actions  were  entirely  de-
pendent upon  his  will.  He  himself  was  elected  fit
first  for  five  years,  then  for  ten,  and  at  length  for
life.  (Sueton.  Caes.  76,  80  ;  Dion  Cass.  xlii.  20,
xliii.  1,  46,  49  ;  Appian,  De  Bell.  Civ.  ii.  106.)


CONSUL.

Irt  the  Tcign  of  Augustus,  the  consular  power  was
a  mere  s'hadow  of  what  it  had  been  before,  and
the  consuls  who  were  elected,  did  not  retain  their
office  for  a  full  year,  but  had  usually  to  abdi-
cate after  a  few  months.  (Dion  Cass,  xlviii.  35,
xliii.  46  ;  Lucan,  v.  399.)  These  irregularities
increased  to  such  an  extent,  that  m  the  reign  of
Commodus  there  were  no  less  than  twenty-five
consuls  in  one  year.  (Lamprid.  Commod.  6  ;  Dion
Cass.  Ixxii.  12.)  In  the  republican  time^  the  year
had  received  its  name  from  the  consuls,  and  in  all
public  documents  their  names  were  entered  to  m.ark
the  year  ;  but  from  the  time  that  there  were  more
than  two  in  one  year,  only  those  that  entered  upon
their  office  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  were  re-
garded as  consnles  ordinarii,  and  gave  their  names
to  the  year,  though  the  suffecti  were  likewise
entered  in  the  Fasti.  (Sueton.  Domit.  2,  GaU).  6,
Vitell.  2  ;  Senec.  De  Tra.  iii.  31  ;  VYm.Panegr.  38  ;
Lamprid.  Al.  Sev.  28.)  The  consules  ordinarii
ranked  higher  than  those  who  were  elected  after-
wards. The  election  from  the  time  of  Tiberius  was
in  the  hands  of  the  senate,  who,  of  course,  -elected
only  those  that  were  recommended  by  the  em-
peror ;  those  who  were  elected  were  then  announced
(remmtiare)  to  the  people  assembled  in  what  was
called  comitia.  (Dion  Cass.  Iviii.  20  ;  Plin.  Paneg.
77  ;  Tac.  yl7^re.  iv.  68.)  In  the  last  centuries  of
the  empire,  it  was  customary  to  create  honorary
■consuls  {consules  Jionorarit)  who  were  chosen
by  the  senate  and  sanctioned  by  the  emperor
(Cassiod.  i.  10  ;  Justin.  N'ov.  Ixx.  80.  c.  1),  and
consules  suffecti  were  then  scarcely  heard  of  at  all,
for  Constantino  restored  the  old  custom  of  appoint-
ing only  two  consuls,  one  for  Constantinople,  and
the  other  for  Rome,  who  were  to  act  as  supreme
judges  (under  the  emperor)  for  a  whole  year,  and
besides  these  two  there  were  no  others  except
honorary  consuls  and  consulares.  Although  the
dignity  of  these  honorary  consuls  as  well  as  of  the
consules  ordinarii  and  suffecti  was  merely  nominal,
still  it  was  regarded  as  the  highest  in  the  empire,
and  was  sought  after  by  noble  and  wealthy  persons
with  the  greatest  eagerness,  notwithstanding  the
great  expenses  connected  with  the  office  on  ac-
count of  the  public  entertainments  which  a  newly
appointed  consul  had  to  give  to  his  friends  and  the
people.  (Lydus,  De  Magistr.  ii.  8  ;  Liban.  Orat.
8  ;  Symraach.  ii.  64,  iv.  8,  x.  44  ;  Sidon.  Apollin.
Epist.  ii.  3  ;  Cassiod.  ii.  2,  vi.  1  ;  Procop.  De  Bell.
Pers.  i.  25.)  Sometimes  the  emperors  themselves
assumed  the  consulship  or  conferred  it  upon  im-
perial princes.  The  last  consul  of  Rome  was  Deci-
mus  Theodoras  Paulinus,  A.  ».  536,  and  at  Con-
stantinople Flavius  Basilius  Junior,  in  A.  D.  541.
After  that  time,  the  emperors  of  the  East  took  the
title  of  consul  for  themselves,  until  in  the  end  it
fell  quite  into  oblivion.

The  official  functions  of  the  consuls  imder  the
empire  were  as  follows  :  —  1.  They  presided  in  the
senate,  though,  of  course,  never  without  the  sanction
of  the  emperor  ;  2.  They  administered  justice,
partly  e,rtra  ordinem  (Tac.  Ann.  iv.  19,  xiii.  4  ;
Gell.  xiii.  24),  and  partly  in  ordinary  cases,  such  as
manumissions  or  the  appointment  of  guardians  (Am-
mian.  Maroell.  xxii.  7  ;  Cassiod.  vi.  1  :  Sueton.
Claud.  23  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  ix.  13)  ;  3.  The' letting  of
the  public  revenues,  a  duty  which  had  fonnerly
been  performed  by  the  censors  (Ov.  ex  Pojii.  iv.  5.
19)  ;  4.  The  conducting  of  the  games  in  the  Circus
and  of  public  solemnities  in  honour  of  the  emperors,


CONTUBERNALES.

for  whicli  they  had  to  defray  the  expenses  out  of
their  o\vii  means.  (Sueton.  Nero^  4  ;  Juven.  xi.
193,  &c.  ;  Ca&aiod.  I  c,  and  iii.  39,  v.  42,  vL  10.)
Some  empemrs  indeed  granted  the  money  necessary
for  such  purposes  and  endeavoured  to  check  the
growing  extravagance  of  the  consuls,  but  these
regulations  were  all  of  a  transitory  nature.  (Lam-
prid.  AL  Sever.  43  ;  Vopisc,  Aurel.  12  ;  Justin.
N(yo.  105.)  Compare  besides  the  various  works  on
Roman  history,  K.  D.  HuUmann,  Rom.  Grundver-
fnssung.,  p.  125,  &c.  ;.  K.  W.  Gottling,  Gesch.  der
Rom.  Stimtsverf.  p.  269,  &c.,  and  above  all,  Becker,
Handbuch  der  Rom.  Alterth.  vol.  ii.  part  ii.  pp.  87
—  126.  [L.  S.J

CONSULA'RIS,  throughout  the  time  of  the
Roman  republic  signifies  a  person  who  has  been
invested  with  the  consulship  ;  but  under  the  em-
pire it  became  a  mere  title  for  the  higher  class  of
officers,  who  thereby  obtained  peraiission  to  have
the  insignia  of  a  consul,  without  ever  having  ac-
tually been  consuls.  Hence  the  title  was  almost
equivalent  to  that  of  an  "  honorary  consul  "  (consul
honoranus ;  Cod.  Theod.  vi.  tit.  19.  s.  1,  vi.  tit.  2.
s.  2).  The  title  was  given  especially  to  generals,  as
formeily  persor.s  after  their  consulship  had  usually
undertaken  the  command  of  an  army  in  the  pro-
vinces, and  in  many  instances  they  were  the  same
as  the  legati  principis  or  the  magistri  militum.
(Veget.  ii.  9  ;  Dig.  3.  tit.  2.  s.  2.)  It  was  further  a
common  custom  estiiblished  even  by  the  first  em-
perors to  give  to  governors  of  imperial  pi-ovinces  the
title  of  consularis,  irrespective  of  their  ever  having
been  consuls.  (Suet.  Aug.  33,  Tib.  33,  Domit.  6  ;
Tac.  Agric.  8,  14,  40.)  Consularis  thus  gradually
became  the  established  title  for  those  entrusted
with  the  administration  of  imperial  provinces.
The  emperor  Hadrian  divided  Italy  into  four  re-
gions, and  over  each  he  placed  an  officer  who  like-
wise bore  the  title  of  consularis,  and  was  entrusted
with  the  administration  of  justice  in  his  district,
whence  he  is  frequently  called  Juridicus  (Spar-
tian.  Hadr.  22,  with  the  note  of  Salmas.).  At
Constantinople  the  title  was  given  to  the  super-
intendents of  the  aquaeducts  (consulares  aquarum),
who  had  to  see  that  all  public  and  private  places
were  properly  supplied  with  water,  and  who  seem
to  have  been  analogous  to  the  curatores  aquarum
of  Rome.  They  are  frequently  mentioned  in  in-
scriptions, and  also  in  the  Codex  of  Justinian  and
Theodosius.  [L.  S.]

CONTRACTUS.     [Obligationes.]

CONTROVE'RSIA.     [Judex.]

CONTUBERNA'LES  {(tvckwoi).  This  word,
in  its  original  meaning,  signified  men  who  served
in  the  same  army  and  lived  in  the  same  tent.  It
is  derived  from  taberna  (afterwards  tabemaculum).,
which,  according  to  Festus,  was  the  original  name
for  a  military  tent,  as  it  was  made  of  boards
{tabulae).  Each  tent  was  occupied  by  ten  soldiers
(contul/ernales),  with  a  subordinate  officer  at  their
head,  who  was  called  decanus,  and  in  later  times
caput  contubemii.  (Veget.  De  Re  Mil.  ii.  8.  13;
compare  Cic.  Pro  Ligar.  7  ;  Hirt.  BeU.  Alex.  16  ;
Drakenborch,  Ad  Liv.  v.  2.)

Young  Romans  of  illustrious  families  used  to
accompany  a  distinguished  general  on  his  expedi-
tions, or  to  his  province,  for  the  purpose  of  gaining
under  his  superintendence  a  practical  training  in
the  art  of  war,  or  in  the  administration  of  public
affairs,  and  were,  like  soldiers  living  in  the  same
tent,  called  his  coniubernales.     (Cic.  Pro  Coel.  30,


CONVENTUS.


357


Pro  Plane.  1 1  ;  Suet.  Cues.  42  ;  Tacit.  Agr.  5  ;
Frontin.  Strateg.  iv.  1.  11  j  Plutarch.  Pomp.  3.)

In  a  still  wider  sense,  the  name  coniuhernales
wa*  applied  to  persons  connected  by  ties  of  inti-
mate friendship  and  living  under  the  same  roof
(Cic.  Ad  Fam.  ix.  2  ;  Plin.  Epist  ii.  13)  j  and
hence  when  a  free  man  and  a  slave,  or  two  slaves,
who  were  not  allowed  to  contract  a  legal  marriage,
lived  together  as  husband  and  wife,  they  were
called  contubernales ;.  and  their  connection,  as  well
a&  their  place  of  residence,  ciyiitvhernmm.  (Colum.
xii.  1.  3,  i.  8  ;  Petron.  Sat.  96  ;  Tacit.  Hist.  i.
43,  iii.  74.)  Cicero  {Ad  Att.  xiii.  28)  calls  Caesar
the  contubevnalis  of  Quirinus,  thereby  alluding  to
the  fact  that  Caesar  had  allowed  his  own  statue  to
be  erected  in  the  temple  of  Quirinus  (corap.  Ad
Att.  xii.  45,  and  Suet.  Caes.  76).  [L.  S.]

CONTUBE'RNIUM.        [Contubernales  ;

CONCUBINA.]

CONTUS  (/covT(Js,  from  Kei/reoji,  I  prick  or
pierce),  was,  as  Nonius  (xviii.  24)  expresses  it,  a
long  and  strong  wooden  pole  or  stake,  with  a
pointed  iron  at  the  one  end.  (Virg.  Aen.  v.  208.)
It  was  used  for  various  purposes,  but  chiefly  as  a
punt-pole  by  sailors,  who,  in  shallow  water,  thrust
it  into  the  ground,  and  thus  pushed  on  the  boat.
(Hom.  Od.  ix.  287  ;  Virg.  I.  c.  and  vi.  302.)  It
also  served  as  a  means  to  sound  the  depth  of  the
water.  (Festus,  s.v.  Perconctaiio^  p.  214,  ed.  M til-
ler ;  Donat.  ad  Terent.  Hec.  i.  2.  2.)  At  a  later
period,  when  the  Romans  became  acquainted  with
the  huge  lances  or  pikes  of  some  of  the  northern
barbarians,  the  word  eoritus  was  applied  to  that
kind  of  weapon  (Virg,  Aen.  ix.  510  ;  Tacit.  Hist.
i.  44,  iiL  27  ;  Lamprid.  Commod.  13)  ;  and  the
long  pikes  peculiar  to  the  Sarmatians  were  alvvaycj
designated  by  this  name;  (Tacit.  Hist.  i.  79,
Aunal.  vi.  35';  Stat.  AcML  iL  416  ;  Valer.  Flac'.
vi.  162,  and  others.)  [L.  S.]

CONVENFRE    IN    MANUM.      [Matri-

MONIUM.]

CONVENTIO'NES.  [Obugationes.]
CONVENTUS  {(TvvoZos,  a-wovaia^  or  cvva'
ycoy-f])  is  properly  a  name  which  may  be  given  to
any  assembly  of  men  who  meet  for  a  certain  pur-
pose. (Paul.  Diac.  p.  42,  ed.  MUUer.)  But  when
the  Romans  had  reduced  foreign  countries  into
the  form  of  provinces,  the  word  coiiventus  assumed
a  more  definite  meaning,  and  was  applied  to  the
meetings  of  the  provincials  in  certain  places  ap-
pointed by  the  praetor  or  proconsul  for  the  pur-
pose of  administering  justice.  (Cic.  in  Verr.  ii.  20,
•24,  30,  iv.  29,  48  ;  Cic.  ad  Fam.  xv.  4  ;  Herat.
Sat.  i.  7.  22  ;  Caes.  Bell.  Civ.-  ii.  21  ;  Hirt.  Bell.
Afr.  97.)  In  order  to  facilitate  the  administration
of  justice,  a  province  was  divided  into  a  number
of  districts  or  circuits,  each  of  which  was  likewise
called  conventus,  forum,  or  jui'isdictio.  (Cic.  in
Verr.  ii.  8,  Qii  ;  Plin.  Fp.  x.  5  ;  Plin.  //.  A^.  iii.
1,  iv.  22,  V.  29.)  Roman  citizens  living  in  a  pro-
vince were  likewise  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the
proconsul,  and  accordingly  all  that  had  to  settle  any
business  at  a  conventus  had  to  make  their  appear-
ance there.  The  towns  which  had  the  Jus  Ita-
licum,  had  magistrates  of  their  own  with  a  juris-
dictio,  from  whom  there  was  no  doubt  an  appeal
to  the  proconsul.  At  certain  times  of  the  year,
fixed  by  the  proconsul,  the  people  assembled  in
the  chief  town  of  the  district.  To  hold  a  con-
ventus was  expressed  by  conventus  agere^  peragere^
forum  agere^  ayopalovs  (so.  W^pas)  iyciv^  &c.
A  a   3


358


CORBIS.


(Caes.  Bell.  Gall.  i.  54,  v.  1,  viii.  46  ;  Act.  Apost.
xix.  38.)  At  such  a  conventus  litigant  parties
applied  to  the  proconsul,  who  selected  a  number  of
judges  from  the  conventus,  generally  from  among
the  Romans  residing  in  the  province,  to  try  their
causes.  (Cic.  in  Verr.  ii.  13,  &c.  ;  Niebuhr,  Hist.
Rom.  vol.  iii.  p.  732.)  The  proconsul  himself  pre-
sided at  the  trials,  and  pronounced  the  sentence
according  to  the  views  of  the  judges,  who  were  his
assessors  {consilium  or  consiliarii).  As  the  pro-
consul had  to  carry  on  all  official  proceedings  in
the  Latin  language  (Val.  Max.  ii.  2.  2),  he  was
always  attended  by  an  interpreter.  (Cic.  in  Verr.
iii.  37,  ad  Fam.  xiii.  54.)  These  conventus  appear
to  have  been  generally  held  after  the  proconsul
had  settled  the  military  affairs  of  the  province  ;  at
least  when  Caesar  was  proconsul  of  Gaul  he  made
it  a  regular  practice  to  hold  the  conventus  after
his  armies  had  retired  to  their  winter-quarters.
In  the  time  of  the  emperors  certain  towns  in
each  province  were  appointed  as  the  seats  of
standing  courts,  so  that  the  conventus  were  super-
seded. (Cod.  Just.  i.  tit.  40.  s.  6.)  The  term  con-
ventus is  lastly  applied  to  certain  bodies  of  Roman
citizens  living  in  a  province,  forming  a  sort  of  cor-
poration, and  representing  the  Roman  people  in
their  district  or  town  ;  and  it  was  from  among
these  that  proconsuls  generally  took  their  assist-
ants. Such  corporations  are  repeatedly  mentioned,
as,  for  example,  at  Syracuse  (Cic.  in  Verr.  ii.  13,
29,  iii.  13,  iv.  25,  31,  v.  36,  &c.),  Capua  (Caes.
De  Bell.  Civ.  i.  14  ;  Cic.  p.  Sext.  4),  Salona  (Caes.
De  Bell.  Civ.  iii.  9),  Puteoli  (Cic.  in  Vat.  5),
and  Corduba  (Caes.  De  Bell.  Civ.  ii.  19;  comp.
Provincia.)  [L.  S.]

CONVFVIUM.     [Symposium.]

COOPTA'RE.     [Collegium.]

CO'PHINUS  (k6<Pivos,  Engl.  cq^n\  a  large
kind  of  wicker  basket,  made  of  willow  branches.
(Moer.  Att.  and  Hesych.  s.  v.  "Kppixos.)  From
Aristophanes  {Av.  1223)  it  would  seem  that  it
was  used  by  the  Greeks  as  a  basket  or  cage  for
birds.  The  Romans  used  it  for  agricultural  pur-
poses, and  Columella  (xi.  3.  p.  460,  ed.  Bip.)  in
descriljing  a  method  of  procuring  early  cucumbers,
says,  that  they  should  be  sown  in  well  manured
soil,  kept  in  a  cophinus,  so  that  in  this  case  we
have  to  consider  it  as  a  kind  of  portable  hot-bed.
Juvenal  {Sat.  iii.  14,  and  vi.  542),  when  speaking
of  the  Jews,  uses  the  expression  cophinus  et
foenum  (a  truss  of  hay),  figuratively  to  designate
their  high  degree  of  poverty.   [Corbis.]     [L.  S.]

CORBIS,  dim.  CO'RBULA,  CORBICULA,
a  basket  of  very  peculiar  form  and  common  use
among  the  Romans,  both  for  agricultural  and  other
purposes.  It  was  made  of  osiers  twisted  together,
and  was  of  a  conical  or  pyramidal  shape.  (Var.  L.  L.
V.  1 39,  ed.  Miiller ;  Isidor.  Orig.  xx.  9  ;  Cic.  pro
Sest.  38  ;  Ov.  Met.  xiv.  643;  Plant.  Aul.  ii.  7.  4  ;
Suet.  Ner.  19.)  A  basket  answering  precisely
to  this  description,  both  in  form  and  material,  is
still  to  be  seen  in  everyday  use  among  the  Cam-
panian  peasantr}',  which  is  called  in  the  language
of  the  country  "  la  corbella,"  a  representation  of
which  is  introduced  in  the  lower  portion  of  the
annexed  woodcut.  The  hook  attached  to  it  by
a  string  is  for  the  purpose  of  suspending  it  to  a
branch  of  the  tree  into  which  the  man  climbs  to
pick  his  oranges,  lemons,  olives,  or  figs.  The
upper  portion  of  the  woodcut  {Antichitd  di  Er-
cohnOf  torn.  iii.  tav.  29)  represents  a  Roman  farm,


CORNU.

in  which  a  farming  man,  in  the  shape  of  a  dwarf-
ish satyr,  is  seen  with  a  pole  (aa-iWa)  across
his  shoulder,  to  each  end  of  winch  is  suspended  a
basket  resembling  in  every  respect  the  Campanian
corfjella ;  all  which  coincidences  of  name,  form,
and  description  leave  no  doubt  as  to  the  identity
of  the  term  with  the  object  represented.      [A.  R.]


CORBI'TAE,  merchantmen  of  the  larger  class,
so  called  because  they  hung  out  a  corbis  at  the
mast-head  for  a  sign.  (Festus  ;  Nonius,  s.  v.)
They  were  also  termed  onerariae;  and  hence
Plautus,  in  order  to  designate  the  voracious  ap-
petites of  some  women,  says,  "  Corbitam  cibi
comesse  possunt  "  {Cas.  iv.  1.  20).  They  were
noted  for  their  heavy  build  and  sluggish  sailing
(Lucil.  ap.  Non. s.  v.  Corhitae ;  Plant.  Poen.  iii.  1.4),
and  carried  passengers  as  well  as  merchandise,  an-
swering to  the  large  "  felucca  "  of  the  present  day.
Cicero  proposed  to  take  a  passage  in  one  of  those
vessels,  which  he  opposes  to  the  smarter  class  of
packets  (actuariola,  ad  Att.  xvi.  6).  [A.  R.]
CORDAX  (Ko>5a|).  [Chorus,  280,  a.]
CORNI'CINES.  [Aeneatores.]
CORNICULA'RII.  [Exercitus.]
CORNU.  [Exercitus.]
CORNU,  a  wind  instrument,  anciently  made  of
horn,  but  afterwards  of  brass.  (Varr.  L.  L.v.W  7,
ed.  Miiller.)  According  to  Athenaeus  (iv.  p.  184,  a.)
it  was  an  invention  of  the  Etruscans.  Like  the
t7iba,  it  differed  from  the  tibia  in  being  a  larger
and  more  powerful  instrument,  and  from  the  tuba
itself,  in  being  curved  nearly  in  the  shape  of  a  C,
with  a  cross-piece  to  steady  the  instrument  for  the
convenience  of  the  performer.  In  Greek  it  is
called  arpoyyvXi]  adXTriy^.  It  had  no  stopples  or
plugs  to  adjust  the  scale  to  any  particular  mode
(Barney's  Hist,  of  Music,  vol.  i.  p.  518)  ;  the
entire  series  of  notes  was  produced  without  keys
or  holes,  by  the  modification  of  the  breath  and
the  lips  at  the  mouthpiece.  Probably,  from  the
description  given  of  it  in  the  poets,  it  was,  like
our  own  horn,  an  octave  lower  than  the  trumpet.
The  classicum.,  which  originally  meant  a  signal,
rather  than  the  musical  instrument  which  gave  the
signal,  was  usually  sounded  with  the  cornu.

"  Sonuit  reflexo  classicum  cornu,
Lituusque  adunco  stridulos  cantus
Elisit  aere."  (Sen.  Oed.  734.)


CORONA.

From  which  lines  we  learn  the  distinction  between
the  comu  and  lituus,  as  from  Ovid  {Metam.  i.  98)
we  learn  that  between  the  tuba  and  comu  —

"  Non  tuba  directi,  non  aeris  comua  flexi."

The  following  woodcut,  taken  from  Bartholini  {De
TUtiis^  p.  403),  illustrates  the  above  account.  [B.J.]


CORONA.


359


COROLLA.     [Corona.]

CORO'NA  ((TT4<pavos),  a  crown,  that  is,  a
circular  ornament  of  metal,  leaves,  or  flowers,
worn  by  the  ancients  round  the  head  or  neck,  and
used  as  a  festive  as  well  as  funeral  decoration,  and
as  a  reward  of  talent,  military,  or  naval  prowess,
and  civil  worth.  It  includes  the  synonymes  of
the  species,  for  which  it  is  often  used  absolutely,
<rT€(/)a»'77,  crTe<pos,  (mcpduoo/jia,  corolla,  sertum,  a
garland  or  wreath.

Judging  from  Homer's  silence,  it  does  not  ap-
pear to  have  been  adopted  amongst  the  Greeks  of
the  heroic  ages  as  a  reward  of  merit,  nor  as  a
festive  decoration ;  for  it  is  not  mentioned  amongst
the  luxiu-ies  of  the  delicate  Phaeacians,  nor  of  the
suitors.  But  a  golden  crown  decorates  the  head
of  Venus  in  the  hymn  to  that  goddess  (1  and  7).

Its  first  introduction  as  an  honorary  reward  is
attributable  to  the  athletic  games,  in  some  of  which
it  Avas  bestowed  as  a  prize  upon  the  victor  (PI in.
H.  N.  XV.  39  ;  Pindar.  Olymp.  iv.  36),  from  whence
it  was  adopted  in  the  Roman  circus.  It  was  the
only  one  contended  for  by  the  Spartans  in  their
gymnastic  contests,  and  was  worn  by  them  when
going  to  battle.

The  Romans  refined  upon  the  practice  of  the
Greeks,  and  invented  a  great  variety  of  crowns
formed  of  different  materials,  each  with  a  separate
appellation  and  appropriated  to  a  particular  purpose.
We  proceed  to  enumerate  these  and  their  proper-
ties, including  in  the  same  detail  an  account  of  the
corresponding  ones,  where  any,  in  Greece.

I.  Corona  Obsidionalis.  Among  the  honorary
crowns  bestowed  by  the  Romans  for  military
achievements,  the  most  difficult  of  attainment,  and
the  one  which  conferred  the  highest  honour,  was
the  corona  obsidionalis,  presented  by  a  beleaguered
army  after  its  liberation  to  the  general  who  broke  up
the  siege.  It  was  made  of  grass,  or  weeds  and
wild  flowers  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxii.  7),  thence  called
corona graminea  (Plin.  H.N.  xxii.  4),  and  ^?-am-
nea  obsidionalis  (Liv.  vii.  37),  gathered  from  the
spot  on  which  the  beleaguered  army  had  been
enclosed  (Plin.  l.  c.  ;  Aul.  Gell.  v.  6  ;  Festus,
s.  V.  Obsidionalis)  ;  in  allusion  to  a  custom  of  the
early  ages,  in  which  the  vanquished  party  in  a  con-
test of  strength  or  agility  plucked  a  handful  of  grass
from  the  meadow  where  the  struggle  took  place,
and  gave  it  to  his  opponent  as  a  token  of  victory.


(Aul.  Gell.  V.  6  ;  Plin.  //.  N.  xxii.  4  ;  Festus,
s.v.  Obsidionalis  ;  Serv.  ad  Virg.  Aen.  viii.  128.)
A  list  of  the  few  Romans  who  gained  this  honour
is  given  by  Pliny  (//.  A^.  xxii.  4,  5).  A  repre-
sentation of  the  corona  graminea  is  introduced  in
the  annexed  woodcut.  (Guichard,  De  Antiquis
Triumphis,  p.  268  ;  compare  Hardouji,  ad  Plin.
H.  N.  X.  68).


II.  Corona  Civica,  the  second  in  honour  and
importance  (Plin.  H.  N.  xvi.  3),  was  presented  to
the  soldier  who  had  preserved  the  life  of  a  Roman
citizen  in  battle  (Aul.  Gell.  v.  6),  and  therefore
accompanied  with  the  inscription  Ob  civem  servatum
(Senec.  Clem.  i.  26).  It  was  originally  made  of
the  zVar,  afterwards  of  the  aesculus,  and  finally  of
the  quercus  (Plin.  H.  N.  xvi.  5),  three  different
sorts  of  oak,  the  reason  for  which  choice  is  ex-
plained by  Plutarch  (Qitaest.  Rom.  p.  151,  ed.
Reisk.).     It  is  represented  in  the  next  woodcut.


As  the  possession  of  this  crown  was  so  high  an
honour,  its  attainment  was  restricted  by  very
severe  regulations  (Plin.  H.  N.  xvi.  5),  so  that
the  following  combinations  must  have  been  satis-
fied before  a  claim  was  allowed  :  —  To  have  pre-
served the  life  of  a  Roman  citizen  in  battle,  slain
his  opponent,  and  maintained  the  ground  on  which
the  action  took  place.  The  testimony  of  a  third
party  was  not  admissible  ;  the  person  rescued
must  himself  proclaim  the  fact,  which  increased
the  difl[iculty  of  attainment,  as  the  Roman  soldier
was  commonly  unwilling  to  acknowledge  his  obli-
gation to  the  prowess  of  a  comrade,  and  to  show
A  A  4


3G0


CORONA.


him  that  deference  which  he  would  he  compelled
to  pay  to  his  preserver  if  the  claim  were  established.
(Cic.  Pro  Plane.  30.)  Originally,  therefore,  the
corona  civica  was  presented  by  the  rescued  soldier
(Aul.  Gell.  V.  6  ;  Polyb.  vi.  37),  after  the  claim
had  been  thoroughly  investigated  by  the  tribune
who  compelled  a  reluctant  party  to  come  forward
and  give  his  evidence  (Polyb.  I.  c.)  ;  but  under
the  empire,  when  the  prince  was  the  fountain  from
whence  all  hqnours  emanated,  the  civic  crown  was
no  longer  received  from  the  hands  of  the  person
whose  preservation  it  rewarded,  but  from  the  prince
himself^  or  his  delegate.  (Tacit.  Ann.  xv.  12  ;
compare  iii.  2.)

The  preserration  of  the  life  of  an  ally,  even
though  he  were  a  king,  would  not  confer  a  suffi-
cient title  for  the  civic  crown.  When  once  ob-
tained, it  might  always  be  worn.  The  soldier  who
had  acquired  it,  had  a  place  reserved  n«xt  to  the
senate  at  all  the  public  spectacles  ;  and  they,  as
well  as  the  rest  of  the  company,  rose  up  upon  his
entrance.  He  was  freed  from  all  public  burthens,
as  were  also  his  father,  and  his  paternal  grand-
father ;  and  the  person  who  owed  his  life  to  him
was  bound,  ever  after,  to  cherish  his  preserver  as
a  parent,  and  afford  him  all  such  offices  as  were
due  from  a  son  to  his  father.  (Polyb.  vi.  37  ;  Cic.
Pro  Plane.  SO  ;  Plin.  H.N.  xvi. 5  ;  Aul. Gell.  v.  6.)

A  few  of  the  principal  persons  who  gained  this
reward,  are  enumerated  in  the  following  pas-
sages :  —  Plin.  //.  A^.  vii.  29,  xvi.  5  ;  Liv.  vi.  20  ;
X.  4-6.  L.  Gellius  Publicola  proposed  to  confer  it
upon  Cicero  for  having  detected  and  cnished  the
conspiracy  of  Catiline  (Aul.  Gell.  v.  6)  ;  and  among
the  honours  bestowed  upon  Augustus  by  the  senate,
it  was  decreed  that  a  civic  crown  should  be  sus-
pended from  the  top  of  his  house  (Dion  Cass.  liii.
16  ;  Val.  Max.  ii.  8./w.  ;  Ovid.  Fast.  i.  614,  iv.
953,  Trist.  iii.  1.6;  Senec.  Clem.  i.  26  ;  Suet.
Calig.  19,  compare  Claud.  17,  Tib.  26)  ;  hence  a
crown  of  oak  leaves,  with  the  inscription  ob  cives
servatos^  is  frequently  seen  on  the  reverse  of  the
Augustan  medals,  as  also  on  those  of  Galba,  Vi-
tellius,  Vespasian,  Trajan,  &c.,  showing  that  they
likewise  assumed  to  themselves  a  similar  honour.

III.  Corona  Navalis  or  Rostrata,  called
also  Classica,  (Veil.  Pat,  ii.  81.)  It  is  difficult
to  determine  whether  these  were  two  distinct
crowns,  or  only  two  denominations  for  the  same
one.  Virgil  {Aen.  viii.  6B4)  unites  both  terms  in
one  sentence,  "  Tempora  navali  fulgent  rostrata
corona."  But  it  seenis  probable  that  the  former,
besides  being  a  generic  term,  was  inferior  in  dignity
to  the  latter,  and  given  to  the  sailor  who  first
boarded  an  enemy's  ship  (Plin.  //.  A^.  xvi.  3)  ;
whereas  the  latter  was  given  to  a  comn^nder  who
destroyed  the  whole  fleet,  or  gained  any  very
signal  victory.  M.  Agrippa  is  said  to  have  been
the  first  person  who  received  the  honour  of  a  naval
crown,  which  was  conferred  upon  him  on  his  con-
quest of  Sex.  Pompeius  in  B.  c  36  ;  though,  ac-
cording to  other  authorities,  M.  Varro  was  the  first
who  obtained  it  from  Pompeius  Magnus.  (Comp.
Veil  Pat.  I.  €. ;  Liv.  Epit.  129  ;  Dion  Cass.  xlix.
14 ;  Aul.  Gell.  V.  6  ;  Senec.  De  Den.  iii.  32  ;
Festug,  S.V.  Navalis  Corona;  Plin.  H.N.  viii.  31,
xvi.  4;  Suet.  Claud.  17.)  At  all  events,  they
were  both  made  of  gold  ;  and  one  at  least  {rostraia)
decorated  with  the  beaks  of  ships  like  the  rostra  in
•the  forum  (Plin.  xvi.  4),  as  seen  in  a  medal  of
Agrippa  j  the  other  (navalis),  with  a  representation


CORONA.

of  the  entire  bow,  as  shown  in  the  subjoined  wood-
cut.   (Guichard.  De  Antiq.  Triumph,  p.  267.)


The  Athenians  likewise  bestowed  golden  crowns
for  naval  services  ;  sometimes  upon  the  person  who
got  his  trireme  first  equipped,  and  at  others  upon
the  captain  who  had  his  vessel  in  the  best  order.
(Dem.  De  Coron.  Praef.  Nav.  pp.  278,  279.  ed.
Schaeffer.)

IV.  Corona  Muralis.  The  first  man  who
scaled  the  wall  of  a  besieged  city  was  presented
by  his  commander  with  a  mural  crown.  (Aul.  Gell.
V.  6.  4  ;  Liv.  xxvi.  48.)  It  was  made  of  gold,  and
decorated  with  turrets  (mnri  pinnis,  Aul.  Gell.  I.  c),
as  represented  in  the  next  woodcut  (Guichard.
De  Antiq.  Triumph,  p.  265)  ;  and  being  one  of  the
highest  orders  of  military  decorations,  was  not
awarded  to  a  claimant  until  after  a  strict  investi-
gation.    (Liv.  L  c.  ;  compare  Suet.  Aug.  25.)


Cybele  is  always  repre-sented  with  this  crown
upon  her  head  (Lucret.  ii.  607,  610  ;  Ovid,  Fast.
iv.  219  ;  compare  Virg,  Aen.  x.  253,  vi.  786)  ;
but  in  the  woodcut  annexed  (Caylus,  PecKcil
d''Antiq.  vol,  v.  pi.  3)  the  form  of  the  crown  ia
very  remarkable,  for  it  includes  the  whole  tower  as
well  as  the  turrets,  thus  affording  a  curious  specimen
of  the  al^cient  style  of  fortification.


V.  Corona  Castrensis  or  Vallaris.  The
first  soldier  who  surmounted  the  vallum,  and  forced
an  entrance  into  the  enemy's  camp,  Avas,  in  like
manner,  presented  with  a  golden  crown,  called
corona  castrensis  or  vallaris  (Aul.  Gell.  v.  6  ;
compare  Val.  Max.  I.  8.  §  6),  which  was  oma-


CORONA.

merted  with,  the  palisades  (vallt)  used  in  fomiing
an  entrenchment,  as  represented  in  the  annexed
woodcut.     (Gmc\ia,rd.  De  Ant iq.  Tnumph.  1^.266.)


VI.  Corona  Triumphalis.  There  were  three
sorts  of  triumphal  crowns,  the  first  of  which  was
worn  round  the  head  of  the  commander  during  his
triumph.  It  was  made  with  laurel  or  bay  leaves
(Aul,  Gell.  V.  6  ;  Ovid.  Pont.  ii.  2.  81  ;  Tibull.  i.
7-7),  which  plant  is  frequently  met  with  on  the
ancient  coins,  both  with  the  berries  and  without
tliera.  It  was  the  latter  kind,  according  to  Pliny
(//.  A''.  XV.  29),  which  was  used  in  the  triumph,
as  is  shown  in  the  annexed  woodcut,  from  a  medal
which  commemorates  the  Parthian  triumph  of
Ventidius,  the  lieutenant  of  Anxony.  Being  the
most  honourable  of  the  three,  it  was  termed  kiurea
insignis  (Liv.  vii.  1 3)  and  insignis  corona  triumph-
alis.


The  second  one  was  of  gold,  often  enriched  with
jewels,  which  being  too  large  and  massive  to  be
worn,  was  held  over  the  head  of  the  general  during
his  triumph,  by  a  public  officer  (servus  publicus,
Juv.  Sat,  x.  41).  This  crown,  as  well  as  the
former  one,  was  presented  to  the  victorious  general
by  his  array.

The  thii-d  kind,  likewise  of  gold  and  great
value,  was  sent  as  presents  from  the  provinces  to
the  commander,  as  soon  as  a  triumph  had  been
decreed  to  him  (Pint.  Aemil.  Paul.  34),  and  there-
fore they  were  also  termed  provinciates.  (Tertull.
De  Coron.  Mil.  c.  13.)  In  the  early  ages  of  the
republic,  these  were  gratuitous  presents,  but  sub-
sequently they  were  exacted  as  a  tribute  under  the
name  of  aurum  coronarium.,  to  which  none  were
entitled  but  those  to  whom  a  triumph  had  been
decreed.  The  custom  of  presenting  golden  crowns
from  the  provinces  to  victorious  generals  was  like-
wise in  use  among  the  Greeks,  for  they  were  pro-
fusely lavished  upon  Alexander  after  his  conquest
of  Dareius  (Athen.  xii.  p.  539,  a)  ;  and  the
Romans  probably  borrowed  the  custom  from  the
Greeks.     [Aurum  Coronarium.]

VII.  Corona  Ova  lis  was  another  crown  of  less
estimation,  appropriated  solely  to  commanders.  It
was  given  to  those  who  merely  deserved  an  ovation,


CORONA.  3bl

which  happened  when  the  war  was  not  duly  de-
clared, or  was  carried  on  against  a  very  inferior
force,  or  with  persons  not  considered  by  the  lawa
of  nations  as  lawful  enemies,  such  as  slaves  and
pirates  ;  or  when  the  victory  was  obtained  without
danger,  difficulty,  or  bloodshed  (Aul.  Gell.  v.  6  ;
Festus,  s.  V.  Ovalis  Corona)  ;  on  which  account  it
was  made  of  myrtle,  the  shrub  sacred  to  Venus,
"  Quod  non  Martins^  sed  quasi  Veyieris  quidam
triumphus  foret."  (Aul.  Gell.  I.  c.  ;  Plut.  Marcell.
22  ;  compare  Plin.  //.  N.  xv.  39  ;  Dionys.  v.  47.)
The  myrtle  crown  is  shown  in  the  woodcut  an-
nexed, from  a  medal  of  Augustus  Caesar.


VIII.  Corona  Oleagina.  This  was  likewise
an  honorary  wreath,  made  of  the  olive  leaf,  and
conferred  upon  the  soldiers  as  well  as  their  com-
manders. According  to  Gellius  (v.  6),  it  was  given
to  any  person  or  persons  through  whose  instru-
mentality a  triumph  had  been  obtained,  but  when
they  were  not  personally  present  in  the  action.  It
is  represented  in  the  next  woodcut,  from  a  medal  of
Lepidus,  and  was  conferred  both  by  Augustus  and
the  senate  upon  the  soldiery  on  several  occasions.
(Dion  Cass.  xlix.  14,  xlvl  40.)


Golden  crowns,  without  any  particular  designa-
tion, were  frequently  presented  out  of  compliment
by  one  individual  to  another,  and  by  a  general  to
a  soldier  who  had  in  any  way  distinguished  him-
self.    (Liv.  vii.  10,  37,  x.  44,  xxx.  15.)

The  Greeks  in  general  made  but  little  use  of
crowns  as  rewards  of  valour  in  the  earlier  and
better  periods  of  their  historj',  except  as  prizes  in
the  athletic  contests  ;  but  previous  to  the  time  of
Alexander,  crowns  of  gold  were  profusely  distri-
buted among  the  Athenians  at  least,  for  every
trifling  feat,  whether  civil,  naval,  or  military
(Aesch.  c.  Ctesiph. ;  Dem.  De  Coron.  passim),
which,  though  lavished  without  much  discrimina-
tion as  far  as  regards  the  character  of  the  receiving


362


CORONA.


parties,  were  still  subjected  to  certain  legal  re-
strictions in  respect  of  the  time,  place,  and  mode  in
which  they  were  conferred.  Thej'  could  not  be
presented  but  in  the  public  assemblies,  and  with
the  consent,  that  is  by  suflFrage,  of  the  people,  or
by  the  senators  in  their  council,  or  by  the  tribes
to  their  own  members,  or  by  the  SrffxdTai  to  mem-
bers of  their  own  Srjixos.  According  to  the  state-
ment of  Aeschines,  the  people  could  not  lawfully
present  crowns  in  any  place  except  in  their  as-
sembly, nor  the  senators  except  in  the  senate-
house  ;  nor,  according  to  the  same  authority,  in
the  theatre,  which  is,  however,  denied  by  De-
mosthenes ;  nor  at  the  public  games,  and  if  any
crier  there  proclaimed  the  crowns  he  was  subject
to  ari/xia.  Neither  could  any  person  holding  an
office  receive  a  crown  whilst  he  was  vnevQuuos,
that  is,  before  he  had  passed  his  accounts.  But
crowns  were  sometimes  presented  by  foreign  cities
to  particular  citizens,  which  were  termed  arecpavoi
^eviKoi,  coronae  hospitales.  This,  however,  could
not  be  done  until  the  ambassadors  from  those  cities
had  obtained  permission  from  the  people,  and  the
party  for  whom  the  honour  was  intended  had  un-
dergone a  public  investigation,  in  which  the  whole
course  of  his  life  was  submitted  to  a  strict  inquiry,
(Aesch.  Dem.  II.  cc.)

We  now  proceed  to  the  second  class  of  crowns,
which  were  emblematical  and  not  honorary,  at
least  to  the  person  who  wore  them,  and  the  adop-
tion of  which  was  not  regulated  by  law,  but
custom.     Of  these  there  were  also  several  kinds.

I.  Corona  Sacerdotalis,  so  called  by  Am-
mianus  Marcellinus  (xxix.  5.  §  6).  It  was  worn
by  the  priests  (sacerdotes),  with  the  exception  of
the  pontifex  Maximus  and  his  minister  (camillus),
as  well  as  the  bystanders,  when  officiating  at  the
sacrifice.  It  does  not  appear  to  have  been  confined
to  any  one  material,  but  was  sometimes  made  of
olive  (see  the  preceding  woodcut  ;  Stat.  Theb.  iii.
466),  sometimes  of  gold  (Prudent.  Ilept  Sre'e^.  x.
1011  ;  Tertull.  De  Idol.  18),  and  sometimes  of  the
ears  of  com,  then  termed  corona  spicea,  which  kind
was  the  most  ancient  one  amongst  the  Romans
(Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  2),  and  was  consecrated  to
Ceres  (Hor.  Carm.  Sec.  30  ;  Tibull.  ii.  1.  4,  i.  1.  15),
before  whose  temples  it  was  customarily  suspended.
(Tibull.  i.  1.  16  ;  compare  Apul.  Met.  vi.  p.  110.
Varior.)  It  was  likewise  regarded  as  an  emblem
of  peace  (Tibull.  i.  10.  67),  in  which  character  it
appears  in  the  subjoined  medal,  which  comme-
morates the  conclusion  of  the  civil  war  between
Antony  and  D.  Albiims  Brutua.


II.  Corona  Funebris  amd  Sbpulchralis.
The  Greeks  first  set  the  example  of  crowning  the
dead  with  chaplets  of  leaves  and  flowers  (Eur.
Phoen.  1647  ;  Schol.  ad  loc),  which  was  imitated
by  the  Romans.  It  was  also  provided  by  a  law
of  the  Twelve  Tables,  that  any  person  who  had


CORONA.

acquired  a  crown  might  have  it  placed  upon  his
head  when  carried  out  in  the  funeral  procession.
(Cic.  De  Leg.  ii.  24  ;  Plin.  ff.  N.  xxi.  5.)  Gar-
lands of  flowers  were  also  placed  upon  the  bier,  or
scattered  from  the  windows  under  which  the  pro-
cession passed  (Plin. //".  A',  xxi.  7  ;  Dionys.  xi.  39),
or  entwined  about  the  cinerary  urn  (Pint.  MarcelL
30,  Demetr.  53),  or  as  a  decoration  to  the  tomb
(Plin.  //.  N.  xxi.  3  ;  Ovid.  Trist.  iii.  2.  82  ;  Tibull.
ii.  4.  48).  In  Greece  these  crowns  were  commonly
made  of  parsley  {aiKivov).  (Suidas,  s.  v. ;  Plut.
Timol.  26.)

III.  Corona  Convivialis.  The  use  of  chap-
lets  at  festive  entertainments  sprung  likewise  from
Greece,  and  owe  their  origin  to  the  practice  of
tying  a  woollen  fillet  tight  round  the  head,  for  the
purpose  of  mitigating  the  efi'ects  of  intoxication.
(Comp.  Plaut.  Amph.  iii.  4.  16.)  But  as  luxury
increased  they  were  made  of  various  flowers  or
shrubs,  such  as  were  supposed  to  prevent  intoxica-
tion ;  of  roses  (which  were  the  choicest),  violets,
myrtle,  ivy,  philyra^  and  even  parsley.  (Hor.
Carm.  ii.  7.  24,  et  alibi.)  The  Romans  were  not
allowed  to  wear  these  crowns  in  public,  "  in  usu
promiscuo,"  which  was  contrary  to  the  practice  of
the  Greeks,  and  those  who  attempted  to  do  so
were  punished  with  imprisonment.  {V\m.  H.  N.
xxi.  6  ;  compare  Hor.  Sat.  ii.  3.  256  ;  Val.  Max.
vi.  9.  ext.  1.)

IV.  Corona  Nuptialis.  The  bridal  wreath
((TTe(pos  ya/iiijAioy,  Bion.  Idt/Il.  i.  88)  was  also  of
Greek  origin,  among  whom  it  was  made  of  flowers
plucked  by  the  bride  herself,  and  not  bought,
which  was  of  ill  omen.  Among  the  Romans  it
was  made  of  verbena,  also  gathered  by  the  bride
herself,  and  worn  under  ihejlainmeum  (Festus,  s.  v.
Corolla)  with  which  the  bride  was  always  en-
veloped. (CatuU.  Ixi.  6.  8  ;  Cic.  De  Orat.  iii.  58.)
The  bridegroom  also  wore  a  chaplet.  (Plaut.  Cas.
iv.  1.  9.)  The  doors  of  his  house  were  likewise
decorated  with  garlands  (CatuU.  Ixiv.  294 ;  Juv.
Sat.  vi.  51,  227),  and  also  the  bridal  couch.

V.  Corona  Natalitia,  the  chaplet  suspended
over  the  door  of  the  vestibule,  both  in  the  houses
of  Athens  and  Rome,  in  which  a  child  was  born.
(Juv.  Sat.  ix.  85;  Meursius,  Attic.  Lect.  iv.  10.)
At  Athens,  when  the  infant  was  male,  the  crown
was  made  of  olive  ;  when  female,  of  wool  (Hesj'ch.
s.  V.  '2,re<pavos)  ;  at  Rome  it  was  of  laurel,  ivy,  or
parsley  (Bartholin.  De  Puerp.  p.  127).

Besides  the  crowns  enumerated,  there  were  a
few  others  of  specific  denominations,  which  re-
ceived their  names  either  from  the  materials  of
which,  or  the  manner  in  which,  they  were  com-
These  were  —

I.  Corona  Longa  (Cic.  De  Leg.  24 ;  Ovid,
Fast.  iv.  738),  commonly  thought  to  resemble
what  we  call  festoons,  and  as  such  seem  to  have
been  chiefly  used  to  decorate  tombs,  curule  chairs,
triumphal  cars,  houses,  &c.  But  the  word  must
have  had  a  more  precise  meaning,  and  was  pro-
bably called  longa  from  its  greater  size,  and  meant
a  circular  string  of  anything,  like  the  "rosary"
used  by  the  lower  orders  in  Catholic  countries  to
reckon  up  their  pniyers,  which  in  Italy  is  still
called  la  corona,  doubtless  tracing  its  origin  to  the
corona  longa  of  their  heathen  ancestors,  to  which
description  it  answers  exactly.

II.  Corona  Etrusca,  a  golden  cro-svn  made  to
imitate  the  crown  of  oak  leaves,  studded  with
gems,  and  decorated  with  ribbons  (Jemnisct)  or


CORPUS  JURIS  CIVILIS.

ties  of  gold.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxi.  4,  xxxiii.  4.)  Any
crown  fastened  with  these  ribbons,  whether  real
or  artificially  represented,  was  also  termed  corona
lemniscata^  a  specimen  of  which  is  given  by  Caylus
(liecueil  d''Antiq.  vol.  v.  pi.  57.  No.  3).

III.  Corona  Pactilis  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxi.  8),
probably  the  same  as  the  corona  plectilis  of  Plautus
(Bacch.  i.  1,  37)^  corona  torta  (Propert.  iii.  20.  18,
ed.  Kuinoel),  plexa  (Aul.  Gell.  xviii.  2),  and  as
the  a-recpdvoi  irXeKToi  and  KvXicnhs  arecpdvos  of
the  Greeks.  It  was  made  of  flowers,  shrubs,
grass,  ivy,  wool,  or  any  flexible  material  twisted
together.

IV.  Corona  Sutilis,  the  crown  used  by  the
Salii  at  their  festival.  It  was  made  in  the  first
instance  of  any  kind  of  flowers  sowed  together,
instead  of  being  wreathed  with  their  leaves  and
stalks ;  but  subsequently  it  was  confined  to  the
rose  only,  the  choicest  leaves  of  which  were
selected  from  the  whole  flower,  and  sowed  together
by  a  skitful  hand,  so  as  to  form  an  elegant  chaplet.
(Plin.  H.  N.  xxi.  8.)

V.  Corona  Tonsa  or  Tonsilis  (Virg.  Aen.
V.  556)  was  made  of  leaves  only,  of  the  olive  or
laurel  for  instance  (Serv.  ad  Virg.  Georg.  iii.  21),
and  so  called  in  distinction  to  neadlis  and  others,
in  which  the  whole  branch  was  inserted.

VI.  Corona  Radiata  (Stat.  Theb.  i.  28)  was
the  one  given  to  the  gods  and  deified  heroes,  and
assumed  by  some  of  the  emperors,  as  a  token  of
their  divinity.  It  may  be  seen  on  the  coins  of
Trajan,  Caligula,  M.  Aurelius,  Valerius  Probus,
Theodosius,  &c.,  and  is  given  in  the  woodcut  an-
nexed, from  a  medal  of  M.  Antonius.


CORPUS  JURIS  CIVILIS.


363


VII.  The  crown  of  vine  leaves  (pampinea)  was
appropriated  to  Bacchus  (Hor.  Carm.  iii.  25.  20,
iv.  8.  33),  and  considered  a  symbol  of  ripeness
approaching  to  decay ;  whence  the  Roman  knight,
when  he  saw  Claudius  with  such  a  crown  upon
his  head,  augured  that  he  would  not  survive  the
autumn.  (Tacit.  Ann.  xi.  4  ;  compare  Artemidor.
i.  79.)  [A.  R.]

CORO'NIS  (Kopcoi/is),  the  cornice  of  an  entabla-
ture, is  properly  a  Greek  word  signifying  anything
curved  (Schol.  ad  Aristoph.  Plut.  253  ;  Hesych.
s.  v.).  It  is  also  used  by  Latin  writers,  but  the
genuine  Latin  word  for  a  cornice  is  corona  or  coro-
nix.  (Vitruv.v.  2,  3.)  [P.S.]

CORPORA'TI.  CORPORA'TIO.  [Col-
legium.]

CORPUS.     [Collegium.]

CORPUS  JURIS  CIVI'LIS.  The  three  great
compilations  of  Justinian,  the  Institutes,  the  Pan-
dect or  Digest,  and  the  Code,  together  with  the
Novellae,  form  one  body  of  law,  and  were  considered
as  such  by  the  glossatores,  who  divided  it  into  five


volumina.  The  Digest  was  distributed  into  three
volumina,  under  the  respective  names  of  Digestnm
Vetus,  Infortiatum,  and  Digestum  Novum.  The
fourth  volume  contained  the  first  nine  books  of  the
Codex  Repetitae  Praelectionis.  The  fifth  volume
contained  the  Institutes,  the  Liber  Authenticorum
or  Novellae,  and  the  three  last  books  of  the  Codex.
The  division  into  five  volumina  appears  in  the
oldest  editions  ;  but  the  usual  arrangement  now  is,
the  Institutes,  Digest,  the  Code,  and  Novellae.
The  name  Corpus  Juris  Civilis  was  not  given  to
this  collection  by  Justinian,  nor  by  any  of  the
glossatores,  Savigny  asserts  that  the  name  was
used  in  the  twelfth  century :  at  any  rate,  it  be-
came common  from  the  date  of  the  edition  of  D.
Gothofredus,  1 604.

Most  editions  of  the  Corpus  also  contain  the  fol-
lowing matter: — Thirteen  edicts  of  Justinian,  five
constitutions  of  Justin  the  younger,  several  consti-
tutions of  Tiberius  the  younger,  a  series  of  consti-
tutions of  Justinian,  Justin,  and  Tiberius  ;  113
Novellae  of  Leo,  a  constitution  of  Zeno,  and  a
number  of  constitutions  of  difi'erent  emperors,  under
the  name  of  BaaiXiKoX  AiaTa^eis  or  Imperatoriae
Constitutiones  ;  the  Canones  Sanctorum  et  vene-
randorum  Apostolorum,  Libri  Feudorum,  a  consti-
tution of  the  emperor  Frederick  II.,  two  of  the
emperor  Henry  VII.  called  Extravagantes,  and  a
Liber  de  pace  Constantiae.  Some  editions  also
contain  the  fragments  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  of  the
praetorian  edict,  &c.

The  Roman  law,  as  received  in  Europe,  consists
only  of  the  Corpus  Juris,  that  is,  the  three  compila-
tions of  Justinian  and  the  Novellae  which  were  is-
sued after  these  compilations  ;  and  further,  this  Cor-
pus Juris  is  only  received  within  the  limits  and  in  the
form  which  was  given  to  it  in  the  school  of  Bologna.
Accordingly,  all  the  Ante-Justinian  law  is  now
excluded  from  all  practical  application  ;  also,  the
Greek  texts  in  the  Digest,  in  the  place  of  which
the  translations  received  at  Bologna  are  substi-
tuted ;  and  further,  the  few  unimportant  restora-
tions in  the  Digest,  and  the  more  important  resto-
rations in  the  Codex.  Of  the  three  collections  of
Novellae,  that  only  is  received  which  is  called
Authenticum,  and  in  the  abbreviated  form  which
was  given  to  it  at  Bologna,  called  the  Vulgata.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  received  the
additions  made  to  the  Codex  in  Bologna  by  the
reception  of  the  Authentica  of  the  Emperors
Frederick  I.  and  IL,  and  the  still  more  numerous
Authentica  of  Irnerius.  The  application  of  the
matter  comprised  within  these  limits  of  the  Corpus
Juris  has  not  been  determined  by  the  school  of
Bologna,  but  by  the  operation  of  other  principles,
such  as  the  customary  law  of  diflferent  European
countries  and  the  development  of  law.  Various
titles  of  the  Corpus  Juris  have  little  or  no  appli-
cation in  modern  times  ;  for  instance,  that  part  of
the  Roman  law  which  concerns  constitutional  forms
and  administration.  (Savigny,  System  des  Heut.
Romisclmn  Rechts,  vol.  i.  p.  66.)

Some  editions  of  the  Corpus  Juris  are  published
with  the  glossae,  and  some  without.  The  latest
edition  with  the  glossae  is  that  of  J.  Fehius,  Lugd.
1627,  six  vols,  folio.  Of  the  editions  without  the
glossae,  the  most  important  are — that  of  Russardus,
Lugd.  1560 — 61,  folio,  which  was  several  times
reprinted  ;  Contius,  Lugd.  1571  and  1581, 15  vols.
12mo  ;  Lud.  Charondae,  Antw.  ap.  Christ.  Plantin,
1575,  folio  ;  Dionys.  Gothofredi,  Lugd.  1583, 4to.


364


CORYBANTICA.


of  which  there  are  various  editions,  one  of  the  best
by  Sim.  Van  Leeuvven,  Amst.  ]  663,  folio  ;  G.  Chr.
Gebaueri,cura  G.Aug.  Spangenberg,  Goetting.  1776
— 1797,  2vols.  4to;  Schrader,  1  vol.  4to,  Berlin,
1832,  of  which  only  the  Institutes  are  yet  published.

For  further  information  on  the  editions  of  the
Corpus  Juris  and  its  several  portions,  see  Bocking,
Institutionen^  p.  78,  &c.,  and  Mackeldey,  Lehrhucli^
&c.  §97,  a,  12th  ed.  [G.  L,]

CO'RREUS.     [Obligationes.]

CORTI'NA.  1.  In  its  primary  sense,  a  large
circular  vessel  for  containing  liquids,  and  used  in
dyeing  wool  (Plin.  H.  N.  ix.  62),  and  receiving
oil  when  it  first  flows  from  the  press.  (Cat.  De
Re  Rust.  ^^.')  2.  A  vase  in  which  water  was
carried  round  the  circus  during  the  games  (Plant.
Poen.  v.  5.  12),  for  the  use  of  the  horses,  drivers,
or  attendants.  See  the  cut  on  p.  284,  in  which  two
of  the  children  thrown  down  by  the  horses  are
furnished  with  a  vessel  of  this  kind.  3.  The  table
or  hollow  slab,  supported  by  a  tripod,  upon  which
the  priestess  at  Delphi  sat  to  deliver  her  responses;
and  hence  the  word  is  used  for  the  oracle  itself.
(Virg.  Aen.  vi.  347.)  The  Romans  made  tables  of
marble  or  bronze  after  the  pattern  of  the  Delphian
tripod,  which  they  used  as  we  do  our  sideboards,
for  the  purpose  of  displaying  their  plate  at  an
entertainment,  or  the  valuables  contained  in  their
temples,  as  is  still  done  in  Catholic  countries  upon
the  altars.  These  were  termed  cortinae  Delphicae,
or  Delphicae  simply.  (Plin.  //.  A^.  xxxiv.  8  ;  Schol.
ad  Hor.  Sat.  \.  6.  116;  Mart,  xii,  66.  7;  Suet,
Atiff.  52.)  4.  From  the  conical  form  of  the  vessel
which  contains  the  first  notion  of  the  word,  it
came  also  to  signify  the  vaulted  part  of  a  theatre
over  the  stage  {tncujni  cortina  theatric  Sever,  in
Aetn.  294),  such  as  is  in  the  Odeium  of  Pericles,
the  shape  of  which  we  are  expressly  told  was
made  to  imitate  the  tent  of  Xerxes  (Paus.  i.  20.
§  3;  Plut.  Pericl.  13);  and  thence  metaphorically
for  anything  which  bore  the  appearance  of  a  dome,
as  the  vault  of  heaven  (Ennius,  ap.  Var.  De  Ling.
Lat.  viii,  48,  ed.  Miiller)  ;  or  of  a  circle,  as  a
group  of  listeners  surrounding  any  object  of  at-
traction.    (Tacit.  De  Om<.  19.)  [A.  R.]

CORYBANTES  (KopvSaures).  The  history
and  explanation  of  the  deities  bearing  this  name,
in  the  early  mythology  of  Greece,  cannot  be  given
m  this  place,  as  it  would  lead  us  to  enter  into  his-
torical and  mythological  questions  beyond  the
limits  of  this  Dictionaiy.  The  Corybantes,  of  whom
we  have  to  speak  here,  were  the  ministers  or  priests
of  Rhea  or  Cybele,  the  great  mother  of  the  gods,
who  was  worshipped  in  Phrygia.  In  their  solemn
festivals  they  displayed  the  most  extravagant  fury
in  their  dances  in  armour,  as  well  as  in  the  ac-
companying music  of  flutes,  cymbals  and  drums.
(Strab,  X.  p.  470.)  Hence  KopvSauTi<Tfi6s  was  the
name  given  to  an  imaginary  disease,  in  which  per-
sons felt  as  if  some  great  noise  was  rattling  in  their
ears.  (Plato,  CnYo,  p.  54.  d.,  with  Stallbaum's
note.)  [L.  S.]

CORYBA'NTICA  {KopvSavTiKi\  a  festival
and  mysteries  celebrated  at  Cnossus  in  Crete,  in
commemoration  of  one  Corybas  (Strab.  x.  p.  470.),
who,  in  common  with  the  Curetes,  brought  up  Zeus
and  concealed  him  from  his  father  Cronos  in  that
island.  Other  accounts  say  that  the  Corybantes,
nine  in  number,  independent  of  the  Curetes,  saved
and  educated  Zeus ;  a  third  legend  (Cic.  De  Nat.
Deor.  ill  23)  states  that  Corybas  was  the  father


COSMETAE.

of  the  Cretan  Apollo  who  disputed  the  sovereignty
of  the  island  with  Zeus.  But  to  which  of  these
traditions  the  festival  of  the  Corybantica  owed  its
origin  is  uncertain,  although  the  first,  Avhich  was
current  in  Crete  itself,  seems  to  be  best  entitled
to  the  honour.  All  we  know  of  the  Corybantica
is,  that  the  person  to  be  initiated  was  seated
on  a  throne,  and  that  those  who  initiated  him
formed  a  circle  and  danced  around  him.  This
part  of  the  solemnity  was  called  Stpdvci^ais  or  ^po-
vi(Tix6s.  (Plato,  Eudiydem.  p.  277,  d. ;  Dion  Chry-
sost.  Oral.  xii.  p.  387  ;  Proclus,  Theol.  Plat.
vi.  13.)  [L.  S.]

CORYMBUS.  CORY'MBIUM.  [Coma.]
CORVUS,  a  sort  of  crane,  used  by  C.  Duilius
against  the  Carthaginian  fleet  in  the  battle  fought
off  Mylae,  in  Sicily  (b.  c.  260).  The  Romans,  we
are  told,  being  unused  to  the  sea,  saw  that  their
only  chance  of  victory  was  by  bringing  a  sea-fight
to  resemble  one  on  land.  For  this  purpose  they
invented  a  machine,  of  which  Polybius  (ij»22)  has
left  a  minute,  although  not  very  perspicuous,  de-
scription. In  the  fore  part  of  the  ship  a  round
pole  was  fixed  perpendicularly,  twenty-four  feet  in
height  and  about  nine  inches  in  diameter ;  at  the
top  of  this  was  a  pivot,  upon  Avhich  a  ladder  was
set,  thirty-six  feet  in  length  and  four  in  breadth.
The  ladder  was  guarded  by  cross-beams,  fastened
to  the  upright  pole  by  a  ring  of  wood,  which  turned
with  the  pivot  above.  Along  the  ladder  a  rope
was  passed,  one  end  of  which  took  hold  of  the
corvus  by  means  of  a  ring.  The  corvus  itself  was
a  strong  piece  of  iron,  with  a  spike  at  the  end,
which  was  raised  or  lowered  by  drawing  in  or
letting  out  the  rope.  When  an  enemy's  ship
drew  near,  the  machine  was  turned  outwards,  by
means  of  the  pivot,  in  the  direction  of  the  assail-
ant. Another  part  of  the  machine  which  Polybius
has  not  clearly  described  is  a  breastwork,  let  down
(as  it  would  seem)  from  the  ladder,  and  serving
as  a  bridge,  on  which  to  board  the  enemy's  vessel.
(Compare  Curtius^  iv.  2.  4.)  By  means  of  these
cranes  the  Carthaginian  ships  were  either  broken
or  closely  locked  with  the  Roman,  and  Duilius
gained  a  complete  victory.

The  word  corvus  is  also  applied  to  various  kinds
of  grappling-hooks,  such  as  the  corvus  demolitor,
mentioned  by  Vitruvius  (x.  19)  for  pulling  down
walls,  or  the  terrible  engine  spoken  of  by  Tacitus
{Hist.  iv.  30),  which  being  fixed  on  the  walls  of  a
fortified  place,  and  suddenly  let  down,  carried  oif
one  of  the  besieging  party,  and  then  by  a  turn  of
the  machine  put  him  down  within  the  walls."  The
word  is  used  by  Celsus  for  a  scalpel.  It  is  hardly
necessary  to  remark  that  all  these  meanings  have
their  origin  in  the  supposed  resemblance  of  the
various  instruments  to  the  beak  of  a  raven.  [B.J.]
CORYTOS.  [Arcus,  p.  126,a.]
COSME'TAE,  a  class  of  slaves  among  the  Ro-
mans, whose  duty  it  was  to  dress  and  adorn  ladies.
(Juv.  Sat.  vi.  476.)  Some  writers  on>  antiquities,
and  among  them  Bottiger  in  his  Sabina  (i.  22)
have  supposed  that  the  cosmetae  were  female
slaves,  but  the  passage  of  Juvenal  is  alone  suffi-
cient to  refute  this  opinion ;  for  it  was  not  cus-
tomary for  female  slaves  to  take  off  their  tunics
when  a  punishment  was  to  be  inflicted  upon  them.
There  was,  indeed,  a  class  of  female  slaves  who
were  employed  for  the  same  purposes  as  the  cos-
metae ;  but  they  were  called  cosmeli-iae,  a  name
which   Naevius  chose  as  the  title  for  one  of  his


COSMI.

comedies.      (See    Heindorf,    ad    Horat.     Sat.  i.
2.  98.)  [L.  S.]

COSME'TES  (KOfT/xTjT^s),  an  officer  in  the
Athenian  Gymnasia  in  the  time  of  the  Romans.
[Gymnasium.]

COSMI  (/cJcTyuoi),  the  chief  magistrates  of
Crete.  It  is  proposed  under  this  head  to  give  a
brief  account  of  the  Cretan  constitution.

The   social   and  political  institutions  of  Crete
were  so  completely  Dorian  in  character,  and  so
similar  to  the  Spartan,  that  it  was  a  disputed  point
amongst  the  ancients  whether  the  Spartan  consti-
tution had  its  origin  there,  or  the  Cretan  was  trans-
ferred from  Laconia  to  Crete.  The  historian  Ephorus
{itp.  Strab.  X.  p.  482)  expressly  states    that   the
Spartan  institutions  had  their  origin  in  Crete,  but
were  perfected  and  completed  in  Sparta  ;  so  that
there  is  good  reason  for  the  assertion  of  Miiller
{Dorians^    iii.    1.    §   8),    "that   the   constitution
founded  on  the  principles  of  the  Doric  race,  was
there  first  moulded  into  a  consistent  shape,  but
even  in  a  more  simple  and  antiquated  form  than
in  Sparta  at  a  subsequent  period."    Thus  much,  at
any  rate,  we  know  for  certain,  that  there  were
various  Dorian  cities  in  the  island,  the  political
arrangements  of  which  so  closely  resembled  each
other,  that  one  form  of  government  was  ascribed  to
all.     (Thirlwall,  Hist.  Greece,  vol.  i.  p.  284.)     In
the  earliest  ages  of  which  we  have  historical  in-
formation, this  was  an  aristocracy  consisting  of  three
component  bodies,  the  Cosing  the  Gerusia  (yepov-
(Tia),  and  the  Ecclesia   (iKK\7]aia).     The  cosmi
were  ten  in  numbel-,  nnd  are  by  Aristotle  (Pol.  ii.
7),  Ephorus  (ap.  Strab.  I.  c),  and  Cicero  (de  Rep.
ii.  33)  compared  to  the  ephors  of  Sparta.     Miiller,
however  (iii.  8.  §  1 )  compares  them  with  the  Spartan
kings,  and  supposes  them  to  have  succeeded  to  the
functions   of  the   kingly  office  ;   which  Aristotle
(probably  alluding  to  the  age  of  Minos)  tells  us
was  at  one  time  established  in  Crete.    These  cosrai
were  ten  in  number,  and  chosen  not  from  the  body
of  the  people,  but  from  certain  y^vq  or  housed,
which  were  probably  of  more  pure  Doric  or  Achaiau
descent  than  their  neighbours.     The  first  of  them
in  rank  was  called  Protocosrnus,  and  gave  his  name
to  the  year.     They  commanded  in  war,  and  also
conducted  the  business  of  the  state  with  the  repre-
sentatives and  ambassadors  of  other  cities.     With
respect  to  the  domestic  government  of  the  state,
they  appear  to  have  exercised  a  joint  authority
with  the  members  of  the  gerusia,  as  they  are  said
to  have  consulted  with  them  on  the  most  important
matters.    (Ephor.  /.  c.)     In  the  times  subsequent
to  the  age  of  Alexander,  they  also  performed  cer-
tain duties  which  bore  a  resemblance  to  the  intro-
duction of  the  lawsuits  into  court,  by  the  Athenian
magistrates.    (Miiller,  L  c.)     Their  period  of  office
was  a  year  ;  but  any  of  them  during  that  time
might  resign,  and  was  also  liable  to  deposition  by
his  colleagues.     In  some  cases,  too,  they  might  be
indicted  for  neglect  of  their  duties.     On  the  whole,
we  may  conclude  that  they  fonned  the  executive
and  chief  power  in  most  of  the  cities  of  Crete.

The  Gerusia,  or  council  of  elders,  called  by  the
Cretans  Boule,  consisted,  according  to  Aristotle
(Polit.  ii.  7),  of  thirty  members  who  had  formerly
been  cosmi,  and  were  in  other  respects  approved  of
(ra  aWa  S6ki[moi  KpivSixeuoi,  Ephor.  I.  c).  They
retained  their  office  for  life,  and  are  said  to  have
decided  in  all  matters  that  came  before  them,  ac-
cording to  their  own  judgment,  and  not  agreeably


COSMI.


365


to  any  fixed  code  of  laws.  They  are  also  said  to
have  been  irresponsible,  which,  however,  hardly
implies  that  they  were  independent  of  the  "  un-
written law  "  of  custom  and  usage,  or  uninfluenced
by  any  fixed  principles.  (Thirlwall,  Hist.  Greece,,
vol.  i.  p.  186.)  On  important  occasions,  as  we  have
before  remarked,  they  were  ^vfx€ov\oi,  or  council-
lors of  the  cosmi.

The  democratic  element  of  the  Ecclesia  was  al-
most powerless  in  the  constitution  ;  its  privileges,
too,  seem  to  have  been  merel}'-  a  matter  of  form  ;
for,  as  Aristotle  observes,  it  exercised  no  function
of  government,  except  ratifying  the  decrees  of  the
yepovT€s  and  the  Koafioi.  It  is,  indeed,  not  im-
probable that  it  was  only  summoned  to  give  its
sanction  to  these  decrees  ;  and  though  this  may
appear  to  imply  the  power  of  withholding  assent,
still  the  force  of  habit  and  custom  would  prevent
such  an  alternative  being  attempted,  or,  perhaps,
even  thought  of.  (Thirlwall,  vol.  i.  p.  286  ;  Gott-
ling.  Excursus  ad  Aristot.  ii.  7.)

From  these  observations,  it  is  clear  that  the
Cretan  constitution  was  formerly  a  Dorian  aristo-
cracy, which,  in  the  age  of  Aristotle,  had  degene-
rated to  what  he  calls  a  Sui/ao-reto,  i.  e.  a  govern-
ment vested  in  a  few  privileged  families.  These
quarrelled  one  amongst  the  other,  and  raised  fac-
tions or  parties,  in  which  the  demus  joined,  so  that
the  constitution  was  frequently  broken  up,  and  a
temporary  monarchy,  or  rather  anarchy,  established
on  its  ruins.  The  cosmi  were,  in  fact,  often  de-
posed by  the  most  powerful  citizens,  when  the
latter  wished  to  impede  the  course  of  justice
against  themselves  {yi^i  ^ovvai  diKas),  and  an
aKOfffj-ia  then  ensued,  without  any  legal  magis-
trates at  the  head  of  the  state.

In  the  time  of  Polybius,  the  power  of  the  aris-
tocracy had  been  completely  overthrown  ;  for  he
tells  us  that  the  election  of  the  magistrates  was
annual,  and  determined  by  democratical  principles.
(Polyb.  vi.  44.)  In  other  respects  also,  he  points
out  a  difference  between  the  institutions  of  Crete
and  those  of  Lycurgus  at  Sparta,  to  which  they
had  been  compared  by  other  writers.

Miiller  observes  that  the  cosmi  were,  so  far  as
we  know,  the  chief  magistrates  in  all  the  cities  of
Crete,  and  that  the  constitution  of  these  cities  was
in  all  essential  points  the  same — a  proof  that  their
political  institutions  were  determined  by  the  prin-
ciples of  the  governing,  i.  e.  the  Doric  race.

The  social  relations  of  the  Cretans  seem  to  have
been  almost  identical  with  those  of  the  Spartans.

The  inhabitants  of  the  Dorian  part  of  the  island
were  divided  into  three  classes,  the  freemen,  the
perioeci  or  virrjKooi,  and  the  slaves.  The  second
class  Avas  as  old  as  the  time  of  Minos,  and  was
undoubtedly  composed  of  the  descendants  of  the
conquered  population  ;  they  lived  in  the  niral  dis-
tricts, round  the  TroAeis  of  the  conquerors  ;  and,
though  personally  free,  j'et  exercised  none  of  the
privileges  or  influence  of  citizens,  either  in  the
administration  and  enactment  of  the  laws,  or  the
use  of  heavy  arms.  They  occupied  certain  lands,
for  which  they  paid  a  yearly  tribute  or  rent,  sup-
posed, from  a  statement  in  Athenaeus  (iv.  p.  143),
to  have  been  an  Aeginetic  stater.*


*  The  expression  of  Dosiadas,  rav  SovXau
e/cacTTos,  probably  refers  to  the  perioeci,  Sov\oi
being  used  as  a  generic  term  for  those  who  were
not  full  and  free  citizens.


see  COTHURNUS.

The  slaves  were  divided  into  two  classes,  the
public  bondsmen  (tj  koiu^  SovXda),  and  the  slaves
of  individuals.  The  former  were  called  the  fivcva,
fivoia,  fivw'ia,  or  Mivwia  (TvuoSos :  the  latter,  a(pa-
fiiMTai,  or  K\apc!)Tai.  The  acpafxiwTai  were  so
named  from  the  cultivation  of  the  lots  of  land,  or
cKpafxiai,  assigned  to  private  citizens,  and  were
therefore  agricultural  bondsmen  (ot  Kar  ayp6v,
Athen.  vi.  p.  263).  The  fivoia  was  distinguished,
by  more  precise  writers,  both  from  the  perioeci
and  the  aphamiotae  ;  so  that  it  has  been  concluded
that  every  state  in  Crete  possessed  a  public  do-
main, cultivated  by  the  mnotae,  just  as  the  private
allotments  were  by  the  bondsmen  of  the  individual
proprietors.  The  word  fivoia,  as  Thirlwall  has
remarked,  is  more  probably  connected  with  Sficos
than  Minos.

The  origin  of  the  class  called  jxvoia,  and  the
K\apu>Tai,  was  probably  twofold  ;  for  the  analogy
of  other  cases  would  lead  us  to  suppose  that  they
consisted  partly  of  the  slaves  of  the  conquered
freemen  of  the  country,  and  partly  of  such  freemen
as  rose  against  the  conquerors,  and  were  by  them
reduced  to  bondage.  But  besides  these,  there  was
also  a  class  of  household  servants  emplo3'ed  in
menial  labours,  and  called  xp^Cf^^V'oi :  they  were,
as  their  name  denotes,  purchased,  and  imported
from  foreign  comitries.  ^[R.  W.]

COTHURNUS  (K6eopuus\  a  boot.  Its  essen-
tial distinction  was  its  height  ;  it  rose  above  the
middle  of  the  leg,  so  as  to  surround  the  calf  (alte
suras  vincire  cotkwno,  Virg.  Aen.  i.  337),  and
sometimes  it  reached  as  high  as  the  knees.  (Millin,
Vases  Ant.  vol.  i.  pi.  20  and  72.)  It  was  worn
principally  by  horsemen,  hunters,  and  by  men  of
rank  and  authority.  The  ancient  marbles,  repre-
senting these  different  characters,  show  that  the
cothurnus  was  often  ornamented  in  a  very  tasteful
and  elaborate  manner.  The  boots  of  the  ancients
were  laced  in  front,  and  it  was  the  object  in  so
doing  to  make  them  fit  the  leg  as  closely  as  pos-
sible. It  is  evident  from  the  various  represent-
ations of  the  cothurnus  in  ancient  statues,  that  its
sole  was  commonly  of  the  ordinary  thickness.  But
it  was  sometimes  made  much  thicker  than  usual,
probably  by  the  insertion  of  slices  of  cork.  (Serv.
in  Viry.  Ed.  II.  cc.)  The  object  was  to  add  to  the
apparent  stature  of  the  wearer  ;  and  this  was  done
either  in  the  case  of  women  who  were  not  so  tall
as  they  wished  to  appear  (Juv.  Sat.  vi.  507),  or  of
the  actors  in  Athenian  tragedy,  who  assumed  the
cothurnus  as  a  grand  and  dignified  species  of  cal-


COTTABOS.

ceamentum,  and  had  the  soles  made  unusually
thick,  as  one  of  the  methods  adopted  in  order  to
magnify  their  whole  appearance.  (Virg.  Ed.  viii.
10  ;  Hor.  Sat.  i.  5.  64  ;  Ars  Poet.  280.)  Hence
tragedy  in  general  was  called  cothurnus.  (Ov.
Trist.  ii.  1.  393  ;  Juv.  vi.  633,  xv.  29.)

As  the  cothurnus  was  commonly  worn  in  hunt-
ing, it  is  represented  both  by  poets  and  statuaries
as  part  of  the  costume  of  .Diana.  It  was  also
attributed  to  Bacchus  (Veil  Pat.  ii.  82),  and  to
Mercury  (Hamilton's  Vases.,  vol.  iii.  pi,  8).  The
preceding  woodcut  shows  two  cothurni  from  sta-
tues in  the  Museo  Pio-Clementino  (vol.  ii.  pi.  15,
and  vol.  iii.  pi.  38).  [J.  Y.]

CO'TTABOS  (Ionic,  K6a<Ta€o5  or  oxTagos),  a
social  game  which  was  introduced  from  Sicily  into
Greece  (Athen.  xv.  p.  666),  where  it  became  one
of  the  favourite  amusements  of  young  people  after
their  repasts.  The  simplest  way  in  which  it  ori-
ginally was  played  was  this  :  —  One  of  the  com-
pany threw  out  of  a  goblet  a  certain  quantity  of
pure  wine,  at  a  certain  distance,  into  a  metal  basin,
endeavouring  to  perform  this  exploit  in  such  a
manner  as  not  to  spill  any  of  the  wine.  While  he
was  doing  this,  he  either  thoiight  of  or  pronounced
the  name  of  his  mistress  {Eti/mol.  Mag.  s.  v.
KoTTa§i(w),  and  from  the  more  or  less  full  and
pure  sound  with  which  the  wine  stnick  against  the
metal  basin,  the  lover  drew  his  conclusions  respect-
ing the  attachment  of  the  object  of  Lis  love.  The
sound,  as  well  as  the  wine  by  which  it  was  pro-
duced, were  called  Actral  or  K6rTa§os :  the  metal
basin  had  various  names,  either  KOTrdSiOv,  or  kot-
TaSelov,  or  karayuov,  or  xctA-Keiov,  or  A.e/cd!'?;,
or  (TKcicpr].  (Pollux,  vi.  1Q9  ;  Etymol.  Mag.  I.  c.  ;
Athen.  xv.  p.  667.  sub  fin.)  The  action  of  throw-
ing the  wine,  and  sometimes  the  goblet  itself,  waa
called  a.yKv\%  because  the  persons  engaged  in  the
game  turned  round  the  right  hand  with  great
dexterity,  on  which  thej'-  prided  themselves.  Hence
Aeschylus  spoke  of  KSrraSoi  ayKvAr]ToL  (Athen.
XV.  p.  667.)  Thus  the  cottabus,  in  its  simplest
form,  was  nothing  but  one  of  the  many  methods
by  which  lovers  tried  to  discover  whether  their
love  was  returned  or  not.  But  this  simple  amuse-
ment gradually  assumed  a  variety  of  different  cha-
racters, and  became,  in  some  instances,  a  regular
contest,  with  prizes  for  the  victor.  One  of  the
most  celebrated  modes  in  which  it  was  carried  on
is  described  by  Athenaeus  (Z.  c.)  and  in  the  Etymol.
Mag.^  and  was  called  Si'  6^v§d(pwv.  A  basin  was
filled  with  water,  with  small  empty  bowls  sAvim-
ming  upon  it.  Into  these  the  young  men,  one  after
another,  threw  the  remnant  of  the  wine  from  their
goblets,  and  he  who  had  the  good  fortune  to  drown
most  of  the  bowls  obtained  the  prize  {KOTrd§Lov),
consisting  either  of  simple  cakes,  sweet-meats,  or
sesame-cakes.

A  third  and  more  complicated  form  of  the  cot-
tabus  is  thus  described  by  Suidas  (s.  v.  KoTTaSiCw) .
—  A  long  piece  of  wood  being  erected  on  the
ground,  another  was  placed  upon  it  in  an  hori-
zontal direction,  with  two  dishes  hanging  down
from  each  end ;  underneath  each  dish  a  vessel  full
of  water  was  placed,  in  each  of  which  stood  a  gilt
brazen  statue,  called  p-dv-qs.  Every  one  who  took
part  in  the  game  stood  at  a  distance,  holding  a  cup
full  of  wine,  which  he  endeavoured  to  throw  into
one  of  the  dishes,  in  order  that,  struck  down  by
the  weight,  it  might  knock  against  the  head  of  the
statue  which  was  concealed  under  the  water.     He


COTYTTIA.

who  spilled  least  of  the  wine  gained  the  victon',
and  thereby  knew  that  he  was  loved  by  his  mis-
tress. (See  Schol.  ad  Lucian.  Lcxiph.  3.  vol.  ii.
p.  325.)

A  fourth  kind  of  cottabus,  which  was  called
ndrraSos  kutuktSs  {oltto  rod  Kara-y^iv  rhv  kot-
raSov),  is  described  by  Pollux  (vi.  109),  the
Scholiast  on  Aristophanes  (Paar,  1172),  and  Athe-
naeus  (xv.  p.  G67).  The  so-called  fiavvs  was
placed  upon  a  pillar  similar  to  a  candelabrum,  and
the  dish  hanging  over  it  must,  by  means  of  wine
projected  from  the  goblet,  be  thrown  upon  it,  and
thence  fall  into  a  basin  filled  with  water,  which
from  this  fall  gave  forth  a  sound  ;  and  he  who  pro-
duced the  strongest  was  the  victor,  and  received
prizes,  consisting  of  eggs,  cakes,  and  sweetmeats.

This  brief  description  of  four  various  forms  of
the  cottabus  may  be  sufficient  to  show  the  general
character  of  this  game  ;  and  it  is  only  necessary  to
add,  that  the  chief  object  to  be  accomplished  in
all  the  various  modifications  of  the  cottabus  was  to
throvv  the  wine  out  of  the  goblet  in  such  a  manner
that  it  should  remain  together  and  nothing  be
spilled,  and  that  it  should  produce  the  purest  and
strongest  possible  sound  in  the  place  where  it  was
thrown.  In  Sicily,  the  popularity  of  this  game
was  so  great,  that  houses  were  built  for  the  especial
purpose  of  playing  the  cottabus  in  them.  Those
readers  who  wish  to  become  fullj'-  acquainted  with
all  the  various  forms  of  this  game,  may  consult
Athenaeus  (xv.  p.  666,  &c,),  the  Greek  Lexico-
graphers, and,  above  all,  Groddeck  {Ueber  de?i
Kotiahos  der  GHechen,  in  his  Atdiquarisclie  Ver-
suche^'i.  Sammlung^  1800,  pp.  163 — 238),  who  has
collected  and  described  nine  different  forms  in
which  it  was  played.  Becker  (Charikies^  i.  p.  476,
&c.)  is  of  opinion  that  all  of  them  were  but  modi-
fications of  two  principal  forms.  (Compare  also  Fr.
Jacobs,  Ueber  den  Kottabos  in  Wtelund''s  Attisches
Museum^  iii.  1.  pp.  475 — 496.)  [L.  S.]

CO'TYLA  (kotvXt])  was  a  measure  of  capacity
among  the  Romans  and  Greeks :  by  the  former  it
was  also  called  hemina  ;  by  the  latter,  rpvSXiov  and
7]jjiiva  or  Tjixlixva.  It  was  the  half  of  the  sextarius
or  |eo-T7js,  and  contained  6  cyathi,  or  nearly  half  a
pint  English.

This  measure  was  used  by  physicians  with  a
graduated  scale  mai'ked  on  it,  like  our  own  chemi-
cal measures,  for  measurmg  out  given  weights  of
fluids,  especially  oil.  A  vessel  of  horn,  of  a  cubic
or  cylindrical  shape,  of  the  capacity  of  a  cotyla,
was  divided  into  twelve  equal  parts  by  lines  cut
on  its  side.  The  whole  vessel  was  called  litra,  and
each  of  the  parts  an  ounce  {undo).  This  measure
held  nine  ounces  ( by  weight)  of  oil,  so  that  the
ratio  of  the  weight  of  the  oil  to  the  number  of
ounces  it  occupied  in  the  measure  would  be  9  :  12
or  3  :  4.  (Galenus,  De  Compos.  Medicam.  per
Genera,  iii.  3,  i.  16,  17,  iv.  14,  v.  3,  6,  vi.  6,  8  ;
Wunn,  Z>e  Pond.  Metis.  &c.  ;  Hussey,  On  Ancient
Weights,  8ic.)  [P.S.]

COTYTTIA  or  COTTYTES  (KorirTia,  k6t-
rvTfs),  a  festival  which  was  originally  celebrated
by  the  Edonians  of  Thrace,  in  honour  of  a  goddess
called  Cotys  or  Cotytto.  (Strab.  x.  p.  470  ;  Eupolis,
apud  Hesych.  s.  v. ;  Suidas.)  It  was  held  at  night,
and,  according  to  Strabo,  resembled  the  festivals
of  the  Cabeiri  and  the  Phrygian  Cybele.  But  the
worship  of  Cotys,  together  with  the  festival  of  the
Cotyttia,  was  adopted  by  several  Greek  states,
chiefly  those  which  were  induced  by  their  com-


CRATER.


367


raercial  interest  to  maintain  friendly  relations  with
Thrace.  Among  these  Corinth  is  expressly  men-
tioned by  Suidas,  and  Strabo  (x.  p.  471)  seems
to  suggest  that  the  worship  of  Cotys  was  adopted
by  the  Athenians,  who,  as  he  observes,  were  as
hospitable  to  foreign  gods  as  they  were  to  foreigners
in  general.  (Compare  Juven.  Sat.  ii.  92.)  The
priests  of  the  goddess  were  formerly  supposed  to
have  borne  the  name  of  baptae ;  but  Buttmann
has  shown  that  this  opinion  is  utterly  groundless.
Her  festivals  were  notorious  among  the  ancients
for  the  dissolute  manner  and  the  debaucheries  with
which  they  were  celebrated.  (Suidas,  s.  v.  KtJrus  ;
Horat.  Epod.  xvii.  bQ  ;  Theocrit.  vi.  40.)  Another
festival  of  the  same  name  was  celebrated  in  Sicily
(Plut.  Proverb.),  where  boughs  hung  with  cakes
and  fruit  were  carried  about,  which  any  person
had  a  right  to  pluck  off  if  he  chose  ;  but  we  have
no  mention  that  this  festival  was  polluted  with  any
of  the  licentious  practices  which  disgraced  those  of
Thrace  and  Greece,  unless  we  refer  the  allusion
made  by  Theocritus  to  the  Cotyttia,  to  the  Sicilian
festival.  (Compare  Buttmann's  essay,  Ueber  die
Kotyttia  und  die  Baptae,  in  his  Mythologus,  vol.  ii.
p.  159 ;  Lobeck,  Aghxoph.  pp.  627,  1007,
«&c.)  [L.  S.]

COVINA'RII.     [CoviNus.J

COVI'NUS  (Celtic,  kowain),  a  kind  of  car,  the
spokes  of  which  were  armed  with  long  sickles,  and
which  was  used  as  a  scythe-chariot  chiefly  by  the
ancient  Belgians  and  Britons.  (Mela,  iii.  6  ;  Lucan,
i.  426  ;  SiJius,  xvii.  422.)  The  Romans  designated,
by  the  name  of  covinus,  a  kind  of  travelling  car-
riage, which  seems  to  have  been  covered  on  all
sides  with  the  exception  of  the  front.  It  had  no
seat  for  a  driver,  but  was  conducted  by  the  travel-
ler himself,  who  sat  inside.  (Mart.  Epig.  ii.  24.)
There  must  have  been  a  great  similarity  between
the  Belgian  scythe-chariot  and  the  Roman  travel-
ling carriage,  as  the  name  of  the  one  was  transferred
to  the  other,  and  we  may  justly  conclude  that  the
Belgian  car  was  likewise  covered  on  all  sides,  ex-
cept the  front,  and  that  it  was  occupied  by  one
man,  the  covinarius  only,  who  was,  by  the  struc-
ture of  his  car,  sufficiently  protected.  The  covi-
7iarii  (the  word  occurs  only  in  Tacitus)  seem  to
have  constituted  a  regular  and  distinct  part  of  a
British  army.  (Tacit.  Agr.  35  and  36,  with  M.  J.
H.  Becker's  note ;  Botticher's  Lexicori  Tacit,  s.  v.  ;
Becker,  Gallus,  vol.  i.  p.  222  ;  compare  the  article
ESSEDUM.)  [L.  S.]

CRATER  (Kpar-f}p :  Ionic,  Kp-nrrjp  :  Lat.  crater
or  cratera;  from  Kipavvvjii,  I  mix),  a  vessel  in
which  the  wine,  according  to  the  custom  of  the
ancients,  who  very  seldom  drank  it  pure,  was
mixed  with  water,  and  from  which  the  cups  were
filled.  In  the  Homeric  age  the  mixture  was  al-
ways made  in  the  dining-room  by  heralds  or  young
men  {Kovpoi;  see  11.  iii.  p.  269,  Od.  vii.  182,  xxL
271).  The  use  of  the  vessel  is  sufficiently  clear
from  the  expressions  so  frequent  in  the  poems  of
Homer :  KpriTrjpa  Kepdaaadai,  i.  e.  olvov  kolI  USap
iv  KprjTTJpi  fMLaryeiy :  iriv^iv  Kp7]rr\pa  (to  empty  the
crater)  ;  KpriTripa  crT7](ra(rOai  (cratera  statuere.  to
place  the  filled  crater  near  the  table)  ;  Kp-nrripas
ini<TTe(picr6ai  ttotoTo  (to  fill  the  craters  to  the
brim,  see  Buttmann,  Lexil.  i.  15).  The  crater  in
the  Homeric  age  was  generally  of  silver  (Od.  ix.
203,  X.  356),  sometimes  with  a  gold  edge  (0'/.
iv.  616),  and  sometimes  all  gold  or  gilt.  (II.  xxiii.
219.)     It  stood  upon  a  tripod,  and  its  ordinary


S6«  CRATKR.

place  in  the  fxiyapov  was  in  the  most  honourable
part  of  the  room,  at  the  farthest  end  from  the  en-
trance, and  near  the  seat  of  the  most  distinguished
among  the  guests.  {Od.  xxi.  145,  xxii.  333,  com-
pared with  341.)  The  size  of  the  crater  seems  to
have  varied  according  to  the  number  of  guests  ;
for  where  their  number  is  increased,  a  larger  crater
is  asked  for.  {II.  ix.  202.)  It  would  seem,  at
least  at  a  later  period  (for  in  the  Homeric  poems
we  find  no  traces  of  the  custom),  that  three  craters
Avere  filled  at  every  feast  after  the  tables  were  re-
moved. They  must,  of  course,  have  varied  in  size
according  to  the  number  of  guests.  According  to
Suidas  (s.  v.  Kparr^p)  the  first  was  dedicated  to
Hermes,  the  second  to  Charisius,  and  the  third  to
Zeus  Soter ;  but  others  called  them  by  different
names;  thus  the  first,  or,  according  to  others,  the
last,  was  also  designated  the  Kparrip  ayadov  5ai-
fxouos,  the  crater  of  the  good  genius  (Suidas  s.  v.
Ayadov  Aai/xopos:  compare  Athen.  xv.  p.  692,
&c.  ;  Aristoph.  Vesp.  507,  Pcur,  300),  npar^p
vyiiias  and  fx^Taviirrpis  or  /xerdviirTpov,  because
it  was  the  crater  from  which  the  cups  were  filled
after  the  washing  of  the  hands.  (Athen.  xv.  p.  629,
f.  &c.)

Craters  were  among  the  first  things  on  the  em-
bellishment of  which  the  ancient  artists  exercised
their  skill.  Homer  (11.  xxiii.  741,  &c.)  mentions,
among  the  prizes  proposed  by  Achilles,  a  beauti-
fully wrought  silver  crater,  the  work  of  the  ingeni-
ous Sidonians,  which,  by  the  elegance  of  its  work-
manship, excelled  all  others  on  the  whole  earth.
In  the  reign  of  Croesus,  king  of  Lydia,  the  Lace-
daemonians sent  to  that  king  a  brazen  crater,  the
])order  of  which  was  all  over  ornamented  with
figures  (^w5ia),  and  which  was  of  such  an  enor-
mous size  that  it  contained  300  amphorae.  (Herod.
i.  70.)  Croesus  himself  dedicated  to  the  Delphic
god  two  huge  craters,  which  the  Delphians  believed
to  be  the  work  of  Theodorus  of  Samos,  and  Hero-
dotus (i.  51)  was  induced  by  the  beauty  of  their
workmanship  to  think  the  same.  It  was  about
01.  35,  that  the  Samians  dedicated  six  talents  (the
tenth  of  the  profits  made  by  Colaeus  on  his  voyage
to  Tartessus)  to  Hera,  in  the  shape  of  an  immense
brazen  crater,  the  border  of  which  was  adorned
Avith  projecting  heads  of  griffins.  This  crater,  which
Herodotus  (iv.  152)  calls  Argive  (from  which  we
must  infer  that  the  Argive  artists  were  celebrated
for  their  craters),  was  supported  by  three  colossal
brazen  statues,  seven  cubits  long,  with  their  knees
closed  together.

The  number  of  craters  dedicated  in  temples
seems  everywhere  to  have  been  very  great.  Livius
Andronicus,  in  his  Equus  Trojanus,  represented
Agamemnon  returning  from  Troy  with  no  less  than
3000  craters  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  vii.  1),  and  Cicero
(in  Vcrr.  iv.  58)  says  that  Verres  carried  away
from  Syracuse  the  most  beautiful  brazen  craters,
Avhich  most  probably  belonged  to  the  various  tem-
ples of  that  city.  But  craters  were  not  only  de-
dicated to  the  gods  as  anathemata,  but  were  used
on  various  solenm  occasions  in  their  service.  Thus
we  read  in  Theocritus  (v.  53,  compare  Virgil,
Edog.  v.  67)  : — "I  shall  oflfer  to  the  Muses  a  crater
full  of  fresh  milk  and  sweet  olive-oil."  In  sacri-
fices the  libation  was  always  taken  from  a  crater
(Demosth.  De  Fals.  Legal,  p.  431,  c.  Lept.  p.  505,
c.  Mid.  p.  531,  c.  Macart.  p.  1072  ;  compare  Bekk.
Anecdot.  p.  274.  4),  and  sailoi's  before  they  set  out
on  their  journey  used  to  take  the  libation  with


CRIMEN.

cups  from  a  crater,  and  pour  it  into  the  sea.
(Thucyd.  vi.  32  ;  Diodor.  iii.  3  ;  Arrian,  Anab.
vi.  3  ;  Virg.  Aen.  v.  765.)  The  name  crater  was
also  sometimes  used  as  synonymous  with  <riT\iov,
situla,  a  pail  in  which  water  was  fetched.  (Naev.
aptid  Non.  xv.  36  ;  Hesych.  s.  xi.  Kparripes.)

The  Romans  u-ed  their  crater  or  cratera  for  the
same  purposes  for  which  it  was  used  in  Greece  ;
but  the  most  elegant  specimens  were,  like  most
other  works  of  art,  made  by  Greeks.  (Virg.  Aen.  i.
727,  iii.  525  ;  Ovid,  Fast.  v.  522  ;  Hor.  Carm.
iii.  18.  7.)  [L.S.]

CRATES  (rdpaos),  a  hurdle,  used  by  the
ancients  for  several  purposes.  First,  in  war,  espe-
cially in  assaulting  a  city  or  camp,  they  were  placed
before  or  over  the  head  of  the  soldier  to  shield  off
the  enemy's  missiles.  (Amm.  Marc.  xxi.  12.)  From
the  plutei^  which  were  employed  in  the  same  way,
they  differed  only  in  being  without  the  covering  of
raw  hides.  A  lighter  kind  was  thrown  do\vn  to
make  a  bridge  over  fosses,  for  examples  of  which
see  Caesar,  B.  G.  vii.  81,  86.  By  the  besieged
(Veget.  iv.  6)  they  were  used  joined  together  so
as  to  form  what  Vegetius  calls  a  metella,  and  filled
with  stones  :  these  were  then  poised  between  two
of  the  battlements  ;  and  as  the  stonning  party
approached  upon  the  ladders,  overturned  on  their
heads.

A  capital  punishment  was  called  by  this  name,
whence  the  phrase  sub  crate  necari.  The  criminal
was  thrown  into  a  pit  or  well,  and  hurdles  laid
upon  him,  over  which  stones  were  afterwards
heaped.     (Liv.  i.  51,  iv.  50  ;  Tacit.  German.  12.)

Crates  called  ficariae  were  used  by  the  countiy
people  upon  which  to  dry  figs,  grapes,  &c.,  in  the
rnys  of  the  sun.  (Colum.  xii.  15,  16.)  These,  as
Columella  informs  us,  were  made  of  sedge  or
straw,  and  also  employed  as  a  sort  of  matting  to
screen  the  fruit  from  the  weather.  Virgil  (Georg.
i.  94)  recommends  the  use  of  hurdles  in  agriculture
to  level  the  ground  after  it  has  been  turned  up
with  the  heavy  rake  (rastrum).  Any  texture  of
rods  or  twigs  seems  to  have  been  called  by  the
general  name  craves.  [B.  J."|

CRETIDA  (/cpTjTTts),  a  slipper.  Slippers  were
worn  with  the  pallium,  not  with  the  toga,  and
were  properly  <:haracteristic  of  the  Greeks,  though
adopted  from  them  by  the  Romans.  Hence  Sue-
tonius says  of  the  Emperor  Tiberius  (c.  13),  Depo-
sito  patrio  hafntu  redegit  se  ad  pallium  et  crepidas.
As  the  cothurnus  was  assumed  by  tragedians,  be-
cause it  was  adapted  to  be  part  of  a  grand  and
stately  attire,  the  actors  of  comedy,  on  the  other
hand,  wore  crepldae  and  other  cheap  and  common
coverings  for  the  feet  [Baxea  ;  Soccas.]  Also
whereas  the  ancients  had  their  more  finished  boots
and  shoes  made  right  and  left,  their  slippers,  on
the  other  hand,  were  made  to  fit  both  feet  indif-
ferently.    [Isid.  On>.  ix.  34.)  [J.  Y.]

CREPITA'CULUM.     [Sistrum.]

CRE'TIO  HEREDITA'TIS.     [Heres.]

CRIMEN.  Though  this  word  occurs  so  fre-
quently, it  is  not  easy  to  fix  its  meaning.  Crimen
is  often  equivalent  to  accusatio  (KaTrjyopia)  ;  but  it
frequently  means  an  act  which  is  legally  punish-
able. In  this  latter  sense  there  seems  to  be  no
exact  definition  of  it  by  the  Roman  jurists.  Ac-
cording to  some  modem  writers,  crimina  are  either
public  or  private ;  but  we  have  still  to  determine
the  notions  of  public  and  private.  There  was  a
want  of  precise  terminology  as  to  what,  in  common


CRIMEN.

language,  are  called  criminal  offences  among  the
Romans ;  and  this  defect  appears  in  other  systems
of  jurisprudence.  Crimen  has  been  also  defined  by
modern  writers  to  be  that  which  is  capitalis,  as
murder,  &c. ;  delictum,  that  which  is  a  private
injury  (privata  noxa)  ;  a  distinction  founded  ap-
parently on  Dig.  21.  tit.  1.  s.  17.  §  15.

Delicts  (delicta)  were  maleficia,  wrongful  acts
(Dig.  47.  tit.  1.  s.  3),  and  the  foundation  of  one
class  of  obligationes :  these  delicts,  as  enumerated
by  Gaius  (iii.  182),  are  furtum,  rapina,  damnum,
injuriae  ;  they  gave  a  right  of  action  to  the  indi-
vidual injui-ed,  and  intitled  him  to  compensation.
These  delicts  were  sometimes  called  crimina  (cri-
men furti,  Gaius,  iii.  197).  Crimen  therefore  is
sometimes  applied  to  that  class  of  delicta  called
privata  (Dig.  47.  tit.  1.  De  Privatis  Delidis)  ;  and
accordingly  crimen  may  be  viewed  as  a  genus,
of  which  the  delicta  enumerated  by  Gaius  are  a
species.  But  crimen  and  delictum  are  sometimes
used  as  synonymous.  (Dig.  48.  tit.  19.  s.  1.)  In
one  passage  (Dig.  48.  tit.  19.  s.  5)  we  read  of
raajora  delicta  (a  term  implying  that  these  are
minora  delicta),  which  expression  is  coupled  with
the  expression  omnia  crimina  in  such  a  way  that
the  inference  of  crimen  containing  delictum  is,  so
far  as  concerns  this  passage,  necessary ;  for  the
omnia  crimina  comprehend  (in  this  passage)  more
than  the  delicia  majora.

Some  judicia  publica  were  capitalia,  and  some
were  not.  (Dig.  48.  tit.  1.  s.  2.)  Judicia,  which
concerned  crimina,  were  not,  for  that  reason  only,
publica.  There  were,  therefore,  crimina  which
were  not  tried  in  judicia  publica.  This  is  con-
sistent with  what  is  stated  above  as  to  those  cri-
mina (delicta)  which  were  the  subject  of  actions.
Those  crimina  only  were  the  subject  of  judicia
publica,  which  were  made  so  by  special  laws  ;  such
as  the  Julia  de  adulteriis,  Cornelia  de  sicariis  et
veneficis,  Porapeia  de  parricidiis,  Julia  peculatus,
Cornelia  de  testamentis,  Julia  de  vi  privata,  Julia
dt  vi  publica,  Julia  de  ambitu,  Julia  repetundarum,
Julia  de  annona.  (Dig.  48.  tit.  1.  s.  1.)  So  far  as
Cicero  {De  Orat.  ii.  25)  enumerates  causae  crimi-
num,  they  were  causae  publici  judicii ;  but  he  adds
(ii.  31),  "  criminum  est  multitude  infinita."  Again,
infamia  was  not  the  consequence  of  e\ery  crimen,
but  only  of  those  crimina  which  were  "  publici
judicii."  A  condemnation,  therefore,  for  a  crimen,
not  publici  judicii,  was  not  followed  by  infamia,
unless  the  crimen  laid  the  foundation  of  an  actio,
in  which,  even  in  the  case  of  a  privatum  judicium,
the  condemnation  was  followed  by  infamia  ;  as
furtum,  rapina,  injuriae.    (Dig.  48.  tit.  1.  s.  7.)

Most  modern  writers  on  Roman  law  have  con-
sidered delicta  as  the  general  term,  which  they
have  subdivided  into  delicta  publica  and  privata.
The  division  of  delicta  into  publica  and  privata
had  partly  its  origin  in  the  opinion  generally  enter-
tained of  the  nature  of  the  delict  ;  but  the  legal
distinction  must  be  derived  from  a  consideration  of
the  form  of  obtaining  redress  for,  or  punishing,  the
wrong.  Those  delicta  which  were  punishable  ac-
cording to  special  leges,  senatus-consulta,  and  con-
stitutiones,  and  were  prosecuted  in  judicia  publica
by  an  accusatio  publica,  were  m.ore  especially  called
crimina  ;  and  the  penalties,  in  case  of  conviction,
were  loss  of  life,  of  freedom,  of  civitas,  and  the  con-
sequent infamia,  and  sometimes  pecuniary  penalties
also.  Those  delicta  not  provided  for  as  above  men-
tioned, were  prosecuted  by  action,  and  were  the


CROCOTA.  369

subjects  of  judicia  privata,  in  which  pecuniary  com-
pensation was  awarded  to  the  injured  party.  At  a
later  period  we  find  a  class  of  crimina  extraor-
dinaria  (Dig.  47.  tit.  11),  which  are  somewhat
vaguely  defined.  They  are  ofi'ences  which  in  the
earlier  law  would  have  been  the  foundation  of
actions,  but  were  assimilated,  as  to  their  punish-
ment, to  crimina  publici  judicii.  This  new  class
of  crimina  (new  as  to  the  form  of  judicial  proceed-
ings) must  have  arisen  from  a  growing  opinion  of
the  propriety  of  not  limiting  punishment,  in  certain
cases,  to  compensation  to  the  party  injured.  The
person  who  inquired  judicially  extra  ordinem,  might
affix  what  punishment  he  pleased,  within  reason-
able limits.  (Dig.  48.  tit.  19.  s.  13.)  Thus,  if  a
person  intended  to  prosecute  his  action,  which
was  founded  on  maleficium  (delict),  for  pecuniary
compensation,  he  followed  the  jus  ordinarium  ;  but
if  he  wished  to  punish  the  offender  otherwise  (extra
ordinem  ejus  rei  poenam  exerceri  (e?)  velit),  then  he
took  criminal  proceedings,  "  subscripsit  in  crimen."
(Dig.  47.  tit.  1.  s.  3.)

The  forty-seventh  book  of  the  Digest  treats  first
of  delicta  pi-ivata  properly  so  called  (Tit,  1 — 10),
and  then  of  extraordinaria  crimina.  The  forty-
eighth  book  treats  of  crimina,  and  the  first  title  is
De  Publicis  Judiciis.  Compensation  might  be  de-
manded by  the  heredes  of  the  injured  person,  and
of  the  heredes  of  the  wrong -doer  ;  but  the  heredes
of  the  wrong-doer  were  not  liable  to  a  penal  action
(poenalis  actio,  Dig.  47.  tit.  1.  s.  1).  Compensa-
tion could  be  sued  for  by  the  party  injured :  a
penalty,  which  was  not  a  direct  benefit  to  the  in-
jured party,  was  sued  for  by  the  state,  or  by  those
to  whom  the  power  of  prosecution  was  given,  as  in
the  case  of  the  lex  Julia  de  adulteriis,  &c.  In
the  case  of  delicta  publica,  the  intention  of  the
doer  was  the  main  thing  to  be  considered  :  the
act,  if  done,  was  not  for  that  reason  only  punished  ;
nor  if  it  remained  incomplete,  was  it  for  that  rea-
son only  unpunished.  In  the  case  of  delicta  pri-
vata, the  injury,  if  done,  was  always  compensated,
even  if  it  was  merely  culpa.  [G.  L.]

CRINIS.     [Coma.]

CRISTA.     [Galea.]

CRITAE  (Kpirai),  judges.  I'his  name  was
applied  by  the  Greeks  to  any  person  who  did  not
judge  of  a  thing  like  a  SiKaarr^s,  according  to
positive  laws,  but  according  to  his  own  sense  of
justice  and  equity.  (Herod,  iii.  160;  Demosth.
Olynth.  i.  p.  17,  c  Mid.  p.  520.)  But  at  Athens
a  number  of  Kpirai  was  chosen  by  ballot  from  a
number  of  selected  candidates  at  every  celebration
of  the  Dionysia,  and  were  called  ol  Kpirai^  Kar'
H^XW'  Their  office  was  to  judge  of  the  merit  of
the  different  choruses  and  dramatic  poems,  and  to
award  the  prizes  to  the  victors.  (Isocr.  Trapez.
p.  365,  c.  with  Coraes'  note.)  Their  number  is
stated  by  Suidas  {s.  v.  'Ev  TreVre  Kpirwu  yovvaai)
to  have  been  five  for  comedies,  and  G.  Hermann
has  supposed,  with  great  probability,  that  there
were  on  the  whole  ten  Kpirai,  five  for  comedy,  and
the  same  number  for  tragedy,  one  being  taken
from  every  tribe.  The  expression  in  Aristophanes
(Av.  421),  viKuv  iracTL  roh  Kpirals,  signifies  to
gain  the  victory  by  the  unanimous  consent  of  the
five  judges.  For  the  complete  literature  of  this
subject,  see  K.  F.  Hermann's  Manual  of  the  Pol.
Ant.  of  Greece,  %  149.  n.  13.  [L.  S.]

CRO'BYLUS.     [Coma.]

CROCO'TA  {scvestis;  KpoKwrhv  sc.  ifidriov


'870  CROTALUM.

or  KpoKccrhs  sc.  x^'^'*'^)^  was  a  kind  of  gala  dress,
chiefly  worn  by  women  on  solemn  occasions,  and
in  Greece  especially,  at  the  festival  of  the  Dionysia.
(Aristoph.  Roti.  46,  with  the  ScJiol.  Lysislr,
44  ;  Pollux,  iv.  18.  117.)  It  was  also  worn  by
the  priest  of  Cybele  (Apul.  M&t.  8  and  11  ;
Virg.  Aen.  ix.  614),  and  sometimes  by  men  of
effeminate  character.  (Aristoph.  Tltesmoph.  253  ;
Suidas,  s.  <o. ;  Plant,  and  Naevius,  ap.  Nonium,
xiv.  8.  and  xvi.  4  ;  Cic.  Harusp.  Resp.  21.)  It
is  evident  from  the  passage  of  Virgil,  that  its
name  was  derived  from  crocus^  one  of  the  favourite
colours  of  the  Greek  ladies,  as  we  still  see  in  the
pictures  discovered  at  Herculaneura  and  Pompeii.
The  circumstance  that  dresses  of  this  colour  were
in  Latin  commonly  called  vestes  crocatae  or  cro-
ceae,  has  induced  some  writers  on  antiquities  to
suppose  that  crocota  was  derived  from  KpoK-i]
(woof  or  weft),  or  KpoKis  (a  flake  of  wool  or  cotton
on  the  surface  of  the  cloth),  so  that  it  would  be  a
soft  and  woolly  kind  of  dress.  (Salmas.  ad  Ca-
pitolin.  Pertinac.  8.  t.  1.  p.  547,  and  ad  TertulL  De
Pall.  p.  329.)  But  the  passages  above  referred  to
are  sufficient  to  refute  this  opinion,  and  the  name
crocota  was,  like  many  others,  adopted  by  the
Romans  from  the  Greeks.  (Compare  Becker's
Chirikles,  vol.  ii.  p.  35 1 ,  &c.)  [L.  S.]

CRO'NIA  {Kp6via\  a  festival  celebrated  at
Athens  in  honour  of  Cronos,  whose  worship  was
said  to  have  been  introduced  into  Attica  by
Cecrops.  He  had  a  temple  in  common  with  Rhea.
(Paus.  i.  18.  §  7  ;  comp.  vi.  20.  §  1.)  The  fes-
tival was  held  on  the  twelfth  of  the  month  of
Hecatorabaeon  (Demosth.  c.  Timocr.  p.  708  ;  Pint.
Thes.  12  ;  Etyra.  M.  s.  v.\  which,  at  an  early
period  of  the  history  of  Attica,  bore  the  name  of
/iV  Kpoviwv.     (Athen.  xiii.  p.  581.)

The  Rhodians  also  celebrated  a  festival  in  honour
of  Cronos  —  perhaps  the  Phoenician  Moloch  —  to
whom  human  sacrifices,  generally  consisting  of
criminals,  were  offered.  The  festival  was  held  on
the  sixteenth  of  Metageitnion.  (Porphyr.  De
Abstinent,  ii.  54.)

Greek  writers,  when  speaking  of  the  Roman
Saturnalia,  apply  to  them  the  name  KpSria,  which
in  the  early  times  seem  to  have  really  resembled
them  in  their  excessive  merriment.  (See  Athen.
xiv.  p.  639  ;  Appian,  Samn.  10,  §  5  ;  Bxittmann,
Mythol.  vol.  ii.  p.  52,  &c.)  [L.  S.]

CROTALUM  {KpdToKov),  a  kind  of  cymbal,
erroneously  supposed  by  some  writers  to  be  the
same  with  the  sistrum.  [Sistrum.]  The  mistakes
of  learned  men  on  this  point  are  refuted  at
length  by  Lampe  (De  Cymh.  Vet  i.  4,  5,  6).  From
Suidas  and  the  Scholiast  on  Aristophanes  {Nubes,
260),  it  appears  to  have  been  a  split  reed  or  cane,
which  clattered  when  shaken  with  the  hand.  Ac-
cording to  Eustathius  {U.  xi.  1 60),  it  was  made  of
shell  and  brass,  as  well  as  of  wood.  Clemens.
Alexandrinus  further  says  that  it  was  an  invention
of  the  Sicilians.

Women  who  played  on  th«  crotalum  were
termed  croialisiriae.     Such  was  Virgil's  Copa  (2),

**  Crispum  sub  crotalo  docta  movere  latus."

The  line  alludes  to  the  dance  with  crotala  (similar
to  castanets),  for  which  we  have  the  additional
testimony  of  Macrobius  {Sat.  ii.  10).  The  annexed
woodcut,  taken  from  the  drawing  of  an  ancient
marble  iii  Spon's  Miscellanea  (sec.  i.  art.  vi.  fig.


CRUX,
43),  represents  one  of  these  crotalistriae  perform-
ing.


The  word  Kp6ra\ov  is  often  applied,  by  an  easy
metaphor,  to  a  noisy  talkative  person.  (Aristoph.
Nzd).  448  ;  Eurip.  Cycl.  104.)  [B.  J.]

CRUSTA.  [Caelatura  ;  Chrysendkta  ;
Emblemata.]

CRUX  CcrravpSs,  ckSKo^),  an  instrument  of
capital  punishment,  used  by  several  ancient  nations,
especially  the  Romans  and  Carthaginians.  The
words  cravp6(a  and  (TKoKoirl^ti)  are  also  applied  to
Persian  and  Egyptian  punishments,  but  Casaubon
{Exer.  Antibaron.  xvi.  77)  doubts  whether  they
describe  the  Roman  method  of  crucifixion.  From
Seneca  {Cons.  <td  Marc,  xx.,  Epist.  xiv,  1)  we
learn  the  latter  to  have  been  of  two  kinds,  the  less
usual  sort  being  rather  impalement  than  what  we
should  describe  by  the  word  crucifixion,  as  the  crimi-
nal was  transfixed  by  a  pole,  which  passed  through
the  back  and  spine  and  came  out  at  the  mouth.

The  cross  was  of  several  kinds  ;  one  in  the  shape
of  an  X,  called  cntx  Andreana^  because  tradition
reports  St.  Andrew  to  have  suffered  upon  it  ;  an-
other was  formed  like  a  T,  as  we  learn  from  Lucian
{Judic.  Vocal,  xii.),  who  makes  it  the  subject  of  a
charge  against  the  letter.

The  third,  and  most  common  sort,  was  made  of
two  pieces  of  wood  crossed,  so  as  to  make  four  right
angles.  It  was  on  this,  according  to  the  unani-
mous testimony  of  the  fathers  who  sought  to  con-
firm it  by  Scripture  itself  (Lips.  De  Cruce.,  i.  9),
that  our  Saviour  suffered.  The  punishment,  as  is
well  kno\vn,  was  chiefly  inflicted  on  slaves,  and
the  worst  kind  of  malefactors.  (Juv.  vi.  219  ;  Hor.
Sat.  i.  3.  82. )  The  manner  of  it  was  as  follows  :
—  The  criminal,  after  sentence  pronounced,  carried
his  cross  to  the  place  of  execution  ;  a  custom  men-
tioned hj  Plutarch  {De  Tard.  Dei  Vind.  (Ka<TTos
Twv  KaKovpywv  iK(p4p€i  rhv  aurov  <TTavp6v)^  and
Artemidorus  {Oneir.  ii.  61),  as  well  as  in  the
Gospels.  From  Livy  (xxxiii.  36)  and  Valerius
Maximus  (i.  7),  scourging  appears  to  have  formed
a  part  of  this,  as  of  other  capital  punishments
among  the  Romans.  The  scourging  of  our  Sa-
viour, however,  is  not  to  be  regarded  in  this  light,
for,  as  Grotius  and  Hammond  have  observed,  it
was  inflicted  before  sentence  was  pronounced.
(St.  Luke,  xxiiu  16  ;  St.  John,  xix.  1.  6.)  The
criminal  was  next  stripped  of  his  clothes  and
nailed  or  bound  to  the  cross.  The  latter  was  the
more  painful  method,  as  the  sufferer  was  left  to  die
of  hunp-er.  Instances  are  recorded  of  persons  who
survived  nine  days.  It  was  usual  to  leave  the
body  on  the  cross  after  death.  The  breaking  of
the  legs  of  the  thieves,  mentioned  in  the  Gospels,


CRYPTEIA.

was  accidental  ;  because  by  the  Jewish  law,  it  is
expressly  remarked,  the  bodies  could  not  remain
on  the  cross  during  the  Sabbath-day.  (Lipsius,
De  Cruce ;  Casaubon,  Exer.  Antibaron.  xvi.
77.)  ^  [B.J.]

CRYPTA  (from  KpvTvmv,  to  conceal),  a  crypt.
Amongst  the  Romans,  any  long  narrow  vault,
whether  wholly  or  partially  below  the  level  of  the
earth,  is  expressed  by  this  term  ;  such  as  a  sewer
{crypta  Suburae,  Juv,  Sat.y.  106)  [Cloaca]  ;  the
carceres  of  the  circus  [Circus,  p.  285]  ;  or  a
magazine  for  the  reception  of  agricultural  produce.
(Vitruv.  vi.  8  ;  comp.  Varro,  R.  R.  i.  57.)

The  specific  senses  of  the  word  are  :  —

1.  A  covered  portico  or  arcade  ;  called  more
definitely  crypto-porticus^  because  it  was  not  sup-
ported by  open  columns  like  the  ordinary  portico,
but  closed  at  the  sides,  with  windows  only  for  the
admission  of  light  and  air.  (Plin.  Epist.  ii.  15,
V.  6,  vii,  21  ;  Sidon.  Epist.  ii.  2.)  These  were
frequented  during  summer  for  their  coolness.  A
portico  of  this  kind,  almost  entire,  is  still  remain-
ing in  the  suburban  villa  of  Arrius  Diomedes  at
Pompeii.     [Porticus.]

Some  theatres,  if  not  all,  had  a  similar  portico
attached  to  them  for  the  convenience  of  the  per-
formers, who  there  rehearsed  their  parts.  (Suet.
Col.  58  ;  compare  Dion  Cass.  lix.  20  ;  Joseph.
Antiq.  xix.  1.  §  14.)  One  of  these  is  mentioned
by  P.  Wciox  {Regio  ix.)  as  the  crypta  Balbi,  at-
tached to  the  theatre  built  by  Cornelius  Balbus  at
the  instigation  of  Augustus  (Suet.  Auff.29  ;  Dion
Cass.  liv.  25),  which  is  supposed  to  be  the  ruin
now  seen  in  the  Via  di  S.  Maria  di  Cacaberis,  be-
tween the  church  of  that  name  and  the  S.  Maria
di  Pianto.

2.  A  grotto,  particularly  one  open  at  both  ex-
tremities, forming  what  in  modem  language  is
denominated  a  "  tunnel,"  like  the  grotto  of  Pausi-
lippo,  well  known  to  every  visitant  of  Naples.
This  is  a  tunnel  excavated  in  the  tufa  rock,  about
20  feet  high,  and  1800  long,  forming  the  direct
communication  between  Naples  and  Pozzuoli  {Pu-
teoli),  called  by  the  Romans  crypta  Neapolitana,
and  described  by  Seneca  {Epist.  57)  and  Strabo
who  calls  it  Siwpv^  Kpvirr)]  (v.  p.  246  ;  compare
Petron.  Frag.  xiii.).

A  subterranean  vault  used  for  any  secret  wor-
ship, but  more  particularly  for  the  licentious  rites
consecrated  to  Priapus,  was  also  called  crypta.
(Petron.  Sat.  xvi.  3  ;  compare  xvii.  8.)

3.  When  the  practice  of  consuming  the  body  by
fire  was  relinquished  [Fun us],  and  a  number  of
bodies  were  consigned  to  one  place  of  burial,  as
the  catacombs  for  instance,  this  common  tomb  Avas
called  crypta.  (Salmas.  Exercit.  Plinian.  p.  850  ;
Aring.  Rom.  Subterr.  i.  1.  §  9  ;  Prudent.  Ilepl
Srec/),  xi.  153.)  One  of  these,  the  crypta  Nepo-
tiana,  which  was  in  the  victis  Patricius,  imder  the
Esquiline  (Festus,  s.  v.  Septimonttum\  was  used
by  the  early  Christians,  durmg  the  times  of  their
persecution,  as  a  place  of  secret  worship,  as  well
as  of  interment,  and  contains  many  interesting
inscriptions.  (Nardini,  Rom.  Antic,  iv.  3  ;  Mait-
land,  The  Church  in  the  Catacombs.)         [A.  R.]

CRYPTEIA  (/cpuTTTeio,  also  called  Kpvrtrla
or  KDvirrii),  was,  according  to  Aristotle  («/>.  Plut.
Lye.  28),  an  institution  introduced  at  Sparta  by
the  legislation  of  Lycurgus.  Its  character  was  so
cruel  and  atrocious,  that  Plutarch  only  with  great
reluctance  submitted  to  the  authority  of  Aristotle


CRYPTEIA.


371


in  ascribing  its  introduction  to  the  Spartan  law-
giver.  The  description  which  he  gives  of  it  is
this :  —  The  ephors,  at  intervals,  selected  from
among  the  young  Spartans,  those  who  appeared  to
be  best  qualified  for  the  task,  and  sent  them  in
various  directions  all  over  the  country,  provided
with  daggers  and  their  necessary  food.  During
the  daytime,  these  young  men  concealed  them-
selves ;  but  at  night  they  broke  forth  into  the
high-roads,  and  massacred  those  of  the  helots
whom  they  met,  or  whom  they  thought  proper.
Sometimes  also  they  ranged  over  the  fields  ( in  the
daytime)  and  despatched  the  strongest  and  best  of
the  helots.  This  account  agrees  with  that  of
Heracleides  of  Pontus  (c,  2),  who  speaks  of  the
practice  as  one  that  was  still  carried  on  in  his  own
time,  though  he  describes  its  introduction  by  Ly-
curgus only  as  a  report.

The  crypteia  has  generally  been  considered
either  as  a  kind  of  military  training  of  the  Spartan
youths,  in  which,  as  in  other  cases,  the  lives  of
the  helots  were  unscrupulously  sacrificed  ;  or  as  a
means  of  lessening  the  numbers  and  weakening
the  power  of  the  slaves.  But  Miiller  (Dorians,
iii.  3.  §  4),  who  is  anxious  to  soften  the  notions
generally  current  respecting  the  relations  between
the  helots  and  their  masters,  supposes  that  Plutarch
and  Heracleides  represent  the  institution  of  the
crypteia  "  as  a  war  which  the  ephors  themselves,
on  entering  upon  their  yearly  office,  proclaimed
against  the  helots."  Heracleides,  however,  does
not  mention  this  proclamation  at  all  ;  and  Plutarch,
who  mentions  it  on  the  authority  of  Aristotle,
does  not  represent  it  as  identical  with  the  crypteia.
Miiller  also  supposes  that,  according  to  the  re-
ceived opinion,  this  chase  of  the  slaves  took  place
regularly  every  year  ;  and  showing  at  once  the
absurdity  of  such  an  annual  proclamation  of  war
and  massacre  among  the  slaves,  he  rejects  what  he
calls  the  commem  opinion  altogether  as  involved  in
inextri'cable  difficulties,  and  has  recourse  to  Plato
to  solve  the  problem.  But  Thirlwall  (Hist.  Greece,
vol.  i.  p.  311)  much  more  judiciously  considers
that  this  proclamation  of  war  is  not  altogether
groundless,  but  only  a  misrepresentation  or  some-
thing else,  and  that  its  real  character  was  most
probably  coruiected  with  the  crypteia.  Now,  if  we
suppose  thai  the  thing  here  misrepresented  and
exaggerated  into  a  proclamation  of  war,  was  some
promise  which  the  ephors  on  entering  upon  their
office  were  obliged  to  make,  for  instance,  to  protect
the  state  against  any  danger  that  might  arise  from
too  great  an  increase  of  the  numbers  and  power
of  the  helots  —  a  promise  which  might  very  easily
be  distorted  into  a  proclamation  of  war  —  there  is
nothing  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  the  legislation  of
Lycurgus  ;  and  such  an  institution,  by  no  means
surprising  in  a  slave- holding  state  like  Sparta,
where  the  number  of  free  citizens  was  compara-
tively ver}'^  small,  would  have  conferred  upon  the
ephors  the  legal  authority  occasionally  to  send  out
a  number  of  young  Spartans  in  chase  of  the  helots.
(Isocr.  Pa?tath.  p.  271',  b.)  That  on  certain  oc-
casions, when  the  state  had  reason  to  fear  the
overwhelming  number  of  slaves,  thousands  were
massacred  with  the  sanction  of  the  public  authori-
ties, is  a  well-known  fact.  (Thucyd.  iv.  80.)  It
is,  however,  probable  enough  that  such  a  system
may  at  first  have  been  carried  on  with  some  degree
of  moderation  ;  but  after  attempts  had  been  made
by  the  slaves  to  emancipate  themselves  and  put

BB  2


372


CUBITUS.


their  masters  to  death,  as  was  the  case  during  and
after  the  earthquake  in  Laconia,  it  assumed  the
barbarous  and  atrocious  character  which  we  have
described  above.  (Compare  Plut.  Lye.  28,  suh  fin.)
If  the  crypteia  had  taken  place  annually,  and  at  a
fiijred  time,  we  should,  indeed,  have  reason,  with
Miiller,  to  wonder  why  the  helots,  who  in  many
districts  lived  entirely  alone,  and  were  united  by
despair  for  the  sake  of  common  protection,  did  not
every  year  kindle  a  most  bloody  and  determined
war  throughout  the  whole  of  Laconia  ;  but  Plutarch,
the  only  authority  on  which  this  supposition  can
rest,  does  not  say  that  the  crypteia  took  place
every  year,  but  Sia  xp^^ov,  i.  e.  "  at  intervals,"  or
occasionally.  (Hermann,  ad  Viger.  p.  856.)  The
difficulties  which  Miiller  finds  in  what  he  calls  the
common  account  of  the  crypteia,  are  thus,  in  our
opinion,  removed,  and  it  is  no  longer  necessary  to
seek  their  solution  in  the  description  given  by
Plato  {De  Leg.  i.  p.  633,  vi.  p.  763),  who  pro"-
posed  for  his  Cretan  colony  a  similar  institution
under  the  name  of  crypteia.  From  the  known
partiality  of  Plato  for  Spartan  institutions,  and  his
inclination  to  represent  them  in  a  favourable  light,
it  will  be  admitted  that,  on  a  subject  like  this,  his
evidence  will  be  of  little  weight.  And  when  he
adopted  the  name  crypteia  for  his  institution,  it
by  no  means  follows  that  he  intended  to  make  it
in  every  respect  similar  to  that  of  Sparta  ;  a  partial
resemblance  was  sufficient  to  transfer  the  name  of
the  Spartan  institution  to  that  which  he  proposed
to  establish  ;  and  it  is  sufficiently  clear,  from  his
own  words,  that  his  attention  was  more  particu-
larly directed  to  the  advantages  which  young  sol-
diers might  derive  from  such  hardships  as  the
Kpvwrol  had  to  undergo.  But  even  Plato's  colony
would  not  have  been  of  a  very  humane  character,
as  his  KpuTTToi  were  to  go  out  in  arms  and  make
free  iTse  of  the  slaves.  [L.  S.]

CRYPTOPO'RTICUS-  [Crypta.]
CUBICULA'RII,  were  slaves  who  had  the
care  of  the  sleeping  and  dwelling  rooms.  Faithful
slaves  were  always  selected  for  this  office,  as  they
had,  to  a  certain  extent,  the  care  of  their  master's
person.  When  Julius  Caesar  Avas  taken  by  the
pirates,  he  dismissed  all  his  other  slaves  and
attendants,  only  retaining  with  him  a  physician
and  two  cubicularii.  (Suet.  Caes.  4  )  It  was  the
duty  of  the  cubicularii  to  introduce  visiters  to  their
master  (Cic.  ad  Att.  vi.  2.  §  5,  in  Verr.  iii.  4)  ;
for  which  purpose  they  appear  to  have  usually  re-
mained in  an  ante- room  (Suet.  Tih.  21,  Dom.  16).
Under  the  later  emperors,  the  cubicularii  belong-
ing to  the  palace  were  called  praepositisacro  cubiculo,
and  were  persons  of  high  rank.  (Cod.  12,  tit.  5.)
CUBI'CULT^M,  usually  means  a  sleeping  and
dwelling  room  in  a  Roman  house  [DoMus],  but  is
also  applied  to  the  pavilion  or  tent  in  which  the
Roman  emperors  were  accustomed  to  witness  the
public  games.  (Suet.  Ner.  12  ;  Plin.  Paneg.  51.)
It  appears  to  have  been  so  called,  because  the
emperors  were  accustomed  to  recline  in  the  cubicula,
instead  of  sitting,  as  was  anciently  the  practice,  in
a  sella  curulis.     (Emesti,  ad  Suet.  I.  c.)

CU'BITUS(7r?7Xws),  a  measure  of  length  used  by
the  Greeks,  Romans,  and  other  nations,  was  origi-
nally the  length  of  the  human  arm  from  the  elbow
to  the  wrist,  or  to  the  tip  of  the  forefing -r  ;  the
latter  was  its  signification  among  the  Greeks  and
Romans.  It  was  equal  to  a  foot  and  a  half  ;  and
therefore  the  Roman  cubit  was  a  little  less,  and


CUDO.
the  Greek  cubit  a  little  more,  than  a  foot  and  a
half  English.  The  cubit  was  divided  by  the
Greeks  into  2  spans  ((nridafiai),  6  hand-breadths
{iraAaLa-Tai),  and  24  finger  breadths  (SaKTvAot),
and  by  the  Romans  into  1^  feet,  6  breadths  (palini),
and  24  thumb-breadths  {pollices).  (Wurm,  De
Pond.  Mens.  &c.  ;  Hussey,  On  Andent  Weights,
&c.,  see  the  Tables.)  Respecting  the  Egyptian
and  other  cubits,  see  Bockh,  MetroL  Urdersuch.
p.  211.  [P.S.]

CUBUS,  a  vessel,  the  sides  of  which  were
formed  by  six  equal  squares  (includmg  the  top),
each  square  having  each  of  its  sides  a  foot  long.
The  solid  contents  of  the  cube  were  equal  to  the
amphora.  (Rhem.  Fann.  De  Pond,  &c.  v.  59 —
62  ;  Metretes).  In  Greek  kv§os  is  the  equiva-
lent of  the  Latin  Tessera.  [P.  S.]

CUCULLUS,  a  cowl.  As  the  cowl  was  in-
tended to  be  used  in  the  open  air,  and  to  be  drawn
over  the  head  to  protect  it  from  the  injuries  of  the
weather,  instead  of  a  hat  or  cap,  it  was  attached
only  to  garments  of  the  coarsest  kind.  Its  form  is
seen  attached  to  the  dress  of  the  shepherd  in  the
annexed  woodcut,  which  is  fciken  from  a  gem  in
the  Florentine  cabinet,  and  represents  a  Roman
shepherd  looking  at  the  she-wolf  with  Romulus
and  Remus.      The  cucuUus  was  also  used  by  per-


sons in  the  higher  circles  of  society,  when  they
wished  to  go  abroad  without  being  known.  (Juv.
vi.  330.)  The  use  of  the  cowl,  and  also  of  the
cape  [BiRRUs],  which  served  the  same  purpose,
was  allowed  to  slaves  by  a  law  in  the  Codex  Theo-
dosianus.  (Vossius,  Etym.  lAng.  Lot.  s.  v.  Birrus.)
Cowls  were  imported  into  Italy  from  Saintes  in
France  {Santonico  cucullo,  Juv.  viii.  145  ;  Schol.
in  loc.),  and  from  the  countrj-^  of  the  Bardaei  in
Illyria.  (.Jul.  Cap.  Pertiyiax,  8.)  Those  from  the
latter  locality  were  probably  of  a  peculiar  fashion,
which  gave  origin  to  the  term  BardocucuUus,
Liburnici  cucuUi  are  mentioned  by  Martial  (xi',-.
139.)  [J.  Y.]

CUDO  or  CUDON,  a  skull-cap,  made  of  leather
or  of  the  rough  shaggy  fur  of  any  wild  animal
(Sil.  Ital.  viii.  495,  xvi.  bi)),  such  as  were  worn
by  the  velites  of  the  Roman  armies  (Polyb.  vi.  20),
and  apparently  synonymous  with  galerus  (Virg.
Ae7i.  vii.  688)  or  galericidus.  (Frontin.  Strategem.
iv.  7.  §  29.)  In  the  sculptures  on  the  Column  of
Trajan,  some  of  the  Roman  soldiers  are  repre-
sented with  the  skin  of  a  wild  beast  drawn  over
the  head,  in  such  a  manner  that  the  face  appears
between  the  upper  and  lower  jaws  of  the  animal,
while  the  rest  of  the  skin  falls  down  behind  over
the  back  and  shoulders,  as  described  by  Virgil
{Aen.  vii.  QQQ).  This,  however,  was  an  extra  de-
fence (Polyb.  I.  c),  and  must  not  be  taken  for  the
cudOf  which  was  the  cap  itself ;  that  is,  a  particular


CULPA.

kind  of  (7a7«T.  [Galea.]  The  following' repre-
tsentation  of  a  cudo  is  taken  from  Choul's  Castra-
men.  des  Ancicns  Iiomains,  1581.  [A.  R.]


CULTER.


373


CULCITA.     [Lectus.]

CU'LEUS,  or  CU'LLEUS,  a  Roman  measure,
which  was  used  for  estimating  the  produce  of  vine-
yards. It  was  the  largest  liquid  measure  used  by
the  Romans,  containing  20  amphorae,  or  160  conr/ii.
that  is,  almost  119  gallons.  (Rhem.  Fann.  De  Fond.
&c.  V.  86,  87  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xiv.  4  :  Varro,  /?.  R.


i.  2.  §  7  ;  Colum.  iii.  3.)


[P.  S.]


CU'LEUS  or  CU'LLEUS,  a  sack  used  in  the
punishment  of  parricides..     [Lex    Cornelia  de

SiCARIIS.]

CULI'NA.     [DoMus.]

CULPA.  The  general  notion  of  dolus  malus
may  be  conveniently  explained  under  this  head.

Culpa  in  its  most  general  juristical  sense  of  any
illegal  act  of  commission  or  omission  comprehends
dolus  malus.  But  the  special  meaning  of  culpa  is
distinct  from  that  of  dolus  malus.  Dolus  malus  is
thus  defined  by  Labeo  (Dig.  4.  tit.  3.  s.  1)  :  —
"  Dolus  malus  est  omnis  calliditas,  fallacia,  machi-
natio  ad  circumveniendam,  fallendum,  decipiendum
altennn  adhibita."  Dolus  malus,  therefore,  has
reference  to  the  evil  design  with  which  an  act  is
accomplished  to  the  injury  of  another ;  or  it  may
be  the  evil  design  with  which  an  act  is  omitted  that
ought  to  be  done.  The  definition  of  Aquilius,  a
learned  jurist,  the  friend  of  Cicero  and  his  colleague
in  the  praetorship  (de  Off.  iii.  14),  labours  under  the
defect  of  the  definition  of  Servius,  which  is  criticised
by  Labeo.  (Dig.  4.  tit.  8.  s.  1.)  This  seems  to  be
the  Aquilius  who,  by  the  edict,  gave  the  action  of
dolus  malus  in  all  cases  of  dolus  malus  where  there
Avas  no  legislative  provision,  and  there  was  a  justa
causa.  (Cic.  de  Nat.  Deor.  iii.  30.)

It  is  sometimes  considered  that  culpa  in  the
special  sense  may  be  either  an  act  of  commission
or  omission ;  and  that  an  act  may  fall  short  of
dolus,  as  not  coming  within  the  above  definition,
but  it  may  approach  very  near  to  dolus,  and  so  be-
come culpa  dolo  proxima.  But  the  characteristic
of  culpa  appears  to  be  omission.  It  is  tnie  that
the  damnum  which  is  necessarj'  to  constitute  culpa
is  often  the  consequence  of  some  act ;  but  the  act
derives  its  culpose  character  rather  from  something
that  is  omitted  than  from  what  is  done.

Culpa  then  being  characterised  by  an  act  of
omission  (7iegligeniia),  or  omissio  diligentiae,  the
question  always  is,  how  far  is  the  person  charged
with  culpa  bound  to  look  after  the  interest  of  an-
other, or  to  use  diligentia.  There  is  no  such  ge-
neral obligation,  but  there  is  such  obligation  in
particular  cases.  Culpa  is  sometimes  divided  into
lata,  levis,  and  levissima.     Lata  culpa  "  est  nimia


negligentia,  id  est,  non  intelligere  quod  omnea
intelligunt."  (Dig.  50.  tit.  16.  s.  213.)  If  then  one
man  injured  the  property  of  another  by  gross  care-
lessness, he  was  always  bound  to  make  good  the
damage  (damnum  praestare).  Such  culpa  was  not
dolus,  because  there  was  not  intention  or  design,
but  it  was  as  bad  in  its  consequences  to  the  person
charged  with  it.

Levis  culpa  is  negligence  of  a  smaller  degree.
He  who  is  answerable  for  levis  culpa,  is  answer-
able for  injury  caused  to  the  property  of  another
by  some  omission,  which  a  careful  person  could
have  prevented.  For  instance,  in  the  case  of  a
thing  lent  [Commodatum],  a  man  must  take  at
least  as  much  care  of  it  as  a  careful  man  does  of
his  own  property.  There  is  never  any  culpa,  if
the  person  charged  with  it  has  done  all  that  the
most  careful  person  could  do  to  prevent  loss  or
damage.  Levissima  culpa  came  within  the  mean-
ing of  the  term  culpa  in  the  lex  Aquilia ;  that  is,
any  injury  that  happened  to  one  man's  property
through  the  conduct  of  another,  for  want  of  such
care  as  the  most  careful  person  would  take,  was  a
culpa,  and  therefore  punishable.  But  the  expres-
sion levissima  culpa  is  said  to  occur  only  once  in
the  Digest  (Dig.  9.  tit.  2.  s.  44).

In  the  passage  of  Horace  (Sat.  ii.  2.  123.)

"  Post  hoc  ludus  erat  culpa  potare  magistra,"

Bentley  has  the  absurd  emendation  of  "  cuppa."
The  general  meaning  of  culpa  in  the  Roman
writers  is  well  explained  by  Hasse  (p.  8).  There
is  great  difficulty  in  stating  the  Roman  doctrine
of  dolus  and  culpa,  and  modem  jurists  are  by
no  means  agreed  on  this  matter.  The  chief  essay
on  this  subject  is  the  classical  work  of  Hasse
"  Die  Culpa  des  Romischen  Rechts,  second  edition
by  Bethmann  —  Hollweg,  1 838.  Hasse "s  view  is
briefly  explained  in  a  note  by  Rosshirt,  to  his  edi-
tion of  Mackeldey's  Lehrbuch,  §  342  (r2th  ed.)  ;
but  it  requires  a  careful  study  of  his  work  to  com-
prehend Hasse's  doctrine  fully,  and  to  appreciate  the
great  merits  of  this  excellent  essay.  What  is  stated
in  this  short  article  is  necessarily  incomplete,  and
may  be  in  some  respects  incorrect.  [G.  L.]

CULTER  (probably  from  cello^  percello  ;  dim
cuhellus,  Engl,  coulter  ;  in  southern  Germany,  das
holier  ;  French,  couteau  ;  Greek,  fidxatpa,  /cotti's,
or  a^ayis),  a  knife  with  only  one  edge,  which
formed  a  straight  line.  The  blade  was  pointed
and  its  back  curved.  It  was  used  for  a  variety  of
purposes  ;  but  chiefly  for  killing  animals  either
in  the  slaughter-house,  or  in  hunting,  or  at  the
altars  of  the  gods.  (Liv.  iii.  48  ;  Scribonius,
Compos.  Med.  13  ;  Suet.  Auc^.  9  ;  Plant.  Rud.  i.  2.
45  ;  Virg.  Geore/.  iii.  492  ;  Ovid.  Fast.  i.  321.)
Hence  the  expressions — bovem  ad  cidtrum  emere^
"  to  buy  an  ox  for  the  purpose  of  slaughtering  it  '*
(Varro,  De  Re  Rust.  ii.  5)  ;  me  sub  cultro  linquit^
"  he  leaves  me  in  a  state  like  that  of  a  victim  dragged
to  the  altar"  (Hor.  Sat.  i.  9.  74)  ;  se  ad  cultrum
locare^  "  to  become  a  bestiarius"  (Seneca,  Ep.  87).
From  some  of  the  passages  above  referred  to,  it
would  appear  that  the  culter  was  carried  in  a  kind
of  sheath.  The  priest  who  conducted  a  sacrifice
never  killed  the  victim  himself ;  but  one  of  his
ministri,  appointed  for  that  purpose,  who  was  called
either  by  the  general  name  minister.,  or  the  more
specific  popa  or  cultrarius.  (Suet.  Calig.  32.)  A
tomb-stone  of  a  cultrarius  is  still  extant,  and  upon
it  two  cultri  are  represented  (Gruter,  Inscript.  vol,

BB   3


374


CUPA.


ii.  p.  G40.  No.  11),  which  are  copied  in  the  an-
nexed woodcut.


Q.TIBVRTl.Q.L
MEKOLA.N1

CVLTB.AR1.   OSSA
HEIC.SITA.  SVNT


The  name  culter  was  also  applied  to  razors  (Cic.
De  Of.  ii.  7  ;  Plin.  vii.  59  ;  Petron.  Sat.  108),
and  kitchen  knives  (Varro,  ap.  Non.  iii.  32).  That
in  these  cases  the  culter  was  different  from  those
above  represented,  and  most  probably  smaller,  is
certain  ;  since  whenever  it  was  used  for  shaving  or
domestic  purposes,  it  was  always  distinguished
from  the  common  culter  by  some  epithet,  as  culter
tonsorius^  culter  coquinaris.  Fruit  knives  were  also
called  cultri  ;  but  they  were  of  a  smaller  kind
(cultelli),  and  made  of  bone  or  ivory  (Colum.  xii.
14,  45  ;  Plin,  xii.  25  ;  Scribon.  c.  83).  Colu-
mella, who  gives  (iv.  25)  a  very  minute  descrip-
tion of  a  fab;  vinitoria,  a  knife  for  pruning  vines,
says  that  the  part  of  the  blade  nearest  to  the
handle  was  called  culter  on  account  of  its  similarity
to  an  ordinary  culter,  the  edge  of  that  part  form-
ing a  straight  line.  This  culter  according  to  him
was  used  when  a  branch  was  to  be  cut  off  which
required  a  hard  pressure  of  the  hand  on  the  knife.
The  name  culter,  which  was  also  applied  to  the
sharp  and  pointed  iron  of  the  plough  (Plin,  H.  N.
xviii.  18.  48),  is  still  extant  in  English,  in  the  form
coulter,  to  designate  the  same  thing.  [Aratrum.]
The  expression  in  cultrum  or  in  ailtro  coUocatus
(Vitruv.  X.  10,  14)  signifies  placed  in  a  perpendi-
cular position.  [L-  S.]
CULTRA'RIUS.  [Culter.]
CU'NEUS.  [Exercitus  ;  Theatrum.]
CUNI'CULUS  (vTrSuo/j-os).  A  mine  or  pas-
sage underground  was  so  called  from  its  resemblance
to  the  burrowing  of  a  rabbit.  Thus  Martial  (xiii.
60)  says,

"  Gaudet  in  effossis  habitare  cuniculus  antris,
Monstravit  tacitas  hostibus  ille  vias."

Fidenae  and  Veii  are  said  to  have  been  taken
by  mines,  which  opened,  one  of  them  into  tlie
citadel,  the  other  into  the  temple  of  Juno.  (Li v.
iv.  22,  V.  19.)  Niebuhr  (Hist.  Rom.  vol.  ii.
p.  483)  observes  that  there  is  hardly  any  authen-
tic instance  of  a  town  being  tfiken  in  the  manner
related  of  Veii,  and  supposes  that  the  legend  arose
out  of  a  tradition  that  Veii  was  taken  by  means  of
a  mine,  by  which  a  part  of  the  wall  was  over-
thrown. [R.  W.]

CUPA,  a  wine-vat,  a  vessel  very  much  like  the


CURATOR.
dolium,  and  used  for  the  same  purpose,  namely,  to
receive  the  fresh  must,  and  to  contain  it  during  the
process  of  fermentation.  The  inferior  wines  were
drawn  for  drinking  from  the  cupa,  without  being
bottled  in  amphorae,  and  hence  the  term  vinum  de
cupa  {Y-ATT.ap.  Non.  ii.  113  ;  Dig.  18.  tit.  6.  s.  1.
§  4).  The  phrase  in  Horace  {Sat.  ii.  2. 123),  cupa
potare  magistra,  if  correct,  would  mean,  to  make
the  wine  vessel  the  sole  viagister  hibendi  ;  Bentley
adopts  cupa  in  this  passage,  as  another  fonn  of
copa,  a  hostess,  a  word  connected  with  caupo  :  this
word  occurs  in  Suetonius  (Ner.  27),  and  one  of
Virgil's  minor  poems  was  entitled  Copa  or  Cupa.
(Charis.  i.  p.  47,  Putsch.)  In  the  passage  of
Horace,  however,  the  reading  cupa  is  only  con-
jectural :  the  MSS.  give  culpa,  out  of  which  a
good  sense  can  be  made.  (See  the  notes  of  Hein-
dorf,  Orelli,  and  Diintzer.)

The  cupa  was  either  made  of  earthenware,  like
the  dolium,  or  of  wood,  and  covered  with  pitch.  In
the  latter  case,  pine-wood  was  preferred  (Plin.
H.  N.  xvi.  10.  s.  18).  It  was  used  for  other
purposes,  such  as  preserved  fruits  and  com,  form-
ing rafts,  and  containing  combustibles  in  war,
and  even  for  a  sarcophagus.  (See  the  passages
cited  by  Forcellini,  s.  v.)  [Comp.  Dolium  ;  Vi-
num.] [P.  S.]

CURA.     [Curator,]

CURATE'LA.     [Curator.]

CURA'TIO.     [Curator.]

CURATOR.  Up  to  the  time  of  pubertas,
every  Roman  citizen,  as  a  general  rule,  was  inca-
pable of  doing  any  legal  act,  or  entering  into  any
contract  which  might  be  injurious  to  him.  The
time  when  pubertas  was  attained,  was  a  matter  of
dispute  ;  some  fixed  it  at  the  commencement  of  the
age  of  procreation,  and  some  at  the  age  of  fourteen.
(Gaius,  i.  169.)  In  all  transactions  by  the  impubes,
it  was  necessary  for  the  auctoritas  of  the  tutor  to
be  interposed.  [Auctoritas  ;  Tutor.]  With
the  age  of  puberty,  the  youth  attained  the  capacity
of  contracting  marriage  and  becoming  a  pater-
familias :  he  was  liable  to  military  service,  and
entitled  to  vote  in  the  comitia ;  and  consistently
with  this,  he  was  freed  from  the  control  of  a  tutor.
Females  who  had  attained  the  age  of  puberty  be-
came subject  to  another  kind  of  tutela.   [Tutela.]

"With  the  attainment  of  the  age  of  puberty  by  a
Roman  youth,  every  legal  capacity  was  acquired
which  depended  on  age  only,  with  the  exception
of  the  capacity  for  public  offices,  and  there  was  no
rule  about  age,  even  as  to  public  offices,  before  the
passing  of  the  lex  Villia.  [Aediles.]  It  was,
however,  a  matter  of  necessity  to  give  some  legal
protection  to  young  parsons  who,  owing  to  their
tender  age,  were  liable  to  be  overreached  ;  and
consistently  with  the  development  of  Roman  juris-
prudence, this  object  was  effected  without  inter-
fering with  the  old  principle  of  full  legal  capacity
being  attained  with  the  age  of  puberty.  This  was
accomplished  by  the  lex  Plaetoria  (the  true  name
of  the  lex,  as  Savigny  has  shown),  the  date  of
which  is  not  known,  though  it  is  certain  that  the
law  existed  when  Plautus  wrote  (Fseudolus,  i.  3.
69).  This  law  established  a  distinction  of  age,
which  was  of  great  practical  importance,  by  form-
ing the  citizens  into  two  classes,  those  above  and
those  below  twenty-five  years  of  age  {minores  viginti
quinque  annis),  whence  a  person  under  the  last-
mentioned  age  was  sometimes  simply  called  minor.
The  object  of  the  lex  was  to  protect  persons  under


CURATOR.

twenty-five  years  of  age  against  all  fraud  (dolus).
The  person  who  was  guilty  of  such  a  fraud  was
liable  to  a  judicium  publicum  (Cic.  De  Nat.  Deor.
iii.  30),  though  the  offence  was  such  as  in  the
case  of  a  person  of  full  age  would  only  haye  been
matter  of  action.  The  punishment  fixed  by  the
lex  Plaetoria  was  probably  a  pecuniary  penalty,
and  the  consequential  punishment  of  infamia  or
loss  of  political  rights.  The  minor  who  had  been
fraudulently  led  to  make  a  disadvantageous  contract,
might  protect  himself  against  an  action  by  a  plea
of  the  lex  Plaetoria  {exceptio  legis  Plaetoriae).
The  lex  also  appears  to  have  further  provided  that
any  person  who  dealt  with  a  minor  might  avoid  all
risk  of  the  consequences  of  the  Plaetoria  lex,  if  the
minor  was  aided  and  assisted  in  such  dealing  by  a
curator  named  or  chosen  for  the  occasion.  But
the  curator  did  not  act  like  a  tutor  :  it  can  hardly
be  supposed  that  his  consent  was  even  necessary  to
the  contract  ;  for  the  minor  had  full  legal  capacity
to  act,  and  the  business  of  the  cui'ator  was  merely
to  prevent  his  being  defrauded  or  surprised.

The  praetorian  edict  carried  still  further  the
principle  of  the  lex  Plaetoria,  by  protecting  minors
generally  against  positive  acts  of  their  own,  in
all  cases  in  which  the  consequences  might  be
injurious  to  them.  This  was  done  by  the  "  in  in-
tegrum restitutio  : "  the  praetor  set  aside  trans-
actions of  this  description,  not  only  on  the  ground
of  fraud,  but  on  a  consideration  of  all  the  circum-
stances of  the  case.  But  it  was  necessary  for  the
minor  to  make  application  to  the  praetor,  either
during  his  minority,  or  within  one  year  after  attain-
ing his  majority,  if  he  claimed  the  restitutio  ;  a
limitation  probably  founded  on  the  lex  Plaetoria.
The  provisions  of  this  lex  were  thus  superseded  or
rendered  unnecessary  by  the  jurisdiction  of  the
praetor,  and  accordingly  we  find  very  few  traces  of
the  Plaetorian  law  in  the  Roman  jurists.

Ulpian  and  his  contemporaries  speak  of  adole-
scentes,  under  twenty-five  years  of  age,  being  under
the  general  direction  and  advice  of  curatores,  as  a
notorious  principle  of  law  at  that  time.  (Dig.  4.
tit.  4  ;  De  Minoribus  xxv  Annis.)  The  establish-
ment of  this  general  rule  is  attributed  by  Capito-
linus  {M.  Anton,  c.  10)  to  the  emperor  M.  Aurelius
in  a  passage  which  has  given  rise  to  much  discussion.
Savigny's  explanation  is  as  follows  ;  —  Up  to  the
time  of  Marcus  Aurelius  there  were  only  three
cases  or  kinds  of  curatela :  1.  That  which  was
founded  on  the  lex  Plaetoria,  by  which  a  minor
who  wished  to  enter  into  a  contract  with  another,
asked  the  praetor  for  a  curator,  stating  the  ground
or  occasion  of  the  petition  {reddita  causa).  One
object  of  the  application  was,  to  save  the  other  con-
tracting party  from  all  risk  of  judicial  proceedings
in  consequence  of  dealing  with  a  minor.  Another
object  was,  the  benefit  of  the  applicant  (the  minor) ;
for  no  prudent  person  woidd  deal  with  him,  ex-
cept with  the  legal  security  of  the  curator.  (Plant.
Pseudolus,i.  3.  69.  "  Lex  me  perdit  quinavicenaria :
metmmt  credere  omnes.")  2.  The  curatela,  which
was  given  in  the  case  of  a  man  wasting  his  sub-
stance, who  was  called  "  prodigus."  3.  And  that
in  the  case  of  a  man  being  of  unsound  mind,
'*  demens,"  "  furiosus."  In  both  the  last-mentioned
cases  provision  was  made  either  by  the  law  or  by
the  praetor.  Curatores  who  were  determined  by
the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  were  called  legitimi  ;
those  who  were  named  by  the  praetor,  were  called
honorarii.     A    furiosus    and   prodigns,    whatever


CURATOR.


37C


might  be  their  age,  were  placed  under  the  cura  of
their  agnati  by  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables.
When  there  was  no  legal  provision  for  the  appoint-
ment of  a  curator,  the  praetor  named  one.  Cura-
tores appointed  by  a  consul,  praetor,  or  governor
of  a  province  (praeses),  were  not  generally  required
to  give  security  for  their  proper  conduct,  having
been  chosen  as  fit  persons  for  the  office.  What
the  lex  Plaetoria  required  for  particular  transac-
tions, the  emperor  Aurelius  made  a  general  rule,
and  all  minors,  without  exception,  and  without  any
special  grounds  or  reasons  (nan  redditis  causis),
were  required  to  have  curatoi-es.

The  following  is  the  result  of  Savigny's  investiga-
tions into  the  curatela  of  minors  after  the  constitution
of  M.  Aurelius.  The  subject  is  one  of  considerable
difficulty,  but  it  is  treated  with  the  most  consum-
mate skill,  the  result  of  complete  knowledge,  and
unrivalled  critical  sagacity.  The  minor  only  re-
ceived a  general  curator  when  he  made  application
to  the  praetor  for  that  purpose :  he  had  the  right
of  proposing  a  person  as  curator,  but  the  praetor
might  reject  the  person  proposed.  The  apparent
contradiction  between  the  rule  which  required  all
minors  to  have  a  curator,  and  the  fact  that  the
minor  received  a  general  curator  only  when  he  ap-
plied for  one,  is  explained  by  Savigny  in  his  essay
(p.  272,  &c.).  The  curator,  on  being  appointed,
had,  without  the  concurrence  of  the  minor,  as
complete  power  over  the  minor's  property  as  the
tutor  had  up  to  the  age  of  puberty.  He  could
sue  in  respect  of  the  minor's  propert}-,  get  in
debts,  and  dispose  of  property  like  a  tutor.  But  it
was  only  the  property  which  the  praetor  intrusted
to  him  that  he  managed,  and  not  the  acquisitions
of  the  minor  subsequent  to  his  appointment  ;  and
herein  he  differed  from  a  tutor  who  had  the  care  of
all  the  property  of  the  pupillus.  If  it  was  intended
that  the  curator  should  have  the  care  of  that  which
the  minor  acquired,  after  the  curator's  appoint-
ment, by  will  or  otherwise,  a  special  application
for  this  purpose  was  necessary.  Thus,  as  to  the
property  which  was  placed  under  the  care  of  the
curator,  both  as  regards  alienation  and  the  getting
in  of  debts,  the  minor  was  on  the  same  footing
as  the  prodigus  :  his  acts  in  relation  to  such  mat-
ters, without  the  curator,  were  void.  But  the
legal  capacity  of  the  minor  to  contract  debts  was
not  affected  by  the  appointment  of  a  curator  ;  and
he  might  be  sued  on  his  contract  either  during
his  minority  or  after.  Nor  was  there  any  incon-
sistency in  this :  the  minor  could  not  spend  his
actual  property,  for  the  preservation  of  his  property
during  minority  was  the  object  of  the  curator's  ap-
pointment. But  the  minor  would  hav3  been  de-
prived of  all  legal  capacity  for  doing  any  act  if  he
could  not  have  become  liable  on  his  contract.  The
contract  was  not  in  its  nature  immediately  inju-
rious, and  when  the  time  came  for  enforcing  it
against  the  minor,  he  had  the  general  protection  of
the  restitutio.  If  the  minor  wished  to  be  adro-
gated  [Adoptio],  it  was  necessarj'  to  have  the
consent  of  the  curator.  It  is  not  stated  in  the
extant  authorities  what  was  the  form  of  proceeding
when  it  was  necessary  to  dispose  of  any  property
of  the  minor  by  the  mancipatio  or  in  jure  cessio  ;
but  it  may  be  safely  assumed  that  the  minor  acted
(for  he  alone  could  act  on  such  an  occasion)  and
the  curator  gave  his  consent,  which,  in  the  case
supposed,  would  be  analogous  to  the  auctoritas  of
the  tutor.     But  it  would  differ  from  the  auctoritas,

B  B   4


376


CURATOR.


in  not  being,  like  the  auctoritas,  necessary  to  the
completion  of  the  legal  act,  but  merely  necessary
to  remove  all  legal  objections  to  it  when  com-
pleted.

The  cura  of  spendthrifts  and  persons  of  unsound
mind,  as  already  observed,  owed  its  origin  to  the
laws  of  the  Twelve  Tables.  The  technical  word
for  a  person  of  unsound  mind  in  the  Twelve  Tables
is  /uriosus,  which  is  equivalent  to  demens  ;  and
both  words  are  distinguished  from  insanus.  Though
furor  implies  violence  in  conduct,  and  dementia  only
viental  imbecility,  there  was  no  legal  diiferonce  be-
tween the  two  terms,  so  far  as  concerned  the  cura.
hisania  is  merely  weakness  of  understanding
(stultitia  constantia,  id  eat,  sanitate  vaeans,  Cic.  Tusc.
Quaest.  iii.  5),  and  it  was  not  provided  for  by  the
laws  of  the  Twelve  Tables.  In  later  times,  the
praetor  appointed  a  curator  for  all  persons  whose
infirmities  required  it.  This  law  of  the  Twelve
Tables  did  not  apply  to  a  pupillus  or  pupilla.  If,
therefore,  a  pupillus  was  of  unsound  mind,  the
tutor  was  his  curator.  If  an  agnatus  was  the
curator  of  a  furiosus,  he  had  the  povver  of  alien-
ating the  property  of  the  furiosus.  (Gains,  ii.  64.)
The  prodigus  only  received  a  curator  upon  appli-
cation being  made  to  a  magistratus,  and  a  sentence
of  interdiction  being  pronounced  against  him  (ei
bonis  interdictum-  est.  Compare  Cic.  De  Seyiec.  c.  7).
The  form  of  the  interdictio  was  thus  :  — "  Quando
tibi  bona  paterna  avitaque  nequitia  tua  disperdis,
liberosque  tuos  ad  egestatem  perducis,  ob  earn  rem
tibi  ea  re  commercioque  interdico."  The  cura  of
the  prodigus  continued  till  the  interdict  was  dis-
solved. It  might  be  inferred  from  the  form  of  the
interdict,  that  it  was  limited  to  the  case  of  per-
sons who  had  children  ;  but  perhaps  this  was  not
so.  (Dig.  27.  tit.  10 ;  Cod.  5.  tit.  70  ;  Inst.  i.
tit.  23.)

It  will  appear  from  what  has  been  said,  that,
whatever  similarity  there  may  be  between  a  tutor
and  a  curator,  an  essential  distinction  lies  in  this,
that  the  curator  was  specially  the  guardian  of  pro-
perty, though  in  the  case  of  a  furiosus  he  must
also  have  been  the  guardian  of  the  person.  A
curator  must,  of  course,  be  legally  qualified  for  his
functions,  and  he  was  bound,  when  appointed,  to
accept  the  dut}',  unless  he  had  some  legal  exemp-
tion {excusatio).  The  curator  was  also  bound  to
account  at  the  end  of  the  curatela,  and  was  liable
to  an  action  for  misconduct.

The  word  cura  has  also  other  legal  applications  :
—  1.  Cura  bonorum,  in  the  case  of  the  goods  of  a
debtor,  which  are  secured  for  the  benefit  of  his
creditors.  2.  Cura  bonorum,  et  ventria,  in  the  case
of  a  woman  being  pregnant  at  the  death  of  her
husband.  3.  Cura  hereditatis,  m  oxise  oi  o.  (k\s^\xi&
as  to  who  is  the  heres  of  a  person,  when  his  sup-
posed child  is  under  age.  4.  Cura  hereditatis
Jacentis,  in  the  case  of  a  property,  when  the  heres
had  not  yet  declared  whether  or  not  he  would  ac-
cept the  inheritance.  5.  Cura  bonorum  absentis,  in
the  case  of  property  of  an  absent  person  vvho  had
appointed  no  manager  of  it.

This  view  of  the  curatela  of  minors  is  from  an
essay  by  Savigny,  who  has  handled  the  whole
matter  in  a  way  equally  admirable,  both  for  the
scientific  precision  of  the  method  and  the  force  and
perspicuity  of  the  language.  (  Von  dem  Schutz  der
■Minderj'dJirigen,  Zeitschrift.  vol.  x.  ;  Savigny,  Vom
Beruf,  Sec.  p.  102  ;  Gaius,  i.  197;  Ulp.  Fra<^.  xii.  ;
Dirkscn,  Uebersicht,  &c.   7ai.  v.  Frag.  7  ;  Mac-


CURATORES.

keldey,  Lehrbuck  des  heutigen  liomischen  Rechts^
%  588,  &c.  (12th  ed.)  ;  Thibaut,  System  des  Pan-
dekten-RecMs,  §  786,  &c.  9th  ed.  &c.)    [G.  L.]

C  UR ATO'RES,  were  public  officers  of  various
kinds  under  the  Roman  empire,  several  of  whom
were  first  established  by  Augustus.  (Suet.  Aug.
37.)  The  most  important  of  them  were  as  fol-
low :  —

1.  CuRATORES  Alvei  ET  RiPARUM,  who  had
the  charge  of  the  navigation  of  the  Tiber.  The
duties  of  their  office  may  be  gathered  from  Ulpian
(Dig.  43.  tit.  15).  It  was  reckoned  very  honour-
able, and  the  persons  who  filled  it  received  after-
wards the  title  of  comites.

2.  CuRATORES  Annonae,  who  purchased  com  •
and  oil  for  the  state,  and  sold  it  again  at  a  small
price  among  the  poorer  citizens.  They  were  also
called  curatores  emendi  frumenti  et  olei,  and
aiTcouai  and  iXaiSivai.  (Dig.  50.  tit.  5.  s.  18.  §  5.)
Their  office  belonged  to  the  personalia  munera ;
that  is,  it  did  not  require  any  expenditure  of  a
person's  private  property :  but  the  curatores  re-
ceived from  the  state  a  sufficient  sum  of  money  to  .
purchase  the  required  amount.      (Dig.  50.  tit.  8.

s.  9.  §  5.)

3.  Curatores  Aquarum.  [Aquae  Duc-
tus.]

4.  Curatores  Kalendarii,  who  had  the
care  in  municipal  towns  of  the  kalendaria;  that  is,
the  books  which  contained  the  names  of  the  per-
sons to  whom  public  money,  which  was  not  wanted
for  the  ordinary  expenses  of  the  town,  was  lent  on
interest.  The  office  belonged  to  the  personalia
munera.  (Dig.  50.  tit.  4.  s.  18.  §  2 ;  tit.  8.  s.  9.
§  7  ;  Heinecc.  Antiq.  Rom.  iii.  15.  §  4.)  These
officers  are  mentioned  in  inscriptions  found  in  mu-
nicipal towns.    (Orelli,  Inscrip.  No.  3940,  449.1.)

5.  Curatores  LuDORUiU,  who  had  the  care  of
the  public  games.  Persons  of  rank  appear  to  have
been  usually  appointed  to  this  office.  (Tacit  A7m.
xi.  35,  xiii.'22;  Suet.  Cal.  27.)  In  inscriptions,
they  are  usually  called  curatores  muneris  glatiia-
torii,  &c.

6.  Curatores   Operum   Publicorum,   who         1
had  the  care  of  all  public  buildings,  such  as  the
theatres,  baths,  aquaeducts,  &c.,  and  agreed  with

the  contractors  for  all  necessary  repairs  to  them.
Their  duties  under  the  republic  were  discharged
by  the  aediles  and  censors.  [Censores,]  They
are  frequentlv  mentioned  in  inscriptions.  (Orelli,
Inscrip.  No.  24,  1506,  2273.)

7.  Curatores  Regionum,  who  had  the  care
of  the  fourteen  districts  into  which  Rome  was
divided,  and  whose  duty  it  was  to  prevent  all
disorder  and  extortion  in  their  respective  dis-
tricts. This  office  was  first  instituted  by  Augus-
tus. (Suet.  A  ug.  30.)  There  were  usually  two  offi-
cers of  this  kind  for  each  district ;  Alexander
Severus,  however,  appears  to  have  appointed  only
one  for  each  ;  but  these  were  persons  of  consular
rank,  who  were  to  have  jurisdiction  in  conjunction
with  the  praefectus  urbi.  (Lamprid.  Alex.  Sev.  33.)
We  are  told  that  M.  Antoninus,  among  other
regulations,  gave  special  directions  that  the  cura-
tores regionum  should  either  punish,  or  bring
before  the  praefectus  urbi  for  punishment,  all  per-
sons who  exacted  from  the  inhabitants  more  than
the  legal  taxes.     (Jul.  Capitol.  M.  Anton.  12.)

8.  Curatores  Reipublicae,  also  called  Lo-
gistae,  who  administered  the  landed  property
of  raunicipia.     (Dig.  50.  tit.  8.  s.  9,  §  2  ;  2.  tit.  14


CURIA.
,8.  37.)     Ulpian  wrote  a  separate  Avork,  De  Officio
CurcUoris  ReipuUicae.

9.    CURATORKS  VlARUM,       [VlAE.]

CU'RIA,  signifies  both  a  division  of  the  Roman
people  and  the  place  of  assembly  for  such  a  divi-
sion. Various  etymologies  of  the  word  have  been
proposed,  but  none  seems  to  be  so  plausible  as  that
which  connects  it  with  the  Sabine  word  quiris  or
curis  (whence  the  surname  of  Juno  Cuntis  among
the  Sabines).

Each  of  the  three  ancient  Romulian  tribes,
the  Ramnes,  Titles,  and  Luceres,  was  subdivided
into  10  curiae,  so  that  the  whole  body  of  the
populus  or  the  patricians  were  divided  into  30
curiae.  (Liv.  i.  13  ;  Dionys.  ii.  7,  23  ;  Plut.  Rom.
\9.)  The  plebeians  had  no  connection  whatever
with  the  curiae,  and  the  clients  of  the  patricians
were  members  of  the  curiae  only  in  a  passive  sense.
(Fest.  p.  285,  ed.  Miillor ;  comp.  Patricii,  Gens.)
All  the  members  of  the  different  gentes  belonging
to  one  curia  were  called,  in  respect  of  one  another,
ciiriales.  The  division  into  curiae  was  of  great
political  importance  in  the  earliest  times  of  Rome,
for  the  curiae  alone  contained  those  that  were
real  citizens,  and  their  assembly  alone  was  the
legitimate  representative  of  the  whole  people
[CoMiTiA  curiata],  from  whom  all  other  powers
emanated.  The  senators  and  equates  were  of
course  chosen  from  among  them ;  but  their  import-
ance was  especially  manifest  in  the  religious  affairs
of  the  state.  Each  curia  as  a  corporation  had  its
peculiar  sacra  (Fest.  pp.  174,  245  ;  Paul.  Diac.
p.  49,  ed.  Miiller),  and  besides  the  gods  of  the
state,  they  worshipped  other  divinities  and  with
peculiar  rites  and  ceremonies.  For  such  religious
purposes  each  curia  had  its  own  place  of  worship,
called  curia,  which  at  first  may  have  contained
nothing  but  an  altar,  afterwards  a  sacellum,  and
finally  a  building  in  which  the  curiales  assembled
for  the  purpose  of  discussing  political,  financial,  re-
ligious and  other  matters.  (Paul.  Diac.  pp.  62,
64  ;  Dionys.  ii.  50.)  The  religious  affairs  of  each
curia  were  taken  care  of  by  a  priest,  curio,  who
was  assisted  by  another  called  curialis  Flamen.
(Paul.  Diac.  pp.  49,  64 ;  Varro,  De  L.  L.  v.  83,
vi.  46  ;  Dionys.  ii.  21  ;  comp.  Curio.)  The  30
curiae  had  each  its  distinct  name,  which  are  said
to  have  been  derived  from  the  names  of  the  Sabine
Avomen  who  had  been  carried  off  by  the  Romans,
though  it  is  evident  that  some  derived  their  names
from  certain  districts  or  from  ancient  eponymous
heroes.  Few  of  these  names  only  are  known,  such
as  curia  Titia,  Faucia,  Calabra,  Foriensis,  Rapta,
Veliensis,  Titiata.  (Paul.  Diac,  pp.  49,  366  ;  Fest.
p.  174  ;  Liv.  i.  13;  Dionys.  ii.  47  ;  Cic.  De  Re
Puhl.  ii,  8.)  The  political  importance  of  the  curiae
sank  in  proportion  as  that  of  the  plebeians  and
afterwards  of  the  nobilitas  rose  ;  but  they  still
continued  the  religious  observances  of  their  cor-
poration, until  in  the  end  these  also  lost  their  im-
portance and  almost  fell  into  oblivion.  (Ov.  Fast.
ii.  527,  &c.)

Curia  is  also  used  to  designate  the  place  in
which  the  senate  held  its  meetings,  such  as  curia
Hostilia,  curia  Julia,  curia  Marcelli,  curia  Pompeii,
curia  Octaviae,  and  from  this  there  gradually  arose
the  custom  of  calling  the  senate  itself  in  the  Italian
towns  curia,  but  never  the  senate  of  Rome.  The
official  residence  of  the  Salii,  which  was  dedicated
to  Mars,  was  likewise  styled  curia.  (Cic.  de  Div.
L  17;   Dionys.  xiv.  5;    V\\xi.  Ca<ni!l.  32;    comp.


CURIUS.


377


Becker,  Handh.  der  Rom.  Alterth.  vol.  ii.  part  i.
p.  31,&c.)  [L.  S.]

CU'RIA  {^ovXfvT-fjpiou,  yepova-Lo),  in  archi-
tecture. The  building  in  which  the  highest  coun-
cil of  the  state  met,  in  a  Greek  or  Latin  city,  is
described  by  Vitruvius  as  being  adjacent  to  the
affora  or  forum.  Its  form  was  quadrangular ;
either  square  or  oblong.  If  square,  its  height  was
one  and  a  half  times  its  length  :  if  oblong,  the  height
was  half  the  sum  of  the  length  and  breadth.  Thus,
a  senate  house  40  feet  square  would  be  60  feet
high  :  and  one  60  feet  by  40  would  be  50  feet  high :
which  are  somewhat  remarkable  proportions.  Half
way  up  each  wall  there  was  a  projecting  shelf  or
cornice  to  prevent  the  voice  being  lost  in  the  height
of  the  building.  Vitruvius  says  nothing  of  columns
in  the  curia,  but  we  know  that  in  some  Greek
senate  houses,  as  in  that  at  Phocis,  there  were
rows  of  columns  down  each  side,  very  near  the  wall
(Pans.  viii.  32,  x.  5),  and  this  also  was  the  case  at
Pompeii.  A  sort  of  religious  character  was  con-
ceived to  belong  to  the  senate  house  ;  and  there
were  often  statues  of  the  gods  placed  in  it.  (Paus.
/,  c.)  Respecting  the  three  curiae  at  Rome,  the
Hostilia,  the  Julia,  and  the  Pompeiana,  see  Diet,  of
Gr.  and  Rom.  Geog.  art.  Roma.  ( Vitruv.  v,  2  ;
Stieglitz,  Arch'dol.  d.  Baukunst,  vol.  iii.  p.  21  ;  Hirt,
Lehre  d.  Gebaude,  pp.  186—188).  [P.  S,]

CURIA'TA  COMI  TIA.     [Comitia,]

CU'RIO,  the  person  who  stood  at  the  head  of  a
curia,  and  had  to  manage  its  affairs,  especially
those  of  a  religious  nature  (Dionys.  ii.  7,  65  ;
Varro,  De  L.  L.  v.  15,  32,  vi.  6)  :  in  their  ad-
ministration he  was  assisted  by  another  priest,
called  flamen  curialis.  (Paul.  Diac.  p,  64  ;  Dionys.
ii.  21,  64.)  As  there  were  thirty  curiae,  the  number
of  curiones  was  likewise  thirty,  and  they  formed  a
college  of  priests,  which  was  headed  by  one  of
them  bearing  the  title  of  curio  maximus.  (Paul.
Diac.  p.  126  ;  Liv.  xxvii.  8.)  He  Avas  elected  in
the  comitia  curiata,  and  had  authority  over  the
curiae  as  well  as  over  the  curiones.  It  need  hardly
be  observed,  that  the  office  of  curio  could  not  be
held  by  any  one  except  a  patrician  ;  at  a  com-
paratively late  time  we  indeed  find  now  and  then
a  plebeian  invested  with  the  office  of  curio  maximus
(Liv.  xxvii.  8,  xxxiii.  42),  but  this  only  shows  how
much  the  ancient  institution  of  the  curiae  had
then  lost  of  its  original  meaning  and  importance  ;
and  at  the  time  when  the  plebeians  had  gained
access  to  priestly  dignities,  the  office  of  curio  seems
to  have  been  looked  upon  in  the  light  of  any  other
priestly  dignity,  and  to  have  been  conferred  upon
plebeians  no  less  than  upon  patricians.     [L.  S.]

CU'RIUS  (icvpios),  signifies  generally  the  per-
son that  was  responsible  for  the  welfare  of  such
members  of  a  family  as  the  law  presumed  to  be
incapable  of  protecting  themselves  ;  as,  for  instance,
mmors  and  slaves,  and  women  of  all  ages.  Fathers,
therefore,  and  guardians,  husbands,  the  nearest
male  relatives  of  women,  and  masters  of  families,
would  all  bear  this  title  in  respect  of  the  vicarious
functions  exercised  by  them  in  behalf  of  the  re-
spective objects  of  their  care.  The  qualifications
of  all  these,  in  respect  of  which  thoy  can  be  com-
bined in  one  class,  designated  by  the  term  curius^
were  the  male  sex,  years  of  discretion,  freedom,
and  whe^  citizens  a  sufficient  share  of  the  franchise
(iiriTiixia)  to  enable  them  to  appear  in  the  law
courts  as  plaintiffs  or  defendants  in  behalf  of  their
several  charges  ;  in  the  case  of  the  curiw  being  a


378


CURRUS.


resident  alien,  the  deficiency  of  franchise  would  he
supplied  by  his  Athenian  patron  {irpoa-TaT'qs).
The  duties  to  be  performed,  and  m  default  of  their
perfonnance,  the  penalties  incurred  by  guardians,
and  the  proceedings  as  to  their  appointment,  are
mentioned  under  their  more  usual  title  [Epitro-
pus].

The  business  of  those  who  were  more  especially
designated  curii  in  the  Attic  laws,  was  to  protect
the  interests  of  women,  whether  spinsters  or  widows,
or  persons  separated  from  their  husbands.  If  a
citizen  died  intestate,  leaving  an  orphan  daughter,
the  son,  or  the  father,  of  the  deceased  was  bound
to  supply  her  with  a  sufficient  dowry,  and  give  her
in  marriage  ;  and  take  care  both  for  his  own  sake
and  that  of  his  ward,  that  the  husband  made  a
proper  settlement  in  return  for  what  his  bride
brought  him  in  the  way  of  dower  {anoTifj.'n/j.a,
Harpocr.).  In  the  event  of  the  death  of  the  hus-
band or  of  a  divorce,  it  became  the  duty  of  the
curias  that  had  betrothed  her,  to  receive  her  back
and  recover  the  dowry,  or  at  all  events  ali-
mony from  the  husband  or  his  representatives.  If
the  father  of  the  woman  had  died  intestate,  with-
out leaving  such  relations  as  above-mentioned  sur-
viving, these  duties  devolved  upon  the  next  of
kin,  who  had  also  the  option  of  marrying  her  him-
self, and  taking  her  fortune  with  her,  whether  it
were  great  or  small.  (Bunsen,  De  J.  H.  Ath.  p.  46.)
If  the  fortune  was  small,  and  he  was  unwilling  to
marry  her,  he  was  obliged  to  make  up  its  defici-
encies according  to  a  regulation  of  Solon  (Dem.
c.  Macart.  p.  1068)  ;  if  it  were  large  he  might,  it
appears,  sometimes  even  take  her  away  from  a
husband  to  whom  she  had  been  married,  in  the
lifetime  and  with  the  consent  of  her  father.

There  were  various  laws  for  the  protection  of
female  orphans  against  the  neglect  or  cruelty  of
their  kinsmen  ;  as  one  of  Solon's  (Diod.  xii.
p.  298),  whereby  they  could  compel  their  kinsmen
to  endow  or  marry  them  ;  and  another  which  after
their  marriage  enabled  any  Athenian  to  bring  an
action  KaKwcnws,  to  protect  them  against  the
cruelty  of  their  husbands  (Petit.  Lecf.  Att.  p.  .543)  ;
and  the  archon  was  specially  entrusted  with  official
power  to  interfere  in  their  behalf  upon  all  occasions.
(Dem.c.  Afocarf.p.  1076.)  [Kakosis.]   [J.  S.M.]

CURRUS  (apfia),  a  chariot,  a  car.  These
terms  appear  to  have  denoted  those  two-wheeled
vehicles  for  the  carriage  of  persons,  which  were
open  overhead,  thus  differing  from  the  carpentum,
and  closed  in  front,  in  which  they  differed  from
the  cisium.  The  most  essential  articles  in  the
construction  of  the  currus  were  :  —

1.  The  antyx  (&vtv^),  or  rim  ;  and  it  is  accord-
ingly seen  in  all  the  chariots  which  are  represented
either  in  this  article  or  at  pp.  101,238.  [Antyx.]

2.  The  axle,  made  of  oak  ((piiyivos  S|a>j/,  Hom.  //.
V.  830,  imitated  by  YirgW, /affi7ms  axis,  Georg.  iii.
172),  and  sometimes  also  of  ilex,  ash,  or  elm.
(Plin.  H.  ly.  xvi.  84.)  The  axle  was  firmly  fixed
under  the  body  of  the  chariot,  which,  in  reference
to  this  circumstance,  was  called  virfprepia,  and
which  was  often  made  of  wicker-work,  inclosed
by  the  &vtv^  (Hom.  II.  xxiii.  335,  436  ;  Hes.
Scvt  306).

3.  The  wheels  (KvKKa,  rpoxoi,  rotae)  revolved
upon  the  axle  as  in  modem  carriages  ;  and  they
were  prevented  from  coming  off  by  the  insertion  of
pins  (TrepAyai,  f/j-goXoi)  into  the  extremities  of  the
axle  {aKpa^ovia).     The  paits  of  the  wheel  were  as


CURRUS.

follows :  —  (a)  The  nave,  called  irX-ft/j.uT]  (llom.
11.  V.  726,  xxiii.  339  ;  Hes.  Scut  309),  xo»"f 's,
modiolus  (Plin.  H.  N.  ix.  3).  The  two  last  tenna
are  founded  on  the  resemblance  of  the  nave  to  a
modius  or  bushel.  (/>)  The  s}>okes,  Kvr^fxai  (literally,
tlie  legs),  radii.  The  number  of  spokes  of  coui-se
differed  in  different  wheels.  On  one  occasion  we
read  of  eight  (oKTaKv-nixta,  II.  v.  723).  (c)  The/elly,
irvs  (Hom.  II.  v.  724).  This  Avas  commonly  made
of  some  flexible  and  elastic  wood,  such  as  pophar  (//.
iv.  482 — 486),  or  the  wild  fig,  which  was  also  used
for  the  rim  of  the  chariot ;  heat  was  applied  to  assist
in  producing  the  requisite  curvature.  (//.  xxi.  37,
38,  compared  with  Theocrit.  xxv.  247 — 251.)  The
felly  was,  however,  composed  of  separate  pieces,
called  arcs  {a\p7S€s,  Hes.  Op.  et  Dies,  426).  Hesiod
(I.  c.)  evidently  intended  to  recommend  that  a
wheel  should  consist  of  four  pieces,  (d)  The  tire,
4iri(TO}Tpov,  canthus.  Homer  (II.  v.  725)  describes
the  chariot  of  Hera  as  having  a  tire  of  bronze  upon
a  golden  felly,  thus  placing  the  harder  metal  in  a
position  to  resist  friction,  and  to  protect  the  softer.

4.  The  pole  (^vfiSs,  temo).  It  was  firmly  fixed
at  its  lower  extremity  to  the  axle  ;  and  at  the
other  end  (aKpop^vfiiov)  the  pole  was  attached  to
the  yoke  either  by  a  pin  (e/xloAos),  as  shown  in
the  chariot  engraved  below,  or  by  the  use  of  ropes
and  bands  [Jugum].

All  tlie  parts  now  enumerated  are  seen  in  an
ancient  chariot  preserved  in  the  Vatican,  a  repre-
sentation of  which  is  given  in  the  annexed  wood-
cut.


Carriages  with  two  or  even  three  poles  were
used  by  the  Lydians.  (Aeschyh  Pers.  47.)  The
Greeks  and  Romans,  on  the  other  hand,  appear
never  to  have  used  more  than  one  pole  and  one
yoke,  and  the  currus  thus  constructed  was  com-
monly drawn  by  two  horses,  which  were  attached
to  it  by  their  necks,  and  therefore  called  SiCvyes
'liriroi  (Horn.  //.  v.  195,  x.  473),  avvwpis  (Xen.
Hell.  i.  2.  §  1 ),  "gemini  jugales  "  (Virg.  Aen.  vii.
280),  "  equi  bijuges  "  {Georg.  iii.  91).  If  a  third
horse  was  added,  as  was  not  unfrequently  the  case,
it  was  fastened  by  traces.  It  may  have  been  in-
tended to  take  the  place  of  either  of  the  yoke  horses
(  ^vyioi  hiroi),  which  might  happen  to  be  disabled.
The  horse  so  attached  was  called  irapiiopos.  Ginz-
I  rot  (W'dgen  und Fahrwerke,  voLi  p.  342)  haspub^


CURRUS.

Hshed  two  drawings  of  chariots  with  three  horses,
from  Etruscan  vases  in  the  collection  at  Vienna.
The  'Uttos  irapijopos  is  placed  on  the  right  of  the
two  yoke  horses.  (See  woodcut.)  We  also  observe
traces  passing  between  the  two  &vTvyis,  and  pro-
ceeding from  the  front  of  the  chariot  on  each  side
of  the  middle  horse.  These  probably  assisted  in
attaching  the  third,  or  extra  horse.


CURRUS.


879


The  Latin   name   for  a   chariot  and  pair  was
higae.     When  a  third  horse  was  added,  it  was


called  iriga  ;  and  by  the  same  analogy  a  chariot
and  four  was  called  quadrigae  ;  in  Greek-  rerpao-
pia  or  TcOpiinros.

The  horses  v/ere  commonly  harnessed  in  a
quadriga  after  the  manner  already  represented,  the
two  strongest  horses  being  placed  under  the  yoke,
and  the  two  others  fastened  3n  each  side  by  means
of  ropes.  This  is  implied  m  the  use  of  the  epi-
thets (Teipa7os  or  (Teipa^6pos,  and  funalis  or  fmia-
rius,  for  a  horse  so  attached.  (Isid.  Orig.  xviii.
35.)  The  two  exterior  horses  were  further  dis-
tinguished from  one  another  as  the  right  and  the  left
trace-horse.  In  the  splendid  triumph  of  Augustus
after  the  battle  of  Actium,  the  trace-horses  of  his  car
were  ridden  by  two  of  his  young  relations.  Tibe-
rius rode,  as  Suetonius  relates  (Tib.  6.)  sinisteriore
funali  eqtio^  and  Marcellus  deocteriore  funali  equo.
As  the  works  of  ancient  art,  especially  fictile  vases,
abound  in  representations  of  quadrigae,  numerous
instances  may  be  observed,  in  which  the  two
middle  horses  (o  fi4(ros  Sixths  Kal  6  fiecros  apicTTe-
phs,  Schol.  in  Aristoph.  Nub.  122)  are  yoked  to-
gether as  in  the  bigae  ;  and,  as  the  two  lateral
ones  have  collars  (AeVaSva)  equally  with  the  yoke-
horses,  we  may  presume  that  from  the  top  of  these


proceeded  the  ropes  which  were  tied  to  the  rim  of
the  car,  and  by  which  the  trace-horses  assisted  to
draw  it.  The  first  figure  in  the  annexed  woodcut
is  the  chariot  of  Aurora,  as  painted  on  a  vase  found
at  Canosa.  (Gerhard,  uber  Lichtgottheiten.,  pi.  iii.
fig,  1.)  The  reins  of  the  two  middle  horses  pass
through  rings  at  the  extremities  of  the  yoke.  All
the  particulars  which  have  been  mentioned  are  still
more  distinctly  seen  in  the  second  figure,  taken
from  a  terra-cotta  at  Vienna.  (Ginzrot,  vol.  ii.
pp.  107,  108.)  It  represents  a  chariot  overthrown
in  passing  the  goal  at  the  circus.  The  charioteer
having  fallen  backwards,  the  pole  and  yoke  are
thrown  upwards  into  the  air  ;  the  two  trace-horses
have  fallen  on  their  knees,  and  the  two  yoke-
horses  are  prancing  on  their  hind  legs.

If  we  may  rely  on  the  evidence  of  numerous
works  of  art,  the  currus  was  sometimes  drawn  by
four  horses  without  either  yoke  or  pole  ;  for  we  see
two  of  them  diverging  to  the  right  hand  and  two
to  the  left,  as  in  the  cameo  in  the  royal  collection  of
Berlin,  which  exhibits  Apollo  surrounded  by  the
signs  of  the  zodiac.  If  the  ancients  really  drove
the  quadrigae  thus  harnessed,  we  can  only  suppose
the  charioteer  to  have  checked  its  speed  by  pulling
up  the  horses,  and  leaning  with  his  whole  body
backwards,  so  as  to  make  the  bottom  of  the  car  at
its  hindennost  border  scrape  the  ground,   an  act


and  an  attitude  which  seem  not  unfrequently  to  be
intended  in  antique  representations.

The  currus,  like  the  cisium,  was  adapted  to
carry  two  persons,  and  on  this  account  was  called
in  Greek  5i(ppos.  One  of  the  two  was  of  course
the  driver.  He  was  called  rjvioxos,  because  he
held  the  reins,  and  his  companion  TrapaiSaTris^
from  going  by  his  side  or  near  him.  Though  in  all
respects  superior,  the  irapai€ari}5  was  often  obliged
to  place  himself  behind  the  rjvloxos.  He  is  so  re-
presented in  the  bigae  at  p.  101,  and  in  the  Iliad
(xix.  397)  Achilles  himself  stands  behind  his  cha-
rioteer, Automedon.  On  the  other  hand,  a  per-
sonage of  the  highest  rank  may  drive  his  own  car-
riage, and  then  an  inferior  may  be  his  irapaiSdr-qs^
as  when  Nestor  conveys  Machaon  (tto/)'  Se  Mox«w
)8aiVe,  II.  xi.  512,  517),  and  Hera,  holding  the
reins  and  whip,  conveys  Athena,  who  is  in  full
armour  (v.  720 — 775).  In  such  cases  a  kindness,
or  even  a  compliment,  was  conferred  by  the  driver
upon  him  whom  he  conveyed,  as  when  Diony-
sius,  tyrant  of  Sicily,  "  himself  holding  the  reins
made  Plato  his  Trapai^aTrjs."  ( Aelian,  V.  H.  iv.
18.)

Chariots  were  frequently  employed  on  the  field
of  battle  not  only  by  the  Asiatic  nations,  but  also
by  the  Greeks  in  the  heroic  age.  The  ooio-r^es,
«'.  e.  the  nobility,  or  men  of  rank,  who  were  com-


38a


CURRUS.


plete  suits  of  armour,  all  took  their  chariots  with
them,  and  in  an  engagement  placed  themselves  in
front.  In  the  Homeric  battles  we  find  that  the
horseman,  who  for  the  purpose  of  using  his  weapons,
and  in  consequence  of  the  weight  of  his  amtiour,  is
under  the  necessity  of  taking  the  place  of  irapai-
€dT7]s  (see  above  the  woodcut  of  the  triga),  often
assails  or  challenges  a  distant  foe  from  the  chariot  ;
but  that,  when  he  encounters  his  adversary  in
close  combat,  they  both  dismount,  "  springing  from
their  chariots  to  the  ground,"  and  leaving  them  to
the  care  of  the  'nviox'Jt.  (If.  iii.  29,  xvi.  426,  427,
xvii.  480—483  ;  Hes.  Scut.  Here.  370—372.)
As  soon  a?  the  hero  had  finished  the  trial  of  his
strength  with  his  opponent,  he  returned  to  his
chariot,  one  of  the  chief  uses  of  which  was  to  rescue
him  from  danger.  These  chariots,  as  represented
on  bas-reliefs  and  fictile  vases,  were  exceedingly
light,  the  body  often  consisting  of  little  besides  a
rim  fastened  to  the  bottom  and  to  the  axle.  Thus
we  find  Diomed,  in  his  nocturnal  visit  to  the
enemy's  camp,  deliberating  whether  to  draw
away  the  splendid  chariot  of  Rhesus  by  the  pole,
or  to  carry  it  off  on  his  shoulder.  (7/.  x.  503 — 505).
In  later  times  the  chariots  were  chiefly  em-
ployed in  the  public  games.  Their  form  was  the
same,  except  that  they  were  more  elegantly  deco-
i-ated.  Chariots  were  not  much  used  by  the  Ro-
mans. The  most  splendid  kind  were  the  quad-
rigae, in  which  the  Roman  generals  and  emperors
rode  when  they  triumphed.  The  body  of  the
triumphal  car  was  cylindrical,  as  we  often  see  it
represented  on  medals.  It  was  enriched  with
gold  (aureo  curru,  Flor.  i.  5  ;  Hor.  Epod.  ix.  22)
and  ivory  (Ov.  Trid.  iv.  2.  63,  Po7it.  iii.  4.  35).
The  utmost  skill  of  the  painter  and  the  sculptor
was  employed  to  enhance  its  beauty  and  splendour.
More  particularly  the  extremities  of  the  axle,  of
the  pole,  and  of  the  yoke,  were  highly  wrought  in
the  form  of  animals'  heads.  Wreaths  of  laurel
were  sometimes  hung  round  it  {currum  laurige-
rum,  Claudian,  De  Laud.  Stil.  iii.  20,  Tert.  Cons.
Honor.  130),  and  were  also  fixed  to  the  heads  of
the  four  snow-white  horses.  (Mart.  vii.  7.)  The
car  was  elevated  so  that  he  who  triumphed  might
be  the  most  conspicuous  person  in  the  procession,
and  for  the  same  reason  he  was  obliged  to  stand
erect  {in  curru  stuntis  eburno.,  Ovid,  I.  c).  The
triumphal  c<ir  had  in  general  no  pole,  the  horses
being  led  by  men  who  were  stationed  at  their
heads.


Chariots   executed   in    terra    cotta    {quadrigae
Juitilesy  Plin.  H.  N.  xxviii.  4),  in  bronze,  or  in


CYATHUS.

niarble,  an  example  of  whicli  last  is  shown  in
the  preceding  woodcut  from  an  ancient  chariot
in  the  Vatican,  were  among  the  most  beautiful
ornaments  of  temples  and  other  public  edifices.
No  pains  were  spared  in  their  decoration  ;  and
Pliny  informs  us  (//.  A^.  xxxiv.  19)  that  some
of  the  most  eminent  artists  were  employed  upon
them.  In  numerous  instances  they  were  de-
signed to  perpetuate  the  fame  of  those  who  had
conquered  in  the  chariot-race.  (Pans.  vi.  10.)  As
the  emblem  of  victon,-^,  the  quadriga  was  some-
times adopted  by  the  Romans  to  grace  the  trium-
phal arch  by  being  placed  on  its  summit ;  and
even  in  the  private  houses  of  great  families,
chariots  were  displayed  as  the  indications  of  rank,
or  the  memorials  of  conquest  and  of  triumph.
(Juv.  viii.  3.)  [J.  Y.]

CURSO'RES,  slaves,  whose  duty  it  was  to
run  before  the  carriage  of  their  masters,  for  the
same  purpose  as  our  outriders.  They  were  not
used  during  the  times  of  the  republic,  but  appear
to  have  first  come  into  fashion  in  the  middle  of  the
first  century  of  the  Christian  aera.  The  slaves
employed  for  this  purpose  appear  to  have  fre-
quently been  Numidians.  (Senec.  Ep.  87,  126  ;
Marc.  iii.  47,  xii.  24  ;  Petron.  28.)  The  word
cursores  was  also  applied  to  all  slaves,  whom
their  masters  employed  in  carrying  letters,  mes-
sages, &c.  (Suet.  Ner.  49,  Tit.  9  ;  Tacit.  Agric.
43.)

CURSUS.     [Circus.]
CURU'LIS  SELLA.     [Sella  Curulis.]
CUSTO'DES.     [CoMiTiA,  p.  336,  b.]
CUSTO'DES,     CUSTO'DIAE.       [Castra,
p.  250,  b.]

CUSTOS  URBIS.  [Praefectus  Urbl]
CY'ATHUS  {KvaBos),  is  one  of  the  numerous
words,  containing  the  element  /cu,  and  signifying
something  hollow :  it  is  applied,  for  example,  to
the  hollow  of  the  hand.  Its  general  meaning  is  a
cup  of  any  kind  ;  and  it  constantly  occurs  as  the
name  of  a  sort  of  drinking  vessel  used  by  the  Ro-
mans, who  borrowed  it  from  the  Greeks  (Varro,
De  Ling.  Lat.  v.  124,  ed.  MUller)  ;  but  whether
it  designates  the  cup  out  of  which  the  wine  was
drunk,  or  the  small  ladle  by  means  of  which  it
was  transferred  from  the  mixing-bowl  {Kpari]p)
into  the  drinking-cup,  is  a  disputed  point.  Orelli
asserts  that  it  is  never  used  in  the  latter  sense,
and  that  the  ladle  was  called  iTrixvais,  or  trulla
vinaria  {Ad  Herat.  Carm.  iii.  8.  13).  But  the
passages  in  which  the  word  occurs  bear  out  the
opinion  of  Becker,  that  the  ladle  was  called  cy^


V


^


CYMBALUM.

athus.  (See  the  Leaicons  of  Scott  and  Liddell,
Sailer  and  Jacobitz,  and  Facciolati  ;  Becker,
Charikles^  vol.  i.  p.  463.)  Two  of  these  cyathi
are  represented  in  the  preceding  woodcut,  from
the  Museo  Borhonico^  vol.  iv.  pi.  1 2.  They  were
usually  of  bronze  or  silver.  The  cyathus  is  re-
ferred to  as  a  measure  of  the  quantity  of  wine
which  a  person  drank.  (Hor.  Carm.  iii.  8.  13,  19.
12.)  A  slave  was  appointed  to  supply  the  drink-
ing-cups  of  the  banqueters  by  means  of  the  cy-
athus. (Hor.  Carm.  \.  29.  8  ;  Suet.  Caes.  49  ;
Juv.  Sat.  ix.  46.)

Another  sense  in  which  the  word  occurs  is,  in
surgery,  for  a  cup  for  cupping  (Aristoph.  Lys.
444,  Pa.r,  542  ;  Aristot.  Prohl.  ix.  9).

The  cyathus  was  a  definite  measure,  with  both
the  Greeks  and  the  Romans,  containing  one-twelfth
of  the  seatarius.  It  was  the  micia^  considered  with
reference  to  the  seatarius  as  the  unit ;  hence  we
have  sextans  used  for  a  vessel  containing  the  sixth
of  the  seaiarius,  or  two  cyathi,  quadrans  for  one
containing  three  cyathi,  triens  for  four  cyathi,  quin-
cutix  for  five  cyathi,  &c.  (Wumi.  De  Po?idcri-
bus,  Mensuris,  &c.  ;  Hussey  On  Ancient  Weights,
&c.)  [P.  S.]

CYCLAS  (kvkKols),  a  circular  robe  worn  by
women,  to  the  bottom  of  which  a  border  was
affixed,  inlaid  with  gold.  (Prop.  iv.  7.  40.)  Alex-
ander Severus,  in  his  other  attempts  to  restrain  the
luxury  of  his  age,  ordained  that  women  should
possess  only  one  cyclas  each,  and  that  it  should
not  be  adorned  with  more  than  six  unciae  of  gold.
(Lamp.  Alex.  Sev.  41.)  The  cyclas  appears  to
have  been  usually  made  of  some  thin  material
(teftui  in  cyclade,  Juv.  vi.  259).  It  is  related,
among  other  instances  of  Caligula's  effeminacy,
that  he  sometimes  went  into  public  in  a  garment
of  this  description.     (Suet.  Cat.  52.)

CYCLOPEIA.     [Architectura].

C  YMA  (Kv/xa),  in  architecture,  an  ogee,  a  wave-
shaped  moulding,  consisting  of  two  curves,  the
one  concave  and  the  other  convex.  There  were
two  forms,  the  cyina  recta,  which  was  concave  above,
and  convex  below,  thus,  3,  and  the  cyma  reversa,
which  was  convex  above  and  concave  below,  thus,
'^.  The  diminutive  cymatium  or  cumatium  (kv/xo.-
Tiov)  is  also  used,  and  is  indeed  the  more  common
name.  The  original  form  of  the  cymatium,  was,
however,  a  simple  hollow  (the  cavettu)  thus  '^.
This  was  called  the  cymatium  Doricum,  and  the
other  the  cymaiium  Leshicum.  ( Aesch.  Fr.  70,  ed.
Dindorf.;  V>'6ck\i.Coi-p.  Jnscr.  vol.  i.  p.  284  ;  Vitruv.
iii.  3.  8.  5.  §  7,  Schn.  iv.  6.  §  2 — 6  ;  Gruter, /«i.6-r.
p.  ccvii  ;  Miiller,  J  rc/(ao/.  d.  Kunst,  §  274  ;  Mauch,
Gr.  und  Rom.  Bauord.  pp.  6,  7  :  for  examples,  see
the  profiles  on  p.  326.  [P.  S.j

CYMA'TIUM.     [Cyma.]

CYMBA  {kvixSt])  is  derived  from  Kvfx€os,  a
hollow,  and  is  employed  to  signify  any  small  kind
of  boat  used  on  lakes",  rivers,  &c.  (Cic.  De  Off.  iii.
14  ;  Aen.  vi.  303.)  It  appears  to  have  been  much
the  same  as  the  a/cartoi'  and  scapha.

CY'MBALUM  (/cu/xgaAov),  a  musical  instru-
ment, in  the  shape  of  two  half  globes,  which  were
held  one  in  each  hand  by  the  performer,  and  played
by  being  struck  against  each  other.  The  word  is
originally  Greek,  being  derived  from  kv/xSos,  a
hollow,  with  which  the  Latin  cymba,  cymbium,  &c.
seem  to  be  connected.  Several  kinds  of  cymbals
are  found  on  ancient  monuments,  and  on  the  othet
hand  a  great  many  names  have  been  preserved  by


CYMBALUM.


38  i


the  grammarians  and  lexicographers ;  but  the  de-
scriptions of  the  latter  are  so  vague,  that  it  is  im-
possible to  identify  one  with  the  other.  A  large
class  of  cymbals  was  termed  Kpovfxara,  which,  if
they  were  really  distinct  from  the  KpoTuXa,  as
Spohn  and  Lampe  suppose,  cannot  now  be  exactly
described.  [Crotalum.]  The  annexed  drawing
of  a  Kpovfia  is  taken  from  an  ancient  marble,  and
inserted  on  the  authority  of  Spohn  (MiscelLaec.  1.
art.  6.  fig.  44).


The  KpeixSaXa  mentioned  in  the  Homeric  hymn
to  Apollo  (161 — 164),  were  of  this  kind,  played
on  by  a  choms  of  Delians.  The  scabilla  or  Kpov-
'!re(ia  were  also  on  the  same  principle,  only  played
with  the  foot,  and  inserted  in  the  shoe  of  the  per-
former ;  they  were  used  by  flute-players,  perhaps
to  beat  time  to  their  music.  (Pollux,  x.  33.)
Other  kinds  of  cymbals  were,  the  TrXarayf],  an
invention  of  Archytas,  mentioned  by  Aristotle
(Pol.  viii.  6),  and  its  diminutive  irXaraydiViov,
which,  from  the  description  of  Julius  Pollux
and  Hesychius  (s.  v.),  appears  to  have  been  a
child's  rattle:  6^v€a'pa,  the  two  parts  of  which
Suidas  tells  us  (s.  v.)  were  made  of  different  mate-
terials  for  the  sake  of  variety  of  sound:  KorvXai,
mentioned  in  the  fragments  of  Aeschylus,  with
several  others,  noted  by  Lampe  in  his  work  De
Cymbalis,  but  perhaps  without  sufficient  authority.
The  C3'mbal  was  usually  made  in  the  form  of  two
half  globes,  either  running  oft'  towards  a  point  so
as  to  be  grasped  by  the  whole  hand,  or  with  a


handle.  It  was  commonly  of  bronze,  but  some-
times of  baser  material,  to  which  Aristophanes
alludes  {Ranae,  1305).     The  preceding  woodcut


882


DAKDALA.


of  a  cjTTibalistria  is  taken  from  an  ancient  marble,
and  given  on  the  authority  of  Lampe.

The  cymbal  was  a  very  ancient  instrument,
being  used  in  the  worship  of  Cybele,  Bacchus,
Juno,  and  all  the  eariier  deities  of  the  Grecian  and
Roman  mytholog}^  It  probably  came  from  the
East,  from  whence,  through  the  Phoenicians,  it  was
conveyed  to  Spain  (compare  Martial's  Baetica
Crumata).  Among  the  Jews  it  appears  (from
2  Chron.  v.  ]2,  13 ;  Nehem.  xii.  27)  to  have  been
an  instrument  in  common  use.  At  Rome  we  first
hear  of  it  in  Livy's  account  of  the  Bacchic  orgies,
which  were  introduced  from  Etruria.  (xxxix.  9.)

For  sistrnm^  which  some  have  referred  to  the
class  oi  cymhala^  see  Sistrwm.  [B.  J.]

CYRBEIS  {KvpS^is).     [AxoNES.]

CYZICE'NUS  OECUS.     [Domus].

CYZICENUS  NUMMUS.     [Stater].


D.


DACTYLIOTHE'CA  (5aKTv\jo0:^/«]),acase  or
box  where  rings  were  kept.  (Mart.  xi.  59.)  The
name  was  also  applied  to  a  cabinet  or  collection  of
jewels.  We  learn  from  Pliny  (//".  A^.  xxxvii.  5),
that  Scaunis,  the  step-son  of  Sulla,  was  the  first
person  at  Rome  who  had  a  collection  of  this  kind,
and  that  his  was  the  only  one  till  Pompey  brought
to  Rome  the  collection  of  Mithridates,  which  he.
placed  in  the  capitol.

DA'CTYLUS  (SaKTuAos),  a  Greek  measure,
answering  to  the  Roman  digitus^  each  signifying  a
finger-breadth^  and  being  the  sixteenth  part  of  a
foot.     [Pes.]     (See  the  Tables.)  [P.S.]

DADU'CHUS.     [Eleusinia.]

DAE'DALA  or  DAEDALEIA  (Sa(Sa\a,  Sai-
Sa\eia),  were  names  used  by  the  Greeks  to  sig-
nify those  early  works  of  art  which  were  ascribed
to  the  age  of  Daedalus,  and  especially  the  ancient
wooden  statues,  ornamented  with  gilding  and
bright  colours  and  real  drapery,  which  were  the
earliest  known  forms  of  the  images  of  the  gods,
after  the  mere  blocks  of  wood  or  stone,  which
were  at  first  used  for  symbols  of  them.  (See
Did.  of  Greek  and  Roman  Biog.^  art.  Daedalus,
vol.i.  p.  928.)  ^  [P.S.]

DAE'DALA  (SatSaAo),  a  festival,  celebrated  in
Boeotia  in  honour  of  Hera,  sumamed  'NvfKpevo/j.hT]
or  TeAeta  (Pans.  ix.  2.  §  5).  Its  origin  and  mode
of  celebration  are  thus  described  by  Pausanias  (ix.
3.  §  1 ,  &c.)  :  —  Hera  was  once  angry  with  Zeus,  and
•withdrew  herself  to  Euboea.  Zeus  not  being  able
to  persuade  her  to  return,  went  to  Cithaeron,  who
then  governed  Plataeae,  and  who  was  said  to  be
unequalled  in  wisdom.  He  advised  Zeus  to  get  a
wooden  statue,  to  dress  and  place  it  upon  a  chariot,
and  to  say  that  it  was  Plataea,  the  daughter  of
Asopus,  whom  he  was  going  to  marry.  Zeus  fol-
lowed the  advice  of  Cithaeron,  and  no  sooner  had
Hera  heard  of  her  hu3band''s  projected  marriage
than  she  returned.  But  when,  on  approaching  the
chariot  and  dragging  off  the  coverings,  she  saw  the
wooden  statue,  she  was  pleased  with  the  device,
and  became  reconciled  to  Zeus.  In  remembrance
of  this  reconciliation  the  Plataeans  solemnised  the
festival  of  the  daedala,  which  owes  its  name  to
AaiSaXa^  the  name  by  which,  in  ancient  times,
statues  were  designated.  (See  preceding  article.)
Pausanias  was  told  that  the  festival  was  held
every  seventh  year,  but  he  believes  that  it  took


DAMARETION.

place  at  shorter  intervals,  though  he  was  unable
to  discover  the  exact  time.

This  festival  was  celebrated  by  the  Plataeans
alone,  and  was  called  the  lesser  Daedala  {AaiSa\a
/jLiKpd),  and  was  celebrated  in  the  following  man-
ner :  —  In  the  neighbourhood  of  Alalcomene  was
the  greatest  o.i,k-forest  of  Boeotia,  and  in  it  a
number  of  oak  trunks.  Into  this  forest  the  Pla-
taeans went,  and  exposed  pieces  of  cooked  meat  to
the  ravens,  attentively  watching  upon  which  tree
any  of  the  birds,  after  taking  a  piece  of  the  meat,
would  settle ;  and  the  trees  on  which  any  of  the
ravens  settled,  were  cut  down  and  worked  into
daedala,  i.  e.  roughly  hewn  statues.

The  great  Daedala  (AaiSaAa  fieydXa),  in  the
celebration  of  which  the  Plataeans  were  joined  by
the  other  Boeotians,  took  place  every  sixtieth  year ;
because  at  one  time  when  the  Plataeans  were  ab-
sent from  their  coimtry,  the  festival  had  not  been
celebrated  for  a  period  of  sixty  years.  At  each  of
the  lesser  Daedala  fourteen  statues  were  made  in
the  manner  described  above,  and  distributed  by  lot
among  the  towns  of  Plataeae,  Coroneia,  Thespiae,
Tanagra,  Chaeroneia,  Orchomenos,  Lebadeia,  and
Thebes ;  the  smaller  towns  took  one  statue  in
common.  The  Boeotians  assembled  on  the  banks
of  the  Asopus  ;  here  a  statue  of  Hera  was  adorned
and  raised  on  a  chariot,  and  a  young  bride  led  the
procession.  The  Boeotians  then  decided  by  lot
in  what  order  the)"-  were  to  form  the  procession,
and  drove  their  chariots  away  from  the  river  and
up  mount  Cithaeron,  on  the  summit  of  which  an
altar  was  erected  of  square  pieces  of  wood,  fitted
together  like  stones.  This  altar  was  covered  with
a  quantity  of  dry  wood,  and  the  towns,  persons  of
rank,  and  other  wealthy  individuals,  offered  each
a  heifer  to  Hera,  and  a  bull  to  Zeus,  with  plenty
of  wine  and  incense,  and  at  the  same  time  placed
the  daedala  upon  the  altar.  For  those  who  did
not  possess  sufficient  means,  it  was  customary  to
offer  small  sheep,  but  all  their  offerings  were  burnt
in  the  same  manner  as  those  of  the  wealthier  per-
sons. The  fire  consumed  both  offerings  and  altar,
and  the  immense  flame  thus  kindled  was  seen  far
and  wide.

The  account  of  the  origin  of  the  daedala  given
by  Pausanias  agrees  in  the  main  points  Avith  the
story  related  by  Plutarch  (apud  Euseh.  De  Prae-
parat.  Evang.  iii.  p.  83,  and  Fragm.  p.  759,  &c.
ed.  Wyttenb.),  who  wrote  a  work  on  the  Plataean
daedala  ;  the  only  difference  is  that  Plutarch  re-
presents Zeus  as  receiving  his  advice  to  deceive
Hera  from  Alalcomenes  ;  and  that  he  calls  the
wooden  statue  by  which  the  goddess  was  to  be  de-
ceived Daedala,  instead  of  Plataea.  Plutarch  also
adds  some  remarks  respecting  the  meaning  of  the
festival,  and  thinks  that  the  dispute  betwien  Zeus
and  Hera  had  reference  to  the  physical  revolutions
to  which  Boeotia,  at  a  very  remote  period,  had
been  subject,  and  their  reconciliation  to  the  restor-
ation of  order  in  the  elements.  (See  Creuzer,
SpnboL  und  Mythol.  ii.  p.  580,  and  Miiller's  Or-
chom.  p.  216,  &c.  2d  edit.)        ^  [L.  S.]

DAMARE'TION  (Aa/xapereiov  xP^^^^^)i  ^
Sicilian  coin,  respecting  Avhich  there  is  much  dis-
pute. Diodorus  tells  us  (xi.  26)  that  after  Gelon's
great  victory  over  the  Carthaginians  at  Himera,  his
wife  Damarete  prevailecj  upon  him  to  grant  them
moderate  terms  of  peace  ;  and  that  the  Cartha-
ginians, as  a  token  of  their  gratitude,  presented
Damarete   with  a  golden  crown  of  one  hundred


DAMNUM  INFECTUM.

talents'  weight  ;  upon  receiving  which,  she  struck
the  coin,  which  was  called,  after  her,  Sa/iopereiov,
and  which  contained  ten  Attic  drachmae,  and  was
called  by  the  Sicilians  ir^vTriKovTahiTpov^  from
its  weight.  (Comp.  Schol.  ad  Piiid.  01.  ii.  1.)
The  story  is  told  somewhat  differently  by  other
writers,  namely,  that  Damarete  and  the  ladies  of
the  court  gave  up  their  ornaments  to  be  coined  into
money,  in  order  to  supply  Gelon's  necessities  during
the  war.  (Pollux,  ix.  85  ;  Hesych.  s.  v.  Arjfiape-
riov.)  In  an  epigram  ascribed  to  Simonides,  who
was  probably  living  at  the  court  of  Gelon  at  this
very  time  (Schol  ad  Find.  Pyth.  i.  155  ;  Anth.  Pal.
vi.  214  ;  No.  196,  Schneidewin),  it  is  said  that
Gelon  and  his  brothers  dedicated  to  the  Pythian
Apollo,  after  their  victory  over  the  barbarians,  a
tripod  AapgTiou  xP^^°^->  where  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  Bentley  is  right  in  reading  Aafxaperiov^
but  it  is  not  equally  certain  whether  the  last  two
lines  of  the  epigram  are  not  altogether  spurious.
(Comp.  Schneidewin,  ad  loc.^  and  Bockh,  Metrol.
Untermch.  p.  304.)  At  all  events,  the  passage  is
an  indication  of  the  unifonn  tradition  respecting
this  "  Damaretian  gold  ; "  the  exact  history  of
which  is  of  very  little  consequence  compared  with
the  identification  of  the  coinage  to  which  the  state-
ments refer.  From  all  the  discussion  of  this  point
by  Eckhel,  Miillcr,  Hussey,  Btickh,  and  others,
the  most  probable  conclusion  seems  to  be  that  the
coin  was  of  gold  and  not  of  silver  (although  coins
of  equal  value  were  at  some  time  or  other  struck
in  silver  also),  and  that  the  statements  which  give
its  weight  as  fifty  Sicilian  litras,  or  ten  Attic
drachmae,  are  to  be  understood,  not  literally  of  its
weight.,  but  of  its  value.,  as  estimated  by  those
weights  of  silver  :  in  short,  it  was  a  gold  coin,  equal
in  value  to  fifty  litrae  or  ten  Attic  drachmae  of
silver  ;  that  is,  a  half  stater.  (Eckhel,  Doct.  Num.
Vet.  vol.  i.  p.  250  ;  Hussey,  On  Ancient  Weights^
p.  57.  &c. ;  Bockh,  Metrologisclie  Untersuchungen^
p.  304,&c.)  [P.S.]

DAMIURGI.  [Demiurgi.]
DAMN  UM.  Damnum  signifies  generally  any
loss  or  damage  which  a  person  has  sustained  in  his
property  (damnum  datum,  factum),  or  damage
which  he  has  reason  to  fear  (damnum  infectum).
(Dig.  39.  tit.  2.  s.  2.)  Damnum  actually  done  is
generiiUy  called  damnum  simply.  The  liability  to
make   good  a  loss  is  praestare  damnum.

The  causes  of  damage  are  either  chance,  acci-
dent (casus),  or  the  free  acts  or  omissions  of  rea-
sonable human  beings.  (Dig.  9.  tit.  2.  s.  5.  §  2.)
If  the  damnum  is  caused  by  the  just  exercise  of  a
right,  it  is  indirect.  In  any  other  case  it  is  direct
or  injuria  datum  ;  and  when  it  is  injuria  datum,
there  may  be  neither  dolus  nor  culpa,  or  there  may
be  either  one  or  the  other.

The  obligation  to  make  compensation  for  damage
arises  either  from  dolus  mains,  culpa,  and  mora,
which  in  fact  is  included  in  culpa,  and  out  of  con-
tracts. A  man  is  not  bound  to  make  compensa-
tion for  indirect  loss  or  damage  (Dig.  39.  tit.  2.
8.  26  ;  47.  tit.  9.  s.  3.  §  7);  nor  for  direct  damage,
if  neither  dolus  nor  culpa  can  be  imputed  to  him,
as  if  he  be  mad.  (Dig.  9.  tit.  2.  s.  5.  §  2,  30.  §  3  ;
Thibaut,  System,  &c.,  9th  ed.  §  163.)  As  to
damage  done  by  an  animal,  see  Pauperies.  [G.L.]
DAMNUM  INFECTUM,  is  damage  (dam-
num) not  done,  but  apprehended.  (Dig.  39.  tit.  2.
B.  2.)  The  praetor's  edict  provided  for  such  cases.
If  the  building  of  one  man  threatened  damage  to


DAMNUM  INJURIA  DATUM.    383

another  in  consequence  of  its  dilapidated  state,  the
ovraer  of  the  dilapidated  property  might  be  required
to  repair  it  or  to  give  security  against  any  damage
that  might  be  caused  by  the  state  of  his  building.
The  security  (cautio)  was  demanded  by  an  actio  in
factum,  in  all  cases  where  the  security  could  be
required.  Every  person  who  was  in  possession  of  the
property  that  was  threatened,  whether  as  owner  or
in  any  other  right  (but  not  a  bonae  fidei  possessor),
could  claim  this  cautio.  (Dig.  39.  tit.  2.  s.  5.  §  2  ;
13.  §  5, 18  ;  13.  §  4,  9.)  The  owner  of  the  ruinous
property  or  any  person  who  had  a  right  therein,  and
a  bonae  fidei  possessor,  might  be  required  to  give  this
cautio,  which  might  be  given  by  a  simple  promise
or  by  giving  sureties.  The  complainant  had  to
swear  that  he  did  not  require  the  cautio  calumniae
causa  (Dig.  39.  tit.  2.  s.  7  ;  idqve  .  non  .  k.  k.

SE  .  FACERE  .  IVRAVERIT.  Tab.  Vel.  C.  XX.)

If  the  defendant  wrongfully  refused  to  give  the
security,  the  complainant  was  empowered  to  enter
upon  the  property  which  threatened  the  damage,
and  apparently  for  the  purpose  of  protecting  him-
self against  it  ;  if  this  produced  no  result,  the  de-
fendant was  ejected,  and  the  complainant  was
allowed  to  take  possession  of  the  property,  and  the
defendant  lost  all  his  rights  to  it.

If  a  ruinous  house  (aedes  ruinosae)  fell  and
damaged  a  neighbour  before  any  cautio  had  been
given,  all  the  right  that  the  damaged  person  had
was  to  retain  the  materials  that  had  fallen  on  his
land  (Dig.  39.  tit.  2.  ss.  6,  7.  §§  2,  8)  ;  but  it  seems
that  the  owner  of  the  ruinous  house  could,  if  he
liked,  pack  up  the  materials  and  carry  them  off.
( Cic.  Top.  4,  In  Verr.  i.  66  ;  Inst.  4.  tit.  5  ;  Thi-
baut, System,  Sec.  §  274,  &c.  9th  ed.)       [G.  L.]

DAMNUM  INJURIA  DATUM,  The  most
usual  form  of  proceeding  in  cases  of  Damnum  in-
juria datum  was  by  the  Lex  Aquilia  (Dig.  9.  tit.  2),
which  repealed  all  previous  legislation  on  the  sub-
ject. This  Lex  Aquilia  was  a  plebiscitum,  which
was  proposed  by  Aquilius,  a  tribunus  plebis.  If  the
owner  of  the  damaged  thing  sued,  there  might  be
two  cases.  The  damage  might  be  done  by  cor-
poreal contact  of  the  wrongdoer  (corpore),  or  by
something  which  he  directed,  and  done  to  another
thing  (corpus),  so  as  to  impair  its  value  or  destroy
it  ;  and  in  this  case  there  was  the  directa  actio
Legis  Aquiliae.  The  first  chapter  provided  that
if  a  man  killed  (injuria,  that  is,  dolo  aut  culpa.
Gains,  iii.  211 )  a  slave  or  quadruped  (quae  pecudum
numero  sit)  which  belonged  to  another,  he  was
bound  to  pay  the  highest  value  that  the  slave  or
animal  had  within  the  year  preceding  the  unlaw-
ful act.  If  the  wrongdoer  wilfully  denied  the  fact
of  the  damage,  he  was  liable  to  make  compensation
to  double  the  value.  The  third  chapter  provided
for  the  case  of  a  slave  or  quadruped  (quae  pecudum.
Sec.)  being  damaged,  or  any  thing  else  being
damaged  or  destroyed.  In  this  case  he  had  to
pay  the  highest  value  that  the  thing  had  within
the  thirty  days  preceding  the  unlawful  act.  If
the  damage  was  done  to  a  thing  (corpus),  but  not
by  a  corpus,  there  was  an  actio  utilis  Legis  Aqui-
liae, which  is  also  an  actio  in  factum  or  on  the
case.  Such  a  case  would  occiu*  when,  for  instance,
a  man  should  purposely  drive  his  neighbour's  beast
into  a  river  and  it  should  perish  there.  (Dig.  9.
tit.  2.  s.  7.  §  3,  9.)

If  the  thing  was  not  damaged,  but  the  owner
was  damaged,  there  might  be  an  actio  in  factum  ;
as,  for  instance,  if  a  man  out  of  compassion  loosed


384


DAPHNEPHORIA.


another  man's  slave  who  was  bound  and  so  gave
him  the  opportunity  of  escaping.  A  man  who
was  not  owner,  might  have  an  actio  utilis  legis
Aquiliae  or  in  factum,  if  he  had  an  interest  in  the
thing,  as  a  fructuarius,  usuarius,  a  bonae  fidei  pos-
sessor, or  a  person  who  had  received  a  thing  as  a
pledge.

If  a  man's  slave  was  killed,  the  owner  might
sue  for  damages  under  the  Lex  Aquilia,  and
prosecute  for  a  capital  offence.

(Cic.  Pro  Roscio  Comoedo^  c.  11  ;  Gaius,  iii.
210,  &c.  ;  Inst.  4.  tit.  3  ;  Thibaut,  System,  &c.,
JHh  ed.  §  551,  &c.  ;  Rein,  Das  Romische  Privat-
recht.)  ^  [G.  L.]

DAMOSIA  (SafjLocria),  the  escort  or  suite  of
the  Spartan  kings  in  time  of  war.  It  consisted  of
his  tent-comrades  {(rv(rKT)voi\  to  whom  the  pole-
marchs,  Pythians,  and  three  of  the  equals  (ojxoioi)
also  belonged  (Xen.  Rep.  Lac.  xiii.  1)  ;  of  the
prophets,  surgeons,  flute-players,  volunteers  in  the
army  (Xen.  Rep.  Lac.  xiii.  7),  Olympian  conquerors
(Plut.  I^yc.  22),  public  servants,  «&c.  The  two
ephors,  who  attended  the  king  on  military  expedi-
tions, also  formed  part  of  the  damosia.  (Miiller,
Dorians.,  iii.  12.  §  5.)

DAN  ACE  (SayciKTj),  the  name  of  a  foreign  coin,
according  to  Hesychius  (»'.  c.)  worth  a  little  more
tlian  an  obolos.  According  to  some  writers,  it  was
a  Persian  coin.  (Pollux,  ix.  82,  and  Hemster.  ad
loc.)  This  name  was  also  given  to  the  obolos,
which  was  placed  in  the  mouth  of  the  dead  to  pay
the  ferrj'man  in  Hades  (Hesych.  s.  v. ;  Lucian,  De
Luctu,  c.  10,  Morf.  Dial.  i.  3,  xi.  4,  xxii.  1.)  At
the  opening  of  a  grave  at  Same  in  Cephallenia,  a
coin  was  found  between  the  teeth  of  the  corpse.
(Stackelberg,  Die  Gr'dber  der  Hellenen,  p.  42  ;
IBecker,  Chan'Jdes,  vol.  ii.  p.  170.)

DANEISMA  (SdueKTfia).     [Fenus.]

DAPHNEPHO'RIA  (Sa(pvr)(popia),  a  festival
celebrated  every  ninth  year  at  Thebes  in  honour
of  Apollo,  surnamed  Ismenius  or  Galaxius.  Its
name  was  derived  from  the  laurel  branches  (M(pvai)
which  were  carried  by  those  who  took  part  in  its
celebration.  A  full  account  of  the  festival  is  given
by  Proclus  {Chrestomath.  p.  11).  At  one  time  all
the  Aeolians  of  Arne  and  the  adjacent  districts,  at
the  command  of  an  oracle,  laid  siege  to  Thebes,
which  was  at  the  same  time  attacked  by  the  Pe-
lasgians,  and  ravaged  the  neighbouring  country.
But  when  the  day  came  on  which  both  parties  had
to  celebrate  a  festival  of  Apollo,  a  truce  was  con-
cluded, and  on  the  day  of  the  festival  they  went
with  laurel-boughs  to  the  temple  of  the  god.  But
Polematas,  the  general  of  the  Boeotians,  had  a
vision  in  which  he  saw  a  young  man  who  pre-
sented to  him  a  complete  suit  of  armour,  and  who
made  him  vow  to  institute  a  festival,  to  be  cele-
brated every  ninth  year,  in  honour  of  Apollo,  at
which  the  Thebans,  with  laiirel-boughs  in  their
hands,  were  to  go  to  his  temple.  When,  on  the
third  day  after  this  vision,  both  parties  again  were
engaged  in  close  combat,  Polematas  gained  the
victory.  He  now  fulfilled  his  promise,  and  walked
himself  to  the  temple  of  Apollo  in  the  manner  pre-
scribed by  the  being  he  had  seen  in  his  vision.
And  ever  since  that  time,  continues  Proclus,  this
custom  has  been  strictly  observed.  Respecting  the
mode  of  celebration,  he  adds :  —  At  the  daphne-
phoria  they  adorn  a  piece  of  olive  wood  with  gar-
lands of  laurel  and  various  flowers  ;  on  the  top  of
it  a  brazen  globe  is  placed,  from  which  smaller


DARICUS.

ones  are  suspended  ;  purple  garlands,  smaller  tlinil
those  at  the  top,  are  attached  to  the  middle  part
of  the  wood,  and  the  lowest  part  is  covered  with  a
crocus-coloured  envelope.  I3y  the  globe  on  the
top  they  indicate  the  sun,  which  is  identical  with
Apollo  ;  the  globe  immediately  below  the  iirst,
represents  the  moon  ;  and  the  smaller  suspending
globes  are  symbols  of  the  stars.  The  number  of
garlands  being  365,  indicates  the  course  of  the
year.  At  the  head  of  the  procession  walked  a
youth,  whose  father  and  mother  must  be  living.
This  youth  was,  according  to  Pausanias  (ix.  10.
§  4),  chosen  priest  of  Apollo  every  year,  and  called
5a(f)V7](l)6pos :  he  was  always  of  a  handsome  figure
and  strong,  and  taken  from  the  most  distinguished
families  of  Thebes.  Immediately  before  this
youthful  priest  walked  his  nearest  kinsman,  who
bore  the  adorned  piece  of  olive-wood,  which  was
called  /cwTTw.  The  priest  followed,  bearing  in  his
hand  a  laurel -branch,  with  dishevelled  and  floating
hair,  wearing  a  golden  crown  on  his  head,  a
magnificent  robe  which  reached  down  to  his  feet
(TToSTjprjs),  and  a  kind  of  shoes  called  'IcpiKpariSes,
from  the  general,  Iphicrates,  who  had  first  intro-
duced them.  Behind  the  priest  there  followed  a
choir  of  maidens  with  boughs  in  their  hands  and
singing  hymns.  In  this  manner  the  procession
went  to  the  temple  of  Apollo  Ismenius  or  Galaxius.
It  would  seem  from  Pausanias  that  all  the  boys  of
the  town  wore  laurel  garlands  on  this  occasion,
and  that  it  was  customary  for  the  sons  of  wealthy
parents  to  dedicate  to  the  god  brazen  tripods,  a
considerable  number  of  which  were  seen  in  the
temple  by  Pausanias  himself.  Among  them  was
one  which  was  said  to  have  been  dedicated  by
Amphitryon,  at  the  time  when  Heracles  was
daphnephorus.  This  last  circumstance  shows  that
the  daphnephoria,  whatever  changes  may  have
be:n  subsequently  introduced,  was  a  very  ancient
festival.

There  was  a  great  similarity  between  this  fes-
tival and  a  solemn  rite  observed  by  the  Delphians,
who  sent  every  ninth  year  a  sacred  boy  to  Tempo.
This  boy  went  on  the  sacred  road  (Plut.  Quaest.
Gr.  12),  and  returned  home  as  laurel-bearer  (Sa</)-
vT](p6pos)  amidst  the  joyful  songs  of  choruses  of
maidens.  This  solemnity  was  observed  in  com-
memoration of  the  purification  of  Apollo  at  the
altar  in  Tempo,  whither  he  had  fled  after  killing
the  Python,  and  was  held  in  the  month  of  Thar-
gelion  (probably  on  the  seventh  day).  It  is  a  very
probable  conjecture  of  Miiller  (Dor.  ii.  8.  §  4)  that
the  Boeotian  daphnephoria  took  place  in  the  same
month  and  on  the  same  day  on  which  the  Delphian
boy  broke  the  purifying  laurel-boughs  in  Tempo.

The  Athenians  seem  likewise  to  have  celebrated
a  festival  of  the  same  nature,  but  the  only  mention
we  have  of  it  is  in  Proclus  (ap.  Photium,  p.  987),
who  says  that  the  Athenians  honoured  the  seventh
day  as  sacred  to  Apollo,  that  they  carried  laurel-
boughs  and  adorned  the  basket  (Kdveov,  see  Cane-
PHOROs)  with  garlands,  and  sang  hymns  to  the
god.  Respecting  the  astronomical  character  of
the  daphnephoria  see  Miiller,  Orchom.  p.  215,
2d  edit. ;  and  Creuzer,  Symbol,  und  Mi/thol.  ii.
p.  160.  [L.S.]

DARI'CUS  (SapeiKSs),  or,  to  give  the  name  in
full,  ffrar^p  SapeiKos,  the  stater  of  Dareius  (Thuc.
viii.  28),  was  a  gold  coin  of  Persia,  stamped  on  one
side  with  the  figure  of  an  archer  crowned  and
kneeling  upon  one  knee,  and  on  the  other  with  a


DARICUS.

Bort  of  qnadrata  incusa  or  deep  cleft.  We  know
from  Herodotus  (iv.  166)  that  Dareins,  the  son  of
Hystaspes,  reformed  the  Persian  currency,  and
stamped  gold  of  the  purest  standard  ;  and  it  is
generally  believed  that  the  daricns  was  so  called
from  him.  Harpocration,  howeTer,  says  (s.  v.)
that  the  name  was  older  than  this  Dareius,  and
taken  from  an  earlier  king.  Gesenius  {Htbr.
Lexicon)  supposes  the  name  to  be  derived  from  an
ancient  Persian  word  signifying  king,  or  royal
}ialace,  or  the  bow  of  the  king,  in  allusion  to  the
fignre  stamped  upon  it.  The  best  authors,  how-
ever, think  that  there  is  no  sufficient  ground  for
supposing  either  the  name  or  the  coin  to  be  older
than  Dareius,  the  son  of  Hystaspes.  (Bockh,
Metrol.  Untersuch.  p.  129  ;  Grote,  History  of
Greece^  vol.  iv.  p.  320.)

This  coin  had  a  very  extensive  circulation,  not
only  in  the  Persian  empire,  but  also  in  Greece.
The  pay  given  by  Cyrus  to  the  soldiers  of  Clear-
chus  was  a  daricus  a  month  (Xen.  Anah.  i.  3.
§  21)  ;  and  the  same  pay  was  offered  to  the  same
troops  by  Thimbrion,  a  Lacedaemonian  general
{Ihid.  vii.  6.  §  1).  In  the  later  books  of  the  Old
TesUiment,  the  daricus  is  supposed  to  be  mentioned
under  the  names  of  adarkon  (|^3"115§)  and  darke-
mon  (PD2'1'^).  (See  1  Chron.  xxix.  7  ;  Ezra,  viii.
27,  ii.  69  VNehem.  vii.  70,  72.)

All  ancient  authorities  agree  in  stating  that  the
daricus  was  the  precise  equivalent  of  the  Lydian
and  Attic  stater  ;  that  is,  it  was  equal  in  weight  to
two  Attic  drachmae.  (Harpocr.  ;  Lex.  Seg.  ;
Suid.  ;  Schol.  ad  Ansioph.  Eccl.  598.)  This,
according  to  the  ordinary  ratio  of  gold  to  silver,
10  :  1,  would  make  its  value  equal  to  twenty  silver
drachmae  ;  which  agrees  with  the  statement  of
Xenophon  {Anab.i.  7.  §  18  ;  comp.  Arrian.  Anah.
iv.  18).

Five  darics  made  a  mina  of  silver,  and  300
darics  a  talent.  Xenophon  also  mentions  half
darics  (T]fx.idapeiKovs,  Anah.  i.  3.  §  21.)

The  value  of  the  daricus  in  our  money,  computed
from  the  drachma,  is  16s.  Zd.  ;  but  if  reckoned  by
comparison  with  our  gold  money,  it  is  worth  much
more.  The  darics  in  the  British  Museum  weigh
]28"4  grains  and  128*6  grains,  respectively.
Hussey  {Ancient  Weights^  &c.  vii.  3)  calculates
the  daricus  as  containing  on  an  average  about  123*7
grains  of  pure  gold,  and  therefore  equal  in  value

to  —-r^  ^^  ^  sovereign,  or  about  \l.  Is.  10c?.  1-/6

11512
farthings.

Very  few  darics  have  come  down  to  us  ;  their
scarcity  may  be  accounted  for  by  the  fact,  that
after  the  conquest  of  Persia,  they  were  melted
down  and  recoined  under  the  type  of  Alexander.

There  were  also  silver  darics,  bearing  the  same
device  as  the  gold,  namely,  the  figure  of  an
archer.  (Plut.  dm.  1 0  ;  Aelian.  V.  H.  i.  22.)
Their  weights  vary  from  224  to  230  grains :
those  of  the  latter  weight  must  have  been  struck,
as  was  not  very  unusual  in  old  coinages,  some-
what above  the  true  weight  ;  they  seem  to  have
been  didrachms  of  the  Babylonian  or  Egyptian
standard.

In  allusion  to  the  device  of  an  archer,  the
darics  were  often  called  t(}|otoi,  and  it  is  related  of
Agesilaus,  that,  when  recalled  to  Greece,  he  said
that  the  Persian  king  had  driven  him  out  of  Asia
by  means  of  30,000  bowmen,  referring  to  the  sura


DECASMUS.  335

which  was  entrusted  to  Timocrates  the  Rhodian  to
bribe  the  demagogues  of  Thebes  and  Athens  to
make  his  presence  necessary  at  home.  (Plut.  Ages.
15,  Artax.  20,  Lacon.  Apojihth.  p.  181.)  Ary-
andes,  Avho  was  appointed  governor  of  Egypt  by
Cambyses,  is  supposed  to  have  been  the  first  who
stioick  these  silver  coins,  in  imitation  of  the  gold
coinage  of  Dareius  Hystaspis.     (Herod,  iv.  166.)


GOLD    DARIC.     BUITISH    JHUSEUM.      ACTUAL    SIZB.


SILVER  DARIG.    BRITISH  MUSEUM.     ACTUAL  SIZB.

DE'BITOR.     [Obligationes.]

DECADU'CHI  (Se/caSoOxoO^  the  members  of
a  council  of  Ten,  who  succeeded  the  Thirty  in  the
supreme  power  at  Athens,  b.  c.  403.  (Harpocrat.
s.  V.)  They  were  chosen  from  the  ten  tribes,  one
from  eack  (Xen.  Hell.  ii.  4.  §§  23,  74)  ;  but,
though  opposed  to  the  Thirty,  they  sent  ambas-
sadors to  Sparta  to  ask  for  assistance  against
Thrasybulus  and  the  exiles.  They  remained
masters  of  Athens  till  the  party  of  Thrasybulus
obtained  possession  of  the  city  and  the  democracy
was  restored,  (hjs.  c.  Eratosth.  p.  420  ;  Wachs-
muth,  Hellen.  Alterthumsk.  vol.  i.  p.  646,  2d  ed.)

DECA'RCHIA  or  DECADA'RCHIA  (Sexop-
Xia,  deKaSapxi^a),  was  a  supreme  council  esta-
blished in  many  of  the  Grecian  cities  by  the
Lacedaemonians,  who  intrusted  to  it  the  whole
government  of  the  state  under  the  direction  of  a
Spartan  harmost.  It  always  consisted  of  the
leading  members  of  the  aristocratical  party.  (Har-
pocrat, s.v.  ;  Schneider,  acf  Aristot.  Pol.  ii.  146,
147.)  This  form  of  government  appears  to  have
been  first  established  by  Lysander  at  Ephesus.
(Plut.  Lys.  5  ;  Wachsmutb^  Hellen.  Alterthumsk.
vol.  i.  p.  517,  2d  ed.)

DECASMUS  (Se/catr/AJs),  bribery.  There
Avere  two  actions  for  bribery  at  Athens :  one,
called  B^KacTj-Lov  ypacp-fj.,  lay  against  the  person
who  gave  the  bribe  ;  and  the  other,  called  Sdipwr
or  SojpoSo/cias  ypa(pii,  against  the  person  who  re-
ceived it.  (Pollux,  viii.  42.)  These  actions  ap-
plied to  the  bribery  of  citizens  in  the  public  as-
semblies of  the  people  ((TvpSeKdCeiv  ri^v  (KK\-n(riau,
Aesch.  c.  Timarch.  p.  12),  of  the  Heliaea  or  any  of
the  courts  of  justice,  of  the  jSouX^  3^"^  of  the  public
advocates  {(Twqydpoi,  Dem.  c.  Steph.  ii.  p.  1137.
]).  Demosthenes  {De  Falsa  Leg.  p.  343),  in-
deed, says  that  orators  were  forbidden  by  the  law,
not  merely  to  abstain  from  receiving  gifts  for  the
injury  of  the  state,  but  even  to  receive  any  present
at  all.

c  c


386


DECEMVIRI.


According  to  Aristotle  {a/pud  Haiyocrai.  s.  v.
SeKct^wr),  Anj-tus  was  the  first  person  at  Athens
wlio  bribed  the  judges  ;  and  we  learn  from
Plutarch  {CorioL  c.  14)  that  he  did  so,  when  he
was  charged  of  having  been  guilty  of  treachery  at
Pylos,  at  the  end  of  the  Peloponnesian  war.  Other
writers  say  that  Melitus  ^vas  the  first  person  who
bribed  the  judges.  (Petit  Leg,  Att.  p.  427,  and
Duker's  note.)

Actions  for  bribery  were  under  the  jurisdiction
of  the  thesmothetae.  (Dem.  c. -Sfep/i.  I.e.)  The
punishment  on  conviction  of  the  defendant  was
death,  or  payment  of  ten  times  the  value  of  the
gift  received,  to  which  the  court  might  add  an  ad-
ditional punishment  {TTpo(nifj.T]fji.a).  Thus  Demos-
thenes was  sentenced  to  a  fine  of  50  talents  by  an
action  for  bribery,  and  also  thrown  into  prison.
(Bdckh,  Publ.  Ec(m.  of  Athens,  p.  384,  •2d  ed.  ;
Meier,  Ait.  Process.,  p.  352.)

DECASTY'LOS.     [Templum.]

DECATE  (Se/carrj).    [Decumae.]

DECE'MPEDA,  a  pole  ten  feet  long,  used  by
the  agrimensores  in  measuring  land.  (Cic.  Pro  Mil.
27  ;  Hor.  Carm.  ii.  15.  14  ;  Cic.  Philipp.  xiv.  4.)
Thus  we  find  that  the  agrimensores  were  sometimes
cnWed  decempedatores  (Cic.  Philipp.  xiii.  18).  The
decempeda  was  in  fact  the  standard  land-measure.
[Actus  ;  Agrimensores.]

DECEM  PRIMI.     [Senatus.]

DECE'MVIRI,  the  Ten  Men,  the  name  of
various  magistrates  and  functionaries  at  Rome.

1.  Decemviri  Legibus  Scribendis,  were  ten
persons,  who  were  appointed  to  draw  up  a  code  of  J
laws,  and  to  whom  the  whole  government  of  the
state  was  entrusted.  As  early  as  a.  c.  462,  a
law  was  proposed  by  C.  Terentilius  Arsa,  that
commissioners  should  be  appointed  for  drawing  up
a  body  of  laws  ;  but  this  was  violently  opposed  by
the  patricians  (Liv.  iii.  9)  ;  and  it  was  not  till
after  a  struggle  of  nine  years  that  the  patricians
consented  to  send  three  persons  to  Greece,  to  col-
lect such  information  respecting  the  laws  and  con-
stitutions of  the  Greek  states  as  might  be  useful
to  the  Romans.  (Liv.  iii.  31.)  They  were  absent  a
year  ;  and  on  their  return,  after  considerable  dis-
pute between  the  patricians  and  plebeians,  ten
commissioners  of  the  patrician  order  were  ap-
pointed with  the  title  of  "  decemviri  legibus  scri-
bendis," to  whom  the  revision  of  the  laws  was
committed.  All  the  other  magistrates  were  ob-
liged to  abdicate,  and  no  exception  was  made  even
in  favour  of  the  tribunes  ;  for  there  is  no  reason  to
suppose,  as  Niebuhr  has  done,  that  the  tribune-
ship  was  not  given  up  till  the  second  decemvirate
(Cic.  de  Rep.  ii.  36  ;  Liv.  iii.  32  ;  Dionys.  x.  56).
They  were  thus  entrusted  with  supreme  power  in
the  state.

The  decemviri  entered  upon  their  office  at  the
beginning  of  B.C.  451.  They  consisted  of  App,
Claudius  and  T.  Genucius  Augurinus,  the  new
consuls,  of  the  praefectus  urbi,  and  of  the  two
quaestores  pamcidii  as  Niebuhr  conjectures,  and
of  five  others  chosen  by  the  centuries.  They  dis-
charged the  duties  of  their  office  with  diligence,
and  dispensed  justice  with  impartiality.  Each  ad-
ministered the  government  day  by  day  in  succes-
sion as  during  an  interregnum  ;  and  the  fasces  were
only  carried  before  the  one  who  presided  for  the
day.  (Liv.  iii.  33.)  They  drew  up  a  body  of  laws,
distributed  into  ten  sections  ;  which,  after  being
approved  of  by  the  senate  and  the  comitia,  were


DECEMVIRI.

engraven  on  tables  of  metal,  and  set  up  in  the
comitium.

On  the  expiration  of  their  year  of  office,  all
parties  were  so  well  satisfied  with  the  manner  in
which  they  had  discharged  their  duties,  that  it  was  .
resolved  to  continue  the  same  form  of  government
for  another  year  ;  more  especially  as  some  of  the
decemvirs  said  that  their  work  was  not  finished.
Ten  new  decemvirs  were  accordingly  elected,  of
whom  Appius  Claudius  alone  belonged  to  the  former
body  (Liv.  iii.  35  ;  Dionys.  x.  53)  ;  and  of  his
nine  new  colleagues,  Niebuhr  thinks  that  five  were
plebeians.  These  magistrates  framed  several  new
laws,  which  were  approved  of  by  the  centuries,
and  engraven  on  two  additional  tables.  They
acted,  however,  in  a  most  tyi-annical  manner.  Each
was  attended  by  twelve  lictors,  who  carried  not
the  rods  only,  but  the  axe,  the  emblem  of  sove-
reignty. They  made  common  cause  with  the  patri-
cian part}',  and  committed  all  kinds  of  outrages
upon  the  persons  and  property  of  the  plebeians  and
their  families.  When  their  year  of  office  expired
they  refused  to  resign  or  to  appoint  successors.
Niebuhr,  however,  considers  it  certain  that  they
were  appointed  for  a  longer  period  than  a  year  ;
since  otherwise  thej'^  would  not  have  been  required
to  resign  their  office,  but  interreges  would  at  the
expiration  of  the  year  have  stepped  into  their  place.
This,  however,  does  not  seem  conclusive  ;  since  the
decemvirs  were  at  the  time  in  possession  of  the
whole  power  of  the  state,  and  would  have  pre-
vented any  attempt  of  the  kind.  At  length,  the
unjust  decision  of  App.  Claudius,  in  the  case  of
Virginia,  which  led  her  father  to  kill  her  with  his
own  hands  to  save  her  from  prostitution,  occasioned
an  insurrection  of  the  people.  The  decemvirs
were  in  consequence  obliged  to  resign  their  office,
B.  c.  449  ;  after  which  the  usual  magistracies  were
re-established.  (Niebuhr,  Hist,  of  Rome,  vol.  ii.
pp.  309 — 35(1  ;  Arnold,  Hist,  of  Rome.,  vol.  i.  pp.
250 — 313  ;  Becker,  Romisch.  Alterthuin.  vol.  ii.
part  ii.  pp.  126— 136.)

The  ten  tables  of  the  former,  and  the  two  tables
of  the  latter  decemvirs,  together  form  the  laws  of
the  Twelve  Tables,  of  which  an  account  is  given
in  a  separate  article.     [Lex  Duodecim  Tab.]

2.  Decemviri  Litibus  or  Stlitibus  Judican-
Dis,  were  magistrates  forming  a  court  of  justice,
which  took  cognizance  of  civil  cases.  From  Pom-
ponius  {de  Orig.  Jur.  Dig.  i.  tit.  2.  s.  2.  §  29)  it
would  appear  that  thej'"  were  not  instituted  till  the
year  b.  a  292,  the  time  when  the  triumviri  capi-
tales  were  first  appointed.  Livy  (iii.  55)  however
mentions  decemvirs  as  a  plebeian  magistracy  very
soon  after  the  legislation  of  the  Twelve  Tables  ;
and  while  Niebuhr  {Hist,  of  Rome.,  vol.  ii.  p.  324,
&c.)  refers  these  decemvirs  to  the  dccemviral
magistrates,  who  had  shortly  before  been  abolished,
and  thus  abides  by  the  account  of  Pomponius,
Giittling  {Gesch.  der  Rom.  Staatsv.  p.  241,  &c.)
believes  that  the  decemvirs  of  Livy  are  the  de-
cemviri litilms  judicandis,  and  refers  their  insti-
tution, together  with  that  of  the  centumviri,  to
Servius  TuUius.  [Centumviri.]  But  the  history
as  well  as  the  peculiar  jurisdiction  of  this  court
during  the  time  of  the  republic  are  involved  in
inextricable  obscurity.  In  the  time  of  Cicero  it
still  existed,  and  the  proceedings  in  it  took  place
in  the  ancient  form  of  the  sacramentum.  (Cic.  pro
Caecin.  33,  pro  Dom.  29.)  Augustus  transferred
to  these  decemvirs  the  presidency  in  the  courts  ot


DEC  I  MAT  10

the  centum viri.  (Suet.  Aug.  36  ;  Dion  Cass,
liv.  26.)  During  the  empire,  this  court  had  juris-
diction in  capital  matters,  which  is  expressly
stated  in  regard  to  the  decemvirs.

3.  Decemviri  Sacris  Faciundis,  sometimes
called  simply  Decemviri  Sacrorum,  were  the
members  of  an  ecclesiastical  collegium,  and  were
fleeted  for  life.  Their  chief  duty  was  to  take  care
of  the  Sibylline  books,  and  to  inspect  them  on  all
important  occasions,  by  command  of  the  senate.
(Liv.  vii,  27,  xxi.  62,  xxxi.  12.)  Virgil  (Aen.
vi.  73)  alludes  to  them  in  his  address  to  the  Sibyl
• —  "  Lectos  sacrabo  viros."

Under  the  kings  the  care  of  the  Sibylline  books
was  committed  to  two  men  (duwnviri)  of  high
rank  (Dionys.  iv,  62),  one  of  whom,  called  Atilius
or  Tullius,  was  punished  by  Tarquinius,  for  being
unfaithful  to  his  trust,  by  being  sewed  up  in  a  sack
and  cast  into  the  sea.  (Dionys.  l.  c.  ;  Val.  Max.  i.
J,  §  13.)  On  the  expulsion  of  the  kings,  the  care
of  these  books  was  entrusted  to  the  noblest  of  the
patricians,  who  were  exempted  from  all  military  and
civil  duties.  Their  number  was  increased  about
the  year  367  b.  c.  to  ten,  of  whom  five  were  chosen
from  the  patricians  and  five  from  the  plebeians.
(Liv.  vi.  37,  42.)  Subsequently  their  number  was
still  further  increased  to  fifteen  (quindecemviri)  ;
but  at  what  time  is  uncertain.  As,  however,  there
were  decemviri  in  B,  c.  552,  when  the  capitol  was
burnt  (Dionys.  /.  c),  and  we  read  of  quindecemviri
in  the  time  of  Cicero  (ad  Fain.  viii.  4),  it  appears
probable  that  their  number  was  increased  from  ten
to  fifteen  by  Sulla,  especially  as  we  know  that  he
increased  the  numbers  of  several  of  the  other  eccle-
siastical corporations.  Julius  Caesar  added  one
more  to  their  number  (Dion  Cass.  xlii.  51)  ;  but
this  precedent  was  not  followed,  as  the  collegium
appears  to  have  consisted  afterwards  of  only  fifteen.

It  was  also  the  duty  of  the  decemviri  and
quinqueviri  to  celebrate  the  games  of  Apollo  (Liv.
X.  8),  and  the  secular  games.  (Tac.  Anri.  xi.  1 1  ;
Hor.  Carm.  Saec.  70.)  They  were,  in  fact,  con-
sidered priests  of  Apollo,  whence  each  of  them  had
in  his  house  a  bronze  tripod  dedicated  to  that  deity.
(Serv.  ad  Virg.  Aen.m.  332.)

4.  Decemviri  Agris  Dividundis,  were  some-
times appointed  for  distributing  the  public  land
among  the  citizens.    (Liv.  xxxi.  4,  xlii.  4.)

DECENNA'LIA  or  DECE'NNIA,  a  festival
celebrated  with  games  every  ten  years  by  the
Roman  emperors.  This  festival  owed  its  origin
to  the  fact  that  Augustus  refused  the  supreme
power  when  offered  to  him  fcff  hi»  life,  and  would
only  consent  to  accept  it  for  ten  years,  and  when
these  expired,  for  another  period  of  ten  years,  and
so  on  to  the  end  of  his  life.  The  memory  of  this
comedy,  as  Gibbon  has  happily  called  it,  was  pre-
served to  the  last  ages  of  the  empire  by  the  festival
of  the  Decennalia,  which  was  solemnised  by  sub-
sequent emperors  every  tenth  year  of  their  reign,
although  they  had  received  the  imperium  for  life,
and  not  for  the  limited  period  of  ten  years.  (Dion
Cass.  liii.  16,  liv.  12,  Iviii.  24,  Ixxvi.  1  ;  Trebell.
Poll.  Salonin.  3,  Gallim.  7.)

DECIMA'TIO,  was  the  selection,  by  lot,  of
every  tenth  man  for  punishment,  when  any  nimiber
of  soldiers  in  the  Roman  army  had  been  guilty  of
any  crime.  The  remainder  usually  had  barley
allowed  to  them  instead  of  wheat.  (Polyb.  vi.  38  ;
Cic.  Clmnt.  46.)  This  pvmishment  does  not  appear
to  have  been  often  inflicted  in  the  earlv  times  of


DECUMAE.


385


the  republic  ;  but  is  frequently  mentioned  in  the
civil  wars,  and  under  the  empire.  It  is  said  to
have  been  revived  by  Crassus,  after  being  discon-
tinued for  a  long  time.  (Plut.  Crass.  10.)  For
instances  of  this  jmnishment,  see  Liv.  ii.  59  ;  Suet.
Aug.  24,  Galba,  12  ;  Tacit.  Hist.  i.  37  ;  Dion
Cass.  xli.  35,  xlix.  27,  38.

Sometimes  only  the  twentieth  man  was  punished
(vicesimatio),  or  the  hundreth  {centesimatio,  Capitol.
Macrin.  12).

DECIMATRUS.     [Quinquatrus.]

DECREET  UM,  seems  to  mean  that  which  is
determined  in  a  particular  case  after  examination
or  consideration.  It  is  sometimes  applied  to  a  de-
termination of  the  consuls,  and  sometimes  to  a  de-
termination of  the  senate.  A  decretum  of  the
senate  would  seem  to  differ  from  a  senatus-con-
sultum,  in  the  way  above  indicated  :  it  was  limited
to  the  special  occasion  and  circumstances,  and  this
would  be  true  whether  the  decretum  was  of  a
judicial  or  a  legislative  character.  But  this  dis-
tinction in  the  use  of  the  two  words,  as  applied  to
an  act  of  the  senate,  was  perhaps  not  always  ob-
served. Cicero  (adFam.  xiii.  56)  opposes  edictum
to  decretum  ;  between  which  there  is,  in  this  pas-
sage, apparently  the  same  analogy  as  between  a
consultum  and  decretum  of  the  senate.  A  de-
cretum, as  one  of  the  parts  or  kinds  of  constitutio,
was  a  judicial  decision  in  a  case  before  the  sove-
reign, when  it  was  carried  to  the  auditorium
principis  by  way  of  appeal.  Paulus  wrote  a  work
in  six  books  on  these  Imperiales  Sententiae.
Gains  (iv.  140),  when  he  is  speaking  of  interdicta,
says  that  they  are  properly  called  decreta,  "cum
(praetor  aut  proconsul)  fieri  aliquid  jubet,"  and
interdicta  when  he  forbids.  A  judex  is  said  "con-
demnare,"  not  "decernere,"  a  word  which,  in
judicial  proceedings,  is  appropriate  to  a  magistratus
who  has  jurisdictio.  [G.  L.j

DECUMAE  (sc.  partes),  the  tithes  paid  to
the  state  by  the  occupiers  of  the  ager  publicu3
[Ager  Publicus]  :  hence  the  Publicani  are  also
called  Decumani  from  their  fanning  these  tithes.
[Publicani.]

A  similar  system  likewise  existed  in  Greece.
Peisistratus,  for  instance,  imposed  a  tax  of  a  tenth
on  the  lands  of  the  Athenians,  which  the  Peisistra-
tidae  lowered  to  a  twentieth.  (Thuc.  vi.  54.)  The
same  principle  was  also  applied  to  religious  pur
poses :  tbu&  Xenophon  subjected  the  occupiers
(tovs  exovras  ical  Kapirouiifvovs)  of  the  land  he
purchased  near  Scillus,  to  a  payment  of  tithes  in
support  of  a  temple  of  Artemis,  the  goddess  to
whom  the  purchase-money  was  dedicated  ;  the
Delian  Apollo  also  received  tenths  from  the
Cyclades.  (Xen.  Auak  v.  3.  §  1 1  ;  Callim.  Hymn.
Del.  272,  Spanheim.)  That  many  such  charges
originated  in  conquest,  or  something  similar,  may
be  inferred  from  the  statement  of  Herodotus  (vii.
1 32),  that  at  the  time  of  the  Persian  war  the  con-
federatt;  Greeks  made  a  vow,  by  which  all  the
states  who  had  surrendered  themselves  to  the
enemy,  were  subjected  to  the  payment  of  tithes
for  the  use  of  the  god  at  Delphi.

The  tenth  (rb  iiriSeKarov)  of  confiscated  pro-
perty was  also  sometimes  applied  to  similar  ob-
jects. (Xen.  Hell.  i.  7.  §  U.)  The  tithes  of  the
public  lands  belonging  to  Athens  were  farmed  out
as  at  Rome  to  contractors,  called  deKarwyai:  the
teiTO  S€KaTr]\6yoi  was  applied  to  the  collectors  ;
but  the  callings  were,  as  we  might  suppose,  often
c  c  2


388


DEJECTI  EFFUSIVE  ACTIO.


united  in  the  same  person.  The  title  SeKareuTat
is  applied  to  both.  A  Se/carr;  or  tenth  of  a  dif-
ferent kind  was  the  arbitrary  exaction  im^sed  by
the  Athenians  (b.  c.  410)  on  the  •cargoes  of  all
ships  sailing  into  or  out  of  the  Pontiis.  They  lost
it  by  the  battle  of  Aegospotami  (b.  c.  405)  ;  but  it
was  re  established  by  Thrasybulus  about  B.  c.  S9L
This  tithe  was  also  let  out  to  farm.  (Demosth.
c.  Lep.  p.  475  ;  Xen.  Hell  iv.  8.  §  27,  31.)  The
tithe-house  for  the  receipt  of  this  duty  was  called
SeKarevT-f^piuv:  to  sail  by  necessity  to  it,  irapaya)-
yid(eiv.  (Bockh,  Pttbl.  Econ.  of  Athens,  p.  325,
&c.,  2nded.)  [R.  W.]

DECUMA'NI.    [Decumae.]

DECUNCIS,  another  name  for  lie  dextans.
[As,  p.  140,  b.]

DECU'RIA.     [Ex-ERciTus.]

DECU'RIAE  JUDICUM.    {Jubex.]

DECURIO'NES.     [Colonia  ;  Exercitus.]

DECU'RRERE.     [Funus.]

DECUSSIS.     [As,  p.  140,  b.]

DEDICA'TIO.     [Inauguratio.]

DEDITI'CII,  are  one  of  the  three  classes  of
libertini.  The  lex  Aelia  Sentia  provided  that,  if  a
slave  was  put  in  bonds  by  his  master  as  a  punish-
ment, or  branded,  or  put  to  the  torture  for  an
offence  and  convicted,  or  delivered  up  to  fight  with
wild  beasts,  or  sent  into  a  ludus  {gladiatorius),  or
put  in  confinement  (^ust@dia\  and  then  manumitted
either  by  his  then  owner,  or  by  another  owner,  he
merely  acquired  the  status  of  «,  peregrinus  dediti-
cius,  and  had  not  even  the  privileges  of  a  Latinus.
The  peregrin!  dediticii  were  those  who,  in  former
times,  had  taken  up  arms  against  the  Roman
people,  and  being  conquered,  had  surrendered
themselves.  They  were,  in  fact,  a  people  who
were  absolutely  subdued,  and  yielded  uncon-
ditionally to  the  conquerors,  and,  of  course,  had  no
other  relation  to  Rome  than  that  of  subjects.  The
form  of  deditio  occurs  in  Livy  (i.  37).

The  dediticii  existed  as  a  class  of  persons  who
were  neither  sla'ves,  nor  cives,  nor  Latini,  at  least
as  late  as  the  time  of  Ulpian.  Their  civil  condi-
tion, as  is  stated  above,  was  formed  by  analogy  to
the  condition  of  a  conquered  people,  who  did  not
individually  lose  their  freedom,  but  as  a  community
lost  all  political  existence.  In  the  case  of  the  Volsci,
Livy  inclines  to  the  opinion  that  the  four  thousand
who  were  sold,  were  slaves,  and  not  dediti.  (Gains,
L  13,  &c.  ;  Ulpianus,  Frag.  tit.  1.  s.  11.)  [O.L.]

DEDI'TIO.     [Dediticii.]

DEDUCTO'RES.     [Ambitus.]

DFFENSO'RES.     [Provincia.3

DE'FRUTUM.     [Vinum.]

DEICELISTAE  (Sei/ceAto-Tai).    [Comoedia,]

DEIGMA  (Sery/ta),  a  particular  place  in  the
Peiraeeus,  as  well  as  in  the  harbours  of  other
states,  where  merchants  exposed  samples  of  their
goods  for  sale.  (Harpocrat.  s.  v.  ;  Pollux,  ix.  34  ;
Aristoph.  Equit  974  ;  Dem.  c.  Lacr.  p.  932.  20  ;
Theophr.  Char.  23.)  The  samples  themselves  were
also  called  deigmata.  (Plut.  Demosth.  23  ;  Bockh,
Pvbl.  Econ.  of  Athens.,  p.  58,  2nd.  ed.)

DEJECTUM  EFFUSUM.  [Dejecti  Effu-
sive Actio.]

DEJECTI  EFFUSIVE  ACTIO.  If  any
person  threw  or  poured  out  anything  from  a  place
or  upper  chamber  (caenaculum)  upon  a  road  which
was  frequented  by  passengers,  or  on  a  place  where
people  used  to  stand,  and  thereby  caused  any
damage,  the   praetor's    edict  gave    the    injured


DELATOR.

person  an  actio  in  duplum.  The  action  was  against
the  occupier.  If  several  persons  inhabited  a
<:aenacul«im,  and  any  injurj'  was  done  to  another
by  a  thing  being  thrown  or  poured  out  of  it.  he
bad  a  right  of  action  against  any  of  them,  if  the
doer  was  uncertiiin.  The  damages  recoverable
were  to  double  the  amount  of  the  damage,  except
in  the  case  of  a  liber,  when  tSiey  were  fifty  aurei,
if  he  was  killed  ;  and  any  person  might  sue  for  the
money  'within  a  year,  but  the  right  of  action  was
given  in  preference  to  a  persen  "  cujus  interest,'*
or  to  affines  or  cognati.  If  a  man  was  only  in-
jured in  his  person,  the  damages  were  *'  quantum
■ob  eam  rem  aequum  judici  videbitur  eura  cum  quo
agatur  ^ondemnari,"  which  included  the  expences
of  a  medical  attendant,  loss  of  time,  and  loss  of  a
man's  earnings  during  the  time  of  his  cure,  o\  loss
of  future  earnings  by  reason  of  his  having  been
rendered  incapable  of  making  such  earnings.  If
injury  was  caused  by  a  thing  being  thrown  jFrora  a
ship,  there  was  an  actio  utilis  ;  for  the  words  of
the  edict  are,  "  Unde  in  eum  locum  quo  volgo  iter
fiat  vel  in  quo  consistatur,  dejectum,"  &c.

The  edict  applied  to  things  which  were  sus-
pended over  a  public  place  and  which  by  their  fall
might  injure  people.  It  allowed  any  person  to
bring  an  action  for  the  recovery  of  ten  aurei
against  any  person  who  disregarded  this  rule  of
the  edict.  If  a  thing  so  suspended,  fell  down  and
injured  any  person,  there  was  an  actio  against
hdm  who  placed  it  there.

As  many  of  the  houses  in  Rome  were  lofty,  and
inhabited  to  the  top  by  the  poor  (Cic.  Agr.  ii.
35  ;  Hor.  Ep.  i.  1.  91  ;  Juv.  Sat.  x.  17),  and
probably  as  there  were  very  imperfect  means  for
carrying  off  rubbish  and  other  accumulations,  it
was  necessary  to  provide  against  accidents  which
might  happen  by  such  things  being  thrown  through
the  window.  According  to  Labeo's  opinion,  the
edict  only  applied  to  the  daytime,  and  not  to  the
night,  which,  hov/ever,  was  the  more  dangerous
time  for  a  passer-by.  (Dig.  9.  tit.  3  ;  Dig.  44.
tit.  7.  s.  5.  §  5  ;  Inst.  4.  tit.  5 ;  Juv.  Srtt.  iii.  268,
&c,;  Thibaut,  System,  Sec.  %66G,  9th  ed.)  [G.L.J

DEILIAS  GRAPHE'  {dei\las  ypafi)),  the
name  of  a  sxiit  instituted  agahist  soldiers  who
had  been  guilty  of  cowardice.  (Aesch.  c.  Ctesiph.
p.  bdQ  ;  Lys.  c.  Alcib.  pp.  520,  525.)  The  pre-
sidency of  the  court  belonged  to  the  strategi,  and
the  court  was  composed  of  soldiers  who  had  served
in  the  campaign.  (Lys.  c.  Alcib.  p.  521.)  The
punishment  on  conviction  appears  to  have  been
arifxla.     Compaue  Astrateias  Graphe.

DEIPNON  (deTTTuov).     [CoENA.]

DELA'TOR,  an  informer.  The  delatores,
under  the  emperors,  were  a  class  of  men  who
gained  their  livelihood  by  informing  against  their
fellow- citizens.  (Suet.  Tib.  61,  Dom.  12  ;  Tacit.
Ann.  iv.  30,  vi.  47.)  They  constantly  brought
forward  false  charges  to  gratify  the  avarice  or
jealousy  of  the  different  emperors,  and  were  con-
sequently paid  according  to  the  importance  of  the
information  which  they  gave.  In  some  cases,
however,  the  law  specified  the  sums  which  were
to  be  given  to  informers.  Thus,  when  a  murder
had  been  committed  in  a  family,  and  any  of  the
slaves  belonging  to  it  had  run  away  before  the
quaestio,  whoever  apprehended  such  slaves  re-
ceived, for  each  slave  whom  he  apprehended,  a
reward  of  five  aurei  from  the  property  of  the  de-
ceased, or  else  from  the  state,  if  the  siun  could


DELIA.

not  be  raised  from  the  property  of  the  deceased.
(Dig.  29.  tit.  5.  s.  25.)  In  the  senatus  consultum
quoted  by  Frontinus  (De  Aquaedztct.),  the  informer
received  half  of  the  penalty  in  which  the  person
was  fined  who  trimsgressed  the  deeree  of  the  senate.
There  seems  alsa  t»  have  been  a  fixed  sum  given
to  informers  by  the  lex  Papia»  since  we  aire  told
that  Nero  reduced  it  to  a  fourtk  (Suet  Ner^  10.)
The  number  of  informers^  however,  increased  so
rapidly  under  the  early  emperors,  and  occasioned
so  nmch  mischief  in  society,,  that  many  of  them
were  frequently  banished,  and  punished  in  other
ways,  by  various  emperors.  (Suet.  Tit.  8,  Dom.
9' ;  Maft.  i.  4  ;  Plin.  Faneg.  34  ;  Brissonius,  Ant.
Select,  iii.  17.)

DELECTUS.  [ExERCiTUS.]
DE'LIA  (Sv^Ata),  the  name  of  festivals  and
games  celebrated  at  the  great  panegyris  in  the
island  of  Delos,  the  centre  of  an  amphictyony,  to
which  the  Cyclades  and  the  neighbouring  lonians
OQ  the  coasts  belonged.  (Horn.  Hymn,  in  Apoll.
147,  &c.)  This  amphictyony  seems  originally  to
have  been  instituted  simply  for  the  purpose  of  re-
ligious worship  in  the  common  sanctuary  of  Apollo,
the  ^fihs  irarp^os  of  the  lonians,  who  was  believed
to  have  been  bom  at  Delos.  The  Delia,  as  ap-
pears from  the  Hymn  on  Apollo  (compare  Thucyd.
iii.  104;  Pollux,,  ix.  61),  had  existed  from  very
early  times,  and  were  celebrated  every  fifth  year
(Pollux,,  viii.  104),  and  as  Bockh  supposes,  with
great  probability,  on  the  sixth  and  seventh  days  of
Thargelion,  the  birthdays  of  Apollo  and  Artemis.
The  members  of  the  amphictyony  assembled  on
these  occasions  (idewpovu)  in  Delos,  in  long  gar-
ments, with  their  wives  and  children,  to  worship
the  god  with  gymnastic  and  musical  contests,
choruses,  and  dances.  That  the  Athenians  took
part  in  these  solemnities  at  a  very  early  period,
is  evident  from  the  Deliastae  (afterwards  called
deofpoi)  mientioned  in  the  laws  of  Solon  (Athen.  vi.
p.  234);  the  sacred  vessel  (f^ewpis),  moreover,
which  they  sent  to  Delos  every  year,  was  said  to
be  the  same  which  Theseus  had  sent  after  his  re-
tara  from  Crete.  (See  the  commentators  on  Plato,
Onto,  p.  43,  c.)  The  Delians,  during  the  celebra-
tion of  these  solemnities,  performed  the  office  of
cooks  for  those  who  visited  their  island,  whence
they  were  called  'EkeoSurai  (Athen.  iv.  p.  173).

In  the  course  of  time  the  celebration  of  this
ancient  panegyris  in  Delos  had  ceased,  and  it  was
not  revived  until  01.  88.  3,  when  the  Athenians,
after  having  purified  the  isliand  in  the  winter  of
that  year,  restored  the  ancient  solemnities,  and
added  horse-races  which  had  never  before  taken
place  at  the  Delia.  (Thucyd.  I.  c.)  After  this  re-
storation, Athens  being  at  the  head  of  the  Ionian
confederacy  took  the  most  prominent  part  in  the
celebration  of  the  Delia ;  and  though  the  islanders,
in  common  with  Athens,  provided  the  choruses  and
victims,  the  leader  (apxt^ewpoj),  who  conducted
the  whole  solemnity,  was  an  Athenian  (Plut.  Nie.
3 ;  Wolf.  Introd.  ad  Demosth.  Left.  p.  xc),  and
the  Athenians  had  the  superintendence  of  the  com-
mon sanctuary.     [Amphictyons.]

From  these  solemnities,  belonging  to  the  great
Delian  panegyris,  we  must  distinguish  the  lesser
Delia.,  which  were  celebrated  every  year,  probably
on  the  6th  of  Thargelion.  The  Athenians  on  this  oc-
casion sent  the  sacred  vessel  (Sewpis),  which  the
priest  of  Apollo  adorned  with  laurel  branches,  to
Delos.    The  embassy  was  called  r^ewpjo :  and  those


DEMARCHL


389


who  sailed  to  the  island,  ^itupoi  •  and  before  they
set  sail  a  solemn  sacrifice  waa  offered  in  the  Delion,
at  Marathon,  in  order  to  obtain  a  happy  voyage.
(M tiller.  Dor.  ii.  2.  §  14.)  During  the  absence  of
the  vessel,  which  on  one  occasion  lasted  30  days
(Plat.PAaerfo«,  p.  58  ;  Xen.  Memorak  iv.  8.  §  2),
the  city  of  Athens  was  purified,  and  no  criminal
wais  allowed  to  be  executed.  The  lesser  Delia
were  said  to  have  been  instituted  by  Theseus,
though  in  some  legends  they  are  mentioned  at  a
much  earlier  period,  and  Plutarch  (TTies.  23)  re-
lates that  the  ancient  vessel  used  by  the  founder
himself,  though  often  repaired,  was  preserved  and
used  by  the  Athenians  down  to  the  time  of  Deme-
trius Phalereus.  (Bockh,  Publ.  Econ.  of  Ath.  p.
214,  &c.  2d  edit. ;  Thirl  wall.  Hist,  af  Greece,  voL
iii.  p.  217.)  [L.  S.]

DELICTUM.     [Crimen.]

DELPHI'NIA  (Sehcj)ivia\  a  festival  of  the
same  expiatory  character  as  the  Apollonia,  which
was  celebrated  in  various  towns  of  Greece,  in
honour  of  Apollo,  surnamed  Dephinius,  who  was
considered  by  the  lonians-  as  their  ^ihs  -narpc^os.
The  name  of  the  god,  as  well  as  that  of  his  fes-
tival, must  be  deriTed  from  tl>e  belief  of  the  an-
cients that  in  the  beginning  of  the  month  of  Muny-
chion  (probably  identical  with  the  Aeginetan
Delphinius)  Apollo  came  through  the  defile  of
Parnassus  to  Delphi,  and  began  the  battle  with
Delphyne.  As  he  thus  assumed  the  character  of  f
wrathful  god,  it  was  thought  necessary  to  appease
him,  and  the  Delphinifv,  accordingly,  were  cele-
brated at  Athens,  as  well  as  at  other  places  where
his  worship  had  been  adopted,  on  the  6th  of  Muny-
chion.  At  Athens  seven  boys  and  girls  carried
olive-branches,  bound  with  white  wool  (called  the
i/ceTTjp/a),  into  the  Delphinium.     (Plut.  Thes.  18.)

The  Delphinia  of  Aegina  are  mentioned  by  the
scholiast  on  Pindar  {Pyth.  viii.  88),  and  from  hia
remark  on  another  passage  {Oh/mp.  vii.  151),  it  is
clear  that  they  were  celebrated  with  contests.
(Compare  Diog.  Laert.  Vit  Thai.  c.  7  ;  MuUer,
Dor.  ii.  8.  §  4.)  Coneerning  the  celebration  of  the
Delphinia  in  other  places  nothing  is  known  ;  but
we  have  reason  to  su/ppose  that  the  rites  observed
at  Athens  and  in  Aegina  were  common  to  all
festivals  of  the  same  name.  See  Miiller,  Aeginet.
p.  152.  ^  [L.  S.]

DELPHIS  (5e\(^t's),  an  instrument  of  naval
warfare.  It  consisted  of  a  large  mass  of  iron  or
lead  suspended  on  a  beam,  which  projected  from
the  mast  of  the  ship  like  a  yard-arm.  It  was  used
to  sink,  or  make  a  hole  in,  an  enemy's  vessel,  by
being  dropped  upon  it  when  alongside.  (Aristoph.
Equit.  759  ;  Thuc.  vii.  41  ;  Schol.  ad  loc.  ;
Hesych.  s.  v.)  There  seems  no  necessity  for  sup-
posing that  it  was  made  in  the  shape  of  a  dolphin.
Bars  of  iron  used  for  ballast  are  at  the  present  day
called  "  pigs,"  though  they  bear  no  resemblance  to
that  animal.  Probably  the  8e\(p7v€s  were  hoisted
aloft  only  when  going  into  action.  We  may  also
conjecture  that  they  were  fitted,  not  so  much  to
the  swift  (raxetaO  triremes,  as  to  the  military
transports  (orTpariwriSes,  6Tr\iTdyatyoi),  for  the
sailing  of  the  former  would  be  much  impeded  by
so  large  a  weight  of  metal.  At  any  rate,  those
that  Thucydides  speaks  of  were  not  on  the  tri-
remes, but  on  the  6\Kd8es.

DELUBRUM.     [Templum.]

DEMARCHI  (S'fifjLapxoi),  the  chief  magistrates
of  the  demi  (Pw°0  ^^  Attica,  and  said  to  have
cc  3


390


DEMIOPRATA.


been  first  appointed  by  Clcisthenes.  Their  duties
were  various  and  important.  Thus,  they  convened
meetings  of  the  demus,  and  took  the  votes  upon
all  questions  under  consideration  ;  they  had  the
custody  of  the  Arj^iapxtKhy  ypaix^ar^tov^  or  book
in  which  the  members  of  the  demus  were  enrolled  ;
and  they  made  and  kept  a  register  of  the  landed
estates  (x^P'o)  in  their  districts,  whether  belong-
ing to  individuals  or  the  body  corporate  ;  so  that
whenever  an  elcrcpopd,  or  extraordinary  property-
tax  was  imposed,  they  must  have  been  of  great
service  in  assessing  and  collecting  the  quota  of
each  estate.  Moneys  due  to  the  demus  for  rent,
&c.  were  collected  by  them  (Dem.  c.  Eub.  p.  1318),
and  it  may  safely  be  allowed  that  they  were  em-
ployed to  enforce  payment  of  various  debts  and
dues  claimed  by  the  state.  For  this  purpose  they
seem  to  have  had  the  power  of  distraining,  to  which
allusion  is  made  by  Aristophanes  {Nub.  37).  In
the  duties  which  have  been  enumerated,  they  sup-
planted the  naucrari  (vavKpapoi)  of  the  old  con-
stitution ;  their  functions,  however,  were  not  con-
fined to  duties  of  this  class,  for  they  also  acted  as
police  magistrates :  thus,  in  conjunction  with  the
dicasts  of  the  towns  (diKaa-Tol  Kara  S-fj/xovs),  they
assisted  in  preserving  peace  and  order,  and  were
required  to  bury,  or  cause  to  be  buried,  any  dead
bodies  found  in  their  district :  for  neglect  of  this
duty  they  were  liable  to  a  fine  of  1000  drachmae.
(Dem.  c.  Macar.  1069.  22.)  Lastly,  they  seem  to
have  furnished  to  the  proper  authorities  a  list  of
the  members  of  the  township  who  were  fit  to  serve
in  war  {KaTa\6you5  iiroirja-avTo^  Demosth.  e.
Polyc.  p.  1208  ;  Harpocr.  *.  v.  ;  Poll.  viii.  118  ;
K.  F.  Hermann,  Qriech.  StaatsalteHli.  §  111  ;
Bockh,  Pitblic  Econ.  of  Athens,  pp.  157,  512  ;
Schomann,  De  Coinitiis,  p.  376,  &c.).  Demarchi
was  the  name  given  by  Greek  writers  to  the
Roman  tribimes  of  the  plebs.  [R.  W.]

DEMENS.     [Curator.]

DEMENSUM.     [Servus.]

DEMENTIA.     [Curator.]

DEMETRIA  (STj^urjrpta),  an  annual  festival
which  the  Athenians,  in  307  B.  c,  instituted  in  ho-
nour of  Demetrius  Poliorcetes,  who.  together  with
his  father  Antigonus,  were  consecrated  under  the
title  of  saviour  gods.  It  was  celebrated  every  year
in  the  month  of  Munychion,  the  name  of  which,  as
well  as  that  of  the  day  on  which  the  festival  was
held,  was  changed  into  Demetrion  and  Demetrias.
A  priest  ministered  at  their  altars,  and  conducted
the  solemn  procession,  and  the  sacrifices  and  games
with  which  the  festival  was  celebrated.  (Diodor.
Sic.  XX.  46;  Plut.  Demdr.  10,46.)  To  honour
tlie  new  god  still  more,  the  Athenians  at  the  same
time  changed  the  name  of  the  festival  of  the  Dio-
nysia  into  that  of  Demetria,  as  the  young  prince
was  fond  of  hearing  himself  compared  to  Dionysus.
The  demetria  mentioned  by  Athenaeus  (xii.  p.
536)  are  probably  the  Dionysia,  Respecting  the
other  extravagant  flatteries  which  the  Athenians
heaped  upon  Demetrius  and  Antigonus,  see  Athen.
vi.  p.  252;  Herm.  Polit  Ant.  of  Greece,  §  175.  n.
6,  7,  and  8  ;  and  Thirl  wall,  Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  vii.
p.  331.  [L.  S.]

DKMINUTIO  CAPITIS.     [Caput.]

DEMIOPRA'TA  {Sr^fiioTrpaTO^  sc.  Trpdy^iara
or  KT-frj/jLaTo),  was  property  confiscated  at  Athens
and  sold  by  public  auction.  The  confiscation  of
property  was  one  of  the  most  common  sources  of
revenue  in  many  of  the  Grecian  states  j  and  Aris-


DEMOCRATIA.

tophanes  (Vesp.  559,  with  Schol.)  mentions  the
SrifxtoTrpara  as  a  separate  branch  of  the  public  re-
venue at  Athens.  An  account  of  such  property
WHS  presented  to  the  people  in  the  first  assembly
of  every  prytaneia  (Pollux,  viii.  95)  ;  and  lists  of
it  were  posted  upon  tablets  of  stone  in  different
places,  as  was  the  case  at  Eleusis,  with  the  cata-
logue of  the  articles  which  accnied  to  the  temple
of  Demeter  and  Persephone,  from  persons  who
had  committed  any  offence  against  these  deities.
(Pollux,  X.  97.)  Many  monuments  of  this  kind
were  collected  by  Greek  antiquarians,  of  which  an
account  is  given  by  Bockh  {Fubl.  Econ.  of  Athens,
pp.  197,  392,  2d  edit.)  and  Meier  {De  Bonis  Dam-
natorum,  p.  160,  &c.).

DEMIURGI  {5-niJLiovpyol).  These  magistrates,
whose  title  is  expressive  of  their  doing  the  service
of  the  people,  are  by  some  grammarians  stated  to
have  been  peculiar  to  Dorian  states  ;  but,  perhaps,
on  no  authority,  except  the  form  Safiiovpyol.
MUller  {Dorians,  vol.  ii.  p.  145)  observes,,  on  the
contrary,  that  "  they  were  not  uncommon  in  the
Peloponnesus,  but  they  do  not  occur  often  in  the
Dorian  states."  They  existed  among  the  Eleians
and  Mantineians,  with  whom  they  seem  to  have
been  the  chief  executive  magistracy  {ol  S-q/jLiovpyoi
Koi  7]  ^ovXi],  K.  T.  \.,  Thuc.  V.  47).  We  also  read
of  demiurgi  in  the  Achaean  league,  who  probably
ranked  next  to  the  strategi.  [Achaicum  Foedus,
p.  5,  b.]  Officers  named  Epidemiurgi,  or  upper
demiurgi,  were  sent  by  the  Corinthians  to  manage
the  government  of  their  colony  at  Potidaea.  (Thuc.
i.  56.)  [R.  W.J

DF/MIUS  {HlXlOs).       [TORMENTUM.J

DEMOCRATIA  {S-nfioKparia),  that  form  of
constitution  in  which  the  sovereign  political  power
is  in  the  hands  of  the  demus,  or  commonalty.  In
the  article  Aristocb.atia  the  reader  will  find
notic'd  the  rise  and  nature  of  the  distinction  be-
tween the  politically  privileged  class  of  nobles  and
the  commonalty,  a  class  personally  free,  though
without  any  constitutionally  recognized  political
power.  It  was  this  commonalty  which  was  pro-
perly termed  the  demus  (Stj^uos).  The  natural
and  inevitable  effect  of  the  progress  of  society
being  to  diminish,  and  finally  do  away  with,  those
distinctions  between  the  two  classes,  on  which  the
original  difference  in  point  of  political  power  was
founded,  when  the  demus,  by  their  increasing
numbers,  wealth,  and  intelligence,  had  raised
themselves  to  a  level,  or  nearly  so,  in  real  power
and  importance  with  the  originally  privileged  class,
now  degenerated  into  an  oligarchy,  a  struggle  was
sure  to  ensue,  in  which  the  demus,  unless  over-
borne by  extraneous  influences,  was  certain  to  gain
the  mastery.  The  sovereign  power  of  the  demus
being  thus  established,  the  government  was  termed
a  democracy.  There  might,  however,  be  two
modifications  of  the  victory  of  the  commonalty.  If
the  struggle  between  the  classes  had  been  pro-
tracted and  fierce,  the  oligarchs  were  commonly
expelled.  This  was  frequently  the  case  in  the
smaller  states.  If  the  victory  of  the  commonalty
was  achieved  more  by  the  force  of  moral  power
than  by  intestine  warfare  and  force  of  arms,
through  the  gradual  concessions  of*"  the  few,"  the
result  (as  at  Athens)  was  simply  the  entire  ob-
literation of  the  original  distinctions.  This  form  of
the  constitution  was  still,  in  the  most  literal  sense
of  the  term,  a  democracy  ;  for  as  wealth  and  birth
no  longer  formed  the  title  to  political  power,  though


DEMOCRATIA.

the  wealthy  and  noble  still  remained  citizens  of
the  commonwealth,  the  supreme  power  was  to  all
intents  and  purposes  in  the  hands  of  the  class  for-
merly constituting  the  demus,  by  virtue  of  their
being  the  more  numerous.  (Aristot.  FoL  iv.  4,
p.  122,  ed.  Gottling.)  When  the  two  classes
were  thus  equalised,  the  term  demus  itself  was
frequently  used  to  denote  the  entire  body  of  free
citizens  — "  the  many,"  in  conti-ast  with  "  the
few."

It  is  obvious  that,  consistently  with  the  main-
tenance of  the  fundamental  principle  of  the  supreme
power  being  in  the  hands  of  the  demus,  various
modifications  of  the  constitution  in  detail  might
exist,  and  different  views  might  be  held  as  to  what
was  the  perfect  type  of  a  democracy,  and  what  was
an  imperfect,  or  a  diseased  fonn  of  it.  Aristotle
{Pol.  iv.  3)  points  out  that  a  democracy  cannot  be
defined  by  the  mere  consideration  of  numbers.
For  if  the  wealthy  were  the  more  numerous  and
possessed  the  supreme  power,  this  would  not  be  a
democracy.  A  democracy  is  rather,  when  every
free  citizen  is  a  member  of  the  sovereign  body
(Srjjuos  ^ilv  iariu  Urav  ot  iX^vdepoi  Kvpioi  Sicriv).
This  definition  he  expresses  in  a  more  accurate
fomi  thus  :  etrTt  SrfixoKpaTia  fjL^v  orav  ot  iXsvdipoi
Koi  &Tropoi  irXelovs  ui/res  Kvpioi  t^s  apx^s  S^criv.
It  would  still  be  a  democracy  if  a  certJiin  amount
of  property  were  requisite  for  filling  the  public
offices,  provided  the  amount  were  not  large.
{Pol.  iv.  4.  p.  122,  ed.  Gottl.)  A  Polileia  itself
is  one  species  of  democracy  {Pol.  iv.  3.  p.  117),
democracy,  in  the  full  sense  of  the  word,  being  a
sort  of  irapeKSaais  of  it.  But  for  a  perfect  and
pure  democracy  it  was  necessary  that  no  free
citizen  should  be  debarred  on  account  of  his  in-
feriority in  rank  or  wealth  from  aspiring  to  any
office,  or  exercising  any  political  function,  and  that
each  citizen  should  be  allowed  to  follow  that  mode
of  life  which  he  chose.  (Arist.  Pol.  iv.  4,  vi.  1.)
In  a  passage  of  Herodotus  (iii,  80),  where  we  pro-
bably have  the  ideas  of  the  writer  himself,  the
characteristics  of  a  democracy  are  specified  to  be —
1.  equality  of  legal  rights  {icrovoiii-n)  ;  2.  the  ap-
pointment of  magistrates  by  lot  ;  3.  the  account-
ability of  all  magistrates  and  officers  ;  4.  the  refer-
ence of  all  public  matters  to  the  decision  of  the
community  at  large.  Aristotle  also  {Rhet.  i,  8.
§  4)  says  :  tari  Se  ^r\ixoKpa.ria  /xev  iroKiT^ia  iv  ^
K\i]p(p  SiavefMovrai  ras  apxas^  oKiyap^ia  Se  iv  77
ol  airh  TifxrjfjLdruv.  In  another  passage  {Pol.  vi.  1),
after  mentioning  the  essential  principles  on  which
a  democracy  is  based,  he  goes  on  to  say :  "  The
following  points  are  characteristic  of  a  democracy  ;
that  all  magistrates  should  be  chosen  out  of  the
whole  body  of  citizens  ;  that  all  should  rule  each,
and  each  in  turn  rale  all  ;  that  either  all  magistra-
cies, or  those  not  requiring  experience  and  profes-
sional knowledge,  should  be  assigned  by  lot  ;  that
there  should  be  no  property  qualification,  or  but  a
very  small  one,  for  filling  any  magistracy ;  that  the
same  man  should  not  fill  the  same,  office  twice,  or
should  fill  offices  but  few  times,  and  but  few  of-
fices, except  in  the  case  of  military  commands  ;  that
all,  or  as  many  as  possible  of  the  magistracies,
should  be  of  brief  duration  ;  that  all  citizens  should
be  qualified  to  serve  as  dicasts  ;  that  the  supreme
power  in  everything  should  reside  in  the  public
assembly,  and  that  no  magistrate  should  be  en-
trusted with  irresponsible  power  except  in  very  small
matters.     (Corap.  Plat.  Pesp.  viii.  pp.  558,  562,


DEMUS.


391


563,  Leg.  iii.  p.  690.  c.  vi.  p.  757,  e.)  Aristotle
{Pol.  iv.  3,  4,  5,  vi.  1,  2)  describes  the  various
modifications  which  a  democracy  may  assume.  It
is  somewhat  curious  that  neither  in  practice  nor  in
theory  did  the  representative  system  attract  any
attention  among  the  Greeks.

That  diseased  form  of  a  democracy,  in  which
from  the  practice  of  giving  pay  to  the  poorer  citi-
zens for  their  attendance  in  the  public  assembly,
and  from  other  causes,  the  predominant  party  in
the  state  came  to  be  in  fact  the  lowest  class  of  the
citizens  (a  state  of  things  in  which  the  democracy
in  many  respects  resembled  a  tyranny :  see  Arist.
Pol.  iv.  4)  was  by  later  v/riters  (Polyb.  vi.  4,  57;
Plut.  de  Monarch,  c.  3)  termed  an  Ochlocracy
{ox><ohparia  —  the  dominion  of  the  mob);  but  the
tenn  is  not  found  in  Aristotle.  (Wachsmuth,
Hdlmische  AlteHhumsk.  c.  7,  8  ;  K.  F.  Her-
mann, Lehrhuch  der  Griech.  Staatsalterthumer^
§§  52,  66—72;  ThirlwaU,  History  of  Greece,  vol.  i.
c.  10.)  [C.P.M.J

DEMONSTRA'TIO.     [Actio.]

DEMOPOIE'TOS  (SrjyuoTroiVos),  the  name
given  to  a  foreigner  who  was  admitted  to  the  rights
of  citizenship  at  Athens  by  a  decree  of  the  people,
on  account  of  services  rendered  to  the  state.  Such
citizens  were,  however,  excluded  from  the  phra-
triae,  and  could  not  hold  the  offices  of  either  archon
or  priest  (Dem.  c.  Neaer.  p.  1376),  but  were  re-
gistered in  a  phyle  and  deme.  [Ci vitas,  Greek,
p.2y8,b.]

DEMO'SII  (S77;U(^o-iOi),  public  slaves  at  Athens,
who  were  purchased  by  the  state.  Some  of  them
filled  subordinate  places  in  the  assembly  and  courts
of  justice,  and  were  also  employed  as  heralds,
checking  clerks,  &c.  They  were  usually  called
Srjfxoaioi  olKerai,  and,  as  we  learn  from  Ulpian
{ad  Dem.  Olynth.  ii.  p.  15),  were  taught  at  the
expense  of  the  state  to  qualify  them  for  the  dis-
charge of  such  duties  as  have  been  mentioned.
(Hemsterh.  ad  Polluc.  ix.  10  ;  Maussac.  ad  Har-
pocnxt.  s.  V.  5r}fjL6(nos ;  Petitus,  Leg.  Alt.  p,  342.)
As  these  public  slaves  did  not  belong  to  any  one
individual,  they  appear  to  have  possessed  certain
legal  rights  which  private  slaves  had  not.  (Meier,
Alt.  Process,  pp.  401,  560;  Aeschin.  c.  Timarch.
pp.  79,  85.)

Another  class  of  public  slaves  formed  the  city
guard ;  it  was  their  duty  to  preserve  order  m  the
public  assembly,  and  to  remove  any  person  whom
the  Prytaneis  might  order.  (Schneider,  Ad  Xen.
Mem.  iii.  6.  §  1  ;  Plato,  Protag.  p.  319,  and  Hein-
dorf's  note;  Aristoph.  Acham.  54,  Avith  the  com-
mentators.) They  are  generally  called  bowmen
(To^oTai) ;  or  from  the  native  country  of  the  ma-
jority, Scythians  {1,KvQa)-,  and  also  Speusinians,
from  the  name  of  the  person  who.  first  established
the  force.  (Pollux,  viii.  131,  132;  Photius,  s.©.
To^Srai.)  There  were  also  among  them  many
Thracians  and  other  barbarians.  They  originally
lived  in  tents  in  the  market-place,  and  afterwards
upon  the  Areiopagus.  Their  officers  had  the  name
of  toxarchs  {Td^apxai).  Their  number  was  at  first
300,  purchased  soon  after  the  battle  of  Salamis,
but  was  afterwards  increased  to  1200.  (Aeschin.
Ilepi  napavpeaS.  p.  335  ;  Andoc.  De  Pac.  p.  93  ;
Bockfi,  PuOl.  Econ.  of  Athens,  pp.  207,  208,  2d
edit.)

DEMUS.  The  word  57j/tos  originally  indicated
a  district  or  tract  of  land,  and  is  by  som  derived
from  Sew,  as  if  it  signified  an  "  enclosure  marked
c  c  4


392


DEMUS.


off  from  the  waste,"  just  as  our  word  town  comes,
according  to  Home  Tooke,  from  the  Saxon  verb
*'  tvnan,"  to  enclose.  (Arnold,  ad  I'huc.  vol.  i.
Appendix,  iii.)  It  seems,  however,  more  simple
to  connect  it  with  the  Doric  8a  for  7a.  In  this
meaning  of  a  country  district,  inhabited  and  under
cultivation,  S^/uos  is  contrasted  with  tt6\is  :  thus
we  have  avhpuv  Srj/jL6u  re  ir6\iv  re  (Hes.  Op.  et
Dies,  527) ;  but  the  transition  from  a  locality  to
its  occupiers  is  easy  and  natural,  and  hence  in  th«
earlier  Greek  poets  we  find  5ij/aos  applied  to  the
outlying  country  population,  who  tilled  the  lands  of
the  chieftains  or  inhabitants  of  the  city  ;  so  that
5^/uos  and  iroXlrai  came  to  be  opposed  to  each
other,  the  fonner  denoting  the  subject  peasantry,
the  latter,  the  nobles  in  the  chief  towns.

The  Demi  {pi  Zrjixoi)  in  Attica  were  subdivisions
of  the  tribes,  corresponding  to  our  townships  or
hundreds.  Their  institution  is  ascribed  to  Theseus;
but  we  know  nothing  about  them  before  the  age
of  Cleisthenes,  who  broke  up  the  four  tribes  of  the
old  constitution,  and  substituted  in  their  place  ten
local  tribes  ((pv\ai  ToiriKai),  each  named  after  some
Attic  hero.  (Herod,  v,  66,  69.)  These  were  sulv-
divided  each  into  ten  demi  or  country  parishes,
possessing  each  its  principal  town  ;  and  in  some
one  of  these  demi  were  enrolled  all  the  Athenian
citizens  resident  in  Attica,  with  the  exception,
perhaps,  of  those  who  were  natives  of  Athens  itsel:'.
(Thirlwall,  Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  ii.  p.  74.)  These
subdivisions  corresponded  in  some  degree  to  the
vavKpapiai  of  the  old  tribes,  and  were,  according
to  Herodotus,  one  hundred  an  number ;  but  as  the
Attic  demi  amounted  in  the  time  of  Strabo  (ix.  p.
396,  c.)  to  174,  doubts  have  ^been  raised  about  this
statement.  Niebuhr  has  inferred  from  it  that  the
tribes  of  Cleisthenes  did  not  originally  include  the
whole  population  of  Attica,  and  "  that  some  of  the
additional  74  must  have  been  cantons,  which  had
previously  been  left  in  a  state  of  dependence  ;  by
far  the  chief  part,  however,  were  houses  (yeur])
of  the  old  aristocracy,"  which  were  included  in  the
four  Ionian  tribes,  but,  according  to  Niebuhr,  were
not  incorporated  in  the  ten  tribes  of  the  "rural
commonalty,"  till  after  the  time  of  Cleisthenes.
This  inference,  however,  seems  very  questionahle  ;
for  the  number  of  the  demi  might  increase  from  a
variety  of  causes,  such  as  the  growth  of  the  popu-
lation, the  creation  of  new  tribes,  and  the  division
of  the  larger  mto  smaller  demi  ;  to  say  nothing
of  the  improbability  of  the  co-existence  of  two
different  orders  of  tribes.  "  Another  fact,  more
difficult  to  account  for,  is  the  transposition  by
which  demes  of  the  same  tribe  were  found  at  op-
posite extremities  of  the  countrj%"  (Thirlwall,  I.e.,
and  app.  i.  vol.  ii.)  The  names  of  the  different
demes  were  taken,  some  from  the  chief  towns  in
them,  as  Marathon,  Eleusis,  and  Acharnae  ;  some
from  the  names  of  houses  or  clans,  such  as  the
Daedalidae,  Boutadae,  &c.  The  largest  of  all
was  the  demus  of  Acharnae,  which  in  the  time  of
the  Peloponnesian  war,  was  so  extensive  as  to
supply  a  force  of  no  less  than  three  thousand
heavy-armed  men.     (Comp.  Thuc.  ii.  191 .)

In  explanation  of  their  constitution  and  relation
to  the  state  in  general,  we  may  observe,  that  they
formed  independent  corporations,  and  had  each
their  several  magistrates,  landed  and  other  pro-
perty, with  a  common  treasury.  They  had  like-
wise their  respective  convocations  convened  by  the
Demarchi  (S'hu-apX'^Oi  ^  which  was  transacted


DEMUS.

the  public  business  of  the  demus,  such  as  the  leas-
ing of  its  estates,  the  elections  of  officers,  the  re-
vision of  the  registers  or  lists  of  Demotae  {Sr^noTai),
and  the  admission  of  new  members.  [Demarchi.]
Moreover,  each  demus  appears  to  have  kept  what
was  called  a  irlua^  iKK\r}(TicKrTiK6s,  or  list  of  those
Demotae  who  were  entitled  to  vote  at  the  general
assemblies  of  the  whole  people.  In  a  financial
point  of  view,  tiaey  supplanted  the  old  "  naucra-
ries  "  of  the  four  tribes,  each  demus  being  required
to  furnish  to  the  state  a  certain  quota  of  money,
and  contingent  of  troops,  whenever  necessary.
Independent  of  these  bonds  of  union,  each  demus
seems  to  have  had  its  peculiar  temples,  and  reli-
gious worship  {ht]fxoriKd  Upa,  Pans.  i.  31  ;  Pollux,
viii.  108),  the  officiating  priests  in  which  were
chosen  by  the  Demotae  (Dem.  c.  Euhtd.  p.  1313) ;
so  that  both  in  a  civil  and  religious  point  of  viev/,
the  demi  appear  as  minor  communities,  whose  ma-
gistrates, moreover,  were  obliged  to  submit  to  a
SoKifiacria,  in  the  same  way  as  the  public  officers
of  the  whole  state.  But  besides  the  magistrates,
such  as  demarchs  and  treasurers  (rafxiai),  elected
by  each  parisli,  we  also  read  of  judges,  who  were
called  SiKaaTol  Kara  Sif/xovs :  the  number  of  these
officers,  originally  thirty,  was  afterwards  increased
to  forty,  and  it  appears  that  they  made  circuits
through  the  different  districts,  to  administer  justice
in  all  cases  where  the  matter  in  dispute  was  not
more  than  ten  drachmae  in  value,  more  important
questions  being  reserved  for  the  SiatrTjTaC  (Hudt-
walcker,  p.  37.)

On  the  first  institution  of  the  demi,  Cleisthenes
increased  the  strength  of  the  Srjfxos,  or  commonalty,
by  making  many  new  citizens,  amongst  whom  are
said  to  have  been  included  not  only  strangers  and
resident  foreigners,  but  also  slaves.  (Arist.  /*o/.
iii.  1.)^*^  Now  admission  into  a  demus  was  neces-
sary, before  any  individual  could  enter  upon  his
full  rights  and  privileges  as  an  Attic  citizen  ;  and
though  in  the  first  instance,  every  one  was  enrolled
in  the  register  of  the  demus  in  which  his  property
and  residence  lay,  this  relation  did  not  continue  to
hold  with  all  the  Demotae  ;  for  since  a  son  was
registered  in  the  demus  of  his  real  or  adoptive
father,  and  the  former  might  change  his  residence,
it  would  often  happen  that  the  members  of  a
demus  did  not  all  reside  in  it.  Still  this  would
not  cfiuse  any  inconvenience,  since  the  meetings
of  each  demus  were  not  held  within  its  limits,  but
at  Athens.  (Dem.  c.  Eulnd.  p.  1 302.)  No  one,
however,  could  purchase  property  situate  within  a
demus  to  which  he  did  not  himself  belong,  without
paving  to  the  demarchs  a  fee  for  the  privilege  of
doing  so  {iyKTr}TiK6u),  which  would,  of  course,
go  to  the  treasury  of  the  demus.  (Bockh,  FM.
Econ.  of  Athens,  p.  297,  2nd  ed.)

Two  of  the  most  important  functions  of  the
general  assemblies  of  the  demi,  were,  the  admis-
sion of  new  members  and  the  revision  of  the
names  of  members  already  admitted.  The  register
of  enrolment  was  called  Kr]liapxtK6v  ypafx/xarelou,
because  any  person  whose  name  was  inscribed  in
it  could   enter  upon  an   inheritance  and  enjoy  a


*  UoWovs  e(pv\fTev(Te  ^evovs  Kal  5ov\ovs
IxeroiKovs.  This  passage  has  given  rise  to  much
dispute,  and  has  been  considered  by  many  critics
to  afford  no  sense  ;  but  no  emendation  which  has
been  proposed  is  better  than  the  received  text.  See
Grote,  History  of  Greece,  vol.  iv.  p.  170.


DENARIUS.

patrimony,  the  expression  for  whicli  in  Attic  ]
Greek  was  rfjs  ATj^ews  &px^tv:  \ayxaveiu  icXripou,
being  equivalent  to  tlie  Roman  phrase  adire  here-
ditfttem.  These  registers  were  kept  by  the  de-
marchs,  who,  with  the  approbation  of  the  members
of  the  demus  assembled  in  general  meeting,  in-
serted or  erased  names  according  to  circumstances.
Thus,  when  a  youth  was  proposed  for  enrolment,
it  was  competent  for  any  demote  to  object  to  hig
admission  on  the  ground  of  illegitimacy,  or  non-
citizenship,  by  the  side  of  either  parent.  The
Demotae  decided  on  the  validity  of  these  objec-
tions under  the  sanction  of  an  oath,  and  the  ques-
tion was  determined  by  a  majority  of  votes.  (Dem.
c.  Eiib.  p.  1318.)  The  same  process  was  observed
when  a  citizen  changed  his  demus  in  consequence
of  adoption.  (Isaeus,  De  Apoll.  Hered.  p.  66.  17.)
Sometimes,  however,  a  demarch  was  bribed  to
place,  or  assist  in  placing,  on  the  register  of  a
demus,  persons  who  had  no  claim  to  citizenship.
(^Demosth.  c.  Leoch.  p.  1 09 1 .)  To  remedy  this  ad-
mission of  spurious  citizens  {irapcyypatnoi)  the
Zia^-h^iais  was  instituted.  [Diapsephisis.]
Lastly,  crowns  and  other  honorary  distmctions
could  be  awarded  by  the  demi  in  the  same  way  as
by  the  tribes.  (K.  F.  Hermann,  Griecli.  Staats-
alterth.  §111,  &c. ;  Wachsmuth,  Hellen.  Alter-
Vmmsk.  vol.  i.  p.  544,  &c.,  2nd  ed. ;  Leake,  Tlte
Demi  of  Attika,  London,  1841,  2nd  ed. ;  Ross,
Die  Demen  von  Attika.)  [R.  W.]

DENA'RIUS,  the  principal  silver  coin  among
the  Romans,  was  so  called  because  it  was  originally
equal  to  ten  asses  ;  but  on  the  reduction  of  the
weight  of  the  as  [As],  it  was  made  equal  to  six-
teen asses,  except  in  military  pay,  in  which  it  was
still  reckoned  as  equal  to  ten  asses.  (Plin.  H.  N.
xxxiii.  13.)  The  denarius  was  first  coined  five
years  before  the  first  Punic  war,  B.  c.  269.  [Ar-
GENTUM.]  There  were  originally  84  denarii  to  a
pound  (Plin.//.  A^  xxxiii.  46  ;  Celsus,  v.  17.  §  1),
but  subsequently  QQ.  At  what  time  this  reduction
w;is  made  in  the  weight  of  the  denarius  is  imcertain,
as  it  is  not  mentioned  in  history.  Some  have  con-
jectured that  it  was  completed  in  Nero's  reign  ;  and
Mr.  Hussey  {Ancient  Weights^  &c.  p.  137)  justly
remarks,  that  Suetonius  {Jul.  54)  proves  that  84
denarii  went  still  to  the  pound,  about  the  year  B.C.
50  ;  since  if  we  reckon  96  to  the  pound,  the  pro-
portion of  the  value  of  gold  to  silver  is  7'8  to  1,
which  is  incredibly  low  ;  while  the  value  on  the
other  supposition,  8*9  to  1,  is  more  probable.  Com-
pare Akgentum.

Mr.  Hussey  calculates  the  average  weight  of  the
denarii  coined  at  the  end  of  the  commonwealth
at  60  grains,  and  those  under  the  empire  at  52'5
gi-ains.  If  we  deduct,  as  the  average,  ^  of  the
weight  for  alloy,  from  the  denarii  of  the  common-
wealth, there  will  remain  58  grains  of  pure  silver  ;
and  shice  the  shilling  contains  80*7  grains  of  pure

58
silver,  the  value  of  the  best  denarii  will  be  ^rp^

of  a  shilling,  or  8"6245  pence  ;  which  may  be
Reckoned  in  round  numbers  8^o?.  If  the  same
method  of  reckoninjr  be  applied  to  the  later
denarius,  its  value  will  be  about  7'5  pence,  or  l^d.
(Hussey,  pp.  141,  142.)

The  Roman  coins  of  silver  went  at  one  time  as
low  down  as  the  fortieth  part  of  the  denarius,  the
teruncius.  They  were,  the  quinarius  or  half  de-
narius, the  sestertius  or  quarter  denarius  [Sester-
tius], the  libella  or  tenth  of  the  denarius  (equal  to


DENARIUS.


393


BRITISH    MUSEUM.      ACTUAL   SIZE.      WEIGHT
60*6   GRAINS.


BRITISH    MUSEUM.      ACTUAL    SIZE.      WEIGHT
58'5   GRAINS.

the  as),  the  semhella  or  half  libella,  and  the  teruii^
cius  or  quarter  libella.

The  quinarius  was  also  called  vidoriatus  (Cic.
Pro  Font,  5),  from  the  impression  of  a  figure  of
Victory  which  it  bore.  Pliny  {H.N.  xxxiii.  13)
says  that  victoriati  were  first  coined  at  Rome  in
pursuance  of  the  lex  Clodia  ;  and  that  previous  to
that  time,  they  were  imported  as  an  article  of  trade
from  Illyria.  The  Clodius,  who  proposed  this  law,
is  supposed  to  have  been  the  person  who  obtained
a  triumph  for  his  victories  in  Istria,  whence  he
brought  home  a  large  sum  of  money  (Liv.  xli.  13);
which  would  fix  the  first  coinage  of  the  victoriati
at  Rome,  B.  c.  177  ;  that  is,  92  years  after  the  first
silver  coinage.

If  the  denarius  weighed  60  grains,  the  teruncius
would  only  have  weighed  1^  gr.  ;  which  would
have  been  so  small  a  coin,  that  some  have  doubted
whether  it  was  ever  coined  in  silver  ;  for  we
know  that  it  was  coined  in  copper.  [As.]  But
Varro  {De  Ling.  Lot.  v.  174,  ed.  Miiller)  names  it
among  the  silver  coins  with  the  libella  and  sem-
bella.  It  is,  however,  improbable  that  the  terun-
cius continued  to  be  coined  in  silver  after  the  as
had  been  reduced  to  -^  of  the  denarius  ;  for
then  the  teruncius  would  have  been  g'^th  of  the
denarius,  whereas  Varro  only  describes  it  as  a
subdivision  of  libella,  when  the  latter  was  -Y^^th  of
the  denarius.  In  the  time  of  Cicero,  the  libella
appears  to  have  been  the  smallest  silver  coin  in  use
(Cic.  Pro.  Rose.  Com.  c.  4)  ;  and  it  is  frequently
used,  not  merely  to  express  a  silver  coin  equal  to
the  as,  but  any  very  small  sum.  (Plant.  Cas.  ii.  5.
7,  Capt.  V.  1.  27.)  Gronovius  {De  Sesteriiis,  ii.  2^
however,  maintains  that  there  was  no  such  coin  as
the  libella  when  Varro  wrote  ;  but  that  the  word
was  used  to  signify  the  tenth  part  of  a  sestertius.
No  specimens  of  the  libella  are  now  found.

If  the  denarius  be  reckoned  in  value  8^.,  the
other  coins  which  have  been  mentioned,  will  be  of
the  following  value :  —


Teruncius     ....
Sembella      ....

Libella

Sestertius     ....
Quinarius  or  Victoriatus
Denarius      ....

It  has  been  frequently  stated  that  the  denamis


Pence

Farth.

•53125

1-0625

2-125

2

•5

4

1

8

2

394


DEPOSIT  UM.


is  equal  in  value  to  the  drachma  ;  hut  this  is  not
quite  correct.  The  Attic  drachma  was  almost
equal  to  9^.,  whereas  we  have  seen  that  the
denarius  was  but  little  above  8^.  The  later
drachmae,  however,  appear  to  have  fallen  off  in
weight  ;  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  they  were
at  one  time  nearly  enough  equal  to  pass  for  equal.
Gronovius  has  given  all  the  authorities  upon  the
subject  in  his  De  Sestertiis  (iii.  2).

The  earliest  denarii  have  usually,  on  the  ob-
verse, the  head  of  Rome  with  a  helmet,  the
Dioscuri,  or  the  head  of  Jupiter.  Many  have,  on
the  reverse,  chariots  drawn  by  two  or  four  horses
(Jngue,  quadrigae)^  whence  they  are  called  respect-
ively 6^9«i^•and  ^wac^r/^a^/,  sc.nummi.  [BiGATUS.]
Some  denarii  were  called  serrati  (Tacit.  Germ.  5),
because  their  edges  were  notched  like  a  saw,  which
appears  to  have  been  done  to  prove  that  they  were
solid  silver,  and  not  plated.  Many  of  the  gentile
denarii,  as  those  of  the  Aelian,  Calpurnian,  Pa-
pinian,  Tullian,  and  numerous  other  gentes,  are
marked  with  the  numeral  X,  in  order  to  show
their  value.

Pliny  {H.  N.  xxxiii.  13)  speaks  of  the  denarius
aureus.  Gronovius  {De  Sester.  iii.  15)  says,  that
this  coin  was  never  struck  at  Rome  ;  but  there  is
one  of  Augustus  in  the  British  Museum,  weighing
60  grains,  and  others  of  less  weight.  The  average
weight  of  the  common  aureus  was  120  grains.
[AuRUM,]  In  later  times,  a  copper  coin  was
called  denarius.  (Ducange,  s.  v.  Denarius.)

DENICA'LES  FE'RIAE.    [Feriae.]

DENTA'LE.     [Aratrum.]

DENTIFRI'CIUM  (oSoi/T^rpj/iyLia),  dentrifice
or  tooth-powder,  appears  to  have  been  skilfully
prepared  and  generally  used  among  the  Romans.
A  variety  of  substances,  such  as  the  bones,  hoofs,
and  horns  of  certain  animals,  crabs,  egg-shells,  and
the  shells  of  the  oyster  and  the  miirex,  constituted
the  basis  of  the  preparation.  Having  been  pre-
viously burnt,  and  sometimes  mixed  with  honej',
they  were  reduced  to  a  fine  powder.  Though
fancy  and  superstition  often  directed  the  choice  of
these  ingredients,  the  addition  of  astringents,  such
as  myrrh,  or  of  nitre  and  of  hartshorn  ground  in  a
i-aw  state,  indicates  science  which  was  the  result  of
experience,  the  intention  being  not  only  to  clean
the  teeth  and  to  render  them  white,  but  also  to  fix
them  when  loose,  to  strengthen  the  gums,  and  to
assuage  tooth-ache.  (Plin.  //.  N.  xxviii.  49,  xxxi.
46,  xxxii.  21,  26.)  Pounded  pumice  was  a  more
dubious  article,  though  Pliny  (xxxvi.  42)  says,
"  Utilissima  fiunt  ex  his  dentifricia."       [J.  Y.]

DEPENSI  ACTIO.     [Intercessio.]

DEPORTA'TIO.     [Exsilium.]

DEPO'SITI  ACTIO.     [Depositum.]

DEPO'SITUM.  The  notion  of  depositum  is
this :  a  moveable  thing  is  given  by  one  man  to
another  to  keep  until  it  is  demanded  back,  and
without  any  reward  for  the  trouble  of  keeping  it.
The  party  who  makes  the  depositum  is  called  de-
fonens  or  depositor,  and  he  who  receives  the  thing
is  called  depositarius.  The  act  of  deposit  may  be
purely  voluntary  ;  or  it  may  be  from  necessity,  as
in  the  case  of  fire,  shipwreck,  or  other  casualty.
The  depositarius  is  bound  to  take  care  of  the
thing  which  he  has  consented  to  receive.  He  can-
not use  the  thing  unless  he  has  permission  to  use
it,  either  by  express  words  or  lay  necessary  im-
plication. If  the  thing  is  one  *'  quae  iisu  non  con-
sumitur,"  and  it  is  given  to  a  person  to  be  used.


DESULTOR.

the  transaction  becomes  a  case  of  locatio  and  con-
ductio  [Locatio],  if  money  is  to  be  paid  for  the
use  of  it  ;  or  a  case  of  commodatum  [Commoda-
tum],  if  nothing  is  to  be  paid  for  the  use.  If  a
bag  of  money  not  sealed  up  is  the  subject  of  the
depositum,  and  the  depositarius  at  any  time  asks
for  permission  to  use  it,  the  money  becomes  a  loan
[Mutuum]  from  the  time  when  the  permission
is  granted  ;  if  the  deponens  proffers  the  use  of  the
money,  it  becomes  a  loan  from  the  time  when  the
depositarius  begins  to  use  it,  (Dig.  12.  tit.  1.  s.  9.
§  9,  s.  1 0. )  If  money  is  deposited  with  the  condition
that  the  same  amount  be  returned,  the  use  of  it  is
tacitly  given.  If  the  depositum  continues  purely  a
depositum,  the  depositarius  is  bound  to  make  good
any  damage  to  it  which  happens  through  dolus  or
culpa  lata  ;  and  he  is  bound  to  restore  the  thing
on  demand  to  the  deponens,  or  to  the  person  to
whom  the  deponens  orders  it  to  be  restored.  If
several  persons  had  received  the  deposit,  they  were
severally  liable  for  the  whole  (in  solidum).  The
remedy  of  the  deponens  against  the  depositarius,  is
by  an  actio  depositi  directa.  The  depositarius  is
entitled  to  be  secured  against  all  damage  which
he  may  have  sustained  through  any  culpa  on  the
part  of  the  deponens,  and  to  all  costs  and  expenses
incurred  by  his  charge  ;  and  his  remedy  against
the  deponens  is  by  an  actio  depositi  contmria.
The  actio  was  in  duplum,  if  the  deposit  was  made
from  necessity  ;  if  the  depositJirius  was  guilty  of
dolus,  infamia  was  a  consequence.  (Inst.  3.  tit.  14
(15) ;  Cod.  4.  tit.  34  ;  Dig.  16.  tit.  3 ;  Cic.  de  Of.
i.  10  ;  Juv.  Sat.  xiii.  60  ;  Dirksen,  Uehersicht,  &c.
p.  597  ;  Thibaut,  System,  &c.  §  480,  «&c.  9th
ed.)  [G.L.]

DESERTOR,  is  defined  by  Modestinus  to  be
one  "  qui  per  prolixum  tempus  vagatus,  reducitur,"
and  differs  from  an  emansor,  "  qui  diu  vagatus  ad
castra  egreditur."  (Dig.  49.  tit.  16.  s.  3.)  Those
who  deserted  in  time  of  peace,  were  punished  by
loss  of  rank,  corporal  chastisement,  fines,  ignomini-
ous dismission  from  the  service,  «&c.  Those  who
left  the  standards  in  time  of  war  were  usually
punished  with  death.  The  transfugae,  or  deserters
to  the  enemy,  when  taken,  were  sometimes  de-
prived of  their  hands  or  feet  (Liv.  xxvi.  12),  but
generally  were  put  to  death.  (Lipsius,  De  Milit.
Rom.  iv.  4.)

DESIGNA'TOR.    [Funus.]

DESMOTE'RION  {Sea-fxwT'hpiov).  [Carcer.J

DESPOSIONAUTAE  (SeaTrocriouavTai.)  [Ci-

VITAS.]

DESULTOR  (a-rrogaTTjs,  yueragctTT??),  lite-
rally "  one  who  leaps  off,"  was  applied  to  a  per-
son who  rode  several  horses  or  chariots,  leaping
from  one  to  the  other.  As  early  as  the  Homeric
times,  we  find  the  description  of  a  man,  who  keeps
four  horses  abreast  at  full  gallop,  and  leaps  from
one  to  another,  amidst  a  crowd  of  admiring  spec-
tators. (//.  XV.  679 — 684.)  In  the  games  of  the
Roman  circus  this  sport  was  also  very  popular.
The  Roman  desultor  generally  rode  only  two
horses  at  the  same  time,  sitting  on  them  without  a
saddle,  and  vaulting  upon  either  of  them  at  his
pleasure.  (Isid.  Orig.  xviii.  39.)  He  wore  a  hat  or
cap  made  of  felt.  The  taste  for  these  exerc'^es  was
carried  to  so  great  an  extent,  that  young  men  of
the  highest  rank  not  only  drove  bigae  and  quad-
rigae in  the  circus,  but  exhibited  these  feats  of
horsemanship.  (Suet.  Jul.  39.)  Among  other  na-
tions   this    species    of    equestrian    dexterity    was


DIADEMA.

applied  to  the  piirposes  of  war.  Livy  mentions  a
troop  of  horse  in  the  Numidian  army,  in  which
each  soldier  was  supplied  with  a  couple  of  horses>
and  in  the  heat  of  battle,  and  when  clad  in  ar-
mour, Avouid  leap  with  the  greatest  ease  and  cele-
rity from  that  which  was  wearied  or  disabled  upon
the  back  of  the  horse  which  was  still  sound  and
fresh,  (xxiii,  29).  The  Scythians,  Armenians,  and
some  of  the  Indians,  were  skilled  in  the  same  art.
The  annexed  woodcut  shows  three  figures  of
desultores,  one  from  a  bronze  lamp,  published  by
Bartoli  (Antiche  Lueeme  Sepolcrali,  i.  24),  the
others  from  coins.  In  all  these  the  rider  wears  a
pileus,  or  cap  of  felt,  and  his  horse  is  without  a
saddle  ;  but  these  examples  prove  that  he  had  the
use  both  of  the  whip  and  the  rein.  On  the  coins
we  also  observe  the  wreath  and  palm-branch  as
ensigns  of  victorj\  [J.  Y.]


DIAETETICA.


395


DETEST ATIO  SACRORUM.    [Gens.]
DEVERSO'RIUM.    [Caupona.]
DEUNX.    [As,  p.  140,  b  ;  Libra.]
DEXTANS.    [As,  p.  140,  b  ;  Libra.]
DIABATE'RIA   (Sia§aTiipta),  a  sacrifice  of-
fered to  Zeus  and  Athena  by  the  kings  of  Sparta,
upon  passing  the  frontiers   of  Lacedaemon  with
the  command  of  an  army.     If  the  victims  were
unfavourable,  they   disbanded  the  army  and  re-
turned home.    (Xen.  De  Rep.  Lac.  xi.  2  ;  Thuc.
V.  54,  55,  116.)

DIADE'MA  .'StciSTj/ia),  a  white  fillet  used  to
encircle  the  head  (fascia  alba,  Val.  Max.  vi.  2.
§  7).  The  invention  of  this  ornament  is  by  Pliny
(yii.  57)  attributed  to  "  Liber  Pater."  Diodorus
Siculus  adds  (iv.  p.  250,  Wessel.),  that  he  wore  it
to  assuage  headache,  the  consequence  of  indulgence
in  wine.  Accordingly,  in  works  of  ancient  art,  Dio-
nysus wears  a  plain  bandage  on  his  head,  as  shown
in  the  cut  imder  Cantharus.  The  decoration
is  properly  Oriental.  It  is  commonly  represented
on  the  heads  of  Eastern  monarchs.  Justin  (xii.  3)
relates  that  Alexander  the  Great  adopted  the  large
diadem  of  the  kings  of  Persia,  the  ends  of  which
fell  upon  the  shoulders,  and  that  this  mark  of  roy-
alty was  preserved  by  his  successors.  Antony
ass'imed  it  in  his  luxurious  intercourse  with  Cleo-


patra in  Egj'pt.  (Floras,  iv.  11.)  Aelian  says
(  V.  H.  vi.  38)  that  the  kings  of  that  country  Iiad
the  figure  of  an  asp  upon  their  diadems.  In  pro-
cess of  time  the  sculptors  placed  the  diadema
on  the  head  of  Zeus,  and  various  other  divinities
besides  Dionysus  ;  and  it  was  also  gradually  as-
sumed by  the  sovereigns  of  the  Western  world.
It  was  tied  behind  in  a  bow  ;  whence  Tacitus
{Ann.  vi.  37)  speaks  of  the  Euphrates  rising  in
waves  "  white  with  foam,  so  as  to  resemble  a  dia-
dem." By  the  addition  of  gold  and  gems,  and  by
a  continual  increase  in  richness,  size,  and  splen-
dour, this  bandage  was  at  length  converted  into
the  crown  which  has  been  for  many  centuries  the
badge  of  sovereignty  in  modem  Europe.     [J.  Y.]

DIADICA'SIA  {^iahiKa(ria\  in  its  most  ex-
tended sense  is  a  mere  synonym  of  Siktj  :  techni-
cally, it  denotes  the  proceedings  in  a  contest  for
preference  between  two  or  more  rival  parties  ;  as,
for  instance,  in  the  case  of  several  claiming  to
succeed  as  heirs  or  legatees  to  the  estate  of  a  de-
ceased person.  Upon  an  occasion  of  this  kind,  it
will  be  observed  that,  as  all  the  claimants  are
similarly  situated  with  respect  to  the  subject  of
dispute,  the  ordinary  classification  of  the  litigants
as  plaintiffs  and  defendants  becomes  no  longer  ap-
plicable. This,  in  fact,  is  the  essential  distinction
between  the  proceedings  in  question  and  all  other
suits  in  which  the  parties  appear  as  immediately
opposed  to  each  other ;  but  as  far  as  forms  are  con-
cerned, we  are  not  told  that  they  were  peculiarly
characterised.  Besides  the  case  above  mentioned,
there  are  several  others  to  be  classed  with  it  in
respect  of  the  object  of  proceedings  being  an  ab-
solute acquisition  of  property.  Among  these  are
to  be  reckoned  the  claims  of  private  creditors  upon
a  confiscated  estate,  and  the  contests  between  in-
formers claiming  rewards  proposed  by  the  state  for
the  discovery  of  crimes,  &c.,  as  upon  the  occasion
of  the  mutilation  of  the  Hermae  (Andoc.  14)  and
the  like.  The  other  class  of  causes  included  under
the  general  term  consists  of  cases  like  the  antidosis
of  the  trierarchs  [Antidosis],  contests  as  to  who
was  to  be  held  responsible  to  the  state  for  public
property  alleged  to  have  been  transferred  on  one
hand  and  denied  on  the  other  (as  in  Dem.  c.
Everg.  et  Mnes.\  and  questions  as  to  who  should
undertake  a  choregia,  and  many  others,  in  which
exemptions  from  personal  or  pecuniary  liabilities
to  the  state  were  the  subject  of  claim  by  rival
parties.  In  a  diadicasia,  as  in  an  ordinary  Si'ktj,
the  proper  court,  the  presiding  magistrate,  and  the
expenses  of  the  trial,  mainly  depended  upon  the
peculiar  object  of  the  proceedings,  and  present  no
leading  characteristics  for  discussion  under  the
general  term.  (Platner,  Process  und  Klagen,  ii.
p.  17.  s.  9.)     [Dike.]  [J.S.M.]

DIADOSEIS  {^iaU(T€tS.)      [DlANOMAK]

DIAETA.    [DoMUS.]

DIAETETICA,  or  DIAETE'TICE  (SmzTrj-
TiK-f)),  one  of  the  principal  branches  into  which
the  ancients  divided  the  art  and  science  of  medi-
cine. [Medicina.]  The  word  is  derived  from
diaira,  which  meant  much  the  same  as  our  word
diet.  It  is  defined  by  Celsus  (De  Medic.  Praefat.
in  lib.  i.)  to  signify  that  part  of  medicine  quae
victu  medetur,  "  which  cures  diseases  by  means  of
regimen  and  diet ;"  and  a  similar  explanation  is
given  by  Plato  (ap.  Diog.  La'Crt.  iii.  1.  §  85.)
Taken  strictly  in  this  sense,  it  would  correspond,
very  nearly  with  the  modem  dietetics^  and  this  is


Z96


DIAETETICA.


the  meaning  which  it  ahvaj'-s  bears  in  the  earlier
medical  writers,  and  that  which  will  be  adhered
to  in  the  present  article  ;  in  some  of  the  later  au-
thors, it  seems  to  comprehend  Celsus's  second  grand
division,  Pharmaceutical  and  is  used  by  Scribonius
Largus  (De  Compos.  Medicam.  §  200)  simply  in
opposition  to  cldrurgia^  so  as  to  answer  exactly  to
the  province  of  our  physician.

No  attention  seems  to  have  been  paid  to  this
branch  of  medicine  before  the  date  of  Hippo-
crates. Homer  represents  Machaon,  who  had  been
wounded  in  the  shoulder  by  an  arrow  {11.  xi.  507)
and  forced  to  quit  the  field,  as  taking  a  draught
composed  of  wine,  goat's-milk  cheese,  and  flour
{il>id.  638),  Avhich  certainly  no  modern  surgeon
would  prescribe  in  such  a  case.  (Sse  Plat.  De
Republ  iii.  pp.  405,  406  ;  Max.  Tyr.  Serm.  29  ;
Athen.  i.  p.  10.)  Hippocrates  seems  to  claim  for
himself  the  credit  of  being  the  first  person  who
had  studied  this  subject,  and  says  that  "  the  an-
cients had  written  nothing  on  it  worth  mention-
ing" {De  Rat.  Vict,  in  Morh.  Acut.  vol.  ii.  p.  26,
ed.  KUhn).  Among  the  works  commonly  ascribed
to  Hippocrates,  there  are  four  that  bear  upon  this
subject.  It  would  be  out  of  place  here  to  attempt
any  thing  like  a  complete  account  of  the  opinions
of  the  ancients  on  this  point  ;  those  who  wish  for
more  detailed  information  must  be  referred  to  the
different  works  on  medical  antiquities,  while  in
this  article  mention  is  made  of  only  such  parti-
culars as  may  be  supposed  to  have  some  interest
for  the  general  reader.

In  the  works  of  Hippocrates  and  his  successors
almost  all  the  articles  of  food  used  by  the  ancients
are  mentioned,  and  their  real  or  supposed  pro-
perties discussed,  sometimes  quite  as  fancifully  as
by  Burton  in  his  Anatomy  of  Melancholy.  In
gome  respects  they  appear  to  have  been  much  less
delicate  in  their  tastes  than  the  moderns,  as  we
find  the  flesh  of  the  fox,  the  dog,  the  horse,  and
the  ass  spoken  of  as  common  articles  of  food.
(Pseudo-Hippocr.  De  Vict.  Rat.  lib.  ii.  vol.  i.  pp.
679,  680.)  With  regard  to  the  quantity  of  wine
drank  by  the  ancients,  we  may  arrive  at  some-
thing like  certainty  from  the  fact  that  Caelius
Aurelianus  mentions  it  as  something  extraordinary
that  the  famous  Asclepiades  at  Rome  in  the  first
century  b.  c,  sometimes  ordered  his  patients  to
double  and  treble  the  quantity  of  wine,  till  at  last
they  drank  half  wine  and  half  water  {De  Morh.
Chron.  lib.  iii.  c.  7.  p.  386),  from  which  it  appears
that  wine  was  commonly  diluted  with  five  or  six
times  its  quantity  of  water.  Hippocrates  recom-
mends wine  to  be  mixed  with  an  equal  quantity
of  water,  and  Galen  approves  of  the  proportion  ;
but  Le  Clerc  {Hist,  de  la  Med.)  thinks  that  this
was  only  in  particular  cases.  In  one  place
(Pseudo-Hippocr.  De  Vict.  Rat.  lib.  iii.  in  fin.)
the  patient,  after  great  fatigue,  is  recommended
Hedva-dqvai  aira^  i)  Sis,  in  which  passage  it  has  been
much  doubted  whether  actual  intoxication  is  meant,
or  only  the  "  drinking  freely  and  to  cheerfulness,"
in  which  sense  the  same  word  is  used  by  St.  John
(ii.  10)  and  the  LXX.  {Gen.  xliii.  34  ;  Cant.  v.
1  ;  and  perhaps  Gen.  ix.  21).  According  to  Hip-
pocrates, the  proportions  in  which  wine  and  water
should  be  mixed  together,  vary  according  to  the
season  of  the  year  ;  for  instance,  in  summer  the
wine  should  be  most  diluted,  and  in  winter  the
least  so.  (Compare  Celsus,  De  Medic,  i.  3.  p.  31.
ed.  Argent.)     Exercise  of  various  sorts,  and  bath-


DIAETETAE.

!  mg,  are  also  much  insisted  upon  by  the  writers  on
I  diet  aad  regimen ;  but  for  further  particulars  on
I  these  subjects  the  articles  Balneak  and  Gymna-
sium must  be  consulted.  It  may,  however,  be
added  that  the  bath  could  not  have  been  very
common,  at  least  in  private  families,  in  the  time  of
Hippocrates,  as  he  says  {De  Rat.  Vict,  in  Morb.
Acut.  p.  62)  that  "there  are  few  houses  in  which
the  necessary  conveniences  are  to  be  found."

Another  very  favourite  practice  with  the  an-
cients, both  as  a  preventive  of  sickness  and  as  a
remedy,  was  the  taking  of  an  emetic  from  time  to
time.  The  author  of  the  treatise  De  Victus  Ra-
tioTie,  falsely  attributed  to  Hippocrates,  recom-
mends it  two  or  three  times  a  month  (lib.  iii.  p.
710).  Celsus  considers  it  more  beneficial  in  the
winter  than  in  the  summer  {De  Medic,  i.  3.  p.  28),
and  says  that  those  who  take  an  emetic  tw>ce  a
month  had  better  do  so  on  two  successive  days
than  once  a  fortnight  {Ibid.  p.  29).  At  the  time
in  which  Celsus  wrote,  this  practice  was  so  com-
monly abused,  that  Asclepiades,  in  his  work  De
Sanitate  Tuenda.,  rejected  the  use  of  emetics  alto-
gether, "  Offensus,"  says  Celsus  {Jlnd.  p.  27),
"  eorum  consuetudine,  qui  quotidic  ejiciendo  vo-
randi  facultatem  moliuntur."  (See  also  Plin.
H.  N.  xxvi.  8.)  It  was  the  custom  among  the
Romans  to  take  an  emetic  immediately  before  their
meals,  in  order  to  prepare  themselves  to  eat  more
plentifully  ;  and  again  soon  after,  so  as  to  avoid
any  injuiy  from  repletion.  Cicero,  in  his  account
of  the  day  that  Caesar  spent  with  him  at  his
house  in  the  country  {ad  Att.  xiii.  52),  says,  "  Ac-
cubuit,  ^/xeriK-^v  agebat,  itaque  et  edit  et  bibit
aSecDs  et  jucunde  ; "  and  this  seems  to  have  been
considered  a  sort  of  compliment  paid  by  Caesar  to
his  host,  as  it  intimated  a  resolution  to  pass  the
day  cheerfully,  and  to  eat  and  drink  freely  with
him.  He  is  represented  as  having  done  the  same
thing  when  he  was  entertained  by  King  Deiotfirus
(Cic.  Pro  Deiot.  c.  7).  The  glutton  Vitellius  is
said  to  have  preserved  his  own  life  by  constant
emetics,  while  he  destroyed  all  his  companions
who  did  not  use  the  same  precaution  (Suet.  Vitell.
c.  13  ;  Dion  Cass.  Ixv.  2),  so  that  one  of  them,
who  was  prevented  by  illness  from  dining  with
him  for  a  few  days,  said,  "  I  should  certainly
have  been  dead  if  I  had  not  fallen  sick."  Even
women,  after  bathing  before  supper,  used  to  drink
wine  and  throw  it  up  again  to  sharpen  their  ap-
petite —

[Falemi]  "  sextarius  alter
Ducitur  ante  cibum,  rabidam  facturus  orexim."
3\xx.Sat.\\.  427,  428.
so  that  it  might  truly  be  said,  in  the  strong  lan-
guage of  Seneca  {Cons,  ad  Helv.  9.  §  10),"  Vomunt,
ut  edant  ;  edunt,  ut  vomant."  ((Compare  Seneca,
De  Provid.  c.  4.  §11,  Epist.  95.  §21.)  By
some,  the  practice  was  thought  so  effectual  for
strengthening  the  constitution,  that  it  was  the
constant  regimen  of  all  the  athletae,  or  professed
wrestlers,  trained  for  the  public  shows,  in  order
to  make  them  more  robust.  Celsus,  however,
{I.  c.  p.  28),  warns  his  readers  against  the  too
frequent  use  of  emetics  without  necessity  and
merely  for  luxury  and  gluttony,  and  says  that
no  one  who  has  any  regard  for  his  health,  and
wishes  to  live  to  old  age,  ought  to  make  it  a  daily
practice.  [  W.  A.  G.]

DIAETE'TAE  {Siairvral),  arbitrators,  um-
pires.     The  diaetetae  mentioned  by  the  Athenian


DIAETETAE.

orators,  were  of  two  kinds  ;  the  one  public  and
appointed  by  lot  (/cA.7jpcoTOi),  the  other  private  and
chosen  (alp^Toi)  by  the  parties  who  referred  to
them  the  decision  of  a  disputed  point,  instead  of
trying  it  before  a  court  of  justice  ;  the  judgments
of  both,  according  to  Aristotle,  being  founded  on
equity  mther  than  law  (6  yap  SiaiT-rjrijs  to
eVtejAces  opa^  6  Sk  SiKaffT^s  rhu  yS/xov,  Rhetor,  i.
l;i).  We  shall,  in  the  first  place,  treat  of  the
public  diaetetac,  following  as  closely  as  possible
the  order  and  statements  of  Hudtwalcker  in  his
treatise  "  Ueber  die  oflfentlichen  und  Privat-
Schiedsrichter  Diateten  in  Athen,  und  den  Process
vor  denselben.'*

According  to  Suidas  (s.  «.),  the  public  Diaetetae
were  required  to  be  not  less  than  50  years  of  age  ;
according  to  Pollux  (viii.  126)  and  Hesychius,  not
less  than  60.  With  respect  to  their  number  there
is  some  difKculty,  in  consequence  of  a  statement  of
Ulpian  (Demosth.  c.  Meid.  p.  542.  15),  according
to  which  it  was  440,  i.  e.  44  for  each  tribe,
(■^crav  5e  recra-apes  Koi  recra-apaKOvra,  KaO'  eKaa-TTju
(pvKT]v).  This  number,  however,  appears  so  un-
necessarily large,  more  especially  when  it  is  con-
sidered that  the  Attic  orators  frequently  speak  of
only  one  arbitrator  in  each  case,  that  some  Avriters
have,  with  good  reason,  supposed  the  reading
should  be  —  ^(Xav  Se  ncraapaKovTa^  rccaapes
K.  e.  ^.  At  any  rate,  litigious  as  the  Athenians
were,  it  seems  that  40  must  have  been  enough  for
all  purposes.

The  words  kolS'  ^KdaTr^v  <pvX-i]v,  imply  that  each
tribe  had  its  own  arbitrator  ;  an  inference  which  is
supported  by  Demosthenes  (c.  Everg.  p.  1142.  25),
where  he  speaks  of  the  arbitrators  of  the  Oeneid
and   Erectheid  tribes :  as  well  as  by   Lysias  (c.
Panel,  p.  731),  who,  in  the  words  ■KpoaKX'na-a.^ivos
avrhv  irphs  tovs  rfj  'iTnrodowvTiSi  SiKa^ovras,  is
thought  to  allude  to  the  Diaetetae  of  the  Hippo-
thoontid  tribe.     With  regard  to   the  election   of
these  officers,    it  is  doubtful  whether  they  were
chosen  by  the  members  of  the  tribe  for  which  they
adjudicatedi,  or  in  a  general  assembly  of  the  people.
Hudtwalcker  inclines  to  the  latter  supposition,  as
being  more  probable  :  we  do  not  think  so  ;  fnr  it
seems  just  as  likely,  if  not  more  so,  that  the  four
arbitrators  of  each  tribe  were  chosen  in  an  assem-
bly of  the  tribe  itself.     Again,  whether  they  were
appointed  for  life,  or  only  for  a  definite  period,  is
not  expressly  mentioned  by  the  orators  ;  but  as
none  of  the  Athenian  magistrates,  with  the  excep-
tion of  the  Areiopagites,  remained  permanently  in
office,  and  Demosthenes  (c.Meid.  p.  542. 15)  speaks
of  the  last  day  of  the  1 1th  month   of  the  year  as
being  the  last  day  of  the  Diaetetae  {rj  TtAeurata
r^fifpa  Tbov  SiaiTTjTwj'),  it  seems  almost  certain  that
they  were  elected  for  a  year  only.     The  only  ob-
jection to  this  conclusion  arises  from  a  statement
in  a  fragment  of  Isaeus  (p.  361,  ed.  Reiske),  where
an  arbitrator  is  spoken  of  as   being  engaged  on  a
suit  for  two   years  (Suo  cttj   rov    Ziair-qrov   rijv
StKTfp  exovTos) :  if,  however,  we  admit  the  con-
jectural reading  rwv  StaiTTjrwj/,  the  meaning  would
be  in  accordance  with  what  we  infer  from  other
authorities,  and  would  only  imply  that  the  same
cause  came  before  the  arbitrators'  of  two  different
years,  a  case  which  might  not  unfrequently  happen  ;
if,  on  the  contrary,  the  reading  of  the  text  is  cor-
I    rect,  we  must  suppose  that  it  was  sometimes  neces-
]    Bary  or  convenient  to  re-elect  an  arbitrator  for  the
!   decision  of  a  particular  case.


DIAETETAE.  397

It  is  doubtful  whether  the  public  Diaetetae
took  any  general  oath  before  entering  upon  their
duties.  Such  a  guarantee  would  seem  to  be  unne-
cessary ;  for  Ave  read  of  their  taking  oaths  previous
to  giving  judgment  in  i\\e particular  cases  which
came  before  them.  (Isaeus,  De  Dicaeog.  Hered.
p.  54  ;  Dem.  c.  Callip.  p.  1244.)  From  this  cir-
cumstance we  should  infer  that  no  oath  was  ex-
acted from  them  before  they  entered  upon  office  :
Hudtwalcker  is  of  a  contrary  opinion,  and  sug-
gests that  the  purport  of  their  oath  of  office  was
the  same  as  that  of  the  Heliastic  oath  given  by
Demosthenes  (c.  Timocr.  p.  747).

The  Diaetetae  of  the  different  tribes  appear  to
have  sat  in  different  places  ;  as  temples,  halls,  and
courts  of  justice,  if  not  wanted  for  other  purposes.
Those  of  the  Oeneid  and  Erectheid  tribes  met  in
the  heliaea  (Dem.  c.  Everg.  p.  1142.  25.)  ;  we
read  of  others  holding  a  court  in  the  delphinium
(c,  Boeot.  ii.  p.  1011),  and  also  in  the  crToa
TToiKiK-f]  (c.  Step/i.  i.  p.  1106).  Again,  we  are  told
of  slaves  being  examined  by  the  Diaetetae  sitting
for  that  purpose,  under  the  appellation  of  fiaaavi-
(TToX  [Tormkntum],  in  the  hephaisteium,  or
temple  of  Poseidon.  (Isocr.  TpaTre^.  p.  361.  21,  ed.
Bekker.)  Moreover,  we  are  told  of  private  arbi-
trators meeting  in  the  temple  of  Athena  on  the
Acropolis  ;  and,  if  the  amended  reading  of  Pollux
(viii.  126)  is  correct,  we  are  informed  by  him,  in
general  terms,  that  the  arbitrators  formerly  held
their  courts  in  the  temples  (Ajt/twj/  iv  Upoli
TraXai).  Harpocration  also  {s.  v.)  contrasts  the
dicasts  with  the  arbitrators,  observing  that  the
former  had  regularly  appointed  courts  of  justice
(d7ro5eS6i7yu.€Va).

Another  point  of  difference  was  the  mode  of
payment,  inasmuch  as  the  dicasts  received  an
allowance  from  the  state,  whereas  the  only  remu-
neration of  the  Diaetetae  was  a  drachma  deposited
as  a  TTapda-raa-ts  by  the  complainant,  on  the  com-
mencement of  the  suit,  the  same  sum  being  also
paid  for  the  di/rw/xocrta,  and  every  inrufioaia  sworn
during  the  proceedings.  (Pollux,  viii.  39,  127  ;
Harpocr.  s.  v. )  This  Trapda-Taais  is  the  same  as
tlie  Spaxf^h  ToO  Xeitro/xapTvplov  mentioned  by
Demosthenes  (c.  Timoth.  p.  1190).  The  defendant
in  this  case  had  failed  to  give  evidence  as  he  ought
to  have  done,  and  therefore  the  plaintiff  com-
menced proceedings  against  him  for  this  neglect,
before  the  arbitrators  in  the  principal  suit,  the
first  step  of  which  was  the  payment  of  the  irapd-

(TTaCTtS.

The  public  arbitrators  were  inrevdvvoi,  i.  e.  every
one  who  had,  or  fancied  he  had,  a  cause  of  com-
plaint against  them  for  their  decisions,  might  pro-
ceed against  them  by  elaayycXia,  or  infonnation
laid  before  the  senate.  For  this  pui-pose,  says
Ulpian,  whose  statement  is  confirmed  by  Demo-
stheaes  (c.  Meid.)  in  the  case  of  Straton,  the  public
Dia-tetae  were  towards  the  close  of  their  year
of  office,  and  during  the  latter  days  of  the  month
Thargelion,  required  to  present  themselves  in  some
fixed  place,  probably  near  the  senate-house,  that
ihej  might  be  ready  to  answer  anj'-  charge  brought
against  them,  of  which  they  received  a  previous
notice.  The  punishment,  in  case  of  condemnation,
was  atimia,  or  the  loss  of  civic  rights.  Harpo-
cration (s.  v.),  however,  informs  us  that  the  elaay-
yeXia  against  the  arbitrators  was  brought  before
the  dicasts  or  judges  of  the  regular  courts,  but  this
probably  happened  only  on  appeal,  or  in  cafies  of


398


DIAETETAE.


great  importance,  inasmuch  as  the  ^ovX-ff  could
not  inflict  a  greater  penalty  than  a  fine  of  500
drachmae  with  atimia.

As  to  the  extent  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the
Diaetctae,  Polhix  (viii.  126)  states,  that  in  former
times  no  suit  was  brought  into  a  court  before  it
had  been  investigated  by  the  Diaetetae  (TrctAot
ovSe/xia  Siktj  irplu  eVi  diairrjTas  iXdeTv  eia-fjyeTo).
There  can  be  but  little  doubt  that  the  word  TrdKai
here  refers  to  a  time  which  was  ancient  with  re-
ference to  the  age  of  the  Athenian  orators,  and
therefore  that  this  previous  investigation  was  no
longer  requisite  in  the  days  of  Demosthenes  and
his  contemporaries.  Still  we  find  the  Diaetetae
mentioned  by  them  in  very  many  cases  of  civil
actions,  and  it  is  not  unlikely  that  the  magistrates,
whose  duty  it  was  to  bring  actions  into  court
(etVayei//),  encouraged  the  process  before  the  arbi-
trators, as  a  means  of  saving  the  state  the  pay-
ment which  would  otherwise  have  been  due  to  the
dicasts.  Hudtwalcker  is  accordingly  of  opinion
that  the  Diaetetae  were  competent  to  act  in  all
cases  of  civil  actions  for  restitution  or  compensa-
tion, but  not  of  penal  or  criminal  indictments
(7pa</>oi),  and,  moreover,  that  it  rested  with  the
complainant  whether  his  cause  was  brought  before
them  in  the  first  instance,  or  sent  at  once  to  a
higher  court  of  judicature.  (Dem.  c.  Androt.
p.  601.  18.)

But  besides  hearing  cases  of  this  sort  the
Diaetetae  sat  as  commissioners  of  inquiry  on  mat-
ters of  fact  which  could  not  be  conveniently  exa-
mined in  a  court  of  justice  (Dem.  c.  Steph.  p.  1 106),
just  as  what  is  called  an  "  issue "  is  sometimes
directed  by  our  own  Court  of  Chancery  to  an  in-
ferior court,  for  the  purpose  of  trying  a  question  of
fact,  to  be  determined  bj'  a  jurj'.  Either  party  in
a  suit  could  demand  or  challenge  (-rrpoKaXeladai)
an  inquiry  of  this  sort  before  an  arbitrator,  the
challenge  being  called  irp6K\T}(n5  :  a  term  which
was  also  applied  to  the  "  articles  of  agreement "
by  which  the  extent  and  object  of  the  inquiry  were
defined.  (Dem.  c.  Neaer.  p.  1387.)  Many  in-
stances of  these  TrpoK\i}(reis  are  found  in  the
orators ;  one  of  the  most  frequent  is  the  demand
or  olfer  to  examine  by  torture  a  slave  supposed  to
be  cognisant  of  a  matter  in  dispute,  the  damage
which  might  result  to  the  owner  of  the  slave  being
guaranteed  by  the  party  who  demanded  the  exa-
mination. (Harpocr.  s.  «.  irpSKXrjais.)  See  also  De-
mosthenes {Onetor.  i.  p.  874),  who  observes  that
the  testimony  of  a  slave,  elicited  by  torture,  was
thought  of  more  value  by  the  Athenians  than  the
evidence  of  freemen.  Another  instance  somewhat
similar  to  the  last,  was  the  Trp6K\T)ais  els  fxaprv-
piav  (Pollux,  viii.  62),  where  a  party  proposed  to
his  opponent  that  the  decision  of  a  disputed  point
should  be  determined  by  the  evidence  of  a  third
party.  (Antiphon,  De  Choreut.  p.  144,  ed.  Bek-
ker.)  Sometimes  also  we  read  of  a  irpoKX-qais^
by  which  a  party  was  challenged  to  allow  the  ex-
amination of  documents  ;  as  wills  (Dem.  c.  Steph.
p.  1104),  deeds,  bankers'  books,  &c.  (c.  Timoth.
p.  1197).  It  is  manifest  that  the  forms  and  ob-
jects of  a  TTp6K\T\(ns  would  vary  according  to  the
matter  in  dispute,  and  the  evidence  which  was
producible  ;  we  shall,  therefore,  content  ourselves
•with  adding  that  the  term  w«as  also  used  when
a  party  challenged  his  adversary  to  make  his  alle-
gation under  the  sanction  of  an  oath,  or  offered  to
make  his  own  statements  under  the  same  obli.C'a-


DIAETETAE.

'  tion.  (Dem.  c.  Apat  p.  896,  c.  Con.  p.  1269.  19.)
The  presumption  or  prepossession  which  might
arise  from  a  voluntary  oath  in  the  last  case,  might
be  met  by  a  similar  irpt^KATjtrts,  tendered  by  the  op-
posite party,  to  which  the  original  challenger  ap-
pears to  have  had  the  option  of  consenting  or  not
as  he  might  think  proper.  (Dem.  Timoth.  p.  1203  ;
compare  Arist.  Rhet.  i.  16.)  In  all  cases  where
any  of  these  investigations  or  depositions  were
made  before  the  Diaetetae,  we  may  conclude  with
Hudtwalcker  (p.  48),  that  they  might  be  called  as
witnesses  in  subsequent  stages  of  the  action,  either
to  state  the  evidence  they  had  taken,  or  to  pro-
duce the  documents  they  had  examined,  and  which
were  deposited  by  them  in  an  echinus.  [Appel-
LATio  (Grkek).]

The  proceedings  in  the  trials  before  the  public
arbitrators  were  of  two  kinds,  1st,  When  two
parties  agreed  by  a  regular  contract  to  refer  a
matter  in  dispute  to  a  judge  or  judges  selected  from
them.  2dly,  When  a  cause  was  brought  before  a
public  arbitrator,  without  any  such  previous  com-
promise, and  in  the  regular  course  of  law.  The
chief  difference  seems  to  have  been  that,  in  case
of  a  reference  by  contract  between  two  parties,  the
award  was  final,  and  no  appeal  could  be  brought
before  another  court,  though  the  unsuccessful  party
might,  in  some  instances,  move  for  a  new  trial
(t7?j/  jjL^  ovaav  avTiAaxeTv,  Dem.  c.  Meid.  p.  541).
Except  in  this  point,  of  non -appeal,  an  arbitrator
who  was  selected  from  the  public  Diaetetae  by
litigant  parties,  seems  to  have  been  subject  to  the
same  liabilities,  and  to  have  stood  in  the  same  re-
lation to  those  parties  as  an  arbitrator  appointed  by
lot :  the  course  of  proceeding  also  appears  to  have
been  the  same  before  both  (Dem.  c.  Meid.  p  541),
an  account  of  which  is  given  below.  It  must,  how-
ever, be  first  stated,  that  there  are  strong  reasons
in  support  of  Iludtwalcker's  opinion,  that  when-
ever a  suitor  wished  to  bring  an  actio^i  before  one
or  more  of  the  public  Diaetetae,^he  applied  to  one
of  the  many  officers  called  ^laaywyeis  (Dem.  c.
Lacrit.  p.  940.  5,  c.  Pantaen.  p.  976.  10  ;  Pollux,
viii.  93),  whose  duty  it  was  to  bring  the  cause
{ilaa.-ytiv)  into  a  proper  court.  By  some  such
officer,  at  any  rate,  a  requisite  number  of  arbitra-
tors was  allotted  to  the  complainant,  care  being
taken  that  they  were  of  the  same  tribe  as  the  de-
fendant. (Ilarpocr.  s.  v.  StaiT-nTai.)  Pollux  (viii.
126)  informs  us  that  if  a  Diaetetcs  refused  to
hear  a  cause,  he  might  be  punished  with  atimia  :
but  it  appears  that  under  extraordinary  circum-
stances, and  after  hearing  the  case,  a  Diaetetes
sometimes  refused  to  decide  himself,  and  referred
the  parties  to  a  court  of  justice.  (Dem.  c.  I'horm.
p.  913.)

The  process  before  the  public  Diaetetae  was
conducted  in  the  following  manner.  After  com-
plaint made,  and  payment  of  the  irapdaracns,  the
plaintiff  supported  his  averment  by  an  oath,  to  the
effect  that  his  accusation  was  true,  which  the  de-
fendant met  by  a  like  oath  as  to  the  matter  of  his
defence.  When  the  oath  {oLvrtapioaia)  had  been
thus  tJiken  by  the  parties,  the  arbitrators  entered
upon  the  inquiry,-  heard  witnesses,  examined  docu-
ments, and  held  as  many  conferences  {crvvo^oi)
with  the  parties,  as  might  be  necessaiy  for  the  set-
tlement of  the  question.  (See  authorities,  Hudt-
walcker, p.  80.)  The  day  of  pronouncing  judgment
(t}  avSpaats  ttjs  Si'ktjs,  Dem.  c.  Eveig.  p.  1153)
was  pry1;ably  fixed  by  law,  if  we  may  judge  fi'onj


DIAETETAE.

the  name  (v  Kvpia  scil.  rj/j-fpa)  by  which  it  is
called  in  the  orators  ;  it  might,  however,  with  con-
sent of  both  parties,  be  postponed.  The  verdict
given  was  countersigned  by  the  proper  authorities,
perhaps  by  the  elaayuryus,  and  thereby  acquired
its  validity.  The  archons,  mentioned  by  Demo-
sthenes (c.  Meid.  p.  542)  as  having  signed  a  judg-
ment, were  probably  thesmothetae,  as  the  action
was  a  StKTj  KaKiryopias,  which  is,  moreover,  called
an  arl/jL-nTos  SeKa  fivwv  Si'/ctj,  i.  e.  an  action  where
the  plaintiff  was  not  required  to  assess  the  damages
(aestimare  litem)^  the  penalty,  in  case  of  a  verdict
for  him,  being  determined  by  law  :  this  alone  is  suf-
ficient to  prove  that  the  Diaetetae  sometimes  de-
cided in  cases  where  the  plaintiff  sued  for  damages,
as  distinguished  from  those  in  which  he  sought
restitution  of  rights  or  property  ;  nor,  indeed,  does
there  seem  any  reason  for  supposing  that  their  juris-
diction was  not  extended  to  the  &7w»'es  tiix7]toI,ot
actions  where  the  plaintiff  was  required  to  assess  or
lay  his  damages,  provided  the  assessment  did  not
exceed  some  fixed  amount.  In  support  of  this
opinion  we  may  adduce  the  authority  of  Pollux
(viii.  127),  who  expressly  states  that  the  plaintiff
might  assess  his  damages  before  the  arbitrators,
when  the  law  did  not  do  so  for  him.

If  the  defendant  were  not  present  on  the  proper
day   to   make   his   last    defence,   judgment  went
against    him  by  default  {ep-{]fir}v  di(pAe),  the  ar-
bitrator being  obliged  to  wait  till  the  evening  (o»|/6
rjfjLfpas^  Dem.  c.  Meid.  p.  54],  c.  Timoth.  p.  1190).
Sometimes,  however,  the  time  of  pronouncing  sen-
tence was  defen-ed  in  consequence  of  a  deposition
(yTTco^oo-fa,  Pollux,  viii,  60  ;  Harpocr.  s.  v.)  al-
leging a  satisfactory  oiiuse  for  postponement,  such
as  sickness,  absence  from  town,  military  service,
or  other  reasons.     To  substantiate  those,  the  ap-
plicant, when  possible,  appeared  personally  ;  but  if
a  party  was  prevented  from  appearing  on  the  day
of  trial,  by  any  unexpected  event,  the  virtaixoaia
might  be  made    on  oath  by  authorised   friends.
(Dem.  c.  Ohjmp.  p.  1 1 74.  4  ;  Pollux,  viii.  6Q.)    The
inrwixoaia  might  be  met  by  a  counter-statement
(avduwafjioaia)  from  the  opposite  party  affirming
his  belief  that  the  reasons  alleged  were  fictitious
or  colourable.     In  connection  with  this  point,  we
may  observe  that,  according  to  Pollux  (viii.  60),
the  motion  for  a  new  trial  could  only  be  sustained
in  cases  where  the  applicant  had  made  a  vTrw^uoo-ia,
and  demurred  either  personally  or  by  proxy  against
the  passing  of  judgment  on  the  regular  daj-.   More-
over, it  was  incumbent  on  the  party  who  wished  for
a  new  trial  to  move  for  it  within  ton  days  after
judgment  had  been  pronounced,  and  even  then  he
was  obliged  to  take  a  kind  of  u7rw;u,o<ria,  to  the
effect  that  his  absence  on  the  proper  day  was  in-
voluntary.   (Pollux,  viii.  60.)     In  default  of  com-
pliance with  these  conditions,  the  previous  sentence
was  confirmed.    (Dem.  c.  Meid.  p.  542.)     We  are
told  also  by  Photius  (Lear.  s.  v.  ^u??  ovaa  SIktj),  that
it  was  competent  for  plaintiff  as  well  as  defendant
to  move  for  a  new  trial  on  the  grounds  Ave  have
mentioned.     "When  it  was  granted,  the  former  ver-
dict was  set  aside  (^  ep^/u,7j  iKixro),  and  the  par-
ties   went   again   before   an   arbitrator,   probably
through  the  instrumentality  of  the  daaycoyel^,  to
whom  application  liad  been  made  in  the  first  in-
stance.    The  process  itself  is  called  avriXiq^ts  in
Greek,  and  does  not  seem  to  have  been  confined  to
trials  bcf)re  the  Diaetetae  :  the  corresponding  term
in  Roman  law  is  restauralio  eremodicii.


DIAMASTIGOSIS.


359


This,  however,  was  not  the  only  means  of  set-
ting aside  a  judgment,  inasmuch  as  it  might  also  be
effected  by  an  ^cpea-is,  or  appeal  to  the  higher
courts  [Appellatio  (Greek)],  and  if  false  evi-
dence had  been  tendered,  by  a  Sikt)  KaKor€xvi(av
(Harpocr.  s.  v.  ;  Dem.  c.  Timoth.  p.  1201.  5).

It  remains  to  speak  of  the  strictly  private  arbi-
trators, chosen  by  mutual  agreement  between  con-
tending parties,  and  therefore  generally  distinguished
by  the  title  a/peroi,  of  whom  it  must  be  under-
stood that  they  were  not  selected  from  the  Siair7]Tai
of  the  tribes.  The  powers  with  which  they  were
invested,  were,  as  we  might  suppose,  not  always
the  same  ;  sometimes  they  were  merely  SiaWaKrai^
or  chosen  to  effect  a  compromise  or  reconciliation  :
thus  Isaeus  (De  Dicaeog.  Hered.  p.  54,  ed.  Bekk.)
speaks  of  arbitrators  offering  either  to  bring  about
a  reconciliation  if  they  could,  without  taking  an
oath,  or  to  make  an  award  (airocpaiveadai)  upon  oath.
Sometimes,  on  the  other  hand,  they  were  purely
referees,  and  then  their  powers  depended  upon  the
terms  of  the  agreement  of  reference  ;  if  these  powers
were  limited,  the  arbitration  was  a  Siaira  eVl
pr)ro7s  (Isocr.  c. Call.  p.  373, ed.  Bekk.).  The  agree-
ment Avas  not  merely  a  verbal  contract  (slipulatio)^
but  drawn  up  in  Avriting  {iirirpuir^  Kara  avvdrjKas,
Dem.  c.  Phor.  p.  912),  and  signed  by  the  parties  ;
it  fixed  the  number  of  referees  (generally  three),
determined  how  many  unanimous  votes  were  ne-
cessary'- for  a  valid  decision,  and  probably  reserved
or  prohibited,  as  the  case  might  be,  a  right  of  ap-
peal to  other  authorities.  (Isocr.  c.  Call.  p.  375,
ed.  Bekk.  ;  Dem.  c.  Apat.  p.  897.)

If  there  were  no  limitations,  these  Diaetetae
were  then,  so  to  speak,  arbitrators  proper,  accord-
ing to  the  definition  of  Festus  (p.  15,  ed.  Miil-
ler)  :  — "  Arbiter  dicitur  judex,  quod  totius  rei
habeat  arbitrium  et  potestatem."  Moreover,  no
appeal  could  be  brought  against  their  judgment
(Dem.  c.  Meid.  p.  545)  ;  though  we  read  of  an  in-
stance of  a  party  having  persuaded  his  opponent  to
leave  a  matter  to  the  arbitration  of  three  persons  ;
and  afterwards,  when  he  found  they  were  likely  to
decide  against  himself,  going  before  one  of  the
public  arbitrators.  (Dem.  c.  Apheb.  p.  862.)  We
should,  however,  suppose  that  in  this  case  there
was  no  written  avvQ^Ki).  The  award  was  fre-
quently given  under  the  sanction  of  an  oath,  and
had  the  same  force  as  the  judgment  Avhich  pro-
ceeded from  a  court  of  law,  so  that  it  might  be  fol-
lowed by  a  Sikt;  i^ovXrjs.  (Dem.  c.  Callip.  p.  1240.
22.)  We  may  add,  that  these  private  Diaetetae
are  spoken  of  as  sitting  eV  tw  /ep^,  cV  to5  'Hcjyat-
crreiq)^  and  that  in  some  cases  it  was  customary
to  give  notice  of  their  appointment  to  the  proper
archon  or  magistrate  {aTro<pepiiv  irphs  t^v  apxhv).,
who,  as  Hudtwalcker  suggests,  may  have  acted  as
an  ilcraycay^vs  in  the  case.  (Dem,  c.  Callip.  p.
1244.  14,  c.  Meid.  p.  542.  14.)  [R.  W.]

DIAGRAPHEIS  (Si07pa(/)6?s).    [Eisphora.]
DIA'LIS  FLAMEN.     [Flamen.]
DIAMARTY'RIA     {nia^iaprvpia.)       [Ana-

CRISIS.]

DIAMASTIGO'SIS  (Siafiatrriytcffis),  was  a
solemnity  performed  at  Sparta  at  the  festival  of
Artemis  Orthia,  whose  temple  was  called  Lim-
naeon,  from  its  situation  in  a  marshy  part  of  the
town.  (Pans.  iii.  16.  §  6.)  The  solemnity  was
this  :  —  Spartan  youths  (€<p7]SoL)  were  scourged  en
the  occasion  at  the  altar  of  Artemis,  by  persons
appointed  for  the  purpose,  ujitil  their  blood  gushed


400  DIAPSEPHISIS.

forth  and  covered  the  altar.  The  scourging  itself
was  preceded  by  a  preparation,  by  which  those
who  intended  to  undergo  the  diamastigosis  tried  to
harden  themselves  against  its  pains.  Pausani.is
describes  the  origin  of  the  worship  of  Artemis
Orthia,  and  of  the  diamastigosis,  in  the  following
manner  :  —  A  wooden  statue  of  Artemis,  which
Orestes  had  brought  from  Tauris,  was  found  in  a
bush  by  Astrabacus  and  Alopecus,  the  sons  of
Trbus.  The  two  men  were  immediately  struck
mad  at  the  sight  of  it.  The  Limnaeans  and  the
inhabitants  of  other  neighbouring  places  then  of-
fered sacrifices  to  the  goddess  ;  but  a  quarrel  en-
sued among  them,  in  which  several  individuals  were
killed  at  the  altar  of  Artemis,  who  now  demanded
atonement  for  the  pollution  of  her  sanctuary.  From
henceforth  human  victims  were  selected  by  lot  and
offered  to  Artemis,  until  Lycurgus  introduced  the
scourging  of  young  men  at  her  altar  as  a  substitute
for  human  sacrifices.

The  diamastigosis,  according  to  this  account,  was
a  substitute  for  human  sacrifice,  and  Lycurgus
made  it  also  serve  his  purposes  of  education,  in  so
far  as  he  made  it  a  part  of  the  system  of  harden-
ing the  Spfirtan  youths  against  bodily  sufferings.
(Plut.  Lye.  18,  Instlt.  Laced,  p.  254;  Cic.  Tuscul.
v.  27.)  According  to  another  far  less  probable  ac-
count, the  diamastigosis  originated  in  a  circum-
stiince,  recorded  by  Plutarch  {Aiistid.  17),  which
happened  before  the  battle  of  Plataeae.

The  worship  of  Artemis  Orthia  was  unquestion-
ably very  ancient,  and  the  diamastigosis  ovXj  a  step
from  barbarism  towards  civilisation.  Many  anec-
dotes are  related  of  the  courage  and  intrepidity
with  which  young  Spartans  bore  the  lashes  of  the
scourge  ;  some  even  died  without  uttering  a  murmur
at  their  sufferings,  for  to  die  under  the  strokes  was
considered  as  honourable  a  death  as  that  on  the
field  of  battle.  (Compare  Muller's  Dor.  ii.  9.  §  6.
7iote  k,  and  iv.  5.  §  8.,  note  c.  ;  Manso,  Sparta,  i,  2.
p.  183.)  [L.  S.l

DIA'NOMAE  {^Lavojxai)  or  DIA'DOSEIS
(hia86(Teis)  were  public  donations  to  the  Athenian
people,  which  corresponded  to  the  Roman  congiaria.
[CoNGiARiUM.]  To  these  belong  the  free  distri-
butions of  com  (Aristoph.  Vesp.  715),  the  cleru-
chiae  [Colonia  (Greek)],  the  revenues  from  the
mines,  and  the  money  of  the  theorica.     [Theo-

RICON.]

DIAPSE'PHISIS  {^la^^icris),  a  political  in-
stitution at  Athens,  the  object  of  which  was  to  pre-
vent aliens,  or  such  as  were  the  offspring  of  an
unlawful  marriage,  from  assuming  the  rights  of
citizens.  As  usurpations  of  this  kind  were  not
uncommon  at  Athens  (Plut.  Pericl.  37  ;  Harpocr.
s.  V.  iroTaii6s),  various  measures  had  been  adopted
against  them  {ypa<paX  |ej/ios  and  hwpo^evias) ;  but
as  none  of  them  had  the  desired  effect,  a  new  me-
thod, the  Ziw\ii\(pi<ns  was  devised,  according  to
which  the  trial  on  spurious  citizens  was  to  be  held
by  the  dcmotae,  within  whose  deme  intruders  were
suspected  to  exist ;  for  if  each  deme  separately  was
kept  clear  of  intruders,  the  whole  body  of  citizens
would  naturally  feel  the  benefit.  Every  deme
therefore  obtained  the  right  or  duty  at  certain
times  to  revise  its  lexiarchic  registers,  and  to  ascer-
tain whether  any  had  entered  their  names  who  had
no  claims  to  the  rights  of  citizens.  The  assembly
ot  the  demotae,  in  which  these  investigations  took
place,  was  held  under  the  presidency  of  the  de-
march,    or   some  senator  belonging  to  the   deme


DIASIA.

(Harpocr.  s.  v.  Sr^fiapxos)  ;  for  in  the  case  brought
forward  in  the  oration  of  Demosthenes  against
Eubulides,  we  do  not  find  that  he  was  deraarch,
but  it  is  merely  stated  that  he  Avas  a  member  of
the  Pov\i}.  When  the  demotae  were  assembled,
an  oath  was  administered  to  them,  in  which  they
promised  to  judge  impartially,  without  favour  to-
wards, or  enmity  against,  those  persons  on  whom
they  might  have  to  pass  sentence.  The  president
then  read  the  names  of  the  demotae  from  the  re-
gister, asking  the  opinion  of  the  assembly  {SiaipTj-
(pi^eadai)  respecting  each  individual,  whether  they
thought  him  a  true  and  Icgithnate  citizen  or  no4.
Any  one  then  had  the  right  to  say  what  be
thought  or  knew  of  the  person  in  question ;  and
when  any  one  was  impeached,  a  regular  trial  took
place.  (Dera.  c.  Eidud.  p.  1302;  Aeschin.  De
Fals.  Leg.  p.  345.)  Pollux  (viii.  18)  says  that  the
demotae  on  this  occasion  gave  their  votes  with
leaves  and  not  with  pebbles  as  was  usual,  but  De-
mosthenes simply  calls  them  y\iri(poi.  If  a  pers(Mi
Avas  found  guilty  of  having  usurped  the  rights  of  a
citizen  (a7ro;|/T}<^(^6(r0at),  his  name  was  struck  from
the  lexiarchic  register,  and  he  himself  was  de-
graded to  the  rank  of  an  alien.  But  if  he  did  not
acquiesce  in  the  verdict,  but  appealed  to  the  great
courts  of  justice,  at  Athens,  a  heavier  punishment
awaited  him,  if  he  was  found  guilty  there  also  ;  for
he  was  then  sold  as  a  slave,  and  his  property  waa
confiscated  by  the  state.  (Dionys.  Hal.  de  Isaeo^
c.  16.  p.  617,  ed.  Reiske  ;  Argument,  ad  Demosth.
c.  Euhul.)

H  by  any  accident  the  lexiarchic  registers  had
been  lost  or  destroyed,  a  careful  scrutiny  of  the
same  nature  as  that  described  above,  and  likewise
called  Sia\^'f)(pL(ns,  took  place,  in  order  to  prevent
any  spurious  citizen  from  having  his  name  entered
in  the  new  registers.  (Dem.  l.  c.  p.  1 306.)

It  is  commonly  believed  that  the  Siayp-fi<pKris  was
introduced  at  Athens  in  B.  c.  419,  by  one  Demo-
philus.  (Schomann,  De  Comitiis,  p.  358,  transl. ;
Wachsmuth,  Hellen.  Altertkumsk.  vol.  i,  p.  549,
2nd  ed.)  But  it  has  justly  been  remarked  by
Siebelis  on  Philochorus  {Fragm.  p.  61),  that
Harpocration  (s.  v.  Sia\pT](pi(ns),  the  apparent  au-
thority for  this  supposition,  cannot  be  interpreted
in  this  sense.  One  dLo^-ficpicris  is  mentioned  by
Plutarch  (Pericl.  37)  as  early  as  b.  c.  445.  Clin-
ton (F.  H.'n.  p.  141)  has,  moreover,  shown  that
the  dia\l/-f}(pi(Tis  mentioned  by  Harpocration,  in  the
archonship  of  Archias,  does  not  belong  to  B.  c,  419,
but  to  B.C.  347.  Compare  Hermann,  Marmat  of  the
Pol.  Ant.  of  Greece,  §  123.  n.  14,  &c. ;  and  Scho-
mann, I.  c,  whose  lengthened  account,  however,
should  be  read  with  great  care,  as  he  mfikes  some
statements  which  seem  to  be  irreconcilable  with
each  other,  and  not  founded  on  good  authority.
The  source  from  which  we  derive  most  information
on  this  subject  is  the  oration  of  Demosthenes  against
Eubulides.  [L.  S.J

DIA'RIUM.     [Skrvus.]

DIA'SIA  (Stierto),  a  great  festival  celebrated  at
Athens,  without  the  walls  of  the  city  (e^a  r^y
TrdAcws),  in  honour  of  Zeus,  sumamed  MuKixios
(Thuc.  i.  126).  The  whole  people  took  part  in
it,  and  the  wealthier  citizens  oflfered  victims  (tepeTo),
while  the  poorer  classes  burnt  such  incense  as  their
country  furnished  {^vfxaTa  ixixct>pia),  which  the
scholiast  on  Thucydides  erroneously  explains  as
cakes  in  the  shape  of  animals.  (Compare  Xen.
Anab,  viL  8.   §  4 ;    Luciaa    Tim.  7 ;   Aristoph-


DICASTERION.

Nnh.  402,  &c.)  The  diasia  took  place  in  the  lat-
ter half  of  the  month  of  Anthesterion  (Schol.
ad  Arisioph.  I.  c.)  with  feasting  and  rejoicings,  and
was,  like  most  other  festivals,  accompanied  by  a  fair.
(Aristoph.  AWa  841.)  It  was  this  festival  Jit  which
Cylon  was  enjoined  by  an  oracle  to  take  possession
of  the  acropolis  of  Athens ;  but  he  mistook  the
oracle,  and  made  the  attempt  during  the  celebra-
tion of  the  Olympian  games.  (Compare  Pollux,  i.
20" ;  Suidas  s.  v.)  The  etymology  of  Sidaia,  given
by  most  of  the  ancient  grammarians  (from  Aihs
and  &(rr])  is  false,  the  name  is  a  mere  derivative
from  Sihs,  as 'AiroWwuia  from 'ATr6A\a}y.  [L.S.]
DIASTYLOS.  [Templum.]
DIATRE'TA.  [Vitrum.J
DIAULOS  (SlavXos).     [Stadium.]

DIAZO'MA  (5(aCa)/ia).      [SUBLIGACULUM.]

DICASTE'RION  {Sucaar-fjpiov),  indicates  both
the  aggregate  judges  that  sat  in  court,  and  the
place  itself  in  which  they  held  their  sittings.  For
an  account  of  the  fonnor,  the  reader  is  referred  to
the  article  Dicastes  :  with  respect  to  the  latter,
our  information  is  very  imperfect.  In  the  earlier
ages  there  were  five  celebrated  places  at  Athens  set
apart  for  the  sittings  of  the  judges,  who  had  cog-
nizance of  the  graver  causes  in  which  the  loss  of
human  life  was  avenged  or  expiated,  viz.  the  areio-
pagites  and  the  ephetae.  These  places  were  the
Areiopagus  [Areiopagus],  and  the  inl  TlaWadicp,
itrl  AeAt^tj/iV,  iirl  IlpvTaueicf)^  and  eV  ^pearToT.
The  antiquity  of  these  four  last  is  sufficiently
vouched  for  by  the  archaic  character  of  the  divi-
sion of  the  causes  that  were  appropriated  to  each  :
in  the  first  we  are  told  that  accidental  deaths  were
discussed  ;  in  the  second  homicides  confessed,  but
justified ;  in  the  third  there  were  quasi  trials  of
inanimate  things,  which,  by  falling  and  the  like,
had  occasioned  a  loss  of  human  life  ;  in  the  fourth
homicides  who  had  returned  from  exile,  and  com-
mitted a  fresh  manslaughter,  were  appointed  to  be
tried.  With  respect  to  these  ancient  institutions,
of  which  little  more  than  the  name  remained  when
the  historical  age  commenced,  it  will  be  sufficient
to  observe  that,  in  accordance  with  the  ancient
Greek  feeling  respecting  murder,  viz.,  that  it  par-
took more  of  the  nature  of  a  ceremonial  pollution
than  a  political  offence,  the  presiding  judge  was
invariably  the  king  archon,  the  Athenian  rex  sa-
crorum  ;  and  that  the  places  in  which  the  trials  were
held  were  open  to  the  sky,  to  avoid  the  contami-
nation which  the  judges  might  incur  by  being
under  the  same  roof  with  a  murderer.  (Matthiae,
De  Jud.  Ath.  p.  157.)  The  places,  however,  re-
mained after  the  office  of  the  judges  who  originally
sat  there,  was  abolished ;  and  they  appear  from
Demosthenes  (c.  Neaer.  p.  1348.21)  to  have  been
occasionally  used  by  the  ordinary  Heliastic  judges
when  trying  a  cause  of  the  kind  to  which  they
were  originally  appropriated.  The  most  important
court  in  later  ages  was  the  Heliaea,  in  which,  we
are  told  by  the  grammarians,  the  weightiest
causes  were  decided  ;  and  if  so,  we  may  conclude
the  thesmothetae  were  the  presiding  magistrates.
Besides  this,  ordinary  Heliastic  courts  sate  in  the
Odeium,  in  the  courts  Trigonon,  the  Greater
(MeTCo"),  the  Middle  (MeVoi/),  the  Green,  the
Red,  that  of  Metiochus,  and  the  Parabyston:  but
of  these  we  are  unable  to  fix  the  localities,  or  to
what  magistrates  it  was  usual  to  apportion  them.
They  were  all  painted  with  their  distinctive  co-
lours ;  and,  it  appears,  had  a  letter  of  the  alphabet


DICASTES.  401

inscribed  over  the  doorway.  With  the  exception
of  the  Heliaea,  and  those  in  which  causes  of  mur-
der were  tried,  they  were  probably  protected  from
the  weather.  The  dicasts  sat  upon  wooden
benches,  which  were  covered  with  rugs  or  matting
(i|/£a0ia,)  and  there  Avere  elevations  or  tribunes
{'^ilfxara)^  upon  Avhich  the  antagonist  advocates
stood  during  their  address  to  the  court.  The  space
occupied  by  the  persons  engaged  in  the  trial  was
protected  by  a  railing  (SpxMpdKTois)  from  the  intru-
sion of  the  bystanders ;  but  in  causes  which  bore
upon  the  violation  of  the  mysteries,  a  further  space
of  fifty  feet  all  round  was  enclosed  by  a  rope,  and
the  security  of  this  barrier  guaranteed  by  the
presence  of  the  public  slaves.  (Meier,  Ait.  Proc.
p.  1141.)  [J.  S.  M.]

DICASTES  (^iKaa-T-ns),  in  its  broadest  accep-
tation a  judge,  more  peculiarly  denotes  the  Attic
functionary  of  the  democratic  period,  who,  with  his
colleagues,  was  constitutionally  empowered  to  try
and  pass  judgment  upon  all  causes  and  questions
that  the  laws  and  customs  of  his  country  pronounced
susceptible  of  judicial  investigation.  In  the  circum-
stance of  a  plurality  of  persons  being  selected  from
the  mass  of  private  citizens,  and  associated  tempo-
rarily as  representatives  of  the  whole  body  of  the
people,  adjudicating  between  its  individual  mem-
bers, and  of  such  delegates  SAvearing  an  oath  that
they  would  Avell  and  truly  discharge  the  duties
entrusted  to  them,  there  appears  some  resemblance
betAveen  the  constitution  of  the  Attic  dicasterion
and  an  English  jury,  but  in  nearly  all  other  respects
the  distinctions  between  them  are  as  great  as  the
interrals  of  space  and  time  Avhich  separate  their
several  nations.  At  Athens  the  conditions  of  his
eligibility  Avere,  that  the  dicast  should  be  a  free
citizen,  in  the  enjoyment  of  his  full  franchise
(iTTiTifiia),  and  not  less  than  thirty  years  of  age,
and  of  persons  so  qualified  six  thousand  Avere  se-
lected by  lot  foF  the  service  of  every  year.  Of  the
precise  method  of  their  appointment  our  notices  are
somewhat  obscure  :  but  we  may  gather  from  them
that  it  took  place  eA-ery  year  under  the  conduct  of
the  nine  archons  and  their  official  scribe  ;  that  each
of  these  ten  personages  drew  by  lot  the  names  of
six  hundred  persons  of  the  tribe  assigned  to  him  ;
that  the  whole  number  so  selected  was  again  divided
by  lot  into  ten  sections  of  500  each,  together  with
a  supernumerary  one,  consisting  of  a  thousand  per-
sons, from  among  A\'hom  the  occasional  deficiencies
in  the  sections  of  500  might  be  supplied.  To  each
of  the  ten  sections  one  of  the  ten  first  letters  of  the
alphabet  Avas  appropriated  as  a  distinguishing  mark,
and  a  small  tablet  (TrivotKLou),  inscribed  with  the
letter  of  the  section  and  the  name  of  the  individual,
was  delivered  as  a  certificate  of  his  appointm.ent  to
each  dicast.  Three  bronze  plates  found  in  the
Peiraeeus,  and  described  by  Dodwell  (Travels,  \o\.  i.
pp.  433 — 437),  are  supposed  to  have  served  this
purpose  ;  the  inscriptions  upon  them  consist  of
the  following  letters: — A.  AIOAilPOS  *PEA,
E.  AEINIA2  AAAIET5,  and  B.  ANTIXAPM02
AAMIT,  and  bear  besides  representations  of  owls
and  Gorgon  heads,  .ind  other  devices  symbolic  of
the  Attic  people.  The  thousand  supernumeraries
had  in  all  probability  some  different  token,  but  ot
this  Ave  have  no  certain  knowledge.

Before  proceeding  to  the  exercise  of  his  func-
tions the  dicast  was  obliged  to  SAvear  the  official
oath  ;  which  Avas  done  in  the  earlier  ages  at  a  place
called  Ardettus,  Avithout  the  city,  on  the  banks  of

D    D


402


DICASTES.


the  IHssus,  but  in  after  times  at  some  other  spot,
of  which  we  are  not  informed.  In  the  time  of
Demosthenes  the  oath  (which  is  given  at  full
length  in  Dem.  c.  Tivioc.  p,  746)  asserted  the
qualification  of  the  dicast,  and  a  solemn  engage-
ment by  him  to  discharge  his  office  faithfully  and
incorruptibly  in  general,  as  well  as  in  certain  spe-
cified cases  which  bore  reference  to  the  appoint-
ment of  magistrates,  a  matter  in  no  small  degree
under  the  control  of  the  dicast,  inasmuch  as  few
could  enter  upon  any  office  without  having  had
their  election  submitted  to  a  court  for  its  approba-
tion [Docimasia]  ;  and  besides  these,  it  con-
tained a  general  promise  to  support  the  existing
constitution,  which  the  dicast  would  of  course  be
peculiarly  enabled  to  do,  when  persons  were  ac-
cused before  him  of  attempting  its  subversion.
This  oath  being  taken,  and  the  divisions  made  as
above  mentioned,  it  remained  to  assign  the  courts
to  the  several  sections  of  dicasts  in  which  they
were  to  sit.  This  was  not,  like  the  first,  an  appoint-
ment intended  to  last  during  the  year,  but  took
place  under  the  conduct  of  the  thesmothetae,  d^
tiovo,  every  time  that  it  was  necessary  to  impanel
a  number  of  dicasts.  In  ordinary  cases,  when  one,
two,  or  more  sections  of  500  made  up  the  comple-
ment of  judges  appropriated  to  trying  the  particular
kind  of  cause  in  hand,  the  process  was  extremely
simple.  Two  urns  or  caskets  (/c\7jpcoT^pto)  were
produced,  one  containing  tickets  inscribed  with  the
distinctive  letters  of  the  sections  ;  the  other  fur-
nished, in  like  manner,  with  similar  tickets  to  in-
dicate the  courts  in  which  the  sittings  were  to  be
held.  If  the  cause  was  to  be  tried  by  a  single
section,  a  ticket  would  be  drawn  simultaneously
from  each  urn,  and  the  result  announced,  that  sec-
tion B,  for  instance,  was  to  sit  in  court  T  ;  if  a
thousand  dicasts  were  requisite,  two  tablets  would,
in  like  manner,  be  drawn  from  the  urn  that  re-
presented the  sections,  while  one  was  drawn  from
the  other  as  above  mentioned,  and  the  announce-
ment might  run  that  sections  A  and  B  were  to  sit
in  court  T,  and  the  like.  A  more  complicated
system  must  have  been  adopted  Avhen  Actional
parts  of  the  section  sat  by  themselves,  or  were
added  to  other  whole  sections :  but  what  this  might
have  been  we  can  only  conjecture,  and  it  is  ob-
vious that  some  other  process  of  selection  must
have  prevailed  upon  all  those  occasions  when
judges  of  a  peculiar  qualification  were  required ;
as,  for  instance,  in  the  trial  of  violators  of  the  mys-
teries, when  the  initiated  only  were  allowed  to
judge  ;  and  in  that  of  military  offenders  who  were
left  to  the  justice  of  those  only  whose  comrades
they  were,  or  shoiild  have  been  at  the  time  when
the  offence  was  alleged  to  have  been  committed.
It  is  pretty  clear  that  the  allotment  of  the  dicasts
to  their  several  courts  for  the  day,  took  place  in  the
manner  above-mentioned,  in  the  market  place,  and
that  it  was  conducted  in  all  cases,  except  one,  by
the  thesmothetae  ;  in  that  one,  which  was  when
the  magistrates  and  public  officers  rendered  an  ac-
count of  their  conduct  at  the  expiration  of  their  term
of  office,  and  defended  themselves  against  all  charges
of  malversation  in  it  [Euthyne],  the  logistae
were  the  officiating  personages.  As  soon  as  the
allotment  had  taken  place,  each  dicast  received  a
staff,  on  which  was  painted  the  letter  and  colour  of
the  court  awarded  him,  which  might  serve  both  as
a  ticket  to  procure  admittance,  and  also  to  dis-
tinguish him  from  apy  loiterer  that  might  endea-


DIKE.

vour  clandestinely  to  obtain  a  sitting  after  business
had  begun.

The  dicasts  received  a  fee  for  their  attendance
{rh  ZiKa(TriK6v  or  fiiaOos  SiKacTTiKos).  This  pay-
ment is  said  to  have  been  first  instituted  by  Pe-
ricles (Aristot.  Polit.  ii.  9.  p.  67,  ed.  Gottling  ;
Plut.  Per.  9  ;  Plat.  Gorg,  p.  515)  ;  and  it  is
generally  supposed  from  Aristophanes  {Nub.  840),
who  makes  Strepsiades  say  that  for  the  first  obolus
he  ever  received  as  a  dicast,  he  bought  a  toy  for  his
son,  that  it  was  at  first  only  one  obolus.  Accord-
ing to  the  Scholiast  on  Aristophanes  (Ran.  140)
the  pay  was  subsequently  increased  to  two  oboli,
but  this  seems  to  be  merely  an  erroneous  inference
from  the  passage  of  his  author.  Three  oboli  or  the
triobolon  (rpuvSoXov)  occiu-s  as  early  as  B.  c.  425  in
the  comedies  of  Aristophanes,  and  is  afterwards
mentioned  frequently.  (Aristoph.  Eg.  51,  255,
Vesp.  584,  654,  660,  Ran.  1540,  &c.)  Bockh  has
inferred  from  these  passages  that  the  triobolon  was
introduced  by  Cleon  about  B.  c.  421  ;  butG.  Her-
mann (Praef.  ad  Aristoph.  Nub.  p.  1,  &c.  2nd  edit.)
has  disputed  this  opinion,  at  least  so  far  as  it  is
founded  upon  Aristophanes,  and  thinks  that  the
pay  of  three  oboli  for  the  dicasts  existed  before
that  time.  However  this  may  be,  thus  much  is
certain,  that  the  pay  of  the  dicasts  was  not  the
same  at  all  times,  although  it  is  improbable  that  it
should  ever  have  been  two  oboli.  (Aristot.  ap.
Schol.  ad  Aristoph.  Vesp.  682  ;  Hesych.  s.  v.  Siko-
(TtikSv  ;  Suid.  s.  v.  ^AtacTToi.)  The  payment  was
made  after  every  assembly  of  a  court  of  heliastae
by  the  Colacretae  (Lucian,  Bis  accicsat.  12,  15)  in
the  following  manner.  After  a  citizen  had  been
appointed  by  lot  to  act  as  judge  in  a  particular
court,  he  received  on  entering  the  court  together
with  the  staff  (/SoKTTjpta  or  pd€dos)  a  tablet  or
ticket  {avixSoXov).  After  the  business  of  the  court
was  over,  the  dicast,  on  going  out,  delivered  his
ticket  to  the  prytaneis,  and  received  his  fee  in  re-
turn. (Schol.  ad  Aristoph.  Plut.  277  ;  Suid.  s.  v.
^aKTTjpia  ;  Etymol.  M.  s.  v.  (rh/jLSoKou  ;  Pollux,  viii.
16.)  Those  who  had  come  too  late  bad  no  claim
to  the  triobolon.  (Aristoph.  Vesp.  660.)  The  an-
nual amount  of  these  fees  is  reckoned  by  Aristo-
phanes (Vesp.  560,  &c.  with  the  Schol.)  at  150
talents,  a  sum  which  is  very  high  and  can  perhaps
only  be  applied  to  the  most  flourishing  times  of
Athens.  (Bockh,  Publ.  Econ.  of  Athens.,  p.  227,
2nd  ed.  ;  Meier,  Att.  Proc.  p.  125,  &c.   [.J.S.M.]

DICASTICON  {dlKaCTTlKdv).       [DiCASTKS.]

DIKE'  (St/cTj),  signifies  generally  any  proceed-
ings at  law  by  one  party  directly  or  mediately
against  others.  (Harpocrat.  s.  v.  ;  Pollux,  viii.  40,
41.)  The  object  of  all  such  actions  is  to  protect
the  body  politic,  or  one  or  more  of  its  individual
members,  from  injury  and  aggression  ;  a  distinc-
tion which  has  in  most  countries  suggested  the
division  of  all  causes  into  two  great  classes,  the
public  and  the  private,  and  assigned  to  each  its
peculiar  form  and  treatment.  At  Athens  the  first
of  these  was  implied  by  the  terms  public  ^'iKai,  or
aywvis,  or  still  more  peculiarly  by  ypacpal :  causes
of  the  other  class  were  termed  private  S'lKai  or
aycaves,  or  simply  SiKai  in  its  limited  sense.  There
is  a  still  further  subdivision  ofypacpai  into  ^■qjxoaiai
and  ifStai,  of  which  the  former  is  somewhat  analo-
gous to  impeachments  for  offences  directly  against
the  state  ;  the  latter,  to  criminal  prosecutions,  in
which  the  state  appears  as  a  party  mediately  in-
jured in  the  violence  or  other  wrong  donp  to  indi-


DIKE.

vidual  citizens.  It  will  be  observed  that  cases
frequently  arise,  which,  with  reference  to  the
wrong  complained  of,  may  with  equal  propriety  be
brought  before  a  court  in  the  form  of  the  ypacpi]
last  mentioned,  or  in  that  of  an  ordinary  SZ/ct;,  and
under  these  circumstances  the  laws  of  Athens  gave
the  prosecutor  an  ample  choice  of  methods  to
vindicate  his  rights  by  private  or  public  proceed-
ings (Dem,  c.  Andoc.  p.  601),  much  in  the  same
way  as  a  plaintiff  in  modern  times  may,  for  the
same  offence,  prefer  an  indictment  for  assault,  or
bring  his  civil  action  for  trespass  on  the  person.
It  will  be  necessary  to  mention  some  of  the  prin-
cipal distinctions  in  the  treatment  of  causes  of  the
two  great  classes  above  mentioned,  before  proceed-
ing to  discuss  the  forms  and  treatment  of  the  pri-
vate lawsuit.

In  a  S</c77,  only  the  person  whose  rights  were
alleged  to  be  affected,  or  the  legal  protector  (Kvpios)
of  such  person,  if  a  minor  or  otherwise  incapable
of  appearing  suo  jure,  was  peiTnitted  to  institute
an  action  as  plaintiff  ;  in  public  causes,  with  the
exception  of  some  few  in  which  the  person  injured
or  his  familj'-  were  peculiarly  bound  and  interested
to  act,  any  free  citizen,  and  sometimes,  when  the
Btate  was  directly  attacked,  almost  any  alien,  was
empowered  to  do  so.  In  all  private  causes,  except
those  of  e|ouA7jy,  fiiaiwu,  and  e^aipeaews,  the
penalty  or  other  subject  of  contention  was  ex-
clusively recovered  by  the  plaintiff,  while  in  most
others  the  state  alone,  or  jointly  with  the  prose-
cutor, profited  by  the  pecuniary  punishment  of  the
offender.  The  court  fees,  called  prytaneia,  were
paid  in  private  but  not  in  public  causes,  and  a
public  prosecutor  that  compromised  the  action  with
the  defendant  was  in  most  cases  punished  by  a
fine  of  a  thousand  drachmae  and  a  modified  dis-
franchisement, while  there  was  no  legal  impedi-
ment at  any  period  of  a  private  lawsuit  to  the
reconciliation  of  the  litigant  parties.  (Meier,  Att.
Process,  p.  163.)

The  proceedings  in  the  Siktj  were  commenced
by  a  summons  to  the  defendant  (irpSaKKyjais)
to  appear  on  a  certain  day  before  the  proper
magistrate  (elaaywycvs),  and  there  answer  the
charges  preferred  against  him.  (Arist.  Niib.  1221,
Av.  1046.)  This  summons  was  often  served  by
the  plaintiff  in  person,  accompanied  by  one  or
two  witnesses  [Cleteres],  whose  names  were
endorsed  upon  the  declaration  (A.^|is  or  eyKArnj-a).
If  there  were  an  insufficient  service  of  the  sum-
mons, the  lawsuit  was  styled  a-vrpSaKKriros,  and
dismissed  by  the  magistrate.  (Hesych.)  From
the  circumstance  of  the  same  officer  that  conducted
the  anacrisis  being  also  necessarily  present  at  the
trial,  and  as  there  were  besides  dies  nefasti
(aTTo^pdSes)  and  festivals,  during  which  none,  or
only  some  special  causes  could  be  commenced,  the
power  of  the  plaintiff  in  selecting  his  time  was,  of
course,  in  some  degree  limited  ;  and  of  several
causes,  we  know  that  the  time  for  their  institution
was  particularised  by  law.  (Aristoph.  iVw&.  1190.)
There  were  also  occasions  upon  which  a  personal
arrest  of  the  party  proceeded  against  took  the
place  of,  or  at  all  events  was  simultaneous  with,
the  service  of  the  summons  ;  as  for  instance,
when  the  plaintiff  doubted  whether  such  party
would  not  leave  the  coimtry  to  avoid  answering
the  action  ;  and  accordingly  we  find  that  in  such
cases  (Dem.  c.  Zcnoth.  p.  890,  c.  Arislog.  p.  778)
an  Athenian  plaintiff  might  compel  a  foreigner  to


DIKE.  403

accompany  him  to  the  polcmarch's  office,  and  there
produce  bail  for  his  appearance,  or  failing  to  do  so,
submit  to  remain  in  custody  till  the  trial.  The
word  Kanyyvav  is  peculiarly  used  of  this  proceed-
ing. Between  the  service  of  the  summons  and  ap-
pearance of  the  parties  before  the  magistrate,  it  is
very  probable  that  the  law  prescribed  the  inter-
vention of  a  period  of  five  days.  (Meier,  Att.
Process^  p.  580.)  If  both  parties  appeared,  the
proceedings  commenced  by  the  plaintiff  putting  in
his  declaration,  and  at  the  same  time  depositing  his
share  of  the  court  fees  {-npyrav^la)^  the  non-pay-
ment of  which  was  a  fatal  objection  to  the  further
progress  of  a  cause.  (Matth.  DeJud.  Ath.  p.  261.)
These  were  very  trifling  in  amount.  If  the  sub-
ject of  litigation  was  rated  at  less  than  100
drachmae,  nothing  was  paid  ;  if  at  more  than  100
drachmae  and  less  than  1000  drachmae,  3  drachmae
was  a  sufficient  deposit,  and  so  on  in  proportion.
If  the  defendant  neglected  or  refused  to  make  his
payment,  it  is  natural  to  conclude  that  he  under-
went the  penalties  consequent  upon  non-appear-
ance ;  in  all  cases  the  successful  party  was  reim-
bursed his  prytaneia  b}-^  the  other.  (Meier,  Att.
Process,  p.  6 1 3.)  The  ■jrapaKaraSoX.T)  was  another
deposit  in  some  cases,  but  paid  by  the  plaintiff
only.  This  was  not  in  the  nature  nor  of  the
usual  amount  of  the  court  fees,  but  a  kind  of
penalty,  as  it  was  forfeited  by  the  suitor  in  case  he
failed  in  establishing  his  cause.  In  a  suit  against
the  treasury,  it  was  fixed  at  a  fifth  ;  in  that  of  a
claim  to  the  property  of  a  deceased  person  by  an
alleged  heir  or  devisee,  at  a  tenth  of  the  value
sought  to  be  recovered.  (Matth.  De  Jud.  Ath.
p.  260.)  If  the  action  was  not  intended  to  be
brought  before  an  heliastic  court,  but  merely  sub-
mitted to  the  arbitration  of  a  diaetetes  [Diae-
TETEs],  a  course  which  was  competent  to  the
plaintiff  to  adopt  in  all  private  actions  (Hudt-
walcker,  De  Diaetet.  p.  35),  the  drachma  paid  in
the  place  of  the  deposit  above  mentioned  bore  the
namie  of  TrapaaTaais.  The  deposits  being  made,  it
became  the  duty  of  the  magistrate,  if  no  manifest
objection  appeared  on  the  face  of  the  declaration,
to  cause  it  to  be  written  out  on  a  tablet,  and  ex-
posed for  the  inspection  of  the  public  on  the  wall
or  other  place  that  served  as  the  cause  list  of  his
court.     (Meier,  Att.  Process,  p.  605.)

The  magistrate  then  appointed  a  day  for  the
further  proceedings  of  the  anacrisis  [Anacrisis],
which  was  done  iDy  drawing  lots  for  the  priority
in  case  there  was  a  plurality  of  causes  instituted  at
the  same  time  ;  and  to  this  proceeding  the  phrase
Kayx<^v^^v  SiK-Tjv,  which  generally  denotes  to  bring
an  action,  is  to  be  primarily  attributed.  If  the
planitiff  failed  to  appear  at  the  anacrisis,  the  suit»
of  course,  fell  to  the  ground ;  if  the  defendant
made  default,  judgment  passed  against  him.
(Meier,  Att.  Process,  p.  623.)  Both  parties,  how-
ever, received  an  official  summons  before  theii
non-appearance  was  made  the  ground  of  either  re-
sult. An  affidavit  might  at  this,  as  well  as  at
other  periods  of  the  action,  be  made  in  behalf  of
a  person  unable  to  attend  upon  the  given  day,
and  this  would,  if  allowed,  have  the  effect  of  post-
poning further  proceedings  (^{nrufiocria) ;  it  might,
however,  be  combated  by  a  counter  affidavit  to  the
effect,  that  the  alleged  reason  was  unfounded  or
otherv/ise  insufficient  {avOvTrco/jLoa-ia)  ;  and  a  ques-
tion would  arise  upon  this  point,  the  decision  of
which,  when  adverse  to  the  defendant,  would
I)  n  2


404


DIKE.


render  him  liaHe  to  the  penalty  of  contumacy.
(Dem.  c.  Olymp.  p.  1174.)  The  plaintitf  was  in
this  case  said  ip-fifirfu  lAeTi/ :  the  defendant,  ipi][xrtv
6(p\f7v,  diK7)v  being  the  word  omitted  in  both
phrases.  If  the  cause  were  primarily  brought  be-
fore an  umpire  (StotTTjT'ijs),  the  anacrisis  was  con-
ducted by  him  ;  in  cases  of  appeal  it  was  dispensed
■with  as  unnecessary.  The  anacrisis  began  Avith
the  affidavit  of  the  plaintiif  (Trpowfioaia),  then
followed  the  answer  of  the  defendant  {avTicp-oaia
or  avTiypaipi]  [Antigraphe],  then  the  parties  pro-
duced their  respective  Avitnesses,  and  reduced  their
evidence  to  writing,  and  put  in  originals,  or  authen-
ticated copies,  of  all  the  records,  deeds,  and  con-
tracts that  might  be  useful  in  establishing  their
case,  as  well  as  memoranda  of  offers  and  requisi-
tions then  made  by  either  side  (irpoK\rj(rcis).
The  whole  of  the  documents  were  then,  if  the
cause  took  a  straight-forward  course  (ev9v5iKla\
enclosed  on  the  last  day  of  the  anacrisis  in  a
casket  (6Xi'»'os),  which  was  sealed  and  entrusted
to  the  custody  of  the  presiding  magistrate,  till  it
•was  produced  and  opened  at  the  trial.  During  the
interval  no  alteration  in  its  contents  was  per-
mitted, and  accordinglj'-  evidence  that  had  been
discovered  after  the  anacrisis  was  not  producible
at  the  trial.  (Dem.  c.  Boeot.  i.  p.  999.)  In  some
causes,  the  trial  before  the  dicasts  was  by  law  ap-
pointed to  come  on  within  a  given  time  ;  in  such
as  were  not  provided  for  by  such  regulations,  we
may  suppose  that  it  would  principally  depend  upon
the  leisure  of  the  magistrate.  The  parties,  how-
ever, might  defer  the  day  (Kvpid)  by  mutual  con-
sent. (Dem.  c.  Phaen.  p.  1042.)  Upon  the  court
being  assembled,  the  magistrate  called  on  the  cause
(Platner,  Process  und  Klaffen^  vol.  i.  p.  1B2),  and
the  plaintiif  opened  his  case.  At  the  commence-
ment of  the  speech,  the  proper  officer  (6  i(f)'  vSwp)
filled  the  clepsydra  with  water.  As  long  as  the
water  flowed  from  this  vessel,  the  orator  was  per-
mitted to  speak  ;  if,  however,  evidence  was  to  be
read  by  the  officer  of  the  court,  or  a  law  recited,
the  water  was  stopped  till  the  speaker  recommenced.
The  quantity  of  water,  or,  in  other  words,  the  length
of  the  speeches,  was  not  by  any  means  the  same
in  all  causes :  in  the  speech  against  Macartatus,
and  elsewhere,  one  amphora  only  was  deemed
sufficient ;  eleven  are  mentioned  in  the  impeach-
ment of  Aeschines  for  misconduct  in  his  embassy.
In  some  few  cases,  as  those  of  Ka/cwtrty,  according
to  Harpocration,  no  limit  was  prescribed.  The
speeches  were  sometimes  interrupted  by  the  crj^
KaT6.§a — "  go  down,"  in  effect,  "  cease  speaking"
—  from  the  dicasts,  which  placed  the  advocate  in
a  serious  dilemma  ;  for  if  after  this  he  still  per-
sisted in  his  address,  he  could  hardly  fail  to  offend
those  who  bid  him  stop  ;  if  he  obeyed  the  order,
it  might  be  found,  after  the  votes  had  been  taken,
that  it  had  emanated  from  a  minority  of  the
dicasts.  (Aristoph.  Vesp.  973.)  After  the  speeches
of  the  advocates,  which  were  in  general  two  on
each  side,  and  the  incidental  reading  of  the  docu-
mentary and  other  evidence,  the  dicasts  proceeded
to  give  their  judgment  by  ballot.     [Psephos.]

When  the  principal  point  at  issue  was  decided  in
favour  of  the  plaintiff,  there  followed  in  many  cases
a  further  discussion  as  to  the  amount  of  damages,
or  penalty,  which  the  defendant  sliould  pay.
[TiMEMA.]  The  method  of  voting  upon  this
question  seems  to  have  varied,  in  that  the  dicasts
used  a  small  tablet  instead  of  a  ballot-ball,  upon


DICTATOR.

which  those  that  approved  of  the  heavier  penalty
drew  a  long  line,  the  others  a  short  one.  (Aristoph.
Vesp.  167.)  Upon  judgment  being  given  in  a  pri-
vate suit,  the  Athenian  law  left  its  execution  very
much  in  the  hands  of  the  successful  party,  who  was
empowered  to  seize  the  movables  of  his  antagonist
as  a  pledge  for  the  payment  of  the  money,  or  insti-
tute an  action  of  ejectment  (i^ovKris)  against  the
refractory  debtor.  The  judgment  of  a  court  of
dicasts  was  in  general  decisive  (S/ktj  avTore\i)s)  ;
but  upon  certain  occasions,  as,  for  instance,  when  a
gross  case  of  peijury  or  conspiracy  could  be  proved
by  the  unsuccessful  party  to  have  operated  to  hig
disadvantage,  the  cause,  upon  the  conviction  of
such  conspirators  or  witnesses,  might  be  com-
menced rfe  wovo.  [Appellatio  (Greek).]  In  ad-
dition to  which,  the  party  against  whom  judgment
had  passed  by  default,  had  the  power  to  revive
the  cause,  upon  proving  that  his  non-appearance
in  court  was  inevitable  (tV  ^p'hfJ-w  avriXaxeTy^
Platner,  Process  und  Klagen^  vol.  i.  p.  396)  ;  this,
however,  was  to  be  exercised  within  two  months
after  the  original  judgment.  If  the  parties  were
willing  to  refer  the  matter  to  an  umpire  (5tat-
TT/T^s),  it  was  in  the  power  of  the  magistrate
to  transfer  the  proceedings  as  they  stood  to  that
officer  ;  and  in  the  same  way,  if  the  diaetetes  con-
sidered the  matter  in  hand  too  high  for  him,  he
might  refer  it  to  the  ^Icrayoiyivs^  to  be  brought  by
him  before  an  heliastic  court.  The  whole  of  the
proceedings  before  the  diaetetes  were  analogous  to
those  before  the  dicasts,  and  bore  equally  the  name
of  SfwTj :  but  it  seems  that  the  phrase  avriXax^'^v
T V  M  olffav  is  peculiarly  applied  to  the  revival  of
a  cause  before  the  umpire  in  which  judgment  had
passed  by  default.

The  following  are  the  principal  actions,  both
public  and  private,  which  we  read  of  in  the  Greek
writers,  and  which  are  briefly  discussed  under
their  several  heads  :  —

AtKTj  or  Tpacp-f)  —  'AdiKias  ffphs  rhv  Stjjuoi':
'Aycwpyiov:  *  Ay  pa(piov:  'Aypd(pov  fieToiWov:
AIkIus  :  'AXoyiov  :  'A/xgAcicewy :  'AfxeKiov :  'Ava-
ycoyrjs  :  * Avavfxaxiov :  'Av^pa-nohiaixov :  'Aj/Spo-
nrdhcav .  'AiroTTJo-ecos  rov  Srjfxov  :  'A(pop/xris :  'Airo-
A6/i|/ecos :  'ATToirefirpews  :  'AwoaTaaiov :  'AirpoffTa-
(riov.  'Apyiasi'Apyvplov:  'Acrf§elas:  'AarpaTeias:
AvTOfjLoXlas  :  AvTOT€\i]s  :  BeSuiaxreus :  Biaiwv  :
B\d§7]S  :  BouXeuoreojs  :  KaKTjyopias  :  KaKwaews  :
Ka/coTexvtaJv  ;  KdpTrov :  KaraXvffews  rov  Sjjfiov  :
KaracTKOTrris  :  Xp4ovs  :  Xwpiov  :  K\oirrjs  :  AiKacr-
fjLov  :  AeiKias  :  Adpau :  Accpo^ep'ias  :  'Eyyvr}s  :
'EvoiKiov  :  'EiriTpiTjpapx'ri.uaTos  :  'EiriTpoTrTJs  :  'E|a-
y(ay7Js:  'ElatpeVews:  'E^ov\r]s:  'ApTrayrjs:  Elpyfiov:
'Eraip-fjaews  :  'lepocrvXlas  :  'TTrogoAyjs  :  "TSpeus  :
AeiiroixapTvpiov ;  Aencovavriov  :  Aenro(rTpaTiov  :
AeiTTOTa^iov :  MicrOou :  Micrdaxrews  oXkov  :  Moi-
Xeias  :  'Nofi'KTiJ.aTosdiacpOopas  :  OIkIus:  Hapa/caTo-
Qi]K7)s  :  Tlapavolas  :  Uapavofxcov  :  napanpecrSeias :
Tlapei(Typa<pri9  :  ^apfidKwv :  ^6uov  :  ^opas  a<pai'ov5
Koi  iJ.ed7]iJ.eplvT]s :  ^dopas  rav  fXevdcpujp  :  Ilpoo-
yoiyias  :  UpoSocrias  :  Upoeia-fpopas  :  UpoiKos  :  Veu-
5eyypa(l>ris :  "VevdoKX-qTflas  :  "Vevdofxaprvpiuv  :
'VriTopiKT] :  "XKvpia  :  'Zitov  :  '2,vKo<pavTias  :  Su/uga-
Aoi'wi',  or  'S,vpQt]kwv  TrapaSdaecDS :  Tpavuaros  ix
TTpovoias  :  TvpavviSos.  [J.  S.  M.]

DFCROTUM.     [Navis.]

DICTA'TOR,  an  extraordinary'  magistrate  at
Rome.  The  name  is  of  Latin  origin,  and  the  of-
fice probably  existed  in  many  Latin  towns  before  it
was  introduced  into  Rome  (Dionys.  v.  74).   W»


DICTATOR.

find  it  in  Lanuvium  even  in  very  late  times  (Cic.
pro  Mil.  10).  At  Rome  this  magistrate  was  ori-
ginally called  magister  populi  and  not  diciator^  and
in  the  sacred  books  he  was  always  designated  by
the  former  name  down  to  the  latest  times.  (Cic.
lie  Hep.  i.  40,  de  Leg.  iii.  3,  de  Fin.  iii.  22  ;  Var,
X.  L.  V.  82,  ed.  Miiller  ;  Festus,  s.  v.  optima  lex,
p.  198,  ed.  Muller.)

On  the  establishment  of  the  Roman  republic
the  government  of  the  state  was  entrusted  to  two
consuls,  that  the  citizens  might  be  the  better  pro-
tected against  the  tyrannical  exercise  of  the  supreme
power.  But  it  was  soon  felt  that  circumstances
might  arise  in  which  it  was  of  importance  for  the
safety  of  the  state  that  the  government  should  be
vested  in  the  hands  of  a  single  person,  who  should
possess  for  a  season  absolute  power,  and  from  whose
decision  there  should  be  no  appeal  to  any  other
body.  Thus  it  came  to  pass  that  in  B.  c.  501,
nine  years  after  the  expulsion  of  the  Tarquins,  the
dictatorship  (dictatura)  was  instituted.  The  name
of  the  first  dictator  and  the  immediate  reason  of  liis
appointment  were  differently  stated  in  the  annalists.
The  oldest  authorities  mention  T.  Larcius,  one  of
the  consuls  of  the  year,  as  the  first  dictator,  but
others  ascribed  this  honour  to  M'. Valerius.  (Liv.  ii.
1 8.)  Livy  states  (/.  c.)  that  a  formidable  war  with
the  Latins  led  to  the  appointment  ;  and  he  also
found  mentioned  in  the  annals  that  the  consuls  of
this  year  were  suspected  of  belonging  to  the  party
of  the  Tarquins  ;  but  in  the  latter  case  T.  Larcius
could  not  have  been  one  of  the  consuls.  Dionysius
relates  at  length  (v.  63 — 70)  that  the  plebs,  who
were  oppressed  by  the  weight  of  their  debts,  took
advantJige  of  the  danger  of  the  republic  to  obtain
some  mitigation  of  their  sufferings,  and  refused  to
serve  in  the  army,  and  that  thereupon  recourse
was  had  to  a  dictator  to  bring  them  to  their  duty.
But  as  Livy  makes  no  mention  of  any  internal
disturbances  in  this  j'ear,  and  does  not  speak  of
any  commotions  on  account  of  debts  till  ibur  years
subsequently,  we  may  conclude  that  Dionysius  has
in  this  case,  as  he  has  in  many  others,  deserted  the
annalists  in  order  to  give  what  appeared  to  him  a
more  satisfactory  reason.  It  is  true  that  the  pa-
tricians frequently  availed  themselves  of  the  dic-
tatorship as  a  means  of  oppressing  the  plebs  ;  but
it  is  certainly  unnecessary  to  seek  the  first  institu-
tion of  the  office  in  any  other  cause  than  the  simple
one  mentioned  by  Livy,  namely,  the  great  danger
with  which  the  state  was  threatened.  Modern
scholars  have  stated  other  rejisons  for  the  establish-
ment of  the  dictatorship,  which  are  so  purely  con-
jectural and  possess  such  little  inherent  probability,
that  they  do  not  require  any  refutation.  Thus
Niebuhr  infers  (Hist,  of  Rome,\o\.  \.  p.  564)  from
the  Roman  dictator  being  appointed  only  for  six
months,  that  he  was  at  the  head  both  of  Rome  and
of  the  Latin  league,  and  that  a  Latin  dictator  pos-
sessed the  supreme  power  for  the  other  six  months
of  the  year  ;  but  this  supposition,  independent  of
other  considerations,  is  contradicted  by  the  fact,
that  in  the  year  in  which  the  dictator  was  first  ap-
pointed, Rome  and  the  Latins  were  preparing  for
war  with  one  another.  In  like  manner  Huschke
(Ver/assung  d.  Servius  TuUiiis,  p.  516)  starts  the
strange  hypothesis,  that  the  dictatorship  was  part  of
the  constitution  of  Servius  TuUius,  and  that  a  dic-
tator was  to  be  nominated  every  decennium  for  the
purpose  of  fixing  the  davus  annalis  and  of  holding
the  census.


DICTATOR.


40.S


By  the  original  law  respecting  the  appointment
of  a  dictator  {lex  de  didatore  creando)  no  one  was
eligible  for  this  office,  unless  he  had  previously
been  consul  (Liv.  ii.  18).  We  find,  however,  a
few  instances  in  which  this  law  was  not  observed.
(See  e.g.  Liv.  iv.  26,  48,  vii.  24.)  When  a  dic-
tator was  considered  necessary,  the  senate  passed  a
senatus  consultum  that  one  of  the  consuls  should
nominate  (dicere)  a  dictator  ;  and  without  a  pre-
vious decree  of  the  senate  the  consuls  had  not  the
power  of  naming  a  dictator,  although  the  contrary
used  to  be  asserted  in  most  works  on  Roman  an-
tiquities. In  almost  all  cases  we  find  mention  of
a  previous  decree  of  the  senate  (see  e.  g.  ii.  30,  iv.
17,  21,  23,  26,  57,  vi.  2,  vii.  21,  viii.  17,  ix.  29,
X.  1 1,  xxii.  57) ;  and  in  the  few  instances,  in  which
the  appointment  by  the  consul  is  alone  spoken  of,
the  senatus  consultum  is  probably  not  mentioned,
simply  because  it  was  a  matter  of  course.  Niebuhr
indeed  supposes  {Hist,  of  Rome.,  vol.  i.  p.  567)
that  the  dictator  was  originally  created  by  the
curiae,  like  the  kings.  According  to  his  view  the
senate  proposed  a  person  as  dictator,  whom  the
curiae  elected  and  the  consul  then  proclaimed
{dixit)  ;  and  after  this  proclamation  the  newly
elected  magistrate  received  the  imperium  from  the
curiae.  Niebuhr  further  supposes  that  the  right  of
conferring  the  imperium  may  have  led  the  curiae
to  dispense  with  voting  on  the  preliminary  nomina-
tion of  the  senate.  But  this  election  of  the  dic-
tator by  the  curiae  is  only  supported  by  two  pas-
sages, one  of  Dionj'sius  and  the  other  in  Festus,
neither  of  which  is  conclusive  in  favour  of  Niebuhr's
view.  Dionysius  simply  says  (v.  70)  that  the  dic-
tiitor  should  be  one  "  whom  the  senate  should
nominate  and  the  people  approve  of"  {iTrv^T\(p'ic
T7?Tat),  but  this  may  merely  refer  to  the  granting
of  the  imperium  by  the  curiae.  In  Festus  (p.  198)
we  read  "  M.  Valerius  —  qui  primus  magister  a
populo  creatus  est ; "  but  even  if  there  were  no
corruption  in  this  passage,  we  need  only  under-
stand that  a  dictator  w.as  appointed  in  virtue  of  a
senatus  consultum,  and  certainly  need  not  suppose
that  by  populus  the  curiae  are  intended :  there
can  however  be  hardly  any  doubt  that  the  passage
is  corrupt,  and  that  the  true  reading  is  "  qui
primus  magister  populi  creatus  est."  We  may
therefore  safely  reject  the  election  by  the  curiae.

The  nomination  or  proclamation  of  the  dictator
by  the  consul  was,  however,  necessary  in  all  cases.
It  was  always  made  by  the  consul,  probably  with-
out any  witnesses,  between  midnight  and  morning,
and  with  the  observance  of  the  auspices  {surgens  or
oriens  nocte  silentio  *  dictatorem  dicebat,  Liv.  viii.
23,  ix.  38,  xxiii.  22  ;  Dionys,  x.  11).  The  tech-
nical word  for  this  nomination  or  proclamation  was
dicere  (seldom  creare  ox  facer e^.  So  essential  was
the  nomination  of  the  consuls,  that  we  find  the
senate  on  one  occasion  having  recourse  to  the  tri-
bunes of  the  people  to  compel  the  consuls  to  nomi-
nate a  dictator,  when  they  had  refused  to  do  so
(Liv.  iv.  26)  ;  and  after  the  battle  at  the  lake
Trasimenus,  when  all  communication  with  the  sur-
viving consul  was  cut  off,  the  senate  provided  for
the  emergency  by  causing  the  people  to  elect  a
prodictator,  because,  says  Livy,  the  people  could
not  elect  {creare)  a  dictator,  having  never  up  to
that  time  exercised  such  a  power  (Liv.  xxii.  8).

*  Respecting  the  meaning  of  silentium  in  rela-
tion to  the  auspices,  see  Augub,  p.  176,  b.

D  D   3


406


DICTATOR.


DICTATOR.


m


in  the  same  spirit  it  became  a  question,  whether
the  tribuni  militum  with  consuhir  power  could
nominate  a  dictator,  and  they  did  not  venture  to
do  so  till  the  augurs  had  been  consulted  and  de-
clared it  allowable  (Liv.  iv.  21).  The  nomination
of  Sulla  by  an  interrex  and  of  Caesar  by  a  praetor
was  contrary  to  all  precedent  and  altogether  illegal.
(Comp.  Cie.  ad  Ait.  ix.  15.)  The  senate  seems  to
have  usually  mentioned  in  their  decree  the  name
of  the  person  whom  the  consul  was  to  nominate
(Liv.  iv.  17,21,2,%  46,  vi.  2,  vii.  12,  viii.  17,  ix.
29,  X.  11,  xxii,  57)  ;  but  that  the  consul  was  not
absolutely  bound  to  nominate  the  person  whom  the
senate  had  named,  is  evident  from  the  cases  in
which  the  consuls  appointed  persons  in  opposition
to  the  wishes  of  the  senate  (Liv.  viii.  12,  Epit.
1 9  ;  Suet.  Tib.  2.)  It  is  doubtful  what  rule  was
adopted,  or  whether  any  existed,  for  the  purpose
of  determining  which  of  the  two  consuls  should
nominate  the  dictator.  In  one  case  we  read  that
the  nomination  was  made  by  the  consul  who  had
the  fasces  (Liv.  viii.  12),  in  another  that  it  was
decided  by  lot  (iv,  26),  and  in  a  third  that  it  was
matter  of  agreement  among  themselves  (iv.  21).
In  later  times  the  senate  usually  entrusted  the
office  to  the  consul  who  was  nearest  at  hand.  The
nomination  took  place  at  Rome,  as  a  general  rule  ;
and  if  the  consuls  were  absent,  one  of  them  was
recalled  to  the  city,  whenever  it  was  practicable
(Liv.  vii.  19,  xxiii.  22)  ;  but  if  this  could  not  be
done,  a  senatus  consultum  authorising  the  appoint-
ment was  sent  to  the  consul,  who  thereupon  made
the  nomination  in  the  camp.  (Liv,  vii.  21,  viii.  23,
ix.  38,  XXV.  2,  xxvii.  5.)  Nevertheless,  the  rule
was  maintained  that  the  nomination  could  not  take
place  outside  of  the  Ac/er  Rovianus^  though  the
meaning  of  this  expression  was  extended  so  as  to
include  the  whole  of  Italia.  Thus  we  find  the
senate  in  the  second  Punic  war  opposing  the  nomi-
nation of  a  dictator  in  Sicily,  because  it  was  out-
side of  the  ager  Romanus  {extra  agrum  Romanum —
eum  autem  Italia  terminari.,  Liv.  xxvii.  5).

Originally  the  dictator  was  of  course  a  patrician.
The  first  plebeian  dictator  was  C.  Marcius  Rutilus,
nominated  in  B.  c.  356  by  the  plebeian  consul  M.
Popillius  Laenas.     (Liv.  vii.  17.)

The  reasons,  which  led  to  the  appointment  of  a
dictator,  required  that  there  should  be  only  one  at
a  time.  The  only  exception  to  this  rule  occurred
in  B.  c.  216  after  the  battle  of  Cannae,  when  M.
Fabius  Buteo  was  nominated  dictator  for  the  pur-
pose of  filling  up  the  vacancies  in  the  senate,  al-
though M.  Junius  Pera  was  discharging  the  regular
duties  of  the  dictator  ;  but  Fabius  resigned  on  the
day  of  his  nomination  on  the  ground  that  there
could  not  be  two  dictators  at  the  same  time.  (Liv.
xxiii.  22,  23  ;  Plut.  Fab.  9.)  The  dictators  that
•were  appointed  for  carrying  on  the  business  of  the
state  were  said  to  be  nominated  rei  geruvdae  causa.,
or  sometimes  seditionis  sedamdae  causa  ;  and  upon
them,  as  well  as  upon  the  other  magistrates,  the
imperium  was  conferred  by  a  I^ex  Cwtiata.  ( Liv.
ix.  38,  39  ;  Dionys.  v.  70.)  Dictators  were  also
frequently  appointed  for  some  special  purpose,  and
frequently  one  of  small  importance,  of  whom  I'ur-
ther  mention  will  be  made  below.  At  present  we
confine  our  remarks  to  the  duties  and  powers  of
the  dictator  rei  gerundae  causa.

The  dictatorship  was  limited  to  six  months  (Cic.
de  Leg.  iii.  3  ;  Liv.  iii.  29,  ix.  34,  xxiii.  23  ;  Dio-
nys. V.  70,  X.  25  ;  Dion  Cass,  xxxvi.  17,  xliu  21  ;


Zonar.  vii.  1 3),  and  no  instances  occur  in  which  ^
person  held  this  office  for  a  longer  time,  for  the
dictatorships  of  Sulla  and  Caesar  are  of  course  not
to  be  taken  into  account.  On  the  contrary,  though
a  dictator  was  appointed  for  six  months,  he  often
resigned  his  office  long  previously,  immediately
after  he  had  despatched  the  business  for  which  he
had  been  appointed.  (Liv.  iii.  29,  iv.  46,  vi.  29.)
As  soon  as  the  dictator  was  nominated,  a  kind  of
suspension  took  place  with  respect  to  the  consuls
and  all  the  other  magistrates,  with  the  exception
of  the  tribuni  plebis.  It  is  frequently  stated
that  the  duties  and  functions  of  all  the  ordinary
magistrates  entirely  ceased,  and  some  writers  have
even  gone  so  far  as  to  say  that  the  consuls  abdi-
cated (Polyb.  iii.  87  ;  Cic.  de  Leg.  iii.  3  ;  Dionys.
V.  70,  72)  ;  but  this  is  not  a  correct  way  of  stating
the  facts  of  the  case.  The  regular  magistrates
continued  to  discharge  the  duties  of  their  various
offices  under  the  dictator,  but  they  were  no  longer
independent  officers,  but  were  subject  to  the  higher
imperium  of  the  dictator,  and  obliged  to  obey  his
orders  in  every  thing.  We  often  find  the  dictator
and  the  consuls  at  the  head  of  separate  armies  at
the  same  time,  and  carrying  on  war  independent  of
one  another  (Liv.  ii.  30,  viii.  29)  ;  we  see  that
the  soldiers  levied  by  the  dictator  took  the  oath  of
allegiance  to  the  consul  (Liv.  ii.  32),  and  that  the
consuls  could  hold  the  consular  comitia  during  a
dictatorship.  (Liv.  xxiii.  23.)  All  this  shows  that
the  consuls  did  not  resign  their  functions,  although
they  Avere  subject  to  the  imperium  of  the  dictator  ;
and  accordingl}',  as  soon  as  the  dictator  abdicated,
they  again  entered  forthwith  into  the  full  posses-
sion of  the  consular  power.

The  superiority  of  the  dictator's  power  to  that  of
the  consuls  consisted  chiefly  in  the  three  following
points  —  greater  independence  of  the  senate,  more
extensive  power  of  punishment  without  any  ap-
peal (provocatio)  from  their  sentence  to  the  people,
and  irresponsibility.  To  these  three  points,  must
of  course  be  added  that  he  was  not  fettered  by  a  col-
league. We  may  naturally  suppose  that  the  dic-
tator would  usually  act  in  unison  with  the  senate  ;
but  it  is  expressly  stated  that  in  many  cases  where
the  consuls  required  the  co-operation  of  the  senate,
the  dictator  could  act  on  his  own  responsibility.
(Polyb.  iii.  87.)  For  how  long  a  time  the  dic-
tatorship was  a  magistratus  sine  prcnmcatione^  is
uncertain.  That  there  was  originallj'-  no  appeal
from  the  sentence  of  the  dictator  is  certain,  and
accordingly  the  lictors  bore  the  axes  in  the  fasces
before  them  even  in  the  city,  as  a  symbol  of  their
absolute  power  over  the  lives  of  the  citizens,  al-
though by  the  Valerian  law  the  axes  had  disap-
peared from  the  fasces  of  the  consuls.  (Liv.  ii.  18,
29,  iii.  20  ;  Zonar.  vii.  1 3  ;  Dionj-s.  v.  70,  75  ;
Pompon,  de  Orig.  Jur.  §  1 8.)  That  an  appeal  after-
wards lay  from  their  sentence  to  the  people,  is
expressly  stated  by  Festus  (s.  v.  optima  lex\  and
it  has  been  supposed  that  this  privilege  was
granted  by  the  lex  Valeria  Horatia,  passed  after
the  abolition  of  the  decemvirate  in  B.  c.  449,
which  enacted  "ne  quis  ullum  magistratum  sine
provocatione  crearet."  (Liv.  iii.  15).  But  eleven
years  afterwards  the  dictatorship  is  spoken  of  as  a
magistratus  sine  provocatione ;  and  the  only  in-
stance in  Livy  (viii.  33 — 34)  in  which  the  dicta-
tor is  threatened  with  provocatio,  certainly  does
not  prove  that  this  was  a  legal  right  ;  for  L.  Pa-
pirius,  who  was  then  dictator,  ti-eated  the  provo


DICTATOR.

ratio  as  an  infringement  of  the  rights  of  his  office.
We  may  therefore  suppose  that  the  Lex  Valeria
Horatia  only  applied  to  the  regular  magistracies,
and  that  the  dictatorship  was  regarded  as  exempt
from  it.  Whether  however  the  right  of  provocatio
was  afterwards  given,  or  the  statement  in  Festus
is  an  error,  cannot  be  determined.  In  connection
with  the  provocatio  there  arises  another  question
respecting  the  relation  of  the  dictatorship  to  the
tribunes  of  the  plebs.  We  know  that  the  tribunes
continued  in  office  during  a  dictatorship  ;  but  we
have  no  reason  to  believe  that  they  had  any  con-
trol over  a  dictator,  or  could  hamper  his  pro-
ceedings by  their  intercessio  or  auxilmm,  as  they
could  in  the  case  of  the  consuls.  The  few  in-
stances, which  appear  to  prove  the  contrary,  are
to  be  explained  in  a  different  manner,  as  Becker
has  shown.  That  the  tribunes  continued  in  office  as
independent  magistrates  during  a  dictatorship,  while
all  the  other  magistrates  became  simply  the  officers
of  the  dictator,  is  to  be  explained  by  the  fact,  that
the  lex  de  dictatore  creando  was  passed  before  the
institution  of  the  tribuneship  of  the  plebs,  and
consequently  made  no  mention  of  it,  and  that  as  a
dictator  was  appointed  in  virtue  of  a  senatus  con-
sultum,  the  senate  had  no  power  over  the  tribunes
of  the  plebs,  though  they  could  suspend  the  other
magistrates.

It  has  been  already  stated  that  the  dictator  was
irresponsible,  that  is,  he  was  not  liable  after  his
abdication  to  be  called  to  account  for  any  of  his
official  acts.  This  is  expressly  stated  by  ancient
writers  (Zonar.  vii.  13,  Dionys.  v.  70,  vii.  5Q  ;
Plut.  Fab.  3  ;  Appian,  D.  C.  ii.'23),  and,  even  if  it
had  not  been  stated,  it  would  follow  from  the  very
nature  of  the  dictatorship.  We  find  moreover  no
instance  recorded  in  which  a  dictator  after  his  re-
signation was  made  answerable  for  the  misuse  of
his  power,  with  the  exception  of  Camillus,  whose
case  however  was  a  very  peculiar  one.  (Compare
Becker,  Romisch.  AUerth.  vol.  ii.  part  ii.  p.  172.)

It  was  in  consequence  of  the  great  and  irre-
sponsible power  possessed  by  the  dictatorship,  that
we  find  it  frequently  compared  with  the  regal
dignity,  from  which  it  only  differed  in  being  held
for  a  limited  time.  (Cic.  de  Rep.  ii.  32  ;  Zonar.
vii.  13  ;  Dionys.  v.  70,  73  ;  Appian,  D.  C.  i.  Q9  ;
Tac.  Ann.  i.  1.)  There  were  however  a  few
limits  to  the  power  of  the  dictator.  1.  The  most
important  was  that  which  we  have  often  men-
tioned, that  the  period  of  his  office  was  only  six
months.  2.  He  had  not  power  over  the  treasury,
but  could  only  make  use  of  the  money  which  was
granted  him  by  the  senate.  (Zonar.  vii.  13.)  3.
He  was  not  allowed  to  leave  Italy,  since  he  might  in
that  case  easily  become  dangerous  to  the  republic
(Dion  Cass,  xxxvi.  17)  ;  though  the  case  of  Ati-
lius  Calatinus  in  the  first  Punic  war  forms  an
exception  to  this  rule.  (Liv.  Epit  19.)  4.  He
was  not  allowed  to  ride  on  horseback  at  Rome,
without  previously  obtaining  the  permission  of  the
people  (Liv.  xxiii.  14  ;  Zonar.  vii.  13)  ;  a  re-
gulation apparently  capricious,  but  perhaps
adopted  that  he  might  not  bear  too  great  a  resem-
blance to  the  kings,  who  were  accustomed  to  ride.

The  insignia  of  the  consuls  were  nearly  the  same
as  those  of  the  kings  in  earlier  times  ;  and  of  the
consuls  subsequently.  Instead  however  of  having
only  twelve  lictors,  as  was  the  case  with  the  con-
suls, he  was  preceded  by  twenty-four  bearing  the
secures  as  well  as  the  fasces.      The  sella  citrulis


DICTATOR.


407


and  toga  praetexta  also  belonged  to  the  dictator.
(Polyb.  iii.  87  ;  Dionys.  x.  24  ;  Plut.  Fab.  4  ;
Appian,  ^.  O.  i.  100  ;  Dion  Cass,  liv-  1.).

The  preceding  account  of  the  dictatorship  ap-
plies more  particularly  to  the  dictator  rei  gerundae
causa  ;  but  dictators  were  also  frequently  appointed,
especially  when  the  consuls  were  absent  from  the
city,  to  perform  certain  acts,  which  could  not  be  done
by  any  inferior  magistrate.  These  dictators  had
little  more  than  the  name  ;  and  as  they  were  only
appointed  to  discharge  a  particular  duty,  they  had
to  resign  immediately  that  duty  was  performed,
and  they  were  not  entitled  to  exercise  the  power
of  their  office  in  reference  to  any  other  matter  than
the  one  for  which  they  were  nominated.  The  oc-
casions on  which  such  dictators  were  appointed,
were  principally  :  —  1.  For  the  purpose  of  holding
the  comitia  for  the  elections  {comitioriim  haben-
dorum  causa).  2.  For  fixing  the  clavus  annalis  in
the  temple  of  Jupiter  (clavi  figendi  causa)  in  times
of  pestilence  or  civil  discord,  because  the  law  said
that  this  ceremony  was  to  be  perfonned  by  the
praetor  mojnmus,  and  after  the  institution  of  the
dictatorship  the  latter  was  regarded  as  the  highest
magistracy  in  the  state  (Liv.  vii.  3).  3.  For
appointing  holidays  {feriarum  constituendarum
causa)  on  the  appearance  of  prodigies  (Liv.  vii.
28),  and  for  officiating  at  the  public  games  {lu-
dorum  faciendorum  causa).,  the  presidency  of  which
belonged  to  the  consuls  or  praetors  (viii.  40,  ix.
34).  4.  For  holding  trials  (quaestionibus  eorercen-
dis,  ix.  36).  5.  And  on  one  occasion,  for  filling  up
vacancies  in  the  senate  (legendo  senatui,  xxiii.  22).

Along  with  the  dictator  there  was  always  a
magister  equitum.,  the  nomination  of  Avhom  was  left
to  the  choice  of  the  dictator,  unless  the  senatus  con-
sul turn  specified,  as  was  sometimes  the  case,  the  name
of  the  person  who  was  to  be  appointed  (Liv.  viii.
17,  xxii.  57).  The  magister  equitum  had,  like  the
dictator,  to  receive  the  imperium  by  a  lex  curiata
(Liv.  ix.  38).  The  dictator  could  not  be  without
a  magister  equitum,  and,  consequently,  if  the  latter
died  during  the  six  months  of  the  dictatorship,
another  had  to  be  nominated  in  his  stead.  The
magister  equitum  was  subject  to  the  imperium  of
the  dictator,  but  in  the  absence  of  his  superior  he
became  his  representative,  and  exercised  the  same
powers  as  the  dictator.  On  one  occasion,  shortly  be-
fore legal  dictators  ceased  to  be  appointed,  we  find
an  instance  of  a  magister  equitum  being  invested
with  an  imperium  equal  to  that  of  the  dictator,  so
that  there  were  then  virtually  two  dictators,  but
this  is  expressly  mentioned  as  an  anomaly,  which
had  never  occurred  before  (Polyb.  iii.  103,  106).
The  rank  which  the  magister  equitum  held  among
the  other  Roman  magistrates  is  doubtful.  Nie-
buhr  asserts  (vol.  ii.  p.  390)  "  no  one  ever  sup-
posed that  his  office  was  a  curule  one  ;"  and  if  he
is  right  in  supposing  that  the  consular  tribunate
was  not  a  curule  office,  his  view  is  supported  by
the  account  in  Livy,  that  the  imperium  of  the
magister  equitum  was  not  regarded  as  superior  to
that  of  a  consular  tribune  (vi.  39).  Cicero  on  the
contrary  places  the  magister  equitum  on  a  par
with  the  praetor  {de  Leg.  iii.  3)  ;  and  after  the
establishment  of  the  praetorship,  it  seems  to  have
been  considered  necessary  that  the  person  who
was  to  be  nominated  magister  equitum  should
previously  have  been  praetor,  just  as  the  dictator,
according  to  the  old  law,  had  to  be  chosen  from  the
consulars  (Dion  Cass.  xlii.  21).  Accordingly,  we
D  D  4


408


DIES.


find  at  a  later  time  that  the  magister  equitum  had
the  insignia  of  a  praetor  (Dion  Cass.  xliL  27).
The  magister  equitum  was  originally,  as  his  name
imports,  the  commander  of  the  cavalry,  while  the
dictator  was  at  the  head  of  the  legions,  the  in-
fantry (Liv.  iii.  27),  and  the  relation  between
them  was  in  this  respect  similar  to  that  which
subsisted  between  the  king  and  the  tribunus
celerum.

Dictators  were  only  appointed  so  long  as  the
Romans  had  to  carry  on  wars  in  Italy.  A  solitarj'
instiince  occurs  in  the  first  Punic  war  of  the  nomi-
nation of  a  dictator  for  the  purpose  of  carrj'ing
on  war  out  of  Italy  (Liv.  Epit.  19)  ;  but  this  was
never  repeated,  because,  as  has  been  already  re-
marked, it  was  feared  that  so  great  a  power  might
become  dangerous  at  a  distance  from  Rome.  But
after  the  battle  of  Trasimene  in  b,  c.  21G,  when
Rome  itself  was  threatened  by  Hannibal,  recourse
was  again  had  to  a  dictator,  and  Q.  Fabius  Maxi-
mus  was  appointed  to  the  office.  In  the  next
year,  b,  c.  21 6,  after  the  battle  of  Cannae,  !M.  Ju-
nius Pera  was  also  nominated  dictator,  but  this
was  the  last  time  of  the  appointment  of  a  dictator
rei  gerundae  causa.  From  that  time  dictators
were  frequently  appointed  for  holding  the  elections
down  to  B.  c.  202,  but  from  that  year  the  dictator-
ship disappears  altogether.  After  a  lapse  of  120
years,  Sulla  caused  himself  to  be  appointed  dic-
tator in  B.  c.  82,  reipnhlkae  condituendae  causa
(Veil.  Pat.  ii.  28),  but  as  Niebuhr  remarks,  "  the
title  was  a  mere  name,  without  any  ground  for
such  a  use  in  the  ancient  c&iislitution."  Neither
the  magistrate  (interrex)  who  nominated  him,  nor
the  time  for  which  he  was  appointed,  nor  the  ex-
tent nor  exercise  of  his  power,  was  in  accordance
with  the  ancient  laws  and  precedents  ;  and  the
same  was  the  case  with  the  dictatorship  of  Caesar.
Soon  after  Caesar's  death  the  dictatorship  was
abolished  for  ever  by  a  lex  proposed  by  the  consul
Antonius  (Cic.  Phil.  i.  1  ;  Liv.  Epit.  116  ;  Dion
Cass.  xliv.  51).  The  title  indeed  was  offered  to
Augustus,  but  he  resolutely  refused  it  in  conse-
quence of  the  odium  attached  to  it  from  the  tyrann}'-
of  Sulla  when  dictator  (Suet.  Aug.  52).

During  the  time,  however,  that  the  dictatorship
was  in  ateyance,  a  substitute  was  invented  for  it,
whenever  the  circumstances  of  the  republic  re-
quired the  adoption  of  extraordiiiary  measures,  by
the  senate  investing  the  consuls  with  dictatorial
power.  This  was  done  by  the  well-known  formula,
Videant  or  dent  operam  constdas^  ne  quid  respubiica
detrimenti  capiat.    (Comp.  Sail.  Catil.  29.)

(The  preceding  account  has  been  mostly  taken
from  Becker,  Handbuch  der  Romisdien  Alter-
thumer,  vol.  ii.  part  ii.  p.  150,  &c. ;  comp.  Niebuhr,
Hist,  of  Rome,  vol.  i.  p.  563,  &c.  ;  Gbttling,  Ges-
chichte  der  Romisch.  Staatsverfassung,  p.  279,  &c.)

DICTY'NNIA  (5iKTWJ/<o),  a  festival  with
sacrifices,  celebrated  at  Cydonia  in  Crete,  in  honour
of  Artemis,  sumamed  AiKTvvua  or  AiKTvpvaia.,
from  S'lKTvov,  a  hunter's  net.  (Diodor.  Sic.  v.  76  ;
compare  Strabo  x.  p.  479  ;  Pausan.  iL  30.  §  3.)
Particulars  respecting  its  celebration  are  not  known.
Artemis  AiKTvvya  was  also  worshipped  at  Sparta
(Pans.  iii.  12.  §  7),  and  at  Ambrysus  in  Phocis.
(Pans.  x.  36.  §  3  ;  compare  the  Schol.  ad  Aristoph.
Ran.  1284,  Vesp.  357  ;  and  Meursius,  Creta,
c.  3.)  [L.  S.]

DIES  (of  the  same  root  as  Si6s  and  deus,  Butt-
mann,  Mythol.  ii.  p.  74).     The  name  dies  was  ap-


DIES.

plied,  like  our  word  day,  to  the  time  during  which,
according  to  the  notions  of  the  ancients,  the  stm
performed  his  course  round  the  earth,  and  this
time  they  called  the  civil  day  {dies  civi/is,  in  Greek
j/uX^^^epoi/,  because  it  included  both  night  and
day.  See  Censorin.  De  Die  Nat.  23  ;  Plin.  H.  N.
ii.  77,  79  ;  Varro,  De  Re  Rust.  i.  28  ;  Macrob.  »S'(i«.
i.  3).  The  natural  day  (dies  naturalis),  or  the
time  from  the  rising  to  the  setting  of  the  sun,  was
likewise  designated  by  the  name  dies.  The  civil
day  began  with  the  Greeks  at  the  setting  of  the
sun,  and  with  the  Romans  at  midnight  ;  with  the
Babylonians  at  the  rising  of  the  sun,  and  with  the
Umbrians  at  midday.  (Macrob.  I.  c.  ;  Gellius,  iii.
2.)  We  have  here  only  to  consider  the  natural
day,  and  as  its  subdivisions  were  different  at  dif-
ferent times,  and  not  always  the  same  among  the
Greeks  as  among  the  Romans,  we  shall  endeavour
to  give  a  brief  account  of  the  various  parts  into
which  it  was  divided  by  the  Greeks  at  the  diffe-
rent periods  of  their  history,  and  then  proceed  to
consider  its  divisions  among  the  Romans,  to  which
will  be  subjoined  a  short  list  of  remai'kable  days.  '
At  the  time  of  the  Homeric  poems,  the  natural
day  was  divided  into  three  pai'ts  {II.  xxi.  111).
The  first,  called  i}(i>s,  began  with  sunrise,  and  com-
prehended the  whole  space  of  time  during  which
light  seemed  to  be  increasing,  i.  e.  till  midday.  {II.
viii.  66,  ix.  84,  Od.  ix.  56.)  Some  ancient  gram-
marians have  supposed  that  in  some  instances
Homer  used  the  word  ^cis  for  the  whole  day,  but
Nitzsch  {Anmerkungen  zur  Odyssee,  i.  125)  has
showTi  the  incorrectness  of  this  opinion.  The
second  part  was  called  /ieVoy  "fifiap  or  midday,  dur-
ing which  the  sun  was  thought  to  stand  still.
(Heniiias,  ad  Plat.  Phacdr.  p.  342.)  The  third
part  bore  the  name  of  ScjAtj  or  SeieAov  ^iixap  {Od.
xvii.  606  ;  compare  Buttmann's  Lexilog.  ii.  n.  95),
which  derived  its  name  from  the  increased  warmth
of  the  atmosphere.  The  last  part  of  the  Se/A??  was
sometimes  designated  by  the  words  ■n-ori  ea-irepav
or  ^ov\vr6s  {Od.  xvii.  191,  Il.xy'i.  779).  Besides
these  three  great  divisions  no  others  seem  to  have
been  known  at  the  time  when  the  Homeric  poems
were  composed.  The  chief  information  respecting
the  divisions  of  the  day  in  the  period  after  Homer,
and  more  especially  the  divisions  made  by  the
Athenians,  is  to  be  derived  from  Pollux  {Onom.  \.
68).  The  first  and  last  of  the  divisions  m.ado
at  the  time  of  Homer  were  afterwards  subdivided
into  two  parts.  The  earlier  part  of  the  morning
was  termed  irpuit  or  irpu  ttjs  77/xepas :  the  later,
ir\7)6o6(rT]s  rrjs  ayopas,  or  irepl  TrKi\Qovffav  ayopav
(Herod,  iv.  181  ;  Xen.  Memorab.  i.  1.  §  10,
Ilelleoi.  i.  1.  §  30  ;  Dion  Chrysost.  Orut.  Ixvii).
The  /ji4(Tov  fiiJLap  of  Homer  was  afterwards  expres-
sed by  iJLeorr)iJL6pia,  fieaov  vfiepas,  or  ytieVrj  rjudpa,
•and  comprehended,  as  before,  the  middle  of  the  day,
when  the  sun  seemed  neither  to  rise  nor  to  decline.
The  two  pai-ts  of  the  afternoon  were  called  SelArj
irpoeiri  or  Trpufta,  and  Sei\7]  o\|/jtj  or  6\pia  (Herod,
vii.  167,  viii.  6  ;  Thucyd.  iii.  74,  viii.  26  ;  com-
pare Libanius,  Epist.  1084).  This  division  con-
tinued to  be  observed  down  to  the  latest  period  of
Grecian  history,  though  another  more  accurate
division,  and  more  adapted  to  the  purposes  of  com-
mon life,  was  introduced  at  an  early  period  ;  for
Anaximander,  or  according  to  others,  his  disciple
Anaximenes,  is  said  to  have  made  the  Greeks  ac-
quainted with  the  use  of  the  Babylonian  chrono-
meter or   sun-dial   (called   1^6X05  or  u>poK6yioVf


DIES.
Bcmetimes  with  the  epithet  aKioBr)piK6v  or  T]\ia-
fjidvSpov)  by  means  of  which  the  natural  day  was
divided  into  twelve  equal  spaces  of  time.  (Herod,
ii.  109  ;  Diog.  Laert.  ii.  1.  3  ;  Plin.  //.  N.  ii.  6.
78  ;  Suidas,  s.  v.  'Aua^ifiauSpos.)  These  spaces
were,  of  course,  longer  or  shorter  according  to  the
various  seasons  of  the  year.  The  name  hours
(wpat),  however,  did  not  come  into  general  use  till
a  very  late  period,  and  the  ditference  between
natural  and  equinoctial  hours  was  first  observed  by
the  Alexandrine  astronomers.

During  the  early  ages  of  the  history  of  Rome,
when  artificial  means  of  dividing  time  were  yet
unknown,  the  natural  phenomena  of  increasing
light  and  darkness  formed  with  the  Romans,  as
with  the  Greeks,  the  standard  of  division,  as  we
see  from  the  vague  expressions  in  Censorinus  (De
Die  Nat.  24).  Pliny  states  (//.  N.  vii.  60)  that
in  the  Twelve  Tables  only  the  risuig  and  the
setting  of  the  sun  were  mentioned  as  the  two
parts  into  which  the  day  was  then  divided,  but  from
Censorinus  {I.  c.)  and  Gellius  (xvii.  2)  we  learn
that  midday  (meridies)  was  also  mentioned.  Varro
{De  Ling.  Lut.  vi.  4,  5,  ed.  MUller  ;  and  Isidoi\
Orig.  V.  30  and  31)  likewise  distinguished  three
parts  of  the  day,  viz.,  mane.,  meridies.,  and  suprema,
scil.  tempestas^  after  which  no  assembly  could  be
held  in  the  forum.  The  lex  Plaetoria  prescribed
that  a  herald  should  proclaim  the  suprema  in  the
comitium,  that  the  people  might  know  that  their
meeting  was  to  be  adjourned.  But  the  division  of
the  day  most  generally  observed  by  the  Romans,
was  that  into  iempus  antemendianum  and  pomeri-
dianum.  the  meridies  itself  being  only  considered
as  a  point  at  which  the  one  ended  and  the  other
commenced.  But  as  it  was  of  importance  that  this
moment  should  be  known,  an  especial  officer
[AccENSUs]  was  appointed,  who  proclaimed  the
time  of  midday,  when  from  the  curia  he  saw  the
sun  standing  between  the  rostra  and  the  graeco-
stasis.  The  division  of  the  day  into  twelve  equal
spaces,  which,  here  as  in  Greece,  were  shorter  in
w^inter  than  in  summer,  was  adopted  at  the  time
when  artificial  means  of  measuring  time  were  in-
troduced among  the  Romans  from  Greece.  This
Avas  about  the  year  B.  c.  291,  when  L.  Papirius
Cursor,  before  the  war  with  Pyrrhus,  brought  to
Rome  an  instrument  called  solarium  horologium,
or  simply  solarium.  (Plant,  ap,  Gellium,  iii.  3.
§  5  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  vii.  60.)  But  as  the  solarium
had  been  made  for  a  difi'erent  latitude,  it  showed
the  time  at  Rome  very  incorrectly.  (Plin.  I.  c.)
Scipio  Nasica,  therefore,  erected  in  B.  c.  159  a
public  clepsydra,  which  indicated  the  hours  of  the
night  as  well  as  of  the  day.  (Censorin.  c.  23.)
Before  the  erection  of  a  clepsydra  it  was  cus-
tomary for  one  of  the  subordinate  officers  of  the
praetor  to  proclaim  the  third,  sixth,  and  ninth
hours  ;  which  shows  that  the  day  was,  like  the
night,  divided  into  four  parts,  e.ach  consisting  of
three  hours.  See  Dissents  treatise,  De  Partihus
Noctis  et  Did  ex  Divisionihus  Veterum,  in  his
Kleine  Laleinische  und  Deutsche  Schriften,  pp.  1 30,
150.     Compare  the  article  Horologium,

All  the  days  of  the  year  were,  according  to  dif-
ferent points  of  view,  divided  by  the  Romans  into
diiferent  classes.  For  the  purpose  of  the  admmi-
stration  of  justice,  and  holding  assemblies  of  the
people,  all  the  days  were  divided  into  dies  fasti
and  dies  nefasti.

DiKS  KASTi  were  the  days  on  which  the  praetor


DIES.  409

was  allowed  to  administer  justice  in  the  public
courts  ;  they  derived  their  name  from  fari  {fari
tria  verba  ;  do,  dico,  addico,  Ovid,  Fast.  i.  45,  &c.  ;
Varro,  Deling.  Lat.  vi.  29,  30.  ed.  MuUer  ;  Ma-
crob.  Sat.  i.  16).  On  some  of  the  dies  fasti  comitia
could  be  held,  but  not  on  all.  ( Cicero,  joro.S'ftr^.  15,
with  the  note  of  Manutius.)  Dies  might  be  fasti
in  three  different  ways :  1.  dies  fasti  proprw  ct  toti
or  simply  dies  fasti.,  were  days  on  which  the  prae-
tor used  to  hold  his  courts,  and  could  do  so  at  all
hours.  They  were  marked  in  the  Roman  calendar
b}--  the  letter  F,  and  their  number  in  the  course  of
the  year  was  38  (Niebuhr,  Hist,  of  Rome,  iii.
p.  314)  ;  2.  dies  proprie  sed  non  toti  fasti,  or  dies
intercisi,  days  on  which  the  praetor  might  hold  his
courts,  but  not  at  all  hours,  so  that  sometimes  one
half  of  such  a  day  was  fastus,  while  the  other  half
was  nefastus.  Their  number  was  65  in  the  year,
and  they  were  marked  in  the  calendar  by  the  signs
Fp  ^^fastus  primo,  Np  =7iefastus  primo.  En  =e«-
dotercisus=^  interdsus,  Q.  Rex  C.  F  ==<jiia7ido  Hex
comitio  fugit,  or  quando  Rex  comitiavit  fas,
Q.  St.  Df  =  quando  stercus  defertur ;  3.  dies
wm  proprie  sed  casu  fasti,  or  days  which  were
not  fasti  properly  speaking,  but  became  fasti  ac-
cidentally ;  a  dies  comitialis,  for  instance,  might
become  fastus,  if  either  during  its  whole  course,  or
during  a  part  of  it,  no  comitia  were  held,  so  that  it
accordingly  became  either  a  dies  fastus  totus,  or
fastus  ex  parte.  (Macrob.  Sat.  i.  16  ;  Varro,  De
Li7ig.  Lat.  I.  c.)

Dies  nefasti  were  days  on  which  neither
courts  of  justice  nor  comitia  were  allowed  to  be
held,  and  which  were  dedicated  to  other  purposes.
(Varro,  /.  c.)  According  to  the  ancient  legends
they  were  said  to  have  been  fixed  by  Numa  Pom-
pilius.  (Jiiv.  i.  19.)  From  the  remarks  made  above
it  will  be  understood  that  one  part  of  a  day  might
be  fastus  while  another  was  nefastus.  (Ovid.  L'ast.
i.  50.)  The  nundinae,  which  had  originally  been
dies  fasti  for  the  plebeians,  had  been  made  nefasti
at  the  time  when  the  twelvemonths-year  was  in-
troduced ;  but  in  B.  c.  286  they  were  again  made
fasti  by  a  law  of  Q.  Hortensius.  (Macrob.  Sat.  i.
16.)  The  term  dies  nefasti,  which  originally  had
nothing  to  do  with  religion,  but  simply  indicated
days  on  which  no  courts  were  to  be  held,  was  in
subsequent  times  applied  to  religious  days  in  ge-
neral, as  dies  nefasti  were  mostly  dedicated  to  the
worship  of  the  gods.     (Gellius,  iv.  9,  v.  17.)

In  a  religious  point  of  view  all  days  of  the  year
were  either  dies  festi,  or  dies  profesti,  or  dies  inter-
eisi.  According  to  the  definition  given  by  Macro-
bius,  dies  festi  were  dedicated  to  the  gods,  and
spent  with  sacrifices,  repasts,  games,  and  other
solemnities  ;  dies  profesti  belonged  to  men  for  the
administration  of  their  private  and  public  affairs.
They  were  either  dies  fasti,  or  comitiales,  or  com^
perendini,  or  siaii,  or  proeliales.  Dies  intercisi
were  common  between  gods  and  men,  that  is,
partly  devoted  to  the  worship  of  the  gods,  partly
to  the  transaction  of  ordinary  business.

We  have  lastly  to  add  a  few  remarks  on  some
of  the  subdivisions  of  the  dies  profesti,  which  are
likewise  defined  by  Macrobius.  Dies  comitiales
were  days  on  which  comitia  were  held  ;  their  num-
ber was  184  in  a  year.  Dies  comperendini  wero
days  to  which  any  action  was  allowed  to  be  trans-
ferred (quibns  vadimonium  licet  dicere.  Gains,  iv.
§  15).  Dies  stati  were  days  set  apart  for  causes
between  Roman  citizens  and  foreigners  {qui  judicii


'410


DIMACIIERI.


eausa  cam  peregrinis  instituuniur).  Dies  procHales
were  all  days  on  which  religion  did  not  forbid  to
commence  a  war  ;  a  list  of  days  and  festivals  on
which  it  was  contrary  to  relijiion  to  commence  a
war  is  given  by  Macrobius.  See  also  Festus,  s.  v.
Compare  Manutius,  De  Veterum  Dierum  Ratione,
and  the  article  Calendarium.  [L.  S.]

DIFFAREA'TIO.     [Divortium.]

DIGEST  A.     [Pandectae.]

DIGITA'LIA.     [Manica.]

DFGITUS.     [Pes.]

DIIPOLEIA  {Suir6\€ia\  also  called  AiirSx^ia
or  Anr6\ia,  a  very  ancient  festival  celebrated  every
year  on  the  acropolis  of  Athens  in  honour  of  Zeus,
surnamed  IIoAjeus.  (Paus.  i.  14.  §  4  ;  comp.  Anti-
phon,  120.  10.)  Suidas  and  the  Scholiast  on
Aristophanes  {Pax,  410)  are  mistaken  in  believing
that  the  Diipolia  were  the  same  festival  as  the
Diasia.  It  was  held  on  the  14th  of  Scirropliorion.
The  manner  in  which  the  sacrifice  of  an  ox  was
offered  on  this  occasion,  and  the  origin  of  the  rite,
are  described  by  Porphyrins  {De  Ahstiiient.  ii.
§  29),  with  whose  account  may  be  compared  the
fragmentary  descriptions  of  Pausanias  (i.  28.  §  11)
and  Aelian  (  V.  H.  viii.  3).  The  Athenians  placed
barley  mixed  with  wheat  upon  the  altar  of  Zeus
and  left  it  imguarded  ;  the  ox  destined  to  be  sacri-
ficed was  then  allowed  to  go  and  take  of  the  seeds.
One  of  the  priests,  who  bore  the  name  of  ^ov(p6vos
(whence  the  festival  was  sometimes  called  j8ou-
<p6via),aX  seeing  the  ox  eating,  snatched  the  axe,
killed  the  ox,  and  ran  away.  The  others,  as  if
not  knowing  who  had  killed  the  animal,  made  in-
quiries, and  at  last  also  summoned  the  axe,  which
was  in  the  end  declared  guilty  of  having  committed
the  murder.  This  custom  is  said  to  have  arisen
from  the  following  circumstance  :  —  In  the  reign
of  Erechtheus,  at  the  celebration  of  the  Dionysia,
or,  according  to  the  Scholiast  on  Aristophanes  {Nu/j.
9/2),  at  the  diipolia,  an  ox  ate  the  cakes  offered
to  the  god,  and  one  Baulon  or  T  haul  on,  or,
according  to  others,  the  fiovcpSuos,  killed  the
ox  with  an  axe  and  fled  from  his  country.
The  murderer  having  thus  escaped,  the  axe  was
declared  guilty,  and  the  rite  observed  at  the
diipolia  was  performed  in  commemoi-ation  of  that
event.  (Compare  Suidas  and  Hesych.  s,  v.  l3ov-
<p6i/ia.)  This  legend  of  the  origin  of  the  diipolia
manifestly  leads  us  back  to  a  time  when  it  had  not
yet  become  customary  to  offer  aTiimal  sacrifices  to
the  gods,  but  merely  the  fruits  of  the  earth.
Porphyrins  also  informs  us  that  three  Athenian
families  had  their  especial  (probably  hereditary)
functions  to  perform  at  this  festival.  Members  of
the  one  drove  the  ox  to  the  altar,  and  were  thence
called  KeuTpidbai :  another  family,  descended  from
Baulon  and  called  the  fiovrviroi,  knocked  the
victim  down  ;  and  a  third,  designated  by  the  name
of  Sairpoi,  killed  it.  (Compfire  Creuzer's  Mythol.
und  Symbol,  i.  p.  172,  iv.  p.  122,  &c.)      [L.  S.]

DI MACRAE  (S/^cixaj),  Macedonian  horse-
soldiers,  who  also  fought  on  foot  when  occasion
required.  Their  arniour  was  heavier  than  that  of
the  ordinary  horse-soldiers,  and  lighter  than  that
of  the  regular  heavy-anned  foot.  A  servant  ac-
companied each  soldier  in  order  to  take  care  of  his
horse  when  he  alighted  to  fight  on  foot.  This
species  of  troops  is  said  to  have  been  first  intro-
duced by  Alexander  the  Great.  (Pollux,  i.  1 32  ;
Curtius,  V.  13.)

DIMACHERI.    [GLAniATORES.]


DIONYSIA.
DIMENSUM.    [Servus.]  v]

DIMINUTIO  CA'PITIS.  [Caput.]
DIO'BOLOS.  [Drachma.]
DIOCLEIA  (5iJ«Aeta),  a  festival  celebrated  by
the  Megarians  in  honour  of  an  ancient  Athenian
hero.  Diodes,  around  whose  grave  young  men  as-
sembled on  the  occasion,  and  amused  themselves
with  gymnastic  and  other  contests.  We  read  that
he  who  gave  the  sweetest  kiss  obtained  the  prize,
consisting  of  a  garland  of  flowers.  (Theocrit.
Idyll,  xii.  27,  &c.)  The  Scholiast  on  Theocritus
(/.  c.)  relates  the  origin  of  this  festival  as  fol-
lows :  —  Diodes,  an  Athenian  exile,  fled  to  Me-
gara,  where  he  found  a  youth  with  whom  he  fell
in  love.  In  some  battle,  while  protecting  the
object  of  his  love  with  his  shield,  he  was  slain.
The  Megarians  honoured  the  gallant  lover  with  a
tomb,  raised  him  to  the  rank  of  a  hero,  and  in
commemoration  of  his  faithful  attachment,  insti-
tuted the  festival  of  the  Dioclcia.  See  Bockh,  ad
Find.  Olymp.  vii.  157.  p.  176,  and  the  Scholiast,
ad  Aristoph.  Acharn.  730,  where  a  Megarian
swears  by  Diodes,  from  which  we  may  infer  that
he  was  held  in  great  honour  by  the  Megarians.
(Compare  Welcker's  Sappho,  p.  39,  and  ad
Tlieopn.  p.  79.)  [L.  S.]

DIONY'SIA  {Aiovvaia),  festivals  celebrated
in  various  parts  of  Greece  in  honour  of  Dionysus.
We  have  to  consider  under  this  head  several
festivals  of  the  same  deity,  although  some  of  them
bore  different  names  ;  for  here,  as  in  other  cases,
the  name  of  the  festival  was  sometimes  derived
from  that  of  the  god,  sometimes  from  the  place
where  it  was  celebrated,  and  sometimes  from  some
particular  circumstance  connected  with  its  celebra-
tion. We  shall,  however,  direct  our  attention
chiefly  to  the  Attic  festivals  of  Dionysus,  as,  on
account  of  their  intimate  connection  with  the
origin  and  the  development  of  dramatic  literature,
they  are  of  greater  importance  to  us  than  any  other
ancient  festival.

The  general  character  of  the  festivals  of  Dio-
nysus was  extravagant  merriment  and  enthusiastic
joy,  which  manifested  themselves  in  various  ways.
The  import  of  some  of  the  apparently  immeaning
and  absurd  practices  in  which  the  Greeks  indulged
during  the  celebration  of  the  Dionysia,  has  been
well  explained  by  MUller  {Hist  of  the  Lit.  o/Anc.
Greece,  i  p.  289)  :  —  "  The  intense  desire  felt  by
every  worshipper  of  Dionysus  to  fight,  to  conquer,
to  suffer  in  common  with  him,  made  them  regard
the  subordinate  beings  (satyrs,  panes,  and  nymphs,
by  whom  the  god  himself  was  surrounded,  and
through  whom  life  seemed  to  pass  from  him  into
vegetation,  and  branch  off  into  a  variety  of  beauti-
ful or  grotesque  forms),  who  were  ever  present  to
the  fancy  of  the  Greeks,  as  a  convenient  step  by
which  they  could  approach  more  nearly  to  the
presence  of  their  divinity.  The  customs  so  preva-
lent at  the  festivals  of  Dionj'sus,  of  taking  the  dis-
guise of  satyrs,  doubtless  originated  in  this  feeling,
and  not  in  the  mere  desire  of  concealing  excesses
under  the  disguise  of  a  mask,  otherwise  so  serious
and  pathetic  a  spectacle  as  tragedy  could  never
have  originated  in  the  choruses  of  these  satyrs.
The  desire  of  escaping  from  self  into  something
new  and  strange,  of  living  in  an  imaginary  world,
breaks  forth  in  a  thousand  instances  in  these
festivals  of  Dionysus.  It  is  seen  in  the  colf>uring
the  body  with  plaster,  soot,  vermilion,  and  dif-
ferent sorts  of  green  luid  red  juices  of  plants,  wear-


DIONYSIA.

ing  goats  and  deer  skins  round  the  loins,  covering
the  face  with  large  leaves  of  different  plants  ;  and,
lastly,  in  the  wearing  masks  of  wood,  bark,  and
other  materials,  and  of  a  complete  costume  belong-
ing to  the  character."  Drunkenness,  and  the
boisterous  music  of  flutes,  cymbals,  and  drums,
Avere  likewise  common  to  all  Dionysiac  festivals.
In  the  processions  called  ^lacroi  (from  ^efa^w),
with  which  they  were  celebrated,  women  also  took
part  in  the  disguise  of  Bacchae,  Lenae,  Thyades,
Naiades,  Nymphs,  &c.,  adorned  with  garlands  of
ivy,  and  bearing  the  thyrsus  in  their  hands  (hence
the  god  was  sometimes  called  ©TjAu^uop^os),  so
that  the  whole  train  represented  a  population  in-
spu-ed,  and  actuated  by  the  powerful  presence  of
the  god.  The  choruses  sung  on  the  occasion  were
called  dithyrambs,  and  were  hymns  addressed  to
the  god  in  the  freest  metres  and  with  the  boldest
imagery,  in  which  his  exploits  and  achievements
were  extolled.  [Chorus.]  The  phallus,  the
symbol  of  the  fertility  of  nature,  was  also  carried
in  these  processions  (Plut.  De  Cupid.  Divit.  p.
527,  D  ;  Aristoph.  Acliarn.  229,  with  the  Schol.  ;
Herod,  ii.  49),  and  men  disguised  as  women,
called  lOxxpaXKoi  (Hesych.  s.  v.  ;  Athen.  xiv.  p.
622),  followed  the  phallus.  A  woman  called
XiKvo(p6pos  carried  the  X'ikvov^  a  long  basket  con-
taining the  image  of  the  god.  Maidens  of  noble
birth  {Kavqcpopoi)  used  to  carry  figs  in  baskets,
which  were  sometimes  of  gold,  and  to  wear  gar-
lands of  figs  round  their  necks.  (Aristoph.  Acharn.
I.  c. ;  Lysistr.  647  ;  Natal.  Com.  v.  13.)  The  in-
dulgence in  drinking  was  considered  by  the  Greeks
as  a  duty  of  gratitude  which  they  owed  to  the
giver  of  the  vine  ;  hence  in  some  places  it  was
thought  a  crime  to  remain  sober  at  the  Dionysia.
(Lucian,  De  Column.  16.)

The  Attic  festivals  of  Dionysus  were  four  in
number:  the  Aiovvcria  Kar  arypovs,  or  the  rural
Dionysia,  the  Arjvaia,  the  'Audecxr-fipia,  and  the
Aiovvaia  eV  &aT€i.  After  Ruhnkeu  (Auctar.  ad
Hesych.  vol.  i.  p.  199)  and  Spalding  {Abhandl.
der  Bed.  Acad.  vo7i  1804—1811,  p.  70,  &c.)  had
declared  the  Anthesteria  and  the  Lenaea  to  be  only
two  names  for  one  and  the  same  festival,  it  was
generally  taken  for  granted  that  there  could  be  no
doubt  as  to  the  real  identity  of  tl>€  two,  until  in
1817,  A.  Bockh  read  a  paper  to  the  Berlin
Academy  (  Vom  UnterscJiiede  der  Attischen  Lenaeen,
AntJiesierien  und  I'dndl.  Dionysien^  published  in
1319,  in  the  Abhandl.  d.  Deri.  Acad.).,  in  which
he  established  by  the  strongest  arguments  the
difference  between  the  Lenaea  and  Anthesteria.
An  abridgment  of  Bockh's  essay,  containing  ail
that  is  necessary  to  form  a  clear  idea  of  the  whole
question,  is  given  in  the  Philological  Museum,
vol.  ii.  p.  273,  &.C.  A  writer  in  the  Classical  Mu-
'seuin,  Th.  Dyer  (vol.  iv.  p.  70,  &c.),  has  since
endeavoured  to  support  Ruhnken's  view  with  some
new  arguments.  The  season  of  the  year  sacred
to  Dionysus  was  during  the  months  nearest  to  the
shortest  day  (Plut.  De  El  ap.  Delph.  9),  and  the
Attic  festivals  were  accordingly  celebrated  in  the
Poseidcon,  Gamelion  (the  Lenaeon  of  the  lonians),
Anthesterion,  and  Elaphebolion.

The  Aiovvcria  kut  aypovs,  or  /xiKpd,  the  rural  or
lesser  Dionysia,  a  vintage  festival,  were  celebrated
m  the  various  demes  of  Attica  in  the  month  of
Poseideon,  and  were  under  the  superintendence  of
the  several  local  magistrates,  the  dcmarchs.  This
was  doubtless  the  most  ancient  of  all,  and  was


DIONYSIA.


41)


held  with  the  highest  degree  of  merriment  and
freedom  ;  even  slaves  enjoyed  full  liberty  during
its  celebration,  and  their  boisterous  shouts  on  the
occasion  were  almost  intolerable.  It  is  here  that
we  have  to  seek  for  the  origin  of  comedy,  in  the
jests  and  the  scurrilous  abuse  which  the  peasants
vented  upon  the  bystanders  from  a  waggon  in
which  they  rode  about  (/ccoyuos  i(pi'  a/jLa^wv).
Aristophanes  (Vesp.  620  and  1479)  calls  the  comic
poets  TpvycpSoi,  lee-singers  ;  and  comedy,  Tpvy^Sia,
lee-song  (Acham.  464,  834  ;  Athen.  ii.  p.  40)  ;
from  the  custom  of  smearing  the  face  with  lees  of
wine,  in  which  the  merry  country  people  indulged
at  the  vintage.  The  Ascolia  and  other  amuse-
ments, which  were  afterwards  introduced  into  the
city,  seem  also  originally  to  have  been  peculiar  to
the  rural  Dionysia.  The  Dionysia  in  the  Peiraeeus,
as  well  as  those  of  the  other  demes  of  Attica,  be-
longed to  the  lesser  Dionysia,  as  is  acknowledged
both  by  Spalding  and  Bockh.  Those  in  the
Peiraeeus  were  celebrated  with  as  much  splendour
as  those  in  the  city  ;  for  we  read  of  a  procession,  of
the  performance  of  comedies  and  tragedies,  which
at  first  may  have  been  new  as  well  as  old  pieces  ;
but  when  the  drama  had  attained  a  regular  form,
only  old  pieces  were  represented  at  the  rural
Dionysia.  Their  liberal  and  democratical  character
seems  to  have  been  the  cause  of  the  opposition
which  these  festivals  met  with,  when,  in  the  time
of  Peisistratus,  Thespis  attempted  to  introduce  the
rural  amusements  of  the  Dionysia  into  the  city  of
Athens.  (Plut.  Sol.  c.  29,  30  ;  Diog.  Laert.  Sol.
c.  1 1.)  That  in  other  places,  also,  the  introduc-
tion of  the  worship  of  Dionysus  met  with  great
opposition,  must  be  inferred  from  the  legends  of
Orchomenos,  Thebes,  Argos,  Ephesus,  and  other
places.  Something  similar  seems  to  be  implied  in
the  account  of  the  restoration  of  tragic  choruses  to
Dionysus  at  Sicyon.  (Herod,  v.  67.)

The  second  festival,  the  Lenaea  (from  \r]v6s,
the  wine-press,  from  which  also  the  month  of
Gamelion  was  called  by  the  lonians  Lenaeon),  was
celebrated  in  the  month  of  Gamelion  ;  the  ]Sace  of
its  celebration  was  the  ancient  temple  of  Dionysus
Limnaeus  (from  Xifivrj,  as  the  district  was  ori-
ginally a  swamp,  whence  the  god  was  also  called
Xifivayevfjs).  This  temple,  the  Lenaeon,  was
situate  south  of  the  theatre  of  Dionysus,  and  close
by  it.  (Schol.  ad  Aristoph.  Ban.  480.)  The
Lenaea  were  celebrated  with  a  procession  and
scenic  contests  in  tragedy  and  comedy.  (Demosth.
c.  Mid.  p.  517.)  The  procession  probably  went
to  the  Lenaeon,  where  a  goat  (rpdyos,  hence  the
chorus  and  tragedy  which  arose  out  of  it  were
called  rpayiKhs  x^P^^^  ^"^  rpaytfihia)  was  sacri-
ficed, and  a  chonis  standing  around  the  altar  sang
the  dithyrambic  ode  to  the  god.  As  the  dithyramb
was  the  element  out  of  which,  by  the  introduction
of  an  actor,  tragedy  arose  [Chorus],  it  is  natural
that,  in  the  scenic  contests  of  this  festival,  tragedy
should  have  preceded  comedy,  as  we  see  from  the
important  documents  in  Demosthenes.  {I.  c.)  The
poet  who  wished  his  play  to  be  brought  out  at  the
Lenaea  applied  to  the  second  archon,  who  had  the
superintendence  of  this  festival  as  well  as  the
Anthesteria,  and  who  gave  him  the  chorus  if  the
piece  was  thought  to  deserve  it.

The  third  Dionysiac  festival,  the  Anthesteria^
was  celebrated  on  the  12th  of  the  month  of
Anthesterion  (Thucyd.  ii.  1 5)  ;  that  is  to  say,  the
second  day  fell  on  the  12th,  for  it  lasted  three


412


DIONYSIA.


days,  and  the  first  fell  on  the  11th  (Suidas,  s.  v.
Xo4s)y  and  the  third  on  the  13th  (Philoch.  ap.
Suidam,  s.  v.  Xvrpoi).  The  second  archon  super-
intended the  celebration  of  the  Anthesteria,  and
distributed  the  prizes  among  the  victors  in  the
various  games  which  were  carried  on  during  the
season.  (Aristoph.  Acham.  1143,  with  the  Schol.)
The  first  day  was  called  iriOoiyla :  the  second,
X^es  :  and  the  third,  x^'^P^^-  ( Harpocrat.  and
Suidas,  s.  v.  ;  Schol.  ad  Aristoph.  Ran.  219  ;
Athen.  X.  p.  437,  vii.  p.  276,  and  iv.  129.)  The
first  day  derived  its  name  from  the  opening  of  the
casks  to  taste  the  wine  of  the  preceding  year  ;  the
second  from  X''^^*  the  cup,  and  seems  to  have  been
the  day  devoted  to  drinking.  The  ascolia  seem  to
have  been  played  on  this  day.  [Ascolia.]  We
read  in  Suidas  (s.  v.  'A(Tk6s)  of  another  similar
amusement  peculiar  to  this  day.  The  drinker
placed  himself  upon  a  bag  filled  with  air,  trumpets
were  sounded,  and  he  who  emptied  his  cup
quickest,  or  drank  most,  received  as  his  prize  a
leather  bag  filled  with  wine,  and  a  garland,  or,  ac-
cording to  Aelian  {V.  H.  ii.  41),  a  golden  crown.
(Aristoph.  Acham.  943,  with  the  Schol.)  The
Kwfxos  i(p^  afia^uy  also  took  place  on  this  day,
and  the  jests  and  abuse  which  persons  poured
forth  on  this  occasion  were  doubtless  an  imitation
of  the  amusements  customary  at  the  rural  Dionysia,
Athenaeus  (x.  p.  437)  says  that  it  was  customary
on  the  day  of  the  Choes  to  send  to  the  sophists
their  salaries  and  presents,  that  they  too  might
enjoy  themselves  with  their  friends.  The  tliird
day  had  its  name  from  x^'^P'^^i  ^  pot?  ^s  on  this
day  persons  olfered  pots  with  flowers,  seeds,  or
cooked  vegetables,  as  a  sacrifice  to  Dionysus  and
Hermes  Chthonius.  (Schol.  ad  Aristoph.  Acham.
1009  ;  Suidas,  s.  v.  Xvrpoi.)  With  this  sacrifice
Avere  connected  the  ayuv^s  x'^^pfo'  mentioned
by  the  Scholiast  on  Aristophanes  {Ran.  220),  in
which  the  second  archon  distributed  the  prizes.
Slaves  were  permitted  to  take  part  in  the  general
rejoicings  of  the  Anthesteria  ;  but  at  the  close  of
the  day,  they  were  sent  home  with  the  words
^vpa(e,  Kapes,  ovk  er'  ^Av9€(rT-f}pia.  (Hesych.  s.  v.
&vpaCf  ;  Proclus,  ad  Ilesiod.  Op.  et  Dies.)

It  is  uncertain  whether  dramas  were  performed
at  the  Anthesteria  ;  but  Bockh  supposes  that  co-
medies were  represented,  and  that  tragedies  which
were  to  be  bi'ought  out  at  the  great  Dionysia
were  perhaps  rehearsed  at  the  Anthesteria.  The
mysteries  connected  with  the  celebration  of  the
Anthesteria  were  held  at  night,  in  the  ancient
temple  iu  Aifiuais,  which  was  opened  only  once
a  year,  on  the  1 2th  of  Anthesterion.  They  were
likewise  under  the  superintendence  of  the  second
archon  and  a  certain  number  of  eVtyueXrjTat.  He
appointed  fourteen  priestesses,  called  yepaipal  or
yepapai,  the  venerable,  who  conducted  the  cere-
monies with  the  assistance  of  one  other  priestess.
(Pollux,  viii.  9.)  The  wife  of  the  second  archon
lfia<ri\i<r(ra)  offered  a  mysterious  sacrifice  for  the
Avelfare  of  the  city  ;  she  was  betrothed  to  the  god
in  a  secret  solemnit}',  and  also  tendered  the  oath
to  the  geraerae,  which,  according  to  Demosthenes
(c.  Ncaer.  p.  1371.  22),  ran  thus:  — "  I  am  pure
and  unspotted  by  any  thing  that  pollutes,  and  have
never  had  intercourse  with  man.  I  will  solemnize
the  Theognia  and  lobakcheia  at  their  proper  time,
according  to  the  laws  of  my  ancestors."  The  ad-
mission to  the  mysteries,  from  which  men  were
excluded,  took  place  after  especial  preparations,


DIONYSIA.

which  seem  to  have  consisted  in  purifications  by
air,  water,  or  fire.  (Serv.  ad  Aen.  vi.  740  ;  Paus.
ix.  20.  §  4  ;  Liv.  xxxix.  13.)  The  initiated  per-
sons wore  skins  of  fawns,  and  sometimes  those  of
panthers.  Instead  of  ivy,  which  was  worn  in  the
public  part  of  the  Dionj-sia,  the  mystae  wore
myrtle.  (Schol.  ad  Aristoph.  Ran.  330.)  The
sacrifice  offered  to  the  god  in  these  mysteries  con-
sisted of  a  sow,  the  usual  sacrifice  of  Demeter,  and
in  some  places  of  a  cow  with  calf.  It  is  more
than  probable  that  the  history  of  Dionysus  waa
symbolically  represented  in  these  mysteries,  as  the
history  of  Demeter  was  acted  in  those  of  Eleusis,
which  were  in  some  respects  connected  with  the
former.    (Schol.  ad  Aristoph.  Ran.  343.)

The  fourth  Attic  festival  of  Dionysus,  A.iovv(na,
iv  &(rTei,  aaTiKO,  or  /leydKa,  was  celebrated  about
the  12th  of  the  month  of  Elaphebolion  (Aesch.
c.  Ctesiph.  p.  63)  ;  but  we  do  not  know  whether
they  lasted  more  than  one  day  or  not.  The  order
in  which  the  solemnities  took  place  was,  according
to  the  document  in  Demosthenes,  as  follows :  —
The  great  public  procession,  the  chorus  of  boys,
the  Kufios  [Chorus],  comedy,  and, lastlj-,  tragedy.
We  possess  in  Athenaeus  (v.  p.  197,  199)  the  de-
scription of  a  great  Bacchic  procession,  held  at
Alexandria  in  the  reign  of  Ptolemaeus  Philadel-
phus,  from  which  we  may  form  some  idea  of  the
great  Attic  procession.  It  seems  to  have  been
customary  to  represent  the  god  by  a  man  in  this
procession.  Plutarch  (Nic.  3),  at  least,  relates
that  on  one  occasion  a  beautiful  slave  of  Nicias
represented  Dionysus  (compare  Athen.  v.  p.  200).
A  ridiculous  imitation  of  a  Bacchic  procession  is
described  in  Aristophanes  (Eccles.  759,  &c.).  Of
the  dramas  which  were  performed  at  the  great
Dionysia,  the  tragedies  at  least  were  generally
new  pieces  ;  repetitions  do  not,  however,  seem  to
have  been  excluded  from  any  Dionysiac  festival.
The  first  archon  had  the  superintendence,  and
gave  the  chorus  to  the  dramatic  poet  who  wished
to  bring  out  his  piece  at  this  festival.  The  prize
awarded  to  the  dramatist  for  the  best  play  con-
sisted of  a  crown,  and  his  name  was  proclaimed
in  the  theatre  of  Dionysus.  (Demosth.  De  Coron.
p.  267.)  Strangers  were  prohibited  from  taking
part  in  the  choruses  of  boys.  During  this  and
some  other  of  the  great  Attic  festivals,  prisoners
were  set  free,  and  nobody  was  allowed  to  seize
the  goods  of  a  debtor  ;  but  a  war  was  not  inter-
rupted by  its  celebration.  (Demosth,  c.  Boeot.
de  Nom.  p.  999.)  As  the  great  Dionysia  were
celebrated  at  the  beginning  of  spring,  when  the
navigation  was  re-opened,  Athens  was  not  only
visited  by  numbers  of  country  people,  but  also  by
strangers  from  other  parts  of  Greece,  and  the
various  amusements  and  exhibitions  on  this  oc-
casion were  not  unlike  those  of  a  modern  fair.
(Isocr.  Areop.  p.  203,  ed.  Bekker  ;  Xen.  Hiero^
i.  1  ]  ;  compare  Becker,  Charikles^  ii.  p.  237,  &c.)
Respecting  the  scrupulous  regularity,  and  the
enormous  sums  spent  by  the  Athenians  on  the
celebration  of  these  and  other  festivals,  see  De-
mosthenes {Philip.  1.  p.  50).  As  many  circum-
stances connected  with  the  celebration  of  the
Dionysia  cannot  be  made  clear  without  entering
into  minute  details,  we  must  refer  the  reader  to
Bockh's  essay.

The  worship  of  Dionysus  was  almost  universal
among  the  Greeks  in  Asia  as  well  as  in  Europe,
and  the  character  of  his  festivals  was  the  same


DION  Y  SI  A.

everywhere,  only  modified  by  the  national  differ-
ences of  the  various  tribes  of  the  Greeks.  It  is
expressly  slated  that  the  Spartans  did  not  indulge
so  much  in  drinking  during  the  celebration  of  the
Dionysia  as  other  Greeks.  (Athen.  iv.  p.  156  ;
Plato,  De  Leg.  i.  p.  637.)  The  worship  of  Dio-
nysus was  in  general,  with  the  exception  of  Co-
rinth, Sicyon,  and  the  Doric  colonies  in  southern
Italy,  less  popular  among  the  Doric  states  than  in
other  parts  of  Greece.  (Miiller,  Dorians^  ii.  10.
§  6  ;  Bottiger,  Ideen  z.  Archaeol.  der  Ma/erei,
p.  28.9,  &c.)  It  was  most  enthusiastic  in  Boeotia
in  the  orgies  on  Movmt  Cithaeron,  as  is  well
known  from  allusions  and  descriptions  in  several
Roman  poets.  That  the  extravagant  merriment,
and  the  unrestrained  conduct  with  which  all  fes-
tivals of  this  class  were  celebrated,  did  in  the
course  of  time  lead  to  the  grossest  excesses,  cannot
be  denied ;  but  we  must  at  the  same  time  acknow-
ledge, that  such  excesses  did  not  occur  until  a
comparatively  late  period.  At  a  very  early  period
of  Grecian  history,  Bacchic  festivals  were  so-
lemnized with  human  sacrifices,  and  traces  of  this
custom  are  discernible  even  until  very  late.  In
Chios  this  custom  was  superseded  by  another,
according  to  which  the  Bacchae  were  obliged  to
eat  the  raw  pieces  of  flesh  of  the  victim  which
were  distributed  among  them.  This  act  was  called
wfio^ayia,  and  Dionysus  derived  from  it  the  name
of  wfidSios  and  w/xtjo-t^s.  There  was  a  report  that
even  Themistocles,  after  the  battle  of  Salamis,  sacri-
ficed three  noble  Persians  to  this  divinity.  (Plut.
Tkemist.  13,  Pelop.  21  ;  compare  Thirl  wall,  Hist.
of  Greece.,  ii.  p.  310.)  But  Plutarch's  account  of
this  very  instance,  if  true,  shows  that  at  this  time
such  savage  rites  were  looked  upon  with  horror.

The  worship  of  Dionysus,  whom  the  Romans
called  Bacchus,  or  rather  the  Bacchic  mysteries
and  orgies  {Bacchanalia).,  are  said  to  have  been
introduced  from  southern  Italy  into  Etruria,  and
from  thence  to  Rome  (Li v.  xxxix.  8),  where  for  a
time  they  were  carried  on  in  secret,  and,  during
the  latter  period  of  their  existence,  at  night.  The
initiated,  according  to  Livy,  did  not  only  indulge
in  feasting  and  drinking  at  their  meetings,  but
when  their  minds  were  heated  with  wine,  they
indulged  in  the  coarsest  excesses  and  the  most
unnatural  vices.  Young  girls  and  youths  were
seduced,  and  all  modesty  was  set  aside  ;  every
kind  of  vice  found  here  its  full  satisfaction.  But
the  crimes  did  not  remain  confined  to  these  meet-
ings: their  consequences  were  manifest  in  all  direc-
tions ;  for  false  witnesses,  forgeries,  false  wills,
find  denunciations  proceeded  from  this  focus  ojf
crime.  Poison  and  assassination  were  carried  on
under  the  cover  of  the  society  ;  and  the  voices  of
those  who  had  been  fraudulently  drawn  into  these
orgies,  and  would  cry  out  against  the  shameless
practices,  were  drowned  by  the  shouts  of  the  Bac-
chantes, and  the  deafening  sounds  of  drums  and
cymbals.

The  time  of  initiation  lasted  ten  days,  during
which  a  person  was  obliged  to  abstain  from  all
sexual  intercourse  ;  on  the  tenth  he  took  a  solemn
meal,  underwent  a  purification  by  water,  and  was
led  into  the  sanctuary  {Bacchanal).  At  first  only
women  were  initiated,  and  the  orgies  were  cele-
brated every  year  during  three  days.  Matrons
alternately  performed  the  functions  of  priests.  But
I'acula  Annia,  a  Campanian  matron,  pretending
to   act   under   the    direct   influence   of    Bacchus,


DIONYSIA.  413

changed  the  whole  method  of  celebration :  she
admitted  men  to  the  initiation,  and  transferred
the  solemnisation  which  had  hitherto  taken  place
during  the  daytime  to  the  night.  Instead  of  three
days  in  the  year,  she  ordered  that  the  Bacchanalia
should  be  held  during  five  days  in  every  month.
It  was  from  the  time  that  these  orgies  were  car-
ried on  after  this  new  plan  that,  according  to  the
statement  of  an  eye-witness  (Liv.  xxxix.  13),
licentiousness  and  crimes  of  every  description  were
committed.  Men  as  well  as  women  indulged  in
the  most  unnatural  appetites,  and  those  who  at-
tempted to  stop  or  to  oppose  such  odious  pro-
ceedings fell  as  victims.  It  was,  as  Livy  says,  a
principle  of  the  society  to  hold  every  ordinance
of  god  and  nature  in  contempt.  Men,  as  if  seized
by  fits  of  madness,  and  under  great  convulsions,
gave  oracles  ;  and  the  matrons,  dressed  as  Bac-
chae, Avith  dishevelled  hair  and  burning  torches  in
their  hands,  mn  down  to  the  Tiber  and  plunged
their  torches  into  the  water  ;  the  torches,  how-
ever, containing  sulphur  and  chalk,  were  not  ex-
tinguished. Men  who  refused  to  take  part  in  the
crimes  of  these  orgies,  Avere  frequently  thrown  into
dark  caverns  and  despatched,  while  the  perpe-
trators declared  that  they  had  been  carried  oflF  by
the  gods.  Among  the  number  of  the  members  of
these  mysteries,  were,  at  the  time  when  they  were
suppressed,  prrsons  of  all  classes  ;  and  during  the
last  two  years,  nobody  had  been  initiated  who
was  above  the  age  of  twenty  j-ears,  as  this  age
was  thought  most  fit  for  seduction  and  sensual
pleasure.

In  the  year  B.C.  186,  the  consuls  Spurius  Pos-
tumius  Albinus  and  Q.  Marcius  Philippus  were
informed  of  the  existence  of  these  meetings  ;  and
after  having  ascertained  the  facts  mentioned  above,
they  made  a  report  to  the  senate.  (Liv.  xxxix.
14.)  The  senate,  alarmed  by  this  singular  dis-
covery, and  although  dreading  lest  members  of
their  own  families  might  be  involved,  invested  the
consuls  with  extraordinary  power,  to  inquire  into
the  nature  of  these  nocturnal  meetings,  to  exert  all
their  energy  to  secure  the  priests  and  priestesses,
to  issue  a  proclamation  throughout  Rome  and
Italy,  forbidding  any  one  to  be  initiated  in  the
Bacchic  mysteries,  or  to  meet  for  the  purpose  of
celebrating  them  ;  but  above  all  things,  to  submit
those  individuals  who  had  already  been  secured
to  a  rigid  trial.  The  consuls,  after  having  given
to  the  subordinate  magistrates  all  the  necessary
instructions,  held  an  assembly  of  the  people,  in
which  the  faets  just  discovered  were  explained  to
the  public,  in  order  that  the  objects  of  the  pro-
ceedings which  were  to  take  place  might  be  known
to  every  citizen.  A  reward  was  at  the  same  time
ofiered  to  any  one  who  might  be  able  to  give
further  information,  or  to  name  any  one  that  be-
longed to  the  conspiracy,  as  it  was  called.  Mea-
sures were  also  taken  to  prevent  any  one  from
leaving  Italy.  During  the  night  following,  a  great
number  of  persons  were  apprehended  ;  many  of
them  put  an  end  to  their  own  lives.  The  whole
number  of  the  initiated  was  said  to  be  7000.  The
trial  of  all  those  who  were  apprehended  lasted
thirty  days.  Rome  was  almost  deserted,  for  the
innocent  as  well  as  the  guilty  had  reason  to  fear.
The  punishment  inflicted  on  those  who  were  con-
victed, varied  according  to  the  degree  of  their
guilt ;  some  were  thrown  into  prison,  others  were
put  to  death.     The  women  were  surrendered  to


414


DIONYSIA.


tlieir  parents  or  husbands,  that  they  might  receive
their  punishment  in  private.  The  consuls  then
were  ordered  by  the  senate  to  destroy  all  Baccha-
nalia throughout  Rome  and  Italy,  with  the  excep-
tion of  such  altars  or  statues  of  the  god  as  had
existed  there  from  ancient  times.  In  order  to  pre-
vent a  restoration  of  the  Bacchic  orgies,  the  cele-
brated decree  of  the  senate  {Senatus  auctoritas  de
Bacchanalibus)  was  issued,  commanding  that  no
Bacchanalia  should  be  held  either  in  Rome  or
Italy  ;  that  if  any  one  should  think  such  cere-
monies necessary,  or  if  he  could  not  neglect  them
without  scruples  or  making  atonements,  he  should
apply  to  the  praetor  urbanus,  who  might  then
consult  the  senate.  If  the  permission  should  be
granted  to  him  in  an  assembly  of  the  senate,  con-
sisting of  not  less  than  one  hundred  members,  he
might  solemnise  the  Bacchic  sacra  ;  but  no  more
than  five  persons  were  to  be  present  at  the  cele-
bration ;  there  should  be  no  common  fund,  and  no
master  of  the  sacra  or  priest.  (Li v.  xxxix.  18.)
This  decree  *.s  also  mentioned  by  Cicero  (Z)e
Legg.  ii.  15).  A  brazen  table  containing  this  im-
portant document  was  discovered  near  Bari,  in
southern  Italj',  in  the  j-ear  1640,  and  is  at  present
in  the  imperial  Museum  of  Vienna.  A  copy  of  it
is  given  in  Drakenborch's  edition  of  Livy  (vol.
vii.  p.  197,  &c.).

We  have  in  our  account  of  the  Roman  Baccha-
nalia closely  followed  the  description  given  by
Livy,  which  may,  indeed,  be  somewhat  exag-
gerated ;  but  considering  the  difference  of  character
between  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  it  cannot  be
surprising  that  a  festival  like  the  Dionysia,  when
once  introduced  among  the  Romans,  should  have
immediately  degenerated  into  the  grossest  and
coarsest  excesses.  Similar  consequences  were  seen
immediately  after  the  time  when  the  Romans  were
made  acquainted  with  the  elegance  and  the  luxuries
of  Greek  life  ;  for,  like  barbarians,  they  knew  not
where  to  stop,  and  became  brutal  in  their  enjoy-
ments. But  whether  the  account  of  Livy  be  ex-
aggerated or  not,  this  much  is  certain,  that  the
Romans,  ever  since  the  time  of  the  suppression  of
the  Bacchanalia,  considered  these  orgies  as  in  the
highest  degree  immoral  and  licentious,  as  we  see
from  the  manner  in  which  they  applied  the  words
derived  from  Bacchus,  e.  g.  bacchor,  hacchans^  hac-
chatio,  hacchicus,  and  others.  But  the  most  sur-
prising circumstance  in  the  account  of  Livy  is,  that
the  Bacchanalia  should  have  been  celebrated  for
several  years  in  the  boisterous  manner  described
by  him,  and  by  thousands  of  persons,  without  any
of  the  magistrates  appearing  to  have  been  aware
of  it.

While  the  Bacchanalia  were  thus  suppressed,
another  more  simple  and  innocent  festival  of  Bac-
chus, the  Liberalia  (from  Lilxir^  or  Liber  Pater,  a
name  of  Bacchus),  continued  to  be  celebrated  at
Rome  every  year  on  the  1 6th  of  March.  (Ovid.
Fast.  iii.  713.)  A  description  of  the  ceremonies
customary  at  this  festival  is  given  by  Ovid  {I.  c. ),
with  Avhich  may  be  compared  Varro  {De  Ling.  Lat.
V.  55,  ed.  Bipont).  Priests  and  aged  priestesses,
adorned  with  garlands  of  ivy,  carried  through  the
city  wine,  honey,  cakes,  and  sweet-meats,  toge-
ther with  an  altar  with  a  handle  {ansata  ara),  in
the  middle  of  which  there  was  a  small  fire-pan
(^/oculus),  in  which  from  time  to  time  sacrilices
were  burnt.  On  this  day  Roman  youths  who  had
attained  their  sixteenth  year   received   the  toga


DIRIBITORES.

virilis.  (Cic.  ad  Att.  vi.  1.)  That  the  Liberalia
were  celebrated  with  various  amusements  and  great
merriment,  might  be  inferred  from  the  general
character  of  Dionysiac  festivals  ;  but  we  may  also
see  it  from  the  name  Liuii  Liberales,  which  is
sometimes  used  instead  of  Liberalia ;  and  Naevias
(ap.  Fest.)  expressly  says  that  persons  expressed
themselves  very  freely  at  the  Liberalia.  St.
Augustine  {De  Civ.  Dei,  vii.  21)  even  speaks  of
a  high  degree  of  licentiousness  carried  on  at  this
festival.  [L.  S.]

DIOSCU'RIA  {ho(TKovpia),  festivals  cele-
brated in  various  parts  of  Greece  in  honour  of  the
dioscurl  The  Spartan  dioscuria  mentioned  by
Pausanias  (iv.  27.  §  1  ;  compare  with  iii.  16.  §  3)
and  Spanheim  {ad  Callim.  Hymn,  in  Pall.  24),
were  celebrated  with  sacrifices,  rejoicings,  and
drinking.  At  Cyrene  the  dioscuri  were  likewise
honoured  with  a  great  festival.  (Schol.  ad  Find.
Pyth.  V,  629.)  The  Athenian  festival  of  the  dios-
curi has  been  described  under  Anaceia.  Their
worship  was  very  generally  adopted  in  Greece,
especially  in  the  Doric  and  Achaean  states,  as  we
conclude  from  the  great  number  of  temples  dedi-
cated to  them  ;  but  scarcely  anything  is  known
respecting  the  manner  in  which  their  festivals
were  celebrated.  [L.  S.]

DIOTA.     [Amphora.]

DIPHTHERA  (St</)0e>a),  a  kind  of  cloak
made  of  the  skins  of  animals  and  worn  by  herds-
men and  country  people  in  general.  It  is  fre-
quently mentioned  by  Greek  writers.  (Aristoph.
Nvh.  72,  and  Schol.  Vesp.  AU  ;  Plato,  Crit.  p.  53  ;
Lucian,  Tim.  c.  12.)  Pollux  (vii.  70)  says  that  it
had  a  covering  for  the  head  {iiriKpavov),  in  which
respect  it  would  correspond  to  the  Roman  cuctiI-
lus.  [CucULLUS.]  (Becker,  Charikles,  vol.  ii.  p.
359.)

DIPHROS  (Bicppos).     [CuRRus  ;  Thronus.]

DIPLAX  (5i7rAa|).     [Pallium.]

DIPLOIS  {dnrXo'is).     [Pallium.]

DIPLO'MA,  a  writ  or  public  document,  which
conferred  upon  a  person  any  right  or  privilege.
During  the  republic,  it  was  granted  by  the  con-
suls and  senate  ;  and  under  the  empire  by  the
emperor  and  the  magistrates  whom  he  authorised
to  do  so.  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  vi.  12,  ad  Ait.  x.  17,
c.  Pis.  37  ;  Sen.  Ben.  vii.  10  ;  Suet.  CaL  38,  Ner.
12,  0th.  7  ',  Dig.  48.  tit.  10.  s.27.)  The  diploma
was  sealed  by  the  emperor  (Suet.  Aug.  50)  ;  it  con-
sisted of  two  leaves,  whence  it  derived  its  name.
These  writs  were  especially  given  to  public  couriers,
or  to  those  who  Avished  to  procure  the  use  of  the
public  horses  or  carriages.  (Plin.  Ep.  x.  14, 121  ;
compare  x.  54,  55.)  The  tabellarii  of  the  em-
peror would  naturally  always  have  a  diploma  ;
whence  we  read  in  an  inscription  (Oreili,  No.
2917)  of  a  diplomarius  tabellarius.

DI'PTYCHA.     [Tabulae.]

DIRECTA  ACTIO.     [Actio.]

PIRIBITO'RES,  are  said  by  most  modem
writers  to  have  been  the  persons  who  gave  to  the
citizens  the  tabella  with  which  they  voted  in  the
comitia  ;  but  Wunder  has  most  distinctly  proved,
in  the  preface  to  his  Codex  Erfutensis  (pp.  cxxvi. — ■
clviii.),  that  it  was  the  office  of  the  du-ibitores  to
divide  the  votes  when  taken  out  of  the  cistae,  so  as
to  determine  which  had  the  majority.  He  remarks
that  the  etymology  of  diribere  would  lead  us  to
assign  to  it  the  meaning  of  "  separation ''  or
"  division,"  as  it  is  compounded  of  dis  and  habere^


DISCUS.

in  the  same  maimer  as  dirimere  isofrfts  and  emcre;
tlie  h  disappears  as  in  praebere  and  dehere^  which
come  respectively  from  prae  and  habere^  and  de
and  habere.  In  several  passages  the  word  cannot
have  any  other  signification  than  that  given  bj"^
Wunder.  (Cic.  Fro  Plancio^  20,  ad  Qu.  Fratr.
iii.  4.  §  1  ;  Varro,  De  Re  Rust.  iii.  2.  §  1,  iii.  5.
§18.)

When  Cicero  says  (m  Fison.  15),  "  vos  roga-
tores,  vos  diribitores,  vos  custodes  tabellarum,"  we
limy  presume  that  he  mentions  these  officers  in  the
order  in  which  they  discharged  their  duties  in  the
comitia.  It  was  the  office  of  the  rogatores  to  col-
lect the  tabellae  which  each  century  gave,  as  they
used,  before  the  ballot  was  introduced,  to  ask
(rogare)  each  century  for  its  votes,  and  report
them  to  the  magistrate  Avho  presided  over  the
comitia.  The  diribitores.,  as  has  been  already  re-
marked, divided  the  votes  when  taken  out  of  the
cistae^  and  handed  them  over  to  the  custodes,  who
checked  them  off  by  points  marked  on  a  tablet.
[Compare  CiSTA  ;  Situla.]

DISCUS  {U(TKos\  a  circular  plate  of  stone
(\iQivoi  SicTKoi,  Pind.  Isth.  i.  34),  or  metal  (splen-
dida  pondera  disci.  Mart.  xiv.  164),  made  for
throwing  to  a  distance  as  an  exercise  of  strength
and  dexterity.  This  was,  indeed,  one  of  the  prin-
cipal gymnastic  exercises  of  the  ancients,  being
included  in  the  Fentathlon.  It  was  practised  in
the  heroic  age.  (Horn, /Z.  ii.  7/4,  Oc^.  viii.  129,
186—188,  xvii.  168.)

The  discus  was  ten  or  twelve  inches  in  diameter,
so  as  to  reach  above  the  middle  of  the  forearm
when  held  in  the  right  hand.  The  object  was  to
throw  it  from  a  fixed  spot  to  the  greatest  distance  ;
and  in  doing  this  each  player  had  a  friend  to  mark
the  point  at  which  the  discus,  when  thrown  by
him,  struck  the  ground.  {Od.  viii.  186 — 200  ;
Stat.  Tlieb.  \  i.  703.)  The  distance  to  which  it
was  commonly  thrown  became  a  measure  of  length,
called  Ttt  ViGKovpa.     (11.  xxiii.  431,  523.)

The  space  on  which  the  discobolus,  or  thrower
of  the  discus,  stood,  was  called  fiaXSis,  and  was
indicated  by  being  a  little  higher  than  the  ground
surrounding  it.  As  each  man  took  his  station,
with  his  body  entirely  naked,  on  the  fia\6is,  he
placed  his  right  foot  forward,  bending  his  knee,


PIVINATIO.  4U

and  resting  principally  on  this  foot.  The  discus
being  held,  ready  to  be  thrown,  in  his  right  hand,
he  stooped,  turning  his  body  towards  it,  and  hia
left  hand  was  naturally  turned  in  the  same  direc-
tion. (Philostr.  Imag.  i.  24  ;  Welcker,  ad  loc.)
This  attitude  was  represented  by  the  sculptor
Myron  in  one  of  his  works,  and  is  adduced  by
Quintilian  {Inst.  Or.  ii,  13,  §10)  to  show  how
much  greater  skill  is  displayed  by  the  artist,  and
how  much  more  powerful  an  effect  is  produced  on
the  spectator,  when  a  person  is  represented  in
action,  than  when  he  is  at  rest  or  standing  erect.
We  fortunately  possess  several  copies,  more  or  less
entire,  of  this  celebrated  statue  ;  and  one  of  the
best  of  them  is  in  the  British  Museum  (see  the
preceding  woodcut).  It  represents  the  player  just
ready  to  swing  round  his  outstretched  arm,  so  as
to  describe  with  it  a  semicircle  in  the  air,  and
thus,  with  his  collected  force,  to  project  the  discus
at  an  angle  of  forty-five  degrees,  at  the  same  time
springing  forward  so  as  to  give  to  it  the  impetus  of
his  whole  body.  Discum  "  vasto  contorquet  tur-
bine, et  ipse  prosequitur."     (Statins,  I.  c.)

Sometimes  a  heavy  mass  of  a  spherical  form
{<t6Kos)  was  used  instead  of  a  discus,  as  when  the
Greeks  at  the  funeral  games  contended  for  a  lump
of  iron,  which  was  to  be  given  to  him  who  could
throw  it  furthest,  {II.  xxiii.  826—846.)  The
(t6Kos  was  perforated  in  the  centre,  so  that  a  rope  or
thong  might  be  passed  through  and  used  in  throw-
ing it.  (Eratosth,  ed,  Bernhardy,  p,251,)  In  this
form  the  discobolia  is  still  practised  by  the  moun-
taineers of  the  canton  of  Appenzell,  in  Switzer-
land. They  meet  twice  a  year  to  throw  round
stones  of  great  weight  and  size.  This  they  do  by
a  sudden  leap  and  forcible  swinging  of  the  whole
body.  The  same  stone  is  taken  by  all,  as  in  the
case  of  the  ancient  discus  and  (t6\os  :  he  who  sends
it  to  the  greatest  distance  receives  a  public  prize.
The  stone  is  lifted  as  high  as  the  right  shoulder
(see  woodcut  ;  KaTw/xaSioio,  11.  xxiii.  431)  before
being  projected.  (Ebel,  Schilderung  der  Gebirgs-
volker  der  Schweitz,  i.  p,  174.)  [J.  Y.]

DISPENSA'TOR.     [Calculator.]
DITHYRAMBUS.     [Chorus.]
DIVERSO'RIUM.     [Caupona.]
DIVIDI'CULUM.         [Aquaeductus,      p.
114,  a.]

DIVINA'TIO  is,  according  to  Cicero  {De
Divinat.  i.  1),  a  prescnsion  and  a  knowledge  of
future  things  ;  or,  according  to  Chrysippus  (Cic.
De  Divinat.  ii.  63),  a  power  in  man  which  foresees
and  explains  those  signs  which  the  gods  throw  in
his  way,  and  the  diviner  must  therefore  know  the
disposition  of  the  gods  towards  men,  the  import  of
their  signs,  and  by  what  means  these  signs  are  to
be  obtained.  According  to  this  latter  definition,
the  meaning  of  the  Latin  word  divinatio  is  nar-
rower than  that  of  the  Greek  /xavriKT],  in  as  much
as  the  latter  signifies  any  means  by  which  the
decrees  of  the  gods  can  be  discovered,  the  natural
as  well  as  the  artificial  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  seers
and  the  oracles,  where  the  will  of  the  gods  is  re-
vealed by  inspiration,  as  well  as  the  divinatio  in
the  sense  of  Chrysippus.  In  the  one,  man  is  the
passive  medium  through  which  the  deity  reveaJs
the  future  ;  while  in  the  other,  man  discovers  it
by  his  own  skill  or  experience,  without  any  pre-
tension to  inspiration.  As,  however,  the  seer  or
vates  was  also  frequently  called  divinus,  we  jjhall
treat,  under  this  head,  of  seers  as  well  as  of  other


41S


DIVINATIO.


kinds  of  divinatio.  The  subject  of  oracles  Is  dis-
cussed in  a  separate  article.     [Oraculum.]

The  belief  that  the  decrees  of  the  divine  will
were  occasionally  revealed  by  the  deity  himself,  or
could  be  discovered  by  certain  individuals,  is  one
which  the  classical  nations  of  antiquity  had,  in
common  with  many  other  nations,  before  the
attainment  of  a  certain  degree  of  intellectual  culti-
vation. In  early  ages  such  a  belief  was  natural,
and  perhaps  founded  on  the  feeling  of  a  very  close
connection  between  man,  God,  and  nature.  But
in  the  course  of  time,  when  men  became  more  ac-
quainted with  the  laws  of  nature,  this  belief  was
abandoned,  at  least  by  the  more  enlightened  minds,
while  the  multitudes  still  continued  to  adhere  to
it  ;  and  the  governments,  seeing  the  advantages  to
be  derived  from  it,  not  only  countenanced,  but  en-
couraged and  supported  it.

The  seers  or  fxavreis,  who,  under  the  direct  influ-
ence of  the  gods,  chiefly  that  of  Apollo,  announced
the  future,  seem  originally  to  have  been  connected
Avith  certain  places  where  oracles  were  given  ;  but
in  subsequent  times  they  fonned  a  distinct  class  of
persons,  independent  of  any  locality  ;  one  of  them
is  Calchas  in  the  Homeric  poems.  Apollo,  the
god  of  prophecy,  was  generally  the  source  from
which  the  seers,  as  well  as  other  diviners,  derived
their  knowledge.  In  many  families  of  seers  the
inspired  knowledge  of  the  future  was  considered
to  be  hereditiiry,  and  to  be  transmitted  from  father
to  son.  To  these  families  belonged  the  lamids
(Paus.  iii.  11.  §5,  &c.  ;  Bcickh,  ad  Find.  01.  vi.
p.  152),  who  from  Olympia  spread  over  a  con-
siderable part  of  Greece  ;  the  Bninchidae,  near
Miletus  (Conon,  33)  ;  the  Eumolpids,  at  Athens
and  Eleusis  ;  the  Clytiads  (Paus.  vi.  17.  §4),  the
Telliads  (Herod,  viii.  27  ;  Paus.  x.  1.  §4,  &c.  ;
Herod,  ix.  37),  the  Acarnanian  seers,  and  others.
Some  of  these  families  retained  their  celebrity
till  a  very  late  period  of  Grecian  history.  The
nianteis  made  their  revelations  either  when  re-
quested to  do  so  on  important  emergencies,  or
they  made  them  spontaneously  whenever  they
thought  it  necessar)',  either  to  prevent  some
calamity  or  to  stimulate  their  countrymen  to  some-
thing beneficial.  The  civil  government  of  Athens
not  only  tolerated,  but  protected  and  honoured
them  ;  and  Cicero  (De  Divinat.  i.  43)  says,  that
the  mantels  were  present  in  all  the  public  assem-
blies of  the  Athenians.  (Compare  Aristoph.  Piue^
1025,  with  the  Schol.  ;  Nub.  325,  &c.  and  the
Schol.  ;  Lycurg.  c.  Leocrat.  p.  106.)  Along  with
the  seers  we  may  also  mention  the  Bacides  and
the  Sibyllae.  Both  existed  from  a  very  remote
time,  and  were  distinct  from  the  mantels  so  far  as
they  pretended  to  derive  their  knowledge  of  the
future  from  sacred  books  (xp^Jc^oO  which  they
consulted,  and  which  were  in  some  places,  as  at
Athens  and  Home,  kept  by  the  government  or
some  especial  officers,  in  the  acropolis  and  in  the
jnost  revered  sanctuary.  Bacis  was,  according  to
Pausanias  (x.  12.  §  6"  ;  compare  with  iv.  27.  §  2),
in  Boeotia  a  general  name  for  a  man  inspired
by  nymphs.  The  Scholiast  on  Aristophanes  {Pax.,
1009)  and  Aelian  (  F. //.  xii.  35)  mention  three
original  Biicides,  one  of  Eleon  in  Boeotia,  a  second
of  Athens,  and  a  third  of  Caphys  in  Arcadia.
(Compare  Aristoph.  Equit.  123,  998,  Aves,  9G3  ;
Clem.  Alex.  Strom,  i.  398.)  From  these  three
Bacides  all  others  were  said  to  be  descended,  and
to  have  derived  their  name.     Antichares  (Herod.


DIVINATIO.

V.  43),  Musaeus  (Herod,  vii.  6),  Euclous  of  Cyprus
(Paus.  X.  12.  §  6),  and  Lycus,  son  of  Pandion
(Paus.  I.  c),  probably  belonged  to  the  Bacides.
The  Sibyllae  were  prophetic  women,  probably  of
Asiatic  origin,  whose  peculiar  custom  seems  to
have  been  to  wander  with  their  sacred  books  from
place  to  place.  (Liv.  i.  7.)  Aelian  (  V.  If.  xii.  35)
states  that,  according  to  some  authors,  there  were
four  Sibyllae,  —  the  Erythraean,  the  Samian,  the
Egyptian,  and  the  Sardinian  ;  but  that  others
added  six  more,  among  whom  there  was  one
called  the  Cumaean,  and  another  called  the  Jewish
Sibylla.  Compare  Suidas  (s.  v.  liSvWai)^  and
Pausanias  (x.  12),  who  has  devoted  a  whole  chap-
ter to  the  Sibyllae,  in  which,  however,  he  does  not
clearly  distinguish  between  the  Sibyllae  properly
so  called,  and  other  women  who  travelled  about
and  made  the  prophetic  art  their  profession,  and
who  seem  to  have  been  very  numerous  in  all  parts
of  the  ancient  world.  (Clem.  Alex.  Strom,  i.  319.)
The  Sibylla  whose  books  gained  so  great  an  im-
portance at  Rome,  was,  according  to  Varro  (ap.
Lactant.  i.  6),  the  Erythraean  :  the  books  which
she  was  said  to  have  sold  to  one  of  the  Tarquins,
were  carefully  concealed  from  the  public,  and  only
accessible  to  the  duumvirs.  The  early  existence
of  the  Sibyllae  is  not  as  certain  as  that  of  the
Bacides  ;  but  in  some  legends  of  a  late  date,  they
occur  even  in  the  period  previous  to  the  Trojan
war,  and  it  is  not  improbable  that  at  an  early
period  every  town  in  Greece  had  its  prophecies  by
some  Bacis  or  Sibylla.  (Paus.  Z.  c.)  They  seem  to
have  retained  their  celebrit}^  down  to  the  time  of
Antiochus  and  Demetrius.  (See  Niebuhr,  Hist,  of
Rome,  i.  p.  503,  &c.)

Besides  these  more  respectable  prophets  and
prophetesses,  there  were  numbers  of  diviners  of  an
interior  order  (xpVf^h^^^y^Oi  "W"ho  made  it  their
business  to  explain  all  sorts  of  signs,  and  to  tell
fortunes.  They  were,  however,  more  particularly
popular  with  the  lower  orders,  who  are  everywhere
most  ready  to  believe  what  is  most  marvellous  and
least  entitled  to  belief.  This  class  of  diviners,
however,  does  not  seem  to  have  existed  until  a
comparatively  late  period  (Thucyd.  ii.  21 ;  Aristoph.
Aves,  897,  Pair,  986, 1034,  &cO,and  to  have  been
looked  upon,  even  by  the  Greeks  themselves,  as
nuisances  to  the  public.

These  soothsayers  lead  us  naturally  to  the  mode
of  divination,  of  which  such  frequent  use  was  made
by  the  ancients  in  all  the  affairs  of  public  and
private  life,  and  which  chiefly  consisted  in  the  in-
terpretation  of  numberless  signs  and  phenomena.
No  public  midertaking  of  any  consequence  wjis
ever  entered  upon  by  the  Greeks  and  Romans
without  consulting  the  will  of  the  gods,  by  observ-
ing the  signs  which  they  sent,  especially  those  in
the  sacrifices  offered  for  the  purpose,  and  by  which
they  were  thought  to  indicate  the  success  or  the
failure  of  the  undertaking.  For  this  kind  of  divi-
nation no  divine  inspiration  was  thought  necessary,
but  merely  experience  and  a  certain  knowledge
acquired  by  routine  ;  and  although  in  some  cases
priests  were  appointed  for  the  purpose  of  observing
and  explaining  signs  [Augur;  Haruspex],  ^-et
on  any  sudden  emergency,  especially  in  private
affairs,  any  one  who  met  with  something  extraor-
dinary, might  act  as  his  own  interpreter.  The
principal  signs  by  which  the  gods  were  thought  to
declare  their  will,  were  things  connected  with  the
offering  of  sacrifices,  the  flight  and  voice  of  birds.


DIVINATIO.

all  kinds  of  natural  phenomena,  ordinary  as  well
as  extraordinary,  and  dreams.

The  interpretation  of  signs  of  the  first  class
(^iepofiavTela  or  UpoaKoma,  hartispicium  or  ars
/^arMsp^c^V^a),  was,  according  to  Aeschylus  {Prometli.
492,  &c.),  the  invention  of  Prometheus.  It  seems
to  have  been  most  cultivated  by  the  Etruscans,
among  whom  it  was  raised  into  a  complete  science,
and  from  whom  it  passed  to  the  Romans.  Sacri-
fices were  either  offered  for  the  special  purpose  of
consulting  the  gods,  or  in  the  ordinary  way  ;  but
in  both  cases  the  signs  were  observed,  and  when
they  were  propitious,  the  sacrifice  was  said  KaXMe-
peiy.  The  principal  points  that  were  generally  ob-
served were,  1.  The  manner  in  which  the  victim
approached  to  the  altar,  whether  uttering  a  sound
or  not ;  the  former  was  considered  a  favourable
omen  in  the  sacrifice  at  the  Pan  ionium.  (Strab.
viii,  p.  384  ;  compare  Paus.  iv.  32.  §  3.)  2.  I'he
nature  of  the  intestines  with  respect  to  their  colour
and  smoothness  (Aeschyl.  Prometh.  493,  &c.  ;
Eurip.  Elect.  833)  ;  the  liver  and  bile  were  of
particular  importance.  [Caput  Extorum.]  3.
The  nature  of  the  flame  which  consumed  the
sacrifice  (see  Valckenaer,  ad  Eierip.  Phoen.  1261);
hence  the  words,  irvpofxavTeia,  efxirvpa  crTJixara,
<p\oycaiTa  crijixaTa.  That  the  smoke  rising  from
the  altar,  the  libation,  and  various  other  things
offered  to  the  gods,  were  likewise  considered
us  a  means  through  which  the  will  of  the  gods
might  be  learned,  is  clear  from  the  names,
KaTTvofiaureia,  \i€avofxavTiia,  Kpidofxaureia,  and
others.  Especial  care  was  also  taken  during  a
sacrifice,  that  no  inauspicious  or  frivolous  worSs
were  uttered  by  any  of  the  bystanders  :  hence  the
admonitions  of  the  priests,  eu^Tj/^etre  and  eixprj/xlcx.,
or  (TiyaTe^  (Tiuivare^favete  Unguis^  and  others  ;  for
improper  expressions  were  not  only  thought  to  pol-
lute and  profane  the  sacred  act,  but  to  be  unlucky
omens  {Sva(p7]fjiia^  K\r]56yc5.,  (p^jfiai^  (pooval  or
6fx((>ai,  Pind.  OL  vi,  112  ;  Horn.  //.  ii.  41).

The  art  of  interpreting  signs  of  the  second  class
was  called  oloovKTriKi]^  augurium  or  auspicmm.  It
was,  like  the  former,  common  to  Greeks  and  Ro-
mans, but  was  never  developed  into  so  complete
a  system  by  the  ibrmer  as  by  the  latter  ;  nor  did  it
ever  attain  the  same  degree  of  importance  in  Greece
as  it  did  at  Rome.  [AuGUii.]  The  Greeks,
when  observing  the  flight  of  birds,  turned  their
face  towards  the  north,  and  then  a  bird  appearing
to  the  right  (east),  especially  an  eagle,  a  heron,  or
a  falcon,  was  a  favourable  sign  (Horn.  II.  xiv.
274,  xxiv.  310,  Od.  xv.  524)  ;  while  birds  ap-
pearing to  the  left  (west)  were  considered  as  un-
lucky signs.  (Hom.  II.  xii.  201,  230  ;  Festus,
s.  V.  Sinistrae  Aves.)  Sometimes  the  mere  appear-
ance of  a  bird  was  thought  sufficient :  thus  the
Athenians  always  considered  the  appearance  of  an
owl  as  a  lucky  sign  ;  hence  the  proverb,  yKav^
'lirraTai,  "  the  owl  is  out,"  i.  e.  we  have  good  luck.
Other  animals  appearing  unexpectedly,  especially
to  travellers  on  their  road  {4v6hia  aiixSoXa),  were
also  thought  ominous  ;  and  at  Athens  it  was  con-
sidered a  very  unlucky  omen,  when  a  weasel  ap-
peared during  the  assembly  of  the  people.  (Aristoph.
Eccles.  793.)  Superstitions  of  this  kind  are  still
met  with  in  several  European  countries.  Various
other  means  were  used  to  ascertain  the  will  of  the
gods,  such  as  the  ortSrjpo/iai'Teta,  or  divination  by
placing  straws  on  red  hot  iron  ;  the  fj.o\v§5iJ.auTeia,
by  observing  the  figures  which  molted  lead  formed  ;


DIVINATIO.  41/

the  $oTavoiJ.avTeia,  or  divination  by  writing  ore's
own  name  on  herbs  and  leaves,  which  were  then
exposed  to  the  wind,  &c.

Of  greater  importance  than  the  appearance  of  ani-
mals, at  least  to  the  Greeks,  were  the  phenomena
in  the  heavens,  particularly  during  any  public
transaction.  They  were  not  only  observed  and
interpreted  by  private  individuals  in  their  own
affairs,  but  by  the  public  magistrates.  The  Spartan
ephors,  as  we  learn  from  Plutarch  {Agesil.  11),
made  regular  observations  in  the  heavens  every
ninth  year  during  the  night  ;  and  the  family  of
the  Pythaistae,  of  Athens,  made  similar  observ-
ations every  year  before  the  theoris  set  sail  for
Delos.  (Muller,  Dorians^  ii.  2.  §  14.)  Among
the  unlucky  phenomena  in  the  heavens  {Sioarifiela,
signa,  or  poiienta)  were  thunder  and  lightning
(Aristoph.  Eccles  793  ;  Eustath.  ad  Hom.  Od.  xx,
104),  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  or  moon  (Thucyd.  vii.
50),  earthquakes  (Xen.  Hellen.  iv.  7.  §  4),  rain  of
blood,  stones,  milk,  &c.  (Hom.//.  xi.  53,  &c.;  Cic.
De  Divinat.  i.  43).  Any  one  of  these  signs  was
sufficient  at  Athens,  as  well  as  at  Rome,  to  break
up  the  assembly  of  the  people.  (Schomann,  De
Comit.  Ath.  p.  146.  &c.  transl.)  In  common  life,
things  apparently  of  no  importance,  when  occurring
at  a  critical  moment,  were  thought  by  the  ancients
to  be  signs  sent  by  the  gods,  from  which  conclusions
might  be  drawn  respecting  the  future.  Among  these
common  occurrences  we  may  mention  sneezing
(Hom.  Od.  xvii.  561,  with  the  note  of  Eustath.  ;
Xen.  Anab.  iii.  2.  §  9  ;  Plut.  Themht.  13  ;  Ovid,
Heroid.  19,  151  ;  Pi'opcrt.  ii.  2.  33),  twinkling
of.  the  eyes  (Theocrit.  iii.  37  ;  Plant.  Pseiul.  i.  2.
105  ;  compare  Wiistemann,  ad  Theocrit.  I.  c.\
tinkling  of  the  ears,  and  numberless  other  things
which  we  cannot  here  enumerate.  Some  of  thera
have  retained  their  significance  with  the  super-
stitious multitude  down  to  the  present  day.

The  art  of  interpreting  dreams  (ovetpoTroA-ia),
which  had  probably  been  introduced  into  Europe
from  Asia,  where  it  is  still  a  universal  practice,
seems  in  the  Homeric  age  to  have  been  held  in
high  esteem ;  for  dreams  were  said  to  be  sent  by
Zeus.  (Hom.  //.  i.  63,  ii.  init,  Od.  iv.  841,  xix.
457.)  In  subsequent  times,  that  class  of  diviners
who  occupied  themselves  with  the  interpretation  of
dreams,  seems  to  have  been  very  numerous  and
popular  ;  but  they  never  enjoyed  any  protection
from  the  state,  and  were  only  resorted  to  by  pri-
vate individuals.  Some  persons  are  said  to  have
gained  their  livelihood  by  this  profession.  (Plut
Aridid.  27.)  Respecting  the  oracles  which  were
obtained  by  passing  a  night  and  dreaming  in  a
temple,  see  Oraculum.

For  further  information  concerning  the  art  of
divination  in  general,  see  Cicero's  work,  De  Divi
natione.  The  fxavTiK-f)  of  the  Greeks  is  treated  of
at  some  length  by  Wachsmuth  {Hellen.  Alterth.
ii.  2.  p.  259,  &c.,  vol.  ii.  p.  585,  2d  edit.)  Com-
pare Thirl  wall's  Hist,  of  Greece,  i.  p.  206,  &c.

The  word  divinatio  was  used  in  a  particular
manner  by  the  Romans  as  a  law-terra,  which  re-
quires some  explanation.  If  in  any  case  two  or
more  accusers  came  forward  against  one  and  the
same  individual,  it  was,  as  the  phrase  ran,  decided
by  divinatio,  who  should  be  the  chief  or  real  ac-
cuser, whom  the  others  then  joined  as  subscrip-
tores  ;  i.  e.  by  putting  their  names  to  the  charge
brought  against  the  offender.  This  transaction,  by
which  one  of  several  accusers  was  selected  to  con-

E  E


418


DIVORTIUM.


duct  the  accusation,  was  called  divinatio,  as  the
question  here  was  not  about  facts,  but  about  some-
thing which  was  to  be  done,  and  which  could  not
be  found  out  by  witnesses  or  written  documents  ;
so  that  the  judices  had,  as  it  were,  to  divine  the
course  which  they  had  to  take.  (Ascon,  inArgum.
ad  Cic.  Divinat.  in  Caec.  p.  99.  ed.  Orelli.)  Hence
the  oration  of  Cicero,  in  which  he  tries  to  show  that
he,  and  not  Q.  Caecilius  Niger,  ought  to  conduct
the  accusation  against  Verres,  is  called  Divinatio
in  Caecilium.  Compare  c  15  and  20  of  the  oration,
and  Gellius,  ii.  4.  [L.  S.]

DIVI'SOR.     [Ambitus.]

DIVORTIUM,  divorce.  1.  Greek.  The  term
for  this  act  was  a7r({\eit|/ts  or  air6irefjL\\/is,  the  former
denoting  the  act  of  a  wife  leaving  her  husband,  and
the  latter  that  of  a  husband  dismissing  his  wife.
(Dem.  c.  Onet.  p.  S65,  c.  Neaer.  pp.  1362,  1365.)
The  only  Greek  states  respecting  whose  laws  of
divorce  we  have  any  knovdedge,  are  Athens  and
Sparta.  In  both  states  the  kw,  it  appears,  permitted
both  husband  and  wife  to  call  for  and  effect  a  divorce,
though  it  was  much  easier  for  a  husband  to  get  rid
of  his  wife  than  for  a  wife  to  get  rid  of  her  husband.
The  law  at  Athens  allowed  a  man  to  divorce  his
wife  without  ceremony,  simply  by  his  act  of  sending
her  out  of  his  house  (^/CTre/iTretj',  OTroTre'^Treti/),  but
he  was  bound  to  restore  to  her  the  dowry  which  she
had  brought  to  hira,  or  to  pay  her  the  interest  of
nine  oboli  per  drachma  every  month,  and  in  ad-
dition to  this,  to  provide  for  her  maintenance.
(Demosth.  c.  Neaer.  p.  13^2.)  It  would,  however,
seem  that  a  husband  thus  dismissing  his  wife,
usually  did  so  in  the  presence  of  witnesses.  (Ly-
sias,  c.  Alcib.  p.  541.)  What  became  of  the
children  in  such  a  case  is  not  raeaitioned,  but  it
is  probable  that  they  remained  with  the  father.  If,
on  the  other  hand,  a  wife  wished  to  leave  her  hus-
band, she  was  obliged  in  person  to  appear  before
the  archon  and  to  deliver  up  to  him  a  memorial
containing  the  reasons  why  she  wished  to  be  di-
vorced. (Plut.  Alcib.  8.)  She  had  to  conduct  her
case  quite  alone,  for  as  she  was  in  her  husband's
power  so  long  as  the  verdict  was  not  given,  no  one
had  a  right  to  come  forward  and  plead  her  case.  If
both  parties  agreed  upon  a  divorce,  no  further  pro-
ceedings were  required,  mutual  consent  being  suf-
ficient to  dissolve  a  marriage.  But  if  one  party  ob-
jected, an  action  (iiroTre/ii^ews  or  a^^o\d^\/ioes  SIkt})
might  be  brought  against  the  other :  the  proceed-
ings in  such  a  case,  however,  are  unknown.  (Heff-
ter,  Athen.  Gerichtsverf,  pp.  250,  414  ;  Meier,  Att.
Proc.  p.  413,  &c.)

At  Sparta,  it  seems,  a  man  might  dismiss  his  wife,
if  she  bore  him  no  issue.  (Herod,  v.  39,  vi.  61.)

Charon  das,  in  his  legislation  at  Thurii,  had  per-
mitted divorce,  but  his  law  vsras  subsequently  modi-
fied by  the  addition,  that  if  divorced  persons  should
wish  to  marry  again,  they  should  not  be  allowed  to
marry  a  person  younger  than  the  one  from  whom  he
(or  she)  had  been  separated.     (Diod.  xii.  18.)

A  woman,  after  her  divorce,  returned  to  the
house  of  her  father,  or  of  that  relative  who  was
under  obligation  to  protect  her  if  she  had  never
been  married  at  all.  In  reference  to  her  he  waa
her  Kvpios.  (Demosth.  c.  Neaer.  p.  1362.)     [L.  S.]

2.  Roman.  The  word  divortium  signified  ge-
nerally a  separation,  and,  in  a  special  sense,  a  dis-
solution of  marriage.  A  Roman  marriage  was  dis-
solved by  the  death  of  the  wife  or  husband,  and  by
divortium  in  the  lifetime  of  the  husband  and  wife.


DIVORTIUM.

The  statement  of  Plutarch  (Roinul.  22)  that  the
husband  alone  had  originally  the  power  of  effecting
a  divorce  may  be  true  ;  but  we  cannot  rely  al-
together on  such  an  authority.  In  the  cases  of  con-
ventio  in  raaimm,  one  might  suppose  that  a  woman
could  not  effect  a  divorce  without  the  consent  of
her  husband,  but  a  passage  of  Gains  (i.  137)  seems
to  say,  that  the  conventio  in  manum  did  not  limit
the  wife's  freedom  of  divorce  at  the  time  when
Gaius  wrote  (Bocking,  Instit.  i.  229.  n.  3).  The
passage  of  Dionysius  (Antiq.  Rom.  ii.  25),  in  which
he  treats  of  marriage  by  confarreatio,  declares  that
the  marriage  could  not  be  dissolved.

As  the  essential  part  of  a  marriage  was  the  con-
sent and  conjugal  affection  of  the  parties,  it  was
considered  that  this  affection  was  necessary  to  its
continuance,  and  accordingly  either  party  might
declare  his  or  her  intention  to  dissolve  the  con-
nection. No  judicial  decree,  and  no  interference
of  any  public  authority,  was  requisite  to  dissolve  a
marriage.  Filiifamilias,  of  course,  required  the
consent  of  those  in  whose  power  they  were.  The
first  instance  of  divorce  at  Rome  is  said  to  have
occurred  about  B.  c.  234,  when  Sp.  Carvilius  Ruga
put  away  his  wife  (A,  Gell.  iv.  3,  xvii.  21;
Val.  Max.  ii.  1.  §  4)  on  the  ground  of  barren-
ness ;  it  is  added  that  his  conduct  was  generally
condemned.  The  real  meaning  of  the  story  is
explained  by  Savigny  with  his  usual  acuteness
{Zeitsdirift,  &c.  vol  v.  p.  269).

Towards  the  latter  part  of  the  republic,  and
under  the  empire,  divorces  became  very  common ;
and  in  the  case  of  marriages,  where  we  assume
thftt  there  was  no  conventio  in  manum,  there  was
no  particular  form  required.  Cn.  Pompeius  di-
vorced his  wife  Mucia  for  alleged  adultery,  and  his
conduct  was  approved  (Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  12,  18)  ;
and  Cicero  speaks  of  Paula  Valeria  (ad  Favti.
viii.  7)  as  being  ready  to  serve  her  husband,  on
his  return  from  his  province,  with  notice  of  divorce.
(Compare  Juv.  vi.  224,  &c.  ;  Mart.  vi.  7.)  Cicero
himself  divorced  his  wife  Terentia,  after  living  with
her  thirty  years,  and  married  a  young  woman
whom  he  also  divorced  (Plut.  Cic.  41).  Cato  the
younger  divorced  his  wife  Marcia,  that  his  friend
Hortensius  might  marry  her  and  have  children  by
her  ;  for  this  is  the  true  meaning  of  the  story.  (Plut.
Cat.  Min.  25.)  If  a  husband  divorced  his  wife,  the
wife's  dos,  as  a  general  rule,  was  restored  [Dos]  ;
and  the  same  was  the  case  when  the  divorce  took
place  by  mutual  consent.  As  divorce  became  more
common,  attempts  were  made  to  check  it  indi-
rectly, by  affixing  pecuniary  penalties  or  pecuniary
loss  on  the  party  whose  conduct  rendered  the  divorce
necessary.  This  was  part  of  the  object  of  the  lex
Papia  Poppaea,  and  of  the  rules  as  to  the  retentio
dotis,  and  judicium  morum.  There  was  the  re-
tentio dotis  propter  liberos,  when  the  divorce  was
caused  by  the  fault  of  the  wife,  or  of  her  father,  in
whose  power  she  was :  three -sixths  of  the  dos  was
the  limit  of  what  could  be  so  retained.  On  ac-
count of  matters  morum  graviorum,  such  as  adultery,
a  sixth  part  might  be  retained  ;  in  the  case  of
matters  morum  leviorum,  one  eighth.  The  husband,
when  in  fault,  was  punished  by  being  required  to
return  the  dos  earlier  than  it  was  otherwise  re-
turnable. After  the  divorce,  either  party  might
marry  again.     (Sueton.  Aug.  34.)

By  the  lex  Papia  Poppaea,  a  freedwoman  who
had  married  her  patronus  could  not  divorce  her-
self ;  there  appears  to  have  been  no  other  class  of


DOCANA.

persons  subjected  to  this  incapacity.  (Dig.  24.
tit.  2.  s.  11.)

Corresponding  to  the  forms  of  marriage  hy  con-
farrtatio  and  coemtio,  there  were  the  forms  of
divorce  by  diffarreatio  and  remancipatio.  Accord-
ing to  Festus  (s.  V.  Diffarreatio)^  diffarreatio  was  a
kind  of  religious  ceremony  so  called,  "  quia  fiebat
farreo  libo  adhibito,"  by  which  a  marriage  was  dis-
solved ;  and  Plutarch  (Quaest.  Rom.  50)  has  been
supposed  to  allude  to  this  ceremony  in  the  case  of
a  divorce  between  the  flamen  dialis  and  his  wife.
It  is  said  that  originally  marriages  contracted  by
confarreatio  were  indissoluble  ;  and  in  a  later  age,
this  was  the  case  with  the  marriage  of  the  flamen
dialis  (Gell.  x.  15),  who  was  married  by  confar-
reatio. In  the  case  referred  to  by  Plutarch,  the
emperor  authorised  the  divorce.  A  marriage  by
coemtio  was  dissolved  by  remancipatio  (Festus,
e.  V.  Remancipatam).  In  other  cases,  less  cere-
mony was  used  ;  but  still  some  distinct  notice  or
declaration  of  intention  was  necessary  to  constitute
a  divorce  :  the  simple  fact  of  either  party  con-
tracting another  marriage  was  not  a  legal  divorce.
(Cic.  Oral.  i.  40.)  The  ceremony  of  breaking  the
nuptiales  tabulae  (Tacit.  Ann.  xi.  30),  or  of  taking
the  keys  of  the  house  from  the  woman  and  turning
her  out  of  doors,  were  probably  considered  to  be
acts  of  themselves  significant  enough,  though  it
may  be  presumed  that  they  were  generally  accom-
panied with  declarations  that  could  not  be  mis-
understood. The  general  practice  was  apparently
to  deliver  a  written  notice,  and  perhaps  to  assign  a
reason.  In  the  case  of  Paula  Valeria,  mentioned
by  Cicero,  no  reason  was  assigned.  By  the  Lex
Julia  de  Adulteriis,  it  was  provided  that  there
should  be  seven  witnesses  to  a  divorce,  Roman
citizens  of  full  age  {puberes\  and  a  freedman  of
the  party  who  made  the  divorce.  (Dig.  24.  tit.  2.
S.9.)

Under  the  early  Christian  emperors,  the  power
of  divorce  remained,  as  before,  subject  to  the  ob-
servance of  certain  forms.  Justinian  restricted  the
power  of  divorce,  both  on  the  part  of  the  husband
and  the  wife,  to  certain  cases,  and  he  did  not  allow
a  divorce  even  by  the  consent  of  both  parties,  unless
the  object  of  the  parties  was  to  live  a  life  of  chas-
tity ;  a  concession  made  to  the  opinions  of  his
Christian  subjects.

The  term  repudium,  it  is  said,  properly  applies  to
a  marriage  only  contracted  [Matrimonittm],  and
divortium  to  an  actual  marriage  (Dig.  50.  tit.  16.
s.  101.  191)  ;  but  sometimes  divortium  and  re-
pudium appear  to  be  used  indifferently.  The
phrases  to  express  a  divorce  are,  imncium  remit-
tere,  divortium  facere  ;  and  the  form  of  words
might  be  as  follow  —  "  Tuas  res  tibi  habeto,  tuas
res  tibi  agito."  (Cic.  Phil.  ii.  ^8  ;  Plant.  Amphit.
iii.  2.  47,  Trinum.  ii.  1.  43.)  The  phrases  used  to
express  the  renunciation  of  a  marriage  contract
were,  renuntiare  repudium,  repudium  remittere,
dicore,  and  repudiare  ;  and  the  form  of  words
might  be,  "  Conditione  tua  non  utor."  (Dig.  24.
tit.  2  ;  Ulp.  Frag.  vi.  ;  Heinecc.  Syntagma ;  Cod.
5.  tit.  1 7,  and  24  ;  Rein,  Das  Romische  Privatrecht ;
and  as  to  the  later  Roman  Law,  Thibaut,  System,
&c.  9th  ed.)  [G.  L.]

DO'CANA  (t&  UKava,  from  Zok6s,  a  beam)
was  an  ancient  symbolical  representation  of  the
Dioscuri  (Castor  and  Polydeuces),  at  Sparta.  It
consisted  of  two  upright  beams  with  others  laid
across  them  transversely.    (Plut.  De  Amor.  Fratr.


DOCIMASIA.  419

1.  p.  36.)  This  rude  symbol  ot  fraternal  unity
evidently  points  to  a  very  remote  age,  in  which
scarcely  any  attempts  in  sculpture  can  have  been
made.  At  a  later  time,  when  works  of  art  were
introduced  into  all  the  spheres  of  ordinary  life,
this  rude  and  ancient  object  of  worship,  like  many
others  of  its  kind,  was  not  superseded  by  a  more
appropriate  symbol.  The  Dioscuri  were  worshipped
as  gods  of  war,  and  we  know  that  their  images
accompanied  the  Spartan  kings  whenever  they
took  the  field  against  an  enemy.  But  when  in  the
year  504  B.  c.  the  two  kings,  during  their  inva-
sion of  Attica,  failed  in  their  undertaking  on  ac-
count of  their  secret  enmity  towards  each  other,
it  was  decreed  at  Sparta,  that  in  future  only  one
king  should  command  the  army,  and  in  conse-
quence should  only  be  accompanied  by  one  of  the
images  of  the  Dioscuri.  (Herod,  v.  75.)  It  is  not
improbable  that  these  images,  accompanying  the
kings  into  the  field,  were  the  ancient  ScJ/caya,  which
were  now  disjointed,  so  that  one  half  of  the  sym-
bol remained  at  Sparta,  while  the  other  was  taken
into  the  field  by  one  of  the  kings.  Suidas  and  the
Etymologicum  Magnum  (s.  v.)  state  that  Mnava
was  the  name  of  the  graves  of  the  Dioscuri  at
Sparta,  and  derived  from  the  verb  Sexo/xai.  (Miil-
ler,  Dorians,  i.  5.  §  12.  note  m,  ii.  10.  §  8 ;  Zoega,
De  Obeliscis,  p.  228.)  [L.  S.]

DOCIMA'SIA  (SoKifiaaia).  When  any  citi-
zen of  Athens  was  either  appointed  by  lot,  or
chosen  by  suffrage  (/cArypwrbs  /cat  atperJs),  to  hold
a  public  office,  he  was  obliged,  before  entering  on
its  duties,  to  submit  to  a  docimasia,  or  scrutiny
into  his  previous  life  and  conduct,  in  which  any
person  could  object  to  him  as  unfit.  This  was  the
case  with  the  archons,  the  senators,  the  strategi,
and  other  magistrates.  The  examination,  or  ana-
crisis,  for  the  archonship  was  conducted  by  the
senators,  or  in  the  courts  of  the  heliaea.  The  docivia-
sia,  however,  was  not  confined  to  persons  appointed
to  public  offices  ;  for  we  read  of  the  denouncement
of  a  scrutiny  (^iirayyiKia  SoKifiaa-las)  against  ora-
tors who  spoke  in  the  assembly  while  leading
profligate  lives,  or  after  having  committed  flagi-
tious crimes.  This  denouncement  might  be  made
in  public  by  any  one  Trpbs  SoKifiaa-'iau  rov  ffiov,
i.  e.  to  compel  the  party  complained  of  to  appear
before  a  court  of  justice,  and  give  an  account  of  hig
life  and  conduct.  If  found  guilty,  he  was  punished
with  atimia,  and  prohibited  from  the  assemblies.
(Aesch.  Timarch.  p.  5.)

The  phrase  6.vhpa  clvai  ZoKijxcKTdripai  needs  a
few  words  of  explanation.  At  the  age  of  eighteen,
every  Athenian  became  an  ephebus,  and  after  two
years  was  enrolled  amongst  the  men,  so  that  he
could  be  present  and  vote  at  the  assemblies.  (Poll,
viii.  105.)  In  the  case  of  wards  who  were  heirs
to  property,  this  enrolment  might  take  place  before
the  expiration  of  the  two  years,  on  it  being  esta-
blished by  a  docimasia  that  the  youth  was  physi-
cally qualified  to  discharge  any  duties  the  state
might  impose  upon  him.  If  so,  he  was  released
from  guardianship,  and  "  became  a  man  "  (aviip
iyeyero,  or  SoKifxdadr}),  being  thereby  empowered
to  enter  upon  his  inheritance,  and  enjoy  other
privileges,  just  as  if  he  were  of  the  fidl  age  of
twenty.  (Harpocr.  s.  v.  'EiriSUres  r]6ri(rai :  Denu
e.  Aphob.  p.  857,  c  Onet.  p.  865,  c.  Stepli.  p.  1135.)
We  may  add  that  the  statements  of  the  grammarians
and  orators  are  at  variance  on  this  point ;  but  the
explanation  we  have  given  seems  the  best  way  of
£  B  2


420


DOLABRA.


reconciling  thera,  and  it  agrees  in  suTsstance  with
the  supposition  of  Schbmann,  "  that  among  the
Athenians,  no  one  period  was  appointed  for  enrol-
ment, provided  that  it  was  not  done  before  the
attainment  of  the  18th,  nor  after  the  completion
of  the  20th  vear."  (Schomann,  De  Comitiis^  pp.
75,  241,&c.)  [R.W.]

DODRANS.    [As.]

DOLABRA,  dim.  DOLABELLA  (tr^t'Ar;,  dim.
arfiiXiov),  a  chisel,  a  celt,  was  used  for  a  variety  of
purposes  in  ancient  as  in  modern  times.  They  were
frequently  employed  in  making  entrenchments  and
in  destroying  fortifications  (Liv.  ix.  37,  xxi.  1 1  ;
Curt.  ix.  5  ;  Tacit  Hist.  iii.  20)  ;  and  hence  they
are  often  found  in  ancient  earth-works  and  en-
campments. They  abound  in  our  public  mu-
seums, being  known  under  the  equivalent  name  of
"  celts"  to  antiquaries,  who,  however,  generally
use  the  word  without  understanding  its  true  sense.
(See  Jamieson's  Etym.  Diet.  s.  v.  Celt.)  Celtes  is
an  old  Latin  word  for  a  chisel,  probably  derived
from  coelo,  to  engrave.  Thus  the  phrase  celte
sculpantur  in  silice  occurs  in  the  vulgate  version  of
Job  (xix.  24),  and  malleolo  et  celte  literatus  sileoc  in
an  inscription  found  at  Pola.  (Grater,  p.  329.)
These  articles  are  for  the  most  part  of  bronze,
more  rarely  of  hard  stone.  The  sizes  and  foi-ms
Avhich  they  present,  are  as  various  as  the  uses  to
which  they  were  applied.  The  annexed  woodcut
is  designed  to  show  a  few  of  the  most  remark-
able varieties.  Fig.  1  is  from  a  celt  found,  with
several  others,  at  Karnbre  in  Cornwall.  (Borlase,
Ant.  of  Cornwall.,  iii.  13.)  Its  length  was  six
inches  without  the  haft,  which  was  no  doubt  of
wood,  and  fixed  directly  into  the  socket  at  the  top.
It  must  have  been  a  very  effective  implement  for
removing  the  stones  in  the  wall  of  a  city  or  fortifi-
cation, after  they  had  been  first  shattered  and
loosened  in  some  degree  by  the  battering-ram.
The  ear,  or  loop,  which  is  seen  in  this  and  many
other  celts,  would  be  useful  to  suspend  them  from
the  soldier's  girdle,  and  may  also  have  had  a  cord
or  chain  attached  to  it  to  assist  in  drawing  back
the  celt  whenever  it  became  too  firmly  wedged  be-
tween the  stones  of  the  wall  which  it  was  intended
to  destroy.  Figs  2  and  3  are  from  Sir  W.  Hamil-
ton's collection  in  the  British  Museum.  These
chisels  seem  best  adapted  for  the  use  of  the  car-
penter. The  celt  (fig.  4)  which  was  found  in
Fumess,  co.  Lancaster  {Arehaeologia^  v.  p.  106),
instead  of  being  shaped  to  receive,  or  to  be  in-
serted into  a  handle,  like  the  three  preceding,  is
made  thick,  smooth,  and  round  in  the  middle,  so
as  to  be  conveniently  manipulated  without  a
handle.  It  is  9  inches  long,  and  weighs  2  lb.  5  oz.
Its  sharp  edge  is  like  that  of  a  common  hatchet,
and  may  have  been  used  for  polishing  timber.  On
1  S  3  4         6  6


DOMICILIUM.
fore  illustrate  the  account  given  by  Julius  Pollax;
who  reckons  this  same  tool,  the  a-fiiXT],  among  the
ipyaXeta  tov  aKvroroiiov.  This  instrament  was
also  used  for  cutting  paper,  and  probably  in  the
same  manner  (afxiKa  xapTorc^/ios,  sicila,  Philox.
Gloss.).

The  following  woodcut  shows  a  small  bronze
celt,  fixed  into  a  handle  of  stag's  horn,  and  there-
fore exemplifies  one  of  the  modes  of  attaching  the
metal  to  its  haft.  It  was  evidently  adapted  for
very  fine  work,  and  is  strongly  contrasted  with
the  above-figured  celt  from  Cornwall.  It  was
found  in  an  ancient  tomb  in  Wiltshire.  (Sir  R.
C.  Hoare's  Anc.  Wilts.  South,  pp.  182,  203.)  The
two  other  figures  in  this  woodcut  represent  the
knife  used  in  sacrifices,  as  it  is  often  exhibited  on
cameos  and  bas-reliefs,  being  the  scena,  sacena,  or
dolabra  pontificalis,  mentioned  by  Festus  {s.  v.
Scena)  ;  and  the  secnris  dolabrata,  or  hatchet  fur-
nished with  a  chisel  (Pallad.  De  Re  Rust.  i.  43)  as
sculptured  on  a  funereal  monument.  [J.  Y.]


the  other  hand,  figs.  5,  6,  7,  exactly  resemble
the  knife  now  used  by  leather-cutters,  and  there-


DO'LICHOS  (S6\ixos).     [Stadium.]

DO'LIUM.     [ViNUM.]

DOLO  (P6\ci}u).  1 ,  A  secret  poniard  or  dagger
contained  in  a  case,  used  by  the  Italians.  It  was
inserted  in  the  handles  of  whips  (Dig.  9.  tit.  2.
s.  52  ;  Serv.  ad  Virg.  Aen.  vii.  664),  and  also  in
walking-sticks,  thus  corresponding  to  our  sword-
stick.  It  was  a  weapon  of  the  latter  kind  that
Tib.  Gracchus" carried  (Plut.  Tib.  Gracch.  10  ;  conip.
Hcsych.  s.  V.  ASXwves).

2.  A  small  top-sail.     [Navis.]

DE  DOLO  MALO  ACTIO.  [Culpa.]

DOLUS  MALUS.     [Culpa.]

DOMESTTCI.     [Praetorianl]

DOMICI'LI  UM.  This  word  signifies  a  man's
regular  place  of  abode.  It  was  used  in  the  Lex
Plautia  Papiria  in  such  a  manner,  that  when  that
lex  was  enacted,  B.  c.  89,  the  word  domicilium
must  have  had  a  fixed  meaning :  "  Si  qui  foederatis
civitatibus  adscripti  fuissent,  si  turn  cum  lex
ferebatur  in  Italia  domicilium  habuissent,  et  si
sexaginta  diebus  apud  praetorem  essent  professi."
(Cicero,  Pro  Arclda,  c.  4.)  This  further  appears
from  another  passage  in  the  same  chapter :  "  At
domicilium  Romae  non  habuit:  is  qui  tot  annis
ante   civitatem   datam   sedem   omnium   rerum  ac


DOMINIUM.

fortunarum  suanim  Romae  coUocavit  ; "  and  this
indirect  definition  agrees,  in  part,  with  one  in  the
Code,  which  will  presently  be  cited.

There  are  various  definitions  of  domicilium  in
the  Cornus  Juris.  One  of  these  (Dig.  50.  tit.  1.
B.  27.  §  1 )  determines  that  a  person  must  be  con-
sidered to  have  his  domicilium  in  a  municipium,  if
he  buys  and  sells  there,  attends  the  public  spec-
tivcles,  keeps  the  festival  days  there,  and,  in  fine,
enjoys  all  the  advantages  of  the  municipium,  and
none  of  the  colonia,  or  the  place  where  he  is  merely
for  the  purpose  of  cultivation  (ubi  colendi  ruris
causa  vcrsatur).  In  another  passage  (Cod.  10.
tit.  40  (39.)  s.  7),  it  is  stated  that  a  civis  is  made
by  origo,  manumissio,  allectio  vel  adoptio  ;  but
that  domicilium,  as  an  edict  of  Divus  Hadrianus
declares,  makes  a  person  an  incola.  Domicilium
is  then  defined  in  the  foUowmg  terms:  "In  eo
loco  singulos  habere  domicilium  non  ambigitur  ubi
quis  larem  rerumque  ac  fortunarum  summam  con-
stituit,  unde  rursus  non  discessurus  si  nihil  avocet,
unde  cum  profectus  est  peregrinari  videtur,  quod
(quo  ?)  si  rediit,  peregrinari  jam  destitit."

In  a  passage  in  the  Digest  (50.  tit.  1.  s.  5),
"  incolam  esse"  and  "domicilium  habere"  are  used
as  equivalent  terms.

It  was  important,  for  many  purposes,  to  deter-
mine where  a  man  had  his  permanent  abode.  An
incola  was  bound  to  obey  the  magistrates  of  the
place  where  he  was  an  incola,  and  also  the  magis-
trates of  the  place  where  he  was  a  civis  ;  and  he
was  not  only  subject  to  the  municipal  jurisdiction
in  both  municipia,  but  he  was  bound  to  perform
all  public  functions  (publica  munera).  If  a  man
was  bound  (obligatus),  to  pay  a  sum  of  money  in
Italy,  and  had  his  domicilium  in  a  provincia,  he
might  be  sued  either  in  Italy  or  in  the  province
(Dig.  5.  tit.  1.  s.  19,  §  4).  A  son  followed  the
civitas  which  was  the  naturalis  origo  of  his  father,
and  did  not  follow  his  father's  domicilium.  If  a
man  had  no  legal  father  ( Justus  pater),  he  followed
the  origo  of  his  mother.  In  the  Praescriptio  longi
temporis  dccem  vel  viginti  annorum,  it  was  enacted
by  Justinian,  that  the  ten  years'  prescription  should
apply,  if  both  parties  (tam  petens  quam  possidens)
had  their  domicilium  in  the  same  provincia  ;  if  the
two  parties  had  not  their  domicilium  in  the  same
province,  the  prescription  of  twenty  vears  applied.
(Cod.  7.  tit.  33.  s.  12.)

The  modem  law  of  Domicile  is  a  branch  of  what
is  sometimes  called  international  law  ;  and  many
of  the  principles  which  are  admitted  m  modern
times  are  founded  on  the  Roman  rules.  {The  Law
of  Domicile  by  Robert  Phillimore,  1847  ;  Burge,
Commeritaries  on  Colonial  and  Foreign  Laws^
vol.  i.)      ^  _  ^        [G.  L.]

DOMrNIUM.  Dominium  signifies  quiritarian
ownership  of  a  thing  ;  and  dominus,  or  dominus
legitimus,  is  the  owner.  Possessor  is  often  used
by  Roman  writers  as  equivalent  to  owner  ;  but
this  is  not  a  strictly  correct  use  of  the  word.  In
like  manner,  "to  have  ownership"  is  sometimes
expressed  by  "possidere  ;"  and  the  thing  in  which
there  is  property  is  sometimes  called  "possessio."
(Savigny,  Das  Recht  des  Besitzes,  p.  85,  5th  ed.)

The  complete  notion  of  property  or  ownership
comprehends  the  determination  of  the  things  which
may  be  the  objects  of  ownership  ;  the  power  which
a  man  may  have  over  such  objects,  both  as  to
duration  of  time  and  extent  of  enjoyment ;  the
modes  in  which  ownership  may  be  acquired  and


DOMINIUM.


421


lost  ;   the  persons  who  are  capable  of  acquiring,
transferring,  or  losing  ownership.

Res  is  the  general  name  for  anything  which  is
the  object  of  a  legal  act.  The  chief  division  of  res
is  into  res  divini  juris,  and  res  humani  juris.  Res
divini  juris  are  those  which  are  appropriated  to
religious  purposes,  namely,  res  sacrae,  sanctae,  re-
ligiosae  ;  and  so  long  as  they  have  this  character,
they  cannot  be  objects  of  property.  Res  humani
juris  are  all  other  things  that  can  be  the  objects  of
property  ;  and  they  are  either  res  publicae  or  res
privatae.  Res  publicae  belong  to  the  state,  and
can  only  become  private  property  by  being  de-
prived of  this  public  character.  [Agrariae
Lkges.]  Res  imiversitatis  are  the  property  of  a
universitas,  and  are  not  the  property  of  any  in-
dividual. The  phrase  res  nullius  is  ambiguous  ;
it  sometimes  means  that  the  thing  cannot  be  the
property  of  any  individual,  whicli  is  affirmed  of
things  divini  juris  ;  when  applied  to  things  humani
juris,  it  sometimes  means  that  they  are  not  the  pro-
perty of  an  individual  but  of  a  universitas  ;  yet
such  things  mai/  become  the  property  of  an  in-
dividual ;  res  hereditariae  are  res  nnllius  until  there
is  a  heres.  Res  communes  are  those  which  cannot
be  the  objects  of  property,  and  therefore  are  res
nullius,  as  the  sea.

Res  corporales  are  defined  to  be  those  "  quae  tangi
possunt  ; "  incorporales  are  those  "  quae  tangi
non  possunt,  sed  in  jure  consistunt,"  as  Here-
DiTAS,  UsusFRUGTUs,  Obligationes  ;  and  they
are  consequently  incapable  of  tradition,  or  delivery.
The  distinction  of  things  into  corporeal  and  incor-
poreal did  not  exist  in  the  older  Roman  law  ;  and
it  is  a  useless  distinction.  An  incorporeal  thing
is  merely  a  right,  and  so  it  is  explained  in  the
Institutiones  (ii.  tit.  2,  ed.  Schrader).

Coi-poreal  things  are  divided  into  immobiles,  or
solum  et  res  soli,  and  mobiles.  The  ground  (solum),
and  that  which  is  so  attached  to  the  ground  as
to  be  inseparable  from  it  without  being  destroyed,
as  a  building  for  instance,  are  res  immobiles.
Mobiles  res  are  all  such  as  can  be  removed  from
one  place  to  another  without  the  destruction  of  their
character.  The  class  of  res  mobiles  "  quae  pondere,
numero,  mensura  constant,"  are  such  things  as  wine,
oil,  com,  silver,  gold,  which  are  of  such  a  nature
that  any  the  same  number,  weight,  or  measure,
may  be  considered  the  same  thing.  [Mutuum.]
There  is  another  class  of  res,  consisting  of  those
"  quae  usu  constmiuntur,  minuuntur,"  and  those
"  quae  non,  &c."  The  term  siugulae  res  compre-
hends either  one  thing  or  several  things,  separately
considered  as  ones.  Such  things  are  either  simple,
as  an  animal,  a  stone  ;  or  compounded  of  parts,  as
a  carriage,  or  a  ship.  Any  number  of  things,  not
mechanically  connected,  may  in  a  legal  sense  be
viewed  as  one,  or  as  a  tmiversitas.  (Dig.  41.  tit.  3.
S.30  ;  6.  tit.  1.  S.23.  §  5.)

Some  things  are  appurtenant  to  others,  that  is,
as  subordinate  parts  they  go  with  that  which  forms
the  principal  thing.  (Dig.  18.  tit.  1.  s.  49.)  If  a
thing,  as  a  house  or  a  ship,  was  purchased,  the
buyer  got  every  thing  that  was  a  part  of  the  house
or  ship.     (Dig.  21.  tit.  2.  s.  44.)

Fructus  are  what  is  produced  out  of  a  thing  by
its  own  productive  power  ;  as  the  grass  in  a  field,
the  fruit  on  a  tree.

The  division  of  things  into  res  mancipi  and  res
nee  mancipi,  was  one  of  ancient  origin  ;  and  it  con-
tinued to  a  late  period  in  the  empire.     Res  mancipi
£  E  3


422


DOMINIUM.


(Ulp.  Frag,  xix.)  are  praedia  in  Italico  solo,  both
rustic  and  urban  ;  also  jura  rusticorum  praediorum
or  servitutes,  as  via,  iter,  aquaeductus  ;  also  slaves,
and  four-footed  animals,  as  oxen,  horses,  &c.,  quae
coUo  dorsove  domantur.  Other  things  were  nee
mancipi.

All  the  things  have  been  enumerated  which  are
the  object  of  dominium,  and  some  which  are  not.
Every  dominus  has  a  right  to  the  possession  of  the
thing  of  which  he  is  dominus  ;  but  possession
alone,  which  is  a  bare  fact  without  any  legal
character,  neither  makes  a  man  dominus,  nor  does
the  want  of  possession  deprive  him  of  dominium.
Possession  has  the  same  relation  to  a  legal  right  to
a  thing,  as  the  physical  power  to  operate  upon  it
has  to  the  legal  power  ;  and  accordingly  the  doctrine
of  possession  precedes  that  of  ownership.  Things
cannot  be  the  objects  of  possessio  civilis  which
cannot  be  the  objects  of  dominium.

Certain  things  are  not  properly  objects  of  owner-
ship {dominium),  though  a  claim  to  them  is  pro-
secuted by  an  actio  in  rem :  they  are  servitutes,
emphyteusis,  superficies,  and  pignus  and  hypotheca.

Dominium  properly  signifies  the  right  of  dealing
with  a  corporeal  thing  as  a  person  {dominus)
pleases  ;  this,  of  course,  implies  the  right  to  ex-
clude all  others  from  meddling  with  it.  The  do-
minus has  the  right  to  possess,  and  is  distinguished
in  that  respect  from  the  bare  possessor,  who  has
only  the  right  of  possessioa.  He  who  has  the
ususfructus  of  a  thing,  is  never  considered  as  owner ;
and  proprietas  is  the  name  for  that  which  remains
after  the  ususfructus  is  deducted  from  the  owner-
ship. Ownership  may  be  either  absolute,  that  is,
as  complete  as  the  law  allows  any  ownership  to  be,
or  it  may  be  limited.  The  distinction  between
bare  ownership  and  ownership  united  with  the
beneficial  interest,  is  explained  in  another  place.
[Bona.]  A  person  who  has  no  ownership  of  a
thing,  may  have  rights  in  or  to  a  thing  which,
as  far  as  they  extend,  limit  the  owner's  power  over
his  property,  as  hereafter  explained.  Ownership,
being  in  its  nature  single,  can  only  be  conceived
as  belonging  to  one  person  ;  consequently  there
cannot  be  several  owners  of  one  thing,  but  several
persons  may  own  undivided  shares  or  parts  of  a
thing.

As  a  man's  right  to  deal  with  a  thing  and  to
exclude  others  from  the  use  or  enjoyment  of  it,
may  be  limited,  this  may  arise  either  from  his  being
bound  to  allow  to  another  person  a  certain  use  or
enjoyment  of  the  thing  of  which  he  is  dominus,  or
from  his  being  bound  to  abstain  from  doing  certain
acts  on  or  to  his  property,  and  for  the  benefit  of
some  other  person.

This  limitation  of  a  man's  enjoyment  of  his  own
is  explained  under  Skrvitutks.

In  order  to  acquire  ownership,  a  person  must
have  a  legal  capacity  to  acquire  ;  and  ownership
may  be  acquired  by  such  a  person,  or  by  another
for  him.  There  must  also  be  a  thing  which  can
be  the  object  of  such  ownership,  and  there  must
be  a  legal  mode  of  acquisition  {acquisitio  civilis).
Ownership  may  be  acquired  in  single  things  {ac-
quisitio rerum  singularum),  or  it  may  be  acquired
in  a  number  of  things  of  different  kinds  at  once
{acquisitio per  universitatem).,'\n  which  case  a  person
acquires  them  not  as  individual  things,  but  he  ac-
quires the  parts  by  virtue  of  acquiring  the  whole.
The  latter  kind  of  acquisition  is  either  successio  inter
vivos,  as  in  the  case  where  a  man  adrogates  another,


DOMINIUM.

and  so  becomes  the  owner  of  all  the  adrogated  per-
son's property  (Gaius,  iii.  21)  ;  or  it  is  successio
mortis  causa,  as  in  the  case  of  a  testamentary  heres,
or  a  heres  ab  intestato.

Acquisitiones  per  universitatem  are  properly  dis-
cussed under  other  heads  [Adoptio  ;  Heres  ;
Successio  ;  Universitas].  The  following  re-
marks apply  to  acquisitiones  rerum  singularum.
Acquisitiones  were  either  civiles  {ex  jure  civili)  ;
or  naturales  {ex  jure  gentium),  that  is,  there  was  no
formality  prescribed  for  the  mode  of  acquisition :
in  both  cases  dominium  could  be  acquired.  The
civiles  acquisitiones  of  single  things  were  by  manci-
patio,  in  jure  cessio,  and  usucapio  :  those  naturali
jure  were  by  traditio  or  delivery.  In  the  case  of
res  mancipi,  the  only  modes  of  acquiring  dominium
were  mancipatio,  in  jure  cessio,  and  usucapio  ;  but
usucapio  applied  also  to  things  nee  mancipi.  The
alienation  of  things  nee  mancipi  was  the  peculiar
effect  of  traditio  or  delivery  (Ulp.  Frag.  xix.  8),
and  if  there  was  a  justa  causa,  that  is,  some  legal
ground  or  motive  for  the  delivery,  dominium  was
thus  acquired  ;  traditio,  in  the  case  of  a  thing  man-
cipi, merely  made  it  in  bonis,  and  the  dominium  or
ownership  continued  unchanged.  The  notion  that
in  the  case  of  res  nee  mancipi,  bare  tradition  with
a  justa  causa  did  not  confer  quiritarian  ownership
or  dominium,  is  erroneous  ;  for  when  the  Roman
law  did  not  require  peculiar  forms,  the  transfer  of
ownership  was  effected  in  what  may  be  called  the
natural  way,  that  is,  the  simplest  and  most  easy
way  in  which  the  parties  to  the  act  could  show
their  meaning  and  carry  it  into  effect.

A  man  who  was  dominus  of  a  thing,  whether
acquired  jure  civili  or  naturali,  prosecuted  his  right
to  it  in  the  same  way,  by  the  rei  vindicatio.  He
could  not  of  course  prosecute  such  a  right  unless
he  was  out  of  possession  ;  and,  in  order  to  succeed,
he  must  prove  his  ownership.  If  he  had  a  thing
in  bonis,  and  was  in  possession,  he  could  acquire
the  ownership  by  usucapion  :  if  he  was  out  of  pos-
session, it  seems  not  an  improbable  conjecture  of
Unterholzner  {Rhein.  Mus.  fur  Jurisprud.  Erster
Jahrgang,  p.  129),  that  he  was  aided  in  his  action
after  the  time  when  the  legis  actiones  fell  into  dis-
use and  the  formula  was  introduced  (for  as  to  a
previous  time  it  is  difficult  to  form  any  conjecture)
by  the  fiction  of  his  having  received  the  property
by  mancipatio.  There  are  examples  of  a  similar
fiction  in  the  case  of  the  bonorum  possessor  and
the  bonorum  emtor.  (Gaius,  iv.  34,  35.)  A  man
could  only  dispose  of  a  legacy  by  his  will  per  vin-
dicationem  (Ulp.  Frag.  xxiv.  7)  when  he  had  the
dominium  of  it :  if  he  had  not*  the  dominium,  he
could  only  give  per  damnationem  or  sinendi  modo.
A  slave  who  was  the  property  of  his  master  {domi-
nus) might  attain  the  Roman  civitas  by  the  act  of
manumission  :  if  he  was  only  in  bonis  of  the  person
who  manumitted  him,  he  became  a  Latinus  by  the
act  of  manumission.  The  difference  between  quiri-
tarian ownership  and  in  bonis  was  destroyed  by
the  legislation  of  Justinian,  who  declared  in  bonis
to  be  complete  ownership.

Some  modem  writers  enumerate  in  addition  to
the  civiles  acquisitiones  here  enumerated,  addictio,
emtio  sub  corona,  sectio  bonorum,  adjudicatio,  and
lex  (Ulp.  Frag.  tit.  xix.  §  2),  by  which  last  they
understand  those  circumstances  under  which  some
special  enactment  gives  property  to  a  person  ;  and
caducum  [Caducum]  is  mentioned  as  an  instance.

A  bonae  fidei  possessio  was  not  ownership  (do-


DOMINIUM.

minium),  nor  was  it  the  same  as  in  bonis.  The
two  things  are  distinguished  by  Ulpian  {Frag.
xix.  20,  21).  A  bonae  fidei  possessor  had  a  capa-
city for  acquiring  by  usucapion  the  ownership  of
the  thing  which  he  possessed.  He  had  a  kind  of
action,  actio  publiciana  in  rem,  by  which,  if  he  lost
the  possession  before  he  had  acquired  the  owner-
ship by  usucapion,  he  could  recover  it  against  all
except  the  owner,  or  such  person  as  had  a  better
right  than  himself,  in  which  latter  respect  he  dif-
fered from  him  who  had  a  thing  in  bonis,  for  his
claim  was  good  against  the  person  who  had  the
bare  ownership.     (Dig.  6.  tit.  2.)

As  to  fundi  provinciales,  it  was  an  old  prin-
ciple of  Roman  law  that  there  could  be  no  domi-
nium in  them,  that  is,  no  quiritarian  ownership ;
nor  were  they  said  to  be  in  bonis,  but  the  occupier
had  possessio  and  ususfinictus.  In  fact  the  tenns
dominium  and  in  bonis  were  not  applicable  to  pro-
vincial lands,  nor  were  the  fictions  that  were  ap-
plicable to  things  in  bonis  applicable  to  provincial
lands  ;  but  it  is  an  ingenious  conjecture  of  Unter-
holzner,  that  the  formula  actionis  was  adapted  to
the  case  of  provincial  lands  by  a  fiction  of  their
being  Itolic  lands,  combined  with  a  fiction  of  their
being  acquired  by  usucapion.  In  the  case  of  the
ager  publicus  in  Italy,  the  dominium  was  in  the
Roman  people,  and  the  terms  possessio  and  pos-
sessor were  appropriate  to  the  enjoyment  and  the
person  by  whom  the  land  was  enjoyed.  Still
the  property  in  provincial  land  was  like  the  pro-
perty in  bonis  in  Rome  and  Italy,  and  it  conse-
quently became  dominium  after  the  distinction
between  quiritarian  and  bonitarian  ownership  was
destroyed.

Ownership  was  also  acquired  in  the  case  of  oc-
cupatio,   accessio,    &c.     [Accessio  ;    Alluvio  ;

CONFUSIO.]

A  man,  who  had  a  legal  capacity,  could  acquire
property  either  himself  or  by  those  who  were  "in
potestate,  manu,mancipiove."  He  could  even  acquire
thus  per  universitatem,  as  in  the  case  of  an  here-
ditas  ;  and  he  could  also  thus  acquire  a  legacy.  If  a
slave  was  a  man's  in  bonis,  every  thing  that  the  slave
acquired  belonged  to  the  owner  in  bonis,  and  not  to
him  who  had  the  bare  quiritarian  ownership.  If  a
man  was  the  "  bona  fide  possessor  "  of  another  per-
son, whether  that  person  happened  to  be  a  freeman
supposed  to  be  and  possessed  as  a  slave,  or  was  the
property  of  another,  the  possessor  only  acquired  the
ownership  of  that  which  the  person  so  possessed  ac-
quired "  ex  re  possidentis  "  and  *'  ex  oporis  suis."
The  same  rule  applied  to  a  slave  in  which  a  man
had  only  the  ususfructus  ;  and  the  rule  was  con-
sistent with  the  rule  just  laid  down,  for  ususfructus
was  not  property.  Sons  who  were  in  the  power
of  a  father,  and  slaves,  of  course,  could  not  acquire
property  for  themselves.     [Peculium.]

Ownership  was  lost  either  with  the  consent  of
the  owner  or  against  it.  With  the  consent,  when
he  transferred  it  to  another,  which  was  the  general
mode  of  acquiring  and  losing  property  ;  without
the  consent,  when  the  thing  perished,  when  it  be-
came the  property  of  another  by  accession  or  usu-
capion, when  it  was  judicially  declared  to  be  the
property  of  another,  or  forfeited  by  being  pledged.
Ownership  was  not  lost  by  death,  for  the  heres
was  considered  to  be  the  same  person  as  the  de-
funct

As  certain  persons  had  not  a  capacity  to  acquire,
80  some  persons  had  not  the  same  liability  to  lose


DOM  US.


423


that  others  had.  Thus  the  property  of  a  pupilhis
who  was  in  tutela  legitima,  could  not  become  the
property  of  another  by  usucapion  ;  a  fundamental
principle  of  law  which  Cicero  was  surprised  that
his  friend  Atticus  did  not  know  {Ad  Att.  i.  5).

Ownership  might  be  lost  by  the  Maxima  capitis
diminutio  ;  when  it  was  the  consequence  of  a  con-
viction for  a  capital  crime,  the  property  was  for-
feited to  the  state.  [Sectio  Bonorum.]  The
media  capitis  diminutio  only  effected  an  incapacity
for  quiritarian  ownership  :  the  person  could  still
retain  or  acquire  property  by  the  jus  gentium  ;
still  if  the  media  capitis  diminutio  was  the  conse-
quence of  conviction  for  a  capital  crime,  it  had  the
same  consequences  as  the  Maxima.  (Mackeldey,
Lekrbuch,  &c.  12th  ed.  ;  Ueber  die  Verschiedenen
Alien  des  Eigenthums^  &c.  von  Unterholzner, i?Ae«».
Mus.  Eister  Jalirg.  ;  Gains,  ii.  1,  &c.  ;  Ulp.  Frag.
tit.  xix.  ;  Thibaut,  System,  &c.  §  146.  «&c.,  §  242,
&c.,  9th  ed.)  [G.  L.]

DOMINUS  means  master,  owner  [Dominium].
Dominus  is  opposed  to  Servus.  as  master  to  slave.
Plinius,  in  his  letters,  always  addresses  Trajanus
as  Dominus  ;  but  this  must  be  viewed  rather  as  a
mode  of  showing  his  respect  than  any  acknowledg-
ment of  a  title.  (C.  Plinii  Caecilii  Secundi  Ep.
ed.  G.  H.  Schaefer,  p.  c500,  note.)  Domitianus
claimed  the  titles  of  Dominus  and  Deus.  (Dion  Cass.
Ixvii.  1 3,  and  the  note  of  Reimarus  ;  also  Martialis,
Ep.  V.  8,  and  x.  72,  when  Domitianus  was  dead.)
It  is  said,  that  Aurelianus  first  adopted  the  title
Dominus  on  his  medals.  (Eckhel,  Doct.Num.  Vet.
vol.  vii.  p.  482.)  ^  [G.  L.]

DOMUS  {oIkos,  oLKia,  and  in  old  Greek  ZSfios),
a  house.  1.  Greek.  —  The  arrangement  of  the
several  parts  of  the  dwellings  of  the  Greeks  forms
one  of  the  most  difficult  subjects  in  their  antiquities.
The  only  regular  description  of  the  Greek  house,
that  of  Vitruvius,  is  in  many  respects  inconsistent
with  the  allusions  found  in  the  Greek  writers  ;
while  those  allusions  themselves  are  far  too  scanty
and  obscure,  to  be  woven  into  a  clear  description.
It  is  manifest,  also,  that  the  arrangement  of  the
parts  difi"ered  much  at  different  periods.  To  say
nothing  of  the  early  period  when,  according  to  tra-
dition, rude  huts  of  clay,  or  wood,  or  stone,  began
to  be  used  instead  of  the  hollow  trees,  and  caves,  and
clefts  in  the  rocks,  in  which  the  savage  aborigines
found  shelter  (Diod.  v.  68,  Pans.  x.  17),  we  have  to
distinguish  between  the  houses,  or  rather  palaces,
of  the  heroic  age,  to  which  Homer's  allusions  apply,
the  houses  of  the  historical  period  down  to  the
time  of  Alexander  the  Great,  and  those  after  his
time.

There  were  also  considerable  differences  between
the  arrangements  of  a  town  and  a  country  house.
All  of  these  had  two  principal  features  in  com-
mon. Firstl}',  in  Greece,  as  in  all  warm  climates,
the  general  arrangement  of  a  house  of  the  better
sort  was  that  of  one  or  more  open  courts,  sur-
rounded by  the  various  rooms.  Secondly,  in  a
Greek  family  the  women  lived  in  private  apart-
ments allotted  to  their  exclusive  use.  Hence  the
house  was  always  divided  into  two  distinct  por-
tions, namely,  the  Andronitis,  or  men's  apart-
ments (avSpwv^Tis),  and  the  Gynaeconitis,  or  wa-
men's  apartments  (yvvaiKcoplTis).  In  the  earliest
times,  as  in  the  houses  referred  to  by  Homer,  the
women's  apartments  were  in  the  upper  story  {inrep-
wov).  The  same  arrangement  is  found  at  the  time
of  the  Peloponnesian  war  in  the  house  spoken  of

E  X   4


m


DOMUS.


by  Lysias  (De  Caed.  Eraiosth.  pp.  12,  13  ;  conip.
Aristoph.  Eccles.  961,  Thesm.  482),  But  it  does
not  follow  that  that  was  the  usual  custom  at  this
period.  On  the  contrary,  we  have  the  express
testimony  of  several  writers,  and  of  Lysias  him-
self among  the  rest,  that  the  Gynaeconitis  was  on
the  same  story  with  the  Andronitis,  and  behind  it
(Lysias,  c.  Simon,  p.  139  ;  Demosth.  c.  Etcerg.
p.  1155;  Xen.  Oeeon.  ix.  5;  Antiph.  de  Venif.
p.  611)  ;  and  even  the  tragic  poets  transfer  to  the
heroic  ages  the  practice  of  their  own,  and  describe
both  sets  of  apartments  as  on  the  same  floor.  (Soph.
Oed.  Tyr.  1241—1262.)

The  scanty  notices  of  the  domestic,  or  rather  the
palatial  architecture  of  the  early  Greeks,  which  we
find  in  Homer,  ^are  insufficient  to  give  an  accurate
notion  of  the  names,  uses,  and  arrangement  of  the
apartments  ;  besides  which,  an  allowance  must  no
doubt  be  made  for  .poetical  exaggeration.  The
various  passages  and  words,  in  Homer,  which
throw  any  light  upon  the  subject,  are  collected  and
discussed  by  Schneider  {Epivi,  ad  Xenoph.  Mem.
iii.  8.  §  9),  by  Krause  (in  Pauly's  Real-Encydop.
d.  Class.  AUertJi.  s.  v.  Domus),  and  by  Hirt,  who
gives  a  ground-plan  of  the  Homeric  house  (Gesch-
ichte  der  Baukunst,  vol.  i.  pp.  208 — 216,  and  Plate
VI.  fig.  1).  The  general  plan  was  not  very  dif-
ferent from  that  of  the  later  houses.  The  chief
points  of  difference  appear  to  have  been,  the  posi-
tion of  the  women's  apartments  in  the  upper  story,
and  the  great  court  in  front  of  the  house,  which
was  wanting  at  least  in  the  ordinary  town  dwellings
of  later  times.

We  first  gain  precise  information  on  the  subject
about  the  time  of  the  Peloponnesian  war  ;  and
from  the  allusions  made  by  Greek  writers  to  the
houses  of  this  and  the  immediately  subsequent  pe-
riods, till  the  time  of  Alexander,  we  may  conclude
that  their  general  arrangement  corresponded  with
that  described  by  Vitruvius  (vi.  .7,  Schneider).  In
this  description,  however,  there  is  one  considerable
difficulty,  among  others  of  less  importance.  Vitru-
vius seems  to  describe  the  Gynaeconitis  as  lying
before  the  Andronitis,  an  arrangement  alike  incon-
sistent with  the  careful  state  of  seclusion  in  which
the  Greek  women  were  kept,  and  also  with  the
allusions  in  the  writers  of  the  period,  who,  as  above
stated,  almost  uniformly  refer  to  the  two  sets  of
apartments  as  being  on  the  same  floor,  the  Gynae-
conitis behind  the  Andronitis.  Becker  {Charikles,
vol.  i.  pp.  184,  1^5)  notices  the  different  explana-
tions which  have  been  given  of  the  inconsistency
between  the  statements  and  the  description  of
Vitruvius,  the  most  plausible  of  which  is  that  of
Galiani,  namely,  that  in  the  time  of  Vitruvius  a
slight  change  had  taken  place  in  the  dis^position  of
the  apartments,  by  which  the  Andronitis  ^nd  Gy-
naeconitis were  placed  side  by  side,  each  of  them
having  its  own  front  towards  the  street,  and  its
own  entrance.  It  is  also  very  likely  that  Vitruvius
to  some  extent  misunderstood  the  descriptions  given
by  his  Greek  authorities.

The  front  of  the  house  towards  the  street  was
not  large,  as  the  apartments  extended  rather  in
the  direction  of  its  depth  than  of  its  width.  In
towns  the  houses  were  often  built  side  by  side,
•with  party  walls  between.  (Thucyd.  ii.  3.)  The
exterior  wail  was  plain,  being  composed  generally
of  stone,  brick,  and  timber  (Xen.  Mein.  iii.  1.  §  7;
Demosth.  Uepl  'S.wto^.  p.  175),  and  often  covered
with  stucco.     (Plutarch.  Comp.  Arist.  et  Cat.  4).


DOMUS.

Plutarch  speaks  of  Phocion's  house  as  being  orna-
mented with  plates  of  iron.     (Plut.  Phoc.  18.)

The  general  character  of  the  ordinary  houses  in
towns  was  very  plain,  even  at  the  time  of  the
Peloponnesian  war ;  the  Greeks  preferring  to  ex-
pend their  wealth  on  temples  and  other  public
buildings.  The  ease  with  which  the  Plataeans
broke  through  the  party  walls  of  their  houses,  to
communicate  with  one  another,  in  the  instance
just  quoted,  shows  how  indifferently  they  were
constructed  ;  and  even  at  Athens,  in  the  time  of
Pericles,  foreigners  were  struck  by  the  contrast
between  the  splendour  of  the  public  buildings  and.
the  meaaa  dwellings  of  the  common  people.  (Thuc.
ii.  14,  65  ;  Dicaearch.  Stat.  Graec.  p.  8.)

Xenophon  {Mem.  iii.  8.  §§  9,  10)  represents
Socrates  as  stating  briefly  the  chief  requisites  of  a
good  house  :  that  it  should  be  cool  in  summer  and
warm  in  winter,  and  that  the  apartments  should
furnish  convenient  abodes  for  the  family,  and  safe
receptacles  for  their  property  :  for  the  fonner  pur-
pose, the  chief  apartments  should  face  the  south,
and  should  be  lofty,  so  as  to  receive  the  full  rays
of  the  sun  in  winter,  and  to  be  shaded  by  their
projecting  roofs  in  summer  ;  and  that  those  facing
the  north  should  be  lower,  for  the  sake  of  shelter.
Paintings  and  elaborate  decorations,  he  says,  de-
stroy more  pleasures  than  they  furnish.

The  advance  of  luxury,  after  the  time  of
Alexander  the  Great,  caused  a  corresponding  im-
provement in  the  dwelling-houses  of  the  principal
Greek  cities,  which  had  already  begun  to  receive
more  attention,  in  proportion  as  the  public  build-
ings were  neglected.  (Demosth.  in  Aristocr.  p.
689,  Olynth.  iii.  p.  36.)  It  is  probably  to  the
larger  and  more  splendid  houses  of  this  period
that  the  description  of  Vitruvius  applies  ;  but  there
is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  general  arrange-
ments of  the  previous  period  were  much  altered.
The  following  description,  therefore,  which  is  de-
rived from  a  comparison  of  Vitruvius  with  the
allusions  in  the  Greek  writers,  will  serve  for  the
probalde  arrangements  (for  further  we  cannot  go)
of  the  Greek  house,  at  the  time  of  the  Pelopon-
nesian war  and  onwards.

That  there  was  no  open  space  between  the
street  and  the  house-door,  like  the  Roman  vesti-
hulum,  is  plain  from  the  law  of  Hippias,  which  laid
a  tax  on  house-doors  opening  outwards,  because
they  encroached  upon  the  street.  (Aristot.  Oecon.
ii.  6,  p.  1347-  Bekk.)  The  trpoBvpov.,  which  is
sometimes  mentioned  (Herod,  vi.  35),  seems  to  be
mej-ely  the  space  in  front  of  the  house.  We  learn,
however,  from  the  same  law  of  Hippias,  that
houses  sometimes  stood  back  from  the  street,  with-
in enclosures  of  their  own  {trpocppdyiJLaTa  or  hpvcpa-
KTOJ,  Heracl.  Pont.  Polit.  1).  In  front  of  the
house  was  generally  an  altar  of  Apollo  Agyieus,
or  a  rude  obelisk  emblematical  of  the  god.  Some-
times there  was  a  laurel  tree  in  the  same  position,
and  sometimes  a  terminal  bust  of  the  god  Hermes.
(Thucyd.  vi.  27  ;  Aristoph.  Plut.  1153.)

A  few  steps  (auaeaOfjLoi)  led  up  to  the  house-
door,  which  generally  bore  some  inscription,  for
the  sake  of  a  good  omen,  or  as  a  chann,  such  as
Efo-oSos  KpdT■t^Tl  ^Ayad^  Aalfiovi.  (Plutarch,  Frag.
Vit.  Crat. ;  Diog.  Laert.  vi.  50.)  The  form  aiid
fastenings  of  the  door  are  described  under  Janua.
This  door,  as  we  have  seen,  sometimes  opened  out-
wards ;  but  the  opposite  was  the  general  rule,  aa
is  proved  by  the   expressions   used   for  opening,


DOMUS.
ivSovyai,  and  shutting  it,  iTri(nra.<racr6ai  and  icpeK-
KvaacrOai.     (Plutarch.  Pelop.  1 1,  Dio,  57.)      The
handles  were  called  eViO'Traa'TTjpes.

The  house-door  was  called  aij\eios  or  avKeia
^Vf)a  (Pind.  N'em.  i.  19  ;  Harpocr.  s.  v.  ;  Eustath.
ad  Iliad,  xxii.  66),  because  it  led  to  the  ouAtj.  It
gave  admittance  to  a  narrow  passage  (i^u/Jco/seTof,
irvXcSu,  ^vpcov),  on  one  side  of  which,  in  a  large
house,  were  the  stables,  on  the  other  the  porter's
lodge.  The  duty  of  the  porter  (^vpcx>p6s)  was  to
admit  visitors,  and  to  prevent  anything  improper
from  being  carried  into  or  out  of  the  house,  (Aristot.
Oecon.  i.  6.)  Plato  {Protug.  p.  314.)  gives  a  lively
picture  of  an  officious  porter.  The  porter  was
attended  by  a  dog.  ( Apollod.  apiid  Athen.  i.  p.  3  ;
Theocr.  xv.  43  ;  Aristoph.  Thesm.  416,  Equit.
1025.)  Hence  the  phrase  evAaSelrrOai  r^,v  Kvva
(Aristoph.  Lysid.  1215),  corresponding  to  the
Latin  Cave  canem.

At  the  further  end  of  the  passage  Vitruvius
places  another  door,  which,  however,  does  not
seem  generally  to  have  existed.  Plutarch  {de
Gen.  Soar.  18)  mentions  the  house-door  as  being
visible  from  the  peristj'le.

From  the  ^vpwpuou  we  pass  into  the  peristyle
or  court  (TrepLcrrvAioy,  avXri)  of  the  Andronitis,
which  was  a  space  open  to  the  sky  in  the  centre
{imaiOpou),  and  surrounded  on  all  four  sides  by
porticoes  (crToai),  of  which  one,  probably  that
nejirest  the  entrance,  was  called  irpocnSov  (Plato,
Pnttag.  pp.  314,  315).  These  porticoes  were  used
for  exercise,  and  sometimes  for  dining  in.  (Pollux,
i.  78  ;  Plato,  Symp.  p.  212,  Protag.  p.  311  ;  Plu-
tarch, de  Geii.  Socr.  32.)  Here  was  commonly
the  altar  on  which  sacrifices  were  offered  to  the
household  gods,  but  frequently  portable  altars
were  used  for  this  purpose.  (Plato,  de  Republ.  i.
p.  328.)  Vitruvius  (/.  c.)  says  that  the  porticoes
of  the  peristyle  were  of  equal  height,  or  else  the
one  facing  the  south  was  built  with  loftier  columns.
This  he  aills  a  Rhodian  peristyle  ;  and  it  cor-
responds with  the  arrangement  recommended  by
Xenophon,  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  as  much
sun  in  winter,  and  as  much  shade  and  air  in  sum-
mer, as  possible.  (Xen.  Oecon.  ix.  4  ;  Mem.  iii.  8.
§  y  ;  Aristot.  Oecon.  i.  6.)

Round  the  peristyle  were  arranged  the  chambers
used  by  the  men  \61koi,  avSpcoyes),  such  as  ban-
queting rooms,  which  were  large  enough  to  con-
tain several  sets  of  couches  (rpiKXivoi,  ctttolkXu/oi,
TpiaKovrdiiKivoi),  and  at  the  same  time  to  allow
abundant  room  for  attendants,  musicians,  and  per-
formers of  games  (Vitruv.  I.  c.  ;  Xen.  Syinp.  i.  4.
§  13 ;  Plutarch.  Symp.  v.  5.  §  2 ;  Aristoph.  Eccles.
6,76)  ;  parlours  or  sitting  rooms  (6|e'5/Jot),  and
smaller  chambers  and  sleeping  rooms  (Su'^taria,
KoiTcSj/es,  olK-r]pLaTa)  ;  picture-galleries  and  libraries,
and  sometimes  store-rooms  ;  and  in  the  arrange-
ment of  these  apartments  attention  was  paid  to
their  aspect.  (Vitruv.  /.  c. ;  Lysias,  de  Caede  Era-
tosth.  p.  28,  in  Eratostk.  p.  38*9  ;  Aristoph.  Eccles.
8,  14  ;  Pollux,  i.  79;  Plato,  Protag.  pp.  314.  316.)

The  peristyle  of  the  Andronitis  was  connected
with  that  of  the  Gynaeconitis  by  a  door  called
ueVauAos,  /ifTauAos,  or  fieaavMos,  which  was  in
the  middle  of  the  portico  of  the  peristyle  opposite
to  the  entrance.  Vitruvius  applies  the  name
4J.e(rav\os  to  a  passage  between  the  two  peristyles,
in  which  was  the  /xeaauAos  ^vpa.  By  means  of
this  door  all  communication  between  the  Andronitis
ajid  the  Gynaeconitis  could  be  shut  oiF.     Its  uses


DOMUS.  425

are  mentioned  by  Xenophon,  who  calls  it  ^vpa
^aKavcaT6s  {Oecon.  ix.  5  ;  compare  Plut.  Arat.  26).
Its  name  fiea-avXas  is  evidently  derived  from
fieaoSy  and  means  the  door  between  the  two  avAai
or  peristyles.  (Suidas  s.  v.  MccravXiov  :  Ael.  Dion.
apud  Eusiatli.  ad  Iliad.,  xi.  547  ;  Schol.  in  Apoll.
Rhod.  iii.  335.)  The  other  name,  /j.4Tav\os,  is
taken  by  some  writers  as  merely  the  Attic  form  of
fieaauXos.  (Moer.  Att.  p.  264.)  But  it  should
rather  be  derived  from  /uera,  as  being  the  door
behind  or  beyo?id  the  ai»Ai^,  with  respect  to  the
avAeios  ^vpa.  (Lysias,  de  Coed.  Erat.  p.  20  ;  Plut.
Symp.  vii.  1  ;  Ael.  Dion,  apud  Eustath.  I.  c.)  It
should  be  observed  that  in  the  house  described
by  Vitruvius,  if  the  Andronitis  and  Gynaeconitis
lay  side  by  side,  the  fieaavXos  ^vpa  would  not  be
opposite  to  the  entrance,  but  in  one  of  the  other
sides  of  the  peristyle.

This  door  gave  admittance  to  the  peristyle  of
the  Gynaeconitis,  which  dittered  from  that  of  the
Andronitis  in  having  porticoes  round  only  three  of
its  sides.  On  the  fourth  side,  that  opposite  to  the
/ieVauAos  ^vpa  (the  side  facing  the  south,  accord-
ing to  Vitruvius),  were  placed  two  antae  [Antae],
at  a  considerable  distance  from  each  other.  A
third  of  the  distance  between  these  antae  was  set
oif  inwards  (Vitruv.  I.e.  §  1.  Quantum  inter  antas
distat,  ex  eo  tertia  dempta  spatium  dalur  introrsus),
thus  forming  a  chamber  or  vestibule,  which  was
called  TTpoa'Tds,  irapaards  and  perhaps  Tracrras,  and
also  7rpo5o/ios  ;  although  some  of  the  later  Greek
writers  apply  the  word  ivp6Zo[j.os  to  the  vestibule
of  the  Andronitis,  and  such  seems  to  have  been
its  meaning  in  Homer's  time.  (Pollux  ;  Suid.  ;
Hesych.  ;  Etymol.  Mag.  ;  Vitruv.  I.  c.)  On  the
right  and  left  of  this  ivpoards  were  two  bed-
chambers, the  ^dXafxos  and  afKpLQdXa^os,  of  which
the  former  was  the  principal  bed-chamber  of  the
house,  and  here  also  seem  to  have  been  kept  the
vases,  and  other  valuable  articles  of  ornament.
(Xen.  Oecon.  ix.  3.)  Beyond  these  rooms  (for  this
seems  to  be  what  Vitruvius  means  by  in  his  locis
ijitrorsus)  were  large  apartments  (iVTaJj/ei-)  used
for  working  in  wool  {oeci  mug  id,  in  quibus  matres
familiarum  cum  lanificis  habent  sessionem,  Vitruv.).
Round  the  peristyle  were  the  eating-rooms,  bed-
chambers, store-rooms,  and  other  apartments  in
common  use  (tricli7iia  quotidiana,  cubicula,  et  cellae
familiaricae).

Besides  the  aij\eios  ^vpa  and  the  {x4(TavXos
^vpa,  there  was  a  third  door  (/cTjTroi'a  ^vpa)  lead-
ing to  the  garden.  (Pollux,  i.  76  ;  Demosth.  in
Euerg.  p.  1155  ;  Lysias,  in  Eratosth.  p.  393.)
Lysias  (2.  c.  p.  394)  speaks  of  another  door,  which
probably  led  from  the  garden  into  the  street.

There  was  usually,  though  not  always,  an  upper
story  {inrep^ov,  Strjpes),  which  seldom  extended
over  the  whole  space  occupied  by  the  lower  story.
The  principal  use  of  the  upper  story  was  for  the
lodging  of  the  slaves.  (Demosth.  in  Euerg.  p.  1 156,
where  the  words  eV  t<^  irvpytfi  seem  to  imply  a
building  several  stories  high.)  The  access  to  the
upper  floor  seems  to  have  been  sometimes  by  stairs
on  the  outside  of  the  house,  leading  up  from  the
street.  Guests  were  also  lodged  in  the  upper
story.  (Antiph.  rf<3  re;2e/ p.  611.)  But  in  some
large  houses  there  were  rooms  set  apart  for  their
reception  (^evwuss)  on  the  ground  floor.  (Vitruv.
I.  c.  ;  Pollux,  iv.  125  ;  Eurip.  Alcest.  564.)  In
cases  of  emergency  store-rooms  were  fitted  up  for  the
accommodation  of  guests.     (Pkito^  Protag.  p.  315.)


426


DOM  US.


Portions  of  the  upper  story  sometimes  projected
beyond  the  walls  of  the  lower  part,  fonning  bal-
conies or  verandahs  (TrpoSoAol,  yfKTnroSia-fj.aTay
Pollux,  i.  81).

The  following  plan  of  the  ground -floor  of  a  Greek
house  of  the  larger  size  is  taken  from  Bekker's
Charikles.  It  is  of  course  conjectural,  as  there  are
no  Greek  houses  in  existence.  Other  plans,  differ-
ing very  much  from  this  and  from  one  another,
are  given  by  Hirt,  Stieglitz,  and  the  commentators
on  Vitruvius.


o.  House-door,  aijAcios  dvpa :  ^vp.  passage,
bvpwpciov  or  ^vpdcv :  A,  peristyle  or  avX))  of  the
Andronitis  :  o,  the  halls  and  chambers  of  the  An-
dronitis  ;  /x,  jxiravKos  or  /xfcravKos  dvpa  :  T,  peri-
style of  the  Gynaeconitis  ;  7,  chambers  of  the
Oynaeconitis  ;  ■tt,  irpoaras  or  Trapa<rras :  6,  ^d\a-
fjLOS  and  afKpiddXaixos :  I,  rooms  for  working  in
wool  (iVraJj/es)  ;  K,  garden-door,  KTjTrota  ^vpa.

The  roofs  were  generally  flat,  and  it  was  cus-
tomary to  walk  about  upon  them.  (Lysias,  adv.
Simon,  p.  142  ;  Plaut.  Mil.  ii.  2.  3.)  But  pointed
roofs  were  also  used.     (Pollux,  i.  81.)

In  the  interior  of  the  house  the  place  of  doors
was  sometimes  supplied  by  curtains  {irapaTrcTaa--
fiara)^  which  were  either  plain,  or  dyed,  or  em-
broidered.    (Pollux,  X.  32  ;  Theophrast.  5.)

The  principal  openings  for  the  admission  of  light
and  air  were  in  the  roofs  of  the  peristyles ;  but  it
is  incorrect  to  suppose  that  the  houses  had  no
windows  (^vpj'Ses),  or  at  least  none  overlooking
the  street  They  were  not  at  all  uncommon.
(Aristoph.  Tkesm.  797,  Eccles.  961 ;  Plutarch,  de
Curios,  13,  Di(m,  56.)

Artificial  warmth  was  procured  partly  by  means
of  fire-places.  It  is  supposed  that  chimneys  were
altogether  unknown,  and  that  the  smoke  escaped
through  an  opening  in  the  roof  (KaTTj/oSdjcrj,  Herod,
viii.  137).  It  is  not  easy  to  understand  how  this
could  be  the  case  when  there  was  an  upper  story.

Little  portable  stoves  (eVxapot,  e(rxapi5€y)  or
chafing  dishes  {h.vQp6jcia)   were  frequently  used.


DOMUS.

(Plutarch.  ApopMi.  i.  p.  717;  Aristoph.  Vesp.  811,
Pollux,  vi.  89,  X.  101.)     [Focus.]

The  decorations  of  the  interior  were  very  plain
at  the  period  to  which  our  description  refers.  The
floors  were  of  stone.  At  a  late  period  coloured
stones  were  used.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvi.  25.  s.  60.)
Mosaics  are  first  mentioned  as  introduced  under
the  kings  of  Pergamus.

The  walls,  up  to  the  fourth  century  b.  c,  seem
to  have  been  only  whited.  The  first  instance  of
painting  them  is  that  of  Alcibiades.  (Andoc.  in
Alcib.  p.  119  ;  Plutarch.  Alcib.  16.)  This  inno-
vation met  with  considerable  opposition.  (Xen.
Mem.  iii.  8.  §  10  ;  Oecon.  ix.  2.)  Plato  mentions
the  painting  of  the  walls  of  houses  as  a  mark  of
a  Tpv(p(S(ra  irSXis  {Repub.  iii.  pp.  372,  373).  These
allusions  prove  that  the  practice  was  not  uncommon
in  the  time  of  Plato  and  Xenophon.  We  have
also  mention  of  painted  ceilings  at  the  same  period.
(Plato,  Repub.  vii.  529.)  At  a  later  period  this
mode  of  decoration  became  general.  (The  com-
mentators on  Vitruvius,  I.  c. ;  Schneider,  Epim.  ad
Xen.  Mem.  ;  Kirt^ Die Lehre  der  Gebnude^  pp.287
— 289;  Stieglitz,  Arch'dol.  d.  Baukunst^  vol.  ii.
pt.  2.  pp.  150 — 159;  Becker,  Charikles,  vol.  i.  pp.
166—205.)  [P.S.]

2.  Roman.  The  houses  of  the  Romans  were
poor  and  mean  for  many  centuries  after  the  found-
ation of  the  city.  Till  the  war  with  Pyrrhus  the
houses  were  covered  only  with  thatch  or  shingles
(Plin.  H.  N.  xvi.  15),  and  were  usually  built  of
wood  or  unbaked  bricks.  It  was  not  till  the  latter
times  of  the  republic,  Avhen  wealth  had  been  ac-
quired by  conquests  in  the  East,  that  houses  of  any
splendour  began  to  be  built ;  but  it  then  became
the  fashion  not  only  to  build  houses  of  an  immense
size,  but  also  to  adorn  them  with  columns,  paint-
ings, statues,  and  costly  works  of  art.

M.  Lepidus,  who  was  consul  B.  c.  78,  was  the
first  who  introduced  Numidian  marble  into  Rome
for  the  purpose  of  paving  the  threshold  of  his
house  ;  but  the  fashion  of  building  magnificent
houses  increased  so  rapidly  that  the  house  of  Le-
pidus, which,  in  his  consulship,  was  the  first  in
Rome,  was,  thirty-five  years  later,  eclipsed  by  a
hundred  others.  (Id.  xxxvi.  8.  24.  §  4.)  Lucullus
especially  surpassed  all  his  contemporaries  in  the
magnificence  of  his  houses  and  the  splendour  of
their  decorations.  Marble  columns  were  first  in-
troduced into  private  houses  by  the  orator  L.  Cras-
sus,  but  they  did  not  exceed  twelve  feet  in  height,
and  were  only  six  in  number.  (Id.  xvii.  1,  xxxvi.
3.)  He  was  soon  outdone  by  M.  Scaurus,  who
placed  in  his  atrium  columns  of  black  marble,
called  Lucullean,  thirty-eight  feet  high,  and  of
such  immense  weight  that  the  contractor  of  the
sewers  took  security  for  any  injury  that  might  be
done  to  the  sewers  in  consequence  of  the  columns
being  carried  along  the  streets.    (Id.  xxxvi.  2.)

The  Romans  wore  exceedingly  partial  to  marble
for  the  decoration  of  their  houses.  Mamurra,
who  was  Caesar's  praefectus  fabrum  in  Gaul,  set
the  example  of  lining  his  room  with  slabs  of  mar-
ble. (Id.  xxxvi.  7.)  Some  idea  may  be  formed  of
the  size  and  magnificence  of  the  houses  of  the
Roman  nobles  during  the  later  times  of  the  re-
public by  the  price  which  they  fetched.  The  con-
sul Messalla  bought  the  house  of  Autronius  for
3700  sestertia  (nearly  33,000/.),  and  Cicero  the
house  of  Crassus,  on  the  Palatine,  for  3500  ses-
tertia (nearly  31,000/.).     (Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  13,  a<l


DOMUS.

Fam.  V.  6.)  The  house  of  P.  Clodius,  whom  Milo
killed,  cost  14,800  sestertia  (about  131,000Z.)  ;  and
the  Tusculan  villa  of  Scaurus  was  fitted  up  with
such  magnificence,  that  when  it  was  burnt  by  his
slaves,  he  lost  100,000  sestertia,  upwards  of
885,000/.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvi.  24.)  The  house-
rent,  which  persons  in  poor  circumstances  usually
paid  at  Rome,  was  about  2000  sesterces,  between
17^.  and  \U.  (Suet.  Jul.  38.)  It  was  brought  as
a  charge  of  extravagance  against  Caelius  that  he
paid  30  sestertia  (about  266/.)  for  the  rent  of  his
hwise.  {C\c.  pro  Gael.  7.)

Houses  were  originally  only  one  story  high  ;
but  as  the  value  of  ground  increased  in  the  city
they  were  built  several  stories  in  height.  In  many
houses  each  story  was  let  out  to  separate  tenants,
the  highest  floors  being  usually  inhabited  by  the
poor.  (Cic.  Agr.  ii.  35  ;  Hor.  Ef>.  i.  1.  91  ;  Juv.
Sat.  iii.  268,  &c.,  x.  17.)  To  guard  against  danger
from  the  extreme  height  of  houses,  Augustus  re-
stricted the  height  of  all  new  houses  which  were
built  by  the  side  of  the  public  roads  to  seventy
feet  (Strab.  v.  p.  235.)  Till  the  time  of  Nero,
the  streets  in  Rome  were  narrow  and  irregular,
and  bore  traces  of  the  haste  and  confusion  with
which  the  city  was  built  after  it  had  been  burnt
by  the  Gauls  ;  but  after  the  great  fire  in  the  time
of  that  emperor,  by  which  two-thirds  of  Rome
was  burnt  to  the  ground,  the  city  was  built  with
great  regularity.  The  streets  were  made  straight
and  broad  ;  the  height  of  the  houses  was  re-
stricted, and  a  certain  part  of  each  was  required
to  be  built  of  Gabian  or  Alban  stone,  which  was
proof  against  fire.  (Tacit.  Ann.  xv.  43  ;  Suet.
Ner.  38.)

Our  information  respecting  the  form  and  ar-
rangement of  a  Roman  house  is  principally  derived
from  the  description  of  Vitruvius,  and  the  remains
of  the  houses  which  have  been  found  at  Pompeii.
Many  points,  however,  are  still  doubtful  ;  but
without  entering  into  architectural  details,  we
shall  confine  om'selves  to  those  topics  which  serve
to  illustrate  the  classical  writers.  The  chief  rooms
in  the  house  of  a  respectable  Roman,  though  dif-
fering of  course  in  size  and  splendour  according  to
the  circumstances  of  the  owner,  appear  to  have
been  usually  arranged  in  the  same  manner  ;  while
the  others  varied  according  to  the  taste  and  cir-
cumstances of  the  master.

The  principal  parts  of  a  Roman  house  were
the  1.  Vestibtdum,  2.  Ostium^  3.  Atrium  or  Cavum
Aedium,  4.  Alae,  5.  Tablinum,  6.  Fauces,  7.  Pe-
nstylium.  The  parts  of  a  house  which  were  con-
sidered of  less  importance,  and  of  which  the
arrangement  differed  in  different  houses,  were  the

1.  Cicbicula,  2.  Triclinia,,  3.  Oeci,  4.  Eccedrae,  5.
PinacotJieca,  6.  Bihliotlieca,  7.  Balineum,  8.  Culina,
9.  Coenacula,  10.  Diaeta,  11.  Solaria.  We  shall
speak  of  each  in  order.

1.  Vestibulum.  The  vestibulum  did  not  pro-
perly form  part  of  the  house,  but  was  a  vacant
space  before  the  door,  forming  a  court,  which  was
surrounded  on  three  sides  by  the  house,  and  was
open  on  the  fourth  lo  the  street.  The  two  sides
of  the  house  joined  the  street,  but  the  middle  part
of  it,  where  the  door  was  placed,  was  at  some
little  distance  from  the  street.  (Gell.  xvi.  5  ;
Macrob.  Sat.  vi.  8.)     Hence  Plautus  {Mostell.  iii.

2.  132)  says,  "  Viden'  vestibulum  ante  aedes  hoc
et  ambulacrum  quoiusmodi  ?  "

2.  Ostium.     The  ostium,  which  is  also  called


DOMUS.  427

janva^  and  fores,  was  the  entrance  to  the  house.
The  street-door  admitted  into  a  hall,  to  which  the
name  of  ostium  was  also  given,  and  in  which  there
was  frequently  a  small  room  {cella)  for  the  porter
(ja7iitor  or  osiiarius),  and  also  for  a  dog,  which
was  usually  kept  in  the  hall  to  guard  the  house.
A  full  account  of  this  part  of  the  house  is  given
under  Janua.  Another  door  (janua  ifiterior)  op-
posite the  street  door  led  into  the  atrium.

3.  Atrium  or  Cavum  Akdium,  as  it  is  written
by  Varro  and  Vitruvius ;  Pliny  writes  it  Cavae-
dium.  Hirt,  Miiller  (Etrusker,  vol.  i.  p.  255),
Marini,  and  most  modem  writers,  consider  the
Atrium  and  Cavum  Aedium  to  be  the  same ;  but
Newton,  Stratico,  and  more  recently  Becker  {Gal-
lus,  vol.  i.  p.  77,  &c.),  maintain  that  they  were
distinct  rooms.  It  is  impossible  to  give  a  decisive
opinion  on  the  subject  ;  but  from  the  statements  of
Varro  {De  Ling.  Lat.  v.  161,  Miiller)  and  Vitru-
vius (vi.  3,  4,  Bipont),  taken  in  connection  with
the  fact  that  no  houses  in  Pompeii  have  been  yet
discovered  which  contain  both  an  Atrium  and
Cavum  Aedium,  it  is  most  probable  that  they
were  the  same.  The  Atrium  or  Cavum  Aedium
was  a  large  apartment  roofed  over  with  the  excep-
tion of  an  opening  in  the  centre,  called  complu-
vium,  towards  which  the  roof  sloped  so  as  to  throw
the  rain-water  into  a  cistern  in  the  floor,  termed
impluvium  (Varro,  I.  c.  ;  Festus,  s.  v.  Impluvium),
which  was  frequently  ornamented  with  statues,
columns,  and  other  works  of  art.  (Cic.  c.  Verr.  ii.
23,  56.)  The  word  ijnpluvium,  however,  is  also
employed  to  denote  the  aperture  in  the  roof.  (Ter.
Eun.  iii.  5.  41.)  Schneider,  m  his  commentary  on
Vitruvius,  supposes  cavum  aedium  to  mean  the
whole  of  this  apartment  including  the  impluvium,
while  atrium  signified  only  the  covered  part  ex-
clusive of  the  impluvium.  Mazois,  on  the  con-
trary, maintains  that  atrium  is  applied  to  the
whole  apartment,  and  cavum  aedium  only  to  the
uncovered  part.  The  breadth  of  the  impluvium,
according  to  Vitruvius  (vi.  4),  was  not  less  than  a
quarter  nor  greater  than  a  third  of  the  breadth  of
the  atrium  ;  its  length  was  in  the  same  proportion
according  to  the  length  of  the  atrium.

Vitruvius  (vi.  3)  distinguishes  five  kinds  of  atria
or  cava  aedium,  which  were  called  by  the  follow-
ing names :  —

(1.)  Tuscanicum.  In  this  the  roof  was  sup-
ported by  four  beams,  crossing  each  other  at  right
angles,  the  included  space  forming  the  complu-
vium.  This  kind  of  atrium  was  probably  the  most
ancient  of  all,  as  it  is  more  simple  than  the  others,
and  is  not  adapted  for  a  very  large  building.

(2.)  Tetrastylum.  This  was  of  the  same  form
as  the  preceding,  except  that  the  main  beams  of
the  roof  were  supported  by  pillars,  placed  at  the
four  angles  of  the  impluvium.

(3.)  Corinthium  was  on  the  same  principle  aa
the  tetrastyle,  only  that  there  were  a  greater  num-
ber of  pillars  around  the  impluvium,  on  which  the
beams  of  the  roof  rested.

(4.)  Displuviatum  had  its  roof  sloping  the  con-
trary way  to  the  impluvium,  so  that  the  water  fell
outside  the  house  instead  of  being  carried  into  the
impluvium.

(5.)  Testudinatum  was  roofed  all  over  and  had
no  compluvium.

The  atrium  was  the  most  important  room  in  the
house,  and  among  the  wealthy  was  fitted  up  with
much  splendour  and  magnificence.  (Compare  Hor.


428


DOM  US.


Carm.  iii.  1.  46.)  The  marble  columns  of  SAurus
already  spoken  of  were  placed  in  the  atrimn.  The
atrium  appears  originally  to  have  been  the  only
sitting-room  in  the  house,  and  to  have  served  also
as  a  kitchen  (SerA\  ad  Virg.  Aen.  i.  726,  iii  353)  ;
and  it  probably  continued  to  do  so  among  the
lower  and  middle  classes.  In  the  houses  of  the
wealthy,  however,  it  was  distinct  from  the  private
apartments,  and  was  used  as  a  reception  room,
where  the  patron  received  his  clients,  and  the
great  and  noble  the  numerous  visitors  who  were
accustomed  to  call  every  morning  to  pay  their  re-
spects or  solicit  favours.  (Hor.  Ep.  i.  5.  30  ;  Juv.
vii.  7,  91.)  Cicero  frequently  complains  that  he
was  not  exempt  from  this  annoyance,  when  he
retired  to  his  country-houses.  {Ad  Att.  ii.  14,  v.
2,  &c.)  But  though  the  atrium  does  not  appear
to  have  been  used  by  the  wealthy  as  a  sitting-
room  for  the  family,  it  still  continued  to  be  em-
ployed for  many  purposes  which  it  had  originally
served.  Thus  the  nuptial  couch  was  placed  in  the
atrium  opposite  the  door  {in  atda^  Hor.  Ep.  i.  1.
87  ;  Ascon.  in  Cic.  pro  Mil.  p.  43,  Orelli),  and
also  the  instruments  and  materials  for  spinning
and  weaving,  which  were  formerly  carried  on  by
the  women  of  the  family  in  this  room.  (Ascon.
l.  c.)  Here  also  the  images  of  their  ancestors
were  placed  (Juv.  viii.  1 9  ;  Mart.  ii.  90),  and  the
focus  or  fire-place,  which  possessed  a  sacred  cha-
racter, being  dedicated  to  the  Lares  of  each  family.
[Focus.]

4.  Alae,  wings,  were  small  apartments  or  re-
cesses on  the  left  and  right  sides  of  the  atrium.
(Vitruv.  vi.  4.)

5.  Tablinum  Avas  in  all  probability  a  recess  or
room  at  the  further  end  of  the  atrium  opposite  the
door  leading  into  the  hall,  and  was  regarded  as
part  of  the  atrium.  It  contained  the  family  records
and  archives.  (Vitruv.  vi.  4  ;  Festus,  s.  v.  ;  Plin.
H.  N.  XXXV.  2.)

With  the  tablinum,  the  Roman  house  appears
to  have  originally  ceased  ;  and  the  sleeping  rooms
were  probably  arranged  on  each  side  of  the  atrium.
But  when  the  atrium  and  its  surrounding  rooms
were  used  for  the  reception  of  clients  and  other
public  visitors,  it  became  necessarj'-  to  increase  the
si?e  of  the  house  ;  and  the  following  rooms  were
accordingly  added :  —

6.  Fauces  appear  to  have  been  passages,  which
passed  from  the  atrium  to  the  peristylium  or  in-
terior of  tne  house.    (Vitruv.  vi.  3.)

7.  Peristylium  was  in  its  general  form  like
the  atrium,  but  it  was  one-third  greater  in  breadth,
measured  transversely,  than  in  length.  (Vitruv.
vi.  4.)  It  was  a  court  open  to  the  sky  in  the
middle  ;  the  open  part,  which  was  surrounded  by
columns,  was  larger  than  the  impluvium  in  the
atrium,  and  was  frequently  decorated  with  flowers
and  shrubs.

The  arrangement  of  the  rooms,  which  are  next
to  be  noticed,  varied,  as  has  been  remarked,  ac-
cording to  the  taste  and  circumstances  of  the
owner.  It  is  therefore  impossible  to  assign  to
them  any  regular  place  in  the  house.

] .  Cubicula,  bed-chambers,  appear  to  have  been
usually  small.  There  were  separate  cubicula  for
the  day  and  night  {cubicula  diurna  et  nocturna,
Plin.  Ep.  i.  3) ;  the  latter  were  also  called  dormi-
ioria.  {Id.  v.  6  ;  Plin.  //.  A'',  xxx.  17.)  Vitruvius
(vL  7)  recommends  that  they  should  face  the  east
for  the  benefit  of  the  rising  sun.      They  some-


DOMUS.

times  had  a  small  ante-room,  which  was  called  by
the  Greek  name  of  -rrpoKoiTdov.    (Plin.  Ep.  ii,  17.)

2.  Triclinia,  dining-rooms,  are  treated  of  in  a
separate  article.    [Triclinium.]

3.  Oeci,  from  the  Greek  oJkos,  were  spacious
halls  or  saloons  borrowed  from  the  Greeks,  and
were  frequently  used  as  triclinia.  They  were  to
have  the  same  proportions  as  triclinia,  but  were  to
be  more  spacious  on  account  of  having  columns,
which  triclinia  had  not.  (Vitruv.  vi.  5,)  Vitni-
vius  mentions  four  kinds  of  oeci :  —

(1.)  The  Tetrastyle^  which  needs  no  further  de-
scription.    Four  columns  supported  the  roof.

(2.)  The  CorintJdan,  Avhich  possessed  only  one
row  of  columns,  supporting  the  architrave  {ejnsty-
Hum),  cornice  {corona),  and  a  vaulted  roof.

(3.)  The  Aegyptian,  which  was  more  splendid
and  more  like  a  basilica  than  a  Corinthian  tricli-
nium. In  the  Aegyptian  oecus,  the  pillars  sup-
ported a  gallery  with  paved  floor,  which  formed  a
walk  round  the  apartment ;  and  upon  these  pillars
others  were  placed,  a  fourth  part  less  in  height
than  the  lower,  which  surrounded  the  roof.  Be-
tween the  upper  columns  windows  were  inserted.

(4.)  The  Cyzicene  {KvCiKrfvoi)  appears  in  the
time  of  Vitruvius  to  have  been  seldom  used  in
Italy.  These  oeci  were  meant  for  summer  use.^
looking  to  the  north,  and,  if  possible,  facing  gar-
dens, to  which  they  opened  by  folding-doors.
Pliny  had  oeci  of  this  kind  in  his  villa.

4.  Exedrae,  which  appear  to  have  been  in
form  much  the  same  as  the  oeci,  for  Vitruvius  (vi.
5)  speaks  of  the  exedrae  in  connection  with  oeci
quadrati,  were  rooms  for  conversation  and  the
other  purposes  of  society.  (Cic.  de  Nat.  Deor.  i.  6,
De  Orat.  iii.  5.)  They  served  the  same  purposes
as  the  exedrae  in  the  Thermae  and  Gymnasia,
which  were  semicircular  rooms  with  seats  for  phi-
losophers and  others  to  converse  in.  (Vitruv.  v.  1 1,
vii.  9  ;  Balnea e.)

5.  6,     7.       PiNACOTHECA,     BiBLlOTHECA,    and

Balineum   [see    Balneae],  are  treated   of  in
separate  articles.

8.  Culina,  the  kitchen.  The  food  was  origin-
ally cooked  in  the  atrium,  as  has  been  already
stated  ;  but  the  progress  of  refinement  afterwards
led  to  the  use  of  anotlier  part  of  the  house  for  this
purpose.  In  the  kitchen  of  Pansa's  house,  of
which  a  ground-plan  is  given  below,  a  stove  for
stews  and  similar  preparations  was  found,  very
much  like  the  charcoal  stoves  used  in  the  present
day.  (See  woodcut.)  Before  it  lie  a  knife,  a
strainer,  and  a  kind  of  frying-pan  with  four
spherical    cavities,  as  if  it  were   meant   to  cook


.61^


DOMUS.

In  this  kitchen,  as  well  as  in  many  others  at
Pompeii,  there  are  paintings  of  the  Lares  or  do-
mestic gods,  under  whose  care  the  provisions  and
all  the  cooking  utensils  were  placed.

9.  CoENACULA  properly  signified  rooms  to  dine
in  ;  but  after  it  became  the  fashion  to  dine  in  the
upper  part  of  the  house,  the  whole  of  the  rooms
above  the  groimd-floor  were  called  coenacula  (Varr.
de  Ling.  Lat.  v.  162,  Miiller),  and  hence  Festus
says,  "  Coenacula  dicuntur,  ad  quae  scalis  ascendi-
tur."  (Compare  Dig.  9.  tit.  3.  s.  1.)  As  the  rooms
on  the  ground-floor  were  of  different  heights  and
sometimes  reached  to  the  roof,  all  the  rooms  on
the  upper  story  could  not  be  united  with  one  an-
other, and  consequently  different  sets  of  stairs
would  be  needed  to  connect  them  with  the  lower
part  of  the  house,  as  we  find  to  be  the  case  in
houses  at  Pompeii,  Sometimes  the  stairs  had  no
connection  with  the  lovver  part  of  the  house,  but
ascended  at  once  from  the  street.   (Liv.  xxxix.  14.)

10.  DiAETA  was  an  apartment  used  for  dining
in,  and  for  the  other  purposes  of  life.  (Plin.  Ep.  ii.
17  ;  Suet.  Claud.  10.)     It  appears  to  have   been


DOMUS.  429

smaller  than  the  triclinium.  Diaeta  is  also  the
name  given  by  Pliny  {Ep.  vi.  5)  to  rooms  contain-
ing three  or  four  bed-chambers  {cubicda).  Plea-
sure-houses or  summer-houses  are  also  called  di-
aetae.  (Dig.  30.  tit.  1.  s.  43  ;  7.  tit.  1.  s.  13.
§8.)

\\.  Solaria,  properly  places  for  basking  in
the  sun,  were  terraces  on  the  tops  of  houses.
(Plant  Mil.  ii.  3.  Q9,  ii.  4.  25  ;  Suet.  Ner.  16.)
In  the  time  of  Seneca  the  Romans  formed  artificial
gardens  on  the  tops  of  their  houses,  which  con-
tained even  fruit-trees  and  fish-ponds.  (Sen.  Ep.
122,  Contr.  Eocc.  v.  5  ;  Suet.  Claud.  10.)

The  two  woodcuts  annexed  represent  two  atria
of  houses  at  Pompeii.  The  first  is  the  atrium  of
what  is  usually  called  the  house  of  the  Quaestor.
The  view  is  taken  near  the  entrance-hall  facing  the
tablinum,  through  which  the  columns  of  the  pen-
style  and  the  garden  are  seen.  This  atrium,  which
is  a  specimen  of  what  Vitruvius  calls  the  Corin-
thian, is  surrounded  by  various  rooms,  and  is
beautifully  painted  with  arabesque  designs  upon
red  and  yellow  grounds.


The  next  woodcut  represents  the  atrium  of
what  is  usually  called  the  house  of  Ceres.  In  the
centre  is  the  impluvium,  and  the  passage  at  the
further  end  is  the  ostium  or  entrance-hall.  As
there  are  no  pillars  around  the  impluvium,  this
atrium  must  belong  to  the  kind  called  by  Vitruvius
the  Tuscan.


The  preceding  account  of  the  different  rooms,
and  especially  of  the  arrangement  of  the  atrium,
tablinum,  peristyle,  &c.,  is  best  illustrated  by  the
houses  which  have  been  disinterred  at  Pompeii.
The  ground-plan  of  two  is  accordingly  subjoined.
The  first  is  the  plan  of  a  house,  usually  called  the
house  of  the  tragic  poet.

Like  most  of  the  other  houses  at  Pompeii,  it
had  no  vestibulum  according  to  the  meaning  which
we  have  attached  to  the  word.  1.  The  ostium  or
entrance  hall,  which  is  six  feet  wide  and  neai'ly
thirty  long.  Near  the  street  door  there  is  a  figure
of  a  large  fierce  dog  worked  in  mosaic  on  the
pavement,  and  beneath  it  is  written  Cave  Canem.
The  two  large  rooms  on  each  side  of  the  vestibule
appear  from  the  large  openings  in  front  of  them  to
have  been  shops  ;  they  communicate  with  the  en-
trance hall,  and  were  therefore  probably  occupied
by  the  master  of  the  house.  2.  The  atrium,  which
is  about  twenty-eight  feet  in  length  and  twenty  in
breadth ;  its  impluvium  is  near  the  centre  of  the
room,  and  its  floor  is  paved  with  white  tesserae,
spotted  with  black.     3.  Chambers  for  the  use  of


430


DOM  U.S.


DOMUS.


•— «

s

1

1

-U- .p.

^^                s

2]    ^^  ■"■

1
II

FSl
J

1

the  family,  or  intended  for  the  reception  of  guests,
who  were  entitled  to  claim  hospitality.  When
a  house  did  not  possess  an  hospitium,  or  rooms
expressly  for  the  reception  of  guests,  they  ap-
pear to  have  been  lodged  in  rooms  attached  to
the  atrium.  [Hospitium.]  4.  A  small  room  with
s  stair-case  leading  up  to  the  upper  rooms.  5.
Alae.  6.  The  tablinum.  7.  The  fauces.  8.  Peri-
style, with  Doric  columns  and  garden  in  the  centre.
The  large  room  on  the  right  of  the  peristyle  is  the
triclinium  ;  beside  it  is  the  kitchen  ;  and  the
amaller  apartments  are  cubicula  and  other  rooms
for  the  use  of  the  family.

The  next  woodcut  contains  the  ground-plan  of
an  insula^  which  was  properly  a  house  not  joined
to  the  neighbouring  houses  by  a  common  wall.
(Festus,  s.  V.)  An  insula,  however,  generally
contained  several  separate  houses,  or  at  least
separate  apartments  or  shops,  which  were  let  to
different  families  ;  and  hence  the  term  domus
under  the  emperors  appears  to  be  applied  to  the
house  where  one  family  lived,  whether  it  were  an
insula  or  not,  and  insula  to  any  hired  lodgings.
This  insula  contains  a  house,  surrounded  by  shops,
which  belonged  to  the  owner  and  were  let  out  by
him.  The  house  itself,  which  is  usually  called  the
house  of  Pansa,  evidently  belonged  to  one  of  the
principal  men  of  Pompeii.  Including  the  garden,
which  is  a  third  of  the  whole  length,  it  is  about
300  feeflong  and  100  wide.

A.  Ostium,  or  entrance -hall,  paved  with  mosaic.

B.  Tuscan  atrium.  I.  Impluvium.  C.  Chambers
on  each  side  of  the  atrium,  probably  for  the  recep-
tion of  guests.  D.  Ala.  E.  Tablinum,  which  is
open  to  the  peristyle,  so  that  the  whole  length  of
the  house  could  be  seen  at  once  ;  but  as  there  is  a
passage  (fauces),  F,  beside  it,  the  tablinum  might
probably  be  closed  at  the  pleasure  of  the  owner.

C.  Chambers  by  the  fauces  and  tablinum,  of  which
the  use  is  xmcertain.  G.  Peristyle.  D.  Ala  to
the  peristyle.  C.  Cubicula  by  the  side  of  the
peristyle.  K.  Triclinium.  L.  Oecus,  and  by  its
side  there  is  a  passage  leading  from  the  peristyle
to  the  garden.     M.  Back  door  (posiicum  ostium)  to  ^


djyyj^'i


the  street.  N.  Culina.  H.  Servants'  hall,  with
a  back  door  to  the  street.  P.  Portico  of  two  stories,
which  proves  that  the  house  had  an  upper  floor.
The  site  of  the  staircase,  however,  is  unknown,
though  it  is  thought  there  is  some  indication  of
one  in  the  passage,  M.  Q.  The  garden.  R.  Reser-
voir for  supplying  a  tank,  S.

The  preceding  rooms  belonged  exclusively  to
Pansa's  house  ;  but  there  were  a  good  many  apart-
ments besides  in  the  insula,  which  were  not  in  his
occupfition.  a.  Six  shops  let  out  to  tenants.  Those
on  the  right  and  left  hand  comers  were  bakers'
shops,  which  contained  mills,  ovens,  &c.  at  b.  The
one  on  the  right  appears  to  have  been  a  large
establishment,  as  it  contains  many  rooms,  c.  Two
houses  of  a  very  mean  class,  having  formerly  an
upper  story.  On  the  other  side  are  two  houses
much  larger,  d.

Having  given  a  general  description  of  the  rooms
of  a  Roman  house,   it  remains  to  speak   of  the
(1)  floors,  (2)  walls,  (3)  ceilings,  (4)  windows,  and
(5)  the  mode  of  warming  the  rooms.    For  the  doors  ;
see  Janua.

(1.)  The  floor  (solum)  of  a  room  was  seldom
boarded,  though  this  appears  to  have  been  some-
times done  (strata  solo  tabtdata^  Stat.  Silv.  i.  5.  57).
It  was  generally  covered  with  stone  or  marble,  or
mosaics.     The    common   floors  were  paved   with


DOMUS.

pieces  of  bricks,  tiles,  stones,  &c.,  forming  a  kind
of  composition  called  mderatio.  (Vitruv.  vii.  1.)
Another  kind  of  pavement  was  that  called  opus
Signinum^  which  was  a  kind  of  plaster  made  of
tiles  beaten  to  powder  and  tempered  with  mortar.
It  derived  its  name  from  Signia,  a  town  of  Italy,
celebrated  for  its  tiles.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.  46.)
Sometimes  pieces  of  marble  were  imbedded  in  a
composition  ground,  which  appear  to  have  form.ed
the  floors  CJilled  by  Pliny  barbarica  or  subtegtdanea^
and  which  probably  gave  the  idea  of  mosaics.  As
these  floors  were  beaten  down  (pavita)  with  ram-
mers (Jistucae),  the  word  pavimentum  became  the
general  name  for  a  floor.  The  kind  of  pavement
called  sccdpturatum  was  first  introduced  in  the
temple  of  Jupiter  Capitolinus  after  the  beginning  of
the  third  Punic  war,  but  became  quite  common  in
Rome  before  the  beginning  of  the  Cimbric  war.
(Id.  xxxvi.  61.)  Mosaics,  called  by  Pliny  litho-
strota  {\id6(rTpwTa)^  though  this  word  has  a  more


DOMUS.


extensive  meaning,  first  came  into  use  in  Sulla's
time,  who  made  one  in  the  temple  of  Fortune  at
Praeneste.     (Id.  xxxvi.  64.)     Mosaic  work  was


afterwards  called  Musivum  opus.  (Spartian.  Pescen.
Nig.  6  ;  Trebell.  Pollio,  Trigin.  Tyrann.  24  ;
Augustin.  De  Civitate  Dei.,  xvi.  8.)  The  floors  of
the  houses  at  Pompeii  are  frequently  composed  of
mosaics,  which  are  usually  formed  of  black  frets  on
a  white  ground,  or  white  ones  on  a  black  ground,
though  some  of  them  are  in  coloured  marbles.
The  materials  of  which  they  are  generally  formed
are  small  pieces  of  red  and  white  marble  and  red
tile,  set  in  a  very  fine  cement  and  laid  upon  a
deep  bed  of  mortar,  which  served  as  a  base.  The
three  examples  here  given,  which  are  taken  from
houses  at  Pompeii,  will  convey  a  general  idea  of
their  form  and  appearance.


Mosaic  pavements,  however,  have  been  dis-
covered at  Pompeii,  which  represent  figures  and
scenes  of  actual  life,  and  are  in  reality  pictures  in
mosaic.  One  of  the  most  beautiful  of  these  is
given  in  its  original  colours  in  Gell's  PompeianUy
2nd  series,  plate  xlv.  It  is  composed  of  very  fine
pieces  of  glass,  and  represents  the  choragus,  or
master  of  the  chorus,  instnicting  the  actors  in  their
parts.  A  still  more  extraordinary  mosaic  painting
was  discovered  in  Pompeii  in  1831  ;  it  is  supposed
to  represent  the  battle  of  Issus.  (Museo  Borbonico,
viii.  t.  36—45.)

(2.)  The  inner  walls  (parietes)  of  private  rooms
were  frequently  lined  with  slabs  of  marble  (Plin.
H.  N.  xxxvi-  7),  but  were  more  usually  covered  by
paintings,  which  in  the  time  of  Augustus  were
made  upon  the  walls  themselves.  The  prevalence
of  this  practice  is  attested  not  only  by  Pliny
{H.  N.  xxxv.  37),  but  also  by  the  circumstance  that
even  the  small  houses  in  Pompeii  have  paintings
upon  their  walls.  The  following  woodcut,  which
represents  the  side  of  a  wall  at  Pompeii,  is  one  of
the  simplest  but  most  common  kind.  The  compart-
ments are  usually  filled  with  figures.


The  general  appearance  of  the  walls  may  be
seen  from  the  woodcuts  given  above.  Subjects  of
all  kinds  were  chosen  for  painting  on  the  walls,  as
may  be  seen  by  a  reference  to  the  Museo  Borbonico,
Gell,  Mazois,  &c.  (Compare  Vitruv.  vii.  5.)  The
colours  seem  usually  to  have  been  laid  upon  a  dry-
ground,  but  were  sometimes  placed  upon  it  wet,  as
in  the  modem  fresco  painting  {colores  udo  tectorio
inducere,  Vitruv.  vii.  3).  The  walls  also  appear
to  have  been  sometimes  ornamented  with  raised
figures,  or  a  species  of  has -lelief  (typos  in  tectorio
atrioli  includere^  Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  10),  and  some-
times with  mosaics.     (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvi.  64.)


432


DOM  US.


(3.)  The  ceilings  seem  originally  to  have  been
left  uncovered,  the  beams  which  supported  the
roof  or  the  upper  story  being  visible.  Afterwards
planks  were  placed  across  these  beams  at  certain
intervals,  leaving  hollow  spaces,  called  lacunaria
or  liujtiearia,  which  were  frequently  covered  with
gold  and  ivory,  and  sometimes  with  paintings.
(Hor.  Carm.  ii.  18  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii.  18  ;  Sen.
JEp.  90  ;  Suet.  Ner.  31.)  There  was  an  arched
ceiling  in  common  use,  called  Camara,  which  is
described  in  a  separate  article.

(4.)  The  Roman  houses  had  few  windows
{fenestrae).  The  principal  apartments,  the  atrium,
peristyle,  &c.,  were  lighted,  as  we  have  seen,
from  above,  and  the  cubicula  and  other  small
rooms  generally  derived  their  light  from  them,  and
not  from  windows  looking  into  the  street.  The
rooms  only  on  the  upper  story  seem  to  have  been
usually  lighted  by  windows.  (Juv.  iii.  2/0.)
Very  few  houses  in  Pompeii  have  windows  on  the
ground-floor  opening  into  the  street,  though  there
is  an  exception  to  this  in  the  house  of  the  tragic
poet,  which  has  six  windows  on  the  ground-floor.
Even  in  this  case,  however,  the  windows  are  not
near  the  ground  as  in  a  modern  house,  but  are  six
feet  six  inches  above  the  foot-pavement,  which  is
raised  one  foot  seven  inches  above  the  centre  of  the
street  The  windows  are  small,  being  hardly  three
feet  by  two  ;  and  at  the  side  there  is  a  wooden
frame,  in  which  the  window  or  shutter  might  be
moved  backwards  or  forwards.  The  lower  part  of
the  wall  is  occupied  by  a  row  of  red  panels  four
feet  and  a  half  high.  The  following  woodcut  re-
presents part  of  the  wall,  with  apertures  for  win-
dows above  it,  as  it  appears  from  the  street.  The
tiling  upon  the  wall  is  modern,  and  is  only  placed
there  to  preserve  it  from  the  weather.


The  windows  appear  originally  to  have  been
merely  openings  in  the  wall,  closed  by  means  of
shutters,  which  frequently  had  two  leaves  {hi/ores
femstme^  Ovid,  Font.  iii.  3.  5),  whence  Ovid
{Amor.  i.  5.  3)  says,

"  Pars  adaperta  fuit,  pars  altera  clausa  fenestrae."
They  are  for  this  reason  said  to  be  joined,  when
they  are  shut.  (Ilor.  Carm.  ii.  25.)  Windows
were  also  sometimes  covered  by  a  kind  of  lattice
or  trellis  work  {dathri),  and  sometimes  by  net-
work, to  prevent  serpents  and  other  noxious  rep-
tiles from  getting  in.  (Plaut.  Mill.  ii.  4.  2o  ;
Varro,  Re  Rusi.  iii.  7.)

Afterwards,  however,  windows  were  made  of  a
transparent  stone,  called  lapis  specularis  (mica),
which  was  first  found  in  Hispania  Citerior,  and
afterwards  in  Cyprus,  Cappadocia,  Sicily,  and
Africa  ;  but  the  best  came  from  Spain  and  Cap-
padocia.     It  was   easily  split  into   the  thinnest


DONARIA.
laminae,  but  no  pieces  had  been  discovered,  says
Pliny,  above  five  feet  long.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvi.
45.)  Windows  made  of  this  stone  were  called
specularia.  (Sen.  Ep.  90  ;  Plin.  Ep.  ii.  17  ;
Mart.  viii.  1 4.)  Windows  made  of  glass  {vitrum)
are  first  mentioned  by  Lactantius  {De  Opif.  Dei^  8),
but  the  discoveries  at  Pompeii  prove  that  glass
was  used  for  windows  under  the  early  emperors,  as
frames  of  glass  and  glass  windows  have  been  found
in  several  of  the  houses.

(5.)  The  rooms  were  heated  in  winter  in  dif-
ferent ways  ;  but  the  Romans  had  no  stoves  like
ours.  The  cubicula,  triclinia,  and  other  rooms,
which  were  intended  for  winter  use,  were  built  in
that  part  of  the  house  upon  which  the  sun  shone
most  ;  and  in  the  mild  climate  of  Italy  this  fre-
quently enabled  them  to  dispense  with  any  arti-
ficial mode  of  warming  the  rooms.  Rooms  exposed
to  the  sun  in  this  way  were  sometimes  called  lielio-
camini.  (Plin.  Ep.  ii.  17  ;  Dig.  8.  tit.  2.  s.  17.)
The  rooms  were  sometimes  heated  by  hot  air,  which
was  introduced  by  means  of  pipes  from  a  furnace
below  (Plin.  Ep.  ii.  17  ;  Sen.  Ep.  90),  but  more
frequently  by  portable  furnaces  or  braziers  {foculi)^
in  which  coal  or  charcoal  was  burnt.  (See  wood-
cut, p.  190.)  The  caminus  was  also  a  kind  of
stove,  in  which  wood  appears  to  have  been  usually
burnt,  and  probably  only  differed  from  the /ocm/ms
in  being  larger  and  fixed  to  one  place.  (Suet.
Vitell.  8  ;  Hor.  Sat.  i.  5.  81.)  It  has  been  a  sub-
ject of  much  dispute  among  modern  writers,
whether  the  Romans  had  chimneys  for  carrying
off  the  smoke.  From  many  passages  in  ancient
writers,  it  certainly  appears  that  rooms  usually  had
no  chimneys,  but  that  the  smoke  escaped  through
the  windows,  doors,  and  openings  in  the  roof
(Vitruv.  vii.  3  ;  Hor.  I.  e.  ;  Voss,  ad  Virg.  Georg.
ii.  242)  ;  but  chimneys  do  not  appear  to  have  been
entirely  unkno^vn  to  the  ancients,  as  some  are  said
to  have  been  found  in  the  ruins  of  ancient  build-
ings.    (Becker,  Gallus^  vol.  i.  p.  102.)

{WwikclmKTLW,  Schrijten  uher  die  Herkulanisclien
Entdeckmigen ;  Hirt,  Geschichte  der  Daukunst ;
Mazois,  Les  Ruines  de  Pompci^  part  ii.,  Le  Palais
de  Scauriis ;  Gell,  Pompeiana ;  Pompeii.,  Lond.
12mo,  1832  ;  Becker,  Gallus ;  Schneider,  ad
Vitruv.)

DONA'RIA  {avaQ'}]fxara  or  ai/aKeliJ.€va),  are
names  by  which  the  ancients  designated  presents
made  to  the  gods,  either  by  individuals  or  com-
munities. Sometimes  they  are  also  called  dona  or
5a>oa.  The  belief  that  the  gods  were  pleased  with
costly  presents  was  as  natural  to  the  ancients  as
the  belief  that  they  could  be  influenced  in  their
conduct  towards  men  by  the  offering  of  sacrifices  ;
and,  indeed,  both  sprang  from  the  same  feeling.
Presents  were  mostly  given  as  tokens  of  gratitude
for  some  favour  which  a  god  had  bestowed  on
man  ;  but  in  many  cases  they  were  intended  to
induce  the  deity  to  grant  some  special  favour.
At  Athens,  every  one  of  the  six  thesmothetae,  or,
according  to  Plato  {Phaedr.  p.  235,  d),  all  the  nine
archons,  on  entering  upon  their  office,  had  to  take
an  oath,  that  if  they  violated  any  of  the  laws,  they
would  dedicate  in  the  temple  of  Delphi  a  gilt
statue  of  the  size  of  the  man  who  dedicated  it
{ap^picLvra  XP^^'^^^  iao/xeTpriTov,  see  Plut.  Sol.
25  ;  Pollux  viii.  85  ;  Suidas,  s.  v.  X.pvffT]  EIkcov  ;
Heraclid.  Pont.  c.  1.)  In  this  last  case  the  ana-
thema was  a  kind  of  punishment,  in  which  the
statue  was  regarded  as  a  substitute  for  the  person


DONARIA.

forfeited  to  the  gods.  Almost  all  presents  of  this
kind  were  dedicated  in  temples,  to  which  in  some
places  an  especial  building  was  added,  in  which
these  treasures  were  preserved.  Such  buildings
were  called  ^r)(Tavpoi  (treasuries)  ;  and  in  the  most
frequented  temples  of  Greece  many  states  had  their
separate  treasuries.  (Bbckh,  Puh.  Econ.  of  Atli.
p.  441,  &c.  2d  edit.)  The  act  of  dedication  was
called  dj'oTt^eVoj,  donare,  dedicare^  or  sacrure.

The  custom  of  making  donations  to  the  gods  is
found  among  the  ancients  from  the  earliest  times
of  which  we  have  any  record,  down  to  the  intro-
duction of  Christianity  ;  and  even  after  that  period
it  was,  with  some  modifications,  observed  by  the
Christians  during  the  middle  ages.  In  the  heroic
ages  of  Grecian  history  the  anathemata  were  of  a
simple  description,  and  consisted  of  chaplets  and
garlands  of  flowers.  A  ver}'  common  donation  to
the  gods  seems  to  have  been  that  of  locks  of  hair
{K6fir]s  oiTrapxai),  which  youths  and  maidens,
especially  young  brides,  cut  off  from  their  heads
and  consecrated  to  some  deity.  (Horn.  //■  xxiii.
141  ;  Aeschyl.  Chocph.  6  ;  Eurip.  Orest.  i)Q  and
1427,  Dacch.  493,  Helen.  10.93  ;  Pint.  Thes.  5  ;
Paus.  i.  37.  §  2.)  This  custom  in  some  places
lasted  till  a  very  late  period  :  the  maidens  of  Delos
dedicated  their  hair  before  their  wedding  to
Hecaerge  (Paus.  i.  43.  §  4),  and  those  of  Megara
to  Iphinoe.  Pausanias  (ii.  11.  §  6)  saw  the  statue
of  Hygftiia  at  Titane,  covered  all  over  with
locks  of  hair  which  had  been  dedicated  by  women.
Costly  garments  (vreTrAot)  are  likewise  mentioned
among  the  earliest  presents  made  to  the  gods,
especially  to  Athena  and  Hera,  (Hom.  11.  vi.
293,  303.)  At  Athens  the  sacred  ■JreTrAoy  of
Athena,  in  which  the  great  adventures  of  ancient
heroes  were  worked,  was  woven  by  maidens  every
fifth  year,  at  the  festival  of  the  great  Panathenaea.
[Arrephoria.]  (Compare  Aristoph.  Av.  792  ;
Pollux,  vii.  50  ;  Wesseling,  ad  Diod.  Sic.  ii.  p.
440.)  A  similar  peplus  was  woven  every  five
years  at  Olympia,  by  sixteen  women,  and  dedi-
cated to  Hera.  (Paus.  v.  16.  §2.)

At  the  time  when  the  fine  arts  flourished  in
Greece  the  anathemata  were  generally  works  of
art  of  exquisite  workmanship,  such  as  high  tripods
bearing  vases,  craters,  cups,  candelabras,  pictures,
statues,  and  various  other  things.  The  materials
of  which  they  were  made  differed  according  to  cir-
cumstances ;  some  were  of  bronze,  others  of  silver  or
gold  ( Athen.  vi.  p.  231,  &c.),  and  their  number  is
to  us  almost  inconceivable.  (Demosth.  Olyntli.  iii.
p.  35.)  The  treasures  of  the  temples  of  Delphi
and  Olympia,  in  particular,  surpass  all  conception.
Even  Pausanias,  at  a  period  when  numberless
works  of  art  must  have  perished  in  the  various
ravages  and  plunders  to  which  Greece  had  been
exposed,  saw  and  described  an  astonishing  number
of  anathemata.  Many  works  of  art  are  stili  ex-
tant, bearing  evidence  by  their  inscriptions  that
they  were  dedicated  to  the  gods  as  tokens  of  grati-
tude. Ever}-  one  knows  of  the  magnificent  presents
which  Croesus  made  to  the  god  of  Delphi.  (Herod.
i.  50,  &c.)  It  was  an  almost  invariable  custom,
after  the  happy  issue  of  a  war,  to  dedicate  the
tenth  part  of  the  spoil  {aicpodiviov,  aKpoXeiou,  or
irpwrdKeioi/)  to  the  gods,  generally  in  the  form  of
some  work  of  art.  (Herod,  viii.  82,  121;  Thucyd.
i.  132  ;  Paus.  iii.  18.  §  5  ;  Athen.  vi.  p.  231,  &c.)
Sometimes  magnificent  specimens  of  annour,  such
as  a  fine  sword,  helmet,  or  shield,  were  set  apart


DONARIA.


433


as  anathemata  for  the  gods.  (Aristoph.  Equif.
792,  and  Schol.)  The  Athenians  "wlways  dedi-
cated to  Athena  the  tenth  part  of  the  spoil  and
of  confiscated  goods  ;  and  to  all  the  other  gods  col-
lectively, the  fiftieth  part.  (Demosth.  c.  Timocr.
p.  738,  &c.)  After  a  seafight,  a  ship,  placed  upon
some  eminence,  was  sometimes  dedicated  to  Nep-
time.  (Thucyd.  ii.  84  ;  Herod,  viii.  121.)  It  is
not  improbable  that  trophies  which  were  always
erected  on  the  field  of  battle,  as  well  as  the  statues
of  the  victors  in  Olympia  and  other  places,  were
ariginally  intended  as  tokens  of  gratitude  to  the
god  who  was  supposed  to  be  the  cause  of  the  suc-
cess which  the  victorious  party  had  gained.  We
also  find  that  on  some  occasions  the  tenth  part  of
the  profit  of  some  commercial  undertaking  was
dedicated  to  a  god  in  the  shape  of  a  work  of  art.
Respecting  the  large  and  beautiful  crater  dedicated
jy  tiie  S.niiiaus  to  Hera,  s';e  the  article  Crater.

Individuals  who  had  escaped  from  some  danger
were  no  less  anxious  to  show  their  gratitude  to  the
gods  by  anathemata  than  communities.  The  in-
stances which  occur  most  frequentl}^  are  those  of
persons  who  had  recovered  from  an  illness,  espe-
cially by  spending  one  or  more  nights  in  a  temple
of  Asclcpius  (mct^aiio).  The  most  celebrated
temples  of  this  divinity  were  those  of  Epidaurus,
Cos,  Tricca,  and  at  a  later  period,  that  of  Rome.
(Plin.  H.  N.  xxix.  1  ;  compare  F.  A.  Wolf,  Fer-
mischte  Sckriften  wid  Av/s'dtze,  p.  4 1 1 ,  &c.)  Cures
were  also  effected  in  the  grotto  of  Pluto  and
Proserpina,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Nisa.  (Strab.
ix.  p.  437,  xiv.  p.  649.)  In  all  cases  in  which  a
cure  was  effected  presents  were  made  to  the
temple,  and  little  tablets  {tabulae  rotivae)  were
suspended  on  its  walls,  containing  an  account  of
the  danger  from  which  the  patient  had  escaped,
and  of  the  manner  in  which  he  had  been  restored
to  health.  Some  tablets  of  this  kind,  with  their
inscriptions,  are  still  extant.  (Wolf,  I.  c.  p.  424,
&c.)  From  some  relics  of  ancient  art  we  must
infer,  that  in  some  cases,  when  a  particular  part  of
the  body  was  attacked  by  disease,  the  person,  after
his  recovery,  dedicated  an  imitation  of  that  par*
in  gold  or  silver  to  the  god  to  whom  he  owed  hi.*
recovery.  Persons  who  had  escaped  from  ship-
wreck usually  dedicated  to  Neptune  the  dress
which  they  wore  at  the  time  of  their  danger  (Hor.
Carm.  i.  5. 13  ;  Virg.  Aen.  xii.  768)  ;  but  if  they
had  escaped  naked,  they  dedicated  some  locks  of
their  hair.  (Lucian,  de  Merc.  Cond.  c.  1.  vol.  i.  pv
652,  ed.  Reiz.)  Shipwrecked  persons  also  sus-
pended votive  tablets  in  the  temple  of  Neptune,  on
which  their  accident  was  described  or  painted.
Individuals  who  gave  up  the  profession  or  occupa-
tion by  which  they  had  gained  their  livelihood,
frequently  dedicated  in  a  temple  the  instruments
which  they  had  used,  as  a  grateful  acknowledgment
of  tne  favour  of  the  gods.  The  soldier  thus  dedi-
cated his  arms,  the  fisherman  his  net,  the  shepherd
his  flute,  the  poet  his  lyre,  cithara,  or  harp,  &c.

It  would  be  impossible  to  attempt  to  enumerate
all  the  occasions  on  which  individuals,  as  well  as
communities,  showed  their  gratefulness  towards
the  gods  by  anathemata.  Descriptions  of  the  most
remarkable  presents  in  the  various  temples  of
Greece  may  be  read  in  the  works  of  Herodotus,
Strabo,  Pausanias,  Athenaeus,  and  others.

The  custom  of  making  presents  to  the  gods  was
common  to  Greeks  and  Romans,  but  among  the
latter  the   donaria  were  neither  as  numerous  nor

F  F


434


DONATIO.


as  magnificent  as  in  Greece  ;  and  it  was  more  fre-
quent among  the  Romans  to  show  their  gratitude
towards  a  god,  by  building  him  a  temple,  by  public
prayers  and  thanksgivings  (strpplicatio)^  or  by
celebrating  festive  games  in  honour  of  him,  than  to
adorn  his  sanctuary  with  beautiful  and  costly  works
of  art.  Hence  the  word  donaria  was  used  by  the
Romans  to  designate  a  temple  or  an  altar,  as  well
as  statues  and  other  things  dedicated  in  a  temple.
(Virg.  Georg.  iii.  533  ;  Ovid,  Fast.  iii.  333.)  The
occasions  on  which  the  Romans  made  donaria  to
their  gods,  are,  on  the  whole,  the  same  as  those  we
have  described  among  the  Greeks,  as  will  be  seen
from  a  comparison  of  the  following  passages :  —
Liv.  X.  36,  xxix.  36,  xxxii.  30,  xl.  40,  37  ;
Plin  H.  N.  vii.  48  ;  Suet.  Claud.  25  ;  Tacit  Ann.
iii.  71  ;  Plant.  Amphitr.  iii.  2.  65,  Curcul.  i.  I.  61,
ii.  2.  10  ;  Aurel.  Vict.  Caes.  35  ;  Gellius,  ii.  10  ;
Lucan.  ix.  515  ;  Cic.  De  Nat.  Deor.  iii.  37  ;
Tibxill.  ii.  S.29  ;  Horat.  Epist.  i.  1.  4  ;  Stat.  Silv.
iv.  92.  [L.  S.J

DONA'TIO.  Donatio  or  gift  is  an  agreement
between  two  persons  by  which  one  gives  without
remuneration  and  without  any  legal  obligation
(nullo  jure  cogente),  and  the  other  accepts  some-
thing that  has  a  pecuniary  value.  (Dig.  24.  tit.  1.
s.  5.  §  8,  16  ;  39.  tit.  5.  s.  19.  §  2,  29.)  It  is
properly  called  an  agreement,  because  it  is  not  suffi-
cient that  there  be  a  person  to  give :  there  must
also  be  a  person  who  consents  to  receive.  He  who
is  inco.pacitated  to  dispose  of  his  property  or  to
make  a  contract  is  consequently  incapable  of  giving :
every  person  who  has  a  capacity  to  acquire,  is
capable  of  receiving  a  gift.  The  exceptions  to
these  rules  occurred  in  the  case  of  persons  who
were  in  certain  relations  to  one  another,  as  pater
and  filiusfamilias  ;  yet  this  exception  itself  is
subject  to  exceptions  in  the  matter  of  peculium.
It  is  essential  to  the  notion  of  gift  that  the  giver
gives  in  order  that  the  property  of  the  receiver
may  be  increased  by  the  gift :  there  must  be  the
animus  donandi.  The  object  of  gift  may  be  any
thing  which  accomplishes  this  end  ;  for  instance,
the  release  of  a  debt.  A  gift  of  the  whole  of  a
person's  property  comprises  no  more  than  the  pro-
perty after  the  donor's  debts  are  deducted.  Such
a  gift  is  not  a  case  of  universal  succession,  and
consequently  the  donee  is  not  immediately  liable
for  the  debts  of  the  donor.  By  the  old  Roman  law
a  mere  agreement  (pactum)  to  give  did  not  confer
a  right  of  action  on  the  intended  donee.  In  order
that  a  gift  should  be  valid,  it  was  required  to  be
either  in  the  form  of  a  stipulatio,  or  to  be  made
complete  at  once  by  the  delivery  of  the  thing.
Gifts  also  were  limited  in  amount  by  the  lex  Cincia.
The  legislation  of  Justinian  allowed  a  personal
action  in  cases  of  a  mere  pactum  donationis,  where
there  had  been  neither  delivery  of  the  thing  which
was  made  a  gift,  nor  stipulatio.  (Cod.  8.  tit.  54.
8.  25,  29  ;  35.  §  5  ;  Inst.  2.  tit.  7.  §  2.)  Thus,
the  promise  to  give  was  put  on.  the  footing  of  a
consensual  contract,  when  the  promise  related  to  a
gift  of  less  than  500  solidi:  when  the  gift  was
above  500  solidi,  a  certain  form  was  required,  as
will  presently  be  explained,  and  the  form  was  re-
quired whether  the  gift  was  perfected  at  once  by
traditio,  or  was  only  a  promise  to  give.

If  a  man  gave  something  to  another  for  the
benefit  of  a  third  person,  the  third  person  could  sue
him  to  whom  the  thing  was  given.  (Cod.  8.  tit.
55.  8.  3.)


DONATIO  MORTIS  CAUSA.

It  was  required  by  the  legislation  of  Justinian,
that  a  gift  which  was  in  value  more  than  500  so-
lidi, must,  with  the  exception  of  some  few  cases,
have  the  evidence  of  certam  solenmities  before
official  persons  (insinuatio).  If  these  formalities
were  not  observed,  the  gift  was  invalid  as  to  all
the  amount  which  exceeded  the  500  solidi.  Some
few  kinds  of  gifts,  which  exceeded  500  solidi,  were
excepted  from  the  solemnities  of  insinuatio.

If  then  a  gift  was  not  perfected  at  once  by  de-
livery, or  what  was  equivalent  to  delivery,  the
donee  might  sue  ex  stipulatu,  if  there  had  been  a
stipulatio  ;  and  if  there  had  not,  he  might  sue  by
virtue  of  the  simple  agreement.  (Cod.  8.  tit.  54,
De  Donationibus,  s.  35.  §  5.)  The  right  of  action
which  arises  from  the  promise  to  give  is,  according
to  the  Roman  system,  the  real  gift  (Dig.  50.  tit.
1 6.  s.  49)  :  the  actual  giving  was  the  payment  of
a  debt.  Accordingly,  if  there  was  a  promise  of  a
gift  between  a  man  and  a  woman  before  their
marriage,  the  payment  during  the  marriage  was  a
valid  act,  because  the  promise  was  the  gift,  and
the  payment  was  not  the  gift.  (Savigny,  System,
&c.,  iv.  1 1 9.)  The  heredes  of  a  man  might  im-
pugn the  validity  of  a  donatio  inofficiosa  by  a
querela  inofficiosae  donationis :  and  the  donor  could
revoke  his  gift  if  the  donee  was  guilty  of  gross
ingratitude  towards  him,  as  for  instance,  of  offering
violence  to  his  person.  (Cod.  8.  tit.  BQ.  s.  10.)
But  the  donor's  claim  was  only  in  persoriim,  and
he  could  not  recover  the  fruits  which  the  donee
had  enjoyed.  (Inst.  2.  tit.  7.  §  3  ;  Savigny,  Sys-
tim,  &c.,  vol.  iv.  §  1 42,  &c.,  Schenkung ;  Mackel-
dey,  Lehrbuch,  Slc,  §  421,  &c.,  12th  ed.  ;  Ortolan,
Ejcplication  Historique  des  lustituts,  vol.  i.  p.  472,
5th  ed.)  [G.  L.]

DONA'TIO  MORTIS  CAUSA.  There  were,
according  to  Julianus  (Dig.  39.  tit.  6.  s.  2),  three
kinds  of  donatio  mortis  causa  :  —  1 .  When  a  man
under  no  apprehension  of  present  danger,  but  moved
solely  by  a  consideration  of  mortality,  makes  a  gift
to  another.  2.  When  a  man,  being  in  immediate
danger,  makes  a  gift  to  another  in  such  manner
that  the  thing  immediately  becomes  the  property  of
the  donee.  3.  When  a  man,  moved  by  the  con-
sideration of  danger,  gives  a  thing  in  such  manner
that  it  shall  become  the  property  of  the  donee
only  in  case  the  giver  dies.  Every  person  could
receive  such  a  gift  who  was  capable  of  receiving  a
legacy.

It  appears,  then,  that  there  were  several  forms
of  gift  called  donatio  mortis  causa  ;  but  the  third
is  the  only  proper  one  ;  for  it  was  a  rule  of  law
that  a  donation  of  this  kind  was  not  perfected  un-
less death  followed,  and  it  was  revocable  by  the
donor.  A  thing  given  absolutely  could  hardly  be
a  donatio  mortis  causa,  for  this  donatio  had  a  con-
dition attached  to  it,  namely,  the  death  of  the
donor  and  the  survivorship  of  the  donee.  (Com-
pare Dig.  39.  tit.  6.  s.  1  and  35.)  Accordingly,  a
donatio  mortis  causa  has  been  defined  to  be  "  a
gift  which  a  man  makes  with  reference  to  the
event  of  his  death,  and  so  makes  that  the  right  of
the  donee  either  commences  with  the  death  of  the
donor  or  is  in  suspense  until  the  death."  It  re-
sembles in  some  respects  a  proper  donatio  or  gift :
in  others,  it  resembles  a  legacy.  It  was  necessary
that  the  donatio  should  be  accepted  by  the  donee,
and  consequently  there  must  be  traditio  or  delivery,
or  a  proifer  or  offer,  which  is  assented  to.  Yet
the  donatio  might  be  maintained  as  a  fideicom-


DONATIO  PROPTER  NUPTIAS.
missuin  in  the  absence  of  these  conditions.


DONATIVUM.


435


No


person  could  make  a  donatio  mortis  causa,  who  |
could  not  make  a  testament.  The  death  of  the
donee  before  the  death  of  the  donor  was  ipso  jure
a  revocation  of  the  donatio.  It  would  appear  as  if
the  law  about  such  donations  was  not  free  from
difficulty.  They  were  finally  assimilated  to  legacies
by  Justinian,  though  this  had  been  done  in  some
particulars  before  his  time.  Still  they  difi"ered  in
some  respects  from  legacies  ;  for  instance,  such  a
donation  could  take  effect  though  there  was  no
person  to  take  the  hereditas.  A  filius  familias
might  with  his  father's  consent  make  a  donatio
mortis  causa  of  his  Peculiura  Profectitium.

The  English  law  of  donationes  mortis  causa  is
first  stated  by  Bracton  (ii.  c.  26)  in  the  very  words
of  the  Digest  (39.  tit.  6.  s.  2,  &c.)  ;  and  the  pre-
sent law  is  expounded  by  Lord  Hardwicke  (Ward
V.  Turner,  2  Vez.  431)  ;  but  what  he  there  states
to  be  the  English  law  is  not  exactly  the  law
as  stated  in  Bracton.  The  rules  of  donationes
mortis  causa  in  English  law  are  now  pretty  well
fixed  by  various  recent  decisions.  Tradition  or
delivery  is  considered  one  essential  of  such  a  gift,
and  the  death  of  the  donor  in  the  life  of  the  donee
is  another  essential.  The  gift  is  not  an  absolute
gift,  but  a  gift  made  in  contemplation  of  death,
and  it  is  revocable.  (Dig.  39.  tit.  6  ;  Cod.  8.  tit.
57  ;  Inst.  2.  tit.  7  ;  Savigny.  Si/stem,  &c.  iv.  276  ;
Zeitschrift  furGesch.  Recktsivissenschaft^xu.  p.  400,
Ueber  L.  Seia,  42.  pr. ;  De  mor.  ca,  don. ;  Thibaut,
Si/stem,  &c.  §  495,  &c.  9th  ed.)  [G.  L.]

DONA'TIO  PROPTER  NU'PTIAS.  The
meaning  of  this  term  is  explained  in  the  Institu-
tiones  (2.  tit.  7.  §  3).  It  was  originally  called
Donatio  ante  nuptias,  because  it  could  not  take
place  after  the  marriage  ;  but  when  it  was  made
legal  to  increase  the  donatio  after  marriage,  and
even  to  constitute  it  altogether  after  marriage,  the
more  comprehensive  term  donatio  propter  nuptias
was  used.  If  a  dos  had  been  given  by  the  wife,
or  on  the  part  of  the  wife,  and  the  husband  by
the  terms  of  the  contract  was  entitled  ta  it,  or  to
a  part  of  it  in  case  of  the  wife's  death,  it  was  neces-
sary that  the  husband,  or  some  person  on  the  part
of  the  husband,  should  give  or  secure  something  to
the  wife  which  she  should  have  in  the  event  of
the  husband's  death :  this  was  a  donatio  propter
nuptias.  Justinian's  legislation  required  that  the
donatio  must  be  equal  to  what  was  secured  to  the
husband  in  case  of  the  wife's  death,  and  that  it
must  be  increased  if  the  dos  was  increased  during
the  marriage.  The  husband  had  the  management
of  the  property  given  as  donatio.  Such  part  of  it
as  consisted  of  things  immoveable  he  could  not
alienate  or  pledge  even  with  the  consent  of  his
wife,  unless  she  ratified  her  consent  after  two  years.
If  the  husband  became  impoverished  during  the
marriage,  the  wife  was  entitled  to  the  profits  of
the  donatio  for  her  support  ;  and  it  was  not  liable
to  the  demands  of  the  creditors.  If  the  marriage
was  dissolved  by  the  death  of  the  wife,  the  hus-
band was  entitled  to  the  donatio  ;  \mless  some
third  person,  who  had  made  the  donatio,  was  en-
titled to  have  it  by  the  terms  of  the  agreement.
If  the  husband  died,  the  event  had  happened  with
reference  to  which  the  donatio  was  made  ;  the  wife
had  the  ususfructus  of  the  donatio,  and  the  pro-
perty of  it  belonged  to  the  children  of  the  marriage
if  there  were  any :  if  there  were  no  children,  the
wife  obtained  by  the  death  of  the  husband  full


power  of  disposition  over  the  property  included  in
the  donatio.

The  opinions  of  modem  jurists  are  much  divided
as  to  the  notions,  purpose,  and  law  of  the  donatio
propter  nuptias.  The  term  donatio  propter  nuptias
is  used  by  Bracton  (ii.  c.  39)  ;  and  the  law,  as
there  stated,  is  apparently  formed  upon  a  Roman
original.

(Cod.  5.  tit.  3  ;  Nov.  22.  c.  20  ;  97.  c.  1,  2  ;  98.
c.  1,2;  Mackeldey,  Lehrbuch,  &c.  §528,  12th
ed. ;  Thibaut,  System,  Sec.  §  742,  9th  ed.  ;  Orto-
lan, Explication  Historique  des  Instituts,  &c.,  vol.  i.
p.  479.)  [G.  L.J

DONATIO'NES  INTER  VIRUM  ET
UXO'REM.  During  marriage  neither  husband
nor  wife  could,  as  a  general  rule,  make  a  gift  of
anything  to  one  another.  The  reason  for  this  nile
was  said  to  be  the  preservation  of  the  marriage
relation  in  its  purity,  as  an  agreement  subsisting  by
affection,  and  not  maintained  by  purchase  or  by
gift  from  one  party  to  the  other.  Donationes  of
this  kind  were,  however,  valid  when  there  were
certain  considerations,  as  mortis  causa,  divortii
causa,  servi  manumittendi  gratia.  By  certain  im-
perial constitutions,  a  woman  could  make  gifts  to
her  husband  in  order  to  qualify  him  for  certain
honours.  This  was  a  gift  "  ad  processus  viri "
(Dig.  24.  tit.  1.  s.  41  ;  Juv.  Sat.  i.  39  ;  and  the
note  of  Heinrich).  The  wife  had  the  means  of
doing  this,  because  when  there  was  no  conventio
in  manum  (Gains,  ii.  98),  a  wife  retained  all  her
rights  of  property  which  she  did  not  surrender  on
her  marriage  [Dos],  and  she  might  during  the
marriage  hold  property  quite  distinct  from  her
husband.  It  was  a  consequence  of  this  rule  as  to
gifts  between  husband  and  wife,  that  every  legal
form  by  which  the  gift  was  affected  to  be  transferred,
as  mancipatio,  cessio,  audi  traditio,  conveyed  no
ownership  ;  stipulationes  were  not  binding,  and
acceptilationes  were  no  release.  A  difficulty  might
remain  as  to  usucapion  ;  but  the  law  provided  for
this  also.  If  a  woman  received  from  a  third  per-
son the  property  of  her  husband,  and  neither  the
third  person  nor  she  nor  her  husband  knew  that
it  was  the  husband's  property,  she  might  acquire
the  ownership  by  usucapion.  If  both  the  giver
and  the  husband  knew  at  the  time  of  the  gift
that  it  was  the  husband's  property,  and  the  wife
did  not  know,  it  might  also  become  her  property
by  usucapion  ;  but  not  if  she  knew,  for  in  that  case
the  bona  fides  which  was  essential  to  the  commence-
ment of  possession  was  wanting.  If,  before  the
ownership  was  acquired  by  usucapion,  the  husband
and  wife  discovered  that  it  was  the  husband's,
though  the  husband  did  not  choose  to  claim  it,
there  was  no  usucapion  ;  for  this  would  have  been
a  mere  evasion  of  the  law.  If,  before  the  owner-
ship was  acquired  by  usucapion,  the  wife  alooe
discovered  that  it  was  the  husband's  property,  this
would  not  destroy  her  right  to  acquire  the  pro-
perty by  usucapion.  This,  at  least,  is  Savigny's
ingenious  explanation  of  the  passage  in  Digest
24.  tit.  1.  s.  44.  The  strictness  of  the  bw  as  to
these  donations  was  relaxed  in  the  time  of  Septimius
Severus,  and  they  were  made  valid  if  the  donor
died  first,  and  did  not  revoke  his  gift  beftHre  death.
There  were  also  some  exceptions  as  to  the  general
rule.  (Dig.  24.  tit.  1  ;  Cod.  5.  tit.  16  ;  Savigny,
Zeitschrift,  &c.  i.  p.  270  ;  Mackeldey,  Lehrbuchy
&c.  §531,  12th  ed.)  [G.L.]

DONATFVUM.    [CongiariumJ

FF  2


436


DOS.


DORMITO'RIA.     [Domus.]

DORODO'KIAS  GRAPHE  (SwpoSo/ci'os
ypa<f)'fj).     [Decasmus.]

DORON  (ScDpov.),  a  ualni  or  hand-breadth.
[Pes.]

DORON  GRAPHE  (Bdipau  ypacp-f]).  [De-
casmus.]

DOROXprNIAS  GRAPHE  {dwpoleyias
ypaip-ff).     [Xenias  Graphe.]

DO'RPIA  (56pKia).     [Apaturia.]

DORPON  (SSpTTov).     [CoENA,  p.  303,  b.]

DORU  (S6pv).    [Hasta.]

DORYTHORI  (SopvcpSpoi).    [Mercenarii.]

DOS  (irpoi^,  (pepvr)),  dowry.  1.  Greek.  Eu-
ripides (Med.  236)  makes  Medeia  complain  that,
independent  of  other  misfortunes  to  which  women
were  subject,  they  were  obliged  to  buy  their  hus-
bands b}^  great  sums  of  money  (xpTj^o^wi'  vwep-
S6\r}').  On  this  the  Scholiast  remarks,  that  the
poet  wrote  as  if  Medeia  had  been  his  contem-
porary, and  not  a  character  of  the  heroic  ages,  in
which  it  was  customary  for  the  husband  to  pur-
chase his  wife  from  her  relations,  by  gifts  called
eSi/a  or  eeSfa.  The  same  practice  prevailed  in
the  East  during  the  patriarchal  ages  (Genes,  xxxiv.
2),  and  Tacitus  (Germ.  c.  18)  says  of  the  ancient
Germans,  "  Dotem  non  uxor  marito,  sed  uxori
maritus  oifert."  The  custom  of  the  heroic  times
is  illustrated  by  many  passages  in  Homer.  Thus,
we  read  of  the  onrepetVia,  and  fivpia  'dSua,  or  many
gifts  by  which  wives  were  purchased.  (//.  xvi.
17(i,  190.)  In  another  place  (II.  xi.  243)  we  are
told  of  a  hundred  oxen,  and  a  thousand  sheep  and
goats,  having  been  given  by  a  Thracian  hero  to
his  maternal  grandfather,  whose  daughter  he  was
about  to  marry.  Moreover,  the  poetical  epithet,
a\fp(ai§oiaL  (Heyne,  ad  II.  xviii.  593),  applied
to  females,  is  supposed  to  have  had  its  origin  in
the  presents  of  this  sort,  which  were  made  to  a
woman's  relatives  on  her  marriage.  These  nuptial
gifts,  however,  or  equivalents  for  them  were  re-
turned to  the  husband  in  the  event  of  the  commis-
sion of  adultery  by  the  wife,  and  perhaps  in  other
cases.    (Od.  viii.  318.)

We  must  not  infer  from  the  above  facts  that  it
was  not  usual  in  those  times  for  relations  to  give
a  portion  with  a  woman  when  she  married.  On
the  contrary,  mention  is  made  (II.  ix.  147)  of
the  fxei\ia  or  marriage  gifts  which  men  gave  with
their  daughters  (^TreSw/cav),  and  we  are  told  by
Aeschines  (Tlepl  napa§pe(r.  33),  of  one  of  the  sons
of  Theseus  having  received  a  territory  near  Am-
phipolis  as  a  (pepvfi  or  dower  with  his  wife.  More-
over, both  Andromache  and  Penelope  are  spoken
of  as  SlXoxoi  iroAvSojpoi  (II.  vi,  394,  Od.  xxiv.
294),  or  wives  who  brought  to  their  husbands
many  gifts,  which  probably  would  have  been  re-
turned to  their  relations,  in  case  of  a  capricious
dismissal.     {Od.  ii.  132.)

The  Doric  term  for  a  portion  was  SwTiV?;,  and
Miiller  (/)or.  iii.  10)  observes,  that  we  know  for
certainty  that  daughters  in  Sparta  had  originally
no  dower,  but  were  married  with  a  gift  of  clothes
only  ;  afterwards  they  were  at  least  provided  with
money,  and  other  personal  property  (Phit.  Lys.
30) :  but  in  the  time  of  Aristotle  (Polit.  ii.  0".
§  10),  80  great  wi-re  the  dowers  given  (Sia  rh
■npoLKus  ^i^6vai  /xeydAas),  and  so  large  the  number
of  eTTiKAT/pot,  or  female  representatives  of  families
(oIkoi\  that  nearly  two  fifths  of  the  whole  terri-
tory of  Sparta  had   come  into  the  possession   oi


DOS.

females.  The  regulations  of  Solon  were,  accord-
ing to  Plutarch,  somewhat  similar  in  respect  of
dower  to  the  old  regulations  at  Sparta :  for  the
A  thenian  legislator,  as  he  tells  us,  did  not  allow  a
woman,  unless  she  were  an  imnKripos,  to  have
any  (p^pv-i]  or  dower,  except  a  few  clothes  and
articles  of  household  furniture.  It  is  plain,  how-
ever, that  such  an  interference  with  private  rights
could  not  be  permanent  ;  and,  accordingly,  we  find
that  in  after  times  the  dowers  of  women  formed,
according  to  the  account  in  Bdckh  (Pid).  Econ.  of
Athens,  p.  514,  2nd  ed.),  a  considerable  part  of
the  moveable  property  of  the  stJite :  "  even  with
poor  people  they  varied  in  amount  from  ten  to  a
hundred  and  twenty  minae.  The  daughter  of
Hipponicus  received  ten  talents  at  her  marriage,
and  ten  others  were  promised  her."  This,  how-
ever, was  a  very  large  portion,  for  Demosthenes
(c.  Steph.  p.  1112.  19,  and  p.  1124.  2)  informs  us
that  even  five  talents  Avas  more  than  was  usually
given  ;  and  Lucian  (Dial.  Meret.  7.  p.  298,  ed.
Reitz)  also  speaks  of  the  same  sum  as  a  large
dowry.  The  daughters  of  Aristeides  received  from
the  state,  as  a  portion,  only  thirty  minae  each.
(Plut.  Arist.  27  ;  Aesch.  c.  Ctes.  p.  90.)  We  may
observe  too,  that  one  of  the  chief  distinctions  be-
tween a  vvife  and  a  TraAAa/ci^,  consisted  in  the
former  having  a  portion,  whereas  the  latter  had
not  ;  hence,  persons  who  married  wives  without
portions  appear  to  have  given  them  or  their  guar-
dians an  o/jLoKoyia  'irpoiK6c  (Isaeus,  De  Pyr.
liereA.  p.  41),  or  acknowledgment  in  writing  by
which  the  receipt  of  a  portion  was  admitted.
[CoNCUBiNA.]  Moreover,  poor  heiresses  (rSiv
iiriK\'f}pwy  ocrai  ^rjTiKhv  r^Kovaiv)  were  either
married  or  portioned  by  their  next  of  kin  [Ar-
chon],  according  to  a  law  which  fixed  the
amount  of  portion  to  be  given  at  five  minae  by  a
Pentacosiomedimnus,  three  by  a  Horseman,  and
one  and  a  half  by  a  Zeugites.  (Dem.  c.  Macar.
p.  1068.)  In  illustration  of  this  law,  and  the
amount  of  portion,  the  reader  is  referred  to
Terence,  who  says  (Phorm.  ii.  1.  75),

"  Lex  est  ut  orbae,  qui  sint  genere  proximi
lis  nubant : "

and  again  (ii.  2.  62),

"  Itidera  ut  cognata  si  sit,  id  quod  lex  jubet,  '  v

Dotem  dare,  abduce  banc:  minas  quinque  accipe.**

It  remains  to  state  some  of  the  conditions  and
obligations  attached  to  the  receipt  of  a  portion,  or
Trpot'l,  in  the  time  of  the  Athenian  orators.  The
most  important  of  these  was  the  obligation  under
which  the  husband  lay  to  give  a  security  for  it,
either  by  way  of  settlement  on  the  wife,  or  as  a
provision  for  repayment  in  case  circumstances
should  arise  to  require  it.  With  regard  to  this,
we  are  told  that  whenever  relatives  or  guardians
gave  a  woman  a  portion  on  her  marriage,  they
took  from  the  husband,  by  way  of  security,  some-
thing equivalent  to  it,  as  a  house  or  piece  of  land.
The  person  who  gave  this  equivalent  (rh  hro-
rl/xr)iJ.a)  was  said  a-noiiixav :  the  pers(m  who  re-
ceived it  aTroTi/bLciaOai.  (Harpocrat.  *•.  v.  ;  Dem.
c.  Otiet.  p.  866.)  The  word  airori^rjua  is  also  used
generally  for  a  security.  (Pollux,  viii.  142.)  The
necessity  for  this  security  will  appear  i'rom  the
fact  that  the  portion  was  not  considered  the  pro-
perty of  the  husband  himself,  but  rather  of  his
wife  and  children.     Thus,  if  a  husband  died,  and


4


DOS.

the  wife  left  the  family  (aTTcXnre  rhv  olicov),  she
might  claim  her  portion,  even  though  children  had
been  born  (Dem.  Boeot.  de  Dot.  p.  1010) ;  and  in
the  event  of  a  wife  dying  without  issue,  her  por-
tion reverted  to  the  relatives  who  had  given  her  in
marriage  {ol  Kvpioi)  and  portioned  her.  (Isaeus,
De  Ciron.  Hered.  p.  69,  De  Pyr.  Hered.  p.  41.)
The  portion  was  also  returned,  if  a  husband  put
away  his  wife,  and  in  some  cases,  probably  settled
by  law,  when  a  woman  left  her  husband.  (De
Pyr.  Hered.  p.  45.)  That  after  the  death  of
the  wife,  her  portion  belonged  to  her  children,
if  she  had  left  any,  may  be  inferred  from  De-
mosthenes (c.  Boeot.  de  Dot.  pp.  1023,  1026)  ;
if  they  were  minors,  the  interest  was  set  apart
for  their  education  and  maintenance.  When  the
husband  died  before  the  wife,  and  she  remained
in  the  family  (fiepovcnjs  eV  r^  o'ikw),  the  law  ap-
pears to  have  given  her  portion  to  her  sons,  if  of
age,  subject,  however,  to  an  allowance  for  her
maintenance.  (Id.  c.  Pliaen.  p.  1047.)  If  the
representatives  of  the  deceased  husband  {p\  rhy
K\7}pov  exorres)  wrongfully  withheld  her  portion
from  his  widow,  her  guardians  could  bring  an  ac-
tion against  them  for  it,  as  well  as  for  alimony
(St/cTj  irpoiKhs  Kal  (TLTov).  (Isaeus,  De  Pyr.  Hered.
p.  45  ;  Hudtwalcker,  Diaet.  note  84.)  More-
over, if  a  husband  after  dismissing  his  wife  re-
fused to  return  her  portion,  he  might  be  sued  for
interest  upon  it  as  well  as  the  principal :  the
former  would,  of  course,  be  reckoned  from  the
day  of  dismissal,  and  the  rate  was  fixtxl  by  law  at
nine  oboli  for  every  mina,  or  about  18  per  cent.
'I'he  guardians  were  further  authorised  by  the
same  law  to  bring  an  action  for  alimony  in  the
Hl^ilov.  (Dem.  c.  Neaer.  p.  1362.)  We  may
add  that  a  Sjktj  irpoiKhs,  was  one  of  the  e/i/xr/vot
h'lKai  or  suits  that  might  be  tried  every  month.
(Pollux,  viii.  63,  101.)  [R.W.]

2.   Roman.     Dos  {res  uxoria)   is  every  thing

which   on   the    occasion   of  a   woman''s  marriage

was   transferred   by    her,    or   by  another  person.

to  the    husband,  or  to  the   husband's  father  (if

the  husband  was  in  his  father's  power),  f(;r  the

purpose  of  enabling   the  husband  to    sustain  the

charges  of  the  marriage  state  (onera  matrimonii).

All  the  property  of  the  wife  which  ^'as  not  made

dos,  or  was  not   a   donatio  propter  nuptias,  con-

1       tinned  to  be  her  own,  and  was  comprised  under

i       the  name  of  Pa7xiphema.    The  dos  upon  its  delivery

became  the  husband's  property,  and  continued  to

be  his  so  long  as  the  marriage  relation  existed.

All  things  that  could  be  objects  of  property,  and

in  fact  anything  by  which  the  substance   of  the

husband  could  be  increased,  might  be  the  objects

of  dos.     All  a  woman's  property  might  be  made  a

dps  ;  but  the  whole  property  was  only  what  re-

1      mained  after  deducting  the  debts.     There  was  no

i      universal  succession  in  such  a  case,  and  consequently

the  husband  was  not  personally  answercable  for  the

I      wife's  debts.     Any  person  who  had  a  legal  power

to  dispose  of  his  property  could  give  the  dos  ;  but

j      the  dos  was  divided  into  two  kinds,  dos  profectitia

t     and  dos  adventitia,  a  division  which  had  reference

to  the  demand  of  the  dos  after  the  purposes  were

i     satisfied  for  which  it  was  given.     That  dos  is  pro-

j     fectitia  which  was  given  by  the  father  or  father's

i     father  of  the  bride  ;  and  it  is  profectitia,  even  if

i     the  daughter  was  emancipated,  provided  the  father

;     gave  it  as  such  (ut  parens).     All  other  dos  is  ad-

I     ventitia.     The  dos  receptitia  was  a  species  of  dos


DOS.  437

adventitia,  and  was  that  which  was  given  by  some
other  person  than  the  father  or  father's  father,  on
the  consideration  of  marriage,  but  on  the  condition
that  it  should  be  restored  on  the  death  of  the  wife.
The  giving  of  the  dos  depended  on  the  will  of  the
giver  ;  but  certain  persons,  such  as  a  father  and
father's  father,  were  bound  to  give  a  dos  with  a
woman  when  she  married,  and  in  proportion  to
their  means.  The  dos  might  be  either  given  at
the  time  of  the  marriage,  or  there  might  be  an
agreement  to  give.  The  technical  words  appli-
cable to  the  dos  were  dare,  dicere,  promittere.
Any  person,  who  was  competent  to  dispose  of  his
property,  was  competent  dare,  promittere.  The
word  dicere  was  applied  to  the  woman  who  was
going  to  marry,  who  could,  promise  her  property  as
dos,  but  the  promise  was  not  binding.unless  certain
legal  forms  were  observed  (non  deberi  viro  dotem,
quam  nullo  auctore  dixisset,  Cic.  Pro  Caecin.  c.  25,
compare  Pro  Flacco,  c.  34,  35,  and  Flp.  Frag.  xi.
20),  An  example  of  a  promissio  dotis  occurs  in
VlavLius,  {Trinum.  v.  2).  The  husband  had  a  right
to  the  sole  management  of  the  dos,  and  to  the
fruits  of  it  ;  in  fiict,  he  exercised  over  it  all  the
rights  of  ownership,  with  the  exception  hereafter
mentioned.  He  could  dispose  of  such  parts  of  the
dos  as  consisted  of  things  movable  ;  but  the  Julia
lex  {de  adulteriis)  prevented  him  from  alienating
such  part  of  the  dos  as  was  land  {fundus  dotalis,
dotal ia  praedia,  Cic.  ad  A  it.  xv.  20  ;  dotales
agri,  Hor.  Ep.  i.  1.  21)  without  his  wife's  con-
sent, or  pledging  it  with  her  consent.  (Gains,  ii.
63  ;  Inst.  ii.  8w)  The  legislation  of  Justinian  pre-
vented him  from  selling  it  also  even  with  the  wife's
consent,  and  it  extended  the  law  to  provincial  lands.
Still  there  were  some  cases  in  which  the  land  given
as  dos  could  be  alienated.

The  husband's  right  to  the  dos  ceased  with  the
marriage.  If  the  marriage  was  dissolved  by  the
death  of  the  wife,  her  father  or  father's  father  (as
the  case  might  be)  was  intitled.  to  recover  the  dos
profectitia,  unless  it  had  been  agreed  that  in  such
case  the  dos  should  belong  to  the  husband.  The
dos  adventitia  became  the  property  of  the  wife's
heirs  (Cod.  5.  tit.  13.  §  §),  unless  the  person  who
gave  it  had  stipulated  that  it  should  be  returned
to  him  {dos  receptitia) :  as  to  the  older  law,  see
Ulpian,  Frag.  vi.  5.

In  the  case  of  divorce,  the  woman,  if  she  was
sui  juris,  could  bring  an  action  for  the  restitution  of
the  dos  ;  if  she  was  in  the  power  of  her  father,  he
brought  the  action  jointly  with  his  daughter.
The  dos  could  be  claimed  immediately  upon  the
dissolution  of  the  marriage,  except  it  consisted  of
things  quae  numero,  «&c.,  for  which  time  was
allowed.  (Ulp.  Frag.  vi.  8  :  but  compare  Cod.
7.  tit.  13.  §  7.)     [DiVoHTiuM.]

The  dos  could  not  be  restored  during  the  mar-
riage, but  in  the  case  of  the  husband's  insolvency,
the  wife  could  demand  back  her  dos  during  the
marriage.  In  certain  cases,  also,  the  husband  was
permitted  to  restore  the  dos  during  the  marriage,
and  such  restoration  was  a  good  legal  acquittance
to  him :  these  excepted  cases  were  either  cases  of
necessity,  as  the  payment  of  the  wife's  debts,  or
the  sustentation  of  near  kinsfolks.  {Zeitschrifi,  Sec.
V.  p.  311,  essay  by  Hasse.)

What  should  be  returned  as  dos,  depended  on

the  fact  of  what  was  given  as  dos.     If  the  things

given   were  ready  money  {dos  numerata,  Cic.  Pro

Caecina,  c.  4),  or  things  estimated  by  quantity,  &c.,

F  p  3


'438


DRACHMA.


the  husTsand  must  return  the  like  sum  or  the  like
quantity.  If  the  things,  whether  movable  or  im-
movable, were  valued  when  they  were  given  to  the
husband  (dos  aesthnata)^  this  was  a  species  of  sale,
and  at  the  end  of  the  marriage  the  husband  must
restore  the  things  or  their  value.  If  the  things
were  not  valued,  he  must  restore  the  specific  things,
and  he  must  make  good  all  loss  or  deterioration
which  had  happened  to  them  except  by  accident.
But  the  husband  was  intitled  to  be  reimbursed  for
all  necessary  expences  (impensae  necessariae)  ;  as,
for  instance,  necessary  repairs  of  houses  incurred
by  him  in  respect  of  his  wife's  property,  and  also
for  all  outlays  by  which  he  had  improved  the  pro-
perty (impensae  utiles).

The  husband's  heirs,  if  he  were  dead,  were
bound  to  restore  the  dos.  The  wife's  father,  or  the
surviving  wife,  might  demand  it  by  an  actio  ex
stipulatu  de  dote  reddenda,  which  was  an  actio
stricti  juris,  if  there  was  any  agreement  on  the
subject  ;  and  by  an  actio  rei  uxoriae  or  dotis,
which  was  an  actio  bonae  fidei,  when  there  was
no  agreement.  A  third  person  who  had  given  the
dos  must  always  demand  it  ex  stipulatu,  when  he
had  bargained  for  its  restoration.  Justinian
enacted,  that  the  action  should  always  be  ex
stipulatu,  even  when  there  was  no  contract,  and
should  be  an  actio  bonae  fidei.

The  wife  had  no  security  for  her  dos,  except
in  the  case  of  the  fundus  details,  unless  she  had
by  contract  a  special  security  ;  but  she  had  some
privileges  as  compared  with  the  husband's  cre-
ditors. Justinian  enacted  that  on  the  dissolu-
tion of  the  marriage,  the  wife's  ownership  should
revive,  with  all  the  legal  remedies  for  recover-
ing such  parts  of  the  dos  as  still  existed  ;  that
all  the  husband's  property  should  be  considered
legally  pledged  {tacita  lixfpoiheea)  as  a  security
for  the  dos  ;  and  that  the  wife,  but  she  alone,
should  have  a  priority  of  claim  on  such  property
over  all  other  creditors  to  whom  the  same  might
be  pledged.

The  dos  was  a  matter  of  great  importance  in
Roman  law,  both  because  it  was  an  ingredient  in
almost  every  marriage,  and  was  sometimes  of  a
large  amount.  The  frequency  of  divorces  also
gave  rise  to  many  legal  questions  as  to  dos.  A
woman  whose  dos  was  large  {dotata  uxor)  had
some  influence  over  her  husband,  inasmuch  as  she
had  the  power  of  divorcing  herself,  and  thus  of
depriving  him  of  the  enjoyment  of  her  property.
The  allusions  to  the  dos  and  its  restitution  are
numerous  in  the  Roman  writers.  (Cic.  ad  Ait.
xiv.  13.)

It  is  a  disputed  point  whether  there  could  be
dos,  properly  so  called,  in  the  case  of  a  marriage
with  conventio  in  manum.  [Matrimonium.]
(Hasse,  Blmn.  Mus.  ii.  75.)

The  name  by  which  the  Greek  writers  designate
the  Roman  dos  is  (p^pvi]  (Plutarch,  Caeaar,  c.  1,
Marius^  c.  38,  Cicero^  c.  8).

(Ulp.  Frag.  vi.  ;  Dig.  23.  tit.  3  ;  Cod.  5.  tit.  12  ;
Thibaut,  System,  &c.,  §  728  &c.,  9th  ei,  §  747,
&c. ;  Mackeldey,  Lehrbuch,  &C.,  §  517,  &c.,  12th
ed.)  [G.  L.]

DOULOS  (8ov\os).     [Servus.]

DRACHMA  (SpaxM^).  the  principal  silver
coin  among  the  Greeks.  Like  all  other  denomi-
nations of  money,  the  word  Spaxt^'fl  (sometimes
written  Spay/i-f})  no  doubt  signified  originally  a
•weight  ;  and  it  continued  to  be  used  in  this  sense,


DRACHMA.

as  one  of  the  subdivisions  of  the  talent,  of  which
it  was  the  6000th  part.  [Talentum.]  The
original  meaning  of  the  word  is  a  handful.  The
two  chief  standards  in  the  currencies  of  the  Greek
states  were  the  Attic  and  Aeginetan.  We  shall
therefore  first  speak  of  the  Attic  drachma,  and
afterwards  of  the  Aeginetan.

The  average  weight  of  the  Attic  drachma  from
the  time  of  Solon  to  that  of  Alexander  was  66-5
grains.  It  contained  about  -g^yth  of  the  weight
alloy  ;  and  hence  there  remain  65*4  grains  to  be
valued.  Each  of  our  shillings  contains  80*7  grains
of  pure  silver.  The  drachma  is  therefore  worth
6.5*4
— —  of  a  shilling,  or  9*72  pence,  which  may  be

called  9^.  (Hussey,  Ancient  Weights  and  Money,
pp.47,  48.)  After  Alexander's  time,  there  was  a
sliglit  decrease  in  the  weight  of  the  drachma  ;  till
in  course  of  time  it  only  weighed  63  grains.  The
drachma  contained  six  obols  {b§o\oi)  ;  and  the
Athenians  had  sepaiate  silver  coins,  from  foiur
drachmae  to  a  quarter  of  an  obol.  Among  those
now  preserved,  the  tetradrachm  is  commonly
found  ;  but  we  possess  no  specimens  of  the  tri-
drachm,  and  only  a  few  of  the  didrachm.  Speci-
mens of  the  tetrobolus,  triobolus,  diobolus,  three-
quarter-obol,  half-obol,  and  quarter-obol,  are  still
found.  For  the  respective  values  of  these  coins,
see  the  Tables.

The  tetradrachm  in  later  times  was  called  stater
(Phot.  s.  V.  'XTarijp  ;  Hesych.  s.  v.  TKavKes  Aou-
picDTiKai  :  Matth.  xxvii.  27)  ;  but  it  has  been
doubted  whether  it  bore  that  name  in  the  flourish-
ing times  of  the  republic.  (Hussey,  Ibid.  p.  49.)
We  know  that  stater,  in  writers  of  that  age,
usually  signifies  a  gold  coin,  equal  in  value  to
twenty  drachmae  [Stater]  ;  but  there  appear
strong  reasons  for  believmg  tliat  the  tetradrachm,
even  in  the  age  of  Thucydides  and  Xenophon,  was
sometimes  called  by  this  name.  (Thucyd.  iii.  70,
with  Arnold's  note  ;  Xen.  Hell.  v.  2.  §  22.)  The
obolos,  in  later  times,  was  of  bronze  (Lucian,
Contempl.  11.  vol.  i.  p.  504,  ed.  Reiz)  ;  but  in  the
best  times  of  Athens  we  only  read  of  silver  obols.
The  x«^foi5s  was  a  copper  coin,  and  the  eighth
part  of  an  obol.     [Chai.cus.]


ATHENIAN    DRACHMA.       BRITISH    MUSEUM,
ACTUAL    SIZE.

The  Aeginetan  standard  appears  to  have  been
used  in  Greece  in  very  early  times.  According  to
most  ancient  writers,  money  was  first  coined  at
Aegina  by  order  of  Pheidon  of  Argos  ;  and  the
Aeginetan  standard  was  used  in  almost  all  the
states  of  the  Peloponnesur,  in  Boeotia  and  in  some
other  parts  of  northern  Greece,  though  the  Attic
standard  prevailed  most  in  the  maritime  and  com-
mercial states.

The  average  weight  of  the  Aeginetan  drachma,
calculated  by  Mr.  Hussey  (pp.  59,  60)  from  the
coins  of  Aegina  and  Boeotia,  was  9Q  grains.     It


DUODECIM  TABULARUM  LEX.

containi  about  -g^nd  part  of  the  weight  alloy.
Hence  its  value  is  93  grains  of  pure  silver,  or,  as

before., of  a  shilling  ;    that   is.   Is.    Id.  3*2

*   80-7  ^

farthings.  The  largest  coin  of  the  Aeginetan  stan-
dard appears  to  have  been  the  didrachnia,  and  the
values  of  the  different  coins  of  this  standard  will
be  found  in  the  Tables.

The  proportion  of  the  Aeginetan  drachma  to  the
Attic,  according  to  the  value  given  above,  is  as  93
to  65'4,  or  as  4"  18  to  3  nearly.  According  to
Pollux,  however,  the  proportion  was  5  to  3  ;  for  he
states  (ix.  76,  86)  that  the  Aeginetan  drachma
was  equal  to  10  Attic  obols,  and  that  the  Aegine-
tan talent  contained  10,000  Attic  drachmae.  For
a  full  discussion  of  this  question,  which  is  one  of
the  most  interesting  in  ancient  numismatics,  and
of  the  respective  values  of  the  other  standards
which  were  used  by  the  Greeks,  see  Nummus
and  Talentum.


AKGINETAN    DRACHMA.      BRITISH    MUSEUM.
ACTUAL    SIZE.

As  the  Romans  reckoned  in  sesterces,  so  the
Greeks  generally  reckoned  by  drachmas  ;  and
when  a  sum  is  mentioned  in  the  Attic  writers,
without  any  specification  of  the  unit,  drachmae  are
usually  meant.  (Bdckh,  Pol.  Econ.  of  Athens^  i.
p.  25.)

DRACO.       [SiGNA  MiLITARIA.]

DUCENA'RII,  the  name  of  various  officers
and  magistrates,  in  the  imperial  period,  of  whom
the  principal  were  as  follow :  —

1.  The  imperial  procumtores,  who  received  a
salary  of  200  sestertia.  Dion  Cassius  (liii.  15)
says  that  the  procuratores  first  received  a  salary
in  the  time  of  Augustus,  and  that  t\\ey  derived
their  title  from  the  amount  of  their  salar3%  We
thus  read  of  centenarii,  &c.,  as  well  as  of  duce-
narii.  (See  Capitolin.  Pertin.  2  ;  Orelli,  Inscrip.
No.  946.)  Claudius  granted  to  the  procuratores
ducenarii  the  consular  ornaments.     (Suet.  Claud.

2.  A  class  or  decuria  of  judices,  first  established
by  Augustus.  They  were  so  called  because  their
property,  as  valued  in  the  census,  only  amounted
to  200  sestertia,  and  they  tried  causes  of  small
importance.    (Suet.  Attg.  32.)

3.  Officers  who  commanded  two  centuries,  and
who  held  the  same  rank  as  the  primi  hastati  in
the  ancient  legion.  (Veget.  ii.  8 ;  Orelli,  Inscrip.
No.  3444.)

4.  The  imperial  household  troops,  who  were
under  the  authority   of  the   viagister  offidorum.

■         They  are  frequently  mentioned  among  the  agentcs
j         tw  rebus.,  or  ushers.    (Cod.  1.  tit.  31  ;  12.  tit.  20.)

DUCENTE'SIMA.    [Centesima.]

DUELLA.     [Uncia.]
'  DULCIA'RII.     [PisTOR.]

DUODECIM  SCRIPTA.     [Latrunculi.]

DUODECIM  TABULARUM  LEX.  [Lex.]


ECCLESIA.  439

I  DUPLA'RII  or  DUPLICA'RII,  were  sol-
diers who  received  on  account  of  their  good
conduct  double  allowance  {duplicia  cib(wia\  and
perhaps  in  some  cases  double  pay  likewise.  (Varro,
De  Ling.  Lat.  v.  90,  Muller ;  Liv.  ii.  59,  xxiv.  47  ;
Orelli,  Inscrip.  No.  3535.)  They  are  frequently
mentioned  in  inscriptions  (Orelli,  Nos.  3533,
4994),  but  more  commonly  under  the  name  of
duplarii.  (Orelli,  Nos.  3531,  3535,  3476,  3481,
&c.)  In  one  inscription  the  form  duplicarius  oc-
curs. (Orelli,  No.  3534.)  Vegetius  (ii.  7)  calls
them  d?iplares  milites.

DUPLICA'TIO.     [Actio.]

DUPONDIUS.     [As,  p.  141,  a  ;  Pes.]

DUSSIS.     [As.  p.  141,  a.]

DUU'MVIRI,  or  the  two  men,  the  name  of
various  magistrates  and  functionaries  at  Rome,  and
in  the  coloniae  and  municipia.  In  inscriptions  we
also  meet  with  the  form  duomvires  (Orelli,  Inscrip.
No.  3808),  and  duovir  (Orelli,  No.  3886).

1.  Duumviri  Juri  Dicundo,  the  highest
magistrates  in  the  municipal  towns.  [CoLONiA,
p.  318.)

2.  Duumviri  Navales,  extraordinary  magis-
trates, who  were  created,  whenever  occasion  re-
quired, for  the  purpose  of  equipping  and  repairing
the  fleet.  They  appear  to  have  been  originally
appointed  by  the  consuls  and  dictators,  but  were
first  elected  by  the  people,  B.  c.  311.  (Liv.  ix.  30,
xl.  18,  26,  xli.  1.)

3.  Duumviri   Perduellionis.     [Perduel-

LIO.]

4.  Duumviri  Quinquennales,  the  censors
in  the  municipal  towns,  who  must  not  be  con-
founded with  the  duumviri  juri  dicundo.  [Co-
LONIA,  p.  318.]

5.  Duumviri  Sacri,  extraordinary  magistrates,
like  the  duumviri  Navales,  appointed  for  the  pur-
pose of  building  or  dedicating  a  temple.  (Liv.  vii.
28,  xxii.  33,  XXXV.  41.)

6.  Duumviri  Sacrorum,  originally  had  the
charge  of  the  Sibylline  books.  Their  duties  were
afterwards  discharged  by  the  decemviri  sacris
faciundis.     [Decemviri,  No.  3.]

7.  Duumviri  Viis  extra  urbem  purgan-
Dis,  were  officers  under  tlie  aediles,  who  had  the
charge  of  the  streets  of  the  suburbs  of  Rome,  out-
side the  city  gates.  (Tabul.  Heracl.  i.  50,  ed.
Gottling.)  Their  office  appears  to  have  been
abolished  by  Augustus,  and  their  duties  devolved
upon  the  Quattuoi-viri.  (Comp.  Dion  Cass.  liv.  26 ;
Pompon.  De  Orig.  Jur.  §  30  ;  Becker,  Romisch.
Alterth.  vol.  ii.  part  ii.  p.  366.)

DUX.     [Provincia.]


E.


ECCLE'SIA  (iKKXr](ria),  the  general  assembly
of  the  citizens  at  Athens,  in  which  they  met  to'
discuss  and  determine  upon  matters  of  public  in-
terest. These  assemblies  were  either  ordinary^
and  held  four  times  in  each  prytany,  or  extra-
ordinary, that  is,  specially  convened,  upon  any  sud-
den emergency,  and  therefore  called  <ruyK\riToi.
On  occasions  of  extreme  importance,  when  it  was
desirable  for  as  many  persons  as  possible  to  be  pre-
sent at  the  discussion  of  any  question,  the  people
were  summoned  by  express  from  the  country  t©
the  city,  and  then  the  assembly  was  caDed  a
KaTaKKriaia,  the  proper  meaning  of  KaraKoKeiy
F  F  4


440


ECCLESIA.


being  to  call  from  the  country  into  the  city.  Tlie
ordinaiy  assemblies  were  called  uo/lli/xol  or  Kupiai,
according  to  the  Scholiast  on  Aristophanes  (Achar.
19),  who,  moreover,  informs  us  that  there  were
three  such  in  every  motit/i.  But  according  to  the
best-informed  grammarians  who  followed  Aristotle,
the  name  Kvpia  was  appropriated  to  the  Jirst  only
of  the  regular  fissemblios  of  each  prytany.  Such,
at  least,  is  the  account  given  b}^  Pollux  (viii.  96)
and  Harpocration,  the  former  of  whom  asserts  that
the  third  of  the  regular  assemblies  in  each  prytanj'-
was  partly  devoted  to  the  reception  of  ambassadors
from  foreign  states.

Aristophanes,  however,  in  the  Acharnians  (61),
represents  ambassadors  who  had  just  returned
from  Persia  and  Thrace,  as  giving  an  account  of
their  embassy  in  a  Kvpia  iKKhr^cria,  which,  ac-
cording to  Pollux,  would  be  not  the  third  but  the
first  of  the  regular  assemblies.  With  a  view  of
reconciling  these  discrepancies,  Schomann  (De
Comit.  c.  i.)  supposes,  that  Solon  originally  ap-
pointed one  regular  assembly,  called  Kvpia,  to  be
held  on  a  certain  day  of  every  prytany,  and  that
afterwards  additional  assemblies  were  instituted,
appropriated  respectively  to  particular  purposes,
though  the  terra  Kvpia  was  still  reserved  for  the
assembly  formerly  so  called.  If,  however,  the  re-
presentation of  Aristophanes  is  in  agreement  with
the  practice  of  his  age,  we  must  further  suppose,
what  is  very  probable,  that  the  arrangements  for
business,  as  described  by  Pollux,  were  not  always
observed  even  in  the  time  of  the  poet ;  and  since  a
few  years  after  Aristotle's  time  many  changes  took
place  in  the  constitution  of  Athens,  it  maj^  have
happened  that  the  name  o.f  Kvpia  was  then  given
to  all  the  regular  assemblies,  in  which  case  thb
Scholiast  probably  identified  the  customs  and
terms  of  a  late  age  with  those  of  an  earlier  period.
Moreover,  the  number  of  prytanies  in  each  year,
originally  ten,  one  for  each  tribe,  was,  on  the  in-
crease in  the  number  of  the  tribes  at  Athens,
raised  to  twelve  ;  so  that  the  prytanies  would
then  coincide  with  the  months  of  the  year,  a  foct
which,  taken  in  conjunction  with  other  circum-
stances (Schomann,  ii.  44),  seems  to  show,  that
the  authorities  who  speak  of  three  regular  as-
semblies in  each  month,  had  in  view  the  times
when  a  prytany  and  a  month  were  the  same  thing.
Some  authors  have  endeavoured  to  determine  the
particular  days  on  which  the  four  regular  assem-
blies of  each  prytany  were  held,  but  Schomann  (ii.
47)  has  proved  almost  to  demonstration,  that  there
were  no  invariably  fixed  days  of  .assembly  ;  and
at  any  rate,  even  if  there  were,  we  have  not  suffi-
cient data  to  determine  them.  Ulpian  (ad  De-
mosth.  Timoc.  p.  706)  says,  in  allusion  to  the
times  when  there  were  three  assemblies  in  every
month,  that  one  was  held  on  the  eleventh,  another
about  the  twentieth,  a  third  ahout  the  thirtieth
of  each  month  j  and  it  is  of  course  not  impro-
bable that  they  were  always  held  at  nearly  equal
intervals.

The  place  in  which  the  assemblies  were  anciently
held  was,  we  are  told  by  Harpocration  (s.  v.
UdvSrifjLOS  'A<ppoilTr)\  the  ayopd.  Afterwards  they
were  transferred  to  the  Pnyx,  and  at  last  to  the
great  theatre  of  Dionysus,  and  other  places.  Thus
Thucydides  (viii.  97)  speaks  of  the  people  being
summoned  to  the  Pnyx,  the  usual  place  of  assembly
in  his  times  ;  and  Aristophanes  {Equit.  42),  in
describing  '*  Demus,"  the  representative   of  the


ECCLESIA.

Athenian  people,  just  as  "  John  Bull  "  is  of  the
English,  aiUs  that  character  Ai^jxos  Hvkvittis,  or
Demus  of  the  (parish  of)  Pnyx :  a  joke  by  which
that  place  is  represented  as  the  home  of  the
Athenians.  The  situation  of  it  was  to  the  west
of  the  Areiopagus,  on  a  slope  connected  with
Moxmt  Lycabettus,  and  partly  at  least  within  the
walls  of  the  city.  It  was  semicircular  in  form,
with  a  boundary  wall,  part  rock  and  part  masonry,
and  an  area  of  about  12,000  square  yards.  On  the
north  the  ground  was  filled  up  and  paved  with
large  stones,  so  as  to  get  a  level  surface  on  the
slope  ;  from  which  fact  some  grammarians  derive
its  name  (ivapa  ttjp  tuv  X'lQuv  Tru/cvdrTjTa).  To-
wards this  side,  and  close  to  the  wall,  was  the
hema  (firj/jLo),  a  stone  platfonn  or  hustings  ten  or
eleven  feet  high,  with  an  ascent  of  steps  ;  it  was
cut  out  of  the  solid  rock,  whence  it  is  sometimes
called  6  kidos,  as  in  Aristophanes  {Pax,  680)  we
read  octtis  icpareT  vvv  rov  \idov  toZv  ttj  TIvkvl.
The  position  of  the  bema  was  such  as  to  command
a  view  of  the  sea  from  behind  (on  which  account
the  thirty  tyrants  are  said  to  have  altered  it),
and  of  the  UpoirvAaLa  and  Parthenon  in  front,
though  the  hill  of  the  Aeiopagus  lay  partly  be-
tween it  and  the  Acropolis.  Hence  Demosthenes
(riepi  'StVUTo^.  174),  when  reminding  the  Athenians
from  this  very  bema  of  the  other  splendid  works
of  their  ancestors,  says  emphatically  TlpoirvXaia
Tavra:  and  we  may  be  sure  that  the  Athenian
orators  would  often  rouse  the  national  feelings  of
their  hearers  by  pointing  to  the  assemblage  of
magnificent  edifices,  "  monuments  of  Athenian
gratitude  and  glory,"  which  they  had  in  view
from  the  Pnyx.  (Cramer,  Artcient  Greece,  vol.  ii.
p.  335  ;  Wordsworth,  Athens  and  Attica.  In  the
latter  of  these  works  are  two  views  of  the  re-
mains of  the  Pnyx.)  That  the  general  situation
of  the  place  was  elevated  is  clear  from  the  phrase
auaSaiufiu  els  t^v  €KKXr}(Tiav,  and  the  words  Tvas
6  Srjfios  &va)  kuOvto,  applied  to  a  meeting  of  the
people  in  the  Pnyx.  (Dem.  De  Cor.  p.  285.)
After  the  great  theatre  of  Dionysus  was  built,  the
assemblies  were  frequently  held  in  it,  as  it  afi'orded
space  and  convenience  for  a  large  multitude  ;  and
in  some  particular  cases  it  was  specially  deter-
mined by  law  that  the  people  should  assemble
there.  (Dem.  c.  Meld.  p.  517.)  Assemblies  were
also  held  in  the  Peiraeeus,  and  in  the  theatre  at
Munychia,  (Dem.  De  Fals.  Leg.  p.  359  ;  Lysias,
c.  Agor.  p.  133  ;  Thucyd.  viiL  93.)

The  right  of  convening  the  people  generally
vested  in  the  prytanes  or  presidents  of  the  council
of  Five  Hundred  [Boule]  ;  but  in  cases  of  sud-
den emergency,  and  especially  during  wars,  the
strategi  also  had  the  power  of  calling  extraordi-
nary meetings,  for  which,  however,  if  Ave  may
judge  by  the  form  in  which  several  decrees  are
drawn  up,  the  consent  of  thj  senate  appears  to
have  been  necessary.  (Dem.  De  Cor.  p.  249.)
The  four  ordinary  meetings  of  every  prytany
were,  nevertheless,  always  convened  by  the  pry-
tanes, who  not  only  gave  a  previous  notice  (irpo-
ypd<peiv  T^v  iKK\r](Tiav)  of  the  day  of  asseriibly,
and  published  a  programme  of  the  subjects  to  be
discussed,  but  also,  as  it  appears,  sent  a  crier  round
to  collect  the  citizens  {avi/dyeiv  rhv  Srnxov,  Pol-
lux, viii.  95  ;  Harpocr  it.  s.  v.  Kvpia  ^EKKKrjffia  ;
Dem.  c.  Aristog.  p.  772.)  At  any  rate,  whenever
the  strategi  wished  to  convene  one  of  the  extra-
ordinary assemblies,  notice  was  certainly  given  of


ECCLESIA.

it  by  a  public  proclamation;  for  as  Ulpian  (ad
Demosth.  de  Fals.  Leg.  p,  1 00,  a)  observes,  these
assemblies  were  called  crvyKATjToi,  because  the
people  were  summoned  to  them  by  officers  sent
round  for  that  purpose  ('6ti  (tw^kvlXovu  nues
"trepiiovTes).  But  independent  of  the  right  which
we  have  said  the  strategi  possessed  of  convening
an  extraordinary  meeting,  it  would  seem  from  the
case  of  Pericles  (Thucyd.  ii.  22)  that  a  strategus
had  the  power  of  preventing  any  assembly  being
called.  It  is,  however,  important  to  observe,  that
such  an  exercise  of  power  would  perhaps  not  have
been  tolerated  except  during  wars  and  commotions,
or  in  the  person  of  a  distinguished  character  like
Pericles  ;  and  that  under  different  circumstances,
at  any  rate  after  the  time  of  Solon,  the  assemblies
were  always  called  by  the  prytanes.  All  persons
who  did  not  obey  the  call  were  subject  to  a  fine,
and  six  magistrates  called  lexiarchs  {\T]^iapxoi)
were  appointed,  whose  duty  it  was  to  take  care
that  the  people  attended  the  meetings,  and  to  levy
fines  on  those  who  refused  to  do  so.  (Pollux,  viii.
104.)  With  a  view  to  this,  whenever  an  assembly
was  to  be  held,  certain  public  slaves  (l,Kvdai  or
Tol^TOi)  were  sent  round  to  sweep  the  agora,  and
other  places  of  public  resort,  with  a  rope  coloured
Avith  vermilion.  The  different  persons  whom  these
ropemen  met,  were  driven  by  them  towards  the
ecclesia,  and  those  who  refused  to  go  Avere  marked
by  the  rope  and  fined.  (Schol.  ad  Arist.  Achar,
22.)  Aristophanes  (/.  c.)  alludes  to  this  subject
in  the  lines

oi  5'eV  ayopa  \a\ovcn,  k&uci)  Ka\  KaTco
rh  axoi-Viov  (pivyov<n  rb  ixefA.i\Twix4vop.

Besides  this,  all  the  roads  except  those  which  led
to  the  meeting  were  blocked  up  with  hurdles
(yeppa),  which  were  also  used  to  fence  in  the
place  of  assembly  against  the  intrusion  of  persons
who  had  no  right  to  be  present :  their  removal  in
the  latter  case  seems  to  have  served  as  a  signal  for
the  admission  of  strangers  who  might  wish  to  ap-
peal to  the  people.  (Dem.  c.  Neaer.  p.  1375.)
An  additional  inducement  to  attend,  with  the
poorer  classes,  was  the  /xiadhs  iKKXr]ata(rTiK6s,  or
pay  which  they  received  for  it.  The  originator  of
this  practice  seems  to  have  been  a  person  named
Callistratus,  who  introduced  it  "  long  after  the
beginning  of  the  influence  of  Pericles."  The
payment  itself,  originally  an  obolus,  was  after-
wards raised  to  three  by  a  popular  favourite  called
Agyrrhius,  of  Collytus.  The  increase  took  place
but  a  short  time  before  the  Ecclesiazusae  of  Aris-
tophanes came  out,  or  about  B.  c.  392.  A  ticket
(avuSoXov)  appears  to  have  been  given  to  those
who  attended,  on  producing  which,  at  the  close  of
the  proceedings,  they  received  the  money  from  one
of  the  thesmothetae.  (Aristoph.  Eccles.  295,  380.)
This  payment,  however,  was  not  made  to  the
richer  classes,  who  attended  the  assemblies  gratis,
and  are  therefore  called  olKoanoi  4KK\7]aiacTTai
by  the  poet  Antiphanes  in  a  fragment  preserved
by  Athenaeus  (vi.  p.247,  f).  The  same  word
oiKda-iTos  is  applied  generally  to  a  person  who  re-
ceives no  pay  for  his  services.

With  respect  to  the  right  of  attending,  we  may
observe  that  it  was  enjoyed  by  all  legitimate  citi-
zens who  were  of  the  proper  age  (generally  sup-
posed to  be  twenty,  certainly  not  less  than'  eigh-
teen), and  not  labouring  under  any  atimia  or  loss
of  civil   rights.      All    were    considered    citizens,


ECCLESIA.


441


whose  parents  were  both  such,  or  whc  had  been
presented  with  the  freedom  of  the  state,  and  en-
rolled in  the  register  of  some  demus  or  parish.
(Dem.  c.  Neaer.  p.  13B0.)  Adopted  citizens,  how-
ever (ttojtjtoi),  were  not  qualified  to  hold  the  office
of  archon  or  any  priesthood.  (Id.  p.  1376.)  De-
crepit old  men  (yepovres  ol  a<peiij.fuoi,  perhaps
those  above  sixty)  seem  not  to  have  been  admitted,
although  it  is  not  expressly  so  stated.  (Aristot.
Polit  iii.  1.)  Slaves  and  foreigners  also  were  cer-
tainly excluded  (Aristoph.  Tkesm.  294)  :  though
occasions  would  of  course  occur  when  it  would  be
necessary  or  desirable  to  admit  them  ;  and  from
Demosthenes  (c.  Neaer.  p.  1375)  we  may  infer  that
it  was  not  unusual  to  allow  foreigners  to  enter  to-
wards the  close  of  the  proceedings,  when  the  most
important  business  of  the  day  had  been  concluded;
otherwise    they   stood    outside.      (Aesch.   c.  Cies.

The  IcTOTcKus,  or  foreigners,  who  enjoyed  nearly
equal  privileges  with  the  citizens,  are  by  some
thought  to  have  had  the  same  rights  as  adopted
citizens,  with  respect  to  voting  in  the  assembly.
(Wolf,  ad  Dem.  Left.  p.  70.)  This,  however,  seems
very  doubtful  ;  at  any  rate  the  et}'mology  of  the
word  t(roTeA.6Ts  does  not  justify  such  an  opinion.

In  the  article  Boule  it  is  explained  who  the
prytanes  and  the  proedri  were  ;  and  we  may  hero
remark,  that  it  was  the  duty  of  the  proedi'i  of  the
same  tribe,  under  the  presidency  of  their  chairman
(6  eirKTTOTTjs),  to  lay  before  the  people  the  subjects
to  be  discussed  ;  to  read,  or  cause  to  be  read,  the
previous  bill  (rb  irpogouAeu/xa)  of  the  senate  ;  and
to  give  permission  (yvccfias  irpoTiOivai)  to  the
speakers  to  address  the  people.  They  most  pro-
bably sat  on  the  steps  near  the  bema,  to  which
they  were  on  some  occasions  called  by  the  people.
In  later  times  they  were  assisted  in  keeping  order
(evKoajxia)  by  the  members  of  the  presiding  tribe
(7}  TrposSpevovaa  (pvA-f],  Aesch.  c.  Ctesiph.  p.  53,
and  Boule)  ;  and  the  officers  who  acted  under
them,  the  "  serjeants-at-arms "  were  the  crier  (d
/c^pu|),  and  the  Scythian  bowmen.  Thus,  in
Aristophanes  (Acharn.  24),  the  crier  says  to  a
speaker,  who  was  out  of  order,  KaQiicro  a'iya^  and
in  another  passage  the  To^orai  are  represented  as
dragging  a  drunken  man  out  of  the  assembly.
{Eccles.  143.)  When  the  discussion  upon  any  sub-
ject had  terminated,  the  chairman  of  the  proedri,  if
he  thought  proper,  put  the  question  to  the  vote :
we  read  in  some  instances  Qf  his  refusing  to  do  so.
(Xen.  Mem.  i.  1.  §  18  ;  Thuc.  vi.  14.)

Previous,  however,  to  the  commencement  of
any  business,  it  was  usual  to  make  a  lustra-
tion or  purification  of  the  place  where  the  as-
sembly was  held.  This  was  performed  by  an
officiating  priest  called  the  Peristiarchus  {irfpiariap-
Xos),  a  name  given  to  him  because  he  went  before
the  lustral  victims  (ra  irepiffria)  as  they  were
carried  round  the  boundary  of  the  place.  The
favourite  victims  were  sucking  pigs  (xoipiSia)  :  the
blood  of  which  was  sprinkled  about  the  seats,  and
their  bodies  afterwards  thrown  into  the  sea.
(Schol.  ad  Aristoph.  I.e.,  ad  Aesch.  c.  Timar.  p.
48.)  After  the  peristiarch  the  crier  followed,
burning  incense  in  a  censer.  When  these  cere-
monies were  concluded,  the  crier  proclaimed  silence,
and  then  offered  up  a  prayer,  in  which  the  gods
were  implored  to  bless  the  proceedings  of  the  meet-
ing, and  bring  down  destruction  on  all  those  who
were  hostilely  disposed  towards  the  state,  or  who


442


ECCLESIA.


traitorously  plotted  its  overthrow,  or  received  briljes
for  misleading  and  deceiving  the  people.  ( Aristoph.
Thesm.  330.)  On  the  conclusion  of  this  prayer
business  began,  and  the  first  subject  proposed  was
said  to  be  brouglit  forward,  irpcorov  (jlctci  to  Upd.
(Dem.  c.  Timocr.  p.  706.)  We  must,  however,  un-
derstand that  it  was  illegal  to  propose  to  the  ecclesia
any  particular  measure  imless  it  had  previously  re-
ceived the  sanction  of  the  senate,  or  been  formally
referred  by  that  body  to  the  people,  under  the  title
of  a  TrpoiovKevfia.  The  assembly,  nevertheless,
had  the  power  of  altering  a  previous  decree  of  the
senate  as  might  seem  fit.  Further  information  on
this  point  will  be  found  under  Boule,  to  which  we
may  add,  according  to  Schomann  (De  Comitiis,  c.  9),
that  the  object  of  the  law,  mentioned  by  the  gram-
marians {'AiTpo€ov\cvTov  /xrjSev  ^-fi^iaixa  ilaiivai
iv  T^  hi]jx(f)^  seems  to  have  been,  not  to  provide
that  no  motion  shoidd  be  proposed  in  the  assembly
unless  previously  approved  of  by  the  senate,  but
rather  that  no  subject  should  be  presented  for  dis-
cussion to  the  people,  about  which  a  bill  of  the
senate  had  not  been  drawn  up  and  read  in  the  as-
sembly.

The  privilege  of  addressing  the  assembly  was
not  confined  to  any  class  or  age  amongst  those  who
had  the  right  to  be  present :  all,  without  any  dis-
tinction, were  invited  to  do  so  by  the  proclamation
(T/s  ayopeveiv  jSouAerot)  which  was  made  by  the
crier  after  the  proedri  had  gone  through  the  neces-
sary preliminaries,  and  laid  the  subject  of  discus-
sion before  the  meeting  ;  for  though,  according  to
the  institutions  of  Solon,  those  persons  who  were
above  fifty  years  of  age  ought  to  have  been  called
upon  to  speak  first  (Aesch.  c.  Ctesiph.  p.  54),  this
regulation  had  in  the  days  of  Aristophanes  become
quite  obsolete.  (Dem.  De  Cor.  p.  285  ;  Aristoph.
Acham.  43.)  The  speakers  are  sometimes  simply
called  oi  -rrapiovTes,  and  appear  to  have  worn  a  crown
of  myrtle  on  their  heads  while  addressing  the  as-
sembly, to  intimate,  perhaps,  that  they  were  then
representatives  of  the  people,  and  like  the  archons
when  crowned,  inviolable.  (Aristoph.  Eccles.  130,
147.)  They  were  by  an  old  law  required  to  con-
fine themselves  to  the  subject  before  the  meeting,
and  keep  themselves  to  the  discussion  of  one  thing
at  a  time,  and  forbidden  to  indulge  in  scurrilous  or
abusive  language :  the  law,  however,  had  in  the
time  of  Aristophanes  become  neglected  and  almost
forgotten.  (Aesch.  c.  Tiniar.  p.  5  ;  Aristoph.
Eccles.  142.)  The  most  influential  and  practised
speakers  of  the  assembly  were  generally  distin-
guished by  the  name  of  p-fjTopes.

After  the  speakers  had  concluded,  any  one  was
at  liberty  to  propose  a  decree,  whether  drawn  up
beforehand  or  framed  in  the  meeting  {'Ev  r^  S-f}fji.(f>
ffvYYpd<p€(T6ai,  Plat.  G'org.  p.  451),  which,  how-
ever, it  was  necessary  to  present  to  the  proedri,
that  they  might  see,  in  conjunction  with  the  vouo-
^uAo/ces,  whether  there  was  contained  in  it  any-
thing injurious  to  the  state,  or  contrary  to  the
existing  laws.  (Pollux,  viii.  94.)  If  not,  it  was
read  by  the  crier  ;  though,  even  after  the  reading,
the  chairman  could  prevent  it  being  put  to  the  vote,
unless  his  opposition  was  overborne  by  threats  and
clamours.  (Aesch.  De  Fa/s.  Leg.  p.  39.)  Private
individuals  also  could  do  the  same,  by  engaging
upon  oath  (viroifMocria)  to  bring  against  the  author
of  any  measure  they  might  object  to,  an  accusation
called  a  ypa(p^  irapauSfiwv.  If,  however,  the  chair-
inan  refused  to  submit  any  question  to  the  decision


ECCLESIA.

of  the  people,  he  might  be  proceeded  against  T)y
eiideioois  (Plat.  Apol.  p.  32)  ;  and  if  he  allowed  the
people  to  vote  upon  a  proposal  Avhich  was  contrary
to  existing  constitutional  laws,  he  was  in  some  cases
liable  to  atimia.  (Dem.  c.  Timoc.  p.  716.)  If,  on
the  contrary,  no  opposition  of  this  sort  was  offered
to  a  proposed  decree,  the  votes  of  the  people  were
taken,  by  the  permission  of  the  chairman  and  with
the  consent  of  the  rest  of  the  proedri :  whence  the
permission  is  said  to  have  been  given  sometimes
by  the  proedri  and  sometimes  by  the  chainnan,
who  is  also  simply  called  6  TrpS^dpos,  just  as  the
proedri  are  sometimes  styled  prytjvnes.  (Aesch.
c.  Ctesiph.  p.  64  ;  Dem.  c.  Meid.  p.  51 7.)  The  de-
cision of  the  people  was  given  either  by  show  of
hands,  or  by  ballot,  i.  e.  by  casting  pebbles  into
urns  (KaSia-Koi)  ;  the  former  was  expressed  by  the
word  xe/poToverr,  the  latter  by  \pr}(pi(€(T0ai,  al-
though the  two  terms  are  frequently  confounded.
The  more  usual  method  of  voting  was  by  shovv  of
hands,  as  being  more  expeditious  and  convenient
(X^ipoTouia).  The  process  was  as  follows  : — the
crier  first  proclaimed  that  all  those  who  were  in
favour  of  a  proposed  measure  should  hold  up  their
hands  (orq)  5oKi7  k.  t.  A,  apdro)  r^v  x^^jpa)  :  then
he  proclaimed  that  all  those  who  were  opposed  to
it  should  do  the  same  (Srcfj  /xr/  hoK^^  k.  t.  A.):  they
did  so,  and  the  crier  then  formed  as  accurate  an
idea  as  possible  of  the  numbers  for  and  against
(rjpiO/xei  ras  x«*]pas)?  ^.nd  the  chairman  of  the
meeting  pronounced  the  opinion  of  the  majority.
(Suidas,  s.  V.  KaTex^ipoT6vr)(r€v.)  In  this  way
most  matters  of  public  interest  were  determined.
Vote  by  ballot  (Kpv€5r]v)^  on  the  other  hand,  was
only  used  in  a  few  special  cases  determined  by
law  ;  as,  for  instance,  when  a  proposition  was  made
for  allowing  those  who  had  suffered  atimia  to  appeal
to  the  people  for  restitution  of  their  former  rights  ;
or  for  inflicting  extraordinary  punishments  on  atro-
cious offenders,  and  generally,  upon  any  matter
which  affected  private  persons.  (Dem,  c.  Timuci:
pp.  715,  719.)  In  cases  of  this  sort  it  was  settled
by  law,  that  a  decree  should  not  be  valid  unless  six
thousand  citizens  at  least  voted  in  favour  of  it.  This
was  by  far  the  majority  of  those  citizens  who  were
in  the  habit  of  attending  ;  for,  in  time  of  war  the
number  never  amounted  to  five  thousand,  and  in
time  of  peace  seldom  to  ten  thousand.  (Thuc.
vii.  72.)

With  respect  to  the  actual  mode  of  voting  by
ballot  in  the  ecclesia  we  have  no  certain  informa-
tion ;  but  it  Avas  probably  the  same  as  in  the  courts
of  law,  namely,  by  means  of  black  and  white  peb-
bles, or  shells,  put  into  urns  (KaSiaKoi)  ;  the  white
for  adoption,  the  black  for  rejection  of  any  given
measure.     (Schol.  ad  Arist.  Vesp.  981).

The  determination  or  decree  of  the  people  was
called  a  PsepJdsma  (ip-fjcpia-fjia)^  which  properly
signifies  a  law  proposed  to  an  assembly,  and  ap-
proved of  by  the  people.  The  form  for  drawing
up  the  Psephisma  varied  in  differentages.  [Boule.]

We  now  come  to  the  dismissal  of  the  assembly  ;
the  order  for  which,  when  business  was  over,  was
given  by  the  prj'tanes  {tXvaav  t^v  iKKKy)(riav\
through  the  proclamation  of  the  crier  to  the  people
(Aristoph.  Acham.  173)  ;  and  as  it  was  not  cus-
tomary to  continue  meetings  which  usually  began
early  in  the  morning  {Id.  20)  till  after  sunset,  if
one  day  were  not  sufficient  for  the  completion  of
any  business,  it  was  adjourned  to  the  next.  Bat
an  assembly  was  sometimes  broken  up  if  any  one,


ECCLESIA.

whether  a  magistrate  or  private  individual,  declared
that  he  saw  an  unfavourable  omen,  or  perceived
thunder  and  lightning.  The  sudden  appearance  of
rain  also,  or  the  shock  of  an  earthquake,  or  any-
natural  phaenomenon  of  the  kind  called  dioa-ri/xiat,
was  a  sufficient  reason  for  the  hasty  adjournment
of  an  assembly.  (Aristoph.  Ntd).  579  ;  Thuc.  v.
46.)

We  have  already  stated  in  general  terms,  that
all  matters  of  public  and  national  interest,  whether
foreign  or  domestic,  were  determined  upon  by  the
people  in  their  assemblies,  and  we  shall  conclude
this  article  by  stating  in  detail  what  some  of  these
matters  were.  On  this  point  Julius  Pollux  (viii.
95)  informs  us,  that  in  the  first  assembly  of  every
prytany,  which  was  called  Kvpia,  the  imx^iporovia
of  the  magistrates  was  held  ;  i.  e.  an  inquisition
into  their  conduct,  which,  if  it  proved  unfavour-
able, was  followed  by  their  deposition.  In  the
same  assembly,  moreover,  the  ^laoY^^Xiai  or  ex-
traordinary informations  were  laid  before  the  peo-
ple, as  well  as  all  matters  relating  to  the  watch  and
ward  of  the  country  of  Attica  ;  the  regular  officers
also  read  over  the  lists  of  confiscated  property,  and
the  names  of  those  who  had  entered  upon  inherit-
ances. The  second  was  devoted  to  the  hearing  of
those  who  appeared  before  the  people  as  suppli-
ants for  some  favour,  or  for  the  privilege  of  ad-
dressing the  assembly  without  incurring  a  penalty
to  which  they  otherwise  would  have  been  liable,
or  for  indemnity  previous  to  giving  infonnation
9,bout  any  crime  in  which  they  were  accomplices.
In  all  these  cases  it  was  necessary  to  obtain  an
iSeta,  i.  e.  a  special  permission  or  immunity.  In
the  third  assembly,  ambassadors  from  foreign  states
were  received.  In  the  fourth,  religious  and  other
public  matters  of  the  state  were  discussed.

From  this  statement,  compared  with  what  is
said  under  Eisangelia,  it  appears  that  in  cases
which  required  an  extraordinary  trial,  the  people
sometimes  acted  in  a  judicial  capacity,  although
they  usually  referred  such  matters  to  the  court  of
the  Heliaea.  There  were,  however,  other  cases  in
which  they  exercised  a  judicial  power :  thus,  for
instance,  the  proedri  could  ex  officio  prosecute  an
individual  before  the  people  for  misconduct  in  the
ecclesia.  (Aesch.  c.  Timarch.  p.  5.)  Again,  on
some  occasions  information  {(x-qwcris)  was  simply
laid  before  the  people  in  assembly,  without  the  in-
formant making  a  regular  impeachment  ;  and  al-
though the  final  determination  in  cases  of  this  sort
was  generally  referred  to  a  court  of  law,  still  there
seems  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  people  might
have  taken  cognizance  of  them  in  assembly,  and
decided  upon  them  as  judges  ;  just  as  they  did  in
some  instjmces  of  heinous  and  notorious  crimes,
even  when  no  one  came  forward  with  an  accusa-
tion. Moreover,  in  turbulent  and  excited  times,
if  any  one  had  incurred  the  displeasure  of  the  people,
they  not  unfrequently  passed  summary  sentence
upon  him,  without  any  regard  to  the  regular  and
established  forms  of  proceeding :  as  examples  of
which  we  may  mention  the  cases  of  Demosthenes
and  Phocion.  The  proceedings  called  Trpo€oXri  and
iirayy^Xia  were  also  instituted  before  the  people :
further  information  with  respect  to  them  is  given
under  those  heads.

The  legislative  powers  of  the  people  in  assembly,
60  far  as  they  were  defined  by  the  enactments  of
Solon,  were  very  limited  ;  in  fact,  strictly  speak-
ing, no  laws  could,  without  violating  the  spirit  of


ECCLETI.


443


the  Athenian  constitution,  be  either  repealed  or
enacted,  except  by  the  court  of  the  Hofiodirai :  it
might,  however,  doubtless  happen  that  \pr](j)i(TiiiaTa
passed  by  the  assemblies  had  reference  to  general
and  permanent  objects,  and  were  therefore  virtually
vofioi  or  laws  [Nomothetes]  ;  moreover,  if  we
may  judge  by  the  complaints  of  Demosthenes,  it
appears  that  in  his  days  the  institutions  of  Solon
had,  in  this  respect,  fallen  into  disuse,  and  that
new  laws  were  made  by  the  people  collectively  in
assembly,  without  the  intervention  of  the  court  of
the  nomothetae.  (Dem.  c.  Timocr.  p,  744  ;  Aristot.
Polit  iv.  4.)

The  foreign  policy  of  the  state,  and  all  matters
connected  with  it,  and  the  regulation  and  appropria-
tion of  the  taxes  and  revenues,  were,  as  we  might
expect,  determined  upon  by  the  people  in  assembly.
The  domestic  economy  of  the  state  was  imder  the
same  superintendence  ;  a  fact  which  Pollux  briefly
expresses  by  informing  us  that  the  people  decided
in  the  fourth  assembly  Trepl  Upoov  kou  STjfiocriuv^
i.  e.  on  all  matters,  whether  spiritual  or  secular,  in
which  the  citizens  collectively  had  an  interest.
Such,  for  example,  says  Schomann  (p.  298),  "  are
the  priesthood,  the  temples  of  the  gods,  and  all
other  sacred  things  ;  the  treasury,  the  public  land,
and  public  property  in  general  ;  the  magistracy,
the  courts,  the  laws  and  institutions  of  the  state,
and,  in  fine,  the  state  itself :  "  in  connection  with
which  we  may  observe,  that  the  meetings  for  the
election  of  magistrates  were  called  apxatp^criai.
Lastly,  as  Schomann  remarks,  "  the  people  likewise
determined  in  assembly  upon  the  propriety  of  con  -
ferring  rewards  and  honours  on  such  citizens  or
strangers,  or  even  foreign  states,  as  had  in  any
manner  signally  benefitted  the  commonwealth."
It  is  hardly  necessary  to  add,  that  the  signification
of  a  religious  assembly  or  church,  which  ecclesia
bore  in  later  times,  sprang  from  its  earlier  meaning
of  an  assembly  in  general,  whether  of  the  con-
stituency of  a  whole  state,  or  of  its  sub-divi-
sions, such  as  tribes  and  cantons.  See  TniBUsand
Demus.  [R.  W.]

ECCLE'TI  (e/cKATjTot),  was  the  name  of  an
assembly  at  Sparta,  and  seems  to  have  been  the
same  as  the  so-called  lesser  assembly  (t]  fiiKpa  Ka-
Xovfievri  4KKXr)crla^  Xen.  Hell.  iii.  3.  §  8),  Its
name  seems  to  indicate  a  select  assembly,  but  it  is
difficult  to  determine  of  what  persons  it  was  com-
posed ;  since,  however,  Xenophon  (Hell.  ii.  4.  §  38)
mentions  the  ephors  along  with  and  as  distinct
from  it,  we  cannot  with  Tittman  (Griech.  Staatsv.
p.  100)  and Wachsmuth  (Hell. Alter.  vol.i.  pp.464,
690,  2d  edit.),  consider  it  as  having  consisted  of
the  Spartan  magistrates,  with  the  addition  of  some
deputies  elected  from  among  the  citizens.  As,
however,  the  e/c/cATjTot  do  not  occur  until  the  period
when  the  franchise  had  been  granted  to  a  great
number  of  freedmen  and  aliens,  and  when  the
number  of  ancient  citizens  had  been  considerably
thinned,  it  does  not  seem  improbable  that  the  lesser
assembly  consisted  exclusively  of  ancient  citizens,
either  in  or  out  of  office  ;  and  this  supposition
seems  very  well  to  agree  with  the  fact,  that  they
appear  to  have  always  been  jealously  watchful  in
upholding  the  ancient  constitution,  and  in  prevent-
ing any  innovation  that  might  be  made  by  the
ephors  or  the  new  citizens.  (Thirlwall,  Hist,  of
Greece,  iv,  p.  372,  &c.)

The  whole  subject  of  the  ckkA.tjtoi  is  involved  in
difficulty.    Tittmann  thinks,  that  though  the  name


•444


EDICTUM.


of  this  assembly  is  not  mentioned,  it  existed  long
before  tlie  Persian  wars,  and  that  in  many  cases  in
which  the  magistrates  (Te'A.77,  &pxovTes  or  apxai)
are  said  to  have  made  decrees,  the  magistrates  are
mentioned  instead  of  the  e/</cA.rjTot,  of  whom  they
were  the  chief  members.  This  last  supposition  is
rejected  by  MUUer  {Dor.  iii.  5.  §  10),  who  ob-
serves that  the  magistrates  were  often  said  to  have
decreed  a  measure  (especially  in  foreign  affairs),
though  it  had  been  discussed  before  the  whole
assembly  and  approved  by  it ;  for  the  magistrates
were  the  representatives  and  the  organs  of  the
assembly,  and  acted  in  its  name.  Miiller  is  also
of  opinion  that  cK/cAT/rot  and  iKKXrjffia  are  identical,
and  distinct  from  the  lesser  assembly,  which  he
considers  to  have  been  a  kind  of  select  assembly,
But  his  arguments  on  this  point  are  not  convincing.
The  e/i/cATjTot  and  the  lesser  assembly  are  men-
tioned about  the  same  time  in  Grecian  history,  and
previous  to  that  time  we  hear  of  no  assembly,
except  the  regular  iKKXyjcria  of  all  the  Spartans,
(See  Xen.  Hell.  v.  ii.  §  33,  vi.  3.  §  3.)    [L.  S.]

E'CDICUS  (e/cSi/cos),  the  name  of  an  officer  in
many  of  the  towns  of  Asia  Minor  during  the  Ro-
man dominion,  whose  principal  duty  was  the  care
of  the  public  money,  and  the  prosecution  of  all  par-
ties who  owed  money  to  the  state.  The  word  is
translated  in  the  ancient  glossaries  by  cognitor,  an
attorney.  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  xiii.  56  ;  Plin.  Ep.  x.
Ill  ;  Gronovius,  de  Sesiert.  iv.  3.  p.  2/7.)
E'CDOSIS  {tK^oais).  [Fenus.]
ECHI'NOS  {ix^vos).  [Dike.]
ECLOGEIS  {iKXoyiLs).  [EiSPHORA.]
ECMARTY'RIA  (iKfiapTvpia\  signifies  the
deposition  of  a  witness,  who,  by  reason  of  absence
abroad,  or  illness,  was  unable  to  attend  in  court.
His  statement  was  taken  down  in  writing,  in  the
presence  of  persons  expressly  appointed  to  receive
it,  and  afterwards,  upon  their  swearing  to  its  iden-
tity, was  read  as  evidence  in  the  cause.  They
were  said  fiaprvpelu  ttj^  eKfiapTvpiav  :  the  absent
witness,  iKfiaprvpeTi/ ;  the  party  who  procured  the
evidence,  iKiiaprvpiav  TzoidcrQai.  It  was  considered
as  the  testimony  of  the  deponent  himself,  not  that
of  the  certifying  witnesses,  and  therefore  did  not
come  within  the  description  of  hearsay  evidence,
which  (except  the  declaration  of  a  deceased  per-
son) was  not  admissible  at  Athens.  The  law
was,  OLKO^v  flyai  fxaprvpuu  ndfeuTos,  eKfiaprvpiav
Se  vwepnpiov  koI  ddvvaTov.  The  deponent  (like
any  other  witness)  was  liable  to  an  action  for  false
testimony  if  the  contents  of  the  deposition  were
untrue,  unless  he  could  show  that  it  was  incor-
rectly taken  dovvn  or  forged,  in  which  case  the
certifying  witnesses  would  be  liable.  Therefore
(Isaeus  tells  us)  it  was  usual  to  select  persons  of
good  character  to  receive  such  evidence,  and  to
have  as  many  of  them  as  possible  (Isaeus,  De
Pyrr.  Hered.  23,  24,  ed.  Bekk.  ;  Dem.  c.  Steph.
pp.  1130,  1131.)  [Martyria.]  [C.  R.K.]
E'CPHORA  (4K(pop(i).  [Funus.]
ECPH  YLLOPHO'RIA  (^ic<^uAAo(^opia).  [Ex-

SILIUM.]

ECULEUS.  [Equuleus.]
E'DERE  ACTIO'NEM.  [Actio.]
EDICT  UM.  The  Jus  Edicendi,  or  power  of
making  edicts,  belonged  to  the  higher  magistratus
populi  Romani,  but  it  was  principally  exercised  by
the  two  praetors,  the  praetor  urbanus  and  the
praetor  peregrinus,  whose  jurisdiction  was  exercised
in  th(?  provinces  by  the  praeses.    The  curule  acdilcs


EDICTUM.

also  made  many  edicts,  and  their  jurisdiction  was
exercised  (under  the  empire  at  least)  in  the  pro-
vinciae  populi  Romani  by  the  quaestors.  (Gaius,
i.  6.)  There  was  no  edict  promulgated  in  the  pro-
vinciae  Caesaris.  The  tribunes,  censors,  and  ponti-
fices  also  promulgated  edicts  relating  to  the  matters
of  their  respective  jurisdictions.  The  edicta  are
enumerated  by  Gaius  among  the  sources  of  Roman
law,  and  this  part  of  the  Roman  law  is  sometimes
called  in  the  Pandect,  Jus  Honorarium  (Dig.  44.
tit.  7.  s.  52),  apparently  because  the  edictal  power
belonged  to  those  magistrates  only  who  had  the
honores,  and  not  so  much  ad  honorem  praetorum.
(Dig.  1.  tit.  1.  s.  7.)  As  the  edicts  of  the  praetors
were  the  most  important,  the  jus  honorarium  was
sometimes  called  jus  praetorium  ;  but,  properly,
the  jus  honorarium  was  the  term  under  which  was
comprehended  all  the  edictal  law.

Edictum  signifies,  generally,  any  public  notice
made  by  a  competent  authority  (Tacit.  J7m.  i.  7  ;
Liv.  xxxi.  6,  ii.  30).  But  it  specially  signifies,
under  the  republic,  a  rule  pronuilgatcd  by  a  magis-
tratus, which  was  done  by  writing  it  on  an  album,
and  placing  it  in  a  conspicuous  place,  "  Unde  de
piano  recte  legi  potest."  From  this  circumstance,
the  Edict  was  considered  to  be  a  part  of  the  jus
scriptum.  As  the  office  of  a  magistratus  was
annual,  the  rules  promulgated  by  a  predecessor
were  not  bmding  on  a  successor,  but  he  might
confirm  or  adopt  the  rules  of  his  predecessor,  and
introduce  them  into  his  own  Edict,  and  hence  such
adopted  rules  were  called  edictum  tralatitium  (Cic.
cid  Ait.  iii.  23,  v.  21  ;  ad  Fam.  iii.  8  ;  in  Vei-r.
i.  45),  or  vetus,  as  opposed  to  edictum  novinn.  A
repentinum  edictum  was  that  rule  which  was  made
(prout  res  incidit)  for  the  occasion.  {In  Verr.  iii.
14.)  A  perpetuum  edictum  was  that  rule  which
was  made  by  the  magistratus  on  entering  upon
office,  and  which  was  intended  to  apply  to  all  cases
to  which  it  was  applicable,  during  the  year  of  his
office :  hence  it  was  sometimes  called  also  annua
lex.  It  was  not  called  perpetuum  because  the
rules  were  fixed,  but  because  each  praetor  pub-
lished his  edict  upon  entering  on  his  office,  and
thus  there  was  a  perpetuum  (continuous)  edictum.
Until  it  became  the  practice  for  magistratus  to
adopt  the  edicta  of  their  predecessors,  the  edicta
could  not  form  a  body  of  permanent  binding  rules  ;
but  when  this  practice  became  common,  the  edicta
(edictum  tralatitium)  soon  constituted  a  large  body
of  law,  which  was  practically  of  as  much  import-
ance as  any  other  part  of  the  law.  The  several
edicta,  when  thus  established,  were  designated  by
the  names  of  their  promulgators,  as  the  Edictum
Carbonianum  ;  or  they  were  named  with  reference
to  the  formula,  and  the  actio  which  they  esta-
blished, as  Aquiliana,  Publiciana,  Rutiliana.

The  origin  of  the  edictal  power  cannot  be  his-
torically shown  ;  but  as  the  praetor  was  a  magistrate
established  for  the  administration  of  justice  on  ac-
count of  the  occupations  of  the  consuls,  and  the
consular  power  was  the  representative  of  the  kingly
power,  it  seems  that  the  jus  edicendi  may  have
been  a  remnant  of  the  kingly  prerogative.  How-
ever this  may  be,  the  edictal  power  was  early
exercised,  and  so  far  established,  that  the  jus  prae-
torium was  a  recognised  division  of  law  in  and
before  the  time  of  Cicero  {in  Verr.  i.  44),  in  whose
age  the  study  of  the  Edict  formed  a  part  of  the
regular  study  of  the  law.  {de  Leg.  i.  5,  ii.  23.)
The  edict  of  the  aediles  about  the  buying  and


EDICT  UM.

selling  of  slaves  is  mentioned  by  Cicero  {de  Of.  iii.
17)  ;  the  Edictiones  Aedilitiae  are  alluded  to  by
Plautus  {Capt.  iv.  2,  v.  43)  ;  and  an  edict  of  the
praetor  Peregrinus  is  mentioned  in  the  Lex  (Jalliae
Cisalpinae,  which  probably  belongs  to  the  begin-
ning of  the  eighth  century  of  the  city.  The  Lex
Cornelia,  B.  c.  Ql,  provided  against  abuses  of  the
edictal  power,  by  declaring  that  the  praetors  should
decide  in  particular  cases,  conformably  to  their
perpetual  edict.  The  edicts  made  in  the  provinces
are  often  mentioned  by  Cicero.  They  were  founded
on  the  edictum  nrbanum,  though  they  likewise
comprehended  rules  applicable  only  to  the  ad-
ministration of  justice  in  the  provinces,  and  so  far
they  were  properly  edictum  provinciale.  Thus
Cicero  {ad  Att.v'i.  1)  says,  that  he  promulgated  in
his  province  two  edicta  ;  one  provinciale,  which,
among  other  matters,  contained  every  thing  that
related  to  the  publicani,  and  another,  to  which  he
gives  no  name,  relating  to  matters  of  which  he
says,  "  ex  edicto  et  postulari  et  fieri  solent."  As
to  all  the  rest,  he  made  no  edict,  but  declared  that
he  would  frame  all  his  decrees  (decreta)  upon  the
edicta  urbana.  It  appears,  then,  that  in  the  time
of  Cicero  the  edicta  already  formed  a  large  body
of  law,  v/hich  is  confirmed  by  the  fact,  that,  in
his  time,  an  attempt  had  been  already  made  to
reduce  it  into  order,  and  to  comment  on  it,  Ser-
vius  Sulpicius,  the  great  jurist  and  orator,  the
friend  and  contemporary  of  Cicero,  addressed  to
Brutus  two  very  short  books  on  the  Edict,  which
was  followed  by  the  work  of  Ofilius  (Pomponius,
Dig.  1.  tit.  2.  s.  2)  ;  though  we  do  not  know
whether  the  work  of  Ofilius  was  an  attempt  to
collect  and  arrange  the  various  edicta,  like  the  sub-
sequent compilfition  of  Julian,  or  a  commentary
like  those  of  many  subsequent  jurists  (Ofilius
edictum  praetoris  primus  diligenter  composuit).

The    object   of    the    Edict,   according   to    the

Roman  jurists,  was   the   following    (Papinianus,

Dig.  1.  tit,  I.  s.  7):  —  "Adjuvandi  vel  supplendi

vel  corrigendi  juris  civilis  gratia  propter  utilitatem

publicam  :  "  the  Edict  is  also  described  as  "  viva

vox  juris  civilis."     It  was,  in  effect,  an  indirect

method  of  legislating,  and  it  was  the  means  by

which  numerous  rules  of  law  became  established.

I     It  was  found  to  be  a  more  effectual,  because  an

I     easier  and   more  practical  way  of  gradually  eii-

I     larging  and  altering  the  existing  law,  and  keeping

j     the  whole  system  in  harmony,  than   the  method  ot

j     direct  legislation  ;   and  it  is  undeniable  tliat  the

I    most  valuable  part  of  the  Roman  law  is   derived

I    from  the  edicts.     If  a  praetor  established  any  rule

j    which  was  found  to  be  inconvenient  or  injurious,

I    it  fell  into  disuse,  if  not  adopted   by  his  successor.

\    The  publicity  of  the  Edict  must  also  have  been  a

I    great  security  against  any  arbitrary  changes,  for  a

!    magistratus  would  hardly  venture  to  promulgate  a

rule  to  which  opinion  had  not  by  anticipation  al-

!    ready  given  its  sanction.     Many  of  the  rules  pro-

j    mulgated  by  the  Edict  were  merely  in  conformity

t     to  existing  custom,  more  particularly  in  cases  of

I      contracts,  and  thus  the  edict  would  have  the  effect

I  I   of  converting  custom  into  law.    This  is  what  Cicero

I   seems  to  mean  (de  Invent  ii.  22),  when  he  says

'  ,   that  the  Edict  depends  in  a  great  degree  on  custom.

j       As  to  the  matter  of  the  Edict,  \t  must  be  snp-

I  posed  that  the  defects  of  the  existing  law  must

j  generally  have  been  acknowledged  and  felt  before

i  any  magistratus  ventured  to  supply  them  ;  and  in

I  doing  this,  he  must  have  conformed  to  the  so-called


EDICTUM.  445

natural  equity  (,Tus  Naturale  or  Gentium),  Under
the  emperors,  also,  it  may  be  presumed,  that  the
opinions  of  legal  writers  would  act  on  public
opinion,  and  on  those  who  had  the  jus  edicendi.
Hence,  a  large  part  of  the  edictal  rules  were
founded  on  the  so-called  jus  gentium  ;  and  the  ne-
cessity of  some  modifications  of  the  strict  rules  of
the  civil  law,  and  of  additional  rules  of  law,  would
become  the  more  apparent  with  the  extension  of
the  Roman  power  and  their  intercourse  with  other
nations.  But  the  method  in  which  the  praetor
introduced  new  rules  of  law  was  altogether  con-
formable to  the  spirit  of  Roman  institutions.  The
process  was  slow  and  gradual  ;  it  was  not  effected
by  the  destruction  of  that  which  existed,  but  by
adapting  it  to  circumstances.  Accordingly,  when
a  right  existed,  or  was  recognised,  the  praetor
would  give  an  action,  if  there  was  none  ;  he  would
interfere  by  way  of  protecting  possession,  but  he
could  not  make  possession  into  ownership,  and,
accordingly,  that  was  effected  by  the  law  [Usu-
CAPio]  :  he  aided  plaintiffs  by  fictions,  as,  for  in-
stance, in  the  Publiciana  actio,  where  the  fiction
was,  that  the  possessor  had  obtained  the  ownership
by  usucapion,  and  so  was  quasi  ex  jure  Quiritium
dominus  (Gains,  iv.  36)  ;  and  he  also  aided  parties
by  exceptiones,  and  in  integrum  restitutio.  [Jus.]

The  old  forms  of  procedure  were  few  in  number,
and  they  were  often  inconvenient  and  failed  to  do
justice.  Accordingly,  the  praetor  extended  the
remedies  by  action,  as  already  intimated  in  the
case  of  the  Publiciana  actio.  This  change  pro-
bably commenced  after  many  of  the  legis  actiones
were  abolished  by  the  Aebutia  lex,  and  the  neces-
sity of  new  forms  of  actions  arose.  These  were  in-
troduced by  the  praetors,  and  it  is  hardly  a  matter
of  doubt  that  in  establishing  the  formulae  they
followed  the  analogy  of  the  legis  actiones.  It  is
the  conclusion  of  an  ingenious  writer  (Rhein.  Mus.
fur  Juris,  i.  p.  51,  Die  Oeconomie  des  JEdides,
von  Heffter),  "  that  the  edict  of  the  praetor  urbaiuis
was  in  the  main  part  relating  to  actions  arranged
after  the  model  of  the  old  legis  actiones,  and  that
the  system  is  apparent  in  the  Code  of  Justinian,
and  still  more  in  the  Digest,"

Under  the  emptrors,  there  were  many  commen-
tators on  the  Edict.  Thus  we  find  that  Labeo
wrote  four  books  on  the  Edict,  and  a  work  of  his
in  thirty  books.  Ad  Edictum  Praetoris  Peregrini,
is  cited  by  Ulpian.  (Dig,  4,  tit.  3  s.  9.)  Salvius
Julianus,  a  distinguished  jurist,  who  lived  in  the
time  of  Hadrian,  and  filled  the  office  of  praetor,
made  a  compilation  of  Edictal  law  by  order  of  the
emperor  ;  the  work  was  arranged  in  titles,  ac-
cording to  subjects  (Booking,  Instil,  i,  30.  n.  11).
It  was  called  Edictum  Perpetuum  ;  and  it  seems,
that  from  the  date  of  this  treatise,  the  name  Per-
petuum was  more  particularly  applied  to  this
edictum  than  to  that  which  was  originally  and  pro-
perly called  the  Edictum  Perpetuum,  Julian  ap-
pears to  have  collected  and  arranged  the  old  edicts,
and  he  probably  both  omitted  what  had  fallen  into
disuse,  and  abridged  many  parts,  thus  giving  to
the  whole  a  sj-stematic  character.  The  work  of
Julian  must  have  had  great  influence  on  the  study
of  the  law,  and  on  subsequent  juristical  writings.
It  does  not  seem  probable,  that  the  edicts  of  the
two  Roman  praetors,  together  with  the  Edictum
Provinciale,  and  the  edicts  of  the  cunde  aediles,
were  blended  into  one  in  this  compilation.  If  the
work  of  Julian  comprehended   all   these  edicts.


446


EDICTUM  THEODORICI.


they  must  have  been  kept  distinct,  as  the  subject-
matter  of  them  was  different.  We  know  that  the
edicts  of  the  curule  aediles  were  the  subject  of
distinct  treatises  by  Gaius,  Ulpian,  and  Pauhis,
and  the  Edictum  Provinciale  would,  from  its  nature,
be  of  necessity  kept  separate  from  all  the  rest.
But  some  writers  are  of  opinion,  that  the  Edictum
Perpetuum  of  Julianus  made  one  body  of  law  out
of  the  edicta  of  the  praetor  urbanus  and  peregrinus,
that  there  was  also  incorporated  into  it  much  of
the  Edictum  Provinciale,  and  a  large  part  of  the
Edictum  Aedilitium,  as  an  appendage  at  least.
The  Edict  thus  arranged  and  systematised  was,  it
is  further  supposed,  promulgated  in  the  provinces,
and  thus  became,  as  far  as  its  provisions  extended,
a  body  of  law  for  the  empire.  This  view  of  the
edictum  of  Julianus  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  of
Italy  being  divided  by  Hadrian  into  the  city  of
Rome  with  its  appurtenant  part,  and  four  districts.
The  magistratus  remained  as  before,  but  the  juris-
diction of  the  praetor  was  limited  to  Rome  and  its
territory  ;  and  magistrates,  called  consulares,  and
subsequently,  in  the  time  of  Aurelius,  juridici,  were
appointed  to  administer  justice  in  the  districts.
As  the  edictal  power  of  the  praetor  was  thus
limited,  the  necessity  for  a  comprehensive  Edict
(such  as  the  Edictum  Perpetuum  of  Julian)  is  the
more  apparent.

There  were  numerous  writings  on  the  Edict
besides  those  above  enumerated.  They  were
sometimes  simply  entitled  Ad  Edictum,  according
to  the  citations  in  the  Digest ;  and  there  were  also
other  juristical  writings,  not  so  entitled,  which  fol-
lowed the  order  of  the  Edict,  as,  for  instance,  the
epitome  of  Hermogenianus.  (Dig.  1.  tit.  5.  s.  2.)
Ultimately,  the  writings  on  the  Edict,  and  those
which  followed  the  arrangement  of  the  Edict,  ob-
tained more  authority  than  the  Edict  itself,  and
became  the  basis  of  instruction.

Some  few  fragments  of  the  older  edicts  are
found  in  the  Roman  writers,  but  it  is  chiefly  from
the  writings  of  the  jurists,  as  excerpted  in  the
Digest,  that  we  know  anything  of  the  Edict  in  its
later  form.  It  seems  pretty  clear  that  the  order  of
Justinian's  Digest,  and  more  particularly  that  of
his  .Code,  to  some  extent  followed  that  of  the
Edict.  The  writings  on  the  Edict,  as  well  as  the
Edict  itself,  were  divided  into  tituli  or  rubricae,
and  these  into  capita  ;  some  special  or  detached
rules  were  named  clausulae  ;  and  some  parts  were
simply  named  edictum,  as  Edictum  Carbonianum,
&c.

The  Edicta  or  Edictales  Leges  of  the  emperors
are  mentioned  under  Constitutio.

The  Digest,  as  already  observed,  contains  nu-
merous fragments  of  the  Edicts.  The  most  com-
plete collection  of  the  fragments  of  the  Edicts  is
by  Wieling,  in  his  "  Fragmenta  Edicti  Perpetui,"
Franek.  1733.  The  latest  essay  on  the  subject  is
by  C.  G.  L.  de  Weyhe,  "  Libri  Tres  Edicti  sive
de  Origine  Fatisque  Jurisprudentiae  Romanac  prae-
sertira  Edictorum  Praetoris  ac  de  Forma  Edicti
Perpetui,"  Cell.  1821.  The  twenty-first  book  of
the  Digest  (tit.  1)  is  on  the  Aedilitium  Edictum.
(Zimmem,  Gescldchte  des  Rom.  Frivatrechts  ;  Ma-
rezoll,  Leh  imch^  &c. ;  Rein,  Das  Romische  Privat-
recht^  &c.,  Leipzig,  1836  ;  Savigny,  Geschichte  des
R,  R.y  &c.  vol.  i.  c.  1  ;  Savigny,  System^  &c.,  vol.
i.  pp.  109,  &c.,  116,  &c.)  [G.L.1

EDICTUM  THEODORICL  This  is  the  first
collection  of  law  that  was  made  after  the  downfal


EISAGOGEIS.
of  the  Roman  power  in  Italy.  It  was  promulgated
by  Theodoric,  king  of  the  Ostrogoths,  at  Rome,  in
the  year  a.  d.  500.  It  consists  of  154  chapters,
in  which  we  recognise  parts  taken  from  the  Code
and  Novellae  of  Theodosius,  from  the  Codices  Gre-
gorianus  and  Hermogenianus,  and  the  Sententiae
of  Paulus.  The  Edict  was,  doubtless,  drawn  up  by
Roman  writers,  but  the  original  sources  are  more
disfigured  and  altered  than  in  any  other  compila-
tion. This  collection  of  law  was  intended  to  apply
both  to  the  Goths  (Barbari)  and  the  Romans,  so
far  as  its  provisions  went  ;  but  when  it  made  no
alteration  in  the  Gothic  law,  that  law  was  still  to
be  in  force  for  the  Barbari  ;  and  the  Roman
law  was  still  to  prevail  for  the  Romans  in  those
cases  to  Avhich  the  Edictum  was  not  applicable.
Athalarich,  the  grandson  of  Theodoric,  or  rather
Amalasuntha,  the  mother  of  Athalarich,  who  was
a  minor,  completed  this  Edictum  by  a  new  one  ;
but  after  Narses  had  again  united  Italy  to  the
dominion  of  Justinian,  the  legislation  of  Justinian
was  established  in  Italy  (a.  d.  554),  and  the
Edictum  of  Theodoric  had  no  longer  authority.
The  opinion  of  modern  writers  as  to  the  design  and
object  of  the  Edictum  of  Theodoric  is  by  no  means
uniform.  There  is  an  edition  of  this  Edictum
by  G.  F.  Rhon,  Halle,  1816,  4to.  (Savigny,
Geschichte  des  R.  R.  &c.  ;  Bocking,  I?istit.  i.
89.)  [G.  L.]

EEDNA  (hdua).     [Dos.]

EICOSTE  (dKoffrii),  a  tax  or  duty  of  one
twentieth  (five  per  cent.)  upon  all  commodities  ex-
ported or  imported  by  sea  in  the  states  of  the  allies
subject  to  Athens.  This  tax  was  first  imposed
B.  c.  415,  in  the  place  of  the  direct  tribute  which
had  up  to  this  time  been  paid  by  the  subject
allies  ;  and  the  change  was  made  with  the  hope
of  raising  a  greater  revenue.  (Thuc.  vii.  28.)
This  tax,  like  all  others,  was  farmed,  and  the
farmers  of  it  were  called  eicostologi  (elKoaroKSyoi).
It  continued  to  be  collected  in  b.  c.  405,  as  Aris-
tophanes mentions  an  eicostologus  in  that  year
{Ran.  348).  It  was  of  course  terminated  by  the
issue  of  the  Peloponnesian  war,  but  the  tribute
was  afterwards  revived  on  more  equitable  prin-
ciples imder  the  name  of  Syntaocis  {crvvra^is).
(Bockh,  Publ.  Econ.  of  Athens,  pp.  325,  401,  2nd
ed.)

We  also  read  of  an  eicoste  levied  by  the  sons
of  Peisistratus.  This  tax  was  a  twentieth  of  the
produce  of  the  lands  in  Attica,  and  was  only  half
of  what  had  been  levied  by  Peisistratus  himself.
(Thuc.  vi.  54.)

EI  REN  (dp-np)  or  IREN  Cipw),  the  name
given  to  the  Spartan  youth  when  he  attained  the
age  of  twenty.  At  the  age  of  eighteen  he  emerged
from  childhood,  and  was  called  Melleiren  (/wfA-
Xeipr)u,  Plut.  Lye.  17).  When  he  had  attained
his  twentieth  year,  he  began  to  exercise  a  direct
influence  over  his  juniors,  and  was  entrusted  with
the  command  of  troops  in  battle.  The  word  ap-
pears to  have  orignally  signified  a  commander.
Hesychius  explains  "Ipaves  by  &pxovTes,  Sicv-
Kovres:  and  elprfyd^ei  by  Kparu.  The  Ipfves
mentioned  in  Herodotus  (ix.  85)  were  certainly
not  youths,  but  commanders.  (Miiller,  Donans,
voLii.  p.  315.)

EISAGO'GEIS  (ela-aywycT^),  at  Athens,  were
not  themselves  distinct  magistrates  ;  but  the  name
was  given  to  the  ordinary  magistrates  when  ap-
plication was  made   to  them    for  the  purpose  of


EISANGELIA.

bringing  a  cause  (cia-dyetv)  into  a  proper  court.
[DiAETETAE  ;  DiKE.]  The  cause  itself  was
tried,  as  is  explained  under  Dike,  by  dicasts
chosen  by  lot ;  but  all  the  preliminary  proceed-
ings, such  as  receiving  the  accusation,  drawing  up
the  indictment,  introducing  the  cause  into  court,
&c.,  were  conducted  by  the  regular  magistrate,
who  attended  in  his  own  department  to  all  that
was  understood  in  Athenian  law  by  the  riyfixovia
Tov  ^iKaarripiov.  Thus  we  find  the  strategi,  the
logistae,  the  iiriaTdTai  twv  Srifioalwu  epycov,  the
eTTtyueATjTol  TOV  i/jLiroplov^  &c.,  possessing  this
riyifiovia  ;  but  it  was  not  the  chief  business  of  any
of  the  public  magistrates,  except  of  the  archons
and  perhaps  of  the  eleven.  The  chief  part  of  the
duties  of  the  former,  and  especially  of  the  thes-
mothetae,  consisted  m  receiving  accusations  and
bringing  causes  to  trial  {dady^iv)  in  the  proper
courts.     [Archon.]

EISANGE'LIA  (ej(ra77eAra),  signifies,  in  its
primary  and  most  general  sense,  a  denunciation  of
any  kind  (Schomann,  De  Comitiis,  p.  181),  but,
much  more  usually,  an  information  laid  before  the
council  or  the  assembly  of  the  people,  and  the
consequent  impeachment  and  trial  of  state  crimi-
nals at  Athens  under  novel  or  extraordinary  cir-
cumstances. Among  these  were  the  occasions
upon  which  manifest  crimes  were  alleged  to  have
been  committed,  and  yet  of  such  a  nature  as  the
existing  laws  had  failed  to  anticipate  or  at  least
describe  specifically  (^ypacpa  aSi/cTJ/xaTo),  the  result
of  which  omission  would  have  been,  but  for  the
enactment  by  which  the  accusations  in  question
might  be  preferred  {v6fj.os  elaayy^XriK6s),  that  a
prosecutor  would  not  have  known  to  what  magis-
trate to  apply  ;  that  a  magistrate,  if  applied  to,
could  not  with  safety  have  accepted  the  indictment
or  brought  it  into  court ;  and  that,  in  short,  there
would  have  been  a  total  failure  of  justice.  (Har-
pocrat.  s.  V.)  The  process  in  question  was  pecu-
liarly adapted  to  supply  these  deficiencies  ;  it
pointed  out,  as  the  authority  competent  to  deter-
mine the  criminality  of  the  alleged  act,  the  as-
sembly of  the  people,  to  which  applications  for
this  purpose  might  be  made  on  the  first  business-
day  of  each  prytany  (Kvpia  iKKK-qaia^  Harpocrat.),
or  the  council,  which  was  at  all  times  capable  of
undertaking  such  investigations  ;  and  occasionally
the  accusation  was  submitted  to  the  cog-nizance  of
both  these  bodies.  After  the  oifence  had  been
declared  penal,  the  forms  of  the  trial  and  amount
of  tlie  punishment  were  prescribed  by  the  same
authority  ;  and,  as  upon  the  conviction  of  the
offenders  a  precedent  would  be  established  for  the
future,  the  whole  of  the  proceedings,  although  ex-
traordinary, and  not  originating  in  any  specific
law,  may  be  considered  as  virtually  establishing  a
penal  statute,  retrospective  in  its  first  application.
(Lycurg.  c.  Leocrat.  p.  149,  ed  Steph.)

The  speech  of  Euryptolemus  (Xen.  Hell.  i.  7.
sub  fin.)  clearly  shows  that  the  crime  charged
against  the  ten  generals  who  fought  at  Arginusae
was  one  of  these  unspecified  offences.  The  decree
of  the  senate  against  Antiphon  and  his  colleagues
(Plut.  Vit.  Dec.  Orator,  p.  833,  e),  directing
that  they  should  be  tried,  and,  if  found  guilty,
punished  as  traitors,  seems  to  warrant  the  infer-
ence, that  their  delinquency  (viz.  having  under-
taken an  embassy  to  Sparta  by  order  of  the  Four
Hundred,  a  government  declared  illegal  upon  the
reinstatement  of  the  democracy),  did  not  amount


EISANGELIA.


447


to  treason  in  the  usual  sense  of  the  term,  but  re-
quired a  special  declaration  by  the  senate  to  render
it  cognizable  as  such  by  the  Heliaea.  Another
instance  of  treason  by  implication,  prosecuted  as
an  extraordinary  and  unspecified  crime,  appears  in
the  case  of  Leocrates,  who  is,  in  the  speech  already
cited,  accused  of  having  absented  himself  from  his
country,  and  dropped  the  character  of  an  Athe-
nian citizen  at  a  time  when  the  state  was  in  immi-
nent danger.  Offences,  however,  of  this  nature
were  by  no  means  the  only  ones,  nor  indeed  the
most  numerous  class  of  those  to  which  extraordi-
nary denunciations  were  applicable.  They  might
be  adopted  when  the  charge  embraced  a  combina-
tion of  crimes,  as  that  of  treason  and  impiety  in
the  famous  case  of  Alcibiades,  for  each  of  which  a
common  indictment  (ypacp-l])  was  admissible,  when
the  accused  were  persons  of  great  influence  in  the
state,  when  the  imputed  crime,  though  punishable
by  the  ordinary  laws,  was  peculiarly  heinous,  or
when  a  more  speedy  trial  than  was  permitted  by
the  usual  course  of  business  was  requisite  to  ac-
complish the  ends  of  justice.  (Schomann,  De  Coin.
p.  1 90  ;  Harpocrat.)  Circumstances  such  as  these
would,  of  course,  be  very  often  pretended  by  an  in-
former to  excite  the  greater  odium  against  the
accused,  and  the  adoption  of  the  process  in  ques-
tion must  have  been  much  more  frequent  than
was  absolutely  necessary.

The  first  step  taken  by  the  informer  was  to  re-
duce his  denunciation  to  writing,  and  submit  it
immediately  to  the  cognizance  of  the  council,
which  had  a  discretionary  power  to  accept  or  re-
ject it.  (Lys.  c.  Nico7n.  p.  185.)  Schomann  main-
tains that  a  reference  to  this  body  was  also  neces-
sary when  it  was  intended  to  bring  the  matter
before  the  assembly  of  the  people,  but  that  its
agency  was  in  such  cases  limited  to  permitting
the  impeachment  to  be  announced  for  discussion,
and  directing  the  proedri  to  obtain  a  hearing  for
the  informer.  The  thesmothetae  are  also  men-
tioned by  Pollux  (viii.  87)  as  taking  part  in  bring-
ing the  matter  before  the  assembly,  but  upon  what
occasion  they  were  so  employed  we  can  only  con-
jecture.

In  causes  intended  for  the  cognizance  of  the
council  only,  after  the  reception  of  the  denuncia-
tion, three  courses  with  respect  to  it  might  be
adopted  by  that  body.  If  the  alleged  offence  were
punishable  by  a  fine  of  no  greater  amount  than
five  hundred  drachmae,  the  council  itself  formed  a
court  competent  for  its  trial  ;  if  it  was  of  a  graver
character  they  might  pass  a  decree,  such  as  that  in
the  case  of  Antiphon  already  mentioned,  directing
the  proper  officers  to  introduce  the  cause  to  a  He-
liastic  court,  and  prescribing  the  time  and  forms
of  the  trial,  and  the  penalty  to  be  inflicted  upon
the  conviction  of  the  criminals  ;  lastly,  if  the  mat-
ter were  highly  important,  and  from  doubts  or
other  reasons  they  required  the  sanction  of  the
assembly,  they  might  submit  the  cause  as  it  stood
to  the  consideration  of  that  body.  In  the  first
case,  the  trial  was  conducted  before  the  council
with  all  the  forms  of  an  ordinary  court,  and  if,
upon  the  assessment  of  penalties,  the  offence  seem-
ed to  deserve  a  heavier  punishment  than  fell  with-
in its  competency,  the  trial  was  transferred  to  a
Heliastic  court,  by  the  delivery  of  the  sentence  of
the  council  {Kardyvwa-is)  to  the  thesmothetae  by
the  scribe  of  the  prytanes,  and  upon  these  officers
it  then  devolved  to  bruig  the  criminals  to  jiuitice.


448


EISANGELIA.


(Dem.  c.  Timocr.  p.  720.)  The  accused  were  in
the  meanwhile  put  into  prison  for  safe  custody  by
the  authority  of  the  council.  When  the  offence
was  obviously  beyond  the  reach  of  the  senate's
competency,  the  trial  was  dispensed  with,  and  a
decree  immediately  drawn  up  for  submitting  the
cause  to  a  superior  court.

When  a  cause  of  this  kind  was  so  referred,  the
decree  of  the  senate,  or  vote  of  the  people,  asso-
ciated other  public  advocates,  generally  ten  in  num-
ber, with  the  informer,  who  receiTed  a  drachma
each  from  the  public  treasury  {(Twiiyopoi).  And
besides  these,  permission  was  given  to  any  other
citizen  to  volunteer  his  services  on  the  side  of  the
prosecution.  If  the  information  were  laid  before
the  assembly,  either  by  the  accuser  himself,  or  the
senate,  the  first  proceedings  in  the  cause  had  for
their  object  to  establish  the  penalty  of  the  offence,
or  the  apparent  culpability  of  the  accused  ;  and  this
being  decided  by  a  vote  of  the  people  after  a  public
discussion,  the  mode  of  conducting  the  trial  and
the  penalty  v/ere  next  fixed.  In  the  case  of  the
ten  generals,  the  assembly  directed  that  the  senate
should  propose  the  requisite  arrangements.  The
plan  of  the  senate,  however,  was  not  necessarily
adopted,  but  might  be  combated  by  rival  proposals
of  any  private  citizen.  The  assembly  very  often
referred  the  matter  to  the  Heliastic  courts,  but
occasionally  undertook  the  trial  itself ;  and  when
the  prisoner  was  accused  of  treason,  we  are  told
(Xen.  I.  c.)  that  he  made  his  defence  to  the  assem-
bly in  chains,  and  with  a  keeper  upon  cither  side  ;
and,  according  to  another  authority  (Schol.  ad
Aristoph.  Eccles.  1081),  that  the  time  for  such  de-
fence was  limited.  After  this  the  tribes  voted  by
ballot,  two  urns  being  assigned  to  each  tribe  for
this  purpose.  The  informer,  in  the  event  of  the
prisoner  being  acquitted,  was  subjected  to  no
penally  if  he  obtained  the  votes  of  as  many  as  a
fifth  of  the  judges  ;  otherwise,  he  was  liable  to  a
fine  of  a  thousand  drachmae.  For  a  more  ample
discussion  of  the  trials  in  question  the  reader  is  re-
ferred to  Schomann  {De  Cumitiis^  c.  iii.).

Besides  the  class  of  causes  hitherto  described,
there  were  also  two  others  which  equally  bore  the
name  of  eisangelia,  though  by  no  means  of  the
s.'vme  importance,  nor  indeed  much  resembling  it
in  the  conduct  of  the  proceedings.  The  first  of
these  consists  of  cases  of  alleged  Ka/cw(r/s,  i.  e.
wrong  done  to  aged  or  helpless  parents,  Avomen,
or  orphans.  Upon  such  occasions  the  informer
laid  his  indictment  before  the  archon,  if  the
aggrieved  persons  were  of  a  free  Attic  family  ;  or
before  the  polemarch,  if  they  were  resident  aliens.
The  peculiarities  of  this  kind  of  cause  were,  that
any  Athenian  citizen  might  undertake  the  accusa-
tion ;  that  the  informer  was  not  limited  as  to  time
in  his  address  to  the  court,  and  incurred  no  penalty
whatever  upon  failing  to  obtain  a  verdict.  With
respect  to  the  accused  it  is  obvious  that  the  cause
must  have  been  Ti/i7jT«is,  or,  in  other  words,  that
the  court  would  have  the  power  of  fixing  the
amount  of  the  penalty  upon  conviction.  The  third
kind  of  eisangelia  was  available  against  one  of
the  public  arbitrators  (Statr^TTjs),  when  any  one
complained  of  his  having  given  an  unjust  verdict
against  him.  The  information  was  in  this  case
laid  before  the  senate  ;  and  that  the  magistrate
who  had  so  offended,  or  did  not  appear  to  defend
himself  might  be  pimished  by  disfranchisement,
we  know  from  the  instance  mentioned  by  Demos-


EISPIIORA.
thenes  (c.  Meid.  p.  542,  14).  This  passage,  how-
ever, and  an  allusion  to  it  in  Harpocration,  con-
stitutes the  whole  of  our  information  upon  the
subject.  (Hudtwalcker,  uber  die  Di'dtet.  p.  19  ;
Meier,  Att.  Process,  p.  270.)  [J.  S.  M,]

EISITE'RIA  (elaiTrtpid),  scil.  tfpa,  sacrifices
which  were  offered  at  Athens  by  the  senate  be-
fore the  session  began,  in  honour  of  the  ©eol  Bov-
Aotoj,  ^.  e.  Zeus  and  Athena.  (Antiph.  De  Chor.
p.  789  :  Bockh,  Corp.  Itiscript.  i.  p.  671.)  The
sacrifice  was  accompanied  by  libations,  and  a
common  meal  for  all  the  senators.  (Demosth,  De
Fals.  Leg.  p.  400.  24  ;  compared  with  c.  Mid.
p.  552.  2,  where  elcrir-^pia  are  said  to  be  offered
for  the  senate,  virhp  rrjs  )8ovAtjs).

Suidas  (s.v.)  calls  the  dair^pia  a  festive  day —
the  first  of  every  year — on  which  all  the  Athenian
magistrates  entered  upon  their  office,  and  on  which
the  senate  offered  up  sacrifices  for  the  purpose  of
obtaining  the  goodwill  of  the  gods  for  the  new
magistrates.  But  this  statement,  as  well  as  the
further  remarks  he  adds,  seem  to  have  arisen  from
a  gross  misunderstanding  of  the  passage  of  Demos-
thenes (De  Fals.  Leg.  p.  400),  to  which  he  refers.
Schomann  {De  Comit.  p.  291,  transl.)  adopts  the
account  of  Suidas,  and  rejects  the  other  statement
without  giving  any  reason.  [L.  S.]

EI'SPHORA  (et(r</)opa),  literally  a  contribution
or  tribute,  was  an  extraordinary  tax  on  propert}-,
raised  at  Athens,  whenever  the  means  of  the  state
were  not  sufficient  to  carry  on  a  war.  The  money
thus  raised  was  sometnnes  called  ra.  KaraSK-fjixaTo..
(Demosth.  c.  Timocr.  t^.  731.)  We  must  carefully
distinguish  between  this  tax  and  the  various
liturgies  which  consisted  in  personal  or  direct  ser-
vices which  citizens  had  to  perform,  whereas  the
elfXipopti  consisted  in  paying  a  certain  contribution
towards  dei'raying  the  expenses  of  a  war.  Some
ancient  writers  do  not  always  clearly  distinguish
between  the  two,  and  Ulpian  on  Demosthenes
{Olj/nth.  ii.  p.  33,  e.)  entirely  confounds  them  ;  and
it  is  partly  owing  to  these  inaccuracies  that  this
subject  is  involved  in  great  difficulties.  At  the
time  when  armies  consisted  only  of  Athenian  citi-
zens, who  equipped  themselves  and  served  without
pay,  the  military  service  was  indeed  nothing  but  a
species  of  extraordinary  liturgy  ;  but  when  mer-
cenaries were  hired  to  perform  the  duties  of  the
citizens,  when  wars  became  more  expensive  and
frequent,  the  state  was  obliged  to  levy  contribu-
tions on  the  citizens  in  order  to  be  able  to  carry
them  on,  and  the  citizens  then  paid  money  for
services  which  previously  they  had  performed  in
person.

It  is  not  quite  certain  when  this  property-tax
was  introduced  ;  for,  although  it  is  commonly  in-
ferred, from  a  passage  in  Thucydides  (iii.  19),  that
it  was  first  instituted  in  428  b.  c.  in  order  to  de-
fray the  expenses  of  the  siege  of  Mytilene,  yet  we
find  eicTcpopd  mentioned  at  an  earlier  period.  (See
Antiph.  Tetral.  i.  b.  c.  12  ;  Isacns,  DeDicueog.  c.  37  ;
and  Tittmann,  Griech.  Staatsv.  p.  41,  note  31)  ;
and  even  the  passage  of  Thucydides  admits  of  an
interpretation  quite  in  accordance  with  this,  for  it
is  certainly  not  impossible  that  he  merelj--  meant  to
saj',  that  so  large  an  amount  as  200  talents  had
never  before  been  raised  .is  elacpopd.  But,  how-
ever this  may  be,  after  the  year  428  B.  c.  this  pro-
perty-tax seems  to  have  frequently  been  raised,  for,
a  few  years  afterwards,  Aristophanes  (Eqiiit  .922 )
speaks  of  it  as  something  of  connnon  occurrence;


EISPHORA.

Such  a  contributiou  could  never  be  raised  withont
a  decree  of  the  people,  who  also  fixed  upon  the
amount  required  (Demosth.  c.  Polycl.  p.  1208  ;
Aristoph.  Eccles.  818)  ;  the  generals  superintended
its  coUecticffi,  and  presided  in  the  courts  where
disputes  connected  with,  or  arising  from,  the  levy-
ing of  the  tax  Avere  settled.  (Wolf,  Proleg.  in
Leptin.  p.  94  ;  Demosth.  c.  Boeot  p.  1002.)  Such
disputes  seem  to  have  occurred  rather  frequently  ;
personal  enmity  not  seldom  induced  the  officers  to
tax  persons  higher  than  was  lawful,  according  to
the  amount  of  their  property.  (Aristoph.  I.  c. ;
Demosth.  c.  Aphob.  p.  815.)  The  usual  expres-
sions for  paying  this  property-tax  are :  €l(T^4peiv
XP'huara,  ei(r(p4petv  els  rhv  irSKefiov,  els  r^u  (Tw-
rripiay  ttjs  irS^eus  elacpopas  elacpepeiv,  and  those
who  paid  it  were  called  ot  elacpepovTes.  On  the
occasion  mentioned  by  Thucydides,  the  amount
which  was  raised  was,  as  we  have  seen,  200
talents,  which,  if  we  suppose  the  taxable  property
to  have  been  20,000  talents,  was  a  tax  of  one  per
cent.  (Bockh,  PuM.  Econ.  p.  520,  2d  edit.)  On
other  occasions,  the  rates  were  higher  or  lower,  ac-
cording to  the  wants  of  the  republic  at  the  time  ;
we  have  accounts  of  rates  of  a  twelfth,  a  fiftieth,  a
hundredth,  and  a  five  hundredth  part  of  the  tax-
able property.

The  census  of  Solon  was  during  the  first  period
the  standard  according  to  which  the  elacpopd  was
raised,  until   in   377  b.  c,  in   the  archonship  of
Nausinicus,  a  new  census  was  instituted,  in  which
the  people,  for  the  purpose  of  fixing  the  rates  of
the  property-tax,  were  divided  into  a  number  of
symmoriae  (^(Tvfijxopiai)  or  classes,  similar  to  those
which  were   afterwards  made  for  the  trierarchy.
(Philoch.  apud  Harpocrat.  s.v.  ^vnfiopia  ;  Demosth,
c.  Androt.  p.  606  ;  Ulpian,  ad  Demosth.  Olynth.  ii.
p.  33,  €.)      The  nature  of  this  new  census,  not-
withstanding the  minute  investigation  of  Bockh
{Publ.  Econ.  book  iv),  is  still  involved  in  great  ob-
scurity.     Each  of  the  ten  phylae,  according   to
Ulpian,  appointed  120  of  its  wealthier  citizens,
who  were  divided  into  two  parts,  according  to  their
property,  called  symmoriae,  each  consisting  of  sixty
persons  ;  and  the  members  of  the  wealthier  of  the
two  symmoriae  were  obliged,  in  cases  of  urgent
necessity,  to  advance  to  the  less  wealthy  the  sum
required  for  the  €lcT<pop<i  (irpoei(r(popd^  Demosth.  c.
Mid.  p.  564,  &c.).     When  the  wants  of  the  state
had  been  thus  supplied,  those  who  had  advanced
the  money  could  at  their  ease,  and  in  the  usual
way,  exact  their  money  back  from  those  to  whom
they  had  advanced  it.     The  whole  number  of  per-
sons included  in  the   symmoriae  was  1200,  who
were  considered  as  the  representatives  of  the  whole
I   republic  ;  it  would,  however,  as  Bockh  justly  ob-
serves,  be  absurd   to  suppose   with  Ulpian  that
these  1200  alone  paid  the  property-tax,  and  that
,    all  the  rest  were   exempt  from  it.      The   whole
I  census  of  6000  (Demosth.  De  Symmor.)^  or  more
I  accurately  of  5750  talents  (Polyb.  ii.  62.  §  7),  was
j   surely  not  the  property  of  1200  citizens,  but  the
1   taxable   property  of  the  whole  republic.     Many
'  others,  therefore,  though  their  property  was  smaller
than  that  of  the  1200,  must  have  contributed  to
\  the  el(r<popd,  and  their  property  must  be  considered
1  as  included  in  the  census  of  5750  talents  of  tax-
1  able  property.

!  The  body  of  1200  was,  according  to  Ulpian,
I  lalso  divided  into  four  classes,  each  consisting  of
i  300.      The  first  class,  or  the  richest,  were  the


•  EISPHORA.  ii9

leaders  of  the  symmoriae  (rjye/xSues  <rvix(xopi6oy)^
and  are  often  called  the  three  himdred  Kar  ii,oxhv.
They  probably  conducted  the  proceedings  of  the
symmoriae,  and  they,  or,  which  is  more  likely,  the
demarchs,  had  to  value  the  taxable  property.  Other
officers  were  appointed  to  make  out  the  lists  of  the
rates,  and  were  called  iiriypacpeTs,  diaypa(pe7s^  or
4K\oy€7s.  When  the  wants  of  the  state  were
pressing,  the  30t)  leaders,  perhaps  in  connection
with  the  300  included  in  the  second  class  —  for
Ulpian,  in  the  first  portion  of  his  remark,  states
that  the  richer  symmoria  of  every  phyle  had  to
perform  this  duty  —  advanced  the  money  to  the
others  on  the  above-mentioned  terms  (Demosth.  c.
Phaenipp.  p*.  146),  which,  however,  was  never
done  unless  it  was  decreed  by  the  people.  (Demosth.
c.  Polycl.  p.  1 205.)  The  rates  of  taxation  for  the
four  classes  have  been  made  out  with  great  proba-
bility by  Bockh  (Publ.  Ecm.  p.  519,  2d  edit.),
from  whose  work  the  following  table  is  taken  :  — ■

First  Class,  from  twelve  talents  upivards.
Property.    Taxable.  Taxable  Capital.         ofSTh  par?
500  tal,  -  -  -      -

100    „

50    „

15    „

12    „


00  tal.     .     .     .

5  tal.

20    „      .     .     .

1    „

10   „      .     .     .

30  min.

3    „       ...

9    „

2  tal.  24  min.

720  drach.

Second  Class,  from  six  talents  and  upicards,  hut
under  twelve.
Taxable.         Taxable  Capital.  JS^J^pSj
1  tal.     50  min.     550  drach.
,       1


Property.

11  tal.

10  „
8  „
7  „
6   „


50  min.

40    „

20    „

10    „


500
400
350
300


Tidrd  Class,  from  two


upwards,  but  under


Property.
5  tal.
4  „
3  „
2i  „
2      „


Taxable.


sue.
Taxable  Capital.

37^  min.  .

30       „  .

221     „  .

18^     „  .

15       „  .


Property-tax
of  1.20th  part.

187^  drach.

150        „

112i  „
93^  „
75       „


Fourth  Class,  from  twenty-five  irdnae  upwards,  but
under  two  talents.


Property
11  tal.

1     „
45  rain.
30     „
25     „


Taxable.


Taxable  Capital.
900  drach.     .
600      „
450      „        .
300      „
2.50      ,^


Property-tax
of  l-20th  part.

45   drach.

30      „

22i    „

15      „

12i    „

the   phyle


.     tV
1

•  To

•  ^

Every  one  had  to  pay  bis  tax  in
where  his  landed  property  lay,  as  appears  from
the  oration  of  Demosthenes  against  Polycles  ;  and
if  any  one  refused  to  pay,  the  state  had  a  right  to
confiscate  his  estate,  but  not  to  punish  the  indi-
vidual with  atimia.  (Demosth.  c.  Androt.  p.  609,
e.  Timocrat.  p.  752.)  But  if  any  one  thought  that
his  property  was  taxed  higher  than  that  of  another
man  on  whom  juster  claims  could  be  made,  he  had
the  right  to  call  upon  this  person  to  take  the  office
in  his  stead,  or  to  submit  to  a  complete  exchange
of  property.  [Antidosis.]  No  Athenian,  on
the  other  hand,  if  belonging  to  the  tax-paying
classes,  could  be  exempt  from  the  etV<^opa,  not  even
the   descendants  of  Harmodiua   and  Aristogiton.

G   G


450


ELECTRUM.


(Demosth.  c.  T^ptin.  p.  462,  &c.)  Orphans,  tliougli
exempt  from  liturgies,  were  obliged  to  pay  the  pro-
perty-tax, as  we  see  in  the  instance  of  Demosthe-
nes, who  was  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  symmoriae
for  ten  years  (c.  Mid.  p.  565  ;  compare  Isaeus,
ap.  Dionys.  Isaeus,  p.  108  ;  or  Orat.Grmc.  vol.vii.
p.  331,  ed.  Reiske).  Even  trierarchs  were  not
exempt  from  paying  the  elrrcpopd  themselves,
although  they  could  not  be  compelled  to  pay  the
irpoeiorfpopd.  (Demosth.  c.  Polycl.  p.  1209,  c.Phae-
nipp.  p.  1046.)  It  seems  that  aliens  were  likewise
subject  to  it,  for  the  only  instance  we  have  of  any
exception  being  made  is  one  of  aliens.  (Mann.
Oxon.  ii.  xxiv.  ;  Bockh,  FuhL  Econ.  p.  538.)

For  further  information  concerning  the  subject
of  the  dacpopd,  see  the  fourth  book  of  Bockh's
Public  Economy  of  Athens;  Wolf,  Prolegomena
in  Leptin. ;  Wachsmuth,  Hellen.  Alterth.  vol,  ii.
p.  98,  2d  edit.  ;  Hermann,  Pol.  Ant.  of  Greece,
§162.  [L.S.]

ELAEOTHE'SIUM.  [Balneae,  p.  190.]
ELAPHEBO'LIA  (iAa(pv§6\ia),  the  greatest
festival  in  the  town  of  Hyampolis,  in  Phocis,  which
was  celebrated  in  honour  of  Artemis,  in  commemo-
ration, it  is  said,  of  a  victory  Avhich  its  inhabitants
had  gained  over  the  Thessalians,  who  had  ravaged
the  country  and  reduced  the  Phocians  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  town  nearly  to  the  last  ex-
tremity. (Plut.  De  Mid.  Virt.  p.  267  ;  Paus.  x.
35.  §  4.)  The  only  particular  which  we  know  of
its  celebration  is,  that  a  peculiar  kind  of  cake
(ekacpos)  was  made  on  the  occasion,  (Athen.  xv.
p.  646.)  These  cakes  were,  as  their  name  indi-
cates, probably  made  in  the  shape  of  a  stag  or
deer,  and  offered  to  the  goddess.  The  festival  of
the  elaphebolia  was  also  celebrated  in  many  other
parts  of  Greece,  but  no  particulars  are  known.
(Etymol.  Magn.  s.  v.  'EKac})ri€oKLdJy.)  [L.  S.]
ELAPHEBO'LION.  [Calendarium.]
ELECTRUM  (^Ae/crpos  and  ¥i\^Krpov),  is
used  by  the  ancient  writers  in  two  different  senses,
either  for  amber  or  for  a  mixture  of  metals  com-
posed of  gold  and  silver.  In  the  former  sense,  it
does  not  come  within  the  scope  of  this  work,  ex-
cept as  a  substance  used  in  the  arts,  and  also  on
account  of  the  difficulty  of  deciding,  with  respect
to  several  of  the  passages  in  which  the  word
occurs,  in  which  of  the  two  senses  it  is  used.  If
we  could  determine  which  was  first  known  to  the
Greeks,  the  mineral  or  the  metal,  the  subject
would  be  simplified  ;  but  the  only  means  we  have
of  determining  this  question  is  the  slight  internal
evidence  of  a  few  passages  in  Homer.  If,  as  we
shall  endeavour  to  show,  those  passages  rei'er  to
amber,  a  simple  explanation  of  the  two!bld  use  of
the  word  suggests  itself  ;  namely,  that  the  word
originally  meant  amber.,  and  that  it  v/as  afterwards
applied  to  the  mixed  metal,  because  its  pale  yellow
colour  resembled  that  of  amber.  Etymologically,
the  word  is  probably  connected  with  ijXeKTCDp,  the
sun,  the  root-meaning  being  brilliant.  (Pott,  Etym.
Forsch.  pt,  i.  p.  237  :  this  derivation  was  known  to
Pliny, //^.  iV.  xxxvii.  2.  s,  11:  Buttmann's  deriv-
ation from  eA./cw,  to  draw.,  is  objectionable  both  on
philological  and  historical  grounds :  the  attractive
power  of  amber,  when  rubbed,  is  said,  and  no
doubt  correctly,  to  have  been  discovered  long  after
the  mineral  was  first  known,)

The  word  occurs  three  times  in  Homer  ;  in  two
cases  where  mention  is  made  of  a  necklace  of  gold,
bound,  or  held  together,  ■^Ae/cTpotaii',  where  the


ELECTRUM.

plural  is  almost  alone  sufficient  to  prove  tliat  the
meaning  is,  with  amber  beads.  (Od.  xv  460,  xviii.
295,)  In  the  fonner  passage  the  necklace  is
brought  by  a  Phoenician  merchant.  The  other
passage  is  in  the  description  of  the  palace  of  Me-
nelaus,  which  is  said  to  be  ornamented  with  the
brilliancy  of  copper  (or  bronze)  and  gold,  and
elcctrum,  and  silver,  and  ivory.  (Od.  iv.  73.)
Now,  since  the  metallic  electrum  was  a  mixture  of
gold  with  a  small  poition  of  silver,  the  enumera-
tion of  it,  as  distinct  from  gold  and  silver  would
seem  almost  superfluous  ;  also,  the  supposition  that
it  means  amber  agrees  very  well  with  the  subse-
quent mention  of  ivory :  moreover,  the  order  of
the  words  supports  this  view  ;  for,  applying  to
them  the  principle  of  parallelism,  —  which  is  so
common  in  early  poets,  and  among  the  rest  in
Homer,  —  and  remembering  that  the  Homeric  line
is  really  a  distich  divided  at  the  caesura,  we  have
gold  and  amber  very  aptly  contrasted  with  silver
and  ivory :

Xpvffov  T*  7]\eKTpov  re
KOL  apyvpov  i]S'  i\4cpavTos.

In  this  last  passage,  Pliny  understood  the  wood
to  mean  the  metallic  electrum  (//.  N.  xxxiii.  4.
s,  23)  ;  but  his  authority  on  the  meaning  of  a  pas-
sage of  Homer  is  worthless  :  and  indeed  the  Latin
writers  seem  generally  to  have  understood  the
word  in  the  sense  of  the  metal,  rather  than  of
amber,  for  which  they  have  another  word,  stic-
cinum.  In  Hesiod's  description  of  the  shield  of
Hercules  (v.  141),  the  word  again  occurs,  and
we  have  gypsum.,  and  white  ivory,  and  electrum^
connected  with  shining  gold  and  cyanus,  where
amber  is  the  more  natural  interpretation  ;  although
here  again,  the  Roman  imitator,  Virgil,  evidently
understood  by  it  the  metal.  (Aen.  viii.  402.)  For
the  discussion  of  other  passages,  in  which  the
meaning  is  more  doubtful,  see  the  Lexicons  of
Liddell  and  Scott,  and  Seller  and  Jacobitz,  and
especially  Buttmann's  Mythologus,  Supp.  I.  Uey.r
das  Electron,  vol.  ii.  pp.  337,  foil.

The  earliest  passage  of  any  Greek  writer,  in
which  the  word  is  certainly  used  for  the  metal,  is
in  the  Antigone  of  Sophocles  (1038),  where  men-
tion is  made  of  Indian  gold  and  the  electrum,  of
Sardis,  as  objects  of  the  highest  value.  There  can
be  little  doubt  that  what  is  here  meant  is  the  pale
gold  deposited  by  certain  rivers  of  Asia  Minor,
especially  the  Pactolus,  which  contained  a  consi-
derable alloy  of  silver.  We  have  here  an  example
of  native  electrum;  but  the  compound  was  also
made  artificially.  Plhiy  states  that  when  gold
contains  a  fifth  part  of  silver,  it  is  called  electrum  ;
that  it  is  found  in  veins  of  gold  ;  and  that  it  is
also  made  by  art :  if,  he  adds,  it  contains  more
than  a  fifth  of  silver,  it  becomes  too  brittle  to  be
malleable.  Among  its  properties  are,  according  to
the  same  author,  the  reflecting  the  light  of  a  lamp
more  brightly  than  silver,  and  that  a  cup  of  native
electrum  detects  the  presence  of  poison  by  certain
signs.  One  cannot  but  suspect  that  the  last  state-
ment is  copied  from  some  Greek  writer,  who  made
it  respecting  amber,  on  account  of  the  similar  pro-
perty that  used  to  be  attributed  to  opal.  (Plin.
H.  N.  xxxiii.  4.  s.  23,  with  Harduin's  note  ;  comp.
ix.  50.  s.  Qo  ;  Paus.  v.  12,  §  6.)  Isidorus  also  dis-
tinguishes the  three  kinds  of  electrum,  namely,
(1)  amber  ;  (2)  the  metal,  found  in  its  natural
state  ;  (3)  the  metal  artificially  composed  of  three


ELEPHAS.

parts  of  gold  and  one  of  silver,  proportions  differ-
ing from  those  mentioned  by  Pliny.  (Isid.  xvi.
23.)

Electrum  was  used  for  plate,  and  the  other
similar  piu-poses  for  which  gold  and  silver  were
employed.  It  was  also  used  as  a  material  for
money.  Lampridius  tells  us^  that  Alexander
Severus  struck  coins  of  it  ;  and  coins  are  in
existence,  of  this  metal,  struck  by  the  kings  of
Bosporus,  by  Syracuse,  and  by  other  Greek
states.  (Eckhel,  Doct.  Num.  Vet.  vol.  i.  pp.  xxiv.
XXV.)  ^  [P.S.]

E'liEPHAS  (ix4(pa5).  As  we  have  to  speak
.of  ivory  chiefly  in  connection  with  Greek  art,  we
place  what  we  have  to  say  of  it  under  its  Greek
name,  in  preference  to  the  proper  Latin  word
£ljur.  {Elephantus  is  also  used  in  poetry  for
ivory  ;  Virg.  Georg.  iii,  26,  Aen.  iii,  464,  vi,  896.)
In  the  early  writers,  such  as  Homer,  Hesiod,  and
Pindar,  the  word  invariably  means  ivory^  never  the
elephard ;  just  because  the  Greeks  obtained  ivory
by  commerce  long  before  they  ever  saw,  or  had
occasion  to  speak  of,  the  animal  from  which  it  was
obtained.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  there  can  be
no  doubt  that  the  word  etymologically  signifies  the
animal,  being  identical  with  the  Hebrew  and
Arabic,  u4fc/)/i  and  Elef,  which  means  an  ox  or
other  large  graminivorous  animal  ;  that  is  to  say,
the  Greeks  received  the  substance  ivory,  together
with  the  name  of  the  animal  which  produces  it,  and
naturally  applied  the  latter  to  the  former.  (Re-
specting the  name  see  further  Liddell  and  Scott's
Lexicon.,  and  Pott's  Etym.  Forsch.  pt.  i.  p.  Ixxxi.)
•  Herodotus,  as  might  be  expected  from  his  researches
in  Asia  and  Africa,  knew  that  ivory  came  from
the  teeth  of  the  elephant,  (iv.  191  ;  Plin.  H.  N.
viii.  3.  s.  4)  ;  while  on  the  other  hand  writers  as
late  as  Juba  (Plin.  I.  c.)  and  Pausanias  (v.  12.  s.  1.)
fell  into  the  mistake  of  regarding  the  tusks  as
horns.

The  earliest  mention  of  ivory  in  a  Greek
writer  is  in  a  passage  of  the  Iliad  (v.  583),  where
it  appears  as  an  ornament  for  harness  {rivia  \evK
iXf^aPTi).  In  the  Odyssey  its  use  as  an  article  of
luxury  is  so  often  referred  to,  that  it  is  needless  to
enumerate  the  passages,  which  prove  how  exten-
sively the  Phoenician  traders  had  introduced  it
into  the  Greek  cities  of  Asia  Minor,  and  no  doubt
also  into  Greece  Proper.  It  appears  among  the
ornaments  of  houses,  furniture,  vessels,  armour,
harness,  and  so  forth.  Neither  is  there  any  oc-
casion to  trace  its  continued  use  among  the  Greeks
and  Romans,  down  to  the  luxurious  and  expensive
period  of  the  empire,  when  the  supply  furnished  by
increased  commerce  was  greatly  enlarged  by  the
prodigious  quantity  of  elephants,  which  were  pro-
vided for  the  slaughters  of  the  amphitheatre.  It
was  used,  not  only  as  an  ornament  for,  but  as  the
entire  material  of  chairs,  beds,  footstools,  and  other
furniture,  statues,  flutes,  and  the  frames  of  lyres,
besides  many  other  objects.

The  most  important  application  of  ivory  was  to
works  of  art,  and  especially  to  those  statues  which,
I  being  composed  of  gold  and  ivory,  were  called
j  chryselephantine  (xpi'o'eAe(/)ovT(vo).
j  The  art  of  chrj'selephantine  statuary  must  be
1  regarded  as  a  distinct  subdivision,  different  from
I  casting  in  bronze,  and  sculpturing  in  marble,  and
,  indeed  more  nearly  connected  with  carving  in
I  wood,  as  is  even  indicated  by  the  application  of  the
!    name  ^6ava  to  the  master  works  in  this  art  (Strab.


ELEPHAS.


451


viii.  p.  372).  While  the  sculptor  wrought  at
once  upon  a  material,  which  had  been  compara-
tively neglected  in  the  early  stages  of  art,  on  ac-
count of  the  difficulty  of  working  it,  while  the
statuary  reproduced  in  a  more  durable  substance
those  forms  which  had  been  first  moulded  in  a
plastic  material,  another  class  of  artists  developed
the  capabilities  of  the  other  original  branch  of
sculpture,  carving  in  wood,  which,  on  account  of  its
facility,  had  been  the  most  extensively  practised
in  early  times,  especially  for  the  statues  of  the
gods.  (Comp.  Statu  ARIA,  and  Diet,  of  Biog.  art.
Daedalus.)  The  rade  wooden  images  were  not
only  improved  in  fonn,  but  elaborately  decorated,
at  first  with  colours  and  real  draper}^  and  after-
wards with  more  costly  materials.  The  first  great
step  in  their  improvement  was  to  make  the  parts
which  were  not  covered  by  drapery,  namelj^  the
face,  hands,  and  feet,  of  white  marble  ;  such  statues
were  called  acroUths.  The  next  was  to  substitute
plates  of  ivory  for  the  marble  ;  and  the  further  im-
provement, the  use  of  beaten  gold  in  place  of  real
drapery,  constituted  the  chryselephantine  statues.
This  art  was  one  of  those  Avhich  have  attained  to
their  perfection  almost  as  soon  as  they  have  re-
ceived their  first  development.  There  were  some
works  of  this  description  before  the  time  of  Phei-
dias*  ;  but  the  art,  properly  regarded,  Avas  at
once  created  and  perfected  by  him  ;  and  the  reason
for  its  immediate  perfection  was,  that  the  artist
was  prepared  for  his  work,  not  only  by  his  genius,
but  also  by  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  artistic
laws,  and  the  technical  processes,  of  all  the  other
departments  of  his  art.

Chryselephantine  statuary,  as  practised  by  Phei-
dias,  combined,  in  addition  to  that  perfection  of
form  which  characterised  all  the  great  works  of
the  age,  the  elements  of  colossal  grandeur,  exqui-
site beauty  and  delicacy  of  material,  and  the  most
rich  and  elaborate  subsidiarj^  decorations.  The
general  effect  of  his  Zeus  or  Athena  was  that  of
the  most  imposing  grandeur  and  the  most  perfect
illusion  to  which  art  can  attain.  In  a  bronze  or
marble  statue  the  material  at  once  dispels  the
illusion  of  reality  ;  but  the  impression  produced
upon  a  spectator  by  the  soft  tints  of  the  ivory,  the
coloured  eyes  and  the  golden  robe  of  the  Olympian
Zeus,  to  say  nothing  of  the  expression  of  the  fea-
tures and  the  figure,  was  almost  that  of  looking
upon  the  praesens  numen.  These  statues  were  the
highest  efforts  ever  made,  and  probably  that  ever
can  be  made,  to  invest  a  religion  of  idolatry  with
an  external  appearance  of  reality  ;  and  for  the
sake  of  this  immediate  effect  the  artist  was  willing
to  forego  the  lasting  fame  which  he  would  have
obtained  if  he  had  executed  his  greatest  works  in
a  more  durable  material.

The  most  celebrated  chryselephantine  statues  in
Greece  and  the  Greek  states  were  those  of  Athena
in  the  Acropolis  of  Athens,  of  Zeus  at  Olympia,  of
Asclepius  at  Epidaurus,  all  three  by  Pheidias  ;
the  Hera  near  Argos  by  Polycleitus  (whose  works
in  this  department  are  esteemed  by  some  the  most
beautiful  in  existence,  though  others  considered
them  far  inferior  to  those  of  Pheidias :  comp.  Strab.
viii.  p.  372  ;  Quintil.  xii.  1 0)  ;  the  Olympian  Zeus,


*  Mention  is  made  of  chryselephantine  statues
by  Dorycleides,  Theocles,  Medon,  Canachus,  Me-
naechmus,  and  Suidas.  (See  the  articles  in  the
Diet,  nf  Biog.)

G  G   2


452


ELEPHAS.


set  up  at  Daphne  by  Antiochiis  IV.,  in  imitation
of  that  of  Pheidias  ;  certain  statues,  in  the  temple
of  Zeus  Olympius  at  Athens,  which  are  praised,
but  not  specified,  by  Pausanias :  and  even  some  of
the  Greek  kings  of  the  conquered  states  of  Asia
arrogated  to  themselves  this  highest  honour  that
the  piety  of  earlier  times  could  pay  to  the  gods  ;
for  Pausanias  saw,  in  the  temple  of  Zeus  at
Olympia,  an  ivory  statue  of  king  Nieomedes  (v.
12.  §  5).  The  chief  of  the  above  works  are  fully
described  in  the  Dictionary  of  Biography,  arts.
Pheidias,  Polydeitus.

The  question  respecting  the  mechanical  execu-
tion of  chryselephantine  statues  involves  certain
difficulties,  which  have  been  very  elaborately  and
ingeniously  examined  by  Quatremere  de  Quincy,
in  his  splendid  work  entitled  "  Le  Jupiter  Olym-
pien,  ou,  TArt  de  ia  Sculpture  Antique,  conside're'
sous  un  nouveau  point  de  vue:"  &c  Paris,  1815,
folio.  A  very  slight  consideration  of  the  material
employed  will  show  the  nature  -of  the  difficulties.
From  a  log  of  wood  or  a  block  of  marble  the  re-
quired figure  can  be  elaborated  by  cutting  away,
certain  portions  :  clay  can  be  moulded,  and  bronze
or  plaster  cast,  in  the  form  previously  determined
on :  but  the  material  for  an  ivory  statue  is  pre-
sented in  pieces  which  must  be  made  to  assume  an
entirely  new  form  before  the  Avork  can  be  com-
menced. Now  De  Quincy  supposes  that  the
ancients  possessed  the  art,  now  lost,  of  cutting  the
curved  parts  of  the  elephant's  tusk  into  thin
plates,  varying  in  breadth  up  to  12  or  even  20
inches,  and  bending  them  into  the  exact  curves
required  by  the  various  parts  of  the  figure  to  be
covered.  These  plates,  having  been  brought  to
their  proper  forms  by  comparison  with  a  model,  on
which  each  of  them  was  marked,  were  placed  upon
the  core  of  the  statue,  Avhich  was  of  wood,
strengthened  with  metal  rods,  and  were  fastened
to  it  and  to  each  other  chiefly  by  isinglass  ;  and
of  course  the  whole  surface  was  polished.  (An
excellent  account  of  the  process,  according  to  De
Quincy's  views,  is  given  in  the  work  entitled
Menageries,  vol.  ii.  c.  13.)  The  ivory  was  used
for  the  flesh  parts,  that  is,  in  the  colossal  statues
of  the  deities,  the  face,  neck,  breast,  arms,  hands,
and  feet.  The  other  parts  of  the  wooden  core
were  covered  with  thin  beaten  gold,  to  represent
the  hair  and  drapery,  which  Avas  affixed  to  the
statue  in  such  a  manner  as  to  be  taken  oflf  at  plea-
sure, as,  ultimately,  it  was.  The  gold  was  in
many  places  embossed  and  chased  ;  and  colours
were  freely  employed.  The  eyes  were  formed
either  of  precious  stones  or  of  coloured  marbles.
To  preserve  the  ivory  from  injury,  either  from  too
much  or  too  little  moisture,  oil  was  poured  over  it
m  the  first  case,  water  in  the  second.  (Comp.
Diet,  of  Biog.  art  Pheidias,  and  MuWer,  Arch.  d.
Kunst,  §  312.)  The  prodigious  quantities  of  ivory
required  for  these  works  were  imported,  in  the
time  of  Pheidias,  chiefly  from  Africa.  (Hermipp.
ap.  Ath.  i.  p.  27.)

The  other  uses  of  ivory  in  the  arts  were  chiefly
the  making  of  statuettes  and  other  small  objects,
which  could  be  carved  at  once  out  of  the  solid  part
of  the  tusk ;  and  for  such  purposes  it  seems  to
have  been  employed  from  a  very  early  period.
Thus  on  the  chest  of  Cypselus  there  were  ivory
figures  in  relief  (Paus.  v.  17.  §2).  Various  small
works  in  ivory  have  come  down  to  us,  belonging
to  all  periods  of  the  art,  among  the  most  interest-


ELEUSINIA.

ing  ©f  which  are  writing  tablets  (SeA-Tot,  libri  ele-
•phaiitini),  with  two,  three,  five,  or  more  leaves
(diptycha,  triptycha,  pentaptycha,  &c.),  either  en-
tirely of  ivory,  or  with  the  leaves  of  parchment  and
th-e  covers  of  ivory  :  the  covers  are  carved  in  relief.
These  tablets  are  chiefly  of  the  later  ages  of  Rome,
and  are  divided  into  two  classes,  Consularia  and
Ecclesiastica,  which  are  distinguished  by  the  carv-
ings on  their  covers ;  those  on  the  former  being
figures  of  consuls  at  the  pompa  Circensis,  missiones,
and  so  forth,  those  on  the  latter  representing  bibli-
cal subjects  (Miiller,  L  c.  n.  3).  The  teeth  of  the
hippopotamus  were  sometimes  used  as  a  substi-
tute for  ivory  in  works  of  art,  (Paus.  viii.  46.
§  2.)  [R  S.]

ELEUSI'NIA  {'E\€v<riyia),  a  festival  and
mysteries,  originally  celebrated  only  at  Eleusis  in
Attica,  in  honour  of  Demeter  and  Persephone.
(Andoc.  Z>e  Myst.  15.)  All  the  ancients  who  have
occasion  to  mention  the  Eleusinian  mysteries,  or
the  mysteries,  as  they  were  sometimes  called,  agree
that  they  were  the  holiest  and  most  venerable  of
all  that  were  celebrated  in  Greece.  (Aristot.  Rhet.
ii.  24  ;  Cic.  De  Nat.  Dear.  i.  42.)  Various  tradi-
tions were  current  among  the  Greeks  respecting
the  author  of  these  mysteries  ;  for,  while  some  con-
sidered Eumolpus  or  Musaeus  to  be  their  founder,
others  stated  that  they  had  been  introduced  from
Egypt  by  Erechtheus,  who  at  a  time  of  scarcity
provided  his  country  with  com  from  Egypt,  and
imported  from  the  same  quarter  the  sacred  rites
and  mysteries  of  Eleusis.  A  third  tradition  attri-
buted the  institution  to  Demeter  herself,  who,  when
wandering  about  in  search  of  her  daughter,  Perse,
phone,  was  believed  to  have  come  to  Attica,  in  the
reign  of  Erechtheus,  to  have  supplied  its  inhabit-
ants with  com,  and  to  have  instituted  the  reAerai
and  mysteries  at  Eleusis.  (Diod.  Sic.  i.  29  ;  Isocrat.
Paiiegyr.  p.  46,  ed.  Steph.)  This  last  opinion
seems  to  have  been  the  most  common  among  the
ancients,  and  in  subsequent  times  a  stone,  called
dyiXaa-Tos  Trerpa  (triste  saxum),  was  shown  near
the  Avell  Callichoros  at  Eleusis,  on  which  the  god-
dess, overwhelmed  with  grief  and  fatigue,  was  be-
lieved to  have  rested  on  her  arrival  in  Attica.
(Apollod.  BiUioth.  i.  5  ;  Ovid.  Fast.  iv.  502,  &c.)
Around  the  well  Callichoros,  the  Eleusinian  women
were  said  to  have  first  performed  their  chorus,  and
to  have  sung  hymns  to  the  goddess.  (Paus.  i.  38.
§  6.)  All  the  accounts  and  allusions  in  ancient
writers  seem  to  warrant  the  conclusion  that  the
legends  concerning  the  introduction  of  the  Eleu-
sinia  are  descriptions  of  a  period  when  the  inhabit-
ants of  Attica  were  becoming  acquainted  with  the
benefits  of  agriculture,  and  of  a  regularly  consti-
tuted form  of  society.  (Cic.  De  Leg.  ii.  14,  in
Verr.  v.  14.)

In  the  reign  of  Erechtheus  a  war  is  said  to  have
broken  out  between  the  Athenians  and  Eleusinians
(Hermann,  Polit.  Antiq.  of  Greece,  §  91.  note  9),
and  when  the  latter  were  defeated,  they  acknow-
ledged the  supremacy  of  Athens  in  every  thing  ex-
cept the  TeAerof,  which  they  wished  to  conduct
and  regulate  for  themselves.  (Thucyd.  ii.  15  ;
Paus.  i.  38.  §  3.)  Thus  the  superintendence  re-
mained with  the  descendants  of  Eumolpus  [Eu-
molpidae],  the  daughters  of  the  Eleusinian  king
Celeus,  and  a  third  class  of  priests,  the  Keryces,
who  seem  likewise  to  have  been  connected  with
the  family  of  Eumolpus,  though  they  themselves
traced  their  origin  to  Hermes  and  Aglauros.


ELEUSINIA.

At  the  time  when  the  local  governments  of  the
several  townships  of  Attica  were  concentrated  at
Athens,  the  capital  became  also  the  centre  of  reli-
gion, and  several  deities  who  had  hitherto  only  en-
joyed a  local  worship,  were  now  raised  to  the  rank
of  national  gods.  This  seems  also  to  have  been
the  case  with  the  Eleusinian  goddess,  for  in  the
reign  of  Theseus  we  find  mention  of  a  temple  at
Athens,  called  Eleusinion  (Thucyd.  ii.  17),  pro-
bably the  new  and  national  sanctuary  of  Demeter.
Her  priests  and  priestesses  now  became  naturally
attached  to  the  national  temple  of  the  capital,
though  her  original  place  of  worship  at  Eleusis,
with  which  so  many  sacred  associations  were  con-
nected, still  retained  its  importance  and  its  special
share  in  the  celebration  of  the  national  solemnities  ;
and  though,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter,  the  great
Eleusinian  festival  was  commenced  at  Athens,  yet
a  numerous  procession  always  went,  on  a  certain
day,  to  Eleusis :  it  was  here  that  the  most  solemn
part  of  the  sacred  rites  was  performed.

We  must  distinguish  between  the  greater  Eleu-
sinia  which  were  celebrated  at  Athens  and  Eleusis,
and  the  lesser  which  were  held  at  Agrae  on  the
Ilissus.  (Steph.  Byz.  s.  ». ''A7P0.)  From  the  tra-
dition respecting  the  institution  of  the  lesser  Eleu-
sinia,  it  seems  to  be  clear,  that  the  initiation  into
the  Eleusinian  mysteries  was  originally  confined  to
Atticans  only  ;  for  it  is  said  that  Heracles,  before
descending  into  the  lower  world,  wished  to  be  ini-
tiated, but  as  the  law  did  not  admit  strangers,  the
lesser  Eleusinia  were  instituted  in  order  to  evade
the  law,  and  not  to  disappoint  the  great  benefactor
of  Attica.  (Schol.  ad  Aristoph.  Plut.  846.)  Other
legends  concerning  the  initiation  of  Heracles  do
not  mention  the  lesser  Eleusinia,  but  merely  state
that  he  was  adopted  into  the  family  of  one  Pylius,
in  order  to  become  lawfully  intitled  to  the  initia-
tion. But  both  traditions  in  reality  express  the
same  thing,  if  we  suppose  that  the  initiation  of
Heracles  was  only  the  first  stage  in  the  real  ini-
tiation ;  for  the  lesser  Eleusinia  were  in  reality
only  a  preparation  {izpoKaQapais,  or  irpodyveva-is)
for  the  real  mysteries.  (Schol.  ad  Aristoph.  I.  c.)
After  the  time  when  the  lesser  Eleusinia  are  said
to  have  been  instituted,  we  no  longer  hear  of  the
exclusion  of  any  one  from  the  mysteries,  except
barbarians ;  and  Herodotus  (viii.  65)  expressly
states,  that  any  Greek  who  wished  it,  might  be
ijiitiated.  The  lesser  Eleusinia  were  held  every
year  in  the  month  of  Anthesterion  (Plut.  Demetr.
26),  and,  according  to  some  accounts,  in  honour  of
Persephone  alone.  Those  who  were  initiated  in
them  bore  the  name  of  mystae  (^ucrrat,  Suidas,  s.  v.
'ETTt^TTTTjs),  and  had  to  wait  at  least  another  year
before  they  could  be  admitted  to  the  great  mys-
teries. The  principal  rites  of  this  first  stage  of
initiation  consisted  in  the  sacrifice  of  a  sow,  which
the  mystae  seem  to  have  first  washed  in  the  Can-
tharus  (Aristoph.  Acharn.  703,  with  the  Schol.
720,  and  Pax,  360  ;  Varro,  De  Be  Rust.  ii.  4  ;
Plut.  Phoc.  28),  and  in  the  purification  by  a  priest,
who  bore  the  name  of  Hydranos.  (Hesych.  s.  v.
I  'TSpaj'os  ;  Polyaen.  v.  17.)  The  mystae  had  also
t  to  take  an  oath  of  secrecy,  which  was  administered
j  to  them  by  the  mystagogus,  also  called  Upo<pdvT7]s
I  or  TrpocfniTTjs :  they  received  some  kind  of  pre-
!  paratory  instruction,  which  enabled  them  after-
'.  wards  to  understand  the  mysteries  which  were
j  revealed  to  them  in  the  great  Eleusinia  ;  they  were
]  not  admitted  into  the  sanctuary  of  Demeter,  but


ELEUSINIA.  453

remained  during  the  solemnities  in  the  vestibule.
(Seneca,  Quaest.  Nat.  vii.  31.)

The  great  mysteries  were  celebrated  every  year
in  the  month  of  Boedromion  during  nine  days,
from  the  15th  to  the  23d  (Plut.  Demetr.  26  ;
Meursius,  Elemin.  c.  21),  both  at  Athens  and
Eleusis.  The  initiated  were  called  iirSirTai  or
%(pvpoi.  (Suidas,  s.  v.)  On  the  first  day,  those
who  had  been  initiated  in  the  lesser  Eleusinia,
assembled  at  Athens,  whence  its  name  was
ayvpij.6s  (Hesych. s. v.);  but  strangers  who  wished
to  witness  the  celebration  of  these  national  so-
lemnities likewise  visited  Athens  in  great  numbers
at  this  season,  and  we  find  it  expressly  stated
that  Athens  was  crowded  with  visitors  on  the
occasion.  (Maxim.  Tyr.  Dissert.  33.  sub  Jin.  ;
Pliilostrat.  Vit.  Apoll.  iv.  6.)  On  the  second  day
the  mystae  went  in  solemn  procession  to  the  sea-
coast,  where  they  underwent  a  purification.  Hence
the  day  was  called  "AAaSe  fivarai,  probably  the
conventional  phrase  by  which  the  mystae  were  in-
vited to  assemble  for  the  purpose.  (Hesych.  s.  v. ;
Polyaen.  iii.  11.)  Suidas  (s.  v.  'Peiroi:  compare
Pans.  i.  38.  §  2.)  mentions  two  rivulets,  called
peiToi,  as  the  place  to  which  the  mystae  went  in
order  to  be  purified.  Of  the  third  day  scarcely
anything  is  known  with  certainty  ;  we  only  learn
from  Clemens  of  Alexandria  (Protrept.  p.  18,  ed.
Potter)  that  it  was  a  day  of  fasting,  and  that  in
the  evening  a  frugal  meal  was  taken,  which  con-
sisted of  cakes  made  of  sesame  and  honey.
Whether  sacrifices  were  off"ered  on  this  day,  as
Meursius  supposes,  is  uncertain  ;  but  that  which
he  assigns  to  it  consisted  of  two  kinds  of  sea-fish
(rpiyXr)  and  fxaiv'ts^  Athen.  vii.  p.  325),  and  of
cakes  of  barley  grown  in  the  Rharian  plain.  (Paus.
i.  38.  §  6.)  It  maiy  be,  however,  that  this  sacri-
fice belonged  to  the  fourth  day,  on  which  also  the
KaXdOos  KaOoSos  seems  to  have  taken  place.  This
was  a  procession  with  a  basket  containing  pome-
granates and  poppy-seeds  ;  it  was  carried  on  a
waggon  drawn  by  oxen,  and  women  followed  with
small  mystic  cases  in  their  hands,  (Callim.  Hymn,
in  Cer.;  Virg.  Georg.  i.  166  ;  Meursius,  I.  c.  c.  25.)
On  the  fifth  day,  which  appears  to  have  been
called  the  torch  day  (j]  tSsv  Ka^iva5u>v  vfjiepa),  the
mystae,  led  by  the  Sadovxos,  went  in  the  evening
with  torches  to  the  temple  of  Demeter  at  Eleusis,
where  they  seem  to  have  remained  during  the
following  night.  This  rite  was  probably  a  symboli-
cal representation  of  Demeter  wandering  about
in  search  of  Persephone.  The  sixth  day,  called
lakchos  (Hesych.  s.  v.  "laKXov),  was  the  most
solemn  of  all.  The  statue  of  lakchos,  son  of
Demeter,  adorned  with  a  garland  of  myrtle  and
bearing  a  torch  in  his  hand,  was  carried  along  the
sacred  road  (Plut.  Alcib.  34  ;  Etymol.  Magn.,  and
Suidas,  s.  V.  'lepa  'OSJs)  amidst  joyous  shouts
(laKxK^iv)  and  songs,  from  the  Cerameicus  to
Eleusis.  (Aristoph.  Ran.  315,  &c.  ;  Plut.  Pho-
cion,  28,  and  Valcken,  ad  Herod,  viii.  65.)
This  solemn  procession  was  accompanied  by  great
numbers  of  followers  and  spectators,  and  the
story  related  by  Herodotus  is  founded  on  the
supposition  that  30,000  persons  walking  along
the  sacred  road  on  this  occasion  was  nothing
uncommon.  During  the  night  from  the  sixth  to
the  seventh  day  the  mystae  remained  at  Eleu-
sis, and  were  initiated  into  the  last  mysteries
(iTroTTTeia).  Those  who  were  neither  iv6iTrcu
nor  fiixTTai  were  sent  away  by  a  herald.    The

G  G    3


454


ELEUSINIA.


mystae  now  repeated  the  oath  of  secresy  which
had  been  administered  to  them  at  the  lesser  Eleu-
sinia,  underwent  a  new  purification,  and  then  they
were  led  by  the  mystagogus  in  the  darkness  of
night  into  the  lighted  interior  of  the  sanctuary
((paTayotyia),  and  were  allowed  to  see  (avTorpia)
what  none  except  the  epoptae  ever  beheld.  The
awful  and  horrible  manner  in  which  the  initia-
tion is  described  by  later,  especially  Christian
writers,  seems  partly  to  proceed  from  their  igno-
rance of  its  real  character,  partly  from  their  horror
and  aversion  to  these  pagan  rites.  The  more
ancient  writers  always  abstained  from  entering
upon  any  description  of  the  subject.  Each  in-
dividual, after  his  initiation,  is  said  to  have  been
dismissed  by  the  words  K6y^,  u/M-rra^  (Hesych.  s.  r.),
in  order  to  make  room  for  other  mystae.

On  the  seventh  day  the  initiated  returned  to
Athens  amid  various  kinds  of  raillery  and  jests,
especially  at  the  bridge  over  the  Cephisus,  where
they  sat  down  to  rest,  and  poured  forth  their  ridi-
cule on  those  who  passed  by.  Hence  the  words
ye((>vpi(eiv  and  yecpvpiafMos  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  395;
Suidas,  s.  V.  Tecpvpi(cov  :  Hesych.  s.  v.  TecpvpiaTai:
Aelian,  Hist.  Animal,  iv.  43  ;  MUller,  Hist,  of  the
Lit.  of  Greece,  p.  132).  These  aKooix/xaTa  seem,
like  the  procession  with  torches  to  Eleusis,  to  have
been  dramatical  and  symbolical  representations  of
the  jests  by  which,  according  to  the  ancient  legend,
lambe  or  Baubo  had  dispelled  the  grief  of  the  god-
dess and  made  her  smile.  We  may  here  observe,
that  probably  the  whole  histor}'-  of  Demeter  and
Persephone  was  in  some  way  or  other  symbolically
represented  at  the  Eleusinia.  Hence  Clemens  of
Alexandria,  (Protrept.  p.  12,  ed.  Potter)  calls  the
Eleusinian  mysteries  a  "  mystical  drama."  (See
MUller,  Hist,  of  the  Lit.  of  Greece,  p.  287,  &c.)
The  eighth  day,  called  'Ewidavpia,  was  a  kind  of
additional  day  for  those  who  by  some  accident  had
come  too  late,  or  had  been  prevented  from  being
initiated  on  the  sixth  day.  It  was  said  to  have
been  added  to  the  original  number  of  days,  when
Asclepius,  coming  over  from  Epidaurus  to  be  in-
itiated, arrived  too  late,  and  the  Athenians,  not  to
disappoint  the  god,  added  an  eighth  day.  (Philostr.
Vit.  Jpo/l.  iv.  6  ;  Pans.  ii.  26.  §  7.)  The  ninth
and  last  day  bore  the  name  of  irXr]iJ.ox6ai  ( Pollux,
X.  74  ;  Athen.  xi.  p.  496),  from  a  peculiar  kind
of  vessel  called  TrXfifxax^f],  which  is  described  as  a
small  kind  of  kotvKos.  Two  of  these  vessels  were
on  this  day  filled  with  water  or  wine,  and  the  con-
tents of  the  one  thrown  to  the  east,  and  those  of
the  other  to  the  west,  while  those  who  performed
this  rite  uttered  some  mystical  words.

Besides  the  various  rites  and  ceremonies  described
above,  several  others  are  mentioned,  but  it  is  not
known  to  which  day  they  belonged.  Among  them
we  shall  mention  only  the  Eleusinian  games  and
contests,  which  Meursius  assigns  to  the  seventh
day.  They  are  mentioned  by  Gellius  (xv.  20),  and
are  said  to  have  been  the  most  ancient  in  Greece.
The  prize  of  the  victors  consisted  in  ears  of  barley.
(Schol.  ad  Find.  01.  ix.  150.)  It  was  considered
as  one  of  the  greatest  profanations  of  the  Eleusinia,
if  during  their  celebration  an  &tj;uos  came  as  a  sup-
pliant to  the  temple  (the  Eleusinion),  and  placed
his  olive  branch  (i/c6Ti7pta)  in  it  (Andoc.  De  Myst.
p.  54)  ;  and  whoever  did  so  might  be  put  to  death
without  any  trial,  or  had  to  pay  a  fine  of  one  thou-
sand drachmae.  It  may  also  be  remarked  that  at
other  festivals,  as  well  as  the  Eleusinia,  no  man,


ELEUTHERIA.
while  celebrating  the  festival,  could  be  seized  or
arrested  for  any  offence.  (Demosth.  c.  Mid.  p.  571.)
Lycurgus  made  it  a  law  that  any  woman  using  a
carriage  in  the  procession  to  Eleusis  should  be  fined
one  thousand  drachmae.  (Plut.  De  Cup.  Div.  ix.
p.  348  ;  Aelian,  V.  H.  xiii.  24.)  The  custom
against  which  this  law  was  directed  seems  to  have
been  very  common  before.  (Demosth.  c.  Mid.
p.  565.)

The  Eleusinian  mysteries  long  survived  the  in-
dependence of  Greece.  Attempts  to  suppress  them
were  made  by  the  emperor  Valentinian,  but  he
met  with  strong  opposition,  and  they  seem  to  have
continued  down  to  the  time  of  the  elder  Theodo-
sius.  Respecting  the  secret  doctrines  which  were
revealed  in  them  to  the  initiated,  nothing  certain
is  known.  The  general  belief  of  the  ancients  was
that  they  opened  to  man  a  comforting  prospect  of
a  future  state.  (Pind.  Thren.  p.  8.  ed.  Bockh.)
But  this  feature  does  not  seem  to  have  been  origi-
nally connected  with  these  mysteries,  and  was  pro-
bably added  to  them  at  the  period  which  followed
the  opening  of  a  regular  intercourse  between  Greece
and  Egypt,  when  some  of  the  speculative  doctrines
of  the  latter  country,  and  of  the  East,  may  have
been  introduced  into  the  mysteries,  and  hallowed
by  the  names  of  the  venerable  bards  of  the  mytlii-
cal  age.  This  supposition  would  also  account,  in
some  measure,  for  the  legend  of  their  introduction
from  Egypt.  In  modem  times  many  attempts  have
been  made  to  discover  the  nature  of  the  mysteries
revealed  to  the  initiated,  but  the  results  have  been
as  various  and  as  fanciful  as  might  be  expected.
The  most  sober  and  probable  view  is  that,  ac-
cording to  which,  "  they  were  the  remains  of  a
worship  which  preceded  the  rise  of  the  Hellenic
mythology  and  its  attendant  rites,  grounded  on  a
view  of  nature,  less  fanciful,  more  earnest,  and
better  fitted  to  awaken  both  philosophical  thought
and  religious  feeling."  (Thirl wall,  Hist,  of  Greece,
ii.  p.  140,  &c.)  Respecting  the  Attic  Eleusinia
see  Meursius,  Eleusinia,  Lugd.  Bat,  1619  ;  St.
Croix,  Recherclies  Hist,  et  Critiq.  sur  les  Mysterea
du  Paganisme  (a  second  edition  was  published  in
1817,  by  Sylvestre  de  Sacy,  in  2  vols.  Paris)  ;
Ouwaroff,  Essai  sur  les  Mysttres  d'^Eleusis,  3d  edi-
tion, Paris,  1816;  Wachsmuth, //e//.  ^/.ier.  vol.  ii.
p.  575,  &c.  2d  edit.  p.  249,  &c.  ;  Creuzer,  Symbol,
u.  Mythol.  iv.  p.  534,  &c.  ;  Nitzsch,  De  Eleusin.
Ratione,  Kiel,  1842.

Eleusinia  Avere  also  celebrated  in  other  parts  of
Greece.  At  Ephesus  they  had  been  introduced
from  Athens,  (Strabo,  xiv,  p.  633.)  In  Laconia
they  were,  as  far  as  we  know,  only  celebrated  by
the  inhabitants  of  the  ancient  town  of  Helos,  who
on  certain  days,  carried  a  wooden  statue  of  Per-
sephone to  the  Eleusinion,  in  the  heights  of  Tay-
getus,  (Pans.  iii.  20.  §  5,  &c.)  Crete  had  likewise
its  Eleusinia.     (See  Meurs.  Eleus.  c.  33.)    [L.  S.]

ELEUTHE'RIA  {iK^vOepia),  the  feast  of
liberty,  a  festival  which  the  Greeks,  after  the
battle  of  Plataeae  (479,  b.  c),  instituted  in  honour
of  Zeus  Eleutherios  (the  deliverer).  It  was  in-
tended not  merely  to  be  a  token  of  their  gratitude
to  the  god  to  whom  they  believed  themselves  to  be
indebted  for  their  victory  over  the  barbarians,  but
also  as  a  bond  of  union  among  themselves  ;  for,  in
an  assembly  of  all  the  Greeks,  Aristides  carried  a
decree  that  delegates  {■Kp6§ov\oi  koX  ^eupoi)  from
all  the  Greek  states  should  assemble  every  year  at
Plataeae  for  the  celebration  of  the  Eleuthcria.   The


I


EMANCIPATIO.

town  itself  was  at  the  same  time  declared  sacred
and  inviolable,  as  long  as  its  citizens  offered  the  an-
nual sacrifices  which  were  then  instituted  on  behalf
of  Greece.  Every  fifth  year  these  solemnities  were
celebrated  with  contests  {ayoiv  twv  'EAeuflepicuy)
in  which  the  victors  were  rewarded  with  chaplets
(ayibv  yvfxviKbs  (TT€(paflTr]s^  Strab.  ix.  p.  412).
The  annual  solemnity  at  Plataeac,  which  con-
tinued to  be  observed  down  to  the  time  of  Plutarch
(Aristid.  19,  21 ;  Paus.  ix.  2.  §  4),  was  as  follows:  —
On  the  sixteenth  of  the  month  of  Maimacterion,  a
procession,  led  by  a  trumpeter,  who  blew  the  signal
for  battle,  marched  at  daybreak  through  the  middle
of  the  town.  It  was  followed  by  waggons  loaded
with  myrtle  boughs  and  chaplets,  by  a  black  bull,
and  by  free  youths  who  carried  the  vessels  con-
taining the  libations  for  the  dead.  No  slave  was
permitted  to  minister  on  this  occasion.  At  the  end
of  this  procession  followed  the  archon  of  Plataeae,
who  was  not  allowed  at  any  other  time,  during  his
office,  to  touch  a  weapon,  or  to  wear  any  other  but
white  garments,  now  wearing  a  purple  tunic,  and
with  a  sword  in  his  hand,  and  also  bearing  an  urn,
kept  for  this  solemnity  in  the  public  archive  (ypafji-
fia(pvX6.Kiov).  When  the  procession  came  to  the
place  where  the  Greeks,  who  had  fallen  at  Pla-
taeae, were  buried,  the  archon  first  washed  and
anointed  the  tombstones,  and  then  led  the  bull  to
a  pyre  and  sacrificed  it,  praying  to  Zeus  and  Her-
mes Chthonios,  and  inviting  the  brave  men  who
had  fallen  in  the  defence  of  their  country,  to  take
part  in  the  banquet  prepared  for  them.  This  ac-
count of  Plutarch  {Aristid.  19  and  21)  agrees  with
that  of  Thucydides  (iii.  58).  The  latter,  however,
expressly  states  that  dresses  formed  a  part  of  the
offerings,  which  were  probably  consumed  on  the
pyre  with  the  victim.  This  part  of  the  ceremony
seems  to  have  no  longer  existed  in  the  days  of  Plu-
tarch, who  does  not  mention  it,  and  if  so,  the  Pl:i-
taeans  had  probably  been  compelled  by  poverty  to
drop  it.  (See  Thirl  wall's  Hist,  of  Greece.,  ii.  p.  353,
&c.  ;  Bijckh,  Expl.  Find.  p.  208,  and  ad  Corp.
inscript.  i.  p.  904.)

Eleutheria  was  also  the  name  of  a  festival  cele-
brated in  Samos,  in  honour  of  Eros.  (A then.  xiii.
p.  5G2.)  [L.  S.]

ELLIME'NION      {i\Xifi4uiov).       [Pente-

COSTE  1

ELLO'TIA  or  HELLOTIA  (iWdria  or  4\-
Xdoria)^  a  festival  with  a  torch  race  celebrated  at
Corinth  in  honour  of  Athena  as  a  goddess  of  fire.
(Schol.  Find.  01.  xiii.  56  ;  Athen.  xv.  p.  678  ;
Etymol.  s.  V.  'EAAojtis).

A  festival  of  the  same  name  was  celebrated  in

Crete,  in  honour  of  Europe.     The  word  eAAwris,

from   which  the   festival  derived  its  name,  was,

according  to   Seleucus  {ap.  Athen.  I.e.),  a  myrtle

garland   twenty   yards    in    circumference,    which

was  carried  about  in  the  procession  at  the  festival

of  the  Ellotia.     (Compare  Hesych.  and  Etj^mol.

Magn.  s.  V.  'EXXwria.)  [L.  S.]

ELLY'CHNIUM  [Lucerna.]

EMANCIPA'TIO  was  an  act  by  which  the

1    patria  potestas  was  dissolved  in  the  lifetime  of  the

parent,  and  it  was  so  called  because  it  was  in  the

I    form   of  a   sale  {mancipatio).      By   the   Twelve

!    Tables^  it  was  necessary  that  a  son  should  be  sold

I    three  times  in  order  to  be  released  from  the  paternal

i    power,  or  to  be  sui juris.    In  the  case  of  daughters

j    and  grandchildren,   one  sale  was  sufficient.     The

I   father  transferred  the  son  by  the  form  of  a  sale  to


EMANCIPATIO.


455


another  person  who  manumitted  him,  upon  which
he  returned  into  the  power  of  the  father.  This
was  repeated,  and  with  the  like  result.  After  a
third  sale,  the  paternal  power  was  extinguished,
but  the  son  was  resold  to  the  parent,  who  then
manumitted  him,  and  so  acquired  the  rights  of
a  patron  over  his  emancipated  son,  which  would
otherwise  have  belonged  to  the  purchaser  who  gave
him  his  final  manumission.

The  following  view  of  emancipatio  is  given  by  a
German  writer :  —  "  The  patria  potestas  could  not
be  dissolved  immediately  by  manumissio,  because
the  patria  potestas  must  be  viewed  as  an  imperium,
and  not  as  a  right  of  property  like  the  power  of  a
master  over  his  slave.  Now  it  was  a  fundamental
principle  that  the  patria  potestas  was  extinguished
by  exercising  once  or  thrice  (as  the  case  might  be)
the  right  which  the  pater  familias  possessed  of  sell-
ing or  rather  pledging  his  child.  Conformably  to
this  fundamental  principle,  the  release  of  a  child
from  the  patria  potestas  was  clothed  with  the  form
of  a  mancipatio,  effected  once  or  three  times.  The
patria  potestas  was  indeed  thus  dissolved,  though
the  child  was  not  yet  free,  but  came  into  the  con-
dition of  a  nexus.  Consequently  a  manumissio  was
necessarily  connected  with  the  mancipatio,  in  order
that  the  proper  object  of  the  emancipatio  might  be
attained.  This  manumissio  must  take  place  once
or  thrice,  according  to  circumstances.  In  the  case
when  the  manumissio  was  not  followed  by  a  return
into  the  patria  potestas,  the  manumissio  was  at-
tended with  important  consequences  to  the  nianu-
missor,  which  consequences  ought  to  apply  to  the
emancipating  party.  Accordingly,  it  was  necessary
to  provide  that  the  decisive  manumission  should  be
made  by  the  emancipating  party  ;  and  for  that
reason  a  remancipatio,  which  preceded  the  final
manumissio,  was  a  part  of  the  form  of  emancipatio."
{\]i\ie\:h.o\znQY,  Zeitschrift,  vol.  ii,  p,  139  ;  Von  den
formen  der  Manumissio  per  Vindictam  und  der
Emancipatio.)

The  legal  effect  of  emancipation  was  to  make
the  emancipated  person  become  sui  juris :  and  all
the  previously  existing  relations  of  agnatio  between
the  parent's  familia  and  the  emancipated  child
ceased  at  once.  But  a  relation  analogous  to  that  of
patron  and  freedman  was  formed  between  the  per-
son who  gave  the  final  emancipation  and  the  child,
so  that  if  the  child  died  without  children  or  legal
heirs,  or  if  he  required  a  tutor  or  curator,  the  rights
which  would  have  belonged  to  the  father,  if  he  had
not  emancipated  the  child,  were  secured  to  him  as
a  kind  of  patronal  right,  in  case  he  had  taken  the
precaution  to  secure  to  himself  the  final  manumis-
sion of  the  child.  Accordingly,  the  father  would
always  stipulate  for  a  remancipatio  from  the  pur-
chaser :  this  stipulation  was  the  pactum  fiduciae.

The  emancipated  child  could  not  take  any  part
of  his  parent's  property  as  heres,  in  case  the  parent
died  intestate.  This  rigor  of  the  civil  law  {juris
iniquitaies.  Gains,  iii.  25)  was  modified  by  the
praetor's  edict,  which  placed  emancipated  children,
and  those  who  were  in  the  parent's  power  at  the
time  of  his  death,  on  the  same  footing  as  to  suc-
ceeding to  the  intestate  parent's  property.

The  emperor  Anastasius  introduced  the  practice
of  effecting  emancipation  by  an  imperial  rescript,
when  the  parties  were  not  present.  {Cod.  8.  tit.  49.
s.  5.)  Justinian  enacted  that  emancipation  could
be  effected  before  a  magistrate.  But  he  still  al-
lowed, what  was  probably  the  old  law,  a  fiather  to

G  G   4


456


EMBATEIA.


emancipate  a  grandson,  without  emancipating  the
son,  and  to  emancipate  the  son  without  emancipating
the  grandson,  or  to  emancipate  them  all,  Justinian
also  (Nov.  89.  c.  11)  did  not  allow  a  parent  to
emancipate  a  child  against  his  will,  though  it  seems
that  this  might  be  done  by  the  old  law,  and  that
the  parent  might  so  destroy  all  the  son's  rights  of
agnation.  But  a  man  might  emancipate  an  adopted
child  against  the  will  of  the  child  (Inst.  1.  tit.  IL
6.  3).  As  a  general  rule  the  father  could  not  be
compelled  to  emancipate  a  child  ;  but  there  were
some  cases  in  which  he  might  be  compelled.

The  emperor  Anastasius  allowed  an  emancipated
child  (under  certain  restrictions)  to  succeed  to  the
property  of  an  intestate  brother  or  sister,  which
the  praetor  had  not  allowed  ;  and  Justinian  put  an
emancipated  child  in  all  respects  on  the  same  foot-
ing as  one  not  emancipated,  with  respect  to  such
succession.

An  emancipatio  effected  a  capitis  diminutio
minima,  inconsequence  of  the  servile  character  (ser-
vilis  causa)  into  which  the  child  was  brought  by
such  act.  (Gaius,  i.  1 32,  &c. ;  Dig.  1.  tit.  7 ;  Cod.  6.
tit.  57.  s.  15;  8.  tit.  49;  Inst.  1.  tit.  12;  3.  tit.  5;
Dirksen,  UebersicJd,  &c.  p.  278 ;  Thibaut,  Si/stem,
&c.,  §  783,  &c.,  9th  ed.)  [G.  L.J

EM  AN  SO  R.     [Desertor.]

EMBAS  (e/igas),  a  shoe  worn  by  men  (Suidas,
5.  «.),  frequently  meaitioned  by  Aristophanes
(Equit  321,  869,  872,  Ecc.  314,  850)  and  other
Greek  writers.  This  appears  to  have  been  the
most  common  kind  of  shoe  worn  at  Athens  (ew-
TeAes  u7r(^57j/u.a,  Pollux,  vii.  85  ;  compare  Isaeus,
ile  Dicaeog.  Hered.  94).  Pollux  {I.  c.)  says  that
it  was  invented  by  the  Thracians,  and  that  it  was
like  the  low  cothurnus.  The  embas  was  also  worn
by  the  Boeotians  (Herod,  i.  195),  and  probably  in
other  parts  of  Greece.  (Becker,  Charikles,  vol.  ii.
p.  372.)

EMBATEIA  (ifxeareia).  In  Attic  law  this
word  (like  the  corresponding  English  one,  entri/),
was  used  to  denote  a  formal  taking  possession  of
real  property.  Thus,  when  a  son  entered  upon
the  land  left  him  by  his  father,  he  was  said
ilxSareveiv,  or  fiaSi^fiv  els  to.  Trarp^a,  and  there-
upon he  became  seised^  or  ])0ssessed  of  his  in-
heritance. If  any  one  disturbed  him  in  the  en-
joyment of  this  property,  with  an  intention  to
dispute  the  title,  he  might  maintain  an  action  of
ejectment,  e'louArjs  Si'/crj,  Before  eiitrj'  he  could
not  maintain  such  action.  'E^ovXrj  is  from  i^i\-
Afir,  an  old  word  signifying  to  eject.  The  sup-
posed ejectment,  for  which  the  action  was  brought,
was  a  mere  formality.  The  defendant,  after  the
plaintiff's  entry,  came  and  turned  him  off,  e^rjyei/
eK  rris  yrjs.  This  proceeding  (called  i^ayuyri)
took  place  quietly,  and  in  the  presence  of  wit-
nesses ;  the  defendant  then  became  a  wrong-doer,
and  the  plaintiff  was  in  a  condition  to  try  the

All  this  was  a  relict  of  ancient  times,  when  be-
fore writs  and  pleadings  and  other  regular  processes
were  invented,  parties  adopted  a  ruder  method  and
took  the  law  into  their  own  hands.  There  was
then  an  actual  ouster,  accompanied  often  with  vio-
lence and  breach  of  the  peace,  for  which  the  per-
son in  the  wrong  was  not  only  responsible  to  the
party  injured,  but  was  also  punishable  as  a  public
offender.  Afterwards,  in  the  course  of  civilization,
violent  remedies  became  useless  and  were  discon-
tinued ;  yet  the  ceremony  of  ejecting  was  still  kept


EMBLEMA.

up  as  a  form  of  law,  being  deemed  by  lawyers  a
necessary  foundation  of  the  subsequent  legal  pro-
cess. Thus  at  Rome,  in  the  earlier  times,  one
party  used  to  summon  the  other  by  the  words  "  ex
jure  te  manum  consertum  voco,"  to  go  with  him  to
the  land  in  dispute,  and  (in  the  presence  of  the
praetor  and  others)  turn  him  out  by  force.  After-
wards this  was  changed  into  the  sym-bolical  act  of
breaking  a  clod  of  earth  upon  the  land,  by  which
the  person  who  broke  intimated  that  he  claimed  a
right  to  deal  with  the  land  as  he  pleased.  We
may  observe  also,  that  the  English  action  of
ejectment  in  this  respect  resembles  the  Athe-
nian, that,  although  an  entry  by  the  plaintiff  and  an
ouster  of  him  by  the  defendant  are  supposed  to
have  taken  place,  and  are  considered  necessary  to
support  the  action,  yet  both  entry  and  ouster  are
mere  fictions  of  law.

These  proceedings  by  entry,  ouster,  &c.,  took
place  also  at  Athens  in  case  of  resistance  to  an  exe-
cution ;  when  the  defendant,  refusing  to  give  up
the  land  or  the  chattel  adjudged,  or  to  pay  the
damages  awarded  to  the  plaintiff,  by  the  appointed
time,  and  thus  being  vTr€pi]fx€pos,  i.  e.  the  time
having  expired  by  which  he  was  bound  to  satisfy
the  judgment,  the  plaintiff  proceeded  to  satisfy
himself  by  seizure  of  the  defendant's  lands.  This
he  certainly  might  do,  if  there  were  no  goods  to
levy  upon  ;  though,  whether  it  was  lawful  in  all
cases,  does  not  appear.  The  Athenian  laws  had
made  no  provision  for  putting  the  party,  who  suc-
ceeded, in  possession  of  his  rights  ;  he  was  there-
fore obliged  to  levy  execution  himself,  without  the
aid  of  a  ministerial  officer,  or  any  other  person.
If,  in  doing  so,  he  encountered  opposition,  he  had
no  other  remedy  than  the  i^ov\ns  St/cr;,  which  (if
the  subject-matter  was  land)  must  have  been
grounded  upon  his  own  previous  entry.  The  action
could  be  brought  against  any  one  who  impeded
him  in  his  endeavour  to  get  possession,  as  well  as
against  the  party  to  the  former  suit.  The  cause  of
Demosthenes  against  Onetor  was  this  :  —  Demo-
sthenes having  recovered  a  judgment  against  Apho-
bas,  proceeded  to  take  his  lands  in  execution.
Onetor  claimed  them  as  mortgagee,  and  turned
him  out  (el^Tev),  whereupon  Demosthenes,  con-
tending that  the  mortgage  was  collusive  and  frau-
dulent, brought  the  i^ovKTjs  Siktj,  which  is  called
S/ktj  irphs  'Oj/'/jto/mz,  because  the  proceeding  is  in
rem,  and  collateral  to  another  object,  rather  than  a
direct  controversy  between  the  parties  in  the  cause.
The  consequence  to  the  defendant,  if  he  failed  in
the  action  of  ejectment,  was,  that  (besides  his  liabi-
lity to  the  plaintiff)  he  was,  as  a  public  offender,
condemned  to  pay  to  the  treasury  a  sum  equal  to
the  damages,  or  to  the  value  of  the  property  re-
covered in  the  first  action.  While  this  remained
unpaid  (and  we  may  presume  it  could  not  be  paid
without  also  satisfying  the  party),  he  became,  as  a
state  debtor,  subject  to  the  disabilities  of  ari/ita.
(Meier,  Att.  Proc.  pp.  372, 460,  748.)  [C.  R.  K.]

E'MBATES.     [Modulus.]

EMBLE'MA  (efiSKr^fia,  ejUTrato-jUo),  an  inlaid
ornament.  The  art  of  inlaying  (^  rixvt]  iixiraia-
TiK-i],  Ath.  xi.  p.  488)  was  employed  in  producing
beautiful  works  of  two  descriptions,  viz, :  —  1st,
Those  which  resembled  our  marquetry,  buhl,  and
Florentine  mosaics ;  and  2dly,  those  in  which
crusts  (crustae),  exquisitely  wrought  in  relief  and
of  precious  metals,  such  as  gold,  silver,  and  amber,
were  fastened  upon  the  surface  of  vessels  or  other


EMISSARIUM.

pieces  of  furniture.     Works  of  both  classes,  when
in  metal,  come  under  the  head  of  Caelatura.

To  productions  of  the  former  class  we  may  refer
all  attempts  to  adom  the  walls  and  floors  of  houses
with  the  figures  of  flowers  and  animals,  or  with
any  other  devices  expressed  upon  a  common  ground
by  the  insertion  of  variously  coloured  woods  or
marbles,  all  of  which  were  polished  so  as  to  be
brought  to  a  plain  surface.  To  such  mosaics  Luci-
lius  alludes  (ap.  Cic.  de  Orat.  iii.  43),  when  he
compares  the  well-connected  words  of  a  skilful
orator  to  the  small  pieces  (tessertdae)  which  com-
pose the  "  emblema  vermiculatum "  of  an  orna-
mental pavement.  In  the  time  of  Pliny  these  de-
corations for  the  walls  of  apartments  had  become
very  fashionable.  (//.  N.  xxxv.  1.)  Respecting
emblemata  in  metal  work,  see  Caelatura  and
Chrysendeta.  It  may  here  be  added  that
Athenaeus,  in  describing  two  Corinthian  vases  (v.
p.  199),  distinguishes  between  the  emblems  in
bas-relief  (Trp6crrvTra)  which  adorned  the  body
and  neck  of  each  vessel,  and  the  figures  in  high
relief  {ir^picpavTi  T^Topvevixeva  ^(t>a)  Avhich  were
placed  upon  its  brim.  An  artist,  whose  business
it  was  to  make  works'  ornamented  with  emblems,
was  called  crustanus.  (Plin.  H.  N'.  xxxiii.  12.
s.  55  ;  Cic.  Verr.  iv.  23  ;  Martial,  viii.  51  ;  Juv.
i,  76,  V.  38  ;  Dig.  24.  tit.  2.  s.  23.  §  1  ;  Heyne,
Antiq.  Aufs.  vol.  i.  p.  147.)  [J.  Y.]

EMISSA'RIUM  (uTrdvo/ios),  a  channel,  natural
or  artificial,  by  which  an  outlet  is  formed  to  carry
off  any  stagnant  body  of  water.  (Plin.  H.  N.
xxxiii.  4.  8.21;  Cic.  ad  Fam.  xvi.  18.)  Such
channels  may  be  either  open  or  underground  ;  but
the  most  remarkable  works  of  the  kind  are  of  the
latter  description,  as  they  carry  off  the  waters  of
lakes  surrounded  by  hills.  In  Greece,  the  most
remarkable  example  is  presented  by  the  subter-
raneous channels  which  carry  off  the  waters  of  the
lake  Copais  into  the  Cephisus,  which  were  partly
natural  and  partly  artificial.  (Strab.  ix.  p.  406  ;
Thierscli,  E'tat  actuel  de  la  Grece,  vol.  ii.  p.  23  ;
Miiller,  Orchomenos,  pp.  49,  &c.,  2nd  ed.)

Another  specimen  of  such  works  among  the
Greeks  at  an  early  period  is  presented  by  the  sub-
teiTaneous  channels  constructed  by  Phaeax  at
Agrigentum  in  Sicily,  to  drain  the  city,  about  B.C.
480  ;  which  were  admired  for  their  magnitude,
although  the  workmanship  was  very  rude.  (Diod.
Sic.  xi.  25.)

Some  works  of  this  kind  are  among  the  most
remarkable  efforts  of  Roman  ingenuity.  Remains
still  exist  to  show  that  the  lakes  Trasimene,
Albano,  Nemi,  and  Fucino,  were  all  drained  by
means  of  emissaria,  the  last  of  which  is  still  nearly
perfect,  and  open  to  inspection,  having  been  par-
tially cleared  by  the  present  king  of  Naples.
Julius  Caesar  is  said  to  have  first  conceived  the
idea  of  this  stupendous  undertaking  (Suet.  Jul.
44),  which  was  carried  into  effect  by  the  Emperor
Claudius.     (Tacit.  A7in.  xii.  57.)

The  following  account  of  the  works,  from  ob-
servations on  the  spot,  will  give  some  idea  of  their
extent  and  difficulties.     The  circumference  of  the
lake,  including  the  bays  and  promontories,  is  about
I    thirty  miles  in  extent.     The  length  of  the  emis-
I    sary,  which  lies  nearly  in   a  direct  line  from  the
\    lake  to  the  river  Liris  (Garigliano),  is  something
I    more  than  three  miles.     The  number  of  workmen
j    employed  was  30,000,  and  the  time   occupied  in
i    the  work  eleven  years.   (Suet.  Claud.  20  j  compare


EMISSARIUM.


457


Plin.  //.  A^.  xxxvi.  15.  s.  24.  §11.)  For  more
them  a  mile  the  tunnel  is  carried  under  a  moun-
tain, of  which  the  highest  part  is  1000  feet  above
the  level  of  the  lake,  and  through  a  stratum  of
rocky  formation  (camelian)  so  hard  that  every  inch
required  to  be  worked  by  the  chisel.  The  remain-
ing portion  runs  through  a  softer  soil,  not  much
below  the  level  of  the  earth,  and  is  vaulted  with
brick.  Perpendicular  openings  (putei)  are  sunk  at
various  distances  into  the  tunnel,  through  which
the  excavations  were  partly  discharged  ;  and  a
number  of  lateral  shafts  (cuniculi),  some  of  which
separate  themselves  into  two  branches,  one  above
the  other,  are  likewise  directed  into  it,  the  lowest
at  an  elevation  of  five  feet  from  the  bottom.
Through  these  the  materials  excavated  were  also
carried  out.  Their  object  was  to  enable  the  pro-
digious multitude  of  30,000  men  to  carry  on  their


operations  at  the  same  time,  without  incommoding
one  another.  The  immediate  mouth  of  the  tunnel
is  some  distance  from  the  present  margin  of  the
lake,  which  space  is  occupied  by  two  ample  reser-
voirs, intended  to  break  the  rush  of  water  before  it
entered  the  emissary,  connected  by  a  narrow  pas-
sage, in  which  were  placed  the  sluices  (epistomia).
The  mouth  of  the  tunnel  itself  consists  of  a  splendid
archway  of  the  Doric  order,  nineteen  feet  high  and
nine  wide,  formed  out  of  large  blocks  of  stone,  re-
sembling in  construction  the  works  of  the  Claudian
aqueduct.  That  through  which  the  waters  dis-
charged themselves  into  the  Liris  was  more  simple,
and  is  represented  in  the  preceding  woodcut.  The
river  lies  in  a  ravine  between  the  arch  and  fore-
ground, at  a  depth  of  60  feet  below,  and  conse-
quently cannot  be  seen  in  the  cut.  The  small
aperture  above  the  embouchure  is  one  of  the  cuni-
culi  above  mentioned.  It  appears  that  the  actual
drainage  was  relinquished  soon  after  the  death  of
Claudius,  cither  from  the  perversity  of  Nero,  as  the


458


EMPHYTEUSIS.


words  of  Pliny  (I.  c.)  seem  to  imply,  or  by  neglect  ;
for  it  was  reopened  by  Hadrian.  (Spart.  Hadr.
22.)  For  further  information  see  ELirt,  who  gives
a  series  of  plans  and  sections  of  the  works  con-
nected with  the  Lacus  Fucinus  {Geb'dude  d.
Griech.  u.  R6m.  pp.  371—375,  PI.  XXXI.  figs.  14
—21).  [A.  R.]

E'MBOLUM.     [Navis.]

EME'RITI.     [ExERciTus.]

EMME'NI  DIKAE  (efi/xwoi  5t/coi),  suits  in
the  Athenian  courts,  which  were  not  allowed  to
be  pending  above  a  month.  This  regulation  was
not  introduced  till  after  the  date  of  Xenophon's
treatise  on  the  revenue,  in  which  it  was  proposed
that  a  more  rapid  progress  should  be  allowed  to
commercial  suits  (Xen.  de  Vectig.  3),  and  it  ap-
pears to  have  been  first  established  in  the  time  of
Philip.  {Or.  de  Halon.  p.  Id.  23.)  It  was  con-
fined to  those  subjects  which  required  a  speedy
decision  ;  and  of  these  the  most  important  were
disputes  respecting  commerce  (ifMiropiKoi  S'lKai,  Pol-
lux, viii.  63,  101  ;  Harpocrat.  and  Suid.  s.v.
"Efi/x-nvoi  Ai'/cai),  which  were  heard  during  the  six
winter  months  from  Boedromion  to  Munychion,
so  that  the  merchants  might  quickly  obtain  their
rights  and  sail  away  (Dem.  c.  Apat.  p.  900.  3)  ;
by  which  we  are  not  to  understand,  as  some  have
done,  tliat  a  suit  could  be  protracted  through  this
whole  time,  but  it  was  necessary  that  it  should  be
decided  within  a  month.  (Bockh,  Fubl.  Econ.  of
Athens.,  p.  50,  2nd  ed.)

All  causes  relating  to  mines  (fieTaWiKal  Si/caz)
•\yere  also  i^in]voi  h'ucai  (Dem.  c.  Pantaen.  p.  d(]Q.
17)  ;  the  object,  as  Bockh  remarks  {On  the  Silver
Mines  of  Laurion.,  Puhl.  Econ.  of  Athens.,  p.  ^^I')
being  no  doubt  that  the  mine  proprietor  might
not  be  detained  too  long  from  his  bus'ness.  The
same  was  the  case  with  causes  relating  to  tpavoi
(Polhix,  viii.  101  ;  Harpocrat.  and  Suid.  I.  c.)
[Erani]  ;  and  Pollux  {I.e.)  includes  in  the  list,
suits  respecting  dowry,  which  are  omitted  by  Har-
pocration  and  Suidas.

EMPHRU'RI  {efiippovpoi),  from  (ppovpd,  the
name  given  to  the  Spartan  citizens  dunng  the
period  in  which  they  were  liable  to  military  ser-
vice. (Xen.  Rep.  Lac.  v.  7.)  This  period  lasted  to
the  fortieth  year  from  manhood  (a(^'  v^^tjs),  that  is
to  say,  to  the  sixtieth  year  from  birth  ;  and  during
this  time  a  man  could  not  go  out  of  the  country
without  permission  from  the  authorities.  (Isocr.
Busir.  p.  225,  where  /jidxi/J-os,  according  to  MUller,
Doi:  iii.  12.  §  1,  is  evidently  put  for  cficppovpos.)

EMPHYTEUSIS  {ifKp^revaLS,  literally  an
"  in-planting ")  is  a  perpetual  right  in  a  piece
of  land  that  is  the  property  of  another :  the
right  consists  in  the  legal  power  to  cultivate  it,
and  treat  it  as  our  own,  on  condition  of  cultivating
it  properly,  and  paying  a  fixed  sum  {canon,  pensio,
reditus)  to  the  owner  {dominns)  at  fixed  times.  The
right  is  founded  on  contract  between  the  owner
(dominus  emphyteuscos)  and  the  lessee  (emphy-
teuta),  and  the  land  is  called  ager  vectigalis  or
emphyteuticarius.  It  was  long  doubted  whether
this  was  a  contract  of  buying  and  selling,  or  of
letting  and  hiring,  till  the  emperor  Zeno  gave  it  a
definite  character,  and  the  distinctive  name  of  con-
tractus emphyteuticarius.

The  Ager  Vectigalis  is  first  distinctly  mentioned
about  the  time  of  Hadrian,  and  the  term  is  applied
to  lands  which  were  leased  by  the  Roman  state,
by  towns,  by  ecclesiastical  corporations,  and  by  the


EMPHYTEUSIS.

Vestal  virgins.  In  the  Digest  mention  only  is
made  of  lands  of  towns  so  let,  with  a  distinction  of
them  into  agri  vectigales  and  non  vectigales,  ac-
cording as  the  lease  was  perpetual  or  not  ;  but  in
either  case  the  lessee  had  a  real  action  {utilis  in  rem
actio)  for  the  protection  of  his  rights,  even  against
the  owner.

The  tenn  Emphyteusis  first  occurs  in  the  Digest.
The  Praedia  Emphyteutica  are  also  frequently  men-
tioned in  the  Theodosian  and  Justinian  Codes,  but
they  are  distinguished  from  the  agri  vectigales.
Justinian,  however,  put  the  emphyteusis  and  the
ager  vectigalis  on  the  same  footing  ;  and  in  the  case
of  an  emphyteusis  (whether  the  lessor  was  a  com-
munity or  an  individual),  the  law  was  declared  to
be  the  same  as  in  the  case  of  leases  of  town  pro-
perty. This  emphyteusis  was  not  ownershij) :  it
was  a  jus  in  re  only,  and  the  lessee  is  constantly
distinguished  from  tlie  owner  (dominus).  Yet  the
occupier  of  the  ager  vectigalis  and  the  emphyteuta
had  a  juristical  possessio  ;  a  kind  of  inconsistency,
which  is  explained  by  Savigny,  by  showing  that
the  ager  vectigalis  was  formed  on  the  analogy  of
the  ager  publicus,  and  though  there  Avere  many
differences  between  them,  tliL're  was  nothing  in-
consistent in  the  notion  of  possession,  as  applied  to
the  public  land,  being  transferred  to  the  ager  vec-
tigalis as  a  modified  form  of  the  ager  publicus.

Though  the  emphyteuta  had  not  the  ownership
of  the  land,  he  had  an  almost  unlimited  right  to
the  enjoyment  of  it,  unless  there  were  special
agreements  limiting  his  right.  The  fruits  belonged
to  him  as  soon  as  they  were  separated  from  the
soil.  (Dig.  22.  tit.  1.  s.  25.  §  1.)  He  could  sell
his  interest  in  the  land,  after  giving  notice  to  the
owner,  who  had  the  power  of  choosing  whether  he
would  buy  the  land  at  the  price  which  the  pur-
chaser was  willing  to  give.  But  the  lessee  could
not  sell  his  interest  to  a  person  who  was  unable  to
maintain  the  property  in  good  condition.  The
lessee  was  bound  to  pay  all  the  public  charges  and
burdens  which  might  fall  on  the  land,  to  improve
the  property,  or  at  least  not  to  deteriorate  it,  and
to  pay  the  rent  regularly.  In  case  of  the  lessee's
interest  being  transferred  to  another,  a  fiftieth  part
of  the  price,  or  of  the  value  of  the  property,  when
the  nature  of  the  transfer  did  not  require  a  price  to
be  fixed,  was  paj^able  to  the  owner  on  the  admis-
sion of  the  new  emphyteuta,  and  which,  as  a  general
rule,  was  payable  by  hini.  Under  these  limitations
the  dominus  was  bound  to  admit  the  new  emphy-
teuta (in  possessionem  suscipere.)  If  the  domhnis
refused  to  admit  him,  the  seller,  after  C(?rtain  fornm-
lities,  could  transfer  all  his  right  without  the  con-
sent of  the  dominus.  The  heredes  of  the  emphy-
teuta were  not  liable  to  such  payment.  The
emphyteuta  could  dispose  of  his  right  by  testament :
in  case  of  intestacy  it  devolved  on  his  heredes.

The  origin  of  the  emphyteusis,  as  already  stated,
was  by  contract  with  the  owner  and  by  tradition ;
or  the  owner  might  make  an  emphyteusis  by  his
last  will.  It  might  also  in  certain  cases  be  founded
on  prescription.

The  right  of  the  emphyteuta  might  cease  in
several  ways  ;  by  surrender  to  the  dominus,  or  by
dying  without  heirs,  in  which  case  the  emphyteusis
reverted  to  the  owner.  He  might  also  lose  his
right  by  injuring  the  property,  by  non-payment  of
his  rent  or  the  public  burdens  to  which  the  laud
was  liable,  by  alienation  without  notice  to  the
dominus,  &c.     In  auch  cases  the  dominus  could


EMTIO  ET  VENDITIO.
take  legal  measures  for  recovering  the  possession.
(Dig.  6.  tit.  3,  and  39.  tit,  4  ;  Cod.  4.  tit.  66  ;
Inst.  3.  tit.  24  (25)  ;  Muhlenbruch,  Dodrina  Pan-
dectarum  ;  Savignj'-,  Des  Redd  des  Besitzes,  p.  99^
&c.  p.  180  ;  Mackeldev,  Lehrbuch,  &c.  §  295,  &c.
§  384,  12th  ed.)  [G.  L.]

EMPO'RIUM  (rh  e/ATTtJpioi'),  a  place  for  whole-
gale  trade  in  commodities  carried  by  sea.  The
name  is  sometimes  .applied  to  a  sea-port  town,  but
it  properly  signifies  only  a  particular  place  in  such
a  town.  Thus  Amphitryo  says  (Plaut.  AmpL  iv.
1 .  4)  that  he  looked  for  a  person.

"  Apud  emporium,  atque  in  macello,  in  palaestra

atque  in  foro.
In  medicinis,   in  tonstrinis,  apud   omnis  aedis

sacras."

(Compare  Liv.  xxxv.  10,  xli.  27.)  The  word  is
derived  from  e/nropos,  which  signifies  in  Homer  a
person  who  sails  as  a  passenger  in  a  ship  belonging
to  another  person  (Oi.  ii.  319,  xxiv.  300)  ;  but  in
later  writers  it  signifies  the  merchant  who  carries
on  commerce  with  foreign  countries,  and  differs
from  KctTTTjAos,  the  retail  dealer,  who  purchases  his
goods  from  the  e/xTTopos  and  retails  them  in  the
market-place.     (Plat.  De  Rep.  ii.  p.  371.)

At  Athens,  it  is  said  (Lex.  Seg,  p.  208)  that
there  were  two  kinds  of  emporia,  one  for  foreigners
and  the  other  for  natives  {i,eviK6v  and  aariKdu)  ;
but  this  appears  doubtful.  (Bbckh,  Publ.  Econ.  of
Athens,  p.  313,  2nd  ed.)  The  emporium  at  Athens
was  under  the  inspection  of  certain  officers,  who
were  elected  annually  {iirifieATjTal  rov  iixiroplov).
f  Epimeletae,  No.  3.]

■  EMPTI  ET  VE'NDITI  A'CTIO.  The  seller
has  an  actio  venditi,  and  the  buyer  has  an  actio
empti,  upon  the  contract  of  sale  and  purchase.  Both
of  them  are  actiones  directae,  and  their  object  is  to
obtain  the  fulfilment  of  the  obligations  resulting
from  the  contract.     (Dig.  19.  tit  1.)        [G.  L.]

E'MPTIO  ET  VENDI'TIO.  The  contract  of
buying  and  selling  is  one  of  those  which  the  Ro-
mans called  ex  consensu,  because  nothing  more  was
required  than  the  consent  of  the  parties  to  the  con-
tract. (Gains,  iii.  135,  &c.)  It  consists  in  the
buyer  agreeing  to  give  a  certain  sum  of  money  to
the  seller,  and  the  seller  agreeing  to  give  to  the
buyer  some  certain  thing  for  his  money  ;  and  the
contract  is  complete  as  soon  as  both  parties  have
agreed  about  the  thing  that  is  to  be  sold  and  about
the  price.  No  writing  is  required,  unless  it  be
part  of  the  contract  that  it  shall  not  be  complete
till  it  is  reduced  to  writing.  (Dig.  44.  tit.  7.  s.  2;
Inst.  3.  tit.  23.)  After  the  agreement  is  made,  the
buyer  is  bound  to  pay  his  money,  even  if  the  thing
which  is  the  object  of  purchase  should  be  accident-
ally destroyed  before  it  is  delivered  ;  and  the  seller
must  deliver  the  thing  with  all  its  intermediate  in-
crease. The  purchaser  does  not  obtain  the  ownership
of  the  thing  till  it  has  been  delivered  to  him,  and  till
he  has  paid  the  purchase  money,  unless  the  thing  is
sold  on  credit.  (Dig.  19.  tit.  1.  s.  11,  §  2.)  If  he
does  not  pay  the  purchase  money  at  the  time  when
it  is  due,  he  must  pay  interest  on  it.  The  seller
must  also  warrant  a  good  title  to  the  purchase
[EviCTio],  and  he  must  also  warrant  that  the
thing  has  no  concealed  defects,  and  that  it  has  all
the  good  qualities  which  he  (the  seller)  attributes
I  to  it.  It  was  with  a  view  to  check  frauds  in  sales,
,  and  especially  in  the  sales  of  slaves,  that  the  seller
was  obliged   by  the  edict  of  the  curule  aediles


ENDEIXIS.


AB9


[Edictum]  to  inform  the  buyer  of  the  defects  of
any  slave  offered  for  sale  :  "  Qui  mancipia  vendunt,
certiores  faciant  emptores  quod  morbi  vitiique,"  &c.
(Dig.  21.  tit.  1.)  In  reference  to  this  part  of  the
law,  in  addition  to  the  usual  action  arising  from
the  contract,  the  buyer  had  against  the  seller,  ac-
cording to  the  circumstances,  an  actio  ex  stipulatu,
redhibitoria,  and  quanti  minoris.  Horace,  in  his
Satires  (ii.  3.  286),  and  in  the  beginning  of  the
second  epistle  of  the  second  book,  alludes  to  the
precautions  to  be  taken  by  the  buyer  and  seller
of  a  slave.  [G.L.]

ENCAUSTICA.  [Pictura,  No.  7.]
ENCLE'MA  (e7/cA77/ia).  [Dike.]
ENCTE'SIS  (e7KTi7(ris),  the  right  of  possessing
landed  property  and  houses  {iyKritiais  77jy  koX
oiKias)  in  a  foreign  country,  which  was  frequently
granted  by  one  Greek  state  to  another,  or  to  se-
parate individuals  of  another  state.  (Dem.  De  Cor.
p.  2G5.  7  ;  Bockh,  Corp.  Inscript.  vol.  i.  p.  725.)
'EyKTrjixara  were  such  possessions  in  a  foreign
country,  and  are  opposed  by  Demosthenes  (De
Hcdon.  p.  87.  7)  to  /cTTj/^ara,  possessions  in  one's
own  country.  (Valcken.  ad  Herod,  v.  23.)  The
term  iyKT'fjiJ.aTa  was  also  applied  to  the  landed
property  or  houses  which  an  Athenian  possessed
in  a  different  Stjjuos  from  that  to  which  he  belonged
by  birth,  and  with  respect  to  such  property  he
was  called  iyKeKTr^jxeuos :  whence  we  find  De-
mosthenes (c.  Polycl.  p.  1208.  27)  speaking  of  ol
SrjfjidTai  Kal  at  ey/ceKTTjyueVot.  For  the  right  of
holding  property  in  a  Srj^ioy  to  which  he  did  not
belong,  he  had  to  pay  such  S-fj/ios  a  tax,  which  is
mentioned  in  inscriptions  under  the  name  of  €7-
kt7]tik6v.  (Bockh,  PvhL  Econ.  of  Athens,  p.  297,
2nd  ed.)

ENDEIXIS  (fvSei^is),  properly  denotes  a  prose-
cution instituted  against  such  persons  as  were  al-
leged to  have  exercised  rights  or  held  offices  while
labouring  under  a  peculiar  disqualification.  Among
these  are  to  be  reckoned  state  debtors,  who  during
their  liability  sate  in  court  as  dicasts,  or  took  any
other  part  in  public  life  ;  exiles,  who  had  returned
clandestinely  to  Athens  ;  those  that  visited  holy
places  after  a  conviction  for  impiety  (aaeSeia)  ;  and
all  such  as  having  incurred  a  partial  disfranchise-
ment (ari/xia  Kara  TTpoaTa^iv)  presumed  to  exercise
their  forbidden  functions  as  before  their  condemna-
tion. Besides  these,  however,  the  same  form  of
action  was  available  against  the  chairman  of  the
proedri  (eTTio-TciTTjs),  who  wrongly  refused  to  take
the  votes  of  the  people  in  the  assembly  (Plat.
Apol.  p.  32)  ;  against  malefactors,  especially  mur-
dei-ers  (which  Schomann  thinks  was  probably  the
course  pursued  when  the  tinie  for  an  apagoge  had
been  suffered  to  elapse)  ;  traitors,  ambassadors
accused  of  malversation  (Isocrat.  c.  Callim.  11)  ;
and  persons  who  furnished  supplies  to  the  enemy
during  war.  (Aristoph.  Equit.  278  ;  Andoc.  JJe
Reditu,  82.)  The  first  step  taken  by  the  prose-
cutor was  to  lay  his  information  in  writing,  also
called  endeians,  before  the  proper  magistrate,  who
might  be  the  archon  or  king  archon,  or  one  of  the
thesmothetae,  according  to  the  subject-matter  of
the  information  ;  but  in  the  case  of  a  malefactor
(KUKovpyos)  being  the  accused  person,  the  Eleven
were  the  officers  applied  to.  It  then  became  the
duty  of  the  magistrate  to  arrest,  or  hold  to  bail,
the  person  criminated,  and  take  the  usual  steps  for
bringing  him  to  trial.  There  is  great  obscurity  as
to  the  result  of  condemnation  in  a  prosecution  of


460


ENECHYRA.


this  kiJid.  Heraldus  {Animadv.  in  Salin.  iv.  9.
§  10)  ridicules  the  idea  that  it  was  invariably  a
capital  punishment.  The  accuser,  if  unsuccessful,
was  responsible  for  bringing  a  malicious  charge
(TpevSovs  ipSei^ews  virevdvuos).  (Schomann,  De
Com.  p.  175,  Aft.  Proc.  p.  239,  &c.)

The  endeixis,  apayoge  (airaywyf})  and  ephegesis
(^i^Tiyrjais)  must  be  carefully  distinguished.  Pollux
says  (viii.  49)  that  the  endeixis  was  adopted  when
the  accused  was  absent  ;  the  apagoge  when  he  was
present ;  and  we  know  that  the  apagoge  was  a
summary  process,  in  Avhich  the  defendant  was  al-
lowed to  apprehend  a  culprit  caught  in  ipso  facto
and  lead  him  before  a  magistrate.  In  case  the
charge  was  ill-founded,  the  complainant  ran  the
risk  of  forfeiting  1000  drachmae.  If  he  did  not
like  to  expose  himself  to  this  risk,  he  might  have
recourse  to  the  ephegesis  (icp-ffyTja-is),  in  which  he
made  an  application  to  the  proper  magistrate,
as,  for  instance,  to  one  of  the  Eleven,  if  it  were
a  case  of  burglary  or  robbery  attended  with  murder,
and  conducted  him  and  his  officers  to  the  spot
where  the  capture  was  to  be  effected.  (Comp.
Dem.  c.  Androt.  p.  601.)

The  cases  in  which  the  apagoge  and  ephegesis  were
most  generally  allowed,  were  those  of  theft,  murder,
ill-usage  of  parents,  &c.  The  punishment  in  these
cases  was  generally  fixed  by  law  ;  and  if  the
accused  confessed,  or  was  proved  guilty,  the  magis-
trate could  execute  the  sentence  at  once,  without
appealing  to  any  of  the  jury-courts  ;  otherwise,  it
was  necessary  that  the  case  should  be  referred  to  a
higher  tribunal.  (Aesch.  c.  Timarch-  c.  37  ;  Dem.
De  Fals.  Legate,  p,  431.)  The  magistrates  who
presided  over  the  apagoge  were  generally  the  Eleven
(ot  eVSewa,  Dem.  c.  Timocr.  p.  736  ;  Lysias,  c.
Agorat.  c.  85)  ;  sometimes  the  chief  archon  (Aesch.
c.  Timarch.  c.  64),  or  the  thesmothetae  (Dem.  c.
Aristocr.  p.  630).  The  most  important  passage
with  regard  to  the  apagoge  (Lysias,  c.  Agorat.
§  85,  86)  is  unfortunately  corrupt  and  unintelligible.
(See  Sluiter,  Led.  Andocid.  p.  254,  &c.)  The
complainant  was  said  aird'yiiv  r^v  aTrayuyfjv :  the
magistrates,  when  they  allowed  it,  irapedexovro
TT]v  airaycayiii/.  [J.  S.  M.]

E'NDROMIS  (iuBpofjus),  a  thick  coarse  blanket,
manufactured  in  Gaul,  and  called  "  endromis  "  be-
cause those  who  had  been  exercising  in  the  stadium
(iv  Sp6fi({>)  threw  it  over  them  to  obviate  the  ef-
fects of  sudden  exposure  when  they  were  heated.
Notwithstanding  its  coarse  and  shaggy  appearance,
it  was  worn  on  other  occasions  as  a  protection  from
the  cold  bv  rich  and  fashionable  persons  at  Rome.
(Juv.  iii,  103  ;  Mart.  iv.  19,  xiv.  126.)  Ladies
also  put  on  an  endromis  of  a  finer  description  (en-
dromidas  Tyrias,  Juv.  vi.  246),  when  they  partook,
as  they  sometimes  did,  of  the  exercises  of  the
palaestra.  Moreover,  boots  [Cothuknus]  were
called  iySpofj-'iBis  on  account  of  the  use  of  them  in
running.  (Callim.  Hymn,  in  Dian,  16,  in  Delum^
238  ;  Pollux,  iii.  155,  vii.  93  ;  Brunck,  Anal.  iii.
206.)  [J.  Y.l

ENECHYRA  (ivex^pa).  In  private  suits  at
Athens,  whether  tried  by  a  court  of  law,  or  before
an  arbitrator,  whenever  judgment  was  given  against
a  defendant,  a  certain  period  was  at  the  same  time
fixed  (v  rrpoOeafiia),  before  the  expiration  of  which
it  was  incumbent  upon  him  to  comply  with  the  ver-
dict. In  default  of  doing  so  he  became  yTrep^yuepos,
or  over  the  day,  as  it  was  called,  and  the  plaintiff
was  privileged  to  seize  upon  (ai//oa0oi)  his  goods


ENGYE.

and  chattels  as  a  security  or  compensation  for  non-
compliance. (Dem.  c.  Meid.  p.  540.  21  ;  Ulpian,
ad  he.  ;  Aristoph.  Nuhes,  35.)  The  property  thus
taken  was  called  eVex^pa,  and  slaves  were  gene-
rally seized  before  anything  else.  (Athen.  xiii.
p.  612,  c.)  This  "taking  in  execution  "  was  usu-
ally left  to  the  party  who  gained  the  suit,  and  who,
if  he  met  with  resistance  in  making  a  seizure,  had
his  remedy  in  a  SiKrj  e|ouA.7}s  :  if  with  personal
violence,  in  a  Siktj  aiKias.  (Dem.  c.  Everg.  p.
1153.)  On  one  occasion,  indeed,  we  read  of  a
public  officer  (uTTTjpeTTjs  irapa  t^s  apxrjs)  being
taken  to  assist  in,  or  perhaps  to  be  a  witness  of,  a
seizure  ;  but  this  was  in  a  case  where  public  in-
terests were  concerned,  and  consequent  upon  a  de-
cision of  the  )8ouAi  (Id.  c.  Everg.  I U9.)  The
same  oration  gives  an  amusing  account  of  what
Englishmen  would  consider  a  case  of  "assault  and
trespass,"  committed  by  some  plaintiffs  in  a  de-
fendant's house,  though  the  amount  of  damages
which  had  been  given  (rj  /caraSi/cTj)  was,  according
to  agreement,  lying  at  the  bank  (iirl  rij  rpaire^r)),
and  there  awaiting  their  receipt.

It  seems  probable,  though  we  are  not  aware  of
it  being  expressly  so  stated,  that  goods  thus  seized
were  publicly  sold,  and  that  the  party  from  Avhom
they  were  taken  could  sue  his  opponent,  perhaps  by
a  S'lKrf  /3A,ag7js,  for  any  surplus  which  might  remain
after  all  legal  demands  were  satisfied.  No  seizure
of  this  sort  could  take  place  during  several  of  the
religious  festivals  of  the  Athenians,  such  as  the
DiouA'sia,  the  Lenaea,  &c.  They  were,  in  fact,
dies  non  in  Athenian  law.  (Dem.  c.  Meid.  p.  518  ;
Pludtwalcker,  Diaet.  p.  132.)  [R.  W.]

ENGYE  (677^77),  bail  or  sureties,  Avere  in
very  frequent  requisition,  both  in  the  private  and
public  affairs  of  the  Athenians.  Private  agree-
ments, as,  for  instance,  to  abide  by  the  decisicm  of
arbitrators  (Dem.  c.  Apatur.  pp.  892 — 899),  or  that
the  evidence  resulting  from  the  application  of  tor-
ture to  a  slave  should  be  conclusive  (Dem.  c.  Pan-
taen.  p.  978.  11),  were  corroborated  by  the  parties
reciprocally  giving  each  other  such  sureties ;  and
the  same  took  place  generally  in  all  money  lending
or  mercantile  transactions,  and  was  invariably  ne-
cessary when  persons  undertook  to  farm  tolls,  taxes,
or  other  public  property.

In  judicial  matters  bail  or  sureties  were  provided
upon  two  occasions  ;  first,  when  it  was  requisite
that  it  should  be  guaranteed  that  the  accused
should  be  forthcoming  at  the  trial  ;  and  secondly,
when  security  Avas  demanded  for  the  satisfaction
of  the  award  of  the  court.  In  the  first  case,  bail
was  very  generally  required  when  the  accused  was
other  than  an  Athenian  citizen,  whether  the  action
were  public  or  private  ;  but  if  of  that  privileged
class,  upon  no  other  occasion,  except  when  pro-
ceeded against  by  way  of  Apagoge,  Endeixis,
Ephegesis,  or  Eisangelia.  Upon  the  last-mentioned
form  being  adopted  in  a  case  of  high  treason  bail
was  not  accepted.  The  technical  word  for  requiring
bail  of  an  accused  person  is  Kareyyvav^  that  for
becoming  surety  in  such  case  i^eyyvaaOeti.  Surety
of  the  other  kind  was  demanded  at  the  beginning
of  a  suit  upon  two  occasions  only ;  first,  when  a
citizen  asserted  the  freedom  of  a  person  detained
in  slavery  by  another  ;  and  secondly,  when  a  liti-
gant, who  had  suffered  judgment  to  go  by  default
before  the  arbitrator  (StatTTjr^s),  had  recommenced
his  action  within  the  given  time  (/i^  oxxra  SUrj).
After  the  judgment,  security  of  this  kind  was  re-


ENOIKIOU  DIKE,
quired  in  all  mercantile  and  some  other  private
causes  ;  and  state  debtors,  who  had  been  sentenced
to  remain  in  prison  till  they  had  acquitted  them-
selves of  their  liabilities,  were,  by  a  law  of  Timo-
crates  (Dem.  c.  Timocr.  pp.  712 — 716),  allowed  to
go  at  large  if  they  could  provide  three  sureties
that  the  money  should  be  paid  within  a  limited
period.     If  the  principal  in  a  contract  made  default
the  surety  was  bound  to  make  it  good,  or  if  he  re-
fused to  do  so,  might  be  attacked  by  an  iyyvtis  St Krj,
if  such  action  were  brought  within  a  twelvemonth
after  the    obligation  was  undertaken.     (Dem.  c,
Apaiur.Yp.  901,910.)  If, however,  a  person  accused
in  a  public  action  by  one  of  the  forms  above  men-
tioned failed  to  appear  to  take  his  trial,  his  bail
became  liable  to  any  punishment  that  such  person
had  incurred  by  contempt  of  court ;  and,  consistently
with  this,  it  appears,  from  a  passage  in  Xenophon
{Hell.  I  7.  §  39),  that  the  law  allowed  the  bail  to
secure  the  person  of  the  accused  by  private  con-
finement.   (Meier,  Att.  Proc.  p.  515.)     [J.  S.  M.]
ENGUE'SIS  (iyyvT^a-is).     [Matrimonium.]
E'NNATA  (ivvaTo).     [Funus.]
ENOIKIOU    DIKE   (iuoiKlov   S/ktj),  action
brought  (like  our  trespass /or  mesne  profits  after  a
successful  action  of  ejectment)  to  recover  the  rents
withheld  from  the  owner  during  the  period  of  his
being  kept  out  of  possession.     If  the  property  re-
covered were  not  a  house,  but  land  (in  the  more
confined  sense  of    the  word),  the  action  for  the
rents  and  profits  was  called  Kapirou  Sikt?.    It  seems
from  the  language  of  the  grammarians,  that  these
actions  could  be  brought  to  try  the  title  to  the
estate,  as  well  as  for  the  above-mentioned  purpose.
Perhaps  both  the  tenement  and  the  intermediate
profits  might  be  recovered  by  one  suit,  but  the  pro-
ceeding would  be  more  hazardous,  because  a  failure
in  one  part  of  the  demand  would  involve  the  loss
of  the  whole  cause.     Thus,  the  title  of  a  party  to
the  land  itself  might  have  expired,  as  for  instance
where  he  held  under  a  lease  for  a  term ;  yet  he
would  be  entitled  to  recover  certain  bygone  profits
from  one  who  had  dispossessed  him.     Therefore  it
is  not  improbable  that  tlie  SIkui  ev,  and  Kap.  might
m  practice  be  confined  to   those  cases  where  the
rents  and  profits  only  were  the  subject  of  claim.
We  are  told  that,  if  the  defendant,  after  a  judg-
ment in  one  of  these  actions,  still  refused  to  give
'    satisfaction,  an  ovaias  Si'ktj  might  be  commenced
I    against   him,  of  which   the  effect  was,  that  the
I    plaintiif  obtained  a  right  to  indemnify  himself  out
I    of  the  whole  property  of  the  defendant.    Schbmann
I    observes,  that  this  was  a   circuitous   proceeding,
I    when  the  plaintiff  might  take  immediate  steps  to
[    execution  by  means  of  entry  and  ejectment.     His
!    conjecture,  however,  that  the   ovaias  Si'/ctj  was  in
I   ancient  times  an  important  advantage,  when  real
\   property  could  not  in  the  first  instance  be  taken  in
1   execution,  is  probably  not  far  from  the  truth,  and
is   supported   by   analogy   to    the   laws   of  other
I  nations,  which,  being  (in  the   infancy  of  civiliza-
tion) framed  by  the  landowners  only,  bear  marks
of  a  watchful  jealousy  of  any  encroachment  upon
I  their  rights.     He  remarks  also,  that  the  giving  to
;  the  party  the  choice  between  a  milder  and  a  more
I  stringent  remedy,  accords  with  the  general  tenor
!  and  spirit  of  the  Athenian  laws.     We  may  add,
'  that  our  own  law  furnishes  an  illustration  of  this,
viz.,  where  the  plaintiff  has  obtained  a  judgment,
};c  has  the  option  of  proceeding  at  once  to  execu-
tion, or  bringing   an   action    on    the    judgment  ;


ENTASIS,


461


though  with  us  the  latter  measure  is  considered
the  more  vexatious,  as  it  increases  the  costs,  and  is
rendered  less  necessary  by  the  facility  with  which
executions  can  be  levied.  At  Athens  the  6|ouAtj.9
ZIkt}^  as  it  was  the  ultimate  and  most  efficacious
remedy,  drew  with  it  also  more  penal  consequences,
as  is  explained  under  Embateia.  [Meier,  Att.
Proc.  p.  749.)  [C.  R.  K.]

ENOMO'TIA  (evcofjLOTia).     [Exercitus.]

ENSIS.     [Gladius.]

E'NTASIS  (evTacris).  The  most  ancient  co-
lumns now  existing  are  remarkable  for  the  extreme
diminution  of  the  shaft  between  its  lower  and  upper
extremity,  the  sides  of  which,  like  those  of  a  cone,
converge  immediately  and  regularly  from  the  base
to  the  neck,  so  that  the  edge  forms  a  straight  line —
a  mode  of  construction  which  is  wanting  in  grace
and  apparent  solidity.  To  correct  this,  a  swelling
outline,  called  entasis  (Vitruv.  iii.  2,  iv.  3),  was
given  to  the  shaft,  which  seems  to  have  been  the
first  step  towards  combining  grace  and  grandeur  in
the  Doric  column.

The  original  form  is  represented  by  the  figure  on
the  left  in  the  annexed  woodcut,  which  is  taken
from  the  great  temple  at  Posidonia  (Paestum),
which  is  one  of  the  most  ancient  temples  now  re-
maining ;  that  on  the  right  shows  the  e7itasis,  and
is  from  a  building  of  rather  later  construction  in
the  same  city.  Two  other  examples  of  the  same
style  are  still  to  be  seen  in  Italy,  one  belonging  to
an  ancient  temple  at  Alba  Fucinensis  (Piranesi,
Moffnif.  de''  Rom.  tav.  31.  fig.  6),  and  the  other
at  Rome,  on  the  sepulchre  of  C.  Publicius.  (i6.
%■  7.)


In  the  example  at  Paestum  the  greatest  devia-
tion which  the  curved  edge  of  the  column  makes
from  the  straight  line  of  the  cone  of  which  the
pillar  may  be  considered  as  a  part,  is  at  about  the
middle  of  the  height,  but  it  still  keeps  within  the
line  of  a  perpendicular  drawn  from  the  circumfer-
ence of  the  base  ;  or,  in  other  words,  the  column
is  thickest  at  the  base :  both  these  properties  are
clearly  shown  by  the  dotted  lines  in  the  woodcut.
(Comp.  Stieglitz,  Arch'dol.  d.  Baukunst,  vol.  i,
p.  161.)  [A.R.]


II


462


EPEUNACTAE.


EO'RA.     [Aeora.]

EPANGE'LIA  (€7ro77€\/a).  If  a  citizen  of
Athens  had  incurred  ari/xia^  the  privilege  of  taking
part  or  speaking  in  the  public  assembly  Avas  for-
feited [Atimia].  But  as  it  sometimes  might
happen  that  a  person,  though  not  formally  declared
&Ti^os^  had  committed  such  crimes  as  Avould,  on
accusation,  draw  upon  him  this  punishment,  it  was
of  course  desirable  that  such  individuals,  like  real
&TIIX01,  should  be  excluded  from  the  exercise  of  the
rights  of  citizens.  Whenever,  therefore,  such  a
person  ventured  to  speak  in  the  assembly,  any
Athenian  citizen  had  the  right  to  come  forward  in
the  assembly  itself  ( Aeschin.  c.  Timarch.  p.  1 04),
and  demand  of  him  to  establish  his  right  to  speak
by  a  trial  or  examination  of  his  conduct  (doKi/xaaia
rod  fiiov\  and  this  demand,  denouncement,  or
threat,  was  called  67ra77eA.ta,  or  eTrayyeXia  So/ct-
fxacrias.  The  impeached  individual  was  then  com-
pelled to  desist  from  speaking,  and  to  submit  to  a
scrutiny  into  his  conduct  (Pollux,  viii.  43  ;  Suidas,
s.  V.  t'7ra776Ato),  and  if  he  was  convicted,  a  formal
declaration  of  arifjiia  followed.

Some  writers  have  confoimded  the  ^TraTyeAta
■with  SoKi/xacrla,  and  considered  the  two  words  as
synonyms  ;  but  from  the  statements  made  above,
it  is  evident  that  the  SoKifiarria  is  the  actual  trial,
while  the  l7ra77eA(a  is  only  the  threat  to  subject
a  man  to  the  SoKi/naaia :  hence  the  expression
eirayyeKXeiv  SoKifiaaiav.  (Schomann,  De  Comit.
p.  232.  note  8.  transl.)  Other  writers,  such  as  Har-
pocration  and  Suidas,  do  not  sufficiently  distinguish
between  €7ro776Aia  and  ^vZi:ilis  :  the  latter  is  an
accusation  against  persons  who,  though  they  had
been  declar&l  &Tifioi^  nevertheless  ventured  to
assume  the  rights  of  citizens  in  the  public  assem-
bly ;  whereas  e7ra77eA(a  applied  only  to  those  who
had  not  yet  been  convicted  of  the  crime  laid  to
their  charge,  but  were  only  threatened  with  an  ac-
cusation for  the  first  time.  (Meier,  Att.  Proc.
p.  210  ;  Schomann,  De  Comit.  p.  232,  note  7.
transl.)  Wachsmuth  (Hellen.  AltertJmmsk,  vol.  ii.
p.  236,  2d  edit.)  seems  to  be  inclined  to  consider
the  l>7]TopiK^  ''ypa<ph  to  be  connected  or  identical
with  the  ewaYY^^ioL,  but  the  former,  according  to
tht^  definitions  of  Photius  and  Suidas,  was  in  reality
quite  a  diff'erent  thing,  inasmuch  as  it  was  intended
to  prevent  orators  from  saying  or  doing  unlawful
things  in  the  assembly  where  they  had  a  right  to
come  forward ;  whereas  the  e7ra77€A^a  was  a  de-
muiciation,  or  a  promise  to  prove  that  the  orator
had  no  right  at  all  to  speak  in  the  assembly.  [L.  S.]
EPARITI  (ktrdpiToi),  the  name  of  the  standing
army  in  Arcadia,  which  was  formed  to  preserve
the  independence  of  the  Arcadian  towns,  when
they  became  united  as  one  state  after  the  defeat
of  the  Spartans  at  Leuctra.  They  were  5000  in
j:umber,  and  were  paid  by  the  state.  (Xen.  Hell.
vii.  4.  §  34,  vii.  5.  §  3  ;  Diod.  xv.  62,  67  ;  Hesych.
.V,  V.  iirop6iqToi  ;  Bejot,  in  Mem,  de  I'' Acad,  des
Inscrip.  xxxii.  p.  234  ;  Kellermann,  De  Re  Militari
Arcadum,  p.  44  ;  Wachsmuth,  Hellen.  Alierthumsk.
vol.  i.  p.  283,  2d  ed.)

EPAU'LIA.  [Matrimonium.]
EPEflNACTAE  (eVeuw/cToi),  a  class  of
citizens  at  Sparta  who  are  said  to  have  been  the
oflfspring  of  slaves  and  the  widows  of  Sjjartan
citizens.  Theopompus  tells  us  (Athen.  vii,  p.
27],  d)  that  in  the  Messenian  war,  in  consequence
of  the  great  losses  which  the  Spartans  sustained,
they  mairied  the  widows  of  those  who  were  slain


EPHEBUS.
to  helots,  and  that  these  helots  were  admitted  to
the  citizenship  under  the  name  of  airevvaKTai.
Diodorus  (Mai,  Exc.  Vat.  p.  10)  also  aills  the  par-
tisans of  Phalanthus  iirevuaKTai.  [Partiieniae.]
(Thirlwall,  Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  i.  p.  353  ;  Muller.
Dor.  iii.  3.  §  5.)

EPHEBE'UM.     [Gymnasium.]

EPHE'BUS  (e<|)77§os),  the  name  of  an  Athenian
youth  after  he  had  attained  the  age  of  18.  (Pollux,
viii.  105  ;  Harpocrat.  s.  v.  'EiridUres  'Hgyjcrat).
The  state  of  (cprj^du  lasted  for  two  years,  till  the
young  men  had  attained  the  age  of  20,  Avhen  they
became  men,  and  were  admitted  to  share  all  the
rights  and  duties  of  a  citizen,  for  which  the  law
did  not  prescribe  a  more  advanced  age.  That  the
young  men,  when  they  became  e(pr}€oi,  did  not  re-
ceive all  the  privileges  of  full  citizens,  is  admitted
on  all  hands  ;  but  trom  the  assertion  of  Pollux  and
Harpocration,  who  state  that  their  names  were  not
entered  in  the  lexiarchic  registers  until  they  had
completed  their  20th  year,  that  is  to  s.ay,  until  they
had  gone  through  the  period  of  e(/)7j§eja,  it  would
seem  that  they  were  not  looked  upon  as  citizens  as
long  as  they  were  e<^7j§0£,  and  that  consequently
they  enjoyed  none  of  the  privileges  of  full  citizens.
But  Ave  have  sufficient  ground  for  believing,  that
the  names  of  young  men  at  the  time  they  became
e<pr)§oi,  were  entered  as  citizens  in  the  lexiarchic
registers,  for  Lycurgus  (c.  Leocrat.  p.  189)  uses  the
expressions  ^(pri§ovyiyv(cr6aianA  els  rh  Ari^iapxiKdv
ypafi/xaTelov  iyypd^ecrdai  as  synonymous.  The
statement  of  Harpocration  and  Photius  is  therefore
probably  nothing  but  a  false  inference  from  the  fact,
that  young  men  before  the  completion  of  their  20th
year  were  not  allowed  to  take  an  active  part  in  the
public  assembly  ;  or  it  may  be,  that  it  arose  out  of
the  law  which,  as  Schomann  (De  Comit.  p.  71,
transl.)  interprets  it,  prescribed  that  no  Athenian
should  be  enrolled  in  the  lexiarchic  registers  before
the  attainment  of  the  18th,  or  after  the  completion
of  the  20th  year  [Docimasia.]  From  the  oration
of  Demosthenes  against  Aphobus  (p.  814,  &;c.  ;
compare  c.  Onetor.  p.  868),  we  see  that  some  of
the  privileges  of  citizens  were  conferred  upon  young
men  on  becoming  i(p7]Soi :  Demosthenes  himself,  at
the  age  of  18,  entered  upon  his  patrimony,  and
brought  an  action  against  his  guardians  ;  one  Man-
titheus  (Demosth.  c.  Boeot.  De  Dote,  p.  1009)  re-
lates that  he  mai-ried  at  the  age  of  18  ;  and  these
facts  are  stated  ix^  such  a  manner  that  we  must
infer  that  their  occurrence  had  nothing  extra-
ordinary, but  were  in  accordance  with  the  usual
custom.

Before  a  youth  was  enrolled  among  the  ephebi,
he  had  to  undergo  a  So/ciyuao-ia,  the  object  of  which
was  partly  to  ascertain  whether  he  was  the  son  of
Athenian  citizens,  or  adopted  by  a  citizen,  and
partly  whether  his  body  was  sufficiently  developed
and  strong  to  undertake  the  duties  which  now  de-
volved upon  him.  (Aristoph.  Vesp.  533,  with  the
Schol.  ;  Demosth.  c.  Onetor.  p.  868  ;  Xen.  De  Rep.
Ath.  c.  3.  §  4;  Plato,  Crito,  p.  51,  with  Stall-
baum's  note  p.  174.  Eng.  transl.)  Schomann  {I.e.)
believes  that  this  ZoKifxacria  only  applied  to  oi-phans,
but  Aristophanes  and  Plato  mention  it  in  such  a
general  way,  that  there  seems  to  be  no  ground  for
such  a  supposition.  After  the  doKLfiaaia  the  young
men  received  in  the  assembly  a  shield  and  a  lance
( Aristot.  ap.  Harpocrat.  s.  v.  AoKiiu-acria)  ;  but
those  Avhose  fathers  had  fallen  in  the  defence  of
their  country,  received  a  complete  suit  of  armour


EPHETAE.

in  the  theatre.  (Aeschin.  c.  Ctesiph.  p.  75,  ed.  Stcph.;
Plato,  Menex.  p.  249,  with  Stallbaum's  note.)  It
seems  to  have  been  on  this  occasion  that  the
€(pr]§oi  took  an  oath  in  the  temple  of  Artemis
Aglauros  (Demosth.  De  Fals.  Leg.  p.  438  ;  Pollux,
viii.  106),  by  which  they  pledged  themselves  never
to  disgrace  their  arms  or  to  desert  their  comrades  ;
to  fight  to  the  last  in  the  defence  of  their  country,
its  altars  and  hearths  ;  to  leave  their  country  not  in
a  worse  but  in  a  better  state  than  they  found  it  ;
to  obey  the  magistrates  and  the  laws  ;  to  resist  all
attempts  to  subvert  the  institutions  of  Attica,  and
finally  to  respect  the  religion  of  their  forefathers.
This  solemnity  took  place  towards  the  close  of  the
year  (eV  apxaip^o-iais)^  and  the  festive  season  bore
the  name  of  i(p-f]€ia.  (Isaeus,  De  Apollod.  c.  28  ;
Demosth.  c.  Leochar.  p.  1092.)  The  external  dis-
tinction of  the  ^<(>T]§oi  consisted  in  the  )(\aiJLvs  and
the  ireTatTos.     (Hemsterhuis,  ad  Polluc.  x.  164.)

During  the  two  3^ears  of  the  icprtSeia,  which  may
be  considered  as  a  kind  of  apprenticeship  in  arms,
and  in  which  the  young  men  prepared  themselves  for
the  higher  duties  of  lull  citizens,  they  were  gene-
rally sent  into  the  country,  under  the  name  of
xepiTToAoi,  to  keep  watch  in  the  towns  and  for-
tresses, on  the  coast  and  frontier,  and  to  perform
other  duties  which  might  be  necessary  for  the  pro-
tection of  Attica,  (Pollux,  viii.  106  ;  Photius,  s.  v.
TlepiiroXos  :  Plato,  De  Leg.  vi.  p.  760,  c.)  [L.  S.]
EPHEGE'SIS  (icp-fiywis).  [Endeixis.]
EPHE'SIA  {€(p4<Tia\  a  great  panegyris  of  the
lonians  at  Ephesus,  the  ancient  capital  of  the
lonians  in  Asia.  It  was  held  every  year,  and  had,
like  all  panegyreis,  a  twofold  character,  that  of  a
bond  of  political  union  among  the  Greeks  of  the
Ionian  race,  and  that  of  a  common  worship  of  the
Ephesian  Artemis.  (Dionvs.  Hal.  Antiq.  Rom.  iv.
p.  229,  ed.  Sylburg  ;  Strabo,  xiv.  p.  639.)  The
Ephesia  continued  to  be  held  in  the  time  of  Thu-
cydides  and  Strabo,  and  the  former  compares  it
(iii.  104)  to  the  ancient  panegyris  of  Delos
[Delia],  where  a  great  number  of  the  lonians
assembled  with  their  wives  and  children.  Re-
specting the  particulars  of  its  celebration,  we  only
know  that  it  was  accompanied  Avith  much  mirth
and  feasting,  and  that  mystical  sacrifices  were  of-
fered to  the  Ephesian  goddess.  (Strabo,  I.  c.)  That
games  and  contests  formed  likewise  a  chief  part  of
the  solemnities  is  clear  from  Hesychius  (s.  v.),  who
calls  the  Ephesia  an  aycisv  i-nitpaviis.  (Compare
Paus.  vii.  2.  §  4  ;  Miiller,  Dor.  ii.  9.  §  8  ;  Bockh,
Corp.  Inscript.  ii.  n.  2909.)

From   the   manner  in  which  Thucydides  and
Strabo  speak  of  the  Ephesia,  it  seems  that  it  was
only  a  panegyris  of  some  lonians,  perhaps  of  those
who   lived   in   Ephesus    itself    and   its   vicinity.
Thucydides  seems  to  indicate  this  by  comparing  it
with  the  Delian  panegyris,  which  likewise  con-
sisted  only   of  the  lonians   of  the  islands  near
Delos  ;  and  Strabo,  who  calls  the  great  national
panegyris  of  all  the  lonians  in  the  Panionium  the
Koiv))  Trav7]'yvpis  rSiv  'luvoou,  applies  to  the  Ephesia
simply  the  name  ■navi]yvpis.     It  may,  however,
nave  existed  ever  since  the  time  when  Ephesus  was
fte  head  of  the  Ionian  colonies  in  Asia.       [L.  S.]
E'PHESIS  (^ip^cns).     [Appellatio.]
EPHESTRIS  (6<|)e<TTpt'$).     [Amictus.]
E'PHETAE    (€4)6Tai),   the   name    of    certain
I  judges  at  Athens.    They  were  fifty-one  in  number,
j  selected  from  noble  families  {apiarivhriv  alp^Qivres),
and  more  than  fifty  years  of  age.     They  formed  a


EPHETAE.


463


tribunal  of  great  antiquity,  so  much  so,  indeed,
that  Pollux  (viii.  125),  ascribed  their  institution  to
Draco ;  moreover,  if  we  can  depend  upon  the  au-
thority of  Plutarch  {Solon,  c.  1 9),  one  of  Solon's
laws  l&^oves)  speaks  of  the  courts  of  the  Ephetae
and  Areiopagus  as  co-existent  before  the  time  of
that  legislator.  Again,  we  are  told  by  Pollux
(1.  c),  the  Ephetae  formerly  sat  in  one  or  other  of
the  five  courts,  according  to  the  nature  of  the
causes  they  had  to  try.  In  historical  times,  how-
ever, they  sat  in /our  only,  called  respectively  the
court  by  the  Palladium  (rh  4irl  naWaSicf),  by  the
Delphinium  (rb  eVt  Ae\rpivicp)^\)j  the  Prytaneium
(rh  iirl  UpvTavelcp),  and  the  court  at  Phreatto  or
Zea  Qrh  iv  ^pearTot).  At  the  first  of  these  courts
they  tried  cases  of  unintentional,  at  the  second,  of
intentional  but  justifiable  homicide,  such  as  slay-
ing another  in  self-defence,  taking  the  life  of  an
adulterer,  killing  a  tj^rant  or  a  nightly  robber.
(Plat.  Leg.  ix.  p.  874.)  At  the  Prytaneium,  by  a
strange  custom,  somewhat  analogous  to  the  imposi-
tion of  a  deodand,  they  passed  sentence  upon  the
instrument  of  murder  when  the  perpetrator  of  the
act  was  not  known.  In  the  court  at  Phreatto,  on
the  sea-shore  at  the  Peiraeeus,  they  tried  such  per-
sons as  were  charged  with  wilful  murder  during
a  temporary  exile  for  unintentional  homicide.  In
cases  of  this  sort,  a  defendant  pleaded  his  cause  on
board  ship  (rr\s  77)5  p.^  aTn6p,€vos),  the  judges
sitting  close  by  him  on  shore.  (Dem.  c.  Aridocr.
p.  644.)  Now  we  know  that  the  jurisdiction  in
cases  of  wilful  murder  was  by  Solon's  laws  entrusted
to  the  court  of  the  Areiopagus,  which  is  mentioned
by  Demosthenes  (/.  c.)  in  connection  with  the  four
courts  in  which  the  Ephetae  sat.  Moreover,  Draco,
in  his  Thesmi,  spoke  of  the  Ephetae  only,  though
the  jurisdiction  of  the  Areiopagus  in  cases  of
murder  is  admitted  to  have  been  of  great  antiquity.
Hence  Miiller  {Eumenid.  §  Go)  conjectures  that
the  court  of  the  Areiopagus  was  anciently  included
in  the  five  courts  of  the  Ephetae,  and  infers,  more-
over, the  early  existence  of  a  senate  at  Athens,
resembling  the  Gerousia  at  Sparta,  and  invested
with  the  jurisdiction  in  cases  of  homicide.  (Thirl-
wall,  Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  ii.  p.  41.)  The  name  of
Ephetae  given  to  the  members  of  this  council  was,
as  he  conceives,  rather  derived  from  their  granting
a  licence  to  avenge  blood  {oi  icpiaai  TCf  avZpo<p6vcf
rhu  avdpr^AdTirjv)  than  their  being  appealed  to,  or
from  the  transfer  to  them  of  a  jurisdiction  which
before  the  time  of  Draco  had  belonged  to  the
kings.  (Pollux,  I.  c.)  If  this  hypothesis  be  true,
it  becomes  a  question,  why  and  Avhen  was  this
separation  of  the  courts  made  ?  On  this  subject
Miiller  adds,  that  when  an  act  of  homicide  was
not  punished  by  death  or  perpetual  banishment,
the  perpetrator  had  to  receive  expiation.  [Exsi-
LiUM.]  Now  the  atonement  for  blood  and  the
purification  of  a  shedder  of  blood  came  under  the
sacred  law  of  Athens,  the  knowledge  of  which  was
confined  to  the  old  nobility,  even  after  they  had
lost  their  political  power.  [Exegetae.]  Con-
sequently the  administration  of  the  rights  of  ex-
piation could  not  be  taken  away  from  them,  and
none  but  an  aristocratical  court  like  that  of  the
Ephetae  would  be  competent  to  grant  pennissiou
of  expiation  for  homicide,  and  to  preside  over  the
ceremonies  connected  with  it.  Accordingly,  that
court  retained  the  right  of  decision  in  actions  for
manslaughter,  in  which  a  temporary  flight  was
followed  by  expiation,  and  also  in  cases  of  justifi-


464


EPHIPPIUM.


able  homicide,  whether  from  the  similarity  of  the
latter  (as  regards  the  guilt  of  the  perpetrator)  to
acts  of  accidental  homicide,  or  as  requiring  a  like
expiation.  (Plat.  Leg.  ix.  pp.  864,  875.)  For
acts  of  wilful  murder,  on  the  other  hand,  the
punishment  was  either  death  or  aei(pvyia,  and
therefore  no  expiation  {Kadapais)  was  connected
with  the  administration  of  justice  in  such  cases,
so  that  there  could  be  no  objection  against  their
being  tried  by  the  court  of  the  Areiopagus,  though
its  members  did  not  of  necessity  belong  to  the  old
aristocracy.

Such  briefly  are  the  reasons  which  Muller
alleges  in  support  of  this  hypothesis,  and  if  they
are  valid  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  separa-
tion alluded  to  was  effected  when  the  Athenian
nobility  lost  their  supremacy  in  the  state,  and  a
timocracy  or  aristocracy  of  wealth  was  substituted
for  an  aristocracy  of  birth.  This,  as  is  well  known,
happened  in  the  time  of  Solon.

Lastly,  we  may  remark,  that  the  comparatively
unimportant  and  antiquated  duties  of  the  Ephetae
sufficiently  explain  the  statement  in  Pollux  (I.  c),
that  their  court  gradually  lost  all  respect,  and  be-
came at  last  an  object  of  ridicule.  [R.  W.]

EPHI'PPIUM  (acrrpde-n,  i^iTwiou,  icpiinreiov),
a  saddle.  Although  the  Greeks  occasionally  rode
without  any  saddle  (iirl  \pL\ov  'linrov,  Xenoph.  De
He  Eques.  vii.  5),  yet  they  commonly  used  one,
and  from  them  the  name,  together  with  the  thing,
was  borrowed  by  the  Romans.  ( Varr.  De  Re  Rust.
ii.  7  ;  Caes.  B.  G.  iv.  2 ;  Hor.  Epist.  i.  14.  43  ;
Gellius,  V.  5.)  It  has  indeed  been  asserted,  that
the  use  of  saddles  was  unknown  until  the  fourth
century  of  our  era.  But  Ginzrot,  in  his  valuable
work  on  the  history  of  carriages  (vol.  ii.  c.  26),
has  shown,  both  from  the  general  practice  of  the
Egyptians  and  other  Oriental  nations,  from  the
pictures  preserved  on  the  walls  of  houses  at  Hercu-
ianeum,  and  from  the  expressions  employed  by  J.
Caesar  and  other  authors,  that  the  terra  "  ephip-


EPHORI.

pium  "  denoted  not  a  mere  horse-cloth,  a  skin,  or
a  flexible  covering  of  any  kind,  but  a  saddle-tree,
or  frame  of  wood,  which,  after  laeing  filled  with  a
stuffing  of  wool  or  cloth,  was  covered  with  softer
materials,  and  fastened  by  means  of  a  girth  {cingu-
lum.,  zona)  upon  the  back  of  the  animal.  The
ancient  saddles  appear,  indeed,  to  have  been  thus
far  different  from  ours,  that  the  cover  stretched
upon  the  hard  frame  was  probably  of  stuffed  or
padded  cloth  rather  than  leather,  and  that  the
saddle  Avas,  as  it  were,  a  cushion  fitted  to  the
horse's  back.  Pendent  cloths  (crTpoS/ioTa,  strata)
were  always  attached  to  it  so  as  to  cover  the  sides
of  the  animal ;  but  it  was  not  provided  with  stir-
rups. As  a  substitute  for  the  use  of  stirrups  the
horses,  more  particularly  in  Spain,  were  taught  to
kneel  at  the  word  of  command,  when  their  riders
wished  to  mount  them.  See  the  preceding  figure
from  an  antique  lamp  found  at  Herculaneum,  and
compare  Strabo,  iii.  1.  p.  436,  ed.  Sieb. ;  and  Silius
Italicus,  X.  465.

The  saddle  with  the  pendent  cloths  is  also  ex-
hibited in  the  annexed  coin  of  Q.  Labienus.


The  terra  "  Ephippium  "  was  in  later  times  in
part  supplanted  by  the  word  "  sella,"  and  the  more
specific  expression  "  sella  equestris,"         [J.  Y.]

E'PHORI  ("Eipopoi).  Magistrates  called  £'p/^on
or  "  Overseers  "  were  common  to  many  Dorian
constitutions  in  times  of  remote  antiquity.  Cyrene
and  the  mother  state  of  Thera  may  be  mentioned
as  examples :  the  latter  colonized  from  Laconia  in
early  ages,  and  where,  as  we  are  told,  the  ephors
were  itrtavvjxoi.,  i.  e.  gave  their  name  to  their  year
of  office.  (Heracl.  Pont.  4.)  The  ephoralty  at
Sparta  is  classed  by  Herodotus  (i.  65)  among  the
institutions  of  Lycurgus.  Since,  however,  the
ephori  are  not  mentioned  in  the  oracle  which  con-
tains a  general  outline  of  the  constitution  ascribed
to  him  (Pint.  Lycurg.  6),  we  may  infer  that  no
new  powers  were  given  to  them  by  that  legislator,
or  in  the  age  of  which  he  may  be  considered  the
representative.  Another  account  refers  the  insti-
tution of  the  Spartan  ephoralty  to  Theopompus
(B.C.  770 — 720),  who  is  said  to  have  founded
this  office  with  a  view  of  limiting  the  authority  of
the  kings,  and  to  have  justified  the  innovation  by
remarking  that  "  he  handed  down  the  royal  power
to  his  descendants  more  durable,  because  he  had
diminished  it."  (Aristot.  Polit.  v.  9.)  The  in-
consistency of  these  accounts  is  still  farther  com-
plicated by  a  speech  of  Cleomenes  III.,  who  is  re-
presented to  have  stated  (Plut.  Cleom.  10)  that  the
ephors  were  originally  appointed  by  the  kings,  to
act  for  them  in  a  judicial  capacity  {irphs  rh  Kpivdv)
during  their  absence  from  Sparta  in  the  first  Mes-
senian  war,  and  that  it  was  only  by  gradual
usurpations  that  these  new  magistrates  had  made
themselves  paramount  even  over  the  kings  them-
selves. Now,  according  to  some  authorities  (Thirl-
wall.  Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  i.  p.  353),  Polydorus,  the
colleague  of  Theopompus,  and  one  of  the  kings
under  whom  the  first  Messenian  war  (b.  c.  743 — •
723)  was  completed,  appropriated  a  jmrt  of  the


EPHORT.

conquered  Messeman  territory  to  the  augmentation
of  the  ntimber  of  portions  of  land  possessed  by  the
Spartans  —  an  augmentation  which  implies  an  in-
crease in  the  number  of  Spartan  citizens.  But  the
ephors,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter,  were  the  repre-
eentatives  of  the  whole  nation,  and  therefore,  if  m
the  reign  of  Theopompus  the  franchise  at  Sparta
was  extended  to  a  new  class  of  citizens  who  never-
theless were  not  placed  on  an  equality  with  the
old  ones  {inroiJ.eloves)y  the  ephors  would  thencefor-
ward stand  in  a  new  position  with  respect  to  the
kings,  and  the  councillors  (ol  yepovres)  who  were
elected  from  the  higher  class.  Moreover,  it  is
not  improbable  that,  during  the  absence  of  the
kings,  the  ephors  usurped,  or  had  conferred  upon
them,  powers  which  did  not  originally  belong  to
them  ;  so  that,  from  both  these  causes,  their
authority  may  have  been  so  far  altered  as  to  lead
to  the  opinion  that  the  creation  of  the  office,  and
not  merely  an  extension  of  its  powers,  took  place
during  the  reign  of  Theopompus.  Again,  as  Thirl-
wall  observes,  ""if  the  extension  of  the  ephoralty
was  connected  with  the  admission  of  an  inferior
class  of  citizens  to  the  franchise,  the  comparison
which  Cicero  (De  Leg.  iii.  7,  De  Rep.  ii.  33)
draws  between  the  ephoralty  and  the  Roman
tribunate  would  be  more  applicable  than  he  him-
self suspected,  and  would  throw  a  light  on^  the
seeming  contradiction  of  the  ephors  being  all-
powerful,  though  the  class  which  they  more  espe-
cially represented  enjoyed  only  a  limited  fran-
chise." {Hid.  of  Greece,  vol.  i,  p.  356.)  But  after
all,  the  various  accounts  which  we  have  been  consi-
dering merel)'-  show  how  different  were  the  opi-
nions, and  how  little  historical  the  statements,
about  the  origin  of  the  ephoralty.  (Miiller,
Doriaiis,  iii.  c.  7  ;  and  see  Clinton,  F.  II.  vol.  i.
Appendix  6.)

We  therefore  proceed  to  investigate  the  func-
tions and  authority  of  the  ephors  in  historical  times,
after  first  observing  that  their  office,  considered  as
a  counterpoise  to  the  kings  and  council,  and  in  that
respect  peculiar  to  Sparta  alone  of  the  Dorian  states,
would  have  been  altogether  inconsistent  with  the
constitution  of  Lycurgus,  and  that  their  gradual
usurpations  and  encroachments  were  facilitated  by
the  vague  and  indefinite  nature  of  their  duties.
Their  number,  five,  appears  to  have  been  always
the  same,  and  was  probabl}^  connected  with  the
five  divisions  of  the  town  of  Sparta,  namely,  the
four  /ca-^at,  Limnae,  Mesoa,  Pitana,  Cynosura,  and
the  U6Xis  or  city  properly  so  called,  around  which
the  Koifiai  lay.  {Philoloy.  Museum.,  vol.  ii.  p.  52.)
They  were  elected  from  and  \>j  the  people  (e|
!  aTrcti/Tcci/),  without  any  qualification  of  age  or
!  property,  and  without  undergoing  any  scnitiny  {oi
\  Tl;x<5^'T€s)  ;  so  that,  as  Aristotle  remarks  {Polit  ii.
,  7),  the  87J/XOS  enjoyed  through  them  a  participa-
1  tion  ^  in  the  highest  magistracy  of  the  state.  The
I  precise  mode  of  their  election  is  not  known,  but
Aristotle  {I.e.)  speaks  of  it  as  being  very  puerile  ;
I  and  Plato  {Leg.  iii.  p.  692)  describes  their  ofiice
I  as  €771;?  TTis  K\7ipct)Tris  Svudfj-ecos,  words  which
may  apply  to  a  want  of  a  directing  and  discrimin-
;  ating  principle  in  the  electors,  without  of  necessity
j  implying  an  election  by  lot.  They  entered  upon
,  office  at  the  autumnal  solstice,  and  the  first  in  rank
\  of  the  five  gave  his  name  to  the  year,  which  was
'called after  him  in  all  civil  transactions.  (MUller,
\Dor.iu.  7.  §  7.)  Their  meetings  were  held  in  the
'public  building  called  apx^'tov,  which   in  some  re-


EPIIORI.


465


spects  resembled  the  Prytaneium  at  Athens,  as
being  the  place  where  foreigners  and  ambassadors
were  entertained,  and  where,  moreover,  the  ephors
took  their  meals  together.     (Pausan.  iii.  11.  §2.)

The  ephors  also  possessed  judicial  authority,
on  which  subject  Aristotle  (PoHt.  iii.  1)  remarks
that  they  decided  in  civil  suits  {diKai  rwu  avfi§o-
\aicav),  and  generally  in  actions  of  great  im-
portance (/cptVecov  fxeydXctiV  Kvpioi,  Polit.  ii.  6)  :
whereas  the  council  presided  over  capital  crimes
{S'tKai  (poviKal).  In  this  arrangement  we  see  an
exemplification  of  a  practice  common  to  many  of
the  ancient  Greek  states,  according  to  which  a
criminal  jurisdiction  was  given  to  courts  of  aris-
tocratic composition,  while  civil  actions  were  de-
cided by  popular  tribunals.  [Compare  Ephetak
and  Areiopagus.]  But  with  this  civil  jurisdiction
was  united  a  censorial  authority,  such  as  was  pos-
sessed by  the  ephors  at  Cyrene  :  for  example,  the
ephors  punished  a  man  for  having  brought  money
into  the  state  (Plut.  Lysan.  19),  and  others  for  in-
dolence. (Schol.  ad  Thucyd.  i.  84.)  We  are  told
also,  that  they  inspected  the  clothing  and  the  bed-
ding of  the  young  men.  (Athen.  xii.  p.  550.)
Moreover,  something  like  a  superintendence  over
the  laws  and  their  execution  is  implied  in  the  lan-
guage of  the  edict,  which  they  published  on  entering
upon  their  office,  ordering  the  citizens  "  to  shave
the  upper  lip  {fMvaTaKa),  i.  e.  to  be  submissive,  and
to  obey  the  laws."  Now  the  symbolical  and  archaic
character  of  this  expression  seems  to  prove  that  the
ephors  exercised  such  a  general  superintendence
from  very  early  times,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt
"  that  in  the  hands  of  able  men,  it  would  alone
prove  an  instrument  of  unlimited  power."  (Thirl-
wall.  Hist  0/ Greece,  vol.  i.  p.  355.)

Their  jurisdiction  and  power  were  still  farther
increased  by  the  privilege  of  instituting  scrutinies
{evdvvai)  into  the  conduct  of  all  the  magistrates,
on  which  Aristotle  {Polit.  ii.  6.  §  17)  observes  that
it  was  a  very  great  gift  to  the  ephoralty  (toCto  Se
TTJ  i(pop^ia.  jue'ya  Ai'av  rh  Swpou).  Nor  were  they
obliged  to  wait  till  a  magistrate  had  completed  his
term  of  office,  since,  even  before  its  termination,
they  might  exercise  the  privilege  of  deposition
(Xen.  De  Be.  Lac.  viii.  4.)  Even  the  kings  them-
selves could  be  brought  before  their  tribunal  (as
Cleomcmes  was  for  bribery,  ScopoSoKia,  Herod,  vi.
82),  though  they  were  not  obliged  to  answer  a
summons  to  appear  there,  till  it  had  been  repeated
three  times.  (Plut.  Cleom.  10.)  In  extreme  cases,
the  ephors  were  also  competent  to  lay  an  accusation
against  the  kings  as  well  as  the  other  magistrates,
and  bring  them  to  a  capital  trial  before  the  great
court  of  justice.  (Xen.  I.  c.  ;  Herod,  vi.  85.)
If  they  sftt  as  judges  themselves,  they  were  only
able,  according  to  Miiller,  to  impose  a  fine,  and
compel  immediate  payment  ;  but  they  were  not  in
any  case,  great  as  was  their  judicial  authority,
bound  by  a  written  code  of  laws.  (Aristot  Polit.
ii.  6.)

In  later  times  the  power  of  the  ephors  was
greatly  increased  ;  and  this  increase  appears  to
have  been  principally  owing  to  the  fact,  that  they
put  themselves  in  connection  with  the  assembly  of
the  people,  convened  its  meetings,  laid  measures
before  it,  and  were  constituted  its  agents  and  re-
presentatives. When  this  connection  arose  is
matter  of  conjecture  ;  some  refer  the  origin  of  it  to
Asteropus,  one  of  the  first  ephors  to  whom  the  ex-
tension of  the  powers  of  the  ephoralty  is  ascribed,"

H    H


466


EPIIORI.


and  who  is  said  to  have  lived  many  years  after  the
time  of  Theopompus  ;  probably  about  B.C.  560.
That  it  was  not  known  in  early  times  appears  from
the  circumstance  that  the  two  ordinances  of  the
oracle  at  Delphi,  which  regulated  the  assembly  of
the  people,  made  no  mention  of  the  functions  of  the
ephors.  (Thirlwall,  vol.  i.  p.  356.)  It  is  clear,
however,  that  the  power  which  such  a  connection
gave,  would,  more  than  any  thing  else,  enable
them  to  encroach  on  the  royal  authority,  and  make
themselves  virtually  supreme  in  the  state.  Ac-
cordingly, we  find  that  they  transacted  business
with  foreign  ambassadors  (Herod,  ix.  8)  ;  dis-
missed them  from  the  state  (Xen.  HeU.  ii.  13.  §  19) ;
decided  upon  the  government  of  dependent  cities
(Xen.  Hell.  iii.  4.  §  2)  ;  subscribed  in  the  presence
of  other  persons  to  treaties  of  peace  (Thucyd.  v.  1 9),
and  in  the  time  of  war  sent  out  troops  when  they
thought  necessary.  (Herod,  ix,  7.)  In  all  these
capacities  the  ephors  acted  as  the  representatives  of
the  nation,  and  the  agents  of  the  public  assembly,
being  in  fact  the  executive  of  the  state.  Their  au-
thority in  this  respect  is  further  illustrated  by  the
fact,  that  after  a  declaration  of  war,  "  they  entrusted
the  army  to  the  king,  or  some  other  general,  who
received  from  them  instructions  how  to  act ;  sent
back  to  them  for  fresh  instructions,  were  restrained
by  them  through  the  attendance  of  extraordinary
plenipotentiaries,  were  recalled  by  means  of  the
scytale,  summoned  before  a  judicial  tribunal,  and
their  first  duty  after  return  was  to  visit  the  office
of  the  ephors."  (Muller,  Dor.  vol.  ii.  p.  127.)
Another  striking  proof  of  this  representative  cha-
racter is  given  by  Xenophon  {iDe  Rep.  Lac.  15),
who  informs  us,  that  the  ephors,  acting  on  behalf
of  the  state  {virep  ttjs  irtJAecos),  received  from  the
kings  every  month  an  oath,  by  which  the  latter
bound  themselves  to  rule  according  to  law  ;  and
that,  in  return  for  this,  the  state  engaged,  through
the  ephors,  to  maintain  unshaken  the  authority  of
the  kings,  if  they  adhered  to  llheir  oath.

It  has  been  said  that  the  ephors  encroached  upon
the  royal  authority  ;  in  course  of  time  the  kings
became  completely  under  their  control.  For  ex-
ample, they  fined  Agesilaus  (Plut.  Ages.  2,  5)  on
the  vague  charge  of  trying  to  make  himself  popular,
and  interfered  even  with  the  domestic  arrangements
of  other  kings  ;  moreover,  as  we  are  told  by
Thucydides  (i.  131),  they  could  even  imprison  the
kings,  as  they  did  Pausanias.  We  know  also  that
in  the  field  the  kings  were  followed  by  two  ephors
who  belonged  to  the  council  of  war  ;  the  three
who  remained  at  home  received  the  booty  in  J
charge,  and  paid  it  into  the  treasury,  whitJh  was
under  the  superintendence  of  the  whole  College  of
Five.  But  the  eph-ors  had  still  another  preroga-
tive, based  on  a  religious  foundation,  which  enabled
them  to  effect  a  temporary  deposition  of  the  kings.
Once  in  eight  years  (Si'  iTwv  ivvfa\  as  we  are  told,
they  chose  a  calm  and  cloudless  night  to  observe
the  heavens,  and  if  there  was  any  appearance  of  a
falling  meteor,  it  was  believed  to  be  a  sign  that  the
gods  were  displeased  with  the  kings,  who  were  ac-
cordingly suspended  from  their  functions  until  an
oracle  allowed  of  their  restoration.  (Plut.  Jc/is,
II.)  The  outward  symbols  of  supreme  authority
also  were  assumed  by  the  ephors  ;  and  they  alone
kept  their  seats  while  the  kings  passed  ;  whereas  it
was  not  considered  below  the  dignity  of  the  kings
to  rise  in  honour  of  the  ephors.  (Xen.  De  Rep.
Lac.  15.)


EPIBATAE.

The  position  which,  as  we  have  shown,  the
ephors  occupied  at  Sparta,  will  explain  and  justify
the  statement  of  Muller,  "  that  the  ephoralty  was
the  moving  element,  the  principle  of  change  in  the
Spartan  constitution,  and  in  the  end,  the  cause  of
its  dissolution."  In  confirmation  of  this  opinion
we  may  cite  the  authority  of  Aristotle,  who  ob-
serves, that  from  the  excessive  and  absohite  power
{laoTvpavvos)  of  the  ephors,  the  kings  were  obliged
to  court  them  {ST^fiaywyelv),  and  eventually  the
government  became  a  democracy  instead  of  an
aristocracy.  Their  relaxed  and  dissolute  mode  of
life  too  {aveiixivt]  Biaira),  he  adds,  was  contrary  to
the  spirit  of  the  constitution  ;  and  we  may  remark
that  it  was  one  of  the  ephors,  Epitadeius,  who  first
carried  through  the  law  permitting  a  free  inherit-
ance of  property  in  contravention  of  the  regulation
of  Lycurgus,  by  which  an  equal  share  in  the  com-
mon territory  was  secured  to  all  the  citizens.

The  change,  indeed,  to  which  Aristotle  alludes,
might  have  been  described  as  a  transition  from  an
aristocracy  to  an  oligarchy  ;  for  we  find  that  in
later  times,  the  ephors,  instead  of  being  dema-
gogues, invariably  supported  oligarchical  principles
and  privileges.  The  case  of  Cinadon,  b.  c.  399,  is
an  instance  of  this  ;  and  the  fact  is  apparently  so
inconsistent  with  their  being  representatives  of  the
whole  communit}',  and  as  much  so  of  the  lower
(vTo/xeioves)  as  of  the  higher  (i^/noioi)  class  of
citizens,  that  Wachsmuth  supposes  the  S^juos,  from
and  by  whom  the  ephors  were  chosen,  to  mean  the
whole  body  of  privileged  or  patrician  citizens  only,
the  most  eminent  (/caAoi  KayaOoi)  of  whom  were
elected  to  serve  as  yepovTes.  This  supposition  is
not  itself  improbable,  and  wt5uld  go  far  to  explain
a  great  difficulty  ;  but  any  analysis  of  the  argu-
ments that  may  be  urged  for  and  against  it  is  pre-
cluded by  our  limits.  (See  Thirlwall,  vol.  iv.
p.  377.)  We  only  add  that  the  ephors  became  at
last  thoroughly  identified  with  all  opposition  to  the
extension  of  popular  privileges.

For  this  and  other  reasons,  when  Agis  and
Cleomenes  undertook  to  restore  the  old  constitu-
tion, it  was  necessary  for  them  to  overthrow  the
ephoralty,  and  accordingly  Cleomenes  murdered  the
ephors  for  the  time  being,  and  abolished  the  office
(:B.  c.  2'25)  ;  it  was,  however,  restored  under  the
Romans.  [R.  W.]

EPI'BATAE  (ivi§dTai\  soldiers  ©r  marines
appointed  to  defend  the  vessels  in  the  Athenian
navy,  were  entirely  distinct  from  the  rowers,  and
also  from  the  land  soldiers,  such  as  hoplitae,  pel-
tasts,  and  cavalry.  (Xen.  Hell.  i.  2.  §  7,  v.  1.
§11;  Harpocrat.  and  Hesych.  s.  v.)  It  appears
that  the  ordinary  number  of  epibatae  on  board  a
trireme  was  ten.  Dr.  Arnold  (ad  TJiuc.  iii.  do)
remarks  that  by  comparing  Thuc.  iii.  95  with  cc.  91,
94,  we  find  three  hundred  epibatae  as  the  comple-
ment of  thirty  ships,  and  also  by  comparing  ii.  92
with  c.  102,  we  find  four  hundred  as  the  comple-
ment of  forty  ships  ;  and  the  same  proportion  re-
sults from  a  comparison  of  iv.  76  with  c.  101.  In
Thucydides  vi.  42,  we  find  seven  hundred  epibatae
for  a  fleet  of  one  hundred  ships,  sixty  of  which  were
equipped  In  the  ordinary  way  and  forty  had  troops
on  board.  In  consequence  of  the  number  of  heavy-
armed  men  e/c  rov  KaraXSyov  on  the  expedition,
the  Athenians  appear  to  have  reduced  the  number
of  regular  epibatae  from  ten  to  seven.  The  number
of  forty  epibatae  to  a  ship  mentioned  by  Herodotus
(vi.  15),  Dr.  Arnold  justly  remarks  (I.e.),  "be-


EPIBOLE.

longs  to  the  earlier  state  of  Greek  naval  tactics,
when  victory  depended  more  on  the  number  and
prowess  of  the  soldiers  on  board  than  on  the
manoeuvres  of  the  seamen  (Thuc.  i.  49)  ;  and  it  was
in  this  very  point  that  the  Athenians  improved  the
system,  by  decreasing  the  number  of  eTrtgdrat,  and
relying  on  the  more  skilful  management  of  their
vessels."

The  epibatae  were  usually  taken  from  the
Thetes,  or  fourth  class  of  Athenian  citizens
(Thuc.  vi.  42)  ;  but  on  one  occasion,  in  a  season
of  extraordinary  danger,  the  citizens  of  the  higher
classes  (e/c  KaraAoyov)  were  compelled  to  serve  as
epibatae.     (Thuc.  viii.  24.)

The  term  is  sometimes  also  applied  by  the  Ro-
man writers  to  the  marines  (Hirt.  de  BdL  Alex.
1 1,  rfe  Dell.  Afric.  63)  ;  but  they  are  more  usually
called  elassiarii  milites.  The  latter  term,  however,
is  also  applied  to  the  rowers  or  sailors  as  well  as
the  marines  {classiariorum  remigio  vehi,  Tac.  Ann.
xiv.  4).

EPIBLE'MA  (eTTi'gATj^a).     [Amictus.]

EPrBOLE  (eTTtgoArj),  a  fine  imposed  by  a
magistrate,  or  other  official  person  or  body,  for  a
misdemeanour.  The  various  magistrates  at  Athens
had  (each  in  his  own  department)  a  summary  penal
jui'isdiction  ;  i.  e.  for  certain  offences  they  might
inflict  a  pecuniary  mulct  or  fine,  not  exceeding  a
fixed  amount ;  if  the  offender  deserved  further
punishment,  it  was  their  duty  to  bring  him  before
a  judicial  tribunal.  Thus,  in  case  of  an  injury  done
to  orphans  or  heiresses,  the  archon  might  fine  the
parties,  or  (if  the  injury  were  of  a  serious  nature)
bring  them  before  the  court  of  Heliaea.  (Dem.
c.  Macart.  p.  1076.)  Upon  any  one  who  made  a
disturbance,  or  otherwise  misbehaved  himself  in  the
public  assembly,  the  proedri  might  impose  a  fine  of
fifty  drachms,  or  else  bring  him  for  condign  punish-
ment before  the  senate  of  500,  or  the  next  as-
sembly. ( Aesch.  c.  Timar.  35,  Bekk.)  The  senate
of  500  were  competent  to  fine  to  the  extent  of  500
drachms.  (Dem.  c.  Euerg.  and  Mnes.  p.  1152;
see  also  Dem.  c.  Mid.  p.  572.)

The  magistrate  who  imposed  the  fine  (iiriSoX^y
eirc'gaAe)  had  not  the  charge  of  levying  it,  but  was
obliged  to  make  a  return  thereof  to  the  treasury
officers  (iTnypd(peiv  or  iyypdcpeiu  rois  irpaKTopcriu,
or  iyypd^€iu  ry  drjixoaicf}),  whereupon,   like    all
other  penalties  and  amerciaments,  it  became  (as  we
should  say)  a  debt  of  record,  to  be  demanded  or
recovered  by  the  collectors.    (Aesch.  e.  Timar.  I.  c. ;
Dem.  c.  Nicost.  p.  1251.)     If  it  were  made  pay-
able to  the  fund  of  a  temple,  it  was  collected  by
\  the  functionaries  who  had  the  charge  of  that  fund
I  {Tajxiai).     There  might  (it  seems)  be   an  appeal
'  irom  the  sentence  of  the  magistrate  to  a  jury  or
superior  court.   (Meier,  Att.  Proc.  pp.  32,  34,  5Q5;
Schimann,  Ant.  Jur.  Pub.  Grace,  pp.  242,  293.)

As  under  the  old  Roman  law  no  magistrate  could
impose  a  fine  of  more  than  two  oxen  and  thirty
I  sheep,  so  by  the  laws  of  Solon  fines  were  of  very
I  small  amount  at  Athens.  How  greatly  they  in-
I  creased  afterwards  (as  money  became  more  plentilul,
and  laws  more  numerous),  and  how  important  a
i  branch  they  formed  of  the  public  revenue,  may  be
jseen  from  the  examples  collected  by  Bockh,  Pvh.
\Econ.  of  Alliens.,  p.  375,  &c.,  2nd  ed.
I  These  epibolae  are  to  be  distinguished  from  the
I  penalties  awarded  by  a  jury  or  court  of  law  (Tt/iVj-
Ifiara)  upon  a  formal  prosecution.  There  the  ma-
igistrate  or  other  person  who  instituted  the  pro-


EPICLERUS.  467

ceeding  (for  any  one  miglet  prosecute,  KarT]yopiiv\
was  said  rijrqiJLa  enrypaxl/aadai,  as  the  court  or
jurjr  were  said  ri/nSv^  "to  assess  the  penalty,"
which  always  devolved  upon  them,  except  where
the  penalty  was  one  fixed  by  law  (e/c  twj/  vSfxwv
iiriK^ifidv-q  Cvf^'^odi  in  which  case  it  could  not  be
altered.  (Aesch.  Uepi  Udpa§.  14,  Bekk.  ;  Dem.
c.  Theocr.  p.  1328 ;  Harpocr.  s.  v.  'AtI/jlt^tos
ay<^v.)  [C.  R.  K.]

EPICHEIROTO'NI A  {^mx^ipoTovia).  [Chei-

ROTONIA.]

EPICLE'RUS  (tTTiKX-npos,  heiress),  the  name
given  to  the  daughter  of  an  Athenian  citizen,  who
had  no  son  to  inherit  his  estate.  It  was  deemed
an  object  of  importance  at  Athens  to  preserve  the
family  name  and  property  of  every  citizen.  This
was  effected,  where  a  man  had  no  child,  by  adop-
tion (eto-TTotTjo-ts)  ;  if  he  bad  a  daughter,  the  in-
heritance was  transmitted  through  her  to  a  grand-
son, who  would  take  the  name  of  the  maternal
ancestor.  If  the  father  died  intestate,  the  heiress
had  not  the  choice  of  a  husband,  but  was  bound  to
marry  her  nearest  relation,  not  in  the  ascending
line.  Upon  such  person  making  his  claim  before
the  archon,  whose  duty  it  was  iin/jLi\e7(r6ai  tuu
eTriK\r}p(cv  Koi  rcou  oXkwv  tS>u  i^eprifjLov/^duwv
(Dem.  e.  Macart.  p.  1076),  public  notice  was  given
of  the  claim  ;  and  if  no  one  appeared  to  dispute  it,
the  archon  adjudged  the  heiress  to  him  {eiret'iKaaiv
aiircf  T7]u  cTrf/cATjpoj/).  If  another  claimant  ap-
peared (a/j.(pi(T§7iTe7u  avTip  ttjs  iiriK.),  a  court  was
held  for  the  decision  of  the  right  {SiaSiKaaia  ttjs
eVi/c,),  which  was  determined  according  to  the
Athenian  law  of  consanguinity  (yfyovs  kcit  ay~
Xiamiau.)  Even  where  a  woman  was  already
married,  her  husband  was  obliged  to  give  her  up
to  a  man  with  a  better  title  ;  and  men  often  put
away  their  former  wives  in  order  to  marry  heir-
esses. (Dem.  c.  Onei.  argum.,  c.  Evhul.  p.  1311  ;
Isaeus,  De  Pyrr.  Hered.  p.  78.)

A  man  without  male  issue  might  bequeath  his
property;  but  if  he  had  a  daughter,  the  devisee
was  obliged  to  marry  her.  (Isaeus,  De  Arist.  Hered.
p.  19.)  If  the  daughter  was  poor,  and  the  nearest
relative  did  not  choose  to  marry  her,  he  was  bound
to  give  her  a  portion  corresponding  to  his  own  for-
tune.    (Dem.  c.  Macart.  p.  1067.)

The  husband  of  an  heiress  took  her  property
until  she  had  a  son  of  full  age  (cttI  Sieres  ^§7j-
aavra\  who  was  usually  adopted  into  his  maternal
grandfather's  family,  and  took  possession  of  the
estate.  He  then  became  his  mother's  legal  pro-
tector (Kvpios),  and  was  bound  to  find  her  main-
tenance {ff'irov).  If  there  were  more  sons,  they
shared  the  property  equally.  (Isaeus,  De  Pyrr.
Hered.  p.  5Q,  De  Cir.  Hered.  p.  40  ;  Dem.  c.  Steph.
pp.  1134,  1135.)

When  there  was  but  one  daughter,  she  was
called  iiriKXripos  iirl  iravrl  t^  o'iK(p.  If  there  were
more  they  inherited  equally,  like  our  co-parceners  ;
and  were  severally  married  to  relatives,  the  nearest
having  the  first  choice.  (Andoc.  De  Myst  p.  117,
&c.;  Isaeus,  DeOV. //ererf.  pp.  57,58.)  Illegitimate
sons  did  not  share  with  the  daughter,  the  law
being  v6Q(i)  fi)}  dvat  ayx^rTelay  /iTjfl'  lepwy  ^^d*
offiwv.  (Dem.  c.  Macaii.  p.  1067  ;  Aristoph.  Aves,
1652.)

The  heiress  was  under  the  special  protection  of
the  archon  ;  and  if  she  was  injured  by  her  husband
or  relatives,  or  by  strangers  ejecting  her  Irom  her
estate,  the  law  gave  a  criminal  prosecution  against

H  H    2


468  EPIMELETAE.

the  offender,  called  KaKuaeas  elaayycKia.  (Isaeus,
De  Pyrr.  Hered.  p.  76  ;  Meier,  Ait.  Proc.  pp.  269,
460,468.)  [C.  R.K.]

EPIDAU'RIA.  [Eleusinia.]
EPIDICA'SIA  (eTTiSiKao-m).  [Heres.]
EPIDEMIURGI.  [Demiurgi.]
EPPDOSEIS  (e7rtS({(reis),  were  voluntary  con-
tributions, either  in  money,  arms,  or  ships,  which
were  made  by  the  Athenian  citizens  in  order  to
meet  the  extraordinary  demands  of  the  state.
When  the  expences  of  the  state  were  greater  than
its  revenue,  it  was  usual  for  the  prytanes  to  sum-
mon an  assembly  of  the  people,  and  after  ex-
plaining the  necessities  of  the  state,  to  -cali  upon
the  citizens  to  contribute  according  to  their  means.
Those  who  were  willing  to  contribute  then  rose
and  mentioned  what  they  would  give  ;  while  those,
who  were  unwilliug  to  give  any  thing,  remained
silent  or  retired  privately  from  the  assembly.
(Pint.  Alcib.  10,  Phoc.  9  ;  Dem.  c.  Meid.  p.  567  ;
Theophras.  Cluir.  22  ;  Athen.  iv.  p.  168,  e.)  The
names  of  those  who  had  promised  to  contribute,
together  with  the  amount  of  their  contributions,
were  written  on  tablets,  which  were  placed  before
the  statues  of  the  Eponymi,  where  they  remained
till  the  amount  was  paid.  (Tsaeus,  De  Dicaeog.
p.  Ill,  ed.  Reisk.)

These  epidoseis,  or  voluntary  contributions,  were
frequently  very  large.  Sometimes  the  more  wealthy
citizens  voluntarily  undertook  a  trierarchy,  or  the
expences  of  equipping  a  trireme.  (Dem.  c.  Meid.
p.  566.  23.)  We  read  that  Pasion  furnished
1000  shields,  together  with  five  triremes,  which  he
equipped  at  his  own  expence.  (Dem.  c.  Steph.
p.  1127.  12.)  Chrysippus  presented  a  talent  to
the  state,  when  Alexander  moved  against  Thebes
(D  jm.  c.  Phorm.  p.  918.  20)  ;  Aristophanes,  the
son  of  Nicophemus,  gave  30,000  drachmae  for  an
expedition  against  Cyprus  (Lysias,  pro  Aristoph.
bonis,  p.  644)  ;  Charidemus  and  Diotimus,  two
commanders,  made  a  free  gift  of  800  shields  (Dem.
pro  Coron.  p.  265.  18)  ;  and  similar  instances  of
liberality  are  mentioned  by  Bockh  (PM.  Econ.  of
Athens.,  pp.  586,  587,  2nd.  ed.),  from  whom  the
preceding  examples  have  been  taken.  (Compare
Schomann,  De  Comitiis,  p.  292.")

EPIG A'MIA  (iTTiyafiia).  [Civitas  (Greek.)]
EPIGRAPHEIS  (imypac^us).     [Eisphora.]
EPIMELE'TAE  (initieXrjTai),    the  names  of
various  magistrates  and  functionaries  at  Athens.

1.  'ETrifX€\riTi]s  rris  Koiurjs  TrpoadSov,  more  usu-
ally called  rafiias,  the  treasurer  or  manager  of  the
public  revenue.     [Tamias.]

2.  'EirineKriToL  tu>v  [xopiwu  'EXaiuv,  were  persons
chosen  from  among  the  Areopagites  to  take  care  of
the  sacred  olive  trees.  (Lysias,  Areopag.  p.  284. 5.)

3.  'ETTi/neArjTaJ  Tov'EfJLnoplov.,  were  the  overseers
of  the  emporium.  [Emporium.]  They  were  ten
in  number,  and  were  elected  yearly  by  lot.  (Har-
pocrdt  s.  V.)  They  had  the  entire  management  of
the  emporium,  and  had  jurisdiction  in  all  breaches
of  the  commercial  laws.  ( Dem.  c.  Lacrit.  p.  94 1 .  15.
c.  Tlieoc.  p.  1324  ;  Dinarch.  c.  Arislog.  pp.  81,  82.)
According  to  Aristotle  {aptid  Harpocrat.  s.  v.\
it  was  part  of  their  duty  to  compel  the  merchants  to
bring  into  the  city  two-thirds  of  the  corn  which
had  been  brought  by  sea  into  the  Attic  emporium  ;
by  which  we  learn  that  only  one-third  could  be
carried  away  to  other  countries  from  the  port  of
the  Peiraeeus.  (Bockh,  PM.  Econ.  of  Athens,
pp.  48,  81,  2nd  ed.  ;  Meier,  Att.  Proc.  p.  86.)


EPISTATES.

4.  'ETTi/xeArjToi  tuv  Mvarripicov,  were,  m  con-
nection with  the  king  archon,  the  managers  of  the
Eleusinian  mysteries.  They  Avere  elected  by  open
vote,  and  were  four  in  number  ;  of  whom  two  were
chosen  from  the  general  body  of  citizens,  one
from  the  Eumolpidae,  and  one  from  the  Cerj'ces.
(Harpocrat  and  Suid.  s.  v, ;  Dem.  c,  Meid.  p.  570.  6.)

5.  'ETTi/xeKriTaL  ru>v  vewpicou,  the  inspectors  of
the  dockyards,  formed  a  regular  apx^,  and  were
not  an  extraordinary  commission,  as  appears  from
Demosthenes  (c.  Euerg.  et  Mnes.  p.  1 1 45),  Aes-
chines  (c.  Ctesiph.  p.  419),  and  the  inscriptions
published  by  Bockh  {JJrhunden  ilber  das  Seeioesen
des  Attisclies  Staates.,  Berlin,  1840),  in  which  they
are  sometimes  called  ot  &pxouTe5  iu  to7s  vewpioiSy
and  their  office  designated  an  apxh-  (No.  xvi.  b.
104,  &c.  ;  No.  X.  c.  125  ;  No.  xiv.  c.  122.  138.)
We  learn  from  the  same  inscriptions  that  their  of-
fice was  yearly,  and  that  they  were  ten  in  number.
It  also  appears  that  they  were  elected  by  lot  from
those  persons  who  possessed  a  knowledge  of  ship-
ping.

The  principal  duty  of  the  inspectors  of  the  dock-
yards was  to  take  care  of  the  ships,  and  all  the
rigging,  tools,  &c.  (tr/ceuirj)  belonging  to  them.
They  also  had  to  see  that  the  ships  were  sea-
worthy ;  and  for  this  purpose  they  availed  them-
selves of  the  services  of  a  ZoKifxaar-iis,  who  was
well  skilled  in  such  matters.  (Bockh,  Ibid.  No.  ii.
56.)  They  had  at  one  time  the  charge  of  various
kinds  of  military  o-/ceuif),  which  did  not  necessarily
belong  to  ships,  such  as  engines  of  war  (No.  xi.  m),
which  were  afterwards,  however,  entrusted  to  the
generals  by  a  decree  of  the  senate  and  people.
(No.  xvi.  a.  195.)  They  had  to  make  out  a  list  of
all  those  persons  who  owed  anything  to  the  docks
(Dem.  c.  Euerg.  et  Mnes.  p.  1145),  and  also  to
get  in  what  was  due.  (Id.  c.  Androt.  p.  612.)'
We  also  find  that  they  sold  the  rigging,  &c.,  of
the  ships  and  purchased  new,  under  the  direc-
tion of  the  senate,  but  not  on  their  own  responsi-
bility. (No.  xiv.  b.  -190,  &c.,  compared  with  Nos.
xiv.  xvi.  u.)  They  had  riyefxoviav  diKaarrripiov  in
conjunction  with  the  aTroaroX^ls  in  all  matters
connected  with  their  own  department.  (Dem.  c.
Euerg.  et  Mnes.  p.  1147.)  To  assist  them  in  dis-
charging their  duties  they  had  a  secretary  (ypa/x-
fiarevs.  No.  xvi.  b,  1 65),  and  a  public  servant  (Stj-
/.Ldaios  iu  Toh  vewpioLs,  No.  xvi.  b.  135).  For  a
further  account  of  these  inspectors,  see  Bockh,
Cfrkunden,  &c.  pp.  48 — 64.

6.  'ETTijueATyral  twj/  (pvXwv,  the  inspectors  of  the
(pvXai  or  tribes.     [Tribus.]

EPIRHE'DIUM.     [Rheda.]

EPISCETSIS  (iirlcTK-nrpLs).     [Martyria.]

EPI'SCOPI  (iiricrKonoi),  inspectors,  who  were
sometimes  sent  by  the  Athenians  to  subject  states.
Harpocration  compares  them  to  the  Lacedaemonian
harmosts,  and  says  that  they  were  also  called
<pu\aKes.  It  appears  that  these  Episcopi  received
a  salary  at  the  cost  of  the  cities  over  which  they
presided.  (Aristoph.  ^  res,  1022,  &c.,  with  Schol.;
Hai-pocrat.  s.  v.  ;  Bockh,  Publ.  Econ.  of  Athens,
pp.  156,  238,  2d  ed. ;  Schomann,  Antiq.  Juris
Pub.  Grace,  p.  432.  18.)

EPI'S'TATES  (eVio-TcCrTjs),  which  means  a  per-
son placed  over  any  thing,  was  the  name  of  two
distinct  classes  of  functionaries  in  the  Athenian
state  ;  namely,  of  the  chairman  of  the  senate  and
assembly  of  the  people,  respecting  whose  duties  see
the  articles  Boule  and  Ecclesia  ;  and  also  of  the


EPISTYLIUM.

directors  of  the  public  works,  ('ETrKTrarai  rwu
STUu-oaluv  epywv.)  These  directors  had  different
names,  as  TeixoTroioi^  the  repairers  of  the  walls  ;
TpiTjpoTTotot,  the  builders  of  the  triremes  ;  Tacpf/oiroioi^
the  repairers  of  the  trenches,  &c. ;  all  of  whom
were  elected  by  the  tribes,  one  from  each :  but  the
most  distinguished  of  these  were  the  reixoTroiol.
(Aeschin.  c.  aesipL  pp.  400,  422,  425.)  Over
other  public  buildings  a  manager  of  public  works
had  the  superintendence ;  and  it  was  in  this
capacity  that  Pericles,  and  subsequently  Lycurgus,
xmdertook  so  many  works  of  architecture.  In  the
inscriptions  relating  to  the  building  of  the  temple
of  Athena  Polias,  we  find  iTnaraToi  mentioned.
(Bockh,  Fubl.  Econ.  of  Athens,  p.  203,  2nd  ed.)
Similar  authorities  were  appointed  for  the  care  of
the  roads,  and  of  the  supply  of  water  (oSoTroioi,
Aeschin.  c.  Ctesiph.  p.  419  ;  iinararai  tuu  vSoltoou,
Plut.  Them.  31 ;  Schomann,  A7iiiq.  Juris  PuU.
Graec.  p.  247).

The  directors  received  the  money  which  was
necessary  for  these  works  from  the  public  treasury
(€«  TTjs  SzoiK^crews,  Aeschin.  c.  Ctesiph.  p.  425).

EPI'STOLA.     [CoNSTiTUTio.]

EPISTOLEUS  (eVjoTToAei^s),  was  the  officer
second  in  rank  in  the  Spartan  fleet,  and  succeeded
to  the  command  if  any  thing  happened  to  the
V3.vapxos  or  admiral.  (Xen.  Hell.  i.  1.  §  23,  iv.
8.  §  11,  v.  1.  §  5,  6;  Sturtz,  Lex.  Xenoph.  s.  v.)
Thus,  when  the  Chians  and  the  other  allies  of
Sparta  on  the  Asiatic  coast  sent  to  Sparta  to  re-
quest that  Lysander  might  be  again  appointed  to
the  command  of  the  navy,  he  was  sent  with  the
title  of  eTrtcTToAeus,  because  the  laws  of  Sparta  did
not  permit  the  same  person  to  hold  the  office  of
vavapxos  twice.     (Xen.  Hell.  ii.  1.  §  7.)

EPISTY'LIUM  (iTTLCTTvALov),  is  properly,  as
the  name  implies,  the  architrave,  or  lower  member
of  an  entablature,  which  lies  immediately  over  the
columns.  (Plut.  Per.  13;  Pans.  pass. ;  Varr.  R.  R.
iii.  2  ;  Festus,  s.  v.  ;  comp.  Columna,  p.  324,  a)
The  rules  for  the  height  of  the  architrave  are  given
by  Vitruvius  (iii.  3.  s.  5,  ed.  Schn.).  In  the
best  examples  of  the  Doric  order,  the  front  of  the
architrave  was  a  plain  flat  surface,  with  no  carvings,
but  sometimes  ornamented  with  metal  shields  af-
fixed to  it  over  each  column,  as  in  the  Parthenon,
where  there  are  also  inscriptions  between  the
shields.  (See  Lucas's  model.)  In  the  Ionic  and
Corinthian  orders  it  was  cut  up  into  two  or  usually
three  surfaces  (fasciae),  projecting  beyond  one
another,  the  edges  of  which  were  afterwards
decorated  with  mouldings.  (See  the  woodcuts
under  Columna.)  Originally  the  architrave  was
the  main  beam,  laid  along  the  top  of  the  columns
to  support  the  roof.  When  stone  was  used,  a
I  natural  limit  was  set  to  the  length  of  the  pieces
I  of  the  architrave,  and  consequently  the  distance  of
I  the  columns,  by  the  impossibility  of  obtaining
j  blocks  of  stone  or  marble  beyond  a  certain  size.
In  the  temple  of  Artemis  at  Ephesus  the  pieces  of
I  the  jirchitrave  were  so  large  that  Pliny  wonders
I  how  they  could  have  been  raised  to  their  places.
|(^.A^.  xxxvi.  14.  s.  21.)  When  an  intercolum-
■  niation  was  of  the  kind  called  araeostyle,  that  is,
i  when  the  columns  were  more  than  three  diameters
I  apart,  the  epistylium  was  necessarily  made  of  wood
1  instead  of  stone  (Vitrav.  iii.  2.  s.  3.  §  5.  ed.  Schn.) ;
I  a  construction  exemplified  by  the  restoration  in  the
j  annexed  woodcut  {Pompeii,  \o\.  i.  p.  143)  of  the
1  Doric  portico,  which  surrounds  three  sides  of  the


EPITROPUS.


469^


Forum  at  Pompeii.  The  holes  seen  at  the  back
of  the  frieze  received  the  beams  which  supported
an  upper  gallery.


The  word  is  sometimes  also  used  for  the  whole
of  the  entablature.  [P.  S.]

EPITA'PHIUM.     [FuNus.]

EPITHALA'MIUM.     [Matrimonium.]

EPITPMIA  (eVm^i'a).     [Atimia.]

EPITRIERARCHE'MATOS  DIKE  (iiriTpi.
r]papx^l^aTos  Siicrj).     [Trierarchia.]

EPITROPES  GRAPHE  {imrpoTrrjs  ypacp-fi).
[Epitropus.]

EPITROPUS  (iniTpoiros),  which  signifies
literally  a  person  to  whom  any  thing  is  given  in
charge  (Dem.  c  Aphoh.  i.  p.  819.  18),  occurs,  how-
ever, much  more  frequently  in  the  sense  of  a  guar-
dian of  orphan  children.  Of  such  guardians  there
were  at  Athens  three  kinds  :  first,  those  appointed
in  the  will  of  the  deceased  father ;  secondly,  the
next  of  kin,  whom  the  law  designated  as  tu tores
legitimi  in  default  of  such  appointment,  and  who
required  the  authorization  of  the  archon  to  enable
them  to  act ;  and  lastly,  such  persons  as  the  archon
selected  if  there  were  no  next  of  kin  living  to  un-
dertake the  office.  The  duties  of  the  guardian
comprehended  the  education,  maintenance,  and
protection  of  the  ward,  the  assertion  of  his  rights,
and  the  safe  custody  and  profitable  disposition  of
his  inheritance  during  his  minority,  besides  making
a  proper  provision  for  the  widow  if  she  remained
in  the  house  of  her  late  husband.  In  accordance
with  these,  the  guardian  was  bound  to  appear  in
court  in  all  actions  in  behalf  of  or  against  his  ward,
and  give  in  an  account  of  the  taxable  capital
(r/^Tj/ia)  when  an  ela(popd  (the  only  impost  to
which  orphans  were  liable)  was  levied,  and  make
the  proportionate  payment  in  the  minor's  name.
With  reference  to  the  disposition  of  the  property,
two  courses  were  open  to  the  guardian  to  pursue,
if  the  deceased  had  left  no  will,  or  no  specific
directions  as  to  its  management,  viz.,  to  keep  it  in
his  own  hands  and  employ  it  as  he  best  could  for
the  benefit  of  the  minor  (Sioikuv),  or  let  it  out  to
farm  to  the  highest  bidder  (fxiadovv  rov  oIkov).
In  the  former  case  it  seems  probable  (Dem.  c.
Onetor.  i.  p.  865.  17)  that  a  constant  control  of
the  guardian's  proceedings  might  be  exercised  by
the  archon ;  and  a  special  law  ordanied  that  aU
money  belonging  to  a  minor  should  be  vested  in

H  H    3


470


EPOBELIA.


mortgages,  and  upon  no  account  be  lent  out  upon
the  more  lucrative  but  hazardous  security  of  bot-
tomrj%     (Suidas,  s.  v.  "Eyy^^ov.)

To  insure  the  performance  of  these  duties  the
law  permitted  any  free  citizen  to  institute  a  public
action,  as,  for  instance,  an  apagoge  or  eisangelia
against  a  guardian  who  maltreated  his  ward
(^KUKwcr^us  op(j>avov\  or  a  ypa(p^  iiriTpoTTTis  for
neglect  or  injury  of  his  person  or  property  ;  and  the
punishment,  upon  conviction,  depended  entirely
upon  the  greater  or  less  severity  of  the  dicasts.
(Meier,  Ait.  Froc.  p.  294.)  If  the  guardian  pre-
ferred that  the  estate  should  be  farmed,  the  regular
method  of  accomplishing  this  was  by  making  an
application  to  the  archon,  who  thereupon  let  the
inheritance  to  the  highest  bidder,  and  took  care
that  the  farmer  should  hypothecate  a  sufficient
piece  of  ground  or  other  real  property  to  guarantee
the  fulfilment  of  the  contract  (aTrorijUTj^ca).  In
some  cases  the  guardian  might  be  compelled  to
adopt  this  course  or  be  punished,  if  the  lease  were
irregularly  or  fraudulently  made,  by  a  phasis,
Avhich,  upon  this  occasion,  might  be  instituted  by
any  free  citizen.  The  guardianship  expired  when
the  ward  had  attained  his  eighteenth  year,  and  if
the  estate  had  been  leased  out,  the  farmer  paid  in
the  market-place  the  capital  he  had  received  to
trade  with,  and  the  interest  that  had  accrued
(Dem.  c.  Aphob.  i.  832,  1)  ;  if,  however,  the  in-
heritance had  been  managed  by  the  guardian,  it
was  from  him  that  the  heir  received  his  property
and  the  account  of  his  disbursements  during  the
minority.  In  case  the  accounts  were  unsatisfactory,
the  heir  might  institute  an  action  iinrpoiTris  against
his  late  guardian  ;  this,  however,  was  a  mere  pri-
vate lawsuit,  in  which  the  damages  and  epobelia
only  could  be  lost  by  the  defendant,  to  the  latter
of  which  the  plaintiff  was  equally  liable  upon  fail-
ing to  obtain  the  votes  of  a  fifth  of  the  dicasts.
This  action  was  barred  by  the  lapse  of  five  years
from  the  termination  of  the  guardianship ;  and,  if
the  defendant  in  it  died  before  that  time,  an  action
)3Aag^s  would  lie  against  his  representatives  to  re-
cover what  was  claimed  from  his  estate.  (Meier,
Att.  Proc.  p.  444,  &c.)  [J.  S.  M.]

EPOBELIA  (iTrw§e\ia),  as  its  etymology  im-
plies, at  the  rate  of  one  obolus  for  a  drachma,  or
one  in  six,  was  payable  on  the  assessment  (rf/irj/xo)
of  several  private  causes,  and  sometimes  in  a  case
of  phasis,  by  the  litigant  that  failed  to  obtain  the
votes  of  one  fifth  of  the  dicasts.  (Dem.  c.  Aphob.
p.  834.  25,  c.  Euerg.  et  Mnesib.  p.  1158.  20.)  It
is  not,  however,  quite  certain  that  such  was  in-
variably the  case  when  the  defeated  suitor  was  the
defendant  in  the  cause  (Meier,  Att.  Proc.  p.  730)  ;
though  in  two  great  classes,  namely,  cross,  suits
(a.vTi'ypa<pai)^  and  those  in  which  a  preliminary
question  as  to  the  admissibility  of  the  original
cause  of  action  was  raised  {■7rapaypa(pal),  it  may  be
confidently  asserted.  As  the  object  of  the  regula-
tion was  to  inflict  a  penalty  upon  litigiousness,
and  reimburse  the  person  that  was  causelessly  at-
tacked for  his  trouble  and  anxiety,  the  fine  was
paid  to  the  successful  suitor  in  private  causes,  and
those  cases  of  phasis  in  which  a  private  citizen  was
the  party  immediately  aggrieved.  In  public  ac-
cusations, in  general,  a  fine  of  a  thousand  drachmae,
payable  to  the  public  treasury,  or  a  complete  or
partial  disfranchisement,  supplied  the  place  of  the
epobelia  as  a  punishment  for  frivolous  prosecu-
tions. [J.  S.  M.]


EPULONES.

EPO'MIS  (iirwfiis).     [Tunica.]

EPO'NIA  (fVojWo),     [Telos.]

EPO'NYMUS  (eVcoi/u/ios),  having  or  giving  a
name,  was  the  surname  of  the  first  of  the  nine
archons  at  Athens,  because  his  name,  like  that  of
the  consuls  at  Rome,  was  used  in  public  records  to
mark  the  year  [Archon].  The  expression  iirci-
vufMoi  Twv  rjKiKiuv,  whose  number  is  stated  by
Suidas,  the  Etymologicum  Magn.,  and  other  gram-
marians, to  have  been  fort}^  likewise  applies  to  the
chief-archon  of  Athens.  Every  Athenian  had  to
serve  in  the  army  from  his  19th  to  his  60th  year,
i.  e.  diu-mg  the  archonship  of  forty  archons.  Now
as  an  army  generally  consisted  of  men  from  the
age  of  18  to  that  of  60,  the  forty  archons  under
whom  they  had  been  enlisted,  were  called  iTtu)vv-
fioi  Tuv  T]\iKiS}v^  in  order  to  distinguish  them  from
the  eTrduvfioi  rwv  (pv\a>y.  (Compare  Demosih.  ap.
Harpocrat.  s.  v.  'Eiruvvfioi^  and  Bekker,  Anecdota^
p.  245.)  At  Sparta  the  first  of  the  five  ephors
gave  his  name  to  the  year,  and  was  therefore  called
e<popos  iTTcovvfxos.     (Pans.  iii.  11.  §  2.)

It  was  a  very  prevalent  tendency  among  the
ancients  in  general  to  refer  the  origin  of  their  in-
stitutions to  some  ancient  or  fabulous  hero  {apxv-
7eT7jy,  Demosth.  c.  Macart.  p.  1 072),  from  whom,
in  most  cases,  the  institution  was  also  believed  to
have  derived  its  name,  so  that  the  hero  became  its
apxny^T"i]s  eVcovu^uos.  In  later  times  new  institu-
tions were  often  named  after  ancient  heroes,  on
account  of  some  fabulous  or  legendary  connection
which  was  thought  to  exist  between  them  and  the
new  institutions,  and  the  heroes  thus  became,  as  it
were,  their  patrons  or  tutelary  deities.  A  striking
instance  of  this  custom  are  the  names  of  the  ten
Attic  tribes  instituted  by  Cleisthenes,  all  of  which
were  named  after  some  national  hero.  (Demosth.
Epitaph,  p.  1397,  &c.  ;  Pans.  i.  5.)  These  ten
heroes  who  were  at  Athens,  generally  called  the
iirwuvfiot^  or  iirdivv/xoL  tuv  (pv\wv,  were  honoured
with  statues,  which  stood  in  the  Ceramicus,  near
the  Tholos.  (Pans.  i.  5.  §  1 ;  Suidas  and  Etymol.
Magn.  s.  V.  'Eirwwixoi.)  If  an  Athenian  citizen
wished  to  make  proposals  for  a  new  law,  he  ex-
hibited them  for  public  inspection  in  front  of  these
statues  of  the  iTrcovv/xoi,  whence  the  expressions
(KOelt/ai  irpocrOev  twv  cttcovuju.wj',  or  irpbs  tovs  iirw-
vvfjLovs.  (Aeschin.  c.  Ctesiph.  p.  59,  ed  Steph. ;  Wolf,
Proleg.  ad  Demosth.  Leptin.  p.  133.)  [L.  S.]

EPOPTAE  (eTrJirraO.     [Eleusinia.]

EPULO'NES,  who  were  originally  three  in
number  {Triumviri  Eptdoties)^  were  first  created
in  B.  c.  1 96,  to  attend  to  the  Epulum  Jovis
(Valer.  Max.  ii.  1.  §  2  ;  Liv.  xxxi.  4  ;  Gell.  xii.
8),  and  the  banquets  given  in  honour  of  the  other
gods  ;  which  duty  had  originally  belonged  to  the
Pontifices.  (Liv.  xxxiii.  42  ;  Cic.  De  Orat.  iii.
19,  De  Ilarusp.  Respons.  10 ;  Festus,  s.  v.  Epo-
lonos.)  Their  number  was  afterwards  increased
to  seven  (Gell.  i.  12  ;  Lucan,  i.  602),  and  they
were  called  Septemviri  Epulones  or  Septemviri
Epulonum;  under  which  names  they  are  frequently
mentioned  in  inscriptions.  (Orelli,  Inscrip.  No.
590,  773,  2259,  2260,  2365.)  Julius  Caesar
added  three  more  (Dion  Cass,  xliii.  51),  but  after
his  time  the  number  appears  to  have  been  agaui
limited  to  seven.

The  Epulones  formed  a  collegium,  and  were  one
of  the  four  great  religious  corporations  at  Rome ;
the  other  three  were  those  of  the  Pontifices,  Ai*-
gures,  and  Quindecemviri.      (Dion  Cass.  liii.  If


EQUITES

IvMi.  12  ;  Plin.  Ep.  x.  3  ;  Walter,  GescUoMe  des
Bom.  Rechts,  %  Ul,  2d  ei.)

ETULUM  JOVIS.     [Epulones.]

EQUrRIA,  horse-races,  which  are  said  to
have  been  instituted  by  Romulus  in  honour  of
Mars,  and  were  celebrated  in  the  Campus  Martins.
(Festus,  s.  V.  ;  Varro,  Ling.  Lat.  vi.  13,  Miiller.)
There  were  two  festivals  of  this  name  ;  of  which
one  was  celebmted  a,  d.  III.  Cal.  Mart,,  and  the
other  prid.  Id.  Mart.  (Ovid,  Fast.  ii.  859,  iii.
519.)  If  the  Campus  Martins  was  overflowed  by
the  Tiber,  the  races  took  place  on  a  part  of  the
Mons  Coelius,  which  was  called  from  that  circum-
stance the  Martialis  Campus,  (Festus,  s.  v.  Mart.
Campus.)

E'QUITES,  The  Roman  Equltes  were  origin-
ally the  horse-soldiers  of  the  Roman  state,  and  did
not  form  a  distinct  class  or  ordo  in  the  common-
wealth till  the  time  of  the  Gracchi,  Their  insti-
tution is  attributed  to  Romulus,  who  caused  300
equites,  divided  into  three  centuries,  to  be  elected
by  the  curiae.  Each  of  the  old  Roman  tribes,  the
liamnes,  Tities^  and  Luceres  was  represented  by
100  equites,  and  consequently  each  of  the  30
curiae  by  1 0  equites  ;  and  each  of  the  three  cen-
turies bore  the  name  of  the  tribe  which  it  repre-
sented. The  three  centuries  were  divided  into  10
turmae^  each  consisting  of  30  men ;  every  turma
contained  10  Ramnes,  10  Titles,  and  10  Luceres  ;
and  each  of  these  decuries  was  commanded  by  a
decurio.  The  whole  body  likewise  bore  the  name
of  Celeres,  who  are  erroneously  regarded  by  some
writers  simply  as  the  body-guard  of  the  king.
The  commander  of  the  300  equites  was  called
Trilmnus  Celerum.  (Dionys.  ii.  13;  Varr.  L.  L.  v.
91,  ed.  Miiller  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii.  9  ;  Festus,
s.v.  Celeres ;  Liv.  i.  13,  15.)     [Celeres.]

To  the  three  hundred  equites  of  Romulus,  ten
Alban  turmae  were  added  by  TuUus  Hostilius.
(Liv,  i.  30.)  There  were  consequently  now  600
equites  ;  but  as  the  number  of  centuries  was  not
increased,  each  of  these  centuries  contained  200
men.  Tarquinius  Priscus,  according  to  Livy  (i.
36),  wished  to  establish  some  new  centuries  of
horsemen,  and  to  call  them  by  his  own  name,  but
gave  up  his  intention  in  consequence  of  the  opposi-
tion of  the  augur  Attus  Navius,  and  only  doubled
the  number  of  the  centuries.  The  three  centuries
which  he  added  were  called  the  Ramnes,  Titienses,
and  Luceres  Pos^enbres.  The  number  ought  there-
fore now  to  be  1200  in  all,  which  number  is  given
in  many  editions  of  Livy  (1.  c),  but  is  not  found  in
any  manuscript.  The  number  in  the  manuscripts
is  different,  but  some  of  the  best  manuscripts  have
1800,  which  has  been  adopted  by  most  modern
editors.  This  number,  however,  is  opposed  to
Livy's  previous  account,  and  cannot  be  supported
by  the  statement  of  Plutarch  {Rom.  20),  that  after
the  union  with  the  Sabines,  the  equites  were  in-
creased to  600  ;  becaiise  the  original  300  are  spoken
of  as  the  representatives  of  the  three  tribes  ;  where-
as, according  to  Plutarch's  account,  the  original  300
ought  only  to  represent  the  Ramnes,  If  therefore
we  adopt  Livy's  account  that  there  were  originally
300  equites,  that  these  were  increased  to  600  by
Tullus  Hostilius,  and  that  the  600  were  doubled
by  Tarquinius  Priscus,  there  were  1200  in  the
time  of  the  last-mentioned  king,  being  divided  into
three  centuries  of  Ramnes,  7'ities,  and  Luceres,  each
century  containing  200  priores  and  200  pos-
teriores.


EQUITES.  471

The  complete  organization  of  the  equites  Livy
(i,  43)  attributes  to  Servius  Tullius.  He  says  that
this  king  formed  (scripsit)  12  centuries  of  equites
from  the  leading  men  of  the  state  (ex  primoribus
civitatis)  ;  and  that  he  also  made  six  centuries  out
of  the  three  established  by  Romulus,  Thus,  there
were  now  18  centuries.  As  each  of  the  12  new
centuries  probably  contained  the  same  number  as
the  six  old  centuries,  if  the  latter  contained  1200
men,  the  former  would  have  contained  2400,  and
the  whole  number  of  the  equites  would  have  been
3600,

The  account,  however,  which  Cicero  (Z)e  Rep.
ii,  20)  gives  is  quite  different.  He  attributes  the
complete  organization  of  the  equitos  to  Tarquinius
Priscus,  He  agrees  with  Livy  in  saying  that  Tar-
quinius Priscus  increased  the  number  of  the  Ram-
nes, Titienses,  and  Luceres,  by  adding  new  cen-
turies under  the  name  of  Ramnes,  Titienses,  and
Luceres  secmidi  (not,  however,  postericres,  as  Livy
states  ;  compare  Festus  s.  v.  Sex  Vestae)  ;  but  he
differs  from  him  in  stating,  that  this  king  also
doubled  their  number  after  the  conquest  of  the
Aequi.  Scipio,  who  is  represented  by  Cicero  as
giving  this  account,  also  says  that  the  arrangement
of  the  equites,  which  was  made  by  Tarquinius
Priscus,  continued  unchanged  to  his  day  (b.  c.
129).  The  account,  which  Cicero  gave  of  the
equites  in  the  constitution  of  Servius  Tullius,  is
unfortunately  lost,  and  the  only  words  which  re-
main are  dnodeviginti  censu  maocimo;  but  it  is  diffi-
cult to  conceive  in  what  way  he  represented  the
division  of  the  1 8  centuries  in  the  Servian  consti-
tution, after  he  had  expressly  said  that  the  orga-
nization of  the  bo€ly  by  Tarquinius  Priscus  had
continued  unchanged  to  the  time  of  Scipio.  The
number  of  equites;  in  this  passage  of  Cicero  is  open
to  much  doubt  and  dispute.  Scipio  states,  accord-
ing to  the  reading  adopted  in  all  editions  of  the
"  De  Republica,"  that  Tarquinius  Priscus  increased
the  original  number  of  the  equites  to  1200,  and
that  he  subsequently  doubled  this  number  after
the  conquest  of  the  Aequi  ;  which  account  would
make  the  whole  number  2400,  which  number
cannot  be  correct,  since  if  2400  be  divided  by  18
(the  number  of  the  centuries),  the  quotient  is
not  a  complete  number.  The  MS.,  however,  has
OO  ACCC,  which  is  interpreted  to  mean  mille  ac
ducentos;  but  instead  of  this,  Zumpt  (Ueber  die
Romischen  Rittcr  und  den  Ritterstand  in  Rom,
Berlin,  1840)  proposes  to  read  00  DCCC,  1800,
justly  remarking,  that  such  a  use  of  ac  never  occurs
in  Cicero.  This  reading  would  make  the  number,
when  doubled,  3600,  which  agrees  with  Livy's  view,
and  which  appears  to  have  been  the  regular  number
of  equites  in  the  flourishing  times  of  the  republic.

Both  Livy  and  Cicero  agree  in  stating  that  each
of  the  equites  received  a  horse  from  the  state
{equus  publicus),  or  money  to  purchase  one,  as  well
as  a  sum  of  money  for  its  annual  support ;  and  that
the  expense  of  its  support  was  defrayed  by  the
orphans  and  unmarried  females  ;  since,  says  Nie^
buhr  {Hist,  of  Rome,  vol.  i.  p.  461),  "  in  a  military-
state  it  could  not  be  esteemed  unjust,  that  the
women  and  the  children  were  to  contribute  largely
for  those  who  fought  in  behalf  of  them  and  of  the
commonwealth."  According  to  Gaius  (iv.  27)  the
purchase-money  for  a  knight's  horse  was  called  aes
eqtiestre,  and  its  annual  provision  aes  hordearium.
[Aes  Hordearium.]  The  former  amounted,  ac-
cording to  Livy  (i.  43),  to  1 0,000  asses,  and  the

H  H   4


47-3  EQUITES.

latter  to  2000  :  but  these  sums  are  so  large  as  to
be  almost  incredible,  especially  when  we  take  into
account  that  126  years  afterwards  a  sheep  was  only
reckoned  at  10,  and  an  ox  at  100  asses  in  the
tables  of  penalties.  (Gell.  xi.  1,)  The  correctness
of  these  numbers  has  accordingly  been  questioned
by  some  modern  writers,  while  others  have  at-
tempted to  account  for  the  largeness  of  the  sum,
Niebuhr  (vol.  i.  p.  433)  remarks  that  the  sum  was
doubtless  intended  not  only  for  the  purchase  of  the
horse,  but  also  for  its  equipment,  which  would  be
incomplete  without  a  groom  or  slave,  who  had  to
be  bought  and  then  to  be  mounted.  Bockh  {Me-
trolog.  Untersucli.  c.  29)  supposes  that  the  sums  of
money  in  the  Servian  census  are  not  given  in  asses
of  a  pound  weight,  but  in  the  reduced  asses  of  the
first  Punic  war,  when  they  were  struck  of  the  same
weight  as  the  sextans,  that  is,  two  ounces,  or  one-
sixth  of  the  original  weight.  [As.]  Zumpt  con-
siders that  1000  asses  of  the  old  weight  were
given  for  the  purchase  of  the  horse,  and  200  for  its
annual  provision  ;  and  that  the  original  sum  has
been  retained  in  a  passage  of  Varro  {equum  pvLli-
cum  mille  assariorum,  L.  L.  viii.  71).

All  the  equites,  of  whom  we  have  been  speak-
ing, received  a  horse  from  the  state,  and  were  in-
cluded in  the  1 8  equestrian  centuries  of  the  Servian
constitution  ;  but  in  course  of  time,  we  read  of
another  class  of  equites  in  Roman  history,  who
did  not  receive  a  horse  from  the  state,  and  were
not  included  in  the  18  centuries.  This  latter  class
is  first  mentioned  by  Livy  (v.  7)  in  his  account
of  the  siege  of  Veii,  B.  c.  403.  He  says  that  dur-
ing the  siege,  when  the  Romans  had  at  one  time
suffered  great  disasters,  all  those  citizens  who  had
an  equestrian  fortune,  and  no  horse  allotted  to  them
(quihus  census  equester  e/rat^  equi  publici  non  erani)^
volunteered  to  serve  with  their  own  horses  ;  and
he  adds,  that  from  this  time  equites  first  began  to
serve  with  their  own  horses  {turn  priimim  eqiiis
merere  equites  coepe.nint).  The  state  paid  them
(certus  numei-us  aeris  est  assignatus)  as  a  kind  of
compensation  for  serving  with  their  own  horses.
The  foot  soldiers  had  received  pay  a  few  years
before  (Liv.  iv.  59)  ;  and  two  years  afterwards,
B.  c.  401,  the  pay  of  the  equites  was  made  three-
fold that  of  the  infantry.  (Liv.  v.  12  ;  see  Niebuhr,
vol.  ii.  p.  439.)

From  the  year  B.  c.  403,  there  were  therefore  two
classes  of  Roman  knights :  one  who  received  horses
from  the  state,  and  are  therefore  frequently  called
equites  equo  publico  (Cic.  Phil.  vi.  5),  and  sometimes
Flexuminos  or  Trossuli^  the  latter  of  which,  according
to  Gottling,  is  an  Etruscan  word  (Plin,  H.A'.  xxxiii.
.9  ;  Festus,  s.v. ;  Gottling,  Gesch.  der  Rom.  Staatsv.
p.  372),  and  another  class,  who  served,  when
they  were  required,  with  their  own  horses,  but  were
not  classed  among  the  18  centuries.  As  they  served
on  horseback  they  were  called  equites  ;  and,  when
spoken  of  in  opposition  to  cavalrj'',  which  did  not
consist  of  Roman  citizens,  they  were  also  called
equites  liomani ;  but  they  had  no  legal  claim  to
the  name  of  equites,  since  in  ancient  times  this  title
was  strictly  confined  to  those  who  received  horses
from  the  state,  as  Pliny  (H.  N.  xxxiii.  7)  expressly
says,  "  Equitum  nomen  subsistebat  in  turmis
equorum  publicorum."

But  here  two  questions  arise.  Why  did  the
equites,  who  belonged  to  the  eighteen  centuries,
receive  a  horse  from  the  state,  and  the  others  not  ?
and  how  was  a  person  admitted  into  each  class  re-


EQUITE8.

spectively  ?  These  questions  have  occasioned  much
controversy  among  modern  writers,  but  the  follow-
ing account  is  perhaps  the  most  satisfactory  :  —

Ik  the  constitution  of  Servius  TuUius  all  the
Roman  citizens  were  arranged  in  different  classes
according  to  the  amount  of  their  property,  and  it
may  therefore  fairly  be  presumed  that  a  place  in
the  centuries  of  equites  was  determined  by  the
same  qualification.  Dionysius  (iv.  18)  expressly
says,  that  the  equites  were  chosen  by  Servius  out
of  the  richest  and  most  illustrious  families  ;  and
Cicero  (De  Hep.  ii.  22)  that  they  were  of  the
highest  census  {censu  maodmo).  Livy  (i.  43)  also
states  that  the  twelve  centuries  formed  by  Servius
TuUius  consisted  of  the  leading  men  of  the  state.
None  of  these  writers,  however,  mention  the  pro-
perty which  was  necessary  to  entitle  a  person  ^to  a
place  among  the  equites  ;  but  it  was  probably  of
the  same  amount  as  in  the  latter  times  of  the  re-
public, that  is,  four  times  that  of  the  first  class.
Every  one  therefore  who  possessed  the  requisite
property,  and  whose  character  was  unblemished
(for  this  latter  qualification  appears  to  have  been
always  necessary  in  the  ancient  times  of  the  re-
public), was  admitted  among  the  equites  of  the
Servian  constitution  ;  and  it  may  be  presumed  that
the  twelve  ncAV  centuries  were  created  in  order  to
include  all  those  persons  in  the  state  who  possessed
the  necessary  qualifications.  Niebuhr  \Hist.  of
Rome^  vol.  i.  p.  427,  &c.),  however,  supposes  that
the  qualification  of  property  was  only  necessary  for
admission  into  the  twelve  new  centuries,  and  that
the  statement  of  Dionj'-sius,  quoted  above,  ought
to  be  confined  to  these  centuries,  and  not  applied
to  the  whole  eighteen.  He  maintains  that  the
twelve  centuries  consisted  exclusively  of  plebeians  ;
and  that  the  six  old  centuries  (that  is,  the  three
double  centuries  of  Ramnes,  Titles  and  Luceres,
priores  and  posteriores),  which  were  incorporated
by  Servius  into  his  comitia  under  the  title  of  the
sex  siifragia,  comprised  all  the  patricians,  inde-
pendent of  the  amount  of  property  which  they
possessed.  This  account,  however,  does  not  seem
to  rest  on  sufficient  evidence ;  and  we  have,  on  the
contrary,  an  express  instance  of  a  patrician,  L.  Tar-
quitius,  B.  c.  458,  who  was  compelled  on  account
of  his  poverty  to  serve  on  foot.  (Liv,  iii.  27.)
That  the  six  old  centuries  consisted  entirely  of
patricians  is  most  probable,  since  the  plebeians
would  certainly  not  have  been  admitted  among  the
equites  at  all  till  the  Servian  constitution  ;  and  as
by  this  constitution  new  centuries  were  created,  it
is  not  likely  that  any  plebeians  would  have  been
placed  among  the  ancient  six.  But  we  have  no
reason  for  supposing  that  these  six  centuries  con-
tained the  whole  body  of  patricians,  or  that  the
twelve  consisted  entirely  of  plebeians.  We  may
suppose  that  those  patricians,  who  belonged  to  the
six,  wen  allowed  by  the  Servian  constitution  to
continue  in  them,  if  they  possessed  the  requisite
property ;  and  that  all  other  persons  in  the  state,
whether  patricians  or  plebeians,  who  possessed  the
requisite  property,  were  admitted  into  the  1 2  new
centuries.  That  the  latter  were  not  confined  to
plebeians  may  be  inferred  from  Livy,  who  says
that  they  consisted  of  the  leading  men  in  the  state
(primores  civitutis),  not  in  the  plebs.

As  vacancies  occun-ed  in  the  eighteen  centuries,
the  descendants  of  those  who  were  originally  en-
rolled succeeded  to  their  places,  whether  plebeians
or  patricians,   provided   they  had   not  dissipated


EQUITES.
their  properly  ;  for  Niebuhr  goes  too  far  when  he
assorts  that  all  vacancies  were  filled  up  according
to  birth,  independent  of  any  property  qualification.
But  in  course  of  time,  as  population  and  wealth  in-
creased, the  number  of  persons,  who  possessed  an
equestrian  fortune,  also  increased  greatlj^  ;  and  as
the  number  of  equites  in  the  lli  centuries  was
limited,  those  persons,  whose  ancestors  had  not
been  enrolled  in  the  centuries,  could  not  receive
horses  from  the  state,  and  were  therefore  allowed
the  privilege  of  serving  with  their  own  horses
amongst  the  cavalry,  instead  of  the  infantr\',  as
they  would  otherwise  have  been  obliged  to  have
done.  Thus  arose  the  two  distinct  classes  of
equites,  which  have  been  already  mentioned.

The  inspection  of  the  equites  who  received
horses  from  the  state,  belonged  to  the  censors,  who
Lad  the  power  of  depriving  an  eques  of  his  horse,
and  reducing  him  to  the  condition  of  an  aerarian
(Liv.  xxiv.  43),  and  also  of  giving  the  vacant
horse  to  the  most  distinguished  of  the  equites
who  had  previously  served  at  their  own  expense.
For  these  purposes  they  made  during  their  censor-
ship a  public  inspection,  in  the  forum,  of  all  the
knights  who  possessed  public  horses  {equitatum  re-
cognoscunt^  Liv.  xxxix.  44  ;  equitum  centurias  re-
C(ygnoscu7d^  Valer,  Max.  ii.  9.  §  6).  The  tribes
were  taken  in  order,  and  each  knight  was  sum-
moned by  name.  Every  one,  as  his  name  was
called,  walked  past  the  censors,  leading  his  horse.
This  ceremony  is  represented  on  the  reverse  of
many  Romantcoins  struck  by  the  censors.  A  spe-
cimen is  annexed.


If  the  censors  had  no  fault  to  find  either  with
the  character  of  the  knight  or  the  equipments  of
liis  horse,  they  ordered  him  to  pass  on  {traduc
equum,  Valer.  Max.  iv.  1.  §  10)  ;  but  if  on  the  con-
trary they  considered  him  unworthy  of  his  rank,
they  struck  him  out  of  the  list  of  knights,  and  de-
prived him  of  his  horse  ( Liv.  xxxix.  44)  or  ordered
him  to  sell  it  (Liv.  xxix.  37  ;  Valer.  Max.  ii.  9.
§  6),  with  the  intention  no  doubt  that  the  person
thus  degraded  should  refund  to  the  state  the
money  which  had  been  advanced  to  him  for  its
purchase.  (Niebuhr,  Hist,  of  Borne,  vol.  i.  p.  433.)
At  the  same  review,  those  equites  who  had  served
the  regular  time,  and  wished  to  be  discharged,  were
accustomed  to  give  an  account  to  the  censors  of  the
campaigns  in  which  they  had  served,  and  were
then  dismissed  with  honour  or  disgrace,  as  they
might  have  deserved.    (Plut.  Pomp.  22.)

This  review  of  the  equites  by  the  censors  must
not  be  confounded  with  the  Equitum  Transvedio,
which  was  a  solemn  procession  of  the  body  every
year  on  the  Ides  of  Quintilis  (July).  The  proces-
sion started  from  the  temple  of  Mars  outside  the
city,  and  passed  through  the  city  over  the  forum,
and  by  the  temple  of  the  Dioscuri.  On  this  occasion
the  equites  were  always  crowned  with  olive  chap-
lets,  and  wore  their  state  dress,  the  trabea,  with
all  the   honourable   distinctions   which  they  had


EQUITES.  473

gained  in  battle.  (Dionys.  vi.  1 3.)  According  to
Livy  (ix.  46)  this  annual  procession  was  first  esta-
blished by  the  censors  Q.  Fabius  and  P.  Decius,
B.  C.304  ;  but  according  to  Dionysius  (I.e.)  it  was
instituted  after  the  defeat  of  the  Latins  near  the
lake  Regillus,  of  which  an  account  was  brought  to
Rome  by  the  Dioscuri.

It  may  be  asked,  how  long  did  the  knight  retain
his  public  horse,  and  a  vote  in  the  equestrian  cen-
tury to  which  he  belonged  ?  On  this  subject  we
have  no  positive  information  ;  but  as  those  equites,
who  served  with  their  own  horses,  were  only  ob-
liged to  serve  for  ten  years  (stipendia,  a-Tpareias)
under  the  age  of  4G  (Polyb.  vi.  19.  §  2),  we  may
presume  that  the  same  rule  extended  to  those  who
served  with  the  public  horses,  provided  they  ivished
to  give  up  the  service.  For  it  is  certain  that  in
the  ancient  times  of  the  republic  a  knight  might
retain  his  horse  as  long  as  he  pleased,  even  after
he  had  entered  the  senate,  provided  he  continued
able  to  discharge  the  duties  of  a  knight.  Thus  the
two  censors,  M.  Livius  Salinator  and  C.  Claudius
Nero,  in  B.  c.  204,  were  also  equites  (Liv.  xxix.
37)  ;  and  L.  Scipio  Asiaticus,  who  was  deprived
of  his  horse  by  the  censors  in  b.  c.  185  (Liv.  xxxix.
44),  had  himself  been  censor  in  B.  c.  191.  This  is
also  proved  by  a  fragment  in  the  fourth  book  (c.  2)
of  Cicero's  "  De  Republica,"  in  which  he  says,
equitatus,  in  quo  suffragia  sunt  etiam  senatus ;  by
which  he  evidently  means,  that  most  of  the  senators
were  enabled  to  vote  at  the  Comitia  Centuriata  in
consequence  of  their  belonging  to  the  equestrian
centuries.  But  during  the  later  times  of  the  re-
public the  knights  were  obliged  to  give  up  their
horses  on  entering  the  senate,  and  consequently
ceased  to  belong  to  the  equestrian  centuries.  This
regulation  is  alluded  to  in  the  fragment  of  Cicero
already  referred  to,  in  which  Scipio  says  that  many
persons  were  anxious  that  a  plebiscitum  should  be
passed,  ordaining  that  the  public  horses  should  be
restored  to  the  state,  which  decree  was  in  all  pro-
bability passed  afterwards  ;  since,  as  Niebuhr  ob-
serves (vol.  i.  p.  433,  note  1016),  "when  Cicero
makes  Scipio  speak  of  any  measure  as  intended,
we  are  to  suppose  that  it  had  actually  taken  place,
but,  according  to  the  information  possessed  b}' Cicero,
was  later  than  the  date  he  assigns  to  Scipio 's  dis-
course." That  the  greater  number  of  the  equites
equo  publico,  after  the  exclusion  of  senators  from
the  equestrian  centuries,  were  young  men,  is  proved
by  a  passage  in  the  work  of  Q,  Cicero,  De  Feiitione
Consulatus  (c.  8).

The  equestrian  centuries,  of  which  we  have
hitherto  been  treating,  were  only  regarded  as  a
division  of  the  army  ;  they  did  not  form  a  distinct
class  or  ordo  in  the  constitution.  The  community,
in  a  political  point  of  view,  was  only  divided  into
patricians  and  plebeians  ;  and  the  equestrian  cen-
turies were  composed  of  both.  But  in  the  year
B.  c.  1 23,  a  new  class,  called  the  Ordo  Equestris,
was  formed  in  the  state  by  the  Lex  Sempronia,
which  was  introduced  by  C.  Gracchus.  By  this
law  all  the  judices  had  to  be  chosen  from  those
citizens  who  possessed  an  equestrian  fortune.
(Plut.  C.  Gracck.  5  ;  Appian,  De  Bell.  Civ.  i.  22  ;
Tac.  Ann.  xii.  60.)  We  know  very  little  respecting
the  provisions  of  this  law  ;  but  it  appears  from  the
Lex  Servilia  repetundarum,  passed  eighteen  years
afterwards,  that  every  person  who  was  to  be  chosen
judex  was  required  to  be  above  thirty  and  under  sixty
years  of  age,  to  have  either  an  equus  publicus  or  to


474  EQUITES.

be  qualified  by  his  fortune  to  possess  one,  and  not
to  be  a  senator.  The  number  of  judices,  who  were
required  yearly,  was  chosen  from  this  class  by  the
praetor  urbanus.   (Klenze,  Lex  ServUia,  Berl.  1 825.)

As  the  name  of  equites  had  been  originally  ex-
tended from  those  who  possessed  the  public  horses
to  those  who  served  with  their  own  horses,  it  now
came  to  be  applied  to  all  those  persons  who  were
qualified  by  their  fortune  to  act  as  judices,  in  which
sense  the  word  is  usually  used  by  Cicero.  Pliny
(FT.  N.  xxxui.  7)  indeed  says  that  those  persons
who  possessed  the  equestrian  fortune,  but  did  not
serve  as  equites,  were  only  called  jiuUces^  and  that
the  name  of  equites  was  always  confined  to  the
possessors  of  the  equi  publici.  This  may  have
been  the  correct  use  of  the  term  ;  but  custom  soon
gave  the  name  of  equites  to  the  judices  chosen  in
accordance  with  the  Lex  Sempronia.

After  the  reform  of  Sulla,  which  entirely  de-
prived the  equestrian  order  of  the  right  of  being
chosen  as  judices,  and  the  passing  of  the  Lex  Au-
relia  (b.  c.  70),  which  ordained  that  the  judices
should  be  chosen  from  the  senators,  equites,  and
tribuni  aerarii,  the  influence  of  the  oi-der,  says
Pliny,  was  still  maintained  by  the  publicani  (Plin.
H.  N.  xxxiii.  8),  or  farmers  of  the  public  taxes.  We
find  that  the  publicani  were  almost  alwa^^s  called
equites,  not  because  any  particular  rank  was  neces-
sary in  order  to  obtain  from  the  state  the  farming
of  the  taxes,  but  because  the  state  naturally
would  not  let  them  to  any  one  who  did  not  possess
a  considerable  fortune.  Thus  the  publicani  are
frequently  spoken  of  by  Cicero  as  identical  with
the  equestrian  order  {Ad  Att  ii.  1.  §  8).  [Pub-
licani.] The  consulship  of  Cicero  and  the  active
part  which  the  knights  then  took  in  suppressing
the  conspiracy  of  Catiline,  tended  still  further  to
increase  the  power  and  influence  of  the  equestrian
order  ;  and  "  from  that  time,"  says  Pliny  {I.  c),
"  it  became  a  third  body  {corpus)  in  the  state,  and,
to  the  title  of  Senatus  Populusque  Romanus,  there
began  to  be  added  FA  Equestris  Ordo.^''

In  B.  c.  63,  a  distinction  was  conferred  upon
them,  which  tended  to  separate  them  still  further
from  the  plebs.  By  the  Lex  Roscia  Othonis,
passed  in  that  year,  the  first  fourteen  seats  in  the
theatre  behind  the  orchestra  were  given  to  the
equites  (Liv,  Epit.  99)  ;  which,  according  to  Cicero
{pro  Mur.  19)  and  Velleius  Paterculus  (ii.  32),
was  only  a  restoration  of  an  ancient  privilege  ;
which  is  alluded  to  by  Livy  (i.  35),  when  he  says
that  special  seats  were  set  apart  in  the  Circus
Maximus  for  the  senators  and  equites.  They  also
possessed  the  right  of  wearing  the  Clavus  Augus-
tus [Clavus]  ;  and  subsequently  obtained  the
privilege  of  wearing  a  gold  ring,  which  was  origi-
nally confined  to  the  equites  equo  publico.

The  number  of  equites  increased  greatly  under
the  early  emperors,  and  all  persons  were  admitted
into  the  order,  provided  they  possessed  the  requisite
property,  without  any  inquiry  into  their  character
or  into  the  free  birth  of  their  father  and  grand-
father, which  had  always  been  required  by  the
censors  under  the  republic.  Property  became  now
the  only  qualification  ;  and  the  order  in  conse-
quence gradually  began  to  lose  all  the  consideration
■which  it  had  acquired  during  the  later  times  of  the
republic.  Thus  Horace  {Ep.\.  1.  58)  says,  with
uo  small  degree  of  contempt,  —

Si  quadringentis  sex  septem  railia  dcsunt,
Plebs  eris.


EQUITES.

Augustus  formed  a  select  class  of  equites,  con-
sisting of  those  equites  who  possessed  the  property
of  a  senator,  and  the  old  requirement  of  free  birth
up  to  the  grandfather.  He  permitted  this  class  to
wear  the  latus  clavus  (Ovid.  Trlst.  iv.  10.  35)  ;
and  also  allowed  the  tribunes  of  the  plebs  to  be
chosen  from  them,  as  well  as  the  senators,  and  gave
them  the  option  at  the  termination  of  their  ofiice  to
remain  in  the  senate  or  return  to  the  equestrian
order.  (Suet.  Aug.  40  ;  Dion  Cass.  liv.  30.)  This
class  of  knights  was  distinguished  by  the  special
title  illustres  (sometimes  insignes  and  splendidi)
equites  Romani.  (Tacit.  Ann.  xi.  4,  with  the  note
of  Lipsius.)

The  formation  of  this  distinct  class  tended  to
lower  the  others  still  more  in  public  estimation.
In  the  ninth  year  of  the  reign  of  Tiberius  an  at-
tempt was  made  to  improve  the  order  by  requiring
the  old  qualifications  of  free  birth  up  to  the  grand-
father, and  by  strictly  forbidding  any  one  to  wear
the  gold  ring  unless  he  possessed  this  qualification.
This  regulation,  however,  was  of  little  avail,  as  the
emperors  frequently  admitted  freedmen  into  the
equestrian  order.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii.  8.)  When
private  persons  were  no  longer  appointed  judices,
the  necessity  for  a  distinct  class  in  the  community,
like  the  equestrian  order,  ceased  entirely  ;  and  the
gold  ring  came  at  length  to  be  worn  by  all  free
citizens.  Even  slaves,  after  their  manumission,
were  allowed  to  wear  it  by  special  permission  from
the  emperor,  which  appears  to  have  been  usually
granted  provided  the  patronus  consenftd.  (Dig.  40.
tit.  10.  s.  3.)     [Annulus.]

Having  thus  traced  the  history  of  the  equestrian
order  to  its  final  extinction  as  a  distinct  class  in
the  community,  we  must  now  return  to  the  equites
equo  publico,  who  formed  the  eighteen  equestrian
centuries.  This  class  still  existed  during  the  latter
years  of  the  republic,  but  had  entirely  ceased  to
serve  as  horse-soldiers  in  the  army.  The  cavalry
of  the  Roman  legions  no  longer  consisted,  as  in  the
time  of  Poly  bins,  of  Roman  equites,  but  their  place
was  supplied  by  the  cavalry  of  the  allied  states.
It  is  evident  that  Caesar  in  his  Gallic  wars
possessed  no  Roman  cavalry.  (Caes.  Bell.  Gall.
i.  15.)  When  he  went  to  an  interview  with
Ariovistus,  and  was  obliged  to  take  cavalry  with
him,  we  are  told  that  he  did  not  dare  to  trust  his
safety  to  the  Gallic  cavalry,  and  therefore  mounted
his  legionary  soldiers  upon  their  horses.  (Id.  i.  42.)
The  Roman  equites  are,  however,  frequently  men-
tioned in  the  Gallic  and  civil  wars,  but  never  as
common  soldiers  ;  they  were  officers  attached  to  the
stafl"  of  the  general,  or  commanded  the  cavalry  of
the  allies,  or  sometimes  the  legions.  (Id.  vii.  70 ;
Bell.Civ.i.T!,m.n,&.c.)

After  the  year  B.  c.  50,  there  were  no  censors  in
the  state,  and  it  would  therefore  follow  that  for  some
years  no  review  of  the  body  took  place,  and  that
the  vacancies  were  not  filled  up.  When  Augustus
however  took  upon  himself,  in  b.  c.  29,  the  prae-
fectura  morum,  he  frequently  reviewed  the  troops
of  equites,  and  restored,  according  to  Suetonius
{Aug.  38),  the  long-neglected  custom  of  the  solemn
procession  {transvectio)  ;  by  which  we  are  probably  S
to  understand  that  Augustus  connected  the  revievir^l
of  the  knights  {recognitio)  with  the  annual  proces-
sion {transvectio)  of  the  15th  of  July.  From  this
time  these  equites  formed  an  honourable  corps,
from  which  all  the  higher  officers  in  the  army
,  (Suet.  Aug.  38,  Claud.  25)  and  the  chief  magis-


ERANI.

trates  in  the  state  were  chosen.  Admission  into
tliis  body  was  equivalent  to  an  introduction  into
public  life,  and  was  therefore  esteemed  a  great  pri-
vilege ;  whence  we  find  it  recorded  in  inscriptions
that  such  a  person  was  equo  publico  Iionoratus,
ejrornatus^  &c.  by  the  emperor.  (Orelli,  Inscrip.
No.  3457,  313,  1229.)  If  a  young  man  was  not
admitted  into  this  body,  he  was  excluded  from  all
civil  offices  of  any  importance,  except  in  municipal
towns  ;  and  also  I'rom  all  rank  in  the  army,  with
the  exception  of  centurion.

All  those  equites  who  were  not  employed  in
actual  service  were  obliged  to  reside  at  Rome
(Dion  Cass.  lix.  9),  where  they  were  allowed  to
fill  the  lower  magistracies,  which  entitled  a  person
to  admission  into  the  senate.  They  were  divided
into  six  turmae,  each  of  which  was  commanded  by
an  officer,  who  is  frequently  mentioned  in  inscrip-
tions as  Sevir  equitum  Rom.  turmae  i.  il.  &c.,  or
commonly  Sevir  turmae  or  Sevir  turmarum  equitum
Romanorum.  From  the  time  that  the  equites  be-
stowed the  title  of  principes  juve?itutis  upon  Caius
and  Lucius  Caesar,  the  grandsons  of  Augustus
(Tacit.  Ann.  i.  3  ;  Monum.  Ancyr.),  it  became  the
custom  to  confer  this  title,  as  well  as  that  of  Sevir,
upon  the  probable  successor  to  the  throne,  when
he  first  entered  into  public  life  and  was  presented
with  an  equus  publicus.  (Capitol.  M.  Anton.  Phil.
6  ;  Laraprid.  Commod.  1.)

The  practice  of  filling  all  the  higher  offices  in
the  state  from  these  equites  appears  to  have  con-
tinued as  long  as  Rome  was  the  centre  of  the
government  and  the  residence  of  the  emperor.
They  are  mentioned  in  the  time  of  Severus  (Gru-
ter,  Inscrip.  p.  1001.  5  ;  Papinian,  in  Dig.  29.  tit.
I.  s.  43),  and  of  Caracalla  (Gruter,  p.  379.  7)  ;  and
perhaps  later.  After  the  time  of  Diocletian,  the
equites  became  only  a  city  guard,  under  the  com
mand  of  the  Praefectus  Vigilum  ;  but  they  still  re-
tfihied  in  the  time  of  Valentinianus  and  Valens,
A.  D.  364,  the  second  rank  in  the  city,  and  were
not  subject  to  corporal  punishment.  (Cod.  Theodos.
6.  tit.  36.)  Respecting  the  Magister  Equitum^  see
Dictator.

(Zumpt,  TJeher  die  Romischen  Rilter  und  den
Ritterstand  in  Rom,  Berlin,  1840  ;  Marquardt,
Historiae  Equitum  Romanorum  libri  IV.  Berlin,
1840  ;  Madvig,  De  Loco  Ciceronis  in  lib.  iv.  de
Republica,  in  Opuscula,  vol.  i.  p.  72,  &c.  ;  Becker
Ilandbuch  der  Romischen  Alterthumer,  vol.  ii.
part  i.  p.  235,  &c.)

EQUULEUS  or  ECULEUS,  an  instrument  of
torture,  which  is  supposed  to  have  been  so  called
because  it  was  in  the  form  of  a  horse.     We  have
no  description  of  its  form  given  by  any  of  the  an-
cient writers,  but  it  appears  not  to  have  differed
greatly  from  the  crux.     (Cic.  Pro  Mil.  21,   com-
pared with  certa  cmx,  c.  22.)     It  appears  to  have
been  commonly  used  at  Rome  in  taking  the  evi-
dence   of    slaves.      (See    Sigonius,    De   Judiciis,
1  iii.  17  ;  Magius,  De  Equuleo,  in  Salengre's  Nov.
I  Thesaur.  Ant.  Rom.  vol.  ii.  p.  1211,  &c.)
I      EQUUS  OCTOBER.     [Palilia.]
'       E  RANI  (epai/oj),  were  clubs  or  societies,  estab-
1  lished  for  charitable  or  convivial  purposes,  or  for
}  both.     They  were  very  common  at  Athens,  and
;  suited  the  temper  of  the  people,   who  were  both
'  social  and   generous.     The   term    (pavo^,   in   the
!  sense   of  a   convivial   party,   is  of  ancient  date.
;  (Hom.  Od.  i.  226.)     It  resembled  out  picnics,  or
'  the  German  pikaiiks,  and  was  also  called  ^iiirvov


ERANI.  475

ctTT^  a-KvplZos  OX  a-nh  (TvfxSoXwv :  where  every  guest
brought  his  own  dish,  or  (to  save  trouble)  one  was
deputed  to  cater  for  the  rest,  and  was  afterwards
repaid  by  contributions.  [Coena,  p.  304,  b.]  The
clubs  that  were  formed  at  Athens  used  to  dine  to-
gether at  stated  periods,  as  once  a  month  ;  and
every  member  was  bound  to  pay  his  subscription,
which  (as  well  as  the  society  itself)  was  called
epavos.,  and  the  members  ipavicTTal.  If  any  mem-
ber failed  to  pay,  the  sum  was  made  up  by  the
president,  ipavdjjxv^t  Jilso  called  TrArjpwT^s  ipdvovy
who  afterwards  recovered  it,  if  he  could,  from  the
defaulter.  TlK7]poxJv  epauou  often  means  simply,  to
pay  the  subscription,  as  \eiireiv  or  iKX^iireiv,  to
make  default.  (Dem.  c.  Aphob.  p.  821,  c.  Mid.
p.  547,  c.  Aristog.  p.  776.)

There  were  also  associations  under  this  name,
for  the  purpose  of  mutual  relief,  resembling  in
some  degree  our  friendly  or  benefit  societies  ;  but
with  this  essential  difference,  that  the  relief  which,
they  afforded  was  not  (as  it  is  with  us)  based  upon
an}"-  calculation  of  natural  contingencies,  but  was
given  pro  re  nata,  to  such  poor  members  as  stood
in  need  of  it.  The  Athenian  societies  do  not  ap-
pear to  have  kept  up  a  common  fund  by  regular
subscriptions,  though  it  is  probable  that  the  sum
which  each  member  was  expected  to  advance,  in
case  of  need,  was  pretty  well  understood.  If  a
man  was  reduced  to  poverty,  or  in  distress  for
money  for  any  cause,  he  applied  to  the  members
of  his  club  for  assistance  ;  this  Avas  called  crvK-
Aeyeiu  epauou :  those  who  advanced  it  were  said
ipauiC^iu  auT(^ :  the  relief  was  considered  as  a
loan,  repayable  by  the  borrower  when  in  better
circumstances.  Isaeus  (De  Ilagn.  Hered.  p.  294)
reckons  among  the  assets  of  a  person,  €|  ipdvwv
o^eATjjLiaTo  (IcrireTrpayiJ.iva,  from  which  we  may
infer,  that  each  contributor  was  entitled  to  recover
the  sum  he  had  lent.  For  the  recovery  of  such
loans,  and  for  the  decision  of  other  disputes,  there
were  epauiKoi  Si/cat,  in  which  a  summary  and
equitable  kind  of  justice  was  administered.  Plato
(Leg.  xi.  p.  915)  disapproved  of  lawsuits  in  such
matters,  and  would  not  allow  them  in  his  republic.

Salmasius  contends  that  wherever  the  term
ipavos  is  applied  to  an  established  society,  it  means
only  a  convivial  club,  and  that  there  were  no  re-
gular associations  for  the  purposes  of  charity  ;  but
others  have  held  a  different  opinion.  (See  Salmas.
De  Usu7-is,  c.  3,  Obs.  ad  Jus  Att.  et  Rom.  and
Herald.  Animadv.  in  Salmas.,  referred  to  in  Meier's
Att.  Proc.  p.  540.)  It  is  not  probable  that  many
permanent  societies  were  formed  with  the  sole
view  of  feasting.  We  know  that  at  Athens,  as
well  as  in  the  other  Grecian  republics,  there  were
clubs  for  various  purposes,  political  as  well  as
social :  the  members  of  which  would  naturally
meet,  and  dine  together  at  certain  periods.  Such
were  the  religious  companies  (i^i'ao-oi),  the  commer-
cial (e/iTTopj/coi),  and  some  others.  (Bockh,  Po/.
Econ.  of  Athens,  p.  245,  2nd  ed.)  Unions  of  this
kind  were  called  by  the  general  name  of  (raiplai^
and  were  often  converted  to  mischievous  ends,
such  as  briber)',  overawing  the  public  assembly,
or  influencing  courts  of  justice.  (Thuc.  iii.  82  ;
Dem.  De  Coron.  p.  329  ;  Thirl  wall,  Gr.  Hist.  vol.
iv.  p.  36.)  In  the  days  of  the  Roman  empire
friendly  societies,  under  the  name  of  tpavoi,  were
frequent  among  the  Greek  cities,  but  were  looked
on  with  suspicion  by  the  emperors  as  leading  to
political  combinations.    (Plin.  Ep.  x.  93,  94.)   The


476


ESSEDA.


gikls,  or  fraternities  for  mutual  aid,  among  the  an-
cient Saxons,  resembled  the  (pavoi  of  the  Greeks.
(Turner's  Hist,  of  the  Anglo-Saxons,  iv.  10.)  Cora-
pare  also  the  d7a7rat,  or  love-feasts  of  the  early
Christians,

The  word  epavos  is  often  used  metaphorically,  to
signify  any  contributions  or  friendly  advance  of
money.  [C.  R.  K.]

ERGA'STULUM  was  a  private  prison  attached
to  most  Roman  farms,  called  career  ruslicus  by
Juvenal  (xiv.  24),  where  the  slaves  were  made  to
work  in  chains.  It  appears  to  have  been  usually
under  ground,  and  according  to  Columella  (i.  6)
ought  to  be  lighted  by  narrow  windows,  which
should  be  too  high  from  the  ground  to  be  touched
by  the  hand.  The  slaves  confined  in  an  ergastu-
lum  were  also  employed  to  cultivate  the  fields  in
chains.  (Plin.  //.  N.  xviii.  7-  §  4  ;  Flor.  iii.  19.)
Slaves  who  had  displeased  their  masters  were
punished  by  imprisonment  in  the  ergastulum  ;  and
in  the  same  place  all  slaves  who  could  not  be  de-
pended upon  or  were  barbarous  in  their  habits,  were
regularl}'  kept.  A  trustworthy  slave  had  the  care
of  the  ergastulum,  and  was  therefore  called  ergasttda-
rius.  (Coliim.  i.  8.)  According  to  Plutarch  (7%.
Gracdi.  8),  these  prisons  arose  in  consequence  of
the  conquest  of  Italy  by  the  Romans,  and  the
great  number  of  barbarous  slaves  who  were  em-
ployed to  cultivate  the  conquered  lands.  In  the
time  of  Hadrian  and  Antoninus,  many  enactments
were  made  to  ameliorate  the  condition  of  slaves  ;
and  among  other  salutary  measures,  Hadrian  abo-
lished the  ergastula,  which  must  have  been  liable
to  great  abuse  in  the  hands  of  tyrannical  masters.
(Spart.  Pladrian,  18,  compared  with  Gains,  i.  53.)
For  further  information  on  the  subject,  see  Bris-
sonius,  Antiq.  Select.  \\.  9  ;  Lipsius,  Elect,  ii.  15,
Opera,  vol,  i.  p.  317,  &c.  ;  Gottling,  Gesch.  der
R'oin.  Staatsi;.  p,  1 35,

ERI'CIUS,  a  military  engine  full  of  sharp
spikes,  which  was  placed  by  the  gate  of  the  camp
to  prevent  the  approach  of  the  enemy.  (Caes.
B.  C.  iii.  67  ;  Sallust,  apud  Nan.  xviii.  16  ;  Lipsius,
PoUorcet.  v.  4.)

EROGA'TIO.     [Aquaeductus,  p.  115,a.]

ERO'TIA  or  EROTI'DIA  (epci^Tta  or  epwrf-
5<a),  the  most  solemn  of  all  the  festivals  celebrated
in  the  Boeotian  town  of  Thespiae.  It  took  place
every  fifth  year,  and  in  honour  of  Eros,  the  prin-
cipal divinity  of  the  Thespians.  Respecting  the
particulars  nothing  is  known,  except  that  it  was
solemnised  with  contests  in  music  and  gynmastics.
(Plut,  Arnat.  1  ;  Pans.  ix.  31.  §  3  ;  Athen,  xiii,
p.  561 .)  The  worship  of  Eros  seems  to  have  been
established  at  Thespiae  from  the  earliest  times  ;
and  the  ancient  symbolic  representation  of  the  god,
a  rude  stone  {apyhs  \i6os),  continued  to  be  looked
upon  with  particular  reverence  even  when  sculp-
ture had  attained  the  highest  degree  of  perfection
among  the  Greeks.  (Pans.  ix.  27.  §  1  ;  compare
Schol.  ad  Pind.  Olymp.  vii.  154  ;  Ritschl,  in  the
Rhein.  Mus.  vol,  ii,  p,  106.)  [L,  S.]

ERRHEPHO'RIA  or  ERSEPHO'RIA  C^^-
l>-ii^6pia  or  «p(Tin(p6pia.)     [Arrephoria.]

ESCHARA  (^o-xapa).     [Focus.]

E'SSEDA  or  E'SSEDUM  (from  the  Celtic
Ess,  a  carriage,  Ginzrot,  vol.  i.  p.  377),  the  name
of  a  chariot  used,  especially  in  war,  by  the  Britons,
the  Gauls  and  Belgae  (Virg.  Georg.  iii.  204  ;  Ser-
viiw,  ad  loc.) ;  and  also  by  the  Germans  (Pers.  vi.
47).


EVICTIO.

According  to  the  account  given  by  Caesar  {Dell.
Gall.  iv.  33),  and  agreeably  to  the  remarks  of  Dio-
dorus  Siculus  (v.  21,  29),  the  method  of  using  the
essedum  in  the  ancient  British  army  was  very
similar  to  the  practice  of  the  Greeks  in  the  heroic
ages,  as  described  by  Homer,  and  in  the  article
CuRRUS.  The  principal  difference  seems  to  have
been  that  the  essedum  was  stronger  and  more
ponderous  than  the  Zicppos,  that  it  was  open  before
instead  of  behind  ;  and  that  in  consequence  of
these  circumstances  and  the  width  of  the  pole,  the
owner  was  able,  whenever  he  pleased,  to  run
along  the  pole  {de  temone  Britanno  ejrcidet,  Juv,  iv.
125),  and  even  to  raise  himself  upon  the  yoke,
and  then  to  retreat  with  the  greatest  speed  into
the  body  of  the  car,  which  he  drove  with  extra-
ordinary swiftness  and  skill.  From  the  extremity
of  the  pole,  he  threw  his  missiles,  especially  the
cateia  (Val,  Flacc.  Argon,  vi.  83).  It  appears
also  that  these  cars  were  purposely  made  as  noisy
as  possible,  probably  by  the  creaking  and  clanging
of  the  wheels  (strepitu  rotarum,  Caes,  I.  c.  ;  com-
pare Tacit,  Agrlc.  35  ;  Esseda  mullisonora,  Claud.
Epig.  iv.)  ;  and  that  this  was  done  in  order  to
strike  dismay  into  the  enemy.  The  formidable
British  warriors  who  drove  these  chariots,  the
"  car-borne "  of  Ossian,  were  called  in  Latin
Essedarii.  (Caes.  B.  G.  iv.  24  ;  Cic.  ad  Fam.  vii.
6.)  There  were  about  4000  of  them  in  the  army
of  Cassibelaunus.  (Caes.  B.G.  v.  19.)  Having
been  captured,  they  were  sometimes  exhibited  in
the  gladiatorial  shows  at  Rome,  and  seem  to  have
been  great  favourites  with  the  people.  (Sueton.
Calig.  35,  Claud.  21.)  They  must  have  held  the
highest  rank  in  the  armies  of  their  own  country  ;
and  Tacitus  (Agric.  12)  observes  that  the  driver  of
the  car  ranked  above  his  fighting  companion,
which  was  the  reverse  of  the  Greek  usage.

The  essedum  was  adopted  for  purposes  of  con-
venience and  luxury  among  the  Romans.  (Propc^rt.
ii.  1.  76  ;  Cic.  ad  Att.  vi.  1  ;  Ovid.  Ayn.  ii.  J  6,
49,)  Cicero  {Phil.n.  24)  mentions  the  use  of  it
on  one  occasion  by  the  tribune  of  the  people  as  a
piece  of  extravagance  ;  but  in  the  time  of  Seneca,
it  seems  to  have  been  much  more  common  ;  for
he  {Epist.  57)  reckons  the  sound  of  the  "  essedae
transcurrentes  "  among  those  noises  which  did  not
distract  him.  As  used  by  the  Romans,  the  esse-
dum may  have  differed  from  the  cisiura  in  this  ;
that  the  cisium  was  drawn  by  one  horse  (see  wood-
cut, p.  288),  the  essedum  always  by  a  pair.  The
essedum,  like  the  cisium,  appears  to  have  been
kept  for  hire  at  the  post-houses  or  stations  (Salo-
nem  quinto  essedo  videbis,^ia.vt.x.  104.)  [Mansio.]
The  essedum  must  have  been  similar  to  the  Covi-
Nus,  except  that  the  latter  had  a  cover.       [J.  Y.]

ESSEDA'RIL     [Esseda.]

EVI'CTIO.  If  the  purchaser  of  a  thing  wa»
deprived  of  it  by  a  third  person  by  legal  process
(evicted),  the  seller  was  bound  to  make  good  the
loss  (evictionem  praestare).  If  the  seller  knew
that  he  was  selling  what  was  not  his  own,  tins
was  a  case  of  dolus,  and  he  was  bound  in  case  of
eviction  to  make  good  to  the  purchaser  all  loss  and
damage  that  he  sustained.  If  there  was  no  dolus
on  the  part  of  the  seller,  he  was  simply  bound  to
make  good  to  the  purchaser  the  value  of  the  thing
at  the  time  of  eviction.  It  was  necessary  for  thd
purchaser  to  neglect  no  proper  means  of  defence,
when  an  attempt  was  made  to  evict  him  ;  and  it
was  his  duty  to  give  the  seller  notice  of  the  ad-


I


EUMOLPIDAE.
Terse  claim  {litem  dcmmciare),  and  to  pray  his  aid
in  defence  of  the  action.  The  stipulatio  duplae
■was  usual  ampng  the  Romans  ;  and,  in  such  case,
if  the  purchaser  was  evicted  from  the  whole  thing,
he  might  by  virtue  of  his  agreement  demand  from
the  seller  double  its  value.  (Dig.  21.  tit.  2,  De
evictionibus  et  duplae  stipulatione  ;  Mackeldcy,
Lehrbuch,  &c.,  §  370,  12th  ed.)  [G.  L.]

EUMO'LPIDAE  (evfio\TriSai),  the  most  dis-
tinguished and  venerable  among  the  priestly  fami-
lies in  Attica.  They  were  devoted  to  the  service
of  Deraeter  at  Athens  and  Eleusis,  and  were  said
to  be  the  descendants  of  the  Thracian  bard  Eumol-
pus,  who,  according  to  some  legends,  had  intro-
duced the  Eleusinian  mysteries  into  Attica.  (Diod.
Sic.  i.  29;  Apollod.  iii.  15.  §  4;  Demosth.  c.Neaer.
p.  1384.)  The  high  priest  of  the  Eleusinian
goddess  (Upo(pdvTT}s  or  fivcrrayuySs),  who  con-
ducted the  celebration  of  her  mysteries  and  the  in-
itiation of  the  mystae,  was  always  a  member  of  the
family  of  the  Eumolpidae,  as  Eumolpus  himself  was
believed  to  have  been  the  first  hierophant.  (Hesych.
s.v.  Evfjt.o\Tri5ai:  Tacit.  Hist  iv.  83  ;  Arnob.,  v.  25;
Clemens  Alex.  Protrept.  p.  16,  &.c.)  In  his  external
appearance  the  hierophant  was  distinguished  by  a
peculiar  cut  of  his  hair,  a  kind  of  diadem  {crrpd-
<ptoi/),  and  a  long  purple  robe.  (Arrian.  in  Epidet.
lii.  21  ;  Plut.  Alcib.  22.)  In  his  voice  he  seems
always  to  have  affected  a  solemn  tone  suited  to
the  sacred  character  of  his  office,  which  he  held  for
life,  and  which  obliged  him  to  remain  unmarried.
(Pans.  ii.  14.  §  1.)  The  hierophant  was  attended
by  four  iTriixeX-qral^  one  of  whom  likewise  belonged
to  the  family  of  the  Eumolpidae.  (Harpocrat.  and
Suidas,  s.  V.  'E7ri/xeA.7}Tai  twv  /xvarT^piwy.)  Other
members  of  their  family  do  not  seem  to  have  had
any  particular  functions  at  the  Eleusinia,  though
they  undoubtedly  took  part  in  the  great  procession
to  Eleusis.  The  Eumolpidae  had  on  certain  occa-
sions to  offer  up  prayers  for  the  welfare  of  the
state,  and  in  case  of  neglect  they  might  be  taken
to  account  and  punished  ;  for  they  were,  like  all
other  priests  and  magistrates,  responsible  for  their
conduct,  and  for  the  sacred  treasures  entrusted  to
their  care.  (Acschin.  c.  Ctesiph.  p.  bQ^  Steph.  ;
compare  Euthyne.)

The  Eumolpidae  had  also  judicial  power  in  cases
where  religion  was  violated  (Trepl  oKregeias,  De-
mosth. c.  Androt  p.  601).     This  power  probably
belonged  to  this  family  from  the  earliest  times,  and
Solon  as  well  as  Pericles  do  not  seem  to  have  made
1  any  alteration  in  this  respect.     Whether  this  re-
ligious court  acted  independent  of  the  archon  king,
1  or   under    his   guidance,  is   uncertain.     The  law
I  according  to  which  they  pronounced  their  sentence,
I  and  of  which  they  had  the  exclusive  possession,
'  was  not  written,  but  handed  down  by  tradition  ;
I  and  the  Eumolpidae  alone  had  the  right  to  inter-
pret it,  whence  they  are  sometimes  called  4^7}yr]Tai.
[ExEOETAE.]^    In  cases  for  which  the  law  had
made  no  provisions,  they  acted  according  to  their
own    discretion.       (Lysias,    c.   Andocid.    p.  204  ;
j  Andocid.  De  Mijst.  p.  57.)     Respecting  the  mode
i  of  proceeding  in  these  religious  courts  nothing  is
I  known.    (lieffter,  Athen.  Gerichtsverf.  p.  405,  &c.  ;
Platner,  Process,  ii.  p.  147,  &c.)      In  some  cases,
when  a  person  was  convicted  of  gross  violation  of
j  the  public  institutions  of  his  country,  the  people,
j  besides  sending  the  offender  into  exile,  added  a
I  clause  in  their  verdict  that  a  curse  should  be  pro-
nounced upon  him  by  the  Eumolpidae.      (Plut.


EUPATRIDAE.  477

Alcib.  22  ;  Com.  Nep.  Alcib.  4,  5.)  But  the
Eumolpidae  could  pronounce  such  a  curse  only  at
the  command  of  the  people,  and  might  afterwards
be  compelled  by  the  people  to  revoke  it  and  purify
the  person  whom  they  had  cursed  before.  (Plut,
Alcib.  33  ;  Corn.  Nep.  Alcib.  6.  5.)  [L.  S.]

EVOCA'TI,  were  soldiers  in  the  Roman  army,
who  had  served  out  their  time  and  obtained  their
discharge  {missio),  but  had  voluntarily  enlisted
again  at  the  invitation  of  the  consul  or  other  com-
mander. (Dion  Cass.  xlv.  12.)  'i'here  appears
always  to  have  been  a  considerable  number  of
evocati  in  every  army  of  importance  ;  and  when
the  general  was  a  favourite  among  the  soldiers,  the
number  of  veterans  who  joined  his  standard  would
of  course  be  increased.  The  evocati  were,  doubt-
less, released,  like  the  vexillarii,  from  the  common
military  duties  of  fortifying  the  camp,  making
roads,  &c.  (Tacit.  Ann.  i.  36),  and  held  a  higher
rank  in  the  army  than  the  common  legionary '
soldiers.  They  are  sometimes  spoken  of  in  con-
junction with  the  equites  Romani  (Caes.  Bell.  Gall.
vii.  65),  and  sometimes  classed  with  the  centurions.
(Caes.  Bell.  Civ.  i.  1 7.)  They  appear  to  have  been
frequently  promoted  to  the  rank  of  centurions.
Thus  Pompey  induced  a  great  many  of  the  veterans,
who  had  served  under  him  in  former  years,  to  johi
his  standard  at  the  breaking  out  of  the  civil  war,
by  the  promise  of  rewards  and  the  command  of
centuries  (ordinitm,  Caes.  Bell.  Civ.  i.  3).  All  the
evocati  could  not,  however,  have  held  the  rank  of
centurions,  as  we  read  of  two  thousand  on  one
occasion  (lb.  iii.  88),  and  of  their  belonging  to
certain  cohorts  in  the  army.  Cicero  (ad  Fam.
iii.  6.  §  5)  speaks  of  a  Pracfictus  evocatonim.
(See  Cic.  ad  Fam.  xv.  4.  §  3  ;  Caes.  Bell.  Civ.  iii.
91  ;  '^WQi.Aug.  56  ;  Lipsius,  Z>e  M«7i<.  Rom.  i.  8.)

The  name  of  evocati  was  also  given  to  a  select
body  of  young  men  of  the  equestrian  order,  who
were  appointed  by  Domitian  to  guard  his  bed-
chamber. (Suet.  Dom.  10.)  This  body  is  sup-
posed by  some  writers  to  have  existed  under  the
succeeding  emperors,  and  to  have  been  the  same
as  those  who  are  called  Evocati  Augusti.  (Hyginus,
de  Urn.  p.  209  ;  OvclW,  Inscrip.  No.  3495,  153.)

EUPA'TRIDAE  {evirarpiSai),  i.e.  descended
from  noble  ancestors,  is  the  name  by  which  in  early
times  the  nobility  of  Attica  was  designated.  Who
the  Eupatridae  originally  were  has  been  the  sub-
ject of  much  dispute  ;  but  the  opinion  now  almost
universally  adopted  is,  that  they  were  the  noble
Ionic  or  Hellenic  families  who  at  the  time  of  the
Ionian  migration  settled  in  Attica,  and  there  exer-
cised the  power  and  influence  of  an  aristocracy  of
warriors  and  conquerors,  possessing  the  best  parts
of  the  land,  and  commanding  the  services  of  a
numerous  class  of  dependents.  (Thirlwall,  Hist,  of
Greece,  vol.  i.  p.  1 1 5,  &;c. ;  W achsmuth,  vol.  i.  p.  36 1 ,
&c.,  2d  ed.)  The  chiefs  who  are  mentioned  as
kings  of  the  several  Attic  towns,  before  the  organi-
sation of  the  country  ascribed  to  Theseus,  belonged
to  the  highest  or  ruling  class  of  the  Eupatridae  ;
and  when  Theseus  made  Athens  the  seat  of  go-
vernment for  the  whole  country,  it  must  have  been
chiefly  these  nobles  of  the  highest  rank,  that  left
their  fonner  residences  and  migrated  to  Athens,
where,  after  Theseus  had  given  up  his  royal  pre-
rogatives and  divided  them  among  the  nobles,  they
occupied  a  station  similar  to  that  which  they  had
previously  held  in  their  several  districts  of  Attica.
Other  Eupatridae,  however,  who  either  were  not


478


EUTHYNE.


of  the  highest  rank,  or  were  less  desirous  to  exer-
cise any  direct  influence  upon  the  government,
reniained  in  their  former  places  of  residence.
(Thirl wall,  vol.  ii.  p.  8.)  In  the  division  of  the
inhabitants  of  Attica  into  three  classes,  which  is
ascribed  to  Theseus,  the  Eupatridae  were  the  first
class  (Plut.  Tlies.  25 ),  and  thus  formed  a  compact
order  of  nobles,  united  by  their  interests,  rights,
and  privileges.  The  first,  or  at  least  the  most
ambitious  among  them,  undoubtedly  resided  at
Athens,  where  they  enjoyed  nearly  the  same  privi-
leges as  they  had  before  the  union  in  the  separate
townships  of  Attica.  They  were  in  the  exclusive
possession  of  all  the  civil  and  religious  ofiices  in
the  state,  regulated  the  affairs  of  religion,  and  in-
terpreted the  laws  human  and  divine.  .(Miillcr,
Dor.  ii.  2.  §  15.)  The  king  was  thus  only  the
first  among  his  equals,  being  distinguished  from
them  only  by  the  duration  of  his  office  (Schbmann,
De  Coniit.  p.  4,  transl.)  ;  and  the  four  kings  of  the
phylae  (<|)u\ogacn\ers),  who  were  chosen  from  the
Eupatridae,  were  more  his  colleagues  than  his
counsellors.  (Pollux,  viii.  1 1 1.)  The  kingly  power
Avas  in  a  state  of  great  weakness  ;  and,  while  the
overbearing  influence  of  the  nobles,  on  the  one
hand,  -naturally  tended  gradually  to  abolish  it
altogether,  and  to  establish  a  purely  aristocratical
government  in  its  stead  (Hermann,  Pol.  Ant.  of
Greece,  §  102),  it  produced,  on  the  other  hand,
effects  which  threatened  its  own  existence,  and  at
last  led  to  the  entire  overthrow  of  the  hereditary
aristocracy  as  an  order :  for  the  commonalty,
which  had  likewise  gained  in  strength  by  the
xmion  of  all  the  Attic  townships,  soon  began  to
feel  the  oppression  of  the  aristocracy,  which  in
Attica  produced  nearly  the  same  effects  as  that  of
the  patricians  at  Rome.  The  legislation  of  Draco
seems  to  have  arisen  out  of  the  growing  discontent
of  the  commonalty  with  the  oppressive  rule  of  the
nobles  (Thirl wall,  vol.  ii.  p.  18,  &c.)  ;  but  his  at-
tempts to  remedy  the  evil  were  more  calculated  to
intimidate  the  people  than  to  satisfy  them,  and
could  consequently  not  have  any  lasting  results.
The  disturbances  which,  some  years  after,  arose
from  the  attempt  of  Cylon,  one  of  the  Eupatridae,
who  tried  to  overthrow  the  aristocratical  govern-
ment and  establish  himself  as  tyrant,  at  length  led
to  the  legislation  of  Solon,  by  which  the  political
power  and  influence  of  the  Eupatridae  as  an  order
was  broken,  and  property  instead  of  birth  was
made  the  standard  of  political  rights.  (Aristot.
Polit.  ii.  9  ;  Dionys.  Hal.  Ant.  Rom.  ii.  8  ;  Aelian,
V.  H.  V.  13.)  But  as  Solon,  like  all  ancient
legislators,  abstained  from  abolishing  any  of  the
religious  institutions,  those  families  of  the  Eupa-
tridae in  which  certain  priestly  offices  and  func-
tions were  hereditary,  retained  these  distinctions
down  to  a  very  late  period  of  Grecian  history.
(Compare  Schomann,  Antiq.  Jur.  publ.  Graec.  p.
167,  &c.,  and  p.  77,  &c.)  [L.  S.]

EURI'PUS.     [Amphitheatrum,  p.  88,  b.]

EUSTYLOS.     [Templum.]

EUTHY'NE  and  EUTHY'NI  {^vdivv,
eijBvvoi).  All  public  officers  at  Athens,  espe-
cially generals,  ambassadors,  the  archons  and  their
assessors,  the  diaetetae,  priests  and  priestesses
(Aeschin.  c.  Ctesiph.  p.  56.  Steph.),  the  secretaries
of  the  state  (Lysias,  c.  Nieomach.),  the  superin-
tendents of  public  buildings,  the  trierarchs,  and
even  the  senate  of  the  Five  Hundred  and  the
members  of  the  Areiopagus,  were  accountable  for


EUTHYNE.

their  conduct  and  the  manner  in  which  they  ac-
quitted themselves  of  their  official  duties.  The
judges  in  the  popular  courts  seem  to  have  been
the  only  authorities  who  were  not  responsible
(Aristoph.  Vesp.  546  ;  Hudtwalcker,  Von  den
Diaetet.  p.  32)  ;  for  they  were  themselves  the  re-
presentatives of  the  people,  and  would  therefore,
in  theory,  have  been  responsible  to  themselves.
This  account,  which  officers  had  to  give  after  the
time  of  their  office  was  over,  was  called  evQvvn) :
and  the  officers  subject  to  it,  virevdvvoi.  Every
public  officer  had  to  render  his  account  within
thirty  da3^s  after  the  expiration  of  his  office
(Harpocrat.  Phot,  and  Suid.  s.  v.  Aoyi(xral  and
Evdvyoi)  ;  and  as  long  as  this  duty  was  not  fulfilled,
the  whole  property  of  the  ex-officer  was  in  bondage
to  the  state  (Aeschin.  c.  Ctesiph.  p.  56.  Steph.)  :
he  was  not  allowed  to  travel  bej'ond  the  frontiers
of  Attica,  to  consecrate  any  part  of  his  property  as
a  donarium  to  the  gods,  to  make  his  will,  or  to
pass  from  one  family  into  another  by  adoption  ;
no  public  honours  or  rewards,  and  no  new  office
could  be  given  to  him.  (Aeschin.  and  Demosth.
De  Coron.  and  c.  Tim.  p.  747-)  If  within  the  stated
period  an  officer  did  not  send  in  his  account,  an
action,  called  aXoyiov  or  aXoyias  Sj'ktj,  was  brought
against  him.  (Pollux,  viii.  54  ;  Hesych.  Suid.  Etym.
Mag.  s.  V.  'AKoyiou  diKri.)  At  the  time  when
an  officer  submitted  to  the  fvQvvn].,  any  citizen  had
the  right  to  come  forward  and  impeach  him.  Those
who,  after  having  refused  to  submit  to  the  evOvvrj,
also  disobeyed  the  summons  to  defend  themselves
before  a  court  of  justice,  thereby  forfeited  their
rights  as  citizens.     (Demosth.  c.  Mid.  p.  542.)

It  will  appear  from  the  list  of  officers  subject  to
the  euthyne,  that  it  was  not  confined  to  those
whose  office  was  connected  with  the  administration
of  the  public  money,  or  any  part  of  it ;  but  in  many
cases  it  was  only  an  inquiry  into  the  manner  in
which  a  person  had  behaved  himself  in  the  dis-
charge of  his  official  duties.  In  the  former  case
the  scrutiny  was  conducted  with  great  strictness,
as  the  state  had  various  means  to  check  and  con-
trol the  proceedings  of  its  officers  ;  in  the  latter,
the  euthyne  may  in  many  instances  have  been  no
more  than  a  personal  attendance  of  the  ex-officer
before  the  representatives  of  the  people,  to  see
whether  any  charge  was  brought  against  him.
When  no  accuser  appeared,  the  officer  was  honour-
ably dismissed  (iTricrr]ixaiu€(Tdai,  Demosth.  De
Coron.-p.  310).  After  an  officer  had  gone  through  the
euthyne,  he  became  auevdvuos.     (Pollux,  viii.  54.)

The  officers  before  whom  the  accounts  were
given  were  in  some  places  called  etjdvuoi  or  XoyitT-
rai,  in  others  e|eTacrToi  or  (Tvvi\yopoi.  (Aristot.
Polit.  vi.  5.  p.  213,  ed.  Goettling.)  At  Athens  we
meet  with  the  first  two  of  these  names,  and  both
are  mostly  mentioned  together  ;  but  how  far  their
functions  differed  is  very  uncertain.  Some  gram-
marians (Etymol.  Magn.  and  Phot.  s.  v.  Eijdvvpi)
state  that  Koyiarai  was  the  name  of  the  same  offi-
cers who  were  formerly  called  (fiQvvoi.  But  from
the  manner  in  which  the  Greek  orators  speak  of
them,  it  can  scarcely  be  doubted  that  their  func-
tions were  distinct.  From  the  authorities  referred
to  by  Bockh  {Pull.  Econ.  p.  190,  &c.  2d  ed.
compare  the  Rhein.  Mus.  1827,  vol.  i.  p.  72,  &c.),
it  seems,  moreover,  clear  that  the  office  of  the
XoyicTTai,  though  closely  connected  with  that  of
the  eijdvuoi,  was  of  greater  extent  than  that  of
the  latter,  who  appear  rather  to  have  been  the


EXAIRESEOS  DIKE.

fcssossors  of  the  former,  than  a  totally  distinct  class
»f  officers,  as  will  be  seen  hereafter.  All  accounts
»f  those  officers  who  had  anything  to  do  with  the
mblic  money  were,  after  the  expiration  of  their
•ffice,  first  sent  in  to  the  Xoyta-rai^  who  examined
hem,  and  if  any  difficulty  or  incorrectness  was  dis-
lovcred,  or  if  charges  were  brought  against  an  ex-
(fficer  within  the  period  of  30  days,  the  further  in-
[uiry  devolved  upon  the  ei/fluj/ot,  before  whom  the
(fficer  was  obliged  to  appear  and  plead  his  cause.
Hermann,  Polit.  Antiq.  of  Greece,  §  154.  8.)  If
he  eijOvvoi  found  that  the  accounts  were  unsatis-
actory,  that  the  officer  had  embezzled  part  of  the
)ublic  money,  that  he  had  accepted  bribes,  or  that
:barges  brought  against  him  were  well  founded,
hey  referred  the  case  to  a  court  of  justice,  for
vhich  the  XoyicTTai  appointed  the  judges  by  lot,
md  in  this  court  their  herald  proclaimed  the  ques-
ion  who  would  come  forward  as  accuser.  (Aeschin.
^  Ctesiph.  p.  57,  ed.  Steph.  ;  Etymol.  Magn.  s.  v.
ivdvva  ;  Bekker,  Anccdot.  p.  245.  6.)  The  place
vhere  the  court  was  held  was  the  same  as  that  to
vhich  ex-officers  sent  their  accounts  to  be  examined
)y  the  Aoyia-rai,  and  was  called  AoyitXT-ffpiov.
'Andocid.  De  Myst.  p.  37  ;  Lys.  c.  Polystrat.  p.
)72.)  It  can  scarcely  be  doubted  that  the  evOuvoi
ook  an  active  part  in  the  trials  of  the  XoyicrTT]-
nov;  but  whether  they  acted  only  as  the  asses-
lors  of  the  AoyttrTat,  or  whether  they,  as  Pollux
itates,  exacted  the  embezzled  sums  and  fines,  in-
;tead  of  the  practores,  is  uncertain.  The  number
)f  the  ef/fluvoi,  as  well  as  that  of  the  Xoyiarai^  was
;en,  one  being  taken  from  every  tribe.  (Phot.  s.  v.
Zijdvvos^  and  Ilarpocrat.  s.  v.  Aoyia-Tai)  The
\.oyi(rTai  were  appointed  by  the  senate,  and  chosen
jy  lot  ;  whether  the  cijdvvoi  were  likewise  chosen
ay  lot  is  uncertain,  for  Photius  uses  an  expression
ierived  from  kAtj/jos  (lot),  while  Pollux  (viii.  99)
states  that  the  etOvyoi  izpocraipovPTai,  scil.  rots
KoyuTTois^  according  to  which  they  were  like  the  as-
sessors of  the  archons ;  the  latter  account,  however,
seems  to  be  more  consistent  and  more  probable.
Rvery  e^Qwos  had  two  assessors  (■trdpeSpoi).  (See
Bockh,  PuJjL  Econ.  I.  c. ;  Titmann,  Griech.  Staatsv.
p.  323,  (Sec. ;  Hermann,  Polit.  Antiq.  of  Greece.,  §  154;
Schomann,  Antiq.  Jur.  publ.  Grace,  p.  239,  &c.)

The  first  traces  of  this  truly  democratic  institu-
tion are  generally  found  in  the  establishment  of
the  archonship  {o.py()]  inrevdvvos)  instead  of  the
kingly  power,  by  the  Attic  nobles  (Pans.  iv.  5.  4).
It  was  from  this  state  of  dependence  of  the  first
magistrates  upon  the  order  of  the  nobles  that,  in
^he  co\irse  of  time,  the  regular  euthyne  arose.  Simi-
lar institutions  were  established  in  several  other
bepublics  of  Greece.  (Arist.  Polit.  vi.  5  ;  Wachs-
Inuth,  Helkn  Allerth.  i.  p.  419,  &c.  2d.  ed.)  [L.S.]
I  EXAGO'GES  DIKE'  (i^aycoyrjs  SUn\  a  mh
pf  a  public  nature,  which  might  be  instituted
igainst  one,  who,  assuming  to  act  as  the  protector
Kvpios)  of  an  Athenian  woman,  married  her  to  a
'oreigner  in  a  foreign  land.  This  was  contrary  to
aw,  intermarriage  with  aliens  being  (as  a  general
j-ule)  prohibited.  In  the  speech  of  Demosthenes
iigainst  Timocrates  (p.  763),  he  is  charged  with
iiaving  sold  his  sister  to  a  Corcyrean,  on  pretence
bf  giving  her  in  marriage.  (Meier,  Att.  Proc.
>.  350.)  [C.  R.  K.]

I  EX AIRE'SEOS  DIKE'  (e'laipeVecos  SiKTj),  was
iin  action  brought  to  recover  damages  for  the  at-
tempt to  deprive  the  plaintiff  of  his  slave  ;  not
(vhere  the  defendant  claimed  a  property  in  the


EXAUGURATIO.


47J)


slave,  but  where  he  asserted  him  to  be  a  freeman.
As  the  condition  of  slaver}^  at  Athens  incapacitated
a  man  to  take  any  legal  step  in  his  own  person,  if
a  reputed  slave  wished  to  recover  his  rights  as  a
freeman,  he  c«uld  only  do  it  by  the  assistance  of
one  who  was  himself  a  freeman.  He  then  put
himself  under  the  protection  of  such  a  person,  who
was  said  i^aipeladai  or  CKpaipeladai  avrhv  els  4\ev-
depiav,  in  libertatem  vindicare.  If  the  master
sought  to  reclaim  him,  he  proceeded  to  take  manual
possession,  &yeiy  avrhv  ets  SouAetav.  A  runaway
slave  might  at  any  time  be  seized  by  his  master,
either  in  the  open  street  or  elsewhere,  except  in  a
sanctuary.  If  the  friend  or  person  who  harboured
the  slave  meant  to  contest  the  master's  right,  the
proper  course  was  to  go  with  him  before  the  ma-
gistrate, and  give  security  for  the  value  of  the  slave
and  costs,  in  case  a  court  of  law  should  decide
against  him.  The  magistrate  who  took  cognizance
of  the  cause  was  the  archon,  where  a  man  claimed
to  be  a  citizen  ;  the  polemarch,  where  he  claimed
to  be  an  alien  freeman.  It  was  the  duty  of  the
archon  or  polemarch  to  set  the  man  at  liberty
pendetite  lite.  In  the  suit  that  followed,  the  plaintiif
had  to  prove  his  title  to  the  ownership  of  the
slave,  and,  if  successful,  obtained  such  compensa-
tion as  the  jury  chose  to  award  ;  this  being  a
ri/xrjThs  aychv,  and  half  of  the  ri/j.T}iiia  being  given
to  the  state.  (Dem.  c.  Theocr.  p.  1328.)  A  verdict
for  the  plaintiff  drew  with  it,  as  a  necessary  con-
sequence, the  adjudication  of  the  ownership,  and
he  would  be  entitled  to  take  possession  of  his
slave  immediately :  if,  however,  the  slave  had
escaped  in  the  meantime,  and  evidence  of  such
fact  were  produced,  the  jury  would  probably  take
that  into  consideration  in  estimating  the  damages.

If  the  friend,  in  resisting  the  capture  of  the
slave,  had  used  actual  violence,  he  was  subject  to
a  StKTj  ^laiwv.  And  if  the  soi-disant  master  had
failed  in  the  6|.  Si'ktj,  the  injured  party  might
maintain  an  action  against  him  for  the  attempted
seizure.  (Lys.  c.  Panel,  p.  734,  &c.,  with  Reiske's
note  ;  Dem.  c.  Neaer.  p.  1358  ;  Harpocr.  s.  v.
'E^aipeo-ews,  and*'A7ct  ;  Meier,  J ^;.  Proc.  p.  394.)

In  a  speech  of  Isocrates  (Trapez.  p.  3G1),  the
defendant,  a  banker,  from  whom  it  is  sought  to  re-
cover a  deposit,  is  charged  with  having  asserted
the  freedom  of  his  own  slave,  in  order  to  prevent
his  being  examined  by  torture  respecting  the  sum
of  money  deposited  in  his  hands.  This  is  remark-
able on  two  accounts :  first  (as  Meier  observes),
because  it  seems  to  prove  that  one  not  tlie  owner
of  the  slave  could  bring  the  e|,  Siktj,  if  he  had  an
interest  in  the  matter  ;  secondly,  because  it  was
optional  with  a  man  to  give  up  his  slave  to  the
torture  or  not,  the  refusal  being  only  matter  of  ob-
servation to  the  jury  ;  and,  therefore,  it  appears
strange  that  any  one  should  have  recourse  to  a
measure,  the  result  of  which  (if  successful)  would
be,  to  deprive  him  of  his  property.      [C.  R.  K.]

EXAUCTORA'TIO.     [Exercitus.]

EXAUGURA'TIO  is  the  act  of  changing  a
sacred  thing  into  a  profane  one,  or  of  taking  away
from  it  the  sacred  character  which  it  had  received
by  inauguratio,  consecratio,  or  dedicatio.  That
such  an  act  was  perlbrmed  by  the  augurs,  and
never  without  consulting  the  pleasure  of  the  gods
by  augurium,  is  implied  in  the  name  itself.  (Liv,
i.  55,  V.  54  ;  Dionys.  Hal.  Atitiq.  Rom.  iii.  p.  202,
ed.  Sylburg  ;  Cato.  ap.  Fest.  s.  v.  Neqiutium.)
Temples,  chapels,  and  other  consecrated  places,  as


480


EXEGETAE.


well  as  priests,  were  considered  as  belonging  to  the
gods.  No  consecrated  place  whatever  could  be
applied  for  any  profane  purpose,  or  dedicated  to
any  other  divinity  than  that  to  which  it  originally
belonged,  without  being  previously  'exaugurated  ;
and  priests  could  not  give  up  their  sacred  func-
tions, or  (in  case  they  were  obliged  to  live  in  celi-
bacy) enter  into  matrimony,  without  first  under-
going the  process  of  exauguratio.  (Gellius,  vi.  7.
4  ;  Jul.  Capitol.  M.  Anto7i.  P/iilos.  c.  4.)     [L.  S.]

EXCE'PTIO.     [Actio.]

EXCU'BIAE.     [Castra,  p.  250.]

EXCUBITO'RES,  which  properly  means  watch-
men or  sentinels  of  any  kind  (Caes.  Bell.  Gall.  vii.
69)^  was  the  name  more  particularly  given  to  the
soldiers  of  the  cohort  who  guarded  the  palace  of
the  Roman  emperor.  (Suet.  Ner.  8,  Otk.  6.)
Their  commanding  officer  was  called  tribunus  ex-
cubltor.  (Suet.  Claud.  42,  Ner.  9.)  When  the
emperor  went  to  an  entertainment  at  the  house  of
another  person,  the  excubitores  appear  to  have  ac-
companied him,  and  to  have  kept  guard  as  in  his
own  palace.  (Suet.  O^A.  4.)

EXEDRA  (e|e5pa),  which  properly  signifies  a
seat  out  of  doors,  came  to  be  used  for  a  chamber
furnished  with  seats,  and  opening  into  a  portico,
where  people  met  to  enjoy  conversation  ;  such  as
the  room  which  Vitruvius  describes  as  opening  on
to  the  peristyle  of  the  gynaeconitis  of  a  Greek  house
[DoMUs],  and  as  the  rooms  attached  to  a  gymna-
sium, which  were  used  for  the  lectures  and  dis-
putations of  the  rhetoricians  and  philosophers.
[Gymnasium.]  The  fonner  class  of  ea:edras
Vitruvius  indeed  calls  by  another  name,  namely
TrapacTTois  or  TratrTcis,  but  the  word  i^edpa  occurs
in  Euripides  (Orest.  1449)  in  this  sense,  and
Pollux  mentions  the  Avords  i^eSpai  and  TracrrdSes
as  synonymous  (vii.  122).  In  this  sense  the  word
might  be  translated  parlour.

In  old  Greek  the  word  AeVxr?  appears  to  have
had  a  similar  meaning  ;  but  the  ordinary  use  of
the  word  is  for  a  larger  and  more  public  place  of
resort  than  the  4^45pa.     [Lesche.]

Among  the  Romans  the  word  had  a  wider
meaning,  answering  to  both  the  Greek  tenns,  i^edpa
and  Xicrxn.  Thus  it  is  not  only  used  to  signify  a
chamber  for  ordinary  resort  and  conversation  in  a
private  house,  or  in  the  public  baths  and  gymnasia
open  to  the  sun  and  air,  (Vitruv.  v.  11  ;  vii.  9  ;
Cic.  Oral.  iii.  5,  De  Nat.  Deor.  i.  6  ;  Varro,  R.  R.
iii.  5  ;  Ulpian,  Dig.  ix.  tit.  3,  leg.  5)  ;  but  the
word  is  even  applied  to  the  hall  attached  to  the
theatre  of  Pompey,  which  was  used  as  a  place  of
meeting  by  the  senate.  (Plut.  Brut.  14,  17).
The  diminutive  exedrium  also  occurs.  (Cic.  ad
Fam.  vii.  23.)  [P.  S.]

EXEGETAE  (6|777r7Ta(,  interpreters  ;  on  this
and  other  meanings  of  the  word  see  Rhunken,  ad
Timaei  Glossar.  p.  1 09,  &c.),  is  the  name  of  the
Eumolpidae,  by  which  they  were  designated  as
the  interpreters  of  the  laws  relating  to  religion  and
of  the  sacred  rites.  (Demosth.  Etierg.  ]).  1160)
[Eumolpidae.]  They  were  thus  at  Athens  the
only  class  of  persons  who,  in  some  measure,  resem-
bled the  Roman  jurists  ;  but  the  laws,  of  which  the
€^r]-yr]Tai  were  the  interpreters,  were  not  written
but  handed  down  by  tradition.  Plutarch  ( T/ies.
25)  applies  the  term  to  the  whole  order  of  the
Eupatridae,  though  properly  speaking  it  belonged
only  to  certain  members  of  their  order,  i.  e.  the
Eumolpidae.     The  Etymologicum  Magn.  (s.  v.),  in


EXERCrrORIA  ACTIO.
accordance  with  the  etymological  meaning  of  tlie^
word,  states,  that  it  was  applied  to  any  interpreter
of  laws,  whether  sacred  or  profane  ;  but  we  know
that  at  Athens  the  name  was  principally  applied  to
three  members  of  the  family  of  the  Eumolpidae
(Suidas,  s.  v.),  whose  province  it  was  to  interpret
the  religious  and  ceremonial  laws,  the  signs  in  the
heavens,  and  the  oracles  ;  whence  Cicero  (De  Leg:
ii.  27)  calls  them  religiomim  inierpretes.  (Compare
Pollux,  viii.  124  and  188  ;  Plato,  Euthjphr.  p.  4,d.)
They  had  also  to  perform  the  public  and  private
expiatory  sacrifices,  and  were  never  appointed
without  the  sanction  of  the  Delphic  oracle,  whence
they  were  called  W\)Q6xpf]'^'roi.  (Timaeus,  Glossar.
s.  V.  'E|7j7r/Tot :  compare  Meier,  De  Bonis  Damnat.
p.  7  ;  Miiller,  ad  Aeschyl.  Emnen.  p.  1  62,  &c.)

The  name  i^iryriT'fjs  was  also  applied  to  those
persons  who  served  as  guides  (cicerone)  to  the
visitors  in  the  most  remarkable  towns  and  places
of  Greece,  who  showed  to  strangers  the  curiosities
of  a  place,  and  explained  to  them  its  history  and
antiquities.     (Paus.  i.  41.  §  2.)

R  specting  the  e^riynTTfs  of  the  laws  of  Lj^cur-
gus  at  Sparta,  see  Miiller,  Dor.  iii.  1 1.  2.  [L.  S.]
EXERCITO'RIA  ACTIO,  was  an  action
granted  by  the  edict  against  the  excrcitor  navis.
By  the  term  navis  was  understood  any  vessel,
whether  used  for  the  n.ivigation  of  rivers,  lakes,
or  the  sea.  The  exercitor  navis  is  the  person  to
whom  all  the  ship's  gains  and  earnings  (ohvc?diones
et  reditus)  belong,  whether  he  is  the  owner,  or  has
hired  the  ship  {per  aversionem)  from  the  owner
for  a  time  definite  or  indefinite.  The  magister
navis  is  he  who  has  the  care  and  management  of
the  ship,  and  was  appointed  ( pnwpositzts)  by  the
exercitor.  The  exercitor  was  bound  generally  by
the  contracts  of  the  magister,  who  was  his  agent,
but  with  this  limitation,  that  the  contract  of  the
magister  must  be  with  reference  to  furthering  the
object  for  which  he  was  appointed  ;  as,  for  instance,
if  he  purchased  things  useful  for  the  navigation  of
the  ship,  or  entered  into  a  contract  or  inciuTed
expense  for  the  ship's  repairs,  the  exercitor  was
bound  by  such  contract :  the  tenns  of  the  master's
appointment  (praepositio)  accordingly  determine
the  rights  of  third  parties  against  the  exercitor.
If  the  magister,  being  appointed  to  manage  the
ship  and  to  use  it  for  a  particular  purpose,  used  it'i
for  a  ditferent  purpose,  his  employer  was  not  boimd
by  the  contract.  If  there  were  several  magistri,
without  any  partition  of  their  duties  (7ion  divisut
officiis\  a  contract  with  one  was  the  same  as  tt
contract  with  all.  If  there  were  several  exer-
citores,  who  appointed  a  magister  either  out  of
their  own  number  or  not,  they  were  severally  an-
swerable {in  solidum)  for  the  contracts  of  tli9
magister.  The  contracting  party  might  have  his
action  either  against  the  exercitor  or  the  magister,
so  long  as  the  magister  continued  to  be  such.

A  part}'  might  have  an  action  ex  delicto  against
an  exercitor  in  respect  of  the  act  either  of  the
magister  or  the  sailors,  but  not  on  the  contract  of
the  sailors.  If  the  magister  substituted  a  person
in  his  place,  though  he  was  forbidden  to  do  so,  the
excrcitor  would  still  be  bound  by  any  proper  con'
tract  of  such  person.

The  term  Nauta  properly  applies  to  all  persons
who  are  engaged  in  navigating  a  ship  ;  but  in  the
Praetor's  Edict  (Dig.  4.  tit.  9.  s.  1)  the  term  Nauta
means  Exercitor  (qui  navcm  exercel).

(Dig.  14.  tit.  1  ;  Pcckius,  in  Titt.  Dig.  et  Cod.


1


EXERCITUS.

id  Rem  Nauticam  fertinmtes  Comment ;  Abbott
3«  Shipping,  Index,  Exercitor  JVavis.)        [G.  L,]

EXE'RCITUS  (o-rpoTds),  anny.  1.  Greek.
rhe  earliest  notices  which  we  possess  of  the  mili-
tary art  among  the  Greeks  are  those  contained  in
the  Homeric  poems.  The  unsettled  state  of  society
in  the  first  ages  of  Greece,  led  to  the  early  and
2;eneral  cultivation  of  the  art  of  arms,  Avhich  were
habitually  worn  for  defence,  even  when  aggressive
warfare  was  not  intended.  (Thuc.  i.  6.)  But  the
Homeric  poems  contain  an  exhibition  of  combined
military  operations  in  their  earliest  stage.  War-
like undertakings  before  the  time  described  in
them  can  have  been  little  else  than  predatory
inroads  (^0T)\aaiai,  11.  xi.  667).  A  collection  of
warriors  exhibiting  less  of  organisation  and  dis-
cipline than  we  see  depicted  in  the  Grecian  troops
before  Troy,  would  hardly  deserve  the  name  of  an
army.  The  organisation  which  we  see  there,  such
as  it  was,  arose,  not  from  any  studied,  formative
system,  but  naturally,  out  of  the  imperfect  con-
stitution of  society  in  that  age.  Every  freeman  in
those  times  was  of  course  a  soldier  ;  but  when  all
the  members  of  a  family  were  not  needed  to  go
upon  an  expedition  imder  the  command  of  their
chieftain  or  king,  those  who  were  to  go  seem  to
have  been  selected  by  lot  {U.  x.  418).  As  the
confederated  states,  which  are  represented  as
taking  part  in  the  Trojan  war,  are  united  by
scarcely  any  other  bond  than  their  participation  in
a  common  object,  the  different  bodies  of  troops,
led  by  their  respective  chieftains,  are  far  from
being  united  by  a  common  discipline  under  the
command-in-chief  of  Agamemnon.  Each  body
obeys  its  own  leader,  and  follows  him  to  the  con-
flict, or  remains  inactive,  according  as  he  chooses
to  mingle  in  the  fight  or  not.  Authority  and
obedience  are  regulated  much  more  by  the  nature
of  the  circumstances,  or  by  the  relative  personal
distinction  of  the  chieftains,  than  by  any  law  of
military  discipline.  Agamemnon  sometimes  urges
the  chieftains  to  engage,  not  by  commands,  but  by
taunts  (//.  iv.  338,  &c.  368,  &c.).  Accordingly,
nothing  like  the  tactics  or  strategy  of  a  regularly
disciplined  army  is  to  be  traced  in  the  Homeric
descriptions  of  battles.  Each  chieftain  with  his
body  of  troops  acts  for  himself,  without  reference
to  the  movements  of  the  rest,  except  as  these
furnish  occasion  for  a  vigorous  attack,  or,  when
hard  pressed,  call  for  assistance  from  the  common
feeling  of  brotherhood  in  arms.  The  wide  interval
which  in  the  Homeric  age  separated  the  noble  or
chieftain  from  the  common  freeman,  appears  in  as
marked  a  manner  in  military,  as  in  civil  affairs.
The  former  is  distinguished  by  that  superior  skill
and  prowess  in  the  use  of  his  arms,  which  would
naturally  result  from  the  constant  practice  of  war-
like exercises,  for  Avhich  his  station  gave  him  the
leisure  and  the  means.  A  single  hero  is  able  to
but  to  flight  a  whole  troop  of  common  soldiers.
The  account  of  a  battle  consists  almost  entirely  of
[iescriptions  of  the  single  combats  of  the  chiefs  on
|both  sides  ;  and  the  lortune  of  the  day,  when  not
lyerruled  by  the  intervention  of  the  gods,  is  de-
inded  by  the  individual  valour  of  these  heroes.
jyVhile  the  mass  of  the  common  soldiers  were  on
oot;  the  chiefs  rode  in  chariots  [Currus],  which
isually  contained  two,  one  to  drive  and  one  to
,icht._  In  these  they  advanced  against  the  an-
!  agonists  whom  they  singled  out  for  encounter,
sometimes  hurling  their  spears  from  their  chariots,


EXERCITUS.  481

but  more  commonly  alighting,  as  they  drew  near,
and  fighting  on  foot,  making  use  of  the  chariot  for
pursuit  or  flight.  The  Greeks  did  not,  like  the
ancient  Britons  and  several  nations  of  the  East,
use  the  chariot  itself  as  an  instrument  of  warfare.
Cavalry  was  unknown  at  that  time  to  the  Greeks,
and  horsemanship  but  very  rarely  practised  ;  the
iTTTrf/es  of  Homer  are  the  chieftains  who  ride  in
chariots.  These  chiefs  are  drawn  up  in  the  front
of  the  battle  array  {II.  iv.  297,  TrpS/xaxoi,  ■npojj.d-
X^cOai)  ;  and  frequently  the  foot  soldiers  seem  to
have  done  nothing  but  watch  the  single  combats
of  their  leaders,  forming,  in  two  opposite,  parallel
lines,  sorriething  answering  to  a  ring  (epKos  TroAe-
fioio,  II.  iv.  299)  within  which  the  more  important
single  combats  are  fought.  How  they  got  the
chariots  out  of  the  way  when  the  foot  soldiers
came  to  close  quarters  (as  in  II.  iv.  427,  &c.)  is
not  described.

Though  so  little  account  is  usually  made  of  the
common  soldiers  (7rpu\ees,  11.  xi.  49,  xii.  77),
Homer  occasionally  lays  considerable  stress  on
their  orderly  and  compact  array  ;  Nestor  and  Me-
nestheus  are  honourably  distinguished  by  the
epithet  Koarfx-firope  Xdwv  (II.  ii.  553,  iv.  293,  &c,).
The  troops  were  naturally  drawn  up  in  separate
bodies  according  to  their  different  nations.  It
would  appear  to  be  rathef  a  restoration  of  the  old
arrangement,  than  a  new  classification,  when
Nestor  (//.  ii.  362)  recommends  Agamemnon  to
draw  the  troops  up  by  tribes  and  phratries.
Arranged  in  these  natural  divisions,  the  foot  sol-
diers were  drawn  up  in  densely  compacted  bodies
(TTVKiual  (pdXayyes)  shield  close  to  shield, —  hel-
met to  helmet  —  man  to  man  (//.  xiii.  130,  xvi.
212,  &c,).  In  these  masses,  though  not  usually
commencing  the  attack,  they  frequently  offer  a
powerful  resistance,  even  to  distinguished  heroes
(as  Hector  II.  xiii.  145,  &c.,  comp.  xvii.  267,  354,
&c.,  xiii.  339),  the  dense  array  of  their  spears
fonuing  a  barrier  not  easily  broken  through.  The
signal  for  advance  or  retreat  was  not  given  by  in-
struments of  any  kind,  but  by  the  voice  of  the
leader.  A  loud  voice  was  consequently  an  im-
portant matter,  and  the  epithet  jSo^v  kyadds  is
common.  The  trumpet,  however,  was  iiot  abso-
lutely unknown  (II.  xviii.  219).  Respecting  the
ai'mour,  offensive  and  defensive,  see  Arma.

Under  the  king  or  chieftain  who  commands  his
separate  contingent  we  commonly  find  subordinate
chiefs,  who  command  smaller  divisions.  It  is
difficult  to  say  whether  it  is  altogether  accidental
or  not,  that  these  are  frequently  five  in  number.
Thus  the  Myrmidons  of  Achilles  are  divided  into
five  (TTixes,  each  of  500  men.  Five  chiefs  command
the  Boeotians  ;  and  the  whole  Trojan  army  is
formed  in  five  divisions,  each  under  three  leaders.
(II.  iv.  295,  &c.,  xvi.  171—197,  ii.  494,  &c.,  xii.
87 — 104.)  The  term  (pdXay^  is  applied  either  to
the  whole  army  (as  11.  vi.  6),  or  to  these  smaller
divisions  and  subdivisions,  which  are  also  called
(TTixes  and  -Kvpyoi.

When  an  enemy  was  slain,  it  was  the  universal
practice  to  stop  and  strip  off  his  arms,  which  were
carefully  preserved  by  the  victor  as  trophies.  The
division  of  the  booty  generally  was  arranged  by  the
leader  of  the  troop,  for  whom  a  portion  was  set  aside
as  an  honorary  present  (yepas,  II.  i.  392,  368,  ix.
328,  xi.  703)."^  The  recovery  of  the  dead  bodies  of
the  slain  was  in  the  Homeric  age,  as  in  all  later
times,  a  point  of  the  greatest  importance,  and  fre-
I  I


482


EXERCITUS.


qiiently  either  led  to  a  fierce  coirtest,  or  was  effected
by  the  payment  of  a  heavy  ransom  (Kbpke,  Kriegs-
wesen  der  Griechen  in  heroischen  Zeitalter ;  Wachs-
muth,  Hellen.  Alterthumsk.  vol,  ii.  §  110  ;  Grote,
History  of  Greece^  vol.  ii.  p.  141).

After  the  heroic  age  considerable  impulse  was
given  to  the  cultivation  of  the  military  art  by  the
conquests  of  the   Thessalians'  (the  first   Grecian
people,  apparently,  that  employed  cavalry,  to  the
use  of  which  their   conquests  were  probably  in
great  part  owing)  and  Dorians,  among  the  latter
of  whom  the  art  of  warfare  was  earliest  reduced  to
system.    The  distinction  of  heavy  and  light  armed
foot  soldiers  of  course  took  its  rise  with  the  be-
ginnings of  military  service,  the  poorer  class  being
unable  to  provide  themselves  with  the  more  effi-
cient, but  more  costly  weapons  of  those  who  were
better  off  than  themselves.    Political  considerations
tended  to  make  the  distinction  more  marked  and
systematic.      The  system  of  military  castes  was
indeed  unknown  among  the  Greeks,  though  some-
thing answering  the  same  purpose  existed  in  the
earliest  times,  when  the  nobles  and  their  more
immediate  dependants  and  retainers,  having  greater
leisure  for  the  cultivation  of  skill  in  the  use  of
arms,  and  greater  means  for  procuring  them,  were
separated  in  that  respect  by  a  wide  interval  from
the  lower  class  ;  while -conversely,  military  supe-
riority  was   the   most   direct  means  of  securing
political  supremacy.     Hence,  as  soon  as  the  dis-
tinction between  the  nobles  (the  privileged  class)
and  the  commonalty  (demus')  was  established,  it
became  the  object  of  the  former  to  prevent  the
latter  from  placing  themselves  on  a  par  with  them
in  military  strength,  and  so  the  use  of  the  full
annoiu-  of  the  heavy-armed  infantry  was  reserved
by  the  former  for  themselves  ;  and  when,  in  times
of  distress,  it  was  found  necessary  to  entrust  the
demus  with  full  armour,  the  result  was  not  un-
commonly a  revolution  (as  was  in  some  degree  the
case  at  Mytilene,  Thuc.  iii.  27).     But  in  the  de-
mocracies this  distinction  as  regards  the  kinds  of
service  depended  merely  upon  the  greater  or  less
ability  of  the  citizens  to  procure  arms.     In  the
Greek  commonwealths  all  those  who  enjoyed  the
privileges  of  citizens  or  freemen  were  held  bound
to  serve  as  soldiers  when  called  upon,  and  were
provided  with  arms  and  trained  in  military  exer-
cises as  a  matter  of  course.     The  modern  system
of  standing  annies  was  foreign  to  Greek  habits,
and  would  have  been  dangerous  to  the  liberties  of
the   diiferent  commonwealths,   though  something
of  the  kind   may  be  seen  in  the  body  guards,
usually   of   mercenary   troops,   kept   by   tyrants.
The   mercenaries    in   the   pay   of   Alexander   of
Pherae  formed  a  considerable  army.     Practically
too,  from  the  continuity  of  the  warlike  operations
in  Avhich  they  were  engaged,  the  armies  of  Philip
and  Alexander  of  Macedon,  and  their  successors,
became  standing  armies.     The  thousand  Xo-yaZes
at  Argos   (Thuc.  v.  67)  and  the  sacred  band  at
Thebes  (Plut.  Pelop.  18 ;  K.  F.  Hermann,  Griech.
Staatsalteiih.  §  181  note  2)  were  not  considerable
enough  to  be  called  armies.     The  employment  of
mercenary  troops  might  have  led  to  the  use  of
Standing  armies,  had  it  not  been  that  the  use  of
them   characterised   the   decline   of  the    Grecian
states,   so   that  the  circumstances  which  led  to
their  employment,  also  rendered  it  impossible  to
provide  the  resources  for.  their  maintenance,  ex-
cept when  they  were  immediately  needed.     Still,


EXERCITUS.

as  in  the  case  of  the  Scythian  bowmen  at  Athens,
individual  corps  of  mercenaries  might  be  regularly
maintained.  Slaves  Avere  but  rarely  trusted  with
arms,  and  when  it  was  the  case,  they  were  usually
manumitted.  The  Greek  armies  accordingly  were
national  armies,  resembling  rather  the  militia  than
the  regular  armies  of  modem  times.

In  all  the  states  of  Greece,  in  the  earliest  as  in
later  times,  the  general  type  of  their  military  or-
ganisation was  the  jplialanx^  a  body  of  troops  in
close  array  with  a  long  spear  as  their  principal
weapon.     It  was  among  the  Dorians,  and  especially
among  the  Spartans,  that  this  type  was  most  rigidly
adhered  to.     The  strength  of  their  military  array
consisted  in  the  heavy-armed  infantry  (^TrAtTot).
They  attached  comparatively  small  importance  to
their  cavalry,  which   was  always  inferior  (Xen.
Hellen.  vi.  4.  §  10).     Indeed,  the  Thessalians  and
Boeotians  were  the  only  Greek  people  who  dis-
tinguished   themselves   much    for   their   cavalry ;
scarcely  any  other  states  had  territories  adapted
for  the  evolutions  of  cavalry.     The  Spartan  army,
as  described  by  Xenophon,  was  probably  in  all  its
main  features  the  same  that  it  was  in  the  time  of
Lycurgus.     The  institutions  of  that  lawgiver  con-
verted the  body  of  Spartan  citizens  into  a  kind  of
military  brotherhood,  whose  almost  sole  occupation
was  the  practice  of  warlike  and  athletic  exercises.
The  whole  life  of  a  Spartan  was  little  else  than
either  the  preparation  for  or  the  practice  of  war.
The  result  was,  that  in  the  strictness  of  their  dis-
cipline, the  precision  and  facility  with  which  they
performed  their  military  evolutions,  and  the  skill
and  power  with  which  they  used  their  weapons,
the  Spartans  were  unrivalled  among  the  Greeks,
so  that  they  seemed  like  real  masters  of  the  art  of
war  (rexi'iTas  twj/    7roA.e/iz/c«;/),   while    in  com-
parison with  them   other  Greeks  appeared  mere
tiros   (ayTO(rxeSja(rTas  tSsv   (TTpariaTiKcov^  Xen.
Rep.  Laced,   xiii.  §  6  ;  Plut.   Pelop.   23).      The
heavy  armed  infantry  of  the  Spartan  armies  was
composed  partly  of  genuine  Spartan  citizens,  partly
of  Perioeci  (e.  g.  Thucyd.  iv.  8,  comp.  Grote,  Hist,
of  Greece.,  vol.  ii.  p.  493).     In  later  times,  as  the
number  of  Spartan  citizens  decreased,  the  Perioeci
constituted  the  larger  portion,  a  fact  Avhich  renders
nugatory  all  attempts  to  connect  the  numbers  of
the  divisions  of  the  army  with  the  political  divi-
sions  of  the   Spartan   citizens.       Every    Spartan
citizen  was  liable  to  military  service  (efKppovpos)
from  the  age  of  twenty  to  the  age  of  sixty  years.
Those  beyond  that  age  were,  however,  sometimes
employed  in  the  less  arduous  kinds  of  service  — -
as  at  Mantineia,  where  they  had  charge  of  the
baggage  (Thuc.  v.  72).     On  the  occasion  of  any
military  expedition,  the  kings  at  first,  and  after-
wards the  ephors,  made  proclamation  what  class,
according  to  age,  were  to  go  on  the  expedition
(to.  €T77  els  &  Se?  (nparevecrOai,  Xen.  Jiep.  Lac.  XU
§  2)  as,  for  example,  all  citizens  between  twenty
and  thirty,  or  between  twenty  and  thirty-five  &c
(to  5e/ca  a(p'  tJ^tjs,  to  TrevreKalSeKa  acp"  i)€r}S,  &c.).' Jj
When  in  the  field,  the  troops  were  drawn  up  in  ■
some  manner  according  to  their  ages,  so  that  for
any  special  service,  those  of  a  particular  age  might
be  separated  and  employed  (Xen.  Hellen.  iv.  4.
§  16,  5.  §  15,  16).     On  one  occasion  (b.  c.  4  J  8),
on  a  sudden  emergency,  when  probably  there  was
not  time  to  collect  the  Perioeci,  all  the  citizens  of
the  military  age  were  called  forth  (Thuc.  v.  64).
The  political    and    military   divisions   of   the


EXERCITUS.

Spartans  were  mixed  up  together  in  some  ■way
which  it  is  not  easy  to  unravel.  The  whole  life
of  a  Spartan  was  passed  in  the  discipline  of  a  kind
of  camp.  The  citizens  messed  together  in  com-
panies, and  slept  in  a  sort  of  barracks.  It  appears
from  Xenophon  (Hep.  Lac.  xi.)  that  the  whole
body  of  citizens  of  military  age  was  dirided  into
six  divisions  called  /xSpai  {icoXtTiKol  fiSpai  he
terms  them),  under  the  command  or  superintend-
ence of  a  polemarch,  each  mora  being  subdivided
into  four  \6xoi  (commanded  by  \oxayoi\  each
\6xos  into  two  TrevTT]KO(rTves  (headed  by  TrevxTj-
KOTTTjpe?),  each  irevTTjKoaTvs  into  two  ivcofioriai
(headed  by  enomotarchs).  The  ivcafxariai  were
80  called  from  the  men  composing  them  being
bound  together  by  a  common  oath  {rd^is  tis  dia
(T(payiwu  ivdofj-oros.,  Ilesych.  s.  «.).  These  were
not  merely  divisions  of  troops  engaged  in  actual
military  expeditions.  The  whole  body  of  citizens
at  all  times  formed  an  army,  whether  they  were
congregated  at  head-quarters  in  Sparta,  or  a
portion  of  them  were  detached  on  foreign  service.
Herodotus  (i.  G5)  speaks  of  enomoties,  triacades,
lud  syssitia  as  military  divisions,  and  we  learn  that
the  poleraarchs  presided  over  the  public  tables
[Plut.  Z^c.  12).  When  a  portion  of  the  citizens
was  sent  out  on  foreign  service,  the  army  that  they
formed  was  arranged  in  divisions  corresponding  to,
and  bearing  the  same  names  as  the  divisions  of
the  entire  military  force  of  Sparta,  i.  e.  of  the
LMitire  body  of  citizens  of  military  age.  As  has
already  been  remarked,  an  army  sent  on  foreign
service  consisted  of  citizens  between  certain  ages,
determined  according  to  the  number  of  soldiers
wanted.  So  that,  as  it  would  seem,  every  eno-
motia  of  the  general  body  sent  out  a  certain  pro-
portion of  its  numbers  for  the  expedition  in
question,  who  (with  some  Perioeci)  formed  an
cnomotia  of  the  anny  so  sent ;  and  the  detach-
ment of  those  enomotiae  which  formed  a  mora  of
the  whole  body  of  citizens,  formed  (apparently)  a
mora  of  the  army  on  service.  All  the  accounts
that  we  have  of  Spartan  military  operations  indi-
cate that  the  Perioeci  who  served  as  heavy-armed
soldiers,  formed  integral  members  of  the  different
divisions  to  which  they  were  attached  ;  so  that  an
enomotia,  pentecostys,  &c.,  in  the  field,  would  con-
tain a  number  of  soldiers  who  did  not  belong  to
the  corresponding  larger  divisions  of  the  whole
body  of  citizens  of  military  age.  Thirlwall  {Hist,
of  Greece.,  vol.  i.  app.  ii.)  talks  of  thirty  families
being  represented  in  the  army  by  thirty  soldiers  ;
an  idea  totally  at  variance  with  all  the  accounts
that  we  have.  Supposing  a  family  to  consist  of  a
father  and  three  sons,  if  the  latter  were  above
twenty,  and  the  father  not  above  sixty  years  of
age,  all  would  be  soldiers,  liable  to  be  called  out
for  active  service  at  any  time  ;  and  according  to
the  limits  of  the  age  proclaimed  by  the  ephors,
one,  two,  three,  or  all  of  them  might  be  called  out
at  once.  The  strength  of  a  mora  on  actual  service,
of  course,  varied,  according  to  circumstances.  To
ijudge  by  the  name  pentecostys,  the  normal  number
;of  a  mora  would  have  been  400  ;  but  500,  600,
jand  900  are  mentioned  as  the  number  of  men  in  a
jmora  on  different  occasions  (Plut.  Pelap.  16  ;  Xen.
\HeUen.  iv.  5.  §  11,  12,  vi.  4.  §  12  ;  Schol.  ad
\Thuc.  V.  66  ;  Died.  xv.  32,  &c.  ;  M.\x\\ev^  Dorians,
jiii.  12.  §  2,  note  t.).  That  these  variations  arose
jfrora  variations  in  the  number  of  Spartan  citizens
l(Haase  in  Ersch  and  Gruber's  Eucyclop'ddie^  {irt.


EXERCITUS.  483

Phalanx).,  is  an  assumption  which  leaves  out  of
sight  the  proportion  of  citizens  called  out,  and  the
number  of  Perioeci  in  the  array.  (Of  the  292
heavy-armed  soldiers  who  surrendered  at  Sphac-
teria,  120  were  Spartans,  Thuc.  iv,  38.  At  the
battle  of  Plataeae,  one  half  of  the  heavy-armed
soldiers  of  the  Lacedaemonians  were  Spartans.)
When  in  the  field,  each  mora  of  infantry  was  at-
tended by  a  mora  of  cavalry,  consisting  at  the  most
of  100  men,  and  commanded  by  an  hipparmost
{iinrapixoar7]s,  Xen.  Hellen.  iv.  4.  §  10,  5.  §  12).
Plutarch  {Lye.  23)  mentions  squadrons  {ovKafxoi)
of  fifty,  which  may  possibly  be  the  same  divisions.
It  is  not  easy,  however,  to  see  in  what  manner  the
cavalry  could  have  been  thus  apportioned,  or  how-
each  mora  of  cavalry  could  have  "  belonged  to  a
mora  of  infantry  without  being  in  close  connection
with  it"  (as  Miiller  says).  The  cavalry  seems
merely  to  have  been  employed  to  protect  the  flanks,
and  but  little  regard  was  paid  to  it.  The  corps  of
300  l-Kirils  (Herod,  viii.  124)  formed  a  sort  of
body-guard  for  the  king,  and  consisted  of  the
flower  of  the  young  soldiers.  Though  called
horsemen,  they  fought  on  foot.  (Xen.  Rep.  Lac.  iv.

Thucydides  in  his  account  of  the  battle  of  Man-
tineia  (v.  68)  describes  the  Lacedaemonian  army
as  divided  into  seven  lochi,  each  containing  four
pentecostyes,  and  each  pentecostys  four  enomotiae,
with  thirty-two  men  in  each  ;  so  that  the  lochus
here  is  a  body  of  512  men,  and  is  commanded  by
a  polemarch.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  lochus
of  Thucydides,  in  this  instance,  answers  to  the
mora  of  Xenophon.  As  on  this  occtision,  the
pentecostys  contained  four  instead  of  two  eno-
motiae, and  as  four  pentecostyes  were  throAvn  toge-
ther into  one  division,  Thucydides  may  have  been
led  to  call  this  division  a  lochus,  as  being  next
above  the  pentecostys,  though  it  was,  in  fact,  a
mora  commanded  by  a  polemarch  (Thirlwall,  I.  c.
p.  445  ;  comp.  Arnold  on  Thuc.  v.  68).  Aristotle
appears  to  vise  the  terms  lochus  and  mora  indis-
criminately {AaKdiVcav  ttoAIt.  Fr.  5  and  6  ;  Photius
s.  V.  Aoxo')'  The  suggestion  of  Arnold  {l.  c.)  that
one  of  the  seven  lochi  spoken  of  consisted  of  the
Brasidean  soldiers  and  Neodamodes,  who  would
not  be  taken  account  of  in  the  ordinary  divisions
of  the  Spartan  forces,  is  not  unlikely,  and  would
explain  the  discrepancy  between  the  number  of
lochi  (or  morae)  here,  and  the  ordinary  number  of
six  morae  ;  but  even  independently  of  it,  no  diffi-
culty need  be  felt  with  respect  to  that  particular
point,  as  the  whole  arrangement  of  the  troops  on
that  occasion  was  a  departure  from  the  ordinary
divisions.  It  was  not  universally  the  case  that  an
army  was  made  up  of  six  morae  and  twenty-four
ordinary  lochi.  On  one  occasion,  we  hear  of
twelve  lochi  (Xen.  Hellen.  vii.  4.  §  20,  comp.
§  27),  each  of  about  100  men.  The  Neodamodes
were  not  usually  incorporated  in  the  morae  (Xen.
Hellen.  iv.  3.  §  15).

It  seems  a  probable  opinion  that  the  number  of
morae  in  the  Spartan  military  force  had  reference
to  the  districts  into  which  Laconia  was  divided.
These,  including  Sparta  and  the  districts  imme-
diately around  it,  were  six  in  number.  Perhaps,
as  Thirlwall  suggests,  the  division  of  the  army
may  have  been  founded  on  the  fiction  that  one
mora  was  assigned  for  the  protection  of  each
district.  The  same  -wTiter  also  suggests  a  very
probable  explanation  of  the  Ad^os  TliT&i/dTrjs
II  2


484


EXERCITUS.


which  Herodotus  (ix.  53)  speaks  of,  and  of  whicfi
Thucydides  (i.  20),  thougli  doubtless  erroneously,
denies  the  existence.  Thirlvvall  suggests  that  as
each  mora  consisted  of  four  lochi,  the  four  lochi  of
the  mora  belonging  to  the  district  of  Sparta  may
have  been  distributed  on  the  same  principle  among
the  four  /cw//ai,  Limnae,  Cynosura,  Mesoa,  and
Pitana,  of  which  Sparta  was  composed.*

A  Spartan  army,  divided  as  above  described,
was  drawn  up  in  the  dense  array  of  the  phalanx,
the  depth  of  which  depended  upon  circumstances.
An  evwixoTia  sometimes  made  but  a  single  file,
sometimes  was  drawn  up  in  three  or  six  files  (C'''7«5
Xen.  liep.  Lac.  xi.  §  4;  Miiller,  iii,  12.  §.  3,  note  a).
At  the  battle  of  Mantineia  the  phalanx  was  eight
deep,  so  that  each  enomotia  made  four  files.  (Thuc.
V.  G8  ;  comp.  Xen.  He.llen.  iii.  2.  §  16,  vi.  2.  §  21.)
At  the  battle  of  Leuctra  it  was  twelve  deep,
(Xen.  Hellen.  vi.  4.  §  12.)  The  enomotarch  stood
at  the  head  of  his  file  (vpaToaTdT-ns),  or  at  the
head  of  the  right-hand  file,  if  the  enomotia  was
broken  up  into  more  than  one.  The  last  man  was
called  ovpayds.  It  was  a  matter  of  great  import-
ance that  he,  like  the  enomotarch,  should  be  a  man
of  strength  and  skill,  as  in  certain  evolutions  he
would  have  to  lead  the  movements.  (Xen.  Cyrop.
iii.  3.  §  41,  &c.)  The  commander-in-chief,  who
was  usually  the  king  (after  the  afi:air  of  Demaratus
and  Cleomenes  it  was  the  practice  not  to  send  out
both  kings  together,  Herod,  v.  75  ;  but  comp.
vi.  73),  had  his  station  sometimes  in  the  centre  (as
at  Mantineia,  Thuc.  v.  72),  more  commonly  (as  at
Leuctra)  on  the  right  wing.  The  deployments  by
which  the  arrangements  of  the  phalanx  were  altered
took  place  vmder  the  direction  of  the  enomotarch.
When  the  troops  were  drawn  up  in  a  line  in  the
ordinary  battle  army,  they  were  said  to  be  eVl
<pd\ayyos.  Supposing  an  enomotia  to  consist  of
twenty -five  men,  including  its  leader,  and  to  be
di'awn  up  eight  deep,  the  front  line  of  the  army
would  consist  of  28(3.  In  an  ordinary  march  the
army  advanced  ctti  /ce'pcos  (or  KaTct.  Kepas^  Xen.
Hellen.  vii.  4.  §  23),  the  first  enomotia  of  the
right  wing  filing  oft',  and  the  rest  in  succession
following  it ;  so  that  if  the  enomotia  was  drawn
ap  in  three  or  two  files,  the  whole  army  would
march  in  three  or  two  files.  The  most  usual  ar-
rangement was  in  two  files.  (Xen.  Hellen.  vii.  4.
§  22,  iii.  1.  §  22,  Polyaen.  ii.  1.  §  10.)  If  an
army  in  marching  order  had  to  form  in  phalanx,
the  movement  began  with  the  hindmost  enomotia  of
the  column,  Avhich  placed  itself  on  the  left  of  (Trap'
ofTTTiSas)  and  on  a  line  with  (ets  fiirunrov)  the
enomotia  before  it.  These  two  then  performed
the  same  evolution  with  recpect  to  the  last  but
two,  and  so  on,  till  all  were  in  a  line  with  the


*  MiiUer  {Dorians^  book  iii.  c.  3.  §  7)  talks  of
a  tt6Kis  distinct  from  these  KWfjLai.  But  the  latter
were  certainly  not  mere  suburbs,  but  component
parts  of  Sparta  itself  (comp.  Paus.  iii.  16.  §  .9).
Ilaase  (I.  c.)  speaks  of  five  divisions  of  the  city  be-
sides Pitana,  so  that  the  six  raorae  or  lochi  in  the
sense  of  Thucydides  corresponded  to  these  six
divisions.  For  this  arrangement,  there  seems  no
authority,  except  the  statement  of  the  scholiast  on
Aristoph.  {Lys.  453),  that  there  were  six  lochi  at
Sparta,  five  of  which  he  names,  one  of  the  names
being  corrected  conjecturally  by  Miiller  to  Meco-
axTjs.  But  there  seems  here  little  more  than  a  con-
fused Version  of  the  division  into  six  morae.


EXERCITUS.

first  enomotia,  which  now,  with  the  commander-
in-chief  at  its  head,  occupied  the  extremity  of  the
right  wing.  This  evolution  was  called  Trapayayylj
(Xen.  Rep.  Lac.  xi.  §  6),  a  name  also  given  to  the
reverse  movement,  when  a  phalanx  had  to  fall  into
marching  order,  and  to  subordinate  movements  of
the  same  kind  for  changing  the  depth  of  the
phalanx.  In  the  latter  the  evolutions  were  con-
ducted on  much  the  same  principle.  Thus,  if  the
depth  of  the  phalanx  was  to  be  diminished  by  half,
the  hinder  portion  of  each  enomoty  marched  for-
wards and  placed  itself  on  the  left  of  the  half  in
front  of  it.  Similarly,  if  the  depth  had  to  be  in-
creased, the  left-hand  portion  of  each  enomotia
faced  about  towards  the  rights  took  up  its  station  in
the  rear,  and  then,  facing  to  the  left  again,  as-
sumed their  proper  position.  (Xen.  Rep.  Lac.  xi.
§  8.)  The  facing  to  the  right  was  always  the
usage,  because  if  the  evolution  were  performed  in
the  face  of  an  enemy,  the  shielded  side  could  be
presented  towards  him.  Modifications  of  this
evolution,  conducted  on  the  same  principle,  were
employed  if  the  depth  had  to  be  increased  or
diminished  in  any  other  proportion  (comp.  Xen.
Anab.  iv.  3.  §26,  iv.  6.  §  6,  Cyrop.  ii.  3.  §21).
It  is  very  likely  that  at  those  points  of  the  files
where  in  such  evolutions  they  would  have  to
separate,  there  were  placed  men  suitable  for  taking
their  station  in  the  front  rank,  where  it  was  al-
ways an  object  to  get  the  best  men.  These  would
answer  to  the  SeKaSapxoi  and  TrefM-rrddapxoi  of
Xenophon.  (Cyrop.  ii.  1;  com^.  Hipparch.  ii.  §  6,
iv.  §  9.)  If  an  enemy  appeared  in  the  rear,  it  was
not  enough  that  the  soldiers  should  face  about  to-
wards the  enemy.  The  Spartan  tactics  required
that  the  stoutest  soldier  should  be  opposed  to  the
enemy.  This  was  accomplished  by  the  manoeuvre
termed  i^eMy/xSs.  Of  this  there  were  three  va-
rieties :  1.  The  Macedonian.  In  this  the  leader  of
each  file  kept  his  place,  only  turning  towards  the
enem3%  The  man  behind  him  (eTrto-TciTTjs)  re-
treating and  again  taking  up  his  station  behind
him,  and  so  on.  In  this  way  the  army  retreated
from  the  enemy  by  a  distance  equal  to  its  depth.
2.  T7ie  Tjoconian  (the  one  usually  adopted  by  the
Macedonian  phalanx  of  Philip  and  Alexander).
This  was  the  reverse  of  the  preceding,  the  rear
man  remaining  stationary  and  the  others  advancing
successively  one  before  the  other.  In  this  way  of
course  the  ai-my  advanced  against  the  enemy  by  a
distance  equal  to  its  depth.  3.  The  Cretan.  In
this  the  leader  and  reamian,  the  second  and  last
but  two,  and  so  on,  changed  places,  so  that  the
whole  army  remained  at  the  same  distance  from
the  enemy.  This  species  was  also  called  xopf'^y
(Haase  ad  Xen.  Rep.  Lac.  xi.  §  9.  ;  Miiller,  iii.  12.
§  8 ;  Aelianus,  Tact.  26,  27,  33.)  These  evolu-
tions would  of  course  leave  the  general  on  the  left
wing.  If  it  was  deemed  expedient  that  he  should
be  upon  the  right,  it  was  not  enough  that  he  should
simply  remove  from  the  left  to  the  right,  the  who!
army  had  to  reverse  its  position,  so  that  what  waa
the  left  wing  should  become  the  right.  This  was
effected  by  an  exeligmus,  tenned  (at  least  by  the
later  tacticiaiis),  i^cKiyfihs  Kara  C^^a,  as  con-
trasted with  the  i^€\i.y/jihs  Kara  arlxovs.  If  the
army  changed  its  front  by  wheeling  round  through
a  half  circle,  round  one  corner  .is  a  pivot,  the
movement  seems  to  have  been  expressed  by
irfpiiTTva'a'eiu  or  auairTiKTcreiv,  One  more  evolu-
tion remains  to  be  noticed.     Suppose  an  enemy


[

d    ,

•1


EXERCITUS.

appeared  on  the  right,  while  the  anuy  was  march-  !
ing  in  column,  two  abreast.  The  different  lochi
wheeled  round  through  a  quadrant  of  a  circle,
roimd  their  leader,  as  on  a  pivot,  so  that  the  army-
presented  twenty-four  columns  to  the  enemy,  con-
sisting of  two  files  each,  and  separated  by  a  con-
siderable interval  from  each  other.  The  depth  of
the  whole  body  was  then  lessened,  and  these  in-
tervals filled  up  by  the  ordinary  paragoge,  and  by
the  different  lochi  siding  up  nearer  to  each  other
in  ease  the  intervals  still  remained  too  great.  If
it  was  necessary  for  the  general  to  take  his  station
on  the  right,  this  would  be  effected,  as  in  other
cases,  by  an  e^eXiyfiSs.  Similar  manoeuvres  took
place  if  the  enemy  appeared  on  the  left,  though,
as  this  was  the  shielded  side  of  the  soldiers,  and
the  danger  was  consequently  less,  it  was  frequently
thought  sufficient  to  keep  the  enemy  in  check  by
means  of  the  cavalry  and  light  troops.  (Xen.  Rep.
Lac.  xi.  §  10.)  One  point  that  a  general  had  to  be
on  his  guard  against  was  the  tendency  of  an  army,
when  advancing  eVi  ^d\ayyos,  to  sheer  off  towards
the  right,  each  man  pressing  closer  to  his  right-hand
neighbour  in  order  to  protect  his  unshielded  ai'de,
so  that  the  right  wing  frequently  got  beyond  the
left  wing  of  the  enemy.  (See  especially  the  ac-
count of  the  battle  of  Mantineia,  Thucyd.  v.  71.)
A  slight  consideration  will  shew  that  the  analogy
traced  between  the  evolutions  of  an  army  and
those  of  a  chorus  is  by  no  means  fanciful.  One
kind  of  i^'e\iyfJL6s  was  even  called  x^P^^os.  The
importance  attached  to  the  war  dances  among  the
Spartans  as  a  means  of  military  training  was  con-
sequently very  great.     [Chorus.]

When  an  army  was  led  to  attack  a  height,  it
was  usually  drawn  up  in  what  were  termed  \6xoi.
opQioi,  a  term  wliich  merely  implies  that  the  lochi
had  greater  depth  than  breadth  (irapdixriKes  jxev
Aeyerai  irav  rdyjiia  t)  hv  rh  jxriKos  ^XV  '"'^^^ov  rov
^ddovs,  opBiov  Se  h  tcu  rb  fiddos  rod  ix7]kous,  Aelian.
Tact.  c.  29).  The  breadth  of  the  lochi  would,  of
course,  vary  according  to  circumstances.  They
were  drawn  up  with  considerable  intervals  between
them.  In  this  way  the  army  presented  a  con-
siderable front  to  the  enemy,  and  was  less  liable  to
be  thrown  into  confusion  than  if  drawn  up  in  close
phalanx,  while  at  the  same  time  the  intervals  be-
tween the  lochi  were  not  left  so  great  that  the
enemy  could  safely  press  in  between  them.  (Xen.
;  Jnah.  iv.  2.  §  11,  13,  «.  §  10—19,  v.  4.  §  22,
i  Cyrop.  iii.  2.  §  6,  Atiab.  iv.  3.  §  17  ;  Polyaen.
I  Slrat.  v.  16.  §  1.)  There  is  no  ground  for  affirming
that  a  A^x''^  upOtos  was  drawn  up  in  two  files,  or
!  even  one,  as  Sturz  (Lea:  Xen.)  says.  Such  an  ar-
rangement would  be  perfectly  useless  for  attack.
This  system  of  arrangements,  which  formed  some
approximation  to  the  Roman  tactics,  was  not,  how-
ever, employed,  except  in  the  particular  case  men-
tioned.

In  special  circumstances,  such  as  those  of  the
retreating  Greeks  in  the  Anabasis,  the  arrange-
ment in  a  hollow  square  was  adopted,  the  troops
j  being  so  placed  that  by  simply  facing  about  they
I  presented  a  front  for  battle  on  whichever  side  it  was
j  necessary.  The  term  ir\ai<Tiou  was  applied  to  an
I  army  so  arranged,  whether  square  or  oblong.
I  Afterwards  the  term  vXaiaiov  was  restricted  to
j  the  square,  the  oblong  being  called  irXiuOiov.
j  Though  at  first  sight  the  arrangement  and  ma-
I  noeuvTes  of  a  Lacedaemonian  anny  seem  exceed-
jingly   complex,  they  were  in  reality   quite  the


EXERCITUS.


485


reverse,  owing  to  the  carefully  graduated  system
of  subordination  which  prevailed  (crxeSbj/  ydp  rot.
irau  rh  (xrparSir^Zov  rct>u  AaKedai/xouiuu  'dpxovns
apx^vroiv  ela't.  Thuc.  v.  66).  The  commands  of
the  general  were  issued  in  the  first  place  to  the
polemarchs,  by  these  to  the  lochagi,  by  these
again  to  the  pentecosteres,  by  the  latter  to  the
enomotarchs,  and  by  these  last  to  their  respective
divisions.  From  the  orderly  manner  in  which  this
was  done,  commands  were  transmitted  with  great
rapidity:  every  soldier,  in  fact,  regulating  the
movements  of  the  man  behind  him,  every  two
being  connected  together  as  Trpcoro(T7rdrr]s  and
iinardrr)s.

In  later  times  the  king  was  usually  accompanied
by  two  ephors,  as  controllers  and  advisers.  These,
with  the  polemarchs,  the  four  Pythii,  three  peers
((ijxoLoi),  who  had  to  provide  for  the  necessities  of
the  king  in  war,  the  laphyropolae  and  some  other
officers,  constituted  what  was  called  the  damosia
of  the  king.  (Xen.  Rep.  Lac.  xiii.  §  1,  7,  xv.
§  14,  JLeUe7i.  iv.  5.  §  8,  vi.  4.  §  14  ;  Plut.  Li/c.
22.)  The  polemarchs  also  had  some  sort  of  suite
or  staff  with  them,  called  (ru/xcpopus  (Plut.  Pelop.
17  ;  Xen.  IMlen.  vi.  4.  §  14).  With  the  excep-
tion of  the  enomotarchs,  the  superior  officers  and
those  immediately  about  them,  are  not  to  be  reck-
oned with  the  division  v/hich  they  led.  They  stood
distinct,  forming  what  was  called  the  ayqixa.

The  Spartan  and  Perioecian  hoplites  were  ac-
companied in  the  field  by  helots,  partly  in  the
capacity  of  attendants,  partly  to  serve  as  light-
armed  troops.  The  number  attached  to  an  army
was  probably  not  uniform.  At  Plataeae  each
Spartan  was  accompanied  by  seven  helots  ;  but
that  was  probably  an  extraordinary  case.  One
helot  in  particular  of  those  attached  to  each  Spartan
was  called  his  (3-efjd7ra?p',  and  performed  the  func-
tions of  an  armourer  or  shieldbearer  (Eustath.  ad
Dionys.  Per.  533).  Xenophon  {Ilellen.  iv.  5.
§  1 4,  8.  §  39)  calls  them  vTraa-marai.  (Comp.  Herod.
V.  Ill  ;  Muller,  Dor.  iii.  3.  §  2.)  In  extra-
ordinary cases,  helots  served  as  hoplites,  and  in
that  case  it  was  usual  to  give  them  their  liberty
(Thucyd.  vii.  19,  iv.  80,  v.  34).  Distinct  corps
were,  sometimes,  composed  entirely  of  these  Neo-
damodes.  A  separate  troop  in  the  Lacedaemonian
army  was  formed  by  the  Sciritae  (l,icip7rai),  ori-
ginally, no  doubt,  inh.ibitants  of  the  district  Sciritis.
In  battle,  they  occupied  the  extreme  left  of  the  line.
On  a  march,  they  formed  the  vanguard,  and  were
usually  employed  on  the  most  dangerous  kinds  of
service.  (Thuc.  v.  67,  with  Arnold's  note  ;  Xen.
Ci/rop.  iv.  2.  §  1  ;  K.  F.  Hermann,  §  29,  note  13,
infers  from  this  passage  that  they  were  cavalry,
an  inference  Avhich  is  certainly  not  necessary,  and
is  contradicted  by  Muller,  Manso,  Haase,  Thirl-
wall,  Arnold,  «&c.)

The  arms  of  the  phalanx  consisted  of  the  long
spear  and  a  short  sword  {^vi]\7}).  The  chief  part
of  the  defensive  armour  was  the  large  brazen
shield,  which  covered  the  body  from  the  shoulder
to  the  knee  (Tyrtaeus,  fr.  ii.  23),  suspended,  as  in
ancient  times,  by  a  thong  round  the  neck,  and
managed  by  a  simple  handle  or  ring  (TrSpira^),
The  improved  Carian  handle  (oxdvn)  was  not  in-
troduced till  the  time  of  Cleomenes  III.  Besides
this,  they  had  the  ordinary  armour  of  the  hoplite
[ArmaJ.  The  heavy-armed  soldiers  wore  a
scarlet  uniform  (Xen.  Bep.  Lac.  xi.  §  3,  Ages,  iu
7).  The  Spartan  encampments  were  circular,
II  3


^86


EXERCITUS.


Only^  the  hea\y-armed  were  stationed  witliin  it,
the  cavalry  being  placed  to  look  out,  and  the  helots
being  kept  as  much  as  possible  outside.  As
another  precaution  against  the  latter,  every  soldier
was  obliged  always  to  carry  his  spear  about  with
him.  (Xen.  Rep.  Lac.  xii.)  Though  strict  disci-
pline was,  of  course,  kept  up  in  the  camp,  it  was
less  rigorous  than  in  the  city  itself  (Plut.  Lye.  22,
comp.  Herod,  vii.  208).  Preparatory  to  a  battle
the  Spartan  soldier  dressed  his  hair  and  crowned
himself  as  others  would  do  for  a  feast.  The  signal
for  attack  in  ancient  times  was  given  by  priests  of
Ares  {Trvp(p6poi),  who  threw  lighted  torches  into
the  interval  between  the  two  armies  (Schol.  ad
Eurip.  Phoen.  1186).  Afterwards  it  was  given
not  by  the  trumpet,  but  by  the  music  of  flutes,
and  sometimes  also  of  the  lyre  and  cithara,  to
which  the  men  sang  the  battle  song  (Traiav  ijxSa-
T-fjpios).  (Pans.  iii.  1 7.  §  5  ;  Pint.  I.  c.)  The  object
of  the  music  was  not  so  much  to  inspirit  the  men,
as  simply  to  regulate  the  march  of  the  phalanx
(Thuc.  v.  70).  This  rhythmical  regularity  of
movement  was  a  point  to  which  the  Spartans  at-
tached great  importance.  A  sacrifice  was  oifered
to  the  Muses  before  a  battle,  as  also  to  Eros  (Plut.
Aristid.  17).  To  prevent  the  ranks  being  broken
the  soldiers  were  forbidden  to  stop  in  order  to
strip  a  slain  enemy  while  the  fight  lasted,  or  to
pursue  a  routed  enemy.  The  younger  hoplites  or
the  cavalry  or  light-armed  troops  were  despatched
for  this  purpose  (Xen.  Hel/en.  iv.  4.  §  16,  v.  14.
§  16).  All  the  booty  collected  had  to  be  handed
over  to  the  laphyropolae  and  ephors,  by  whom  it
was  sold.

The  rigid  inflexibility  of  the  Spartan  tactics
rendered  them  indisposed  to  the  attack  of  fortified
places.  At  the  battle  of  Plataeae,  they  even  as-
signed to  the  Athenians  the  task  of  storming  the
palisade  formed  by  the  yeppa  of  the  Persians.

In  Athens,  the  military  system  was  in  its  lead-
ing principles  the  same  as  among  the  Spartans,
though  differing  in  detail,  and  carried  out  with  less
exactness  ;  inasmuch  as  when  Athens  became
powerful,  greater  attention  was  paid  to  the  navy.
Of  the  times  before  Solon,  we  have  but  little  in-
formation. We  learn  that  there  were  twelve
phratriae,  and  in  each  of  these  four  naucrariae,
each  of  which  was  bound  to  furnish  two  horsemen
and  one  ship.  Of  the  four  classes  into  which  the
citizens  were  arranged  by  the  constitution  of  Solon,
the  citizens  of  the  first  and  second  served  as  ca-
valry, or  as  commanders  of  the  infantry  (still  it
need  not  be  assumed  that  the  t7r7re?s  never  served
as  heavy-armed  infantrj'^),  those  of  the  third  class
((evyiTai)  formed  the  heavy-armed  infantry.  The
Thetes  served  either  as  light-armed  troops  on  land,
or  on  board  the  ships.  The  same  general  principles
remained  when  the  constitution  was  remodelled
by  Cleisthenes.  The  cavalry  service  continued  to
be  compulsory  on  the  wealthier  class  (Xen.  Oecon.
ii.  6  ;  Lycurg.  Zeoe?*.  §  139).  All  citizens  quali-
fied to  serve  either  as  horsemen,  or  in  the  ranks  of
the  heavy-armed  infantry,  were  enrolled  in  a  list
[Catalogus].  The  case  of  Thetes  serving  as
heavy-armed  soldiers  is  spoken  of  as  an  exception
to  the  general  rule  ;  and  even  when  it  was  the
case,  they  were  not  enrolled  in  the  catalogus.
(Thucyd.  vi.  43.)  Every  citizen  was  liable  to
service  from  his  eighteenth  to  his  sixtieth  year.
On  reaching  their  eighteenth  year,  the  young  citi-
uens  were  formally  enrolled  els  tV  A7j|iapYtf ^*'


EXERCITUS.

ypafiixarcTov,  and  received  a  shield  and  spear  in  a
public  assembly  of  the  people,  binding  themselves
by  oath  to  perform  rightly  the  duties  of  a  citizen
and  a  soldier  (Aristot.  ap.  Harpocr.  p.  241  ;  Her-
mann, I.  c.  §  123).  During  the  first  two  j'ears,
they  were  only  liable  to  service  in  Attica  itself,
chiefly  as  garrison  soldiers  in  the  different  fortresses
in  the  country.  During  this  period,  they  were
called  xepiTToAoj.  (Harpocr.  s.  v.  irepiiroXos  ;
Pollux,  viii.  105  ;  Lycurg.  Leocr.  §  76.)  Accord-
ing to  some  authorities,  this  service  was  also  called
(TTpaTeia  eV  ro7s  fiepeai  (Wachsmuth,  I.  c.  vol.  i.
§56,  note  45).  The  levies  were  made  under  the
direction  of  the  generals  [Strategi].  The
soldiers  were  selected  either  according  to  age,  as
among  the  Spartans  (Aristot.  ap.  Harpocr.  s.v.
(TTpaTeia  and  Phot.  s.  v.  (XTpaTia :  OTav  rjXiKiav
iKTviix-nwai^  irpoa-ypdcpovo'i  aTrh  tIvos  &pxoptos
eTTwvvjxov  fxexpi  t'iuos  Set  ffTpaTeveadai  ;  the
archons  being,  of  course,  those  in  whose  year  of
office  they  had  entered  the  military  service),  when
the  expeditions  were  called  €|oSoi  iv  toTs  iirwvv-
jiiois,  or  else  according  to  a  certain  rotation  (Aesch.
F.  L.  p.  330,  Tas  iK  5ta8ox7)s  i^ddovs).  The  ser-
vices of  those  below  or  above  the  ordinary  military
age,  were  only  called  for  on  emergencies,  or  for
guarding  the  walls.  (Comp.  Thuc.  i.  105,  ii.  J  3.)
Members  of  the  senate  during  the  period  of  their
office,  farmers  of  the  revenue,  choreutae  at  the
Dionysia  during  the  festival  ;  in  later  times,  traders
by  sea  also,  were  exempted  from  military  service.
(Lycurg.  Leocr.  §  164  ;  Demosth.  Neaer.  p.  1353,
Meid.  p.  516  ;  Aristoph.  Eccles.  1019,  with  the
Schol.)  Any  one  bound  to  serve  who  attempted
to  avoid  doing  so,  was  liable  to  a  sentence  of
aTi/xia.  The  resident  aliens  commonly  served  as
heavy-armed  soldiers,  especially  for  the  purpose  of
garrisoning  the  city.  They  were  prohibited  from
serving  as  cavalry  (Thuc.  ii.  13,  31,  iv.  90  ;  Xen.
de  Vect.  ii.  §  5,  Hipparcli.  ix.  §  6).  Slaves  were
only  employed  as  soldiers  in  cases  of  great  neces-
sity, as  at  Marathon  (according  to  Pans.  i.  32.
§  33),  and  Arginusae  (Xen.  Hellen.  i.  6.  §  17).

Of  the  details  of  the  Athenian  military  organi-
sation, we  have  no  distinct  accounts  as  we  have
of  those  of  Sparta,  The  heavy-armed  troops,  as
was  the  universal  practice  in  Greece,  fought  in
phalanx  order.  They  were  arranged  in  bodies  in
a  manner  dependent  on  the  political  divisions  of
the  citizens.  The  soldiers  of  each  tribe  formed  a
separate  body  in  the  army,  also  called  a  tribe,  and
these  bodies  stood  in  some  preconcerted  order
(Herod,  vi.  Ill  ;  Plut.  Arist.  5  ;  Thuc.  vi.  98  ;
Xen.  Hellen.  iv.  2,  §  19,  with  Schneider's  notes).
It  seems  that  the  name  of  one  division  was  to|<s,j
and  of  another  A^xoy,  but  in  what  relations  thea
stood  to  the  c^vXi],  and  to  each  other,  we  do  not
learn,  unless  Xenophon's  expressions  {Cyrop.  ii.  1.
§  4)  may  be  looked  upon  as  indicating  that  the
Ta^is  contained  four  lochi,  and  consisted  of  one
hundred  men.  (Comp.  Xen.  Mem.  iii.  4.  §  1  ;
Pollux,  viii.  §  114  ;  Lysias  pro  Mantitheo,  §  15,
&c.)  Every  hoplite  was  accompanied  by  an  at-
tendant (inrrjpeTTis,  Thuc.  iii.  1 7),  to  take  charge  o(
his  baggage,  and  carry  his  shield  on  a  march.
Each  horseman  also  had  a  servant,  called  /tttto-
k6ij.os,  to  attend  to  his  horse  (Thuc.  vii.  75,  7^  ;
Xen.  Hellen.  ii.  4).

It  would  appear,  that  before  the  time  of  Solon
the  cavalry  which   the  Athenians   could  muster  j
was  under  100.      In  the  time  of  Cimon  it  was


■I'M

>sef


EXERCITUS.
300,  and  soon  after,  GOO  (Andoc.  de  Pace,  p.  92  ;
Schol.  Aristoph.  E(]uit.  577,624);  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  Peloponnesian  war,  1200,  of  wliora
200  seem  to  have  been  hired  Scythian  bowmen
(Thuc.  ii.  13,  V.  {34,  vi.  94).  Besides  the  light-
armed  soldiers  drawn  from  the  ranks  of  the
poorer  citizens,  there  Avas  at  Athens  a  regiment
of  Thracian  slaves,  armed  with  bows.  The
number  of  these  increased  from  300,  who  were
purchased  after  the  battle  of  Salamis,  to  1 000  or
1200  (Aeschin.  de  fals.  Leg.  p.  335,  336  ;  Bockh,
Public  Econ.  of  Ath.  book  ii.  c.  1 1).  These,  how-
ever, were  generally  employed  as  a  sort  of  police
or  city  guard.  Besides  these,  however,  the  Athe-
nians had  a  troop  of  bowmen  of  their  own  citizens,
amounting,  at  the  beginning  of  the  Peloponnesian
war,  to  1600  (Thuc.  ii.  13  ;  Bockh,  I.e.  ii.  c.  21).

For  the  command  of  the  army,  there  were
chosen  every  year  ten  generals  [Strategi],  and
ten  taxiarchs  [Taxiarchi],  and  for  the  cavalry,
two  hipparchs  (iTt-Kapxoi-)  and  ten  phylarchs  {(pv-
Xapxoi).  Respecting  the  military  functions  of  the
&PX^v  Tro\€fjLapxos,  see  the  article  Archon.  The
number  of  strategi  sent  with  an  army  was  not
imiform.  Three  was  a  common  number.  Some-
times one  Avas  invested  with  the  supreme  com-
mand ;  at  other  times,  they  either  took  the  com-
mfvnd  in  tuni  (as  at  Marathon),  or  conducted
their  operations  by  common  consent  (as  in  the
Sicilian  expedition).  (Xen.  Hipparch.  i.  §  8  ;
Demosth.  Phil.  i.  §  26  ;  Pollux,  viii.  §  87  ;  Scho-
mann,  de  Com.  Ath.  pp.  313 — 315.)

The  practice  of  paying  the  troops  when  upon
service  was  first  introduced  by  Pericles  (Ulpian.
ad  Demosth.  Trepl  avvrd^.  p.  50,  a).    The  pay  con-
sisted partly  of  wages  (/xiorflcJs),  partly  of  provi-
sions, or,  more  commonly,  provision-money  {(Tith)-
pecTiov).     The   ordinary  fiiadSs  of  a  hoplite   was
two  obols  a  day.     The  cnrripea-iou  amounted  to
two  obols  more.     Hence,  the  life  of  a  soldier  was
called,  proverbially,  Terp(/)§6kov  ^ios  (Eustath.  ad
Od.  p.  1405,  ad  II.  p.  951).     Higher  pay,  how-
ever, was  sometimes  given,  as  at  the  siege  of  Poti-
daea  the  soldiers  received  two  drachmae   apiece,
one  for  themselves,  the  other  for  their  attendants.
This,    doubtless,    included    the    provision-money
(Thuc.  iii.  17).     Officers  received  twice  as  much  ;
horsemen,  three   times  ;   generals,  four  times   as
much  (comp.  Xen.  Anal.  vii.  6.  §  1,  3.  §  9).    The
i   horsemen  received  pay  even  in  time  of  peace,  that
i   they  might  always  be  in  readiness,  and  also  a  sum
I   of  money  for  their  outfit  (/caraaTao-ty,  Xen.  Ilij^-
I  parch,  i.  §  19  ;  K.  F.  Hermann,  §  152,  note  19).
I   They  were  reviewed  from  tihie  to  time    by  the
I  senate   (Xen.  Hipparch.  iii.   §  9,  Oecon.  ix.   15).
Before  entering  the  service,  both  men  and  horses
I  had  to  undergo  an  examination  before  the  hip-
parchs, who  also  had  to  drill  and  train  them  in
I  time  of  peace.     The  horses  of  the  heavy-armed

cavaliy  were  protected  by  defensive  armour.
1  As  regards  the  military  strength  of  the  Athe-
I  nians,  we  find  10,000  heavy-armed  soldiers  at
Marathon,  8,000  heavy  armed,  and  as  many  light
!  armed  at  Plataeae  ;  and  at  the  beginning  of  the
I  Peloponnesian  war  there  were  1 3,000  heavy  armed
!  ready  for  foreign  service,  and  16,000  consisting  of
j  those  beyond  the  limits  of  the  ordinary  miliUiry
j  age  and  of  the  metoeci,  for  garrison  service.
i  It  was  the  natural  result  of  the  national  charac-
I  ter  of  the  Athenians  and  their  democratical  con-
I  Btitution,  that  military  discipline  was  much  less


EXERCITUS.


487


stringent  among  them  than  among  the  Spartans
(XaAfTrai  "yap  al  vfj.^repai  (pvaeis  ^p|a',  Thuc.
vii.  14),  and  after  defeat  especially  it  was  often
found  extremely  difficult  to  maintain  it.  The
generals  had  some  power  of  punishing  military'-
offences  on  the  spot,  but  for  the  greater  number  of
such  offences  a  species  of  court-martial  was  held,
consisting  of  persons  who  had  served  in  the  army
to  which  the  offender  belonged,  and  presided  over
by  the  strategi  (Lysias,  Adv.  Ale.  §5,6;  Plato,


p.  943  ;  K.  F.  Hermann,  /.  c.  §  146,


153  ;  Meier  and  Schbmann,  der  Attische  Process,
pp.  133,  363 — 366).  Various  rewards  also  were
held  out  for  those  who  especially  distinguished
themselves  for  their  courage  or  conduct,  in  the
shape  of  chaplets,  statues,  &c.  In  connection  with
these  the  Xoyos  iiriTdcpios,  spoken  over  those  Avho
had  fallen  in  war,  must  not  be  omitted.  Respect-
ing the  provision  made  for  those  who  were  dis-
abled in  war,  see  the  article  Adunati.

The  Peltastae  (TreAracrTai),  so  called  from  the
kind  of  shield  which  they  wore  [Pelta],  were  a
kind  of  troops  of  which  we  hoar  very  little  before
the  end  of  the  Peloponnesian  war.  The  first  time
we  have  any  mention  of  them  is  in  Thuc.  iv.  Ill,
where  they  are  spoken  of  as  being  in  the  army  of
Br<isidas.  With  the  more  frequent  employment
of  mercenary  troops  a  greater  degree  of  attention
was  bestowed  upon  the  peltastae  ;  and  the  Athe-
nian general  Iphicrates  introduced  some  important
improvements  in  the  mode  of  arming  them,  com-
bining as  far  as  possible  the  peculiar  advantages  of
heavy  (oTrXlrai)  and  light  armed  {\pi\oi)  troops.
He  substituted  a  linen  corslet  for  the  coat  of  mail
worn  by  the  hoplites,  and  lessened  the  shield,  while
he  doubled  the  length  of  the  spear  and  sword.  He
even  took  the  pains  to  introduce  for  them  an  im-
proved sort  of  shoe,  called  after  him  'I(piKpari5es
(Pollux,  vii.  89).  This  equipment  was  very  com-
monly adopted  by  mercenary  troops,  and  proved
very  effective.  The  almost  total  destruction  of  a
mora  of  Lacedaemonian  heavy-armed  troops  by  a
body  of  peltastae  under  the  command  of  Iphicrates
was  an  exploit  that  became  very  famous.  (Xen.
Hellen.  iv.  5.  §  11.)  The  peltast  style  of  arming
was  general  among  the  Achaeans  until  Philo-
poemen  again  introduced  heavy  armour.  (Plut.
Philop.  9  f  Liv.  xlii.  55.)

When  the  use  of  mercenary  troops  became
general,  Athenian  citizens  seldom  served  except  as
volunteers,  and  then  in  but  small  numbers.  Thua
we  find  1 0,000  mercenaries  sent  to  Olynthus  with
only  400  Athenians  (Demosth.  de  fals.  Leg.
p.  425).  With  15,000  merci^naries  sent  against
Philip  to  Chaeroneia,  there  were  2000  citizens  (De-
mosth. de  Cor.  p.  306).  It  became  not  uncommon
also  for  those  bound  to  serve  in  the  cavalry  to
commute  their  services  for  those  of  horsemen  hired
in  their  stead,  and  the  duties  of  the  linroTpo<(>la
were  ill  executed.  The  employment  of  mer-
cenaries also  led  in  other  respects  to  considerable
alterations  in  the  military  system  of  Greece.  Wai
came  to  be  studied  as  an  art,  and  Greek  generals,
rising  above  the  old  simple  rules  of  warfare,  be-
came tacticians.  The  old  method  of  arranging
the  troops,  a  method  still  retained  by  Agesilaus
at  the  battle  of  Coronea,  was  to  draw  up  the
opposing  armies  in  two  parallel  lines  of  greater
or  less  depth,  according  to  the  strength  of  the
forces,  the  engagement  commencing  usually  very
nearly  at  the  same  moment  in  all  parts  of  the  line,
II  4


488


EXERCITUS.


The  genius  of  Epaminondas  introduced  a  complete
revolution  in  the  military  system.  He  was  the
first  who  adopted  the  method  of  charging  in  co-
lumn, concentrating  his  attack  upon  one  point  of
the  hostile  line,  so  as  to  throw  the  whole  into  con-
fusion by  breaking  through  it.  For  minute  details
the  reader  is  referred  to  the  account  of  the  battle
of  Mantineia  (Xen.  Hellen.  vii.  5.  §  22 ;  comp.  vi.
4.  §  12),  It  seems  from  the  description  that  the
troops  Avere  drawn  up  in  a  form  somewhat  like
a  wodffo.

Philip,  king  of  Macedonia,  is  sometimes  spoken
of  by  Greek  writers  as  the  inventor  of  the  phalanx.
It  is   probable    enough  that  he  was  the  first  to
introduce  that  mode  of  organisation  into  the  army
of  Macedonia,  and  that  he  made  several  improve-
ments in  its  arms  and  arrangement,  but  the  pha-
lanx   was   certainly   not   invented   by  him.     The
spear  ((rdpicraa  or  aapiffa)^  with  which  the  soldiers
of  the  Macedonian  phalanx  Avere  anned,  was  ordi-
narily 24  feet  long ;  but  the  ordinary  length  was
21   feet   (Polyb,  xviii,  12  ;  Aelian,  Tact.  14),  and
the  lines  were  arranged  at  such  distances  that  the
spears  of  the  fifth  rank  projected  three  feet  beyond
the  first,  so  that  every  man  in  the  front  rank  was
protected  by  five  spears.     The  men  in  the  ranks
further  back  rested  their  spears  on  the  shoulders
of  those  in  front  of  thero,  inclining  them  upwards,
in  which  position  they,  to  some  extent  at  least,
arrested  the  missiles  that  might  be  hurled  by  the
enemy.     Besides  the   spear  they  carried  a  short
sword.     The   shield  was  very  large  and  covered
nearly  the    whole   body,    so   that    on   favourable
ground  an  impenetrable  front  was  presented  to  the
enemy.     The  soldiers  were  also  defended  by  hel-
mets, coats    of  mail,   and  greaves  ;   so  that   any
thing  like  rapid  movement  was  impossible.    When
in    dense  battle   array   (TrvKvwais   or  irvKuSr-ns),
three  feet  were  allowed  for  each  man,  and  in  this
position  their  shields  touched  ((Tvva(nriaiJL6s,  Polyb,
/.  c.  ;  Aelian,  Tact.  c.  1 L  gives  six  feet  for  each
man  in  the  ordinary  arrangement,  three  feet  for
the  TTVKvacis  or  dense  battle  array,  and  one  and  a
half  feet  for  the  avva(nn<rfj.6^).     On  a  march  six
feet  were  allowed  for  each  man.   The  ordinary  depth
of  the  phalanx  was  sixteen,  though  depths  of  eight
and  of  thirty-two  are  also  mentioned.    (Polyb.  /.  c.
comp.  xii.  19 — 21.)    Each  file  of  sixteen  was  called
?<6xos.     It  is  difficult  to  say  what  reliance  is  to  be
placed   upon   the   subdivisions  mentioned  by  the
tacticians  Aelian,  &c,  as  connected  with  the  pha-
lanx of  Philip,  though  they  may  have  been  usual
in  later  times.      According  to  them  each  higher
division  was  the  double  of  the  one  below  it.    Two
lochi  made  a  dilodiia;  two  dilochiae  made  a  re-
Tpapx'ia,    consisting  of    sixty-four  men  ;    two  te-
trarchies  made  a  rd^is;  two  rd^eis  a  avvTay^a  or
|6va7fa,  to  which  were  attached  five  supernumeraries,
a  herald,  an  ensign,  a  trumpeter,  a  sen-ant,  and  an
officer  to  bring  up  the  rear  {ovpay6s) ;  two  syntiig-
mata  formed  a  pentacosiarchia.  two  of  which  made
a   X'^"'PX'"'>    containing    1024    men  ;    two    chi-
liarchies  made  a  reXos,  and  two  re'ATj  made  a  pha-
langarchia  or  phalanx  in  the  narrower  sense  of  the
word,  the  normal  number  of  which  would  there-
fore be  4096.     It  was  commanded  by  a  polemarch
or  strategus ;  four  such  bodies  formed  the  larger
phalanx,  the  normal  number  of  which  would  be
16,384,    When  drawn  up,  the  two  middle  sections
constituted   what  was   termed   the  dfi(paX6s,  the
others  being  called  nepara  or  wings.  The  phalanx


EXERCITUS.
soldiers  in  the  army  of  Alexander  amounted  to
18,000,  and  were  divided  not  into  four,  but  into
six  divisions,  each  named  after  a  Macedonian  pro-
vince, from  which  it  was  to  derive  its  recruits.
These  bodies  are  oftener  called  Ta|ejs  than  (paXayY^s
by  the  historians,  and  their  leaders  tjixiarchs  or
strategi.  The  phalanx  of  Antiochus  consisted  of
16,000  men,  and  was  formed  into  ten  divisions
(/j-epT))  of  1600  each,  arranged  50  broad  and  32
deep  (Appian,  Syr.  32  ;  Liv.  xxxvii.  40).

In  the  general  principles  of  its  arrangement  and
the  modes  of  altering  its  form,  the  Macedonian
phalanx  resembled  the  Lacedaemonian,  though
the  late  tacticians  do  not  always  describe  the
movements  by  the  same  technical  terms  as  Xeno-
phon.  The  Macedonian  phalanx,  however,  altered
its  form  with  great  difficulty.  If  an  attack  on  the
flanks  or  rear  was  apprehended,  a  separate  front
was  formed  in  that  direction,  if  possible  before  the
commencement  of  the  fight  Such  a  double  pha-
lanx, with  two  fronts  in  opposite  directions,  was
called  (pd\ay^  a/x(pi(rToixos.  To  guard  against
being  taken,  in  flank,  the  line  was  bent  round,
forming  what  was  called  the  iir-iKd/jLTrios  rd^is.
The  cavalry  or  light  troops  were  not  unfrequently
employed  for  this  purpose,  or  to  protect  the  rear
(comp.  Arrian,  Anab,  ii.  9,  iii.  12  ;  Polyb.  xii.
21).  Respecting  the  relative  advantages  and  dis-
advantages of  the  Roman  legion  and  the  phalanx,
there  is  an  instructive  passage  in  Polybius  (xviii.
12,  and  comp.  xii.  19,  &c).  The  phalanx,  of
course,  became  all  but  useless,  if  its  ranks  were
broken.  It  required,  therefore,  level  and  open
ground,  so  that  its  operations  were  restricted  to
very  narrow  limits  ;  and  being  incapable  of  rapid
movement,  it  became  almost  helpless  in  the  face  of
an  active  enemy,  unless  accompanied  by  a  suffi-
cient number  of  cavalry  and  light  troops.

The  light  armed  troops  Avcre  arranged  in  files
(\6xoi)  eight  deep.  Fom-  lochi  fonned  a  (TvaTacrii^
and  then  larger  divisions  were  successively  formed,
each  being  the  double  of  the  one  below  it  ;  the
largest  (called  €ViTa7/xa),  consisting  of  8192  men.
The  cavalry  (according  to  Aelianus),  were  ar-
ranged in  an  analogous  manner,  the  lowest  division
or  squadron  (i'A??),  containing  64  men,  and  the
successive  larger  divisions  being  each  the  double
of  that  below  it  ;  the  highest  {iiriTayfxa)  contain-
ing 4096.

Both  Philip  and  Alexander  attached  great  im-
portance to  the  cavalry,  which,  in  their  armies,
consisted  partly  of  Macedonians,  and  partly  of
Thessalians.  The  Macedonian  horsemen  were  the
flower  of  the  youiig  nobles.  They  amounted  to
about  1 200  in  number,  forming  eight  squadrons,
and,  under  the  name  eraipoi,  fonned  a  sort  of
body-guard  for  the  king.  The  Thessalian  cavalry
consisted  chiefly  of  the  elite  of  the  wealthier  class
of  the  Thessalians,  but  included  also  a  number  of
Grecian  j'outh  from  other  states.  There  was  also
a  guard  of  foot-soldiers  {vTTa(nn(nai\  whom  we
find  greatly  distinguishing  themselves  in  the  cam-
paigns of  Alexander.  They  seem  to  be  identical
with  the  TTe^eVatpoi,  of  whom  Ave  find  mention.
They  amounted  to  about  3000  men,  arranged  in
six  battalions  (Tdi|ets),  There  Avas  also  a  troop
called  ArgjTaspids,  from  the  silver  Avith  Avhich
their  shields  were  ornamented,  [Argvraspides,]
They  seem  to  have  been  a  species  of  peltiustae.
Alexander  also  organised  a  kind  of  troops  called
Sifj.dxaif   who  were  something  intermediate   be-


EXERCITUS.

tweon  cavalry  and  infantry,  being  designed  to  fight
on  horseback  or  on  foot,  as  circumstances  required.

It  is  in  the  time  of  Alexander  the  Great,  that
we  first  meet  with  artillery  in  the  train  of  a
Grecian  army.  His  balistae  and  catapeltae  were
frequently  employed  with  great  effect,  as,  for  in-
stance, at  the  passage  of  the  Jaxartes  (Arrian.  iv.
4.  §  7).  After  the  invasion  of  Asia  also  ele-
phants began  to  be  employed  in  connection  with
Grecian  armies.  (Miiller,  Dorians,  book  iii.  c.  12  ;
W&chsmu.ih.^Hellenische  AUerthumskunde,  book  vi. ;
K.  F,  Hermann,  Griech.  Staatsalterth.  §  29,  30,
152  ;  Haase  in  Ersch  and  Gruber's  Encyclop.
art.  Phalanx;  Heeren's  Reflections^  «&;c.  Ancient
Greece^  c.  xii. ;  Bockh's  Public  Economy  of  Athens^
c.  xxi.  xxii.)  [C.  P.  M.]

2.  Roman.  In  the  present  article  we  shall
attempt  to  present  a  view  of  the  constitution  of  a
Roman  army  at  several  remarkable  epochs,  and  to
point  out  in  what  respect  the  usages  of  one  age
differed  most  conspicuously  from  those  of  another,
abstaining  most  carefully  from  those  general  state-
ments which  in  many  works  upon  antiquities  are
enunciated  broadly,  without  reference  to  any  spe-
cified time,  as  if  they  were  applicable  alike  to  the
reign  of  Tarquin  and  to  the  reign  of  Valentinian,
including  the  whole  intermediate  space  within
their  wide  sweep.

Our  authorities  will  enable  us  to  fonn  a  con-
ception, more  or  less  complete,  of  the  organisation
of  a  Roman  army  at  five  periods  :  —

1.  At  the  establishment  of  the  comitia  centuriata
by  Servius.

2.  About  a  century  and  a  half  after  the  expul-
sion of  the  kings.

3.  During  the  wars  of  the  yoimger  Scipio,  when
the  discipline  of  the  troops  was,  perhaps,  more
perfect  than  at  any  previous  or  subsequent  era  ;  and
here,  fortunately,  our  information  is  most  complete.

4.  In  the  times  of  Marius,  Sulla,  and  Julius
Caesar.

5.  A  hundred  and  fifty  years  later,  when  the
empire  had  reached  its  culminating  point  under
Trajan  and  Hadrian.

Beyond  this,  we  shall  not  seek  to  advance.
After  the  death  of  M.  Aurelius,  we  discern  nought
save  disorder,  decay,  and  disgrace  ;  while  an  in-
quiry into  the  complicated  arrangements  introduced
Avhen  every  department  in  the  state  was  remodel-
led by  Diocletian  and  Constantine,  Avould  de-
mand lengthened  and  tedious  investigation,  and
would  prove  of  little  or  no  service  to  the  classical
student.

Authorities.  The  number  of  ancient  writers
now  extant,  who  treat  professedly  of  the  military
affairs  of  the  Romans,  is  not  great,  and  their  works
are,  with  one  or  two  exceptions,  of  little  value.
Incomparably  the  most  important  is  Polyhius,
wlio  in  a  fragment  preserved  from  his  sixth  book,
])resents  us  with  a  sketch  of  a  Roman  army  at
the  time  when  its  character  stood  highest,  and  its
discipline  was  most  perfect.  This,  so  far  as  it
reaches,  yields  the  best  information  we  could  desire.
The  tract  irept  (npaTi]yiKwv  rd^ecou  ''E.KK'qvLKoov
of  Aelianus  who  flourished  imder  Nerva,  belongs,
as  the  title  implies,  to  Greek  tactics,  but  con-
tains also  a  brief,  imperfect,  and  indistinct  ac-
count of  a  Roman  army.  The  rexvri  raKTiK-fj  of
1  Arrian,  governor  of  Cappadocia  under  Hadrian,
I  is  occupied  in  a  great  measure  with  the  raa-
j  noeu\Tes  of  the  phalanx,  to  which  is  subjoined  a


EXERCITUS.


489


minute  practical  exposition  of  the  preliminary
exercises  by  which  tlie  Roman  cavalry  were
trained  ;  to  Arrian,  likewise,  we  are  indebted  for
a  very  interesting  fragment  entitled  eKra^is  icar*
'AXaucuv,  supposed  to  be  a  portion  of  his  lost
histoiy,  which  bore  the  name  'AAaviKci,  consist-
ing of  instructions  for  the  order  of  march  to  be
adopted  by  the  force  despatched  against  the  Scy-
thians, and  for  the  precautions  to  be  observed  in
marshalling  the  line  of  battle.  This  piece  taken
in  connection  with  the  essay  of  Hyginus,  of  which
we  have  spoken  under  Castra,  will  assist  us
materially  when  we  seek  to  form  a  distinct  idea
of  the  constitution  of  a  Roman  army  in  the  early
part  of  the  second  century.  It  remains  for  us  to
notice  the  Latin  "  Scriptores  de  Re  Militari,"
Frontinus,  Modestus,  and  Vegetitis.  The  Strate-
gematica  of  the  first,  who  lived  under  Vespasian,
is  merely  a  collection  of  anecdotes  compiled  with-
out much  care  or  nice  discrimination,  and  presents
very  little  that  is  available  for  our  present  purpose  ;
the  Libellus  de  VocabuUs  Rei  Militaris  of  the
second,  addressed  to  the  emperor  Tacitus,  affords  a
considerable  number  of  technical  terms,  but  is  in
such  a  confused  state,  and  so  loaded  with  interpola-
tions, that  we  can  employ  it  with  little  confidence  ;
the  Rei  Militaris  Instituta  of  the  third,  dedi-
cated to  the  younger  Valentinian,  is  a  formal  treatise
drawn  up  in  an  age  when  the  ancient  discipline  of
Rome  was  no  longer  known,  or  had,  at  least,  fallen
into  desuetude  ;  but  the  materials,  we  are  assured
by  the  author  himself,  were  derived  from  sources
the  most  pure,  such  as  Cato  the  Censor,  Cornelius
Celsus,  and  the  official  regulations  of  the  earlier
emperors.  Misled  by  these  specious  professions,
and  by  the  regularity  displayed  in  the  distribution
of  the  different  sections,  many  scholars  have  been
induced  to  adopt  the  statements  here  embodied
without  hesitation,  without  even  asking  to  what
period  they  applied.  But  when  the  book  is  sub-
jected to  critical  scrutiny,  it  will  be  found  to  be
full  of  inconsistencies  and  contradictions,  to  mix
up  into  one  confused  and  heterogeneous  mass  the
systems  pursued  at  epochs  the  most  remote  from
each  other,  and  to  exhibit  a  state  of  things  which
never  did  and  never  could  have  existed.  Hence,
if  we  are  to  make  any  use  at  all  of  this  farrago,
we  must  proceed  with  the  utmost  caution,  and
ought  to  accept  the  novelties  which  it  offers,  merely
in  illustration  or  confirmation  of  the  testimony  of
others,  without  ever  permitting  them  to  weigh
against  more  trustworthy  witnesses.

But  while  the  number  of  direct  authorities  is
very  limited,  much  knowledge  may  be  obtained
through  a  multitude  of  indirect  channels.  Not
only  do  the  narratives  of  the  historians  of  Roman
affairs  abound  in  details  relating  to  military  opera-
tions, but  there  is  scarcely  a  Latin  writer  upon
any  topic,  whether  in  prose  or  verse,  whose  pages
are  not  filled  with  allusions  to  the  science  of  war.
The  writings  of  the  jurists  also,  inscriptions,
medals,  and  monuments  of  art  communicate  much
that  is  curious  and  important ;  but  even  after  we
have  brought  together  and  classified  all  these
scattered  notices,  we  shall  have  to  regret  that
there  are  many  things  left  in  total  darkness,  and
many  upon  which  the  assertions  of  different  wri-
ters cannot  by  any  dexterity  be  reconciled  in  a
satisfactory  manner.  We  shall  endeavour  to  ex-
pound in  each  case  those  views  which  are  sup-
,  ported  by  the  greatest  amount  of  credible  evidence,


490


EXERCITUS.


without  attempting  to  discuss  the  various  points
upon  which  controversies  have  arisen.

Among  the  writings  of  modern  scholars  Ave
ought  to  notice  specially  the  dialogues  "  De  Mi-
litia Romana"  by  the  learned  and  indefatigable
Lipsius,  in  which  the  text  of  Polybius  (vi.  19,
42),  and  a  chapter  in  Livy  (viii.  8)  serve  as  a
foundation  for  a  great  superstructure  of  illustration
and  supplementar}'-  matter ;  nor  must  we  forget  the
"  Poliorcetica  "  of  the  same  author,  which  may  be
regarded  as  a  continuation  of  the  preceding.  The
posthumous  dissertation  of  Salmasius  "  De  Re  mi-
litari  Romanorum,"  which  displays  the  deep  read-
ing, mixed  up  Avith  not  a  little  of  the  rashness,  of
that  celebrated  critic,  is  well  worthy  of  perusal,
and  will  be  found  in  the  "  Coi-pus  Antiquitatum
Romanarum  "  of  Graevius,  vol.  x.  p.  1284.  The
same  volume  includes  the  admirable  commentary
of  Schelius  on  PlA'ginus,  his  notes  on  Polybius,
together  with  essays  on  various  topics  connected
with  Roman  warfare  by  Boederus,  Rohertellus,
Erydus  Puteanus^  M.A.  Causeus  (De  la  Chausse),
Petrus  Ramus,  &c.  A  most  elaborate  series  of
papers  by  M.  Le  Beau  is  printed  in  the  twenty-
fifth  and  several  succeeding  volumes  of  the  "  Me-
moires  de  I'Academie  des  Inscriptions  et  Belles
Lettres  ;"  and  although  we  are  far  from  acquiescing
in  all  the  conclusions  at  which  he  anives,  it  is  im-
possible to  deny  that  in  so  far  as  facts  are  con-
cerned, he  has  almost  exhausted  every  topic  on
which  he  has  entered,  and  we  cannot  but  lament
that  he  should  not  have  completed  the  design
which  he  originally  sketched  out.  We  may
consult  with  profit  Folarcfs  "  Commentaire,"  at-
tached to  the  French  translation  of  Polybius,  by
the  Benedictine  Vincent  Thuillier,  6  tom.  4to,
Amst.  1729  ;  Guischard,  "  Memoires  Militaires
sur  les  Grecs  et  les  Remains,"  2  tom.  4to,  La
Haye,  1757,  and  "  Memoires  Critiques  et  His-
toriques  sur  Plusieurs  Ponts  et  Antiquites  Mili-
taires," 4  tom.  4to,  Berlin  et  Paris,  1775  ;
Vaudoncourt,  "  Histoire  des  Campagnes  d'Han-
nibal  en  Italie,"  3  tom.  4to,  Paris,  1812  ;  Pot/,
"  Military  Antiquities  of  the  Romans  in  Britain,"
fol.  Lond.  1793  ;  Nasi,  "  Romischo  Kriegsalter-
thumer,"  8vo,  Halle,  1782  ;  Lohr,  "  Ueber  die
Tactik  und  das  Kriegswesen  der  Griechen  und
Romer,"  8vo.  Kempt.  1825  ;  Lehner,  "  De  Re-
publica  Romana  sive  ex  Polybii  Megalop.  sexta
Historia  Excerpta,"  8vo.  Salzb.  1823.

General  Remarks  on  tJie  Legion.

The  name  Legio  is  coeval  with  the  foundation
of  Rome,  and  always  denoted  a  body  of  troops,
which,  although  subdivided  into  several  smaller
bodies,  was  regarded  as  forming  an  organised
whole.  It  cannot  be  held  to  have  been  equivalent
to  what  we  call  a  regiment,  inasmuch  as  it  con-
tained troops  of  all  arms,  infantry,  cavalry,  and,
when  military  engines  were  extensively  employed,
artillery  also ;  it  might  thus,  so  far,  be  regarded  as
a  complete  army,  but  on  the  other  hand  the  num-
ber of  soldiers  in  a  legion  was  fixed  within  certain
limits,  never  much  exceeding  6000,  and  hence
Avhen  war  was  carried  on  upon  a  large  scale,  a
single  army,  under  the  command  of  one  general,
frequently  contained  two,  three,  or  more  legions,
besides  a  large  number  of  auxiliaries  of  A'arious
denominations.  In  like  manner  the  legion  being
complete  within  itself,  and  not  directly  or  neces-
sarily connected  with  any  other  corps,  cannot  be


EXERCITUS.

translated  by  hattalion,  division,  detachment,  nor
any  other  term  in  ordinary  use  among  modem
tacticians.  Ancient  etymologists  agree  in  deriving
legio  from  legere  to  choose  (Varr.  L.  L.  v.  §  87,
vi.  §  QQ.  ed.  Muller  ;  Plut.  Rmn.  13 ;  Non.  Mar-
cell,  i.  s.  V.  legionum  ;  Modest,  de  Vocahl.  R.  M.  ;
Isidor.  Orig.  ix.  3.  §  46),  and  the  name  endured
as  long  as  the  thing  itself.  Le  Beau  and  others
are  mistaken  when  they  assert  that  in  Tacitus,  and
the  writers  who  followed  him,  the  word  numeri  is
frequently  substituted  for  legio,  for  it  will  be  seen
from  the  passages  to  which  we  give  references
below,  that  numeri  is  used  to  denote  either  the
different  corps  of  which  a  legion  Avas  composed,  or
a  corps  generally,  without  any  allusion  to  the
legion  (Tac.  Hist.  i.  6,  87.  Agric.  18,  comp.  Ann.
ii.  80,  Hist.  ii.  69  ;  Plin.  Ep.  iii.  8,  x.  38  ;  Vopisc.
Prob.  14  ;  Ulpian.  in  Dig.  3.  tit.  3.  s.  8.  §  2  f  29.
tit.  1.  s.  43,  &c.  &c.  See  below  the  remarks  on
the  Cohors).

In  the  Scriptures  of  the  Ncav  Testament,  in
Plutarch  (e.g.  Rom.  13,  20),  and  elsewhere,  Ave
meet  Avith  the  Grecized  word  Xeyeeav,  but  the
Greek  writers  upon  Roman  affairs  for  the  most
part  employ  some  tenn  borroAved  from  their  own
literature  as  an  equivalent  ;  and  since  each  con-
sidered himself  at  liberty  to  select  that  Avhich  he
deemed  most  appropriate  or  which  suggested  itself
at  the  moment,  Avithout  reference  to  the  practice
of  those  Avho  had  gone  before  him,  and  Avithout
endeavouring  to  preserve  uniformity  even  Avithin
the  bounds  of  his  OAvn  writings,  we  not  only  find  a
considerable  variety  of  Avords  used  indiscriminately
as  representatives  of  Legio,  but  we  find  the  same
author  using  different  Avords  in  different  passages,
and,  what  is  still  more  perplexing,  the  same  word
Avhich  is  used  by  one  author  for  the  legion  as  a
whole  is  used  by  others  to  indicate  some  one  or
other  of  the  subdivisions.  The  terms  Avhich  we
meet  with  most  commonly  are,  aTpaToiv^hov,  <pd-
Aa7|,  Tayfia,  reXos,  less  frequently  aTpdrcv/xa  and
Ti7xos.  Polybius  in  those  chapters  which  arc  de-
A'Oted  exclusively  to  a  description  of  the  legion
uniformly  designates  it  by  (rTparSireSov,  which  he
sometimes  applies  to  an  army  in  general  (e.  g.  ii.
73,  86),  Avhile  by  others  it  is  usually  employed
to  denote  a  camp  (castra).  Again  Polybius  gives
a  choice  of  three  names  for  the  maniple,  (njfiaia,
(TTTcipa,  and  Tayixa,  but  of  these  the  first  is  for  the
most  part  introduced  by  others  as  the  translation  of
the  Latin  veocillum,  the  second  almost  imifomily  as
equivalent  to  cohors,  and  the  third,  although  of  Avide  |
acceptation,  is  constantly  the  representative  oi  legio.
Dionysius  uses  sometimes,  especially  in  the  earlier!
books  of  his  history,  <pd\ay^  (e.  g.  v.  Q7),  some-l
times  rdyfxara  (e.g.  A'i.  45,  ix.  10,  13),  or  iTTpct-]
TicoTiKo,  Tay/xara  (vi,  42),  and  his  example  is  fol-
lowed by  Josephus  (B.  J.  iii.  5.  §  5  ;  6.  §  2)  ;
Appian  adopts  t4\os  (e.g.  Annib.  8,  B.  C.  ii.  7<
79,  96,  iii.  45,  83,  92,  iv.  115)  ;  Plutarch  Avithin
the  compass  of  a  single  sentence  {M.  Anton.  18)
has  both  "rdyixaTa  and  reXt]  ■  Dion  Cassius,  when
speaking  of  the  legions  in  contradistinction  to  the
household  troops,  calls  them  in  one  passage  ri
TroXiTiKo.  <Trpar6-K^^a  (xxxviii.  47),  in  another
Ti'iXfl  "T^v  iK  KaraXdyov  (TrpaT^vojxivaiv  (1a-.  24),
and  where  no  particular  emphasis  is  required,  we
find  (TTpdrevfia  (to  Sckutov  (rrpdrevfia,  xxxviii.
47,  xl.  65),  relxos  (rod  rerdpTov  rod  ^kvBikov
T^xovs,  Ixxix.  7),  (TTparS-Ki^ov  (xxxviii.  AQ,  xl.
Gb^  66),  and  (rrpaTdirQ^ov  e/c  Ka7(xX6yov  (xl.  27


EXERCITUS.

comp.  xl.  18),  whence  the  legionaries  are  styled
oi  €K  Tov  KaTa\6yov  (TTpar^vojxevoi  (Iv.  24,  lii.  22,
lix.  2),  or  simply  KaTa\ey6ix€Voi  (liv.  25).

Neither  Livy  nor  Dionysius  notice  the  first  es-
tablishment of  the  legion,  but  they  both  take  for
granted  that  it  existed  from  the  very  foundation  of
the  city,  while  Varro  (L.L.  v,  §  89)  and  Plutarch
(Rom.  13)  expressly  ascribe  the  institution  to
Romulus.  The  latter  speaks  of  the  band  led  by
Romulus  against  Amnlius  as  being  divided  into
centuries  (Svvafiiv  o'uA.AeAoxifr/xeVrjj'  fls  e/caro-
(TTc^as),  giving  at  the  same  time  the  origin  of  the
term  maniple,  and  the  former  states  that  Romulus,
to  establish  his  legion,  took  1000  men  from  each
tribe.

Constitution  of  the  Legion.  The  legion  for  many
centuries  was  composed  exclusively  of  Roman
citizens.  By  the  ordinances  of  Serv'ius  Tullius
those  alone  who  were  enrolled  in  the  five  classes
were  eligible,  and  one  of  the  greatest  changes  in-
troduced by  Marius  was  the  admission  of  all
orders  of  citizens,  including  the  lowest,  into  the
ranks.  (Sail.  Jug.  8G  ;  Plut.  Mar.  9  ;  Flor.  iii.  1  ;
Gell.  xvi.  10.)  Up  to  the  j'ear  B.  c.  107  no  one
was  permitted  to  serve  among  the  regular  troops  of
the  state  except  those  who  were  regarded  as  pos-
sessing a  strong  personal  interest  in  the  stability  of
the  commonwealth,  but  the  principle  having  been
at  this  period  abandoned,  the  privilege  was  ex-
tended after  the  close  of  the  Social  War  (b.  c.  87)
to  nearly  the  whole  of  the  free  population  of  Italy,
and  by  the  famous  edict  of  Caracalla  (or  perhaps
of  M.  Aurelius),  to  the  whole  Roman  world.  Long
before  this,  however,  the  legions  were  raised  chiefly
in  the  provinces,  and  hence  are  ranked  by  Hyginus
among  the  provincialis  militia  (legioiics  quoniam
sunt  militiae  provincialis  fidelissima).  Even  under
Augustus,  the  youth  of  Latium,  Umbria,  Etruria,
and  the  ancient  colonies,  served  chiefly  in  the
household  troops  (Tac.  Ann.  iv,  5),  who  for  this
reason  are  complimented  by  Otho  as  Italiae  alumni
et  vere  Romana  juventus  (Tac.  Hist.  i.  84).  But
although  the  legions  contained  comparatively  few
native  Italians,  it  does  not  appear  that  the  admis-
sion of  foreigners  not  subjects  was  ever  practised
upon  a  large  scale  until  the  reign  of  the  second
Claudius  (a.  d.  2C8 — 270),  who  incorporated  a
large  body  of  vanquished  Goths,  and  of  Probus
(a.  d.  276—282),  who  distributed  16,000  Germans
among  legionary  and  frontier  battalions  (?mmeris  et
limitaneis  militibus,  Vopisc.  Prob.  14.).  From  this
time  forward  what  had  originally  been  the  leading
characteristic  of  the  legion  was  rapidly  obliterated,
so  that  under  Diocletian,  Constantine,  and  tlieir
successors,  the  best  soldiers  in  the  Roman  armies
were  barbarians.  The  name  Legion  was  still  re-
tained in  the  fifth  century,  since  it  appears  in  an
edict  addressed  by  the  emperors  Arcadius  and
Honorius  to  the  prefect  Romulianus  (Cod.  Justin,
1 2.  tit.  36,  s.  1 3)  and  also  in  the  tract  known  as
the  Notitia  Dignitatum  Imperii  (c,  59).  It  pro-
bably did  not  fall  into  total  disuse  until  the  epoch
of  Justinian's  sway  ;  but  in  the  numerous  ordi-
nances of  that  prince  with  regard  to  military  affairs
nothing  bears  in  any  way  upon  the  constitution  of
the  legion,  nor  does  the  name  occur  in  legal  docu-
ments subsequent  to  the  above-mentioned  edict  of
Arcadius  and  Honorius.

I  There  is  yet  another  circumstance  connected
!  with  the  social  position  of  the  soldier  to  which  it
I  ia  very  necessary  to  advert,  if  we  desire  to  form  a


EXERCITaS.


491


distinct  idea  of  the  changes  gradually  introduced
into  the  Roman  military  system.  The  Roman
armies  for  a  long  period  consisted  entirely  of  what
we  might  term  militia.  Every  citizen  was,  to  a
certain  extent,  trained  to  arms  during  a  fixed
period  of  his  life  ;  he  was,  at  all  times,  liable  to
be  called  upon  to  serve ;  but  the  legion  in  which
he  was  enrolled  was  disbanded  as  soon  as  the
special  service  for  which  it  had  been  levied,  was
performed  ;  and  although  these  calls  were  frequent
in  the  early  ages  of  the  kingdom  and  the  common-
wealth, when  the  enemies  of  the  republic  were
almost  at  the  gates,  yet  a  few  months,  or  more
frequently,  a  few  weeks  or  even  days,  sufficed  to
decide  the  fortunes  of  the  campaign.  The  Roman
annalists  assure  us  that  a  Roman  army  had  never
wintered  in  the  field,  until  more  than  three  cen-
turies after  the  foundation  of  the  city,  when  the
blockade  of  Veil  required  the  constant  presence  of
the  besiegers.  As  the  scene  of  action  became
by  degrees  farther  removed  from  Latium,  when
southern  Italy  and  Sicily  were  now  the  seat  of
war  —  when  the  existence  of  Rome  was  menaced
by  the  Carthaginian  invasion  —  when  her  armies
were  opposed  to  such  leaders  as  Pyrrhus,  Hamilcar,
and  Hannibal  —  it  was,  of  course,  impossible  to
leave  the  foe  for  a  moment  unwatched  ;  and  the
exigencies  of  the  state  rendered  it  necessary  that
the'  same  legions  and  the  same  soldiers  should
remain  in  activity  for  several  years  in  succession.
This  protracted  service  became  inevitable  as  the
dominion  of  Rome  extended  over  Greece  and  Asia,
when  the  distances  rendered  frequent  relief  im-
practicable ;  but  down  to  the  very  termination  of
the  republic,  the  ancient  principle  was  recognised,
that  when  a  campaign  was  concluded,  the  soldier
was  entitled  to  return  home  and  to  resume  the
occupation  of  a  peaceful  citizen.  It  was  a  con-
viction that  their  leader  had  broken  faith  with
them  by  commencing  a  new  war  against  Tigranes,
after  the  defeat  of  Mithridates,  their  proper  and
legitimate  opponent,  which  induced  the  troops  of
Lucullus  to  mutiny,  and  compelled  their  leader  to
abandon  his  Armenian  conquests.  Hence,  for  up-
wards of  seven  centimes,  there  was  no  such  thing
as  the  military  profession,  and  no  man  considered
himself  as  a  soldier  in  contradistinction  to  other
callings.  Every  individual  knew  that  he  was
bound  as  a  member  of  the  body  politic  to  perforin
certain  duties  ;  but  these  duties  were  performed
without  distinction  by  all  —  at  least  by  all  whose
stake  in  the  prosperity  of  their  country  was  con-
sidered sufficient  to  insure  their  zeal  in  defending
it  ;  and  each  man,  when  his  share  of  this  obligation
was  discharged,  returned  to  take  his  place  in
society,  and  to  pursue  his  ordinary  avocations.
The  admission  of  the  Capite  Censi  into  the  ranks,
persons  who,  probably,  found  their  condition  as
soldiers  much  superior  to  their  position  as  civilians,
and  who  could  now  cherish  hopes  of  amassing
wealth  by  plunder,  or  of  rising  to  honour  as  officers,
tended  to  create  a  numerous  class  disposed  to  de-
vote themselves  permanently  to  a  military  life  as
the  only  source  from  whence  they  could  secure
comfort  and  distinction.  The  long-continued
operations  of  Caesar  in  Gaul,  and  the  necessity
imposed  upon  Pompeius  of  keeping  up  a  large
force  as  a  check  on  his  dreaded  rival,  contributed
strongly  to  nourish  this  feeling,  which  was,  at
length,  fully  developed  and  confirmed  by  the  civil
broils  which  lasted  for  twenty  years,  and  by  the


4.92


EXERCITUS.


practice  first  introduced  upon  a  large  scale,  after
the  Mithridatic  wars,  of  granting  pensions  for  long
service  in  the  shape  of  donations  of  land.  Hence,
when  Augustus  in  compliance,  as  we  are  told  by
Dion  Cassius  (Hi,  27),  with  the  advice  of  Maecenas,
detennined  to  provide  for  the  security  of  the
distant  provinces,  and  for  tranquil  submission  at
home  by  the  establishment  of  a  powerful  standing
anny,  he  found  the  public  mind  in  a  great  degree
prepared  for  such  a  measure,  and  the  distinction
between  soldier  and  civilian  imknown,  or  at  least
not  recognised  before,  became  from  this  time  for-
Avard  as  broadly  marked  as  in  the  most  pure  mili-
tary despotisms  of  ancient  or  modem  times.  In
this  place,  we  are  required  simply  to  call  attention
to  the  fact  —  it  belongs  to  the  philosophic  historian
to  trace  the  results.

The  numbering  of  the  legions  and  timr  titles.
The  legions  were  originally  numbered  according  to
the  order  in  which  they  were  raised.  Thus  in  the
early  part  of  the  second  Punic  war,  we  hear  of  the
fourth  legion  (jh  Tiraprov  crpaTdir^hov)^  being
hard  pressed  by  the  Boii  (Polyb.  iii.  40)  ;  the
tenth  legion  plays  a  conspicuous  part  in  the  history
of  Caesar  as  his  favourite  corps  (Dion  Cass.
xxxviii.  1 7),  and  the  cabinets  of  numismatologists
present  us  with  an  assemblage  of  denarii  struck  by
M.  Antonius  in  honour  of  the  legions  which  he
commanded,  exhibiting  a  regular  series  of  numbers
from  1  up  to  30,  with  only  four  blanks  (25,  27,
28,  2d).  As  the  legions  became  permanent,  the
same   numbers  remained   attached  to    the   same


EXERCITUS.

corps,  whicli  were  moreover  distinguished  by  varioug
epithets  of  which  we  have  early  examples  in  the
Legio  Martla  (Ck.  Philip,  v.  2  ;  Veil.  Pat.  ii.  61  ;
Dion  Cass.  xlv.  13  ;  Appian,  B.  C.  iv.  115),  and  the
Legio  Quintet  Alauda.     [Alauda.]

Dion  Cassius,  who  flourished  under  Alexander
Sever  us,  tells  us  (Iv.  23)  that  the  military  estab-
lishment of  Augustus  consisted  of  twenty-three  or
twenty-five  legions  (we  know  from  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  5,
that  twenty-five  was  the  real  number),  of  which
nineteen  still  existed  when  he  wrote,  the  rest  hav-
ing been  destroyed,  dispersed,  or  incorporated  by
Augustus  or  his  successors  in  other  legions.  He
gives  the  names  of  nineteen,  and  the  localities
where  they  were  stationed  in  his  own  day,  adding
the  designations  of  those  which  had  been  raised  by
subsequent  emperors.  This  list  h.is  been  consider-
ably enlarged  from  inscriptions  and  other  autho-
rities, which  supply  also  several  additional  titles.
We  give  the  catalogue  as  it  stands  in  the  pages  of
the  historian,  and  refer  those  who  desire  more
complete  inforaiation  to  the  collections  of  Roman
Inscriptions  by  Gruter  and  Orelli,  to  the  fifth  book
of  the  Comment.  Reip.  Rom.  of  Wolfgang  Lazius,
fol.  Francf.  1598,  and  to  Eckhel,  ZJorfnwa  A^m?«?«.
Vet.  vol.  vi.  p.  50,  vol.  viii.  p.  488.  In  the  follow-
ing table  an  asterisk  is  subjoined  to  the  nineteen
legions  of  Augustus,  to  the  remainder  the  name  of
the  prince  by  whom  they  were  first  levied  ;  the
epithets  included  within  brackets  are  not  given
by  Dion,  but  have  been  derived  from  various
sources :  —


List  of  the  Legions  in  the  Reign  of  Alexander  Sever  us.


1     Number  of  the
1            Legion.

Title.

By  whom  raised.

Where  stationed  in  the  age  of
Dion  Cassius.

Prima

Italica

Nero

Hiberna  in  Mysia  Inferiore.

Adjutrix

Galba

Pannonia  Inferior.


Minervia

Domitianus

Germania  Inferior.

.

Parthica

Sept.  Severus

Mesopotamia.

Secunda

Augusta

*

Hiberna  in  Britannia  Superiore.

Adjutrix

Vespasianus

Pannonia  Inferior.


^gyptia  Trajana

Trajanus

(Egypt?)

Italica

Media  (Parthica)

M.  Antoninus
Sept.  Severas

Noricum.
Italia.

Tertia

Augusta

*

Numidia.

1

Gallica

*

Phoenicia.

Cyrenaica

*

Arabia.

Italica

M.  Antoninus

Rhaetia.

Parthica

Sept.  Severus

Mesopotamia.

Quarta

Scythica

*

Syria


Flavia  (Felix)

Vespasianus

Syria.

Quinta

Macedonica

*

Dacia.

Sexta

Victrix

*

Britannia  Inferior.

Ferrata

♦

Judaea.

Septima

Claudia

«

Mysia  Superior.


(Gemina)

Galba

Hispania.                                             ,

Octava

Augusta

*

Germania  Superior.

Decima

Gemina

*

Pannonia  Superior.

(Fretensis)

«

Judaea,

Undecima

Claudia

♦

Mysia  Inferior.

Duodecima

Fulrainatrix

«

Cappadocia,

Decima  Tertia

Gemina

*

Dacia.

Decima  Quarta

Gemina

♦

Pannonia  Superior.

Decima  Quinta

Apollinaris

•

Cappadocia.

Vigesima

Valeria  Victrix

*

Britannia  Superior.

*

Hiberna  in  (}enaaiiia.
(Germania  ?).

Trigesima

Ulpia  (Victrix)

Trajanus

EXERCITUS.

On  this  wc  may  remark  —

1.  That  several  legions  bore  the  same  numhor:
hus  there  were  four  Firsts,  five  Seconds,  and  five
nirds.

2.  The  titles  were  derived  from  various  circum-
;tances  ;  some  indicated  the  deity  imder  whose
)atronage  the  legions  were  placed,  such  as  Minervia
md  Apollinaris  ;  some  the  country  in  which  they
lad  been  levied  or  recruited,  as  Italica,  Mace-
lonica,  Gallica ;  or  the  scene  of  their  most  bril-
iant  achievements,  as  Parthica,  Scythica  ;  some  the
imperor  under  whom  they  had  served  or  by  whom
hey  had  been  created,  as  Augusta,  Flavia,  U/pia  ;
ome  a  special  service,  as  Claudiana  Pia  Felix,
ipplied  to  the  7th  and  11th,  which  had  remained
rue  to  their  allegiance  during  the  rebellion  of
^amillus,  praefect  of  Dalmatia,  in  the  reign  of
.'huidius  (Dion  Cass.  Ix.  15)  ;  some,  the  fact  that
nother  legion  had  been  incorporated  with  them  ;
i  least,  this  is  the  explanation  given  by  Dion
^assius  of  the  epithet  Gemina  {AiSv/xa),  and  there
eems  little  doubt  that  he  is  correct.  (See  Eckhel,
ol.  iv.  p.  47'2.)

3.  The  same  legions  appear  in  certain  cases  to
lave  been  quartered  in  the  same  districts  for  cen-
iiries.  Thus  the  Secmida  Augusta,  the  Seocta  Vic-
nr,  and  the  Viccsima  Victrix,  which  were  stationed
11  Britain  when  Dion  drew  up  his  statement,  were
here  in  the  age  of  the  Antonines,  as  we  learn  from
*tolcmy  (ii.  31),  and  the  first  of  them  as  early  as
he  reign  of  Claudius.     (Tac.  Hist.  iii.  22,  24.)

4.  The  six  legions  of  Augustus  which  had  dis-
ppeared  when  Dion  wrote,  were  probably  the  fol-
jwing,  whose  existence  in  the  early  years  of  the
mpire  can  be  demonstrated:  Prima  Germanica ;
luarta  ATacedonica ;  Quinta  Alauda ;  Nona  His-
una ;  Decima  Sexta  Gallica ;  Vigesima  Prima
iapax;  besides  these,  it  would  seem  that  there
/as  a  second  fifteenth  and  a  twenty-second,  both
amed  Primigenia,  and  one  of  these  ought,  perhaps,
a  be  substituted  for  the  second  twentieth  in  the
bove  table,  since  the  words  of  Dion  with  regard  to
lie  latter  are  very  obscure  and  apparently  corrupt.

5.  We  find  notices  also  of. a  Prima  Macriatia
Aberatria:  raised  in  Africa,  after  the  death  of  Nero,
ly  Clodius  Macer  ;  of  a  Decima  Sexta  Flavia  Firma
aised  by  Vespasian  ;  and  of  a  Vigesima  Secujida
')eiotariana,  apparently  originally  a  foreign  corps,
aised  by  Deiotarus,  which,  eventually,  like  the
ilamla  of  Caesar,  was  admitted  to  the  name  and
rivileges  of  a  Roman  legion.

6.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  numbers  XVII.,
CVIIL,  XIX.  are  altogether  wanthig  in  the  above
ists.  We  know  that  the  XVIII.  and  XIX.  were
wo  of  the  legions  commanded  by  Varus,  and
lence  it  is  probable  that  the  XVII.  was  the  third
a  that  ill-fated  host.

7.  The  total  number  of  legions  under  Augustus
ras  twenty-five,  under  Alexander  Severus  thirty-
wo,  but  during  the  civil  wars  the  number  was  far
jTeater.  Thus,  when  the  second  triumvirate  was
prmed  the  forces  of  the  confederates  Avere  calcu-
lited  at  forty-three  legions,  which,  after  the  battle
:f  Philippi,  had  dwindled  down  to  twenty-eight
jAppian,  B.  C.  v.  6)  ;  but  a  few  years  afterwards,
|/hen  war  between  Octavianus  and  M.  Antonius
l-as  imminent,  the  former  alone  had  upwards  of
j)rty  legions,  and  his  adversaries  nearly  the  same.
lAppian,  B.  C.  v.  .53.)  In  order  that  we  may  be
ble  to  form  some  idea  of  the  magnitude  of  these
nd  other  amiies,  we  must  next  consider


EXERCITUS.


493


T/ie  number  of  fool  soldiers  in  a  Roman  legion. —
Although  we  can  determine  with  tolerable  certainty
the  number  of  soldiers  who,  at  different  periods,
were  contained  in  a  legion,  we  must  bear  in  mind
that  at  no  epoch  does  this  number  appear  to  have
been  absolutely  fixed,  but  to  have  varied  within  mo-
derate limits,  especially  when  troops  were  required
for  some  special  or  extraordinary  service.  The
permanent  changes  may  be  referred  to  four  epochs.

1.  Under  the  Kings.  —  Varro  {L.  L.  v.  §  89)  and
Plutarch  {Rom..  13),  both  of  whom  describe  the
first  establishment  of  the  legion,  agree  that  under
Romulus  it  contained  3000  foot  soldiers.  The
words  of  Plutarch  indeed,  in  a  subsequent  passage
{Rom..  20),  would,  at  first  sight,  appear  to  imply
that  after  the  junction  with  the  Sabhies  the  num-
ber was  raised  to  6000  ;  but  he  must  be  understood
to  mean  two  legions,  one  from  each  nation.  It  is
highly  probable  that  some  change  may  have  been
introduced  by  Servius  Tullius,  but,  in  so  far  as
numbers  are  concerned,  we  have  no  evidence.

2.  From  the  expulsion  of  the  Kings  u?itil  the  seco?id
yoar  of  the  second  Punic  War.  —  The  regular  num-
ber during  this  space  of  time  may  be  fixed  at  4000
or  4200  infantr}'.  According  to  Dionysius  (vi.  42)
M.  Valerius,  the  brother  of  Publicola,  raised  two
legions  (b.  c.  492),  each  consisting  of  4000,  and
Livy,  in  the  first  passage,  where  he  specifies  the
numbers  in  the  legions  (vi.  22,  b.  c.  378),  reckons
them  at  4000,  and  a  few  years  afterwards  (vii.  25,
B.  c.  346)  he  tells  us  that  legions  were  raised
each  containing  4200  foot  soldiers,  and  300  horse.
The  legion  which  possessed  itself  of  Rhegium
(b.  c.  281 — 271)  is  described  (Li v.  xxviii.  28)  as
having  consisted  of  4000,  and  we  find  the  same
number  in  the  first  year  of  the  second  Punic  War
(Liv.  xxi.  17,  B.  c.  21 8).  Polybius,  in  like  manner
(i.  16),  fixes  the  number  at  4000  in  the  second
year  of  the  first  Punic  War  (b.  c.  263),  and  again
in  the  first  year  of  the  second  Punic  War  (iii.  72,
B.  c.  218).  In  the  war  against  Veii,  however,
when  the  Romans  put  forth  all  their  energies,  ac-
cording to  Dionysius  (ix.  13),  an  anny  was  raised
of  20,000  infantry  and  1200  cavalry,  divided  into
four  legions  ;  and,  according  to  Polybius  (ii.  24),
in  the  war  against  the  Gauls,  which  preceded  the
second  Punic  War,  the  legions  of  the  consuls  con-
sisted of  5200  infiintry,  while  those  serving  in
Sicily  and  Tarentum  contained  4200  only,  a  proof
that  the  latter  was  the  ordinary  number.

3.  From  the  second  year  of  the  second  Punic
War  until  the  consulship  of  Murius.  —  During
this  interval  the  ordinary  number  may  be  fixed
at  from  5000  to  5200.  Polybius,  indeed,  in
his  treatise  on  Roman  warfare,  lays  it  dovvn
(vi.  20)  that  the  legion  consists  of  4200  foot  sol-
diers, and  in  cases  of  peculiar  danger  of  5000.
However,  the  whole  of  the  space  Ave  are  now  con-
sidering, was  in  fact  a  period  of  extraordinary
exertion,  and  hence  from  the  year  B.C.  216,  we
shall  scarcely  find  the  number  stated  under  5000
(e.  g.  Polyb.  iii.  107,  Liv.  xxii.  36,  xxvi.  28,
xxxix.  38),  and  after  the  commencement  of  the
Ligurian  war  it  seems  to  have  been  raised  to
5200  (Liv.  xl.  1,  18,  36,  xli.  9,  but  in  xli.  21  it  is
again  5000).  The  two  legions  which  passed  over
into  Africa  under  Scipio  (b.  c.  204)  contained  each
6200  (Liv.  xxix.  24),  those  which  served  against
Antiochus  5400  (Liv.  xxxvii.  39),  those  employed
in  the  last  Macedonian  war  6000  (Liv.  xlii.  31,  xliv.
21,  comp.  xliii.  12),  but  these  were  special  cases.


494


EXERCITUS.


4.  From  the  first  consulship  of  Marius  (b.  c.
107)  until  the  extinction  of  the  legion,  —  For  some
centuries  after  Marius  the  numbers  varied  from
5000  to  6200,  generally  approaching  to  the  higher
limit.  Festus  (s.  v.  sex  'millium  et  ducentorum)
expressly  declares  that  C.  Marius  raised  the  num-
bers from  4000  to  6200,  but  his  system  in  this
respect  was  not  immediately  adopted,  for  in  the
army  which  Sulla  led  against  Rome  to  destroy
his  rival,  the  six  complete  legions  (e|  Tdy/xara
TcAeta)  amounted  to  30,000  men  (Plut.  Sull.  .9,
Mar.  35,  but  the  text  in  the  latter  passage  is
doubtful).  In  the  Avar  against  Mithridates  again,
the  30,000  men  of  Lucullus  formed  five  legions
(Appian.  Mithr.  72).  Comparing  Plutarch  {Cic.
S6)  with  Cicero  {ad  Att.  v,  15),  we  conclude
that  the  two  legions  commanded  by  the  latter
in  Cilicia  contained  each  6000.  Caesar  never
specifies  in  his  Commentaries  the  number  of  men
in  his  legions,  but  we  infer  that  the  13th  did
not  contain  more  than  5000  {B.  C.  i.  7),  while
the  two  mentioned  in  the  fifth  book  of  the  Gallic
war  (c.  48,  49)  were  evidently  incomplete.  In
Appian,  M.  Antonius  is  represented  as  calcu-
lating the  amount  of  28  legions  at  upwards  of
170,000  men,  that  is  nearly  6100  to  each  legion,
but  he  seems  to  include  auxiliaries  {tcov  avuracr-
Gofxivoav).  During  the  first  century  the  standard
force  was  certainly  6000,  although  subject  to  con-
stant variations  according  to  circumstances,  and
the  caprice  of  the  reigning  prince.  The  legion  of
Hadrian,  if  we  can  trust  Hyginus,  was  5280,  of
Alexander  Severus  5000  (Lamprid.  Sev.  50),  that
described  by  Vegetius  (ii.  6),  to  whatever  period
it  may  belong,  6100,  and  most  of  the  grammarians
agree  upon  6000  (e.  g.  Serv.  ad  Virg.  Aen.  vii.
274  ;  Isidor.  Orig.  ix.  3.  §  46  ;  Suidas,  s.  v.
A676WJ',  but  Hesychius  gives  6666).  The  Jovi-
ans  and  Herculeans  of  Diocletian  and  Maximian
formed  each  a  corps  of  6000  (Veget.  i.  17),  but
beyond  this  we  have  no  clue  to  guide  us.  If  we
believe  the  Tdy/xara  of  Zosimus  and  the  apL6/xoi
of  Sozonien  to  designate  the  legions  of  Honorius,
they  must  at  that  epoch  have  been  reduced  to  a
number  varying  from  1200  to  700.

Number  of  Cavalry  attached  to  the  Legion.  —
According  to  Varro  and  the  other  authorities  who
describe  the  original  constitution  of  the  legion,  it
consisted  of  3000  infantry  and  300  cavalry.  The
immber  of  foot  soldiers  was,  as  we  have  seen
above,  gradually  increased  until  it  amounted  to
6000,  but  the  number  of  horsemen  remained  al-
ways the  same,  except  upon  particular  occasions.
In  those  passages  of  Livy  and  Dionysius,  where
the  numbers  of  the  legion  are  specified,  we  find
uniformly,  amid  all  the  variations  with  regard  to
the  infantry,  300  horsemen  set  down  as  the  regular
complement  {Justus  equitatus)  of  the  legion.

Polybius,  however,  is  at  variance  with  these  au-
thorities, for  although  in  his  chapter  upon  Roman
warfare  (vi.  20)  he  gives  300  as  the  number,  yet
when  he  is  detailing  (iii.  107)  the  military  pre-
parations of  the  year  B.  c.  216,  after  having  re-
marked that  each  legion  contained  5000  infantry,
he  adds,  that  under  ordinary  circumstances  it  con-
tained 4000  infantry  and  200  cavalry,  but  that
iipon  pressing  emergencies  it  was  increased  to
5000  infantry  and  300  cavalry,  and  this  repre-
sentation is  confirmed  by  his  review  of  the  Roman
forres  at  the  time  of  the  war  against  the  Cisalpine
Gauls  (ii.  24).    It  is  true  that  when  narrating  the


EXERCITUS.

events  of  the  first  Punic  War,  he  in  one  place
(i.  16)  makes  the  legions  to  consist  of  4000  in-
fantry and  300  cavalry  ;  and  in  the  passage  re-
ferred to  above  (ii.  24)  the  consular  legions
amounted  to  5200  infantry  and  300  cavalry,  but
both  of  these  were  pressing  emergencies.  The
statements,  therefore,  of  Polybius  upon  this  point
are  directly  at  variance  with  those  of  Dionysius
and  Livy,  and  it  does  not  seem  possible  to  re-
concile the  discrepancy.  There  are  two  passages
in  the  last-named  historian  which,  might  appear  to
bear  out  the  Greek  (Liv.  xxii.  36,  xlii.  31),  but
in  the  first  he  is  evidently  alluding  to  the  asser-
tions of  Polybius,  and  in  the  second  the  best  edit-
ors agree  in  considering  the  text  corrupt,  and  that  we
should  substitute  duceni  pedites  for  duceni  equites.

When  troops  were  raised  for  a  service  which  re-
quired special  arrangements,  the  number  of  horse-
men was  sometimes  increased  beyond  300,  Thus
the  legion  despatched  to  Sardinia  in  B.  c.  215  (Liv.
xxiii.  34)  consisted  of  5000  infantry  and  400
cavalry,  the  same  number  of  horsemen  Avas  at-
tached to  a  legion  sent  to  Spain  in  b.  c.  1 80  under
Tiberius  Sempronius  (Liv.  xl.  36),  and  in  B.  c.
1  Qd  it  was  resolved  that  the  legions  in  Spain  should
consist  of  5000  infantry  and  330  cavalry  (Liv.
xliii.  1 1 2),  but  in  the  war  against  Perseus  when
the  infantry  of  the  legions  was  raised  to  6000  the
cavalry  retained  the  ancient  number  of  300.  (Liv.
xlii.  31.)  It  must  be  observed  that  these  remarks
with  regard  to  the  cavalry  apply  only  to  the  period
before  Marius  ;  about  that  epoch  the  system  ap-
pears to  have  undergone  a  veiy  material  change,
which  will  be  adverted  to  in  the  proper  place.

We  now  proceed  to  consider  the  organisation  of
the  legion  at  the  five  periods  named  above.

First  Period.  Servius  Tullius. — The  legion  of
Servius  is  so  closely  connected  with  the  Comitia
Centuriata  that  it  has  already  been  discussed  in  a
former  article  [Comitia],  and  it  is  only  necessary
to  repeat  here  that  it  was  a  phalanx  equipped  in
the  Greek  fashion,  the  front  ranks  being  furnished
with  a  complete  suit  of  armour,  their  weapons
being  long  spears,  and  their  chief  defence  the  round
Argolic  shield  {clipeus).

Second  Period.  The  Great  Latin  War.,  B.  C
340.  —  Our  sole  authority  is  a  single  chapter  in
Livy  (viii.  8),  but  it  "  is  equalled  by  few  others  in
compressed  richness  of  information."  and  is  in  it-
self sufficiently  intelligible,  although  tortured  and
elaborately  corrupted  by  Lipsius  and  others,  who
were  determined  to  force  it  into  harmony  with  ihe^
words  of  Polybius,  which  represent,  it  is  tme,  m
accurately  the  state  of  a  Roman  army,  but  of
Roman  army  as  it  existed  two  centuries  afterwan
According  to  the  plain  and  obvious  sense  of  tb
passage  in  question,  the  legion  in  the  year  B.  C'
340  had  thrown  aside  the  arms  and  almost  en-
tirely discarded  the  tactics  of  the  phalanx.  It  was
now  drawn  up  in  three,  or  perhaps  we  ought  to  saj',
in  five  lines.  The  soldiers  of  the  first  line,  called
Hastati.,  consisted  of  youths  in  the  first  bloom  of
manhood  {flqremjuvenum pubesce7dium  in  militiam)
distributed  into  fifteen  companies  or  maniples  {ma-
nipuli).,  a  moderate  space  being  left  between  each.
The  maniple  contained  sixty  privates,  two  centu-
rions {cejituriones),  and  a  standard  bearer  {vexilla-
rius)  ;  two  thirds  were  heavily  armed  and  bore
the  scutum  or  large  oblong  shield,  the  remainder
carried  only  a  spear  {hasta)  and  light  javelins
{gaesa).     The  second  line,  the  Principcs,  was  coin-


the

i


EXERCITUS.

TOsed  of  men  in  the  full  vigour  of  life,  divided  in
ike  manner  into  fifteen  maniples,  all  heavily  armed
'sctUtUi  omnes),  and  distinguished  by  the  splendour
)f  their  equipments  (insignibus  majcime  armis).  The
wo  lines  oit}\Q  Hastaii  andPrincipes  taken  together
imounted  to  thirty  maniples  and  formed  the  Anie-
nlani.  The  third  line,  the  Triarii,  composed  of
ried  veterans  {veteranum  militem  spectatae  virtutis),
vas  also  in  fifteen  divisions,  but  each  of  these  was


EXERCITUS.  49S

triple,  containing  3  manipuli,  1 80  privates,  6  cen-
turions, and  3  vexillarii.  In  these  triple  manipuli
the  veterans  or  triarii  proper  formed  the  front
ranks  ;  immediately  behind  them  stood  the  Rorarii^
inferior  in  age  and  prowess  {minus  roboris  aetate
factisque),  while  the  Accensi  or  supernumeraries,
less  trustworthy  than  either  (minimae  fiduciae
manum),  were  posted  in  the  extreme  rear.  The
battle  array  may  be  thus  represented .


r~

1

1       1     1       1

1       1     1        1

15  Manipuli
of  Hastati.

15  Manipuli
of  Principes.

1      1

L

■■|     1       1     1

1     1       1

Triarii  proper

1

1

1       1     1       1

1        1    1        i

15  triple

Rorarii  .

L  1     1       1 1

Manipuli  of

Triarii.

Accensi    .     .

n

1

1       1     1       1

1       1    1        1

The  fight  was  commenced  by  the  Rorarii,  so
ailed  because  the  light  missiles  which  they
prinkled  among  the  foe  were  like  the  drops  which
re  the  forerunners  of  the  thunder  shower  (Festus
.  V.  Rorarios  milites\  who,  mnning  forward  be-
ween  the  ranks  of  the  antepilani,  acted  as  tirail-
eurs  ;  when  they  were  driven  in  they  returned  to
heir  station  behind  the  triarii,  and  the  battle
)egan  in  earnest  by  the  onset  of  the  hastati  ;  if
hey  were  unable  to  make  any  impression  they  re-
ircd  between  the  ranks  of  the  principes,  who  now
idvanced  and  bore  the  brunt  of  the  combat,  sup-
)orted  by  the  hastati,  who  had  rallied  in  their  rear,
f  the  principes  also  failed  to  make  an  impression,
hey  retired  through  the  openings  between  the
naniples  of  the  triarii,  who  up  to  this  time  had
)een  crouched  on  the  ground  (hence  called  sub-
idiarii),  but  now  arose  to  make  the  last  efitbrt
y hence  the  phrase  rem  ad  triarios  redisse).  No
onger  retaining  the  open  order  of  the  two  first
ines,  they  closed  up  their  ranks  so  as  to  present
m  unbroken  line  of  heavy  armed  veterans  in  front,
kvhile  the  rorarii  and  accensi,  pressing  up  from  be-
lind,  gave  weight  and  consistency  to  the  mass,  —
m  arrangement  bearing  evidence  to  a  lingering  pre-
lilection  for  the  principle  of  the  phalanx,  and  ex-
libiting,  just  as  we  might  expect  at  that  period,
he  Roman  tactics  in  their  transition  state.  It
tnust  be  observed  that  the  Avords  ordo,  manipidus,
I'enciUum,  although  generally  kept  distinct,  are
liroughout  the  chapter  used  as  synonymous  ;  and
n  like  manner,  Polybius,  when  describing  the
naniple,  remarks  (vi.  20),  Kal  .rh  fi\v  fiipos  €Ka-
TTov  (KaXeaau  koL  rdyfia  koI  (Tireipau  Kal  ar-qjiaiav.
Livy  concludes  by  saying,  that  four  legions  were
ommonly  levied,  each  consisting  of  5000  infantry
.nd  300  horse.  We  must  suppose  that  he  speaks
II  round  numbers  in  so  far  as  the  infantry  are  con-
jenied,  for  according  to  their  own  calculations  the
jiurabcrs  will  stand  thus  :  —
i   HastJiti   .         .        .     15  xGO  =900

j   Principes  .         .15x60  =900

I  Triarii,  &c.  .  .  15  x  3  x  60  =  2700
j  Centuriones  .  .  .  .  =150
I  Vexillarii        ....         =75

1  4725


In  deference  to  a  great  name,  we  ought  not  to
omit  mentioning  that  Niebuhr  {Hist,  of  Rome,
vol.  iii.  p.  97),  while  he  admits  that  the  text  of
Livy  is  sound  and  consistent  with  itself,  argues,
we  venture  to  think,  somewhat  unreasonably,  that
he  did  not  understand  his  excellent  materials,  and
althongh  clear  at  first,  became  eventually  completely
bewildered  and  wrote  nonsense.

Third  Period.  Polybius.  —  Polybius  describes
minutely  the  method  pursued  in  raising  the  four
legions,  which  under  ordinary  circumstances  were
levied  yearly,  two  being  assigned  to  each  consul.
It  must  be  observed  that  a  regular  consular  array
{Justus  consularis  exercitus)  no  longer  consisted  of
Roman  legions  only,  but  as  Italy  became  gradually
subjugated,  the  various  states  under  the  dominion
of  Rome  were  bound  to  furnish  a  contingent,  and
the  number  of  allies  {socii)  usually  exceeded  that
of  citizens.  They  were,  however,  kept  perfectly
distinct,  both  in  the  camp  and  in  the  battle  field.

1.  After  the  election  of  consuls  was  concluded,
the  first  step  was  to  choose  the  twenty-four  chief
officers  of  the  legions,  named  iribuni  militum,  and
by  the  Greek  writers  xtA.tctp%ot.  Of  these,  four-
teen were  selected  from  persons  who  had  served
five  campaigns  of  one  year  {annua  stipendia,  iviav-
(TLOvs  arpaTeias)  and  were  termedijuniores  {ol  vew-
repoi  Twv  xiA.iapx'«"')5  the  remaining  ten  {seniores,
Trpeo-gurepot),  from  those  who  had  served  for  ten
campaigns.  The  manner  of  their  election  will  be
explained  below,  when  we  treat  more  particularly
of  the  legionary  officers.     (Polyb.  vi.  19.)

2.  All  Roman  citizens  whose  fortune  was  not
rated  under  4000  asses  were  eligible  for  military
service  from  the  age  of  manhood  up  to  their  forty-
sixth  year,  and  could  be  required  to  serve  for
twenty  years  if  in  the  infantry,  and  for  ten  years,
if  in  the  cavalry.  Those  whose  fortune  Avas  below
the  above  sum  were  reserved  for  naval  service,
except  in  any  case  of  great  necessity,  when  they
also  might  be  called  upon  to  serve  for  the  regular
period  in  the  infantry.

The  consuls  having  made  proclamation  of  a  day
upon  which  all  Roman  citizens  eligible  for  service
must  assemble  in  the  Capitol,  and  these  being  in
attendance  at  the  time  appointed  in  the  presence  of
the  consuls,  the   tribunes  were  divided  into  four


496


EXERCITUS.


spctions,  according  to  the  order  of  their  election,
in  the  following  manner  :  —  The  four  junior  tri-
bunes first  elected,  and  the  two  senior  tribunes  first
elected  were  assigned  to  the  first  legion,  the  three
juniors  and  the  three  seniors  next  in  order  to  the
second  ;  the  four  juniors  and  the  two  seniors  next
in  order  to  the  third,  the  last  three  juniors  and
the  last  three  seniors  to  the  fourth  legion.  (Polyb.
vi.  14.)

The  tribunes  being  thus  distributed  into  four
parties  of  six,  those  belonging  to  each  legion  seated
themselves  apart,  and  the  tribes  were  summoned  in
succession  by  lot.  The  tribe  whose  lot  came  out
first  being  called  up,  they  picked  out  from  it  four
youths  as  nearly  matched  as  possible  in  age  and
form  ;  out  of  these  four,  the  tribunes  of  the  first
legion  chose  one,  the  tribunes  of  the  second  legion
one  of  the  remaining  three  ;  the  tribunes  of  the
third  legion,  one  of  the  remaining  two,  and  the  last
fell  to  the  fourth  legion.  Upon  the  next  tribe
being  called  up,  the  first  choice  was  given  to  the
tribunes  of  the  second  legion,  the  second  choice  to
those  of  the  third,  and  the  last  man  fell  to  the  first
legion.  On  the  next  tribe  being  called  up,  the
tribunes  of  the  third  legion  had  the  first  choice,
and  so  on  in  succession,  the  object  in  view  being
that  the  four  legions  should  be  as  nearly  alike  as
possible,  not  in  the  number  only,  but  in  the  quality
of  the  soldiers.  This  process  was  continued  until
the  ranks  were  complete,  the  regular  number,  ac-
cording to  Polybius  in  this  passage,  being  4200,
but  when  any  danger  greater  than  usual  was  im-
pending, 5000.

In  ancient  times,  the  cavalry  were  not  chosen
until  after  the  infantry  levy  was  concluded,  but
when  Polybius  wrote  the  cavalry  were  picked  in
the  first  place  from  the  list  on  which  they  were
enrolled  by  the  censor  according  to  their  fortune,
and  300  were  apportioned  to  each  legion.  (Polyb.
vi.  20.)

3.  The  levy  being  completed  (eTrir^XeaOda-ris
T^s  KaTaypa<pris)^  the  tribunes  collected  the  men
belonging  to  their  respective  legions,  and  making
one  individual  stand  out  from  the  rest  administered
to  him  an  oath  {i^opKi^ouaiu)  "  that  he  would  obey
orders  and  execute  to  the  best  of  his  ability  the
command  of  his  officers."  {Sacramentum  s.  Jusju-
randum  militare,  Cic.  de  Off',  i.  11  ;  Liv.  xxii.  38  ;
Sacramento  milites  adigere  s.  rofjare,  Liv.  vii.  1 1  ;
sacramentum  s.  sacramctito  dicere,  Fest.  s.  v.  ;
Caes.  B.  C.  i.  23  ;  Liv.  ii.  24,  iv.  53  ;  Gell.  xvi.  4.)
The  rest  of  the  soldiers  then  came  forward  one  by
one,  and  swore  to  do  what  tlie  first  had  bound
himself  to  perform.  They  were  then  dismissed,  a
day  and  place  having  been  appointed  where  each
legion  was  to  assemble  without  arras.  (Polyb.  vi.
21  ;  Cacs.  B.  C.  i.  76.)  The  words  uttered  by
each  soldier  after  the  first  were  pro])ably  simply
"  idem  in  me."  (see  Fest.  s.  v.  Praejm-atlories).

4.  At  the  same  time  the  consuls  gave  notice  to
the  magistrates  of  those  towns  in  Italy  in  alliance
with  Rome,  from  whom  they  desired  to  receive  a
contingent,  of  the  number  which  each  would  be
required  to  furnish,  and  of  the  day  and  place  of
gathering.  The  allied  cities  levied  tlieir  troops
and  administered  the  oath  much  in  the  same  manner
as  the  Romans,  and  then  sent  them  forth  after
appointing  a  commander  and  a  pay-master  (apxcvra
Kai  (Mi(Teo56Tnv).     [Socii.]     (Polyb.  vi.  21.)

5.  The  soldiers  having  again  assembled,  the  men
belonging  to  each  legion  were  separated  into  four


EXERCITUS.

divisions  ;  and  here,  we  must  remark  in  passing,
that  Polybius  has  fallen  into  a  slight  inconsistency,
for  while  in  the  passage  quoted  above  he  fixes  the
number  of  tlie  legion  when  he  wrote,  under  ordi-
nary circumstances,  at  4200,  in  describing  the
arrangements  which  follow  he  supposes  it  to  con-
sist of  4000  only  (vi.  21).

(1)  One  thousand  of  the  youngest  and  poorest
were  set  apart  to  form  the  Velites  (Tpoatpoixaxoi,
Tpo(T(po(p6poi),  or  skirmishers  of  the  legion.

(2)  Twelve  himdred  who  came  next  in  age  (or
who  were  of  the  same  age  with  the  preceding  but
more  wealthy — the  words  of  Polybius  are  not  very-
distinct)  formed  the  Hastati  ('AarTaToi).

(3)  Twelve  hundred,  consisting  of  those  in  the
full  vigour  of  manhood,  formed  the  Principes
(IlplyKiires).

(4)  Six  hundred,  consisting  of  the  oldest  and
most  experienced,  formed  the  Triarii  (Tpidoioi).

When  the  number  of  soldiers  in  the  legion  ex-
ceeded 4000,  the  first  three  divisions  were  increased
proportionally,  but  the  number  of  the  Triarii  re-
mained always  the  same.

The  equipment  of  these  corps  was  as  follows :  —
For  defensive  armour  the  Velites  were  furnished
with  a  plain  head-piece  {Aircp  irspiKe(l)a\al(p\
sometimes  covered  with  the  hide  of  a  wolf  {\v-
Keiav)  or  any  similar  material,  and  a  strong  circular
buckler  (parma  —  Trdpfxr}),  three  feet  in  diameter.
Their  offensive  weapons  were  a  sword  (juaxaipa),
and  the  light  javelin  (kasta  velitaris  —  yp6(T(pos\
the  shaft  of  which  (hastile  —  rh  ^v\ov)  was  gene-
rally two  cubits  (5i7rr?xw),  that  is,  about  three  feet
in  length,  and  in  thickness  a  finger's  breadth  (r^
Se  TTctxei  SaKTvAiaiou),  i.  e.  about  •7584  of  an  inch ;
the  iron  point  a  span  in  length  (rh  Se  KiuTpov  airi-
da,aia7ou),  i.  e.  about  nine  inches,  hammered  out  so
fine  that  it  was  of  necessity  bent  at  the  first  cast,
and  therefore  could  not  be  hurled  back  by  the
enemy.

The  Hastati  wore  a  full  suit  of  defensive  annour
(irauoTrX'.a),  consisting  of  shield,  helmet,  breast-
plate, and  greave.  Their  shield,  termed  Scutum
(^vpeSs)^  was  formed  of  two  rectangular  boards
from  four  feet  to  four  feet  three  inches  long  by  two
and  a  half  feet  broad,  the  one  laid  over  the  other,
and  united  with  strong  glue  ;  the  outer  surface  was
then  covered  with  coarse  canvas,  and  over  this  a
calf's  hide  was  stretched,  and  a  curvature  was
given  to  the  whole,  the  convexity  being  turned
outwards.  The  upper  and  under  edge  was
strengthened  by  an  iron  rim  (aidripovv  fnd\(i)iJ.a\
the  former,  that  it  might  resist  the  downwa
stroke  of  a  sword  ;  the  latter,  that  it  might  not
injured  by  resting  upon  the  ground.  In  addition
it  was  still  further  fortified  by  an  iron  boss  (crtSTjp
iidyx^^)-,  which  served  to  render  it  more  secure
against  blows  from  stones,  against  thrusts  from  the
long  pikes  of  the  phalanx,  and,  in  general,  from  all
heav}"-  missiles.  [See  a  figure  of  the  Scutum
under  that  article.]  One  leg  was  protected  by  a
greave  (ocrca  —  Trapa.KV7]/j.is)^  and  the  head  by  a
bronze  helmet  (galea — ii^piKicpaKaia  xaAKT?),  with
a  crest  composed  of  three  scarlet  or  black  feathers,
standing  erect  to  the  height  of  about  eighteen  |]
inches,  so  that  the  casque  added  greatly  to  the
apparent  stature  and  imposing  carriage  of  thej
soldier.  The  greater  number  of  the  Hastati  wore
in  front  of  their  breast  a  brass  plate  nine  inches
square,  which  was  called  the  HeaH-presa-ver  (KOp-
5io<pv\a.f)  ;    Init    those    whose    fortune    exceeded


EXERCITUS.

100,000  asses  h.ad   complete  cuirasses  of  chain-
armour  (loricas  —  a\v(TidccTovs  ^doprjKas).

The  offensive  weapons  of  the  Hastati  consisted
of  a  sword  and  heavy  javelins.  The  sword,  which
was  girded  on  the  right  side,  had  a  strong  straight
blade,  double-edged,  and  sharp-pointed,  being  thus
calculated  both  for  cutting  and  thrusting.  It  was
called  a  Spanish  sword  (fxdxaipa  'ISripLK-r]),  in  con-
tradistinction to  the  Gaulish  sword,  which  was  a
cutting  sword  only.  Each  man  carried  in  his
hand  two  of  those  heavy  missiles,  called  pila  by
the  Latins,  vacroi  by  the  Greeks,  which  may  be
regarded  as  the  characteristic  weapon  of  the  Roman
infantry.  The  shaft  of  these  was  in  every  case
four  and  a  half  feet  (three  cubits)  long,  and  the
barbed  iron  head  was  of  the  same  length,  but  this
extended  half  way  down  the  shaft  to  which  it
was  attached  with  extreme  care  (Polyb.  vi.  23),  so
that  the  whole  length  of  the  weapon  was  about
six  feet  nine  inches.  The  shaft  varied  both  in
form  and  thickness — -in  form  it  was  sometimes
cylindrical,  sometimes  quadrangular  —  in  the
heaviest,  the  diameter  of  the  cylinder  or  the
breadth  across  one  of  the  flat  sides  was  about  three
inches  (TraXaioTialav  exovai  .  .  .  r^v  didixerpov).

The  equipment  of  the  Principes  and  the  Triarii
was  in  every  respect  the  same  with  that  of  the
Hastati,  except  that  the  latter  carried  pikes  (hastae
—  S6paTa)  instead  of  pila.  (Polyb.  vi.  21,  22,
23.  For  more  minute  information  with  regard  to
the  different  parts  of  the  equipment,  consult  Galea,
Hasta,  Louica,  Scutum,  Parma,  &c.)

We  may  remark,  in  passing,  that  in  addition  to
his  armour  and  weapons  the  legionary,  when  in
marching  order,  usually  carried  provisions  for  a
fortnight  at  least,  and  three  or  four  stakes,  used  in
forming  the  palisade  of  the  camp,  besides  various
tools,  an  enumeration  of  which  will  be  found  in
Joseph  us.  (B.  J.  iii.  5.  §  5. )  The  Roman  writers
frequently  allude  with  pride  to  the  powers  of  en-
durance exhibited  by  their  countrymen  in  sup-
porting with  ease  such  overwhelming  loads  ;  and
Polybius  draws  a  contrast  between  the  Italian
and  the  Greek  soldier  in  this  respect  little  favour-
able to  the  energy  of  the  latter.  (See  Cic.  Tuscul.
ii.  16.,  which  is  the  locus  classicus ;  Polyb.  xviii.
1  ;  comp.  Veget.  i.  19  ;  from  Liv.  Epit.  Ivii.  it
appears  that  Scipio  trained  his  men  to  carry  food
for  thirty  days,  and  seven  stakes  each  —  double
the  usual  burden.)

6.  The  Hastati,  Principes,  and  Triarii  were  each
divided  into  ten  companies  called  Manipuli^  to
which  Polybius  gives,  as  equivalents,  the  three
terras  rary^xa,  aTreipa^  crrjfxaia.  The  Velites  were
not  divided  into  companies,  but  were  distributed
equally  among  the  Hastati,  Principes,  and  Triarii.
;  7.  Before  the  division  of  the  three  classes  into
maniples,  officers  were  appointed  inferior  to  the
tribunes.  Thirty  men  were  chosen  by  merit,  ten
from  the  Hastati,  ten  from  the  Principes,  and  ten
(from  the  Triarii  ;  and  this  first  choice  being  com-
jpleted,  thirty  more  in  like  manner.  These  sixty
[officers,  of  whom  twenty  were  assigned  to  each  of
!the  three  classes,  and  distributed  equally  among
the  maniples,  were  named  centuriones,  or  ordinum
\luctores  (Kcurvpiuves,  ra^idpxoi),  and  each  of  the
[sixty  chose  for  himself  a  lieutenant  (optio),  who,
{being  posted  in  the  rear  of  the  company  while  the
;centurion  was  at  the  head,  was  named  ovpayds
t(i.  e.^  Terffidudor)  by  the  Greeks,  so  that  in  each
jmaniple  there  were  two  centurions  and  two  op-


EXERCITUS.  m

tiones.  Farther,  the  centurions  selected  out  of
each  maniple  two  of  the  bravest  and  most  vigorous
men  as  standard  bearers  {veonllarii,  signi/eri^  arj-
fxaiocpopoi).  The  first  elected  centurion  of  the
whole  had  a  seat  in  the  military  council  (a-uveSpiou
KoiP(cv€i),  and  in  each  maniple  the  first  chosen
commanded  the  right  division  of  the  maniple,  and
the  other  the  left.  Each  of  these  subdivisions  of
the  maniple  was  called,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter,
centuria^  but  it  is  not  specifically  noticed  here  by
Polybius.     (Polyb.  vi.  24.)

8.  The  cavalry  were  divided  into  ten  troops
{tunnae,  tXai)^  and  out  of  each  of  these  three  of-
ficers were  chosen,  named  decuriones  {i\dpxai\
who  named  three  lieutenants  (optiones,  oupayoi).
In  each  troop  the  decurio  first  chosen  commanded
the  Avhole  troop,  and  failing  him,  the  second.

The  equipment  of  the  cavalry  was  originally
adapted  solely  to  secure  great  ease  and  rapidity  of
movement.  Hence  they  wore  no  breastplate,  but
were  clad  in  a  single  garment  girded  tight  round
their  bodies  ;  their  shields  were  fonned  simply  of
an  ox's  hide,  were  incapable  of  withstanding  a
strong  blow,  and  were  readily  damaged  by  wet  ;
their  lances  (SSpara)  were  so  light  and  the  shaft
so  thin,  that  they  vibrated  from  the  action  of  the
horse  ;  could  not  be  directed  to  their  object  with  a
steady  aim,  and  were  constantly  snapped  in  a
charge  merely  by  the  rapid  motion.  Moreover,
not  being  furnished  with  a  point  at  both  ends,
they  served  for  one  thrust  only,  by  which  they
were  broken,  and  then  became  useless.  In  the
time  of  Polybius,  however,  they  had  adopted  the
Greek  equipment,  —  a  breastplate,  a  solid  buckler,
and  a  strong  spear,  tashioned  in  such  a  manner  that
the  end  by  which  it  was  held  was  so  far  pointed
as  to  be  available  in  case  of  necessity.

LK  After  the  soldiers  had  been  thus  divided  and
officered,  the  tribunes  having  given  the  different
classes  instructions  with  regard  to  the  arms  which
they  were  to  provide,  dismissed  them  to  their
homes,  having  first  bound  them  by  an  oath  to  as-
semble again  on  a  day  and  in  a  place  fixed  by  the
consul.  Then  and  there  accordingly  they  did  as-
semble, no  excuse  for  absence  being  admitted  ex-
cept inevitable  necessity  or  the  appearance  of  evil
omens.

10.  The  infantry  furnished  by  the  socii  was  for
the  most  part  equal  in  number  to  the  Roman  le-
gions, the  cavalry  twice  or  thrice  as  numerous,  and
the  whole  were  divided  equally  between  the  two
consular  armies.  Each  consul  named  twelve  su-
perior officers,  who  were  termed  Praefedi  Sociorum
(vpai(peKToi),  and  corresponded  to  the  legionary
tribunes,  A  selection  was  then  made  of  the  best
men,  to  the  extent  of  one  fifth  of  the  infantry  ajid
one  third  of  the  cavalry  ;  these  were  formed  into  a
separate  corps  under  the  name  of  eartraordinani^
and  on  the  march  and  in  the  camp  were  always
near  the  person  of  the  consul.  The  remainder
were  divided  into  two  equal  portions,  and  were
styled  respectively  the  Dextera  Ala  and  the  Sinistra
Ala  ( KaXovai  rh  fxev  Zi^ihu  rh  S'  evcci/vfxou  K(pas).
[Ala.]

It  v/ill  be  observed  that  we  have  implied  a  doubt
with  regard  to  the  number  of  cavalry  furnished  by
the  allies.  Polybius  (iii.  107),  when  giving  a
sketch  of  the  Roman  forces  before  the  battle  of
Cannae,  after  stating  that  the  legion  under  or-
dinary circumstances  consisted  of  4000  infantry
and  200  cavalr}-,  but  that  in  circumstances  of  pe-

li.  K


498


EXERCITUS.


culiar  difficulty  and  danger  it  was  augmented  to
5000  infantry  and  300  cavalry,  adds  distinctly
that  the  allies  supplied  a  force  of  infantry  equal  to
that  of  the  legion,  and  generally  thrice  as  many
cavalry  {tu>u  Se  cuyU/iaxwf,  rh  jj-hv  roov  TreQcav
TTAridos  trapicrov  noiovai  to7s  'Pco/xawcots  (TTpa.ro-
TreSois,  rh  8e  toov  iinrewv  ws  iiriirav  rpiir^daiop).
When  ti'eating  more  formally  of  the  same  subject
(vi.  26)  he  repeats  the  above  observation  in  nearly
the  same  words,  but  when  he  came  to  rh  5e  twv
iV'/recoi/  TpiTTXaaiov,  many  of  the  MSS.  present
hi-KKaaiov  ;  and  a  little  further  on  (vi.  30),  in  the
passage  where  he  explains  the  manner  in  which
the  troops  were  quartered  in  a  camp,  his  expres-
sions, when  interpreted  according  to  their  natural
meaning  and  their  connection  with  the  preceding
clause,  must  signify  that  the  total  number  of  the
allied  cavalry  was  double  that  of  the  Romans,  and
not,  as  the  Latin  translation  attached  to  the  edition
of  Schweighaeuser  has  it,  double  that  of  the
Romans  ajhr  deducting  one-third  for  the  extra-
ordinarii  equites.  Livy,  when  referring  to  the
position  of  affairs  between  the  Romans  and  their
allies  before  the  great  Latin  war  of  b.  c.  340,  after
specifying  the  ordinary  strength  of  the  Roman
armies,  adds  (viii.  8)  "  alterum  tantum  ex  Latino
delectu  adjiciebatur."  "When  recounting  the  pre-
parations for  the  campaign  of  Cannae,  although  he
appears  to  allude  directly  to  the  narrative  of  Po-
lybius  and  to  copy  his  words,  he  contradicts  him
directly  with  regard  to  the  allied  cavalry  (xxii.
36),  "  socii  duplicem  numerum  equitum  darent."
At  a  somewhat  later  period  (b.  c.  189),  when  four
legions  were  raised,  the  socii  were  required  to  con-
tribute 15,000  infantry  and  1200  cavalry  (xxxviii.
35),  and  nine  years  afterwards  the  consuls  were
ordered  to  levy  a  new  army  of  four  legions  "  et
socium  Latini  nominis,  qumitus  semper  numcnis,
quindecim  millia  peditum  et  octingenti  equites  "
(xl.  36),  which  exactly  corresponds  with  what  we
read  in  a  former  chapter  (xl.  18).  The  truth
eeems  to  be,  that  although  the  contingent  which
each  state  was  bound  to  furnish,  was  fixed  by
treaty,  it  was  seldom  necessary  to  tax  all  the  al-
lies to  the  full  extent,  and  hence  the  senate  used
their  discretion  as  to  the  precise  number  to  be
supplied,  according  to  the  circumstances  of  the
case,  the  proportion  of  confederates  to  Roman
citizens  becoming  of  course  gradually  larger  as
the  limits  of  the  Rom.an  sway  embraced  a  greater
number  of  cities  and  districts.  (See  Lips,  de
Milit.  Rom.  ii.  7.)

1 1 .  Agmen  or  Line  of  March. — The  Extraordinarii
Pedites  led  the  van  followed  by  the  right  wing  of
the  infantry  of  the  allies  and  the  baggage  of  these
two  divisions  ;  next  came  one  of  the  Roman  legions
with  its  baggage  following ;  next  the  other  Roman
legion  with  its  own  baggage,  and  that  of  the  left
wing  of  the  allies,  who  brought  up  the  rear.  The
different  corps  of  cavalry  sometimes  followed  im-
mediately behind  the  infantry  to  which  they  were
attached,  sometimes  rode  on  the  flanks  of  the
beasts  of  burden,  at  once  protecting  them  and  pre-
vimting  them  from  straggling.  If  there  was  any
apprehension  of  an  attack  from  behind,  the  only
change  in  the  above  order  consisted  in  making  the
Extraordinarii  bring  up  the  rear  instead  of  leading
the  van.  As  far  as  the  position  of  the  two  legions
Avith  regard  to  each  other,  and  also  of  the  two
wings  of  the  allies,  was  concerned,  it  was  imder-
stood  that  the  legion  and  the  wing  which  took  the


EXERCITUS.

lead  upon  one  day  should  fall  behind  upon  the  next
day,  in  order  that  each  in  turn  might  have  the
advantage  of  arriving  first  at  the  watering  places
and  fresh  pastures.  When  marching  in  open
ground  where  an  attack  on  the  flanks  was  antici-
pated, a  different  disposition  was  sometimes  adopted.
The  Hastati,  Principes,  and  Triarii  marched  in
three  columns  parallel  to  each  other,  the  baggage
of  the  first  maniples  took  the  lead,  the  baggage  of
the  second  maniples  was  placed  between  the  first
and  second  maniples,  and  so  on  for  the  rest,  the
baggage  in  each  case  preceding  the  maniple  to
which  it  belonged.  If  an  attack  was  made  then
the  soldiers  wheeling  either  to  the  right  or  to  the
left,  according  to  circumstances,  and  advancing  at
the  same  time  a  feAV  steps,  by  this  simple  and
easily  executed  movement  presented  at  once  an
even  front  to  the  enemy,  the  whole  of  the  baggage
being  now  in  the  rear.

Generally,  when  advancing  through  a  country
in  which  it  was  necessary  to  guard  against  a  sudden
onset,  the  troops,  instead  of  proceeding  in  a  loose
straggling  column,  were  kept  together  in  close
compact  bodies  ready  to  act  in  any  direction  at  a
moment's  warning,  and  hence  an  anny  under  these
circumstances  was  said  agmine  quadrato  incedere.
(e.  g.  Sail,  Jug.  105  ;  Senec,  Ep.  59  ;  comp.  Cic.
Phil,  ii,  42,  v.  7,)

It  is  to  be  observed  that  Pol5^bius,  at  the  outset,
promises  an  account  of  the  order  of  march,  of  the
encampment,  and  of  the  battle  array  of  the  Roman
armies  (Tropeias,  CTpaTOireSelas,  irapard^eis  ;  Ag-
men, Castra,  Acies)  ;  but  that  while  he  has  re-
deemed his  pledge  with  regard  to  the  two  former,
he  has  left  the  last  topic  imtouched,  unless,  indeed,
it  \vas  included  in  a  section  now  lost.  It  is,  more-
over, comparatively  speaking,  a  subject  of  little
consequence,  for  while  we  know  that  a  camp  was
always  the  same  so  long  as  the  constitution  of  the
army  remained  unchanged,  and  while  the  order  of
march  was  subject  to  few  modifications,  the  mar-
shalling of  the  troops  for  an  engagement  must  have
varied  materially  in  almost  every  contest,  depend-
ing necessarily  in  a  great  measure  on  the  nature  of
the  ground,  and  on  the  aspect  assumed  by  the  foe.

Some  doubt  exists  with  regard  to  the  force  of
the  term  Agmen  Pilatum  as  distinguished  from
Agmen  Quadratum.  The  explanation  quoted  from
Varro  by  Servius  (Ad  Virg.  Aen.  xii,  121),  '''■  Quad-
ratum, quod  immixtis  etiam  jumentis  incedit,  ut
ubivis  possit  considere :  pilatum^  quod  sine  ju-
mentis incedit,  sed  inter  se  densum  est,  quo  faci-
lius  per  iniquiora  loca  tramittatur,"  has  not  been
considered  satisfactory,  although  it  is  difficult  to
understand  how  Varro,  himself  a  soldier,  should
have  been  inaccurate  upon  such  a  point.  Whero
the  phrase  occurs  in  poetry  as  in  the  passage  in
Virgil  referred  to  above  (comp.  Martial,  x.  48  ),  it
probably  denotes  merely  "  columns  bristling  with
spears."

Polybius  being  our  most  copious  and  pure  source
of  information,  before  passing  on  to  the  fourth
period,  it  may  be  fitting  to  enter  more  fully  upon
certain  topics  which  he  has  either  touched  very
lightly  or  passed  over  in  silence.  We  shall,  there-
fore, make  a  few  remarks  :  —  1.  On  the  levying
of  soldiers.  2.  On  the  division  of  the  legion  as  a
body  into  cohorts,  maniples,  and  centuries,  of
which  the  cohort  and  the  century  are  not  named
by  Polybius  in  the  above  description.  3,  On  the
distribution  of  the  soldiers  into  Triarii,  Principe^


I


EXERCITUS.

Ifastati^  VcHtes,  Antepilani^  Anteslc/nani,  &c.,  and
on  the  original  import  of  these  terms.  4.  On  the
otHcers  of  the  legion,  the  tribunes,  the  centurions
and  subalterns.

1.  The  levy  {delectus,  KaTaypaclt-f])  was  usually
held  in  the  Capitol  (Liv.  xxvi.  31)  by  the  consuls
seated  on  their  chairs  of  state  (positis  sellis,  Liv.
lii.  11)  ;  but  sometimes  in  the  Campus  Martins
t Dionys.  viii,  87),  which  was  beyond  the  juris-
diction of  the  tribunes  of  the  plebs,  who,  in  the
earlier  ages  of  the  commonwealth  especially,  fre-
quently interfered  to  prevent  an  army  from  being
raised.

According  to  the  principles  of  the  constitution,
j  none  were  enrolled  in  the  legion,  except  freeborn
!  citizens  {ingenui)  above  the  age  of  seventeen,  and
und'er  the  age  of  forty-six,  possessing  the  amount
or'  fortune  specified  above  (Gell.  x.  28)  ;  but  in
times  of  peculiar  difficulty,  these  conditions  were
nut,  insisted  upon.  Thus,  in  consequence  of  the
scarcity  of  men  during  the  second  Punic  war,  it
j  was  at  one  time  ordained,  that  lads  under  seven-
1  teen  might  be  admitted  into  the  ranks,  and  that
I  their  time  should  be  allowed  to  count  just  as  if
they  had  attained  to  the  legal  age  (Liv.  xxv.  5),
and  on  the  other  hand,  when  strenuous  exertions
were  made  for  the  campaign  against  Perseus,  the
Rin.ate  decreed  that  no  one  under  fifty  should  be
excused  from  enlisting  (Liv.  xlii,  33).  Moreover,
not  only  were  all  freeborn  citizens  without  dis-
tinction of  fortune  called  out  on  such  occasions,  but
evei;  freedmen  were  armed  (Liv.  x.  21,  xxii.  11)  ;
and  after  the  battle  of  Cannae,  eight  thousand
I  slaves  who  had  declared  themselves  willing  to
jfight  for  the  republic,  were  purchased  by  the  state,
iand  formed  into  two  legions,  who,  under  the  name
'of  Volones,  displayed  great  bravery,  and  eventually
learned  their  freedom  (Liv.  xxii.  57).

In  moments  of  sudden  panic  or  when  the  neces-
sity was  so  pressing  as  to  admit  of  not  a  moment's
[delay,  all  formalities  were  dispensed  with,  and
every  man  capable  of  bearing  arms  was  summoned
rto  join  in  warding  off  the  threatened  danger,  a
pbrce  raised  under  such  circumstances  being  termed
vubitarius  s.  tumultuarius  eocerdtus  {Suhitarii  mi-
iites^  Liv.  iii.  4,  xli.  17  ;  Subitarius  exercitus,  iii.
30  ;  Legiones  suhitarlae  tumultus  causa  scriptae,
jxxxi.  2,  xl.  26  ;  Tumultuarius  exercitus  raptim
ponscriptus,  viii.  11  ;  Legiones  tumultuarias  scriberet,
!xl.  26).

If  citizens  between  the  ages  of  seventeen  and
ioity  six  did  not  appear  and  answer  to  their  names
pr  contumaciously  refused  to  come  forward,  they
pight  be  punished  in  various  w.aj'^s,  —  by  fine,
''"  imprisonment,  by  stripes,  by  confiscation  of
n-  property,  and   even,  in   extreme  cases,  by

Mig  sold  as  slaves  (Dionys.  viii.  87  ;  Liv.  vii.  4  ;
^-  arr.  ap.  Gell.  xi.  1,  ap.  Non.  s.v.  Tenebrionem ;
\  al.  Max.  vi.  3.  §  4).  At  the  same  time,  causes
iuight  be  alleged  which  were  recognised  as  fonning
1  legitimate  ground  for  exemption  (vacaiio  jtcsta
nilitiae).  Thus,  all  who  had  served  for  the  full
leriod  of  twenty  years  in  the  infantry  or  ten  in
cavalry,  were  relieved  from  further  service,  al-
though they  might  still  be  within  the  regular  age  ;
jmd  so,  in  like  manner,  when  they  were  afflicted  by
[my  grievous  malady,  or  disabled  by  any  personal
defect,  or  engaged  in  any  sacred  or  civil  offices
Hvhich  required  their  constant  attendance  ;  but
|;hese  and  similar  pleas,  although  sustained  under
brdinary  circunistiinccs,  might  bo  rendered  void  by


EXERCITUS.


49»


a  decree  of  the  senate  "  ne  vacationes  valerent,**
and  hence  in  the  case  of  a  Gallic  war,  we  read  that
Aemilius  Maraercinus,  then  consul,  was  instructed
"  scribere  exercitum  sine  ulla  vacationis  venia  "
(Liv.  viii.  20),  and  one  of  the  measures  urged  by
Cicero  upon  the  senate  in  the  contest  with  Antonius
was  "  delectum  haberi  sublatis  vacationibus"
{Philipp.  v.  12).  So,  also,  if  the  soldier,  after
being  enrolled,  failed  to  appear  at  the  place  of
muster  appointed  by  the  consul,  his  absence  might
be  justified  by  various  "  excusationes,"  a  list  of
which  will  be  found  in  Gellius  (xvi.  4),  the  most
important  being  severe  bodily  ailment  {morbus
so7iticus)  ;  the  death  of  a  near  relation  {funusfa-
miliare)  ;  the  obligation  of  performing  a  stated
sacrifice  {sacrificium  anniversarium),  or  some  other
religious  impediment.

While  those  who  had  served  for  the  stipulated
period  were  entitled  to  immunity  for  the  future,
even  although  within  the  legal  age,  and  were  styled
Emeriti,  so  on  the  other  hand,  it  appears  from
some  passages  in  the  classics,  that  persons  who  had
not  completed  their  regular  term  within  the  usual
limits,  might  be  forced,  if  required,  to  serve  be-
tween the  ages  of  forty -five  and  fifty  ( Liv.  xxvii.
11,  xlii.  34  ;  Senec.  rfe  brev.  Vit.  cap.  ult.  ;  Quintil.
ix.  2.  §  85).  Towards  the  close  of  the  republic,
and  under  the  empire,  when  the  legions  became
permanent,  the  soldier  who  had  served  his  full
time  received  a  regular  discharge  {missio)  together
with  a  bounty  {praemiuin)  in  money  or  an  allot-
ment of  land.  The  jurists  distinguish  three  kinds
of  discharge  :  — 1.  Missio  konesta,  granted  for  length
of  service.  2.  Missio  caussaria,  in  consequence  of
bad  health.  3.  Missio  Ignominiosa,  when  a  man
was  drummed  out  for  bad  conduct  (Macer  in  Dig.
49.  tit.  16.  s.  13;  Ulpian  in  Dig.  3.  tit.  2.  s.  2,
cornp.  Hirt.  ^.^.  54  ;  Suet.  Jul.  69,  Octav.  24).
It  frequently  happened  that  emeriti  were  induced
to  continue  in  the  ranks,  either  from  attachment  to
the  person  of  the  general  or  from  hopes  of  profit  or
promotion  (Appian.  B.  C.  v.  3),  and  were  then
called  veterani,  or  when  they  joined  an  army,  ii.
consequence  of  a  special  invitation  evocati  {apa-
K\i]roi,  Dion  Cass.  Iv.  24).  Dion  Cassius  states
{I.e.)  that  troops  bearing  this  last  denomination  were
first  employed  by  Octavianus,  when  he  called  out
{a.u€Kd\€<T€u)  the  veterans  of  Julius  Caesar  to  aid
him  against  Antonius,  but  we  read  of  them  at  an
earlier  period.  (Caes.  B.  G.  vii.  65,  B.  C.  i.  17,
iii.  88.)  [Evocati.]  They  must  in  no  way
be  confounded  with  the  volunteers  mentioned  by
Polybius  in  his  description  of  a  Roman  camp
{tiv\s  twu  ide\ovT7)dhv  aTparevofxivuv  T'p  riav
viroLTwu  xt^P'Tt),  who  seem  to  have  formed  pajt  of
what  may  be  termed  the  personal  suite  of  the
general.  (Comp.  Sallust.  Jug.  84.)  We  shall
make  some  further  remarks  upon  the  Veterani  and
the  changes  introduced  by  Augustus  with  regard
to  the  term  of  service,  when  we  speak  of  the
Veadllarii,  who  belong  to  our  fifth  period.

2.  We  next  proceed  to  consider  the  division  of
the  legion  into  Cohortes,  Manipuli,  Centuriae,
Signa,  Ordines,  Contubernia.

Cohortes. — It  will  be  observed  that  Polybius
takes  no  notice  of  the  Cohort,  a  division  of  the
legion  mentioned  so  often  in  the  Roman  writers.
Hence  Salmasius  and  other  distinguished  scholars
have  supposed  that  the  cohort  had  no  existence
until  the  time  of  JNIarius,  and  although  named  by
Livy  almost  immediately  after  the  expulsion  of
E  k  2


500


EXERCITUS.


the  kings  (ii.  11),  and  repeatedly  afterwards  (e.g.
xxvii.  13,  41)  he  may  be  suf)posed  to  speak  pro-
leptically.  But  in  a  quotation  preserved  by  A.
Gellius  (A''.  A.  xvi.  4)  from  the  treatise  De  Re
Militari  of  Cincius,  who  is  generally  admitted  to
be  Cincius  Alimentus,  the  annalist  contemporary
Avith  Hannibal,  we  find  the  cohort  not  only  named
but  specifically  defined.  In  legione  sunt  centuriae
seaxiginta^  manipuH  triginta^  cohories  decern ;  and
Polybius  himself  uses  the  Latin  word  KoSpris
twice  in  his  history  of  Scipio's  Spanish  campaigns
(xi.  23,  33),  giving  in  the  first  of  these  passages
an  explanation  of  the  term,  koI  \a€ciiu  .  .  .  Tpels
aireipas,  tovto  Se  kuAutm  rh  (rvurayfia  twv  tt^^wv
irapa  'Pccixainis  KoSpris  .  .  .  where  it  must  be  borne
in  mind  that  Polybius  uses  the  words  Tayixa^
a-nixaia^  and  (nreipa  indifi^erently,  to  denote  the
maniple.  On  the  other  hand,  the  later  Greek
writers  generally  designate  the  maniple  by  ?^6xos,
and  almost  invariably  employ  (nreipa  as  the  repre-
sentative of  cohort:  Hence  considerable  confusion
is  apt  to  arise  ;  and  Livy  lias  rendered  his  de-
scription of  the  order  in  which  Scipio  marshalled
his  army  at  Zama  unintelligible  by  translating  ras
(Tireipas  in  the  text  of  Polybius  by  coltoi'tes  instead
of  mam'pulos  (Liv.  xxx.  33  ;  Polyb.  xv.  9)  ;  while
Polybius  himself  is  guilty  of  an  inconsistency  in
the  same  chapter  when  he  uses  the  expression  rali
TOiv  7pocr<^0|Uaxa>j'  CTreipats,  for  the  ypoacpofxdxoi
or  Velites  were  not  divided  into  maniples,  as  he
most  distinctly  states  elsewhere.

When  the  soldiers  of  the  legion  were  classified
as  Velites,  Hastati,  Principes  and  Triarii,  the  co-
hort contained  one  maniple  of  each  of  the  three  latter
denominations,  together  with  their  complement  of
Velites,  so  that  when  the  legion  contained  4000,
each  cohort  would  consist  of  €0  Triarii,  120
Principes,  120  Hastati,  and  100  Velites,  in  all
400  men.

The  number  of  cohorts  in  a  legion  being  always
ten  (Cincius,  I.  c.  ;  Cic.  Philip,  iv.  27 ;  the  words
of  Isidor.  Orig.  ix.  3.  §  47,  are  evidently  corrupt),
and  the  cohorts,  during  the  republic,  being  all
equal  to  each  other,  the  strength  of  the  cohort
varied  from  time  to  time  with  the  strength  of  the
legion,  and  thus  at  different  periods  ranged  between
the  limits  of  300  and  600.  They  were  regularly
numbered  from  1  to  10,  the  centurion  of  the  first
century  of  the  first  maniple  of  the  first  cohort
was  the  guardian  of  the  eagle,  and  hence  the  first
cohort  seems  always  to  have  been  regarded  as
superior  in  dignity  to  the  rest.  (Caes.  B-  C  iii.  64,
Cic.  ad  Att.  V.  20.)  From  some  expressions  in  the
description  given  by  Caesar  of  the  battle  of  Phar-
salia,  it  has  been  inferred  that  even  then  the  first
cohorts  in  the  legions  were  more  numerous  than
the  rest ;  and  this  was  certainly  the  case  under  the
empire,  when  they  were  termed  cohories  millinriae,
.ind  contained  twice  as  many  soldiers  as  the  others.
Thus  the  legion  described  by  Hyginus  amounted
to  5280  men,  divided  into  ten  cohorts  ;  and  of
these,  the  first,  which  had  the  charge  of  the  eagle,
consisted  of  960  men,  while  the  remaining  nine
had  480  each.

The  word  cohort  lasted  as  long  as  the  word  le-
gion, and  even  longer,  for  not  only  docs  Ammianus
(xxi.  13,  xxiii.  5)  speak  of  centuries  and  cohorts
in  the  array  of  Julian,  but  cohors,  as  a  military
term,  is  met  with  in  authors  after  Justinian.  But
although  cohories  is  found  occasionally  in  the  wri-
ters of  the  later  empire,  they  for  the  most  part


EXERCITUS.
prefer  tlie  somewlmt  vjigue  term  numeri,  which
appears  in  Tacitus  and  Suetonius,  and  perhaps
even  in  Cicero  (ad  Fain.  xi.  1 0,  xii.  1 3).  Numen
seems  to  have  signified  strictly  the  muster  roll,
whence  the  phrases  referre  in  rmmeros.,  distrihuere
171  numeros  (Plin.  Ep.  iii.  8,  x.  30,  31),  and  thus
served  to  denote  any  body  of  legionaries.  In  the
Digest  and  the  two  Codes  it  is  used  sometimes  for
a  century,  sometimes  for  a  cohort ;  by  Suetonius
( Vespas.  6)  ibr  a  detachment  selected  from  three
different  legions.  Nor  is  it  absolutely  restricted  to
legionaries,  for  we  read  in  inscriptions  of  Numerus
Britonum  (Orell.  1627),  Numeri  Dalmaiarum
(Grut.  dxxviii. ;  Orell.  3410),  while  Ammianus
applies  it  to  cavalry  as  well  as  infantry,  and  to
auxiliaries  as  well  as  legionaries  (xxiii.  2).  In
like  manner  the  later  Greeks  introduced  apidfiol
or  vovfiepol  for  cohories.,  the  former  being  the  ex-
planation given  by  St.  Chrysostom  in  his  exposition
of  the  tenth  chapter  of  the  Acts  for  the  word
anreipas,  while  Suidas  interprets  crireipai  by  vov-
f^epa.

Whenever  Cohors  occurs  in  the  Latin  classics  in
connection  with  the  legion,  it  always  signifies  a
specific  division  of  the  legion  ;  but  it  is  very  fre-
quently found,  in  the  general  sense  of  baiialion.,  to
denote  troops  altogether  distinct  from  the  legion.
Thus  in  Livy  (iv.  39)  it  is  applied  to  a  body  of
dismounted  cavalry,  to  the  force  of  the  allies
(alariae  cohories,  x.  40,  41  ;  cohors  Peligna,  xxv.
14  ;  cohortem  Marsonim,  xxxiii.  36,  &c.),  to  the
troops  of  an  enemy  (vii.  7,  x.  40,  xxx.  36),  with
various  other  modifications  ;  and  we  shall  be  called
upon  to  speak  under  our  fifth  period  of  Cohories
praeiorianae,  CohoHes  pediiaiae,  Cohories  equUaiae^
and  several  others.

Manipulus. — The  original  meaning  of  this  word,
which  is  clearly  derived  from  manus.,  was  a  Jiand-
fid  or  ivisp  of  hay.,  straw.,  fern,  or  tJie  like,  and  this,
according  to  Roman  tradition,  affixed  to  the  end  of
a  pole,  formed  the  primitive  military  standard  in
the  days  of  Romulus  —

Pertica  suspensos  portabat  longa  maniplos
Unde  maniplaris  nomina  miles  habet.

(Ovid.  Fast.  iii.  117;  compare  Plut.  Rom.  8)
Hence  it  was  applied  to  a  body  of  soldiers  serving
under  the  same  ensign  (see  Varr.  L.L.  v.  8,  vi.  85,
who  connects  it  in  this  sense  directly  with  manus):
when  the  ponderous  mass  of  the  phalanx  was  re-
solved into  small  companies  marshalled  in  open
order,  these  were  termed  manipuli,  and  down  to  a
very  late  period  the  common  soldiers  of  the  legion
were  designated  as  manipulares  or  manipularii^
terms  equivalent  to  gregarii  milites.  By  whom
this  momentous  innovation  upon  the  tactics  of  a
Roman  army  was  first  introduced,  it  is  impossible
to  determine  with  certainty  ;  but  from  the  remark
of  Livy  (viii.  8),  that  a  change  in  the  equipment
of  the  heavy-armed  soldiery  took  place  at  the
period  when  they  began  to  receive  pay,  compared
with  the  words  of  Plutarch  (Camill.  40),  we  may
conjecture  that  the  revolution  was  brought  about
in  part  at  least  by  the  greatest  general  of  whom
the  infant  republic  could  boast  —  Camillus.

When  the  phalanx  was  first  broken  up,  it  ap-
pears (Liv.  viii.  8)  that  each  of  the  three  classes
of  Hastati,  Principes,  and  Triarii,  contained  fif-
teen maniples  ;  but  before  the  second  Punic  war
(see  Cincius,  as  quoted  by  Gell.  above)  the  num-
ber of  maniples  in  each  of  these  classes  was  re-


I


EXERCITUS.

duced  to  ten,  as  stated  by  PoljLius.  Hence  it
is  easy  to  calculate  the  number  of  soldiers  in  each
maniple,  according  to  the  varying  numbers  in  the
legion,  it  being  always  bcriie  in  mind  that  the
Triarii  never  exceeded  600,  and  that  the  Velites
were  not  divided  into  maniples,  but  distributed
equally  among  the  heavy -armed  companies.

Some  writers,  especially  Le  Beau,  in  his  "  Me-
moires  "  on  the  Legion,  maintain  that,  after  the
distinctions  between  the  Hastati,  Principes  and
Triarii  Were  abolished,  and  the  legion  was  mar-
shalled in  cohorts,  the  division  into  maniples  was
no  longer  practised,  and  that  the  term  vianipulus
must  from  this  time  be  understood  to  indicate  either
a  small  number  of  men  indefinitely,  or  a  mass  of
ten  soldiers  quartered  in  the  same  tent.  No  one,
however,  who  reads  without  prejudice  the  words  of
Caesar  "  adeo  ut  paucis  mutatis  centurionibus,
iidem  ordines,  manipulique  constarent  "  {B.  C  ii.
2ii,  comp.  B.  G.  ii,  25,  vi.  33),  and  of  Tacitus,
"  assistentem  concionem  quia  permixta  videbatur
discedere  in  manipulos  jubet  "  {A?m.  i.  34),  to-
gether with  the  still  more  explicit  expressions  of
Ammianus,  "omnes  centurias  et  manipulos  et  co-
hortes  in  concionem  convocabat  "  (xxi.  13.  §9),
repeated  almost  in  the  same  words  in  two  other
])assages  (xvii.  13.  §25,  xxiii.  5.  §  15),  can  doubt
that  the  manipulus  continued  to  the  very  last  to
form  one  of  the  larger  subdivisions  of  the  legion.
Indeed,  the  whole  system  of  classifying  and  naming
the  centurions  upon  which  Le  Beau  himself  be-
stows so  much  labour  and  ingenuity  is  unintelligible
upon  any  other  supposition.  At  the  same  time
i  1  c;uniot  be  denied  that  manipulus  must  sometimes
I M-  taken  in  a  general  sense,  as  when  Tacitus  gives
tliis  name  to  the  detachment  of  sixty  men,  sent
into  Asia  by  Nero,  for  the  purpose  of  putting  Plautus
to  death.  (Ann.  xiv.  58,  59.)  As  to  the  identity
of  manipulus  and  contubernium,  no  doubt  Vegetius
states  very  distinctly  that  the  centuries  were  divided
into  contubernia,  and  adds  "  contubernium  autem
manipulus  vocabatur,"  but  an  assertion  proceeding
from  such  a  source  is  as  worthless  as  the  etymology
by  which  it  is  followed  up.

Centuriae.  —  The  distribution  of  soldiers  into
centuriae  must  be  regarded  as  coeval  with  the  origin
of  Rome.  Plutarch,  as  noticed  above,  speaks  of
the  force  led  by  Romulus  against  Amulius  as
(formed  of  centuries  ;  and  from  the  close  connections
jbetween  the  centuries  of  Servius  TuUius,  and  the
iorganization  of  the  military  force,  we  cannot  hesi-

i'tate  to  believe  that  the  term  was  communicated  to
the  ranks  of  the  phalanx.  For  a  long  period  after
the  establishment  of  the  manipular  constitution,  the
jlegion  contained  invariably  sixty  centuries,  and
jcven  after  the  introduction  of  the  cohors  milliaria,
jwe  have  no  good  evidence  to  prove  that  any
jchange  took  place  in  this  respect  except  we  choose
!to  adopt  the  statements  of  Vegetius.

Signum.  —  There  is  much  doubt  with  regard  to
the  import  of  the  word  signum,  when  used  to  denote
la  division  of  the  legion,  in  such  phrases  as  signi  unius
^^ilites  ferre  scalas  jussit  (Liv.  xxv.  23)  ;  oadLpostero
die  cum  unius  signi  militibus  ....  pergit  ire  ad  ui-beni.
(Liv.  xxxiii.  1.)  The  question  is,  whether  in
these  passages  we  are  to  iniderstand  that  a  maniple
is  meant  or  a  centurj-.  On  the  one  hand,  it  is
admitted  that  after  the  legion  was  marshalled  by
Icohorts,  each  century  had  its  own  standard,  and
lin  so  far  as  the  earlier  ages  are  concerned,  Poly-
ibius  expressly  tells  us  that  there  were  two  standard-


EXERCITUS.  501

bearers  (avSpas  (T7]iJ.aio<p6povs)  in  each  maniple
(see  also  Liv.  viii,  8).  On  the  other  hand,  one  of
the  names  given  by  Polybius  to  the  maniple  is
{TTj^am,  which  seems  to  correspond  exactly  with
signum,  and  Varro  in  his  glossary  of  military  terms,
"  Majiipulos  exercitus  minimas  manus  quae  ununi
sequuntur  signum,"  to  which  we  may  add  Liv.  xxvii.

14.,  "  ni  C.  Decimius  Flavus signo  adrepto

primi  hastati,  manipulum  eius  signi  se  sequi  jus-
sisset,"  and  as  to  the  &.vhpas  (T7jp.aio(p6povs,  although
there  were  two  standard-bearers,  it  does  not  follow
that  there  were  two  standards.

Ordo  generally  signifies  a  century,  and  ordinum
dzictor  is  synonymous  with  centurio,  and  ducere
honestum  ordinem  means  to  be  one  of  the  principal
centurions  in  a  legion.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the
celebrated  chapter  in  Livy  (viii,  8.),  discussed
above,  ordo  undoubtedly  denotes  one  of  the  ori-
ginal maniples,  and  when  we  read  in  book  xlii.  34.
"  Mihi  T.  Quinctius  Flamininus  deeumura  ordinem
hastatum  adsignavit,"  the  speaker  seems  to  declare
that  he  had  been  raised  from  the  ranks  to  the  post
of  a  centurion  in  the  10th  maniple  of  the  Hastati.
These  must,  however,  be  regarded  as  exceptions.

Contubernium.  —  This  was  the  name  given  under
the  empire  to  the  body  of  soldiers  who  were  quar-
tered together  in  the  same  tent ;  the  captain  of  the
mess,  decanus  or  decurio,  is  called  by  Vegetius
caput  contulternii,  and  Ammianus  designates  the
mess-mates  by  the  word  concoi-porales.

3.  Hastati, Principesy  Triarii,  Filani,  Antepilani^
Antesignani,  Prindpia.  —  No  reasonable  doubt
can  exist  that  the  Hastati  were  so  called,  from
having  been  armed  with  a  hasta  (Hastati  dicti
qui  primi  hastis  pugnabmd,  Varr.  L.  L.  v.  39),  the
Principes  from  having  occupied  the  front  line  (the
etymology  of  Varro,  l.  e,  is  here  not  distinct,  Prin-
CIPKS  qui  a  principio  gladiis),  the  Triarii,  other-
wise named  Pilani,  from  having  been  ranged  be-
hind the  first  two  lines  as  a  body  of  reserve  and
armed  with  the  pilum  (Pilani,  qui  pilis  .  .  .
Pilatii  Triarii  quoque  dicti  qitod  in  acic  tcrtio  ordine
eatremis  subsidio  deponebantur  ;  quod  Id  subsidebanty
ab  eo  snbsidium  dictum,  a  quo  Plautus,

Agile  nunc  suLsidite  omnes  quasi  solent  triam,

Varr.  I.  c.  ;  comp.  Liv.  viii.  8),  while  the  first  two
lines  were  termed  coUectivelj^  Antepilani,  from
standing  in  front  of  the  Pilani.  In  process  of  time,
it  came  to  pass,  that  these  designations  no  longer
expressed  the  actual  condition  of  the  troops  to  which
they  were  attached.  When  Polybius  wrote,  and
long  before  that  period,  the  Hastati  were  not  armed
with  hastae,  but  in  common  with  the  Principes  bore
the  heavy  pilum:  on  the  other  hand,  the  pilani
carried  hastae  and  not joz'/a,  while  the  Principes  were
not  drawn  up  in  the  front,  but  formed  the  second
lini\  The  origin  of  this  discrepancy  between  the
names  and  the  objects  which  they  represented,  is
somewhat  obscure,  but  perhaps  not  altogether  be-
yond the  reach  of  a  very  simple  conjecture.  The
names  were  first  bestowed  when  the  Roman  army
was  disciplined  according  to  the  tactics  of  the
Grecian  phalanx.  At  that  time  the  hastati  were
the  skirmishers  armed  with  a  light  javelin  (the
liasta  velitai-is),  who  were  thrown  forward  in  ad-
vance of  the  main  body,  and  it  is  with  reference  to
their  ancient  duty  that  Ennius  in  the  eighth  book
of  his  annals  uses  an  expression  no  longer  appli-
i  cable  in  his  day.
!      "  Hastati  spargunt  hastas,  fit   ferreus   imber.'*

K  K    3


502  EXERCITUS.

In  corroboration  of  this,  it  will  be  seen  from  the
celebrated  chapter  in  Livy  (viii.  8),  which  we
have  discussed  at  length  above,  that  after  the  open
order  had  been  estJiblished,  and  the  majority  of
the  hastati  had  become  hoplites  (scututi),  one-third
of  the  men  in  each  maniple  were  equipped  as  light
troops  "  manipulus  leves  viccnos  milites  ....  leves
autem,  qui  hastam  tantum  gaesaque  gererent."
The  Principes  were  the  front  ranks  of  the  phalanx,
men  in  the  full  vigour  of  their  years  and  strength,
clad  in  complete  defensive  armour,  and  hence  dis-
tinguished by  Livy  {L  c.)  as  "  insignibus  maxime
armis."  The  Pilani  were  in  the  rear  of  the  pha-
lanx, and  as  the  opposing  hosts  approached  each
other,  before  they  were  required  to  give  weight
and  momentum  to  the  mass,  threw  the  heavy
pilum  over  the  heads  of  their  comrades,  in  order
to  break,  if  possible,  the  continuity  of  the  enemy's
line.

Vegetius  uniformly  places  ths  Principes  in  front
(i.  20,  ii.  2,  15,  iii.  14),  and  it  is  only  necessary
to  read  the  sentences  in  which  they  are  mentioned,
to  perceive  hov/  hopeless  is  the  confusion  which
pervades  his  statements.

Antesignani. — While  the  Hastati  and  Principes,
taken  together,  were  sometimes  termed  Antepilani,
in  contradistinction  to  the  Triarii,  so  the  Hastati
alone  were  sometimes  termed  Antesignani^  in  con-
tradistinction to  the  Principes  and  Triarii  taken
together.  That  the  Antesignani  were  the  soldiers
who  fought  in  the  front  ranks,  is  manifest  from
almost  every  passage  in  which  the  word  is  found
(e.  g.  Itiv.  ii.  20,  vii.  33)  ;  that  they  were  so  called
from  being  placed  before  the  standards,  is  proved
by  the  description  of  the  confusion  which  prevailed
in  the  engagement  at  the  Thrasymene  lake,  "  Non
ilia  (sc.  pugna)  ordinata  per  principes,  hastatosque
ac  triarios,  nee  ut  pro  signis  antesignani,  post  signa
alia  pugnaret  acies"  (Liv.  xxii.  5)  ;  that  they
were  not  the  Velites  is  clear  from  the  marshalling
of  the  troops  before  Zama,  "  vias  patentes  inter
raanipulos  antesignanorum  velitibus  complevit "
(Liv.  XXX.  33,  who  here  translates  Polybius)  ;
that  they  were  the  soldiers  who  formed  the  first
line  as  distinguished  from  the  second,  appears  from
the  narratives  of  the  battles  against  the  Latins,
"caesos  hastatos  principesque,  stragem  et  ante
signa  et  post  signa  factam,  triarios  postremo  rem
restituisse  "  (Liv.  viii.  11),  and  against  the  Tuscans,
*'cadunt  antesignani,  et  ne  nudentur  propugna-
toribus  signa,  fit  ex  secunda  prima  acies  "  (Liv.
ix.  39)  ;  and  from  these  two  quotations,  it  is
further  evident  that  the  position  of  the  "  signa  "
was  behind  the  hastati  and  before  the  principes.
These  signa  must  have  been  the  ordinary  standards
of  the  maniples,  for  we  know  that  the  aquila  was
in  the  custody  of  the  first  maniple  of  the  triarii.
The  term  Antesignani  having  become  established
as  denoting  the  front  ranks  in  a  line  of  battle,  was
retained  in  this  general  sense  long  after  the  Hastati,
Principes,  and  Triarii  had  disappeared  (see  Caes.
B.  C.  i.  43,  iii.  84,  where  they  are  the  oldest  and
best  soldiers,  who  now  led  the  van.  Comp.  Varro
ap.  Non.  8.  V.  Antesignanorum.)

Another  term  employed  to  denote  the  front
ranks  of  an  army  in  battle  array  is  Principia,  and
in  this  sense  must  be  carefully  distinguished  from
the  Principia  or  chief  street  in  the  camp,  and  from
Principia,  which  in  the  later  writers,  such  as  Am-
niianus  and  Vegetius,  is  equivalent  to  principales
tniliies  (Liv.  ii.  65,  iii.  22,  viii.  10  ;  Sisenn.  ap.


EXERCITUS.

Non.  s.  V.  majulare  ;  Sail.  Jug.  54  ;  Tac.  Hist.  iL
43  ;  comp.  Varr.  ap.  Gell.  iii.  4  ;  Terent.  Eun.  iv.
7,  and  note  of  Donatus  ;  Scnec.  «fe  Vit.  heat.  14).

Postsignani  does  not  occur  in  any  author  earlier
than  Ammianus  Marcellinus  (xviii.  8.  §  7,  xxiv.  6.
§  9),  and  therefore  need  not  be  illustrated  here  ;
the  Sulmgnanus  miles  of  Tacitus  {Hist.  i.  70,  iv.
33)  seems  to  be  the  same  with  the  Vexillarii^  who
fall  under  our  next  period.

Rorarii^  Accensi,  Ferentarii,  Jaculatores^  Velites^
Procubitores.

Light-armed  troops  {levis  armatura)  were,
from  the  first,  associated  with  the  hoplites,  but
under  different  circumstances  and  different  names,
at  different  periods.

When  the  Hastati  had,  in  a  great  measure,  ceased
to  act  as  tirailleurs,  their  place  was  supplied  by
iheRorarii  (Rorarii  dicti  ah  rore,  qui committehant
helium  ante,  ideo  quod  ante  rorat  qitam  pluit,  Varro,
L.  L.  vii.  §  57),  whose  method  of  fighting  has  been
described  above  (p.  495).  The  Accensi,  as  de-
scribed by  Livy  (viii.  8),  were  inferior  in  equip-
ment to  the  rorarii,  although  employed  in  a  similar
manner,  and  seem  to  have  been  camp  followers  or
servants  (Accensos  ministratores  Cato  esse  scribit,
Varro,  I.  c.  and  ap.  Non.  Marcell.  s.  v.  accensi),  and
hence  the  name  is  given  to  those  also  who  attended
upon  magistrates  or  other  officials  {e.g.  Cic.  ad
Fam.  iii.  7,  ad  Q.  Fr.  i.  1.  §  4,  7).  At  a  later
period  the  accensi  were  supernumeraries,  who
served  to  fill  up  any  vacancies  which  occurred  in
the  course  of  a  campaign  (Accensi  dicebantur  qui
in  locum  moHuorum  militum  subito  subrogabantur,
Fest.  s.  v.),  persons  to  whom  Varro  gives  the  name
of  adscriptivi  {quod  olim  adscribchantur  inermes,
armatis  militihus  qui  succederent,  L.  L.  vii.  §  56)  ;
and,  according  to  Festus  (p.  198,  ed.  Miiller),  ac-
census  was  the  name  given,  originally,  to  the  optio
or  lieutenant  of  the  centurion,  a  fact  to  which
the  Pseudo-Asconius,  perhaps,  refers,  when  he  says
(in  Verr.ii.  28),  ^^  Accensus  nomen  est  ordinis  et
promotionis  in  militia,  ut  nunc  dicitiu"  princeps,  vel
commentariensis  aut  cornicularius.  Haec  enim
nomina  de  legionaria  militia  sumpta  sunt."

Another  ancient  term  for  light-armed  soldiere
was  Ferentarii,  a  word  found  in  the  Trinummus  of
Plautus  (ii.  4.  55),  where /erentarius  amicus  signi-
fies a  friend  nimble  and  prompt  to  lend  assistance  ;
in  Sallust  {Caiil.  60),  "  Postquam  eo  ventum  est,
unde  a/erentariis  proelium  committi  posset  ;"  and
even  in  Tacitus  {Ann.  xii.  35),  "ferentarius  gravis-
que  miles."  The  term  is  twice  explained  by
Varro,  who,  in  his  treatise  De  Vita  Popidi  Romani,
after  defining  accensi,  adds  (ap.  Non.  Marcell.
s.  V.  Decurio),  "  Eosdem  etiam  quidam  vocabant
ferentarios  qui  depugnabant  pugnis  et  lapidibus,
his  armis  quae  ferrentur,  non  quae  tenerentur;"
and,  again  {L.  L.  vii.  §  57),  '"'' Ferentarium  a
ferendo  ....  aut  quod  ferentarii  equites  hi  dicti
qui  ea  modo  habebant  arma  quae  ferrentur,  ut
jaculum,"  whence  it  appears  that  horsemen  as
well  as  foot-soldiers  were  sometimes  known  by
this  appellation.  Rorarii  and  accensi  stand  to-
gether in  a  line  quoted  (Varro,  I.  c.)  from  the
Frivolaria  of  Plautus.

Ubi  rorarii   estis  ?   en  sunt.     Ubi  sunt  accensi  ?
Ecce !  —

"  Rorarius  veiox "  occurs  twice  in  the  fragments
of  Lucilius  ;  and  even  Symmachus,  in  one  of  his


EXERCITUS.

epistles  (vili.  47),  draws  an  illustration  from  this
source  "tamquam  levis  armaturae  miles  Ilorarios
aeniularis."

The  Velites,  called  also  Procuhitores,  because
they  were  employed  on  outpost  duty  when  the
Romans  were  encamped  before  an  enemy  (Festus,
s. «.),  were  first  formed  into  a  corps  at  the  siege  of
Capua,  B.  c.  211,  as  we  are  infomied  by  Livy
(xxvi.  4,  comp.  xxxviii.  21,  and  Val.  Max.  ii.  3  ;
Frontin.  iv.  7),  who  gives  a  minute  description  of
the  circumstances  which  led  to  their  institution,
and  of  the  manner  in  which  thej^  were  armed.
It  is  true  that  the  historian  uses  the  term  Velites
before  the  epoch  in  question  (e.g.  xxi.  56,  xxiv.
34)  ;  and  Polybius,  in  like  manner,  speaks  of
ypo<r<poix6.xoi  from  the  time  of  the  first  Punic  war  ;
but  these  expressions  must  be  understood  to  in-
dicate the  light-armed  troops  as  they  then  existed,
and  which,  after  the  name  Rorarii  fell  into  disuse,
were  styled  jaculatores  or  TTe(aKoi/Ti(TTal.  We
must  not  conclude  from  the  narrative  of  Livy,  that
it  was  customary  for  the  Velites  to  mount  behind
the  cavalry  ;  on  the  contrary,  the  above  passage  is,
perhaps,  the  only  one  in  which  they  are  represented
as  employed  in  this  manner,  although,  in  later
times,  it  was  by  no  means  uncommon  for  light-
armed  troops  to  mingle  with  the  horsemen,  to  keep
pace  with  them,  and  to  support  them  in  their
operations  (Caesar,  B.G.  i.  48,  viii.  19,  B.C.  iii.
84  ;  Sa]\.Jug.9l).

The  foreign  light-armed  troops  will  be  noticed
under  the  next  epoch.

The  Oncers  of  the  Legion.

Trihuni. —  The  chief  officers  of  the  legion  were
the  Trihuni  Militum.,  rendered  by  the  Greeks
X'AiapX"''  Trihunus  is,  unquestionably,  derived
from  tribus;  and,  according  to  Varro  (Z.  L.  v,
§  81),  in  ancient  times  three  were  sent  to  the
army,  —  one  from  the  liamnes  ;  one  from  the
Luceres  ;  one  from  the  Titles,  —  who  would  then
he  the  commanders  of  the  original  legion  of  3000.
In  the  time  of  Polybius,  the  number  in  each  legion
was  six  ;  but  when  and  under  what  circumstances
this  increase  took  place,  is  unknown.  Two  pas-
sages from  Livy  (vii.  5,  ix.  30),  to  be  more  par-
ticularly adverted  to  hereafter,  by  which  Sigonius
endeavoured  to  throw  light  upon  the  question,
admit  of  an  interpretation  totally  different  from
that  which  he  has  assigned  to  them,  and  they
leave  the  matter  altogether  in  doubt.  After  the
number  six  was  once  established,  it  does  not
appear  to  have  varied  for  many  centuries,  nor  do
we  know  what  changes  were  introduced,  m  this
respect,  during  the  decline  of  the  empire.  The
case  in  Livy  (xlii.  35),  where  four  military  tri-
bunes are  represented  to  have  been  chosen  from
the  senate  to  command  four  legions,  supposing  the
text  to  be  faultless,  is  manifestly  quite  special.

It  must  be  understood  that  the  authority  of
each  tribune  was  not  confined  to  a  particular  portion
of  the  legion,  but  extended  equally  over  the  whole.
In  order,  however,  to  prevent  confusion  and  colli-
sion, it  was  the  practice  (Polyb.  vi.)  for  the
tribunes  to  divide  themselves  into  three  sections  of
two,  and  each  pair  undertook  the  routine  functions
for  two  months  out  of  the  six,  during  which  active
operations  in  the  field  usually  lasted.  (Comp.
Liv.  xl.  41,  "  Secundae  legionis  Fulvius  tribunus
militum  erat,  is  mensibus  stiis  dimisit  legionem.")
In  addition  to  the  duties  specified  by  Polj-bius,


EXERCITUS.  503

and  already  detailed  under  Castra,  and  to  the
general  superintendence  which  they  must  have
exercised,  we  perceive  that  they  nominated  the
centurions,  and  assigned  to  each  the  company
which  he  was  to  command.  They  presided  also  a^^t
courts-martial,  and  had  the  power  of  awarding  the
highest  punishments.

Up  to  the  year  b.  c.  361,  the  tribunes  were
chosen  by  the  commanders-in-chief,  that  is,  by  the
kings  in  the  first  instance,  and  afterwards  by  the
consuls,  or  a  dictator,  as  the  case  might  be.  In
the  year  above  named  the  people  assumed  to  them-
selves the  right  of  electing  either  the  whole  or  a
certain  number,  it  is  impossible  to  say  which  (Liv.
vii.  5),  but  they  seem  to  have  allowed  matters  to
return  to  a  great  extent  to  their  former  state  until
B.  c.  311,  when  it  was  ordained  that  they  should
choose  sixteen  for  the  four  legions  (Liv.  ix.  30)  ;
but  whether  this  embraced  a  whole  or  a  part  onlj-,
is  a  point  upon  which  we  are  again  left  in  doubt.
From  this  time  forward,  in  virtue  of  the  rogation
then  passed,  the  people  continued  to  elect  the
whole,  or,  at  all  events,  the  greater  number  until
B.  n.  207,  when  the  consuls,  Claudius  Nero  and
Livius  Salinator,  appointed  the  tribunes  to  nineteen
out  of  the  twenty-three  legions  of  that  year,  the
people  taking  to  themselves  the  nomination  to  the
first  four  only  (Liv.  xxvii.  36).  When  war  was
declared  against  Perseus  B.C.  171,  a  special  act
was  passed  that  the  military  tribunes  for  that  year
should  not  be  elected  by  the  votes  of  the  people,
but  should  be  nominated  by  the  consuls  and
praetors  (Liv.  xlii.  31.)  ;  the  same  arrangement
probably  was  adopted  the  following  year,  for  it  is
particularly  mentioned  that  in  the  third  year  of
the  war  (b.  c.  169),  the  people  named  the  tribunes
of  four  legions,  which  were  kept  in  reserve  (Liv,
xliii.  12)  ;  and,  finally,  in  the  fourth  and  last  year
of  the  war  (b.  c.  1 68),  the  senate  resolved  that
the  tribunes  for  the  eight  legions  should  be  named
one  half  by  the  people  and  one  half  by  the  consuls,
Aemilius  Paulus  being  allowed  to  select  out  of  the
whole  body  those  whom  he  considered  best  fitted
for  serving  in  the  two  legions  which  he  was  about
to  transport  into  Macedonia.  Polybius  (vi.  19)
refers  incidentally  to  the  fact  that  some  of  the
tribunes  were  chosen  by  the  people,  and  some  by
the  consuls,  but  without  specifying  the  proportions,
and  this  division  of  patronage  probably  subsisted
so  long  as  the  forms  of  the  constitution  were  main-
tained, for  even  under  Augustus  the  people  re-
tained some  power,  nominally  at  least,  in  the
military  elections  ;  but  from  the  reign  of  Tiberius
these  offices  were  held  to  be  in  the  gift  of  the
prince  exclusively.  It  is  clear  that  in  the  later
ages  of  the  republic  the  nomination  of  tribunes,
not  elected  by  the  people,  was  vested  not  in  th?
consuls  alone  but  in  proconsuls  also,  and  generally
in  those  who  held  the  chief  command  in  an  army.
Thus  Cicero,  when  in  Cilicia,  oftered,  at  the  rci-
quest  of  Brutus,  a  tribuneship  to  Scaptius  (Cic.  ad
Att.  vi,  3)  ;  and  the  orator,  at  another  time,  gives
a  hint  to  Caesar,  when  in  Gaul,  that  he  might
bestow  a  tribuneship,  or  some  such  office,  on  Tre-
batius  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  vii.  5)  ;  while  Caesar  himself
found,  to  his  cost,  that  he  had  attended  too  much
to  the  claims  of  friendship  in  granting  these  ap-
pointments. (Caes.  B.  G.  i.  39.)  Those  tribunes
elected  by  the  votes  of  the  people  were  termed
Comitiati,  those  chosen  by  the  general  Rufuli ;  be-
cause, says  Festus,  their  privileges  were  fixed  by

K  K    4


504


EXERCITUS.


a  law  of  Rutilius  Rufus.  (Liv,  vii.  5  ;  Pseud.
•  Ascon.  in  Verr,  Act.  i.  30  ;  Festus,  s.  v.  Rvfidi.)
That  all  tribunes  were  not  upon  an  equality  is
clear  from  the  expression  of  Livy  (xli.  3.),  "  L.
Atius,  trilmnus  primus  secundae  legionis  ;"  and,
from  the  Cornelian  law  quoted  by  Cicero  {Pro
Clnent.  54),  where  the  tribunes  of  the  first  four
legions  are  evidently  regarded  as  superior  to  others.
How  this  precedence  was  regulated,  whether  by
seniority,  by  the  mode  of  election,  or  by  some
otlier  principle  we  cannot  determine.

We  have  seen  from  Polybius  that  no  one  was
eligible  to  the  office  of  tribune  who  had  not  sei-ved
for  ten  years  in  the  infantry  or  five  in  the  cavalry.
This  rule  admitted  of  exceptions,  for  we  find  that
the  elder  Scipio  Africanus  was  tribune  of  the
soldiers  at  the  battle  of  Cannae  (Liv.  xxii.  53),  al-
though certainly  not  twenty  years  old  ;  and  Hor-
tensius  rose  to  the  same  rank  in  his  second  cam-
paign. Augustus  introduced  certain  regulations
altogether  new.  Ho  permitted  the  sons  of  senators
to  wear  the  tunica  laticlavia  as  soon  as  they  as-
sumed the  manly  gown,  and  to  commence  their
military  career  as  tribunes,  or  as  commanders
(prae/edi)  of  cavalry  (Suet.  Octav.  38).  Such
persons  were  the  Tribuni  Laticlavii  (Sueton.  Dom.
10),  whom  we  find  frequently  commemorated  in
the  inscriptions  of  the  empire  (Orelli,  n.  1 33,  1 665,
2379,  3113,  3143,  3441),  and  to  these  we  observe
allusions  in  Hoi^ace  {Sat  i.  6.  25),  and  in  Statins
{Sylv.  V.  1.  97).  We  find  also,  in  one  passage  at
least,  the  phrase  Trihunus  Augusticlavitis  {SuetOth.
10).  We  can  scarcely  suppose  that  raw  j^ouths
entering  the  army  far  the  first  time  were  actually
allowed  to  exercise  the  authority  which  the  name
implies  ;  and  hence  we  may  conclude  that  in  their
case  it  was  a  mere  honorary  title.  By  the  later
emperors,  tribuneships  were  bestowed  without  re-
gard to  the  birth  of  the  individual  ;  and,  in  order
that  they  might  have  an  opportunity  of  obliging  a
greater  number  of  applicants,  the  post  was  fre-
quently conferred  for  six  months  only.  Hence,  we
read  in  Pliny  {Ep.  iv.  4.  1),  "  Hunc  rogo  semestri
trihunatu  splendidiorem  facias,"  and  in  Juvenal,
"  Semestri  vatum  digitos  circumligat  auro^''''  where
there  is  an  allusion  to  the  gold  ring  which  formed
one  of  their  insignia.

Tribunes  were,  from  a  very  early  period,  distin-
guished by  their  dress  from  the  common  soldiers
(Liv.  vii.  34),  and  their  equipments  and  rations  ,
in  the  middle  of  the  third  century  may  be  seen
from  a  curious  letter  written  by  Valerian,  when  he
bestowed  the  command  of  certain  battalions  of
Saracens  on  Probus.  (Vopisc.  Prol).  A.)  Under
the  empire  they  were  attended  by  a  certain  num-
ber of  apparitores,  or  of  soldiers  who  walked  be-
fore them  (Lamprid.  ^/&r.  Sev.  52),  by  a  Vimrius^
or  aide-de-camp  (Vopisc.  Aurelian.  7.  10),  and  by
a  person  termed  Comicularius  Trihuni  (Val,  Max.
vi.  1  ;  Frontin.  iii.  14  ;  Orelli,  Inscripp.  Lat,  3465),
who  was  probably  a  sort  of  fugle-man  who  gave
certain  signals  according  to  the  orders  which  the
officers  wished  to  communicate  —  thus  we  meet
with  the  Comicularius  of  a  centurion  (Val.  Max.
vi.  1.  §  11),  of  a  propraetor  (Orell.  3486),  and
others.  (Orell.  3487,  3522,  comp.  1251,  comp.
Suet.  Dom.  17.)

Trihuni  Cohoriium.— It  has  been  maintained  by
some  critics,  that  in  addition  to  the  six  tribunes  of
the  legions  there  were  ten  inferior  tribunes,  each
cf  whom  commanded  a  cohort.     We  have  no  rea-


EXERCITUS.

son  to  believe  that  any  such  tribunes  existed  even
so  late  as  Hadrian  ;  for  Hyginus,  in  his  minute
description  of  a  camp,  and  of  the  accommodation
required  for  the  officers,  makes  no  mention  of  them.
It  is  true  that  we  read  in  Caesar  {B.  C.  ii.  20),
and  in  Pliny  {Ep.  iii.  9  ;  comp.  Juv.  i.  58  ;  Stat.
Sylv.  v.  96)  of  tribunes  who  commanded  cohorts ;
but  those  in  Caesar  were  not  legionary  but  auxi-
liary cohorts,  and  such,  in  all  probability,  was  the
cohort  alluded  to  by  Pliny.

Lender  Augustus  and  his  successors  Trihunus  was
employed  with  reference  to  many  military  offices.
Thus  Velleius  Paterculus  tells  us  (ii.  104),  that  he
discharged  the  duties  of  Tribunus  Castrorum,  and
in  inscriptions  we  meet  with  Tribunus  Praetorianns
(Orell.  1133),  Trihunus  Fabrum  Navalium  (Orell.
3140),  and  many  others.

Centuriones.  —  Next  in  rank  to  the  Tribunus
was  the  Centurio^  who,  as  the  name  implies,  com-
manded a  century;  and  the  century,  being  termed
also  ordo,  the  centurions  were  frequently  designated
ordinum  dudores  (hence,  adimere  ordines,  q^hrre
ordines,  ordines  impetrare.,  &c>)i  words  represented
in  the  Greek  historians  by  kicaTovTapxns  or  ra-
|tapxo?,  'T^nd  more  rarely  hj  Aoxayds.  The
number  of  centurions  in  a  legion  was  sixt}^,  that
being  at  all  epochs  the  number  of  centuries.
(Dionys.  ix.  107  ;  Tac,  Ann.  i.  32.)

The  moral  qualities  desired  in  a  centurion  are
described  by  Polybius  (vi.  24),  who  tells  us  that
those  regarded  as  best  adapted  for  the  office  were
persons  not  so  much  remarkable  for  daring  valour
as  for  calmness  and  sagacity  ;  men  not  eager  to
begin  a  battle  at  all  hazards,  but  who  would  keep
their  ground  although  overwhelmed  by  a  superior
force,  and  die  rather  than  quit  their  post.  Tlieir
chief  ordinary  duties  were  to  drill  the  soldiers,  to
inspect  their  arms,  clothing,  and  food,  to  watch  the
execution  of  the  toils  imposed,  to  visit  the  centinels,
and  to  regulate  the  conduct  of  their  men,  both  in
the  camp  and  in  the  field.  They  sat  as  judges
also  in  minor  offences,  and  had  the  power  of  in-
flicting corporal  punishment,  whence  their  badge
of  office  was  a  vine  sapling,  and  thus  vitis  is  fre-
quently used  to  denote  the  office  itself.  (Tac.  Ann.
i.  23 ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xiv.  1  ;  Martial,  x.  26  ;  comp.
Juv.  viii.  247,  xiv.  193,  vilem  posce  libello  ;  Spar-
tian.  Hadrian.  10.)

According  to  the  system  described  by  Polybius,
the  centurions  were  chosen  according  to  merit  by  the
tribunes  (e'leAelav  Ta^idpxovs  apicrTLySi^u),  subject,
however,  it  is  evident,  to  the  control  of  the  consuls
(see  Liv.  xlii.  33,  34)  ;  during  the  decline  of  there-
public,  it  was  notorious  that  these  posts  were  made
an  object  of  mercenary  traffic  {Quern  enim  possumus
imperatorem  allquo  in  numero  putare,  cuius  in  exer-
citu  veneant  centuriatus  et  venierint  1  Cic.  pro  Leg.
Manil.  13.  Quidl  centuriatus  palam  venditosl  Cic.
in  Pison.  36)  ;  and  under  the  empire,  the  greatest
corruption  prevailed  (Tac.  Hist.  i.  52,  iii.  49;
Plin.  Ep.  vi.  25),  although  many  laws,  as  may  be
seen  upon  reference  to  the  codes,  were  promul-
gated from  time  to  time  to  remedy  such  disorders.
The  regular  pay  of  the  centurions  is  considered
under  another  head  [Stipendium]  ;  but,  in  addition
to  this,  their  income  was  increased  by  the  money
which  they  received  from  the  soldiers  for  leave
of  absence,  exemption  from  fatiguing  or  disagree-
able duties,  and  other  indulgences.  This  abuse,  so
subversive  of  all  discipline,  probably  arose  during
the  confusion  of  the  civil  wars,  and  gradually  be-


EXERCITUS.

came  so  intolerable  that  Otho,  to  satisfy  all  par-
ties, granted  to  the  centurions  a  fixed  sum  out  of
the  imperial  exchequer  as  a  compensation  for  these
emoluments  ;  and  his  example,  in  this  respect,  was
followed  by  the  most  worthy  of  his  successors.
(Tac.  Hist.  i.  46  ;  comp.  i,  17.)  Even  the  tribunes
appear  to  have  derived  perquisites,  called  stella-
turae,  from  the  rations  of  the  soldiers,  and  these,
although  for  a  time  strictly  prohibited,  were
eventually  recognised  as  lawful.  (Spartian.  Hadr.
10  ;  Spartian.  Fescenn,  Nig.  3  ;  Laraprid.  Alex.
Sev.  15  ;  Cod.  12.  tit.  38.  s.  12  ;  Cod.  Theod.  7.
tit.  4.  s.  28.)

It  will  be  seen  from  Polybius  that  of  the  two
centurions  in  each  maniple  the  one  first  chosen
took  the  command  of  the  right  division  {b  /xhu
irpciTos  alpedils  r^yelrai  rov  Se|zou  /xepovs  t^s
(Tireipas),  the  other  of  the  left.  The  century  to
the  right  was  considered  as  the  first  century  of  the
maniple,  and  its  commander  took  precedence  pro-
bably with  the  title  Prior,  his  companion  to  the  left
being  called  Posterior,  the  priores  in  each  of  the
three  divisions  of  Triarii,  Principes,  and  Hastati
being  the  ten  centurions  first  chosen.  (Polyb.  vi.
24.)  So  long  as  these  divisions  were  recognised,
all  the  centurions  of  the  Triarii  appear  to  have
ranked  before  those  of  the  Principes,  and  all  the
centurions  of  the  Principes  before  those  of  the
Hastati.  Moreover,  since  the  maniples  were
numbered  in  each  division  from  1  to  1 0,  there  was
probably  a  regular  progression  from  the  first  cen-
turion of  the  first  maniple  down  to  the  second
centurion  of  the  tenth  maniple.

The  first  centurion  of  the  first  maniple  of  the
Triarii,  originally  named  (Li v.  vii.  41)  Centurio
Primus,  and  afterwards  Centurio  Primipili,  or
simply  Primipilus,  occupied  a  very  conspicuous
position.  He  stood  next  in  rank  to  the  Tribuni
militum ;  he  had  a  seat  in  the  military  council
(  Polyb.  vi.  24)  ;  to  his  charge  was  committed  the
eagle  of  the  legion,  whence  he  is  sometimes  styled
Aijuilifer  (Val.  Max.  i.  6.  §  11  ;  Tac.  Hist.  iii.  22;
Dionys.  x.  36),  and,  under  the  empire  at  least,  his
ofKce  was  very  lucrative  (locupletem  aquilam,  Juv.
xiv.  197  ;  Mart.  i.  32,  vi.  58).

A  series  of  terms  connected  with  these  arrange-
ments are  furnished  by  the  narrative  which  Sp.
Ligustinus  gives  of  his  own  career  in  the  34th
chapter  of  the  42d  Book  of  Livy.  He  thus
enumerates  the  various  steps  of  his  promotion  :
"  Mihi  T.  Quinctius  Flamininus  decumum  ordi?iem
hastatum  adsignavit  ...  me  imperator  dignum  ju-
dicavit  cui  primum  hastatum  prions  centuriae  ad-
signaret  ...  a  M'.  Acilio  mihi  primus  princeps
prioris  centuriae  est  adsignatus  .  .  .  quater  intra
paucos  annos  primum  pilum  duxi.''''  The  gradual
ascent  from  the  ranks  being  to  the  post  of  cen-
turion:  1.  In  the  tenth  maniple  of  the  Hastati.  2.
In  the  first  century  of  the  first  maniple  of  the  Has-
tati. 3.  In  the  first  century  of  the  first  maniple  of
the  Principes.  4.  In  the  first  century  of  the  first
maniple  of  the  Triarii.

But  even  after  the  distinction  between  Hastati,
Principes,  and  Triarii  was  altogether  abolished,
and  they  were  all  blended  together  in  the  cohorts,
the  same  nomenclature  with  regard  to  the  centuries
and  their  commanders  was  retained,  although  it  is
by  no  means  easy  to  perceive  how  it  was  applied.
The  cohorts  being  numbered  from  1  to  10,  and
the  first  cohort  having  unquestionably  the  prece-
dence over  the  others,  we  may  suppose  that   the


EXERCITUS.


505


rest  took  rank  in  like  manner  in  regular  order,
each  containing  three  maniples.  The  first  maniple
in  each  cohort  may  have  been  considered  as  repre-
senting Triarii  according  to  the  ancient  arrange-
ment, the  second  maniple  in  each  cohort  as  repre-
senting Principes,  the  third  as  representing  Hastati.
If  this  hypothesis  be  admitted,  the  Primipilus,
whom  we  find  mentioned  down  to  a  very  late  date,
was,  imder  the  new  system,  the  first  centurion  of
the  first  maniple  of  the  first  cohort,  and  as  such  had
as  formerly  the  charge  of  the  eagle  ;  thus  also,
when  Caesar  says  (B.  C.  iii.  64),  "  Hoc  casu
aquila  conservatur  omnibus  primae  cohortis  centu-
rionibus  interfectis  praeter  principem  priorem,''''  he  i
must  intend  to  designate  the  first  centurion  of  the
second  maniple  of  the  first  cohort,  who  would  at
full  length  have  been  denominated  primus  princeps
prior ;  in  like  manner,  "  Cretensi  bello  octavum
principem  duxit "  {Ep.  ad  Brut.  i.  8)  will  denote
the  second  maniple  of  the  eighth  cohort,  "  Q.
Fulginius  ex  primo  hastato  legionis  XIV.  qui
propter  eximiam  virtutem  ex  inferioribus  ordinibus
in  eum  locum  pervenerat"  (Caes.  B.  C  i.  46),  and
"  Cum  signifer  primi  hastati  signum  non  posset
rnovere  loco  "  (Cic.  de  Div.  i.  35),  the  third  maniple
of  the  first  cohort.

That  great  differences  of  rank  existed  among  the
centurions  is  evident  from  the  phrases  primores
centurionum  (Liv.  xxvi.  5),  primi  ordines  (i.  e.  chief
centurions,  Caes.  B.  C.  vi.  6),  as  opposed  to  in/e-
riores  ordines  (Caes.  B.  C.  i.  46),  andiinfimi  ordines
(Ibid.  ii.  35)  ;  and  that  promotion  from  a  lower
to  a  higher  grade  frequently  took  place,  is  evident
from  the  career  of  Ligustinus  as  detailed  by  him-
self (Liv.  xlii.  34),  of  Scaeva,  who  was  raised  "  ab
octavis  ordinibus  ad  primum  pilum  "  ( Caes.  B.  C.
iii.  53)  for  his  gallant  conduct  at  Dyrrhachium,
and  from  many  other  passages  of  which  it  will  be
sufficient  to  quote  one  from  Caesar  {B.  G.  vi.  42) :
"  Centuriones  quorum  nonnulli  ex  inferioribus  ordi-
nibus reliquarum  legionum  virtutis  causa  in  supe-
riores  erant  ordines  huius  legionis  traducti  ;"  but
we  are  ignorant  whether  in  ordinary  cases  this
promotion  proceeded  regularlj-,  or  was  conducted
according  to  any  fixed  principle.  While  on  the
one  hand  we  should  be  led  to  infer  that  there  was
some  regular  progression,  from  such  observations  as
"  Erant  in  ea  legione  ibrtissimi  viri  centuriones
qui  jam  primis  ordinibus  appropinquarent  "  ( Caes.
B.  G.  V.  44),  and  while  it  is  probable  that  such
was  actually  the  case  when  the  legion  became  per-
manent, so  on  the  other  hand  it  is  difficult  to  see
how  promotion  could  have  been  systematic  during
the  long  period  when  the  legions  were  disbanded
annually,  since  the  choice  of  the  centurion  depended
entirely  upon  the  discretion  of  the  tribunes  subject
to  the  control  of  the  general,  who  was  himself
changed  from  year  to  year,  so  that  those  who  served
together  in  one  season  might  be' in  different  legions
and  different  countries  the  next.  Nor  was  it  un-
constitutional for  a  centurion  who  had  commanded
one  of  the  higher  companies  to  be  called  upon  sub-
sequently to  fill  lower  stations  :  this  was  not
common,  as  we  perceive  from  a  case  in  which
strenuous  resistance  was  offered  by  twenty-three
centurions  "  qui  primos  piles  duxerant "  to  enrolling
unless  their  former  rank  was  guaranteed  to  them
(Liv.  xlii.  32,  33),  but  this  resistance  was  overcome,
and  it  was  held,  that  the  consul  ought  not  to  be
prevented  from  assigning  that  post  to  any  individual
:  in  which  his  services  were  likely  to  prove  most


SOS


EXERCITUS.


valuable  to  the  state.  It  was  not  until  the  year
B.  c.  341,  that  a  law  was  passed  by  which  it  was
ordained,  that  no  one  who  had  held  the  office  of
military  tribune  should  be  eligible  as  a  centurion
(ne  quis^  ubitrihunus  militum  fuisset^postea  ordinum
drictor  essei,  Li  v.  vii.  41),  and  at  that  time  the
regulation  was  made  in  consequence  of  the  dislike
entertained  by  the  soldiers  to  a  particular  individual
who  during  a  succession  of  years  had  been  alter-
nately a  tribune  and  primipilus.

Optio7ies.  —  In  like  manner  as  the  tribunes  named
the  centurions,  so  each  centurion  named  his  oAvn
lieutenant,  who  is  called  by  Polybius  ovpay6s,  be-
cause his  station  was  in  the  rear  of  the  company.
By  Livy  (viii,  8),  a  subaltern  of  this  kind  is  named
subce?iturio,  but  the  individual  there  mentioned  was
selected  for  a  particular  purpose,  and  it  seems  clear
from  Varro  and  Festus  that  the  regular  term  was
optio,  which  signifies  in  general  a  person  chosen
(optatus),  by  another  as  an  assistant.  They  agree
as  to  the  etymology,  but  the  former  (L.  L.  v.  91)
confines  the  term  to  the  lieutenant  chosen  originally
by  the  decurio  in  a  troop  of  cavalry,  and  adds  that
the  tribunes  had  assumed  to  themselves  the  patron-
age, "  Quos  hi  (sc.  decuriones)  prime  administros
ipsi  sibi  adoptabant,  optiones  vocari  coepti,  quos
nunc  propter  ambitiones  tribuni  faciunt,"  while  the
words  of  the  latter  (p.  198,  ed,  Miiller),  although
veiy  corrupt,  seem  to  imply  that  they  had  been
originally  appointed  by  the  tribunes,  and  the  nomi-
nation afterwards  transferred  to  the  centurions :
^^Optio  qui  nunc  dicitur,  antea  appollabatur  Jc-
census,  his  adjutor  dabatur  a  Trib.  Militum,  qui
ex  eo  tempore,  quem  velint,  centurionibus  per-
missum  est  optare,  etiam  nomen  ex  facto  sortitus
est."  The  explanation  in  the  Excerpta  of  Paulus
Diaconus,  is  somewhat  different  from  either  :  "■  Op-
tio  est  optatio,  sed  in  re  militari  optio  appellatur
is,  quem  decurio  aut  centurio  optat  sibi  rerum
privatarum  ministrum,  quo  facilius  obcat  publica
officia  "  (p.  184,  ed.  Miiller).

Fourth  Period.  From  the  times  of  the  Gracchi
until  the  downfall  of  tJie  Republic.  —  The  century
which  immediately  preceded  the  destruction  of  the
Roman  constitution,  was  above  all  others  a  season
of  restless  excitement  and  revolution.  A  vast  num-
ber of  organic  changes  was  introduced  into  the
array,  the  greater  number  of  which  are  commonly
ascribed  to  Marius,  but,  although  he  was  un-
doubtedly the  author  of  many  most  important
modifications,  others  not  less  vital  were  the  result
of  the  new  position  assumed  by  the  Italian  states  ;
and  some  must  have  required  so  much  time  for
their  full  development,  that  they  could  scarcely
have  been  the  work  of  a  single  individual.  We
shall  call  attention  very  briefly  to  the  leading
features  of  the  new  system,  in  so  far  as  they  can
be  gleaned  from  the  pages  of  Sallust,  Caesar,  and
Plutarch,  who  mus't  be  here  regarded  as  our  chief
guides.

1.  In  the  first  consulship  of  Marius,  the  legions
were  thrown  open  to  citizens  of  all  grades,  without
distinction  of  fortune.     (See  above.)

2.  The  whole  of  the  legionaries  were  armed  and
equipped  in  the  same  manner,  all  being  now  fur-
nished with  the  pilum  ;  and  hence  we  see  in  Taci-
tus (Ann.  xii.  35)  the  pila  and  gladii  of  the  legion-
aries, opposed  to  the  hastae  and  spathae  of  the
auxiliaries.

3.  The  legionaries  when  in  battle  order  were  no
longer  arranged  in  three  lines,  each  consisting  of


EXERCITUS.

ten  maniples  with  an  open  space  between  eacli  ma-
niple, but  in  two  lines,  each  consisting  of  five  co-
horts with  a  space  between  each  cohort.

4.  The  younger  soldiers  were  no  longer  placed  in
the  front,  but  in  reserve,  the  van  bemg  composed
of  veterans  as  may  be  seen  from  various  passages
in  Caesar.

5.  As  a  necessary  result  of  the  above  arrange-
ments, the  distinction  between  Hastati,  Principes,
and  Triarii  ceased  to  exist.  These  names,  as  applied
to  particular  classes  of  soldiers,  are  not  found  in
Caesar,  in  Tacitus,  in  the  treatise  of  Hyginus  on
castrametation,  nor  in  any  writer  upon  military  af-
fairs after  the  time  of  Marius,  while  Varro  explains
them  as  terras  no  longer  in  use.  The  words  Hiis-
tatus  and  Princeps  occur  at  a  later  period,  in  con-
nection with  the  legion,  but  are  used  only  with
reference  to  the  precedence  of  the  centuries  and  of
the  officers  by  whora  they  were  commanded,  as  we
have  pointed  out  when  treating  of  the  ceniuriones.

6.  The  Velites  disappeared.  The  skirmishers,
included  under  the  general  tenii  levis  armatura,
consisted  for  the  raost  part  of  foreign  raercenaries
possessing  peculiar  skill  in  the  use  of  some  national
weapon,  such  as  the  Balearic  slingers  (funditores)^
the  Cretan  archers  {scuiittarii),  and  the  Moorish,
dartraen  (jaculatores).  Troops  of  this  description
had,  it  is  true,  been  employed  by  the  Romans  even
before  the  second  Punic  war  (Liv.  xxii.  37),  and
were  denominated  levium  armatorum  (s.  minorum)
auonlia  (Liv.  I.  c.  and  xlii.  Qb,  where  they  are  dis-
tinguished from  the  Velites),  but  now  the  levis
armatura  consisted  exclusively  of  foreigners,  were
formed  into  a  regular  corps  under  their  own  officers,
and  no  longer  entered  into  the  constitution  of  the
legion  ;  indeed,  the  terms  legionarius  and  levis
armatura  became  opposed  to  each  other  in  the
Latin  writers,  just  as  oirKnai  and  ^iKoi  among
the  Greeks  {e.  g.  "  ceciderunt  ex  levi  armatura
cccxxiv.  ex  legionariis  cxxxviii,"  Auct.  de  B.  His'
pan.  24,  corap.  Tacit  A?in.  ii.  IG).  The  word
velites  is  not  found  in  Caesar,  and  that  they  had
ceased  to  exist  when  Livy  wrote  is  clear  frora  the
expression  in  his  description  of  the  battle  of  Zama,
where  after  having  used  the  word  "  velitibus,"  he
adds  the  explanation  "  eatunc  levis  arraatura  erat  "
(xxx.  33).  When  operations  requiring  great  ac-
tivitj"-  were  undertaken,  such  as  could  not  be  per-
formed by  mere  skirmishers,  detachments  of  le-
gionaries were  lightly  equipped,  and  marched
without  baggage,  for  these  special  services  ;  and
hence,  the  frequent  occurrence  of  such  phrases  as
eapediti,  eocpediti  militcs,  expeditae  cohortes,  and  even
eocpeditae  legiones.

7.  The  cavalry  of  the  legion  underwent  a  change
in  every  respect  analogous  to  that  which  took  place
in  regard  of  the  light  armed  troops.  Whoever
reads  with  attention  the  history  of  Caesar's  cam-
paigns in  Gaul,  will  perceive  that  the  number  of
Roman  equites  attached  to  his  anny  Avas  very  small,
and  that  they  were  chiefly  employed  as  aide-de-
camps, and  on  confidential  missions.  On  the  other
hand,  it  is  evident  that  the  bulk  of  his  cavalry  con-
sisted of  foreigners,  a  fact  which  becomes  strikingly
apparent  when  we  read  that  Ariovistus  having
stipulated  that  the  Roman  general  should  come  to
their  conference  attended  by  cavalry  alone,  Caesar
feeling  no  confidence  in  his  Gaulish  horse,  dis-
mounted them  and  supplied  their  place  by  soldiers
of  the  tenth  legion.  {D.  G.  i.  42.)  In  like  manner
they  ceased  to  form  part  of  the  legion,  and  from


EXERCITUS.

this  time  forward  we  find  the  legions  and  the
cavalry  spoken  of  as  completely  distinct  from  each
other (e.. 9.  Caesar,  E.G.  v.  11, 18  ;  Appian,  B.  C
V.  5).  Whether  there  was  not  to  a  certain  extent
a  return  to  the  ancient  system  under  the  empire,  is
a  question  which  will  fall  to  be  considered  in  the
next  section.

8.  When,  after  the  termination  of  the  Social  War,
a  large  proportion  of  the  inhabitants  of  Italy  were
admitted  to  the  privilege  of  Roman  citizens,  the
ancient  distinction  so  long  maintained  between  the
Legiones  and  the  Sodi  at  once  disappeared,  all  who
had  formerly  served  as  Socii  became  as  a  matter
of  right  incorporated  with  the  legiones,  and  an
army  during  the  last  years  of  the  republic  and
under  the  earlier  emperors  consisted  of  Romanae
Legiones  et  AuxUia  s.  Auxiliares,  the  latter  term
comprehending  troops  of  all  kinds,  except  the
legions  and  the  imperial  guards,  whether  infantry
or  cavalry,  light  armed  or  heavy  armed,  merce-
naries in  the  pay  of  the  state  or  contingents  fur-
nished at  the  cost  of  kings  and  cities  in  alliance
with  Rome.  The  infantry,  not  legionary,  was  for
the  most  part  organised  in  battalions  called  eo-
hortes,  the  cavalry  in  squadrons  called  alae,  the
numbers  in  each  coliors  and  ala  varying  according
to  circumstances,  and  hence  such  phrases  as  aloe
auadiiaqits  cohortium  (Tacit.  Ann.  iv.  5)  ;  agmen
legionum  aloe  cohortesque  praexeniehant.  (Tacit.  //.
ii.  11.)  Whenever  the  word  socii  is  applied  to
troops  after  the  date  of  the  Marsic  war,  it  is  gene-
rally to  be  regarded  as  equivalent  to  auxiliares^
although  a  distinction  is  occasionally  drawn  be-
tween socii  in  the  sense  of  the  civilised  allies  or
subjects  of  Rome,  and  the  barbarian  Germans,
Numidiaiis,  Spaniards  and  others  who  are  more
specially  termed  auxiliares  (Auxiliares  dicuntur
in  bello  socii  Romanorum  eocterarum  nationum,  Paul.
Diac).  In  the  description  of  the  army  of  Germa-
nicus,  as  marshalled  to  encounter  Arminius,  sociae
cohortes  is  used  in  the  most  extended  signification,
for  we  are  told  that  the  army  was  composed  of
auxiliares  Galli  Germaniqiie,  pedites  sagittarii,
qtiatuor  legiones^  duae  praetoriae  cohortes  ac  delecti
equites,  quatuor  legiones^  levis  armatura,  equites
sagittarii,  ceterae  sociorum  cohortes.

9.  The  manner  of  levying  troops  in  Italy  must
necessarily  have  changed  with  this  change  of  cir-
cumstances. We  are  destitute  of  any  definite  in-
formation, but,  in  all  probability,  a  system  of  con-
scription was  established  and  carried  out  by  means
of  Conquisitores,  such  as  were  occasionally  appointed
in  ancient  times  when  difficulty  was  experienced
in  finding  men  (see  Liv.  xxii.  1 1  ;  comp.  Cic.  ad
Att.  vii.  10  ;  Hirt,  D.  Alex.  2)  ;  and  we  find  that
the  Emperor  Tiberius  was  not  satisfied  with  ob-
taining volunteers,  whom  he  regarded  as,  for  the
most  part,  an  inditferent  class  of  soldiers,  and  in-
sisted upon  the  necessity  of  recruiting  the  legions
»*  delectibus."     {Ann.  iv.  4.)

10.  The  most  important  change  of  all,  in  so  far
as  society  at  large  was  concerned,  was  that  to
which  we  have  already  adverted,  the  establishment
namely  of  the  military  profession,  and  the  distinc-
tion now  first  introduced  between  the  civilian  and
the  soldier.  This  naturally  led  to  the  abrogation
of  the  rule,  still  in  force  when  Polybius  wrote,  by
which  no  one  could  hold  any  magistracy  (iroXi-
TiK^v  a.pxhv)  until  he  had  completed  ten  years  of
military  service,  a  rule  which  had  fallen  so  com-
pletely into  desuetude  in  the  course  of  sixty  or


EXERCITUS.


607


seventy  years  afterwards,  that  we  see  Cicero  pass-
ing through  all  the  highest  dignities  and  attaining
to  the  consiilship,  although  his  experience  of  a
military  life  was  limited  to  a  single  campaign  under
Pompeius  Strabo.

Fifth  Period.  From  the  establishment  of  the  Im-
perial government  until  the  age  of  the  Antonines,
B.  c.  31 — A.  D.  150. — We  shall  be  enabled  to  form
a  correct  idea  of  the  materials  which  constituted  an
imperial  anny  during  the  first  two  centuries  of  our
era  by  passing  under  review  the  various  kinds  of
troops  for  which  Hyginus  proposes  to  provide  ac-
commodation in  the  camp,  whose  construction  ho
describes  [Castra].  We  shall  not  take  these
precisely  in  the  order  in  which  they  are  named  by
him,  but  shall  endeavour  to  arrange  them  sj'S-
tematically.

A  regular  army  during  this  period  consisted  of
a  certain  number  of  Legiones  and  of  Supplemental
the  Supplementa  being  again  divided  into  the  im-
perial guards,  which  appear  under  several  different
forms,  distinguished  by  different  names  ;  and  the
Atixilia,  which  were  subdivided  into  Sociae  Co-
hortes and  Nationes,  the  latter  being  for  the  most
part  barbarians.

1.  The  Legiones,  as  we  have  already  had  occa-
sion to  point  out,  although  still  composed  of  per-
sons who  enjoyed  the  privileges  of  Roman  citizens,
were  now  raised  almost  exclusively  in  the  pro-
vinces ;  and  hence  Tiberius,  when  about  to  under-
take his  long  projected  progress  through  the  pro-
vinces, alleged  as  one  of  his  excuses  for  quitting
Italy,  the  necessity  of  recruiting  the  legions  by
a  regular  levy  or  conscription.  (Tac.  Ann.  iv.
4.)  The  legion  was  divided  into  ten  cohorts,  and
each  cohort  into  six  centuries  ;  the  first  cohort,
which  had  the  custody  of  the  eagle,  was  double
the  size  of  the  others,  and  contained  960  men,  the
remaining  cohorts  contained  each  480  men  ;  and
consequently  each  ordinary  century  80  men,  the
total  strength  of  the  legion  being  thus  5280  men.

2.  Legionum  Vexillarii.  The  term  Vexillarii  or
Vexilla,  which  is  found  repeatedly  in  Tacitus,  has
proved  a  source  of  the  greatest  embarrassment  to
commentators,  and  a  vast  number  of  hypotheses,
all  of  them  highly  unsatisfactory,  have  been  pro-
pounded in  order  to  reconcile  the  statements  of  the
historian,  which  at  first  sight  appear  replete  with
contradictions.  But  the  difficulty  has  arisen  en-
tirely from  almost  all  critics  having  entered  upon
a  wrong  path  from  the  very  first,  starting  upon  the
supposition  that  Vexillarii,  in  every  case,  denoted
troops  of  the  same  kind,  whereas,  in  reality,  the
word  is  a  general  term  ;  and  we  must  ascertain  its
signification  in  each  particular  case  from  the  words
with  which  it  is  immediately  joined  or  the  general
context  of  the  passage.  Vexillum  is  used  in  the
earliest  account  of  the  manipular  legion  (Liv.  viii.
8)  to  denote  the  standard  of  the  ordo  or  maniple,
vexillarius  being  the  standard  bearer  ;  and  in  pro-
cess of  time,  vexillum  was  employed  to  denote  any
military  standard  whatsoever,  except  the  sacred
eagle  of  the  legion.  By  a  careful  examination  of
the  various  passages  in  Tacitus  where  Vexillarii
are  mentioned,  it  will  be  seen  that  he  designates
by  this  appellation  any  body  of  soldiers  serving
apart  from  the  legion  under  a  separate  ensign,  or
even  an  army  collectively.  In  this  sense  we  must
understand  such  expressions  as  Vexillum  tironum
{Ann.  ii.  78)  ;  Germanica  vexilla  {Hist.  i.  31)  ;
Gennanis  vcxillis  {Hist.  i.  70)  ;  veonllis  inferioria


508


EXERCITUS.


Germaniae  praeventus  est  (Hist.  i.  53)  ;  EquUnm
vexiUa  {Hist.  ii.  11).  Compare,  Manipuli  ante
coeptam  seditionem  Nauportum  missi  .  .  .  vexilia
convellunt  (Ann.  i.  20).  But  when  Vexillarii  or
Vexilia  are  accompanied  by  any  word  which  de-
notes an  immediate  connection  with  a  legion,  as
vexillarii  discordium  legionum  (Ann.  i.  38)  ;  quarta
decima  legio  cum  vexillariis  vicesimanis  (Ann.  xiv.
34)  ;  cum  veooillis  nonae  secundaeque  et  vicesimae
Britannicarum  legionum  (Hist.  iii.  22),  then  they
bear  a  specific  meaning  connected  with  certain
changes  introduced  by  Augustus.  We  have  seen
that  under  tlie  republic  a  citizen  might  be  called
upon  to  serve  for  twenty  years  in  the  infantry  ;
when  the  legions  became  permanent  the  full  pe-
riod was  generally  exacted,  and  those  who  chose
to  remain  after  their  time  was  completed,  were
termed  veterani.  Augustus,  in  the  year  B.  c.  13,
limited  the  period  of  service  to  twelve  years  for  the
praetorians,  and  sixteen  for  the  legionaries,  after
which  they  were  to  be  entitled  to  an  honom-able
discharge  (missio  honesta),  and  to  receive  a  bounty
(praemtum,  commoda  missionum)  ;  but  not  long
afterwards,  a.  d.  5,  it  was  found  necessary  to  in-
crease the  period  to  sixteen  years  for  the  prae-
torians, and  twenty  for  the  legionaries.  At  this
time  it  appears  probable  that  the  practice  was  first
introduced  of  discharging  the  soldiers  from  the
legion  at  the  end  of  sixteen  years,  and  keeping
them  together  under  a  vexillum  with  peculiar
privileges  during  the  remaining  four  years  of  their
service.  Abuses,  however,  crept  in,  and  many
soldiers,  instead  of  being  pensioned  off  at  the  end
of  twenty  years,  were  compelled  to  remain  for  a
much  longer  period,  and  the  discontent  caused  by
such  oppression  gave  rise  to  the  formidable  mutinies
in  Pannonia  and  Germany,  which  burst  forth  im-
mediately after  the  accession  of  Tiberius.  The
soldiers  then  demanded  that  the  original  arrange-
ment by  Augustus  should  be  restored,  and  that
they  should  receive  a  full  discharge  and  the  bountj'
at  the  end  of  sixteen  years  ;  while,  in  order  to
calm  their  wrath,  Germanicus  proposed  to  put  an
end  to  the  disorders  of  which  they  complained,
and  to  carry  honestly  into  effect  the  second  arrange-
ment according  to  which  they  were  to  serve  in  the
legion  for  sixteen  years,  and  then  being  embodied
under  a  vexillum  by  themselves  to  be  relieved
of  all  irksome  labours,  and  to  be  required  only  to
face  the  enemy  in  the  field.  (Dion  Cass.  liv.  25,
Iv.  23  ;  Suet.  Octav.  49  ;  Tacit.  Ann.  i.  17,  36,  the
proposal  contained  in  the  last  passage  being  in
these  words :  missionem  dari  vicena  stipendia  me-
ritis  ;  exauctorari,  qui  senadena  /'ecissent,  ac  retineri
sub  veodllo^  ceterorum  immunes  nisi  propulsandi
liostis).  The  vexillarii  or  vexilia  legionum,  then,
were  those  soldiers  who,  after  having  served  in
the  legion  for  sixteen  years,  became  exauctorati,
but  continued  to  serve  in  company  with  that  legion,
under  a  vexillum  of  their  own,  until  they  received
their  full  discharge.  Hyginus  states  the  number
attached  to  each  legion  as  usually  about  five  or  six
hundred.

3.  Evocati  (avaK\-f}Toi).  Dion  Cassius  tells  us
that  Augustus  began  to  employ  troops  bearing  this
denomination  when  he  called  out  (hveKaKea-fv)  the
veterans  of  Julius  Caesar  to  aid  him  against  An-
tonius.  They  still,  says  Dion,  form  a  peculiar
corps  ((Tv<rTr]jj.a  'iSiov),  and  carry  sticks  in  their
hands  like  centurions.  (Dion  Cass.  xlv.  12,  Iv.  24).
.Galba  gave  the  name  of  Evocati  to  a  body  of  life-


EXERCITUS.

guards  instituted  by  himself,  who  are  described  Iry
Suetonius  (^Galb.  10),  "Delegit  et  equestris  ordini's
juvenes,  qui,  manente  annulorum  aureorura  usii,
Evocati  appellarentur,  excubiasque  circa  cubiculum
suum  vice  militum  agerent."

4.  Coliortes  Praetor iae.  To  these  a  separate
article  is  devoted.     [Praetoriani.]

5.  Equites  Praetoriani.     [Praetoriani.]

6.  Primipilares.  These,  according  to  the  arrange-
ments of  the  Hyginian  camp,  were  placed  close  to
the  person  of  the  emperor,  and  must  have  been  a
small  corps,  consisting  of  persons  who  had  dis-
charged the  office  of  legionary  Primipilus,  and
who  now  acted  as  guards  or  aide-decamps  to  the
commander-in-chief.  Primipilares  is  met  with  fre-
quently in  Tacitus  and  in  inscriptions  (e.  g.  Tacit.
Ann.  ii.  11,  iv.  72,  Hist.  i.  31,  87,  ii.  22,  iii.  70,
iv.  15,  Ann.  xiii.  36  ;  Orelli,  No.  517,  748,  3568).

7.  Officiales.  These  appear  to  have  been  public
servants.  Thus  we  read  in  Appuleius  of  the  offi-
cialis  of  an  aedile,  and  in  Ulpian  of  the  officialis  of
a  praefect.  (Dig.  36.  tit.  4.  s.  5  ;  comp,  Grutcr,
Inscr.  p.  ccccxxii. ;  Orelli,  No,  2952,  4013.)

8.  Equites  Singulares  Imperatoris.  These  are
classed  by  Hyginus  along  Avith  the  Equites  Prae-
toriani, were  like  them  quartered  in  the  Latera
Praetorii,  and  equalled  or  slightly  exceeded  them
in  number.  The  only  classical  author  by  whom
they  are  noticed  is  Tsicitus,  who,  in  that  portion
of  his  Histories  (iv.  70)  where  he  is  describing  the
confusion  that  arose  upon  the  death  of  Vitellius,
mentions  among  the  troops  "  ala  Singularium  ex-
cita  olim  a  Vitellio,  deinde  in  partes  Vespasiani
transgressa,"  but  they  are  very  frequently  com-
memorated in  inscriptions,  as  Equites  Singulares  s.
Singulani  Imperatoris  — A  ugusti — Caesaris — Do  -
mini  Nostri,  &c.  (Orell.  No.  3525,  &c.,  3100,
3496, 1576),  and  on  one  stone  we  read  T.  Flavius.
QuiNTiNus.  Eq.  Sing.  Aug.  Lectus.  Ex.  Exer-
ciTU.  Raetico.  Ex.  Ala.  Flavia.  Pia.  Fideli.
MiLLiARiA.  (Orell.  No.  3409),  which  may  lead
us  to  suppose  that  they  received  their  appellation
in  consequence  of  being  selected  individually  from
other  corps,  and  thus  they  may  belong  to  the  same
class  with  the  Equites  Elect i  (Orell.  3155)  and  the
Eq.  Cust.  Aug.  (Orell.  4453).

9.  Statores.  —  Hyginus  assigns  a  place  for  two
"  Centuriae  Statorura  "  immediately  in  the  rear  of
the  Praetorium  which  they  protected,  and  allots  to
them,  as  to  the  Praetorians,  twice  as  much  space,
in  proportion  to  their  numbers,  as  to  the  troops  of
the  line.  Hence,  it  is  evident  that  they  were
ranked  among  the  life-guards,  although  members  of
their  body  may  have  been  employed  in  the  capacity
of  couriers,  as  persons  bearing  the  same  designation
certainly  were  employed  both  under  the  republic
and  the  empire  by  those  invested  with  military
command.  (Cic.  ad  Fatn.  ii.  17,  19  ;  "  ut  ad  te
statores  meos  et  lictores  cum  Uteris  mitterem  ;  "
comp.  X.  21  ;  Vulcat.  Gallic.  Avid.  Cass.  9  ;  Lam-
prid.  Alex.  Sev.  52  ;  Ulpian,  Dig.  1.  tit.  16.  s.  4.)
In  inscriptions  we  find  Stator.  Aug.  (Orell.
3524),  Stator.  Civitatis.  Vienes.  (lb.  2780),
and  once  Statorum.  Evocati.  (lb.  3422.)

10.  Speculatores,  although  not  provided  for  by
Hyginus,  ought  to  be  mentioned  here,  since  they
also  occupied  a  place  among  the  personal  attendants
of  the  emperors  (Tpsum  Othonem  comitabantur
speculatorum  lecta  corpora.  Tacit.  Hist.  ii.  II,
comp.  i.  24  ;  Suet.  Octav.  74.).  They  were  the
executioners  of  the  array  (Senec  de  Ira,  i.  1 6  ;


,  EXERCITUS.

St.  Mark,  vi.  27,  and  comment,  of  CLrysost. ;  comp.
Suet.  Calig.  32),  and  seem  to  have  acted  as  couriers
likewise.  (Tacit.  Hist  ii,  73.)  They  formed  a
regular  corps  with  officers  of  their  own  (Tacitus
speaks  of  an  optio  speculaiorum,  H.  i.  25),  and
must  have  been  numerous,  as  appears  from  such
expressions  as  ^  praetoriarum  cohortium  et  specula-
torura  equitumque  valida  manus  "  (Tacit.  H.  ii.
33)  ;  and  from  inscriptions  where  mention  is  made
of  a  sixth  cohort  of  speculatores  (Orell.  3518)  ;
while  from  another  inscription,  in  which  a  certain
L.  Veturius  is  styled  Praef.  Turmae.  Specu-
LAT.,  it  is  manifest  that  there  must  have  been
mounted  speculatores.  The  word  is  used  also  by
Tacitus  to  denote  an  ordinary  scout.    {Ann.  ii.  12.)

11.  The  scouts,  however,  formed  a  distinct  body
under  the  name  of  Eocploratores^  and  Plyginus
quarters  them  appropriately  at  the  extremity  of  the
camp  nearest  to  the  Praetorian  gate,  and  close  to
the  Pioneers.

12.  Aloe. —  From  the  time  when  the  cavalry
were  separated  from  the  legion  they  were  formed
into  bodies  called  alae^  which  varied  in  number
according  to  circumstances.  Hyginus  provides  ac-
commodation in  his  camp  for  four  Akie  Milliariae,
and  for  five  Aloe  Quingenariae.

The  Ala  Milliaria  was  divided  into  24  turmae,
each  of  which,  according  to  the  conjecture  of
Schelius,  consisted  of  40  men  except  the  first
which  had  80.  The  commander  of  the  whole  was
the  Praefedus  Aloe,  the  inferior  officers  were  24
decuriones,  24  duplicarii,  and  24  sesquiplarii,  that
is,  a  decurio,  a  duplicarius,  and  a  sesquiplarius  for
each  tunna.

The  J /a  Quingenaria  was  divided  into  1 6  turmae
•with  a  decurio,  a  duplicarius  and  sesquiplarius  for
each,  and  we  may  suppose  that  each  turma  con-
sisted of  30  men  except  the  first,  which  thus  would
have  50.

Each  decurio  had  three  horses  allowed  to  him,
each  duplicarius  and  each  sesquiplarius  two  horses,
so  that  the  total  number  of  horses  in  the  Ala  Mil-
liaria was  1090,  and  in  the  Ala  Quingenaria  504,
exclusive  of  those  belonging  to  the  Praefecti.

It  is  evident  that  the  duplicarii  and  sesquiplarii
here  named  were  subalterns  ;  according  to  the
ancient  signification  of  duplicarius,  as  interpreted
by  Varro  (L.  Z.  v.  §  90),  it  denoted  a  soldier  who
on  account  of  his  valour  was  allowed  double  ra-
tions (comp.  Liv.  xxiv.  47,  ii.  59),  which  must  of
course  have  been  convertible  into  increased  pay.
(Orelli,  C.  I.  3535.)  Such  persons  are  frequently
presented  to  us  in  inscriptions  under  the  cognate
forms  duplarius^  duplicarius^  and  dupliciarius.  Thus
we  have  Dupl.  N.  Explor.  (Duplarii  numeri
exploratorum,  Orell.  206)  ;  Duplario  Leg.  I.
(lb.  3531)  ;  DuPLARius  Alarius  (lb.  2003)  ;
Duplicarius  (lb.  3533);Dupliciar.  (lb.  3534).
Sesquiplarius,  which  evidently  denotes  a  soldier
who  received  a  ration  and  a  half,  appears  in  no
authors  except  Hyginus  and  Vegetius,  of  whom
the  latter  gives  them  gold  collars  and  styles  them
Torquati  duplares,  torquati  sesquiplares  (ii.  7),  but
the  title  is  met  with  in  inscriptions.  (Orell.  3470.)

13.  Mauri  Equites.  Pannonii  Veredarii.  —
The  Alae  were  raised  in  the  Roman  provinces  and
consisted,  probably,  for  the  most  part,  of  citizens,
or  at  least  subjects.  But  in  addition  to  these
every  army  at  this  period  was  attended  by
squadrons  of  light  horse  composed  entirclj'  of  bar-
barians ;  and  the  chief  duty  performed  by  those


EXERCITUS.


509


named  above  was  guarding  the  pioneers  as  they
pert'ormed  their  labours  in  advance  of  the  army.
When  Tacitus  speaks  of  "  Alares  Pannonios,
robur  equitatus "  {Ann.  xv.  10)  he  must  mean
cavalry  of  a  different  description  from  the  Pan-
nonii veredarii  of  Hyginus,  who,  probably,  re-
sembled the  Cossacks  of  modern  warfare.

14.  Cohortes  peditatae,  were  battalions  raised
chiefly  in  the  provinces,  composed  of  Roman  citi-
zens, of  subjects  and  allies,  or  of  citizens,  allies,
and  subjects  indiscriminately.  They  were,  it
would  appear,  not  bound  down  by  the  same  strict
rules  with  regard  to  the  period  of  service  as  the
legionaries,  not  so  heavily  equipped,  and  not  sub-
jected to  the  same  exhausting  labours.  Vegetius,
in  the  chapter  where  he  endeavours  to  account  for
the  decay  of  the  legionary  force  (ii.  3),  throws
some  light  upon  these  points.  To  this  class  of
troops  belonged  the  cohortes  auariliares,  the  auocilia
cohortium.,  and  the  sociorum  cohoiies,  of  whom  we
read  in  Tacitus,  together  with  a  multitude  of
others  recorded  in  inscriptions  and  named  for  the
most  part  from  the  nations  of  which  they  were  com-
posed. The  expression  cohortem  decimam  octavam
(Tacit.  H.  i.  64)  indicates  that  these  cohorts  were
numbered  regularly  like  the  legions.  Hyginus
provides  accommodation  for  Cohortes  peditatae  mil-
liariae tres,  and  Cohortes  peditatae  quingenariae  tres.

15.  Cohortes  Equitatae  differed  from  the  Pedi-
tatae in  this  only,  that  they  were  made  up  of  in-
fantry combined  with  cavalry.  A  Cohors  Equitata
Milliaria  contained  760  foot  soldiers  divided  into
10  centuries,  and  240  horsemen  divided  into  10
turmae.  A  Cohors  Equitata  quingenaria  contained
380  foot-soldiers  divided  into  six  (?)  centuries  and
1 20  horsemen,  divided  into  5  turmae.  There  is  an
inscription  in  the  collections  of  Grater  (p.  Mcviii.)
to  the  memory  of  L.  Flavins,  who  among  other
military  titles  is  styled  Praep.  Coh.  Primae.
Equitatae.  Civ.  Roman,  in.  German.  In-
PERiORE  ;  Pliny,  in  one  of  his  epistles  (x.  108),
and  Trajan  in  his  reply,  make  use  of  the  terms
Cohors  equestris,  the  former  mentioning  a  centurion
in  connection  with  it,  which  proves  that  it  contained
infantry.  Tacitus  {Hist.  iv.  19)  speaks  of  cohorts
of  the  Batavi  and  Canninefates,  who,  among  other
demands,  insisted  that  the  number  of  horse  should
be  increased  {augeri  numerum  equitum)  ;  and
Josephus,  in  describing  the  army  of  Vespasian,
notices  10  cohorts  ((TTreipot)  of  600  infantry  and
120  cavalry,  a  series  of  passages  which  evidently
refer  to  Cohortes  Equitatae.  The  Cohortes  Pe-
ditatae are  not  mentioned  under  that  name  except
by  Hyginus,  but  are  indicated  by  Tacitus  in  the
words  {Ann.  xiii.  35),  "  ex  Gemiania  legio  cum
equitibus  alariis  et  peditatu  cohortium.''''  Hyginus
allows  space  for  Cohortes  equitatae  milliariae  duae,
and  Cohortes  equitatae  quingenariae  quatuor.

16.  Ci'assici,  which  we  may  fairly  render  Ma-
rines, were  employed,  according  to  Hyginus,  as
pioneers.  They  corresponded  to  the  Navales  Socii,
under  the  republic,  who  were  always  regarded  as
inferior  to  regular  soldiers,  and  were  recruited,  as
we  learn  from  Polybius,  among  those  persons
whose  fortune  did  not  entitle  them  to  enlist  in  the
legions.  After  the  establishment  by  Augustus  of
regular  permanent  fleets  at  Misenum,  Ravenna,
and  on  the  coast  of  Gaul,  a  large  body  of  men
must  have  been  required  to  man  them,  wlio,  when
their  services  were  not  required  afloat,  were  called
upon,  at  least  in  great  emergencies,  to  s^rve  i«


MO


EXERCITUS.


ordinary  soldiers.  Tacitus  mentions  at  the  com-  I
mencement  of  his  history  (i.  6),  that  Galba  fomid  ]
in  the  city  a  legion  "  quam  e  classe  Nero  conscrip-
gerat  "  (comp.  Dion  Cass.  Ixiv.  3  ;  Suet.  Galb.  12  ;
Plut.  Galb.  15),  which  he  subsequently  (i.  31,  36)
terms  "  legio  classica  "  and  "  classicorum  legio  "
(comp.  ii.  11,  14,  17,  22,  iii.  55),  and  elsewhere
(ii.  67)  we  hear  of  the  "prima  classicorum  legio."
In  the  Annals  classiariTis  is  the  form  which  he
generally  employs,  as  classiariorum  copia  (Ann.  iv.
27),  and  ceniurione  classiario  (Ann.  xiv.  8).

17.  Nationes.  —  These  occupied  the  same  posi-
tion with  regard  to  the  sociae  cohortes,  that  the
Mauri  and  Pannonii  Veredarii  did  with  regard  to
the  regular  Aloe  of  cavalry.  They  were  battalions
composed  entirely  of  barbarians,  or  of  the  most
imcivilised  among  the  subjects  of  Rome,  and  were
probably  chiefly  employed  upon  outpost  duties.
Hyginus  allows  space  for  3300,  consisting  of  Pal-
myrcni ;  Gaetae ;  Dad ;  Britones  ;  Cantabri.

Urbanae  Cohortes.  —  We  may  take  occasion  to
notice  in  this  place  tv/o  bodies  of  men  established
during  the  first  years  of  the  empire,  who  held  a
station  intermediate  between  regular  troops  and
an  armed  police,  their  services  being,  properly
Bpeaking,  confined  to  the  city.  These  were  the
UrbanoR  Cohortas  and  the  Cohortes  Vigilum.

Dion  Cassius  (Iv.  24)  informs  us  that  Augustus,
in  addition  to  the  praetorian  cohorts,  instituted  a
force  of  city  guards,  amounting  to  six  thousand
men  divided  into  four  battalions  :  to  these  he  else-
where gives  the  name  of  aa-riKoi  (lix.  2),  while,
by  the  Latin  writers,  they  are  usually  distin-
guished as  Cohortes  Urbanae  or  Urbana  militia^
their  quarters,  which  were  within  the  city,  being
the  Urbana  Castra.  According  to  Tacitus,  who
states  the  number  of  cohorts  at  three  onl}-,  they,
like  the  praetorians,  were  levied  in  Latium,  Umbria,
Etruria,  and  the  ancient  Roman  colonies  (Tacit.
A7m.  iv.  5),  and  were  under  the  immediate  com-
mand of  the  praefect  of  the  city,  whence  it  was
urged  upon  Flavins  Sabinus  (Tacit.  Hist.  iii.  64),
*'  esse  illi  proprium  militem  cohortium  urbanarum."

Coliortes  Vigilum.  —  Augustus  organised  a  large
bodj'-  of  nitjht-watchers  also,  whose  chief  duty  was
to  act  as  firemen  (Adversus  inccndia  excubias  noc-
turnas  vigilesque  commentus  est,  Sueton.  Octav.  30).
They  were  divided  into  seven  cohorts,  in  the  pro-
portion of  one  cohort  to  each  two  Regiones,  were
stationed  in  fourteen  guardhouses  (eoccubitoria),
and  are  called  vvKTo<pv\aK€s  by  the  Greek,  Co-
lioi-tes  Vigilum  by  the  Latin  writers.  They  were
commanded  by  a  Praefectus  (Tacit.  Ann.  xi.  35),
who  was  of  equestrian  rank  ;  but  the  corps,  in  con-
sequence of  being  raised  among  the  class  of  li-
bertini,  was  regarded  as  occupying  a  position  in-
ferior to  that  of  regular  soldiers  (Dion  (3ass.  Iv.  26,
lix.  2).  In  Tacitus  {Hist.  iii.  64),  they  are  termed
the  servitia  of  the  aristocracy,  and  Suetonius  (Octav.
25)  alludes  to  them  as  "  libertino  milite."  (Comp.
Dig.  1.  tit.  15.  8.  3.)

Equipment  oftJie  Troops  under  tlve  Empire.

Josephus  has  transmitted  to  us  a  description  of
the  equipment  of  the  Roman  troops,  and  his  testi-
mony is  peculiarly  valuable,  proceeding,  as  it  does,
from  a  competent  eye-witness  (B.  J.  iii.  5.  §  5).

The  infantry  wore  cuirasses,  helmets,  and  two
B^yo^d3  (^wpa^i  re  necppay/jievoi  Kol  Kpdvecri  koL
uaxaipofpopovvTfs  aficporepcodev),  that  is,  a  long
sword  on  the  left,  and  a  short  dagger  (<nridaf.L^s


EXERCITUS.
oif  irXiov  exet  iiriKos)  on  the  right  side.  T  he  select
infantry  in  attendance  upon  the  general  carried  a
long  spear  (X^yxw^  hastam),  and  a  round  shield
(do-TTiSa,  clipeum)  ;  the  rest  of  the  legionaries  (rj
8e  Koiirk}  (pd\ay^)  a  pilum(?)  (^v(Tt6v),  and  a
scutum,  (^vpshu  inLfx-fiKT]).  In  addition,  each  man
had  a  saw  and  a  basket  (irpiova  koX  Kocpivov),  a
mattock  and  a  hatchet  (d^T]v  kou  TreAeKuv),  a  leather
strap,  a  hook  and  a  chain  (Ifidura  Koi  Speirauop
KoL  aXvaiv),  together  with  provisions  for  three
days,  —  so  that,  says  Josephus,  the  Roman  in-
fantry differ  little  from  mules  of  burden.

The  Equites  wore  helmets  and  cuirasses  like
the  infantry,  with  a  broadsword  at  their  right  side
(jxaxaipa  fiaKpd),  and  carried  in  their  hand  a  long
pole  (Kovrhs  iTn/j.7}Kr)s)  ;  a  buckler  swunj^  at  their
horses'  flank  (^vpehs  Se  irapa  TrA€vpci,u  'iirirov
■nXdyios),  and  they  were  furnished  with  a  quiver
containing  three  or  more  javelins  (dKovres).,  with
broad  points,  and  as  large  as  spears  (  ovk  aTroS4ou-
T€S  8e  Sopdraiv  /xdyedos).  Those  selected  to  attend
the  general  differed,  in  no  respect,  in  their  ap-
pointments from  the  regular  cavalry  (rwu  iv  tuIs
t\ais  iTTTreoji/).

The  Jewish  historian  has  moreover  given  an  ac-
count of  the  Agmen  or  line  of  march  in  which  the
army  of  Vespasian  entered  Galilee  (B.  J.  iii.  6.  §  2),
this  being,  he  adds,  the  regular  arrangement  fol-
lowed by  the  Romans.  1.  The  light-armed  aux-
iliaries and  bowmen  (tovs  fx-iv  76  ^iXovs  twu  iiri-
Kovpwu  Koi  To|oTos)  advauccd  first  to  reconnoitre,
to  examine  woods  and  suspicious  localities,  and  to
give  tunely  notice  of  the  approach  of  an  enemy.
2.  A  detachment  of  Roman  heavy-armed  troops,
horse  and  foot  ('Pa>,uatW  ottXitik^  ii.io7pa,  ire^oi  re
KOL  iTTirels).  3.  Ten  men  out  of  each  century  car-
rying their  own  equipments  and  the  measures  of  the
camp  (fjL^Tpa  ttjs  irapef/.SoXrjs).  4.  The  pioneers
(dSoTToioi).  The  baggage  of  Vespasian  and  his
legati  (rwv  vir  avrcp  Tjyeixovcov)  guarded  by  a
strong  body  of  horse.  6.  Vespasian  himself  at-
tended by  Selecti  Pedites,  Selecti  Equites,  and  a  body
of  spearmen  (Xoyxocpopovs)^  7.  The  peculiar
cavalry  of  the  legion  (rh  ^Siou  rod  rdyfiaros  Itt-
TTiKhv),  for,  he  subjoins,  each  legion  has  120  horse
attached  to  it.  This  we  perceive  was  a  return,  to
a  certain  extent,  to  the  ancient  system.  8.  The
artillery  dragged  by  mules  (ol  ra?  eXeiroXeis  <pe-
pouT€s  6pe7s  Kol  Ttt  Xoiira  ii-qxav^ixara.)  9.  The
legati,  praefects  of  cohorts  and  tribunes  ('r)yeix6ves
T€  Kal  (TTreipav  eirapxoi  crvv  XjAiapx^'j)  guarded
by  a  body  of  picked  soldiers.  10.  The  standards
surrounding  the  eagle  (al  arifxaiai  irepucrxovarai
Tov  af:T6v).  11.  The  trumpeters  (oi  (xaXTnyKiai).
12.  The  main  body  of  the  infantry  (t)  (pdXay^)
six  abreast,  accompanied  by  a  centurion  (kKarov-
rdpxvs),  whose  duty  it  was  to  see  that  the  men
kept  their  ranks.  13.  The  whole  body  of  slaves
attached  to  each  legion  (rh  olKeriKhv  kKdcnov  rdy~
ixaros),  driving  the  mules  .and  beasts  of  burden
loaded  with  the  baggage.  14.  Behind  all  the  le-
gions followed  the  mercenaries  (6  ixiadios  ux^os}.
15.  The  rear  was  brought  up  by  a  strong  body  of
infantry  and  cavalry.  Josephus  seems  to  desig-
nate the  legati  by  the  word  riyeix6ues,  the  Tribuni
militum  by  Xoxa-yoi  or  X'^"*PX<"i  *he  ccnturiones
by  ra^idpxoi  or  iKarovrapxai  ;  whether  he  means
by  ovpayoi  (in  iii.  6.  §  2)  the  optiones  who  are  so
designated  by  Polybius,  or  intends  to  comprehend
the  whole  rear-guard  under  the  appellation,  may
admit  of  doubt.     Four  words  are  used  to  denote


EXERCITUS.

weapons  of  the  spear  kind, — ^u^tou  probably  in-
tended to  represent  the  jnlum,  for  which  vcraSs  is
generall}^  employed  ;  ^rcwj' the  light  javelin  ;  A07X77
and  86pv,  pikes  of  different  kinds.  It  would  ap-
pear from  Arrian  that  the  \6yx''l  was  sometimes
us  d  as  a  missile.

Finally,  some  additional  light  will  be  thrown
upon  the  constitution  of  a  Roman  army  about  half  a
century  later  by  the  instructions  issued  for  the  line
of  march  to  be  observed  by  the  force  despatched
against  the  Scythian  Alani,  preserved  in  the  frag-
ment of  Arrian,  of  which  we  have  spoken  above.

The  force  in  question  consisted  of  the  fifteenth
legion,  which  was  complete,  and  of  the  twelfth,
which  appears  to  have  been  a  fragment  only,  these
lf\gions  having  both  cavalry  and  skirmishers  at-
tached to  them  exactly  as  under  the  republic  —  of
several  cohortes  equitatae^  composed  of  Italians,
Cyrenians,  Armenians,  and  others,  each  of  these
battalions  containing  heavy  and  light  Infantry  to-
gether with  squadrons  of  cavalry  —  of  cohortes  pe-
ditatae,  including  infantry  only,  both  light  and
heavy,  and  of  light  cavalry  of  the  allies  and  of
barbarians.  The  order  in  which  they  were  to  ad-
vance was  as  follows :  —

].  Horse  scouts  {KaracicSTcovs  lirireas),  horse
archers  and  slingers  ('nnroTo^oTas  Kal  Trerpaious),
commanded  by  their  own  decurions  (SeKahdpxai).
2.  Various  corps  of  foreign  cavalrj-,  Cyrenians,
Ituraeans,  Celts,  and  others,  of  whom  the  names
are  doubtful.  3.  The  whole  of  the  infantry  arch-
ers, followed  by  different  bodies  of  heavy-armed
infantry,  not  legionaries,  Italians,  Cyrenians,  Bos-
p(;ranians  and  Numidians,  the  flanks  of  this  division
being  covered  by  cavalry.  4.  The  equites  selecti
and  the  equites  of  the  legion  (01  airh  tvjs  (pdkayyos
Imri'is).  5.  The  artillery  (KaraTreATa:).  6.  The
standard  {(Tr]fjt.€7ov)  of  the  fifteenth  legion,  and
around  it  the  principal  officers,  namely  the  com-
mander of  the  legion  (Tjyeinav  ttjs  (pdXayyos),  the
Icgatus  (?)  (uTrdpxos\  the  tribunes  {01  x^Aiapx^Oi
and  the  centurions  of  the  first  cohort  (eKarSurapxat.
ol  TTJS  TTpwTTis  (TiTeiprjs  eTTicTTaTaj).  Here,  it  will
be  remarked,  we  meet  with  an  officer  called  the
riye/jLouv  t^s  (pdXayyos  and  his  deputy  or  inrupxos.
7.  The  infantry  of  the  legion,  four  and  four,  pre-
ceded by  their  own  skinnishers  (ttc^wv  ol  aKovTicr-
rai).  8.  Foreign  (rb  avfiixaxiKhu)  infantry,  both
light  and  heavy.  9.  The  baggage  (ra  cxK^vocpSpa).
1 0.  The  rear  brought  up  by  an  ala  of  Getae  under
their  pracfectus  (elxdpxv^)'  The  centurions  were
to  march  on  the  flanks  of  the  infantry,  keeping  the
men  to  their  ranks  :  for  the  sake  of  greater  security
a  body  of  horsemen  was  to  ride  in  single  file  along
the  whole  length  of  the  line  ;  the  commander-in-
chief,  Xenophon,  was  to  march  in  front  of  the  in-
fantry standards,  but  to  move  about  occasionally
from  place  to  place,  watching  everything,  and  pre-
serving order  ever}*where.  It  appears  that  of  the
<;avalry  some  were  archers  (i7r7roTo|oTat),  some
lancers  (\oyxo(p6poi),  some  pole-men  (KouTO(p6poi),
some  sword-men  (/xaxaipotpSpoi),  some  axe-men
{Trf\€KO(p6poi)  ;  these  and  many  other  curious  par-
ticulars may  be  extracted  from  the  detailed  account
of  the  Agmeii^  and  from  the  Acies  or  scheme  of
battle  by  which  it  is  followed  ;  but  unfortunately
we  are  so  much  embarrassed  at  every  step  by  the
\niccrtainty  of  the  text  that  it  is  scarcely  safe  to
form  positive  conclusions.

A  great  many  topics  connected  with  a  Roman
army  arc  discussed  under  separate  articles  :  thus,


EXHIBENDUM,  ACTIO  AD.


511


much  that  belongs  to  the  cavalry  is  necessarily  in-
cluded under  Equites  ;  the  position  of  the  allies
in  the  service  under  Socii  ;  the  life-guards  under
Praetoriani  ;  the  pay  of  the  soldier  under
Stipendium  ;  a  detailed  account  of  his  armour
and  weapons  under  Galea,  Lorica,  Ocrea,
Caliga,  Hasta,  Pilum,  Gladius,  Scutum,
&c.  ;  of  his  dress  under  Chlamys,  Paluda-
MENTUM,  Sagum  ;  of  the  standards  under  Signa
MiLiTARiA  ;  of  military  processions  under  Ova-
Tio,  Triumphus  ;  of  punishments  under  FusTU-
arium,  Decimatio  ;  of  military  rewards  under
Torques,  Phalerae,  Corona  ;  of  military  en-
gines under  Tormentum,  Aries,  Vineae,
Plutei,  Helepolis,  Turris,  &c.  [W.  R.]
_  EXETASTAE  (e'lerao-TaO,  special  commis-
sioners sent  out  by  the  Athenian  people  to  investi-
gate any  matters  that  might  claim  attention.  Thus
we  find  mention  of  Exetastae  being  appointed  to
ascertain  whether  there  were  as  many  mercenaries
as  the  generals  reported.  It  appears  to  have  been  no
uncommon  plan  for  the  commanders,  who  received
pay  for  troops,  to  report  a  greater  number  than
they  possessed,  in  order  to  receive  the  pay  them-
selves ;  in  which  case  they  were  said  "  to  draw
pay  for  empty  places  in  the  mercenary  force "
(fj.i(rdo(pope7v  iv  t^  ^euiKcp  Keua7s  xwpots,  Aeschin.
c.  Ctes.  p.  536).  The  commissioners,  however,  who
were  sent  to  make  inquiries  into  the  matter,  often
allowed  themselves  to  be  bribed.  (Aeschin.  c.
Timarch.  p.  131,  De  Fids.  Leg.  p.  339  ;  Biickh.
PuhL  Econ.  of  Athens,  p,  292,  2nd  ed.)

EXHERES.     [Heres.]

EXHIBENDUM,  ACTIO  AD.  This  action
was  introduced  mainly  with  respect  to  vindica-
tiones  or  actions  about  property.  "  Exhibere  '■  is
defined  to  be  "  facere  in  publico  potestatem,  ut  ei
qui  agat  experiundi  sit  copia."  This  was  a  per-
sonal action,  and  he  had  the  right  of  action  who
intended  to  bring  an  actio  in  rem.  The  actio  aa
exhibendum  was  against  a  person  who  was  in
possession  of  the  thing  in  question,  or  had  fraudu-
lently parted  with  the  possession  of  it  ;  and  the
object  was  the  production  of  the  thing  for  the  pur-
pose of  its  being  examined  by  the  plaintiff.  The
thing,  which  was  of  course  a  movable  thing,  was
to  be  produced  at  the  place  where  it  was  at  the
commencement  of  the  legal  proceedings  respecting
it  ;  but  it  was  to  be  taken  to  the  place  where  the
action  was  tried,  at  the  cost  and  expense  of  the
plaintiff.

The  action  was  extended  to  other  cases  :  for  in-
stance, to  cases  when  a  man  claimed  the  privilege
of  taking  his  property  off  another  person's  land,
that  other  person  not  being  legally  bound  to  restore
the  thing,  though  bound  by  this  action  to  allow
the  owner  to  take  it  ;  and  to  some  cases  where  a
man  had  in  his  possession  something  in  which  his
own  and  the  plaintiff's  property  were  united,  as  a
jewel  set  in  the  defendant's  gold,  in  which  case
there  might  be  an  actio  ad  exhibendum  for  the
purpose  of  separating  the  things  (ut  excludatur  ad
exhibendum  agi  potest.  Dig.  10.  tit.  4.  s.  6).

If  the  thing  was  not  produced  when  it  ought  to
have  been,  the  plaintiff  might  have  damages  for
loss  caused  by  such  non-production.  This  action
would  lie  to  produce  a  slave,  in  order  that  he  might
be  put  to  the  torture  to  discover  his  confederates.

The  ground  of  the  right  to  the  production  of  a
thing,  was  either  property  in  the  thirg  or  some  in-
terest ;  and  it  was  the  business  of  the  judex  to


f>l2


EXODIA.


declare  whether  there  was  sufficient  reason  (fasta
et  probabilis  causa)  for  production.  The  word
'•  interest "  was  obviousl}'^  a  word  of  doubtful  im-
port. Accordingly,  it  was  a  question  if  a  man  could
bring  this  action  for  the  production  of  his  adver-
sary's accounts,  though  it  was  a  general  rule  of  law
that  all  persons  might  have  this  action  who  had  an
interest  in  the  thuig  to  be  produced  (quorum  in-
terest) ;  but  the  opinion  as  given  in  the  Digest
(Dig.  10.  tit.  4.  s.  19)  is  not  favourable  to  the  pro-
duction on  the  mere  ground  of  its  being  for  the
plaintiff's  advantage.  A  man  might  have  this
actio  though  he  had  no  vindicatio  ;  as,  for  instance,
if  he  had  a  legacy  given  to  him  of  such  a  slave  as
Titius  might  choose,  he  had  a  right  to  the  production
of  the  testator's  slaves  in  order  that  Titius  might
make  the  choice  ;  when  the  choice  was  made,  then
the  plaintiff  might  claim  the  slave  as  his  property,
though  he  had  no  power  to  make  the  choice.  If  a
man  wished  to  assert  the  freedom  of  a  slave  (in
libeiiatem  vindicare),  he  might  have  this  action.

This  action  was,  as  it  appears,  generally  in  aid
of  another  action,  and  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining
evidence  ;  in  which  respect  it  bears  some  resem-
blance to  a  Bill  of  Discovery  in  Equitj-.

(Miihlenbruch,  Doctrina  Pandedarum  ;  Dig.  1 0.
tit.  4  )  [G.  L.]

EXlTE'RIAorEPEXO'DIA(6|iT^pjaoreV6|.
<{5ia),  the  names  of  the  sacrifices  which  were  offered
by  generals  before  they  set  out  on  their  expeditions.
(Xenoph.  Anab.  vi.  5.  §  2.)  The  principal  object
of  these  sacrifices  always  was  to  discover  from  the
accompanying  signs  the  favourable  or  unfavourable
issue  of  the  undertaking  on  which  they  were  about
to  enter.  According  to  Hesychius,  e^iTTjpto  was
also  the  name  of  the  day  on  which  the  annual
magistrates  laid  down  their  offices.  [L.  S.]

EXO'DIA  (e|(J5ia,  from  e|  and  bhos)  were
old-fashioned  and  laughable  interludes  in  verses,
inserted  in  other  plays,  but  chiefly  in  the  Atel-
lanae.  (Liv.  vii.  2.)  It  is  difficult  to  ascertain
the  real  character  of  the  exodia  ;  but  from  the  words
of  Livy  we  must  infer  that,  although  distinct  from
the  Atellanae,  they  were  closely  connected  with
them,  and  never  performed  alone.  Hence  Juvenal
calls  them  eocodium  Atellanae  (Sat.  vi.  71),  and
Suetonius  (Tib.  45)  exodium  Atellanicum.  They
were,  like  the  Atellanae  themselves,  played  by
young  and  well-born  Romans,  and  not  by  the
histriones.  Since  the  time  of  Jos.  Scaliger  and
Casaubon,  the  exodia  have  almost  generally  been
considered  as  short  comedies  or  farces  which
•were  performed  after  the  Atellanae  ;  and  this
opinion  is  founded  upon  the  vague  and  incorrect
statement  of  the  Scholiast  on  Juvenal  (Sat.  iii.
174).  But  the  words  of  Livy,  exodia  conserta
fabcllis.,  seem  rather  to  indicate  interludes,  which,
however,  must  not  be  understood  as  if  they  had
heen  played  between  the  acts  of  the  Atellanae,
which  would  suggest  a  false  idea  of  the  Atellanae
themselves.  But  as  several  Atellanae  were  per-
formed on  the  same  day,  it  is  probable  that  the
exodia  were  played  between  them.  This  supposi-
tion is  also  supported  by  the  etjTnology  of  the
word  itsel]^  which  signifies  something  e'l  6Soi),
extra  viam,  or  something  not  belonging  to  the
main  subject,  and  thus  is  synonymous  with  eVeto--
6Ziov.  The  play,  as  well  as  the  name  of  exodium,
seems  to  have  been  introduced  among  the  Romans
from  Italian  Greece  ;  but  after  its  introduction  it
appears  to  have  become  very  popular  among  the


EXOMOSIA.

Romans,  and  continued  to  be  played  do\^al  to  a
very  late  period.  (Sueton.  Z)omzY.  10.)     [L.  S.]

EXO'MIS  (e|w/xis),  a  dress  which  had  only  a
sleeve  for  the  left  arm,  leaving  the  right  with  the
shoulder  and  a  part  of  the  breast  free,  and  was  for
this  reason  called  eocomis.  It  is  also  frequently
called  x^'''^^  erepo/j.d(Txa\os.  (Phot,  and  Hesych.
s.  V.  'Erepo/x. :  Heliod.  Aethiop.  iii.  1  ;  Paus.  v.  16.
§  2.)  The  exomis,  however,  was  not  only  a  chiton
[Tunica],  but  also  an  i/uloltiou  or  ircpiSXri/jLa.
[Pallium,]  According  to  Hesychius  (s.  v.  'E|co-
/its),  and  Aelius  Dionysius  (ap.  Eustath.  ad  II.
xviii.  69B)^  it  served  at  the  same  time  both  the
purposes  of  a  chiton  and  an  himation  ;  but  Pollux
(vii.  48)  speaks  of  two  different  kinds  of  exomis,
one  of  which  was  a  TTepi§\r]u.a  and  the  other  a
XiTcbv  eTepoyuaffxaAos.  His  account  is  confirmed
by  existing  works  of  art.  Thus  we  find  in  the
Mus.  Pio-Clement.  (vol.  iv.  pi.  11),  Hephaestos
wearing  an  exomis,  which  is  an  himation  thrown
round  the  body  in  the  way  in  which  this  garment
was  always  worn,  and  which  clothes  the  body  like
an  exomis  when  it  is  girded  round  the  waist.  The
following  figure  of  Charon,  on  the  contrary  (taken
from  Stack elberg,  Die  Gr'dber  der  Ilellenen,  pi.  47),.
represents  the  proper  x''^^^  eTipofida-xa^os^  and
we  see  a  similar  dress  in  the  figure  of  Ulysses
represented  in  the  article  Pileus.


The  exomis  was  usually  worn  by  slaves  and
working  people  (Phot.  s.  v.  ;  Schol.  ad  Aristoph.
Equit.  879),  whence  we  find  Hephaestos,  the
working  deity,  frequently  represented  with  this
garment  in  works  of  art.  (MUller,  Arckdol.  der
Kunst,  §  366.  6.)  The  chorus  of  old  men  in  the
Lysistrata  of  Aristophanes  (1.  662)  wear  the
exomis  ;  which  is  in  accordance  with  the  state-
ment of  Pollux  (iv.  1 18),  who  says  that  it  was  the
dress  of  old  men  in  comic  plays.  According  to
Gellius  (vii.  12),  the  exomis  was  the  same  as  the
common  tunic  without  sleeves  {ciira  humerum  de-
sinentes)  ;  but  his  statement  is  opposed  to  the  ac-
counts of  all  the  Greek  grammarians,  and  is  without
doubt  erroneous.  (Becker,  Charikles^  vol.  ii.  p.
112,  &c.)

EXOMO'SIA  (i^ufioaia).  Any  Athenian
citizen  Avhen  called  upon  to  appear  as  a  witness  in


EXSTLUIM.       ,

a  court  of  justice  (K\r}Teveiu  or  iKK\r}T€veiv,  Pol-
lux, viii.  37  ;  Aeschin.  c.  Timarch.  p.  71),  was
obliged  by  law  to  obey  the  summons,  unless  he
could  establish  by  oath  that  he  was  unacquainted
with  the  case  in  question.  (Demosth.  De  Fals.
Leg.  p.  396,  c.  Neaer.  p.  1354,  c.  Aphob.  p.  850  ;
Suidas,  s.  v.  ''E.^ojxocracrQai.')  This  oath  Avas  called
i^iajxoaia^  and  the  act  of  taking  it  was  expressed
by  e^Sfx-vvadai.  (Demosth.  c.  Stepli.  i.  p.  1119  ;
c.  Eubidid.  p.  1317  ;  Harpocrat.  s.  v.)  Those  who
refused  to  obey  the  summons  without  being  able
to  take  the  6|co/xo(n'a,  incuired  a  fine  of  one  thousand
drachmae  ;  and  if  a  person,  after  promising  to  give
his  evidence,  did  nevertheless  not  appear  when
railed  upon,  an  action  called  X^nrofxapTvpiov,  or
fi\d§r]s  5i«Tj,  might  be  brought  against  him  by  the
parlies  who  thought  themselves  injured  by  his
having  withheld  his  evidence.  (Demosth.  c.  Timot/i.
p.  1 190  ;  Meier,  Att.  Proc.  p  3»7,  &c.)

When  the  people  in  their  assembly  appointed  a
man  to  a  magistracy  or  any  other  public  officp,  he
Avas  at  liberty,  before  the  SoKi/xaa-ia  took  place,
to  decline  the  office,  if  he  could  take  an  oath  that
the  state  of  his  health  or  other  circumstances  ren-
dered it  im.possible  for  him  to  fulfil  the  duties
connected  with  it  {i^o/xwaOat  ri]v  apx^f,  or  r^v
XeipoToi'iau) :  and  this  oath  was  likewise  called
i^a}fxo(Tia,  or  sometimes  airojixoaia.  ( Demosth.  De
Fals.  Leg.  p.  379,  c.  Timoth.  p.  1204  ;  Aeschin.
De  Fals.  Leg.  p.  271  ;  Pollux,  viii.  65  ;  Etymol.
Mag.  s.  V.)  [L.  S.]

EXOSTRA  (^dcrrpa,  from  i^coOeco),  was  one
of  the  many  kinds  of  machines  used  in  the  theatres
of  the  ancients.  Cicero  (De  Prov.  Cons.  6),  in
speaking  of  a  man  who  formerly  concealed  his
vices,  expresses  this  sentiment  by  post  siparium
heluabatur  ;  and  then  stating  that  he  now  shame-
lessly indulged  in  his  vicious  practices  in  public,
sn,ys,jam  in  exostra  heluatur.  From  an  attentive
consideration  of  this  passage,  it  is  evident  that
the  exostra  was  a  machine  by  means  of  Avhich
things  which  had  been  concealed  behind  the  sipa-
rium, were  pushed  or  rolled  forward  from  behind
it,  and  thus  became  visible  to  the  spectators.  This
machine  was  therefore  very  much  like  the  ^kkv-
KA.7j/ta,  with  this  distinction,  that  the  latter  was
moved  on  wheels,  while  the  exostra  was  pushed
forward  upon  rollers.  (Pollux,  iv.  128  ;  Schol.
ad  Aristoph.  Achai'n.  375.)  But  both  seem  to
have  been  used  for  the  same  purpose  ;  namely,  to
exhibit  to  the  eyes  of  the  spectators  the  results  or
consequences  of  such  things — e.g.  murder  or  suicide

—  as  could  not  consistently  take  place  in  the  pro-
scenium, and  were  therefore  described  as  having
occurred  behind  the  siparium  or  in  the  scene.

The  name  exostra  was  also  applied  to  a  peculiar
Kind  of  bridge,  which  was  thrown  from  a  tower  of
the  besiegers  upon  the  walls  of  the  besieged  town,
and  across  which  the  assailants  marched  to  attack
those  of  the  besieged  who  were  stationed  on  the
ramparts  to  defend  the  town.  (Veget.  De  Be  Milit
iv.  21.)  [L.  S.]

EXOULES  DIKE  {^^oix-ns  SIkv).  [Em-
bate  ja.]

EXPLORATO'RES.  [Exercitus,  p.  509,  a.]

EXSEQUIAE.     [FuNus.]

EXSFLIUM  (</)u7'^),  banishment.    I.Greek.

—  Banishment  among  the  Greek  states  seldom,  if
ever,  appears  as  a  punishment  appointed  by  law
for  particular  offences.  We  might,  indeed,  expect
this  ;  for  the  division  of  Greece  into  a  number  of


EXSILIUM.  613

independent  states  Avould  neither  admit  of  the  es-
tablishment of  penal  colonies,  as  amongst  us,  nor
of  the  various  kinds  of  exile  which  we  read  of
under  the  Roman  emperors.  The  general  term
(pvy-f)  (flight)  was  for  the  most  part  applied  in  the
case  of  those  who,  in  order  to  avoid  some  punish-
ment or  danger,  removed  from  their  own  country
to  another.  Proof  of  this  is  found  in  the  records  of
the  heroic  ages,  and  chiefly  where  homicide  had  been
committed,  whether  with  or  without  malice  afore-
thought. Thus  {II.  xxiii.  88)  Patroclus  appears  as
a  fugitive  for  life,  in  consequence  of  manslaughter
{avdpoKTaair])  committed  by  him  when  a  boy,  and
in  anger.  In  the  same  manner  (Hom.  Od.  xv.
275)  Theoclymenus  is  represented  as  a  fugitive
and  wanderer  over  the  earth,  and  even  in  foreign
lands  haunted  by  the  fear  of  vengeance,  from  the  nu-
merous kinsmen  of  the  man  whom  he  had  slain.  The
duty  of  taking  vengeance  Avas  in  cases  of  this  kind
considered  sacred,  though  the  penalty  of  exile  was
sometimes  remitted,  and  the  homicide  allowed  to
remain  in  his  country  on  pa\'ment  of  a  Troivfj^  the
price  of  blood,  or  wehrgeld  of  the  Germans  (Tacit.
Germ.  21),  which  was  made  to  the  relatives  or
nearest  connections  of  the  slain.  (//.  ix.  630.)
Even  though  there  were  no  relatives  to  succour  the
slain  man,  still  deference  to  public  opinion  imposed
on  the  homicide  a  temporary  absence  (Od.  xxiii.
119,  and  Schol.),  until  he  had  obtained  expiation
at  the  hands  of  another,  Avho  seems  to  have  been
called  the  ayviTTjs  or  purifier.  For  an  illustration
of  this,  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  story  of
Adrastus  and  Croesus.     (Herod,  i.  35.)

In  the  later  times  of  Athenian  history,  (pvyf),  or
banishment,  partook  of  the  same  nature,  and  was
practised  nearly  in  the  same  cases,  as  in  the  heroic
ages,  with  this  difference,  that  the  laws  more  strictly
defined  its  limits,  its  legal  consequences,  and  dura-
tion. Thus  an  action  for  Avilful  murder  was  brought
before  the  Areiopagus,  and  for  manslaughter  before
the  court  of  the  Ephetae.  The  accused  might,  in
either  case,  withdraw  himself  ((pvye7u)  before  sen-
tence Avas  passed  ;  but  when  a  criminal  evaded  the
punishment  to  which  an  act  of  murder  Avould  ha\'e
exposed  him  had  he  remained  in  his  own  land,  he
Avas  then  banished  for  ever  ((jxvy^i  aeKpvyiay),  and
not  allowed  to  return  home  even  Avhen  other  exiles
Avere  restored  upon  a  general  amnesty,  since  on
such  occasions  a  special  exception  Avas  made  against
criminals  banished  by  the  Areiopagus  (oi  €|  'Apeiov
Trdyov  (pevyovres).  A  convicted  murderer,  if  found
within  the  limits  of  the  state,  might  be  seized  and
put  to  death  (Dem.  c.  Aris.  p.  629),  and  Avhoever
harboured  or  entertained  (uTreSe'laro)  any  one  who
had  fled  from  his  country  to  avoid  a  capital  punish-
ment, Avas  liable  to  the  same  penalties  as  the  fugi-
tive himself.     (Dem.  c.  Poljfcl.  p.  1222.  2.)

Demosthenes  (c.  Aris.  p.  634)  saysythat  the  Avord
(pei'ryeiu  was  properly  applied  to  the  exile  of  those
Avho  copimitted  murder,  with  malice  aforethought,
Avhereas  the  term  /jLedlaraaOai,  was  used  Avhere  the
act  Avas  not  intentional.  The  property  also  Avas
confiscated  in  the  former  case,  but  not  in  the  latter.

When  a  verdict  of  manslaughter  Avas  returned,
it  Avas  usual  for  the  convicted  party  to  leave  (i^T}\dc)
his  countrj"^  by  a  certain  road,  and  to  remain  in
exile  till  he  induced  some  one  of  the  relatives  of
the  slain  man  to  take  compassion  on  him.  During
his  absence,  his  possessions  Avere  eiriTifia,  that  is,
not  confiscated  ;  but  if  he  remained  at  home  or
returned  before  the  requirements  of  the  laAv  wero

L    L


514  EXSILILM.

Batisfied,  he  was  liable  to  be  driven  or  carried  out
of  the  country  by  force.  (Dem.  c.  Aris.  pp.  634
and  644.)  It  sometimes  happened  that  a  fugitive
for  manslaughter  was  charged  with  murder  ;  in
that  case  he  pleaded  on  board  ship,  before  a  court
which  sat  at  Phreatto,  in  the  Peiraeeus.  (Dem.  c.
Aris.  p.  64 G.)  We  are  not  informed  what  were  the
consequences  if  the  relatives  of  the  slain  man  re-
fused to  make  a  reconciliation  ;  supposing  that  there
was  no  compulsion,  it  is  reasonable  to  conclude  that
the  exile  was  allowed  to  return  after  a  fixed  time.
In  cases  of  manslaughter,  but  not  of  murder,  this
seems  to  have  been  usual  in  other  parts  of  Greece
as  well  as  at  Athens.  (Meursius,  ad  Lycop.  282  ;
Eurip.  Hipp.  37,  and  Scholia.)  Plato  {Leg.  ix.
p.  865),  who  is  y:)elieved  to  have  copied  many  of
his  laws  from  the  constitution  of  Athens,  fixes  the
period  of  banishment  for  manslaughter  at  one  year,
and  the  word  aTr€viavTicrix6s^  explained  to  mean  a
year's  exile  for  the  commission  of  homicide  (rols
(povov  Spdaaai)  seems  to  imply  that  the  custom  was
pretty  general.  We  have  indeed  the  authority  of
Xenophon  (^wmZi.  iv.8.  §15)  to  prove  that  at  Sparta
banishment  was  the  consequence  of  involuntary
homicide,  though  he  does  not  tell  us  its  duration.

Moreover,  not  only  was  an  actual  murder
punished  with  banishment  and  confiscation,  but
also  a  rpavfjLa  eK  Trpovoias,  or  wounding  with  intent
to  kill,  though  death  might  not  ensue.  (Lysias,  c.
Simon,  p.  100  ;  Dem.  c.  Boeot  p.  1018.  10.)  The
same  punishment  was  inflicted  on  persons  who
rooted  up  the  sacred  olives  at  Athens  (Lysias,
'Trrep  l,r]Kov  ^AiroXoyia),  and  by  the  laws  of  Solon
every  one  was  liable  to  it  who  remained  neuter
during  political  contentions.  (Plut.  Sol.  20  ;  Gell.
ii.  12.)

Under  (pvyfj.,  or  banishment,  as  a  general  term,
is  comprehended  Ostracism  {oa-TpaKia-fios)  ;  the
difference  between  the  two  is  correctly  stated  by
Suidas,  and  the  Scholiast  on  Aristophanes  (Equit.
861 ),  if  we  are  to  understand  by  the  former  aeirpv-
yla,  or  banishment  fjr  life,  ^'■^vyi)  (say  they)
differs  from  ostracism,  inasmuch  as  those  who  are
banished  lose  their  property  by  confiscation,  whereas
the  ostracised  do  not;  the  former  also  have  no  fixed
place  of  abode,  no  time  of  return  assigned,  but  the
latter  have."  This  ostracism  was  instituted  by
Cleisthenes,  after  the  expulsion  of  the  Pei^istra-
tidae  ;  its  nature  and  objects  are  thus  explained
by  Aristotle  (Pol.  iii.  8) :  —  "  Democratical  states
(he  observes)  used  to  ostracise,  and  remove  from
the  city  for  a  definite  time,  those  who  appeared  to
be  pre-eminent  above  their  fellow-citizens,  by  rea-
son of  their  wealth,  the  number  of  their  friends,  or
any  other  means  of  influence."  It  is  well  known,
and  implied  in  the  quotation  just  given,  that  ostra-
cism was  not  a  punishment  for  any  crime,  but
rather  a  precautionary  removal  of  those  who  pos-
sessed sufficient  power  in  the  state  to  excite  either
envy  or  fear.  Thus  Plutarch  (A  rist.  1 0)  says  it  was
a  good-natured  way  of  allaying  envy  {<p66vov  irapa-
fu'dia  (piKdudpwTTos),  by  the  humiliation  of  superior
dignity  and  power.  Mr.  Grote  (  History  of  Greece.,
vol.  iv.  p.  200,  &c.)  has  some  very  ingenious  re-
marks in  defence  of  ostracism,  which  he  maintains
was  a  wise  precaution  for  maintaining  the  demo-
cratical constitution  established  by  Cleisthenes.
He  observes  that  *'  Cleisthenes,  by  the  spirit  of
his  reforms,  secured  the  hearty  attachment  of  the
body  of  citizens  ;  but  from  the  first  generation  of
leading  men,  under  the  nascent  democracy,  and


EXSILIUM.

with  such  precedents  as  they  had  to  look  back
upon,  no  self-imposed  limits  to  ambition  could  be
expected  :  and  the  problem  required  was  to  elimi-
nate beforehand  any  one  about  to  transgress  these
limits,  so  as  to  escape  the  necessity  of  putting  him
do\vn  afterwards,  with  all  that  bloodshed  and  reac-
tion, in  the  midst  of  which  the  free  working  of  the
constitution  would  be  suspended  at  least,  if  not  ir-
revocably extinguished.  To  acquire  such  influence
as  would  render  him  dangerous  under  democratical
forms,  a  man  must  stand  in  evidence  before  the
public,  so  as  to  afford  some  reasonable  means  of
judging  of  his  character  and  purposes  ;  and  the
security  which  Cleisthenes  provided  was,  to  call  in
the  positive  judgment  of  the  citizens  respecting  his
future  promise  purely  and  simply,  so  that  they
might  not  remain  too  long  neutral  between  two
political  rivals.  He  incorporated  in  the  constitu-
tion itself  the  principle  of  privilegium  (to  employ
the  Roman  phrase,  Avhich  signifies,  not  a  peculiar
favour  granted  to  any  one,  but  a  peculiar  incon-
venience imposed),  yet  only  under  circumstances
solemn  and  well  defined,  with  full  notice  and  dis-
cussion beforehand,  and  by  the  positive  secret  vote
of  a  large  proportion  of  the  citizens.  '  No  law
shall  be  made  against  any  single  citizen,  without
the  same  being  made  against  a/Z  Athenian  citizens;
unless  it  shall  so  seem  good  to  6000  citizens  voting
secretly'  (Andoc.  de Myst.  p.  12).  Such  was  that
general  principle  of  the  constitution,  under  which  the
ostracism  was  a  particular  case."  Mr.  Grote  further
observes, — "  Care  was  taken  to  divest  the  ostra-
cism of  all  painful  consequence,  except  what  was
inseparable  from  exile  ;  and  this  is  not  one  of  the
least  proofs  of  the  wisdom  with  which  it  Avas  de-
vised. Most  certainly  it  never  deprived  the  public
of  candidates  for  political  influence  ;  and  when  we
consider  the  small  amount  of  individual  evil  which
it  inflicted,  two  remarks  will  be  quite  sufficient  to
offer  in  the  way  of  justification.  First,  it  com-
pletely produced  its  intended  effect  ;  for  the  de-
mocracy grew  up  from  infancy  to  manhood  without
a  single  attempt  to  overthrow  it  by  force :  next,
through  such  tranquil  working  of  the  democratical
forms,  a  constitutional  morality  quite  sufficiently
complete,  was  produced  among  the  leading  Athe-
nians, to  enable  the  people  after  a  certain  time  to
dispense  with  that  exceptional  security  which  the
ostracism  offered.  To  the  nascent  democracy,  it
was  absolutely  indispensable  ;  to  the  growing,  yet
military  democracy  it  was  necessary  ;  but  the  full-
grown  democracy  both  could  and  did  stand  without
it."  The  manner  of  effecting  it  was  as  follows:  —
Before  the  vote  of  ostracism  could  be  taken,  the
senate  and  the  ecclesia  had  to  determine  in  the
sixth  prytany  of  the  year  whether  such  a  step  was
necessary.  If  they  decided  in  the  affirmative,  a
day  was  fixed,  and  the  agora  was  enclosed  by  bar-
riers, with  ten  entrances  for  the  ten  tribes.  By
these  the  tribesmen  entered,  each  with  his  oarpa-
Kov,  or  piece  of  tile,  on  which  was  written  the
name  of  the  individual  whom  he  wished  to  be
ostracised.  The  nine  archons  and  the  senate,  i.  e.
the  presidents  of  that  bod}'-,  superintended  the
proceedings,  and  the  party  who  had  the  greatest
number  of  votes  against  him,  supposing  that  this
number  amounted  to  6000,  was  obliged  to  with-
draw {n^raar rival)  from  the  city  within  ten  days  ;
if  the  number  of  votes  did  not  amount  to  6000,
nothing  was  done.  (Schol.  ad  Aristoph  Equ.  851 ;
Pollux,  viii.    19.)     Plutarch  (Arist.  c.  7)  differs


EXSILIUM.

from  other  authorities  in  stiting,  tliat  for  an  ex-
pulsion of  this  sort  at  was  not  necessary  that  the
votes  given  against  any  individual  should  amount
to  6000,  but  only  that  the  sum  total  should  not  be
less  than  that  number.  Bockh  and  Wachsmuth
are  in  favour  of  Plutarch  ;  but  Mr.  Grote,  who
supports  the  other  opinion,  justly  remarks,  "  that
the  purpose  of  the  general  law  would  by  no  means
be  obtained,  if  the  simple  majority  of  votes  among
6000  in  all,  had  been  allowed  to  take  effect.  A
person  might  then  be  ostracised  with  a  very  snmll
number  of  votes  against  him,  and  without  creating
any  reasonable  presumption  that  he  was  dangerous
to  the  constitution,  which  was  by  no  means  either
the  purpose  of  Cleisthenes,  or  the  well-understood
operation  of  the  ostracism,  so  long  as  it  continued
to  be  a  reality."  All,  however,  agree  that  the
party  thus  expelled  was  not  deprived  of  his  pro-
perty. The  period  of  his  banishment  was  ten
years.  The  ostracism  was  also  called  the  KepafiiK^
fidaTi^,  or  earthenware  scourge,  from  the  material
of  the  oarpaKou  on  which  the  names  were  written.
Some  of  the  most  distinguished  men  at  Athens
were  removed  by  ostracism,  but  recalled  when  the
city  found  their  services  indispensable.  Amongst
these  were  Themistocles,  Aristeides,  Cimon,  and
Alcibiades  ;  of  the  iirst  of  whom  Thucydides  (i.
135)  states,  that  his  residence  during  ostracism
was  at  Argos,  though  he  was  not  confined  to  that
city,  but  visited  other  parts  of  Peloponnesus.  The
last  person  against  whom  it  was  used  at  Athens
was  Hyperbolus,  a  demagogue  of  low  birth  and
character,  whom  Nicias  and  Alcibiades  conspired
together  to  ostracise,  when  the  banishment  threat-
ened each  of  themselves ;  but  the  Athenians
thought  their  own  dignity  compromised,  and  os-
tracism degraded  by  such  an  application  of  it,  and
accordingly  discontinued  the  practice.  (Plut.  Nic.
c.  1 1,  Alcib.  c.  13,  Arist.  c.  7  ;  Thuc.  viii.  73.)

Ostracism  prevailed  in  other  democratical  states
as  well  as  Athens  ;  namely,  at  Argos,  Miletus,  and
Megara,  but  we  have  no  particulars  of  the  way
in  which  it  was  administered  in  those  states.
Aristotle  says  {Pol.  iii.  8)  that  it  was  abused  for
party  purposes.

From  the  ostracism  of  Athens  was  copied  the
Petalism  (ireTaXiafxos)  of  the  Syracusans,  so  called
from  the  irdraXa,  or  leaves  of  the  olive,  on  which
was  written  the  name  of  the  person  whom  they
wished  to  remove  from  the  city.  The  removal,
however,  was  only  for  five  years  ;  a  sufficient  time,
as  they  thought,  to  humble  the  pride  and  hopes  of
the  exile.  But  petalism  did  not  last  long  ;  for  the
fear  of  this  "  humbling,"  deterred  the  best  quali-
fied amongst  the  citizens  from  taking  any  part  in
public  affairs,  and  the  degeneracy  and  bad  govern-
ment which  followed,  soon  led  to  a  repeal  of  the
law  B.  c.  452.   (Diod.  xi.  87.)

In  connection  with  petalism  it  may  be  remarked
that  if  any  one  were  falsely  registered  in  a  demus,
or  ward,  at  Athens,  his  expulsion  was  called
iK(pvA\o(popLa,  from  the  votes  being  given  by  leaves.
(Meier,  His.  Juris.  Att.  83;  Lys.  c.  Nicom.  p.  844.)
The  reader  of  Greek  history  will  remember,  that
besides  those  exiled  by  law,  or  ostracised,  there
was  frequently  a  great  number  of  political  exiles  in
Greece  ;  men  who,  having  distinguished  themselves
as  the  leaders  of  one  party,  were  expelled,  or  obliged
to  remove,  from  their  native  city  when  the  opposite
faction  became  predominant.  They  are  spoken  of
as  oi  (pevyovresy  or  ol  iKTcea-6vT€i,  and  as  oi  KaT€\-


EXSiLlUM.  515

OSuTes  after  their  return  (rj  icdOodos),  the  word
Kardy^LV  being  applied  to  those  who  were  instru-
mental in  effecting  it.  [R.  W.]

2.  Roman.  In  the  later  imperial  period,  eorsi-
lium  was  a  general  term  used  to  express  a  punish-
ment, of  which  there  were  several  species.  Paulua
(Dig.  48.  tit.  1.  s.  2),  when  speaking  of  those
judicia  publica,  which  are  capitalia,  defines  them
by  the  consequent  punishment,  which  is  death,  or
exsilium  ;  and  exsilium  he  dcifines  to  be  aquae  ef
ignis  ifiterdictio,  by  which  the  caput  or  citizenship
of  the  criminal  was  taken  away.  Other  kinds  of
exsilium  he  says  were  properly  called  relegatio,
and  the  relegatus  retained  his  citizenship.  The
distinction  between  relegatio  and  exsilium  existed
under  the  republic.  ( Liv.  iii.  10,  iv.  4  ;  Cic.  Fro
P.  Se.rt.  c.  12. )  Ovid  also  {Tnst.  v.  11)  describes
himself,  not  as  exsul,  which  he  considers  a  term  of
reproach,  but  as  relegatus.  Speaking  of  the  em-
peror, he  says, —

"  Nee  vitam,  nee  opes,  nee  jus  mihi  civis  ademit ;"
and  a  little  further  on,

"  Nil  nisi  me  patriis  jussit  abire  focis. "
Compare  also  Tristia,  ii.  127,  &c.

Marcianus  (  Dig.  48.  tit.  22.  s.  5)  makes  three
divisions  of  exsilium  :  it  was  either  an  interdiction
from  certain  places  named,  and  was  then  called  lata
fuga  (a  term  equivalent  to  the  libera  fuga  or
liberum  exsilium  of  some  writers) ;  or  it  was  an  in-
terdiction of  all  places,  except  some  place  named ;
or  it  was  the  constraint  of  an  island  (as  opposed  to
lata  fuga).*

Of  relegatio  there  were  two  kinds :  a  person-
might  be  forbidden  to  live  in  a  particular  province,
or  in  Rome,  and  either  for  an  indefinite  or  a  defi-
nite time ;  or  an  island  might  be  assigned  to  the
relegatus  for  his  residence.  Relegatio  was  not  fol-
lowed by  loss  of  citizenship  or  property,  except  so
far  as  the  sentence  of  relegatio  might  extend  to  part
of  the  person's  property.  The  relegatus  retained
his  citizenship,  the  ownership  of  his  property,  and
the  patria  poiestas,  whether  the  relegatio  was  for  a
definite  or  an  indefinite  time.  The  relegatio,  in
fact,  merely  confined  the  person  within,  or  excluded
him  from,  particular  places,  which  is  according
to  the  definition  of  Aelius  Gallus  (Festus,  s.  Rele-
gati),  who  says  that  the  punishment  was  imposed
by  a  lex,  senatus-consultum,  or  the  edictum  of  a
magistratus.  The  words  of  Ovid  express  the  legal
effect  of  relegatio  in  a  manner  literally  and  techni-


*  Noodt  (Op.  Omn.  i.  58)  corrects  the  extract
from  Marcianus  thus  :  — "  Exsilium  duplex  est:  aut
certorum  locorum  interdictio,  ut  lata  fuga  ;  aut
omnium  locorum  praeter  certum  locum,  ut  insulae
vinculum,"  &c.

The  passage  is  evidently  comipt  in  some  editions
of  the  Digest,  and  the  correction  of  Noodt  is  sup-
ported by  good  reasons.  It  seems  that  Marcian  is
here  speaking  of  the  two  kinds  of  relegatio  (com-
pare Ulpian,  Dig.  48.  tit.  22.  s.  7),  and  he  does
not  include  the  exsilium,  which  was  accompanied
with  the  loss  of  the  civitas ;  for  if  his  definition
is  intended  to  include  all  the  kinds  of  exsilium,  it
is  manifestly  incomplete  ;  and  if  it  includes  only
relegatio,  as  it  must  do  from  the  terms  of  it,  the
definition  is  wrong,  inasmuch  as  there  are  only
two  kinds  of  relegatio.  The  conclusion  is,  that  the
text  of  Marcianus  is  either  coiTupt,  or  has  been
altered  by  tlie  compilers  of  the  Digest.
L  L   2


516


ExsiLiu:\r.


cally  correct.  (Instances  of  relcgatio  occur  iii  tlic
following  passages:  —  Suet.  Atig.  c.  16,  Tib.  c50  ;
Tacit.  Ann.  iii.  17,  68  ;  Suet.  Claud,  c.  23,  which
last,  as  the  historian  remarks,  was  a  new  kind  of
relegatio.)  Tlie  term  relegatio  is  applied  by  Cicero
(de  Of.  iii.  31)  to  the  case  of  T.  Manlius,  who
had  been  compelled  by  his  father  to  live  in  solitude
in  the  country.

Deportatio  in  insulam,  or  deportatio  simply,  was
introduced  under  the  emperors  in  place  of  the
aquae  et  ignis  interdictio.  (Ulpian,  Dig.  48.  tit.
13.  s.  3;  tiL  19.  s.  2.)  The  governor  of  a  pro-
vince {prueses)  had  not  the  power  of  pronouncing
the  sentence  of  deportatio  ;  but  this  power  was
given  to  the  praefectus  urbi  by  a  rescript  of  the
emperor  Severus.  The  consequence  of  deportatio
was  loss  of  property  and  citizenship,  but  not  of
freedom.  Though  the  deportatus  ceased  to  be  a
Roman  citizen,  he  had  the  capacity  to  buy  and
sell,  and  do  other  acts  which  might  be  done  ac-
cording to  the  jus  gentium.  Deportatio  differed
from  relegatio,  as  already  shown,  and  also  in  being
always  for  an  indefinite  time.  The  relegatus  went
into  banishment ;  the  deportatus  was  conducted  to
his  place  of  banishment,  sometimes  in  chains.

As  the  exsilium  in  the  special  sense,  and  the
deportatio  took  away  a  person's  civitas,  it  follows
that  if  he  was  a  father,  his  children  ceased  to  be
in  his  power ;  and  if  he  was  a  son,  he  ceased  to  be
in  his  father's  power ;  for  the  relationship  ex-
pressed by  the  terms  patria  potedas  could  not
exist  when  either  party  had  ceased  to  be  a  Roman
citizen.  (Gains,  i.  128.)  Relegatio  of  a  father  or
of  a  son,  of  course,  had  not  this  effect.  But  the
interdict  and  the  deportatio  did  not  dissolve  mar-
riage. (Cod.  5.  tit  16.  s.  24  ;  tit.  17.  s.  1 ;  com-
pare Gains,  i.  128,  with  the  Institutes,  i.  tit.  12,
in  which  the  deportatio  stands  in  the  place  of  the
aquae  et  ignis  interdictio  of  Gains.)

When  a  person,  either  parent  or  child,  was  con-
demned to  the  mines  or  to  fight  with  wild  beasts,
the  relation  of  the  patria  potestas  was  dissolved.
This,  though  not  reckoned  a  species  of  exsilium,
resembled  deportatio  in  its  consequences.

It  remains  to  eximine  the  meaning  of  the  term
exsilium  in  the  republican  period,  and  to  ascend,  so
far  as  we  can,  to  its  origin.  Cicero  {Pro  Caecina,
c.  34)  affirms  that  no  Roman  was  ever  deprived  of
his  civitas  or  his  freedom  by  a  lex.  In  the  oration
Pro  Domo  (c.  16, 17)  he  makes  the  same  assertion,
but  in  a  qualified  way ;  he  says  that  no  special
lex,  that  is,  no  privUegiuin,  could  be  passed  against
the  caput  of  a  Roman  citizen,  unless  he  was  first
condemned  in  a  judicium.  It  was,  according  to
Cicero,  a  fundamental  principle  of  Roman  law  (Pro
Uoino^  c.  29),  that  no  Roman  citizen  could  lose
his  freedom  or  his  citizenship  without  his  consent.
He  adds,  that  Roman  citizens  who  went  out  as
Latin  colonists,  could  not  become  Latin,  unless
they  went  voluntarily  and  registered  their  names :
those  who  were  condemned  of  capital  crimes  did
not  lose  their  citizenship  till  they  were  admitted
aa  citizens  of  another  state  ;  and  this  was  effected,
not  by  depriving  them  of  their  civitas  {ademptio
ctvttatis),  but  by  the  interdictio  tecti  aquae  et
ignis.  The  same  thing  is  stated  in  the  oration
Pro  Caecina  (c.  34),  with  the  addition,  that  a
Roman  citizen,  when  he  was  received  into  another
state,  lost  his  citizenship  at  Rome,  because  by  the
Roman  law  a  man  could  not  be  a  citizen  of  two
states.     This  reason,  however,  would  be  equally


EXSILIUM.

good  for  showing  that  a  Roman  citizen  could  not
become  a  citizen  of  another  community.  In  the
oration  Pro  Balbo  (c.  11)  the  proposition  is  put
rather  in  this  form  ;  that  a  Roman  who  became  a
citisen  of  another  state,  thereby  ceased  to  be  a  Ro-
man citizen.  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  in  the
oration  Pro  Caecina^  it  is  one  of  Cicero's  objects  to
prove  that  his  client  had  the  rights  of  a  Roman
citizen ;  and  in  the  oration  Pro  Domo,  to  prove
that  he  himself  had  not  been  an  exsul,  though  he
was  interdicted  from  fire  and  water  within  400
miles  of  Rome.  (Cic.  Ad  Attic,  iii.  4.)  Now,  as
Cicero  had  been  interdicted  from  fire  and  water,
and  as  he  evaded  the  penalty,  to  use  his  own  words
{P7'o  Caecina  c.  34),  by  going  beyond  the  limits,
he  could  only  escape  the  consequences,  namely,
exsilium,  either  by  relying  on  the  fact  of  his  not
being  received  as  a  citizen  into  another  state,  or  by
alleging  the  illegality  of  the  proceedings  against
him.  But  the  latter  is  the  ground  on  which  he
seems  to  maintain  his  case  in  the  Pro  Domo :  he
alleges  that  he  was  made  the  subject  of  a  privi-
legiura,  without  having  been  first  condemned  in  a
judicium  (c  17).

In  the  earlier  republican  period,  a  Roman
citizen  might  have  a  right  to  go  into  exsilium  to
another  state,  or  a  citizen  of  another  state  might
have  a  right  to  go  into  exsilium  at  Rome,  by  virtue
of  certain  isopolitical  relations  existing  between
such  state  and  Rome.  This  right  was  called  jus
exulandi  with  reference  to  the  state  to  which  the
person  came  ;  with  respect  to  his  own  state  which
he  left,  he  was  exul,  and  his  condition  was  ex-
silium :  with  respect  to  the  state  which  he  en-
tered, he  was  inquilinus* ;  and  at  Rome  he  might
attach  himself  {applicare  se)  to  a  quasi  patronus,  a
relationship  which  gave  rise  to  questions  involving
the  jus  applicationis.

The  sentence  of  aquae  et  ignis,  to  which
Cicero  adds  {Pro  Domo.,  c.  30)  tecti  interdictio
(comp.  Plut.  Marius.,  c.  29),  was  equivalent  to
the  deprivation  of  the  chief  necessaries  of  life,  and
its  effect  was  to  incapacitate  a  person  from  exer-
cising the  rights  of  a  citizen  within  the  limits  which
the  sentence  comprised.  Supposing  it  to  be  time,
that  no  Roman  citizen  could  in  direct  terms  be  de-
prived of  his  civitas,  it  requires  but  little  know-
ledge of  the  history  of  Roman  jurisprudence  to
perceive  that  a  way  would  readily  be  discovered
of  doing  that  indirectly  which  could  not  be  done
directly  ;  and  such,  in  fact,  was  the  aquae  ct  ignis
interdictio.  The  meaning  of  the  sentence  of  aquae
et  ignis  interdictio  is  clear  when  we  consider  the
symbolical  meaning  of  the  aqua  et  ignis.  The
bride,  on  the  day  of  her  marriage,  was  received  by
her  husband  with  fire  and  water  (Dig.  24.  tit.  1.
s.  G(j\  which  were  symbolical  of  his  tJiking  her
under  his  protection  and  sustentation.  Varro  {De
Ling.  Lat.  iv.)  gives  a  different  explanation  of
the  symbolical  meaning  of  aquae  et  ignis  in  the
marriage  ceremony: — Aquae  et  ignis  (according  to
the  expression  of  Festus)  sunt  duo  elementa  quae
humanam,  vitam  maxime  contine7it.  The  sentence
of  interdict  was  either  pronounced  in  a  judicium,
or  it  was  the  subject  of  a  lex.     The   punishment

*  This  word  appears,  by  its  termination  inus^
to  denote  a  person  who  was  one  of  a  class,  like  the
word  libertinus.  The  prefix  in  appears  to  be  the
correlative  of  ex  in  exsul,  and  the  remaining  part
(juil,  is  probably  related  to  col  in  incola  and  colonua.


I


FABRI.

was  inflicted  for  various  crimes,  as  vis  publica,
pecuhitus^  veneficium,  &c.  The  Lex  Julia  de  vi
puUica  et  privata  applied,  among  other  cases,  to
any  person  qui  receperit,  celaverit,  tenuerit^  the  inter-
dicted person  (Paulus,  Sent.  liecept.  ed.  Schulting)  ;
and  there  was  a  clause  to  this  effect  in  the  lex  of
Clodius,  by  which  Cicero  was  banished.

The  sentence  of  the  interdict,  which  in  the
time  of  the  Antonines  was  accompanied  with  the
loss  of  citizenship  (Gains,  i.  90),  could  hardly  have
had  any  other  effect  in  the  thne  of  Cicero.  It
may  be  true  that  exsilium,  that  is,  the  change  of
sociim,  or  ground,  was  not  in  direct  terms  included
in  the  sentence  of  uquae  et  iynis  i?itei-dictio :  the
person  might  stay  if  he  liked,  and  submit  to  the
penalty  of  being  an  outcast,  and  being  incapacitated
from  doing  any  legal  act.  Indeed,  it  is  not  easy
to  conceive  that  banishment  can  exist  in  any  state,
except  such  state  has  distant  possessions  of  its  own
to  which  the  offender  can  be  sent.  Thus  banish-
ment as  a  penalty  did  not  exist  in  the  old  English
law.  When  isopolitical  relations  existed  between
Rome  and  another  state,  exsilium  might  be  the
privilege  of  an  offender.  Cicero  might  then  truly
say  that  exsilium  was  not  a  punishment,  but  a
mode  of  evading  punishment  {Fro  Caecina)  ;  and
this  is  quite  consistent  with  the  interdict  being  a
punishment,  and  having  for  its  object  the  exsilium.

According  to  Niebuhr,  the  interdict  was  intended
to  prevent  a  person,  who  had  become  an  exsul,  from
retm-ning  to  Rome  and  resuming  his  citizenship,
and  the  interdict  was  taken  off  when  an  exsul  was
recalled.  Further,  Niebuhr  asserts,  that  they  who
settled  in  an  unprivileged  place  (one  that  was  not
in  an  isopolitical  connection  with  Rome)  needed  a
decree  of  the  people,  declaring  that  their  settle-
ment should  operate  as  a  legul  exsilium.  And
this  assertion  is  supported  by  a  single  passage  in
Livy  (xxvi.  3),  from  which  it  appears  that  it  was
declared  by  a  plebiscitum,  that  C.  Fabius,  by
going  into  exile  (exuhitum)  to  Tarquinii,  which
was  a  municipium  {Pro  Caecin.  c.  4),  was  legally
in  exile.

Niebuhr  asserts  that  Cicero  had  not  lost  the
ci vitas  by  the  interdict';  but  Cicero  {Ad  Attic,  iii.
23)  by  implication  admits  that  he  had  lost  his
civitas  and  his  ordo,  though  in  the  Oratio  Pro
Doino  he  denies  that  he  had  lost  his  civitas.  And
the  ground  on  which  he  mainly  attempted  to  sup-
port his  case  v/as,  that  the  lex  by  which  he  was
interdicted,  was  in  fact  no  lex,  but  a  proceeding
altogether  irregular.  Cicero  was  restored  by  a  lex
Centuriata.    {Ad  Attic,  iv.  1.)  [G.  L.]

EXTISPEX.     [Haruspex.]

EXTRAORDINA'RII.  [Exercitus,  p.
497,  b.]


F.


FABRI,  are  workmen  who  make  any  thing  out
of  hard  materials,  as  fabri  tignarii,  carpenters,
fabri  aerarii^  smiths,  «Scc.  The  different  trades
were  divided  by  Numa  (Pint.  Numa,  17)  into
nine  collegia,  which  correspond  to  our  companies
or  guilds.  In  the  constitution  of  Servius  TuUius,
the  fabri  tignarii  (re/CToi/es,  Orelli,  Inscrip.  60,
417,  3690,  4086,  4088, 4184)  and  the  fabri  aerarii
or  ferrarii  {xaXKorvnoi)  were  formed  into  two
centuries,  which  were  called  the  cenUmae  fabrum,
and  not  fabrorum.    (Cic.  Orat.  46.)    They  did  not


FALSUM.


617


belong  to  any  of  the  five  classes  into  wliich  Servius
divided  the  people  ;  but  the  fabri  tign.  probably
voted  with  the  first  class,  and  tha  fabri  aer.  with
the  second.  Livy  (i.  43)  and  Dionysius  (vii.  bd)
name  both  the  centuries  together:  the  former  says
that  they  voted  with  the  first  class  ;  the  latter,
that  they  voted  with  the  second.  Cicero  {De  Rep.
ii.  22)  names  only  one  century  of  fabri,  which  he
says  voted  with  the  first  class  ;  but  as  he  adds  the
word  tignariorum^  he  must  have  recognized  the
existence  of  the  second  century,  which  we  suppose
to  have  voted  with  the  second  class.  (Gottling,
Gesch.  der  Rom.  Staastv.  p.  249.)

The  fabri  in  the  army  were  under  the  command
of  an  ofiicer  called  praefectus  fabrum.  (Caes.  ap.
Cic.  ad  Att.  ix.  8,  Bell  Civ.  i.  24  ;  Veget.  ii.  11.)
It  has  been  supposed  by  some  modem  writers  that
there  was  a  praefectus  fabrum  attached  to  each
legion  ;  and  this  may  have  been  the  case.  No  genuine
inscriptions  however,  contain  the  title  of  praefectus
fabrum  with  the  name  o-  a  legion  added  to  it.
There  were  also  civil  magistrates  at  Rome  and  in
the  municipal  towns,  called  praefecti  fabrum ;  but
we  know  nothing  respecting  them  beyond  their
name.  Thus  we  find  in  Gruter,  Praef.  Fabr.
RoMAE  (467.  7),  Praefectus  Fabr.  Caer.
(235,  9.)  The  subject  of  the  praefecti  fabrum  ia
discussed  with  great  accuracy  in  a  letter  of  Hagen-
buchius,  published  by  Orelli  {Inscrip.  vol.  ii.
p.  95,  &c.).

FA'BULA.     [CoMOEDiA.]

FACTIO'NES  AURIGA'RUM.  [Circus,
p.  287,]

FALA'RICA.    [Hasta.]

FALSA'RIUS.    [Falsum.]

FALSUM.  The  oldest  legislative  provision  at
Rome  against  Falsum  was  that  of  the  Twelve
Tables  against  false  testimony  (Cell.  xx.  1)  ;  but
there  were  trials  for  giving  false  testimony  before
the  enactment  of  the  Twelve  Tables.  (Liv.  iii.
24,  &c.)  The  next  legislation  on  Falsum,  so  far
as  we  know,  was  a  Lex  Cornelia,  passed  in  the
time  of  the  Dictator  Sulla,  which  Cicero  also  calls
testamentaria  and  nimaaria  {In  Verr.  ii.  lib.  1.
c.  42),  with  reference  to  the  crimes  which  it  was
the  object  of  the  law  to  punish.  The  offence  was
a  Crimen  Publicum.  The  provisions  of  this  lex
are  stated  by  Paulus  {Sent.  Recept.  v.  25,  ed.
Berl.),  Avho  also  entitles  it  Lex  Cornelia  testa-
mentaria, to  apply  to  any  person  "  qui  testamentum
quodve  aliud  instrumentum  falsum  sciens  dolo
malo  scripserit,  recitaverit,  subjecerit,  suppresserit,
amoverit,  resignaverit,  deleverit,"  &c.  The  punish-
ment was  deportatio  in  insulam  (at  least  when
Paulus  wrote)  for  the  "  honestiores  ;"  and  the  mines
or  crucifixion  for  the  "  humiliores."  In  place  of
deportatio,  the  law  probably  contained  the  punish-
ment of  the  interdictio  aquae  et  ignis.  According
to  Paulus  the  law  applied  to  any  instrument  as
well  as  a  will,  and  to  the  adulteration  of  gold  and
silver  coin,  or  refusing  to  accept  in  payment  ge-
nuine coin  stamped  with  the  head  of  the  princeps.
But  it  appears  from  Ulpian  (sub  titulo  de  poena
legis  Corneliae  testamentariae)  that  these  were
subsequent  additions  made  to  the  Lex  Cornelia
{Mos.  et  Rom.  Leg.  Coll.  tit.  8.  s.  7)  by  various
senatus-consulta.  (Tacit.  Ann.  xiv.  40,  41.)  By
a  senatus-consultum,  in  the  consulship  of  Statilius
and  Taurus,  the  penalties  ^i  the  law  were  extended
to  the  case  of  other  than  testamentary  instruments.
It  is  conjectured  that,  for  the  consulship  of  Statilius

LL   3


518


FALX.


FALX.


and  Taurus,  as  it  stands  in  the  text  of  Ulpian,  we
should  read  Statiliiis  Taurus,  and  that  the  consul-
ship of  T.  Statiliiis  Taurus  and  L.  Scriboniiis  Libo
(a.  d.  16)  is  meant.  A  subsequent  senatus-con-
sultum,  in  the  fourteenth  year  of  Tiberius,  extended
the  penalties  of  the  law  to  those  who  for  money-
undertook  the  defence  of  a  (criminal  ?)  cause,  or  to
procure  testimony ;  and  by  a  senatus-consultum,
passed  between  the  dates  of  those  just  mentioned,
conspiracies  for  the  ruin  of  innocent  persons  were
comprised  within  the  provisions  of  the  law.  An-
other senatus-consultum,  passed  a.  d.  26,  extended
the  law  to  those  who  received  money  for  selling,
or  giving,  or  not  giving  testimony.  There  were
probably  other  legislative  provisions  for  the  pur-
pose of  checking  fraud.  In  the  time  of  Nero  it
was  enacted  against  fraudulent  persons  (/alsarii),
that  tabulae  or  written  contracts  should  be  pierced
with  holes,  and  a  triple  thread  passed  through  the
holes,  in  addition  to  the  signature.  (Suet.  Nero^
c.  17  ;  compare  Paulus,  Sent.  RecepL  v.  tit.  25.
s.  6.)  In  the  time  of  Nero  it  was  also  provided
that  the  first  two  parts  (cerae)  of  a  will  should
have  only  the  testator's  signature,  and  the  remain-
ing one  that  of  the  witnesses  :  it  was  also  provided
that  no  man  who  wrote  the  will  should  give  himself
a  legacy  in  it.  The  provisions,  as.  to  adulterating
money  and  refusing  to  take  legal  coin  in  payment,
were  also  made  by  senatus  consulta  or  imperial
constitutions.  Allusion  is  made  to  the  latter  law
by  Arrian  (Epict.  iii.  3).  It  appears  from  numer-
ous passages  in  the  Roman  writers  that  the  crime
of  falsum  in  all  its  forms  was  xevj  common,  and
especially  in  the  case  of  wills,  against  which  legis-
lative enactments  are  a  feeble  security.  (Heinecc.
Syntagma ;  Rein,  Das  Crhninalrecht  der  Homer,
where  the  subject  is  fully  discussed.)      [G.  L.]

FALX,  dim.  FALCULA  {apirri,  Zpiirai'ov,
poet.  Speirdvr],  dim.  Spewduiov) ,  a  sickle  ;  a  scythe  ;
a  pruning-knife,  or  pruning-hook ;  a  bill ;  a  fal-
chion ;  a  halbert.

As  CuLTER  denoted  a  knife  with  one  straight
edge,  "  falx  "  signified  any  similar  instrument,  the
single  edge  of  which  was  curved.  {Apiiravov  (u-
Kajtijres,  Hom.  Od.  xviii.  367  ;  cur>;ae  fulces,  Virg.
Georg.  i.  508  ;  curvamine  falcis  aenae,  Ovid,  Met.
vii.  227  ;  adunca/alce,  xiv.  628.)  By  additional
epithets  the  various  uses  of  the  falx  were  indicated,
and  its  corresponding  varieties  in  fonn  and  size.
Thus  the  sickle,  because  it  was  used  by  reapers,
was  called /ct/ar  messoria ;  the  scythe,  which  was
employed  in  mowing  hay,  was  caWed  falx /oenaria ;
the  pruning-knife  and  the  bill,  on  account  of  their
use  in  dressing  vines,  as  well  as  in  hedging  and  in
cutting  off  the  shoots  and  branches  of  trees,  were
distinguished  by  the  appellation  of  /alx  putaloria,
vinitoria,  arl>oraria,  or  silvatica  (Cato,  De  Re  Rust.
10,  11  ;  Pallad.  i.  43  ;  Colum.  iv.  25),  or  by  the
diminutive /o/cM^a.     (Colum.  xii.  18.)

A  rare  coin  published  by  Pellerin  {Med.  de  Roisy
Par.  176%  p.  208)  shows  the  head  of  one  of  the
Lagidae,  kings  of  Egypt,  wearing  the  Diadema,
and  on  the  reverse  a  man  cutting  down  corn  with
a  sickle.     (See  woodcut.)

The  lower  figure  in  tlie  same  woodcut  is  taken
from  the  MSS.  of  Columella,  and  illustrates  his
description  of  the  various  parts  of  the/a/ir  vinitoria.
{De  Re  Rust.  h'.  25.  p.  5 1 8,  ed.  Gesner.)  [Culter.]
The  curvature  in  the  fore  part  of  the  blade  is  ex-
pressed by  Virgil  in  the  phrase  procurva  faloc.
(fietyrg,  il  421.)     After  the  removal  of  a  branch


by  the  pruning-hook,  it  was  often  smoothed,  as
in  modern  gardening,  by  the  chisel.  (Colum.
De  Arbor.  10.)  [Dolabra.]  The  edge  of  the
falx  was  often  toothed  or  serrated  {aptrtiv  Kap-
Xap68oPTa,  Hesiod,  Theog.  174,  179  ;  denticulata,
Colum.  De  Re  Rust.  ii.  21).  The  indispensable
process  of  sharpening  these  instruments  {apTrrfU
Xapaccre/ieVat,  Hesiod,  Op.  573  ;  apmrju  cvKa^iirri
veodrj-yea,  Apoll.  Rhod.  iii.  1 388)  was  effected  by
whetstones  which  the  Romans  obtained  from
Crete  and  other  distant  places,  with  the  addition
of  oil  or  watcT  which  the  mower  {/oenisex)  car-
ried ui  a  hom  upon  his  thigh.  (Plin.  //.  A^.  xviii.
67.)

Numerous  as  were  the  uses  to  which  the  falx
was  applied  in  agriculture  and  horticulture,  its
employment  in  battle  was  almost  equally  varied,
though  not  so  frequent.  The  Geloni  were  noted
for  its  use.  (Claudian,  De  Laud.  Stil.  i.  110.)  It
was  the  weapon  with  which  Jupiter  wounded
Typhon  (Apollod.  i.  6)  ;  with  which  Hercules
slew  the  Lernaean  Hydra  (Eurip.  Ion,  191)  ;  and
with  which  Mercury  cut  off  the  head  of  Argus
{falcato  ense,  Ovid,  Met.  i.  718  ;  harpen  Cyllenida^
Lucan,  ix.  662 — 667).  Perseus,  having  received
the  same  weapon  from  Mercury,  or,  according  to
other  authorities,  from  Vulcan,  used  it  to  decapi-
tate Medusa  and  to  slay  the  sea-monster.  (Apollod.
ii.  4  ;  Eratosth,  Cataster.  22  ;  Ovid,  Met.  iv.  666,
720,  727,  V.  69  ;  Brunck,  ^«aZ.  iii.  157)  From
the  passages  now  referred  to,  we  may  conclude  that
the  falchion  was  a  weapon  of  the  most  remote
antiquity  ;  that  it  was  girt  like  a  dagger  upon  the
waist ;  that  it  was  held  in  the  hand  by  a  short
hilt  ;  and  that,  as  it  was  in  fact  a  dagger  or  sharp-
pointed  blade,  with  a  proper  falx  projecting  from
one  side,  it  was  thrust  into  the  flesh  up  to  this
lateral  curvature  {curvo  tenus  abdidit  hamo).  In
the  following  woodcut,  four  examples  are  selected
from  works  of  ancient  art  to  illustrate  its  form.
One  of  the  four  cameos  here  copied  represents
Perseus  with  the  falchion  in  his  right  hand,  and
the  head  of  Medusa  in  his  left.  The  two  smaller
figures  are  heads  of  Saturn  with  the  falx  in  its
original  form  ;  and  the  fourth  cameo,  representing
the  same  divinity  at  full  length,  was  probably  en-
graved in  Italy  at  a  later  period  than  the  others,
but  early  enough  to  prove  that  the  scythe  was  in
use  among  the  Romans,  whilst  it  illustrates  the
adaptation  of  the  symlDols  of  Saturn  {Kp6vos  :  ^
senex  falcifer,  Ovid,  Fust.  v.  627,  in  Ibin,  216)
for  the  purpose  of  personifying  Time  {Xp6i/os).
If  we  imagine  the  weapon  which  has  now  been


FAMILIA.


described  to  be  attached  to  the  end  of  a  pole,  it
would  assume  the  form  and  be  applicable  to  all  the
purposes  of  the  modern  halbert.  Such  must  have
been  the  asseres  falcati  used  by  the  Romans  at
the  siege  of  Ambracia.  (Liv.  xxxviii,  5  ;  compare
Caes.  Bell.  Gall.  vii.  22,  86  ;  Q.  Curt.  iv.  19.)
Sometimes  the  iron  head  was  so  large  as  to  be
fastened,  instead  of  the  ram's  head,  to  a  wooden
beam,  and  worked  by  men  under  a  testudo.
(Veget.  iv.  14.)

Lastly,  the  Assyrians,  the  Persians,  the  Medes,
and  the  Syrians  in  Asia  (Xen.  Cyrop.  vi.  1,  2,
Anah.  i.  8  ;  Diod.  ii.  5,  xvii.  53  ;  Polvb.  v.
53  ;  Q.  Curt.  iv.  9,  12,  13  ;  Gell.  v.  5  ;  2  Mace,
xiii.  2  ;  Veget.  iii,  24  ;  Liv.  xxxvii.  41),  and  the
Gauls  and  Britons  in  Europe  [Covinus],  made
themselves  formidable  on  the  field  of  battle  by  the
use  of  chariots  with  scythes,  fixed  at  right  angles
(eis  TcKayiov)  to  the  axle  and  turned  downwards ;
or  inserted  parallel  to  the  axle  into  the  felly  of  the
wheel,  so  as  to  revolve,  when  the  chariot  was
put  in  motion,  with  more  than  thrice  the  velocity
of  the  chariot  itself  ;  and  sometimes  also  projecting
from  the  extremities  of  the  axle.  [J.  Y.]

FAMI'LIA.  This  word  contains  the  same
element  as  "  famulus,"  which  is  said  to  be  the
same  as  the  Oscan /aTwwZ  ov  famel.,  which  signified
"servus."  The  conjecture  that  it  contains  the
same  element  as  the  Greek  6fxi\ia,  and  is  the
same  as  S/jl  or  a/j.^  is  specious,  but  somewhat  doubt-
ful. In  its  widest  sense  Familia  comprehends  all
that  is  subjected  to  the  will  of  an  individual,  who
is  sui  juris,  both  iree  persons,  slaves,  and  objects
of  property.  Li  this  sense  it  corresponds  to  the
Greek  oIkus  and  oIkio.  But  the  word  has  various
narrower  significations  (familiae  —  appellatio  et  in
res  et  in  personas  diducitur.  Dig.  50.  tit.  16.  s.  195.
§  1 ).  In  the  third  kind  of  testamentary  disposi-
tion mentioned  by  Gaius  (ii.  102),  the  word
"  familia  "  is  explained  by  the  equivalent  "  patri-
monium  ;"  and  the  person  who  received  the  familia
from  the  testator  (qui  a  testatore  familiam  ac-
cipiebat  mancipio)  was  called  "  familiae  emptor."
And  in  the  formula  adopted  by  the  "familiae
emptor,"  when  he  took  tlie  testator's  familia  by  a
fictitious  Side,  his  words  were :  "  Familiam  pe-
cuniamque  tuam  endo  mandatam  tutelam  custode-
lamque  meam  recipio,"  &c.

In  the  passage  of  the  Twelve  Tables  which  de-


FAMILIA.  51d

clares  that  in  default  of  any  lieres  suus,  the  pro-
perly of  the  intestate  shall  go  to  the  next  agnatus,
the  word  "  familia  "  signifies  the  property  only  :
"Agnatus  proximus  familiam  habeto."  In  the
same  section  in  which  Ulpian  (Frag.  tit.  26.  1)
quotes  this  passage  from  the  Twelve  Tables,  he
explains  agnati  to  be  "  cognati  virilis  sexus  per
mares  descendentes  ejusdem  familiae,"  where  the
word  "  familia  "  comprehends  only  persons.  (Dig.
50.  tit.  16.  s.  195;  10.  tit.  2.)

The  word  "  familia "  sometimes  signifies  only
"  persons,"  that  is,  all  those  who  are  in  the  power
of  a  paterfamilias,  such  as  his  sons  (filii/amilias\
daughters,  grandchildren,  and  slaves,  who  are  strictly
objects  of  dominium,  but  are  also  in  a  sense  objects
of  potestas.  In  another  sense  "  familia  "  signifies
only  the  free  persons  who  are  in  the  power  of  a
paterfamilias  ;  and,  in  a  more  extended  sense  of
this  kind,  all  those  who  are  agnati,  that  is,  all
who  are  sprung  from  a  conunon  ancestor,  and
would  be  in  his  power  if  he  were  living.  With
this  sense  of  familia  is  connected  the  status  fami-
liae, by  virtue  of  which  a  person  belonged  to  a
particular  familia,  and  thereby  had  a  capacity  for
certain  rights  which  only  the  members  of  the
familia  could  claim.  A  person  who  changed  this
status,  ceased  to  belong  to  the  familia,  and  sus-
tained a  capitis  diminutio  minima.  [Adoptio;
Caput.]  Members  of  the  same  family  were
"familiares ;"  and  hence  familiaris  came  to  signifj'
an  intimate  friend.  Slaves  who  belonged  to  the
same  familia  were  called,  with  respect  to  this  re-
lation, familiares.  Generally,  "  familiaris  "  might
signify  any  thing  relating  to  a  familia.

Sometimes  "  familia  "  is  used  to  signify  only  the
slaves  belonging  to  a  person  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  xiv.  4,
ad  Quint.  Fr.  ii.  Q)  ;  or  to  a  body  of  persons
{societas\  in  which  sense  they  are  sometimes  op-
posed to  liberti  (Cic.  Brut.  22),  where  the  true
reading  is  "liberti."     (Cic.  ad  Fam.  i.  3.)

The  word  familia  is  also  applied  (improperly)  to
sects  of  philosophers,  and  to  a  body  of  gladiators :  in
the  latter  sense  with  less  impropriety.  In  a  sense
still  less  exact,  it  is  sometimes  applied  to  signify  a
living,  a  man's  means  of  subsistence.  (Ter.  Heauton.
V.  1.  36.)

A  paterfamilias  and  a  materfamilias  were  re-
spectively a  Roman  citizen  who  was  sui  juris,  and
his  wife  in  manu.  (Cic.  7'op.  3  ;  comp.  Ulp.  Frug.
iv.  1,  and  Bocking,  Instit.  i.  pp.  217,  229.)  A
filiusfamilias  and  a  filiafamilias  were  a  son  and
daughter  in  the  power  of  a  paterfamilias.  The
familia  of  a  paterfamilias,  in  its  widest  sense,
comprehended  all  his  agnati  ;  the  extent  of  which
term,  and  its  legal  import,  are  explained  under
Cognati.  The  relation  of  familia  and  gens  is
explained  under  Gens.

The  notion  of  Familia  as  a  natural  relation  con-
sists of  Marriage,  the  Patria  Potestas,  and  Cognatio
(kinship).  But  Positive  Law  can  fashion  other
relations  after  the  type  of  these  natimal  relations.
Of  these  artificial  family  relations  the  Roman  law
had  five,  which  are  as  follow:  —  (1)  Manus,  or
the  strict  marriage  relation  between  the  husband
and  wife  ;  (2)  Servitus,  or  the  relation  of  master
and  slave  ;  (3)  Patronatus,  or  the  relation  of
former  master  to  foi-mer  slave  ;  (4)  Mancipii  '
causa,  or  that  intermediate  state  between  servitus
and  libertas,  which  characterized  a  child  who  was
mancipated  by  his  father  [Emancipatio]  ;  (5)
Tutela  and  Curatio,  the  origin  of  which  must  be


520  FARTOR.

traced  to  the  Patria  Potestas.  These  relations  are
treated  under  their  appropriate  heads.

The  doctrine  of  representation,  as  applied  to  the
acquisition  of  property,  is  connected  with  the  doc-
trine of  the  relations  of  familia  ;  but  being  limited
Avith  reference  to  potestas,  manus,  and  mancipium,
it  is  noc  co-extensive  nor  identical  with  the  rela-
tions of  familia.  Legal  capacity  is  also  connected
with  the  relations  of  familia,  though  not  identical
with,  but  rather  distinct  from  them.  The  notions
of  liberi  arid  servi,  sui  juris  and  alieni,  are  com-
prised in  the  above-mentioned  relations  of  familia.
The  distinctions  of  Gives,  Latini,  Peregrini,  are
entirely  unconnected  with  the  relations  of  familia.
Some  of  the  relations  of  familia  have  no  effect  on
legal  capacity,  for  instance,  marriage  as  such.  That
family  relationship  which  has  an  influence  on  legal
capacity,  is  the  Patria  Potestas,  in  connection
with  which  the  legal  incapacities  of  filiusfamilias,
filiafamilias,  and  a  wife  in  manu,  may  be  most
appropriately  considered.  (Savigny,  Si/stem  des
heutigen  Rom.  BecJils,  vol.  i.  pp.  345,  &c.,  '656,  &c..
vol.  ii.  Berlin,  1840  ;  Bocking,  Instntionen,  vol.  i.
p.  213,  &c.)  [G.  L.]

FAMPLIAE  ERCISCUNDAE  ACTIO.
Every  heres,  who  had  full  power  of  disposition
over  his  property,  was  entitled  to  a  division  of  the
hereditas,  unless  the  testator  had  declared,  or  the
co-hcredes  had  agreed,  that  it  should  remain  in
common  for  a  fixed  time.  The  division  could  be
made  by  agreement  among  the  co-heredes  ;  but  in
case  they  could  not  agree,  the  division  was  made  by
a  judex.  For  this  purpose  every  heres  had  against
each  of  his  co-heredes  an  actio  familiae  erciscundae,
which,  like  the  actiones  communi  dividundo,  and
finium  regundorum,  was  of  the  class  of  Mixtae
Actiones,  or,  as  they  were  sometimes  called,  Du-
plicia  Judicia,  because,  as  in  the  familiae  erciscundae
judicium,  each  heres  was  both  plaintiff  and  defend-
ant (actor  and  reus) ;  though  he  who  brought  the
actio  and  claimed  a  judicium  {ad  judicium  provo-
cavit)  was  properly  the  actor.  A  heres,  either  ex
testamento  or  ab  intestato,  might  bring  this  action.
All  the  heredes  were  liable  to  the  bonoi-um  collatio
[BoKORUM  Collatio],  that  is,  bound  to  allow,  in
taking  the  account  of  the  property,  what  they  had
received  from  the  testator  in  his  lifetime,  as  part  of
their  share  of  the  hereditas,  at  least  so  far  as  they
had  been  enriched  by  such  donations.

This  action  was  given  by  the  Twelve  Tables.
The  word  Familia  here  signifies  the  "  property,"
as  explained  in  the  previous  article,  and  is  equiva-
lent to  hereditas.

The  meaning  and  origin  of  the  verb  ere,  isccre,
or  here,  iscere,  have  been  a  subject  of  some  dis-
pute. It  is,  however,  certain  that  the  word  means
"division."  (Dig.  10.  tit.  2;  Cic.  De  Oral.  i.
6Q,  Pro  Caedna,  c.7;  Apul.  Met.  ix.  p.  210,
Bipont.)  [G.  L.]

FAMO'SI  LIBELLI.     [Libellus.]

FANUM.     [Templum.]

FA'RREUM.     [Matrimonium.]

FARTOR  (a-iTcvT'fjs),  was  a  slave  who  fattened
poultry.  (Colum.  viii.  7  ;  Hor.  Sat.  ii.  3.  228  ;
Plant.  True.  i.  2.  11.)  Donatus  (ad  Terent.  Eun.
ii.  2.  26)  says  that  the  name  was  given  to  a
maker  of  sausages ;  but  compare  Becker,  Gullus,
vol.  ii.  p.  190.

The  name  of  fartores  or  crammers  was  also
given  to  the  noraenclatores,  who  accompanied  the
candidates  for  the  public  offices  at  Rome,  and  gave


FASCES.

I  them  the  names  of  such  persons  as  they  might
meet.     (Festus,  s.  v.  Fartores.)

FAS.     [Fasti  ;  Jus.]

FASCES,  were  rods  bound  in  the  form  of  a
bundle,  and  containing  an  axe  (securis)  in  the
middle,  the  iron  of  which  projected  from  them.
These  rods  were  carried  by  lictors  before  the  supe-
rior magistrates  at  Rome,  and  are  often  represented
on  the  reverse  of  consular  coins.  (Spanh.  De
Praest.  et  Usu  Numism.  vol.  ii.  pp.  88,  91.)  The
following  woodcuts  give  the  reverses  of  four  con-
sular coins  ;  in  the  first  of  which  we  see  the  lictors
carrying  the  fasces  on  their  shoulders  ;  in  the
second,  two  fasces,  and  between  them  a  sella
curulis  ;  in  the  third,  two  fasces  crowned,  with
the  consul  standing  between  them  ;  and  in  the
fourth,  the  same,  only  with  no  cro\vns  around  the
fasces.


The  next  two  woodcuts,  which  are  taken  from
the  consular  coins  of  C.  Norbanus,  contain  in  ad-
dition to  the  fasces  —  the  one  a  spica  and  caduceus,
and  the  other  a  spica,  caduceus,  and  prora.


The  fasces  appear  to  have  been  usually  made  of
birch  (fjetuUa,  Wm.H.N.  xvi.  30),  but  sometimes
also  of  the  twigs  of  the  elm.  (Plant.  Asin.  iii..  2.
'29,  ii.  3.  74.)  They  are  said  to  have  been  de-
rived from  Vetulonia,  a  city  of  Etniria.  (Sil.  Ital.
viii.  485  ;  compare  Liv.  i.  8.)  Twelve  were  carried
before  each  of  the  kings  by  twelve  lictors  ;  and
on  the  expulsion  of  the  Tarquins,  one  of  the  con-
suls was  preceded  by  twelve  lictors  with  the  fasces
and  secures,  and  the  other  by  the  same  number
of  lictors  with  the  fasces  only,  or,  according  to
some  accounts,  with  crowns  round  them.  (Dionys.
v.  2.)  But  P.  Valerius  Publicola,  Avho  gave 'to
the  people  the  right  of  provdcatio,  ordained  that


FASCIA.

the  secures  should  be  removed  from  the  fasces,  and
allowed  only  one  of  the  consuls  to  be  preceded  by
the  lictors  while  they  were  at  Rome.  (Cic.  de
Rep.  ii.  31  ;  Valer.  Max.  iv.  ].  §  1.)  The  other
consul  was  attended  only  by  a  single  accensus
[  AccENSusJv  When  they  were  out  of  Rome,  and
at  the  head  of  the  army,  each  of  the  consuls  re-
tained the  axe  in  the  fasces,  and  was  preceded  by
his  own  lictors.  (Dionys.  v.  19  ;  Liv.  xxiv.  9,
xxviii.  27.)

When  the  decemviri  were  first  appointed,  the
fasces  were  only  carried  before  the  one  who  pre-
sided for  the  day  (Liv.  iii.  33)  ;  and  it  was  not
till  the  second  decemvirate,  Avhen  they  began  to
act  in  a  tyrannical  manner,  that  the  fasces  with
the  axe  were  carried  before  each  of  the  ten.  (Liv.
iii.  36.)  The  fasces  and  secures  were,  however,
carried  before  the  dictator  even  in  the  city  (Liv.
ii.  1 8)  :  he  was  preceded  by  24  lictors,  and  the
magister  equitum  by  six.

The  praetors  were  preceded  in  the  city  by  two
lictors  with  the  fasces  (Censorin.  De  Die  Natal.
24  ;  Cic.  Ayrar.  ii.  34)  ;  but  out  of  Rome  and  at
the  head  of  an  army  by  six,  with  the  fasces  and
secures,  whence  they  are  called  by  the  Greek
writers  a-Tparrjyol  elaTreAe/cets.  (Appian,  Syr.  15  ;
Polyb.  ii.  24.  §  6,  iii.  40.  §  9,  106.  §  6.)  The
proconsuls  also  were  allowed,  in  the  time  of  Ulpian,
six  fasces.  (Dig.  1.  tit.  16.  s.  14.)  The  tribunes
of  the  plebs,  the  aediles  and  quaestors,  had  no
lictors  in  the  city  (Plut.  Quaest.  Rom.  81  ;  Gell.
xiii.  1 2)  ;  but  in  the  provinces  the  quaestors  were
permitted  to  have  the  fasces.      (Cic.  Pro  Plane.

The  lictors  carried  the  fasces  on  their  shoulders,
as  is  seen  in  the  coin  of  Brutm  given  above  ;  and
when  an  inferior  magistrate  met  one  who  was
higher  in  rank,  the  lictors  lowered  their  fasces  to
him.  This  was  done  by  Valerius  Publicola,  when
he  addressed  the  people  (Cic.  de  Rep.  ii.  31  ;  Liv.
ii.  7  ;  Valer.  Max.  iv.  1.  §  1)  ;  and  hence  came
the  expression* swiwtV^ere  fasces  in  the  sense  of  to
yield,  to  confess  one's  self  inferior  to  another.  (Cic
Brut.  6.)

When  a  general  had  gained  a  victory,  and  had
been  saluted  as  Iraperator  by  his  soldiers,  his
fasces  were  always  crowned  with  laurel.  (Cic.  ad
Att.  viii.  3.  §  5,  de  Div.  i.  28  ;  Caes.  Dell.  Civ.
iii.  71.)

FASCIA  (raii/i'a),  dim.  FASCIOLA,  a  band
or  fillet  of  cloth,  worn,  1.  round  the  head  as  an
ensign  of  roj-alty  (Sueton.  Jul.  79)  [Diadema  ;
woodcut  to  Falx]  :  2.  by  women  over  the  breast
(Ovid,  De  Art.  Amat.  iii.  622  ;  Propert.  iv.  10.
49  ;  Fascia  Pectoralis^  Mart.  xiv.  134)  [Stho-
phium]  :  3.  round  the  legs  and  feet,  especially
by  women  (see  the  woodcut  under  the  article
Libra).  Cicero  reproached  Clodius  for  wearing
fasciae  upon  his  feet,  and  the  Calantica,  a  female
ornament,  upon  his  head  (op.  Non.  Marc.  xiv.  2).
Afterwards,  when  the  toga  had  fallen  into  disuse,
and  the  shorter  pallium  was  worn  in  its  stead,
80  that  the  legs  were  naked  and  exposed, /asaae
crurales  became  common  even  with  the  male  sex.
(llor.  Sat.  ii.  3.  2.55  ;  Val.  Max.  vi.  2.  §  7  ;  Grat.
Cyneg.  338.)  The  emperor  Alexander  Severus
(Lamprid.  Alex.  Sev.  40)  always  used  them,  even
although,  when  in  town,  he  wore  the  toga.  Quin-
tilian,  nevertheless,  asserts  that  the  adoption  of
them  could  only  be  excused  on  tlie  plea  of  infirm
health.     (^Inst.  Or.  xi.  3.)      White  fasciae,  worn


FASTI.  521

by  men  (Val.  Max.  /.  c.  ;  Phaed.  v.  7.  37),  were  a
sign  of  extraordinary  rehnement  in  dress  :  the
mode  of  cleaning  them  was  by  rubbing  them  with
a  white  tenacious  earth,  resembling  our  pipe-clay
(fasciae  cretatae,  Cic.  ad  Att.  ii.  3).  The  finer
fasciae,  worn  by  ladies,  were  purple.  (Cic.  de
Harusp.  Resp.  21.)  The  bandages  wound  about
the  legs,  as  shown  in  the  illuminations  of  ancient
MSS.,  prove  that  the  Roman  usage  was  generally
adopted  in  Europe  during  the  middle  ages!

On  the  use  of  fasciae  in  the  nursing  of  children
(Plant.  True.  v.  1 3)  see  Incunabula.      [J.  Y.]

FA' SCI  A  (roii/ia),  in  architecture,  signifies  (by
an  obvious  analogy  with  the  ordinary  meaning  of
the  word)  any  long  flat  surface  of  wood,  stone,  or
marble,  such  as  the  band  which  divides  the  archi-
trave from  the  frieze  in  the  Doric  order,  and  the
surfaces  into  which  the  architrave  itself  is  divided
in  the  Ionic  and  Corinthian  orders.  (See  Episty-
LiUM,  and  the  cuts  under  Columna.)       [P.  S.]

FA'SCINUM  {fiaaKavia).,  fascination,  enchant-
ment. The  belief  that  some  persons  had  the
power  of  injuring  others  by  their  looks,  was  as
prevalent  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans  as  it  is
among  the  superstitious  in  modern  times.  The
ocpdaXjxbs  fidcTKavos,  or  evil  eye,  is  frequently  men-
tioned by  ancient  writers.  (Alciphr.  Ep.  i.  15  ;
Heliod.  Aethiop.  iii.  7  ;  compare  Plin.  //.  N.  vii,  2.)
Plutarch,  in  his  Symposium  (v.  7),  has  a  sepai'ate
chapter  Trepl  tuv  KaraSaaKaiveiv  K^yojxevwv,  koI
^daKavov  ex^iv  b(pQa\p.6v.  The  evil  eye  was  sup-
posed to  injure  children  particularly,  but  some-
times cattle  also  ;  whence  Virgil  {Eel.  iii.  103)
says,

"  Nescio  quis  teneros  oculos  mihi  fascinat  agnum."

Various  amulets  were  used  to  avert  the  influence
of  the  evil  eye.  The  most  common  of  these  ap-
pears to  have  been  the  phallus,  called  by  the
Romans  fascinum,  which  was  hung  round  the
necks  of  children  {turpicula  res,  Varr.  DeLi?ig.  Lat.
vii.  97,  ed.  MUller).  Pliny  (//.  N.  xix.  19.  §  1)
also  says  that  Satyiica  signa,  by  which  he  means
the  phallus,  were  placed  in  gardens  and  on  hearths
as  a  protection  against  the  fascinations  of  the
envious  ;  and  we  learn  from  Pollux  (viii.  118)
that  smiths  were  accustomed  to  place  the  same
figures  before  their  forges  with  the  same  design.
Sometimes  other  objects  were  employed  for  this
purpose.  Peisistratus  is  said  to  have  hung  the
figure  of  a  kind  of  grasshopper  before  the  Acro-
polis as  a  preservative  against  fascination.  (Hesych.
s.  V.  Karaxhvf].)

Another  common  mode  of  averting  fascination
was  by  spitting  into  the  folds  of  one's  own  dress.
(Theocr.  vi.  39  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxviii.  7  ;  Lucian,
Navig.  15.  vol.  iii.  p.  259,  ed.  Reitz.)

According  to  Pliny  (//.  N.  xxviii.  7),  Fascinus
was  the  name  of  a  god,  who  was  worshipped  among
the  Roman  sacra  by  the  Vestal  virgins,  and  was
placed  under  the  chariot  of  those  who  triumphed
as  a  protection  against  fascination  ;  by  which  he
means  in  all  probability  that  the  phallus  was
placed  under  the  chariot.  (Miiller,  Arch'dol.  der
Kunst,  §  436.  1,  2  ;  Bottiger,  Klein.  Sckr.  iii.
p.  Ill  ;  Becker,  Charikles,  vol.  ii.  pp.  109,  291.)

FASTI.  Fas  signifies  divine  law  :  the  epithet
fastus  is  properly  applied  to  anything  in  accordance
with  divine  law,  and  hence  those  days  upon  which
legal  business  might,  without  impiety  {sinepiaculo)^
be  transacted  before  the  praetor,  were  technically


522  FASTI.

denominated  fasti  diesy  i.  e.  law/id  days.  Varro
and  Festus  derive  yas^z**  directly  from /an  (Varr.
de  Ling.  Lat.  vi.  2  ;  Festus,  s.  v.  Fasti),  while
Ovid  {Fast.  i.  47)  may  be  quoted  in  support  of
either  etymology.

The  sacred  books  in  which  the  fasti  dies  of  the
year  were  marked,  were  themselves  denominated
fasti  ;  the  term,  however,  was  employed  in  an  ex-
tended sense  to  denote  registers  of  various  descrip-
tions, and  many  mistakes  have  arisen  among  com-
mentators from  confounding  fasti  of  different  kinds.
It  will  be  useful,  therefore,  to  consider  separately
the  two  great  divisions,  which  have  been  distin-
guished as  Fasti  Sacri  or  Fasti  Katendares^  and
Fasti  Annates  or  Fasti  Historid.

I.  Fasti  Sacri  or  Kalendarks.  For  nearly
four  centuries  and  a  half  after  the  foundation  of
the  city  a  knowledge  of  the  calendar  was  possessed
exclusively  by  the  priests.  One  of  the  pontifices
regularly  proclaimed  the  appearance  of  the  new
moon,  and  at  the  same  time  announced  the  period
which  would  intervene  between  the  Kalends  and
the  Nones.  On  the  Nones  the  country  people
assembled  for  the  purpose  of  learning  from  the  Rex
Sacrorum  the  various  festivals  to  be  celebrated
during  the  month,  and  the  days  on  which  they
would  fall.  (Macrob.  i.  15.)  In  like  manner  all
who  wished  to  go  to  law  were  obliged  to  inquire  of
the  privileged  few  on  what  day  they  might  bring
their  suit,  and  received  the  reply  as  if  from  the  lips
of  an  astrologer.  (Cic.  Pro  Muren.  11.)  The  whole
of  this  lore,  so  long  a  source  of  power  and  profit,
and  therefore  jealously  enveloped  in  mystery,  was
at  length  made  public  by  a  certain  Cn.  Flavins,
scribe  to  App.  Claudius  Caecus  (Li v.  ix.  46  ;
Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii.  1  ;  Gell.  vi.  9  ;  Val.  Max.  ii.
o),  who,  having  gained  access  to  the  pontifical
books,  copied  out  all  the  requisite  infonnation,  and
exhibited  it  in  the  forum  for  the  iise  of  the  people
at  large.  From  this  time  forward  such  tables  be-
came common,  and  were  known  by  the  name  of
Fasti.  They  usually  contained  an  enumeration  of
the  months  and  days  of  the  year  ;  the  Nones,  Ides,
Nundinae,  Dies  Fasti,  Nefasti,  Comitiales,  Atri,
«Scc.  [Calendarium],  together  with  the  different
festivals,  were  marked  in  their  proper  places :  as-
tronomical observations  on  the  risings  and  settings
of  the  fixed  stars,  and  the  commencement  of  the
seasons  were  frequently  inserted,  and  sometimes
brief  notices  annexed  regarding  the  introduction
and  signification  of  certain  rites,  the  dedication  of
temples,  glorious  victories,  and  terrible  disasters.
In  later  times  it  became  common  to  pay  homage
to  the  members  of  the  imperial  family  by  noting
down  their  exploits  and  honours  in  the  calendar,  a
species  of  flattery  with  which  Antonius  is  charged
by  Cicero  (Philipp.  ii.  34.  See  also  Tacit.  Ann.
i.  15).

It  will  be  seen  from  the  above  description  that
these  fasti  closely  resembled  a  modern  almanac
{Fastorum  libri  appcllantur  totius  anni  descriptio.
Festus)  ;  and  the  celebrated  work  of  Ovid  may  be
considered  as  a  {)oetical  Year-book  or  Companion
to  the  Almanac,  having  been  composed  to  illustrate
the  Fasti  published  by  Julius  Caesar,  who  re-
modelled the  Roman  year.  All  the  more  remark-
able epochs  are  examined  in  succession,  the  origin
of  the  different  festivals  explained,  the  various
ceremonies  described,  the  legends  connected  with
the  principal  constellations  narrated,  and  many
curious  discussiong  interwoven  upon  subjects  likely


FASTI.

to  prove  interesting  to  his  countrymen  ;  the  whole
being  seasoned  with  frequent  allusions  to  the
glories  of  the  Julian  line.

Several  specimens  of  fasti,  more  or  less  perfect,
on  stone  and  marble,  have  been  discovered  at  dif-
ferent times  in  different  places,  none  of  them,  how-
ever, older  than  the  age  of  Augustus.  The  most
remarkable,  though  one  of  the  least  entire,  is  that
known  as  the  Kaleiidarium  Praenestinum  or  Fasti
Verriani.  Suetonius,  in  his  short  treatise  on  dis-
tinguished grammarians,  tells  us  that  a  statue  of
Verrius  Flaccus,  preceptor  to  the  grandsons  of
Augustus,  stood  in  the  lower  part  of  the  forum
of  his  native  town,  Praeneste,  opposite  to  the
Hemicyclium^  on  which  he  had  exhibited  to  public
view  the  fasti,  arranged  by  himself,  and  engraved
on  marble  slabs.  In  the  year  1770  the  remains
of  a  circular  building  were  discovered  in  the  im-
mediate vicinity  of  the  modem  Palestrina,  to-
gether with  several  fragments  of  marble  tablets,
which  were  soon  recognised  as  forming  part  of  an
ancient  calendar  ;  and  upon  further  examination
no  doubt  was  entertained  by  the  learned  that
these  were  the  very  fasti  of  Verrius  described  by
Suetonius.  An  Italian  antiquary,  named  Foggini,
continued  the  excavations,  collected  and  arranged
the  scattered  morsels  with  great  patience  and
skill  ;  and  in  this  manner  the  months  of  January,
March,  April,  and  December,  to  which  a  very
small  portion  of  February  was  afterwards  added,
were  recovered  ;  and,  although  much  defaced  and
mutilated,  form  a  very  curious  and  useful  monu-
ment. They  appear  to  have  embraced  much  in-
formation concerning  the  festivals,  and  a  careful
detail  of  the  honours  bestowed  upon,  and  the
triumphs  achieved  by,  Julius,  Augustus,  and  Ti-
berius. The  publication  of  Foggini  contains  not
only  an  account  of  this  particular  discovery,  but
also  the  complete  fasti  of  the  Roman  year,  so  far
as  such  a  compilation  can  be  extracted  from  the
ancient  calendars  now  extant.  Of  these  he  enu-
merates eleven,  the  names  being  derived  either
from  the  places  where  they  were  found,  or  from
the  family  who  possessed  them  when  they  first  be-
came known  to  the  literary  world  :  —

1.  Calendarium  Majfeiorum,  which  contains  the
twelve  months  complete.

2.  Cal.  Praenestinum,  described  above.

3.  Cal.  Capranicorum,  August  and  September
complete.

4.  Cal.  Ainiteminum,  fragments  of  the  month
from  May  to  December.

5.  Cal.  Antiatinum,  fragments  of  the  six  last
months.

6.  Cal.  Esquilinum,  fragments  of  May  and  June.

7.  Cal.  Famesianum,  a  few  days  of  February
and  March.

8.  Cal.  Pincianum,  fragments  of  July,  August,
and  September.

9.  Cal.    Venusinum,  May  .ind  June  complete.

1 0.  Cal.  Vaticanum,  a  few  days  of  March  and
April.

11.  Cal.  Allifaimm,  a  few  days  of  July  and
August.

Some  of  the  above,  with  others  of  more  recent
date,  are  given  in  the  Corpus  Inscriptionum  of
Gruter,  in  the  11th  vol.  of  the  Thesaurus  Pom.
A?di(fq.  of  Graevius,  and  in  other  works  of  a  simi-
lar description  ;  but  the  fullest  information  upon
all  matters  connected  with  the  Fasti  Sacri  is  em-
bodied in  the  work  of  Foggini,  entitled  Fastorum


FASTI.

anniRomani  a  Verrio  Flacco  ordinatorum  Relujulae,
&c.  Romae,  1779  ;  and  in  Jac.  Van  Vaassen  Atii-
viadversa.  ad  Fastos  Bom.  Sacros  fragmenta^  Traj.
ad  Rhen.  1795:  to  which  add  Ideler's  Handlmch
der  Mathematischen  und  TechniscJien  Ckro7iologie.
Berlin,  1826.

Before  quitting  this  part  of  our  subject,  we  may-
make  mention  of  a  curious  relic,  the  antiquity  of
Avhich  has  been  called  in  question  without  good
cause,  the  Calendarium  Rusticum  Farnesianum.
This  Rural  Almanac  is  cut  upon  four  sides  of  a
cube,  each  face  being  divided  into  three  columns,
and  each  column  including  a  month.  At  the  top
of  the  column  is  carved  the  appropriate  sign  of  the
zodiac  ;  then  follows  the  name  of  the  month,  the
number  of  the  days,  the  position  of  the  nones,  the
length  of  the  day  and  night,  the  name  of  the  sign
through  which  the  sun  passes,  the  god  under
whose  protection  the  month  was  placed,  the  various
agricultural  operations  to  be  performed,  and  a  list
of  the  principal  festivals.  Take  May  as  an  ex-
ample :  — •

MENSIS

MAIVS

DIES.  XXXI.

NON.  SEPTIM.

DIES.  HOR.  XIIIIS.

Nox.  HOR.  Vims.

SOL.  TAVRO.

TVTELA.  APOLLIN.

SEGET.  RVNCANT.

OVES.  TONDENT.

LANA,  LAVATVR.

IVVENCI  DOMANT.

VICEA.   PABVL.

SECATVR.

SEGETES

LVSTRANTVR.

SACRVM.  MERCVR.

ET.   FLORAE.

(See  the  commentary  of  Morcelli  in  his  Opera
Epiyraphica^  vol.  i.  77.)

II.  Fasti  Annales  or  Historicl  Chronicles
such  as  the  Aniiales  Mascimi,  containing  the  names
of  the  chief  magistrates  for  each  year,  and  a  short
account  of  the  most  remarkable  events  noted  down
opposite  to  the  days  on  which  they  occurred,
were,  from  the  resemblance  which  they  bore  in
arrangement  to  the  sacred  calendars,  denominated
fasti;  and  hence  this  word  is  used,  especially
by  the  poets,  in  the  general  sense  of  historical
records.  (Horat.  ^a^.  i.  3.  112,  Curm.  iv.  13.
13,  iii.  17.  7.)

In  prose  writers /as^i  is  commonly  employed  as
the  technical  term  for  the  registers  of  consuls,
dictators,  censors,  and  other  magistrates,  which
formed  part  of  the  public  archives.  (Liv.  ix.  18  ;
Cic.  Pro  Seat.  1 4  ;  compare  Cic.  Phiiipp.  xiii.
12  ;  Tacit.  ^Kw,  iii.  17,  18.)  Again,  when  Cicero
remarks  in  the  famous  epistle  to  Lucceius  {Ad
Fam.  V.  12),  "  Etenim  ordo  ille  annalium  medio-
criter  nos  retinet  quasi  enumeratione  fastorum,"
he  means  that  the  regular  succession  of  events
meagrely  detailed  in  chronicles  fixed  the  attention
but  feebly,  and  was  little  more  interesting  than  a
mere  catalogue  of  names.  (Compare  Ad  Att.  iv.  8.)

A  most  important  specimen  oi fasti  belonging  to
this  class,  executed  probably  at  the  beginning  of
the  reign  of  Tiberius,  has  been  partially  preserved.
In  the  year  1547,  several  fragments  of  marble
tablets  were  discovered  in  excavating  the  Roman


FASTIGIUM.


523


forum,  and  were  found  to  contain  a  list  of  consuls
dictators  with  their  masters  of  horse,  censors  with
the  lustra  which  they  closed,  triumphs  and  ova-
tions, all  arranged  in  regular  succession  according
to  the  years  of  the  Catonian  era.  These  had  evi-
dently extended  from  the  expulsion  of  the  kings
to  the  death  of  Augustus,  and  although  defective
in  many  places,  have  proved  of  the  greatest  value
in  chronology.  The  different  pieces  were  collected
and  arranged  under  the  inspection  of  Cardinal
Alexander  Farnese,  and  deposited  in  the  Capitol,
where  they  still  remain.  From  this  circumstance
they  are  generally  distinguished  as  the  Fasti
Capitolini,  In  the  years  1817  and  1818,  two
other  fragments  of  the  same  marble  tablets  were
discovered  in  the  course  of  a  new  excavation  in
the  Forum.  A  fac-simile  of  them  was  published
at  Milan,  by  Borghesi,  in  1818.  [W.  R.]

FASTI'GIUM  (derc^s,  aeVwyua),  literally,  a
slope,  in  architecture  a  pediment,  is  the  triangle
which  surmounts  each  end  of  a  rectangular  build-
ing, and  which,  in  fact,  represents  the  gable  end  of
the  roof.  (See  woodcut,  p.  97.)  It  is  composed
of  three  sets  of  mouldings  (forming  respectively  the
horizontal  base  and  the  sloping  sides  of  the  triangle,
and  representing  the  timber  framing  of  the  roof),
and  of  a  flat  surface  enclosed  by  them,  which  covers
the  vacant  space  of  the  roof,  and  which,  from  its
resemblance  to  a  membrane  stretched  upon  the
triangular  frame,  is  called  tympanum.  (Vitruv.
iii.  3.)  This  flat  surface  was  generally  ornamented
with  sculpture  ;  originally,  in  the  early  temples  of
Zeus,  with  a  simple  eagle  as  a  symbol  of  the  god
(Find.  Olymp.  xiii.  29,  and  Schol.  ad  loc.\  an  in-
stance of  whicli  is  afforded  by  the  coin  represented
in    the   following  woodcut    (Beger.  Spicil.  Antiq,


WW¥P¥¥


i


p.  6),  whence  the  Greek  name  aerds  which  was  at
first  applied  to  the  tympanum  and  afterwards  to
the  whole  pediment ;  and  in  after  times  with  elabo-
rate sculptures  in  high  relief,  such  as  those  in  the
pediments  of  the  Parthenon,  the  fragments  of  which
are  among  the  Elgin  marbles  in  the  British  Museum;
where  also  may  be  seen  a  full-sized  model  of  the
pediments  of  the  temple  of  Zeus  Panhellenius,  at
Aegina,  with  casts  of  the  statues  in  them,  restored.
Most  of  the  celebrated  Greek  temples  were  simi-
larly adorned.  (See  Pans.  i.  24.  §  5,  ii.  7.  §  3,
V.  10.  §  2,  ix.  11.  §  4  ;  Aristoph.  Aves,  1110.)
Terra-cotta  figures  were  applied  in  a  similar  manner
by  the  Romans  in  the  early  ages.  (Cic.  Divin.
i.  10  ;  Vitruv.  iii.  2;  Plin.  H.N.  xxxv.  12.  s.  43,
46,  xxxvi.  2.)

The  dwelling-houses  of  the  Romans  had  no  gable
ends  ;  consequently,  when  the  word  is  applied  to
them  (Cic.  Epist.  ad  Q.  Fr.  iii.  1.  4  ;  Virg.  Aen.
viii.  491),  it  is  not  in  its  strictly  technical  sense,
but  designates  the  roof  simply,  and  is  to  be  under-
stood of  one  which  rises  to  an  apex  as  distinguished


524


FAX.


from  a  flat  one,  or  sometimes  it  may  refer  to  the
pediment  of  a  portico  attached  to  the  front  of  a  man-
sion, as  when  the  Romans  decreed  to  Caesar  the
libert}^  of  erecting  a  fastigium  to  his  house  (Cic.
Phil.  ii.  43  ;  Floras,  iv.  2  ;  Plut.  Cues.  81  ;  comp.
Acroterium),  that  is,  a  portico  and  pediment
towards  the  street  like  that  of  a  temple.       [A.  R.1

FAUCES.     [DoMus,  p.  428,a.]

FAX  (4>ai/<5s),  a  torch.  The  descriptions  of
poets  and  mythologists,  and  the  works  of  ancient
art,  represent  the  torch  as  carried  by  Diana,  Ceres,
Bellona,  Hymen  (woodcut,  p.  238),  Phosphorus,
by  females  in  Bacchanalian  processions  (p.  288),
and,  in  an  inverted  position,  by  Sleep  and  Death.
In  the  annexed  woodcut,  the  female  figure  in  the
middle  is  copied  from  a  fictile  -vase.  The  winged
figure  on  the  left  hand,  asleep  and  leaning  on  a
torch,  is  from  a  funeral  monument  at  Rome :  the
word  "  Somnus"  is  inscribed  beside  it.  The  other
winged  figure,  also  with  the  torch  inverted,  is
taken  from  an  antique  gem,  and  represents  Cupid
under  the  character  of  Autrepws  (Serv.  in  Virg.  Ae?i.
iv,  520)  or  "  Lethaeus  Amor"  (Ovid,  Rem.  Amor,
555).  In  ancient  marbles  the  torch  is  sometimes
more  ornamented  than  in  the  examples  now  pro-


duced ;  but  it  appears  to  be  formed  of  wooden
staves  or  twigs,  either  bound  by  a  rope  drawn
round  them  in  a  spiral  form,  as  in  the  above  middle
figure,  or  surrounded  by  circular  bands  at  equal
distances,  as  in  the  two  exterior  figures.  The  in-
side of  the  torch  may  be  supposed  to  have  been
filled  with  flax,  tow,  or  other  vegetable  fibres,  the
whole  being  abundantly  impregnated  with  pitch,
rosin,  wax,  oil,  and  other  inflammable  substances.
As  the  principal  use  of  torches  was  to  give  light  to
those  who  went  abroad  after  sunset,  the  portion  of
the  Roman  day  imm.ediately  succeeding  sun-set
was  calledyJ/o?  or  prima  fax.  (Gell.  iii.  2  ;  Ma-
crob.  Sat.  i.  2.)  Torches,  as  now  described,  ap-
pear to  have  been  more  common  among  the  Romans
than  the  Greeks.  The  use  of  torches  after  sun  set,
and  the  practice  of  celebrating  marriages  at  that
time,  probably  led  to  the  consideration  of  the  torch
a.s  one  of  the  necessary  accompaniments  and  sym-
bols of  marriage.  Among  the  Romans  the  fax
nuptialis  (Cic,  pro  Cluent.  6),  having  been  lighted
at  the  parental  hearth,  was  carried  before  the  bride
by  a  boy  whose  parents  were  alive.  (Plant.  Cas.  i.
30;  Ovid,  Epist.xu  101  ;  Servius,  w  Virg.  Ed.
viii.  29  ;  Plin,  H.  N.  xvi.  1 8  ;  Festus,  s.  v.  Pa-
trimi.)  The  torch  was  also  carried  at  funerals  {fax
sepulchralis,  Ovid,  Epist.  ii.   120),   both  because


FEN  US.

these  were  often  nocturnal  ceremonies,  and  because
it  was  used  to  set  fire  to  the  pile.  Hence  the  ex-
pression of  Propertius  (iv.  12.  46),  "  Vivimus  in-
signcs  inter  utramque  facem."  The  torch-bearer
turned  away  his  face  from  the  pile  in  setting  it  on
fire.     (Virg,  ^e«.  vi.  224.)  [J.Y.]

FEBRUUM.     [LuPERCALiA.J

FECIi\'LES.     [Fktiales.]

FEMINA'LIA,  were  worn  in  winter  by  Augus-
tus Caesar,  who  was  very  susceptible  of  cold,
(Sueton,  Aitg.  82.)  Casaubon  supposes  them  to
have  been  bandages  or  fillets  [Fascia]  wound
about  the  thighs  ;  it  seems  more  probable  that  they
were  breeches  resembling  ours,  since  garments  for
tlie  thighs  (TT^piixripia)  were  worn  by  the  Roman
horsemen  (Arrian,  Tact.  p.  14,  ed.  Blanc.)  ;  and
the  column  of  Trajan,  the  arch  of  Constantine,  and
other  monuments  of  the  same  period,  present  nu-
merous examples  of  both  horse  and  foot  soldiers
who  wear  breeches,  closely  fitted  to  the  body,  and
never  reaching  much  below  the  knees.  (See  wood-
cuts, pp.  2,  1 1  7,  136.)  [J.  Y.]

FENESTRA.     [Domus,  p.  432.]

FENUS  (tJ/cos),  interest  of  money.  1.  Greek.
At  Athens,  Solon,  among  other  reforms,  abolished
the  law  by  which  a  creditor  was  empowered  to
sell  or  enslave  a  debtor,  and  prohibited  the  lending
of  money  upon  a  person's  own  body  (iirl  to7s
acitfiaai  firjSeua  Savii^^iy,  Plut.  Sol.  c.  15).  No
other  restriction,  we  are  told,  was  introduced  by
him,  and  the  rate  of  interest  was  left  to  the  dis-
cretion of  the  lender  (rh  afryupiov  (TTacriixov  cJuai
i(p'  6ir6(r(f  tiv  fiovKrjTai  6  Savd^wv,  La'S,  in  Tlieom.
p.  117).  The  only  case  in  which  the  rate  was
prescribed  by  law,  was  in  the  event  of  a  man  sepa-
rating from  his  lawful  wife,  and  not  refunding  the
dowry  he  had  received  with  her.  Her  tnistees  or
guardians  (ol  Kvpioi)  could  in  that  case  proceed
against  him  for  the  principal,  with  lawful  interest
at  the  rate  of  18  per  cent.     [Dos  (Greek).]

Any  rate  might  be  expressed  or  represented  in
two  different  wa3's :  (1.)  by  the  number  of  oboli
or  drachmae  paid  by  the  month  for  every  mina  ;
(2)  by  the  part  of  the  principal  (rb  dpx«»oj/  or
KscpdAaiov)  paid  as  interest  either  annually  or  for
the  whole  period  of  the  loan.  According  to  the
former  method,  which  was  generally  used  when
monej'  was  lent  upon  real  security  (t6koi  iyyvoi
or  eyyeioi),  different  rates  were  expressed  as  fol-
lows:—^10  per  cent,  hj  eirl  nevre  6§o\o7s,  i.e.
5  oboli  per  month  for  every  mina,  or  60  oboli  a
year=  1 0  drachmae=-^  of  a  mina.     Similarh-,

12  per  cent,  by  M  dpaxi^f}  per  month.

16  per  cent.  „  eTr'  oktu  oSoXoTs         „

18  j)er  cent.  „  iir*  iuvea  i§o\o7$         „

24  per  cent.  „  iirl  dval  Spax/J-cus       „

36  per  cent.  „  iwl  rpial  Spaxfious      „

5  per  cent.  „  dirl  rpiTCfi  7)iJ.io€o\ic}},  probably.

Another  method  was  generally  adopted  in
cases  of  bottomry,  where  money  was  lent  upon  the
ship's  cargo  or  freightage  (eVi  rifi  vavXtt))  or  the
ship  itself,  for  a  specified  time,  commonly  that  of
the  voyage.  By  this  method  the  following  rates
were  thus  represented.

1 0  per  cent,  by  tSkoi  eViSeKaTOi,  i.  e.  interest  at
the  rate  of  a  tenth  ;  i2^,  16^,  20,  33^-,  by  t6koi
itrSySooi.,  (((xKroi,  ^irimixTTroi^  and  iiriTpiToi,  re-
spectively. So  that,  as  Bockh  (Pull.  Economy  of
Athens,  pp.  123,  124,  2nd  ed.)  remarks,  the  t6kos
iniSfKUTos  is  equal  to  the  ivl  TreVre  ogoAoTs'


FEN  us.

the  t6kos  ^TToySoos     =the  67rt  Spax/J-ri        nearlj'.
,,       „      €(p(^KTos      =  „    eV-  uKTco  66o\o7s    „
„       ,,       e'7ri7r6jU7rTOS=  „    eV  ivvea  6€oKo7s    „
„       „       iiTLTpiros     =  „    i-TTi  Tpial  Spaxi^-cus  „

These  nearly  corresponding  expressions  are  not
to  be  considered  as  identical,  however  closely  the
rates  indicated  by  them  may  approach  each  other
in  value  ;  although  in  the  age  of  Justinian,  as
Salmasius  {de  M.  if.)  observes,  the  r6Kos  inSy^oos
or  12^  per  cent,  was  confounded  with  the  ce7i-
tesimae,  which  is  exactly  equal  to  the  interest  at  a
drachma  or  12  per  cent.

The  rates,  above  explained,  frequently  occur  in
the  orators  ;  the  lowest  in  ordinary  use  at  Atlicns
bemg  the  t6kos  iniScKaros  or  10  per  cent.,  the
highest  the  tokos  iirirpiTos  or  33^  per  cent.  The
latter,  however,  was  chiefly  confined  to  cases  of
bottomry,  and  denotes  more  than  it  appears  to  do,
as  the  time  of  a  ship's  voyage  was  generally  less
than  a  year.  Its  near  equivalent,  the  eVi  rpial
Spaxfiois  or  36  per  cent.,  was  sometimes  exacted
by  bankers  at  Athens.  (Lys.  Frcu/.  u.)  The
firl  SpaxjJ-f),  or  rate  of  12  per  cent.,  was  common
in  the  time  of  Demosthenes  (c.  Jph.  p.  820.  16),
but  appears  to  have  been  thought  low.  The  interest
of  eight  oboli  or  16  per  cent,  occurs  in  that  orator
(c.  Nioos.  p.  1250.  18)  ;  and  even  in  the  age  of
Lysias  (b.  c.  440)  and  Isaeus  (b.  c.  400),  nine
oboli  for  the  mina,  or  18  per  cent.,  appears  to  have
been  a  common  rate.  (Isaeus,  de  Hagn.  Hered.
p.  293.)  Aeschines  also  (c.  Timarch.  p.  15)  speaks
of  money  being  borrowed  on  the  same  terms  ;  so
that  on  the  whole  we  may  conclude,  that  the  usual
rates  of  interest  at  Athens  about  the  time  of  De-
mosthenes varied  from  12  to  18  percent.  That
they  were  nearly  the  same  in  range,  and  similarly
expressed,  throughout  the  rest  of  Greece,  ap-
pears from  the  authorities  quoted  by  Bockh.  No
conclusions  on  the  subject  of  the  general  rate  of
interest  can  be  drawn  from  what  we  are  told  of
the  exorbitant  rates  exacted  by  common  usurers
{roKoy\v(poi,  toculliones^  r)ixepo5ayei(TTai).  Some
of  these  (Theophr.  Charact.  6)  exacted  as  much  as
an  obolus  and  a  half  per  day  for  each  drachma  ;
and  money-lenders  and  bankers  in  general,  from
the  high  profits  which  they  realised,  and  the  se-
verity with  which  they  exacted  their  dues,  seem
to  have  been  as  unpopular  amongst  their  fellow-
citizens  as  Jews  and  usurers  in  more  modem
times.  Demosthenes  (c.  Pant.  p.  981),  indeed,
intimates  that  the  fact  of  a  man  being  a  money-
lender was  enough  to  prejudice  him,  even  in  a
court  of  law,  amongst  the  Athenians.  (Mjctoi)-
(Tiv  ol  ^Adrivaioi  rouy  Sayei(ovTas.)  It  is  curious
also  to  observe  that  Aristotle  {Pol.  i.  3.  §  23)
objects,  on  principle,  to  putting  money  out  at
interest  (fiiKoywrara  ixiaelrai  7]  6§o\o(TTaTiKi)),
as  being  a  perversion  of  it  from  its  proper  use,  as
a  medium  of  exchange,  to  an  unnatural  purpose,
viz.  the  reproduction  or  increase  of  itself  ;  whence,
he  adds,  comes  the  name  of  interest  or  tSko^,  as
being  the  offspring  (rh  yiyuSfieuov)  of  a  parent
like  Uself.

The  arrangement  of  a  loan  would  of  course  de-
pend upon  the  relation  between  the  borrower  and
the  lender,  and  the  confidence  placed  by  one  in  the
other.  Sometimes  money  was  lent,  e.  g.  by  the
banker  Pasion  at  Athens,  without  a  security,  or
written  bond,  or  witnesses.  (Dcm.  c.  Timoth.
p.  1185.)  But  generally  either  a  simple  acknow-
ledgment {x^ip6ypa<pov)  was  given  by   the   bor-


FENUS.  525

rower  to  the  lender  [Chirographctm]  ;  or  a
regular  instrument  (avyy pacpi})^  executed  by  both
parties  and  attested  by  witnesses,  was  deposited
wih  a  third  party,  usually  a  banker.  (Dem.  c.
Lacr.  p.  927,  c  Phorm.  p.  908.  22.)  Witnesses,
as  we  might  expect,  were  also  present  at  the  pay-
ment of  the  money  borrowed.  (Id.  c.  Phorm.  p.  915.
27.)  The  security  for  a  loan  was  either  a  viroO-fjKf]
or  an  iv^xvpov :  the  latter  was  put  into  the  pos-
session of  the  lender,  the  former  was  merely  assured
to  him,  and  generally,  though  not  always,  con-
sisted of  real  or  immovable  property.  The  eVe-
X^po,  on  the  contrary,  generally  consisted  of
movable  property,  such  as  goods  or  slaves.
(Bockh,  Ibid.  p.  128.)  At  Athens,  when  land
was  given  as  security,  or  mortgaged  (ovaia  vTr6-
Xpecos),  pillars  {bpoi  or  <TTT}\ai)  were  set  upon
it,  with  the  debt  and  the  mortgagee's  name  in-
scribed. Hence  an  unincumbered  estate  was
called  an  &(rTiKTou  x^P'-^^-  (Harpocrat.  s.  v.)
In  the  rest  of  Greece  there  were  public  books  of
debt,  like  the  German  and  Scotch  registers  of
mortgages  ;  but  they  are  not  mentioned  as  having
existed  at  Athens.

Bottomry  (jh  uuvtikSu,  tokoi  vavTiKoi,  or
iK^ocTLs')  was  considered  a  matter  of  so  much  im-
portance at  Athens,  that  fraud  or  breach  of  contract
in  transactions  connected  with  it  was  sometimes
punished  with  death.  (Dem.  e.  Phorm.  p.  922.  3.)
In  these  cases  the  loans  were  generally  made  upon
the  cargo  shipped,  sometimes  on  the  vessel  itself,
and  sometimes  on  the  money  received  or  due  for
passengers  and  freightage  (eVi  t^  vavXtfi).  The
principal  {iK^ocris,  oioveL  e|w  hoffis^  Harpocrat.)  as
well  as  the  interest,  could  only  be  recovered  in  case
the  ship  met  with  no  disaster  in  her  voj^age  (crco-
dii(Tr)srr\s  ueds,  Dem.  c.  Zenoth.  p.  883. 1 6) ;  a  clause
to  this  effect  being  generally  inserted  in  all  agree-
ments of  bottomry  or  vavriKoX  (Tvyypa<pai.  The
additional  risk  incurred  in  loans  of  this  description
was  compensated  for  by  a  high  rate  of  interest,
and  the  lenders  took  every  precaution  against
negligence  or  deception  on  the  part  of  the  bor-
rowers ;  the  latter  also  were  careful  to  have  wit-
nesses present  when  the  cargo  was  put  on  board,
for  the  purpose  of  deposing,  if  necessary,  to  a
bona  fide  shipping  of  the  required  amount  of  goods.
(Dem.  c.  Phorm.  p.  915.  13).  The  loan  itself
was  either  a  Saj/ezo-jua  eT^poirXow^  i.  e.  for  a  voyage
out,  or  it  was  a  Mv^iafxa  afji.(poTep6ir\ovp^  i.  e.  ibr
a  voyage  out  and  home.  In  the  former  case  the
principal  and  interest  Avere  paid  at  the  place  of
destination,  either  to  the  creditor  himself,  if  he
sailed  in  the  ship,  or  to  an  authorised  agent.  (Dem.
c.  Phorm.  p.  909.  24,  and  p.  914.  28.)  In  the
latter  case  the  payment  was  made  on  the  return  of
the  ship,  and  it  was  specially  provided  in  the
agreement  between  the  contracting  parties,  that
she  should  sail  tp  gome  specified  places  only.  A
deviation  from  the  terms  of  the  agreement,  in  this
or  other  respects,  was,  according  to  a  clause  usually
inserted  in  the  agreement,  punishable  by  a  fine  of
twice  the  amount  of  the  money  lent.  (Dem.  c.
Dionys.  p.  1294.)  Moreover,  if  the  goods  which
formed  the  original  security  were  sold,  fresh
articles  of  the  same  value  were  to  be  shipped  iii
their  place.  (Dem.  c.P/iorm.  p.  909.  26.)  Some-
times also  the  trader  (<5  efiiropos)  was  himself  the
owner  of  the  vessel  ( 6  vamK-npos),  which  in  that
case  might  serve  as  a  security  for  the  money  bor-
rowed.    (I<1.  c.  Dionys.  p.  1284.  11.)


526  FEN  US.

Tlio  rate  of  interest  would  of  course  vary  with
the  risks  and  duration  of  the  voyage,  and  therefore
we  cannot  expect  to  find  that  it  was  at  ail  fixed.
Xenophon  {de  Veciig.  iii.  7 — 14)  speaks  of  the  fifth
and  third  parts  of  the  capital  lent  as  being  com-
monly given  in  bottomry,  referring  of  course  to
voyages  out  and  home.  The  interest  of  an  eighth
or  12g-  per  cent.,  mentioned  by  Demosthenes  (c.
Polycl.  p.  121 2),  was  for  money  lent  on  a  trireme,
during  a  passage  from  Sestos  to  Athens,  but  upon
condition  that  she  should  first  go  to  Hienim  to
convoy  vessels  laden  with  corn  ;  the  principal  and
interest  were  to  be  paid  at  Athens  on  her  arrival
there.

The  best  illustration  of  the  facts  mentioned
above,  is  found  in  a  vavriK^  crvyypa'p-fi^  given  in
the  speech  of  Demosthenes  against  Lacritus.  It
contains  the  following  statement  and  conditions.

Two  Athenians  lent  two  Phaselitans  3000
drachmae  upon  a  cargo  of  3000  casks  of  Mendean
wine,  on  which  the  latter  were  not  to  owe  anything
else,  or  raise  any  additional  loan  (ou5'  (Tridaveicrov-
Tttt).  They  were  to  sail  from  Athens  to  Mende  or
Scione,  where  the  wine  was  to  be  shipped,  and
thence  to  the  Bosporus,  with  liberty,  if  they  pre-
ferred it,  to  continue  their  voyage  on  the  left  side
of  the  Black  Sea  as  far  as  the  Borysthenes,  and
then  to  return  to  Athens  ;  the  rate  of  interest
being  fixed  at  225  drachmas  in  1000,  or  25  per
cent,  for  the  whole  time  of  absence.  If,  however,
they  did  not  return  to  Hierum,  a  port  in  BithN^nia
close  to  the  Thracian  Bosporus  (Wolf,  ad  Lept.  p.
259),  before  the  early  rising  of  Arcturus,  i.e.  be-
fore the  20th  of  September  or  thereabouts,  Avhen
navigation  began  to  be  dangerous,  they  had  to  pay
a  liigher  rate  of  30  per  cent,  on  account  of  the  ad-
ditional risk.  The  agreement  further  specified
that  there  should  be  no  change  of  vessel  fur  the
return  cargo,  and  that  if  it  arrived  safe  at  Athens,
the  loan  was  to  be  repaid  within  twenty  days
afterwards,  without  any  deductions  except  for  loss
by  payments  made  to  enemies,  and  for  jettisons
(eVreAes  vX^v  eKSoXr\s.  k.  t.  A.,)  made  with  the
consent  of  all  on  board  {ol  (rvfiirXoi)  ;  that  till  the
money  was  repaid,  the  goods  pledged  (rh.  vtto-
Kfifieva)  should  be  under  the  control  of  the
lenders,  and  be  sold  by  them,  if  payment  was  not
made  within  the  appointed  time  ;  that  if  the  sale
of  the  goods  did  not  realise  the  required  amount,
the  lender  might  niise  the  remainder  by  making  a
lev}'  (irpa^is)  upon  the  property  of  both  or  either
of  the  traders,  just  as  if  the}'  had  been  cast  in  a
suit,  and  became  vTrep'/ijufpoj,  i  e.  had  not  complied
•with  a  judgment  given  agJiinst  them  within  the
time  .appointed.  Another  clause  in  the  agreement
provides  for  the  contingency  of  their  not  entering
the  Pontus  ;  in  that  case  they  were  to  remain  in
the  Hellespont,  at  the  end  of  July,  for  ten  days
after  the  early  rising  of  the  dog-stjir  (ew\  kuj/i),
discharge  their  cargo  (e^fXfadai)  in  some  place
where  the  Athenians  had  no  right  of  reprisals
(Stfou  tt,v  fii]  arvXai  Siai  to7s  'AOrjvalois),  (which
might  be  executed  unfairly,  and  would  lead  to
retaliations,)  and  then,  on  their  return  to  Athens,
they  were  to  pay  the  lower  rate  of  interest,  or  25
per  cent.  Lastly,  if  the  vessel  were  to  be  wrecked,
the  cargo  was,  if  possible,  to  be  saved  ;  and  the
agreement  was  to  be  conclusive  on  all  points.

From  the  preceding  investigation,  it  appears  that
the  rate  of  interest  amongst  the  ancient  Greeks  was
higher  than  in  modern  Europe,  and  at  Rome  in  the


FKNUS.
age  of  Cicero.  This  high  rate  does  not  appear  to
have  been  caused  by  any  scarcity  of  money,  for  the
rent  of  land  and  houses  in  Athens  and  its  neigh  •
bourhood  was  not  at  all  proportional  to  it.  Thus
Isaeus  (de  Hacjn.  Hered.  p.  88)  says  that  a  house
at  Thriae  was  let  for  only  8  per  cent,  of  its  value,
and  some  houses  at  Melite  and  Eleusis  for  a  frac-
tion more.  We  should  therefore  rather  refer  it  to
a  low  state  of  credit,  occasioned  by  a  variety  of
causes,  such  as  the  division  of  Greece  into  a  number
of  petty  states,  and  the  constitution  and  regulation
of  the  courts  of  law,  which  do  not  seem  to  have  been
at  all  favourable  to  money-lenders  in  enforcing  theii"
rights.  Bockh  assigns  as  an  additional  cause"  the
want  of  moral  principles."  (Bockh,  Ibid.  pp.  123
—139,  2nd  ed.)

2.  Roman.  The  Latin  word  for  interest, _/e«M5
or/oe/ius,  originally  meant  any  increase,  and  was
thence  applied,  like  the  Greek  tJkos,  to  denote  the
interest  or  increase  of  money.  "  Fenus,"  says
Varro  (apud  Gelt.  xvi.  12),  "  dictum  a  fetu  et  quasi
a  fetura  quadam  pecuniae  parientis  atque  incres-
centis."  The  same  root  is  found  in  fecundus.
Fenus  was  also  used  for  the  principal  as  well  as  the
interest,  (Tacit.  Ann.y'i.  17,  xiv.  53.)  Another
term  for  interest  was  usurae^  generally  found  in
the  plural,  and  also  impendium,  on  which  Varro
(de  Ling.  Lat.  v.  183,  Miiller)  remarks,  "a  quo
(pondere)  usura  quod  in  sorte  accedebat,  impen-
dium  appellatum."

Towards  the  close  of  the  republic,  the  interest
of  money  became  due  on  the  first  of  every  mouth  :
hence  the  phrases  trisies  or  celeres  calendae  and
calendariuiitf  the  latter  meaning  a  debt-book  or  book
of  accounts.  The  rate  of  interest  was  expressed  in
the  time  of  Cicero,  and  afterwards  by  means  of  the
as  and  its  divisions,  according  to  the  foUowinjf
table :  —

Asses  usurae,  or  one  as  per  month

for  the  use  of  one  hundred        =12  per  cent.

Deunces  usurae 11  „

Dextantes      „ 10  „

Dodrantes      „ 9  „

Besses            „ 8  „

Septunces      „ 7  „

Semisses        „ 6  „

Quincunces    „..'...  5  „

Trientes         ,, 4  „

Quadrantes    „ 3  „

Sextantes       „ 2  „

Unciae           „ 1  „

Instead  of  the  phrase  asses  usurae,  a  sj'^nonyme
was  used,  viz.  centesimae  usurae,  inasmuch  as  at
this  rate  of  interest  there  was  paid  in  a  hundred
months  a  sum  equal  to  the  whole  principal.  Hence
binae  centesimae  =  24  per  cent.,  and  quaternue
centesimae  =  48  per  cent.  So  also  in  the  line  ol
Horace  (Sat.  i.  2.  14),  "  Quinas  hie  capiti  mercedes
exsecat,"  we  must  understand  quinas  centesimas,
or  60  per  cent.,  as  the  sum  taken  from  the  capital.
Niebuhr  (Hist,  of  Rom.  vol.  iii.  p.  57)  is  of  opinion
that  the  monthly  rate  of  the  centesimae  was  of
foreign  origin,  and  first  adopted  at  Rome  in  the
time  of  Sulla.  The  old  yearly  rate  establislied  by
the  Twelve  Tables  (u.  c.  450)  was  the  unciarium
fenus.  This  has  been  variously  interpreted  to
mean,  (1)  one-twelfth  of  the  centesima  paid
monthly,  i.  e.  one  per  cent,  per  annum  ;  and  (2)
one-twelfth  of  the  principal  pn,id  monthly,  or  a
hundred  per  cent,  per  annum.     Niebuhr  (/.  c.)  re-


FEN  us.

futes  at  length  the  two  opinions  ;  but  it  maj'  be
sufficient  to  observe  that  one  is  inconsistent  with
common  sense,  and  the  other  with  the  early  history
of  the  republic.  A  third  and  satisfactory  opinion
is  as  follows  :  —  The  uncia  was  the  twelfth  part  of
the  as,  and  since  the  full  (12  oz.)  copper  coinage
was  still  in  use  at  Rome  when  the  Twelve  Tables
became  law,  the  phrase  unciarium  fenus  would  be
a  natural  expression  for  interest  of  one  ounce  in
the  pound  ;  t.  e.  a  twelfth  part  of  the  sum  bor-
rowed, or  8-J-  per  cent.,  not  per  month,  but  per  year.
This  rate,  if  calciilati«d  for  the  old  Roman  year  of
ten  months,  would  give  10  per  cent,  for  the  civil
year  of  twelve  months,  which  was  in  common  use
in  the  time  of  the  decemvirs.  The  analogy  of  the
Greek  terms  t6kos,  inlrpiTos,  &c.,  confirms  this
view,  which,  as  Niebuhr  observes,  is  not  invalidated
by  the  admission,  that  it  supposes  a  yearly  and  not
a  monthly  payment  of  interest  ;  for  though  in  the
later  times  of  the  republic  interest  became  due
every  month,  there  is  no  trace  of  this  having  been
the  case  formerly.  (Rein,  Romische  Privatrecht^
p.  304.)  Nor  is  it  difficult  to  account  for  the
change  :  it  probably  was  connected  with  the  modi-
fications made  from  time  to  time  in  the  Roman
law  of  debtor  and  creditor  (such  as  the  abolition  of
personal  slavery  for  debt),  the  natural  effect  of
which  would  be  to  make  creditors  more  scrupulous
in  lending  money,  and  more  vigilant  in  exacting
the  interest  due  upon  it.

If  a  debtor  could  not  pay  the  principal  and  in-
terest at  the  end  of  the  year,  he  used  to  borrow
money  from  a  fresh  creditor,  to  pay  off  his  old
debt.  This  proceeding  was  very  frequent,  .ind
called  a  versura  (compare  Ter.  Phorm.  v.  2.  16),
a  v/-ord  which  Festus  (s.  v.)  thus  explains :  "  Versu-
ram  facere,  mutuam  pecuniam  sumere,  ex  eo  dic-
tum est,  quod  initio  qui  mutuabantur  ab  aliis,  ut
aliis  solverent,  velut  verterent  creditorem,"  It
amounted  to  little  short  of  paying  compound  in-
terest, or  an  Atiatocismus  anniversarius,  another
phrase  for  which  was  usurae  rcnovatae ;  e.g.cen-
tcsimae  renovatae  is  twelve  per  cent,  compound
interest,  to  which  Cicero  {ad  Aft.  v.  21)  opposes
centisimae  perpetuo  fenore*=  12  per  cent,  simple
interest.  The  following  phrases  are  of  common
occuiTence  in  connection  with  borrowing  and  lend-
ing money  at  interest :  —  Pecuniam  apud  aliquern
coilocare^  to  lend  money  at  interest  ;  reler/ere,  to
call  it  in  again  ;  cavere,  to  give  security  for  it  ;
oppofiere  or  opponere  pignori,  to  give  as  a  pledge  or
mortgage :  hence  the  pun  in  Catullus  {Car.  2G),

"  Furi,  villula  nostra  non  ad  Austri
Flatus  opposita  est,  nee  ad  Favoni :
Verum  ad  millia  quindecim  et  ducentos.
0  ventum  horribilem  atque  pestilentem."

The  word  nomen  is  also  of  extensive  use  in  money
transactions.  Properly  it  denoted  the  name  of  a
debtor,  registered  in  a  banker's  or  any  other  ac-
count-book ;  hence  it  came  to  signify  the  articles
of  an  account,  a  debtor,  or  a  debt  itself.  Thus  we
have  bonum  nomen,  a  good  debt :  nomina  facere,
to  lend  monies  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  vii.  23),  and  also  to
borrow  money  (Id.  de  Of.  iii.  14).  Moreover,  the
Romans  generally  discharged  debts  through  the
agency  of  a  banker  {inforo  et  de  mensae  scriptura)
rather  than  by  a  direct  personal  payment  {ex  area
domoque)  ;  and  as  an  order  or  undertaking  for  pay-
ment was  given  by  writing  down  the  siun  to  be
paid,  with  the  receiver's  name  underneath  or  along-


FENUS.


527


side  it  (see  Dem.  c.  Callip.  p.  1236),  hence  came
the  phrases  scribere  nummos  alicui,  to  promise  to
pay  (Plant.  Asin.  ii.  4.  34)  ;  rescribere,  to  pay  back,
of  a  debtor  (Ter.  Phorm.  v.  7.  29).  So  also  per-
scribere,  to  give  a  bill  or  draft  {perscriptio)  on  a
banker  for  payment,  in  opposition  to  payment  by
ready  money.  (Cic.  ad  Att.  xii.  51,  xvi.  2.)

The  Roman  law  of  debtor  and  creditor  is  given
under  Nexum.  It  is  sufficient  to  remark  here  that
the  Liciniau  laws  [Leges  Liciniae],  by  which
the  grievances  of  debtors  were  to  a  certain  extent
redressed,  did  not  lay  any  restriction  on  the  rate  of
interest  that  might  be  legally  demanded  ;  and  it  is
clear  from  various  circumstances  that  the  scarcity  of
money  at  Rome  after  the  taking  of  the  city  by  the
Gauls  had  either  led  to  the  actual  abolition  of  the
old  uncial  rate  {unciarum  fenus)  of  the  Twelve
Tables,  or  caused  it  to  fall  into  disuse.  Nine  years,
however,  after  the  passing  of  these  laws  (Liv.  vii.
16)  the  rate  of  the  Twelve  Tables  was  re-es-
tablished, and  any  higher  rate  prohibited  by  the
bill  {rogatio)  of  the  tribunes  Duilius  and  Maenius.
Still  this  limitation  of  the  rate  of  interest  did  not
enable  debtors  to  pay  the  principal,  and  what  Tacitus
{Ann.  vi.  1 6)  calls  i\\efencbre  malum  became  at  last
so  serious  that  the  government  thought  it  necessary
to  intei'fere,  and  remedy,  if  possible,  an  evil  so  great
and  inveterate.  Accordinglj',  fourteen  j-ears  after
the  passing  of  the  Licinian  laws,  five  commissioners
were  appointed  for  this  purpose  under  the  title  of
mensarii  or  bankers.  These  opened  their  banks  in
the  forum,  and  in  the  name  of  the  treasury  offered
ready  money  to  any  debtor  who  could  give  security
{cavere)  to  the  state  for  it :  moreover,  they  ordered
that  land  and  cattle  should  be  received  in  payment
of  debts  at  a  fair  valuation,  a  regulation  Avhich
Caesar  adopted  for  a  similar  purpose.  (Suet.  Jul.
Caes.  42.)  By  these  means  Livy  (vii.  21)  tells
us  that  a  great  amount  of  debt  was  satisfactorily'
liquidated.  Five  years  afterwards,  the  legal  rate
of  interest  was  still  further  lowered  to  the  scmun-
ciarium  fenus,  or  the  twenty-fourth  part  of  the
whole  sum  {ad  semuncias  redacta  usura,  Tac.  Ann.
vi.  16)  ;  and  in  B.C.  346  we  read  of  several  usurers
being  punished  for  a  violation  of  the  law  (Liv.  vii.
28),  by  which  they  were  subjected  to  a  penalty  of
four  times  the  amount  of  the  loan.  (Cato,  de  Re
Rust,  init.)  But  all  these  enactments  were  merely
palliatives  ;  the  termination  and  cure  of  the  evil
was  something  more  decisive — neither  more  nor
less  than  a  species  of  national  bankruptcy  — a
genenil  abolition  of  debts  or  xpf^i'  aTzoKoir-i].  This
happened  in  B.  c.  341,  a  year  remarkable  for  po-
litical changes  of  great  importance,  and  was  fol-
lowed up  by  the  passing  of  the  Geniician  laws,
which  forbade  the  taking  of  usury  altogether.  (Liv.
vii.  42.)  A  law  like  this,  however,  was  sure  to  be
evaded,  and  there  was  a  very  simple  way  of  doing
so  ;  it  only  affected  Roman  citizens,  and  therefore
the  usurers  granted  loans,  not  in  the  name  of  them-
selves, but  of  the  Latins  and  allies  who  were  not
bound  by  it.  (Liv.  xxxv.  7.)  To  prevent  thiseva*
sion  the  Sempronian  law  was  passed  (b.  c.  194),
which  placed  the  Latins  and  allies  on  the  same
footing  in  respect  of  lending  money  as  the  full
Roman  citizens.  At  last,  after  many  futile  at-
tempts to  prevent  the  exaction  of  interest  at  any
rate,  and  in  any  shape,  the  idea  was  abandoned
altogether,  and  the  centesima  or  12  per  cent,  per
annum  became  the  legal  and  recognised  rat^.
Niebuhr,  as  we  have  already  observed,  is  of  opi-


528


FERIAE


nion  that  it  was  first  adopted  at  Rome  in  the  time
of  Sulla  ;  but  whether  it  became  the  legal  rate  by
anN--  special  enactment,  or  from  general  consent,  does
not  appear.  Some  writers  have  inferred  (Heinecc.
iii.  15)  that  it  was  first  legalised  by  the  edicts  of
the  city  praetors,  an  inference  drawn  from  the
general  resemblance  between  the  praetorian  and
proconsular  edicts,  coupled  with  the  fact  that  some
proconsular  edicts  are  extant,  by  which  the  cente-
sima  is  fixed  as  the  legal  rate  in  proconsular  pro-
vinces. (/«  edicto  tralaticio  ce7itesimas  me  obser-
vaturum  habui,  Cic.  ad  Att.  v.  21.)  Whether  this
supposition  is  true  or  not,  it  is  admitted  that  the
centesima  or  12  per  cent,  was  the  legal  rate  towards
the  close  of  the  republic,  and  also  under  the  em-
perors. Justinian  reduced  it  to  6  per  cent.  (Heinec.
iii.  1  6.)

In  cases  of  fenus  nauticum,  however,  or  bottomry,
as  the  risk  was  the  money  lender's,  he  might  de-
mand any  interest  he  liked  while  the  vessel  on
■which  the  money  was  lent  was  at  sea  ;  but  after  she
reached  harbour,  and  while  she  was  there,  no  more
than  the  usual  rate  of  12  per  cent,  on  the  centesima
could  be  demanded.

Justinian  made  it  the  legal  rate  for  fenus  nauti-
cum under  all  circumstances.  (Heinec.  I.  c.)  [R.W.]

FERA'LIA.     [FuNus.]

FE'RCULUM  (from  fer-o)^  is  applied  to  any
kind  of  tray  or  platform  used  for  carrying  anything.
Thus  it  is  used  to  signify  the  tray  or  frame  on  which
several  dishes  Avere  brought  in  at  once  at  dinner
(I'etron.  35  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxviii.  2)  ;  and  hence
fercula  came  to  mean  the  number  of  courses  at
dinner,  and  even  the  dishes  themselves.  (Suet.
Avg.  74  ;  Serv.  ad  Virg.  Aen.  i.  637 ;  Juv.  i.  93,
xi.  64  ;  Hor.  Sat.  ii.  6.  104  ;  Mart.  iii.  50,  ix.  82,
xi.  31.)

The  ferculura  was  also  used  for  carrying  the
images  of  the  gods  in  the  procession  of  the  circus
(Suet.  JuL,  76)  [Circus,  p.  287,  a],  the  ashes  of
the  dead  in  a  funeral  (Suet.  Cal.  15),  and  the  spoils
in  a  triumph  (Suet.  Jul.  37  ;  Liv.  i.  10)  ;  in  all
which  cases  it  appears  to  have  been  carried  on  the
ehouldcrs  or  in  the  hands  of  men.  The  most  illus-
trious captives  were  sometimes  placed  on  a  fer-
culum  in  a  triumph,  in  order  that  they  might  be
better  seen.     (Seiiec.  Here  Get.  109.)

FERENTA'RII.     [ExERciTUfe,  p.  502,  b.]

FERETRUM.     [Funus.]

FE'RIAE,  holidaj-s,  were,  generally  speaking,
days,  or  seasons  during  which  free-born  Romans
suspended  their  political  transactions  and  their
law-suits,  and  during  which  slaves  enjoyed  a  cessa-
tion from  labour.  (Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  8.  12,  de  Div.
i.  45.)  All  feriae  were  thus  dies  nefasti.  The
feriae  included  all  days  consecrated  to  any  deity  ;
consequently  all  days  on  which  public  festivals
were  celebrated  were  feriae  or  dies  feriati.  But
some  of  them,  such  as  the  feria  vindemialis,  and
the  feriae  aestivae,  seem  to  have  had  no  direct  con-
nection with  the  worship  of  the  gods.  The  nun-
dinae,  however,  during  the  time  of  the  kings  and
the  early  period  of  the  republic,  were  feriae  only
for  the  populus,  and  days  of  business  for  the  ple-
beians, until,  by  the  Hortensian  law,  they  became
fasti  or  days  of  business  for  both  orders.  (Macrob.
Sat.  i.  16;  compare  Niebuhr,  Hist,  of  Rome.,  vol.  ii.
p.  213,  &c.  ;  Walter,  Geschichte  d.  Rom.  Rechts,
p.  190.)

All  feriae  were  divided  into  two  classes,  feriae
pvMicae  sxiA  feriae  pnvaiac.    The  latter  were  only


FERIAE.

observed  by  single  families  or  individuals,  in  com-
memoration of  some  particular  event  which  had
been  of  importance  to  them  or  their  ancestors.  As
family  feriae,  are  mentioned  the  fenae  Claudiae,
Aemiliae,  Juliae,  Corneliae,  &c.,  and  we  must  sup-
pose that  all  the  great  Roman  families  had  their
particular  feriae,  as  they  had  their  private  sacra.
Among  the  family-holidays  we  may  also  mention
the  feriae  denicale:>,i.  e.  the  day  on  which  a  family,
after  having  lost  one  of  its  members  by  death,
underwent  a  purification.  (Fest.  s,  v.  ;  Cic.  de
Leg.  li.  22  ;  Columell.  ii.  22.)  Individuals  kept
feriae  on  their  birthdays,  and  other  occasions  which
marked  any  memorable  event  of  their  lives.  During
the  time  of  the  empire  the  birthday  of  an  emperor
sometimes  assumed  the  character  of  a  public  holiday,
and  was  celebrated  by  the  whole  nation  with  games
and  sacrifices.  Thus  the  birthday  of  Augustus,
called  Augustalia,  was  celebrated  with  great  splen-
dour even  in  the  time  of  Dion  Cassius  (liv.  34,
Ivi.  46).  The  day  on  which  Augustus  had  re-
turned from  his  wars  was  likewise  for  a  long  time
made  a  holiday  of.  (Tacit.  Annal.  i.  15,  with  the
note  of  Lipsius  ;  Dion  Cass.  liv.  10.)  The  dies
natalicii  of  the  cities  of  Rome  and  Constantinople
were  at  a  still  later  period  likewise  reckoned  among
the  feriae.     (Cod.  3.  tit.  12.  s.  6.)

All  feriae  pidiLicae.,  i.  e.  those  which  were  ob-
served by  the  whole  nation,  were  divided  into
feriae  stativae.,  feriae  conceptivae^  awA  feriae  impera-
tivae.  Feriae  stativae  or  statae  were  those  which
were  held  regularly,  and  on  certain  days  marked
in  the  calendar.  (Fest.  s.  v.  ;  Macrob.  l.  c.)  To
these  belonged  some  of  the  great  festivals,  such  as
the  Agonalia,  Carmentalia,  Lupercalia,  &c.  Feriae
conceptivae  orconceptae  were  held  every  year,  but
not  on  certain  or  fixed  days,  the  time  being  every
year  appointed  by  the  magistrates  or  priests  (qtiot-
a?inis  a  magistratihus  vel  sacerdotibus  concipiimtur^
Macrob.  I.  c.  ;  Varro,  de  lAng.  I^at.  vi.  25,  &c. ;
Fest.  s.  v.).  Among  these  we  may  mention  the
feriae  Latinae,  feriae  Sementivae,  Paganalia,  and
CompitJilia,  Feriae  imperativae  are  those  whicii
Were  held  on  certain  emergencies  at  the  command
of  the  consuls,  praetors,  or  of  a  dictator.  The  books
of  Livy  record  many  feriae  imperativae,  which
were  chiefly  held  in  order  to  avert  the  dangers
which  some  extraordinary  prodigy  seemed  to  fore-
bode, but  also  after  great  victories.  (Liv.  i.  31,
iii.  5,  vii.  28,  xxxv.  40,  xlii.  3  ;  Polyb.  xxi.  ].)
They  frequently  lasted  for  several  days,  the  number
of  which  depended  upon  the  importance  of  the
event  which  was  the  cause  of  their  celebration.
But  whenever  a  rain  of  stones  was  believed  to  have
happened,  the  anger  of  the  gods  was  appeased  hj
a  sacrum  novemdiale.  or  feriae  per  novum  dies.
This  number  of  days  had  been  fixed  at  the  time
when  this  prodigy  had  first  been  observed.  (Liv.
i.  31.)  Respecting  the  legitimate  forms  in  which
the  feriae  conceptivae  and  imperativae  were  an-
nounced and  appointed,  see  Brisson.  de  Form.  p.
107,  &c.

The  manner  in  which  all  public  feriae  were  kept
bears  great  analogy  to  our  Sunday.  The  people
generally  visited  the  temples  of  the  gods,  and
offered  up  their  prayers  and  sacrifices.  The  most
serious  and  solemn  seem  to  have  been  the  feriae
imperativae,  but  all  the  others  were  generally  at-
tended by  rejoicings  and  feasting.  All  kinds  of
business,  especially  law-suits,  were  suspended  dur-
ing the  public  feriae,  as  they  were  considered  to


FERIAE.

pollute  the  sacred  season  ;  the  rex  sjicronim  and
the  flamines  were  not  even  allowed  to  behold  any
work  being  done  during  the  feriae  ;  hence,  when
they  went  out,  they  were  preceded  by  their  heralds
[praeciae.,  praeelamitatores,  or  calatoi'es),  who  en-
joined the  people  to  abstain  from  working,  that  the
sanctity  of  the  day  might  not  be  polluted  by  the
priests  seeing  persons  at  work.  (Fest.  s.  v.  Fraecia;
Macrob.  L  c.  ;  compare  Serv.  ad  Virg.  Georg.  v,
26"8  ;  Plut.  Numa,  c.  14.)  Those  who  neglected
this  admonition  were  not  only  liable  to  a  fine,  but
in  case  their  disobedience  was  intentional,  their
crime  was  considered  to  be  beyond  the  power  of
any  atonement ;  whereas  those  who  had  unconsci-
ously continued  their  work,  might  atone  for  their
transgression  by  offering  a  pig.  It  seems  that
doubts  as  to  what  kinds  of  work  might  be  done  at
public  feriae  were  not  imfrequent.  and  we  possess
some  curious  and  interesting  decisions  given  by
Roman  pontiffs  on  this  subject.  One  Umbro  de-
clared it  to  be  no  violation  of  the  feriae,  if  a  person
did  such  work  as  had  reference  to  the  gods,  or  was
coimected  with  the  offering  of  sacrifices  ;  all  work,
he  moreover  declared,  was  allowed  which  was  ne-
cessary to  supply  the  urgent  wants  of  human  life.
The  pontiff  Scaevola,  when  asked  what  kind  of
work  might  be  done  on  a  dies  feriatus,  answered
that  any  work  might  be  done,  if  any  suffering  or
injury  should  be  the  result  of  neglect  or  delay,  e.g.
if  an  ox  should  fall  into  a  pit,  the  owner  might
employ  workmen  to  lift  it  out  ;  or  if  a  house
threatened  to  fall  down,  the  inhabitants  might  take
such  measures  as  would  prevent  its  falling,  without
polluting  the  feriae.  (Macrob.  l.  c.  and  iii.  3  ;
Virg.  Georg.  i.  270,  with  the  remarks  of  J.  H.Voss;
Cato,  de  Re  Rust.  2  ;  Columella,  ii.  22  ;  compare
Math.  xii.  1 1  ;  Luke  xiv.  5.)  Respecting  the  va-
rious kinds  of  legal  affairs  which  might  be  brought
before  the  praetor  on  days  of  public  feriae,  sec
Digest.  2.  tit.  12.  s.  2.

It  seems  to  have  been  owing  to  the  immense  in-
crease of  the  Roman  republic  and  of  the  accumula-
tion of  business  arising  therefrom,  that  some  of  the
feriae  such  as  the  Compitalia  and  Lupercalia,  in
the  course  of  time  ceased  to  be  observed,  until  they
were  restored  by  Augustus,  who  revived  many  of
the  ancient  religious  rites  and  ceremonies.  (Suet.
Aiig.  31.)  Marcus  Antonhms  again  increased  the
number  of  days  of  business  {dies  fasti)  to  230,  and
the  remaining  days  were  feriae.  (Capitol.  M.Anton.
Phil.  c.  10.)  After  the  introduction  of  Christi-
anity in  the  Roman  empire,  the  old  feriae  were
abolished,  and  the  Sabbath,  together  with  the
Christian  festivals,  were  substituted  ;  but  the  man-
ner in  which  they  were  kept  was  nearly  the  same
as  that  in  which  the  feriae  had  been  observed.
Law-suits  were  accordingly  illegal  on  Sundays  and
holidays,  though  a  master  might  emancipate  his
slave  if  he  liked.  (Cod.  3.  tit.  12.)  All  work
and  all  political  as  well  as  judicial  proceedings,
were  suspended  ;  but  the  country  people  were  al-
lowed freely  and  unrestrainedly  to  apply  them-
selves to  their  agricultural  labours,  which  seem  at
all  times  to  have  been  distinguished  from  and
thought  superior  to  all  other  kinds  of  work  ;  for,  as
mentioned  below,  certain  feriae  were  instituted
merely  for  the  purpose  of  enabling  the  country
people  to  follow  their  rural  occupations  without
being  interrupted  by  law-suits  and  other  public
transactions.

After  this  general  view  of  the  Roman  feriae,  we


FERIAE.


629


shall  proceed  to  give  a  short  account  of  those  festi-
vals and  holidays  which  were  designated  by  the
name  of  feriae.

Feviae  Latinae,  or  simply  Latinae  (the  original
name  was  Latiar,  Macrob.  t.  c.  ;  Cic.  ad  Quint.
Frat.  ii.  4),  had,  according  to  the  Roman  legends,
been  instituted  by  the  last  Tarquin  in  commemo-
ration of  the  alliance  between  the  Romans  and
Latins.  (Dionys.  Plal.  iv.  p.  250.  Sylb.)  But
Niebuhr  {Hist,  of  Rome,  ii.  p.  34)  has  shown  that
the  festival,  which  was  originally  a  panegyris  of
the  Latins,  is  of  much  higher  antiquity  ;  for  we
find  it  stated  that  the  towns  of  the  Priscans  and
Latins  received  their  shares  of  the  sacrifice  on  the
Alban  mount — which  was  the  place  of  its  celebration
—  along  with  the  Albans  and  the  thirty  towns  of
the  Alban  commonwealth.  All  that  the  last
Tarquin  did  was  to  convert  the  original  Latin
festival  into  a  Roman  one,  and  to  make  it  the
means  of  hallowing  and  cementing  the  alliance
between  the  two  nations.  Before  the  union,  the
chief  magistrate  of  the  Latins  had  presided  at  the
festival  ;  but  Tarquin  now  assumed  this  distinc-
tion, which  subsequently,  after  the  destruction  of
the  Latin  commonwealth,  remained  with  the  chief
magistrates  of  Rome.  (Liv.  v.  17.)  The  object
of  this  panegyris  on  the  Alban  mount  was  the
worship  of  Jupiter  Latiaris,  and,  at  least  as  long
as  the  Latin  republic  existed,  to  deliberate  and
decide  on  matters  of  the  confederacy,  and  to  settle
any  disputes  which  might  have  arisen  among  its
members.  As  the  feriae  Latinae  belonged  to  the
conceptivae,  the  time  of  their  celebration  greatly
depended  on  the  state  of  affairs  at  Rome,  as  the
consuls  were  never  allowed  to  take  the  field  until
they  had  held  the  Latinae.  (Liv.  xxi.  63,  xxii.  1,
XXV.  12.)  This  festival  was  a  great  engine  in  the
hands  of  the  magistrates,  who  had  to  appoint  the
time  of  its  celebration  {coneipere,  edicere,  or  i7idicere
Latinas);  as  it  might  often  suit  their  purpose
either  to  hold  the  festival  at  a  particular  time  or
to  delay  it,  in  order  to  prevent  or  dehiy  such  pub-
lic proceedings  as  seemed  injurious  and  pernicious,
and  to  promote  others  to  which  they  were  favour-
ably disposed.  This  feature,  however,  the  feriae
Latinae  had  in  common  with  all  other  feriae  con-
ceptivae. Whenever  any  of  the  forms  or  cere-
monies customary  at  the  Latinae  had  been  neglected,
the  consuls  had  the  right  to  propose  to  the  senate,
or  the  college  of  pontiffs,  that  their  celebration
should  be  repeated  {instaurari,  Cic.  ad  Quint.
Frat.  ii.  6  ;  Liv.  xxii.  1,  xli.  \&).  Respecting
the  duration  of  the  feriae  Latinae,  the  common
opinion  fonnerly  was,  that  at  first  they  only  lasted
for  one  day,  to  which  subse(iuently  a  second,  a
third,  and  a  fourth  were  added  (Dionys.  Hal.  vi.
p.  415.  Sylb.)  ;  but  it  is  clear  that  this  suppo-
sition was  founded  on  a  confusion  of  the  feriae
Latinae  with  the  Ludi  Maximi,  and  that  they
lasted  for  six  days ;  one  for  each  decury  of  the
Alban  and  Latin  towns.  (Niebuhr,  Hist,  of  Rome.,
ii.  p.  35  ;  comp.  Liv.  vi.  42  ;  Plut.  Camill.  42.)
The  festive  season  was  attended  by  a  sacred  truce,
and  no  battle  was  allowed  to  be  fought  during  those
days.  (Dionys.  Hal.  iv.  p.  250,  Sylb.  ;  Macrob.
I.  c.)  In  early  times,  during  the  alliance  of  the
Romans  and  Latins,  the  chief  magistrates  of  both
nations  met  on  the  Alban  mount,  and  conducted
the  solemnities,  at  which  the  Romans,  however,
had  the  presidency.  But  afterwards  the.  Romans
alone    conducted  the  celebration,  and   offered  the


580


FESCENNINA.


common  sacrifice  of  an  ox  to  Jupiter  Latiaris,  in
the  name  and  on  behalf  of  all  who  took  part  in  it
The  flesh  of  the  victim  was  distributed  among  the
several  towns  whose  common  sanctuary  stood  on
the  Albnn  mount.  (Dionys.  Hal.  I.  c.  ;  Varro,  de
Liny.  Lat  vi.  25  ;  Schol.  Bobiens.  in  Cic.  Orat.
pro  Plane,  p.  255,  &c.  Orelli.)  Besides  the  com-
mon sacrifice  of  an  ox,  the  several  towns  offered
each  separately  lambs,  cheeses,  or  a  certain  quan-
tity of  milk  (Cic.  de  Div.  i.  11),  or  cakes.  Mul-
titudes flocked  to  the  Alban  mount  on  the  occasion,
sind  the  season  was  one  of  great  rejoicings  and
feasting.  Various  kinds  of  games  were  not  want-
ing, among  which  may  be  mentioned  the  oscillatio
(swinging,  Fest.  s.  v.  Oscillum).  It  was  a  sym-
bolic game,  and  the  legend  respecting  its  origin
shows  that  it  was  derived  from  the  Latins,  Pliny
(fl.  N.  xxvii.  2)  mentions  that  during  the  Latin
liolidays  a  race  of  four-horse  chariots  (quadrigae
certant)  took  place  on  the  Capitol,  in  which  the
victor  received  a  draught  of  absynthium.

Although  the  Roman  consuls  were  always  pre-
sent on  the  Alban  mount,  and  conducted  the
solemn  sacrifice  of  an  ox,  yet  we  read  that  the
superintendence  of  the  Latinae,  like  that  of  other
festivals,  was  given  by  the  senate  to  the  Aediles,
who,  therefore,  probably  conducted  the  minor  sa-
crifices, the  various  games,  and  other  selemnities
(Dionys,  Hal.  vi.  p,  415.)  While  the  consuls  were
engaged  on  the  Alban  mount,  their  place  at  Rome
was  filled  by  the  praefectus  urbi.  [Praefectus
Urbl]

The  two  days  following  the  celebration  of  the
Latin  holidays  were  considered  as  dies  religiosi^  so
that  no  marriages  could  be  contracted,  (Cic.  ad
Quint.  Frat.  ii.  4.)  From  Dion  Cassius  we  see
that  in  his  times  the  Feriae  Latinae  were  still
strictly  observed  by  the  Romans,  whereas  the
Latin  towns  had,  at  the  time  of  Cicero,  almost  en-
tirely given  up  taking  any  part  in  them.  The
Romans  seemed  to  have  continued  to  keep  them
down  to  the  fourth  century  of  our  era.  (Lactant.
Institut.  i.  21.)

Feriae  Seiuentivae,  or  Sementina  dies,  was  kept
in  seed-time  for  the  purpose  of  praying  for  a  good
crop  ;  it  lasted  only  for  one  daj^,  which  was  fixed
by  the  pontiff's.  (Varro,  de  Ling.  Lat.  vi.  26,
de  Re  Rust.  i.  2,  init.  ;  Ovid,  Fast.  i.  658,  &e.)

Feria  lindemialis  lasted  from  the  22d  of  August
to  the  15th  of  October,  and  was  instituted  for  the
purpose  of  enabling  the  country-people  to  get  in
the  fruits  of  the  field  and  to  hold  the  vintage.
(Codex,  3.  tit  12.)

Feriae  aestivae  were  holidays  kept  during  the
liottest  season  of  summer,  when  many  of  the  weal-
thier Romans  left  the  city  and  went  into  the
country.  (Gellius,  ix.  15.  §  1.)  They  seem  to  have
been  the  same  as  the  messis  feria  (Cod,  3,  tit,  1 2.
s.  2,  6),  and  lasted  from  the  24th  of  June  till  the
1st  of  August.

Feriae  praecidaneae  are  said  to  have  been  pre-
paratory days,  or  such  as  preceded  the  ordinary
feriae  ;  although  they  did  not  belong  to  the  feriae,
and  often  even  were  dies  atri,  they  were  on  certain
occasions  inaugurated  by  the  chief  pontiff  and  thus
made  feriae.     (Gellius,  iv.  6.)  [L.  S.]

FESCENNI'NA,  scil.  carmina,  one  of  the
earliest  kinds  of  Italian  poetry,  which  consisted  of
rude  and  jocose  verses,  or  nither  dialogues  in  ex-
tempore verses  (Liv.  vii.  2),  in  which  the  merry
country  folks  assailed  and  ridiculed  one  another.


FKTIALES.

(Herat  Epist.  il  1.  145.)  This  amusement  seems
originally  to  have  been  peculiar  to  country  people,
but  it  was  also  introduced  into  the  towns  of  Italy
and  at  Rome,  where  we  find  it  mentioned  az  one
of  those  in  which  young  people  indulged  at  wed-
dings. (Serv.  axl  Aen.  vii.  695  ;  Seneca,  Cofdrov.
21  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  XV.  22.)  The  fescennina  were
one  of  the  popular  amusements  at  various  festivals,
and  on  many  other  occasions,  but  especially  after
the  liarvest  was  over.  After  their  introduction
into  the  towns  they  seem  to  have  lost  much  of
their  original  rustic  character,  and  to  have  been
modified  by  the  influence  of  Greek  refinement  (see
Virg.  Georg.  ii.  585,  &c.  ;  TibulL  ii.  1.  55 ;  CatuU.
61.  27)  ;  they  remained,  however,  in  so  far  the
same,  as  they  were  at  all  times  irregular,  and
mostly  extempore  doggerel  verses.  Sometimes,
however,  versus  fescennini  were  also  written  as
satires  upon  persons.  (Macrob.  Saturn,  ii.  4.)  That
these  railleries  had  no  malicious  character,  and
were  not  intended  to  hurt  or  injure,  may  be  in-
ferred from  the  circumstance  that  one  person  often
called  upon  another  to  answer  and  retort  in  a  simi-
lar strain.  The  fescennina  are  generally  believed
to  have  been  introduced  among  the  Romans  from
Etruria,  and  to  have  derived  their  name  from  Fes-
cennia,  a  town  of  that  country.  But,  in  the  first
place,  Fescennia  was  not  an  Etruscan  but  a  Falis-
can  town  (Niebuhr,  Hist,  of  Rome,  i.  p.  136),  and,
in  the  second,  this  kind  of  amusement  has  at  all
times  been,  and  is  still,  so  popular  in  Italy,  that  it
can  scarcely  be  considered  as  peculiar  to  any  par-
ticular place.  The  derivation  of  a  name  of  this
kind  from  that  of  some  particular  place  was  for-
merly a  favourite  custom,  as  may  be  seen  in  the
derivation  of  caerimonia  from  Caere.  Festus  (s.  v.)
endeavours  to  solve  the  question  by  supposing  fes-
cennina to  be  derived  from  fascinum,  either  because
they  were  thought  to  be  a  protection  against  sor-
cerers and  witches,  or  because  fascinum  (phallus),
the  s3nnbol  of  fertility,  had  in  early  times,  or  in
rural  districts,  been  connected  with  the  amusements
of  the  fescennina.  But  whatever  may  be  thought
of  this  etymolog}',  it  is  of  importance  not  to  be
misled  by  the  common  opinion  that  the  fescennina
were  of  Etruscan  origin.  [L.  S.]

FESTI  DIES.     [Dies.]

FESTU'CA.     [Manumissio.]

FETIA'LES,  a  college  (Liv.  xxxvi.  3)  of  Ro-
man priests  who  acted  as  the  guardians  of  the
public  faith.  It  was  their  province,  when  any
dispute  arose  with  a  foreign  state,  to  demand  satis-
faction, to  determine  the  circumstances  under
which  hostilities  might  be  commenced,  to  perform
the  various  religious  rites  attendant  on  the  solemn
declaration  of  war,  and  to  preside  at  the  formal
ratification  of  peace.  These  functions  are  briefly'
but  comprehensively  defined  by  Varro  (De  Ling.
Lat.  V.  86,  ed  Mliller),  "  Fetiales. . .  fidei  publicae
inter  populos  praeerant:  nam  per  hos  fiebat  ut
justum  conciperetur  bellum  et  inde  desitum,  ut
foedere  fides  pacis  constitueretur.  Ex  his  mit-
tebantur,  antequam  conciperetur,  qui  res  repeterent,
et  per  hos  etiam  nunc  fit  foedus,"  to  Avhich  we
may  add  the  old  law  quoted  by  Cicero    {De  Leg.

ii.  9),  "  FOEDERUM,  PACLS,  BELLI,  INDUCIARUM
ORATORES  FETIALES  JUDICESQUE  SUNTO  ;  BELLA

DiscEPTANTO."  Dionysius  (ii.  72)  and  Liv}'-  (i.
32)  detail  at  considerable  length  the  ceremonies
observed  by  the  Romans  in  the  earlier  ages,  when
they  felt  themselves  aggrieved  by  a  neighbouring


FETIALES.
people.  It  appears  that  when  an  injury  had  Ijeen
sustained,  fo^l^  fetiales  (Varro,  ap.  Non.)  were
deputed  to  seek  redress,  who  again  elected  one  of
their  number  to  act  as  their  representatiye.  This
individual  was  styled  the  pater  patmtus  populi
Romani.  A  fillet  of  white  wool  was  bound  round
his  head,  together  with  a  wreath  of  sacred  herbs
gathered  within  the  in  closure  of  the  Capitoline  hill
\verbenae,  sagmina)  [Sagmina],  whence  he  was
sometimes  named  Verbenarius.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxiL
2.)  Thus  equipped  he  proceeded  to  the  confines
of  the  offending  tribe,  where  he  halted  and  ad-
dressed a  prayer  to  Jupiter,  calling  the  god  to  wit-
ness, with  heavy  imprecations,  that  his  complaints
were  well  founded  and  his  demands  reasonable.
He  then  crossed  the  border,  and  the  same  form
was  repeated  in  nearly  the  same  words  to  the  first
native  of  the  soil  whom  he  might  chance  to  meet  ;
again  a  third  time  to  the  sentinel  or  any  citizen
wliom  he  encountered  at  the  gate  of  the  chief
town ;  and  a  fourth  time  to  the  magistrates  in  the
forum  in  presence  of  the  people.  If  a  satisfactory
answer  was  not  returned  within  thirty  days,  after
publicly  delivering  a  solemn  denunciation, — in  which
the  gods  celestial,  terrestrial,  and  infernal  were
invoked, — of  what  might  be  expected  to  follow,  he
returned  to  Rome,  and,  accompanied  by  the  rest
of  the  fetiales,  made  a  report  of  his  mission  to  the
senate.  If  the  people  (  Liv.  x.  45),  as  well  as  the
senate,  decided  for  war,  the  pater  patratus  again
set  forth  to  the  border  of  the  hostile  territory,  and
launched  a  spear  tipped  with  iron,  or  charred  at
the  extremity  and  smeared  with  blood  (emblematic
doubtless  of  fire  and  slaughter)  across  the  boun-
dary, pronouncing  at  the  same  time  a  solemn
declaration  of  war.  The  demand  for  redress  and
the  proclamation  of  hostilities  were  alike  termed
darigatio^  which  word  the  Romans  in  later  times
explained  by  dare  repetere  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxii.  3  ;
Serv.  ad  Virg.  Aen.  ix.  53)  ;  but  Gottling  (Ge-
schidite  der  Rom.  Staatsverf.  p.  196)  and  other  mo-
dem writers,  connect  it  with  the  Doric  form  of
Kripv^  and  KiqpvKeiov.

Several  of  the  formulae  employed  on  these  occa-
sions have  been  preserved  by  Livy  (i.  24,  32),  and
Aulus  Gellius  (xvi.  4),  forming  a  portion  of  the
Jus  Fetiale  by  which  the  college  was  regulated,  i
The  services  of  the  fetiales  were  considered  abso-
lutely essential  in  concluding  a  treaty  (Liv.  ix.  5)  ;
and  we  read  that  at  the  termination  of  the  second
Punic  war  fetiales  were  sent  over  to  Africa,  who
carried  with  them  their  own  verbenae  and  their
own  flint  stones  for  smitmg  the  victim.  Here  also
the  chief  was  termed  pater  patratus.  (Liv.  xxx.
43.)

The  institution  of  these  priests  was  ascribed  by
tradition,  in  common  with  other  matters  con-
nected with  religion,  to  Noma  (Dionys.  ii.  71)  ;
and  although  Livy  (i.  32)  speaks  as  if  he  attri-
buted their  introduction  to  Ancus  Martins,  yet  in
an  earlier  chapter  (i.  24)  he  supposes  them  to  have
existed  in  the  reign  of  Hostilius.  The  whole
system  is  said  to  have  been  borrowed  from  the
Aequicolae  or  the  Ardeates  (Liv.  and  Dionys.  I.e.),
and  similar  usages  undoubtedly  prevailed  among
the  Latin  states  ;  for  it  is  clear  that  the  formula
preserved  by  Livy  (i.  32),  must  have  been  em-
ployed when  the  pater  patratus  of  the  Romans  was
put  in  communication  with  the  pater  patratus  of
the  Prisci  Latini.

The  number  of  the  fetiales  cannot  be  ascertained


FIBULA.


531


with  certaint}-,  but  some  have  inferred  from^a  pas-
sage quoted  from  Varro  by  Nonius  (xii.  43)  that
it  amomited  to  twenty  ;  of  whom  Niebuhr  sup-
poses ten  Avere  elected  from  the  Ramnes  and
ten  from  the  Titienses  ;  but  Gottling  {Gesddchte  der
Rom.  Staatsverf.  p.  195)  thinks  it  more  probable
that  they  were  at  first  all  chosen  from  the  Ramnes,
as  the  Sabhies  were  originally  unacquainted  with
the  use  of  fetiales.  They  were  originally  selected
from  the  most  noble  families  j  their  office  lasted  for
life  (Dionys.  ii.  72)  ;  and  it  seems  probable  that
vacancies  were  filled  up  by  the  college  (cooptatione)
until  the  passing  of  the  Lex  Domitia,  when  in  com-
mon with  most  other  priests  they  would  be  nomi-
nated in  the  comitia  tributa.  This,  however,  is
nowhere  expressly  stated.

The  etymology  of  fetialis  is  tmcertain.  Varro
would  connect  it  with  Jidus  and  foedus  ;  Festus
with  ferio  or  /acta  :  while  some  modem  scholars
suppose  it  to  be  allied  to  (pr)/j.i^  and  thus  (prjridKeis
wo.dd  be  oratores,  speuke7's.  In  inscriptions  we
find  hoih/etialis  nnd  fecialis  ;  but  since  in  Greek
MSS.  the  word  always  appears  under  some  one  of
the  forms  (prjTidXeis  (periaKeiSy  (piridXfis,  the
orthography  we  have  adopted  in  this  article  is
probably  correct.

The  explanation  given  by  Livy  (i.  24)  of  the
origin  of  the  tenn  Pater  Patratus  is  satisfactory  : —
"  Pater  Patratus  ad  jusjurandum  patrandura,  id
est,  sanciendum  fit  foedus  ;  "  and  we  may  at  once
reject  the  speculations  of  Servius  (ad  Aen.  ix.  53,
x.  14,  xii.  206)  and  Plutarch  (Q.  R.  p.  127,  ed.
Reiske)  ;  the  former  of  whom  supposes  that  he  was
so  called  because  it  was  necessary  that  his  father
should  be  alive,  the  latter  that  the  name  indicated
that  his  father  was  living,  and  that  he  himself  was
the  father  of  children.  [  W.  R.]

FI'BULA  (TrepSt/rj^Trepovis^TTcpovTOTpis:  iropirr],
iirnropiris :  ei/tr^),  a  buooch  consisting  of  a  pin
{acus)y  and  of  a  curved  portion  furnished  with  a
hook  (K\elSf  Hom.  Od.  xviii.  293).  The  curved
portion  was  sometimes  a  circular  ring  or  disc,  the
pin  passing  across  its  centre  (woodcut,  figs.  1,  2),
and  sometimes  an  arc,  the  pin  being  as  the  chord
of  the  arc  (fig.  3).  The  forms  of  brooches,  which
were  commonly  of  gold  or  bronze,  and  more  rarely
of  silver  (Aelian,  V.  H.  i.  18),  were,  however,  as
various  in  ancient  as  in  modem  times  ;  for  the
fibula  served  in  dress  not  merely  as  a  fastening,
but  also  as  an  ornament.  (Hom.  Od.  xix,  256,
257  ;  Eurip.  P/ioew.  821.)

1.    2.  3.  4.        5.  6.        7.


Women  wore  the  fibxila  both  with  the  Amictus
and  the  indutus ;  men  wore  it  with  the  amictus
onl}'.  Its  most  frequent  use  was  to  pin  together
two  parts  of  the  scarf,  shawl  or  cloak  [Chla-
MYS  ;  Peplum  ;  Pallium],  which  constituted
the  amictus,  so  as  to  fasten  it  over  the  right
shoulder.     (Soph.  Track.  923  ;  Theocrit.  xiv.  66  ;

M  M    2


532


FIBULA.


Ovid,  Met  viii.  318  ;  Tacit.  Germ.  17).  [Wood-
cuts, pp.  2,  117,  213.]  More  rarely  we  see  it
over  the  breast.  [Woodcut,  p.  ^18,]  The  epi-
thet eTepoTTopnos  was  applied  to  a  person  wear-
ing the  fibula  on  one  shoulder  only  (Schol.  in
Eurip.  Hoc  933,  934)  ;  for  women  often  wore  it
on  both  shoulders.  [Woodcuts,  pp.  136,  243,
257.J  In  consequence  of  the  habit  of  putting  on
the  amictus  with  the  aid  of  a  fibula,  it  was  called
iTf:povriiJ.a  or  ip.TTep6v7)jxa  (Theocrit.  Adon.  34.  79),
vopiT'fjij.a  (Eurip.  Elect.  820),  or  afj.irex6vn  irepo-
vi^TLs  (Brunck,  Anal.  ii.  28).  The  splendid  shawl
of  Ulj'sses,  described  in  the  Odyssey  (xix.  225 —
231),  was  provided  with  two  small  pipes  for  ad-
mitting the  pin  of  the  golden  brooch  ;  this  contri-
vance would  secure  the  cloth  from  being  torn.  The
highest  degree  of  ornament  was  bestowed  upon
brooches  after  the  fall  of  the  western  empire.
Justin  II.  (Corippus,  ii.  122),  and  many  of  the
emperors  who  preceded  him,  as  we  perceive  from
the  portraits  on  their  medals,  wore  upon  their
right  shoulders  fibulae,  from  which  jewels,  at-
tached by  three  small  chains,  depended.  (Beger,
Thcs.  Pal.  p.  407,  408,  &c.)

It  has  been  already  stated  that  women  often
wore  the  fibula  on  both  shoulders.  In  addition  to
this,  a  lady  sometimes  displayed  an  elegant  row  of
brooches  down  each  arm  upon  the  sleeves  of  her
tunic  (Aelian,  V.  H.  i.  18),  examples  of  which  are
seen  in  many  ancient  statues.  It  was  also  fashion-
able to  wear  them  on  the  breast  (Isid.  Orig.  xix.
30)  ;  and  another  occasional  distinction  of  female
attire,  in  later  times,  was  the  use  of  the  fibula  in
tucking  up  the  tunic  above  the  knee.

Not  only  might  sligbt  accidents  to  the  person
arise  from  wearing  brooches  (Hom.  II.  v.  426),  but
they  were  sometimes  used,  especially  by  females,  to
inflict  serious  injuries.  The  pin  of  the  fibula  is  the
instrument,  which  the  Phrj'gian  women  employ  to
deprive  Polymnestor  of  his  sight  by  piercing  his
pupils  (Eurip.  Hec.  1170),  and  with  which  the
Athenian  women,  having  first  blinded  a  man,  then
dispatch  him.  (Herod,  v.  87  ;  Schol.  in  Eurip.  Hec.
934).  Oedipus  strikes  the  pupils  of  his  own  eye-
balls with  a  brooch  taken  from  the  dress  of  Jocasta
(Soph.  Oed.  Tyr.  1269  ;  Eurip.  Fhoen.  62).  For
the  same  reason  we  find  that  Trepovdo}  meant  to
pierce,  since  TrepSvr)  was  properly  the  pin  of  the
brooch  (7rep({vrjo-e,  "  pinned  him,"  Hom.  II.  vii.
145  ;  xiii.  397).

Brooches  were  succeeded  by  buckles,  especially
among  the  Romans,  who  called  them  by  the  same
name.  The  preceding  woodcut  shows  on  the  right
hand  the  forms  of  four  bronze  buckles  (4, 5, 6, 7)  from
the  collection  in  the  British  Museum.  This  article
of  dress  was  chiefly  used  to  fasten  the  belt  [Bal-
TEUS],  and  the  girdle  [Zona].  (Virg.  Aen.  xii.
274  ;  Lydus,  De  Mag.  Rom.  ii.  13).  It  appears
to  have  been  in  general  much  more  richly  orna-
mented than  the  brooch  ;  for,  although  Hadrian
was  simple  and  unexpensive  in  this  as  well  as  in
other  matters  of  costume  (Spartian.  Hadr.  10),
yet  many  of  his  successors  were  exceedingly
prone  to  display  buckles  set  with  jewels  {fibulae
gemviatae).

The  terms  which  have  now  been  illustrated  as
applied  to  articles  of  dress,  were  also  used  to  denote
pins  variously  introduced  in  carpentry  ;  e.  g.  the
linch-pins  of  a  chariot  (Parthen.  6);  the  wooden  pins
inserted  through  the  sides  of  a  boat,  to  which  the
sailors  fasten  their  lines  or  ropes  (Apoll.  Rhod.  i.


FICTILE.

567)  ;  the  trenails  which  imite  the  posts  anfl
planks  of  a  wooden  bridge  (Caesar,  B.  G.  iv.  1  7)  ;
and  the  pins  fixed  into  the  top  of  a  wooden  tri-
angle used  as  a  mechanical  engine  (Vitniv.  x.  2).

The  practice  of  infibiJating  singers,  alluded  to
by  Juvenal  and  Martial,  is  described  in  Rhodius
De  Ada  and  Pitiscus.  [J.  Y.J

FFCTILE  (KepdfjLos,  KepdfMiov,  ocTTpaKov,
ocTTpdKii/ov),  earthenware,  a  vessel  or  other  article
made  of  baked  clay.

The  instruments  used  in  pottery  (ars  jigulina)
were  the  following: — 1.  The  wheel  (rpox6s,orhis,
rota,  "  rota  figularis,"  Plant.  Epid.  iii.  2.  35),
which  is  mentioned  by  Homer  (//.  xviii.  600),  and
is  among  the  most  ancient  of  all  human  inventions.
According  to  the  representations  of  it  on  the  walls
of  Egyptian  tombs  (Wilkinson,  Manners  and  Cus-
toms, iii.  p.  163),  it  was  a  circular  table,  placed  on
a  cylindrical  pedestal,  and  turning  freely  on  a
point.  The  workman,  having  placed  a  lump  of
clay  upon  it,  whirled  it  swiftly  with  his  left  hand,
and  employed  his  right  in  moulding  the  clay  to
the  requisite  shape.  Hence  a  dish  is  called  "  the
daughter  of  the  wheel  "  {rpoxfl^dros  KSprj,  Xenar-
chus,  ap.  Atlmi.  ii.  p.  64).  2.  Pieces  of  wood  or
bone,  which  the  potter  {K^pap.^vs,  figulus)  held  in
his  right  hand,  and  applied  occasionally  to  the
surface  of  the  clay  during  its  revolution.  A  pointed
stick,  touching  the  clay,  would  inscribe  a  circle
upon  it  ;  and  circles  were  in  this  manner  disposed
parallel  to  one  another,  and  in  any  number,  ac-
cording to  the  fancy  of  the  artist.  By  having  the
end  of  the  stick  curved  or  indented,  and  by  turning
it  in  different  directions,  he  would  impress  many
beautiful  varieties  of  form  and  outline  upon  his
vases.  3.  Moulds  (/brmae,  rviroi,  Schol.  in  Arist.
Eccles.  1),  used  either  to  decorate  with  figures  in
relief  (Trp6(rTvira)  vessels  which  had  been  thrown
on  the  wheel,  or  to  produce  foliage,  animals,  or
any  other  appearances,  on  Antefixa,  on  cornices
of  terra  cotta,  and  imitative  or  ornamental  pottery
of  all  other  kinds,  in  which  the  wheel  was  not
adapted  to  give  the  first  shape.  The  annexed
woodcut  shows  three  moulds,  which  were  found
near  Rome  by  M.  Seroux  d'Agincourt.  {Becueil  de
Fragmens,  p.  88—92.)  They  are  cut  in  stone.
One  of  them  was  probably  used  for  making  ante-
fixa, and  the  other  two  for  making  hearts  and
legs,  designed  to  be  suspended  by  poor  persons
"  ex  voto,"  in  the  temples  and  sanctuaries.  [Do-
NARiA.]     Copies  of  the  same  subject,  which  might


in  this  manner  be  multiplied  to  any  extent,  were
called  "  ectypa."  4.  Gravers  or  scalpels,  used  by
skilful  modellers  in  giving  to  figures  of  all  kinds  a
more  perfect  finish  and  a  higher  relief  than  could
b(;  produced  by  the  use  of  moulds.  These  instru-
ments, exceedingly  simple  in  themselves,  and  de>


FICTILE.

riving  their  efficiency  altogether  from  the  ability
and  taste  of  the  sculptor,  would  not  tnly  contri-
bute to  the  more  exquisite  decoration  of  earthen
vessels,  but  would  be  almost  the  only  tools  appli-
cable for  making  "  Dii  fictiles,"  or  gods  of  baked
earth,  and  other  entire  figures.  (Property  ii.  3.  25,
iv.  1.5;  Plin.  //.  N.  xxxv.  45,  46  ;  Sen.  Cons,  ad
Alb.  10  ;  ayd\fj.aTa  4k  tttjAoO,  okttjs  777s,  Paus.
i.  2.  §  4,  i.  3.  §  1,  vii.  22.  §  6.)  These  were
among  the  earliest  efforts  of  the  plastic  art,  and
even  in  times  of  the  greatest  refinement  and
luxury  they  continued  to  be  regarded  with  reve-
rence.

Vessels  of  all  kinds  were  very  fi-equently  fur-
nished with  at  least  one  handle  (ansa,  ovas,  S>s).
The  Amphora  was  called  Diota,  because  it  had
two.  The  name  of  the  potter  was  commonly
stamped  upon  the  handle,  the  rim,  or  some  other
part.  Of  this  we  have  an  example  in  the  amphora,
adapted  for  holding  grain  or  fruits,  oil  or  wine,
which  is  here  introduced  from  the  work  of  Seroux
d'Agincourt.  The  figure  on  the  right  hand  shows
the  name  in  the  genitive  case  *'  Maturi,"  im-
pressed on  an  oblong  surface  which  is  seen  on  the
handle  of  the  amphora.


I


The  earth  used  for  making  pottery  (icepd/JUKr}
•yv,  Geopon.  ii.  49)  was  commonly  red,  and  often
of  so  lively  a  colour  as  to  resemble  coral.  Vau-
quelin  found,  by  analysis,  that  a  piece  of  Etruscan
earthenware  contained  the  following  ingredients:  —
Silica,  53  ;  alumina,  15  ;  lime,  8  ;  oxide  of  iron,
24.  To  the  great  abundance  of  the  last  constitu-
ent the  deep  red  colour  is  to  be  attributed.  Other
pottery  is  brown  or  cream-coloured,  and  sometimes
white.  The  pipe-clay,  which  must  have  been  used
for  white  ware,  is  called  "  figlina  creta."  (Varro,
Re  Rust.  iii.  9.)  Some  of  the  ancient  earthenware
is  throughout  its  substance  black,  an  effect  pro-
duced by  mixing  the  earth  with  comminuted  as-
phaltum  (gagates),  or  with  some  other  bituminous
or  oleaginous  substance.  It  appears  also  that  as-
phaltum,  with  pitch  and  tar,  both  mineral  and
vegetable,  was  used  to  cover  the  surface  like  a  var-
nish. In  the  finer  kinds  of  earthenware  this  var-
nish served  as  a  black  paint,  and  to  its  application
many  of  the  most  beautiful  vases  owe  the  decora-
tions which  are  now  so  highly  admired.  (Plin.  //.
A^.  xxxvi.  34.)  But  the  coarser  vessels,  designed
for  common  purposes,  were  also  smeared  with
pitch,  and  had  it  burnt  into  them,  because  by  this
kind  of  encaustic  they  became  more  impervious  to
.moisture  and  less  liable  to  decay.     (Hor.  Carm.  i.


FICTILE.  533

20.  3;  Plin.  //.  A^.  xiv.  25,  27.)  Hence  a
"  dolium  picatum  fictile  "  was  used,  as  well  as  a
glass  jar  to  hold  pickles.  (Colum,  Re  Rust  xii.  1 8,
54.)  Also  the  year  of  the  vintage  was  inscribed
by  the  use  of  pitch,  either  upon  the  amphorae
themselves  or  upon  the  labels  {pittacia,  schedia),
which  were  tied  round  their  necks.  (Hor.  Carm.
iii.  21.  1 — 5.)  Although  oily  or  bitiraiinous  sub-
stances were  most  commonly  employed  in  pottery
to  produce  by  the  aid  of  fire  (e5  Se  fxeXavOeleu.,
Horn.  Epig.  xiv.  3)  the  various  shades  of  black
imd  brown,  the  vessels,  before  being  sent  for  the
last  time  to  the  furnace  [Fornax],  were  some-
times immersed  in  that  finely  prepared  mud,  now
teehnicall}^  called  "  slip,"  by  which  the  surface  is
both  smoothed  and  glazed,  and  at  the  same  time
receives  a  fresh  colour.  Ruddle,  or  red  ochre
(/xiAros,  rubrica)y  was  principally  employed  for
this  purpose.  (Suidas,  s.  v.  KwKiolSos  K€paiJ.rie<:.)
To  produce  a  further  variety  in  the  paintings  upon
vases  ihe  artists  employed  a  few  brightly  coloiired
earths  and  metallic  ores.     [Pictura,  No.  9.]

As  we  might  expect  concerning  an  art  so  indis-
pensable as  that  of  the  potter,  it  was  practised  to
a  great  extent  in  every  ancient  nation  ;  even  the
most  uncivilized  not  being  strangers  to  it,  and
sometimes  displaying  a  surprising  degree  of  dexte-
rity. Tlae  remains  of  an  ancient  pottery  have  been
found  in  Britain,  and  some  of  the  potters'  names
preserved  on  their  works,  are  probably  British.
We  are  told  of  a  place  called  the  Potteries  (Fig"
linae)  in  Gaul.  Numa  instituted  a  corporation  of
potters  at  Rome.  (Plin.  //.  N.  xxxv.  46.)  Men-
tion has  already  been  made  of  Egypt,  and  there
are  frequent  allusions  to  the  art  in  the  ancient
writings  of  the  Jews.  We  also  read  of  its  pro-
ductions in  Tralles,  Pergamus,  Cnidus,  Chios,
Sicyon,  Corinth,  Cumae,  Adria,  Modena,  and
Nola,  from  which  city  the  exports  of  earthenware
were  considerable,  and  where  some  of  the  most  ex-
quisite specimens  are  still  discovered.  But  three
places  were  distinguished  above  all  others  for  the
extent  and  excellence  of  this  beautiful  manufac-
ture.

1.  Samos,  to  which  the  Romans  resorted  for  the
articles  of  earthenware  necessary  at  meals,  and
intended  for  use  rather  than  display.  (Plant.
Bacch.  ii.  2.  24,  Sfich.  v.  4.  12  ;  Tibull.  ii.  3.  51  ;
Cic.  jiro  Murcn,  36  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.  46  ;
Tertull.  ApoL  25.)

2.  Athens,  a  considerable  part  of  which  was
called  Cerameicus,  because  it  was  inhabited  by
potters.  In  this  quarter  of  the  city  were  temples
dedicated  to  Athena,  as  presiding  over  every  kind
of  handicraft,  and  to  the  two  fire-gods,  Hephaestos
and  Prometheus,  the  latter  of  whom  was  also  the
mythical  inventor  of  the  art  of  modelling.  Various
traditions  respecting  Coroebus  and  others  point  to
the  early  efforts  of  the  Athenian  potters  (Plin.//.  A'".
vii.  57,  xxxv.  45  ;  Critias  ap.  Athen.  i.  p.  28)  ;
and  it  is  a  remarkable  circumstance  that  the  enemies
of  free  trade,  and  especially  of  Athenian  influence  at
Aegina  and  Argos,  imposed  restrictions  on  the  use
of  these  productions.  (Herod,  v.  88.)  The  Athe-
nian ware  was  of  the  finest  description  ;  the  master-
pieces were  publicly  exhibited  at  the  Pana-
THENAEA,  and  were  given,  filled  with  oil,  to  the
victors  at  the  games  ;  in  consequence  of  which,  we
now  read  on  some  of  them,  in  the  British  Museum
and  other  collections,  the  inscription  Twv  " AQ-iivndiv
ddKuv  or  other  equivalent  expressions.  (Pind.  Nem.


534


FICTILE.


X.  35  ;  Schol.  and  Bockh,  ad  loc.  ;  Bcickh,  Corp.
Inse.  vol.  i.  p.  49.)  Many  other  specimens  were  pre-
sents given  to  relations  and  friends  on  particular
occasions,  and  often  distinguished  by  the  epithets
KoAo's  and  kuXt]  added  to  their  names.  A  circum-
stance which  contributed  to  the  success  of  the  Athe-
nians in  this  manufacture,  was  a  mine  of  fine  pot-
ter''s  clay  in  the  Colian  Promontory,  near  Phalerum.
(Suidas,  I.  c.  ;  A  then.  xi.  p.  482.)  The  articles
made  from  it  became  so  fashionable,  that  Plutarch
(Z)e  Audit.)  describing  an  act  of  extreme  foil}',
compares  it  to  that  of  the  man  who,  having  swal-
lowed poison,  refuses  to  take  the  antidote  unless  it
be  administered  to  him  in  a  cup  made  of  Colian  clay.
Some  of  the  *'  Panathenaic"  vases,  as  they  were
called,  are  two  feet  in  height,  which  accords  with
what  is  said  by  ancient  authors  of  their  uncommon
size.  (Athen.  xi.  p.  495  ;  Biickh,  in  Pind.  Frag.  No.
89.)  A  diota  was  often  stamped  upon  the  coins
of  Athens,  in  allusion  to  the  facts  which  have  now
been  explained.

3.  Etrm-ia,  especially  the  cities  of  Aretium  and
Tarquinii.  Whilst  the  Athenian  potters  excelled
all  others  in  the  manufacture  of  vessels,  the  Tuscans,
besides  exercising  this  branch  of  industry  to  a  great
extent  though  in  a  less  tasteful  and  elaborate
manner,  were  very  remarkable  for  their  skill  in
producing  all  kinds  of  statuary  in  baked  clay.
Even  the  most  celebrated  of  the  Roman  temples
were  adorned,  both  within  and  without,  by  the
aid  of  these  productions.  The  most  distinguished
among  them  was  an  entire  quadriga,  made  at  Veii,
which  surmounted  the  pediment  of  the  temple  of
Jupiter  Capitolinus.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxviii.  4,  xxxv.
45,  xxxvi.  2  ;  K.  O.  Muller,  Etrusker,  iv.  3.  1,  2.)
The  Etrurians  also  manifested  their  partiality  to
this  branch  of  art  by  recurring  to  it  for  the  purpose
of  interment  ;  for  whilst  Pliny  mentions  (//.  A^.
xxxv.  46),  that  many  persons  preferred  to  be  buried
in  earthen  jars,  and  in  other  parts  of  Italy  the
bones  of  the  dead  have  been  found  preserved  in
amphorae,  Etruria  alone  has  afforded  examples,
some  of  them  now  deposited  in  the  British  Museum,
of  large  sarcophagi  made  wholly  of  terra  cotta,  and
ornamented  with  figures  in  bas-relief  and  with  re-
cumbent statues  of  the  deceased.

Among  many  qualities  which  we  admire  in  the
Greek  pottery,  not  the  least  wonderful  is  its  thin-
ness (AeTTTci)  and  consequent  lightness,  notwith-
standing the  great  size  of  the  vessels  and  the  per-
fect regularity  and  elegance  of  their  fonns.  That  it
was  an  object  of  ambition  to  excel  in  this  respect
we  learn  from  the  story  of  a  master  .and  his  pupil,
who  contended  which  could  throw  the  thinnest  clay,
and  whose  two  amphorae,  the  result  of  the  trial,
were  preserved  in  the  temple  at  Erythrae.  (Plin,
H.  N.  xxxv.  46.)  The  well-known  passage  of
Hesiod  (Kai  Kepafi€vs  Kepajj.e'i  Koreu,  &c.  Op.  el
Dies,  25)  describes  the  emulation,  which  incited
potters  to  excellence  as  well  as  architects  and
poets.

The  Greeks  and  Romans  contented  themselves
with  using  earthenware  on  all  occasions  until  the
time  of  Alexander  the  Great:  the  Macedonian
conquests  introduced  from  the  East  a  taste  for  vessels
of  gold  and  silver,  in  which,  however,  the  Spartans
refused  to  indulge  themselves.  The  Persians,  on  the
contrarj'^,  held  earthenware  in  so  low  estimation,
that  they  condemned  persons  to  drink  out  of  fictile
vessels  as  a  punishment.  (Athen.  vi.  p.  229,  c,  xi.
p.  464,  a,  p.  483,  c,  d.)    But  although  the  Romans,


FICTIO

as  they  devitjted  from  the  ancient  simplicity,  made
a  great  display  of  the  more  splendid  kind  of
vessels,  yet  they  continued  to  look  upon  potterj'-  not
only  with  respect  but  even  with  veneration.  (Ovid,
3fei.  viii.  690  ;  Cic.  ad  Ait.  vi.  1  ;  Juv.  iii.  \Q^.,
X.  25.)  They  called  to  mind  the  magnanimity  of
the  Consul  Curius,  who  preferred  the  use  of  his  own
earthenware  to  the  gold  of  the  Samnites  (Florus,  i.
18)  ;  they  reckoned  some  of  their  consecrated
terra-cottas,  and  especially  the  above-mentioned
quadriga,  among  the  safeguards  of  their  imperial
city  (Serv. oc?  Virg.  Aen.y'ii.  188)  ;  and,  bound  by
old  associations  and  the  traditons  of  their  earliest
history,  they  considered  earthen  vessels  proper  for
religious  ceremonies,  although  gold  and  silver  might
be  admitted  in  their  private  entertainments  (Ter-
tull.  I.  c.)  ;  forPiiny  says  {H.  N.  xxxv.  46),  that
the  productions  of  this  class,  "  both  in  regard  to
their  skilful  fabrication  and  their  high  antiquity,
were  more  sacred,  and  certainly  more  innocent,  than
gold."

Another  term,  often  used  as  synonymous  with
fictile  was  testa.  [DoLiuM  ;  Later  ;  Patera  ;
Patina  ;  Tegula.]  [J.  Y.]

FI'CTIO.  Fictions  in  Roman  law  are  like  fic-
tions in  English  law,  of  which  it  has  been  said  that
they  are  "  those  things  that  have  no  real  essence
in  their  own  body,  but  are  so  acknowledged  and
accepted  in  law  for  some  especial  purpose."  The
fictions  of  the  Roman  law  apparently  had  their
origin  in  the  edictal  power,  and  they  Avere  devised
for  the  purpose  of  providing  for  cases  where  there
was  no  legislative  provision.  A  fiction  supposed
something  to  be  which  was  not ;  but  the  thing  sup-
posed to  be  was  such  a  thing  as,  being  admitted  to
be  a  fact,  gave  to  some  person  a  right  or  imposed
on  some  person  a  duty.  Various  instances  of  fic-
tions are  mentioned  by  Gains.  One  instance  is
that  of  a  person  who  had  obtained  the  bonorum
possessio  ex  edicto.  As  he  was  not  heres,  he  had
no  direct  action :  he  could  neither  claim  the  pro-
perty of  the  defunct  as  his  (legal)  property,  nor
could  he  claim  a  debt  due  to  the  defunct  as  his
(legal)  debt.  He  therefore  brought  his  suit  (m-
tendit)  as  heres  {ficto  se  herede)^  and  the  formula
was  accordingly  adapted  to  the  fiction.  In  the
Publiciana  Actio,  the  fiction  was  that  the  possessor
had  obtained  by  usucapion  the  ownership  of  the
thing  of  which  he  had  lost  the  possession.  A
woman  by  coemptio,  and  a  male  by  being  adro-
gated,  ceased,  according  to  the  civil  law,  to  be
debtors,  if  they  were  debtors  before  ;  for  by  the
coemptio  and  adrogatio  they  had  sustained  a  capitis
diminutio,  and  there  could  be  no  direct  action
against  them.  But  as  this  capitis  diminutio  might
be  made  available  for  fraudulent  purposes,  an  actio
utilis  was  still  allowed  against  such  persons,  the
fiction  being  that  they  had  sustained  no  capitis
diminutio.  The  formula  did  not  (as  it  appears
from  Gaius)  express  the  fiction  as  a  fact,  but  it  ran
thus  :  —  If  it  shall  appear  that  such  and  such  are
the  facts  (the  facts  in  issue),  and  that  the  party,
plaintiff  or  defendant,  would  have  such  and  such  a
right,  or  be  liable  to  such  and  such  a  duty,  if  such
and  such  other  facts  (the  facts  supposed)  were  true;
et  reliqua,  (Gaius,  iv,  10.  32,  &c.  ;  Ulp.  Frag.
xxviii.  12.)

It  was  by  a  fiction  that  the  notion  of  legal  ca-
pacity was  extended  to  artificial  persons.  [Colle-
gium ;  Fiscus.]  Instances  of  fiction  occur  in  the
chapter  intitlcd  Juristische  Personen  in  Savigny's


FIDEICOMMISSUM.
System  des  Jieut.  R.  R.  vol.  ii.,  and  in  Puchta's  In-
siitutionen,  i.  §  80,  ii.  §  165.)  [G.  L.]

FIDEICOMMISSUM  is  a  testamentary  dis-
position, by  which  a  person  who  gives  something
to  another  imposes  on  him  the  obligation  of  trans-
ferring it  to  a  third  person.  The  obligation  was
not  created  by  words  of  legal  binding  force  {civilia
verba),  but  by  words  of  request  (precative),  such
as  "  Meicommitto,"  "  peto,"  "  volo  dari,""  and  the
like;  which  were  the  operative  words  (verba
uiiua).  If  the  object  of  the  fideicommissum  was
the  hereditas,  the  whole  or  a  part,  it  was  called
fideicommissaria  hereditas,  which  is  equivalent  to
a  universal  fideicommissum  ;  if  it  was  a  single
thing  or  a  sum  of  money,  it  was  called  fideicom-
missum singulae  rei  or  fideicommissum  speciale.
The  obligation  to  transfer  a  fideicommissaria  here-
ditas could  only  be  imposed  on  the  heres  ;  the  ob-
ligation of  transferring  a  single  thing  might  be
imposed  on  a  legatee.

By  the  legislation  of  Justinian  a  fideicommis-
sum of  the  hereditas  was  a  universal  succession ;
but  before  his  time  the  person  entitled  to  it  was
sometimes  "  heredis  loco,"  and  sometimes  "  lega-
tarii  loco."  The  heres  still  remained  heres  after
he  had  parted  with  the  hereditas.  Though  the
fideicommissum  resembled  a  vulgar  substitution,  it
differed  from  it  in  this :  —  in  the  case  of  a  vulgar
substitution,  the  substituted  person  only  became
heres  when  the  first  person,  named  heres,  failed  to
become  such  ;  in  the  case  of  the  fideicommissum,
the  second  heres  had  only  a  claim  on  the  inherit-
ance when  the  person,  named  heres,  had  actually
become  such.  There  could  be  no  fideicommissum
unless  there  was  a  heres.

The  person  who  created  the  fideicommissum
must  be  a  person  who  was  capable  of  making  a
will ;  but  he  might  create  a  fideicommissum  orally
without  having  made  a  will.  The  person  who
was  to  receive  the  benefit  of  the  fideicommissum
was  the  fideicommissarius  ;  and  a  person  might  be
a  fideicommissarius  who  could  take  a  legacy  (Ulp.
Frag.  xxv.  6)  ;  the  person  on  whom  the  obligation
was  laid  was  the  fiduciarius.  The  fideicommis-
sarius himself  might  be  bound  to  give  the  fideicom-
missum to  a  second  fideicommissarius.  Originally
the  fideicommissarius  was  considered  as  a  purchaser
(emptoris  loco)  ;  and  when  the  heres  transferred  to
him  the  hereditas,  mutual  covenants  (catUiones)
were  entered  into  by  which  the  heres  was  not  to
be  answerable  for  any  thing  which  he  had  been
bound  to  do  as  heres,  nor  for  what  he  had  given
bona  fide,  and  if  an  action  was  brought  against
him  as  heres,  he  was  to  be  defended.  On  the
other  hand  the  fideicommissarius  (qui  recipiehat
fiereditatem)  was  to  have  whatever  part  of  the
hereditas  might  still  come  to  the  hands  of  the
heres,  and  was  to  be  allowed  to  prosecute  all  rights
of  action  which  the  heres  might  have.  But  it  was
enacted  by  the  senatus- consul  turn  Trebellianum,  in
the  time  of  Nero,  that  when  the  heres  had  given
up  the  hereditas  to  the  fideicommissarius,  all  right
of  action  by  or  against  the  heres  should  be  trans-
ferred to  the  fideicommissarius.  The  praetor  ac-
cordingly gave  utiles  actiones  to  and  against  the
fideicommissarius.  From  this  time  the  heres
ceased  to  require  from  the  fideicommissarius  the
covenants  which  he  had  formerly  taken  as  his
eecurity  against  his  general  liabilities  as  heres.

As  fideicommissa  were  sometimes  lost  because
the  herea  would  not  accept  the  inheritance,  it  was


FIDEICOMMISSUM.


535


enacted  by  the  senatus-consultum  Pegasianum,  in
the  time  of  Vespasian,  that  the  fiduciarius  might
retain  one  fourth  of  the  hereditas,  and  the  same
power  of  retainer  was  allowed  him  in  the  case  of
single  things.  In  this  case  the  heres  was  liable  to
all  debts  and  charges  (miera  lieredilaria)  ;  but
the  same  agreement  was  made  between  him  and
the  fideicommissarius  which  was  made  between
the  heres  and  the  legatus  partiarius,  that  is,  the
profit  or  loss  of  the  inheritance  was  shared  be-
tween them  according  to  their  shares  (pro  rata
parte).  Accordingly,  if  the  heres  was  required
to  restore  not  more  than  three-fourths  of  the  here-
ditas, the  senatus-consultum  Trebellianum  took
eftect,  and  any  loss  was  borne  by  him  and  the
fideicommissarius  in  proportion  to  their  shares.
If  the  heres  was  required  to  restore  more  than
three-fourths  or  the  whole,  the  senatus-consultum
Pegasianum  applied.  If  the  heres  refused  to
take  possession  of  (adire)  the  hereditas,  the
fideicommissarius  could  compel  him,  by  applica-
tion to  the  praetor,  to  take  possession  of  it  and  to
restore  it  to  him  ;  but  all  the  costs  and  charges
accompanying  the  hereditas  were  borne  by  the
fideicommissarius.

Whether  the  heres  was  sole  heir  (ex  asse),  and
required  to  restore  the  whole  or  a  part  of  the
hereditas,  or  whether  he  was  not  sole  heir  (ex
parte)  and  was  required  to  restore  the  whole  of
such  part,  or  a  part  of  such  part,  was  immaterial :
in  all  cases  the  S.  C.  Pegasianum  gave  him  a
fourth.

By  the  legislation  of  Justinian  the  senatus-con-
sulta  Trebellianum  and  Pegasianum  were  consoli-
dated, and  the  following  rules  were  established:  —
The  heres  who  was  charged  with  a  universal  fidei-
commissum  always  retained  one- fourth  part  of  the
hereditas  (which  was  called  simply  Quarta,  or
Falcidia,  or  commodum  Legis  Falcidiae),  and  all
claims  on  behalf  of  or  against  the  hereditas  were
shared  between  the  fiduciarius  and  fideicommissarius
who  was  considered  heredis  loco.  If  the  fiduciarius
suffered  himself  to  be  compelled  to  take  the  inherit-
ance, he  lost  his  Quarta,  and  any  other  advantage
that  he  might  have  from  the  hereditas.  If  the  fidu-
ciarius was  in  possession,  the  fideicommissarius  had
a  personal  actio  ex  testamento  against  him  for  the
hereditas.  If  not  in  possession,  he  must  at  least
verbally  assent  to  the  claim  of  the  fideicommissarius,
who  had  then  the  hereditatispetitio  fideicommissaria
against  any  person  who  was  in  possession  of  the
property.

The  Quarta  is  in  fact  the  Falcidia,  applied  to
the  case  of  universal  fideicommissa.  Accordingly,
the  heres  only  was  entitled  to  it,  and  not  a  fidei-
commissarius, who  was  himself  charged  with  a
fideicommissum.  If  there  were  several  heredes
charged  with  fideicommissa,  each  was  entitled
to  a  quarta  of  his  portion  of  the  hereditas.  The
heres  was  entitled  to  retain  a  fourth  out  of  the
hereditas,  not  including  therein  what  he  took  as
legatee.

The  fiduciarius  was  bound  to  restore  the  here-
ditas at  the  time  named  by  the  testator,  or,  if  no
time  was  named,  immediately  after  taking  posses-
sion of  it.  He  was  entitled  to  be  indemnified  for
all  proper  costs  and  charges  which  he  had  sustained
with  respect  to  the  hereditas  ;  but  he  was  answer-
able for  any  damage  or  loss  which  it  had  sustained
through  his  (;ulpa.

Res  singidae,  as  already  observed,  might  also
M  M  4


S36


FIDEICOMMISSUM.


be  the  objects  of  a  fideicomraissum,  as  a  particular
piece  of  land,  a  slave,  a  garment,  piece  of  silver,
or  a  sum  of  money  ;  and  the  duty  of  giving  it  to
the  fideicommissarius  might  be  imposed  either  on
the  heres  or  on  a  legatee.  In  this  way  a  slave
also  might  receive  his  liberty,  and  the  request  to
manumit  might  be  addressed  either  to  the  heres  or
the  legatarius.  The  slave  when  manumitted  was
the  libertus  of  the  person  who  manumitted  him.
There  were  many  differences  between  fideicom-
missa  of  single  things  and  legacies.  A  person
about  to  die  intestate  might  charge  his  heres  with
a  fideicommissum,  whereas  a  legacy  could  only  be
given  by  a  testament,  or  by  a  codicil  which  was
confirmed  by  a  proper  declaration  of  the  testator  in
a  will  ;  but  a  fideicommissum  could  be  given  by
a  simple  codicil  not  so  confirmed.  A  heres  insti-
tuted by  a  will  might  be  requested  by  a  codicil,
not  so  confirmed  as  above,  to  transfer  the  whole
hereditas,  or  a  part,  to  a  third  person.  A  woman
who  was  prevented  by  the  provisions  of  the
Voconia  lex  from  taking  a  certain  hereditas,  might
take  it  as  a  fideicommissum.  The  Latini,  also,
who  were  prohibited  by  the  Lex  Junia  from
taking  hereditates  and  legacies  by  direct  gift
{diredo  jure)  could  take  by  fideicommissa.  It  Avas
not  legal  to  name  a  person  as  heres,  and  also  to
name  another  who  after  the  death  of  the  heres,
should  become  heres  ;  but  it  was  lawful  to  request
the  heres  on  his  death  to  transfer  the  whole  or  a
part  of  the  hereditas  to  another.  In  this  way  a
testator  indirectly  exercised  a  testamentary  power
over  his  property  for  a  longer  period  than  the  law
allowed  him  to  do  directly.  A  man  sued  for  a
legacy  per  formulam  ;  but  he  sued  for  a  fideicom-
missum before  the  consul  or  praetor  for  fideicom-
missa at  Rome,  and  in  the  provinces  before  the
praeses.  A  fideicommissum  was  valid,  if  given  in
the  Greek  language,  bnt  a  legacy  was  not,  until  a
late  period.  Justinian  finally  assimilated  legacies
and  singular  fideicommissa.  [Legatum  ;  Inst.  2.
tit.  20.  §  3  ;  Cod.  6.  tit.  43.  s.  2.]

It  appears  that  there  were  no  legal  means  of  en-
forcing the  due  discharge  of  the  trust  called  fidei-
commissum  till  the  time  of  Augustus,  who  gave
the  consuls  jurisdiction  in  fideicommissa.  In  the
time  of  Claudius  praetores  fideicomraissarii  were
appointed  :  in  the  provinces  the  praesides  took  cog-
nizance of  fideicommissa.  The  consuls  still  retained
their  jurisdiction,  but  only  exercised  it  in  impor-
tant cases.  (Quintil.  Inst.  iii.  6.)  The  proceeding
was  always  exti'a  ordinem.  (Gains,  ii.  228  ;  Ulp.
Frag.  tit.  25.  s.  12.)  Fideicommissa  seem  to  have
been  introduced  in  order  to  evade  the  civil  law,
and  to  give  the  hereditas,  or  a  legacy,  to  a  person
who  was  either  incapacitated  from  taking  directly,
or  who  could  not  take  as  much  as  the  donor  wished
to  give.  Gains,  when  observing  that  peregrini  could
take  fideicommissa,  observes  that  "this"  (the  ob-
ject of  evading  the  law)  '^  was  probably  the  origin
of  fideicommissa ;"  but  by  a  senatus-consultum  made
in  the  time  of  Hadrian,  such  fideicommissa  were
claimed  by  the  fiscus.  They  are  supposed  to  be
the  commendationes  mortuorum  mentioned  b}'
Cicero  {de  Fin.  iii.  20).  There  is  the  case  of
Q.  Pompeius  Rufus  (Val.  Max.  iv.  2.  7),  who,
being  in  exile,  was  legally  incapacitated  from
taking  any  thing  under  the  will  of  a  Roman  citi-
zen, but  could  claim  it  from  his  mother,  who  was
the  heres  fiduciarius.  They  were  also  adopted  in
the  case  of  gifts  to  women,  in  order  to  evade  the


FIDUCIA.

Lex  Voconia  [Lkx  Voconia]  ;  and  in  the  case
of  proscribed  persons,  incertae  personae,  Latini,
peregrini,  caelibes,  orbi.  But  the  senatus-con-
sultum Pegasianum  destroyed  the  capacity  of
caelibes  and  orbi  to  take  fideicommissa,  and  gave
them  to  those  persons  mentioned  in  the  will  who
had  children,  and  in  default  of  such  to  the  popu-
lus,  as  in  the  case  of  hereditates  and  legata.
[Bona  Caduca.]  Municipia  could  not  tjike  as
heredes  [Collegium]  ;  but  by  the  senatus-con-
sultum Apronianura,  which  was  probably  passed
in  the  time  of  Hadrian,  they  could  take  a  fidei-
commissa hereditas.  (Ulp.  Frag.  tit.  22.  s.  5  ;
Plin.  Ep.  v.  7.)  [Heres  (Roman).]  (Gains,
ii.  247—289  ;  Ulp.  Frag.  tit.  25 :  Inst.  2.  tit.  23,
24  ;  Dig.  36.  tit.  1  ;  Cod.  6.  tit.  49  ;  Mackeldey,
Lehrbuck.,  &c.,  1 2th  ed.  §  726,  &c.  ;  Vangerow,
Leitfaden  fur  Pandekten  Vorlesungen^  vol.  ii.  p.
5^1.)  [G.  L.]

FIDEJUSSOR.     [Intercessio.  1

FIDEPROMISSOR.     [Intercessic]

FIDES.     [Lyra.]

FIDI'CULA  is  said  to  have  been  an  instal-
ment of  torture,  consisting  of  a  number  of  strings.
According  to  some  modern  writers,  it  was  the
same  as  the  equuleus,  or  at  all  events  formed  part
of  it.  [Equuleus.]  The  term,  however,  appears
to  be  applied  to  any  strings,  whether  forming  part
of  the  equuleus  or  not,  by  which  the  limbs  or  ex-
tremities of  individuals  were  tied  tightly.  (Sueton.
Tib.  62,  Cal.  33  ;  Cod.  Theod.  9.  tit.  35.  s.  1  ;
Sigonius,  De  Jud.  iii.  17.)

FIDU'CI  A.  If  a  man  transferred  his  property
to  another,  on  condition  that  it  should  be  restored
to  him,  this  contract  was  called  Fiducia,  and  the
person  to  whom  the  property  was  so  transferred  was
s?i\di.  fidnciam  accipere.  (Cic  Top.  c.  10.)  A  man
might  transfer  his  property  to  another  for  the  sake
of  greater  security  in  time  of  danger,  or  for  other
sufficient  reason.  (Gains,  ii.  60.)  The  contmct  of
fiducia  or  pactum  fiduciae  also  existed  in  the  case
of  pignus  ;  and  in  the  case  of  mancipation.  [Eman-
cipatio.]  The  hereditas  itself  might  be  an  object
of  fiducia.  [Fidp:icommissum.]  The  trustee  was
bound  to  discharge  his  trust  by  restoring  the  thing :
if  he  did  not,  he  was  liable  to  an  actio  fiduciae  or
fiduciaria,  which  was  an  actio  bonae  fidei.  (Cic.
de  Off',  iii.  ]5.,  ad  Fam.  vii.  12  ;  ut  inter  bonos
bene  agier  oportet.)  If  the  trustee  was  con-
demned in  the  action,  the  consequence  was  in-
famia.  Cicero  enumerates  the  judicium  fiduciae
with  that  tutelae  and  societatis  as  "  judicia  sum-
mae  existimationis  et  paene  capitis "  (Cic.  pro
Ros.  Com.  c.  6),  where  he  is  evidently  alluding  to
the  consequence  of  infamia.  (Compare  Savigny,
System,,  &c.  vol.  ii.  p.  176.)

When  the  object  for  Avhich  a  thing  was  trans-
ferred to  another  was  attained,  a  remancipatio  of
those  things  which  required  to  be  transferred  by
mancipatio  or  in  jure  cessio  was  necessary  ;  and
with  this  view  a  particular  contract  {pactum, fidu-
ciae) was  inserted  in  the  formula  of  mancipatio.  If
no  remancipatio  took  place,  but  only  a  simple  re-
stitutio, usucapio  was  necessary  to  restore  the  Quiri-
tarian  ownership,  and  this  was  called  usureceptio*
The  contract  of  fiducia  might  be  accompanied  with
a  condition,  by  virtue  of  which  the  fiducia  might
cease  in  a  given  case,  and  thus  the  fiducia  was  con
nected  with  the  Commissoria  Lex,  as  we  see  in
Paulus  {Sent.  Rece])L  ii.  tit.  13),  and  in  Cic.  pro
F/accOf  c.2\^  "fiducia  commissa,"  which  maybe


FIMBRIAE.

explained  by  reference  to  Commissum.  (Gains,  ii.
60,  iii.  201  ;  Rosshirt,  Grundlinlen^  &c.  §  99  ;
'Rs'm,  Das  Rom.  Privatrecht;  Heinecc.  Syntagma.
ed.  Haubold.)  [G.  L.]

FIDUCLVRIA  ACTIO.   [Actio.]

FIGLI'NA  ARS.     [Fictile.]

FIGLINAE.     [Fictile.]

FFGULUS.     [Fictile.]

FILIUSFAMILIAS.     [Familia.]

FI'MBRIAE  (Kpoa-<Toi ;  lonice,  ^vaavoi,  Greg.
Corinth. ),  thrums  ;  tassels  ;  a  fringe.

When  the  weaver  had  finished  any  garment  on
the  loom  [Tela],  the  thrums,  i.  e.  the  extremities
of  the  threads  of  the  warp,  hung  in  a  row  at  the
bottom.  In  this  state  they  were  frequently  left,
being  considered  ornamental.  Often  also,  to  pre-
vent them  from  ravelling,  and  to  give  a  still  more
artificial  and  ornamental  appearance,  they  were
separated  into  bundles,  each  of  which  was  twisted
(aTp€irTo7s  ^vadvois,  Brunck,  Anal.i.  416),  and
tied  in  one  or  more  knots.  The  thrums  were  thus,
by  a  very  simple  process,  transformed  into  p.  row  of
tassels.  The  linen  shirts,  found  in  Egyptian  tombs,
sometimes  show  this  ornament  among  their  lower
edge,  and  illustrate,  in  a  very  interesting  manner,
the  description  of  these  garments  by  Herodotus
(ii.  81).  Among  the  Greeks  and  Romans  fringes
were  seldom  worn  except  by  females  (Kpoaacvrhy
X'Twi/o,  Brunck,  ii.  525  ;  Jacobs,  &c.  ad  loc.  ;
Pollux,  vii.  64  ;  Sueton.  Jul.  45).  Of  their  manner
of  displaying  them  the  best  idea  may  be  formed  by
the  inspection  of  the  annexed  woodcut,  taken  from
a  small  bronze,  representing  a  Roman  lady'  who
wears  an  inner  and  an  outer  tunic,  the  latter  being
fringed,  and  over  these  a  large  shawl  or  pallium.


Fiscas


537


Among  barbarous  nations  the  amictus  was  often
worn  by  men  with  a  fringe,  as  is  seen  very  con-
spicuously in  the  group  of  Sarmatians  at  p.  213
By  crossing  the  bundles  of  thrums,  and  tying
them  at  the  points  of  intersection,  a  kind  of  net-
work was  produced,  and  we  are  informed  of  a
fringe  of  this  description,  which  was,  moreover,
himg  with  bells.  (Diod.  xviii.  26.)  The  ancients
also  manufactured  fringes  separately,  and  sewed
them  to  the  borders  of  their  gannenta.     They  were


likewise  made  of  gold  thread  and  other  costly-
materials.  Of  this  kind  was  the  ornament,  con-
sisting of  a  hundred  golden  tassels,  which  sur-
rounded the  mythical  shield  of  Jupiter,  the  alyis
bv(Tav6iacTa,  and  which  depended  from  the  girdle
of  Juno.  (Horn.  II.  ii.  448,  v.  738,  xiv.  181,
xvii.  593.)

In  consequence  of  the  tendency  of  wool  to  form
itself  into  separate  bundles  like  tassels  {^vaavriShv^
Aelian,  //.  A.  xvi.  11),  the  poets  speak  of  the
golden  fleece  as  consisting  of  them  (Find.  Pyth.  iv.
411;  ApoU.  Rhod.  iv.  1146)  ;  and  Cicero,  declaim-
ing against  the  eiTeminacy  of  Gabinius,  applies  the
same  expression  to  his  curling  locks  of  hair  (in
Pis.U).  [J.  Y.]

FINITO'RES.     [Agrimensores.]

FFNIUM  REGUNDO'RUM  ACTIO.  If  the
boundaries  of  contiguous  estates  were  accidentally
confused,  each  of  the  parties  interested  in  the  re-
establishment  of  the  boundaries  might  have  an
action  against  the  other  for  that  purpose.  This
action  belonged  to  the  class  of  duplicia  judicia.
[Familiae  Erciscundae  Actio.]  In  this  action
each  party  was  bound  to  account  for  the  fruits  and
profits  which  he  had  received  from  any  part  of  the
land  which  did  not  belong  to  him,  and  also  to
account  for  any  injury  which  it  had  sustained
through  his  culpa.  Each  party  was  also  entitled
to  compensation  for  improvements  made  in  the  por-
tion of  land  which  did  not  belong  to  him.  ( Dig.  1 0.
tit.  1.)  There  is  an  article  entitled  '  Ueber  die
Granzscheidungsklage '  by  Rudorff  in  the  Zeit-
schrift  fur  Geschichtliche  Rechtswissenschaft^  vol.  x.
[Ager.]  [G.  L.]

FISCA'LES.     [Gladiatores.]

FISCUS.  The  following  is  Savigny's  account
of  the  origin  and  meaning  of  this  term :  —

In  the  republican  period,  the  state  was  desig-
nated by  the  term  Aerarium,  in  so  far  as  it  was
viewed  with  respect  to  its  having  property,  which
ultimately  resolved  itself  into  receipts  into,  and
payments  made  out  of,  the  public  chest.  On  the
establishment  of  the  imperial  power,  there  was  a
division  of  the  provinces  between  the  senate,  as
the  representative  of  the  old  republic,  and  the
Caesar ;  and  there  was  consequently  a  division  of
the  most  important  branches  of  public  income  and
expenditure.  The  property  of  the  senate  retained
the  name  of  Aerarium,  and  that  of  the  Caesar,  as
such,  received  the  name  of  Fiscus.  The  private
property  of  the  Caesar  {res  privata  Prijidpis^  ratio
Caesaris)  was  quite  distinct  from  that  of  the  Fiscus.
The  word  Fiscus  signified  a  wicker-basket,  or  pan-
nier, in  which  the  Romans  were  accustomed  to
keep  and  carry  about  large  sums  of  money  (Cic.
Verr.  i.  8  ;  Phaedr.  Fab.  ii.  7)  ;  and  hence  Fis-
cus came  to  signify  any  person's  treasure  or  money
chest.  The  importance  of  the  imperial  Fiscus  soon
led  to  the  practice  of  appropriating  the  name  to
that  property  which  the  Caesar  claimed  as  Caesar,
and  the  word  Fiscus,  without  any  adjunct,  was
used  in  this  sense  (res  fisci  est,  Juv.  Sat.  iv.  54).
Ultimately  the  word  came  to  signify  generally  the
property  of  the  state,  the  Caesar  having  concen-
trated in  himself  all  the  sovereign  power,  and  thus
the  word  Fiscus  finally  had  the  same  signification
as  Aerarium  in  the  republican  period.  It  does  not
appear  at  what  time  the  Aerarium  was  merged  in
the  Fiscus,  though  the  distinction  of  name  and  of
thing  continued  at  least  to  the  time  of  Hadrian.
In  the  later  periods  the  words  Aerarium  and  Fis-


£38


FISTUCA.


cus  were  often  used  indiscriminate]3%  but  only  in
the  sense  of  the  imperial  chest,  for  there  was  then
no  other  public  chest.  So  long  as  the  distinction
existed  between  the  aerarium  and  the  fiscus,  the
law  relating  to  them  severally  might  be  expressed
by  the  terms  jus  populi  and  jus  fisci,  as  in  Paulus
(Sent.  Recept.  v.  12),  though  there  is  no  reason  for
applying  the  distinction  to  the  time  when  Paulus
wrote  ;  for,  as  already  observed,  it  had  then  long
ceased.

The  Fiscus  had  a  legal  personal  existence  ;  that
is,  as  the  subject  of  certain  rights,  it  was  legally  a
person,  by  virtue  of  the  same  fiction  of  law  which
gave  a  personal  existence  to  corporations,  and  the
communities  of  cities  and  villages.  But  the  Fiscus
differed  in  many  respects  from  other  persons  exist-
ing by  fiction  of  law ;  and,  as  an  instance,  it  was
never  under  any  incapacity  as  to  taking  an  here-
ditas,  which,  for  a  long  time,  was  the  case  with
corporations,  for  the  reason  given  by  Ulpian.  [Col-
legium]. These  reasons  would  also  apply  to  the
Populus,  as  well  as  to  a  Municipium,  and  yet  the
populus  is  never  alluded  to  as  being  under  such
disability ;  and  in  fact  it  could  not,  consistently
with  being  the  source  of  all  rights,  be  under  any
legal  disabilities.

Various  officers,  as  Procuratores,  Advocati  [Ad-
VOCATUS],  Patroni,  and  Praefecti  were  employed
in  the  administration  of  the  Fiscus.  Nerva  esta-
blished a  Praetor  Fiscalis  to  administer  the  law  in
matters  relating  to  the  Fiscus.  The  patrimonium
or  private  property  of  the  Caesar  was  administered
by  Procuratores  Caesaris.  The  privileges  of  the
Fiscus  were,  however,  extended  to  the  private
property  (ratio)  of  the  Caesar,  and  of  his  wife  the
Augusta.  (Dig.  49.  tit.  14.  s.  6.)

Property  was  acquired  by  the  Fiscus  in  various
ways,  enumerated  in  the  Digest  (49.  tit.  14.  s.  1),
many  of  which  may  be  arranged  under  the  head
of  penalties  and  forfeitures.  Thus,  if  a  man  was
led  to  commit  suicide  in  consequence  of  having
done  some  criminal  act  (Jlagitium),  or  if  a  man
made  counterfeit  coin,  his  property  was  forfeited  to
the  fiscus.  (Paulus,  ^.  /?.  v.  12.)  The  officers  of  the
Fiscus  generally  received  information  (nunciationes)
of  such  occurrences  from  private  individuals,  who
were  rewarded  for  their  pains.  Treasure  (thesaurus)
which  was  found  in  certain  places  was  also  subject
to  a  claim  on  the  part  of  the  Fiscus.  To  explain
the  rights  and  privileges  of  the  Fiscus,  and  its  ad-
ministrations, would  require  a  long  discussion.  (Dig.
49.  tit.  15.  da  Jure  Fisci;  Cod.  10.  tit.  1  ;  Cod.
Theod.  10.  tit.  1  ;  Paulus,  Sent.  Recept.  v.  12;
Savigny,  System  des  heut.  Rom.  R.  vol.  ii. ;  Fragmen-
tum  veteris  juris-consulti  de  Jure  Fisci,  printed  in
Goeschen's  edition  of  Gains  ;  Savigny,  Neu  entdeckte
Quellen  des  Rom.  i?.,  Zeitschrift,  vol.  iii.)    [G.  L.]

FISTU'CA,  jin  instrument  used  for  ramming
down  pavements  and  threshing  floors,  and  the
foundations  of  buildings  (Cato, /?. /e.  18,  28  ;  Plin.
H.N.  xxxvi.  25.  s.  61  ;  Vitruv.  iii.  3.  s.  4.  §  1,  x.
3.  8.  2.  §  3)  ;  and  also  for  driving  piles  (Caes.
B.  G.  iv.  17).  When  used  for  the  former  purpose,
that  of  making  earth  solid,  it  was  no  doubt  a  mere
log  of  wood  (shod  perhaps  with  iron),  with  handles
to  lift  it  up  ;  just  like  a  paviour's  rammer.  But
in  the  case  cited  from  Caesar,  where  it  was  used
for  driving  the  piles  of  his  bridge  over  the  Rhine,
it  is  almost  evident  that  it  must  have  been  a  ma-
chine, something  like  our  pile-driving  engine  (or
monkey),  by  which   a  heavy  log  of  wood,  shod


FISTULA.

with  iron,  was  lifted  up  to  a  considerable  iieigbt
and  then  let  fall  on  the  head  of  the  pile.     [P.  S.]

FI'STULA  ((TaX'i]v\  a  water-pipe.  Vitruvius
(viii.  7.  s.  6".  §.  1,  ed.  Schn.)  distinguishes  three
modes  of  conveying  Avater  :  by  channels  of  masonry
(per  canales  structiles),  by  leaden  pipes  (fstulis
plumbeis),  and  by  earthen  pipes  (tuhulis  jietiiibus)  ;
but  of  these  two  sorts  of  pipes  the  leaden  were  the
more  commonly  used.*  [Aquaeductus,]  They
were  made  by  bending  up  cast  plates  of  lead  hito  a
form  not  perfectly  cylindrical,  but  having  a  sort  of
ridge  at  the  junction  of  the  edges  of  the  plate,  as
represented  in  the  folloAving  engraving,  taken  from
antique  specimens.  (Frontin.  de  Aquaed.  p.  73.
fig.  15, 16,  ed.  Polen.  ;  Hirt,  Lehre  d.  Geb'dude,  pL
xxxii.  fig.  8.)


f     i)


1


In  the  manufacture  of  these  pipes,  particular  at-
tention was  paid  to  the  bore,  and  to  the  thickness.
The  accounts  of  Vitruvius,  Frontinus,  and  other
writers,  are  not  in  perfect  accordance  ;  but  it  ap-
pears, from  a  comparison  of  them,  that  two  different
systems  of  measurement  were  adopted,  namely,
either  by  the  width  of  the  plate  of  lead  (lamina  or
lamna)  before  it  was  bent  into  the  shape  of  a  pipe,
or  by  the  internal  diameter  or  bore  (lumen)  of  the
pipe  when  formed.  The  former  is  the  system
adopted  by  Vitmvius  (I.  c.  §  4)  ;  according  to  him
the  leaden  plates  were  cast  of  a  length  not  less  than
ten  feet,  and  of  a  width  containing  an  exact  number
of  digits  (sixteenths  of  a  foot),  which  number  was  of
course  different  for  different  sized  pipes  ;  and  then
the  sizes  of  the  pipes  were  named  from  the  number
of  digits  in  the  width  of  the  plates,  as  in  the  fol-
lowing table,  where  the  numbers  on  the  right  hand
indicate  the  number  of  pounds  which  Vitruvius  as-
signs to  each  ten-feet  length  of  pipe  :  —

Centenaria,  from  a  plate  1 00  digits  wide  :  1 200   lbs.
Octogenaria       —  80         —         :    960   —

Quinquagenaria —  50         —         :    600   — .

*  The  etj^mologieal  distinction  between  fistula
and  tubus  seems  to  be  that  the  fomier,  which  ori-
ginally signified  a  flute,  was  a  small  pipe,  the  latter
a  large  one  ;  but,  in  usage,  at  least  so  far  as  water-
pipes  are  concerned,  it  seems  that  j^i-^z^a  is  applied
to  a  leaden  pipe,  tulnis  and  tulmlus  to  one  of  any
other  material,  especially  of  terra-cotta,  as  in  the
above  and  the  following  passages.  (Varro,  R.  R.
i.  8  ;  Colum.  i.  5  ;  Plin.  v.  31.  s.  34,  xvi.  42.  s.
81,  XXXV.  12.  s.  46  ;  Frontinus,  see  below.)


FLABELLUM.

40


:    480   —

30

.

:    360   —

20

,

:    240   —

15


:    180   —

10


:    120   —

8


:      96*  —

5

—

:      60  —

►uadragcuiiria

'ricenaria

'icenaria

►uindena

)ena

►ctona

luinaria

'rom  tliis  scale  it  is  evident,  at  a  mere  glance,  that

le  thickness  of  the  plates  was  the  same  for  pipes  of

II  sizes,  nameh',  such  that  each  strip  of  lead,  ten

;et  long  and  one  digit  wide,  weighed  twelve  pounds.

'he  account  of  Vitruvius  is    followed   by  Pliny

II.  N.  xxxi.  6.  s.  31 )  and  Palladius  (ix.  12  :  comp.

le  notes  of  Schneider  and  Gesner).

Frontinus,  who  enters  into  the  subject  much  more
linutely,  objects  to  the  system  of  Vitruvius  as  too
idefinite,  on  account  of  the  variation  which  is
lade  in  the  shape  of  the  pipe  in  bending  up  the
late  of  le<ui  ;  and  he  thinks  it  more  probable  that
he  names  were  derived  from  the  length  of  the  in-
3rnal  diameters,  reckoned  in  quadrantes  (the  unit
eing  the  digit),  that  is,  in  quarters  of  a  digit ;
3  that  the  Qtdnaria  had  a  diameter  of  five  fourths
f  a  digit,  or  1^  digit,  and  so  on,  up  to  the  Vicenaria,
bove  which  the  notation  was  altered,  and  the  names
^ere  no  longer  taken  from  the  number  of  linear
iiarters  of  a  digit  in  the  diameter  of  the  pipe,  but
rom  the  number  of  square  quarters  of  a  digit  in  its
rea,  and  this  system  prevailed  up  to  the  Centuin-
icena,  which  was  the  largest  size  in  use,  as  the
luinaria  was  the  smallest :  the  latter  is  adopted
ly  Frontinus  as  the  standard  measure  (modulus)  of
he  whole  system.  (For  further  details  see  Fron-
inus,  de  Jquaed.  20—63,  pp.  70—112,  wkh  the
^otes  of  Polenus.)  Another  mode  of  explaining
he  nomenclature  was  by  the  story  that  when
\^grippa  undertook  the  oversight  of  the  aquaeducts,
inding  the  modulus  inconveniently  small,  he  en-
arged  it  Xo  fire  times  its  diameter,  and  hence  the
irigiu  oit\ie  fistula  quinaria.  (Frontin.  25,  pp.  80,
il.)  Of  these  accounts  that  of  Vitruvius  appears
It  once  the  most  simple  and  the  most  correct :  in-
iced  it  would  seem  that  the  plan  of  measurement
ivas  very  probably  the  invention  of  Vitruvius  him-
self. (Frontin.  l.  c.)  Respecting  the  uses  of  pipes
in  the  aqueducts,  see  Aquaeductus.

Of  the  earthen  (terra-cotta)  pipes  we  know  very
little.  Pliny  says  that  they  are  best  when  their
thickness  is  two  digits  (1^  inch),  and  that  each
pipe  should  have  its  end  inserted  in  the  next,  and
the  joints  should  be  cemented  ;  but  that  leaden
pipes  should  be  used  where  the  water  rises.  The
earthen  pipes  were  thought  more  wholesome  than
the  leaden.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxi.  6.  s.  31  ;  Vitruv.
?.  c.  §  10  ;  Pallad.  ix.  11.)  Water  pipes  were  also
made  of  leather  (Plin.  H.N.  v.  31.  s.  34  ;  Vitruv.
I.  c.  §  8)  ;  and  of  wood  (Pallad.  I.  c),  especially  of
the  hollowed  trunks  of  the  pine,  fir,  and  alder.
(Plin.  //.  N.  xvi.  42.  8.  81.)  [P.  S.]

FLABELLUM,  dim.  FLABELLULUM,
(^tTTi's,  ^tTTto-T^p,  dim.  ^tTriSto^),  a  fan.  "  The  ex-
ercise of  the  fan,"  so  wittily  described  by  Addison
{Sped.  No.  102),  was  wholly  unknown  to  the
ancients.     Neither  were  their  fans  so  constructed


*  Pliny  and  Palladius,  and  even  the  ancient
MSS.  of  Vitruvius,  give  here  C,  which,  however,  is
clearly  an  error  of  a  transcriber  who  did  not  perceive
the  law  of  the  proportion,  but  who  had  a  fancy  for
the  round  number.


FLAGRUM.  539

that  they  might  be  furled,  unfurled,  and  fluttered,
nor  were  they  even  carried  by  the  ladies  themselves.
They  were,  it  is  true,  of  elegant  foraas,  of  delicate
coloiu-s  [prasino  flahello.  Mart,  iii.  40),  and  some-
times of  costly  and  splendid  materials,  such  as  pea-
cock's feathers  (Propert.  ii.  15)  ;  but  they  were
stiff  and  of  a  fixed  shape,  and  were  held  by  female
slaves  {fiabelliferae^  Philemon,  as  translated  by
Plaut.  Trin.  ii.  1.  22),  by  beautiful  boys  (Strato,
Epig.  22),  or  by  eunuchs  (Eurip.  Orest.  1408 —
1412  ;  Menander,  p.  175,  ed.  Meineke  ;  and  as
translated  by  Terence,  Eun.  iii.  5.  45 — 54),  whose
duty  it  was  to  wave  them  so  as  to  produce  a  cool-
ing breeze.  (Brunck,  Anal.  ii.  92.)  A  gentleman
might,  nevertheless,  take  the  fan  into  his  own
hand  and  use  it  in  fanning  a  lady  as  a  compliment.
(Ovid,  ^rs  Am.  i.  161,  Amor.  iii.  2.  38.)  The
woodcut  at  p.  257  shows  a  female  bestowing  this
attendance  upon  her  mistress.  The  fan  which  she
holds  is  apparently  made  of  separate  feathers  joined
at  the  base,  and  also  united  both  by  a  thread  pass-
ing along  the  tips  and  by  another  stronger  thread
tied  to  the  middle  of  the  shaft  of  each  feather.
Another  use  of  the  fan  was  to  drive  away  flies
from  living  persons,  and  from  articles  of  food
which  were  either  placed  upon  the  table  or  offered
in  sacrifice.  When  intended  for  a  fly-flapper  it
was  less  stiff,  and  was  called  muscarium  (Mart.  xiv.
67),  and  fivioaSSr]  (Menander,  p.  175  ;  Aelian,
H.  A.xv.  14  ;  Brunck,  Avm/.  ii.  388,  iii.  92).  In
short,  the  manner  of  using  fans  was  precisely  that
which  is  still  practised  in  China,  India,  and  other
parts  of  the  East ;  and  Euripides  (1.  c.)  says  that
the  Greeks  derived  their  knowledge  of  them  from
"  barbarous "  countries.  The  emperor  Augustus
had  a  slave  to  fan  him  during  his  sleep  (Sueton.
Aug.  82)  ;  for  the  use  of  fans  was  not  confined  to
females.

Besides  separate  feathers  the  ancient  fan  was
sometimes  made  of  linen,  extended  upon  a  light
frame.  (Strato,  I.  c.)  From  the  above-cited  pas-
sage of  Euripides  and  the  ancient  Scholia  upon  it,
compared  with  representations  of  the  flabellum  in
ancient  paintings,  it  also  appears  to  have  been
made  by  placing  the  two  wings  of  a  bird  back  to
back,  fastening  them  together  in  this  position,  and
attaching  a  handle  at  the  base.  (See  also  Brunck,
Anal.  ii.  258,  Unpivav  piTrtSa.)

A  more  homely  application  of  the  fan  was  its  use
in  cookery  [Focus].  In  a  painting  which  repre-
sents a  sacrifice  to  Isis  (Ant.  d''  Ercolano,  ii.  60),  a
priest  is  seen  fanning  the  fire  upon  the  altar  with
a  triangular  flabellum,  such  as  is  still  used  in  Italy.
This  practice  gave  origin  among  classical  writers  to
expressions  corresponding  to  ours,  meaning  to  fan
the  flame  of  hope  (Alciph.  iii.  47),  of  love  (piiriC^iv,
Brunck,  ii.  306),  or  of  sedition  (Aristoph.  Ban.
360  ;  Cic.  pro  Place.  23).  [J.  Y.]

FLAGRUM,  dim.  FLAGELLUM  (AtocrTtI),
a  whip,  a  scourge,  to  the  handle  of  which  was
fixed  a  lash  made  of  cords  (finibus.  Hot.  Epod.
iv.  3  ;  John,  ii.  15),  or  thongs  of  leather  (fom,
Hor.  Epist.  i.  1  6.  47  ;  tr/cuTiVa,  Anac.  p.  357,  ed.
Fischer),  especially  thongs  made  from  the  ox's
hide  (bubulis  eomvii's^  Plaut.  Most.  iv.  1.  26).  The
fiagellum  properly  so  called  was  a  dreadful  instru-
ment, and  is  thus  put  in  opposition  to  the  scutica^
which  was  a  simple  whip.  (Hor.  Sat.  i.  3.  119.)
Cicero  in  like  manner  contrasts  the  severe  fiageUa
with  the  virgae  ( pro  Rahir.  4).  The  flagellura
was  chiefly  used  in  the  punishment  of  slaves.     It


MO


FLAMEN.


was  knotted  with  bones  or  lieavy  indented  circles
of  bronze  or  terminated  by  hooks,  in  which  case  it
was  aptly  denominated  a  scorpion.  The  cut  below
represents  a  scourge  taken  from  a  bas-relief  of  the
statue  of  Cybele  in  the  Museum  of  the  Capitol  at
Rome,  and  fully  justifies  the  epithet  of  Horace
(l.  c.)^Jiorrihile  flagellum.  The  infliction  of  punish-
ment with  it  upon  the  naked  back  of  the  sufferer
(Juv.  vi.  382)  was  sometimes  fatal  (Hor.  Sat.  i.
2.  41),  and  was  carried  into  execution  by  a  class
of  persons,  themselves  slaves,  who  were  called
lorarii.  A  slave  who  had  been  flogged  was  called
Jlagrio  (fxaa-riyias,  Philemon,  p.  415.  ed.  Mein.  ;
Aristoph.  Ran.  502,  Equit.  1225,  Lr/s.  1242  ;
mastiffia,  Plautus,  passim;  Ter.  Adelph.  v.  2.  6),
which  of  course  became  a  term  of  mockery  and
contempt.  During  the  Saturnalia  the  scourge  was
deposited  under  the  seal  of  the  master.  We  like-
wise find  that  some  gladiators  fought  with  the
flagella  (Tertull.  Apol.  21),  as  in  the  coin  here
introduced.  The  flagellum  here  has  two  lashes.
(Seealsocut,  p.  101.)  [J.  Y.]


FLAMP3N,    the    name    for  any  Roman  priest
who  was  devoted  to  the  service  of  one  particular

god  (DiVlSQUE  ALUS  ALII  SACERDOTES,  OMNIBUS
PONTIFICES,  SINGULIS  FLAMINES  SUNTO,    Cic.  De

Leg.  ii.  8),  and  who  received  a  distinguishing
epithet  from  the  deity  to  whom  he  ministered.
{Horum.,  sc.  flaminum,  singuli  cognomina  hahent
ab  eo  dec  qnoi  sacra  faciunt^  Varro,  De  Ling.  Lat.
v.  84.)  The  most  dignified  were  those  attached
to  Diiovis,  Mars,  and  Quirinus,  the  Flamen  Dialis,
Flamcn  Martialis,  and  Flamen  Quirinalis.  The
two  first  are  said  by  Plutarch  (Num.  c.  7)  to  have
been  established  by  Romulus  ;  but  the  greater  num-
ber of  authorities  agree  in  referring  the  institution
of  the  whole  three,  in  common  with  all  other
matters  connected  with  state  religion,  to  Numa.
(Li v.  i.  20  ;  Dionys.  ii.  64.  &c.)  The  number  was
eventually  increased  to  fifteen  (Fest.  s.  v.  Maximae
dignationis) :  the  three  original  flamens  were  always
chosen  from  among  the  patricians,  and  styled
Majores  (Gaius,  i.  1 12)  ;  the  rest  from  the  plebeians,
with  the  epithet  Minores  (Fest.  Majores  FlaminesX
Two  rude  lines  of  Ennius  (Varro,  de  Ling.  Lat.  vii.
44)  preserve  the  names  of  six  of  these,  appointed,
says  the  poet,  by  Numa, —

Voltumalcm,  Palatualem,  Furinalem,
Florakmque,  Falacrem  et  Pomonalem  fecit
Hie  idem

to  which  we  may  add  the  Flamen  Volcanalis
(Varro,  De  TJng.  Lat.  v.  84),  and  the  Flamen
Carmenialis  (Cic.  Brut.  14).  We  find  in  books  of
antiquities  mention  made  of  the  Virhialis,  Lauren-
tmliSf  Lavinalis,  and  Lmullaris,  which  would  coni-


FLAMEN.

plete  the  list ;  but  there  is  nothing  to  prove  that
these  four  were  Roman  and  not  merely  provincial
priests.

It  is  generally  stated,  upon  the  authority  of
Aulus  Gellius  (xv.  27),  that  the  flamens  were
elected  at  the  Comitia  Curiata,  and  this  was  doubt-
less the  case  in  the  earlier  times  ;  but  upon  ex-
amining the  passage  in  question,  it  will  be  seen
that  the  grammarian  speaks  of  their  induc-
tion into  office  only,  and  therefore  we  may  con-
clude that  subsequently  to  the  passing  of  the  Leje
Domitia  they  were  chosen  in  the  Comitia  Tributa,
especially  since  so  many  of  them  were  plebeians.
After  being  nominated  by  the  people,  they  were
received  (capti)  and  installed  (inaiigurabantur)  by
the  Pontifex  Maximus  (Liv.  xxvii.  8,  xxix.  38  ;
Val.  Max.  vi.  9.  §  3),  to  whose  authority  they  were
at  all  times  subject.  (Liv.  Epit.  xix.,  xxxvii.  51  ;
Val.  Max.  i.  1.  §  2.)

The  office  was  understood  to  last  for  life  ;  but  a
flamen  might  be  compelled  to  resign  {JUxminio
ubire)  for  a  breach  of  duty,  or  even  on  account  of
the  occurrence  of  an  ill-omened  accident  while  dis-
charging his  functions.     (Val.  Max.  i.  1.  §  4.)

Their  characteristic  dress  was  the  apex  [Apex],
the  laena  [Laena],  and  a  laurel  wreath.  The
name,  according  to  Varro  and  Festus,  was  derived
from  the  band  of  white  wool  {filum^  filamen,fia-
raen)  which  was  wrapped  round  the  apex,  and
which  they  wore,  without  the  apex,  when  the  heat
was  oppressiA^e.  (Serv.  Virg.  A  en.  y\n.  664.)  This
etymology  is  more  reasonable  than  the  transfonna-
tion  of  pilearnities  (from  pileus)  mioflamines.  (Plu-
tarch, Num,  7.)  The  most  distinguished  of  all  the
flamens  was  the  Dialis ;  the  lowest  in  rank  the
Pomonalis.     (Festus,  .<?.  v.  Maximae  dignationis.)

The  former  enjoyed  many  peculiar  honours.
When  a  vacancy  occurred,  three  persons  of  patri-
cian descent,  whose  parents  had  been  married  ac-
cording to  the  ceremonies  of  confarrealio  [Mak-
riage],  were  nominated  by  the  Comitia,  one  of
whom  was  selected  (captus)^  and  consecrated  (i?i-
angurabatur)  by  the  Pontifex  Maximus.  (Tacit.
Ann.  iv.  16  ;  Liv.  xxvii.  8.)  From  that  time  for-
ward he  was  emancipated  from  the  control  of  his
father,  and  became  sui  juris.  (Gaius,  i.  130  ;  Ulpian,
Frag.  X.  5;  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  16.)  He  alone  of  all
priests  wore  the  albogalerus  [Apex]  (Varro,  ap.
Gell.  X.  15);  he  had  a  right  to  a  lictor  (Plut.
Q.  R.  p.  119,  ed.  Reiske),  to  the  toga  praetexia,
the  sella  curulis,  and  to  a  seat  in  the  senate  in
virtue  of  his  office.  This  last  privilege,  after  having
been  suffered  to  fall  into  disuse  for  a  long  period,
was  asserted  by  C.  Valerius  Flaccus  (b.  c.  209),
and  the  claim  allowed,  more,  however,  says  Livy,
in  deference  to  his  high  personal  character  thau
from  a  conviction  of  the  justice  of  the  demand.
( Liv.  xxvii.  8 ;  compare  i.  20.)  The  Rex  Sacrificu-
lus  alone  was  entitled  to  recline  above  him  at  a
banquet :  if  one  in  bonds  took  refuge  in  his  house,
the  chains  were  immediately  struck  off  and  con-
veyed through  the  impluvium  to  the  roof,  and
thence  cast  down  into  the  street  (Aul.  Gell.  x.  15):
if  a  criminal  on  his  way  to  punishment  met  him,
and  fell  suppliant  at  his  feet,  he  was  respited  fM*
that  day  (Aul.  Gell.  x.]5x  Plut.  Q.  R.  p.  166)  ;
usages  which  remind  us  of  the  right  of  sanctuary
attached  to  the  persons  and  dwellings  of  the  papal
cardinals.

To  counterbalance  these  high  honours,  the  Dialis
was  subjected  to  a  multitude  of  restrictions  and


FLAMEN.

privations,  a  long  cotalogue  of  which  lias  been  com-
piled by  Aulas  Gellius  (x,  15)  from  the  works  of
Fabius  Pictor  and  Masnrius  Sabinus,  while  Plu-
tarch, in  his  Roman  Questions,  endeavours  to
explain  their  import.  Among  these  were  the  fol-
lowing :  —

It  was  unlawful  for  him  to  be  out  of  the  city  for
a  single  night  (Liv.  v.  52)  ;  a  regulation  which
seems  to  have  been  modified  by  Augustus,  in  so
far  that  an  absence  of  two  nights  was  permitted
(Tacit.  Ami.  iii.  58.  71) ;  and  he  was  forljidden  to
sleep  out  of  his  own  bed  for  three  nights  consecu-
tively. Thus,  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  under-
take the  government  of  a  province.  He  might  not
mount  upon  horseback,  nor  even  touch  a  horse,  nor
look  upon  an  army  marshalled  without  the  pomoe-
xiuni,  and  hence  was  seldom  elected  to  the  consul-
ship. Indeed,  it  would  seem  that  originally  he  was
altogether  precluded  from  seeking  or  accepting  any
civil  magistracy  (Plut.  Q.  R.  p.  169)  ;  but  this  last
prohibition  was  certainly  not  enforced  in  later
times.  The  object  of  the  above  rules  was  mani-
festly to  make  him  literally  Jovi  adsiduum  sacer-
dotem  ;  to  compel  constant  attention  to  the  duties  of
the  priesthood  ;  to  leave  him  in  a  great  measure
without  any  temptation  to  neglect  them.  The
origin  of  the  superstitions  which  we  shall  next
enumerate  is  not  so  clear,  but  the  curious  will  find
abundance  of  speculation  in  Plutarch  {Q.  R.  pp.  1 14,
118,  1G4 — 170),  Festus  (s.  v.  Edera  and  Equo),
and  Plhiy  {ff.  N.  xviii.  30,  xxviii.  40).  He  was
not  allowed  to  swear  an  oath  (Liv.  xxxi.  50),  nor
to  wear  a  ring  "  nisi  pervio  et  casso,''''  that  is,  as
the)'-  explain  it,  unless  plain  and  without  stones
(Kirchmann,  De  Annulis^  p.  14)  ;  nor  to  strip
himself  naked  in  the  open  air,  nor  to  go  out  without
his  proper  head-dress,  nor  to  have  a  knot  in  any
part  of  his  attire,  nor  to  walk  along  a  path  over-
canopied  by  vines.  He  might  not  touch  flour,  nor
leaven,  nor  leavened  bread,  nor  a  dead  body  :  he
might  not  enter  a  bustum  [Fun us],  but  was  not
prevented  from  attending  a  funeral.  He  was  for-
bidden either  to  touch  or  to  name  a  dog,  a  she-
goat,  ivy,  beans,  or  raw  flesh.  None  but  a  free
man  might  cut  his  hair  ;  the  clippings  of  which,
together  Avith  the  parings  of  his  nails,  were  buried
beneath  ■A/e/ix  arbor.  No  one  might  sleep  in  his
bed,  the  legs  of  which  were  smeared  with  fine
clay  ;  and  it  was  unlawful  to  place  a  box  con-
taining sacrificial  cakes  in  contact  with  the  bed-
stead.

Fluminiea  was  the  name  given  to  the  wife  of  the
dialis.  He  was  required  to  wed  a  virgni  accord-
ing to  the  ceremonies  of  con/htreatio^  which  regu-
lation also  applied  to  the  two  other  flamines
majores  (Serv.  ad  Virg.  Aen.  iv.  104,  374  ;
Gains,  i.  112)  ;  and  he  could  not  many  a  second
time.  Hence,  since  her  assistance  was  essential
in  the  performance  of  certain  ordinances,  a  divorce
was  not  permitted,  and  if  she  died  the  dialis  was
obliged  to  resign.  The  restrictions  imposed  upon
the  flaminica  were  similar  to  those  by  which  her
husband  was  fettered.  (Aul.  Gell.  x'  15.)  Her
dress  consisted  of  a  dyed  robe  {venenato  operitur)  ;
her  hair  was  plaited  up  with  a  purple  band  in  a
conical  form  (tutulus)  ;  and  she  wore  a  small
square  cloak  with  a  border  (rica).,  to  which  was
attached  a  slip  cut  from  a  /klix  arbor.  (Fest.
8.  V.  Tutulum,  Rica;  V.arro,  De  Ling.  Lot.  vii.  44.)
It  is  difficult  to  determine  what  the  rica  really
was  ;  whether  a  short  cloak,  as  appears  most  pro-


FLORALIA.  541

bable,  or  a  napkin  thrown  over  the  head.  She
was  prohibited  from  mounting  a  staircase  consist-
ing of  more  than  three  steps  (the  text  of  Aulus
Gellius  is  uncertain,  but  the  object  must  have  been
to  prevent  her  ancles  from  being  seen)  ;  and  when
she  went  to  the  argei  [Argei]  she  neither  combed
nor  arranged  her  hair.  On  each  of  the  nundinae
a  ram  was  sacrificed  to  Jupiter  in  the  regia  by  the
flaminica.     (Macrob.  i.  16.)

After  the  death  of  the  flamen  Morula,  who  was
chosen  consul  suffectus  on  the  expulsion  of  Cinna
(Veil.  Pat.  ii.  20  ;  Val.  Max.  ix.  12.  §  5),  and  who,
upon  the  restoration  of  the  Marian  faction,  shed  his
own  blood  in  the  sanctuary  (b.  c.  87),  calling
down  curses  on  his  enemies  with  his  dying  breath
(Veil.  Pat.  ii.  22),  the  priesthood  remained  vacant
until  the  consecration  of  Servius  Maluginensia
(b.  c.  11)  by  Augustus,  then  Pontifex  Maximus.
Julius  Caesar  had  indeed  been  nominated  in  his
17th  3'ear,  but  was  never  installed  ;  and  during  the
whole  of  the  above  period  the  duties  of  the  office
were  discharged  by  the  Pontifex  Maximus.  (Suet.
Jul.  c.  1,  compared  with  Veil.  Pat.  ii.  43,  and  the
Commentators.  See  also  Suet.  Octav.  31  ;  Dion
Cass.  liv.  36  ;  Tacit.  Ann.  iii.  58.  The  last  quoted
historian,  if  the  text  be  correct,  states  the  interrup-
tion lasted  for  72  years  only.)

The  municipal  towns  also  had  their  flamens.
Thus  the  celebrated  afl'ray  betAveen  Milo  and
Clodius  took  place  while  the  former  was  on  his  way
to  Lanuvium,  of  which  he  was  then  dictator,  to
declare  the  election  of  a  flamen  (ad  Jlaminem  pro-
dendum).  After  the  deification  of  the  emperors,
flamens  were  appointed  to  superintend  their  wor-
ship in  Rome  and  in  all  the  provinces  ;  and  we  find
constantly  in  inscriptions  such  titles  as  Flamen
AuGUSTALis ;  Flamen  Tiberii  Caesaris  ;  P'la-
MEN  D.  JuLii,  &c.,  and  sometimes  Flamen  Di-
vorum  Omnium  (sc.  imperatorum).

Flaminia^  according  to  Festus  and  Aulus  Gel-
lius (x.  15),  was  the  house  of  the  Flamen  Dialis,
from  which  it  was  unlawful  to  carry  out  fire  except
for  sacred  purposes.

Flaminia.,  according  to  Festus,  was  also  a  name
given  to  a  little  priestess  {sacerdotula),  who  assisted
the  Jlaminica  in  her  duties.  [  W.  R.j

FLA'MMEUM.     [Matrimonium.J

FLEXU'MINES.     [Equites.]

FLORA'LIA,  or  Florales  Ludi,  a  festival
which  was  celebrated  at  Rome  in  honour  of  Flora
or  Chloris.  It  was  solemnized  during  five  days,
beginning  on  the  28th  of  April  and  ending  on  the
2d  of  May.  (Ovid,  Fast.  v.  185;  Plin. //.  N.
xviii.  69.)  It  was  said  to  have  been  instituted  at
Rome  in  238  b.  c,  at  the  command  of  an  oracle
in  the  Sibylline  books,  for  the  purpose  of  obtain-
ing from  the  goddess  the  protection  of  the  blos-
soms (ut  om7iia  bene  dejlorescerent,  Plin.  I.  c. ;  com-
pare Veil.  Pat.  i.  14  ;  Varro,  De  Re  Rust.  i.  1).
Some  time  after  its  institution  at  Rome  its
celebration  was  discontinued  ;  but  in  the  consul-
ship of  L.  Postumius  Albinus  and  M.  Popilius
Laenas  (173  b.  c),  it  was  restored,  at  the  com-
mand of  the  senate,  by  the  aedile  C.  Servilius
(Eckhel,  De  Num.  Vet.  v.  p.  308  ;  compare  Ovid,
Fast.  v.  329,  &c.),  as  the  blossoms  in  that  year
had  severely  suff"ered  from  winds,  hail,  and  rain.
The  celebration  was,  as  usual,  conducted  by  the
aediles  (Cic.  inVerr.  v.  14  ;  Valer.  Max.  ii.  10.  §  8;
Eckhel,  I.  c),  and  was  carried  on  with  excessive
merriment,  drinking,  and  lascivious  games.  (Mart.


rrl2  FOCUS.

i.  3;  Seiiec.  Epist.  ^Q.)  From  Valerius  Maxiinus
Ave  learn  that  theatrical  and  mimic  representations
formed  a  principal  part  of  the  various  amusements,
and  that  it  was  customary  for  the  assembled  people
on  this  occasion  to  demand  the  female  actors  to
appear  naked  on  the  stage,  and  to  amuse  the
multitude  with  their  indecent  gestures  and  dances.
This  indecency  is  probably  the  only  ground  on
Avhich  the  absurd  story  of  its  origin,  related  by
Ijactantius  {Institut.  i.  20),  is  founded.  Similar
festivals,  chiefly  in  spring  and  autumn,  are  in
southern  countries  seasons  for  rejoicing,  and,  as  it
were,  called  forth  by  the  season  of  the  year  itself,
without  any  distinct  connection  with  any  particu-
lai"  divinity ;  they  are  to  this  day  very  popular  in
1  taly  ( Voss.  cul  Virg.  Georg.  ii.  ;385),  and  in  ancient
times  we  find  them  celebrated  from  the  southern  to
the  northern  extremity  of  Italy.  (See  Anthespho-
RIA,  and  Justin,  xliii.  4.)  The  Floralia  were
originally  festivals  of  the  country  people,  which
were  afterwards,  in  Italy  as  in  Greece,  introduced
into  the  towns,  where  they  naturally  assumed  a
more  dissolute  and  licentious  character,  while  the
country  people  continued  to  celebrate  them  in  their
old  and  merry  but  innocent  manner.  And  it  is
highly  probable  that  such  festivals  did  not  become
connected  with  the  worship  of  any  particular  deity
until  a  comparatively  late  period,  (Buttmann,
Mytholog.  ii.  p.  54.)  This  would  account  for  the
lute  introduction  of  the  Floralia  at  Rome,  as  well
as  for  the  manner  in  which  v/e  find  them  celebrated
there.  (See  Spanheim,  De  Praest.et  Usu  Numisni.
ii.  p.  145,  &c.)  [L.  S.]

FOCA'LE,  a  covering  for  the  ears  and  neck,
made  of  wool  and  worn  by  infirm  and  delicate
persons.  (Hor.  Sat.  ii.  3.  255  ;  Senec.  Qu.  Nat.
iv.  13;  Quintil.  xi.  3.  144;  Mart.  i.  121,  xiv.
142.)  [J.  Y.]

^  FOCUS,  dim.  FO'CULUS  (lo-rfa:  ^(Tx^pa,
eaxapis,  dim.  iax^p^ov),  a  fire-place  ;  a  hearth  ;  a
brazier.  The  fire-pl.ice,  considered  as  the  highest
member  of  an  altar,  is  described  under  Ara,  p.  116.
Used  by  itself,  it  possessed  the  same  sacred  cha-
racter, being,  among  the  Romans,  dedicated  to  the
Lares  of  each  familv.  (Plaut.  Aul.  ii.  8.  16  ;  Cato,
De  lie  Rust.  15  ;  Ovid,  Fast.  ii.  589,  61 1,  iii.  423;
J  uv.  xii.  85 — 95.)  It  was,  nevertheless,  made  sub-
servient to  all  the  requirements  of  ordinary  life.
(Hor.  Epod.  ii.  43,  Epist.  i.  5.  7  ;  Ovid,  Met.  viii.
673  ;  Sen.  De  Cons,  ad  Alh.  1.)  It  was  sometimes
tonstructed  of  stone  or  brick,  in  which  case  it  was
elevated  only  a  few  inches  above  the  ground,  and
remained  on  the  same  spot  ;  but  it  was  also  fre-
quently made  of  bronze,  and  it  was  then  variously
ornamented,  and  was  carried  continually  from  place
to  place.  This  movable-hejirth,  or  brazier,  was
properly  called/ocw/ws  and  iffxo-pa.  One  is  shown
at  p.  190.  Another,  found  at  Caere  in  Etruria,
und  preserved  in  the  British  Museum,  is  repre-
sented in  the  annexed  woodcut.


FOEDERATAE  CIVITATES.

In  accordance  with  the  sentiments  of  veneration
with  which  the  domestic  fire-place  was  regarded,
we  find  that  the  exercise  of  hospitality  was
at  the  same  time  an  act  of  religious  worship.
Suppliants,  strangers,  all  who  sought  for  mercy
and  favour,  had  recourse  to  the  domestic  hearth  as
to  an  altar.  (Hom.  Od.  vii.  153—169  ;  Apoll.
Rhod.  iv.  693.)  The  phrase  "  pro  aris  et  focis  "
was  used  to  express  attachment  to  all  that  was
most  dear  and  venerable.  (Cic.  de  Nat.  Dear.  iii.
40  ;  Flor.  iii.  13.)  Among  the  Romans  the  focus
was  placed  in  the  Atrium,  which,  in  primitive
times,  was  their  kitchen  and  dining-room.  (Virg.
Aen.  i.  726  ;  Servius,  ad  loc.)  There  it  remained,
as  we  see  in  numerous  examples  at  Pompeii,  even
after  the  progress  of  refinement  had  led  to  the  use
of  another  part  of  the  house  for  culinary  purposes.
On  festivals  the  house-wife  decorated  the  hearth
with  garlands  (Cato,  De  Re  Rust.  143  ;  Ovid,
I'rist.  V.  5.  1 0)  ;  a  woollen  fillet  was  sometimes
added.     (Propert.  iv.  6.  1—6).  [J.  Y.]

FOEDERA'TAE  CIVITA'TES,  foede-
RA'TI,  SO'CII.  In  the  seventh  century  of  Rome
these  names  expressed  those  Italian  states  which
were  connected  with  Rome  by  a  treaty  (foedus).
These  names  did  not  include  Roman  colonies  or
Latin  colonies,  or  any  place  which  had  obtained
the  Roman  civitas.  Among  the  foederati  were  the
Latiui,  who  were  the  most  nearly  related  to  the
Romans,  and  were  designated  by  this  distinctive
name ;  the  rest  of  the  foederati  Avere  comprised
under  the  name  of  Socii  or  Foederati.  They  were
independent  states,  yet  under  a  general  liability  to
furnish  a  contingent  to  the  Roman  anny.  Thus
they  contributed  to  increase  the  power  of  Rome,
but  they  had  not  the  privileges  of  Roman  citizens.
The  relations  of  any  particular  federate  state  to
Rome  might  have  some  peculiarities,  but  the  general
relation  was  that  expressed  above  ;  a  kind  of  con-
dition, inconsistent  with  the  sovereignty  of  the
federates,  and  the  first  stage  towards  unconditional
submission.  The  discontent  among  the  foederati,
and  their  claims  to  be  admitted  to  the  privileges  of
Roman  citizens,  led  to  the  Social  War.  The  Julia
Lex  (b.  c.  90)  gave  the  civitas  to  the  Socii  and
Latini ;  and  a  lex  of  the  following  year  contained,
among  other  provision?,  one  for  the  admission  to
the  Roman  civitas  of  those  peregrini  who  were
entered  on  the  lists  of  the  citizens  of  federate  states,
and  who  complied  with  the  provisions  of  the  lex.
[Civitas.]  It  appears,  however,  that  the  Lex
Julia,  and  probably  also  the  Lex  of  the  following
year,  contained  a  condition  that  the  federate  state
should  consent  to  accept  what  the  Leges  offered,
or,  as  it  was  technically  expressed,  "  populus  fundus
ficret."  (Cic.  pro  Baldo,  c.  8.)  Those  who  did
not  become  fundi  populi  did  not  obtain  the  civitas.
Balbus,  the  client  of  Cicero,  was  a  citizen  of  Gades,
a  federate  town  in  Spain.  Cn,  Pompeius  Magnus
had  conferred  the  Ronum  civitas  on  Balbus,  by
virtue  of  certain  powers  given  to  him  by  a  lex.
It  was  objected  to  Balbus  that  he  could  not  have
the  civitas,  unless  the  state  to  which  he  belonged
"  fundus  factus  esset  ;  which  was  a  complete  mis-
apprehension, for  the  term  fundus,  in  this  sense,
afiplied  to  a  tvhole  state  or  community,  whethei '
federate  or  other  free  state,  which  accepted  wha  j
Wtis  oflfered,  and  not  to  an  individual  of  such  stati  i
or  communit}',  for  he  might  accept  the  Romai
civitas  without  asking  the  consent  of  his  fellov
citizens  at  home,  or  without  all  of  them  reccivin


FOLLIS.
the  same  privilege  that  was  offered  to  himself.  The
people  of  a  state  which  had  accepted  the  Roman
civitas  {fundus  foetus  est)^  were  called,  in  reference
to  tlieir  condition  after  such  acceptance,  "  fundani."
This  word  only  occurs  in  the  Latin  inscription  (the
Lex  Roraana)  of  the  tablet  of  Heraclea,  1.  85,  and
proves  that  the  inscription  is  posterior  to  the  Lex
Julia  de  Civitate.  It  has  indeed  been  supposed
that  the  word  may  refer  to  the  acceptance  by  the
state  of  Heraclea  of  this  lex  which  is  on  the  tablet ;
but  there  is  no  doubt  that  it  refers  to  the  prior  lex
which  gave  the  civitas.     [Fundus.]

It  must  be  observed  that  the  acceptance  of  the
two  Leges  above  mentioned  could  onlj^  refer  to  the
federate  states,  and  the  few  old  Latin  states.  The
Latinae  coloniae  also  received  the  civitas  by  the
Julia  Lex  ;  but  as  they  were  under  the  sovereigntj'^
of  Rome,  their  consent  to  the  provisions  of  this  lex
was  not  required.

Before  the  passing  of  the  Julia  Lex,  it  was  not
unusual  for  the  Socii  and  Latini  to  adopt  Roman
leges  into  their  own  system,  as  examples  of  which
Cicero  mentions  the  Lex  Furia  de  Testamentis,  and
the  Lex  Voconia  de  Mulierum  Hereditatibus  ;  and
he  adds  that  there  were  other  instances.  (Pro
Balbo^  0.8.)  In  such  cases,  the  state  which
adopted  a  Roman  lex  was  said  '  in  earn  legem
fundus  fieri,"  It  hardly  needs  remark  that  the
state  which  adopted  a  Roman  lex,  did  not  thereby
obtain  for  its  citizens  any  privileges  with  respect
to  the  Roman  state :  the  federate  state  merely
adopted  the  provisions  of  the  Roman  lex  as  being
applicable  to  its  own  circumstances.

An  apparent  difficulty  is  caused  by  the  undoubted
fact,  that  the  provisions  of  the  Lex  Julia  required
that  the  states  which  wished  to  avail  themselves
of  its  benefits,  should  consent  to  accept  them.  As
the  federate  states  commenced  the  war  in  order  to
obtain  the  civitas,  it  may  be  asked  why  was  it
given  to  them  on  the  condition  of  becoming  "  fun-
dus?" In  addition  to  the  reasons  for  such  con-
dition, which  are  suggested  by  Savigny,  it  may  be
observed  that  the  lex  only  expressed  in  terms  what
would  necessarily  have  been  implied,  if  it  had  not
been  expressed :  a  federate  state  must  of  necessity
declare  by  a  public  act  its  consent  to  accept  such  a
proposal  as  was  contained  in  the  Lex  Julia.  It
appears  from  the  cases  of  Heraclea  and  Naples,
that  the  citizens  of  a  federate  state  were  not  in  all
cases  unanimous  in  changing  their  former  alliance
with  Rome  into  an  incorporation  with  the  Roman
state.    [Civitas.]

There  were  federate  cities  bej'ond  the  limits  of
Italy,  as  shown  by  the  example  of  Gades :  Sagun-
tum  and  Massilia  also  are  enumerated  among  such
cities.  (Savigny,  Volksschluss  der  Tafel  Von  Hera-
clea^ Zeitschrft^  &c.  vol.  ix. ;  Mazochi,  Tab.  Herac.
P-  465.)  [G.  Lj

FOEDUS.       [FOEDERATAE    CiVITATES,  I

FOENUS.     [Fenus.]

FOLLIS,  dim.  FOLLFCULUS,  an  inflated
ball  of  leather,  perhaps  originallv  the  skin  of  a
quadruped  filled  with  air:  Martml  (iv.  19)  calls
It  "  light  as  a  feather."  Boys  and  old  men  among
the  Romans  threw  it  from  one  to  another  with
their  arms  and  hands  as  a  gentle  exercise  of  the
body,  unattended  with  danger.  (Mart.  vii.  31,
XIV.  45,  47  :  Athen.  i.  25.)  The  emperor  Au-
gustus (Suet.  Aug.  83)  became  fond  of  the  exercise
^'^^.    5''^^^    o'd-      (See    Becker,    Gallus,    ^ol.  i.


FONS.  548

The  term  foHis  is  also  applied  to  a  leather  purse
or  bag  (Plaut.  Aut.  ii.  4.  23  ;  Juv.  xiv.  281)  ;  and
the  diminutive  folUculus  to  the  swollen  capsule  of
a  plant,  the  husk  of  a  seed,  or  anything  of  similar
appearance,  {^ewo^c.  Nat.  Qiuiest.\.  18;  TertuU.
De  Res.  Cam.  52.)

Two  inflated  skins  {^vo  <pv<rai,  Herod,  i.  68  ;
CdiTTvpa,  Ephor.  Frag.  p.  188  ;  7rpr?(rT7?pes,  ApoU.
Rhod.  iv.  763,  777),  constituting  a  pair  of  bellows,
and  having  valves  adjusted  to  the  natural  apertures
at  one  part  for  admitting  the  air,  and  a  pipe  in-
serted into  another  part  for  its  emission,  were  an
essential  piece  of  furniture  in  every  forge  and  foun-
dry. {11  xviii.  372 — 470  ;  Virg.  Aen.  viii,  449.)
According  to  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  work
to  be  done  the  bellows  were  made  of  the  hides  of
oxen  {tawrinis  follibus,  Virg.  Georg.  iv.  171),  or  of
goats  {hircinis,  Hor.  Sat.  i.  4.  19),  and  other
smaller  animals.  The  nozzle  of  the  bellows  was
called  aKpo(pv(nov  or  aKpo(TT6iitov  (Thucyd.  iv.
100  ;  Eust.  in  II.  xviii.  470).  In  bellows  made
after  the  fashion  of  those  exhibited  in  the  lamp
here  introduced  from  Bartoli  {Ant.  Lucerne^  iii.  21),
we  may  imagine  the  skin  to  have  been  placed  be-
tween the  two  boards  so  as  to  produce  a  machine
like  that  which  we  now  employ.  [J.  Y.J


FONS  (Kp7]VT]\  signifies  originally  a  natural
spring  of  water,  but  both  the  Greeks  and  Romans
had  artificial  fountains,  made  either  by  covering
and  decorating  a  spring  with  buildings  and  sculp-
ture, or  by  making  a  jet  or  stream  of  water,  sup-
plied by  an  elevated  cistern,  play  into  an  artificial
basin.  Such  fountains  served  the  double  purpose
of  use  and  ornament.  Among  the  Greeks,  they
formed  the  only  public  supply  of  water  except  the
rain-water  which  was  collected  in  cisterns  [Aquae-
DUCTUs]  ;  and  at  Rome,  the  poorer  people,  who
could  not  afford  to  have  water  laid  on  to  their
houses,  no  doubt  procured  it  from  the  public  foun-
tains.

Several  examples  of  natural  springs,  converted
into  ornamented  fountains,  in  the  cities  of  Greece,
have  been  mentioned  under  Aquaeductus.  They
were  covered  to  keep  them  pure  and  cool,  and  the
covering  was  frequently  in  the  form  of  a  monopteral
temple :  there  were  also  statues,  the  subjects  of
which  were  suggested  by  the  circumstance  that
every  fountain  was  sacred  to  some  divinity,  or  they
were  taken  from  the  whole  range  of  mythological
legends.  That  at  Megara,  erected  by  Theagenes,
is  described  by  Pausanias  as  worth  seeing  for  its
size,  its  beauty,  and  the  number  of  its  columns  (i.
40.  §  1).  That  of  Peirene  at  Corinth  was  adorned
with  covered  cisterns  of  white  marble  like  grottoes",


544  FONS.

out  of  which  the  water  flowed  into  the  open  air,
and  with  a  statue  of  Apollo,  and  was  enclosed  with
a  wall,  on  which  was  painted  the  slaughter  of  the
suitors  by  Ulysses.  (Paus.  ii.  3.  §  3 ;  sea  a  paper
by  Gottling,  on  the  present  state  of  this  fountain,
and  of  the  Craneion,  with  an  engraving  of  the  source
of  the  Peirene,  in  Gerhard's  Archaolotjische  Zeitung
for  1 844,  pp.  32<),  328  ;  the  engraving  is  given  be-
low.)   Corinth  contained  numerous  other  fountains  ;


over  one  of  which  was  a  statue  of  Bellerophon  and
Peu'^asus,  with  the  water  flowing  out  of  the  horse's
hoofs  {lb.  %  5)  ;  over  another,  that  of  Glauce,  was
the  Odeium  {Ih.  §  6) ;  and  another  was  adorned
with  a  bronze  statue  of  Poseidon,  with  a  dolphin  at
his  feet,  out  of  the  mouth  of  which  the  water  flowed.
(Paus.  ii.  2.  §  7.  a.  8.)  In  the  same  city,  was
another  fountain  on  a  still  grander  scale  ;  namel}',
that  of  Lerna,  which  was  surrounded  by  a  colonnade
with  seats  for  those  who  desired  a  cool  retreat  in
summer  ;  the  water  was  no  doubt  collected  in  a
spacious  basin  in  the  centre.  {lb.  4.  §  5.  s.  6  ;  see
also  5.  §  1.)  Several  other  fountains  of  a  similar
kind  to  these  are  described  or  referred  to  by  Pausa-
nias  (ii.  27,  iv.  31,  33,  34,  vii.  5,  21,  viii.  1),
among  which  two  deserve  special  mention,  as  they
were  within  temples  ;  namely,  that  in  the  temple
of  Erechtheus  at  Athens,  and  of  Poseidon  at  Man-
tineia,  which  were  salt-water  springs  (i.  26.  §  5,
viii.  10.  §  4).  Vitruvius  mentions  the  fountain  of
Salmacis  as  among  the  admirable  works  of  art  at
Halicarnassus.  (ii.  8.  §  12.)

The  Ilomans  also  erected  edifices  of  various  de-
grees of  splendour  over  natural  springs,  such  as  the
well-known  grotto  of  Egeria,  near  Rome,  where
the  naturfil  cave  is  converted  by  the  architect  into
a  sort  of  temple  (comp.  Plin.  //.  N.  xxxvi.  21.
8. 42),  and  the  haptisterium  of  Constantine.  A
simple  mode  of  decorating  less  considerable  springs
was  by  covering  them  with  a  vault,  in  the  top  of
which  was  an  opening,  surrounded  by  a  balustrade,
or  by  a  low  wall  adorned  with  marble  bas-reliefs,
one  example  of  which,  among  many,  is  seen  in  a
relief  representing  the  twelve  gods,  now  in  the  Capi-
toline  Museum.  In  all  cases,  a  cistern  was  con-
sti-ucted  to  cont<iin  the  water,  either  by  cutting  it
out  of  the  living  rock,  or  (if  the  spring  did  not  rise
out  of  rock)  by  building  it  of  masonry.  Vitruvius
discusses  at  length  the  different  sorts  of  springs,
and  gives  minute  niles  for  testing  the  goodness  of
the  spring,  and  for  the  construction  of  the  cisterns
(viii.  3.  7).  The  observations  of  Vitruvius  apply
chiefly  to  those  springs  and  cisterns  which  formed
the  sources  of  the  aqueducts.

At  Rome,  a  very  la'-ge  proportion  of  the  im-
mense supply  of  water  brought  to  the  city  by  the
aqueducts,   was  devoted  to  the  public  foimtains,


FONS.

wliich  were  divided  into  two  classes  ;  namely,
/rtCMs,  ponds  or  reservoirs,  and  salieides^  jets  of
water,  besides  which  many  of  the  castella  were
so  constructed  as  to  be  also  fountains.  (See  Aquae-
DUCTUS,  p.  114,  b,  and  the  woodcut.)  Agripp,'i,
who  during  his  aedileship  paid  special  attention  to
the  restoration  of  the  Roman  waterworks,  is  said  to
have  constructed  700  locus,  105  salientes,  and  130
castella,  of  which  very  many  were  magnificently
adorned  ;  they  were  decorated  with  300  bronze
or  marble  statues,  and  400  marble  columns.  (Plin.
H.  N.  xxxvi.  15.  s.  24.  §  9.)  There  were  also
many  small  private  fountains  in  the  houses  and
villas  of  the  wealthy.  (Plin.  Epist  v.  6.)  At
Pompeii,  the  fountains  are  extremely  numerous,
and  that  not  only  in  the  streets  and  public  places,
especially  at  the  junctions  of  streets  {in  biviis,  in
triviis)  ;  but  also  in  private  houses.  The  engraving
on  p.  109  represents  a  section  of  one  of  these  foun-
tains, in  which  the  water  pours  into  a  basin  ;  that
now  given,  in  which  the  water  is  thrown  up  in  a
jet,  is  taken  from  an  arabesque  painting  on  the  wall


of  a  house  at  Pompeii :  in  the  painting,  the  vase  and
pedestal  rise  out  of  a  sheet  of  water,  which  may
be  supposed  to  represent  the  impluvium  in  the
atrium  of  a  house.  (Respecting  the  fountains  of
Pompeii,  see  Pompeii,  vol.  i.  p.  131,  vol.  ii.  pp.  71,
78,  and  Sir  W.  Gell's  Pompeiana,  vol.  i.  pp.  390,
395,  plates  50,  53.)  The  proof  which  these  foun-
tains afford,  of  the  acquaintance  of  the  ancients
with  the  chief  law  of  hydrostatics  is  noticed  under
Aquaeductus,  p.  109.

The  fonus  given  to  fountains  were  as  numerous
as  the  varieties  of  taste  and  fancy.  The  large  flat
vases  were  a  common  form,  and  they  are  found,  of
5,  10,  20,  and  30  feet  in  diameter,  cut  out  of  a
single  piece  of  some  hard  stone,  such  as  porphyry,
granite,  basanite,  breccia,  alabaster  and  marble.  An
ingenious  and  elegant  variety,  of  which  there  is  a
specimen  in  the  Capitoline  Museum,  is  a  tripod,  up
the  centre  of  which  the  jet  passes,  the  legs  being
hollow  to  carry  off  the  water  again.  Very  often
the  water  was  made  to  flow  out  of  bronze  statues,
especially  of  boys,  and  of  Tritons,  Nereids,  Satyrs,
and  such  beings  :  several  of  these  statues  have  been
found  at  Pompeii ;  and  four  of  them  are  engraved
in  Pompeii,  vol.  i.  p.  104,  one  of  which  is  given  be-
low. On  the  Monte  Cavallo,  at  Rome,  is  a  colossal
statue  of  a  river  god,  probably  the  Rhine,  which
was  formerly  in  the  forum  of  Augustus,  which  it
refreshes  with  a  stream  of  water  pouring  con-
tinually into  a  basin  of  granite  twenty-seven  feet
in  diameter.  The  celebrated  group,  known  as
the  Toro  Famese,  originally,  in  Hirt's  opinion,
adorned  a  fou}itain.     Mythological   subjects  were


FORFEX.


FORNACALIA.


MS


also  sculptured  over  the  fountains,  as  among  the
Greeks ;  thus  at  Rome,  there  were  the  fountains
of  Ganymede  and  Prometheus,  and  the  Nyraphaeum
of  Jupiter.  (Stieglitz.  Arch'dol.  d.  Daukunst^  vol.  ii.
pt.  2.  pp.  76,  79  ;  Hirt,  Lehre  der  Geb'dude,  pp.  399,
403.)  [P.  S.]

FORCEPS  (irvpdypa)^  tongs  or  pincers,  need
no  further  explanation  here,  as  they  were  used  in
antiquity  for  the  same  purposes  as  they  are  in
modern  times.  They  were  invented,  as  the  ety-
mology indicates,  for  taking  hold  of  what  is  hot
(foi-vum,  Festus,  s.  v.  ;  Servius,  ad  Virg.  Georg.
iv.  175,  Aen.  viii.  453,  xii.  404),  used  by  smiths,
and  therefore  attributed  to  Vulcan  and  the  Cy-
clopes. (Virg.  II.  cc.  •  Horn.  II.  xviii.  477,  Od.
iii.  434  ;  Callim.  in  Del.  144  ;  fcyrcipe  curva,  Ovid,
il/e<.  xii.  277.)     [Incus  ;  Malleus.]

FORES.     [Janua.]

FORFEX,  dim.  FORFICULA  (y^aXls,  dim.
^aKiSiou)^  shears  (Serv.  in  Virg.  Aen.  viii.  453),
used,  1.  in  shearing  sheep,  as  represented  in  the
annexed  woodcut,  which  is  taken  from  a  carnelian


in  the  Stosch  collection  of  antique  gems  at  Berlin  ;
2.  in  cutting  hair  (Eurip.  Orest.  954  ;  Schol.  in loc;
Brunck,  Anal.  iii.  9  ;  Virg.  Catal.  vii.  9  ;  ferro
Indenti.,  Ciris,  213);  3.  in  clipping  hedges,  myrtles,
and  other  shrubs  {^i/aXiffTol  fjivpf)ivwvis^  Hierocles,
ap.  Stoh.  Serm.  65.)

In  military  manoeuvres  the  forfex  was  a  tenaille,
t.  e.  a  body  of  troops  arranged  in  the  form  of  an
acute  angle,  so  as  to  receive  and  overcome  the  op-
posite body,  called  a  Cuneus.  (Gell.  x.  9  ;  Amm.
Marc.  xvi.  11.)

In  architecture  the  terra  ypaXh  denoted  a  con-
struction which  was  probably  the  origin  of  the  arch
(Macculloch's  West.  lsla?ids,  i.  p.  142,  iii.  p.  49),
consisting  of  two  stones  leaning  against  each  other


so  as  to  form  an  acute  angle  overhead,  as  is  seen
in  the  entrance  to  the  pyramid  of  Cheops  and  hi
the  ruins  of  Mycenae  ;  and  gradually  brought  nearer
to  the  forms  which  we  now  employ.  (See  woodcut,
p.  125.)  (Plat.  De  Leg.  xii.  p.  292.  ed.  Bekker  ;
Diod.  Sic.  ii.  9.)  [J.  Y.]

FORI.  [Navis  ;  Circus,  p.  283,  b.J
FORMA,  dim.  FORMULA,  second  dim.  FOR-
MELLA  (tuttos),  a  pattern,  a  moiUd  ;  any  con-
trivance adapted  to  convey  its  own  shape  to  some
plastic  or  flexible  material,  including  moulds  for
making  pottery,  pastry,  cheese,  bricks,  and  coins.
The  moulds  for  coins  were  made  of  a  kind  of  stone,
which  was  indestructible  by  heat.  (Plin.  H.  N.
xxxvi.  49.)  The  mode  of  pouring  into  them  the
melted  metal  for  casting  the  coins  will  be  best
understood  from  the  annexed  woodcut,  which  re-
presents one  side  of  a  mould,  engraved  by  Seroux


d'Agincourt.  Moulds  were  also  employed  in  making
walls  of  the  kind,  now  called  pise,  which  were
built  in  Africa,  in  Spain,  and  about  Tarentum.
(Varro,  De  Re  Rust.  i.  14  ;  Pallad.  i.  34  ;  parietes
formacei,  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.  48.)  The  shoe-
maker's last  was  also  called /brma  {Hor.  Sat.  ii.  3.
106)  and  tentipellium  (Festus,  s.  v.),  in  Greek
Ka\6irovs.    (Plato,  Conviv.  p.  404,  ed.  Bekker.)

The  spouts  and  channels  of  aquaeducts  are  called
/hmiae,  perhaps  from  their  resemblance  to  some  of
the  moulds  included  in  the  above  enumeration.
(Frontin.  De  Aquaeduct  75,  126.)  [J.  Y.]

FO'RMULA.     [Actio.]

FORNACA'LIA,  a  festival  in  honour  of
Fornax,  the  goddess  of  furnaces,  in  order  that  the
corn  might  be  properly  baked.  (Festus,  s.  v.)  This
ancient  festival  is  said  to  have  been  instituted  by
Numa.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  2.)  The  time  for  its
celebration  was  proclaimed  every  year  by  the  Curio
Maxiraus,  who  announced  in  tablets,  which  were
placed  in  the  forum,  the  different  part  which  each
curia  had  to  take  in  the  celebration  of  the  festival.
Those  persons  who  did  not  know  to  what  curia
they  belonged,  performed  the  sacred  rites  on  the
Qxiirinalia,  called  from  this  circumstance  the  Sttd-
torum  feriae,  which  fell  on  the  last  day  of  the
Fornacalia.  (Ovid,  Fajiti,\\.  527  ;  \ arro,  De  Linj,

N  N


546  FORNAX.

Lat.  vi.    13,  with    Miiller's  note  ;    Festus,  s.  v.

Quirinalia^  Stultor.  fariae.)

The  Foraacalia  continued  to  he  celebrated  m
the  time  of  Lactantius,  (Lactant.  i.  20,)

FORNAX,  diin.  FORNA'CULA  (Kdfxivos,
dim.  KaiJiiviov\  a  kiln  ;  a  furnace.  The  construc-
tion of  the  kilns  used  for  baking  earthenware
[Fictile]  may  be  seen  in  the  annexed  woodcut,
which  represents  part  of  a  Roman  pottery  discovered
at  Castor,  in  Northamptonshire,  (Artists  Duro-
hrivae.,  Lond.  1 828.)  The  dome-shaped  roof  has
been  destroyed  ;  but  the  flat  circular  floor  on  which
the  earthenware  was  set  to  be  baked  is  preserved
entire.     The  middle  of  this  floor  is  supported  by  a


thick  column  of  brick-work,  which  is  encircled  by
the  oven  (fumns,  K\i§auos).  The  entrance  to  the
oven  (prae/umium)  is  seen  in  front.  The  lower
part  of  a  smelting-furnace,  shaped  like  an  inverted
bell,  and  sunk  into  the  earth,  with  an  opening  and
a  channel  at  the  bottom  for  the  discharge  of  the
melted  metal,  has  been  discovered  near  Aries.
(Florencourt,  ilher  die  Dergwerke  der  Altm^  p.  30.)
In  Spain  these  furnaces  were  raised  to  a  great
height,  in  order  that  the  noxious  fumes  might  be
carried  off.  (Strabo,  iii.  2.  p.  391,  ed.  Sieb.)  They
were  also  provided  with  long  flues  {longinquae  for-
nacis  cuniculo^  Plin.  H.  N.  ix.  62),  and  with  cham-
bers (camerae)  for  the  purpose  of  collecting  more
plentifully  the  oxides  and  other  matters  by  subli-
mation {Hid.  xxxiv.  22.  33 — 41).  Homer  de-
scribes a  blast-furnace  with  twenty  crucibles
(xoaz/ol,  //.  xviii.  470).  Melting-pots  or  crucibles
have  been  found  at  Castor  (Artis,  pi.  38),  and  at
different  places  in  Egypt,  in  form  and  material
very  like  those  which  we  now  employ.  (Wilkin-
son, Man.  and  Cust.  vol.  iii.  p.  224.)  A  glass-house,
or  furnace  for  making  glass,  was  called  viKovpy^lov.
(Dioscor.  v.  182.)

Furnaces  of  an  appropriate  construction  were
erected  for  casting  large  statues  of  bronze  (Claud.
De  Laud.  Stil.  ii.  176),  and  for  making  lamp-black.
(Vitruv.  vii.  10.)  [Atramentum.]  The  lime-
kiln {fomax  calcaria)  is  described  by  Cato.
{De  Re  Rust.  38  ;  see  also  Plin.  H.  N.  xvii.  6  ;
Vitruv.  vii.  3.)  On  the  mode  of  heating  baths,
see  p.  193.

The  early  Romans  recognized,  under  the  name
of  Fomax,  a  divinity  who  presided  over  ovens  and
furnaces  [Fornacalia],  [J.  Y.]


FORUM

FORNIX,  in  its  primary  sense,  is  synonymous
with  Arcus  (Scnec.  Ep.  90),  but  more  commonly
implies  an  arched  vault,  constituting  both  roof  and
ceiling  to  the  apartment  which  it  encloses.  (Cic.
Top.  4.)  It  is  composed  of  a  semicylindrical  and
oblong  arch  like  the  Camera,  but  differs  from  it  in
construction,  consisting  entirely  of  stone  or  brick,
whereas  the  other  was  formed  upon  a  frame-work
of  wood,  like  the  skeleton  of  a  ship  (Sallust,
Jugurth.  18  ;  Suet.  Nero.,  34  ;  Camera)  ;  both  of
which  methods  appear  to  have  been  sometimes
united,  as  in  the  roof  of  the  Tullianum,  described
by  Sallust  {Cat.  bb\  where  the  ribs  of  the  Camera
were  strengthened  by  alternate  courses  of  stone
arches.*

From  the  roof  alone,  the  same  word  came  to
signify  the  chamber  itself,  in  which  sense  it  de-
signates a  long  narrow  vault,  covered  by  an  arch
of  brick  or  masonry  {tectum  fomicatum),  similar  to
those  which  occupy  the  ground  floors  of  the  modern
Roman  palaces.  Three  such  cells  are  represented
in  the  annexed  woodcut,  from  the  remains  of  a
villa  at  Mola  di  Gaietii,  which  passes  for  the  For-
mian  Villa  of  Cicero.  They  are  covered  internally
with  a  coating  of  stucco,  tastily  ornamented,  and
painted  in  streaks  of  azure,  pink,  and  yellow.


Being  small  and  dark,  and  situated  upon  the
level  of  the  street,  these  vaults  were  occupied  by
prostitutes  (Hor.  Sat.  i.  2.  30  ;  Juv.  Sat.  iii.  156  ;
xi.  171  ;  compare  Suet.  Jul.  49),  whence  comes
the  meaning  of  the  word  fomicatio  in  the  eccle-
siastical writers,  and  its  English  derivation.

Fornix  is  also  a  sallyport  in  the  walls  (Liv.
xxxvi.  23  ;  compare  xliv.  11)  ;  a  triumphal  arch
(Cic.  De  Orat.  ii.  66)  ;  and  a  street  in  Rome,  which
led  to  the  Campus  Martins,  was  called  Via  For-
nicata  (Liv.  xxii.  36),  probably  on  account  of  the
triumphal  arches  built  across  it.  [A.  R.]

FORUM.  As  the  plan  of  the  present  work
does  not  include  a  topographical  description  of  the
various  fora  at  Rome,  the  following  article  only
contains  a  brief  statement  of  the  purposes  which
they  served.

Forum,  originally,  signifies  an  open  place  {area)
before  any  building,  especially  before  a  sepulcrum
(Festus,  s.v.  ;  Cic.  De  Leg.  ii.  24),  and  seems,
therefore,  etymologically  to  be  connected  with  the
adverb /bras.  The  characteristic  features  of  a  Ro-
man forum  were,  that  it  was  a  levelled  space  of


*  "  Tullianum  ....  muniunt  undique  parietes,
atque  insuper  Camera,  lapideis  fornicibus  vincta."
If  the  stone  chamber  now  seen  at  Rome  under  the
Mammertine  prisons  was  really  the  Tullianum,  as
commonly  supposed,  it  is  not  constructed  in  the
manner  described  ;  being  neither  cameratum  nor
fornicatum,  but  consisting  of  a  circular  dome,  formed
by  projecting  one  course  of  stones  beyond  tne
course  below  it,  like  the  treasury  of  Atrens  at
Mycenae,  described  at  p.  125.     [Aacus.]


FORUM.

irround  of  an  oblong  form,  and  surrounded  by  build-
ings, houses,  temples,  basilicae  or  porticoes.  (Vitruv.
V.  1,  2.)  It  was  originally  used  as  a  place  where
justice  was  administered,  and  where  goods  were
exhibited  for  sale.  (Varro,  De  Lincj.  Lat.  v.  145,
ed.  MUller.)  We  have  accordingly  to  distinguish
between  two  kinds  of  fora  ;  of  which  some  were
exclusively  devoted  to  commercial  purposes,  and
were  real  market-places,  while  others  were  places
of  meeting  for  the  popular  assembly,  and  for  the
courts  of  justice.  Mercantile  business,  however,
was  not  altogether  excluded  from  the  latter,  and  it
was  especially  the  bankers  and  usurers  who  kept
their  shops  in  the  buildings  and  porticoes  by  which
they  were  surrounded.  The  latter  kinds  of  fora
were  sometimes  called  /orajiidicialia,  to  distinguish
them  from  the  mere  market-places.

Among  the  fora  judicialia  the  most  important
was  the  Forum  Romanum^  which  was  simply  called
joruin^  as  long  as  it  was  the  only  one  of  its  kind
which  existed  at  Rome.  At  a  late  period  of  the
republic,  and  during  the  empire,  when  other  fora  I
judicialia  were  built,  the  Forum  Romanum  was
distinguished  from  them  by  the  epithets  vetus  or
magnum.  It  was  situated  between  the  Palatine
and  the  Capitoline  hills,  and  its  extent  was  seven
jugera,  whence  Varro  {De  Re  Rust.  i.  2)  calls  it
the  "  Septem  jugera  forensia."  It  was  originally
a  swamp  or  marsh,  but  was  said  to  have  been  filled
up  by  Romulus  and  Tatius,  and  to  have  been  set
apart  as  a  place  for  the  administration  of  justice,
for  holding  the  assemblies  of  the  people,  and  for
the  transaction  of  other  kinds  of  public  business.
(Dion.  Hal.  Ant.  Rom.  iii.  p.  200,  compare  ii.  p.
113,  Sylburg.)  In  this  widest  sense  the  forum
included  the  comitium,  or  the  place  of  assembly
for  the  curiae  (Varro,  De  Ling.  Lat.  v.  155,  Miiller),
which  was  separated  from  the  forum  in  its  narrower
sense,  or  the  place  of  assembly  for  the  comitia  tri-
buta,  by  the  Rostra.  (Niebuhr,  Hist,  of  Rome^  i.
p.  291.  note  746,  and  p.  426.  note  990  ;  Waiter,
Gesch.  des  Rom.  Rechts.,  p.  83  ;  Gottling,  Gesck.  der
Rom.  Staatsverf.  p.  155.)  These  ancient  rostra
were  an  elevated  space  of  ground  or  a  stage  {sug-
gestum)^  from  which  the  orators  addressed  the  peo-
ple, and  which  derived  their  name  from  the  circum-
stance that,  after  the  subjugation  of  Latium,  its
sides  were  adorned  with  the  beaks  (rostra)  of  the
ships  of  the  Antiates.  (Liv.  viii.  14.)  In  Subse-
quent times,  when  the  curiae  had  lost  their  import-
ance, the  accurate  distinction  between  comitium
and  forum  likewise  ceased,  and  the  comitia  tributa
were  sometimes  held  in  the  Circus  Flaminius  ;  but
towards  the  end  of  the  republic  the  forum  seems  to
have  been  chiefly  used  for  judicial  proceedings,  and
as  a  money  market  ;  hence  Cicero  (De  Orat.  i.  36)
distinguishes  between  a  speaker  in  the  popular
assembly  (orator)  and  the  mere  pleader :  "  Ego
istos  non  modo  oratoris  nomine,  sed  ne  foro  quidem
dignos  putarim."  The  orators  when  addressing
the  people  from  the  rosti-a,  and  even  the  tribunes
of  the  people  in  the  early  times  of  the  republic,  used
to  front  the  comitium  and  the  curia  ;  but  C.  Grac-
chus (Plut.  C.  Gracch.  5),  or,  according  to  Varro
(De  Re  Rust.  i.  2)  and  Cicero  (De  Amicit.  25),  C.
Licinius,  introduced  the  custom  of  facing  the
forum,  thereby  acknowledging  the  sovereignty  of
the  people.  In  308  b.c.  the  Romans  adorned  the
forum,  or  rather  the  bankers'  shops  (argentarias)
aroimd,  with  gilt  shields  which  they  had  taken
from  the  Samnites  ;  and  this  custom  of  adorning


FRAMEA.  547

the  forum  with  these  shields  and  other  ornaments
was  subsequently  always  observed  during  the  time
of  the  Lud.  Romani,  when  the  Aedi'es  rode  iu
their  chariots  (tmsae)  in  solemn  procession  around
the  forum.  (Liv.  ix.  40  ;  Cic.  in  Verr.  i.  54,  and
iii.  4.)  After  the  victory  of  C.  Duilius  over  the
Carthaginians  the  fonnn  was  adorned  with  the
celebrated  columna  rostrata  [  Column  a].  In  the
upper  part  of  the  forum,  or  the  comitium,  the  laws
of  the  Twelve  Tables  were  exhibited  for  public
inspection,  and  it  was  probably  in  the  same  part
that,  in  304  B.  c,  Cn.  Flavins  exhibited  the  Fasti,
written  on  white  tables  (in  alio).,  that  every  citizen
might  be  able  to  know  the  days  on  which' the  law
allowed  the  administration  of  justice.  (Liv.  ix.  46.)
Besides  the  ordinary  business  which  was  carried
on  in  the  forum,  we  read  that  gladiatorial  games
were  held  in  it  (Vitruv.  v.  1,  2),  and  that  prisoners
of  war  and  faithless  colonists  or  legionaries  were
put  to  death  there.  (Liv.  vii.  19,  ix.  24,  xxviii.
28.)

A  second  forum  judiciarium  was  built  by  J.
Caesar,  and  was  called  Forum  Caesaris  or  Julii.
The  levelling  of  the  ground  alone  cost  him  above
a  million  of  sesterces,  and  he  adorned  it  besides
with  a  magnificent  temple  of  Venus  Genitrix.
(Suet.  J.  Caes.  26  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiv.  15  ;  Dion
Cass,  xliii.  22.)

A  third  forum  was  bu'lt  by  Augustus  and  called
Forum  Augusti,  because  the  two  existing  ones
were  not  found  sufficient  for  the  great  increase  of
business  which  had  taken  place.  Augustus  adorned
his  forum  with  a  temple  of  Mars  and  the  statues
of  the  most  distinguished  men  of  the  republic,  and
issued  a  decree  that  only  the  judicia  publica  and
the  sortitio7ies  judicum  should  take  place  in  it.
(Suet.  Octav.  29  and  31  ;  compare  Dion  Cass.  Ivi.
27  ;  Plin.  ff.  N.  I.  c. ;  Veil.  Pat.  ii.  39  ;  Ovid,  Ex
Pont.  iv.  15,  16  ;  Martial,  iii.  38.  3  ;  Seneca,  Do
Ira,  ii.  9  ;  Stat.  Silv.  iv.  9.  1 5.)  After  the  Forum
Augusti  had  severely  sufifered  by  fire,  it  was  re-
stored by  Hadrianus.  (Ael.  Spart.  Hadr.  c.
19.)

The  three  fora  which  have  been  mentioned  seem
to  have  been  the  only  ones  that  were  destined  for
the  transaction  of  public  business.  All  the  others,
which  were  subsequently  built  by  the  emp  rors,
such  as  the  Forum  Trajani  or  Ulpium.,  the  Forum
Sullustii,  Forum  Diocletiani,  Forum  Aweliani,  &c.,
were  probably  more  intended  as  embellishments  of
the  city  than  to  supply  any  actual  want.

Different  from  these  fora  Avere  the  numerous
markets  at  Rome,  which  were  neither  as  large  nor
as  beautiful  as  the  former.  Thej'^  are  always  dis-
tinguished from  one  another  by  epithets  expressing
the  particular  kinds  of  things  which  were  sold  in
them,  e.g.  forum  boarium,  according  to  Festus,  the
cattle-market ;  according  to  others,  it  derived  the
name  boarium  from  the  statue  of  an  ox  which  stood
there  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiv.  2  ;  Ovid,  Fast,  vi.477);
forum  olitorium,  the  vegetable  market  (Varro,  De
Ling.  Lat.  v.  1^:6);  forum  piscarium,  fish-market;
forum  cupedinis,  market  for  dainties  ; /orM?«  co-
quinum,  a  market  in  which  cooked  and  prepared
dishes  were  to  be  had,  &c.

(Respecting  the  fora  in  the  provinces,  see  the
articles  Colonia  and  Conventus  ;  compare
Sigonius,  De  Antiq.  Jur.  Ital.  ii.  \5^  and  Walter,
Gesch.  des  Rom.  Rechts,  p.  206.)  [L.  S.J

FOSSA.     [Castra.]

FRAMEA.     [Hasta.]
N  N  2


648  FRENUM.

FRATRES   ARVA'LES.      [Arvai.es  Fka-

TRES.]

FRAUS.     [Poena.]

FRENUM  (xaAiJ/os),  a  bridle.  That  Belle-
rophoii  might  be  enabled  to  perfonn  the  exploits
required  of  him  by  the  king  of  Lycia,  he  was  pre-
sented by  Athena  with  a  bridle  as  the  means  of
subduing  the  winged  horse  Pegasus,  who  submitted
to  receive  it  whilst  he  was  slaking  his  thirst  at  the
fountain  Peirene.     See  the  annexed  woodcut,  from


an  antique  Avhich  represents  this  event,  and  com-
pare Pindar,  Olymp.  xiii.  85 — 115.  Such  was  the
Grecian  account  of  the  invention  of  the  bridle,  and
in  reference  to  it  Athena  was  worshipped  at
Corinth  under  the  titles  "linna  and  XaXiviris.
(Pans.  ii.  4.  §§1,  5.)  The  several  parts  of  the
bridle,  more  especially  the  bit,  are  engraved  from
ancient  authorities  in  the  treatises  of  Invernizi
{De  Frenis),  Ginzrot  ( Ueber  W'dgen)^  and  Bracy
Clark  {Chalinology^  Lond.  ]  835).

The  bit  {orea^  Festus,  s.  v.  ;  Srjyfia,  Brunck,
Anal.  ii.  237  ;  (ttSjxiov^  Aeschyl.  Prom.  1045)
was  commonly  made  of  several  pieces,  and  flexible,
so  as  not  to  hurt  tlie  horse's  mouth  ;  for  the  Greeks
considered  a  kind  and  gentle  treatment  the  best
discipline,  although,  when  the  horse  was  intract-
able, they  taught  it  submission  by  the  use  of  a  bit
which  was  armed  with  protuberances  resembling
wolves'- teeth,  and  therefore  called  lupatum.  (Xen.
De  Re  Eg.  vi.  13,  x.  6  ;  Virg.  Georcf.  iii.  208  :  Hor.
Car7n.  i.  8.  7  ;  Ovid,  Amor.  i.  2.  15.)  The  bit
was  held  in  its  place  by  a  leathern  strap  passing
under  the  chin,  and  called  inroxa\iui5ia^  for  which
a  chain  (^paKiov)  was  often  substituted  ;  a  rope  or
thong,  distinct  from  the  reins,  was  sometimes  fast-
ened to  this  chain  or  strap  by  means  of  a  ring,  and
was  used  to  lead  the  horse  {puTayajyevs,  Xen.  /.  e.
vii.  1  ;  Aristoph.  Pac.  154).  The  upper  part  of
the  bridle,  by  which  it  was  fixed  round  the  ears,  is
called  by  Xenophon  Kopvcpaia  (iii.  2),  and  it  in-
cluded the  Ampyx,  which  was  often  ornamental.
The  cheek-pieces  (irap-niov,  Hom.  //.  iv.  142  ;
TrapayuadiSiov^  Eustath.  ad  loc),  which  joined  this
upper  portion  to  the  bit,  were  also  in  some  cases
richly  adorned,  especially  among  the  nations  of
Asia.  Those  who  took  delight  in  horsemanship
bestowed,  indeed,  the  highest  degree  of  splendour
and  elegance  upon  every  part  of  the  bridle,  not  ex-
cepting the  bit,  which,  though  commonly  of  bronze
or  iron,  was  sometimes  silver  or  gold  {fulvum
mandunt  sub  dentihus  aurum.,  Virg.  Aen.  vii.  279).
These  precious  metals  were  also  either  embossed
{frena  caelata^  Apul.  De  Deo  Sac.)  or  set  with
jewels.  (Claud.  Epg.  34.  36.}


FRUM KNTARI AE  LEGES.

Not  only  was  the  bridle  dispensed  with  hi  the
management  of  creatures  invented  by  the  imagi-
nation of  the  poet  (Aeschyl.  Prom.  294),  but  of
some  which  were  actually  trained  by  man  to  go
without  it.  Thus  the  Numidian  desultor  guided
his  two  horses  by  the  whip,  and  the  Gallic  esse-
DARius,  on  the  banks  of  the  Rhone,  directed  and
animated  his  mules  entirely  by  the  voice.  (Claud.
Epig.  4.)  [J.  Y.]

FRIGIDA'RIUM.  [Balneae,  pp.  189, 190.]

FRITILLUS  ((pifxSs)^  a  dice-box  of  a  cylin-
drical form,  and  therefore  called  also  turricula
(Mart.  xiv.  16),  ov  pyrgus  (Sidon.  Epist.  viii.  12),
and  formed  with  parallel  indentations  (gradus)  on
the  inside,  so  as  to  make  a  rattling  noise  when  the
dice  was  shaken  it.  (Mart.  iv.  14,  xiv.  1  ;  Hor.
Sat.  ii.  7.  17,  who  uses  the  Greek  form  phimus.)
(Becker,  Gallus,  vol.  ii.  p.  222.)  [J.  Y.]

FRONTA'LE.     [Ampyx.]

FRUCTUS.     [UsusFRUCTus.]

FRriMENTA'RIAE  LEGES.  From  the
earliest  times  the  supply  of  com  at  Rome  was  con-
sidered one  of  the  duties  of  the  government.  Not
only  was  it  expected  that  the  government  should
take  care  that  the  corn -market  {annona)  was  pro-
perly supplied,  but  likewise  that  in  all  seasons  of
scarcity,  they  should  purchase  com  in  the  sur-
rounding countries,  and  sell  it  to  the  people  at  a
moderate  price  (Liv.  ii.  9,  34,  iv.  12,  52,  x.  11,
&c.  xxvi.  40;  Cic.  pro  Dom.  5.)  This  price,  which
is  spoken  of  as  annona  veins  (Liv.  ii.  34),  could
not  rise  much,  without  exciting  foiTnidable  discon-
tent ;  and  the  administration  was  in  all  such  cases
considered  to  have  neglected  one  of  its  most  im-
portant duties.  The  superintendence  of  the  corn-
market  belonged  in  ordinary  times  to  the  aediles,
but  when  great  scarcity  prevailed,  an  extraordi-
nary officer  was  appointed  for  the  purpose  under
the  title  of  Praefedus  Annonae  (Liv.  iv.  12).
With  the  decay  of  agriculture  in  Italy,  which  fol-
lowed the  importation  of  corn  from  the  provinces,
and  the  decrease  of  the  free  population,  the  govern-
ment had  to  pay  still  further  attention  to  the  supply
of  corn  for  the  city.  In  addition  to  this,  an  in-
digent population  gradually  increased  in  Rome,
which  could  not  even  purchase  corn  at  the  moderate
price  at  which  it  was  usually  sold,  and  who  de-
manded to  be  fed  at  the  expence  of  the  state.
Even  in  early  times  it  had  been  usual  for  the  state  on
certain  occasions,  and  for  wealthy  individuals  who
wished  to  obtain  popularity  and  influence,  to  make
occasional  donations  of  corn  to  the  people  {donatio.,
largitio.,  divisio  ;  subseqiiently  called  frumcnlatio) .
But  such  donations  were  only  casual ;  and  it  was  not
till  the  year  b.  c.  123,  that  the  first  legal  provision
was  made  for  supplying  the  poor  at  Rome  with
corn  at  a  price  much  below  its  market  value.  In
that  year  C.  Sempronius  Gracchus  brought  forward
the  first  Lex Frumenlaria.,  by  which  each  citizen  was
entitled  to  receive  every  month  a  certain  quantity  of
wheat  (triticum)  at  the  price  of  6^  asses  for  the  mo-
dius,  which  was  equal  to  1  gallon  and  nearly  8  pints
English.*     (Liv.  Epit.  60  ;  Appian,  B.  C.  i.  21  ;


*  The  price  of  G^  asses  {senos  aeris  et  trientes)  oc-
curs in  the  Schol.  Bob.  ad  Cic.  Sext.  c.  25.  p.  300.
c.  48,  p.  300  ;  but  in  the  editions  of  Livy(7i:j(?.  60),
we  find  ut  semisse  et  trientefrumentum  plebi  dareiur^
that  is,  at  -Jths  of  an  as.  But  instead  of  semisse^
the  manuscripts  have  semis,  sexis,  sesis.,  evidently  for
ser/im,  and   therefore  there  can  be  little  doubt  that


FRUMENTARIAE  LEGES.

Plut.  C.  Gracchis,  5  ;  Veil.  Pat.  ii.  6  ;  Cic.  pro
iSeojt.  48.)  This  was  only  a  trifle  more  than  half
the  market  price,  since  in  the  time  of  Cicero  3  ses-
terces =  12  asses  were  considered  a  low  sum  for  a
modius  of  wheat  (Bockh,  MetroL  Untersch.  p.  420.)
It  must  not  be  supposed  that  each  person  was
allowed  to  receive  as  much  as  he  pleased  every
month  ;  the  quantity  must  of  course  have  been
fixed,  and  was  probably  five  modii  monthly,  as
in  later  times.  This  quantity  was  only  given  to
lathers  of  families  ;  but  it  was  not  confined  to  the
poor,  as  Plutarch  {I.  c,)  would  imply,  for  every
citizen  had  a  right  to  it,  whether  he  were  rich  or
poor  {kKaarcf  rwv  hrijxoTwv^  Appian,  I.  c.  ;  viritim^
Cic.  Tusc.  Disp.  iii.  20)  ;  and  even  Piso,  who  had
been  consul,  applied  for  his  share  at  the  distribution
(Cic.  I.  c.)  It  appears,  however,  from  the  anecdote
which  Cicero  relates  about  Piso,  that  each  citizen
had  to  apply  in  person,  a  regulation  which  would
of  itself  deter  most  of  the  rich.  The  example  that
had  been  set  by  Gracchus  was  too  tempting  not  to
be  followed,  although  the  consequences  of  sucii  a
measure  were  equally  prejudicial  to  the  public
finances  and  the  public  morality.  It  emptied  the
treasury,  and  at  the  same  time  taught  the  poor  to
become  state-paupers  instead  of  depending  upon
their  own  exertions  for  obtaining  a  living.

The  demagogue  Appuleius  Saturninus  Avent
still  further.  In  B.  c.  1 00  he  brought  forward
Ills  Lex  Appuleia,  by  which  the  state  was  to  sell
corn  at  f  ths  of  an  as  for  the  modius.  The  city
quaestor  Q.  Caepio  pointed  out  that  the  treasury'-
could  not  bear  such  an  expense,  and  the  most
violent  opposition  was  offered  to  the  measure.  It
is  doubtful  whether  it  ever  passed  into  a  law  ;
and  it  is  at  all  events  certain  that  it  was  never
carried  into  execution  (Auctor,  ad  Heretm.  i.  12  ;
comp.  Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  6. )  The  Lex  Livia^  which
was  proposed  by  the  tribune,  M.  Livius  Drusus,
in  B.  c.  91,  was  likewise  never  carried  into  effect,
as  it  was  repealed  by  the  senate,  together  with  all
his  other  laws  as  passed  in  opposition  to  the
auspices.  Of  the  provisions  of  this  Lex  Frumentaria
we  have  no  account  (Liv.  Epit.  71).  About  the
same  time,  either  shortly  before  or  shortly  after
the  Lex  Li  via,  the  tribune  M.  Octavius,  supported
by  the  aristocracy,  brought  forward  the  Leje  Oc-
tavia,  which  modified  the  law  of  Gracchus  to  some
extent,  so  that  the  public  treasury  did  not  suffer
so  much.  He  probably  either  raised  the  price  of
the  corn,  or  diminished  the  number  of  modii  which
each  citizen  was  entitled  to  receive.  (Cic.  Brut.
2-2,deOf.n.'2\.)  Sulla  went  still  further,  and
by  his  Lex  Cornelia,  b,  c.  82,  did  away  altogether
with  these  distributions  of  corn,  so  that  in  the
language  which  Sallust  puts  into  the  mouth  of
Lepidus,  populus  Romaniis — ne  servilia  qiiidem
alimenla  reliqua  kabet.  (Sail.  Hid.  in  Oral.  Lepid.
p.  .939,  ed.  Cort.)  But  the  senate  soon  found  it
inexpedient  to  deprive  the  peoj)le  of  their  cus-
tomary largesses,  as  the  popular  part}^  began  to
increase  in  power  ;  and  it  was  accordingly  at  the
desire  of  the  senate,  that  the  consuls  of  B.  c.  73
brought  forward  the  Lex  Terentia  Cassia.,  which
was  probably  only  a  renewal  of  the  Lex  Sempronia,
with  one  or  two  additions  respecting  the  manner  in
which  the  state  was  to  obtain  the  corn.  The  law
enacted  that  each  Roman  citizen  should  receive  5


we  ought  to  read  senis  instead  oi  scmisse.   (Monnn-
sen,  Die  Roiniselien  Tribus,  p.  179.)


FRUMENTARIAE  LEGE^'.  54<)
modii  a  month  at  the  price  of  6^  asses  for  each
modius.  It  appears  from  the  various  orations  of
Cicero,  that  by  this  law  the  provinces  were
obliged  to  furnish  the  greater  part  of  the  corn  at  a
fixed  price,  which  was  paid  by  the  Roman  trea-
sury, and  that  the  governors  of  the  provinces  had
to  take  care  that  the  proper  quantity  of  corn  was
supplied.  (Cic.  Verr.  iii.  70,  v.  21,  pro  Seai.  25  ;
Ascon.  in  Pis.  4,  p.  9,  ed.  Orelli.)  Occasionally
extraordinary  distributions  of  com  were  made  in
virtue  of  decrees  of  the  senate.  (Cic.  Verr.  I.  c.  •
Plut.  Cat.  min.  26,  Caes.  8.)  *  '

All  the  Leges  Frumentariae,  that  have  been
hitherto  mentioned,  had  sdd  corn  to  the  people,
although  at  a  price  much  below  what  the  state
had  paid  for  it ;  but  as  the  great  party- leaders  to-
wards the  close  of  the  republic  were  ready  to  pur-
chase the  support  of  the  people  at  any  sacrifice  to
the  state,  the  distribution  of  com  became  at  length
quite  gratuitous.  Caesar,  in  his  consulship,  b.  c,  59,
had  threatened  to  make  it  so  (Cic.  ad  Att.  ii.  19  ;
comp.  pro  Dam.  10)  ;  and  this  threat  was  carried
into  execution  in  the  following  year,  b.  c.  58,  by
the  Lex  Clodia  of  the  tribune  Clodius.  The  corn
was  thus  in  future  distributed  without  any  pay-
ment ;  and  the  abolition  of  the  payment  cost  the
state  a  fifth  part  of  its  revenues.  (Cic.  pro  Sext.
25  ;  Schol.  Bob.  ad  Sext.  25,  p.  301,  ed.  Orelli ;
Ascon.  in  Pis.  4.  p.  9  ;  Dion  Cass,  xxxviii.  13.)
In  B.  c.  57,  Pompey  received  by  the  Lex  Cornelia
Caecilia  the  superintendence  of  the  corn-market
{cura  annonae)  for  a  period  of  five  years  ;  but  no
alteration  was  made  in  the  distribution  of  com  by
virtue  of  this  measure.  The  only  extension  which
he  gave  to  the  distribution  was  by  allowing  those
citizens,  whose  names  had  not  hitherto  been  en-
tered in  the  lists  of  the  censors,  to  share  in  the
bounty  of  the  state.      (Dion  Cass,  xxxix.  24.)

The  dangerous  consequences  of  such  a  system
did  not  escape  the  penetration  of  Caesar  ;  and  ac-
cordingly, when  he  became  master  of  the  Roman
world,  he  resolved  to  remedy  the  evils  attending
it,  as  far  as  he  was  able.  He  did  not  venture  to
abolish  altogether  these  distributions  of  com,  but
he  did  the  next  best  thing  in  his  power,  which
was  reducing  the  number  of  the  recipients.  During
the  civil  wars  numbers  of  persons,  who  had  no
claim  to  the  Roman  franchise,  had  settled  at  Rome
in  order  to  obtain  a  share  in  the  distributions  of
corn.  The  first  thing,  therefore,  that  Caesar  did
was  to  have  an  accurate  list  made  out  of  all  the
corn-receivers,  and  to  exclude  from  this  privilege
every  person  who  could  not  prove  that  he  was  a
Roman  citizen.  By  this  measure  the  320,000
persons,  who  had  previously  received  the  corn,
were  at  once  reduced  to  150,000.*  Having  thus
reduced  the  number  of  corn-receivers  to  1 50,000,
he  enacted  that  this  number  should  not  be  exceeded
for  the  future,  and  that  vacancies  that  occurred  by
death,  should  be  filled  up  every  year  by  lot  by  the
praetor  urbanus.  (Suet.  Goes.  55  ;  Dion  Cass,  xliii.
21.)  It  is  further  exceedingly  probable  that  as  a
general  rule,  tlie  corn  was  not  given  even  to  these
150,000,  but  sold  at  a  low  price,  as  had  been  the
case  at  an  earlier  period  ;  and  that  it  was  onl}-  to
the  utterly  destitute  that  the  corn  was  supplied


*  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  this  was  not  a
census,  as  Plutarch  {Caes.  55)  and  Appian  (B.  C.
ii.  102)  state,  but  simply  an  enumeration  of  the
corn-receivers.

N  N    3


550


FRUMENTARIAE  LEGES.


gratuitously :  the  lattpr  class  of  persons  were  fur-
nished with  tickets,  called  tesserae  7iummaruie  or
/'/"umentariae.  Tluis  we  find  it  stated  (Suet.  Octav.
41)  that  Augustus,  on  one  occasion,  doubled  the
number  of  the  tesserae  frumentariae.  If,  therefore,
the  corn  was,  as  a  general  rule,  not  given,  but  sold,
we  may  conclude  that  every  citizen  was  entitled  to
be  enrolled  in  the  150,U00  corn-receivers,  inde-
pendent of  his  fortune.  The  opposite  opinion  has
been  maintained  hj  many  modern  writers  ;  but  the
arguments,  which  have  been  brought  forward  by
Mommsen  {Die  Romischen  Trilnis,  p.  187)  and
others,  but  into  which  our  space  will  not  allow  us
to  enter,  render  the  above  supposition  exceedingly
probable.

The  useful  regulations  of  Caesar  fell  into  neglect
after  his  death,  and  the  number  of  corn-receivers
was  soon  increased  beyond  the  limits  of  1  50,000,
which  -had  been  fixed  by  the  dictator.  This  we
learn  from  the  Monumentum  Ancyranum,  in  which
Augustus  enumerates  the  number  of  persons  to
whom  he  had  given  congiaria  at  different  times  ;
and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  receivers  of  the
congiaria  and  of  the  public  corn  were  the  same.
Thus,  in  b.  c.  44,  and  on  the  three  following  occa-
sions, he  distributed  the  congiaria  to  250,000  per-
sons ;  and  in  B.  c.  5,  the  number  of  recipients  had
amounted  to  320,000.  At  length,  in  b.  c.  2,
Augustus  reduced  the  number  of  recipients  to
200,000,  and  i*enewed  many  of  Caesar's  regula-
tions. (Suet.  Octav.  40  ;  Dion  Cass.  Iv.  10.)  He
had,  indeed,  thought  of  abolishing  the  system  of
corn-distributions  altogether  on  account  of  their
injurious  influence  upon  Italian  agriculture,  but
had  not  persevered  in  his  intention  from  the  con-
viction that  the  practice  would  again  be  introduced
by  his  successors.  (Suet.  Octav.  42.)  The  chief
regulations  of  Augustus  seem  to  have  been:  1.
That  every  citizen  should  receive  monthly  a  cer-
tain quantity  of  corn  (probably  5  modii)  on  the
payment  of  a  certain  small  sum.  As  the  number
of  recipients  was  fixed  by  Augustus  at  200,000,
there  were  consequently  12,000,000  modii  distri-
buted every  year.  Occasionally,  in  seasons  of
scarcity,  or  in  order  to  confer  a  particular  favour,
Augustus  made  these  distributions  quite  gratui-
tous: they  then  became  congiaria.  [Congiarium.]
2.  That  those  who  were  completely  indigent  should
receive  the  corn  gratuitously,  as  Julius  Caesar  had
determined,  and  should  be  furnished  for  the  pur-
pose with  tesserae  numinariae  ov  frumentariae^  which
entitled  them  to  tho  corn  without  paj-ment.  (Suet.
Octav.  A\.)

The  system,  which  had  been  established  by
Augustus,  was  followed  by  his  successors  ;  but  as
it  was  always  one  of  the  first  maxims  of  the  state
policy  of  the  Roman  emperors  to  prevent  any  dis-
turbance in  the  capital,  they  frequently  lowered
the  price  of  the  public  com,  and  frequently  dis-
tributed it  gratuitously  as  a  comjiarium.  Hence,
the  cry  of  the  populace  partem  et  circenses.  No
emperor  ventured  to  abolish  the  public  distributions
of  com :  the  most  that  he  dared  do,  was  to  i-iise
the  price  at  which  it  was  sold.  When,  therefore,
we  find  it  stfited  in  Dion  Cassius  (Ixii.  18),  that
Nero  did  away  with  the  distributions  of  corn  after
the  burning  of  Rome,  we  cannot  understand  this
literally,  but  must  suppose  that  he  either  raised  the
price  of  the  commodity  or,  what  is  more  probable,
obliged  those  poor  to  pay  for  it,  who  had  previously
received  it  gratuitously.     The  care,  which   the


FRUMENTARIAE  LEGES.

emperors  took  to  keep  Rome  well  supplied  with
corn,  is  frequentl}'-  referred  to  in  their  coins  by  the
legends,  Annona^  Obertas^  Ahunduntia^  Liheralitan^
Sec.  We  find  in  a  coin  of  Nerva  the  legend  pl^jei
urhanae  frumento  constituto.  (Eckhel,  vol.  vi.
p.  406.)

In  course  of  time,  the  sale  of  the  com  by  the
state  seems  to  have  ceased  altogether,  and  the
distribution  became  altogether  gratuitous.  Every
corn-receiver  was  therefore  now  provided  with  a
tessera.,  and  this  tessera,  when  once  granted  to  him,
became  his  property.  Hence,  it  came  to  pass,  that
he  was  not  only  allowed  to  keep  the  tessera  for
life,  but  even  to  dispose  of  it  by  sale,  and  bequeath
it  by  will.  (Dig.  5.  tit.  1.  s.  52  f  39.  tit.  1,  s.  49  ;  39.
tit.  1.  s.  87.)  Every  citizen  was  competent  to
hold  a  tessera  with  the  exception  of  senators.
Further,  as  the  corn  had  been  originally  distri-
buted to  the  people  according  to  the  thirtj^-five
tribes  into  which  they  were  divided,  the  corn-
receivers  in  each  tribe  formed  a  kind  of  corporation,
which  came  eventually  to  be  looked  upon  as  the
tribe,  when  the  tribes  had  lost  all  political  signi-
ficance. Hence,  the  purchase  of  a  tessera  became
equivalent  to  the  purchase  of  a  place  in  a  tribe  ;
and,  accordingly,  we  find  in  the  Digest  the  ex-
pressions emere  tnhum  and  e^nere  tesseram  used  as
synonymous.    (Dig.  32.  tit.  1.  s.  35.)

Another  change  was  also  introduced  at  a  later
period,  which  rendered  the  bounty  still  more  ac-
ceptable to  the  people.  Instead  of  distributing  the
corn  every  month,  wheaten  bread,  called  annona
civica,  was  given  to  the  people.  It  is  uncertain  at
what  time  this  change  was  introduced,  but  it  seems
to  have  been  the  custom  before  the  reign  of  Aure-
lian  (a.  d.  270 — 275),  as  it  is  related  of  this  em-
peror that  on  his  return  from  his  Eastern  expedition,
he  distributed  among  the  people  a  larger  quantity  of
bread,  and  of  a  different  form  from  that  vvhich  had
been  usually  given.  (Vopisc.  Aurel.  35  ;  Zosim.  i.  61.)
The  bread  was  baked  by  the  Pistores,  who  delivered
it  to  the  various  depots  in  the  city,  from  which  it  was
fetched  away  on  certain  days  by  the  holders  of  the
tesserae.  (Orelli, /«sc7'i/).  No.  3358.)  These  depots
had  steps  {gradus)  leading  to  them,  whence  the
bread  was  called  fanis  gradilis ;  and  there  were
the  strictest  regulations  that  the  bread  should  only
be  distributed  from  these  steps,  and  should  never
be  obtained  at  the  bakers.  (Cod.  Theod.  14.  lit.
17.  ss.  3,  4.)  When  Constantine  transferred  the
seat  of  government  to  Constantinople,  the  system
of  gratuitous  distribution  of  bread  was  also  trans-
ferred to  that  city  ;  and  in  order  to  encourage  the
building  of  houses,  all  householders  were  entitled
to  a  share  of  the  imperial  bounty.  (Zosim.  ii.  32  ;
Socrat.  H.  E.  ii.  13  ;  Sozom.  iii.  7  ;  Cod.  Theod.
14.  tit.  17.)  The  distribution  of  bread  at  Rome
was,  however,  still  continued  ;  and  the  care  which
the  later  emperors  took  that  both  Rome  and  Con-
stantinople should  be  properly  supplied  with  corn,
may  be  seen  by  the  regulations  in  the  Cod.  Theod.
14.  tit.  15,  De  Canone  Frumentario  urbis  Romae^
and  tit.  1 6,  Z>e  Frumento  Urbis  Constantinopolitamie.
The  superintendence  of  the  com -market,  under  the
emperors,  belonged  to  the  Praefectus  Annonae.

Many  points  connected  with  this  subject  have
been  necessarily  omitted  in  consequence  of  our
limits.  The  reader  who  wishes  for  further  in-
formation is  referred  to :  Contareni,  De  Fi'um.
Rom.  Largitione.,  in  the  Thesaurus  of  Graevius,
vol.  viii.  p.  923  ;  Dirksen,  Civilist.  Abhandlungen^


FUCUS
rol.  ii.  p.  163,  &c.  ;  Mommsen,  Die  RomiscJiefi
Trious,  Altona,  1844,  which  work  contains  the
best  account  of  the  subject;  Kuhn,  Ueber  die  Korn-
iinfuhr  in  Rom  im  Alterthum,  in  the  Zeitachrift
f'iir  die  AUerthumswissenscha/t,  1845,  pp.  093 —
'l008,  1073 — 1084  ;  Rein,  in  the  Real-Encyelo-
p'ddie  der  classischen  A Iterthumswissenscha/t,  art.
Largitio  ;  Hockh,  Romische  Gesdiichte,  vol.  i.  part
ii.  p.  138,  &:c.,  p.  384,  &c.  ;  Walter,  Geschichte  des
Rdmischen  Rechts,  §§  276—278,  360,  361,  2nd  ed.
FRUMENTA'RII,  officers  under  the  Roman
empire,  who  acted  as  spies  in  the  provinces,  and
reported  to  the  eniperors  anything  which  they
considered  of  importance.  (Aurel.  Vict.  De  Caes.
39,  siAfin.  ;  Spartian.  HadHan.  11  ;  Capitol.  Ma-
crin.  12,  Cominod.  4.)  They  appear  to  have  been
called  Frumentarii  because  it  was  their  duty  to
collect  information  in  the  same  way  as  it  was  the
duty  of  other  officers,  called  by  the  same  name,  to
collect  corn.  They  were  accustomed  to  accuse
persons  falsely,  and  their  office  was  at  length
abolished  by  Diocletian,  We  frequently  find  in
inscriptions  mention  made  of  Frumentarii  belong-
ing to  particular  legions  (Orelli,  Liscr.  74,  3491,
4922),  from  which  it  has  been  supposed  that  the
frumentarii,  who  acted  as  s-pies,  were  soldiers
attached  to  the  legions  in  the  provinces  ;  they  may,
however,  have  been  different  officers,  whose  duty  it
was  to  distribute  the  corn  to  the  legions.

F  R  U  M  E  N  T  A' T 1 0.  [Fkumentariae

Leges.]

FUCUS  ((pvKos),  was  the  general  term  to  sig-
nify the  paint  which  the  Greek  and  Roman  ladies
employed  in  painting  their  cheeks,  eye-brows,  and
other  parts  of  their  faces.     The  practice  of  painting
the  face  was  very  general  ainong  the  Greek  ladies,
and  probably  came  into  fashion  in  consequence  of
tlijir  sedentary  mode  of  life,  which  robbed   their
complexions  of  their  natural  freshness,  and  induced
them  to  have  recourse  to  artificial  means  for  re-
storing the  red  and  white  of  nature.     This  at  the
least  is  the  reason  given  by  some  of  the  ancient
writers    themselves.      (Xen.    Oecon.    10.    §    10  ;
Phintys,  ap.  Stolxieum,  tit.  Ixxiv.  61.)     The  prac-
tice, however,  was  of  great  antiquity  among  the
(ireeks,  and  was  probably  first  introduced  among
the  Asiatic  lonians  from  the  East,  where  the  custom
has  prevailed  from  the  earliest  times.     That  it  was
as  ancient  as  the  time  of  Homer  is  inferred  from  the
expression   eTrtxpitracra  irapeids   {Od.  xviii.   172),
but  this  is  perhaps  hardly  sufficient  to  prove  that
the  cheeks  were  painted.     The  ladies  at  Athens,  as
might  have  been  expected,  did  not  always  paint
their  faces  when  at  home,  but  only  had  recourse  to
this  adornment  when  they  went  abroad  or  wished
to  appear  beautiful  or  captivating.     Of  this  we  have
a  striking  example  in  the  speech  of  Lysias  on  the
murder   of  Eratosthenes,    in  which  it   is  related
(p.  93.  20,  ed.  Steph.)  that  the  wife,  after  leaving
-     her  husband  to  visit  her  paramour,  painted  herself,
which    the    husband  observed   on   the   following
morning,   remarking,    €5o|6  Se    fxoi   rh    irpdarwnou
iypifjLvBioocrdai.    {Comp.  Aristoph.  Li/sistr.  149,  EccL
878,  Flut.  1064  ;  Plut.  Alcib.  39.)     In  order  to
give  a  blooming  colour  to  the  cheeks,  6.yxov(Ta  or
l7Xou(ra,  a  red,  obtained  from  the  root  of  a  plant,
was  most  frequently  employed  (Xen.  Oecon.    10,
§  2)  ;  and  the  following  paints  were  also  used  to
produce  the  same  colour,  namely,  Traidepcas,  also  a
.  vegetable   dye   resembling   the   rosy    hue  on  the
cheeks  of  young  children  (Alexis,  ap.  Athen.  xiii.


FULLO.


Ul


p,  568,  c),  avKaixivov  (Eubulis,  ap.  Athm.  xiii.
p,  557,  f),  and  (^O/coy,  which  was  probably  a  red
paint,  though  used  to  signify  paint  in  general,  as
has  been  alreadj'^  remarked.  In  order  to  produce
a  fair  complexion,  >plfj.vdi.ov,  centssa,  white  lead
was  employed,  (Alexis,  ap.  Athen  I.e.;  Xen.
Oecon.  10,"§2  ;  Aristoph,  Eccl.  878,  929.)  The
eve-brows  and  eye-lids  were  stained  black  with
(rri^jxi  or  aTi/xfjLis,  a  sulphuret  of  antimony,  which
is  still  employed  by  the  Turkish  ladies  for  the
same  purpose,  (Pollux,  v.  101.)  The  eye-brows
were  likewise  stained  with  &(r§o\os,  a  preparation
of  soot.     Thus  Alexis  says  (/.  c),

ras  o(ppvs  irvppas  exet  ris'  ^coypacpovaiv  aa66\(p.

(Comp.  Juv.ii.  93.)  Ladies,  who  used  paint,  were
occasionally  l>etrayed  by  perspiration,  tears,  &c.,  of
which  a  humorous  picture  is  given  by  the  comic  poet
Eubulus  (ap.. Athen.  I.e.),  and  by  Xenophon  {Oecon.


lO.S


5)


that  even  in  his  time  men  sometimes  used  paint,  and
in  later  times  it  may  have  been  still  more  common  :
Demetrius  Phalereus  is  expressly  said  to  have
done  so,    (Duris,  ap.  Athen.  xii.  p,  542,  d,)

Among  the  Romans  the  art  of  painting  the  com-
plexion was  carried  to  a  still  greater  extent  than
among  the  Greeks  ;  and  even  Ovid  did  not  disdain
to  write  a  poem  on  the  subject,  which  he  calls  (de  Art.
^m.  iii,  206)  "parvus,  sed  cura  grande,  libellus,
opus  ; '"  though  the  genuineness  of  the  fragment  of  the
Medicamina  faciei,  ascribed  to  this  poet,  is  doubt-
ful. The  Roman  ladies  even  went  so  far  as  to
paint  with  blue  the'  veins  on  the  temples,  as  we
may  infer  from  Propertius  (ii.  14.  27),  "  si  caeruleo
quaedam  sua  tempora  fuco  tinxerit."  The  ri-
diculous use  of  patches  (splenia),  which  were
common  among  the  English  ladies  in  the  reign  of
Queen  Anne  and  the  first  Georges,  was  not  unknown
to  the  Roman  ladies.  (Mart.  ii.  29.  9,  x.  22;
Plin.  Ep.  vi.  2.)  The  more  eft'eminate  of  the  male
sex  at  Rome  also  employed  paint.  Cicero  speaks
(m  Pison.  11)  of  the  cerussatae  buecae  of  his
enemy,  the  consul  Piso,

On  a  Greek  vase  (Tischbein,  Engraxiings,  ii,  58)
we  see  the  figure  of  a  female  engaged  in  putting
the  paint  upon  her  face  with  a  small  brush.     This
figure   is   copied   in    Bottiger's   Sahina    (pi.    ix,),
(Comp.  Becker,    Ckarikles,   vol.  ii.    p.  232,  &c.  j
IJottiger,  Sabina,  vol.  i.  p.  24,  &c.,  p,  51,  &c,)
FUGA  LATA,     [Exsilium,]
FUGA  LIBERA,     [Exsilium,]
FUGITIVA'RIUS.     [Servus.J
FUGITI'VUS,     [Servus.]
FULCRUM.     [Lectus.]
FULLO      (/cj'a^evs,     yuacpevs),     also     called
NACCA    (Festus,  s.  v.  ;    Apul.  Met.  ix.  p.  206,
Bipont),  a  fuller,  a  washer  or  scourer  of  cloth  and
linen.     The  fullones  not  only  received  the  cloth  as
it    came  from    the    loom    in    order    to  scour  and
smooth  it,  but  also  washed  and  cleansed  garments
which  had  been  already  worn.     As  the  Romans
generally  wore  woollen  dresses,  which  were   often
of  a  light  colour,  they  frequently  needed,  in  the
hot  climate  of  Italy,  a  thorough  purification.     The
way  in  which  this  was  done  has  been  described  by
Pliny    and    other    ancient    writers,    but    is    most
clearly  explained  by  some  paintings  which  have  been
found  on  the  walls  of  a  fullonica  at  Pompeii.    Two
of  these  paintings  are  given  by  Gell  {Pompeiana,
vol,  ii,  pi.  51,  52),  and  the  whole  of  them  in  the
Museo  Borbonico  (vol.  iv.  pi,  49,  50)  ;   from  the
N  .V   4


r*52


FULLO.


FULLO.


latter  of  which  works  the  following  cuts  have  been
taken.

The  clothes  were  first  washed,  which  was  done
in  tubs  or  vats,  where  they  were  trodden  upon  and
stamped  by  the  feet  of  the  fuUones,  whence
Seneca  (Ep.  15)  speaks  of  salius  fullonicus.  The
following  woodcut  represents  four  pepsons  thus  em-
ployed, of  whom  three  are  boys,  probably  under
the  superintendence  of  the  man.  Their  dress  is
tucked  up,  leaving  the  legs  bare  ;  the  boys  seem  to
have  done  their  work,  and  to  be  wringing  the
articles  on  which  they  had  been  employed.


The  ancients  were  not  acquainted  with  soap,  but
they  used  in  its  stead  different  kinds  of  alkali,  by
which  the  dirt  was  more  easily  separated  from  the
clothes.  Of  these,  by  far  the  most  common  was
the  urine  of  men  and  animals,  which  was  mixed
Avith  the  water  in  which  the  clothes  were  washed.
(Plin.  H.  N.  xxviii.  18.  26  ;  Athen.  xi.  p.  484.)
To  procure  a  sufficient  supply  of  it,  the  fullones
were  accustomed  to  place  at  the  corners  of  the
streets  vesselsL,  which  they  carried  away  after  they
had  been  filled  by  the  passengers.  (Martial,  vi.  93  ;
M.a.cxoh.  ScUum.  ii.  12.)  We  are  told  by  Suetonius
(  Vesp.  23)  that  Vespasian  imposed  a  urinae  vectigal^
which  is  supposed  by  Gasaubon  and  others  to  have
been  a  tax  paid  by  the  fullones.  Nitrum,  of  wliich
Pliny  {H.  N.  xxxi.  46)  gives  an  account,  was  also
mixed  with  the  water  by  the  scourers.  Fullers'
earth  {creta  fullonia,  Plin.  H.  A^.  xviii.  4),  of  which
there  were  many  kinds,  was  emploj'ed  for  the
same  purpose.  We  do  not  know  the  exact  nature
of  this  earth,  but  it  appears  to  have  acted  in  the
same  way  as  our  fullers'  eartli,  namely,  partly  in
scouring  and  partly  in  absorbing  the  greasy  dirt.
Pliny  (//.  A^.  xxxv.  57)  says  that  the  clothes  should
be  washed  with  the  Sardinian  earth.

After  the  clothes  had  been  washed,  they  were
hung  out  to  dry,  and  were  allowed  to  be  placed  in
the  street  before  the  doors  of  the  fuUonica.  (Dig.
43.  tit.  10.  s.  1.  §4.)  When  dry,  the  wool  was
brushed  and  carded  to  raise  the  nap,  sometimes
with  the  skin  of  a  hedgehog,  and  sometimes  with
some  plants  of  the  thistle  kind.  The  clothes  were
then  hung  on  a  vessel  of  basket-work  {viminea
cavea\  under  which  sulphur  was  placed  in  order  to
whiten  the  cloth  ;  for  the  ancient  fullers  appear  to
have  known  that  many  colours  were  destroyed  by
the  volatile  steam  of  sulphur.  (Apul.  Met.  ix.
p.  208,  Bipont  ;  Plin.  //.  A^.  xxxv.  50,  57  ;  Pol-
lux, vii.  41.)  A  fine  white  earth,  called  Cimolian
by  Pliny,  was  often  rubbed  into  the  cloth  to  in-
crease its  whiteness.  (Theophr.  Char.  10  ;  Plant.
Aulul.  iv.  9.  6  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.  57.)  The  pre-
ceding account  iS  well  illustrated  by  the  following
woodcut.

On  the  left  we  see  a  fuUo  brushing  or  carding  a
white  tunic,  suspended  over  a  rope,  with  a  card  or


brush,  which  bears  considerable  resemblance  to  a
modern  horse-brush.  On  the  right,  another  man
carries  a  frame  of  wicker-work,  which  was  without
doubt  intended  for  the  purpose  described  above ;
he  has  also  a  pot  in  his  hand,  perhaps  intended  for
holding  the  sulphur.  On  his  head  he  wears  a  kind
of  garland,  which  is  supposed  to  be  an  olive  garland,
and  above  him  an  owl  is  represented  sitting.  It  is
thought  that  the  olive  garland  and  the  owl  indicate
that  the  establishment  was  under  the  patronage  of
Minerva,  the  tutelary  goddess  of  the  loom.  Sir  W.
Gell  imagines  ttiat  the  owl  is  probably  the  picture
of  a  bird  which  really  existed  in  the  family.  On
the  left,  a  well-dressed  female  is  sitting,  examining
a  piece  of  work  which  a  younger  girl  brings  to  her.
A  reticulum  [see  p.  329,  a]  upon  her  head,  a  neck-
lace, and  bracelets  denote  a  person  of  higher  rank
than  one  of  the  ordinary  work-people  of  the  es-
tablishment.

In  the  following  woodcut  we  see  a  young  man
in  a  green  tunic  giving  a  piece  of  cloth,  which  ap-
pears to  be  finished,  to  a  woman,  who  wears  a
green  xmder- tunic,  and  over  it  a  yellow  tunic  with


red  stripes.  On  the  right  i«  another  female  in  a
white  tunic,  who  appears  to  be  engaged  in  cleaning
one  of  the  cards  or  brushes.  Among  these  paint-
ings there  was  a  press,  worked  by  two  upright
screws,  in  which  the  cloth  was  placed  to  be
smoothened.  A  drawing  of  this  press  is  given  on
p.  300.

The  establishment  or  workshop  of  the  fullers  was
called  FuUonica  (Dig.  39.  tit  3.  s.  3),  FuUonicum


FUNAMBULUS.
(Dig.  7.  tit  1.  8.  1 3.  §  8),  or  Fullonium  ( Amm.
Marc.  xiv.  11.  p.  44,  Bipont.)  Of  such  establish-
ments there  were  great  numbers  in  Rome,  for  the
Romans  do  not  appear  to  have  washed  at  home
even  their  linen  clothes.  (Martial,  xiv.  51.)  The
trade  of  the  fullers  was  considered  so  important
that  the  censors,  C.  Flaminius  and  L.  Aemilius,
B.  c.  220,  prescribed  the  mode  in  which  the  dresses
were  to  be  washed.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.  57.)  Like
the  other  principal  trades  in  Rome,  the  Fullones
formed  a  collegium.  (Fabretti,  Inscr.  p.  278.)  To
large  farms  a  fullonica  was  sometimes  attached,  in
which  the  work  was  perfonned  by  the  slaves  who
belonged  to  the  familia  rustica.  (Varro,  R.  R.  i.
16.)

The  fullo  was  answerable  for  the  property  while
it  was  in  his  possession  ;  and  if  he  returned  by  mis-
take a  different  garment  from  the  one  he  had  re-
ceived, he  was  liable  to  an  action  eos  locato  ;  to
which  action  he  was  also  subject  if  the  garment'
was  injured.  (Dig.  1 9.  tit.  2.  s.  1 3.  §  6  ;  s.  60.  §  2 ;
12  tit.  7.  s.  2.)  Woollen  garments,  which  had  been
once  washed,  were  considered  to  be  less  valuable
than  they  were  previously  (Petron.  30;  Lamprid.
Heliogah.  26)  ;  hence  Martial  (x.  11)  speaks  of  a
toga  lota  terque  quaterque  as  a  poor  present.

The  Greeks  were  also  accustomed  to  send  their
garments  to  fullers  to  be  washed  and  scoured,  who
appear  to  have  adopted  a  similar  method  to  that
which  has  been  described  above.  (Theophr.  Char.
10;  Athen.  xi.  p.  582,  d. ;  Pollux,  vii.  39,  40,41.)
The  word  irXvyeiv  denoted  the  washing  of  linen,
and  Kva(p€V€iy  or  7i/a(/)eue<»' the  washing  of  woollen,
clothes.  {Eustath.  ad  Od.  xxiv.  148.  p.  1956.  41.)
(Schbttgen  Antiquitates  Triturae  et  Fulloniae,
Traj.  ad  Rhen.  1727  ;  Beckmann,  Hist,  of  Inven-
tions and  Discoveries,  vol.  iii.  p.  266,  &c.,  transl. :
Becker,  Gallus,  vol.  ii.  p.  100,  &c.,  Charikles.,
vol.  ii.  p.  408.)

FULLO^NICA.  [Fullo.]
FUNA'LE  {(TKoXd^,  Isid.  Orig.  xx.  10),  a  link,
used  in  the  same  manner  as  a  torch  [Fax],  but
made  of  papyrus  and  other  fibrous  plants,  twisted
like  a  rope,  and  smeared  with  pitch  and  wax.
(Virg.  A  en.  i.  727  ;  Servius,  ad  loc;  Hor.  Car7n.
iii.  26.  7 ;  Val.  Max.  iii.  6.  §  4.)  It  was  indeed,
as  Antipater  describes  it,  "a  light  coated  with
wax  "  (Ao/iTTOis  KT]poxiTwv,  Brunck,  Anal.  ii.  112  ;
Jacobs,  ad  loc.).  For  this  reason  it  was  also  called
cereus.  Funalia  are  sculptured  upon  a  monument
of  considerable  antiquity  preserved  at  Padua,
(Pignor.  De  Servis,  p.  259.)  At  the  Saturnalia
they  were  presented  by  clients  to  their  superiors,
and  were  lighted  in  honour  of  Saturn.  (Antipater,
/.  c.  ;  Macrob.  Sat.  i.  6.)  [J.  Y.]

FUNA'LIS  EQUUS.     [Currus.  p.  379,b.]
FUNA'MBULUS  (KaXoSa.T'ns  arxoivoSdr-ns),
a  rope-dancer.     The  art  of  dancing  on  the  tight
rope  was  carried  to  as  great  perfection  among  the
Romans  as  it  is  with  us.     (Hor.  Epist.  ii.  1.  210;
Terent.  Hecyr.  Prol.  4.  34  ;  Juv.  iii.  80 ;  Bulenger,
de  Tlieat.  i.  42.)     If  we  may  judge  from  a  series  of
paintings  discovered  in  the  excavations  (J  «<.  d^Ercol.
T.  iii.  p.  160 — 165),  from  which  the  figures  in
the  annexed  woodcut  are  selected,  the  performers
placed  themselves  in  an  endless  variety  of  graceful
'         and  sportive  attitudes,  and  represented  the  charac-
ters   of  bacchanals,  satyrs,  and   other  imaginary
^  beings.     Three  of  the  persons  here  exhibited  hold

j  the  thjTsus,  which  may  have  served  for  a  balancing

j         |K)le     two  .ore  performing  on  the  double  pipe,  and


FUNDA.


553


one  on  the  lyre  :  two  others  are  pouring  wine  into
vessels  of  different  forms.  They  all  have  their
heads  enveloped  in  skins  or  caps,  probably  intended
as  a  protection  in  case  of  falling.  The  emperor
Antoninus,  in  consequence  of  the  fall  of  a  boy,
caused  feather-beds  {culeitras)  to  be  laid  under  the
rope  to  obviate  the  danger  of  such  accidents.
(Capitol.  M.  Anton.  12.)  One  of  the  most  difficult
exploits  was  running  down  the  rope  (Sueton.  Nero,
11)  at  the  conclusion  of  the  performance.  It  was
a  strange  attempt  of  Germanicus  and  of  the  em-
peror Galba  to  exhibit  elephants  walking  on  the
rope.  (Plin.  //.  A^.  viii.  2  ;  Sueton.  Galb.Q  ;  Sen.
Epist.  86.)  [J.  y.l

FUMA'RIUM.     [ViNUM.]

FUNDA  (a'4>€vSo'i/7j),  a  sling.  The  light  troops
of  the  Greek  and  Roman  armies  consisted  in  great
part  of  slingers  {funditores,  <r(p€vSovfiTai).  In  the
earliest  times,  however,  the  sling  appears  not  to
have  been  used  by  the  Greeks.  It  is  not  men-
tioned in  the  Iliad  ;  for  in  the  onl)'-  passage  {IL
xiii.  599)  in  which  the  word  (r(j)€vS6ur}  occurs,  it  is
used  in  its  original  signification  of  a  bandage.  But
in  the  times  of  the  Persian  wars  slingers  had  come
into  use  ;  for  among  the  other  troops  which  Gelon
offered  to  send  to  the  assistance  of  the  Greeks
against  Xerxes,  mention  is  made  of  2000  slingers
(Herod,  vii.  158)  ;  and  that  the  sling  was  then
known  among  the  Greeks  is  also  evident  from  the
allusion  to  it  hj  Aeschylus  {Agam.  982).  At
the  same  time  it  must  be  stated  that  we  rarely  read
of  slingers  in  these  wars.  Among  the  Greeks  the
Acamanians  in  early  times  attained  to  the  greatest
expertness  in  the  use  of  this  weapon  (Thuc.  ii.  81);
and  at  a  later  time  the  Achaeans,  especially  the  in-
habitants of  Agium,  Patrae,  and  Dymae,  were  cele-
brated as  expert  slingers.  The  slings  of  these  Achae-
ans were  made  of  three  thongs  of  leather,  and  not  of
one  only,  like  those  of  other  nations.  (Liv.  xxxviii.
29.)  The  people,  however,  who  enjoyed  the  greatest
celebrity  as  slingers  were  the  natives  of  the  Balearic
islands.'  Their  skill  in  the  use  of  this  weapon  is  said
to  have  arisen  from  the  circumstance,  that,  when
they  were  children,  their  mothers  obliged  them  to
obtain  their  food  by  striking  it  with  a  sling.  ( Veget.


554


FUNDUS.


lie  Ee Mil  i.  1 6 ;  Strab.  iii.  p.  1 68.)  Most  slings  were
made  of  leather,  but  the  Balearic  ones  were  manu-
factured out  of  a  kind  of  rush.  (Strab.  /.  c.)  The
manner  in  which  the  siing  was  wielded  may  be  seen
in  the  annexed  figure  (Bartoli,  Cul.  Traj.  t.  46)  of  a


soldier  with  a  provision  of  stones  in  the  sinus  of  his
pallium,  and  with  his  arm  extended  in  order  to  whirl
the  sling  about  his  head.  (Virg.  Aen.  ix.  587,  588,
xi.  579.)  Besides  stones,  plummets,  called  glandes
(fj.oXv€5ides),  of  a  form  between  acorns  and  al-
monds, were  cast  in  moulds  to  be  thrown  with
slings.  (Lucret.  vi.  176  ;  Ovid,  Met.  ii.  72.9,  vii.
778,  xiv.  825,  826.)  They  have  been  found  on
the  plain  of  Marathon,  and  in  other  parts  of  Greece,
and  are  remarkable  for  the  inscriptions  and  devices
which  they  exhibit,  such  as  thunderbolts,  the  names
of  persons,  and  the  word  AEHAI,  meaning  "  Take
this,"  (Dodweirs  Totir^  vol.  ii.  pp.  159 — 161  ;
Bockh,  Corp.  Ins.  vol.  i.  p.  311  ;  Moramseu,  in
Zeitschrift  fur  die  Alterthumswissenschajt,  1846,
p.  782.)  ^  [J.  Y.]

While  the  sling  was  a  very  efficacious  and  im-
portant instrument  of  ancient  warfare,  stones  thrown
with  the  hand  alone  were  also  much  in  use  both
among  the  Romans  (Veget.  i.  1 6,  ii.  23)  and  with
other  nations  (ot  TrerpogjAoj,  Xen.  Hellen.  ii.  4.
§  12).  The  Libyans  carried  no  other  arms  than
three  spears  and  a  bag  full  of  stones.  (Diod.  Sic.
iii.  49.)

FUNDITORES.     [Fund  a.]

FUNDUS.  The  primary  signification  of  this
word  appears  to  be  the  bottom  or  foundation  of  a
thing  ;  and  its  elementary  part  (fud),  seems  to  be
the  same  as  that  of  fivOos  and  irvQ^jx-nu^  the  n  in
fundus  being  used  to  strengthen  the  syllable.  The
conjectures  of  the  Latin  writers  as  to  the  etymo-
logy of  fundus  may  be  safely  neglected.

Fundus  is  often  used  as  applied  to  land,  the
solid  substratum  of  all  man's  labours.  According  to
Florentinus  (Dig.  50.  tit.  16.  s.  211)  the  term  fundus
comprised  all  land  and  constructions  on  it ;  but
usage  had  restricted  the  name  of  aedes  to  city
houses,  villae  to  rural  houses,  area  to  a  plot  of
ground  in  a  city  not  built  upon,  ager  to  a  plot  of
ground  in  the  country,  and  fundus  to  ager  cum
aedifidis.  This  definition  of  fundus  may  be  com-
pared with  the  uses  of  that  word  by  Horace,  and
other  writers.  In  one  passage  {Ep.  i.  2.  47),
Horace  places  domus  and  fundus  in  opposition  to
one  another,  domus  being  apparently  there  used  as
equivalent  to  aedes.

The  term  fundus  often  occurred  in  Roman  wills.


FUN  US.
and  the  testator  frequently  indicated  the  fundus,  to
which  his  last  dispositions  referred,  by  some  name,
such  as  Sempronianus,  Seianus ;  sometimes  also,
with  reference  to  a  particular  tract  of  country-,  as
Fundus  Trebatianus  qui  est  in  regione  Atellana.
(Brissonius,  de  Formulis,  vii.  80.)  A  fundus  was
sometimes  devised  cum  omni  instru)nento,  with  its
stock  and  implements  of  husbandry.  Occasionally
a  question  arose  as  to  the  extent  of  the  word  in-
strumentum,  between  or  among  the  parties  who  de-
rived their  claim  from  a  testator.  (Dig.  33.  tit.  17.
s.  12.)

Fundus  has  a  derived  sense  which  flows  easily
enough  from  its  primary  meaning.  "Fundus,"
says  Festus,  "  dicitur  populus  esse  rei,  quam  alienat,
hoc  est  auctor."  [Auctor.]  Compare  Plautus,
Trinum.  v.  i.  7  (fundus  potior).  In  this  sense
"  fundus  esse  "  is  to  confirm  or  ratify  a  thing ;
and  in  Gellins  (xix.  8)  there  is  the  expression
"  sententiae  legisque  fundus  subscriptorque  fieri."
[FOEDKKATI.]  [G.  L.]

FUNES.     [Navis.]

FUN  US.  It  is  proposed  in  the  following  article
to  give  a  brief  account  of  Greek  and  Roman
funerals,  and  of  the  different  rites  and  ceremonies
connected  therewith.

1.  Greek.  The  Greeks  attached  great  import-
ance to  the  burial  of  the  dead.  They  believed
that  souls  could  not  enter  the  Elysian  fields  till
their  bodies  had  been  buried  ;  and  accordingly  we
find  the  shade  of  Elpenor  in  the  Odyssey  (xi.  66.
Sic.)  earnestly  imploring  Ulysses  to  bury  his  bod}^
Ulysses  also,  when  in  danger  of  shipwreck,  deplores
that  he  had  not  fallen  before  Troy,  as  he  should  in
that  case  have  obtained  an  honourable  burial,  (Od.
V.  311.)  So  strong  was  this  feeling  among  the
Greeks,  that  it  was  considered  a  religious  duty  to
throw  earth  upon  a  dead  body,  which  a  person
might  happen  to  find  unburied  (Ael.  Var.  Nisi.  v.
14)  ;  and  among  the  Athenians,  those  children  who
were  released  from  all  other  obligations  to  unworthy
parents,  were  nevertheless  bound  to  bury  them  by
one  of  Solon's  laws.  (Aesch.  c.  Timarc.  p.  40.)
The  neglect  of  burying  one's  relatives  is  frequently
mentioned  by  the  omtors  as  a  grave  charge  against
the  moral  character  of  a  man  (Dem.  c.  Aristog.
i.  p.  787.  2  ;  Lys.  c.  Phil  p.  883,  c.  Alcib.  p.  539),
since  the  burial  of  the  body  by  the  relations  of  the
dead  was  considered  a  religious  duty  by  the  uni-
versal law  of  the  Greeks.  Sophocles  represents
Antigone  as  disregarding  all  consequences  in  order
to  bur}'  the  dead  body  of  her  brother  Polyneices,
which  Creon,  the  king  of  Thebes,  had  commanded
to  be  left  unburied.  The  common  expressions  for
the  funeral  rites,  to  diKaia,  v6nifxa  or  voixi^Six^vay
■npo(TT]KovTa,  show  that  the  dead  had,  as  it  were,  a
legal  and  moral  claim  to  burial.

The  common  customs  connected  with  a  Greek
funeral  are  described  by  Lucian  in  his  treatise  de
Luctu  (c.  10,  &c.,  vol,  ii.  p.  926.  ed.  Reitz)  ;  and
there  is  no  reason  for  supposing  that  they  differ
much  from  those  which  were  practised  in  earlier
times.  After  a  person  was  dead,  it  was  the  cus-
tom first  to  place  in  his  mouth  an  obolus,  called
SavaKT}  [Danace],  with  which  he  might  pay  the
ferryman  in  Hades.  The  body  was  tlien  washed
and  anointed  with  perfumed  oil,  and  the  head  Avas
crowTied  with  the  flowers  which  happened  to  be  in
season.  The  deceased  was  next  dressed  in  as
handsome  a  robe  as  the  family  could  afford,  in
order,  according  to  Lucian,  that  he  might  not  be


FUN  us.

cold  on  tha  passage  to  Hades,  nor  be  seen  naked
by  Cerberus :  this  garment  appears  to  have  been
usually  white.  {II.  xviii.  353  ;  Artemiod.  Onelrocr.
ii,  3.)  These  duties  were  not  perfonned  by  hired
persons,  like  the  pollinctores  among  the  Romans,
but  by  the  women  of  the  family,  upon  whom  the  care
of  the  corpse  always  devolved,  (Isaeus,  de  Philoct.
luir.  p.  143,  de  Ciron.  her.  p.  209.)

The  corpse  was  then  laid  out  (irptJfleo-is,  irpori-
OeaOai )  on  a  bed  (kAiVtj),  which  appears  to  have
been  of  the  ordinary  kind,  with  a  pillow  (TrpoaKe-
(pdXaioy)  for  supporting  the  head  and  back.  (  Lys.
c.  Eratosth.  p.  395.)  It  is  said  that  the  bed  on
which  the  corpse  was  laid  out  was  originally  placed
outside  the  house  (Schol.  ad  Aristoph.  Lysistr.
611)  ;  but  at  Athens  we  know  it  was  placed  in-
side, by  one  of  Solon's  laws.  (Dem.  c.  Macart.
p.  1071.)  The  object  of  this  formal  iTp6di(ns  was
that  it  might  be  seen  that  the  deceased  had  died
natui*allv,  and  that  no  violence  had  been  done  to
him.  (Pollux,  viii.  65.)  Plato  {Ley.  xii.  9.  p.  959)
assigns  another  reason,  namely,  that  there  might
be  no  doubt  that  the  person  was  dead,  and  says,
that  the  body  ought  only  to  be  kept  in  the  house
so  long  as  it  may  be  necessary  to  ascertain  that  fact.
By  the  side  of  the  bed  there  were  placed  painted
earthen  vessels,  called  \-i]KvQoi  (Aristoph.  Eccl.
1032,  99^),  which  were  also  buried  with  the
corpse  ;  examples  of  which  may  be  seen  in  the
drawings  of  the  coffins  given  by  Bottiger  (  Vaseng.
title-page)  and  Stackelberg(Z)ze  Gr'dherder  Hellenen,
pi.  8).  Great  numbers  of  these  painted  vases  have
been  found  in  modern  times  ;  and  ,they  have  been
of  great  use  in  explaining  many  matters  connected
with  antiquity.  A  honey-cake,  called  n^AiTTovra,
which  appears  to  have  been  intended  for  Cerberus,
was  also  placed  by  the  side  of  the  corpse.  (Aristoph.
Lt/sistr.  601,  with  Schol.  ;  compare  Virg.  Aen.  vi.
41 9.)  Before  the  door  a  vessel  of  water  was  placed,
called  ua-TpaKov,  apSd\iou  or  apSdviov,  in  order  that
persons  who  had  been  in  the  house  might  purify
themselves  by  sprinkling  water  on  their  persons.
(Aristoph.  Eccl.  1033  ;  Pollux,  viii.  ()5  ;  Hesych.
s.  V.  'ApS.)  The  relatives  stood  around  the  bed,  the
women  uttering  great  lamentations,  rending  their
garments  and  tearing  their  hair.  (Lucian.  lb.  12.)
Solon  attempted  to  put  a  stop  to  this  (Plut.  Sol.
12.  21),  but  his  regulations  on  the  subject  do  not
appear  to  have  been  generally  observed.  It  was
formerly  the  practice  to  sacrifice  victims  before
carrying  out  the  dead  ;  but  this  custom  was  not
observed  in  the  time  of  Plato.  {Min.  p.  315.)  No
females  under  60  j'ears  of  age,  except  the  nearest
relations  {ivrhs  di/ei^iaSwi'),  were  allowed  to  be
present  while  the  corpse  was  in  the  house.  (Dem.
c.  Macart.  p.  1071.)

On  ihe  day  after  the  TrpSdscris,  or  the  third  day-
after  death,  the  corpse  was  carried  out  (e/ccpopo,
iKKOfj-iS-f])  for  burial,  early  in  the  morning  and  be-
fore sunrise,  by  a  law  of  Solon,  which  law  appears
to  have  been  revived  by  Demetrius  Phalereus.
(Dem.  Z.  c;  Antiph.  de  Chor.  p.  782  ;  Cic.  de
Leg.  ii.  26.)  A  burial  soon  after  death  was  sup-
posed to  be  pleasing  to  the  dead.  Thus  we  find
the  shade  of  Patroclus  saying  to  Achilles  (11.  xxiii.
71).^

©c^TTTe  yue  oTTi  rdxKTTa^  TTvKas  diSao  Treprjcrai.
(Compare  Xen.  Mern.  i.  2.  §  53.)     In  some  places
it  appears  to  have  been  usual  to  bury  the  dead  on
the  da3'  following  death.    (Callim.  Epigr.  15  ;  Diog.
Laert.    i.    122.)      The   men   walked  before    the


FUN  US.


555


corpse  and  the  women  behind.  (Dem.  /.  c.)  The
funeral  procession  was  preceded  or  followed  by
hired  mourners  {^prjvcfSoi),  who  appear  to  have
been  usually  Carian  women,  though  Plato  speaks
of  men  engaged  in  this  office.  They  played  mourn-
ful tunes  on  the  flute.  (Plat.  Leg.  vii.  9.  p.  800  ;
Hesych.  s.  v.  Kapiyai  ;  Pollux,  iv.  75.)

The  body  was  either  buried  or  burnt.  Lucian
{lb.  21)  says  that  the  Greeks  bum  and  the  Per-
sians bury  their  dead  ;  but  modern  writers  are-
greatly  divided  in  opinion  as  to  which  was  th©
usual  practice.  Wachsmuth  says  that  in  historical
times  the  dead  were  alwa_ys  buried  ;  but  this  state-
ment is  not  strictly  correct.  Thus  we  find  that
Socrates  speaks  of  his  body  being  either  burnt  or
buried  (Plat.  Pluied.  p.  1 15)  ;  the  body  of  Timoleon
was  burnt  (Plut.  Timol.  39),  and  so  was  that  of
Philopoemen.  {Idi.  Philop.2\.)  The  word  3d7rT€i»'
is  used  in  connection  with  either  mode  ;  it  is  applied
to  the  collection  of  the  ashes  after  burning,  and  ac-
cordingly we  find  the  words  Kaieiv  and  ^dirretv
used  together.  (Dionys.  Ant.  Bom.  v.  48.)  The
proper  expression  for  interment  in  the  earth  is
KaTopvTT€iu,  whence  we  find  Socrates  speaking  of
rh  (TcofjLa  ^  Ka6/xevov  fj  KaTopvTT6fX€vou.  In  Homer
the  bodies  of  the  dead  are  burnt  {11.  xxiii.  127,
&c.,  xxiv.  787,  &c,)  ;  but  interment  was  also  used
in  very  ancient  times.  Cicero  {de  Leg.  ii.  25)  saj's
that  the  dead  were  buried  at  Athens  in  the  time
of  Cecrops  ;  and  we  also  read  of  the  bones  of  Ores-
tes being  found  in  a  coffin  at  Tegea.  (Herod,  i.  68  ;
compare  Plut. -S'oZ.  10.)  The  dead  were  commonly
buried  among  the  Spartans  (Plut.  Lye.  27  ;  com-
pare Thucyd.  i.  134)  and  the  Sicyouians  (Pans.  ii.  7.
§  3)  ;  and  the  prevalence  of  this  practice  is  proved
by  the  great  number  of  skeletons  found  in  coffins
in  modern  times,  which  have  evidently  not  been
exposed  to  the  action  of  fire.  Both  burning  and
burying  appear  to  have  been  always  used  to  a
greater  or  less  extent  at  ditferent  periods  ;  till  the
spread  of  Christianity  at  length  put  an  end  to  the
former  practice.

The  dead  bodies  were  usually  burnt  on  piles  of
wood,  called  irvpai.  The  body  was  placed  on  the
top  ;  and  in  the  heroic  times  it  was  customary  to
bum  with  the  corpse  animals  and  even  captives  or
slaves.  Thus  at  the  funeral  of  Patroclus,  Achilles
killed  many  sheep,  oxen,  horses,  and  dogs,  and
also  twelve  captive  Trojans,  whose  bodies  he  burnt
with  those  of  his  friend.  (//.  xxiii.  165,  &c.)  Oils
and  perfumes  were  also  thrown  into  the  flames
When  the  pyre  was  burnt  down,  the  remains  of
the  fire  were  quenched  with  wine,  and  the  relatives
and  friends  collected  the  bones.  {II.  xxiv.  791.)
The  bones  were  then  washed  with  wine  and  oil,
and  placed  in  urns,  which  were  sometimes  made  of
gold.     (Orf.  xxiv.  71,  «&c.)

The  corpses,  which  were  not  burnt,  were  buried
in  coffins,  which  were  called  by  various  names,  as
cropoi,  TTueA-Oi,  At/j/oj,  KdpvaKes^  SpoiTai,  though
some  of  these  names  are  also  applied  to  the  urns
in  which  the  bones  were  collected.  They  were
made  of  various  materials,  but  were  usually  of
baked  clay  or  earthenware.  Their  forms  are  very
various,  as  may  be  seen  by  a  reference  to  Stackel-
berg  {Die  Or'dber  der  Hellenen,  pi.  7,  8).    The  pre-


-c:^


556


FUNUS.


coding  woodcxit  contains  two  of  the  moiit  ancient
kind  ;  the  figure  in  the  middle  is  the  section  of  one.

The  dead  were  usually  buried  outside  the  town,
as  it  was  thought  that  their  presence  in  the  city
brought  pollution  to  the  living.  At  Athens  the
dead  were  formerly  buried  in  their  own  houses
(Plat.  Min.  I.  c),  but  in  historical  times  none  were
allowed  to  be  buried  within  the  city.  (Cic.  ad
Fam.  iv.  12.  §  3.)  Lycurgus,  in  order  to  remove
all  superstition  respecting  the  presence  of  the  dead,
allowed  of  burial  in  Sparta  (Plut.  Lye.  27);  and
at  Megara  also  the  dead  were  buried  within  the
town.     (Fans.  i.  43.  §  2.)

Persons  who  possessed  lands  in  Attica  were  fre-
quently buried  in  them,  and  we  therefore  read  of
tombs  in  the  fields.  (Dem.  c.  Emrg,^.  J 159;
Donat.  ad  Ter.  Eun.  Prol.  1 0.)  Tombs,  however,
were  most  frequently  built  by  the  side  of  roads  and
near  the  gates  of  the  city.  Thus  the  tomb  of  Tlux-
cydides  was  near  the  Melitian  gate  (Paus.  i.  23.
§  11)  ;  but  the  most  common  place  of  burial  was
outside  of  the  Itonian  gate,  near  the  road  leading  to
the  Peiraeeus,  which  gate  was  for  that  reason  called
the  burial  gate.  ('Hpiat  rrvKai,  Etym.  Mag.  and
Harpocr.  s.v.;  Theophr.  Char.  14.)  Those  who
had  fallen  in  battle  were  buried  at  the  public  ex-
pense in  the  outer  Cerameicus,  on  the  road  leading
to  the  Academia.  (Thuc.  ii.  34  ;  Paus.  i.  29.
§4.)

The  tombs  were  regarded  as  private  proportj',
and  belonged  exclusively  to  the  families  whose  re-
latives had  been  buried  in  them.  (Dem.  c.  Euind.
p.  1307,  c.  Macart.  p.  1077  ;  Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  26.)

Tombs  were  called  i&7]Ka»,  rdcpoi^  fivt^fj-ara^
Ixu7]fxe7a,  a-r^fiara.  Many  of  these  were  only
mounds  of  earth  or  stones  (xc»'/^aTa,  KoXwuai,
rufiSoi).  Others  were  built  of  stone,  and  frequently
(UTiamented  with  great  taste.  Some  of  the  most
remarkable  Greek  tombs  are  those  which  have
been  discovered  hi  Lycia  by  Sir  C.  Fellows.  In  the
neighbourhood  of  Antiphellus  the  tombs  are  very
numerous.  They  all  have  Greek  inscriptions,  which
are  generally  much  destroyed  by  the  damp  sea
air.  The  following  woodcut,  taken  from  Fellows's
work  (Exeursion  in  Asia  Minor,  p.  219),  contains
one  of  these  tombs,  and  will  give  an  idea  of  the
jjeneral  appearance  of  the  whole.


FUNUS.

At  Xantlius  the  tombs  are  still  more  numerous.
They  are  cut  into,  or  are  formed  by  cutting  away,
the  rock,  leaving  the  tombs  standing  like  works  of
sculpture.  {lb.  p.  226.)  The  same  is  the  case  at
Telmessus,  where  they  are  cut  out  of  the  rock  in
the  form  of  temples.  They  are  generally  approached
by  steps,  and  the  columns  of  the  portico  stand  out
about  six  feet  from  the  entrance  to  the  cella  ;  the
interiors  vary  but  little ;  they  are  usually  about
six  feet  in  height  and  nine  feet  by  twelve  in  size.
One  side  is  occupied  by  the  door,  and  the  other
sides  contain  benches  on  which  the  coffins  or  urns
have  been  placed.   {lb.  p.  245.)

Some  Greek  tombs  were  built  under  ground,  and
called  hypogea  {inrdyaia  or  inrdyiia).  They  cor-
respond to  the  Roman  conditoria.    (Petron.  c.  111.)

At  Athens  the  dead  appear  to  have  been  usually
buried  in  the  earth  ;  and  originally  the  place  of  their
interment  was  not  marked  by  any  monument.  (Cic.
de  Leg.  ii.  25.)  Afterwards,  however,  so  much
expense  was  incurred  in  the  erection  of  monuments
to  the  deceased,  that  it  was  provided  by  one  of
Solon's  laws,  that  no  one  should  erect  a  monument
which  could  not  be  completed  by  ten  men  in  the
course  of  three  days.  {Id.  ii.  26.)  This  law,  how-
ever, does  not  seem  to  have  been  strictly  observed.
We  read  of  one  monument  which  cost  twenty-five
minae  (Lys.  c.  Diog..-^.  905),  and  of  another  which
cost  more  than  two  talents.  (Dem.  c.  Sieph.  i.
p.  1125.  15.)  Demetrius  Phalereus  also  attempted
to  put  a  stop  to  this  expense  by  forbidding  the
erection  of  any  funeral  monument  more  than  three
cubits  in  height.    (Cic.  /.  c.)

The  monuments  erected  over  the  graves  of  per-
sons were  usually  of  four  kinds  :  1.  trrTjAai,  pillars
or  upright  stone  tablets  ;  2.  Kloyes,  columns  ;  3.
vaiSia  or  vp^a,  small  buildings  in  the  forai  of  tem-
ples ;  and  4.  rpctTre^ai,  flat  square  stones,  called  by
Cicero  (/.  c.)  mensae.  The  term  (n9\\ai  is  some-
times applied  to  all  kinds  of  funeral  monuments,
but  properly  designates  upright  stone  tablets,  which
were  usually  terminated  with  an  oval  heading,
called  eirldrjfjLa,  These  eTnO-fifiaTa  wore  frequently
ornamented  with  a  kind  of  arabesque  work,  as  in
the  two  following  specimens  taken  from  Stackel-
berg  (pi.  3).  The  shape  of  the  itriQ-q^a,  however,
sometimes  differed ;  among  the  Sicyonians  it  was


in  the  shape  of  the  olctSs  ovfastigium  [Fastigiuaj ],
I  which  is  placed  over  tlie  extremity  of  a  temple.
I      The  Kioyes,  or  columns,  were  of  varioiiB  forms.


FUN  us.

The  three  in  the  following  woodcut  are  taken  from
Stackelherg  (pi.  44,  46)  and  Millin  {Fein.de  Vases
Ant.  vol.  ii.  pi.  51.)


FUN  US.


55^7


The  following  example  of  an  fjp^ov^  which  is  also
taken  from  Stackelberg  (pi.  1 )  will  give  a  general
idea  of  monuments  of  this  kind.  Another  i^p^ou
is  given  in  the  course  of  this  article  (p.  558,  a.).


The  inscriptions  upon  these  funeral  monumpnts
usually  contain  the  name  of  the  deceased  person,
and  that  of  the  demus  to  which  he  belonged,  as
well  as  frequently  some  account  of  his  life.  A
work  on  such  monuments,  entitled  Ilept  Mv-qfidrcov
was  written  by  Diodorus  Periegetes,  (Plut.  Them.
32.)

Oi-ations  in  praise  of  the  dead  were  sometimes
pronounced  ;  but  Solon  ordained  that  such  orations
should  be  confined  to  persons  who  were  honoured
with  a  public  funeral.  (Cic.  de  Lep.  ii.  26.)  In
the  heroic  ages  games  were  celebrated  at  the  fune-
ral of  a  gi-eat  man,  as  in  the  case  of  Patroclus  (//.
xxiii.)  ;  but  this  practice  does  not  seem  to  have
been  usual  in  the  historical  times.

All  persons  who  had  been  engaged  in  funerals
were  considered  polluted,  and  could  not  enter  the
temples  of  the  gods  till  they  had  been  purified.
Those  persons  who  were  reported  to  have  died  in
foreign  countries,  and  whose  funeral  rites  had  been
performed  in  their  own  cities,  were  called  ixTrepd-
iroTfxoi  and  Seirept^TroT^uoi  if  they  were  alive.  Such
persons  were  considered  impure,"^ and  could  only  be
tlelivered  from  their  impurity  by  being  dressed  in


swaddling  clothes,  and  treated  like  new-born  in-
fants. (Hesych.  s.  v.  ;  Plut.  Quaest.  Rom.  5.)

After  the  funeral  vvas  over  the  relatives  partook
of  a  feast,  which  was  called  TT^piZenrvou  or  veKp6-
Sdiruou.  (Lucian,  lb.  c.  24  ;  Cic.  de  Leg.W.  25.)
This  feast  was  always  given  at  the  house  of  the
nearest  relative  of  the  deceased.  Thus  the  relatives
of  those  who  had  fallen  at  the  battle  of  Chaeroneia
partook  of  the  irepi^enrvov  at  the  house  of  Demo-
sthenes, as  if  he  were  the  nearest  relative  to  them
all.  (Dem.  pro  Coron.  p.  321.  15.)  These  feasts
are  frequently  represented  on  funeral  monuments.
In  one  corner  a  horse's  head  is  usually  placed,  which
was  intended  to  represent  death  as  a  journey.  The
following  woodcut,  which  represents  a  irepiSenrvou
or  veKp6Sinrvov,  is  taken  from  the  Marmora  Oxon.  i.
tab.  52.  No.  1 35.  A  similar  example  of  a  Trepideinyov
is  given  at  the  beginning  of  Hobhouse's  Travels.
(Compare  Muller,  Arch'dol.  der  Kunst,  §  428.  2.)


On  the  second  day  after  the  funeral  a  sacrifice
to  the  dead  was  offered,  called  Tpira.  Pollux  (viii.
146)  enumerates,  in  order,  all  the  sacrifices  and
ceremonies  which  followed  the  funeral,  —  rpira,
(vvara,  T/jto/cciSey,  ^vayiaixara^  X"""-  Aristophanes
{Lysistr.  611,  Avith  Schol.)  alludes  to  the  rpha.
The  principal  sacrifice,  however,  to  the  dead  was
on  the  ninth  day,  called  ewaro  or  ^vara.  (Aeschin.
c.  Ctesiph.  p.  617  ;  Isaeus,  de  Ciron.  hercd.  p.  224.)
The  mourning  for  the  dead  appears  to  have  lasted
till  the  thirtieth  day  after  the  funei-al  (Lys.  de  caed..
Erat.  p.  16),  on  which  day  sacrifices  were  again
offered.  (Harpocrat.  s.  v.  t/jjokcis.)  At  Sparta  the
time  of  mourning  was  limited  to  eleven  days.
(Plut.  Lye.  27.)  During  the  time  of  mourning  it
was  considered  indecorous  for  the  relatives  of  the
deceased  to  appear  in  public  (Aeschin.  c.  Ctesiph.
pp.  468,  469) ;  they  were  accustomed  to  wear  a
black  dress  (Eurip.  Helen.  1087,  Iphig.  Jul.  1438;
Isaeus,  de  Nieostr.  her.  p.  71  ;  Plut.  Pericl.  38),
and  in  ancient  times  cut  off  their  hair  as  a  sign  of
grief.  (ll\6KafJLOs  ir(v67}T-f}pios,  Aeschyl.  Chotph.  7.)

The  tombs  were  preserved  by  the  family  to
which  they  belonged  with  the  greatest  care,  and
were  regarded  as  among  the  strongest  ties  which
attached  a  man  to  his  native  land.  (Aeschyl.  Pers.
405  ;  Lycurg.  c.  Leocr.  p.  141.)  In  theDocimasia
of  the  Athenian  archons  it  was  always  a  subject
of  inquiry  whether  they  had  kept  in  proper  repair
the  tombs  of  their  ancestors.  ( Xen.  Mem.  ii.  2.
§  13.)  On  certain  days  the  tombs  were  crowned
with  flowers,  and  offerings  were  made  to  the  dead,
consisting  of  garlands  of  flowers  and  various  other
things ;  for  an  account  of  which  see  Aeschyl.  Pers.


/)58


FUNUS.


609,  &c.,  Clioeph.  86,  &c.  The  act  of  offering
these  presents  was  called  ivayi^^iv^  and  the  offer-
ings themselves  ^vayifffJiaTa,  or  more  commonly
Xoai.  Such  offerings  at  the  tombs  are  represented
upon  many  X-i]Kv6oi,  or  painted  vases  ;  of  which  an
example  is  given  in  the  following  woodcut.  (Millin,
Peitit  de  Vases,  vol.  ii,  pi.  27.)  The  tomb  is  built
in  the  form  of  a  temple  {ripifov),  and  upon  it  is  a
representation  of  the  deceased.  (See  also  Stackel-
berg,  pi.  44 — 46,  and  Millin,  vol.  ii.  pi.  32.  38,  for
further  examples.)


The  yep4(na  mentioned  by  Herodotus  (iv.  26)
appear  to  have  consisted  in  offerings  of  the  same
kind,  which  were  presented  on  the  anniversary  of
the  birth-day  of  the  deceased.  The  veKvaia  were
probably  offerings  on  the  anniversary  of  the  day  of
the  death  ;  though,  according  to  some  writers,  the
V€KV(Tia  were  the  same  as  the  yeuecria.  (Hesych.
s.v.  Tevearia:  Grammat.  Bekk.  p.  231.)  Meals
were  also  presented  to  the  dead  and  burnt.  (Lucian,
Contempl.  22.  vol.  i.  p.  519,  ed.  Reitz.  ;  de  Merc.
Cond.2H.  p.  687  ;  Artemiod.  Ofieirocr.  iv.  81.)

Certain  criminals,  who  were  put  to  death  by  the
state,  were  also  deprived  of  the  rights  of  burial,
which  was  considered  as  an  additional  punish-
ment. There  were  places,  both  at  Athens  and
Sparta,  where  the  dead  bodies  of  such  criminals
were  cast.  (Plut.  T/iem.  22  ;  Thuc.  i.  134.)  A
person  who  had  committed  suicide  was  not  deprived
of  burial,  but  the  hand  with  which  he  had  killed
himself  was  cut  off  and  buried  by  itself.  (Aeschin.
c.  Ctes.  pp.  636,  637.)  The  bodies  of  those  pei"-
sons  who  had  been  struck  by  lightning  were  re-
garded as  sacred  (Upol  veKpoi)  ;  they  were  never
buried  with  others  (Eurip.  Suppl.  935),  but  usually
on  the  spot  where  they  had  been  struck.  (Arte-
miod. Oneirocr.  ii.  9.  p.  146  ;  Bidental.)

2.  Roman.  When  a  Roman  was  at  the  point
of  death,  his  nearest  relation  present  endeavoured
to  catch  the  last  breath  with  his  mouth.  (Virg.
Aen.  iv.  684  ;  Cic.  Verr.  v.  45.)  The  ring  was
taken  off  the  finger  of  the  dying  person  (Suet.  Tib.
73)  ;  and  as  soon  as  he  was  dead  his  eyes  and
mouth  were  closed  by  the  nearest  relation  (Virg.
Aen.  ix.  487  ;  Lucan,  iii.  740),  who  called  upon
the  deceased  by  name  (indamare,  cottclamare),  ex-
claiming have  or  vale.  (Ovid,  Trist.  iii.  3.  43,  Met.
X.  62,  Fast,  iv,  852  ;  Catull.  ci.  10.)  The  corpse
was  then  washed,  and  anointed  with  oil  and  per-
fumes by  slaves,  called  PoUindores,  who  belonged
to  ths  Libitinarii^  or  undertakers,  called  by  the
Greeks  vfiKpoQiirTai.     (Dig.   14.  tit.  3.  s.  5.  §8.)


FUNUS.

The  Libitinarii  appear  to  have  been  so  called  be-
cause they  dwelt  near  the  temple  of  Venus  Libitina,
where  all  things  requisite  for  funerals  were  sold.
(Senec.  de  Benef.  vi.  38  ;  Plut.  Quaest.  Rom.  23  ;
Liv.  xli.  21  ;  Plut.  Num.  12.)  Hence  we  find  the
expressions  vitare  Lihitinam  and  evadere  Libitinam
used  in  the  sense  of  escaping  death.  (Hor.  Carm.
iii.  30.  6  ;  Juv.  xii.  122.)  At  this  temple  an  ac-
count {ratio,  ephemeris)  was  kept  of  those  who  died,
and  a  small  sum  was  paid  for  the  registration  of
their  names.  (Suet.  Ner.  39  ;  Dionys.  Ant.  Horn.
iv.  15.)

A  small  coin  was  then  placed  in  the  mouth  of
the  corpse,  in  order  to  pay  the  ferryman  in  Hades
(Juv.  iii.  267),  and  the  body  was  laid  out  on  a
couch  in  the  vestibule  of  the  house,  with  its  feet
towards  the  door,  .ind  dressed  in  the  best  robe
which  the  deceased  had  worn  when  alive.  Ordi-
nary citizens  were  dressed  in  a  white  toga,  and
magistrates  in  their  official  robes.  (Jnv.  iii.  172  ;
Liv.  xxxiv.  7  ;  Suet.  ]Ver.  50.)  If  the  deceased
had  received  a  crown  while  alive  as  a  reward  for
his  braver)',  it  was  now  placed  on  his  head  (Cic.
de  Leg.  ii.  24)  ;  and  the  couch  on  which  he  was
laid  was  sometimes  covered  with  leaves  .and  flowers.
A  branch  of  cypress  was  also  iisually  placed  at  the
door  of  the  house,  if  he  was  a  person  of  conse-
quence.    (Lucan.  iii.  442  ;  Hor.  Caiin.  ii.  14.  23.)

Funerals  were  usually  called  fimera  jusfa  or
ejrseifdae  ;  the  latter  term  was  generally  applied  to
the  funeral  procession  (pompa  funebris).  There
were  two  kinds  of  funerals,  public  and  private  ;  of
which  the  former  was  caWeA  funus  publicum  (Tacit.
Ann.  vi.  11)  or  indictivum,  because  the  people  were
invited  to  it  by  a  herald.  (Festus,  s.  v.  ;  Cic.  de
Leg.  ii.  24)  ;  the  latter  funus  taciturn  (Ovid,  Trist.
i.  3.  22),translatitium  (Suet.  Ner.  33),  or plebeium.
A  person  appears  to  have  usually  left  a  certain  sum
of  money  in  his  will  to  pay  the  expenses  of  his
funeral  ;  but  if  he  did  not  do  so,  nor  appoint  any
one  to  bury  him,  this  duty  devolved  upon  the  per-
sons to  whom  the  property  was  left,  and  if  he  died
without  a  will,  upon  his  relations  according  to  their
order  of  succession  to  the  property.  (Dig.  11.  tit.
7.  s.  12.)  The  expenses  of  the  funeral  were  in
such  cases  decided  by  an  arbiter  according  to  the
property  and  rank  of  the  deceased  (Dig.  /'.  c),
whence  arbitria  is  used  to  signify  the  funeral  ex-
penses. {Cxc.pro  Domo,  37,  post  Red.  in  Sen.  7,  in
Pis.  9.)  The  following  description  of  the  mode  in
which  a  fimeral  was  conducted  applies  strictly  only
to  the  funerals  of  the  great  ;  the  same  pomp  and
ceremony  could  not  of  course  be  observed  in  the
case  of  persons  in  ordinary  circumstances.

All  funerals  in  ancient  times  were  performed  at
night  (Serv.  ad  Virg.  Aen.  xi.  143  ;  Isidor.  xi.  2,
XX.  10),  but  afterwards  the  poor  only  were  buried
at  night,  because  they  could  not  afford  to  have  any
funeral  procession.  (Festus,  s.  v.  Vespae ;  Suet.
Dom.  17;  Dionys.  iv.  40.)  The  corpse  was  usually
carried  out  of  the  house  {efferebatur)  on  the  eighth
day  after  death.  (Serv.  ad  Virg.  Aen,  v.  64.)
The  order  of  the  funeral  procession  was  regulated
by  a  person  called  Designator  or  Domimis  Funeris,
who  was  attended  by  lictors  dressed  in  black.
(Donat  ad  Ter.  Adelph.  i.  2.  7;  Cic.  de  Jjcg.  ii.  24;
Hor.  Ep.  i.  7.  6.)  It  was  headed  by  musicians  of
various  kinds  {cornicines,  siticines),  who  played
mournful  strains  (Cic.  Ibid.  ii.  23  ;  Gell.  xx.  2),
and  next  came  mourning  women,  called  Praejicac
(Festus,  s.  v.),  who  were  hired  to  lament  and  sing


FUNUS.
the  funeral  song  {naenia  or  lessas)  in  praise  of  the
deceased.  These  were  sometimes  followed  by
players  and  buffoons  (scarrae,  histriones),  of  whom
one,  called  Ankimimus^  represented  the  character
of  the  deceased,  and  imitated  his  words  and  actions.
(Suet.  Vesp.  19.)  Then  came  the  slaves  whom  the
deceased  had  liberated,  wearing  the  cap  of  liberty
(pikati)  ;  the  number  of  whom  was  occasionally
very  great,  since  a  master  sometimes  liberated  all
his  slaves,  in  his  will,  in  order  to  add  to  the  pomp
of  his  funeral.  (Dionys.  iv.  24  ;  compare  Liv.
xxxviii.  55.)  Before  the  corpse  persons  walked
wearing  waxen  masks  [Imago],  representing  the
ancestors  of  the  deceased,  and  clothed  in  the  official
dresses  of  those  whom  they  represented  (Polyb.
vi.  53  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.  2)  ;  and  there  were  also
carried  before  the  corpse  the  crowns  or  military  re-
wards which  the  deceased  had  gained,  (Cic.  de
Leg.  ii.  24,)

The  corpse  was  carried  on  a  couch  (lectica),  to
which  the  name  of  Ferctrum  (Varro,  de  Ling.  Lett.
V,  166)  or  Capulus  (Festus,  s.  v.)  was  usually  given;
but  the  bodies  of  poor  citizens  and  of  slaves  were
carried  on  a  common  kind  of  bier  or  coffin,  called
Sandapila.  (Mart.  ii.  81,  viii.  75.  14  ;  Juv,  viii.
175;  vilis  area.,  Hor.  Sat.  i.  8,  9.)  The  Sandapila
was  carried  b}'^  bearers,  called  Vespae  or  Vespillones
(Suet,  Dom.  17  ;  Mart.  i.  31.  48),  because,  ac-
cording to  Festus  (s.  v.),  they  carried  out  the
corpses  in  the  evening  (vespertino  tempore).  The
couches  on  which  the  corpses  of  the  rich  were  car-
ried were  sometimes  made  of  ivory,  and  covered
with  gold  and  purple.  (Suet.  Jul.  84.)  They  were
often  carried  on  the  shoulders  of  the  nearest  rela-
tions of  the  deceased  (Valer.  Max,  vii.  1.  §  1  ;  Hor.
Sat.  ii.  8.  56),  and  sometimes  on  those  of  hisfreed-
nien.  (Pers.  iii.  106.)  Julius  Caesar  was  carried
by  the  magistrates  (Suet.  Jul.  84),  and  Augustus
by  the  senators.    (Id.  Aug.  100  ;  Tacit,  Ann.  i.  8.)

The  relations  of  the  deceased  walked  behind  the
corpse  in  mourning  ;  his  sons  with  their  heads
veiled,  and  his  daughters  with  their  heads  bare
and  their  hair  dishevelled,  contrary  to  the  ordinar}^
practice  of  both.  (P\ut.  Quaest.  Bom.  \  4.)  They
often  uttered  loud  lamentations,  and  the  women  beat
their  breasts  and  tore  their  cheeks,  though  this  was
forbidden  by  the  Twelve  Tables.  (Mtdieres  genas
ne  radunto^  Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  23.)  If  the  deceased
was  of  illustrious  rank,  the  funeral  procession  went
through  the  forum  (Dionys.  iv.  40),  and  stopped  be-
fore the  rostra^  Avhere  a  funeral  oration  (laudatio)
in  praise  of  the  deceased  was  delivered.  (Dionys.
V.  17  ;  Cic.  pro  Mil.  13,  de  Orat.  ii.  84  ;  Suet.  Jid.
84,  Aug.  100.)  This  practice  was  of  great  an-
tiquity among  the  Romans,  and  is  said  by  some
writers  to  have  been  first  introduced  by  Publicola,
who  pronounced  a  funeral  oration  in  honour  of  his
colleague  Brutus.  (Plut.  Public.  9  ;  Dionys,  v,  1  7.)
Women  also  were  honoured  by  funeral  orations,
(Cic.  de  Orat.  ii.  U  ;  Suet.  Jtd.  26,  Cal.  10.)
From  the  forum  the  corpse  was  carried  to  the  place
of  burning  or  burial,  which,  according  to  a  law  of
the  Twelve  Tables,  was  obliged  to  be  outside  the
city.     (Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  23.)

The  Romans  in  the  most  ancient  times  buried
their  dead  (Plin.  //.  N.  vii.  55),  though  they  also
early  adopted,  to  some  extent,  the  custom  of' burn-
ing, which  is  mentioned  in  the  Twelve  Tables.
(Cic.  /.  c)  Burning,  however,  does  not  appear  to
have  become  general  till  the  later  times  of  the  re-
public J  Marius  was  buried,  and  Sulla  was  the  first


FUNUS.


559


of  the  Cornelian  gens  whose  body  was  burned.
(Cic.  ib.  ii.  22.)  Under  the  empire  burning  was
almost  universally  practised,  but  was  gradually  dis-  ,
continued  as  Christianity  spread  (Minuc.  Felix,  p.
327,  ed.  Ouzel,  1672),  so  that  it  had  fallen  into
disuse  in  the  fourth  century.  (Macrob,  vii.  7.)  Per-
sons struck  by  lightning  were  not  burnt,  but  buried
on  the  spot,  which  was  called  Bidental.,  and  was
considered  sacred,  [Bidental.]  Children  also,
who  had  not  cut  their  teeth,  were  not  burnt,  but
buried  in  a  place  called  Suggrundarium.  (Plin.
H.  N.  vii.  15  ;  Juv.  xv.  140  ;  Fulgent,  de  prise.
Serm.  7.)  Those  who  were  buried  were  placed  in
a  coffin  (area  or  loeulus)^  which  was  frequently
made  of  stone  (Valer,  Max,  i,  1,  §  12  ;  Aurel,  Vict.
de  Vir.  III.  42),  and  sometimes  of  the  Assian
stone,  which  came  from  Assos  in  Troas,  and  which
consumed  all  the  body,  with  the  exception  of  the
teeth,  in  40  days  (Plin.  H.  N.  ii.  98,  xxxvi,  27),
whence  it  was  called  Sarcophagus.  This  name  was
in  course  of  time  applied  to  any  kind  of  coffin  or
tomb.  (Juv.  X.  172  ;  Dig.  34.  tit,  1.  s,  18.  §5;
Orelli,  Inscr.  No,  194,  4432,  4554.)

The  corpse  was  burnt  on  a  pile  of  wood  {pyra
or  rogus).  Servius  {ad  Virg.  Aen.  xi.  185)  thus
defines  the  difference  between  pyra  and  rogus,
"  Pyra  est  lignorum  congeries  ;  rogus,  cum  jam
ardere  coepcrit,  dicitur."  This  pile  was  built  in
the  form  of  an  altar,  with  four  equal  sides,  whence
we  find  it  called  ara  sepulcri  (Virg.  Aen.  vi.  177)
and  funeris  ara.  (Ovid,  Trist.  iii.  13.21,)  The
sides  of  the  pile  were,  according  to  the  Twelve
Tables,  to  be  left  rough  and  unpolished  (Cic,  de
Leg.  ii,  23)  ;  but  were  frequently  covered  with  dark
leaves.  (Virg.  Aen.  vi,  215.)  Cypress  trees  were
sometimes  placed  before  the  pile.  (Virg.  Ovid,  /.  c.  /
Sil.  Ital.  X.  535.)  On  the  top  of  the  pile  the  corpse
was  placed,  with  the  couch  on  which  it  had  been
carried  (Tibull.  i.  1.  61),  and  the  nearest  relation
then  set  fire  to  the  pile  with  his  face  turned  away.
[Fax.]  When  the  flames  began  to  rise,  various
perfumes  were  thrown  into  the  fire  (called  by
Cicero  {I.  c.)  sumptuosa  respersio),  though  this
practice  was  forbidden  by  the  Twelve  Tables  ;
cups  of  oil,  ornaments,  clothes,  dishes  of  food,  and
other  things,  which  were  supposed  to  be  agreeable
to  the  deceased,  were  also  thrown  upon  the  flames.
(Virg.  Aen.  vi.  225  ;  Stat.  Theb.  vi.  126  j  Lucan.
ix.l75.)

The  place  where  a  person  was  burnt  was  called
Bustum,  if  he  was  afterwards  buried  on  the  same
spot,  and  Vstrina  or  Ustrinum  if  he  was  buried  at
a  different  place,  (Festus,  s.  v.  bustum.)  Persons
of  property  frequently  set  apart  a  space,  surrounded
by  a  wall,  near  their  sepulchres,  for  the  purpose  of
burning  the  dead  ;  but  those  who  could  not  afford
the  space  appear  to  have  sometimes  placed  the
funeral  pyres  against  the  monuments  of  others,
which  was  frequently  forbidden  in  inscriptions  on
monuments.  {Huic  monuniento  ustrinum  appUcari
non  licet,  Gruter,  755.  4.  Q56.  3  ;  Orelli,  4384,
4385.)

If  the  deceased  was  an  emperor,  or  an  illustrious
general,  the  soldiers  marched  (decurrebant)  three
times  round  the  pile  (Virg.  Aen.  xi,  188  ;  Tacit.
A7in.  ii.  7),  Avhich  custom  was  observed  annually
at  a  monument  built  by  the  soldiers  in  honour  of
Dnisus,  (Suet,  Claud.  I.)  Sometimes  animals
were  slaughtered  at  the  pile,  and  in  ancient  times
captives  and  slaves,  since  the  Manes  were  supposed
to  be  fond  of  blood ;   but   afterwards   gladiators.


.160


FUN  US.


called  ISustuarii,  were  hired  to  fight  round  the
burning  pile.  (Serv.  ad  Virg.  Aeti.  x.  519;  comp.
Hor.  Sat.  ii.  3.  85.)

When  the  pile  was  burnt  down,  the  embers
were  soaked  with  wine,  and  the  bones  and  ashes
of  the  deceased  were  gathered  by  the  nearest  rela-
tives ( Virg.  Aen.  vi.  226—228 ;  Tibull.  i.  3.  6,  iii.
2.  10  ;  Suet.  Aug.  100),  who  sprinkled  them  with
jierfumes,  and  placed  them  in  a  vessel  called  urna
(Ovid,  A7m.  iii.  9.  39  ;  feralis  ttma^  Tacit.  Ann.
iii.  1),  which  was  made  of  various  materials,  ac-
cording to  the  circumstances  of  individuals.  Most
of  the  funeral  urns  in  the  British  Museum  are  made
of  marble,  alabaster,  or  baked  clay.  They  are  of
various  shapes,  but  most  commonly  square  or  round;
and  upon  them  there  is  usually  an  inscription  or
epitaph  {tituhis  or  epitaphium)^  beginning  with  the
letters  D.  M.  S.  or  only  D.  M.,  that  is,  Dis  Man-
IBUS  Sacrum,  followed  by  the  name  of  the  de-
ceased, with  the  length  of  his  life,  &c.,  and  also  by
the  name  of  the  person  who  had  the  urn  made.
The  following  examples,  taken  from  urns  in  the
British  Museum,  will  give  a  general  knowledge  of
such  inscriptions.  The  first  is  to  Serullia  Zosimenes,
who  lived  26  years,  and  is  dedicated  by  her  son
Prosdecius  ;  —

D.M.

Servlliae  Zosimeni

qvae  vixit  ann  xxvi.

Bene  meren.  fecit

Prosdecivs  Filivs.

The  next  is  an  inscription  to  Licinius  Successus,
who  lived  13  years  one  month  and  19  days,  by  his
most  unhappy  parents,  Comicus  and  Auriola  :  —

Dis.  Man.
comicvs.  et

AVRIOLA.    PaRENTES

Infelicissimi

LiCINIO  SVCCESSO.
V.  a.    XIII.  M.  I.   D.   XIX.

The  following  woodcut  is  a  representation  of  a
sepulchral  urn  in  the  British  Museum.     It  is  of  an


-^  kc/l^i^==(


FUN  US.

upriglit  rectangular  form,  richly  ornamented  with
foliage,  and  supported  at  the  sides  by  pilasters.  It
is  erected  to  the  memory  of  Cossutia  Prima.  Its
height  is  twenty-one  inches,  and  its  width,  at  the
base,  fourteen  inches  six-eighths.  Below  the  in-
scription an  infant  genius  is  represented  driving  a
car  drawn  by  four  horses.

After  the  bones  and  ashes  of  the  deceased  had
been  placed  in  the  urn,  the  persons  present  were
thrice  sprinkled  by  a  priest  with  pure  water  from
a  branch  of  olive  or  laurel  for  the  purpose  of  purifi-
cation (Virg.  Aen.  vi.  229  ;  Serv.  ad  loc.)  ;  after
which  they  were  dismissed  by  the  praefica,  or  some
other  person,  by  the  solemn  word  Ilicet,  that  is,
ire  licet.  (Serv.  I.  c.)  At  their  departure  they  were
accustomed  to  bid  farewell  to  the  deceased  by  pro-
nouncing the  word  Vale.     (Serv.  I.  c.)

The  urns  were  placed  in  sepulchres,  which,  as
alreadj'  stated,  were  outside  the  city,  though  in  a
few  cases  we  read  of  the  dead  being  buried  within
the  city.  Thus  Valerius,  Publicola,  Tubertus,  and
Fabricius  were  buried  in  the  city  ;  which  right
their  descendants  also  possessed,  but  did  not  use.
(Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  23.)  The  vestal  virgins  and  the
emperors  were  buried  in  the  city,  according  to  Ser-
vius  {ad  Virg.  Aen.  xi.  205),  because  they  were
not  bound  by  the  laws.  By  a  rescript  of  Hadrian,
those  who  buried  a  person  in  the  city  were  liable  to
a  penalty  of  40  aurei,  which  was  to  be  paid  to  the
fiscus  ;  and  the  spot  where  the  burial  had  taken
place  was  confiscated.  (Dig.  47.  tit.  12.  s.  3  §  5.)
The  practice  was  also  forbidden  by  Antoninu/ Pius
(Capitol.  Anton.  Pius,  12),  and  Theodosius  II.
(Cod.  Theod.  9.  tit.  1 7.  s.  6.)

The  verb  sepelire,  like  the  Greek  baTrr^iv,  was
applied  to  every  mode  of  disposing  of  the  dead
(Plin.  H.  N.  vii.  55)  ;  and  sepidcrum  signified  any
kind  of  tomb  in  which  the  body  or  bones  of  a  man
were  placed.  (Sepulcrum  est.,  u()i  corpus  ossave
hominis  condita  sunt.  Dig.  1 1.  tit.  7.  s.  2.  §  5  ;  com-
pare 47.  tit.  12.  s.  3.  §  2.)  The  terra  Aw/ware  was
originally  used  for  burial  in  the  earth  (Plin.  I.  c),
but  was  afterwards  applied  like  sepelire  to  any  mode
of  disposing  of  the  dead  ;  since  it  appears  to  have
been  the  custom,  after  the  body  was  burnt,  to
throw  some  earth  upon  the  bones.  (Cic.  de  Leg.
ii.  23.)

The  places  for  burial  were  either  public  or  pri-
vate. The  public  places  of  burial  were  of  two
kinds  ;  one  for  illustrious  citizens,  who  were  buried
at  the  public  expense,  and  the  other  for  poor  citi-
zens, who  could  not  aiford  to  purchase  ground  for
the  purpose.  The  former  was  in  the  Campus  Mar-
tins, which  was  ornamented  with  the  tombs  of  the
illustrious  dead,  and  in  the  Campus  Esquilinus
(Cic.  Phil.  ix.  7)  ;  the  latter  was  also  in  the  Cam-
pus Esquilinus,  and  consisted  of  small  pits  or
caverns,  cviWadi  puticuli  or  piUicuhce  (Varr.  de  Ling.
Lat.  V.  25.  ed.  Miiller  ;  Fesius,  s.  v.  ;  Hor.  Sat.
i.  8.  10)  ;  but  as  this  place  rendered  the  neigh-
bourhood unhealthy,  it  was  given  to  Maecenas,
who  converted  it  into  gardens,  and  built  a  m.ig-
nificent  house  upon  it.  Private  places  for  burial
were  usually  by  the  sides  of  the  roads  leading  to
Rome  ;  and  on  some  of  these  roads,  such  as  the
Via  Appia,  the  tombs  formed  an  almost  unin-
terrupted street  for  many  miles  from  the  gates  of
the  city.  They  were  frequently  built  by  indivi-
duals during  their  life-time  (Senec.  de  Brev.  Vit.
20)  ;  thus  Augustus,  in  his  sixth  consulship,  built
the  Mauooleuui  for  his  sepulchre  between  the  Vi*


FUN  us.

Flarainia  and  the  Tiber,  and  planted  round  it
v/oods  and  walks  for  public  use.  (Suet.  ^2^9".  100.)
The  heirs  were  often  ordered  by  the  will  of  the
deceased  to  build  a  tomb  for  him  (Hor.  Sat  ii.  3.
84  ;  Plin.  Ep.  vi.  10)  ;  and  they  sometimes  did
it  at  their  own  expense  (de  smo),  which  is  not  un-
frequently  recorded  in  tiie  inscription  on  funeral
monuments,  as  in  the  following  example  fciken
from  an  urn  in  the  British  Museum : —

Diis  Manibvs

L,  Lepidi  Epaphrae

Patius  Optimi

L.  LEPIDlf  s

Maximvs  F.
De  Svo.

Sepulchres  were  originally  called  husta  (Festus,
s.  V.  Sepulcnmi)^  but  this  word  was  afterwards  em-
ployed in  the  manner  mentioned  above  (p.  559^  b.).
Sepulchres  were  also  frequently  called  Monuinenta
Cic.  ad  Fam.  iv.  12.  §  3  ;  Ovid,  Met.  xiii.  524),
but  this  term  was  also  applied  to  a  monument
erected  to  the  memory  of  a  person  in  a  diiferent
place  from  where  he  was  buried.  (Festus,  s.  v.  ;
Cic.  joro  Sent.  67  ;  comp.  Dig.  11.  tit.  8.)  Co7idi-
lona  or  conditiva  were  sepulchres  under  ground,
in  which  dead  bodies  were  placed  entire,  in  con-
tradistinction to  those  sepulchres  which  contained
the  bones  and  ashes  only.  They  answered  to  the
Greek  inrSyeiou  or  inrSyaiov.

The  tombs  of  the  rich  were  commonly  bu'lt  of
marble,  and  the  ground  enclosed  with  an  iron
railing  or  wall,  and  planted  round  with  trees.  (Cic.
ad  Fam.  iv.  12.  §  3  ;  Tibull.  iii.  2. 22  ;  Suet.  Ner.
33.  50  ;  Martial,  i.  89.)  The  extent  of  the  bury-
ing ground  was  marked  by  Cippi  [Cippus].  The
name  of  Mausoleum,  which  was  originally  the  name
of  the  magnificent  sepulchre  erected  by  Artemisia
to  the  memory  of  Mausolus  king  of  Caria  (Plin.
//.  N.  xxxvi.  4.  §  9,  XXXV.  49  ;  Gell.  x.  18),
was  sometimes  given  to  any  splendid  tomb.  (Suet.
Auff.  100  ;  Paus.  viii.  16.  §  3.)  The  open  space
before  a  sepulchre  was  called  forum  [Fokum],  and


FUN  US.  561

neither  this  space  nor  the  sepulchre  itself  could
become  the  property  of  a  person  by  usucapion.
(Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  24.)

Private  tombs  were  either  built  by  an  individual
for  himself  and  the  members  of  his  family  {sepulcra
familiaria),  or  for  himself  and  his  heirs  {sepulcra
hereditaria.,  Dig,  11.  tit.  7.  s.  5).  A  tomb,  which
was  fitted  up  with  niches  to  receive  the  funeral
urns,  was  called  columbarium.,  on  account  of  the
resemblance  of  these  niches  to  the  holes  of  a
pigeon-house.  In  these  tombs  the  ashes  of  the
freedmen  and  slaves  of  great  families  were  fre-
quently placed  in  vessels  made  of  baked  clay,
called  ollae.,  which,  were  let  into  the  thickness  of
the  wall  within  these  niches,  the  lids  only  being
seen,  and  the  inscriptions  placed  in  front.  Several
of  these  columbaria  are  still  to  be  seen  at  Rome.
One  of  the  most  perfect  of  them,  which  was  dis-
covered in  the  year  1 822,  at  the  villa  Rufini,  about
two  miles  beyond  the  Porta  Pia,  is  represented  in
the  annexed  woodcut..


^0


Tombs  were  of  various  sizes  and  forms,  according
to  the  wealth  and  taste  of  the  owner.  The  fol-
lowing woodcut,  which  represents  part  of  the  street
of  tombs  at  Pompeii,  is  taken,  from  Mazois,  Pom-
pdami,  part  i.  pU  1 8.


All  these  tombs  were  raised  on  a  platform  of
m.'isoiiry  above  the  level  of  the  footway.  The  first
building  on  the  right  hand  is  a  funeral  triclinium,
which  presents  to  the  street  a  plain  front  about
twenty  feet  in  length.  The  next  is  the  family
tomb  of  Naevoleia  Tyche  ;  it  consists  of  a  square
building,  containing  a  small  chamber,  and  from  the
level  of  the  outer  wall  steps  rise,  which  support  a
marble  cippus  richly  ornamented.  The  burial-
ground  of  Nestacidius  follows  next,  which  is  sur-
rounded by  a  low  wall ;  next  to  which  comes  a
monument  erected  to  the  memorj^  of  C.  Calventius
Quietus.  The  building  is  solid,  and  was  not
therefore  a  place  of  burial,  but  only  an  honorary
tomb.  The  wall  in  front  is  scarcely  four  feet
hiirh,  from  which  three  steps  lead  up  to  a  cippus.
The  back  rises  into  a  pediment  ;  and  the  extreme
height  of  the  whole  from  the  footway  is  about
seventeen  feet.     An  unoccupied  space   intervenes


between  this  tomb  and  the  next,  which  bears  no
inscription.  The  Last  building  on  the  left  is  the
tomb  of  Sc;mrus,  which  is  ornamented  with  bas-
reliefs  representing  gladiatorial  combats  and  the
hunting  of  wild  beasts.

The  tombs  of  the  Romans  were  ornamented
in  various  ways^but  they  seldom  represented  death
in  a  direct  manner.  (Muller,  Areh'dol.  der
Ku7ist,  §  431  ;  Lessing,  Wie  die  Alien  den  Tod
gebildet  haben  ?)  A  horse's  head  was  one  of  the
most  common  representations  of  death,  as  it  signi-
fied departure  ;  but  we  rarely  meet  with  skeletons
upon  tombs.  The  following  woodcut,  however,
which  is  taken  from  a  bas-relief  upon  one  of  the
tombs  of  Pompeii,  represents  the  skeleton  of  a
child  lying  on  a  heap  of  stones.  The  dress  of  the
female,  who  is  stooping  over  it,  is  remarkable,  and
is  still  preserved,  according  to  Mazois,  in  the
country  around  Sora.  (Mazois,  Pomp.  i.  pi.  29.)
o  o


£62


FUNUS.


FURCA.


A  sepulchre,  or  any  place  in  which  a  person
was  buried,  was  relujiosus ;  all  things  which  were
left  or  belonged  to  the  Dii  Manes  were  religiosae  ;
those  consecrated  to  the  Dii  Superi  were  called
Sacrae.  (Gains,  ii.  46.)  Even  the  place  in  which
a  slave  was  buried  was  considered  religiosiis.  (Dig.
11.  tit.  7.  8.2.)  Whoever  violated  a  sepulchre
Avas  subject  to  an  action  termed  sepuhri  violati
actio.  (Dig.  47.  tit.  12  ;  compare  Cic,  Tusc.  i.  12,
de  Leg.  ii.  22.)  Those  who  removed  the  bodies
or  bones  from  the  sepulchre  were  punished  by  death
or  deportatio  in  insulam,  according  to  their  rank  ;
if  the  sepulchre  was  violated  in  any  other  way,
they  were  punished  by  deportatio,  or  condemna-
tion to  the  mines.  (Dig.  47-  tit.  12.  s.  11.)  The
title  in  the  Digest  (11.  tit.  7),  "  De  Religiosis  et
Sumtibus  Funerum,"  «&c.,  also  contains  much  curi-
ous information  on  the  subject,  and  is  well  worth
perusal.

After  the  bones  had  been  placed  in  the  urn  at
the  funeral,  the  friends  returned  home.  They  then
underwent  a  further  purification  callei  suffitio.,
which  consisted  in  being  sprinkled  with  water  and
stepping  over  a  fire.  (Festus,  s.  v.  Aqua  et  igni.)
The  house  itself  was  also  swept  with  a  certain
kind  of  broom  ;  which  sweeping  or  purification  was
called  ecrverrae^  and  the  person  who  did  it  everria-
tor.  (Festus,  s.  v.)  The  Denicales  Feriae  were
also  days  set  apart  for  the  purification  of  the
family.  (Festus,  s.  v.  ;  Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  22.)  The
mourning  and  solemnities  connected  with  the  dead
lasted  for  nine  days  after  the  funeral,  at  the  end  of
which  time  a  sacrifice  Avas  performed,  called  Noven-
diale.     (Porphyr.  ad  Ilorat.  Epod.  xvii.  48.)

A  feast  was  given  in  honour  of  the  dead,  but
it  is  uncertain  on  what  day  ;  it  sometimes  appears
to  have  been  given  at  the  time  of  the  funeral,  some-
times on  the  Novendiale,  and  sometimes  later.
The  name  of  Silicernium  Avas  given  to  this  feast
(Festus,  s.  1?.)  ;  of  Avhich  the  etymology  is  un-
known. Among  the  tombs  at  Pompeii  there  is  a
funeral  triclinium  for  the  celebration  of  these  feasts,
which  is  represented  in  the  annexed  woodcut.
(Mazois,  Pomp.  i.  pi.  xx.)  It  is  open  to  the  sky,
and  the  walls  are  ornamented  by  paintings  of  ani-
mals in  the  centre  of  compartments,  which  have
borders  of  flowers.  The  triclinium  is  made  of  stone,
with  a  pedestal  in  the  centre  to  receive  the  table.

After  the  funeral  of  great  men,  there  was,  in  ad-
dition to  the  feast  for  the  friends  of  the  deceased,
a  distribution  of  niAV  meat  to  the  people,  called
Visceratio  (Liv.  viii.  22),  and  sometimes  a  public
banquet.  (Suet.  Jul.  26.)  Combats  of  gladiators
and  other  games  were  also  frequently  exhibited  in


honour  of  the  deceased.  Thus  at  the  funeral  of
P.  Licinius  Crassus,  who  had  been  Pontifex  Maxi-
mus,  raw  meat  was  distributed  to  the  people,  a
hundred  and  twenty  gladiators  fought,  and  funeral
games  Avere  celebrated  for  three  daj-s  ;  at  the  end
of  Avhich  a  public  banquet  Avas  given  in  the  forum.
(Liv.  xxxix.  46.)  Public  feasts  and  funeral  games
AA-ere  sometimes  giA'en  on  the  anniversary  of  fune-
rals. Faustus,  the  son  of  Sulla,  exhibited  in
honour  of  his  father  a  shoAv  of  gladiators  several
j'ears  after  his  death,  and  gave  a  feast  to  the
people,  according  to  his  father's  testament.  (Dion
Cass,  xxxvii.  51  ;  Cic.  pro  Sull.  19.)  At  all  ban-
quets in  honour  of  the  dead,  the  guests  were  dressed
in  Avhite.     (Cic.  c.  Vatin.  13.)

The  Romans,  like  the  Greeks,  were  accustomed
to  visit  the  tombs  of  their  relatives  at  certain
periods,  and  to  offer  to  them  sacrifices  and  A-arious
gifts,  Avhich  were  called  Inferiae  and  Parentalia.
The  Romans  appear  to  have  regarded  the  Manes  or
departed  souls  of  their  ancestors  as  gods  ;  whence
arose  the  practice  of  presenting  to  them  oljlations,
Avhich  consisted  of  victims,  Avine,  milk,  garlands  of
floAvers,  and  other  things.  (Virg.  Aen.  \.  77,  ix.
215,  X.  519  ;  Tacit.  Hist.  ii.  Qo  ;  Suet.  Cal.  15;
Ner.  57  ;  Cic.  Phil.  i.  6.)  The  tombs  Avcre  some-
times illuminated  on  these  occasions  Avith  lamps.
(Dig.  40.  tit.  4.  s.  44.)  In  the  latter  end  of  the
month  of  February  there  Avas  a  festiA-al,  calle'J
Peralia,  in  Avhich  the  Romans  were  accustomed  to
carry  food  to  the  sepulchres  for  the  use  of  the  dead.
(Festus,  s.  V.  ;  Varro,  de  TJng.  Lot.  vi.  13  ;  Ovid,
Fast.  ii.  565—570  ;  Cic.  ad  Att.  viii.  14.)

The  Romans,  like  ourselves,  Avere  accustomed  to
Avear  mourning  for  their  deceased  friends,  Avhich
appears  to  have  been  black  or  dark-blue  {aira)
under  the  republic  for  both  sexes.  (Serv.  ad  Virg.
Aefi.  xi.  287.)  Under  the  empire  the  men  con-
tinued to  wear  black  in  mourning  (Juv.  x.  245),
but  the  women  wore  Avhite.  (Herodian,  iv.  2.)
They  laid  aside  all  kinds  of  ornaments  (Herodian.
I.  c. ;  Terent.  Ileaut.  ii.  3.  47),  and  did  not  cut
either  their  hair  or  beard.  (Suet.  Jul.  67,  Aug.  23,
Cal.  24.)  Men  appear  to  have  usually  worn  their
mourning  for  only  a  few  days  (Dion  Cass.  Ivi.  43),
but  women  for  a  year  when  they  lost  a  husband  or
parent.  (Ovid,  Fast.  iii.  134;  Senec.  Epist.  63,
Consol.  ad  Heh.  16.)

In  a  public  mourning  on  account  of  some  signal
calamity,  as  for  instance  the  loss  of  a  battle  or  the
death  of  an  emperor,  there  was  a  total  cessation
from  business,  called  Justitium.  [Justitium.]  In
a  public  mourning  the  senators  did  not  Avear  the
latus  clavus  and  their  rings  (Ijiv.  ix.  7),  nor  the
magistrates  their  badges  of  office.  (Tacit.  Ann.
iii.  4.)

(Meursius,  de  Funere  ;  Stackelberg,  Die  Gr'dher
der  Hellenen^BerVm,  1837  ;  Kirchmann,rfc  Funeri-
hus  Romanis;  Becker,  Charikles.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  166 —
210,  Gallus,  vol.ii.  pp.  271—301.)

FURCA,  Avhich  properly  meajis  a  fork,  was  also


FUllTUM.

the  name  of  an  instrument  of  punishment.  It  was
a  piece  of  wood  in  the  form  of  the  letter  A,  which
was  placed  upon  the  shoulders  of  the  offender,  Avhose
hands  were  tied  to  it.  Slaves  were  frequently
punished  in  this  way,  and  were  obliged  to  carry
about  the  furca  wherever  they  went  (Donat.  ad
Ter.  Aridr.  iii.  5.  12  ;  Plut.  Coriol.  24  ;  Plant.
Cas.  ii.  6.  37)  ;  whence  the  appellation  of  fuvcifer
was  applied  to  a  man  as  a  term  of  reproach.  (Cic.
in  Vatin.  6.)  The  furca  was  used  in  the  ancient
mode  of  capital  punishment  among  the  Romans  ;
the  criminal  was  tied  to  it,  and  then  scourged  to
death.  (Liv.  i.  26  ;  Suet,  Ner.  49.)  The  patibulum
was  also  an  instrument  of  punishment,  resembling
the  furca  ;  it  appears  to  have  been  in  the  form  of
the  letter  II.  (Plant.  Mil.  ii.  4.  7,  MostelL  i.  1.53.)
Both  the  furca  and  patibulum  were  also  employed
as  crosses,  to  which  criminals  were  nailed  {in furca
suspendere.  Dig.  48.  tit.  13.  s.  6  ;  tit.  19.  s.  28.
§  15  ;  tit.  19.  s.  38).     See  Lipsius,  de  Cruce.

FU'RCIFER.     [Furca.]

FURIO'SUS.     [Curator.]

FURNUS.     [Fornax.!

FUROR.     [Curator.]

FURTI  ACTIO.     [FuRTUM.]

FURTUM,  "  theft,"  is  one  of  the  four  kinds  of
delicts  which  were  the  foundation  of  obligationes  ;
it  is  also  called  "  crimen."  Moveable  things  only
cnuld  be  the  objects  of  furtum  ;  for  the  fraudulent
handling  {contrectatio  fraudulosa)  of  a  thing  was
furtum,  and  contrectatio  is  defined  to  be  "  loco
movere."  But  a  man  might  commit  theft  without
carrying  off  another  person's  property.  Thus  it
■was  furtum  to  use  a  thing  which  was  deposited
{depositum).  It  was  also  furtum  to  use  a  thing
which  had  been  lent  for  use,  in  a  way  different
from  that  which  the  lender  had  agreed  to  ;  but
with  this  qualification,  that  the  borrower  must  be-
lieve that  he' was  doing  it  against  the  owner's  con-
sent, and  that  the  owner  would  not  consent  to  such
use  if  he  was  aware  of  it  ;  for  dolus  mains  was  an
essential  ingredient  in  furtum.  Another  requisite
of  furtum  (Dig.  47.  tit.  2.  s.  1)  is  the  "  lucri  faciendi
gratia,"  the  intention  of  appropriating  the  property,
'i'his  was  otherwise  expressed  by  saying  that  furtum
consisted  in  the  intention  {furtum  ex  affectu  consistit;
or, si?ie  ci^ectufurandinoncommittitur^Gams,  ii.  50).
It  was  not  necessary,  in  order  to  constitute  furtum,
that  the  thief  should  know  whose  property  the  thing
was.  A  person  who  was  in  the  power  of  another
might  be  the  object  of  furtum.  (Inst.  4.  tit.  1.  §  9.)
A  debtor  might  commit  furtum  by  taking  a  thing
which  he  had  given  as  a  pledge  {pignori)  to  a  cre-
ditor ;  or  by  taking  his  property  when  in  the  pos-
session of  a  bona  fide  possessor.  Thus  there  might
be  furtum  either  of  a  moveable  thing  itself,  or  of
the  use  of  a  thing,  or  of  the  possession,  as  it  is  ex-
pressed.    (Inst.  4.  tit.  1.  §  1.)

The  definition  of  furtum  in  the  Institutes  is  rei
contrectatio  fraudulosa,  without  the  addition  of  the
word  "  alienae."  Accordingly  the  definition  com-
prises both  the  case  of  a  man  stealing  the  property
of  another,  and  also  the  case  of  a  man  stealing  his
own  property,  as  when  a  man  fraudulently  takes  a
moveable  thing,  which  is  his  property,  from  a  per-
son who  has  the  legal  possession  of  it.  This  latter
case  is  the  "  furtum  possessionis."  The  definition
in  the  Institutes  is  not  intended  as  a  classification
of  theft  into  three  distinct  kinds,  but  only  to  show
by  way  of  example  the  extent  of  the  meaning  of  the
term  Furtum.   This  is  well  explained  by  Vangerow,


FURTUM.


563


PandeJcten^  Sec.  iii.  p.  550.  See  also  Rein,  Das
Criminalredd  dcr  Rumer,  p.  304.

A  person  might  commit  furtum  by  aiding  in  a
furtum,  as  if  a  man  should  jostle  you  in  order  to
give  another  the  opportunity  of  taking  your  money  ;
or  drive  away  your  sheep  or  cattle  in  order  that
another  might  get  possession  of  them :  but  if  it
were  done  merely  in  a  sportive  way,  and  not  with
a  view  of  aiding  in  a  theft,  it  was  not  furtum,
though  there  might  be  in  such  case  an  actio  utilia
under  the  Lex  Aquilia,  which  gave  such  an  action
even  in  the  case  of  culpa.    [Damnum.]

Furtum  was  either  Manifestum  or  Nee  Manifes-
tum.  It  was  clearly  manifestum  when  the  person
was  caught  in  the  act  ;  but  in  various  other  cases
there  was  a  difference  of  opinion  as  to  whether  the
furtum  was  manifestum  or  not.  Some  were  of
opinion  that  it  was  furtum  manifestum  so  long  as
the  thief  was  engaged  in  carrying  the  thing  to  the
place  to  which  he  designed  to  carry  it :  and  others
maintained  that  it  was  furtum  manifestum  if  the
thief  was  ever  found  with  the  stolen  thing  in  his
possession  ;  but  this  opinion  did  not  prevail.
(Gaius,  iii.  1 84  ;  Inst.  4.  tit.  1.  §  3.)  That  which
was  not  manifestum  was  nee  manifestum.  Furtum
conceptum  and  oblatum  were  not  species  of  theft,
but  species  of  action.  It  was  called  conceptum
furtum  when  a  stolen  thing  was  sought  and  found,
in  the  presence  of  witnesses,  in  the  possession  of  a
person,  who,  though  he  might  not  be  the  thief,  was
liable  to  an  action  called  Furti  Concepti.  If  a  man
gave  you  a  stolen  thing,  in  order  that  it  might  be
found  {coficiperetur)  in  your  possession,  rather  than  in
his,  this  was  called  Furtum  Oblatum,  and  you  had
an  action  Furti  Oblati  against  him,  even  if  he  was
not  the  thief.  There  was  also  the  action  Prohibit!
Furti  against  him  who  prevented  a  person  from
searching  for  a  stolen  thing  {furtum)  ;  for  the
word  furtum  signifies  both  the  act  of  theft  and  the
thing  stolen.

The  punishment  for  furtum  manifestum  by  the
law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  was  capitalis,  that  is,  it
affected  the  person's  caput :  a  freeman  who  had
committed  theft  was  flogged  and  consigned  {addic-
tus)  to  the  injured  person  ;  but  whether  the  thief
became  a  slave  in  consequence  of  this  addictio,  or
an  adjudicatus,  was  a  matter  in  dispute  among  the
ancient  Romans.  The  Edict  subsequently  changed
the  penalty  into  an  actio  quadrupli,  both  in  the  case
of  a  slave  and  a  freedman.  The  penalty  of  the
Tv/elve  Tables,  in  the  case  of  a  furtum  nee  mani-
festum, was  duplum,  and  this  was  retained  in  the
Edict :  in  the  case  of  the  conceptum  and  oblatum
it  was  triplum,  and  this  also  was  retained  in  the
Edict.  In  the  case  of  Prohibitum,  the  penalty  was
quadruplum,  according  to  the  provisions  of  the
Edict  ;  for  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  had  af-
fixed no  penalty  in  this  case,  but  merely  enacted
that  if  a  man  w'ould  search  for  stolen  property,  he
must  be  naked  all  but  a  cloth  round  his  middle,
and  must  hold  a  dish  in  his  hand.  If  he  found
any  thing,  it  was  furtum  manifestum.  The  ab-
surdity of  the  law,  says  Gaius,  is  apparent  ;  for  if
a  man  would  not  let  a  person  search  in  his  ordinary
dress,  much  less  would  he  allow  him  to  search  un-
dressed, when  the  penalty  would  be  so  much  more
severe  if  any  thing  was  found.  (Compare  Grimm,
Von  derPoesie  in  Recht,  Zeitschrift,  vol.  ii.  p.  91.)

The  actio  furti  was  given  to  all  persons  who  had
an  interest  in  the  preservation  of  the  thing  stolen
i CUIUS  interest  rem  salvam  esse),  and  the  owner  of
00  2


564  FURTUM.

a  thing,  therefure,  had  not  necessarily  thi-s  action.
A  creditor  might  have  this  action  even  against  the
owner  of  a  thing  pledged,  if  the  ow^ner  was  the
thief,  A  person  to  whom  a  thing  was  delivered  in
order  to  work  upon  it,  as  in  the  case  of  clothes
given  to  a  tailor  to  mend,  could  bring  this  action
against  the  thief,  and  the  owner  could  not,  for  the
Q-wner  had  an  action  (locati)  against  tli-e  tailor.
But  if  the  tailor  was  not  a  solvent  person,  the  owner
had  his  action  against  the  thief,  for  in  such  case  the
owner  had  an  inteiest  in  the  preservation  of  the
thing.  The  rule  was  the  same  in  the  case  of  com-
modatum  [CoMMonATTni].  But  in  a  case  of  de-
positum,  the  depositee  was  under  no  obligation  for
the  safe  custody  of  the  thing  (custodiam  praestare),
and  he  was  under  no  liability  except  in  the  case  of
dolus;  consequently,  if  the  deposited  thing  was
stolen,  the  owner  alone  had  the  actio  furti.  A
bona  fide  purchaser  might  have  the  actio  furti,
even  if  the  thing  had  not  been  delivered  to  him,
and  he  were  consequently  not  dominus.

An  impubes  might  commit  theft  (obligatur  crimine
furti)^  if  he  was  bordering  on  the  age  of  puberty,
and  consequently  of  sufficient  capacity  to  under-
stand what  he  was  doing.  If  a  person  who  was
in  the  power  of  another  committed  furtum,  the
actio  furti  was  against  the  latter.

The  right  of  action  died  with  the  offending  per-
son. If  a  peregrinus  committed  furtum,  he  was
made  liable  to  an  action  by  the  fiction  of  his  being
a  Roman  citizen  (Gains,  iv.  37)  ;  and  by  the  same
fiction  he  had  a  right  of  action,  if  his  property
was  stolen.

He  Avho  took  the  property  of  another  by  force
was  guilty  of  theft  ;  but  in  the  case  of  this  delict,
the  praetor  g-ave  a  special  action  Vi  bonorum  rap-
torum.  The  origin  of  the  action  Vi  bonorum  rap-
torum  is  referred  by  Cicero  to  the  time  of  the  civil
Avars,  when  men  had  become  accustomed  to  acts  of
violence  and  to  the  use  of  arms  against  one  another.
Accordingly,  the  Edict  was  originally  directed
against  those  who  with  bodies  of  armed  men
{liominihus  armatis  coactisque)  did  injury  to  the
property  of  another  or  carried  it  off  {quid  aut
rapuerint  aut  damni  dederint).  With  the  estab-
lishment of  order  under  the  empire  the  prohibition
against  the  use  of  arms  was  less  needed,  and  the
word  armatis  is  not  contained  in  the  Edict  as  cited
in  the  Digest  (47.  tit.  8).  The  application  of  the
Edict  would  however  have  still  been  very  limited,
if  it  had  been  confined  to  cases  where  numbers
were  engaged  in  the  violence  or  robbery  ;  and  ac-
cordingly the  jurists  discovered  that  the  Edict,
when  properly  understood,  applied  also  to  the  case
of  a  single  person  committing  damnum  or  carrying
off  property.  Originally  the  Edict  comprehended
both  damnum  and  bona  rapta,  and,  indeed,  damnum
which  was  effected  vi  homTiinibus  armatis  coac-
tisque, was  that  kind  of  violence  to  the  repression
of  which  the  Edict  was  at  first  mainly  directed.
Under  the  empire  the  reasons  for  this  part  of  the
Edict  ceased,  and  thus  we  see  that  in  Ulpian's
time  the  action  was  simply  called  "  vi  bonorum
raptorum."  In  the  Institutes  and  Code  the  action
applies  to  robbery  only,  and  there  is  no  trace  of  the
other  part  of  the  Edict.  This  instructive  illustration
of  the  gradual  adaptation,  even  of  the  Edictal  law,
to  circumstances  is  given  by  Savigny  {Zeitschrift.
vol.  V.  Ueber  Cicero  Pro  Tullio  und  die  Actio  vi  bo-
norum Raptorum),  who  has  also  given  the  masterly
emendation  of  Dig.  47.  tit,  8.  s.  2.  §  7,  by  Pleise,


FUSTUARIUM,

The  object  ef  the  furti  actio  was  to  get  a  penalty;
as  to  the  thing  stolen  the  owner  could  recover  it
either  by  a  vindicatio,  v/hich  was  available  against
any  possessor,  whether  the  thief  or  another,  or  by
a  coudictio,  which  was  available  again.^t  the  thief
or  his  heres,  though  he  had  not  the  possession.
(Inst.  4,  tit.  1.  §  19.)

The  strictness  of  the  old  law  in  the  case  of
actions  of  theft  was  gradually  modified,  as  already
shown.  By  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  if
theft  {fuHuiri)  was  committed  in  the  night,  the
thief,  if  caught  in  the  act,  might  be  killed  :  and
he  might  also  be  killed  in  the  daytime,  if  he  was
caught  in  the  act  and  defended  himself  with  any
kind  of  a  weapon  {teluni)  ;  if  he  did  not  so  defend
himself,  he  was  whipped  and  became  addictus,  if
a  freeman  (as  above  stated)  ;  and  if  a  slave,  he
was  whipped  and  thrown  down  a  precipice.

The  following  are  peculiar  kinds  of  actiones
furti :  (1)  Actio  de  tigno  juncto,  against  a  person
who  employed  another  person's  timber  in  his
building  ;  (2)  Actio  arborum  furtim  caesarum,
against  a  person  who  secretly  cut  wood  on  another
person's  ground  ;  (3)  Actio  furti  adversus  nautas
et  caupones,  against  nautae  and  caupones  [Exer-
citor],  who  were  liable  for  the  acts  of  the  men  in
their  employment.

There  weretwo  cases  in  which  a  bona  fide  pos-
sessor of  another  person's  property  could  not  obtain
the  ownership  by  usucapion  ;  and  one  of  them  was
the  case  of  a  res  furtiva,  which  was  provided  for
in  the  Twelve  Tables.  The  Roman  Law  as  to
Furtum  underwent  changes,  as  appears  from  what
has  been  said  ;  and  the  subject  requires  to  be
treated  historically  in  order  to  be  fully  understood.
The  work  of  Rein  {Das  Criminalrecht  der  Romer)
contains  a  complete  view  of  the  matter.

(Gains,  iii.  183—209,  iv.  1  ;  Gellius,  xi.  18  ;
Diar.  47.  tit.  2  ;  Inst,  4.  tit.  1  ;  Dirksen,  Ueher-
sicJd.  &c.  pp.  564 — 594  ;  Heinec.  Syivtag.  ed,  Hau-
bold  ;  Rein,  Das  Rom.  Privatrecht,  p,  345  ;  Rein,
Das  Criminalrecht  der  Router^  p,  293,)     [G.  L,]

FU'SCINA  (Tpiaij/a),  a  trident;  more  commonly
called  tridens,  meaning  tridens  stimidus^  because  it
was  originally  a  three-pronged  goad,  used  to  incite
horses  to  greater  swiftness,  Neptune  was  supposed
to  be  armed  Avith  it  Avhen  he  drove  his  chariot,  and
it  thus  became  his  usual  attribute,  perhaps  with  an
allusion  also  to  the  use  of  the  same  instrument  in
harpooning  fish.  It  is  represented  in  the  cut  on
p.  276.  (Horn.  //.  xii.  27,  Od.  iv.  506,  v.  292  ;
Virg.  Georg.  i.  13,  Jen.  i.  138,  145,  ii.  610  ;
Cic,  de  Nat.  Deor.  i.  36  ;  Philost.  Imag.  ii.  14.)
The  trident  was  also  attributed  to  Nereus  (Virg.
Aeri.  ii.  418)  and  to  the  Tritons.  (Cic.  de  Nat.
Deor.  ii.  35  ;  Mart.  Sped.  xxvi.  3.)

In  the  contests  of  gladiators  the  Retiarius  was
armed  with  a  trident.  (Juv.  ii.  148,  viii.  203.)
[Gladiator.]  [.J.  Y.]

FUSTUA'RIUM  {IvXoKoma)  waa  a  capital
punishment  inflicted  upon  the  Roman  soldiers  for
desertion,  theft,  and  similar  crimes.  It  was  ad-
ministered in  the  following  manner:  —  When  a
soldier  was  condemned,  the  tribune  touched  him
slightly  with  a  stick,  upon  which  all  the  soldiers  of
the  legion  fell  upon  him  with  sticks  and  stones,
and  generally  killed  him  upon  the  spot.  If  how-
ever he  escaped,  for  he  was  allowed  to  fly,  he  could
not  return  to  his  native  country,  nor  did-any  of  his
relatives  dare  to  receive  him  into  their  houses.
(Polyb.  vi.  37  ;  compare  Liv.  v.  6,^     This  punish-


FUSUS.

ment  continued  to  be  inflicted  in  the  later  times  of
the  republic  (Cic.  Philip,  iii.  6),  and  under  the
empire.  (Tacit.  Ann.  iii.  21.)

Diflferent  from  the  fustuarium  was  the  animad-
versio  fustium,  which  was  a  corporal  punishment
inflicted  under  the  emperors  upon  free  men,  but
only  those  of  the  lower  orders  {tenuiores^  Dig.  48.
tit.  19.  s.  28.  §  2).  It  was  a  less  severe  punish-
ment than  the  fl-ogging  with  flagella,  which  punish-
ment was  confined  to  slaves.  (Dig.  48.  tit.  19.
s.  10  ;  47.  tit  10.  8.45.)     [Flagrum.]

FUSUS  (orpaKTos),  the  spindle,  was  alwaj's,
when  in  use,  accompanied  by  the  distaff  (colus.,
i^KaKOLTT]),  as  an  indisputable  part  of  the  same
apparatus.  (Ovid,  Met  iv.  220—229.)  The  wool,
flax,  or  other  material,  having  been  prepared  for
spinning,  and  having  sometimes  been  dyed  (loSue-
<phs  elpos  €xov(Ta,  Hom.  Od.  iv.  135),  was  rolled
into  a  ball  (toA-uttt?,  glomus.,  Hor.  Epist.  i.  13.  14  ;
Ovid,  Met.  vi.  19),  which  was,  however,  sufficiently
loose  to  allow  the  fibres  to  be  easily  drawn  out  by
the  hand  of  the  spinner.  The  upper  part  of  the
distaff  was  then  inserted  into  this  mass  of  flax  or
wool  {colus  comta,  Plin.  //.  N.  viii.  74),  and  the
lower  part  was  held  in  the  left  hand  under  the  left
arm  in  such  a  position  as  was  most  convenient  for
conducting  the  operation.  The  fibres  were  drawn
out,  and  at  the  saime  time  spirally  twisted,  chiefly
by  the  use  of  the  fore-finger  and  thumb  of  the  right
hand  (SaKTi^Aois  cAio-cre,  Eurip.  Orest.  1414  ;pollice
dodo,  Claud,  de  Prob.  Cons.  177)  ;  and  the  thread
(filum,  stamen,  vi]ixa)  so  produced  was  wound  upon
the  spindle  until  the  quantity  was  as  great  as  it
would  carry.

The  spindle  was  a  stick,  10  or  12  inches  long,
having  at  the  top  a  slit  or  catch  (dens,  6.-yKi(TTpov)
in  which  the  thread  was  fixed,  so  that  the  weight
of  the  spindle  might  continually  carry  down  the
thread  as  it  was  formed.  Its  lower  extremity  was
inserted  into  a  small  wheel  called  the  whorl  {vor-
ticellum),  made  of  wood,  stone,  or  metal  ( see  wood-
cut), the  use  of  which  was  to  keep  the  spindle
more  steady  and  to  promote  its  rotation  :  for  the


GALEA.


5G5


Bpinner,  who  was  commonly  a  female,  every  now
and  then  twirled  round  the  spindle  with  her  right
hand  (Herod,  v.  12  ;  Ovid.  Met.  vi.  22),  so  as  to
twist  the  thread  still  more  completely  ;  and  when-
ever, by  its  continual  prolongation,  it  let  down  the
spindle  to  the  ground,  she  took  it  out  of  the  slit,
wound  it  upon  the  spindle,  and,  having  replaced  it
in  the  slit,  drew  out  and  twisted  another  length.
All  these  circumstances  are  mentioned  in  detail  by
Catullus  (Ixiv.  305—  319).      The   accompanying


woodcut  IS  taken  from  a  series  of  bas-reliefs  repre-
senting the  arts  of  Minerva  upon  a  frieze  of  the
Forum  Palladium  at  Rome.  It  shows  the  opera-
tion of  spinning,  at  the  moment  when  the  woman
has  drawn  out  a  sufficient  length  of  yarn  to  twist
it  by  whirling  the  spindle  with  her  right  thumb  and
fore-finger,  and  previously  to  the  act  of  taking  it
out  of  the  slit  to  wind  it  upon  the  bobbin  (Trifviov)
already  formed.

The  distaff  was  about  three  times  the  length  of
the  spindle,  strong  and  thick  in  proportion,  com-
monly either  a  stick  or  a  reed,  with  an  expansion
near  the  top  for  holding  the  ball.  It  was  some-
times of  richer  materials  and  ornamented.  Theo-
critus has  left  a  poem  {IdyU.  xxviii.)  written  on
sending  an  ivory  distaff  to  the  wife  of  a  friend.
Golden  spindles  were  sent  as  presents  to  ladies  ol
high  rank  (Hom.  Od.  iv.  131  ;  Herod,  iv.  162)  ;
and  a  golden  distaft'  is  attributed  by  Homer  and
Pindar  to  goddesses,  and  other  females  of  remark-
able dignity,  who  are  called  xpyo-TjAd/caTOj,

It  was  usual  to  have  a  basket  to  hold  the  dis-
taff and  spindle,  with  the  balls  of  wool  prepared
for  spinning,  and  the  bobbins  already  spun.  (Brunck,
Anal.  ii.  12  ;  Ovid,  Met.  iv.  10.)  [Calathus.]

In  the  rural  districts  of  Italy  women  were  for-
bidden to  spin  when  they  were  travelling  on  foot,
the  act  being  considered  of  evil  omen.  (Plin.  //.  A^.
xxviii.  5.)  The  distaff  and  spindle,  with  the  wool
and  thread  upon  them,,  were  carried  in  bridal  pro-
cessions ;  and,  without  the  wool  and  thread,  they
were  often  suspended  by  females  as  offerings  of  re-
ligious gratitude,  especially  in  old  age,  or  on  relin-
quishing the  constiint  use  of  them.  (Plin.  H.  N.
viii.  74.)  [DoNARiA.]  They  were  most  frequently
dedicated  to  Pallas,  the  patroness  of  spinning,  and
of  the  arts  connected  with  it.  This  goddess  was
herself  rudely  sculptured  with  a  distaff  and  spindle
in  the  Trojan  Palladium.  (Apolkd.  iii.  12.  3.)
They  were  also  exhibited  in  the  representations  of
tlie  three  Fates,  who  were  conceived,  by  their  spin-
ning, to  determine  the  life  of  every  man ;  and  at
the  same  time  by  singing,  as  females  usually  did
whilst  they  sat  together  at  their  work,  to  predict
his  future  lot.     (Catull.  I.  e.)  [J.  Y.]

G.

Gi\BINUS  CtNCTUS.     [Toga.]

GAESUM.     [Hasta.],

GA'LEA  (Kpdvos,2)oet.  K6pvs,  tt^AtjI),  a  helmet;
a  casque.  The  helmet  wa&origiaally  made  of  skin
or  leather,  whence  is  supposed  to  have  arisen  its
appellation,  Kvver),  meaning  properlj'  a  helmet  of
dog-skin,  but  applied  to  caps  or  helmets  made  of
the  hide  of  other  animals  (Taupeirj,  /CTtSe??,  Hom.
//.  X.  258,  335  ;  aiyeir],  Od.  xxiv.  230  ;  Herod,
vii.  77  ;  compare  Kpdvri  aKvriPa,  Xen.  Anab.  v.  4.
§  13  ;  galea  lupina^  Prop.  iv.  11.  19),  and  even  to
those  which  were  entirely  of  bronze  or  iron  {Tr6.-y-
XoXkqs,  Od,  xviii.  377).  The  leathern  basis  of
the  helmet  was  also  very  commonly  strengthened
and  adorned  by  the  addition  of  either  bronze  or
gold,  which  is  expressed  by  such  epithets  as  xa^-
K7]pT)s,  evxa^iios,  xpuo-ei'r?.  Helmets  which  had  a
metallic  basis  (Kpavrj  x«^k«,  Xen.  Anab.  i.  2.  §
16)  were  in  Latin  properly  called  cassides  (Isid.
Orig.  xviii.  14  ;  Tacit.  Germ.  6  ;  Caesar,  B.  G.  iii.
45),  although  the  terms  galea  and  cassis  are  often
confounded.  A  casque  (cassis)  foimd  at  Pompeii
is  preserved  in  the  collection  at  Goodrich  Court,
()  o  3


566


GALEA.


Herefordshire.  (Skelton,  Engraved  lUust.  i.  pi.  44.)
The  perforations  for  the  lining  and  exterior  border
are  visible  along  its  edge.  A  side  and  a  front
view  of  it  are  presented  in  the  annexed  woodcut.


Two  casques  very  like  this  Avere  fished  up  from  the
bed  of  the  Alpheus,  near  Olympia,  and  are  in  the
possession  of  Mr.  Hamilton.  (Dodwell,  Tour,
vol.  ii.  p.  330.)  Among  the  materials  used  for
the  lining  of  helmets  were  felt  (ttTAos,  Horn.  //.
X.  265)  and  sponge.     (Aristot.  //.  A.  v.  16.)

The  helmet,  especially  that  of  skin  or  leather,
was  sometimes  a  mere  cap  conformed  to  the  shape
of  the  head,  without  either  crest  or  any  other  orna-
ment (^a(pa\6v  T6  KaX  &\o(poi^,  11.  x.  358).  In  this
state  it  was  probably  used  in  hunting  (galea  vena-
toria,  C.  Nep.  Dat.  iii.  2.),  and  was  called  /cara?-
Tul  (Hom.  //.  I.  c),  in  Latin  Cudo.  The  pre-
ceding woodcut  shows  an  example  of  it  as  worn  by
Diomede  in  a  small  Greek  bronze,  which  is  also  in
the  collection  at  Goodrich  Court.  (Skelton,  /.  c.)
The  additions  by  which  the  external  appearance  of
the  helmet  was  varied,  and  which  served  both  for
ornament  and  protection,  were  the  following  :  —

1.  Bosses  or  plates,  proceeding  either  from  the
top  ((pdXos,  Horn.  II.  iii.  362)  or  the  sides,  and
varying  in  number  from  one  to  four  (aixtpicpaXos,
hi(pd\os,  Hom.  II.  V.  743,  xi.  41  ;  Eustath.  ad  loc;
T€Tpa<^aAos,  11.  xii.  384).  It  is  however  very
doubtful  what  part  of  the  helmet  the  (pdXos  was.
Buttmann  thought  that  it  was  what  was  after-
wards called  the  Kwyos,  that  is,  a  metal  ridge  in
which  the  plume  was  fixed  ;  but  Liddell  and  Scott
(Lex.  s.  V.)  maintain  with  more  probability  that
the  <pd\os  was  the  shade  or  fore-piece  of  the  helmet;
and  that  an  a^KpicpaXos  helmet  was  one  that  had  a
like  projection  behind  as  well  as  before,  such  as
may  be  seen  in  the  representations  of  many  ancient
helmets.

2.  The  helmet  thus  adorned  was  very  commonly
surmounted  by  the  crest  {crista,  \6(f>os,  Hom.  //.
xxii.  31 6),  which  was  often'of  horse-hair  {'LTnrovpis,
IniroSdaeia,  Hom.  //.  ec.  ;  hScpav  ^Oeipai,  Theocr.
xxii.  186  ;  hirsuta  juha,  Propert.  iv.  11,  19),  and
made  so  as  to  look  imposing  and  terrible  (Horn.  //.
iii.  337  ;  Virg.  Aen.  viii.  620),  as  well  as  hand-
some, {lb.  ix.  365  ;  etXocpos,  Heliod.  Aeih.  vii.)
The  helmet  often  had  two  or  even  three  crests.
(Aesch.  Sep.  c.  Tlieb.  384.)  In  the  Roman  army
of  later  times  the  crest  served  not  only  for  orna-
ment, but  also  to  distinguish  the  different  centu-
rions, each  of  whom  wore  a  casque  of  a  peculiar
form  and  appearance.     (Veget.  ii.  1 3.)

3.  The  two  cheek-pieces  {bucculae,  Jua'.  x.  1 34  ;
irapayvaQihes,  Eustath.  in  II.  v.  743),  which  were
attached  to  the  helmet  by  hinges,  so  as  to  be  lifted
up  and  down.  They  had  buttons  or  ties  at  their
extremities  for  fastening  the  helmet  on  the  head.
(Val.  Place,  vi.  626.)

4.  The  beaver,  or  visor,  a  peculiar  form  of  which
is  supposed  to  have  been  the  auAwTrts  rpvcpdXeia,
i.  e.  the  perforated  beaver.  (Hom.  //.  xi.  353.)
The  gladiators  wore  helmets  of  this  kind  (Juv.
viii.  203),  and  specimens  of  them,  not  unlike  those


GALLL

worn  in  the  middle  ages,  have  been  found  at  Pom-
peii.    See  the  wood-cut  to  Gladiatores.

The  five  following  helmets  .ire  selected  from  an-
tique gems,  and  are  engraved  of  the  size  of  the
originals.  [J.  Y.j


GALERI'CULUM.  [Galerus.]
GALE'RUS  or  GALE'RUM,  was  originally
a  covering  for  the  head  worn  by  priests,  espe-
cially by  the  Jlamen  dialis  (Gell.  x.  15;  Serv.  ad
Virg.  Aen.  ii.  683).  It  appears  to  have  been  a
round  cap  made  of  leather,  with  its  top  ending  in
an  apex  or  point.  [See  cut  on  p.  102.]  The  word  is
probably  connected  with ^a/ea,  a  helmet.  In  course
of  time  the  name  was  applied  to  any  kind  of  cap
fitting  close  to  the  head  like  a  helmet.  (Virg.  Aen.
vii.  688;  Virg.  Moret.  121;  Suet.  Ner.  26.)  Galerus
and  its  diminutive  Galericulum  are  also  used  to
signify  a  covering  for  the  head  made  of  hair,  and
hence  a  wig.  (Juv,  Sat.  vi.  120,  with  the  Schol.;
Suet.  0th.  12;  Mart.  xiv.  50.)

GALLI,  the  priests  of  Cybele,  whose  worship
was  introduced  at  Rome  from  Phrygia,  in  B.C.  204.
(Liv.  xxix.  10,  14,  xxxvi.  36.)  The  Galli  were,
according  to  an  ancient  custom,  alwaA's  castrated
{spadones, semimares^semivirl,  nee  viri  nee  feminae),
and  it  would  seem  that  impelled  by  religious  fana-
ticism they  performed  this  operation  on  themselves.
(Juv.  vi.  512,  &c.  ;  Ovid,  Fast.  iv.  237;  Martial,
iii.  81,  xl.  74  ;  Plin.  H.  N,  xi.  49.)  In  their
wild,  enthusiastic,  and  boisterous  rites,  they  re-
sembled the  Coiybantes  (Lucan.  i.  Bdb,  &c.  ;
compare  Hilaria),  and  even  went  further,  in  as
much,  as  in  their  fury,  they  mutilated  their  own
bodies.  (Propert.  ii.  18.  15.)  They  seem  to  have
been  always  chosen  from  a  poor  and  despised  class
of  people,  for  while  no  other  priests  were  allowed  to
beg,  the  Galli  {famuli  Idaeae  matris)  were  allowed
to  do  so  on  certain  days.  (Cic,  de  Leg.  ii,  9  and
16.)  The  chief  priest  among  them  was  called  ar-
chigallus.  (Servius,  axl  Aen.  ix.  116.)  The  origin
of  the  name  of  Galli  is  uncertain :  according  to
Festus  (s.  v.\  Ovid  {Fast.  iv.  363),  and  others,  it
was  derived  from  the  river  Gallus  in  Phrygia,
which  flowed  near  the  temple  of  Cybele,  and  the
water  of  which  was  fabled  to  put  those  persons
who  drank  of  it  into  such  a  state  of  madness,  that
they  castrated  themselves.  (Compare  Plin.  //.  A^.
V.  32,  xi.  40,  xxxi.  2  ;  Herodian.  11.)  The  sup-
position of  Hieronymus  {Cap.  Oseae,  4)  that  Galli
was  the  name  of  the  Gauls,  which  had  been  given
to  these  priests  by  the  Romans  in  order  to  show
their  contempt  of  that  nation,  is  unfounded,  as  the
Romans  must  have  received  the  name  from  Asia,
or  from  the  Greeks,  by  whom,  as  Suidas  (s.  v.)  in-
forms us,  Gallus  was  used  as  a  common  noun  in
the  sense  of  eunuch.  There  exists  a  verb  gallare^
which  signifies  to  raga  {insanare^  baccJiari),  ai^d


GENIUS,
wljitli  occurs  in  one    of  the  fragments   of  Varro
(p.  273,  ed.  Bip.)  and  in  the  Aiitholog.  Lat.  vol.  i.
p.  34,  ed.  Burmann.  [L.  S.]

GAME'LIA  (yaiu.7}\ia).  The  demes  and  phra-
tries  of  Attica  possessed  various  means  to  prevent
intruders  from  assuming  the  rights  of  citizens.
Among  other  regulations  it  vi^as  ordained  that  every
bride,  previous  to  her  marriage,  should  be  intro-
duced by  her  parents  or  guardians  to  the  phratria
of  her  husband  {yajx-qXiav  inripyvvoLKOS  elac^dpeiu,
Isaeus,  de  Pyrrh.  Haered.  pp.  62,  Q5^  &c. ;  deCiron.
Haered.  p.  208  ;  Demosth.  c.  Euhul.  p.  1312  and
1320).  This  introduction  of  the  young  women
was  accompanied  by  presents  to  their  new  phratores,
which  were  called  ya/xTjAm.  (Suidas,  s.  v. ;  Schol.
ud  Dem.  c.  Euhnl.  p.  1312.)  The  women  were
enrolled  in  the  lists  of  the  phratries,  and  this  enrol-
ment was  also  called  yafxrjKia..  The  presents  seem
to  have  consisted  in  a  feast  given  to  the  phratores,
and  the  phratores  in  return  made  some  oiferings  to
the  gods  on  behalf  of  the  young  bride.  (Pollux,
iii.  3,  viii.  9,  28.)  The  acceptance  of  the  presents
and  the  permission  to  enroll  the  bride  in  the  registers
of  the  phratria,  was  equivalent  to  a  declaration  that
she  was  considered  a  true  citizen,  and  that  conse-
quently her  children  would  have  legitimate  claims
to  all  the  rights  and  privileges  of  citizens.  (Herm.
Lchr.  d.  griech.  Staatsalt.  §  100.  n.  1.)

Va(xT)\ia  was  also  the  name  of  a  sacrifice  offered
to  Athena  on  the  day  previous  to  the  marriage  of  a
girl.  She  was  taken  by  her  parents  to  the  temple
of  the  goddess  in  the  Acropolis,  where  the  offerings
were  made  on  her  behalf.  (Suidas,  s.  v.  UporeXna.)
The  plural,  yafxrjXiai,  was  used  to  express  wed-
ding solemnities  in  general.  (Lycophron,  ap.  Etym.
M.s.v.)  [L.S.J

GAMOS  {ydiios).  [Matrimonium.]
GA'MORI.  [Geomori.]
GA'NEA.  [Cahpona,  p.  259,  a.]
GAUSAPA,  GAUSAPE,  or  GAUSAPUM,
a  kind  of  thick  cloth,  which  was  on  one  side  very
woolly,  and  was  used  to  cover  tables  (Herat.  Sat.
ii.  11  ;  Lucil.  ap.  Priscian.  ix.  870),  beds  (Mart,
xiv.  147),  and  by  persons  to  wrap  themselves  up
after  taking  a  bath  (Petron.  28),  or  in  general  to
protect  themselves  against  rain  and  cold,  (Seneca,
Epist.  53.)  It  was  worn  by  men  as  well  as  women.
(Ovid,  Ars  Aniat.  ii.  300.)  It  came  in  use  among
the  Romans  about  the  time  of  Augustus  (Plin.
//.  A^.  viii.  48),  and  the  wealthier  Romans  liad  it
made  of  the  finest  wool,  and  mostly  of  a  purple
colour.  The  gausapum  seems,  however,  sometimes
to  have  been  made  of  linen,  but  its  peculiarity  of
having  one  side  more  woolly  than  the  other  always
remained  the  same.  (Mart.  xiv.  138.)  As  Martial
(xiv.  152)  calls  it  guusapa  quadrata,  we  have
reason  to  suppose  that,  like  the  Scotch  plaid,  it  was
always,  for  whatever  purpose  it  might  be  used,  a
square  or  oblong  piece  of  cloth.  (See  Bottiger,
Sahina,  ii,  p.  102.)

The  word  gausapa  is  also  sometimes  used  to  de-
signate a  thick  wig,  such  as  was  made  of  the  hair
of  Gei-mans,  and  worn  by  the  fashionable  people
at  Rome  at  the  time  of  the  emperors.  (Pers.  Sat.
vi.  46.)  Persius  {^Sat.  iv.  38)  also  applies  the  word
in  a  figurative  sense  to  a  full  beard.  [L.  S.]

GELEONTES.     [Tribus,  Greek.]
GELOTOPOII  (7eAwT07roioO     [Parasiti.]
GENE'SIA.     [FuNus,  p.  558,  a.]
GE'NIUS.     See  Diet,  of  Gr.  and  Rom.  Bio-
ffraphy.


GENS.  567

GENOS  {y^vos).  [Tribus,  Greek.]
GENS.  This  word  contains  the  same  element
as  the  Latin  genius,  and  gi;^w^o,  and  as  the  Greek
yhps,  yi-yv-ofiai,  &c.,  and  it  primarily  signifies
ki?i.  But  the  word  has  numerous  significations,
which  have  either  a  very  remote  connection  with
this  its  primary  notion,  or  perhaps  none  at  all.

Gens  sometimes  signifies  a  whole  political  com-
munity, as  Gens  Latinorum,  Gens  Campanorum,
&c.  (Juv.  Sat.  viii.  239,  and  Heinrich's  note)  ;
though  it  is  probable  that  in  this  application  of  the
term,  the  notion  of  a  distinction  of  race  or  stock
is  implied,  or  at  least  the  notion  of  a  totalitv  of
persons  distinguished  from  other  totalities  by  same-
ness of  language,  community  of  law,  and  increase
of  their  numbers  among  themselves  only.  Cicero
(pro  Balbo.,  c.  13)  speaks  of  "■  Gentes  universae  in
civitatem  receptae,  ut  Sabinorum,  Volscorum,  Her-
nicorum."  It  is  a  consequence  of  such  meaning  of
Gens,  rather  than  an  independent  meaning,  that
the  word  is  sometimes  iised  to  express  a  people
simply  with  reference  to  their  territorial  limits.

The  meaning  of  the  word  in  the  expression  Jus
Gentium  is  explained  under  Jus.

The  words  Gens  and  Gentiles  have  a  special
meaning  in  the  system  of  the  Roman  law  and  in
the  Roman  constitution.  Cicero  (Top.  6)  has  pre-
served a  definition  of  Gentiles  which  was  given  by
Scaevola,  the  pontifex,  and  which,  with  reference
to  the  time,  must  be  considered  complete.  Those
were  Gentiles,  according  to  Scaevola,  (1)  who  bore
the  same  name,  (2)  who  were  born  of  freemen
(ingenui),  (3)  none  of  whose  ancestors  had  been  a
slave,  and  (4)  who  had  suffered  no  capitis  diminu-
tio.  This  definition  contains  nothing  which  shows
a  common  bond  of  union  among  gentiles,  except
the  possession  of  a  common  name  ;  but  those  who
had  a  common  name  were  not  gentiles,  if  the  three
other  conditions,  contained  in  this  definition,  were
not  applicable  to  them.  There  is  also  a  definition
of  gentilis  by  Festus :  — "  That  is  called  Gens
Aelia  which  is  composed  (co7ificitur)  of  many
familiae.  Gentilis  is  botli  one  who  is  of  the  same
stock  (genus),  and  one  who  is  called  by  the  same
name  (sijnili  nomine)  *,  as  Cincius  says,  those  are
my  gentiles  who  are  called  by  my  name."

We  cannot  conclude  an}'-  thing  more  from  the
conficitur  of  Festus  than  that  a  Gens  contained
several  familiae,  or  that  several  familiae  were  com-
prehended under  one 'Gens.  Accordin]^  to  the
definition,  persons  of  the  same  genus  (kin)  were
gentiles,  and  also  persons  of  the  same  name  were
gentiles.  If  Festus  meant  to  say  that  all  persons
of  the  same  genus  and  all  persons  of  the  same
name  were  gentiles,  his  statement  is  inconsistent


*  "  Gentilis  dicitur  et  ex  eodem  genere  ortus,ef
is  qui  simili  nomine  appellatur."  The  second  et  is
sometimes  read  tit,  which  is  manifestly  not  the  right
reading,  as  the  Context  shows.  Besides,  if  the
words  "  ut  is  qui  simili  nomine  appellatur,"  are  to
be  taken  as  an  illustration  of  "  ex  eodem  genere
ortus,"  as  they  must  be  if  ut  is  the  true  reading,
then  the  notion  of  a  common  name  is  viewed  as  of
necessity  being  contained  in  the  notion  of  common
kin,  whereas  there  may  be  common  kin  without
common  name,  and  common  name  without  common
kin.  Thus  neither  does  common  name  include  all
common  kin,  nor  does  common  kin  include  all  com-
mon name  ;  yet  eacli  includes  something  that  the
other  includes.

oo  4


568


GENS.


■with  the  definition  of  the  Pontifex  ;  for  persons
might  be  of  the  same  gemis,  and  might  have  sus-
tained a  capitis  diminutio  either  by  adoption  or
adrogation,  or  by  emancipation :  in  all  these  cases
the  genus  would  remain,  for  the  natural  relation-
ship was  not  aflfected  by  any  change  in  the  juris-
tical condition  of  a  person  ;  in  the  cases  of  adoption
and  adrogation  the  name  would  be  lost :  in  the  case
of  emancipation  it  would  be  retained.  If  the  defi-
nition of  Festus  means  that  among  those  of  the
same  genus  there  may  be  gentiles ;  and  among
those  of  the  same  name,  gentiles  may  also  be  in-
cluded, his  definition  is  true ;  but  neither  part  of
the  definition  is  absolutely  true,  nor,  if  both  parts
are  taken  together,  is  the  whole  definition  abso-
lutely true.  It  seeras  as  if  the  definition  of  gentiles
Avas  a  matter  of  some  difficulty  ;  for  while  the  pos-
session of  a  common  name  was  the  simplest  general
characteristic  of  gentilitas,  there  were  other  condi-
tions which  were  equally  essential.

The  name  of  the  gens  was  generally  characterised
by  the  termination  eia  or  m,  as  Julia,  Cornelia,
Valeria.

When  a  man  died  intestate  and  without  agnati,
his  familia  [Familia]  by  the  law  of  the  Twelve
Tables  came  to  the  gentiles  ;  and  in  the  case  of  a
lunatic  (furiosus)  who  had  no  guardians,  the  guar-
dianship of  the  lunatic  and  his  property  belonged
to  the  agnati  and  to  the  gentiles  ;  to  the  latter,  we
may  presume,  in  case  the  former  did  not  exist.

Accordingly,  one  part  of  the  jus  gentilitium  or
jus  gentilitatis  related  to  Euccessions  to  the  pro-
perty of  intestates,  who  had  no  agnati.  A  nottible
example  of  a  dispute  on  this  subject  between  the
Claudii  and  Marcelli  is  mentioned  in  a  difficult
passage  of  Cicero  (de  Orat  i.  39).  The  Marcelli
claimed  the  inheritance  of  an  intestate  son  of  one
of  the  liberti  or  freedmen  of  their  familia  {stirpe);
the  Claudii  claimed  the  same  by  the  gentile  rights
(ffenfe).  The  Marcelli  were  plebeians  and  be-
longed to  the  patrician  Claudia  gens.  Niebuhr
observes  that  this  claim  of  the  Claudii  is  incon-
sistent with  Cicero's  definition,  according  to  which
no  descendant  of  a  freedman  could  be  a  gentilis  ;
and  he  concludes  that  Cicero  (that  is  Scaevola)
must  have  been  mistaken  in  this  part  of  his  defi-
nition. But  it  must  be  observed  though  the
descendants  of  freedmen  might  have  no  claim  as
gentiles,  the  members  of  a  gens  might  as  such
have  claims  against  them  ;  and  in  this  sense  the
descendants  of  freedmen  might  be  gentiles.  It
would  seem  as  if  the  Marcelli  iiuited  to  defend
their  supposed  patronal  rights  to  the  inheritance
of  the  sons  of  freedmen  against  the  claims  of  the
gens  ;  for  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  gave  the
inheritance  of  a  freedman  only,  who  died  intestate
and  without  heirs,  to  his  patron,  and  not  the  in-
heritjmce  of  the  son  of  a  freedman.  The  question
might  be  this :  whether  the  law,  in  the  case  sup-
posed, gave  the  heroditas  to  the  gens  as  having  a
right  paramount  to  the  patronal  right.  It  may  be
that  the  Marcelli,  as  being  included  in  the  Claudia
gens,  were  supposed  to  have  merged  their  patronal
rights  (if  they  really  existed  in  the  case  in  dispute)
in  those  of  the  gens.  Whether  as  members  of  the
gens,  the  plebeian  Marcelli  would  take  as  gentiles
what  they  lost  as  patroni,  may  be  doubted.

It  is  generally  said  or  supposed  that  the  here-
ditas  which  came  to  a  gens  was  divided  among  the
gentiles,  which  must  mean  the  heads  of  familiae.
This  may  be  so  ;  at  least  we  must  conceive  that


GENS.

the  heredltas,  at  one  period  at  least,  must  have  beer,
a  benefit  to  the  members  of  the  gens :  Caesar  is
said  (Sueton.  Jul.  1)  to  have  been  deprived  of  his
gentilitiae  hereditates.

In  determining  that  the  property  of  intestates
should  ultimately  belong  to  the  gens,  the  law  of
the  Twelve  Tables  was  only  providing  for  a  case
which  in  every  civilized  country  is  provided  for  by
some  positive  law  ;  that  is,  the  law  finds  some  nile  as
to  the  disposition  of  the  property  of  a  person  who  dies
without  having  disposed  of  it  or  leaving  those  whom
the  law  recognizes  as  immediately  entitled  to  it  in
case  there  is  no  disposition.  The  gens  had  thus  a
relation  to  the  gentiles,  similar  to  that  which  sub-
sists in  modern  states  between  the  sovereign  power
and  persons  dying  intestate  and  without  heirs  or
next  of  kin.  The  mode  in  which  such  a  succession
was  applied  by  the  gens  was  probably  not  deter-
mined by  law ;  and  as  the  gens  was  a  kind  of
juristical  person,  analogous  to  the  community  of  a
civitas,  it  seems  not  unlikely  that  originally  inherit-
ances accrued  to  the  gens  as  such,  and  were  com-
mon property.  The  gens  must  have  had  some
common  property,  such  as  sacella,  &c  It  would
be  no  difficult  transition  to  imagine,  that  what
originally  belonged  to  the  gens  as  such,  was  in  the
course  of  time  distributed  among  the  members,
which  would  easily  take  place  when  the  ficmiiliae
included  in  a  gens  were  reduced  to  a  small  number.

There  were  certain  sacred  rites  {sacra  gentiiitia)
which  belonged  to  a  gens,  to  the  observance  of
which  all  the  members  of  a  gens,  as  such,  were
bound,  whether  they  were  members  by  birth,
adoption,  or  adrogation.  A  person  was  freed  from
the  observance  of  such  sacra,  and  lost  the  privileges
connected  with  his  gentile  rights,  when  he  lost  hia
gens,  that  is,  when  he  was  adrogated,  adopted,  or
even  emancipated  ;  for  adrogation,  adoption,  and
emancipation  were  accompanied  by  a  diminutio
capitis.

When  the  adoption  was  from  one  familia  into
another  of  the  same  gens,  the  name  of  the  gens  was
still  retained  ;  and  when  a  son  was  emjincipated,
the  name  of  the  gens  was  still  retained  ;  and  j'et
in  both  these  cases,  if  we  adopt  the  definition  of
Scaevola,  the  adopted  and  emancipated  persons  lost
the  gentile  rights,  though  they  were  also  freed  from
the  gentile  burdens  (sacra).  In  the  case  of  adop-
tion and  adrogation,  the  adopted  and  adrogated
person  who  passed  into  a  familia  of  another  gens,
must  have  passed  into  the  gens  of  such  familia,
and  so  must  have  acquired  the  rights  of  that  gens.
Such  a  person  had  sustained  a  capitis  diminutio,
and  its  effect  was  to  destroy  his  former  gentile
rights,  together  with  the  rights  of  agnation.  The
gentile  rights  were  in  fact  implied  in  the  rights  of
agnation,  if  the  pater-familias  had  a  gens.  Conse-
quently he  who  obtained  by  adrogation  or  adoption
the  rights  of  agnation,  obtained  also  the  gentile
rights  of  his  adopted  father.  In  the  case  of  adro-
gation, the  adrogated  person  renounced  his  gens  at
the  Comitia  Curiata,  which  solemnity  might  also
be  expressed  by  the  term  "  sacra  detestari,"  for
sacra  and  gens  are  often  synonymous.  Thus,  in
such  case,  adrogatio,  on  the  part  of  the  adoptive
father,  corresponded  to  detestatio  sacrorum  on  the
part  of  the  adrogated  son.  This  detestatio  sacro-
rum is  probably  the  same  thing  as  the  sacrorum
alienatio  mentioned  by  Cicero  (Orator,  c.  42).  It
was  the  duty  of  the  pontifices  to  look  after  the  due
observation  of  the  gentile  sacra,  and  to  see  that


GENS.

tliey  were  not  lost,  {Pro  Doino,  c.  13,  &c.)  Each
gens  seems  to  have  had  its  peculiar  place  (sacellum)
for  the  celebration  of  the  sacra  gentilitia,  which
were  performed  at  stated  times.  The  sacra  genti-
litia,  as  already  observed,  were  a  burden  on  the
members  of  a  gens  as  such.  The  sacra  privata  were
a  charge  on  the  property  of  an  individual ;  the  two
kinds  of  sacra  were  thus  quite  distinct.

According  to  Dionysius  {Antiq.  Rom.  ii.  7),  the
curiae  were  respectively  subdivided  into  Decades  ;
and  Niebuhr  argues  that  Decades  and  Gentes  were
tlie  same.  Accordingly  each  of  the  three  tribes
contained  ten  curiae  and  100  gentes  ;  and  the
three  tribes  contained  300  gentes.  Now  if  there
is  any  truth  in  the  tradition  of  this  original  dis-
tribution of  the  population  into  tribes,  curiae  and
gentes,  it  follows  that  there  Avas  no  necessary  kin-
ship among  those  families  which  belonged  to  a
gens,  any  more  than  among  those  families  which
belonged  to  one  curia.

We  know  nothing  historically  of  the  organisa-
tion of  civil  society,  but  we  know  that  many  new
political  bodies  have  been  organised  out  of  the
materials  of  existing  political  bodies.  It  is  useless
to  conjecture  what  was  the  original  organisation  of
tlie  Roman  state.  We  must  take  the  tradition  as
it  has  come  down  to  us.  The  tradition  is  not,  that
familiae  related  by  blood  were  formed  into  gentes,
that  these  gentes  were  fonned  into  curiae,  that  these
curiae  were  formed  into  tribes.  Such  a  tradition
would  contain  its  own  refutation,  for  it  involves
the  notion  of  the  construction  of  a  body  politic
by  the  aggregation  of  families  into  unities,  and  by
further  combinations  of  these  new  unities.  The  tra-
dition is  of  three  fundamental  parts  (in  whatever
manner  formed),  and  of  the  divisions  of  tliem  into
smaller  parts.  The  smallest  political  division  is  gens.
No  further  division  is  made,  and  thus  of  necessity,
Avhen  we  come  to  consider  the  component  parts  of
gens,  we  come  to  consider  the  individuals  com-
prised in  it  or  the  heads  of  families.  According  to
the  fundamental  principles  of  Roman  law,  the  in-
dividuals arrange  themselves  into  familiae  under
their  respective  patres-familiae.  It  follows,  that  if
the  distribution  of  the  people  was  effected  by  a
division  of  the  larger  into  smaller  parts,  there  could
be  no  necessary  kin  among  the  familiae  of  a  gens  ;
for  kinship  among  all  the  members  of  a  gens  could
only  be  eifected  by  selecting  kindred  familiae,  and
forming  them  into  a  gens.  If  the  gens  was  the
result  of  subdivision,  the  kinship  of  the  original
members  of  such  gens,  whenever  it  existed,  must
have  been  accidental.

There  is  no  proof  that  the  Romans  considered
that  there  was  kinship  among  the  familiae  origin-
ally included  in  a  gens.  Yet  as  kinship  was  evi-
dence of  the  rights  of  agnatio,  and  consequently
of  gentile  rights,  when  there  had  been  no  capitis
diminutio,  it  is  easy  to  see  how  that  which  was
evidence  of  the  rights  of  agn.atio,  and  consequently
of  gentile  rights,  might  be  viewed  as  pan  of  the
definition  of  gentilis,  and  be  so  extended  as  to
comprehend  a  supposed  kinship  among  the  original
members  of  the  gens.  The  word  yens  itself  would
also  favour  such  a  supposition,  especially  as  the
word  geniiii  seems  to  be  often  used  in  the  same
sense.  (Cic.  pro  Balbo,  c.  14.)  This  notion  of
kinship  appears  also  to  be  confirmed  by  the  fact  of
the  members  of  the  gens  being  distinguished  by  a
common  name,  as  Cornelia,  Julia,  &c.  But  many
circumstances,  besides  that  of  a  common  origin.


GENS.  569

may  have  given  a  common  name  to  the  gentiles  ;
and  indeed  there  seems  nothing  more  strange  in  all
the  gentiles  having  a  common  name,  than  there
being  a  common  name  for  all  the  members  of  a
curia  and  a  tribe.

As  the  gentes  were  subdivisions  of  the  three
ancient  tribes,  the  populus  (in  the  ancient  sense)
alone  had  gentes,  so  that  to  be  a  patrician  and  to
have  a  gens  were  synonymous  ;  and  thus  we  find
the  expressions  gens  and  patricii  constantly  united.
Yet  it  appears,  as  in  the  case  already  cited,  that
some  gentes  contained  plebeian  familiae,  which  it
is  conjectured  had  their  origin  in  marriages  be-
tween patricians  and  plebeians  before  there  was
connubium  between  them.  When  the  lex  was
carried  which  established  connubium  between  the
plebs  and  the  patres,  it  was  alleged  that  this
measure  would  confound  the  gentile  rights  {jura
gentium^  Liv.  iv.  I).  Before  this  connubium  ex-
isted, if  a  gentilis  married  a  woman  m)t  a
gentilis,  it  followed  that  the  children  could  not
be  gentiles  ;  yet  they  might  retain  the  gentile
name,  and  thus,  in  a  sense,  the  family  might
be  gentiles  without  the  gentile  privileges.  Such
marriages  would  in  effect  introduce  confusion  ;
find  it  does  not  appear  how  this  would  be  increased
by  giving  to  a  marriage  between  a  gentile  man,
and  a  woman  not  gentilis,  the  legal  character  of
connubium  ;  the  effect  of  the  legal  change  was  to
give  the  children  the  gentilitas  of  their  father.  It
is  sometimes  said  that  the  effect  of  this  lex  was  to
give  the  gentile  rights  to  the  plebs,  which  is  an
absurdity  ;  for,  according  to  the  expression  of  Livy
(iv.  4),  which  is  conformable  to  a  strict  principle
of  Roman  law,  "  patrem  sequuntur  liberi,"  and  the
children  of  a  plebeian  man  could  only  be  plebeian.
Before  the  passing  of  this  lex,  it  may  be  inferred
that  if  a  patrician  woman  married  out  of  her  gens
(e  gente,  e  patribus  enupsit)  it  was  no  marriage  at
all,  and  that  the  children  of  such  marriage  were
not  in  the  power  of  their  father,  and,  it  seems  a
necessary  consequence,  not  Roman  citizens.  The
effect  would  be  the  same,  according  to  the  strict
principles  of  Roman  law,  if  a  plebeian  married  a
patrician  woman,  before  there  was  connubium  be-
tween them  ;  for  if  there  was  no  connubium,  there
was  no  legal  marriage,  and  the  offspring  were  not
citizens,  which  is  the  thing  complained  of  by
Canuleius.  (Liv,  iv.  4.)  It  does  not  appear  then
how  such  marriages  will  account  for  plebeian  fami-
liae being  contained  in  patrician  gentes,  unless  we
suppose  that  when  the  children  of  a  gentile  man
and  a  plebeian  woman  took  the  name  of  the  father,
and  followed  the  condition  of  the  mother,  they
were  in  some  way  or  other,  not  easy  to  explain,
considered  as  citizens  and  plebeians.  But  if  this
be  so,  what  would  be  the  status  of  the  children  of
a  patrician  woman  by  a  plebeian  man  ?

Niebuhr  assumes  that  the  members  of  the  gens
(gentiles)  were  bound  to  assist  their  indigent
fellows  in  bearing  extraordinary'  burdens  ;  but  this
assertion  is  founded  on  the  interpretation  given  to
the  words  roi/s  ^eVei  npocT-fiKovTas  of  Dionysius
(ii.  10),  which  have  a  simpler  and  more  obvious
meaning.  Whatever  probability  there  may  be  in
the  assumption  of  Niebuhr,  as  founded  on  the
passage  above  cited,  and  one  or  two  other  pas-
sages, it  cannot  be  considered  as  a  thing  demon-
strated.

A  hundred  new  members  were  added  to  the
senate  by  the  first  Tnrquin.     These  were  the  re-


S70


GENS.


presentatives  of  the  Luceres,  the  third  and  inferior
tribe  ;  and  they  were  called  Patres  Minorum  gen-
tium (Liv.  i.  35).  See  the  curious  letter  of  Cicero
to  Paetus  {ad  Fam.  ix.  21).

If  the  gentes  were  such  suhdivisions  of  a  curia,
as  already  stated,  it  may  he  asked  what  is  meant
by  new  gentes  being  introduced  among  the  curiae,
for  this  undoubtedly  took  place.  Tullus  Hostilius
incorporated  the  Julii,  Servilii,  and  others,  among
the  Patricii,  and  consequently  among  the  curiae.
The  Claudii  were  a  Sabine  gens,  who,  it  was  said
(Liv.  iv,  3),  were  received  among  the  patricii  after
the  banishment  of  the  kings.  A  recent  writer
(Goettling)  attempts  to  remove  this  difficulty  by
assuming,  according  to  his  interpretation  of  Diony-
sius  (ii.  7),  a  division  of  the  curiae  into  ten  decuriae,
and  by  the  further  assumption  of  an  indefinite
number  of  gentes  in  each  decuria.  Consistently
with  this,  he  assumes  a  kinship  among  the  mem-
bers ♦of  the  same  gens,  according  to  which  hypo-
thesis the  several  patres-familiao  of  such  gens  must
have  descended,  or  claimed  descent,  from  a  common
ancestor.  Thus  the  gentes  would  be  nothing  more
than  aggregates  of  kindred  ftimilies,  and  it  must
have  been  contrived  in  making  the  division  into
decuriae,  that  all  the  members  of  a  gens  (thus
understood)  must  have  been  included  in  the  same
decuria.  But  to  assume  this,  is  nothing  more  than
to  say  that  the  political  system  was  formed  by  be-
ginning Avith  aggregations  of  families  ;  for  if  the
ultimate  political  division,  the  decuriae,  was  to
consist  of  aggregates  of  gentes  (thus  understood),
such  arrangement  could  onlj--  be  effected  hy  making
aggregation  of  families  the  basis  of  the  political
system,  and  then  ascending  from  them  to  decuriae,
from  decuriae  to  curiae,  and  from  curiae  to  tribes  ;
a  proceeding  which  is  inconsistent  with  saying  that
the  curiae  were  subdivided  into  decuriae,  for  this
mode  of  expression  implies  that  the  curiae  were
formed  before  the  decuriae.  But  the  introduction
of  new  gentes  is  conceivable  even  on  the  hypo
thesis  of  the  gens  being  a  mere  political  division.
If  the  number  was  originally  limited,  it  is  perfectly
consistent  with  what  we  know  of  the  Roman  con-
stitution, which  was  always  in  a  state  of  progres-
sive change,  to  suppose  that  the  strict  rule  of  limi-
tation was  soon  neglected.  Now  if  a  new  gens  was
introduced,  it  must  have  been  assimilated  to  the
old  gentes  by  having  a  distinctive  name  ;  and  if  a
number  of  foreigners  were  admitted  as  a  gens,  it  is
conceivable  that  they  would  take  the  name  of  some
distinguished  person  among  them,  who  might  be
the  head  of  a  family  consisting  of  many  branches,
each  with  a  numerous  body  of  retainers.  And  this
is  the  better  tradition  as  to  the  patrician  Claudii,
who  came  to  Rome  vvith  Atta  Claudius,  their  head
{gentis  princeps\  after  the  expulsion  of  the  kings,
and  were  co-optated  (cooptati)  by  the  patres  among
the  patricii ;  which  is  the  same  thing  as  saying  that
this  immigmting  body  was  recognised  as  a  Roman
gens.  (Sueton.  Tib.  1  ;  Liv.  ii.  16.)  According  to
the  tradition,  Atta  Claudius  received  a  tract  of  land
for  his  clients  on  the  Anio,  and  a  piece  of  burj'ing-
ground,  under  the  Capitol,  was  given  to  him  by
the  state  (pitblice).  According  to  the  original  con-
stitution of  a  gens,  the  possession  of  a  common
burying-place,  and  the  gentile  right  to  interment
therein,  were  a  part  of  the  gentile  sacra.  (Cic.
Leg.  ii.22  ;  Veil.  Pat.  ii.  119  ;  Festus,  s.  v.  Cincia  ;
Liv.  iv.  3,  vi.  40  ;  Virgil,  Aen.  vii.  706.  As  to
fhe  Qens  Octaviji,  see  Suetonius,  Aug.  2.)


GEOMORI.

It  is  probable  that  even  in  the  time  of  Cicero
the  proper  notion  of  a  gens  and  its  rights  were  ill
understood  ;  and  still  later,  owing  to  the  great
changes  in  the  constitution,  and  the  extinction  of
so  many  ancient  gentes,  the  traces  of  the  jus  gen-
tilitium  were  nearly  effaced.  Thus  we  find  that
the  words  gens  and  familia  are  used  indifferently
by  later  writers,  though  Livy  carefully  distin-
guishes them.  The  "  elder  Pliny  speaks  of  the
sacra  Serviliae  familiae  ;  Macrobius  of  the  sacra
familiae  Claudiae,  Aemiliae,  Juliae,  Comeliae  ;  and
Jin  ancient  inscription  mentions  an  Aedituus  and  a
Sacerdos  Sergiae  familiae,  though  those  were  all
well  known  ancient  gentes,  and  these  sacra,  in  the
more  correct  language  of  the  older  writers,  would
certainly  have  been  called  sacra  gentilitia."  (Sa-
vigny,  Zeitschrift,  d'C.  vol.  ii.  p.  385.)

In  the  time  of  Gains  (the  age  of  the  Antonines),
the  jus  gentilitium  had  entirely  fallen  into  disuse.
(Gains,  iii.  17.)  Thus  an  ancient  institution,
which  formed  an  integral  part  of  the  old  constitu-
tion, and  was  long  held  together  by  the  con-
servative power  of  religious  rights,  gradually  lost  its
primitive  character  in  the  changes  which  circum-
stances impressed  on  the  form  of  the  Roman  state,
and  was  finally  extinguished.

The  word  Gens  has  recently  been  rendered  in
English  by  the  word  House,  a  term  which  has  here
been  purposely  not  used,  as  it  is  not  necessar}-,
and  can  only  lead  to  misconception.

The  subject  of  the  gens  is  discussed  with  great
acuteness  both  by  Niebuhr  (Rom.  Hint.  vol.  i.)  and
by  Maiden  (Flist.  of  Home,  published  by  the  So-
ciety for  the  Diffusion  of  Useful  Knowledge).

The  views  of  Goettling  are  contained  in  his
Gescliichte  der  Rom.  Staatsverfassung^  Halle,  1840,
and  those  of  Becker  in  his  Handhuch  der  Romischen
Alterthumer  2ter  Theil,  Iste  Abth.  See  also  Sa-
vigny,  Zeitschrift.,  d'c.  vol.  ii.  p.  380,  &c.,  and  Un-
terholzner,  Zeitschrift.,  d'c.  vol.  v.  p.  119.  [G.  L.]
GENTILES.  [Gkns.]
GENTIL'ITAS.  [Gens.]
GEO'MORI  (yiwiuLopoi  ;  Doric,  yd/xopoi)  is  the
name  of  the  second  of  the  three  classes  into  which
Theseus  is  said  to  have  divided  the  inhabitants  of
Attica.  (Pint.  Thes.  25  ;  Pollux,  viii.  HI.)  This
class  was,  together  with  the  third,  the  d7]jxiovpyoi^
excluded  from  the  great  civil  and  priestly  offices
which  belonged  exclusively  to  the  eupatrids,  so
that  there  was  a  great  distinction  between  the  first
and  the  two  inferior  classes.  We  possess,  how-
ever, no  means  to  ascertain  any  particulars  respect-
ing the  relation  in  which  the  yewixSpoi  stood  to  the
two  other  classes.  The  name  may  either  siginty
independent  land-owners,  or  peasants  who  culti-
vated the  lands  of  others  as  tenants.  The  yfcofxSpoi
have,  accordingly,  by  some  writers  been  thought  to
be  free  lanJ-owners,  while  others  have  conceived
them  to  have  been  a  class  of  tenants.  It  seems,
however,  inconsistent  with  the  state  of  affairs  in
Attica,  as  well  as  with  the  manner  in  which  the
name  yew/xSpoi  was  used  in  other  Greek  states,  to
suppose  that  the  whole  class  consisted  of  the  latter
only  ;  there  were  undoubtedly  among  them  a  con-
siderable number  of  freemen  who  cultivated  their
own  lands  (Timaeus,  Glossar.  s,  r.  T^wixSpoi  ;
Valckenaer  ad  Herod,  v.  77),  but  had  by  their
birth  no  claims  to  the  rights  and  privileges  of  the
nobles.  We  do  not  hear  of  any  political  distinc-
tions between  the  yew/xSpoi  and  the  Brjixiovpyoi ;
and  it  may  either  be  that  there  existed  none  at  all.


GEROUSIA.

or  if  there  were  any  originally,  that  they  gradually
vanished.  This  would  account  for  the  fact  that
Dionysius  (ii.  B)  onh^  mentions  two  classes  of  At-
ticans  ;  one  corresponding  to  the  Roman  patricians,
the  other  to  the  plebeians.  (Thirl wall,  History  of
Greece^  vol.  ii.  p.  14  ;  Wachsmuth,  Hellenische
Alterthumskunde,  vol.  i.  p.  361,  2d  edit.  ;  Platner,
Beitr'dge,  tfcc,  p.  1 9  ;  Titmann,  Griech.  Staatsver-
fassmufen^  p.  575,  &c.)

In  Samos  the  name  yeco/jiSpoi  was  applied  to  the
oligarchical  part}',  consisting  of  the  wealthy  and
powerful.  (Thucyd.  viii.  21  ;  Plut.  Quaest  Horn.
p.  303  ;  Mliller,  Dor.  iii.  1.  §  4.)  In  Syracuse  the
aristocratical  party  was  likewise  called  yewfj-opoi
or  yafxSpoi,  in  opposition  to  the  Stj/xos.  (Herod,  vii.
155;  Hesych.  s.  v.  rdfiopoi;  Muller,  Dor.  iii.  4.
§  4  ;  Goller,  de  Situ  et  Orig.  Syrac.  p.  9.)     [L.  S.]

GERAERAE  or  GERARAE  (yepaipai  or  yepa-
pai).     [DioNYSiA,  p.  412,  a.]

GERANOS  (yepavos).     [Hyporchema.]

GERMA'NI.     [CoGNATi.]

GEROU'SIA  (yepovaia),  the  council  of  elders
(y^poi/res).,  was  the  name  of  the  Senate  in  most
Doric  states,  and  was  especially  used  to  signify  the
Senate  id  Sparta.  In  connection  with  this  subject
it  is  proposed  to  give  a  general  view  of  the  Spartan
constitution,  and  to  explain  the  functions  of  its
legislative  and  administrative  elements.  In  the
later  ages  of  Spartan  history  one  of  the  most
prominent  of  these  was  the  college  of  the  five
ephors ;  but  as  an  account  of  the  Ephoralty  is
given  in  a  separate  article  [Ephori],  we  shall
confine  our  inquiries  to  the  kings,  the  yepovres  or
ccuncillors,  and  the  iKK\7\(ria  or  assembly  of  Spar-
tan freemen.

I.  The  Kings.  The  kingly  authority  at  Sparta
was,  as  it  is  well  known,  coeval  with  the  settle-
ment of  the  Dorians  in  the  Peloponnesus,  and
confined  to  the  descendants  of  Aristodemus,  one
of  the  Heracleid  leaders,  under  whom,  according
to  the  Spartan  legend,  the  conquest  of  Laconia
was  achieved.  To  him  were  born  twin  sons,
Eurysthenes  and  Procles ;  and  from  this  cause
arose  the  diarchy,  or  divided  royalty,  the  sove-
reignty being  always  shared  by  the  representatives
of  the  two  families  which  claimed  descent  from
them  (Herod,  vi.  52)  ;  the  precedence  in  point  of
honour  was,  however,  granted  to  the  older  branch,
who  were  called  Agiads,  as  the  younger  house
was  styled  Eurypontides  from  certain  alleged  de-
scendants of  the  twin  brothers.  (Niebuhr,  Hist,
of  Rom.  vol.  i.  p.  356.)  Such  was  the  national
legend ;  but  as  we  read  that  the  sanction  of  the
Pythian  oracle  was  procured  for  the  arrangement
of  the  diarchy  (Herod.  I.  c),  we  may  conclude  that
it  was  not  altogether  fortuitous,  but  rather  the
work  of  policy  and  design  ;  nor  indeed  is  it  impro-
bable that  the  nobles  would  gladly  avail  them-
selves of  an  opportunity  to  weaken  the  royal  au-
thority by  dividing  it.

_  The  descent  of  the  Spartan  kings  from  the  na-
tional heroes  and  leaders  contributed  in  no  small
degree  to  support  their  dignity  and  honour ;  and  it
is,  perhaps,  from  this  circumstance  partly  that  they
were  considered  as  heroes,  and  enjoyed  a  certain
religious  respect.  (Xen.  De  Rep.  Lac.  c.  15.)  The
honours  paid  to  them  were,  however,  of  a  simple
and  heroic  character,  such  as  a  Spartan  might  give
without  derogating  from  his  own  dignity  or  for-
getting his  self-respect.  Thus,  we  are  told  that
the  kings  united  the  character  of  priest  and  king.


GEROUSIA.  571

the  priesthoods  of  ZeusUranius  (Herod,  vi.  5C^)  and
the  Lacedaemonian  Zeus  being  filled  by  them  ;  and
that,  in  their  capacity  of  national  high  priests,  they
officiated  at  all  the  public  sacrifices  offered  on  be-
half of  the  state.  (Xen.  Z)e/?ep.  Zac.  15.)  Moreover
they  were  amply  provided  with  the  means  for  ex-
ercising the  heroic  virtue  of  hospitality;  for  this
purpose,  public  or  domain  lands  were  assigned  to
them  in  the  district  of  the  perioeci,  or  provincial
subjects,  and  certain  perquisites  belonged  to  them
whenever  any  animal  was  slain  in  sacrifice.  Be-
sides this,  the  kings  were  entitled  to  various  pay-
ments in  kind  (TracraJj/  tuv  crvwy  ctTrb  t6kov  x^ipov)^
that  they  might  never  be  in  want  of  victims  to
sacrifice ;  in  addition  to  which  they  received,  twice
a  month  from  the  state,  an  ipi]'iov  Te\e7oy,  to  be
offered  as  a  sacrifice  to  Apollo,  and  then  served  up
at  the  royal  table.  Whenever  also  any  of  the
citizens  made  a  public  sacrifice  to  the  gods,  the
kings  were  invited  to  the  feast,  and  honoured  above
the  other  guests  :  a  double  portion  of  food  was  given
to  them,  and  they  commenced  the  libations  to  the
gods.  (Herod,  vi.  57.)  All  these  distinctions  are
of  a  simple  and  antiquated  character,  and,  so  far  as
they  go,  prove  that  the  Spartan  sovereignty  was  a
continuation  of  the  heroic  or  Homeric.  The  dis-
tinctions and  privileges  granted  to  the  king  as
commander  of  the  forces  in  war,  lead  to  the  same
conclusion.  These  were  greater  than  he  enjoyed
at  home.  He  was  guarded  by  a  body  of  100
chosen  men,  and  his  table  was  maintained  at  the
public  expense  :  he  might  sacrifice  in  his  sacerdotal
capacity  as  many  victims  as  he  chose  ;  the  skins
and  backs  of  which  were  his  perquisites,  and  he
was  assisted  by  so  many  subordinate  officers,  that
he  had  nothing  else  to  do,  except  to  act  as  priest
and  strategus.  (Xen.  De  Rep.  Lac.  14, 15  ;  Herod,
vi.  55.)

The  accession  and  demise  of  the  Spartan  kings
were  marked  by  observances  of  an  Oriental  charac-
ter. (Herod,  vi,  58.)  The  former  event  was  sig-
nalised by  a  remission  of  all  debts  due  from  private
individuals  to  the  state  or  the  king  ;  and  on  the
death  of  a  king,  the  funeral  solemnities  were  cele-
brated by  the  whole  community.  There  was  a
general  mourning  for  ten  days,  during  which  all
public  business  was  suspended  :  horsemen  went
round  the  country  to  carry  the  tidings,  and  a  fixed
number  of  the  perioeci,  or  provincials,  was  obliged
to  come  from  all  parts  of  the  country  to  the  city,
where,  with  the  Spartans  and  Helots,  and  their
wives,  to  the  number  of  many  thousands,  they
made  loud  lamentations,  and  proclaimed  the  virtues
of  the  deceased  king  as  superior  to  those  of  all  his
predecessors.     (Herod.  /.  c.)

In  comparison  with  their  dignity  and  honours,
the  constitutional  powers  of  the  kings  were  very
limited.  In  fact  they  can  scarcely  be  said  to  have
possessed  any  ;  for  though  they  presided  over  the
council  of  yepovres  or  apxayerai,  or  prindpes
senatus,  and  the  king  of  the  elder  house  probably
had  a  casting  vote  *,  still  the  voice  of  each  counted
for  no  more  than  that  of  any  other  senator  :  when
absent,  their  place  was  supplied  and  their  proxies
tendered  by  the  councillors  who  were  most  nearly
related  to  them,  and  therefore  of  an  Heracleid
family.     Still  the  kings  had  some  important  prero-

*  Dr.  Thirlwall  observes  that  this  supposition
may  perhaps  reconcile  the  difference  between  Herod.
vi.  57.  and  Thucyd.  i.  20.


572


GEROUSIA.


gatives  ;  thus  they  had  in  common  with  otlier
magistrates  the  'rifjltt  of  addressing  the  public
assembly  ;  besides  this,  they  sat  in  a  separate  court
of  their  own,  where  they  gave  judgment  in  all  cases
of  heiresses  claimed  by  diffei-ent  parties  :  a  function
formerly  exercised  by  the  kings  at  Athens,  but
afterwards  transferred  to  the  Archon  Eponymus.
(Herod,  vi.  5^.)  They  also  appointed  the  four
Pxflhians  (Uvdioi)^  Avhose  duty  it  was  to  go  as  mes-
sengers to  consult  the  god  at  Delphi.  Adoptions  also
took  place  in  their  presence,  and  they  held  a  court
in  all  cases  connected  with  the  maintenance  of  the
public  roads  ;  probably  in  their  capacity  of  generals,
and  as  superintendents  of  the  intercourse  with
foreign  nations.  (Miiller,  Dor.  iii.  6.  §  7.)  In
ibreign  affairs,  indeed,  their  prerogatives  were  con-
siderable :  thus  they  were  the  commanders  of  the
Spartan  forces,  and  had  the  privilege  of  nominat-
ing from  amongst  the  citizens,  persons  to  act  as
"  proxeni  "  or  protectors  and  entertainers  of  foreign-
ers visiting  Sparta.  But  their  chief  power  was  in
war  ;  for  after  they  had  once  crossed  the  borders
of  I.aconia,  in  command  of  troops,  their  authority
became  unlimited.  They  could  send  out  and  as-
semble armies,  despatch  ambassadors  to  collect
money,  and  refer  those  who  applied  to  themselves
for  justice  to  the  proper  officers  appointed  for  that
purpose.  (Xen.  De  Rep.  Lac.  13  ;  Thuc.  v.  60,
viii.  5.)  Two  ephors,  indeed,  accompanied  the
kings  on  their  expeditions,  but  those  magistrates
had  no  authority  to  interfere  with  the  king's  opera-
tions :  they  simply  watched  over  the  proceedings
of  the  army.  (Xen.  I.  c.)  Moreover,  there  can  be
no  doubt  that  the  kings  were,  on  their  return  home,
accountable  for  their  conduct  as  generals  (Thucyd.  v.
63),  and  more  especially  after  the  increase  of  the
ephoral  authority.  Their  military  power  also  was
not  connected  with  any  political  functions,  for  the
kings  were  not  allowed  to  conclude  treaties  or  to
decide  the  fate  of  cities,  without  communicating
with  the  authorities  at  home.  (Xen.  Hell.  ii.  2.  §  1  "2,
V.  3.  §  24.)  In  former  times  the  two  kings  had  a
joint  command  ;  this,  however,  led  to  inconveni-
ences, and  a  law  tvas  in  consequence  passed  that
for  the  future  one  only  of  the  two  kings  should
have  the  command  of  the  army  on  foreign  expedi-
tions.    (Herod,  v.  57.)

II.  The  yepovcria,  or  council  of  elders.  This
body  was  the  aristo<;ratic  element  of  the  Spartan
polity,  and  not  peculiar  to  Sparta  only,  but  found,
as  has  been  already  observed,  in  other  Dorian
states,  just  as  a  fiovK-i)  or  democratical  council  was
an  element  of  most  Ionian  constitutions.

The  yepovffia  or  yepwvia  at  Sparta  included  the
two  kings,  its  presidents,  and  consisted  of  thirty
members  :  a  number  which  seems  connected  with
the  divisions  of  the  Spartan  people.  Every  Dorian
state,  in  fact,  was  divided  into  three  tribes :  the
Hylleis,  the  Dymanes,  and  the  Pamphyli,  whence
the  Dorians  are  called  rpixaiKes,  or  thrice  divided.
(Od.  xix.  174.)  The  tribes  at  Sparta  were  again
subdivided  into  a»gai,  also  called  ^parpial  (Miiller,
Dor.  iii.  5.  §  3),  a  word  which  signifies  a  union  of
families,  whether  founded  upon  ties  of  relationship,
or  formed  for  political  purposes,  irrespective  of  any
such  connection.  The  obae  were  like  the  yepovres^
thirty  in  number,  so  that  each  oba  was  represented
b^'  its  councillor:  an  inference  which  leads  to
liift  conclusion  that  two  obae  at  least,  of  the  Hyl-
lean  tribe,  must  have  belonged  to  the  royal  house
of  the  Heracleids.     No  one  was  eligible  to  the


GEROUSIA.

council  till  he  was  sixty  years  of  age  (Plut.  Lycurg.
26),  and  the  additional  qualifications  were  strictly
of  an  aristocratic  nature.  We  are  told,  for  in-
stance, that  the  office  of  a  councillor  was  the  re-
ward and  prize  of  virtue  {hrhtot.  Polit.  ii.  6.  §  15  ;
Demosth.  c.  Lept.  p.  48.9),  and  that  it  was  confined
to  men  of  distinguished  character  and  station
(Kahol  Kayadoi).

The  election  was  determined  by  A^ote,  and  the
mode  of  conducting  it  was  remarkable  for  its  old-
fashioned  simplicit3\  The  competitors  presented
themselves  one  after  another  to  the  assembly  of
electors  (Plut.  Lycurg.  26);  the  latter  testified  their
esteem  by  acclamations,  which  varied  in  intensity
according  to  the  popularity  of  the  candidates  for
whom  they  were  given.  These  manifestations  of
esteem  were  noted  b}^  persons  in  an  adjoining
building,  who  could  judge  of  the  shouting,  but
could  not  tell  in  whose  favour  it  was  given.  The
person  whom  these  judges  thought  to  have  been
most  applauded  was  declared  the  successful  candi-
date. The  different  competitors  for  a  vacant  place
offered  themselves  upon  their  own  judgment
(Aristot.  Polit.  ii.  6.  §  18),  probably  .always  from
the  ojga,  to  which  the  councillor  whose  place  was
vacant  had  belonged ;  and  as  the  office  was  for  life,
and  therefore  only  one  vacancy  could  (in  ordin.'iry
cases)  happen  at  a  time,  the  attention  of  the  whob
state  would  be  fixed  on  the  choice  of  the  electors.
The  office  of  a  councillor,  however,  was  not  only
for  life,  but  also  irresponsible  (Aristot.  Polit.  ii.  6),
as  if  a  previous  reputation,  and  the  near  approach
of  death,  were  considered  a  sufficient  guarantee  for
integrity  and  moderation.  But  the  councillors  did
not  always  prove  so,  for  Aristotle  (/.  f.)  tells  us
that  the  members  of  the  yepovcria  received  bribes,
and  frequently  showed  partiality  in  their  decisions.

The  functions  of  the  councillors  were  partly  de-
liberative, partly  judicial,  and  partly  executive.  In
the  discharge  of  the  first  they  prepared  measures
and  passed  preliminary  decrees  (Plut.  J^zs,  11)
which  Avcre  to  be  laid  before  the  popular  assembly,
so  that  the  important  privilege  of  initiating  all
changes  in  the  government  or  laws  was  vested  in
them.  As  a  criminal  court  they  could  punish  with
death  and  civil  degradation  {aTijiia,  Xen.  De
Rep.  Lac.  10.  §2  ;  Arist.  Po/j/.  iii.  1),  and  that,
too,  without  being  restrained  by  any  code  of  writ-
ten laws  (Aristot.  Polit.  ii.  6),  for  which  national
feeling  and  recognised  usages  would  form  a  suffi-
cient substitute.  They  also  appear  to  have  exer-
cised, like  the  Areiopagus  at  Athens,  a  general
superintendence  and  inspection  over  the  lives  and
manners  of  the  citizens  {arbitri  et  magistri  discipli-
naepuUicae,  Aul.  Gell.  xviji.  3),  and  probably  were
allowed  "  a  kind  of  patriarchal  authority  to  enforce
the  observance  of  ancient  usage  and  discipline."
(Thirlwall,  Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  i.  p.  318.)  It  is
not,  however,  easy  to  define  with  exactness  the
original  extent  of  their  functions  ;  especially  as
respects  the  last-mentioned  duty,  since  the  ephors
not  only  encroached  upon  the  prerogatives  of  the
king  and  council,  but  also  possessed,  in  very  early
times,  a  censorial  power,  and  were  not  likelj'-  to
permit  any  diminution  of  its  extent.

III.  Tlie  iKK\7f(ria,  or  assembly  of  Spartan
freemen.  This  assembly  possessed,  in  theory  at
least,  the  supreme  authority  in  all  matters  affecting
the  general  interests  of  the  state.  Its  original
position  at  Sparta  is  shortly  explained  by  a  rhetra
or  ordinance  of  Lycurgus,  which,  in  the  form  of  an


GEROUSIA.

oracle,  exhibits  the  principal  features  of  the  Spartan
polity: — "Build  a  temple,"  says  the  Pythian
god,  '*  to  Hellanian  Zeus  and  Hellaniau  Athena  ;
divide  the  tribes,  and  institute  thirty  obas  ;  ap-
point a  council  with  its  princes  ;  call  an  assembly
(dTreAAct^eii')  between  Babyca  and  Knakion,  then
make  a  motion  and  depart  ;  and  let  there  be  a
right  of  decision  and  power  to  the  people  "  (ddfj-cp
<?€  Kvpidy  ^uiv  Kal  Kparos,  Plut.  Lycurg.  6  ;  Miiller,
Dor.  iii.  5."§  8).

By  this  ordinance  full  power  was  given  to  the
people  to  adopt  or  reject  whatever  was  proposed
to  them  by  the  king  and  other  magistrates.  It
was,  however,  found  necessary  to  define  this  power
more  exactly,  and  the  following  clause,  ascribed  to
the  kings  Theopompus  and  Polydorus,  was  added
to  the  original  rhetra,  "  but  if  the  people  should
follow  a  crooked  opinion  the  elders  and  the  princes
shall  withdraw  "  (tous  TvpeaSvy^veas  koX  apxa-
yeras  aTroaTOLTrjpas  "^fiev).  Plutarch  (/.  c.)  in-
terprets these  words  to  mean  "  That  in  case  the
people  does  not  either  reject  or  approve  in  toto  a
measure  proposed  to  them,  the  kings  and  council-
lors should  dissolve  the  assembly,  and  declare  the
proposed  decree  to  be  invalid."  According  to  this
interpretation,  which  is  confirmed  by  some  verses
in  the  Eunomia  of  Tyrtaeus,  the  assembly  was  not
competent  to  originate  any  measures,  but  only  to
pass  or  reject,  without  modification,  the  laws  and
decrees  proposed  by  the  proper  authorities  :  a  limi-
tation of  its  power,  which  almost  determined  the
character  of  the  Spartan  constitution,  and  justifies
the  words  of  Demosthenes,  who  observed  (c.  Ze;>.
p.  489.  20),  that  the  yepovaia  at  Sparta  was  in
many  respects  supreme  —  AeaivSTTjs  eari  tcou  ttoA-
Aftjj/.  All  citizens  above  the  age  of  thirty,  who
were  not  labouring  under  any  loss  of  franchise,
were  admissible  to  the  general  assembly  or  ixireWa
(Plut.  Lycurg.  25),  as  it  was  called  in  the  old  Spar-
tan dialect  ;  but  no  one  except  public  magistrates,
and  chiefl}'-  the  ephors  and  kings,  addressed  the
people  without  being  specially  called  upon.  (Miil-
ler, Dor.  iii.  4.  §  1 1.)  The  same  public  functionaries
also  put  the  question  to  the  vote.  (Thuc.  i.  80.  87.)
Hence,  as  the  magistrates  only  (ra  tcAtj  or  apxai)
were  the  leaders  and  speakers  of  the  assembly,
decrees  of  the  whole  people  are  often  spoken  of  as
the  decision  of  the  authorities  only,  especially  in
matters  relating  to  foreign  affairs.  The  intimate
connection  of  the  ephors  with  the  assembly  is
shown  by  a  phrase  of  very  frequent  occurrence  in
decrees  (eSo^e  toTs  i(p6pois  Kal  rfj  iKKKrjaia).
The  method  of  voting  was  by  acclamation  ;  the
place  of  meeting  between  the  brook  Knakion  and
the  bridge  Babyca,  to  the  west  of  the  city,  and  en-
closed. (Plut.  Lycurg.  6.)  The  regular  assemblies
were  held  every  full  moon  ;  and  on  occasions  of
emergency  extraordinary  meetings  were  convened.
(Herod,  vii.  134.)

The  whole  people  alone  could  proclaim  "  a  war,
conclude  a  peace,  enter  into  an  armistice  for  any
length  of  time  ;  and  all  negotiations  with  foreign
states,  though  conducted  by  the  kings  and  ephors,
could  be  ratified  by  the  same  authority  only."  With
regard  to  domestic  affairs,  the  highest  offices,  such
as  magistracies  and  priesthoods,  were  filled  "•  by
the  votes  of  the  people  ;  a  disputed  succession  to
the  throne  was  decided  upon  by  them  ;  changes  in
the  constitution  were  proposed  and  explained,  and
nil  new  laws,  after  a  previous  decree  in  the  senate,
were  confirmed  by  them,"  (Miiller,  Dor.  4.  §  9.)


GEROUSIA.  573

It  appears,  therefore,  to  use  the  words  of  Miiller,
that  the  popular  assembly  really  possessed  the
supreme  political  and  legislative  authority  at  Sparta,
but  it  was  so  hampered  and  checked  by  the  spirit
of  the  constitution,  that  it  could  only  exert  its  au-
thority within  certain  prescribed  limits  ;  so  that
the  government  of  the  state  is  often  spoken  of  as
an  aristocracy.

Besides  the  e/c/cATjcria  which  Ave  have  just  de-
scribed, we  read  in  later  times  of  another
called  the  small  assembly  (Xen.  Hell.  iii.  3.  §  18),
which  appears  to  have  been  convened  on  occa-
sions of  emergency,  or  which  were  not  of  sufficient
importance  to  require  the  decision  of  the  entire
body  of  citizens.  This  more  select  assembly  was
probably  composed  of  the  ofioioi,  or  superior  citi-
zens, or  of  some  class  enjoying  a  similar  prece-
dence, together  with  some  of  the  magistrates  of
the  state  [Eccleti],  and  if,  as  appears  to  have
been  the  case,  it  was  convened  more  frequently'
than  the  greater  assembly,  it  is  evident  that  an  ad-
ditional restraint  was  thus  laid  upon  the  power  of
the  latter  (Philol.  Museum.,  vol.  ii.  p.  Go),  the
functions  of  which  must  have  been  often  superseded
by  it.

The  preceding  remarks  will  enable  us  to  decide
a  question  which  has  been  raised,  what  was  the
real  nature  of  the  constitution  of  Sparta  ?  From
the  expressions  of  Greek  writers,  every  one  would
at  once  answer  that  it  was  aristocratic  ;  but  it  has
been  asserted  that  the  aristocracy  at  Sparta  was  an
aristocracy  of  conquest,  in  which  the  conquering
people,  or  Dorians,  stood  towards  the  conquered,
or  Achaians,  in  the  relation  of  nobles  to  conunons,
and  that  it  was  principally  in  this  sense  that  the
constitution  of  Sparta  was  so  completely  anti-popu-
lar or  oligarchical.  (Arnold,  Thuc.  Append,  ii.)
Now  this  indeed  is  true  ;  but  it  seems  no  less  true
that  the  Spartan  government  would  have  been
equally  called  an  oligarchy  or  aristocracy  even  if
there  had  been  no  subject  class  at  all,  on  account
of  the  disposition  and  administration  of  the  sove-
reign power  within  the  Spartan  body  alone.  The
fact  is,  that  in  theory  at  least,  the  Spartan  constitu-
tion, as  settled  by  Lycurgus,  was  a  decided  demo-
cracv%  with  two  hereditary  officers,  the  generals  of
the  commonwealth,  at  its  head  ;  but  in  practice  (at
least  before  the  encroachments  of  the  ephors)  it
was  a  limited  aristocracy  ;  that  is,  it  worked  as  if
the  supreme  authority  was  settled  in  the  hands  of
a  minority.  The  principal  circumstances  which
justify  us  in  considering  it  as  such,  are  briefly  "the
restraints  imposed  upon  the  assembly,  the  exten-
sive powers  of  the  councillors,  their  election  for
life,  their  irresponsibility,  the  absence  of  written
laws,  of  paid  offices,  of  offices  determined  by  lot,"
and  other  things  thought  by  the  Greeks  character-
istic of  a  democracy.  Independent  of  which  we
must  remember  that  Sparta  was  at  the  head  of  the
oligarchical  interest  in  Greece,  and  always  sup-
ported, as  at  Corcyra  and  Argos,  the  oligarchical
party,  in  opposition  to  the  democratic,  which  was
aided  by  Athens.  In  fact  Dr.  Arnold  himself  ob-
serves, that  even  in  the  relations  of  the  conquering
people  among  themselves  the  constitution  was  far
less  popular  than  at  Athens.  We  must,  however,
bear  in  mind  that  the  constitution,  as  settled  by
Lycurgus,  was  completely  altered  in  character  by
the  usurpation  of  the  ephors.  To  such  an  extent
was  this  the  case,  that  Plato  {Leg.  iv.  p.  713)
doubted  whether  the  government  at  Sparta  might


574  GLADIATORES.

not  be  culled  a  "  tyranny,"  in  consequence  of  the
extensive  powers  of  the  ephoralty,  though  it  was
as  much  like  a  democracy  as  any  form  of  government
could  well  be  ;  and  yet,  he  adds,  not  to  call  it  an
aristocracy  (i.  e.  a  government  of  the  &,pi<rToi),  is
quite  absurd.  Moreover,  Aristotle  (Polit.  iv.  8),
Avhen  he  enumerates  the  reasons  why  the  Spartan
government  was  called  an  oligarchy,  makes  no  men-
tion of  the  relations  between  the  Spartans  and  their
conquered  subjects,  but  observes  that  it  received
this  name  because  it  had  many  oligarchical  insti-
tutions, such  as  that  none  of  the  magistrates  were
chosen  by  lot  ;  that  a  few  persons  were  competent
to  inflict  banishment  and  death.

Perhaps  the  shortest  and  most  accurate  descrip-
tion of  the  constitution  of  Sparta  is  contained  in
the  following  observations  of  Aristotle  (Polit.  ii,  6) :
—  Some  affirm  that  the  best  form  _  of  government
is  one  mixed  of  all  the  forms,  wherefore  they  praise
the  Spartan  constitution :  for  some  say  that  it  is
composed  of  an  oligarch}',  and  a  monarchy,  and  a
democracy  —  a  monarchy  on  account  of  the  kingg,
an  oligarchy  on  account  of  the  councillors,  and  a
democracy  on  account  of  the  ephors  ;  but  others
say  that  the  ephoralty  is  a  "  tyranny;  "  whereas,  on
the  other  hand,  it  may  be  affirmed  that  the  public
tables,  and  the  regulations  of  daily  life,  are  of  a
democratic  tendency.  [R.  W.]

Gl^RRIIA  (yeppa),  in  Latin,  Gerrae,  properly
signified  any  thing  made  of  wicker-work,  and  was
especially  used  as  the  name  of  the  Persian  shields,
which  Were  made  of  wicker-work,  and  were  smaller
and  shorter  than  the  Greek  shields  (avrl  aa-TriScou,
76p^a,  Herod,  vii.  61,  ix.  61  ;  Xen.  Atiab.  ii.  1.  §  6  ;
Festus,  s.  vv.  cerroTies,  gerrae).

GLADIATO'RES  {ixovofjia.xoi\  were  men  who
fought  with  swords  in  the  amphitheatre  and  other
places  for  the  amusement  of  the  Roman  people.
{Gkuiiator  est,  qui  in  arena,  populo  spedante,  pug-
navit,  Quintil.  Declam.  302.)  They  are  said  to
have  been  first  exhibited  by  the  Etruscans,  <ind  to
have  had  their  origin  from  the  custom  of  killing
slaves  and  captives  at  the  funeral  pyres  of  the  de-
ceased. (Tertull.  de  Spectac.  12  ;  Serv.  ad  Virg.
Jen.  X.  519.)  [Fun us,  p.  559,  a,]  A  show  of
gladiators  was  called  munus,  and  the  person  who
exhibited  (edebat)  it,  editor,  munerator,  ov  dominus,
who  was  honoured  during  the  day  of  exhibition,  if
a  private  person,  with  the  official  signs  of  a  magis-
trate. (Capitol.  M.  Anton.  Philos.  23  ;  Flor.  iii.
20;  Cic.  a<i  ^«.  ii.  19.  §3.)

Gladiators  were  first  exhibited  at  Rome  in  B.  c.
264,  in  the  Forum  Boarium,  by  Marcus  and  Deci-
mus  Brutus,  at  the  funeral  of  their  father.  (Viilcr,
Max.  ii.  4.  §  7  ;  Liv.  Epit.  16.)  They  were  at
first  confined  to  public  funerals,  but  afterwards
fought  at  the  funerals  of  most  persons  of  conse-
quence, and  even  at  those  of  women.  (Suet.  Jul.
26  ;  Spartan.  Iladr.  9.)  Private  persons  some-
times left  a  sum  of  money  in  their  will  to  pay  tlie
expenses  of  such  an  exhibition  at  their  funerals.
(Sen.  de  Brev.  Vit.  20.)  Combats  of  gladiators
were  also  exhibited  at  entertainments  (Athen.  iv.
p.  153  ;  Sil.  Ital.  xi.  51),  and  especially  at  public
festivals  by  the  aediles  and  other  magistrates,  who
sometimes  exhibited  immense  numbers  with  the
viev/  of  pleasing  the  people.  (Cic.  pro  Mur.  18  ;
de  Ofi\  ii.  16.)  [Aediles.]  Under  the  empire
the  passion  of  the  Romans  for  this  amusement
rose  to  its  greatest  height,  and  the  number  of
gladiators  who  fought  on  some  occasions  appears


GLADIATORES.

almost  incredible.  After  Trajan's  triumph  over
the  Dacians,  there  were  more  than  10,000  ex-
hibited. (Dion  Cass.  Ixviii.  15.)

Gladiators  consisted  either  of  captives  (Vopisc.
Prob.  19),  slaves  (Suet.  Vitell.  12),  and  condemn-
ed malefactors,  or  of  freeborn  citizens  who  fought
voluntarily.  Of  those  who  were  condemned,  some
were  said  to  be  condemned  ad  gladium,  in  which
case  they  were  obliged  to  be  killed  at  least  within
a  year  ;  and  others  ad  ludum,  who  might  obtain
their  discharge  at  the  end  of  three  years.  ( Ulpian,
Collat.  Mos.  et  Rom.  Leg.  tit.  ii.  s.  7.  §  4.)  Free-
men, who  became  gladiators  for  hire,  were  called
avxAorati  (Quint.  I.  c.  ;  Hor.  Sat.  ii.  7.  58),  and
their  hire  auctoramentum  or  gladiatorium.  (Suet.
Tib.  7  ;  Liv.  xliv.  31.)  They  also  took  an  oath
on  entering  upon  the  service,  which  is  preserved
by  Petronius  (117).  —  "  In  verba  Eumolpi  sacra-
mentum  juravimus,  uri,  vinciri,  verberari,  ferroque
necari,  et  quicquid  aliud  Eumolpus  jussisset,  tam-
quani  legitimi  gladiatores  domino  corpora  aniraas-
que  religiosissime  addicimus."  (Compare  Senec.
Epist.  7.)  Even  under  the  republic  free-bom
citizens  fought  as  gladiators  (Liv.  xxviii.  21),  but
they  appear  to  have  belonged  only  to  the  lower
orders.  Under  the  empire,  however,  both  equites
and  senators  fought  in  the  arena  ( Dion  Cass.  Ii.  22  ;
Ivi.  25  ;  Suet.  Jul.  39  ;  Aug.  43  ;  Ner.  12),  and
even  women  (Tacit.  Ann.  xv.  32  ;  Suet.  Dom.  4  ;
Juv.  vi.  250,  «Scc.  ;  Sftat.  Silv.  i.  vi.  53)  ;  which
practice  was  at  length  forbidden  in  the  time  of
Severus.  (Dion  Cass.  Ixxv.  16.)

Gladiators  were  kept  in  schools  {Ittdi),  Avhere
they  were  trained  by  persons  called  lanistae.
(Suet.  Jul.  26  ;  Cic.  pro  Rose.  Amer.  40  ;  Juv.  vi.
216,  xi.  8.)  The  whole  body  of  gladiators  imder
one  lanista  was  frequently  called  familia.  (Suat.
Aug.  42.)  They  sometimes  were  the  property-  of
the  lanistae,  who  let  them  out  to  persons  who
wished  to  exhibit  a  show  of  gladiators  ;  but  at
other  times  belonged  to  citizens,  who  kept  them
for  the  purpose  of  exhibition,  and  engaged  lanistae
to  instruct  them.  Thus  we  read  of  the  Indus
Aemilius  at  Rome  (Hor.  de  Art. poet.  32),  and  of
Caesar's  Indus  at  Capua.  (Caes.  Bell.  Civ.  i.  14.)
The  superintendence  of  the  ludi,  which  belonged
to  the  emperors,  was  entrusted  to  a  person  of  high
rank,  called  curator  or  procurator.  (Tacit.  Ann.  xi.
35  ;  xiii.  22  ;  Suet.  Cal.  27  ;  Gruter,  Tnscr.  p.
489.)  The  gladiators  fought  in  these  ludi  with
wooden  swords,  called  rudes.  (Suet.  Cal.  32,  54.)
Great  attention  was  paid  to  their  diet  in  order  to
increase  the  strength  of  their  bodies,  whence  Cicero
{Phil.  ii.  25)  speaks  of  "  gladiatoria  totius  cor-
poris firmitas."  They  were  fed  with  nourishing
food,  ciiWcd. gladiatoria  sagina.  (Tacit.  Hist.  ii.  88.)
A  great  number  of  gladiators  were  trained  at
Ravenna  on  account  of  the  salubrity  of  the  place.
(Strabo,  v.  p.  213.)

Gladiators  were  sometimes  exhibited  at  the
funeral  pyre,  and  sometimes  in  the  fonim,  but
more  frequentl}'  in  the  amphitheatre.  [Amphi-
THEATRUM.]  The  person  who  was  to  exhibit  a
show  of  gladiators  published  some  days  before  the
exhibition  bills  {libelli),  containing  the  number
and  sometimes  the  names  of  those  who  \vere  to
fight.  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  ii.  8  ;  Suet.  Caes.  26.)
When  the  day  came,  they  were  led  along  the
arena  in  procession,  and  matched  by  pairs  (Hor.
Sat.  i.  7.  20)  ;  and  their  swords  were  examined
by  the  editor  to  see  if  they  were  sufficiently  sharp.


CI.AL'IATORES.

(Dion  Cass.  Ixviii.  3  ;  Suet.  Tit,  9  ;  Lipsiiis,
Excvrs.  ad  Tac.  Ann.  iii,  37.)  At  first  there  was
a  kind  of  sham  battle,  called  praelusio^  in  which
they  fought  with  wooden  swords,  or  the  like  (Cic.
di;  Orat^u.  78,  80  ;  Ovid,  Ars  Amat  iii.  515  ;
Senec.  Epist.  117),  and  afterwards  at  the  sound  of
the  trumpet  the  real  battle  began.  When  a  gladi-
ator was  wounded,  the  people  called  out  hibet  or
hoc  lialx't ;  and  the  one  who  was  vanquished  low-
ered his  arms  in  token  of  submission.  His  fate,
however,  depended  upon  the  people,  who  pressed
down  their  thumbs  if  they  wished  him  to  be
saved,  but  turned  them  up  if  thev  wished  him  to
be  killed  (Hor.  Ep.  i.  18.  QQ -,  Juv.  iii.  36),  and
ordered  him  to  receive  the  sword  {ferrum  reci-
;)ere),  which  gladiators  usually  did  with  the
greatest  firmness.  (Cic,  Tusc.  ii.  17,  pro  Sext.
37,  pro  Mil.  34.)  If  the  life  of  a  vanquished
gladiator  was  spared,  h?  obtained  his  discharge  for
that  day,  which  was  called  missio  (Mart.  xii.  29.
7)  ;  and  hence  in  an  exhibition  of  gladiators  sine
missione  (Liv.  xli.  20),  the  lives  of  the  conquered
were  never  spared.  This  kind  of  exhibition,
however,  was  forbidden  by  Augustus.  (Suet.
Aiuh  45.)

Palms  were  usually  given  to  the  victorious
gladiators  (Suet.  Cal.  32)  ;  and  hence,  a  gladiator,
who  had  frequently  conquered,  is  called  "  pluri-
marura  palmarum  gladiator"  (Cic.  pro  Rose.  Amer.
6)  ;  money  also  was  sometimes  given.  (Juv.  vii.
243  ;  Suet.  Claud.  21.)  Old  gladiators,  and  some-
times those  who  had  only  fought  for  a  short  time,
Avire  discharged  from  the  service  by  the  editor  at
the  request  of  the  people,  who  presented  each  of
them  with  a  rudis  or  wooden  svvord  ;  whence
those  who  wera  discharged  were  called  Rudiarii.
(Cic.  Philip,  ii.  29  ;  Hor.  Ep.  i.  1,  2  ;  Suet.  Tib.
7  ;  Quint.  I.  c.)  If  a  person  was  free  before  he
entered  the  Indus,  he  became  on  his  discharge  free
again  ;  and  if  he  had  been  a  slave,  he  returned  to
the  same  condition  again.  A  man,  however,  who
had  been  a  gladiator  was  always  considered  to
have  disgraced  himself,  and  consequently  it  ap-
pears that  he  could  not  obtain  the  equestrian  rank
if  he  afterwards  acquired  sufficient  property  to
entitle  him  to  it  (Quint.  I.  c.)  ;  and  a  slave  who
had  been  sent  into  a  ludus  and  there  manumitted
either  by  his  then  owner' or  another  owner,  merely
acquired  the  status  of  a  peregrinus  dediticius.
(Gaius,  i.  13.)     [Dediticii.]

Shows  of  gladiators  were  abolished  by  Constan-
tine  (Cod.  11.  tit.  43),  but  appear  notwithstanding
to  have  been  generally  exhibited  till  the  time  of
Honorius,  by  whom  they  were  finally  suppressed.
(Theodoret.  Hist.  Eccles.  v.  20.)

Gladiators  were  divided  into  different  classes,
according  to  their  arms  and  different  mode  of
fighting,  or  other  circumstances.  The  names  of
the  most  important  of  these  classes  is  given  in
alphabetical  order :  —

Andabatae  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  vii.  10),  wore  helmets
without  any  aperture  for  the  eyes,  so  that  they
were  obliged  to  fight  blindfold,  and  thus  excited
the  mirth  of  the  spectators.  Some  modern  writers
say  that  they  fought  on  horseback,  but  this  is
denied  by  Orelli.  (Inscr.  2577.)

Catervarii  was  the  name  given  to  gladiators
■when  they  did  not  fight  in  pairs,  but  when  several
fought  together.  (Suet.  Aug.  45  ;  gregatiin  dimi-
cardes,  Cal.  30.)

DimacJieri  appear  to  have  been  so  called,  be-


GLADIATOKKS.


u5


cause  they  fought  with  two  swords.  (Artemiod.  ii.
32  ;  Orelli,  Inscr.  2584.)

Equites  were  those  who  fought  on  horseback.
(Orelli,  2569.  2577.)

Essedarii  fought  from  chariots  like  the  Gauls
and  Britons.  [Esseda.]  They  are  frequently  men-
tioned in  inscriptions,   (Orelli,  2566.  2584,  &c.)

Fiscales  were  those  under  the  empire,  who  were
trained  and  supported  from  the  fiscus.  (Capitol.
Gord.  33.)

Hoplomacid  appear  to  have  been  those  who
fought  in  a  complete  suit  of  armour.  (Suet.  C(d.
^f)  ;  Martial,  viii.  74  ;  Orelli,  2566.)  Lipsius  con-
siders them  to  have  been  the  same  with  the  Sam-
nites,  and  that  this  name  was  disused  imder  the
emperors,  and  hoplomachi  substituted  for  it.

Laqueatores  were  those  who  used  a  noose  to
catch  their  adversaries.  (Isiod.  xviii.  6Q.)

Meridiani  were  those  who  fought  in  the  middle
of  the  day,  after  combats  with  wild  beasts  had
taken  place  in  the  morning.  These  gladiators  were
very  slightly  armed.  (Senec.  Epist.  7 ;  Suet.  Claud.
34  ;  Orelli,  2587.)

Mirmillones  are  said  to  have  been  so  called  from
their  having  the  image  of  a  fish  (jnormyr.,  p-op.
pvpos^  on  their  helmets.  {Festus,  s.  v. Retiario.)
Their  arms  were  like  those  of  the  Gauls,  whence  we
find  that  they  were  also  called  Galli.  They  were
usually  matched  with  the  retiarii  or  Thracians.
(Cic.  Phil.  iii.  12,  vii.  6  ;  Juv.  viii.  200  ;  Suet.
Cal.  32  ;  Orelli,  2566,  2580.)

Ordinarii  was  the  name  applied  to  all  the  regular
gladiators,  who  fought  in  pairs,  in  the  ordinary
way.  (Senec.  Epist.  7  ;  Suet.  Aug.  45,  Cal.  26.)

Postulaticii  were  such  as  were  demanded  by
the  people  from  the  editor,  in  addition  to  those  who
were  exhibited,  (Senec.  /.  c.)

Provocatores  fought  with  the  Samnites  (Cic.  pro
Sext.  64),  but  we  do  not  know  any  thing  respect-
ing them  except  their  name.  They  are  mentioned
in  inscriptions.  (Orelli,  2566.)  The  tvpoSoKa.TOjp
mentioned  by  Artemiodorus  (ii.  32)  appears  to  be
the  same  as  the  provocator.

Retiarii  carried  only  a  three-pointed  lance,  called
tridens  or fuscina  [FusciNAj,anda  net  (refe),  which
they  endeavoured  to  throw  over  their  adversaries,
and  then  to  attack  them  with  the  fuscina  while  they
were  entangled.  The  retiarius  was  dressed  in  a  short
tunic,  and  wore  nothing  on  his  head.  If  he  missed
his  aim  in  throwing  the  net,  he  betook  himself  to
flight,  and  endeavoured  to  prepare  his  net  for  a
second  cast,  while  his  adversary  Ibllowed  him  round
the  arena  in  order  to  kill  him  before  he  could  make
a  second  attempt.  His  adversary  was  usually  a
secutor  or  a  mirmillo.  (Juv.  ii,  1 43,  A'iii.  203  ;  Suet.
Cal.  30  ;  Claud.  34  ;  Orelli,  2578.)  In  the  follow-
ing woodcut,  taken  from  Winckelmann  (Monum,


^76


GLADIATORES.


GLADIATORES.


Ined.  pi.  197),  a  combat  is  represented  between  a
ret'arius  and  a  mirmillo :  the  former  has  thrown
his  net  over  the  head  of  the  latter,  and  is  proceed-
ing to  attack  him  with  the  fuscina.  The  lanista
stands  behind  the  retiarius.

Samnites  were  so  called,  because  they  were
Rrmed  in  the  same  way  as  that  people,  and  wore
particularly  distinguished  by  the  oblong  senium.
(Liv.  ix.  40  ;  Cic.  pro  Secct.  64.)

Secutores  are  supposed  by  some  writers  to  be  so
called  because  the  secutor  in  his  combat  with  the
retiarius  pursued  the  latter  when  he  failed  in  se-
curing him  by  his  net.  Other  writers  think  that
they  were  the  same  as  the  supposititii,  mentioned  by
Martijil  (v.  24),  who  were  gladiators  substituted  in
th  i  place  of  those  who  were  wearied  or  were  killed.
(  Suet.  Cal.  30  ;  Juv.  viii.  2 1 0.)  If  the  old  reading
in  a  letter  of  Cicero's  {ad  AU.  vii.  14)  is  correct,
Julius  Caesar  had  no  less  than  500  secutores  in  his
rudus  at  Capua  ;  but  it  appears  probable  that  we
ought  to  read  scutorum  instead  of  secutorum.

Supposititii.     See  Secutores.

TItraces  or  Threces  were  armed  like  the  Thra-
cians  with  a  round  shield  or  buckler  (Festus,  s.  v.
Tliraeces),  and  a  short  sword  or  dagger  {sica.,  Suet.
C(d.  32),  which  is  called  falx  supina  by  Juvenal
(viii.  20 1 ).  They  were  usually  matched,  as  already
stated,  with  the  mirmillones.  The  woodcut  in  the
next  column,  taken  from  Winckelmann  (/.  c),  re-
presents a  combat  between  two  Thracians.  A
lanista  stands  behind  each.

Paintings  of  gladiatorial  combats,  as  well  as  of
the  other  sports  of  the  amphitheatre,  were  favourite
subjects  with  the  Roman  artists.  (Plin.  //.  N.
XXXV.  33  ;  Capitol.  Gord.  3  ;  Vopisc.  Carin.  18.)
Several  statues  of  gladiators  have  come  down  to
us,  which  are  highly  admired  as  works  of  art :  of
these  the  most  celebrated  is  the  gladiator  of  the


Borghese  collection,  now  in  the  Museum  of  the
Louvre,  and  the  dying  gladiator,  as  it  is  called,  in
the  Capitoline  Museum.  Gladiatorial  combats  are
represented  in  the  bas-reliefs  on  the  tomb  of  Scau-
rus  at  Pompeii,  and  illustrate  in  many  particulars
the  brief  account  which  has  been  given  in  this
article  of  the  several  classes  of  gladiators.  These
bas-reliefs  are  represented  in  the  following  wood-
cuts from  Mazois  {Pomp.  i.  pi.  32).  The  figures
are  made  of  stucco,  and  appear  to  have  been  mould-
ed separately,  and  attached  to  the  plaster  by  pegs
of  bronze  or  iron.  In  various  parts  of  the  frieze
are  written  the  name  of  the  person  to  whom  the
gladiators  belonged,  and  also  the  names  of  the  gla-
diators themselves,  and  the  number  of  their  vic-
tories. The  first  pair  of  gladiators  on  the  left  hand
represents  an  equestrian  combat.  Both  wear
helmets  with  vizors,  which  cover  the  whole  face,
and  are  armed  with  spears  and  round  bucklers.
In  the  second  pair  the  gladiator  on  the  left  has
been  wounded  ;  he  has  let  fiill  his  shield,  and  is
imploring  the  mercy  of  the  people  by  raising  hia
hand  towards  them.  His  antagonist  stands  be-
hind him  waiting  the  signal  of  the  people.     Like


all  the  other  gladiators  represented  on  the  frieze,
they  wear  the  subligacidum  or  short  apron  fixed
above  the  hips.  The  one  on  the  left  appears  to  be
a  mirmillo,  and  the  one  on  the  right,  with  an  ob-
long shield  {scutum),  a  Samnite.  The  third  pair
consists  of  a  Thracian  and  a  mirmillo,  the  latter  of


whom  is  defeated.  The  fourth  group  consists  of
four  figures  ;  two  are  secutores  and  two  retiarii.
The  secutor  on  his  knee  appears  to  have  been  de-
feated by  the  retiarius  behind  him,  but  as  the
fuscina  is  not  adapted  for  producing  certain  death,
the  other  secutor  is  called  upon  to  do  it.      The


GRADUS.

retiarius  in  the  distance  is  probably  destined  to
fight  in  his  turn  witli  the  surviving  secutor.  The
last  group  consists  of  a  mirmillo  and  a  Samnite  ;
the  latter  is  defeated.

In  the  last  woodcut  two  combats  are  repre-
sented. In  the  first  a  Samnite  has  been  conquered
by  a  minnillo  ;  the  former  is  holding  up  his  hand
to  the  people  to  implore  mercy,  while  the  latter
apparently  wishes  to  become  his  enemy's  execu-
tioner before  receiving  the  signal  from  the  people  ;
but  the  lanrsta  holds  him  back.  In  the  other
combat  a  mirmillo  is  mortally  wounded  by  a
Samnite.

It  will  be  obser\-ed  that  the  right  arm  of  every
figure  is  protected  by  armour,  which  the  left  does
not  require  on  account  of  the  shield.  [Bestiarh  ;
Venatio.]     (Lipsius,  Saturnalia.)

GLADIUS  (^t(pos,  poet.  Hop,  (pdcryauov),  a
sword  or  glaive,  by  the  Latin  poets  called  ensis.
The  ancient  sword  had  generally  a  straight  two-
edged  blade  {afxcpriKes,  Hom.  //.  x.  256),  rather
broad,  and  nearly  of  equal  width  from  hilt  to  point.
Gladiators,  however,  used  a  sword  which  was
curved  like  a  scimitar.  (Mariette,  Rectteil,  No.  92.)
In  times  of  the  remotest  antiquity  swords  were
made  of  bronze,  but  afterwards  of  iron.  (Eurip.
Phoen.  67,  529,  1438  ;  Virg.  Aen.  iv.  579,  vi.  260,
xii.  950.)  The  Greeks  and  Romans  wore  them
on  the  left  side  (Sid.  ApoUin.  Carm.  2),  so  as  to
draw  them  out  of  the  sheath  {vagina.,  koXc6s)  by
passing  the  right  hand  in  front  of  the  body  to  take
hold  of  the  hilt  with  the  thumb  next  to  the  blade.
Hence  Aeschylus  distinguishes  the  army  of  Xerxes
by  the  denomination  of  /xaxatpocpSpov  eduos  (Fers.
56),  alluding  to  the  obvious  difference  in  their  ap-
pearance in  consequence  of  the  use  of  the  Acinaces
instead  of  the  sword.

The  early  Greeks  used  a  very  short  sword.
Iphicrates,  who  made  A^arious  improvements  in
armour  about  400  B.  c,  doubled  its  length  (Diod.
XV.  44),  so  that  an  iron  sword,  found  in  a  tomb
at  Athens,  and  represented  by  Dodwell  {Tour.,  i.
p.  443),  was  two  feet  five  inches  long,  including
the  handle,  which  was  also  of  iron.  The  Roman
sword,  as  was  the  case  also  with  their  other
offensive  weapons,  was  larger,  heavier,  and  more
formidable  than  the  Greek.  (Florus,  ii.  7.)  Its
length  gave  occasion  to  the  joke  of  Lentulus  upon
his  son-in-law,  who  was  of  very  low  stature,
"  Who  tied  my  son-in-law  to  his  sword  .P"  (Ma-
crob.  Saturn,  ii.)  To  this  Roman  sword  the
Greeks  applied  the  term  <nra.9ri  (An-ian,  Tact.),
which  was  the  name  of  a  piece  of  wood  of  the  same
form  used  in  weaving  [Tela].  The  British  glaive
was  still  larger  than  the  Roman.  (Tac.  Agric.  36.)
In  a  monument  found  in  London,  and  preserved
at  Oxford,  the  glaive  is  represented  between  three
and  four  feet  long.  (Montfaucon,  Sujrplem.  iv.
p.  16.)

Tile  principal  oraament  of  the  sword  was  be-
stowed upon  the  hilt.     [Capulus.]

Gladius  was  sometimes  used  in  a  wide  sense,  so
as  to  include  Pugio.     (A.  Gell.  ix.  13.)     [J.  Y.]

GLANDES.     [FuNDA.]

GNOMON  {yvtiixoiv).     [Horologium.]

GOMPHI.     [Via.]

GORGYRA  {yory<,pci).    [Carcer.]

GRADUS  {^rijxa),  a  step,  as  a  measure  of  length,
was  half  a  pace  {passus)  and  contained  2^  feet,
Greek  and  Roman  respectively,  and  therefore  the
Greek    firjfxa   was   rather  more,  and  the   Roman


GRAMMATEUS.


577


gradus  rather  less,  than  2^  feet  English.  (See  the
Tables.)  "  [P.S.]

GRADUS  COGNATIONIS.     [Cognati.]

GRAECOSTASIS,  a  place  in  the  Roman
forum,  on  the  right  of  the  Comitium,  was  so  called
because  the  Greek  ambassadors,  and  perhaps  also
deputies  from  other  Ibreign  or  allied  states,  were
allowed  to  stand  there  to  hej^r  the  debates.  The
Graecostasis  was,  as  Niebuhr  remarks,  like  privi-
leged seats  in  the  hall  of  a  parliamentary  assem-
bly. The  Stationes  Mvmicipiorum,  of  which  Pliny
speaks  (//.  N.  xvi.  44.  s.  86),  appear  to  have  been
places  allotted  to  municipals  for  the  same  purpose.
When  the  sun  was  seen  from  the  Curia  coming
out  between  the  Rostra  and  the  Graecostasis,  it
was  mid-day  ;  and  an  accensus  of  the  consul  an-
nounced the  time  with  a  clenr  loud  voice.  (Plin.
H.  N.  vii.  60,  xxxiii.  1.  s.  6  ;  Cic.  ud  Q.  Fr.  ii.  1 ;
Varr.  L.  L.  v.  155,  ed.  Miiller  ;  Niebuhr,  FFist.  of
Rome.,  vol.  ii.  note  116.)

GRAMMATEUS  {ypaixfjiarevs),  a  clerk  or
scribe.  Among  the  great  number  of  scribes  em-
ployed by  the  magistrates  and  governments  of
Athens,  there  Avere  three  of  a  higher  rank,  who
were  real  state-officers.  (Suidas,  s.  v.)  Their
functions  are  described  by  Pollux  (viii.  98).  One
of  them  was  appointed  by  lot,  by  the  senate,  to  serve
the  time  of  the  administration  of  each  prytanv,
though  he  always  belonged  to  a  different  prytaiiy
from  that  which  was  in  power.  He  was  therefore
called  ypa/jL/xaTevs  Kara  irpvTav^iav.  (Demosth,
c.  Timocrat.  p.  720.)  His  province  was  to  keep  the
public  records,  and  the  decrees  of  the  people  which
were  made  during  the  time  of  his  office,  and  to  de-
liver to  the  thesmothotae  the  decrees  of  the  senate.
(Demosth.  I.  c.)  Demosthenes  in  another  passage
{de  Fals.  Leg.  p.  381)  states  that  the  public  docu-
ments, which  were  deposited  in  the  Metroon,  were
in  the  keeping  of  a  public  slave  ;  whence  we  must
suppose  with  Schbmann  {de  Comit.  p.  302,  transl.)
that  this  servant,  whose  office  was  probably  for  life,
was  under  the  ypa/ufxarcvs,  and  was  his  assistant.
Previous  to  the  archonship  of  Eucleides,  the  name
of  this  scribe  was  attached  to  the  beginning  of
every  decree  of  the  people  (Schomann,  p.  132,  «&c.;
compare  Boule)  ;  and  the  name  of  the  ypa/j-fiaTevs
who  officiated  during  the  administration  of  the
first  prytany  in  a  year  was,  like  that  of  the  archon
eponymus,  used  to  designate  the  year.

Tlie  second  ypa/j.iJ.aTeus  was  elected  by  the
senate,  by  x^^P'^'^°^''-^->  ^"d  was  entrusted  with
the  custody  of  the  laws  (eVi  rovs  vo/xovs,  Pollux,
I.  c.  ;  Demosth.  c.  Tirnocrai.  p.  713  ;  de  Coron.  p.
238).  His  usual  name  was  ypa/njnaTivs  ttjs  fiovArjs.,
but  in  inscriptions  he  is  also  called  ypajj-ixarevs  ruu
^ovK^vTwv  (Bbckh,  Fuhl.  Econ.  p.  185,  2d  edit.).
Fui'ther  particulars  concerning  his  office  are  not
known.

A  third  ypa/x/naTcvs  was  called  ypajj-fxaTebs  rris
TToAews  (Thucyd.  vii.  10),  or  ypafxixanvs  t-Ijs
^ovXiis  Ka\  Tov  ^i}fj.ov.  He  was  appointed  by  the
people,  by  x^'porovta,  and  the  principal  part  of
his  office  was  to  read  any  laws  or  documents  which
were  required  to  be  read  in  the  assembly  or  in  the
senate.  (Pollux,  I.  c. ;  Demosth.  de  Fals.  Leg.  p.
419  ;  c.  Leptin.  p.  485  ;  Suidas,  s.  v.)

A  class  of  scribes,  inferior  to  these,  were  those
persons  who  were  appointed  clerks  to  the  several
civil  or  military  officers  of  the  state,  or  who  served
any  of  the  three  ypafx/xarels  mentioned  above  as
under -clerks  {vnoypa/xixaTus,  Demosth.  de  Fals,
P  P


578


G  RAPHE.


Leg.  p.  419  ;  de  Coro7i.  p.  314  ;  Antiphon,  de
Choreut.  p.  792  ;  Lysias,  c.  Nicomuch.  p.  })64).
These  persons  were  either  public  slaves  or  citizens
of  the  lower  orders,  as  appears  from  the  manner  in
which  Demosthenes  speaks  of  them,  and  were  not
allowed  to  hold  their  office  for  two  succeeding
years.  (Lysias,  c.  Nicomach.  p.  854,  according
to  the  interpretation  of  this  passage  by  Bdckh,
Publ.  Econ.  p.  188,  note  168.)

Different  from  these  common  clerks  Avere  the
avTi-ypa^ih,  checking-clerks  or  counter-scribes,  who
must  likewise  be  divided  into  two  classes,  a  lower
and  a  higher  one.  The  former  comprised  those
who  accompanied  the  generals  and  cashiers  of  the
armies  (Demosth.  de  Cherson.  p.  101),  who  kept
the  control  of  the  expenditure  of  the  sacred  money,
&c.  (Bockh,  Publ.  Econ.  p.  187).  The  higher  class
of  auTiypacpels,  on  the  other  hand,  were  public
oiRcers.  Their  number  was,  accordiug  to  Ilarpo-
cration  (s.  v.),  only  two,  the  ayriypacpevs  ttjs
SiOLK-f}<T€(os,  and  the  avTiypa<pevs  ttj?  Pou\r}s.  The
office  of  the  former  was  to  control  the  expenditure
of  the  public  treasury  (Siolktjo-is)  ;  the  latter  was
always  present  at  the  meetings  of  the  senate,  and
recorded  the  accounts  of  money  which  was  paid
into  the  senate.  (Compare  Pollux,  viii.  98  ;  Suidas,
s.  V.)  He  had  also  to  lay  the  accounts  of  the
public  revenue  before  the  people  in  every  prytany,
so  that  he  was  a  check  upon  the  aTroSe'/crat.  He
was  at  first  elected  by  the  people  by  x^'^P^'^opiu,
but  was  afterwards  appointed  by  lot.  (Aeschin.  c.
Ciesiph.  p.  417  ;  Pollux,  I.  c.)

The  great  number  of  clerks  and  counter-clerks
at  Athens  was  a  necessary  consequence  of  the  in-
stitution of  the  €v6vvr],  which  could  not  otherwise
have  been  carried  into  effect.  (See  Schomann,  de
Comit.  p.  302,  &c.  ;  Bockli,  /.  c.  ;  Hermann,
Polit.  Antiq.  §  127.  n.  17  and  18.)  [L.  S.]

GRAMMATOPHYLACIUM.        [Tabula-

RIUM.]

GRAPHE  (ypa<p7]),  in  its  most  general  accept-
ation, comprehends  all  state  trials  and  criminal
prosecutions  whatever  in  the  Attic  courts  ;  but  in
its  more  limited  sense,  those  only  which  were  not
distinguished  as  the  ewfluj/Tj,  ivSei^is,  claayyehia
by  a  special  name  and  a  peculiar  conduct  of  the
proceedings.  The  principal  characteristic  differ-
ences between  public  and  private  actions  are  enu-
merated luider  Dike,  and  the  peculiar  forms  of
public  prosecutions,  such  as  those  above  men-
tioned, are  separately  noticed.  Of  these  forms,
together  with  that  of  the  Graphe,  properly  so
called,  it  frequently  happened  that  two  or  more
were  applicable  to  the  same  cause  of  action  ;  and
the  discretion  of  the  prosecutor  in  selecting  the
most  preferable  of  liis  available  remedies  was  at-
tended by  results  of  great  importance  to  himself
and  the  accused.  If  the  prosecutor's  speech
(KaT7]yopia\  and  the  evidence  adduced  by  him,
were  insufficient  to  establish  the  aggravated  cha-
racter of  the  wrong  in  question,  as  indicated  by
the  form  of  action  he  had  chosen,  his  ill-judged
rigour  might  be  alleged  in  mitigation  of  the  punish-
ment by  the  defendant  in  his  reply  (airoXoyla),  or
upon  the  assessment  of  the  penalty  after  judgment
given  ;  and  if  the  case  were  one  of  those  in  which
the  dicasts  had  no  power  of  assessing  (drt'/xT/Tos
yparpi}),  it  might  cause  a  total  failure  of  justice,
and  even  render  the  prosecutor  liable  to  a  fine  or
otlier  punishment.  (Dem.  c.  Androt.  p.  601,  c.
Meid.  p.  523.)


GIIAPHE.

The  courts  before  which  public  causes  could  be
tried  were  very  various ;  and,  besides  the  ordinary
Heliastic  bodies  under  the  control  of  the  nine
archons  or  the  generals  or  logistae,  the  council  and
even  the  assembly  of  the  people  occasionally  be-
came judicial  bodies  for  that  purpose,  as  in  the  case
of  certain  Docimasiae  and  Eisangeliae.  (Meier,
Att.  Proc.  pp.  205.  268.)  The  proper  coxirt  in
which  to  bring  a  particular  action  was  for  the  most
part  determined  by  the  subject-matter  of  the  ac-
cusation. In  the  trial  of  state  offences  it  was  in
general  requisite  that  the  ostensible  prosecutor
should  be  an  Athenian  citizen  in  the  full  posses-
sion of  his  franchise  ;  but  on  some  particular  occa-
sions (Thuc.  vi.  28  ;  Lys.  pro  Call.  p.  186)  even
slayes  and  resident  aliens  were  invited  to  come
forward  and  lay  informations.  In  such  cases,  and
in  some  Eisangeliae  and  other  special  proceedings,
the  prosecution  and  conduct  of  the  cause  in  court
was  carried  on  by  advocates  retained  by  the  state
(^vvftyopoi)  for  the  occasion  ;  but  with  the  excep-
tion of  these  temporary  appointments,  the  protec-
tion of  purely  state  interests  seems  to  have  been
left  to  volunteer  accusers.

In  criminal  causes  the  prosecution  was  con-
ducted by  the  Kvpios  in  behalf  of  the  aggrieved
woman,  minor,  or  slave  ;  his  TrpocrTciTTjs  probably
gave  some  assistance  to  the  resident  alien  in  the
commencement  of  proceedings,  though  the  accusa-
tion was  in  the  name  of  the  person  aggrieved,  who
also  made  his  appearance  at  the  trial  without  the
intervention  of  the  patron  (Meier,  Att.  Proc.
p.  661)  ;  and  a  complete  foreigner  would  upon
this  occasion  require  the  same  or  a  still  further
protection  from  the  proxenus  of  his  country
With  the  exception  of  cases  in  which  the  Apagoge,
Ephegesis  Endeixis,  or  Eisangelia  were  adopted,
in  the  three  first  of  which  an  arrest  actuallj'-  did
and  in  the  last  might  take  place,  and  accusations
at  the  Euthynae  and  Docimasiae,  when  the  accused
was  or  was  supposed  by  the  law  to  be  present,  a
public  action  against  a  citizen  commenced  like  an
ordinary  law-suit,  with  a  summons  to  appear  be-
fore the  proper  magistrate  on  a  fixed  day.  (Plato,
Euthyph.  init.)  The  anacrisis  then  followed
[Anacrisis]  ;  but  the  bill  of  accusation  was
called  a  ypa<p7]^  or  (pdais^  as  the  case  might  be,  and
not  an  ^yK\r}jxa  or  A.7j|is,  as  in  private  actions  ;
neither  could  a  public  prosecution  be  referred  to
an  arbitrator  [Diaetetae],  and  if  it  were  com-
promised, would  in  many  cases  render  the  accuser
liable  to  an  action  Kaducp^ffeccs,  if  not  ipso  facto  to
a  fine  of  a  thousand  drachmae.  (Meier,  Att.  Proc.
p.  355.)  The  same  sura  was  also  forfeited  when
the  prosecutor  failed  to  obtain  the  voices  of  a  fifth
of  the  dicasts  in  all  cases  except  those  brought
before  the  archon  that  had  reference  to  injury
(KaKcocris)  done  to  women  or  orphans ;  and  besides
this  penaltj',  a  modified  disfranchisement,  as,  for
instance,  an  incapacity  to  bring  a  similar  accusa-
tion, was  incurred  upon  several  occasions.  Upon
the  conviction  of  the  accused,  if  the  sentence  were
death,  the  presiding  magistrate  of  the  court  deli-
vered the  prisoner,  who  remained  in  the  custody
of  the  Scythae  during  the  trial,  to  the  Eleven,
whose  business  it  was  to  execute  judgment  upon
him.  If  the  punishment  were  confiscation  of  pro-
perty, the  demarchs  made  an  inventory  of  the
effects  of  the  criminal,  which  was  read  in  the  as-
sembly of  the  people,  and  delivered  to  the  poletae,
that  they  might  make  a  sale  of  the  goods,  and  pay


GYMNASIUM.

in  the  proceeds  to  the  public  treasurv.  (Meier,  J  ft.
I'roc.  p.  740,  &c.)  "    [J.  S.  M.]

GRAPHIA'RIUM.     [Stilus.]
GRAPHIS.     [PiCTURA,  No.  VI.]
GRAPH  I UM.     [Stilus.]
GREGORIA'NUS  CODEX.     [Codex  Gre-
gorianus.]

GRIPHUS  {-ip^os).     [Aenigma.]
GROMA.       [Agrimensores  ;     Castra,    p.
251,  a.]

GROSPHOS  (7p(Ja-<^os).     [Hasta.]

GUBERNA'CULUM.     [Navis.]

GUSTA'TIO.     [Coena,  p.  307,  a.]

GUTTUS,  a  vessel,  with  a  narrow  mouth  or

neck,  from  which  the  liquid  was  poured  in  drops :

hence  its  name  "  Qui  vinum  dabant  ut  minutatim

funderent,  a  guttis  guttum  appellarunt."     (Varr,  L.

L.  V.  124,  ed.  MUUer.)     It  was  especially  used  in

sacrifices  (Plin.  H.  N.  xvi.  38.  s.  73),   and  hence

we  find  it  represented  on  the  Roman  coins  struck

by  persons  who  held  any  of  the  priestly  offices  ;

as,  for  instance,  in  the  annexed  coin  of  L.  Plancus,

the  contemporary  of  Augustus,  where  it  appears,

though  in  different  forms,  both  on  the  obverse  and

reverse.     The  guttus  was  also   used  for  keeping


the  oil,  with  which  persons  were  anointed  in  the
baths.  (Juv,  iii.  263,  xi.  158.)  A  guttus  of  this
kind  is  figured  on  p.  192.

GYMNASIARCHES.  [Gymnasium.]
GYMNA'SIUM  {yvixvaaiov).  The  whole  edu-
cation of  a  Greek  youth  was  divided  into  three
parts  :  grammar,  music,  and  gymnastics  {ypdiJ.fxura,
IxovaiKT]^  and  yvixvaariK-f}^  Plato,  Theag.  p.  122  ;
Plut.  de  Audit,  c.  17  ;  Clitoph.  p.  497),  to  which
Aristotle  (de  Repvhl.  viii.  3)  adds  a  iburth,  the
art  of  drawing  or  painting.  Gymnastics,  however,
were  thought  by  the  ancients  a  matter  of  such  im-
portance, that  this  part  of  education  alone  occupied
as  much  time  and  attention  as  all  the  others  put
together  ;  and  while  the  latter  necessarily  ceased
at  a  certain  period  of  life,  gymnastics  continued  to
be  cultivated  by  persons  of  all  ages,  though  those
of  an  advanced  age  naturally  took  lighter  and  less
fatiguing  exercises  than  boys  and  youths.  (Xen.
Sympos.  i.  7  ;  Lucian,  Lexiph.  5.)  The  ancients,
and  more  especially  the  Greeks,  seem  to  have  been
thoroughly  convinced  that  the  mind  could  not  pos-
sibly be  in  a  healthy  state,  unless  the  body  was
likewise  in  perfect  health,  and  no  means  were
thought,  cither  by  philosophers,  or  physicians,  to  be
more  conducive  to  preserve  or  restore  bodily  health
than  well-regulated  exercise.  The  word  gymnas-
tics is  derived  from  yvixvos  (naked),  because  the
persons  who  performed  their  exercises  in  public  or
private  gymnasia  were  either  entirely  naked,  or
merely  covered  by  the  short  X'tcIJi/.  (See  the  autho-
rities inWachsmuth, //e//e;2.  Alterth.  vol.  ii.  p.  354.
2d  edit.,  and  Becker,  CkariMes,  vol.  i.  p.  316.)

The  great  partiality  of  the  Greeks  for  gymnastic
exercises  was  productive  of  infinite  good :  they
gave  to  the  body  tl)at  healthy  and  beautiful  deve-


GYMNASIUM.  57^

lopmcnt  by  which  the  Greeks  excelled  all  other
nations,  and  which  at  the  same  time  imparted  to
their  minds  that  power  and  elasticity  which  will
ever  be  admired  in  all  their  productions.  (Lucian,
de  Gipmiatit.  IH.)  The  plastic  art  in  particular
must  have  found  its  first  and  chief  nourishment  in
the  gymnastic  and  athletic  performances,  and  it
may  be  justly  observed  that  the  Greeks  would
never  have  attained  their  preeminence  in  sculpture
had  not  their  gymnastic  and  athletic  exhibitions
made  the  artists  familiar  with  the  beautiful  forms
of  the  human  body  and  its  various  attitudes.  Re-
specting the  advantages  of  gymnastics  in  a  medical
point  of  view,  some  remarks  are  made  at  the  end
of  this  article.  But  we  must  at  the  same  time
confess,  that  at  a  later  period  of  Greek  history
when  the  gymnasia  had  become  places  of  resort  for
idle  loungers,  their  evil  effects  were  no  less  strik-
ing. The  chief  objects  for  which  they  had  origi-
nally been  instituted  were  gradually  lost  sight  of,
and  instead  of  being  places  of  education  and  train-
ing they  became  mere  places  of  amusement  ;  and
among  other  injurious  practices  to  which  they  gave
rise,  the  gymnasia  were  charged,  even  by  the  an-
cients themselves,  with  having  produced  and  fos-
tered that  most  odious  vice  of  the  Greeks,  the
TratSepao-Tia.  (Plut.  Quaest.  Rom.  40.  vol.  ii.
p.  122.  ed.  Wvttenb. ;  compare  Aristot.  deRepubl.
viii.  4  ;  Plut.  PMlop.  3.)

Gymnastics,  in  the  widest  sense  of  the  word,
comprehended  also  the  agonistic  and  athletic  arts
(aycvviariKri  and  aQ\r,riKri),  that  is,  the  art  of  those
who  contended  for  the  prizes  at  the  great  public
games  in  Greece,  and  of  those  who  made  gymnas-
tic performances  their  profession  [Athletae  and
Agonothetae].  Both  originated  in  the  gymna-
sia, in  as  far  as  the  athletae,  as  well  as  the  agonis-
tae  were  originally  trained  in  them.  The  athletae,
however,  afterwards  formed  a  distinct  class  of  per-
sons imconnected  with  the  gymnasia  ;  while  the
gymnasia,  at  the  time  when  they  had  degenerated,
were  in  reality  little  more  than  agonistic  schools,
attended  by  numbers  of  spectators.  On  certain
occasions  the  most  distinguished  pupils  of  the  gym-
nasia were  selected  for  the  exhibition  of  public
contests  [Lampadephoria],  so  that  on  the  whole
there  was  always  a  closer  connection  between  the
gymnastic  and  agonistic  than  between  the  gym-
nastic and  athletic  arts.  In  a  narrower  sense,  how-
ever, the  gymnasia  had,  with  very  few  exceptions,
nothing  to  do  with  the  public  contests,  and  were
places  of  exercise  for  the  purpose  of  strengthening
and  improving  the  body,  or  in  other  words,  places
for  physical  education  and  training  ;  and  it  is
chiefly  in  this  point  of  view  that  we  shall  consider
them  in  this  article.

Gymnastic  exercises  among  the  Greeks  seem  to
have  been  as  old  as  the  Greek  nation  itself,  as
may  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  gymnastic  con-
tests are  mentioned  in  many  of  the  earliest  legends
of  Grecian  story  ;  but  they  were,  as  might  be  sup-
posed, of  a  rude  and  mostly  of  a  warlike  character.
They  were  generally  held  in  the  open  air,  and  in
plains  near  a  river,  which  afforded  an  opportunity
for  swimming  and  bathing.  The  Attic  legends
indeed  referred  the  regulation  of  gymnastics  to
Theseus  (Paus.  i.  39.  §  3),  but  according  to  Galen
it  seems  to  have  been  about  the  time  of  Cleisthenes
that  gymnastics  were  reduced  to  a  regular  and  com-
plete system.  Great  progress,  however,  must  have
been  made  as  early  as  the  time  of  Solon,  as  appears
r  p  2


580  GYMNASIUM.

from  some  of  his  laws  which  are  mentiened  below.
It  was  about  the  same  period  that  the  Greek  towns
began  to  build  their  regular  gymnasia  as  places  of
exercise  for  the  young,  with  baths,  and  other  con-
veniences for  philosophers  and  all  persons  who
sought  intellectual  amusements.  There  was  pro-
bably no  Greek  town  of  any  importance  which  did
not  possess  its  gymnasium.  In  many  places,  such
as  Ephesus,  Hierapolis,  and  Alexandria  in  Troas,
the  remains  of  the  ancient  gymnasia  have  been
discovered  in  modern  times.  Athens  alone  pos-
sessed three  great  gymnasia,  the  Lyceum  (Au/ceioj/),
Cynosarges  {Kvv6aapy7)s)^aud  the  Academia  (' A/ca-
drjixla)  ;  to  which,  in  later  times,  several  smaller  ones
were  added.  All  places  of  this  kind  were,  on
the  whole,  built  on  the  same  plan,  though,  from
the  remains,  as  well  as  from  the  descriptitos  still
extant,  we  must  infer  that  there  were  many  dif-
ferences in  their  detail.  The  most  complete  de-
scription of  a  gymnasium  which  we  possess,  is  that
given  by  Vitruvius  (v.  11),  which,  however,  is
very  obscure,  and  at  the  same  time  defective,  in  as
far  as  many  parts  which  seem  to  have  been  essen-
tial to  a  gymnasium,  are  not  mentioned  in  it
Among  the  numerous  plans  which  have  been  drawn,
according  to  the  description  of  Vitruvius,  that  of
W.  Newton,  in  his  translation  of  Vitruvius.  vol.  i.
fig.  52,  deserves  the  preference.  The  following
woodcut  is  a  copy  of  it,  with  a  few  alterations.


■iu^


The  peristylia  (D)  in  a  gymnasium,  wl^ich  Vi-
truvius incorrectly  calls  palaestra,  are  placed  in  the
form  of  a  square  or  oblong,  and  have  two  stadia
(1200  feet)  in  circumference.  They  consist  of  four
porticoes.  In  three  of  them  (ABC)  spacious  exe-
drae  with  seats  were  erected,  in  which  philoso-
phers, rhetoricians,  and  others,  who  delighted  in
intellectual  conversation  might  assemble.  A  fourth
portico  (E),  towards  the  south,  was  double,  so  that
the  interior  walk  was  not  exposed  to  bad  weather.
The  double  portico  contained  the  following  apart-
ments: —  The  Ephebeum  (F),  a  spacious  hall  with
seats,  in  the  middle,  and  by  one-third  longer
than  broad.  On  the  right  is  the  Coryceum  (G),
perhaps  the  same  room  which  in  other  cases  was


GYMNASIUM.

called  Apodyterium  ;  then  came  the  Conisterium  (H  )
adjoining  ;  and  next  to  the  Conisterium,  in  the  re-
turns of  the  portico,  is  the  cold  bath,  Xovrpov  (1).
On  the  left  of  the  Ephebeum  is  the  Elaeothesium,
where  persons  were  anointed  by  the  aliptae  (K).
Adjoining  the  Elaeothesium  is  the  Frigidarium
(L),  the  object  of  which  is  unknown.  From  thence
is  the  entrance  to  the  Propnigeum  (M),  on  the  re-
turns of  the  portico  ;  near  which,  but  more  inward,
behind  the  place  of  the  frigidarium,  is  the  vaulted
sudatory  (N),  in  length  twice  its  breadth,  which
has  on  the  returns  the  Laconicum  (0)  on  one  side,
and  opposite  the  Laconicum,  the  hot-bath  (P).
On  the  outside  three  porticoes  are  built ;  one  (Q),
in  passing  out  from  the  peristyle,  and,  on  the  right
and  left,  the  two  stadia!  porticoes  (R  S),  of  which,
the  one  (S)  that  faces  the  north,  is  made  double
and  of  great  breadth,  the  other  (R)  is  single,  and
so  designed  that  in  the  parts  which  encircle  the
walls,  and  which  adjoin  to  the  columns,  there  may
be  margins  for  paths,  not  less  than  ten  feet  ;  and
the  middle  is  so  excavated,  that  there  may  be  two
steps,  a  foot  and  a  half  in  descent,  to  go  from  the
margin  to  the  plane  (R),  which  plane  should  not
be  less  in  breadth  than  12  feet ;  by  this  means
those  who  walk  about  the  margins  in  their  apparel
will  not  be  annoyed  by  those  who  are  exercising
themselves.  This  portico  is  called  by  the  Greeks
^u<tt6s^  because  in  the  winter  season  the  athletao
exercised  themselves  in  these  covered  stadia.  The
^varos  had  groves  or  plantations  between  the  two
porticoes,  and  walks  between  the  trees,  with  seats
of  signine  work.  Adjoining  to  the  ^v(tt6s  (R)  and
double  portico  (3),  are  the  uncovered  walks  (U),
which  in  Greek  are  called  TrapaSpojUtSes,  to  which
the  athletae,  in  fair  weather,  go  from  the  winter-
xystus,  to  exercise.  Beyond  the  xystus  is  the
stadium  (W),  so  large  that  a  multitude  of  people
may  have  sufficient  room  to  behold  the  contests  of
the  athletae.

It  is  generally  believed  that  Vitruvius  in  this
description  of  his  gymnasium  took  that  of  Naples
as  his  model  ;  but  two  important  parts  of  other
Greek  gymnasia,  the  apodyterium  and  the  sphaeris-
terium,  are  not  mentioned  by  him.  The  Greeks
bestowed  great  care  upon  the  outward  and  inward
splendour  of  their  gymnasia,  and  adorned  them
v/ith  the  statues  of  gods,  heroes,  victors  in  the
public  games,  and  of  eminent  men  of  every  class.
Hermes  was  the  tutelary  deity  of  the  .gymnasia,
and  his  statue  was  consequently  seen  in  most  of
them.

The  earliest  regulations  which  we  possess  con-
cerning the  gymnasia  are  contJiined  in  the  laws  of
Solon.  One  of  these  laws  forbade  all  adults  to
enter  a  gymnasium  during  the  time  that  boys  were
taking  their  exercises,  and  at  the  festival  of  the
Hennaea.  The  gymnasia  were,  according  to  the
same  law,  not  allowed  to  be  opened  before  sun-
rise, and  were  to  be  shut  at  sunset,  (Aeschin.
c.  Timarch.  p.  38.)  Another  law  of  Solon  ex-
cluded slaves  from  gymnastic  exercises.  (Aeschin,
c,  Timarch.  p.  147  ;  Plut.  Solon,  1  ;  Demosth.  c.
Timocrat.  p.  736.)  Boys,  who  were  children  of
an  Athenian  citizen  and  a  foreign  mother  {v6Qoi).,
were  not  admitted  to  any  other  gj-mnasium  but  the
Cynosarges.  (Plut.  Them.  1.)  Some  of  the  laws
of  Solon  relating  to  the  management  and  the  super-
intendence of  the  gymnasia,  show  that  he  waa
aware  of  the  evil  consequences  which  these  insti-
tutions might  produce,  unless  they  were  regulated


GYMNASIUM.

by  the  strictest  rules.  As  we,  however,  find  that
adults  also  frequented  the  gj-mnasia,  we  must  sup-
pose that,  at  least  as  long  as  the  laws  of  Solon
were  in  force,  the  gj-mnasia  were  divided  into
diiierent  parts  for  persons  of  diflferent  ages,  or  that
persons  of  different  ages  took  their  exercise  at  dif-
ferent times  of  the  day.  (Bockh,  Carp,  hiscript.
n.  246  and  2214.)  The  education  of  boys  up  to
the  age  of  sixteen  was-  divided  into  the  three  parts
mentioned  above,  so  that  gymnastics  formed  only
one  of  them ;  but  during  the  period  from  the
sixteenth  to  the  eighteenth  year  the  instruction
in  grammar  and  music  seems  to  have  ceased,  and
gymnastics  were  exclusively  pursued.  In  the  time
of  Plato  the  salutary  regulations  of  Solon  appear
to  have  been  no  longer  observed,  and  we  find  per-
sons of  all  ages  visiting  the  gymnasia.  (Plat.  De
Rep.  V.  p.  452  ;  Xen.  Sympos.  ii.  18.)  Athens  now
possessed  a  number  of  smaller  gymnasia,  which  are
Bometimes  called  palaestrae,  in  which  persons  of  all
ages  used  to  assemble,  and  in  which  even  the
Hermaea  were  celebrated  by  the  boys,  while  for-
merly this  solemnity  had  been  kept  only  in  the
great  gymnasia,  and  to  the  exclusion  of  all  adults.
(Plat.  Lys.  p.  206.)  These  changes,  and  the  laxi-
tude  in  the  superintendence  of  these  public  places,
caused  the  gymnasia  to  ditTer  very  little  from  the
schools  of  the  athletae  ;  and  it  is  perhaps  partly
owing  to  this  circumstance  that  writers  of  this  and
subsequent  times  use  the  words  gymnasium  and
palaestra  indiscriminately.  (Becker,  CJiar ikies,  vol.
i.  p.  341.)

Married  as  well  as  unmarried  women  were,  at
Athens,  and  in  all  the  Ionian  states,  excluded  from
the  gymnasia  ;  but  at  Sparta,  and  in  some  other
Doric  states,  maidens,  dressed  in  the  short  xiTa;^',
were  not  only  admitted  as  spectators,  but  also  took
part  in  the  exercises  of  the  youths.  Married
women,  however,  did  not  frequent  the  gymnasia.
(Plat.  De  Leg.  vii.  p.  806.)

Respecting  the  superintendence  and  administra-
tion of  the  gymnasia  at  Athens,  we  know  that
Solon  in  his  legislation  thought  them  worthy  of
great  attention  ;  and  the  transgression  of  some  of
his  laws  relating  to  the  gymnasia  was  punished
with  death.  His  laws  mention  a  magistrate,  called
the  Gymnasiarch  {yvfxvaaiapxos  or  yvfxvaaidpxris)
Vvho  was  entrusted  with  the  whole  management
(if  the  gymnasia,  and  with  every  thing  connected
therewith.  His  office  was  one  of  the  regular  litur-
gies like  the  choregia  and  trierachy  (Isacus,  De
JPhilodem.  her.  p.  154),  and  was  attended  with
considerable  expense.  He  had  to  maintain  and
pay  the  persons  who  were  preparing  themselves  for
the  games  and  contests  in  the  public  festivals,  to
provide  them  with  oil,  and  perhaps  with  the
wrestlers'  dust.  It  also  devolved  upon  him  to
adorn  the  gymnasium  or  the  place  where  the  agones
took  place.  (Xcn.  Z)e  Rep.  Allien,  i.  13.)  The
gymnasiarch  was  a  real  magistrate,  and  invested
with  a  kind  of  jurisdiction  over  all  those  who  fre-
quented or  were  connected  with  the  gymnasia  ;
and  his  power  seems  even  to  have  extended  beyond
the  gymnasia,  for  Plutarch  {Amator.  c.  9,  &c.)
states  that  he  watched  and  controlled  the  conduct
of  the  ephebi  in  general.  He  had  also  the  power
to  remove  from  the  gymnasia  teachers,  philosophers,
and  sophists,  whenever  he  conceived  that  they
exorcised  an  injurious  influence  upon  the  young.
(Aeschin.  c.  Timarch.)  Another  part  of  his  duties
was  to  conduct  the  solemn  games  at  certain  great


GYMNASIUM.


681


festivals,  cspeciallj-  the  torch-race  (\afnra'Sr](popia),
for  which  he  selected  the  most  distinguished  among
the  ephebi  of  the  gymnasia.  The  number  of  gym-
nasiarchs  was,  according  to  Libanius  on  Demos-
thenes (c.  Mid.  p.  510)  ten,  one  from  every  tribe.
(Compare  Demosth.  c.  Philip,  p.  50,  c.Boeot.  p.
996  ;  Isaeus,  De  Meiied.  c.  42.)  They  seem  to
have  undertaken  their  official  duties  in  turns,  but
in  what  manner  is  unknown.  Among  the  external
distinctions  of  a  gymnasiarch,  were  a  purple  cloak
and  white  shoes.  (Plut.  Anton.  33.)  In  early
times  the  office  of  gymnasiarch  lasted  for  a  year,
but  under  the  Roman  emperors  we  find  that  some-
times they  held  it  only  for  a  month,  so  that  there
were  12  or  1 3  g^mmasiarchs  in  one  year.  This  office
seems  to  have  been  considered  so  great  an  honour,
that  even  Roman  generals  and  emperors  were  am-
bitious to  hold  it.  Other  Greek  towns,  like  Athens,
had  their  ov*-n  gymnasiarchs,  but  we  do  not  know
whether,  or  to  what  extent  their  duties  differed
from  the  Athenian  gymnasiarchs.  In  Cyrene  the
office  was  sometimes  held  by  women.  (Krause,
Gymnastik  imd  Agonistik  d.  Uellenen,  p.  179,  &c.)

Another  office  which  was  formerly  believed  to
be  connected  with  the  superintendence  of  the  gym-
nasia, is  that  of  Xystarchus  (J^vfXTo.pxo'i).  But  it
is  not  mentioned  previous  to  the  time  of  the  Ro-
man emperors,  and  then  only  in  Italy  and  Crete.
Krause  {Jh.  p.  205,  &c.)  has  shown  that  this  office
had  nothing  to  do  with  the  gymnasia  properly  so
called,  but  was  only  connected  with  the  schools  of
the  athletae.

An  office  which  is  likewise  not  mentioned  before
the  time  of  the  Roman  emperors,  but  was  neverthe-
less decidedly  connected  with  the  gymnasia,  is  that
of  Cosmetes.  He  had  to  an-ange  certain  games,  to
register  the  names  and  keep  the  lists  of  the  ephebi,
and  to  maintain  order  and  discipline  among  them.
He  was  assisted  by  an  Anticosmetes  and  two  Hy-
pocosmet'ie.     (Krause,  lb.  p.  211,  &c.)

An  office  of  very  great  importance,  in  an  educa-
tional point  of  view,  was  that  of  the  Sophronistae
(o-wcppoulaTai).  Their  province  was  to  inspire  the
youths  with  a  love  of  aucppwrvvq,  and  to  protect
this  virtue  against  all  injurious  influences.  In  early
times  their  number  at  Athens  was  ten,  one  from
every  tribe,  with  a  salary  of  one  drachma  per  day.
{Etymol.  Mag.  s.  v.)  Their  duty  not  only  re-
quired them  to  be  present  at  all  the  games  of  the
ephebi,  but  to  watch  and  correct  their  conduct
wherever  they  might  meet  them,  both  within  and
without  the  gymnasium.  At  the  time  of  the  em-
peror Marcus  Aurelius  only  six  Sophronistae,  as-
sisted by  as  many  Hyposophronistae,  are  mentioned,
(Krause,  lb.  p.  214,  &c.)

The  instructions  in  the  gymnasia  were  given  by
the  Gymnastae  {yvjxvaarai)  and  the  Paedotribae
{■Kai'SoTpiiai)  ;  at  a  later  period  Hypopaedotribae
were  added.  The  Paedotribes  was  required  to
possess  a  knowledge  of  all  the  various  exercises
which  were  performed  in  the  gymnasia  ;  the  Gym-
nastes  was  the  practical  teacher,  and  was  expected
to  know  the  physiological  effects  and  influences
on  the  constitution  of  the  youths,  and  therefore
assigned  to  each  of  them  those  exercises  which  he-
thought  most  suitable.  (Galen.  De  Valet,  tuend.  ii.
9.  11  ;  Aristot.  PoUt.  viii.  3.  2.)  These  teachers
were  usually  athletae,  who  had  left  their  profes-
sion, or  could  not  succeed  in  it.  (Aelian,  V.  H.  iu
6  ;  Galen,  I.  c.  ii.  3,  &c.)

The  anointing  of  the  bodies  of  the  youths,  and
rp  3


582


GYMNASIUM.


strewing  them  with  dust,  before  they  commenced
their  exercises,  as  well  as  the  regulation  of  their
diet,  was  the  duty  of  the  aliptae.  [Aliptae.]
These  men  sometimes  also  acted  as  surgeons  or
teachers.  (Plut.  Dion.  c.  1.)  Galen  {I.  c.  ii.  11)
mentions  among  the  gymnastic  teachers,  a  ffcpai-
pi(TriK6s,  or  teacher  of  the  various  games  at  ball  ;
and  it  is  not  improbable  that  in  some  cases  parti-
cular games  may  have  been  taught  by  separate
persons.

The  games  and  exercises  which  were  performed
in  the  gymnasia  seem,  on  the  whole,  to  have  been
the  same  throughout  Greece.  Among  the  Dorians,
however,  they  were  regarded  chiefly  as  institutions
for  hardening  the  body  and  for  military  training  ;
among  the  lonians,  and  especially  the  Athenians,
they  had  an  additional  and  higher  object,  namely,
to  give  to  the  body  and  its  movements  grace  and
beauty,  and  to  make  it  the  basis  of  a  healthy  and
sound'  mind.  But  among  all  the  different  tribes  of
the  Greeks  the  exercises  which  were  carried  on  in
a  Greek  gymnasium  were  either  mere  games,  or
the  more  important  exercises  which  the  gymnasia
had  in  common  with  the  public  agones  in  the  great
festivals.

Among  the  former  we  may  mention,  I .  The  ball
((r(f)aipi(ns,  crcpaipofxaxLa,  Sec),  which  was  in  imi-
versal  favour  with  the  Greeks,  and  was  here,  as  at
Rome,  played  in  a  variety  ofwaj's,  as  appears  from
the  words  d7roppa|is,  iiriaKvoos,  (paivipSa  or  apiracr-
t6u,  &.C.  (Plat.  De  Legg.  vii,  p.  797  ;  compare
Gronov.  ad  Plant.  Cured,  ii.  3.  17,  and  Becker,
Callus,  i.  p.  270.)  Every  gymnasium  contained
one  large  room  for  the  purpose  of  playing  at  ball  in
it  (<T<paipiaT'f}piou).  2.  riai^eii/  eA.KU(rTiV5a,  SteA-
Kua-TivSa,  or  Sia  ypafiiJLrjs,  was  a  game  in  which  one
boy,  holding  one  end  of  a  rope,  tried  to  pull  the
boy  who  held  its  other  end,  across  a  line  marked
between  them  on  the  ground.  3.  The  top  {P4fj.§T}^,
i8e/xo(|,  pofiSos,  a-TpoSiXos),  which  was  as  common
an  amusement  with  Greek  boys  as  in  our  own
days.  4.  The  ir^vTaKidos,  which  was  a  game  with  five
stones,  which  were  thrown  up  from  the  upper  part
of  the  hand  and  caught  in  the  palm.  5.  2/f07rep5a,
which  was  a  game  in  which  a  rope  was  drawn
through  the  upper  part  of  a  tree  or  a  post.  Two
boys,  one  on  each  side  of  the  post,  turning  their
backs  towards  one  another,  took  hold  of  the  ends
of  the  rope  and  tried  to  pull  each  other  up.  This
sport  was  also  one  of  the  amusements  at  the  Attic
Dionysia,  (Hesych.  s.  i\)  These  few  games  will
suffice  to  show  the  chai'acter  of  the  gymnastic
sports.

The  more  important  games,  such  as  running
(SpJ/ios),  throwing  of  the  5tcr/cos  and  the  aKwu,
jumping  and  leaping  (a\/ia,  with  and  without
aATTjpes),  wrestling  (TraAr?),  boxing  (Trvy/XTj),  the
pancratium  (irayKpaTiou),  Treuradkos,  Ka/JLTraSricpo-
pia,  dancing  {opxn(Tis),  &c.,  are  described  in  sepa-
rate articles.

A  gymnasium  was,  as  Vitruvius  observes,  not  a
Roman  institution,  and  Dionj'sius  of  Halicarnassus
{Ant.  Rom.  vii.  70 — 72 ),  expressly  states  that  the
whole  ayuvicrriK-fi  of  the  Romans,  though  it  was
practised  at  an  early  period  in  the  Ludi  Maximi,
was  introduced  among  the  Romans  from  Greece.
Their  attention,  however,  to  developing  and
strengthening  the  body  by  exercises  was  consider-
able, though  only  for  military  purposes.  The  re-
gidar  training  of  boys  in  the  Greek  gymnastics  was
foreign  to  Roman  manners,  and  even  held  in  con-


GYMNASIUM.

tempt.  (Plut.  Quaest.  Rom.  40.)  Towards  the  end
of  the  republic  many  wealthy  Romans,  .who  had
acquired  a  taste  for  Greek  mamiers,  used  to  attach
to  their  villas  small  places  for  bodily  exercise,
sometimes  called  gymnasia,  sometimes  palaestrae,
and  to  adorn  them  with  beautiful  works  of  art.
(Cic.  ad  Alt.  i.  4,  c.  Verr.  iii.  5.)  The  emperor
Nero  was  the  first  who  built  a  public  gymnasium
at  Rome  (Sueton.  Ner.  12)  ;  another  was  erected  by
Commodus.  (Herod.  1.12.4.)  But  although  these
institutions  were  intended  to  introduce  Greek
gymnastics  among  the  Romans,  yet  they  never
gained  any  great  importance,  as  the  magnificent
thermae,  amphitheatres,  and  other  colossal  build-
ings had  always  greater  charms  for  the  Romans
than  the  gymnasia.

For  a  fuller  account  of  this  important  subject,
which  has  been  necessarily  treated  with  brevity  in
tliis  article,  the  reader  is  referred  to  Hieronymus
Mercurialis,  De  Arte  Cymnastica,  Libri  vi.  1st  ed.
Venice,  1573,  4th  ibid.  1601  ;  Burette,  Histoire
des  Athletes,  in  the  Mem.  de  PA  cad.  dcs  Inscript.
i.  3  ;  G.  Lobker,  Die  Cymnastik  der  Hellenen,  Mun-
ster,  1835  ;  Wachsmuth,  Hellen.  Alterth.  vol.  ii.
p.  344,  &c.  2d.  edit.  ;  Muller,  Dor.  iv.  5.  §  4,  &c. ;
Becker,  Callus,  vol.  i.  p.  270,  kc. ;  Charikles,  vol.  i.
pp.  309 — 345  ;  and  especially  J.  H.  Krause,  Die
Cymnastik  und  Aqonistik  der  Hellenen,  Leipzig,
1841  ;  Olympia,  Wien,  1838  ;  Die  Pythien,  Ne-
meen  &c.,  Leipzig,  1841.  The  histories  of  edu-
cation among  the  ancients,  such  as  those  of  Hoch-
heimer,  Schwarz,  Cramer,  and  others,  likewise  con-
tain much  useful  information  on  the  subject.   [L.  S.]

TJie  Relation  of  Cymnastics  to  the  Medical  Art.  — ■
The  games  of  the  Greeks  had  an  immediate  influ-
ence upon  the  art  of  healing,  because  they  consi-
dered gymnastics  to  be  almost  as  necessary  for  the
preservation  of  health,  as  medicine  is  for  the  cure
of  diseases.  (Hippocrates,  De  Locis  in  Homine,  vol.
ii.  p.  1 38,  ed.  Kiihn  ;  Timaeus  Locrensis,  De  Anima
Mundi,  p.  564,  in  Cale''s  Opusc.  Mythol.)  It  was
for  this  reason  that  the  gymnasia  were  dedicated
to  Apollo,  the  god  of  physicians.  (Plut.  Symp.  viii.
4.  §  4.)  The  directors  of  these  establishments,  as
well  as  the  persons  employed  under  their  orders,
the  bathers  or  aliptae,  passed  for  physicians,  and
were  called  so,  on  account  of  the  skill  which  long
experience  had  given  them.  The  directors,  called
Tra\aiaTpofv\aK€s,  regulated  the  diet  of  the
young  men  brought  up  in  the  gymnasia  ;  the
sub-directors  or  Cymnastae,  prescribed  for  their
diseases  (Plat,  de  Leg.  xi.  p.  91 6)  ;  and  the  inferiors
or  bathers,  aliptae,  iatraliptae,  practised  blood-
letting, administered  clysters,  and  dressed  wounds,
ulcers,  and  fractures.  (Plat.  De  Leg.  iv.  p.  720  ;
Celsus,  de  Medic,  i.  1  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxix.  2.)
Two  of  these  directors,  Iccus,  of  Tarentum,  and
Herodicus,  of  Selymbria,  a  town  of  Thrace,  de-
serve particular  notice  for  having  contributed  to
unite  more  closely  medicine  and  gymnastics.  Iccus,
who  appears  to  have  lived  before  Herodicus  {Olymp.
Ixxvii.  Stephan.  Byzant.  s.  v.  Tapds,  p.  693  ;  com-
pare Paus.  vi.  10.  §  2),  gave  his  chief  attention
to  correcting  the  diet  of  the  wrestlers,  and  to  ac-
customing them  to  greater  moderation  and  abstemi-
ousness, of  which  virtues  he  was  hunself  a  perfect
model.  (Plat,  de  Leg.  viii.  p.  840  ;  Aelian,  Far.
Hist.  xi.  3  ;  Id.  Hist.  Animal,  vi.  1.)  Plato  con-
siders him,  as  well  as  Herodicus,  to  have  been  one
of  the  inventors  of  medical  gymnastics.  (Plat.
[  Protagor.  §  20.  p.  316  ;  Lucian,  De  Conscrib.  Hist,


GYMNASIUM.

§  3.1  p.  626.)    Herodicus,  who  is  sometimes  called
Prodi('UR  (Plin.   H.  N.  xxix.  2),  lived  at  Athens
a  short  time  before  the  Peloponnesian  war,     Plato
says   that   he    was    not    only    a    sophist     (Plat.
Proiag.  l.  c),  but  also  a  master  of  the  gymnasium
(Id.  Rep.  iii.  p.  406),  and  physician    (Id.  Gorg.
§  2.  p.  448),  and  in  fact  he    united    in  his   own
person  these   three  qualities.     He    was   troubled,
says   the  same  author,  with   very    weak    health,
and   tried  if  gymnastic  exercises  would  not  help
to   improve  it  ;   and   having   perfectly  succeeded,
he    imparted    his  method  to  others.     Before  him
medical  dietetics  had  been  entirely  neglected,  espe-
cially by  the  Asclepiadae.     (Id.  Rep.\\\.  p.  406.)
If   Plato's    account   may  be   taken  literally  (Id.
Phaedr.  p.  228),  he  m.uch  abused  the  exercise  of
gymnastics,  as    he  recommended    his   patients  to
w-alk  from   Athens  to    Megara  and  to  return  as
Boon  as  they  had  reached  the  walls  of  the  latter
town,*     The  author  of  the  sixth  book  De  Morb.
Vulgar.     (Hippocr.    Epidem.    vi.     c.    3.    vol.    iii.
p.  599)  agrees  with   Plato  :     ''  Herodicus,"  says
he,  '^  caused  people,  attacked  with  fever,    to  die
from  walking  and  too   hard   exercise,  and  many
of  his  patients  suffered  much  from  dry  rubbing."
A  short  time  after  we  find,  says  Fuller  {Medi-
etna  Gymnastica,  &c.  Lond.  1718,  8vo),  that  Hip-
pocrates   {De  Vict.  Rat.  iii.  vol,  i,  p,  716),    with
some  sort  of  glory,   assumes  to  himself  the   ho-
nour of  bringing  that  method  to  a  perfection,  so
as  to    be   able  to  distinguish    -rrdrepov  rh    cnriov
Kpurdet    Tovs    irovovs,    t)     ol    ttouol    to.    airia,  r)
lJ.€Tpiws    ex^i    •"■p^s   ^A\7]Aa,  as    he    expresses  it.
Pursuant  to  this,  we  find  him  in  several  places  of
his  works  recommending  several  sorts  of  exercises
upon  proper  occasions  ;  as  first,  friction  or  chafing,
the  effects  of  which  he  explains  (De  Vict.  Rat.  ii.
p.  701),  and  tells  us,  that  in  some  cases  it  will
bring  down  the  bloatedness  of  the  solid  parts,  in
others   it   will   incarn  and   cause  an   increase   of
flesh,   and   make   the   part   thrive.       He   advises
(ifnd.  p.  700)    walking,   of  which  they  had  two
sorts,  their  round  and  straight  courses.     He  gives
his  opinion  (ilnd.  p.  701)  of  the  'kvaKivi]fj.aTa.,  or
preparatory  exercises,  which  served  to  warm  and
fit  the  wrestlers  for  the  more  vehement  ones.     In
some  cases  he  advises  the  riaAi^,  or  common  wrest-
ling {ibid.),  and  the  'AKpox^^pia,  or  wrestling  by  the
hands    only,  without  coming  close,  and  also  the>
KwpvKoixax'ia,  or  the  exercise  of  the  Corycus,  or
the  hanging  ball  (see  Antyllus,  apud  Mercur.  de
Arte  Gymn,  p.  123)  ;  the  Xnpovoixia.,  a  sort  of  dex-
terous and  regular  motion  of  the  hands,  and  upper
parts  of  the  body,  something  after  a  military  man-
ner ;  the  'AXivStjo-js,  or  rolling  in  sand  ;  and  once
{ibid.  p.  700)    we  find   mentioned,  with  some  ap-
probation, the  "H-rreipoi  "linroi,  Equi  Tndefinitiy  by
which  is  probably  meant  galloping  long  courses  in
the  open  field.

As  for  Galen,  he  follows  Hippocrates  in  this,  as
closely  as  in  other  things,  and  declares  his  opinion
of  the  benefit  of  exercises  in  several  places  ;  his
second  hook  "  De  Sanitate  Tuenda,"  is  wholly
upon  the  use  of  the  strigil,  or  the  advantage  of


GYMNASIUM.


583


*  "  The  distance  from  Athens  to  Megara  was  210
j  stadia,  as  we  learn  from  Procopius.  {Bell.  Vand.
I  i.  1.)     Dion  Chrj'sostom  calls  it  a  day's  journey.

{Orat.  vi.)  Modern  travellers  reckon  eight  hours.

(Dodwell,   Class.  Tbwr,  vol.  ii.  p.  177.)"    Cramer,

Anr..  Greece^  vol.  ii.  sect.  13,  p.  430.


regular  chafing:  he  lias  written  a  little  tract,
riepi  ToD  5ta  MiKpas  'S.^aipas  rvfxvaaiov^  where-
in he  recommends  an  exercise,  by  which  the
body  and  mind  are  both  at  the  same  time
affected.  In  his  discourse  to  Thrasybuhis,  U6-
Tcpov  'larpiKTis  ^  TvjxvacTTiKris  ecrrt  rh  ''fyuivdv^
he  inveighs  against  the  athletic  and  other  violent
practices  of  the  gymnasium,  but  approves  of  the
more  moderate  exercises,  as  subservient  to  the
ends  of  a  physician,  and  consequently  part  of  that
art.  The  other  Greek  writers  express  a  similar
opinion  ;  and  the  sense  of  most  of  them  in  this
matter  is  collected  in  Oribasius's  "  CoUecta  Medi-
cinalia."  In  those  remains  which  are  preserved
of  the  writings  of  Antyllus,  we  read  of  some  sorts
of  exercises  that  are  not  mentioned  by  Galen  or
any  former  author  ;  among  the  rest  the  Cricilasia
as  the  translators  by  mistake  call  it,  instead  of
Cnco'dasia.  This,  as  it  had  for  many  ages  been
disused,  Mercurialis  himself,  who  had  made  the
most  judicious  inquiries  into  this  subject  {De  Aiie
Gymnastica,  4to.  Amstel.  1 672),  does  not  pretend
to  explain  ;  and  1  believe,  says  Freind  {Hist,  of
Physic,  vol.  L),  though  we  have  the  description  of
it  set  down  in  Oribasius  {Coll.  Medic,  vi.  26),  it
will  be  hard  to  form  any  idea  of  what  it  was.

The  ancient  physicians  relied  much  on  exercise
in  the  cure  of  the  dropsy  (compare  Hor.  Epist.  i.
2.  34.  "  Si  noles  sanus,  curres  hydropicus "),
whereas  we  almost  totally  neglect  it.  (Alexander
Trallianus,  De  Medic,  ix.  3.  p.  524,  ed.  Basil.)
Hippocrates  {De  Internis  Affection,  sect.  28.  vol.
ii.  p.  518)  prescribes  for  one  that  has  a  dropsy
TaXaiTTiopiai,  or  fatiguivg-exercises,  and  he  makes
use  of  the  same  woi'd  in  his  Epidemics,  and  almost
always  when  he  speaks  of  the  regimen  of  a  dropsi-
cal person,  implying,  that  though  it  be  a  labour
for  such  people  to  move,  yet  they  must  undergo
it  ;  and  this  is  so  much  the  sense  of  Hippocrates,
that  Spon  has  collected  it  into  one  of  the  new  Apho-
risms, which  he  has  drawn  out  of  his  works.  Celsus
says  of  this  case  {De  Medic,  iii.  21.  p.  152,  ed.  Ar-
gent.), "  Concutiendum  multa  gestatione  corpus  est."
The  Romans  placed  great  reliance  upon  exercise
for  the  cure  of  diseases  ;  and  Asdepiades,  who
lived  in  the  time  of  Pompey  the  Great,  brought
this  mode  of  treatment  into  great  request.  He
called  exercises  the  common  aids  of  physic,  and
wrote  a  treatise  on  the  subject,  which  is  mentioned
by  Celsus  in  his  chapter  "  De  Frictione  "  {De
Medic,  ii.  1 4.  p.  82),  but  the  book  is  lost.  He  carried
these  notions  so  far,  that  he  invented  the  Lecti
Pensiles  (Plin.  //.  A^.  xxvi.  8)  or  hanging  beds,
that  the  sick  might  be  rocked  to  sleep  ;  which  took
so  much  at  that  time,  that  they  came  afterwards  to  be
made  of  silver,  and  were  a  great  part  of  the  luxury
of  that  people  ;  he  had  so  many  particular  ways  to
make  physic  agreeable,  and  was  so  exquisite  in  the
invention  of  exercises  to  supply  the  place  of  medi-
cine, that  perhaps  no  man  in  any  age  ever  had  the
happiness  to  obtain  so  general  an  applause  ;  and
Pliny  says  {ibid.  c.  7  )  by  these  means  he  made  him-
self the  delight  of  mankind.  About  this  time  the  Ro-
man physicians  sent  their  consumptive  patients  to
Alexandria,  and  with  very  good  success,  as  we  find
by  both  the  Plinys  ;  this  was  done  partly  for  the
change  of  air,  but  chiefly  for  the  sake  of  the  exer-
cise by  the  motion  of  the  ship  ;  and  therefore  Celsus
says  {De  Medic,  iii.  22.  p.  156),  "  Si  vera  Phthisis
est,  opus  est  longa  navigatione  ;"  and  a  little  after
he  makes  Vehiculum  and  Navis  to  be  two  of  the
p  p  4


684


GYMNOPAEDIA.


chief  remedies.  As  for  the  other  more  common
exercises,  they  were  daily  practised,  as  is  manifest
from  Celsus,  Caelius  Aurelianus,  Theodorus  Prisci-
anus,  and  the  rest  of  the  Latin  physicians.  And  we
do  not  want  mstances  of  cures  wrought  by  these
means.  Suetonius  {Calig.  c.  3)  tells  us  that  Ger-
manicus  was  cured  of  a  "  crurum  gracilitas,"  as  he
expresses  it  (by  which  he  probably  means  aw  yl^ro-
p%),  by  riding  ;  and  Plutarch,  in  his  life  of  Cicero,
gives  us  an  account  of  his  weakness,  and  that  he  re-
covered his  health  by  travelling,  and  excessive  dili-
gence in  rubbing  and  chafing  his  body.  (Compare
Cic.  Brtd.  c.  91.)  Pliny  {H.  N.  xxxi.  33)  tells
us  Annaeus  Gallio,  who  had  been  consul,  was  cured
of  a  consumption  by  a  sea  voyage  ;  and  Galen  gives
us  such  accounts  of  the  good  effects  of  particular
exercises,  and  they  were  practised  so  universally
by  all  classes,  that  it  cannot  be  supposed  but  they
must  have  been  able  to  produce  great  and  good
effects.  However,  from  an  attentive  perusal  of
what  we  find  on  this  subject  in  the  classical  au-
thors, the  reader  can  hardly  fail  of  being  convinced
that  the  ancients  esteemed  gymnastics  too  highly,
just  as  the  moderns  too  much  neglect  them  ;  and
that  in  this,  as  in  many  other  matters,  both  in
medicine  and  philosophy,  truth  lies  between  the
two  extremes,  [W.  A.  G.]

GYMNASTES.  [Gymnasium,  p.  581,  b.]
GYMNE'SIIor  GYMNE'TES  {yviivhaLoi^ox
jvjxvriT^s\  were  a  class  of  bond-slaves  at  Argos,
who  may  be  compared  with  the  Helots  at  Sparta.
(Steph.  Byz.  s.  v.  Xios :  Pollux,  iii.  83.)  Their
name  shows  that  they  attended  their  masters  on
military  service  in  the  capacity  of  light-armed
troops.  Muller  (Dor.  iii.  4,  §  2)  remarks  that  it
is  to  these  gymnesii  that  the  account  of  Herodotus
(vi.  83)  refers,  that  6000  of  the  citixens  of  Argos
having  been  slain  in  battle  by  Cleomenes,  king  of
Sparta  (Id.  vii.  148),  the  slaves  got  the  govern-
ment into  their  own  hands,  and  retained  possession
of  it  until  the  sons  of  those  who  had  fallen  had
grown  to  manhood.  Afterwards,  when  the  young
citizens  had  grown  up,  the  slaves  were  compelled
by  them  to  retire  to  Tiryns,  and  then  after  a  long
Avar,  as  it  appears,  were  either  driven  from  the
territory,  or  again  subdued.

GYMNOPAE'DIA  (yvfivoiraiSia),  the  festi-
val of  "  naked  youths,"  was  celebrated  at  Sparta
every  year  in  honour  of  Apollo  Pythaeus,  Artemis,
and  Leto,  The  statues  of  these  deities  stood  in  a
part  of  the  Agora  called  x^P^^s,  and  it  was  around
these  statues  that,  at  the  gymnopaedia.  Spartan
youths  performed  their  choruses  and  dances  in
honour  of  Apollo.  (Paus.  iii.  11.  §  7.)  The  festival
lasted  for  several,  perhaps  for  ten,  days,  and  on
the  last  day  men  also  performed  choruses  and
dances  in  the  theatre  ;  and  during  these  gymnastic
exhibitions  they  sang  the  songs  of  Thaletas  and
Alcmfin,  and  the  paeans  of  Dionysodotus.  The
leader  of  the  chorus  (irpoa-TdTTjs  or  x^Pottozc^s)
wore  a  kindofchaplet,  called  <TT€(pat/oi  ^vpeariKol,
in  commemoration  of  the  victory  of  the  Spartans
at  Thyrea.  This  event  seems  to  have  been  closely
connected  with  the  gymnopaedia,  for  those  Spartans
who  had  fallen  on  that  occasion  were  always
praised  in  songs  at  this  festival.  (Athcn.  xv.
p.  678  ;  Plut.  Affesil.  29  ;  Xen.  Hellen.  vi.  4.  §  1 6  ;
Hesych.  Suid.  Etym.  Mag.  and  Timaeus,  Glossar.
s.  V.  Tvfj.voTrai5ia.)  The  boys  in  their  dances  per-
fonned  such  rhythmical  movements  as  resembled
the  exercises  of  the  palaestra  and  the  pancration,


GYNAECONOMI.

and  also  imitated  the  wild  gestures  of  the  worship  of
Dionysus.  (Athen.xiv.  p.  631.)  Muller  {Hid.ofGr.
Lit.  vol.  i.  p.  161)  supposes,  with  great  probability,
that  the  dances  of  the  gymnopaedia  partly  consist-
ed of  mimic  representations,  as  the  establishment
of  the  dances  and  musical  entertainments  at  this
festival  was  ascribed  to  the  musicians,  at  the  head
of  whom  was  Thaletas.  (Plut.  de  Mas.  c.  9.)  The
whole  season  of  the  gymnopaedia,  during  which
Sparta  was  visited  by  great  numbers  of  strangers,
was  one  of  great  merriment  and  rejoicings  (Xen.
Memor.  i.  2.  §  61  ;  Plut.  Agesil.  25  ;  Pollux,  iv.
14.  104),  and  old  bachelors  alone  seem  to  have
been  excluded  from  the  festivities.  (Osann,  de
Coelibum  apud  Veteres  Populos  Conditione  Com-
mentat.  p.  7,  &c.)  The  introduction  of  the  gymno-
paedia, which  subsequently  became  of  such  import-
ance as  an  institution  for  gymnastic  and  orchestic
performances,  and  for  the  cultivation  of  the  poetic
and  musical  arts  at  Sparta,  is  generally  assigned  to
the  year  QQo  b.  c.  (Compare  Meursius,  OrcJiestra,
p.  1 2,  &c.  ;  Creuzer,  Commentat.  Herod,  i.  p.  230  ;
Muller,  Dor.  vol.  ii.  p.  350,  &c.)  [L.  S.]

GYNAECONI'TIS.  [Domus,  pp.  423—
425.]

GYNAECO'NOMI  or  GYNAECOCOSMI
(yvuaiKovSfxoi  or  yvvaiKOK6crijLoi\  were  magistrates
at  Athens,  who  superintended  the  conduct  of  Athe-
nian women,  (Pollux,  viii.  112.)  We  know  little
of  the  duties  of  these  officers,  and  even  the  time
when  they  were  instituted  is  not  quite  certain.
Bockh  (de  Philoch.  p,  24)  has  endeavoured  to
show  that  they  did  not  exist  until  the  time  of  De-
metrius Phalereus,  whereas,  according  to  others,
they  were  instituted  by  Solon,  whose  regulations
concerning  the  female  sex  certainly  rendered  some
special  officers  necessary  for  their  maintenance.
(Plut.  Sol.  21  ;  comp.  Thirl  wall.  Hist,  of  Greece,
vol.  ii.  p.  51.)  Their  name  is  also  mentioned  by
Aristotle  (Pol.  iv.  12.  p.  144,  and  vi.  5.  p.  214.
ed.  Gottling)  as  something  which  he  supposes
to  be  well  known  to  his  readers.  These  circum-
stances induce  us  to  think  that  the  yvyaiKoi/Sfxoi,
as  the  superintendents  of  the  conduct  of  women,
existed  ever  since  the  time  of  Solon,  but  that  their
power  was  afterwards  extended  in  such  a  manner
that  they  became  a  kind  of  police  for  the  purpose
of  preventing  any  excesses  or  indecencies,  whether
committed  by  men  or  by  women.  ( See  the  Fragm.
of  Timocles  and  Menander,  ap.  Athen.  vi,  p,  245,
where  a  Kaiuhs  v6fios  is  mentioned  as  the  source
from  which  they  derived  their  increased  power  ;
compare  Plut.  Sol.  21.  in  fin.)  In  their  first  and
original  capacity,  therefore,  they  had  to  see  that
the  regulations  concerning  the  conduct  of  Athe-
nian women  were  observed,  and  to  punish  any
transgressions  of  them  (Harpocrat.  s.  v." On  xtA^as  :
Hesych.  s.  v.  TlXdravos)  ;  in  the  latter  capacity
they  seem  to  have  acted  as  ministers  of  the  areo-
pagus,  and  as  such  had  to  take  care  that  decency
and  moderation  Avere  observed  in  private  as  well
as  in  public.  Hence  they  superintended  even  the
meetings  of  friends  in  their  private  houses,  e.  g.  at
weddings,  and  on  other  festive  occasions.  (Philoch.
ap.  At/ien.  vi.  p.  245.)  Meetings  of  this  kind  were
not  allowed  to  consist  of  more  than  thirty  persons,
and  the  yvvaiKou6fioi  had  the  right  to  enter  any
house  and  send  away  all  the  guests  above  that
number  ;  and  that  they  might  be  able,  previous  to
entering  a  house,  to  form  an  estimate  of  the  num-
ber of  persons  assembled  in  it,  the  cooks  who  were


I


HALTERES.

engaged  for  the  occasion  had  to  give  in  tlieir  names
to  the  yvvaiKovSjxoi.  (Athen.  /.  c.)  They  had
also  to  punish  those  men  who  showed  their  effe-
minate character  by  frantic  or  immoderate  wailing
at  their  own  or  other  persons'  misfortunes.  (Plut.
/.  c.)  The  number  of  these  officers  is  unknown.
Meier  {AtL  Froc.  p.  97)  thinks  that  they  were
appointed  by  lot ;  but  Hermann  {Polit.  Ant.
%  150.  n.  5),  referring  to  Menander  {Rhet.  de
Encom.  p.  105,  ed.  Heeren.),  reckons  them  among
those  officers  who  were  elected.  [L.  S.]


H.


HABE'NAE  0]via)  were,  generally  speaking,
leathern  thongs,  by  means  of  which  things  Avere
held  and  managed.  Hence  the  word  was  in  par-
ticular applied — 1.  To  the  reins  by  means  of  which
horses  were  guided  and  managed.  (Virg.  Ac7i.  x.
576,  xi.  670,  765,  xii.  327.)  The  habenae  were,
as  with  us,  fixed  to  the  bit  or  bridle  {froienwii).
2.  To  the  thongs  attached  to  a  lance,  by  which  it
Aras  held  and  wielded.  (Lucan.  vi.  221.)  [Com-
pare Hasta,  p.  558,  a.]  3.  To  the  thong  which  was
formed  into  a  sling,  by  means  of  which  stones  were
thrown.  (Lucan.  iii.  710  ;  Valer.  Place,  v.  609.)
[FuNDA.]  4.  To  thongs  by  means  of  which  the
sandals  were  fiistened  to  the  feet.  (Gellius,  xiii.
21.  4.)  From  this  passage  it  is  also  clear  that  the
habenae  in  this  case  were  not  always  made  of
leather,  but  of  strings  or  chords,  whence  Gellius
calls  them  icretes  habenae.  5.  To  the  thongs  formed
into  a  scourge  with  which  young  slaves  were  chas-
tised, (Horat.  Epist.  iu  2.  15.)  The  commenta-
tors on  this  passage,  indeed,  differ  about  the  meaning
of  habenae  ;  but  if  we  consider  the  expressions  of
Ulpian  (Dig.  29.  tit.  5.  s.  33),  impuberes  sei-vi
terreri  tanlum  sole7it,  et  liabena  vel  ferula  caedi,  it  is
clear  that  the  habena  is  the  scourge  itself.  (Comp.
Ov.  Heroid.  ix.  81  ;  Virg.  Ae}i.  vii.  380.)   [L.  S.]

HABITA'TIO.     [Servitutes.]

HAERES.^    [Heres.]

HALT  A  (aAi'a).     [Agora.]

HALMA  {aXfia).     [Pentathlon.]

HALO'A  (aXwt),     [Aloa.]

HALTE'RES  (aXryipes)  were  certain  masses
of  stone  or  metal,  which  were  used  in  the  gymnastic


exercises  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans.  Persons
"who  practised  leaping  often  performed  their  exer-
cises with  halteres  in  both  hands  ;  but  they  were
^Iso  frequently  used  merely  to  exercise  the  body


HARM  AM  AX  A.  585

in  somewhat  the  same  manner  as  our  dumb-bells.
(Martial,  xiv.  49,  vii.  67.  6  ;  Pollux,  iii.  155,  x.
64  ;  graves  massae,  Juv.  vii.  421  ;  Senec.  Ep.  15,
56.)  Pausanias  (v.  26.  §  3,  v.  27.  §  8,  vi.  3.  §  4)
speaks  of  certain  statues  of  athletes  who  were  re-
presented with  halteres.  They  appear  to  have
been  made  of  various  fonns  and  sizes.  The  pre-
ceding woodcut  is  taken  from  Tassie,  Catalogue,
&c.  pi.  46,  No.  7978.  (Mercurialis,  De  Arte
Gpimastica,  ii.  12  ;  Becker,  Gallus^  vol.  i.  p.  277  ;
Krause,  Z>2e  Gymnastik  und  Agonisiik  der  Hellene?/,
vol.  i.  p.  395.)

HAMAXA  (Sjuala).  [Harmamaxa  ;  Plaus-

TRUM.J

HAMAXO'PODES  (aMo^JSes),  in  Latin,
ARBUSCULAE,  appear  to  have  been  cylindrical
pieces  of  wood,  placed  vertically,  and  with  a  socket
cut  in  the  lower  end,  to  receive  the  upright  pivot
fixed  above  a  wheel  or  above  the  middle  of  the
axis  of  a  pair  of  wheels,  which  could  thus  turn
horizontally  in  every  direction.  One  use  of  this
sort  of  socket  was  to  unite  the  axis  of  the  fore-
wheels  of  a  chariot  to  the  body  (Pollux,  i.  144,
253  ;  Hesych.  s.  v.  ajua|i7ro5es)  ;  another  use  of  it
was  to  attach  the  wheels  of  a  testudo  to  the  framing
in  such  a  manner,  that  the  machine  might  easily
be  moved  in  any  direction  :  in  fact,  the  arbuscula
and  the  wheel  together  formed  a  castor  or  universal
joint.  (Vitruv.  x.  20.  s.  14.  §  1,  ed.  Schneid.)
Newton  {ad  loc.)  supposes  that,  for  the  latter  pur-
pose, a  single  piece  of  timber  would  be  both  clumsy
and  insufficient,  and  that  the  arbuscula  must  have
been  a  sort  of  framing.  (See  liis  figure.  No.
114.)  ^  [P.S.]

HARMA  (apfia).    [Currus  ;  Harmamaxa.]

HARMAMAXA  (apfxa/xa^a)  is  evidently  com-
pounded of  apfjLa,  a  general  term,  including  not
only  the  Latin  Currus,  but  other  descriptions  of
carriages  for  persons  ;  and  a;ua|a,  which  meant  a
cart,  having  commonly  four  wheels,  and  used  to
carry  loads  or  burthens  as  well  as  persons.  (Hes.
Op.  et  Dies,  692  ;  Hom.  //.  vii.  426,  xxiv.  782.)
The  harmamaxa  was  a  carriage  for  persons,  in  its
construction  very  similar  to  the  Carpentum,  being
covered  overhead  and  inclosed  with  curtains  (Diod.
xi.  5Q;  Charito,  v.  2,  3),  so  as  to  be  used  at  night
as  well  as  by  day  (Xen.  Cyrop.  iv.  2.  §  15)  ;  but
it  was  in  general  larger,  often  drawn  by  four  horses,
or  other  suitable  quadrupeds,  and  attired  with
omaments  more  splendid,  luxurious,  and  expen-
sive, and  in  the  Oriental  style.  (Diod.  xvii.  35  ;
Aristoph.  A  char.  70.)  It  occupied  among  the
Persians  (Max.  Tyr.  34)  the  same  place  which  the
carpentum  did  among  the  Romans,  being  used,
especially  upon  state  occasions,  for  the  conveyance
of  women  and  children,  of  eunuchs,  and  of  the  sons
of  the  king  with  their  tutors.  (Herod,  vii.  83,  ix.
76 ;  Xen.  Cyrop.  iii.  1.  §  8,  iv.  3.  §  1,  vi.  4.  §  11;
Q.  Curt.  iii.  3.  §  23. )  Also,  as  persons  might  lie
in  it  at  length,  and  it  was  made  as  commodious  as
possible,  it  was  used  by  the  kings  of  Persia,  and
by  men  of  high  rank  in  travelling  by  night,  or  in
any  other  circumstances  when  they  wished  to  con-
sult their  ease  and  their  pleasure.  (Herod,  vii.  41  ;
Xen.  Cyrop.  iii.  1.  §  40.)

The  body  of  Alexander  the  Great  was  trans-
ported from  Babylon  to  Alexandria  in  a  magnifi-
cent harmamaxa,  the  construction  of  which  occupied
two  years,  and  the  description  of  which,  with  its
paintings  and  ornaments  in  gold,  silver,  and  ivory,
employed  the  pen  of  more  than  one   historian.


586


HARPAGINETULI.


(Diod.  xviii.  26—28  ;  Athen.  v.  p.  206,  e  ;  Aelian,
V.  IL  xii.  64.)

The  harmaraaxa  was  occasionally  used  by  the
ladies  of  Greece.  A  priestess  of  Diana  is  repre-
sented as  riding  in  one  which  is  drawn  by  two
white  cows  (HeViod.  Aeth.  iii,  p.  133,  ed.  Com-
melini),  and  the  coins  of  Ephesus  show,  that  this
carriage,  probably  containing  also  symbols  of  the
attributes  and  worship  of  Diana,  added  to  the
splendour  of  the  religious  processions  in  that
city.  [J.  Y.]

HARMOSTAE  (from  ap^SCo},  to  fit  or  join  to-
gether) was  the  name  of  the  governors  whom  the
Lacedaemonians,  after  the  Peloponnesian  war,  sent
into  their  subject  or  conquered  towns,  partly  to
keep  them  in  submission,  and  partly  to  abolish  the
democratical  form  of  government,  and  establish  in
its  stead  one  similar  to  their  own,  (Diod.  Sic.
xiv,  10  ;  Xen.  Hellen.  iv.  2.  §  5  ;  Isocrat.  Paneg.
p.  92  ;  Suidas,  Hesych.  s,  v. ;  Etymol.  Mag.  s.  v.
^EiriffTaO/xoi.)  Although  in  many  cases  they  were
ostensibly  sent  for  the  purpose  of  abolishing  the
tyrannical  government  of  a  town,  and  to  restore
tlie  people  to  freedom,  yet  they  themselves  acted
like  kings  or  tyrants,  whence  Dionysius  (Antiq.
Rom.  V.  p.  337,  Sylburg)  thinks  that  harmostae
was  merely  a.nother  name  for  kings.  How  little
sincere  the  Lacedaemonians  were  in  their  profes-
sions to  restore  their  subject  towns  to  freedom  was
manifest  after  the  peace  of  Antalcidas  ;  for  although
they  had  pledged  themselves  to  re-establish  free
governments  in  the  various  towns,  yet  they  left
them  in  the  hands  of  the  harmostae.  (Polyb.  iv.
27.)  The  character  of  their  rule  is  sufficiently  de-
scribed by  the  word  /farexeii/,  which  Isocrates  (I.  c.)
and  Demosthenes  (De  Coron.  p.  2.58)  use  in  speak-
ing of  the  harmostae.  (Compare  Demosth.  c.  Timo-
crat.  p.  740  ;  Plut.  Narrat.  Amat.  c.  3.)  Even
Xenophon  {De  Rep.  Lac.  c.  14)  could  not  help  cen-
suring the  Lacedaemonians  for  the  manner  in  which
they  allowed  their  harmostae  to  govern.

It  is  uncertain  how  long  tlie  office  of  an  har-
mostes  lasted  ;  but  considering  that  a  governor  of
the  same  kind,  who  was  appointed  by  the  Lacedae-
monians in  Cythera,  with  the  title  of  Cytherodices,
held  his  office  only  for  one  year  (Thucyd.  iv.  53),
it  is  not  improbable  that  the  office  of  harmostes  was
of  the  same  duration.  [L.  S.]

HARPAGES  GRAPHE  {apirayris  ypacpv).
This  action  seems,  according  to  Lucian  (Jtid.  Voc.
c.  1.  vol,  i.  p.  82,  ed.  Hemsterh,),  to  have  been
applicable  to  cases  of  open  robbery,  attended  with
violence.  Under  these  circumstances  the  offenders
would  be  included  in  the  class  of  KUKovpyoi^  and
as  such  be  tried  before  a  court  under  the  con-
trol and  management  of  the  Eleven.  With  respect
to  the  punishment  upon  conviction,  we  have  no
certain  information,  but  there  seems  no  reason  to
doubt  that  it  was  capital,  as  in  cases  of  burglary
and  stealing  from  the  person.  (Xen.  Mem.  i.  2.
§  62.)  [J.  S.  M.]

HARPAGINETULI,  a  sort  of  decoration  for
the  walls  and  ceilings  of  rooms,  thus  mentioned  by
Vitruvius,  in  a  passage  where  he  is  speaking  of
irregular  and  fantastic  ornaments  (vii.  5.  §  3),
^^pro  columnis  erJm  statuuntur  calami,  pro  fastigiis
harpaginetuli  striati  cum  crispis  foliis  et  volutistene-
ris.''''  The  commentators  have  laboured  in  vain  to
explain  the  tenn  ;  and  it  is  even  very  doubtful
whether  the  reading  is  correct.  As  the  word
Btands,  it  seems  to  refer  to  some  sort  of  scroll-


HARUSPICES,

pattern.  (See  Schneider,  Newton,  and  the  other
commentators  and  translators,  I.  c,  and  an  addition
b}"  Bailey  to  the  article  in  Forcellini.)        [P.  S.]

H  A'RPAGO  {apTrdyrj :  Xvkos  :  Kpedypa,  dim.
KpedypLs).,  a  grappling-iron,  a  drag,  a  flesh -hoolt.
(Ex.  xxvii.  3;  1  Sam.  ii.  13,  14.  Sept.;  Aristoph.
Vesp.  1152  ;  Anaxippus,  ap.  Athen.  iv,  p.  169,  b.)
The  iron-fingered  flesh-hook  (npfdypa  aiSrjpoSaKTv-
\os,  Bvunck,  Anal.  ii.  215)  is  described  by  the  Scho-
liast on  Aristophanes  (Equit.  769),  as  "  an  instru-
ment used  in  cookery,  resembling  a  hand  with  the
fingers  bent  invvards,  used  to  take  boiled  meat  out
of  the  caldron."  Four  specimens  of  it,  in  bronze,
are  in  the  British  Museum.  One  of  them  is  here
represented.  Into  its  hollow  extremity  a  wooden
handle  was  inserted.


A  similar  instrument,  or  even  the  flesh-hook  it-
self (Aristoph,  Eccles.  994)  was  used  to  draw  up
a  pail,  or  to  recover  any  thing  which  had  fallen
into  a  well.     (Hesychius,  s.  w.  'Apirdyr],  Kpedypa,

AVKOS.)

In  war  the  grappling-iron,  thrown  at  an  enemy's
ship,  seized  the  rigging,  and  was  then  used  to  drag
the  ship  within  reach,  so  that  it  might  be  easily
boarded  or  destroyed.  ("ApTral,  Athen.  v.  p.  208,  d.)
These  instruments  appear  to  have  been  much  the
same  as  the  manusferreae  (manus  ferreae  alquc  har-
pagones.,  Caes.  B.  C.  i.  57  ;  Q.  Curt.  iv.  9  ;  Dion
Cass.  xlix.  3,  1.  32,  34).  The  manusferreae  were
employed  by  the  Consul  Duilius  against  the  Car.
thaginians  (Flor.  ii.  2  ;  Front.  Stralag.  ii.  3.  §  24),
and  were  said  to  have  been  invented  bv  Pericles.
(Plin.  //.  N.  vii.  57.)  ^  '[J,  Y.]

HARPASTUM  (apTraa-rSv  from  apTrd(w)  was
a  ball,  used  in  a  game  of  which  we  have  no  ac-
curate account ;  but  it  appears  both  from  the  ety-
mology of  the  word  and  the  statement  of  Galen
(rie^t  fxiKpas  'Stpaipas,  c.  2.  p.  902,  ed.  KUhn),
that  a  ball  was  thrown  among  the  players,  each  of
whom  endeavoured  to  obtain  possession  of  it.
(Comp.  Pollux,  ix.  105,  106  ;  Athen,  i.  p.  14,  f,)
Hence  Martial  (iv.  19.  6)  speaks  of  the  harpasta
pulverulenta.  The  game  required  a  great  deal  of
bodily  exertion.  (Martial,  vii.  67.  4  ;  comp,  xiv.
48.)  (See  Becker,  Callus,  vol.  i.  p.  276  ;  Krause,
Gymnastik  und  Agonistik  der  Hellenen,  vol.  i.  pp.
307,  308.)

HARU  SPICES,  or  ARU'SPICES,  were
soothsaj'ers  or  diviners,  who  interpreted  the  will
of  the  gods.  They  originally  came  to  Rome  from
Etruria,  whence  haruspices  were  often  sent  for  by
the  Romans  on  important  occasions.  (Liv.  xxvii.
37  ;  Cic.  Cat.  iii.  8,  de  Div.  ii.  4.)  The  art  of
the  haruspices  resembled  in  many  respects  that  of
the  augurs  ;  but  they  never  acquired  that  political
importance  which  the  latter  possessed,  and  were
regarded  rather  as  means  for  ascertaining  the  will
of  the  gods  than  as  possessing  any  religious  autho-
rity. They  did  not  in  fact  form  any  part  of  the
ecclesiastical  polity  of  the  Roman  state  during  the
republic  ;  they  are  never  called  sacerdotes,  they
did  not  form  a  collegium,  and  had  no  magister  at
their  head.     The  account  of  Dionysius  (ii.  22),


HASTA.

that  the  hanispices  were  instituted  by  Romulus,
and  that  one  was  chosen  from  each  tribe,  is  op-
posed to  all  the  other  authorities,  and  is  manifestly
incorrect.  In  the  time  of  the  emperors,  we  read
of  a  collegium  or  order  of  sixty  haruspices  (Tacit.
J  tin.  xi.  15 ;  OrelH,  Inscr.  i.  p.  399)  ;  but  the  time
of  its  institution  is  uncertain.  It  has  been  sup-
posed that  such  a  collegium  existed  in  the  time  of
Cicero,  since  he  speaks  of  a  summus  magister  {de
Div.  ii.  24)  ;  but  by  this  we  are  probably  to  un-
derstand not  a  magister  collegii^  but  merely  the
most  eminent  of  the  haruspices  at  the  time.

The  art  of  the  haruspices,  which  was  called
liaruspicina,  consisted  in  explaining  and  interpret-
ing the  will  of  the  gods  from  the  appearance  of  the
entrails  (eata)  of  animals  offered  in  sacrifice,  whence
they  are  sometimes  called  ewtispices,  and  their  art
eortiapicium  (Cic.  de  Div.  ii.  11  ;  Suet.  Ner.  56)  ;
and  also  from  lightning,  earthquakes,  and  all
extraordinary  phenomena  in  nature,  to  which  the
general  name  of  portenta  was  given.  (Valer.  Max.
i.  1.  §  1.)  Their  art  is  said  to  have  been  invented
by  the  Etruscan  Tages  (Cic.  de  Div.  ii.  23  ;  Festus,
s.  V.  Tages).,  and  was  contained  in  certain  books
called  liijri  haruspicini,  fulgurales.,  and  tonitruales.
(Cic.  de  Div.  i.  33  ;  compare  Macrob.  Saturn,  iii.

This  art  was  considered  by  the  Romans  so  im-
portant at  one  time,  that  the  senate  decreed  that  a
certain  number  of  young  Etruscans,  belonging  to
the  principal  families  in  the  state,  should  always
be  instructed  in  it.  {Vac.  de  Div.  \.  Al.)  Niebuhr
appears  to  be  mistaken  in  supposing  the  passage  in
Cicero  to  refer  to  the  children  of  Roman  families.
( See  Orelli,  ad  loc.)  The  senate  sometimes  con-
sulted the  haruspices  (Cic.  de  Div.  i.  43,  ii.  35  ;
Liv.  xxvii.  37),  as  did  also  private  persons.  (Cic.
de  Div.  ii.  29.)  In  later  times,  however,  their  art
fell  into  disrepute  among  well-educated  Romans  ;
and  Cicero  (de  Div.  ii.  24)  relates  a  saying  of
Cato,  that  he  wondered  that  one  haruspex  did  not
laugh  when  he  saw  another.  The  Emperor  Clau-
dius attempted  to  revive  the  study  of  the  art,
which  had  then  become  neglected ;  and  the  senate,
under  his  directions,  passed  a  decree  that  the
pontifices  should  examine  what  parts  of  it  should
be  retained  and  established  (Tacit.  Ann.  xi.  15)  ;
but  we  do  not  know  what  effect  this  decree  pro-
duced.

The  name  of  haruspex  is  sometimes  applied  to
any  kind  of  soothsayer  or  prophet  (Prop.  iii.  13.
59)  ;  whence  Juvenal  (vi.  550)  speaks  of  Arine-
nius  vel  Commagenus  haruspex.

The  latter  part  of  the  word  haruspex  contains
the  root  spec;  and  Donatus  {ad  Ter.  Phorm.  iv.
4.  28)  derives  the  former  part  from  liaruga^  a
victim.  Compare  Festus,  s.  v.  Harviga^  and  Varro,
De  Ling.  Lai.  v.  i98,  ed.  MUller.  (Gbttling,  Gesch.
der  Rum.  Staatsv.  p.  213  ;  Walter,  Gesch.  des  Rom.
Rechts,  §§  142,  770,  2nd  ed.;  Brissonius,  De  For-
mulis,  i.  29,  &c.)

HASTA  (67X0S,  Tra\T6v),  a  spear.  The  spear
is  defined  by  Homer,  b6pv  xaA/crjpes,  "  a  pole  fitted
with  bronze"  {II.  vi.  3),  and  S6pv  x^^KoSapes,
"  a  pole  heavy  with  bronze  "  {Od.  xi.  531).  The
bronze,  for  which  iron  was  afterwards  substituted,
was  indispensable  to  form  the  point  (at'xM,  ol/cw/ct],
Homer  ;  At^yx??,  Xenophon  ;  acies^  cuspis.,  spiczi-
lum,  Ovid,  Met.  viii.  375)  of  the  spear.  Each  of
these  two  essential  parts  is  often  put  for  the  whole,
BO  that  a  spear  is  called  Sopv  and  dopdrioUf  alxi^T],


HASTA.


587


and  \6yxV'  Even  the  more  especial  term  fieXlay
meaning  an  ash-tree,  is  used  in  the  same  manner,
because  the  pole  of  the  spear  was  often  the  stem  of  a
young  ash,  stript  of  its  bark  and  polished.  (//.  xix.
390,  XX.  277,  xxii.  328,  Od.  xxii.  259  ;  Plin.
H.  N.  xvi.  24  ;  Ovid,  Met.  xii.  369.)  In  like
manner  the  spear  is  designated  by  the  term  Ka/xo^
(Aesch.  Ag.  65  ;  Eurip.  Hec.  1155,  Fhoen.  1421  ;
Brunck,  Anal.  i.  191,  226  ;  Ant.  Sid.  34),  meaning
properly  the  strong  tall  reed  of  the  south  of  Europe,
wliich  served  both  for  spears  and  for  various  other
uses,  (Hes.  Scut.  298  ;  Schol.  in  loc. ;  Xen.  de  Re
Equest.  xii.  12.)

The  bottom  of  the  spear  was  often  inclosed  in
a  pointed  cap  of  bronze,  called  by  the  Ionic  writers
(TavpwTrip  (Hom.  //.  x.  153  ;  Herod,  vii.  40,  41  ;
also  Polyb.  vi.  23),  and  ovpiaxos  {II.  xiii.  443,
xvi.  612,  xvii.  528),  and  in  Attic  or  common  Greek
(TTvpa^.  (Xen.  Hellen.  vi.  2.  §  19  ;  Athen.  xii,  p.
514,  b  ;  TTvpaKiov,  Thuc.  ii.  4  ;  Aen.  Tact.  18.)
By  forcing  this  into  the  ground  the  spear  was  fixed
erect.  (Virg.  Aen.  xii.  130.)  Many  of  the  lancers
{Sopv(p6poL,  alxiJ-o<p6poi,  \oyxo(p6poi,  woodcut,  p.
237),  who  accompanied  the  king  of  Persia,  had,
instead  of  this  spike  at  the  bottom  of  their  spears,
an  apple  or  a  pomegranate,  either  gilt  or  silvered.
(Herod. ;  Athen, ;  U.  cc.)  With  this,  or  a  similar
ornament,  the  spear  is  often  tenninated  both  on
Persian  and  Egyptian  monuments.  Fig.  1.  in  the
annexed  woodcut  shows  the  top  and  bottom  of  a
spear,  which  is  held  by  one  of  the  king's  guards  in
the  scxilptures  at  Persepolis.  (Sir  R.  K.  Porter's
Travels,  vol.  i.  p.  601.)  It  may  be  compared  with
those  in  the  hand  of  the  Greek  warrior  at  p.  135,
which  have  the  spike  at  the  bottom.  The  spike  at
the  bottom  of  the  spear  was  used  in  fighting  by
the  Greeks  and  Romans,  when  the  head  was
broken  off.     (Polyb.  vi.  25.)

A  well-finished  spear  was  kept  in  a  case  (Sopa-
To07)/C7j),  which,  on  account  of  its  form,  is  called
by  Homer  a  pipe  {(Tvpiyl,  II.  xix.  387).

The  spear  was  used  as  a  weapon  of  attack  in
three  different  ways  :  —  1,  It  was  thrown  from  cata-
pults and  other  engines  [Tormentum].  2.  It  was
thrust  forward  as  a  pike.     In  this  manner  Achilles


.3       A        .s


killed    Hector   by   piercing   him    with   his   spear
through  the  neck.    (//.  xxii.  326.)    The  Euboeana


588


HA  ST  A.


were  particularly  celebrated  as  pikemen.  (Horn.
//.  ii.  543.)  3.  It  was  commonly  thrown  by  the
hand.  The  Homeric  hero  generally  went  to  the
field  with  two  spears.  (Horn.  11.  iii.  18,  x.  76,
xii.  298  ;  Find.  Fifth,  iv.  139.)  On  approaching
the  enemy  he  first  threw  either  one  spear  or  both,
and  then  on  coming  to  close  quarters  drew  his
sword.  (Horn.  //.  iii.  340,  xvii.  530,  xx.  273—
284.)  The  spear  frequently  had  a  leathern  thong
tied  to  the  middle  of  the  shaft,  which  was  called
ayKv\T]  by  the  Greeks,  and  amentum  by  the
Romans,  and  which  was  of  assistance  in  throwing
the  spear.  (Pollux,  i.  136  ;  Schol.  ad  Eurip.  Orest.
1477  ;  Xen.  Anah.  iv.  2.  §  28  ;  Virg.  Aen.  ix.  665  ;
Ov.  Met.  xii.  321  ;  Cic.  de  Omt.  i.  57.)  The  an-
nexed figure,  taken  from  Sir  W.  Hamilton's  Etrus-
can Vases  (iii.  pi.  33),  represents  the  amentum
attached  to  the  spear  at  the  centre  of  gravity,  a
little  above  the  middle.


We  are  not  informed  how  the  amentum  added
to  the  effect  of  throwing  the  lance  ;  perhaps  it  was
by  giving  it  rotation,  and  hence  a  greater  degree  of
steadiness  and  directness  in  its  llight,  as  in  the
case  of  a  ball,  shot  from  a  rifle  gim.  This  supposi-
tion both  suits  the  expressions  relative  to  the  in-
sertion of  the  fingers,  and  accounts  for  the  frequent
use  of  the  verb  torquere,  to  whirl,  or  twist,  in  con-
nection with  this  subject.  We  also  find  mention
in  the  Latin  grammarians  of  Hastae  ansatae,  and
Ennius  speaks  of  Ansatis  concurrunt  undiqus  telis
(Macrob.  Sat.  vi.  1).  The  ansa  was  probably  the
same  as  the  amentum,  and  was  so  called  as  being
the  part  which  the  soldier  laid  hold  of  in  hurling
the  spear.

Under  the  general  terms  hnsta  and  lyx^^  were
included  various  kinds  of  missiles,  of  which  the
principal  were  as  follow  :  —

Lancea  (KSyxv,  Festus,  s.  v.  Lancea),  the  lance,
a  comparatively  slender  spear  commonly  used  by
the  Greeks.  Iphicrates,  who  doubled  the  length
of  the  sword  [Gladius],  also  added  greatly  to  the
dimensions  of  the  lance.     (Diod.  xv.  44  ;    Nep.


HAST  A.

xi.  1.  3.)  This  weapon  was  used  by  the  Grecian
horsemen  (Polyb.  vi.  23)  ;  and  by  means  of  an
appendage  to  it,  which  is  supposed  by  Stuart  (Ant.
o/  Athens,  vol.  iii.  p.  47  ;  woodcut,  fig.  2)  to  be  ex-
hibited on  the  shafts  of  three  spears  in  an  ancient
bas-relief,  they  mounted  their  horses  with  greater
facility.     (Xen.  de  Re  Equest.  vii.  xii.)

Pilum  (y(T(T6s\  the  javelin,  much  thicker  and
stronger  than  the  Grecian  lance  (Flor.  ii.  7),  as
may  be  seen  on  comparing  the  woodcuts  at  pp.  1 35
and  136.  Its  shaft,  often  made  of  cornel  (Virg.
Ae7i.  ix.  698  ;  Ovid,  Met.  viii.  408),  was  four  and
a  half  feet  (three  cubits)  long,  and  the  barbed  iron
head  was  of  the  same  length,  but  this  extended
half  way  down  the  shaft,  to  which  it  was  attached
Avith  extreme  care,  so  that  the  whole  length  of
the  weapon  was  about  six  feet  nine  inches.  Each
soldier  carried  two.  (Polyb.  vi.  23.)  [Exercitus,
p.  497,  a.J  It  was  used  either  to  throw  or  to
thrust  with  ;  it  was  peculiar  to  the  Romans,  and
gave  the  name  o(  pilani  to  the  division  of  the  army
by  which  it  was  adopted.  When  Marius  fou<rht
against  the  Cimbri,  he  ordered  that  of  the  two  nails
or  pins  (irepSyai)  by  which  the  head  was  fastened
to  the  staff,  one  should  be  of  iron  and  the  other  of
wood.  The  consequence  was,  that,  when  the  pilum
struck  the  shields  of  the  enemy,  the  wooden  nail
broke,  and  as  the  iron  head  was  thus  bent,  the  spear,
owing  to  the  twist  in  the  metal  part,  still  held  to  the
shield  and  so  dragged  along  the  ground.  (Plut.
Mar.  25.)

Whilst  the  heavy-amied  Roman  soldiers  bore
the  long  lance  and  the  thick  and  ponderous  javelin,
the  light-armed  used  smaller  missiles,  which,
though  of  different  kinds,  were  included  under  the
general  term  hastae  velitares  (Liv.  xxxviii.  20  ;
Plin.  H.  N.  xxviii.  6).  From  ypdacpos,  the  cor-
responding Greek  term  (Polyb.  i.  40  ;  Sti-abo,  iv.
4.  §  3),  the  velites,  or  light-armed,  are  called  by
Polybius  ypo(r<poixdxoi  (vi.  19,  20).  According  to
his  description  the  yp6(r(pos  was  a  dart,  with  a
shaft  about  three  feet  long  and  an  inch  in  thick-
ness :  the  iron  head  was  a  span  long,  and  so  thin
and  acuminated  as  to  be  bent  by  striking  against
any  thing,  and  thus  rendered  unfit  to  be  seirt  back
against  the  enemj'.  Fig.  3,  in  the  preceding  wood-
cut, shows  one  which  was  found,  with  nearly  four
hundred  others,  in  a  Roman  entrenchment  at
Meon  Hill,  in  Gloucestershire.  (Skelton's  Enpt-aved
Ilbtstrations,  vol.  i.  pi.  45.)

The  light  infantry  of  the  Roman  army  used  a
similar  weapon,  called  a  spit  {veru.,  rei-uttim,  Liv.
xxi.  55  ;  aavviov,  Diod.  Sic.  xiv.  27  ;  Festus,  s.  v.
Samnites).  It  was  adopted  by  them  from  the
Samnites  (Virg.  Aen,  vii.  665),  and  the  Volsci
{Georg.  ii.  168).  Its  shaft  was  3^  feet  long,  its
point  five  inches.  (Veget.  ii.  15.)  Fig.  4,  in  the
preceding  woodcut,  represents  the  head  of  a  dart
in  the  Royal  Collection  at  Naples  ;  it  may  be  taken
as  a  specimen  of  the  verutum,  and  may  be  con-
trasted with  fig.  5,  which  is  the  head  of  a  lance  in
the  same  collection.  The  Romans  adopted  in  like
manner  the  gaesum.,  which  was  properly  a  Celtic
weapon  (Liv.  xxviii.  45)  ;  it  was  given  as  a  reward
to  any  soldier  who  wounded  an  enemy.  (Polyb.
vi.  37.)  Sparus  is  evidently  the  same  word  with
the  English  spai'  and  spear.  It  was  the  rudest
missile  of  the  whole  class,  and  only  used  when
better  could  not  be  obtained.  (Virg.  Aen.  xi.  682  ,
Serv.  inloc. ;  Nepos,  xv.  9.  §  1  ;  Sallust,  Cat.  56  ;
Gell.  X.  25.)


HASTA.

Besides  the  terms  jaculum  and  spiculum  (&KwUf
oLKovTiov),  which  probably  denoted  darts,  resem-
bling in  form  the  lance  and  javelin,  but  much
smaller,  adapted  consequently  to  the  light-armed
(juculatores)^  and  used  in  hunting  as  well  as  in
battle  (Thvicyd.  ii.  4  ;  Virg.  Aen.  ix.  52  ;  Serv.  in
Inc.;  Ovid,  Met.  viii,  411  ;  Cic.  ad  Fam.  v.  12  ;
Flor.  ii.  7),  we  find  in  classical  authors  the  names
of  various  other  spears,  which  were  characteristic
of  particular  nations.  Thus,  Servius  states  {in  Aen.
vii.  664),  that,  as  the  pilum  was  proper  to  the
Romans,  and  the  gaesum  to  the  Gauls,  so  the
mrissa  was  the  spear  peculiar  to  the  Macedonians.
This  was  used  both  to  throw  and  as  a  pike.  It
exceeded  in  length  all  other  missiles.  [See  p.
488,  a.]  It  was  made  of  cornel,  the  tall  dense
stem  of  which  also  served  to  make  spears  of  other
kinds.  (Theoph.  H.  P.  iii.  12.  2  ;  a-dpeicra^  Arrian,
Tact.;  Kpaveiva,  Xen.  deReEquest.  xii.  12.)  The
Thracian  rompliea^  which  had  a  very  long  point,
like  the  blade  of  a  sword  (Val.  Flac.  vi.  98 ;
ruinpia,  Gell.  l.  c. ;  pQix<paia,  Apoc.  i.  16),  was  pro-
liably  not  milike  the  sarissa  ;  since  Livy  asserts
(xxxi,  39),  that  in  a  country  partly  covered  with
wood  the  Macedonian  phalanx  was  ineffective  on
account  of  their  praelongae  hastae,  and  that  the
romphaea  of  the  Thracians  was  a  hindrance  for  the
same  reason.  With  these  weapons  we  may  also
class  the  Illyrian  sibina,  which  resembled  a  hunting-
pole.  (Festus,  s.  V. ;  (n§vviou,  Polvb.  vi.  21 ;  sibo?i,
(lell.  I.  c.  ;  Ant.  Sid.  1 3.)

The  iron  head  of  the  German  spear,  called
/ramea,  was  short  and  narrow,  but  very  sharp.
The  Germans  used  it  with  great  effect  either  as
a  lance  or  a  pike  :  they  gave  to  each  youth  a
fi-amea  and  a  shield  on  coming  of  age.  (Tacit.  Ge?-m.
6,  1 3,  1 8,  24  ;  Juv.  xiii.  79.)  The  Falarica  or
Phalancxjb  was  the  spear  of  the  Saguntines,  and  was
impelled  by  the  aid  of  twisted  ropes  ;  it  was  large
and  ponderous,  having  a  head  of  iron  a  cubit  in
length,  and  a  ball  of  lead  at  its  other  end  ;  it  some-
times carried  flaming  pitch  and  tow.  (Liv.  xxi.  8,
xxxiv.  18  ;  Virg.  Aen.  ix.  706  ;  Lucan,  vi.  198  ;  Sil.
Ital.  i.  351  ;  Gell.  I.  c.  ;  Isid.  On'^'.  xviii.  7  ;  Grat.
Falisc.  Cyneg.  342.)  The  matara  and  tragjila  were
chiefly  used  in  Gaul  and  Spain :  the  tragula  was
probably  barbed,  as  it  required  to  be  cut  out  of  the
wound.  (Plant.  Cas.  ii.  4.  18,  Epid.  v.  2.  25  ;
Caes.  B.  G.  i.  26,  v.  35  ;  Gell.  I.  c.)  The  Adis
and  Cuteia  were  much  smaller  missiles.  (Virg.
Aen.  vii.  730,  741.;

Among  the  decorations  which  the  Roman  gene-
rals bestowed  on  their  soldiers,  more  especially  for
saving  the  life  of  a  fellow-citizen,  was  a  spear
without  a  head,  called  hasta  pura.  (Virg.  Aen.  vi.
760  ;  Serv.  in  loc.  ;  Festus,  s.  v.  Hasta  ;  Sueton.
Clatid..  28  ;  Tacit.  A7i7i.  iii.  21.)  The  gift  of  it  is
sometimes  recorded  in  funereal  inscriptions.

The  celibaris  Jutda  (Festus,  s.  v.),  having  been
fixed  into  the  body  of  a  gladiator  lying  dead  on
the  arena,  was  used  at  marriages  to  part  the  hair
of  the  bride.     (Ovid,  Fast.  ii.  560.)

A  spear  was  erected  at  auctions  [AucTio],  and
when  tenders  were  received  for  public  offices  {toca-
tioties).  It  served  both  to  announce,  by  a  conven-
tional sign  conspicuous  at  a  distance,"  that  a  sale
was  going  on,  and  to  show  that  it  was  conducted
under  the  authority  of  the  public  functionaries.
(Cic,  OJic.  ii.  8  ;  Nepos,  Attic.  6  ;  Festus,  s.  v.
Hasta.)  Hence  an  auction  was  called  Aasfo,  and
an  auction-room  hastarium.     (Tertull.  Ajml.  13.)


HECTK.  589

It  was  also  the  practice  to  set  up  a  spea,r  in  th«j
court  of  the  Centumviri.

The  throwing  of  spears  (aKoyria-fi'^s)  -^vas  one  of
the  gymnastic  exercises  of  the  Greeks,  and  is  de-
scribed at  length  by  Krause  {Gymnastih  und  Agon-
istikder  Hdknen^  vol.  i.  p.  465,  &c.).  [J.  Y.]

HASTA'TI.    [ExERciTus,  pp.  494—496, 501,
502.]
HECATOMBAEA.     [Herae^.]
HECATOMBAEON.  [Calendarium,

Greek.]

HECATOMBE.     [Sacrificium.]
HECATOMPEDON.     [Pes  ;  Templum.]
HECATOSTE  (e/caroo-T^).     [Pentecoste.]
HECTE  or  HECTEUS    (6kt7;,    e/fretis),  and
its  half,  Hemiecton  or  Hemiecteon  (•^juie/cTo//,  ^/-ick-
reoy),  are  terms  which  occur,  in  more  than  one
sense,  in  the  Greek  metrical  system,  and  are  inter-
esting on  account  of  the  examples  they  furnish  of
the  duodecimal  division.

1.  In  dry  measures,  the  liecteus  was  the  sixth
part  of  the  medimnus^  and  the  hemiecteon^  of  course,
the  twelfth  part.  ( Aristoph.  Eccl.  547,  Nub.  638,
645.)  The  hecteus  was  equal  to  the  Roman  modius,
as  each  contained  16  ^ecrrai  or  sextarii.  (Bockh,
Metrol.  Untersuch.  pp.  33,  200.)

2.  The  Hecte  or  Hecteus  and  Hemiecton  were  also
the  n^mes  of  coins,  but  the  accounts  we  have  of
their  value  are  very  various.  The  only  consistent
explanation  is,  that  there  were  different  Aec/ae,  de-
rived from  different  units  ;  in  fact,  that  these  coins
were  not  properly  denominations  of  money,  but  sub-
divisions of  the  recognised  denominations.  This
view  is  confirmed  by  the  statement  of  Hesychius,
that  the  words  c'/cttj,  rpiTTj,  and  rerdpTif]  were  ap-
plied to  coins  of  gold,  silver,  and  copper  ;  that  is,
we  think,  that  the  various  denominations  of  money
were  subdivided  for  convenience  into  thirds,  fourths,
and  sixths,  which  would  be  of  gold,  silver,  and
copper,  according  to  the  value  of  their  respective
units.  (Hesych.  s.  v.  e/cTTj.)  Now,  since  the  drachma
was  the  unit  of  the  silver  coinages,  which  chiefl}^
prevailed  in  Greece,  we  might  expect,  a  priori^
that  the  common  hecteus  would  be  the  sixth  of  a
drachma,  that  is,  an  obol  ;  and  that  there  was
such  a  hecteus^  is  expressly  stated  by  Hesychius,
who  gives  T]fii(jo§^\iov  as  the  equivalent  oi  rj/uniKTou
(s.v.).  But  then  from  a  passage  of  the  comic  poet
Crates  (Pollux,  ix.  374),  we  learn  that  the
hemiedon  of  gold  was  eight  obols,  the  natural  in-
terpretation of  -which  is,  that  it  was  equal  in  value
to  eight  silver  obols  or  (according  to  Mr.  Hussey's
computation  of  the  drachma),  a  little  more  than  1 3t/.,
which  is  certainly  a  very  small  value  for  a  gold
coin.  This  objection  Bockh  meets  by  supposing
that  the  gold  had  a  very  large  mixture  of  alloy  ;
and  the  probability  of  this  will  appear  further  pre-
sently. This  stater  could  not  have  been  an  Attic
coin,  for  at  that  time  Athens  had  no  gold  money :
the  question  therefore  arises,  to  what  foreign  state
did  it  belong  ?  Now,  among  the  foreign  staters,
which  were  current  at  Athens  in  the  fifth  century
B.  c,  that  of  Phocaea  is  frequently  mentioned,  and
an  inscription  exists  (found  in  the  Acropolis)  in
which,  among  certain  offerings,  we  find  Phocaean
staters,  and  iKrai  4>aj/catS6s  (Bockh,  Corp.  Inscr.
No.  150,  lines  41,  43,  vol.  i.  pp.  231,  236.  §§  19,
22  :  the  hasty  conjecture  that  these  eKxat  must  have
been  of  silver,  is  corrected  by  Bockh  himself,  in
his  Metrologische  Untersuchungen,  p.  1 35).  Little
doubt  can  remain  that  these  cktoi  were  the  sixth^


590  HELEPOLIS.

and  the  hemicrta  of  Crates  the  twelfth  of  the  Pho-
caean  stater.  The  weight  of  the  hemiecton  would  be
a  little  less  than  that  of  the  Attic  obol  ;  and  their
value  would  therefore  give  a  ratio  of  gold  to  silver,
as  8  to  1 ,  a  low  value  for  gold,  it  is  true,  but  one
easily  explained  by  the  fact,  conjectured  by  Bockh,
and  distinctly  stated  by  Hesychius  {s.v.  ^wkois),
that  the  Phocaean  gold  money  was  very  base  :  this
fact  also  will  explain  the  light  weight  of  the  coin
as  compared  with  the  Attic  obol.  The  result  of
this  somewhat  intricate  discussion  seems  to  us  both
clear  and  consistent:  namely,  that  the  standard
weight,  the  drachma,  was  divided,  on  the  duodeci-
mal system,  into  siocths  (e/fxat  or  v€o\oi),  and
twelfths,  TjixUKTa  :  that  Athens  had  silver  coins  of
these  weights :  and  that,  in  those  states  which
used  a  gold  coinage,  of  which  the  unit  was  a  stater
equal  (generally)  in  weight  to  tivo  drachmae  and  in
value  to  trventy,  this  stater  was  subjected  to  a  simi-
lar duodecimal  division,  by  which  the  sixth  {%KTr\
or  €/CT6us)  became  in  tveight  a  piece  of  two  obols,
and  the  twelfth  {i]^ii(:KTov)  a  piece  of  one  obol.
The  values  of  these  coins  (according  to  the  average
ratio  of  the  value  of  gold  to  that  of  silver,  namely
10  :  1)  would  have  been  *20  ubols  and  10  olnls  re-
spectively ;  but  those  of  Phocaea  were  so  light  and
debased,  that  they  Avere  only  worth  1 6  and  8  respec-
tively of  the  obols  of  Athens,  whose  coinage  was
proverbially  pure.  [P-  S.]

IIECTEMO'RII  (eKTT^fxdpLui),  a  name  given
to  the  poor  citizens  of  Attica  before  the  time  of
Solon,  who  cultivated  the  fields  of  the  rich  and
received  only  a  siaih  part  (hence  their  name)  of
the  produce.  (Hesych.  *.  v.  cKTrjixSpoi  ;  Eustath.
ad  Horn.  Od.  xix.  28.  p.  680,  49,  ed.  Basil,  p.  1854,
ed.  Rom.)  Plutarch  {Solon,  13)  seems  to  have
made  a  mistake  in  stating  that  they  paid  a  sixth
portion  to  their  masters,  and  retained  five-sixths
themselves.  (Comp.  Schiimann,  De  Comitiis,
p.  362,  Antiq.  Jur.  Puhl.  Grace,  p.  169  ;  Hermann,
Lehrbuch  d.  Griech.  Staatsalterth.  §  101,  n.  10.)

HEDNA  (e5»/a).     [Dos.]

HEGEMO'NIA  DICASTE'RIOU  (vmi^ovla
SiKaaTTjpiov).     [Eisagogeis.]

HEGETO'RIA.     [Plynteria.]

HEIRGMOU  GRAPHE'  (eipyfiov  ypa<pi]).
This  was  an  action  for  false  imprisonment  of  a  free
citizen  or  stranger,  and  keeping  such  person  in
private  custodj-.  There  are  no  orations  upon  this
subject  extant,  nor  indeed  any  direct  allusions  to
it  by  name  ;  but  it  is  hinted  at  as  -a  remedy  that
might  have  been  adopted  by  Agatharchus,  the
painter,  for  the  restraint  put  upon  his  personal
liberty  by  Alcibiades  (Andoc.  c.Alc.  p.  119)  ;  and
in  a  passage  of  Deinarchus  (c.  Dem.  17),  where  a
miller  is  mentioned  to  have  incurred  capital  punish-
ment for  a  like  oftence.  The  thesmothetae  pro-
bably presided  in  the  court  before  which  offenders
of  this  kind  were  brought  to  trial.  (Meier,  Att.
/'roc.  p.  332.)  [J.S.M.]

HELE'POLIS  (€\4iro\is).  When  Demetrius
Poliorcetes  besieged  Salamis,  in  Cyprus,  he  caused
a  machine  to  be  constructed,  which  he  called  "  the
taker  of  cities."  Its  fi)rm  was  that  of  a  square
tower,  each  side  being  90  cubits  high  and  45  wide.
It  rested  on  four  wheels,  each  eight  cubits  high.
It  was  divided  into  nine  stories,  the  lower  of
which  contained  machines  for  throwing  great
stones,  the  middle  large  catapults  for  throwing
spears,  and  the  highest,  other  machines  for  throwing
smaller  stones,   together   with   smaller   catapults.


HELLENOTAMIAE.

It  was  manned  with  200  soldiers,  besides  those
who  moved  it  by  pushing  the  parallel  beams  at  the
bottom.     (Diod.  xx.  48.)

At  the  siege  of  Rhodes,  b.  c,  306,  Demetrius
employed  an  helcpolis  of  still  greater  dimensions
and  more  complicated  construction.  Besides  wheels
it  had  castors  (avTicrTpeirTa),  so  as  to  admit  of
being  moved  laterally  as  well  as  directly.  Its
ibrm  was  pyramidal.  The  three  sides  which  were
exposed  to  attack,  were  rendered  fire-proof  by
being  covered  with  iron  plates.  In  front  each
story  had  port-holes,  which  were  adapted  to  the
several  kinds  of  missiles,  and  were  furnished  Avith
shutters  that  could  be  opened  or  closed  at  pleasure,
and  were  made  of  skins  stuffed  with  wool.  Each
story  had  two  broad  flights  of  steps,  the  one  for
ascending,  the  other  for  descending.  (Diod.  xx.  91  ;
compare  Vitniv.  x.  22.)  This  helepolis  was  con-
structed by  Epimachus  the  Athenian  ;  and  a  much
esteemed  description  of  it  was  written  by  Dioeclides
ofAbdera.  (Athen.  v.  p.  206,  d.)  It  was  no  doubt
the  greatest  and  most  remarkable  engine  of  the  kind
that  was  ever  erected.  In  subsequent  ages  we
find  the  name  of  "  helepolis  "  applied  to  moving
towers  Avhich  earned  battering  rams,  as  well  as
machines  for  throwing  spears  and  stones.  (Amm.
Marcell.  xxiii.  ;  Agathias,  i.  18.  p.  30,  ed.  Ven.  ;
Nicet.  Chon,  Jo.  Commejius,  p.  14,  b.)  Towers
of  this  description  were  used  to  destroy  the  Avails
of  Jenisalem,  when  it  was  Liken  by  the  Romans.
(Jos.  B.  J.  ii.  19.  §  9,  iii.  6.  §  2.)  [Aries  ;  Tor-

MENTUM.]  [J.  Y.]

HELIAEA.     [DiCASTERioN.]
HELIOCAMI'NUS.     [Domus,  p.  432,  b.J
HELIX  (eA.i|),  anything  of  a  spiral  form,  whether

in  one  plane,  as  the  spiral  curve,  or  in  different

planes,  as  the  screAV.

1.  In  architecture,  the  spiral  volutes  of  the  Ionic
and  Corinthian  capitals.  The  Roman  architects,
while  they  used  the  Avord  volutae  for  the  angular
spirals,  retained  the  term  helices  for  the  smaller
spirals  in  the  middle  of  each  face  of  the  Corinthian
capital.    (VitruA-.  iv.  1.  §  12.)

2.  In  mechanics,  the  Avord  designates  the  scrcAV
in  its  various  applications  ;  but  its  chief  use  Avas
to  describe  a  machine  used  for  pushing  or  draAving
ships  in  the  Avater  from  the  beach,  Avhich  was  said
to  haA-e  been  iuA^ented  by  Archimedes.  (Athen.  v.
p.  207,  a.,  with  Casaubon's  Notes.)  [P.  S.]

HELLANO'DICAE  ('EAAaroSi/cai),  the  judges
in  the  Olympic  games,  of  whom  an  account  is
given  under  Olympia.  The  same  name  was  also
given  to  the  judges  or  court-martial  in  the  Lace-
daemonian anny  (Xen.  Rep.  Lac.  xiii.  11)  ;  and
they  Avere  probably  first  called  by  this  name
when  Sparta  Avas  at  the  head  of  the  Greek  con-
federacy.

HELLENOTA'MIAE  ('EAATj^oTa^uiat),  or
treasurers  of  the  Greeks,  Avere  magistrates  ap-
pointed by  the  Athenians  to  receive  the  contribu-
tions of  the  allied  states.  They  Avere  first  appointed
B.  c.  477,  Avhen  Athens,  in  consequence  of  the
conduct  of  Pausanias,  had  obtained  the  command
of  the  allied  states.  The  money  paid  by  the  dif-
ferent states,  Avhich  Avas  originally  fixed  at  460
talents,  was  deposited  in  Delos,  which  Avas  the
place  of  meeting  for  the  discussion  of  all  common
interests  ;  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the
hellenotcimiae  not  only  received,  but  Avere  also  the
guardians  of  these  monies,  which  were  called  by
Xenophon  {de  Vectig,  v.  5)  'EAATjroTa/Aj'a.    (Thuc.


HELOTES.

i.96  ;  Pint.  Aristld.  24:  ;  Andoc.  de  Pace,Y>.  107.)
The  office  was  retained  after  the  treasury  was
transferred  to  Athens  on  the  proposal  of  the  Sa-
lmans (Pint.  Aristld.  25  ;  Diod.  xii.  38),  but
was  of  course  abolished  on  the  conquest  of  Athens
by  the  Lacedaemonians.  The  Hellenotamiae  were
not  reappointed  after  the  restoration  of  the  demo-
cracy ;  for  which  reason  the  grammarians  afford
lis  little  information  respecting  their  duties.
Bockh,  however,  concludes  from  inscriptions  that
they  were  probably  ten  in  number,  chosen  by  lot,
like  the  treasurers  of  the  gods,  out  of  the  Pentaco-
siomedimni,  and  that  they  did  not  enter  upon  their
office  at  the  beginning  of  the  year,  but  after  the
Panathenaia  and  the  first  Prytaneia.  With  regard
to  their  duties,  Bockh  supposes  that  they  remained
treasurers  of  the  monies  collected  from  the  allies,
and  that  payments  for  certain  objects  were  assigned
to  them.  In  the  first  place  they  would  of  course
pay  the  expenses  of  wars  in  the  common  cause,  as
the  contributions  were  originally  designed  for  that
purpose  ;  but  as  the  Athenians  in  course  of  time
considered  the  money  as  their  own  property,  the
Ilellenotiimiae  had  to  pay  the  Theorica  and  mili-
tary expenses  not  connected  with  wars  on  behalf
of  the  common  cause.  (Bockh,  Ptibl.  Eco?i.  of
Athens.)  p.  176,  2nd  ed.  ;  Corp.  Inscrip.  No.  147.)
HELLO'TIi^.  [EllotiI]
HELO'TES  (EtAwres,  the  Latin  form  I/otae  is
also  used,  Liv.  xxxiv.  27),  were  a  class  of  bonds-
men subject  to  Sparta,  The  whole  of  the  inhabit-
ants of  Laconia  were  included  in  the  three  classes
of  Spartans,  Perioeci,  and  Helots,  of  whom  the
Helots  were  the  lowest.  They  formed  the  rustic
population,  as  distinguished  both  from  the  inhabit-
ants of  Sparta  itself,  and  from  the  Perioeci  who
dwelt  in  the  large  towns.  (Liv.  I.e.)  Their  con-
dition was  that  of  serfs  attached  to  the  land,  ad-
scripti glefme  ;  and  they  appear  to  have  been  the  only
class  of  slaves  among  the  Lacedaemonians.  Different
etymologies  are  given  of  their  name.  The  common
account  is,  that  they  were  originally  the  Achaean
inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Helos  in  Laconia,  who,
having  been  the  last  to  submit  to  the  Dorian  invaders,
and  that  only  after  a  desperate  struggle,  were  reduced
by  the  victors  to  slavery.  (Paus.  iii.20.  §  6;  Harpocr.
s.v.  ilXcoreveiu,  who  cites  Hellanicus  as  his  autho-
rity). Another  account,  preserved  by  Athenaeus
from  Theopompus,  represents  them  as  the  general
body  of  the  ancient  Achaean  population  of  Laconia,
reduced  to  slavery  by  the  Dorians,  like  the  Penestae
in  Thessaly.  (Ath.  vi.  p.  265,  c.)  The  statement
of  Ephorus,  again,  preserved  by  Strabo,  has  some-
thing in  common  with  both  the  other  stories  ;  for,
according  to  it,  the  original  inhabitants  of  the
country,  when  subdued  by  the  Dorians,  were  at
first  permitted  to  enjoy  an  equality  of  civil  and
political  rights  with  their  conquerors,  and  were
called  Helots ;  but  they  were  deprived  of  their
equal  status  by  Agis,  the  son  of  Eurysthenes,  who
[  made  them  pay  tribute :  this  decree  was  resisted
I  only  by  the  people  of  Helos  ('EAeioi  ol  exovres  rb
"EAos),  who  rebelled  and  were  reduced  to  slavery
nnder  certain  conditions.  (Strab.  viii.  p.  '665.)
Now,  all  these  theories  (for  such  they  are)  rest  on
the  doubtful  foundation  of  the  historical  truth  of  the
]  circumstances  attending  the  Dorian  invasion,  and
i  the  connection  of  the  name  with  Helos  is  not  only
1  a  manifest  invention,  opposed  to  the  best  autho-
j  rities  (Theopomp.  Eph.  IL  cc),  but  is  etymolo-
I    gically   faulty,  for  the  people  of  "EAos  were  not


HELOTES.  5P1

called  EiAwT6s,  but  'EAeiot  (Strab.  I.e.)  or  'EAfa-
rat  (Athen.  vi.  p.  271).  The  name  has  been
also  derived  from  cAtj,  marshes,  as  if  it  signified
inkalntafits  of  the  lowlands.  But  MuUer  seems  to
be  nearer  the  mark  in  explaining  eiAwres  as  mean-
ing prisoners.)  from  the  root  of  cAeTv,  to  take,  like
Zfiuiis  from  the  root  of  So^dw.  He  supposes  that
they  were  an  aboriginal  race,  who  were  subdued  at
a  very  early  period,  and  who  naturally  passed  over
as  slaves  to  the  Doric  conquerors.  It  is  objected
by  Thirlwall  that  this  theory  does  not  account  for
the  hereditary  enmity  between  them  and  their
masters  ;  for  unless  they  lost  their  liberty  by  the
Dorian  conquest,  there  is  no  probability  that  it
placed  them  in  a  worse  condition  than  before.  But
to  this  objection,  we  may  oppose  the  acute  observ-
ation of  Grote,  that  those  dangers  from  the  servile
population,  the  dread  of  which  is  the  only  probable
cause  that  can  be  assigned  for  the  cruelty  of  the
Spartans,  and  the  consequent  resentment  of  the
Helots,  "did  not  become  serious  until  after  the
Messenian  war  —  nor  indeed  until  after  the  gradual
diminution  of  the  number  of  Spartan  citizens  had
made  itself  felt."

At  the  end  of  the  second  Messenian  war  (b.  c.
668),  the  conquered  Messenians  were  reduced  to
slavery,  and  included  under  the  denomination  of
Helots.  Their  condition  appears  to  have  been  the
same,  with  some  slight  differences,  as  that  of  the
other  Helots.  But,  in  addition  to  that  remem-
brance of  their  freedom,  which  made  not  only  them,
but,  through  their  influence,  the  whole  class  of
Plelots  more  and  more  dangerous  to  their  masters,
they  preserved  the  recollection  of  their  national  ex-
istence, and  were  ready  to  seize  any  opportunity  of
regaining  it ;  until,  at  length,  the  policy  of  Epami-
nondas,  after  the  battle  of  Leuctra,  restored  the
main  body  of  these  Messenian  Helots  to  their
country,  where  they  no  doubt  formed  the  chief  part
of  the  population  of  the  new  city  of  Messene.
(Thirlwall,  Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  v.  pp.  104,  105.)

The  Helots  were  regarded  as  the  property  of  the
state,  which,  while  it  gave  their  services  to  indivi-
duals, reserved  to  itself  the  power  of  emancipating
them.  (Ephorus,  ap.  Strab.  I.  c.  ;  Paus.  I.  c.)  They
were  attached  to  the  land,  and  could  not  be  sold
away  from  it.  Several  families,  as  many  perhaps
as  six  or  seven,  resided  on  each  /cA^pos,  in  dwell-
ings of  their  own,  either  in  detached  farms  or  in
villages.  They  cultivated  the  land  and  paid  to
their  masters  as  rent  a  fixed  measure  of  com,  the
exact  amount  of  which  had  been  fixed  at  a  very
early  period,  the  raising  of  that  amount  being  for-
bidden under  heavy  imprecations.  (Plut.  Inst.  Lac.
p.  255.)  The  annual  rent  paid  for  each  KXrjpos
was  eighty-two  medimni  of  barle}',  and  a  propor-
tionate quantity  of  oil  and  wine.  (Plut.  Lye.  8.
24.)  The  domestic  servants  of  the  Spartans  were
all  Helots.  They  attended  on  their  masters  at  the
public  meal  ;  and  many  of  them  were  no  doubt
employed  by  the  state  in  public  works.

In  war  the  Helots  served  as  light-armed  troops
(\//:Aot),  a  certain  number  of  them  attending  every
heavy-armed  Spartan  to  the  field  ;  at  the  battle  of
Plataeae,  there  were  seven  Helots  to  each  Spar-
tan, and  one  to  every  hoplite  of  the  Perioeci.
(Herod,  ix.  10,  28.)  These  attendants  were  pro-
bably called  OjUTTtTTapes  (i.  e.  a/xcpiaTaPTes,  Hesych.
s.  v.),  and  one  of  them  in  particular,  the  3epct7ra>y,
or  servant  (Herod,  vii.  229  ;  Sturz.  Lex.  Xen.  s.  v.)\
though  ^epdirwv  was  also  used  by  the  Doriaus  as


592


HELOTES.


a  general  name  for  armed  slaves.  The  Helots  only
served  as  hoplites  in  particular  emergencies  ;  and
on  such  occasions  they  were  generally  emancipated,
if  they  showed  distinguished  bravery.  The  first
instance  of  this  kind  was  in  the  expedition  of  Bra-
sidas,  B.  c.  424.    (Thucyd.  iv.  80,  v.  34,  vii.  19.)

The  treatment  to  which  the  Helots  were  sub-
jected, as  described  by  the  later  Greek  writers,  is
marked  by  the  most  wanton  cruelty.  Thus  Myron
states  that  "  the  Spartans  impose  upon  them  every
ignominious  service,  for  they  compel  them  to  wear
a  cap  of  dog's  skin,  and  to  be  clothed  with  a  gar-
ment of  sheep's  skin,  and  to  have  stripes  inflicted
upon  them  every  year  for  no  fault,  that  they  may
never  forget  that  they  are  slaves.  And  besides  all
this,  if  any  rise  by  their  qualities  above  the  condi-
tion of  a  slave,  they  appoint  death  as  the  penalty,
and  their  masters  are  liable  to  punishment  if  they
do  not  destroy  the  most  excellent."  (Athen.  xiv.
p.  657.)  And  Plutarch  {Lye.  28)  states  that  He-
lots were  forced  to  intoxicate  themselves,  and  per-
form indecent  dances  as  a  warning  to  the  Spartan
youth.  These  statements  must  be  received  with
some  caution.  There  is  no  evidence  that  they  are
true  of  the  period  before  the  Messenian  wars  ;  nor
can  we  believe  that  such  wanton  and  impolitic  op-
])ressions,  provocations,  and  destruction  of  a  valu-
able servile  population  fonned  any  part  of  the  ori-
ginal system  of  Lycurgus.  What  has  been  said
above,  respecting  the  legal  condition  of  the  Helots,
indicates  a  very  different  state  of  things  ;  and  their
real  condition  is  probablj^  not  misrepresented  by
Grote,  when  he  says: — "The  Helots  were  a  part
of  the  state,  having  their  domestic  and  social  sym-
pathies developed,  a  certain  power  of  acquiring
property  (Plut.  Cleom.  23),  and  the  consciousness
of  Grecian  lineage  and  dialect  —  all  points  of
marked  superiority  over  the  foreigners  who  formed
the  slave  population  of  Athens  or  Chios.  They
seem  to  have  been  no  way  inferior  to  any  village
population  of  Greece."  As  is  usual  with  serfs,
every  means  was  taken  to  mark  the  distinction  be-
tween them  and  their  masters  :  they  were  obliged
to  wear  the  rustic  garb  described  above,  and  they
were  not  permitted  to  sing  one  of  the  Spartan  songs.
(Plut.  Lye.  28.)  But  the  state  of  things  described
in  the  above  quotations  belongs  to  a  period  when
the  fear  of  a  servile  insun'ection  had  produced  the
natural  result  of  cruel  oppression  on  the  one  part
and  rebellious  hatred  on  the  other.  That  the
cruelty  of  their  masters  knew  no  restraint  when  it
was  thus  stimulated  by  fear,  is  manifest  enough
from  the  institution  of  the  Kpvirrda  [Crypteia].
How  far  the  statements  of  ancient  writers  respect-
ing the  crypteia  are  to  be  believed,  is  somewhat
doubtful  ;  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  fact
related  by  Thucydides,  that  on  one  occasion  two
thousand  of  the  Helots  who  had  rendered  the
greatest  service  to  the  state  in  war,  were  induced
to  come  forward  by  the  offer  of  emancipation,  and
then  were  put  to  death.     (Thuc.  iv.  80.)

The  Helots  might  be  emancipated,  but  in  that
case,  instead  of  passing  into  the  class  of  Perioeci,
they  formed  a  distinct  body  in  the  state,  known,  at
the  time  of  the  Peloponnesian  war,  by  the  general
term  of  j/eoSojUcoSejs,  but  subdivided  into  several
classes.  Myron  of  Priene  (ap.  Athen.  vi.  p.  27 1 ,  f. ),
enumerates  the  following  classes  of  emancipated
Helots:  — CKperai,  aSeairoToi^ipvKTripes^Seanoaio-
youra/,  and  veoSojuc^Sets.  Of  these  the  arpcrai
were  probably  released  from  all  service  ;  the  ipvK-


HEMINA.

r^ipes  were  those  employed  in  war  ;  the  hfLO-iroaiovaO-
Tof  served  on  board  the  fleet ;  and  the  ueoSa/xcoSeis
were  those  who  had  been  possessed  of  freedom  for
some  time.  Besides  these  there  were  the  jxdQwv^s
or  fioSa/ces,  who  were  domestic  slaves,  brought  up
with  the  young  Spartans,  and  then  emancipated.
Upon  being  emancipated  they  received  permission
to  dwell  where  they  wished.  [Compare  Civitas
(Greek),  p.  290.]

(Miiller,  Dorians,  iii.  3  ;  Hermann,  Political
Antiquities  of  Greece,  §§  19,  24,  28,  30,  48  ;  Wachs-
muth,  Ilellen.  Alterth.  2d  ed.  see  Index  ;  Manso,
Sparta,  see.  Index  ;  Thirlwall's  Hist,  of  Greece,
vol.  i.  pp.  309 — 313  ;  Grote,  Hisi.  of  Greece,  vol.  ii.
pp.  494—499.)  [P.  S.]

HE'MERA  (Vf>«).  [Dies.]

HEMERODHOMI  (vf^epoSpSfioi),  were  cou-
riers  in  the  Greek  states,  who  could  keep  on
running  all  day,  and  were  often  employed  to  carr}'
news  of  important  events.  As  the  Greeks  had  no
system  of  posts,  and  but  few  roads,  such  messen-
gers must  have  been  of  great  service.  They  were
trained  for  the  purpose,  and  could  perform  the
longest  journeys  in  an  almost  incredibly  short  space
of  time.  (Herod,  vi,  105  ;  Com.  livp.  Milt.i  ;  Plut.
Arist.  20  ;  Pans.  vi.  16.  §5.)  Such  couriers  ap-
pear to  have  been  kept  by  most  of  the  Greek
states,  and  were  in  times  of  danger  stationed  on
some  eminence  in  order  to  observe  any  thing  of
importance  that  might  happen,  and  carry  the
intelligence  with  speed  to  the  proper  quarter.
Hence,  we  frequently  find  them  called  Hemero-
scopi  (rjpepocTKOTroi,  Herod,  vii.  182,  192  ;  Xen.
Hell.  i.  1.  §  2  ;  Aeneas  Tact,  c.  6.)  That  the
Hemeroscojyi  were  the  same  as  the  Heinerodroiiii
appears  not  only  from  the  passage  of  Aeneas  Tac-
ticus  just  referred  to,  but  also  from  the  words  of
Livy  (xxxi.  24)  "  ni  speculator  (hemerodromos
vocant  Graeci,  ingens  die  uno  cursu  emetientes
spatium),  contemplans  regium  agmen  e  specula
quadam,  praegressus  nocte  media  Athenas  per-
venisset."  (See  Duker,  ad  Liv.  I.  c.)  The  He-
merodromi  were  also  called  Dromoherukes  (Spu/xo-
KTjpvKes,  Harpocrat,  and  Hesych,  s.  v.).

HEMEROSCOPI,    [Hemerodromi.]

HEMICHRYSUS.     [Aurum  ;  Stateh.]

HEMICO'NGIUS.[CoNGius;  and  the  Tables.]

HEMICY'CLIUM  (vfiiKvK\iov),  a  semicir-
cular seat,  for  the  accommodation  of  persons  en-
gaged in  conversation,  either  in  private  houses  or
in  places  of  public  resort  ;  and  also  the  semicircular
seat  round  the  tribunal  in  a  basilica.  (Plut.  Alcib.
17,  Nic.  12  ;  Cic.  Lael.  1  ;  Vitruv.  v.  1.  §  8,
comp.  Schneider's  Note.)  [P,  S.]

HEMIECTEON,  HEMIECTON.  [Hec-
teus.]

HEMILITRON.     [Litra.]

HE'MINA  {rifxlva),  the  name  of  a  Greek  and
Roman  measure,  seems  to  be  nothing  more  than
the  dialectic  fomi  used  by  the  Sicilian  and  Italian
Greeks  for  r]p.i(Tv.  (See  the  quotations  from  Epi-
charmus  and  Sophron,  ap.  Ath.  xi.  p.  479,  a,  b.,
xiv.  p.  648,  d.,  and  Hesych.  a-,  v.  Iv  rjiuiva.,  which
he  explains  as  ivr^fxiav.)  It  was  therefore  naturally
applied  to  the  half  of  the  standard  fluid  measure,
the  IcVtijs,  which  the  other  Greeks  called  kotvAtj,
and  the  word  passed  into  the  Roman  metrical
system,  where  it  is  used  with  exactly  the  same
force,  namely  for  a  measure  which  is  half  of  the
sextarius,  and  equal  to  the  Greek  cotyh.  (Bockh
Mctrol.  Untersuch.  pp.  17,  200,  203.)      [P.  S.]


HENDECA.
HEMTOBO'LION,  HEMIO'BOLaS.  [Obo-

LUS].

HEMIPO'DION.     [Pes].

HEM  I  STATER.     [Stater].

HEMIXESTON.     [Sextarius].

HE'NDECA,  HOI,  (ot  eVSe/ca,)  the  Eleven,
were  magistrates  at  Athens  of  considerable  im-
portance. They  are  always  called  by  this  name  in
the  classical  writers  ;  but  in  the  time  of  Demetrius
Phalereus,  their  name  Is  said  to  have  been  changed
into  that  of  vo/JLO(pvAaKes  (Pollux,  viii,  102),  who
were,  however,  during  the  democracy  distinct  func-
tionaries. [Nomophvlaces.]  The  grammarians
also  give  other  names  to  the  Eleven,  as  deaixotpv-
Aa/cey,  ^eafxocpvKaKes,  &c.  (Schol.  ad  Aridoph.
Plut.  277,   Vesp.  775,  1108.)

The  time  at  which  the  office  of  the  Eleven  was
instituted  is  disputed.  Ullrich  considers  the  office
to  have  been  of  an  aristocratical  character,  and
concludes  from  a  passage  in  Heraclides  Ponticus
(i.  §  10)  that  it  was  established  by  Aristeides.
Meier,  on  the  other  hand,  maintains  that  the  office
existed  not  only  before  the  time  of  Cleisthenes.
but  probably  before  the  legislation  of  Solon  ;  but  it
seems  impossible  to  come  to  any  satisfactory  con-
clusion on  the  subject.  They  were  annually  chosen
by  lot,  one  from  each  of  the  ten  tribes,  and  a
secretary  (ypaix/xaTevs),  who  must  properly  be  re-
garded as  their  servant  (uTTTjperTjs),  though  he
formed  one  of  their  number.   (Pollux,  viii.  102.)

The  principal  duty  of  the  Eleven  was  the  care
and  management  of  the  public  prison  (deo/xwT'fjpiov)
[Carcer],  which  was  entirely  under  their  juris-
diction. The  prison,  however,  was  seldom  used
by  the  Athenians  as  a  mere  place  of  confinement,
serving  generally  for  punishments  and  executions.
When  a  person  was  condemned  to  death  he  was
immediately  given  into  the  custody  of  the  Eleven,
who  were  then  bound  to  carry  the  sentence  into
execution  according  to  the  laws.  (Xen.  Hell.
ii.  3.  §  54.)  The  most  common  mode  of  execution
was  by  hemlock  juice  (Kwueiou),  which  was  drunk
after  sunset.  (Plat.  Pliaed.  cc.  G5,  QQ.)  The
Eleven  had  under  them  jailors,  executioners,  and
torturers,  who  were  called  by  various  names  (ot
irapaararai,  Bekker,  Anecd.  p.  296.  32  ;  6  rwv
'iySiKa  virr]peTr]s,  Xen.  Hell.  ii.  3.  §  54  ;  6  Srj/xS-
Koivos,  Antiph.  De  Vcnef.  615  ;  ^  drj/jLocrios,  or
Hfiios,  &c.).  When  torture  was  inflicted  in
causes  affecting  the  state,  it  was  either  done  in
the  immediate  presence  of  the  Eleven  (Dem.  c.
Nicost.  p.  1254.  2)  or  by  their  servant  (6  hiiixios).

The  Eleven  usually  only  had  to  carry  into
execution  the  sentence  passed  in  the  courts  of  law
and  the  public  assemblies ;  but  in  some  instances
they  possessed  an  r]y€fj.ouia  SiKao-rripiov.  This  was
the  case  in  those  summary  proceedings  called  aira-
ycayr),  icp-fjyTjais,  and  6i/8ej|jy,  in  which  the  penalty
was  fixed  by  law,  and  might  be  inflicted  by  the
court  on  the  confession  or  conviction  of  the  accused
without  appealing  to  any  of  the  jury  courts.  They
also  had  an  rtye/xovla  SiKa<TTripiov  in  the  case  of
KUKovpyoi,  because  the  summary  proceedings  men-
tioned above  were  chiefly  adopted  in  the  case  of  such
persons  :  hence  Antiphon  (de  Caede  Herod,  p.  71 3)
calls  them  iTri/xfKijTal  tS>v  KUKovpywy.  The
word  KUKovpyoi  properly  means  any  kind  of  male-
factors, but  is  only  applied  in  Athenian  law  to
thieves  (KAeVrat),  house-breakers  (Toix^pyx^O'
man-stealers  (auSpairo^iarTal),  and  other  criminals
of  a  similar  kind.    (Meier,  Att.  Proc  pp.  76,  77.)


hj:raea.


593


The  Eleven  are  also  said  to  have  possessed  riye-
ixovia  SiKaarripiov  in  the  case  of  confiscated  pro-
perty {Etymol.  Mag.  p.  338.  35),  which  statement
is  confirmed  by  an  inscription  published  by  Bockh
( Urkunden  iiber  das  Seewesen  des  A  ttiscJien  StaateSy
p.  535).  (Ullrich,  Ueber  die  Elf  Afajimr,  ap-
pended to  his  translation  of  Plato's  Meno,  Crito,
and  the  first  and  second  Alcibiades,  Berlin,  1821  ;
Sluiter,  Lectioncs  Andocid.  pp.  256 — 261  ;  Meier,
Att.  Proc.  ])p.  68 — 77  ;  Schubert,  de  Aedilibus,
pp.  93 — ^Q  ;  Hermann,  Leh-b.  der  Griecli.  Staats-
alterth.  §  139.)

HEPHAESTAEA.  [LAMPAnEPHORiA.]

HERAEA  ('Hpa?a)  is  the  name  of  festivals
celebrated  in  honour  of  Hera  in  all  the  towns  of
Greece  where  the  worship  of  this  divinity  was  in-
troduced. The  original  seat  of  her  worehip,  from
which  it  spread  over  the  other  parts  of  Greece,  Avas
Argos  ;  whence  her  festivals  in  other  places  were,
more  or  less,  imitations  of  those  which  were  cele-
brated at  Argos.  (Miiller,  Dor.  ii.  10.  §  1.)  The
Argives  had  three  temples  of  Hera  ;  one  lay  be-
tween Argos  and  Mycenae,  45  stadia  from  Argos  ;
ihe  second  lay  on  the  road  to  the  acropolis,  and  near
it  was  the  stadium  in  which  the  games  and  con-
tests at  the  Heraea  were  held  (Pans.  ii.  24.  §  2)  ;
the  third  was  in  the  city  itself  (Pans.  ii.  22.  §  1).
Her  service  was  performed  by  the  most  distin-
guished priestesses  of  the  place  ;  one  of  them  was
the  high-priestess,  and  the  Argives  counted  their
years  by  the  date  of  her  office.  (Thucyd.  ii.  2.)
The  Heraea  of  Argos  were  celebrated  every  fifth
year,  and,  according  to  the  calculation  of  Bockh
(Abhandl.  der  Bert  Akad.  von  1818-19,  p.  92,
&c.)  in  the  middle  of  the  second  year  of  every
Olympiad.  One  of  the  great  solemnities  which
took  place  on  the  occasion,  was  a  magnificent  pro-
cession to  the  great  temple  of  Hera,  between  Argos
and  Mycenae.  A  vast  number  of  young  men  — for
the  festival  is  called  a  panegyrls  —  assembled  at
Argos,  and  marched  in  anuour  to  the  temple  of  the
goddess.  They  were  preceded  by  one  hundred
oxen  (eKaTS/xSr],  whence  the  festival  is  also  called
kKarSfj-Saia).  The  high-priestess  accompanied  this
procession,  riding  in  a  chariot  drawn  by  two  white
oxen,  as  we  see  from  the  story  of  Cleobis  and
Biton  related  by  Herodotus  (i.  31)  and  Cicero
(Tuscul.  i.  47).  The  hundred  oxen  were  sacrificed,
and  their  flesh  distributed  among  all  the  citizens,
(Schol.  ad  Pind.  01.  vii.  152,  and  ad  Nem.  x.  39.)
The  sacrifice  itseTf  was  called  Xex^pva  (Hesych.
s.  V.)  or  "  the  bed  of  twigs."  (Comp.  Welcker
on  Schwenck''s  Etymologisclie  Andcutungen,  p.  268.)
The  games  and  contests  of  the  Heraea  took  place  in
the  stadium,  near  the  temple  on  the  road  to  the
acropolis.  A  brazen  shield  was  fixed  in  a  place
above  the  theatre,  which  was  scarcely  accessible  to
jiny  one,  and  the  young  man  who  succeeded  in
pulling  it  down  received  the  shield  and  a  garland
of  myrtle  as  a  prize.  Hence  Pindar  {Nan.  x.
41)  calls  the  contest  017^1'  x^-'^'^^o^-  It  seems  that
this  contest  took  place  before  the  procession  went
out  to  the  Heraeon,  for  Strabo  (viii.  p.  556)  states
that  the  victor  went  with  his  prizes  in  solemn  pro-
cession to  that  temple.  This  contest  was  said  to
have  been  instituted,  according  to  some  traditions,
by  Acrisius  and  Proetus  ( Aelian,  V.  H.  iii.  24),
according  to  otliers  by  Archinus.  (Schol.  ad  Pind.
01.  vii.  152.)

The  Heraea  or  Hecatombaea  of  Aegina  were
celebi-ated  in  the  same  manner  as  those  of  Argf>8

Q   Q


5S4  IIERES.

(See  Schol.  ad  Pind.  Idhm.  viii.  114;  Miillcr,
Ae(/inet.  p.  149.)

The  Heniea  of  Samos,  which  island  also  derived
the  worship  of  Hera  from  Argos  (Pans.  vii.  4.  §  4),
were  perhaps  the  most  brilliant  of  all  the  festivals  of
this  divinity.  A  magnificent  procession,  consisting
of  maidens  and  married  women  in  splendid  attire,
and  with  floating  hair  (Asius,  ap.  Athen.  xii.  p.
525),  together  with  men  and  youths  in  armour
(P  lyaen.  Strat.  i.  23,  vi.  45),  went  to  the  temple
of  Hera.  After  they  arrived  within  the  sacred
precincts,  the  men  deposited  their  armour  ;  and
prayers  and  vows  were  offered  up  to  the  goddess.
Her  altar  consisted  of  the  ashes  of  the  victims
which  had  been  burnt  to  her.     (Paus.  v.  13.  §  5.)

The  Heraea  of  Elis  were  celebrated  every  fifth
year,  or  in  the  fourth  year  of  every  Olympiad.
(Corsini,  Dissert,  iii.  30.)  The  festival  was  chiefly
celebrated  by  maidens,  and  conducted  by  sixteen
matrons  who  wove  the  sacred  peplus  for  the  goddess.
But  before  the  solemnities  commenced,  these  ma-
trons sacrificed  a  pig,  and  purified  themselves  in
the  well  Piera.  (Paus.  v.  1 6.  §  5.)  One  of  the
principal  solemnities  was  a  race  of  the  maidens  in
the  stadium,  for  which  purpose  they  were  divided
into  three  classes,  according  to  their  age.  The
youngest  ran  first  and  the  oldest  last.  Their  only
dress  on  this  occasion  was  a  %'''■'«'''?  which  came  down
to  the  knee,  and  their  hair  was  floating.  She  who
won  the  prize,  received  a  garland  of  olive-boughs,
together  with  a  part  of  a  cow  which  was  sacrificed
to  Hera,  and  might  dedicate  her  own  painted  like-
ness in  the  temple  of  the  goddess.  The  sixteen
matrons  were  attended  by  as  many  female  attend-
ants, and  perfoniied  two  dances  ;  the  one  called
the  dance  of  Physcoa,  the  other  the  dance  of  Hip-
podameia.  Respecting  further  particulars,  and  the
history  of  this  solemnity,  see  Paus.  v.  1 6.  §  2,  Sic.

Heraea  were  celebrated  in  various  other  places  ;
e.  g.  in  Cos  (Athen.  xiv.  p.  639,  vi.  p.  262),  at
Corinth  (Eurip.  Med.  1379  ;  Philostrat.  Her.  xix.
14),  at  Athens  (Plut.  Quaest.  Rom.  vii.  168),  at
Cnossns  in  Crete  (Diod.  v.  72),  &c.         [L.  S.]

HERE'DITAS.     [Heres.]

HERES.  1.  Greek.  The  Athenian  laws  of
inheritance  are  to  be  explained  under  this  title.
The  subject  may  be  divided  into  five  parts,  of
whioh  we  shall  speak :  1  st,  of  personal  capacity
to  inherit ;  2dly,  of  the  rules  of  descent  and  suc-
cession ;  3dly,  of  the  power  of  devising  ;  4thly,
of  tlie  remedies  of  the  heir  for  recovering  his
rights  ;  5thly,  of  the  obligations  to  which  he  suc-
ceeded.

I.  Of  Personal  Capacity  to  Inherit.  —  To  obtain
the  right  of  inheritance  as  well  as  citizenship
(iyX'O'Teia  and  TroAtTeja),  legitimacy  was  a  neces-
sary qualification.  Those  children  were  legitimate
who  were  born  in  lawful  wedlock.  (Dem.  c.
Neaer.  p.  1386.)  The  validity  of  a  marriage  de-
pended partly  on  the  capacity  of  the  contracting
parties,  partly  on  the  nature  of  the  contract.  On
the  first  point  little  needs  to  be  noticed  here,  ex-
cept that  brother  and  sister  by  the  same  mother
were  forbidden  to  marry  ;  but  consanguinity  in
general  was  so  far  from  being  deemed  an  objection,
that  marriage  between  collateral  relations  was  en-
couraged, in  order  to  keep  the  property  in  the
family.  (Andoc.  dc  Myst.  §  119,  c.  AM,.  §  33,
ed.  Bekk.  ;  Lys.  c.  Jfc.  §  41,  ed.  Bekk.  ;  Dem.
c.  Leock.  p.  1083,  c.  EubuL  p.  1305  ;  Plut.  Cimori,
4,  Tltemist.  32.)      The  contract  was  made  by  the


HERES.

husband  with  the  father,  brother,  or  other  legal
guardian  (Kvpios)  of  the  intended  wife :  then  only
was  she  properly  betrothed  (eTyur/T"^).  An
heiress,  however,  was  assigned,  or  adjudged,  to
the  next  of  kin  (iTndiKa(r6e7(ra)  by  process  of  law,
as  explained  under  Epiclerus.  (Isaeus,  de  Cir.
her.  §26,  de  Philoct.  her.  §  19,  ed.  Bekk.  ;  Dem.
pro  Phorm.  p.  954,  c.  Steph.  p.  1134.)  No  cere-
mony was  necessary  to  ratify  the  contract :  but  it
was  usual  to  betroth  the  bride  in  the  presence  of
witnesses,  and  to  give  a  marriage  feast,  and  invite
the  friends  and  relations,  for  the  sake  of  publicity.
(Isaeus,  de  Cir.  her.  §  IB  ;  Dem.  c.  Onet.  p.  869,
c.  Eubul.  pp.  1311,  1312.)  A  marriage  without
proper  espousals  was  irregular  ;  but  the  issue  lost
their  heritable  rights  only,  not  their  franchise  ;
and  the  former,  it  seems,  might  be  restored,  if  the
members  of  their  father''s  clan  would  consent  to
their  being  registered.  (Isaeus,  de  Philoct.  her.
§§  29 — 33.)  As  it  was  necessary  for  every  man
to  be  enrolled  in  his  clan,  in  order  to  obtain  his
full  civil  rights,  so  was  the  registration  the  best  evi-
dence of  legitimacy,  and  the  (ppdropis  and  ciryve-
!'€??  were  usually  called  to  prove  it  in  courts  of  jus-
tice. (Andoc.  de  Myst.  §  127,  ed.  Bekk.  ;  Isaeus,
de  Cir.  her.  §  26,  de  Philoct.  §  13  ;  Dem.  c.  Eubul.
p.  1305,  &c.)  For  further  particulars  see  Platner,
Beitr'dge,  p.  104,  &c.  ;  Schomann,  Antiq.  juris
pttldici  Graecorum,  lib.  v.  §§  19,  21,  88.

II.  0/  the  Rides  of  Descent  and  Succession. — •
Here  we  would  premise,  that,  as  the  Athenian  law
made  no  diflference  in  this  respect  between  real  and
personal  estate,  the  words  heir.,  inherit,  &c.,  will  be
applied  indiscriminately  to  both.  When  an  Athe-
nian died  leaving  sons,  they  shared  the  inherit-
ance, like  our  heirs  in  gavelkind,  and  as  they  now
do  in  France  (Isaeus,  de  Philoct.  her.  §  32)  :  a  law
no  less  favourable  to  that  balance  of  property  which
Solon  meant  to  establish,  than  the  law  of  primo-
geniture was  suited  to  the  military  aristocracies
created  in  the  feudal  times.  The  only  advantage
possessed  by  the  eldest  son  was  the  first  choice  in
the  division.  (Dem.  joroi^/^orwj.  p.  947.)  If  there
was  but  one  son,  he  took  the  whole  estate  ;  but  if
he  had  sisters,  it  was  incumbent  on  him  to  provide
for  them,  and  give  them  suitable  marriage  portions  ;
they  were  then  called  iirlTrpoiKoi.  (Harpocr.  s.  v.
'EiriSiKos.)  There  was  no  positive  law,  making  it
imperative  on  a  brother  to  give  his  sister  a  portion
of  a  certain  amount ;  but  the  moral  obligation,  to
assign  her  a  fortune  corresponding  to  his  own  rank,
was  strengthened  by  custom  and  public  opinion,
insomuch  that  if  she  was  given  in  marriage  por-
tionless, it  was  deemed  a  slur  upon  her  character,
and  might  even  raise  a  doubt  of  her  legitimacy.
(Isaeus,  de  Pyrr.  her.  §  40  ;  Lys.  de  Arist.  fjofi.
§16,  ed.  Bekk.  ;  Dem.  c.  Boeot.  de  dote,  p.  1014.)

On  failure  of  sons  and  their  issue,  daughters
and  daughters'  children  succeeded  (as  to  the  law
concerning  heiresses,  see  Epiclerus)  ;  and  there
seems  to  have  been  no  limit  to  the  succession  in
the  descending  line.  (Isaeus,  de  Cir.  her.  §§  39 — 46,
de  Pyrr.  her.  §  59,  de  Philoct.  §§  38,  67  ;  Dem.  c.
Macart.  pp.  1057,  1058.)  If  the  deceased  left
grandsons  by  diflferent  sons,  it  is  clear  that  they
would  take  the  shares  of  their  respective  fathers.
So  if  he  had  a  granddaughter  by  one  son,  and  a
grandson  by  another,  the  latter  would  not  exclude
the  former,  as  a  brother  would  a  sister,  but  both
would  share  alike.  Of  this  there  is  no  direct  evi-
dence ;  but  it  follows  from  a  principle  of  Attic  la^f,


i


KERES.

bywhich,  on  the  birth  of  a  son,  his  title  to  his
father's  inheritance,  or  to  a  share  thereof,  imme-
diately accru'^d  ;  if  then  he  died  before  his  father,
but  leaving  issue,  they  claimed  their  grandfather's
inheritance  as  representing  him.  It  was  otherwise
with  daughters.  Their  title  did  not  thus  accrue  ;
and  therefore  it  was  the  practice  for  the  son  of  an
heiress  to  be  adopted  into  his  maternal  grand-
father's house,  and  to  become  his  son  in  point  of
law.  Further  (as  will  presently  be  shown)  the
general  preference  of  males  to  females  did  not  com-
mence till  the  deceased's  father's  descendants  were
exhausted.

On  failure  of  lineal  descendants  the  collateral
branches  were  resorted  to.  And  first  came  the
issue  of  the  same  father  with  the  deceased  ;  viz.
brothers  and  brothers'  children,  the  children  of  a
deceased  brother  taking  the  share  of  their  father
(Isaeus,  dcHagn.  her.  §§  1,  2  ;  Dera.  c.  Macart.
p.  1067,  c.  Leoc/i.  p.  1083)  ;  and.after  them,  sisters
and  sisters'  children,  among  whom  the  principle
of  representation  also  prevailed  (Isaeus,  de  ApolL
lier.  §  23)  ;  but  whether  sisters'  children  took  per
stirpes  or  per  capita.,  does  not  appear.

Next  come  the  descendants  of  the  same  grand-
father with  the  deceased  ;  cousins  and  cousins'
children.  Here  the  law  declared,  that  males  and
the  issue  of  males  should  be  preferred  to  females
and  their  issue.  (Isaeus,  de  Hagn.  her.  §§1,  2  ;
Dem.  c.  Macaii.  p.  1067.)  Thus,  the  son  of  an
uncle  would  exclude  the  son  of  an  aunt,  while  the
son  of  an  aunt  would  exclude  the  daughter  of  an
uncle.  On  the  same  principle  Isaeus  (de  Apoll.
her.  §§  25,  26)  contends  that  the  son  of  a  female  first
cousin  prevented  his  mother's  sister  from  inherit-
ing, although  he  was  further  removed  from  the  de-
cccised  (76Vet  aTrwrepw)  by  one  degree.  This  pre-
ference, however,  was  confined  to  those  who  were
descended  from  the  same  common  ancestor,  that  is
to  say,  from  the  grandfather  of  the  deceased  ;  for
the  words  iK  rSov  avruv  in  Demosthenes  are  to  be
explained  by  the  rpircf}  yei/ei  of  Isaeus.  Therefore
a  first  cousin  once  removed,  claiming  through  a
female,  had  a  better  title  than  a  second  cousin
claiming  through  males  ;  for  a  second  cousin  is  de-
scended not  from  the  grandfather,  but  only  from
the  great-grandfather  of  the  deceased,  and  so  is
beyond  the  legal  degrees  of  succession  (e|w  t^s
ayyicTTelas  or  avyYevsias).  On  this,  Eubulides
founds  his  pretension  to  the  estate  of  Hagnias  ;  be-
cause he  claims  as  representative  (son  by  adoption)
of  his  maternal  grandfather,  who  was  first  cousin
to  Hagnias  ;  whereas  the  father  of  his  opponent,
Macartatus,  was  second  cousin  to  Hagnias,  and  (as
Demosthenes  expresses  it)  was  not  in  the  same
branch  of  the  family  (ouk  ck  tqv  oIkov  tov  'Ayviov,
c.  Macart.  p.  1070).

On  failure  of  first  cousins  and  their  issue,  the  in-
heritance went  to  the  half-blood  by  the  mother's
side  ;  brothers  and  sisters,  nephews  and  nieces,
cousins  and  their  children,  as  before.  But  if  there
were  no  maternal  kinsmen  within  the  legal  degree,
it  returned  to  the  agnatic  or  next  of  kin  on  the  pa-
ternal side  (tovs  vphs  TrorpJs),  whose  proximity
was  traced  by  counting  the  degrees  from  the  com-
mon ancestor.  (Isaeus,  de  Hagn.  /ter.  §§  1 — 18  ;
Deni.  c.  MacaH.  p.  1 067.)

The  succession  of  parents  to  their  children  is
matter  of  dispute  among  the  learned.  From  the
silence  of  the  orators,  the  absence  of  any  example,
and  the  express  declaration  of  Isaeus  {de  llagn.


HERES.  6&«

her.  §  26)  respecting  tlie  mother,  it  may  be  inferred
that  parents  could  not  inherit  at  Athens.  At
Athens  the  maxim,  hereditas  nunquam  ascendit,
held  only  of  lineal,  not  of  collateral  ascent.  For
example,  an  uncle  might  inherit.  (Isaeus, de  Cleon.
her.  §  55.)  So  also  he  might  marry  the  heiress,  as
next  of  kin.  (Be  Pyrr.  her.  §  90.)  On  this  part
of  the  subject  the  reader  is  referred  to  Bunsen,  de
jure  her ed.  A  then.  ;  SirWilliam  Jones's  Commentary
annexed  to  the  translation  of  Isaeus  ;  and  a  short
summary  of  the  law  by  Schomann,  Ant.  j.  p.  Gr.
lib.  V.  §  20.  These  and  other  writers  are  not  agreed
on  many  of  the  foregoing  points,  which  are  left  in
much  obscurity,  owing  to  the  mutilated  state  in
which  the  laws  have  reached  us,  and  the  artifices
used  by  the  orators  to  misrepresent  the  truth.

It  will  assist  the  student  to  be  informed,  that
ave\\>i6s  signifies  a  first  cousin.  'Ai/6i|/iaSoCs  is  a  first
cousin's  son  ;  formed  in  the  same  manner  as  ctSeA.-
(pidovs  from  aSe\(p6s,  and  ^vyarpiSovs  from  ^vya-
T-fip.  Thus,  my  first  cousin's  son  is  aue\\/ia5ovs  to
me  ;  but  not  conversely.  Again,  though  it  is  true
that  two  or  more  second  cousins  may  be  spoken  of
collectively  as  ave\pia5o7  (Dem.  c.  Steph.  p.  1 1 1 7),
yet  one  of  them  cannot  be  said  to  be  aviy\iiahovs  to
another.  Herein  consists  the  fallacy  of  those  who
maintain  that  second  cousins  came  within  the  legal
degrees  of  succession.

KXripos  is  the  subject-matter  of  inheritance,  or
(in  one  sense  of  the  word)  the  inheritance  ;  KXr]po-
v6,uos  the  heir.  'Ayxt(Treia,  proximity  of  blood  in
reference  to  succession,  and  sometimes  right  of  suc-
cession. '2,vyy4veia,  natural  consanguinity,  ^vy-
yev(7s,  collateral  relations,  are  opposed  to  ^Kyovoi,
lineal  descendants.

III.  Of  the  pow6r  of  Devising. — That  the  owner
had  power  to  alienate  his  property  during  his  life-
time, and  that  such  alienation  was  valid  in  point
of  law,  both  as  against  the  heir  and  all  the  rest  of
the  world,  is  beyond  a  doubt.  There  was,  however,
an  ancient  law  which  punished  with  degradation
(drj/xia)  a  man  who  had  wasted  his  patrimony  (t^
Trarp^a  /careSTjSoKws).  He  was  considered  an
offender  against  the  state,  because  he  disabled  him-
self from  contributing  to  the  public  service.  Pro-
secutions for  such  an  offence  were  rare  ;  but  the  re-
putation of  a  spendthriit  was  always  prejudicial  to
a  man  in  a  court  of  justice.  (Diog.  Laert.  Solon.,
55  ;  Aeschin.  c.  Timardi.  §§  97 — 105,  154,  ed.
Bekk.)

Every  man  of  full  age  and  sound  mind,  not  under
durance  or  improper  influence,  was  competent  to
make  a  will  ;  but  if  he  had  a  son,  he  could  not
disinherit  him  ;  although  his  will  might  take  effect
on  the  contingency  of  the  son  not  completing  his
seventeenth  year,  (Isaeus,  de  Arist.  her.  §  14,  de
Philoct.  §10;  Dem.  c.  Steph.  pp.  1 1 33, 1 136.)  The
bulk  of  the  estate  being  left  to  the  son,  legacies
nyght  be  given  to  friends  and  relations,  espe-
cially to  those  who  performed  the  office  of  oiu"  exe-
cutor or  testamentary  guardian.  (Dem.  c.  Aphob.
pp.  814,  827.)  And  in  the  division  of  property
among  sons,  the  recommendations  of  the  father
would  be  attended  to.  (Dem.  c.  Macart.  p.  1055,
pro  Phorm.  p.  955.)  Also  a  provision,  not  ex-
ceeding a  thousand  drachmas,  might  be  assigned  to
an  illegitimate  child.     (Harpocr.  s.  v.  JSfoOela.)

A  daughter  could  not  be  disinherited,  though
the  estate  might  be  devised  to  any  person  on  con-
dition of  his  marrying  her.  (Isaeus,  de  Pyrr.  her,
§§  82—84.)

QQ  2


£96


HERES.


It  was  only  Avhen  a  man  had  no  issue  that  he
was  at  full  liberty  to  appoint  an  heir.  PI  is  house
and  heritage  were  then  considered  desolate  (eprj/nos
Kol  audovvfios),  a  great  misfortune  in  the  eyes  of
an  Athenian  ;  for  every  head  of  a  family  was
anxious  to  transmit  his  name  and  religious  usages
to  posterity.  The  same  feeling  prevailed  among
the  Greeks  in  more  ancient  times.  We  learn  from
Hesychius  and  the  Etymol.  Mag.  that  distant  re-
lations were  called  XTjpcoa'Tar,  because,  when  they
inherited,  the  house  was  xvp^^^^f^  ^al  ipt)iios.  (See
Hom.  //.  V.  158  ;  Hes.  Tlieog.  607.)  To  obviate
this  misfortune,  an  Athenian  had  two  courses  open
to  him.  Either  he  might  bequeath  his  property
by  will,  or  he  might  adopt  a  son  in  his  lifetime.
[Adoptio,  Greek,]

Wills  were  in  writing,  and  usually  had  one  or
more  attesting  witnesses,  whose  names  were  super-
scribed, but  who  did  not  know  the  contents.  They
were  often  deposited  with  friends,  or  other  trust-
worthy persons,  such  as  a  magistrate.  It  was  con-
sidered a  badge  of  fraud  if  they  were  made  secretly
or  in  the  presence  of  strangers.  (Isaeus,  de  Philoct.
her.  §  8,  de  Astyph.  her.  §§  8—17  ;  Dem.  c.  StepL
p.  1137.)  A  will  was  ambulatory  until  the  death
of  the  maker,  and  might  be  revoked  wholly  or  par-
tially, by  a  new  one.  It  seems  also  that  there
might  be  a  parol  revocation,  (Isaeus,  de  Philoct.
Jier.  §  40,  de  Cleon.  her.  §  32.)  The  client  of  Isaeus,
in  the  last-cited  cause,  contends,  that  the  testator
sent  for  the  depositary  of  his  will,  with  an  inten-
tion to  cancel  it,  but  died  before  he  got  it  into  his
possession  ;  this  (he  says)  was  a  virtual  revocation.
He  calls  witnesses  to  prove  the  testator's  affection
for  himself  and  dislike  of  his  opponents,  and  thence
infers  that  the  will  was  imnatural,  and  a  proof  of
insanity.  Similar  arguments  were  often  used.
(Isaeus,  de  Nicost.  her.  §  23,  de  Astyph.  her.  §  21.)

With  respect  to  the  proceeding  by  which  a
father  publicly  renoimced  his  paternal  authority
over  his  son,  see  Apokeruxis.  Plato  {Leg.  xi.
9.  p.  928)  refers  to  it,  and  recommends  that  a
father  should  not  take  such  a  step  alone,  but  in
conjunction  with  the  other  members  of  the  family.
At  Athens  the  paternal  authority  ceased  altogether
after  the  son  had  completed  his  nineteenth  j-ear  ;
he  was  then  considered  to  belong  less  to  his  father
than  to  the  state.  (Valckenaer,  ad  Ammoninm,
s.  V.  'AiroKiipvKTos :  Meier,  de  Bonis  Damn.  p.
26.)

IV.  0/  the  Remedies  of  the  Heir  for  Recovering
his  Rights.  —  A  son  or  other  male  descendant  might
enter  and  take  possession  of  the  estate  immediately
after  the  owner's  death.  (Isaeus,  de  Pyrr.  her.
%  72,  de  dr.  her.  §  47.)  If  he  was  prevented  from
90  doing,  he  might  bring  an  action  of  ejectment
against  the  intruder.  [Embateia.]  Any  one  who
disturbed  a  minor  in  the  enjoyment  of  his  patrimony
was  liable  to  a  criminal  prosecution  (/ca/cdJo-ews
fi<Tayye\ia,  Isaeus,  de  Pyrr.  her.  §  76).  As  to
the  proceedings  in  case  of  heiress,  see  Epiclerus.

Other  heirs  at  law  and  claimants  by  adoption  or
devise  were  not  at  liberty  to  enter,  until  the  estate
was  formally  adjudged  to  them.  The  proper  course
was,  to  make  application  to  the  archon,  who  attended
at  his  office  for  that  purpose  every  month  in  the  year
except  the  last  (Scirophorion ).  The  party  who
applied  was  regarded  as  a  suitor,  and  (on  obtaining
a  hearing)  weis  said  Aa7x<i''et»'  tov  KKi\pov.  (Isaeus,
dc  Hagn.  her.  §§  22,  40,  de  Pyrr.  her.  §  74,  de
Astyph.  her.  §  4  ;  Dem.  c.  Steph.  p.  1136.)


HERES.

At  the  first  regular  assembly  {Kvpia  fKK\7](ria),
held  after  he  had  received  notice,  the  archon  caused
proclamation  to  be  made,  that  such  a  person  had
died  without  issue,  and  that  such  and  such  persons
claimed  to  be  his  heirs.  The  herald  then  asked
e?"  Tis  a/xcpicrSriTe'iif  ^  irapaKaraSaW^iv  ^ouherai
rou  K\-i]pov  ;  these  words  are  variously  interpreted.
Perhaps  the  best  explanation  is  this  :  —  'AjU^to--
€r]Teiv  is  a  term  of  general  import,  applied  to  all
who  dispute  the  title  of  another,  and  would  in-
clude those  who  claimed  a  moiety  or  other  share
of  the  estate.  TlapaKaraSdWeiv  signifies  to  make
a  deposit  by  way  of  security  for  costs,  which  was
required  of  those  who  maintained  their  exclusive
title  to  the  whole  inheritance.  Perhiips,  however,
the  payment  in  this  case  was  optional,  and  might
I  be  intended  for  the  mere  purpose  of  compelling  the
other  parties  to  do  the  same.  The  deposit  thus
paid  was  a  tenth  part  of  the  value  of  the  property
in  dispute,  and  was  returned  to  the  party  if  suc-
cessful. (Pollux,  viii.  32,  95  ;  Isaeus  de  Nicost.
her.  §  13,  de  Hagn.  her.  §  20  ;  Dem.  c.  Macart.
p.  1051,  c.  Leoch.  pp.  1090—1093.)

If  no  other  claimant  appeared  the  archon  ad-
judged the  estate  to  the  first  suitor  (eTreSi/coo-ej/
avTc^  rhv  KKr^pou).  If,  howevei',  there  were  ad-
verse claims,  he  proceeded  to  prepare  the  cause  for
trial  (SiaSi/catrm),  First  came  the  avaKpiffis.,  in
the  usual  way,  except  that  no  party  was  considered
as  plaintiff  or  defendant  ;  and  the  bills  in  which
they  set  forth  their  respective  titles,  were  called
auTiypa(pai.  (Harpocr.  s.  v.  ;  Dem.  c.  Olymp.  pp.
1173,  1175.)  The  dicasts  were  then  to  be  sum-
moned, and,  whatever  the  number  of  parties,  one
court  was  held  for  the  decision  of  all  their  claims.
If  any  one  neglected  to  attend  on  the  appointed
day,  and  had  no  good  excuse  to  offer,  his  claim  was
struck  out  of  the  record  (Sieypdipr]  rj  afji.(pi(r§-nTT]ais),
and  the  contest  was  carried  on  between  the  remain-
ing parties,  or,  if  but  one,  the  estate  was  awarded
to  him.  (Dem.  c.  Olymp.  p.  1174.)  The  trial  was
thus  managed.  The  dicasts  had  to  give  their
verdict  either  for  one  person  proving  a  title  to  the
whole,  or  for  several  persons  coming  in  under  the
same  title,  as  (for  instance)  two  brothers  entitled
each  to  a  moiety.  One  ballotting  box  therefore
was  provided  for  every  party  who  appeared  in  a
distinct  interest.  The  speeches  were  measured  by
the  clepsydra.  Each  party  had  an  a/jLcpopevs  of
water  for  his  first  speech,  and  half  that,  or  three
XOfh  for  the  second.  (Isaeus,  de  Hagn.  Iter.  §  30,
&c. ;  Dem.  c.  Macart.  p.  1052.)  That  these  ar-
rangements gave  rise  to  fraud  and  collusion,  is
clearly  shown  in  the  cases  above  cited.

The  verdict,  if  fairly  obtained,  was  final  against
the  parties  to  the  cause.  But  any  other  person,
Avho  by  absence  or  unavoidable  accident  was  pre-
vented from  being  a  party,  might  afterwards  bring
an  action  against  the  successful  candidate,  to  re-
cover the  estate.  He  was  then  obliged  to  pay  his
deposit  (irapaKaTaSoK-f]),  summon  the  defendant,
and  proceed  in  other  respects  as  in  an  ordinary
suit.  This  he  might  do  at  any  time  during  the
life  of  the  person  in  possession,  and  within  five
years  after  his  death.  (Isaeus,  de  Pyrr.  her.  §  70;
Dem.  c.  Olymp.  p.  1 1 75,  c.  Macart.  p.  1 054.)

It  has  hitherto  been  supposed  that  a  simple  issue
was  raised  between  the  litigant  parties,  viz.  who  was
entitled  to  possess  the  estate  ;  and  that  they  pro-
ceeded at  once  to  the  trial  of  such  issue.  This  was
called  €udu5tKi(j    elaUvai.     The   cause,  howeverf


HERES.

might  become  more  complicated,  if  one  of  the
parties  chose  to  make  exception  to  the  right  of  any
other  to  dispute  his  title  :  this  was  done  by  tender-
ing an  affidavit  (Sia/j-apTvpia)  sworn  either  by  him-
self or  by  another,  wherein  he  declared  that  the
estate  was  not  the  subject  of  litigation  (fx^)  iniSiKos),
.and  alleged  some  matter  of  fact  or  law  to  support
his  assertion.  Sons,  adopted  sons,  and  persons  in
legal  possession,  were  allowed  this  advantage.
For  example,  a  witness  might  depose  that  the  last
occupier  had  left  male  issue  surviving  him,  and
therefore  the  property  could  not  be  claimed  by  any
collateral  relative  or  devisee  :  or  that  the  title  had
already  been  legally  determined,  and  that  the  new
claimants  were  not  at  liberty  to  reopen  the  ques-
tion. This  had  the  effect  of  a  dilatory  plea,  and
stayed  further  proceedings  in  the  cause.  ( Isaeus,
dehicaeog.  her.  §  30,  de  ApolL  §  3,  de  Philoct.  §§  4,
.'V2,  de  Pyrr.  %  3  ;  Dem.  c.  Leoch.  p.  1097.)  If
then  the  suitor  was  resolved  to  prosecute  his  claim,
he  had  no  other  course  but  to  procure  a  conviction
of  the  witness  (who  had  sworn  the  affidavit)  in  an
action  for  false  testimony  (5i/c7j  xpevSo/xapTvpiwv).
Examples  of  such  actions  are  the  causes  in  which
Demosthenes  was  engaged  against  Leochares,  and
Isaeus  for  the  estate  of  Philoctemon.  On  the  trial
of  the  witness  the  questions  were,  first,  the  truth
of  the  facts  deposed  to  ;  secondly,  their  legal  effect,
if  true.  With  respect  to  the  witness,  the  conse-
quences were  the  same  as  in  any  other  action  for
false  testimony.  [Martyria.]  With  respect  to
the  original  cause  nothing  further  was  determined,
than  that  it  could  or  could  not  be  entertained  ;  the
Siafiaprvpla  in  this  particular  resembling  the  irapa-
ypacpr].  If  the  court  decided  that  the  suit  could
be  entertained,  the  parties  proceeded  to  trial  in  the
manner  before  explained.

As  to  the  further  remedies  to  be  pursued  by  the
successful  party,  in  order  to  obtain  the  fruits  of  his
judgment,  see  Embateia  and  Exoules  Dike.
And  on  this  part  of  the  subject  see  Meier,  A  it.  Proe.
pp.  459,  6 1 6,  638  ;  Platner,  Att.  Proc.  vol.  i.  p.  163,
vol.  ii.  p.  309.

V.  Of  the  Obligations  to  which  the  Heir  succeeded.
—  The  first  duty  of  an  heir,  as  with  us  of  an  exe-
cutor, was,  to  bury  the  dead  and  perform  the  cus-
tomary funeral  rites  (to  vo/xiCSfieva  iroLeTy).  It  is
well  known  what  importance  was  attached  to  this
by  the  ancients.  The  Athenian  law  regulated  the
time  of  biu'ial,  and  the  order  in  which  the  female
relations  should  attend.  If  no  money  was  left  to
pay  the  expenses  oF  burial,  still  the  nearest  rela-
tives were  bound  to  defray  them  ;  and  if  they
neglected  to  perform  their  duty,  the  chief  magis-
trate {S-fjfiapxos)  of  the  demus,  in  which  the  death
took  place,  after  warning  them  by  public  notice
(avaipe^u  koL  (&07rT€tv,  Koi  Kadaipeiv  rhv  Sfj^uo;'),
got  the  work  done  by  contract,  paid  for  it  himself,
and  was  then  empowered  to  sue  them  for  double
the  amount.  When  a  rich  man  died,  there  was
no  backwardness  about  his  funeral.  It  is  rather
amusing  to  see  how  eagerly  the  relations  hastened
to  show  respect  to  his  memory,  as  if  to  raise  a  pre-
sumption of  their  being  the  heirs.  (Isaeus,  de
Astt/ph.  lier.  §  40,  de  Cir.  her.  §§  29—33,  de  Ni-
cost.  Jier.  §§  9,  25  ;  Dem.  c.  Macart.  pp.  1069,
1071.)

Children,  who  neglected  to  bury  their  parents,
were  liable  to  a  criminal  prosecution  {'ypa<pr]  KaKw-
crews  yoveav),  just  as  they  were  for  refusing  to
support  or  assist  them  in  their  lifetime.    The  word


HERES.


m


yoviis  in  this  case  includes  all  ancestors.  (Meier,
de  Bon.  Damn.  p.  126.)

Among  heritable  obligations  may  be  reckoned
that  of  marrying  a  poor  heiress  (i^rjtro-a),  or  giving
her  in  marriage  with  a  suitable  portion.  (See
Epiclerus,  and  Meurs.   Them.  Att.  i.  13.)

That  the  heir  was  bound  to  pay  the  debts  of  the
deceased,  as  far  as  the  assets  would  extend,  cannot
be  doubted.  Five  years  seem  to  have  been  the
period  for  the  limitation  of  actions  against  him
(irpode(rixia).  In  case  of  a  mortgage,  he  was  en-
titled only  to  the  surplus  of  the  mortgaged  property,
remaining  after  payment  of  the  debt  charged
thereon.  (Lys.  de  Bon.  Publ.  §§  4,  5  ;  Isaeus,
de  Arist.  her.  §  23;  Demosth.  c.  Calipp.  p.  1240,
c.  Spttd.  p.  1030,  c.  Nausim.  pp.  988,  989.)

State  debtors,  such  as  fanners  of  the  public  re-
venue who  had  made  default,  or  persons  con-
demned to  pay  a  fine  or  penalty,  were  disfran-
chised (&Tifxoi)  until  they  had  settled  the  debt  ;
and  the  disgrace  extended  to  their  posterity.  Thus
Cimon,  son  of  Miltiades,  was  compelled  to  pay  a
fine  of  fifty  talents  which  had  been  imposed  on  his
father  ;  and  the  story  is,  that  Callias  advanced
him  the  money,  in  return  for  the  hand  of  his  sister
Elpinice.  (Dem.  c.  Androt.  p.  603,  c.  Theoc.
pp.  1322,  1327,  c.  Aphoh.  p.  836,;)ro  Cor.  p.  329,
c.  Macart.  p.  1069.)  When  the  whole  of  a  man's
property  was  confiscated,  of  course  nothing  could
descend  to  his  heir.  It  seems  to  have  been  a  com-
mon practice,  in  such  a  case,  for  the  relations  of
the  deceased  to  conceal  his  effects,  or  to  lay  claim
to  them  by  pretended  mortgages.  Against  these
frauds  there  were  severe  penalties,  as  may  be  seen
from  the  speeches  of  Lysias,  c.  Philocr.  and  de  ban.
Arist.     (Meier,  de  Bon.  Damn.  p.  212.)

The  posterity  of  those  who  were  put  to  death
by  the  people,  or  were  convicted  of  certain  in-
famous crimes,  such  as  theft,  inherited  the  aTifila
of  their  ancestors,  a  damnosa  hereditas,  which  they
could  not  decline  or  escape  from.  It  may  be  com-
pared to  the  corruption  of  blood  following  upon
attainder  in  the  feudal  law.  The  legislator  seems
to  have  thought  that  such^  children  must  be  the
natural  enemies  of  their  country,  and  ought  to  be
disarmed  of  all  power  to  do  mischief.  We  cannot
Avonder  at  this,  when  we  consider,  that  with  re-
spect to  private  feuds,  it  was  deemed  honourable
and  meritorious  in  the  child  to  preserve  the  enmity
of  the  father  ;  and  we  find  public  prosecutors  (as
in  the  opening  of  the  speech  of  Lysias  against
Agoratus,  of  Demosthenes  against  Theocrines),
telling  the  dicasts,  that  they  had  been  induced  to
come  forward  by  a  desire  to  avenge  the  wrongs  of
their  family.  In  the  same  spirit  the  Athenian  law
required,  that  men,  guilty  of  unintentional  homi-
cide, should  remain  in  exile,  until  they  had  ap-
peased the  nearest  relatives  of  the  deceased,  to
whom  it  more  especially  belonged  to  resent  and
forgive  the  injury.  (Dem.  c.  Mid.  p.  551.  c.
Aristoc.  pp.  640,  643,  c.  Aristog.  p.  790,  c.  Ma-
cart. p.  1069  ;  Meier,  de  Bon.  Damn.  pp.  106,
136.)

Isaeus  tells  us,  that  parents,  who  apprehended
their  own  insolvency,  used  to  get  their  children
adopted  into  other  families,  that  they  might  escape
the  consequences.  (De  Arist.  her.  §  24.)  This  how-
ever could  not  be  done,  after  the  infamy  had  once
attached.  (Meier,  de  Bon.  Damn.  p.  136  ;  Aesch.
c.  Ctes.  §  21,  ed.  Bekk.)

We  find  no  mention  of  property  escheating  to
Q  Q  3


698


HERES.


the  state  of  Athens  for  want  of  heirs.  Tins  pro-
bably arose  from  a  principle  of  Athenian  law,  ac-
cording to  which  no  civic  family  was  suffered  to
ex])ire  ;  and  therefore  the  property  of  an  intestate
was  always  assigned  to  such  person  as  Avas  most
fit  to  be  his  successor  and  representative.  With
aliens,  and  those  illegitimate  children  who  were
regarded  as  aliens,  it  was  no  doubt  otherwise.
(Meier,  de  Don.  Damn.  p.  148.)  [C.  R.  K.]

2.  Roman.  When  a  man  died,  a  certain
person  or  certain  persons  succeeded  to  all  his
property,  under  the  name  of  htres  or  hered.es:
this  was  a  universal  succession,  the  whole  property
being  cjnsidered  a  universitas.  [Universitas].
Such  a  succession  comprehended  all  the  rights  and
liabilities  of  the  person  deceased,  and  was  ex-
])ressed  by  the  term  Hereditas.  The  word  here-
ditas  is  accordingly  defined  to  be  a  succession  to
all  the  rights  of  the  deceased  (Dig.  50.  tit.  16.
s.  24.)  ;  and  sometimes  it  is  used  to  express  the
property  which  is  the  object  of  the  succession.
The  term  pecunia  is  sometimes  used  to  express  the
whole  property  of  a  testator  or  intestate  (Cic.  de
Invent  ii.  21  ;  Gains,  ii.  104)  ;  but  it  only  ex-
presses it  as  property,  and  therefore  the  definition  of
hereditas  by  pecunia  would  be  incomplete.  Cicero
{Top.  6)  completes  the  definition  thus  :  —  "  Here-
ditas est  pecunia  quae  morte  alicujus  ad  quempiam
pervenit  jure,  nee  ea  aut  legata  testamento  aut
possessione  retenta."  The  negative  part  of  the
definition  excludes  legacies,  and  property  of  the  de-
ceased, the  ownership  of  which  is  acquired  by  a  suf-
ficient possession  of  it.  The  word  "jure"  excludes
the  "  bonorum  possessio,"  in  opposition  to  which
the  hereditas  is  appropriately  called  "justa."  The
lieres  was  the  person  who  acquired  all  that  had  be-
longed to  another,  morte  and  jure  ;  the  etymolo-
gical relation  of  the  word  to  herus  seems  probable.

A  person  might  become  a  heres  by  being  named
as  such  {i?i)>iitutus,  scriptus,  /actus)  in  a  will,  exe-
cuted by  a  competent  person,  according  to  the  forms
required  by  law  [TestamentumJ.  If  a  person
died  intestate  (intestatus).,  or  having  made  a  will
which  was  not  valid,  thS  inheritance  came  to  thosa
to  whom  the  law  gave  it  in  such  cases,  and  was
called  hereditas  legitima  or  ab  intestato.  But  a
man  could  not  die  testate  as  to  part  of  his  property
and  intestate  as  to  another  part,  except  he  were  a
soldier  (cujus  sola  voluntas  in  testando  spectatur).
Accordingij',  if  a  man  gave  a  part  of  the  hereditas
to  one  heres  or  more,  and  did  not  dispose  of  the
rest,  the  heres  or  heredes  took  the  whole.  (Inst.
ii.  tit.  14.  §  5  ;  Cic.  c/e  Livent.  ii.  21  ;  Vangerow,
Pandeklen^  &c.  vol.  ii.  p.  5.)

In  order  that  a  testamentary  succession  should
take  place,  the  person  dying  must  have  such  rights
as  are  capable  of  being  transmitted  to  another  ;
consequently  neither  a  slave,  nor  a  filius-familias,
according  to  the  old  Roman  law,  could  make  a
heres.  Also,  the  person  who  is  made  heres  must
have  a  legal  capacity  to  be  heres.

The  institution  of  a  heres  was  that  formality
which  could  not  be  dispensed  with  in  a  will.  If
the  testator  named  no  heres  or  heredes,  and  com-
plied with  all  the  other  legal  forms,  still  his  dispo-
sition of  his  property  was  not  a  will.  The  heres
called  heres  directus,  or  simply  heres,  represented
the  testator,  and  was  thus  opposed  to  the  heres
fideicommissarius.  [Fideicommissum.]  The  tes-
tator might  either  name  one  person  as  heres,  or
he  might  name  several  heredes  (coheredcs),  and  he


HERES.
might  divide  the  hereditas  among  them  as  he
pleased.  The  shares  of  the  heredes  were  generally
expressed  by  reference  to  the  divisions  of  the  As  :
thus,  "  heres  ex  asse  "  is  heres  to  the  whole  pro-
perty ;  "  heres  ex  dodrante,"  heres  to  three-
fourths  ;  heres  "ex  semuncia,"  heir  to  one  twenty-
fourth.  (Cic.  ad  AU.  xiii.  48,  vii.  8  ;  Cic.  Pro
Caecina,  6  ;  Inst.  2.  tit.  1 4.  §  5.)  If  there  were
several  heredes  named,  without  any  definite  shares
being  given  to  them,  the  property  belonged  to
them  in  equal  shares.  A  heres  might  be  insti-
tuted either  unconditionally  {pure),  or  conditionally
{sub  co7iditione) .

If  the  testator  had  a  legal  capacity  to  dispose,
and  if  his  will  was  made  in  due  fonn,  the  first  in-
quiry as  to  the  heres  was,  Avhether  he  had  a  legal
capacity  to  take  Avhat  was  given  to  him.  He  must
have  this  capacity  at  the  time  of  the  institution,  or
the  institution  is  null  ;  and  in  order  to  takfe  he
must  have  the  capacity  to  take  (Inst.  2.  tit.  19.
§  4),  at  the  time  of  the  testator's  death,  and  at
the  time  of  accepting  the  inheritance.  This  capacity
might  be  expressed  by  the  word  "  testamenti-
factio,"  an  expression  which  had  reference  not
only  to  the  legal  capacity  of  the  testator,  but  also
to  the  legal  capacity  of  the  person  named  heres.
As  a  general  rule,  only  Roman  citizens  could  be
named  as  heredes  in  the  will  of  a  Roman  citizen  ;
but  a  slave  could  also  be  named  heres,  though  he
had  no  power  to  make  a  will,  and  a  filius-familias
could  also  be  named  heres,  though  he  was  under
the  same  incapacity  ;  for  the  slave,  if  he  belonged
to  the  testator,  could,  by  his  master's  testament,
receive  his  freedom  and  become  heres  ;  and  if  he
belonged  to  another,  he  took  the  inheritance  for
the  benefit  of  his  master :  the  filius-familias  in  like
manner  acquired  it  for  his  father.  Persons,  not
Roman  citizens,  who  had  received  the  commercium,
could  take  hereditates,  legata  and  fideicommissa
by  testament.  (Cic.  pro  Caecin.  7,  32  ;  Savigny,
Zeitschrift,  vol.  v.  p.  229,  System,  &c.  vol.  ii.  p.  27.)

Heredes  were  either  Necessarii,  Sui  et  Neces-
sarii,  or  Extranei.  The  heres  necessarius  was  a
slave  of  the  testator,  who  was  made  a  heres  and
liber  at  the  same  time  ;  and  he  was  called  neces-
sarius, because  of  the  necessity  that  he  was  under
of  accepting  the  hereditas.  A  slave  was  sometimes
appointed  heres,  if  the  testator  thought  that  he  was
not  solvent,  for  the  purpose  of  evading  the  ignomi-
nia  which  was  a  consequence  of  a  person's  pro-
perty being  sold  to  pay  his  debts,  as  explained  by
Gains  (ii.  154,  &c.).  The  heredes  sui  et  necessarii
were  sons  and  daughters,  and  the  sons  and  daugh-
ters of  a  son,  wh»  were  in  the  power  of  a  testator  ;
but  a  grandson  or  granddaughter  could  not  be  a
suus  heres,  unless  the  testator's  son  had  ceased  to
be  a  suus  heres  in  the  testator's  lifetime,  either  by
death  or  being  released  from  his  power.  These
heredes  sui  were  called  necessarii,  because  of  the
necessity  that  they  were  under,  according  to  the
civil  law,  of  taking  the  hereditas  with  its  incum-
brances. But  the  praetor  permitted  such  persons  to
refuse  the  hereditas  {aftstinere  se  ah  hereditate),
and  to  allow  the  property  to  be  sold  to  pay  the
testator's  debts  (an  instance  is  mentioned  by  Cic.
Phil.  ii.  16)  ;  and  he  gave  the  same  privilege  to  a
mancipated  son  {qui  in  causa  mancipii  est).  All
other  heredes  are  called  extranei,  and  comprehend
all  persons  who  are  not  in  the  power  of  a  testator,
such  as  emancipated  children.  As  a  mother  had
no  potestas  over  her  children,  they  were  extranei


IIERES.

lieredes  when  named  heredes  in  her  will.  Extranei
heredes  had  the  potestas  or  jus  deliberandi  (Dig.
28.  tit.  8.  8.  ] ),  or  privilege  of  considering  whe-
ther they  would  accept  the  hereditas  or  not :  but
if  either  extranei  heredes,  or  those  who  had  the
abstinendi  potesUis,  meddled  with  the  testator's
property,  they  could  not  afterwards  disclaim  the
inheritance,  unless  the  person  who  had  so  meddled
was  under  twenty-five  years  of  age,  and  so  be-
longed to  a  class  who  were  relieved  by  the  praetor
in  all  cases  where  they  were  overreached  [Cura-
tor], and  also  in  cases  where  they  had  accepted
an  insolvent  hereditas  {damnosa  hereditas).  The
emperor  Hadrian  gave  this  relief  to  a  person
above  twenty-five  years  of  age  who  had  accepted
an  hereditas,  and  afterwards  discovered  that  it  was
incumbered  with  a  heavy  debt.  (Gaius,  ii.  163.)

A  certain  time  was  allowed  to  extranei  for  the
cretio  hereditaiis,  that  is,  for  them  to  determine
whether  they  would  take  the  hereditas  or  not:
hence  the  phrase  "  cernere  hereditatem."  (Cic.
ad  Att  xi.  12.)  Thus,  if  the  testator  had  written
in  his  will  "  Jleres  Titius  esto,"  he  ought  to  add,
*'  Cernitoque  in  centum  diebus  proxumis  quibus
scies  poterisque  :  quod  ni  ita  creveris  exheres  esto."
(Gaius,  ii.  165  ;  Cic.  de  Orat.  i.  22.)  If  the  ex-
traneus  wished  to  take  the  hereditas,  he  was  re-
quired to  make  a  formal  declaration  of  his  intention
within  the  time  named  {intra  diem  cretionis).  The
formal  words  of  cretion  were  "  eam  hereditatem
adeo  cernoque."  Unless  he  did  this,  he  lost  the
hereditas,  and  he  could  not  obtain  it  merel}^  by
acting  as  heres  (  pro  herede  gerendo).  If  a  person
was  named  heres  v/ithout  any  time  of  cretion  being
fixed,  or  if  he  succeeded  {leffitimo  jure)  to  the
property  of  an  intestate,  he  might  become  heres
without  any  formal  declaration  of  his  intention,
and  might  take  possession  of  the  hereditas  when
he  pleased  :  but  the  praetor  was  accustomed,  upon
the  demand  of  the  creditors  of  the  testator  or  in-
testate, to  name  a  time  within  Avhich  the  heres
should  take  possession,  and  in  default  of  his  doing
so,  he  gave  the  creditors  permission  to  sell  the
property.  The  common  form  of  cretion  in  the  will
(vulgaris  cretio)  has  been  already  mentioned.
Sometimes  the  words  *■'  quibus  sciet  poteritque  "
were  omitted,  and  it  Avas  then  specially  called
"  cretio  certorum  dierum,"  which  was  the  more
disadvantageous  to  the  heres,  as  the  days  began  to
be  reckoned,  or,  as  we  say,  the  time  began  to  run
immediately,  and  it  was  not  reckoned  from  the
time  when  the  heres  knew  that  he  was  named
heres,  and  had  no  impediment  to  his  cretion.

It  was  not  unusual  to  make  several  degrees  of
heredes  in  a  will,  which  was  called  suhstitutio.
(Inst,  2.  tit.  15.)  Thus  in  the  formula  beginning
"  Heres  Titius,"  &c.,  after  the  words  "  exheres
esto,"  the  testator  might  add,  "  Tum  Maevius
heres  esto  cernitoque  in  diebus  centum,"  &c.  ;  and
lie  might  go  on  substituting  as  far  as  he  pleased.
The  person  first  named  as  heres  (primo  gradu)
became  heres  by  the  act  of  cretion  ;  and  the
substitutus  (secundus  heres,  Cic.  Top.  10  ;  Hor.
Sat.  ii.  5.  48  ;  Tacit.  A?in.  i.  8)  was  then  entirely
excluded.  If  the  words  "  si  non  creveris  "  were
not  followed  by  words  of  exheredation,  this  gave
some  advantage  to  the  first  heres :  for  instance,  if
he  neglected  the  formality  of  cretion,  and  only  acted
as  heres,  he  did  not  lose  all,  but  shared  the  hereditas
equally  with  the  substituted  person.  This  was  the
old  rule :  but  a  constitution  of  M.  Antoninus  made


HERES.  699

the  acting  as  heres  equivalent  to  cretion,  provided
such  acting  took  place  within  the  time  of  cretion.
(Compare  Gaius,  ii.  177,  &c.,  with  Ulpian,  Frag.
xxii.  'ii4.)

In  the  case  of  liberi  impuberes,  who  were  in  the
power  of  a  testator,  there  might  be  not  only  the
kind  of  substitution  just  mentioned  (vulgaris  suh-
stitutio), but  the  testator  might  declare  that  if  such
children  should  live  to  become  his  heredes,  and
should  die  impuberes,  some  other  person,  whom  he
named,  should  be  his  heres.  This  was  expressed
thus,  "  si  prius  moriatur  quam  in  suam  tutelam
venerit"  (Cic.  de  Invent,  ii.  42,  Top.  10  ;  Gaius,
ii.  179),  for  the  termination  of  impuberty  and  of
the  tutela  were  coincident.  [Curator.]  Thus,
as  Gaius  remarks,  one  testamentary  disposition
comprised  two  hereditates.  This  was  called  pupil-
laris  substitutio.  (Inst.  2.  tit.  16.)  This  kind  of
substitution  was  contained  in  a  clause  by  itself,  and
in  a  separate  part  of  the  will,  which  was  secured
by  the  testator's  own  thread  and  seal,  with  a  pro-
vision in  the  first  part  of  the  will  that  this  second
part  should  not  be  opened  so  long  as  the  son  lived
and  was  impubes.  A  substitution  could  also  be
made  in  the  case  of  children  being  exheredated
(disinherited)  by  the  parent's  will,  and  the  sub-
stituted person  then  took  all  that  the  pupillus  ac-
quired by  hereditas,  legatum  (legacy)  or  gift.
Gaius  observes  (ii.  183)  that  all  his  remarks  with
reference  to  substitution  for  children  impuberes,
when  made  heredes  or  exheredated,  apply  to  post-
humous (postumi)  children,  of  which  there  is  an
example  cited  by  Cicero  (Top.  10.  Si  filius  natus
esset  in  decem  mensibus,  &c.).

If  an  extraneus  was  made  heres,  there  could  be
no  substitution  to  the  eflfect,  that  if  he  died  within
a  certain  time,  another  person  should  be  heres :  for
though  a  testator  could  attach  a  condition  to  be
performed  before  a  person  could  take  the  hereditas,
a  person  when  he  had  once  become  heres  continued
such.  The  case  of  a  pupillaris  substitutio,  Avhich
was  an  exception  to  this  general  rule,  was  probably
founded  on  the  patria  potestas.  The  heres  might,
however,  be  charged  with  a  fideicommissum,  in
which  case  he  was  heres  fiduciarius.  [Fideicom-
missum.]

As  to  conditions  which  the  heres  was  bound  to
perform,  they  might  be  any  that  were  not  contrary
to  positive  law  or  positive  morality  ;  such  as  the
setting  up  of  statues,  &c.  (Cic.  Verr.  ii.  8,  9,  14),
or  changing  the  name  (ad  Att.  vii,  8).  Impos-
sible conditions  were  treated  as  if  there  were  no
conditions  mentioned  (pro  non  scripto,  Inst.  2.  tit.
14.  s.  10).

If  a  man's  own  slave  was  made  heres  by  his
will,  it  was  necessary  that  he  should  be  made  free
also  by  the  will  :  the  words  were  "  Stichus  ser-
vus  mens  liber  heresque  esto."  If  the  slave  were
not  made  free  by  the  testament,  he  could  not  take
under  it,  even  if  he  were  manumitted  by  his
master,  and  of  course  he  could  not  if  he  were  sold  ;
and  the  reason  is,  that  the  institution  was  not
valid.  If  he  was  instituted  free  as  well  as  heres,
he  became  both  a  freeman  and  heres  necessarius  by
the  death  of  his  master :  if  he  was  manumitted  by
his  master  in  his  lifetime,  he  might  accept  the  in-
heritance or  refuse  it.  If  he  was  sold  by  his  mas-
ter in  his  lifetime,  he  could  take  possession  of  the
inheritance  with  the  permission  of  his  new  master,
who  thus  became  heres  through  the  medium  of  his
slave.     If  the  slave  who  was  made  heres  was  at


600  HERES.

that  time  the  property  of  another  person,  and  not
of  the  testator,  he  could  not  take  the  inheritance
■without  the  consent  of  his  master,  for  if  he  took  it
his  master  became  heres :  if  such  slave  was  manu-
mitted before  taking  possession  of  the  inheritance,
he  might  accept  it  or  refuse  it  as  he  pleased.

If  an  Ingenuus  died  intestate,  either  from  not
having  made  a  will,  or  having  made  a  will  but  not
in  due  form,  or  having  made  a  will  in  due  form
which  afterwards  became  invalid  (ruptum,  irrititm),
or  if  there  was  no  heres  under  the  will,  the  here-
ditas,  according  to  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,
came  to  the  heredes  sui,  and  was  then  called  le-
(jitima  hereditas,  (Gaius,  iii.  2.)  The  heredes  sui
were  "  liberi  "  in  the  power  of  the  testator  at  the
time  of  his  death  ;  the  term  liberi  comprehended
not  only  children,  but  the  children  of  the  testator's
male  children,  and  the  children  of  a  son's  son.
Adopted  children  were  considered  the  same  as
other  children.  But  grandchildren  oould  not  be
heredes  sui,  unless  their  father  had  ceased  to  be
in  the  power  of  the  intestate,  either  by  death  or  in
any  other  wa}',  as  by  emancipation.  A  wife  in
manu  being  considered  as  a  daughter,  and  a
daughter- in-law  {nurus)  in  manu  filii  being  con-
sidered a  granddaughter,  Avere  sui  heredes  ;  but
the  latter  only  when  her  husband  was  not  in  the
power  of  the  intestate  at  the  time  of  his  death.
Posthumous  children,  who  would  have  been  in  the
power  of  the  intestate  if  he  were  living,  were  also
sui  heredes.  The  sui  heredes  took  the  hereditas
in  equal  shares.  If  there  was  a  son  or  daughter,
and  children  of  a  son  deceased,  the  children  of  the
deceased  son  took  the  portion  which  their  parent
would  have  taken.  But  the  distribution  was  in
stirpes,  that  is,  araorag  the  stocks  or  stems  sprung
from  the  ancestor,  and  not  in  capita,  or  among  the
individuals :  thus,  if  there  were  a  son,  and  the  sons
of  a  deceased  son,  the  son  would  take  half  of  the
hereditas,  and  the  sons  of  the  deceased  son  would
take  the  other  half,  in  equal  shares.

If  an  intestate  had  no  sui  heredes,  the  Twelve
Tables  gave  the  hereditas  to  the  agnati,  (Gaius,
iii.  9.)  It  is  stated  under  Cognati,  who  are  agnati.
The  hereditas  did  not  belong  to  all  the  agnati,  but
only  to  those  who  were  nearest  at  the  time  when
it  was  ascertained  that  a  person  had  died  intestate.
If  the  nearest  agnatus  either  neglected  to  take  the
inheritance  or  died  before  he  had  taken  possession
of  it,  in  neither  case  did  the  next  in  succession,  as
agnatus,  take  the  inheritance.  He  was  the  nearest
agnatus  who  was  nearest  at  tlie  time  when  it  wjis
ascertained  that  a  person  had  died  intestate,  and
not  he  who  was  nearest  at  the  time  of  the  death  ;
the  reason  of  which  appears  to  be  that  the  heredi-
tas was  in  a  sense  the  property  of  the  intestate
until  his  heir  was  ascertained,  and  his  heir  could
not  be  ascertained  until  it  was  certain  that  he  had
left  no  will  ;  and  as  Gaius  observes,  if  he  had  left
a  will,  still  it  might  happen  that  no  person  would
be  heres  under  that  will ;  and  accordingly  it  seemed
better,  as  he  observes,  to  look  out  for  the  nearest
agnatus  at  the  time  when  it  is  ascertained  that
there  is  no  heres  under  the  will.  If  there  were
several  agnati  in  the  same  degree,  and  any  one
refused  to  take  his  share  or  died  before  he  had
assented  to  take  it,  such  share  accrued  {adcrevii)
to  those  who  consented  to  take  the  hereditas.

In  the  case  of  women,  there  were  some  peculi-
arities which  arose  from  their  legal  condition
(GaiuB,  iii.  14).     The  hereditates  of  women  intes-


HERES.

tate  came  to  their  agnati  just  as  the  inheritance^
of  males  ;  but  women  who  were  beyond  the  degree
of  consanguinei  (a  term  which  legally  means  bro-
thers and  sisters)  a)uld  not  take  hereditates  ab
intestate.  Thus,  a  sister  might  take  from  a  brother
or  sister  as  legitima  heres  ;  but  an  aunt  or  a
brother's  daughter  could  not  be  a  legitima  heres.
The  principle  of  Roman  law  which  gave  to  those
who  came  into  the  potestas  or  manus  the  quality
of  children  of  the  blood,  Avas  followed  out  in  this
case  also  :  a  mother  or  a  stepmother  who  had  come
in  manum  viri  thereby  obfciined  the  status  of  a
daughter  ;  and,  consequently,  as  to  legitimate  suc-
cession, there  were  the  same  relations  between  such
mother  or  stepmother  and  the  husband's  children,
as  there  were  among  the  husband's  children  them-
selves. By  the  Twelve  Tables  the  hereditas  of  an
intestate  mother  could  not  come  to  her  children,
because  women  have  no  sui  heredes  ;  but  by  a
SCtum  Orphitianum  of  M.Antoninus  and  Com-
modus,  the  sons  of  a  wife,  not  in  manu,  might  take
as  her  legitimi  heredes,  to  the  exclusion  of  consan-
guinei and  other  agnati.  (Ulp.  Frag.  xxvi.  §  7  ;
comp.  Inst.  3.  tit.  4.)

If  a  person  died  leaving  no  sui  heredes,  but  only
a  brother  and  another  brother''s  children,  the  bro-
ther took  all  as  the  nearest  agnatus.  If  there  was
no  brother  surviving,  and  only  children  of  brethren,
the  hereditas  was  divided  among  all  the  children
in  capita,  that  is,  the  whole  was  equally  divided
among  all  the  children.

If  there  were  no  agnati,  the  Twelve  Tables  gave
the  hereditas  to  the  gentiles.     [Gens.]

Gaius  (iii.  18,  &c.)  briefly  recapitulates  the  strict
law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  as  to  the  hereditates  of
intestates:  —  emancipated  children  could  claim  no-
thing, as  they  had  ceased  to  be  sui  heredes :  the
same  was  the  case  if  a  man  and  his  children  were
at  the  same  time  made  Roman  citizens,  unless  the
imperator  reduced  the  children  into  the  power  of
the  father:  agnati  who  had  sustained  a  capitis
diminutio  were  excluded,  and  consequently  a  sou
who  had  been  given  in  adoption,  and  a  daughter
who  Avas  married  and  in  manu  viri :  if  the  next
agnatus  did  not  take  possession,  he  who  Avas  next
in  order  could  not  for  that  reason  make  any  claim :
feminae  agnatae  Avho  Avere  beyond  the  degree  of
consanguinei  had  no  claim:  cognati,  whose  kin-
ship depended  on  a  female,  had  no  mutual  rights
as  to  their  hereditates,  and  consequently  there  Avere
no  such  mutual  rights  between  a  mother  and  her
children,  unless  the  mother  had  come  in  manura
viri,  and  so  the  rights  of  consanguinity  had  been
established  between  them.

Gaius  proceeds  to  show  (iii.  25,  &c.)  how  these
inequitable  rules  of  the  civil  law  Avere  modified  by
the  praetor's  edict.  As  to  the  succession  of  cognati
under  the  Imperial  legislation,  see  Inst.  3.  tit.  5,
De  SCto  TertulL;  Cod.  6.  tit.  58  ;  Nov.  118.

If  a  man  had  a  son  in  his  power,  he  Avas  bound
either  to  make  him  heres,  or  to  exheredate  iexhere-
dare)  him  expressly  (nominatlm).  If  he  passed
him  over  in  silence  {silentio  praeterierit),  the  will
was  altogether  void  {inutile,  non  jure  fa/:tum).
Some  jurists  were  of  opinion  that  eA'en  if  the  son,
so  passed  over,  died  in  the  father's  lifetime,  there
could  be  no  heres  under  that  Avill.  (Gaius,  ii.  123,
&c.)  Other  liberi  could  be  passed  over,  and  the
Avill  would  still  be  a  valid  will  ;  but  the  liberi  so
passed  over  took  a  certain  portion  of  the  hereditas
culcrescendo^  as  it  Avas  termed,  or  jure  adcrexendi.


HERES.

•For  instance,  if  the  heredes  instituti  were  sui,  the
person  or  persons  passed  over  took  an  equal  share
with  them.  If  the  heredes  instituti  were  extranei,
the  person  or  persons  passed  over  took  a  half  of
the  whole  hereditas  ;  and  as  the  praetor  gave  the
contra  tabulas  bonorum  possessio  to  the  person  so
passed  over,  the  extranei  were  deprived  of  all  the
hereditas.  A  rescript  of  the  emperor  M.  Antoninus
limited  the  amount  which  women  could  take  by  the
bonorum  possessio  to  that  which  they  could  take
jure  adcrescendi  ;  and  the  same  was  the  law  in  the
case  of  emancipated  females.

It  was  necessary  either  to  institute  as  heredes,
or  to  exheredate  posthumous  children  nominatim,
otherwise  the  will,  which  was  originally  valid,
became  invalid  (ruptnm)  ;  and  the  will  became
invalid  by  the  birth  either  of  a  posthumous  son  or
daughter,  or,  as  the  phrase  was,  adgnascendo  rum-
pitiir  testamentum.  (Cic.  de  Or.  i.  57.)  Postumi
were  not  only  those  who  were  born  after  the  tes-
tator's will  was  made,  and  came  into  his  power  or
would  have  come  into  his  power  if  he  had  lived,
])ut  also  those  who  might  become  the  sui  heredes
of  the  testator  by  the  death  of  some  other  person
in  the  testator's  lifetime.  Thus,  if  a  testator's  son,
Avho  was  in  his  power,  had  children,  and  tlie  son
died  in  the  testator's  lifetime,  the  grandchildren
became  sui  heredes,  and  the  testament  became
Tiiptum  by  this  quasi  agnatic :  it  was  therefore  a
necessary  precaution  to  institute  as  heredes  or  to
exheredate  such  grandchildren.  It  follows  that  if
the  testament  could  be  made  invalid  by  this  quasi
agnatic,  it  must  have  become  invalid  by  a  son
being  born  in  the  lifetime  of  the  testator,  unless
the  will  had  provided  for  the  case  ;  for  it  became
invalid  if  the  testator  adopted  a  son  or  a  daughter
(Ulpian)  either  by  adrogation  or  adoption  properly
80  called,  after  the  date  of  his  will.  The  case  was
the  same  if  he  took  a  wife  in  manum  after  the  date
of  the  will.

The  word  Postumus  has  clearly  the  same  signi-
fication as  Postremus,  and  literally  means  a  child
bom  last.  The  passage  of  Gains  is  defective  where
he  treats  of  Postumi ;  but  the  definition  of  Postumi,
as  preserved  in  the  Breviarium,  appears  to  be
exact ;  *'  Postumorum  duo  genera  sunt :  quia
postumi  adpellantur  hi,  qui  post  mortem  patris  de
uxore  nati  fuerint,  et  illi  qui  post  testamentum
fiictwm  nascuntur."  Sometimes  the  word  postumus
is  defined  only  as  a  child  born  after  a  father's
death,  as  we  see  in  some  of  the  Glossae,  and  in
Plutarch  (Sulla,  37)  ;  but  there  is  no  proof  that
the  meaning  was  limited  to  such  children  ;  and  the
.  passages  sometimes  cited  as  being  to  that  effect
(Dig.  50.  tit.  16.  s.  1 64  ;  '28.  tit,  3.  s.  3)  have  been
misunderstood.

As  to  Postumi  alieni,  see  Gaius,  i.  147,  ii.  242;
.  Vangerow,  Pandekten,  &c.  vol.  ii.  p.  90.

Other  cases  in  which  a  valid  testamentum
became  ruptum  or  irritum,  are  more  properly  con-
sidered under  Testamentum.

The  strictness  of  the  old  civil  law  was  modified
by  the  praetorian  law,  which  gave  the  bonorum
possessio  to  those  who  could  not  take  the  hereditas
by  the  rules  of  the.  civil  law.  [Bonorum  Pos-
sessio.]

The  heres  represented  the  testator  and  intestate
(Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  19),  and  had  not  only  a  claim  to  all
his  property  and  all  that  was  due  to  him,  but  was
bound  by  all  his  obligations.  He  succeeded  to  the
liacra  privata,  and  was  bound  to  maintain  them,


HERES.


601


but  only  in  respect  of  the  property,  for  tlie  obliga-
tion of  the  sacra  privata  was  attached  to  property
and  to  the  heres  only  as  the  owner  of  it.  Hence
the  expression  "  sine  sacris  hereditas  "  meant  an
hereditas  unencumbered  with  sacra.  (Plaut.  Caj4.
iv.  1.  8,  Trinum.  ii.  4.  83;  Festus,  s.v.  Sine  sacris
hereditas.)

The  legislation  of  Justinian  released  the  heres,
who  accepted  an  hereditas,  from  all  the  debts  and
obligations  of  the  testator  or  intestate,  beyond
what  the  property  would  satisfy,  provided  he  made
out  an  inventory  (inventarium)  of  the  property  in
a  certain  form  and  within  a  given  time.  (Cod.  6.
tit.  30.  s.  22.)  It  also  allowed  the  institution  of
a  man's  own  slave  as  heres  without  giving  him  his
freedom.     (Inst.  2.  tit.  14;  comp.  Gaius,  ii.  185.)

The  heres  could  claim  any  propertj'  which  be-
longed to  his  testator  or  intestate  by  the  heredita-
tis  petitio  (Dig.  5.  tit.  3.  s.  20),  which  was  an  actio
in  rem,  and  properly  belonged  to  a  heres  only,
though  it  was  afterwards  given  to  the  bonorum
possessor.  Each  heres  claimed  only  his  share.
(Cic.  Pro  Rose.  Com.,  c.  18.)

The  coheredes  shared  among  themselves  the  pro-
perty, and  bore  their  share  of  the  debts  in  the  same
proportions.  For  the  purpose  of  division  and  set-
tling the  affairs  of  the  testator,  a  sale  was  often
necessary.  (Cic.adAti.xi.\5.)  If  the  parties  could
not  agree  about  the  division  of  the  property,  any
of  them  might  have  an  actio  familiae  erciscundae.
[Familiae  Ekc.  Ac]

The  hereditas  might  be  alienated  by  the  form  of
in  jure  cessio.  The  heres  legitimus  might  alienate
the  hereditas  before  he  took  possession  of  it,  and
the  purchaser  then  became  heres,  just  as  if  he  had
been  the  legitimus  heres.  The  scriptus  heres  could
only  alienate  it  after  the  aditio  :  after  such  aliena-
tion by  him,  or  by  the  heres  legitimus  after  aditio,
both  of  them  still  remained  heredes,  and  conse-
quently answerable  to  creditors,  but  all  debts  due
to  them  as  heredes  were  extinguished.

The  hereditates  of  freedmen  are  more  properly
considered  under  Liberti  and  Patroni.

Before  it  was  determined  who  was  heres,  the
hereditas  was  without  an  owner,  and  was  said
"  jacere."  When  a  heres  was  ascertained,  such
person  was  considered  to  possess  all  the  rights  in-
cident to  the  hereditas  from  the  time  of  the  death
of  the  testator  or  intestate.  But  this  does  not  ex-
plain how  we  are  to  view  the  hereditas  in  the  in-
terval between  the  death  of  the  former  owner  and
the  time  when  the  heres  is  ascertained.  During
such  interval,  according  to  one  form  of  express.'ou
used  by  the  Roman  jurists,  the  hereditas  is  a  juris-
tical person  (vice  personae  fungitur)^  and  is  the
domina,  that  is,  the  domina  of  itself  ;  according  to
another  form  of  expression,  it  represents  the  de-
funct, and  not  the  person  of  ■  the  future  heres.
These  two  forms  are  the  same  in  meaning,  and
they  express  a  fiction  which  has  relation  to  the
legal  capacity  of  the  defunct,  and  not  that  of  the
future  heres,  and  which  does  not  involve  the  no-
tion of  any  juristical  personality  of  the  hereditas.
The  relation  to  the  legal  capacity  of  the  defunct  is
this :  —  Slaves  generally  belonged  to  an  hereditas.
A  slave,  sis  is  well  known,  could  acquire  property
for  his  living  master,  even  without  his  knowledge  ;
but  the  validity  of  the  act  of  acquisition,  in  some
cases,  depended  on  the  legal  capacity  of  his  master
to  acquire.  Now,  while  the  hereditas  was  without
.on  ascertained  owner,  many  acts  of  a  slave  by


602


HERMAE.


■which  the  liereditas  might  receive  additions,  were
strictly  void,  and  such  acts  could  only  have  their
legal  effect  on  the  supposition  that  the  slave  had
an  owner  of  a  sufficient  legal  capacity  ;  and  accord-
ingly, the  fiction  of  law  gave  validity  to  the  act  of
the  slave  by  relation  to  the  known  legal  capacity
of  the  late  owner,  and  not  by  relation  to  the  yet
unascertained  owner  who  might  not  have  such
legal  capacity.  The  following  are  examples  :  —
"  When  a  Roman,  who  had  a  legal  capacity  to
make  a  will,  died  intestate,  and  another  person
appointed  as  his  heres  a  slave,  who  belonged  to
this  hereditas  which  was  still  without  an  owner,  such
institution  of  a  heres  would  be  valid  by  virtue  of
this  fiction,  because  it  had  reference  to  the  legal
capacity  of  the  defunct.  If  there  had  been  no  such
fiction,  the  validity  of  the  institution  would  have
been  doubtful,  for  the  unascertained  legitimus  heres
might  be  an  intestabilis,  who  (at  least  according  to
the  old  law)  could  not  be  instituted  heres.  —  If  a
soldier  died  and  left  a  will,  which  was  not  yet
opened,  another  testator  might  institute  as  heres  a
slave  belonging  to  the  soldier's  hereditas,  because
the  institution,  according  to  this  fiction,  had  refer-
ence to  the  deceased  ;  but  if  there  were  not  this
fiction,  the  institution  might  be  void,  inasmuch  as
the  unascertained  heres  might  be  a  peregrinus  who
had  no  testamentifactio  with  this  other  testator.  —
It  was  to  provide  for  such  cases  as  these  only,  that
this  fiction  was  introduced  ;  and  it  had  no  other
object  than  to  facilitate  certain  acquisitions  by
jneans  of  the  slaves  who  belonged  to  an  hereditas."

This  masterly  exposition  is  by  Savigny  {System
des  heut.  R.  R.  vol.  ii.  p.  363).

(Gaius,  2.  99—190,  3.  1—24  ;  Ulpian,  Frag.
xxii..  Dig.  28,  29  ;  Inst.  2,  3  ;  Rein,  Das  R6-
mische  Privatrecht^  p.  361,  &c.  Erbrecht,  a  useful
compendium  of  the  Law  of  Hereditas,  as  it  appears
chiefly  in  the  Latin  classics  ;  Vangerow,  Pandekten,
«&c.  Erbrecht,  vol.  ii.  The  chapter  on  Erbrecht  in
Puchta's  Institutionen,  &c.  iii.  p.  215,  &c.  is  concise
and  very  clear.)  [G.  L.]

HERMAE  (epiJ.a7\  and  the  diminutive  Hennuli
(epfii^ia),  statues  composed  ofa  head,  usually  that  of
the  god  Hermes,  placed  on  a  quadrangular  pillar,
the  height  of  which  corresponds  to  the  stature  of
the  hum.an  body  (r]  reTpdywvos  ipyaaia,  Thuc.  vi.
27  ;  rh  (TxniJ-a  rh  Terpdywvou,  Paus.  iv.  33.  §  4,
s.  3).  Snne  difficulties  are  involved  in  the  ques-
tion of  their  origin,  and  of  their  meaning  as  symbols
of  Hermes.  One  of  the  most  important  features
in  the  mythology  of  Hermes  is  his  presidence  over
the  common  intercourse  of  life,  traffic,  journeys,
roads,  boundaries,  and  so  forth,  and  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  it  was  chiefly  in  such  relations  as  these
that  he  was  intended  to  be  represented  by  the
Hermae  of  the  Greeks  and  by  the  Tei-mini  of  the
Romans,  when  the  latter  were  identified  with  the
Hermae.  It  is  therefore  natural  that  we  should
look  for  the  existence  of  this  symbol  in  the  very
earliest  times  in  which  the  use  of  boundary-marks
was  required  ;  and  in  such  times  the  symbols
would  be  of  the  simplest  character,  a  heap  of  stones
or  an  unhewn  block  of  marble.  Now  we  find  that
there  were  in  many  parts  of  Greece  heaps  of  stones
by  the  sides  of  roads,  especially  at  their  crossings,
and  on  the  boundaries  of  lands,  which  were  called
tpfiaia   or    ep/xsla,    ep/iatot    \6(poi   and    ep/uLaKes*

*  Lessing,  Bottiger  (Andeut.  p.  45),  and  others
derive  these  words,  and  also  the  name  of  the  god,


HERMAE.
(Hesych.  s.  w.).  An  epixa7os  AtJ^os  near  Ithaca
is  mentioned  in  the  Odyssey  (xvi.  471)  ;  Strabo
noticed  many  cpfxeTa  on  the  roads  in  Elis  (viii.
p.  343)  ;  and  even  now  an  ancient  heap  of  stones
may  be  seen  on  the  boundary  of  Laconia  (Ross,
Pclop.  vol.  i.  pp.  18,  174).  The  religious  respect
paid  to  such  heaps  of  stones,  especially  at  the  meet-
ings of  roads,  is  shown  by  the  custom  of  each  passer
by  throwing  a  stone  onto  the  heap  (Nicand.  77/er.
150)  ;  this  custom  was  also  observed  with  refer-
ence to  the  Hermae  of  later  times,  at  least  to  those
which  stood  where  roads  met.  (AniL  Graec.  loc.
infra  cit.)  Such  heaps  of  stones  were  also  seen  by
Strabo  on  the  roads  in  Egypt  (xvii.  p.  818).
Another  mode  of  marking  a  boundary  or  other  de-
finite locality  was  by  a  pillar  of  stone,  originally
unhewn,  the  sacred  character  of  which  was  marked
by  pouring  oil  upon  it  and  adorning  it  (Theophrast.
16,  comp.  Genesis  xxviii.  18,  22,  xxxi.  45 — 48,
where  both  the  pillar  and  the  heap  of  stones  are
set  up  for  a  witness,  xxxv.  14).  The  EgA^ptian
obelisk  probably  belongs  to  the  same  class  of  monu-
ments.

Referring  the  reader,  for  the  further  examination
of  these  matters,  to  works  in  which  they  are  dis-
cussed at  length  (Zoega,  de  Orig.  et  Us.  Obelise.,
Romae,  1797,  p.  217  ;  Gerhard,  de  Religi(me
Hermarum.,  Berol.  1845,  4to.  ;  Otto,  de  Diis  Via-
li/jus,  c.  7  ;  Miiller,  Arch'dol.  d.  Kunst,  §  66  ;
Preller,  in  Pauly's  Real-Encyc.  d.  Class.  Alterth.
s.  V.  Mercurius,  vol.  iv.  p.  1845),  we  assume  that,
of  these  heaps  of  stones  and  pilhars,  those  which
marked  boundaries  were  either  originally  symbols
of,  or  were  afterwards  consecrated  to,  the  god
Hermes.  It  is  not  denied  that  such  rude  memo-
rials were  at  first  symbols  of  the  various  gods  alike,
but  at  a  very  early  period  they  came  to  be  more
especially  associated  with  the  worship  of  Hermes.

The  first  attempt  at  the  artistic  development  of
the  blocks  of  stone  and  wood,  b}'-  which,  in  the
earliest  period  of  idol-worship,  all  the  divinities
were  represented,  was  by  adding  to  them  a  head,
in  the  features  of  which  the  characteristics  of  the
god  were  supposed  to  be  expressed  ;  and  afterwards
other  members  of  the  body  were  added,  at  first
with  a  symbolical  meaning.  These  changes  pro-
duced the  Hermae,  such  as  they  are  described  by
the  ancient  authors,  and  as  we  now  have  them.
The  phallus  formed  an  essential  part  of  the  symbol,
probably  because  the  divinity  represented  by  it
was  in  the  earliest  times,  before  the  worship  of
Dionysus  was  imported  from  the  East,  the  per-
sonification of  the  reproductive  powers  of  nature.
So  the  symbol  is  described  by  Herodotus,  who
ascribes  the  origin  of  it  to  the  Pelasgians,  who
communicated  it  to  the  Athenians,  and  they  to
the  other  Greeks.  (Herod,  ii.  51  ;  Plut.  an  Sent  sit
Resp.  ger.  28.  p.  797,  f.  ;  Cic.  de  Nat.  Deor.  iii.
22  ;  comp.  Creuzer's  Note,  in  Baehr's  edition  of  He-
rodotus.) Pausanias  gives  the  same  account  of  the
matter  (i.  24.  §  3,  iv.  33.  §  3.  s,  4),  and  also  states
that  the  Arcadians  were  particularly  fond  of  the
li.yaK(xa  nrpdyuvov  (viii.  48.  §  4.  s.  6  ;  where
the  statue  referred  to  is  one  of  Zeus),  which  is


from  ep/Lto,  a  heap  (comp.  Buttmann,  Lexil.  pp.  302,
303).  It  would  seem,  at  all  events,  that  the
words  are  in  some  way  connected  ;  though  the
question,  whether  the  god  took  his  name  from  the
symbol,  or  the  symbol  from  the  god,  cannot  be
entered  into  here;


HERMAE.

some  confirmation  of  the  tradition  which  carried
back  the  invention  to  the  Pelasgic  times.

In  the  historical  times  of  Greece,  too,  it  was  at
Athens  that  the  Hermae  were  most  numerons
and  most  venerated.  So  great  was  the  demand
for  these  works  that  the  words  lp/xoy\v(j)os,  ep/j-o-
yAvcpiKi]  Te'xi'i?,  and  cp/xoy\vtpe7ov,  were  used  as
the  generic  tenns  for  a  sculptor,  his  art,  and  his
studio  (Plat.  Symp.  p.  215,  a,  ;  Lucian,  de  Somn.
i.  7,  vol.  i.  pp.  3,  4,  ]  0,  11  ;  and  the  Lexicons).

Houses  in  Athens  had  one  of  these  statues
placed  at  the  door  called  Ipfxris  crrpo^aTos  or  crrpo-
<^6i;s  (Thucyd.  vi.  27  ;  Aelian.  V.  H.  ii.  41  ;  Suid.
s.  V.  ;  Pollux,  viii.  72  ;  Ath.  x.  p.  437,  b.)  ;  some-
times also  in  the  peristyle  (Lucian,  Navig.  20,
vol.  iii.  p.  262),  which  were  worshipped  by  the
women  as  instrumental  to  fecundity  (see  bas-relief
in  Boissarde,  Antiq,  Roman,  part  1),  and  the  great
reverence  attached  to  them  is  shown  by  the  alarm
and  indignation  which  were  felt  at  Athens  in  con-
sequence of  the  mutilation  of  the  whole  number  in
a  single  night,  just  before  the  sailing  of  the  Sicilian
expedition.  (Thucyd.  vi.  27,  with  Poppo's  note  ;
Andoc.  de.  Mt/st.  ;  Aristoph.  Lysist.  1093,  1094,
and  Schol.  ;  Aristophanes  applies  the  term  ipfioKo-
TTidai  to  the  mutilators  ;  see  also  Phot.  s.  v.  kp/xo-
KcviBai.)

They  were  likewise  placed  in  front  of  temples,
near  to  tombs,  in  the  gymnasia,  palaestrae,  libraries,
porticoes,  and  public  places,  at  the  corners  of  streets,
on  high  roads  as  sign-posts,  with  distances  inscribed
upon  them  (Bockh,  Corp.  Itiscr.  No.  12  ;  Epigr.
Jncert.  No.  234,  Brunck,  Anal.  vol.  iii.  p.  197,
Anth.  Planvd.  iv.  254  ;  the  other  epigrams  on
Hermae,  Nos.  255,  256.  deserve  notice)  ;  and
some  are  still  to  be  seen  at  Athens  with  the  names
of  victors  in  the  gymnastic  contests  inscribed  upon
them.  (Leake,  ^^Aews,  p.  17,  n.  1.)  They  were
even  made  vehicles  of  public  instruction,  according
to  the  author  of  the  Hipparchus  (falsely  ascribed  to
Plato,  p.  229),  who  says  that  the  tyrant  Hippar-
chus placed  Hermae  in  the  streets  of  the  city  and
in  roads  throughout  Attica,  inscribed  with  moral
verses,  such  as  the  following :

I         Hivrjfia  t6V  'linrdpxov  (TtcTx^  S'lKaia  (ppovwv.
Mvrj/jLa  too'  'linrdpxov  [x-r]  (p'lKov  i^airdra.

(Comp.  Harpocrat.  s.  v.  'Ep/xai  ;  Hesych.  s.  v.
'iTnrdpx^ioi  'Epyua?,  with  Alberti's  note).  Those
which  stood  at  cross  roads  had  often  three  or  four
heads  (Philoch.  p.  45,  ed.  Siebelis  ;  Harpocr.  and
Etym.  M.  s.  v.  rpLK4(pa\os  'Epfxris  ;  Phot.  Hesych.
*.  V.  TCTpaKecpaXos  'E/)/*7js  ;  Eustath.  ad  Horn.  p.
1353.  3).

Numerous  examples  occur  in  Pausanias  and
other  writers  of  their  being  placed  on  the  boun-
daries of  hmds  and  states  and  at  the  gates  of
cities  ("rrpos  ttj  irvXldi,  TrpoTruAatoy,  Pans.  viii.  34.
§  3.  s.  6,  iv.  33.  §  3.  s.  4,  et  alih.;  Harpocr.)  Small
Hermae  were  also  used  as  pilasters,  and  as  sup-
ports for  furniture  and  utensils.  (Pollux,  vii.  15,
73  ;  Muller,  Arch.  §  379,  n.  2.)  Respecting  the
use  of  the  Hermae  and  Hermuli  in  the  Circus,
see  pp.  285,  a,  286,  a.

With  respect  to  the  form  of  these  works,  the  es-
sential parts  have  been  already  mentioned.  A
pointed  beard  {atp-nvoirw-yoiv)  belonged  to  the  ancient
type  ( Artemid.  ii.  37).  A  mantle  ( Lfxariov)  was  fre-
quently hung  over  the  shoulders  (Pans.  viii.  39.  §4  ;
I)iog.  Laert.  v.  82).  Originally  the  legs  and  arms
were  altogether  wanting  (Pausanias  calls  thera  &kw-


HERMAE.


603


Aoi,  i.  24.  §  3),  and,  in  place  of  the  arms,  there  were
often  projections  to  hang  garlands  upon  ;  but,  when
the  reverence  attached  to  the  ancient  type  became
less,  and  the  love  of  novelty  greater,  the  whole
torso  was  placed  upon  a  quadrangular  pillar,  which
lessened  towards  the  base,  and  finally  the  pillar
itself  was  sometimes  chiselled  to  indicate  the  sepa-
ration of  the  legs,  as  may  be  seen  in  a  tetragonal
female  statue  in  the  Villa  Albani.  (Winkelm.
Storia  delle  A  lie,  vol.  i.  tav.  1.)  Sometimes,  as
above  stated,  the  head  was  double,  triple,  and  even
fourfold.  The  whole  figure  was  generally  of  stone
or  marble  ;  but  Cicero  (ad  Att.  i.  8)  mentions
some  which  were  of  Pentelic  marble,  with  bronze
heads.   (Muller,  Arch'dol.  d.  Kunst,  §  67.)

Many  statues  existed  of  other  deities,  of  the
same  form  as  the  Hermae  ;  which  no  doubt  ori-
ginated in  the  same  manner  ;  and  which  were  still
called  by  the  generic  name  of  Hermae,  even  though
the  bust  upon  them  was  that  of  another  deity.
Several  images  of  this  kind  are  described  by  Pau-
sanias ;  one  of  Poseidon  at  Tricoloni  in  Arcadia
(viii  35.  §  6),  another  of  Zeus  Teleios  at  Tegea
(ib,  48.  §  4),  and  another  of  Aphrodite  Urania
at  Athens  (i.  19.  §  2).  The  reason  why  the
statues  of  the  other  deities  were  developed  into
perfect  forms,  while  those  of  Hermes  so  gene-
rally (by  no  means  universally)  retained  their
ancient  fashion,  is  obviously  on  account  of  the  re-
ligious significance  attached  to  the  symbol  of  the
pillar,  as  a  boundary  mark.  Where  this  motive
was  not  called  into  action,  Hermes  himself  was
represented  in  the  complete  human  form  with  all
the  perfection  of  Greek  art,  as,  for  example,  in  his
statues  in  the  palaestrae,  and  in  those  which  em-
bodied others  of  his  attributes.  (See  Muller,
Arch'dol.  d.  Kunst,  §§  380,  381.)

Some  statues  of  this  kind  are  described  by  a
name  compounded  of  that  of  Hermes  and  another
divinity :  thus  we  have  Hermanuhis,  Hermares,
Hermatliena  (Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  4),  Hermeracles  (Cic.
ad.  Att.  i.  10),  Hermeros  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvi.  5.
s.  4.  §  10),  Hermopan.  It  has  been  much  dis-
puted whether  such  figures  were  composed  of  the
square  pillar,  as  the  emblem  of  Hermes,  surmounted
by  the  bust  of  the  other  divinity  ;  or,  secondly,
whether  the  heads  of  Hermes  and  the  other  god
were  united,  as  in  the  bust  of  Janus  ;  or,  lastl}'^,
whether  the  symbolical  characteristics  of  the  two
deities  were  combined  in  the  same  statue.  As  to
the  first  explanation,  it  seems  hardly  probable  that,
so  late  as  the  time  of  Cicero,  the  mere  pillar  should
have  been  considered  as  adequate  a  representation
of  Hermes  as  the  bust  was  of  the  other  deity  :  the
second  is  supported  by  many  existing  terminal
double  busts :  the  third  can  only  be  regarded
as  an  ingenious  conjecture,  which  may  be  true  of
some  works  of  a  late  period  of  art.  We  think
that  the  second  is  the  true  explanation  in  the
passages  from  Cicero.  (Comp.  MUUer,  Archaol.  d.
Kunst,  §  345,  n.  2.)

There  is  still  another  class  of  these  works,  in
which  the  bust  represented  no  deity  at  all,  but  was
simply  the  portrait  of  a  man,  and  in  which  the
pillar  loses  all  its  symbolical  meaning,  and  becomes
a  mere  pedestal.  Even  these  statues,  however,  re-
tained the  names  of  Hermae  and  Termini.  The
examples  of  them  are  very  numerous.  A  list  of
these  and  of  the  other  Hermae  is  given  by  C.  W.
Muller,  (Ersch  and  Gruber's  Encyklopadic,  art.
Hcrmcti.)


604


HERMAEA.


The  Hermae  of  all  kinds  were  in  great  request
among  the  wealthy  Romans,  for  the  decoration  of
their  houses  and  villas.  It  is  also  stated  that  they
used  them  as  posts  for  ornamental  railings  to  a
garden,  in  wliich  case  they  were  commonly  deco-
rated with  the  busts  of  philosophers  and  eminent
men,  some  of  which  may  be  seen  at  the  Vatican
and  other  museums,  with  the  square  holes  in  their
shoulders  into  which  the  transverse  rail  was  in-
serted. This  square  hole,  however,  is  also  seen  in
Hermae  of  old  Greek  workmanship,  in  which
cases  they  were  probably  the  sockets  of  the  pro-
jections, above  mentioned,  for  hanging  garlands  on.

The  existing  remains  of  ancient  art  are  rich  in
terminal  statues  of  all  the  classes  which  have  been
described  ;  and  specimens  of  nearly  all  may  be
seen  in  the  British  Museum,  and  in  engravings  in
Muller's  Denkm'dler  der  alten  Kunst  (vol.  i.  pi.  i.
Nos.  3,  4,  5,  vol.  ii.  pi.  xxviii.  Nos.  299,  300,  303,
pi.  xxxi.  No.  341,  pi.  xxxiii.  Nos.  376,  386,  387,
pi.  xxxvi.  Nos.  428,  429,  pi.  xlii.  No.  526).  The
first  two  examples  in  Miiller  are  very  interesting  :
the  one  is  a  bas-relief,  exhibiting  a  Hermes  deco-
rated with  garlands  and  surrounded  with  the  im-
plements of  his  worship,  as  shown  in  the  following
engraving  ;  the  other  is  also  a  bas-relief,  in  which


we  see  a  terminal  bust  of  Dionysus  washed  and  de-
corated by  a  man  and  three  women.  Respecting  the
Hermae  on  cqins,  see  Rasche,  Lex  Univ.  Rei  Num.
s.  w.  Herma^  Hermathene^  Hermes.  [P.  S.]

HERMAEA  ("EpjUata),  festivals  of  Hermes,
celebrated  in  various  parts  of  Greece.  As  Hermes
was  the  tutelary  deity  of  the  gymnasia  and  palaes-
trae, the  boys  at  Athens  celebrated  the  Hermaea
in  the  gymnasia.  They  were  on  this  occasion
dressed  in  their  best,  offered  sacrifices  to  the  god,
and  amused  themselves  with  various  games  and
sports,  which  were  probably  of  a  more  free  and  un-
restrained character  than  usual.  Hence  the  gym-
nasiarch  was  prohibited  by  a  law  of  Solon  (Aeschin.

c.  Timarch,  p.  38)  from  admitting  any  adults  on
the  occasion.  This  law,  however,  was  afterwards
neglected,  and  in  the  time  of  Plato  {Lysis,  p.  206,

d.  &c.)  we  find  the  boys  celebrating  the  Hermaea
in  a  palaestra,  and  in  the  presence  of  persons  of  all
ages.  (Becker,  CharikLes.,  vol.  i.  p.  335,  &c. ;  com-
pare Gymnasium,  p.  580,  b.)

Hermaea  were  also  celebrated  in  Crete,  where,
on  this  occasion,  the  same  custom  prevailed  which
was  observed  at  Rome  during  the  Saturnalia  ;  for
the  day  was  a  season  of  freedom  and  enjoyment
for  the  slaves,  and  their  masters  waited  upon  them
at  their  repasts.     (Athen.  xiv.  p.  639.)


HETAERAE.

The  town  of  Pheneos,  in  Arcadi.i,  of  which
Hermes  was  the  principal  divinity,  likewise  cele-
brated Hermaea  with  games  and  contests.  (Paus.
viii.  14.  §  7.)  A  festival  of  the  same  kind  was
celebrated  at  Pellene.  (Schol.  ad  Pind.  Ol.  vii.  1 5(),
and  Nem.  x.  82.)  Tanagra,  in  Boeotia  (Paus.  ix.
22.  §  2),  and  some  other  places,  likewise  cele-
brated festivals  of  Hermes,  but  particulars  are  not
known.  [L.  S.]

HERMATHENA.     [Hermae.]

HERMERACLAE.     [Hermae.]

HERO'NES,  baskets  or  crates  of  sedge,  which
were  employed,  Avhen  filled  with  chalk,  for  making
a  foundation  in  the  water  (Vitruv.  v.  12.  §  5).
Pliny  states  that  the  architect  of  the  temple  of
Diana,  at  Ephesus,  raised  to  their  places  immense
blocks,  which  formed  the  architrave,  by  means
of  an  inclined  plane,  constructed  of  herones  filled
with  sand  {H.  N.  xxxvi.  14.  s.  21).  In  these
and  the  few  other  passages  where  it  occurs,  the
readings  of  the  word  are  very  various.  Different
modern  scholars  have  adopted  one  of  the  three
forms,  aerones,  erones,  or  herones.  (See  Schneider,
ad  Vitruv.  I.  c.)  [P.  S.]

HEROON  {rjp^op)  [Apotheosis;  Funus,
pp.  556,  b.,  557,  a.]

HESTIA   (earia)   [Focus.]

HESTIASIS  (eo-TiWts),  was  a  species  of  li-
turgy, and  consisted  in  giving  a  feast  to  one  of  the
tribes  at  Athens  {t^v  (pv\^v  kariav,  Dem.  c.  Meld.
p.  565.  10  ;  Pollux,  iii.  67.)  It  was  provided  for
each  tribe  at  the  expense  of  a  person  belonging
to  that  tribe,  who  was  called  kariarup.  (Dem.
c.  Boeot.  p.  QQQ^  24.)  Harpoci-ation  {s.v.  'Eo-Ttarcop)
states  on  the  authority  of  the  speech  of  Demos-
thenes against  Meidias,  that  this  feast  was  some-
times provided  by  persons  voluntarily,  and  at  other
times  by  persons  appointed  by  lot  ;  but  as  Bockh
remarks,  nothing  of  this  kind  occurs  in  the  speech,
and  no  burthen  of  this  description  could  have  been
imposed  upon  a  citizen  by  lot.  The  kariaropis
were  doubtless  appointed,  like  all  persons  serving
liturgies,  according  to  the  amount  of  their  property
in  some  regular  succession.  These  banquets  of  the
tribes,  called  (pvAeriKo.  S^Tirua  by  Athenaeus  (v.
p.  185,  d),  were  introduced  for  sacred  purposes,  and
for  keeping  up  a  friendly  intercourse  between  per-
sons of  the  same  tribe,  and  must  be  distinguished
from  the  great  fieastings  of  the  people,  which  were
defrayed  from  the  Theorica.  (Bbckh,  Ptifd.  Eco7i.
of  Athens^  p.  452,  2nd.  ed.  ;  Wolf,  Proleg.  ad
Dem..  Leptin.  p.  Ixxxvii.  note  60.)

HETAERAE  {kraipai).  The  word  kraipa  ori-
ginally signified  a  friend  or  companion,  but  at
Athens,  and  in  other  towns  of  Greece,  it  was  after-
wards used  as  a  euphemistic  name  for  ir6pv7],  that
is,  a  prostitute,  or  mistress.  (Plut.  Solon.,  c.  15  ;
Athen.  xiii.  p.  571.)  As  persons  of  this  class
acted  a  much  more  prominent  and  influential  part
in  some  of  the  Greek  states  than  in  any  of  the
most  demoralized  capitals  of  modern  times,  we
cannot  avoid  in  this  work  stating  their  position  and
their  relations  to  other  classes  of  society.  But  as
their  conduct,  manners,  ensnaring  artifices,  and  im-
positions, have  at  all  times  and  in  all  countries  been
the  same,  we  shall  confine  ourselves  to  those  points
which  were  peculiar  to  the  hetaerae  in  Greece.

First  we  may  mention  that  the  young  men  at
Athens,  previous  to  their  marriage,  spent  a  great
part  of  their  time  in  the  company  of  hetaerae  with-
out  its  being  thought   blaraable  in  any  respect


HETAERAE,

whatever.  Marriage,  indeed,  produced  on  the
whole  a  change  in  this  mode  of  living  of  young
men,  but  in  innumerable  instances  even  married
men  continued  their  intercouse  with  hetaorae,
without  drawing  upon  themselves  the  censure  of
public  opinion  ;  it  seems,  on  the  contrary,  evident
from  the  manner  in  whicli  Demosthenes  (c.  Neaer.
p.  1351,  &c.)  relates  the  history  of  Lysias  the
sophist,  that  such  connections  after  marriage  were
not  looked  upon  as  anything  extraordinary  or  in-
consistent, provided  a  man  did  not  offend  against
public  decency,  or  altogether  neglect  his  legiti-
mate wife  and  the  affairs  of  his  household,  as
was  the  case  with  Alcibiades.  (An  doc.  c.  Alcib.  p.
177.)  This  irregular  condition  of  private  life
among  the  Greeks  seems  to  have  arisen  chiefly
from  two  causes  ;  first  from  the  great  love  of  sen-
sual pleasures,  which  the  Greeks  appear  to  have
possessed  in  as  high  a  degree  as  most  other
southern  nations  ;  and,  secondly,  from  the  gene-
rally prevailing  indifference  between  husbands  and
wives.  As  regards  the  latter  point,  matrimo-
nial life  in  the  historical  times  of  Greece  was  very
different  from  that  which  we  find  described  in  the
heroic  age.  How  this  change  was  brought  about
is  not  clear  ;  but  it  can  scarcely  be  doubted
that,  generally  speaking,  the  Greeks  looked  upon
marriage  merely  as  a  means  of  producing  citizens
for  the  state.  (Dem.c.  Neaer.  p.  1386;  Becker,  Cha-
rikles,  vol.  ii.  p.  215,  &c.)  The  education  of  women
was  almost  entirely  neglected  ;  they  were  thought
a  kind  of  inferior  beings,  less  endowed  by  nature,
and  incapable  of  taking  any  part  in  public  affairs
and  of  sympathising  with  their  husbands.  In  an
intellectual  point  of  view,  therefore,  they  were  not
fit  to  be  agreeable  companions  to  their  husbands,
who  consequently  sought  elsewhere  that  which
they  did  not  find  at  home.  It  is  true  the  history
of  Greece  furnishes  many  pleasing  examples  of  do-
mestic happiness,  and  well-educated  women,  but
these  are  exceptions,  and  only  confirm  the  general
rule.  A  consequence  of  all  this  was,  that  women
were  bound  down  by  lules  which  men  might  vio-
late with  impunity  ;  and  a  wife  appears  to  have  had
no  right  to  proceed  agaiiist  her  husband,  even  if
she  could  prove  that  he  was  unfaithful  (Plant.  Mei--
cat.  iv.  (>.  3),  although  she  herself  was  subject  to
severe  punishment  if  she  was  detected.  The
isolated  testimony  of  a  late  writer  like  Alciphron
(Episi.  i.  6),  who  represents  a  wife  threatening
her  husband,  that  unless  he  would  give  up  his  dis-
solute mode  of  living,  she  would  induce  her  father
to  bring  a  charge  against  him,  can,  as  Becker
{Chariklcs^  vol.  i.  p  112)  observes,  prove  nothing,
inasmuch  as  a  neglect  of  family  affairs  might,  in
tills  case,  have  been  the  ground  for  accusation.

But  to  return  to  the  hetaerae  ;  the  state  not
only  tolerated,  but  protected  them,  and  obtained
profit  from  them.  Solon  is  said  to  have  established
u  TTopv^lov  (also  called  iraiZiaK^'iov,  ifryaaTTfpiov
or  oi'/crj^a),  in  which  prostitutes  were  kept  ( Athen.
xiii.  p.  569),  and  to  have  built  the  temple  of  Aphro-
dite Pandemos  with  the  profit  which  had  been
obtained  from  them.  At  a  later  period  tlie  num-
ber of  such  houses  at  Athens  was  increased,  and
the  persons  who  kept  them  were  called  iropvoSoff-
Koi,  lenones.  The  conduct  of  the  hetaerae  in  these
houses  is  described  in  Athenaeus  (xiii.  p.  568).
All  the  hetaerae  of  such  houses,  as  well  as  indivi-
diials  who  lived  by  themselves  and  gained  their
livelihood  by  prostitution,  had  to  pay  to  the  state


HETAERAE.


605


a  tax  {iropvinhv  t€\os,  Aesch.  c.  Timarch.  p.  134,
&c.),  and  the  collecting  of  this  tax  was  every  year
let  by  the  senate  to  such  persons  {rtKwvai,  or
TTopoTeAwvaJ,  Philonides,  ap.  Polluc.  vii.  202)
as  were  best  acquainted  with  those  who  had  to  pay
it.  The  hetaerae  were  under  the  superintendence
of  the  ayopavd/xoi  (Suidas,  s.  v.  AidypafxfjLo)^  and
their  places  of  abode  were  chiefly  in  the  Ceramei-
cus.     (Hesych.  s.  v.  KepajxeiKds.)

The  number  of  private  hetaerae,  or  such  as  did
not  live  in  a  iropviiov^  was  very  great  at  Athens.
They  were,  however,  generally  not  mere  prosti-
tutes, but  acted  at  the  same  time  as  flute  or  cithara
players,  and  as  dancers,  and  were  as  such  fre-
quently engaged  to  add  to  the  splendour  of
family  sacrifices  (Plant.  Epid.  iii.  4.  64),  or  to  en-
liven and  heighten  the  pleasures  of  men  at  their
symposia.  Their  private  abodes,  where  often  two,
three,  and  more  lived  together,  were  also  frequently
places  of  resort  for  young  men.  (Isocrat.  Areopa;/.
p.  202,  Bekker.)  Most  of  these  hetaerae  not  only
took  the  greatest  care  to  preserve  their  physical
beauty,  and  to  acquire  such  accomplishments  as  we
just  mentioned,  but  also  paid  considerable  attention
to  the  cultivation  of  their  minds.  Thus  the  Arca-
dian Lastheneia  was  a  disciple  of  Plato  (Athen.
xii.  p.  546),  and  Leontion  a  disciple  of  Epicurus
(Athen.  xiii.  p.  588)  ;  Aspasia  is  even  said  to  have
instructed  Socrates  and  Pericles.  Whatever  we
may  think  of  the  historical  truth  of  these  and  simi-
lar reports,  they  are  of  importance  to  the  historian,
inasmuch  as  they  show  in  what  light  these  hetae-
rae were  looked  upon  by  the  ancients.  It  seema
to  have  been  owing,  especially  to  their  superiority
in  intellectual  cultivation  over  the  female  citizens,
that  men  preferred  their  society  and  conversation
to  those  of  citizens  and  wives,  and  that  some
hetaerae,  such  as  Aspasia,  Lais,  Phryne,  and
others,  formed  connections  with  the  most  eminent
men  of  their  age,  and  acquired  considerable  influ-
ence over  their  contemporaries.  The  free  and  un-
restrained conduct  and  conversation,  which  were
not  subject  to  the  strict  conventional  mles  which
honest  women  had  to  observe ;  their  wit  and
humour,  of  which  so  many  instances  are  recorded  ;
were  well  calculated  to  ensnare  young  men,  and  to
draw  the  attention  of  husbands  away  from  their
wives.  Women,  however,  of  the  intellect  and
character  of  Aspasia  were  exceptions  :  and  even
Athenian  citizens  did  not  scruple  to  introduce
their  wives  and  daughters  to  her  circles,  that  they
might  learn  there  the  secrets  by  which  they  might
gain  and  preserve  the  affections  of  their  husbands.
The  disorderly  life  of  the  majority  of  Greek  hetaerae
is  nowhere  set  forth  in  better  colours  than  in  the
works  of  the  writers  who  belong  to  the  so-called
school  of  the  middle  comedy,  and  in  the  plays  of
Plautus  and  Terence  ;  with  which  may  be  compared
Demosth.  c.  Neaer.  p.  1355,  &c.,  and  Athen.  book
xiii.  It  was  fonnerly  supposed  that  at  Athens
a  peculiar  dress  was  by  law  prescribed  to  the
hetaerae,  but  this  opinion  is  without  any  founda-
tion.    (Becker,  Ckarikles,  vol.  i.  p.  126,  &c.)

The  town  most  notorious  in  Greece  for  the  num-
ber of  its  hetaerae,  as  well  as  for  their  refined  man-
ners and  beauty,  was  Corinth.  (Plato,  De  Rep.
iii.  p.  404  ;  Dio  Chrysost.  Orat.  xxxvii.  p.  119,
Reiske  ;  Aristoph.  Pint.  149,  with  the  Schol.  ;
and  Schol.  ad  Lysistr.  90  ;  Athen.  xiii.  p.  573,  &c  ;
MUlIer,  i)or.  ii.  10.  §  7.)  Strabo  (viii.  p.  378)
states  that  the  temple  of  Aphrodite  in  this  town


me


HETATRESEOS  GRAPHE.


possessed  more  than  one  thousand  hetaerae,  who
•were  called  Up65ov\oi^  and  who  were  the  ruin  of
many  a  stranger  who  visited  Corinth.  (Wachs-
muth,  Hellen.  Alierth.  vol.  ii.  p.  392.)  Hence  the
name  KopivQia  Kopt]  was  used  as  synonymous  with
kraipa^  and  KopivOia^iadai  was  equivalent  to  Irai-
peli'.  (Eustath.  ad  Iliad,  ii.  570.)  At  Sparta,
and  in  most  other  Doric  states,  the  hetaerae  seem
never  to  have  acquired  that  importance  which  they
had  in  other  parts  of  Greece,  and  among  the  Greeks
of  Asia  Minor.

An  important  question  is  who  the  hetaerae  gene


rally


The  ifpSSovAoi  of  Corinth  were,  as


their  name  indicates,  persons  who  had  dedicated
themselves  as  slaves  to  Aphrodite  ;  and  their
prostitution  was  a  kind  of  service  to  the  goddess.
[HiERODULi.]  Those  ir6pvai  who  were  kept  at
Athens  in  public  brothels  by  the  iropvo§o(TKoi^  were
generally  slaves  belonging  to  these  iropuoSoaKoi,  who
compelled  them  to  prostitute  their  persons  for  the
purpose  of  enriching  themselves.  The  owners  of
these  v6puai  were  justly  held  in  greater  contempt
than  the  unhappy  victims  themselves.  Sometimes,
however,  they  were  real  prostitutes,  who  voluntarily
entered  into  a  contract  with  a  iropvo§oaK6s  :  others
again  were  females  who  had  laeen  educated  in
better  circumstances  and  for  a  better  fate,  but  had
by  misfortun'S  lost  their  liberty,  and  were  compelled
Ity  want  to  take  to  this  mode  of  living.  Among
this  last  class  we  may  also  reckon  those  girls  who
had  been  picked  up  as  young  children,  and  brought
up  by  TTopvoSoaKoi  for  the  purpose  of  prostitution.
An  instance  of  this  kind  is  Nicarete,  a  freed
woman,  who  had  contrived  to  procure  seven
young  children,  and  afterwards  compelled  them  to
prostitution,  or  sold  them  to  men  who  wished  to
have  the  exclusive  possession  of  them.  (Dem.
c.  Neaer.  p.  1351,  «&c.)  Other  instances  of  the
same  kind  are  mentioned  in  the  comedies  of  Plau-
tus.  (Compare  Isaeus,  De  Philoctevi.  Iiered.  p.
1 43.)  Thus  all  prostitutes  kept  in  public  or  private
houses  were  either  r^  al  slaves  or  at  least  looked
upon  and  treated  as  such.  Those  hetaerae,  on  the
other  hand,  who  lived  alone  either  as  mistresses  of
certain  individuals  or  as  common  hetaerae,  were
almost  invariably  strangers  or  aliens,  or  freed-
women.  The  cases  in  which  daughters  of  Athe-
nian citizens  adopted  the  life  of  an  hetaera,  as
Lamia,  the  daugliter  of  Cle.anor  (Athen.  xiii.  p.
577),  seem  to  have  occurred  very  seldom  ;  and
whenever  such  a  case  happened,  the  woman  was
by  law  excluded  from  all  public  sacrifices  and  offices,
sank  down  to  the  rank  of  an  alien,  and  as  such  be-
came subject  to  the  iropviKhv  t4\os  :  she  generally
also  changed  her  name.  The  same  degradation
took  place  when  an  Athenian  citizen  kept  a  Trop-
j/tioj/,  which  seems  to  have  happened  very  seldom.
(Bockh,  PuIjI.  Ecm.  of  Alliens,  p.  333,  ^nd  ed.)

(•Fr.  Jacobs,  Beitr'dge  Zur  Gesch.  des  Weiblieli.
GeschleclUs,  in  his  Vermischte  Schriften,  vol.  iv.  ;
Becker,  Ckirikles,  vol.  i.  p.  109 — 128,  and  vol.  ii.
p.  414 — 489;  Limburg-I3rouwer,  Histoirc  de  la
Civilisation  Morale  el  lieligieme  des  Grecs  ;  Wachs-
muth,  Hellen.  Alterth.  vol.  ii.  p.  392,  &c.)    [L.  S.]

HETAERI  (eTaipoj).  [Exkrcitus,  p.  488,
I).]

HETAIRESEOS  GRAPHE  {kraipi^aews
'Ypa<p-(]).  This  action  was  maintainable  against
such  Athenian  citizens  as  had  administered  to  the
unnatural  lusts  of  another  ;  but  only  if  after  such
degradation  they  ventured  to  exercise  their  political


HIERODULI.

franchise,  and  aspire  to  bear  office  in  the  state.
From  the  law,  which  is  recited  by  Aeschines
(c.  Timarch.  p.  47),  we  learn  that  such  offenders
were  capitally  punished.  The  cause  was  tried  by
the  court  of  the  thesmothetae.  (Meier,  Att.  Proc.
p.  334.)  [J.  S.  M.J

HETAIRIAE  {kraipiai).     [Eranos.]

HEXA'PHORUM.     [Lectica.]

HEXA'STYLOS.     [Templum.]

HEXE'RES.     [Navis.]

HIEREION  (leperoj/).     [Sacripicium.]

HIEREIS  TON  SOTERON  {Upus  twv  (rwr-f).
pciiv),  priests  of  the  Saviours,  that  is,  of  Antigonus
and  Demetrius,  who  were  received  by  the  Athe-
nians, in  B,  c.  307,  as  their  liberators  with  honours
and  flatteries  of  every  sort.  They  even  went  so
far  as  to  pay  divine  honours  to  these  princes  under
the  title  of  Saviours  {(TcaTripes),  and  to  assign  a  priest
(tepeus)  to  attend  to  their  worship,  who  was  to  be
elected  annually  and  to  give  his  name  to  the  year  in
place  of  the  first  archon.  This  continued  for  twenty
years  till  the  conquest  of  Demetrius  by  Pyrrhus  in
B.  c.  287,  when  the  office  was  abolished  and  the
first  archon  restored  to  his  former  position  in  the
state.  (Plut.  Demetr.  10,  46.)  The  magistrates
of  these  twenty  years  were  in  later  times  called
archons,  as,  for  instance,  by  Diodorus  and  Diony-
sius  of  Halicarnassus,  since  the  Athenians,  as
Clinton  remarks,  would  not  leave  upon  their  Fasti
this  mark  of  their  humiliation.  (Droysen,  Geschichte
des  Hellenismus.,  vol.  i.  p.  439  ;  Clinton,  F.  H.
vol.  ii.  p.  380,  2d  ed.  ;  Hermann,  Lehrhuch.  d.
Griech.  Staatsalterth.  §  1 75,  n.  7 ;  Schomann,  Jn/Z^M.
Jur.  Pvhl.  Graec.  p.  360.)

HIERODU'LI  (tepJSouAoi),  were  persons  of
both  sexes,  who  were  devoted  like  slaves  to  the
worship  of  the  gods.  They  were  of  Eastern  origin,
and  are  most  irequently  met  with  in  connection
with  the  worship  of  the  deities  of  Syria,  Phoenicia,
and  Asia  Minor.  They  consisted  of  two  classes  ;
one  composed  of  slaves  properly  so  called,  who  at-
tended to  all  the  lower  duties  connected  with  the
worship  of  the  gods,  cultivated  the  sacred  lands,
&c.,  and  whose  descendants  continued  in  the  same
servile  condition  ;  and  the  other,  comprising  per-
sons, who  were  personally  free,  but  had  dedicated
themselves  as  slaves  to  the  gods,  and  who  were
either  attached  to  the  temples,  or  were  dispersed
throughout  the  country  and  brought  to  the  gods
the  money  they  had  gained.  To  the  latter  class
belonged  the  women,  who  prostituted  their  persons
and  presented  to  the  gods  the  money  they  had  ob-
tained by  this  means.  The  pomp  with  which  reli-
gious worship  was  celebrated  in  the  East,  and  the
vast  domains  which  many  of  the  temples  possessed,
required  a  great  number  of  servants  and  slaves.
Thus,  the  great  temple  at  the  Cappadocian  Cornana
possessed  as  many  as  6000  hieroduli  (Strab.  xii.
p.  535),  and  that  at  Morimene  had  3000  of  the
same  class  of  persons.  (Strab.  xii.  p.  537.)  So
numerous  were  the  hieroduli  at  Tyre,  that  the
high-priest  by  their  support  frequently  obtained
the  regal  dignity.  (Joseph,  c.  Apian,  i.  18,  21.)
These  large  numbers  arose  from  the  idea,  prevalent
in  the  Ivist,  that  the  deity  must  have  a  certain
class  of  persons  specially  dedicated  to  his  service
and  separated  from  the  ordinary  duties  of  life,  and
that  it  was  the  duty  of  all  who  had  the  power  to
supply  as  many  persons  as  they  could  for  their  ser-
vice. Thus, kings  dedicated  as  sacred  slaves  the  pri-
soners whom  tliey  took  in  war,  parents  their  children,


HIEROMNEMONES.

.  and  even  persons  of  the  highest  families  Sent  their
daughters  to  the  temples  to  sacrifice  their  chastity
to  the  gods,  at  least  till  the  time  of  their  marriage.
This  practice  of  females  offering  their  chastity  to
the  gods  was  of  ancient  origin  in  the  East,  and
seems  to  have  arisen  from  the  notion  that  the  gods
ought  to  have  the  first-fruits  of  every  thing.  The
custom  prevailed  at  Babylon  (Herod,  i.  199  ;  Strab.
xvi.  p.  745),  as  well  as  in  many  other  places.
(Comp.  Heyne,  De  Baliyloniorum  instituto  religioso,
&c.in  Comment.  Societ.  Gotting.  vol.  xvi.  p.  30,  &c.)
The  Greek  temples  had  of  course  slaves  to  perform
the  lowest  services  (P.aus.  x.  32.  §  8)  ;  but  we
also  find  mention  in  some  Greek  temples  of  free
persons  of  both  sexes,  who  had  dedicated  them-
selves voluntarily  to  the  services  of  some  god,  and
to  whom  the  term  of  hieroduli  was  generally  ap-
plied. Masters,  who  wished  to  give  slaves  their
freedom,  but  were  prevented  by  various  causes
from  manumitting  them,  presented  them  to  some
temple  as  UpohovKoi  under  the  form  of  a  gift  or  a
sale,  and  thus  procured  for  them  liberty  in  reality.
Such  cases  of  manumission  frequently  occur  in  in-
scriptions, and  are  explained  at  length  by  Curtius
{de  Manumissione  sacra  Graecorum^  in  his  A  necdota
Delvhica^  Berlin,  1843,  p.  10,  &c.  ;  comp.  Plut.
AinKit.  c.  21,  rSi'v  &k\ccu  SeanroTwv  Kcd  apx^VTo:v
dXivdepoi  Koi  &^eroi  Kaddncp  lfp65ovKoi  Siar^Xov-
(Tiv).  The  female  hieroduli,  who  prostituted  their
persons,  are  only  found  in  Greece  connected  with
the  worship  of  divinities  who  were  of  Eastern  origin,
or  many  of  whose  religious  rites  were  borrowed  from
the  East.  This  was  the  case  with  Aphrodite,  who
was  originally  an  Oriental  goddess.  At  her  temple
at  Corinth  there  were  a  thousand  tfp65ov\oi  eraTpai,
who  were  the  ruin  of  many  a  stranger  who  visited
Corinth,  and  there  was  also  a  large  number  of  the
same  class  of  women  at  her  temple  at  Eryx,  in
Sicily.  (Strab.  viii.  p.  378,  vi.  p.  272,  comp.  xii.
p.  559.)  (Hirt,  Die  Hierodulen,  with  appendices
by  Bockh  and  Buttniann,  Berlin,  1818  ;  Kreuser,
Der  Hellenen  Priesterstaat^  mit  vorzuglicher  Ruck-
sicht  auf  die  Hierodukn^  Mainz,  1 824  ;  Movers,
Die  Phonizier,  p.  359,  &c.  ;  Hermann,  Lehrbuch  d.
gottesdienstliclien  Alterthumer  d.  Griechen,  §  20,  n.
13—16.)
HIEROMANTEIA  (Upofiavrda).    [Divina-

TIO.]

HIEROME'NIA  (icpoyurji/ia),  was  the  time  of
the  month  at  which  the  sacred  festivals  of  the
Greeks  began,  and  in  consequence  of  which  the
whole  mouth  received  the  name  of  fx-^v  i€p6s.  It
was  a  part  of  the  international  law  of  Greece  that
all  hostilities  should  cease  for  the  time  between
states  who  took  part  in  these  festivals,  so  that  the
inhabitants  of  the  different  states  might  go  and
return  in  safety.  The  hieromeniae  of  the  four
great  national  festivals  were  of  course  of  the  most
importance :  they  were  proclaimed  by  heralds
((TirovSocpSpoL).,  who  visited  the  different  states  of
Greece  for  the  purpose.  The  suspension  of  hosti-
lities was  called  eKexetpta.  (Pind.  Isihm.  ii.  23  ;
Strab.  viii.  p.  343  ;  Krause,  Olpnpia^  p.  40,  &c.  ;
and  the  article  Olympia.)

HIEROMNE'MONES  {Upofxv{]fxoves\  were
the  more  honourable  of  the  two  classes  of  repre-
sentatives who  composed  the  Amphictyonic  council.
An  account  of  them  is  given  under  Amphictyones.
"We  also  read  of  Hieromnemones  in  Grecian  states,
distinct  from  the  Amphictyonic  representatives  of
this  name.      Thus    the    priests   of   Poseidon,   at


HIEROSYLIAS  GRAPHE.  607

Megara,  were  called  hieromnemones  (Plut.  Symp.
viii.  8.  §  4)  ;  and  at  Byzantium,  which  was  a
colony  of  Megara,  the  chief  magistrate  in  the  state
appears  to  have  been  called  by  this  name.  In  a
decree  of  Byzantium,  quoted  by  Demosthenes  {pro
Coron.  p.  255.  20  ;  compare  Polyb.  iv.  52.  §  4),
an  hieromnemon  is  mentioned,  who  gives  his  name
to  the  year  ;  and  we  also  find  the  same  word  ou
the  coins  of  this  city.  (Eckhel,  Doctr.  Num..
vol.  ii.  p.  31,  &c.)  At  Chalcedon,  another  colony  of
Megara,  an  hieromnemon  also  existed,  as  is  proved
by  a  decree  which  is  still  extant.  (Miiller,  Dor.  iii.
9.  §  10.)  An  inscription  foimd  inThasos  also  men-
tions an  hieromnemon  who  presided  over  the  trea-
sury'.    (Bijckh,  Corp.  Inscrip.  vol.  ii,  pp.  1 83,  184.)

HIERONI'CAE.    [Athletae.]

HIEROPHANTES     {Upo<p6.ur7]s).      [Eleu-

SINIA.]

HIEROPOII  {ifpoTToiol).,  were  sacrificers  at
Athens,  of  whom  ten  were  appointed  every  year,
and  conducted  all  the  usual  sacrifices,  as  well  as
those  belonging  to  the  quinquennial  festivals,  with
the  exception  of  those  of  the  Panathenaea.  (Pollux,
viii.  107;  Photius,  s.  v.  'lepoTroioi.)  They  are
frequently  mentioned  in  inscriptions.  (Bockh,
Corp.  Inscr.  vol.  i.  p.  250.)  The  most  honourable
of  these  officers  were  the  sacrificers  for  the  revered
goddesses  or  Eumenides  {UpotroioX  rats  (re/jLual^
^eais),  who  were  chosen  by  open  vote,  and  pro-
bably only  performed  the  commencement  of  the
sacrifice,  and  did  not  kill  the  victim  themselves.
(Dem.  c.  Meid.  p.  552.  6  ;  Bockh,  Publ.  Eco7i.  of
Athens.,  p.  216.)    •

HIEROSYLIAS  GRAPHE  {UpoavXias  ypa-
(pv).  The  action  for  sacrilege  is  distinguished
from  the  /cA.07rf)s  Upuv  xp^h'^'^^^  yp^'P^i  in  that
it  was  directed  against  the  offence  of  robbery,
aggravated  by  violence  and  desecration,  to  which
the  penalty  of  death  was  awarded.  In  the  latter
action,  on  the  contrary,  the  theft  or  embezzlement,
and  its  subject-matter,  only  were  taken  into  con-
sideration, and  the  dicasts  had  a  power  of  assessing
the  penalty  upon  the  conviction  of  the  offender.
With  respect  to  the  tribunal  before  which  a  case
of  sacrilege  might  have  been  tried,  some  circum-
stances seem  to  have  produced  considerable  dif-
ferences. The  ypacpT)  might  be  pieferred  to  the
king  archon,  who  would  thereupon  assemble  the
areiopagus  and  preside  at  the  trial,  or  to  one  of  the
thesmothetae  in  his  character  of  chief  of  an  ordi-
nary Heliastic  body  ;  or.  if  the  prosecution  assumed
the  form  of  an  apagoge  or  ephegesis,  would  fall
within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Eleven.  Before  the
first-mentioned  court  it  is  conjectured  (Meier,  Att.
Proc.  p.  307)  that  the  sacrilege  of  the  alleged
spoliation,  as  well  as  the  fact  itself,  came  in  ques-
tion ;  that  the  thesmothetae  took  cognizance  of
those  cases  in  which  the  sacrilege  was  obvious  if
the  fact  were  estiiblished  ;  and  that  the  Elaven  had
jurisdiction  when  the  criminal  appeared  in  the
character  of  a  common  robber  or  burglar,  surprised
in  the  commission  of  the  offence.  In  all  these
cases  the  convict  was  put  to  death,  his  property
confiscated,  and  his  body  denied  burial  within  the
Attic  territory.  There  is  a  speech  of  Lysias  {fxro
Callia)  extant  upon  this  subject,  but  it  adds
little  to  our  knowledge  ;  except  that  slaves  were
allowed  upon  that  occasion  to  appear  as  informers
against  their  master  —  a  resident  alien  —  and  an-
ticipated their  emancipation  in  the  event  of  hia
cQnviction,  [J.  S.  M.]


eos


HIPPODAMEIA.


HILA'RIA  (l\dpia)  seems  originally  to  have
been  a  name  which  was  given  to  any  day  or  sea-
son of  rejoicing.  The  hilaria  were,  therefore,  ac-
cording to  Maximus  Monachus  (Schol.  ad  Dionys.
Areopag.  Epist.  8)  either  private  or  public.  Among
the  former  he  reckons  the  day  on  which  a  person
married,  and  on  which  a  son  was  born  ;  among  the
latter,  those  days  of  public  rejoicings  appointed  by
a  new  emperor.  Such  days  were  devoted  to  gene-
ral rejoicings  and  public  sacrifices,  and  no  one  was
allowed  to  show  any  symptoms  of  grief  or  sorrow.

But  the  Romans  also  celebrated  hilaria,  as  a
feria  stativa,  on  the  25th  of  March,  in  honour  of
Cybele,  the  mother  of  the  gods  (Macrob.  Sat.  i.
21)  ;  and  it  is  probably  to  distinguish  these  hilaria
from  those  mentioned  above,  that  Lampridius
{Alexatid.  Sever,  c.  37)  calls  them  Hilaria  Matris
Deum.  The  day  of  its  celebration  was  the  first
after  the  vernal  equinox,  or  the  first  day  of  the
year  which  was  longer  than  the  night.  The  winter
with  its  gloom  had  passed  away,  and  the  first  day
of  a  better  season  was  spent  in  rejoicings.  (Flav.
Vopisc.  Aurelian.  c.  1.)  The  manner  of  its  cele-
bration during  the  time  of  the  republic  is  unknown,
except  that  Valerius  Maximus  (ii.  4.  §  3)  mentions
games  in  honour  of  the  mother  of  the  gods.  Re-
specting its  celebration  at  the  time  of  the  empire,
we  learn  from  Herodian  (i.  10,  11)  that,  among
other  things,  there  was  a  solemn  procession,  in
Avhich  the  statue  of  the  goddess  was  carried,  and
before  this  statue  were  carried  the  most  costly
specimens  of  plate  and  works  of  art  belonging
either  to  wealthy  Romans  or  to  the  emperors  them-
selves. All  kinds  of  games  and  amusements  were
allowed  on  this  day  ;  masquerades  were  the  most
prominent  among  them,  and  every  one  might,  in
his  disguise,  imitate  whomsoever  he  liked,  and
even  magistrates.

The  hilaria  were  in  reality  only  the  last  day  of
a  festival  of  Cybele,  which  commenced  on  the  22d
of  March,  and  was  solemnised  by  the  Galli  with
various  mysterious  rites.  (Ovid,  Fas<,  iv.  337,  &c.)
It  must,  however,  be  observed  that  the  hilaria  are
neither  mentioned  in  the  Roman  calendar  nor  in
Ovid's  Fasti.  [L.  S.]

HILAROTRAGOE'DIA.     [Tragoedia.]
HIMATION  (itxariov).     [Pallium.]
HIPPARCHUS.     [ExERCiTus,  p.  487,  a.]
HIPPARMOSTES.    [Exercitus,  p.  483,  b.]
HTPPICON    (litTriKov^  sc.  (TTaSjoj/),  a  Greek
measure  of  distance,  equal  to  four  stadia.     Accord-
ing to  Plutarch  it  was  mentioned  in  the  laws  of
Solon  (Plut.  Sol.  23).     Hesychius  also  mentions
it  under  the   name  of  'Itttthos  SpS/xos.     (Comp.
HiproDROMus ;  Stadium.)  [P,  S.]

niPPO'BOTAE  (iinroS6Tai\  the  feeders  of
horses,  was  the  name  of  the  nobility  of  Chalcis  in
Kuboea,  corresponding  to  the  iTrirels  in  other  Greek
states.  On  the  conquest  of  the  Chalcidians  by  the
Athenians  in  B.  c.  506,  these  Hippobatae  were
deprived  of  their  lands,  and  4000  Athenian  cleruchi
sent  to  fcike  possession  of  them.  (Herod,  v.  77,
vi.  100  ;  Strab.  x.  p.  447  ;  Plut.  Pericl.  23  ;
Aelian,  V.  II.  vi.  1.)     [Colonia,  p.  314,  a.]

HIPPODAMEIA  (tTnroSc^Ateja,  sc.  epyo),  is  an
tadjective  derived  from  the  name  of  the  architect
Hippodamus  of  Miletus,  who  is  said  to  have  been
the  first  of  the  Greeks  who  built  whole  cities  on  a
regular  architectural  plan  ;  and  hence  the  word  is
applied  to  such  cities,  and  to  the  public  places  and
bmldings  ia  them.     Peiraeeus,  for  example,  was


HIPPODROMUS.
designed  by  Hippodamus,  and  its  market-plade
was  called  'l7r7ryS(£/i6ta  ayopk  (Harpoer.  s.  v.).
Hippodamus  flourished  during  the  second  half  of
the  fifth  century  B.  c.  (See  Did.  of  Biog.  art.
Hippodamus;  Muller,  Arch'dol.  d.  Ktmst,  §
111.)  [P.S.]

HIPPO'DROMUS  (iinrSSpofioi)  was  the  name
by  which  the  Greeks  designated  the  place  appro-
priated to  the  horse-races,  both  of  chariots  and  of
single  horses,  which  formed  a  part  of  their  games.
The  word  was  also  applied  to  the  races  themselves.

The  mode  of  fighting  from  chariots,  as  described
by  Homer,  involves  the  necessity  of  much  previous
practice  ;  and  the  funeral  games  in  honour  of
Patroclus  present  us  with  an  example  of  the
chariot-race,  occupying  the  first  and  most  important
place  in  those  games.  (//.  xxiii.  262 — 650.)  In
this  vivid  description  the  nature  of  the  contest  and
the  arrangements  for  it  are  very  clearly  indicated.
There  is  no  artificially  constructed  hippodrome  ;
but  an  existing  land- mark  or  monument  {crrj/xa^
331)  is  chosen  as  the  goal  (rfp/xa),  round  which
the  chariots  had  to  pass,  leaving  it  on  the  left  hand
(336),  and  so  returning  to  the  Greek  ships  on  the
sea-shore,  from  which  they  had  started  (365).
The  course  thus  marked  out  was  so  long,  that  the
goal,  which  was  the  stump  of  a  tree,  could  only  be
clearly  seen  by  its  having  two  white  stones  leaning
against  it  (327 — 329),  and  that,  as  the  chariots
return,  the  spectators  are  uncertain  which  is  first
(450,  &c. :  the  passage  furnishes  a  precedent  for
betting  at  a  horse-race,  485).  The  ground  is  a
level  plain  (330),  but  with  its  natural  inequalities,
which  are  sufficient  to  make  the  light  chariots  leap
from  the  ground  (369,  370),  and  to  threaten  an
overthrow  Avhere  the  earth  was  broken  by  a
winter  torrent,  or  a  collision  in  the  narrow  hollow
way  thus  formed  (419 — 447).  The  chariots  were
five  in  number,  each  with  two  horses  and  a  single
driver  (288,  &c.)  *  ;  who  stood  upright  in  his
chariot  (370).

In  a  race  of  this  nature,  success  would  obviously
depend  quite  as  much  on  the  courage  and  skill  of
the  driver  as  on  the  speed  of  the  horses  ;  a  fact
which  Homer  represents  Nestor  as  impressing  upon
his  son  Antilochus  in  a  speech  which  fully  ex-
plains the  chief  stratagems  and  dangers  of  the
contest,  and  is  nearly  as  applicable  to  the  chariot
i-ices  of  later  times  as  to  the  one  described  by
Homer  (305 — 348).  At  starting,  it  was  necessary
so  to  direct  the  horses  as,  on  the  one  hand,  to  avoid
the  loss  of  time  by  driving  wide  of  the  straightest
course,  and  on  the  other  not  to  incur  the  risk  of  a
collision  in  the  crowd  of  chariots,  nor  to  make  so
straight  for  the  goal  as  to  leave  insufficient  room  to
turn  it.  Here  was  the  critical  point  of  the  race,
to  turn  the  goal  as  sharp  as  possible,  with  the  nave
of  the  near  wheel  almost  grazing  it,  and  to  do  this
safely :  very  often  the  driver  was  here  thrown  out,
and  the  chariot  broken  in  pieces  (334 — 343,  465
— 468).  There  was  another  danger  at  this  point,
which  deserves  particular  notice  as  connected  with
the  arrangements  of  the  hippodrome  of  later  times.
As  the  horse  is  a  very  timid  animal,  it  can  easily
be  understood  that  the  noise  and  crush  of  many
chariots  turning  the  gojil  together,  with  the  addi-


*  But  Nestor  complains  of  having  been  once
beaten  by  two  brothers  driving  at  once,  the  one
managing  the  reins  and  the  other  plying  the  whip
(638—642).


HIPPODROMUS.

tioiial  confusion  created  by  the  overthrow  of  some
of  them,  would  so  frighten  some  of  the  horses  as  to
make  them  unmanageable  ;  and  this  is  expressly
referred  to  by  Homer  (468)

at  5'  i^rjpwTjaav,  eVei  fx4pos  eWaSe  ^v/xSv.

Among  the  other  disasters,  to  which  the  competi-
tors were  liable  were  the  loss  of  the  Avhip  (384)  ;
the  reins  escaping  from  the  hands  (465)  ;  the
breaking  of  the  pole  (392)  ;  the  light  chariot  being
overturned,  or  the  driver  thrown  out  of  it,  through
the  roughness  of  the  ground,  or  by  neglecting  to
balance  the  body  properly  in  turning  the  goal  (368,
369,417 — 425,  335);  and  the  being  compelled
to  give  way  to  a  bolder  driver,  for  fear  of  a  colli-
sion (426 — 437)  ;  but  it  was  considered  foid  play
to  take  such  an  advantage  (439 — 441,  566 — 611).
These  and  similar  disasters  were  no  doubt  frequent,
and,  in  accordance  with  the  religious  character  of
the  games,  they  were  ascribed  to  the  intervention


HIPPODROMUS.


609


of  the  deities,  whom  the  suiferer  had  neglected  to
propitiate  (383—393,  546,  547).  The  prizes,  as
in  the  other  Homeric  games,  were  of  substantial
value,  and  one  for  each  competitor  (262 — 270).
The  charioteer  accused  of  foul  play  was  required
to  lay  his  hand  upon  his  horses,  and  to  swear  by
Poseidon,  the  patron  deity  of  the  race,  that  he  was
guiltless  (581—585).

This  description  may  be  illustrated  by  the  fol-
lowing engraving  from  an  antique  Greek  vase  ;  in
which  we  see  the  goal  as  a  mere  stone  post,  with
a  fillet  wound  round  it :  the  form  of  the  chariots
are  well  shown,  and  the  attitude  of  the  drivers  ;
each  has  four  horses,  as  in  the  earliest  Olympic
chariot  race  ;  and  the  vividness  of  the  representa-
tion is  increased  by  the  introduction  of  the  incident
of  a  horse  having  got  loose  from  the  first  chariot,
the  driver  of  which  strives  to  retain  his  place  with
the  other.  (Panofka,  Bilder  Antiken  Lehens^  pi.
iii.  No.  10.)


For  other  representations  of  the  race  and  its
disasters,  see  Cmcus,  p.  285,  Currus,  p.  379.

In  no  other  writer,  not  even  in  Pindar,  have  we
a  description  at  once  so  vivid  and  so  minute,  of
the  Greek  chariot  race  as  this  of  Homer's  ;  but  it
may  be  safely  assumed  that,  with  a  few  points  of
difference,  it  will  give  us  an  equally  good  idea  of
a  chariot  race  at  Olympia  or  any  other  of  the  great
games  of  later  times.  The  chief  points  of  diifer-
ence  were  the  greater  compactness  of  the  course,
in  order  that  a  large  body  of  spectators  might  view
the  race  with  convenience,  and  the  greater  number
of  chariots.  The  first  of  these  conditions  involved
the  necessity  of  making  the  race  consist  of  several
double  lengths  of  the  course,  instead  of  only  one  ;


the  second  required  some  arrangement  by  which
the  chariots  might  start  without  confusion  and  on
equal  terms.  It  is  now  to  be  seen  how  these
conditions  were  satisfied  in  the  hippodrome  at
Olympia  ;  of  which  the  only  description  we  possess
is  in  two  passages  of  Pausanias  (vi.  20,  v.  15.  §  4).
Very  different  explanations  have  been  proposed  of
some  important  points  in  those  descriptions  ;  but,
from  want  of  t^pace,  and  from  a  strong  conviction
of  what  the  correct  explanation  is,  we  pass  over
the  discussion,  and  give  only  the  result  of  it,  ac-
cording to  the  view  of  Alexandre  de  la  Borde,
which  is  adopted  by  Hirt  {Lehre  d.  Geb'dude,  pp.
147 — 150).  The  following  is  the  ground-plan,
which  Hirt  (pi.  xx.  fig.  8)  has  drawn  out  from  the


c


'm


W"----=

'^-^--~=^~'-:::^-

-  ::;^^^^'^'^'

FiriJ»llllll|i|iiilWlii!iir,|i|i||||.i^^^


^


A


description  of  Pausanias.  A,  B,  the  sides,  C,  the
end  of  the  hippodrome,  with  raised  seats  for  the
spectators  (the-  dotted  line  D  d  is  the  axis  of  the
figure),  a.  Place  of  honour  for  the  magistrates  and
musicians  ;  6,  d.  gateways  ;  D,  the  starting-place  ;
e,  its  apex  ;  f,  g^  its  curved  sides  ;  7/,  i,  &c.,  up  to
^,  stations  of  the  chariots,  their  directions  con-
verging towards  the  point  E.  F,  G,  the  goals,  or
turning-posts  ;  H,  the  spina  ;  jo  p,  small  intervals


between  the  spina  and  the  goals  ;  7,  the  winning
line  ;  m,  dolphin  used  as  a  signal  ;  «,  altar,  with
eagle  for  signal  -,000,  portico  of  Agnamptus.

The  general  form  of  the  hippodrome  was  an
oblong,  with  a  semicircular  end,  and  with  the  rJght
side,  A,  somewhat  longer  than  the  left,  B,  for  a
reason  to  be  stated  presently.  The  right  side,  A,
was  formed  by  an  artificial  mound  ;  the  left,  B,  by
the  natural  slope  of  a  hill.     There  were  (besides


eio


HIPPODROMUS.


the  startinf]^- place)  two  entrances  to  the  area,  h  and
</,  of  which  the  former  was  probably  for  the  exit
of  disabled  chariots  and  horses,  and  the  latter  ap-
pears to  have  been  for  the  same  purpose  as  the
porta  iriumphalis  in  the  Roman  circus.  The  base
of  the  fourth  side,  D,  was  fonned  by  the  portico  of
Agnamptus,  so  called  from  its  builder.  At  this
end  of  the  hippodrome  was  the  starting-place
(6<^eo-Js),  in  the  form  of  the  prow  of  a  ship,  with
its  apex,  <?,  towards  the  area,  and  each  of  its  sides
more  than  400  feet  long.  Along  both  these  sides
were  stalls  (olK-fi/jLaTo)  for  the  chariots  about  to
start,  like  the  carceres  in  the  Roman  circus  ;  and
it  was  in  the  arrangement  of  these  stalls  that  the
peculiarity  of  the  Greek  starting-place  consisted.
According  to  the  view  which  we  follow,  the  stalls
were  so  arranged,  as  that  the  pole  of  each  chariot,
while  standing  in  its  stall,  was  directrd  to  a  normal
pointy  E,  at  which,  as  nearly  as  possible,  each
chariot  ought  to  fall  into  its  proper  course.  As
this  point,  E,  was  necessarily  on  the  right  side  of
the  area  (in  order  to  turn  the  goal  on  the  left  hand),
and  as  the  corresponding  stalls  on  each  side  were
required  to  be  equidistant  from  the  apex,  e  (as  will
presently  be  seen)  and  of  course  also  from  the
point  E,  it  follows  that  the  base  of  the  aphesis
must  have  been  perpendicular  to  the  line  E  e,  and
therefore  oblique  to  the  axis  D  d  ;  and  this  is  the
reason  why  the  side  A  was  longer  than  the  side
B.  The  curvature  of  the  sides  of  the  aphesis,/^  g,
is  a  conjectural  arrangement,  assumed  as  that
which  was  probably  adopted  to  give  more  space  to
each  chariot  at  starting.  The  front  of  each  stall
had  a  cord  drawn  across  it,  and  the  necessary
arrangements  were  made  for  letting  these  cords  fall
at  the  right  moments.  On  the  signal  being  given
for  the  race  to  begin,  the  cords  in  front  of  the  two
extreme  stalls,  h  h^  were  let  fall  simultaneously,
and  the  two  chariots  started  ;  then  those  of  the
next  pair  ;  and  so  on,  each  pair  of  chariots  being
liberated  at  the  precise  moment  when  those  which
had  already  started  came  abreast  of  their  position  ;
and,  when  all  the  chariots  formed  an  even  line
abreast  of  the  apex  of  the  apJiesis,  e,  it  was  a  fair
start.  This  arrangement  of  the  aphesis  was  the
invention  of  the  statuary  Cleoetas,  and  was  im-
proved by  Aristeides  (perhaps  the  famous  painter ;
see  Hirt,  I.  c).  Cleoetas  celebrated  his  invention
in  an  epigram,  Avhich  he  inscribed  on  the  base  of
a  statue  made  by  him  at  Athens :

*0s  T-^jv  iirirdipeaiv  eV  'OAv/iirto  evparo  irpwros
Tev^e  fxe  KAetoiTos,  vlhs  'Api<TTOK\4ovs.

Precisely  the  same  arrangements  were  made  for
the  start  in  the  race  of  single  horses  (/cfATjres),
and  in  both  cases,  as  in  the  race  described  by
Homer,  the  stalls  were  assigned  to  the  competitors
by  lot.  How  many  chariots  usually  started,  can-
not  be  determined  ;   but  that   the   number  was


HIPPODROMUS.

large  is  proved  by  the  well-known  storj'',  that  Alci-
biades  alone  sent  to  one  race  seven  chariots.  So-
phocles (Elect.  701 — 708)  mentions  ten  chariots  aa
running  at  once  in  the  Pythian  games  ;  and  the
number  at  Olympia  was  no  doubt  greater  than  at
any  of  the  other  games.  This  is  probably  the
reason  why  the  arrangements  of  a  starting-place
were  so  much  more  complicated  in  the  Greek  hip-
podromus  than  they  were  in  the  Roman  circus
[Circus].  About  the  centre  of  the  triangular
area  of  the  aphesis  there  was  an  altar,  w,  of  rough
brick,  which  was  plastered  afresh  before  each
festival,  surmounted  by  a  bronze  eagle  with  out-
stretched wings  ;  and  above  the  apex  of  the
aphesis  was  a  bronze  dolphin,  m.  As  the  signal
for  the  race  to  begin,  the  eagle  was  made  to  soar
aloft,  so  as  to  be  seen  by  all  the  spectators,  and
the  dolphin  sank  to  the  ground.

The  chariots,  thus  started,  had  to  pass  several
times  round  two  goals  (vvccrai)^  the  distinction
between  which  is  one  of  the  difficult  points  in  the
description  of  Pausanias.  On  the  whole  it  seems
most  probable  that  the  one  which  he  describes  as
having  upon  it  a  bronze  statue  of  Hippodameia,
holding  out  the  victor's  fillet,  as  if  about  to  crown
Pelops  with  it,  was  the  one  nearer  to  the  aphesis,
and  abreast  of  the  winning  line,  F  ;  and  that  the
other,  G,  round  which  the  chariots  made  their  first
turn,  was  that  which  Pausanias  calls  "  Taraxippus,
the  terror  of  the  horses."  This  was  a  round  altar,
dedicated  to  Taraxippus,  who  was  supposed  to
strike  a  supernatural  terror  into  the  horses  as  they
passed  the  spot,  and  whom,  therefore,  the  chariot-
eers sought  to  propitiate,  before  the  race  began,  by
oifering  sacrifices  and  making  vows  at  this  altar.
Pausanias  gives  various  accounts  as  to  who  this
Taraxippus  was  :  some  modem  scholars  take  the
word  for  an  appellation  of  Poseidon  Hippius.  He
was  similarly  honoured  in  the  Isthmian  hippo-
drome. At  Nemea  there  was  no  such  hero,  but
above  the  turning  point  of  the  course  there  was  a
bright  red  rock,  which  -was  supposed  to  frighten
the  horses.  He  adds  the  remark  that,  the  Olym-
pian Taraxippus  had  by  far  the  most  powerful
effect  upon  the  horses  ;  and  considering  that  the
number  of  chariots  which  joined  in  the  race  there
was  greater  than  at  any  of  the  other  games,  that
remark  affords  a  pretty  clear  proof  that  the  ex-
planation of  the  supposed  supernatural  terror  is  that
which  has  been  given  above  in  describing  the
Homeric  race.  There  are  several  vase  paintings,
on  which  chariots  or  single  horses  are  exhibited
turning  the  goal,  which  is  represented  as  a  Doric
or  Ionic  column.  (See  Panofka,  Dilder  Antiken
Leheiis,  pi.  iii.)  One  of  these  is  shown  in  the  fol-
lowing engraving,  which  exhibits  a  vivid  picture  of
a  race  of  single  horses  :  the  last  rider  has  been
unlucky  in  turning  the  goal.

There  is  no  authority  in  the  account  of  Pausanias


HISTRIO

for  the  connecting  wall,  H,  between  the  goals,
nor  does  he  state  that  the  winning  line,  9,  was
marked  out  as  a  white  line  ;  but  these  details  are
inserted  from  the  analogy  of  the  Roman  circus.
So  also  is  the  oblique  position  of  the  line  of  the
goals,  as  compared  with  the  axis  of  the  figure :  of
course  the  greatest  space  was  required  at  E,  where
the  chariots  were  all  nearly  abreast  of  each  other.

Respecting  the  dimensions  of  the  Olympic  Hip-
podrome we  have  no  precise  information  ;  but,
from  the  length  of  the  measure  called  Hippicon%
and  on  other  grounds,  it  seems  probable  that  the
distance  from  the  starting-place  to  the  goal,  or
perhaps  rather  from  one  goal  to  the  other,  was  two
stadia,  so  that  one  double  course  was  four  stadia.
How  many  such  double  coiu-ses  made  up  the  whole
race,  we  are  not  informed.  The  width  must  have
been,  at  least,  as  great  as  the  length  of  each  side
of  the  aphesis^  namely,  more  than  400  feet.  There
does  not  appear  to  have  been  much  architectural
display  in  the  structure,  and  not  many  statues.
Tlie  internal  area  of  the  aphesis,  D,  contained
several  altars.

The  chief  points  of  difference  between  the  Greek
hippodrome  and  the  Roman  circus  are  the  smaller
Avidth  of  the  latter,  as  only  four  chariots  ran  at
once,  and  the  different  arrangement  of  the  carceres.
The  periods  at  which  the  Olympic  horse-races  were
instituted  are  mentioned  under  Olympia.

A  few  other  hippodromes  in  Greece,  S)'ria,  and
Egypt,  are  mentioned  by  Pausanias  and  other
writers  ;  but  they  deserve  no  special  mention.
(Comp.  Krause,  Gymn.  und  Agon.  vol.  i.  pp.  151,
&c.)     See  also  Hortus.  [P.  S.]

HIPPOPE'RAE  (tTTTToiriipaO,  saddle-bags.
This  appendage  to  the  saddle  [Ephippium]  was
made  of  leather  {sacculi  scortei,  Festus,  s.  v.  Bul-
gae)^  and  does  not  appear  ever  to  have  changed  its
form  and  appearance.  Its  proper  Latin  name  was
bisaccium  (Petron.  Sat.  31),  which  gave  origin  to
Insaccia  in  Italian  and  hesace  in  French.  By  the
Gauls,  saddle-bags  were  called  fiwZ^'ae  (Festus,  I.e.  ;
Onomast.  Gr.  Lat),  because  they  bulge  or  swell
outwards  ;  this  significant  appellation  is  still  re-
tained in  the  Welsh  bolgan  or  hwlgan.  The  more
elegant  terra  kippoperae  is  adopted  by  Seneca
{Epist.  88).  [J.  Y.]

HISTION  and  HISTOS  (/(TtiW,  lards).
[Navis.]

HI'STRIO  (inroKpiT-ffs),  an  actor.  1.  Greek.
It  is  shown  in  the  articles  Chorus  and  Dionysia
that  the  Greek  drama  originated  in  the  chorus
which  at  the  festivals  of  Dionysus  danced  around
his  altar,  and  that  at  first  one  person  detached
himself  from  the  chorus,  and,  with  mimic  gesticu-
lation, related  his  story  either  to  the  chorus  or  in
conversation  with  it.  If  the  story  thus  acted  re-
quired more  than  one  person  they  were  all  repre-
sented in  succession  by  the  same  actor,  and  there
was  never  more  than  one  person  on  the  stage  at
a  time.  This  custom  was  retained  by  Thespis  and
Phrynichus.  But  it  was  clear  that  if  the  chorus
took  an  active  and  independent  part  in  such  a  play,
it  would  have  been  obliged  to  leave  its  original
and  characteristic  sphere.  Aeschylus  therefore
added  a  second  actor,  so  that  the  action  and  the
dialogue  became  independent  of  the  chorus,  and  the
dramatist  at  the  same  time  had  an  opportunity  of
showing  two  persons  in  contrast  with  each  other
on  the  stage.  (Aristot.  Poet.  ii.  14.)  Towards  the
ijlose  of  his  career,  Aeschylus  found  it  necessary


HISTRIO.  611

to  introduce  a  third  actor,  as  is  the  case  in  the
Agamemnon,  Choephori,  and  Eumenides.  (Pollux,
iv.  110.)  This  number  of  three  actors  was  also
adopted  by  Sophocles  and  Euripides,  and  was  but
seldom  exceeded  in  any  Greek  drama.  In  the
Oedipus  in  Colonus,  however,  which  was  performed
after  the  death  of  Sophocles,  four  actors  appeared
on  the  stage  at  once,  and  this  deviation  from  the
general  rule  was  called  irapaxopi]yt]ixa.  (Pollux,
/.  c.)  The  three  regular  actors  were  distinguished
by  the  technical  names  of  TTpwTayuviaT'fis,  Seorepa-
ywuLOTTits,  and  TpnayQiviarris  (Suidas,  s.  v.  Tpira-
ywi/iaT-ffs :  Demosth.  de  Coron.  p.  315,  de  Fals.
Leg.  p.  344  and  403),  which  indicated  the  more  or
less  prominent  part  which  an  actor  had  to  perform
in  the  drama.  Certain  conventional  means  were
also  devised,  by  which  the  spectators,  at  the  mo-
ment an  actor  appeared  on  the  stage,  were  enabled
to  judge  which  part  he  was  going  to  perform  ;  thus,
the  protagonistes  always  came  on  the  stage  from  a
door  in  the  centre,  the  deuteragonistes  from  one  on
the  right,  and  the  tritagonistes  from  a  door  on  the
left  hand  side.  (Pollux,  iv.  124.)  The  protagonistes
was  the  principal  hero  or  heroine  of  a  play,  in
whom  all  the  power  and  energy  of  the  drama  were
concentrated  ;  and  whenever  a  Greek  drama  is
called  after  the  name  of  one  of  its  personae,  it  is
always  the  name  of  the  character  which  was  per-
formed by  the  protagonistes.  The  deuteragonistes,
in  the  pieces  of  Aeschylus  for  two  actors,  calls
forth  the  various  emotions  of  the  protagonistes
either  by  friendly  s-ympathy  or  by  painful  tidings,
&c.  The  part  of  a  tritagonistes  is  represented  by
some  external  and  invisible  power,  by  which  the
hero  is  actuated  or  caused  to  suffer.  When  a
tritagonistes  was  added,  the  part  assigned  to  him
was  generally  that  ef  an  instigator  Avho  was  the
cause  of  the  sufferings  of  the  protagonistes,  while
he  himself  was  the  least  capable  of  depth  of  feeling
or  sympathy.  The  deuteragonistes  in  the  dramas
for  three  actors  is  generally  distinguished  by  lofti-
ness and  warmth  of  feeling,  but  has  not  its  depth
and  vehemence  peculiar  to  the  protagonistes,  and
thus  serves  as  a  foil  to  set  forth  the  character  of
the  chief  hero  in  its  most  striking  and  vivid  colours.
(Miiller,  Hist  ofGreekLit.  i.  p.  305,  &c.  ;  compare
Bottiger,  De  Actoribus  Fvimarum^  Secund.  et  Tert.
Par  Hum.)

The  female  characters  of  a  play  were  always
performed  by  young  men.  A  distinct  class  of
persons,  who  made  acting  on  the  stage  their  pro-
fession, was  unknown  to  the  Greeks  during  the
period  of  their  great  dramatists.  The  earliest  and
greatest  dramatic  poets,  Thespis,  Melanthius,  So-
phocles, and  probably  Aeschylus  also,  acted  in
their  own  plays,  and  in  al2  probability  as  protago-
nistae.  We  also  know  of  several  instances  in
which  distinguished  Athenian  citizens  appeared  on
the  stage,  and  Aeschines,  the  orator,  did.  not  scruple
to  act  the  part  of  tritagonistes.  (I>enIosth.  I.  c.)
These  circumstances  show  that  it  was  by  no  means
thought  degrading  in  Greece  to  perform  as  an
actor,  and  that  no  stigma  whatever  was  attached
to  the  name  of  a  man  for  his  appearing  on  the
stage.  Bad  actors,  however,  to  whatever  station
in  life  they  belonged,  Avere  not,  on  that  account,
spared  ;  and  the  general  mode  of  showing  dis-
pleasure on  the  part  of  the  spectators  seems  to  have
been  by  whistling,  (Demosth.  De  Coron.  p.  31 5.)
It  appears  that  when  the  spectators  shoAved  their
displeasure  in  too  offensive  or  insulting  a  manner,


612


HISTRIO.


the  actors  would  sometimes  attack  the  most  forward
of  the  audience,  and  quarrels  of  this  kind  ended
not  unfrequently  in  blows  and  wounds.  (Demosth.
de  Coron.  p.  314,  deFals.  Leg.  p.  449  ;  Andocid.
c.  Alcib.  p.  121  ;  Athen.  ix,  p,  406.)  At  a  later
period,  however,  persons  began  to  devote  them-
selves exclusively  to  the  profession  of  actors,  and
distinguished  individuals  received  even  as  early  as
the  time  of  Demosthenes  exorbitant  sums  for  their
performances.  Various  instances  are  mentioned  in
BiJckh's  Publ,  Econ.  of  Athens,  p.  120,  «&c.  At
the  time  when  Greece  had  lost  her  independence,
we  find  regular  troops  of  actors,  who  were  either
stationary  in  particular  towns  of  Greece,  or  wan-
dered from  place  to  place,  and  engaged  themselves
wherever  they  found  it  most  profitable.  They
formed  regular  companies  or  guilds,  with  their
own  internal  organisation,  with  their  common  offi-
cers, property,  and  sacra.  We  possess  a  number
of  inscriptions  belonging  to  such  companies,  with
decrees  to  honour  their  superiors,  or  to  declare  their
gratitude  to  some  king  by  whom  they  had  been  en-
gaged. But  these  actors  are  generally  spoken  of
in  very  contemptuous  tenns  ;  they  were  perhaps  in
some  cases  slaves  or  freedmen,  and  their  ordinary
pay  seems  to  have  been  seven  drachmae  for  every
performance.  (Lucian,  Icaromen.  29,  de  Alerced.
Cond.  5  ;  Theophrast.  Charact.  6.)

(Compare  Miiller,  Hist,  of  Greek  Lit.  i.  p.  304,
&c  ;  Becker,  Charikks,  ii.  p.  274  ;  Bode,  Gesch.
der  Dram.  Dichtkunst  der  Hellerieii,  2  vols.  1839
and  1840.)

2.  Roman.  The  word  histrtones,  by  which  the
Roman  actors  were  called,  is  said  to  have  beep
formed  from  the  Etruscan  Mster  which  signified  a
ludio  or  dancer.  (Liv.  vii.  2  ;  Val.  JNCax.  ii.  4.  §  4  ;
compare  Plut.  Quaest  Rom.  p.  289,  c.)  In  the
year  364  B.  c.  Rome  was  visited  by  a  plague,  and
as  no  human  means  could  stop  it,  the  Romans  are
said  to  have  tried  to  avert  the  anger  of  the  gods
by  scenic  plays  {hidi  scenici),  which,  until  then,
had  been  unknown  to  them  ;  and  as  there  were  no
persons  at  Rome  prepared  for  such  performances,
the  Romans  sent  to  Etniria  for  them.  The  first
histriones  who  were  tiius  introduced  from  Etruria,
were  dancers,  and  performed  their  movements  to
the  accompaniment  of  a  flute.  That  the  art  of
dancing  to  this  accompaniment  should  have  been
altogether  unknown  to  the  Romans  is  hardly  credi-
ble ;  the  real  secret  nmst  have  been  in  the  mode
of  dancing,  that  is,  in  the  mimic  representations  of
the  dancers,  such  as  thej'-  are  described  by  Diony-
sius  (Antiq.  Rom.  vii.  72)  and  Appian  (viii.  66).
That  the  Etruscans  far  excelled  the  Romans  in
these  mimic  dances,  is  more  than  probable  ;  and
we  find  that  in  subsequent  times  also,  a  fresh  sup-
ply of  Eti-uscan  dancers  {histriones)  came  to  Rome.
(Miiller,  Etrusk.  iv.  1.  6.)  Roman  youths  after-
wards not  only  imitated  these  dancers,  but  also
recited  rude  and  jocose  verses,  adapted  to  the
movements  of  the  dance  and  the  melody  of  the  flute.
This  kind  of  amusement,  which  was  the  basis  of
the  Roman  drama,  remained  unaltered  until  the
time  of  Livius  Andronicus,  who  introduced  a  slave
upon  the  stage  for  the  purpose  of  singing  or  reciting
the  recitative,  while  he  himself  performed  the  ap-
propriate dance  and  gesticulation.  [Canticum.]
A  further  step  in  the  development  of  the  drama,
which  is  likewise  ascribed  to  Livius,  was,  that  the
dancer  and  reciter  carried  on  a  dialogue,  and  acted
a  storj'  with  the  accompaniment  of  the  flute.    (See


HISTRIO.

Gronov.  ad  lAv.  I.e.)  The  name  histrio,  which
originally  signified  a  dancer,  was  now  applied  to
the  actors  in  the  drama.  The  atellanae  were
played  by  Ireeborn  Romans,  while  the  regular
drama  was  left  to  the  histriones  who  formed  a
distinct  class  of  persons.  It  is  clear  from  the  words
of  Livy,  that  the  histriones  were  not  citizens  ;  that
they  were  not  contained  in  the  tribes,  nor  allowed
to  be  enlisted  as  soldiers  in  the  Roman  legions  ;
and  that  if  any  citizen  entered  the  profession  of
histrio,  he,  on  this  account,  was  excluded  from  his
tribe.  Niebuhr  {Hist,  of  Rome,  i.  p.  520,  note
1150)  thinks  differently,  but  does  not  assign  any
reason  for  his  opinion.  The  histriones  were  there-
fore always  either  freed-men,  strangers,  or  slaves,
and  many  passages  of  Roman  writers  show  that  they
were  generally  held  in  great  contempt.  (Cic.  pro
Arch.  5  ;  Com.  ^e^.  Praefat.  5  ;  Sueton.  Tib.  35.)
Towards  the  close  of  the  republic  it  was  only  such
men  as  Cicero,  who,  by  theif  Greek  education,
raised  themselves  above  the  prejudices  of  their
countrymen,  and  valued  the  person  no  less  than
the  talents  of  an  Aesopus  and  Roscius.  (Macrob.
Sat.  ii.  10.)  But  notwithstanding  this  low  esti-
mation in  which  actors  Avere  generally  held,  dis-
tinguished individuals  among  them  attracted  im-
mense crowds  to  the  theatres,  and  were  exorbitantly
paid.  (Cic.  c.  Verr.  iv.  16.)  Roscius  alone  re-
ceived every  day  that  he  performed  one  thousand
denarii,  and  Aesopus  left  his  son  a  fortune  of
200,000  sesterces,  which  he  had  acquired  solely
by  his  profession.  (Macrob.  /.  c.)  The  position  of
the  histriones  was  in  some  respects  altered  during
the  empire.  By  an  ancient  law  the  Roman  magis-
trates were  empowered  to  coerce  the  histriones  at
any  time  and  in  any  place,  and  the  praetor  had  the
right  to  scourge  them  {jus  virgarum  in  histriones).
This  law  was  partly  abolished  by  Augustus,  in  as
far  as  he  did  entirely  away  with  the  jus  virgarum,
and  confined  the  interference  of  the  magistrates  to
the  time  when,  and  the  place  where  (ludi  et  scena)
the  actors  performed.  (Tacit.  Annal.  i.  77.)  But
he  nevertheless  inflicted  very  severe  punishments
upon  those  actors  who,  either  in  their  private  life
or  in  their  conduct  on  the  stage,  committed  any
impropriety.  (Suet.  Avg.  45.)  After  these  re-
gulations of  Augustus  the  only  legal  punishments
that  could  be  inflicted  upon  actors  for  improper
conduct,  seem  to  have  been  imprisonment  and
exile.  (Tacit.  Annal.  iv.  14,  xiii.  28.)  The  jus
virgamm  is  indeed  said  to  have  been  restored  to
the  praetor  by  a  law  of  Augustus  himself  (Paull.
Sent.  V.  tit.  26),  not  expressly,  but  by  the  inter-
pretation put  upon  this  law  by  the  jurists.  But
this  interpretation  cannot  have  become  valid  till
after  the  reign  of  Tiberius,  of  whom  it  is  clearly
stated  that  he  refused  to  restore  the  jus  virgarum,
because  it  had  been  abolished  by  his  predecessor.
(Tacit.  Anfial.  i.  77.)  These  circumstances,  and
the  favour  of  the  emperors,  increased  the  arrogance
and  the  loose  conduct  of  the  histriones,  and  the
theatres  were  not  seldom  the  scenes  of  bloody
fights.  Hence  Tiberius  on  one  occasion  found  him-
self obliged  to  expel  all  histriones  from  Italy
(Tacit.  Annal.  iv.  14  ;  Dion  Cass.  lix.  2)  ;  but
they  were  recalled  and  patronised  by  his  successor.
(Dion  Cass.  lix.  p.  738.)  Some  of  the  later  em-
perors were  exceedingly  fond  of  histriones,  and
kept  them  for  their  private  amusement  {histriones
aulici,  Spartian.  Hadrian,  c.  19  ;  Jul.  Capitol.
Verus,  c.  8).     They  performed  at  the  repasts  of


HOMOEI.

tlie  emjierors  (Sueton.  Aug.  74),  and  were  occa-
sionally allowed  also  to  play  in  the  theatres  before
the  people  {publicabantur).  In  the  Digest  (3.  tit.  2.
s.  1)  we  read  that  all  actors  were  infamous.  From
the  time  of  Tacitus  the  word  histrio  was  used  as
syiionynious  with  pantomimus.  (Botticher,  Lex.
Tacit,  p.  233.)

Respecting  the  ordinary  pay  which  common
actors  received  during  the  time  of  the  republic  no-
thing is  known.  The  pay  itself  was  called  lucar
(Tacit.  Annal.  i.  77  ;  Plut.  Quaest.Rom.  p.  285,  c.  ;
Festus,  s.  vv.  lucar  and  pecunid)  ;  which  word  was
perhaps  confined  originally  to  the  paj^ment  made  to
those  who  took  part  in  the  religious  services  cele-
brated in  groves.  In  the  times  of  the  empire  it
seems  that  five  denarii  (Senec.  Epist  80),  or,  ac-
cording to  others  (Lucian.  Icaromen.  c.  29),  seven
drachmae,  was  the  common  pay  for  a  histrio  for
one  performance.  Several  emperors  found  it  neces-
sary to  restrict  the  practice  of  giving  immoderate
sums  to  actors.  (Tacit.  I.  c. ;  Suet.  Tib.  34.)  The
emperor  M.  Antoninus,  who  was  fond  of  all  his
trionic  arts,  ordained  that  every  actor  should  re-
ceive five  aurei,  and  that  no  one  who  gave  or  con-
ducted theatrical  representations  should  exceed  the
sum  of  ten  aurei.  (Jul.  Capitol.  M.  Anton,  c.  11  ;
compare  Schol.  ad  Jtirenal.  vii.  243.)  But  it  is
not  clear  whether  in  this  regulation  the  payment
for  one  or  more  performances  is  to  be  understood.
These  sums  were  either  paid  by  those  who  en-
gaged the  actors  to  play  for  the  amusement  of  the
people,  or  from  the  fiscus.  (Lipsius,  Eoccurs.  N.  ad
Tacit.  Annal.  i.)  Besides  their  regular  pay,  how-
ever, skilful  histriones  received  from  the  people
gold  and  silver  crowns  which  were  given  or  thrown
to  them  upon  the  stage.  (Phaedr.  Fab.  v.  7.  36  ;
Plin.  H.  N.  xxi.  3.)  [L.  S.]

HODOPOEI  {bZoTroioi\  public  officers  at
Athens,  who  had  to  take  care  of  the  roads  (ot
b^a>u  iTrifieXrjTai,  Phot.  Lex.  s.  v.)  They  are  men-
tioned in  the  fragment  of  a  comic  poet  of  the  time
of  Pericles  (Plut.  Praec.  Pol.  c.  15)  ;  but  in  the
time  of  Aeschines  their  duties  were  discharged  by
the  managers  of  the  Theoric  fund.  (Aesch.  c.
Ctes.  p.  419,  Reiske  ;  comp.  Bockh,  Publ.  Econ.  of
Athens,  p.  203,  2nd  ed.)

HOLOSE'RICA  VESTIS.  [Sericum.]

HOLOSPHY'RATON,  HOLOSPHYRE'-
LATA.     [Malleus  ;  Metalla.]

HOMOEI  (oiioioi),  the  Equals,  were  those
Spartans  who  possessed  the  full  rights  of  citizen-
ship, and  are  opposed  to  the  uTrojueioves,  or  those
who  had  undergone  some  kind  of  civil  degrada-
tion. (Xen.  de  Rep.  Laced,  x.  4.  s.  7,  Ilellen.  iii.
3.  §  5  ;  Arist.  Pol.  ii.  6.  §21.)  This  distinction
between  the  citizens  was  no  part  of  the  ancient
Spartan  constitution,  and  is  not  mentioned  by  any
writer  before  Xenophon ;  and  Aristotle  simply
makes  a  later  institution  applicable  to  an  early
time,  when  he  speaks  of  the  Partheniae  as  belong-
ing to  the  Homoei  {Pol.  v.  6.  §  1).  In  the  in-
stitution ascribed  to  Lycurgus,  every  citizen  had  a
certain  portion  of  land  ;  but  as  in  course  of  time
many  citizens  lost  their  lands  through  various
causes,  they  were  unable  to  contribute  to  the  ex-
penses of  the  syssitia,  and  therefore  ceased  to
possess  the  full  rights  of  Spartan  citizens.  Hence
tlie  distinction  appears  to  have  arisen  between  the
'6f^oioi  and  virofxeioi/es,  the  former  being  those  who
were  in  the  possession  of  their  land,  and  conse-
quently able  to   contribute   to  tlie   syssitia,   the


HONORES.  613

latter  those  who  through  having  no  land  were  un-
able to  do  so.  (Comp.  Arist.  Pol.  ii.  6.  §21,  ii.
7.  §4.)  Those  persons  likewise,  who  did  not
adopt  the  Spartan  mode  of  life  or  had  disgraced
themselves  by  any  base  act,  were  also  reduced  to
the  condition  of  virofxeioves,  even  if  they  possessed
the  requisite  landed  property  (Xen.  de  Pep.  Lac.
X.  4.  s.  7  ;  Plut.  Inst.  Lac.  21  ;  Teles,  ap.  Stob.
Floril.  xl.  p.  233)  ;  but  as  the  severity  of  the  an-
cient Spartan  manners  decayed,  the  possession  of
property  became  the  chief  test  to  a  place  among
the  Homoei.  The  Homoei  were  the  ruling  class
in  the  state,  and  they  obtained  possession  of
almost  all  the  privileges  and  exclusive  rights  which
the  legislation  of  Lycurgus  conferred  upon  the
Spartan  citizens.  They  filled  all  the  public  offices
of  the  state  with  the  exception  of  the  Ephoralty,
and  they  probably  met  together  to  determine  upon
public  affairs  under  the  name  of  c/c/cAt/toi  in  an
assembly  of  their  own,  which  is  called  rj  /.uKpa
e/c/cATjo-ia,  to  distinguish  it  from  the  assembly  of
the  whole  body  of  Spartan  citizens.  (Hermann,
Lekrb.  d.  Grieck.  Staatsalteiih.  §  47  ;  Id.  de  Con-
ditione  atque  Oriyine  eorum  qui  Homoei  ap.  Laced,
dicebantur,  Marburg,  1832  ;  Schomann,  Antiq.
Jur.  Publ.  Grace   p.  119.)

HONORA'RIA  ACTIO.     [Actio.]
HONORA'RII  LUDI.     [Ludl]
HONORA'RIUM.        [Advocatus  ;      Lex

ClNCIA.]

HONORA'RIUM  JUS.     [Edictum.]
HONO'RES.    Cicero  ( Top.  c.  20)  speaks  of  the

"  honores    populi,"    and    Horace    (Serm.   i.  6.  5)

speaks  of  the  populus

"  qui  stultus  honores
Saepe  dat  indignis.'*

In  both  passages  the  word  "  honores  "  means  the
high  offices  of  the  state  to  which  qualified  indi-
viduals were  called  by  the  votes  of  the  Roman
citizens.  Cicero  calls  the  quaestorship  "  honor  "
(see  also  Liv.  vi.  39)  ;  and  the  words  "magistratus  "
and  "  honores "  are  sometimes  coupled  together.
The  capacity  of  enjoying  the  honores  was  one  of  the
distinguishing  marks  of  citizenship.  [Civitas.]
In  Sulla's  proscription  (Veil.  Pat.  ii.  28),  there
was  a  clause  that  the  children  of  the  proscribed
"petendorum  honorum  jure  prohiberentur."

There  appears  to  be  no  exact  definition  of  honor
earlier  than  in  the  jurists  whose  writings  are  ex-
cerpted in  the  Digest.  "  Honor  municipalis ''  is
defined  to  be  ""  administratio  reipublicae  cum  dig-
nitatis gradu,  sive  cum  sumptu,  sive  sine  erog.i-
tione  contingens."  Munus  was  either  publicum
or  privatum.  A  publicum  munus  was  concerned
about  administration  (in  administranda  republica),
and  was  attended  with  cost  (sumptus)  but  not
with  rank  {dignitas).  "  Honor  "  was  properly  said
"  deferri,"  "dari;"  munus  was  said  ""imponi."
Cicero  {de  Or.  i.  45)  uses  the  phrase  "  honoribus
et  reipublicae  muneribus  pei'functum,"  to  signify
one  who  has  attained  all  the  honours  that  his  state
can  give,  and  discharged  all  the  duties  which  can
be  required  from  a  citizen.  A  person  who  held  a
magistratus  might  be  said  to  discharge  munera,
but  only  as  incident  to  the  office  {magnificentisshno
inunere  aedilitatis  perfunctus,  Cic.  ad  Fam.  xi.  17),
for  the  office  itself  was  the  honor.  Such  munera
as  these  were  public  games  and  other  things  of
the  kind.  (Dig.  50.  tit.  4.  De  Muneribus  et  ITo-
noribus.)  [G.  L.]

R   R   3


614


HORA.


HOPLI'TAE     (6ir\:rai).      [Arma  ;    Exer-

CITUS.]

HOPLOMACHI.  [Gladiatores,  p.  575,  b.]
HORA  i&paX  in  the  signification  of  hour,  that
is,  the  r2th  part  of  the  natural  day,  did  not  come
into  general  use  among  the  ancients  until  about  the
middle  of  the  second  century  b.  c.  The  equinoc-
tial hours,  though  known  to  astronomers,  were  not
used  in  the  affairs  of  common  life  till  towards  the
end  of  the  fourth  century  of  the  Christian  era.
As  the  division  of  the  natural  day  into  twelve
equal  parts,  both  in  summer  and  winter,  rendered
the  duration  of  the  hours  longer  or  shorter  accord-
ing to  the  different  seasons  of  the  year,  it  is  not
easy,  Avith  accuracy,  to  compare  or  reduce  the  hours
of  the  ancients  to  our  equinoctial  hours.  The
hours  of  an  ancient  day  would  only  coincide  with
the  hours  of  our  day  at  the  two  equinoxes.  [Dies
and  HoROLOGiUM.]  As  the  duration  of  the  natural
day,  moreover,  depends  on  the  polar  altitude  of  a
place,  our  natural  days  would  not  coincide  with
the  natural  days  in  Italy  or  Greece.  Ideler,  in  his
Handbuch  der  Chronologie,  has  given  the  following
approximate  duration  of  the  natural  days  at  Rome,
in  the  year  45  b.  c,  which  was  the  first  after  the
new  regulation  of  the  calendar  by  J.  Caesar  ;  the
length  of  the  days  is  only  marked  at  the  eight
principal  points  in  the  apparent  course  of  the  sun.

Dar/s  oftlieyear.  Their  duration  in

45  B.  c.  equinoctial  hours.

Dec.  23  .     .     .     .  (.     8  hours  54  minutes.

Feb.  6 9      „     50     „

March  23    ....  12      „       0      „

May  9 14      „     10      „

June  25  ....  15  „  6  „
August  10  ....  14  „  10  „
Sept.  25  ....  12  „  0  „
Nov.  9 9      „     50      „

The  following  table  contains  a  comparison  of  the
hours  of  a  Roman  natural  day,  at  the  summer  and
winter  solstice,  with  the  hours  of  our  day.

SUMMER-SOLSTICE.

Roman  Hours.  Modern  Hours.

1st  hour  .     4  o'clock,  27  minutes  0  seconds

2d      „  .5  „  42  „  30  „

3rd     „  .     6  „  5»  „  0  .,

4th     „  .     8  „  13  „  30  „

5th     „  .     9  „  29  „  0  „

6th     „  .  10  „  44  „  30  „

7th     „  .  12  „  0  „  0  „

8th     „  .     1  „  15  „  30  „

9th     „  .     2  „  31  „  0  „

10th     „  .     3  „  AQ  ,,  30  „

nth     „  .     5  „  2  „  0  „

12th     „  .     6  „  17  „  30  „

End  of  the  day     7  „  33  „  0  „


WINTBR-SOLSTICE.

Roman

H^ours.

Modem  Hours.

1st  hour    .

7  o'clock

,  33  minutes    0  secc

2d

"»       •

8

V)

17

„        30      ,

3rd

»

9

»>

2

0      „

4th

»       •

9

J»

AG

„        30     „

5th

>»       •

10

»»

31

0      „

6th

»>       •

11

»

15

«        30      ,

7th

>»       •

12

>»

0

0      ,,

8th

*»       •

12

»»

44

„        30     „

9th

9>           •

1

)«

29

0     „

10th

n

2

»

13

»        30     „

HORI.

Roman  Hours.  Modem  Hours.

1 1th  hour    .     2  o'clock,  58  minutes    0  seconds.

12th     „       .     3      „        42       „        30      „
End  of  the  day     4      „        27       „  0     „

The  custom  of  dividing  the  natural  day  into
twelve  equal  parts  or  hours  lasted,  as  we  have  ob-
served, till  a  very  late  period.  The  first  calenda-
rium  in  which  we  find  the  duration  of  day  and
night  marked  according  to  equinoctial  hours,  is  the
calendarium  rusticum  Famesianura.  (Ideler,  Hand-
Imcli  der  Chron.  ii.  p.  139,  &c.  ;  Graev.  Tliesaur.
Ant.  Rom.  viii.)

Another  question  which  has  often  been  discussed,
is  whether  in  such  expressions  as  prima,  altera,
tertia,  hora,  &c.,  we  have  to  understand  the  hour
which  is  passing,  or  that  which  has  already  elapsed.
From  the  construction  of  ancient  sun-dials  on  which
the  hours  are  marked  by  eleven  lines,  so  that  the
first  hour  had  elapsed  when  the  shadow  of  the
gnomon  fell  upon  the  first  line,  it  might  seem  as  if
hora  prima  meant  after  the  lapse  of  the  first  hour.
But  the  manner  in  which  Martial  (iv.  8),  when
describing  the  various  purposes  to  which  the  hours
of  the  day  were  devoted  by  the  Romans,  speaks  of
the  hours,  leaves  no  doubt  that  the  expressions
prima,  altera,  tertia  hora,  &c.,  mean  the  hour  which
is  passing,  and  not  that  which  has  already  elapsed.
(Becker,  Gallus,  vol.  i.  p.  184,  &c.)         [L.  S.]

H ORG  US    (opKOs).       [JUSJURANDUM.]

HORDEA'RIUM  AES.  [Aes  Hordearium.]

HORI  (opoi),  were  stone  tablets  or  pillars  placed
on  mortgaged  houses  and  lands  at  Athens,  upon
which  the  debt  and  the  creditor's  name  were  in-
scribed, and  also  the  name  of  the  archon  epony-
mus  in  whose  year  the  mortgage  had  been  made.
(  Harpocrat.  s.v.  "Opos  and^AtrTt/cTov:  Pollux,  iii.
85,  ix.  9.)  The  following  inscription  upon  an
bpos,  found  at  Achamae,  is  taken  from  Bockh  (Corp.
Inscrip.  i.  p.  484): — 'EttI  &eo(ppdcrTov  &pxoPTos,
'6pos  xojpiou  Ti/xris  fvo(pii\ofji4ur]s  ^avo(npa.T(f
Ylaiav  (lel)  xx,  that  is,  8<(rx'A'£tf»'  Zpaxpi-<*>v.  It  ap-
pears that  the  estate  had  been  bought  of  Phano-
stratus,  but  that  the  purchase- money,  instead  of
being  paid,  was  allowed  to  remain  on  mortgage.

When  the  estate  of  an  orphan  was  let  by  the
archon  and  his  guardian  [Epitropus],  the  per-
son to  whom  it  was  let  was  obliged  to  hj-pothe-
cate  a  sufficient  piece  of  ground  or  other  real
property,  which  was  called  airoTifirjfia  :  and  upon
this  an  opos  was  placed,  bearing  an  inscription  to
that  effect,  as  in  the  following  example,  which  is
taken  from  an  opos  found  upon  the  plain  of  Mara-
thon (Bockh,  p.  485): — -"Opos  x^p'^^^'  naX  oiKias,
airoTi^rilia  -naihl  optpap^  Aioye'iTovos  IlpoSa-
(Xiaiov).  (Compare  Isaeus,  Philoct.  liered.  p.  141.)
"Opoi  were  also  placed  upon  houses  and  lands  on
account  of  money  due  to  a  husband  for  the  dowry
of  his  wife  (Dem.  c.  Spud.  p.  1029.  21),  and  also
upon  the  property  which  a  husband  was  obliged  to
give  as  a  security  for  the  dowry  which  he  received
with  his  wife.     (Dem.  c.  Onetor.  ii.  p.  877.)

The  practice  of  placing  these  Spot  upon  property
was  of  great  antiquity  at  Athens :  it  existed  before
the  time  of  Solon,  who  removed  all  stones  standing
upon  estates,  when  he  released  or  relieved  the
debtors.  (Plut.  Sol.  15.)

(Bockh,  Publ.  Econ.  of  Athens,  p.  129,  2nd  ed.
Corp.  Inscrip.  i.  p.  484  ;  Museum  Criticum,  No.
viii.  p.  622  ;  Herald.  Observ.  ad  J.  A.  et  R,
p.  216  ;  Meier,  Att.  Process^  p.  506.)


HOROLOGIUM.

HOROLO'GIUM  (wpoXSyiov)  was  the  name
of  the  various  instruments  by  means  of  which  the
ancients  measured  the  time  of  the  day  and  night.
The  earliest  and  simplest  horologia  of  which  men-
tion is  made,  were  called  irdKos  and  yvwixoiv.
Herodotus  (ii.  109)  ascribes  their  invention  to  the
Babylonians  ;  Phavorinus  {ap.  Diog.  Laeri.  ii.  1.
3  ;  compare  Suidas,  s.  v.  Tvwjjlwv  and  'Ava^ifiav-
Spos)  to  Anaximander  ;  and  Pliny  (H.  N.  ii.  76)
to  his  disciple  Anaximenes.  Herodotus  mentions
the  ttSKos  and  yyoofj-uu  as  two  distinct  instruments.
Both,  however,  divided  the  day  into  twelve  equal
parts,  and  were  a  kind  of  sun-dial.  The  yucifiwu,
which  was  also  called  aroix^lov,  was  the  more
simple  of  the  two,  and  probably  the  more  ancient.
It  consisted  of  a  staff  or  pillar  standing  perpen-
dicular, in  a  place  exposed  to  the  sun  (crKiddripov),
so  that  the  length  of  its  shadow  might  be  easily
ascertained.  The  shadow  of  the  gnomon  was
measured  by  feet,  which  were  probably  marked  on
the  place  where  the  shadow  fell.  (Hesych.  s.  v.
Eirrd^rovs  (TKia  and  SajSe/caTroSos  :  Pollux,  i.  72.)
The  gnomon  is  almost  without  exception  mentioned
in  connection  with  the  Ztlnvov  or  the  bath  ;  and
the  time  for  the  former  was  towards  sunset,  or
at  the  time  when  the  shadow  of  the  gnomon  mea-
sured ten  or  twelve  feet.  (Aristoph.jEJcc/es.  652,  with
the  Schol.  ;  Pollux,  Z.c.  ;  Menander,  ap.  Athen.  vi.
p.  243  ;  Hesych.  s.  v.  Ackolttovp  l^Toix^hv.)  The
longest  shadow  of  the  gnomon,  at  sunrise  and  sun-
set, was  generally  12  feet,  but  in  some  cases  24
feet,  so  that  at  the  time  of  the  Selirvoi/  it  was  20
feet.  (Eubulides,  ap.  Aiken,  i.  p.  8.)  The  time
for  bathing  was  when  the  gnomon  threw  a  shadow
of  six  feet.  (Lucian,  Crmios.  c.  17,  Somn.  s.  Gall.
c.  9.)  In  later  times  the  name  gnomon  was  applied
to  any  kind  of  sun-dial,  especially  its  finger,  which
threw  the  shadow,  and  thus  pointed  to  the  hour.
Even  the  clepsydra  is  sometimes  called  gnomon.
(Athen.  ii.  p.  42.)

The  gnomon  was  evidently  a  very  imperfect  in-
strument, and  it  was  impossible  to  divide  the  day
into  twelve  equal  spaces  by  it.  This  may  be  the
reason  that  we  find  it  only  used  for  such  purposes
as  are  mentioned  above.  The  irSXos  or  7)\ioTp6-
TTiov,  on  the  other  hand,  seems  to  have  been  a  more
perfect  kind  of  sun-dial  ;  but  it  appears,  neverthe-
less, not  to  have  been  much  used,  as  it  is  but  seldom
mentioned.  (Aristoph.  ap.  Polluc.  ix.  5.)  It  con-
sisted of  a  basin  (Ae/cavi's),  in  the  middle  of  which
the  perpendicular  staff  or  finger  (yvuifj-cou)  was
erected,  and  in  it  the  twelve  parts  of  the  day  were
marked  by  lines.  (Alciphron,  Epist.  iii.  4  ;  Lucian,
Ijeseiph.  c.  4.)

Another  kind  of  horologium  was  the  clepsydra
(KKe\pv5pa).  It  derived  its  name  from  KAiirreiv
and  OScop,  as  in  its  original  and  simple  form  it  con-
sisted of  a  vessel  with  several  little  openings
(jpviT-i]fxara)  at  the  bottom,  through  which  the
water  contained  in  it  escaped,  as  it  were,  by
stealth.  This  instrument  seems  as  first  to  have
been  used  only  for  the  purpose  of  measuring  the
time  during  which  persons  were  allowed  to  speak
in  the  courts  of  justice  at  Athens.  The  time  of  its
invention  or  introduction  is  not  known  ;  but  in  the
age  of  Aristophanes  (see  Acham.  653,  Vesp.  93
and  827)  it  appears  to  have  been  in  common  use.
Its  form  and  construction  may  be  seen  very  clearly
from  a  passage  of  Aristotle  (Problem,  xvi.  8).  The
clepsydra  was  a  hollow  globe,  probably  some-
what flat  at  the   top  part,  where  it  had  a  short


HOROLOGIUM.


615


neck  (auAo's),  like  that  of  a  bottle,  through  which
the  water  was  poured  into  it.  This  opening  might
be  closed  by  a  lid  or  stopper  (Trcoyuo),  to  prevent
the  water  running  out  at  the  bottom.  The  clepsy-
dra which  Aristotle  had  in  view  was  probably  not
of  glass  or  of  any  transparent  material,  but  of
bronze  or  brass,  so  that  it  could  not  be  seen  in
the  clepsydra  itself  what  quantity  of  water  had
escaped.  As  the  thne  for  speaking  in  the  Athenian
courts  was  thus  measured  by  water,  the  orators
frequently  use  the  term  vSoop  instead  of  the  time
allowed  to  them  (eV  t^  e^cp  CSari,  Demosth.  de
Coron.  p.  274  ;  iav  iyx(>^pfi  rb  vScop,  c.  Leoch.  p.
1094).  Aeschines  (c.  Ctesipli.  p.  587),  when  de-
scribing the  order  in  which  the  several  parties
were  allowed  to  speak,  says  that  the  first  water
was  given  to  the  accuser,  the  second  to  the  accused,
and  the  third  to  the  judges.  An  especial  officer
(<5  e^'  v^cap)  was  appointed  in  the  courts  for  the
purpose  of  watching  the  clepsydra,  and  stopping  it
v/hen  any  documents  were  read,  whereby  the
speaker  was  interrupted  ;  and  it  is  to  this  officer
that  Demosthenes  (c.  Steph.  i.  p,  1103)  calls  out:
av  5e  i7ri\a§e  rh  vdcap.  The  time,  and  conse-
quently the  quantity  of  water  allowed  to  a  speaker
depended  upon  the  importance  of  the  case  ;  and  we
are  informed  that  in  a  ypacp^  TrapaTrpeaSeias  the
water  allowed  to  each  party  amounted  to  eleven
amphorae  (Aeschin.  de  Fals.Leg.  §  126),  whereas
in  trials  concerning  the  right  of  inheritance  only
one  amphora  was  allowed.  (Demosth.  c.  Macart.
p.  1502.)  Those  actions  in  which  the  time  was
thus  measured  to  the  speakers  are  called  by  Pollux
(viii.  113)  ^'iKai  trphs  vSaip :  others  are  termed
S'lKai  &v^v  iiSaros^  and  in  these  the  speakers  were
not  tied  down  to  a  certain  space  of  time.  The
only  instance  of  this  kind  of  actions  of  which  we
know,   is  the  ypa(p^  KaKcliaews  (Harpocrat.  s.  v.

KOLKOiCTls).

The  clepsydra  used  in  the  courts  of  justice  how-
ever was,  properly  speaking,  no  horologium ;  but
smaller  ones,  made  of  glass,  and  of  the  same  simple
structure,  were  undoubtedly  used  very  early  in
families  for  the  purposes  of  ordinary  life,  and  for
dividing  the  day  into  twelve  equal  parts.  In  these
glass-clepsydrae  the  division  into  twelve  parts  must
have  been  visible,  either  on  the  glass-globe  itself,  or
in  the  basin  into  which  the  water  flowed.  These
instruments,  however,  did  not  show  the  time  quite
correctly  all  the  year  round  ;  first,  because  the
water  ran  out  of  the  clepsydra  sometimes  quicker
and  sometimes  slower,  according  to  the  different
temperature  of  the  water  (Athen.  ii.  p.  42  ;  Plut.
Quaest.  Natur.  c.  7)  ;  and  secondly,  because  the
length  of  the  hours  varied  in  the  different  seasons
of  the  year.  To  remove  the  second  of  these  de-
fects tlie  inside  of  the  clepsydra  Avas  covered  with
a  coat  of  wax  during  the  shorter  days,  and  when
they  became  longer  the  wax  was  gradually  taken
away  again.  (A en.  Tact.  c.  22.)  Plato  is  said  to
have  used  a  vvKT€piv6v  wpoXdyiov  in  the  shape  of  a
large  clepsydra,  which  indicated  the  hours  of  the
night,  and  seems  to  have  been  of  a  complicated
structure.  (Athen.  iv.  p.  174.)  This  instance
shows  that  at  an  early  period  improvements  were
made  on  the  old  and  simple  clepsydra.  But  all
these  improvements  were  excelled  by  the  ingeni-
ous invention  of  Ctesibius,  a  celebrated  mathema-
tician of  Alexandria  (about  135  b.  c).  It  is  called
iipoXoyiov  vSpavKiKhv,  and  is  descrilDed  by  Vitru-
vius  (ix.  9  ;  compare  Athen.  I.  c).  Water  was
R  R  4


«16


HOROI.OGIUM.


made  to  drop  upon  wheels  which  were  therehy
turned.  The  regular  movement  of  these  wheels
was  communicated  to  a  small  statue,  which,  gra-
duallj'  rising,  pointed  with  a  little  stick  to  the
hours  marked  on  a  pillar  which  was  attached  to
the  mechanism.  It  indicated  the  hours  regularly
throughout  the  year,  but  still  required  to  be  often
attended  to  and  regulated.  This  complicated  clep-
sydra seems  never  to  have  come  into  general  use,
and  was  probably  only  found  in  the  houses  of  very
wealthy  persons.  The  sun-dial  or  gnomon,  and  a
simpler  kind  of  clepsydra,  on  the  other  hand,  were
much  used  down  to  a  very  late  period.  The  twelve
parts  of  the  day  were  not  designated  by  the  name
wpa  until  the  time  of  tlie  Alexandrian  astrono-
mers, and  even  then  the  old  and  vague  divisions,
described  in  the  article  Dies,  were  preferred  in  the
affairs  of  common  life.  At  the  time  of  the  geo-
grapher Hipparchus,  however  (about  150  B.  c),  it
seems  to  have  been  very  common  to  reckon  by  hours.
(Com  p.  Becker,  Char  ikies,  vol.  ii.  p.  490,  &c.)
There  is  still  existing,  though  in  ruins,  a  horo-


HOROLOGIUM.

logical  building,  Avhich  is  one  of  the  most  interest-
ing monuments  at  Athens.  It  is  the  structure
formerly  called  the  Tower  of  tlie  Winds,  but  now
known  as  the  Horological  Monument  of  Andronicus
Ci/rrhestes  (see  Diet,  of  Biog.  s.  v.).  It  is  ex-
pressly called  horologium  by  Varro  {R.  R.  iii.  5.
§  17).  This  building  is  fully  described  by  Vitru-
vius  (i.  6.  §  4),  and  the  preceding  woodcuts  show
its  elevation  and  ground  plan,  as  restored  by  Stuart.
(Antiq.  of  Athens,  vol.  i.  c.  3.)

The  structure  is  octagonal  ;  with  its  faces  to  the
points  of  the  compass.  On  the  N.E.  and  N.W.
sides  are  distyle  Corinthian  porticoes,  giving  access
to  the  interior  ;  and  to  the  south  wall  is  affixed  a
sort  of  turret,  forming  three  quarters  of  a  circle,  to
contain  the  cistern  which  supplied  water  to  the
clepsydra  in  the  interior.  On  the  summit  of  the
building  was  a  bronze  figure  of  a  Triton,  holding  a
wand  in  his  hand  ;  and  this  figure  turned  on  a
pivot,  so  that  the  wand  always  pointed  above  that
side  of  the  building  which  faced  the  wind  then
blowing.  The  directions  of  the  several  faces  were
indicated  by  figures  of  the  eight  winds  on  the  frieze
of  the  entablature.  On  the  plain  wall  below  the
entablature  of  each  fiice,  lines  are  still  visible,
which,  with  the  gnomons  that  stood  out  above
them,  formed  a  series  of  sun-dials.  In  the  centre
of  the  interior  of  the  building  was  a  clepsydra,  the
remains  of  which  are  still  visible,  and  are  shown
on  the  plan,  where  the  dark  lines  represent  the
channels  for  the  water,  which  was  supplied  from
the  turret  on  the  south,  and  escaped  by  the  hole
in  the  centre.

The  first  horologium  with  which  the  Romans  be-
came acquainted  was  a  sun-dial  {solariiim,  or  horo-
logium sciotkericum),  and  Avas,  according  to  some
writers,  brought  to  Rome  by  Papirius  Cursor  twelve
years  before  the  war  with  Pyrrhus,and  placed  before
the  temple  of  Quirinus  (Plin.  H.N.  vii.  60)  ;  others
stated  that  it  was  brought  to  Rome  at  the  time  of  the
first  Punic  war,  by  the  consul  M.  Valerius  Messala,
and  erected  on  a  column  behind  the  Rostra.  But
this  solarium  being  made  for  a  different  latitude
did  not  show  the  time  at  Rome  correctly.  Ninety-
nine  years  afterwards,  the  censor  Q.  Marcius  Philip-
pus  erected  by  the  side  of  the  old  solarium  a  new
one,  which  was  more  carefully  regulated  according
to  the  latitude  of  Rome.  But  as  sun-dials,  however
perfect  they  might  be,  were  useless  when  the  sky
was  cloudy,  P.  Scipio  Nasica,  in  his  censorship,
i  5.9  B.  c,  established  a  public  clepsydra,  which  in-
dicated the  hours  both  of  day  and  night.  This
clepsydra  was  in  aftertimes  generally  called  sola-
rium. (Plin.  H.  N.  vii.  60  ;  Censorin.  de  Die  Nat.
c.  23.)  The  word  hora  for  hour  was  introduced
at  Rome  at  the  time  when  the  Romans  became  ac-
quainted with  the  Greek  horologia,  and  was  in  this
signification  well  known  at  the  time  of  Plautus.
{Fseudol.  V.  2.  10.)  After  the  time  of  Scipio
Nasica  several  horologia,  chiefly  solaria,  seem  to
have  been  erected  in  various  public  places  at  Rome.
A  magnificent  horologium  was  erected  by  Augustus
in  the  Campus  Martins.  It  was  a  gnomon  in  the
shape  of  an  obelisk ;  but  Pliny  (//.  N.  xxxvi.  1 0)
complains  that  in  the  course  of  time  it  had  become
incorrect.  Another  horologium  stood  in  the  Circus
Flaminius.  (Vitruv.  ix.  9.  1.)  Sometimes  solaria
were  attached  to  the  front-side  of  temples  and  basi-
licae.  (Varro,  de  Ling.  Lot.  vi,  4  ;  Gruter,  Inscript.
vi.  6.)  The  old  solarium  which  had  been  erected
behind  the  Rostra  seems  to  have  existed  on  that


HOROLOGIUM.

spot  till  a  very  late  period,  and  it  would  seem  that
the  place  was  called  ad  Solarium,  so  that  Cicero
uses  this  expression  as  synonymous  with  Rostra
or  Forum  {pro  Quitict  18,  ad  Herenn.  iv.  10).
Ilorologia  of  various  descriptions  seem  also  to  have
been  commonly  kept  by  private  individuals  (Cic.
ad  Fam.  xvi.  1 8)  ;  and  at  the  time  of  the  emperors,
the  wealthy  Romans  used  to  keep  slaves  whose
special  duty  it  was  to  announce  the  hours  of  the  day
to  their  masters.  (Juven.  x.  215 ;  Mart.  viii.  67  ;
Petron.  26.)

From  the  number  of  solaria  which  have  been
discovered  in  modern  times  in  Italy,  we  must  infer
that  they  were  very  generally  used  among  the
ancients.  The  following  woodcut  represents  one
of  the  simplest  horologia  which  have  been  dis-
covered ;  it  seems  to  bear  great  similarity  to  that,
the  invention  of  which  Vitruvius  ascribes  to
Berosus.  It  was  discovered  in  1741,  on  the  hill
of  Tusculum,  among  the  ruins  of  an  ancient  villa,
and  is  described  by  Gio.  Luca  Zuzzeri,  in  a  work
entitled  D''una  antica  villa  scoperta  sul  dosso  del
Tusculo,  e  d''un  antico  orologio  a  sole,   Venezia,


1746,  and  by  G.  PL  Martini,  in  his  Abhandbmg
von  den  Sonnenuhren  der  Alien,  Leipzig,  1777,
p.  49,  &c.

The  following  woodcut  shows  the  same  solarium
as  restored  by  Zuzzeri.


The  breadth  as  well  as  the  height  (A  0,  and
P  A)  are  somewhat  more  than  eight  inches ;  and
the  length  (A  B)  a  little  more  than  sixteen  inches.
The  surface  (A  0  R  B)  is  horizontal.  S  P  Q  T
is  the  basis  of  the  solarium,  which,  originally,
was  probably  erected  upon  a  pillar.  Its  side,
A  S  T  B,  inclines  somewhat  towards  the  basis.
This  inclination  was  called  cyKKifia,  or  inclinatio
solarii  and  enclima  succisum  (Vitruv.  I.  c),  and


HOROSCOPUS.  617

shows  the  latitude  or  polar  altitude  of  the  place
for  which  the  solarium  was  made.  The  angle  of
the  enclima  is  about  40"'  4:Y,  which  coincides
with  the  latitude  of  Tusculum.  In  the  body  of
the  solarium  is  the  almost  spherical  excavation,
H  K  D  M  I  F  N,  which  fonns  a  double  hemicyclium
(hemia/clium  excavatum  ex  quadrato,  Vitruv.).
Within  this  excavation  the  eleven  hour-lines
are  marked  which  pass  through  three  semicircles,
H  L  N,  K  E  F,  and  D  M  J.  The  middle  one,
KEF,  represents  the  equator,  the  two  others  the
tropic  lines  of  winter  and  summer.  The  curve  re-
presenting the  summer  tropic  is  somewhat  more
than  a  semicircle,  the  other  two  curves  somewhat
smaller.  The  ten  middle  parts  or  hours  in  each  of
the  three  curves  are  all  equal  to  one  another  ;  but
the  two  extreme  ones,  though  equal  to  each  other,
are  by  one-fourth  smaller  than  the  rest.  In  the
middle,  G,  of  the  curve  D  K  H  N  I  J,  there  is
a  little  square  hole,  in  which  the  gnomon  or  pointer
must  have  been  fixed,  and  a  trace  of  it  is  still
visible  in  the  lead  by  means  of  which  it  was  fixed.
It  must  have  stood  in  a  perpendicular  position
upon  the  surface  A  B  R  0,  and  at  a  certain  dis-
tance from  the  surface  it  must  have  turned  in  a
right  angle  above  the  spheric  excavation,  so  that
its  end  (C)  extended  as  far  as  the  middla  of  the
equator,  as  it  is  restored  in  the  above  woodcut.
See  the  description  of  another  solarium  in  G.  H.
Martini's  Antiqzioi~um  Monimentorum  Sylloge,  p.
95,  &c.

Clepsydrae  were  used  by  the  Romans  in  their
camps,  chiefly  for  the  purpose  of  measuring  accu-
rately the  four  vigiliae  into  which  the  night  was
divided.  (Caes.  de  Bell  Gall.  v.  13  ;  Veget.  de
Re  Milit.  iii.  8  ;  Aen.  Tact.  c.  22.)

The  custom  of  using  clepsydrae  as  a  check  upon
the  speakers  in  the  courts  of  justice  at  Rome  was
introduced  by  a  law  of  Cn.  Pompeius,  in  his  third
consulship.  (Tacit.  Z)ec/ar.  (5ra^  38.)  Before  that
time  the  speakers  had  been  under  no  restrictions,
but  spoke  as  long  as  they  deemed  proper.  At
Rome,  as  at  Athens,  the  time  allowed  to  the
speakers  depended  upon  the  importance  of  the
case.  Pliny  {Epist.  ii.  11)  states  that  on  one  im-
portant occasion  he  spoke  for  nearly  five  hours,
ten  large  clepsydrae  having  been  granted  to  him
by  the  judices,  but  the  case  was  so  important  that
four  others  were  added,  (Compare  Plin.  Epist.  vi.
2  ;  Martial,  vi.  35,  viii.  7.)  Pompeius,  in  his  law,
is  said  to  have  limited  the  time  during  which  the
accuser  was  allowed  to  speak  to  two  hours,  while
the  accused  was  allowed  three  hours.  (A scon,  in
Milan,  p.  37,  ed.  Orelli.)  This,  however,  as  is
clear  from  the  case  of  Pliny  and  others,  was  not
observed  on  all  occasions,  and  we  must  suppose
that  it  was  merely  the  intention  of  Pompeius  to  fix
the  proportions  of  the  time  to  be  allowed  to  each
party,  that  is,  that  in  all  cases  the  accuser  should
only  have  two-thirds  of  the  time  allowed  to  the
accused.  This  supposition  is  supported  by  a  case
mentioned  by  Pliny  {Epist.  iv.  9),  where,  accord-
ing to  law  (e  lege)  the  accuser  had  six  hours,
while  the  accused  had  nine.  An  especial  officer
was  at  Rome  as  well  as  at  Athens  appointed  to
stop  the  clepsydra  during  the  time  when  docu-
ments were  read.  (Apul.  Apolog.  i.  and  ii.  ;  com-
pare Emesti,  de  Solariis,  in  his  Opuscul.  Fhilolog.
etCrii.  pp.  21—31  ;  Becker,  Gallus,  vol.  i.  p.  186,
&c)  [L.  S.]

HOROSCOPUS.     [AsTROLor;iA,  p.  144,  b.]


618


HORTUS.


HORREA'RII.     [HoRREUM.]

HORREUM  (u)pe7ov,  (TiTO(pv\aKi7ov.  aTroQi]Kri)
was,  according  to  its  etymological  signification,  a
place  in  which  ripe  fruits,  and  especially  corn,  were
kept,  and  thus  answered  to  our  granary.  (Virg.
Geon].  i.  49  ;  TibuU.  ii.  5.  84  ;  Horat.  Carm.  i.  1.
7  ;  Cic.  de  Leg.  Agr.  ii.  83.)  During  the  empire
the  name  horreum  was  given  to  any  place  destined
for  the  safe  preservation  of  things  of  any  kind.
Thus  we  find  it  applied  to  a  place  in  which  beauti-
ful works  of  art  were  kept  (Plin,  Epist.  viii.  18)  ;
to  cellars  (Jiorrea  suhterranea,  horrea  vinaria.  Dig.
18.  tit.  1.  8.  76)  ;  to  depots  for  merchandise,  and  all
sorts  of  provisions  (horreum  penarium.  Dig,  30.  tit.

9.  8.'  3).  Seneca  (Epist.  45)  even  calls  his  library
a  horreum.  But  the  more  general  application  of
the  word  horreum  was  to  places  for  keeping  fruit
and  corn  ;  and  as  some  kinds  of  fruit  required  to  be
kept  more  dry  than  others,  the  ancients  had  be-
sides the  horrea  subterranea,  or  cellars,  two  other
kinds,  one  of  which  was  built  like  every  other
house  xipon  the  ground  ;  but  others  (horrea  pensi-
lia  or  sublimia)  were  erected  above  the  ground,  and
rested  upon  posts  or  stone  pillars,  that  the  fruits
kept  in  them  might  remain  dry.  (Colum.  xii.  50,
i.  6  :  Vitruv.  vi.  6.  4.)

From  about  the  year  140  after  Christ,  Rome  pos-
sessed two  kinds  of  public  horrea.  The  one  class
consisted  of  buildings  in  which  the  Romans  might
deposit  their  goods,  and  even  their  money,  securities,
and  other  valuables  (Cod.  4.  tit.  24.  s.  9),  for  which
they  had  no  safe  place  in  their  own  houses.  This
kind  of  public  horrea  is  mentioned  as  early  as  the
time  of  Antoninus  Pius  (Dig.  1.  tit.  15.  s.  3),
though  Lampridius  (Alex.  Sev.  c.  39)  assigns  their
institution  to  Alexander  Severus.  (Compare  Dig.

10.  tit.  4.  s.  5.)  The  officers  who  had  the  super-
intendence of  these  establishments  were  called  hor-
rearii.  The  second  and  more  important  class  of
horrea,  which  may  be  termed  public  granaries,  were
buildings  in  which  a  plentiful  supply  of  com  was
constant!)'  kept  at  the  expense  of  the  state,  and  from
which,  in  seasons  of  scarcity,  the  corn  was  distri-
buted among  the  poor,  or  sold  at  a  moderate  price.
The  first  idea  of  building  such  a  public  granary
arose  with  C.  Sempronius  Gracchus  [lex  Sempronia

frumentaria)  ;  and  the  ruins  of  the  great  granary
(horrea  pcypuli  Romani)  which  he  built  were  seen
down  to  the  sixteenth  century  between  the  Aven-
tine  and  the  Monte  Testaceo.  (Appian,  de  Bell.
Civ.  i.  21  ;  Plut.  C.  Graech.  5  ;  Liv.  Epit.  60  ;
Veil.  Pat.  ii.  6  ;  Cic.  pro  Sext.  24.)

The  plan  of  C.  Gracchus  was  followed  out  and
carried  further  by  Clodius,  Pompey,  and  several  of
the  emperors  ;  and  during  the  empire  we  thus  find
a  great  number  of  public  horrea  wliich  were  called
after  the  names  of  their  founders,  e.  .9.,  horrea  Ani-
ceti,  Vargiuiteii,  Seiani,  Augusti,  Domitiani,  &c.
The  manner  in  which  corn  from  these  granaries
was  given  to  the  people  differed  at  different  times.
[Comp.  Frumkntariak  liEGES.]  [L.  S.]

HORTUS  (k-^ttos).  garden.  1.  Greek.  Our
knowledge  of  the  horticulture  of  the  Greeks  is  very
limited.  We  must  not  look  for  information  re-
specting their  gardens  to  the  accounts  which  we
find  in  Greek  writers  of  the  gardens  of  Alcinous,
filled  with  all  manner  of  trees  and  fruit  and  flowers,
and  adorned  with  fountains  (Odyss.  vii.  112 — 130),
or  of  those  of  the  Hesperides  (Hesiod.  Theog.  25),
or  of  the  paradises  of  the  Persian  satraps,  which
resembled  our  parks  (Xen.  Anah.  i.  2.  §  7,  Occo'


HORTUS.

mm.  iv.  26,  27  ;  Plut.  Alcih.  24)  ;  for  the  former
gardens  are  only  imaginary,  and  the  manner  in
which  the  paradises  are  spoken  of  by  Greek  writers
shows  that  they  were  not  familiar  with  anything
of  the  kind  in  their  own  country.  In  fact  the
Greeks  seem  to  liave  had  no  great  taste  for  land-
scape beauties,  and  the  small  number  of  flowers
with  which  they  were  acquainted  afforded  but
little  inducement  to  ornamental  horticulture.

The  sacred  groves  were  cultivated  with  special
care.  They  contained  ornamental  and  odoriferous
plants  and  fruit  trees,  particularly  olives  and  vines.
(Soph.  Oed.  Col.  16  ;  Xen.  Anab.\.  3.  §  12.)  Some,
times  they  were  without  fruit  trees.  (Paus.  i.  21.
§  9.)

The  only  passage  in  the  earlier  Greek  writers,
in  which  flower-gardens  appear  to  be  mentioned,
is  one  in  Aristophanes,  who  speaks  of  icr^irous
evciSeis  (Aves,  v.  1066).  At  Athens  the  flowers
most  cultivated  were  probably  those  used  for
making  garlands,  such  as  violets  and  roses.  In
the  time  of  the  Ptolemies  the  art  of  gardening
seems  to  have  advanced  in  the  favourable  climate
of  Egypt  so  far,  that  a  succession  of  flowers  was
obtained  all  the  year  round.  (Callixenus,  ap.  Ath.
v.  p,  196.)  Longus  (Past.  ii.  p.  36)  describes  a
garden  containing  every  production  of  each  sea-
son, "  in  spring,  roses,  lilies,  hyacinths,  and  vio-
lets ;  in  summer,  poppies,  wild- pears  (dxpaSes),
and  all  fruit  ;  in  autumn,  vines  and  figs,  and  pome-
granates and  myrtles."  That  the  Greek  idea  of
horticultural  beauty  was  not  quite  the  same  as
ours,  may  be  inferred  from  a  passage  in  Plutarch,
where  he  speaks  of  the  practice  of  setting  off  the
beauties  of  roses  and  violets,  by  planting  them  side
by  side  with  leeks  and  onions  (De  capienda  ex
inimieis  utilitate,  c.  10).  Becker  considers  this
passage  a  proof  that  flowers  were  cultivated  more
to  be  used  for  garlands  than  to  beautify  the  garden.
(Becker,  Charikles,  vol.  ii.  p.  403— -405.)

2.  Roman.  The  Romans,  like  the  Greeks,
laboured  under  the  disadvantage  of  a  verv  limited
flora.  This  disadvantage  they  endeavoured  to  over-
come, by  arranging  the  materials  they  did  possess
in  such  a  way  as  to  produce  a  striking  effect.
We  have  a  very  full  description  of  a  Roman  garden
in  a  letter  of  the  j'ounger  Pliny,  in  which  he  de-
scribes his  Tuscan  villa.  (Plin.  Epist.  v.  6.)  In
front  of  the  portions  there  was  generally  a  xj/stus,
or  flat  piece  of  ground,  divided  into  flower-beds  of
different  shapes  by  borders  of  box.  There  were
also  such  flower-beds  in  other  parts  of  the  garden.
Sometimes  they  were  raised  so  as  to  form  terraces,
and  their  sloping  sides  planted  with  evergreens  or
creepers.  The  most  striking  features  of  a  Roman
garden  were  lines  of  large  trees,  among  which  the
plane  appears  to  have  been  a  great  favourite,  planted
in  regular  order  ;  allej'S  or  walks  (ambulationes)
formed  by  closely  dipt  hedges  of  box,  yew,  cypress,
and  other  evergreens  ;  beds  of  acanthus,  rows  of
fruit-trees,  especially  of  vines,  with  statues,  pyra-
mids, fountains,  and  summer-houses  (diaetae).  The
trunks  of  the  trees  and  the  parts  of  the  house  or
any  other  buildings  which  were  visible  from  the
garden,  were  often  covered  with  ivy.  (Plin.  l.ci
Cic.  ad  Q.  F.  iii.  1,  2.)  In  one  respect  the  Roman
taste  differed  most  materially  from  that  of  the
present  day,  namely,  in  their  fondness  for  the  ars
topiaria^  which  consisted  in  tying,  twisting,  or
cutting  trees  and  shrubs  (especially  the  box)  into
the  figures  of  animab,  ships,  letters,  &c.     The  im«


HOSPITIUM.

portance  attached  to  this  part  of  horticulture  is
proved  not  only  by  the  description  of  Pliny,  and
the  notices  of  other  writers  (Plin.  H.  N.  xvi.  33.
s.  (tO,  xxi.  U.S.  39,  xxii.  22.  s.  34  ;  Martial,  iii.
19),  but  also  by  the  fact  that  topiarins  is  the  only
name  used  in  good  Latin  writers  for  the  orna-
mental gardener.  Cicero  (Parad.  v.  2)  mentions
the  topiarius  among  the  higher  class  of  slaves.

Attached  to  the  garden  were  places  for  exercise,
the  gestatio  and  hippodromus.  The  gestatio  was  a
sort  of  avenue,  shaded  hy  trees,  for  the  purpose  of
taking  gentle  exercise,  such  as  riding  in  a  litter.
(Plin.  Epist.  V.  6,  ii.  17.)  The  hippodromus  (not,
as  one  reading  gives  the  word  in  Pliny,  hypodro-
mus)  was  a  place  for  running  or  horse  exercise,  in
the  form  of  a  circus,  consisting  of  several  paths
divided  by  hedges  of  box,  ornamented  with  topi-
arian  work,  and  surrounded  by  large  trees.  (Plin.
/.  c.  ;  Martial,  xii.  50,  Ivii.  23.)

The  flowers  which  the  Romans  possessed,  though
few  in  comparison  with  the  species  known  to  us,
Avere  more  numerous  than  some  writers  have  re-
presented ;  but  the  subject  still  requires  investiga-
tion. Their  principal  garden-flowers  seem  to  have
been  violets  and  roses,  and  they  also  had  the  cro-
cus, nai-cissus,  lily,  gladiolus,  iris,  poppy,  amaranth,
and  others.

Conservatories  and  hot-houses  are  not  mentioned
by  any  writer  earlier  than  the  first  century  of  our
era.  They  are  frequently  referred  to  by  Martial
(viii.  14,  b'B,  iv.  19,  xiii.  127).  They  were  used
both  to  preserve  foreign  plants  and  to  produce
flowera  and  fruit  out  of  season.  Columella  (xi.  3.
§§51,  52)  and  Pliny  {H.  N.  xix.  5.  s.  23)  speak
of  forcing-houses  for  grapes,  melons,  &c.  In  every
garden  there  was  a  space  set  apart  for  vegetables
{olera).

Flowers  and  plants  were  also  kept  in  the  central
space  of  the  peristyle  [Domus],  on  the  roofs,  and
in  the  windows  of  the  houses.  Sometimes,  in  a
town,  where  the  garden  was  very  small,  its  walls
wero  painted  in  imitation  of  a  real  garden,  with
trees,  fountains,  birds,  &c.,  and  the  small  area  was
ornamented  with  flowers  in  vases.  A  beautiful
example  of  such  a  garden  was  found  at  Pompeii.
(Gell's  Pompeiana,  ii.  4.)

An  ornamental  garden  was  also  called  viridariuni
(Dig.  33.  tit.  7.  s.  8),  and  the  gardener  fapiarius
or  viridarius.  The  common  name  for  a  gardener
is  villicus  or  cultor  liortorum.  We  find  also  the
special  names  vinitor^  olitor.  The  word  hoHulanus
is  only  of  late  formation.  The  aquarius  had
charge  of  the  fountains  both  in  the  garden  and
in  the  house.  (Becker,  Gallus,  vol.  i.  p.  283,
&c.  ;  Bottiger,  liacemationen  zur  Garteti-Kunst
der  Alien.)  [P.  S.]

HOSPES.     [HospiTiUM.]

HOSPI'TIUM  (leWa,  Trpo^^via).  Hospitality
is  one  of  the  characteristic  features  of  almost  all
nations  previous  to  their  attaining  a  certain  degree
of  civilisation.  In  civilised  countries  the  necessity
of  general  hospitality  is  not  so  much  felt  ;  but  at
a  time  when  the  state  or  the  laws  of  nations  afforded
scarcely  any  security,  and  when  the  traveller  on
his  journey  did  not  meet  with  any  places  destined
for  his  reception  and  accommodation,  the  exercise
of  hospitality  was  absolutely  necessary.  Among
the  nations  of  antiquity,  with  whom  the  right  of
hospitality  was  hallowed  by  religion,  it  was  to
some  degree  observed  to  the  latest  period  of  their
existence,  and  acquired  a  political  importance  which


HOSPITIUM.  619

it  has  never  had  in  any  other  state.  It  was  in
Greece,  as  well  as  at  Rome,  of  a  twofold  nature,
either  private  or  public,  in  as  far  as  it  was  either
established  between  individuals,  or  between  two
states.  {Hospitium  privatum  and /tospitium  publi-
ca?«,  ^€uia  and  irpo^eyia.)

1.  Greek.  In  ancient  Greece  the  stranger,
as  such  (|eVos  and  hostis)^  was  looked  upon  as  an
enemy  (Cic.  de  Off.  i.  12  ;  Herod,  ix.  11  ;  Plut,
Aristid.  10);  but  whenever  he  appeared  among
another  tribe  or  nation  without  any  sign  of  hostile
intentions,  he  was  considered  not  only  as  one  who
required  aid,  but  as  a  suppliant,  and  Zeus  was  the
protecting  deity  of  strangers  and  suppliants.  (Zei/y
iivios  and  lKiTT]<nos;  Hom.  Od.  xiv.  57,  &c.  283,
ix.  270,  xiii.  213,  vii.  164:  compare  Apollon.
Argo?iaut  ii.  1134  ;  Aelian.  V.  H.  iv.  1.)  This
religious  feeling  was  strengthened  by  the  belief
that  the  stranger  might  possibly  be  a  god  in  dis-
guise. iOdyss.  xvii.  484.)  On  his  arrival  there-
fore, the  stranger,  of  whatever  station  in  life  he
might  be,  was  kindly  received,  and  provided  with
everything  necessary  to  make  him  comfortable,
and  to  satisfy  his  immediate  wants.  The  host  did
not  inquire  who  the  stranger  was,  or  what  had  led
him  to  his  house,  until  the  duties  of  hospitality
were  fulfilled.  During  his  sttiy,  it  was  a  sacred
duty  of  his  host  to  protect  him  against  any  per-
secution, even  if  he  belonged  to  a  politically  hostile
race,  so  that  the  host's  house  was  a  perfect  asylum
to  him.  On  his  departure  he  was  dismissed  with
presents  and  good  wishes.  {Odyss.  iv.  37,  &c.,
Nitzch's  note.)  It  seems  to  have  been  customary'
for  the  host,  on  the  departure  of  the  stranger,
to  break  a  die  {aaTpayoKos)  in  two,  one  half  of
which  he  himself  retained,  while  the  other  half
was  given  to  the  stranger  ;  and  when  at  any  fu-
ture time  they  or  their  descendants  met,  they  had
a  means  of  recognising  each  other,  and  the  hospi-
table connection  was  renewed.  (Schol.  ad  Eurip.
Med.  613.)  Hospitality  thus  not  only  existed
between  the  persons  who  had  originally  formed  it,
but  was  transferred  as  an  inheritance  from  father
to  son.  To  violate  the  laws  of  hospitality  was  a
great  crime  and  act  of  impiety,  and  was  punished
by  men  as  well  as  gods  {h'lKai  KaKo^^vias,  Aelian,
I.e. ;  Pans,  vii.  25).  Instances  of  such  hereditary
connections  of  hospitality  are  mentioned  down  to  a
very  late  period  of  Greek  history  ;  and  many
towns,  such  as  Athens,  Corinth,  Byzantium,  Phasis,
and  others,  were  celebrated  for  the  hospitable
character  of  their  citizens.  (Herod,  vi.  35  ;  Thucyd.
ii.  13  ;  Plato,  Crito,  p.  45,  c.  ;  Stobaeus,  Flori/eg.
tit.  xliv.  40,  &c.)  But  when  a  more  regular  and
frequent  intercourse  among  the  Greeks  began  to
be  established,  it  was  impossible  tc  receive  all  these
strangers  in  private  houses.  This  naturally  led  to
the  establishment  of  inns  ( TravSoKetov,  KaTay(t>yiou,
KaraXvais),  in  which  such  strangers  as  had  no  hos-
pitable connections  found  accommodation.  For  those
occasions,  on  which  numerous  visitors  flocked  to  a
particular  place  for  the  purpose  of  celebrating  one
of  the  great  or  national  festivals,  the  state  or  the
temple  provided  for  the  accommodation  of  the  visitors
either  in  tents  or  temporary'  inns  erected  about  the
temple.  (Aelian,  V.  H.  iv.  9  ;  Schol.  ad  Pind.
01.  xi.  51  and  55:  compare  Plato,  de  Leg.  xii.
p.  952  ;  Lucian,  Amor.  12  ;  Thucyd.  iii.  68.)
The  kind  of  hospitality  which  was  exercised  by
private  individuals  on  such  festive  occasions  pro-
bably differed  very  little  from  that  which  is  cus-


620


HOSPITIUM.


tomary  among  ourselves,  and  was  chiefly  shown
towards  friends  or  persons  of  distinction  and  merit,
whose  presence  was  an  honour  to  the  house  wherein
they  stayed.  (Xen.  Oecon.  2.  5  ;  Plato,  Prolog.
p.  315  ;  Becker,  Charikles,  vol.  i.  p.  134.)  In  the
houses  of  the  wealthier  Greeks  a  separate  part  {hos-
pitium  or  hosjntalia  and  ^(viives)  with  a  separate
entrance,  was  destined  for  the  reception  and  habi-
tation of  strangers,  and  was  provided  with  all  the
necessary  comforts  for  the  temporary  occupants.
On  tlie  first  day  after  their  arrival  they  were  gene-
rally invited  to  the  table  of  their  host  ;  but  after-
wards their  provisions  (^4via),  consisting  of  fowl,
eggs,  and  fruit,  were  either  sent  to  them,  or  they
had  to  purchase  them  themselves.  ( Vitruv.  vi.  7.
4  ;  Apul.  Metam.  ii.  p.  19.)

What  has  been  said  hitherto,  only  refers  to  hos-
pitium  privatum,  that  is,  the  hospitality  existing
between  two  individuals  or  families  of  different
states.  Of  far  greater  importance,  however,  was
the  hospitium  publicum  (7rpo|ej/ia,  sometimes
simply  i^via),  or  public  hospitality  which  existed
between  two  states,  or  between  an  individual  or  a
family  on  the  one  hand,  and  a  whole  state  on  the
other.  Of  the  latter  kind  of  public  hospitality
many  instances  are  recorded,  such  as  that  between
the  Peisistratids  and  Sparta,  in  which  the  people
of  Athens  had  no  share.  The  hospitium  publicum
among  the  Greeks  arose  undoubtedly  from  the  hos-
pitium privatum,  and  it  may  have  originated  in  two
ways.  When  the  Greek  tribes  were  governed  by
cfiieftains  or  kings,  the  private  hospitality  existing
between  the  ruling  families  of  two  tribes  may  have
produced  similar  relations  betvveen  their  subjects,
which  after  the  abolition  of  the  kingly  power,  con-
tinued to  exist  between  the  new  republics  as  a
kind  of  political  inheritance  of  former  times.  Or  a
person  belonging  to  one  state  might  have  either
extensive  connections  with  the  citizens  of  another
state,  or  entertain  great  partiality  for  the  other
state  itself,  and  thus  offer  to  receive  all  those  who
came  from  that  state  either  on  private  or  public
business,  and  act  as  their  patron  in  his  own
city.  This  he  at  first  did  merely  as  a  private  in-
dividual, but  the  state  to  which  he  offered  this  kind
service  would  naturally  soon  recognise  and  reward
him  for  it.  When  two  states  established  public
hospitality,  and  no  individuals  came  forward  to
act  as  the  representatives  of  their  state,  it  was  ne-
cessary that  in  each  state  persons  should  be  ap-
pointed to  show  hospitality  to,  and  .watch  over  the
interests  of,  all  persons  who  came  from  the  state
connected  by  hospitality.  The  persons  who  were
appointed  to  this  office  as  the  recognised  agents  of
the  state  for  which  they  acted  were  called  irpj-
|ej/o(,  but  those  who  undertook  it  voluntarily  ^0eAo-
irp6liVoi.  (Pollux,  iii.  52  ;  compare  Thucyd.  ii.  29
with  Arnold's  note,  and  iii.  70  with  Goller's.)

The  office  of  proxenus,  which  bears  great  re-
semblance to  that  of  a  modem  consul  or  minister-
resident,  was  in  some  cases  hereditary  in  a  parti-
cular family.  When  a  state  appointed  a  proxenus,
it  either  sent  out  one  of  its  own  citizens  to  reside
in  the  other  state,  or  it  selected  one  of  the  citizens
of  this  state,  and  conferred  upon  him  the  honour  of
proxenus.  The  former  was,  in  early  times,  the
custom  of  Sparta,  where  the  kings  had  the  right  to
select  from  among  the  Spartan  citizens  those  whom
they  wished  to  send  out  as  proxeni  to  other  states.
(Herod,  vi.  57.)  But  in  subsequent  times  this
custom  seems  to  have  been  given  up,  for  we  find


HOSPITIUM.

that  at  Athens  the  family  of  Callias  were  the  pro-
xeni of  Sparta  (Xen.  Helien.  v.  4.  §  22,  vi.  3.  §  4,
&c.)  ;  at  Elis,  the  Elean  Xenias  (Paus.  iii.  8.  §  2)  ;
and  at  Argos,  the  Argive  Alciphron.  (Thucyd.  v.
59.)  A  Spartan  sent  out  as  proxenus  was  some-
times also  entrusted  with  the  power  of  harmostes,
as  Clearchus  at  Byzantium.  (Xen.  Helien.  i.  1.  §
35,  i.  3.  §  15.)

The  custom  of  conferring  the  honour  of  proxenus
upon  a  citizen  of  the  state  with  which  public  hospi-
tality existed,  seems  in  later  times  to  have  been
universally  adopted  by  the  Greeks.  Thus  we  find
besides  the  instances  of  Spartan  proxeni  mentioned
above,  Nicias  the  Athenian,  as  proxenus  of  Syra-
cuse at  Athens  (Diodor.  xiii.  27),  and  Arthmius,
of  Zeleia,  as  the  proxenus  of  Athens  at  Zeleia.
(Aeschin.  c.  Ctesiph.  p.  647 :  compare  Plato,  de
Leg.  i.  p.  642.)  The  common  mode  of  appointing
a  proxenus  was,  with  the  exception  of  Sparta,  by
show  of  hands.  ( Ulpian,  ad  Demosth.  Mid.  p.  374.)
The  principal  duties  of  a  proxenus  were  to  receive
those  persons,  especially  ambassadors,  who  came
from  the  state  which  he  represented  ;  to  procure  for
them  the  admission  to  the  assembly,  and  seats  in
the  theatre  (Pollux,  I.  c.)  ;  to  act  as  the  patron  of
the  strangers,  and  to  mediate  between  the  two
states  if  any  disputes  arose.  (Xen.  Helien.  vi.  3.  §
4.)  If  a  stranger  died  in  the  state,  the  proxenus
of  his  country  had  to  take  care  of  the  property  of
the  deceased.     (Demosth.  c.  Callip.  p.  1237,  &c.)

Regarding  the  honours  and  privileges  which  a
proxenus  enjoyed  from  the  state  which  he  repre-
sented, the  various  Greek  states  followed  different
principles  :  some  honoured  their  proxenus  with  the
full  civic  franchise,  and  other  distinctions  besides.
(Bockh,  Corp.  hiscript.  n.  1691 — 93,  and  ii.  p.  79  ;
Demosth.  de  Cor.  p.  256  ;  Xen.  Helien.  i.  1.  §  26.)
But  the  right  of  acquiring  property  in  the  state  of
which  he  thus  became  a  citizen  seems  not  to  have
been  included  in  his  privileges ;  for  we  find  that  where
this  right  was  granted,  it  was  done  by  an  especial
document.  (Bockh,  i^z^W.  jEcow.p.  140.)  A  foreigner
who  was  appointed  in  his  own  country  as  proxenus
of  Athens,  enjoyed  for  his  own  person  the  right  of
hospitality  at  Athens  whenever  he  visited  this
city,  and  all  the  other  privileges  that  a  foreigner
could  possess  without  becoming  a  real  Athenian
citizen.  Among  these  privileges,  though  they  were
not  necessarily  included  in  the  proxeny,  but  were
granted  by  special  decrees,  we  may  mention,  1.
'E'7ri7aytiia,  which,  in  cases  when  it  was  granted
by  the  more  powerful  state,  generally  became  mu-
tual (Platner's  Process,  ii.  p.  73  ;  Xen.  Helien.  v.  2.
§19);  2.  The  right  to  acquire  property  at  Athens
(eyKTrjcrts,  l/iTratriS,  einraais)  ;  3,  The  exemption
from  paying  taxes  (areAeta  or  dT€A.€:a  a-TrdyTwu,
Demosth.  c.  Leptin.  p.  475,  compare  p.  498)  ;  and
4.  Inviolability  in  times  of  peace  and  war,  both  by
sea  and  by  land.  (Bockh,  Corp.  Inscrip.  i.  p.  725.)
Some  of  these  privileges  were  granted  to  indivi-
duals as  well  as  to  whole  states  ;  but  we  have  no
instance  of  a  whole  state  having  received  all  of  them,
with  the  exception  of  those  cases  where  the  civic
franchise  or  isopolity  was  granted  to  a  whole  state  ;
and  in  this  case  the  practical  consequences  could
not  become  manifest,  unless  a  citizen  of  the  pri-
vileged state  actually  took  up  his  residence  at
Athens.  (Compare  F.  W.  Ullrich,  de  Proxenia^
Berlin,  1822  ;  Wachsmuth,  Helien.  Alterth.  vol.  i.
p.  168,  &c.  ;  Hermann,  Polit.  Ant.  §  116.)

2.  Roman.   The  hospitality  of  the  Romans  was.


HOSPITIUM.

IIS  in  Greece,  either  hospitium  privatiirn,  or  publicum.
Private  hospitality  with  the  Koraans,  however,
seems  to  have  been  more  accurately  and  legall)^
defined  than  in  Greece.  The  character  of  a  hospes,
I.  e.  a  person  connected  with  a  Roman  by  ties  of
hospitality,  was  deemed  even  more  sacred,  and  to
have  greater  claims  upon  the  host,  than  that  of  a
person  connected  by  blood  or  affinity.  The  relation
of  a  hospes  to  his  Roman  friend  was  next  in  im-
portance to  that  of  a  cliens.  (Gellius,  V.  13.)  Ac-
cording to  Massurius  Sabinus  (or/).  Gellium^  I.  c),  a
hospes  had  even  higher  claims  than  a  cliens.  The
obligations  which  the  connection  of  hospitality  with
a  foreigner  imposed  upon  a  Roman  were  to  receive
in  his  house  his  hospes  when  travelling  (Liv.  xlii.
1 ),  and  to  protect,  and,  in  case  of  need,  to  repre-
sent him  as  his  patron  in  the  courts  of  justice.
(Cic.  in  Q.  CaeciL  Divin.  c.  20.)  Private  hospi-
tality thus  gave  to  the  hospes  the  claims  upon  his
host  which  the  client  had  on  his  patron,  but  with-
out any  degree  of  the  dependence  implied  in  the
clientela.  Private  hospitality  was  established  be-
tween individuals  by  mutual  presents,  or  by  the
mediation  of  a  third  person  (Serv.  mi  Aen.  ix.
360),  and  hallowed  by  religion  ;  for  Jupiter  hospi-
talis  was  thought  to  Avatch  over  the  jus  hospitii,  as
Zeus  xenios  did  with  the  Greeks  (Cic.  c.  Verr.  iv.
22,  ad  Quint,  frat.  ii.  12,  pro  Deiotar.  6),  and
the  violation  of  it  \a  as  as  great  a  crime  and  impiety
at  Rome  as  in  Greece.  When  hospitality  was
formed,  the  two  friends  used  to  divide  between
themselves  a  tessera  hospitalis  (Plant.  Poen.  v.  2. 87,
&:c.),  by  which,  afterwards,  they  themselves  or  their
descendants — for  the  connection  was  hereditary  as
in  Greece  —  might  recognise  one  another.  From
an  expression  in  Plautus  {deum  hospitalem  ac  tesse-
ram  mecum  fero,  Poen.  v.  1.  25)  it  has  been  con-
cluded that  this  tessera  bore  the  image  of  Jupiter
hospitalis.  Hospitality,  when  thus  once  established,
could  not  be  dissolved  except  by  a  formal  decla-
ration {renuntiailo,  Liv.  xxv.  18  ;  Cic.  in  Verr.
ii.  36),  and  in  this  case  the  tessera  hospitalis  was
broken  to  pieces.  (Plant.  CVs^e//.  ii.  1.  27.)  Hos-
pitality was  at  Rome  never  exercised  in  that  in-
discriminate manner  as  in  the  heroic  age  of  Greece,
but  the  custom  of  observing  the  laws  of  hospitality
was  probably  common  to  all  the  nations  of  Italy.
(Aelian.  V.  H.  iv.  1  ;  Liv.  i.  1.)  In  many  cases
it  was  exercised  without  any  formal  agreement  be-
tween the  parties,  and  it  was  deemed  an  honour-
able duty  to  receive  distinguished  guests  into  the
house.     (Cic.  de  Off.  ii.  18,  pro  Rose.  Avi.  6.)

Public  hospitality  seems  likewise  to  have  ex-
isted at  a  very  early  period  among  the  nations  of
Italy,  and  the  foedus  hospitii  mentioned  in  Livy
(i.  9)  can  scarcely  be  looked  upon  in  any  other
light  than  that  of  hospitium  publicum.  But  the
first  direct  mention  of  public  hospitality  being  esta-
blished between  Rome  and  another  city,  is  after
the  Gauls  had  departed  from  Rome,  when  it  was
decreed  that  Caere  should  be  rewarded  for  its  good
services  by  the  establishment  of  public  hospitality
between  the  two  cities.  (Liv.  v.  50.)  The  public
hospitality  after  the  war  with  the  Gauls  gave  to
the  Caerites  the  right  of  isopolity  with  Rome,  that
is,  the  civitas  without  the  suffragium  and  the  ho-
nores.  [Civitas  ;  CoLt)NiA.]  In  the  later  times  of
the  republic  we  no  longer  find  public  hospitality  es-
t'lblished  between  Rome  and  a  foreign  state  ;  but  a
relation  which  amounted  to  the  same  thing  was
ijitroduced  in  its  stead,  that  is,  towns  were  raised


HYACINTHIA.  621

to  the  rank  of  municipia  (Liv.  viii.  1 4),  and  thus
obtained  the  civitas  without  the  suffragium  and  the
honores  ;  and  when  a  town  was  desirous  of  form-
ing a  similar  relation  with  Rome,  it  entered  into
clientela  to  some  distinguished  Roman,  who  then
acted  as  patron  of  the  client- town.  But  the  custom
of  granting  the  honour  of  hospes  publicus  to  a  dis-
tinguished foreigner  by  a  decree  of  the  senate,
seems  to  have  existed  down  to  the  end  of  the  re-
public. (Liv.  i.  45,  V.  28,  xxxvii.  54.)  Whether
such  a  public  hospes  undertook  the  same  duties  to-
wards Roman  citizens,  as  the  Greek  proxenus,  is
uncertain  ;  but  his  privileges  were  the  same  as
those  of  a  municeps,  that  is,  he  had  the  civitas.  but
not  the  suffragium  nor  the  honores.  Public  hos-
pitality was,  like  the  hospitium  privatum,  hereditary
in  the  family  of  the  person  to  whom  it  had  been
granted.  (Died.  Sic.  xiv.  93.)  The  honour  of
public  hospes  was  sometimes  also  conferred  upon  a
distinguished  Roman  by  a  foreign  state.  (Biickh,
Corp.  Inscrip.\o\.i.n.  1331  ;  Cic. pro  Balb.  18,  c.
Verr.  iv.  65.  Compare  Niebuhr,  Hist,  of  Rome.,
vol.  ii.  p.  58 ;  Walter,  Gesch.  des  Rom.  Reehts,  p.  54,
&c.  ;  Gottling,  Gesch.  der  Rom.  Staatsv.  p.  216,
&c.)  [L.  S.l

HO'STIA.  [Sacrificium.]
HOSTIS.  [Hospitium  ;  Postliminium.]
HYACI'NTHIA  ('Ta/ciVem),  a  great  national
festival,  celebrated  every  year  at  Amyclae  by
the  Amyclaeans  and  Spartans.  The  ancient  writers
who  mention  this  festival  do  not  agree  in  the
name  of  the  divinity  in  whose  honour  it  was  held :
some  say  that  it  was  the  Amj'claean  or  the  Car-
neian  Apollo,  others  that  it  was  the  Amyclaean
hero,  Hyacinthus :  a  third  and  more  probable
statement  assigns  the  festival  to  the  Amyclaean
Apollo  and  Hyacinthus  together.  This  Amyclaean
Apollo,  however,  with  whom  Hyacinthus  was
assimilated  in  later  times^  must  not  be  confounded
with  Apollo,  the  national  divinity  of  the  Dorians.
(MuUer,  Orchom.  p.  327,  Dor.  ii.  8.  §  \5.)  The
festival  was  called  after  the  youthful  hero  Hyacm-
thus,  who  evidently  derived  his  name  from  the
flower  hyacinth  (the  emblem  of  death  among  the
ancient  Greeks),  and  whom  Apollo  accidentally
struck  dead  with  a  quoit.  The  Hyacinthia  lasted
for  three  days,  and  began  on  the  longest  day  of
the  Spartan  month  Hecatombeus  (the  Attic  Heca-
tombaeon,  Hesych.  s.  v.  'EKaro/xSevs  :  Manso,
Sparta,  iii.  2.  p.  201),  at  the  time  when  the  tender
flowers  oppressed  by  the  heat  of  the  sun,  drooped
their  languid  heads.  On  the  first  and  last  day  of
the  Hyacinthia  sacrifices  were  oftered  to  the  dead,
and  the  death  of  Hyacuithus  was  lamented.
During  these  two  days  nobod}'^  wore  any  garlands
at  the  repasts,  nor  took  bread,  but  only  cakes  and
similar  things,  and  no  paeans  were  sung  in  praise
of  Apollo  ;  and  when  the  solenm  repasts  were  over,
every  body  went  home  in  the  greatest  quiet  and
order.  This  serious  and  melancholy  character  was
foreign  to  all  the  other  festivals  of  Apollo.  The
second  day,  however,  was  wholly  spent  in  public
rejoicings  and  amusements,  Amyclae  was  visited
by  numbers  of  strangers  (iravfiyvpis  a^i6\oyos  Kal
/A67aA'<7),  and  boys  played  the  cithara  or  sang  to
the  accompaniment  of  the  flute,  and  celebrated  in
anapaestic  metres  the  praise  of  Apollo,  while  others,
in  splendid  attire,  performed  a  horse-race  in  the

I  theatre.     This  horse-race  is  probably  the    ayd?v
mentioned  by  Strabo  (vi.  p.  278).     After  this  race
\  there  followed  a   number  of  choruses  of  youths


622


HYBREOS  GRAPHE.


conducted  by  a  xoRo^olSs  (Xen.  Agesil.  2.  17),  in
which  some  of  their  national  songs  (iirixwpia
■iroi7}fxaTa)  were  sung.  During  the  songs  of  these
choruses  dancers  performed  some  of  the  ancient
and  simple  movements  with  the  accompaniment  of
the  flute  and  the  song.  The  Spartan  and  Aray-
claean  maidens,  after  this,  riding  in  chariots  made
of  wicker-work  (Kavadpa),  and  splendidly  adorned,
performed  a  beautiful  procession.  Numerous  sacri-
fices were  also  offered  on  this  day,  and  the  citizens
kept  open  house  for  their  friends  and  relations  ;  and
even  slaves  were  allowed  to  enjoy  themselves.
(Didymus,  ap.  Athen.  iv.  p.  139.)  One  of  the  fa-
vourite meals  on  this  occasion  was  called  Kowis,
and  is  described  by  Molpis  (ap.  Athen.  iv.  p.  140)
as  consisting  of  cake,  bread,  meat,  raw  herbs,  broth,
figs,  dessert,  and  the  seeds  of  lupine.  Some  ancient
writers,  when  speaking  of  the  Hyacinthia,  apply
to  the  whole  festival  such  epithets  as  can  only  be
used  in  regai'd  to  the  second  day  ;  for  instance,
Avhen  they  call  it  a  merry  or  joyful  solemnity.
Macrohhis  (Saturn,  i.  11)  states  that  the  Amyclae-
aiis  wore  chaplets  of  ivy  at  the  Hyacinthia,  which
can  only  be  true  if  it  be  understood  of  the  second
day.  The  incorrectness  of  these  writers  is  how-
ever in  some  degree  excused  by  the  fact,  that  the
second  day  formed  the  principal  part  of  the  festive
season,  as  appears  from  the  description  of  Didy-
mus. and  as  may  also  be  inferred  from  Xenophon
(Hellen.  iv.  5.  §  1 1  ;  compare  Agesil.  2.  17),  who
makes  the  paean  the  principal  part  of  the  Hya-
cinthia, The  great  importfvnce  attached  to  this
festival  by  the  Amyclaeans  and  Lacedaemonians
is  seen  from  the  fact,  that  the  Amyclaeans,  even
when  they  had  taken  the  field  against  an  enemy,
always  returned  home  on  the  approach  of  the
season  of  the  Hyacinthia,  that  they  might  not  be
obliged  to  neglect  its  celebration  (Xen.  Ilelleri.  iv.
5.  §  11  ;  Pans.  iii.  10.  §  1),  and  that  the  Lacedae-
monians on  one  occasion  concluded  a  truce  of  forty
days  with  the  town  of  Eira,  merely  to  be  able  to
return  home  and  celebrate  the  national  festival
(Pans.  iv.  19.  §  3)  ;  and  that  in  a  treaty  with
Sparta,  B.C.  421,  the  Athenians,  in  order  to  show
their  good-will  towards  Sparta,  promised  every
year  to  attend  the  celebration  of  the  Hyacinthia.
(Thucyd.  V.  23.)  [L.  S.]

HY'ALUS.     [ViTRUM.]

HYBREOS  GRAPHE  (ii€p€a}sypa<pi,).  This
action  was  the  principal  remedy  prescribed  by  the
Attic  law  for  wanton  and  contumelious  injury  to
the  person,  whether  in  the  nature  of  indecent  (St'
alaxpovpyias)  or  other  assaults  (5to  trKriywv).  If
the  offence  were  of  the  former  kind,  it  would  al-
ways be  available  when  the  sufferer  was  a  minor
of  either  sex  (for  the  consent  of  the  infant  was
immaterial),  or  when  an  adult  female  was  forcibly
violated :  and  this  protection  was  extended  to  all
conditions  of  life,  whether  bond  or  free.  (Dem.  c.
Afeid.  Tp.5'29.  15.)  The  legal representative(/c»;ptos),
however,  of  such  person  might,  if  he  pleased,  con-,
eider  the  injury  as  a  private  rather  than  a  public
wrong,  and  sue  for  damages  in  a  civil  action.
[BiAioN  Dike.]  With  respect  to  common  as-
saults, a  prosecution  of  this  kind  seems  to  have
been  allowable  only  when  the  object  of  a  wanton
attJick  was  a  free  person  (Aristot.  Rhet.  ii.  24),  as
the  essence  lay  in  its  contumely,  and  a  slave  could
incur  no  degradation  by  receiving  a  blow,  though
the  injury,  if  slight,  might  entitle  the  master  to
recover  damages   for   the  batter}'  (ot«ia),   or,  if


HYDRAULA.

serious,  for  the  loss  of  his  services  [Blabes  Dike]
in  a  private  lawsuit.  (Meier,  Att.  Proc.  p.  326.)
These  two  last-mentioned  actions  might  also  be  re-
sorted to  by  a  free  citizen  Avhen  similarly  outraged
in  his  own  person,  if  he  were  more  desirous  of  ob-
taining compensation  for  the  wrong,  than  the  mere
punishment  of  the  wrongdoer,  as  the  penalty  in-
curred by  the  defendant  in  the  public  prosecution
accrued  to  the  state  and  not  to  the  plaintiff.  A
fine  also  of  a  thousand  drachmae,  forfeited  by  the
prosecutor  upon  his  relinquishing  his  suit  or  failing
to  obtain  the  votes  of  a  fifth  of  the  dicasts,  may
have  contributed  to  render  causes  of  this  kind  less
frequent,  and  partly  account  for  the  circumstance
that  there  are  no  speeches  extant  upon  this  subject.
If,  however,  the  case  for  the  prosecution  was  both
strong  and  clear,  the  redress  afforded  by  the  public
action  was  prompt  and  efficient.  Besides  the  legi-
timate protectors  of  women  and  children,  any
Athenian  citizen  in  the  enjoyment  of  his  full  fran-
chise might  volunteer  an  accusation :  the  declar-
ation was  laid  before  the  thesmothetae,  who,  ex-
cept it  were  hindered  by  extraordinary  public  busi-
ness, were  boimd  not  to  defer  the  trial  before  the
Heliaea  beyond  a  month.  The  severity  of  the
sentence  extended  to  confiscation  or  death  ;  and  if
the  latter  were  awarded,  the  criminal  was  executed
on  the  same  day  :  if  a  fine  were  imposed  upon  him
he  was  allowed  but  eleven  days  for  its  payment,
and,  if  the  object  of  his  assault  were  a  free  person,
he  was  imprisoned  till  the  claim  of  the  state  was
liquidated.  (Dem.  I.  c.  ;  Aeschin.  c.  Tiirmrch.  p.
41.)  [J.  S.  M.]

HYDRA'LETA.     [Mola.]

HYDRAULA  (vdpavhTfs),  an  organist.  Ac-
cording to  an  author  quoted  by  Athenaeus  (iv.  75  ;
compare  Plin.  H.  N.  vii.  38),  the  first  organist
was  Ctesibius  of  Alexandria,  who  lived  about  B.  c.
200.  He  evidently  took  the  idea  of  his  organ
from  the  Syrinx  or  Pandean  pipes,  a  musical
instrument  of  the  highest  antiquity  among  the
Greeks.  Hia  object  being  to  employ  a  row  of
pipra  of  great  size,  and  capable  of  emitting  the
most  powerful  as  well  as  the  softest  sounds,  he  con-
trived the  means  of  adapting  keys  with  levers
(ayKOiviffKoi),  and  with  perforated  sliders  (irwyuara),
to  open  and  shut  the  mouths  of  the  pipes  (y\u}(ra6-
Kofia)^  a  supply  of  wind  being  obtained,  without
intermission,  by  bellows,  in  which  the  pressure  of
water  performed  the  same  part  which  is  fulfilled  in
the  modern  organ  by  a  weight.  On  this  account
the  instrument  invented  by  Ctesibius  was  called
the  water-organ  (uSpauAts,  Athen.  /.  c.  ;  vdpav\i-
Khv  opydvov^  Hero,  Spirit.;  hydrauUca  mackina.,
Vitruv.  X.  1 3  ;  Schneider,  ad  loc. ;  Drieberg,  die
piieiim.  Erfindungen  der  Griechen.,  pp.  53 — 61  ;
hydraulus^  Plin.//.  N.  ix.  8  ;  Cic.  Tusc.  iii.  18).
Its  pipes  were  partly  of  bronze  (xa^K^i^  apovpa^
Jul.  Imp.  in  Brunck's  Afial.  ii.  403  ;  seges  atna,
Claud,  de  Mall.  Theod.  Cons.  316),  and  partly  of
reed.  The  number  of  its  stops,  and  consequently  of
its  rows  of  pipes,  varied  from  one  to  eight  (Vitruv.
/.  c),  so  that  Tertullian  (dc  Anima.,  14)  describes
it  with  reason  as  an  exceedingly  complicated  in-
strument. It  continued  in  use  so  late  as  the  ninth
century  of  our  era :  in  the  year  826,  a  water-organ
was  erected  by  a  Venetian  in  the  church  of  Aquis-
granura,  the  modern  Aix-la-Chapelle.  (Quix,
Munster-Mrche  in  Aac/iett,  p.  14.)

The  organ  was  well  adapted  to  gratify  the  Ro-
man people  in  the  splendid  entertainments  provided


HYLORI.
for  them  by  the  emperors  and  other  opulent  per-
sons. Nero  was  very  curious  about  organs,  both
in  regard  to  their  musical  effect  and  their  mecha-
nism. (Sueton.  iVer.  41.  54.)  A  contorniate  coin
of  this  emperor,  in  the  British  Museum  (see  wood-
cut), shows  an  organ  with  a  sprig  of  laurel  on  one


side,  and  a  man  standing  on  the  other,  who  may
have  been  victorious  in  the  exhibitions  of  the  cir-
cus or  the  amphitheatre.  It  is  probable  that  these
medals  were  bestowed  upon  such  victors,  and  that
the  organ  was  impressed  upon  them  on  account  of
its  introduction  on  such  occasions.  (Havercamp,  de
Num.  contoTniatis  ;  Rasche,  Lex.  Univ.  Rei  Num.
s.v. Hydraulicum Instrumentum.)  The  general  form
of  the  organ  is  also  clearly  exhibited  in  a  poem
by  Publilius  Porphyrius  Optatianus,  describing  the
instnmient,  and  composed  of  verses  so  constructed
as  to  show  both  the  lower  part  which  contained
the  bellows,  the  wind-chest  which  lay  upon  it,  and
over  this  the  row  of  26  pipes.  These  are  repre-
sented by  26  lines,  which  increase  in  length  each
by  one  letter,  until  the  last  line  is  twice  as  long
as  the  first.  (Wernsdorf,  Foetae  Lai.  Min.  vol.  ii.
pp.394— 413.)  [J.  Y.]

HYDRAU'LICA        MA'CHINA.        [Hy-

DRAULA.]

HYDRAULUS  [Hydraula.]

HY'DRIA  (uSpta).     [SiTULA.]

HYDRIAPHO'RlA(i'Spta</)op(a)wasoneofthe
services  which  aliens  (fxeroiKoi)  residing  at  Athens
had  to  perform  to  the  Athenians  at  the  Panathenaea,
and  by  which  it  was  probably  only  intended  to  im-
press upon  them  the  recollection  that  they  were
mere  aliens  and  not  citizens.  The  hydriaphoria  was
performed  only  by  the  wives  of  aliens  (Pollux,  iii.
55)  ;  whereas  their  daughters  had  on  the  same  oc-
casion to  perform  the  aKiaSr](popia  (the  carrj-ing  of
parasols)  to  the  Athenian  maidens,  and  their  hus-
bands the  (TKa<pT](popia  (the  carrying  of  vessels,
see  Aelian,  V.  H.  vi.  I,  with  Perizonius  ;  Harpo-
crat.  s.  V.  '2,Ka<pi\(popoi).  It  is  clear  from  the  words
of  Aelian  that  these  humiliating  services  were  not
demanded  of  the  aliens  by  the  laws  of  Solon,  but
that  they  were  introduced  at  a  later  period.  (Pe-
titus,  Ijeg.  Att.  p.  95.)  The  hydriaphoria  was
the  carrying  of  a  vessel  with  water  (vSp'ta.,  Ari-
stoph.  Eccles.  738),  which  service  the  married  alien
women  had  to  perform  to  the  married  part  of  the
female  citizens  of  Athens,  when  they  walked  to  the
temple  of  Athena  in  the  great  procession  at  the
Panathenaea.  (Compare  Meursius,  Panathenaea,
c.  21.)  [L.  S.]

HYDROMELI.     [Vinum.]

HYLO'RT  orH  YLEO'RI  (uA«poi,uAr7«po0.are
said  by  Hesychius  (s.  v.)  to  have  been  officers  v/ho


HYPOBOLES  GRAPHE.  623

had  the  superintendence  of  forests  ({'iKii]v  <pv\d(T creep j
compare  Suidas,  s.  v.).  Aristotle  (Polit.  vi.  5),
who  divides  all  public  officers  into  three  classes
(dpxal,  iiriixcXrjTai,  and  UTrTjpeTot),  reckons  the
vXwpoi  among  the  cTri/xeAT/Tai,  and  says  that  by
some  they  were  called  aypovS/xot.  They  seem  to
have  been  a  kind  of  police  for  the  protection  of
the  forests,  similar  to  the  German  forster.  But
the  exact  nature  of  their  office,  or  the  Greek
states  where  it  existed,  are  unknown.       [L.  S.]

HYPAETHRUS.     [Templum.]

HYPASPISTAE  (viraa-nLo-rai).  [Exercitus,
p.  488,  b.]

H  YPE'RETES  (vir-npcT-ns).  This  word  is  de-
rived from  ipeaaci},  eperrjs,  and  therefore  originally
signifies  a  rower  ;  but  in  later  times  the  word  was,
with  the  exception  of  the  soldiers  or  marines,  ap-
plied to  the  whole  body  of  persons  who  performed
any  service  in  a  vessel.  (Thucyd.  vi.  31,  with
Goller's  note  ;  Demosth.  c.  Polycl.  pp.  1214, 1216,
&c. ;  Polyb.  v.  109.)  In  a  still  wider  sense  wTTTjp-
cTTjy  was  applied  to  any  person  who  acted  as  the
assistant  of  another,  and  performed  manual  labour
for  him,  whether  in  sacred  or  profane  things  (Pol-
lux, i.  1 ,  16,  viii.  1 0),  whence  the  word  is  some-
times used  as  synonymous  with  slave.  (Clitarchus,
ap.  Atlien.  vi.  p.  26/  ;  compare  Pollux,  vii.  8.  2  ;
Hesj-^ch.  s.  V.)  Hence  also  the  name  imrfpeTai  was
sometimes  given  to  those  men  by  whom  the  hopli-
tae  were  accompanied  when  they  took  the  field,
and  who  carried  the  luggage,  the  provisions,  and
the  shield  of  thehoplites.  (Xen.  Cyrop.  ii.  1.  §  31.)
The  more  common  name  for  this  servant  of  the
hoplites  was  aK^v6<popos.

At  Athens  the  name  vTnjperrjs,  or  the  abstract
inrrjpea-ia,  seems  to  have  been  applied  to  a  whole
class  of  officers.  Aristotle  (Polit.  vi.  5)  divides  all
public  offices  into  three  classes,  apxai  or  magis-
tracies, eVijueAejat  or  administrations,  and  uTrrjpecriai
or  services.  Now  all  public  officers  at  Athens,  in
as  far  as  they  were  the  representatives  of  the
people,  or  the  executors  of  its  will,  were  appointed
by  the  people  itself  or  by  the  senate  ;  and  with
the  exception  of  some  subaltern  military  officers,
we  never  find  that  one  public  officer  was  appointed
by  another.  A  public  officer,  therefore,  when  he
appointed  another  person  to  perform  the  lower  or
more  mechanical  parts  of  his  office,  could  not  raise
him  to  the  rank  of  a  public  officer,  but  merely
engaged  him  as  a  servant  (vtttjpcttjs),  and  on  his
own  responsibility.  These  virTjpeVat,  therefore,
were  not  public  officers,  properly  speaking,  but
only  in  as  far  as  they  took  a  part  in  the  functions
of  such  officers.  The  original  and  characteristic
difference  between  them  and  real  public  officers
was,  that  the  former  received  salaries,  while  the
latter  had  none.  Among  the  inrrjpeTai  were  reckoned
the  lower  classes  of  scribes  [Grammateus],  he-
ralds, messengers,  the  ministers  of  the  Eleven,  and
others.  This  class  of  persons,  as  might  be  sup-
posed, did  not  enjoy  any  high  degree  of  estimation
at  Athens  (Pollux,  vi.  31),  and  from  Aristotle
(Polit.  iv.  12)  it  is  clear  that  they  were  not  always
Athenian  citizens,  but  sometimes  slaves.  [L.  S.]
HYPEROON  (virep^ov).  [DoMus,  p.  426,a.]
HYPOBOLES  GRAPHE  ({nroSoXri^  yp(M).
Of  this  action  we  learn  from  the  Lex  Rhet.  that
it  was  one  of  the  many  institutions  calculated  to
preserve  the  purity  of  Attic  descent,  and  preferred
against  persons  suspected  of  having  been  supposi-
titious children.     If  this  fact  was  established  at  the


624


HYSPLENX.


trial,  tlie  pretended  citizen  was  reduced  to  slavery,
and  liis  property  confiscated.  [J.  S.  M.]

HYPOCAUSTUM.  [Balneae,  p.  192,  b.]
H  YPOCOSMETAE  ( viroKoa/xrfrai^fveqxicntW
occur  in  Athenian  inscriptions  of  the  time  of  the
Roman  empire,  as  assistants  of  the  «0(r/i7jT'i]s,  who
at  that  period  was  the  chief  officer  who  regulated
the  exercises  of  the  Gymnasium.  (Krause,  Gi/m-
nastik  und  Jgomsfik,  vol.  i.  p.  212,  &c.)

HYPO'CRITES  {vTTOKpLTiis).     [HiSTRio.]
HYPODE'MA  {vTToHfxa).     [Calceus.]
HYPOGE'UM.     [FuNus,  p.  56],a.]
HYPOGRAMMATEUS      iyiro-ypaixfianls).
[Grammateus.]
HYPO'GRAPHIS.     [Pictura,  No.  VT.]
HYPOMEPONES  (i^Tro/ieiWes).    [HoMOEi].
HYPOMO'SIA    (vnoixQaia).      [Diaetetae  ;
Dike.]

HYPO'NOMUS.  [Emissarium.]
HYPURCHE'MA  (yirdpxwa),  was  a  lively
kind  of  mimic  dance  whicli  accompanied  the  songs
used  in  the  worship  of  Apollo,  especially  among  the
Dorians.  It  was  performed  by  men  and  women.
(Athen.  xiv.  p.  631.)  A  chorus  of  singers  at  the
festivals  of  Apollo  usually  danced  around  the  altar,
while  several  other  persons  were  appointed  to  ac-
company the  action  of  the  song  with  an  appropriate
mimic  performance  (vtropx^'taBai).  The  hypor-
chema  was  thus  a  lyric  dance,  and  often  passed
into  the  playful  and  comic,  whence  Athenaeus
(xiv.  p,  630,  &c.)  compares  it  with  the  cordax  of
comedy.  It  had,  according  to  the  supposition  of
Mliller,  like  all  the  music  and  poetry  of  the  Dorians,
originated  in  Crete,  but  was  at  an  early  period  in-
troduced in  the  island  of  Delos,  where  it  seems  to
have  continued  to  be  performed  down  to  the  time
of  Lucian.  (Athen.  i.  p.  15  ;  Lucian,  de  Saltat.
16  ;  compare  Mliller,  Dor.  ii.  8.  §  14.)  A  similar
kind  of  dance  was  the  yipavos^  which  Theseus  on
his  return  from  Crete  was  said  to  have  performed
in  Delos,  and  which  was  customary  in  this  island
as  late  as  the  time  of  Plutarch.  {Thes.  21.)  The
leader  of  this  dance  was  called  y^pavovXK6s.
(Hesych.  s.  v.)  It  was  performed  with  blows,  and
with  various  turnings  and  windings  (eV  pvO/j.^
iTfpieKl^eis  Kot  av^Ki^sis  exoj/rt),  and  was  said  to
be  an  imitation  of  the  windings  of  the  Cretan
labyrinth.  When  the  chorus  was  at  rest,  it  formed
a  semicircle,  with  leaders  at  the  two  wings.  (Pol-
lux, iv.  101.)

The  poems  or  songs  which  were  accompanied  by
the  hyporchem  were  likewise  called  hyporchemata.
The  first  poet  to  whom  such  poems  are  ascribed
was  Thaletas :  their  character  must  have  been  in
accordance  with  the  playfulness  of  the  dance  which
bore  the  same  name,  and  by  which  they  were  ac-
companied. The  fragments  of  the  hyporchemata
of  Pindar  confirm  this  supposition,  for  their  rhythms
are  peculiarly  light,  and  have  a  very  imitative
and  graphic  character.  (Bockh,  de  Meir.  Pind.
p.  201,  &c.,  and  p.  270.)  These  characteristics
must  have  existed  in  a  much  higher  degree  in  the
hyporchematic  songs  of  Thaletas.  (Mliller,  Hii^t.
of  Greek  Lit.  i.  p.  23,  &c.  ;  compare  with  p.  160,
&c.)  [L.S.]

HYPOSCE'NIUM.     [Theatrum.]
HYPOTHE'CA.     [Pignus.]
HYPOTHECA'RIA  ACTIO.     [Pignus.]
HYPOTRACHE'LIUM.        [Columna,     p.
325,  a.]
HYSPLENX  (ao-TTATjy^.     [Stadium.]


JANUA.


I.  J.


JACULATO'RES.  [Exercitus,  p.  503,  a.]

JA'CULUM.     [Hasta.]

JA'NITOR.^   [Janua.]

JA'NUA  (pvpa).,  a  door.  Besides  being  appli-
cable to  the  doors  of  apartments  in  the  interior  of
a  house,  which  were  properly  called  ostia  (Isid.
Orig.  XV.  7  ;  Virg.  Aen.  vi.  43.  81),  this  term  more
especially  denoted  the  first  entrance  into  the  house,
i.  e.  the  front  or  street  door,  which  was  also  called
anticum  (Festus,  s.  «.),  and  in  Greek  ^vpa  auA^ios.,
avKela,  av\ios,  avKia  (Od.  xxiii.  19  ;  Pind.  Nem.
i.  19  ;  Menand.  p.  87,  ed.  Mein.  ;  Harpocration,
S.V.;  Theophr.  Char.  18;  Theocrit.  xv.  43;
Charit.  i.  2  ;  Herodian,  ii,  1).  The  houses  of  the
Romans  commonly  had  a  back-door,  called  posti-
cum^  postica,  or  posticula  (Festus,  s.  v. ;  Plor.  Epist.
i.  5.  31  ;  Plant.  Most.  iii.  3.  27  ;  Sueton.  Claud.
18),  and  in  Greek  irapdQvpa  dim.  irapaQvpiou.
Cicero  (post.  Med.  6)  also  calls  it  pseudothyron.,
"  the  false  door,"  in  contradistinction  to  janua,  the
front  door  ;  and,  because  it  often  led  into  the
garden  of  the  house  (Plant.  Stick,  iii.  1.  40 — 44),
it  was  called  the  garden-door  (/cTjTraio,  Hermip.  ap.
Athen.  xv.  6).

The  door-way,  when  complete,  consisted  of  four
indispensable  parts,  the  threshold,  or  sill  ;  the
lintel  ;   and  the  two  jambs.

The  threshold  {limen^  fiT)\hs,  ovdas)  was  the  ob-
ject of  superstitious  reverence,  and  it  was  thought
unfortunate  to  tread  on  it  with  the  left  foot.  On
this  account  the  steps  leading  into  a  temple  were
of  an  uneven  number,  because  the  Avorshipper,
after  placing  his  right  foot  on  the  bottom  step,
would  then  place  the  same  foot  on  the  threshold
also.  (Vitruv.  iii.  4.)  Of  this  an  example  is  pre-
sented in  the  woodcut,  p.  97.

The  lintel  {juginnentum.  Cat.  de  Re  Bust.  14  ;
siipercilium,  Vitruv.  iv,  6)  was  also  called  limen
(Juv.  vi.  227),  and  more  specifically  limen  superum,
to  distinguish  it  from  the  sill,  which  was  called
li77ien  inferum.  (Plant.  Merc.  v.  1.  1.)  Being  de-
signed to  support  a  superinciimbent  weight,  it  was
generally  a  single  piece,  either  of  wood  or  stone.
Hence  those  lintels,  which  still  remain  in  ancient
buildings,  astonish  us  by  their  great  length.  In
large  and  splendid  edifices  the  jambs  or  door-posts
(postes,  (TTadjuLOL)  were  made  to  converge  towards
the  top,  according  to  certain  rules,  which  are  given
by  Vitruvius  (I.  c).  In  describing  the  construc-
tion of  temples  he  calls  them  antcpagmenta.,  the
propriety  of  which  term  may  be  understood  from
the  groimd-plan  of  the  door  at  p.  241,  where  the
hinges  are  seen  to  be  behind  the  jambs.  This
plan  may  also  serve  to  show  what  Theocritus
means  by  the  hollow  door-posts  ((TTaOfxa  Ko7Xa
dvpdwv.  Idyll,  xxiv.  15).  In  the  Augustan  age
it  was  fashionable  to  inlay  the  posts  with  tortoise-
shell.  (Virg.  Georg.  ii.  463.)  Although  the  jamb
was  sometimes  nearly  twice  the  length  of  the
lintel,  it  M^as  made  of  a  single  stone  even  in  the
largest  edifices.  A  very  striking  effect  was  pro-
duced by  the  height  of,  these  door- ways,  as  well  as
by  their  costly  decorations,  beautiful  materials,  and
tasteful  proportions.

The  door  in  the  front  of  a  temple,  as  it  reached
nearly  to  the  ceiling,  allowed  the  worshippers  to
view  fi:on?.  without  the  entire  statue  of  the  divinity,


JANUA.

and  tr>  nhsorve  the  rites  perfonned  before  it.  Also
the  whole  .light  of  the  building  was  commonly  ad-
mitted through  the  same  aperture.  These  circum-
stances are  illustrated  in  the  accompanying  wood-
cut, showing  the  front  of  a  small  temple  of  Jupiter,


JANUA.


625


taken  from  a  bas-relief.  (Mon.  Matt.  vol.  iii.  Tab.
39.)  The  term  antepagmentum,  which  has  been
already  explained,  and  which  was  applied  to  the  lin-
tel as  well  as  the  jambs  {antepaginentum  siiperius,
Vitruv.  iv.  6.  §  1),  implies,  that  the  doors  opened  in-
wards. This  is  clearly  seen  in  the  same  woodcut,
and  is  found  to  be  the  construction  of  all  ancient
buildings  at  Pompeii  and  other  plates.  In  some
of  these  buildings,  as  for  example,  in  that  called
"  the  house  of  the  tragic  poet,"  even  the  marble
threshold  rises  about  an  inch  higher  than  the  bot-
tom of  the  door  (Gell's  Pompeiana.,  2nd  Ser.  vol.  i.
p.  144),  so  that  the  door  was  in  every  part  behind
the  door-case.  After  the  time  of  Hippias  the
street-doors  were  not  permitted  to  open  outwardly
at  Athens  (Becker,  Charikles,  vol.  i.  pp.  189,  200);
and  hence  iuSovvai  meant  to  open  the  door  on
coining  in,  and  iTria-irdcraaOai  or  ((pfXKvaaadai.  to
shut  it  on  going  out.  In  a  single  instance  only
were  the  doors  allowed  to  open  outwardly  at  Rome  ;
an  exception  was  made  as  a  special  privilege  in
honour  of  M.  Valerius  Publicola.  (Schneider,  in
Vitriiv.  iv,  6.  §  6.)

The  lintel  of  the  oblong  door-case  was  in  all
large  and  splendid  buildings,  such  as  the  great
temples,  surmounted  either  by  an  architrave  and
cornice,  or  by  a  cornice  only.  As  this  is  not
shown  in  the  bas-relief  above  introduced,  an  actual
door-Avay,  viz.,  that  of  the  temple  of  Hercules  at
Cora,  is  here  added.  Above  the  lintel  is  an  archi-
trave with  a  Latin  inscription  upon  it,  and  above
this  a  projecting  cornice  supported  on  each  side  by
a  console,  which  reaches  to  a  level  with  the  bottom
of  the  lintel.  The  top  of  the  cornice  (corona  summa,
Vitruv.  iv.  6.  §  1)  coincided  in  height  with  the  tops
of  the  capitals  of  the  columns  of  the  pronaos,  so
that  the  door- way,  with  its  superstructure,  was
exactly  equal  in  height   to  the  columns  and  the


Antae.  This  superstruction  was  the  hyperthp-um
of  Vitruvius  {I.  c),  and  of  the  Greek  architects
whom  he  followed.  The  next  woodcut  shows  one  of
the  two  consoles  which  support  the  cornice  of  a  beau-
tiful Ionic  door- way  in  the  temple  of  Minerva  Polias
at  Athens.  In  the  inscription  i-elating  to  the  build-
ing of  thac  temple,  which  is  now  in  the  Elgin  col-
lection of  the  British  Museum,  the  object  here
delineaieQ  is  called  oZs  rtp  imepQvptf.  Other
Greek  names  for  it,  used  by  Vitruvius  (iv.  6.  §  4),
are  paroiis  and  aiicon.,  literally  a  "  side-ear  "  and
"  an  elbow."  The  use  of  consoles,  or  trusses,  in
this  situation  was  characteristic  of  the  Ionic  style
of  architecture,  being  never  admitted  in  the  Doric.
It  is  to  be  observed  that  Homer  {Ckl.  vii.  90),
Hesiod  {Scut.  271),  and  Herodotus  (i.  1/9),  use
the  term  vir4\>Qupov.,  or  its  diminutive  virepdvpiov^
to  include  the  lintel.  Upon  some  part  of  the  hyper-
thyrum  there  was  often  an  inscription,  recording
the  date  and  occasion  of  the  erection,  as  in  the
case  of  the  temple  of  Hercules  above  rej)resentod,
or  else  merely  expressing  a  moral  sentiment,  like
the  celebrated  "  Know  thyself"  upon  the  temple  at
Delphi.

The  door  itself  was  called /brj.?  or  vali-a,  and  in
Greek  cravis,  KAicrlas.,  or  ^vp^rpov.  These  words
are  commonly  found  in  the  plural,  because  the  door-
way of  every  building  of  the  least  importance  con-
tained two  doors  folding  together,  as  in  all  the
instances  already  referred  to.  When  foris  is  used
in  the  singular,  we  may  observe  that  it  denotes  one
of  the  folding-doors  only,  as  in  the  phrase  foris
crepuit.,  which  occurs  repeatedly  in  Plautus,  and
describes  the  creaking  of  a  single  valve,  opened
alone  and  turning  on  its  pivots.  Even  the  internal
doors  of  houses  were  bivalve  (GelPs  Pompeiana,
2nd  Ser,  vol.  i.  p.  166)  ;  hence  we  read  of  "the
folding-doors  of  a  bed-chamber"  (fores  cvMculi^
Suet.  Aug.  82  ;  Q,  Curt.  v.  6  ;  cavih^^  cdapapvlai,
Horn,  Od.  xxiii.  42  ;  -rrvKai  SittAo?,  Soph.  Oed.
Tyr.  1261),  But  in  every  case  each  of  the  two
valves  was  wide  enough  to  allow  persons  to  pass
through  without  opening  the  other  valve  also,
s  s


626


JANUj^.


ICvon  eacli  valve  was  sometimes  double,  so  as  to
fold  like  our  window-shutters  {duplices  coinplica-
hiiesqiie^  Isid.  Orig.  xv.  7).  The  mode  of  attach-
ing doors  to  the  door-way  is  explained  under  the
article  Cardo.

The  remaining  specimens  of  ancient  doors  are
all  of  marble  or  of  bronze  ;  those  made  of  wood,
which  was  by  far  the  most  common  material,  have
perished.  The  door  of  a  tomb  at  Pompeii  (Mazois,
Ruines  de  Pompei,  vol.  i.  pi.  xix.  fig.  4)  is  made
of  a  single  piece  of  marble,  including  the  pivots,
which  were  encased  in  bronze,  and  turned  in
sockets  of  the  same  metal.  It  is  3  feet  high,  2  feet
9  inches  wide,  4^  inches  thick.  It  is  cut  in  front
to  resemble  panels,  and  thus  to  approach  nearer
to  the  appearance  of  a  common  wooden  door,  and
it  was  fastened  by  a  lock,  traces  of  which  remain.
The  beautifully  wrought  tombs  of  Asia  Minor
and  other  eastern  countries  have  stone  doors,
made  either  to  turn  on  pivots  or  to  slide  sideways
in  grooves.  Doors  of  bronze  are  often  mentioned
by  ancient  writers.  (Herod,  i.  1 79  ;  Plin.  H.  N.
xxxiv.  7.)  The  doors  of  a  supposed  temple  of
Remus,  still  existing  at  Rome,  and  now  occupied
as  a  Christian  church,  are  of  this  material.  Mr.
Donaldson  (Collection  of  Door  ways  from  Ancient
Buildinqs,  Londoj},  1833,  pi.  21)  has  represented
them  filling  up  the  lower  part  of  the  door-way  of
the  temple  at  Cora,  as  shown  in  the  last  woodcut,
which  is  taken  from  him.  The  four  panels  are
surrounded  by  rows  of  small  circles,  marking  the
spots  on  which  were  fixed  rosettes  or  bosses,  simi-
lar to  those  which  are  described  and  figured  in  the
article  Bulla,  and  which  served  both  to  strengthen
and  to  adorn  the  doors.  The  leaves  of  the  doors
•were  sometimes  overlaid  with  gold,  which  was  an
Eastern  practice,  as  we  see  from  the  doors  in  the
temple  of  Solomon  at  Jerusalem  (1  Kings,  vi.  32 —
35)  ;  at  other  times  they  were  enriched  with  the
most  exquisite  carving.  (Ovid.  Met.  viii.  705  ;  Virg.
Georg.  iii.  26,Aen.  vi.  20 — 33.)  Those  in  the  temple
of  Minerva,  at  Syracuse,  are  said  by  Cicero  (Verr.
iv.  56)  to  have  exceeded  all  others  in  the  curious
and  beautiful  workmanship  executed  upon  them  in
gold  and  ivory.  "  It  is  incredible,"  says  he,  "  how
many  Greeks  have  left  writings  descriptive  of  the
elegance  of  these  valves."  One  of  the  ornaments
was  "  a  most  beautiful  Gorgon's  head  with  tresses
of  snakes,"  probably  occupying  the  centre  of  a
panel.  In  addition  to  the  sculptures  upon  the
valves  themselves,  the  finest  statues  were  some-
times placed  beside  them,  probably  at  the  base  of
the  antepagmenta,  as  in  the  magnificent  temple  of
Juno  in  Samos.  (Cic.  Verr.  i.  23.)  In  the
fancied  palace  of  Alcinous  (Od.  vii.  83 — 94)  the
door-case,  which  was  of  silver  with  a  threshold  of
bronze,  included  folding -doors  of  gold  ;  whilst  dogs,
wrought  in  gold  and  silver,  guarded  the  approach,
probably  disposed  like  the  avenue  of  sphinxes  be-
fore an  Egyptian  temple.  As  luxury  advanced
among  the  Romans  metal  took  the  place  of  wood,
even  in  the  doors  of  the  interior  of  a  house.  Hence
the  Quaestor  Sp.  Carvilius  reproved  Camillus  for
having  his  chamber  doors  covered  with  bronze
(aerafa  ostia,  Plin.  I.  c).

A  lattice-work  is  to  be  observed  above  the
bronze  doors  in  the  last  woodcut,  Mr.  Donaldson
having  introduced  it  on  the  authority  more  espe-
cially of  the  Pantheon  at  Rome,  where  the  upper
part  of  the  door- way  is  filled  with  a  window  such
as  that  here  represented.  Vitruvius  (iv.  6.  §  1 )  calls


JANUA.

it  the  hipaetrxim.,  and  his  language  implies  that  it
was  commonly  \ised  in  temples.

The  folding-doors  exhibited  in  the  last  woodcut,
instead  of  a  rebate  such  as  we  employ,  have  an  up-
right bronze  pilaster  standing  in  the  middle  of  the
door- way,  so  as  to  cover  the  joining  of  the  valves.
The  fastenings  of  the  door  (ckuxstra,  Ovid.  Amor.
i,  6.  17  ;  ohices)  commonly  consisted  in  a  bolt
(pessulus  ;  yucivSaXos,  KaTox^vs,  K\f76pov,  Ait.
KAfjOpov,  Soph.  Oed.  Tyr.  1262,  1287,  1294)
placed  at  the  base  of  each  foris.,  so  as  to  admit  of
being  pushed  into  a  socket  made  in  the  sill  to  re-
ceive it  (7ru0/-iV,  Soph,  Oed.  Tyr.  1261).  The
Pompeian  door-ways  show  two  holes  correspond-
ing to  the  bolts  of  the  two  fores  (Gell,  Pompeiana,
2nd  Ser.  vol.  i.  p.  167)  ;  and  they  agree  with
numerous  passages  which  mention  in  the  plural
number  "  the  bolts,"  or,  "  both  the  bolts  "  of  a  door.
(Plant.  Aulul  i.  2.  26,  Cure.  i.  2.  60—70  ;  Soph.
II.  cc.  ;  Callim.  in  Apoll.  6.)

The  annexed  woodcut  shows  an  ancient  bolt
preserved  in  the  Museum  at  Naples.  (Mazois,
Ruines  de  Pompti,  vol.  i.  part.  2.  pi.  vii.)


By  night,  the  front-door  of  the  house  was  fui'thcr
secured  by  means  of  a  wooden  and  sometimes  an
iron  bar  {sera.,  repagula,  fxox^hs)  placed  acr/^ss  it,
and  inserted  into  sockets,  on  each  side  of  the  door-
way. (Festus,  s.v.  Adserere;  Ovid.  Amor.  i.  6.
24 — 5G.)  Hence  it  was  necessary  to  remove  the
bar(Tbi/  fioxA^v  irapdcpepeLV,  avafiox^ev^iy,  Eurip.
Med.  1 309)  in  order  to  open  the  door  {rescrare).
(Theophrast.  Char.  18  ;  Plutarch,  Pelop.  p.  517,
ed.  Steph.  ;  Plaut.  Cist.  iii.  18  ;  Ovid.  Met.  v.  120.)
Even  chamber-doors  were  secured  in  the  same
manner  (Heliodor.  vi.  p.  281,  ed.  Comm. ;  cubiculi
obseratis  foribus,  Apul.  Met.  ix.)  ;  and  here  also,
in  case  of  need,  the  bar  was  employed  as  a  further
security  in  addition  to  the  two  bolts  (KXfjOpa  av/x-
irepaiyovres  fidx^ots.,  Eurip.  Orest.  1546,  1566,
IpL  Aul.  345,  Androm.  952).  To  fasten  the
door  with  the  bolt  was  januae  pessulum  obdere,  with
the  \)ax  januam  obserare  (Ter.  Eun.  iii.  5.  55,  iv.
6.  26,  Heaut.  ii.  3.  37).  At  Athens  a  jealous
husband  sometimes  even  proceeded  to  seal  the  door
of  the   women's  apartment.      (Aristoph.   T/icsm,


JANUA.

422  ;  Menaiid.  p.  185,  ed.  Mein.)  The  door  of  a
bed-chamber  was  sometimes  covered  with  a  cvu'tain
[Veuim].

In  the  Odyssey  (i.  442,  iv.  802,  xxi.  6,  46—
50)  we  find  mention  of  a  contrivance  for  bolting  or
unlDolting  a  door  from  the  outside,  which  consisted
in  a  leathern  thong  (f/^as)  inserted  through  a  hole
in  the  door,  and  by  means  of  a  loop,  ring,  or  hook
(K\6is,  /cATj'fs),  which  was  the  origin  of  keys,  capa-
ble of  laying  hold  of  the  bolt  so  as  to  move  it  in
the  manner  required.  The  bolt  by  the  progress  of
improvement  was  transformed  into  a  lock,  and  the
keys  found  at  Herculaneum  and  Pompeii  and
those  attached  to  rings  (Gorlaei,  Dactylioth.  42,
205 — 209)  prove,  that  among  the  polished  Greeks
and  Romans,  the  art  of  the  locksmith  (/cAeiSo7roit»s)
approached  very  nearly  to  its  present  state.  (Achill.
Tat.  ii.  19.)

The  door  represented  in  the  first  woodcut  to  this
article  has  a  ring  upon  each  valve,  which  was  used
to  shut  the  door,  and  therefore  called  the  iiricnza-
(TTTip.  Herodotus  (vi.  91)  tells  a  story  of  a  captive
who  having  escaped  to  a  temple  of  Ceres,  clung  to
the  rings  on  the  "doors  with  both  his  hands.  This
appendage  to  the  door,  which  was  sometimes  gilt
and  very  handsome,  was  also  called,  on  account  of
its  form,  Kp'iKos  and  Kopwvt],  i.  e.  a  "  circle  "  or
"  crown  "  (Hom.  Od.  i.  441,  vii.  90)  ;  and,  be-
cause it  was  used  sometimes  as  a  knocker,  it  was
called  p6iTTpov  (Harpocrat,  s.  v.  ;  Xen.  Ilellen.  vi.
4.  §  36).  The  term  K6pa^,  "  a  crow"  (Brunck,
Anal.  iii.  168),  probably  denoted  a  knocker  more
nearly  approaching  the  form  of  that  bird,  or  per-
haps of  its  neck  and  head.  The  lowest  figure  in
the  last  woodcut  shows  a  richly  ornamented  epi-
spaster,  from  the  collection  at  Naples.  That  with
a  lion's  head  is  taken  from  a  bas-relief,  represent-
ing the  doors  of  a  temple,  in  the  collection  at  Ince-
Blundell,  near  Liverpool.  The  third  figure  is  from
the  Neapolitan  Museum.

Before  the  door  of  a  palace,  or  of  any  private  house
of  a  superior  description,  there  was  a  passage  lead-
ing to  the  door  from  the  public  road,  which  was
called  vestihulum  (Isid.  Orig.  xv.  7  ;  Plaut.  Most.
iii,  2.  132  ;  Gell.  xvi.  5)  and  irpdOvpot/  (Vitruv.
vi.  7.  5  ;  Hom.  Od.  xviii.  10—100  ;  Herod,  iii.  35,
140).  It  was  provided  with  seats  (Herod,  vi.  35).
It  was  sometimes  covered  by  an  arch  [Camera],
which  was  supported  by  two  pillars  (Serv.  ad
Virg.  Aen.  ii.  469)  ;  and  sometimes  adorned  with
sculptures  (Virg.  AeM.  vii.  181  ;  Juv.  vii.  126).
Here  persons  waited,  who  came  in  the  morning  to
pay  their  respects  to  the  occupier  of  the  house.
(Gell.  iv.  1.)  In  the  vestibule  was  placed  the
domestic  altar  [Ara].  The  Athenians  also
planted  a  laurel  in  the  same  situation,  beside  a
figure  designed  to  represent  Apollo  (Aristoph.
Tkesm.  496  ;  Plaut.  Merc.  iv.  1.  11,  12);  and
statues  of  Mercury  were  still  more  frequent  (Thu-
cyd.  vi.  27),  being  erected  there  on  the  principle
of  setting  a  thief  to  catch  a  thief.  (Schol.  ad  Aris-
toph. Plut.  1155.)

The  DoNARiA  offered  to  the  gods  were  suspended
not  only  from  the  Antae,  but  likewise  from  the
door-posts  and  lintels  of  their  temples  (Virg.
Aen.  iii.  287,  v.  360  ;  Ovid.  Trist.m.  1.  34  ;  Ilor.
■Carm.  iv.  15.  8,  Epist.  i.  1.  5,  i.  18,  56  ;  Pcrs.
Sat.  vi.  45  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.  4),  as  well  as  of
palaces,  which  in  ancient  times  partook  of  the
sanctity  of  temples.  (Virg.  Aen.  ii.  503,  vii.  1 83.)
Victors  ic  the  games  suspended  their  crowns  at


JANUA.


€27


the  door  of  a  temple.  (Find.  Nem.  v.  53.)  In
like  manner  persons  fixed  to  the  jambs  and  lintels
of  their  own  doors  the  spoils  which  they  had  taken
in  battle.  (Festus,  s.  v.  Resignare  ;  Plin.  //.  A^.
xxxv.  2.)  Stag's  horns  and  boar's  tusks  were  on
the  same  principle  used  to  decorate  the  doors  of
the  temples  of  Diana,  and  of  the  private  indivi-
duals who  had  taken  these  animals  in  the  chace.
Owls  and  other  nocturnal  birds  were  nailed  upon
the  doors  as  in  modern  times.  (Pallad.  de  Re  Rust.
i.  35.)  Also  garlands  and  wreaths  of  flowers  were
suspended  over  the  doors  of  temples  in  connection
with  the  performance  of  religious  rites,  or  the  ex-
pression of  public  thanksgiving,  being  composed  in
each  case  of  productions  suited  to  the  particular
divinity  whom  they  were  intended  to  honour.  In
this  manner  the  corona  spicea  was  suspended  in
honour  of  Ceres  (Tib.  i.  1.  21  ;  see  also  Virg.
Ciris^  95 — 98).  Laurel  was  so  used  in  token  of
victory,  especially  at  Rome  (Ovid.  Met.  i.  562),
where  it  sometimes  overshadowed  the  Corona
CivicA  on  the  doors  of  the  imperial  palace.  (Ovid.
Trist.  iii.  1,  35—49  ;  Plin.  //.  N.  xv.  39  ;  laureatis
foribus^  Sen.  Consol.  ad  Polyb.  35  ;  Vffl.  Max.  ii.
8.  §  7.)  The  doors  of  private  houses  were  orna-
mented in  a  similar  way,  and  with  different  plants
according  to  the  occasion.  More  especially,  in  cele-
bration of  a  marriage  either  laurel  or  myrtle  was
placed  about  the  door  of  the  bridegroom.  (Juv.  vi.
79,  228  ;  Claud,  de  Ntipt.  Hon.  et  Mar.  208.)
Catullus,  in  describing  an  imaginary  marriage,  sup-
poses the  whole  vestibulum  to  have  been  tastefully
overarched  with  the  branches  of  trees.  {Epithal.
Pel.  et  Thet.  278—293.)  The  birth  of  a  child
was  also  announced  by  a  chaplet  upon  the  door
(Juv.  ix.  84),  and  a  death  was  indicated  by  cy-
presses, probably  in  pots,  placed  in  the  vestibulum.
(Plin.  H.  N.  xvi.  CO  ;  Serv.  in  Virg.  Aen.  iii.  64.)
In  addition  to  trees,  branches,  garlands,  and
wreaths  of  flowers,  the  Romans  sometimes  dis-
played lamps  and  torches  before  the  doors  of  their
houses  for  the  purpose  of  expressing  gratitude  and
joy.  (Juv.  xii.  92.)  Music,  both  vocal  and  instru-
mental, was  sometimes  performed  in  the  vestibulum,
especiallj'-  on  occasions  when  it  was  intended  to  do
honour  to  the  master  of  the  house,  or  to  one  of  his
family.  (Pind.  Nem.  i.  19,  20,  Isth.  vii.  3.)

It  was  considered  improper  to  enter  a  house
without  giving  notice  to  its  inmates.  This  notice
the  Spartans  gave  by  shouting  ;  the  Athenians  and
all  other  nations  by  using  the  knocker  already  de-
scribed, but  more  commonlj''  by  rapping  with  the
knuckles  or  with  a  stick  {Kpoveiv,  KSicTeiv^  Becker,
Charik.  vol.  i.  pp.  230 — 234;  Plat.  Protag.  pp.  151,
159,  ed.  Bekker.)  In  the  houses  of  the  rich  a
porter  (Janitor,  custos,  ^vpwpSs)  was  always  in  at-
tendance to  open  the  door.  (Tibull.  i.  1.  56.)  He
was  commonly  a  eunuch  or  a  slave  (Plat.  I.  c),
and  was  chained  to  his  post.  (Ovid.  Amor.  i.  6  ;
Sueton.  de  Clar.  Rhet.  3.)  To  assist  him  in  guard-
ing the  entrance,  a  dog  was  universally  kept  near
it,  behig  also  attached  by  a  chain  to  the  wall  (Theo-
crit.  XV.  43  ;  Apollodor.  ap.  A  then.  i.  4  ;  Aristoph.
Thesm.  423,  Lysist.  1217  ;  Tibull.  ii.  4.  32—36)  ;
and  in  reference  to  this  practice,  the  warning  Cave
CaTiem,  evXaSov  tV  n'^va,  was  sometimes  written
near  the  door.  Of  this  a  remarkable  example  oc-
curs in  "  the  house  of  the  tragic  poet  "  at  Pompeii,
where  it  is  accompanied  by  the  figure  of  a  fierce
dog,  wrought  in  mosaic  on  the  pavement.  (Gell's
Pomp.  2ud  Ser.  vol.   i.  pp.  142,    145.)     Instead

8S  2


62a  ILLUSTRES.

of  this  harsh  admonition,  some  walls  or  pavements
exhibited  the  more  gracious  SALVE  or  XAIPE.
(Plat.  Charm,  p.  94,  ed.  Heindorf.)  The  appro-
priate names  for  the  portion  of  the  house  immedi-
ately behind  the  door  (i^upojj/,  Soph.  Oed.  Tyr.
1242,  Elect.  32o;,  denotes  that  it  was  a  kind  of
apartment  ;  it  corresponded  to  the  hall  or  lobby  of
our  houses.  Immediately  adjoining  it,  and  close
to  the  front  door,  there  was  in  many  houses  a
small  room  for  the  porter  {ceUa.,  or  cellidajanitoris,
Sueton.  Vitell.  16  ;  Varro,  de  Re  Rust  i.  13  ;
^vpwpe7ov,  Pollux,  i.  77)-  [J.  Y.]

lATRALIPTA,  lATRALIPTES,  or  lA-
TROALIPTES  (taTpaXeiTTTrjs),  the  name  given
by  the  ancients  to  a  physician  who  paid  particular
attention  to  that  part  of  medical  science  called
latraliptice.  The  name  is  compounded  of  larpls
and  a\ei(pQ},  and  signifies  literally  a  phi/sician  that
cures  by  anointing.  According  to  Pliny  {H.  N.
xxix.  2),  they  were  at  first  only  the  slaves  of  phy-
sicians, but  afterwards  rose  to  the  rank  of  physicians
themselves,  and  were  therefore  superior  to  the
aliptae.  [Aliptae.]  The  word  occurs  in  Paulus
Aegineta  (De  Re  Med.  iii.  47),  Celsus  (De  Medic.
i.  1)  and  other  medical  writers.  [W.  A.  G.]

IATRUS  (laTpos).  [Medicus]
lATROSOPHlSTA  (laTpo(To<^i<TThs\  an  an-
cient medical  title,  signifying  apparently  (according
to  Du  Cange,  Glossar.  Med.  et.  Inf.  Graecit.)  one
who  both  taught  medicine  and  also  practised  it
himself ;  as  the  ancients  made  a  distinction  be-
tween Si5aarKa\LK^  and  epyarts^  the  art  and  the
science  of  medicine,  the  theory  and  the  practice.
(Damascius  in  vita  Isidori.)  Eunapius  Sardianus
{De  Fit.  Philosoph.  et  Sophist,  p.  168,  ed.  Antwerp.
1568)  calls  them  i^TjtTKrjjxcpovs  Xeyeiv  re  Koi
iroL^'iv  luTpiK-fiK  The  word  is  somewhat  varied  in
different  authors.  Socrates  (Hist.  Eccles.  \ii.  13)
calls  Adamantius  larpiKuv  X6ywv  (TO(picrT-f)s.  Ste-
phanus  Byzantinus  (*-.  v.  Tea)  mentions  twj/
larpwu  <ro(pi(TT'f]s  ;  Callisthenes  (quoted  in  Du
Cange),  iarphs  (To<pi(Trr\s  :  and  Theophanes  (ibid.)
(ro(pi(Tri\s  Tr\s  laTpiKrjs  iivi(TT-i]fj.-r]s.  Several  ancient
physicians  are  called  by  this  title,  e.  g.  Magnes
(Theoph.  Protospath.  De  Urinis)^  Cassius,  the
author  of  "  Quaestiones  Medicae  et  Naturales,"
and  others.  [W.A.  G.]

IDUS.  [Calendarium,  Roman.]
JENTA'CULUM.     [Coena,  p.  306,  a.]
IGNO'BILES.     [NoBiLEs.]
TGNOMI'NIA.     [Infamia.]
ILE  {X\'n).     [ExERCiTUs,  p.  488,  b.]
ILLUSTRES.     When  Constantine  the  Great
re-organized  the  Roman  administration,  he  divided
the  principal  magistrates  and  officials  into  three
classes  :  —  1.  The  Illustres,  who  held  the  first  rank ;
2.  The  Spectahiks  ;  and  3.  The  Clarissimi.     The
title  of  lUustres  belonged  only  to  the  Consules,  the
Patricii,  the   Pracfectus  praetorio,  the  Praefectus
nrbi,  the  Praepositus  sacri  cubiculi,  the  Magistri
militum,  the  Magister  officiorum,  the  Quaestor  sacri
palatii,  the  Comes  sacrarum  largitionum,  and  the
Comes  rerum  privatarum.   Even  among  the  Illustres
there  was  a  gradation   of  rank,  the  Consuls  and
Patricii  being  regarded  as  higher  in  dignity  than  the
others.    The  titles  Sublimissimi,  Eoccellentissiuii.  and
Magnifid  are  used  as  synonymous  with  Illustres.
Among  the  privileges  of  the  Illustres  we  read  that
in  criminal  cases  they  could  only  be  tried  by  the
emperor  himself  or  by   an   imperial   commission,
and  that  they  could  appear  before  the  courts  by


IMPERIUM.

means  of  procurators.  (Cod.  Theod.  6.  tit.  6,  «&c.,
with  the  commentarjr  of  Gothofred  ;  Walter,  Gesch-
ichte  des  Rnmischen  Rechts,  §  380,  2nd  ed.  ;  Gibbon,
Decline  and  Fall^  c.  17.  vol.  iii.  p.  34,  London,
1797.)

IMA'GINUM  JUS.     [NoBiLEs.]

IMA'GO,  the  representation  or  likeness  of  any
object,  is  derived  from  the  root  im  or  sim^  which
appears  in  im-itari  and  sim-ilis.,  and  likewise  in
the  Greek  bij.-6<s.  ("  Imago  ab  imitatione  dicta,"
Festus,  s.  V.  ;  ''''Imago  dicitur  quasi  imitago^''  Por-
phyr.  ad  Hor.  Carm.  i.  12.  4.)  It  was  especially
applied  among  the  Romans  to  indicate  the  waxen
busts  of  deceased  ancestors,  which  distinguished
Romans  kept  in  the  atria  of  their  hoiises,  and  of
which  an  account  is  given  in  the  article  Nobiles.
The  word  is  also  used  in  general  to  signify  a  por-
trait or  statue  of  a  person  ;  on  both  of  which
some  remarks  are  made  under  Pictura,  No.  XV.
and  Statuaria,  No.  II.

I'MBRICES.     [Tegula.]

IMMUNI'TAS  (from  in  and  rnunus).,  signifies,
1 .  A  freedom  from  taxes.  2.  A  freedom  from  ser-
vices which  other  citizens  had  to  discharge.  With
respect  to  the  first  kind  of  immunitas  we  find  that
the  emperors  frequently  granted  it  to  separate
persons  (Suet.  Aug.  40),  or  to  certain  classes  of
persons,  or  to  whole  states.  When  granted  to
individuals  the  immunitas  ceased  with  their
death,  but  in  the  case  of  states  the  privilege  con-
tinued to  subsequent  generations.  (Dig.  50.  tit.
15.  s.  4.  §  3.)  Thus  we  find  that  certain  people
in  Illj'ria  had  immunitas  from  taxes  (Liv.  xlv.
26),  and  that  the  emperor  Claudius  granted  freedom
from  taxation  in  perpetuum  to  the  inhabitants  of
Ilium.  (Suet.  Claud.  25.)  The  Roman  soldiers
from  the  time  of  Nero  were  exempt  from  all  duties
on  goods  which  they  might  carry  into  the  pro-
vinces for  their  own  use  or  might  purchase  in  any
place.   (Hac.Ann.  xiii.  51  ;  Cod.  4.  tit.  61.  s.  3.)

The  second  kind  of  immunitas  was  granted  to  all
persons  who  had  a  valid  excuse  (excusatio)  to  be
released  from  such  services,  and  also  to  other  per-
sons as  a  special  favour.  Under  the  republic,  public
offices  were  objects  of  ambition,  and  consequently
there  was  no  difficulty  in  obtaining  persons  to  dis-
charge them  even  when  they  were  attended  with
expense  to  the  individual  who  held  them.  But
under  the  empire  the  case  became  different.  Many
offices  Avhich  entailed  expenses,  such,  for  instance,
as  that  of  the  decuriones  in  the  municipia,  were
avoided  rather  than  sought  after  ;  and  hence  various
regulations  were  made  at  different  times  to  define
the  classes  of  persons  who  were  entitled  to  ex-
emption. (Comp.  Dig.  50.  tit.  6  ;  Cod.  10.  tit.  47
and  48.)  The  definition  of  immunitas  in  this  sense
is  given  by  Paulus  (Dig.  50.  tit.  16.  s.  18)  :  —
"  Munus  —  onus,  quod  cimi  remittatur,  vacationem
militiae  munerisque  praestat,  inde  immunitatem  ap-
pellari."  The  immunitas  might  be  either  general,
from  all  services  which  a  citizen  owed  to  the  state,
orspecial,  such  as  from  military  service  [Exercitus,
p.  499],  from  taking  the  office  of  tutor  or  guardian
[Tutor],  and  the  like.

IMPE'NDIUM.     [Femjs,  p.  526,  b.]

IMPERATI'VAE  FERIAE.     [Feriae.]      .

IMPERA'TOR.     [Imperium.]

IMPE'RIUM.  Gains  (iv.  103),  when  making
a  division  of  judicia  into  those  Quae  Legitinio
jure  consistunt,  and  those  Quae  Imperio  conti-
nentur,  observes   that    the   latter   are    so   called


IMPERIUAI.

because  thej^  continue  in  force  during  the  Impe-
riuni  of  him  who  has  granted  thera.  Legitima
judicia  were  those  which  were  prosecuted  in  Rome
or  within  the  first  miliarium,  between  Roman
citizens,  and  before  a  single  judex.  By  a  Lex
Julia  Judiciaria,  such  judicia  expired,  unless  they
were  concluded  within  a  year  and  six  months.
All  other  judicia  were  said  Imperio  contineri,
whether  conducted  within  the  above  limits  before
recuperatores,  or  before  a  single  judex,  when
either  the  judex  or  one  of  the  litigant  parties  was
a  peregrinus,  or  when  conducted  beyond  the  first
miliarium  either  between  Roman  citizens  or  pere-
grini.  From  this  passage  it  follows  tliat  there
were  judicia  quae  Imperio  ccmtiiiebantur,  which
wore  granted  in  Rome  ;  which  is  made  clearer  by
Avhat  follows.  There  was  a  distinction  between  a
judicium  ex  lege,  that  is,  a  judicium  founded  on  a
particular  lex,  and  a  judicium  legitimum  ;  for
instance,  if  a  man  sued  in  the  provinces  under  a
lex,  the  Aquilia  for  example,  the  judicium  v/as  not
legitimum,  but  was  said  Imperio  contineri,  that  is,
the  Imperium  of  the  praeses  or  proconsul,  who
gave  the  judicium.  The  same  was  the  c;jse  if  a
man  sued  at  Rome  ex  lege,  and  the  judicium  was
before  recuperatores,  or  there  was  a  peregrinus
concerned.  If  a  man  sued  under  the  praetor's
edict,  and  consequently  not  ex  lege,  and  a  judi-
cium was  granted  in  Rome  and  the  same  was  be-
fore one  judex  and  no  foreigner  was  concerned,  it
was  legitimum.  The  judicia  legitima  are  men-
tioned by  Cicero  {Pro  Rose.  Com.  5  ;  Or.  Part.
12)  ;  but  it  may  perhaps  be  doubted  if  he  uses
the  term  in  the  sense  in  which  Gains  does.
It  appears  then,  that  in  the  time  of  Gains,  so  long
as  a  man  had  jurisdictio,  so  long  was  he  said  to
have  Imperium.  Imperium  is  defined  by  Ulpian
(Dig.  2.  tit.  1,  s.  3)  to  be  either  nierum  or
mixtum.  To  have  the  merum  Imperium  is  to
have  "  gladii  potestatem  ad  animadvertendum  in
facinorosos  homines,""  a  power  that  had  no  con-
}iection  with  jurisdictio :  the  mixtum  Imperium  is
defined  by  him  as  that  "  cui  etiam  jurisdictio  inest,"
or  the  power  which  a  magistrate  had  for  the  pur-
poses of  administering  the  civil  (not  criminal)  part
of  the  law.  It  appears  then  that  there  was  an
Imperium  which  was  incident  to  jurisdictio  ;  but
the  merum  or  pure  Imperium  was  conferred  by  a
lex  (Dig.  1.  tit.  21.  s.  1).  The  mixtum  Imperium
was  nothing  more  than  the  power  necessary^  for
giving  eifect  to  the  Jurisdictio.  There _  might
therefore  be  Imperium  without  Jurisdictio,  but
there  could  be  no  Jurisdictio  without  Imperium.
Accordingly,  Imperium  is  sometimes  used  to  express
the  authority  of  a  magistratus,  of  which  his  Juris-
dictio is  a  part.  (Puchta,  Zeitschrift  fur  §esch.
licchtswisseDischaft.,  vol.  x.  p.  201.)

Imperium  is 'defined  by  Cicero  {Phil.  y.  16)  to
])e  that  "  sine  quo  res  militaris  administrari,
teneri  exercitus,  bellum  geri  non  potest."  As  op-
posed to  Potestiis,  it  is  the  power  which  was  con-
ferred by  the  state  upon  an  individual  who  was
appointed  to  command  an  army.  The  phrases
Consularis  Potestas  and  Consulare  Imperiimi  might
both  be  properly  used  ;  but  the  expression  Tri-
bunitia  Potestas  only  could  be  used,  as  the  Tribuni
.  never  received  the  Imperium.  (Liv.  vi.  37  ;  in  Veil.
Paterc.  ii.  2,  Imperium  is  improperly  used.)  A  con-
sul could  not  act  as  commander  of  an  army  {attin-
yere  rem  militarem)  unless  he  were  empowered  by  a
Lex  Curiata,  v/hich  is  expressed  by  Livy  (v.  52)


IMPERIUM.  629

thus: — "  Comitia  Curiala  rem  militarem  continent."
Though  consuls  were  elected  at  the  Comitia  Cen-
turiata,  the  Comitia  Curiata  only  could  give  them
Imperium.  (Liv.  v.  52.)  This  was  in  conformity
with  the  ancient  constitution,  according  to  which
the  Imperium  was  conferred  on  the  kings  after
they  had  been  elected:  "On  the  death  of  King
Pompilius,  the  populus  in  the  Comitia  Curiata
elected  Tullus  Ilostilius  king,  upon  the  rogation
of  an  interrex  ;  and  the  king,  following  the  ex-
ample of  Pompilius,  took  the  votes  of  the  populus
according  to  their  curiae  on  the  question  of  his
Imperium."  {C\c.  Rep.  n.  17.)  Both  Numa  (ii.
13),  and  Ancus  Marcius  (ii.  18),  the  successor  of
Tullus,  after  their  appointment  as  Reges,  are
severally  said  "  De  Imperio  suo  legem  curiatam
tulisse."  It  appears  then  that,  from  the  kingly
period  to  the  time  of  Cicero,  the  Imperium,  as
such,  was  conferred  by  a  Lex  Curiata.  On  the
kingly  Imperium  see  Becker,  Handbuch  der  Jiom.
Alterthumer,  vol.  i.  part  ii.  p.  314,  &c.

The  Imperium  of  the  kings  is  not  defined  by
Cicero.  It  is  declared  by  some  modem  writers  to
have  been  the  military  and  the  judicial  power  ;
and  it  is  said  that  the  consuls  also  received  the
Imperium  in  the  same  sense  ;  and  the  reason  why
the  Lex  Curiata  is  specially  said  to  confer  the
Imperium  Militare,  is  that  it  specially  referred  to
the  consuls,  and  by  the  establishment  of  the  prae-
torship  tlie  jurisdictio  was  separated  from  the  con-
sulship. It  may  be  conjectured  that  the  division
of  Imperium,  made  by  the  jurists,  was  in  accord-
ance with  the  practice  of  the  republican  period :  there
was  during  the  republican  period  an  Imperium
within  the  walls  which  was  incident  to  jurisdictio,
and  an  Imperium  without  the  walls  which  was
conferred  by  a  lex  curiata.  There  are  no  traces  of
this  separation  in  the  kingly  period,  and  it  is  pro-
bable that  the  king  received  the  Imperium  in  its
full  import,  and  that  its  separation  into  two  parts
belongs  to  the  republican  period.  The  Imperium,
which  was  conferred  by  a  lex  under  the  republic,
was  limited,  if  not  by  the  terms  in  which  it  was
conferred,  at  least  by  usage  :  it  could  not  be  held
or  exercised  within  the  city.  It  was  sometimes
specially  conferred  on  an  individual  for  tlie  day  of
his  triumph  within  the  city  ;  and,  at  least  in  some
cases,  by  a  plebiscitum.  (Liv.  xxvi.  21,  xlv.
35.)

The  Imperium  was  as  necessary  for  the  go-
vernor of  a  province,  as  for  a  general  who  merely
commanded  the  armies  of  the  republic,  as  he  could
not  without  it  exercise  military  authority  {rem
militarem  attingcre).  (See  Caes.  B.  C.  i.  6.)  So  far
as  we  can  trace  the  strict  practice  of  the  Roman
constitution,  military  command  was  given  by  a
special  lex,  and  was  not  incident  to  any  office,  and
might  be  held  without  any  other  office  than  that  of
imperator.  It  appears  that  in  the  time  of  Cicero
there  were  doubts  as  to  the  necessity  of  the  lex  in
some  cases,  which  may  have  gradually  arisen  from
the  irregular  practices  of  the  civil  wars,  and  from
the  gradual  decay  of  the  old  institutions.  Cicero,
in  a  passage  which  is  not  very  clear  {AdFam.  L  9),
refers  to  a  Cornelia  Lex  according  to  which  an  in-
dividual who  had  received  a  Province  ex  Senatus-
consulto  thereby  acquired  the  Imperium,  without
the  formality  of  a  Lex  Curiata.

The  Imperium  (inerum)  of  the  republic  appears
to  have  been  (1),  a  power  which  was  only  exer-
cised out  of  the  city  ;  (2)  a  power  which  v.ns
s  s  3


630  IMPUBES.

specially  conferred  by  a  Lex  Curiata,  and  was  not
incident  to  any  office  ;  (3)  a  power  without  which
no  military  operation  could  be  considered  as  done
in  the  name  and  on  the  behalf  of  the  state.  Of  this
a  notable  example  is  recorded  in  Livy  (xxvi.  2),
where  the  senate  refused  to  recognise  a  Roman  as
a  commander  because  he  had  not  received  the
Imperium  in  due  form.

In  respect  of  his  Imperium,  he  who  received  it
was  styled  imperator  (ayTo/cparwp)  :  he  might  be  a
consul  or  a  proconsul.  It  was  an  ancient  practice,
observe?  Tacitus  (yl72«.  iii.  74),  for  the  soldiers  of
a  victorious  general  to  salute  him  by  the  title  of
imperator  ;  but  in  the  instance  ref.^rred  to  by
Tacitus,  the  Emperor  Tiberius  allowed  the  soldiers
to  confer  the  title  on  an  individual  who  had  it  not
already,  while  under  the  republic  the  title  as  a
matter  of  course  was  given  with  the  Imperium  ;
and  every  general  who  received  the  Imperium  was
entitled  to  the  name  of  imperator.  After  a  victory
it  was  usual  for  the  soldiers  to  salute  their  com-
mander as  imperator,  but  this  salutation  neither
gave  nor  confirmed  the  title.  Under  the  republic,
observes  Tacitus,  there  were  several  impenitores
at  a  time :  Augustus  granted  the  title  to  some  ;
but  tha  last  instfince,  he  adds,  of  the  title  being
conferred  was  in  the  case  of  Blaesus,  under
Tiberius.  There  were,  however,  later  instances.
The  assumption  of  the  praenomen  of  imperator  by
Julius  Caesar  (Suet,  Cues.  c.  76)  was  a  usurpation  ;
or  it  may  have  been  conferred  by  the  senate  (Dion
Cassius,  xliii.  44).  Under  the  republic  the  title
came  properly  after  the  name  ;  thus  Cicero,  when
he  was  proconsul  in  Cilicia,  could  properly  style
himself  M,  Tullius  Cicero  Imperator,  for  the  term
merely  expressed  that  he  had  the  Imperium.  Ti-
berius and  Claudius  refused  to  assume  the  prae-
nomen of  Imperator,  but  the  use  of  it  as  a  prae-
nomen became  established  among  their  successors,
as  we  see  from  the  imperial  coins.  The  title  Im-
perator sometimes  appears  on  the  imperial  medals,
followed  by  a  numeral  (VI.  for  instance),  which
indicates  that  it  was  specially  assumed  by  them  on
the  occasion  of  some  great  victory  ;  for  though  the
victory  might  be  gained  by  their  generals,  it  was
considered  to  be  gained  under  the  auspices  of  the
Imperator.

The  term  Imperium  was  applied  in  the  republi-
can period  to  express  the  sovereignty  of  the  Ro-
man state.  Thus  Gaul  is  said  by  Cicero  {Pro
Font.  1)  to  have  come  under  the  Imperium  and
Ditio  of  the  Populus  Romanus  ;  and  the  notion  of
the  Majestas  Populi  Romani  is  said  to  be  "  in
Imperii  atque  in  nominis  populi  Romani  dignitate."
(Cic.  Or.  Part.  30.)  Compare  the  use  of  Impe-
rium in  Horace,  Od.  i.  37,  iii.  5.  [G.  L.J

IMPLU' VI UM.     [DoMUS,  p.  427,  b.]

IMPU'BES,  An  infans  [Infans]  was  in-
capable of  doing  any  legal  act.  An  impubes,  who
bad  passed  the  limits  of  infantia,  could  do  any
legal  act  with  the  auctorltas  of  his  tutor  ;  without
Buch  auctoritas  he  could  only  do  those  acts  which
tvere  for  his  benefit.  Accordingly  such  an  im-
pubes could  stipulate  (stipuluri),  but  not  promise
{promittere)  ;  in  other  Avords,  as  Gains  (iii.  107)
expresses  it,  a  pupillus  could  only  be  bound  by  the
auctoritas  of  his  tutor,  but  he  could  bind  another
without  such  auctoritas.     [Infans]

But  this  remark  as  to  pupilli  only  applies  to
those  who  had  understanding  enough  to  know  what
they  were  doing  (qui  jam  aliquetn  intellectum  ha-


IMPUBES.

bent),  and  not  to  those  who  were  infantes  or  Infant!
proximi,  though  in  the  case  of  the  infanti  proximi
a  liberal  interpretation  was  given  to  the  nde  of  law
{benignior  juris  interprctatio),  by  virtue  of  which  a
pupillus,  who  was  infanti  proximus,  was  placed
on  the  same  footing  as  one  who  was  pubertati
proximus,  but  this  was  done  for  their  benefit  only
{propter  utilitatem  eorum),  and  therefore  could  not
apply  to  a  case  where  the  pupillus  might  be  a  loser
(Compare  Inst,  iii.  tit.  19.s.  10  with  Gains,  iii.  108.)
An  impubes  who  was  in  the  power  of  his  father,
could  not  bind  himself  even  with  the  auctoritas  of
his  father  ;  for  in  the  cas-e  of  a  pupillus,  the  auc-
toritas of  the  tutor  was  only  allowed,  in  respect  of
the  pupillus  having  property  of  his  own,  which  a
son  in  the  power  of  his  father  could  not  have.

In  the  case  of  obligationcs  ex  delicto,  the  notion
of  the  auctoritas  of  a  tutor  was  of  course  excluded,
as  such  auctoritas  was  only  requisite  for  the  pur-
pose of  giving  effect  to  rightful  acts.  If  the  im-
pubes was  of  sufficient  capacity  to  understand  the
nature  of  his  delict,  he  was  bound  by  it  ;  other-
wise, he  was  not.  In  the  case  of  a  person  who
was  Pubertati  proximus,  there  was  a  legal  pre-
sumption of  such  capacity  ;  but  still  this  presump-
tion did  not  exclude  a  consideration  of  the  degree
of  understanding  of  the  impubes  and  the  nature  of
the  act,  for  the  act  might  be  such  as  either  to  be
perfectly  intelligible,  as  theft,  or  it  might  be  an
act  which  an  impubes  imperfectly  understood,  as
when  he  was  made  the  instrument  of  fraud.  These
principles  were  applicable  to  cases  of  furtum,  dam-
num injuria  datum,  injuria,  and  others  ;  and  also
to  crimes,  in  which  the  nature  of  the  act  mainly
determined  whether  or  not  guilt  should  be  im-
puted.

An  impubes  could  enter  into  a  contract  by  which
he  was  released  from  a  debt,  but  he  could  not  re-
lease a  debt  without  the  auctoritas  of  his  tutor.
He  could  not  pay  money  without  his  tutor  ;  nor
could  he  receive  money  without  his  tutor,  at  least
it  was  not  a  valid  payment,  because  such  payment
was,  as  a  consequence,  followed  by  a  release  to  the
debtor.  But  since  the  rule  as  to  the  incapacity  of
an  impubes  was  made  only  to  save  him  from  loss,
he  could  not  retain  both  the  money  and  the  claim.

An  impubes  could  not  be  a  plaintiff  or  a  defend-
ant in  a  suit  without  his  tutor.  He  could  acquire
the  ownership  of  property  alone,  but  he  could  not
alienate  it  without  the  consent  of  his  tutor,  nor
could  he  manumit  a  slave  without  such  consent.
He  could  contract  sponsalia  alone,  because  the
auctoritas  of  the  tutor  has  reference  only  to  pro-
perty :  if  he  was  in  his  father's  power,  he  was  of
course  entirely  under  his  father''s  control.

Aif  impubes  could  acquire  an  hereditas  with  the
consent  of  his  tutor,  which  consent  was  necessary,
because  an  hereditas  was  accompanied  with  obliga-
tions. But  as  the  act  of  cretion  was  an  act  that  must
be  done  b\  the  heres  himself,  neither  his  tutor  nor
a  slave  could  take  the  hereditas  for  a  pupillus,  and
he  was  in  consequence  of  his  age  incapable  of  taking
it  himself.  This  difficulty  was  got  over  by  the
doctrine  of  pro  herede  gestio  :  the  tutor  might  per-
mit the  pupillus  to  act  as  heres,  which  had  the
effect  of  cretion :  and  this  doctrine  would  apply
even  in  tlie  case  of  infantes,  for  no  expression  of
words  was  necessary  in  order  to  the  pro  herede
gestio.  In  the  case  of  the  bonomm  possessio,  the
father  could  apply  for  it  on  behalf  of  his  child,  and
tlie  tutor  on  behalf  of  his  pupillus,  without  any  act


IMPUBES.

being  done  hj  the  impubcs.  By  the  imperial  legis-
lation, a  tutor  was  allowed  to  acquire  the  hereditas
for  his  pupillus,  and  a  father  for  his  son,  who  was
in  his  power  ;  and  thus  the  doctrine  of  the  pro
herede  gestio  was  rendered  unnecessary.

A  pupillus  could  not  part  with  a  possession
without  the  auctoritas  of  a  tutor,  for  though  pos-
session of  itself  was  no  legal  right,  legal  advantages
were  attached  to  it.  As  to  the  acquisition  of  pos-
session, possession  in  itself  being  a  bare  fact,  and
the  fundamental  condition  of  it  being  the  animus
possidendi,  consequently  the  pupillus  could  only
acquire  possession  by  himself,  and  when  he  had
capjicity  to  understand  the  nature  of  the  act.  But
with  the  auctoritas  of  his  tutor  he  could  acquire
possession  even  when  he  was  an  infans,  and  thus
the  acquisition  of  possession  by  a  pupillus  was  faci-
litated, utilitatis  causa.  There  was  no  formal  diffi-
culty in  such  possession  any  more  than  in  the  case
of  pro  herede  gestio,  for  in  neither  instance  was  it
necessary  for  words  to  be  used.  Subsequently  the
legal  doctrine  was  established  that  a  tutor  could
acquire  possession  for  his  pupillus.  (Dig.  41.  tit.  2.
s.  l.§20.)

With  the  attainment  of  pubertas,  a  person  ob-
tained the  full  power  of  his  property,  and  the
tutela  ceased  :  he  could  also  dispose  of  his  property
by  will  ;  and  he  could  contract  marriage.  Accord-
ing to  the  legislation  of  Justinian  (Inst.  i.  tit.  22),
pubertas,  in  the  case  of  a  male,  was  attained  with
the  completion  of  the  fourteenth,  and,  in  a  female,
with  the  completion  of  the  twelfth  year.  In  the
case  of  a  female,  it  seems  that  there  never  had
been  any  doubt  as  to  the  period  of  the  tv/elve
years,  but  a  dispute  arose  among  the  jurists  as  to
the  period  of  fourteen  years.  The  Sabiniani  main-
tained that  the  age  of  pubertas  was  to  be  deter-
mined by  physical  capacity  {haJAtu  corporis),  to
ascertain  which  a  personal  examination  might  be
necessary  ;  the  Proculiani  fixed  the  age  of  fourteen
complete,  as  that  which  absolutely  determined  the
attainment  of  puberty.  (Gains,  i.  196  ;  \]]j).Fraff.
xi.  28.)  It  appears,  therefore,  that  under  the
earlier  emperors  there  was  some  doubt  as  to  the
time  when  pubertas  was  attained,  though  there
was  no  doubt  that  with  the  attainment  of  puberty,
whatever  that  time  might  be,  full  legal  capacity
was  acquired.

Until  a  Roman  youth  assumed  the  toga  virilis,
he  wore  the  toga  praetexta,  the  broad  purple  hem
of  which  (praetexta)  at  once  distinguished  him
from  other  persons.  The  toga  virilis  was  assumed
at  the  Liberalia  in  the  month  of  March,  and  though
no  age  appears  to  have  been  positively  fixed  for
the  ceremony,  it  probablj'-  took  place  as  a  general
rule  on  the  feast  which  next  followed  the  comple-
tion of  the  fourteenth  year  ;  though  it  is  certain
that  the  completion  of  the  fourteenth  year  was  not
always  the  time  observed.  Still,  so  long  as  a  male
wore  the  praetexta,  he  was  Impubes,  and  when  he
assumed  the  toga  virilis,  he  was  Pubes.  Accord-
ingly, Vesticeps  (Festus,  *.  v.)  was  the  same  as
Pubes,  and  Investis  or  praetextatus  the  same  as
Impubes.  (Gell.  v.  19.  Vesticeps.)  After  the  assump-
tion of  the  toga  virilis,  the  son  who  was  in  the
power  of  his  father  had  a  capacity  to  contract  debts ;
and  a  pupillus  was  released  from  the  tutela.  But
if  neither  the  pupillus  wished  to  get  rid  of  his  tutor,
nor  the  tutor  to  be  released  from  the  responsibility
of  his  office  (for  which  he  received  no  emolument),
the  period  of  assuming  the  toga  virilis  might  be


INAUGURATIO.  631

deferred.  If  the  pupillus  and  the  tutor  could  not
agree,  it  might  be  necessary  that  there  should  be  a
judicial  decision.  In  such  case  the  Proculiani
maintained  as  a  theoretical  question,  that  the  age
of  fourteen  should  be  taken  as  absolutely  deter-
mining the  question,  fourteen  being  the  age  after
the  attainment  of  which  the  praetexta  had  been
generally  laid  aside.  The  Sabiniani  mahitained
that  as  the  time  of  puberty  had  never  been  abso-
lutely fixed,  but  had  depended  on  free  choice,  some
other  mode  of  deciding  the  question  must  be
adopted,  where  free  choice  was  out  of  the  question,
and  therefore  they  adopted  that  of  the  physical  de-
velopment {habitus  coiporis).  But  though  there
are  allusions  to  this  matter  (Quinct,  Inst.  Or.  iv.  2),
there  is  no  evidence  to  show  that  inspection  of
the  person  was  ever  actually  resorted  to  in  order
to  determine  the  age  of  puberty.  It  appears  that
the  completion  of  fourteen  years  was  established  as
the  commencement  of  pubertas.  The  real  foundation
of  the  rule  as  to  the  fourteen  and  the  twelve  years
appears  to  be,  that  in  the  two  sexes  respectively,
puberty  was,  as  a  general  rule  in  Italy,  attained
about  these  ages.  In  the  case  of  females,  the  time
had  been  fixed  absolutely  at  twelve  by  immemo-
rial custom,  and  had  no  reference  to  any  practice
similar  to  that  among  males  of  adopting  the  toga
virilis,  for  women  wore  the  toga  praetexta  till  they
were  married.  And  further,  though  the  pupillaris
tutela  ended  with  females  with  the  twelfth  year,
they  were  from  that  time  subject  to  another  kind
of  tutela.

A  male  had  a  capacity  to  make  a  will  upon
completing  his  fourteenth,  and  a  female  upon  com-
pleting her  twelfth  year  (Gains,  ii.  113  ;  Paulus,
(S.  R.  iii.  tit.  4.  a.)  ;  and  the  same  ages,  as  already
observed,  determined  the  capacity,  in  the  two  sexes,
for  contracting  a  legal  marriage.  The  dispute  be-
tween the  two  schools  as  to  the  time  when  the
male  attained  the  age  of  puberty,  appears  to  have  had
reference  to  the  termination  of  the  tutela,  and  his
general  capacity  to  do  legal  acts  ;  for  the  test  of
the  personal  examination  could  hardly,  from  the
nature  of  the  case,  apply  to  the  capacity  to  make
a  will  or  contract  a  marriage,  as  Savigny  shows.

Spadones  (males  who  could  never  attain  physi-
cal pubertas)  might  make  a  testament  after  attain-
ing the  age  of  eighteen.  (Savigny,  System  des  heut.
Rom.  Rechts,  vol.  iii.  p.  55,  &c.)  [G.  L.]

INAUGURA'TIO  was  in  general  the  ceremony
by  which  the  augurs  obtained,  or  endeavoured  to
obtain,  the  sanction  of  the  gods  to  something
which  had  been  decreed  by  man  ;  in  particular,
however,  it  was  the  ceremony  by  which  things
or  persons  were  consecrated  to  the  gods,  whence
the  terms  dedicatio  and  conseo-atio  were  sometimes
used  as  synonymous  with  inauguratio.  (Liv.  i.  44,
55  ;  Flor.  i.  7,  8  ;  Plin.  Ep.  ix.  39,  x.  58,  59,  76 ;
Cic.  in  Catil.  iv.  1.)  The  ceremony  of  inauguratio
was  as  follows :  —  After  it  had  been  decreed  that
something  should  he  set  apart  for  the  service  of  the
gods,  or  that  a  certain  person  should  be  appointed
priest,  a  prayer  was  addressed  to  the  gods  by  the
augurs  or  other  priests,  soliciting  them  to  declare
by  signs  whether  the  decree  of  men  was  agreeable
to  the  will  of  the  gods.  (Liv.  i.  18.)  If  the  signs
observed  by  the  inaugurating  priest  were  thought
favourable,  the  decree  of  men  had  the  sanction  of
the  gods,  and  the  inauguratio  was  completed.  The
inauguratio  was,  in  early  times,  always  performed
by  the  augurs  j  but  subsequently  we  find  that  the
s  s  4


632


TNAURIS.


INCENDIUM.


inauguratio,  especially  that  of  the  rex  sacrificulus
and  of  the  flamines,  was  soraetimes  performed  by
the  college  of  pontiffs  in  the  comitia  calata.  (Gell.
XV.  27.)  But  all  other  priests,  as  well  as  new
members  of  the  college  of  augurs,  continued  to  be
inaugurated  by  the  augurs,  or  sometimes  by  the
augurs  in  conjunction  with  some  of  the  pontiffs
(Liv.  xxvii.  8,  xl.  42)  ;  the  chief  pontiff  had  the
right  to  enforce  the  inauguratio,  if  it  was  refused
by  the  augurs,  and  if  he  considered  that  there  was
no  sufficient  ground  for  refusing  it.  Sometimes
one  augur  alone  performed  the  rite  of  inauguratio,
as  in  the  case  of  Numa  Pompilius  (Liv.  i.  1 8  ;
compare  Cic.  Bnit.  1  ;  Macrob.  Sut.  ii.  9)  ;  and  it
n^ould  seem  that  in  some  cases  a  newly  appointed
priest  might  himself  not  only  fix  upon  the  day,  but
also  upon  the  particular  augur  by  whom  he  desired
to  be  inaugurated.  (Cic.  I.e.  ;  and  Philip,  ii.  43.)
During  the  kingly  period  of  Rome  the  inaugura-
tion of  persons  was  not  confined  to  actual  priests  ;
but  the  kings,  after  their  election  by  the  populus,
were  inaugurated  by  the  augurs,  and  thus  became
the  high-priests  of  th-eir  people.  After  the  civil
and  military  power  of  the  kings  had  been  conferred
upon  the  consuls,  and  the  office  of  high-priest  was
given  to  a  distinct  person,  the  rex  sacrorum,  he
was,  as  stated  above,  inaugurated  by  the  pontiffs
in  the  comitia  calata,  in  which  the  chief  pontiff
presided.  But  the  high  republican  magistrates,
nevertheless,  likewise  continued  to  be  inaugurated
(Dionys.  ii.  6),  and  for  this  purpose  they  were
summoned  by  the  augurs  {condictio,  denunciatio)
to  appear  on  the  capitol  on  the  third  day  after  their
election.  (Serv.  ad  Virg.  Aen.  iii.  117.)  This
inauguratio  conferred  no  priestly  dignity  upon  the
magistrates,  but  was  merely  a  method  of  obtaining
the  sanction  of  the  gods  to  their  election,  and  gave
them  tlie  right  to  take  the  auspicia  ;  and  on  im-
portant emergencies  it  was  their  duty  to  make  use  of
this  privilege.  At  the  time  of  Cicero,  however,  this
duty  was  scarcely  ever  observed.  (Cic.  de  Divin.
iL  36.)  As  nothing  of  any  importance  was  ever
introduced  or  instituted  at  Rome  without  consult-
ing the  pleasure  of  the  gods  by  augury,  we  read  of
the  inauguratio  of  the  tribes,  &c.  [L.  S.]

INAURIS,  an  ear-ring  ;  called  in  Greek  eVco-
Tiov^  because  it  was  worn  in  the  ear  (o5s),  and
i\\6§ioy.  because  it  was  inserted  into  tlie  lobe  of
the  ear  {\o§6s\  which  was  bored  for  the  purpr>se.
(Horn.  IL  xiv.  182,  Hymn.  ii.  in  Fen.  9  ;  Plin.
ff.  N.  xii.  1.)

Ear-rings  were  worn  by  both  sexes  in  oriental
countries  (Plin.  //.  N.  xl  30)  ;  especially  by.  the
Lydians  (Xen.  Anah.  iiu  1.  §  31),  the  Persians
(Diod.  Sic.  V.  45),  the  Babylonians  (Juv.  i.  104),
and  also  by  the  Libyans  (Macrob.  Sat.  vii.  3),  and
the  Carthaginians  (Plaut.  Poen.  v.  2.  21).  Among
the  Greeks  and  Romans  they  were  worn  only  by
females.

This  ornament  consisted  of  the  ring  (KpiKos^
Diod.  Sic.  I.  c.)  and  of  the  drops  {sialagmia,  Festus,
8.  V.  ;  Plaut.  Men.  iii.  3.  18.)  The  ring  was  gene-
rally of  gold,  although  the  common  people  also
wore  ear-rings  of  bronze.  See  Nos.  1,  4,  from  the
Egyptian  collection  in  the  British  Museum.  Instead
of  a  ring  a  hook  was  often  used,  as  shown  in  Nos.
6,  8.  The  women  of  Italy  still  continue  the
same  practice,  passing  the  hook  through  the  lobe
of  the  ear  without  any  other  fastening.  The  drops
were  sometimes  of  gold,  veiy  finely  wrought  (see
Nos.  2,  7,  8),  and  sometimes  of  pearls  (Plin.  ll.cc, ;


Sen.  de  Ben.  vii.  9  ;  Ovid.  Met.  x.  265  ;  Claud,  de
VI.  Cons.  Honor.  528  ;  Sen.  Hippol.  ii  1.  33).  and
precious  stones  (Nos.  3,  5,  6).  The  pearls  were
valued  for  being  exactly  spherical  (Hor.  Epod.  viii.
1 3),  as  well  as  for  their  great  size  and  delicate
whiteness  ;  but  those  of  an  elongated  form,  called
elencJd,  were  also  much  esteemed,  being  adapted  to
terminate  the  drop,  and  being  sometimes  placed
two  or  three  together  for  this  purpose.  (Plin.  H.  N.
ix.  56  ;  Juv.  vi.  364.)  In  the  Iliad  (xiv.  182, 183),
Hera,  adorning  herself  in  the  most  captivating
manner,  puts  on  ear-rings  made  with  three  drops
resembling  mulberries.  (See  Eustath.  ad  loc. )  Pliny
observes  (xi.  50)  that  greater  expense  was  lavished
on  no  part  of  the  dress  than  on  the  ear-rings.
According  to  Seneca  (I.  c.)  the  ear-rinir.  No.  3,  in
the  preceding  woodcut,  in  which  a  couple  of  pearls
are  strung  both  above  and  below  the  precious  stone,
was  worth  a  patrimony.  (See  also  De  Vita  Beata^
1 7.)  All  the  ear-rings  above  engraved  belong  to
the  Hamilton  collection  in  the  British  Museum.

In  opulent  families  the  care  of  the  ear-rings  was
the  business  of  a  female  slave,  who  was  called
Auriculae  Omatrix  (Gruter,  Inscrip.).  The  Venus
de'  Medici,  and  other  female  statues,  have  the  ears
pierced,  and  probably  once  had  ear-rings  in  them.
The  statue  of  Achilles  at  Sigeum,  representing  him
in  female  attire,  likewise  had  this  ornament.  (Serv.
in  Virg.  Aen.  i.  30  ;  Tertull.-  de  Pall.  4.)  [J.  Y.]
INCE'NDIUM,  the  crime  of  setting  any  object
on  fire,  by  which  the  property  of  a  man  is  endan-
gered. It  was  thus  a  more  general  term  than
the  modern  Arson.,  which  is  limited  to  the  act  of
wilfully  and  maliciously  burning  the  property  of
another.  The  crime  of  incendium  Avas  the  subject
of  one  of  the  laws  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  which  in-
flicted a  severe  punishment  on  the  person  who  set
fire  to  property  maliciously  {sciens.,  pnidens)  ;  but  if
it  was  done  by  accident  (casu,  id  est.,negligentia)^  the
law  obliged  the  oft'ender  to  repair  the  injury  he
had  committed.  (Dig.  47.  tit.  9.  s.  9.)  The  pun-
ishment, however,  of  burning  alive,  which  is  men-
tioned in  the  passage  of  the  Digest  referred  to,  is
supposed  by  modern  commentators  not  to  have  been
contained  in  the  Twelve  Tables,  but  to  have  been
transferred  from  the  imperial  period  to  earlier  times.
In  the  second  Punic  war  a  great  fire  broke  out  at


I^XESTUM.

Rome,  which  was  evidently  occasioned  liumana
/raude.  The  offenders  were  discovered  and  pun-
ished (cmimadve.rsum  est),  but  Livy  unfortunately
does  not  state  (xxvi.  27)  in  what  manner.  The
•crime  of  incendium  was  the  subject  of  various
enactments  in  the  last  century  of  the  republic.
iSulla,  in  his  Lejc  Cornelia  de  Sicariis,  punished  ma-
licious (dolo  maio)  incendium,  but  only  in  the  city,
or  within  a  thousand  paces  of  it,  with  aquae  et  ignis
iuterdictio,  since  it  was  irequently  employed  as  a
means  for  the  perpetration  of  mui'der,  which  wa.s
especially  the  subject  of  this  law.  (Dig.  48.  tit.  8.
s.  1.)  Cn.  Pompeius,  in  b.  c.  o2,  made  incendium
a  crime  of  Vis  by  his  Lex  Pompeia  de  Vi,  in  conse-
quence of  the  burning  of  the  Curia  and  the  Porcia
Basilica  on  the  buiial  of  Clodius  ;  and  Julius  Caesar
also  included  it  in  his  Lex  Julia  de  Vi,  which  en-
acted that  any  act  of  incendium  committed  by
large  numbers  of  men,  even  if  the  object  of  their
assembling  together  was  not  incendium,  should  be
treated  as  Vis,  and  punished  with  aquae  et  ignis
iuterdictio.  (Cic.  Phil.  i.  9  ;  comp.  Parad.  4.)  The
more  recent  Lex  Julia  de  Vi  seems  to  have  been
less  severe,  but  it  is  uncertain  what  punishment  it
ordained.  (Paull.  v.  26.  §  3.)  Besides  the  two
criminal  prosecutions  given  by  the  Lex  Cornelia
and  Lex  Julia,  a  person  could  also  bring  actions  to
recover  compensation  for  the  injury  done  to  his
property:  1.  By  the  actio  legis  AquiUiae,  in  case
of  accidental  incendium.  (Dig.  9.  tit.  2.  s.  27  §  5.)
2.  In  the  case  of  a  person  who  had  committed
robbery  or  done  injury  during  an  incendium,
there  was  a  praetorian  action  de  incendio,  which
compelled  him  to  restore  fourfold  the  amount.  (Dig.
47.  tit.  9.  ss.  1,5.)  In  the  imperial  period  various
distinctions  were  made  in  the  crime.  First,  a  dis-
tinction was  made  according  to  the  greater  or  smaller
danger  of  the  incendium  to  the  contiguous  objects :
thus  incendium  in  the  city  was  punished  with  less
severitj'^  than  incendium  in  the  country.  Secondly,
a  distinction  was  made  according  as  the  act  had
been  performed  dolo,  culpa,  or  casu.  If  the  incen-
dium was  not  malicious,  but  still  might  have  been
avoided  by  ordinary  care,  a  person  had  to  make
compensation  ;  but  if  the  incendium  was  purely  ac-
cidental, no  compensation  was  necessary.  The
cognitio  was  eodraordinaria  and  belonged  to  the
Praefectus  urbi,  who  could  inflict  whatever  pun-
ishment he  pleased,  for  it  appears  that  there  Avas
no  punishment  fixed  by  law.  We  accordingly  find
mention  of  execution  by  the  sword,  burning  alive,
condemnation  to  the  mines  and  to  public  works,
deportatio,  relegatio,  flogging,  &c.,  as  pxmishments
inflicted  on  account  of  incendium.  (Dig.  48.  tit.  19,
s.  28.  §  12;  9.  tit.  2.  8.  30.  §  3  ;  47.  tit.  9.  §  I  ;
Paull.  V.  20.  §  1.  V.  3.  §  6  ;  Coll.  Leg.  tit.  12.)
The  preceding  account  is  taken  from  Rein,  Das
Criminalrecht  der  Romer,  pp.  765 — 774,  where  all
the  authorities  are  given.

INCENSUS.  [Caput  ;  Cknsus,  p.  263,  a.]
INCESTUM  or  INCESTUS.  Incestum  is
non  castum,  and  signifies  generally  all  immoral
and  irreligious  acts.  In  a  narrower  sense  it  denotes
the  unchastity  of  a  Vestal,  and  sexual  intercourse
of  persons  within  certain  degrees  of  consanguinity.
If  a  man  married  a  woman  whom  it  was  for-
bidden for  him  to  marry  by  positive  morality
(moribus),  he  was  said  to  commit  incestum.  (Dig.
23.  tit.  2.  s.  39.)  Such  a  marriage  was  in  fact  no
marriage,  for  the  necessary  connubium  between
the  pxvrties  was  wanting.     Accordingly,  incestum


INCITEGA.


633


is  the  sexual  connection  of  a  male  and  a  female,
whether  under  the  form  of  marriage  ornot,  if  such
persons  cannot  marry  by  reason  of  consanguinity.

There  was  no  connubium  between  persons  re-
lated by  blood  in  the  direct  line,  as  parents  and
children.  If  such  persons  contracted  a  marriage  it
was  Nefariae  et  Incestae  nuptiae.  There  was  no
connubium  between  persons  who  stood  in  the  rela-
tion of  parent  and  child  by  adoption,  not  even
after  the  adopted  child  was  emancipated.  There
were  also  restrictions  as  to  connubium  between
collateral  kinsfolk  {ex  transversa  gradu  cognationis) :
there  was  no  connubium  between  brothers  and
sisters,  either  of  the  whole  or  of  the  half  blood  ;
nor  between  children  of  the  blood  and  children  by
adoption,  so  long  as  the  adoption  continued,  or  so
long  as  the  children  of  the  blood  remained  in  the
power  of  their  father.  There  was  connubium  be-
tween an  uncle  and  his  brother's  daughter,  after
the  emperor  Claudius  had  set  the  example  by
marrying  Agrippina  ;  but  there  was  none  between
an  uncle  and  a  sister's  daughter.  There  was  no
connubium  between  a  man  and  his  amita  or  mater-
tera  [Cognati]  ;  nor  between  a  man  and  his
socnis,  nurus,  privigna  or  noverca.  In  all  such,
cases  when  there  was  no  connubium,  the  children
had  a  mother,  but  no  legal  father.

Incest  between  persons  in  the  direct  line  was
punishable  in  both  parties  ;  in  other  cases  only  in
the  man.  The  punishment  was  Relegatio,  as  in
the  case  of  adultery.  Concubinage  between  near
kinsfolk  was  put  on  the  same  footing  as  marriage.
(Dig.  23.  tit.  2.  s.  56.)  In  the  case  of  adulterium
and  stuprum  between  persons  who  had  no  connu-
bium, there  was  a  double  offence :  the  man  was
punished  with  deportatio,  and  the  woman  was  sub-
ject to  the  penalties  of  the  Lex  Julia.  (Dig.  48.
tit.  18.  s.  5.)  Among  slaves  there  was  no  inces-
tum, but  after  they  became  free  their  marriages
were  regulated  according  to  the  analogy  of  the
connubium  among  free  persons.  It  was  incestum
to  have  knowledge  of  a  vestal  virgin,  and  both
parties  were  punished  with  death.

That  which  was  stupmm,  was  considered  inces-
tum when  the  connection  was  between  parties  who
had  no  connubium.  Incestum,  therefore,  was
stuprum,  aggravated  by  the  circumstance  of  real  or
legal  consanguinity,  and,  in  some  cases,  affinity.
It  was  not  the  form  of  marriage  between  such  per-
sons that  constituted  the  incestum  ;  for  the  nuptiae
were  incestae,  and  therefore  no  marriage,  and  the
incestuous  act  was  the  sexual  connection  of  the
parties.  Sometimes  incestum  is  said  to  be  contra
fas,  that  is,  an  act  in  violation  of  religion.  The
rules  as  to  Incestum  were  founded  partlj"-  on  the
Jus  Gentium  and  partly  on  the  Jus  Civile  ;  but
the  distinction  did  not  exist  in  the  early  periods,
and  the  rules  as  to  Incestum  were  only  such  as
were  recognized  by  the  Jus  Gentium.  Though
the  rules  as  to  Incestum  were  afterwards  more
exuctl^Y  determined  by  the  Jus  Civile,  there  does
not  seem  to  have  been  any  complete  lex  on  the
matter.  The  Lex  Julia  de  adulteriis  only  treated
Incestum  incidentally,  or  so  far  as  it  was  also
adultery:  but  the  jurists  connected  all  the  im-
perial legislation  on  this  matter  and  their  own  inter-
pretation with  the  Lex  Julia.  (Rein,  Das  Crimi-
nalrecht der  Romer,  p.  869,  &c.)  [G.  L.]

INCITE'GA,  a  corruption  of  the  Greek
a.YyoOi]K7}  or  i'YyvQi]K'n,  a  term  used  to  denote  a
piece  of  domestic  furnitiu'e,  variously  formed  ac-


634


INCUNABULA.


cording  to  the  particular  occasion  intended  ;  made
of  silver,  bronze,  clay,  stone,  or  wood,  according  to
the  circumstances  of  the  possessor  ;  sometimes
adorned  with  figures  ;  and  employed  to  hold
amphorae,  bottles,  alabastra,  or  any  other  vessels
which  were  round  or  pointed  at  the  bottom,  and
therefore  required  a  separate  contrivance  to  keep
them  erect.  (Festus,  s.v.  Iiicitega  ;  Bekker,  Anecd.
245  ;  Wilkinson,  iVfa«.  and  Customs^  vol.  ii.  pp.158,
160,  216,  217.)  Some  of  those  used  at  a\lexandria
were  triangular.  (Athen.  v.  45.)  We  often  see
them  represented  in  ancient  Egyptian  paintings.
The  annexed  woodcut  shows  three  ayyoQrjKai^
which  are  preserved  in  the  British  Museum.  Those
on  the  right  and  left  hand  are  of  wood,  the  one
having  four  feet,  the  other  six  ;  they  were  found
in  Egyptian  tombs.  The  third  is  a  broad  earth-
enware ring,  which  is  used  to  support  a  Grecian
amphora.  [J.  Y.]


I'NCOLA.     [DoMiciLiuM.]

INCORPORA'LES  RES.     [Dominium.]

INCUNA'BULA  orCUNA'BULA  {(nrdpya-
vov)^  swaddling-clothes.

The  first  thing  done  after  the  birth  of  a  child
was  to  wash  it  ;  the  second  to  wrap  it  in  swad-
dling clothes,  and  the  rank  of  the  child  was  indi-
cated by  the  splendour  and  costliness  of  this,  its
first  attire.  Sometimes  a  fine  white  shawl,  tied
with  a  gold  band,  was  used  for  the  purpose  (Hom.
Hymn.  inApoll.  121, 122)  ;  at  other  times  a  small
purple  scarf,  fastened  with  a  brooch.  (Pind.  Pyth.
iv.  114  ;  xKafivZiov^  Longus,  i.  1.  p.  14,  28,  ed.
Boden.)  The  poor  used  broad  fillets  of  common  cloth
{pa7ini,  Luke,  ii.  7,  12  ;  Ezek.  xvi.  4.  Fulcf.  ;  com-
pare Hom.  Hymn,  in  Merc.  151,  306;  Apollod.
Bibl.  iii.  ]  0.  §  2  ;  Aelian,  V.  H.  ii.  7  ;  Eurip.  /ow,
32  ;  Dion  Chrysost.  vi  p.  203,  ed.  Reiske  ;  Plaut.


INFAMIA.
AmpJnt.  V.  1.  52,  Tnic.  v.  13).  The  preceding
woodcut,  taken  from  a  beautiful  bas-relief  at  Rome,
which  is  supposed  to  refer  to  the  birth  of  Telephus,
shows  the  appearance  of  a  child  so  clothed,  and
renders  in  some  degree  more  intelligible  the  fable
of  the  deception  practised  by  Rhea  upon  Saturn  in
saving  the  life  of  Jupiter  by  presenting  a  stone,
enveloped  in  swaddling-clothes,  to  be  devoured  by
Saturn  instead  of  his  new-born  child.  (Hes.  Tlieoc;.
485.)  It  was  one  of  the  peculiarities  of  the  Lace-
daemonian education  to  dispense  with  the  use  of
incunabula,  and  to  allow  children  to  enjoy  the  free
use  of  their  limbs.  (Plut.  Lycurg.  p.  90,  ed.
Steph.)  [J.  Y.]

INCUS  (&KiJLCiv),  an  anvil.  The  representa-
tions of  Vulcan  and  the  Cyclopes  on  various  works
of  art,  show  that  the  ancient  anvil  was  formed  like
that  of  modern  times.  When  the  smith  wanted  to
make  use  of  it,  he  placed  it  on  a  large  block  of
wood  (aKfjLodeTou,  Hom.  11.  xviii.  410,  476,  Od.
viii.  274  ;  positis  incudibus,  Virg.  Aen.  vii.  629  ;
viii.  451)  ;  and  when  he  made  the  link  of  a  chain,
or  any  other  object  which  was  round  or  hollow,  he
beat  it  upon  a  point  projecting  from  one  side  of
the  anvil.  The  annexed  woodcut,  representing
Vulcan  forging  a  thunderbolt  for  Jupiter,  illus-
trates these  circumstances  ;  it  is  taken  from  a  gem
in  the  Royal  Cabinet  at  Paris.     It  appears  that  in


the  "  brazen  age,"  not  only  the  things  made  upon
the  anvil,  but  the  anvil  itself,  with  the  hammer
and  the  tongs,  were  made  of  bronze.  (Hom.  Od.
iii.  433,  434 ;  ApoUon.  Rhod.  iv.  761,  762.)
[Malleus.]  [J.  Y.J

INDEX.     [Liber.]
INDIGITAMENTA.     [Pontifex.]
INDU'SIUM.    [Tunica.]
I'NDUTUS.     [Amictus  ;  Tunica.]
INFA'MIA.     The  provisions  as  to  Infamia,  as
they  appear  in  the  legislation  of  Justinian,  are  con-
tained in  Dig.  3.  tit.  2.  De  his  qui  notantur  In-
famia, and  in  Cod.  2.  tit.  12.  Ex  quibus  causis  In-
famia irrogatur.     The  Digest   contains  (s.  1)  the
cases  of  Infamia   as  enumerated  in  the  Praetor'a
Edict.     There  are  also  various  provisions  on  the
subject  in  the  Lex  Julia  Municipalis  (b.  c.  45),
commonly  called  the  Table  of  Heraclca.

Infamia  was  a  consequence  of  condemnation  in
any  Judicium  Publicum,  of  ignominious  {ignominiae
causa)  expulsion  from  the  army  (Tab.  Heracl.  1.
121),  of  a  woman  being  detected  in  adulter)-,
though  she  might  not  have  been  condemned  in  a
Judicium  Publicum,  &c. ;  of  condemnatio  for  Fur-


INFAMIA.

turn,  Rapina,  Injurlae,  and  Dolus  Mains,  provided
the  offender  was  condemned  in  his  own  name,  or
provided  in  his  own  name  he  paid  a  sum  of  money
by  way  of  compensation  ;  of  condemnation  in  an  ac-
tion Pro  Socio,  Tutelae,  Mandatum,  Depositura  or
Fiducia  (compare  the  Edict  with  Cic.  pro  Rose.
Com.  6,  pro  Rose.  Amer.  38,  39,  pro  Caecina.,
2,  Tof,.  c.  10;  Tab.  Heracl.  1.  Ill),  provided
the  offender  was  condemned  in  his  own  name.
Infaraia  only  followed  for  a  condemnatio  in  a
directa  actio,  not  if  a  man  was  condemned  con-
trario  judicio,  unless  the  person  condemned  was
guilty  of  some  special  dishonesty.  Infamia  was  also
a  consequence  of  insolvency,  when  a  man's  bona
were  Possessa,  Proscripta,  Vendita  (Cic.  pro
Quint.  15  ;  Tab.  Heracl.  1.  113—117  ;  Gains,  ii.
lo4)  ;  of  a  widow  marrying  within  the  time  ap-
pointed for  mourning,  but  the  Infamia  attached  to
the  second  husband,  if  he  was  a  paterfamilias,  and
if  he  was  not,  then  to  his  father,  and  to  the  father
of  the  widow  if  she  was  in  his  power  ;  the  Edict
does  not  speak  of  the  Infamia  of  the  widow,  but  it
was  subsequently  extended  to  her.  Infamia  was
a  consequence  of  a  man  being  at  the  same  time  in
the  relation  of  a  double  marriage  or  double  sponsa-
lia  ;  the  Infamia  attached  to  the  man  if  he  was  a
paterfamilias,  and  if  he  was  not,  to  his  father  ;  the
Edict  here  also  speaks  only  of  the  man,  but  the
Infamia  was  subsequently  extended  to  the  woman.
Infamia  was  a  consequence  of  prostitution  in  the
case  of  a  woman,  of  similar  conduct  in  a  man  {qui
muliebria  passus  est),  of  Lenocinium  or  gaining  a
living  bj"-  aiding  in  prostitution  (Tab.  Heracl.  1.
123)  ;  of  appearing  on  a  public  stage  as  an  actor,
of  engaging  for  money  to  appear  in  the  fights  of  the
wild  beasts,  even  if  a  man  did  not  appear,  and  of
appearing  there,  though  not  for  money.

It  results  from  this  enumeration  that  Infamia
was  only  the  consequence  of  an  act  committed  by
the  person  who  became  Infamis,  and  was  not  the
consequence  of  any  punishment  for  such  act.  In
some  cases  it  only  followed  upon  condemnation  ;  in
others  it  was  a  direct  consequence  of  an  act,  as  soon
as  such  act  was  notorious.

It  has  sometimes  been  supposed  that  the  Prae-
tor established  the  Infamia  as  a  rule  of  law,  which
however  was  not  the  case.  The  Praetor  made  cer-
tain rules  as  to  Postulatio  (Dig.  3.  tit.  1.  s.  1),  for
the  purpose  of  maintaining  the  purity  of  his  court.
With  respect  to  the  Postulatio,  he  distributed  per-
sons into  three  classes.  The  second  class  compre-
hended, among  others,  certain  persons  who  were
turpitudiTie  notubiles,  who  might  postulate  for  them-
selves but  not  for  others.  The  third  class  contained,
among  others,  all  those  "  qui  Edicto  Praetoris  ut
infames  notantur,"  and  were  not  already  enume-
rated in  the  second  class.  Accordingly  it  was
necessary  for  the  Praetor  to  enumerate  all  the  In-
fames who  were  not  included  in  the  second  class,
and  this  he  did  in  the  Edict  as  quoted.  (Dig.  3.
tit.  2.  s.  1.)  Consistently  w^ith  this,  Infamia  was  al-
ready an  established  legal  condition  ;  and  the  Prae-
tor in  his  edicts  on  Postulation  did  not  make  a
class  of  persons  called  Infames,  but  he  enumerated
as  persons  to  be  excluded  from  certain  rights  of
Postulation,  those  who  were  Infames.  Conse-
quently the  legal  notion  of  Infamia  was  fixed  before
these  edicts.

It  is  necessary  to  distinguish  Infamia  from  the
Nota  Censocia.  The  Infamia  does  not  seem  to
have  been  created  by  v/ritten  law,  but  to  have


INFAMIA.  635

been  an  old  Roman  institution.  In  many  caseg,
though  not  in  all,  it  was  a  consequence  of  a  judi-
cial decision.  The  power  of  the  Censors  was  in  its
effects  analogous  to  the  Infamia,  but  different  from
it  in  many  respects.  The  Censors  could  at  their
pleasure  remove  a  man  from  the  Senate  or  the
Equites,  remove  him  into  a  lower  tribe,  or  remove
him  out  of  all  the  tribes,  and  so  deprive  him  of  his
suffragium,  by  reducing  him  to  the  condition  of  an
aerarius.  (Cic.  pro  Cluent.  43,  45.)  They  could
also  affix  a  mark  of  ignominy  or  censure  opposite
to  a  man's  name  in  the  list  of  citizens,  nota  censoria
or  subscriptio  (Cic.  fro  Cluent.  42,  43,  44,  46,
47)  ;  and  in  doing  this,  they  were  not  bound  to
make  any  special  inquiry,  but  might  follow  general
opinion.  This  arbitrary  mode  of  proceeding  was
however  partly  remedied  by  the  fact  that  sucli  a
censorian  nota  might  be  opposed  by  a  colleague,  or
removed  by  the  following  censors,  or  by  a  judicial
decision,  or  by  a  lex.  Accordingly  the  censorian
nota  was  not  perpetual,  and  therein  it  differed
essentially  from  Infamia,  which  was  perpetual.

The  consequences  of  Infamia  were  the  loss  of
certain  political  rights,  but  not  all.  It  was  not  a
capitis  deminutio,  but  it  resembled  it.  The  In-
famis became  an  Aerarius,  and  lost  the  suffragium
and  honores  ;  that  is,  he  lost  the  capacity  for  cer-
tain so-called  public  rights,  but  not  the  capacity  for
private  rights.  Under  the  empire,  the  Infamia  lost
its  effect  as  to  public  rights,  for  such  rights  became
unimportant.

It  might  be  doubted  Avhether  the  loss  of  the
suffragium  was  a  consequence  of  Infamia,  but  the
affirmative  side  is  maintained  by  Savigny  with
such  reasons  as  may  be  pronounced  completely  con-
clusive. It  appears  from  Livy  (vii,  2)  and  Valerius
Maximus  (ii.  4.  §  4),  that  the  Actores  Atellanarum
were  not  either  removed  from  their  tribe  {nee  tribu
moventur),  nor  incapable  of  serving  in  the  armj'' :  in
other  words  such  actors  did  not  become  Infames,
like  other  actors.  The  phrase  "  tribu  moveri  "  is
ambiguous,  and  may  mean  either  to  remove  from
one  tribe  to  a  lower,  or  to  move  from  all  the  tribes,
and  so  make  a  man  an  aerarius.  Now  the  mere  re-
moving from  one  tribe  to  another  must  have  been
an  act  of  the  Censors  only,  for  it  was  necessary  to
fix  the  tribe  into  which  the  removal  was  made:
but  this  could  not  be  the  case  in  a  matter  of  In-
ftimia,  which  was  the  effect  of  a  general  rule,  and
a  general  nile  could  only  operate  in  a  general  way  ;
that  is,  "  tribu  moveri,"  as  a  consequence  of  In-
famia, must  have  been  a  removal  from  all  the
tribes,  and  a  degradation  to  the  state  of  an  Aera-
rius.    (Compare  Liv.  xlv.  15.)

The  Lex  .lulia  Municipal  is  does  not  contain  the
word  Infamia,  but  it  mentions  nearly  the  same
cases  as  those  which  the  Edict  mentions  as  cases
of  Infamia.  The  Lex  excludes  persons  who  fall
within  its  terms,  from  being  Senatores,  Decuriones,
Conscripti  of  their  city,  from  giving  their  vote  in
the  senate  of  their  city,  and  from  magistracies
which  gave  a  man  access  to  the  senate  :  but  it  says
nothing  of  the  right  of  voting  being  taken  away.
Savigny  observes  that  there  would  be  no  incon-
sistency in  supposing  that  the  lex  refused  only
the  Honores  in  the  municipal  towns,  while  it  still
allowed  Infames  to  retain  the  suffragium  in  such
towns,  though  the  practice  was  different  in  Rome,
if  we  consider  that  the  suffragium  in  the  Roman
Comitia  was  a  high  privilege,  while  in  the  munici-
pal towns  it  was  comparatively  unimportant.


636  INFANS,  INFANTIA.

Cicero  {pro  Rose.  Com.  6)  speaks  of  the  judida
Fiduciae,  Tutelae,  and  Societatis  as  "  sunimae
existimationis  et  pene  capitis."  In  another  oration
{pro  Quint.  8,  9,  13,  15,  22)  he  speaks  of  the  ex
edicto  possessio  honorum  as  a  capitis  causa,  and  in
fact  as  identical  with  Infamia  (c.  l.*),  cujus  bona
ex  edicto  possidentur.  hujus  omnis  fania  et  exis-
timatio  cum  bonis  simul  possidetur).  This  capitis
Tninutio,  however,  as  already  observed,  aifected
only  the  public  rights  of  a  citizen  ;  whereas  the
capitis  deminuto  of  the  imperial  period  and  the
expression  capitalis  causa,  apply  to  the  complete
loss  of  citizenship.  This  change  manifestly  arose
from  the  circumstance  of  the  public  rights  of  the
citizens  under  the  empire  having  become  alto-
gether unimportant,  and  thus  the  phrase  capitis
deminutio,  under  the  empire,  applies  solely  to  the
individual's  capacity  for  private  rights.

In  his  private  rights  the  Infamis  was  under
some  incapacities.  He  could  only  postulate  before
the  Praetor  on  his  own  behalf,  and  on  behalf  of
certain  persons  who  were  very  nearlj^  related  to
him,  but  not  generally  on  behalf  of  all  persons.
Consequently  he  could  not  generally  be  a  Cognitor
or  a  Procurator.  Nor  could  a  cause  of  action  be
assigned  to  him,  for  by  the  old  law  he  must  sue  as
the  cognitor  or  procurator  of  the  assignor  (Gains,
ji.  39)  ;  but  this  incapacity  became  xmimportant
when  the  Cessio  was  eftected  by  the  utiles  actiones
without  the  intervejition  of  a  Cognitor  or  Procu-
rator, The  Infamis  could  not  sustain  a  Popularis
Actio,  for  in  such  case  he  must  be  considered  as  a
procurator  of  the  state.  The  Infamis  was  also
limited  as  to  his  capacity  for  marriage,  an  incapa-
city which  originated  in  the  Lex  Julia.  (Ulp.  Frap.
xiii.)  This  lex  prohibited  senators,  and  the  chil-
dren of  senators,  from  contracting  marriage  with
Libertini  and  Libertinae,  and  also  with  other  dis-
reputable persons  enumerated  in  the  lex  :  it  also
forbade  all  freemen  from  marrying  with  certain
disreputable  women.  The  Jurists  made  the  fol-
lowing change:  —  they  made  the  two  classes  of
disreputable  persons  the  same,  which  were  not
the  same  before,  and  they  extended  the  prohibition,
both  for  senators  and  others,  to  all  those  whom  the
Edict  enumerated  as  Infames.  The  provisions  of
the  Lex  Julia  did  not  render  the  marriage  null,  but
it  deprived  the  parties  to  such  marriage  of  the  privi-
leges conferred  by  the  lex  ;  that  is,  such  a  marriage
did  not  release  them  from  the  penalties  of  celibacy.
A  senatus-consultum,  under  M.  Aurelius,  however,
made  such  marriage  null  in  certam  cases.  (Savigny,
System.^  «&:c.,  vol,  ii.)  [G.  L.J

INFA'MIS.     [Infamia.]

INFANS,  INFA'NTIA.  In  the  Roman  law
there  were  several  distinctions  of  age  wliich  were
made  with  reference  to  the  capacity  for  doing  legal
acts:  —  1.  The  first  period  was  from  birth  to  the
end  of  the  seventh  year,  during  which  time  per-
sons were  called  Infantes,  or  Qui  fari  non  possunt.
2,  The  second  period  was  from  the  end  of  seven
years  to  the  end  of  fourteen  or  twelve  years,  ac-
cording as  the  person  was  a  male  or  a  female,
during  which  persons  were  defined  as  those  Qui
fari  possunt.  The  persons  included  in  these  first
two  classes  were  Impuberes.  3.  The  third  period
was  from  the  end  of  the  twelfth  or  fourteenth  to
the  end  of  the  twenty-fifth  year,  during  which
period  persons  were  Adolescentes,  Adulti.  The
.  persons  included  in  these  three  classes  were
miiiores  xxv  annis  or  annorum,  and  were  often,  for


INFANS,  INFANTIA.
brevity's  sake,  called  minores  only  [Curator]  ;.
and  the  persons  included  in  the  third  and  fourth
class  were  Puberes.  4.  The  fourth  period  was  from
the  age  of  twenty-five,  during  which  persons  were
Majores.

The  term  Impubes  comprehends  Infans,  as  all
Infantes  are  Impuberes  ;  but  all  Impuberes  are  not
Infantes.  Thus  the  Impuberes  were  divided  into
two  classes  ;  Infantes  or  those  under  seven  years  of
age,  and  those  above  seven,  who  are  generally  un-
derstood by  the  term  Impuberes.  Pupillus  is  a
general  name  for  all  Impuberes  not  in  the  power  of
a  father.     (Dig,  50.  tit.  IG.  s.  239.)

The  commencement  of  Pubertas  was  the  com-
mencement of  full  capacity  to  do  legal  acts.  Be-
foi-e  the  commencement  of  Pubertas,  a  person,
according  to  the  old  civil  law,  could  do  no  legal
act  without  the  auctoritas  of  a  tutor.  This  rule
was  made  for  those  Impuberes  who  had  property
of  their  own  ;  for  it  could  have  no  application  to
Impuberes  who  were  in  the  power  of  a  father.
Now  the  age  of  pubertas  was  fixed  as  above  men-
tioned, on  the  supposition  that  persons  were  then
competent  to  understand  the  nature  of  their  acts,
and  the  age  of  twelve  or  fourteen  was  only  fixed
because  it  was  necessary  to  fix  some  limit  which
might  apply  to  all  cases  ;  but  it  was  obvious  that  in
many  cxises  when  a  person  bordered  on  the  age  of
Puberty  (pubertati  proximus),  and  had  not  yet
attained  it,  he  might  have  sufficient  understanding
to  do  many  legal  acts.  Accordingly,  a  person  who
was  proximus  pubertati  was  in  course  of  time  con-
sidered competent  to  do  certain  legal  acts  without
the  auctoritas  of  a  tutor  ;  but  to'  secure  him  against
fraud  or  mistake,  he  could  only  do  such  acts  as
were  for  his  own  advantage.  This  relaxation  of
the  old  law  was  beneficial  both  to  the  Impubes
and  to  others,  but  owing  to  its  being  confined  to
such  narrow  limits  of  time,  it  was  of  little  practical
use,  and  accordingly  it  was  extended  as  a  positive
rule  to  a  longer  period  below  the  age  of  puberty  ;
but  still  with  tlie  same  limitation :  the  Impubes
could  do  no  act  to  his  prejudice  without  the
auctoritas  of  a  tutor.  It  was,  however,  necessary
to  fix  a  limit  here  also,  and  accordingly  it  was
determined  that  such  limited  capacity  to  do  legal
acts  should  commence  with  the  termination  of
infantia,  which,  legally  defined,  is  that  period  after
which  a  person,  either  alone  or  with  a  tutor,  is
capable  of  doing  legal  acts.

Infans  properlj'  means  Qui  fari  non  potest ;  ana
he  of  whom  could  be  predicated,  Fari  potest,
was  not  Infans,  and  was  capable  of  doing  certain
legal  acts.  The  phrase  Qui  fari  potest  is  itself
ambiguous  ;  but  the  Romans,  in  a  legal  sense,  did
not  limit  it  to  the  mere  capacity  of  uttering  words,
which  a  child  of  two  or  three  years  generally  pos-
sesses, but  they  understood  by  it  a  certain  degree
of  intellectual  developement ;  and,  accordingly,  the
expression  Qui  fari  potest  expressed  not  only  that
degree  of  intellectual  development  which  is  shown
by  the  use  of  intelligible  speech,  but  also  a
capacity  for  legal  acts  in  which  speech  was  re-
quired. Thus  the  period  of  infantia  was  extended
beyond  that  which  the  strict  etymological  meaning
of  the  word  signifies,  and  its  termination  was  fixed
by  a  positive  rule  at  the  end  of  the  seventh  year,
as  appears  by  numerous  passages.  (Dig,  26.  tit.  7.
8.  1  ;  23.  tit.  I.  s.  14  ;  Cod.  6.  tit.  30.  s.  18  ;
Quintilian,  Inst.  Or.  i.  1  ;  Isidorus,  Otig.  xi.  2.)

The  expressions  proximus  pubertati,  and  proxi-


INFULA.

mns  infantiae  or  infanti  (Gains,  iii.  109),  are  used
by  the  Roman  jurists  to  signify  respectively  one
who  is  near  attaining  Pubertas,  and  one  who  has
just  passed  the  limit  of  Infantia.  (Savigny,  System
des  heM.  R.  R.  vol.  iii.)     [Impubes.]  [G.  L.]

INFE'RIAE.     [FuNus,  p.  562,  b.]

I'NFULA,  a  flock  of  white  and  red  wool,  which
was  slightly  twisted,  drawn  into  the  form  of  a
wreath  or  fillet,  and  used  by  the  Romans  for  orna-
ment on  festive  and  solemn  occasions.  In  sacri-
ficing it  was  tied  with  a  white  band  [Vitta]  to
the  head  of  the  victim  (Virg,  Georg.  iii.  487  ;
Lucret  i.  88  ;  Sueton.  Calig.  27),  and  also  of  the
priest,  more  especially  in  the  worship  of  Apollo
and  Diana.  (Virg.  Acn.  ii.  430,  x.  538  ;  Servius,
in  loc.  ;  Isid,  Orig.  xix.  30 ;  Festus,  s.  v.  Infulae.)
The  "  torta  infula  "  was  worn  also  by  the  Vestal
Virgins.  (Prud.  c.  Sym.  ii.  1085,  1094.)  Its  use
seems  analogous  to  that  of  the  lock  of  wool  worn
by  the  flamines  and  salii  [Apex].  At  Roman
marriages  the  bride,  who  carried  wool  upon  a  dis-
taff in  the  procession  [Fusus],  fixed  it  as  an  infula
upon  the  door-case  of  her  future  husband  on  enter-
ing the  house,  (Lucan,  ii.  '6ob  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxix.
2 ;  Servius,  in  Virq.  Aen.  iv.  458.)  [J.  Y.]

INGE'NUI,  INGENU'ITAS.^  Freemen  {li-
heri)  were  either  ingenui  or  libertini.  Ingenui  are
those  free  men  who  are  bora  free.  (Gains,  i.  1 1.)
Libertini  are  those  who  are  manumitted  from  legal
slavery.  Though  freedmen  {libertini)  were  not
ingenui,  the  sons  of  libertini  were  ingenui.  A
libertinus  could  not  by  adoption  become  ingenuus.
(Gell.  V.  19.)  If-  a  female  slave  {ancilla)  was
pregnant,  and  was  manumitted  before  she  gave
birth  to  a  child,  such  child  was  born  free,  and
therefore  was  ingenuus.  In  other  cases,  also,  the
law  favoured  the  claim  of  free  birth,  and  conse-
quently of  ingenuitas.  (Paulus,  Sent.  Recept.  iii.
24,  and  v.  1.  De  liberali  cattsa.)  If  a  man's  in-
genuitas was  a  matter  in  dispute,  there  was  a
judicium  ingenuitatis.  (Tacit.  Ann.  xiii.  27  ;
Paulus,  S.  R.  V.  1.)

The  words  ingenuus  and  litertinus  are  often
opposed  to  one  another  ;  and  the  title  of  freeman
(liber),  which  would  comprehend  libertinus,  is
sometimes  limited  by  the  addition  of  ingenuus
(liber  et  ingenuus,  Hor.  Ar.  P.  383).  According
to  Cincius,  in  his  work  on  Comitia,  quoted  by
Festus  (s.  V.  Fatricios),  those  who,  in  his  time,
were  called  ingenui,  were  originally  called  patricii,
which  is  interpreted  ])y  Goettling  to  mean  that
Gentiles  were  originally  called  Ingenui  also  :  a
manifest  misunderstanding  of  the  passage.  If  this
passage  has  any  certain  meaning,  it  is  this :  ori-
ginally the  name  ingenuus  did  not  exist,  but  the
word  patricius  was  sufficient  to  express  a  Roman
citizen  by  birth.  This  remark  then  refers  to  a
time  when  there  were  no  Roman  citizens  except
patricii  ;  and  the  definition  of  ingenuus,  if  it  had
then  been  in  use,  would  have  been  a  sufficient  de-
finition of  a  patricius.  But  the  word  ingenuus  was
introduced,  in  the  sense  here  stated,  at  a  later  time,
and  when  it  was  wanted  for  the  purpose  of  indicat-
ing a  citizen  by  birth,  merely  as  such.  Thus,  in
the  speech  of  Appius  Claudius  Crassus  (Liv.  vi.
40),  he  contrasts  with  persons  of  patrician  descent,
"  Unus  Quiritium  quilibet,  duobus  ingenuis  or-
tus."  Further,  the  definition  of  Gentilis  by
Scaevola  [Gens,  p.  567],  shows  that  a  man  might
be  ingenuus  and  yet  not  gentilis,  for  he  might  be
the  Bon  of  a  freedman  :  and  this  is  consistent  with


INJURIA.


637


Livy  (x.  8).  If  Cincius  meant  his  proposition  to
be  as  comprehensive  as  the  terms  will  allow  us  to
take  it,  the  proposition  is  this  :  —  All  (now)  ingenui
comprehend  all  (then)  patricii ;  which  is  untrue.

Under  the  empire,  Ingenuitas,  or  the  Jura  In-
genuitatis, might  be  acquired  by  the  imperial
favour  ;  that  is,  a  person,  not  ingenuus  by  birth,
was  made  so  by  the  sovereign  power.  A  freedman
who  had  obtained  the  Jus  Annulorum  Aureorum,
was  considered  ingenuus  ;  but  this  did  not  inter-
fere wiih  the  patronal  rights.  (Dig.  40.  tit.  10.  s.
5  and  6.)  By  the  natalibus  restitutio  the  princeps
gave  to  a  libertinus  the  character  of  ingenuus  ;  a
form  of  proceeding  which  involved  the  theory  of
the  original  freedom  of  all  mankind,  for  the  liber-
tinus was  restored,  not  to  the  state  in  which  he
had  been  born,  but  to  his  supposed  original  state  of
freedom.  In  this  case  the  patron  lost  his  patronal
rights  by  a  necessary  consequence,  if  the  fiction
were  to  have  its  full  effect.  (Dig.  40.  tit.  11.)  It
seems  that  questions  as  to  a  man's  ingenuitas  were
common  at  Rome  ;  which  is  not  surprising,  when
we  consider  that  patronal  rights  were  involved  in
them.  [G.  L.]

INGRATUS.     [Patronus.]

INJU'RIA.  Injuria,  in  the  general  sense,  is
to  Jus.  In  a  special  sense  injuria  was
done  by  striking  or  beating  a  man  either  with  the
hand  or  with  any  thing  ;  by  abusive  words  {con-
vicinm)  ;  by  the  proscriptio  bonorum,  when  the
clamiant  knew  that  the  alleged  debtor  was  not
really  indebted  to  him,  for  the  bonorum  proscriptio
was  accompanied  with  infamia  to  the  debtor  (Cic.
pro  Quint.  6,  15,  16)  ;  by  libellous  writings  or
verses  ;  by  soliciting  a  mater  familias  or  a  prae-
textatus  [Impubes]  ;  and  by  various  other  acts.
A  man  might  sustain  injuria  either  in  his  own
person,  or  in  the  person  of  those  who  were  in  his
power  or  in  manu.  No  injuria  could  be  done  to  a
slave,  but  certain  acts  done  to  a  slave  were  an  in-
juria to  his  master,  when  the  acts  were  such  as
appeared  from  tlieir  nature  to  be  insulting  to  the
master ;  as,  for  instance,  if  a  man  should  flog
another  man's  slave,  the  master  had  a  remedy
against  the  wrong-doer,  which  was  given  him  by
the  praetor's  fomiula.  But  in  many  other  cases  of
a  slave  being  maltreated,  there  was  no  regular
fornnila  by  which  the  master  could  have  a  remed}',
and  it  was  not  easy  to  obtain  one  from  the  praetor.

The  Twelve  Tables  had  A'arious  provisions  on
the  subject  of  Injuria.  Libellous  songs  or  verses
were  followed  by  capital  punishment,  that  is,
death,  as  it  appears  (Cic.  Rep.  iv.  10,  and  the
notes  in  Mai's  edition).  In  the  case  of  a  limb
being  mutilated  the  punishment  was  Talio  (Festus,
s.  V.  Talio).  In  the  case  of  a  bi'oken  bone,  the
penalty  was  3(J0  asses  if  the  injurj'-  was  done  to  a
freeman,  and  150  if  it  was  done  to  a  slave.  In
other  cases  the  Tables  fixed  the  penalty  at  25  asses.
(Gellius,  xvi.  10,  xx.  1  ;  Dirksen,  Uebcrsicht,  &.c.)

These  penalties  which  were  considered  sufficient
at  the  time  when  they  were  fixed,  were  afterwards
considered  to  be  insufficient ;  and  the  injured  per-
son was  allowed  by  the  praetor  to  claim  such
damages  as  he  thought  that  he  was  entitled  to,  and
the  judex  might  give  the  full  amount  or  less.  But
in  the  case  of  a  very  serious  injury  (atrox  injuria),
when  the  praetor  required  security  for  the  defend-
ant's appearance  to  be  given  in  a  particular  sum,
it  was  usual  to  claim  such  sum  as  the  damages  in
the  plaintiff  'a  declaration,  and  though  the  judex


638  TNSIGNE.

was  not  bound  to  give  damages  to  that  amount,  he
seldom  gave  less.  An  injuria  had  the  character
of  atrox,  either  from  the  act  itself,  or  the  place
where  it  was  done,  as  for  instance,  a  theatre  or
forum,  or  from  the  condition  of  the  person  injured,
as  if  he  were  a  magistratus,  or  if  he  were  a  senator
and  the  wrong-doer  were  a  person  of  low  condition.

A  Lex  Cornelia  specially  provided  for  cases  of
p'lT'^Mtio,  verberatio,  and  forcible  entry  into  a  man's
house  {(iomus).  The  jurists  who  conmiented  on
this  lex  defined  the  legal  meaning  of  pulsatio,  ver-
bei-atio,  and  domus.     (Dig.  47.  tit.  10.  s.  5.)

The  actions  for  Injuria  were  gradually  much  ex-
tended, and  the  praetor  would,  according  to  the
circumstances  of  the  case  {causa  cogiiila)^  give  a
person  an  action  in  respect  of  any  act  or  conduct
of  another,  which  tended,  in  the  judgment  of  the
praetor,  to  do  him  injury  in  reputation  or  to  wound
his  feelings.  (Dig. '47.  tit.  10.  s.  15,  22,  23,  24,
&c.)  Many  cases  of  Injuria  were  subject  to  a
special  punishment  (Dig.  47.  tit.  11)  as  deportatio ;
and  this  proceeding  extra  ordinem  was  often
adopted  instead  of  the  civil  action.  Various  imperial
constitutions  affixed  the  punishment  of  death  to
libellous  writings  {famosi  liUdli).      [Ltbem.i.]

Infamia  was  a  consequence  of  condemnation  in
an  actio  Injuriarum  [Infamia].  He  who  brought
such  an  action  per  calumniam  was  liable  to  be
punished  extra  ordinem.  (Gaius,  iii.  220 — 225  ;
I-lor.  !Sat.  i.  1.  80  ;  Dig.  47.  tit.  10  ;  Cod.  Theod.
ix.  tit.  34  ;  Cod.  ix.  tit.  3G  ;  Paulus,  Sent,  liecep.
V.  tit.  4  ;  Rein,  Das  CriminalrecM  der  Rimer,
p.  35,  &c.)  [G.  L.]

INJURIA'RUM  ACTIO.     [Injuria.]

INOA  ('Iz/cDo),  festivjils  celebrated  in  several
parts  of  Greece,  in  honour  of  the  ancient  heroine
Ino.  At  Megara  she  was  honoured  with  an  annual
Bacrifice,  because  the  Megarians  believed  that  her
body  had  been  cast  by  the  waves  upon  their  coast,
and  that  it  had  been  found  and  buried  there  by
Cleso  and  Tauropolis.  (Pans.  i.  42.  §  8.)  Another
festival  of  Ino  was  celebrated  at  Epidaurus  Limera,
in  Laconia.  In  the  neighbourhood  of  this  town
there  was  a  small  but  very  deep  lake,  called  the
water  of  Ino,  and  at  the  festival  of  the  heroine  the
people  threw  barle3'-cakes  into  the  water.  When
the  cakes  sank  it  was  considered  a  propitious  sign,
but  when  they  swam  on  the  surface  it  was  an  evil
sign.  (Fans.  iii.  23.  §  5.)  An  annual  festival,
with  contests  and  sacrifices,  in  honour  of  Ino,  was
also  held  on  the  Corinthian  Isthmus,  and  was  said
to  have  been  instituted  by  king  Sisyphus.  (Tzetzes,
ad  Lycophr.)  [L.  S.]

INOFFICIO'SUM  TESTAME'NTUM.
[Testamentum.]

INQUILFNUS.     [ExsiLiUM,  p.  516,  b.]

INSA'NIA,  INSA'NUS.     [Curator.]

INSIGNE  ((XrjfjLuov,  eTTitrTjytia,  iiri<n]fiov,  irapd-
crr)iJ.of^\  a  badge,  an  ensign,  a  mark  of  distinction.
Thus  the  Bulla  worn  by  a  Roman  boy  was  one
of  the  insignia  of  his  rank.  (Cic.  Verr.  ii.  58.)
Five  classes  of  insignia  more  especially  deserve
notice  :  —

I.  Those  belonging  to  officers  of  state  or  civil
functionaries  of  all  descriptions,  such  as  the  Fasces
carried  before  the  Consul  at  Rome,  tlie  laticlave
and  shoes  worn  by  senators  [Calceus  ;  Clavus],
the  carpentum  and  the  sword  bestowed  by  the
emperor  upon  the  praefcct  of  the  praetorium.
(Lydus,  de  Mag.  ii.  3.  9.)  The  Roman  Equites
were  diBtinguished  by  the  "  equus  publicus,"  the


INSIGNE.

golden  ring,  the  angustus  clavus  [p.  294],  and  the
seat  provided  for  them  in  the  theatre  and  the  circus.
(C.  G.  Schwartz,  Diss.  Selectae,  pp.  84— 1 01.)  The
insignia  of  the  kings  of  Rome,  viz.  the  trabea,  the
toga-praetexta,  the  crown  of  gold,  the  ivory  sceptre,
the  sella  curulis,  and  the  twelve  lictors  with  fasces,
all  of  which  except  the  crown  and  sceptre  were
transferred  to  subsequent  denominations  of  magis-
strates,  were  copied  from  the  usages  of  the  Etrus-
cans and  other  nations  of  early  antiquity.  (Flor.
i.  5  ;  Sallust,  B.  Cat.  51 ;  Virg.  Aen.  vii.*188,  612,
xi.  334  ;  Lydus,  de  Mag.  i.  7,  8,  37.)

II.  Badges  worn  by  soldiers.  The  centurions
in  the  Roman  army  were  known  by  the  crests  of
their  helmets  [Galea],  and  the  common  men  by
their  shields,  each  cohort  having  them  painted  in  a
manner  peculiar  to  itself.  (Veget.  ii.  18  ;  compare
Caes.  Dell.  Gall.  vii.  45.)  [Clipeus.]  Among
the  Greeks  the  devices  sculptured  or  painted  upon
shields  (see  woodcut,  p.  298),  both  for  the  sake
of  ornament  and  as  badges  of  distinction,  em-
ployed the  fancy  of  poets  and  of  artists  of  every
description  from  the  earliest  times.  Thus  the
seven  heroes  who  fought  against  Thebes,  all  ex-
cept Amphiaraus,  had  on  their  shields  expressive
figures  and  mottoes,  differently  described,  however,
by  different  authors.  (Aeschyl.  Sept.  c.  Theb.  583
— 646;  Eurip.  Flioen.  1125 — 1156;  Apollodor.
Bibl.  iii.  6.  §  1.)  Alcibiades,  agreeably  to  his
general  character,  wore  a  shield  richly  decorated
with  ivcr}'  and  gold,  and  exhibiting  a  representa-
tion of  Cupid  brandishing  a  thunderbolt.  (Athen.
xii,  p.  534,  e.)  The  first  use  of  these  emblems  on
shields  is  attributed  to  the  Carians  (Herod,  i.  171)  ;
and  the  fictitious  employment  of  them  to  deceive
and  mislead  an  enemy  was  among  the  stratagems
of  war.  (Pans,  iv.28.  §3  ;  Virg.  ^e«.ii.  389—392.)

III.  Family  badges.  Among  the  indignities
practised  by  the  Emperor  Caligula,  it  is  related
that  he  abolished  the  ancient  insignia  of  the
noblest  families,  viz.  the  torques,  the  cincinni,  and
the  cognomen  "  Magnus."     (Sueton.  Calig.  35.)

IV.  Signs  placed  on  the  front  of  buildings.  A
figure  of  Mercury  was  the  common  sign  of  a
Gymnasium  ;  but  Cicero  had  a  statue  of  Minerva
to  fulfil  the  same  purpose.  {Ad  Ait.  i.  4.)  Cities
had  their  emblems  as  well  as  separate  edifices  ;
and  the  officer  of  a  city  sometimes  affixed  the
emblem  to  public  documents  as  we  do  the  seal  of  a
municipal  corporation.     (Antigonus  Caryst.  1 5.)

V.  The  figure-heads  of  ships.  The  insigne  of  a
ship  was  an  image  placed  on  the  prow,  and  giving
its  name  to  the  vessel.  (Tacit.  Ann.  vi.  34  ;  Caes.
B.  Civ.  ii.  6.)  Paul  sailed  from  Melite  to  Puteoli
in  the  Dioscuri,  a  vessel  which  traded  between
that  cit)--  and  Alexandria.  {Acts.,  xxviii.  11.)
Enschede  has  drawn  out  a  list  of  one  hundred
names  of  ships,  which  occur  either  in  classical
authors  or  in  ancient  inscriptions.  {Diss,  de  Tut.
et  Insignihus  Navium,  reprinted  in  Ruhnken,
Opusc.  pp.  257 — 305.)  The  names  were  those  of
gods  and  heroes,  together  with  their  attributes,
such  as  the  helmet  of  Minerva,  painted  on  the
prow  of  the  ship  which  conveyed  Ovid  to  Pontus
(a  picta  casside  nomen  habet,  Trist.  i.  9.  2)  ;  of
virtues  and  affections,  as  Hope,  Concord,  Victory ;
of  countries,  cities,  and  rivers,  as  the  Po,  the  Min-
cius  (Virg.  Aen.  x.  206),  the  Delia,  the  Syracuse,
the  Alexandria  (Athen.  v.  43)  ;  and  of  men,
women,  and  animals,  as  the  boar's  head,  which
distinguished  the  vessels  of  Samos  (Herod,  iii.  59  J


INSTITORIA  ACTIO.

Choerilus,  p.  155,  ed.  Naeke  ;  Hesych.  s.  v.  2a-
/j-iaKhs  rponos  :  Eu3t.  in  Horn.  Od.  xiii.  p.  525),
the  swan,  the  tiger  (Virg.  Aen.  x.  166),  the
bull  {TTpoTO[j^)i/  ravpov,  Schol.  in  ApolL  Rhod.
ii.  168).  Plutarch  mentions  a  Lycian  vessel  with
the  sign  of  tlie  lion  on  its  prow,  and  that  of
the  serpent  on  its  poop,  manifestly  intended  to
express  the  form  of  the  chimaera.  (£>e  Mul.
Viti.  p,  441,  ed.  Steph.)  After  an  engagement  at
sea,  the  insigne  of  a  conquered  vessel,  as  well  ag
its  aplustre,  w^as  often  taken  from  it  and  suspended
in  some  temple  as  an  offering  to  the  god.  (Plut.
Themist.  p.  217.)  Figure-heads  were  probably  used
from  the  first  origin  of  navigation.  On  the  war-
gallej^s  of  the  Phoenicians,  who  called  them,  as
Herodotus  says  (iii.  37),  Trarat/coi,  i.  e.  *'  carved
images,"  they  had  sometimes  a  ver}^  grotesque
appearance.

Besides  the  badge  which  distinguished  each
individual  ship,  and  which  was  either  an  engraved
and  painted  wooden  image  forming  part  of  the
prow,  or  a  figure  often  accompanied  by  a  name
and  painted  on  both  the  bows  of  the  vessel,  other
insignia,  which  could  be  elevated  or  lowered  at
pleasure,  were  requisite  in  naval  engagements.
These  were  probably  flags  or  standards,  fixed  to
the  aplustre  or  to  the  top  of  the  mast,  and  serving
to  mark  all  those  vessels  which  belonged  to  the
same  fleet  or  to  the  same  nation.  Such  were  "  the
Attic  "  and  "  the  Persic  signals  "  (jh  "•ArriKhv  ar]-
fjt.e7oy^  Polyaen.  iii.  11.  §  11,  viii.  53.  §  1  ;  Becker,
C/uiriklcs,  vol.  ii.  p.  63).  A  purple  sail  indicated
the  admiral's  ship  among  the  Romans,  and  flags  of
different  colours  were  used  in  the  fleet  of  Alexander
the  Great.     (Plin.  H.  N.  xix.  5.)  [J.  Y.]

I'NSTITA  (irepiirSSiov),  a  flounce  ;  a  fillet.
The  Roman  matrons  sometimes  wore  a  broad  fillet
with  ample  folds,  sewed  to  the  bottom  of  the  tunic
and  reaching  to  the  instep.  The  use  of  it  indi-
cated a  superior  regard  to  decency  and  propriety  of
manners.  (Hor.  Sat  i.  2.  29  ;  Ovid,  Ars  Amat.  i.
32.)  It  must  have  resembled  a  modern  flounce.
By  the  addition  of  gold  and  jewellery  it  took  the
form  of  the  more  splendid  and  expens-ive  Cyclas.

When  this  term  denoted  a  fillet,  which  was
used  by  itself,  as  in  the  decoration  of  a  Thyrsus
(Stat.  Theh.  vii.  654),  it  was  equivalent  to  Vitta
or  Fascia.     [Tunica.]  [J.  Y.]

FNSTITOR,     [Institoria  Actio.]

INSTITO'RIA  ACTIO.  This  actio  was  al-
lowed against  a  man  who  had  appointed  either
his  son  or  a  slave,  and  either  his  own  or  another
man's  slave,  or  a  free  person,  to  manage  a  taberna
or  any  other  business  for  him.  The  contracts  with
such  manager,  in  respect  of  the  taberna  or  other
business,  were  considered  to  be  contracts  with  the
principal.  The  formula  was  called  Institoria,  be-
cause ha  who  was  appointed  to  manage  a  taberna
was  called  an  Institor.  And  the  institor,  it  is  said,
was  so  called,  "  quod  negotio  gerendo  instet  sive
insistat."  If  several  persons  appointed  an  institor,
any  one  of  them  might  be  sued  for  the  whole
amount  for  which  the  persons  were  liable  on  the
contract  of  their  institor  ;  and  if  one  paid  the  de-
mand, he  had  his  redress  over  against  the  others
by  a  societatis  judicium  or  communi  dividundo.  A
great  deal  of  business  was  done  through  the  medium
of  institores,  and  the  Romans  thus  carried  on  various
lucrative  occupations  in  the  name  of  their  slaves,
which  they  could  not  or  would  not  have  carried  on
personally.     Institores  are  coupled  with  Nautae  by


INSTITUTIONES.


63I>


Horace  {Ep.  xvii.  20),  and  with  the  Magister  Navia
{Carm.  iii.  6.  30).  (Gains,  iv.  71  ;  Instit.  iv.
tit.  7  ;  Dig.  14.  tit.  3.)  [G.  L.]

INSTITUTIO'NES.  It  was  the  object  of
Justinian  to  comprise  in  his  Code  and  Digest  or
Pandect,  a  complete  body  of  law.  But  these  works
were  not  adapted  to  elementary  instruction,  and
the  writings  of  the  ancient  jurists  were  no  longer
allowed  to  have  any  authority,  except  so  far  as
they  had  been  incorporated  in  the  Digest.  It  was,
therefore,  necessary  to  prepare  an  elementary  trea-
tise, for  which  purpose  Justinian  appointed  a  com-
mission, consisting  of  Tribonianus,  Theophilus,  and
Dorotheus.  The  commission  was  instructed  to  com-
pose an  institutional  work  which  should  contain  the
elements  of  the  law  {lexjum  cunabula),  and  should
not  be  encumbered  with  useless  matter  {Frooem.
Inst.).  Accordingly,  they  produced  a  treatise,
under  the  title  of  Institutiones,  or  Elementa  {De
Juris  docendi  Ratiotie),  which  was  based  on  former
elementary  works  of  the  same  name  and  of  a  simi-
lar character,  but  chiefly  on  the  Commentarii  of
Cains  or  Gaius,  his  Res  Quotidianae,  and  various
other  Commentarii.  The  Institutiones  were  pub-
lished with  the  imperial  sanction,  at  the  close  of
the  year  a.  d.  533,  at  the  same  time  as  the  Digest.

The  Institutiones  consist  of  four  books,  which  are
divided  into  titles.  They  treat  only  of  Privatum
Jus  ;  but  there  is  a  title  on  Judicia  Publica  at  the
end  of  the  fourth  book.  The  judicia  publica  are  not
treated  of  by  Gaius  in  his  Commentaries.  Hein-
eccius,  in  his  Antiquitatum  Romanarum  Jurispru-
dentiam  illustrantium  Syntagma,  has  followed  the
order  of  the  Institutiones.  Theophilus,  generally
considered  to  be  one  of  the  compilers  of  the  Institu-
tiones, wrote  a  Greek  paraphrase  upon  them,  whicli
is  still  extant,  and  is  occasionally  useful.  The  best
edition  of  the  paraphrase  of  Theophilus  is  that  of
W.  0.  Reitz,  Haag,  1751,  2  vols.  4to.  There  are
numerous  editions  of  the  Latin  text  of  the  Institu-
tiones. The  editio  princcps  is  that  of  Mainz,  1468,
fol.  ;  that  of  Klenze  and  Boecking,  Berlin,  1829,
4to,  contains  both  the  Institutiones  and  the  Com-
mentarii of  Gaius  ;  the  most  recent  edition  is  that
of  Schrader,  Berlin,  1832  and  1836.

There  were  various  institutional  works  written
hj  the  Roman  jurists.  Callistratus,  who  lived
under  Septimius  Severus  and  Antoninus  Caracalla,
wrote  three  books  of  Institutiones.  Aelius  Mar-
cianus  wrote  sixteen  books  of  Institutiones  under
Antoninus  Caracalla.  Florentinus,  who  lived  under
Alexander  Severus,  wrote  twelve  books  of  Institu-
tiones, from  which  there  are  forty-two  excerpts  in
the  Digest.  Paulus  also  wrote  two  books  of  Insti-
tutiones. There  still  remain  fragments  of  the
Institutiones  of  Ulpian,  which  appear  to  have  con-
sisted of  two  books.  But  the  first  treatise  of  this
kind  that  we  know  of  was  the  Institutiones  of
Gaius  in  four  books.  They  were  fonnerly  only
known  from  a  few  excerpts  in  the  Digest,  from  the
Epitome  contained  in  the  Breviarium,  from  the
Collatio,  and  a  few  quotations  in  the  Commentary
of  Boethius  on  the  Topica  of  Cicero,  and  in  Priscian.

The  MS.  of  Gaius  was  discovered  in  the  library
of  the  Chapter  of  Verona,  by  Niebuhr,  in  1816.
It  was  first  copied  by  Goeschen  and  Bethman-
Hollweg,  and  an  edition  was  published  by  Goe-
schen in  1820.  The  deciphering  of  the  MS.  was
a  work  of  great  labour,  as  it  is  a  palimpsest,  the
writing  on  which  has  been  washed  out,  and  in
some  places  erased  with  a  knife,  in  order  to  adapt


640


INSTITUTIONES.


the  parchment  for  the  purposes  of  the  transcriber.
The  parchment,  after  being  thus  treated,  was  used
for  transcribing  upon  it  some  works  of  Jerome,
chiefly  his  epistles.  The  old  writing  was  so  ob-
scure that  it  could  only  be  seen  by  applying  to  it
an  infusion  of  gaU-nuts.  A  fresh  examination  of
the  MS.  was  made  by  Blume,  but  Avith  little  ad-
ditional profit,  owing  to  the  condition  of  the  manu-
script. A  second  edition  of  Gaius  was  published
by  Goeschen  in  1824,  with  valuable  notes,  and  an
Index  Siglarmii  used  in  the  MS.  The  preface  to
the  first  edition  contains  the  complete  demonstra-
tion that  the  MS.  of  Verona  is  the  genuine  Com-
mentarii  of  Gaius,  though  the  MS.  itself  has  no
title.  An  improved  edition  of  Goeschen's  by  Lach-
mann  appeared  in  1842.

It  appears  from  the  Institutiones  that  Gaius
wrote  that  work  under  Antoninus  Pius  and  M.
Aurelius.

Many  passages  in  the  Fragments  of  Ulpian  are
the  same  as  passages  in  Gaius,  which  may  be  ex-
plained by  assuming  that  both  these  writers  copied
such  parts  from  the  same  original.  Though  the
Institutiones  of  Justinian  were  mainly  based  on
those  of  Gaius  the  compilers  of  the  Institutiones  of
Justinian  sometimes  followed  other  works  :  thus
the  passage  in  the  Institutes  (ii.  tit.  17.  §  2,  "si
quis  priori  ")  is  from  the  fourth  book  of  Marcianus'
Institutes  (Dig.  36,  tit.  1.  s.  29)  ;  and,  in  some  in-
stances, the  Institutiones  of  Justinian  are  more
clear  and  explicit  than  those  of  Gaius.  An  in-
stance of  this  occurs  in  Gaius  (iii.  109)  and  the
Institutiones  of  Justinian  (iii.  tit.  19.  s.  10).

Gaius  belonged  to  the  school  of  the  Sabiniani
[JuRiscoNSULTi].  The  Jurists  whom  he  cites  in
the  Institutiones,  are  Cassius,  Fufidius,  Javolenus,
Julianus,  Labeo,  Maximus,  Q.  Mucins,  Ofilius,
Proculus,  Sabinus,  Servius,  Servius  Sulpicius,  Sex-
tus,  Tubero.

The  arrangement  of  the  Institutes  of  Justinian
is  the  same  as  that  of  the  work  of  Gaius  ;  what-
ever difference  there  is  between  them  in  this  re-
spect, is  solely  owing  to  the  changes  in  the  Roman
law,  which  had  been  made  between  the  time  of  Gaius
and  that  of  Justinian.  There  has  been  considerable
difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  nature  of  the  ar-
rangement of  Gaius ;  and  it  is  obvious  that  most
persons  have  misunderstood  it.  According  to  Gaius  :
"  omne  jus  quo  utimur  vol  ad  personas  pertinet,
vel  ad  res,  vel  ad  actlones  "  (i.  8).  It  is  generally
supposed  that  the  division  (the  first  book)  which
treats  of  Persons  comprehends  the  status  or  con-
dition of  persons  as  the  subjects  of  rights  ;  others
affirm  that  it  treats  of  legal  capacity,  or  of  the
three  conditions  which  correspond  to  the  threefold
capitis  deminutio.  But  the  first  book  of  Gaius
which  treats  of  Persons  contains  both  matter  which
lias  nothing  to  do  with  legal  capacity,  and  it  does
not  contain  all  that  relates  to  legal  capacity,  for  it
does  not  treat  of  one  of  three  chief  divisions  which
relate  to  legal  capacity,  that  of  Gives,  Latini,  Pere-
i,'rini.  It  treats  in  fact  only  of  Marriage,  Patria
Potestas,  Manus,  Slavery,  Patronatus  with  respect
to  the  different  classes  of  freed  men,  Mancipium
and  Tutela.  Accordingly,  this  part  of  the  work
treats  only  of  persons  so  far  as  they  belong  to
Familia,  in  the  widest  and  Roman  acceptation  of
that  term.  The  part  which  treats  of  res  com-
prehends the  Law  of  ownership,  &c.  and  Law  of
Obligatione.s,  which  two  divisions  occupy  the  se-
cond and  third  books.     The  fourth  book  treats  of


INTERCESSIO.

Actlones,  which  is  the  third  of  the  three  divisioni?
of  Gaius.  The  division  of  Gaius  is  faulty  in  several
respects  ;  but  this  does  not  detract  from  the  merit
of  the  work,  which  is  perspicuous  and  abounds  in
valuable  matter.  This  view  of  the  nature  of  the
division  of  Gaius  is  from  Savigny.  {System,  &c.,
vol.  i.  p.  393,  &c.)  [G.  L.]

INSTITUTO'RIA  ACTIO.    [Intercessio.}

I'NSULA.     [DoMUs,  p.  430,  a.]

FNTEGRUM  RESTITUTIO,  IN.  [Re-
stitutio.]

INTE'NTIO.     [Actio.]

INTERCE'SSTO.  It  is  a  case  of  Intercessio
when  a  man  takes  upon  himself  the  debt  of  another
by  virtue  of  some  dealing  with  the  creditor.  This
may  be  in  either  of  the  following  ways :  he  who
intercedes  may  take  upon  himself  the  debt  of
another,  and  may  become  debtor  in  place  of  that
other :  or  the  intercedent  may  become  debtor  while
the  debtor  still  continues  debtor.  (Vangerow,
Pandekten,  &c.  vol.  iii.  p.  133,  &c.)

To  the  first  class  belong  (1)  the  case  of  a  man
undertaking  an  already  existing  obligatio,  so  as  to
exclude  the  existing  debtor  ;  (2.)  And  the  case  of  a
man  taking  an  obligatio  on  him'self,  which  does
not  already  exist  in  the  person  of  another,  but  which
without  such  intervention  would  exist.

To  the  second  class  belong  (1),  the  case  when
the  creditor  may  consider  either  the  original  debtor
or  the  intercedent  as  his  principal  debtor,  or  when,
in  other  words,  the  intercedent  is  correus  debendi
(Inst.  iii.  tit.  16.  De  duobus  reis  stipulandi  et
promittendi)  ;  (2)  When  the  creditor  can  consider
the  intercedent  only  as  liable  to  pay,  when  the
principal  debtor  does  not  pay,  or  when  in  other
words,  the  intercedent  is  a  fidejussor.  (Inst.  iii.
tit.  20,  de  Fidejussoribus.)

The  views  of  Puchta  as  to  the  Intercessio  are
contained  in  his  histUidionen,  vol.  iii.  p.  48,  &c.)

In  the  Institutes  of  Gaius,  a  distinction  is  made
between  sponsores  and  fidepromissores,  on  one  side;
and  fidejussores  on  the  other.  With  respect  to  one
another,  sponsores  were  consponsores.  (Cic.  ad  Att.
xii.  1 7.)  In  the  Institutes  of  Justinian,  the  dis-
tinction between  sponsores  and  fidejussores  does  not
exist.

Sponsores  and  fidepromissores  could  only  become
parties  to  an  obligatio  verborum,  though  in  some
cases  they  might  be  bound,  when  their  principal
{qzd  promiserit)  was  npt,  as  in  the  case  of  a  pupillus
who  promised  without  the  auctoritas  of  his  tutor,
or  of  a  man  who  promised  something  after  his
death.  A  fidejussor  might  become  a  party  to  all
obligations,  whether  contracted  re,  verbis,  litteris,  or
consensu.  In  the  case  of  a  sponsor  the  interrogatio
was.  Idem  dari  spondes  ?  in  the  case  of  a  fidepro-
missor,  it  was,  Idem  fidepromittis  ?  in  the  case  of
a  fidejussor,  it  was.  Idem  fide  tua  esse  jubes  ?  The
object  of  having  a  sponsor,  fidepromissor,  or  fide-
jussor, was  greater  security  to  the  stipulator.  On
the  other  hand,  the  stipulator  had  an  adstiptilator
only  when  the  promise  was  to  pay  something  after
the  stipulator's  death,  for  if  there  was  no  adstipu-
lator  the  stipulatio  was  inutilis  or  void.  (Gaius,
iii.  100,  117.)  The  adstipulator  was  the  proper
party  to  sue  after  the  stipulator's  death,  and  he  could
be  compelled  by  a  mandati  judicium  to  pay  to  the
heres  whatever  he  recovered.

The  heres  of  a  sponsor  and  fide])romissor  was
not  bound,  unless  the  fidepromissor  were  a  pcre-
grinus,  whose  state    had   a  diti'erent   law  on  tha


INTERCESSIO.

Vnattor  ;  but  the  heres  of  a  fidejussor  was  bound.
By  the  Lex  Furia,  a  sponsor  and  fidepromissor
were  fre*?  from  all  liability  after  two  years,  which
appears  to  mean  two  years  after  the  obligation  had
become  a  present  demand  ;  but  the  Lex  Furia  only
applied  to  Italy.  All  of  them  who  were  alive  at
the  time  when  the  money  became  due  could  be
sued,  but  each  only  for  his  share  (si?if/uli  viriles
partes).  Fidejussores  were  never  released  from  their
obligation  by  length  of  time,  and  each  was  liable
for  the  whole  sum  (singuli  in  solidum  ohlujantur)  ;
but  by  a  rescript  (ejustola)  of  Hadrian,  the  creditor
was  required  to  sue  the  solvent  fidejussores  sepa-
rately, each  according  to  his  proportion.  If  any
one  of  them  was  not  solvent,  his  share  became  a
burden  to  the  rest.

A  Lex  Apuleia,  which  was  passed  before  the
Lex  Furia,  gave  one  of  several  sponsores  or  fide-
promissores,  who  had  paid  more  than  his  share,  an
action  against  the  rest  for  contribution.  Before
the  passing  of  this  Lex  Apuleia,  any  one  sponsor  or
fidepromissor  might  be  sued  for  the  whole  amount ;
but  this  lex  was  obviously  rendered  useless  by  the
subsequent  Lex  Furia,  at  least  in  Italy,  to  which
country  alone,  as  already  observed,  the  Lex  Furia
applied,  while  the  Lex  Apuleia  extended  to  place§
out  of  Italy  ;  yet  not  to  fidejussores.

A  fidejussor,  who  had  been  compelled  to  pay
the  whole  amount,  had  no  redress  if  his  principal
was  insolvent  ;  though,  as  already  observed,  he
could  by  the  rescript  of  Hadrian  compel  the  credi-
tor to  limit  his  demand  against  him  to  his  share.

A  creditor  was  obliged  formally  to  declare  his
cicceptance  of  the  sponsores  or  fidepromissores  who
were  offered  to  him,  and  also  to  declare  what  was
the  object  as  to  which  they  were  securitj  ;  if  he
did  not  comply  with  this  legal  requisition,  the
sponsores  and  fidepromissores  might,  within  thirty
days  (it  is  not  said  what  thirty  days,  but  probably
thirty  days  from  the  time  of  the  sureties  being
offered),  demand  a  praejudiciura  {praejudicium  pos-
tulare)^  and  if  they  proved  that  the  creditor  had
not  complied  with  the  requisitions  of  the  law,  they
were  released.     (Gains,  iii.  123.)

A  Lex  Cornelia  limited  the  amount  for  which
any  person  could  be  a  security  for  the  same  person
to  tlic  same  person  within  the  same  year,  but  with
some  exceptions,  one  of  which  was  a  security
"  dotis  nomine."  No  person  could  be  bound  in  a
greater  amount  than  his  principal,  but  he  might  be
bound  in  less  ;  and  every  surety  could  recover  on
a  mandati  judicium  from  his  principal  whatever  he
had  been  compelled  to  pay  on  his  account.  By  a
Lex  Publilia  sponsores  had  a  special  action  in
duplum,  which  was  called  an  actio  depensi.

There  is  a  passage  in  the  Epitome  of  Gains  in
the  Breviarium  (ii.  9.  §  2),  which  is  not  taken
from  Gains :  it  is  to  this  effect :  —  The  creditor  may
8U'i  either  the  debtor  or  his  fidejussor ;  but  after  he
has  chosen  to  sue  one  of  them,  he  cannot  sue  the
other.  —  Cicero  appears  to  allude  to  the  same  doc-
trine (ad  Att  xvi,  15)  in  a  passage  which  is  some-
what obscure,  and  is  variously  explained.  The
subject  of  the  sponsio  often  occurs  in  Cicero's
letters  ;  and  in  one  case  he  was  called  upon  in  re-
spect of  a  sponsio  alleged  to  have  been  given  by
him  twenty-five  years  before  (ad  Att.  xii.  17).
Cicero  uses  the  expression  "  appellare  "  to  express
callin?  on  a  surety  to  pay  (ad  Att.  i.  8).

(Oaius,  iii.  115—127  ;  Inst.  iii.  tit.  20  ;  Dig.  It.
tit.  7;  46.  tit.  1.)


INTERCESSIO.


64]


Women  generally  were  incapacitated  from  doing
many  acts  on  account  of  the  weakness  of  the  sex.
It  was  a  genci-al  rule  that  any  person  might  "  in-
tercedere,"  who  was  competent  to  contract  and  to
dispose  of  his  property  ;  but  minores  xxv  and  wo-
men had  only  a  limited  capacity  in  respect  of  their
contracts  and  the  disposition  of  their  estates.  In
the  early  part  of  the  reign  of  Augustus  and  in  that
of  Claudius,  it  was  declared  by  the  Edict  that  wo-
men should  not  "  intercedere  "  for  their  husbands.
Subsequently  tiie  Senatusconsultum  Velleianum
[Sknatusconsultum  VelleiaisUm]  absolutely
proliibited  all  Intercessio  by  women  ;  and  the
Novella  1 34.  c.  8,  had  for  its  special  object  to  make
null  all  Intercessio  of  a  wife  for  her  husband.  A
woman  who  was  sued  in  respect  of  her  Intercessio,
or  her  heres,  might  plead  the  Senatusconsultum,
and  she  might  recover  anything  that  she  had  paid
in  respect  of  her  Intercessio.  The  Senatusconsultum,
though  it  made  null  the  intercessio  of  a  woman,
protected  the  creditor  so  far  as  to  restore  to  him  a
former  right  of  action  against  his  debtor  and  fide-
jussores :  this  action  was  called  Restitutoria  or
Rescissoria.  In  the  case  of  a  new  contract,  to
which  the  woman  was  a  partj',  the  Intercessio  was
null  by  the  Senatusconsultum,  and  the  creditor  had
the  same  action  against  the  person  for  whom  the
woman  "  intercessit,"  as  he  would  have  had
against  the  woman  :  this  action,  inasmuch  as  the
contract  had  no  reference  to  a  former  right,  but  to
a  right  arising  out  of  the  contract,  was  Institutoria.
In  certain  cases,  a  woman  was  permitted  to  re-
nounce the  benefit  of  the  Senatusconsultum  ;  and
there  Avas  a  considerable  number  of  exceptions  to
the  rule  that  a  Avoman  could  plead  the  senatus-
consultum.

(Dig.  16.  tit.  1.  ad  S.  C.  Velleianum  ;  Paulus,
S.  R.  ii.  tit.  1 1  ;  Vangerow,  Fandehten^  &c.  iii.
p.  149.)  [G.  L.]

INTERCE'SSIO  was  the  interference  of  ama-
gistratus  to  whom  an  appeal  [Appellatio]  was
made.  The  object  of  the  Intercessio  was  to  put  a
stop  to  proceedings,  on  the  ground  of  informality
or  other  sufficient  cause.  Any  magistratus  might
"  intercedere,"  who  was  of  equal  rank  with  or  of
rank  superior  to  the  magistratus  from  or  agaiiist
whom  the  appellatia  was.  Cases  occur  in  which
one  of  the  praetors  interposed  (intercessit)  against
the  proceedings  of  ■  his  colleague.  (Cic.  in  Verr.
I.  46.)

The  Intercessio  is  most  frequently  spoken  of  with
reference  to  the  Tribunes  who  originally  had  not
jurisdictio,  but  used  the  Intercessio  for  the  purpose
of  preventing  wrong  which  was  offered  to  a  person
in  their  presence  (Gell.  xiii.  12).  The  Intercessio
of  the  Tribunes  of  the  Plebs,  was  Auxilium  (Liv.
vi.  38  ;  Cic.  pro  Q?untio,  7,  20)  ;  and  it  might  be
exercised  either  in  jure  or  in  judicio.  The  tribune
qui  intercessit  could  prevent  a  judicium  from  being
instituted.  That  there  could  be  an  Intercessio
after  the  Litis  Contestatio  appears  from  Cicero
(pro  Tvllio,  38).  The  tribunes  could  also  use
the  Intercessio  to  prevent  execution  of  a  judicial
sentence.  (Liv.  vi.  27.)  T.  Gracchus  interfered
(intercessit)  against  the  praetor  Terentius,  who  was
going  to  order  execution,  in  the  case  of  L.  Scipio
who  was  condemned  for  peculation  (Liv.  xxxviii.
60  ;  Gell.  vii.  19),  and  he  prevented  Scipio  being
sent  to  prison,  but  he  did  not  interfere  to  prevent
execution  being  had  on  his  property.  A  single
tribune  could  effect  this,  and  against  the  opinion  of


642


TNTERDICTUM.


his  colleagues,  which  was  the  case  in  the  matter  of
L.  Scipio.   [Tribunl]

The  term  Intercessio  and  the  verb  intercedo
also  applied  to  the  tribunitian  opposition  to  a  roga-
tio,  (Liv.  vi,  35  ;  Cic.  de  Orat.  ii.  47.)        [G.  L.]

INTERCrSI  DIES.     [Dies.]

INTERCOLU'MNIA.     [Templum.]

INTERDFCTIO  AQUAE  ET  IGNIS.  [Ex-
siLiUM,  p.  516,  b.]

INTERDICTUM.  "  In  certain  cases  {certis
ex  causis)  the  praetor  or  proconsul,  in  the  first  in-
stance (prindpaliier),  exercises  his  authority  for
the  termination  of  disputes.  This  he  chiefly  does
when  the  dispute  is  about  Possession  or  Quasi-
possession  ;  and  the  exercise  of  his  authority  con-
sists in  ordering  something  to  be  done,  or  forbidding
something  to  be  done.  The  formulae  and  the
terms,  which  he  uses  on  such  occasions,  are  called
either  Interdicta  or  Decreta.  They  are  called  De-
creta  when  he  orders  something  to  be  done,  as
when  he  orders  something  to  be  produced  (eccldberi)
or  to  be  restored  :  they  are  called  Interdicta  when
he  forbids  something  to  be  done,  as  when  he  orders
that  force  shall  not  be  used  against  a  person  who
is  in  possession  rightfully  (mie  vitio),  or  that  no-
thing shall  be  done  on  a  piece  of  sacred  ground.
Accordingly  all  Interdicta  are  either  Restitutoria,  or
Exhibitoria,orProhibitoria."  (Gaius,  iv.  139,  140.)

This  passage  contains  the  essential  distinction
between  an  Actio  and  an  Interdictum,  so  far  as
the  praetor  or  proconsul  is  concerned.  In  the  case
of  an  Actio,  the  praetor  pronounces  no  decree,  but
he  gives  a  Judex,  whose  business  it  is  to  investi-
gate the  matter  in  dispute,  and  to  pronounce  a
sentence  consistently  with  the  formula,  which  is
his  authority  for  acting.  In  the  case  of  an  Actio,
therefore,  the  praetor  neither  orders  nor  forbids  a
thing  to  be  done,  but  he  says  Judicium  dabo.  In
the  case  of  an  Interdict,  the  praetor  makes  an
order  that  something  shall  be  done  or  shall  not  be
done,  and  his  words  are  accordingly  words  of  com-
mand :  Restituas,  Exhibeas,  Vim  fieri  veto.  This
immecliate  interposition  of  the  praetor  is  appropri-
ately expressed  by  the  word  "  principaliter,"  the
full  eifect  of  which  is  more  easily  seen  by  its  juxta-
position with  the  other  words  of  the  passage,
than  by  any  attempt  to  find  an  equivalent  English
expression.

Savigny  observes  that  it  may  be  objected  to  this
exposition,  that  in  one  of  the  most  important  In-
terdicts, that  De  Vi,  the  formula  is.  Judicium  dabo.
(Dig.  43,  tit.  16.  s.  1.)  But,  as  he  observes,  the
old  genuine  formula  was,  Restituas  (Cic.  pro
Caecin.  8,  30)  ;  and  the  "  Judicium  dabo  "  must
have  been  introduced  when  the  formulae  of  the
two  old  Interdicts  {De  Vi  Armata  and  De  Vi
Quotidiana)  were  blended  together,  and  at  a  time
when  the  distinctions  between  the  old  fonnulae
had  become  a  matter  of  indifference.

The  mode  of  proceeding  as  to  the  Interdict  was
as  follows :  —  The  party  aggrieved  stated  his  case
to  the  praetor,  which  was  the  foundation  of  his  de-
mand of  an  Interdict,  and  was  therefore  analogous
to  the  Postulatio  actionis.  If  the  praetor  saw
sufficient  reason,  he  might  grant  the  Interdict,
which  was  often  nothing  more  than  the  words  of
the  Edict  addressed  to  the  litigant  parties  ;  and  in
doing  so,  he  used  his  "  auctoritas  finiendis  contro-
versiis  "  in  the  first  instance,  or  immediately,  and
without  the  intervention  of  a  judex  (principaliter)^
and  aUo  "  certis  ex  causis,"  that  is,  in  cases  already


INTERDICTUM.

provided  for  by  the  Edict.  If  the  defendant  either
admitted  the  plaintiff's  case  before  the  interdict
was  granted,  and  complied  with  its  terms,  or  sub-
mitted to  the  interdict  after  it  was  granted,  the
dispute  was  of  course  at  an  end.  Thi-s  is  not
stated  by  Gaius,  but  follows  of  necessity  from  the
nature  of  the  case  ;  and  when  he  goes  on  to  say
"  that  when  the  praetor  has  ordered  any  thing  to
be  done  or  forbidden  anything  to  be  done,  the
matter  is  not  then  ended,  but  the  parties  go  before
a  judex  or  recuperatores,"  he  means  that  this  fur-
ther proceeding  takes  place,  if  the  praetor's  Inter-
dict does  not  settle  the  matter.  The  whole  form
of  proceeding  is  not  clearly  stated  by  some  modern
writers,  but  the  following  is  consistent  with  Gaius.

The  complainant  either  obtained  the  Interdict
or  he  did  not,  which  would  depend  on  the  case
that  he  made  out  before  the  praetor.  If  he  failed,
of  course  the  litigation  was  at  end  ;  and  if  he  ob-
tained the  interdict,  and  the  defendant  complied
with  its  terms,  the  matter  in  this  case  also  was  at
an  end.  If  the  defendant  simply  did  not  obey  the
terms  of  the  Interdict,  it  would  be  necessary  for
the  complainant  again  to  apply  to  the  praetor,  in
order  that  this  fact  might  be  ascertained,  and  that
the  plaintiff  might  give  full  satisfaction.  If  the
defendant  was  dissatisfied  with  the  Interdict,  he
might  also  apply  to  the  praetor  for  an  investigation
into  the  facts  of  the  case  :  his  allegation  might  be
that  tnere  was  originally  no  ground  for  the  Interdict.
He  might  also  apply  to  the  praetor  on  the  ground
that  he  had  satisfied  the  terms  of  the  Interdict,
though  the  plaintiff  was  not  satisfied,  or  on  the
ground  that  he  was  unable  to  do  more  than  he  had
done.  In  all  these  cases,  when  the  praetor's  order
did  not  terminate  the  dispute,  he  directed  an  in-
quiry by  certain  fonnulae,  which  were  the  instruc-
tion of  the  judex,  recuperatores,  or  arbiter.  Ac-
cordingly, the  process  of  the  Interdict  belonged
to  the  ordo  judiciorum  privatorum,  but  the  judi-
cium was  constituted  by  the  peculiar  process  of
the  Interdict.  The  inquiry  would  be.  Whether
anything  had  been  done  contrary  to  the  Praetors
Edict*  ;  or.  Whether  that  had  been  done,  which
he  had  ordered  to  be  done :  the  former  inquir)'
would  be  made  in  the  case  of  a  Prohibitory  Inter-
dict ;  and  the  latter  in  the  case  of  an  Exhibitoi7
or  Restitutory  Interdict.

In  the  case  of  Interdicta  Prohibitoria  there  was
always  a  sponsio  ;  that  is,  the  parties  were  re-
quired to  deposit  or  give  security  for  a  sum  of
money,  the  loss  of  which  was  in  the  nature  of  a
penalty  (  poena)  to  the  party  who  failed  before  the
judex  :  this  sponsio  was  probably  required  hj  the
praetor.  In  the  case  of  Interdicta  Restitutoria
and  Prohibitoria,  the  proceeding  was  sometimes
per  sponsionem,  and  therefore  before  a  judex  or  re-
cuperatores, and  sometimes,  without  any  sponsio,
per  formulam  arbitrariam,  that  is,  before  an  arbiter.
in  the  case  of  these  two  latter  Interdicts,  it  seems
to  have  depended  on  the  party  who  claimed  the
inquiry  whether  there  should  be  a  sponsio  or  not :
if  such  party  made  a  sponsio,  that  is,  proffered  to
pay  a  sum  of  money,  if  he  did  not  make  out  his

*  "  Edict "  is  the  word  used  by  Gaius,  but  he
means  Interdict.  He  uses  Edict,  because  the  In-
terdict would  only  be  granted  in  such  cases  as
were  provided  for  by  the  Edict  {certis  ex  causis)^
and  thus  an  Interdict  was  only  an  application  of
the  Edict  to  a  particular  case.


INTERDICTUM.

case,  the  opposite  party  was  required  to  make  one
also.  In  the  case  of  Caecina  (Cic.  pro  Caecin.  8)
a  sponsio  had  been  made  :  Cicero  says,  addressing
llie  recupenitores,  "  sponsio  facta  est :  hac  de  spon-
sione  vobis  judicandum  est."  In  fact,  when  the
matter  came  before  a  judex  or  arbiter,  the  form  of
proceedirg  vas  simikir  to  the  oidinary  judicium.

The  chief  division  of  Interdicts  has  been  stated.
The  various  purposes  to  which  they  were  appli-
cable appear  from  the  titles  ;  as,  Interdictum  de
Aqua,  de  Arboribus  caedendis,  de  Liberis  exhi-
bendis,  de  Rivis,  de  Superficiebus,  &c.

Another  division  of  Interdicts  was  into  those  for
the  purpose  of  acquiring  Possession,  retaining  pos-
session, or  recovering  possession.    (Gains,  iv.  144.)

The  Interdictum  adipisceudae  possessionis  was
given  to  him  to  whom  the  Bonorum  possessio
[BoNORUM  Possessio]  was  given,  and  it  is  referred
to  by  the  initial  words  Quorum  bonorum.  (Dig.
43.  tit.  2.  s.  1.)  Its  operation  was  to  compel  a
person,  who  had  possession  of  the  property  of
which  the  Bonorum  possessio  Avas  granted  to  an-
other, to  give  it  up  to  such  person,  whether  t*he
person  in  possession  of  such  property  possessed  it
pro  herede  or  pro  possessore.  The  Bonorum  Emtor
[Bonorum  Emtio]  was  also  entitled  to  this  In-
terdict, which  was  sometimes  called  Possessorium.
It  was  also  granted  to  him  who  bought  goods  at
public  auction,  and  in  such  case  was  called  Secto-
rium,  the  name  "  Sectores  "  being  applied  to  per-
sons who  bought  property  in  such  manner.  (Cic.
pro  Rose.  Am.  36.)

The  Interdictum  Salvianum  was  granted  to  the
owner  of  land,  and  enabled  him  to  take  possession
of  the  goods  of  the  colonus,  who  had  agreed  that
liis  goods  should  be  a  security  for  his  rent.  (Dig.
43.  tit.  3.)

This  Interdict  was  not  strictly  a  Possessorial
Interdict,  as  Savigny  has  shown  (Das  Recht  des
Besitzes,  p.  410  ;  Puchta,  histitutioncn,  &c.  ii,
§  225.)  It  did  not,  like  the  two  other  Interdicts,
presuppose  a  lawful  possession,  that  is,  a  Jus  pos-
sessionis acquired  by  the  fact  of  a  rightful  posses-
sion ;  the  complainant  neither  alleged  an  actual
possession  nor  a  former  possession.

The  Interdictum  retinendae  possessionis  could
only  be  granted  to  a  person  who  had  a  rightful
possessio,  and  he  was  intitled  to  it  in  respect  of
damages  sustained  by  being  disturbed  in  his  pos-
session, in  respect  of  anticipated  disturbance  in  his
possession,  and  in  the  case  of  a  dispute  as  to  owner-
mhip  in  which  the  matter  of  possession  was  first  to
be  inquired  into.  Its  effect  in  the  last  case  would
be,  as  Gains  states,  to  determine  which  of  two
litigant  parties  should  possess,  and  be  the  defend-
ant, and  which  should  be  the  claimant,  and  have
the  burden  of  proof.  There  were  two  Interdicts
of  this  class  named  respectively  Uti  Possidetis  and
Utrubi,  from  the  initial  words  of  the  Edict.  The
Interdictum  Uti  Possidetis  applied  to  land  or
houses,  and  the  other  to  moveables.  The  Uti
Possidetis  protected  the  person  who  at  the  time  of
obtaining  the  Interdict  was  in  actual  possession,
provided  he  had  not  obtained  the  possession  against
the  other  party  {adversarius)  vi,  clam,  or  precario,
which  were  the  three  vitia  possessionis.  (Festus,
s.  V.  Possessio  ;  Gains,  iv.  160.)  In  the  case  of  the
Interdictum  Utrubi,  the  possession  of  the  movable
thing  was  by  the  Interdict  declared  to  belong  to
him  who  had  possessed  the  thing  against  the  other
party  during  the  greater  part  of  that  year,  "  nee  vi


INTERDICTUM.  643

nee  clam  nee  precario."  There  were  some  peculi-
arities as  to  possessio  of  moveable  things.  (Gaius,
iv.  151.)

The  Interdictum  recuperandae  possessionis  might
be  claimed  by  him  who  had  been  forcibly  ejected
(vi  dejectus)  from  his  possession  of  an  immovable
thing,  and  its  effect  was  to  compel  the  wrong-
doer to  restore  the  possession,  and  to  make  good  all
damage.  The  initial  words  of  the  Interdict  were,
Unde  tu  ilium  vi  dejecisti ;  and  the  words  of  com-
mand were,  Eo  restituas.  (Cic,  pro  Caecin.  30,
pro  Tull.  4,  29,  44;  Gaius,  iv.  154;  Dig.  43.
tit.  16.  s.  1.)  There  were  two  cases  of  Vis:  one  of
Vis  simph',  to  which  the  ordinary  Interdict  applied,
which  Cicero  calls  Quotidianum  ;  the  other  of  Vis
Armata,  which  had  been  obtained  by  Caecina
against  Aebutius.  The  plaintiff  had  to  prove  that
he  was  in  possession  of  the  premises,  and  had  been
ejected  by  the  defendant  or  his  agents  {familia  or
procurator.,  Cic.  pro  Tull.  29.)  If  the  matter  came
before  a  judex  the  defendant  might  allege  that  he
had  complied  with  the  Interdict,  "  restituisse,"
though  he  had  not  done  so  in  fact ;  but  this  was
the  form  of  the  sponsio,  and  the  defendant  would
succeed  before  the  judex  if  he  could  show  that  he
was  not  bound  to  restore  the  plaintiff  to  his  pos-
session.    {Pro  Caecin.  8,  32.)

The  defendant  might  put  in  an  answer  {exceptio)
to  the  plaintiff's  claim  for  restitution:  he  might
show  that  the  plaintiff 's  possession  commenced
either  vi,  clam,  or  precario  with  respect  to  the
defendant  {pro  Caecin.  32,  pro  Tull.  44)  ;  but
this  exceptio  was  not  allowed  in  the  case  of  vis
armata.  {Pro  Caecin.  8,  32.)  The  defendant
might  also  plead  that  a  year  had  elapsed  since  the
violence  complained  of,  and  this  was  generally  a
good  plea  ;  for  the  Interdict  contained  the  words
"  in  hoc  anno."  But  if  the  defendant  was  still  in
possession  after  the  year,  he  could  not  make  this
plea  ;  nor  could  he  avail  himself  of  it  in  a  case  of
Vis  Armata.  {Cic.ad  Fam.xv.  16.)

A  clandestina  possessio  is  a  possessio  in  which
the  possessor  takes  a  thing  (which  must  of  course
be  a  movable  thing)  secretly  {furtive)  and  without
the  knowledge  of  the  person  whose  adverse  claim
to  the  possession  he  fears.  Such  a  possessio,  when
it  was  a  disturbance  of  a  rightful  possessio,  gave
the  rightful  possessor  a  title  to  have  the  Interdict
de  clandesthia  possessione  for  the  recovery  of  his
possession.  All  traces  of  this  interdict  are  nearly
lost  ;  but  its  existence  seems  probable,  and  it  must
have  had  some  resemblance  to  the  Interdictum  de
vi.  The  exceptio  clandestinae  possessionis  was
quite  a  different  thing,  inasmuch  as  a  clandestina
possessio  did  not  necessarily  suppose  the  lawful
possession  of  another  party.

The  Interdictum  de  Precaria  possessione  or  de
Precario  applied  to  a  case  of  Precarium.  It  is  Pre-
carium  when  a  man  permits  another  to  exercise
ownership  over  his  property,  but  retains  the  right
of  demanding  the  property  back  when  he  pleases.
It  is  called  Precarium  because  the  person  who
received  such  permission  usually  obtained  it  by
request  {prece)  ;  though  request  was  not  neces-
sary to  constitute  Precarium,  for  it  might  arise
by  tacit  permission.  (Paulus,  S.  R.  v,  tit.  6.  s.
11.)  The  person  who  received  the  detention  of
the  thing,  obtained  at  the  same  time  a  legal  posses-
sion, unless  provision  to  the  contrary  was  made  by
agreement.  In  cither  case  the  permission  could  at
a)»y  time  be  recalled,  and  the  possessio,  which  in
TT  2


644


INTERDICTUM.


Its  origin  was  justa,  became  injiista,  vitiosa,  as
soon  as  restitution  was  refused.  Restitution  could
be  claimed  by  the  Inter  dictum  de  Precario,  pre-
cisely as  in  the  case  of  Vis  ;  and  the  sole  founda-
tion of  the  right  to  this  Interdict  was  a  vitiosa
possessio,  as  just  explained.  The  Precarium  was
never  viewed  as  a  matter  of  contract.  The  Inter-
dictum  de  precario  originally  applied  to  land  only,
but  it  was  subsequently  extended  to  movable
things.  The  obligation  imposed  by  the  Edict  was
to  restore  the  thing,  but  not  its  value,  in  case  it
was  lost,  unless  dolus  or  lata  culpa  could  be  proved
against  the  defendant.  But  from  the  time  that
the  demand  is  made  against  the  defendant,  he  is
in  mora^  and,  as  in  the  case  of  the  other  Interdicts,
he  is  answerable  for  all  culpa,  and  for  the  fruits  or
profits  of  the  thing  ;  and  generally,  he  is  bound  to
place  the  plaintiff  in  the  condition .  in  which  he
would  have  been,  if  there  had  been  no  refusal.
No  exceptions  were  allowed  in  the  case  of  a  Pre-
carium.

The  origin  of  the  Precarium  is  referred  by
Savigny  to  the  relation  which  subsisted  between  a
patronus  and  his  cliens,  to  whom  the  patronus  gave
the  use  of  a  portion  of  the  ager  publicus.  If  the
cliens  refused  to  restore  the  land  upon  demand,  the
patronus  was  entitled  to  the  Interdictum  de  pre-
cario. As  the  relation  between  the  patronus  and
the  cliens  was  analogous  to  that  between  a  parent
and  his  child,  it  followed  that  there  was  no  contract
between  them,  and  the  patron's  right  to  demand  the
land  back  was  a  necessary  consequence  of  the  relation
between  him  and  his  cliens.  (  Festus,  s.  v.  Patres.)
The  precarium  did  not  fall  into  disuse  when  the
old  ager  publicus  ceased  to  exist,  and  in  this  respect
it  followed  the  doctrine  of  possessio  generally.
[Agkariae  Leges.]  It  was  in  fact  extended
and  applied  to  other  things,  and,  among  them,  to
the  case  of  pledge.     [Pignus.]

Gains  (iv.  156)  makes  a  third  division  of  In-
terdicta  into  Simplicia  and  Duplicia.  Simplicia
are  those  in  which  one  person  is  the  plaintiff
(actor),  and  the  other  is  the  defendant  {reus) :  all
Restitutoria  and  Exhibitoria  Interdicta  are  of  this
kind,  Prohibitoria  Interdicta  are  either  Simplicia
or  Duplicia :  they  are  Simplicia  in  such  cases  as
those,  when  the  praetor  forbids  any  thing  to  be
done  in  a  locus  sacer,  in  a  flumcn  publicum,  or  on
a  ripa.  They  are  Duplicia  as  in  the  case  of  the
Interdictum  uti  Possidetis  and  Utrubi  ;  and  they
are  so  called,  saj-s  Gains,  because  each  of  the  liti-
gant parties  may  be  indifferently  considered  as
actor  or  reus,  as  appears  from  the  terms  of  the
Interdict.     (Gaius,  iv.  160.)

Interdicta  seem  to  have  been  also  called  Duplicia
in  respect  of  their  being  applicable  both  to  the  ac-
quisition of  a  possession  which  had  not  been  had
before,  and  also  to  the  recovery  of  a  possession.
An  Interdict  of  this  class  was  granted  in  the  case
of  a  vindicatio,  or  action  as  to  a  piece  of  land
against  a  possessor  who  did  not  de  end  his  pos-
B?3sion,  as,  for  instance,  when  he  did  not  submit
to  a  judicium  and  give  the  proper  sponsiones  or
satisdationes.  A  similar  interdict  was  granted  in
the  case  of  a  vindicatio  of  an  heredit<is  and  a
ususfructus.  Proper  security  was  always  required
from  the  person  in  possession,  in  the  case  of  an  in
rem  actio,  in  order  to  secure  the  plaintiff'  against
any  loss  or  injury  that  the  property  might  sustain
while  it  was  in  the  possession  of  the  defendant,
if  the  defendant  refused  to  give  such  ?eciirity  he


INTERREX.

lost  the  possessio,  which  was  transferred  to  the?
plaintiff'  {petUor).  (Rudorff,  Ueher  das  Interdict
Quern.  Fundum,  &c.,  Zeitschrift,  vol.  ix.)

"  By  all  these  Interdicts  Possession  is  protected,
and  possession  in  itself,  in  its  immediate  form  as
power,  in  fact,  over  a  tiling.  Possession  thus  ob-
tains a  legal  existence,  which  is  simply  connected
with  that  fact.  This  pure  reception  of  possession
among  Rights  is  not  perplexed  by  the  consideration
of  the  rightful  or  wrongful  origin  of  the  possession,
which  origin  has  no  effect  with  respect  to  the  pro-
tection given  to  possession.  The  Injusta  Possessio,
that  is,  t?ie  possession  which  has  been  acquired  vi,
or  clam  or  precario,  is  certainly  not  protected
against  the  person  from  whom  it  has  been  acquired
by  the  possessor  by  any  one  of  these  three  vitia
possessionis  ;  but  apart  from  this  case,  the  Injusta
Possessio  gives  the  same  claim  to  protection  as  the
Justa.  (Dig.  43.  tit.  17.  s.  2.)  The  Interdicts
arise  out  of  Possessio,  and  indifferently  whether  it
is  Justa  or  Injusta  ;  only,  if  two  possessors  claim
against  one  another,  a  former  and  a  present  pos-
sessor, of  whom  the  one  has  obtained  possession
from  the  other  vitiose,  the  former  is  not  protected
against  the  latter,  (Dig.  43.  tit.  17.  s.  1.  §  9.)"
Puchta,  Institutionen,  &c.,  ii.  §  225,

(For  other  matters  relating  to  the  Interdict  see
Gaius,  iv.  138—170  ;  Paulus,  S.  R.  v.  tit.  6  ;  Dig.
43  ;  Savigny,  Das  Redd  des  Besitzes,  pp.  403 — ■
516;  Savigny  and  Haubold,  Zeitschrifl,  vol  iii,  pp.
305,  358,  421  ;  Keller,  Ueber  die  Deductio  quae
morihus  fit  and  Das  Interdictum  Uti  possidetis^
Zeitsciirift,  vol.  xi.  ;  Rudorff,  Bemerkungen  uber
dasselbe  Interdict,  Zeitschri/t,  vol.  xi. ;  Puchta,  Li-
stitutionen,  &c.,  ii.  §§  169,  225.)  [G.  L.]

INTERPRES,  an  interpreter.  This  class  of
persons  became  very  numerous  and  necessary  to
the  Romans  as  their  empire  extended.  Embassies
from  foreign  nations  to  Rome,  and  from  Rome  to
other  states,  were  generally  accompanied  by  inter-
preters to  explain  the  objects  of  the  embassy  to
the  respective  authorities.  (Cic.  de  Divinat.  ii.
64,  de  Finib.  v,  29  ;  Plin.  //.  A^.  xxv.  2  ;  Gell.
xvii.  17.  2  ;  Liv.  xxvii.  43.)  In  large  mercantile
towns  the  interpreters,  who  formed  a  kind  of
agents  through  whom  business  was  done,  were
sometimes  very  numerous,  and  Pliny  (//,  N.  vi.
5)  states  that  at  Dioscurias  in  Colchis,  there  were
at  one  time  no  less  than  130  persons  who  acted  as
interpreters  to  the  Roman  merchants,  and  thiough
whom  all  the  business  was  carried  on.

All  Roman  praetors,  proconsuls,  and  quaestors,
who  were  entrusted  with  the  administration  of  a
province,  had  to  carry  on  all  their  official  proceed-
ings in  the  Latin  language  (Val.  Max.  ii.  2.  §  2),
and  as  they  could  not  be  expected  to  be  acquainted
with  the  language  of  the  provincials,  they  had
always  among  their  servants  [Apparitores]  one
or  more  interpreters,  who  were  generally  Romans,
but  in  most  cases  undoubtedly  freedmen.  (Cic.  pro
Balb.  1 1.)  These  interpreters  had  not  only  to
officiate  at  the  conventus  [Conventus],  but  also
explained  to  the  Roman  governor  everything  which
the  provincials  might  wish  to  be  laid  before  him.
(Cic.  c.  V^rr.  iii.  37,  ad  Fam.  xiii.  44  ;  Caes.  Bell.
GallA.  19  ;  compare  Dirksen,  Civil.  Abhandl.  i.  p.
16,  &c.)  [US.]

INTERREX,  INTERREGNUM  (called  by
the  Greek  \vriters  iJ.e(To€a<Ti\evs,  fxe(To€a(Ti\€ios
apxht  iJ.f(ToSaai\€la).  The  office  of  Interrex  is  said
to  have  been  instituted  on  the  death  of  Romulus,


INTERREX.

\v]\en  the  senate  wished  to  share  the  sovereign
power  among  themselves  instead  of  electing  a  king.
For  this  purpose,  according  to  Livy  (i.  17),  the
senate,  wliich  then  consisted  of  one  hundred  m«m-
bors,  was  divided  into  ten  decuries  ;  and  from  each
of  these  decuries  one  senator  was  nominated.  These
together  formed  a  board  of  ten,  with  the  title  of
Interregcs^  eacli  of  whom  enjoyed  in  succession  the
regal  power  and  its  badges  for  five  days  ;  and  if  no
king  was  appointed  at  the  expiration  of  fifty  da3-s,
the  rotation  began  anew.  The  period  during
which  they  exercised  their  power  was  called  an
Interregnum.  Dionysius  (ii.  57)  and  Plutarch
{Numa^  2)  give  a  different  account  of  the  matter ;
but  that  of  Livy  appears  the  most  probable.
Niebuhr  (Hist,  of  Rome,  vol.  i.  p.  334,  vol.  ii.  p.
Ill)  supposes  that  the  first  inteixeges  were  ex-
clusively Ramnes,  and  that  they  were  the  Decern
Primi,  or  ten  leading  senators,  of  whom  the  first
was  chief  of  the  whole  senate.  (Compare  Walter,
Gesch.  des  Rom.  Reehts,  §  21,  2nd  ed.)

The  intcrreges  agreed  among  themselves  who
should  be  proposed  as  king  (Dionys.  iv.  40,  80),
and  if  the  senate  approved  of  their  choice,  they
summoned  the  assembly  of  the  curiae,  and  pro-
posed the  person  whom  they  had  previously  agreed
upon  ;  the  power  of  the  curiae  was  confined  to  ac-
cepting or  rejecting  him.  The  decree  of  the  curiae,
by  which  they  accepted  the  king,  was  caWed  Jussus
popuh  i^Liv.  i,  22  ;  Cic.  de  Rep.  ii.  1 .3,  21.)  After
tlie  king  had  been  elected,  the  curiae  conferred
the  imperium  upon  him  by  a  special  law,  lexcuriata
de  imperio.     (Cic.  de  Rep.  ii.  13,   17,  18,  20,  21.)

Interreges  were  appomted  under  the  republic  for
holding  the  comitia  for  the  election  of  the  consuls,
when  the  consuls,  through  civil  commotions  or
other  causes,  had  been  unable  to  do  so  in  their
year  of  office.  (Dionys.  viii.  90  ;  Liv.  iv.  43,  &c.)
Each  held  the  office  for  only  five  days,  as  under
the  kings.  The  comitia  were,  as  a  general  rule,
not  held  by  the  first  interrex  ;  more  usually  by  the
second  or  third  (Liv.  ix.  7,  x.  11,  v.  31)  ;  but  in
one  instance  we  read  of  an  eleventh,  and  in  another
of  a  fourteenth  interrex.  (Liv.  vii.  22,  viii.  23.)
The  comitia  for  electing  the  first  consuls  were  held
by  Sp.  Lucretius  as  interrex  (Dionys.  iv.  84),
whom  Livy  (i.  60)  calls  also  praefectus  urbis.  The
interreges  under  the  republic,  at  least  from
B.  c.  482,  were  elected  by  the  senate  from  the
whole  body,  and  were  not  confined  to  the  decern
primi  or  ten  chief  senators  as  under  the  kings.
(Dionys.  viii.  90.)  Plebeians,  however,  were  not
admissible  to  this  office  ;  and  consequently  when
plebeians  were  admitted  into  the  senate,  the  patri-
cian senators  met  together  (coiere)  without  the
plebeian  members  to  elect  an  interrex.  (Liv.  iii.
40,  iv.  7,  43,  vi.  41  ;  Cic.  pro  Dome,  14  ;  Niebuhr,
vol.  ii.  p.  429  ;  Walter,  §§  55,  131.)  For  this
reason,  as  well  as  on  account  of  the  influence  which
the  interrex  exerted  in  the  election  of  the  magis-
trates, we  find  that  the  tribunes  of  the  plebs  were
strongly  opposed  to  the  appointment  of  an  interrex.
(Liv.  iv.  43,  xxii.  34.)  The  interrex  had  juris-
dictio.     (Liv.  x.  41  ;  Niebuhr,  vol.  iii.  p.  24.)

Interreges  continued  to  be  appointed  occasionally
till  the  time  of  the  second  Punic  war  (Liv.  xxii.  33,
34)  ;  but  after  that  time  we  read  of  no  interrex,
till  the  senate,  by  command  of  Sulla,  created  an
interrex  to  hold  the  comitia  for  his  election  as  Dic-
tator, B.  c.  82.  ( Appian,  Bell.  Civ.  i,  98.)  In  b.  c.
65  another  interrex   was  appointed  to  hold  the


ISTHMIA.


CA5


comitia,  in  which  Porapey  and  Crassus  were
elected  consuls  (Dion  Cass.*  xxxix.  27,  31)  ;  and
we  also  read  of  interreges  in  b.  c.  53  and  52,  in  the
latter  of  which  years  an  interrex  held  the  comitia,
in  which  Pompey  was  appointed  sole  consul.
(Dion  Cass.  xl.  45  ;  Ascon.  ad  Cic.  Mil.  init.  p.  32,
Orelli ;  Plut.  Pomp.  54  ;  comp.  Becker,  Handhuch
der  Romischen  Alterthumer,  vol.  ii.  part  i.  p.  295,
&c.)

INTE'RULA.     [Tunica.]

INTESTA'BILIS.  Tn  the  Twelve  Tables  it
was  declared  "  qui  se  sierit  testarier  libripensve
fuerit,  ni  testimonium  fariatur,  improbus  intesta-
bilisque  esto."  (Dirksen,  Uebersic/it,  &c.  p.  ()07  ;
compare  Gellius,  vi.  7,  xv.  13.)  According  to
these  passages,  a  person  who  had  been  a  witness
on  any  solemn  occasion,  such  as  the  making  of  a
will,  and  afterwards  refused  to  give  his  testimony,
was  "  intestabilis,"  that  is,  disqualified  from  ever
being  a  witness  on  any  other  occasion.  The  word
afterwards  seems  to  have  had  its  meaning  extended,
and  to  have  been  used  to  express  one  who  could
not  make  a  will,  and  who  laboured  under  a  general
civil  incapacity.  (Hor.  Sat.  ii.  3.  181 ;  Dig.  28.
tit.  1.  s.  18.  26  ;  Inst.  ii.  tit.  10.]  [G.  L.]

INTESTATO,  HEREDITATES  AB.
[Heres,  p.  598,  a.]

INTESTA'TUS.     [Heres,  p.  598,  a.]

INTESTI'NUM  OPUS,  joiner's  work,  is  re-
ferred to  in  some  passages  of  Vitruvius  as  used  in
the  interior  of  buildings  ;  but  there  is  notliing  in
his  allusions  to  it  that  requires  explanation  (Vitruv.
ii.  9,  V.  2,  V.  3).  [P.  S.]

INTU'SIUM.     [Tunica.]

INVENTA'RIUM.     [Heres,  p.  601,  b.]

INVESTIS.     [Imptjbes.]

IREN  (rpvy).     [EiREN.]

IRPEX,  HIRPEX,  or  URPEX  (Cato,  de  Re
Rust.  10),  a  harrow,  used  to  clear  the  fields  of
weeds  and  to  level  and  break  dovvn  the  soil.
(Festus,  s.  V. ;  Servius,  in  Virg.  Georg.  i.  Q5.)  The
harrow  of  the  ancients,  like  ours,  had  iron  teeth,
and  was  drawn  by  oxen.  (Var.  de  Ling.  Lot.  v.
31,  ed.  Spengel.)  [J.  Y.]

ISELA'STICI  LUDI    [Athletae.]

ISO'DOMUM  OPUS.     [Murus.]

ISOPOLITEIA  (tVoTToAiTeta).  [ClVITAS,  p.
289,  b.]

ISOTELEIS  (io-oreAers).  [CiVlTAS,p.289,  b.]

ISTHMIA  ("Icre/xm),  one  of  the  four  great
national  festivals  of  the  Greeks.  This  festival  de-
rived its  name  from  the  Corinthian  isthmus,  where
it  wfls  held  in  honour  of  Poseidon.  Where  the
isthmus  is  narrowest,  between  the  coast  of  the
Saronic  gulf  and  tlie  western  foot  of  the  Oenean
hills,  was  the  temple  of  Poseidon,  and  near  it  was  a
theatre  and  a  stadium  of  white  marble,  the  scene  of
the  Isthmian  games.  (Pans.  ii.  1.  §7;  Strab.  viii.  6.
p.  380.)  The  entrance  to  the  temple  was  adorned
with  an  avenue  of  statues  of  the  victors  in  the
Isthmian  games,  and  with  groves  of  pine-trees.
These  games  were  said  originally  to  have  been
instituted  by  Sisyphus  in  honour  of  Melicertes,
who  was  also  called  Palaemon.  (Apollod.  iii.  4.
§  3  ;  Pans.  ii.  1.  §  3.)  Their  original  mode  of
celebration  partook,  as  Plutarch  {Thes.2b)  remarks,
more  of  the  character  of  mysteries,  than  of  a  great
and  national  assembly  with  its  various  amusements,
and  was  perfomied  at  night.  Subsequent  to  the
age  of  Theseus  the  Isthmia  were  celebrated  in
honour  of  Poseidon  ;  and  this  innovation  is  ascribed

T  T    3


646


ISTHMIA.


to  Theseus  himself,  who,  according  to  some  legends,
was  a  son  of  Poseidon,  and  who,  in  the  institution
of  the  new  Isthmian  solemnities,  is  said  to  have
imitated  Heracles,  the  founder  of  the  Olympian
games.  The  celebration  of  the  Isthmia  was  hence-
forth conducted  by  the  Corinthians,  but  Theseus
had  reserved  for  his  Athenians  some  honourable
distinctions ;  those  Athenians  who  attended  the
Jsthmia  sailed  across  the  Saronic  gulf  in  a  sacred
vess  -1  (i&ewp  s),  and  an  honorary  place  (TrpoeSpi'a),
as  large  as  the  sail  of  their  vessel,  was  assigned  to
them  during  the  celebration  of  the  games.  (Plut.
I.  c.)  In  times  of  war  between  the  two  states  a
sacred  truce  was  concluded,  and  the  Athenians
were  invited  to  attend  at  the  solemnities.  (Thucyd.
viii.  10.)  The  Eleans  did  not  take  part  in  the
games,  and  various  stories  were  related  to  account
for  this  singular  circumstance.  (Pans.  v.  2.  §  2.)
It  is  a  very  probable  conjecture  of  Wachsmuth
{Hellen.  Alterth.  vol.  i.  p.  155),  that  the  Isthmia,
after  the  changes  ascribed  to  Theseus,  were  merely
a  panegyris  of  the  lonians  of  Peloponnesus  and
those  of  Attica  ;  for  it  should  be  observed,  that
Poseidon  was  an  Ionian  deity,  whose  worship
appears  originally  to  have  been  unknown  to  the
Dorians.  During  the  reign  of  the  Cypselids  at
Corinth,  the  celebration  of  the  Isthmian  games  was
suspended  for  seventy  years.  (Solin.  c.  12.)  But
after  that  time  they  gradually  rose  to  the  rank  of  a
national  festival  of  all  the  Greeks.  In  Olymp.  49
they  became  periodical,  and  were  henceforth  cele-
brated regularly  every  third  year,  twice  in  every
Olympiad,  that  is,  in  the  first  and  third  year  of
every  Olympiad.  The  Isthmia  held  in  the  first
year  of  an  Olympiad  fell  in  the  Corinthian  month
Panemus  (the  Attic  Hecatombaeon)  ;  and  those
which  were  held  in  the  third  year  of  an  Olympiad,
fell  either  in  the  month  of  Munychion  or  Tharge-
lion.  (Corsini,  Disseii,.  Agon.  4  ;  compare  Goeller
ad  Thucyd.  viii.  9.)  Pliny  (//.  N.  iv.  5)  and  So-
linus  (c.  9)  erroneously  state  that  the  Isthmia  were
celebrated  every  fifth  year.  With  this  regularity
the  solemnities  continued  to  be  held  by  the  Greeks
down  to  a  very  late  period.  In  228  B.  c.  the
Romans  were  allowed  the  privilege  of  taking  part
in  the  Isthmia  (Polyb.  ii.  13)  ;  and  it  was  at  this
solemnity  that,  in  B.  c.  196  Flaminimis  proclaimed
before  an  innumerable  assembly  the  independence
of  Greece  (Polyb.  xvii.  29).  After  the  fall  of
Corinth,  in  b.  c.  146,  the  Sicyonians  were  honoured
with  the  privilege  of  conducting  the  Isthmian
games  ;  but  when  the  town  of  Corinth  was  rebuilt
by  Julius  Caesar  (Pans.  ii.  1.  §  2,  ii.  2.  §  2),  the
right  of  conducting  the  solemnities  was  restored  to
the  Corinthians,  and  it  seems  that  they  henceforth
continued  to  be  celebrated  till  Christianity  became
the  state-religion  of  the  Roman  empire.  (Sueton.
Nero^  24  ;  Julian  Imperat.  Epist.  35.)

The  season  of  the  Isthmian  solemnities  was,  like
that  of  al)  the  great  national  festivals,  distinguished
by  general  rejoicings  and  feasting.  The  contests
and  games  of  the  Isthmia  were  the  same  as  those
at  Olympia,  and  embraced  all  the  varieties  of
athletic  performances,  such  as  wrestling,  the  pan-
cratium, together  with  horse  and  chariot  racing.
(Paus.  V.  2.  §  4  ;  Polyb.  I.  c.)  Musical  and  poeti-
cal contests  were  likewise  carried  on,  and  in  the
latter  women  also  were  allowed  to  take  part,  as
■we  must  infer  from  Plutarch  {Sympos.  v.  2),  who,
on  the  authority  of  Polemo,  states  that  in  the  trea-
sury at  Sicyon  there  was  a  golden  book  which  had


JUDEX,  JUDICIUM.

been  presented  to  it  by  Aristomache,  the  poetess,
after  she  had  gained  the  victory  at  the  Isthmia.
At  a  late  period  of  the  Roman  empire  the  charac-
ter of  the  games  at  the  Isthmia  appears  greatly
altered  ;  for  in  the  letter  of  the  emperor  Julian,
above  referred  to,  it  is  stated  that  the  Corinthians
purchased  bears  and  panthers  for  the  purpose  of
exhibiting  their  fights  at  the  Isthmia,  and  it  is  not
improbable  that  the  custom  of  introducing  fights  of
animals  on  this  occasion  commenced  soon  after  the
time  of  Caesar.

The  prize  of  a  victor  in  the  Isthmian  games  con-
sisted at  first  of  a  garland  of  pine-leaves,  and  after-
Avards  of  a  wreath  of  ivy ;  but  in  the  end  the  ivy
was  again  superseded  by  a  pine-garland.  (Plut.
Sympos.  v.  3.)  Simple  as  such  a  reward  was,  a
victor  in  these  games  gained  the  greatest  distinc-
tion and  honour  among  his  countrymen  ;  and  a
victory  not  only  rendered  the  individual  who  ob-
tained it,  a  subject  of  admiration,  but  shed  lustre
over  his  family  and  the  whole  town  or  community
to  which  he  belonged.  Hence  Solon  established
by  a  law  that  every  Athenian  who  gained  the
victory  at  the  Isthmian  games,  should  receive  from
the  public  treasury  a  reward  of  one  hundred
drachmae.  (Plut.  .So/.  23.)  His  victory  was  gene-
rally celebrated  in  lofty  odes,  called  Epinikia,  or  tri-
umphal odes,  of  which  we  still  possess  some  beau-
tiful specimens  among  the  poems  of  Pindar.  (See
Massieu  in  the  Man.  de  VAcad.  des  Inscript.  et
Bell.  Lett.  V.  p.  214,  &c.  ;  Dissen,  De  Ratione
Poetica  Carminum  Pindaricorum,  prefixed  to  the
first  volume  of  his  edition  of  Pindar  ;  Muller,
Hist,  of  Greek  Lit.  p.  220,  &c.  ;  Krause,  Die
Pythien., Nemeen., und  Isthinien,  p.  1 65^ &c.)   [L.S.]

ITA'LIA.     [CoLONiA  ;  Provincia.]

ITER.     [Viae.]

ITINERIS  SERVITUS.     [Servitutes.]

JUDEX,  JUDrCIUM.  A  Roman  magis-
tratus  generally  did  not  investigate  the  facts  in
dispute  in  such  matters  as  were  brought  before
him  :  he  appointed  a  Judex  for  that  purpose,  and
gave  him  instructions.  [Actio  ;  Interdictum.]
Accordingly,  the  whole  of  Civil  procedure  was  ex-
pressed by  the  two  phrases  Jus  and  Judicium,  of
which  the  fonner  comprehended  all  that  took  place
before  the  magistratus  (injure),  and  the  latter  all
that  took  place  before  the  judex  (in  judicio).  The
meaning  of  the  term  Judices  in  a  passage  of  Livy
(iii.  55)  is  uncertain.  In  the  Theodosian  Code  the
term  Judex  designates  the  governor  of  a  province.
From  the  earlier  periods  to  the  time  of  Constan-
tine  it  designated  a  person,  whose  functions  may
be  generally  understood  from  what  follows.

in  many  cases  a  single  Judex  was  appointed  :
in  others,  several  were  appointed,  and  they  seem
to  have  been  sometimes  called  Recuperatores  as
opposed  to  the  single  Judex.  (Gains,  iv.  104 —
109.)  Under  certain  circimistances  the  Judex  was
called  Arbiter :  thus  Judex  and  Arbiter  are  named
together  in  the  Twelve  Tables.  (Dirksen,  Ueber-
sicht,  &c.  p.  725.)

A  Judex  when  appointed  was  bound  to  dis-
charge the  functions  of  the  office,  unless  he  had
some  valid  excuse  (excusatio).  A  person  might
also  be  disqualified  from  being  a  Judex.  There
were  certain  seasons  of  the  year  when  legal  busi-
ness was  done  at  Rome  (cum  res  Of/ebantur,  Gaius,
ii.  279),  and  at  these  times  the  services  of  the
judices  were  required.  These  legal  terms  were
regulated  according  to  the  seasons,  so  that  there


I


I


JUDEX,  JUDICIUM.

'were  periods  of  vacation  (Cic-  ad  Ait.  i.  I  ;  cum
Jiomae  a  judiciis  forum  refrixerit)  :  in  the  pro-
vinces, the  terms  depended  on  the  Conventus.  A
Judex  was  liable  to  a  fine  if  he  wa^not  in  attend-
ance when  he  was  required.  In  any  given  case,
the  litigant  parties  agreed  upon  a  judex  or  accepted
him  whom  the  magistratus  proposed.  A  party
had  the  power  of  rejecting  a  proposed  judex,
though  there  must  have  been  some  limit  to  this
power.  (Cic.  x>ro  Ciiient.  43.)  In  cases  where  one
of  the  litigant  parties  was  a  peregrinus,  a  pere-
grinus  might  be  judex.  (Gains,  iv.  105.)  The
judex  was  sworn  to  discharge  his  duty  faithfully.
(Cic.  de  Invent,  i.  39. )

When  Italy  had  received  its  organization  from
the  Romans,  the  magistratus  of  the  several  cities
had  jurisdictio,  and  appointed  a  Judex  as  the
praetor  did  at  Rome  {Leoo  JRubria  de  Gallia
Cisa/jiina).  In  the  provinces,  the  governors  ap-
pointed a  Judex  or  Recuperatores,  as  the  case
might  be,  at  the  Conventus  which  they  held  for
the  administration  of  justice  ;  and  the  Judex  or
Recuperatores  were  selected  both  from  Roman
citizens  and  natives.

When  the  Judex  was  appointed,  the  proceed-
ings injure  or  before  the  praetor  were  terminated,
which  was  sometimes  expressed  by  the  term  Litis
Contestatio,  the  phrases  Lis  Contestata  and  Judicium
acceptum  or  ordinaium.,  being  equivalent  in  the
classical  jurists.  [Litis  Contestatio.]  The
parties  appeared  before  the  Judex  on  the  third  day
{comperendinatio\  unless  the  praetor  had  deferred
the  judicium  for  some  sufficient  reason.  Tlie  Judex
was  generally  aided  by  advisers  (jurisconsidti)
learned  in  the  law,  who  were  said  "  in  consilio
adesse  "  (Cic.  pro  P.  Quintio,  2.  6,  Top.  17) ;  but
the  Judex  alone  was  empowered  to  give  judgment.
The  matter  was  first  briefly  stated  to  the  Judex
{causae  conjectio,  collectio\  and  the  oratores  or
patroni  of  each  party  supported  his  cause  in  a
speech.  The  evidence  seems  to  have  been  given
at  the  same  time  that  the  speeches  were  made,
and  not  to  have  been  heard  before  the  patroni
made  their  address.  (Cic.  pro  Rose.  Com.  14,  pro
P.  Quintio,  1 8.)  But  it  is  probable  that  the  prac-
tice in  this  respect  might  vary  in  different  cases.
Witnesses  were  produced  on  both  sides  and  ex-
amined orally  ;  the  witnesses  on  one  side  were  also
cross-examined  by  the  other.  (Cic.  pro  Caecina,
10,  pro  Flacco,  10.)  Written  documents,  such
as  instruments  and  books  of  account,  were  also
given  in  evidence  ;  and  sometimes  the  deposition
of  an  absent  witness  was  read,  when  it  was  con-
firmed by  an  oath.  (Cic.  pro  Pose.  Com.  1 5,  Cic.
ad  Alt.  ii.  1 2,  xiv.  1 5.)  There  were  no  direct  means
of  compelling  a  person  to  give  evidence  before  the
legislation  of  Justinian,  unless  they  were  slaves,
who  in  some  cases  might  be  put  to  the  torture.
As  to  the  application  of  the  oath   in  judicio,  see

JUS.TURANDUM.

After  all  the  evidence  was  given  and  the  patroni
had  finished,  the  judex  gave  sentence  :  if  there
were  several  judices,  a  majority  decided.  If  the
matter  was  one  of  difficulty,  the  hearing  might  be
adjourned  as  often  as  was  necessary  (ampliatio)  ;
and  if  tlie  judex  could  not  come  to  a  satisfactory
conclusion,  he  might  declare  this  upon  oath  and  so
release  himself  from  the  difficulty.  This  was  done
by  the  form  of  words  "  non  liquere"  (N.L.).  (Gell.
xiv.  2.)  The  sentence  was  pronounced  orally,  and
wafl  sometimes  first  written  on  a  tablet.     If  the


JUDi:X,  JUDICIUM.


647


defendant  did  not  make  his  appearance  after  being
duly  summoned,  judgment  might  be  given  against
him  {judicium  desertum^  erenwdicium),  according  to
the  proof  which  the  plaintiff  had  made.  If  the
plaintiff  did  not  appear,  the  defendant  could  de-
mand an  acquittal.  (Dig.  40.  tit.  12.  s.  27.  §  1,
49.  tit.  1.  s.  28.  pr.)

The  sentence  was  either  of  Absolutio  orCondem-
natio.  That  part  of  the  formula  which  was  called
the  Condemnatio  [Actio,  p.  12,  b],  empowered
the  Judex  tn  condemn  or  acquit  {condemnare^
absolvere,  Gaius,  iv.  43).  The  defendant  might
satisfy  the  plaintiff  after  the  judicium  had  been
constituted  by  the  litis  contestatio  {post  acceptum
judicium,  Gaius,  iii.  180,  iv.  114),  and  before
judgment  was  given  ;  but  in  this  case  it  was  a
disputed  question  between  the  two  schools  whether
the  judex  should  acquit,  or  whether  he  should
condemn  on  the  ground  that  at  the  time  when  the
judicium  was  constituted,  the  defendant  was  liable
to  be  condemned  and  it  was  the  business  of  the
judex  merely  to  follow  his  instructions.  The  dis-
pute accordingly  involved  one  of  those  principles
on  which  the  schools  were  theoretically  divided,
—  the  following  out  of  a  legal  principle  to  all  its
logical  consequences  ;  but,  like  many  other  ques-
tions between  the  schools,  this  question  was  prac-
tically of  no  importance,  as  the  plaintiff  would  not
be  allowed  to  have  satisfaction  twice.

While  the  Legis  actiones  were  in  force,  the  judg-
ment was  for  the  restitution  of  a  thing,  if  a  given
thing  {corpus)  was  the  object  of  the  action  ;  but
under  the  process  of  the  formula,  the  Judex  gave
judgment,  pursuant  to  the  formula,  in  a  sum  of
money,  even  when  a  piece  of  property  was  the  ob-
ject of  dispute.  The  sum  of  money  was  either
fixed  or  not  fixed  in  the  formula.  If  the  claim
was  for  a  certain  sum  of  money,  the  amount  was
inserted  in  the  condemnatio,  and  the  judex  was
bound  to  give  that  or  nothing  to  the  plaintiff.  If
the  claim  was  for  damages  or  satisfaction,  the
amount  of  which  was  not  ascertained,  the  con-
demnatio was  either  limited  to  a  sum  named  in
the  formula,  and  which  the  judex  could  not  exceed
except  at  his  own  peril  {liton  suam  faciendo)  :  or,
if  the  action  was  for  the  recovery  of  property  from
the  possessor,  or  if  it  was  an  actio  ad  exhibendum,
the  condemnatio  empowered  the  judex  to  condemn
the  defendant  in  the  value  of  the  thing.  Gene-
rally, the  term  in  the  formula  which  expressed  the
value  which  was  the  object  of  the  demand  was,
"  quanti  res  est."  Res  may  mean  either  a  thing
in  the  limited  sense  of  the  word,  or  generally  the
claim  or  demand,  and  the  fixing  this  at  a  money
value,  was  equivalent  to  litis  aestimatio.  The  judex
was  always  bound  to  condemn  in  some  definite  sura,
even  though  the  formula  did  not  contain  a  definite
sum  :  the  reason  of  which  is  obvious,  for,  unless
the  condemnatio  was  definite,  there  would  be  no
judgment.     (Gaius,  iv.  48 — 52.)

The  following  is  the  distinction  between  an
Arbitrium  and  Judicium,  according  to  Cicero  {pro
Pose.  Com.  4)  :  —  In  a  judicium  the  demand  was
of  a  certain  sum  or  definite  amount  {pecuniae
certae)  ;  in  an  arbitrium,  the  amount  was  not  de-
termined {incerta).  In  a  judicium  the  plaintiff
obtained  all  that  he  claimed  or  nothing,  as  the
words  of  the  formula  show :  "  Si  paret  H.  S.  looa
dari  oportere."  (Compare  Gaius,  iv.  50.)  The  cor-
responding words  in  the  formula  arbitraria  were :
"  Quantum  aequius  melius  id  dari ; "  and  their
T  T  4


t>48  JUDEX,  JUDICIUM.

•equivalents  were,  "  Ex  fide  bona,  Ut  inter  Ijonos
bene  agier."  {Top.  17.)  In  a  dispute  about  dos,
which  Cicero  calls  "  arbitrium  rei  uxoriae,"  the
words  "  Quod  aequius,  melius,"  were  added.  (Com-
pare Gaius,  iv,  47,  62.)  If  the  matter  was  brought
before  a  judex,  properly  so  ftilled,  the  judicium
was  constituted  with  a  poena,  that  is,  per  spon-
sionem  ;  there  was  no  poena,  when  an  arbiter  was
demanded,  and  the  proceeding  was  by  the  formula
arbitraria.  The  proceeding  by  the  sponsio  then
was  the  strict  one  (angustisaima  formula  sponsionis.,
Cic.  pro  Rose.  Com.  14)  :  that  of  the  arbitrium
was  ex  fid 3  bona,  and  the  arbiter,  though  he  was
bound  by  the  instructions  of  the  formula,  was  al-
lowed a  greater  latitude  b}'  its  terms.  The  engage-
ment between  the  parties  who  accepted  an  arbiter,
by  which  they  bound  themselves  to  abide  by  his
arbitrium,  was  Compromissum  (  pro  Rose.  Com.  4.
4)  ;  but  this  term  was  also  employed,  as  it  appears,
to  express  the  engagement  by  which  parties  agreed
to  settle  their  differeRces  by  arbitration,  without
the  intervention  of  the  praetor.  Cicero  appears  to
allude  to  this  arbitration.  {Pro  P.  Quintio^  5  ;
compare  Senec.  de  Bene/,  iii.  7.)

In  the  division  of  judicial  functions  between  the
Magistratus  and  Judex  consisted  what  is  called
the  Ordo  Judiciorum  Privatorum,  which  existed  in
the  early  periods  of  Rome,  and  continued  till  the
time  of  Constantine.  At  the  same  time  with  the
Ordo  Judiciorum  Privatorum  existed  the  proceed-
ing extra  ordinem  or  extraordinaria  cognitio,  in
which  the  magistratus  made  a  decision  by  a  de-
cretum,  without  letting  the  matter  come  to  a  judex.
Finally,  under  the  later  empire  the  extraordinaria
cognitio  supplanted  the  old  mode  of  proceeding.

According  to  Cicero  {pro  Caecina,  2)  all  Judicia
had  for  their  object,  either  the  settlement  of  dis-
putes between  individuals  {controvcrsiae\  or  the
punishment  of  crimes  {maleficia).  This  passage
refers  to  a  division  of  Judicia,  which  appears  in  the
Jurists,  into  Publica  and  Privata.  The  term  Pri-
vata  Judicia  occurs  in  Cicero  {Top.  17),  where  it
refers  to  the  class  of  Judicia  which  he  indicates  in
the  Caecina  by  the  term  Controversiae.  The  term
Publica  Judicia  might  not  then  be  in  use,  but  the
term  Publica  Causa  is  used  by  Cicero  {pro  Rose.
Amer.  c.  21)  with  reference  to  a  Judicium,  which
by  the  Jurists  would  be  called  Publicum.  In  the
Digest  (48.  tit.  1.  s.  1)  it  is  stated  that  all  Judicia
are  not  Publica  in  which  a  crimen  was  the  matter
in  question,  but  only  those  in  which  the  offence
was  prosecuted  under  some  lex,  such  as  the  Julia
Majestatis,  Cornelia  de  Sicariis,  and  others  there
enumerated.  The  Judicia  Popularia  or  Populares
Actiones  as  they  are  called  (Dig.  47.  tit.  23.  s,  1)
are  defined  to  be  those  by  which  "  suum  jus
populus  tuetur  ;"  and  they  agreed  with  the  Pub-
lica Judicia  in  this,  that  any  person  might  be
the  prosecutor,  who  was  not  under  some  legal  dis-
qualification. The  Judicia  Populi  (Cic.  Brut.  27)
were  those  in  which  the  populus  acted  as  judices  ;
and  accordingly  Cicero  enumerates  the  Populi  Ju-
dicia among  others  when  he  says  {pro  Domo,  c.
1 3)  that  "  nihil  de  capite  civis,  aut  de  bonis,  sine
judicio  senatus  aut  populi  aut  eorum  qui  de  quaque
re  constituti  judices  sint,  detrahi  posse."  As  the
Judicia  Publica  are  defined  by  the  jurists  to  be
those  in  which  crimina  were  tried  by  a  special  lex,
it  appears  that  the  Judicia  Populi,  strictl}-  so
called,  must  have  fallen  into  disuse  or  have  gradu-
ally become  unnecessary  after  the  Judicia  Publica


JUDEX,  JUDICIUM.

were  regulated  by  special  leges  ;  and  thus  the
Judicia  Publica  of  the  later  republican  period  re-
present the  Judicia  Populi  of  the  earlier  times.  The
Judicia  Populi  were  originally  held  in  the  Comitia
Curiata  and  subsequently  in  the  Centuriata  and
Tributa.  x\  lex  of  P.  Valerius  Publicola  (Liv.  ii,
8  ;  Cic.  Rep.  ii.  31)  gave  an  appeal  {provocatio)  to
the  populus  from  the  magistratus  ;  and  a  law  of
C.  Sempronius  Gracchus  (Cic.  pro  Rabir.  4)  de-
clared to  the  same  effect :  "  Ne  de  capite  civium
Romanonim  injussu  populi  judicaretur."

The  kings  presided  in  the  Judicia  Populi,  and
the  consuls  succeeded  to  their  authority.  But
after  the  passing  of  the  Lex  Valeria  de  Provoca-
tione  (b.  c.  508)  persons  were  appointed  to  preside
at  such  trials  as  affected  a  citizen's  caput,  and
they  were  accordingly  called  Quaesitores  or  Quae-
stores  Parricidii  or  Rerum  Capitalium.  In  some  cases
(Liv.  iv.  51)  a  plebiscitum  was  passed,  by  which  a
magistrate  was  appointed  to  preside  at  the  judicial
investigation.  In  the  course  of  time,  as  cases  were
of  more  frequent  occurrence,  these  Quaestlones
were  made  Perpetuae,  that  is,  particular  magi-
strates were  appointed  for  the  purpose.  In  the
year  149  B.  c.  the  tribune  L.  Calpurnius  Piso
Frugi  carried  a  Lex  De  Pecuniis  Repetundis,  by
which  a  Praetor  presided  at  all  such  trials  during
his  year  of  office,  from  which  time  the  Quaestio
Repetimdarum  became  Pcrpetua.  L.  Sulla  gave
to  one  praetor  the  Quaestioncs  de  Maj estate,  and
to  others  those  of  Peculatus  and  Ambitus  ;  and
he  also  added  four  other  Quaestiones  Perpetuae.
Thus  he  carried  out  the  principle  of  the  Lex  Cal-
purnia,  by  establishing  permanent  courts  for  the
trial  of  various  specified  offences,  and  the  praetors
detennined  among  themselves  in  which  of  these  new
courts  they  should  severally  preside.  The  ordinaiy
functions  of  the  praetor  urbanus  and  peregrinus
were  not  interfered  with  by  these  new  arrange-
ments. The  Quaestiones  of  Sulla  were,  De  Repe-
tundis, Majestatis,  De  Sicariis  et  Veneficis,  De
Parricidio,  Peculatus,  Ambitus,  De  Nummis  Adul-
terinis,  De  Falsis  or  Testamentaria,  and  De  V^i
Publica.  But  in  special  cases  the  senate  still  some-
times by  a  decretura  appointed  the  consuls  as
quaesitores,  of  which  an  example  occurs  in  Cicero.
{Brat.  22.)

An}--  person,  not  legally  disqualified,  might  be
an  accuser  {accusator)  in  a  Judicium  Publicum.
On  such  an  occasion  a  praetor  generally  presided
as  quaesitor,  assisted  by  a  judex  quaestionis  and  a
body  of  judices  called  his  consilium.  The  judex
quaestionis  was  a  kind  of  assistant  to  the  presiding
magistratus,  according  to  some  opinions  ;  but  others
consider  him  to  be  a  quaesitor,  who  was  sometimes
specially  appointed  to  preside  on  the  occasion  of  a
quaestio,  (Walter,  Geschichte  des  Rom.  Rechts^
p.  861.)  The  judices  were  generally  chosen  by
lot  out  of  those  who  were  qualified  to  act.  Both
the  accusator  and  the  reus  had  the  privilege  of
rejecting  or  challenging  {rejicere)  such  judices  as
they  did  not  like.  (Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  \Q.)  The  ju-
dices appointed  according  to  the  provisions  of  the
Lex  Licinia  de  Ambitu,  b.  c.  55,  were  called
edititii,  and  these  were  judices  named  by  the  ac-
cuser, whom  the  accused  (reus)  could  not  chal-
lenge. (Cic.  pro  Cn.  Plancio,  15,  17,  ed.  Wun-
der,  Prolegom.  p.  Ixxvi.)  The  judices  were  called
editi,  when  they  could  be  challenged  by  the  reus.
In  many  cases  a  lex  was  passed  for  the  purpose  of
regulating  the  mode  of  procedure.     In  the  matter


JUDEX,  JUDICIUM.

of  Clodiiis  and  the  Bona  Dca,  the  senate  attempted
to  carry  a  lex  l)y  which  the  praetor  who  was  to
preside  at  the  trial  should  be  empowered  to  select
the  judices,  the  effect  of  which  would  have  been  to
prevent  their  being  challenged  by  Clodius.  After
a  violent  struggle,  a  lex  for  the  regulation  of  the
trial  was  proposed  by  the  tribune  Fufius  and  car-
ried :  it  only  differed  from  the  lex  recommended
by  the  senate  in  the  mode  of  determining  who
should  be  the  judices  {judicum  genus)  :  a  differ-
ence however  which  was  not  unimportant,  as
it  secured  the  acquittal  of  Clodius.  The  judices
voted  by  ballot,  and  a  majority  determined  tlie
acquittal  or  condemnation  of  the  accused.  If  the
votes  were  equal,  there  was  an  acquittal  (Plut.
Jifarius,  5).  Each  judex  was  provided  with  three
tablets  (tabulae),  on  one  of  which  was  marked
A,  Absolve  ;  on  a  second  C,  Condemno  ;  and  on  a
third  N.  L.,  Non  liquet.  The  judices  voted  by
placing  one  of  these  tablets  in  the  urn  (itma,
Juv.  Sat.  V.  4),  which  Avas  then  examined  for  the
purpose  of  ascertaining  the  votes.  It  was  the  duty
of  the  magistratus  to  pronounce  the  sentence  of
the  judices  ;  in  the  case  of  condemnation,  to  ad-
judge the  legal  penalty  ;  of  acquittal,  to  declare
him  acquitted  ;  and  of  doubt,  to  declare  that  the
matter  must  be  further  investigated  (amj)lius  cogno  ■
vcefidum).

Mention  is  often  made  of  the  Judicia  Populi  in  the
Latin  writers.  A  Judicium  was  commenced  by
the  accuser,  who  must  be  a  magistratus,  declaring
in  a  coritio,  that  he  would  on  a  certain  day  accuse
a  certain  person,  whom  he  named,  of  some  offence,
which  he  also  specified.  This  was  expressed  by
the  phrase  "  diem  dicere  "  (  Virginius  Caesoiii  capi-
tis diem,  dicit,  Li  v.  iii.  11).  If  the  offender  held  any
high  office,  it  was  necessary  to  wait  til!  his  time  of
service  had  expired,  before  proceedings  could  be
thus  commenced  against  him.  The  accused  was
required  to  give  security  for  his  appearance  on  the
day  of  trial  ;  the  security  v.-as  called  vades  in  a
causa  capitalis,  and  praedes  when  the  penalty  for
the  alleged  offence  was  pecuniary.  If  such  secu-
rity was  not  given,  the  accused  was  kept  in  con-
finement. (Liv.  iii.  13.)  If  nothing  prevented  the
inquiry-  from  taking  place  at  the  time  fixed  for  it,
the  trial  proceeded,  and  the  accuser  had  to  prove
his  case  by  evidence.  The  investigation  of  the
facts  was  called  Anquisitio  with  reference  to  the
proposed  penalty  :  accordingly,  the  phrases  pecunia,
capite  or  capitis  anquirere,  are  used.  (Liv.  xxvi.  3.)
When  the  investigation  was  concluded,  the  magis-
tratus promulgated  a  rogatio,  which  comprehended
the  charge  and  the  punishment  or  fine.  It  was  a
rule  of  law  that  a  fine  should  not  be  imposed  toge-
ther with  another  punishment  in  the  same  rogatio.
(Cic.  pro  Dom.  c,  17.)  The  rogatio  was  made
public  during  three  imndinae,  like  any  other  lex  ;
and  proposed  at  the  comitia  for  adoption  or  re-
jection. The  form  of  the  rogatio,  the  effect  of
which  was  to  drive  Cicero  into  banishment,  is
given  in  the  Oration  Pro  Dome,  c.  18.  The  ac-
cused sometimes  withdrew  into  exile  before  the
votes  were  taken  ;  or  he  might  make  his  defence,
of  which  we  have  an  instance  in  the  oration  of
Cicero  for  Rabirius.  Though  these  were  called
Judicia  Populi,  and  properly  so  in  the  early  ages
of  the  state,  the  leges  passed  in  such  judicia  in  the
Jatter  period  of  the  republic  were  often  Plebiscita.

The  offences  which  were  the  chief  subject  of
Judicia  Populi  and  Publica  were  MajesUis,  Adul-


JUDEX,  JUDICIUAL


C49


teria  and  Stupra,  Parricidium,  Falsum,  Vis  Pub-
lica and  Privata,  Peculatus,  Repetundae,  Ambitus,
which  are  treated  under  their  several  heads.

With  the  passing  of  special  enactments  for  the
punishment  of  particular  offences,  was  introduced
the  practice  of  forming  a  body  of  Judices  for  the
trial  of  such  offences  as  the  enactments  were  di-
rected against.  Thus  it  is  said  that  the  Lex  Cal-
pumia  De  Pecuniis  Repetundis  established  the
Album  Judicum  Selectorum,  or  the  body  out  of
which  Judices  were  to  be  chosen.  It  is  not  known
what  was  the  number  of  the  body  so  constituted,
but  it  has  been  conjectured  that  the  number  was
350,  and  that  ten  were  chosen  from  each  tribe,
and  thus  the  origin  of  the  phrase  Decuriae  Judi-
cum is  explained.  It  is  easy  to  conceive  that  the
Judicia  Populi,  properly  so  called,  would  be  less
frequent  as  special  leges  were  framed  for  particular
offences,  the  circumstances  of  which  could  be
better  investigated  by  a  smaller  body  of  Judices
than  by  the  assembled  people.  It  is  affirmed  that
up  to  the  passing  of  the  Calpurnia  Lex,  the
Judices  were  chosen  from  the  senators  only,  but
after  this  time  they  were  not  taken  from  that  body
exclusively  ;  and  further,  that  not  only  the  Ju-
dices in  the  Quaestiones  de  Repetundis,  but  also
the  Judices  in  private  matters  were  from  the  date
of  this  lex  taken  from  the  Album  Judicum  whicli
was  annually  made  (Goettling,  Geschichte  der  Bom.
Staatsverfassung,  p.  425)  ;  for  which  there  appears
to  be  no  evidence.  Some  modern  writers  affirm
that  by  the  Lex  Calpurnia  the  Judices  were  chosen
by  the  Praetor  annually  out  of  the  body  of  sena-
tors, and  arranged  according  to  their  tribes  ;  and
that  the  necessary  number  for  each  trial  was
chosen  out  of  this  body  by  lot.

As  many  of  those  who  were  tried  in  the  quaes-
tiones perpetuae  belonged  to  the  class  of  the  Op-
timates,  it  often  happened  that  the  Judices  ac-
([uitted  those  members  of  their  own  body,  who
would  have  been  convicted  by  impartial  judices.
Accordingly  a  struggle  arose  between  the  popular
party  and  the  Optimates,  whom  the  popular  party
wished  to  exclude  from  the  office  of  Judex.  The
laws  which  relate  to  the  constitution  of  the  body
of  Judices  are  called  Judiciariae,  whether  these  laws
related  only  to  this  matter,  or  made  rules  about
it  and  other  things  also.  The  first  lex  which  ex-
cluded the  Senators  from  the  Album  judicum
selectorum  was  a  Lex  Sempronia  of  C.  Gracchus,
B.C.  123,  in  accordance  with  which  the  judices
were  taken  only  from  the  Equites.  This  arrange-
ment lasted  above  forty  years,  and  gave  satisfac-
tion to  the  popular  party  ;  but  it  did  not  work
well  in  all  respects,  because  the  magistrates  in  the
provinces  favoured  the  rapacity  of  the  Publicani,  in
order  to  keep  on  good  terms  with  the  Equites,
to  which  class  the  Publicani  belonged.  (Cic.  Verr.
iii.  41.)  A  Lex  Servilia  Caepionis  B.  c.  106  is
said  to  have  repealed  the  Sempronia  Lex  ;  but
this  Lex  Servilia  was  itself  repealed  by  a  Lex
Servilia  Glauciae  repetundarum,  probably  in  b.  c.
104.  This  Lex  is  said  to  have  given'the  Judicia
to  the  Equites,  and  consequently  it  either  repealed
the  Lex  of  b.  c.  106  indirectly,  or  it  may  merely
have  confinned  the  Lex  Sempronia  ;  for  the  real
nature  of  the  Lex  of  B.C.  106  is  hardly  ascer-
tainable. There  is  a  passage  in  Tacitus  {Annal.
xii.  60)  in  which  he  speaks  of  the  Serviiiae  legea
restoring  the  Judicia  to  the  senate.  The  Lex
Servilia  of  b.  c.  104  excluded  from  the  function  of


«50


JUDEX,  JUDICIUM.


Judices  every  person  who  had  been  tribiinus
plebis,  quaestor,  triumvir  capitalis,  tribunus  mili-
tum  in  one  of  the  first  four  legions,  triumvir  agris
dandis  assignandis,  who  was  or  had  been  in  the
senate,  who  was  infamis,  every  person  who  was
under  thirty  or  above  sixty  years  of  age,  every
person  who  did  not  live  in  Rome  or  in  tlie  imme-
diate neighbourhood,  every  father,  brother,  or  son
of  a  person  who  was  or  had  been  in  the  senate,
and  every  person  who  was  beyond  seas.  The
Praetor  who  presided  in  this  Quaestio,  was  to
choose  450  judices,  from  whom  the  Judices  for
the  particular  case  were  to  be  taken  by  lot.
(Fragmenta  Legis  Serviliae  Repetundarum,  &c.
C.  A.  C.  Klenze,  Berlin,  1825,  4to.)

The  attempts  of  the  tribune  M.  Livius  Dru-
sus  the  younger  had  no  result  [Leges  LiviaeJ.
A  Lex  Plautia  b.  c.  89  enacted,  that  the  Judices
should  be  chosen  by  the  tribes,  five  by  each
tribe,  without  any  distinction  of  class.  The  Op-
tiraates  triumphed  under  L.  Cornelius  Sulla,  who
by  a  Lex  Cornelia  B.  c.  80  enacted  that  the  Ju-
dices should  be  taken  exclusively  from  the  Sena-
tors. But  a  Lex  Aurelia  (b.  c.  70)  enacted  that  the
Judices  should  be  chosen  from  the  three  classes  —
of  Senators,  Equites,  and  Tribuni  Aerani  (Veil.  ii.
32.)  The  Tribuni  Aerarii  were  taken  from  the
rest  of  the  citizens,  and  were,  or  ought  to  have
been,  persons  of  some  property.  Thus  the  three
decuriae  of  Judices  were  formed  ;  and  it  was  either
in  consequence  of  the  Lex  Aurelia  or  some  other
lex  that,  instead  of  one  urn  for  all  the  tablets,
the  decuriae  had  severally  their  balloting  urn,  so
that  the  votes  of  the  three  classes  were  known.
Dion  Cassius  (xxxviii.  8)  ascribes  this  regulation  to
a  Lex  Fufia,  and  he  says  that  the  object  was  that
the  votes  of  the  decuriae  (eflvTj,  yevr])  might  be
known,  though  those  of  individuals  could  not,
owing  to  the  voting  being  secret.  It  is  not  known
if  the  Lex  Aurelia  determined  the  number  of  Ju-
dices in  any  given  case.  A  Lex  Pompeia  passed
in  the  second  consulate  of  Pompey  (b.  c.  55),
seems  to  have  made  some  modifications  in  the  Lex
Aurelia,  as  to  the  qualification  of  the  Judices  ;  but
the  new  provisions  of  this  lex  are  only  known
from  Asconius,  who  explains  them  in  terms  which
are  very  far  from  being  clear.  The  Lex  Pompeia
de  Vi,  and  De  Ambitu  (b.  c.  52)  determined  that
eighty  judices  were  to  be  selected  by  lot,  out  of
whom  the  accuser  and  the  accused  might  reject
thirty.  In  the  case  of  Clodius  (b.  c.  61),  in  the
matter  of  the  Bona  Dea,  there  were  fifty-six  judices.
It  is  conjectured  that  the  number  fixed  for  a  given
case,  by  the  Lex  Aurelia,  was  seventy  judices.

A  Lex  Judiciaria  of  Julius  Caesar  (Sueton.  Jul.
41  ;  Cic.  Philip,  i,  8)  took  away  the  decuria  of
the  Tribuni  Aerarii,  and  thus  reduced  the  judices
to  two  classes  {genera.,  the  yevv  of  Dion  Cassius).
A  Lex  Judiciaria,  passed  after  his  death  by  M.
Antonius,  restored  the  decuria  of  the  Tribuni
Aerarii,  but  required  no  pecuniary  qualification
from  them :  the  only  qualification  which  this  lex
required  was,  that  a  person  should  have  been  a
centurion  or  have  served  in  the  legions.  It  appears
that  the  previous  Lex  Pompeia,  Lex  Aurelia,  and
a  Lex  of  Caesar,  had  given  to  those  who  had  been
centurions  (qui  ordincs  duxerant)  the  privilege  of
being  judices  (judicatus),  but  still  they  required  a
pecuniary  qualification  (census).  The  Lex  of  An-
tonius, besides  taking  away  the  pecuniary  qualifi-
cation, opened  the  judicia  to  the  soldiers.     (Cic.


JUDEX,  JUDICIUM.

Pkil.  i.  8,  V.  5  ;  Sueton.  ,/.  Caes.  c,  41.)  It  seems
probable  that  the  expression  ea?  centuriis.,  which  is  J

used  by  Asconius  in  speaking  of  the  change  intro-  j

duced  by  this  Lex  Pompeia,  had  reference  to  the
admission  of  the  centurions  into  the  third  class  of
judices.

Augustus,  who  altered  the  whole  constitution  of
the  body  of  judices  by  his  leges  judiciorum  pub-
licorum  et  privatorum,  added  to  the  existing
three  Decuriae  Judicum,  a  fourth  Decuria,  called
that  of  the  Ducenarii,  who  had  a  lower  pecuniary
qualification,  and  only  decided  in  smaller  matters
(de  levioribus  siimmis,  Sueton.  Atig.  32).  Cali-
gula (Sueton.  Califf.  16)  added  a  fifth  Decuria,
in  order  to  diminish  the  labours  of  the  judices.
Augustus  had  already  allowed  each  Decuria,  in  its
turn,  an  exemption  for  one  year,  and  had  relieved
them  from  sitting  in  the  months  of  November  and
December.  The  whole  number  of  judices  was
raised  by  Augustus  to  near  4000  (Plin.  Hist.
Nat.  xxxiii.  7)  ;  and  the  judices  in  civil  cases
wer^  taken  out  of  this  body.  They  were  chosen
by  the  Praetors  out  of  the  persons  who  had  the
property  qualification,  and  the  duty  of  serving
as  a  judex  thus  became  one  of  the  burdens  to
which  citizens  were  liable.

As  to  the  whole  number  of  judices,  included  at
any  given  time  in  the  Album  Judicum,  it  seems
almost  impossible  to  state  any  thing  with  preci-
sion ;  but  it  is  obvious  from  what  has  been  said,
that  the  number  must  have  varied  with  the  vari-
ous changes  already  mentioned.  After  the  time  of
Augustus  the  number  was  about  four  thousand,
and  from  this  period,  at  least,  there  is  no  doubt  that
the  Album  Judicum  contained  the  whole  number
of  persons  who  were  qualified  to  act  as  judices,
both  in  Judicia  Privata  and  Judicia  PubMca.  The
fourth  Decuria  of  Augustus  was  limited  in  its  func-
tions to  the  Judicia  Privata  in  which  the  matter  in
dispute  was  of  small  value.  It  is  often  stated
by  modem  writers,  without  any  qualification,  that
the  various  changes  in  the  judiciary  body  from  the
time  of  the  Lex  Calpumia  to  the  end  of  the  re-
public had  reference  both  to  the  Judicia  Publica
and  Privata  ;  though  it  is  also  stated  that  the  ol)-
jects  of  these  various  enactments  were  to  elevate
or  depress  one  of  the  great  parties  in  the  state,  by
extending  or  limiting  the  body  out  of  which  the
judices  in  any  given  case  were  to  be  chosen.  But
it  is  obvious  that  these  reasons  do  not  apply  to  th^
matter  of  Judicia  Privata,  in  which  a  single  judex
generally  acted,  and  which  mostly  concerned  mat-
ters of  property  and  contract.  Accordingly,  a  re-
cent writer  (Walter,  Geschichte  des  Rom.  Jiechts,
p.  716)  has  observed  with  more  caution  than  some
of  his  predecessors,  that  "  there  is  no  doubt  that
from  the  time  of  Augustus  the  Album  Judicum
had  reference  to  the  judices  in  civil  matters,  but
that  as  to  ftarlier  times  a  difficulty  arises  from
the  fact  that  while  the  Lex  Sempronia  Avas  in
force,  by  which  the  senators  were  excluded  from  M
the  Album  Judicum,  a  Consularis  is  mentioned  as  ^j
a  judex  (Cic.  de  Off.  iii.  19)  ;  and,  on  the  other
hand,  an  Eques  is  mentioned  as  a  judex  at  a  time
when  the  Lex  of  Sulla  was  in  force,  and  conse-
quently senators  only  could  be  judices.  (Cic.  Pro
Rose.  Com.  c.  14.)"  These  instances  certainly  are
inconsistent  with  the  fact  of  the  Judicia  Privata
being  regulated  by  the  various  Legis  Judiciariae  ;
but  they  are  of  small  weight,  compared  with  the
reasons  derivable  from  the  character  of  the  two


i


JUDEX  PEDANEUS.

kinds  of  Judicia  and  the  difFcrence  in  the  mode  of
procedure,  -which  render  it  ahnost  a  matter  of  de-
monstration that  the  various  changes  in  the  judi-
ciary body  had  reference  to  the  Quaestiones  and
Judicia  Publica.  It  is  true  that  some  of  these
loges  may  have  contained  provisions  even  as  to
Judicia  Privata,  for  many  of  the  Roman  leges  con-
tained a  great  vartetj'  of  legislative  provisions,  and
it  is  also  true  that  we  are  verj^  imperfectly  ac-
quainted with  the  provisions  of  these  Leges  Judi-
ciariae  ;  but  that  the  regulation  of  the  Judicia
Privata  was  included  in  their  provisions,  in  the
same  form  and  to  the  same  extent  as  that  of  the
Judicia  Publica,  is  an  assertion  totally  unsupported
by  evidence,  and  one  which  leads  to  absurd  con-
clusions. Two  Leges  Juliae  together  with  a  Lex
Aebutia  put  an  end  to  the  Legis  Actiones  (Gaius,
iv.  30)  ;  and  a  Lex  Julia  Judiciaria  limited  the
time  of  the  Judicia  Legitima  (Gaius,  iv.  104)  :  but
it  does  not  appear  whether  these  leges  were  passed
solely  for  these  objects,  or  whether  their  provisions
were  part  of  some  other  leges.

Bethma.nn-Ro\l\vcg  (Ilandbuchdes  Civilprozesses,
p.  13)  observes:  "the  establishment  of  a  more
limited  body  of  judices  out  of  the  senatorial  body
(album  judicum  selcctorum),  A.  v.  c.  G05,  the
transfer  of  this  privilege  to  the  equites,  by  C.
Gracchus,  the  division  of  it  between  both  classes
after  long  struggles  and  changes,  and  even  the
giving  it  to  the  third  class,  whereby  three  classes
or  decuriae  of  judices  were  established  ;  all  these
changes,  which  were  so  important  in  a  constitutional
point  of  view,  referred  especially  to  the  criminal
proceedings  which  were  politically  so  important."

Though  the  general  character  of  the  Roman
Judicia,  and  the  modes  of  procedure  both  in  civil
and  criminal  matters,  are  capable  of  a  sufficiently
clear  exposition,  there  is  much  uncertainty  as  to
many  details,  and  the  whole  subject  requires  a
careful  examination  by  some  one  who  combines
with  a  competent  knowledge  of  the  original  autho-
rities, an  accurate  acquaintance  with  the  nature  of
legal  procedure.

The  following  works  may  be  referred  to :  —
Walter,  Geschichte  des  Rom.  Redds  ;  Goettling,
Ccschiclite  der  Rom.  Staatsmrfassung  ;  Heinec-
cius,  Syntagma^  &c.  ;  Tigerstrom,  De  Judidbus
apud  Roinanos,  Berl.  1826,  valuable  only  for  the
collection  of  the  original  authorities  :  Keller,  L^eLer
Litis  ContestcUion  und  Urtheil,  &c.  Zurich,  ]  827  ;
]?ethmann-Hollweg,  Handbuch  des  Civilprozesses,
Borm,  1834  ;  P.  Invernizii,  De  Puhlicis  et  Criini-
nalibus  Judieiis  Romanorum.,  Libri  Tres,  Leipzig,
1846;  Puchta,  Instit  i.  §71,  ii.  §151,  «&c.  ;
Gaius.  iv.  ;  Dig.  5.  tit.  1.  De  Judieiis  ;  Dig.  48.
De  Judieiis  PiMicis  ;  Inst.  iv.  tit.  18.)      [G.  L.]

JUDEX  ORDINA'RIUS.     [Judex  Peda-

NEUS.]

JUDEX  PEDA'NEUS.  The  origin  and  mean-
ing of  this  term  seem  to  be  unknown.  It  is  not
used  by  the  classical  Roman  writers.  The  judices
to  whom  the  praetor  or  praeses  referred  a  matter  in
litigation  with  the  usual  instructions,  were  some-
times called  Pedanei.  (Theophil.  iv.  15  ;  Cod.  3.
tit.  3.)  Subsequently  the  praeses,  who  was  now
sometimes  designated  Judex  Ordinarius  or  Judex
simply  {Cod.Tkeod.  1.  tit.  7),  decided  most  matters
without  the  intervention  of  a  Judex  ;  biit  still  he
was  empowered  to  appoint  a  permanent  body  of
judices  for  the  decision  of  less  important  matters,
and  these  also  were  called  Judices  Pedanei,  "  hoc


JUGERUM.


651


est  qui  negotia  huiniliora  disceptent.''  (Cod.  3.
tit.  3.  s.  5.)  The  proceedings  before  this  new  kind
of  Judices  Pedanei  were  the  same  as  before  the
praeses.  Some  modern  writers  are  of  opinion  that
these  new  pedanei  judices  did  not  form  a  perma-
nent court,  but  only  decided  on  matters  which  were
referred  to  them  by  a  superior  authority.  (Cod.  3.
tit.  3.)  The  reason  of  these  judices  receiving  a  dis-
tinctive name  is  conjectured  to  be  this,  that  the
magistrate  himself  was  now  generally  called  Judex.
The  Greek  translation  of  Pedaneus  is  xa,"«'St-
/cao-TTjs  (Theophil.  iv.  15.  pr.)  [G.  L.]

JUDEX  QUAESTIO'NIS.  [Judex,  p.  648.]

JUDICA'TI  ACTIO.  A  thing  was  a  Res
judicata,  when  the  matter  in  dispute  had  been  de-
termined by  a  judicial  sentence  ;  and  the  actio
judicati  was  a  mode  which  the  successful  part}'-
might  adopt,  for  obtaining  a  decree  of  the  magis-
tratus  by  which  he  could  take  possession  of  the
property  of  the  person  who  had  lost  the  cause  and
had  not  satisfied  the  judgment.  The  plaintiff  in
the  actio  judicati  was  also  protected  in  his  posses-
sion of  the  defendant's  property  by  a  special  inter-
dict, and  he  was  empowered  to  sell  it.  The  party
condemned  was  limited  as  to  his  defence.  Origin-
ally the  judicatus  was  obliged  to  find  a  vindex
{ri7idicem  dare)  ;  but  in  the  time  of  Gaius  it  had
become  the  practice  for  him  to  give  security  to
the  amount  of  the  judgment  {judicatum  solvi  satis-
dare).  If  the  defendant  pleaded  that  there  was
no  res  judicata,  he  was  mulcted  in  double  the
amount  of  the  judgment,  if  his  plea  was  false.

The  actio  judicati,  as  a  peculiar  obligation,  is
m(>rely  the  development  and  completion  of  the
obligatio  which  is  founded  on  the  Litis  Contes-
tatio  ;  but  this  peculiar  obligatio  is  merely  another
form  of  execution,  and  it  participates  in  the  general
nature  of  the  process  of  execution.  The  general
nature  of  the  actio  judicati  appears  from  the  fol-
lowing passages.  (Dig.  42.  tit.  1.  s.  4,  5,  6,  7,  41.
§  2,  43,  44,  61).     Savigny,  System,  «&c.  vi.  p.  41 1.

(Gaius,  iv.  9,  25,  171,  102  ;  Cic.  pro  Place.  21  ;
Paulus,  S.R.i.  tit.  19.)  [G.  L.]

JU'DICES  EDITI,  EDITI'TIL  [Judex,
P.646.J

JUDI'CIA  DUPLI'CIA.  [Familiae  Ercis-
cuNDAE  Actio.]

JUDI'CIA  LEGFTIMA.  [Imperium,  p.
628,  b.,  p.  629,  a.]

JUDI'CIA  QUAE  IMPE'RIO.  [Impeuium,
p.  628,  b,  p.  629,3.]

JUDFCIUM.     [Judex.]

JUDFCIUM   PO'PULI.     [Judex,  p.  648.]

JUDFCIUM  PRIVA'TUM,  PU'BLICUM.
[Judex,  p.  648.]

JU'GERUM  or  JUGUS  (the  latter  form,  as  a
neuter  noun  of  the  third  declension,  is  very  com-
mon in  the  oblique  cases  and  in  the  plural),  a
Roman  measure  of  surface,  240  feet  in  length  and
120  in  breadth,  containing  therefore  28,800  square
feet.  (Colum.  R.R.\.\.%Q;  Quintil.  i.  18.)  It
was  the  double  of  the  Actus  Quadraius,  and  from
this  circumstance,  according  to  some  writers,  it
derived  its  name.  (Varro,  L.  L.  v.  35,  Miiller,
R.  R.  i.  1 0).  [Actus.]  It  seems  probable  that,
as  the  word  was  evidently  originalh^  the  same  as
jtigtis  or  jiigum,  a  yoke,  and  as  actus,  in  its  original
use,  meant  a  path  wide  enough  to  drive  a  single
beast  along,  that  jugerum  originally  meant  a  path
wide  enough  for  a  yoke  of  oxen,  namely,  the
double  of  the  actus  in  width  j  and  that  when  aclu9


652


JUGIJM.


•was  used  for  a  square  measure  of  surface,  theju-
(ferum,  by  a  natural  analogy,  became  the  double  of
the  actus  quadratus ;  and  that  this  new  meaning
of  it  superseded  its  old  use  as  the  double  of  the
single  actus.  The  uncial  division  [As]  was  ap-
plied to  the  jugerum^  its  smallest  part  being  the
scrupufuin  of  1 0  feet  square,  =100  square  feet.
Thus  the  ju(/eru>n  contained  288  scrupula.  (Varro,
li.  R.  1.  c.)  The  jugerum  was  the  common  mea-
sure of  land  among  the  Romans.  Two  jvgera
formed  an  heredium^  a  hundred  heredia  a  ccnturia,,
and  four  centuriae  a  sall?is.  These  divisions  were
derived  from  the  original  assignment  of  landed
property,  in  which  two  jngera  were  given  to  each
citizen  as  heritable  property.  (Varro,  ^c;  Nie-
buhr,  Flist.  of  Rome,  vol.  ii,  pp.  156,  &c.,  and  Ap-
pendix ii.)  [P.  S.J

JUGUM  {C^yhs,  ^vyhv),  signified  in  general
that  which  joined  two  things  together.  It  denoted
more  especially,

1.  In  architecture  any  cross  beam  (Vitruv.  x.  8.
19).

2.  The  transverse  beam  which  united  the  up-
right posts  of  a  loom,  and  to  which  the  warp  was
attached.  (Ovid.  Met.  vi.  55.)     [Tela]

3.  The  transverse  rail  of  a  trellis  (Varro,  de  Re
Rust.  i.  8  ;  Col.  de  Re  Rust.  iv.  17,  20,  xii.  15,
Geopon.  v.  29),  joining  the  upright  poles  {perticae,
XdpctKes)  for  the  support  of  vines  or  other  trees.
[Capistrum,]  Hence  by  an  obvious  resemblance
the  ridges  uniting  the  tops  of  mountains  were
called  juga  moniium.  (Virg.  Eel.  v.  76  ;  Flor.  ii.
3,  9,  17,  iii.  3.)

4.  The  cross-bar  of  a  lyre.  (Horn.  R.  ix.  187.)

5.  A  scale-beam,  and  hence  a  pair  of  scales
[Libra].  The  constellation  Libra  was  conse-
quently also  called  Jugum.  (Cic.  Div.  ii.  47.)

6.  The  transverse  seat  of  a  boat.  (Aeschj'l.
J  gam.  1608  ;  Soph.  Ajax,  247  ;  Virg.  A  en.  vi.
411.)  This  gave  origin  to  the  term  C^yirr]s,  as
applied  to  a  rower.  A  vessel  with  many  benches
«)r  banks  for  the  rowers  was  called  vr}vs  iroKvQliyos
or  kKarS^vyos.   (Horn.  11.  iii.  293,  xx.  247.)

7.  The  yoke  by  which  nloughs  and  carriages
were  drawn.  The  yoke  was  in  many  cases  a
straight  wooden  plank  or  pole  laid  upon  the
horses'  necks  ;  but  it  was  commonly  bent  to-
wards each  extremity,  so  as  to  be  accommodated
to  the  part  of  the  animal  which  it  touched  {cui-va
jtuja,  Ovid.  Fast.  iv.  216,  Trist.  iv.  6.  2).  The
following  woodcut  shows  two  examples  of  the
yoke,  the  upper  from  a  MS.  of  Hesiod's  Works
and  Days,  preserved  at  Florence,  the  lower  from  a
MS.  of  Terence  belonging  to  the  Vatican  library.
These  may  be  compared  with  the  still  ruder  forms
of  the  yoke  as  now  used  in  Asia  Minor,  which  are
introduced  in  the  article  Aratrum.  The  practice
of  having  the  j'oke  tied  to  the  horns  and  pressing
upon  the  foieheads  of  the  oxen  {capite,  non  cervice

junctis,  Plin.  H.  N.  viii.  70),  which  is  now  com-
juon  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  and  especially  in
France,  is  strongly  condemned  by  Columella  on
grounds  of  economy  as  Avell  as  of  humanity.  (De
Re  Rust.  ii.  2.)  He  recommends  that  their  heads
should  be  left  free,  so  that  they  may  raise  them
aloft  and  thus  make  a  much  handsomer  appearance.
(Cic.  jVuL  Dear.  ii.  63;  Ovid.  Met.  vii.  211.)
All  this  was  effected  by  the  use  either  of  the  two
collars  (stdijugia.,  Vitruv.  x.  3.  8  ;  fj-eadSa,  Hesiod.
Op.  et  Dies.  469  ;  Proclus,  ad  he.  ;  C^vyXai,  Hom.
li  xix,  406  ;    Schol.  ad  Apoll.   Rhod.  iii.  232)


JUGUM.

shown  in  the  upper  figure  of  the  woodcut,  or  of  tlie
excavations  {y\v<pai)  cut  in  the  yoke,  with  the
l)auds  of  leather  (lora ;  vi?ic/a,  'I'ib.  ii.  1.  7  ;  rav
poSeriv  $vpaav  inavx^virjv,  Brunck,  Anal.  iii.  44,
AeiraSvo),  which  are  seen  in  the  lower  figure.


This  figure  also  shows  the  method  of  tying  the
yoke  to  the  pole  (temo,  pv/j-os)  by  me.ans  of  a
leathern  strap  (Cvyddecr^ov,  Hom.  //.  v.  730,  xxiv.
268 — 274),  which  was  lashed  from  the  two  op-
posite sides  over  the  junction  of  the  pole  and  yoke.
These  two  parts  were  still  more  firmly  connected
by  means  of  a  pin  (l,ugoAos,  Schol.  in  Eurip.  Hip-
pol.  666  ;  'iaTccp,  Horn.  I.  c.  ;  Arrian.  Eorped.
Alex.  ii.  p.  85,  ed.  Blan.  ;  ffigpvoK  lies.  I.  c),
which  fitted  a  circular  cavity  in  the  middle  of  the
yoke  (ofKpaXhs,  Hom.  I.  c).  Homer  represents  the
leathern  band  as  turned  over  the  fastening  thrice
in  each  direction.  But  the  fastening  was  some-
times much  more  complicated,  especially  in  the  case
of  the  celebrated  Gordian  knot,  which  tied  the
yoke  of  a  common  cart,  and  consisted  only  of  flexi-
ble twigs  or  bark,  but  in  which  the  ends  were  so
concealed  by  being  inserted  within  the  knot,  that
the  only  way  of  detaching  the  yoke  was  that  which
Alexander  adopted.  (Arrian,  I.  c;  Q.  Curt.  iii.  2  ;
Schol.  in  Eurip.  I.  c.)

Besides  being  variegated  with  precious  materials
and  with  carving,  the  yoke,  especially  among  the
Persians,  was  decorated  with  elevated  plumes  and
figures.  Of  this  an  example  is  presented  in  a
bas-relief  from  Persepolis,  preserved  in  the  British
Museum.  The  chariot  of  Dareius  was  remarkable
for  the  golden  statues  of  Belus  and  Ninus,  about
eighteen  inches  high,  which  were  fixed  to  the  yoke
over  the  necks  of  the  horses,  a  spread  eagle,  also
wrought  in  gold,  being  placed  between  them.  (Q.
Curt.  iii.  3.)  The  passages  above  cited  show  that
when  the  carriage  was  prepared  for  use,  the  yoke
which  had  been  laid  aside,  was  first  fastened  to
the  pole,  and  the  horses  were  then  led  inider  it.
Either  above  them,  or  at  the  two  ends  of  the
yoke,  rings  were  often  fixed,  through  which  the
reins  passed.  These  frequently  appear  in  works  of
ancient  art,  representing  chariots.

Morning  and  evening  are  often  designated  lii
poetry  by  the  act  of  putting  the  yoke  on  the  oxen
(Hos.  Op.  et  Dies,  581)  and  taking  it  off.  (Hor.
Carm.  iii.  6.  42  ;  Virg.  Eel.  ii.  66  ;  Ovid.  Fast.
V.  497  ;  ^ov\v<ns,  fiovXvr'bs,  Arrian,  I.  c.  ;  Horn.
II.  xvi.  779  ;  Cic.  ad  Att.  xv.  27  ;  ^ovXvcrios  &pTii
Arat.  Dios.  387-)


JUKGIUM.

By  metonymy  jwmm  nieaiit  the  qucvntity  of
land  which  a  yoke  ot"  oxen  could  ])lougli  in  a  day.
(Varro,  de  Re  Rnst.  i.  10.)  It  was  used  as  equi-
ralent  to  the  Latin  par  and  tiie  Greek  C^vyos,  as
in  mjuilanim  jugum.  (Plin.  //.  A',  x.  4,  5.)  By
another  figure  the  yoke  meant  slavery^  or  the  con-
dition in  whicli  men  are  compelled  against  their
■will,  like  oxen  or  horses,  to  labour  for  others.
(Aeschyl.  Agam.  512  ;  Floras,  ii.  14  ;  Tacit.  Agric.
31  ;  Hor.  Sal.  ii.  7.  91.)  Hence,  to  express  sym-
bolically the  subjugation  of  conquered  nations,  the
Romans  made  their  captives  pass  under  a  yoke  {sub
jugum  mittere)^  which,  however,  in  form  and  for
the  sake  of  convenience,  was  sometimes  made,  not
like  the  yoke  used  in  drawing  carriages  or  ploughs,
but  rather  like  the  jugum  described  under  the  two
first  of  the  preceding  heads  ;  for  it  consisted  of  a
spear  supported  transversely  by  two  others  placed
upright.  [J.  Y.J

JlJGUMENTUM.  [Janua,  p.  624,  b.]
JUNIO'RES.  [CoMiTiA.  p.  333.J
JURA  IN  RE.  [DoMiNmM.l
JURE  ACTIO,  IN.  [JuKiSDicTio.]
JURE  CESSIO,  IN,  was  a  mode  of  trans-
ferring ownership  by  means  of  a  fictitious  suit,  and
60  far  resembled  the  forms  of  conveyance  by  fine
and  by  common  recovery,  which,  till  lately,  were
in  use  in  England.  The  In  Jure  Cessio  was  appli-
cable to  things  Mancipi  and  Nee  Mancipi,  and
also  to  Res  Incorporales,  which,  from  their  nature,
were  incapable  of  tradition.  The  parties  to  this
transaction  were  the  owner  {dominus  qui  cedit)^  the
person  to  whom  it  was  intended  to  transfer  the
ownership  (vindicans,  cut  ceditur),  and  the  magis-
tratus,  qui  addicit.  The  person  to  whom  the
ownership  was  to  be  transferred,  claimed  the  thing
as  his  own  in  presence  of  the  magistratus  and  the
real  owner  :  the  magistratus  called  upon  the  owner
for  his  defence,  and  on  his  declaring  that  he  had
none  to  make,  or  remaining  silent,  the  magistratus
decreed  {uddixit)  the  thing  to  the  claimant.  This
proceeding  was  a  legis  actio.

An  hereditas  could  be  transferred  by  this  pro-
cess [Heres,  p.  601,  b.]  ;  and  the  res  corporales,
which  belonged  to  the  hereditas,  passed  in  this  way
just  as  if  they  had  severally  been  transferred  by
the  In  Jure  Cessio.

The  In  Jure  Cessio  was  an  old  Roman  institu-
tion, and  there  were  provisions  respecting  it  in  the
Twelve  Tables.    (Frag.  Vat.  s.  50.)

(Gains,  ii.  24;  UIp.  Frag.  tit.  1 9.  s.  9.)  [G.  L.]
JU'RGIUM  i8  apparently  a  contracted  form  of
.Tnridicium.  The  word  had  a  special  legal  mean-
ing, as  appears  from  a  passage  of  Cicero,  De  Re-
pidjlica,  quoted  by  Nonius :  "  Si  jurgant,  inquit,
bcnevolorum  concertatio,  non  lis  inimicorum  jurgium
dicitur.  Et  in  sequenti :  J  urgare  igitur  lex  putat
inter  so  vicinos,  non  litigare."  Rudorff  states  that
the  small  disputes  which  arose  between  owners  of
contiguous  lands  within  the  "  quinque  pedes "
(Cic.  de  Leg.  i.  18)  were  comprehended  under  the
term  Jurgium.  He  refers  for  a  like  use  of  the
word  to  Horace  (Fp.  ii.  1.  38,  and  ii.  2.  170),

Sed  vocat  usque  suum,  qua  populus  adsita  certis
Limitibus  vicina  refugit  jurgia.

(Rudorff,  Zeitschrl/t,  8cc.  vol.  x.  p.  346,  Ueberdle
Gr'dnzscheidungsMage.)

Compare  also  Cicero,  de  Legifms,  ii.  8.  "  Feriis
jurgia  amovento;"  and  Eacciolati,  Le^ricov.,  s.  v.
Jurgiujn,  [G.  I^.j


JURISCONSULTt.  6.W

JURFDICI.  Under  Hadrian,  Italy  was  di-
vided into  five  districts,  one  of  which  contained
Rome,  and  continued  in  the  same  relation  to  the
Roman  praetor  that  it  had  been  before  the  division
of  Hadrian.  Each  of  the  other  four  districts  re-
ceived a  magistratus  with  the  title  of  consularis,
who  had  the  higher  jurisdiction,  which  was  taken
from  the  municipal  magistrates.  We  may  also
infer  that  the  court  of  the  consularis  was  a  court  of
appeal  from  the  inferior  courts  in  the  matters  which
were  left  to  their  jurisdiction.  (Spart.  Hadrian,  22  ;
Capitol,  Pius, 2.)  This  aiTangement  of  Hadrian
was  an  advantage  to  the  Italians,  for  before  this
time  the  inhabitants  had  to  go  to  the  Roman
praetor's  court  for  all  matters  which  were  not
Avithin  the  jurisdiction  of  the  duumviri  ;  for  we
must  assume  that  the  consulares  resided  in  their
districts.  M.  Aurelius  placed  functionaries  with
the  title  of  Juridici  in  the  place  of  the  Consulares
(Puchta,  Instit.  i.  §  92  ;  and  note  (m)  on  the  pass-
age of  Appian,  BeJL  Civ.  i.  38).  [G.  L.]

JURFDICI  CONVENTUS  [Provixcia].

JURISCONSULTI  or  JURECONSULTI.
The  origin  among  the  Romans  of  a  bod}'  of  men,
who  were  expounders  of  the  law,  may  be  referred
to  the  separation  of  the  Jus  Civile  irom  the  Jus
Pontificium.  [Jus  Civile  Flavianum.]  Such
a  body  certainly  existed  before  the  time  of  Cicero,
and  the  persons  who  professed  to  expound  the  law
were  called  by  the  various  names  of  jurisperiti,
jurisconsult!,  or  consulti  simply.  They  were  also
designated  by  other  names,  as  jurisprudentes,  pru-
dentiores,  peritiores,  and  juris  auctores.  The  word
which  Plutarch  uses  is  vofioSdKTiqs  (Tib.  Gracch.
9),  and  vojjlikos  (Stdla,  36.)  Cicero  (Top.  5)  enu-
merates the  jurisperitorum  auctoritas  among  the
component  parts  of  the  Jus  Civile.  The  definition
of  a  jurisconsultus,  as  given  by  Cicero  (De  Or.  i,
48),  is,  "  a  person  who  has  such  a  knowledge  of
the  laws  (leges)  and  customs  (consuetudo)  which
prevail  in  a  state  as  to  be  able  to  advise  (respo7i-
dendum),  act  (agendum),  and  to  secure  a  person  in
his  dealings  (cavendum)  :  Sextus  Aelius  Catus  [Jus
Aelianum],  M\  Manilius,  and  P.  Mucins  are  ex-
amples." In  the  oration  Pro  Murena,  Cicero  uses
"  scribere  "  in  the  place  of  ""  agere."  The  business
of  the  early  jurisconsulti  consisted  both  in  advising
and  acting  on  behalf  of  their  clients  (conszdtores)
gratuitously.  They  gave  their  advice  or  answers
(responsa)  eitlier  in  public  places  which  they  at-
tended at  certain  times,  or  at  their  own  houses
(Cic.  de  Or.  iii.  33)  ;  and  not  only  on  matters  of
law,  but  on  any  thing  else  that  might  be  referred
to  them.  The  words  "  scribere  "  and  ""  cavcre  "
referred  to  their  employment  in  drawing  up  formal
instruments,  such  as  contracts  or  wills,  &c.  At  a
later  period,  many  of  these  functions  were  per-
formed by  persons  who  were  paid  by  a  fee,  and
thus  there  arose  a  body  of  practitioners  distinct
from  those  who  gave  responsa  and  who  were  writers
and  teachers.  The  earlier  jurisconsults  cannot  be
said  to  be  the  same  kind  of  persons  as  those  of  a
later  period.  Law  had  not  then  assumed  a  sci-
entific form.  The  first  whom  Pomponius  mentions
was  Papirius,  who  is  said  to  have  made  a  collection
of  the  Leges  Regiae.  Tiberius  Coruncanius,  a
plebeian,  who  was  consul  b.  c.  281,  and  also  the
first  plebeian  Pontifex  Maximus,  is  mentioned  as
the  first  who  publicly  professed  (publice  pru-
/essus  est),  and  he  was  distinguished  both  for  his
knowledge  of  the  laAV  and  his  eloquence.     Ho  left


654


JURISCOXSULTI.


110  writings.  It  must  not,  however,  be  assumed
that  Coruncanius  was  a  professor  of  law  in  the
inodern  sense  of  the  tenii  ;  nor  any  other  of  the
jurists  after  him  who  are  enumerated  by  Pomponius.
Before  the  time  of  Cicero  the  study  of  the  law
had  become  a  distinct  branch  from  the  study  of
oratory,  and  a  man  might  raise  himself  to  eminence
in  the  state  by  his  reputation  as  a  lawyer,  as  well
as  by  his  oratorical  power  or  militfiry  skill.  There
were  many  distinguished  jurists  in  the  last  two
centuries  of  the  republican  period,  among  whom
are  M\  Manilius  ;  P.  Mucins  Scaevola,  Pontifex
Maximus  (b.  c.  131)  ;  Q.  Mucins  Scaevola,  the
augur ;  and  Q.  Mucins  Scaevola,  the  son  of  Publius,
who  was  consul  B.  c.  95,  and  afterwards  Pontifex
Maximus,  and  one  of  the  masters  of  Cicero  (juris-
jMritorum  eloqttentisisiitius,  eloqtientium  jiiriaperit'isd-
mus,  Cic.  de  Or.  i.  39,  Brutus,  c.  89).  This  Scae-
vola the  Pontifex,  was  considered  to  have  been  tlie
first  who  gave  the  Jus  Civile  a  systematic  form,  by
a  treatise  in  eighteen  books.  (Dig.  1.  tit.  2.  s.  2.
§  41.)  There  are  four  excerpts  in  the  Digest  from
a  work  of  his  in  one  book,  on  Definitions.  Servius
Sulpicius  Rufus,  the  friend  and  contemporary  of
Cicero,  and  consul  b.  c.  51  {Brut.  7,  40),  was  as
great  an  orator  as  the  Pontifex  Scaevola,  and  more
distinguished  as  a  jurist.  Many  persons,  both  his
predecessors  and  contemporaries,  had  a  good  prac-
tical knowledge  of  the  law,  but  he  was  the  first
who  handled  it  in  a  scientific  manner,  and  as  he
had  both  numerous  hearers  and  was  a  voluminous
'A^riter,  we  may  view  him  as  the  founder  of  that
methodical  treatment  of  the  matter  of  law  which
characterised  the  subsequent  Roman  jurists  (Cic.
Brut.  41  ;  Dig.  1.  tit.  2.  s.  2.  §  43),  and  in  which
they  have  been  seldom  surpassed.

The  jurists  of  the  imperial  times  are  distin-
guished from  those  of  the  republican  period  by  two
circumstances,  the  Jus  Respondendi,  and  the  rise
of  two  Schools  of  Law.

It  is  said  that  Augustus  determined  that  the
Jurisconsult!  should  give  their  responsa  under  his
sanction  {ex  auctoritate  ejus  responderent).  The
jurists  who  had  not  received  this  mark  of  imperial
favour,  were  not  excluded  from  giving  opinions  ;
but  the  opinions  of  such  jurists  would  have  little
weight  in  comparison  with  those  of  the  privileged
class.  Those  who  obtained  the  Jus  Respondendi
from  the  Princeps,  would  from  this  circumstance
alone  have  a  greater  authority,  for  formally  their
Responsa  were  founded  on  the  authority  of  the
Princeps.  These  responsa  were  given  sealed  {siff-
nata\  apparently  to  prevent  fixlsification.  The
matter  proposed  for  the  opinion  of  the  Jurisconsulti
was  sometimes  stated  in  the  Responsum,  either
fully  or  briefly  ;  and  the  Responsum  itself  was
sometimes  short,  sometimes  long  ;  sometimes  it
contained  the  grounds  of  the  opinion,  and  some-
times it  did  not.  (Brisson.  de  Form.  iii.  c.  85 —
87.)

The  responsa  of  a  privileged  jurisconsultus  would
be  an  authority  for  the  decision  of  a  judex  ;  if
there  were  conflicting  responsa  given,  the  judex
would  of  course  decide  as  he  best  could.  But,
besides  the  direct  responsa,  which  were  given  in
particular  cases,  there  was  the  authority  of  the
writings  of  the  privileged  jurists.  As  before  the
time  of  Augustus,  public  opinion  only  gave  autho-
rity to  a  jurist's  responsa  and  writings,  so  from  the
time  of  Augustus  this  authority  was  given  by  the
Jus  Respondendi  to  the  responsa  and  writings  of  \


JURISCONSULTI.

a  jurist.  This  privilege  gave  to  a  jurist  the  con-
dition of  a  Juris  auctor,  and  to  his  writings  legal
authority,  neither  of  which  belonged  to  a  jurist
who  had  not  received  the  privilege.  Accordingl}',
the  writings  of  such  privileged  jurists  received  the
same  authority  as  their  responsa  ;  and  if  the
opinions  of  the  Juris  auctores,  as  expressed  in
their  writings,  did  not  agree,  the  Judex  was  left
to  decide  as  he  best  could.  This  explanation  of
the  nature  of  the  Jus  Respondendi,  which  is  by
Puchta  (Instit.  i.  §  1 1  7),  is  applied  by  him  to  the
elucidation  of  the  passage  in  Gains  (i.  7.  Responsa
pinidentium  sunt  sententiae  et  opiniones,  &c.).  He
supposes  that  this  interpretation  of  the  passage  is
strictly  conformable  to  what  has  been  said  of  the  au-
thority of  the  writings  of  the  jurists.  If  we  leave
out  of  consideration  the  technical  expression  Res-
ponsa, with  which  the  passage  begins,  there  is  no
difficulty  at  all  in  applying  the  words  of  Gains  to  the
writings  of  the  jurists  ;  and,  in  fact,  it  is  most  con-
sistent to  take  responsa  in  this  passage  in  a  wider
sense,  and  as  equivalent  to  auctoritas.  The  term
Responsa  originated  at  a  time  when  responsa,  in
the  simple  sense  of  the  term,  were  the  only  form
in  which  the  auctoritas  of  a  jurist  was  manifested  ;
whereas  in  the  time  of  Gains,  the  writings  of  tl^
jurists  had  become  a  very  important  legal  authoritj-,
and  consequently  they  must  be  included  by  Gaius
in  the  term  Responsa  Prudentium,  for  otherwise
he  would  not  have  mentioned  at  all  the  Auctoritas
Prudentium,  to  which  he  so  often  refers  in  various
parts  of  his  work.  Puchta's  explanation  of  this
passage,  which  bears  the  stamp  of  great  probability,
may  be  compared  with  that  of  Savigny  {System,
&c.  vol.  i.  p.  155).

In  the  time  of  Augustus  there  arose  two  schools
{scholae)  of  Jurists,  the  heads  of  which  were  re-
spectively Ateius  Capito  and  Antistius  Labeo.  The
followers  of  Labeo,  whom  we  know  with  certainty
to  have  been  such,  were  Nerva,  Proculus,  Nerva
the  son,  Pegasus,  Celsus,  Celsus  the  son,  and
Neratius  Priscus.  The  followers  of  Capito  v/ere
Massurius  Sabinus,  C.  Cassius  Longinus,  Coelius
Sabinus,  Priscus  Javolenus,  Aburnus  Valens  Tus-
cianus,  Gaius,  .and  probably  Pomponius.  But  the
schools  did  not  take  their  names  from  Labeo  and
Capito.  The  followers  cf  Labeo  were  named  Pro-
culiani,  from  Proculus.  The  followers  of  Capito
derived  their  name  of  Sabiniani  from  Massurius
Sabinus,  who  lived  under  Tiberius,  and  as  late  as
the  reign  of  Nero :  they  were  sometimes  also  called
Cassiani,  from  C.  Cassius  Longinus.  It  is  not
easy  to  state  with  precision  the  differences  which
characterised  the  two  schools.  Whatever  may
have  been  the  origin  of  these  differences,  which
may  perhaps  be  partly  referred  to  the  personal
character  of  Capito  and  Labeo,  the  schools  wero
subsequently  distinguished  by  a  difference  in  their
manner  of  handUng  the  matter  of  the  law.  The
school  of  Capito  adhered  more  closely  to  what  was
established,  and  to  the  letter  of  what  was  written.^
Labeo  was  a  man  of  greater  acquirements  than  J
Capito,  and  his  school  looked  more  to  the  internal]
meaning  than  to  the  external  form,  and  thus,  while  ■
apparently  deviating  from  the  letter,  they  ap-
proached nearer  to  true  results  ;  though  the  strict
logic  of  this  school  might  sometimes  produce  a  re-
sult less  adapted  to  general  convenience  than  the
conclusions  of  the  Sabiniani,  which  were  based  on
the  prevailing  notions  of  equity.  Much  has  been
Avritten  on  the  characteristics  of  the  two  schools,


JURISDICTIO.
Ijut  to  vnry  little  purpose.     The  matter  is  briefly
t-eated  by  Puchta.     {Instit.  i.  §  m.)

The  writings  of  the  jiirisconsulti  consisted  of
commentarii  on  the  Twelve  Tables,  on  the  Edict,
on  particular  leges,  more  especially  on  some  of  the
Juliae  Leges,  and  on  other  matters.  The  later
jurists  also  commented  on  the  writings  of  the  earlier
jurists.  They  also  wrote  elementary  treatises  {ele-
mental comine?iiarii),  such  as  the  Institutiones  of
Gaius,  whicli  is  the  earliest  work  of  the  kind  that
we  know  to  have  been  written  ;  books  called
Regulae,  and  Definitiones,  which  probably  were
collections  of  maxims  and  legal  principles  ;  collec-
tions of  cases  and  answers,  under  the  various  names
of  responsa,  epistolae,  sententiae,  and  opiniones  ;
systems  of  law  ;  and  various  works  of  a  miscella-
neous character,  with  a  great  variety  of  names,
such  as  disputationes,  quaestiones,  enchiridia,  res
quotidianae,  and  various  other  titles.

The  juristical  writers  were  very  numerous  :  they
formed  a  series,  beginning  with  Q.  Mucins  Scae-
vola,  the  Pontifex,  and  ending  about  the  time  of
Alexander  Severus,  with  Modestinus  who  was  a
pupil  of  Ulpian.  With  the  exception  of  the  frag-
ments preserved  in  the  Digest,  this  great  mass  of
literature  is  nearl}'^  lost.    [Pandectak.]

The  mode  of  teaching  law  at  Rome  was  of  a
practical  nature.  Professors  of  law  in  the  modern
sense  did  not  exist  till  the  Imperial  periods.  Ul-
pian calls  them  Juris  civilis  professores  (Dig.  50.
tit,  13.  s.  1.  §  5)  ;  but  there  is  no  indication  that  he
considered  himself  as  one  of  the  class  ;  nor  can  we
consider  that  such  men  as  Julian,  Papinian  or
Paulus  ever  followed  the  occupation  of  teacher  of
law.  The  instruction  which  was  given  in  the  re-
publican period  consisted  in  the  Jurisconsulti  al-
lowing young  men  to  be  present  as  audiiores,  when
they  delivered  their  legal  opinions,  and  to  see  how
they  conducted  their  business.  (Cic.  Brut.  89,
Laelius,  1.)  Previous,  however,  to  attending  to
this  practical  instruction,  young  men  were  taught
the  elements  of  law,  which  was  expressed  by  the
term  institui,  whence  probably  the  name  Insti-
tutiones was  given  to  elementar}^  treatises  like
those  of  Gaius.  Accordingly,  i?istitm  and  audire,
expressed  the  two  parts  of  a  legal  education  ;  and
this  mode  of  instruction  continued  probably  till
near  the  time  of  Constantino.  In  the  Imperial
period,  probably  young  men  devoted  themselves
for  a  still  longer  period  to  attendance  on  those
jurists,  who  had  the  Jus  Respondendi.  These
young  men  are  the  juris  studiosi,  who  are  men-
tioned by  Ulpian  and  others.  Thus  Ulpian  calls
Modestinus,  "  studiosus  mens."  As  already  ob-
served, the  class  called  Juris  Civilia  Professores
arose  under  the  empire,  and  they  received  from
those  who  attended  them  an  Honorarium,  or  fee.
(Ulpian,  Dig.  50.  tit.  13.  s.  1.  §  5.)

(Pomponius,  De  Origine  Juris.,  Dig.  1.  tit.  2,
s.  2  ;  Zimmern,  Geschichte  dcs  Romischen  Privat  ■
rechts.)  [G.  L.]

JURISDI'CTTO.  The  "officium"  of  him
*'qui  jus  dicit  "  is  defined  as  follows  (Dig.  2.  tit.  1.
De  Jurisdictione)  :  —  "  Bonorum  possessionem  dare
potest,  et  in  possessionem  mittere,  pupiliis  non
habentibus  tutores  constituere,  judices  litigantibus
dare.""  This  is  the  general  signification  of  the
word  Jurisdictio,  which  expresses  the  whole  "  offi-
cium  jus  dicentis."  The  functions  which  are  in-
cluded in  the  "  officium  jus  dicentis  "  belong  either
to  the  Jurisdictio  (in  its  special  sense),  or  to  the


JUS.  655

Imperlum  Mixtum,  or  they  are  those  which  are
exercised  by  virtue  of  some  lex,  senatusconsultum,
or  authority  delegated  by  the  princeps,  as  the
"Tutoris  datio."  (Dig.  26.  tit.  1.  s.  6.)  The  Juris-
dictio of  those  magistratus  who  had  no  Imperium,
was  limited  in  consequence  of  not  having  the  Im-
perium, and  therefore  was  not  Jurisdictio  in  the
full  meaning  of  that  term.  [Imperium  ;  Magis-
tratus.] Inasmuch  as  Jurisdictio  in  its  special
sense,  and  the  Imperium  Mixtum,  are  component
parts  of  .Jurisdictio  in  its  wider  sense,  Imperium
may  be  said  to  be  contained  in  or  incident  to
.Jurisdictio  {impeiHum  qiwd  juri.sdictio7ii  coJiaeret^
Dig.  1.  tit.  21.  8.  1).  Sometimes  Imperium  is
viewed  as  the  term  which  designates  the  full  power
of  the  magistratus  ;  and  when  so  viewed,  it  may  be
considered  as  equivalent  to  Jurisdictio,  in  its  wider
sense,  or  as  comprehending  Jurisdictio  in  its  nar-
rowest sense.  Thus  Imperium  may  be  considered
as  containing  or  as  contained  in  Jurisdictio,  according
as  we  give  to  each  term  respectively  its  wider  or  its
narrower  meaning.  (Puchta,  Ueber  den  mhalt  der
Lex  Rubria,  Zeilsch-ift,  vol.  x.  p.  195.)  The  Juris-
dictio was  either  Voluntaria  or  Contentiosa.  (Dig.  ] .
tit.  1.  ().  s.  2.)  The  Jurisdictio  Voluntaria  rendered
valid  certain  acts  done  before  the  magistratus,  for
which  certain  forms  were  required,  as  adoption
and  manumission.  Thus  adoption,  properly  so
called,  could  take  place  before  the  praeses  of  a  pro-
vincia  (Gaius,  i.  100)  ;  but  in  Rome  it  took  place
before  the  praetor,  and  was  said  to  be  efi"ccted
"  imperio  magistratus."'  The  Jurisdictio  Conten-
tiosa had  reference  to  legal  proceedings  before  a
magistratus,  which  were  said  to  be  in  jure  as  op-
posed to  the  proceedings  before  a  judex,  which
were  said  to  be  in  judicio.  The  parties  were  said
"  Lege  agere  :"  the  magistratus  was  said  jus  dicerc
or  reddei'e.  Accordingly  "  magistratus  "  and  "  qui
Romae  jus  dicit  "  are  equivalent.  (C'\c.  ad  Fain.
xiii.  14.)  The  functions  included  in  Jurisdictio
in  this,  its  special  sense,  were  the  addictio  in  the
legis  actiones,  the  giving  of  the  formula  in  proceed-
ings conducted  according  to  the  newer  process,  and
the  appointment  of  a  judex.  The  appointing  of  a
judex,  "judicis  datio,"  was  for  the  purpose  of  in-
quiring into  the  facts  in  dispute  between  the  par-
ties. The  words  of  the  formula  are  "Judex  esto,"
&c.  (Gaius.  iv.  47)  ;  and  the  terms  of  the  edict  in
which  the  praetor  declares  that  he  will  give  a  jude.v,
that  is,  will  recognise  a  right  of  action,  are  "  Judi-
cium dabo."  (Cic.  pro  Flacc.  35.)  Addictio  be-
longs to  that  part  of  jurisdictio  by  which  the  magis-
tratus himself  makes  a  decree  or  gives  a  judgment:
thus  in  the  case  of  the  In  Jure  Cessio,  he  is  said
"rem  addicere."  (Gaius,  ii.  24.)  Addicere  is  to
adjudge  a  thing  or  the  possession  of  a  thing  to  one
of  the  litigant  parties.  In  the  case  of  furium
manifestum,  inasmuch  as  the  facts  would  be  certain,
there  was  an  addictio.   (Gaius,  iv.  189.)

Other  uses  of  the  word  addictio  are  collected  in
Facciolati,

It  is  with  reference  to  the  three  terms.  Do,  Dico,
Addico,  that  Varro  {De  Ling.  Lat.  vi.  30)  remarks
that  the  praetor  must  use  one  of  these  words  "  cum
lege  quid  peragitur."  Accordingly,  those  days
were  called  Nefasti  on  which  no  legal  business
could  be  done,  because  the  words  of  legal  force
could  not  be  used.  (Compare  Ovid.  Fad.  i.  47  ;
Macrobius,  Solum,  i.  16.)  [G.  L.]

JUS.  "All  people,"  says  Gaius  (i.  1),  "  who
are  governed  by  Leges  and  Mores,  use  partly  their


656


JUS.


own  law  (,ftts),  partly  the  law  (jus)  that  is  com-
mon to  all  mankind  ;  for  the  law  (jus)  which  a
state  establishes  for  itself  is  peculiar  to  such  state,
and  is  called  Jus  Civile,  as  the  peculiar  law  (jtis)
of  that  state.  But  the  law  (jus)  which  natural
reason  (naturalis  ratio)  has  established  among  all
mankind  is  ecjually  observed  by  all  people,  and  is
called  Jus  Gentium,  as  being  that  law  (jus)  which
all  nations  follow.  The  Roman  populus  therefore
follows  partly  its  own  peculiar  law  (suum  proprium
Jus),  partly  the  common  law  (commune  jus)  of  all
mankind."

According  to  this  view,  all  Law  (jus)  is  distri-
buted into  two  parts,  .Jus  Gentium  and  Jus  Civile,
and  the  whole  body  of  law  peculiar  to  any  state  is
its  Jus  Civile.  (Cic.  de  Orat.  i.  44.)  The  Roman
law,  therefore,  which  is  peculiar  to  the  Roman
state,  is  its  Jus  Civile,  sometimes  cidled  Jus  Civile
Romanorum,  but  more  frequently  designated  by  the
t-^nn  Jus  Civile  only,  by  which  is  meant  the  Jus
Civile  of  the  Romans.

The  Jus  Gentium  is  here  viewed  by  Gains  as
springing  out  of  the  Naturalis  Ratio  common  to  all
mankind,  which  is  still  more  clearly  expressed  in  an-
other passage  (i.  189)  where  he  uses  the  expres-
sion "  omnium  civitatium  jus "  as  equivalent  to
the  Jus  Gentium,  and  as  founded  on  the  Naturalis
Ratio.  In  other  passages  he  founds  the  acquisi-
tion of  property,  which  was  not  regulated  by  Ro-
man law,  on  the  naturalis  ratio  and  on  the  naturale
jus  indifferently,  thus  making  naturalis  ratio  and
naturale  jus  equivalent  (ii.  65,  6H,  69,  73,  79).
He  founds  Cognatio  on  Naturalis  Ratio,  as  being
common  to  all  mankind,  and  Agnatio  on  Civilis
Ratio,  as  being  purely  a  Roman  institution  (i.  158).
In  two  passages  in  the  Digest  (1.  tit.  8)  he  calls
same  thing  Naturale  Jus  in  s.  2,  and  Jus  Gentium
in  s.  3,  5.  (Compare  Gains,  iii.  132.)  The  Natu-
rale Jus  and  the  Jus  Gentium  are  therefore  iden-
tical. (Savigny,  (System,  &c.,  vol.  i.  p.  113.)  Cicero
(de  Off-',  iii.  5)  opposes  Natura  to  Leges,  where  he
explains  Natura  by  the  term  Jus  Gentium,  and
makes  Leges  equivalent  to  Jus  Civile.  In  the
Partitiones  (c.  37)  he  also  divides  Jus  into  Natura
and  Lex.

There  is  a  threefold  division  of  Jus  made  by
Ulpian  and  others,  which  is  as  follows  :  Jus  Civile  ;
Jus  Gentium,  or  that  which  is  common  to  all  man-
kind ;  and  Jus  Naturale  which  is  common  to  man
and  beasts.  The  foundation  of  this  division  seems
to  have  been  a  theory  of  the  progress  of  mankind
from  what  is  commonly  termed  a  state  of  nature,  first
to  a  state  of  society,  and  then  to  a  condition  of  inde-
pendent states.  This  division  had,  however,  no
practical  application,  and  must  be  viewed  merely
as  a  curious  theory.  Absurd  as  it  appears  at  first
sight,  this  theory  is  capable  of  a  reasonable  expla-
Jiation,  and  Savigny  shows  that  it  is  not  meant  to
say  that  beasts  have  law,  but  only  the  matter  of
law  ;  that  is,  some  of  those  natural  relations  on
v.-hich  legal  relations  are  founded,  exist  among
beasts  as  well  as  men.  Such  natural  relations  are
those  by  which  the  species  is  propagated.  (See
also  Puchta''8  remarks,  Indit.  i.  §  9,  note  a.)  In
the  Institutes  the  two  divisions  are  confounded
(i.  tit.  2.  De  Jure  Naturali,  Gentium  ct  Civili)  ;
for  the  explanation  of  Jus  Naturale  is  first  taken
from  the  threefold  division  of  Ulpian,  and  then
the  Jus  Gentium  and  Civile  are  explained  accord-
ing to  the  twofold  divi?ion  of  Gains  already  quoted,
«>  tiuit  wc  iiave  in  the  same  section  the  Jus  Na-


JUS.

turale  explained  in  the  sense  of  Ulpian,  and  the
Jus  Gentium  explained  in  the  sense  of  Gaius,  as
derived  from  the  Naturalis  Ratio.  Further,  in  the
second  book  (tit.  1.  s.  11)  the  Jus  Naturale  is  ex-
plained to  be  the  same  as  Jus  Gentium,  and  the
Jus  Naturale  is  said  to  be  coeval  with  the  human
race.  Notwithstanding  this  confusion  in  the  In-
stitutes, there  is  no  doubt  that  the  two-fold  divi-
sion of  Gaius  was  that  which  prevailed  in  Roman
jurisprudence.  (Savigny,  System,  &c.  vol.  i.  p.  413.)
This  two-fold  division  appears  clearly  in  Cicero,
who  says  that  the  old  Romans  separated  the  Jus
Civile  from  the  Jus  Gentium  ;  and  he  adds  that
the  Jus  Civile  (of  any  state)  is  not  therefore  Jus
Gentium,  but  that  what  is  Jus  Gentium  ought  to
be  Jus  Civile  (de  Off.  iii.  17).

Those  rules  which  regulated  the  declaration  of
war  and  the  conduct  of  war  are  comprehended
under  the  temi  Jus  Feciale.  Some  modern  writers
give  to  the  term  a  wider  signification  ;  and  others
limit  it  more  closely.  Osenbinieggen  (De  Jure
Belli  et  Pads  Romanorum,  p.  20.  Lips.  1836)
defines  the  Jus  Feciale  to  be  that  which  pre-
scribed the  formulae,  solemnities  and  ceremonial
observed  in  the  declaring,  carrying  on,  and  ter-
minating a  war,  and  in  the  matter  of  treaties.
The  Romans  often  used  the  expression  Jus  Gen-
tium in  a  sense  Avhich  nearly  corresponds  to  the
modern  phrase  Law  of  Nations,  or,  as  some  call  it.
International  Law.  (Livy,  ii.  14,  vi.  1,  quod  le-
gatus  in  Gallos,  ad  quos  missus  erat,  contra  jus
gentium  pugnasset  ;  xxxviii.  48  ;  Sallust*  Jug.
22.)  The  term  Jus  Belli  (Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  14)
is  used  in  the  same  sense.

The  origin  of  the  opposition  between  Jus  Gen-
tium and  Jus  Civile  was  not  a  speculative  notion,
nor  did  it  originate  with  the  Jurists,  thouah  they
gave  it  a  theoretical  fonn.  The  Jus  Gentium  in
its  origin  was  the  general  law  of  Peregrini,  ac-
cording to  which  the  Romans  determined  the  legnl
relations  among  Peregrini,  a  class  of  persons  to
whom  the  Jus  Civile  was  not  applicable.  Con-
sequently, the  foundation  of  the  Jus  was  foreign
law,  modified  by  the  Romans  according  to  their
own  notions,  so  as  to  be  capable  of  general  appli-
cation. This  is  one  side  of  the  original  Jus  Gen-
tium. The  other  is  that  Law  which  owed  its
origin  to  the  more  enlarged  views  of  the  nature
of  law  among  the  Roman  people,  and  was  the
development  of  the  national  character.  The  tvvo
notions,  however,  are  closely  connected,  for  the  law
of  Peregrini  was  that  which  first  presented  the
Romans  with  the  notion  of  the  Jus  Gentium,  and
it  was  formed  into  a  body  of  Law,  hidependejit
of  the  Jus  Civile,  and  not  interfering  with  it.
But  the  general  Law  of  Peregrini  also  obtained
among  the  Romans,  as  Law,  and  not  considered
merely  with  reference  to  their  intercourse  with
Peregrini.  "  The  Law  of  Peregrini  and  Roman
Lavv,  disencumbered  of  all  peculiarity  of  indi-
vidual nations,  are  the  two  sides  of  the  same  no-
tion, which  the  Romans  express  by  the  term  Jus
Gentium."  (Puchta,  Instit.  i.  §  84).  The  Jus
Gentium  was  chiefly  introduced  by  the  Edictum, —
as  the  Law  of  Peregrini  by  the  Edict  of  the  Prae-
tor Peregrinus  and  the  Edicta  Provincialia,  and  as
Law  for  the  Romans  by  the  Edictum  of  the  Prae-
tor Urbanus.

The  Jus  Civile  of  the  Romans  is  divisible  into
tvvo  parts.  Jus  Civile  in  the  narrower  sense,  and
Jus  Pontificium  or  Sacrum,  or  the  law  of  religion/


JUS.

This  opposition  is  sometimes  expressed  by  the
words  Jus  and  Fas  {J'\cs  et  jura  siiiuni,  Virg.
Georg.  i.  269)  ;  and  the  law  of  things  not  pertain-
ing to  religion  and  of  things  pertaining  to  it,  are
also  respectively  opposed  to  one  another  by  the
terms  Res  Juris  Humani  et  Divini.  (Instit.  2.
tit.  1.)  [Dominium.]  Thus  the  Pontifices  Max-
imi,  P.  Crassus,  and  T.  Coruncanius,  are  said  to
have  given  Responsa  de  omnibus  divinis  et  hu-
manis  rebus.  (Cic.  de  Orat.  iii.  33.)

The  Law  of  Religion,  or  the  Jus  Pontificium,
•was  under  the  control  of  the  Pontifices,  who  in  fact
originally  had  the  control  of  the  whole  mass  of  the
law,  and  it  was  only  after  the  separation  of  the  Jus
Civile  in  its  wider  sense  into  the  two  parts  of  the
Jus  Civile,  in  its  narrower  sense,  and  the  Jus  Ponti-
ficium, that  each  part  had  its  proper  and  peculiar
limits.  But  after  this  separation  was  fully  made
the  Auctoritas  Pontificum  had  the  same  operation
and  effect  with  respect  to  the  Law  of  Religion  that
the  Auctoritas  Prudentium  had  on  the  Jus  Civile.
(Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  19,  20.)  Still  even  after  the  sepa-
ration there  was  a  mutual  relation  between  these
two  branches  of  law  ;  for  instance,  an  Adrogatio
was  not  valid  by  the  Jus  Civile  unless  it  was
valid  by  the  Jus  Pontificium.  (Cic.  de  Orat.  iii.
33,  Brut.  42  ;  Adoptio.)  Again,  Jus  Pontifi-
cium, in  its  wider  sense,  as  the  law  of  religion,  had
its  subdivisions,  as  into  Jus  Augurum,  Pontificum,
&c.     (Cic.  de  Senect.  IL)

"  Law,"  Bays  Gains  (i.  2),  meaning  the  Roman
civil  law  (jura)^  '•  is  composed  of  leges,  plebiscita,
senatus-consulta,  constitutiones  Principum,  the
Edicta  of  those  who  have  the  Jus  Edicendi,  and
the  Responsa  Prudentium."  This  is  a  division  of
law  merely  according  to  its  formal  origin.  The
divisions  enumerated  by  Cicero  (Top.  5)  are  "  leges
(which  include  plebiscita),  senatus-consulta,  res
judicatae,  jurisperitorura  auctoritas,  edicta  magis-
tratuum,  mos,  aeqi\itas."  A  consideration  of  the
different  epochs  at  which  these  writers  lived,  will
account  for  part  of  the  discrepancy  ;  but  the  addi-
tion of  Mos  in  Cicero's  enumeration  is  important.

Jus  Civile  is  opposed  to  the  Jus  Praetorium  or
Honorarium  [Edictum]  ;  and  the  opposition
consists  in  the  opposition  of  the  means  or  form  by
which  the  two  severally  obtained  an  existence  ;
whereas  the  opposition  of  Jus  Civile  and  Gentium
is  founded  on  the  internal  character  of  the  two
kinds,  and  the  extent  of  their  application.

Lex  and  Mos  are  sometimes  opposed  to  one  an-
other, as  parts  component  of  the  Jus  Civile,  but
different  in  their  origin.  Horace  (Carm.  iv.  5)
speaks  of  "  Mos  et  Lex  :  "  Juvenal  (viii.  50)  opposes
"  Juris  nodos  et  legum  aenigmata : "  Jus  Civile
is  opposed  to  Leges  (Cic.  de  Orat.  i.  43),  to  Lex
(de  Off.  iii.  17),  and  to  Senatus-consultum  (Gains,
ii.  197).  As  then  opposed  to  Leges,  Jus  Civile
appears  to  be  equivalent  to  Mos.  In  fact  the  op-
position between  Lex  and  Mos  follows  the  analogy
of  that  between  jus  scriptum  and  non  scriptum.
"  When  there  are  no  scriptae  leges  we  must  follow
that  which  has  been  introduced  by  mores  and  con-
suetudo.  —  Immemorial  (inveterata)  consuetude  is
properly  observed  as  a  lex  (pro  lege),  and  this  is
the  jus  which  is  said  to  be  '  moribus  constitutum,''  "
(Julian,  Dig.  1.  tit.  3.  s.  32.)  Thus  immemorial
usage  was  the  foundation  of  the  "  jus  Moribus
constitutum."  (See  the  article  Infamia  as  to  the
origin  of  Infamia.)  The  ultimate  origin  of  custom
IB  the  common  consciousness  of  the  people  among


JUS.  657

whom  it  exists :  the  evidence  of  it  is  usage,  re-
peated and  continued  use :  it  is  law  when  recog-
nized by  a  competent  authority.  There  is  a  pas-
sage of  Ulpian  (Dig.  1.  tit,  3.  s.  34)  in  which  he
distinctly  speaks  of  confirming  a  consuetudo  in  a
judicium,  which  can  have  no  other  meaning  than
that  its  force  as  law  depended  on  a  decision  in  a
judicium.  And  the  meaning  is  clear,  whether  we
read  contradicto  or  contradicta  in  the  passage  just
referred  to.

The  Roman  writers  indeed  frequently  refer  to  a
large  part  of  their  law  as  founded  on  Mores  or  on
the  Mos  Majorum  and  not  on  Leges.  (Quintil,  Instit.
Orat.  V.  10.)  Thus  Ulpian  (Dig.  1.  tit.  6.  s.  8)
says  that  the  Jus  Patriae  Potestatis  is  moribus
receptum.  But  mos  contained  matters  relating  to
religion  as  well  as  to  the  ordinary  affairs  of  life  ;
and  therefore  we  may  also  view  Mos  and  Lex,  when
opposed,  as  component  parts  of  the  Jus  Civile  in
its  wider  sense,  but  not  as  making  up  the  whoie  of
it.  Mores  in  the  sense  of  immorality,  thafr  which
positive  morality  disapproves  of,  must  not  be  con-
founded with  jus  founded  on  mores  :  the  former  is
mali  mores  in  respect  of  which  there  was  often  a
jus  moribus  cons-titutum.  Thus  in  the  matter  of
the  dos  there  was  a  retentio  in  respect  of  the  mores
graviores  or  majores,  which  was  adultery.  (Ulp.
Frag.  tit.  6.)

The  terms  Jus  Scriptum  and  Non  Scriptum,  as  ex-
plained in  the  Institutes  (i.  tit.  2),  comprehended
the  whole  of  the  Jus  Civile  ;  for  it  was  all
either  Scriptum  or  Non  Scriptum,  whatever  other
divisions  there  might  be.  (Ulp.  Dig.  1.  tit.  1.  s.  6.)
Jus  Scriptum  comprehended  every  thing  except  that
''quod  usus  approbavit."  This  division  of  Jus
Scriptum  and  Non  Scriptum  does  not  appear
in  Gains.  It  was  borrowed  from  the  Greek  writers,
and  seems  to  have  little  or  no  practical  application
among  the  Romans.  The  sense  in  which  Written
and  Unwritten  law  has  been  used  by  English  writers
is  hardly  the  same  as  the  Roman  sense.  Hale
says  (Hist,  of  the  Common  Law.,  p.  2),  "  Those  laws
that  I  call  leges  scriptae  (he  should  have  used  the
expression  jus  scriptum,  though  Cicero  uses  the
expression  Lex  Scripta)  are  such  as  are  originally
reduced  into  writing  before  they  are  enacted."
Hale  applies  his  definition  only  to  statutes  or  acts  of
parliament ;  but  it  is  equally  applicable  to  any  rules
v/hich  are  promulgated  in  writing  and  have  the
force  of  law  or  of  a  law,  by  virtue  of  authority
delegated  to  those  who  make  such  rules.

Jus  was  also  divided  into  Publicum  and  Priva-
tum by  the  Roman  jurists.  (Dig.  1.  tit.  1.  s.  1.)
Publicum  Jus  is  defined  to  be  that  which  relates
to  the  Status  Rei  Romanae,  or  to  the  Romans  as  a
State  ;  Pri\-atum  Jus  is  defined  to  be  that  which
relates  "ad  singulorum  utilitatem,"  The  Publi-
cum Jus  is  further  said  by  Ulpian  (Dig.  1.  tit.  1.  s.  1)
"  in  sacris,  in  sacerdotibus,  in  magistratibus  con-
sistere."  Accordmg  to  this  view,,  it  comprehends
the  Law  of  Religion  and  all  the  rest  of  the  Jus
Civile,  which  is  not  Privatum :  and  the  matter
which  is  comprehended  in  Jus  Privatum  is  that
which  is  contained  in  the  Institutes  of  Gaius  and
Justinian.  The  elementary  treatise  of  Gaius  does
not  mention  this  division,  and  it  is  limited  to  the
Jus  Privatum.  Justinian,  in  his  Institutes,  after
making  this  division  of  Jus  into  Publicum  and
Privatum,  says,  "  we  must  therefore  treat  of  Jus
Privatum,"  from  which  it  appears  that  he  did  not
contemplate  treating  of  Jus  Publicum,  though  the
u   V


658


JUS.


last  title  of  the  fourth  book  is  De  Judiciis  Pub-
licis.  The  Roman  term  Jus  Publicum  also  com-
prehended Criminal  Law  and  Criminal  Procedure,
and  Procedure  in  Civil  Actions.  It  is  said  by  Papi-
nian  (Dig.  28.  tit.  1.  s.  3)  that  the  Testamenti-
factio  belonged  to  Publicum  Jus.  Now  the  Testa-
mentifactio  was  included  in  Commercium,  and
only  Roman  citizens  and  Latini  had  Commer-
cium. This  is  an  instance  of  the  application  of
the  term  Publicum  Jus.  All  Jus  is  in  a  sense
Publicum,  and  all  Jus  is  in  a  sense  Privatum  ;
but  the  Roman  Publicum  Jus  directly  concerned
the  constitution  of  the  state  and  the  functions  of
government  and  administration  ;  the  Privatum
Jus  directly  concerned  the  interests  of  individuals.
The  opposition  between  these  two  things  is  clear,
and  as  well  marked  as  the  nature  of  such  things
will  allow.  If  the  terms  be  found  fault  with,  the
meaning  of  the  terms  admits  of  a  defence.

The  expression  Populus  Romanus  Quirites  has
given  Ase  to  much  discussion.  Becker  {Handh.  der
Romischen  Altertkumer,  vol.  ii.  p.  24)  concludes
that  Romani  and  Quirites  are  so  far  opposed  that
Romani  is  the  historical  and  political  name  viewed
with  respect  to  foreign  states,  and  Quirites  the
political  name  as  viewed  with  reference  to  Rome.
Accordingly  Quirites  is  equivalent  to  Cives.
(Sueton.  Caes.  70  ;  Plut.  Cues.  51  ;  Liv,  xlv.
37.)  It  does  not  seem  easy  to  explain  the  dif-
ference between  Civitas  Romana  and  the  Jus
Quii-itium,  yet  so  much  seems  clear  that  Civitas
Romana  was  a  term  largs  enough  to  comprehend
all  who  were  Cives  in  any  sense.  But  the  Jus
Quiritium  in  its  later  sense  seems  to  be  the  pure
Privatum  Jus  as  opposed  to  the  Publicum  Jus,  and
thus  it  differs  from  Jus  Civile  viewed  as  the  whole
Roman  law,  or  as  opposed  to  the  law  of  other
people.  He  who  claimed  a  thing  exclusively  as  his
own  claimed  it  to  be  his  ex  Jure  Quiritium.  (Gains,
ii.  40.  8ic.)  Accordingly  we  find  the  expressions
Dominus  and  Dominium  Ex  Jure  Quiritium,  as
contrasted  with  In  bonis  [Dominium].  Such
part  of  the  Roman  law,  in  its  widest  sense,  as
related  to  buying,  selling,  letting,  hiring,  and  such
obligations  as  were  not  founded  on  the  Jus  Civile,
were  considered  to  belong  to  the  Jus  Gentium  (Dig.
1.  tit.  ].  s.  .5),  that  is,  the  Jus  Naturale.  (Gains,
ii.  65.)  Accordingly  when  ownership  could  be
acquired  by  tradition,  occupation,  or  in  any  other
way,  not  specially  provided  for  by  the  Jus  Civile,
such  ownership  was  acquired  by  the  Jus  Gentium.
When  the  Jus  Civile  prescribed  certain  forms  by
which  ownership  was  to  be  transferred,  and  such
forms  were  not  observed,  there  was  no  ownership
Jure  Civili  or  Jure  Quiritium,  but  there  was  that
interest  which  was  called  In  bonis.  It  is  not  said
by  Gaius  (ii.  40,  &c)  that  the  In  bonis  arose  by
virtue  of  the  Jus  Gentium,  and  it  may  perhaps  be
concluded  that  he  did  not  so  view  it ;  for  in  another
passage  (ii.  65),  he  speaks  of  alienation  or  change
of  ownership  being  effected  either  by  the  Jus
Naturale,  as  in  the  case  of  tradition,  or  by  the  Jus
Civile,  as  in  the  case  of  mancipatio,  in  jure  cessio,
and  usucapion.  In  this  passage  he  is  speaking  of
alienation,  which  is  completely  effected  by  tra-
dition, 80  that  there  is  a  legal  change  of  ownership
recognized  by  Roman  law  ;  not  by  Roman  law,
specially  as  such,  but  by  Roman  law  as  adopting
or  derived  from  the  Jus  Gentium.  In  the  other
case  (ii.  40)  there  is  no  ownership  either  as  re-
cognized by  Roman  law  as  such,  or  by  Roman  law  I


JUS.

as  adopting  the  Jus  Gentium  :  the  In  bonis  is
merely  recognized  by  the  Praetorian  Law,  to  which
division  it  therefore  belongs.  So  far  as  the  equity
of  the  praetor  may  be  said  to  be  based  on  the  Jus
Gentium,  so  far  may  the  In  bonis  be  said  to  be
founded  on  it  also.  Properly  speaking,  the  Jus
Gentium  was  only  received  as  Roman  law,  when
it  did  not  contradict  the  Jus  Civile  ;  that  is,  it
could  only  have  its  full  effect  as  the  Jus  Gentium
when  it  was  not  contradicted  or  limited  by  the
Jus  Civile.  When  it  was  so  contradicted  or
limited,  the  praetor  could  only  give  it  a  partial
effect,  but  in  so  doing,  it  is  obvious  that  he  wrvs
endeavouring  to  nullify  the  Jus  Civile  and  so  to
make  the  Jus  Gentium  as  extensive  in  its  opera-
tion, as  it  would  have  been  but  for  the  limitation
of  the  Jus  Civile.  The  bounds  that  were  placed
to  this  power  of  the  praetor  were  not  very  definite.
Still  he  generally  fashioned  his  Jus  Praetorium
after  the  analogy  of  the  Jus  Civile,  and  though  he
made  it  of  no  effect  as  against  his  Jus  Praetorium,
he  maintained  its  form  and  left  it  to  its  full  ope-
ration, except  so  far  as  he  necessarily  limited  its
operation  by  his  own  Jus  Praetorium.

Jus  used  absolutely  is  defined  to  be  *'  ars  boni
et  aequi"  (Dig.  1.  tit.  1.  s.  1),  which  is  an  absurd
definition.  What  it  really  is,  may  be  collected
from  the  above  enumeration  of  its  parts  or  divi-
sions. Its  general  signification  is  Law,  and  in  this
sense  it  is  opposed  to  Lex  or  a  Law.  Lex,  how-
ever, as  already  shown,  is  sometimes  used  generally
for  Law,  as  in  the  instance  from  Cicero  where  it  is
opposed  to  Natura.  Lex  therefore  in  this  general
sense  comprehends  leges  and  all  the  other  parts  of
the  Jus  Civile.  In  its  special  sense  of  a  Law,  it
is  included  in  Jus.  Jus  is  also  used  in  the  plural
number  (jura)  apparently  in  the  sense  of  the
component  parts  of  Jus,  as  in  Gaius  (i.  2),  where
he  sa3-s  "  Constant  autem  jura  ex  legibus,"  &c.  ;
and  in  another  passage  (i.  158),  where  he  says  with
reference  to  the  Agnationis  Jus  or  Law  of  Agnatio,
and  the  Cognationis  Jus  or  Law  of  Cognatio,  "  civil  is
ratio  civilia  quidem  jura  coiTumpere  potest."  In-
deed in  this  passage  Agnationis  Jus  and  Cognationis
Jus  are  two  of  the  Jura  or  parts  of  Jus,  which
with  other  Jura  make  up  the  whole  of  Jus.  Again
(Gaius,  ii.  62),  that  provision  of  the  Lex  Julia  de
Adulteriis,  which  forbade  the  alienation  of  the
Fundus  Dotalis,  is  referred  to  thus — "  quod  quidem
jus,"  '*  which  rule  of  law"  or  "  which  law" — it
being  a  law  comprehended  in  another  law,  which
contained  this  and  many  other  provisions.  Thus
though  Lex  in  its  strict  sense  of  a  Law  is  different
from  Jus  in  its  large  sense,  and  though  Jus,  in  its
narrower  sense,  is  perhaps  never  used  for  a  Lex,
still  Jus,  in  this  its  narrower  sense,  is  used  to  ex-
press a  rule  of  law.  Thus  Gaius  (i.  47)  speaks  of
the  jura  or  legal  provisions  comprised  in  the  Lex
Aelia  Sentia ;  and  oijura  as  based  on  the  Responsa
Prudentium  ("  responsa  prudentium  smit  sententiae
et  opiniones  eorum  quibus  permissum  est  jura  con-
dere,"  Gaius,  i.  7  ;  Jurisconsulti).

Jus  has  also  the  meaning  of  a  faculty  or  legal
right.  Thus  Gaius  says,  '*  it  is  an  actio  in  rem,
when  we  claim  a  corporeal  thing  as  our  own,  or
claim  some  jus  as  our  own,  such  as  a  jus  utendi,
eundi,  agendi."  The  parental  power  is  called  a
"  Jus  proprium  civium  Romanorum."  The  mean-
ing of  law  generally,  and  of  a  legal  right,  are  ap-
plied to  Jus  by  Cicero  in  the  same  sentence  :  "  I,
a  man  ignorant  of  law  (imperitus  juris) ^  seek  to


\


JUS  AELIANUM.

maintain  my  right  (nieum  jus)  by  the  Interdict."
(  Pro  Caecina^  c.  1 1.)  As  the  several  rules  of  law
which  are  often  comprised  in  one  lex,  or  which
make  up  the  whole  body  of  Jus  (Law),  may  be
called  jura  with  reference  to  their  object,  so  the
various  legal  rights  which  are  severally  called  jus
with  reference  to  some  particular  subject,  may  be
collectively  called  jura.  Thus  we  find  the  phrase
Jura  Parentis  to  express  all  the  rights  that  flow
from  the  fact  of  legal  paternity.

The  phrase  Jura  Praediorum,  which  is  used  by
the  Roman  Jurists,  is  somewhat  peculiar,  and  open
to  objection.     [Servitus.]

The  potestas  which  a  Roman  father  had  over  his
children  and  a  husband  over  his  wife  in  manu,  being
a  jus  or  legal  right,  there  hence  arose  the  distinc-
tion of  persons  into  those  who  are  sui  and  those
who  are  alieni  juris.  All  the  rights  of  such  persons
severallj'-  are  represented  by  the  phrase  "  Jus  Per-
sonarum,"  or  that  division  of  the  whole  matter  of
Jus  which  treats  of  the  condition  of  persons  as
members  of  a  Familia.     [Familia.]

This  leads  to  the  mention  of  another  division  of
the  matter  of  law  which  appears  among  the  Roman
Jurists,  namely,  the  Law  of  Persons  ;  the  Law  of
Things,  which  is  expressed  by  the  phrase  "  jus
quod  ad  res  peninet  ;■"  and  the  Law  of  Actions,
"jus  quod  ad  actiones  pertinet."  (Gaius,  i.  8.)
In  his  first  book  Gaius  treats  of  the  Law  of  Per-
sons, in  the  sense  explained  in  the  article  Insti-
TUTiONES,  in  the  fourth  he  treats  of  the  Law  of
Actions  ;  and  accordingly  the  second  and  third
contain  the  Law  of  Things,  to  express  which  he
does  not  use  a  phraseology  analogous  to  that  of
"  Jus  Personarum  ;"  but  he  says  lie  will  treat  De
Rebus.    [Institutiones.]

The  adjective  Justum  often  occurs  in  the  Latin
writers,  in  the  sense  of  that  which  is  consistent
with  Jus  or  Law,  or  is  not  contrary  to  law.  Thus
it  is  a  justum  (legal)  matrimonium,  if  there  is  con-
nubiura  between  the  two  parties  to  the  marriage.
The  word  Justum  has  many  varieties  of  meaning,
which  may  generally  be  derived,  without  much
difficulty,  from  the  meanings  of  Jus  :  as  justa
servitus,  justum  concilium,  justum  iter,  Justus  ex-
ercitus,  justa  causa.

Jus  is  opposed  to  Judicium,  and  a  thing  was  said
to  be  done  in  jure  or  in  judicio,  according  as  it  was
done  before  the  magistratus  or  before  a  judex.
[Judicium.]  Thus  all  matters  of  legal  question
were  said  to  be  done  "  aut  ad  populum,  aut  in  jure,
aut  ad  judicem."  (Plaut.  Menaeeh.  iv.  2.  18.)
Jus,  in  the  sense  of  the  place  "  in  quo  jus  red-
ditur"  (Dig.  1.  tit.  1.  s.  11),  is  only  an  application
of  the  name  of  what  is  done  to  the  place  in  which
it  is  done.  The  expression  Jus  Dicere  is  explained
under  Jurisdictio.

The  foregoing  explanation  of  Jus  may  not  be
entirely  free  from  error,  nor  would  it  be  easy  to
make  it  so,  as  will  appear  from  comparing  the
views  of  various  modern  writers.  [G.  L.]

JUS  AEDILPTIUM.  [Aediles;  Edictum.]

JUS  AELIA'NUM  was  a  compilation  by
Sextus  Aelius  Paetus,  sumamed  Catus,  who  was
consul  B.  c.  198  (Liv.  xxxii.  7),  and  who  is  called
by  his  contemporary  Ennius,  "  egregie  cordatus
homo."  He  is  also  frequently  mentioned  with
praise  by  Cicero  {de  Rep.  i.  18,  de  Or.  i.  45,
iii.  33).  The  Jus  Aelianum,  also  called  Tripertita,
contained  the  Law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  an  in-
terpretatio,  and  the  Legis  Actiones.     This  work


JUSJURANDUM.


659


existed  in  the  time  of  Pomponius.  (Dig.  1.  tit.  2.
s.  2.  §  38.)  Cicero  also  speaks  of  some  commen-
tarii  by  Aelius.  {De  Oral.  i.  56,  Top.  2.)  [G.  L.]
JUS  ANNULORUM.  [Annulus.]
JUS  APPLICATIO'NIS.  [Exsilium,  p.
516,  b.]
JUS  CIVI'LE.  [Jus.]
JUS  CIVI'LE  FLAVIA'NUM.  Appius
Claudius  Caecus,  who  was  censor  b.  c.  312,  is
said  to  have  drawn  up  a  book  of  Actiones  or  forms
of  procedure,  which  his  clerk  Cn.  Flavius  made
public.  (Cic.  de  Or.  i.  41.)  According  to  one
story  (Dig.  1.  tit.  2.  s.  7)  Flavius  surreptitiously
obtained  possession  of  the  book  of  Appius,  and
was  rewarded  b)'  the  people  for  his  services  by
being  made  Tribunus  Plebis  and  Curule  Aedile.
The  effect  of  this  publication  was  to  extend  the
knowledge  and  the  practice  of  the  law  to  the  ple-
beians, and  to  separate  the  Jus  Civile  from  the
Jus  Pontificium.  (Liv,  ix.  45  ;  Gellius,  vi.  9  ;
Cic.  pro  Murefia,  11.)  [G.  L.]

JUS    CIVILE     PAPIRIA'NUM     or    PA-
PISIA'NUM    was   a   compilation   of  the   Leges
Regiae  or  laws  passed  in  the  kingly  period   of
Rome.    They  are  mentioned  by  Livy  (vi.  1).    This
compilation  was  commented  on  by  Granius  Flaccus
in  the  time  of  Julius  Caesar  (Dig.  50.  tit.  1  6.  s.
144),  to  which  circumstance  we  probably  owe  the
preservation  of  existing  fragments  of  the   Leges
Regiae.     There   is   great  doubt  as  to  the  exact
character  of  this  compilation  of  Papirius,  and  as  to
the  time  when  it  was  made.     Even  the  name  of
the  compiler  is  not  quite  certain,  as  he  is  variously
called  Caius,  Sextus,  and  Publius.     The  best  no-
tice of  the  fragments  of  the  Leges  Regiae  is  by
Dirksen,  in  his  **  Versuchen  zur  Kritik  und  aus-
legung  der  Quellen  des  Rbmischen  Rechts  "     See
also  Zimmem,  Gesch.  des  Rom.  Privatrechts.  [G.  L.]
JUS  CIVITA 'TIS.     [CiviTAS,  p.  291,  b.]
JUS  COMME'RCIL     [Civitas,  p.  291,  b.]
JUS  CONNU'BII.      [Civitas,  p.   291,   b  ;
Matrimonium.]
JUS  EDICENDL     [Edictum.]
JUS  GENTILI'TIUM.     [Gens.]
JUS  GE'NTIUM.     [Jus.]
JUS  HONORA'RIUM.     [Edictum.]
JUS  HONO'RUM.     [Civitas,  p.  291,  b.]
JUS  IMA'GINUM.     [NoBiLEs.]
JUS  ITA'LICUM.    [CoLONiA.]
JUS  LA'TIL     [Civitas  ;  Latinitas.]
JUS  LIBERO'RUM.     [Lex  Julia  et  Pa
piA  Pofpaea.]
JUS  NATURALE.     [Jus.]
JUS  PONTIFI'CIUM.     [Jus.]
JUS  POSTLIMI'NIL     [Postliminium.]
JUS  PRAEDIATO'RIUM.     [Praes.]
JUS  PU'BLICUM,  PRIVA'TUM.    [Jus.]
JUS  QUIRI'TIUM.     [Civitas  ;  Jus.]
JUS  RELATIO'NIS.     [Senatus.]
JUS  RESPONDENDI.     [Jurisconsultl]
JUS  SCRIPT UM.     [Jus.]
JUS  SUFFRA'GII.     [Civitas,  p.  291,  b.]
JUS  VOCATIO,  IN.  [Actio.]
JUSJURANDUM     {opKos\    an    oath.      1.
Greek.     An  oath  is  an  appeal  to  some  superior
being,  calling  on  him  to  bear  witness  that  the
swearer  speaks  the  truth,  or  intends  to  perform
the  promise  which  he  makes.     Hence  the  expres-
sions iO-Tw  Zei/s,  Siebv  fiaprvpo/xai,  and  others  of
the  same  import,  so  frequently  used  in  the  taking
of  oaths.     (Soph.  Track.  399,  Antig.  184  ;    St.
tr  u  2


660


JUSJURANDUM.


Paul,  Galat.  i.  20.)  It  is  obvious  that  such  an
appeal  implies  a  belief,  not  only  in  the  existence
of  the  being  so  called  upon,  but  also  in  his  power
and  inclination  to  punish  the  false  swearer  ;  and
the  force  of  an  oath  is  founded  on  this  belief.
Hence  an  oath  is  called  i^ewv  opKos.  (Horn.  Hym.
ad  Merc.  272.  515  ;  Find.  01.  vii.  119.)  Zei/s
opiaos  (Soph.  Phiioct.  1324)  is  the  god  who  has
regard  to  oaths,  and  punishes  their  violation.  Zriv
€xwi/  iirw/xoTov  (Soph.  Track.,  1190)  means  (ac-
cording to  Suidas)  opKov  iyyvnTiv.

We  find  early  mention  in  the  Greek  writers  of
oaths  being  taken  on  solemn  and  important  oc-
casions, as  treaties,  alliances,  vows,  compacts,  and
agreements,  both  between  nations  and  individuals.
Thus,  when  the  Greeks  and  Trojans  agree  to  de-
cide the  fate  of  the  war  by  a  single  combat  be-
tween Menelaus  and  Paris,  they  ratify  their  agree-
ment by  an  oath.  {IL  iii.  276.)  The  alliance
between  Croesus  and  the  Lacedaemonians  is  con-
firmed by  oath.  (Herod,  i.  69.)  So  is  the  treaty
between  the  Medes  and  Lj'dians,  whose  rites  in
swearing  (as  Herodotus  tells  us,  i.  74)  were  the
same  as  those  of  the  Greeks,  with  this  addition,
that  they  made  an  incision  in  their  arms  and  tasted
each  other's  blood.  We  may  further  notice  the
treaty  of  peace  between  the  Athenians  and  Pelo-
ponnesians,  upon  which  every  state  was  to  swear
iirixMpiov  opKov  Thu  fieyia-Tov  (Thucyd.  v.  47),
the  vow  of  the  Ionian  women  (Herod,  i.  146),  that
of  the  Phocaeans  (Id.  165),  and  the  promise  of
Circe  to  Ulysses  (Od.  x.  345).  The  reliance  placed
in  an  oath  is  specially  shown  in  the  dialogue  be-
tween Aegeus  and  Medea  in  Eurip.  Med.  736 —
760  ;  and  the  speech  of  Athena  in  Eurip.  Suppl.
1196.  For  other  examples  we  refer  the  reader  to
Soph.  Oed.  Tyr.  647,  Oed.  Col.  1637,  TracJdn.
1183  ;  Herod,  vi.  74  ;  Horn,  i/.ix.  132.

That  the  Greeks  (as  a  nation)  were  deeply  im-
bued with  religious  feeling,  and  paid  high  regard
to  the  sanctity  of  oaths,  may  be  gathered  from  the
whole  tenor  of  their  early  history,  and  especially
from  the  writings  of  the  poets.  Homer,  Aeschylus,
and  Pindar.  (See  Thirlwall,  Hist,  of  Greece.,  vol.  i.
c.  vi.  §  3.)  They  prided  themselves  on  being  su-
perior in  this  respect  to  the  barbarians.  ( Aelian.
xiv.  2.)  The  treacherous  equivocation  practised
by  the  Persians  at  the  siege  of  Barca  (Herod,  iv.
201)  would  have  been  repugnant  to  the  feelings  of
a  people,  whose  greatest  hero  declared  that  he
hated  like  hell  one

"Os  x'  %Tcpoy  ixkv  KivBri  eVl  (ppealu^  &K\o  Se  jSo^p.

IL  ix.  313.  *

The  poets  frequently  allude  to  the  punishment
of  perjury  after  death,  which  they  assign  to  the
infernal  gods  or  furies  (Horn.//,  iv.  157,  xix,  260;
Pind.  Olymp.  ii.  118;  Aristoph.  Ran.  274),  and
we  find  many  proofs  of  a  persuasion  that  perjurers
would  not  prosper  in  this  world.  (Hom.  II.  iv.
67,  270,  vii.  351  ;  Hesiod.  Op.  et  Dies,  280  ;
Thuc.  vii.  18.)  One  of  the  most  striking  is  the
story  told  by  Leutychides  to  the  Athenians,  of
Glaucus  the  Spartan,  who  consulted  the  Pythian
oracle  whether  he  should  restore  a  deposit,  or  deny
on  oath  that  he  had  ever  received  it ;  and  who,  for
merely  deliberating  upon  such  a  question,  was  cut
oiFwith  his  whole  family.  (Herod,  vi.  86;  Pausan.
ii.  18,  viii.  7  ;  Juv.  Sat.  xiii.  202.)

Anciently  the  person  who  took  an  oath  stood
up,  and  lifted  his  hands  to  heaven,  as  he  would  in


JUSJURANDUM.

prayer  ;  for  an  oath  was  a  species  of  prayer,  and
required  the  same  sort  of  ceremony.  (Horn.  //.
xix.  175,  254  ;  Pind.  01.  vii.  119.)  Oaths  were
frequently  accompanied  with  sacrifice  or  libation.
(Hom.  //.  iv.  158  ;  Aristoph.  Acharn.  148,  Vesp,
1 048.)  Both  sacrifice  and  libation  are  used  in  the
compact  of  the  Greeks  and  Trojans  in  II.  iii,  276.
The  victims  on  such  occasions  were  not  eaten  ;  but,
if  sacrificed  by  the  people  of  the  country,  were
buried  in  the  ground;  if  by  strangers,  were  thrown
into  the  sea  or  river.    {II.  iii.  310,  xix.  267.)

The  parties  used  also  to  lay  their  hands  upon
the  victims,  or  on  the  altar  or  some  other  sacred
thing,  as  if  by  so  doing  they  brought  before  them
the  deity  by  whom  the  oath  was  sworn,  and  made
him  witness  of  the  ceremony.  Hence  the  expres-
sions TTphs  rhv  fiwixbv  e^opKiCnv,  Ofiuvvai  Ka9
Upwv.  (See  Reiske,  Index  ad  Dem.  s.  v.  'Oixvvvai :
Harpocr.  s.  v.  AiOos  ;  Thuc.  v.  47;  Goeller,  ad  loc;
Juv.  Sat.  xiv.  219  ;  Ovid.  Epist.  Dido  ad  Aen.
129.)  In  Homer  (//.  xiv.  270),  Juno,  making  a
solemn  promise  to  Sleep,  takes  the  Earth  in  one
hand  and  Heaven  in  the  other,  and  swears  by
Styx  and  the  subterranean  gods.  To  touch  the
head,  hand,  or  other  part  of  the  body,  of  the  per-
son to  whom  the  promise  was  made,  was  a  common
custom.  The  hand  especially  was  regarded  as  a
pledge  of  fidelity,  and  the  allusions  to  the  junction
of  hands  in  making  contracts  and  agreements
abound  in  the  ancient  writers.  (Eurip.  Medea,
496  ;  Soph.  PJiilod.  812,  TracA.  1183  ;  Oy'i^L.  Ep.
Phyllisad  Demoph.  21,  Briseis  ad  Ach.  107;  Horn.
Hym.  ad  Ven.  26.)  Other  superstitious  rites  were
often  superadded,  to  give  greater  solemnity  to  the
ceremony  (Aesch.  Sept.  c.  Theb.  42  ;  Soph.  ^«%.
264  ;  Demosth.  c.  Con.  1269),  which  appear  to  be
ridiculed  by  Aristophanes  (Lysist.  188).

The  different  nations  of  Greece  swore  by  their
own  peculiar  gods  and  heroes  ;  as  the  Thebansby
Hercules,  lolaus,  &a,  the  Lacedaemonians  by
Castor  and  Pollux,  the  Corinthians  by  Poseidon
(Aristoph.  Acharn.  774,  860,  867,  Equites,  609,
Lysist.  81,  148)  ;  the  Athenians  swore  principally
by  Zeus,  Athena,  Apollo  (their  irarpwos  Sebs),
Demeter,  and  Dionysus.

The  office  or  character  of  the  party,  or  the
place,  or  the  occasion  often  suggested  the  oath  to
be  taken.  Thus,  Iphigeneia  the  priestess  swears
by  Artemis  in  Eurip.  Iph.  in  Tauris.  Menelaus
bids  Antilochus  swear  by  Poseidon  (the  equestrian
god),  the  subject  being  on  horses.  {II.  xxiii.  585.)
So  Philippides,  in  Arist.  Ntd).  83,  is  made  ridi-
culously to  swear  I'r?  rhv  Hoanhu)  rhv  'lirinov.
Achilles  swears  by  his  sceptre  (//.  i.  234),  Tele-
machus  by  the  sorrows  of  his  father  {Od.  xx.  339).
Hence  the  propriety  of  the  famous  oath  in  Demo-
sthenes, by  the  warriors  who  fought  at  Marathon,
&c.  Here  we  may  observe,  that  as  swearing  be-
came a  common  practice  with  men  upon  trivial
occasions,  and  in  ordinary  conversation,  they  used
to  take  oaths  by  any  god,  person,  or  thing,  as  their
peculiar  habits  or  predilections,  or  the  fancy  of  the
moment,  dictated.  Pythagoras  on  this  account
swore  by  the  number  Four.  (Lucian,  Pythag.  4  ;
Pint,  de  Plac.  Phil.  i.  3.  1 61 6.)  Socrates  used  to
swear  v^  rhy  Kvva,  in  which  he  was  absurdly  im-
itated by  others.  (Athen.  ix.  p.  370.)  Aristo-
phanes, so  keenly  alive  to  all  the  foibles  of  his
countrymen,  takes  notice  of  this  custom,  and  turns
it  into  ridicule.  Hence  he  makes  the  sausage-
dealer  swear  v^  rhv  'EpiJ.rju  rhy  ayopaiov  {EquiU


JUSJURANDUM.
297),  Socrates  fi^  T^v'AifaTrvo^y^  &c.  (AVa  627.)
(See  further  Vesp.  83,  Aves,  54,  1611,  Ran.  336,
1J69.)

Women  also  had  their  favourite  oaths.  As  the
men  preferred  swearing  by  Hercules,  Apollo,  «&.c.,
so  the  other  sex  used  to  swear  by  Aphrodite,  De-
meter,  and  Persephone,  Hera,  Hecate,  Artemis  ;
and  Athenian  women  by  Aglauros,  Pandrosus,  &c.
(Lucian,  Dial.  Meretr.  7  ;  Xen.  Memor.  i,  5.  §  5;
Aristoph.  Lysist.  81,  148,  208,  439,  Eccles.  70,
Thesm.  286,  383,  533  ;  Theocr.  Idyll,  xv.  14.)

The  security  which  an  oath  was  supposed  to
confer  induced  the  Greeks,  as  it  has  people  of  mo-
dern times,  to  impose  it  as  an  obligation  upon  per-
sons invested  with  authoritj^  or  intrusted  with  the
discharge  of  responsible  duties.  (Plato,  de  Leg.  xii.
p.  948.)  The  Athenians,  with  whom  the  science
of  legislation  was  carried  to  the  greatest  perfection,
were,  of  all  the  Greek  states,  the  most  punctilious
in  this  respect.  The  youth,  entering  upon  his  20th
year,  was  not  pennitted  to  assume  the  privileges  of
a  citizen,  or  to  be  registered  in  the  X.'q^iapxiKhv
ypafi/xaTeTot^,  without  taking  a  solemn  oath  in  the
temple  of  Aglauros  to  obey  the  laws  and  defend
his  country.  (The  form  of  his  oath  is  preserved  in
Pollux,  viii.  105.)  The  archon,  the  judge,  and  the
arbitrator,  were  required  to  bind  themselves  by  an
oath  to  perform  their  respective  duties.  (See  Pol-
lux, I.e.  ;  Hudtwalcker,  iiberdie  Di'dt.  p.  10  ;  and
DiCASTES.)  As  to  the  oath  taken  by  the  Senate
of  Five  Hundred,  see  Demosth.  c.  Timoc.  745.
As  to  the  oath  of  the  witness,  and  the  voluntary
oath  of  parties  to  an  action,  see  Martybia.  The
importance,  at  least  apparently,  attached  to  oaths
in  courts  of  justice,  is  proved  by  various  passages
in  the  orators.  (Andoc.  de  Myst.  5  ;  Lycurg.  c.
Leoer.  157.  ed.  Steph. ;  Antiph.  de  m.  Herod.  139,
140.  ed  Steph. ;  Demosth.  c.  Aphob.  860.)  Demos-
thenes constantly  reminds  his  judges  that  they  are
on  their  oaths,  and  Lycurgus  {I.  c.)  declares  that
rb  avv^xov  t^v  S-q/uLOKpariav  opKOS  iariv.

The  experience  of  all  nations  has  proved  the
dangerous  tendency  of  making  oaths  too  common.
The  history  of  Athens  and  of  Greece  in  general
furnishes  no  exception  to  the  observation.  While
in  the  popular  belief  and  in  common  parlance  oaths
continued  to  be  highly  esteemed,  they  had  ceased
to  be  of  much  real  wealth  or  value.  It  is  impos-
sible to  read  the  plays  of  Aristophanes,  the  orators,
and  other  writers  of  that  period,  without  seeing
that  perjury  had  become  a  practice  of  ordinary
occurrence.  The  poet  who  wrote  that  verse  which
incurred  the  censure  of  the  comedian,  t]  yXuxra''
ofKvixox',  V  Se  (pp^y  avufioros  (Eur.  Hippol.  612;
Aristoph.  Tltesm.  275),  was  not  the  only  person
who  would  thus  refine.  The  bold  profligacy  de-
scribed by  Aristophanes  {Nub.  1232 — 1241,
Equit.  298)  was  too  often  realized  in  action.  To
trace  the  degeneracy  of  the  Greek  character  be-
longs not  to  this  place.  We  conclude  by  reminding
our  readers  that  in  a  later  age  the  Greeks  became
a  by- word  among  the  Romans  for  lying  and  bad
faith.  (Cic.  pro  Flacco,  4  ;  Juv.  Sat.  iii.  60,  &c.)
A  few  expressions  deserve  notice.  N^  is  used
by  Attic  writers  in  affirmative  oaths,  jua  in  nega-
tive. The  old  form  of  affirmation,  still  preserved
by  the  other  Greeks,  and  used  by  Xenophon,  was
yaliJ.il.  (Xen.  Mem.  ii.  7.  §  14," Apol.  Socr.  20.)
fii]  is  nothing  more  than  another  form  ofyai,  used
with  an  accusative  case,  fia  being  omitted,  as  it
often  is  in  negative  oaths.    (Soph.  Oed.  Tyr.  660,


JUSJURANDUM.


661


1088,  Elect.  758,  1063.)  N^,  however,  is  never
used  by  the  tragedians,  who  always  employ  a  para-
phrase in  affirmative  oaths,  such  as  h^hy  fiaprvpea-
6ai.  "E.irojxvvyai  is  used  affirmatively,  airo/xyvyai
negatjvely,  according  to  Eustathius.  (Hom.  Od.
ii.  377.)  Aidixyvadai  is  to  swear  strongly,  to
protest,  (Soph.  Track  378.)  "OpKioy,  though
often  used  synonymously  with  8p/foy,  signifies
more  strictly  a  compact  ratified  by  oath  ;  opKia
Ta^iyeiy  is  to  make  a  compact  with  oaths  and
sacrifice  ;  and  through  the  frequent  practice  of
sacrificing  on  such  occasions,  it  came  that  opKioy
w.-is  sometimes  used  for  the  victim  itself.  (Horn.
II.  iii.  245.)  In  the  phrase  6fj.yvyai  Kaff  Upcuy,  the
original  meaning  of  Karct  was,  that  the  party  laid
his  hand  upon  the  victims ;  but  the  same  phrase
is  used  metaphorically  in  other  cases,  wheie  there
could  be  no  such  ceremony.  Thus  Kara  xiKiav
evxhv  TTOiijaaaeai  x^t^apo^t^  (Arist.  Equit.  660)  is
to  make  a  vow  to  offer  a  thousand  kids  ;  as  though
the  party  vowing  layed  his  hands  upon  the  kids  at
the  time,  as  a  kind  of  stake.  The  same  observation
applies  to  ofxyvyai  kut  e|a)Aeiay.  (Comp,  La-
saulz,  Ueber  den  Eid  bei  den  Gnecken,  WUrzburg,
1844.)

2.  Roman.  The  subject  of  Roman  oaths  may
be  treated  under  four  dirterent  heads,  viz. :  —  1.
Oaths  taken  by  magistrates  and  other  persons  who
entered  the  service  of  the  republic.  2.  Oaths
taken  in  transactions  with  foreign  nations  in  the
name  of  the  republic.  3.  Oaths,  or  various  modes
of  swearing  in  common  life.  4.  Oaths  taken  be-
fore the  praetor  or  in  courts  of  justice.

I,  Oaths  taken  by  magistrates  and  other  persons
who  entered  the  service  of  the  republic.  —  After  the
establishment  of  the  republic  the  consuls,  and  sub-
sequently all  the  other  magistrates,  were  obliged,
within  five  daj's  after  their  appointment,  to  pro-
mise on  oath  that  they  would  protect  and  observe
the  laws  of  the  republic  {in  leges  jurare,  Liv.  xxxi.
50  ;  compare  Dionys.  v.  1.).  Vestal  virgins  and
the  flamen  dialis  were  not  allowed  to  swear
on  any  occasion  (Liv.  l.  c. ;  Fest.  s.v.  Jurare;
Piut.  Quaest.  Rom.  p.  275),  but  whether  they  also
entered  upon  their  sacred  offices  without  taking  an
oath  analogous  to  that  of  magistrates  is  unknown.
When  a  flanien  dialis  was  elected  to  a  magistracy,
he  might  either  petition  for  an  especial  dispensa-
tion {ut  legibus  solveretur),  or  he  might  depute
some  one  to  take  the  oath  for  him.  But  this  could
not  be  done  unless  the  permission  was  granted  by
the  people.  The  first  Roman  consuls  seem  only
to  have  sworn  that  they  would  not  restore  the
kingly  government,  nor  allow  any  one  else  to  do
so  (Liv.  ii.  1  ;  Dionys.  I.  c),  and  this  may  have
been  the  case  till  all  fears  of  such  a  restoration
having  vanished,  the  oath  was  changed  into  a
jusjurandum  in  leges.  The  consular  oath  was
occasionally  taken  under  the  empire.  (Plin.
Paneg.  64.)

During  the  later  period  of  the  republic  we  also
find  that  magistrates,  when  the  time  of  their  office
had  expired,  addressed  the  people  and  swore  that
during  their  office  they  had  undertaken  nothing
against  the  republic,  but  had  done  their  utmost  to
promote  its  welfare.  (Cic.  ad  Fain.  v.  2.  §  7,  pro
Sulla,  11,  in  Pison.  3,  pro  Dom.  35 ;  Dion  Cass,
xxxvii.  p. 52,  xxxviii.  p.  72,  liii.  p.  568, ed.  Steph.;
Liv.  xxix.  37.)  In  some  cases  a  tribune  of  the
people  might  compel  the  whole  senate  to  promise
on  oath  that  they  would  observe  a  plebiscitum,
u  u  3


662


JUSJURANDUM.


and  allow  it  to  be  carried  into  effect,  as  was  the
case  with  the  lex  agraria  of  Saturninus.  The
censor  Q.  Metellus,  who  refused  to  swear,  was  sent
into  exile.  (Appian,  J5.  C  i.  29  ;  Q,\c. -pro  Sext.  47;
Plut.  Mar.  29.)  During  the  time  of  the  empire
all  magistrates  on  entering  their  office  were  obliged
to  pledge  themselves  by  an  oath  that  they  would
observe  the  acta  Caesarum  (  mrare  in  acta  Cae-
sarum.  Suet.  Tiber.  67  ;  Tacit.  Annal.  i.  72,  xiii.
26,  xvi.  22  ;  Dion  Cass,  xlvii.  p.  384,  &c.),  and
the  senators  had  to  do  the  same  regularly  every
ji-ear  on  the  first  of  January.  (Dion  Cass.  Iviii.
p.  724 ;  compare  Lipsius,  Excurs.  A.  ad  Tacit.
Annal.  xvi.  22.)

AH  Roman  soldiers  after  they  were  enlisted  for
a  campaign,  had  to  take  the  military  oath  (sacra-
mentum),  which  was  administered  in  the  following
manner  :  —  Each  tribunus  militum  assembled  his
regiment,  and  picked  out  one  of  the  men  to  whom
he  put  the  oath,  that  he  would  obey  the  com-
mands of  his  generals  and  execute  them  punctually.
The  other  men  then  came  forward  one  after  an-
other and  repeated  the  same  oath,  saying  that  they
would  do  like  the  first  (ide?n  in  me,  Polyb.  vi.
21  ;  Fest.  s.  V.  Praejiiratianes).  Livy  (xxii.  38)
says  that  until  the  year  216  B.  c.  the  military
oath  was  only  sacramentum,  i.  e.  the  soldiers
took  it  voluntarily,  and  promised  (with  impreca-
tions) that  they  would  not  desert  from  the  army,
and  not  leave  the  ranks  except  to  fight  against
the  enemy  or  to  save  a  Roman  citizen.  But  in
the  year  216  B.C.  the  soldiers  were  compelled  by
the  tribunes  to  take  the  oath,  which  the  tribunes
put  to  them,  that  they  would  meet  at  the  command
of  the  consuls  and  not  leave  the  standards  without
their  orders,  so  that  in  this  case  the  military  oath
became  a  jusjurandum.  But  Livy  here  forgets  that
long  before  that  time  he  has  represented  (iii.  20)
the  soldiers  taking  the  same  jusjurandum.  A  per-
fect formula  of  a  military  oath  is  preserved  in  Gel  -
lius  (xvi.  4;  compare  Dionys.  vi.  23.)

It  may  here  be  remarked  that  any  oath  might
be  taken  in  two  ways :  the  person  who  took  it,
either  framed  it  himself,  or  it  was  put  to  him  in
a  set  form,  and  in  this  case  he  was  said  in  verba
jurare,  ovjurare  verbis  conceptis.  Polybius  (vi.  33)
speaks  of  a  second  oath  which  was  put  to  all  who
served  in  the  army,  whether  freemen  or  slaves,  as
soon  as  the  castrametatio  had  taken  place,  and  by
which  all  promised  that  they  would  steal  nothing
from  the  camp,  and  that  they  would  take  to  the
tribunes  whatever  they  might  happen  to  find.  The
military  oath  was,  according  to  Dionysius  (xi.
43),  the  most  sacred  of  all,  and  the  law  allowed
a  general  to  put  to  death  without  a  formal  trial  any
soldier  who  ventured  to  act  contrary  to  his  oath.
It  was  taken  upon  the  signa,  which  were  them-
selves considered  sacred.  In  the  time  of  the  em-
pire a  clause  was  added  to  the  military  oath,  in
which  the  soldiers  declared  that  they  would  con-
sider the  safety  of  the  emperor  more  important  than
anything  else,  and  that  they  loved  neither  them-
selves nor  their  children  more  than  their  sovereign,
(Arrian,  Epict.m.  14;  Suet.  Ca%.  15;  Ammian.
Marc.  xxi.  5.)  On  the  military  oath  in  general,
compare  Brissonius,  De  Formul.  iv.  c.  1 — 5.

II.  Oaths  taken  in  transactions  with  foreujn  na-
tions in  the  name  of  tlie  republic.  The  most  ancient
form  of  an  oath  of  this  kind  is  recorded  by  Livy
(i.  24),  in  a  treaty  between  the  Romans  and  Albans.
The  pater  patratus  pronounced  the  oath  in  the


JUSJURANDUM.

name  of  his  country,  and  struck  the  victim  with  a
flint-stone,  calling  on  Jupiter  to  destroy  the  Roman
nation  in  like  manner,  as  he  (the  pater  patratus)
destroyed  the  animal,  if  the  people  should  violate
the  oath.  The  chiefs  or  priests  of  the  other  nation
then  swore  in  a  simi-lar  manner  by  their  own  gods.
The  ceremony  was  sometimes  different,  inasmuch
as  the  fetialis  cast  away  the  stone  from  his  hands,
saying.  Si  sciens  /'alio,  turn  me  Diespiter  salva  urbe
arceque  bonis  ejiciat,  uti  ego  hunc  lapidem.  (Fest.
s.  V.  Lapidem.)  Owing  to  the  prominent  part
which  the  stone  {lapis  silex)  played  in  this  act,
Jupiter  himself  was  called  Jupiter  Lapis  (Polyb.
iii.  25),  and  hence  it  was  in  aftertimes  not
uncommon  among  the  Romans  in  ordinary  con-
versation to  swear  by  Jupiter  Lapis.  (Gellius,  i.
21  ;  Cic.  ad  Fam.  vii.  1,  12  ;  Plut.  Sulla,  10.)
In  swearing  to  a  treaty  with  a  foreign  nation,  a
victim  (a  pig  or  a  lamb)  was  in  the  early  times  al-
ways sacrificed  by  the  fetialis  (whence  the  expres-
sions yoeiws  icere,  opKia  rdfiveiv),  and  the  priest
while  pronouncing  the  oath  probably  touched  the
victim  or  the  altar.  (Virg.  Aen.  xii.  201,  &c.  ;
Liv,  xxi.  45  ;  compare  Fetiales.)  This  mode  of
swearing  to  a  treaty  through  the  sacred  person  of
a  fetialis,  was  observed  for  a  long  time,  and  after
the  second  Punic  war  the  fetiales  even  travelled  to
Africa  to  perform  the  ancient  ceremonies.  (Liv.
XXX.  43.)  The  jus  fetiale,  however,  fell  into  dis-
use as  the  Romans  extended  their  conquests  ;  and
as  in  most  cases  of  treaties  with  foreign  nations,  the
Romans  were  not  the  party  that  chose  to  promise
anything  on  oath,  we  hear  no  more  of  oaths  on
their  part ;  but  the  foreign  nation  or  conquered
party  was  sometimes  obliged  to  promise  with  a  so-
lemn oath  (sacramentum)  to  observe  the  conditions
prescribed  by  the  Romans,  and  documents  record-
ing such  promises  were  kept  in  the  capitol.  (Liv.
xxvi.  24.)  But  in  cases  where  the  Romans  had
reason  to  mistrust,  they  demanded  hostages  as
being  a  better  security  than  an  oath,  and  this  was
the  practice  which  in  later  times  they  adopted
most  generally.  At  first  the  Romans  were  very
scrupulous  in  observing  their  oaths  in  contracts  or
treaties  with  foreigners,  and  even  with  enemies  ;
but  attempts  were  soon  made  by  individuals  to
interpret  an  oath  sophistically  and  explain  away
its  binding  character  (Gellius,  vii.  18  ;  Liv.  iii.
20,  xxii.  61  ;  Cic.  de  Of.  iii.  27,  &c.),  and  from
the  third  Punic  war  to  the  end  of  the  republic,
perjury  was  common  among  the  Romans  in  their
dealings  with  foreigners  as  well  as  among  them-
selves,

III.  Oaths  or  various  modes  of  swearing  in  com-
mon life.  The  practice  of  swearing  or  calling
upon  some  god  or  gods  as  witnesses  to  the  truth
of  assertions  made  in  common  life  or  in  ordinary
conversations,  was  as  common  among  the  Romans
as  among  the  Greeks.  The  various  forms  used  in
swearing  may  be  divided  into  three  classes  :  —

1.  Simple  invocations  of  one  or  more  gods,  as
Hercle  or  Meherch,  that  is,  ita  me  Hercules  juvet,
amet,  or  ser vet  (Fest.  s.  v.  Mecastor)  ;  Pol,  Perpol
or  Aedepol,  that  is,  per  PoUucem  ;  per  Jovem  La-
pidem or  simply  joer  Jovem;  per  superos ;  per  deos
immortales ;  medius  fidius,  that  is,  ita  me  Dius
(Afos)  filius  juvet  (Fest.  s.  v.  ;  Varro,  de  Ling.
Lat.  iv.  p.  20,  Bip.) ;  ita  me  deus  amet,  oxdiiament.
Sometimes  also  two  or  a  great  number  of  gods
were  invoked  by  their  names.  (Plant.  Bacchid.  iv.
8.  51  ;  Terent.  Andr.  iii.  2.  25.)      The  genii  of


JUSJURANDUM.

men  were  regarded  as  divine  beings,  and  persons
used  to  swear  by  their  own  genius,  or  by  that  of
a  friend,  and  during  the  empire  by  that  of  an
emperor.  (Plorat.  Epist  i.  7,  94  ;  Suet.  Calig.
27.)  Women  as  well  as  men  swore  by  most  of
the  gods  ;  but  some  of  them  were  peculiar  to  one
of  ihe  sexes.  Thus  women  never  swore  by  Her-
cules, and  men  never  by  Castor  ;  Varro,  moreover,
said  that  in  ancient  times  women  only  swore  by
Castor  and  Pollux,  while  in  the  extant  writers  we
find  men  frequently  swearing  by  Pollux.  (Gellius,
xi.  6.)  Juno  and  Venus  were  mostly  invoked  by
women,  but  also  by  lovers  and  effeminate  men  in
general.  (Plant.  Amphit.  ii.  2.  210  ;  Tibull.  iv.  ]  3.
15  ;  Juv.  ii.  98  ;  Ovid.  Amor.  ii.  7.  27,  ii.  8.  18.)

2.  Invocations  of  the  gods,  together  with  an
execration,  in  case  the  swearer  was  stating  a  false-
hood. Execrations  of  this  kind  are,  Dii  me  per-
dant  (Plaut.  Mil.  Glor.  iii.  2.  20,  Cistell.  ii.  1.  21);
dii  me  interficiant  (Plaut.  Afostell.  i.  3.  35)  ;  dis-
peream  (Horat.  Sat.  i.  9.  47)  ;  ne  vivam  (Cic.  ad
Fam.  vii.  23  ;  Mart.  x.  12.  3);  ne  salvus  sim  (Cic.
ad  Att.  xvi.  13),  &c.

3.  Persons  also  used  to  swear  by  the  indi-
viduals or  things  most  dear  to  them.  Thus  we
have  instances  of  a  person  swearing  by  his  own  or
another  man's  head  (Dig.  12.  tit.  2.  s.  3.  §4;
Ovid,  Trist.  v.  4.  45  ;  Heroid.  iii.  107  ;  Juv.  vi.
1 6),  by  his  eyes  (Plaut.  Meneach.  v.  9.  1 ;  Ovid,
Amoi:  ii.  1 6.  44),  by  his  own  welfare  or  that  of  his
children  (Dig.  12.  tit.  2.  s.  5  ;  Plin.  Epist.  ii.  20),
by  the  welfare  of  an  emperor  (Cod.  2.  tit.  4.  s.  41),
&c.

Respecting  the  various  forms  of  oaths  and
Bwearing  see  Brissonius,  de  Formtd.  viii.  cc.  1 —
18.  [L.  S.]

IV.  Oaths  taken  before  the  praetor  or  in  courts  of
justice.  There  might  be  a  jusjurandura  either  in  jure
or  in  judicio.  The  jusjurandum  in  jure  had  a  like
effect  to  the  confessio  in  jure,  and  it  stood  in  the
place  of  the  Litis  Contestatio  (Dig.  5.  tit.  1.
s.  28.  §  2).  The  jusjurandum  in  jure  is  the  oath
which  one  party  proposed  to  his  adversary  (detulit)
that  he  should  make  about  the  matter  in  dispute ;
and  the  effect  of  the  oath  being  taken  or  refused
was  equivalent  to  a  judicium.  If  the  defendant
took  the  oath,  he  had  in  answer  to  the  actio  an
exceptio  (plea)  jurisjurandi,  analogous  to  the  ex-
ceptio  rei  in  judicium  deductae  and  rei  judicatae.
If  the  plaintiff  swore,  he  had  an  actio  in  factum
(on  the  case)  analogous  to  the  actio  judicati.  The
reason  of  the  jusjurandum  having  this  effect  is
explained  (Dig.  44.  tit.  5.  s.  1)  to  be,  that  a  party
to  a  cause  makes  his  adversary  the  judex  by  pro-
posing to  him  to  take  the  oath  (deferendo  ei  jus-
jurandum;. This  jusjurandum  which  is  proposed
(delatum)  in  jure,  is  called  necessarium,  because  he
to  whom  it  is  proposed  cannot  simply  refuse  it  ;
he  must  either  take  the  oath,  or,  in  his  turn,  pro-
pose (referre)  that  the  proposer  shall  take  it.
Simple  refusal  was  equivalent  to  con'essio  (con-
fessionis  est  nolle  nee  jurare  nee  jusjurandum  re-
ferre  ;  Dig.  12.  tit.  2.  s.  38).  In  the  Edict  (Dig.  12.
tit.  2.  s.  34.  §  6),  the  praetor  says  that  he  will
compel  the  person  from  whom  the  oath  is  demanded
to  pay  or  to  take  the  oath.  A  pupillus,  a  procurator,
or  defensor,  a  Vestal,  and  a  flamen  dialis  could  not
be  compelled  to  swear  (Gell.  x.  15),

The  jusjurandum  in  judicio  (jusjurandum  judi-
ciale)  is  required  by  the  judex,  and  not  by  either
of  the  parties,  though  either  of  the  parties  may


rUVENALIA.


6Gi


suggest  it.  This  jusjurandum  has  not  the  effect  of
the  jusjurandum  in  jure :  it  is  merely  evidence,
and  the  judex  can  give  it  such  probative  force  as
to  him  seems  just.  Such  an  oath  is  only  wanted
when  other  evidence  fails.  The  judicial  oath  was
particularly  applicable  in  cases  in  which  the  judex
had  to  detennine  the  value  of  the  matter  in  dis-
pute. As  a  general  rule,  the  aestimatio  or  esti-
mate of  value  or  damages  was  to  be  made  by  the
judex  conformably  to  the  evidence  furnished  by
the  plaintiff;  but  if  the  defendant  by  his  dolus
or  contumacia  prevented  the  plaintiff  from  recover-
ing the  specific  thing,  which  was  the  object  of  the
action,  and  consequently  the  plaintiff  must  have
the  value  of  it,  the  judex  could  put  the  plaintiff  to
his  oath  as  to  the  value  of  the  thing  ;  but  he
could  also  fix  a  limit  (^taxatio)  which  the  plaintiff
must  not  exceed  in  the  amount  that  he  declared
upon  oath.  This  is  called  jusjurandum  in  litem
(Dig.  12.  tit.  3).  This  oath  is  merely  evidence  ;
the  judex  may  still  either  acquit  the  defendant  or
condemn  him  in  a  less  sum  (Dig.  22.  tit.  3  ;  De
probationibus  et  praesumptionibus).

As  to  the  Jusjurandum  Calumniae,  see  Calum-
NiA  ;  and  see  Judex,  Judicium.  [G.  L.]

JUSSU,  QUOD,  ACTIO,  is  a  Praetorian
actio  which  a  man  had  against  a  father  or  master
of  a  slave  (dominus),  if  a  filiusfamilias  or  a  slave
had  entered  into  any  contract  at  the  bidding
(jussu)  of  the  father  or  master,  for  the  full  amount
of  the  matter  in  dispute.  He  who  thus  contracted
with  a  filiusfamilias  or  a  slave,  was  not  considered
to  deal  with  them  on  their  own  credit,  but  on  that
of  the  father  or  master.  This  Actio  is  classed  by
Gains  with  the  Exercitoria  and  Institoria.  (Gains,
iv.  70;  Dig.  15.  tit.  4.)  [G.  L.]

JUSTA  FUNERA.     [Funera,  p.  558,  b.]

JUSTINIANE  US  CODEX.    [Codex  Jus-

TINIANEUS.]

JUSTI'TIUM,  probably  signified  originally  a
cessation  of  judicial  business  (juris  quasi  interstitio
quaedam  et  cessatio,  Gell.  xx.  1),  but  is  always  used
to  indicate  a  time  in  which  public  business  of  every
kind  was  suspended.  Thus  the  courts  of  law  and
the  treasury  were  shut  up,  no  ambassadors  were
received  in  the  senate,  and  no  auctions  took  place
{jurisdictionem  intermitti^  claudi  aerarium,  judicia
tola,  Cic.  de  Har.  Besp.  36  ;  pro  Plane.  14,  with
Wunder's  note).  The  Justitium  was  proclaimed
(edicere,  indicere)  by  the  senate  and  the  magis-
trates in  times  of  public  alarm  and  danger ;  and
after  confidence  and  tranquillity  had  been  restored,
the  Justitium  was  removed  (remittere,  eocuere)  by
the  same  authorities.  (Liv.  vi.  7,  ix.  7,  x.  21  ;
Plut.  Sull.  8,  Mar.  35.)  As  such  times  of  alarm
are  usually  accompanied  with  general  sorrow,  a
Justitium  came  in  course  of  time  to  be  ordained  as
a  mark  of  public  mourning,  and  under  the  empire
was  only  employed  for  this  reason.  Thus  we  find
it  usually  proclaimed  on  the  death  of  an  emperor
or  of  a  member  of  the  imperial  family.  It  was
observed  in  the  provinces  as  well  as  at  Rome,  and
during  its  continuance  the  soldiers  were  released
from  their  ordinary  military  duties.  (Tac.  Ann.  i.
16,  ii,  82  ;  Suet.  Tib.  52,  Cal.  24,  Galb.  10.)

JUVENA'LIA,  or  JUVENA'LES  LUDI
{'lov§€vd\ia  SxTirep  tlvcl  veaviffK^vixara),  were
scenic  games  instituted  by  Nero  in  a.  d.  59,  in
commemoration  of  his  shaving  his  beard  for  the
first  time,  thus  intimating  that  he  had  passed
from  youth  to  manhood.  He  was  then  in  the
u  u  4


664


LABYRINTHUS.


twenty-second  year  of  his  age.  These  games  were
not  celebrated  in  the  circus,  but  in  a  private
theatre  erected  in  a  pleasure-ground  (nemus),  and
consisted  of  every  kind  of  theatrical  performance,
Greek  and  Roman  plaj'^s,  mimetic  pieces,  and  the
like.  The  most  distinguished  persons  in  the  state,
old  and  young,  male  and  female,  were  expected  to
take  part  in  them.  The  emperor  set  the  example
by  appearing  in  person  on  the  stage  ;  and  Dion
Cassius  mentions  a  distinguished  Roman  matron,
upwards  of  eighty  years  of  age,  who  danced  in  the
games.  It  was  one  of  the  offences  given  by  Paetus
Thrasea  that  he  had  not  acquitted  himself  with
credit  at  this  festival.  (Dion  Cass,  Ixi.  IS  ;  Tac.
Ann.  xiv.  15,  xv.  33,  xvi.  21.)  Suetonius  (Ner.
12)  confounds  this  festival  with  the  Quinquennalia,
which  was  instituted  in  the  following  year,  A.  D.
60.  [Quinquennalia.]  The  Juvenalia  con-
tinued to  be  celebrated  by  subsequent  emperors,
but  not  on  the  same  occasion.  The  name  was
given  to  those  games  which  were  exhibited  by  the
emperors  on  the  1st  of  January  in  each  year.
They  no  longer  consisted  of  scenic  representations,
but  of  chariot  races  and  combats  of  wild  beasts.
(Dion  Cass.  Ixvii.  14  ;  Sidon.  ApoU.  Carm.  xxiii.
307,  428  ;  Capitol.  Gord.  4 ;  comp,  Lipsius,  ad
Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  15.)


K.     See  C.


L.


LA'BARUM.    [SiGNA  Militaria.]

LABRUM.     [Balneak,  p.  191.]

LABYRINTHUS  (XagipipOos).  This  word
appears  to  be  of  Greek  origin,  and  not  of  Egyptian
as  has  generally  been  supposed  ;  it  is  probably  a
derivative  form  of  KaSipos^  and  etymologically
connected  with  Xavpai.  Accordingly,  the  pi'oper
definition  of  labyrinth  is  a  large  and  complicated
subteri-aneous  cavern  with  numerous  and  intricate
passages,  similar  to  those  of  a  mine.  (Welcker,
Aeschyl.  Trilog.  p.  212,  &c.)  Hence  the  caverns
near  Nauplia  in  Argolis  were  called  labyrinths.
(Sti-abo,  viii.  6  .  p.  369.)  And  this  is  indeed  the
characteristic  feature  of  all  the  structures  to  which
the  ancients  apply  the  name  labyrinth,  for  they  are
always  described  as  either  entirely  or  partially
under  ground.

The  earliest  and  most  renowned  labyrinth  was
that  of  Egj'pt,  which  lay  beyond  lake  Moeris,  at  a
short  distance  from  the  eity  of  Crocodiles  (Arsinoe),
in  the  province  now  called  Faioum.  Herodotus
(ii.  148)  ascribes  its  construction  to  the  dodecarchs
(about  G50  B.  c),  and  Mela  (i.  9)  to  Psammetichus
alone.  But  other  and  more  probable  accounts  refer
its  construction  to  a  much  earlier  age.  (Plin.  H.N.
xxxvi.  13;  Diod.  Sic.  i.  61,  89;  Strabo,  xvii.
p.  81 1 .)  This  edifice,  which  in  grandeur  even  ex-
celled the  pyramids,  is  described  by  Herodotus  and
Pliny  {U.  cc.)  It  had  3000  apartments,  1500
under  ground,  and  the  same  number  above  it,  and
the  whole  was  surrounded  by  a  wall.  It  was  di-
vided into  courts,  each  of  which  was  surrounded
by  colonnades  of  white  marble.  At  the  time  of
Diodorus  and  of  Pliny  the  Egyptian  labyrinth  was
still  extant.  But  the  ruins  which  modern  travel-
lers describe  as  relics  of  the  ancient  labyrinth,  as
well  as  the  place  where  thoy  saw  them,  do  not


LABYRINTHUS.

agree  with  what  we  know  from  the  best  ancient
authorities  respecting  its  architecture  and  its  site.
(British  Mus.  Egyptian  Antiq.  vol.  i.  p.  54,  and
more  especially  Bunsen,  Aegyptens  Stelle  in  der
Weligesch.  voL  ii.  p.  324,  &c.)  The  purpose  which
this  labyrinth  was  intended  to  serve,  can  only  be
matter  of  conjecture.  It  has  been  supposed  by
some  wi'iters  that  the  whole  arrangement  of  the
edifice  was  a  symbolical  representation  of  the
zodiac  and  the  solar  sj-stem.  Herodotus,  who  saw
the  upper  part  of  this  labyrinth,  and  went  through
it,  was  not  permitted  by  the  keepers  to  enter  the
subterraneous  part,  and  he  was  told  by  them  that
here  were  buried  the  kings  by  whom  the  labyrinth
had  been  built,  and  the  sacred  crocodiles.

The  second  labyrinth  mentioned  by  the  ancients
was  that  of  Crete,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Cnos-
sus :  Daedalus  was  said  to  have  built  it  after  the
model  of  the  Egyptian,  and  at  the  command  of
king  Minos.  (Plin.  Diod.  U.  cc.)  This  labyrinth
is  said  to  have  been  only  one  hundredth  part  the
size  of  the  Egyptian,  and  to  have  been  the  habit-
ation of  the  monster  Minotanrus.  Although  the
Cretan  labyrinth  is  very  frequently  mentioned  by
ancient  authors,  yet  none  of  them  speaks  of  it  as
an  eyewitness ;  and  Diodorus  and  Pliny  expressly
state  that  not  a  trace  of  it  was  to  be  seen  in  their
days.  These  circumstances,  together  with  the
impossibility  of  accounting  for  the  objects  which  a
Cretan  king  could  have  had  in  view  in  raising  such
a  building,  have  induced  almost  all  modem  writers
to  deny  altogether  the  existence  of  the  Cretan
labyrinth.  This  opinion  is  not  only  supported  by
some  testimonies  of  the  ancients  themselves,  but
by  the  peculiar  nature  of  some  parts  of  the  island
of  Crete.  The  author  of  the  Etymologicum  Magn.
calls  the  Cretan  labyrinth  "  a  mountain  with  a  ca-
vern," and  Eustathius  {ad  Odyss.  xi.  p.  1688)
calls  it  "a  subterraneous  cavern  ;""  and  similar
statements  are  made  by  several  other  writers
quoted  by  Meursius  {Creta,  pp.  67  and  69).  Such
large  caverns  actually  exist  in  some  parts  of  Crete,
especially  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  ancient
town  of  Gortys ;  and  it  was  probably  some  such
cavern  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Cnossus  that  gave
rise  to  the  story  of  a  labyrinth  built  in  the  reign
of  Minos.  (See  Wal pole's  Travels,  p.  402,  &c,  ;
Hockh,  Kreta,  i,  p.  56,  &c.,  and  p.  447,  &c.)

A  third  labyrinth,  the  construction  of  which
belongs  to  a  more  historical  age,  was  that  in  the
island  of  Lemnos.  It  was  commenced  by  Smilis,
an  Aeginetan  architect,  and  completed  by  Rhoecus
and  Diodorus  of  Samos,  about  the  time  of  the  first
Oympiad.  (Plin.  I.  c.)  It  was  in  its  construction
similar  to  the  Egyptian,  and  was  only  distinguish-
ed from  it  by  a  greater  number  of  columns.  Re-
mains of  it  were  still  extant  in  the  time  of  Pliny.
It  is  uncertain  whether  this  labyrinth  was  in-
tended as  a  temple  of  the  Cabeiri,  or  whether  it  had
any  connection  with  the  art  of  mining.  (Welcker,
Aeschyl.  Tril.  I.  c.)

Samos  had  likewise  a  labyrinth,  which  was  built
by  Theodorus,  the  same  who  assisted  in  building
that  of  Lemnos  ;  but  no  particulars  are  known,
(Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiv.  8.)

Lastly,  we  have  to  mention  a  fabulous  edifice  in
Etniria,  to  which  Pliny  applies  the  name  of  laby-
rinth. It  is  described  as  being  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  Clusium,  and  as  the  tomb  of  Lar  Porsen;u
But  no  writer  says  that  he  ever  saw  it,  or  remains
of  it;  and  Pliny,  who  thought  the  description  which


LACINIAE.

he  found  of  it  too  fabulous,  did  not  venture  to  give
it  in  his  own  words,  but  quoted  those  of  Varro,
who  had  probably  taken  the  account  from  the  po-
pular stories  of  the  Etruscans  themselves.  It  was
said  to  have  been  built  partly  under  and  partly
above  ground,  whence  the  name  labyrinth  is  cor-
rectly applied  to  it.  But  a  building  like  this,  says
Niebuhr  {History  of  Rome,  vol.  i.  p.  130.  note
405),  is  absolutely  impossible,  and  belongs  to  the
Arabian  Nights.  (Comp.  Abeken,  Mittelitalien,
p.  243.)  [L.  S.]

LACERNA  (juai'Suos,  fiavZvti),  a  cloak  worn
by  the  Romans  over  the  toga,  whence  it  is  called
by  Juvenal  (ix.  28)  "  munimentum  togae."  It
differed  from  the  paenula  in  being  an  open  gar-
ment like  the  Greek  pallium,  and  fastened  on  the
right  shoulder  by  means  of  a  buckle  {fibula),
whereas  the  paenula  was  what  is  called  a  vestimen-
tiim  clausmn  with  an  opening  for  the  head.  [Pae-
nula.] The  Lacema  appears  to  have  been  com-
monly used  in  the  army  (Veil.  Pat.  ii.  70,  80  ;
Ovid,  Fast.  ii.  746  ;  Prop.  iv.  3.  18),  but  in  the
time  of  Cicero  was  not  usually  worn  in  the  city
(Cic.  Philip,  ii.  30.)  It  soon  afterwards,  however,
became  quite  common  at  Rome,  as  we  learn  from
Suetonius,  who  says  {Ati^.  40)  that  Augustus,
seeing  one  day  a  great  number  of  citizens  before
his  tribunal  dressed  in  the  lacema,  which  was
commonly  of  a  dark  colour  {pullati),  repeated  with
indignation  the  line  of  Virgil.

"  Romanos  rerum  dominos,  gentemque  togatam,'"'

and  gave  orders  that  the  Aediles  should  henceforth
allow  no  one  to  be  in  the  forum  or  circus  in  that
dress.

Most  persons  seem  to  have  carried  a  lacema  or
paenula  with  them,  when  they  attended  the  public
games,  to  protect  them  from  the  cold  or  rain  (Dion
Cass.  Ivii.  13);  and  thus  we  are  told  that  the  equites
used  to  stand  up  at  the  entrance  of  Claudius  and
lay  aside  their  lacernae.    (Suet.  Claud.  6.)

The  lacerna  was  usually,  as  already  remarked,
of  a  dark  colour  {fusci  colores.  Mart.  i.  97.  9),  and
was  liequently  made  of  the  dark  wool  of  the
Baetic  sheep  {Baeticae  lacernae,  xiv.  133).  It  was,
however,  sometimes  dyed  with  the  Tj'rian  purple,
and  with  other  colours.  (Juv.  i.  27  ;  Mart.  i.  97.)
Martial  (viii.  10)  speaks  of  larcernae  of  the  former
kind,  which  cost  as  much  as  10,000  sesterces.
When  the  emperor  was  expected  at  the  public
games,  it  was  tlie  practice  to  wear  white  lacernae
only.     (Mart.  iv.  2,  xiv.  137.)

The  lacerna  was  sometimes  thrown  over  the
head  for  the  purpose  of  concealment  (Hor.  Sat.  ii.
7.  55)  ;  but  a  cucullus  or  cowl  was  generally  used
for  that  purpose,  which  appears  to  have  been  fre-
quently attached  to  the  lacernae,  and  to  have
formed  a  part  of  the  dress.  (Mart.  xiv.  139,
132.)  See  Becker,  G alius,  vol.  ii.  p.  95,  &c.
[Cucui.LUS.]

LACTNIAE,  the  angular  extremities  of  the
toga,  one  of  which  was  brought  round  over  the  left
shoulder.  It  was  generally  tucked  into  the  girdle,
but  sometimes  was  allowed  to  hang  down  loose.
Plautus  {Mercat.  i.  2.  16)  indicates  that  it  occa-
sionally served  for  a  pocket-handkerchief  {At  tu
edepol  sume  laciniam  atque  alisterge  sudorem  tibi)  :
Velleius  Paterculus  (ii.  3)  represents  Scipio  Nasica
as  wrapping  the  lacinia  of  his  toga  round  his  left
arm  for  a  shield  (compare  Val.  Max.  iii.  2.  §  17)
before  he  rushed  upon  Tib.  Gracchus  ;  while,  ac-


LAENA.


6(J5


cording  to  Servius  {ad  Virg.  Aen.  vii.  612),  the
Cinctus  Gabinus  was  formed  by  girding  the  toga
tight  round  the  body  by  one  of  its  laciniae  or  loose
ends.  These  expressions  are  quite  irreconcileable
with  the  opinion  of  Ferrarius  and  others,  that  the
lacinia  was  the  lower  border  or  skirt  of  the  toga,
while  all  the  passages  adduced  by  them  admit  of
easy  explanation  according  to  the  above  view.
The  lacinia  was  undoubtedl}"-  permitted  by  some
to  sweep  the  ground,  especially  by  such  as  wore
their  garments  loosely.  Thus  Macrobius  {Sat.  ii.  3)
remarks  upon  one  of  Cicero's  witticisms,  "  Jocatus
in  Caesarera  quia  ita  praecingebatur,  ut  trahendo
laciniam  velut  mollis  mcederet,"  which  corresponds
with  the  well-known  caution  of  Sulla  addressed
to  Pompey,  "  Cave  tibi  ilium  puerum  male  prae-
cinctum  ; "  and  Suetonius  tells  how  the  emperor
Caius,  being  filled  with  jealousy  on  account  of  the
plaudits  lavished  on  a  gladiator,  hurried  out  of  the
theatre  in  such  haste  "  ut  calcata  lacinia  togae
praeceps  per  gradus  iret."  Moreover,  the  secondary
and  figurative  jueanings  of  the  word,  namely,  a  rag
(Plin.  H.  N.  xix.  7),  a  narrow  neck  of  land  (Id.
V.  32),  the  point  of  a  leaf  (Id.  xv.  30),  the  ea?-
crescences  whidt  hang  down  from  the  7ieck  of  a  sJie-
goat  (Id.  viii.  50),  &c.,  accord  perfectly  with  the
idea  of  the  angular  extremity  of  a  piece  of  cloth,  but
can  scarcely  be  connected  naturally  with  the  notion
of  a  bonier  or  ski?i.

The  corresponding  Greek  term  was  Kp(x<nreBoPy
and  perhaps  Tcnpvyiov  (Pollux  considers  these
synonymous)  ;  and  accordingly  Plutarch  {Chracch.
19)  and  Appian  {B.  C.  i.  16)  employ  the  former
in  narrating  the  story  of  Scipio  alluded  to  above,
with  this  difference,  however,  that  they  de-
scribe him  as  throwing  rb  KpaaireSov  tov  ifxaTiov
over  his  head  instead  of  twisting  it  round  his
arm.  [W.  R.]

LACO'NICUM.  [BALNEAE,p.l84,b.  190, b.]

LACU'NAR.    [DoMUS,  p.  432,  a.]

LACUS.    [FoNS,  p.  544,  b.]

LAENA,  the  same  word  with  the  Greek
X^atva,  and  radically  connected  with  \dxvr],  lana,
&c.

1.  It  signifies,  properly,  a  woollen  cloak,  the
cloth  of  which  was  twice  the  ordinary  thickness
{duarum  togarum  iiistar,  Varro,  de  Ling.  Lat.  v.
133,  ed.  Miiller),  and  therefore  termed  duplex
(Festus,  s.  V.  Laena;  Serv.  ad  Virg.  Aen.  iv.
262),  shaggy  upon  both  sides  (Schol.  ad  Jtiv.  iii.
283),  worn  over  the  pallium  or  the  toga  for  the
sake  of  warmth.  (Mart.  xiv.  136.)  Hence  per-
sons carried  a  laena  with  them  when  they  went
out  to  supper  (Mart.  viii.  6Q)  ;  and  the  rich  man  in
Juvenal,  who  walks  home  at  night  escorted  by  a
train  of  slaves  and  lighted  on  his  way  by  flam-
beaux, is  wrapped  in  a  scarlet  laena.  (Juv.  iii.
283.)

2.  A  robe  of  state,  fomiing,  it  is  said,  in  ancient
times,  part  of  the  kingly  dress.    (Plut.  Num.  7.)

3.  The  flamines  offered  sacrifice  in  a  laena
which  was  fastened  round  the  throat  by  a  clasp,
and  in  the  case  of  the  dialis  was  woven  by  the
hands  of  the  flaminica.  (Serv.  ad  Virg.  Aen.  iv.
262;  Cic.  Brut.  57.)

4.  In  later  times  the  laena  seems,  to  a  certain
extent,  to  have  been  worn  as  a  substitute  for  the
toga.  Thus  the  courtly  bard  in  Persius  (i.  32)  is
introduced  reciting  his  fashionable  lays  with  a
violet-coloured  laena  over  his  shoulders ;  and  we
gather  from  Juvenal  (v.  130,  vii.  73)  that  it  was


em


LAMPADEPHORIA.


an   ordinary   article  of  dress   among   the   poorer
classes.    (Becker,  Gal/us,  vol.  ii.  p.  .99.)

5.  Nonius  defines  it  to  be  "  vestimentum
militare  quod  supra  omnia  vestimenta  sumitur,"
but  quotes  no  authority  except  Virg.  Aen.  iv,
262.  [W.  R.]

LAGE'NA.    [ViNUM.]

LAMPADA'RCHIA.    [Lampadephoria.]

LAMPADEPHO'RIA  (XaixiraSricpopia),  torch-
bearing  (as  Herodotus  calls  it),  or  Xa}JLTrahi]^poixia^
torch-race  (as  some  lexicographers),  also  Aa/*ira-
hovxos  aywv,  and  often  simply  Xafxirds,  was  a
game  common  no  doubt  throughout  Greece  ;  for
though  all  we  know  concerning  it  belongs  to
Athens,  yet  we  hear  of  it  at  Corinth,  Pergamus,
and  Zerinthus  (Bockh,  Publ  Econ.  of  Athens,  p.
463,  2nd  ed.  ;  Miiller,  Minerv.  Folias,  p.  5)  ;  and
a  coin  in  Mionnet,  with  a  Xa/xTrds  on  it,  which  is
copied  below,  bears  the  legend  'AfjKpiiroXiTuy.

At  Athens  we  know  of  five  celebrations  of  this
game :  one  to  Prometheus  at  the  Prometheia
(Schol.  ad  AristopL  Ran.  131  ;  Ister.  ap.  Harpocr.
s.  V.)  ;  a  second  to  Athena  at  the  Panatbenaea  *
(Herod,  vi.  105,  and  II.  cc.)  ;  a  third  to  Hephaestos
at  the  Hephaesteiaf  (Herod,  viii.  9,  and  U.  cc.)  ;  a
fourth  to  Pan  (Herod,  v.  105)  ;  a  fifth  to  the  Thra-
cian  Artemis  or  Bendis.  (Plat,  de  Rep.  p.  328,  a.)
The  three  former  are  of  unknown  antiquity ;  the
fourth  was  introduced  soon  after  the  battle  of  Ma-
rathon ;  the  last  in  the  time  of  Socrates.

The  race  was  usually  run  on  foot,  horses  being
first  used  in  the  time  of  Socrates  (Plat.  I.  c.)  ;
sometimes  also  at  night.  (Interp.  vetus  ad  Lucret.
ii.  77.  ap.  Wakef.>  The  preparation  for  it  was  a
principal  branch  of  the  yv/xvaaiapxia,  so  much  so
indeed  in  later  times,  that  AauTraSapxja  seems  to
have  been  pretty  much  equivalent  to  the  yv/xvacri-
apx'ia.  (Aristot.  Pol.  v.  8.  20.)  The  gymnasiarch
had  to  provide  the  Aa/X7rcis,  which  was  a  candle-
stick with  a  kind  of  shield  set  at  the  bottom  of
the  socket,  so  as  to  shelter  the  flame  of  the  candle  ;
as  is  seen  in  the  following  woodcut,  taken  from  a
coin  in  Mionnet  (pi.  49.
6.)  He  had  also  to  pro-
vide for  the  training  of  the
runners,  which  was  of  no
slight  consequence,  for  the
race  was  evidently  a  se-
vere one  (compare  Aris-
toph.  Vesp.  1203,  Ran.
1085),  with  oiner  ex-
penses, which  on  the  whole
were  very  heavy,  so  that
Isaeus  (de  Philoct.  Haered.  p.  62.  20)  classes
this  office  with  the  x^PVy^f^  and  Tpirjpapxia,  and
reckons  that  it  had  cost  him  12  minae.  The  dis-
charge of  this  office  was  called  yvixvacriapx^'iv
Ka/jLirddi  (Isaeus,  /.  c),  or  ^J'  Ta7s  Xa/jLirdai  yvfiva-
a-iapxf'iCTdai  (Xen.  de  Vectig.  iv.  52).  The  victo-
rious gymnasiarch  presented  his  Kafnrds  as  a  votive
offering  (avde-n/xa,  Bockh,  Inscr.  No.  243,  250).

As  to  the  manner  of  the  \aixirdSr](popia,  there
are  some  things  difficult  to  understand.  The  case
stands  thus.  We  have  two  accounts,  which  seem
contradictory.  —  First,  it  is  represented  as  a  course,
:n  which  a  Kafinds  was  carried  from  one  point  to

*  Probably  the  greater  Panathenaea.  (Bockh,
vln  supr.)

f  The  ceremony  at  tha  Apatuiia  was  different
[Apaturu.]


LAMPADEPHORIA.

another  by  a  chain  of  runners,  each  of  whoin
formed  a  successive  link.  The  first,  after  running
a  certain  distance,  handed  it  to  tiie  second,  the
second  in  like  manner  to  the  third,  and  so  on,  till
it  reached  the  point  proposed.  Hence  the  game  is
used  by  Herodotus  (viii.  98)  as  a  comparison
whereby  to  illustrate  the  Persian  ayyap-n'iov,  by
Plato  (Leg.  p.  776,  b.)  as  a  living  image  of  suc-
cessive generations  of  men,  as  also  in  the  well-
known  line  of  Lucretius  (ii.  77.)

"  Et  quasi  cursores  vital  lampada  tradunt."

(Compare  also  Auctor,  ad  Herenn.  iv.  46.)  And
it  is  said  that  the  art  consisted  in  the  several  run-
ners carrying  the  torch  unextinguished  through
their  respective  distances,  those  who  let  it  go  out
losing  all  share  of  honour.  Now,  if  this  were  all,
such  explanation  might  content  us.  But,  secondly,
we  are  plainly  told  that  it  was  an  aywv,  the  run-
ners are  said  afxiWaadai  (Plat  Rep.  I.  c.) ;  some  are
said  to  have  won  (uiKav  Xa/jLirdSi,  Andoc.  i?i  Alcib.
ad  fin. ;  compare  Bockh,  Insc.  No.  243,  244) ;  the
Schol.  on  Aristoph.  Ran.  {I.  c.)  talks  of  rohs
ixndTovs  Tp4xouTas,  which  shows  that  it  must  have
been  a  race  between  a  number  of  persons  ;  the
Schol.  on  the  same  play  (v.  133)  speaks  of  atp^lvai
rohs  Spo/xdas,  tous  rpexc^Tas,  which  shows  that  a
number  must  have  started  at  once.

This  second  account  implies  competition.  But
in  a  chain  of  runners,  each  of  whom  handed  the
torch  to  the  next  man  successively/,  where  could  the
competition  be.^  One  runner  might  be  said  to
lose  —  he  who  let  the  torch  out;  but  who  could  be
said  to  win  ?

We  offer  the  following  hypothesis  in  answer  to
this  question.  Suppose  that  there  were  several
chains  of  runners,  each  of  which  had  to  carry  the
torch  the  given  distance.  Then  both  conditions
would  be  fulfilled.  The  torch  would  be  handed
along  each  chain,  —  which  would  answer  to  the
first  condition  of  successive  delivery.  That  chain
in  which  it  travelled  most  quickly  and  soonest
reached  its  destination  would  be  the  winner, — ■
which  would  answer  to  the  second  condition,  it
being  a  race  between  competitors.

In  confirmation  of  this  hypothesis  we  observe
as  follows:  —  The  inscription  in  Bockh,  No.  245,
consists  of  the  following  lines  :  —

KapLiraSa  veiK-r\(T(xs  crhu  i(pi]§ois  ttjv  5*  aveOrjKa
EuTvx'^Sf}^  TTots  &v  Evrvxi^ovs  'AOfxavevs.

This  Eutychides  was  no  doubt  the  gymnasiarch
who  won  with  the  ^(pi]§oi  he  had  trained,  just  Jis
Andocides  (I.  c.)  talks  of  his  vej/iKrjKevai  KafindSi
as  gymnasiarch ;  so  too  Inscr.  No.  250  records  a
like  victory  of  the  tribe  Cecropis.*  Now  we  know
that  the  gymnasiarchs  were  chosen  one  from  each
tribe.  If  then  each  furnished  a  chain  of  \a^nTabri<p6-
poj,  there  would  have  been  ten  (in  later  times  twelve)
chains  of  runners.  Perhaps,  however,  the  gym-
nasiarchs were  not  all  called  on  to  perform  this  ser-
vice, but  each  once  only  in  the  year,  which  would
allow  us  for  each  of  the  three  greater  celebrations


*  No.  244  gives  a  list  of  ol  veiK-fiffavrcs  r^v
AafiTrdSa,  the  winners  in  the  torch-race,  fourteen  in
number.  Who  were  these  ?  If  the  several  links
of  the  winning  chain,  it  is  rather  against  analogy
that  they  should  be  named.  No  one  ever  heard
the  names  of  a  chorus ;  yet  they  can  hardly  be
fourteen  winning  gymnasiarchs.


I


LANX.

(the  Prometheia,  Panathenaea,  and  Hephaesteia)
three  or  four  chains  of  competitors.

The  place  of  running  was,  in  these  great  celebra-
tions, from  the  altar  of  the  Three  Gods  (Prome-
theus, Athena,  and  Hephaestos)  in  the  outer
Cerameicus  to  the  Acropolis,  a  distance  of  near  half
a  mile.  (Pausan.  i.  30.  §  2  ;  Schol.  ad  Ran.  1 085.)
That  in  honour  of  Bendis  was  run  in  the  Peiraeeus.
(Plat.  ;.c.)

The  origin  of  these  games  must  be  sought,  we
think,  in  the  worship  of  the  Titan  Prometheus.
The  action  of  carrying  an  unextinguished  light
from  the  Cerameicus  to  the  Acropolis  is  a  lively
symbol  of  the  benefit  conferred  by  the  Titan  upon
man,  when  he  bore  fire  from  the  habitations  of
the  gods,  and  bestowed  it  upon  man.

K\(^as  a-Kafxaroio  irvphs  TTjXeaKOTrov  avyhv
iv  KoiK(f  mpe-nKi.  (Hesiod.  Theog.  566.  Gaisf.)
But  the  gratitude  to  the  giver  of  fire  soon  passed
to  the  Olympian  gods  who  presided  over  its  use,
—  Hephaestos,  who  taught  men  to  apply  it  to  the
melting  and  moulding  of  metal,  and  Athena,  who
carried  it  through  the  whole  circle  of  useful  and
ornamental  arts.  To  these  three  gods,  then,  were
these  games  at  first  devoted,  as  the  patrons  of  fire.
And  looking  to  the  place  it  was  run  in  —  the
Cerameicus  or  Potters'  quarter —  we  are  much  in-
clined to  adopt  Welcker's  suggestion  {Aeschylische
Trilogie,  p.  121),  viz.  that  it  was  the  Kepaf/.e7s  or
potters  who  instituted  the  \aixTraS7}<popLa.  Athena
(as  we  learn  from  the  Kepafj-is)  was  their  patron
goddess  ;  and  who  more  than  they  would  have
reason  to  be  thankful  for  the  gift  and  use  of  fire  ?
Pottery  would  be  one  of  the  first  modes  in  which
it  would  be  made  serviceable  in  promoting  the  arts
of  life.  In  later  times  the  same  honour  was  paid  to
all  gods  who  were  in  any  way  connected  with  fire,
as  to  Pan,  to  whom  a  perpetual  fire  was  kept  up  in
his  grotto  under  the  Acropolis,  and  who  was  in
this  capacity  called  by  the  Greeks  Phanetes,  by
the  Romans  Lucidus  ;  so  also  to  Artemis,  called
by  Sophocles  'AfKpiirvpos,  and  worshipped  as  the
moon.  (Creuzer,  Symbolique,  vol,  ii.  pp.  752,  764,
French  transl.)  At  first,  however,  it  seems  to
have  been  a  symbolic  representation  in  honour  of
the  gods  who  gave  and  taught  men  the  use  of
material  moulding  fire  {■rrdvTiX'^ov  irvp,  SiSac/caXo?
t4xvvs-,  as  Aeschylus  calls  it.  Prom.  7.  HO),
though  this  special  signification  was  lost  sight  of
in  later  times.  Other  writers,  in  their  anxiety  to
got  a  common  signification  for  all  the  times  and
modes  of  the  XaixiraSrjcfjopla^  have  endeavoured  to
prove  that  all  who  were  honoured  by  it  were  con-
nected with  the  heavenly  bodies,  Kafiirpol  Swacrrai,
(so  Creuzer,  /.  c.  ;  Miiller,  Minerva  Polias,  p.  5)  ;
Others  that  it  always  had  an  inner  signification,
alluding  to  the  inward  fire  by  which  Prometheus
put  life  into  man  (so  Bronsted,  Voyages^  vol.  ii.
p.  286,  note  2).  But  this  legend  of  Prometheus
was  a  later  interpretation  of  the  earlier  one,  as  may
be  seen  by  comparing  Plat,  Protag.  p.  321,  d,  with
Hesiod.  fheog.  56 1 ,  &c.  [H,  G.  L.]

LAMPAS.     [Lampadephoria.]

LANA'RIUS.     [PiLEus.]

LA'NCEA.     [Hasta,  p.  588  a.]

LANIFPCIUM.     [Tela.]

LANISTA.     [Gladiatores.]

LANTERNA.     [Laterna.]

LANX,  dim.  LANCULA,  a  large  dish,  made
uf  silver  or  some  other  metal,  and  sometimes  em-


LARARIUM.


667


bossed,  used  at  splendid  entertainments  to  hold
meat  or  fruit  (Cic.  ad  Att.  vi.  1  ;  Hor.  Sat.  ii.  2.
4,  ii.  4.  41  ;  Ovid,  de  Ponto^  iii.  5.  20  ;  Petron.
3J)  ;  and  consequently  at  sacrifices  (Virg.  Georg.
ii.  194,  394,  Aen.  viii,  284,  xii,  215  ;  Ovid,  de
Panto.,  iv.  8.  40)  and  funeral  banquets  (Propert.
ii.  13.  23).  The  silver  dishes,  used  by  the  Ro-
mans at  their  grand  dinners,  were  of  a  vast  size,
80  that  a  boar,  for  example,  might  be  brought  whole
to  table.  (Hor.  /.  c.)  They  often  weighed  from
100  to  500  pounds.    (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii.  52.)

The  balance  (Libra  bilanoc.  Mart.  Cap.  ii.  180)
was  so  called,  because  it  had  two  metallic  dishes.
(Cic.  Acad.  iv.  12,  Tusc.  v.  17  ;  Virg.  Aen.  xii.
725  ;  Pcrs.  iv.  10.^  [J.  Y.]

LA'PHRIA  {Aa^pia),  an  annual  festival,  cele-
brated at  Patrae  in  Achaia,  in  honour  of  Artemis,
surnamed  Laphria.  The  peculiar  manner  in  Avhich
it  was  solemnised  during  the  time  of  the  Roman
empire  (for  the  worship  of  Artemis  Laphria  was
not  introduced  at  Patrae  till  the  time  of  Augustus),
is  described  by  Pausanias  (viii.  18.  §  7).  On  the
approach  of  the  festival  the  Patraeans  placed  in  a
circle,  around  the  altar  of  the  goddess,  large  pieces
of  green  wood,  each  being  sixteen  yards  in  length ;
within  the  altar  they  placed  dry  wood.  They  then
formed  an  approach  to  the  altar  in  the  shape  of
steps,  which  were  slightly  covered  with  earth.
On  the  first  day  of  the  festival  a  most  magnifi-
cent procession  went  to  the  temple  of  Artemis,  and
at  the  end  of  it  there  followed  a  maiden  who  had
to  perform  the  functions  of  priestess  on  the  occa-
sion, and  who  rode  in  a  chariot  drawn  by  stags.
On  the  second  day  the  goddess  was  honoured  with
numerous  sacrifices,  offered  by  the  state  as  well  as
by  private  individuals.  These  sacrifices  consisted
of  eatable  birds,  boars,  stags,  goats,  sometimes  of
the  cubs  of  wolves  and  bears,  and  sometimes  of  the
old  animals  themselves.  All  these  animals  were
thrown  upon  the  altar  alive  at  the  moment  when
the  dry  wood  was  set  on  fire.  Pausanias  says  that
he  often  saw  a  bear,  or  some  other  of  the  animals,
when  seized  by  the  flames,  leap  from  the  altar  and
escape  across  the  barricade  of  green  wood.  Those
persons  who  had  thrown  them  upon  the  altar,
caught  the  devoted  victims  again,  and  threw  them
back  into  the  flames.  The  Patraeans  did  not  re-
member that  a  person  had  ever  been  injured  by
any  of  the  animals  on  this  occasion.  (Comp.  Pans,
iv.  31.  §  6  ;  Schol.  ad  Eurip.  Orest.  1087.)  [L.  S.]
LAPICIDINAE.  [Lautumiae.]
LAPIS  MILLIA'RIUS.  [Milliarium.]
LAPIS  SPECULA'RIS.  [Domus,  p.  432  a.]
LA'QUEAR.  [Domus,  p.  432,  a.]
LA'QUEUS,  a  rope,  was  used  to  signify  the
punishment  of  death  by  strangling.  This  mode  of
execution  was  never  performed  in  public,  but  only
in  prison  and  generally  in  the  TuUianum.  Hence
we  find  the  words  career  and  laqueus  frequently
joined  together  (see  e.g.  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  50).  Per-
sons convicted  of  treason  were  most  frequently  put  to
death  by  strangling,  as  for  instance  the  Catilinarian
conspirators  (laqueo  gulam  fregere.  Sail.  Cat.  55).
This  punishment  was  frequently  inflicted  in  the
reign  of  Tiberius  (Tac.  Ann.  v.  9,  vi.  39,  40  ;
Suet.  Tib.  61),  but  was  abolished  soon  aftei'wards
(Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  48).

LAQUEATO'RES.  [Gladiatcres,  p.  575,
b.]

LARA'RIUM  was  a  place  in  the  inner  part  of
a  Roman  house,  which  was  dedicated  to  the  Larea,


668


LATER.


LATER.


and  in  which  their  images  were  kept  and  wor-
shipped. It  seems  to  have  been  customary  for  re-
ligious Romans  in  the  morning,  immediately  after
they  rose,  to  perform  their  prayers  in  the  lararium.
This  custom  is  said  at  least  to  have  been  observed
by  the  emperor  Alexander  Severus  (Lampi'id.  J  I.
Sev.  29,  31),  who  had  among  the  statues  of  his
Lares  those  of  Christ,  Abraham,  Orpheus,  and
Alexander  the  Great.  This  emperor  had  a  second
lararium,  from  which  the  first  is  distinguished  by
the  epithet  majus^  and  the  images  of  his  second  or
lesser  lararium  were  representations  of  great  and
distinguished  men,  among  whom  are  mentioned
Virgil,  Cicero,  and  Achilles.  That  these  images
were  sometimes  of  gold,  is  stated  by  Suetonius
(  Vitell.  2).  We  do  not  know  whether  it  was  cus-
tomary to  have  more  than  one  lararium  in  a  house,
or  whether  the  case  of  Alexander  Severus  is  merely
to  be  looked  upon  as  an  exception.  [L.  S.]

LARENTA'LIA,  sometimes  written  LAREN-
TINA'LIA  and  LAURENTA'LTA,  was  a  Ro-
man festival  in  honour  of  Acca  Larentia,  the  wife
of  Faustulus  and  the  nurse  of  Romulus  and  Remus.
It  was  celebrated  in  December  on  the  1 0th  before
the  Calends  of  January-.  (Festus,  s.  v.  ;  Macrob.  i.
10  ;  Ovid,  Fast.  iii.  57.)  The  sacrifice  in  this
festival  was  performed  in  the  Velabrum  at  the
place  which  led  into  the  Nova  Via,  which  Avas
outside  of  the  old  city  not  far  from  the  porta
Romanula.  At  this  place  Acca  was  said  to  have
been  buried.  (Macrob,  /.  c.  ;  Varr.  de  Ling.  Lai.
V.  23,  24.)  This  festival  appears  not  to  have  been
confined  to  Acca  Larentia,  but  to  have  been  sacred
to  all  the  Lares.  (Hartung,Z)ie  Religion  derRumer,
vol.  ii.  p.  146.)

LARES.  See  Did.  of  Gr.  and  Rom.  Biography
and  Mythology.

LARGrTIO.  [Ambitus  ;  Frumentariae
Leges.]

LARNACES  (XapvaK^s).    [Funus,  p.  555,  b.]

LATER,  dim.  LATERCULUS  (7rAiV0os,  dim.
'srXiydis,  TtKivQiov^)  a  brick.  Besides  the  Greeks
and  Romans  other  ancient  nations  employed  brick
for  building  to  a  great  extent,  especially  the  Baby-
lonians (Herod.  179  ;  Xen.  Anal.  iii.  4.  §§  7,  11  ;
Nahum,  iii.  14)  and  Egyptians.  In  the  latter
country  a  painting  on  the  walls  of  a  tomb  at  Thebes
(Wilkinson's  Manners  and  Customs,  vol.  ii.  p.  99)
exhibits  slaves,  in  one  part  employed  in  procuring
water,  in  mixing,  tempering,  and  carrying  the  clay,
or  in  turning  the  bricks  out  of  the  mould  [Forma],
and  arranging  them  in  order  on  the  ground  to  be
dried  by  the  sun,  and  in  another  part  carrying  the
dried  bricks  by  means  of  the  yoke  [Asili-a].  In
the  annexed  woodcut  we  see  a  man  with  three
bricks  suspended  from  each  end  of  the  yoke,  and
beside  him  another  who  returns  from  having  de-
posited his  load.

These  figures  are  selected  from  the  .above-men-
tioned painting,  being  In  fact  original  portraits  of
two  'AiyinrTioi  Tr\ivdo<p6pot,  girt  with  linen  round
the  loins  in  exact  accordance  with  the  description
given  of  them  by  Aristophanes,  who  at  the  same
time  alludes  to  all  the  operations  in  the  process  of
brick-makiug  (irXiudoTroua,  Schol.  in  Pind.  01.  v.
20 ),  which  are  exhibited  in  the  Theban  painting.
(J  ves,  1 1 32—1 1 52  ;  Schol.  ad  loc.)

The  Romans  distinguished  between  those  bricks
which  were  merely  dried  by  the  sun  and  air  (la-
teres  crudi,  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.  48  ;  Varro,  de  Re
Rust.  i.  14  ;  Col.  de  Re  Rust.  ix.  1 }  vKivOos  wfii]^


Paus.  viii.  8.  §  5),  and  those  which  were  burnt  in
the  kiln  (cocti  or  coctiles  ;  drrrai,  Xen.  Anah.  ii.  4.
§  12  ;  Herod.  I.  c).  They  preferred  for  the  pur-
pose clay  which  was  either  whitish  or  decidedly
red.  They  considered  spring  the  best  time  for
brick-making,  and  kept  the  bricks  two  years  before
they  were  used.  (Pallad.  de  Rust.  vi.  12).  They
made  them  principally  of  three  shapes  ;  the  Zy-
dian,  which  was  a  foot  broad,  1^  feet  long  ;  the
tetradoron,  which  was  four  palms  square,  i.  e.
1  foot ;  and  the  pentadoron,  which  was  five  palms
square.  Thej'  used  them  smaller  in  private  than
in  public  edifices.  Of  this  an  example  is  pre-
sented in  the  great  building  at  Treves,  called  the
palace  of  Constantine,  which  is  built  of  "  burnt
bricks,  each  of  a  square  form,  fifteen  inches  in
diameter,  and  an  inch  and  a  quarter  thick."  ( Wyt-
tenbach's  Guide  to  the  Roman  Antiquities  of  Treves,
p.  42.)  These  bricks  therefore  were  the  pentadora
of  Vitruvius  and  Pliny.  At  certain  places  the
bricks  were  made  so  porous  as  to  float  in  water  ;
and  these  were  probably  used  in  the  construction
of  arches,  in  which  their  lightness  would  be  a  great
advantage.  (Plin.  //.  N.  xxxv.  49  ;  Vitruv.  ii.  3.)
It  was  usual  to  mix  straw  with  the  clay.  (Vitruv.
I.  c.  ;  Pallad.  de  Re  Rust.y'i.  12  ;  Exod.  v.  7.)  In
building  a  brick  wall,  at  least  crudo  latere,  i.  e.
with  unburnt  bricks,  the  interstices  were  filled
with  clay  or  mud  {Into,  CoL  /.  c),  but  the  bricks
were  also  sometimes  cemented  with  mortar.
(Wyttenbach,  p.  Qb,  66.)  For  an  account  of  the
mode  of  arranging  the  bricks,  see  Murus.  The
Babylonians  used  asphaltum  as  the  cement.  (Herod.
I.  c.)  Pliny  (vii.  57)  calls  the  brickfield  lateraria,
and  to  make  bricks  lateres  dvA^ere,  corresponding
to  the  Greek  ir'KxvQovs  'e\Keiu  or  epveiv.  (Herod,  i.
179,  ii.  136.)

The  Greeks  considered  perpendicular  brick  walls
more  durable  than  stone,  and  introduced  them  in
their  greatest  public  edifices.  Brick  was  so  com-
mon at  Rome  as  to  give  occasion  to  the  remark  of
the  emperor  Augustus  in  reference  to  his  improve-
ments, that,  having  found  it  brick  (lateritiam),  he
had  left  it  marble.  (Sueton.  Aug.  29.)  The  Baby-
lonian bricks  are  commonly  found  inscribed  with
the  characters  called  from  their  appearance  arrow-
headed  or  cuneiform.  It  is  probable  that  these  in-
scriptions recorded  the  time  and  place  where  the
bricks  were  made.  The  same  practice  was  enjoined
by  law  upon  the  Roman  brickmakers.  Each  had
his  mark,  such  as  the  figure  of  a  god,  a  plant,  or
an  animal,  encircled  by  his  own  name,  often  with
the  name  of  the  place,  of  the  consulate,  or  of  the
owner  of  the  kiln   or  the  brickfield.     (Seroux


LATERNA.

3'Agincourt,  Rec.  de  Fragine7is,  pp.  82 — 88.)  It
has  been  observed  by  several  antiquaries,  that  these
imprints  upon  bricks  might  throw  considerable
light  upon  the  histor}-  and  ancient  geography  of
the  places  where  they  are  found.  Mr.  P.  E.
Wiener  has  accordingly  traced  the  22nd  legion
through  a  great  part  of  Germany  by  the  bricks
which  bear  its  name.  (De  Leg.  Rom.  vie.  sec,
Darmstadt,  1830,  p.  106—137.)  In  Britain  many
Roman  bricks  have  been  found  in  the  country  of
the  Silures,  especially  at  Caer-leon,  with  the  in-
scription LEG.  II.  AVG.  stamped  upon  them.
{Archaeoloyia,  v.  p.  35.)  The  bricks,  frequently
discovered  at  York,  attest  the  presence  there  of  the
6th  and  9th  legions.  (Wellbeloved's  Eburacum,
pp.13,  34,  118).

The  term  laterculus  was  applied  to  various  pro-
ductions of  the  shape  of  bricks,  such  as  pastry  or
confectionery  (Plaut.  Poen.  i.  2.  115  ;  Cato,  de
Re  Rust.  109)  ;  and  for  the  same  reason  ingots  of
gold  and  silver  are  called  lateres.  (Plin.  H.  N.
xxxiii.  17.)  [J.Y.]

LATERNA  or  LANTERN  A  (t7rj/ds,Aristoph.
Pcuc,  841  ;  Pherecrates,  p.  26.  ed.  Runkel  ;  Xv-
Xvovxos.,  Phrynichus,  Edog.  p.  59  ;  in  later
Greek,  ^at'(5s,  Athen.  xv.  58  ;  Philox.  Gloss.),  a
lantern.  Two  bronze  lanterns,  constructed  with
nicety  and  skill,  have  been  found  in  the  ruins  of
Herculaneum  and  Pompeii.  One  of  them  is  re-
presented in  the  annexed  woodcut.  Its  form  is
cylindrical.  At  the  bottom  is  a  circular  plate  of
metal,  resting  on  three  balls.  Within  is  a  bronze
lamp  attached  to  the  centre  of  the  base  and  pro-
vided with  an  extinguisher,  shown  on  the  right
hand  of  the  lantern.  The  plates  of  translucent
horn,  forming  the  sides,  probably  had  no  aperture  ;
but  the  hemispherical  cover  may  be  raised  so  as  to
admit  the  hand  and  to  serve  instead  of  a  door,  and
it  is  also  perforated  with  holes  through  which  the
emoke  might  escape.  To  the  two  upright  pillars
supporting  the  frame- work,  a  front  view  of  one  of
which  is  shown  on  the  left  hand  of  the  lantern,
chains  are  attached  for  carrying  the  lantern  by
means  of  the  handle  at  the  top.


LATINITAS.


6G9


We  learn  from  Martial's  epigrams  (xiv.  61,  62)
that  bladder  was  used  for  lanterns  as  well  as  horn.
Some  centuries  later  glass  was  also  substituted.
(Isid.  Orig.  xx.  10.)  The  most  transparent  horn
lanterns  were  brought  from  Carthage.  (P\a,ut.  Jul.
iii.  6.  30.)  When  the  lantern  Avas  required  for
use,  the  lamp  was  lighted  and  placed  within  it.


(Plierccrates,  p.  21.)  It  was  carried  by  a  slave
(P\avLt.Jmphitr.  Prol.  149,  i.  1.  185  ;  Val.  Max.
vi.  8.  §  1 ),  who  was  called  the  latemarius.  (Cic.
in  Pis.  9.)  [J.  Y.J

LATICLA'VII.  [Clavus.]
LATFNAE  FE'RIAE.  [Feriae.]
LATFNITAS,  LA'TIUM,  JUS  LA'TII  (rh
Kdhovjxevov  Aareioy,  Strab.  p.  1 86,  Casaub. ;  Aart'oi*
hiKaiou,  Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  26.)  All  these  expressions
are  used  after  the  Social  war  to  signify  a  certain
status  intermediate  between  that  of  Gives  and
Peregrini.  The  word  "  Latinitas"  occurs  in  Cicero
(ad  Att.  xiv.  12),  where  he  is  speaking  of  the  La-
tinitas being  given  to  the  Siculi  after  Caesar's
death.  Before  the  passing  of  the  Lex  Julia  de
Civitate,  Latini  were  the  citizens  of  the  old  towns
of  the  Latin  nation,  with  the  exception  of  those
which  were  raised  to  the  rank  of  municipia:  it
also  comprehended  the  coloniae  Latinae,  There
were  before  the  Lex  Julia  only  two  classes,  Cives
and  Peregrini  ;  and  Peregrini  comprehended  the
Latini,  Socii,  and  the  Provinciales,  or  the  free  sub-
jects of  the  Romans  beyond  the  limits  of  Italy.
About  the  year  B.C.  89,  a  Lex  Pompeia  gave  the
Jus  Latii  to  all  the  Transpadani,  and  the  privilege
of  obtaining  the  Roman  civitas  by  having  filled  a
magistratus  in  their  own  cities.  To  denote  the
status  of  these  Transpadani,  the  word  Latinitas
was  used,  which  since  the  passing  of  the  Lex  Julia
had  lost  its  proper  signification  ;  and  this  was  the
origin  of  that  Latinitas  which  thenceforth  existed
to  the  time  of  Justinian.  This  new  Latinitas  or
Jus  Latii  was  given  to  whole  towns  and  countries  ;
as  for  instance  by  Vespasian  to  the  whole  of  Spain
(Plin.  Hist.  Nat.  iii.  4)  ;  and  to  certain  Alpine
tribes  (Latio  donati.  Id.  iii.  20).  Hjxdrianus  gave
the  Latium  (Latium  dedit)  to  many  cities.  (Spart.
Hadrian.  21).

This  new  Latinitas  was  given  not  only  to  towns
already  existing,  but  to  towns  which  were  founded
subsequently  to  the  Lex  Pompeia,  as  Latinae  Co-
loniae ;  for  instance  Novum-Comum,  which  was
founded  B.  c.  59  by  Caesar.  (Appian,  B.  C.  ii.
26.)  Several  Latin  towns  of  this  class  are  men-
tioned by  Pliny,  especially  in  Spain.

Though  the  origin  of  this  Latinitas,  which  makes
so  prominent  a  figure  in  the  Roman  jurists,  is  cer-
tain, it  is  not  certain  wherein  it  differed  from  that
Latinitas  which  was  the  characteristic  of  the  Latini
before  the  passing  of  the  Julia  Lex.  It  is  however
clear  that  all  the  old  Latini  had  not  the  same
rights,  with  respect  to  Rome  ;  and  that  they  could
acquire  the  civitas  on  easier  terms  than  those  by
which  the  new  Latinitas  was  acquired.  (Liv.  xli.
12.)  Accordingly  the  rights  of  the  old  Latini
might  be  expressed  by  the  term  Majus  Latium,
and  those  of  the  new  Latini  by  the  tenn  Minus
Latium,  according  to  Niebuhr's  ingenious  emenda-
tion of  Gains  (i.  ^Q).  The  Majus  Latium  might
be  considered  to  be  equivalent  to  the  Latium  An-
tiquum and  Vetus  of  Pliny  (iv.  22)  ;  for  Pliny,  in
describing  the  towns  of  Spain,  alwaj-s  describes
the  proper  colonies  as  consisting  "  Civium  Roma-
norum,"  while  he  describes  other  towns  as  consist-
ing sometimes  "Latinorura"  simply,  and  sometimes
"  Latinorum  veterum,"  or  as  consisting  of  oppidani
"Latii  veteris  ;"  from  which  an  opposition  be-
tween Latini  Veteres  and  Latini  simply  might  be
inferred.  But  a  careful  examination  of  Pliny
rather  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  his  Latini  Ve-
teres and  Latini  are  the  same,  and  that  by  these


fJ70


LATINITAS.


terras  he  merely  designates  the  Latini  Coloniarii
hereafter  mentioned.  The  emendation  of  Niebuhr
is  therefore  not  supported  by  these  passages  of
Pliny,  and  though  ingenious,  it  ought  perhaps  to
be  rejected  ;  not  for  the  reasons  assigned  by  Mad-
vig,  which  Savigny  has  answered,  but  because  it
does  not  appear  to  be  consistent  with  the  whole
context  of  Gaius.

The  new  Latini  had  not  the  connubiura  ;  and  it
is  a  doubtful  question  whether  the  old  Latini  had
it.     The  new  Latini  had  the  commercium.

This  new  Latinitas,  which  was  given  to  the
Transpadani,  was  that  legal  status  which  the  Lex
Junia  Norbana  gave  to  a  numerous  class  of  freed-
men,  hence  called  Latini  Juniani.  (Gaius,  i.  22,
iii.  56 ;  Ulp.  Frag.  tit.  i.)  The  date  of  this  lex  is
not  ascertained  ;  but  it  is  fixed  with  some  pro-
bability at  A.  U.  C.  772.  {Latini  Juniani,  by
C.  A.  Von  Vangerow,  Marburg,  1833.)

The  Latini  Coloniarii,  who  are  mentioned  by
Ulpian  {Frag.  xix.  s.  4),  are  the  inhabitants  of  towns
beyond  Italy,  to  whom  the  Latinitas  was  given.
These  are  the  towns  which  Pliny  calls  "  oppida
Ladnorum  veterum,"  and  enumerates  with  the  "op-
pida civium  Romanorum  "  (iii.  3),  which  were
military  colonies  of  Roman  citizens.  The  passages
in  which  the  Latini  Coloniarii  are  mentioned,  as  a
class  then  existing,  must  have  been  written  before
Caracalla  gave  the  Civitas  to  the  whole  empire.

These,  which  are  the  views  of  Savigny  on  this
difficult  subject,  are  contained  in  the  Zeitschrift.,  vol.
ix.  Der  Rom.  Volksschluss  der  Tafel  von  Heraclea.

The  Latini  could  acquire  the  Jus  Quiritium,  ac-
cording to  Ulpian  {Frag.,  tit.  iii.  De  Latinis\  in
the  following  ways :  —  By  the  Beneficium  Princi-
pale,  Liberi,  Iteratio,  Militia,  Navis,  Aedificium,
Pistrinum  ;  and  by  a  Senatus-consultum  it  was
given  to  a  female  "  vulgo  quae  sit  ter  enixa."  These
various  modes  of  acquiring  the  civitas  are  treated
in  detail  by  Ulpian,  from  which,  as  well  as  the
connection  of  this  title  "  De  Latinis "  with  the
first  title  which  is  "  De  Libertis,"  it  appears  that
he  only  treated  of  the  modes  in  which  the  civitas
might  be  acquired  by  those  Latini  who  were  Li-
berti.  The  same  remark  applies  to  the  observa-
tions of  Gaius  (i.  28)  on  the  same  subject  {Quibus
modis  Latini  ad  Civitatem  Romanam  perveniant).
In  speaking  of  the  mode  of  acquiring  the  civitas
by  means  of  Liberi,  Gaius  speaks  of  a  Latinus,  that
is,  a  Libertus  Latinus,  marrying  a  Roman  citizen,
or  a  Latina  Coloniaria,  or  a  woman  of  his  own  con-
dition, from  which  it  is  clear  that  all  his  remarks
under  this  head  apply  to  Liberti  Latini ;  and  it
also  appears  that  Gaius  speaks  of  the  Latini  Colo-
niarii as  a  class  existing  in  his  time.  Neither
Ulpian  nor  Gaius  says  any  thing  on  the  mode  by
which  a  Latinus  Coloniarius  might  obtain  the  Civi-
tas Romana.

Savigny's  opinions  on  the  nature  of  the  La-
tinitas are  further  explained  in  the  eleventh
number  of  the  Zeitschrift  {Nachtr'dge  zu  den
fruheren  Arbeiten).  Richard  of  Cirencester,  in
his  work  De  Situ  Britannia^,  speaks  of  ten  cities
in  Britain,  which  were  Latio  jure  donatae ;  and
this  is  a  complete  proof,  independent  of  other
proofs,  that  Richard  compiled  his  work  from
genuine  materials.  The  expression  "  Latium  Jus"
could  not  be  invented  by  a  monk,  and  he  here
used  a  genuine  term,  the  full  import  of  which
he  certainly  could  not  understand,  bee  also  Civis,
LiBKRTUs,  Manumissio.  [G.  L.]


LATRUNCULI.

LATROCI'NIUM,  LATRO'NES.  Armed
persons,  wbo  robbed  others  abroad  on  the  public
roads,  or  elsewhere,  were  called  Xa^rowes,  and  their
crime  Latrocinium.  Murder  was  not  an  essential
part  of  the  crime,  though  it  was  frequently  an  ac-
companiment. (Sen.  deBen.v.  14  ;  Festus,  p.  118,
ed.  Muller  ;  Dig.  49.  tit.  15.  s.  24,  50.  tit.  16.
s.  118.)  Under  the  republic,  Latrones  were  appre-
hended by  the  public  magistrates,  such  as  consuls
and  praetors,  and  forthwith  executed  (Liv.  xxxix.
29,  41).  By  the  Lex  Cornelia  de  Sicariis  of  the
dictator  Sulla,  they  were  classed  with  sicarii,  and
punished  with  death,  and  this  law  continued  in
force  in  the  imperial  period  (Paulus,  v.  23  ;  Dig.
48.  tit.  19.  8.  28.  §  15  ;  Sen.  de  Clem.  ii.  1,  Epist.
7  ;  Petron.  91).  The  Grassatores  were  another
kind  of  robbers,  who  robbed  people  in  the  streets
or  roads.  The  name  seems  to  have  been  originally
applied  to  those  robbers,  who  did  not  carry  arms,
and  who  followed  their  trade  alone.  They  appear
to  have  been  classed  with  the  sicarii  by  the  Lex
Cornelia  ;  and  if  they  used  arms  or  were  united
with  others  in  committing  the  robbery,  they  were
punished  in  the  same  manner  as  latrones  (Cic.  de
Fata,  15  ;  Suet.  Oct.  32  ;  Dig.  48.  tit.  19.  s.  28.
§10).  Comp.  Rein,  Das  Crimi7ialrecht  der  Komer,
pp.  424—426.

LATRU'NCULI  {Trecrcoi,  ^cpoi),  draughts.
The  invention  of  a  game  resembling  draughts  was
attributed  by  the  Greeks  to  Palamedes  (Abacus,
§  5).  The  game  is  certainly  mentioned  by  Homer,
who  represents  the  suitors  of  Penelope  amusing
themselves  with  it.  {Od.  i.  107.)  Others  ascribed
the  invention  to  the  Egyptian  Theuth  (Plat.
Phaedr.  p.  274  d.)  ;  and  the  paintings  in  Egyptian
tombs,  which  are  of  far  higher  antiquity  than  any
Grecian  monuments,  not  unfrequently  represent
persons  employed  in  this  recreation.  The  paint-
ing, from  which  the  accompanying  woodcut  is
taken,  is  on  a  papynis  preserved  in  the  Museum
of  Antiquities  at  Leyden,  and  was  probably  made
about  1700  years  B.C.  It  is  remarkable  that  a
man  is  here  represented  playing  alone  ;  whereas
not  only  in  works  of  Egyptian  art,  but  also  on
Greek  painted  vases,  we  commonly  observe  tvvo
persons  playing  together.     For  this  purpose  there


were  two  sets  of  men,  one  set  being  black,  the
other  white  or  red.  Being  intended  to  represent
a  miniature  combat  between  two  armies,  tliey  were
called  soldiers  {milites,  Ovid.  Trist.  ii.  477),  foea
{hastes),  and  marauders  {latrones,  dim.  latrunculi,
Ovid.  Art.  Amat.  ii.  208,   iii.   357  ;  Mart.  xiv.


LAUTUMIAE.

20  ;  Sen.  Epist.  107)  ;  also  Calculi,  because
stones  were  often  employed  for  the  purpose.  (Gell.
xiv.  1.)  Sometimes  they  were  made  of  metal  or
ivorj',  glass  or  earthenware,  and  they  were  vari-
ous and  often  fanciful  in  their  forms.  The  object
of  each  player  was  to  get  one  of  his  adversary's
men  between  two  of  his  own,  in  which  case  he
was  entitled  to  take  the  man  kept  in  check  (Ovid,
U.  cc;  Mart.  xiv.  17),  or,  as  the  phrase  was,  aUi-
gatus  (Qen.  Epist.  118).  Some  of  the  men  were
obliged  to  be  moved  in  a  certain  direction  (ordine\
and  were  therefore  called  ordinarii;  others  might
be  moved  any  way,  and  were  called  vagi  (Isid.
Orig.  xviii.  Ql)  ;  in  this  respect  the  game  resem-
bled chess,  which  is  certainly  a  game  of  great
antiquity.

Seneca  calls  the  board  on  which  the  Romans
played  at  draughts,  tabula  latruncidaria  {Epist.
118).  The  spaces  into  which  the  board  was
divided  were  called  marerfroe.  (Mart.  vii.  71.)  The
abacus,  represented  at  page  1,  is  crossed  by  five
lines.  As  five  men  were  allowed  on  each  side,  we
may  suppose  one  player  to  arrange  his  five  men  on
the  lines  at  the  bottom  of  the  abacus,  and  the  other
to  place  his  five  men  on  the  same  lines  at  the  top,
and  we  shall  have  them  disposed  according  to  the
accounts  of  ancient  writers  {Etymol.  Mag.  s.  v.
neo-ffoi :  Pollux,  ix.  97  :  Eustath,  in  Horn.  I.  c),
who  say  that  the  middle  line  of  the  five  was  called
lepa  ypd/j-fir].  But  instead  of  five,  the  Greeks  and
Romans  often  had  twelve  lines  on  the  board,
whence  the  game  so  played  was  called  dvodedm
scripta.  (Cic.  de  Orat.  i.  50  ;  Quintil.  xi.  2  ;  Ovid,
Art.  Amat.  m.  363.)  Indeed  there  can  be  little
doubt  that  the  latrunculi  were  arranged  and  played
in  a  considerable  variety  of  ways,  as  is  now  the
case  in  Egypt  and  other  Oriental  countries.  (Nie-
buhr,  Reiseheschr.  nach  Arahien.,  vol.  i.  p.  1  72.)

Besides  playing  with  draughtsmen  only,  when
the  game  was  altogether  one  of  skill,  the  ancients
used  dice  (Tesserae,  kvSoI)  at  the  same  time,  so
as  to  combine  chance  with  skill,  as  we  do  in  back-
gammon or  tric-trac.  (Ter.  Adelph.  iv.  7.  23  ;
Isid.  Orig.  xviii.  60  ;  Brunck,  An.  iii.  60  ;  Becker,
Gallus,  vol.  ii.  p.  228,  &c.)  [J.  Y.]

LATUS  CLAVUS.     [Clavus  Latus.]

LAUDA'TIO  FUNEBRIS.  [FuNus,p.559a.]

LAURENTA'LIA.     [Larentalia.]

LAU'TIA.     [Legatus.]

LAUTU'MIAE,  LAUTO'MIAE,  LATO'-
MIAE,  or  LATQ'MIAE  {XiOoTop-iai  or  Karofxiai,
Lat.  Lapicidinae).,  are  literally  places  where  stones
are  cut,  or  quarries  ;  and  in  this  sense  the  word
Karofxiai  was  used  by  the  Sicilian  Greeks.  (Pseudo-
Ascon.  ad  Cic.  c.  Verr.  ii,  1,  p.  161,  ed.  Orelli  ;
compare  Diodor.  Sic.  xi.  25  ;  Plant.  Poenvl.  iv.  2.
5,  Capt.  iii.  5.  65  ;  Festus,  s.  v.  Latumiae.)  In
particular,  however,  the  name  lautumiae  was  given
to  the  public  prison  of  Syracuse.  It  lay  in  the
Bteep  and  almost  inaccessible  part  of  the  town
which  was  called  Epipolae,  and  had  been  built  by
Dionysius  the  tyrant.  (Aelian.  V.  H.  xii.  44  ;  Cic.
c.  Verr.  v.  55.)  Cicero,  who  had  undoubtedly
seen  it  himself,  describes  it  (c,  Verr.  v.  27)  as  an
immense  and  magnificent  work,  worthy  of  kings
and  tyrants.  It  was  cut  to  an  immense  depth  into
the  solid  rock,  so  that  nothing  could  be  imagined
to  be  a  safer  or  stronger  prison  than  this,  though  it
had  no  roof,  and  thus  left  the  prisoners  exposed  to
the  heat  of  the  sun,  the  rain,  and  the  coldness  of
the  nights.     (Compare   Thucyd.  vii.  87.)      The


LECTICA.


671


whole  was  a  stadium  in  length,  and  two  plethra  in
width.  (Aelian.  /,  c.)  It  was  not  only  used  as  a
prison  for  Syracusan  criminals,  but  other  Sicilian
towns  also  had  their  criminals  often  removed  to  it.

The  Tullianum  at  Rome  was  also  sometimes
called  lautumiae.  [Carcer.]  [L.  S.]

LECTI'CA  (kKIvt],  KMviSiov^  or  (popciov)  was  a
kind  of  couch  or  litter,  in  which  persons,  in  a  lying
position,  were  carried  from  one  place  to  another.
They  may  be  divided  into  two  classes,  viz.,  those
which  were  used  for  carrying  the  dead,  and  those
which  served  as  conveniences  for  the  living.

The  former  of  these  two  kinds  of  lecticae  (also
called  lectica  funebris,  lecticula,  lectus  funebris,
feretrum  or  capulum),  in  which  the  dead  were  car-
ried to  the  grave,  seems  to  have  been  used  among
the  Greeks  and  Romans  from  very  early  times.  In
the  beauty  and  costliness  of  their  ornaments  these
lecticae  varied  according  to  the  rank  and  circum-
stances of  the  deceased.  [FuNUS,  p.  55.9  a.]  The
lectica  on  which  the  body  of  Augustus  was  carried
to  the  grave,  was  made  of  ivory  and  gold,  and  was
covered  with  costly  drapery  worked  of  purple  and
gold.  (Dion  Cass.  Ivi.  34  ;  compare  Dionys.  Atd.
Rom.  iv.  76  ;  Corn.  Nepos,  Att.  22.  §  2  ;  Tacit.
Hist.  iii.  67.)  During  the  latter  period  of  the
empire  public  servants  (lecticarii)  Avere  appointed
for  the  purpose  of  carrying  the  dead  to  the  grave
without  any  expense  to  the  family  to  whom  the
deceased  belonged.  (Novell.  43  and  59.)  Repre-
sentations of  lecticae  funebres  have  been  found  on
several  sepulchral  monuments.  The  following  wood-
cut represents  one  taken  from  the  tombstone  of
M.  Antonius  Antius  Lupus.


(Compare  Lipsius,  Elect,  i,  1 9  ;  Scheifer,  De  Re
Vehiculari^  ii.  5.  p.  89  ;  Gruter,  Inscript.  p.  954.
8  ;  Bottiger,  Sahina.,  vol.  ii.  p.  200  ;  Agyafalva,
Wanderungen  durch  Pompeii.)

Lecticae  for  sick  persons  and  invalids  seem  like-
wise to  have  been  in  use  in  Greece  and  at  Rome
from  very  early  times,  and  their  constniction  pro-
bably differed  very  little  from  that  of  a  lectica
funebris.  (Liv.  ii.  36  ;  Aurel.  Vict.  De  Vir.  III.  c.
34.)  We  also  frequently  read  that  generals  in
their  camps,  when  they  had  received  a  severe
wound,  or  when  they  were  suffering  from  ill  health,
made  use  of  a  lectica  to  be  carried  from  one  place
to  another.  (Liv.  xxiv.  42  ;  Val.  Max.  ii.  8.  §  2  ;
i.  7  ;  Sueton.  Aug.9\.)

Down  to  the  time  of  the  Gracchi  we  do  not  hear
that  lecticae  were  used  at  Rome  for  any  other  pur-
poses than  those  mentioned  above.  The  Greeks,
however,  had  long  been  familiar  with  a  different
kind  of  lectica  (K\ivrj  or  <pope7ov\  which  was  in-
troduced among  them  from  Asia,  and  which  wa8
more  an  article  of  luxury  than  anything  to  supply
an  actual  want.  It  consisted  of  a  bed  or  mattress
and  a  pillow  to  support  the  head,  placed  upon  a
kind  of  bedstead  or  couch.  It  had  a  roof  consist-
ing of  the  skin  of  an  ox,  extending  over  the  couch
and  resting  on  four  posts.  The  sides  of  this  lec-
tica were  covered  with  curtains  (auXaiai).     It  ap-


672


LECTICA.


pears  to  have  been  chiefly  used  by  women  (Suid.
s.  V.  (pope7ov),  and  by  men  only  when  they  were
in  ill  health.  (Anacr.  ap  Athen.  xii.  p.  533,  &c.  ;
Vlni.  PericL  27  ;  Lysias,Z><3  Vuln.  Proem,  p.  172  ;
Andocid.  DeMyst.  p.  30  ;  J*\\\i.  Eumen.  14.)  If
a  man  without  any  physical  necessity  made  use  of
a  lectica,  he  drew  upon  himself  the  censure  of  his
countrymen  as  a  person  of  effeminate  character.
(Dinarch.  c.  Demosih.  p.  29.)  But  in  the  time
subsequent  to  the  Macedonian  conquests  in  Asia,
lecticae  were  not  only  more  generally  used  in
Greece,  but  were  also  more  magnificently  adorned.
(Plut.  ^ra^.  17.)  The  persons  or  slaves  who  car-
ried their  masters  or  mistresses  in  a  lectica  were
called  <pop(a(p6poi  (Diog.  Laert.  v.  4.  §  73),  and
their  number  was  generally  two  or  four.  (Lucian,
Epist.  Saturn.  28  ;  Som7i.  s.  Gall.  10  ;  Cyn.  9  ;
compare  Becker,  C%an'A;/es,  ii.  p.  71,  &c.)  When
this  kind  of  lectica  was  introduced  among  the
Romans,  it  Avas  chiefly  used  in  travelling,  and  only
very  seldom  in  the  city  of  Rome  itself.  The  first
trace  of  such  a  lectica  is  in  a  fragment  of  a  speech
of  C.  Gracchus,  quoted  by  Gellius  (x.  3).  From
this  passage  it  seems  evident  that  this  article  of
luxury  was  introduced  into  Italy  from  Asia,  and
that  at  the  time  scarcely  any  other  lectica  than  the
lectica  funebris  was  known  to  the  country  people
about  Rome.  It  also  appears  from  this  passage
that  the  lectica  there  spoken  of  was  covered  ;  other-
wise the  countryman  could  not  have  asked  whether
they  were  carrying  a  dead  body.  (Compare  Cic.
Philip,  ii.  45  ;  Plut.  Cic.  48  ;  Dion  Cass,  xlvii.  10.)
The  resemblance  of  such  a  lectica  used  by  the  Ro-
mans to  that  which  the  Greeks  had  received  from
Asia  is  manifest  from  the  words  of  Martial  (xi.
98) :  lectica  tuta  pelle  veloque.  It  had  a  roof  con-
sisting of  a  large  piece  of  skin  or  leather  expanded
over  it  and  supported  by  four  posts,  and  the  sides
also  were  covered  with  curtains  {vela.,  plagae.,  or
plagulae  ;  compare  Senec.  Suas.  i.  6  ;  Suet.  Tit.  10).
During  the  time  of  the  empire,  however,  the  cur-
tains were  not  thought  a  sufficient  protection  for  a
lectica  ;  and,  consequently,  we  find  that  lecticae  used
by  men  as  well  as  women,  were  closed  on  the  sides
with  windows  made  of  transparent  stone  {lapis
specularis\  whence  Juvenal  (iv.  20)  calls  such  a
lectica  an  antrum  clausum  lutis  specularihus.  (Com-
pare Juv.  iii.  239.)  We  sometimes  find  mention
of  a  lectica  aperta  (Cic.  Phil.  ii.  24),  but  we  have
no  reason  to  suppose  that  in  this  case  it  had  no
roof,  for  the  adjective  aperta  probably  means  no-
thing more  than  that  the  curtains  were  removed,
t.  e.  either  thrown  aside  or  drawn  up.  The
whole  lectica  was  of  an  oblong  form,  and  the  per-
son conveyed  in  it  lay  on  a  bed,  and  the  head
was  supported  by  a  pillow,  so  that  he  might
read  and  write  in  it  with  ease.  To  what  extent
the  luxury  of  having  a  soft  and  pleasant  bed  in  a
lectica  was  carried,  as  early  as  the  time  of  Cicero,
may  be  seen  from  one  of  his  orations  against
Verres  (v.  11).  Feather-beds  seem  to  have  been
very  common.  (Juv.  i.  159,  &c.)  The  frame-
work, as  well  as  the  other  appurtenances,  were,
with  wealthy  persons,  probably  of  the  most  costly
description.  The  lectica,  when  standing,  rested  on
four  feet,  generally  made  of  wood.  Persons  were
carried  in  a  lectica  by  slaves  {lecticarii)  by  means
of  poles  {asseres)  attached  to  it,  but  not  fixed,  so
that  they  might  easily  be  taken  off  when  neces-
sary. (Sueton.  Calig.  58  ;  Juv.  vii.  122,  iii.  245  ;
Martial,  ix.  23.  9.)    There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the


LECTICA.

asseres  rested  on  the  shoulders  of  the  lecticarii,  and
not  on  thongs  which  passed  round  the  necks  of  these
slaves  and  hung  down  from  their  shoulders,  as
some  modern  writers  have  thought.  (Senec.  Epist.
80.  110;  Tertull.  ad  Uxor.  i.  4;  Clem.  Alex.
Paedag.  iii.  4  ;  Juv.  iii.  240,  ix.  142.)  The  act
of  taking  the  lectica  upon  the  shoulders  was  called
succollare  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.  1 0  ;  Sueton.  Cland.
10),  and  the  persons  who  were  carried  in  this
manner  were  said  succollari  (Sueton.  Otho.  6).
From  this  passage  we  also  learn  that  the  name
lecticarii  was  sometimes  incorrectly  applied  to  those
slaves  who  carried  a  person  in  a  sella  or  sedan-
chair.  The  number  of  lecticarii  employed  in  carry-
ing one  lectica  varied  according  to  its  size,  and  the
display  of  wealth  which  a  person  might  wish  to
make.  The  ordinary  number  was  probably  two
(Petron.  Sat.  56  ;  Juv.  ix.  142)  ;  but  it  varied  from
two  to  eight,  and  the  lectica  is  called  hexaphoron
or  octophoron,  accordingly  as  it  was  carried  by  six
or  eight  persons.  (Juv.  i.  64  ;  Mart.  ii.  81,  vi.  77  ;
Cic.  c.  Verr.  v.  11,  ad  Quint,  ii.  10.)  Wealthy
Romans  kept  certain  slaves  solely  as  their  lecticarii
(Cic.  ad  Fam.  iv.  12)  ;  and  for  this  purpose  they
generally  selected  the  tallest,  strongest,  and  most
handsome  men,  and  had  them  always  well  dressed.
In  the  time  of  Martial  it  seems  to  have  been  cus-
tomary for  the  lecticarii  to  wear  beautiful  red  live-
ries. The  lectica  was  generally  preceded  by  a  slave
called  anteambulo,  whose  ofHce  was  to  make  room
for  it.  (Martial,  iii.  46  ;  Plin.  Epist.  iii.  14  ;  com-
pare Becker,  Gallus,  i.  p.  213,  &c.)

Shortly  after  the  introduction  of  these  lecticae
among  the  Romans,  and  during  the  latter  period  of
the  republic,  they  appear  to  have  been  very  com-
mon, though  they  were  chiefly  used  in  journeys,  and
in  the  city  of  Rome  itself  only  by  ladies  and  in-
valids. (Dion  Cass.  Ivii.  17.)  But  the  love  of  this
as  well  as  of  other  kinds  of  luxury  increased  so
rapidly,  that  Julius  Caesar  thought  it  necessary  to
restrain  the  use  of  lecticae,  and  to  confine  the  pri-
vilege of  using  them  to  certain  persons  of  a  certain
age,  and  to  certain  days  of  the  year.  (Sueton.
Caes.  43.)

In  the  reign  of  Claudius  we  find  that  the  privilege
of  using  a  lectica  in  the  city  was  still  a  great  dis-
tinction, which  was  only  granted  by  the  emperor
to  his  especial  favourites.  (Suet.  Claud.  28.)  But
what  until  then  had  been  a  privilege  became  gra-
dually a  right  assumed  by  all,  and  every  wealthy
Roman  kept  one  or  more  lecticae,  with  the  requisite
number  of  lecticarii.  The  emperor  Domitian,  how-
ever, forbade  prostitutes  the  use  of  lecticae.  (Suet.
Domit.  8.)  Enterprising  individuals  gradually  be-
gan to  form  companies  {corpus  lecticariorum),  and
to  establish  public  lecticae,  which  had  their  stands
{castra  Iccticariorum)  in  the  regio  transtiberina,
and  probably  in  other  parts  also,  where  any  one
might  take  a  lectica  on  hire.  (Victor,  De  Eegionih.
Urb.  Rom.  in  Graevii  Thesaur.  iii.  p.  49  ;  Martial,
iii.  46.)  The  persons  of  whom  these  companies
consisted,  were  probably  of  the  lower  orders  or
freedmen.  (Compare  Gruter,  Inscript.  bQ9.  11,
600.  1.)

The  lecticae  of  which  we  have  hitherto  spoken,
were  all  portable,  i.  e.  they  were  constructed  in
such  a  manner  that  the  asseres  might  easily  be
fastened  to  them  whenever  it  was  necessary  to
carry  a  person  in  them  from  one  place  to  another.
But  the  name  lectica,  or  rather  the  diminutive  lec-
ticula,  was  also  sometimes  applied  to  a  kind  of


LECTUS.

sofa,  which  was  not  moved  oiit  of  the  house.
On  it  the  Romans  frequently  reclined  for  the  pur-
pose of  reading  or  writing,  for  the  ancients  when
writing  seldom  sat  at  a  table  as  we  dp,  but  generally
reclined  on  a  couch  ;  in  this  posture  they  raised
one  knee,  and  upon  it  they  placed  the  parchment
or  tablet  on  which  they  wrote.  From  this  kind  of
occupation  the  sopha  was  called  lecticula  lucubra-
toria  (Suet.  Aug.  78),  or  more  commonly  lectulus.
(FVm.Epist.v.  5  ;  Ovid,  Trist.  i.  11.  38  ;  compare
Alstorph,  De  Ledicis  Veterum  Diairiba,  Amster-
dam, 1704.)  [L.  S.]

LECTICA'RII.     [Lectica.]

LECTISTE'RNIUM.  Sacrifices  being  of  the
nature  of  feasts,  the  Greeks  and  Romans  on  occa-
sion of  extraordinary  solemnities  placed  images  of
the  gods  reclining  on  couches,  with  tables  and
viands  before  them,  as  if  they  v/ere  really  partaking
of  the  things  offered  in  sacrifice.  This  ceremony
Avas  called  a  ledistemium.  Three  specimens  of
the  couches  employed  for  the  purpose  are  in  the
Glyptotek  at  Munich.  The  woodcut  here  intro-
duced exhibits  one  of  them,  which  is  represented
with  a  cushion  covered  by  a  cloth  hanging  in
ample  folds  down  each  side.  This  beautiful  pul-
vinar  (Sueton.  Jul.  76  ;  Com.  Nep.  Timoth.  2)  is
wrought  altogether  in  white  marble,  and  is  some-


what more  than  two  feet  in  height.  At  the
Epulum  Jovis,  which  was  the  most  noted  lecti-
stemium  at  Rome,  and  which  was  celebrated  in  the
Capitol,  the  statue  of  Jupiter  was  laid  in  a  reclining
posture  on  a  couch,  while  those  of  Juno  and
Minerva  were  seated  on  chairs  by  his  side  ;  and
this  distinction  was  observed  in  allusion  to  the
ancient  custom,  according  to  which  only  men  re-
clined and  women  sat  at  table.  (Val,  Max.  ii.  1.
§  2.)  Nevertheless  it  is  probable  that  at  a  later
period  both  gods  and  goddesses  were  represented
in  the  same  position  :  at  least  four  of  them,  viz.
Jupiter  Serapis  and  Juno  or  Isis,  together  with
Apollo  and  Diana,  are  so  exhibited  with  a  tjible
before  them  on  the  handle  of  a  Roman  lamp  en-
graved by  Bartoli.  {Luc.  Aiit  ii.  34.)  Livy  (v,  13)
gives  an  account  of  a  very  splendid  lectistcmium,
which  he  asserts  to  have  been  the  origin  of  the
practice.  [J.  Y.]

LECTUS  (A.exos,  K\ivri,  ewj/^),  a  bed.  In  the
heroic  ages  of  Greece  beds  were  very  simple  ;  the
bedsteads,  however,  are  sometimes  represented  as
ornamented  (rp-qTo.  Ae'xea,  II.  iii.  448  ;  compare
Odyss.  xxiii.  219,  &c.).  The  principal  parts  of  a
bed  were  the  X'^-a*""'  and  'p'i]yea  {Odyss.  xix.  337);
the  former  were  a  kind  of  thick  woollen  cloak,
sometimes  coloured,  which  was  in  bad  weather
worn  by  men  over  their  X'^w;/,  and  was  sometimes
spread  over  a  chair  to  render  the  seat  soft.     That


LECTUS.  673

these  x^o"""'  served  as  blankets  for  persons  ia
their  sleep,  is  seen  from  Odyss.  xiv.  488,  500,  504,
513,  52,9,  XX,  4.  The  pvyea,  on  the  other  hand,
were  probably  a  softer  and  more  costly  kind  of
woollen  cloth,  and  were  used  chiefly  by  persons  of
high  rank.  They  were,  like  the  x^a'»'a«,  some-
times used  to  cover  the  seat  of  chairs  when  persons
wanted  to  sit  down.  (Orf^ss.  x.  352.)  To  render
this  thick  woollen  stuff  less  disagreeable,  a  linen
cloth  was  sometimes  spread  over  it.  {Odyss.  xiii.
73.)  It  has  been  supposed  that  the  pTjyea  were
pillows  or  bolsters  ;  but  this  opinion  seems  to  be
refuted  by  the  circumstance  that,  in  Odyss.  vi.
38,  they  are  described  as  being  washed  without
anything  being  said  as  to  any  operation  which
would  have  necessarily  preceded  the  washing  had
they  been  pillows.  Beyond  this  supposition  re-
specting the  pvyea,  we  have  no  traces  of  pillows
or  bolsters  being  used  in  the  Homeric  age.  The
bedstead  (Ae'xos,  Ae/cTpor,  S^fxvtov)  of  persons  of
high  rank  was  covered  with  skins  (Kwea)  upon
which  the  fiiiyea  were  placed,  and  over  these  linen
sheets  or  carpets  were  spread  ;  the  X''^"'^''",  lastly,
served  as  a  cover  or  blanket  for  the  sleeper.  (Odyss.
iv.  296,  &c.  ;  11.  xxiv.  643,  &c.  ;  ix.  660,  &c.)
Poor  persons  slept  on  skins  or  beds  of  dry  herbs
spread  on  the  ground.  (Odyss.  xiv.  519  ;  xx.  139,
&c.  ;  xi.  188,  &c.  ;  compare  Nitzsch,  zur  Odyss.
vol.  i.  p.  210.)  These  simple  beds,  to  which  shortly
after  the  Homeric  age  a  pillow  for  the  head  was
added,  continued  to  be  used  by  the  poorer  classes
among  the  Greeks  at  all  times.  Thus  the  bed  of
the  orator  Lycurgus  is  said  to  have  consisted  of
one  sheep-skin  (KuSioy)  and  a  pillow.  (Plut.  Vit.
Dec.  Orat.  Lycurg.  p.  842.  c.)  But  the  complete
bed  (ihv-i])  of  a  wealthy  Greek  in  later  times,
generally  consisted  of  the  iollowing  parts :  K\ii/r],
iiriTouol,  Tvkilov  or  KvicpaXov^  irpoffKscpdKeiov^  and
ffTpw/xura.

The  K\iur]  is  properly  speaking  only  the  bed-
stead, and  seems  to  have  consisted  onlj'-  of  posts
fitted  into  one  another  and  resting  upon  four  feet.
At  the  head  part  alone  there  was  a  board  (avaKKiv-
rpov  or  iiviKXivrpov)  to  support  the  pillow  and  pre-
vent its  falling  out.  Sometimes  the  auaKXivi pov
was  wanting,  as  we  see  in  drawings  on  ancient
vases.  (Pollux,  x.  34,  vi.  9.)  Sometimes,  however,
the  bottom  part  of  a  bedstead  was  likewise  pro-
tected by  tne  board,  so  that  in  this  case  a  Greek
bedstead  resembled  a  modern  so-called  French  bed-
stead. The  KKivT]  was  generally  made  of  wood,
which  in  quality  varied  according  to  the  means  of
the  persons  for  whose  use  it  was  destined  ;  for  in
some  cases  we  find  that  it  was  made  of  solid
maple  or  box-wood,  or  veneered  Avith  a  coating  of
these  more  expensive  woods.  At  a  later  period,
bedsteads  wei'e  not  only  made  of  solid  ivory  or
veneered  with  tortoiseshell,  but  sometimes  had
silver  feet.  (Pollux,  I.  c.  ;  Aelian,  V.  H.  xii.  29  ;
Athen.  vi.  p.  255.)

The  bedstead  was  provided  with  girths  (t6voi^
iTTiTovoi,  Keipia)  on  which  the  bed  or  mattress
(KviipdKou^  TvKetov^  Koivws  or  tvAtj)  rested  ;  in-
stead of  these  girths  poorer  people  used  strings.
(Aristoph.  Av.  814,  with  the  Schol.)  The  cover
or  ticking  of  a  mattress  was  made  of  linen  or  wool-
len cloth,  or  of  leather,  and  the  usual  material  with
which  it  was  filled  (rh  i/xSaWSfievov,  irKTjpwfia^
or  yudcpaXoi/)  was  either  wool  or  dried  weeds.  At
the  head  part  of  the  bed,  and  supported  by  the
iiriKXivrpoVy  lay  a  round  pillow  (irpoaKecpdAeiov)
X   X


674


LECTUS.


to  support  the  head  ;  and  in  some  ancient  pictures
two  other  square  pillows  are  seen,  which  were  in-
tended to  support  the  back.  The  covers  of  such
pillows  are  striped  in  several  pictures  on  ancient
vases  (see  the  woodcut  under  Symposium),  and
were  therefore  probably  of  various  colours.  They
were  undoubtedly  filled  with  the  same  materials
as  the  beds  and  mattresses.

The  bed-covers,  which  may  be  tenned  blankets
or  counterpanes,  were  called  by  a  variety  of  names,
such  as  TrepicTTpaljuaTa,  uTrocrrpciS^OTa,  iiri§\i}fxaTa,
ipeaTpiSes,  xXali/ai,  a/xcpieaTpiSes^  e7r:§oAaia,  5a-
7riS€S,i|/jAo5a7riSes,  lucriSes,  xP^<^07raaT0i,Tdn7]T€S
or  a^</)iTa7r?jTes.  The  common  name,  however,  was
CTpwixara.  They  were  generally  made  of  cloth,
which  was  very  thick  and  woolly  either  on  one
or  on  both  sides.  (Pollux,  vi.  9.)  It  is  not
always  easy  to  distinguish  whether  the  ancients,
when  speaking  of  K\ivai,  mean  beds  in  our  sense
of  the  word,  or  the  couches  on  which  they  lay  at
meal  times.  We  consequently  do  not  know  whe-
ther the  descriptive  epithets  of  K\ivai,  enumerated
by  Pollux,  belong  to  beds  or  to  couches.  But  this
matters  little,  as  there  was  scarcely  any  difference
between  the  beds  of  the  ancients  and  their  couches,
with  this  exception,  that  the  latter  being  made  for
appearance  as  well  as  for  comfort,  were,  on  the
whole,  undoubtedly  more  splendid  and  costly  than
the  former.  Considering,  however,  that  bedsteads
were  often  made  of  the  most  costly  materials,  we
may  reasonably  infer  that  the  coverings  and  other
ornaments  of  beds  were  little  inferior  to  those  of
couches.  Notwithstanding  the  splendour  and  com-
fort of  many  Greek  beds,  the  Asiatics,  who  have
at  all  times  excelled  the  Europeans  in  these  kinds
of  luxuries,  said  that  the  Greeks  did  not  under-
stand how  to  make  a  comfortable  bed.  (Athen.  ii.
p.  48  ;  Plut.  Pelop.  30.)  The  places  most  cele-
brated for  the  manufacture  of  splendid  bed-covers
were  Miletus,  Corinth,  and  Carthage.  (Aristoph.
Ran.  410,  542,  with  the  Schol.  ;  Lysistr.  732  ;
Cic.  c.  Verr.  i.  34  ;  Athen.  i.  pp.  27,  28.)  It  ap-
pears that  the  Greeks,  though  they  wore  night-
gowns, did  not  simply  cover  themselves  with  the
(rrpujxara^  but  wrapt  themselves  up  in  them.  Less
wealthy  persons  continued,  according  to  the  ancient
custom,  to  use  skins  of  sheep  and  other  animals,
especially  in  winter,  as  blankets.  (Pollux,  x.  123  ;
Aristoph.  Nvh.  10.)

The  bedsteads  of  the  poorer  classes  are  de-
signated by  the  names  aKifxirovs^  a.(TKavTr\s^  and
Kpd§§aTos^  and  an  exaggerated  description  of  such
a  bed  is  given  by  Aristophanes.  {Plut.  540,
&c.  ;  compare  Lysistr.  916.)  The  words  x«j"f'^''^
and  xcf-f^^^^^ou,  which  originally  signified  a  bed  of
straw  or  dry  herbs  made  on  the  ground  (Theocrit.
iii.  33  ;  Plut.  Lycurg.  16),  were  afterwards  ap-
plied to  a  bed  which  was  only  near  the  ground,
to  distinguish  it  from  the  KKivi\  which  was  gene-
rally a  high  bedstead.  Xafievvia  were  the  usual
beds  for  slaves,  soldiers  in  the  field,  and  poor
citizens,  and  the  mattresses  used  in  them  were  mere
mats  made  of  rushes  or  bast.  (Pollux,  I.  c,  and
vi.  II;  Becker,  Ckarikles,  vol.  ii.  pp.  114 — 122  ;
Pollux,  X.  c.  7,  8,  vi.  1.)

The  beds  of  the  Romans  (lecti  ciddculares)  in  the
earlier  periods  of  the  republic  were  probably  of  the
same  description  as  those  used  in  Greece  ;  but  to-
wards the  end  of  the  republic  and  during  the  em-
pire, when  Asiatic  luxuries  were  imported  into
Italy,  the  richness  and  magnificence  of  the  beds  of


LECTUS.

the  wealthy  Romans  far  surpassed  everything  we
find  described  in  Greece.  The  bedstead  was  ge-
nerally rather  high,  so  that  persons  entered  the
bed  (scandere,  ascendere)  by  means  of  steps  placed
beside  it  (scamnum,  Varro,  de  Line/.  Lat.x.  168^
Miiller  ;  Ovid.  Fast.  ii.  349,  &c.).  It  was  some-
times made  of  metal,  and  sometimes  of  costly  kinds
of  wood  or  veneered  with  tortoise-shell  or  ivory  ;  its
feet  (fulcra)  were  frequently  of  silver  or  gold.
(Plin.  xvi.  43  ;  Mart.  xii.  67  ;  Juv.  xi.  94.)  The
bed  or  mattress  (culcita  and  torus)  rested  upon
girths  or  strings  (restes,  fasciae,  institae,  or  funes)
which  connected  the  two  horizontal  side-posts  of
the  bed.  (Cic.  de  Div.  ii.  GB  ;  Mart.  v.  62  ;
Petron.  97  ;  compare  Herat.  Epod.  xii.  12  ;  Cato,
de  Re  Rust.  c.  10.)  In  beds  destined  for  two
persons,  the  two  sides  are  distinguished  by  different
names  ;  the  sides  at  which  persons  entered  was
open,  and  bore  the  name  ofsponda;  the  other  side,
which  was  protected  by  a  board,  was  caWed  pluteus.
(Isidor.  XX.  11.  p.  629,  ed.  Lindemann.)  The  tAvo
sides  of  such  a  bed  are  also  distinguished  by  the
names  toi-us  exterior  and  torus  interior,  or  sponda
edierior  and  sponda  i7iierior  (Ovid.  ^raor.  iii.  14.
32  ;  Sueton.  Caes.  49)  ;  and  from  these  expres-
sions it  is  not  improbable  that  such  lecti  had  two  beds
or  mattresses,  one  for  each  person.  Mattresses  were
in  the  earlier  times  filled  with  dry  herbs  (Varro,
I.  c.  ;  Ovid.  Fast.  i.  200  and  205),  or  straw  (Herat.
Sat.  ii.  3.  117  ;  Mart.  xiv.  160  ;  Senec.  De  Vit.
Beat.  c.  25),  and  such  beds  continued  to  be  used
by  the  poor.  But  in  subsequent  times  wool,  and
at  a  still  later  period,  feathers  were  used  by  the
wealthy  for  the  beds  as  well  as  the  pillows.  (Plin.
H.N.  viii.  48,  x.  22  ;  Plaut.  Mil.  Glor.  iv.  4.
42  ;  Cic.  Tusc.  iii.  19  ;  Mart.  xiv.  161  and  159.)
The  cloth  or  licking  {pperimentum  or  involucrum),
with  which  the  beds  or  mattresses  were  covered,
was  called  toral,  torale,  linteum,  or  segestre.  (Herat.
Sat.  ii.  4.  84,  Epist.  i.  5.  21  ;  Varro,  I.e.)  The
blankets  or  counterpanes  (vestes  stragulae,  straguki^
peristromata,  peripetasmata)  were  in  the  houses  of
wealthy  Romans  of  the  most  costly  description,
and  generally  of  a  purple  colour  (stragula  concliylio
tincta,  peristromata  conchyliata,  coccina  stragula)
and  embroidered  with  beautiful  figures  in  gold.
Covers  of  this  sort  were  called  peripetasmata
Attalica,  because  they  were  said  to  have  been
first  used  at  the  court  of  Attains.  (Plin.  H.  N.
I.e.  ;  Cic.  c.Verr.  iv.  12,  26,  Philip,  ii.  27  ;  Mart.
ii.  16.)  The  pillows  Avere  likewise  covered  with
magnificent  casings.  Whether  the  ancients  had
curtains  to  their  beds  is  not  mentioned  any-
where ;  but  as  curtains,  or  rather  a  kind  of  canopy
(aidaea),  were  used  in  the  lectus  tricliniaris  (Horat.
Carm.  iii.  29.  15,  Sat.  ii.  8.  54)  for  the  puiposo
of  preventing  the  dust  falling  upon  the  persons
lying  on  it,  it  is  not  improbable  that  the  same  or
a  similar  contrivance  was  used  in  the  lectus  cubi-
cularis.

The  lectus  genialis  or  adversus  was  the  bridal
bed  which  stood  in  the  atrium,  opposite  the  janua,
whence  it  derived  the  epithet  adversus.  (Horat.
Epist.  i.  1.  87;  Festus,  s.  v.  ;  comp.  Domus,
p.  428,  a.)  It  was  generally  high,  with  steps  by
its  side,  and  in  later  times  beautifully  adorned.
(Gellius,  xvi.  9  ;  Lucan.  ii.  356  ;  Cic.  pro  Cluent.
c.  5.)

Respecting  the  lectus  funebris  see  the  articles
Fun  us  and  Lectica.  An  account  of  the  dis-
position of  the  couches  used  at  entertainments,  and


LEGATUM.

of  the  place  -wliich  each  guest  occupied,  is  given
under  Triclinium.  (Becker,  Gallus,  vol.  i.  p.  42,
&c.)  [L.  S.]

LE'CYTH  US  (A.i*?Ku0os),a  small  narrow-mouthed
vessel,  the  principal  use  of  which  was  to  hold  oil,
for  anointing  after  the  bath,  and  in  the  palaestra.
It  was  sometimes  of  leather,  but  more  often  of
earthen-ware.  Numerous  terra-cotta  vessels  of
this  sort  exist,  of  an  oval  shape,  holding  about  a
pint,  generally  painted  a  plain  dark  brown  or  black,
but  sometimes  a  bright  colour,  while  a  few  ex-
amples are  adofned  with  beautifully  executed  paint-
ings. Most  of  them  are  the  productions  of  the
Athenian  potteries.  (Horn.  Od.  vi.  79  ;  Krause,
Gymn.  u.  Agon.  vol.  i.  p.  189,  and  in  Pauly's
Jieul-Encyclop'ddie.1  s.  v.)  [P.  S.]

LEGA'TIO  LI'BERA.  [Legatus,  p.  678,  b.]

LEGA'TUM  is  defined  (Dig.  30.  s.  116)  to  be
*'  delibatio  hereditatis  qua  testator  ex  eo  quod  uni-
versum  heredis  foret  alicui  quid  collatum  velit."
This  singular  succession  presupposes  a  universal
succession,  for  if  there  is  no  heres  ex  testamento
or  person  loco  heredis,  there  can  be  no  legacy.  A
Legatum  then  is  a  part  of  the  hereditas  which  a
testator  gives  out  of  it,  from  the  heres  {ab  herede)  ;
that  is,  it  is  a  gift  to  a  person  out  of  that  whole
(univcrsum)  which  is  diminished  to  the  heres  by
such  gift.  Accordingly  the  phrase  "  ab  heyede
legare  "  thus  becomes  intelligible.  (Dig.  30.
s.  1 1 6  ;  "  ei  testamento  legal  grandem  pecuniam  a
filio,"  Cic.  pro  Cluent.  1 2.)  A  legatee  could  not
be  charged  with  the  payment  of  a  legacy  out  of
Avhat  was  given  to  him,  a  rule  of  law  which  was
thus  expressed,  *'  A  legatario  legari  non  potest."
A  legatum  was  something  given  according  to  the
Jus  Civile,  and  therefore  could  only  be  given  in
civilia  verba,  and  in  Latin.     [Testamentum.]

The  word  "  Legatum,"  from  the  verb  lego,  con-
tains the  same  element  as  Lex.  Lego  has  the
sense  of  appointing  or  disposing  of  a  matter,  as  in
the  phrase  "  legatum  negotium  "  (Plant.  Cas.  i.  1.
12)  ;  and  it  is  used  in  the  Twelve  Tables  to  ex-
press generally  a  testator's  disposition  of  his  pro-
perty {uti  legassit,  &c.).  Ulpian  accordingly
explains  the  word  Legatum  by  referring  to  its
etymology,  and  likening  a  Legatum  to  a  Lex  pro-
perly so  called.  "  A  Legatum,"  he  says,  *•'  is  that
which  is  left  by  a  testament,  legis  modo,  that  is,
imperative ;  for  those  things  which  are  left  pre-
cativo  modo,  are  called  Fideicommissa."  {Frag.
tit.  24.)  A  legatee  was  named  legatarius ;  those
to  whom  a  thing  was  given  jointly  (covjtmctim)
were  collegatarii.  A  legacy  which  was  legally
valid  or  good,  was  legatum  utile;  a  void  legacy  was
tmitile.  A  legacy  which  was  given  absolutely  or
unconditionallj^  was  said  to  be  given  pure;  one
which  was  given  conditionally  was  said  to  be  given
s»/j  conditione.  The  expression  purum  legatum.,  an
unconditional  legacy,  also  occurs.  (Dig.  36.  tit.  2.
8.  5.)

Gains  apologizes  for  treating  of  Legata  in  that
part  of  his  Institutional  work  in  which  he  has
placed  them.  In  the  first  ninety-six  chapters  of  his
second  book  he  treats  of  the  acquisition  of  property
in  Res  singular,  to  which  class  legacies  belong.
But  as  the  matter  of  legacies  is  not  intelligible
without  reference  to  the  matter  of  hereditas  or
universal  succession,  he  places  the  law  of  legacies
(haec  juris  materia)  immediately  after  that  of
hereditas.

There  were  four  Civil  forms  in  which  a  legacy


LEGATUM.  67J5

could  be  left:   Per  Vindicationem,   Per  Damna-
tionem,  Sinendi  modo.  Per  Praeceptionem.

A  legatum  per  vindicationem  was  given  in  these
words:  "Hominem  Stichura  Do,  Lego;"  or  the
words  might  be  with  reference  to  the  legatee,
"Capito,  Sumito,  Sibi  Habeto."  A  legatum  per
vindicationem  was  so  called  with  reference  to  the
legal  means  by  which  the  legatee  asserted  his  right
to  the  legacy  against  the  heres  or  any  possessor,
which  was  by  a  vindicatio  or  an  Actio  in  rem  ;  for
as  soon  as  the  Hereditatis  aditio  had  taken  place,
the  legatee  had  the  Quiritarian  {ex  jure  Quiritium)
ownership  of  the  legacy.  The  two  schools  raised
a  question  as  to  this.  Whether  under  such  circum-
stances, the  legatee  obtained  the  Quiritarian  owner-
ship of  the  thing  before  he  had  consented  to  take
it.  The  opinion  of  the  Proculiani  who  contended
for  such  consent,  was  confirmed  by  a  Constitution
of  Antoninus  Pius  (Gains,  ii.  195).  It  was  con-
sistent with  the  nature  of  the  Per  Vindicationem,
that  those  things  only  could  be  so  given,  in  which
the  testator  had  Quiritarian  ownership:  and  it  was
also  necessary  that  he  should  have  such  owner-
ship both  at  the  time  of  making  his  will  and  at
the  time  of  his  death  ;  otherwise  the  legacy  was
void  {inutile).  But  there  was  an  exception  in
respect  of  things  "  quae  pondere.  numero,  men-
sura  constant,"  as  wine,  oil,  corn,  and  the  pre-
cious metals  in  the  form  of  coin  [pecunia  nume-
rata ),  in  regard  to  which  it  was  sufficient  if  the
testator  had  the  Quiritarian  ownership  at  the
time  of  his  death.  By  a  senatusconsultum  of  the
time  of  Nero,  it  was  enacted  that  if  a  testator  left
a  thing  as  a  legacy,  which  had  never  been  his,  the
legacy  should  be  equally  good  as  if  it  had  been
left  in  the  form  most  advantageous  to  the  legatee
{optimo  jure),  which  form  was  the  Legatum  per
damnationera.  But  if  a  testator  gave  a  thing  of  his
own  by  a  testament,  which  he  afterwards  alienated,
it  was  the  best  opinion  that  the  legacy  was  inutile
by  the  Jus  Civile,  and  that  the  Senatusconsultum
did  not  make  it  good.  If  the  same  thing  was
given  to  more  than  one  person  either  jointly  {con-
junctim)  so  as  to  make  them  collegatarii,  or  se-
verally {disjundim),  each  took  an  equal  share.  A
legatum  was  given  cotijunctim  thus  :  '"  Titio  et  Seio
hominem  Stichum  do,  lego;"  difjunctim.  thus:
"  Titio  hominem  Stichum  do,  lego  ;  Seio  eundem
hominem  do,  lego."  If  one  collegatarius  failed  to
take,  his  portion  went  to  the  others.  In  the  case
of  a  conditional  legacy  left  per  vindicationem,  the
schools  were  divided  in  opinion :  the  Sabiniani
said  that  it  was  the  property  of  the  heres  during
the  pendency  of  the  condition  ;  the  Proculiani  said
that  it  was  "  res  nuUius."

The  form  of  the  Per  damnationem  was  this :
Heres  mens  Stichum  servum  meum  dare  damnas
esto  ;  but  the  word  Date  was  equally  effective.  A
thing  which  belonged  to  another  (aliena  res)  could
be  thus  left,  and  the  heres  was  bound  to  procure
the  thing  for  the  legatee  or  to  pay  him  the  value
of  it.  A  thing  not  in  existence  at  the  date  of  the
will  might  be  left  by  this  fonn,  as  the  future  pro-
duce of  a  female  slave  {ancilla).  The  legatee  did
not  acquire  the  Quiritarian  ownership  of  the  legacy
by  virtue  of  the  hereditatis  aditio :  the  thing  still
remained  the  property  of  the  heres,  but  the  effect
of  the  legatum  was  to  establish  an  obligatio  be-
tween the  heres  and  the  legatee,  who  could  sue
for  it  by  an  Actio  in  personam.  If  it  was  a  thing
Mancipi,  the  legatee  could  only  acquire  the  Quiri-
X  X  2


676  LEGATUM.

tarian  ownership  of  it  by  Mancipatio  or  In  jure
cessio  from  the  heres :  if  it  was  merely  delivered,
the  legatarius  only  acquired  the  complete  owner-
ship {plenum  jus)  by  usucapion.  If  the  same
thing  was  left  to  two  or  more  conjnnciim,  each
had  an  equal  share  ;  if  dtsjimctim^  the  heres  was
bound  to  give  the  thing  to  one  and  its  value  to  the
lest.  In  the  case  of  a  gift  coiijunctim  the  share  of
the  legatee  who  failed  to  take  belonged  to  the
hereditas  ;  but  the  Lex  Papia  made  it  caducum,
and  gave  it  first  to  a  collegatarius  who  had
children,  then  to  the  heredes  Avho  had  children,
and  then  to  the  other  legatees  who  had  children
(legatarii),  a  privilege  which  Juvenal  alludes  to
{duke  caducum^  ix.  88).

The  Legatum  Sinendi  modo  was  thus  given :
*'  Heres  meua  damnas  esto  sinere  Lucium  Titium
horainem  Stichum  sumere  sibique  habere  ;"  by
which  form  a  testator  could  give  either  his  own
property  or  that  which  was  the  property  of  his
heres  at  the  time  of  the  death.  As  in  the  case  of
a  legatum  per  damnationem,  the  legatee  prosecuted
his  claim  by  an  Actio  in  personam.  It  was
doubted  whether  the  heres  was  boimd  to  transfer
the  property,  in  the  case  of  a  res  mancipi,  by  man-
cipatio or  in  jure  cessio,  or,  in  the  case  of  a  thing
nee  mancipi,  by  traditio  or  delivery,  for  the  words
of  the  gift  are  "  permit  him  to  take."  If  the  same
thing  was  left  to  several  conjunctim,  they  took  it
in  common,  but  without  any  jus  accrescendi  if  one
of  them  failed  to  take.  It  was  a  still  more  doubtful
question  (in  the  time  of  Gains),  whether,  if  the
same  thing  was  given  in  this  way  to  two  severally
{disjunctim\  the  whole  was  due  to  each,  or  if  the
heres  was  released  from  all  further  claim,  when
either  of  them  had  obtained  possession  of  the  whole
with  his  permission.

The  Legatum  pcir  praeceptionem  was  in  this
manner :  "  Lucius  Titius  hominem  Stichum  Prae-
cipito  ; "  where  "  praecipito,"  in  the  opinion  of  the
Sabiniani,  is  the  same  as  "  praecipuum  sumito,"  or
*'  take  first."  The  Sabiniani  accordingly  were  of
opinion  that  a  legacy  could  only  thus  be  left  to
one  who  was  also  made  a  heres  ;  but  a  Senatus-
consultum  Neronianum  made  the  legacy  good,  even
if  it  was  thus  left  to  an  extraneus,  that  is,  to  an-
other than  the  heres,  provided  the  legatee  was  a
person  to  whom  a  legacy  could  be  left  in  any  of
the  three  other  modes.  For  the  Senatusconsultum
made  those  legacies  valid  which  were  not  valid  by
the  Jus  Civile  on  account  of  the  words  of  the  gift
{verborum  vitio),  but  not  those  legacies  which
were  invalid  on  accoimt  of  the  incajjacity  of  the
legatee  {vitio  persona e),  which  was  the  case  with  a
peregrinus.  The  Sabiniani  also  maintained  that  a
man  could  leave  in  this  manner  only  what  was  his
own,  for  the  only  way  in  which  the  legatee  could
enforce  his  right  was  by  a  judicium  familiae  ercis-
cundae,  in  which  judicium  it  was  necessary  that
the  judex  should  adjudicate  that  which  was  given
per  praeceptionem,  and  he  could  adjudicate  on
nothing  else  than  the  res  hereditaria.  But  the
same  senatusconsultum  made  a  legacy  valid,  which
was  given  in  this  form,  even  if  the  thing  did  not
belong  to  the  testator.  The  Proculiani  contended
that  a  legacy  could  be  given  to  an  extraneus  per
praeceptionem  ;  and  further  that  if  the  thing  was
the  testfitor's  ex  jure  Quiritium,  it  could  be  sued  for
(vindicari)  by  the  legatee,  whether  he  was  a  heres
or  not  {extraneus)  ;  if  it  was  the  testator's  in  bonis,
it  was  a  utile  legatum  to  the  extraneus  by  the


LEGATUM.

senatusconsultum  ;  and  the  heres,  if  he  was  tli6
legatee,  could  obtain  it  in  a  judicium  familiae  er-
ciscundae.  If  it  did  not  belong  to  the  testator  in
either  way,  still  the  legatum  was  made  utile  both
to  the  heres  and  the  extraneus  by  the  senatus-
consultum. If  the  same  thing  was  thus  left  to
more  than  one  either  disjunctim  or  conjunctim,
each  had  only  his  share.  In  all  the  three  foi-ms,
except  the  per  damnationem,  only  Things  and
Jura  in  re  could  be  the  objects  of  legata :  but  by
the  per  damnationem  any  thing  could  be  made  the
object  of  a  legatum  which  could  be  made  the  ob-
ject of  an  obligatio.

By  the  Law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  a  man  could
dispose  of  his  property  as  be  pleased,  and  he  might
exhaust  {erogare)  the  whole  hereditas  by  legacies
and  bequests  of  freedom  to  slaves,  so  as  to  leave
the  heres  nothing.  The  consequence  was  that  in
such  cases  the  scripti  heredes  refused  to  take  the
hereditas,  and  there  was  of  course  an  intestacy.
The  first  legislative  measure  on  this  subject  Avas
the  Lex  Furia,  called  Testamentaria,  which  did
not  allow  a  testator  to  give  as  a  donatio  mortis
causa  or  as  a  legacy  more  than  a  thousand  asses
to  one  person,  certain  kinsfolk  excepted.  (Gains,
iii.  225  ;  Ulp.  Frag.  i.  2,  xxviii.  7.)  But  this
measure  was  a  failure,  for  it  did  not  prevent
a  man  from  giving  as  many  several  thousands  to
as  many  persons  as  he  pleased,  and  so  exhausting
his  estate.  The  Lex  Voconia  (b.  c.  169)  after-
wards enacted  that  no  person  should  take  by  way
of  legacy  or  donatio  mortis  causa  more  than  the
heredes  (severally,  as  it  seems)  ;  but  this  lex
was  ineffectual,  for  by  the  testator  distributing
his  property  among  numerous  legatees,  the  heres
might  have  so  small  a  portion  as  not  to  nmke  it
worth  his  while  to  assume  the  burdens  attached  to
the  hereditas.  (Gains,  ii.  26  ;  Cic.  in  Verr.  i.
43.)  The  Lex  Falcidia  (b.  c.  40)  at  last  took
away  all  means  of  evasion  by  declaring  that  a  tes-
tator should  not  give  more  than  three -fourths  in
legacies,  and  thus  a  fourth  was  secured  to  the
heros  ;  and  "  this  law,"  says  Gains,  "  is  now  in
force."  The  Senatusconsultum  Pegasianum  extended
the  same  rule  of  law  to  fideicommissa  [Fideicom-
missum]  ;  and  the  Emperor  Antoninus  applied  it
to  the  case  of  fideicommissa,  when  there  was  an
intestac3\  (Dig.  35.  tit.  2.  s.  18.)  The  Lex  Fal-
cidia applied  to  the  wills  of  persons  who  died  in
captivity  {apud  Jtosies),  for  a  previous  Lex  Cor-
nelia had  given  to  the  wills  of  such  persons  the
same  force  as  if  they  had  died  cives  {in  civitate.
Dig.  35.  tit.  2.  s.  1).

Legata  were  inutilia  or  void,  if  they  were  given
before  a  heres  wjis  instituted  by  the  will,  for  the
will  derived  all  its  legal  efficacy  from  such  institu-
tion ;  there  was  the  same  rule  as  to  a  gift  of  free-
dom. It  was  an  inutile  legatum,  if  in  form  the
gift  Avas  given  after  the  death  of  the  heres,  but  it
might  be  given  on  the  event  of  his  death  ;  it  was
also  inutile  if  given  in  form  on  the  day  before  the
death  of  the  testator,  for  which  rule  of  law,  says
Gains,  there  seems  to  be  no  good  reason  {pretiosa
ratio).  A  legatum  could  not  be  left  in  the  way  of
a  penalty  (  voenae  nomine),  that  is,  for  the  purpose
of  compelling  the  heros  to  do  or  restraining  him
from  doing  any  particular  act.  but  Justinian  made
all  such  legata  good,  except  those  which  were  im-
possible, or  forbidden  by  law  or  against  boni
mores  (probrosa)  (Inst.  2.  tit.  2.  s  36).  A  legacy
could  not  be  left  to  an  uncertain  person  {inccrta


LEGATUM.

persona).  The  notion  of  an  uncertain  person  was
not  of  a  person  who  could  never  he  ascertained,
for  in  several  of  the  instances  mentioned  hy  Gains,
the  person  or  persons  would  easily  be  ascertained
(for  instance  "  qui  post  testamentum  consules  de-
signati  erunt  ")  ;  but  the  notion  of  the  uncertainty
was  referred  to  the  mind  of  the  testator  at  the
time  of  making  his  testament.  Accordingly  the
persona  was  not  considered  incerta,  where  he  was
one  of  a  certain  class,  such  as  cognati,  though  the
individual  of  the  class  might  be  uncertain  till  the
event  happened  which  was  to  determine  who  out
of  the  class  was  intended  by  the  testator.  Such  a
form  of  bequest  was  called  a  certa  demonstratio
incertae  personae.  (Gains,  ii.  238.)  A  legatarius
must  have  the  testament!  factio,  and  be  under  no
legal  incapacity.  A  legacy  could  not  be  left  to  a
postumus  alienus,  nor  could  such  a  person  be  a
heres  institutiis,  for  he  was  an  incerta  persona.  It
has  been  explained  who  is  a  postumus  [Heres,  p.
601,  a]  :  a  postumus  alienus  is  one  who  when  born
cannot  be  among  the  sui  heredes  of  the  testator.

It  was  a  question  whether  a  legacy  could  be
legally  (recte)  left  to  a  person,  who  Avas  in  the
power  of  another  person  who  was  made  heres  by
the  same  will.  The  Proculiani  denied  that  such  a
legacy  could  be  left  either  pure  or  sub  conditione,
(Gains,  ii.  244.)  But  if  a  person  who  was  in  the
power  of  another  was  made  heres,  a  legacy  might
be  left  {ab  eo  legari)  to  the  person  in  whose  power
he  was  ;  for  if  such  latter  person  became  heres
thereby  {per  ewn),  the  legacy  was  extinguished,
because  a  man  cannot  owe  a  thing  to  himself  ;  but
if  the  son  was  emancipated,  or  the  slave  was  ma-
numitted or  transferred  to  another,  and  so  the  son
became  heres,  or  so  the  slave  made  another  person
heres,  the  legacy  was  due  to  the  father  or  former
master.

Not  only  Res  singulae  could  be  given  as  a
legacy,  but  also  a  part  of  a  universitas  of  things
{universarum  rerum)  could  be  so  given  ;  thus
the  heres  might  be  directed  to  share  a  half  or
any  other  part  of  the  hereditas  with  another,
which  was  called  partitio.  (Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  20,  pro
Caecin.  4  ;  Ulp.  Frag.  tit.  24.  s.  25.)  By  the  jus
civile  there  might  be  a  legacy  of  a  ususfructus  of
those  things  which  were  capable  of  being  ,used  and
enjoyed  without  detriment  to  the  things.  By  a
scnfvtusconsultura  there  might  be  a  legacy  of  the
ulmsjis  of  those  things  which  were  consumed  in
the  use,  as  money,  wine,  oil,  wheat,  but  the  lega-
tarius had  to  give  security  for  the  restoration  of
the  same  quantity  or  tlie  same  value,  when  his
right  to  the  enjoyment  ceased.  This  technical
meaning  of  abusus.,  that  is,  the  use  of  things  which
are  consumed  in  the  use,  is  contrasted  with  usus-
fructus by  Cicero  (Top.  3  ;  Ueber  das  alter  des
cfuusitisus/ructus,  von  Puchta,  Rheinisches  Alas.
iii.  p.  82,  and  Puchta,  Instit.  ii.  §  255).

A  legacy  might  be  transferred  to  another  per-
son, or  taken  away  {adimi)  by  another  will  or
codicilli  confirmed  by  a  will  ;  it  might  also  be
taken  away  by  erasure  of  the  gift  Irom  the  will.
Such  a  revocation  of  legacies  (ademptio  hgatorum)
seems  to  have  been  only  effected  in  the  way  men-
tioned. The  expression  ademption  of  legacies  in
English  law  has  a  different  meaning,  and  in  tlie
case  of  a  specific  thing  corresponds  to  the  Roman
extinction  of  legacies,  which  took  place  if  the  tes-
tator disposed  of  the  thing  in  his  lifetime.

If  a  legatee  died  after  the  day  on  which  the


LEGATUS-  677

legatum  had  become  his  {post  diem  legati  cedenteni\
it  passed  to  his  heres  ;  or  to  use  a  phrase  of  Eng-
lish law,  the  legacy  was  vested.  The  phrase
"  dies  legati  cedit "  accordingly  means  "•  the  time
is  come  at  which  the  legacy  belongs  to  the  legatee,"
though  the  time  may  not  have  come  when  he  is
entitled  to  receive  it ;  and  "  dies  venit  "  denotes  the
arrival  of  the  day  on  which  it  can  be  demanded,
(Dig.  50.  tit.  1 6.  s.  2 1 3.)  If  the  legacy  was  left  con-
ditionally there  was  no  vesting  till  the  condition
was  fulfilled.  By  the  old  law,  legacies  which  were
left  unconditionally  or  from  a  time  named  {in  diem
certum)  were  vested  from  the  time  of  the  testator's
death  ;  but  by  the  Lex  Papia  they  vested  from  the
time  of  opening  the  will.  The  legacy  might  vest
immediately  on  the  death  of  the  testator  and  yet
the  testator  might  defer  the  time  of  payment.  (Dig.
36.  tit.  2.  s.  21.)  A  legacy  might  also  be  left  on  a
condition  of  time  only,  as  a  legacy  to  Titius  when
or  if  he  should  attain  the  age  of  fourteen  j'ears,  in
which  case  the  words  ivhen  and  if  were  considered
equivalent,  a  decision  which  has  been  adopted  in
English  law,  in  cases  in  which  there  is  nothing  in
the  will  which  gives  the  words  "  when  "  or  "  if  "
a  different  signification.  (Dig.  36.  tit.  2.  s.  5,  22  ;
Hanson  v.  Graham,  6  Ves.  p.  243.)

(Gaius,  ii.  191 — 245  ;  Ulp.  Frag.  tit.  xxiv.  &c.  ;
Dig.  30—32,  <&c.  ;  Inst.  ii.  tit.  20—22  ;  Paulus,
S.R.  iii.  tit.  6.)  [Fideicommissum.]     [G.  L]

LEGA'TUS.  Legati  may  be  divided  into  three
classes :  1.  Legati  or  ambassadors  sent  to  Rome
by  foreign  nations ;  2.  Legati  or  ambassadors  sent
from  Rome  to  foreign  nations  and  into  the  pro-
vinces ;  3.  Legati  who  accompanied  the  Roman
generals  into  the  field,  or  the  proconsuls  and  prae-
tors into  the  provinces.

I.  Foreign  legati  at  Rome,  from  whatever  coun-
try they  came,  had  to  go  to  the  temple  of  Saturn
and  deposit  their  name  with  the  quaestors,  which
Plutarch  (Quaest.  Roin.  p.  275,  b.)  explains  as  a
remnant  of  an  ancient  custom ;  for  formerly,  says
he,  the  quaestors  sent  presents  to  all  legati,  which
were  called  lautia,  and  if  any  ambassador  was  taken
ill  at  Rome,  he  was  in  the  care  of  the  quaestors,
who,  if  he  died,  had  also  to  pay  the  expenses  of
his  burial  from  the  public  treasury.  When  after-
wards the  number  of  foreign  ambassadors  increased
in  proportion  as  the  republic  became  extended,  the
foraier  hospitable  custom  was  reduced  to  the  mere
formality  of  depositing  the  name  with  the  keepers
of  the  public  treasury.  Previous  to  their  admis-
sion into  the  city,  foreign  ambassadors  seem  to
have  been  obliged  to  give  notice  from  what  nation
they  came  and  for  what  purpose  ;  for  several  in-
stances are  mentioned  in  which  ambassadors  were
prohibited  from  entering  the  city,  especially  in  case
of  a  war  between  Rome  and  the  state  from  which
thev  came.  (Liv.  xxx.  21,  xlii.  36,  xlv.  22.)  In
such  cases  the  ambassadors  were  either  not  heard
at  all,  and  obliged  to  quit  Italy  (Liv.  xlii.  36),  or
an  audience  was  given  to  them  by  the  senate  {sejiatus
[(gntis  datur)  outside  the  cit}',  in  the  temple  of
Bellona.  (Liv.  I.  c. ;  xxx.  21.)  This  was  evidently
a  sign  of  mistrust,  but  the  ambassadors  were  never-
theless treated  as  public  guests,  and  some  public
villa  outside  the  city  was  sometimes  assigned  for
their  reception.  In  other  cases,  however,  as  soon
as  the  report  of  the  landing  of  foreign  ambassa-
dors on  the  coast  of  Italy  was  brought  to  Rome,
especially  if  they  were  persons  of  great  distinction,
as  the  son  of  Masinissa  (Liv.  xlv.  13),  or  if  they
X  X  3


678


LEGATUS.


came  from  an  ally  of  the  Roman  people,  some  one
of  the  inferior  magistrates,  or  a  legatus  of  a  consul,
was  despatched  by  the  senate  to  receive  and  con-
duct them  to  the  city  at  the  expense  of  the  re-
public. When  they  were  introduced  into  the
senate  by  the  praetor  or  consul,  they  first  ex-
plained what  they  had  to  communicate,  and  then
the  praetor  invited  the  senators  to  put  their  ques-
tions to  the  ambassadors.  (Liv.  xxx.  22.)  The
manner  in  which  this  questioning  was  frequently
carri;'d  on,  especially  when  the  envoys  came  from
a  state  with  which  the  Romans  were  at  war,  re-
sembled more  the  cross-questioning  of  a  witness
in  a  court  of  justice,  than  an  inquiry  made  with  a
view  to  gain  a  clear  understanding  of  what  was
proposed.  (Liv.  /.  c.  with  Gronov's  note.)  The
whole  ti'ansaction  was  carried  on  by  interpreters,
and  in  the  Latin  language.  [Interpres.]  Vale-
rius Maximus  (ii.  2.  §  3)  states  that  the  Greek
rhetorician  Molo,  a  teacher  of  Cicero,  was  the  first
foreigner  who  ever  addressed  the  Roman  senate  in
his  own  tongue.  After  the  ambassadors  had  thus
been  examined,  they  were  requested  to  leave  the
assembly  of  the  senate,  who  now  began  to  discuss
the  subject  brought  before  them.  The  result  was
communicated  to  the  ambassadors  by  the  praetor.
(Liv.  viii.  1.)  In  some  cases  ambassadors  not  only
received  rich  presents  on  their  departure,  but  were
at  the  command  of  the  senate  conducted  by  a
magistrate,  and  at  the  public  expense,  to  the  fron-
tier of  Italy,  and  even  further.  (Liv.  xlv.  14.)  By
the  Lex  Gabinia  it  was  decreed  that  from  the  first
of  February  to  the  first  of  March,  the  senate  should
every  day  give  audience  to  foreign  ambassadors.
(Cic.  ad  Quint.  Frat.  ii.  11,  12,  ad  Fam.  i.  4.)
There  was  at  Rome,  as  Varro  {De  Ling.  Lat.  v.
155,  Miiller)  expresses  it,  a  place  on  the  right-
hand  side  of  the  senate-house  called  Graecostasis,
in  which  foreign  ambassadors  waited.

All  ambassadors,  whencesoever  tliey  came,  were
considered  by  the  Romans  throughout  the  whole
period  of  their  existence  as  sacred  and  inviolable.
(Cic.  c.  Verr.  i,  33  ;  Dionys.  Hal.  Ant  Rom.  xi.
25  ;  Tacit.  A7in.  i.  42  ;  Liv.  xxi.  10  ;  Dig.  50.
tit,  7.  8.  17.)

II.  Legati  to  foreign  nations  in  the  name  of  the
Roman  republic  were  always  sent  by  the  senate
(Cic.  c.  Vatin.  15)  ;  and  to  be  appointed  to  such  a
mission  was  considered  a  great  honour  which  was
conferred  only  on  men  of  high  rank  or  eminence  ;
for  a  Roman  ambassador,  according  to  Dionysius,
had  the  powers  {i^ovaia  Ka\  Siivafiis)  of  a  magis-
trate and  the  venerable  character  of  a  priest.  If
a  Roman  during  the  performance  of  his  mission  as
ambassador  died  or  was  killed,  his  memory  was
honoured  by  the  republic  with  a  public  sepulchre
and  a  statue  in  the  Rostra.  (Liv.  iv.  17  ;  Cic.
Philip,  ix,  2.)  The  expenses  during  the  journey
of  an  ambassador  were,  of  course,  paid  by  the  re-
public ;  and  when  he  travelled  through  a  province,
the  provincials  had  to  supply  him  with  everything
he  wanted.

III.  The  third  class  of  legati,  to  whom  the
name  of  ambassadors  cannot  be  applied,  were  per-
sons who  accompanied  the  Roman  generals  on  their
expeditions,  and  in  later  times  the  governors  of
provinces  also.  Legati,  as  ser\'ing  under  the  con-
suls in  the  Roman  armies,  are  mentioned  along
with  the  tribunes  at  a  very  early  period.  (Liv.  ii.
o9,  iv.  17.)  These  legati  were  nominated  (lega-
hantur)  by  the  consul  or  the  dictator  imder  whom


LEGATUS.

they  served  (Sallust.  Jug.  28  ;  Cic.  ad  Ait.  xv.  \\,
ad  Fam.  vi.  6,  pro  Leg.  Manil.  IQ).,  but  the
sanction  of  the  senate  (senatusco?isuUum)  was  an
essential  point  without  which  no  one  could  be
legally  considered  a  legatus  (Cic.  c.  Vutin.  I.  c,
pro  Se.zt.  14)  ;  and  from  Livy  (xliii.  1  ;  compare
xliv.  18)  it  appears  that  the  nomination  by  the
magistrates  (consul,  praetor,  or  dictator)  did  not
take  place  until  they  had  been  authorised  by  a
decree  of  the  senate.  The  persons  appointed  to
this  ofiice  were  usually  men  of  great  military
talents,  and  it  was  their  duty  to  advise  and  assist
their  superior  in  all  his  undertakings,  and  to  act
in  his  stead  both  in  civil  and  military  affairs.
(Varro,  de  Ling.  Lat.  v.  87,  Miiller.)  The  legati
were  thus  always  men  in  whom  the  consul  placed
great  confidence,  and  were  frequently  his  friends  or
relations  ;  but  they  had  no  power  independent  of
the  command  of  their  general.  (Caes,  de  Bell.  Civ.
ii.  17,  iii.  51  ;  Appian,  de  Bell.  Civ.  i.  38.)  Their
number  varied  according  to  the  greatness  or  im-
portance of  the  war,  or  the  extent  of  the  province :
three  is  the  smallest  number  we  know  of,  but
Pompey,  when  in  Asia,  had  fifteen  legati.  When-
ever the  consuls  were  absent  from  the  army,  or
when  a  proconsul  left  his  province,  the  legati  or
one  of  them  took  his  place,  and  then  had  the  in-
signia as  Avell  as  the  power  of  his  superior.  He
was  in  this  case  called  legatus  pro  praetore  (Liv,
xxix.  .9  ;  Lydus,  de  Magistr.  iii.  3  ;  Caes.  de  Bell.
Gall.  i.  21),  and  hence  we  sometimes  read  that  a
man  governed  a  province  as  a  legatus  without  any
mention  being  made  of  the  proconsul  whose  vice-
gerent he  was.  (Sallust.  Cat.  42.)  During  the
latter  period  of  the  republic,  it  sometimes  hap-
pened that  a  consul  carried  on  a  war,  or  a  pro-
consul governed  his  province  through  his  legati,
while  he  himself  remained  at  Rome,  or  conducted
some  other  more  urgent  affairs.

When  the  provinces  were  divided  at  the  time
of  the  empire  [Provincia],  those  of  the  Roman
people  were  governed  by  men  who  had  either  been
consuls  or  praetors,  and  the  former  were  always
accompanied  by  three  legati,  the  latter  by  one.
(Dion  Cass.  liii.  13;  Dig.  1.  tit.  16.)  The  pro-
vinces of  the  emperor,  who  was  himself  the  pro-
consul, were  governed  by  persons  whom  the
emperor  himself  appointed,  and  who  had  been  con-
suls or  praetors,  or  were  at  least  senators.  These
vicegerents  of  the  emperor  were  called /e^a/i  ^m-
gusti  pro  praetore,  legati  praetord,  legati  consu-
lares,  or  simply  legati,  and  thej%  like  the  governors
of  the  provinciae  populi  Romani,  had  one  or  three
legati  as  their  assistants.  (Strabo,  iii.  p.  352 ;  com-
pare Dig.  1.  tit.  18.  s.  7  ;  Tacit.  Ann.  xii.  59,
Agricol.  c.  7  ;  Spanheim,  de  Usu  et  praest.  Numism.
ii.  p.  595.)

During  the  latter  period  of  the  republic  it  had
become  customary  for  senators  to  obtain  from  the
senate  the  permission  to  travel  through  or  stay  in
any  province  at  the  expense  of  the  provincials,
merely  for  the  purpose  of  managing  and  conducting
their  own  personal  affairs.  There  was  no  restraint
as  to  the  length  of  time  the  senators  were  allowed
to  avail  themselves  of  this  privilege,  which  was  a
heavy  burden  upon  the  provincials.  This  mode  of
sojourning  in  a  province  was  called  legatio  libera,
because  those  who  availed  themselves  of  it  en-
joyed all  the  privileges  of  a  public  legatus  or
ambassador,  without  having  any  of  his  duties  to
perform.     At  the  time  of  Cicero  the  privilege  of


LEITURGIA.

legatio  libera  was  abused  to  a  very  great  extent.
Cicero,  therefore,  in  his  consulship  endeavoured  to
put  an  end  to  it,  but  owing  to  the  opposition  of  a
tribune,  he  only  succeeded  in  limiting  the  time  of
its  duration  to  one  year.  (Cic.  de  Leg.  iii.  8,
de  Leg.  Agr.  i.  3,  pro  Flacc.  M,*Philip.  i.  2.)
Julius  Caesar  afterwards  extended  the  time  during
which  a  senator  might  avail  himself  of  legatio  libera
to  five  j-^ears  (Cic.  ad  Att.  xv,  11),  and  this  law  of
Caesar  (Lex  Julia)  seems  to  have  remained  in
force  down  to  a  very  late  period.  (Suet.  Tiber.
SI ;  Dig.  50.  tit.  7.  s.  14.)  [L.  S.]

LEGES.     [Lex.]

LE'GIO.     [ExERCiTus.]

LKGIS  ACTIO.     [Actio.]

LEGIS  AQUFLIAE  ACTIO.  [Damni  In-
juria Actio.]

LEGI'TIMA  ACTIO.     [Actio.]

LEGITIMA  HERE'DITAS.     [Heres.]

LEIPOMARTYRIOU   DIKE    {Xenroixaprv-

p'lOV  SiKT]).       [MaRTYRIA.]

LEIPONAUTIOU  GRAPHE  (K^nrovavTiov
ypaiprj).  The  indictment  for  desertion  from  the
fleet  was  preferred  before  the  tribunal  of  the  stra-
tegi ;  and  the  court  which  under  their  superintend-
ence sat  for  the  trial  of  this  and  similar  military
offences  was  composed  of  citizens  who  had  been
engaged  in  the  expedition  in  question.  (Meier,  Ati.
Proc.  pp.  108, 133.)  The  penalty  upon  conviction
seems  to  have  been  a  fine,  and  the  complete  dis-
franchisement of  the  offender  and  his  descendants.
(Petit.  Leg.  Att.  pp.  401,  667.)  [J.  S.  M.]

LEIPOSTRATIOU  GRAPHE  {X^nroarpu.
riov  ypacpi]).  The  circumstances  of  the  trial  for
desertion  from  the  army  and  the  penalties  inflicted
upon  conviction  were  the  same  as  in  the  case  of  de-
sertion from  the  fleet  [Leiponautiou  Graphe],
and  the  offence  was  also  punishable  by  an  eisan-
gelia,  which,  Ileraldus  suggests,  would  be  fre-
quently adopted  when  the  accuser  was  solicitous
to  impose  silence  upon  a  political  opponent  by  pro-
curing his  disfranchisement,  as  this  was  a  necessary
consequence  of  judgment  being  given  against  the
defendant,  and  prevented  his  speaking  or  appearing
in  public.  The  eisangelia  in  such  case  would  be
preferred  before  the  assembly  of  the  people,  by
which,  if  reasonable  cause  appeared,  it  would  be
submitted  to  the  decision  of  one  of  the  ordinary
legal  tribunals.  (Herald.  Animad.  in  Salvias.
p.  242.)  [J.  S.  M.]

LEIPOTAXIOU  GRAPHE  (Ae£7roTo|ioi;
'ypa(pT)).     [AsTRATEiAS  Graphe.]

LEITU'RGIA  (AfciTowp7ia,  from  X^trov,  Ion.
Xi)iTov,  i.  e.  SY]iJ.6(rLou,  or,  according  to  others,
TrpuTaveToi'),  is  the  name  of  certain  personal  ser-
vices which  at  Athens  and  in  some  other  Greek
republics,  every  citizen,  who  possessed  a  certain
amount  of  property,  had  to  perform  towards  the
state.  These  personal  services,  which  in  all  cases
were  connected  with  considerable  expense,  occur
in  the  history  of  Attica  as  early  as  the  time  of  the
Pcisistratids  (Aristot.  Oeconom.  ii.  5),  and  were
probably,  if  not  introduced,  at  least  sanctioned  by
the  legislation  of  Solon.  They  were  at  first  a
natural  consequence  of  the  greater  political  privi-
leges enjoyed  by  the  wealthy,  who,  in  return,  had
also  to  perform  heavier  duties  towards  the  re-
public ;  but  when  the  Athenian  democracy  was  at
its  height,  the  original  character  of  these  liturgies
became  changed,  for  as  every  citizen  now  enjoyed
the  same  rights  and  privileges  as  the  wealthiest,


LEITURGIA.  679

they  were  simply  a  tix  upon  property  connected
with  personal  labour  and  exertion  {tols  xPVI^aa-i
Koi  rid  awfxari  Xeirovpyuu).  Notwithstanding
this  altered  character  of  the  liturgies,  we  scarcely
ever  find  that  complaints  were  made  by  persons
subject  to  them  ;  many  wealthy  Athenians,  on  the
contrary,  mined  their  estates  by  their  ambitious
exertions,  and  by  the  desire  to  gain  the  favour  of
the  people.  (Xen.  de  Rep.  Ath.  i.  13  ;  Demosth.
c.  Euerget.  p.  1 155  ;  compare  Lys.  pro  bon.  Alcih.
p.  646  and  657  ;  Isocrat.  de  Big.  15  ;  Aristot.
Polit.  V.  7.  p.  173,  ed.  Gdttling.)  To  do  no  more
than  the  law  required  {a^oaiovaOai,  Isaeus,  de
Apollod.  c.  38)  was  at  Athens  considered  as  a  dis-
grace, and  in  some  cases  a  wealthy  Athenian,
even  when  it  was  not  his  turn,  would  volunteer
to  perform  a  liturgy.  (Demosth.  c.  Mid.  p.  519,
566,  &c.  ;  compare  Bockh,  Pub.  Econ.  of  Athens,
p.  448,  &c.,  2d  ed.)

All  liturgies  may  be  divided  into  two  classes :
1.  ordinary  or  encyclic  liturgies  (iyKVKXioi  Xeirovp-
yiai,  Demosth.  c.  T^ept.  p.  463),  and  2.  extraordi-
nary liturgies.  The  former  were  called  encyclic,
because  they  recurred  every  year  at  certain  festive
seasons,  and  comprised  the  xop7?7ia.  yv/xvaaiapxia,
XafMiradapxia,  apxiOeoopia,  and  eariaai^,  which
are  all  described  in  separate  articles.  [Choregus  ;
Gymnasium  ;  Lampadephoria  ;  Theoria  ;
Hestiasis.]  Every  Athenian  who  possessed  three
talents  and  above,  was  subject  to  them  (Demosth.
c.  Aphob.  p.  833  ;  Isaeus,  de  Pyrrh.  hered.  c.  80),
and  they  Avere  imdertaken  in  turns  by  the  mem-
bers of  every  tribe  who  possessed  the  property
qualification  just  mentioned,  unless  some  one  vo-
lunteered to  undertake  a  liturgy  for  another  per-
son. But  the  law  did  not  allow  any  one  to  be
compelled  to  undertake  more  than  one  liturgy  at
a  time  (Demosth.  c.  I^ept.  p.  462,  c.  Polyclet.  p.
1209),  and  he  who  had  in  one  year  performed  a
liturgy,  was  free  for  the  next  {iviavrhv  Sia\nr(i>v
cKaaros  XsiTovpyeT,  Demosth.  c.  Lepf.  p.  459),  so
that  legally  a  person  had  to  perform  a  liturgy  only
every  other  year.  Those  whose  turn  it  was  to
undertake  any  of  the  ordinary  liturgies,  were  al-
ways appointed  by  their  own  tribe  (Demosth.
e.  Mid.  pp.  510,  519),  or  in  other  words,  by  the
ini^eKrjTal  robv  (pvhwv  (Tittmann,  Griech.  Staatsv.
p.  296,  &c.),  and  the  tribe  shared  praise  as  well
as  blame  with  its  \^irovpy6s.

The  persons  who  were  exempt  from  all  kinds  of
liturgies  were  the  nine  archons,  heiresses,  and  or-
phans until  after  the  commencement  of  the  second
year  of  their  coming  of  age.  (Lysias,  c.  Diogeit.
p.  908  ;  Demosth.  de  Symmor.  p.  182.)  Some-
times the  exemption  from  liturgies  (areXela)  was
granted  to  persons  for  especial  merits  towards  the
republic.     (Demosth.  c.  I^ept.  p.  466,  «&c.)

The  only  kind  of  extraordinary  liturgy  to  which
the  name  is  properly  applied,  is  the  trierarchy
(Tpt-qpapxia)  ;  in  the  earlier  times,  however,  the
service  in  the  armies  was  in  reality  no  more  than
an  extraordinary  liturgy.  [See  Eisphora  and
Trierarchia.]  In  later  times,  during  and  after
the  Peloponnesian  war,  when  the  expenses  of  a
liturgy  were  found  too  heavy  for  one  person,  we
find  that  in  many  instances  two  persons  combined
to  defray  the  expenses  of  a  liturgy  ((TwreAeia).
Such  was  the  case  with  the  choregia  and  the
trierarchy.  (Hermann,  Polit.  Ant.  §  161.  n,  12
and  13.)

Liturgies  in  regard  to  the  persons  by  whom
X  X  4


680


LEMNISCUS.


they  were  performed  were  also  divided  into  \(LTovp-
yiai  iroXiTiKai,  such  as  were  incumbent  up6n
citizens,  and  K^novpyiai  roiv  ihto'ikwv.  (De-
mosth.  c.  Left.  p.  462.)  The  only  liturgies  which
are  mentioned  as  having  been  performed  by  the
fxeroiKoi,  are  the  choregia  at  the  festival  of  the
Lenaea  (Schol.  ad  Aristoph.  Plut.  954),  and  the
(CTTLaais  (Ulpian,  ad  Demosth  Lept.  §  15),  to
which  may  be  added  the  hydriaphoria  and  skiade-
phoria.    [Hydriaphoria.]

That  liturgies  were  not  peculiar  to  Athens,  has
been  shown  by  Bockh  {Pab.  Econ.  &c.  p.  299),
for  choregia  and  other  liturgies  are  mentioned  at
Siphnos  (Isocrat.  Aeginet.  c.  17)  ;  choregia  in
Aegina  even  before  the  Persian  wars  (Herod,  v,
83)  ;  in  Mytilene  during  the  Peloponnesian  war
(Antiph,  de  Coed.  Herod,  p.  744)  ;  at  Thebes  in
the  time  of  Epaminondas  (Plut.  Aristid.  1)  ;  at
Orchomenos,  in  Rhodes,  and  in  several  towns  of
Asia  Minor.  (Compare  Wolf,  Prolegom.  in  De-
mosth. Lept.  p.  Ixxxvi.  &c.  ;  Wachsmuth,  vol.  ii.  p.
92,  &C.-)  [L.  S.]

LEMBUS,  a  skiflf  or  small  boat,  used  for  carry-
ing a  person  from  a  ship  to  the  shore.  (Plaut.
Merc.  i.  2.  81,  ii.  1.  35.)  The  name  was  also
given  to  the  light  boats  which  were  sent  ahead  of
a  fleet  to  obtain  information  of  the  enemy's  move-
ments. (Isidor,  Orig.  xix.  1  ;  Liv.  xxxi.  45,  xlv.
10.)  Pliny  {H.  N.  vii.  r>Q.  s.  57)  attributes  their
invention  to  the  inhabitants  of  Cyrene.

LEMNISCUS  {kT)u.vi(TKos).  This  word  is  said
to  have  originally  been  used  only  by  the  Syracu-
sans.  (Hesych.  s.  v.)  It  signified  a  kind  of  co-
loured ribbon  which  hung  down  from  crowns  or
diadems  at  the  back  part  of  the  head.  (Fest.  s.  v.)
The  earliest  crowns  are  said  to  have  consisted  of
wool,  so  that  we  have  to  conceive  the  lemniscus  as
a  ribbon  wound  around  the  wool  in  such  a  manner
that  the  two  ends  of  the  ribbon,  where  they  met,
were  allowed  to  hang  down.  See  the  representa-
tions of  the  corona  obsidionalis  and  civica  in  p.
359,  where  the  lemnisci  not  only  appear  as  a  means
to  keep  the  little  branches  of  the  crowns  together,
but  also  serve  as  an  ornament.  From  the  remark
of  Servius  {ad  Aen.  v.  269)  it  appears  that  coronae
adorned  with  lemnisci  were  a  greater  distinction
than  those  without  them.  This  serves  to  explain
an  expression  of  Cicero  {palma  lemniscata^  pro
Rose.  Am.  35)  where  palma  means  a  victory,  and
the  epithet  lemniscata  indicates  the  contrary  of
infamis,  and  at  the  same  time  implies  an  honour-
able as  well  as  lucrative  victory.  (Comp.  Auson.
Epist.  XX.  5.)

It  seems  that  lemnisci  were  also  worn  alone  and
without  being  connected  with  crowns,  especially  by
ladies,  as  an  ornament  for  the  head.  (Plin.  H.N.  xxi.
3.)  To  show  honour  and  admiration  for  a  person,
flowers,  garlands,  and  lemnisci  were  sometimes
showered  upon  him  while  he  walked  in  public.
(Casaub.  ad  Suet.  Ncr.  25  ;  Liv.  xxxiii.  19.)

Lemnisci  seem  originally  to  have  been  made  of
wool,  and  afterwards  of  the  finest  kinds  of  bast
{philyrae,  Plin.  //.  A^.  xv.  14)  ;  but  during  the
latter  period  of  the  republic  the  wealthy  Crassus
not  only  made  the  foliage  or  leaves  of  crowns  of
thin  sheets  of  gold  and  silver,  but  the  lenniisci
likewise  ;  and  P.  Claudius  Pulcher  embellished  the
metal  lemnisci  with  works  of  art  in  relief  and  with
inscriptions.    (Plin.  H.  N.  xxi.  3.)

The  word  lemniscus  is  used  by  medical  writers
in  the  signification  of  a  kind  of  liniment  applied  to


LENO.

wounds.   (Celsus,  vii.  28;  Veget.  de  Re  Veter.'ii.
14  and  48,  iii.  18.)  [L.  S.]

LEMURA'LIA  or  LEMU'RIA,  a  festival  for
the  souls  of  the  departed,  which  was  celebrated  at
Rome  every  yo^r  in  the  month  of  May.  It  was
said  to  havei  been  instituted  by  Romulus  to  ap-
pease the  spirit  of  Remus  whom  he  had  slain
(Ovid.  Fast.  v.  473,  &c.),  and  to  have  been  called
originally  Remuria.  It  was  celebrated  at  night
and  in  silence,  and  during  three  alternate  days,
that  is,  on  the  ninth,  eleventh,  and  thirteenth  of
May.  During  this  season  the  temples  of  the  gods
were  closed,  and  it  was  thought  unlucky  for  women
to  marry  at  this  time  and  during  the  whole  month
of  May,  and  those  who  ventured  to  maiTy  were
believed  to  die  soon  after,  whence  the  proverb,
7)ie7ise  Maio  malae  nuhent.  Those  who  celebrated
the  Lemuralia,  walked  barefooted,  washed  their
hands  three  times,  and  threw  nine  times  black
beans  behind  their  backs,  believing  by  this  cere-
mony to  secure  themselves  against  the  Lemures.
(Varro,  Vita  pop.  Rom.  Fragm.  p.  241,  ed.
Bipont ;  Servius,  ad  Aen.  i.  276.)  As  regards
the  solemnities  on  each  of  the  three  days,  we  only
know  that  on  the  second  there  were  games  in  the
circus  in  honour  of  Mars  (Ovid.  Fast.  v.  597),  and
that  on  the  third  day  the  images  of  the  thirty
Argei,  made  of  rushes,  were  thrown  from  the  pons
sublicius  into  the  Tiber  by  the  Vestal  virgins.
(Ovid.  Fast.  v.  621  ;  Fest.  s.  v.  Deponiani ;  com-
pare Argei.)  On  the  same  day  there  was  a  fes-
tival of  the  merchants  {festum  mercatorum^  Ovid.
Fast.  V.  670,  &c.),  probably  because  on  this  day
the  temple  of  Mercury  had  been  dedicated  in  the
year  495  B.C.  (Liv.  ii.  21.)  On  this  occasion  the
merchants  offered  up  incense,  and  by  means  of  a
laurel-branch  sprinkled  themselves  and  their  goods
with  water  from  the  well  of  Mercury  at  the  Porta
Capena,  hoping  thereby  to  make  their  business
prosper.  [L.  S.]

LEMURES.  See  Diet,  of  Gr.  and  Rom.  Bio-
graphy and  Mythology.

LENAEA.     [DioNYSiA,  p.  411,  b.]

LENO,  LENOCrNIUM.  Lenocinium  is
defined  by  Ulpian  (Dig.  3.  tit.  2.  s.  4)  to  be  the
keeping  of  female  slaves  for  prostitution  and  the
profits  of  it  ;  and  it  was  also  lenocinium  if  gain
was  made  in  the  like  way  by  means  of  free  women.
Some  lenones  kept  brothels  {lupanaria)  or  open
houses  for  prostitution.  This  trade  was  not  for-
bidden, but  the  praetor's  edict  attached  infamia  to
such  persons  [Infamia].  In  the  time  of  Caligula
(Sueton.  Cat.  40,  and  the  notes  in  Bunnann's
ed.),  a  tax  was  laid  on  lenones,  Theodosius  and
Valentinian  endeavoured  to  prevent  parents  from
prostituting  their  children  and  masters  their  female
slaves  by  severe  penalties  ;  and  they  forbad  the
practice  of  lenocinium  under  pain  of  corporal
punishment,  and  banishment  from  the  city,  and  so
forth.  Justinian  (Nov.  14)  also  attempted  to  put
down  all  lenocinium  by  banishing  lenones  from  the
cit3%  and  by  making  the  owners  of  houses,  who
allowed  prostitution  to  be  carried  on  in  them,
liable  to  forfeit  the  houses  and  to  pay  ten  pounds
of  gold :  those  who  by  trickery  or  force  got  girls
into  their  possession  and  gave  them  up  to  prostitu-
tion were  punished  with  the  "  extreme  penalties  ; "
but  it  is  not  said  what  these  extreme  penalties
were.     This  Novella  contains  curious  matter.

The  Lex  Julia  de  Adulteriis  defined  the  leno-
cinium which  that  lex  prohibited  (Dig.  48.  tit.  5.


LESCH  E.

s.  2.  §  2).  It  was  leiiocinium,  if  a  husband  al-
lowed his  wife  to  commit  adultery  in  order  to  share
the  gahi.  The  legislation  of  Justinian  (Nov,  117.
c.  9.  §  3)  allowed  a  wife  a  divorce,  if  her  husband
had  attempted  to  make  her  prostitute  herself  ;  and
the  woman  could  recover  the  dos  and  the  donatio
propter  nuptias.  It  was  lenocinium  in  the  husband
if  he  kept  or  took  back  (comp.  Sueton.  Domit.  8)
a  wife  whom  he  had  detected  in  an  act  of  adultery  ;
or  if  he  let  the  adulterer  who  was  detected  in  the
act,  escape  ;  or  if  he  did  not  prosecute  him.

With  respect  to  other  persons  than  the  husband,
it  was  lenocinium  by  the  lex  Julia,  if  a  man  mar-
ried a  woman  who  was  condemned  for  adultery  ;
if  a  person  who  had  detected  others  in  adultery,
held  his  peace  for  a  sum  of  money  ;  if  a  man  com-
menced a  prosecution  for  adultery  and  discontinued
it ;  and  if  a  person  lent  his  house  or  chamber  for
adulterium  or  stuprum.  In  all  these  cases,  the
penalty  of  the  lex  Julia  was  the  same  as  for  adulte-
rium and  stuprum.  The  lex  in  this  as  in  other
like  instances  of  leges,  was  the  groundwork  of  all
subsequent  legislation  on  lenocinium.  Probably
no  part  of  the  lex  Julia  de  adulteriis  was  formally
repealed,  but  it  received  additions,  and  the  penal-
ties were  increased.  (Rein,  CriminalrecM  der
Homer,  p.  <}83.)  As  to  the  uses  of  the  words
Leno,  Lenocinium,  in  the  classical  writers,  see  the
passages  cited  in  Facciolati,  Lex.  [G.  L.]

LHNUS  {XvJ'6s).     [ToRcuLAR.]

LEONIDEIA  {Xfoui8e7a),  were  solemnities
celebrated  every  year  at  Sparta  in  honour  of
Leonidas,  who,  with  his  300  Spartans,  had  fallen
at  Thermopylae.  Opposite  the  theatre  at  Sparta
there  were  two  sepulchral  monuments,  one  of  Pau-
sanias  and  another  of  Leonidas,  and  here  a  funeral
oration  was  spoken  every  year,  and  a  contest  was
held,  in  which  none  but  Spartans  were  allowed  to
take  part     (Pans.  iii.  14.  §  1.)  [L.  S.]

LEPTON.     [Chalcous  ;  Obolos.]

LEPTURGI  (\€TTTovpyoi),  a  class  of  artificers,
respecting  whom  there  is  some  doubt.  They  are
commonly  supposed  to  be  carvers  of  fine  work  in
wood  ;  but,  on  the  authority  of  two  passages
(Plut.  Aeynil.  Paul.  37  ;  Diod.  xvii.  115),  in  the
former  of  which  Topeveiv  Koi  AemovpyeTv  are
mentioned  together,  Raoul-Rochette  supposes  that
the  Lepturgi  were  those  who  beat  out  gold  and
silver  in  thin  leaves  to  cover  statues  and  furniture  ;
and  that  they  corresponded  to  the  Bractearii  Arti-
Jices  among  the  Romans.  {Letire  a  M.  Schom,
pp.  189,  191.)  [P.S.]

LE'RIA.     [LiMBUs  ;  Tunica.]

LERNAEA  (Xcpvaia),  were  mysteries  {nK^ri])
celebrated  at  Lema  in  Argolis,  in  honour  of  De-
meter.  (Pans.  ii.  36.  §  7.)  They  were  said  to
have  been  instituted  by  Philammon.  (Pans.  ii.  37.
§  3.)  In  ancient  times  the  Argives  carried  the  fire
from  the  temple  of  Artemis  Pyronia,  on  Mount
Crathis,  to  the  Lernaea.  (Pans.  viii.  15.  §  4.)
These  mysteries  were  probably  a  remnant  of  the
ancient  religion  of  the  Pelasgians,  but  further
particulars  ai-e  not  known.  [L.  S.]

LESCHE  (AeVxTj),  is  an  Ionic  word,  signify-
ing council  or  conversation,  and  a  place  for  council
or  conversation.  There  is  frequent  mention  of  places
of  public  resort,  in  the  Greek  cities,  by  the  name
of  AeVxa',  some  set  apart  for  the  purpose,  and
otliers  so  called  because  they  were  so  used  by
loungers  ;  to  the  latter  class  belong  the  agora  and
its  porticoes,  the  gj^mnasia,  and  the  shops  of  vari-


LEX.  681

ous  tKidesmen,  especially  those  of  the  smiths,
which  were  frequented  in  winter  on  account  of
their  warmth,  and  in  which,  for  the  same  reason,
the  poor  sought  shelter  for  the  night.  (Horn.  Od.
xviii.  329  ;  Hes.  Op.  491,  499.)  In  these  pas-
sages, however,  in  which  are  the  earliest  examples
of  the  use  of  the  word,  it  seems  to  refer  to  places
distinct  from  the  smiths'  workshops,  though  re-
sorted to  in  the  same  manner  ;  and  we  may  gather
from  the  grammarians,  that  there  were  in  the
Greek  cities  numerous  small  buildings  or  porticoes,
furnished  with  seats,  and  exposed  to  the  sun,  to
which  the  idle  resorted  to  enjoy  conversation,  and
the  poor  to  obtain  warmth  and  shelter,  and  which
were  called  AeVxat :  at  Athens  alone  there  were
360  such.  (Eustath.  ad  Horn.  I.  c.  ;  Proclus,  ad
Hes.  I.  c.  ;  Hesych.,  Etym.  Mag.,  s.  v.  ;  Kiihn,  ad
Acl.  V.  H.  ii.  34.)  Suidas,  refemng  to  the  pas-
sage in  Hesiod,  explains  AeVx''?  by  Kd/xivos.

By  Aeschylus  {Eum.  366)  and  Sophocles  {Ant.
1 60)  the  word  is  used  for  a  solemn  council  ;  but
elsewhere  the  same  writers,  as  well  as  Herodotus,
employ  it  to  signify  common  conversation.

In  the  Dorian  states  the  word  retained  the
meaning  of  a  place  of  meeting  for  deliberation  and
intercourse,  a  council-chamber  or  club-room.  At
Sparta  every  phyle  had  its  lesclis,  in  which  and  in
the  gymnasium  the  elders  passed  the  greater
part  of  the  day  in  serious  and  sportive  conversa-
tion, and  in  which  the  new-born  children  were
presented  for  the  decision  of  the  elders  as  to
whether  they  should  be  brought  up  or  destroyed.
(Plut.  Lye.  16,  25  ;  MUller,  Dor.  iii.  10.  §  2,  iv.
9,  §  1.)  Some  of  these  Spartan  leschae  seem  to
have  been  halls  of  some  architectural  pretensions :
Pausanias  mentions  two  of  them,  the  Kicrxn  "K-po-
raviav,  and  the  AeVxT?  TroiKiKri  (iii.  14.  §  2,  15.
§  8).  They  were  also  used  for  other  purposes.
(Ath.  iv.  p.  138,  e.)

There  were  generally  chambers  for  council  and
conversation,  called  by  this  name,  attached  to
the  temples  of  Apollo,  one  of  whose  epithets  was
Aeaxv^opio^  (Harpocrat.  s.  v.  ;  Plut.  de  El  ap.
Delph.  p.  385,  b.  ;  MUller,  Dor.  ii.  2.  §  1 5,  note).
Of  such  leschae  the  chief  was  that  which  was
erected  at  Delphi  by  the  Cnidians,  and  which  was
celebrated  throughout  Greece,  even  less  for  its  own
magnificence,  than  for  the  paintings  with  which  it
was  adorned  by  Polygnotus.  (Pans.  x.  25 ;  Bot-
tiger,  Arch'dol.  d.  Malerei,  p.  296,  &c.  ;  Did.  of
Bioq.  s.  V.  Polygnotus.)  [P*  S.]

LEUCA  or  LEUGA.     [Pes.]

LEX.  Lex  is  defined  by  Papinian  (Dig.  1.
tit.  3.  s.  1):  —  "Lex  est  commime  praeceptum,
virorum  prudentium  consultum,  delictorum,  quae
sponte  vel  ignorantia  contrahuntur,  coercitio,  com-
munis reipuialicae  sponsio."  Cicero  (de  Leg.  i.  6)
defines  it  thus  :  —  *"  Quae  scripto  sancit  quod  vult,
aut  jubendo,  aut  vetando."  (See  also  de  Leg.  ii.
16.)  A  Law  is  properly  a  rule  or  command  of  the
sovereign  power  in  a  state,  published  in  writing,
and  addressed  to  and  enforced  upon  the  members
of  such  state  ;  and  this  is  the  proper  sense  of  Lex
in  the  Roman  writers.

In  the  Institutes  (1.  tit.  2.  s.  4)  there  is  a  defi-
nition of  a  Lex,  which  has  a  more  direct  reference
to  that  power  which  is  the  source  of  law:  —  ••'  Lex
est  quod  Populus  Romanus  senatorio  magistratu
interrogante,  veluti  Consule,  constituebat."  The
definition  of  Capito  (Gell.  x.  20)  is  "  Generale
jussum   populi   aut  plebis    rogante  magistratu;"


C82


LEX.


but  this  definition,  as  Gellius  observes,  -will  not
apply  to  such  cases  as  the  Lex  about  the  Irape-
rium  of  Pompeius,  or  that  about  the  return  of
Cicero,  which  related  only  to  individuals,  and  were
properly  called  Privilegia.

Of  Roman  Leges,  viewed  Avith  reference  to  the
mode  of  enactment,  there  were  properly  two  kinds,
Leges  Curiatae  and  Leges  Centuriatae.  Plebiscita
are  improperly  called  Leges,  though  they  were
Laws,  and  in  the  com-se  of  time  had  the  same
effect  as  Leges.

Originally  the  Leges  Curiatae  were  the  only
Leges,  and  they  were  passed  b}'  the  populus  in
the  Comitia  Curiata.  After  the  establishment  of
the  Comitia  Centuriata,  the  Comitia  Curiata  fell
almost  into  disuse  ;  but  so  long  as  the  Republic
lasted,  and  even  under  Augustus,  a  shadow  of  the
old  constitution  was  preserved  in  the  formal  con-
ferring of  the  Imperium  by  a  Lex  Curiata  onh',
and  in  the  ceremony  of  adrogation  being  effected
only  in  these  Comitia.     [Adoptio.]

Those  Leges,  properly  so  called,  with  which  we
are  acquainted,  were  passed  in  the  Comitia  Centu-
riata, and  were  proposed  {rogahantur)  by  a  nia-
gistmtus  of  senatorial  rank.  Such  a  Lex  was  also
designated  by  the  name  Populi  Scitum.  (Festus,
.V.  V.  Scitum  Pop.)  As  to  the  functions  of  the
Senate  in  legislation,  see  Auctor  and  Senatus.

A  Plebiscitum  was  a  law  made  in  the  Comitia
Tributa,  on  the  rogation  of  a  Tribune :  "  Plebis-
citum est  quod  plebs  plebeio  magistratu  interro-
gante,  veluti  Tribuno,  constituebat."  (Inst.  1.
tit.  2.  s.  4.)  "  Accordingly,"  says  Gains  (i.  3),
*'  formerly  the  patricii  used  to  say  that  they  were
not  bound  by  Plebiscita,  because  they  were  made
without  their  sanction  (sine  auctoritate  eorum)  ;
but  afterwards  the  Lex  Hortensia  was  carried
(B.C.  "288),  which  provided  that  Plebiscita  should
bind  the  whole  populus  (in  the  larger  sense  of  the
word),  and  thus  thej-  were  made  of  equal  force
with  Leges."  (Liv.  viii.  12  ;  Gell.  xv,  27  ;  Leges

PUBLILIAE.)

When  the  Comitia  Tributa  were  put  on  the
same  footing  as  the  Centuriata,  the  name  Lex  was
applied  also  to  Plebiscita,  and  thus  Lex  became  a
generic  term,  to  which  was  sometimes  added  the
specific  designation,  as  Lex  Plebeivescitum,  Lex
sive  Plebiscitum  est  [Plebiscitum].

Cicero,  in  his  enumeration  of  the  sources  of'
Roman  law  {Top.  5),  docs  not  mention  Plebis-
cita, which  he  undoubtedly  comprehended  under
*'  leges."  Various  Plebiscita  are  quoted  as  leges,
such  as  the  Lex  Falcidia  (Gains,  ii.  227)  and  Lex
Aquilia.  (Cic.  joro  Tullio.,  8.  11.)  In  the  Table  of
Heraclea  the  words  "  lege  plebisvescito  "  appear
to  refer  to  the  same  enactment  ;  and  in  the  Lex
Rubria  there  occurs  the  phrase  "  ex  lege  Rubria
sive  id  plebiscitum  est."  (Savigny,  Zdtschriji^  &c.
vol.  ix.  p.  355.)

The  word  Rogatio  (from  the  verb  rogai)  properly
means  any  measure  proposed  to  the  legislative
body,  and  therefore  is  equally  applicable  to  a  pro-
posed Lex  and  a  proposed  Plebiscitum.  Accord-
ingly there  occur  the  expressions  "  populum  ro-
gare,"  to  propose  a  lex  to  the  populus  ;  and  "  legem
rogare,"  to  propose  a  lex.  (Festus,  s.  v.  Rogatio.)
A  Rogatio  then  is  properly  a  proposed  lex  or  a
proposed  plebiscitum.  The  terms  Rogare,  Rogatio
also  apply  to  a  person  being  proposed  for  a  magis-
tratus  at'the  Comitia.  (Sail.  Jug.  29.)  The  form
of  a  Rogatio,  in  the  case  of  Adrogatio,  which  was


LEX.

effected  at  the  Comitia  Curiata  {per  populi  roga-
tionem),  is  preserved  by  Gellius  (v.  19)  :  it  begins
with  the  words  "  Velitis,  jubeatis,  &c.,"  and  ends
with  the  Avords  "  ita  vos  Quirites  rogo."  The
corresponding  expression  of  assent  to  the  Rogatio
on  the  part  of  the  sovereign  assembly  was,  Uti
Rogas.  The  rejection  of  a  Rogatio  is  expressed  by
Antiquare  Rogationem.  (Liv.  xxxi.  6.)  The  term
Rogatio  therefore  included  every  proposed  Lex,
Plebiscitum,  and  Privilegium,  for  without  a  Rogatio
there  could  be  no  command  (jiissum)  of  the  Popu-
lus or  Plebs.  But  the  words  Lex,  Plebiscitum,
and  Privilegium  were  often  improperly  used  to  ex-
press laws  (Gell.  x.  20)  ;  and  Rogationes,  after  they
had  become  laws,  were  still  sometimes  called  Roga-
tiones. The  term  Rogationes  is  often  applied  to
measures  proposed  by  the  Tribunes,  and  afterwards
made  Plebiscita :  hence  some  writers  (improperly)
view  Pv,ogatio  as  simply  equivalent  to  Plebiscitum.
Besides  the  phrase  "  rogare  legem,"  there  are  the
phrases  "  legem  ferre,"  to  propose  a  Lex,  and  "  ro-
gationem promulgare,"  to  give  public  notice  of  the
contents  of  a  Lex  which  it  was  intended  to  pro-
pose ;  the  phrase  "  rogationem  accipere  "  applies  to
the  enacting  bodj'-.  "LexRogata"  is  equivalent
to  "  Lex  Lata."  Legem  perferre  and  Lex  perlata
apply  to  a  Rogatio  when  it  has  become  a  Lex.
(Dig.  35.  tit.  2.  s.  ].  Ad  legem  Fakidiam.)  The
terms  relating  to  legislation  are  thus  explained  by
Ulpian  (tit.  1.  s.  3):  —  "A  Lex  is  said  either
rognri  or  ferri ;  it  is  said  ahrogari^  when  it  is  re-
pealed ;  it  is  said  derogari^  when  a  part  is  re-
pealed ;  it  is  said  s?ibrogari,  when  some  addition
is  made  to  it ;  and  it  is  said  obrogaii,  when  some
part  of  it  is  changed."  A  subsequent  lex  repealed
or  altered  a  prior  lex  which  was  inconsistent  with
it.  It  appears  to  have  been  also  a  principle  among
the  Romans  that  a  Law  by  long  desuetude  became
of  no  effect.  (Comp.  Liv.  xxi.  63,  and  Cic.  in
Verr.  v.  18.)

As  to  their  form,  we  can  judge  of  the  Roman
style  of  legislation  by  the  fragments  which  exist.
The  Romans  seem  to  have  always  adhered  to  the
old  expressions,  and  to  have  used  few  superfluous
words.  Great  care  was  taken  with  such  clauses  as
were  proposed  to  alter  a  former  lex,  and  great  care
was  also  used  to  avoid  all  interference  with  a
former  lex,  when  no  change  in  it  Avas  intended.
The  Leges  Avere  often  divided  into  chapters  (capita).
(See  the  tablet  of  the  Lex  de  Gallia  Cisalpina  ;
and  Cic.  ad  Att.  iii.  23.)  The  Lex  was  cut
on  bronze  (aes)  and  deposited  on  the  Aerarium.
(Sueton.  Caes.  28  ;  Plutarch,  Cat.  Min.  17.)  Pro-
bably the  fixing  of  a  Lex  in  a  public  place  was
generally  only  for  a  time.  (Cic.  ad  Att.  xiv.
12.)  The  title  of  the  lex  Avas  generally  derived
from  the  gentile  name  of  the  magi  stratus  Avho  pro-
posed it,  as  the  Lex  Hortensia  from  the  dictator
Hortensius.  Sometimes  the  lex  took  its  name
from  the  two  consuls  or  other  magistrates,  as  the
Acilia  Calpurnia,  Aelia  or  Aelia  Sentia,  Papia  or
Papia  Poppaea,  and  others.  It  seems  to  have  been
the  fashion  to  omit  the  Avord  et  betAveen  the  two
names,  though  instances  occur  in  Avhich  it  Avas
used.  [Julia  Lex  et  Titia.]  A  lex  was  also
often  designated,  with  reference  to  its  object,  as
the  Lex  Cincia  de  Donis  et  Muneribus,  Lex
Furia  Testamentaria,  Lex  Julia  Municipalis,  and
many  others.  Leges  which  related  to  a  common
object,  were  often  designated  by  a  collective  name,
as  Leges  Agrariae,  Judiciariae,  and  others.   Some-


LEX.

times  a  chapter  of  a  lex  was  referred  to  under  the
title  of  the  lex,  with  the  addition  of  a  reference
to  the  contents  of  the  chapter,  as  Lex  Julia  de
Fundo  Dotali,  which  was  a  chapter  of  the  Lex
Julia  de  Adulteriis.  A  lex  sometimes  took  its
name  from  the  chief  contents  or  its  first  chapter,  as
Lex  Julia  de  Maritaudis  Ordinibus.  Sometimes  a
lex  comprised  very  various  provisions,  relating  to
matters  essentially  different,  and  in  that  case  it
was  called  Lex  Satura.  [Lex  Caecilia  Didia,
Lex  Julia  Municipalis.]

The  terms  in  which  a  Lex  was  expressed  were
fixed  by  the  person  who  proposed  it ;  but  in  many
cases  probably  he  would  require  the  assistance  of
some  person  who  was  acquainted  with  technical
language.  A  Lex  was  })roposed  to  the  Comitia  in
its  entire  form  for  acceptance  or  rejection :  there
Avas  no  discussion  on  the  clauses,  and  no  alteration
of  them  in  the  Comitia,  and  indeed  discussion
of  details  and  alteration'  were  impossible.  The
Sanctio  of  a  Lex  (lihet.  ad  Herenn.  ii.  10;  Papi-
iiiai).  Dig.  48.  tit.  19.  s.  41)  made  a  Lex  which
tlie  Romans  call  Perfecta.  In  a  Lex  Perfecta,  the
act  which  is  done  contrary  to  the  provisions  of
the  Lex,  is  declared  by  the  Lex  to  be  null.  If  a
Lex  did  not  contain  this  Sanctio,  it  was  called
Imperfecta.  A  Lex  was  called  minus  quam  per-
fecta, when  the  act  which  was  done  contrary  to  its
provisions  was  not  declared  null,  but  the  Lex  im-
posed a  penalty.  (Savigny,  System,  «&:c.  vol.  iv.  p.
549,  &c.)  This  division  of  Leges  into  Perfectae,
&c.  is  obviously  only  applicable  to  such  Leges  as
referred  to  what  the  llomans  called  the  department
of  Privatum  Jus.

The  number  of  Leges  was  greatly  increased  in
the  later  part  of  the  republican  period  (Tacit.  Ann.
iii.  25 — 28),  and  Julius  Caesar  is  said  to  have  con-
templated a  revision  of  the  whole  body.  Under
him  and  Augustus  numerous  enactments  were
passed,  which  are  known  under  the  general  name
of  Juliae  Leges.  [Juliae  Leges.]  It  is  often
stated  that  no  Leges,  properly  so  called,  or  Plebis-
cita,  were  passed  after  the  time  of  Augustus  ;  but
this  is  a  mistake  Though  the  voting  might  be  a
mere  form,  still  the  form  was  kept  ;  and  if  this
were  not  so,  the  passage  of  Gaius  (i.  2,  &c.),  in
which  he  speaks  of  leges  and  plebiscita  as  fonns
of  legislation  still  in  use,  would  not  be  correct.
Besides,  various  leges  are  mentioned  as  having
been  passed  under  the  Empire,  such  as  the  Lex
Visellia,  a  Lex  Agraria  imder  Caligula,  and  a  Lex
Claudia  on  the  tutela  of  women.  (Gaius,  i.  157,
171.)  It  does  not  appear  when  the  ancient  forms
of  legislation  were  laid  aside,  but  they  certainly
long  survived  the  popular  elections  to  which  alone
the  passage  of  Tacitus  {Ann.  i.  15)  refers.

In  the  Digest  a  Senatusconsultum  is  sometimes
referred  to  as  a  Lex  (14.  tit.  6.  s.  9.  §  4  ;  s.  14)  ;
in  which  there  was  no  great  impropriety  if  we
have  regard  to  the  time,  for  Senatusconsulta  were
then  laws.  Still  a  Senatusconsultum,  properly  so
called,  must  not  be  confounded  with  a  Lex  properly
so  called  ;  and  there  is  no  reason  for  supposing
that  the  Lex  Claudia  of  Gaius  was  a  Senatuscon-
sultum, for  when  he  speaks  of  a  Senatusconsultum
of  the  time  of  Claudius,  he  calls  it  such  (i.  84,  91).
However  there  is  no  mention  of  any  Lex  being
enacted  later  than  the  time  of  Nerva.  (Dig.  47.
tit.  21.  s.  3.  §  1.)

It  remains  further  to  explain  the  words  Rogatio
and  Privilegium.


LEX.  683

Piogatio  is  defined  by  Festus  to  be,  a  command
of  the  Populus  relating  to  one  or  more  persons,  but
not  to  all  persons  ;  or  relating  to  one  or  more
things,  but  not  to  all.  That  which  the  Populus
has  commanded  (scivit)  with  respect  to  all  per-
sons or  things  is  a  Lex ;  and  Aelius  Gallus  says,
Rogatio  is  a  genus  legis  ;  that  which  is  Lex  is  not
consequently  {continuo)  Rogatio  ;  but  Rogatio  must
be  Lex,  if  it  has  been  proposed  {rogata)  at  legal
comitia  (justis  comitiis).  According  to  this  defini-
tion a  rogatio,  when  enacted,  is  Lex  ;  there  is  also
Lex  which  is  not  rogatio :  therefore  we  must
assume  a  general  name  Lex,  comprehending  Lex
Proper  and  Rogatio.  The  passage  of  Aelius  Gal-
lus is  emended  by  Goettling  (Geschichfe  dcr  Rom.
Staatsv.  &c.  p.  310) ;  but  his  emendation  is  founded
on  mistaking  the  sense  of  the  passage,  and  it  con-
verts the  clear  meaning  of  Gallus  into  nonsense.
According  to  the  d;'finition  of  Gallus,  Rogatio  was
equivalent  to  Privilegium,  a  term  which  occurred
in  the  Twelve  Tables  (Cic.  de  Leg.  iii.  19)  ;  and  it
signified,  according  to  Gallus  (Festus,  s.  v.  Rogatio)
an  enactment  that  had  for  its  object  a  single  per-
son, which  is  indicated  by  the  form  of  the  word
( privi-kgium), '''■  Tpri\ ae  res"  being  the  same  as
"  singulae  res."  The  word  privilegium,  according
to  the  explanation  of  Gallus,  did  not  convey  any
notion  of  the  character  of  the  legislative  measures  :
it  might  be  beneficial  to  the  party  to  whom  it  re-
ferred, or  it  might  not.  It  is  generally  used  by
Cicero  in  the  unfavourable  sense  (pro  Domo,  17  ;
pro  Sestio,  30  ;  rogationcm  privihgii  similem.  Brut.
23).  Accordingly  in  the  Republican  period  Privi-
legia  were  not  general  Laws  or  parts  of  the  general
Law:  they  bear  the  character  of  an  exception  to  the
general  rule.  In  the  Corpus  Juris  Privilegium  is
the  common  name  for  a  Jus  Singulare,  the  mean-
ing of  which  is  explained  by  Savigny  {System,  &c.
i.p.  61).

The  meaning  of  Lex,  as  contrasted  with  Jus,  is
stated  in  the  article  Jus.

Some  other  significations  of  Lex,  which  are  not
its  proper  significations,  are  easily  explained  ;  for
instance.  Lex  is  used  to  express  the  terms  or  con-
ditions of  a  contract,  apparently  with  reference  to
the  binding  force  of  all  legal  contracts.  In  English
instruments  which  contain  covenants,  it  is  often
expressed  that  it  shall  be  "  lawful "  for  one  or
more  of  the  parties  to  do  a  certain  act,  by  which
is  simply  meant  that  the  parties  agree  about  some-
thing, which  is  legal,  and  which  therefore  makes
a  valid  agreement.  The  work  of  Marcus  Manilius
(Cos.  B.C.  149)  on  sales  is  quoted  by  Cicero  {de
Or.  i.  58)  as  "  Manilianas  venalium  vendendorum
leges."  (See  Dig.  18.  tit.  1.  s.  40,  where  Lex
means  conditions  of  sale.)  Accordingly  we  find
the  expression  Leges  Censoriae  to  express  the  con-
ditions on  which  the  censors  let  the  public  pro-
perty to  farm  ;  and  perhaps  the  term  also  signified
certain  standing  regulations  for  such  matters,  which
the  censors  were  empowered  to  make.  {Frag,  de
jureFhci,  s.  18  ;  Dig.  50.  tit.  16.  s.  203.)  In  both
the  cases  just  referred  to,  the  phrase  Lex  Cen-
soria  is  used  (in  the  singular  number)  ;  and  this
Lex,  whether  a  Law  proper  or  not,  seems  to  have
been  divided  into  chapters.

Lex  simply  sometimes  signifies  the  laws  of  the
Twelve  Tables.

The  extant  authorities  for  the  Roman  Leges  are
the  works  of  the  classical  Roman  writers,  of  the
Roman  Jurists,  and  inscriptions.     The  most  useful


684


LEX  AELIA  SENTIA.


modern  collection  is  that  in  the  Onomasticon  of
Orellius,  intitled  "  Index  Legum  Ronianarum  qua-
rum  apud  Ciceronem,  ejnsque  Scholiastas,  item
apud  Livium,  Velleium  Paterculum,  A.  Gelliumno-
minatim  mentio  fit."  There  are  also  extant  frag-
ments of  several  laws  on  bronze  tablets,  such  as
the  Lex  Thoria,  which  is  a  Lex  Agraria,  and  is
cut  on  the  back  of  the  same  tablet  which  contains
the  Lex  Servilia  ;  the  Lex  Rubria  ;  and  some  few
other  monuments.

The  following  is  a  list  of  the  principal  Leges  :  —

ACI'LIA  Dk  Coloniis  Deducendis  (Liv.
xxxii.  2.9).

ACI'LIA.    [Repetundae.]

ACFLIA  CALPU'RNIA.     [Ambitus.]

AEBU'TIA,  of  uncertain  date,  which  with  two
Juliae  Leges  put  an  end  to  the  Legis  Actiones,
except  in  certain  cases.     [Judex  ;  Actio.]

Another  Lex  of  the  same  name  prohibited  the
proposer  of  a  lex,  which  created  any  office  or  power
(curatio  ac  potestas),  from  having  such  office  or
power,  and  even  excluded  his  collegae,  cognati  and
affines,  (Cic.  inRull.  ii.  8,  where  he  mentions  also
a  Lex  Licinia,  and  in  the  pro  Domo,  20.)

AE'LIA.  This  Lex  and  a  Fufia  Lex  passed
about  the  end  of  the  sixth  century  of  the  city,  gave
to  all  the  magistrates  the  obnunciatio  or  power  of
preventing  or  dissolving  the  comitia,  by  observing
the  omens  and  declaring  them  to  be  unfavourable.
(Cic.  Fhil.  ii.  32,  p7-o  Sestio,  15,  ad  Att  ii.  9.)

There  is  some  difficulty  in  stating  the  precise
nature  of  these  two  Leges  ;  for  it  is  most  probable
that  there  were  two.  The  passages  in  which  they
are  mentioned  are  collected  in  Orellii  Onomasticon,
Index  Legum.

AE'LIA  De  Coloniis  Deducendis.  (Liv.
xxxiv.  53.)

AE'LIA  SE'NTIA.  This  law  which  was
passed  in  the  time  of  Augustus  (about  A.  D.  3),
chiefly  regulated  the  manumission  of  slaves  ;  a
matter  that  has  been  put  under  certain  restrictions
in  modern  slave  states  also.

By  one  provision  of  this  law  slaves  who  had
been  put  in  chains  by  their  masters  as  a  punish-
ment, or  branded,  or  subjected  to  the  other  punish-
ments mentioned  in  the  law  (Gaius,  i.  13),  if  they
were  afterwards  manumitted  either  by  the  same
master  or  another,  did  not  become  Roman  citizens
or  even  Latini,  but  were  in  the  class  of  Peregrini
dediticii.  [Dediticii.]  The  law  also  made  regula-
tions as  to  the  age  of  slaves  who  might  be  manu-
mitted. It  enacted  that  slaves  under  thirty  years
of  age  who  were  manumitted,  only  became  Roman
citizens  when  the}'  were  manumitted  by  the  Vin-
dicta,  and  after  a  legal  cause  for  manumission  had
been  established  before  a  consilium.  What  was
a  legal  cause  (causa  justa),  and  how  the  consi-
lium was  constituted,  are  explained  by  Gaius  (i.
1 9,  20).  These  consilia  for  the  nuinumission  of
slaves  were  held  at  stated  times  in  the  provinces,
and  in  Rome.  A  slave  under  thirty  years  of  age
could  become  a  Roman  citizen  if  he  was  made
free  and  heres  by  the  testament  of  a  master,  who
was  not  solvent.  (G.aiiis,  i.  21.)  The  law  also
contained  provisions  by  which  those  who  were
under  thirty  years  of  age  at  the  time  of  manumis-
sion, and  had  become  Latini  in  consequence  of
manumission,  might  acquire  the  Roman  citizenship
on  certain  conditions,  which  were  these.  They
must  have  taken  to  wife  a  Roman  citizen,  or  a
Latina  coloniaria  or  a  woman  of  the  same  class  as


LEGES  ANN  ALES.

themselves,  and  must  have  had  as  evidence  of  th.it
fact  the  presence  of  five  Roman  citizens  of  full
age,  and  have  begotten  a  son  who  had  attained  the
age  of  one  year.  On  showing  these  facts  to  the
praetor  at  Rome,  or  to  the  governor  in  a  pro-
vince, and  the  magistrate  declaring  that  the  facts
were  proved,  the  man,  his  wife,  and  his  child  be-
came Roman  citizens.  If  tlie  father  died  before
he  had  proved  his  case  before  the  magistrate,  the
mother  could  do  it,  and  the  legal  effect  was  the
same.

If  a  man  manumitted  his  slave  to  defraud  his
creditors,  or  to  defraud  a  patron  of  his  patronal
rights,  the  act  of  manumission  was  made  invalid
by  this  law.  A  person  under  the  age  of  twenty
years  was  also  prevented  from  manumitting  any
slave,  except  by  the  process  of  Vindicta,  and  after
establishing  a  legal  cause  before  a  consilium.
The  consequence  was  that  though  a  male,  >vlio
had  completed  his  fourteenth  year,  could  make  a
will,  he  could  not  by  his  will  manumit  a  slave
(Gaius,  i.  37 — 40).  A  male  under  the  age  of
twenty  could  manumit  his  slave  so  as  to  make  him
a  Latinus,  but  this  also  required  a  legal  cause  to  be
affirmed  by  a  consilium.  The  provisions  of  the  Lex
Aelia  Sentia,  as  to  manumitting  slaves  for  the  pur-
pose of  defrauding  creditors,  did  not  apply  to  Pere-
grini, until  the  provision  was  extended  for  their
benefit  by  a  Sctuin  in  the  time  of  Hadrian.  The
other  provisions  of  the  Lex  did  not  apply  to  Pere-
grini. The  application  of  the  principles  of  the
Law  is  shown  in  other  passages  of  Gaius  (i.  QG,
68,  70,  71,  80,  139,  iii.  5,  73,  74).  In  a  free
state,  when  manumission  must  change  the  condi-
tion of  slaves  into  that  of  citizens,  the  importance
of  limiting  and  regulating  the  manumitting  power
is  obvious.  Under  the  later  Empire  such  regu-
lations would  be  of  little  importance.  This  law
was  passed  according  to  the  constitutional  forms  in
the  time  of  Augustus,  when  the  status  of  a  Civis
had  not  yet  lost  its  value,  and  the  semblance  oi
the  old  constitution  still  existed  (Ulpian,  Frag.
tit.  i. ;  Dig.  28.  tit.  5.  s.  57,  60  ;  38,  tit.  2.  s.  33  ;
Tacit.  Annul,  xv.  55.)

AEMFLIA  DE  Censoribus.  A  Lex  passed
in  the  Dictatorship  of  Mamercus  Aemilius  (b.  c.
433),  by  which  the  Censors  were  elected  for  a
year  and  a  half,  instead  of  a  whole  lustrum.  (Liv.
iv.  24,  ix.  33.)  After  this  Lex  they  had  accord-
ingly only  a  year  and  a  half  allowed  them  for
holding  the  census  and  letting  out  the  public  works
to  farm.

AEMI'LIA  BAE'RIA.  [Cornelia  Baebia.]

AEMI'LIA  LE  PIDI,  AEMFLIA  SCAURl.

[SUMTUARIAE  LeGES.]

AGRA'RIAE.  [Agrariae  Leges  ;  and  Lex
Apuleia  ;  Cassia  ;  Cornelia  ;  Flaminia  ;
Flavia  ;  Julia  ;  Licinia  ;  Mamilia  ;  Sem-
PRONiA  ;  Servilia  ;  Thoria.]

A'MBITUS.    [Ambitus.]

A'MPIA,  a  Lex  proposed  by  T.  Ampins  and
T.  Labienus,  tr.  pi.  B.  c.  64,  by  which  Cn.  Pom-
peius  was  allowed  to  wear  a  crown  of  bay  at  the
Ludi  Circenses,  and  the  like.  (Veil.  Pat.  iL  40  ;
Dion  Cass,  xxxvii.  21.)

ANNA'LES  LEGES  were  those  Leges  whicli
determined  at  what  age  a  man  might  be  a  candi-
date for  the  several  magistratus.  (Cic.  Philipp.  v.  1 7.)

The  first  Lex  which  particularly  determined
the  age  at  which  a  man  might  be  a  candidate  for
the  several  magistratus  was  the  Villia.     It  was


LEX  BAEBIA  CORNELIA,
proposed  by  L.  VilHus,  tr.  pi,  b.  c.  180  (Liv.  xxv.
'J,  xl.  44.)     According  to  this  Lex  a  man  might
be  elected  quaestor  at  the  age  of  thirty-one,  and
consul  at  forty-three.      [Villi a.]

There  seems  to  have  been  also  a  Lex  Pinaria
on  this  subject.     (Cic.  de  Orat.  ii.  65.)

A'NTIA.    [SuMTUARiAE  Leges.]

ANTO'NIA  DE  Thermensibus,  about  b.  c,
72,  by  which  Thermessus  in  Pisidia  was  recog-
nised as  Libera.  (Puchta,  Inst.  vol.  i.  §  69  ;
Dirksen,  liemerkungen  iiber  das  Plebiscitum  de
The  nnensibus. )

ANTO'NIAE,  the  name  of  various  enactments
proposed  or  passed  by  the  influenceof  M.  Antonius,
after  the  death  of  the  Dictator  J.  Caesar,  such  as
the  Judiciaria.  [.Judex,  p.  650,  a.]  Another  lex
that  was  promulgated  allowed  an  appeal  to  thepapu-
lus  after  conviction  for  Vis  or  Majestas.  (Cic.  Phil.
i.  9.)  Various  other  measures  proposed  by  M.
Antonius  are  mentioned  by  Cicero  {Phil.  i.  1,
ii.43,  V.  3,  5),  Dion  Cassius  (xliv.  51,  xlv.  9,20,
25,  34,  xlvi.  23,  24),  and  Appian  {Bell.  Civ.Wi.
27,  30.)

APULE'IA,  gave  a  surety  an  action  against
his  co-sureties  for  whatever  he  had  paid  above  his
share.  [Intkrcessio.]

APULE'L\  AGRA'RIA,  proposed  by  the  tri-
bune L.  Apuleius  Satuniinus,  B.  c.  101.  (Liv.
Epit.  69  :  Appian,  Bell.  Civ.  i.  29  ;  Cic.  pro  Sestio,
16,  47.)  ■

APULE'IA  De  Coloniis  Deducendis  (Cic.
j3ro  Balbo,  21).

APULE'IA  FRUMENTAR'IA,  proposed
about  the  same  time  by  the  same  tribune.  (Auct.
ad  Herenti.  i.  12.)     [Frumentariae  Leges.]

APULE'IA  MAJESTATIS.     [Majestas.]

AQUI'LIA    [Damni  Injuria  Actio.]

ATE'RNIA  TARPE'IA,  b.  c.  455.  This  Lex
empowered  all  magistratus  to  fine  persons  who  re-
sisted their  authority ;  but  it  fixed  the  highest  fine
at  two  sheep  and  thirty  oxen,  or  two  oxen  and
thirty  sheep,  for  the  authorities  vary  in  this.  (Cic.
de  Rep.  ii.  35  ;  Dionys.  x.  50  ;  Gel),  xi.  1  ;  Festus,
3.  vv.  Multam,  Ovibus,  Peculatus^  Niebuhr,  Hist,
of  Rome,  vol.  ii.  p.  300.)

ATI  A  DE  SACERDO'TIIS  (b.c.  63),  pro-
posed by  the  tribune  T.  Atius  Labienus,  re-
pealed the  Lex  Cornelia  de  Sacerdotiis.  (Dion
Cass,  xxxvii.  37.)

ATI'LIA  MA'RCIA,  enacted  b.  c.  312,  em-
powered the  populus  to  elect  sixteen  tribuni  mi-
litum  for  each  of  four  legions.     (Liv.  ix.  30.)

ATI'LIA.    [Julia  Lex  et  Titia  ;  Tutor.]

ATI'NIA,  allowed  no  usucapion  in  a  stolen
thing.  (Gcll.  xvii.  7;  Instit.  2.  tit.  6.  8.  2.)
[Furtum.]

ATI'NIA,  of  uncertain  date,  was  a  plebiscitum
which  gave  the  rank  of  senator  to  a  tribune.  (Gell.
xiv.  8.)  The  measure  probably  originated  with  C.
Atinius,  who  was  tribune  b.  c.  130.  (Plin.  H.  N.
vii.  45  ;  Cic.  pro  Domo.,  47.)

AUFI'DI  A.[  Ambitus  ;Senatuscoxsultum.]

AURE'LIA  JUDICIA'RIA.  [Judex,  p.
650,  a.]

AURE'LIA  TRIBUNICIA.     [Tribunl]

BAE'BIA  (b.  c.  192),  which  enacted  that  four
praetors  and  six  praetors  should  be  chosen  in  al-
ternate years  (Liv.  xl.  44)  ;  but  the  law  was  not
observed.  (Meyer,  Orator.  Roman.  Fragm.  p.  90,
2nd  ed.)

BAE'BfA  CORNE'LIA.     [Ambitus.]


LEX  CINCIA.  685

CAECI'LIA  DE  CENSO'RIBUS  or  CEN-
SO'RIA  (b.  c.  54),  proposed  by  Metellus  Scipio
repealed  a  Clodia  Lex  (b.  c.  58),  which  had  pre-
scribed certain  regular  forms  of  proceeding  for  the
Censors  in  exercising  their  functions  as  inspectors
of  Mores,  and  had  required  the  concurrence  of  both
Censors  to  inflict  the  nota  censoria.  When  a
senator  had  been  already  convicted  before  an  ordi-
nary court,  the  lex  permitted  the  Censors  to  re-
move him  from  the  senate  in  a  summary  way.
(Dion  Cass.  xl.  57,  xxxviii.  13;  Cic.  pro  Sestio,
25  ;  Dig.  50.  tit.  16.  s.  203.  De  Portorio.)

CAECI'LIA  DE  VECTIGA'LIBUS  (b.c.
62),  released  lands  and  harbours  in  Italy  from  the
payment  of  taxes  and  dues  (portoria).  "  The  only
vectigal  remaining  after  the  passing  of  this  lex  wa'a
the  Vicesima.  (Dion  Cass,  xxxvii.  51  ;  Cic.  ad  Att.
ii.  16,  ad  Quint,  i.  10.)

CAECI'LIA  DFDIA  (b.  c.  98),  forbade  the
proposing  of  a  Lex  Satura,  on  the  ground  that  the
people  might  be  compelled  either  to  vote  for  some-
thing which  they  did  not  approve,  or  to  reject  some-
thing which  they  did  approve,  if  it  was  proposed
to  them  in  this  manner.  This  lex  was  not  always
operative.  It  also  contained  a  provision  that  Leges
must  be  promulgated  "  trinis  nundinis  "  before
they  were  proposed.  (Cic.  Phil.  v.  3,  pro  Domo,
16,  20,  ad  Att.  ii.  9.)   [Lex  and  Licinia  Junia.]

CAECI'LIA  De  P.  Sulla  et  P.  Autronio
(Orellii  Onomasticon").

CAE'LIA  TABELLA'RIA.  [Tabellariae
Leges.]

CALFGULAE  LEX  AGRA'RIA.  [Ma-

MILIA.]

CALPU'RNIA  DE  A'MBITU.   [Ambitus.]
CALPU'RNIA  DE  CONDICTIO'NE.  [Per

CONDICTIONEM.]

CALPU'RNIA  DE  REPETUNDIS.  [Repe-

TUNDAE.]

CANULE'IA  (B.  c.  445),  established  connu-
bium  between  the  Patres  and  Plebs,  which  had
been  taken  away  by  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables.
(Liv.  iv.  1,  4  ;  Cic.  de  Rep.  ii,  37.)

CA'SSIA  (B.C.  104),  proposed  by  the  tribune
L.  Cassius  Longinus,  did  not  allow  a  person  to  re-
main a  senator  who  had  been  convicted  in  a  Judi-
cium Populi,  or  whose  Imperium  had  been  abro-
gated by  the  populus.  (Ascon.  in  Cic.  ComeL
p.  78,  ed.  Orelli.)

CA'SSIA  {Tacit.  Ann.  xi,  25),  which  empowered
the  Dictator  Caesar  to  add  to  the  number  of  the
Patricii,  to  prevent  their  extinction.  (Compare
Sueton.  Caes.  41.)  C.  Octavius  was  made  a  pa-
trician by  this  lex.     (Sueton.  Ang.  2.)

CA'SSIA  AGRA'RIA,  proposed  by  the  consul
Sp.  Cassius,  B.  c.  486.  (Liv.  ii.  41  ;  Dionys.  viii.
76.)

CA'SSIA  TABELLA'RIA.  [Tabellariak
Leges.]

CA'SSIA  TERE'NTIA  FRUMENTA'RIA
(b.  c.  73)  for  the  distribution  of  corn  among  the
poor  citizens  and  the  purchasing  of  it.  (Cic.  Verr.
iii.  70,  v.  21.)    [Frumentariab  Leges.]

CIN'CIA  LEX,  or  MUNERA'LIS.  This  lex
was  a  plebiscitum  passed  in  the  time  of  the  tribune
M.  Cincius  Alimontus  (b.  c.  204),  and  entitled  De
Do?ns  et  Muneribus  (Cic.  de  Orat.  ii.  71,  ad  Att.
i.  20  ;  Liv.  xxxiv.  4.)  One  provision  of  this  law,
which  forbade  a  person  to  take  anything  for  his
pains  in  pleading  a  cause,  is  recorded  by  Tacitus
{Ann.  xi.  5),  No  quis  ob  causam  orandam  pecuniam


6HG


LEX  CINCTA.


dojiumve  accipiat.  In  the  time  of  Augustus,  the
lex  Cincia  was  confirmed  by  a  senatusconsultum
(Dion  Cass.  liv.  18),  and  a  penalty  of  four  times
the  sum  received  was  imposed  on  the  advocate.
This  fact  of  confirmation  v/ill  explain  a  passage  in
Tacitus  (An?i.  xiii.  42).  The  law  was  so  far  modi-
fied in  the  time  of  Claudius,  that  an  advocate  was
allowed  to  receive  ten  scstertia ;  if  he  took  any
sum  beyond  that,  he  was  liable  to  be  prosecuted
for  repetundae  {repetundarumienebaiu)\  Tacit.  Ann.
xi.  7 ;  see  also  Sueton.  A^'/'o,  1 7,  and  the  note  in
Burmann's  edition).  [Rkpetundae.]  It  appears
that  this  permission  was  so  iar  restricted  in  Tra-
jan's time,  that  the  fee  could  not  be  paid  till  the
work  was  done.     ( Plin.  J^p.  v.  2 1 ).

So  far  the  Cincian  law  presents  no  difficulty;
but  it  appears  tliat  tlie  provisions  of  the  law  were
not  limited  to  the  case  already  stated.  The}'-  ap-
plied also  to  gifts  in  general:  or,  at  least,  there
■were  enactments  which  did  limit  the  amount  of
what  a  person  could  give,  and  also  required  gifts
to  be  accompanied  with  certain  formalities  ;  and  it
does  not  seem  possible  to  refer  these  enactments  to
any  other  than  the  Cincian  law.  The  numerous
contradictions  and  diih'culties  which  perplex  this
subject,  are  perhaps  satisfactorily  reconciled  and
removed  by  the  following  conjecture  of  Savigny
iUeher  die  Lex  Ciiici<i^  Zcitschrlft^  &c.  iv.)  :  —
*'  Gifts  which  e.'^ceeded  a  certain  amount  were  only
valid  when  made  by  mancipatio,  in  jure  cessio,  or
by  tradition  :  small  gifts  consequently  weve  left  to
a  person's  free  choice  as  before  ;  but  large  gifts
(except  in  the  case  of  near  relations)  were  to  be
accompanied  with  certain  formalities."  The  object
of  the  law,  according  to  Savigny,  was  to  prevent
foolish  and  hasty  gifts  to  a  large  amount ;  and
consequently  was  intended  among  other  things  to
prevent  fraud.  This  was  etfected  by  declaring
that  certain  forms  were  necessarj^  to  make  the  gift
vjilid,  such  as  mancipatio  and  in  jure  cessio,  both
of  which  required  some  time  and  ceremony,  and  so
allowed  the  giver  opportunity  to  reflect  on  what
he  was  doing.  These  forms  also  could  not  be  ob-
served, except  in  the  presence  of  other  persons,
which  was  an  additional  security  against  fraud.
It  is  true  that  this  advantage  was  not  secured  by
the  law  in  the  case  of  the  most  valuable  things,
ncc  wancipi^  namely,  money,  for  the  transferring  of
which  bare  tradition  was  sufficient ;  but,  on  the
other  hand,  a  gift  of  a  large  sum  of  ready  money  is
one  that  people  of  all  gifts  are  least  likely  to  make.

Savigny  concludes,  and  principally  from  a  pas-
sage in  Pliny's  letters  (x.  3),  that  the  Cincian  law
originally  contained  no  exception  in  favour  of  rela-
tives ;  but  that  all  gifts  above  a  certain  amount
required  the  formalities  already  mentioned.  The
emperor  Antoninus  Pius  introduced  an  exception  in
favour  of  parents  and  children,  and  also  of  near
collateral  kinsmen.  It  appears  that  this  exception
was  subsequently  abolished  (Cod.  Hermog.  vi.  1),
but  was  restored  by  Constantine  (a.  d.  319)  so  far
as  it  was  in  favour  of  parents  and  children ;  and  so
it  continued  as  long  as  the  provisions  of  the  Cincian
law  were  in  force.

As  to  the  amount  beyond  which  the  law  forbade
a  gift  to  be  made,  except  in  conformity  to  its  pro-
visions, see  Savigny,  Zeitschrift,  &c.  iv.  p.  36.

The  matter  of  the  lex  Cincia  is  also  discussed  in
an  elaborate  essay  by  Hasse  {Rlieinischcs  Museum.,
1827),  and  it  is  discussed  by  Puchta,  Inst.  vol.  ii.
§  206.     These  examinations  of  the  subjecl^  togc-


LEGES  CORN  ELI  AE.

ther  with  the  essay  of  Savigny,  will  furnish  the
reader  with  all  the  necessary  references  and  ma-
terials for  investigating  this  subject.

CliAU'DIA,  a  Lex  passed  in  the  time  of  the
emperor  Claudius,  took  away  the  agnatonira  tutela
in  the  case  of  women.     (Gains,  i.  171.)

CLAU'DJ A  De  Senatoribus,  b.  c.  21 8.  The
provisions  of  this  Lex  are  stated  by  Livy  (xxi.
63),  and  alluded  to  by  Cicero  {in  Verr.  v.  18)  as
antiquated  and  dead.

CLAU'DIADe  Sociis,b.c.177.  (Liv.xli.8,9.)

CLAU'DIA  De  Senatu  cooptando  Hale-
SINORUM  (Cic.  in  Verr.  ii.  49).

CLO'DIAE,  the  name  of  various  plebiscita,  pro-
posed by  Clodius  when  tribune,  b.  c.  58.

Clodia  de  Auspiciis,  prevented  the  magis-
tratus  from  dissolving  the  Comitia-  Tributa,  by
declaring  that  the  auspices  Avere  unfavourable.
This  lex  therefore  repealed  the  Aelia  and  Fufia.
It  also  enacted  that  a  lex  miirht  be  passed  on  the
Dies  Fasti.  (Dion  Cass,  xxxviii.  13  ;  Cic.  in
Vatin.  17,  in  Pison.  4,  5.)      [Aelia  Lex.]

Clodia  de  Censoribus.     [Caecilia.]

Clodia  de  Civibus  Romanis  Interemptis,
to  the  effect  that  "  qui  civem  Romanum  indemna-
tufn  interemisset  ei  aqua  et  igni  interdiceretur."
(Veil.  Pat.  ii.  45.)  It  Avas  in  consequence  of  this
lex  that  the  interdict  was  pronounced  against  Ci-
cero, who  considers  the  whole  proceeding  as  a
privilegium.  {Fro  Domo.,  18,  &c..  Post  Redit.  in
Sen.  2.  5,  &c.  ;  Dion  Cass,  xxxviii.  14.)

Clodia  Frumentaria,  by  which  the  com,
which  had  formerly  been  sold  to  the  poor  citizens
at  a  low  rate,  was  given.  (Dion  Cass,  xxxviii.  13  ;
C\c.  pro  Domo,  10.)     [Frumentariae  Leges.]

Clodia  de  Sodalitatibus  or  de  Collegiis
restored  the  Sodalitia  which  had  been  abolished  by
a  senatusconsultum  of  the  year  b.  c.  80,  and  per-
mitted the  formation  of  new  sodalitia.  (Cic.  in
Pis.  4,  pro  Sest.  25,  ad  Att.  in.  15  j  Dion  Cass,
xxxviii.  13.)

Clodia  de  Libertinorum  Suffragiis  (Cic.
pro  Mil.  12,  33).

Clodia  de  Rege  Ptolemaeo  et  de  exsu-
libus  Byzantinis  (Veil.  Pat.  ii.  45  ;  Cic.  pro
Dom.  8,  20,  pro  Sest.  26  ;  Dion  Cass,  xxxviii.  30  ;
Pint.  Cat.  Min.  34).

There  were  other  so-called  Leges  Clodiae,  Avhich
were  however  Privilegia.

CO  F/ LI  A.     [C  aelia.]

COMMISSO'RIA  LEX.  [Commissoria
Lex.]

CORNE'LIAE.  Various  leges  passed  in  the
dictatorship  of  Sulla  and  by  his  influence,  are  so
called.     (Liv.  Epii.  89.)

Agraria,  by  which  many  of  the  inhabitants  of
Etruria  and  Latium  were  deprived  of  the  complete
civitas  and  retained  only  the  connnercium,  and  a
large  part  of  their  lands  were  made  Publicum  and
given  to  military  colonists.  (Cic.  in  Hull.  ii.  28,
iii.  2,  3.)

De  Civitate.  (Liv.  Epii.  86  ;  Cic.  pro  Dom.
30,  pro  Caecin.  33,  35  ;  Sail.  Hist.  Frag.  lib.  1.
Orat.  Lepidi.)

De  Falsis.     [Falsum.]

De  Injuriis.     [Injuria.]

JuDiciARiA.     [Judex,  p.  650,  a.]

De  Magistratibus  (Appian,  Bell  Civ.  i.
100,  101),  partly  a  renewal  of  old  Plebiscita  (Liv.
vii.  42,  X.  13).

Majestatis.     [Majestas.]


LEGES  CORNELIAE.

KrrM  MARIA.     [Falsum.]

Dk  Proscriptionk  et  Proscriptis.  [Pro-
bcriptio.]

De  Provinciis  Ordinandis  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  i.
.0,  iii.  6,  8,  10).

De  Parricidio.    [See  below.  Lex  de  Sica-

RIIS.]

De  Rejections  Judicum  (Cic.  Verr.  ii.  31  ;
and  Orellii  Onomasticon).

De  Repetundis  {Q,\c.  pro  Rahir.  i).

De  Sacerdotiis.     [Sacerdotia.]

De  Sententia  Ferenua  (Cic.  pro  Cluent.
CO.  20,  27).  This  was  probably  only  a  chapter  in
a  Lex  Judiciaria.

De  Sicariis  et  Veneficis.  A  law  of  the
Twelve  Tables  contained  some  provision  as  to
homicide  (Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  3),  but  this  is
all  that  we  know.  It  is  generally  assumed
that  the  law  of  Numa  Pompilius,  quoted  by  Fes-
tus  {s.  V.  Parici  Quaestores),  "  Si  quis  hominem
liberum  dolo  sciens  niorti  duit  paricida  esto,"  was
incorpoi-ated  in  the  Twelve  Tables,  and  is  the  law
of  homicide  to  which  Pliny  refers  ;  but  this  can-
not be  proved.  It  is  generalh^  supposed  that  the
laws  of  the  Twelve  Tables  contained  provisions
against  incantations  (malum  carmen)  and  poisoi^f
ing,  both  of  which  offences  were  also  included
under  parricidium :  the  murderer  of  a  parent  was
sewed  up  in  a  sack  (cideus  or  culleus)  and  thrown
into  a  river.  It  was  under  the  provisions  of  some
old  law  that  the  senate  by  a  consultum  ordered  the
consuls  P.  Scipio  and  D.  Brutus  (b.  c.  138)  to  in-
quire into  the  murder  in  the  Silva  Scantia  [Silva
Sila,  Cic.  Brutus,  22).  The  lex  Cornelia  de  si-
cariis et  veneficis  was  passed  in  the  time  of  the
dictator  Sulla,  B.  c.  82.  The  lex  cont<iined  provi-
sions as  to  death  or  fire  caused  by  dolus  malus,
and  against  persons  going  about  armed  with  the
intention  of  killing  or  thieving.  The  law  not  only
provided  for  cases  of  poisoning,  but  contained  pro-
visions against  those  who  made,  sold,  bought,
possessed,  or  gave  poison  for  the  purpose  of  poison-
ing ;  also  against  a  magistratus  or  senator  who
conspired  in  order  that  a  person  might  be  con-
demned in  a  judicium  publicum,  &c.  (Compare
Cic.  pro  Cluent  c.  54,  with  Dig.  49.  tit.  8.)  To
the  provisions  of  this  law  was  subsequently  added
a  senatusconsultum  against  mala  sacrificia,  other-
wise called  impia  sacrificia,  the  agents  in  which
were  brought  within  the  provisions  of  this  lex.
The  punishment  inflicted  by  the  law  was  the  in-
terdictio  aquae  et  ignis,  according  to  some  modern
writers.  Marcian  (Dig.  49.  tit.  8.  s.  8)  says  that
the  punishment  was  deportatio  in  insulam  et
bonorum  ademtio.  These  statements  are  recon-
cilable when  we  consider  that  the  deportatio  under
the  emperors  took  the  place  of  the  interdictio,  and
the  expression  in  the  Digest  was  suited  to  the
times  of  the  wricers  or  the  compilers.  Besides,
it  appears  that  the  lex  was  modified  by  various
senatusconsulta  and  imperial  rescripts.

The  Lex  Pompeia  de  Parricidiis,  passed  in  the
time  of  Cn.  Pompeius,  extended  the  crime  of  par-
ricide to  the  killing  (dolo  malo)  of  a  brother,  sister,
\mcle,  aunt,  and  many  other  relations  enumerated
by  Marcianus  (Dig.  49.  tit.  9.  s.  1) ;  this  enumera-
tion also  comprises  vitricus,  noverca,  privignus,  pri-
vigna,  patronus,  patrona,  an  avus  who  killed  a
nepos,  and  a  mother  who  killed  a  filius  or  filia  ;
but  it  did  not  extend  to  a  father.  All  privies  to
the   crime  were  also  punished  by  the  law,   and


LEGES  CORNELIAE.


68:


attempts  at  the  crime  also  came  within  its  pro-
visions. The  punishment  was  the  same  as  that
affixed  by  the  lex  Cornelia  de  sicariis  (Dig.  I.  c),
by  which  must  be  meant  the  same  punishment
that  the  lex  Cornelia  affixed  to  crimes  of  the  same
kind.  He  who  killed  a  father  or  mother,  grand-
father or  grandmother,  was  punished  (more  majo-
rum)  by  being  whipped  till  he  bled,  sewn  up  in  a
sack  with  a  dog,  cock,  viper,  and  ape,  and  thrown
into  the  sea,  if  the  sea  was  at  hand,  and  if  not,  by
a  constitution  of  Hadrian,  he  was  exposed  to  wild
beasts,  or,  in  the  time  of  Paulus,  to  be  burnt.  The
ape  would  appear  to  be  a  late  addition.  The  mur-
derers of  a  father,  mother,  grandfather,  grand-
mother only  were  punished  in  this  manner  (Mo-
dest. Dig.  49.  tit.  9.  s.  9)  ;  other  parricides  were
simply  put  to  death.  From  this  it  is  clear  that  the
lex  Cornelia  contained  a  provision  against  parri-
cide, if  we  are  rightly  informed  as  to  the  provisions
de  sicariis  et  veneficis,  unless  there  was  a  separate
Cornelia  lex  de  paiTicidiis.  As  already  observed,
the  provisions  of  those  two  leges  were  modified  in
various  ways  under  the  emperors.

It  appears  from  the  law  of  Numa,  quoted  by
Festus  (s.  V.  Parici  Quaesfbres),  that  a  parricida
was  any  one  who  killed  another  dolo  malo.  Cicero
{pro Rose.  Am.  c.  25)  appears  to  use  the  word  in
its  limited  sense,  as  he  speaks  of  the  punishment
of  the  culleus.  In  this  limited  sense  there  seems
no  impropriety  in  Catilina  being  called  parricida,
with  reference  to  his  country  ;  and  the  day  of
the  dictator  Caesar's  death  might  be  called  a  parri-
cidium, considering  the  circumstances  under  which
the  name  was  given.  (Suet.  Cae.«.  c.  88.)  If  the
original  meaning  of  parricida  be  what  Festus  says,  it
may  be  doubted  if  the  etymology  of  the  word  (pater
and  caedo)  is  coi-rect  ;  for  it  appears  that  paricida  or
parricida  meant  murderer  generally,  and  afterwards
the  murderer  of  certain  persons  in  a  near  relation-
ship. If  the  word  was  originally  patricida,  the  law
intended  to  make  all  malicious  killing  as  great  an
offence  as  parricide,  though  it  would  appear  that
parricide,  properly  so  called,  was,  from  the  time  of
the  Twelve  Tables  at  least,  specially  punished  with
the  culleus,  and  other  murders  were  not,  (Dig.
49.  tit.  8,  9  ;  Paulus,  Recept.  Sentent.  v.  tit.
24  ;  Dirksen,  Uehersiclit^  <ix.  der  Zwolftafelyesetze.
Leipzig.)

Sumtuariae.     [Sumtuariae  Leges.]

Testamentaria.     [Falsum.]

Tribunicia,  which  diminished  the  power  of  the
Tribuni  Plebis.  (Veil.  Pat.  ii.  30 ;  Appian,  Dell.
Civ.  ii.  29  ;  Caes.  Bell.  Civ.  i.  7.)

Unciaria,  appears  to  have  been  a  lex  which
lowered  the  rate  of  interest,  and  to  have  been
passed  about  the  same  time  with  the  Leges  Sum-
tuariae of  Sulla.     (Festus,  s.  v.  Unciaria.)

De  Vadimonio.     [Vadimonium.]

De  Vi  Publica.     [Vis  Publica.]

There  were  other  Leges  Comeliae,  such  as  that
de  Sponsoribus  [Intercessio],  which  may  be
Leges  of  L,  Cornelius  Sulla.

There  were  also  Leges  Comeliae  which  were
proposed  by  the  Tribune  C.  Cornelius  about  B.  c.
67,  and  limited  the  Edictal  power  by  compelling
the  Praetors  Jus  dicere  ex  edictis  suis  perpetuis.
('Ascon.  in  Cic.  Cornel,  p.  58  ;  Dion  Cass,  xxxvi.
23.)     [Edictum.]

Another  Lex  of  the  same  Tribune  enacted  that
no  one  "  legibus  solveretur,"  unless  such  a  measure
was  agreed  on  in  a  meeting  of  the  Senate  at  which


688   LEX  DUODECIM  TABULARUM.

two  hundred  members  were  present  and  after-
wards approved  by  the  people  ;  and  it  enacted  that
no  Tribune  should  put  his  veto  on  such  a  Sena-
tusconsultura.     (Ascon.  in  Cic.  Cornel,  pp.  57,58.)

There  was  also  a  Lex  Cornelia  concerning  the
wills  of  those  Roman  citizens  who  died  in  cap-
tivit}^  (cipud  hostes).  [Legatum,  p.  676,  b;  Post-
liminium.]

CORNE'LIA  De  Novis  Tabellis,  proposed
by  the  Tribune  P.  Cornelius  Dolabella,  B.C.  47,  and
opposed  by  M.  Antonius,  Magister  Equitum.  (Liv.
Epit  Ui;   Dion  Cass.  xlii.   32;  Pint.   Anton.Q.)

CORNE'LIA  ET  CAECI'LIA  De  Cn.  Pom-
PEio,  B.  c.  57,  gave  Cn.  Pompeius  the  superintend-
ence over  the  Res  Frumentaria  for  five  years,  with
extraordinary  powers.  (Cic.  ad  Att.  iv.  1  ;  Liv.
Epit.  104  ;  Dion  Cass,  xxxix.  9  ;  Plut.  Pomp.
49.)     [Frcmentariae  Leges.]

CURIA'TA    LEX    De    Imperio.      [Impe-

RIUM.]

CURT  ATA  LEX  De  Adoptions.  [Adop-
Tio  ;  and  Gell.  v.  19  ;  Cic.  ad  Att.  ii.  7  ;  Sueton.
Aiifi.  6b  ;  Tacit.  Hist.  i.  15.]

CORNE'LIA  BAE'BIA  DE  AMBITU,  pro-
posed bv  the  consuls  P.  Cornelius  Cethegus  and
M.  Baebius  Tamphilus,  B.C.  181.  (Liv.  xl.  19  ;
Schol.  Bob.  in  Cic.  pro  Stdla,  p.  361,  ed.  Orelli.)
This  law  is  sometimes,  but  erroneously,  attributed
to  the  consuls  of  the  preceding  year,  L.  Aemilius
and  Cn.  Baebius.     [Ambitus.]

DECEMVIRA'LTS.      [Lex   Duodecim  Ta-

BULARUM.]

DECIA  DE  DuuMViRis  Navalibus  (Liv.  ix.
30  ;  see  Atilia  Marcia).

DI'DIA.     [Sumtuariae  Leges.]

DOMI'TIA  DE  SACERDO'TIIS.  [Sacer-
dotia.]

DUI'LIA  (b.  c.  449),  a  plebiscitum  proposed  by
the  Tribune  Duilius,  which  enacted  "  qui  plebem
sine  tribunis  reliquisset,  quique  magistratum  sine
provocatione  creasset,  tergo  ac  capite  punirctur."
(Liv.  iii.  55.)

DUI'LIA  MAE'NIA  De  Unciario  Foenore
B.c.  357.     (Liv.  ii.  16,  19.)

The  same  tribunes  Duilius  and  Maenius  carried
a  measure  which  was  intended  in  future  to  prevent
such  unconstitutional  proceedings  as  the  enactment
of  a  Lex  by  the  soldiers  out  of  Rome,  on  the  pro-
posal of  the  Consul.     (Liv.  vii.  16.)

DUO'DECIM  TABULA'RUM.  In  the  year
b.  c.  462  the  Tribune  C.  Terentilius  Arsa  pro-
posed a  rogation  that  five  men  should  be  ap-
pointt^d  for  the  purpose  of  preparing  a  set  of  laws
to  limit  the  Imperium  of  the  consuls.  (Liv.  iii.  9.)
The  Patricians  opposed  the  measure,  but  it  was
brought  forward  by  the  tribunes  in  the  following
year  Avith  some  modifications :  the  new  rogation
proposed  that  ten  men  should  be  appointed  {legum
latores)  from  the  plebs  and  the  patricii,  who  were
to  make  laws  for  the  advantage  of  both  classes,  and
for  the  "  equalizing  of  liberty,"  a  phrase  the  im-
port of  which  can  only  be  imderstood  by  reference
to  the  disputes  between  the  two  classes.  (Liv.  ii.
10  ;  Dionys.  x.  3.)  According  to  Dionysius  (x.
52,  54)  in  the  year  B.C.  454  the  Senate  assented
to  a  Plebiscitum,  pursuant  to  which  commissioners
were  to  be  sent  to  Athens  and  the  Greek  citie^
generally,  in  order  to  make  themselves  acquainted
with  their  laws.  Three  commissioners  were  ap-
pouited  for  the  purpose.  On  the  return  of  the
commisoiouers,  B.  c.  452,  it  was  agreed  that  persons


LEX  DUODECIM  TABULARUM.

should  be  appointed  to  draw  up  the  code  of  laws
(decemviri  Legibus  scribundis),  but  they  were  to
be  chosen  only  from  the  Patricians,  with  a  provi-
sion that  the  rights  of  the  Plebeians  should  be
respected  by  the  decemviri  in  drawing  up  the
laws.  (Liv.  iii.  32,  &c.)  In  the  following  year
(B.C.  451)  the  Decemviri  were  appointed  in  the
Comitia  Centuriata,  and  during  the  time  of  their
office  no  other  magistratus  were  chosen.  The  body
consisted  of  ten  Patricians,  including  the  three
commissioners  who  had  been  sent  abroad :  Appius
Claudius,  Consul  designatus,  was  at  the  head  of  the
body.  The  Ten  took  the  administration  of  affairs
in  turn,  and  the  Insignia  of  office  were  only  used
by  him  who  for  the  time  being  directed  the  ad-
ministration. (Liv.  iii.  33.)  Ten  Tables  of  Laws
were  prepared  during  the  year,  and  after  being
approved  by  the  Senate  were  confirmed  by  the
Comitia  Centuriata.  As  it  was  considered  that
some  farther  Laws  were  wanted,  Decemviri  were
again  elected  B.C.  450,  consisting  of  Appius  Clau-
dius and  his  friends :  but  the  second  body  of
Decemviri  comprised  three  plebeians,  according  to
Dionysius  (x.  58),  but  Livy  (iv.  3)  speaks  only  of
Patricians.  Two  more  Tables  were  added  by
tllese  Decemviri,  which  Cicero  {de  Repub.  ii.  37)
calls  "  Duae  tabulae  iniquarum  legum."  The  pro-
vision Avhich  allowed  no  connubium  between  the
Patres  and  the  Plebs  is  referred  to  the  Eleventh
Table.  (Dirksen,  UehcrsicJit^  &c.,  p.  740.)  The
whole  Twelve  Tables  were  first  published  in  the
consulship  of  L.  Valerius  and  M.  Horatius  after
the  downfall  of  the  Decemviri,  b.  c.  449.  (Liv,  iii.
54,  57.)  This  the  first  attempt  to  make  a  code
remained  also  the  only  attempt  for  near  one  thou-
sand years,  until  the  legislation  of  Justinian.  The
Twelve  Tables  are  mentioned  by  the  Roman
writers  under  a  great  variety  of  names  :  Leges  De-
ceint^irales.  Lex  Decemviralis.,  Leges  XI L^  Lex  XII.
tahularam  or  Duodecim,  and  sometimes  they  are
referred  to  under  the  names  of  Leges  and  Lex
simply,  as  being  pre-eminently  The  Law.

The  Laws  were  cut  on  bronze  tablets  and  put
up  in  a  public  place.  (Liv.  iii,  57 ;  Diod,  xii.  5Q.)
Pomponius  (Dig.  1.  tit.  2.  s.  2.  §  4)  states  that  the
first  Ten  Tables  were  on  ivory  (tabulae  eboreae) :
a  note  of  Zimmern  (Gesch.  des  Rom.  Privatrechis,
vol.i.  p.  101)  contains  references  to  various  autho-
rities which  treat  of  this  disputed  matter.  After
the  burning  of  the  city  by  the  Gauls  (Liv.  vi.  1),
an  order  was  made  to  collect  the  old  foedera  and
leges  ;  for,  as  it  has  been  well  remarked,  Livy's
words,  which  are  supposed  to  imply  that  the
Twelve  Tables  were  lost,  and  restored  or  recon-
structed, may  just  as  well  mean  that  they  were
not  lost.  Indeed,  the  juster  interpretation  of  the
passage  is,  that  they  were  looked  for  and  were
found.  However  this  may  be,  neither  the  Romans
of  the  age  of  Cicero  nor  at  any  time  after  had
any  doubt  as  to  the  genuineness  of  the  collection
which  then  existed.

The  legislation  of  the  Twelve  Tables  has  been  a
fruitful  matter  of  speculation  and  inquiry  to  modern
historians  and  jurists,  who  have  often  handled  the
subject  in  the  most  uncritical  manner  and  with
utter  disregard  to  the  evidence.  As  to  the  mis-
sion to  the  Greek  cities,  the  fact  rests  on  as  much
and  as  good  evidence  as  most  other  facts  of  the
same  age,  and  there  is  nothing  in  it  improbable,
though  we  do  not  know  what  the  commissioners
brought  back  with  them.     It  is  further  said  that


LEX  DUODECIM  TABULARUM.

Hermodorus  an  Ephesian  exile  aided  the  Decem-
viri in  drawing  up  the  Twelve  Tables,  though  his
assistance  would  probably  be  confined  to  the  inter-
pretation of  Greek  laws,  as  it  has  been  suggested
(Strabo,  p.  642,  Casaub.  ;  Pompon,  de  Orig.  Juris^
Dig.  1.  tit.  2.  s.  2.  §  4).  This  tradition  was  con-
firmed by  the  fact  of  a  statue  having  been  erected
in  the  Comitium  at  Rome  in  memory  of  Hermo-
dorus :  but  it  did  not  exist  in  the  time  of  Pliny.
(Plin.  i7.A^.  xxxiv.  5.)

The  Twelve  Tables  contained  matters  relating
both  to  the  Jus  Publicum  and  the  Jus  Privatum
(^fons  piihlici  privatique  juris^  Liv.  iii.  34).  The
Jus  Publicum  underwent  great  changes  in  the
course  of  3^ears,  but  the  Jus  Privatum  of  the  Twelve
Tables  continued  to  be  the  fundamental  law  of  the
Roman  State.  Cicero  speaks  of  learning  the  laws
of  the  Twelve  Tables  {ut  carmen  necessarium)  when
a  boy  {de  Leg.  ii.  4,  23)  ;  but  he  adds  that  this
practice  had  fallen  into  disuse  when  he  wrote,  the
Edict  having  then  become  of  more  importance.
But  this  does  not  mean  that  the  fundamental  prin-
ciples of  the  Twelve  Tables  were  ever  formally
repealed,  but  that  the  Jus  Honorarium  grew  up
by  the  side  of  them  and  mitigated  their  rigour  or
supplied  their  defects.  There  is  indeed  an  instance
in  which  positive  legislation  interfered  with  them,
by  the  abolition  of  the  Legis  actiones  ;  but  the
Twelve  Tables  themselves  were  never  repealed.
They  became  the  foundation  of  the  Jus  Civile  ;
and  they  continued  to  exist  together  with  the  un-
written Law.  The  Law  which  grew  up  in  the
course  of  time  existed  in  harmony  with  the  Twelve
Tables,  and  was  a  development  of  their  fundamental
principles.  It  is  a  remarkable  circumstance  in  thft
history  of  Roman  Law  and  a  proof  of  the  practical
skill  of  the  Romans,  that  long  before  Jurisprudence
was  a  science,  the  doctrine  of  Successio  per  Uni-
versitatem  was  so  completely  and  accurately  stated
in  the  Law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  that  the  Jurists
of  the  best  period  could  find  nothing  to  improve.
(Cod.  3.  tit.  36.  s.  6  ;  10.  tit.  2.  s.  25.  §  9.  13  ;  4.
tit.  16.  s.  7  ;  2.  tit.  3.  s.  26  ;  Savigny's  System,
«Slc.  i.  p.  383.)  The  Roman  writers  speak  in  high
terms  of  the  precision  of  the  enactments  contained
in  the  Twelve  Tables,  and  of  the  propriet}'-  of
the  language  in  which  they  were  expressed.  (Cic.
de  Rep.  iv.  8  ;  Diodor.  xii.  26.)  That  many  of
their  provisions  should  have  become  obscure  in
the  course  of  time,  owing  to  the  change  which
language  undergoes,  is  nothing  surprising ;  nor
can  we  wonder  if  the  strictness  of  the  old  law
should  often  have  seemed  unnecessarily  harsh  in  a
later  age.  (Gell.  xvi.  10.)  So  far  as  we  can  form
a  judgment  by  the  few  fragments  which  remain,
the  enactments  were  expressed  with  great  brevity
and  archaic  simplicity.

Sextus  Aelius  Paetus  Catus  in  his  Tripartita
commented  on  the  Twelve  Tables,  and  the  work
existed  in  the  time  of  Pomponius.  [Jus  Aelia-
NUM.]  Antistius  Labeo  also  wrote  a  conmient  on
the  Tables,  which  is  mentioned  several  times  by
Gellius.  (i.  12,  vii.  15,  xx.  1.)  Gains  also  wrote
a  Comment  on  the  Tables  in  six  books  (ad  legem
XII.  tabularum),  twenty  fragments  of  which  are
contained  in  the  Digest,  and  collected  by  Hom-
melius  in  his  Palingenesia.  (i.  117.)  There  were
also  other  commentaries  or  explanations  of  the
Laws  of  the  Twelve  Tables.  (Cic.  de  Leg.  iL  23,
25.)

The  notion  which  has  sometimes  been  enter-


LEX  DUODECIM  TABULARUM.  609

tained  that  the  Twelve  Tables  contained  a  body
of  rules  of  law  entirely  new,  is  not  supported  by
any  evidence,  and  is  inconsistent  with  all  that  we
know  of  them  and  of  Roman  institutions.  It  is
more  reasonable  to  suppose  that  they  fixed  in  a
written  form  a  large  body  of  customary  law,  which
would  be  a  benefit  to  the  Plebeians,  inasmuch  as
the  Patricians  were  the  expounders  of  the  law  ;
and  it  would  be  to  the  Patricians  a  better  security
for  their  privileges.  One  of  the  two  last  tables  con-
tained a  provision  which  allowed  no  Connubium  be-
tween Patricians  and  Plebeians  ;  but  it  is  uncertain
whether  this  was  a  new  rule  of  law,  or  a  confirmation
of  an  old  rule.  The  latter  seems  the  more  probable
supposition  ;  but  in  either  case  it  is  clear  that  it
was  not  one  of  the  objects  of  this  legislation  to
put  the  two  classes  on  the  same  footing.  Modem
writers  often  speak  inaccurately  of  the  Decemviral
legislation,  and  of  the  Decemviri  as  enacting  Laws,
as  if  the  Decemviri  had  exercised  sovereign  power ;
but  they  did  not  even  afiect  to  legislate  abso-
lutely, for  the  Ten  Tables  were  confirmed  by  the
Comitia  Centuriata,  or  the  sovereign  people,  or,  as
Niebuhr  expresses  it,  "  when  the  Decemviri  had
satisfied  every  objection  they  deemed  reasonable,
and  their  work  was  approved  by  the  Senate,  they
brought  it  before  the  Centuries,  whose  assent  was
ratified  by  the  Curies,  under  the  presidency  of
the  colleges  of  priests  and  the  sanction  of  happy
auspices,"  (Vol.  ii.  p.  313.)  The  two  new  Tables
were  confirmed  in  the  same  way,  as  we  may  safely
conclude  from  the  circumstances  of  the  case.  (Liv.
ii.  37,  57.)  It  makes  no  difference  that  the
Sovereign  people  did  not  vote  on  the  several
laws  included  in  the  Tables :  such  a  mode  of  le*
gislation  would  have  been  impracticable,  and,
as  Niebuhr  observes,  was  not  conformable  to  the
usage  of  ancient  Commonwealths.  How  far  the
Decemviri  really  were  able,  by  intrigue  or  other-
wise, to  carry  such  particular  measures  as  they
wished  to  insert  in  the  Tables,  is  a  diff'erent  ques-
tion :  but  in  form  their  so-called  legislation  was
confirmed,  as  a  whole,  by  the  sovereign,  that  is^
the  Roman  people,  and  consequently  the  Decemviri
are  improperly  called  Legislators:  they  might  be
called  code-makers.

It  is  consistent  with  the  assumption  that  the
Twelve  Tables  had  mainly  for  their  object  the  emr
bodying  of  the  customary  law  in  writing,  to  admit
that  some  provisions  were  also  introduced  from
the  laws  of  other  states.  Indeed,  where  the  Roman
law  was  imperfect,  the  readiest  mode  of  supplying
the  defects  would  be  by  adopting  the  rules  of  law
that  had  been  approved  by  experience  among  other
people,  and  were  capable  of  being  easily  adapted  to
the  Roman  system.  Gains,  in  his  Commentaiy  on
the  Twelve  Tables,  where  he  is  speaking  of  Collegia
(Dig.  47.  tit.  22.  s.  4),  says,  that  the  members  of
Collegia  may  make  what  terms  they  please  among
themselves,  if  they  thereby  violate  no  Publica  Lex  ;
and  he  adds,  this  Lex  seems  to  be  taken  from  one
of  Solon's,  which  he  quotes.  And  in  another  pas-
sage, when  he  is  speaking  of  the  Actio  finium  re-
gundorum  (Dig.  10.  tit.  1.  s.  13),  he  refers  to  a  law
of  Solon  as  the  source  of  certain  rules  as  to  boun-
daries. (See  also  Cicero,  de  Leg.  ii.  25.)  It  is  a
possible  case  that  the  Romans  had  no  written  law
before  the  enactment  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  except
a  few  Leges,  and  if  this  is  so,  the  prudence  of
applying  to  those  states  which  had  bodies  of
written  law,  if  it  were  only  as  samples  and  pat-

Y  Y


fino


LEX  GABINIA.


tems  of  the  form  of  written  law,  is  obvious.  How-
ever, what  was  actually  received  of  foreign  law
could  not  be  more  than  a  few  rules  of  an  arbitrary-
nature,  which  in  no  way  depend  on  the  peculiar
system  of  law  of  any  country.  The  Jus  Priva-
tum was  hardly  and  indeed  could  hardly  be  affected
by  any  rules  of  foreign  law  ;  and  as  to  resemblance
between  Roman  Law  and  the  Law  of  any  Greek
states,  that  is  no  ground  for  a  conclusion  that  the
Roman  rules  are  derived  from  the  Greek.

The  fragments  of  the  Twelve  Tables  have  often
been  collected,  but  the  most  complete  essay  on  their
history,  and  on  the  critical  labours  of  scholars  and
jurists,  is  by  Dirksen,  llebersicht  der  bisher'ujen  Ver-
suche  zur  Kritik  und  HerstcUung  des  Teaies  der
Zrv'6lf-Tafd-Fragmc7ite,  Leipzig,  1824.  Zimmern"'s
Geschichte,  &c.  contains  references  to  all  the  au-
thorities on  this  subject  ;  and  Puchta's  Institutionen,
&c.  i.  §  54,  55,  73,  78,  some  valuable  remarks  on
them.

FA'BIA  DE  PLA'GIO.     [Plagium.]

FA'BIA  De  Numero  Sectatorum  (Cicero
Mureiia^  34).

FALCl'DIA.     [Legatum.]

FA'NNIA.     [SuMTUARiAE  Leges.]

FA'NNIA.     [JuNiA  DE  Peregrinis.]

FLAMI'NIA,  was  an  Agraria  Lex  for  the
distribution  of  lands  in  Picenum,  proposed  by  the
tribune  C.  Flaminius,  in  u.  o.  228  according  to
Cicero,  or  in  B.  c.  232  according  to  Polybius.  The
latter  date  is  the  more  probable.  (Cic.  Acad.  ii.  5,
de  Scnect.  4  ;  Polvb.  ii.  21.)

FLA' VI A  AGRA'RL\,  b.  c.  60,  for  the  dis-
tribution of  lands  among  Pompeius'  soldiers,  pro-
posed by  the  Tribune  L.  Fluvius,  who  committed
the  Consul  Caecilius  Metellus  to  prison  for  op-
posing it.  (Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  18,  19  ;  Dion  Cass,
xxxvii.  50.)

FRUMENTA'RIAE.  [Frumentariae
Leges.]

FU'FLA..     [Aelia.]

FU'FIA  DE  RELIGIO'NE,  b.  c.  61,  was  a
privilegium  which  related  to  the  trial  of  Clodius.
(Cic.  ad  Att.\.  13,  16.)

FU'FIA  JUDICIA'RIA.  [Judex,  p.  650,  a.,
and  the  remarks  in  Orellii  Onoinasticon.]

FU'RIA  or  FU'SIA  CANPNIA,  limited  the
number  of  slaves  to  be  manumitted  by  testament.
[Manumissio.]

FU'RIA  DE  FENORE  (Gaius,  iii.  122).

FU'RIA  DE  SPONSORIBUS.    [Interces-

810.]

FU'RIA  or  FUSIA  TESTAMENTA'RIA.
[Legatum.]

G.ABPNIA     TABELLA'RIA.      [Tabella-

RIAE.]

There  were  various  Gabiniae  Leges,  some  of
which  were  Privilegia,  as  that  (b.  c.  67)  for  con-
ferring extraordinary  power  on  Cn.  Pompeius  for
conducting  the  war  against  the  pirates.  ( Cic.  pro
Lege  Manil.  17  ;  Veil.  Pat  ii.  31  ;  Dion  Cass.
xxxvi.  6  ;  Plut.  Pomp.  25.)

A  Gabinia  Lex,  b.  c.  58,  forbade  all  loans  of
money  at  Rome  to  legationes  from  foreign  parts
{Salamimi  cum  Romae  versuram  facere  vellent.,  non
imterant.,  quod  Lex  Galmiia  vetabat,  Cic.  ad  A  it.  v,
^1,  vi.  1,2).  The  object  of  the  lex  v/as  to  pre-
vent money  being  borrowed  for  the  purpose  of
bribing  the  senators  at  Rome.  There  was  a  Lex
Gabinia  intitled  De  Senatu  legatis  dando  (Cic.  ad
Q.Fr.  ii.  13).


LEGES  JULIAE.

GE'LLIA  CORNE'LIA,  b.  c.  72,  which  gave
to  Cn.  Pompeius  the  extraordinnry  power  of  con-
ferring the  Roman  civitas  on  Spaniards  in  Spain,
with  the  advice  of  his  consilium  {de  consiUi  sen-
ientia,  Cic.  pro  Balb.  8,  1 4).

GENU'CIA,  B.  c.  341,  forbade  altogether  the
taking  of  interest  for  the  use  of  money.  (Liv.  vii.
42.)  It  is  conjectured  that  Appian  {Bell.  Civ.  i.
54)  alludes  to  this  law  (Orellii  Onomasticon).
Other  Plebiscita  of  the  same  year  are  mentioned
by  Livy  (vii.  42).

GALLIAE  CISALPI'NAE.     [Rubria.]
HIERO'NICA    was   not   a  Lex  properly    so
called.     Before  the  Roman  conquest  of  Sicily,  the
payment  of  the  tenths  of  wine,  oil,  and  other  pro-
duce had  been  fixed  hj  Hiero,  and  the  Roman
quaestors,  in  letting  these  tenths  to  farm,  followed
the  practice  which  they  found  established.     (Cic.
Verr.  ii.  13,  26,  60,  iii.  6,  &c.)
HFRTIA  De  Pompeianis  (Cic.  PAtZ.xiii.  16.)
HORA'TIA,  proposed  by  M.  Horatius,  made
the  persons  of  the  Tribunes,  the  Aediles,  and  others
sacrosancti.     (Liv.  iii.  65.)     [Valeriae  et  Ho-

RATIAE.]

Another  Lex  Horatia  mentioned  by  Gellius
(vi.  7)  was  a  privilegium.

HORTE'NSIA  DE  PLEBISCI'TIS.    [Ple-

BISCITUM  ;    PuBLILIAE    LeGES.]

Another  Lex  Hortensia  enacted  that  the  nun-
dinae,  which  had  hitherto  been  Feriae,  should  be
Dies  Fasti.  This  was  done  for  the  purpose  of  ac-
commodating the  inhabitants  of  the  country.
(Macrob.  i.  16  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  3.)

HOSTFLIA  DE  FURTIS  is  mentioned  only
in  the  Institutes  of  Justinian  (iv.  tit.  10).

ICI'LIA,  intitled  by  Livy,  De  Aventino  Piib-
licando,  was  proposed  by  L.  Icilius,  tr.  pi.  a.  c.
456.  As  to  the  object  of  this  Lex,  see  the  pnssages
which  are  here  referred  to  ;  and  particularly  Dio-
nysius,  and  the  article  Superficies.  (Liv.  iii.  31,
32  ;  Dionys.  x.  32,  33  ;  Niebuhr,  Hist,  of  Rome,
ii.  p.  301  ;  Puchta,  Inst.  ii.  §  244.)

Another  Lex  Icilia,  proposed  by  the  Tribune  Sp.
Icilius  B.  c.  471,  had  for  its  object  to  prevent  all
interruption  to  the  Tribunes  while  they  were  ad-
dressing the  Plebs.  In  some  cases  the  penalty
was  death.  (Dionvs.  vii.  17  ;  Cic.  pro  Sestioy
37;  Niebuhr,ii.  p.  231.)

JU'LIAE,  leges,  most  of  which  were  passed  in
the  time  of  C.  Julius  Caesar  and  Augustus.

De  Adulteriis.     [Adulterium.]

Agraria  is  referred  to  by  Suetonius  {Jul.
Caesar,  c.  20),  and  in  the  Digest,  De  Termino
Moto  (47.  tit.  21).  But  the  lex  of  C.  Caesar,  re-
ferred to  in  the  Digest,  is  probably  a  lex  of  Cali-
gula. The  Agraria  lex  of  the  dictator  Caesar  was
passed  B.  c.  59,  when  he  was  consul.  (Dion  Cass,
xxxviii.  1 — 7,  «Scc.  ;  Appian,  Bell.  Civ.  ii.  10  ;
Veil.  Pat.  ii.  44  ;  Cic.  Phil.  ii.  39,  ad  Ait.  ii.
16,  18  ;  Rudorff,  Lex  Mamilia  de  Coloniis,  Zeit-
schrift,  vol.  ix.)

De  Ambitu.     [Ambitus.]

De  Annona.     (Dig.  48.  tit.  L  s.  L)

De  Bonis  Cedendis.  This  lex  provided  that
a  debtor  might  escape  all  personal  molestation  from
his  creditors  by  giving  up  his  property  to  them,  for
the  purpose  of  sale  and  distribution.  (Gaius,  iii.
78.)  It  is  doubtful  if  this  lex  was  passed  in  the
time  of  Julius  Caesar  or  of  Augustus,  though  pro-
bably of  the  former.  (Caesar,  Bell.  Civ.  iii.  1  »
Sueton.   Caes.    42;    Tacit.   Ann.  vi.    16:   DioD


LEGES  JULIAE.

Cass.  Iviii.  21.)  The  beneficium  of  the  lex  was
extended  to  the  provinces  by  the  imperial  consti-
tutions.    (Cod.  7.  tit.  71.  s.  4.)

Caducaria  is  the  same  as  the  Lex  Julia  de
Papia  Poppaea.

De  Caede  et  Veneficio  (Sueton.  Nero,
c.  33),  perhaps  the  same  as  the  Lex  De  Vi  Pub-
lica.

De  Civitate,  was  passed  in  the  consulship  of
L.  Julius  Caesar  and    P.  Rutilius  Lupus,   B.  c.

90.       [CiVITAS  ;    FOEDERATAE  CiVlTATES.]

Db  Fenore,  or  rather  De  Pecuniis  Mutuis  or
Creditis  (b.  c.  47),  passed  in  the  time  of  Julius
Caesar  (Sueton.  Caes.  c.  42  ;  Caesar,  de  Bell.  Civil.
iii.  1).  The  object  of  it  was  to  make  an  arrange-
ment between  debtors  and  creditors,  for  the  satis-
faction of  the  latter.  The  possessiones  and  res
were  to  be  estimated  at  the  value  which  they  had
before  the  civil  war,  and  to  be  surrendered  to  the
creditors  at  that  value ;  whatever  had  been  paid
for  interest  was  to  be  deducted  from  the  principal.
The  result  was  that  the  creditor  lost  about  one-
fourth  of  his  debt ;  but  he  escaped  the  loss,
usually  consequent  on  civil  disturhance,  which
would  have  been  caused  by  Novae  Tabulae.  (Com-
pare Caesar,  de  Bell.  Civ.  iii.  1,  with  Sueton.
Cogs.  c.  42.)  A  passage  of  Tacitus  {Arm.  vi.  16)
is  sometimes  considered  as  referring  to  this  lex,  and
sometimes  to  the  Lex  de  Bonis  Cedendis  ;  but  it
does  not  seem  to  refer  to  either  of  them.  The
passage  of  Dion  Cassius  (Iviii.  21.  Hepi  rwv
(ru/x§o\aiwv)  seems  to  refer  to  this  Lex  de  Mutuis
Pecuniis.

De  Fundo  Dotali.  The  provisions  as  to  the
Fundus  Dotalis  were  contained  in  the  Lex  Julia
de  Adulteriis.  (Gains,  ii.  63  ;  Paulus,  S.  H.  ii.
tit.  21.  s.  2  :  Dig.  De  Fundo  Dotali,  23.  tit.  5.
s.  1,  2,  13.)  This  Julia  Lex  was  commented  on  by
Papinian,  Ulpian,  and  Paulus.   [Adulterium.]

JuDiciARiAE.  The  lex  referred  to  in  the  Digest
(4.  tit.  8.  8.  41)  by  which  a  person  under  twenty
years  of  age  was  npt  compelled  to  be  a  judex,  is
probably  one  of  the  Leges  Juliae  Judiciariae.
(Gell.  xiv.  c.  2.)  As  to  the  other  Juliae  Leges
Judiciariae,  see  Judex.

De  Liberis  Legationibus.  (Cic.  ad  Att.  xv,
11.)     [Legatus.]

Majestatis.  (Cic.  Pkil.  i.  91.)  The  Lex
Majestatis  of  the  Digest  (48.  tit.  4)  is  probably  a
lex  of  Augustus.  [Majestas.]

De  Maritandis  Ordinibus.  [Julia  et
Papia  Poppaea.]

MuNiciPALis,  commonly  called  the  Table  of
Ileraclea,  In  the  year  1732  there  were  found
near  the  Gulf  of  Tarentum  and  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  the  ancient  city  of  Heraclea,  large  frag-
ments of  a  bronze  tablet  which  contained  on  one
side  a  Roman  lex  and  on  the  other  a  Greek  in-
scription. The  whole  is  now  in  the  Museo  Bor-
bonico  at  Naples.  The  lex  contains  various  pro-
visions as  to  the  police  of  the  city  of  Rome,  and  as
to  the  constitution  of  communities  of  Roman  citi-
zens {municipia,  coloniae,  praefecUirae,  fora,  cnn-
cilialjula  civium  Romanorum).  It  was  accordingly
a  lex  of  that  kind  which  is  called  Satura.

It  is  somewhat  difficult  to  determine  the  date
of  this  lex,  but  there  seem  to  be  only  two  dates
which  can  be  assumed  as  probable  ;  one  is  the  time
immediately  after  the  Social  War,  or  shortly  after
B.  c.  89  ;  the  other  is  that  which  shortly  followed
the  admission  of  the  Transpadani  to  the  civitas  (b.  c.


LEGES  JULIAE.


6.91


i9).  This  latter  date,  in  favour  of  which  various
considerations  preponderate,  seems  to  be  fixed
about  the  year  b.  c.  45  by  a  letter  of  Cicero  {ad
Fam.  vi.  18).  Compare  the  tablet  1.  94,  104,  as
to  persons  whom  the  lex  excluded  from  the  office
of  decurio.

It  seems  that  the  lex  of  the  year  b,  c.  A9,  which
gave  the  civitas  to  the  Transpadani,  enacted  that  a
Roman  commissioner  should  be  sent  to  all  the
towns  for  the  purpose  of  framing  regulations  for
their  municipal  organization.  The  Lex  Julia
empowered  the  commissioners  to  continue  their
labours  for  one  year  from  the  date  of  the  lex,  the
terms  of  which  were  so  extended  as  to  comprise
the  whole  of  Italy.  The  lex  was  therefore  appro-
priately called  Municipalis,  as  being  one  which
established  certain  regulations  for  all  municipia  ;
and  this  sense  of  the  term  municipalis  must  be  dis-
tinguished from  that  which  merely  refers  to  the
local  usages  or  to  the  positive  laws  of  anj'-  given
place,  and  which  is  expressed  by  such  terms  as
Lex  Municipii,  Lex  Civitatis,  and  other  equivalent
terms.

The  name  Lex  Julia  rests  mainly  on  the  fact
(assumed  to  be  demonstrated)  that  this  lex  was
passed  when  Julius  Caesar  was  in  the  possession  of
full  power,  that  it  is  the  lex  referred  to  by  Cicero,
and  that  it  is  improbable  that  it  woitld  have  been
called  by  any  other  personal  appellation  than  that  of
Julia,  It  is  further  proved  by  a  short  inscription
found  at  Padua  in  1696,  that  there  was  a  Lex
Julia  Municipalis  ;  and  the  contents  of  the  inscrip-
tion (mi  vir  aediliciae.  potestat.  e  lege.  Julia
Municipali)  compared  with  Cicero  (eratque  rumor
de  Transpadanis  eos  jussos  iiii  viros  creare,  ad
Att.  v.  2)  render  it  exceedingly  probable  that  the
Lex  Julia  Municipalis  of  the  inscription  is  the  lex
of  the  Table  of  Heraclea,  and  the  Lex  Municipalis
of  the  Digest  (50.  tit.  9.  s.  3  ;  Cod.  7.  tit.  9.  s.  1  ;
and  Dig.  50.  tit.  1.  Ad  Municipalem  et  de  Incolis).

(Savigny,  Volksschluss  der  Tafel  von  Heraclea,
Zeitschrift,  vol.  ix.  p.  300,  and  vol.  xi.  p.  50,  as  to
the  passage  of  Sueton.  Caesar.  41.  The  tablet  is
printed  in  the  work  of  Mazochi,  Comm.  in  aeneas
Tab.  Heracl.  p.  1,  2.  Neap.  1754,  1755,  fol.,  with
a  commentary  which  contains  much  learning,  but
no  sound  criticism).

Julia  et  Papia  Poppaea.  The  history  of
this  lex  is  not  quite  clear.  Augustus  appears
to  have  caused  a  lex  to  be  enacted  about  B.  c.  18,
which  is  cited  as  the  Lex  Julia  de  Maritandis
Ordinibus  (Dig.  38.  tit.  11  ;  23.  tit.  2),  and  is  re-
ferred to  in  the  Carmen  Seculare  of  Horace,  which
was  written  in  the  year  B.  c.  1 7.  The  object  of
this  lex  was  to  regulate  marriages  as  to  which  it
contained  numerous  provisions  ;  but  it  appears  not
to  have  come  into  operation  till  the  year  B.  c.  1 3.
Some  writers  conclude  from  the  passage  in  Sueto-
nius {August.  34)  that  this  lex  was  rejected ;
and  add  that  it  was  not  enacted  until  A.  D.  4.
In  the  year  A.  d.  9,  and  in  the  consulship  of  M.
Papius  Mutilus  and  Q.  Poppaeus  Secundus  {con-
sules  suffecti),  another  lex  was  passed  as  a  kind  of
amendment  and  supplement  to  the  former  lex,  and
hence  arose  the  title  of  Lex  Julia  et  Papia  Pop-
paea by  which  these  two  leges  are  often  quoted  ;
for  it  has  been  inferred  from  the  two  Leges  being
separately  cited  that  they  were  not  made  into  one.
Various  titles  are  used  according  as  reference  is
made  to  the  various  provisions  ;  sometimes  the  re-
ference is  to  the  Lex  Julia,  sometimes  Papia  Pop-

7  Y   2


692


LEGES  JULIAE.


paea,  sometimes  Lex  Julia  et  Papia,  sometimes  Lex
de  Maritandis  Ordinibus,  from  the  chapter  which
treated  of  the  marriages  of  the  senators  (Gaius,  i.
178  ;  Ulp.  Frag.  xi.  20  ;  Lex  Marita,  Hor.  Carm.
Sec.),  sometimes  Lex  Caducaria,  Decimaria,  &c.
from  the  various  chapters.  (Ulp.  Frag,  xxviii.  tit.
7  ;  Dion  Cass.  liv.  16,  Ivi.  1,  &c. ;  Tacit.  Ann.  iii.
25.)

There  were  many  commentaries  on  these  leges
or  on  this  lex  by  the  Roman  jurists,  of  which  con-
siderable fragments  are  preserved  in  the  Digest:
Gaius  wrote  15  books,  Ulpian,'20,  and  Paulus  10
books  at  least  on  this  lex.  The  lex  contained  at
least  35  chapters  (Dig.  22.  tit.  2.  s.  19)  ;  but  it  is
impossible  to  say  to  which  of  the  two  leges  in-
cluded under  the  general  title  of  Lex  Julia  et  Papia
Poppaea,  the  several  provisions  as  now  known  to
us,  belong.  Attempts  have  been  made  both  by  J.
Gothofredus  and  Heineccius  to  restore  the  lex,
on  the  assumption  that  its  provisions  are  reducible
to  the  two  general  heads  of  a  Lex  Maritalis  and
Lex  Caducaria.

The  provisions  of  this  Lex  or  of  these  Leges
forbade  the  marriage  of  a  senator  or  a  senator's
children  with  a  libertina,  with  a  woman  whose
father  or  mother  had  followed  an  Ars  Ludicra,
and  with  a  prostitute  ;  and  also  the  marriage  of
a  libertinus  with  a  senator's  daughter.  If  an
hereditas  or  a  legatum  was  left  to  a  person  on
condition  of  not  marrying,  or  on  conditions  which
in  effect  prevented  marriage,  the  conditions  were
illegal,  and  the  gift  was  unconditional.  The  con-
dition, however,  might  be  not  to  marry  a  certain
specified  person  or  certain  specified  persons  ;  or  it
might  be,  to  marry  a  particular  person  ;  but  then
the  person  must  be  such  a  one  as  would  be  a
suitable  match,  otherwise  the  condition  would  be
in  effect  a  condition  not  to  marry,  and  therefore
void.  (Dig.  35.  tit.  1.  s.  63.)

In  order  to  promote  maixiage,  various  penalties
were  imposed  on  those  who  lived  in  a  state  of  celi-
Ijacy  (caelibattis)  after  a  certain  age.  Caelibes
could  not  take  an  hereditas  or  a  legacy  {lega-
tum)  ;  but  if  a  person  was  caelebs  at  the  time  of
the  testator's  death,  and  was  not  otherwise  dis-
qualified {jure  civili),  he  might  take  the  hereditas
or  legatum,  if  he  obeyed  the  lex  within  one  hun-
dred days,  that  is,  if  he  married  within  that  time.
(Ulp.  Frag.  xvii.  1.)  If  he  did  not  comply  with
the  lex,  the  gift  became  caducum.  [Caduca.]
The  Lex  Julia  allowed  widows  a  terra  of  one  year
(vacatio)  from  the  death  of  a  husband,  and  di-
vorced women  a  term  (vacatio)  of  six  months  from
the  time  of  the  divorce,  within  which  periods  they
were  not  subject  to  the  penalties  of  the  lex :  the
Lex  Papia  extended  these  periods  respectively  to
two  years,  and  a  year  and  six  months.  (Ulp.
Frag,  xiv.)

A  man  when  he  attained  the  age  of  sixty  and
a  woman  when  she  attained  the  age  of  fifty  were
not  included  within  certain  penalties  of  the  lex
( Ulpian,  Frag,  xvi.)  ;  but  if  they  had  not  obeyed
the  lex  before  attaining  those  respective  ages,  they
were  perpetually  bound  by  its  penalties  by  a  Se-
natus-consultum  Pernicianum.  A  Senatusconsul-
tum  Claudianum  so  fcir  modified  the  strictness  of
the  new  rule  as  to  give  to  a  man  who  married  above
sixty  the  same  advantage  that  he  would  have  had
if  he  had  married  under  sixty,  provided  he  mar-
ried a  woman  who  was  under  fifty  ;  the  ground
of  which  nile  was  the  leijal  notion  that  a  woman


LEGES  JULIAE.

under  fifty  was  still  capable  of  having  children.
(Ulp.  Frag.  xvi.  ;  Sueton.  Claud.  23.)  If  the
woman  was  above  fifty  and  the  man  under  sixty,
this  was  called  Impar  Matrimonium,  and  by  a
Senatus-consultum  Calvitianum  it  was  entirely
without  effect  as  to  releasing  from  incapacit}'  to
take  legata  and  dotes.  On  the  death  of  the  woman,
therefore,  the  dos  became  caduca.

By  the  Lex  Papia  Poppaea  a  candidate  who  had
several  children  was  preferred  to  one  who  had
fewer.  (Tacit.  Jnn.  xv.  19  ;  Plin.  Ep.  vii.  16.)
Freedmen  who  had  a  certain  number  of  children
were  freed  "  operarum  obligatione  "  (Dig.  38.  tit.

1.  De  Operis  Libertorum)  ;  and  libertae,  who  had
four  children,  were  released  from  the  tutela  of  their
patrons.  (Ulp.  Frag.  tit.  29.)  Those  who  had
three  children  living  at  Rome,  four  in  Italy,  and
five  in  the  provinces,  were  excused  from  the  office
of  tutor  or  curator.  (Inst.  1.  tit.  25  ;  Dig.  27.  tit.  1.)
After  the  passing  of  this  lex,  it  became  usual  for
the  senate,  and  afterwards  the  emperor  (princeps)
to  give  occasionally,  as  a  privilege,  to  certain  per-
sons who  had  not  children,  the  same  advantage
that  the  lex  secured  to  those  who  had  children.
This  was  called  the  Jus  Liberoriim.  Pliny  sjiys
(Ep.  ii.  1 3)  that  he  had  lately  obtained  from  the
emperor,  for  a  friend  of  his,  the  Jus  Trium  Libero-
rum.   (See  also  Ep.  x.  95,  96  ;  and  Dion  Cass.  Iv.

2,  and  the  note  of  Reimarus.)  This  privilege  is
mentioned  in  some  inscriptions,  on  which  the  ab-
breviation I.  L.  H.  (jus  liberorum  hahens)  some-
times occurs,  which  is  equivalent  to  "jura  parentis
habere."  The  emperor  M.  Antoninus  provided
that  children  should  be  registered  by  name  within
thirty  days  after  their  birth  with  the  Praefectus
Aerarii  Satumi.  (Capitol.  M.  Atit.  c.  9  ;  compare
Juvenal,  Sat.  ix.  84.)

The  lex  also  imposed  penalties  on  orbi,  that  is,
married  persons  who  had  no  children  (qui  liberos
non  habent,  Gaius,  ii.  Ill)  from  the  age  of  twenty-
five  to  sixty  in  a  man,  and  from  the  age  of  twenty
to  fifty  in  a  woman.  By  the  Lex  Papia,  orbi
could  only  take  one  half  of  an  hereditas  or  legatum
which  was  left  to  them.  (Gaius,  ii.  286.)  It  seems
that  an  attempt  had  been  made  to  evade  this  part
of  the  lex  by  adoptions,  which  a  Senatus-consultum
Neronianum  declared  to  be  ineffectual  for  the  pur-
pose of  relieving  a  person  from  the  penalties  of  the
lex.  (Tacit.  Ann.  xv.  19.)

As  a  general  rule  a  husband  and  wife  could  only
leave  to  one  another  a  tenth  part  of  their  property  ;
but  there  were  exceptions  in  respect  of  children
either  born  of  the  marriage  or  by  another  marriage
of  one  of  the  parties,  which  allowed  of  the  free
disposal  of  a  larger  part.  This  privilege  might
also  be  acquired  by  obtaining  the  Jus  Liberorum.
(Ulp.  Frag.  tit.  xv.  xvi.)

As  to  some  provisions  of  this  Lex,  see  Patronus.

Peculatus.     [Peculatus.]

Julia  et  Plautia,  which  enacted  that  there
could  be  no  usucapion  in  things  obtained  by  robbery
(vi  possessae).  The  Twelve  Tables  had  already
provided  that  there  could  be  no  ucucapion  in  stolen
things.  (Gaius,  ii.  45  ;  Inst.  2.  tit.  6.)  This  lex
was  probably  passed  b.  c.  89.

Julia  Papiria.     [Papiria.]

De  Provinciis.  (Dion  Cass,  xliii.  25  ;  Orelli,
Onomasticon,  refers  to  this  Lex  Julia  de  Repe-
tundis  the  regulations  de  Provincialibus  Sumptibus,
which  Ernesti  considers  to  belong  to  the  Lex
Julia  de  Repetundis.)     [Provinciab.]


L


LEX  J  UN  I A  VELLEIA.

De  PuBLicAMS  (Cic.  ad  Attic,  ii.  16,  pro  Cn.
PluHcio^  c  14,  cd.  Wunder;  Appian,  Bell.  Civ.  ii.
13.)

Rkpetundarum.     [Repetundab.]

I)e  Residuis.     [Peculatus.]

De  Sacerdoths.  (Cic.  Ep.  ad  Drutum^  i.  5.)

Dk  Sacrilegis.     [Peculatus.]

SuMTUARiA,  passed  in  the  time  of  Julius  Caesar
(Dion  Cass,  xliii.  25)  and  one  under  Augustus.
(Gell.  ii.  24.)     [Sumtuariae  Leges.]

Theatralis  (Sueton.  Aug.  40  ;  Plin.  xxxiii.
2),  which  permitted  Roman  equites,  in  case  they  or
their  parents  had  ever  had  a  census  equestris,  to
sit  in  the  fourteen  rows  {quatiiordecim  ordines)
lixed  by  the  Lex  Roscia  Theatralis,  B.  c.  67.

Julia  et  Titia  (Inst.  1.  tit.  20)  empowered
the  praeses  of  a  province  to  appoint  a  tutor  for
women  and  pupilli  who  had  none.  (L^lp.  Frag.  xi.
18.)  A  Lex  Atilia  of  earlier  but  uncertain  date
had  given  the  same  power  at  Rome  to  the  praetor
urbanus  and  the  majority  of  the  tribuni  plebis  ;  and
the  new  lex  was  passed  in  order  to  extend  the
same  advantages  to  the  provinces.  There  are  some
reasons  for  supposing  that  there  were  two  leges,  a
Julia  and  a  Titia  ;  and  among  those  reasons,  is  the
circumstance  that  it  is  not  usual  to  unite  by  the
word  et  the  two  names  which  belong  to  one  lex,
tliough  this  is  done  by  Cicero  {Brut.  c.  1  6,  Pro
Ualho.,  c.  21)  in  speaking  of  the  Lex  Licinia  and
Mucia,

De    VI   PUBLICA    ET   PrIVATA.       [ViS.]

VlCESIMARIA.       [ViCESlMA.]

JU'NIA  DE  PEREGRFNIS  proposed  B.  c.
126  by  M.  Junius  Pennus  a  tribune,  banished
peregrini  from  the  city.

A  lex  of  C.  Fannius,  consul  B.  c.  122,  contained
the  same  provisions  respecting  the  Latini  and
Italici,  for  we  must  assume  that  there  was  a  Lex
( Plut.  C.  Gracchus^  1 2) :  and  a  lex  of  C.  Papius,
perhaps  B.  c.  Q5,  contained  the  same  respecting  all
persons  who  were  not  domiciled  in  Italy.  (Cic.  De
Of.  iii.  11,  Brut.  26,  28,  de  Leg.  Agr.  i.  4;
Festus,  s.  V.  Respublicas ;  Meyer,  Orat.  Rom.
Fragm.  p.  229,  2nd  ed.)

JU'NIA  LICPNIA.     [Licinia  JuNiA.]

JU'NIA  NORBA'NA  of  uncertain  date,  but
probably  about  A.  D.  19,  enacted  that  when  a  Ro-
man citizen  had  manumitted  a  slave  without  the
requisite  formalities,  the  manumission  should  not  in
all  cases  be  ineifectual,  but  the  manumitted  person
should  have  the  status  of  a  Latinus.  (Gaius,  i.  1 6,
17,  22,&c.,  iii.  56  ;  Ulp.  Frag.  i.  xx.  8,  xxii.  3.)
[Latinitas  ;  LiBERTUS  ;   Manumissio.]

A  special  clause  in  the  Lex  took  away  from
these  Latini  Juniani,  as  they  were  called,  the
capacity  of  making  a  testament,  taking  under  a
testament,  and  being  appointed  tutores  \>\  a  testa-
ment. Yet  they  had  the  other  parts  of  the  testa-
nienti  factio  (Ulp.  Frag.  xx.  8).  The  condition  of
the  Latini  Jimiani  is  the  subject  of  an  essay  by
C.  A.  vonVangerow,  Marburg,  1833  ;  see  also  the
remarks  of  Puchta,  Inst.  ii.  §  213,  on  the  date  of
the  Lex  Junia  ;  and  also  §§  217,  218.

De  Libertinorum  Suffragiis.  [Clodia  ;
Manumissio.]

JU'NIA  PETRO'NIA  or  PATRO'NIA(Dig.
40.  tit.  1.  s.  24).  It  is  doubtful  whether  this  is
the  same  as  Petronia,  or  is  another  Lex.

JU'NIA  REPETUNDA'RUM.    [Repetun-
dab.]
JU'NIA   VELLE'IA,    allowed  a  child  who


LEX  LICINIA.  693

was  in  the  womb,  and  who,  when  bom,  would  be
the  testator's  suus  heres,  to  be  instituted  heres,
even  if  he  should  be  born  in  the  lifetime  of  the
testator.  It  also  so  far  modified  the  old  law,
that  a  person  who  by  the  death  of  a  heres  insti-
tutus  after  the  testator  had  made  his  will,  became
a  heres  quasi  agnascendo,  did  not  break  the  will,
if  he  was  instituted  heres.  (Gaius,  ii.  134  ;  Ulp.
Frag.  xxii.  19,  ed.  Rocking.)

LAETO'RIA.     [Curator.]

Sometimes  the  lex  proposed  by  Volero  for  electing
plebeian  magistrates  at  the  Comitia  Tributa  is  cited
as  a  Lex  Laetoria.     (Liv.  ii.  bQ,  57.)

LICI'NIA.     [Aebutia.]

LICPNIA  DE  LUDIS  APOLLINA'RIBUS
(Liv.  xxvii.  23).

LICPNIA  DE  SACERDO'TIIS  (Cic.  LaeL
25).

LICPNIA  DE  SODALPTIIS.    [Ambitus.]

LICPNIA  JU'NIA,  or,  as  it  is  sometimes
called,  Junia  et  Licinia,  passed  in  the  consulship  of
L.  Licinius  Murena  and  Junius  Silanus,  b.  c.  62,
enforced  the  Caecilia  Didia,  in  connection  with
which  it  is  sometimes  mentioned.  (Cic.  pro  Sesfio,
64,  Phil.  V.  3,  ad  Att.  ii.  9,  iv.  16,  in  Vatin.
14.)

LICPNIA  MU'CIA  DE  CIVIBUS  RE*
GUNDIS  (probably  Redigundis),  passed  in  the
consulship  of  L.  Licinus  Crassus  the  orator,  and
Q.  Mucins  Scaevola  Pontifex  Maximus,  B.  c.  95,
which  enacted  a  strict  examination  as  to  the  title
to  citizenship,  and  deprived  of  the  exercise  of
civic  rights  all  those  who  could  not  make  out  a
good  title  to  them.  This  measure  partly  led  to
the  Marsic  war.  (Cic.  de  Off.  iii.  11,  Brut.  16,
■pro  Ball.  21,  24,  pro  Sest.  13  ;  Ascon.  in  Cornel.
p.  67. )

LICPNIA  SUMTUA'RIA.  [Sumtuariab
Leges.]

LICI'NIA.  In  the  year  b.  c.  375  C.  Licinius
Stolo  and  L.  Sextius  being  elected  tAvo  of  the
Tribuni  Plebis,  promulgated  various  Rogationes,
the  object  of  which  was  to  weaken  the  power  of
the  Patricians  and  for  the  benefit  of  the  Plebs.
One  Rogatio  related  to  the  debts,  with  which  the
Plebs  was  incumbered  (Liv.  vi.  34):  and  it  pro-
vided that  all  the  money  which  had  been  paid  as
interest  should  be  deducted  from  the  principal
sum,  and  the  remainder  should  be  paid  in  three
years  by  equal  payments.  The  Second  related
to  the  Ager  Publicus,  and  enacted  that  no  person
should  occupy  (possideret)  more  than  500  jugera.
The  Third  was  to  the  effect  that  no  more  Tribuni
militum  should  be  elected,  but  that  consuls  should
be  elected  and  one  of  them  should  be  a  Plebeian.
The  Patricians  prevented  these  Rogationes  from
being  carried  by  inducing  the  other  tribunes  to
oppose  their  iiitercessio.  C.  Licinius  Stolo  and
L.  Sextius  retaliated  in  the  same  way,  and  would
not  allow  any  comitia  to  be  held  except  those  for
the  election  of  Aediles  and  Tribuni  Plebis.  They
were  also  re-elected  Tribuni  Plebis,  and  they
persevered  for  five  years  in  preventing  the  election
of  any  Curule  Magistratus.

In  the  year  368,  the  two  tribunes  were  still
elected,  for  the  eighth  time,  and  they  felt  their
power  increasing  with  the  diminution  of  the  op-
position of  their  colleagues,  and  by  having  the  aid
of  one  of  the  Tribuni  Militum,  M.  Fabius,  the
father-in-law  of  C.  Licinius  Stolo.  After  violent
agitation,  a  new  Rogation  was  promulgated  to  the
V  V  3


694


LEX  LICINIA.


eflfcct  that  instead  of  Duumviri  sacris  faciuudis,
Decemviri  should  be  elected,  and  that  half  of  them
should  be  Plebeians.  In  the  year  b.  c.  366,  when
Licinius  and  Sextius  had  been  elected  Tribuni  for
the  tenth  time,  the  law  was  passed  as  to  the  De-
cemviri, and  five  plebeians  and  five  patricians  were
elected,  a  measure  which  prepared  the  way  for  the
plebeians  participating  in  the  honours  of  the  con-
sulship. The  Rogationes  of  Licinius  were  finally
carried,  and  in  the  year  B.  c,  365  L.  Sextius  was
elected  consul,  being  the  first  Plebeian  who  at-
tained that  dignity.  The  Patricians  were  com-
pensated for  their  loss  of  the  exclusive  right  to  the
consulship  by  the  creation  of  the  office  of  Curule
Aediie  and  of  Praetor.

The  law  as  to  the  settlement  between  debtor
and  creditor  was,  if  Livy's  text  is  to  be  literally
understood,  an  invasion  of  the  established  rights
of  property.  Niebuhr's  explanation  of  this  law  is
contained  in  his'  third  volume,  pp.  23,  &c.

Besides  the  limitation  fixed  by  the  second  Lex
to  the  number  of  jugera  which  an  individual  might
possess  in  the  public  land,  it  declared  that  no  in-
dividual should  have  above  100  large  and  500
smaller  animals  on  the  public  pastures.  Licinius
was  the  first  who  fell  under  the  penalties  of  his
own  law.  The  statement  is  that  "  he,  together
with  his  son,  possessed  a  thousand  jugera  of  the
ager  (publicus),  and  by  emancipating  his  son  had
acted  in  fraud  of  the  law."  (Liv.  vii.  16.)  From
this  story  it  appears  that  the  Plebeians  could  now
possess  the  public  land,  a  right  which  they  may
have  acquired  by  the  Law  of  Licinius,  but  there
is  no  evidence  on  this  matter.  The  story  is  told
also  by  Columella  (i.  3),  Pliny  {Hist.  Nat.  xviii.
3),  and  Valerius  Maximus  (viii.  6.  §  3).  The
last  writer  not  understanding  what  he  was  record-
ing, says  that  in  order  to  conceal  his  violation  of
the  law,  Licinius  emancipated  part  of  the  land  to
his  son.  The  facts  as  stated  by  Livy  are  not  put
in  the  clearest  light.  The  son  when  emancipated
would  be  as  much  intitled  to  possess  500  jugera  as
the  father,  and  if  he  bona  fide  possessed  that
quantity  of  the  Ager  publicus,  there  was  no  fraud
on  the  law.  From  the  expression  of  Pliny  {svb-
stituta  filii  persona)  the  fraud  appears  to  have  con-
sisted in  the  emancipation  of  the  son  being  effected
solely  that  he  might  in  his  own  name  possess  500
jugera  while  his  father  had  the  actual  enjoyment.
But  the  details  of  this  Lex  are  too  imperfectly
known  to  enable  us  to  give  more  than  a  probable
solution  of  the  matter.  As  the  object  of  the  Lex
was  to  diminish  the  possessiones  of  the  patricians,
it  may  be  assumed  that  the  surplus  land  thus
arising  -was  distributed  (assiynatus)  among  the
plebeians,  who  otherwise  would  have  gained  no-
thing by  the  change  ;  and  such  a  distribution  of
land  is  stated  to  have  been  part  of  the  Lex  of
Licinius  by  Varro  (de  Be  Rust.  i.  2)  and  Colu-
mella (i.  3).

According  to  Livy  (vi.  42)  the  Rogatio  de
Decemviris  sacrorura  was  carried  first,  b.  c.  366.
The  three  other  rogationes  were  included  in  one
Lex,  which  was  a  Lex  Satura,  (Liv.  vii.  39  ;
Dion  Cass.  Fraff.  33.)

Besides  the  passages  referred  to,  the  reader  may
see  Niebuhr,  vol.  iii.  pp.  1 — 36,  for  his  view  of  the
Licinian  Rogations ;  and  Goettling,  Geschichte  der
Rom.  Staatsverfassung,  p.  354,  and  the  note  on
the  passage  of  Varro  {de  Re  Rust.  L  2).  The
Liciuian  Rogations  have  been  the  subject  of  much


LEX  MANLIA.

discussion.  See  the  Classical  Museum,  No.  V.
on  the  Licinian  Rogation  De  Modo  Agri  ;  No. VI.,
Ueber  die  Stelle  des  Varro,  &c.,  De  Re  Rust.  i.  2.
§  9  ;  and  No.  VII.,  Remarks  on  Professor  Long's
Paper  on  the  Licinian  Law  De  Modo  Agri,  by
Professor  Puchta  ;  and  on  the  passage  in  Appian's
Civil  Wars,  i.  8,  which  relates  to  the  Liciuian
Law  by  Professor  Long.

LICI'NIA  DE  CREANDIS  TRIU'MVIRIS
EPULO'NIBUS  (Liv.xxxiii.  42;  Orellii  0«o-
mastico?i).

LI  VIAE  were  various  enactments  proposed  by
the  Tribune  M.  Livius  Drusus,  B.c.  91,  for  esta-
blishing colonies  in  Italy  and  Sicily,  distributing
corn  among  the  poor  citizens  at  a  low  rate,  and
admitting  the  foederatae  civitates  to  the  Roman
civitas.  He  is  also  said  to  have  been  the  mover
of  a  law  for  adulterating  silver  by  mixing  with  it
an  eighth  part  of  brass.  (Plin.  H.N.  xxxiii.  3.)
Drusus  was  assassinated,  and  the  Senate  declared
that  all  his  Leges  were  passed  contra  auspicia,  and
were  therefore  not  Leges.  (Cic.  Leg.  ii.  6, 12,  pro
Dome,  16  ;  Liv.  Ep.  71  ;  Appian,  Bell.  Civ.  i.  35 ;
A  scon,  in  Cic.  Cornel,  p.  62.)

LUTA'TIA  DE  VL     [Vis.]

MAE'NIA  LEX  is  only  mentioned  by  Cicero
{Brutus,  14),  who  says  that  M\  Curius  compelled
the  Patres  "  ante  auctores  fieri "  in  the  case  of  the
election  of  a  plebeian  consul,  "  which,"  adds  Cicero,
"  was  a  great  thing  to  accomplish,  as  the  Lex
Maenia  was  not  yet  passed."  The  Lex  therefore
required  the  Patres  to  give  their  consent  at  least
to  the  election  of  a  magistratus,  or  in  other  words
to  confer  or  agree  to  confer  the  Imperium  on  the
person  whom  the  comitia  should  elect.  Livy  (i.
17)  appears  to  refer  to  this  law.  It  was  probably
proposed  by  the  Tribune  Maenius,  B.C.  287.  [Auc-

TORITAS.]

DE  MAGISTRIS  AQUARUM.  (Haubold,
Spangenberg,  Mon.  Leg.  p.  177.)

MAJESTATIS.     [Majestas.]

MAMPLIA  DE  COLO'NIIS.  The  subject
of  this  lex  and  its  date  are  fully  discussed  by  Ru-
dorff  {Zeitschrift,  vol.  ix.),  who  shows  that  the  Lex
Mamilia,  Roscia,  Peducaea,  AUiena,  Fabia  is  the
same  as  the  "  Lex  Agraria  quam  Gains  Caesar
tulit"  (D  g.  47.  tit.  21,  s.  3),  and  that  this  Gaius
Caesar  is  the  Emperor  Caligula.

MAMILIA  DE  JUGURTHAE  FAUTO'-
RIBUS.     (Sal.  Jug.  c.  40  ;  Orellii  Onomasticon.)

MAMI'LIA  Fl'NIUM  REGUNDO'RUM,
enacted  in  b.c.  239,  or  according  to  another  sup-
position, in  b.  c.  165,  fixed  at  five  or  six  feet  the
width  of  the  boundary  spaces  which  were  not  sub-
ject to  Usucapio.  (Rudorff,  Zeitschrift,  vol.  x.
p.  342,  &c.)

MANl'LIA,  proposed  by  the  tribune  C.  Mani-
lius  B.C.  6Q,  was  a  privilegium  by  which  was  con-
ferred on  Pompey  the  command  in  the  war  against
Mithridates.  The  lex  was  supported  by  Cicero
when  praetor.  {De  I^ege  Manilia;  Plut.  Pomp.  30  ;
Dion  Cass,  xxxvi.  25.)

The  Leges  Manilianae,  mentioned  by  Cicero  {De
Or.  i.  58),  were  evidently  not  Leges  Proper,  but
probably  forms  which  it  was  prudent  for  parties  to
observe  in  buying  and  selling.

MANl'LIA  DE  LIBERTINO'RUM  SUF-
FRA'GIIS  (Dion  Cass,  xxxvi.  25  ;  Ascon.  in  Cor-
nel.  pp.  64,  65),  is  apparently  the  same  as  the
Manila  De  Lib.  Suff.

MA'NLIA,  also  caUed  LICI'NIA,  b.c.  196,


LEX  PAPIRIA.

created  the  trumviri  epulones.  (Liv,  xxxiii.  42  ;
Cic.  de  Or.  iii.  19.)    [Licikia.]

MA'NLIA  DE  LIBERTINO'RUM  SUF-
FRA'GIIS  (b.  c,  58  ;  Ascon.  in  Mil.  p.  46.)

MA'NLIA  DE  VICE  SIMA  MANUMIS-
SO'RUM.     [Manumissio.]

MA'RCIA  probably  about  the  year  B.C.  352
*'  ad  versus  feneratores."  (Gaius,  iv.  23  ;  Liv.  vii.
21.)

MA'RCIA  DE  LIGU'RIBUS.  (Liv.  xlii.  22.)

MA'RCIA  an  agrarian  law  proposed  by  the
tribune  L.  Marcius  Philippus,  B.C.  104.  (Cic.  de
0/:ii.  21.)

MA'RIA  proposed  by  Marius  when  tribune
B.C.  119,  for  narrovi^ing  the  pontes  at  elections.
(Cic.  de  Leq.  iii.  17  ;  Pint.  Mar.  4.)

ME'MMIA  or  RE  MMIA.     [Calumnia.]

ME'NSIA.  This  lex  enacted  that  if  a  woman
who  was  a  Roman  citizen  {civis  Romano)  married
a  psregrinus,  the  oifspring  was  a  peregrinus.  If
there  was  connubium  between  the  peregrinus  and
the  woman,  the  children,  according  to  the  principle
of  connubium,  Avei'e  peregrin!,  as  the  legal  effect  of
coimubium  was  that  children  followed  the  condition
of  their  father  {liberi  semper  patrem  sequuntur).
If  there  were  no  connubium,  the  children,  ac-
cording to  another  rule  of  law,  by  which  they  fol-
lowed the  condition  of  the  mother,  would  have
been  Roman  citizens ;  and  it  was  the  object  of  the
lex  to  prevent  this.    (Gaius,  i.  78  ;  Ulp.  Frag.  v.  8.)

ME'SSIA.     (Cic.  ad  Att.  iv.  1.)

METI'LIA.  (Liv.  xxii.  25  ;  Plut.  Fahius,
c.  9.)

MINU'CIA,  B.C.  216,  created  the  triumviri
mensarii.     (Liv.  xxiii.  21.)

NERVAE  AGRA'RIA  (Dig.  47.  tit.  21.  s.  3.
§  1),  the  latest  known  instance  of  a  Lex.

OCTA'VIA.     [Frumentariae  Leges.]

OGU'LNIA,  proposed  by  the  tribunes  b.  c.  300,
increased  the  number  of  Pontifices  to  eight  and
that  of  the  augurs  to  nine  ;  it  also  enacted  that
four  of  the  Pontifices  and  five  of  the  augurs  should
be  taken  from  the  plebes.     (Liv.  x.  6 — 9.)

O'PPIA.       [SUMTUARIAE  LeGES.J

O'RCHIA.  [SuMTUARiAE  Leges.]
OVI'NIA,  of  uncertain  date,  was  a  plebiscitum
which  gave  the  censors  certain  powers  in  regu-
lating the  lists  of  the  senators  {prdo  senatorius ) :
the  main  object  seems  to  have  been  to  exclude  all
improper  persons  from  the  senate,  and  to  prevent
their  admission,  if  in  other  respects  qualified.
(Festus,  s.  V.  Prae.le.riti  Senatores;  Cic.  de  Leg.  iii.
12.)  The  Lex  Ovinia  of  Gaius  (iv.  109),  if  the
reading  is  right,  was  a  different  lex.

PA'PIA    DE   PEREGRI'NIS.     [Junia   de

PkREG  RINKS.]

PA'PIA   POPPAEA.     [Juliae.]

A  Lex  Papia  on  the  manner  of  choosing  the
Vestal  Virgins  is  mentioned  by  Gellius  (i.  12)  ;  but
the  reading  appears  to  be  doubtful,  and  perhaps  it
ought  to  be  called  Lex  Popilia.

PAPI'RIA,  or  JU'LIA  PAPI'RIA  DE
MULCTA'RUM  AESTIMATIO'NE  (b.c.  430)
fixed  a  money  value  according  to  which  fines  were
paid,  which  formerly  were  paid  in  sheep  and  cattle.
(Liv,  iv.  30  ;  Cic.  de  Rep.  ii.  35. )  Gellius  (xi.  1)
and  Festus  (s  v.  Peculatus)  make  this  valuation
part  of  the  Aternian  law  [Aternia  Tarpeia],
but  in  this  they  appear  to  have  been  mistaken
according  to  Niebuhr.  {Hist,  of  Rome.,  ii.  p.  300.)

PAPI'RIA,  by  which  the  as  was  made  seniun-


LEX  PLAUTIA.


69.5


cialis  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii.  3),  one  of  the  various
enactments  which  tampered  with  the  coinage.

PAPI'RIA,  B.C.  332,  proposed  by  the  Praetor
Papirius,  gave  the  Acerrani  the  ci vitas  without  the
sufi"ragium.  It  was  properly  a  Privilegium,  but  is
useful  as  illustrating  the  history  of  the  extension  of
the  Civitas  Romana.    (Liv.  viii.  17.)

PAPI'RIA,  of  uncertain  date,  enacted  that  no
aedes  should  be  declared  consecratae  without  a
Plebiscitum  (injussu  Plebis,  Cic.  pro  Dom.  49).

PAPFRIA  PLAU'TIA,  a  Plebiscitum  of  the
year  B.C.  89,  proposed  by  the  tribunes  C.  Papirius
Carbo  and  M.  Plautius  Silvanus,  in  the  consulship
of  Cn.  Pompeius  Strabo  and  L.  Porcius  Cato,  is
called  by  Cicero  {pro  Archia,  4)  a  lex  of  Silvanus
and  Carbo.  (See  Civitas  ;  Foederatae  Civi-
TATES  ;  and  Savigiiy,  VolksscMuss  der  Ta/el  von
Heruclea,  ZeiUchrift,  ix.)

PAPI'RIA  PUETE'LI.\.    [Poetelia.]

PAPI'RIA  DE  SACRAMENTO  (Festus,
s.  V.  Sacramentum),  proposed  by  L.  Papirius,  Tri-
bunus  Plebis,  probably  enacted  that  in  the  case  of
the  Legis  actio  sacramento,  the  money  should  not
be  actually  deposited,  but  security  should  be  given
for  it.  (Puchta,  lust.  ii.  161,  note  101.)

PAPI'RIA  TABELLA'RIA.  [Tabellariar
Leges.]

PE'DIA,  related  to  the  murderers  of  the  Dic-
tator Caesar.     (Veil.  Pat.  ii.  69.)

PEDUCAEA,  B.C.  113,  a  Plebiscitum,  seems
to  have  been  merely  a  Privilegium  and  not  a  ge-
neral law  against  Incestum.  (Cic.  de  Nat.  Deor.
iii.  30  ;  Ascon.  in  Cic.  Mil.  p.  46.)

PESULA'NIA  provided  that  if  an  animal  did
any  damage,  the  owner  should  make  it  good  or
give  up  the  animal.  (Paul.  S.  R.  1.  tit.  15.  s.  1.  3. )
There  was  a  general  provision  to  this  effect  in  the
Twelve  Tables  (Dirksen,  Uebersickt^  &c.  p.  532,
«&;c.),  and  it  might  be  inferred  from  Paulus  that
this  Lex  extended  the  provisions  of  the  old  law
to  dogs.  The  name  of  tlie  lex  may  be  uncertain.
See  the  note  in  Arndt's  edition  of  Pfiulus.

PKTI'LLIA  DE  PECU'NIA  REGIS  AN-
TIOCHI.     (Liv.  xxxviii.  54.)

PETRE'IA,  a  Lex  under  this  title,  de  decima-
tione  militura,  in  case  of  mutiny,  is  mentioned  by
Appian  {de  Bell.  Civ.  ii.  47),  according  to  the  old
editions.     But  the  true  reading  is  iraTpiw  vS/no}.

PETRO'NIA,  probably  passed  in  the  time  of
Augustus,  and  subsequently  amended  by  various
senatusconsulta,  forbade  a  master  to  deliver  up  his
slave  to  fight  with  wild  beasts.  If,  however,  the
master  thought  that  his  slave  deserved  such  a
punishment,  he  might  take  him  before  the  autho-
rities {judex)  who  might  condemn  him  to  fight  if
he  appeared  tc  deserve  it.  (Dig.  48.  tit  8.  s.  11.
18.  tit.  1,  s.  42  ;  Gell.  v,  14  ;  Puchta,  Inst.  i.  §  107,
note  101  ;  Savigny,  Zeitschrift^  ix.  p.  374,  on  the
inscription  found  on  a  wall  of  the  amphitheatre  of
Pompeii.)

PINA'RIA  (Gaius,  iv.  15)  related  to  the  giving
of  a  Judex  within  a  limited  time.  (See  Puchta,
Inst.  i.  §  53.)

PINA'RIA.     [Annales  Leges.]

PLAETO'RIA.     [Curator.]

PLAETO'RIA  DE  PRAETO'RE  Utl-
BA'NO.  (Varro,  de  Ling.  Lat.  vi.  5  ;  Censorinus,
de  Die  N'atali,  c.  24.)

PLAU'TIA  or  PLO'TIA  DE  VL    [Vis.]

PLAU'TIA  or  PLO'TIA  JUDICIA'RIA  is
mentioned  by  Ascon  ius  {in  Cic.  Cornel,  p.  79)  as
Y  Y  4


696


LEX  PUBLILIA.


having  enacted  that  fifteen  persons  should  be  an-
nually elected  hy  each  tribe  out  of  its  own  body
to  be  placed  in  the  Album  Judicum.

PLAUTIA  or  PLOTIA  DE  RE'DITU  LE-
PIDANO'RUM.  (Sueton.Coes.  5  ;  Gellius,xiii.  3.)

PLAUTIA  PAPI'RIA.      [Papiria   Plau-

TIA.]

POETE'LIA,  B.C.  358,  a  Plebiscitum,  was  the
first  Lex  against  Ambitus.     (Liv.  vii.  15.)

POETE'LIA  PAPFRIA,  b.c.  326,  made  an
important  change  in  the  liabilities  of  the  Nexi.
(Liv.  viii.  28.)     [Nexi.]

POMPEIAE.  There  were  various  Leges  so
called.

PoMPEiA,  proposed  by  Cn.  Pompeius  Strabo,
the  father  of  Cn.  Pompeius  Magnus,  probably  in  his
consulship  B.  c.  89,  gave  the  Jus  Latii  or  Latinitas
to  all  the  towns  of  the  Transpadani,  and  probably
the  Civitas  to  the  Cispadani.  (Savigny,  Volkssdduss
der  Tafel  von  Heradea,  Zeitsdtrift,  ix.)

DE  AMBiTU.    [Ambitus.]

DE   IMPERIO  CAESARI  PROROGANDO.

(Veil.  Pat.  ii.  46  ;  Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  18.)
jUDiciARiA.     [Judex.]

DE   JURE    MAGISTRATUUM    (Sueton.

Cues.  28  ;  Dion  Cass.  xl.  56  ;  Cic.  ad  Att.  viii.
3)  forbade  a  person  to  be  a  candidate  for  public
offices  (petitio  honornim)  who  was  not  at  Rome  ;  but
C.  Julius  Caesar  was  excepted.  This  was  doubt-
less the  old  law,  but  it  had  apparently  become  ob-
solete.

DE     PARRICIDIIS.       [CoRNELIA     DB

SICARIIS.]

TRiBUNiTiA  (b.  c.  70)    restored  the

old  Tribunitia  Potestas  which  Sulla  had  nearly
destroyed.  (Sueton.  Caes.  5  ;  Veil.  Pat.  ii,  30  ;
Cic.  de  Leg.  iii.  9,  11,  in  Verr.  Act.  i.  15  ;  Liv.
Epit.  97.)     [Tribuni.]

DE  VI  was  a  Privilegium,  and  only

referred  to  the  case  of  Milo.  (Cic.  Phil.  ii.  9  ;
Ascon,  and  Schol.  Bob.  in  Argum.  Milon.)

POPFLIA.    [Papia.]

PO'RCIAE  DE  CATITE  CIVIUM  or  DE
PROVOCATIO'NE  enacted  that  a  Roman  citizen
should  not  be  scourged  or  put  to  death.  (Liv.  x.  9  ;
Cic.  de  Rep.  ii.  31 ,  pro  Rabir.  3,  4  ;  Sail.  Catil.  51.)

PO'RCIA  DE  PROVI'NCIIS  (about  b.c.
198).  The  passage  in  Llvy  (xxxii.  27.  "  Sumtus
quos  in  cultum  praetorum,"  &c.)  is  supposed  to
refer  to  a  Porcia  Lex,  to  which  the  Plebiscitum  de
Thermensibus  refers  ;  and  the  words  quoted  by
Cicero  (  Verr.  ii.  4,  5.  "  Ne  quis  emat  mancipium  ")
are  taken,  as  it  is  conjectured,  from  this  Porcia
Lex.

PUBLI'CIA  permitted  betting  at  certain  games
■which  required  strength,  as  running  and  leaping.
(Dig.  11.  tit.  5.)

PUBLFLIA  DE  SPONSO'RIBUS.  [Inter-

CESSIO.]

PUBLI'LIA  LEX  was  proposed  by  Publilius
Volero,  a  tribunus  plebis,  and  enacted  B.  c.  471.
The  terms  of  the  Rogatio  were  "  ut  plebeii  magis-
tratus  tributis  comitiis  fierent"  (Liv.  ii.  56).  The
object  of  the  Lex  was  to  take  these  elections  from
the  Comitia  Centuriata,  in  which  the  patricians
could  determine  the  result  of  the  elections  by  the
votes  of  their  clients.  The  Rogatio  became  a  Lex
after  much  opposition,  the  history  of  which  is
given  in  Livy.  According  to  some  authorities,  the
number  of  tribunes  was  also  increased  from  two  to
five  (Liv.  ii.  58)  ;  and  this  must  therefore  have


LEGES  PUBLILIAE.

been  provided  by  the  Lex.  In  B.  c.  457  (Liv.  iii.
30)  ten  tribunes,  two  from  each  class,  were  elected
for  the  first  time  ;  but  it  is  not  said  under  what
legislative  provision.  Dionysius  {Antiq.  Rom.  ix.
43)  gives  a  more  complete  account  of  this  Lex.
After  Publilius  failed  in  his  first  attempt  to  carry
his  Rogatio,  he  added  a  new  chapter,  which  gave
the  election  of  the  aediles  (plebeian)  to  the  Comitig
Tributa,  and  enabled  the  Tributa  to  deliberate  and
decide  upon  any  matter  which  could  be  deliberated
and  decided  upon  in  the  Comitia  Centiiriata.  From
the  time  of  the  enactment  of  this  Lex,  says  Dio-
nysius (ix.  49)  "  up  to  my  time,  the  election  of
tribunes  and  aediles  was  made  without  birds  (au-
gural ceremonies),  and  all  the  rest  of  the  religious
forms  in  the  Comitia  Tributa."  Dionysius  says
nothing  here  of  the  other  matter  which  the  addi-
tional chapter  contained  (ix.  43).

PUBLI'LIAE  LEGES  of  the  Dictator  Q.
Publilius  Philo,  which  he  proposed  and  carried  b.  c.
339  (Liv.  viii.  12).  The  purport  of  these  Leges
is  thus  expressed  by  Livy  :  "  tres  leges  secundis-
simas  plebei,  adversas  nobilitati  tulit:  unam  ut
plebiscita  omnes  Quirites  tenerent:  alteram,  lit
legum  quae  comitiis  centuriatis  ferrentur,  ante
initum  sulfragium  Patres  auctores  fierent :  tertiam
ut  alter  utique  ex  plebe,  quum  eo  ventum  sit  ut
iitrumque  plebeium  consulem  fieri  liceret,  censor
crearetur."  The  provision  of  the  first  lex  seems  to
be  the  same  as  that  of  the  Lex  Hortensia,  B.  c.
286  "  ut  plebiscita  universum  populum  tenerent  "
(Gaius,  i.  3).  Some  critics  suppose  that  the  first
Lex  enacted  that  a  Plebiscitum  should  be  a  Lex
without  being  confirmed  by  the  Comitia  Centuriata,
but  that  it  would  still  require  the  confirmation  of
the  Senate,  or,  as  some  suppose,  of  the  Comitia
Curiata.  The  Lex  Hortensia,  it  is  further  sup-
posed, did  away  with  the  confirmation  of  the
Curiae,  or,  as  some  suppose,  of  the  Senate.  But
the  expression  "  owwes  Quirites  "  of  Livy  clearly
has  some  reference,  and,  according  to  correct  in-
terpretation, must  be  taken  to  have  some  reference,
to  the  extent  of  the  effect  of  a  Plebiscitum.  There
is  no  difficulty  in  giving  a  consistent  meaning  to
Livy's  words.  The  first  Lex  enacted  that  Plebis-
cita should  bind  all  the  Quirites  ;  which  means
nothing  else  than  that  a  Plebiscitum  should  have
the  effect  of  a  Lex  passed  at  the  Comitia  Centu-
riata. It  is  not  here  said  whether  the  Comitia
Tributa  could  legislate  on  all  matters  on  which  the
Comitia  Centuriata  could  [Publilia  Lex]  ;  and
nothing  is  said  as  to  the  dispensing  with  any  form
for  the  confirming  of  a  Lex  passed  at  these  Co-
mitia. And  that  Livy  did  not  suppose  that  the
first  Lex  contained  any  regulations  as  to  matter
of  form,  is  made  clear  by  what  he  says  of  the
second  Lex,  which  did  regulate  the  form  of  le-
gislation. This  is  the  clear  meaning  of  Livy's
words  :  it  may  not  be  the  true  import  of  the  first
Lex  ;  but  it  is  somewhat  difficult  to  prove  any
thing  about  a  matter  beyond  what  the  evidence
shows.     [Plebiscitum.]

The  simplest  meaning  of  the  second  Lex,  ac-
cording to  the  words,  is,  that  no  Rogatio  should  be
proposed  at  the  Comitia  Centuriata,  until  the
Patres  had  approved  of  it,  and  had  given  it  their
auctoritas.  If  we  knew  who  were  meant  by  the
Patres,  the  meaning  of  the  Lex  would  be  tolerably
clear.  It  is  now  generally  supposed  that  Livy
means  the  Comitia  Curiata,  and  that  their  veto
on  the  measures  of  the  Comitia  Centuriata  was


LEX  REGIA.

taken  away.  If  Patres  means  the  Senate,  then
the  purport  of  the  Lex  is  this,  that  no  mea-
sure must  be  proposed  at  the  Centuriata  Comitia,
without  a  SCtum  first  authorising  it.  (Corap.  Liv.
xlv.  21.)

The  meaning  of  the  third  Lex  is  plain  enough.
Puchta  shows  or  tries  to  show  that  the  first  Lex
Publilia  simply  rendered  unnecessary  the  con-
firmation of  a  Plebiscitum  by  the  Comitia  Centu-
riata ;  and  therefore  there  remained  only  the  con-
firmation of  the  Senate.  Accordingly,  the  eflfect
of  the  first  Lex  was  to  make  the  Comitia  Tributa
cease  to  have  merely  the  initiative  in  legislation  ;
henceforth,  Plebiscita  did  not  require  the  confirm-
ation of  a  Lex  Centuriata,  but  only  that  of  the
Senate  ;  and  we  may,  probably,  from  this  time  date
the  use  of  the  expression :  "  Lex  sive  id  Plebiscitum
est."

He  considers  the  second  Lex  to  have  simply
declared  the  old  practice,  that  the  Comitia  Centu-
riata should  pass  no  Rogation  without  the  authority
of  a  previous  Senatusconsultum.  The  two  Leges
then  had  this  relation  to  one  another :  the  first
Lex  provided,  that  a  Lex  passed  at  the  Comitia
I'ributa,  which  before  this  time  was  confirmed  by
a  Senatusconsultum,  and  finally  ratified  by  the
Comitia  Centuriata,  should  not  require  the  ratifi-
cation of  the  Comitia  Centuriata  ;  the  second  Lex
declared  that  the  old  practice  as  to  the  Comitia
Centuriata  should  be  maintained,  that  the  Leges
passed  there  should  have  the  previous  authorisa-
tion (auctoritas)  of  the  Senate.

On  the  subject  of  these  Leges,  see  Zachariae
SuUa^  i.  p,  26,  note  ;  Puchta,  Inst.  i.  §  59  ;  and
Niebuhr,  vol.iii.  p.  147,  &c.  Engl.  Tr. :  and  see
Valeriae  Leges.

PU'PIA,  mentioned  by  Cicero  {ad  Quint,  ii.
1 3,  arf  Fam.  i.  4)  seems  to  have  enacted  that  the
senate  cf)uld  not  meet  on  Comitiales  Dies.

QUI'NTIA  was  a  lex  proposed  by  T.  Quintius
Criapinus,  consul  b.  c.  9,  and  enacted  by  the  Populus
for  the  preservation  of  the  Aquaeductus.  The  Lex
is  preserved  by  Frontinus  {de  Aquaeduct  Roman.).

RE'GIA,  properly  LEX  PE  IMPE'RIO
PRl'NCIPIS.  The  nature  of  the  Imperium  and
the  mode  of  conferring  it  have  been  explained
under  Imperium.  Augustus,  by  virtue  of  uniting
in  his  own  person  the  Imperium,  the  Tribunitia
Potestas,  the  Censorian  power,  and  the  office  of
Pontifex,  was  in  fact  many  magistrates  in  one  ;
and  his  title  was  Princeps.  These  various  powers
were  conferred  on  the  earliest  Principes  (em-
perors) by  various  leges  ;  but  finally  the  whole
of  this  combined  authority  was  conferred  by  a
Lex  Imperii  or  Lex  de  Imperio.  (Dion  Cassius,
liii.  18  ;  his  remarks  on  the  power  of  Augustus,
and  the  notes  of  Reimarus.)  By  this  Lex  the  Im-
perial authority,  as  we  may  call  it,  was  conferred
on  the  Princeps  (cum  ipse  Imperator  per  legem
Imperium  accipiat.  Gains,  i.  5),  and  legislative
power.  By  this  Lex  the  Princeps  was  also  made
"  solutus  legibus,"  that  is,  many  restrictive  enact-
ments were  declared  not  to  apply  to  him,  either
in  his  private  or  his  magisterial  capacity  (Dion
Cass.  liii.  1 8,  28) :  for  instance,  Caligula  was  re-
leased by  a  Senatusconsultum,  which  was  pro-
bably followed  by  a  Lex  as  a  matter  of  form,
from  the  Lex  Julia  et  Papia.  (Dion  Cass.  lix.  1 5  ;
compjire  Ulpian,  Dig.  1.  tit.  3.  s.  31.)  This  Lex
De  Imperio  was  preceded  by  a  Senatusconsultum.
(Tacit.  Hist.  i.  47,  iv.  3,  6.)    A  considerable  frag-


LEX  RUBRIA.  G97

ment  of  the  Lex  De  Imperio  Vespasiani  is  still
preserved  at  Rome.  (Haubold,  Spangenberg,  Mo-
num.  Legal,  p.  221.)  It  is  sometimes  incorrectly
called  a  Senatusconsultum.  but  on  the  fragment
itself  it  is  called  a  Lex.  It  is  true  that  a  Senatus-
consultum preceded  the  Lex,  and  the  enactment
of  the  Lex  was  a  mere  form.  This  Lex  empowers
Vespasian  to  make  treaties,  to  originate  Senatus-
consulta,  to  propose  persons  to  the  people  and  the
Senate  to  be  elected  to  magistracies,  to  extend  the
Pomoerium,  to  make  constitutions  or  edicts  which
should  have  the  force  of  law,  and  to  be  released
from  the  same  laws  from  which  Augustus,  Tibe-
rius, and  Claudius  were  released  ;  and  all  that  he
had  done  before  the  enactment  of  this  lex  (ante
legefn  rogatam)  was  to  have  the  same  effect  as  if
it  had  been  done  by  the  command  of  the  people.

This  Lex  de  Imperio  Principis  is  several  times
named  Lex  Regia  in  the  Corpus  Juris  (Inst.  1.
tit.  2.  s.  6.  ;  Dig.  1.  tit.  4.  s.  1.  ;  Cod.  1.  tit.  17.
187).  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  Lex  de  Im-
perio Principis  was  ever  called  Lex  Regia  under
the  early  emperors.  Under  the  later  emperors
there  is  nothing  surprising  in  the  name  Regia
being  adopted  as  a  common  expression.  When
the  emperor  was  called  Dominus,  a  title  which  was
given  even  to  Trajan,  the  Lex  de  Imperio  might
well  be  called  Regia.  To  deny  the  existence  of
a  Lex  de  Imperio  would  show  a  very  imperfect
knowledge  of  the  history  and  constitution  of  Rome,
and  a  want  of  critical  judgment.  (Puchta,  Inst.  1.
§88.)

RE'GIAE.    [Jrjs  Civile  Papirianum.]

RE'MMIA.    [Calumnia.]

REPETUNDA'RUM.    [Repetundak.]

RHO'DIA.  The  Rhodians  had  a  maritime
code  which  was  highly  esteemed.  Some  of  its
provisions  were  adopted  by  the  Romans,  and  have
thus  been  incorporated  into  the  maritime  law  of
European  states.  Strabo  (p.  652.  Casaub.)  speaks
of  the  wise  laws  of  Rhodes  and  their  admirable
policy,  especially  in  naval  matters  ;  and  Cicero
{pro  Leg.  Manil.  c.  18)  to  the  same  effect.  The
Digest  (14.  tit.  2)  contains  so  much  of  the  Lex
Rhodiorum  as  relates  to  jactus  or  the  throwing
overboard  of  goods  in  order  to  save  the  vessel  or
remainder  of  the  cargo.  This  Lex  Rhodiorum  de
Jactu,  is  not  a  Lex  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  tenn.

RO'SCIA  THEATRA'LIS,  proposed  by  the
tribune  L.  Roscius  Otho,  B.C.  67,  which  gave  the
Equites  a  special  place  at  the  public  spectacles  in
fourteen  rows  or  seats  {in  quattiordecim  gradibus
sive  ordinibus)  next  to  the  place  of  the  senators,
which  was  in  the  orchestra.  This  Lex  also  assigned
a  certain  place  to  spendthrifts  {decodores,  Cic.
Phil.  ii.  18).  The  phrase  "  sedere  in  quatuor-
decim  ordinibus,'"  is  equivalent  to  having  the
proper  Census  Equestris  which  was  required  by
the  Lex.  There  are  numerous  allusions  to  this  Lex
(Dion,  xxxvi.  25  ;  Veil.  Pat.  ii.  32  ;  Liv.  Epit.  99  ;
Cic.  pro  Murena.,  1 9),  which  is  sometimes  simply
called  the  Lex  of  Otho  (Juv.  xiv.  324),  or  referred
to  by  his  name.  (Hor.  Epod.  iv.  16.)  This  law
caused  some  popiiLar  disturbance  in  the  consulship
of  Cicero,  B.  c.  63,  which  he  checked  by  a  speech.
(Cic.  ad  Att.  ii.  )  ;  Plut.  Cic.  c.  13.)  [Julia
Theatralis.]

RU'BRIA.  The  province  of  Gallia  Cisalpina
ceased  to  be  a  Provincia,  and  became  a  pai't  of
Italia  about  the  year  B.C.  43.  When  this  change
took  place,  it  was  necessary  to  provide  for  the


698


LEX  SATURA.


administration  of  justice,  as  the  usual  modes  of
provincial  administration  would  cease  with  the  de-
termination of  the  provincial  form  of  government.
This  was  effected  by  a  Lex,  the  name  of  which  is
imknown,  but  a  large  part  of  it,  on  a  bronze  tab-
let, is  preserved  in  the  Museum  at  Parma.  This
Lex  arranged  the  judiciary  establishment  of  the
former  provincia,  and  appointed  ii.  viri  and  iv.
viri  juri  dicundo :  a  Praefectus  Alutinensis  is  also
mentioned  in  the  lex.  Li  two  passages  of  this
Lex  (c.  XX.  1.  29.  38)  a  Lex  Rubria  is  mentioned,
which,  according  to  some,  is  an  earlier  lex  by  which
Mutina  was  made  a  Praefectura ;  and  according  to
others,  the  Lex  Rubria  is  this  very  Lex  de  Gallia
Cisalpina.  This  subject  is  discussed  by  Savigny
{Zeitschrift,  ix.)  and  by  Puchtii  {Zeitschrift^  x.  Ueber
den  hilicdt  der  Lex  Rubria  de  Gallia  Cisalpina).

This  Lex  has  been  published  several  times  ;  the
latest  edition  is  "  Tavola  legislativa  della  Gallia
Cisalpina  ritrovata  in  Veleia  et  restituita  alia  sua
vera  lezione  da  D.  Pietro  de  Lama,  Parma  1820."
We  only  possess  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  chapter
of  this  Lex,  wliich  treats  of  the  Novi  Operis
Nuntiatio  ;  the  twentieth  chapter  on  the  Damnum
Infectum  is  complete  :  the  tweiity-first  treats  of
Pecunia  Certa  Credita,  but  only  of  Execution  ;
the  twenty-second  treats  in  like  manner  of  similar
actions  ;  there  is  only  the  beginning  of  the  twenty-
third,  which  treats  of  the  division  of  an  hereditas
(fjvei  de  familia  eerceiscunda  deividunda  ivdicivm
sibei  darei  reddeive,  &c.  postulaverint,  &c.).  The
matter  of  this  lex  therefore,  so  far  as  we  know  it,
purely  concerns  procedure,  as  Puchta  remarks.

RUPI'LIAE  (b.  c.  131),  were  the  regulations
established  by  P.  Rupilius,  and  ten  legati,  for  the
administration  of  the  province  of  Sicily,  after  the
close  of  the  first  servile  war.  They  were  made
in  pursuance  of  a  consultum  of  the  senate.  Cicero
(m  Verr.  ii.  13,  15,  16,  37)  speaks  of  these  re-
gulations as  a  Decretum  of  Rupilius  (quod  is  de
decern  lefjatorum  sententia  statuit),  which  he  saj'S
they  call  Lex  Rupilia ;  but  it  was  not  a  Lex
proper.  The  powers  given  to  the  commissioners
by  the  Lex  Julia  Municipalis  were  of  a  similar
kind.  There  was  also  a  Lex  Rupilia  de  Cooptando
Senatu  Heracleiotarum  (In  Verr.  ii.  50) ;  and
De  Re  Frumentaria  (In  Verr.  iii.  40).

SACRA'TAE,  mentioned  by  Livy  (ii.  54)  and
by  Cicero  (de  Off.  iii.  33).  Leges  were  properly
so  called  which  had  for  their  object  to  make  a
thing  or  person  sacer.,  as  m  Livy  (ii.  8,  da  sacrando
cum  bonis  capite  ejus  qui^  &c.).  The  consecratio
was  in  fact  the  sanction  by  which  a  Lex  was  to  be
enforced.  (Liv.  iii.  55.)  In  the  latter  case  it  was
the  opinion  of  the  jurisconsulti  (juris  interpretes)
that  the  Lex  did  not  make  "  sacrosancti  "  the
persons  for  whose  protection  it  was  designed,  but
that  it  made  "sacer"  (sacrum  sanxit)  any  one
who  injured  them ;  and  this  interpretation  is  cer-
tainly consistent  with  the  terms  of  the  Lex.
(Festus,  s.  V.  Sacratae  leges.)  Compare  Liv.  ii.
33  ;  Dion  Hal.  Rom.  Antiq.  vi.  89  ;  and  the  pas-
sage referred  to  in  Orellii  Onomasticon.

A  Lex  Sacrata  Miiitaris  is  also  mentioned  by
Livy  (vii.  41) ;  but  the  sanction  of  the  Lex  is  not
stated.

SAE'NIA  De  Patriciorum  Numero  Au-
GENDO,  enacted  in  the  fifth  consulship  of  Au-
gustus. (Tacit.  Ann.  xi.  25;  Mon.  Ancijr.  Pilae
prions  Tab.  2  ;  see  Cassia.]

SA'TURA.     [Lex,  p.  683,  a.]


LEGES  SEMPRONL\E.

SCANTI'NIA,  proposed  by  a  tribune:  the  date
and  contents  are  not  known,  but  its  object  was  to
suppress  unnatural  crimes.  It  existed  in  the  time
of  Cicero.  (Auson.  Epig.  89  ;  Juv.  ii.  44  ;  Cic.  ad
Fam.  viii.  12,  14.)  The  Lex  Julia  de  Adulteriia
considered  this  offence  as  included  in  Stuprura
and  it  was  punishable  with  a  fine  ;  but  by  the  later
Imperial  constitutions  the  punishment  was  death.
(Sueton.  Dom.  8  ;  Paiilus,  S.  R.  ii.  tit.  26.  s.  13.)

SCRIBO'NIA.  The  date  and  whole  import  of
this  Lex  are  not  known  ;  but  it  enacted  that  a
right  to  servitutes  should  not  be  acquired  by  usu-
capion (Dig.  41.  tit.  3.  s.  4.  §29),  from  which  it
appears  that  the  law  was  once  different  as  to  cer-
tain servitudes  at  least :  and  these  appear  to  be
the  servitutes  praediorum  urbanorum.  which,  ac-
cording to  this  Lex,  could  not  be  acqui'red  by  usu-
capion. In  the  case  of  servitutes  praediorum  rusti-
corum,  and  of  personal  servitudes,  the  impossibility
of  usucapion  arose  out  of  the  nature  of  the  thing.
A  "  libertas  servitutium  "  could  be  gained  by  usu-
capion or  rather  disuse,  for  the  Lex  only  applied
to  that  usucapion  which  established  a  servitus
(servitutem  constituebat)  and  not  to  that  so-called
usucapion  which  took  away  the  right  (sustulit
senitutem).  It  is  perhaps  doubtful  if  the  passage
of  Cicero  (pro  Caecin.  26)  should  be  alleged  in
proof  of  this  usucapion  formerly  existing.

SCRIBONIA    VlARIA    Or    De    VlIS   MUNIENDIS,

proposed  by  C.  Scribonius  Curio,  tr.  pleb.  B.  c.  51.
(Orellii  Onomasticon.)

SEMPRO'Nl AE  LEGES,  were  leges  proposed
by  Tiberius  and  C.  Gracchus  respectively,  while
they  were  tribuni  plebis.

Agraria  of  Tib.  Gracchus  was  proposed  by  him
during  his  tribunate  B.C.  133.  The  nature  of  tliis
measure  is  explained  by  Appian.  (Dell.  Civ.  i.  1 0,
&c.)  It  was  au  Agraria  Lex,  tlie  object  of  which
was  the  distribution  of  the  Public  Land  among  the
poorer  citizens.  [Agrariae  Leges.]  Tib.  Gracchus
with  the  advice  of  P.  Licinius  Crassus,  Pontifex
Maximus,  P.  Mucins  Scaevola,  afterwards  Ponti-
fex Maximus,  and  Appius  Claudius  (Pint.  Tih.
Gracchus^  9),  proposed  that  no  person  should  hold
more  of  the  Ager  Publicus  than  500  jugera
(comp.  LiciNiAE  Leges),  but  that  for  every  son
he  might  hold  250  more.  The  poor  who  were  to
be  provided  with  land  out  of  what  remained  after
the  large  possessions  were  reduced,  were  not  to
have  the  power  of  alienating  their  own  lots  ;  and
they  were  to  pay  the  tenths.  The  law  was  enacted
and  the  execution  of  it  was  intrusted  to  three  per-
sons (tres  viri),  who  were  Tiberius  himself,  his
brother  Cuius,  and  Appius  Claudius.  The  execu-
tion of  the  law  was  attended  with  great  difficulty,
because  the  public  land  which  had  been  held  for
many  generations  by  private  persons,  had  been
dealt  with  like  private  property,  had  often  changed
hands  by  sale,  and  had  been  improved  and  built
upon.  It  was  first  proposed  to  indemnify  the
Possessors  for  all  improvements,  but  it  appears  that
when  they  made  opposition  to  the  measure,  this
proposal  was  withdrawn.

Other  measures  were  designed  by  Tiberius,  but
his  premature  death  stopped  them.  The  execution
of  the  Agraria  Lex  of  Tiberius  was  impeded  by  a
Senatusconsultum,  which  put  an  end  to  the  com-
mission. The  Lex  was  revived  by  Caiua  Grac-
chus, trib.  pi.  in  B.  c.  123.  The  senate  ruined  the
cause  of  Gracchus  by  engaging  the  tribune  M.
Livius   Drusus  to  pripose  measures  of  a  character


LEX  SILIA.

even  more  popular  than  those  of  Gracchus.  The
legislation  about  the  Roman  Public  Land  requires
a  history  in  itself.

De  Capite  Civium,  proposed  by  C.  Gracchus
B.C.  123,  enacted  that  the  caput  or  condition  of
a  Roman  citizen  could  not  be  affected  without  a
trial  and  vote  of  the  people.  (Cic.  pro  Eabir.  c.  4;
and  Cicero's  disingenuous  exposition.  In  Cat  iv.  5).
Plutarch  (C.  Gracchus^  4)  appears  to  allude  to  this
Lex  ;  but  if  he  does,  he  has  mistaken  its  purport.

FRtTMENTARIA.       [FrUMENTARIAE    LeGES.]

JuDiciARiA  proposed  by  C.  Gracchus,  had  for  its
object  to  deprive  the  senate  of  the  power  which
they  derived  from  supplying  the  Judices  in  .Indicia
Publica  from  their  body  (Plut.  C.  Gracchus,  5).
Plutarch's  account  of  this  Lex  is  probably  incor-
rect. Compare  Appian  {Dell.  Civ.  i.  22)  ;  and  Ju-
dex, p.  b'49,b.

De  Provinciis  Consularibus  proposed  by  C.
Gracchus,  b.  c.  1 23,  enacted,  that  in  every  year,
before  the  Comitia  for  electing  the  consuls,  the
senate  should  determine  the  two  provinces  which
the  consuls  should  have  ;  and  the  consuls  were  to
settle  between  themselves  by  lot,  or  otherwise,
which  province  each  should  have.  (Sallust,  Jug.
c.  27,  and  the  note  of  Cortius  ;  Cic.  de  Prov.  Cons.
c.  2.)

There  may  have  been  other  measures  proposed
and  carried  by  C.  Gracchus  ;  but  it  is  not  easy  to
distinguish  between  all  that  Avas  proposed  and
carried,  and  what  Avas  simply  proposed.  The
Lives  of  Tiberius  and  C.  Gracchus  by  Plutarch,
translated  with  notes  by  G.  Long,  give  some  in-
formation on  the  legislation  of  the  Gracchi,  which
should  be  compared  with  Appian.  {Bell.  Civ.  i.
10,  &c.)

SEMPRO'NIA  DE  FE'NORE,  b.c.  193,
was  a  Plebiscitum  proposed  by  a  tribune  M.S?m-
pronius  (Liv.  xxxv.  7),  which  enacted  that  the  law
(Jms)  about  money  lent  (pecunia  credita)  should
be  the  same  for  the  Socii  and  Latini  (Socii  ac
Nomen  Latimcni)  as  for  Roman  citizens.  The
object  of  the  Lex  was  to  prevent  Romans  from
lending  money  in  the  name  of  the  Socii  who  were
not  bound  by  the  Fenebres  Leges.  The  Lex
could  obviously  only  apply  within  the  jurisdiction
of  Rome.

SERVI'LTA  AGRA'RIA,  proposed  by  the
tribune  P.  Servilius  RuUus  in  the  consulship  of
Cicero,  a.  c.  63,  was  a  very  extensive  Agraria  Ro-
gatio.  It  was  successfully  opposed  by  Cicero  (In
Rullum) ;  but  it  was  in  substance  carried  by  Julius
Caesar  B.  c.  59  [Julia  Lex  Agraria],  and  is
the  Lex  called  by  Cicero  Lex  Campana  {ad  Att.  ii.
18),  from  the  public  land  called  Ager  Campanus
being  assigned  under  this  Lex.

SERVI  LIA  GLAU'CIA  DE  REPETUN-
DIS.     [Repetundae.]

SERVI'LIA  JUDICIA'RIA,  proposed  by
the  consul  Q.  Servilius  Caepio,  B.  c.  106.  See
the  article  Judex,  p.  649,  b,  and  the  various  pas-
sages in  Cicero  {Brut.  43,  44,  63,  86).  It  is
assumed  by  some  writers  that  a  Lex  of  the  tribune
Servilius  Glaucia  repealed  the  Servilia  Judiciaria
two  years  after  its  enactment.  (Cic.  Brut.  62  ;
Orellii  Onomasticon.)

SI'LIA.  (Gains,  iv.  19.)  The  Legis  Actio
called  Condictio  was  established  1)y  this  Lex  in
the  case  when  the  demand  was  a  determinate  sum
of  money  {coia  pecunid).

SI'LIA,  a  plebiscitum  proposed  by  P.  and  M.


LEX  THORIA.


69.1


Sillii  tribuni  plebis  related  to  Publica  Pondera.
(Festus,  Publica  Pondera,  where  the  Lex  is
given ;  and  the  notes  in  the  Delphin  edition.)

SILVA'NI  ET  CARBO'NIS.  [Pai-iria
Plautia.]

SULPI'CIAE,  proposed  by  the  tribune  P.
Sulpicius  Rufus,  a  supporter  of  Marius,  b.  c.  88,
enacted  the  recal  of  the  exiles,  the  distribution  of
the  new  citizens  and  the  libertini  among  the  thirtv-
five  tribes,  that  the  command  in  the  Mithridatic
war  should  be  taken  from  Sulla  and  given  to
Marius,  and  that  a  Senator  should  not  contract
debt  to  the  amount  of  more  than  2000  denarii.
(Plut.  Sidl.  8.)  The  last  enactment  may  have
been  intended  to  expel  persons  from  the  senata
who  should  get  in  debt.  All  these  Leges  were
repealed  by  Sulla.  (App.  Bell.  Civ.  i.  55,  59  ;
Liv.  Epit.  77  ;  Veil.  Pat.  ii.  18.)

SULPFCIA  SEMPRO'NIA,  b.c.  304.  No
name  is  given  to  this  Lex  by  Livy  (ix.  46),  but  it
was  probably  proposed  by  the  consuls.  It  prevented
the  dedicatio  of  a  templum  or  altar  without  the
consent  of  the  senate  or  a  majority  of  the  tribunes.
(Compare  Gains,  ii.  5 — 7.)

SUMTUA'RIAE.     [Sumtuariae  Leges.]
TABELLA'RIAE.    [Tabellariae  Leges.]
TARPE'IA  ATE'RNIA.      [Aternia  Tar-

PEIA.]

TERENTI'LIA,  proposed  by  the  tribune  C.
Terentilius,  b.  c.  462,  but  not  carried,  was  a  ro-
gatio  which  had  for  its  object  an  amendment  of  tbo
constitution,  though  in  form  it  only  attempted  a
limitation  of  the  Imperium  Consulare.  (Liv.  iii.  9,
10,  31  ;  Dionys.  Pom.  Antiq.  x.  1,  &c.)  This
rogatio  probably  led  to  the  subsequent  legislation
of  the  Decemviri.

TESTAMENTA'RIAE.  Various  leges,  such
as  the  Cornelia,  Falcidia,  Furia,  and  Voconia,  re-
gulated testamentary  dispositions.

THO'RIA.  This  Agraria  Lex  is  the  subject
of  a  very  elaborate  essaj'-  by  Rudoi-ff,  "  Das
Ackergesetz  des  Spurius  Thorius,  Zeitschrift,
vol.  x."

This  Lex  was  engraved  on  the  back  part  of  the
same  bronze  tablet  which  contained  the  Servilia
Lex  which  applied  to  the  Judicia  de  Repetundis.
The  tablet  was  broken  at  some  unknown  time,
and  the  lower  which  was  perhaps  the  larger  part
is  now  lost.  Seven  fragments  of  the  upper  part
were  preserved,  which  as  the  tablet  is  written  on
both  sides,  make  fourteen  inscriptions,  which
were  published  by  Fulvius  Ursinus  :  the  first  five
of  the  inscriptions,  as  they  are  numbered  by  him,
belong  to  the  Lex  Thoria,  and  the  seven  last  to
the  Lex  Servilia.  The  largest  and  most  important
of  the  fragments  are  now  in  the  Museo  Borbonico.
Their  history  is  traced  and  their  present  condition
described  hj  Rudorff  with  great  minuteness.  Two
of  the  firagments  were  copied  by  Sigonius  when
they  were  in  the  Museum  of  Cardinal  Bembo ;
and  the  copy  of  the  two  fragments  of  the  Lex
Thoria,  and  also  the  coj)y  of  the  two  fragments  of
the  Lex  Servilia,  are  printed  in  the  work  of  Sigo-
nius, De  Antiquo  Jure  Populi  Roviani  Libri  Un-
decirn,  Bononiae,  1574.

The  title  of  this  Lex  does  not  appear  from  the
mutilated  inscription,  but  Rudortf  shows  that  the
Lex  belongs  to  the  period  between  the  consulship  of
P.  Cornelius  Scipio  Nasica  and  L.  Calpumius  Piso
Bestia,  B.  c.  Ill,  and  that  of  L.  Julius  Caesar,
B.  c.  90,  within  which  space  of  twenty  two  yeara


700


LEX  THORIA.


five  Agrarian  laws  were  enacted,  Boria,  Thoria,
Marcia,  Apuleia,  and  Titia.  It  further  appears
from  comparing  two  passages  of  Cicero  {de  Or.  ii.
70 ;  and  Brutus,  36),  in  which  he  speaks  of  the
Lex  Thoria,  with  the  fragments  of  this  Lex  whose
title  is  lost,  that  tlie  fragments  are  those  of  the
Lex  Thoria.  Now  the  date  of  the  Lex  Thoria  is
fixed  by  Kudorff  at  the  year  of  the  city  643  or
IJ.  c.  Ill,  which  is  consequently  the  date  of  the
Lex  on  the  bronze  tablet,  thus  identified  with
the  Lex  Thoria.  Proceeding  on  the  assumption
that  the  fragmentary'  Lex  was  the  Plebiscitum,
called  the  Lex  Thoria,  Sigonius  restored  the  be-
ginning of  it  according  to  the  usual  form  of  Roman
Plebiscita :  Sp.  Thorivs  .  .  .  F.  Tr.  PI.  Plebem  ivre
rog.  Plebesque  ivre  scivit  Tribvs  ....  Principivm
fvit  pro  tribv  Q.  Fabivs.  Q.  F.  primvs  scivit.

The  history  of  this  inscription  is  curious.  It
was  not  cut  on  the  rough  back  of  the  bronze  tablet
till  after  the  other  side,  which  is  smooth,  had  been
occupied  by  the  Servilia  Lex.  The  Servilia  Lex
is  certainly  not  of  earlier  date  than  the  year  of  the
city  648,  or  B.C.  106,  and  consequently  the  Thoria
could  not  have  been  cut  on  this  tablet  before  the
year  648.  It  seems  that  the  tablet  was  large
enough  for  the  Lex  Servilia,  for  which  it  was  in-
tended, but  much  too  small  for  the  Agrarian  Law :
"  consequently,  the  characters  of  the  Agrarian  side
of  the  tablet  are  remarkably  small,  the  lines  nar-
row, the  abbreviations  numerous,  and  the  chapters
only  separated  by  two  or  three  points,  whereas  on
the  other  side  the  letters  are  uniform,  large,  and
well  made,  the  lines  wide,  the  words  written  at
full  length,  and  the  chapters  of  the  Lex  separated
by  superscriptions.  Further,  the  lines  (of  the
Agrarian  Lex)  are  often  so  oblique  that  they  cross
the  straight  lines  on  the  opposite  side,  which  are
cut  very  deep  and  consequently  are  visible  on  the
side  on  which  the  Agrarian  Lex  is  cut."  (Rudorff.)

The  subject-matter  of  this  Lex  cannot  be  stated
without  entering  into  detail :  the  whole  is  examined
by  Rudorff  with  great  care.  The  main  subject  of
the  Lex  to  which  the  first  eighteen  chapters  or
forty-three  lines  refer,  is  the  Public  land  in  Italy
as  far  fis  the  rivers  Rubico  and  Macra.  The  second
part  of  the  Lex  begins  with  the  nineteenth  chap-
ter and  the  forty-fourth  line,  and  extends  to  the
fiftieth  chapter  and  the  ninety-sixth  line:  this
part  of  the  Lex  relates  to  the  Public  and  Private
land  in  the  Province  of  Africa.  The  third  and
last  part  of  the  Lex,  from  the  fiftieth  chapter  and
the  ninety-sixth  line  to  the  end  of  the  inscription,
relates  to  the  Roman  Public  land  in  the  territory
of  Corinth.

Rudorff  concludes  that  the  Lex  applied  to  other
land  also  ;  and  for  two  reasons.  First,  the  Roman
Agrarian  Laws  of  the  seventh  century  of  the  city,
related  to  all  the  provinces  of  the  empire,  of  which
we  have  an  example  in  the  case  of  the  Lex  Servilia
of  Rullus.  Secondly,  the  fragment  of  the  Lex
Thoria,  which  is  preserved,  is  so  broad  compared
with  the  height  that  we  may  conclude  that  the
complete  tablet  contained  three  times  as  much  as
it  does  now  ;  for  nearly  all  the  bronze  tablets  on
which  Roman  laws  are  cut,  are  of  an  oblong  form,
with  the  height  much  greater  than  their  width.
Of  the  two-thirds  of  the  tablet  which  it  is  con-
cluded have  been  lost,  not  a  trace  has  yet  been
discovered.

The  essay  of  Rudorff  contains  a  copy  of  the  in-
scription, with  the  restoration  of  the  passages  that


LEGES  VALERIAE.

are  defaced.  The  value  of  this  attempt  can  only
be  estimated  by  an  investigation  as  complete  as
that  of  the  author.

TI'TIA,  similar  in  its  provisions  to  the  Lex
Publicia.     (Dig.  1 1.  tit.  5.  s.  3.)

TFTIA  DE  TUTO'RIBUS  (see  Julia  Lkx
ET  TiTiA,  and  Gains  i.  195).

TREBO'NIA,  a  plebiscitum  proposed  by  L.
Trebonius,  B.  c.  448,  which  enacted  that  if  the  ten
tribunes  were  not  chosen  before  the  Comitia  were
dissolved,  those  who  were  elected  should  not  fill
up  the  number  {co-optare),  but  that  the  Comitia
should  be  continued  till  the  ten  were  elected.  (Liv.
iii.  65,  V.  1 0.)

TREBO'NIA  DE  PROVFNCIIS  CONSU-
LA'RIBUS.  (Plut.  CaLMin.  43  ;  Liv. Epit.  105  ;
Dion  Cass,  xxxix.  33.)

TRIBUNI'TIA.     [Tribunus.]

TU'LLIA  DE  A'MBITU.     [AMBirtis.J

TU'LLIA  DE  LEGATIO'NE  LFBERA.
[Legatus,  p.  679,  a.]

VALE'RIAE  LEGES.  In  b.  c.  508,  the  con-
sul P.  Valerius  proposed  and  carried  various  leges,
the  purpose  of  which  was  to  relieve  himself  from
the  suspicion  of  aiming  at  kingly  power,  and  to
increase  his  popularity.  The  chief  were  a  Lex
which  gave  an  appeal  (provocatio)  to  the  populiis
against  magistratus,  and  one  which  declared  to  be
accursed,  and  devoted  the  man  and  his  propert}-,
who  should  form  a  design  to  seize  the  kingly  power
(Liv.  ii.  8).  Ovving  to  these  popular  measures,
the  consul  received  the  cognomen  of  Publicola,  by
which  he  is  generally  known.  This  statement  of
the  law  on  Provocatio  by  Livy  is  very  brief  and
unsatisfactory.  Cicero  (de  Rep.  ii.  31)  states
more  distinctly  that  this  Lex  was  the  first  that  was
passed  at  the  Comitia  Centuriata,  and  that  the
provisions  were  "  ne  quis  magistratus  civem  Roma-
num  adversus  provocationem  necaret  neve  verbe-
rarct."  The  Lex,  therefore,  secured  the  right  of
appeal  to  all  Roman  cives  ;  and  it  is  consistent
with  this,  that  some  of  the  Roman  cives,  the  patri-
cians, as  Niebuhr  states,  had  already  the  provo-
catio to  their  curiae.  This  right  of  provocatio  only
applied  to  Rome  and  a  mile  round  the  city,  for
the  Imperium  of  the  consuls  beyond  this  boundary
was  unlimited  (Liv.  iii.  20,  neque  enim  provocatio-
nem esse  longius  ab  urbe  mille  passuum).  Con-
formably to  this,  the  Judicia  quae  Imperio  continen-
tur  comprised  among  other  cases  those  where  the
Judicium  was  beyond  the  limits  of  the  mille  pas-
sus.  The  substance  of  the  two  Leges  is  stated  by
Dionysius  {Antiq,  Rom.  v.  19,  70)  with  more  pre-
cision and  apparently  in  accordance  with  the  terms
of  the  Leges.  The  right  of  provocatio  was  in-
tended to  protect  persons  against  'the  summary
jurisdiction  of  the  consuls,  by  giving  them  an  ap-
peal to  the  Stj/uos,  and  until  the  irK^Oos  decided
on  their  case,  no  punishment  could  be  inflicted.
(c.  70.)  In  c.  19  it  is  said  that  the  appeal  was
also  to  the  S^/xos  ;  and  this  measure  made  Publi-
cola popular  with  the  Stj^uotj/co^,  whom  we  must
take  to  be  the  Plebs  (comp.  Dionys.  ix.  39).  Dio-
nysius generally  uses  Sriiuios  to  signify  Plebs  ;  but
he  also  uses  irKridos  in  the  same  sense  (vii.  65,
viii.  70,  71,  X.  40).

VALE'RIAE  ET  HORA'TIAE  LEGES  weie
proposed  by  the  consuls  L.  Valerius  and  M.  Ho-
ratius  b.  c.  449.  (Liv.  iii.  55.)  One  of  these
Leges  which  was  passed  at  the  Comitia  Centuriata
was   "  ut  quod  tributim  plebes  jussisset  populum


LEX  VICESIMARIA.

teneret,"  the  import  of  which  is  not  easy  to  dis-
tinguish from  the  later  Publilia  Lex  (Liv.  viii.  12),
"ut  plebiscita  omnes  Quirites  tenerent."  [Ple-
BisciTUM  ;  Publilia  Lex.]

A  second  Lex  was  intended  to  secure  the  prin-
ciple of  the  Lex  Valeria  De  Provocatione  ;  "that  if
any  person  appointed  (creasset)  a  magistratus  with-
out appeal,  it  was  lawful  to  kill  such  person."
Creasset  has  here  a  technical  meaning.  (Liv.  iii.
55^  iv.  13  ;  Cic.  de  Rep.  ii.  31  ;  "ne  qui  magistra-
tus sine  provocatione  crearetur.")  This  Lex  was
enacted  again  B.  c.  300  (Liv.  x.  9)  on  the  proposal
of  M.  Valerius,  consul  ;  and  the  sanction  of  the
Lex  was  more  carefully  expressed  (diligentius
sanctam).  This,  says  Livy,  was  the  third  time
that  this  Lex  was  enacted  since  the  expulsion  of
the  kings  :  "  the  cause  of  its  being  enacted  several
times  I  take  to  be  no  other  than  this,  that  the
power  of  a  few  was  greater  than  the  liberty  of
the  plebs."  This  is  a  plain  and  intelligible  account
of  the  matter,  and  may  be  safely  accepted.  The
Great  Charter  of  England  was  ratified  more  than
once.  A  Lex  Duilia  (Liv.  iii.  55)  which  imme-
diately followed  these  Valeriae,  again  enacted,  among
other  things,  severe  penalties  against  him  "  qui
magistratum  sine  provocatione  creasset."  The  plebs
thought  they  were  never  safe  enough  against  the
nobility,  and  they  had  good  grounds  to  be  suspi-
cious.

A  third  Lex  of  these  consuls  was  to  protect  the
persons  of  the  tribuni  plebis,  aediles,  judices,  de-
cemviri. Any  person  who  violated  their  personality
was  sacer,"  devoted,"  and  his  familia,  liberi  liberae-
que,  were  to  be  sold.  It  is  not  known  who  are
meant  by  judices  and  decemviri  in  this  passage.
The  context  shows  that  they  were  persons  of  the
plebeian  class  or  in  the  plebeio.n  interest.  Niebuhr's
conjecture  that  the  judices  may  be  the  Centumviri
is  ingenious  and  probable.  All  conjectures  about
the  decemviri  are  vague.

VALE'RIA  HORA'TIA.     [Plebiscitum.]

VA'RIA.     [Majestas.]

VATFNIA  DE  PROVFNCIIS  was  the  en-
actment by  which  Julius  Caesar  obtained  the  pro-
vince of  Gallia  Cisalpina  with  Illyricum  for  five
years,  to  which  the  senate  added  Gallia  Transal-
pina.  This  Plebiscitum  was  proposed  by  the  tri-
bune P.  Vatinius,  B.  c.  59.  (Dion  Cass,  xxxviii.  8  ;
Appian.  Bell.  Civ.  ii.  13  ;  Sueton.  Caes.  22  ;  Veil.
Pat.  ii.  44.)  A  Trebonia  Lex  subsequently  pro-
longed Caesar's  Imperium  for  five  years.

VATI'NIA.     [Repetundae.]

VATFNIA  DE  COLO'NIS,  under  which  the
Latina  Colonia  [Latinitas]  of  Novum-Comum  in
Gallia  Cisalpina  was  planted  B.  c.  59.  (Sueton.
Caes.  28.)

VATI'NIA  DE  REJECTIO'NE  JU'DICUM
(Cic.  in  Vatin.  c.  11  ;  Schol.  Boh.  321,  323.)

LEGES  DE  VL     [Vis.]

VIA'RIA.  A  Lex  that  was  talked  of  (Cic.
ad  Fain.  viii.  6)  is  only  worth  mention  on  account
of  the  name.  Such  a  Lex  might  be  De  Viis
Muniendis.

Some  modem  writers  speak  of  Leges  Viariae,
but  there  do  not  appear  to  be  any  Leges  properly
so  called.  The  provisions  as  to  roads  (viae)  in
many  of  the  Agrarian  laws  were  parts  of  such
leges,  and  had  no  special  reference  to  roads.
(Frontinus,  or,  as  he  is  often  called,  Pseudo-Fron-
tinus,  De  Coloniis  Liliellus.)

VICESIMA'RIA.      [VicKsiMA.]


LEX  VOCONIA.  roi

VFLLIA  ANNA'LIS.  [Annales,?.  684,  b.
and  the  Essay  of  Wex  on  the  Leges  Annales
of  the  Romans,  translated  in  the  Classical  Mu-
seum, No.  X.]

VISE'LLIA  made  a  man  liable  to  a  criminal
prosecution  who,  being  a  Latinus,  assumed  to  ex-
ercise the  rights  of  an  Ingenuus.   (Cod.  ix.  tit.  21.)

VOCO'NIA,  was  enacted  on  the  proposal  of
Q.  Voconius  Saxa,  a  Tribunus  Plebis.  In  the
"  De  Senectute  "  of  Cicero,  Cato  the  elder  is  in-
troduced as  saying  that  he  spoke  in  favour  of  the
Lex  when  he  was  sixty-five  years  of  age,  and  in
the  consulship  of  Caepio  and  Philippus.  (b.  c.
169.)  Gellius  also  speaks  of  the  oration  in  which
Cato  recommended  this  Lex.  (Cic.  pro  Balbo,  8,
Cato  Major,  5 ;  Gellius,  vii.  13,  xvii.  6.)

One  provision  of  the  Lex  was  that  no  person
who  should  be  included  in  the  census,  after  the
census  of  that  year  (posteos  censores  ;  the  Censors
of  that  year  were  A.  Postumius  and  Q.  Fulvius),
should  make  any  female  {virginem  neve  mulierem)
his  heres.  (Cic.  t«  Fen-ew,  i.  41,  42.)  Cicero  does
not  state  that  the  Lex  fixed  the  census  at  any
sum  ;  but  it  appears  from  Gaius  (ii.  274)  that  a
woman  could  not  be  made  heres  by  any  person
who  was  rated  in  the  census  at  100,000  asses  or
upwards  (centum  millia  aeris),  though  she  could
take  the  hereditas  per  fideicommissum.  Dion  Cas-
sius  (Ivi.  10)  names  the  sum  as  25,000  drachmae,
which  is  100,000  sestertii.  The  lex  allowed  no
exceptions  even  in  favour  of  an  only  daughter.
(Augustin,  de  Civit.  Dei,  iii.  21.)  The  Lex  only
applied  to  testaments,  and  therefore  a  daughter
or  other  female  could  inherit  ab  intestate  to  any
amount.  The  Vestal  Virgins  could  make  women
their  heredes  in  all  cases,  which  was  the  only
exception  to  the  provisions  of  the  Lex.  (Cic.  de
Rep.  iii.  10  ;  Gell.  i.  12.)

If  the  terms  of  the  Lex  are  correctly  reported
by  Cicero,  a  person  who  was  not  census  might
make  a  woman  his  heres,  whatever  was  the  amount
of  his  property,  and  so  Cicero  understands  the  Lex
{in  Verr.  ii.  41).  Still  there  is  a  difficulty  about
the  meaning  of  census.  If  it  is  taken  to  mean  that
a  person  whose  property  was  above  100,000,  and
who  was  not  included  in  the  census,  could  dispose
of  his  property  as  he  pleased  by  testament,  the
purpose  of  the  Lex  would  be  fnistrated  ;  and
further  "  the  not  being  included  in  the  census  ■"
(neque  census  esset)  seems  rather  vague.  Still,  ac-
cording to  the  terms  of  the  Lex,  any  person  who
had  ever  been  included  in  the  census,  would  be
affected  by  this  legal  incapacity.  Sometimes  it  is
assumed  that  the  last  census  is  meant.  The  Edict
extended  the  rule  of  the  Voconia  Lex  to  the  Bo-
norum  Possessio.     (Dig.  37.  tit.  1.  s.  12.)

Another  provision  of  the  Lex  forbade  a  person,
who  was  census,  to  give  more  in  amount  in  the
form  of  a  legacy  or  a  donatio  mortis  causa,  to  any
person  than  the  heres  or  heredes  should  take.
This  provision  secured  something  to  the  heres  or
heredes,  but  still  the  provision  was  inefiectual,  and
the  object  of  this  lex  was  only  accomplished  by
the  Lex  Falcidia.  [Legatum.]  Gaius  (ii.  226),
in  quoting  this  provision  of  the  Lex,  does  not
mention  the  condition  of  being  census,  but  this  is
stated  by  Cicero  {in  Verr.  i.  43).

Some  writers  suppose  that  this  Lex  also  con-
tained a  provision  by  which  a  testator  was  forbid-
den to  give  a  woman  more  than  half  of  his  property
by  way  of  legacy ;  and  it  appears  from  Cicero  that


702


LEX  VOCONIA.


the  Lex  applied  to  legacies  (de  muUerum  lefjatis  el
Jiereditatibus,  Cic.  de  Repub.  iii.  10).  But  this
provision  is  not  allowed  by  some  of  the  best  critics
to  have  been  a  part  of  the  Lex.  Quintiliaii
{Declam.  2C4)  states  that  by  the  Lex  (Voconia)  a
woman  could  not  take  by  testament  more  than  half
of  a  person\s  property  ;  but  Quintilian  says  nothing
of  the  provisions  of  this  Lex,  which  incapacitated
women  altogether  from  taking  under  a  will  in
certain  cases,  and  in  the  passage  referred  to  he
is  speaking  of  two  women  being  made  heredes  of
a  property  in  equal  shares.  The  dispute  between
the  cognati  and  the  two  women  turned  on  the
words  of  the  Lex,  "  ne  liceat  mulieri  plusquam
diraidiam  partem  bonorum  suorum  relinquere,"  the
cognati  contending  that  the  Lex  did  not  allow  the
whole  property  to  be  thus  given  to  two  women  in
equal  shares,  though  it  was  admitted  that  if  half  of
the  property  had  been  given  to  one  woman,  there
would  have  been  no  ground  for  dispute.  It  is
quite  consistent  that  the  Lex  might  have  allowed  a
woman  to  take  half  of  a  man's  property  in  certain
cases,  and  in  others  to  take  none,  though  the  object
of  the  Lex,  which  was  to  prevent  large  properties
from  coming  into  women's  hands,  would  have  been
better  secured  by  other  provisions  than  those  of
the  Lex  as  they  are  known  to  us  ;  for  it  appears
from  Quintilian,  that  a  woman  might  take  by  will
one  half  of  as  many  properties  as  there  were  tes-
tators. It  might  be  conjectured  that  the  clause  of
the  Lex  which  forbade  a  woman  being  made  heres,
signified  sole  heres,  and  then  the  clause  which
forbade  her  taking  more  than  half  would  be  fitly
framed  to  prevent  an  evasion  of  the  law  by  making
a  woman  heres  ex  deunce,  for  instance,  and  giving
the  rest  to  another  person.  And  this  conjecture
derives  some  support  from  the  provision  of  the  Lex
Voconia  which  prevented  the  giving  nearly  all  the
property  in  legacies  to  the  detriment  of  the  heres  ;
which  provision,  however,  it  must  be  observed,
does  not  apply  to  women  only  (Gaius,  ii.  226).
The  case  of  Fadia,  mentioned  by  Cicero  (de  Fin.
ii.  17),  shows  that  there  was  a  provision  in  the
l^ex  by  which,  in  certain  cases  at  least,  a  woman
might  take  something  ;  and  it  also  shows  that  the
Lex  prevented  a  man  from  making  even  his  own
daughter  sole  heres.

According  to  Gaius  and  Pliny  {Paneg.  42),  the
provisions  of  the  Voconia  Lex  were  in  force  at  the
time  when  they  wore  writing,  though  Gellius  (xx.
1)  speaks  of  them  as  being  either  obsolete  or  re-
pealed. The  provisions  of  the  Lex  Julia  et  Papia
Poppaea  may  have  repealed  some  of  the  clauses  of
the  Voconia  Lex.

The  subject  of  the  Voconia  Lex  is  one  of  con-
siderable difficulty,  owing  to  the  imperfect  state-
ments that  remain  of  its  contents  and  provisions,
which  were  probably  numerous.  The  chief  modern
authorities  on  the  matter  are  referred  to  by  Rein
(Das  R'6m.  Privat.  Redd^  p.  367,  &c.),  and  in
Orellii  Onomaslicon.  The  latest  essay  on  it  that
the  writer  has  seen  is  "  Die  Lex  Voconia  &c."
by  Dr.  J.  J.  Bachofen,  Basel,  1843  ;  but  the  essay
does  not  settle  all  the  difficulties.

This  list  of  Leges  may  not  be  quite  complete,
and  the  d.ites  of  some  of  them  and  the  statement
of  their  purport  may  not  be  perfectly  accurate.
Still  it  contains  all  the  Leges  that  are  of  any  im-
portance for  the  understanding  of  Roman  History
and  Jurisprudence.  Those  which  are  not  specially
noticed  here,  are  referred  to  their  proper  heads,


LIBELLUS.

particularly  when  there  are  many  Leges  relating
to  one  subject,  as  Ambitus,  Repetundae,  &c.
Several  of  the  Roman  Leges  were  modified  by
Senatusconsnlta.  The  Senatusconsulta,  which  are
properly  laws,  are  enumerated  imder  Senatus-
CONSULTUM.  [G.  L.]

LEXIARCHI  (XviV^apxoi).  [Ecclesia,  p.
441,  a.]

LEXIARCHICON  (Xv^iapxiKSv).  [Demus.]
LEXIS  (A^lis).  [Dike.]
LIBELLA,  instruments.  [Libra.]
LIBELLA,  a  small  Roman  silver  coin,  which
is  mentioned  by  Varro  {L.  L.  v.  36,  p.  68,  Miil-
ler)  as  having  existed  in  the  early  age  of  the  city,
but  which  in  his  time,  and  apparently  for  a  con-
siderable period  before,  was  no  longer  coined.
The  name,  however,  was  retained  especially  as  a
proverbial  expression  for  a  very  small  value.  (Plant.
Pseud,  ii.  2.  34,  Capt.  v.  1.  27  ;  Cic.  Ferr.  ii.  2,
pro  Rose.  Com.  4.)  It  was  equal  in  value  to  the
as  (whence  its  name),  and,  in  the  system  of
silver  money,  it  was  the  tenth  part  of  the  denarius.
(Varr.  /.  c.  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii.  3.  s  13.)  The
words  of  Varro  and  Pliny  clearly  imply  that  the
lihella  was  equal  in  value  to  the  old  full-weight
as;  and  it  seems  most  probable  that  the  coin
ceased  being  struck  at  the  time  of  the  reduction
of  the  c/s,  on  account  of  the  inconveniently  small
size  which  it  would  have  assumed.  The  lihella
was  subdivided  into  the  sembella,  its  half,  and  the
teruncius,  its  quarter.  Cicero  (ad  Att.  vii.  12)  uses
these  words  to  express  fractions  of  an  estate,  with
reference  to  the  denarius  as  the  unit,  the  libella
signifying  1-lOth,  and  the  teruncius  l-40th  of
the  whole  (Bbckh,  Metrol.  Untersuch.  p.  453,
&c.).  [P.S.]

LIBELLUS,  is  the  diminutive  form  of  liber,  and
signifies  properly  a  little  book.  A  libellus  was
distinguished  from  other  kinds  of  writings,  by  b?ing
written  like  our  books  by  pages,  whereas  other
writings  were  written  transversa  charta.  (Suet.
Caes.  5^.')  A  libellus,  however,  did  not  necessarily
consist  of  several  pages.  It  was  used  by  the  Ro-
mans as  a  technical  term  in  the  following  cases  :  —

1.  Libelli  accusatorum  or  accusatorii  were  tlie
written  accusations  which  in  some  cases  a  plaintiif,
after  having  received  the  permission  to  bring  an
action  against  a  person,  drew  up,  signed,  and  sent
to  the  judicial  authorities,  viz.,  in  the  city  to  the
praetor,  and  in  a  province  to  the  proconsul.  (Cod.
9.  tit.  2.  s.  8  ;  Dig.  48.  tit.  5.  s.  2.  17.  29  ;  47.
tit.  2.  s.  74  ;  compare  Actio.)  The  form  in
which  a  libellus  accusatorius  was  to  be  written,  is
described  by  Ulpian  in  a  case  of  adultery.  (Dig.
48.  tit,  2.  s.  3.)  The  accuser  had  to  sign  the  libel-
lus, and  if  he  could  not  write,  he  was  obliged  to
get  somebody  else  to  do  it  for  him.  If  the  libel-
lus was  not  written  in  the  proper  legal  form,  it
was  invalid,  but  the  plaintiff  had  still  the  right  to
bring  the  same  action  again  in  its  legal  form.
(Juv.  vi.  244,  &c.  •,  Tacit.  Ann.  iii.  44  ;  Plin.  Epist.
vii.  27  ;  compare  Brisson.  de  Form.  v.  c.  187,  &c.)

2.  TAbelli  famosi  were  what  we  call  libels  or
pasquinades,  intended  to  injure  the  charactor  of
persons.  A  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  inflicted
very  severe  punishments  on  those  who  composed
defamatory  writings  against  any  person.  (C'xc.de
Re  Pub.  iv.  10  ;  Arnob.  iv.  p.  151.)  During  the
latter  part  of  the  republic  this  law  appears  to  have
been  in  abeyance,  for  Tacitus  (Ann.  i.  72)  says  that
previous  to  the  time  of  Augustus  libels  had  never


LIBELLUS.

})oen  legally  punished  (compare  Cic.  adFam.  iii.  11),
jind  that  Augustus  provoked  by  the  audacity  with
Avhich  Cassius  Severus  brought  into  disrepute  the
most  illustrious  persons  of  the  age,  ordained,  by  a
lex  majestatis,  that  the  authors  of  libelli  famosi
should  be  brought  to  trial.  On  this  occasion  Au-
gustus, wlio  was  informed  of  the  existence  of
several  such  works,  had  a  search  made  at  Rome  by
the  acdiles,  and  in  other  places  by  the  local  magis-
trates, and  ordered  the  libels  to  be  burnt  ;  some  of
the  authors  were  subjected  to  punishment.  (Dion
Cass.  Ivi.  27.)  A  law  quoted  by  Ulpian  (Dig.  47.
tit,  10.  s.  5)  ordained  that  the  author  of  a  libellus
famosus  should  be  intestabilis,  and  during  the  later
period  of  the  empire  we  find  that  capital  punish-
ment was  not  only  inflicted  upon  the  author,  but
upon  those  persons  in  whose  possession  a  libellus
famosus  was  found,  or  who  did  not  destroy  it  as
soon  as  it  came  into  their  hands,  (Cod.  9.  tit.  36.)
For  further  information  on  this  subject  see  Rein,
Das  Cnminalrccht  der  Romer^  pp.  378,  &c.  531,

3.  Libellus  memorialis,  a  pocket  or  memorandum
book,  (Suet,  Cues.  56.)  The  libellus,  from  which
Cicero  (ad  Alt.  vi.  1.  §  5)  communicfites  a  memo-
randum of  Brutus,  appears  to  have  been  a  book  of
this  kind,

4.  Liheltus  is  used  by  the  Roman  jurists  as
equivalent  to  O ratio  Principis.  [Orationes  Prin-

CIPUM.]

5.  The  word  libellus  was  also  applied  to  a
variety  of  writings,  which  in  most  cases  probably
consisted  of  one  page  only  :  —

a.  To  short  letters  addressed  to  a  person  for  the
purpose  of  cautioning  him  against  some  danger
which  threatened  his  life  (Sueton,  C«es.  81,  Calig.
]  5)  ;  and  to  any  short  letters  or  reports  addressed
to  the  senate  or  private  individuals.  (Suet,  Caes.
56,  August.  84  ;  Cic.  ad  Fam.  xi.  1 1.)

h.  To  the  bills  called  libelli  fjladiatorii,  or  mune-
rarii,  which  persons  who  gave  gladiatorial  exhibi-
tions distributed  among  the  people.  [Gladiatores,
p.  574,  b.]

c.  To  petitions  to  the  emperors.  (Suet.  Aug.  53  ;
Mart.  viii.  31,  3,  82.  1.)  The  emperors  had  their
especial  officers  or  secretaries  who  attended  to  all
petitions  {libellis  praefedus^  Dig.  20.  tit,  5),  and
who  read  and  answered  them  in  the  name  of  the
emperor,  (Suet,  Domit.  l-i.)  Such  a  libellus  is
still  extant.     See  Gruter,  Jnscri-pt.  p,  Dcvii.  1 .

d.  To  the  bill  of  appeal  called  liheilus  a.ppella-
torius.,  which  a  person  who  did  not  acquiesce  in  a
judicial  sentence,  had  to  send  in  after  the  lapse  of
two  or  three  days.  (Dig.  40.  tit.  1.)

e.  To  the  bills  stuck  up  in  the  most  frequented
parts  of  the  city,  in  case  of  a  debtor  having  ab-
sconded. (Cic.  pro  Quint.  6,  15,  19  ;  Rein, /?o/7?..
Prlvatr.  p.  499.)  Such  bills  were  also  stuck  upon
the  estates  of  such  a  debtor,  and  his  friends  who
wished  to  pay  for  him  sometimes  pulled  down  such
bills.   (Senec.  de  Benef.  iv.  12.)

f.  To  bills  in  which  persons  announced  to  the
public  that  they  had  found  things  which  had  been
lost,  and  in  which  they  invited  the  owner  to  claim
his  property.  (Plant. '^mc?.  v.  2.  7,  &c.  ;  Dig.  47.
tit.  2.  s.  44.)  The  owner  gave  to  the  finder  a  re-
Avard  (euperpa)  and  received  his  property  back.
Sometimes  the  owner  also  made  known  to  the
public  by  a  libellus  what  he  had  lost,  stated  his
name  and  residence,  and  promised  to  give  a  reward
to  the  person  who  found  his  property,  and  brought
ii  back  to  him.  (Propert.  iii,  21,  21,  &c,)    [L,'S.]


LIBER.


■03


LIBER  (fiiSXiof)  a  book.  The  most  common
material  on  which  books  were  written  by  the
Greeks  and  Romans,  was  the  thin  coats  or  rind
(liber,  whence  the  Latin  name  for  a  book)  of  the
Egyptian  papyrus.  This  plant  was  called  by  the
Egyptians  %Wos  (jSugAos),  whence  the  Greeks  de-
rived their  name  for  a  book  (l3i§\iov).  It  formed
an  article  of  commerce  long  before  the  time  of
Herodotus  (v,  58),  and  was  extensively  used  in
the  western  part  of  Europe,  as  is  proved  by  the
number  of  rolls  of  papyri  found  at  Herculaneum.
In  the  sixth  century  of  the  Christian  aera  the
duty  on  imported  papyi-us  was  abolished  by  Theo-
doric  the  Great,  on  which  occasion  Cassiodorus
wrote  a  letter  (xi,  38),  in  which  he  congratulates
the  world  on  the  cessation  of  a  tax  so  unfavourable
to  the  progress  of  learning  and  of  commerce.  The
papyrus-tree  grows  in  swamps  to  the  height  of
ten  feet  and  more,  and  paper  was  prepared  from
the  thin  coats  or  pellicles  which  surround  the  plant
in  the  following  manner  according  to  Pliny  (xiii.
23) : —  The  ditlerent  pieces  were  joined  together  by
the  turbid  Nile  water,  as  it  has  a  kind  of  glutin-
ous property.  A  layer  of  papyrus  (sclieda  or
philyra)  was  laid  flat  on  a  board,  and  a  cross  layer
put  over  it ;  and  being  thus  prepared,  the  layers
were  pressed  and  afterwards  dried  in  the  sun.
The  sheets  were  then  fastened  or  pasted  together,
the  best  being  taken  first  and  then  the  inferior
sheets.  There  were  never  more  than  twenty  in  a
scapus  or  roll.  The  papyri  found  in  Egyptian
tombs  difier  very  much  in  length,  but  not  much  in
breadth,  as  the  breadth  was  probably  determined
by  the  usual  length  of  the  strips  taken  from  the
plant.  The  length  might  be  carried  to  almost  any
extent  by  fastening  one  sheet  to  another.  The
writing  was  in  columns  with  a  blank  slip  between
them.  {Egyptian  Antiquities,  vol.  ii.  ch.  7,  Lond,
1836.)  The  form  and  general  appearance  of  the
papyri  rolls  will  be  understood  from  the  following
woodcut  taken  from  paintings  found  at  Pompeii.
(Gell,  Pomp.  vol.  ii.  p.  187,)


The  paper  {citarta)  made  from  the  papyrus  was  of
difl^ere  It  qualities.  The  best  was  called  after  Au-
gustus, the  second  after  Livia,  the  third,  which  was
originally  the  best,  was  named  Hlcratica,  because
it  was  appropriated  to  the  sacred  books.  The
finest  paper  was  subsequently  called  Claudia,  from
the  emperor  Claudius.  The  inferior  kinds  were
called  Amphitheatnca,  Saitica,  Leiieotica,  from  the
places  in  Egypt  where  it  was  made,  and  also
Fanniana,  from  one  Fannius,  who  had  a  celebrated
manufactory  at  Rome.  The  kind  called  Emporetica
was  not  fit  for  writing,  and  was  chiefly  used  by
merchants  for  packing  their  goods,  from  which  cir-
cumstance it  obtained  its  name.  (Piia.  xiii.  23,
24.)

Next  to  the  papynis,  parchment  (memlrana)
was  the  most  common  material  for  writing  upon.


^04


LIBER.


It  is  said  to  have  been  invented  by  Eumenes  II.
king  of  Pergamus,  in  consequence  of  the  prohibi-
tion of  the  export  of  papyrus  from  Egypt,  by
Vtolemy  Epiphanes.  (Plin.  xiii.  21.)  It  is  pro-
bable, however,  that  Eumenes  introduced  only
some  improvement  in  the  manufacture  of  parch-
ment, as  Herodotus  mentions  writing  on  skins  as
common  in  his  time,  and  says  that  the  lonians  had
been  accustomed  to  give  the  name  of  skins  (Si(p9e-
pat)  to  books  (v.  58).  Other  materials  are  also
mentioned  as  used  for  writing  on,  but  books  appear
to  have  been  almost  invariably  written  either
upon  papyrus  or  parchment.

The  ancients  wrote  usually  on  only  one  side  of
the  paper  or  parchment,  whence  Juvenal  (i.  5)
speaks  of  an  extremely  long  tragedy  as

"  Summi  plena  jam  margine  libri

Scriptus  et  in  tergo  necdum  finitus  Orestes."

Such  works  were  called  Opistograpld  (Plin.  Ep.
iii.  5),  and  are  also  said  to  be  written  in  aversa
charta.    (Mart.  viii.  62.)

The  back  of  the  paper,  instead  of  being  written
upon,  was  usually  stained  with  saffron  colour  or
the  cedrus.  (Lucian,  irphs  airaiS.  16.  vol.  iii.  p.
113;  croceae  viembrana  tabellae,  Juv.  vii.  23  ;  Pers.
iii.  10.)  We  learn  from  Ovid  that  the  cedrus
produced  a  yellow  colour.    (Ovid,  THs^.  iii.  1.  13.)

As  paper  and  parchment  were  dear,  it  was  fre-
quently the  custom  to  erase  or  wash  out  writing  of
little  importance,  and  to  write  upon  the  paper  or
parchment  again,  which  was  then  called  Palim-
psestus  {■7ra\LiJ.\pr](rTos).  This  practice  is  mentioned
by  Cicero  (cui  Fam.  vii.  18),  who  praises  his  friend
Trebatius  for  having  been  so  economical  as  to  write
upon  a  palimpsest,  but  wonders  what  those  writ-
ings could  have  been  which  were  considered  of  less
importance  than  a  letter.  (Compare  Catull.  xxii.
5  ;  Martial,  xiv.  7.)

The  paper  or  parchment  was  joined  together  so
as  to  form  one  sheet ;  and  when  the  work  was
finished,  it  was  rolled  on  a  staff,  whence  it  was
called  a  volumen ;  and  hence  we  have  the  expres-
sion evolvere  libruni.  (Cic.  ad  Att.  ix.  10.)  When
an  author  divided  a  work  into  several  books,  it
was  usual  to  include  only  one  book  in  a  volume  or
roll,  so  that  there  Avere  generally  the  same  number
of  volumes  as  of  books.  Thus  Ovid  (Trist  i.  1.
117)  calls  his  fifteen  books  of  Metamorphoses
"mutatae  ter  quinque  volumina  formae."  (Com-
pare Cic.  Tusc.  iii.  3,  ad  Fam.  xvii.  17.)  When
a  book  was  long,  it  was  sometimes  divided  into
two  volumes  ;  thus  Pliny  (Ep.  iii.  5)  speaks  of  a
work  in  three  books  "in  sex  volumina  propter
amplitudincra  divisi."

In  the  papyri  rolls  found  at  Herculaneum,  the
stick  on  which  the  papynis  is  rolled  does  not  pro-
ject from  the  papyrus,  but  is  concealed  by  it.
Usually,  however,  there  were  balls  or  bosses,
ornamented  or  painted,  called  umbilici  or  comua,
which  were  fastened  at  each  end  of  the  stick  and
projected  from  the  papyrus.  (Martial,  iii.  2,  v.  6,
15  ;  Tibull.  iii.  1.  14  ;  Ovid.  Trist.  i.  1.  8.)  The
ends  of  the  roll  were  carefully  cut,  polished  with
pumice-stone  and  coloured  black  ;  they  were  called
the  geminae  /routes.     (Ovid.  I.  c.)

To  protect  the  roll  from  injury  it  was  frequently
put  in  a  parchment  case,  which  was  stained  with  a
}>urple  colour  or  with  the  yellow  of  the  Lutum.
Martial  (x.  93)  calls  such  a  covering^  a  purpurea
kxfa.     Something  of  the  same  kind  is  meant  by


LIBERALITAS.

the  Greek  sittybae  (a-irrvSai,  Cic.  ad  Att.  iv.  5),
which  Hesychius  explains  by  Sep/xdrD/ai  trroAoi.

The  title  of  the  book  (titulus  index)  was  written
on  a  small  strip  of  papyrus  or  parchment  with  a
light  red  colour  {coccum  ov  minium).  Winkelmann
supposed  that  the  title  was  on  a  kind  of  ticket
suspended  to  the  roll,  as  is  seen  in  the  paintings
at  Herculaneum  (see  woodcut),  but  it  was  most
probably  stuck  on  the  papyrus  itself.  (Compare
Tibull, /.c.)  We  learn  from  Seneca  (tie  Tranq.
An.  9)  and  Martial  (xiv.  186)  that  the  portraits  of
the  authors  were  often  placed  on  the  first  page  of
the  work.

As  the  demand  for  books  increased  towards  the
end  of  the  Roman  republic,  and  it  became  the
fashion  for  the  Roman  nobles  to  have  a  library,
the  trade  of  booksellers  naturally  arose.  They
were  called  Librarii  (Cic.  de  Leg.  iii.  20),  Biblio-
polae  (Mart.  iv.  71,  xiii.  3),  and  by  the  Greek
writers  fiiSxlwv  KairrjAot  or  jSiSAio/cotttjAoj.  Their
shop  was  called  taberna  libraria  (Cic.  Phil.  ii.  9).
These  shops  were  chiefly  in  the  Argiletum  (Mart,
i.  4),  and  in  the  Vicus  Sandalarius  (Gell  xviii.  4).
On  the  shop  door,  or  the  pillar,  as  the  case  might
be,  there  was  a  list  of  the  titles  of  books  on  sale :
allusion  is  made  to  this  by  Horace  (^Sat.  i.  4.  71,
^r^Poa  372)  and  Martial  (i.  118).  The  price
at  which  books  were  sold,  seems  to  have  been  mode-
rate. Martial  says  Q.  c.)  that  a  good  copy  of  the
first  book  of  his  epigrams  might  be  had  for  five
denarii.  In  the  time  of  Augustus,  the  Sosii  appear
to  have  been  the  great  booksellers  at  Rome.  (Hor.
Ep.  i.  20.  2,  Art. Pott.  345  ;  see  also  Becker,  Gallus,
vol.  i.  p.  163,  &c.)     Compare  the  articles  Atra-

MKNTUM,  BiBLIOTHECA,  CaLAMUS,  CaPSA,  STY-
LUS.

LIBER,  LIBERTAS.  The  Roman  writers  di-
vide all  men  into  Liberi  and  Servi  [Servus]  ;  and
men  were  either  bom  Liberi,  in  which  case  they
were  called  by  the  Romans  Ingenui  [Incjenui],  or
they  became  Liberi  after  being  Servi,  in  which
case  they  were  called  Libertini  [Libertus].
Libertus  is  defined  in  the  Institutes  of  Justinian
(l.tit.  1),  to  be  "the  natural  faculty  to  do  that
which  a  man  pleases,  except  he  be  in  any  thing
hindered  by  force  or  law."  Accordingly  the  Ro-
mans considered  Libertas  as  the  natural  state  or
condition  of  men  [Servus].  A  man  might  either
be  born  a  slave,  or  he  might  become  a  slave  by  loss
of  freedom.  Libertas  was  the  first  essential  of  the
three  which  determined  status  or  condition :  the
other  two  were  Civitas  and  Familia.  Without
Libertas  there  could  be  no  status.  Civitas  implied
Libertas  ;  but  Libertas  did  not  necessarily  imply
Civitas,  for  a  man  might  be  Liber  without  being
Civis.  [Civis.]  Familia  implies  both  Libertas
and  Civitas,  and  he  only  who  is  Civis  has  Familia.
[Familia.]  Thus,  Familia  necessarily  includes
Civitas,  but  Civitas  does  not  necessarily  include
Familia  in  one  sense;  for  familia  may  be  changed,
while  libertas  and  civitas  remain  (cum  et  libertas
et  civitas  retinetur,  familia  tantum  mutatur  mini-
mam  esse  capitis  diminutionem  constat :  Dig.  4.
tit.  5.  s.  11).  But  Civitas  so  far  necessarily  implied
Familia,  that  no  Civis  Romanus  was  permanently
without  Familia.  [G.  L.]

LI'BERA  FUGA.     [Exsilium.]
LIBERA'LIA.     [Dionysia.  p.  414,  a.]
LIBERA'LIS  CAUSA.     [Assertok.]
LIBERA'LIS  MANUS.     [Manus.]
LIBERA'LITAS.     [Ambitus.]


LIBERTUS.
LIBERO'RUM  JUS.    [Lex  Julia  et  Papia

POPPAEA,]

LIBERTUS  (a7reXei;0epos),  a  freedman.  1.
Greek.  It  was  not  unfrequent  for  a  master  at
Athens  to  restore  a  slave  to  freedom.  A  priTate
persoft,  it  appears,  might  liberate  his  slave  without
any  particular  formality  ;  sometimes  the  state
would  emancipate  a  slave,  but  then  the  purchase
money  had  to  be  restored  to  his  master.  (Plat.
de  Leg.  xi.  p.  914.)  The  state  into  which  a  slave
thus  entered  was  called  OKeXeudepia^  and  he  was
said  to  be  Kad^  lourdi/.  (Demosth.  pro  Pkorm.
p.  945.)  It  is  not  quite  certain  whether  those  per-
sons who  are  termed  ol  x^pls  oIkovutcs  (Demosth.
Philip,  i.  p.  50)  were  likewise  freedmen,  as  the
grammarians  assert,  or  whether  they  were  persons
yet  in  slavery,  but  living  separated  from  their  mas-
ters' household  ;  but  in  Demosthenes  (c.  Eiterg.  et
Mnesib.  p.  1161)  the  expression  x^P^''  V'^^'-  is  evi-
dently used  as  synonymous  with  "  he  has  been
emancipated."  A  slave  when  manumitted  entered
into  the  status  of  a  imctoikos  [Metoecus],  and
as  such  he  had  not  only  to  pay  the  fieToiKiou,  but
a  triobolon  in  addition  to  it.  This  triobolon  was
probably  the  tax  which  slave-holders  had  to  pa}^  to
the  republic  for  each  slave  they  kept,  so  that  the
triobolon  paid  by  freedmen  was  intended  to  in-
demnify the  state,  which  would  otherwise  have
lost  by  every  manumission  of  a  slave.  (Bockh,
Publ.  Econ.  of  Athens,  p.  331,  &c.,  2d  edit.)  The
connection  of  a  freedman  with  his  former  master
was  however  not  broken  off  entirely  on  his  manu-
mission, for  he  had  throughout  his  life  to  regard
him  as  his  patron  (TrpoarciTr/s),  and  to  fulfil  certjiin
duties  towards  him.  In  what  these  duties  con-
sisted beyond  the  obligation  of  showing  gratitude
and  respect  towards  his  deliverer,  and  of  taking
him  for  his  patron  in  all  his  affairs,  is  uncertain,
though  they  seem  to  have  been  fixed  by  the  laws
of  Athens.  (Meier  and  Schom.  Att.  Proc,  p.  473,
&c.  ;  Petit.  Leg.  Att.  ii.  6.  p.  261  ;  compare  Plato,
deLeg.xi.  p.  915.)  Whether  the  relation  exist-
ing between  a  person  and  his  freedman  descended
to  the  children  of  the  latter,  is  likewise  unknown.
That  a  master,  in  case  his  freedman  died,  had  some
claims  to  his  property,  is  clear  from  Isaeus  (de
Nicostrat.  hered.  c.  9  ;  Rhetor,  ad  Alex.  i.  16  ;
compare  Bunsen,  De  Jur.  hered.  Ath.  p.  51).  The
neglect  of  any  of  the  duties  which  a  freedman  had
towards  his  former  master,  was  prosecuted  by  the
aTTocrraffiov  hiKt).     [Apostasiou  Dike.]

The  Spartans  likewise  restored  their  slaves  some-
times to  freedom,  but  in  what  degree  such  freed-
men partook  of  the  civic  franchise  is  not  known.
That  they  could  never  receive  the  full  Spartan
franchise  is  expressly  stated  by  Dion  Chrysosto-
mus  {Orat.  xxxvi.  p.  448,  b),  but  Miiller  {Dor.
iii.  3.  §  5)  entertains  the  opinion  that  Spartan
freedmen,  after  passing  through  several  stages,
might  in  the  end  obtain  the  full  franchise  ;  this
opinion  however  is  more  than  doubtful.  Spartan
freedmen  were  frequently  used  in  the  armies  and
in  the  fleet,  and  were,  according  to  Myro  {ap.
J  then.  vi.  p.  271),  designated  by  the  names  of
ctc^eVat,  dSe'cTTroTot,  ^puKxrjpes,  dea-iroffiouavrai,
and  PfoBafKoSeis.  [L,  S.]

2.  Roman.  Freemen  (liberi)  were  either  In-
genui  [Ingenui]  or  Libertini.  Libertini  were
those  persons  who  had  been  released  from  legal
servitude  {qui  ex  justa  servitutc  manumissi  sunt.,
Gains,  i,  11).     A  manumitted  slave  was  Libertus


LIBERTUS.  706

(that  is,  liberatus)  with  reference  to  his  master  ;
with  reference  to  the  class  to  which  he  belonged
after  manumission,  he  was  Libertinus.  According
to  Suetonius,  libertinus  was  the  son  of  a  libertus
in  the  time  of  the  censor  Appius  Claudius,  and
for  some  time  after  {Claud,  c.  24)  ;  but  this  is  not
the  meaning  of  the  word  in  the  extant  Roman
writers.

There  were  three  modes  of  Legiiima  manumis-
sio,  the  vindicta,  the  census,  and  the  testamentum  :
if  the  manumitted  slave  was  above  thirty  years  of
age,  if  he  was  the  Quiritarian  property  of  his
master,  and  if  he  was  manumitted  in  proper  form
{legitime,  justa  et  legitima  munumissione)  he  became
a  Civis  Romanus :  if  any  of  these  conditions  were
wanting,  he  became  a  Latinus  ;  and  in  some  cases
only  3  Dediticius.  [MANUMissia]  Thus  there
were,  as  Ulpian  observes,  three  kinds  of  Liberti :
Gives  Romani,  Latini  Juniani,  and  Dediticii.

The  Status  of  a  Civis  Romanus  and  that  of  a
Dediticius,  have  been  already  described.  [Civitas;
Dediticii.]  As  to  the  political  condition  of  Liber-
tini under  the  republic,  who  were  Cives  Romani,
see  Manumissio.

Originally  slaves  who  were  so  manumitted  as
not  to  become  Cives  Romani,  were  still  slaves  ;  but
the  Praetor  took  them  under  his  protection,  and
maintained  their  freedom,  though  he  could  not
make  them  Cives  Romani.  The  Lex  Junia  gave
them  a  certain  status,  which  was  expressed  by  the
phrase  Latini  Juniani :  they  were  called  Latini,
says  Gaius  (i.  22,  iii.  56),  because  they  were  put
on  the  same  footing  as  the  Latini  Coloniarii,  and
Juniani  because  the  Junia  Lex  gave  them  freedom,
whereas  before  they  were  by  strict  law  {eco  Jure
Quiritium)  slaves.  Gaius  (iii.  56)  says  that  the
Lex  Junia  declared  such  manumitted  persons  to  be
as  free  as  if  they  had  been  Roman  citizens  by
birth  {cives  Romani  ingenui),  who  had  gone  out
from  Rome  to  join  a  Latin  colony,  and  thereby
had  become  Latini  Coloniarii :  this  passage,  which
is  not  free  from  difficulty,  is  remarked  on  by
Savigny  {Zeitschrifi,  ix.  p.  320).

A  Latinus  could  attain  the  Civitas  in  several
ways.  (Gaius,  i.  28,  &c.  ;  Ulp.  Frag.  tit.  3  ;  La-
TiNiTAS.)  As  the  patria  potestas  was  a  Jus  pecu-
liar to  Roman  citizens,it  followed  that  a  Latinus  had
not  the  (Roman)  patria  potestas  over  his  children.
If,  however,  he  had  married  either  a  Latina  and  had
begotten  a  child,  who  would  of  course  be  a  Latinus,
or  had  married  a  Roman  civis,  and  had  begotten
a  child,  which,  by  a  senatusconsultum  of  Hadrian,
would  be  a  Romanus  Civis,  he  might,  by  complying
with  the  provisions  of  the  Lex  Aelia  Sentia,  in  the
former  case  obtain  the  civitas  for  himself,  his  wife,
and  child,  and  in  both  cases  acquire  the  patria
potestas  over  his  child  just  as  if  the  child  had  been
bom  in  justae  nuptiae.     (Gaius,  i.  30.  6Q.)

In  considering  the  legal  condition  of  Libertini,
it  is  necessary  to  remember  that  even  those  who
were  Cives  Romani  were  not  Ingenui,  and  that
their  patroni  had  still  certain  rights  with  respect
to  them.  The  Latini  Juniani  were  under  some
special  incapacities  ;  for  the  Lex  Junia  which  de-
termined their  status,  neither  gave  them  the  power
of  making  a  will,  nor  of  taking  property  under  a
will,  nor  of  being  named  Tutores  in  a  will.  They
could  not  therefore  take  either  as  heredes  or  lega-
tarii,  but  they  could  take  by  way  of  fidei-com-
missum. (Gaius,  i.  24.)  The  sons  of  libertini
were  ingenui,  but  they  could  not  hare  gentile  rightsj


706


LIBRA.


and  the  descendants  of  libertini  were  sometimes
taimted  with  their  servile  origin.  (Hor.  Serin,  i.
6,  46.)

The  law  which  concerns  the  property  (6072a)  of
Libertini  may  be  considered  under  Patronus  ;
see  also  Ingenui  and  Lex  Junia.  [G.  L.]

LIBITINA'RIL     [Funus,  p.  558,  a.]

LIBRA  or  AS,  a  pound,  the  unit  of  weight
among  the  Romans  and  Italians.  ]\Iany  ancient
specimens  of  this  weight,  its  parts  and  multiples,
have  come  down  to  us  ;  but  of  these  some  are  im-
perfect, and  the  rest  differ  so  much  in  weight  that
no  satisfactory  conclusion  can  be  drawn  from  them.
The  differeEce  between  some  of  these  specimens
is  as  much  as  two  ounces.  An  account  of  some  of
the  most  remarkable  of  them  is  given  by  Hussey
(Ancient  Weights,  &c.  ix.  §  3),  and  Bockh  (Metro-
log.  Untersuch.  p.  170).  This  variety  is  to  be  ac-
counted for  partly  by  the  well-known  carelessness
of  the  Romans  in  keeping  to  their  standards  of
weight,  and  partly  by  the  fact  that  many  of  the
extant  weights  are  from  pi-ovincial  towns,  in  which
this  carelessness  was  notoriously  greater  than  in
the  metropolis.

The  computation  of  the  weight  of  the  libra  has
been  attempted  in  two  ways,  which  are  more  fully
discussed  under  Pondera.  The  method  which  has
been  followed  by  most  writers  is  that  of  deducing
it  from  the  weights  of  the  silver  coins  —  a  process
which  gives,  according  to  Hussey,  5040  grains,
and  according  to  Wurm  and  Bockh,  a  little  more
than  5053.  The  other  plan  is  that  of  weighing
the  quantity  of  water  held  by  the  Congius  of
Vespasian,  which  originally  contained  10  Roman
pounds,  wliich  gives  a  result  of  about  5200  grains.
According  to  the  former  computation,  it  was  some-
what less  than  11^,  according  to  the  latter,  some-
what more  than  \\%  ounces  avoirdupois;  and,
according  to  either,  its  value  may  be  roughly
stated  as  a  little  less  than  3-4th  of  a  pound
avoirdupois.

The  uncial  division,  which  has  been  noticed  in
speaking  of  the  coin  As,  was  also  applied  to  the
weight.  (See  the  Tables.)  The  divisions  of  the
ounce  are  given  under  Uncia.  Where  the  word
pondo,  or  its  abbreviations  P.  or  pond.,  occur
with  a  simple  number,  the  weight  understood  is
the  libra.

The  name  libra  was  also  given  to  a  measure  of
horn  divided  into  twelve  equal  parts  (unciae)  by
lines  marked  on  it,  and  used  for  measuring  oil.
(Suet.  Caes.  c.  38  ;  Galen,  de  Comp.  Med.  Gen.  i.
17,  vi.  8  ;  Horat.  Sat.  ii.  2.  59— Gl.)       [P.  S.]

LIBRA,  ditn.  LIBELLA  (cTaefxhs)^  a  balance,
a  pair  of  scales.  The  principal  parts  of  this  instru-
ment were,  1.  The  beam  [Jugum],  whence  any-
thing which  is  to  be  weighed  is  said  vwh  (vyhu
ava§\'f}dr}vai,  literally,  "  to  be  thrown  under  the
beam."  (Aelian,  V.  //.  x.  0.)  2.  The  two  scales,
called  in  Greek  TaXaura  (Horn.  //.  viii.  69,  xii.
433,  xvi.  659,  xix.  22'i  xxii.  209  ;  Aristoph.
Ranae^  809)  and  -irXdtTri'yyi  (Aristoph.  Ranae,
1425),  and  in  Latin  lances  (Virg.  Aen.  xii.  725  ;
Pers.  iv.  10;  Cic.  Acad.'w.  12).  [Lanx.]  Hence
the  verb  raXavT^vw  is  employed  as  equivalent  to
CTadfidw,  and  to  the  Latin  libro,  and  is  applied  as
descriptive  of  an  eagle  balancing  his  wings  in  the
air.  (Philostrat.  Jun.  Imag.  6  ;  W'elcker,  ad  loc.)
The  beam  was  made  without  a  tongue,  being  held
by  a  ring  or  other  appendage  (ligula,  p'v^M-),  fixed
in  the  centre.     (See  the  woodcut.)     Specimens  of


LIBRARIL

bronze  balances  maybe  seen  in  the  British  Museum
and  in  other  collections  of  antiquities,  and  also  of
the  steel-yard  [Statera],  which  was  used  for  the
same  piu-poses  as  the  libra.  The  woodcut  to  the
article  Catena  shows  some  of  the  chains  by  which
the  scales  are  suspended  from  the  beam.  In  the
works  of  ancient  art,  the  balance  is  also  introduced
emblematically  in  a  great  variety  of  ways.  The
annexed  woodcut  is  taken  from  a  beautiful  bronze
patera,  representing  Mercury  and  Apollo  engaged
in  exploring  the  fiites  of  Achilles  and  Memnon,  by
weighing  the  attendant  genius  of  the  one  against


that  of  the  other.  (Winckelmann,  Mon.  hied.  \  33;
Millin,  Peintures  de  Vases  Ant.  i.  pi.  19.  p.  39.)
A  balance  is  often  represented  on  the  reverse  of
the  Roman  imperial  coins  ;  and  to  indicate  more
distinctly  its  signification,  it  is  frequently  held  by
a  female  in  her  right  hand,  while  she  supports
a  cornucopia  in  her  left,  the  words  aeq,vitas
AVGVSTi  being  inscribed  on  the  margin,  so  as  to
denote  the  justice  and  impartiality  with  which  the
emperors  dispensed  their  bounty.

The  constellation  Libra  is  placed  in  the  Zodiac
at  the  equinox,  because  it  is  the  period  of  the  year
at  which  day  and  night  are  equally  balanced.
(Virg.  Georg.  i.  208  ;  Piin.  H.N.  xviii.  69  ;  Schol.
in  Arat.  89^

The  mason's  or  carpenter's  level  was  called  libra
or  libella  (whence  the  English  name),  on  account
of  its  resemblance  in  many  respects  to  a  balance*
(Varro,  de  Re  Rust.  i.  6;  Columella,  iii.  13;  Plin.
H.  N.  xxxvi.  52.)  Hence  the  verb  lib?-o  meant  to
level  as  well  as  to  weigh.  The  woodcut  to  the
article  CiRCiNUS  shows  a  libella  fabriUs  having  the
form  of  the  letter  A  (Veget.  iii.  20),  and  the  line
and  plummet  (perpendiculum)  depending  from  the
apex.  [J.  Y.]

LIBRAMENTUM,  LIBRATIO  AQUA-
RUM.    [Aquaeductus,  p.  113,  b.]

LIBRA'RII,  the  name  of  slaves,  who  were  em-
ployed by  their  masters  in  writing  or  copying  in
any  way.  They  must  be  distinguished  from  the
Scribae  publici,  who  were  freemen  [Scribae],
and  also  from  the  booksellers  [Liber],  to  both
of  whom  this  name  is  occasionally  applied.  The
slaves,  to  whom  the  name  of  librarii  was  given,
may  be  divided  into  three  classes :  —

1.  Librarii  who  were  employed  in  copying
books,  called  i^cn/>/ores  Librani  by  Horace  (Ars
Pott.  354).  These  librarii  were  called  in  later
i\me&antiquarii.  (Cod.  12.  tit.  19.  s.  10  ;  Cod.
Theod.  4.  tit.  8.  s.  2;  Isid.  Orig.  vi.  14.)      Isidore


LICTOR.

(l.c.)  says  that  the  librarii  copied  both  old  and
new  books,  while  the  antiquarii  copied  only  old
books.  Becker  (Gallus,  vol.  i.  p.  lb'4),  however,
thinks  that,  when  the  cursive  character  came  into
general  use,  the  name  of  antiquarii  was  applied  to
the  copyists  who  transcribed  books  in  the  old  uncial
character.  The  name  of  librarii  was  also  given  to
those  who  bonnd  books  (Cic.  ad  Ait.  iv.  4),  and  to
those  who  had  the  care  of  libraries.

2.  Librarii  a  studiis-  were  slaves  who  were  em-
ployed by  their  masters  when  studying  to  make
extracts  from  books,  .&«..  (0rell. /«scr.  719  ;  Suet.
C/aud.  28  ;  Cic.  ad  Fam.xvi.  21.)  To  this  class
the  7/otarii,  or  short-hand  writers,  belonged,  who
could  write  down  rapidly  whatever  their  masters
dictated  to  them.     (Plin.  JiJp.  iii.  5;  Martial,  xiv.

208.)       [NOTARII.]

3.  Librarii  ab  epistolis,.  whose  principal  duty
was  to  write  letters  from  their  master's  dictation.
(Orelli, /Mscr.  2437,  2997,. &c.;  Becker,  Gallus,
vol.  i.  p.  180.)  To  this  class  belonged  the  slaves
called  ad  manum,  a  manu,  ov  amanuenses.     [Ama-

NUKNSIS.]  '

LIBRA'TOR  is  in  general  a  person  who  ex-
amines things  by  a  libk.a.  ;  but  the  name  was,  in
particular,  applied  to  two  kinds  of  persons.

1.  Librator  aquae.,  a  person  whose  knowledge
was  indispensable  in  the  construction  of  aquae-
ducts,  sewers,  and  other  structures  for  the  purpose
of  conveying  a  fluid  from  one  place  to  another.  He
examined  by  a  hydrostatic  balance  {libra  aquaria)
the  relative  heights  of  the  places  from  and  to  which
the  water  was  to  be  conducted.  Some  persons  at
Rome  made  this  occupation  their  business,  and
were  engaged  under  the  curatores  aquarum,  though
architects  were  also  expected  to  be  able  to  act  as
libratores.  (Plin.  Epist.  x.  50  ;  Frontin.  de  Aquaed.
105  ;   compare  Vitruv.  viii..  6  ;   Cod.  10.   tit.  66.

2.  Libratores  in  the  armies  were  probably  sol-
diers who  attacked  the  enemy  by  hurling  with
•their  own  hands  {librando)  lances  or  spears  against
them.  (Tacit.  Ann.  ii.  20,  xiii.  39;  in  both  these
passages  some  MSS:  have  libritores.)  Lipsius- (ao?
Tacit.  Ann.  I.  c.)  thinks  that  the  libratores  were
men  who  threw  darts  or  stones  against  the  enemy
by  means  of  machines,  tormenta  (compare  his  Po-
liorcet.  iv.  3).  But:  this  supposition  can  scarcely
be  supported  by  any  good  authority.  During.the
time  of  the  republic  libratores  are  not'  mentioned
in  the  Roman  armies.  [L.  S.]

LPBRIPENS.     [Mancipatio.]
LIBURNA,  LTBU'RNICA.     [Navis.]
LICHAS  (Aixcis)-     [Pes.]
LPCIA,  LICIATO'RIUM.     [Tela.]
LICTOR,  a  public  officer,  who  attended  on  the
chief   Roman   magistrates.      The   number   which
waited  on  the  different  magistrates  is  stated  in  the
article  Fasces.

The  office  of  lictor  is  said  to  have  been  derived
by  Romulus  from  the  Etruscans,  (Liv.  i.  8.)  The
etymology  of  the  name  is  doubtful  ;  Gellius  (xii.
3)  connects  it  with  the  verb  ligare.,  because  the
lictors  had  to  bind  the  hands  and  feet  of  criminals
before  they  were  punished.  The  lictors  went  be-
fore the  magistrates,  one  by  one  in  a  line  ;  he  who
went  last  or  next  to  the  magistrate  was  called
proocimus  lictor.,  to  whom  the  magistrate  gave  his
commands  (Liv.  xxiv.  44;  Sail.  Jzw;.  12;  Cic.
Verr.  v.  54,  de  Div.  i.  28  ;  Orelli,  Insn:  3218),
and  as  this  lictor  was  always  the  principal  one,  we


LIMBUS.


707


also  find  him  called  primus  lictor  (Cic.  ad  Quint.  L
!•  §  7),  which  expression  some  modern  writers
have  erroneously  supposed  to  refer  to  the  lictor  who
went  first.

The  lictors  had  to  inflict  punishment  on  those
who  were  condemned,  especially  in  the  case  of
Roman  citizens  (Liv.  ii.  5,  viii.  7);  for  foreigners
and  slaves  were  punished  by  the  camifex  ;  and
they  also  probably  had  to  assist  in  some  cases  in
the  execution  of  a  decree  or  judgment  in  a  civil
suit.  The  lictors  also  commanded  {animadverterunt)
persons  to  pay  proper  respect  to  a  magistrate
passing  by,  which  consisted  in  dismounting  from
horseback,  uncovering  the  head,  standing  out  of  the
way,  &c.  (Liv.  xxiv.  44  ;  Sen.  Ep.  64.)

The  lictors  were  originally  chosen  from  the  plebs
(Liv.  ii.  5B)^  but  afterwards  appear  to  have  been
generally  freedmen,.  probably  of  the  magistrate  on
whom  they  attended.  (Comp.  Tacit.  Ann.  xiii.
27.)

Lictors  were  properly  only  granted  to  those  ma-
gistrates who  had  the  Imperium.  Consequently
the  tribunes  of  the  plebs  never  had  lictors  (Plut.
QuKxest.  Rom.  81),  nor  several  of  the  other  magis-
trates. Sometimes,  however,  lictors  were  granted
to  persons  as  a  mark  of  respect  or  for  the  sake  of
protection.  Thus  by  a  laAv  of  the  Triumvirs  every
Vestal  virgin  was  accompanied  by  a  lictor,  when-
ever she  v/ent  out  (Dion  Cass,  xlvii.  19),  and  the
honour  of  one  or  two  lictors  was  usually  granted
to  the  wives  and  other  female  members  of  the  Im-
perial family.    (Tacit.  Ann.  i.  14,  xiii.  2.)

There  were  also  thirty  lictors  called  Lictores
Curiati,  whose  duty  it  was  to  summon  the  curiae
to  the  comitia  curiata  ;  and  when  these  meetings
became  little  more  than  a  form,  their  suffrages
were  represented  by  the  thirty  lictors.  (Gell.  xv.
27;  Cic.  ^^r.  ii.  12  ; -Orelli, 7«scn.  2176,  2922,
3240.)

LIGO  (SiK6\Aa  or  /ict/ceAAa)  was  a  hatchet
formed  either  of  one  broad  iron  or  of  two  curved
iron  prongs,  which  was'  used  by  the  ancient  hus-
bandmen to  clear  the  fields  from  weeds.  (Ovid,  &v
Pont.  i.  8.  59  ;  Mart;  iv.  64  ;  Stat.  rheb.  iii.  589 ;
Colum.  X.  89.)  The  ligo  seems  also  to  have  been
used  in  digging  the  soil  and  breaking  the  clods.
(Hor.  Carm.  iii.  6.  38,  Epist.-  i.  14.  27  ;  Ovid,
Amor.  iii.  10.  31  ;  compare  Dickson,  On  the  Hus-
bandry of  the  Ancients^  i.  p.  415.)  [L.  S.]

LI'GULA,  a  Roman  measure  of  fluid  capacity,
containing  one-fourth  of  the  Cyathus.  (Columella,
R.  R.  xii.  21  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xx.  5.  s.  18.)

It  signifies  a  spoonful.,  like  cochlears  onlj'  the
ligula  was  larger  than  the  cochlear.  The  spoon
which  was  called  ligula^  or  lingula  (djih.  of  lin-
gua)  from  its  shape,  was  used  for  various,  purposes,
especially  to  clean  out  small  and  narrow  vessels,
and  to  eat  jellies  and  such  things.  (Cato,  R.  R.
84  ;  Colum.  ix.  5  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxi.  14.  s.  49  ;
Martial,  viii.  33.  23.  71.  9,  xiv.  120  ;  Becker,
Galltis,  ii.  p.  156.)  The  word  is  also  used  for  the
leather  tongue  of  a  shoe  (Pollux,  ii.  109,  vii.  80;
Festus  S.V.).  [P.S.]

LIMA,  a  file,  was  made  of  iron  or  steel,  for  the
purpose  of  polishing  metal  or  stene,  and  appears  to
have  been  of  the  same  form  as  the  instruments
used  for  similar  purposes  in  modern  times.  (Plin.
H.N.  xxxvii.  8.  s.  32,  ix.  35.  s.  54,  xxviii.  9.  s.41;
Plant.  Menaech.  i  1.  9.)  [L.  S.]

LIMBUS  (iropu^^),  the  border  of  a  tunic
(Corippus,  de  Laud.  Just.  ii.  1 17)  or  a  scar£  (Virg.


708  LITIS  CONTESTATIO.

Am.  iv.  137  ;  Serv.  in  he.)  This  ornaatent,  when
displayed  upon  the  tunic,  was  of  a  similar  kind
with  the  Cyclas  and  Instita  (Servius  in  Virg.
Aen.  ii.  616),  but  much  less  expensive,  more  coni-
jnon  and  more  simple.  It  was  generally  woven  in
the  same  piece  with  the  entire  garmeiit  of  which  it
formed  a  part,  and  it  had  sometimes  the  appear-
ance of  a  scarlet  or  purple  band  upon  a  white
ground ;  in  other  instancea  it  resembled  foliage
{Y\xg.Aen.\.  649;  Ovid,  Met.  vi.  127),  or  the
scrolls  and  meanders  introduced  in  architecture.
A  very  elegant  effect  was  produced  by  bands  of
gold  thread  interwoven  in  cloth  of  Tyrian  purple
(Ovid,  Met.  v.  51),  and  called  X-qpoi  or  leria.
(Festus,  s.  V.  ;  Brunck,  Anal.  i.  483.)  Demetrius
Poliorcetes  was  arrayed  in  this  manner  (xpyo^o-
irapv^ois  aKovpyi(r{,  Plut.  Demet.  41)-.  Virgil
{Aen.  V.  251)  mentions  a  scarf  enriched  with  gold,
the  border  of  which  was  in  the  form  of  a  double
meander.  In  illustration  of  this  account  examples
of  both  the  single  and  the  donble  meander  are  in-
troduced at  the  tap  of  the  rannexed  woodcut.  The
other  eight  specimens  of  lirabi  are  selected  to  show
some  of  the  principal  varieties  of  this  ornament,
which  present  themselves  on  Etniscan  vases  and
other  works  of  ancient  ;art.


ilDHDB


The  use  of  the  limbus  was  almost  «onfined  to
the  female  sex  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans  ;
but  in  other  nations  it  was  admitted  into  tlie  dress
of  men  likewise.

An  ornamental  band,  when  used  by  itself  as  a
fillet  to  surround  the  temples  or  the  waist,  was  also
called  limbus.  (Stat.  Theh.  vi.  367,  Achill.  ii.  176  ;
Claud,  de  Cons.  Mallii  Tlieod.  118.)  Probably  the
limbolarii  mentioned  by  Plautus  {Auhd.  iii.  5.  45),
were  persons  employed  in  making  bands  of  this
description.  [J.  Y.j

LIMEN.     [Janua.]

LINTEA'MEN,  LI'NTEUM.     [PAi^niiM.]

LlTHOSTllOTA.  [Domus  ;  Pictura,  sub
Jin.)

LITIS  CONTEST A'TIO.  "  Contestari  "  is
when  each  party  to  a  suit  {uterqm  reus)  says,
"Testes  estote."  Two  or  more  parties  to  a  suit
(adversarii)  are  said  contestari  litem,  because  wlien
the  Judicium  is  arranged  {prdinato  judicio)  each
party  is  accustomed  to  say,  "  Testes  estote."
(Festus,  s.  V.  Contestari.)  The  Litis  Contestatio
was  therefore  so  called  because  persons  were  called
on  by  the  parties  to  the  suit  to  "  bear  witness,"
*'  to  be  witnesses."  It  is  not  here  said  what  they
were  to  be  witnesses  of,  but  it  may  be  inferred


LITIS  CONTESTATIO

frojn  the  use  of  the  words  contestatio  and  testatio
in  .a  similar  sense  in  other  passages  (Dig.  28.  tit.  1.
s.  20  ;  Ulp.  Frag.  xx.  s.  9)  that  this  contestatio  was
the  formal  termination  of  certain  -acts  of  which  the
persons  called  t©  be  witnesses  were  at  some  future
time  to  bear  record.  Accordingly  the  Contesfcitio,
spoken  of  in  th«  passage  of  Festus,  must  refer  to
the  words  ordinate  judicio,  that  is,  to  the  whole
business  that  has  taken  place  In  Jure  and  which  is
now  completed.  This  interpretation  seems  to  be
confirmed  by  the  following  considerations.

When  the  Legis  Actiones  were  in  force,  the
procedure  consisted  of  a  series  of  oral  acts  and
pleadings.  The  whole  procedure,  as  was  the  case
after  the  introduction  of  the  Formulae,  was  divided
into  two  parts,  that  before  the  Magistratus  or  In
Jure,  and  that  before  the  Judex  or  In  Judicio.
That  before  the  Magistratus  consisted  of  acts  and
words  by  the  parties,  and  by  the  Magistratus,  the
result  of  which  was  the  determination  of  the  form
and  manner  of  the  future  proceedings  In  Judicio.
When  the  parties  appeared  before  the  Judex,  it
would  be  necessary  for  him  to  be  fully  informed  of
all  the  proceedings  In  Jure:  this  was  effected  in
later  times  by  the  Formula,  a  written  instrument
under  the  authority  of  the  Praetor,  which  contained
the  result  of  all  the  transactions  In  Jure  in  the
form  of  instructions  for  the  Judex.  But  there  is
no  evidence  of  any  such.written  instructions  having
been  used  in  the  time  of  the  Legis  Actiones  ;
and  this  must  therefore  have  been  effected  in  some
other  way.  The  Litis  Contestatio  then  may  be
thus  explained :  the  whole  proceedings  In  Jure
took  place  before  witnesses,  and  the  Contestatio
was  the  conclusion  of  these  proceedings  ;  and  it
was  the  act  by  which  the  litigant  parties  called  on
the  witnesses  to  bear  record  before  the  Judex  of
what  had  taken  place  In  Jiu"e.

This,  which  seems  a  probable  explanation  of  the
original  meaning  of  Litis  Contestatio,  may  be  com-
pared to  some  extent  with  the  apparently  original
sense  of  Recordex  and  Recording  in  English  law.
{Penny  Cyclopaedia^  art  Recorder.)

When  the  Formula  was  introduced,  the  Litis
Contestatio  would  be  unnecessary,  and  there  ap-
pears no  trace  of  it  in  its  original  sense  in  the  clas-
sical jurists.  Still  the  expressions  Litis  Contestatio
and  Lis  Contestata  frequently  occur  in  the  Digest,
but  only  in  the  sense  of  the  completion  of  the
proceedings  In  Jure,  and  this  is  the  meaning  of
the  phrases.  Ante  litem  contestatam.  Post  litem
contcstatam.  (Gains,  iii.  180,  iv.  114.)  The  ex-
pression Lis  Contestata  in  a  passive  sense  is  used
by  Cicero  {pro  Rose.  Com.  ell,  12,  pro  Flacco^
c.  1 1,  and  in  the  Lex  Rubria  of  Gallia  Cisalpina,
col.  1 1.  48,  "  quos  inter  id  judicium  accipietur  leisve
contestabitur  ").  As  the  Litis  Contestatio  was  ori-
ginaUj'  and  properly  the  termination  of  the  pro-
ceedings In  Jure,  it  is  easily  conceivable  that  after
this  form  had  fallen  into  disuse,  the  name  should
still  be  retained  to  express  the  conclusion  of  such
proceedings.  When  the  phrase  Litem  Contestari
occurs  in  the  classical  jurists,  it  can  mean  nothing
more  than  the  proceedings  by  which  the  parties
terminate  the  procedure  In  Jure  and  so  prepare  the
matter  in  dispute  for  the  investigation  of  the  Judex.

It  appears  from  the  passage  in  Festus  that  the
phrase  Contestari  litem  was  used,  because  the
words  "  Testes  estote  "  were  uttered  by  the  parties
after  the  Judicium  Ordinatum.  It  was  therefore
the  uttering  of  the  words  "  Testes  estote  "  which


LITRA.

gave  rise  to  the  pkrase  Litis  Contestatio  ;  but  tliis
does  not  inibrm  us  what  the  Litis  Contestatio
properly  was.  Still  as  the  name  of  a  thing  is  de  -
rived  frora  that  which  constitutes  its  essence,  it
may  be  that  the  name  here  expresses  the  thdng,  that
is,  that  the  Litis  Contestatio  was  so  called,  for  the
reason  which  Festus^ives,  and  that  it  also  consisted
in  the  litigant  parties  calling  on  the  witnesses  to
bear  record.  But  as  it  is  usual  for  the  whole  of
a  thing  to  take  its  name  from  some  special  part,  so
it  may  be  that  the  Litis  Contestatio,  in  the  time  of
the  Legis  Actiones,  was  equivalent  to  the  whole
proceedings  in  Jure,  and  that  the  whole  was  so
called  fjrom  that  part  which  completed  it.

The  time  when  the  proper  Litis  Contestatio  fell
into  disuse  cannot  be  determined,  though  it  would
seem  that  this  must  have  taken  place  with  the
passing  of  the  Aebutia  Lex  and  the  two  Leges
Juliae  which  did  away  with  the  Legis  Actiones,
except  in  certain  cases.  It  is  also  uncertain  if  the
proper  Litis  Contestatio  still  existed  in  those  Legis
Actiones,  which  were  not  interfered  with  by  the
Lege*  above  mentioned  ;  and  if  so,  whether  it  ex-
isted in  the  old  fonn  or  in  a  modified  shape.

This  view  of  the  matter  is  by  Keller,,  in  his
treatise  "  Ueber  Litis  Contestation  und  Urtheil
nach  Classischen  Romischen  Recht,"  ZUricb,,  1827.
Other  opinions  are  noticed  in  his  work.  The
author  labours  particularly  to  show  that  the  ex-
pression Litis  Contestatio  always  refers  to  the  pro-
ceedings In  Jure  and  never  to  those  In  Judicio.

Savigny  {Systetn,  &c.  vi.  §  256 — 279)  has  also
fully  examined  the  Litis  Contestatio.  He  shows
that  in  the  Extraordinaria  Judicia  [Judicium]
which  existed  at  the  same  time  with  the  process  of
the  formula,  and  in  which  theie  was  neitherWudex
nor  formula,  and  in  which  the  whole  legal  dispute
was  conducted  before  a  magistratus,  the  Litis  Con-
testatio means  the  time  when  the  parties  had  fully
declared  their  several  claims  and  answers  to  such
claims  before  the  magistratua.  This  was  substan-
tially the  same  as  the  Litis  Contestatio,  and  the
difference  lay  simply  in  the  external  form.  (Comp,
Cod.  3.  tit.  9.  s.  1,  Rescript  of  Severus  and  Anto-
ninus.) At  a  later  period,  when  all  actions  had
become  changed  into  extraordinaria  judicia,  that
which  was  before  the  exception  now  became  the
rule,  and  Lis  Contestata  in  the  system  of  Jus-
tinian consisted  in  the  statements  made  by  the
parties  to  a  suit  before  the  magistrate  respecting
the  claim  or  demand,  and  the  answer  or  defence  to
it.  When  this  was  done,  the  cause  was  ready  for
hearing.  [G.  L.]

LITRA  (Xtrpa),  a  word  which  was  used  by
the  Greeks  of  Sicily  in  their  system  of  weights
and  money,  and  which  occurs  as  early  as  in  the
fragments  of  Simonides  and  Epicharmus,  is  evi-
dently another  form  of  the  Italian  word  libra,  as
Ave  are  told  by  Festus  (s.  v.  Lties,  "  Airpa  enim
libra  est ").  It  was  the  unit  of  an  uncial  system
similar  to  that  used  in  the  Roman  and  Italian
weights  and  money  [As  ;  Libra],  its  twelfth  part
being  called  07/cio  (the  Roman  undo),  and  six,
five,  four,  three,  and  two  of  these  twelfth  parts
being  denominated  respectively  T)fii\tTpov,  irevrdy-
Kiov,  T€Tpas,  Tptas,  and  c|ay.  As  a  coin,  the  Airpa
was  equal  in  value  to  the  Aeginetan  obol ;  and  hence
the  origin  of  the  word  may  be  explained,  by  sup-
posing that  the  Greeks  of  Sicily,  having  brought
with  them  the  Aeginetan  obol,  afterwards  assimi-
lated their  system  of  coinage  to  that  used  by  their


LITUUS.


709


Italian  neighbours,  making  their  obol  to  answer  to
the  librst,  under  the  name  of  Klrpa.  In  the  same
way  a  Corinthian  stater  of  ten  obols  was  called  in
Syracuse  a  SeKdhnpoy,  or  piece  of  ten  litras.
(Aristot.  ap.  Pollux,  iv.  24,  173,  ix.  6, 80  ;  Muller,
Der.  iii.  10.  §  12.)     See  Nummus  and  Pondkra.

The  cott/lu,  ust-d  for  measuring  oil,  which  is
mentioned  by  Galen  [Cotyla],  is  also  called  by
him  \irpa.  Here  the  word  is  only  a  Greek  form
of  libra.    [See  Libra,  sw6/w.]  [P- S.]

LI'TUUS.  MUller  {Die  EtrusJcer,  iv.  1.  5)
supposes  this  to  be  an  Etruscan  word  signifying
crooked.     In  the  Latin  writers  it  is  used  to  denote

1.  The  crooked  staff  borne  by  the  augurs,  with
which  they  divided  the  expanse  of  heaven  when
viewed  with  reference  to  divination  {templum)^
inta  regions  {regioncs)  ;  the  number  of  these  ac-
cording to  the  Etruscan  discipline,  being  sixteen,
according  to  the  Roman  practice,  four.  (MUller,  iii.
6.  1  ;  Cic.  de  Div.  ii.  18.)  Cicero  {de  Div.  i.  7)  de-
scribes the  lituus  as  "  incurvum  et  leviter  a  summo
inflexum  bacillum  ; "  and  Livy  (i.  1 8)  as  "  bacu-
lum  sine  node  aduncum."  It  is  very  frequently  ex-
hibited upon  works  of  art.  The  figure  in  the
middle  of  the  following  illustrations  is  from  a  most
ancient  specimen  of  Etruscan  sculpture  in  the  pos-
session of  Inghirami  {Monumenti  Etrusdii,  torn,
vi.  tav.  P.  5.  I),  representing  an  augur  j  the  two
others  are  Roman  denarii.


2.  A  sort  of  trumpet  slightly  curved  at  the  ex-
tremity. (Festus,  s.  v.;  Gell.  v.  8.)  It  differed  both
from  the  tuba  and  the  comu  (Hor.  Cami.  ii.  1 .  17;
Lucan,  i.  237),  the  former  being  straight  while  the
latter  was  bent  round  into  a  spiral  shape.  Lydus  {de
Mens.  iv.  SO)  calls  the  lituus  the  sacerdotal  trumpet
{UpariK^v  (TaXTriYya),  and  says  that  it  was  em-
ployed by  Romulus  when  he  proclaimed  the  title
of  his  city.  Aero  {ad  Horat.  Carm.  i.  1.  23)  as-
serts that  it  was  peculiar  to  cavalry,  while  the
tuba  belonged  to  infantry.  Its  tones  are  usually
characterised  as  harsh  and  shrill  {stridor  lituum^
Lucan,  i.  237  ;  sonitus  acutos,  Ennius,  apud  Fest.
s.  V.  ;  Stat.  T/ieb.  vi.  228,  &c.).  See  Muller,  Die
Etrusker,  iv.  1.  5.  The  following  representation
is  from  Fabretti.  [W.  R.]


710  LODIX.

LIXAE.     [Calones.]
LOCA'TI  ET  CONDUCTI   ACTIO.     [Lo-

CATIO.]

LOCA'TIO,  CONDU'CTIO,  is  one  of  those
contracts  vvhich  are  made  merely  by  consent,  with-
out the  observation  oF  anj'  peculiar  form.  The  con-
tract might  be  either  a  locatio  conductio  rerum,  or
a  locatio  conductio  operarum.  In  the  locatio  con-
ductio rerum,  he  who  promises  the  use  of  the  thing,
is  locator,  he  who  promises  to  give  si  sum  of  money
for  the  use  is  conductor:  if  the  thing  is  a  dwelling-
house,  the  conductor  is  called  inquilinus  ;  if  it  is
cultivable  land,  he  is  called  colon  us.  The  locatio
conductio  operaram  consists  either  in  giving  certain
services  for  a  nxed  price,  or  giving  that  which  is
the  result  of  labour,  as  an  article  of  furniture,  or  a
house.  He  for  whom  the  service  is  done,  or  the
thing  is  made,  is  called  locator:  he  who  under-
takes to  produce  the  thing  is  conductor  or  redemp-
tor.     (Hor.  Carm.  iii.  1.)

The  determination  of  a  fixed  price  or  sum  of
money  {meree&,  pensio)  is  an  essential  part  of  the
contract.  When  lands  were  let,  the  merces  might
consist  in  a  part  of  the  produce.  (Dig.  4.  tit.  65.
s.  21.)  When  the  parties  have  agreed  about  the
object  and  the  price,  the  contract  is  completed  ;  and
thepirties  have  severally  the  actiones locati  et  con-
ducti  for  enforcing  the.obligatio.     (Dig.  19.  tit.  2.)

This  being  the  nature  of  the  contract  of  locatio
et  conductio,  it  was  a  matter  of  doubt  sometimes
whether  a  contract  was  locatio  et  conductio  or
something  else  :  when  a  man  made  a  pair  of  shoes
or  suit  of  clothes  for  another,  it  was  doubted  whether
the  contract  was  emtio  et  venditio,  or  locatio  et  con-
ductio. The  better  opinion,  and  that  which  is  con-
formable to  the  nature  of  the  thing,  was  that  if  a  man
furnished  the  materials  to  the  tailor  or  shoemaker,
it  was  a  contract  of  locatio  et  conductio :  if  the  tailor
or  shoemaker  furnished  the  materials,  it  was  a  con-
tract of  emtio  et  venditio.  (Gains,  iii.  142,  &c.  ;
Inst.  3.  tit.  24.  s.  3,  4.)  A  doubt  also  arose  as  to
the  nature  of  the  contract  when  a  thing  was  given
to  a,  man  to  be  used,  and  he  gave  the  lender  another
thing  to  be  used.  Sometimes  it  was  doubted
whether  the  contract  was  Locatio  et  Conductio
or  Emtio  et  Venditio .;  as  in  the  case  where  a
thing  was  let  {locuta)  for  ever,  as  was  done  with
lands  belong'ng  to  municipia,  which  were  let  on
the  condition  that  so  long  as  the  rent  {vedigal)
was  paid,  neither  the  conductor  nor  his  heres
could  be  turned  out  of  the  land :  but  the  better
opinion  was  in  favour  of  this  being  a  contract  of
Locatio  et  Conductio.   [Emphyteusis.]      [G.  L,]

LOCHUS  (A.<<xo0-  1-  Spartan  [see  p.  483].
2.  Athenian  fp.  486.].     3.  Macedonian  [p.  488].

LO'CULUS.     [FuNUS,  p.  559,  b.)

LOCUPLE'TES  or  ASSFDUI,  was  the
name  of  the  Roman  citizens  who  were  included  in
the  five  classes  of  the  Servian  constitution,  and
was  opposed  to  the  Proletarii.  The  term  assi-
dui  seems  to  have  been  the  older  appellation  ;  but
the  etymology  of  both  words  is  very  uncertain.
(Cic.  Top.  2,  de  Rep.  ii.  22  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  3  ;
Festus,  s.  vv.  A  ssiduus,  Locupletes  ;  Becker,  Bom.
AlteHh.  vol.  ii.  pt.  i.  pp.  21 1,  212.)

LODIX,  dim.  LODI'CULA  {ad-yiov),  a  small
Bhasjgy  blanket.  (Juv.  vii.  QQ.)  Sometimes  two
lodices  sewed  together  were  used  as  the  coverlet  of
a  bed.  (Mart.  xiv.  148.)  The  Emperor  Augustus
occasionally  wrapt  himself  in  a  blanket  of  this  de-
scription on  account  of  its  warmth.    (Sueton.  Aug.


LOPE.

83.)  It  was  also  used  as  a  carpet  (ancilla  lodicu.
lam  in  pavimento  diligenter  extendit^  Petron.  Sat.
20).  The  Romans  obtained  these  blankets  from
Verona.  (Mart.  xiv.  152).  Their  lodix  was  nearly,
if  not  altogether,  the  same  as  the  sagulum  worn  by
the  Germans.  (Tac.  Germ..  6.)  [Sagum.]  [J.  Y.j
LOGISTAE  {Xoyiffrai).  '[Euthyne.]
LOGOGRAPHI  (Xoyoypdcpoi),  is  a  name  ap-
plied by  the  Greeks  to  two  distinct  classes  of
persons.

1.  To  the  earlier  Greek  historians  previous  to
Herodotus,  though  Thucydides  (i.  21)  applies  the
name  logographer  to  all  historians  previous  to  him-
self, and  thus  includes  Herodotus  among  the  num-
ber. The  lonians  were  the  first  of  the  Greeks
who  cultivated  history ;  and  the  first  logographer,
who  lived  about  Olymp.  60,  was  Cadmus,  a  native
of  Miletus,  who  wrote  a  history  of  the  foundation
of  his  native  city.  The  characteristic  feature  of  all
the  logographers  previous  to  Herodotus  is,  that
they  seem  to  have  aimed  more  at  amusing  their
hearers  or  readers  than  at  imparting  accurate
historical  knowledge.  They  described  in  prose  the
mythological  subjects  and  traditions  which  had
previously  been  treated  of  by  the  epic  and  espe-
cially by  the  cyclic  poets.  The  omissions  in  the  nar-
ratives  of  their  predecessors  were  probably  filled  up
by  traditions  derived  from  other  quarters,  in  order
to  produce,  at  least  in  form,  a  connected  history.  In
many  cases  they  were  mere  collections  of  local  and
genealogical  traditions.  (Thirl  wall.  Hist,  of  Greece,
ii.  p.  1 27,  &c.  ;  MUUer,  Hist  of  Greek  Lit.  i.  p.
206,  &c.  ;  Wachsmuth,  Hellen.  Alterth.  ii.  2.  p.
443,  &c.)

2.  To  persons  who  wrote  judicial  speeches  or
pleadl^s  and  sold  them  to  those  who  were  in
want  of  them.  These  persons  were  called  Ao-
yoTTOLoi  as  well  as  Xoyoypdcpoi,  Antiphon,  the
orator,  was  the  first  who  practised  this  art  at
Athens,  towards  the  close  of  the  Peloponnesian
war.  (Plut.  Vit  Dec.  Orat.  p.  832,  ed.  Frankf  ;
Aristot.  EJiet.  L  33.)  After  this  time  the  custom
of  making  and  selling  speeches  became  very  general,
and  though  the  persons  who  practised  it  were  not
very  highly  thought  of  and  placed  on  a  par  with
the  sophists  (Demosth.  de  Fals.  Leg.  pp.  417,  420  ;
Plat.  Phaedr.  p.  257,  c  ;  Anaxim.  Rhet.  xxxvi.  22
and  24  ;  compare  Plat.  I^dhydem.  p.  272,  a,  289,
d,  305,  a),  yet  we  find  that  orators  of  great  merit
did  not  scruple  to  write  speeches  of  various  kinds
for  other  persons.  Thus  Lysias  wrote  for  others
numerous  X6yov%  els  SiKacrT-fipid  re  Koi  $ovXas  Kal
Trphs  e/c/cATjo'ias  evdeTovs,  and  besides  naurjyvpi-
Kovs,  ipciJTiKovs,  and  eiriaToMKOvs.  (Dionys.  Hal.
Lys.  p.  82,  ed.  Sylburg  ;  compare  Meier  and  Schora.
Att.  Proc.  p.  707.)  [L.  S.]

LOIDORIAS  DIKE  (Xoihopias  Z'lK-ri)  [Ka-
KEGORiAS  Dike.]

LONCHE  {,\6yxn).  [Hasta.]

LOPE  (AwTTTj,  also  Aa-TTos,  dim.  Xdoniov),  the
ancient  Greek  name  of  the  Am  ictus,  whether
consisting  of  the  hide  of  an  animal  or  of  cloth.
Having  fallen  into  disuse  as  a  colloquial  or  prosaic
term  (Phryn.  Eel.  p.  461,  ed.  Lobeck),  it  was  re-
tained, though  employed  very  sparingly,  by  the
poets.  (Hom.  Od.  xiii.  224  ;  ApoU.  Rhod.  ii.  32  ;
Schol.  in  lac. ;  Anacreon,  Frag.  79  ;  Theocrit.
xiv.  66  ;  Brunck,  A7ial.  i.  230,  ii.  185.)  We
also  find  it  retained  in  XcanoSvrrjs,  literally  one
who  puts  on  tJie  amictus^  a  term  properl}'  applicable
to  those  persons  who  frequented  the  thermae  in


LORICA.

order  to  steal  the  clothes  of  the  batliers  (Sch  il.  in
Horn.  I.  c),  but  used  in  a  more  general  sense  to
denote  thieves  and  highwaymen  of  all  classes.
From  the  same  root  was  formed  the  verb  e/cAwTrt-
C^iv,  meaning,  to  take  off  the  amictus^  to  denude-.
(Soph.  TroAildn.  92.5.)  [J.  Y.]

LOPHOS  {\6(pos).     [Galea.]

LORA'RII.     [Flagrum.]

LORI'CA  {^dipa^)y  a  cuirass.  The  epithet
XivodccpTj^,  applied  to  two  light-armed  warriors  in
the  Iliad  (ii.  529,  830  ;  Schol.  ad  Zoc),  and  op-
posed to  x°-^'^'^X'-'^^^>  the  common  epithet  of  the
Grecian  soldiers,  indicates  the  early  use  of  the
linen  cuirass.  It  continued  to  be  worn  to  much
later  times  among  the  Asiatics,  especially  the  Per-
sians (Xen.  Cyrop.  vi.  4.  §  2  ;  Plut.  Alex.  p.  1234,
ed.  Steph.),  the  Egyptians  (Herod,  ii.  182,  iii.
47),  the  Phoenicians  (Pans.  vi.  19.  §  4),  and  the
Chalybes.  (Xen.  Anal),  iv.  7.  §  15.)  Iphicrates
endeavoured  to  restore  the  use  of  it  among  the
Greeks  (Nepos,  Iphic.  i.  4),  and  it  was  occasion-
ally adopted  by  the  Romans,  though  considered  a
much  less  effectual  defence  than  a  cuirass  of  metal.
(Sueton.  Galba,  19  ;  Arrian,  Tact.  p.  14,  ed.
Blancardi.)

A  much  stronger  material  for  cuirasses  was  horn,
whith  was  applied  to  this  use  more  especially  by
the  Sarmatae  and  Quadi,  being  cut  into  small
pieces,  which  were  planed  and  polished  and  fas-
tened, like  feathers,  upon  linen  shirts.  (Amm.
Marcell.  xvii.  12.  ed.  Wagner.)  Hoofs  were  em-
ployed for  the  same  purpose.  Pausanias  (i..  21.
§  8)  having  made  mention  of  a  thorax  preserved
in  the  temple  of  Aesculapius  at  Athens,  gives  the
following  account  of  the  Sarmatians  :  —  Having
vast  herds  of  horses,  which  they  sometimes  kill
for  food  or  for  sacrifice,  they  collect  their  hoofs,
cleanse  and  divide  them,  and  shape  them  like  the
scales  of  a  serpent  {(poXiaiv)  ;  they  then  bore  them
and  sew  them  together,  so  that  the  scales  overlia.p
one  another,  and  in  general  appearance  they  re-
semble the  surface  of  a  green  fir-cone.  This  author
adds,  that  the  loricae  made  of  these  homy  scales
are  much  more  strong  and  impenetrable  than
linen  cuirasses,  which  are  useful  to  hunters,  but
not  adapted  for  fighting.  The  annexed  woodcut,
taken  from  Meyrick's  Critical  Inquiry  into  Ancient
Armour  (plate  iii.)  exhibits  an  Asiatic  cuirass  ex-
actly corresponding  to  this  description.  It  consists
of  slices  of  some  aiiimars  hoof,  which  are  stitched
together,  overlapping  each  other  in  perpendicular
rows,  without  being  fastened  to  any  under  gar-
ment.     The  projection  nearest  the  middle  must  be


LORICA.


711


supposed  to  have  been  worn  over  the  breast,  and
the  other  over  the  back,  so  as  to  leave  two  vacant
spaces  for  the  arms.

This  invention  no  doubt  preceded  the  metallic
scale  armour.  The  Rhoxalani,  a  tribe  allied  to
the  Sarmatians,  defended  themselves  by  wearing  a
dress  consisting  of  thin  plates  of  iron  and  hard
leather.  (Tacit.  Ilist,  i.  79.)  The  Persians  wore  a
tunic  of  the  same  description,  the  scales  being
sometimes  of  gold  (Herod,  vii.  61  ;  ^up-r]Ka  xp^-
aeov  XeiridcoTdv,  ix.  22)  ;  but  they  were  commonly
of  bronze  {thoraca  indutus  a'tnis  squamis^Y  ivg.  A  en.
xi.  487).  The  basis  of  the  cuirass  was  sometimes
a  skin,,  or  a  piece  of  strong  linen  to  which  the
metallic  scales,  or  "feathers,"  as  they  are  also
called,  were  sewed.  (Virg.  Aen.  xi.  770  ;  Serv.
in  loc.  ;.  Justin,  xli.  2.  10.)

The  epithet  AeiriScoTds,  as  applied  to  a  thorax,
is  opposed  to  the  epithet  (poXiSwrSs..  (Arrian,
Tact.  p.  13,  14.)  The  former  denotes  a  shnilitude
to  the  scales  of  fish  (Xeniaiv)^  the  latter  to  the
scales  of  serpents  ((poKiaiv).  The  resemblance  to
the  scales  of  serpents,  which  are  long  and  narrow,
is  exhibited  on  the  shoulders  of  the  Roman  soldier
in  the  woodcut  at  page  136^  These  scales  were
imitated  by  long  flexible  bands  of  steel,  made  to
fold  one  over  another  according  to  the  contraction
of  the  body.  They  appear  very  frequently  on  the
Roman  monuments  of  the  times  of  the  emperors,
and  the  following  woodcut  places  in  immediate
contrast  n  ^wpa^  AeTriSwTtJs.  on  the  right  and
(poXidwrds  on  the  left,  both  taken  from  Bartoli'g
Arcus  Trlumphales.


The  Roman  hastati  wore  cuirasses  of  chain-mail,
i.  e.  hauberks  or  habergeons  (aKvcnSwrovs  ^wpa-
has,  Polyb.  vi.  21  ;  Athen.  v.  22  ;  Arrian,  I.  c).
Virgil  several  times  mentions  hauberks  in  wlich
the  rings,  linked  or  hooked  into  one  another,  were
of  gold  {loricam  consertam  Jiamis,  auroque  triHcem,
Virg.  Aen.  iii.  467,  v.  259,  vii.  639).

In  contradistinction  to  the  fliexible  cuirasses,  or
coats  of  mail,  which  have  now  been  described,  that
commonly  worn  by  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  more
especially  in  the  earlier  ages,  was  called  ^dpa^
(TToSios,  or  ararSs,  because,  when  placed  upon  the
ground  on  its  lower  edge,  it  stood  erect.  In  con-
sequence of  its  firmness  it  was  even  used  as  a  seat
to  rest  upon.  (Pans.  x.  27.  §  2.)  It  consisted
principally  of  the  two  yvaXa,  viz.  the  breast-plate
(pectonde)  made  of  hard  leather  or  of  bronze,  iron,
or  sometimes  the  more  precious  metals,  which
covered  the  breast  and  abdomen  (Hom.  //.  v.  9%
xiii.  507,  587,  xvii.  314)  ;  and  of  the  correspond-
z  z  4


712


LORICA.


ing  plate  which  covered  the  back.  (Paus.  x.  26.  2  ;
Horn.  II.  XV.  530.)  Both  of  these  pieces  were
adapted  to  the  form  of  the  body,  as  may  be  per-


LORICA.

ceived  in  the  representation  of  tliem  in  the  wood-
cnts  at  pages  135,  196.  The  two  figures  here
introduced  are  designed  to  $how  the    usual  dif-


ference of  form  and  appearance  between  the  an-
tique Greek  thorax  and  that  worn  by  the  Roman
emperors  and  generals.  The  right-hand  figure
is  from  one  of  Mr,  Hope's  fictile  vases  (Costumes
of  the  Ancients,  i.  102),  and  bears  a  very  strong
resemblance  to  a  Greek  warrior  painted  on  one  of
Sir  W.  Hamilton's  (i.  4).  The  figure  on  the  left
hand  is  taken  from  a  marble  statue  of  Caligula
found  at  Gabii.  (Visconti,  Mon.  Gab.  No.  38.)
The  gorgon's  head  over  the  breast,  and  the  two
griffins  underneath  it,  illustrate  the  style  of  orna-
ment which  was  common  in  the  same  circum-
stances. (Mart.  vii.  1.  1 — 4.)  [Abgis.]  The  ex-
ecution of  these  ornaments  in  relief  was  more
esp  cially  the  work  of  the  Corinthians.  (Cic.  Verr.
iv.  44.)

The  two  plates  were  united  on  the  right  side  of
the  body  by  two  hinges,  as  seen  in  the  equestrian
statue  of  the  younger  Balbus  at  Naples,  and  in
various  portions  of  bronze  cuirasses  still  in  ex-
istence. On  the  other  side,  and  sometimes  on
both  sides,  they  were  fastened  by  means  of  buckles
{iTep6vai,  Paus.  I.  c).  [FiBULA.]  In  Roman
statues  we  often  observe  a  band  surrounding  the
waist  and  tied  before.  The  breast-plate  and  the
back- plate  were  further  connected  together  by
leathern  straps  passing  over  the  shoulders,  and  fast-
ened in  front  by  means  of  buttons  or  of  ribands
tied  in  a  bow.  In  the  last  woodcut  both  of  the
connecting  ribands  in  the  right-hand  figure  are
tied  to  a  ring  over  the  navel.  The  breast-plate  of
Caligula  has  a  ring  over  each  breast,  designed  to
fulfil  the  same  purpose.

Bands  of  metal  often  supplied  the  place  of  the
leathern  straps,  or  else  covered  them  so  as  to  be-
come very  ornamental,  being  terminated  by  a  lion's
head,  or  some  other  suitable  figure  appearing  on


each  side  of  the  breast.  The  most  beautiful  spe-
cimens of  enriched  bronze  shoulder-bands  now  in
existence  are  those  which  were  found  A.  d.  1820,
near  the  river  Siris  in  S.  Italy,  and  which  are  pre-
served in  the  British  Museum.  They  were  origin-
ally gilt,  and  represent  in  very  salient  relief  two
Grecian  heroes  combating  two  Amazons.  They  are
seven  inches  in  length,  and  belong  to  the  descrip-
tion of  bronzes  called  efyya  (r<pvfy{]\aTa,  having  been
beaten  into  form  with  wonderful  skill  by  the  ham-
mer. Bl-ondsted  (Bronzes  of  Siris,  London,  1836)
has  illustrated  the  purpose  which  they  served,  by
showing  them  in  connection  with  a  portion  of  an-
other lorica,  which  lay  upon  the  shoulders  behind
the  neck.  This  fragment  was  found  in  Greece.
Its  hinges  are  sufficiently  preserved  to  show  most
distinctly  the  manner  in  which  the  shoulder-bands
were  fastened  to  them  (see  woodcut).


"  Around  the  lower  edge  of  the  cuirass,"  ob-
serves Brondsted,  "  were  attached  straps,  four  or
five  inches  long,  of  leather,  or  perhaps  of  felt,  and


LUCERNA.

covered  with  small  plates  of  metal.  These  straps
served  in  part  for  ornament,  and  partly  also  to  pro-
tect the  lower  region  of  the  body  in  concert  with
the  belt  (C't'J'v)  and  the  band  {fiiTpa).  They  are
well  shown  in  the  preceding  figure  of  Caligula.

Instead  of  the  straps  here  described,  which  the
Greeks  called  Trrepvyes  (Xen.  de  Re  Equest.  xii.
4),  the  Chalybes,  who  were  encountered  by  Xeno-
phon  on  his  retreat  (Anab.  iv.  7.  §  15),  had  in  the
same  situation  a  kind  of  cordage.  Appendages  of
a  similar  kind  were  sometimes  fastened  by  hinges
to  the  lorica  at  the  right  shoulder,  for  the  pui-pose
of  protecting  the  part  of  the  body  which  was  ex-
posed by  lifting  up  the  arm  in  throwing  the  spear
or  using  the  sword.     (Xen.  de  Re  Equest.  xii.  6.)

Of  Grecian  cuirasses  the  Attic  were  accounted
the  best  and  most  beautiful.  (Aelian,  V.  H.  iii.
24).  The  cuirass  was  worn  universally  by  the
heavy-armed  infantry  and  by  the  horsemen,  ex-
cept that  Alexander  the  Great  gave  to  the  less
brave  of  his  soldiers  breast-plates  only,  in  order
that  the  defenceless  state  of  their  backs  might
decrease  their  propensity  to  flight.  (Polyaen.
iv.  3.  13.)  These  were  called  half-cuirasses  (7f/tJ0«-
poLKia).  The  thorax  was  sometimes  found  to  be
very  oppressive  and  cumbersome.  (Tac.  Ann.  i.
64.)  [J.Y.]

LORI'CA,  LORICA'TIO,  in  architecture.
[MuRus  ;  Tectorium  Opus.]

LOUTRON  (Xovrpov).     [Balnkae.]

LUCAR.     [HiSTRio,  p.  613,  a.]

LU'CERES.     [Patricii.]

LUCERNA  (Xuxvos),  an  oil  lamp.  The.Greeks
and  Romans  originally  used  candles  ;  but  in  later
times  candles  were  chiefly  confined  to  the  houses
of  the  lower  classes.  [Candela.]  A  great
number  of  ancient  lamps  has  come  down  to  us  ;
the  greater  part  of  which  are  made  of  terra  cotta
(rpox'^A.oTot,  Aristoph.  Eccl.  1),  but  also  a  con-
siderable number  of  bronze.  Most  of  the  lamps
are  of  an  oval  form,  and  flat  upon  the  top,  on  which
there  are  frequently  figures  in  relief.  (See  the
woodcuts,  pp.  143,  395,  464.)  In  the  lamps  there
are  one  or  more  round  holes  according  to  the  num-
ber of  wicks  {ellychnia)  burnt  in  it ;  and  as  these
holes  were  called  from  an  obvious  analogy,  ixv-
KTTJpes  or  /xv^ai,  literally  nostrils  or  nozzles,  the
lamp  was  also  called  Monomi/xos,  Dimyxos^  Tri-
myxos,  or  Polymyxos,  according  as  it  contained
one,  two,  three,  or  a  greater  number  of  nozzles  or
holes  for  the  wicks.  The  following  example  of  a
dimyxos  luceiTia^  upon  which  there  is  a  winged  boy
with  a  goose,  is  taken  from  the  Museo  Borbonico^
vol.  iv.  pi.  14.


LUCTA.


Ui


The  next  woodcut,  taken  from  the  same  work
(vol.  i.  pi.  10),  represents  one  of  the  most  beautiful
bronze  lamps  which  has  yet  been  found.  Upon  it
is  the  figure  of  a  standing  Silenus.


The  lamps  sometimes
hung  in  chains  from  the
ceiling  of  the  room  (Virg.
Aen.  i.  726  ;  Petron.  30),
but  generally  stood  upon  a
stand.  [Candelabrum.]
Sometimes  a  figure  holds
the  lamp,  as  in  the  an-
nexed woodcut  {Museo
Borbon.  vol.  vii.  pi.  15),
which  also  exhibits  the
needle  or  instrument  which
served  to  trim  the  wick,
and  is  attached  to  the
figure  by  means  of  a  chain.
(Comp.  Virg.  Moret.  11.
"  Et  producit  acu  stupas
humore  carentes.")

We  read  of  lucemae  cu-
biculares^  balneares,  tricli-
niares,  sepulcrales^  &c. ;  but
these    names    were    only
given  to  the  lamps  on  ac-
count of  the  purposes  to  which  they  were  applied,
and  not  on  account  of  a  difference  in  shape.     The
lucemae  cubiculares  were  burnt  in   bed-chambera
all  night.    (Mart.  xiv.  39,  x.  38.)

Perfumed  oil  was  sometimes  burnt  in  the  lamps.
(Petron.  70 ;  Mart.  x.  38.  9.)

(Passeri,  Lucemae  fictiles  ;  Bbttiger  Die  Silenus-
lampen,  Amalth.  vol.  iii.  p.  168,  &c.  ;  Becker,
ChariMes^  vol.  ii.  p.  215,  &c.,  Gallus^  vol.  ii.  p.
201,  &c.)

LUCTA,  LUCTATIO  (TrtfAt;,  iriXaKTiia,
iraXai(rfx.o(Tvvriy  or  Kara€\'nTtKii\  wrestling.  The
word  iraATj  is  sometimes  used  in  a  wider  sense,
embracing  all  gymnastic  exercises  with  the  excep-
tion of  dancing,  whence  the  schools  of  the  athletae
were  called  palaestrae,  that  is,  schools  in  which
the  TroA.7?  in  its  widest  sense  was  taught.  (Plat  de
Leg.  vii.  p.  795  ;  Herod,  ix.  33.)  [Palaestra.]
There  are  also  many  passages  in  ancient  writers  in
which  7r£iArj  and  iraKaieiv  are  used  to  designate
any  particular  species  of  athletic  games  besides
wrestling,  or  a  combination  of  several  games.  (See
Krause,  p.  400.  note  2.)

The  Greeks  ascribed  the  invention  of  wrestling
to  mythical  personages,  such  as  Palaestra,  the
daughter  of  Hermes  (ApoUod.  ii.  4.  §  9),  Antaeus
and  Cercyon  (Plat,  de  Leg.  vii.  p.  796),  Phorbas
of  Athens,  or  Theseus.  (Schol.  ad  Find.  Nem.  v«
49.)    Herni.  s,   the  god  of  all  gymnastic  exercises.


7H


LUCTA.


also  presided  over  the  xciAtj.  Theseus  is  said  by
Pausanias  (i.  39.  §  3)  to  have  been  the  first  who
reduced  the  game  of  wrestling  to  certain  rules,
and  to  have  thus  raised  it  to  the  rank  of  an  art  ;
whereas  before  his  time  it  was  a  rude  fight,  in
which  bodily  size  and  strength  alone  decided  the
victory.  The  most  celebrated  wrestler  in  the
heroic  age  was  Heracles.  In  the  Homeric  age
wrestling  was  much  practised,  and  a  beautiful  de-
scription of  a  wrestling  match  is  given  in  the  Hiad
(xxiii.  710,  &c. ;  compare  Od.  viii.  103,  126,  246  ;
Hesiod,  Scut.  Here.  302,  where  p-dx^iv  k\Kr)hhv
signifies  the  TraATj).  During  this  period  wrestlers
contended  naked,  with  the  exception  of  the  loins,
which  were  covered  with  the  Trepi^wixa  {It.  xxiii.
700),  and  this  custom  remained  throughout  Greece
until  01. 15,  from  which  time  the  perizoma  was  no
longer  used,  and  wrestlers  fought  entirely  naked.
(Thucyd.  i.  6,  with  the  Schol. ;  Pans.  i.  44.  §  1  ;
Dionys.  vii.  72.)  In  the  Homeric  age  the  custom  of
anointing  the  body  for  the  purpose  of  wrestling  does
not  appear  to  have  been  known,  but  in  the  time  of
Solon  it  was  quite  general,  and  was  said  to  have
been  adopted  by  the  Cretans  and  Lacedaemonians
at  a  very  early  period.  (Thucyd.  I.  c. ;  Plat,  de  Re
Pvhl.  V.  p.  452.)  After  the  body  was  anointed,  it
was  strewed  over  with  sand  or  dust,  in  order  to
enable  the  wrestlers  to  take  a  firm  hold  of  each
other.  At  the  festival  of  the  Sthenia  in  Argos  the
TraArj  was  accompanied  by  flute-music.  [Sthenia.]

When  two  athletae  began  their  contest,  each
might  use  a  A-ariety  of  means  to  seize  his  antagonist
in  the  most  advantageous  manner,  and  to  throw
him  down  without  exposing  himself  (Ovid.  Met.
ix.  33,  &c.  ;  Stat.  Theh.vx.  831,  &c.  ;  Heliodor.
Aethiop.  X.  p.  235)  ;  but  one  of  the  great  objects
was  to  make  every  attack  with  elegance  and
beauty,  and  the  fight  Avas  for  this  as  well  as  for
other  purposes  regulated  by  certain  laws.  (Plat,  de
Leg.  viii.  p.  834  ;  Cic.  Orat.  68  ;  Lucian,  Anach.
24  ;  Aelian.  V.  H.  xi.  1.)  Striking,  for  instance,
was  not  allowed,  but  pushing  an  antagonist  back-
ward (0}di(Tjj.6s)  was  frequently  resorted  to.  (Pint.
Sjjmp.  ii.  5  ;  Lucian,  Anach.  1.  24.)  It  is  pro-
bably on  account  of  the  laws  by  which  this  game
was  regulated,  and  the  great  art  which  it  re-
quired in  consequence,  that  Plutarch  (St/mp.  ii.  4)
calls  it  the  r^xviKdnaTov  koX  TravovpydraTOV  rcoy
aQXrifiaTwv.  But  notwithstanding  these  laws,
wrestling  admitted  of  greater  cunning  and  more
tricks  and  stratagems  than  any  other  game,  with
the  exception  of  the  pancratium  (Xen.  Cyrop.  i.  6.
§  32)  ;  and  the  Greeks  had  a  great  many  technical
terms  to  express  the  various  stratagems,  positions,
and  attitudes  in  which  wrestlers  might  be  placed.
Numerous  scenes  of  wrestlers  are  represented  on
ancient  works  of  art.  (Krause,  p.  412,  &c.  ;  see
woodcut  in  Pancratium.)

The  contest  in  wrestling  was  divided  by  the  an-
cients into  two  parts,  viz.  the  ttciAtj  opQ^  or  opQia
(op6o(TTdSTfv  iraKaieiv),  that  is,  the  fight  of  the
athletae  as  long  as  they  stood  upright,  and  the
a\LvBr](ns  or  KvAiais  {lucta  volutatoria),  in  which
the  athletae  struggled  with  each  other  while  lying
on  the  ground.  Unless  they  contrived  to  rise  again,
th?  aKlvS7)cns  was  the  last  stage  of  the  contest,
which  continued  until  one  of  them  acknowledged
himself  to  be  conquered.  The  TrdKrj  opdrj  appears
to  have  been  the  only  one -which  was  fought  in  the
times  of  Homer,  as  well  as  afterwards  in  the  great
national  games  of  the  Greeks ;  and  as  soon  as  one


LUDL

athlete  fell,  the  other  allowed  him  to  rise  and  con-
tinue the  contest  if  he  still  felt  inclined.  (Plat,  de
Legg.  vii.  p.  796  ;  Com.  Nep.  Epam.  2  ;  Lucian,
Lexiph.  5.)  But  if  the  same  athlete  fell  thrice,  the
victory  was  decided,  and  he  was  not  allowed  to  go
on.  (Senec.  de  Benef.  v.  3  ;  Aeschyl.  Again.  171  ;
Anthol.  Gr.  vol.  ii.  p.  406,  ed.  Jacobs.)  The
a\ivdr)(ns  was  only  fought  in  later  times,  at  the
smaller  games,  and  especially  in  the  pancratium.
The  place,  where  the  wrestlers  contended,  was  ge-
nerally soft  ground,  and  covered  with  sand.  (Xen.
Anab.  iv.  8.  §  26  ;  Lucian,  Anach.  2.)  Effeminate
persons  sometimes  spread  large  and  magnificent
carpets  on  the  place  where  they  wrestled.  (Athen.
xii.  p.  539.)  Each  of  the  various  tribes  of  the
Greeks  seem  to  have  shown  its  peculiar  and  na-
tional character  in  the  game  of  wrestling  in  some
particular  trick  or  stratagem,  by  which  it  excelled
the  others.

In  a  diaetetic  point  of  view  the  aklvS-qa-is  wae
considered  beneficial  to  the  interior  parts  of  the
body,  the  loins,  and  the  lower  parts  in  general,
but  injurious  to  the  head  ;  whereas  the  xaATj  6p6-f)
was  believed  to  act  beneficially  upon  the  upper
parts  of  the  body.  It  was  owing  to  these  salutary
effects  that  wrestling  was  practised  in  all  the  gym-
nasia as  well  as  in  the  palaestrae,  and  that  in  01.
37  wrestling  for  boys  was  introduced  at  the
Olympic  games,  and  soon  after  in  the  other
great  games,  and  at  Athens  in  the  Eleusinia,  and
Thesea  also.  (Pans.  v.  8.  §  3,  iii.  11.  §  6  ;  Pind.
01.  viii.  68  ;  Gell.  xv.  20  ;  Plut.  Si/mp.  ii.  5.)  The
most  renowned  of  all  the  Greek  wrestlers  in  the
historical  age  was  Milon  of  Croton,  whose  name
was  known  throughout  the  ancient  world.  (Herod,
iii.  137  ;  Strab.  vi.  p.  262,  &c.  ;  Diodor.  xii.  9.)
Other  distinguished  wrestlers  are  enumerated  by
Krause  (p.  135,  &c.),  who  has  also  given  a  very
minute  account  of  the  game  of  wrestling  and  every
thing  connected  with  it,  in  his  Gymnastik  und  Agon,
d.  Hell.  pp.  400—439.  [L.  S.]

LUDI  is  the  common  name  for  the  whole  variety
of  theatrical  exhibitions,  games  and  contests,  which
were  held  at  Rome  on  various  occasions,  but  chiefly
at  the  festival  of  the  gods  ;  and  as  the  ludi  at  cer-
tain festivals  formed  the  principal  part  of  the  so-
lemnities, these  festivals  themselves  are  called  ludi.
Sometimes,  however,  ludi  were  also  held  in  honour
of  a  magistrate  or  of  a  deceased  person,  and  in  this
case  the  games  may  be  considered  as  ludi  privati,
though  all  the  people  might  take  part  in  them.

All  ludi  were  divided  by  the  Romans  into  two
classes,  viz.  ludi  circenses  and  ludi  scenici  (Cic.  de
Leg.  ii.  15),  accordingly  as  they  were  held  in  the
circus  or  in  the  theatre  ;  in  the  latter  case  they
were  mostly  theatrical  representations  with  their
various  modifications  ;  in  the  former  they  consisted
of  all  or  of  a  part  of  the  games  enumerated  in  the
articles  Circus  and  Gladiatores.  Another  di-
vision of  the  ludi  into  stati,  imperativi^  and  votivi,
was  made  only  with  regard  to  religious  festivals,
and  is  analogous  to  the  division  of  the  feriae.
[Feriae.]

The  superintendence  of  the  games  and  the  so-
lemnities connected  with  them  was  in  most  cases
intrusted  to  the  aediles.  •  [Aediles.]  If  the  law-
ful rites  were  not  observed  in  the  celebration  of  the
ludi,  it  depended  upon  the  decision  of  the  pontiffs
whether  they  were  to  be  held  again  (instaurari)  or
not.  An  alphabetical  list  of  the  principal  ludi  is
subjoined.  [L.S.]


LUDI  CAPITOLINI.
LUDI  APOLLINA'RES  were  instituted  at
Rome  during  the  second  Punic  war,  four  years  after
the  battle  of  Cannae  (b.c.  212),  at  the  command  of
an  oracle  contained  in  the  books  of  the  ancient
seer  Marcius  (carmina  Marciana,  Liv.  xxv.  12  ;
Macrob.  Sat.  i.  1 7).  It  was  stated  by  some  of  the
ancient  annalists  that  these  ludi  were  instituted  for
the  purpose  of  obtaining  from  Apollo  the  protection
of  human  life  during  the  hottest  season  of  summer  ;
but  L.ivy  and  Macrobius  adopt  the  account  founded
upon  the  most  authentic  document,  the  carmina
Marciana  themselves,  that  the  Apollinarian  games
were  instituted  partly  to  obtain  the  aid  of  Apollo
in  expelling  the  Carthaginians  from  Italy,  and
partly  to  preserve,  through  the  favour  of  the  god,
the  republic  from  all  dangers.  The  oracle  suggested
that  the  games  should  be  held  every  year  imder
the  superintendence  of  the  praetor  urbanus,  and
that  ten  men  should  perform  the  sacrifices  accord-
ing to  Greek  rites.  The  senate  complying  with
the  advice  of  the  oracle  made  two  senatuscon-
sulta  ;  one  that,  at  the  end  of  the  games,  the
praetor  should  receive  12,000  asses  to  be  expended
on  the  solemnities  and  sacrifices,  and  another  that
the  ten  men  should  sacrifice  to  Apollo,  according  to
Greek  rites,  a  bull  with  gilt  horns  and  two  white
goats  also  with  gilt  horns,  and  to  Latona  a  heifer
with  gilt  horns.  The  games  themselves  were  held
in  the  Circus  Maxinius,  the  spectators  were  adorned
with  chaplets,  and  each  citizen  gave  a  contribution
towards  defraying  the  expenses.  (Festus,  s.  v.
ApoUinares.)  The  Roman  matrons  performed  sup-
plications, the  people  took  their  meals  in  the  pro-
patulum  with  open  doors,  and  the  whole  day —
for  the  festival  lasted  only  one  day  —  was  filled  up
with  ceremonies  and  various  other  rites.  At  this
first  celebration  of  the  ludi  ApoUinares  no  decree
was  made  respecting  the  annual  repetition  sug-
gested by  the  oracle,  so  that  in  the  first  year  they
were  simply  ludi  votivi  or  indictivi.  The  year
after  (n.  c.  211)  the  senate,  on  the  proposal  of  the
praetor  Calpurnius,  decreed  that  they  should  be  re-
peated, and  that  in  future  they  should  be  vowed
afresh  every  year.  (Liv.  xxvi.  23.)  The  day  on
which  they  were  held  varied  every  j^ear  according
to  circumstances.  A  few  years  after,  however  (b.  c.
208),  when  Rome  and  its  vicinitj'-  were  visited  by
a  plague,  the  praetor  urbanus,  P.  Licinius  Vanis,
brought  a  bill  before  the  people  to  ordain  that  the
Apollinarian  games  should  in  future  always  be
vowed  and  held  on  a  certain  day  {dies  status)^  viz.
on  the  6th  of  July,  which  day  henceforward  re-
mained a  dies  solennis.  (Liv.  xxvii.  23.)  The
games  thus  became  votivi  et  stativi,  and  continued
to  be  conducted  by  the  praetor  urbanus.  (Cic.
Phil.  ii.  1 3.)  But  during  the  empire  the  day  of  these
solemnities  appears  again  to  have  been  changed,
for  Julius  Capitolinus  {Afaoeim.  et  Balbin.  c.  1)  as-
signs them  to  the  26th  of  May.  [L.S.]
LUDI  AUGUSTA'LES.  [Augustales.]
LUDI  CAPITOLPNI  were  said  to  have  been
instituted  by  the  senate,  on  the  proposal  of  the
dictator  M.  Furius  Camillus,  in  the  year  B.C.  387,
after  the  departure  of  the  Gauls  from  Rome,  as  a
token  of  gratitude  towards  Jupiter  Capitolinus,
who  had  saved  the  Capitol  in  the  hour  of  danger.
The  decree  of  the  senate  at  the  same  time  intrusted
the  superintendence  and  management  of  the  Capi-
toline  games  to  a  college  of  priests  to  be  chosen  by
the  dictator  from  among  those  who  resided  on  the
Capitol  and  in  the  citadel  {in  arce)^  which  can  only


LUDI  FUNEBRES.


15


mean  that  they  Avere  to  be  patricians.  (Liv.  v.  50,
52.)  These  priests  were  called  Capitolini.  (Cic.
ad  Quint.  Frat.  ii,  5.)  One  of  the  amusements  at
the  Capitoline  games,  a  solemnity  which  was  ob-
served as  late  as  the  time  of  Plutarch,  was  that  a
herald  offered  the  Sardiani  for  public  sale,  and
that  some  old  man  was  led  about,  who,  in  order  to
produce  laughter,  wore  a  toga  praetexta,  and  a
bulla  puerilis  which  hung  down  from  his  neck.
(Plut.  Quaest.  Rom.  p,  277  ;  Fest,  *,  v.  tSardi
venales,  &c.)  According  to  some  of  tho  ancients
this  ceremony  was  intended  to  ridicule  the  Veien-
tines,  who  were  subdued,  after  long  wars  with
Rome,  and  numbers  of  whom  were  sold  as  slaves,
while  their  king,  represented  by  the  old  man  with
the  bulla  (such  was  said  to  have  been  the  costume
of  the  Etruscan  kings),  was  led  through  the  city
as  an  object  of  ridicule.

The  Veientines,  it  is  further  said,  were  desig-
nated by  the  name  Sardiani  or  Sardi,  because  they
were  believed  to  have  come  from  Lydia,  the  capital
of  which  was  Sardes,  This  specimen  of  ancient  ety-
mology, however,  is  opposed  by  another  interpretation
of  the  origin  of  the  ceremony  given  by  Sinnius  Capito.
According  to  this  author,  the  name  Sardiani  or
Sardi  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  Veientines,  but
referred  to  the  inhabitants  of  Sardinia.  When
their  island  was  subdued  by  the  Romans  in  b,  c.
238,  no  spoils  were  found,  but  a  great  number  of
Sardinians  were  brought  to  Rome  and  sold  as
slaves,  and  these  proved  to  be  slaves  of  the  worst
kind.  (Fest.  l.  c. ;  Aurel.  Vict,  de  Vir.  lUustr.
c.  57,)  Hence  arose  the  proverb,  Sardi  venales  ;
alius  alio  nequior  (Cic,  ad  Fam.  vii,  24),  and  hence
also  the  ceremony  at  the  Capitoline  games.  At
what  time  or  at  what  intervals  these  ludi  were
celebrated  is  not  mentioned.  During  the  time  of
the  empire  they  seem  to  have  fallen  into  oblivion,
but  they  were  restored  by  Domitian,  and  were
henceforth  celebrated  every  fifth  year  under  the
name  of  agones  Capitolini.  (See  Jos,  Scaliger,
Auson.  Led.  i,  10,)  [L,  S.]

LUDI  CIRCENSES  ROMA'NI  or  MAGNI,
were  celebrated  every  year  during  several  days,
from  the  fourth  to  the  twelfth  of  September,  iu
honour  of  the  three  great  divinities,  Jupiter,  Juno,
and  Minerva  (Cic,  c.  Verr.  v,  14),  or  according  to
others,  in  honour  of  Jupiter,  Consus,  and  Neptunus
Equestris.  They  were  superintended  by  the  curule
aediles.  For  further  particulars  see  Circus,  p.
286,  &c.  [L.S.1

LUDI  COMPITALI'CIL  [Compitalia.]
LUDI  FLORA'LES.  [Floralia.]
LUDI  FUNEBRES  were  games  celebrated  at
the  funeral  pyre  of  illustrious  persons.  Such  games
are  mentioned  in  the  very  early  legends  of  the
history  of  Greece  and  Rome,  and  they  continued
with  various  modifications  until  the  introduction  of
Christianity,  It  was  at  such  a  Indus  funebris  that
in  the  year  b.  c,  264  gladiatorial  fights  were  ex-
hibited at  Rome  for  the  first  time,  which  hence-
forward remained  the  most  essential  part  in  all
ludi  funebres,  [Gladiatores,  p.  574,a,]  The
duration  of  these  games  varied  according  to  cir-
cumstances. They  lasted  sometimes  for  three  and
sometimes  for  four  days,  though  it  may  be  supposed
that  in  the  majority  of  cases  they  did  not  last  more
than  one  day.  On  one  occasion  120  gladiators
fought  in  the  course  of  three  days,  and  the  whole
forum  was  covered  with  triclinia  and  tents,  ia
I  which  the  people  feasted.     (Liv.  xxil  30,  xxxi.


7ie


LUDI  PLEBEII.


."JO,  xxx\x.  46  ;  Plin.  ff.  N.  xxxv.  7.)     It  was

thought  disgraceful  for  women  to  be  present  at
these  games,  and  Publius  Sempronius  separated
liimself  from  his  wife  because  she  had  been  present
without  his  knowledge  at  ludi  funebres.  (Plut.
Qiiaest.  Rom.  p.  267,  B  ;  Val.  Max.  vi.  3.  §  12  ;
compare  Suet.  Aug.  44.)  These  ludi,  though  on
some  occasions  the  whole  people  took  part  in  them,
were  not  ludi  publici,  properly  speaking,  as  they
were  given  by  private  individuals  in  honour  of
their  relations  or  friends.  Compare  Funus,  p.
562.  [L.S.]

LUDI  HONORA'RII  are  expressly  mentioned
only  by  Suetonius  (Aug.  32),  who  states  that
Augustus  devoted  thirty  days,  which  had  been
occupied  till  that  time  by  ludi  honorarii,  to  the
transaction  of  legal  business.  What  is  meant  by
ludi  honorarii,  is  not  quite  certain.  According  to
Festus  (s.  V.  HonoraHos  ludos)  they  were  the  same
as  the  Liberalia.  Scaliger,  however,  in  his  note
on  Suetonius,  has  made  it  appear  very  probable
that  they  were  the  same  as  those  which  Tertullian
{De  Sped.  c.  21)  says  were  given  for  the  purpose
of  gaining  honours  and  popularity,  in  contradis-
tinction to  other  ludi  which  were  intended  either
as  an  honour  to  the  gods,  or  as  oaia  for  the  dead.
At  the  time  of  Augustus  this  kind  of  ludi  which
Tacitus  (Agric.  6)  seems  to  designate  by  the  name
inania  honoris^  were  so  common  that  no  one  ob-
tained any  public  office  without  lavishing  a  con-
siderable portion  of  his  property  on  the  exhibition
of  games.  Augustus  therefore  wisely  assigned
thirty  of  the  days  of  the  year,  on  which  such
spectacles  had  been  exhibited  previously,  to  the
transaction  of  business,  i.  e.  he  made  these  30  days
fasti.  (Compare  Ernesti  and  F.  A.  Wolf,  ad
Suelon.l.c.)  [L.  S.]

LUDI  JUVENA'LES.  [.Tuvenales.]
LUDI  LIBERA'LES.  [Dionysia,  p.  414.]
LUDI  MARTIA'LES  were  celebrated  every
year  on  the  first  of  August,  in  the  Circus,  and  in
honour  of  Mars,  because  the  temple  of  Mars  had
been  dedicated  on  this  day.  (Dion  Cass.  Ix.  5  ;
Sueton.  Claud.  4.)  The  ancient  calendaria  men-
tion also  other  ludi  raartiales  which  were  held  in
the  Circus  on  the  12th  of  May.  [L.  S.]

LUDI  MEGALENSES.  [Megalesia.]
LUDI  N  ATALITII  are  the  games  with  which
the  birth-day  of  an  emperor  was  generally  cele-
brated. They  were  held  in  the  Circus,  whence
they  are  sometimes  called  circenses.  (Capitol.  An-
tonin.  Pius^  5  ;  Spartian.  Hadrian,  7.)  They  con-
sisted generally  of  fights  of  gladiators  and  wild
beasts.  On  one  occasion  of  this  kind  Hadrian
exhibited  gladiatorial  combats  for  six  days,  and  one
thousand  wild  beasts.  [L.  S.]

LUDI  PALATI'NI  were  instituted  by  Livia
in  honour  of  Augustus,  and  were  held  on  the  Pala-
tine. (Dion  Cass.  Ivi.  sub  fin.)  According  to  Dion
Cassius  they  were  celebrated  during  three  days,
but  according  to  Josephus  (Antiq.  Jud.  xix.  1)  they
lasted  eight  days,  and  commenced  on  the  27th  of
December.  (See  Suet  Calig.  bQy  with  Scaliger's
note.)  [L.  S.]

LUDI  PISCATO'RII  were  held  every  year  on
the  sixth  of  June,  in  the  plain  on  the  right  bank
of  the  Tiber,  and  were  conducted  by  the  praetor
urbanus  on  behalf  of  the  fishermen  of  the  Tiber,
who  made  the  day  a  holiday.  (Ovid.  Fast.  vi.  235,
&c.  ;  Fest  s.  v.  Piscat.  ludi.)  fL.  S.]

•LUDI    PLEBE'II    were,    according    to    the


LUDI  SAECULARES.
Pseudo-Asconius  {ad  Verr.  i.  p.  143,  Orelli),  the
games  which  had  been  instituted  in  commemoration
of  the  freedom  of  the  plebeians  after  the  banish-
ment of  the  kings,  or  after  the  secession  of  the
plebes  to  the  Aventine.  The  first  of  these  ac-
counts is  not  borne  out  by  the  history  of  the  ple-
beian order,  and  it  is  more  probable  that  these
games  were  instituted  in  commemoration  of  the
reconciliation  between  the  patricians  and  plebeians
after  the  first  secession  to  the  mons  sacer,  or,  ac-
cording to  others,  to  the  Aventine.  They  were
held  on  the  16th,  17th,  and  18th  of  November,
and  were  conducted  by  the  plebeian  aediles.  (Li v.
xxviii.  1 0,  xxxix,  7.)  It  is  sufficiently  clear  from
the  ancient  calendaria  that  the  ludi  plebeii  were
not,  as  some  have  supposed,  the  same  as,  or  a  part
of,  the  ludi  Romani.  [L.  S.]

LUDI  PONTIFICA'LES  were  probably  no-
thing but  a  particular  kind  of  the  ludi  honorarii
mentioned  above.  They  were  for  the  first  time
given  by  Augustus,  when,  after  the  death  of  Lepi-
dus,  he  obtained  the  office  of  pontifex  maximus.
(Sueton.  Aug.  44.)  [L,  S.]

LUDI  QUAESTO'RII  were  of  the  same  cha-
racter as  the  preceding  games.  They  were  insti-
tuted by  the  emperor  Claudius  (Suet.  Claud.  24  ;
Tacit.  Ann.  ii.  22),  who  decreed  that  all  who  ob-
tained the  office  of  quaestor  should,  at  their  own
expense,  give  gladiatorial  exhibitions.  Nero  did
away  with  this  obligation  for  newly  appointed
quaestors  (Tacit.  Ann.  xiii.  5),  but  it  was  revived
by  Domitian.     (Sueton.  Domit.  c.  4.)         [L.  S.]

LUDI  ROMANI  orMAGNL  [Megalesia.]

LUDI  SAECULA'RES.  If  we  were  to  judge
from  their  name,  these  games  would  have  been
celebrated  once  in  every  century  or  saeculum  ;  but
we  do  not  find  that  they  were  celebrated  with  this
regularity  at  any  period  of  Roman  history,  and  the
name  ludi  saecidares  itself  was  never  used  during
the  time  of  the  republic.  In  order  to  understand
their  real  character  we  must  distinguish  between  the
time  of  the  republic  and  of  the  empire,  since  at
these  two  periods  these  ludi  were  of  an  entirely
different  character.

During  the  time  of  the  republic  they  were  called
ludi  Tarentini,  Terentini,  or  Taurii,  while  during
the  empire  they  bore  the  name  of  ludi  saeculares.
(Fest.  s.  V.  Saecul.  ludi  and  Taurii  ludi;  Val.  Max.
ii.  4.  §  5.)  Their  origin  is  described  by  Valeriug
Maximus,  who  attributes  their  institution  to  the
miraculous  recovery  of  three  children  of  one  Vale-
rius, who  had  been  attacked  by  a  plague  raging  at  the
time  in  Rome,  and  were  restored  to  health  by  drink-
ing some  water  warmed  at  a  place  in  the  Campus
Martins,  called  Tarentum.  Valerius  afterwards
offered  sacrifices  in  the  Tarentum  to  Dis  and  Pro-
serpina, to  whom  the  recovery  of  his  children  was
supposed  to  be  owing,  spread  lectistemia  for  th«
gods,  and  held  festive  games  for  three  successive
nights,  because  his  three  children  had  been  saved.
The  account  of  Valerius  Maximus  agrees  in  the
main  with  those  of  Censorinus  {De  Die  Nat.  c.  1 7)
and  of  Zosimus  (ii.  3),  and  all  appear  to  have  derived
their  information  from  the  ancient  annalist,  Vale-
rius Antias.  While  according  to  this  account  the
Tarentine  games  were  first  celebrated  by  Valerius,
another  legend  seems  to  consider  the  fight  of  the
Horatians  and  Curiatians  as  connected  with  their
first  celebration.  A  third  account  (Festus,  s.  v.
Taurii  ludii;  Serv.  ad  Aen.  ii.  140)  ascribes  their
first  institution  to  the  reign  of  Tarquinius  Superbus,


LUDI  SAECULARES.

A  fearful  plague  broke  out,  by  which  all  pregnant
women  were  affected  in  such  a  manner  that  the
children  died  in  the  womb.  Games  were  then  in-
stituted to  propitiate  the  infernal  divinities,  and
sacrifices  of  sterile  cows  (taureae)  were  oifered  up
to  them,  whence  the  games  were  called  ludi  Taurii.
These  games  and  sacrifices  took  place  in  the  Circus
Flaminius,  that  the  infernal  divinities  might  not
enter  the  city.  Festus  (s.  v.  Saec.  ludi)  and  Cen-
sorinus  ascribe  the  first  celebration  to  the  consul
Valerius  Poplicola.  This  account  admits  that  the
worship  of  Dis  and  Proserpina  had  existed  long
before,  but  states  that  the  games  and  sacrifices
were  now  performed  for  the  first  time  to  avert  a
plague,  and  in  that  part  of  the  Campus  Martins
which  had  belonged  to  the  last  king  Tarquinius,
from  whom  the  place  derived  its  name  Tarentum.
Valerius  Maximus  aud  Zosimus,  who  knew  of  the
celebration  of  these  games  by  Valerius  Poplicola,
endeavour  to  reconcile  their  two  accounts  by  repre-
senting the  celebration  of  Poplicola  as  the  second
in  chronological  order.  Other  less  important  tradi-
tions are  mentioned  by  Servius  (ad  Aen.  il  140)
and  by  Varro  (ap  Censorin.).

As  regards  the  names  Tarenti  or  Taurii,  they  are
perhaps  nothing  but  different  forms  of  the  same
word,  and  of  the  same  root  as  Tarquinius.  All  the
accounts  mentioned  above,  though  differing  as  to
the  time  at  which  and  the  persons  by  whom  the
Tarentine  games  were  first  celebrated,  yet  agree  in
stating  that  they  were  celebrated  for  the  purpose
of  averting  from  the  state  some  great  calamity  by
which  it  had  been  afflicted,  and  that  they  were
held  in  honour  of  Dis  and  Proserpina.  From
the  time  of  the  consul  Valerius  Poplicola  down  to
that  of  A  ugustus,  the  Tarentine  games  were  only
held  three  times,  and  again  only  on  certain  emer-
gencies, and  not  at  any  fixed  time,  so  that  we
must  conclude  that  their  celebration  was  in  no  way
connected  with  certain  cycles  of  time  (saecula).
The  deities  in  whose  honour  they  were  held  during
the  republic,  continued,  as  at  first,  to  be  Dis  and
Proserpina.  As  to  the  times  at  which  these  three
celebrations  took  place,  the  commentarii  of  the
quindeciraviri  and  the  accounts  of  the  annalists  did
not  agree  (Censorin.  /.  c),  and  the  discrepancy  of
the  statements  still  extant  shows  the  vain  attempts
which  were  made  in  later  times  to  prove  that
during  the  republic  the  games  had  been  celebrated
once  in  every  saeculum.  All  these  misrepresenta-
tions and  distortions  arose  in  the  time  of  Augustus,
Not  long  after  he  had  assumed  the  supreme  power
in  the  republic,  the  quindecimviri  announced  that
according  to  their  books  ludi  saeculares  ought  to
be  held,  and  at  the  same  time  tried  to  prove  from
historj'-  that  in  fonner  times  they  had  not  only
been  celebrated  repeatedly,  but  almost  regularly
once  in  every  century.  The  games  of  which  the
quindecimviri  made  this  assertion,  were  the  ludi
Tarentini.

The  celebrated  jurist  and  antiquary  Ateius  Capito
received  from  the  emperor  the  command  to  deter-
mine the  ceremonies,  and  Horace  was  requested  to
compose  the  festive  hymn  for  the  occasion  (carmen
saectdare),  which  is  still  extant  (Zosim.  ii,  4.),
But  the  festival  which  was  now  held,  was  in
reality  very  different  from  the  ancient  Tarentine
giimes  ;  for  Dis  and  Proserpina,  to  whom  formerly
the  festival  belonged  exclusively,  were  now  the  last
in  the  list  of  the  divinities  in  honour  of  whom  the
ludi  saeculares  were  celebrated.     A  description  of


LUDUS.


7ir


the  various  solemnities  is  given  by  Zosimus.  Some
days  before  they  commenced,  heralds  were  sent
about  to  invite  the  people  to  a  spectacle  which  no
one  had  ever  beheld,  and  which  no  one  would  ever
behold  again.  Hereupon  the  quindecimviri  dis-
tributed, upon  the  Capitol  and  the  Palatine,  among
the  Roman  citizens,  torches,  sulphur,  and  bitumen,
by  which  they  were  to  purify  themselves.  In  the
same  places,  and  on  the  Aventine  in  the  temple
of  Diana,  the  people  received  wheat,  barley,  and
beans,  which  were  to  be  oifered  at  night-time  to
the  Parcae,  or,  according  to  others,  were  given  as
pay  to  the  actors  in  the  dramatic  representations
which  were  performed  during  the  festive  days.
The  festival  took  place  in  summer,  and  lasted  for
three  days  and  three  nights.  On  the  first  day  the
games  commenced  in  the  Tarentum,  and  sacrifices
were  offered  to  Jupiter,  Juno,  Neptune,  Minerva,
Venus,  Apollo,  Mercury,  Ceres,  Vulcan,  Mars,
Diana,  Vesta,  Hercules,  Latona,  the  Parcae,  and
to  Dis  and  Proserpina,  The  solemnities  began  at
the  second  hour  of  the  night,  and  the  emperor
opened  them  by  the  river  side  with  the  sacrifice  of
three  lambs  to  the  Parcae  upon  three  altars  erected
for  the  purpose,  and  which  were  sprinkled  with
the  blood  of  the  victims.  The  lambs  themselves
were  burnt.  A  temporary  scene  like  that  of  a
theatre  was  erected  in  the  Tarentum,  and  illumi-
nated with  lights  and  fires.

In  this  scene  festive  hymns  were  sung  by  a
chorus,  and  various  other  ceremonies,  together
with  theatrical  performances,  took  place.  Diu-ing
the  morning  of  the  first  day  the  people  went  to
the  Capitol  to  offer  solemn  sacrifices  to  Jupiter  ;
thence  they  returned  to  the  Tarentum  to  sing
choruses  in  honour  of  Apollo  and  Diana.  On  the
second  day  the  noblest  matrons,  at  an  hour  fixed
by  an  oracle,  assembled  on  the  Capitol,  performed
supplications,  sang  hymns  to  the  gods,  and  also
visited  the  altar  of  Juno.  The  emperor  and  the
quindecimviri  offered  sacrifices  which  had  been
vowed  before,  to  all  the  great  divinities.  On  the
third  day  Greek  and  Latin  choruses  were  sung  in
the  sanctuary  of  Apollo  by  three  times  nine  boys
and  maidens  of  great  beauty  whose  parents  were
still  alive.  The  object  of  these  hymns  was  to
implore  the  protection  of  the  gods  for  all  cities,
towns,  and  officers  of  the  empire.  One  of  these
hymns  was  the  carmen  saeculare  by  Horace,  which
was  especially  composed  for  the  occasion,  and
adapted  to  the  cirumstances  of  the  time.  During
the  whole  of  the  three  days  and  nights,  games  of
every  description  Avere  carried  on  in  all  the  cir-
cuses and  theatres,  and  sacrifices  were  offered  in
all  the  temples.

The  first  celebration  of  the  ludi  saeculares  in  the
reign  of  Augustus  took  place  in  the  summer  of  the
year  b. c.  17  (Tacit.  Ann.  xi.  II.);  the  second
took  place  in  the  reign  of  Claudius,  A.  d.  47  (Suet.
Claud.  21)  ;  the  third  in  the  reign  of  Domitian,
A.  D.  88  (Suet.  Domit.  4,  with  Emesti's  note)  ;  and
the  last  in  the  reign  of  Philippus  A.  D.  248,  and,
as  was  generally  believed,  just  1000  years  after
the  building  of  the  city.  (Jul.  Capitol.  Gord.  Tert.
c.  33  ;  compare  Scaliger,  De  Einend.  Tempor.  p.
486  ;  Hartung,  Die  Religion  der  Romer^  vol.  ii.
p.  92,  &c.,  and  the  commentators  ad  Horat.
Carm.  Saec.)  [L.S.J

LUDUS.    [Gladiatores,  p.  574,  b.]

LUDUS  DUO'DECIM  SCRIPTO'RUM.
[Latrunculi.J


7in


LUPERCALIA.


LUDUS  LATRUNCULO'RUM.  [Latrun-

CULI.]

LUDUS  TROJAE.    [Circus,  p.  288,  a.]

LU'MINA.     [Servitutes.]

LUPA'NAR.    [Caupona,  p.  258,b.]

LUPA'TUM.    [Frenum.]

LUPERCA'LIA,  one  of  the  most  ancient  Ro-
man festivals,  which  was  celebrated  every  year  in
honour  of  Lupercus,  the  god  of  fertility.  All  the
ceremonies  with  which  it  was  held,  and  all  we
know  of  its  history,  shows  that  it  was  originally  a
shepherd-festival.  (Pint.  Goes.  61.)  Hence  its  in-
troduction at  Rome  was  connected  with  the  names
of  Romulus  and  Remus,  the  kings  of  shepherds.
Greek  writers  and  their  followers  among  the  Ro-
mans represent  it  as  a  festival  of  Pan,  and  ascribe
its  introduction  to  the  Arcadian  Evander.  This
misrepresentation  arose  partly  from  the  desire  of
these  writers  to  identify  the  Roman  divinities  with
those  of  Greece,  and  partly  from  its  rude  and
almost  savage  ceremonies,  which  certainly  are  a
proof  that  the  festival  must  have  originated  in  the
remotest  antiquity.  The  festival  was  held  every
year,  on  the  15th  of  February,  in  the  Lupercal,
where  Romulus  and  Remus  were  said  to  have  been
nurtured  by  the  she- wolf ;  the  place  contained  an
altar  and  a  grove  sacred  to  the  god  Lupercus.
(Aurel.  Vict,  de  Orig.  Gent.  Rom.  22  ;  Ovid.  Fast.
ii.  267.)  Here  the  Luperci  assembled  on  the  day
of  the  Lupercalia,  and  sacrificed  to  the  god  goats
and  young  dogs,  which  animals  are  remarkable  for
their  strong  sexual  instinct,  and  thus  were  appro-
priate sacrifices  to  the  god  of  fertility.  (Plut.  Rom.
21  ;  Servius  ad  Aen.  viii.  343.)  Two  youths  of
noble  birth  were  then  led  to  the  Luperci,  and  one
of  the  latter  touched  their  foreheads  with  a  sword
dipped  in  the  blood  of  the  victims  ;  other  Luperci
immediately  after  wiped  off  the  bloody  spots
with  wool  dipped  in  milk.  Hereupon  the  two
youths  were  obliged  to  break  out  into  a  shout  of
laughter.  This  ceremony  was  probably  a  sym-
bolical purification  of  the  shepherds.  After  the
sacrifice  was  over,  the  Luperci  partook  of  a  meal,
at  which  they  were  plentifully  supplied  with  wine.
(Val.  Max.  ii.  2.  9.)  They  then  cut  the  skins
of  the  goats  which  they  had  sacrificed,  into  pieces  ;
with  some  of  which  they  covered  parts  of  their
body  in  imitation  of  the  god  Lupercus,  who  was
represented  half  naked  and  half  covered  with  goat-
skin. The  other  pieces  of  the  skins  they  cut  into
thongs,  and  holding  them  in  their  hands  they  ran
through  the  streets  of  the  city,  touching  or  strik-
ing with  them  all  persons  whom  they  met  in  their
way,  and  especially  women,  who  even  used  to
come  forward  voluntarily  for  the  purpose,  since
they  believed  that  this  ceremony  rendered  them
fruitful,  and  procured  them  an  easy  delivery  in
childbearing.  This  act  of  running  about  with
thongs  of  goat-skin  was  a  symbolic  purification  of
the  land,  and  that  of  touching  persons  a  purifi-
cation of  men,  for  the  words  by  which  this  act  is
designated  arejebruare  and  lustrare.  (Ovid.  Fast.
ii.  31 ;  Fest.  s.  v.  Fehruarius.)  The  goat-skin  itself
was  called  fehruum.,  the  festive  day  dies  februatay
the  month  in  which  it  occurred  Februarius^  and
the  god.  h'lmseU  Februus.

The  act  of  purifying  and  fertilizing,  which,  as
we  have  seen,  was  applied  to  women,  was  without
doubt  originally  applied  to  the  flocks,  and  to  the
people  of  the  city  on  the  Palatine.  (Vairo,  de  Ling.
Lai.  v,  p.  60,  Bip.)     Festus   (s.  v,  Crejms)  says


LUPERCL

that  the  Luperci  were  also  called  crept  or  creppi^
from  their  striking  with  goatskins  (a  crepitu  pelli'
cularum),  but  it  is  more  probable  that  the  name
crepi  was  derived  from  crepa,  which  was  the
ancient  name  for  goat.     (Fest.  s.  v.  Caprae.)

The  festival  of  the  Lupercalia,  though  it  neces-
sarily lost  its  original  import  at  the  time  when  the
Romans  were  no  longer  a  nation  of  shepherds,  was
yet  always  observed  in  commemoration  of  the
founders  of  the  city.  Antonius,  in  his  consulship,
was  one  of  the  Luperci,  and  not  only  ran  with
them  half-naked  and  covered  with  pieces  of  goat-
skin through  the  city,  but  even  addressed  the
people  in  the  forum  in  this  rude  attire.  (Plut.  Cues.
61.)  After  the  time  of  Caesar,  however,  the  Lu-
percalia seem  to  have  been  neglected,  for  Augustus
is  said  to  have  restored  it  (Suet.  Aug.  31),  but
he  forbade  youths  (imberbes)  to  take  part  in  the
running.  The  festival  was  henceforth  celebrated
regularly  down  to  the  time  of  the  emperor  Anas-
tasius.  Lupercalia  were  also  celebrated  in  other
towns  of  Italy  and  Gaul,  for  Lxiperci  are  mentioned
in  inscriptions  of  Velitrae,  Praeneste,  Nemausus,
and  other  places.  (Orelli,  Insc}-.  n.  2251,  &c.)
(Compare  Luperci  ;  and  Hartung,  Die  Relig.  der
Romer,  vol.  ii.  p.  1  76,  &c.)  [L.  S.]

LUPERCI,  were  the  priests  of  the  god  Luper-
cus. They  formed  a  college  (sodalitas,  eraipio),  the
members  of  which  were  originall}^  youths  of  patri-
cian families,  and  which  was  said  to  have  been  in-
stituted by  Romulus  and  Remus.  (Plut.  Rom.  21.)
The  college  was  divided  into  two  classes,  the  one
called  Fabii  or  Fabiani,  and  the  other  Quinctilii  or
Quinctiliani.  (Fest.  s.  vv.  Quinctiliani  Luperci  and
Fabiani.)  These  names,  which  are  the  same  as
those  with  which  the  followers  of  Romulus  and
Remus  were  designated  in  the  early  Roman  le-
gends, seem  to  show  that  the  priesthood  was
originally  confined  to  certain  gentes.  (Ovid.  Fast.
ii.  378,  who,  however,  confounds  the  Potitii  and
Pinarii  with  the  Quinctilii  and  Fabii.)  But  if  such
actually  was  the  case,  this  limitation  does  not  seem
to  have  existed  for  a  very  long  time,  though  the
two  classes  retained  their  original  names,  for  Festus
says,  that  in  course  of  time  the  number  of  Luperci
increased,  "  Quia  honoris  gratia  multi  in  Lupercis
adscribebantur."  What  was  the  original  number
of  Luperci,  and  how  long  their  office  lasted,  is
unknown  ;  but  it  is  stated  in  inscriptions  (Orelli,
n.  2256  and  n.  4920)  that  a  person  held  the  office
of  Lupercus  twice,  and  another  three  times,  and
this  fact  shows  at  least  that  the  priests  were  not
appointed  for  life.  Julius  Caesar  added  to  the  two
classes  of  the  college  a  third  with  the  name  of  Julii
or  Juliani  (Dion  Cass.  xliv.  6  ;  Suet.  Caes.  76),  and
made  Antonius  their  high  priest  He  also  assigned
to  them  certain  revenues  (vectigalia)^  which  were
afterwards  withdrawn  from  them.  (Cic.  Philip,  iii.
15,  with  the  note  of  P.  Manutius.)  But  it  is  un-
certain whether  Caesar  assigned  these  revenues  to
the  whole  college,  or  merely  to  the  Julii.  From
this  time  the  two  ancient  classes  of  the  Luperci  are
sometimes-distinguished  from  the  new  one  by  the
nameof  Luperci  veteres.  (Orelli,  n.  2253.)  Although
in  early  times  the  Luperci  were  taken  only  from
noble  families,  their  strange  and  indecent  conduct
at  the  Lupercalia  was  offensive  to  the  more  re-
fined Romans  of  a  later  age  (Cic.  Philip,  ii.  34),
and  Cicero  (pro  Cod.  11)  characterises  the  college
as  a  "  Fera  quaedam  sodalitas  et  plane  pastoricia
atquc  agresMs,  quorum  coitio  ilia  silvestris  ante  est


LUSTRATIO.

instituta  quam  humanitas  atque  leges."  Respect-
ing the  rites  with  which  they  solemnised  the  Lu-
percalia  see  Lupercalia.  [L.  S.]

LUPU&  FE'RREUS,  the  iron  wolf  used  by
the  besieged  in  repelling  the  attacks  of  the  be-
siegers, and  especially  in  seizing  the  battering-ram
and  diverting  its  blows.  [Aries.]  (Liv.  xxxviii.
3  ;   Veget.  de  lie  Mil.  ii.  25,  iv.  23.)        [J.  Y.  |

LUSTRA'TIO  (Kddap(ns\  was  originally  a
purification  by  ablution  in  water.  But  the  lus-
trations, of  which  we  possess  direct  knowledge,
are  always  connected  with  sacrifices  and  other
religious  rites,  and  consisted  in  the  sprinkling  of
water  by  means  of  a  branch  of  laurel  or  olive,  and
at  Rome  sometimes  by  means  of  the  aspergillura
(X^pvi^),  and  in  the  burning  of  certain  mate-
rials, the  smoke  of  which  was  thought  to  have  a
purifying  effect.  Whenever  sacrifices  were  offered,
it  seems  to  have  been  customary  to  carry  them
around  the  person  or  thing  to  be  purified.  Lustra-
tions were  made  in  ancient  Greece,  and  probably  at
Rome  also,  by  private  individuals  when  they  had
polluted  themselves  with  any  criminal  action.
Whole  cities  and  states  also  sometimes  underwent
purifications  to  expiate  the  crime  or  crimes  com-
mitted by  a  member  of  tlie  community.  The  most
:elebrated  purification  of  this  kind  was  that  of
Athens,  performed  by  Epimenides  of  Crete,  after
the  Cylonian  massacre.  (Diog.  Laert.  i.  10.  §  3.)
Purifications  also  took  place  when  a  sacred  spot  had
been  imhallowed  by  profane  use,  as  by  burying
dead  bodies  in  it,  such  as  was  the  case  with  the
island  of  Delos.    (Thucyd.  i.  8,  iii.  104.)

The  Romans  performed  lustrations  on  many
occasions,  on  which  the  Greeks  did  not  think  of
them  ;  and  the  object  of  most  Roman  lustrations
was  not  to  atone  for  the  commission  of  crime,  but
to  obtain  the  blessing  of  the  gods  upon  the  persons
or  things  which  were  lustrated.  Thus  fields  were
purified  after  the  business  of  sowing  was  over
(Ovid.  Fast.  i.  669),  and  before  the  sickle  was
put  to  the  corn.  [Arvales  Fratres.]  The
manner  in  which  sheep  were  lustrated  every  year
at  the  festival  of  the  Palilia.  is  described  by  Ovid
(  Fast.  iv.  735,  &c.).  The  shepherd  towards  even-
ing sprinkled  his  flock  with  water,  adorned  the
fold  with  branches  and  foliage,  burnt  pure  sulphur
and  various  herbs,  and  offered  sacrifices  to  Pales.
The  object  of  this  lustration  was  to  preserve  the
flock  from  disease,  contagion,  and  other  evils.
(C?Ao.,  de  Be  Rust.  c.  141.)  All  Roman  armies
before  they  took  the  field  were  lustrated  (Dion
Cass,  xlvii.  3{i ;  Appian,  Hisp.  c.  19,  Civil  iv.  89.
et  passim),  and  as  this  solemnity  was  probably  al-
ways connected  with  a  review  of  the  troops,  the
word  lustratio  is  also  used  in  the  sense  of  the  mo-
dern review.  (Cic.  ad  Ait.  v.  20.  §  2.)  The  rites
customary  on  such  occasions  are  not  mentioned,
but  they  probably  resembled  those  with  which  a
fleet  was  lustrated  before  it  set  sail,  and  which  are
described  by  Appian  {Civil,  v.  96).  Altars  were
erected  on  the  shore,  and  the  vessels  manned  with
their  troops  assembled  in  order  close  to  the  coast.
Every  body  kept  profound  silence,  and  priests
standing  close  by  the  water  killed  the  victims,  and
carried  the  purifying  sacrifices  {KaQdpaia)  in  small
boats  three  times  around  the  fleet.  On  these  rounds
they  were  accompanied  by  the  genends,  who
prayed  to  the  gods  to  preserve  the  armament  from
all  dangers.  Hereupon  the  priests  divided  the  sacri-
fices into  two  parts,  one  of  which  was  thrown  into


LUSTRUM.


'Iff


the  sea,  and  the  other  burnt  upon  the  altars,  while
the  multitude  around  prayed  to  the  gods.  (Com-
pare Liv.  xxxvi.  42,  and  xxix.  27,  where  also  a
praj-er  is  recorded  such  as  generals  used  to  offer
on  these  occasions.)  When  a  Macedonian  army
was  lustrated,  a  dog  was  cut  in  two  pieces  in  the
place  where  the  army  was  to  assemble,  and  one
half  of  the  dog  was  thrown  at  a  distance  on  the
right  and  the  other  to  the  left.  The  army  then  as-
sembled in  the  place  between  the  spots  where  the
pieces  had  fallen.  (Liv.  xl.  6 ;  Curt.  x.  9.  §  12.)
But  to  return  to  the  Romans.  The  establishment
of  a  new  colony  was  always  preceded  by  a  lustra-
tio with  solemn  sacrifices.  (Cic.  de  Divin.  i.  45  ;
Barth,  ad  Stat.  Theh.  iv.  p.  1073.)  The  city  of
Rome  itself,  as  well  as  other  towns  within  its  do-
minion, always  underwent  a  lustratio,  after  they
had  been  visited  by  some  great  calamity,  such  as
civil  bloodshed,  awful  prodigies,  and  the  like.
(Appian,  Civil,  i.  26  ;  Liv.  xxxv.  9,  xlii.  20.)  A
regular  and  general  lustratio  of  the  whole  Roman
people  took  place  after  the  completion  of  every  lus-
trum, when  the  censor  had  finished  his  census  and
before  he  laid  down  his  oflfice.  The  lustratio  (also
called  lustrum.  Fest.  s.  v.)  was  conducted  by  one  of
the  censors  (Cic.  de  Divin.  i.  45),  and  held  with
sacrifices  called  Suovetaurilia  (Liv.  i.  44;  Varro,
de  Re  Rust.  ii.  1),  because  the  sacrifices  consisted
of  a  pig  (or  ram),  a  sheep,  and  an  ox.  This  lus-
tratio, which  continued  to  be  observed  in  the  days
of  Dionysius,  took  place  in  the  Campus  Martins,
where  the  people  assembled  for  the  purpose.  The
sacrifices  were  carried  three  times  around  the  as-
sembled multitude.  (Dionys.  Ant.  Rom.  iv.  22.)
Another  regular  lustration  which  was  observed
every  year  in  the  month  of  February,  was  said.
to  have  been  instituted  because  the  god  Februus
was  believed  to  be  poteus  lustrationuniy  and  be-
cause in  this  month  the  solemnities  in  honour  of
the  dii  manes  took  place.  (Macrob.  Sat.  i.  1 3 ;
compare  Hartung,  Die  Religion  der  Romer,  i.  p.
198,  &c.)  [L.S.]

LUSTRUM  (from  luo,  Gr.  Aovoj),  is  properly
speaking  a  lustration  or  purification  of  the  Avhole
Roman  people  performed  b}'  one  of  the  censors  in
the  Campus  Martins,  after  the  business  of  tlie  census
was  over.  [Censor  ;  Lustratio.]  As  this  purifi-
cation took  place  only  once  in  five  years,  the  word
lustrum  was  also  used  to  designate  the  time  between
two  lustra,  Varro  (de  Ling.  Lat.  vi.  1 1,  ed.  Miill.)
erroneously  derives  the  word  lustrum  from  luo  (I
pay),  because  the  vectigalia  and  tributa  were  paid
ever}'  five  years  to  the  censors.  The  first  lustrum
was  performed  in  b.  c.  666  by  king  Servius,  after
he  had  completed  his  census  (Liv.  i.  44 ;  Dionys.
iv.  22),  and  afterwards  it  is  said  to  have  taken
place  regularly  every  five  years  after  the  census
was  over.  In  the  earliest  period  of  the  republic
the  business  of  the  census  and  the  solemnities  of
the  lustrum  were  performed  by  the  consuls.  The
first  censors  were  appointed  in  b.  c.  443,  and  from
this  year  down  to  b.  c.  294  there  had,  according  to
Livy  (x.  47),  only  been  26  pairs  of  censors,  and
only  21  lustra,  or  general  purifications,  although  if
all  had  been  regular,  there  would  have  been  30
pairs  of  censors  and  30  lustra.  We  must  therefore
conclude,  that  sometimes  the  census  was  not  held
at  all,  or  at  least  not  by  the  censors.  We  als«>
learn  from  this  statement  that  the  census  might
fcike  place  without  the  lustrum,  and  indeed  two
rases  of  this  kind  are  recorded  (Liv.  iii.  22,  xxiv.


720  LYRA.

43)  which  happened  in  B.  c.  459  atid  214.  In
these  cases  the  lustrum  was  not  performed  on  ac-
count of  some  great  calamities  which  had  befallen
the  republic.

The  time  when  the  lustrum  took  place  has  been
very  ingeniously  defined  by  Niebiihr  {Hist,  of  Rom.
i.  p.  277).  Six  ancient  Romulian  years  of  304
days  each  were,  with  the  difference  of  one  day,
equal  to  five  solar  years  of  365  days  each,  or  the
six  ancient  years  made  1824  days,  while  the  five
solar  years  contained  1 825  days.  The  lustrum,  or
the  great  year  of  the  ancient  Romans  (Censorin.
de  Die  Nat.  \  8),  was  thus  a  cycle,  at  the  end  of
which,  the  beginning  of  the  ancient  year  nearly
coincided  with  that  of  the  solar  year.  As  the  co-
incidence however  was  not  perfect,  a  month  of  24
days  was  intercalated  in  every  eleventh  lustrum.
Now  it  is  highly  probable  that  the  recurrence  of
such  a  cycle  or  great  year  was,  from  the  earliest
times,  solemnized  with  sacrifices  and  purifications,
and  that  Servius  Tullius  did  not  introduce  them,
but  merely  connected  them  with  his  census,  and
thus  set  the  example  for  subsequent  ages,  which
however,  as  we  have  seen,  was  not  observed  with
regularity.  At  first  the  irregularity  may  have
been  caused  by  the  struggles  between  the  patri-
cians and  plebeians,  when  the  appointment  of  cen-
sors was  purposely  neglected  to  increase  the  dis-
orders ;  but  we  also  find  that  similar  neglects  took
place  at  a  later  period,  when  no  such  cause  ex-
isted. (Sueton.  Aug.  37,  Claud.  16.)  The  last
lustrum  was  solemnized  at  Rome,  in  a.  d.  74,  in
the  reign  of  Vespasian.     (Censorin.  I.  c)

Many  writers  of  the  latter  period  of  the  republic
and  during  the  empire,  use  the  word  lustrum  for
any  space  of  five  years,  and  without  any  regard  to
the  census  (Ovid.  Fast.  ii.  183,  iv.  701,  Amor.
iii.  6.  27  ;  Herat.  Carm.  ii.  4.  24,  iv.  1.  6),  while
others  even  apply  it  in  the  sense  of  the  Greek  pen-
taeteris  or  an  Olympiad,  which  only  contained  four
years.  (Ovid,  ex  Pont.  iv.  6.  5,  &c.  ;  Mart.  iv.
45.)  Martial  also  uses  the  expression  lustrum
ingens  for  saeculum.

(Compare  Scaliger,  de  Emend.  Tempor.  p.  183  ;
Ideler,  Handb.  der  Chronol.  ii.  p.  77,  &c.)  [L.  S.]
LYCAEA  (AwKoia),  a  festival  with  contests,  ce-
lebrated by  the  Arcadians  in  honour  of  Zeus  sur-
named  Aufcatos.  It  was  said  to  have  been  instituted
by  the  ancient  hero  Lycaon,  the  son  of  Pelasgus.
(Pans.  viii.  2.  §  1  ;  Strab.  viii.  p.  388.)  He  is  also
said,  instead  of  the  cakes  which  had  formerly  been
offered  to  the  god,  to  have  sacrificed  a  child  to  Zeus,
and  to  have  sprinkled  the  altar  with  its  blood.  It  is
not  improbable  that  human  sacrifices  were  offered
in  Arcadia  to  Zeus  Lycaeus  down  to  a  very  late
period  in  Grecian  history.  (Porphyr.  de  Ab-
etin.  ii.  27.)  No  further  particulars  respecting  the
celebration  of  the  Lycaea  are  known,  with  the  ex-
ception of  the  statement  of  Plutarch  {Caes.  61),
that  the  celebration  of  the  Lycaea  in  some  degree
resembled  that  of  the  Roman  Lupercalia.  [L.S.J
LYCHNU'CHUS.  [Candelabrum.]
LYRA  (Kvpa^  Lat.  fides),  a  lyre,  one  of  the
most  ancient  musical  instruments  of  the  stringed
kind.  There  can  scarcely  be  any  doubt  that  this
and  similar  instruments  were  used  by  the  Eastern
nations  and  by  the  Egyptians,  long  before  the
Greeks  became  acquainted  with  them,  and  that
they  were  introduced  among  the  Greeks  from  Asia
Minor.  (Wilkinson's  Manners  and  Cust.  oftlie  Anc.
Egypt,  ii.  pp.  272,  288,  &c.)      The  Greeks  them-


LYRA.

selves  however  attributed  the  invention  of  the  lyre
to  Hermes,  who  is  said  to  have  formed  the  instru-
ment of  a  tortoise-shell,  over  which  he  placed  gut-
strings.  (Horn.  Hymn.in Merc. ;  Apollod.  iii.  10.  §  2;
Diodor.  V.  75  ;  Serv.  ad  Virg.  Gcorg.  iv.  464.)  As*
regards  the  original  number  of  the  strings  of  a  lyre,
the  accounts  of  the  ancients  differ  so  widely,  that
it  is  almost  impossible  to  arrive  at  any  definite
conclusion.  Diodorus  (i.  16)  states  that  Hermes
gave  his  lyre  three  strings,  one  with  an  acute,  the
other  with  a  grave,  and  the  third  with  a  middle
sound.  Macrobius  {Sat.  i.  1 9  )  says  that  the  lyre
of  Mercury  had  four  strings,  which  symbolically
represented  the  four  seasons  of  the  year  ;  while
Lucian  {Deor.  Dial.  7),  Ovid  {Fast.  v.  106),  and
others,  assume  that  the  lyre  from  the  first  had
seven  strings.  All  ancient  writers  who  mention
this  invention  of  Hermes,  apply  it  to  the  name
lyra,  though  its  shape  in  this  description  of  Apol-
lodorus  and  Servius  rather  resembles  that  of  the
instrument  which  in  subsequent  times  was  de-
signated by  the  name  cithara  {KiBapa  or  Kidapis\
and  in  some  degree  resembled  a  modem  guitar,  in
as  far  as  in  the  latter  the  strings  were  drawn  across
the  sounding  bottom,  whereas  in  the  lyra  of  later
times  they  were  free  on  both  sides.  In  the  Plo-
meric  poems  the  name  Aupa  does  not  occur,  with
the  exception  of  the  Homeric  hymn  to  Hermes  ;
and  from  the  expression  which  occurs  in  this  hymn
(423),  \vpr]  KidapiCiiy,  it  appears  that  originally
there  was  very  little  or  no  difference  between  the
two  instruments,  that  is  to  say,  the  instrument
formerly  used  was  a  cithara  in  the  later  sense  of
the  word.

The  instruments  which  Homer  mentions  as  used
to  accompanj--  songs  are  the  (pSpfiiy^  and  Kidapis.
{II.  i.  603,  Od.  viii.  248  and  261.)  Now  that
the  <p6pijLi'y^  and  the  Kidapis  were  the  same  instru-
ment, appears  to  be  clear  from  the  expression  (p6p.
fxiyyi  KiQapiCeiv^  and  KiQapi  (popfii^eiu.  {Od.  i,  153,
«&:c.)  The  lyra  is  also  called  X^^"^»  or  x^^'^'^V,
and  in  Latin  testudo^  because  it  was  made  of  a
tortoise-shell.

The  obscurity  which  hangs  over  the  original
number  of  strings  of  the  lyre,  is  somewhat  removed
by  the  statement  made  by  several  ancient  writers,
that  Terpander  of  Antissa  (about  B.  c.  650)  added
to  the  original  number  of  four  strings  three  new
ones,  and  thus  changed  the  tetrachord  into  a  hepta-
chord. (Euclid.  Introd.  Harm.  p.  19  ;  Strab.  xiii.
p.  618  ;  Clem.  AXex.  Strom,  vi.  p.  814,  ed.  Potter),


LYRA.

tKoagh  it  cannot  Le  denied  tliat  there  existed  lyres
with  only  three  strings.  (Blanchiui,  De  Tribus
Generibus  Instrumentorum  Musicae  Veterum  Or-
f/anicae  Dissertation  tab.  iv.)  The  preceding  re-
presentation of  a  tetrachord  and  the  following  one
of  a  heptachord  are  both  taken  from  the  work  of
Blanchini.

The  heptachord  introduced  by  Terpander  hence-
forth continued  to  be  most  commonly  used  by  the
Greeks  as  well  as  subsequently  by  the  Romans,
though  in  the  course  of  time  many  additions  and
improvements  were
made  which  are  de-
scribed below.  Inthe
ancient  tetrachord
the  two  extreme
strings  stood  to  each
other  in  the  relation
of  a  fourth  (Biot.  rear-
adpwv)^i.e.  the  lower
string  made  three
vibrations  in  the
time  that  the  upper
one  made  four.  In
the  most  ancient
arrangement  of  the
scale,  which  was
called  the  diatonic,
the  two  middle
strings  were  strung
in  such  a  manner,
that  the  three  in-
tervals between  the
four  strings  produc-
ed twice  a  whole
tone,  and  one  semi-
tone. Terpander  in
forming  his  heptachord,  in  reality  added  a  new
tetrachord  to  the  ancient  one,  but  left  out  the
third  string  of  the  latter,  as  there  was  between
it  and  the  fourth  only  an  interval  of  a  semi-tone.
The  heptachord  thus  had  the  compass  of  an  octave,
or,  as  the  ancients  called  it,  a  diapason  (Sia  iracruv).
The  intervals  between  the  seven  strings  in  the
diatonic  scale  were  as  follovv  :  —  between  one  and
two  a  whole  tone,  between  two  and  three  a  whole
tone,  between  three  and  four  a  whole  tone  and  a
semi-tone  ;  between  four  and  five  and  five  and  six
a  whole  tone  each,  between  six  and  seven  a  semi-
tone. The  seven  strings  themselves  were  called,
beginning  from  the  highest,  viiry},  Trapavi]r7),
TTapa/xeVrj,  yucV??,  \ixav6s,  TrapuTC^TTj,  wraTr}.
(Bockh,  de  Metris  Pindari,  p.  205,  &c.)  Pindar
himself  made  use  of  the  heptachord,  though  in
his  time  an  eighth  string  had  been  added.  In
the  time  of  Philip  and  Alexander  the  number  of
strings  was  increased  to  eleven  by  Timotheus  of
Miletus  (Suidas,  s.  v.  Tifj-dOeos  ;  MUller,  Dor.  iv.
6.  §  3),  an  innovation  which  was  severely  cen-
sured by  the  Spartans,  who  refused  to  go  beyond
the  number  of  seven  strings.  (Cic.  deLeg.  ii.  15  ;
Athen.  xiv.  p.  636.)  It  is  however  clear  that  the
ancients  made  use  of  a  variety  of  lyres,  and  in  the
representations  which  we  still  possess,  the  number
of  strings  varies  from  three  to  eleven.  About  the
time  of  Sappho  and  Anacreon  several  stringed  in-
struments, such  as  magadis,  barbiton,  and  others,
were  used  in  Greece,  and  especially  in  Lesbos.
They  had  been  introduced  from  Asia  Minor,  and
their  number  of  strings  far  exceeded  that  of  the
lyre,  for  we  know  that  some  had  a  compass  of


LYRA.


721


two  octaves,  and  others  had  even  twenty  strings,
so  that  they  must  have  more  resembled  a  modern
harp  than  a  lyre.  (Bode,  Gesch.  der  Lyrisch.  Dicht-
kunst  der  Helknen,  vol.  i.  p.  382,  &c.  ;  compare
Quinctil.  xii.  10.)

It  has  been  remarked  above  that  the  name  lyra
occurs  very  seldom  in  the  earliest  Greek  writers,
and  that  originally  this  instrument  and  the  cithara
were  the  same.  But  about  the  time  of  Pindar  in-
novations seem  to  have  been  introduced  by  which
the  lyra  became  distinct  from  the  cithara,  the  in-
vention of  which  was  ascribed  to  Apollo,  and  hence
the  name  of  the  former  now  occurs  more  frequently.
(Pind.  01.  X.  113,  Nem.  iii.  19,  xi.  8,  Pyth.
viii.  42,  et  passim.)  Both  however  had  in  most
cases  no  more  than  seven  strings.  The  difference
between  the  two  instruments  is  described  above  ;
the  lyre  had  a  great  and  full-sounding  bottom,
which  continued  as  before  to  be  made  generally  of
a  tortoise-shell,  from  which,  as  Lucian  {Dial.  Mar.
1)  expresses  it,  the  horns  rose  as  from  the  head  of  a
stag.  A  transverse  piece  of  wood  connecting  the
two  horns  at  or  near  their  top-ends  served  to  fasten
the  strings,  and  was  called  C'^7oi',  and  in  Latin
transtillum.  The  horns  were  called  irrix^t^s  or
cornua.  (Schol.  Venet.  ad  Iliad,  ii.  293  ;  Hesych.
s.  V.  Zvya  ;  Cic.  de  Nat.  Deor.  ii.  69.)  These  in-
struments were  often  adorned  in  the  most  costly
manner  with  gold  and  ivory.  (Cic.  ad  Heren.  iv.
47  ;  Ovid.  Met.  xi.  167.)  The  lyre  was  considered
as  a  more  manly  instrument  than  the  cithara,
which,  on  account  of  its  smaller-sounding  bottom,
excluded  full- sounding  and  deep  tones,  and  was
more  calculated  for  the  middle  tones.  The  lyre
when  played  stood  in  an  upright  position  between
the  knees,  while  the  cithara  stood  upon  the  knees
of  the  player.  Both  instruments  were  held  with
the  left  hand,  and  played  with  the  right.  (Ovid.
Metam.  xi.  168.)  It  has  generally  been  supposed
that  the  strings  of  these  instruments  were  always
touched  with  a  little  staff  called  plectrum  (ttAtj-
KTpov)  (see  woodcut  under  Mewsa),  but  among
the  paintings  discovered  at  Herculaneum  we  find
several  instances  where  the  persons  play  the  lyre
with  their  fingers.  (See  also  Ovid.  Heroid.  iii.
118.)  The  lyre  was  at  all  times  only  played
as  an  accompaniment  to  songs.

The  Latin  name^es,  which  was  used  for  a  lyre
as  well  as  a  cithara,  is  probably  the  same  as  the
Greek  o-^ISes,  which,  according  to  Hesychius  (s. «.),
signifies  gut-string  ;  but  Festus  {s.  v.)  takes  it  .to
be  the  same  as  tides  (faith),  because  the  lyre  was
the  symbol  of  harmony  and  unity  among  men.

The  lyre  (cithara  or  phorminx)  vvas  at  first
used  in  the  recitations  of  epic  poetry,  though  it  was
probably  not  played  during  the  recitation  itself,
but  only  as  a  prelude  before  the  minstrel  com-
menced his  story,  and  in  the  intervals  or  pauses
between  the  several  parts.  The  lyre  has  given  its
name  to  a  species  of  poetry  called  lyric  ;  this  kind
of  poetry  was  originally  never  recited  or  sung  with-
out the  accompaniment  of  the  lyre,  and  sometimes
also  of  an  appropriate  dance.  (Compare  the  article
Musica  ;  Plutarch,  de  Musica  ;  Bbckh,  de  Metris
Pindari ;  Driebcrg,  Musikalische  Wissenschafien
der  Griechen;  and  by  the  same  author  Aufschlusse
ilber  die  Musik  der  Griechen  ;  Burney,  History  of
Music;  Hav^kins,  History  of  Music ;  Kriiger,  2>e
Mnsicis  Graec.  Organis  circa  Pindari  temporafio-
rentibtis,  Gottingen,1840  ;  MuUer,  Hist,  of  Greek
ZiV.  p.  148,  &c.)  [L.  S.]

3a


722


MACHINAE.


M.


MACELLUM  (o</^o7rwXto,  Athen.  i.  9  ;  b\poira-
Xetov,  KpeoircoXelov),  a  provision-market,  frequent-
ed by  cooks,  fishermen,  poulterers,  confectioners,
butchers,  and  men  of  similar  occupations.  (Varro,
de  Re  Rust.  iii.  2. 17,  de  Ling.  Lat.  v.  32.  pp.  147,
148.  ed.  Spengel  ;  Plant.  Aulul.  ii.  8.  3  ;  Ter.
Eun.  ii.  2.  24  ;  Hor.  Sat.  ii.  3.  229,  Epist.  i.  15.
31  ;  Seneca,  Epist.  78.)  [Foritm.]  From  ma-
celbtm,  a  provision-merchant  was  called  macel-
larius  {orpoird!>\r]s^  KpeoirdJArjs).  (Sueton.  Jul.  26.
Fespas.  19  ;  Varro,  de  Re  Rust.  iii.  2,  4.)  The
Athenians  called  their  macellum  els  toSv|/o;/,  just  as
they  called  their  slave -markets  ets  to,  avSpdiroSa,
their  wine-market  els  rhv  oivov^  and  other  markets
by  the  name  of  the  commodities  sold  in  them.
(Poll.  ix.  47  ;  X.  19  ;  Harpocr.  s.v.  Aelyfia.)   [J.Y.]

MA'CHINAE  (ixvxayal),  and  O'RGANA
(Hpyava).  The  object  of  this  article  is  to  give  a
brief  general  account  of  those  contrivances  for  the
concentration  and  application  of  force,  which  are
known  by  the  names  of  i?istruments,  mechanical
yowers,  machines,  engines,  and  so  forth,  as  they
were  in  use  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  espe-
cially in  the  time  of  Vitruvius,  to  whose  tenth
book  the  reader  is  referred  for  the  details  of  the
subject.

The  general,  but  loose,  definition  which  Vitru-
vius gives  of  a  machine  (x.  1.  §  1),  is  a  wooden
structure,  having  the  virtue  of  moving  very  great
weights.  A  machina  differs  from  an  organon,  in-
asmuch as  the  former  is  more  complex  and  produces
greater  effects  of  power  than  the  latter :  perhaps
the  distinction  may  be  best  expressed  by  translat-
ing the  terms  respectively  machine  or  engine  and
instrument.  Under  the  latter  class,  besides  com-
mon tools  and  simple  instruments,  as  the  plough  for
example,  Vitruvius  appears  to  include  the  simple
mechanical  powers,  which,  however,  when  used  in
combination,  as  in  the  crane  and  other  machines,
become  machinae.  Thus  Horace  uses  the  word  for
the  machines  used  to  launch  vessels  (Carm.  i.  4.  2),
which  appears  to  have  been  effected  by  the  joint
force  of  ropes  and  pulleys  drawing  the  ship,  and
a  screw  pushing  it  forwards,  aided  by  rollers
(<^oAo77es)  beneath  it.  The  word  organon  was
also  used  in  its  modern  sense  of  a  musical  instru-
ment.    [See  Hydraula.]

The  Greek  writers,  whom  Vitruvius  followed,
divided  machines  into  three  classes,  the  (genus)
scanscorium  or  aKpo§ariK6v  (respecting  which  see
Vitruvius  and  his  commentators),  the  spiritaU  or
irt/evfiariKSu  [Hydraula],  and  the  tractorium  or
fiapov\Kov  (or  fidvavaov  according  to  the  reading
of  the  old  editions)  for  moving  heavy  weights.  The
information  which  he  gives  us  may  perhaps,  how-
ever, be  exhibited  better  under  another  classifi-
cation.

I,  Mechanical  Engines.

1.  The  Simple  Mechanical  Powers  were  known
to  the  Greek  mechanicians  from  a  period  earlier
than  can  be  assigned,  and  their  theories  were  com-
pletely demonstrated  by  Archimedes.  Vitnivius
(X.  3.  s.  8)  discourses  of  the  two  modes  of  raising
heavy  weights,  by  rectilinear  (cb^eiav)  and  circular
(kvkKwt^u)  motion.  He  explains  the  action  of
the  lever  (ferreus  vectis),  and  its  three  different
sorts,  according  to  the  position  of  the  fulcrum
(^t)Trofi6x?^ioy),  and  fome  of  its  applications,  as  in  the


MACHINAE.

steelyard  {trutina,  statera),  and  the  oars  and  nidder-
oars  of  a  ship ;  and  alludes  to  the  principle  of
virtual  velocities.  The  inclined  plane  is  not  spoken
of  by  Vitruvius  as  a  machina,  but  its  properties
as  an  aid  in  the  elevation  of  weights  are  often
referred  to  by  him  and  other  writers  ;  and  in  early
times  it  was,  doubtless,  the  sole  means  by  which
the  great  blocks  of  stone  in  the  upper  parts  of
buildings  could  be  raised  to  their  places.

Under  the  head  of  circular  motion,  Vitruvius
makes  a  passing  allusion  to  the  various  forms  of
wheels  and  screws,  plaustra,  rhedae,  tympana,  rotae,
cochleae,  scorpiones,  balistae,  prela,  about  which  see
the  respective  articles.  It  is  worth  while,  also,  to
notice  the  methods  adopted  by  Chersiphron  and  his
son  Metagenes,  the  architects  of  the  temple  of
Artemis  at  Ephesus,  and  by  later  architects,  to
convey  large  blocks  of  marble  from  the  quarries,  by
supporting  them  in  a  cradle  between  wheels,  or
enclosing  them  in  a  cylindrical  frame-work  of
wood  (Vitruv.  x.  6.  s.  2)  ;  and  also  the  account
which  Vitruvius  gives  of  the  mode  of  measuring
the  distance  passed  over  by  a  carriage  or  a  ship,
by  an  instrument  attached  to  the  wheel  of  the
former,  or  to  a  sort  of  paddle-wheel  projecting  from
the  side  of  the  latter  (c.  9.  s.  14).  What  he  says
of  the  pulley  will  be  more  conveniently  stated  under
the  next  head.

2.  Compound  Mechanical  Powers^  or  Machines
for  raising  heavy  weights  {machinae  tractoriae).
Of  these  Vitruvius  describes  three  principal  sorts,
all  of  them  consisting  of  a  proper  erect  frame- work
(either  three  beams,  or  one  supported  by  ropes)  ;
from  which  hang  pullies,  the  rope  of  which  is
worked  either  by  a  number  of  men,  or  by  a  wind-
lass (sucula),  or  by  a  large  drum  (tympanum,  a/jLcpi-
pevcris,  irepiTpdx^oy)  moved  as  a  tread-wheel,  only
from  within.  He  describes  the  different  sort  of
pullies,  according  to  the  number  of  sheaves  (orbi-
culi)  in  each  block  (trochlea  or  rechamus),  whence
also  the  machine  received  special  names,  such  as
trispastos,  when  there  were  three  sheaves,  one  in
the  lower  block  and  two  in  the  upper  ;  and  penta-
spastos,  when  there  were  Jive  sheaves,  two  in  the
lower  block,  and  three  in  the  upper  (x.  2 — 5).

II.  Military  Engines.  (Vitruv.  x.  15 — 22  ;
Vegetius  and  the  other  writers  de  Re  Militari ;
Aries  ;  Helepolis  ;  Tbstudo  ;  Tormentum  ;
Turris,  &c.)

III.  Theatrical  Machines.     [Theatrum.]

IV.  Hydraulic  Engines.

1.  Conveyance  and  delivery  of  water  through  pipes
and  channels.  [Aquaeductus  ;  Emissarium  ;
Fistula  ;  Fons.]  It  has  been  shown,  under  the
articles  referred  to,  that  the  ancients  well  knew,  and
that  they  applied  in  practice,  the  hydrostatic  law,
that  water  enclosed  in  a  bent  pipe  rises  to  the
same  level  in  both  arms.  It  also  appears,  from
the  work  of  Frontinus,  that  they  were  acquainted
with  the  law  of  hydraulics,  that  the  quantity  of
water  delivered  by  an  orifice  in  a  given  time  de-
pends  on  the  size  of  the  orifice  and  on  the  height
of  the  water  in  the  reservoir  ;  and  also,  that  it  is
delivered  faster  through  a  short  pipe  than  through
a  mere  orifice  of  equal  diameter.

2.  Machines  for  raising  water.  The  ancients
did  not  know  enough  of  the  laws  of  atmospheric
pressure  to  be  acquainted  with  the  common  sucking
pump  ;  but  they  had  a  sort  of  forcing  pump,  which
is  described  by  Vitruvius  (x.  12),  who  ascribes  the
invention  to  Ctesibius.     For  raising  water  a  small


MAGISTER.

Height  only  they  had  the  well-known  screw  of
Archimedes,  an  instrument  which,  for  this  parti-
cular purpose,  has  never  been  surpassed.  (Vitruv.
X.  II ;  Cochlea.)  But  their  pumps  were  chiefly
on  the  principle  of  those  in  which  the  water  is
lifted  in  buckets,  placed  either  at  the  extremity  of
a  lever,  or  on  the  rim  of  a  wheel,  or  on  a  chain
working  between  two  wheels.  (Vitruv.  x.  9  ;
Antlia  ;  Tympanum.)

3.  Machines  in  which  water  is  the  moving  power.
(Vitniv.  X.  10  ;  Mola.)

4.  Other  applications  of  water,  as  to  the  mea-
surement of  time,  and  the  production  of  musical
sounds,  in  the  clepsydra  and  the  hydraulic  organ.
(Vitruv.  ix.  5,  6,  x.  13;    Horologium  ;    Hy-

DKAULA.)  [P.  S.]

MAENIA'NUM,  signified,  originally,  a  pro-
jecting balcony,  which  was  erected  round  the  Ro-
man forum,  in  order  to  give  more  accommodation
to  the  spectators  of  the  gladiatorial  combats,  by  the
censor,  C.  Maenius,  B.C.  318  (Festus,  s.v.  p.  135,
ed.  Miiller;  Isidor.  Orig.  xv.  3.  §  11)  ;  and  hence
balconies  in  general  came  to  be  called  maeniana.
Many  allusions  to  such  structures,  and  to  the  regu-
lations which  were  found  necessary  to  keep  them
within  due  bounds,  are  found  in  the  ancient
writers  (Cic.  Acad.  iv.  22  ;  Non.  p.  83.  s.  65,
Mlill.  ;  Sueton.  Caliq.  18  ;  Vitruv.  v.  1  ;  Plin.
//.  N.  xxxY.  10.  3.37  ;  Val.  Max.  ix.  12.  §7  ;
Cod.  Just.  viii.  2.  20,  10.  11,  xliii.  8.  2.  §  6,
1.  16.  242.  §  1  ;  Amm.  Marc,  xxvii.  9,  10  ;  see
also  Amphitheatrum,  p.  88,  and  Circus,  p.
2b6,  a.)  [P.  S.]

MAGADIS.     [Lyra,  p.  721,  a.  ;  Musica.]

MAGIST'ER,'  which  contains  the  same  root  as
mag-is  and  mag-nus,  was  applied  at  Rome  to  per-
sons possessing  various  kinds  of  offices,  and  is  thus
explained  by  Festus  (s.  v.  Magisterare)  :  —  "  Ma-
gisterare^  moderari.  Unde  magistri  non  solum
doctores  artium,  sed  eiiam  pagorum,  societatum,
vicorum,  collegiorum,  equitum  dicuntur  ;  quia
oranes  hi  magis  ceteris  possunt."  Paulus  (Dig.  50.
tit.  16.  s.  5/)  thus  defines  the  word  :  —  "  Quibus
praecipua  cura  rerum  incumbit,  et  qui  magis  quam
ceteri  diligentiam  et  sollicitudinem  rebus,  quibus
praesunt,  debent,  hi  magistri  appellantur.''  The
following  is  a  list  of  the  principal  magistri :  —

Magister  Admissionum.  [Admissionales.]

Magister  Armorum  appears  to  have  been  the
same  officer  as  the  Magister  Militum.  (Amm.  Marc,
xvi.  7,  XX.  9.)

Magister  Auctionis.    [Bonorum  Emptio.]
c  Magister  Bibendi.     [Symposium.]

Magister  Collegii  was  the  president  of  a  col-
legium or  corporation.     [Collegium.]
■         Magister  Epistolarum  answered  letters  on
l)ehalf  of  the  emperor.    (Orelli,  Inscr.  2352.)

Magister  Equitum.    [Dictator,  p.  407,  b,]

Magister  Libellorum  was  an  ofticer  or  secre-
tary who  read  and  answered  petitions  addressed  to
the  emperors.  [Libellus,  4.  c]  He  is  called  in
an  inscription  "  Magister  Libellorum  et  Cogui-
tionum  Sacrarum."     (Orelli,  I.  c.)

Magister  Memoriae,  an  ofticer  whose  duty  it
was  to  receive  the  decision  of  the  emperor  on  any
subject  and  communicate  it  to  the  public  or  the
persons  concerned.    (Amm.  Marc.  xv.  5,  xxvii.  6.)

Magister  Militum,  the  title  of  the  two  offi-

Ieers,  to  whom  Constantine  intrusted  the  command
pf  all  the  anriies  of  the  empire.  One  was  placed
pver  the  cavalry,  and  the  other  pver  the  infantry.


MAGISTRATUS.


723


On  the  divisions  of  the  empire  their  number  was
increased,  and  each  of  them  had  both  cavalry  and
infantry  under  his  command.  In  addition  to  the
title  oi  Magistri  militum,  we  find  them  called  A%rt»-
tri  armorum,  equitum  et  peditum,  utriusque  militiae
(Zosim.  ii.  33,  iv.  27  ;  Vales,  ad  Amm.  Marc.
xvi.  7.)  In  the  fifth  century,  there  were  in  the
Eastern  empire  two  of  these  officers  at  court,  and
three  in  the  provinces  ;  in  the  western  empire,  two
at  court,  and  one  in  Gaul.  Under  Justinian,  a
new  magister  militum  was  appointed  for  Armenia
and  Pontus.  (Walter,  Geschichte  des  Romischen
Bechts,  §  342,  2d  ed.)

Magister  Navis.    [Exercitoria  Actio.]

Magister  Officiorum,  was  an  officer  of  high
rank  at  the  imperial  court,  who  had  the  superin-
tendence of  all  audiences  with  the  emperor,  and
also  had  extensive  jurisdiction  over  both  civil  and
military  officers.  (Cod.  1.  tit.  31  ;  12.  tit.  16  ;  Cod.
Theod.  I.  tit.  9  ;  6.  tit.  9  ;  Amm.  Marc.  xv.  5  ;
XX.  2,  xxii.  3  ;  Cassiod.  Variar.  vi.  6.)

Magister  Popull     [Dictator.]

Magister  Scriniorum,  had  the  care  of  all  the
papers  and  documents  belonging  to  the  emperor.
(Cod.  12.  tit.  9  ;  Spartian.  Ael.  Ver.  4  ;  Lamprid.
Alex.  Sev.  26.)

Magister  Societatis.  The  equites,  who
farmed  the  taxes  at  Rome,  were  divided  into  com-
panies or  partnerships  ;  and  he  who  presided  in
such  a  company  was  called  Magister  Societatis.
(Cic.  Verr.'n.  74,  arf  Fara.  xiii.  9,  pro  Plancio,  13.)

Magister  Vicorum.  Augustus  divided  Rome
into  certain  regiones  and  vici,  and  commanded  that
the  people  of  each  vicus  should  choose  magistri  to
manage  its  affairs.  (Suet.  Aug.  30,  Tib.  76  ;  Orelli,
/wscr.  5, 813,  1530.)  From  an  inscription  on  an
ancient  stone  referred  to  by  Pitiscus  {Lexicon,  s.  v.)
it  appears  that  there  were  four  such  magistri  to  each
vicus.  They  were  accustomed  to  exhibit  the  Ludi
Compitalitii  dressed  in  the  praetexta.  (Ascon.  in
Cic.  Pison,  p.  7,  ed.  Orelli.)

MAGISTRATUS.  A  definition  of  Magistra-
tus  may  be  collected  from  Pomponius,  De  Origine
Juris  (Dig.  1.  tit.  2).  Magistratus  are  those  "  qui
juri  dicundo  praesunt."  The  King  was  originally
the  sole  Magistratus  ;  he  had  all  the  Potestas.  On
the  expulsion  of  the  Kings,  two  Consuls  were  an-
nually appointed  and  they  were  Magistratus.  In
course  of  time  other  Magistratus  were  appointed,
so  that  Pomponius  enumerates  as  the  Magistratus
of  his  time  "  qui  in  civitate  jura  reddebant,"  ten
tribuni  plebis,  two  consuls,  eighteen  praetors,  and
six  aediles.  He  adds  that  the  Praefecti  Annonae
et  Vigilum  were  not  Magistratus.  The  Dictator
was  also  a  Magistratus  ;  and  the  Censors ;  and  the
Decemviri  litibus  judicandis.  The  governors  of
Provinces  with  the  title  of  Propraetor  or  Proconsul
were  also  Magistratus.  Gaius  attributes  the  Jus
Edicendi  to  the  Magistratus  Populi  Romani,  with-
out any  restriction  ;  but  he  says  that  the  chief
edictal  power  was  possessed  by  the  Praetor  Urbanus
and  the  Praetor  Peregrinus,  whose  jurisdictio  in
the  provinces  was  exercised  by  the  Praesides  of
Provinces ;  and  also  by  the  Curule  Aediles  whose
jurisdiction  in  the  Provinciae  Populi  Romani  was
exercised  by  the  Quaestors  of  those  Provinces.

The  word  Magistratus  contains  the  same  element
as  mag(ister)  and  mag(nus)  ;  and  it  signifies  both
the  persons  and  the  office,  as  we  see  in  the  phrase
"  se  magistratu  abdicare,"  which  signifies  to  give
up  the  office  before  the  time  at  which  it  regularly
3  A  2


724


MAGISTRATUS.


expired.  (On  the  abdicatio,  see  Rnbino,  liomlsche
Staatsverfassung,  p.  88  ;  and  Plut.  Cic.  Id).  (Liv.
\\.  1,  xxiii.  23.)  According  to  Festus,  a  magis-
tratus  was  one  who  had  '■'judicium  auspiciunique."

According  to  M.  Messala  the  augur,  quoted  by
•Gellius  (xiii.  15),  the  Auspicia  Maxima  belonged
to  the  Consuls,  Praetors,  and  Censors,  and  the
Minora  auspicia  to  the  other  Magistratus  ;  accord-
ingly the  Consuls,  Praetors,  and  Censors  were
called  Majores,  and  they  were  elected  at  the  Co-
mitia  Centuriata;  the  other  Magistratus  were  called
Minores.  The  Magistratus  were  also  divided  into
Curules  and  those  who  were  not  Curules :  the
Magistratus  Curules  were  the  dictator,  consuls,
praetors,  censors,  and  the  curule  aediles,  who  were
80  called,  because  they  had  the  Jus  Sellae  Curulis.
The  magistrates  were  chosen  only  from  the  Patri-
cians in  the  early  Republic,  but  in  course  of  time
the  Plebeians  shared  these  honours,  with  the
exception  of  that  of  the  Interrex  :  the  Plebeian
Magistratus  properly  so  called  were  the  Plebeian
Aediles  and  the  Tribuni  Plebis.

The  distinction  of  Magistratus  into  Majores
who  had  the  Imperium,  and  the  Minores  who  had
not,  had  a  reference  to  Jurisdiction  also.  The
former  term  comprised  Praetors  and  governors  of
Provinces  ;  the  latter,  in  the  Republican  time,
comprised  Aediles  and  Quaestors,  and,  under  the
Empirv",  the  numerous  body  of  Municipal  Magis-
trates. The  want  of  the  Imperium  limited  the
power  of  the  Magistratus  Minores  in  various  mat-
ters which  came  under  their  cognizance,  and  the
want  of  it  also  removed  other  matters  entirely  from
their  jurisdictio  (taking  the  word  in  its  general
sense).  Those  matters  which  belonged  to  Juris-
dictio in  its  limited  sense  were  within  the  com-
petence of  the  Magistratus  Minores  [Jurisdictio]  ;
but  those  matters  which  belong  to  the  Imperium,
were  for  that  reason  not  within  the  competence  of
the  Magistratus  Minores.  As  proceeding  from  the
Imperium  we  find  enumerated  the  praetoriae  stipu-
lationes,  such  as  the  cautio  damni  infecti,  and
ex  novi  operia  niinciatione  ;  and  also  the  Missio
in  possessionem,  and  the  In  integrum  restitutio.
Thus  it  appears  that  the  limited  jurisdictio  was
confined  to  the  Ordo  judiciorum  privatorum,  and
all  the  proceedings  Extra  ordinem  were  based  on
the  Imperium :  consequently  a  Minor  Magistratus
could  not  exercise  Cognitio,  properly  so  called,  and
could  not  make  a  Decretum.  This  consideration
explains  the  fact  of  two  Praetors  for  questions  as
to  fideicommissa  being  appointed  under  Claudius  :
they  had  to  decide  such  matters  for  all  Italy,
inasmuch  as  such  matters  were  not  within  the
competence  of  the  municipal  magistrates.  The
jurisdiction  of  the  municipal  magistrates  of  Cisal-
pine Gaul  was  limited  in  many  cases  to  a  certain
sum  of  money;  and  this  limitation  was  afterwards
extended  to  all  ItJily.  Added  to  this,  these  magis-
trates had  not  the  Imperium,  which,  as  already
observed,  limited  their  Jurisdictio.

The  Magistratus  Minores  could  take  cognizance
of  matters  which  were  not  within  their  jurisdictio,
by  delegation  from  a  superior  Magistratus.  Thus
in  the  case  of  Damnum  Infectum,  inasmuch  as  de-
lay might  cause  irreparable  mischief,  the  Praetor
could  delegate  to  the  Municipal  Magistratus,  who
were  under  him,  the  power  of  requiring  the  Cautio.
(Dig.  39.  tit.  2.  s.  4.)

It  became  necessary  to  re-organize  the  admini-
stration of  Gallia  Cisalpina,  on  its  ceasing  to  be. a


MAJESTAS.

Province ;  and  as  the  Jurisdictio  was  placed  in  the
hands  of  Municipal  Magistratus,  who  had  no  Im-
perium, it  was  further  necessary  to  determine  what
should  be  the  form  of  procedure  before  these  Ma-
gistratus in  all  matters  that  were  extra  ordinem,
that  is,  in  such  matters  as  did  not  belong  to  their
competence  because  they  were  Magistratus  Minores,
but  were  specially  given  to  them  by  a  Lex.  The
determining  of  this  form  of  procedure  was  the  ob-
ject of  the  Lex  Rubria.  [Lex  RuBRiA.]  (Puchui,
Zeitschrijl,  x.  p.  J  .95.)

The  case  of  Adoption  (properly  so  called)  illus-
trates the  distinction  of  Magistratus  into  Majores
and  Minores,  as  founded  on  the  possessing  or  not
possessing  the  Imperium.  (Gains,  i.  99.)  This
adoption  was  effected  "  Imperio  Magistratus,"  as
for  instance  before  the  Praetor  at  Rome :  in  the
Provinciae  the  same  thing  was  effected  before  a
Proconsul  or  Legatus,  both  of  whom  therefore  had
the  Imperium.  The  Municipal  Magistratus,  as
they  had  not  the  Imperium,  could  not  give  validity
to  such  an  act  of  adoption.  [G.  L.]

MAJESTAS  is  defined  by  Ulpian  (Dig.  48.
tit.  4.  s.  1)  to  be  "  crimen  illud  quod  ad  versus
Populurn  Romanum  vel  adversua  securitatem  ejus
committitur."  He  then  gives  various  instances  of
the  crime  of  Majestas,  some  of  which  pretty  nearly
correspond  to  treason  in  English  law ;  but  all  the
offences  included  imder  Majestas  comprehend  more
than  the  English  treason.  One  of  the  offences  in-
cluded in  Majestas  was  the  effecting,  aiding  in,  or
planning  the  death  of  a  magistratus  Populi  Ro-
mani  or  of  one  who  had  Imperium  or  Potestas.
Though  the  phrase  "  crimen  majestatis  "  was  used,
the  complete  expression  was  "  crimen  laesae,  im-
minutae,  diminutae,  minutae,  majestatis."

The  word  Majestas  consistently  with  its  relation
to  mag  (nus)  signifies  the  magnitude  or  greatness
of  a  thing.  "  Majestas,"  says  Cicero  (Part.  30)
"  est  quaedam  magnitude  Populi  Romani  ; "  "  Ma-
jestas est  in  Imperii  atque  in  nominis  Populi  Ro-
mani dignitate."  Accoi'dingly  the  phrases  ""  Ma-
jestas Populi  Romani,"  "  Imperii  Majestas  "  (Hor.
Carm.  iv.  15)  signify  the  whole  of  that  which
constituted  the  Roman  State  ;  in  other  words  the
sovereign  power  of  the  Roman  State.  The  expres-
sion "  minuere  majestatem  "  consequently  signifies
any  act  by  which  this  majestas  is  impaired  ;  and
it  is  thus  defined  by  Cicero  (de  Invent,  ii.  17),
"  Majestatem  minuere  est  de  dignitate,  aut  ampli-
tudine,  aut  potestate  Populi  aut  eorum  quibua
Populus  potestatem  dedit,  aliquid  derogare."  (See
Cic.  ad  Fam.  iii.  11.  "  Majestatem  auxisti.")
The  phrase  Majestas  Publica  in  the  Digest  is
equivalent  to  the  Majestas  Populi  Romani.  In
the  Republican  period  the  term  Majestas  Laesa  or
Minuta  was  most  commonly  fipplied  to  cases  of  a
general  betraying  or  surrendering  his  army  to  the
enemy,  exciting  sedition,  and  generally  by  his  bad
conduct  in  administration  impairing  the  Majestas
of  the  State.    (Tacit.  Ann.  i.  72.)

The  Laws  of  the  Twelve  Tables  punished  with
death  a  person  who  stirred  up  an  enemy  against
Rome  or  surrendered  a  Roman  citizen  to  an  enemy.
(Dig.  48.  tit.  4.  s.  3.)  The  Leges  Majestatis  seem
to  have  extended  the  offence  of  Majestas  gene-
rally to  all  acts  which  impaired  the  Majestas
Publica  ;  and  several  of  the  special  provisions  of
the  Lex  Julia  are  enumerated  in  the  passage  just
referred  to.
.  Like  many  other  leges  the  Lex  Julia  was  modified


MAJESTAS,

by  Scnatusconsulta  and  Imperial  Constitutions  ;  and
we  must  not  conclude  from  tlie  title  in  the  Digest,
*'  Ad  Legem  Juliam  Majestatis,"  that  all  the  provi-
sions enumerated  under  that  title  were  comprehended
in  the  original  Lex  Julia.  It  is  stated  by  Marcianus,
as  there  cited,  that  it  was  not  Majestas  to  repair  the
stf»,tues  of  the  Caesar  which  were  going  to  decay  ;
and  a  Rescript  of  Severus  and  his  son  Antoninus
Caracalla  declared  that  if  a  stone  was  thrown  and
accidentally  struck  a  statue  of  the  Emperor,  that
also  was  not  Majestas  ;  and  they  also  graciously
declared  that  it  was  not  Majestas  to  sell  the
statues  of  the  Caesar  before  thej'  were  consecrated.
Here  then  is  an  instance  under  the  title  ad  Legem
Juliam  Majestatis  of  the  Imperial  rescripts  de-
claring what  was  not  Majestas.  There  is  also  an
extract  from  Satuminus  De  Judiciis,  who  says
that  if  a  person  melted  down  the  statues  or  ima-
gines of  the  Imperator  which  were  already  con-
secrated, or  did  any  similar  act,  he  was  liable  to
the  penalties  of  the  Lex  Julia  Majestatis.  But
even  this  also  does  not  prove  that  this  provision
was  a  part  of  the  Julia  Lex,  as  originally  passed,  for
a  Lex  after  being  amended  by  Scnatusconsulta  or
Imperial  Constitutions  still  retained  its  name.  In
the  time  of  Tiberius  it  was  a  matter  of  charge
against  a  man  that  in  selling  a  garden  he  had  in-
cluded a  statue  of  Augustus  ;  which  Tiberius  de-
clared to  be  no  offence.     (Tacit.  Ann.  i.  73.)

The  old  punishment  of  Majestas  was  perpetual
Interdiction  from  fire  and  water  ;  but  now,  says
Paulus  {S.  R.  V.  39),  that  is,  in  the  later  Imperial
period,  persons  of  low  condition  are  thrown  to
wild  beasts,  or  burnt  alive  ;  persons  of  better  con-
dition are  simply  put  to  death.  The  property  of
the  offender  was  confiscated  and  his  memory  was
infamous.

In  the  early  times  of  the  Republic  every  act  of
a  citizen  which  was  injurious  to  the  State  or  its
peace  was  called  Pcrduellio,  and  the  offender  {per-
duclUs)  was  tried  before  the  populus  (  popu/i  judi-
cio),  and,  if  convicted,  put  to  death.  (Liv.  ii.  41,
vi.  20.)  The  earliest  trial  and  form  of  procedure
is  that  which  is  given  by  Livy  (i.  26)  ;  after  the
overthrow  of  the  kingly  power  the  notion  of  Pcr-
duellio and  the  process  were  in  some  degree
changed.  Numerous  offences  against  the  state
were  comprehended  under  Perduellio.  For  in-
stance Cn.  Fulvius  (Liv.  xxvi.  c.  3.)  was  charged
with  the  offence  of  perduellio  for  losing  a  Roman
army  ;  but  in  course  of  time,  and  probably  after
the  passing  of  the  Lex  Porcia,  though  it  does  not
appear  that  this  I^ex  applied  to  Perduellio,  the
punishment  was  aquae  et  ignis  interdictio.  Ac-
cording to  Gains  "  perduellis  "  originally  signified
"  hostis"  (Dig.  50.  tit.  16.  s.  234)  ;  and  thus  the
old  offence  of  perduellio  was  equivalent  to  making
war  on  the  Roman  State.  The  trial  for  perduellio
(  pcrduellionis  judicium)  existed  to  the  later  times
of  the  Republic  ;  but  the  name  seems  to  have
almost  fallen  into  disuse,  and  various  leges  were
passed  for  the  purpose  of  determining  more  accu-
rately what  should  be  Majestas.

These  Leges  were  a  Lex  Apuleia,  probably
passed  in  the  fifth  consulship  of  Marius,  the  exact
contents  of  which  are  unknown  (Cic.  de  Or.  ii.  25,
49),  a  Lex  Varia  b.c.  91  (Appian,  Bell.  Civ.  i.
37  ;  Cic.  Brut.  89  ;  Valer.  Maxim,  viii.  6.  §  4),  a
Lex  Cornelia  passed  by  L.  Cornelius  Sulla  (Cic.
in  Pis.  21,  pro  Cluent.  35),  and  the  Lex  Julia
already  mentioned,   and  which  continued  under


MAJESTAS.  72S

the  Empire  to  be  the  fundamental  enactment  on
this  subject.  This  Lex  Julia  is  by  some  attributed
to  C.  Julius  Caesar,  and  assigned  to  the  year  b.  c.
48,  and  this  may  be  the  Lex  referred  to  in  the
Digest  ;  some  assume  a  second  Lex  Julia,  under
Augustus.  That  a  Lex  de  Majestate  was  passed
in  Caesar's  time  appears  from  Cicero.  (Philipp.
i.  9.)

Under  the  Empire  the  term  Majestas  was  applied
to  the  person  of  the  reigning  Caesar,  and  we  find
the  phrases  Majestas  Augusta,  Imperatoria,  and
Regia.  It  wfis  however  nothing  new  to  apply  the
term  to  the  Emperor,  considered  in  some  of  his
capacities,  for  it  was  applied  to  the  magistratus
under  the  Republic,  as  to  the  consul  and  praetor.
(Cic.  PJdlipp.  xiii.  9,  in  Pisonem,  11.)  Horace
even  addresses  Augustus  (Ep.  ii.  1.  288)  in  the
terms  "  majestas  tua,"  but  this  can  hardly  be
viewed  otherwise  than  as  a  personal  compliment,
and  not  as  said  with  reference  to  any  of  the  offices
which  he  field.  The  extension  of  the  penalties
to  various  new  offences  against  the  person  of  the
Emperor  belongs  of  course  to  the  Imperial  period.
Augustus  availed  himself  of  the  Lex  for  prosecut-
ing the  authors  of  famosi  libelli  {cognitionem  de
famosis  libellis,  specie  legis  ejus.,  tractavit^  Tacit.
Ann.  i.  72  ;  Dion  Cass.  Ivi.  27  ;  Sueton.  Octuv.
55) :  the  proper  inference  from  the  passage  of
Tacitus  is  that  the  Leges  Majestatis  (for  they  all
seem  to  be  comprised  under  the  tenn  "  Legem
Majestatis,")  did  not  apply  to  words  or  writings,
for  these  were  punishable  otherwise.  The  pas-
sage of  Cicero  {ad  Fam.  iii.  11)  is  manifestly
corrupt,  and  as  it  stands,  inconsistent  with  the
context  ;  it  cannot  be  taken  as  evidence  that  the
Lex  Majestatis  of  Sulla  contained  any  provisions
as  to  libellous  words,  as  to  which  there  were
other  sufficient  provisions.  [Injuria.]  Sigonius
has  attempted  to  collect  the  capita  of  the  Lex
Majestatis  of  Sulla.  Under  Tiberius  the  offence
of  Majestas  was  extended  to  all  acts  and  words
which  might  appear  to  be  disrespectful  to  the
Princeps,  as  appears  from  various  passages  in  Ta-
citus {Ann.  i.  73,  74,  ii.  50,  iii.  38,  66,  67,  &c.).
The  tenn  Perduellio  was  still  in  use  under  the
Empire,  and  seems  to  have  been  eq-nlvalent  to
Majestas  at  that  period.

An  inquiry  might  be  made  into  an  act  of  Majes-
tas against  the  Imperator  even  after  the  death  of
the  oriender  ;  a  rule  which  was  established  (as  we
are  informed  by  Paulus)  by  M.  Aurelius  in  the
case  of  Druncianus  or  Druncanius,  a  senator  who
had  taken  part  in  the  outbreak  of  Cassius,  and
whose  property  was  claimed  by  the  fiscus  after  his
death.  (Perhaps  the  account  of  Capitolinus,  M.
Ant.  Phil.  c.  26,  and  of  Vulcatins  Gallicanu*,  Avi'
dius  Cassius,  c.  9,  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  state-
ment of  Paulus :  on  the  case  of  Druncianus,  see
Tillemont,  Histoire  des  Empereurs,  vol.  ii.  p.  38'?.)
A  constitution  of  S.  Severus  and  Antoninus  Cara-
calla declared  that  from  the  time  that  an  act  of
Majestas  was  committed,  a  man  could  not  alienate
his  property  or  manumit  a  slave,  to  which  the
great  {magnus)  Antoninus  (probably  Caracalla  is
still  meant),  added  that  a  debtor  could  not  after
that  time  lawfully  make  a  payment  to  him.  In
the  matter  of  Majestas  slaves  could  also  be  ox-
amined  by  torture  in  order  to  give  evidence  against
their  master:  this  provision,  though  comprehended
in  the  Code  under  the  title  Ad  Legem  Juli^ua
Majestatis,  was  perhaps  not  containea  in  the  ori-
3  A  3


726


MALLEUS.


ginJil  law,  for  Tiberius  sold  a  man's  slaves  to  the
actor  publicus  (A7in.  iii.  67)  in  order  that  they
might  give  evidence  against  their  master,  who  was
accused  of  Repetundae  and  also  of  Majestas.
"Women  were  admitted  as  evidence  in  a  case  of
Laesa  Majestas,  and  the  case  of  Fulvia  is  cited  as
an  instance.     (Dig.  48.  tit.  4  ;  Cod.  ix.  tit.  8.)

As  to  the  phrase  Patria  Majestas,  see  Patria
PoTESTAS.  (The  history  of  Majestas  is  given
with  great  minuteness  by  Rein,  Das  Criminalrecht
der  Romer.  A  brief  view  of  the  subject  is  very
difficult  to  give.)  [G.  L.]

MAJO'RES.     [Infans.]

MA'LLEUS,  dim.  MALLEOLUS  (^aiffriip:
fftpvpa,  dim.  <T<pvpiou)^  a  hammer,  a  mallet,  was
used  much  for  the  same  purposes  in  ancient  as  in
modem  times.  When  several  men  were  striking
with  their  hammers  on  the  same  anvil,  it  was  a
matter  of  necessity  that  they  should  strike  in  time,
and  Virgil  accordingly  says  of  the  Cyclopes,  "Inter
se  brachia  tollunt  in  numerum.''''  {Georg.  iv.  174;
Aca.  viii.  452.)  The  scene  which  he  describes  is
represented  in  the  annexed  woodcut,  taken  from  an
ancient  bas-relief,  in  which  Vulcan,  Brontes,  and
Steropes,  are  seen  forging  the  metal,  while  the
third  Cyclops,  Pyracmon,  blows  the  bellows.  {Aen.
viii.  425.)  Beside  the  anvil-stand  [Incus]  is  seen
the  vessel  of  water,  in  which  the  hot  iron  or  bronze
was  immersed.   {lb.  v.  450,  451.)


But  besides  the  employment  of  the  hammer
upon  the  anvil  for  making  all  ordinary  utensils,
the  smith  (xaAiceus)  wrought  with  this  instrument
figures  called  epya  a<pvfy(]\ara  (or  6\o(r<pvprfTa^
Brunck,  Anal.  ii.  222),  which  were  either  small
and  fine,  some  of  their  parts  being  beaten  as  thin
as  paper  and  being  in  very  high  relief,  as  in  the
bronzes  of  Siris  f  Lorica],  or  of  colossal  propor-
tions, being  composed  of  separate  plates,  rivetted
together:  of  this  the  most  remarkable  example
was  the  statue  of  the  sun  of  wrought  bronze  (tr^u-
p^\aTos  ko\o(t<t6s,  Theocrit.  xxii.  47  ;  paurr-npo-
Korria^  Philo,  de  7  Spectac.  4.  p.  14,  ed.  OrelL),
seventy  cubits  high,  which  was  erected  in  Rhodes.
Another  remarkable  production  of  the  same  kind
was  the  golden  statue  of  Jupiter  (Strabo,  viii.  6.
20  ;  Plat.  Phaedr.  p.  232,  Heindorf),  which  was
erected  at  Olympia  by  the  sons  of  Cypselus.

By  other  artificers  the  hammer  was  used  in  con-
junction with  the  chisel  [Dolabra],  as  by  the
carpenter  (pulsans  malleiis,  Coripp.  de  Laud.  Justini,
iv.  47  ;  woodcut,  p.  98)  and  the  sculpton

The  term  malleolus  denoted  a  hammer,  the
transverse  head  of  which  was  formed  for  holding


MANCIPII  CAUSA.

pitch  and  tow ;  which,  having  been  set  on  fire,  was
projected  slowly,  so  that  it  might  not  be  extin-
guished during  its  flight,  upon  houses  and  other
buildings  in  order  to  set  them  on  fire  ;  and  which
was  therefore  commonly  used  in  sieges  together
with  torches  and  falaricae.  (Liv.  xxxviii.  6  ;  Non.
Marcellus,  p.  55^^  ed.  Lips ;  Festus,  s.  v.  ;  Cic.
pro  Mil.  24  ;  Veget  de  Re  Mil.  iv.  18  ;  Vitruv.  x.
16.  9.  ed.  Schneider.)
MALUS.  [Navis.]
MALUS  OCULUS.  [Fascinum.]
MANCEPS  has  the  same  relation  to  Mancipium
that  Auspex  has  to  Auspicium.  It  is  properly  qui
manu  capit.  But  the  word  has  several  special
significations.  Mancipes  were  they  who  bid  at  the
public  lettings  of  the  censors  for  the  purpose  of
farming  any  part  of  the  public  property.  (Festus,
$.  V.  Manceps  ;  Manceps  dicitur  qui  quid  a  populo
emit  conducitve,  quia,  &c.  ;  Cic.  pro  Plane,  c.  26,
ed.  Wunder.)  Sometimes  the  chief  of  the  Publi-
cani  generally  are  meant  by  this  term,  as  they  were
no  doubt  the  bidders  and  gave  the  security,  and
then  they  shared  the  undertaking  with  others  or
underlet  it.  (Ascon.  in  Div.  Verr.  c.  10.)  The
Mancipes  would  accordingly  have  distinctive  names
according  to  the  kind  of  revenue  which  they  took
on  lease,  as  Decumani,  Portitores,  Pecuarii.  Sueto-
nius {Vesp.  1,  and  the  note  in  Burmann's  edition)
says  that  the  father  of  Petro  was  a  manceps  of
labourers  (operae)  who  went  yearly  from  Umbria
to  Sabinum  to  cultivate  the  land  ;  that  is,  he  hired
them  from  their  masters  and  paid  so  much  for  the
use  of  them  ;  as  is  now  often  done  in  slave  coun-
tries. The  terms  Mancipes  Thermarum  et  Sali-
narum  occur  in  the  Theodosian  Code  (14.  tit.  5.
8. 3).  [G.  L.]

MANCIPA'TIO.  [Mancipium.]
MA'NCIPI  RES.  [Dominium.]
MANCI'PII  CAUSA.  The  three  expressions
by  which  the  Romans  indicated  the  status  in
which  a  free  person  might  be  with  respect  to  an-
other, were  In  Potestate,  In  Manu,  and  In  Man-
cipio  ejus  esse.  (Gains,  i.  49.)  In  consequence
of  his  Potestas  a  father  could  mancipate  his  child
to  another  person,  for  in  the  old  times  of  the  re-
public his  Patria  Potestas  was  hardly  distinguished
from  property.  A  husband  had  the  same  power
over  a  wife  In  Manu,  for  she  was  "  filiae  loco."
Accordingly  a  child  in  Potestate  and  a  wife  in
Manu  were  properly  Res  Mancipi  ;  and  they  were
said  to  be  In  Mancipio.  Still  such  persons,  when
mancipated,  were  not  exactly  in  the  relation  of
slaves  to  the  persons  to  whom  they  were  mancipated ;
but  they  occupied  a  status  between  free  persons  and
slaves,  which  was  expressed  by  the  words  Mancipii
causa.  Such  persons  as  were  in  Mancipii  causa
were  not  Sui  juris  (Gains,  i.  48 — 50) ;  and  all  that
they  acquired,  was  acquired  for  the  persons  to  whom
they  were  mancipated.  But  they  differed  from
slaves  in  not  being  possessed  ;  they  might  also  have
an  injurianxm  actio  for  ill-treatment  from  those  who
had  them  In  Mancipio,  and  they  did  not  lose  the
rights  of  Ingenui,  but  these  rights  were  only  sus-
pended. As  to  contracts,  the  person  with  whom
they  contracted  might  obtain  the  sale  of  such  pro-
perty (6owa)  as  would  have  been  theirs,  if  they  had
not  been  in  mancipii  causa  ;  as  Gains  expresses  it
(iv.  80).  Persons  In  mancipii  causa  might  he
manumitted  in  the  same  way  as  slaves,  and  the
limitations  of  the  Lex  Aelia  Sentia  and  Furia  Cani-
nia  did  not  apply  to  such  manumissions.    The  per-


MANCIPIUM

son  who  effected  the  manumission  thereby  acquired
a  kind  of  patronal  right,  which  was  of  some  im-
portance in  the  matters  of  hereditas  and  tutela.
(Savigny,  System,  &c.  i.  360.)

The  strict  practice  of  Mancipatio,  as  applied  to
children,  had  fallen  into  disuse  in  the  time  of  Gaius,
and  probably  still  earlier,  and  it  had  then  become
a  mere  legal  form  by  which  the  Patria  Potestas
was  dissolved  [Emancipatio]  ;  except  a  person
was  mancipated  ex  noxali  causa.  In  case  of  delicts
by  the  son,  the  father  could  mancipatehim  (ex  noxali
causa  mancipio  dare),  and  one  act  of  mancipatio
was  considered  sufficient  (Gaius,  iv.  75 — 78  ;
Liv.  viii.  28  ;  but  the  son  had  a  right  of  action  for
recovering  his  freedom,  when  he  had  worked  out
the  amount  of  the  damage.  (Mos.  et  Rom.  Leg.  Coll.
ii.  3.)  Justinian  put  an  end  to  the  noxae  datio
in  the  case  of  children,  which  indeed  before  his
time  had  fallen  into  disuse.  (Inst.  4.  tit.  8.  s.  7.)

In  his  time,  Gaius  remarks  (i.  141),  that  men
were  not  kept  in  mancipii  causa  {in  eo  jure)  for
any  long  time,  the  form  of  mancipatio  being  only
used  (except  in  the  case  of  a  noxalis  causa)  for  the
purpose  of  emancipation.  But  questions  of  law
still  arose  out  of  this  form  ;  for  the  three  mancipa-
tiones,  which  Were  necessary  in  the  case  of  a  son,
might  not  always  have  been  observed.  Accord-
ingly a  child  begotten  by  a  son  who  had  been
twice  mancipated,  but  born  after  the  third  manci-
patio of  his  father,  was  still  in  the  power  of  his
grandfather.  A  child  begotten  by  a  son  who  was
in  his  third  mancipatio,  came  into  his  father's  power
if  he  was  manumitted  after  that  mancipation  ;  but
if  the  father  died  in  mancipio,  the  child  became
«ui  juris.  (Gaius,  i.  135.)

Coemptio,  by  which  a  woman  came  in  manum,
was  effected  by  mancipatio,  and  the  coemptio  might
be  either  matrimonii  causa,  or  fiduciae  causa.  The
fiduciae  causa  coemptio  was  a  ceremony  which  was
necessary  when  a  woman  wished  to  change  her
tutores,  and  also  when  she  wished  to  make  a  will  ;
but  a  senatusconsultum  of  Hadrian  dispensed  with
the  ceremony  in  the  latter  case.  (Gaius,  i.  1 15,  &c.)
Dion  Cassius  (xlviii.  44)  says  that  Tiberius  Nero
transferred  or  gave  (€|e5c«>Ke)  his  wife  to  Octavianus,
as  a  father  would  do  ;  and  the  transfer  of  his  wife
Marcia  by  the  younger  Cato  to  Quintus  Hortensius
(Plut.  Cat.  Min.  c.  25)  is  a  well-known  story.  If  in
both  these  cases  the  wife  was  In  Manu,  she  must
have  been  mancipated.  Mancipatio  in  such  case
would  be  equivalent  to  a  divorce  ;  at  any  rate,  in
both  the  cases  which  have  been  mentioned,  the
second  marriage  must  have  been  preceded  by  a
consent  to  dissolve  the  marriage,  which  would  be
sufficient  if  the  wife  was  not  in  manu,  and  would
require  the  form  of  mancipatio  if  she  was  in  manu.
(Gaius,  i.  ]  37.)

The  situation  of  a  debtor  who  was  adjudicated
to  his  creditor  resembled  that  of  a  person  who  was
In  mancipii  causa.  [G.  L.]

MANCIPIUM.  The  etymology  of  this  word
is  the  same  as  that  of  the  word  Mancipatio,  of
which  Gaius  (i.  121)  says,  "Mancipatio  dicitur
quia  manu  res  capitur."  The  term  Mancipium
then  is  derived  from  the  act  of  corporeal  appre-
hension of  a  thing  ;  and  this  corporeal  apprehen-
sion is  with  reference  to  the  transfer  of  the  owner-
ship of  a  thing.  It  was  not  a  simple  corporeal
apprehension,  but  one  which  was  accompanied  with
certain  forms  described  by  Gaius  (i.  119):  —
•*  Mancipatio  is  effected  in  the  presence  of  not  less


MANCIPIUM.  ?27

than  five  witnesses,  who  must  be  Roman  citizens
and  of  the  age  of  puberty  (puberes),  and  also  in
the  presence  of  another  person  of  the  same  condition,
who  holds  a  pair  of  brazen  scales  and  hence  is
called  Libripens.  The  purchaser  (qui  inancipio  ac-
cipit),  taking  hold  of  the  thing,  says  :  I  affirm  that
this  slave  (homo)  is  mine  Ex  Jure  Quiritium,  and
he  is  purchased  by  me  with  this  piece  of  money
{aes)  and  brazen  scales.  He  then  strikes  the  scales
with  the  piece  of  money,  and  gives  it  to  the  seller
as  a  symbol  of  the  price  {quasi  pretii  loco).''''  The
same  account  of  the  matter  is  given  more  lariefly  by
Ulpian  {Frag.  xix.).  This  mode  of  transfer  ap-
plied to  all  Res  Mancipi  whether  free  persons  or
slaves,  animals  or  lands.  Lands  {praedia)  might
be  thus  transferred,  though  the  parties  to  the
mancipatio  were  not  on  the  lands  ;  but  all  other
things,  which  were  objects  of  mancipatio,  were  only
transferable  in  the  presence  of  the  parties,  because
corporeal  apprehension  was  a  necessary  part  of  the
ceremony.  The  purchaser  or  person  to  whom  the
mancipatio  was  made  did  not  acquire  the  possession
of  the  mancipatio  ;  for  the  acquisition  of  possession
was  a  separate  act.  (Gaius,  iv.  131).  Gaius  calls
Mancipatio  "  imaginaria  quaedam  venditio,"  for
though  the  law  required  this  form  for  the  transfer
of  the  Quiritarian  ownership,  the  real  contract  of
sale  consisted  in  the  agreement  of  the  parties  as  to
the  price.  The  party  who  transferred  the  owner-
ship of  a  thing  pursuant  to  these  forms  was  said
"  mancipio  dare  ; "  he  who  thus  acquired  the
ownersliip  was  said  "mancipio  accipere."  (Plaut.
Trinum.  ii.  4.  18.)  The  verb  "mancipare"  is
sometimes  used  as  equivalent  to  "  mancipio  dare."
Horace  {Ep.  ii.  2.  159)  uses  the  phrase  "mancipat
usus,"  which  is  not  an  unreasonable  licence :  he
means  to  say  that  "  usus  '*  or  usucapion  has  the
same  effect  as  mancipatio,  which  is  true  ;  but  usus
only  had  its  effect  in  the  case  of  Res  Mancipi,
where  there  had  been  no  Mancipatio  or  In  Jure
Cessio.  Both  Mancipatio  and  In  Jure  Cessio
existed  before  the  Twelve  Tables  {Frag.  Vat.  50).
Mancipatio  is  used  by  Gaius  to  express  the  act
of  transfer,  but  in  Cicero  the  word  Mancipium  is
used  in  this  sense.  (Cic.  de  Of.  iii.  16,  de  Orat.
i.  39.)

The  division  of  things  into  Res  Mancipi  and
Nee  Mancipi,  had  reference  to  the  formalities  re-
quisite to  be  observed  in  the  transfer  of  ownership.
It  is  stated  in  the  article  Dominium,  what  things
were  things  Mancipi.  To  this  list  may  be  added
children  of  Roman  parents,  who  were  accorduig  to
the  old  law  Res  Mancipi.  [Mancipii  Causa.]
The  Quiritarian  ownership  of  Res  Mancipi  could
only  be  immediately  transferred  by  Mancipatio  or
In  Jure  Cessio  ;  transfer  by  tradition  only  made
such  things  In  bonis.  The  Quiritarian  ownership
of  Res  nee  mancipi  was  acquired  by  tradition  only,
when  there  was  a  justa  causa.  Quiritarian  owner-
ship is  called  mancipium  by  the  earlier  Roman
writers :  the  word  dominimn  is  first  used  by  later
writers,  as  for  instance  Gaius.  Mancipatio  could
only  take  place  between  Roman  citizens  or  those
who  had  the  Commercium  ;  which  indeed  appears
from  the  words  used  by  the  purchaser.  (Gaius,  i.
119  ;  Ulp.  Fro^.  xix.  3.)

The  only  word  then  by  which  this  formal  transfer
of  ownership  was  made  was  Mancipium,  which
occurs  in  the  Twelve  Tables.  (Dirksen,  Uebersicht^
&c.  p.  395.)  The  word  nexum  or  nexus  is  also
sometimes  used  in  the  same  sense.  Cicero  (7(w>.
3a  4


728


M  AND  AT  I  ACTIO.


5)  defines  "  Abalienatio "  to  be  "  ejus  rel  quae
mancipi  est ;"  and  this  is  effected  either  by  "  tra-
ditio  alteri  noxu  aut  in  jure  cessio  inter  quos  ea
jure  civili  fieri  possunt."  According  to  this  defini-
tion "  Abalienatio  "  is  of  a  Res  Mancipi,  a  class  of
things  determinate  ;  and  the  mode  of  transfer  is
either  by  "traditio  nexu  "  or  by  "in  jure  cessio."
These  two  modes  correspond  respectively  to  the
*' mancipatio  "  and  "  in  jure  cessio"  of  Gaius  (ii.
41),  and  accordingly  mancipatio  or  the  older  term
mancipium  is  equivalent  to  "  traditio  nexu : "  in
other  words  mancipium  was  a  nexus  or  nexum.
Cicero  {De  Harusp.  respons.  c.  7)  uses  both  words
in  the  same  sentence,  where  he  speaks  of  various
titles  to  property,  and  among  them  he  mentions
the  Jus  mancipii  and  Jus  nexi.  lie  may  mean
here  to  speak  of  the  Jus  mancipii  in  its  special
sense  as  contrasted  with  the  Jus  nexi  which  had  a
wider  meaning  ;  in  another  instance  he  uses  both
words  to  express  one  thing.  {Ad  Fam.  iv.  30.)  Ac-
cording to  Aelius  Gallus,  everything  was  "  nexum''
"  quod cun que  per  aes  et  libram  geritur  ;"  and  as
mancipatio  was  effected  per  aes  et  libram,  it  was
consequently  a  nexum.  The  form  of  mancipatio
by  the  aes  and  libra  continued  probably  till  Jus-
tinian abolished  the  distinction  between  Res  Man-
cipi and  Res  Nee  Mancipi.  It  is  alluded  to  by
Horace  {Ep.  ii.  2.  158),  and  the  libra,  says  Pliny
(xxxiii.  3),  is  still  used  in  such  forms  of  transfer.

When  things  were  transferred  by  mancipatio
under  a  contract  of  sale,  the  vendor  was  bound  to
warranty  in  double  of  the  amount  of  the  thing  sold.
(Paul.  S.  R.  ii.  s.  16.)  A  vendor  therefore  who
had  a  doubtful  title  would  not  sell  by  mancipium,
but  would  merely  transfer  by  delivery,  and  leave
the  purchaser  to  obtain  the  Quiritarian  ownership
of  the  thing  by  usucapion.  (Plant.  Cure.  iv.  2.  P,
Fersa,  iv.  .3.  55.)  Accordingly  Vari'o  observes
{De  Re  Rustica,  ii.  10)  that  if  a  slave  was  not
transferred  by  mancipium,  the  seller  entered  into  a
stipulatio  dupli  to  be  enforced  by  the  buyer  in  the
case  of  eviction  ;  when  the  transfer  was  by  manci-
pium, this  stipulation  was  not  necessary.  The
terms  of  the  contract  were  called  Lex  Mancipii,
but  it  is  not  necessary  to  infer  from  the  passage  of
Cicero  (De  Or.  I  39),  that  the  Lex  or  terms  con-
tained the  penalty,  but  merely  that  it  contained
what  the  seller  warranted.  (See  Fro  Murena,  c.  2.)

A  s  to  the  application  of  Mancipatio  to  Testaments,
Bee  Testa  MENTUM.

It  appears  from  what  has  been  said  that  manci-
pium may  be  used  as  equivalent  to  complete  owner-
ship, and  may  thus  bo  opposed  to  usus  as  in  a  pas-
sage of  Lucretius  that  has  been  often  quoted  (iii.
985),  and  to  Fructus  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  vii.  29,  30).
Sometimes  th ;  word  mancipium  signifies  a  slave,
as  being  one  of  the  Res  mancipi :  this  is  probably
the  sense  of  the  word  in  Cicero  (Top.  5)  and
certainly  in  Horace  (Ep.  i.  6.  39).  Sometimes
mancipia  is  used  generally  for  Res  mancipi  (Ulp.
tit.  xi.  27),  unless  Rem  mancipi  is  the  right  read-
ing in  that  passage.  Mancipation  no  longer  ex-
isted in  the  code  of  Justinian,  who  took  away  all
distinction  between  Res  Mancipi  sind  Nee  Man-
cipi. The  ownership  of  all  corporeal  things  was
made  transferable  by  Traditio  with  a  jasUi  causa.

The  subject  of  Mancipium  and  Mancipatio  is
discussed  by  Com.  Van  Bynkershoek,  Opusculum
de  Rebus  Mancipi  et  Nee  Mancipi ;  and  Puchta,
Inst.  ii.  §  238.  [G.  L.]

MANDATI  ACTIO.     [Mandatum.j


MANDATUM.

MANDA'TUM.  It  is  a  contract  of  mandatuifi
when  one  person  commissions  another  to  do  some-
thing without  reward,  and  that  other  person  under-
takes to  do  it :  and  generally  it  may  be  stated  that
whenever  a  man  commissions  another  to  do  some-
thing without  pay,  which,  if  the  thing  were  to  be
done  for  pay  (merees),  would  make  the  transaction
a  contract  of  locatio  and  conductio,  the  contract  oi
mandatum  exists  ;  as  if  a  man  gives  clothes  to  a
fullo  to  be  furbished  up  and  cleaned,  or  to  a  tailor
{sarcinator)  to  mend.  The  person  who  gave  the
commission  was  the  mandans  or  mandator :  he  who
received  it,  was  the  mandatarius.  The  mandatum
might  be  either  on  the  sole  account  of  the  man-
dator, or  on  another  person's  account,  or  on  the
account  of  the  mandator  and  another  person,  or  on
account  of  the  mandator  and  mandatarius  or  on  the
account  of  the  mandatarius  and  another  person.
But  there  could  be  no  mandatum  on  the  account
{gratia)  of  the  mandatarius  only  ;  as  if  a  man
were  to  advise  another  to  put  his  money  out  to  in-
terest, and  it  were  lost,  the  loser  would  have  no
mandati  actio  against  his  adviser.  If  the  advice
were  to  lend  the  money  to  Titius,  and  the  loan
had  the  like  result,  it  was  a  question  whether  this
was  a  case  of  mandatum  ;  but  the  opinion  of  Sa-
binus  prevailed,  that  it  was,  and  the  mandant  thus
became  security  for  Titius.  It  was  not  mandatum
if  the  thing  was  contra  bonos  mores,  or  in  other
words,  if  the  object  of  the  mandatum  was  an  illegal
act.  A  mandatum  might  be  general  or  special  ;
and  the  mandatarius  was  bound  to  keep  within
the  limits  of  the  mandatum.  The  mandator  had
an  utilis  actio  against  such  persons  as  the  mandata-
rius contracted  with  ;  and  such  persons  had  the
like  action  against  the  mandator  ;  and  a  directa
actio  against  the  mandatarius.  The  mandator  and
mandatarius  had  also  respectively  a  directa  actio
against  one  another  in  respect  of  the  mandatum :
the  actio  of  the  mandatarius  might  be  for  in-
demnity generally  in  respect  of  what  he  had  done
bona  fide.  If  the  mandatarius  exceeded  his  com-
mission, he  had  no  action  against  the  mandator;
but  the  mandator  in  such  case  had  an  action  for
the  amount  of  damage  sustained  by  the  non-execu-
tion of  the  mandatum,  provided  it  could  have  been
executed.  The  mandatum  might  be  recalled  by
the  mandans,  or  renounced  by  the  mandatarius,
"  dum  ad  hue  Integra  res  sit,"  that  is,  no  loss  must
accrue  to  either  party  in  consequence  of  the  contract
being  rescinded.  The  contract  was  dissolved  by
the  death  of  either  party  ;  but  if  the  mandatarius
executed  the  mandatum  after  the  death  of  the
mandator,  in  ignorance  of  his  death,  he  had  his
action  against  the  heres,  which  was  allowed  "  utili-
tatis  causa."  According  to  Cicero  a  mandati  judi-
cium was  "  non  minus  turpe  quam  furti  "  {Fro
Rose.  Amer.  c.  38)  ;  which  however  would  ob-
viously depend  on  circumstances.     [Infamia.]

Mandatum  is  sometimes  used  in  the  sense  of  a
command  from  a  superior  to  an  inferior.  Under
the  empire  the  Mandata  Principum  were  the  com-
mands and  instructions  given  to  governors  of  pro-
vinces and  others.  (See  the  letter  of  Plinius  to
Trajanus,  and  the  emperor's  answer,  Plin.  Ep.  x.
Ill,  112.)  Frontinus  {De  Aquaediuit.)  classes  the
Mandata  Principum  with  Lex  and  Senatuscon-
sulta.  (See  Puchta,  Inst.  i.  110.)

(Gaius,  iii.  155—162,  iv.  83,  84  ;  Inst.  3.
tit.  26  ;  Dig.  17.  tit.  1  ;  Cod.  4.  tit.  35  ;  Vangerow
Fandehten,  &c.  iii.  469.)  [G.  L.]


MANSIO.

MANDRAE.     [Latrunculi.]

MANDYAS  (ixavSvas).    [Lacerna.]

MANES.  See  Diet,  of  Greek  and  Rom.  Bio-
graphy and  Mythology.

MANGONES.     [Servus.]

MA'NICA,  a  sleeve.  Besides  the  use  of  sleeves
Bewed  to  the  tunic,  which,  when  so  manufactured,
was  called  ehiridota  or  manicata  tunica  (Curt.  iii.
/.  p.  12,  ed.  Zunipt),  sleeves  were  also  worn  as  a
separate  part  of  the  dress.  Palladius  {de  Re  Rust.
i.  43)  mentions  the  propriety  of  providing  ocreas
manicasque  de  peliibus,  i.  e.  leggins  and  sleeves
made  of  hides,  as  useful  both  to  the  huntsman  and
to  the  agricultural  labourer.  Tlje  Roman  gladiators
wore,  together  with  greaves,  a  sleeve  of  an  appro-
priate kind  on  the  right  arm  and  hand  (Juv.  vi.
255),  as  is  exhibited  in  the  woodcuts  at  p.  576.

These  parts  of  dress  are  mentioned  together
even  as  early  as  the  Homeric  age  (see  Od.  xxiv.
228,  22.9).  In  this  passage  the  manicae  (xetf'Ses)
seem  to  be  mittens,  worn  on  the  hands  to  protect
them  from  briars  and  thorns :  and  Eustathius,  in
his  commentary  on  tlie  passage,  distinguishes  be-
tween simple  mittens,,  such  as  our  labourers  use  in
hedging,  and  gloves,  which  he  calls  x^'P'Ses  5aK-
TvAcirai  (p.  1960.  i»it.).

Gloves  with  fingars  (digitalia,  YaxTO,de  Re  Rjtst.
i.  55)  were  worn  among  the  Romans  for  the  per-
formance of  certain  manual  operations.  Pliny  the
younger  refers  also  to  the  use  of  manicae  in  winter
to  protect  the  hands  from  cold  (Epist.  iii.  5).
Those  used  by  the  Persians  were  probably  made
of  fur,  perhaps  resembling  muffs  :  the  Persians  also
wore  gloves  in  winter  (5aKTv\T}6pas,  Xen.  Cyrop.
viii.  3.  §  17).  In  an  enumeration  of  the  instru-
ments of  torture  used  in  the  fourth  century  of  the
Christian  era  we  observe  "the  glove"  (Synes.
Epist.  58)  ;  but  its  construction  or  material  is  not
described.

Handcuffs  were  called  manicae.  (Virg.  Georg.  iv.
439,  Aen.  ii.  146  ;  Plant.  Asin.  ii.  2.  38,  Capt.
iii.  5.  1,  Most.  V.  1.  17  ;  Non.  Marcellus,  s.v.
Manicae.)  [J.  Y.]

MANITULUS;  MANIPULA'RES ;  MA-
NIPULA'RII.    [ExERciTus,  p.  500,  b.]

MA'NSIO  {aTaQjxSs).,  a  post-station  at  the  end
of  a  day's  journey.  The  great  roads,  which  were
constructed  first  by  the  kings  of  Persia  and  after-
wards by  the  Romans,  were  provided,  at  intervals
corresponding  to  the  length  of  a  day's  journey,  with
establishments  of  the  same  kind  with  the  khans
or  caravanseras  which  are  still  found  in  the  East.
There  were  1 1 1  such  stations  on  the  road  from
Sardes  to  Susa  (Herod,  v.  52,  53,  vi.  118),  their
average  distance  from  one  another  being  something
less  than  20  English  miles.  The  khan,  erected  at
the  station  for  the  accommodation  of  travellers,  is
called  by  Herodotus  /caraAuo-ts  and  Korayuyi].
To  stop  for  the  night  was' /caraAveti/.  (Xen.  Anab.
I.  8  ;  Aelian,  V.  H.  i,  32.)  As  the  ancient  roads
made  by  the  kings  of  Persia  are  still  followed  to  a
considerable  extent  (Heeren,  Ideen^  vol.  i.  pt.  ii.
pp.  193 — 203,  713 — 720),  so  also  there  is  reason  to
believe  that  the  modern  khan,  which  is  a  square
building,  enclosing  a  large  open  court,  surrounded
by  balconies  with  a  series  of  doors  entering  into
plain  unfurnished  apartments,  and  having  a  foun-
tiiin  in  the  centre  of  the  court,  has  been  copied  by
uninterrupted  custom  from  the  Persic  KUTahvais,
and  that,  whether  on  occasion  of  the  arrival  of
armies  or  of  caravans,  they  have  always  served  to


MANSIO.


729


afford  a  shelter  during  the  night  both  to  man  and
beast.

The  Latin  term  mansio  is  •  derived  from  manere^
signifying  to  pass  the  night  at  a  place  in  travelling.
On  the  great  Roman  roads  the  mansiones  were  at
the  same  distance  from  one  another  as  on  those  of
the  Persian  empire.  They  were  originally  called
castra,  being  probably  mere  places  of  encampment
formed  by  making  earthen  entrenchments.  In
process  of  time  they  included,  not  only  barracks
and  magazines  of  provisions  (Jiorrea)  for  the  troops,
but  commodious  buildings  adapted  for  the  reception
of  travellers  of  all  ranks,  and  even  of  the  emperor
himself,  if  he  should  have  occasion  to  visit  them.
At  those  stations  the  cisiarii  kept  gigs  for  hire  and
for  conveying  government  despatches.  [CisiUM  ;
EssEDUM.]  The  mansio  was  under  the  superin-
tendence of  an  officer  called  mansionarius.

Besides  the  post-stations  at  the  end  of  each
day's  journe}',  there  were  on  the  Roman  military
ways  others  at  convenient  intervals,  which  were
used  merely  to  change  horses  or  to  take  refresh-
ment, and  which  were  called  mutationes  {ahXayal).
There  were  four  or  five  mutationes  to  one  mansio.
The  Rinerarium  a  Burdigala  Hierusalem  usqtie^
which  is  a  road-book  drawn  up  about  the  time  of
Constantine,  mentions  in  order  the  mansiones  from
Bourdeaux  to  Jerusalem  with  the  intervening
mutationes,  and  other  more  considerable  places,
which  are  called  either  civitates,  vict,  or  castella.
The  number  of  leagues  {leugae)  or  of  miles  between
one  place  and  another  is  also  set  down.      [J.  Y.]

MANTE'LE  (x^ip^iiiaKTpou,  xeip6K/xa7eroi'),  a
napkin.  The  circumstance,  that  forks  were  not
invented  in  ancient  times,  gave  occasion  to  the  use
of  napkins  at  meals  to  wipe  the  fingers  (Xen.  Cyrop.
i.  3.  §51)  ;  also  when  the  meal  was  finished,  and
even  before  it  commenced,  an  apparatus  was  car-
ried round  for  washing  the  hands.  A  basin,  called
in  Latin  malluvium  (Festus,  s.  ??.),  and  in  Greek
Xepvi\p,  x^P'''^"!/,  or  x^'-poviirrpov,  was  held  under
the  hands  to  receive  the  water,  which  was  poured
upon  them  out  of  a  ewer  {urceolus).  Thus  Homer
describes  the  practice,  and  according  to  the  ac-
count of  a  recent  traveller,  it  continues  unchanged
in  the  countries  to  which  his  description  referred.
(Fellow's  Journal,  1838,  p.  153.)  The  boy  or
slave  who  poured  out  the  water,  also  held  the
napkin  or  towel  for  wiping  the  hands  dry.  The
word  mappa,  said  to  be  of  Carthaginian  origin
(Quintil.  i.  5.  §  57),  denoted  a  smaller  kind  of
napkin,  or  a  handkerchief,  which  the  guests  car-
ried with  them  to  table.  (Hor.  Sat.  ii.  4.  81,  ii.
8.  63.)  The  mantele,  as  it  was  larger  than  the
mappa,  was  sometimes  used  as  a  table-cloth.
(Martial,  xii.  29,  xiv.  138.)

The  napkins  thus  used  at  table  were  commonly
made  of  coarse  unbleached  linen  {wfxoXivcf),  Athen.
ix.  79).  Sometimes,  however,  they  were  of  fine
linen  {iKTplfjLfjLara  Kafinpa  (TiuSovvcpTJ,  Philoxenus,
ap.  Athen.  ix.  77).  Sometimes  they  were  woollen
with  a  soft  and  even  nap  {tonsis  mantelia  villis,
Virg.  Georg.  iv.  377,  Aen.  i.  702).  Those  made
of  Asbestos  must  have  been  rare.  The  Romans
in  the  time  of  the  emperors  used  linen  napkins
embroidered  or  interwoven  with  gold  (Lamprid.
Heliogab.  27,  Al.  Severus,  37,  40),  and  the  traveller
already  quoted  informs  us  that  this  luxury  still
continues  in  the  East.  Napkins  were  also  worn
by  women  as  a  head-dress,  in  which  case  they
were  of  fine  materials  and  gay  colours.  (Athen.  ix>


730


MANUMISSIO.


79.)  These  were  no  doubt  put  on  in  a  variety  of
elegant  ways,  resembling  those  which  are  in  use
among  the  ifemales  of  Italy,  Greece,  and  Asia
Minor,  at  the  present  day.

MANTIKE  (navTiK-h,)     [Divinatio.]

MANU'BIAE.     [SroLiA.]

MANUM,    CONVENTIO    IN.       [Matri-

MONIUM.]

MANUMI'SSIO  was  the  form  by  which  slaves
and  persons  In  Mancipii  causa  were  released  from
those  conditions  respectively.

There  were  three  modes  of  effecting  a  Justa  et
Legitima  Manumissio,  namely,  Vindicta,  Census,
and  Testanientum,  which  are  enumerated  both  by
Gaius  and  Ulpian  (Frag,  i.)  as  existing  in  their
time.  (Compare  Cic.  Top.  2,  and  Plautus,  Cas.  ii.
8.  68.)  Of  these  the  Manumissio  by  Vindicta  is
probably  the  oldest,  and  perhaps  was  once  the  only
mode  of  manumission.  It  is  mentioned  by  Livy
as  in  use  at  an  early  period  (ii.  5),  and  indeed  he
states  that  some  persons  refer  the  origin  of  the
Vindicta  to  the  event  there  related,  and  derive  its
name  from  Vindicius  ;  the  latter  part,  at  least,  of
the  supposition  is  of  no  value.

The  ceremony  of  the  Manumissio  by  the  Vin-
dicta was  as  follows: — The  master  brought  his
slave  before  the  magistratus,  and  stated  the  grounds
(causa)  of  the  intended  manumission.  The  lictor
of  the  magistratus  laid  a  rod  (festuca)  on  the  head
of  the  slave,  accompanied  with  certain  formal  words,
in  which  he  declared  that  he  was  a  free  man  ex
Jure  Quiritium,  that  is,  "  vindicavitin  libertatem."
The  master  in  the  meantime  held  the  slave,  and
after  he  had  pronounced  the  words  "  hunc  ho-
minem  liberum  volo,"  he  turned  him  round  (mo-
mento  turbinis  exit  Marcus  Dama.,  Persius,  Sat.  v.
78)  and  let  him  go  (emisit  e  manu^  or  misit  manu.,
Plant.  Capt.  ii.  3.  48),  whence  the  general  name  of
the  act  of  manumission.  The  magistratus  then
declared  him  to  be  free,  in  reference  to  which
Cicero  (ad  Att.  vii.  2)  seems  to  use  the  word
**addicere."  The  word  Vindicta  itself,  which  is
properly  the  res  vindicata.,  is  used  for  festuca  by
Horace  (Sat.  ii.  7.  76).  Plautus  (Mil.  Glor.  iv.  I.
15)  uses  festuca.

It  seems  highly  probable  that  this  form  of  Manu-
missio was  framed  after  the  analogy  of  the  In  jure
vindicationes  (Gaius,  iv.  16)  ;  and  that  the  lictor
in  the  case  of  manumission  represented  the  opposite
claimant  in  the  vindicatio.  (Unterholzner,  Von
den  formen  der  Manumissio  per  Vindictam  und
Emancipation  Zeitschrifi^  vol.  ii.  p.  139.)

As  for  the  explanation  of  the  word  Vindicta  see
ViNDiciAE  and  Vindicatio.

The  Manumissio  by  the  Census  is  thus  briefly
described  by  Ulpian  :  *'  Slaves  were  formerly
manumitted  by  census,  when  at  the  lustral  census
(lustrali  censu)  at  Rome  they  gave  in  their  census
(some  read  nomen  instead  of  census)  at  the  bidding
of  their  masters."  Persons  In  mancipio  might  also
obtain  their  manumission  in  this  way.  (Gaius,  i.
140.)  The  slave  must  of  course  have  had  a  suffi-
cient Peculium,  or  the  master  must  have  given  him
property.

In  the  absence  of  decisive  testimony  as  to  the
origin  of  these  two  modes  of  manumissio,  modem
writers  indulge  themselves  in  a  variety  of  conjec-
tures. It  may  be  true  that  originally  the  manu-
mission by  Vindicta  only  gave  libertas  and  not
civitas  ;  but  this  opinion  is  not  probable.  It  may
easily  be  allowed  that  in  the  earliest  period  the


MANUMISSIO.

civitas  could  only  be  conferred  by  the  sovereign
power,  and  that  therefore  there  could  be  no  eiFec-
tual  manumission  except  by  the  same  power.  But
the  form  of  the  Vindicta  itself  supposes,  not  that
the  person  manumitted  was  a  slave,  but  that  he
was  a  free  person,  against  whose  freedom  his
master  made  a  claim.  The  proceeding  before  the
magistratus  was  in  form  an  assertion  of  the  slave's
freedom  (manu  asserere  liberali  causa,  Plant.  Poeru
iv.  2.  83,  &c.),  to  which  the  owner  made  no  de-
fence, but  he  let  him  go  as  a  free  man.  The
proceeding  then  resembles  the  In  Jure  Cessio,
and  was  in  fact  a  fictitious  suit  in  which  freedom
(libertas)  was  the  matter  in  issue.  It  followed  as
a  consequence  of  the  fiction,  that  when  the  magis-
tratus pronounced  in  favour  of  freedom  Ex  jure
Quiritium,  there  could  be  no  dispute  about  the
Civitas.

In  the  case  of  the  Census  the  slave  was  regis-
tered as  a  citizen  with  his  master's  consent.  The
assumption  that  the  Vindicta  must  have  originally
preceded  the  Census,  for  which  there  is  no  evi-
dence at  all,  is  inconsistent  with  the  nature  of  the
proceeding,  which  was  a  registration  of  the  slave,
with  his  master's  consent,  as  a  citizen.  A  question
might  arise  whether  he  should  be  considered  free
immediately  on  being  entered  on  the  censor's  roll,
or  not  until  the  lustrum  was  celebrated  (Cic.  de  Or.
i.  40)  ;  and  this  was  a  matter  of  some  importance,
for  his  acquisitions  were  only  his  own  from  the
time  when  he  became  a  free  man.

The  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  confirmed  free-
dom which  was  given  by  will  (testamentum).  Free-
dom (libertas)  might  be  given  either  directo,  that
is,  as  a  legacy,  or  by  way  of  fideicommissum.  The
slave  who  was  made  free  directo,  was  called  orcinus
libertus  (or  horcinus,  as  in  Ulp.  Frag.),  for  the
same  reason  perhaps  that  certain  senators  were
called  Orcini.  (Sueton.  Octav.  35.)  He  who  re-
ceived his  libertas  by  way  of  fideicommissum,  was
not  the  libertus  of  the  testator,  but  of  the  person
who  was  requested  to  manumit  him  (manumissor) :
if  the  heres,  who  was  requested  to  manumit,  re-
fused, he  might  be  compelled  to  manumit  on  appli-
cation being  made  to  the  proper  authority.  Liber-
tas might  be  given  by  fideicommissum  to  a  slave  of
the  testator,  of  his  heres,  or  of  his  legatee,  and  also
to  the  slave  of  any  other  person  (ecrtraneus).  In
case  of  libertas  being  thus  given  to  the  slave  of
any  other  person,  the  gift  of  libertas  was  extin-
guished, if  the  owner  would  not  sell  the  slave  at  a
fair  price.  A  slave  who  was  made  conditionally
free  by  testament,  was  called  Statu  liber,  and  he
was  the  slave  of  the  heres  until  the  condition  was
fulfilled.  If  a  StJitu  liber  was  sold  by  the  heres,
or  if  the  ownership  of  him  was  acquired  by  usu-
capion, he  had  still  the  benefit  of  the  condition :  this
provision  was  contained  in  the  Law  of  the  Twelve
Tables.  If  a  slave  was  made  free  and  heres  by
the  testator's  will,  on  the  death  of  the  testator  he
became  both  free  and  heres,  whether  he  wished  it
or  not.  (Gaius,  ii.  153  ;  Ulp.  Frag.  xxii.  11.)
[Heres.]

A  manumission  by  adoption  is  spoken  of,  but  no-
thing is  known  of  it.  (Gell.  v.  19  ;  Inst.  1.  tit.  11.

8.12.)

The  Lex  Aelia  Sentia  laid  various  restrictions  on
manumission  [Lex  Aelia  Sentia],  particularly  as
to  slaves  under  thirty  years  of  age.  The  ceremony
of  manumitting  slaves  above  thirty  years  of  age  had
become  very  simple  in  the  time  of  Gaius  (i.  20)  :  it


MANUMISSIO.

might  be  in  the  public  road  (in  transitu)^  as  when
the  praetor  or  proconsul  was  going  to  the  bath  or
the  theatre.  It  was  not  the  place  which  determined
the  validity  of  such  an  act,  but  it  was  the  cir-
cumstance of  its  being  done  before  a  competent
authority.

The  Lex  Furia  or  Fusia  Caninia  fixed  limits  to
the  number  of  slaves  who  could  be  manumitted  by
will.  The  number  allowed  was  a  half,  one  third,
one  fourth,  and  one  fifth  of  the  whole  number  that
the  testator  possessed,  according  to  a  scale  fixed  by
the  lex.  As  its  provisions  only  applied  to  cases
where  a  man  had  more  than  two  slaves,  the  owner
of  one  slave  or  of  two  slaves  was  not  affected  by
this  lex.  It  also  provided  that  the  slaves  to  whom
freedom  was  given,  should  be  named.  This  lex
only  applied  to  manumission  by  testament.  It
was  passed  about  A.  D.  7,  and  several  senatuscon-
Bulta  were  made  to  prevent  evasions  of  it.  (Sueton.
Octav.  40  ;  Gaius,  i.  42 — 46.)  This  lex  was  re-
pealed by  Justinian.  (Cod.  5.  tit.  3.  De  lege  Fus.
Can.  tollenda.)

A  form  of  manumission  "  inter  amicos  "  is  al-
luded to  by  Gaius.  This  was  in  fact  no  legal
manumission,  but  it  was  a  mere  expression  of  the
master's  wish,  which  would  have  been  sufficient  in
the  absence  of  all  positive  law.  This  might  be
done  by  inviting  the  slave  to  table,  writing  him  a
letter,  or  in  any  other  less  formal  way.  It  is
stated  that  originally  such  a  gift  of  freedom  could
be  recalled,  as  to  which  there  can  be  no  doubt,  as
it  was  not  legal  freedom  ;  but  ultimately  the  prae-
tor took  persons  who  had  been  made  free  in  this
manner  under  his  protection,  and  the  Lex  Junia
Norbana  gave  them  the  status  called  Latinitas.
[Lex  Junia  Norbana  ;  Latini.]

A  Manumissio  sacrorum  causa  is  sometimes
mentioned  as  a  kind  of  manumission,  whereas  the
words  Sacrorum  causa  point  rather  to  the  grounds
of  the  manumission  :  the  form  might  be  the  usual
form.  (Festus,  s.v.  Manumitti^  Puri;  Savigny,
ZeitschrifU  vol.  iii.  p.  402.)

Besides  the  due  observance  of  the  legal  forms,
it  was  necessary  in  order  to  effect  a  complete  manu-
mission that  the  manumissor  should  have  the  Qui-
ritarian  ownership  of  the  slave.  If  the  slave  was
merely  In  bonis,  he  only  became  a  Latinus  by
manumission.  A  woman  in  tutela,  and  a  pupillus
or  pupilla  could  not  manumit.  If  several  persons
were  joint  owners  (socii)  of  a  slave,  and  one  of  thera
manumitted  the  slave  in  such  form  as  would  have
effected  complete  manumission,  if  the  slave  had
been  the  sole  property  of  the  manumissor,  such
manumissor  lost  his  share  in  the  slave  which  ac-
crued to  the  other  joint  owner  or  joint  owners.
Justinian  enacted  that  if  only  one  joint  owner  was
willing  to  manumit  a  slave,  the  others  might  be
compelled  to  manumit  on  receiving  the  price  fixed
by  law  for  their  shares.  If  one  person  had  the
ususfructus  and  another  the  property  of  a  slave,
and  the  slave  was  manumitted  by  him  who  had
the  property,  he  did  not  become  free  till  the  usus-
fructus had  expired  :  in  the  meantime,  however,  he
had  no  legal  owner  (dominus).

The  act  of  manumission  established  the  relation
of  Patronus  and  Libertus  between  the  manumissor
and  the  manumitted.  [Libertus.]  When  manu-
mitted by  a  citizen,  the  Libertus  took  the  praeno
men  and  the  gentile  name  of  the  manumissor,  and
became  in  a  sense  a  member  of  the  Gens  of  his
patron.     To  these  two  names  he  added  some  other


MANUS  INJECTIO.


ni


name  as  a  cognomen,  either  some  name  by  which
he  was  previously  known,  or  some  name  assumed
on  the  occasion  :  thus  we  find  the  names  L.  Corne-
lius Chrysogonus,  M.  TuUius  Tiro,  P.  Terentius
Afer,  and  other  like  names.  If  he  was  manumitted
by  the  state  as  a  Servus  publicus,  he  received  the
civitas  and  a  praenomen  and  gentile  name,  or  he
took  that  of  the  magistratus  before  whom  he  was
manumitted.  The  slave  also  assumed  the  toga  or
dress  of  a  Roman  citizen,  shaved  his  head  and  put
on  a  pileus:  this  last  circumstance  explains  the
expression  "  servos  ad  pileum  vocare  "  (Liv.  xxiv,
32),  which  means  to  invite  the  slaves  to  join  in
some  civil  disturbance  by  promising  them  liberty.
The  relation  between  a  Patronus  and  Libertus  is
stated  under  Patronus.

At  the  time  when  Gaius  wrote,  the  peculiar
rights  of  Romiin  citizens  were  of  less  importance
than  they  had  been  under  the  republic.  He  states
that  all  slaves  who  were  manumitted  in  the  proper
form  and  under  the  proper  legal  conditions,  became
complete  Roman  citizens.  But  this  could  not  have
been  so  in  the  earliest  ages.  The  liberti  of  the
plebeians,  for  instance,  before  their  masters  ob-
tained the  honores,  could  not  be  in  a  better  con-
dition than  those  who  manumitted  them,  and  their
masters  had  not  then  the  complete  civitas.  The
want  of  ingenuitas  also  affected  their  status  ;  but
this  continued  to  be  the  case  even  under  the  empire.
[Ingenul]

According  to  Dionysius  (iv.  22),  Servius  Tullius
placed  the  libertini  in  the  four  Urbanae  Tribus.
In  B.  c.  311,  the  censor  Appius  Claudius  gave  the
libertini  a  place  in  all  the  tribes.  (Plut.  Poplicol.  7  ;
Liv.  ix.  46  ;  Diod.  xx.  36.)  In  the  year  b.  c,  304,
they  were  again  placed  in  the  four  tribus  urbanae
(Liv.  ix.  46)  ;  but  it  seems  that  the  libertini  did
not  keep  to  their  tribus,  for  in  B.  c.  220  they  were
again  placed  in  the  four  urbanae  tribus.  (Liv.  Epit.
XX.)  In  the  censorship  of  Tiberius  Gracchus,
B.  c.  1 69,  they  were  placed  in  one  of  the  tribus
urbanae  determined  by  lot  (Liv.  xlv.  15  ;  compare
Dionys.  iv.  22),  or  as  Cicero  (de  Or.  i.  9)  expresses
it,  the  father  of  Tiberius  and  Caius  Sempronii
transferred  the  libertini  (nutu  atque  verbo)  into  the
tribus  urbanae.  Subsequently  by  a  law  of  Aemilius
Scaurus,  about  B.  c.  1 1 6,  they  were  restored  to  the
four  city  tribes,  and  this  remained  their  condition
to  the  end  of  the  republic,  though  various  attempts
were  made  to  give  them  a  better  suffrage.  As  to
the  attempt  of  the  tribune,  C.  Manilius  B.  c.  58,  to
give  the  libertini  votes  in  all  the  tribes,  see  Dion
Cassius  (xxxvi.  25),  and  the  note  of  Reimarus.  As
to  the  distribution  of  the  libertini  in  the  tribus,
see  Becker,  Handbtich  der  Rom.  Alterthumer.

A  tax  was  levied  on  manumission  by  a  Lex
Manlia,  b.  c.  357:  it  consisted  of  the  twentieth
part  of  the  value  of  the  slave,  hence  called  Vicesi-
ma.     (Liv.  vii.  16,  xxvii.  10  ;  Cic.  ad  Att.  ii.  16.)

As  to  Manumissio,  see  Becker,  Handbuch  der
Horn.  Alterthumer.,  2te  Th.  Iste  Abth.  ;  Dig.  40.
tit.  1.  De  Manumissionibus.)  [G.  L.]

MANUS.     [Aes  Manuarium.]

MANUS  FERREA.     [Harpago.]

MANUS  INJE'CTIO  is  one  of  the  five  modi
or  forms  of  the  Legis  Actio  according  to  Gaius  (iv.
12).  It  was  in  effect  in  some  cases  a  kind  of
execution.  The  judicati  manus  injectio  was  given
by  the  Twelve  Tables.  The  plaintiff  (actor)  laid
hold  of  the  defendant,  using  the  formal  words
''  Quod  tu  mihi  judicatus  sive  damnatus  es  sester-


Y32,


MARIS.


t him  X  m ilia  quae  dolo  malo  non  solvisti  ob  earn
rem  ego  tibi  sestertium  x  milia  judicati  manus
injicio."  The  defendant  who  had  been  condemned
in  a  certain  sum,  had  tliirty  daj'S  allowed  him  to
make  payment  in,  and  after  that  time  he  was  liable
to  the  manus  injectio.  The  defendant  was  not
permitted  to  make  any  resistance,  and  his  only
mode  of  defence  was  to  find  some  responsible  per-
Bon  {vindex)  who  would  undertake  his  defence  {pro
eo  lege  agere).  If  he  found  no  vindex,  the  plaintiff
might  carry  the  defendant  to  his  house  and  keep
him  in  confinement  for  sixty  days,  during  which
time  his  name  and  the  amount  of  his  dei)t  were
-proclaimed  at  three  successive  nundinae.  If  no
one  paid  the  debt,  the  defendant  might  be  put  to
death  or  sold.  (Gell.  xx.  1.)  According  to  the
words  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  the  person  must  be
brought  before  the  Praetor  (in  jus),  which  of  course
means  that  he  must  be  seized  first :  if  when
brought  before  the  praetor,  he  did  not  pay  the
money  {ni  judicatum  solvit)  or  find  a  vindex,  he
might  be  carried  off  and  put  in  chains,  apparently
without  the  formality  of  an  addictio.  The  Lex
Publilia,  evidently  following  the  analogy  of  the
Twelve  Tables,  allowed  the  manus  injectio  in  the
case  of  mone)'-  paid  by  a  sponsor,  if  the  sponsor  was
not  repaid  in  six  months.  The  Lex  Furia  de
Sponsu  allowed  it  against  him  who  had  exacted
from  a  sponsor  more  than  his  just  proportion
{vir His  pars).  These  and  other  leges  allowed  the
manus  injectio  pro  judicato,  because  in  these  cases
the  claim  of  the  plaintiff  was  equivalent  to  a  claim
of  a  res  judicata.  Other  leges  granted  the  manus
injectio  pura,  that  is,  non  pro  judicato,  as  the  Lex
Furia  Testamentaria  and  the  Marcia  adversus
f -neratores.  But  in  these  cases  the  defendant  might
Avithdraw  himself  from  the  manus  injectio  (manum
sihi  depellere),  and  defend  his  cause  ;  but  it  would
appear  that  he  could  only  relieve  himself  from  this
seizure,  by  actually  undertaking  to  defend  himself
by  legal  means.  Accordingly,  if  we  follow  the
analogy  of  the  old  law,  it  was  in  these  cases  an
execution  if  the  defendant  chose  to  let  it  be  so ;
if  he  did  not,  it  was  the  same  as  serving  him
with  process  to  appear  before  the  Praetor.  A  lex,
the  name  of  which  is  obliterated  in  Gains,  allowed
the  person  seized  to  defend  his  own  cause  except
in  the  case  of  a  ."judicatus,"  and  "is  pro  quo
depensum  est  ;"  and  consequently  in  the  two  latter
cases  even  after  the  passing  of  this  lex,  a  man  was
bound  to  find  a  vindex.  This  continued  the  practice
so  long  as  the  Legis  Actiones  were  in  use  ;
"  whence,"  says  Gaius  (iv.  25),  "  in  our  time  a
man  'cum  quo  judicati  depensive  agitur'  is  com-
pelled to  give  security  '  judicatum  solvi.'  "  From
this  we  may  conclude  that  the  vindex  in  the  old
time  was  liable  to  pay,  if  he  could  find  no  good  de-
fence to  the  plaintiff's  claim  ;  for  as  the  vindex
could  "  lege  agere,"  though  the  defendant  could  not,
we  must  assume  that  he  might  show,  if  he  could,
that  the  plaintiff  had  no  ground  of  complaint ;  as.
for  instance,  that  he  had  been  paid  ;  and  that  if
he  had  no  good  defence,  he  must  pay  the  debt
himself.  The  subject  of  the  manus  injectio  is
discussed  by  Puchta,  Inst.  ii.  §  160,  162,  17.9,  iii.
§  269.  [G.  L.]

MAPPA.     [Mantele.]

MARIS  (fidpis,  fidpTji,  Hesych.  ndpKrTov),  a
Greek  measure  of  capacity,  which,  according  to
Pollux  (x.  184)  and  Aristotle  (Hist.  An.  viii.  9),
contained  6  cotylae,  or  nearly  3  pints.     Polyaenus


[J.  Y.]


MARTYRIA.

(iv.  3.  §  32)  mentions  a  much  larger  measure  of
the  same  name,  containing  10  congii,  or  nearly  8
gallons.  [P.  S.j

MARSU'PIUM  {jxapcviriov,  fiaXdvriov),  a
purse.  (Non.  Marcellus,  s.  v.  ;  Varro,  de  Ee  liust.
iii.  17  ;  Plant.  Men.  ii.  1.  29,  ii.  3.  33,  35,  v.  7.
47,  Poen.  iii.  5.  37,  Rud.  v.  2.  26  ;  Xen.  Conviv,
iv.  2.)

The  purse  used  by  the  an-
cients was  commonly  a  small
leathern  bag,  and  was  often
closf'd  by  being  drawn  together
at  the  mouth  {(Tva-rraaTa  fia-
XdvTia,  Plat.  Conviv.  p.  404,ed.
Bekker).  Mercury  is  com-
monly represented  holding  one
in  his  hand,  of  which  the  an-
nexed woodcut  from  an  intag-
lio in  the  Stosch  collection  at
Berlin,  presents  an  example.

MA'RTIA  LE'GIO.    [Exercitus,  p.  492,  b.]
MARTIA'LTS  FLAMEN.     [Flamen.]
MARTIA'LES  LUDI.    [Ludi  Martiales.]
MARTY'RIA  {ixapTvpia),  signifies  strictly  the
deposition  of  a  witness  in  a  court  of  justice,  though
the  word  is  applied  metaphorically  to  all  kinds  of
testimony.     We  shall  here  explain  —  1,  what  per-
sons were  competent  to  be  witnesses  at  Athens  ;
2,  what  was  the  nature  of  their  obligation  ;  3,  in
what  manner  their  evidence  was  given  ;  4,  what
was  the  pimishment  for  giving  false  evidence.

None  but  freemen  could  be  witnesses.  The  in-
capacity of  women  may  be  inferred  from  the  gene-
ral policy  of  the  Athenian  law,  and  the  absence  of
any  example  in  the  orators  where  a  woman ''s  evi-
dence is  produced.  The  same  observation  applies
to  minors.

Slaves  were  not  allowed  to  give  evidence,  unless
upon  examination  by  torture  {^daavos).  There
appears  to  have  been  one  exception  to  this  rule,
viz.,  that  a  slave  might  be  a  witness  against  a  free-
man in  case  of  a  charge  of  murder  (Antiph.  de
Morte  Her.  728),  though  Platner  {Alt.  Proc.  p.
215)  thinks  this  only  applied  to  the  giving  infor-
mation. The  party  who  wished  to  obtain  the  evi-
dence of  a  slave  belonging  to  his  opponent  chal-
lenged him  to  give  up  the  slave  to  be  examined
(i^rJTei  rhv  ^ovKov).  The  challenge  was  called
Trp6K\r](Tis.  The  owner,  if  he  gave  him  up,  Avas
said  eKdovpai  or  irapadovvai.  But  he  was  not
obliged  so  to  do,  and  the  general  practice  was  to
refuse  to  give  up  skives,  which  perhaps  arose  from
humanity,  though  the  opponent  always  ascribed  it
to  a  fear  lest  the  truth  should  be  elicited.  The
orators  affected  to  consider  the  evidence  of  slaves,
wrung  from  them  by  torture,  more  valuable  and
trustworthy  than  that  of  freemen  ;  but  it  must  be
observed,  they  always  use  this  argument  when  the
slave  had  not  been  examined.  (Demosth.  c.  Aphob.
848,  c.  Onet.  874  ;  Hudtwalcker,  Ueber  die  Diii-
teten,  p.  44,  &c.)

Citizens  who  had  been  disfranchised  (^ti/zoi-
/j.fvoi)  could  not  appear  as  witnesses  (any  more
than  as  jurors  or  plaintiffs)  in  a  court  of  justice  ;
for  they  had  lost  all  honourable  rights  and  pri-
vileges. (Demosth.  c.  Neaer.  1353;  Wachsmuth,
vol.  ii.  pt.  i.  p.  244.)  But  there  was  no  objection
to  alien  freemen.  (Demosth.  c.  Lacr.  927,  929  ;
Aeschin,  de  Pais.  Leg.  49,  ed.  Steph.)  We  le.am
from  Harpocration  (s.  v.  Aiafiaprvpia)  that  in  ac-
tions against  fre  >men  for  neglect  of  duty  to  their


MARTYRIA.

jtatrons  (^airoffraaiov  St/cat)  foreigners  were  not  al-
lowed to  put  in  an  affidavit,  that  the  action  was
not  maintainable  (/j-h  ilcraywyijxou  ehai).  But  this
can  hardly  be  considered  an  exception,  for  such
affidavits  gave  an  undue  advantage  to  the  party
for  whom  they  were  made.

Neither  of  the  parties  to  a  cause  was  competent
to  give  evidence  for  himself,  though  each  was  com-
pelled to  ansvver  the  questions  put  by  the  other.
The  law  declared  rolu  auTiS'iKoiu  iiravayK^s  eluai
airoKpivacrdai  aAA.7jA.ojs  rh  iparoo^cvov^  jxaprvpiiv
Se  uTj.  (Demosh.  c.  Steph.  1131.)  That  the  friends
of  the  party,  who  pleaded  for  him  (called  avvrjyo-
poi)^  were  not  incompetent  to  give  evidence,  ap-
pears from  the  fragment  of  Isaeus,  pro  Euphii.^  and
also  from  Aeschines,  who,  on  his  trial  for  miscon-
duct in  the  embassy,  calls  Phocion  to  assist  him
both  as  a  witness  and  an  advocate.  (Z)e  Fals.  Leg.
pp.  51,  53,  ed.  Steph.)

The  obligation  to  attend  as  a  witness,  both  in
civil  and  criminal  proceedings,  and  to  give  such
evidence  as  he  is  able  to  give,  arises  out  of  the
duty  which  every  man  owes  to  the  state  ;  and
there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  any  persons  (ex-
cept the  parties  themselves)  were  exempted  from
this  obligation.  The  passages  which  Platner  {Att.
Proc.  p.  217)  and  Schomann  {Att.  Proc.  p.  671)
gite  in  support  of  the  contrary  view,  prove  nothing
more  than  that  the  near  relations  of  a  party  were
reluctant  to  give  evidence  against  him  ;  whereas  the
£act  that  they  were  bound  by  law  to  give  evidence
may  be  inferred  from  Demosthenes  (c.  Aphob.  849,
850,  855).

The  party  who  desired  the  evidence  of  a  wit-
ness, summoned  him  to  attend  for  that  purpose.
The  summons  was  called  TTp6(TK\r}(ns.  (Demosth.
c.  Timoth.  1194.)  If  the  witness  promised  to
attend  and  failed  to  do  so,  he  was  liable  to  an
action  called  ^ikt]  kenroixaprvpiott.  Whether  he
promised  or  not,  he  was  bound  to  attend,  and  if
his  absence  caused  injury  to  the  party,  he  was
liable  to  an  action  (Siktj  fikaSris).  This  is  the
probable  distinction  between  these  forms  of  action,
as  to  which  there  has  been  much  doubt  (Meier
and  Schomann,  Att.  Proc.  p.  387  ;  Platner,  Att.
Proc.  p.  221.)

The  attendance  of  the  witness  was  first  required
at  the  avoLKpiais,  whei'e  he  was  to  make  his  deposi-
tion before  the  superintending  magistrate  (rfyefxchu
SiKaarTTjpiov).  The  party  iu  whose  favour  he  ap-
peared, generally  wrote  the  deposition  at  home
upon  a  whitened  board  or  tablet  (\€\evKa>/xevov
ypajxfjiaTiiov),  which  he  brought  with  him  to  the
magistrate's  office,  and,  when  the  witness  had  de-
posed thereto,  put  into  the  box  (extvov)  in  which
all  the  documents  in  the  cause  were  deposited.  If
the  deposition  were  not  prepared  beforehand,  as
must  always  have  been  the  case  when  the  party
was  not  exactly  aware  what  evidence  would  be
given,  or  when  any  thing  took  place  before  the
magistrate  which  could  not  be  foreseen,  as  for  in-
stance a  challenge,  or  question  and  answer  by  the
parties ;  in  such  a  case  it  was  usual  to  write  down
the  evidence  upon  a  waxen  tablet.  The  dilFerence
between  these  methods  was  much  the  same  as  be-
tween writing  with  a  pen  on  paper,  and  with  a
pencil  on  a  slate  ;  the  latter  could  easily  be  rubbed
out  and  written  over  again  if  necessary.  (Demosth.
c.  Steph.  1132.)  If  the  witness  did  not  attend,
his  evidence  was  nevertheless  put  into  the  box,
that  is,  such  evidence  as  the  party  intended  him


MARTYRIA.


738


to  give,  or  thought  he  might  give,  at  the  trial.  For
all  testimonial  evidence  was  required  to  be  in  writ-
ing, in  order  that  there  might  be  no  mistake  about
the  terms,  and  the  witness  might  leave  no  subter-
fuge for  himself  when  convicted  of  falsehood.
(Demosth.  c.  ^eph.  1115,  1130.)  The  av^Kpiffis
might  last  several  days,  and,  so  long  as  it  lasted,
fresh  evidence  might  be  brought,  but  none  could
be  brought  after  the  last  day,  when  the  box  was
sealed  by  the  magistrate,  and  kept  so  by  him  till
the  day  of  trial.  (Demosth.  c.  Aphob.  836,  c.  Boeot.
de  Nom.  9d9,  c.  Euerg.  et  Mnes.  1143,  c.  Conon.
1265.)

The  form  of  a  deposition  was  simple.  The  fol-
lowing example  is  from  Demosthenes  (c.  Lacr.
927)  :  —  "  Archenomides  son  of  Archedamas  of
Anagyrus  testifies,  that  articles  of  agreement  were
deposited  with  him  by  Androcles  of  Sphettus,
Nausicrates  of  Carystus,  Artemon  and  Apollodorus
both  of  Phaselus,  and  that  the  agreement  is  still  in
his  hands."  Here  we  must  observe  that  when-
ever a  document  was  put  in  evidence  at  the  trial,
as  an  agreement,  a  will,  the  evidence  of  a  slave,  a
challenge,  or  an  answer  given  by  either  party  at
the  avaKpicris^  it  was  certified  by  a  witness,  whose
deposition  was  at  the  same  time  produced  and
read.  (Demosth.  pro  Phorm.  946,  949,  957,  c.
Phaenipp.  1046,  c.  Steph.  1120.)

The  witness,  whether  he  had  attended  before
the  magistrate  or  not,  was  obliged  to  be  present  at
the  trial,  in  order  to  confirm  his  testimony.  The
only  exception  was,  when  he  was  ill  or  out  of  the
country,  in  which  case  a  commission  might  be  sent
to  examine  him.  [Ecmartyria.]  All  evidence
was  produced  by  the  party  during  his  own  speech,
the  K\e\pv5pa  being  stopped  for  that  purpose.
(Isaeus,  de  Pyrr.  her.  39,  ed.  Steph.  ;  Demosth.  c.
Eubul.  1305.)  The  witness  was  called  by  an
officer  of  the  court,  and  mounted  on  the  raised
platform  {firifia)  of  the  speaker,  while  his  deposi-
tion was  read  over  to  him  by  the  clerk  ;  he  then
signified  his  assent,  either  by  express  words,  or
bowing  his  head  in  silence.  (Lys.  de  Eratos.  Mort.
94,  ed.  Steph. ;  Aesch.  de  Fals.  Leg.  49,  ed  Steph.;
Demosth.  c.  Mid.  560,  c.  Phorm.  913,  c.  Steph.
1109.  c.  Eubul.  1305.)  In  the  editions  that  we
have  of  the  orators  we  see  sometimes  Maprvpla
written  (when  evidence  is  produced)  and  some-
times Mdprvpes.  The  student  must  not  be  de-
ceived by  this,  and  suppose  that  sometimes  the'
deposition  only  was  read,  sometimes  the  witnesses
themselves  were  present.  The  old  editors  merely
followed  the  language  of  the  orators,  who  said
"  call  the  witnesses,"  or  "  mount  up  witnesses,"  or
"  the  clerk  shall  read  you  the  evidence  "  or  some-
thing to  the  same  effect,  varying  the  expression
according  to  their  fancy.  (See  Lys.  pro  Mantith.
147,  ed.  Steph.  ;  Isaeus,  de  Pyrr.  her.  45,  ed.
Steph.  ;  Demosth.  c.  CalUpp.  1236,  c.  Neaer.
1352.)

If  the  witness  was  hostile,  he  was  required
either  to  depose  to  the  statement  read  over  to  him,
or  to  take  an  oath  that  he  knew  nothing  about  it
(papTvpelv  t)  e^ofivveiv).  One  or  the  other  he
was  compelled  to  do,  or  if  he  refused,  he  was  sen-
tenced to  pay  a  fine  of  a  thousand  drachms  to  the
state,  which  sentence  was  immediately  proclaimed
by  the  officer  of  the  court,  who  was  commanded
K\T}T€veiv  or  iKK\r}T€veiv  avrhy,  i.  e.  to  give  him
notice  tliat  he  was  in  contempt  and  had  incurred
the  fine,  (Demosth.  c.  Apliob.  850,  c.  Neaer.  1373,


734


MARTYRTA.


c.  TJieocr.  1324  ;  Aesch.  c.  Timarch.  10,  ed.  Steph.;
Isaeus,  de  Astyph.  her.  76,  ed.  Steph.,  c.  Leocr.
150,  ed.  Steph. ;  Meier  and  Schdraann,  Ati.  Proc.
p.  672  ;  Platn.  Att.  Proc.  p.  219.)

An  oath  was  usually  taken  by  the  witness  at
the  aviKpiffis,  where  he  was  sworn  by  the  opposite
party  at  an  altar  {irphs  rhv  ficofibv  i^wpKiaOr]).  If
he  had  not  attended  at  the  a.va.Kpi<ns,  he  might  be
sworn  afterwards  in  court ;  as  was  always  the  case
when  a  witness  took  the  oath  of  denial  (e|w/xo(re).
In  the  passage  just  cited  from  Lycurgus,  the  ex-
pression \a€6vTas  TO  Upa  means  nothing  more
than  touching  the  altar  or  its  appurtenances,  and
has  no  reference  to  victims.  (Valckenaer,  Opusc.
Philol.  vol.  i.  pp.  37—39.)  Whether  the  witness
was  always  bound  to  take  an  oath,  is  a  doubtful
point.  (See  Demosth.  c.  Coron.  1265,  c.  Steph.
1J19,  c.  Euhtil.  1305  ;  Aesch.  de  Fals.  Leg.  49,
ed.  Steph.  ;  Schomann,  Att.  Proc.  p.  675.)

The  oath  of  the  witness  (the  ordinary  v6^ijxos
UpKos)  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  oath
taken  by  one  of  the  parties,  or  by  some  friend  or
other  person  out  of  court,  with  a  view  to  decide
the  cause  or  some  particular  point  in  dispute.  This
was  taken  by  the  consent  of  the  adversary,  upon  a
challenge  given  and  accepted  ;  it  was  an  oath  of  a
more  solemn  kind,  sworn  by  (or  upon  the  heads  of)
the  children  of  the  party  swearing  (koto  tuv
•iraiS(i)v\  or  by  perfect  or  full-grown  victims  (/co0'
ifpav  TcAewj'),  and  often  with  curses  upon  himself
or  his  family  (kut  e'lwAejos),  and  sometimes  was
accompanied  with  peculiar  rites,  such  as  passing
through  fire  (Sjo  tou  irvpSs).  The  mother,  or
other  female  relation  of  the  party  (who  could  not
be  a  witness)  was  at  liberty  to  take  this  oath.
(Demosth.  c.  Aphob.  852,  c.  Boeot.  de  Dote,  1011,
c.  Timoth.  120;{,  c.  Callipp.  1240,  c.  Conon.  1269,
«.  Neaer.  1365  ;  Wachsmuth,  vol.  ii.  pt.  i.  p.  335 ;
Hudtwalcker,  pp.  52 — 57.)

On  some  extraordinary  occasions  we  find  that
freemen  were  put  to  the  torture  by  a  special  de-
cree of  the  people  or  the  senate  ;  as  on  the  occa-
sion of  the  mutilated  Hermes  busts  (Thirlwall,
Hist,  of  Greece,  c.  25.  p.  393) ;  and  they  were  less
scrupulous  about  aliens  than  about  citizens  ;  but
(as  a  general  rule)  it  is  certain  that  freemen  could
not  be  tortured  in  courts  of  justice,  and  even  an
emancipated  slave,  Demosthenes  says  it  would  be
an  act  of  impiety  (ouS'  '6(nov)  to  give  up  for  such
a  purpose.  (Demosth.  c.  ApJiob.  856,  c.  Timoth.
1200  ;  Meier,  Att.  Proc.  p.  684.)

With  respect  to  hearsay  evidence  see  Ec.«f  ar-
tyria:  and  with  respect  to  the  affidavit  called
Ziafiaprvpia,  see  Heres,  p.  597,  a.

We  have  hitherto  spoken  only  of  causes  which
came  before  the  dicasts  in  the  ordinary  way,  and
have  said  nothing  of  those  which  were  decided  by
the  public  arbitrators.  The  above  remarks,  how-
ever, will  equally  apply  to  the  latter,  if  the  reader
will  bear  in  mind  that  the  arbitrator  performed  the
duties  of  the  magistrate  at  the  avuKpiais  as  well  as
those  of  the  SiKaarai  at  the  trial.  He  heard  the
witnesses  and  received  the  depositions  from  day  to
day,  as  long  as  he  sat,  and  kept  the  ^x^''^^  open
until  the  last  day  (Kvpiav  rtfifpop).  (See  Demosth.
c.Mid.  541,  c.  Timoth.  1199  ;  Meier  and  Scho-
mann, Att.  Proc.  p.  676.)

If  the  witness  in  a  cause  gave  false  evidence,
the  injured  party  was  at  liberty  to  bring  an  action
against  him  (Siktj  \\/ev5ofxapTvpiuv)  to  recover  com-
pensation.    The  proceeding  was  sometimes  called


MARTYRIA.

iiriffKTiypii,  and  the  plaintiff  was  said^irjo-K^n-Tfer-
Oai  T^  juaoTi/piot  or  rip  fxaprvpi  (Isaeus,  de  Pyir.
her.  39,  de  Dicaeog.  her.  52,  ed,  Steph. ;  Demosth.
c.  Aphob.  846,  856  ;  Harpocr.  «,  v.  'ETr€(TK'i}\paTo).
This  cause  was  probably  tried  before  the  same  pre-
siding magistrate  as  the  one  in  which  the  evidence
was  given.  (Meier,  Att.  Proc.  p.  45.)  The  form
of  the  plaintiff's  bill,  and  of  the  defendant's  plea
in  denial,  will  be  found  in  Demosthenes  (c.  Steph.
1 115).  From  the  same  passage  we  also  learn  that
the  action  for  false  testimony  was  a  Tifirfrhs  ay<Si}u,
in  which  the  plaintiff  laid  his  own  damages  in  the
bill ;  and  from  Demosthenes  (c.  Aphob.  849,  859),
it  appears  that  the  dicasts  had  power  not  only
to  give  damages  to  the  plaintiff,  but  also  to  inflict
the  penalty  of  ari/xia  by  a  irpoa-Tl/jLiiffis.  (See  also
Isaeus,  de  Dicaeog.  her.  52.)  A  witness  who  had
been  a  third  time  convicted  of  giving  false  testi-
mony was  ipso  jure  disfranchised.  (Meier,  Att.
Proc.  p.  383.)  The  main  question  to  be  tried  in
the  cause  against  the  witness  was,  whether  his
evidence  was  true  or  false  ;  but  another  question
commonly  raised  was,  whether  his  evidence  was
material  to  the  decision  of  the  previous  cause.  (De-
mosth. c.  Euerg.  et  Mnes.  1139,  1161,  c.  Aphob.
853—856,  c.  Steph.  1117;  Platner.  Att.  Proc.
vol.  i.  p.  400,  &c.)

When  a  witness,  by  giving  false  evidence  against
a  man  upon  a  criminal  trial,  had  procured  his  con-
viction, and  the  convict  was  sentenced  to  such  a
punishment  (for  instance,  death  or  banishment)  as
rendered  it  impossible  for  him  to  bring  an  action,
an)'  other  person  was  allowed  to  institute  a  public
prosecution  against  the  witness,  either  by  a  ypa(p^,
or  perhaps  by  an  6tVa77eAta  or  irpoSoK-fi.  (Andoc.
de  My  St.  4c ;  Platner,  Att.  Proc.  p.  411  ;  Meier,
Att.  Proc.  p.  382.)

After  the  conviction  of  the  witness,  an  action
might  be  maintained  against  the  party  who  sub-
orned him  to  give  false  evidence,  called  S/ktj
KaKorcxviS)v.  (Demosth.  c.  Timx)th.  1201,  c.  Euerg.
et  Mnes.  1139.)  And  it  is  not  improbable  that  a
similar  action  might  be  brought  against  a  person,
who  had  procured  false  evidence  to  be  given  of  a
defendant  having  been  summoned,  after  the  con-
viction of  the  witness  in  a  ypa<pi)  i^euSoKATjrcios.
(Meier,  Att.  Proc.  p.  759.)

It  appears  that  in  certain  cases  a  man  who  had
lost  a  cause  was  enabled  to  obtain  a  reversal  of  the
judgment  (SIktj  avdSiKos),  by  convicting  a  certain
number  of  the  adverse  witnesses  of  false  testimony.
Thus  in  inheritance  causes  the  law  enacted  ^ov
a\(p  Tis  rav  rpivSofiapTvpiuv,  irdkip  e'l  apxvs
elvai  TTepl  avrSov  ray  \i]^fis.  (Isaeus,  de  Hagn.
her.  88,  ed.  Steph.,  de  Dicaeog.  her.  50,  51.)  This
was  the  more  necessary,  on  account  of  the  facility
afforded  to  the  parties  to  stop  the  progress  of  these
causes  by  affidavits,  and  also  because  no  money
could  compensate  an  Athenian  for  the  loss  of  an
inheritance.  The  same  remedy  was  given  by  the
law  to  those  who  had  been  convicted  in  a  Si'ktj
ypevdofiapTvpiMU  or  in  a  ypaxp^  ^(vias.  In  the  last
case  the  convicted  person,  who  proceeded  against
the  witness,  was  compelled  to  remain  in  prison
until  the  determination  of  his  suit.  (Demosth.
c.  Timocr.  741.)  We  are  informed  that  these  are
the  only  cases  in  which  a  judgment  was  allowed
to  be  reversed  in  this  way  ;  but  whether  there
were  not  more  cases  than  these  has  been  justly
doubted  by  Schomann  (Att.  Proc.  761).  The
Scholiast  on  Plato  (Leg.  xL  14)  is  evidently  wrong


MATRALIA.

in  supposing  that  it  was  necessary  under  the  Athe-
nian law  to  convict  more  tlian  half  tlie  number  of
the  witnesses.  This  appears  from  the  passage  above
cited  from  Isaeus  on  the  estate  of  Hagnias.

We  conclude  by  noticing  a  few  expressions.
MapTvpuv  Tiui  is  to  testify  in  favour  of  a  man,
Karafxaprvpelv  rivos  to  testify  against.  Mcprv-
piffOat  to  call  to  witness  (a  word  used  poetically),
SiafiapTvpeadai  and  sometimes  iTrifiapTvpfffdai,
rovs  irapovTaSy  to  call  upon  those  who  are  present
to  take  notice  of  what  passes,  with  a  view  to  give
evidence.  (Demosth.  c.  Euerg.  et  Mries.  1150.)
WeuSofiopTvpeTu  and  iiriopKelu  are  never  used  in-
differently, which  affords  some  proof  that  testi-
mony was  not  necessarily  on  oath.  The  fidprvs
(witness  in  the  cause)  is  to  be  distinguished  from
the  kAtjttjp  or  K\-fiTo>p,  who  merely  gave  evidence
of  the  summons  to  appear.  [C.  R.  K.]

MASTE'RES  (fxaaTripes).  [Zetetae.]
MASTI'GIA.  [Flagrum.]
MASTIGOTHORI  or  MASTIGO'NOMI
(/xa(TTiyo(p6poi  or  ^affri-yovSixoi),  the  name  of  the
lower  police  officers  in  the  Greek  states,  who  car-
ried into  execution  the  corporal  punishments  in-
flicted by  the  higher  magistrates.  Thus  Lycurgus
assigned  mastigophori  to  the  Paedonomus  at  Sparta,
who  had  the  general  superintendence  of  the  edu-
cation of  the  boys.  (Xen.  Rep.  Lac.  ii.  2,  iv.  6  ;
Plut.  Lye.  17,)  In  the  theatre  the  mastigophori
preserved  order,  and  were  stationed  for  this  pur-
pose in  the  orchestra,  near  the  thymele.  (Schol.
ad  Plat.  p.  99,  Ruhnken  ;  Lucian,  Pise.  33.)  In
the  Olympic  games  the  Pa€Sovxoi  performed  the
same  duties.  At  Athens  they  were  discharged  by
the  public  slaves,  called  bowmen  (ro^oTot),  or
Scvthiaus  (2«:v0ai).  [Demosii.]
MATARA.  [Hast A,  p.  589,  a.]
MATERFAMFLIAS.  [Matrimonium.]
MATHEMATICI.  [Astrologia.]
MATRA'LIA,  a  festival  cel<?brated  at  Rome
every  year  on  the  1 1th  of  June,  in  honour  of  the
goddess  Mater  Matuta,  whose  temple  stood  in  the
Forum  Boarium.  It  was  celebrated  only  by  Ro-
man matrons,  and  the  sacrifices  offered  to  the  god-
dess consisted  of  cakes  baked  in  pots  of  earthen-
ware. (Varro,  rfe  Ling.  Lat.  iv.  p.  31,  Bip,  ;  Ovid.
Fast.  vi.  475,  &c.)  Slaves  were  not  allowed  to
take  part  in  the  solemnities,  or  to  enter  the  temple
of  the  goddess.  One  slave,  however,  was  admitted
by  the  matrons,  but  only  to  be  exposed  to  a  humi-
liating treatment,  for  one  of  the  matrons  gave  her
a  blow  on  the  cheek  and  then  sent  her  away  from
the  temple.  The  matrons  on  this  occasion  took
with  them  the  children  of  their  sisters,  but  not
their  own,  held  them  in  their  arms,  and  prayed  for
their  welfare.  (Plut.  Camil.  5,  Quaest.  Horn.  p.
267.)  The  statue  of  the  goddess  was  then  crowned
with  a  garland,  by  one  of  the  matrons  who  had
not  yet  lost  a  husband.  (Tertull.  Monogam.  c.  17.)
The  Greek  writers  and  their  Roman  followers,
who  identify  the  Mater  Matuta  with  Leucothea  or
Ino,  explain  the  ceremonies  of  the  Matralia  by
means  of  the  mythological  stories  which  relate  to
these  Greek  goddesses.  But  the  real  import  of
the  worship  of  the  Mater  Matuta  appears  to  have
been  to  inculcate  upon  mothers  the  principle,  that
they  ought  to  take  care  of  the  children  of  their
sisters  as  much  as  of  their  own,  and  that  they
should  not  leave  them  to  careless  slaves,  the  con-
tempt for  whom  was  symbolically  expressed  by
the  infliction  of  a  blow  on  the  cheek  of  the  one


MATRIMONIUM.  735

admitted  into  the  temple.  (Compare  Hartung,  Die
Relig.  der  Romer,  vol,  ii.  p.  75.)  [L.  S-l

MATRIMO'NIUM,  NU'PTIAE  (ydf,os\
marriage.  1.  Greek.  The  ancient  Greek  legis-
lators considered  the  relation  of  marriage  as  n
matter  not  merely  of  private,  but  also  of  public  or
general  interest.  This  was  particularly  the  case
at  Sparta,  where  the  subordination  of  private  in-
terests and  happiness  to  the  real  or  supposed  exi-
gencies of  the  state  was  strongly  exemplified  in  the
regulations  on  this  subject.  For  instance,  by  the
laws  of  Lycurgus,  criminal  proceedings  might  be
taken  against  those  who  married  too  late  {ypa<p^
6^f/iyaiJ.iov)  or  unsuitably  (ypacfyi]  KaKoyafiiov)^  as
well  as  against  those  who  did  not  marry  at  all
(ypacpi)  aya/jLiov).  (Pollux,  viii.  40  ;  Plut.  Lycurg.
15.)  These  regulations  were  founded  on  the
generally  recognised  principle,  that  it  was  the  duty
of  every  citizen  to  raise  up  a  strong  and  healthy
progeny  of  legitimate  children  to  the  state.  (Miil-
ler,  Dorians,  iv.  4.  §  3.)  So  entirely,  in  fact,  did
the  Spartans  consider  the  rcKvoiroda,  or  the  pro-,
duction  of  children,  as  the  main  object  of  marriage,
and  an  object  which  the  state  was  bound  to  pro-
mote, that  whenever  a  woman  had  no  children  by
her  own  husband,  she  was  not  only  allowed,  but
even  required  by  the  laws,  to  cohabit  with  another
man.  (Xen.  de  Rep.  Lac.  i.  8.)  On  the  same
principle,  and  for  the  purpose  of  preventing
the  extinction  of  his  family,  the  Spartan  king,
Anaxfndrides,  was  allowed  to  cohabit  with  two
wives,  for  whom  he  kept  two  separate  establish-
ments :  a  case  of  bigamy,  which,  as  Herodotus
(vi.  39,  40)  observes,  was  not  at  all  consistent
with  Spartan  nor  indeed  with  Hellenic  customs.
Thus  the  heroes  of  Homer  appear  never  to  have
had  more  than  one  KovpiSirj  &\oxos  (Buttmann,
Lexilogus,  73)  ;  though  they  are  frequently  repre-
sented as  living  in  concubinage  with  one  or  more
iraKKaKai.  Solon  also  seems  to  have  viewed  mar-
riage as  a  matter  in  which  the  state  had  a  right  to
interfere,  for  we  are  told  that  his  laws  allowed  of  a
ypa(p-{]  ayajxiov^  though  the  regulation  seems  to
have  grown  obsolete  in  later  times  ;  at  any  rate
there  is  no  instance  on  record  of  its  application.
(Platner,  Process,  &c.  vol.  ii.  p.  248.)  Plato  too
may  be  quoted  to  prove  how  general  was  this  feel-
ing, for  according  to  his  laws  (Ltg.  iv.  p.  721),
any  one  who  did  not  marry  before  he  was  thirty-
five  was  punishable  not  only  with  ^.Tifila,  but  also
with  pecuniary  penalties :  and  he  expressly  states
that  in  choosing  a  wife  every  one  ought  to  consult
the  interests  of  the  state,  and  not  his  own  plea-
sure.    (Leg.  vi.  p.  773.)

But  independent  of  any  public  considerations
there  were  also  private  or  personal  reasons  (peculiar
to  the  ancients)  which  made  marriage  an  obliga-
tion. Plato  (I.  c.)  mentions  one  of  these,  viz.
the  duty  incumbent  upon  every  individual  to  pro-
vide for  a  continuance  of  representatives  to  succeed
himself  as  ministers  of  the  Divinity  (r^  ©e^  inni-
peras  avff  aurov  TrapaSiSdvai).  Another  was  the
desire  felt  by  almost  every  one,  not  merely  to  per-
petuate his  own  name,  but  also  to  prevent  his
"  heritage  being  desolate,  and  his  name  being  cut
off"  ('dirus  fi^  i^epi]fxw<T<ti(Ti  rovs  <r(peTfpa)V  avruv
o^Kovs),  and  to  lelive  some  one  who  might  make
the  customary  offerings  at  his  grave  (aAA'  tcrrai
ris  Kal  6  ivayiuv,  Isaeus  de  Apoll.  Hered.  p.  66*.
Bek.).  We  are  told  that  with  this  view  childless
persons  sometimes  adopted  children.


756


MATRIMONIUM.


The  choice  of  a  wife  among  the  ancients  was  but
rarely  grounded  upon  affection,  and  scarcely  ever
could  have  been  the  result  of  previous  acquaintance
or  familiarity.  In  many  cases  a  father  chose  for
his  son  a  bride  whom  the  latter  liad  never  seen,  or
compelled  him  to  marry  for  the  sake  of  checking
his  extravagances.  Terence  {Andria^  i.  5)  thus
illustrates  the  practice :  —

"  Pater  praeteriens  modo
Mihi  apud  forum,  uxor  tibi  ducenda  est,  Pamphile,
hodie  inquit :  para."

In  Plautus  (Trinum.  v.  2.  59)  a  son  promises  his
father  that  he  will  marry  in  these  words  :  —

**  Ego  ducam,  pater:  etiam  si  quam  aliam  jubebis."

Representations  of '  this  sort  may  indeed  be  con-
sidered as  exaggerations,  but  there  must  have  been
scenes  in  real  life  to  which  they  in  some  measure
correspond.  Nor  Avas  the  consent  of  a  female  to  a
match  proposed  for  her  generally  thought  neces-
sary :  she  was  obliged  to  submit  to  the  wishes  of
her  parents,  and  receive  from  them,  it  might  be  a
stranger  for  her  husband  and  lord.  Sophocles
thus  describes  the  lot  of  women  in  this  respect:  —
"  When  we  are  groAvn  up  (he  makes  a  female  say)
we  are  driven  away  from  oui'  parents  and  paternal
gods,"

Kai  toDt',  eTreiBav  eixppof^  C^'^^V  i"'"?
Xpew^  eTraiyeTj/,  Kal  Sok^Tu  kuXus  exeiv.

Frag.  Te^his.
So  also  in  Euripides  (Androm.  951)  Hermicne  de-
clares that  it  is  her  father's  business  to  provide  a
husband  for  her.  The  result  of  marriages  con-
tracted in  this  manner  would  naturally  be  a  want
of  confidence  and  mutual  understanding  between
husband  and  wife,  until  they  became  better  ac-
quainted with,  and  accustomed  to,  each  other.
Xenophon  (Oecon.7.%10.)  illustrates  this  with  much
naivete  in  the  person  of  Ischomachus,  who  says  of
his  newly  married  wife  :  —  "  When  at  last  she  was
manageable  (x^ipor^d-qs),  and  getting  tame  so  that
I  could  talk  with  hei',  I  asked  her,"  &c.,  &c.  By
the  Athenian  laws  a  citizen  was  not  allowed  to
marry  with  a  foreign  woman,  nor  conversely,  under
very  severe  penalties  (Dcmosth.  c.Neaer.  p,  1350);
but  promixity  by  blood  (d7x«o-T€ta),  or  consan-
guinity ((ru77^€ta),  was  not,  with  some  few  ex-
ceptions, a  bar  to  marriage  in  any  part  of  Greece  ;
direct  lineal  descent  was.  (Isaeus,  de  Ciron.  her.
p.  72.)  Thus  brothers  were  permitted  to  marry
with  sisters  even,  if  not  dfiofi^rpioi.,  or  born  from
the  same  mother,  as  Cimon  did  with  Elpinice,
though  a  connection  of  this  sort  appears  to  have
been  looked  on  with  abhorrence.  (Becker,  Chari-
kles^  vol.  ii.  p.  448.)  In  the  earlier  periods  of
society,  indeed,  we  can  easily  conceive  that  a  spirit
of  caste  or  family  pride,  and  other  causes  such  as
the  difficulties  in  the  way  of  social  intercourse  would
tend  to  make  marriages  frequent  amongst  near
relations  and  connections.  (Compare  Numbers,
c.  xxxvi.)  At  Athens,  however,  in  the  case  of  a
father  dying  intestate,  and  without  male  children,
his  heiress  had  no  choice  in  marriage  ;  she  was
compelled  by  law  to  marry  her  nearest  kinsman
not  in  the  ascending  line  ;  and  if  the  heiress  were
poor  {^riaaa)  the  nearest  unmarried  kinsman
eitlier  married  her  or  portioned  her  suitably  to  her
itink.  When  there  were  several  coheiresses,  they
were  respectively  married  to  their  kinsmen,  the
nearest  having  the  first  choice.  [Epiclerus.]  I'he


MATRIMONIUM.

heiress  in  fact,  together  with  her  inheritance,
seems  to  have  belonged  to  the  kinsmen  of  the
family,  so  that  in  early  times  a  father  could  not
give  his  daughter  (if  an  heiress)  in  marriage  with-
out their  consent.  (Miiller,  Dorians,  ii,  10.  §  4.)
But  this  was  not  the  case  according  to  the  later
Athenian  law  (Demosth.  c.  Steph.  p.  1134),  by
which  a  father  was  empowered  to  dispose  of  his
daughter  by  will  or  otherwise  ;  just  as  widows
also  were  disposed  of  in  marriage,  by  the  will  of
their  husbands,  who  were  considered  their  right-
ful guardians  (Kvpioi).  (Demosth.  c.  Aphob.
p.  814.)

The  same  practice  of  marrying  in  the  family
(oIkos),  especially  in  the  case  of  heiresses,  prevailed
at  Sparta ;  thus  Leonidas  married  the  heiress  of
Cleomenes,  as  being  her  ayxt<rTevs,  or  next  of  kin,
and  Anaxandrides  his  own  sister's  daughter.
Moreover,  if  a  father  had  not  determined  himself
concerning  his  daughter,  it  was  decided  by  the
king's  court,  who  among  the  privileged  persons  or
members  of  the  same  family  should  marry  the  heiress.
(Herod,  vi.  57  ;  Miiller,  I.  c.)  A  striking  resem-
blance to  the  Athenian  law  respecting  heiresses
is  also  found  in  the  Jewish  code,  as  detailed  in
Numbers  (c.  xxvii.  1 — 11),  and  exemplified  in
Ruth  (c.  iv.).

But  match-making  among  the  ancients  was  not,
in  default  of  any  legal  regulations,  entirely  left  to
the  care  and  forethought  of  parents,  for  we  read  of
women  who  made  a  profession  of  it,  and  who  were
therefore  called  irpojuvriaTpiai  or  Trpo/nvrjcrrpiSes.
(Pollux,  iii.  31.)  The  profession,  however,  does
not  seem  to  have  been  thought  very  honourable
nor  to  have  been  held  in  repute,  as  being  too
nearly  connected  with,  or  likely  to  be  prostituted
to,  Trpoayw'^ela.  (Plato,  Theaet.  2.  p.  150.)

Particular  daA's  and  seasons  of  the  year  were
thought  auspicious  and  favourable  for  marriaj^e
amongst  the  Greeks.  Aristotle  (PoUl.  vii.  15)
speaks  of  the  winter  generally  as  being  so  consi-
dered, and  at  Athens  the  month  Taix-qXiwv,  partly
corresponding  to  our  January,  received  its  name
from  marriages  being  frequently  celebrated  in  it.
Hesiod  {Oper.  800)  recommends  marrying  on  the
fourth  day  of  the  month,

'Ey  Se  T6Ta/)T77  firivhs  ^yeaOai  is  oIkov  ^koitlv,

but  whether  he  means  the  fourth  from  the  begin-
ning or  end  of  the  month  is  doubtful.  Euripides
{Iphig.  in  Aul.  707)  speaks  as  if  the  time  of  the
full  moon  were  thought  favourable,

in  which  he  is  confirmed  by  the  expression  Sixo-
ln7]ulSes  ea-irepcu,  or  the  full-moon  nights  in  Pin-
dar. (Isth.  vii.  45.)  That  this  prepossession,  how-
ever, was  not  general  and  permanent  appears  from
Proclus  (ad  Hesiod.  Oper.  782),  who  informs  us
that  the  Athenians  selected  for  marriages  the  times
of  new  moon  (ras  Trphs  avvoZov  T]jxepas\  i.  e.
when  the  sun  and  moon  were  in  conjunction.

There  was  also  some  difference  of  opinion,  on
which  it  is  not  worth  while  to  dilate,  about  the
proper  age  for  marrying  ;  but  generally  speaking
men  were  expected  to  marry  between  30  and  35,
and  women  about  20  or  rather  before.  (Plato,  Ley,
vi.  p.  785.)

We  proceed  now  to  explain  the  usual  prelimi-
naries and  accompaniments  of  marriage  in  various
parts  of  Greece.     The  most  important  preliminary


1


MATRIMONIUM.

at  Athens  was  the  JEnguesis  (iyyvrjais)  or  betro-
thal, which  was  in  fact  indispensable  to  the  eom-
j)!ete  validity  of  a  marriage  contract.  It  was  made
ty  the  natural  or  legal  guardian  (o  Kvpios)  of  the
bride  elect,  and  attended  by  the  relatives  of  both
parties  as  witnesses.  The  law  of  Athens  ordained,
that  all  children  bom  from  a  marriage  legally  con-
tracted in  this  respect  should  be  yvrjaioL  (Demosth.
c.  Ste})h.  p.  1134),  and  consequently,  if  sons,
la-o/j-oipoi,  or  intitled  to  inherit  equally  or  in  gavel-
kind. It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  the  issue  of
a  marriage  without  espousals  would  lose  their
heritable  rights,  which  depended  on  their  being
born  e|  oktttjs  koL  eyyvT]Tris  yvvaiKOS  :  i.  e.  from  a
citizen  and  a  legally  betrothed  wife.  The  wife's
dowry  was  also  settled  at  the  espousals.  (Meier
and  Schoraan,  p.  415.)

But  there  were  also  several  ceremonies  observed
either  on  or  immediately  before  the  day  of  mar-
riage. The  first  of  these  were  the  irporiKeia  ya-
luwu  or  TTpoyd/xsia  (Pollux,  iii.  38),  and  consisted
of  sacrifices  or  ofterings  made  to  the  ©eoi  yafXT]\ioi
or  divinities  who  presided  over  marriage.  They
are  generally  supposed  to  have  been  made  on  the
day  before  the  yd/xos  or  marriage  ;  but  there  is  a
passage  in  Euripides  {Iphig.  in  Aul.  642)  which
makes  it  probable  that  this  was  not  always  the
case.  The  sacrificer  was  the  father  of  the  bride
elect  ;  the  divinities  to  whom  the  offering  was  made
were,  according  to  Pollux  (iii.  381),  Hera  and
Artemis,  and  the  Fates,  to  whom  the  brides  elect
then  dedicated  the  airapxai  of  their  hair.  Accord-
ing to  Diodorus  Siculus  (v.  73)  they  were  Zeus
and  Hera  reXeia  (Juno  pronuba)  ;  but  they  pro-
bably varied  in  different  countries,  and  were  some-
times the  &€o\  iyx^ipioi  or  local  deities.  The
offerings  to  Artemis  were  probably  made  with  a
view  of  propitiating  her,  as  she  was  supposed  to
be  averse  to  marriage.  [Brauronia.]  We
may  also  observe  that  Pollux  uses  irpoydfi€ia  as
synonymous  with  TrporeAeta,  making  yd/xos  iden-
tical with  Te'Aos,  as  if  marriage  were  the  reAos  or
perfection  of  man's  being:  whence  r4\cios  con-
nected with  or  presiding  over  marriage  or  a  mar-
ried person,  and  S6fj.os  ^/^itcAtjs  a  house  without
a  husband  or  incomplete.  (Hom.  //.  ii.  701.)
Another  ceremony  of  almost  general  observance  on
the  wedding  day,  was  the  bathing  of  both  the
bride  and  bridegroom  in  water  fetched  from  some
particular  fountain,  whence,  as  some  think,  the
custom  of  placing  the  figure  of  a  \ouTpo(p6pos  or
*'  water-carrier  "  over  the  tombs  of  those  who  died
unmarried.  [Balneae,  p.  185,  b.]  At  Athens
the  water  was  fetched  from  the  fountain  Callirrhoe,
at  the  foot  of  the  Acropolis  (Thuc.  ii.  15.).  After
these  preliminaries  the  bride  was  generally  con-
ducted from  her  father's  to  the  house  of  the  bride-
groom at  nightfall,  in  a  chariot  {icp'  a/xd^-qs)  drawn
by  a  pair  of  mules  or  oxen,  and  furnished  with  a
K\ivis  or  kind  of  a  couch  as  a  seat.  On  either  side
of  her  sat  the  bridegroom,  and  one  of  his  most  in-
timate friends  or  relations,  who  from  his  office  was
called  irapduvfX(pos  or  vvfji<pevT'i]s  :  but  as  he  rode
in  the  carriage  (oxvi^a)  with  the  bride  and  bride-
groom, he  was  sometimes  called  the  irdpoxos
(6  eK  rpirov  6  irapoxovnevos  irdpoxos  iKhrid-q,
Harpocr.  s.  v.).  Hence  Aristophanes  (Aves,  1735)
gpeaks  of  the  "  blooming  Love  guiding  the  supple
reins,"  when  Zeus  was  wedded  to  Hera,  as  the
Zvvhs  irdpoxos  ydfxcav  ttjs  t'  ^vdaifiovos  "Hpas.

The   nuptial   procession   was  probably   accom-


MATRIMONIUM.  737

panied,  according  to  circumstances,  by  a  number  of
persons,  some  of  whom  carried  tlie  nuptial  torches
(SaSes  vv/x(j)iKai,  Aristoph.  Pax,  1318)  ;  and  in
some  places,  as  in  Boeotia,  it  was  customary  to
burn  the  axle  of  the  carriage  on  its  arrival  at  the
bridegroom's  house,  as  a  symbol  that  the  bride  was
to  remain  at  home  and  not  go  abroad.  (Plut.
Quaest.  Rom.  p.  1 1 1 ,)  If  the  bridegroom  had  been
married  before,  the  bride  was  not  conducted  to
his  house  by  himself,  but  by  one  of  his  friends,
who  was  therefore  called  vvix<payoi>y6s.  (Hesych.
s.  V.  ;  Pollux,  iii.  40.)

Both  bride  and  bridegroom  (the  former  veiled)
were  of  course  decked  out  in  their  best  attire,  with
chaplets  on  their  heads  (Becker,  Charikles,  vol.  ii.
p.  467),  and  the  doors  of  their  houses  were  hung
with  festoons  of  ivy  and  bay.  (Plut.  Amat.  10.
p.  27.)  As  the  bridal  procession  moved  along,  the
Hymenaean  song  was  sung  to  the  accompaniment
of  Lydian  flutes,  even  in  olden  times,  as  beautifullj'-
described  by  Homer  {II.  xviii.  490  ;  Hes.  Scut.
Here.  273),  and  the  married  pair  received  the
greetings  and  congratulations  of  those  who  met
them.  (Aristoph.  Pax,  1316.)  After  entering
the  bridegroom's  house,  into  which  the  bride  was
probably  conducted  by  his  mother  bearing  a  lighted
torch  (Eurip.  Phoen.  v.  311),  it  was  customary  to
shower  sweetmeats  upon  them  (KaTax^'O'/xara)  as
emblems  of  plenty  and  prosperity.  (Schol.  ad
Aristoph.  Plut.  768.)

After  this  came  the  ydfxos  or  nuptial  feast,  the
r&oiVTj  yajxiK-f},  which  was  generally  (Becker,  Clturi-
kles,  vol.  ii.  p.  469)  given  in  the  house  of  the  bride-
groom or  his  parents  ;  and  besides  being  a  festive
meeting,  served  other  and  more  important  purposes.
There  was  no  public  right  whether  civil  or  religious
connected  Avith  the  celebration  of  marriage  amongst
the  ancient  Greeks,  and  therefore  no  public  record
of  its  solemnisation.  This  deficiency  then  was  sup-
plied by  the  marriage  feast,  for  the  guests  were  of
course  competent  to  prove  the  fact  of  a  marriage
having  taken  place  ;  and  Demosthenes  (c.  Gnel.
p.  869)  says  they  were  invited  partly  with  such
views.  To  this  feast,  contrary  to  the  usual  prac-
tice amongst  the  Greeks,  women  were  invited  as
well  as  men  ;  but  they  seem  to  have  sat  at  a  separate
table,  with  the  bride  still  veiled  amongst  there.
(Lucian,  Conviv.  8  ;  Athen.  xiv.  p.  644.)  At  the
conclusion  of  this  feast  she  was  conducted  by
her  husband  into  the  bridal  chamber  ;  and  a  law
of  Solon  (Plut.  Solon,  c.  20)  required  that  on  en-
tering it  they  should  eat  a  quince  together,  as  if  to
indicate  that  their  conversation  ought  to  be  sweet
and  agreeable.  The  song  called  the  Epithalamium
(iiridaXd/xiov,  sc.  /xeXos)  was  then  sung  before  the
doors  of  the  bridal  chamber,  as  represented  by
Theocritus  in  his  18th  Idyl,  where,  speaking  of
the  marriage  of  Helen,  he  says —

Twelve  Spartan  virgins,  the  Laconian  bloom,
Choir'd  before  fair  Helen's  bridal  room  —
To  the  same  time  with  cadence  true  they  beat
The  rapid  round  of  many  twinkling  feet,
One  measure  tript,  one  song  together  sung,
Their  hyraenean  all  the  palace  rung.

Chapman.

On  which  passage  the  Scholiast  remarks  that  Epi-
thalamia  are  of  two  kinds  ;  some  sung  in  the  even-
ing, and  called  /cara/cot/ATjTt/cd,  and  others  in  the
morning  (opdpia),  and  called  SuyepriKa.

The  day  after  the   marriage,  the  first   of  the

SB


738


MATRIMONIUM.


bride's  resid' nee  in  her  new  abode,  was  called  the
iiravAia  :  on  which  their  friends  sent  the  customary
presents  to  the  newly  married  couple.  On  another
day,  the  anavXia,  perhaps  the  second  after  mar-
riage, the  bridegroom  left  his  house  to  lodge  apart
from  his  wife  at  his  father's-in-law,  and  the  bride
presented  him  with  a  garment  called  airavXiaTrjpia,
in  connection  with  which,  Pollux  (iii.  39)  observes,
that  the  gifts  made  to  the  bride  after  the  marriage
were  called  airavXia.  Some  of  the  presents  made
to  the  bride  by  her  husband  and  friends  were
called  avaKa\vivTi]pia^  as  being  given  on  the  occa-
sion of  the  bride  first  appearing  unveiled  (Harpocr,
s.  V.)  ;  they  were  probably  given  on  the  iiravKia.  or
day  after  the  marriage.

Another  ceremony  observed  after  marriage  was
the  sacrifice  which  the  husband  offered  up  on  the
occasion  of  his  bride  being  registered  amongst  his
own  phratores  {yaix-qXiav,  scil.  bvaiav  tols  (ppdrop-
<Tiv  6tcr'^j'67/<:ei/,  Demosth.  c.Eubul.  pp.  1312,  1320;
Isaeus,  de  Pyrr.  her.  p.  45).

The  statement  above  made  of  the  solemnities
connected  Avith  marriage  cannot  of  course  be  con-
sidered as  applicable  to  all  ages  and  circumstances,
but  rather  as  a  representation  of  the  customs  gene-
rally observed  at  Athens  in  later  times.

At  Sparta  the  betrothal  of  the  bride  by  her
father  or  guardian  {Kvpios)  was  requisite  as  a  pre-
liminary of  marriage,  as  well  as  at  Athens.  (Miil-
ler,  Dorians.,  ii.  4.  §  2.)  Another  custom  pecu-
liar to  the  Spartans,  and  a  relic  of  ancient  times,
was  the  seizure  of  the  bride  by  her  intended
husband  (see  Herod,  vi.  65),  but  of  course  with
the  sanction  of  her  parents  or  guardians.  (Plut.
Lycur.  15  ;  Xen.  de  Rep.  Lae.  i.  5.)  She  was
not,  however,  immediately  domiciled  in  her  hus-
band's house,  but  cohabited  with  him  for  some
time  clandestinely,  till  he  brought  her,  and  fre-
quently her  mother  also,  to  his  home.  (Muller,
Dorians,  I.e.)  A  similar  custom  appears  to  have
prevailed  in  Crete,  where,  as  we  are  told  (Strabo,
X.  p.  482),  the  young  men  when  dismissed  from
the  aycXi]  of  their  fellows,  were  immediately  mar-
ried, but  did  not  take  their  wives  home  till  some
time  afterwards.  Muller  suggests  that  the  chil-
dren of  this  furtive  kind  of  intercourse  were  called
•napQivioi.

We  subjoin  some  particulars  concerning  the  re-
lation between  man  and  wife  amongst  the  ancient
Greeks,  prefacing  them  with  a  description  of  do-
mestic married  life,  from  Lysias  {de  Cuede  Eratos.
p.  92).  The  speaker  there  says,  "  I  have  a  small
two-story  house,  of  equal  dimensions  on  the  base-
ment and  first  floor,  both  in  the  male  and  female
apartments  {Kara  t^v  yvvaiKwvlTiv  k.  t.  A..),  Now
after  our  little  boy  was  born,  his  mother  used  to
suckle  it,  and  that  she  might  not  meet  with  any
accident  in  going  down  the  ladder  {rj  /cAijua|),
whenever  she  wanted  to  wash,  I  lived  up  stairs,
and  the  women  below.  And  it  was  usual  for  my
wife  to  leave  me  very  frequently  and  sleep  down
stairs  with  the  child,  to  give  it  the  breast  and  keep
it  from  crying.  And  one  day  after  dinner  the
little  fellow  cried  and  fretted,  and  T  told  my  wife
to  go  and  suckle  it  ;  now  at  first  she  would  not,
but  at  last  I  got  angry  with  her,  and  ordered  her
to  go  :  '  yes,'  said  she,  '  that  you  may  play  with
the  servant  maid,' "  Ac.

Now,  though  the  wife,  as  appears  by  this  tale,
usually  took  her  meals  with  her  husband,  she  did
not  go  out  with  him  to  dinner,  nor  sit  at  table  with


MATRIMONIUM.

his  guests  when  he  had  conipany.  (Isaous,  de
Pyrr.  her.  p.  139  ;  Demosth.  c.  Neaer.  p.  1352.)

The  duties  of  a  good  housewife  are  summed  up
by  Plato  {Leg.  vii.  p.  805)  under  the  heads  of'
Ta/iiida,  idepaTrefa,  and  TraiSoTpocpia.  The  first  of
these  included  the  domestic  arrangements  of  the
house  and  superintendence  of  the  furniture,  provi-
sions, cookery-,  and  servants  ;  in  fact  every  thing
that  came  under  the  name  of  housekeeping.  (Becker,
Charikles,  vol.  ii.  p.  476.)  But  a  trust  of  tliis  kind
was  not  reposed  in  a  young  wife  till  she  had  gained
some  experience  ;  for  what,  says  Xenophon  (Oecow.
7.  §  4),  could  a  wife,  married  at  fifteen,  be  likely
to  know,  who  had  lived  in  complete  seclusion,  and
had  only  been  taught  by  her  mother  to  conduct
herself  virtuously  {aci}<ppov€7v)  ?  The  ^epmrda  in-
cluded the  attendance  upon  the  sick  inmates  of  the
house,  whether  free  or  slaves.  (Xen.  Oecon.  7.  §  37.)
The  irai8oTpo(pia  was  the  physical  education  of  the
children,  on  which  Plutarch  {de  Educat.  Puer.  5.
p.  9)  observes  that  mothers  ought  themselves  to
nurture  and  suckle  their  children,  though  frequently
female  citizens  were  hired  as  wet-nurses.  (Demosth.
c.Eubul.  p.  1309.)  The  Spartan  nurses  were  so
famous,  that  they  were  engaged  even  in  foreign
states  ;  thus  Alcibiades  we  are  told  was  suckled  by
a  Laconian  nurse.  (Plut.  Z^/cwr^.  16.)  It  is  scarcely
necessary  to  remark  that  we  have  been  speaking  of
the  household  of  a  citizen  in  good  circumstances,
to  which  only  our  observations  can  apply.

The  consideration  in  which  women  were  held  by
their  husbands,  and  the  respect  paid  to  them  in  an-
cient Greece,  would  naturally  depend,  in  some  de-
gree, on  their  intellectual  and  moral  character  ;  but
generally  speaking  the  Greeks  entertained  compara-
tively little  regard  for  the  female  character.  They
considered  women,  in  fact,  as  decidedly  inferior  to
men,  qualified  to  discharge  only  the  subordinate
functions  in  life,  and  rather  necessarj'^  as  help-
mates, than  agreeable  as  companions.  To  these
notions  female  education  for  the  most  part  corre-
sponded, and  in  fact  confirmed  them  ;  it  did  not
supply  the  elegant  accomplishments  and  refinement
of  manners  which  permanently  engage  the  affec-
tions, when  other  attractions  have  passed  away.
Aristotle  {de  Rep.  i.  2)  states,  that  the  relation  of
man  to  woman  is  that  of  the  governor  to  the  sub-
ject ;  and  Plato  (A/e«o,  p.  71),  that  a  woman's
virtue  may  be  summed  up  in  a  few  words,  for  she
has  only  to  manage  the  house  well,  keeping  what
there  is  in  it,  and  obeying  her  husband.  Nor  is  it
unimportant  to  remark,  that  Athenians,  in  speaking
of  their  wives  and  children,  generally  said  re'/ci/a
/cat  7i;j'ar«:as,  putting  their  wives  last:  a  phrase
which  indicates  very  clearly  what  was  the  tone  of
feeling  on  this  subject.  Moreover,  before  marriage
Grecian  women  were  kept  in  a  state  of  confinement,
which  amomited  to  little  short  of  a  deprivation  of
liberty,  so  that  they  are  even  said  to  have  been
watched  and  guarded  in  strong  apartments,

oxvpo7(n  irapOevaxri  (ppovpovvrai  Ka\us

(Eurip.  Iphig.  in  Aulid.),  nor  was  it  thought  be-
coming in  them  to  be  seen  in  public  (Eurip.  Orest.
108),  except  on  some  particular  occasions,  when
they  appeared  as  spectators  of,  or  participators  in
religious  processions  ;  of  which,  young  men  de-
sirous of  being  married  would  naturally  avail  them-
selves to  determine  the  object  of  their  choice.
Even  after  marriage  the  restrictions  imposed  upon
young  women  of  the  middle  and  higher   classes


MATRIMONIUM.

were  of  a  very  jealous  and  almost  Oriental  charac-
ter. They  occupied,  as  is  well  known,  a  separate
part  of  the  house,  and  in  the  absence  of  their  hus-
band it  was  thought  highly  improper  for  a  man
even  to  enter  where  they  were.  (Demosth.  c.  Euerg.
pp.  1157,  1150.)  From  various  passages  of  the
Attic  comedians  it  would  also  seem  that  married
women  were  required  to  keep  at  home  {olKovp^lv)^
and  not  allowed  to  go  out  of  doors  without  the
])ermission  of  their  husbands.  Thus,  in  a  fragment
of  Menander  (Meineke,  p.  87),  we  are  told  that
married  women  are  not  allowed  to  pass  the  gate  of
the  court-j-ard  of  the  house,

irepas  ydp  aijXios  ^vpa

'EXevdepa  yvvaiKl  veyS/xiaT  oIkIus  :

and  Aristophanes  (Tkesm.  p.  790)  speaks  of  their
husbands  forbidding  them  to  go  out.  Again,  on
occasions  of  great  public  alarm  (e.^r.,  when  the
news  of  the  defeat  at  Chaeroneia  reached  Athens),
the  women  are  spoken  of,  not  as  leaving  their
houses,  but  standing  at  their  doors  and  inquiring
after  the  fate  of  their  husbands,  a  circumstance
which  is  described  as  being  discreditable  to  them-
selves and  the  city  (ava^iwv  avTwv  Kal  ttjs  ■nSKcoos,
Lycurg.  c.  Leocr.  p.  53,  Bek.).  From  a  passage  in
Plutarch  (de  Gen.  Socr.  33)  it  appears  that  on  this
subject  there  was  the  same  feeling  at  Thebes  as
well  as  at  Athens  ;  and  the  same  writer  (Solo7i,  21)
informs  us  that  one  of  Solon's  laws  specified  the
conditions  and  occasions  upon  which  women  were
to  be  allowed  to  leave  their  houses.  In  later  times
there  were  magistrates  at  Athens  (the  yvvaiKovo-
fxoi),  charged,  as  their  name  denotes,  with  the
superintendence  of  the  behaviour  of  women,     [Gy-

NAECONOMI.]

But  we  must  observe  that  the  description  given
above  of  the  social  condition  and  estimation  of
women  in  Greece,  does  not  apply  to  the  Heroic
times  as  described  by  Homer,  nor  to  the  Dorian
Rtate  of  Sparta.  With  respect  to  the  former,  we
have  only  space  to  remark,  that  the  women  of  the
Homeric  times  enjoyed  much  more  freedom  and
consideration  than  those  of  later  ages,  and  that  the
connection  between  the  sexes  was  then  of  a  more
generous  and  affectionate  character  than  after-
wards. For  another  important  distinction  see  Dos
(Grkkk).     (Becker,  Charikles,  vol.  ii.  p.  415.)

Among  the  Dorians  generally,  and  in  Sparta
especially,  the  relation  of  the  wife  to  the  husband,
and  the  regard  paid  to  women,  was  for  the  most
part  the  same  as  that  represented  by  Homer  to
have  prevailed  universally  amongst  the  ancient
Greeks  ;  and  as  such,  presented  a  strong  contrast
to  the  habits  and  principles  of  the  Ionic  Athenians,
with  whom  the  ancient  custom  of  Greece,  in  this
respect,  was  in  a  great  measure  supplanted  by  that
of  the  East.  At  Sparta,  for  instance,  the  wife  was
honoured  with  the  title  of  Seanoiua  or  "mistress,''
an  appellation  not  used  unmeaningly  or  ironically,
and  which  was  common  amongst  the  Thessalians
and  other  nations  of  northern  Greece.  (Muller,  ii.
4,  §  4.)  Moreover,  the  public  intercourse  per-
mitted by  the  Dorians  between  the  sexes  was
(comparatively  at  least)  of  so  free  and  unre-
stricted a  character,  as  to  have  given  occasion
for  the  well  known  charges  of  licentiousness
(&veiTis)  against  the  Spartan  women.  (Eurip.
Androm.  586.)  The  influence,  too,  which  the
Lacedaemonian  women  enjoyed  was  so  great  that
the   Spartans  were  blamed  for  submitting  to  the


MATRIMONIUM.  739

'  yoke  of  their  wives  ;  and  even  Aristotle  {Pol.
ii.  6)  thought  it  necessary  to  account  for  the  cir-
cumstance, by  the  supposition  that  Lycurgus  had
failed  in  his  attempt  to  regulate  the  life  and  con-
duct of  the  Spartan  women  as  he  had  wished.  In
short  there  was  a  great  contrast  and  diff  rence
between  the  treatment  of  women  in  the  Dorian
and  Ionian  states  of  Greece,  which  is  well  de-
scribed by  Miiller  {I.  c.)  in  the  following  words  :  —
"  Amongst  the  lonians  women  were  merely  con-
sidered in  an  inferior  and  sensual  light,  and  though
the  Aeolians  allowed  their  feelings  a  more  exalted
tone,  as  is  proved  by  the  amatory  poetesses  of
Lesbos,  the  Dorians,  as  well  at  Sparta  as  in  the
south  of  Italy,  were  almost  the  only  nation  who
considered  the  higher  attributes  of  the  female  mind
as  capable  of  cultivation."  In  Sparta,  too,  the  un-
married women  lived  more  in  public  than  the  mar-
ried. The  former  appeared  with  their  faces  un-
covered, the  latter  veiled  ;  and  at  Sparta,  in  Crete,
and  at  Olympia,  virgins  were  permitted  to  be  spec-
tators of  the  gymnastic  contests,  and  married
women  only  were  excluded.  The  reverse  of  this
was  the  case  in  Ionia.  (Muller,  ii.  2.  §  2.)

The  preceding  investigation  will  have  prepared
the  reader  for  the  fact,  that  the  strictest  conjugal
fidelity  was  required  under  very  severe  penalties
from  the  wife  [Adulterium],  while  great  laxity
was  allowed  to  the  husband.  The  general  practice
is  thus  illustrated  by  Plautus  {Mercat.  iv.  6.  2)  :  —

"  Nam  si  vir  scortum  duxit  clam  uxorem  suam,
Id  si  rescivit  uxor,  impune  est  viro.
Uxor  viro  si  clam  domo  egressa  est  foras,
Viro  fit  causa,  exigitur  matriraonio."

In  cases  of  adultery  by  the  wife,  the  Athenian
law  subjected  the  husband  to  ariytiia,  if  he  con-
tinued to  cohabit  with  her  ;  so  that  she  was  ipso
/ado  divorced.  (Demosth.  c.A^eaer.  p.  1374.)  But
a  separation  might  be  effected  in  two  different
ways :  by  the  wife  leaving  the  husband,  or  the
husband  dismissing  the  wife.  If  the  latter  sup
posed  her  husband  to  have  acted  without  sufficient
justification  in  such  a  course,  it  was  competent  for
her  after  dismissal,  or  rather  for  her  guardians,
to  bring  an  action  for  dismissal  (St/c)/  airoirefi\l/fws
or  dTTOTTOjUTTTjs):  the  corresponding  action,  if  brought
by  the  husband,  was  a  SiK-f]  aTroAeii/zecos.  If,
however,  a  wife  were  ill-used  in  any  way  by  her
husband,  he  was  liable  to  an  action  called  a  SiK-fi
KaKwa-ecos,  so  that  the  wife  was  not  entirely  un-
protected by  the  laws :  a  conclusion  justified  by  a
fragment  in  Athenaeus  (xiii.  p.  559)  in  which
married  women  are  spoken  of  as  relying  on  its
protection.  But  a  separation,  whether  it  origi-
nated from  the  husband  or  wife,  was  considered  to
reflect  discredit  on  the  latter  (6  yap  5lav\6s  ia-riv
alax^vfl^  ^X^^i  Frag,  apiid  Stoh.  p.  6' 7,  Gaisford)
independent  of  the  difficulties  and  inconveniences
to  which  she  was  subjected  by  it.  At  Sparta
barrenness  on  the  part  of  a  wife  seems  to  have
been  a  ground  for  dismissal  by  the  husband
(Herod,  vi.  61)  ;  and  from  a  passage  iu  Dion  Chry-
sostom  {Orat.  xv.  p.  447)  it  has  been  inferred  that
women  Avere  in  the  habit  of  imposing  supposititious
children  with  a  view  of  keeping  (/carao-xetj')
their  husbands  :  not  but  that  the  word  admits  of,
if  indeed  it  does  not  (from  the  tense)  require,  a
different  interpretation.

This  article  has  been  mainly  composed  from
Becker's  Charikles  (vol,  ii.  p,  415).     The  duties  of
3b  2


740


MATRIMONIUM.


an  Athenian  wife  are  stated  somewhat  in  detail  by
Xenophon  (Oeconom.  ad  init.).  [R.  W.]

2.  Roman.  A  Roman  marriage  was  called
Justae  Nuptiae,  Justum  Matrimonium,  Legitimiim
Matrimonium,  as  being  conformable  to  Jus  Civile
or  to  Roman  Law.  A  marriage  Avas  either  Cum
conventione  uxoris  in  manum  viri,  or  it  was  with-
out this  conventio.  In  both  cases  there  must  be
connubiura  between  the  parties,  and  consent :  the
male  must  also  be  pubes,  and  the  woman  viri
potens.  The  legal  consequences  as  to  the  poAver
of  the  father  over  his  children  were  the  same  in
both.  Opposed  to  the  Legitimura  Matrimonium
was  the  Matrimonium  Juris  Gentium.

A  Roman  marriage  may  be  viewed.  First  with
reference  to  the  conditions  required  for  a  Justum
Matrimonium  ;  Secondly,  with  reference  to  the
forms  of  the  marriage  ;  Thirdly,  with  reference  to
its  legal  consequences.

Unless  there  was  connubium  there  could  be  no
Roman  marriage.  Connubium  is  defined  by  Ul-
pian  {Frag.  v.  3)  to  be  "  uxoris  jure  ducendae
facultas,"  or  the  faculty  by  which  a  man  may  make
a  woman  his  lawful  wife.  But  in  truth  this  is  no
definition  at  all,  nor  does  it  give  any  information.
Conmibium  is  merely  a  term  which  comprehends
all  the  conditions  of  a  legal  marriage.  Accordingly,
the  term  is  explained  by  particular  instances :
*'  Roman  men  citizens,**'  says  Ulpian,  **  have  con-
nubium with  Roman  women  citizens  (Romana^
elves)  ;  but  with  Latinae  and  Peregrinae  only  in
those  cases  where  it  has  been  permitted.  With
slaves  there  is  no  connubium."

Sometimes  connubium,  that  is  the  faculty  of
contracting  a  Roman  marriage,  is  viewed  with  re-
ference to  one  of  its  most  important  consequences,
namely,  the  Patria  Potestas:  "for,"  says  Gains,
*'  since  it  is  the  eflfect  of  Connubium  that  the
children  follow  the  condition  of  their  father,  it
results  that  when  Connubium  exists,  the  children
are  not  only  Roman  citizens,  but  are  also  in  the
power  of  their  father."  Generally,  it  may  be
stated  that  there  was  only  connubium  between
Homan  citizens :  the  cases  in  which  it  at  any  time
existed  between  parties,  not  both  Roman  citizens,
were  exceptions  to  the  general  rule.  Originally,
or  at  least  at  one  period  of  the  Republic,  there
was  no  Connubium  between  the  Patricians  and
the  Plebeians  ;  but  this  was  altered  by  the  Lex
Canuleia  which  allowed  Connubium  between  per-
sons of  those  two  classes.

There  was  no  connubium  between  many  persons
with  respect  to  one  another,  who  had  severally
connubium  with  respect  to  other  persons.  Thus
there  were  various  degrees  of  consanguinity  within
which  there  was  no  connubium.  There  was  no
connubium  between  parent  and  child,  whether  the
relation  was  natural  or  by  adoption  ;  and  a  man
could  not  marry  an  adopted  daughter  or  grand-
daughter, even  after  he  had  emancipated  her.
There  was  no  connubium  between  brothers  and
sisters,  whether  of  the  whole  or  of  the  half  blood :
but  a  man  might  marry  a  sister  by  adoption  after
her  emancipation,  or  after  his  own  emancipation.
It  became  legal  to  marry  a  brother's  daughter
after  Claudius  had  set  the  example  by  marrying
Agrippina  ;  but  the  rule  was  not  carried  further
than  the  example,  and  in  the  time  of  Gains  it  re-
mained unlawful  for  a  man  to  marry  his  sister's
daughter.  (Gaius,  i.  62  ;  Tacit.  Ann.  xii.  5  ;
Sucton.  Claud.  26.)


MATRIMONIUM.

There  was  no  connubium  also  between  persons
within  certain  relations  of  affinity,  as  between  a
man  and  his  socrus,  nurus,  privigna,  and  noverca.

Any  illegal  union  of  a  male  and  female,  though
affecting  to  be,  was  not  a  marriage  :  the  man  had
no  legal  wife,  and  the  children  had  no  legal  father  ;
consequently  they  were  not  in  the  po  ,ver  of  their
reputed  father.  These  restrictions  as  to  marriage
were  not  founded  on  any  enactments :  they  were
a  part  of  that  large  mass  of  Roman  law  which  be-
longs to  Jus  Moribus  Constitutum.

The  marriage  of  Domitius,  afterwards  the  em-
peror Nero,  with  Octavia  the  daughter  of  Claudius,
seems  at  first  sight  somewhat  irregular.  Nero  was
adopted  by  Claudius  by  a  Lex  Curiata  (Tacit.
Ann.  xii.  26),  but  he  was  already  his  son-in-law ;
at  least  the  sponsalia  are  mentioned  before  the
adoption.  (Tacit.  Ann.  xii.  9.)  There  seems  to  be
no  rule  of  law  which  would  prevent  a  man  from
adopting  his  son-in-law  ;  though  if  the  adoption
took  place  before  the  marriage,  it  would  be  illegal,
as  stated  by  Gaius.

Persons  who  had  certain  bodily  imperfections,
as  eunuchs,  and  others  who  from  any  cause  could
never  attain  to  puberty,  could  not  contract  mar-
riage ;  for  though  pubertas  was  in  course  of  time
fixed  at  a  positive  age  [Impubes],  yet  as  the
foundation  of  the  notion  of  pubertas  was  physical
capacity  for  sexual  intercourse,  there  could  be  no
pubertas  if  there  was  a  physical  incapacity.

The  essence  of  marriage  was  consent,  and  the
consent,  says  Ulpian,  "  both  of  those  who  come
together,  and  of  those  in  whose  power  they  are  ; "
and  "  marriage  is  not  effected  by  sexual  union,  but
by  consent."  Those  then  who  were  not  sui  juris,
had  not,  strictly  speaking,  connubium,  or  the
"  uxoris  jure  ducendae  facultas  ;"  though  in  an-
other sense,  they  had  connubium  by  virtue  of  the
consent  of  those  in  whose  power  they  were,  if
there  was  no  other  impediment.  (Dig.  23.  tit.  1.
s.  11—13.)

The  Lex  Julia  et  Papia  Poppaea  placed  certain
restrictions  on  marriage  as  to  the  parties  between
whom  it  could  take  place.  [Julia  et  Papia
Poppaea  ;  Infamia.]

A  man  could  only  have  one  lawful  wife  at  a
time  ;  and  consequently  if  he  were  married,  and
divorced  his  wife,  a  second  marriage  would  be  no
marriage,  unless  the  divorce  were  effectual.

The  marriage  Cum  conventione  in  manum  dif-
fered from  that  Sine  conventione,  in  the  relation-
ship which  it  effected  betvveen  the  husband  and
the  wife  ;  the  marriage  Cum  conventione  was  a
necessary  condition  to  make  a  woman  a  mater-
familias.  By  the  marriage  Cum  conventione,  the
wife  passed  into  the  familia  of  her  husband,  and
was  to  him  in  the  relation  of  a  daughter,  or  as  it
was  expressed,  "  in  manum  convenit."  (Cic.  Top.
3  ;  filiae  loco  est,  Gaius,  ii.  159.)  In  the  marriage
Sine  conventione,  the  wife's  relation  to  her  own
familia  remained  as  before,  and  she  was  merely
Uxor.  "  Uxor,"  says  Cicero  {Top.  3),  "  is  a  gciuis
of  which  there  are  two  species  ;  one  is  mater-
familias,  'quae  in  manum  convenit ;'  the  other  is
uxor  only."  Accordingly  a  materfamilias  is  a  wife
who  is  in  manu,  and  in  the  familia  of  her  hus-
band, and  consequently  one  of  his  sui  heredes  ;  or
in  the  manus  of  him  in  whose  power  her  husband
is.  A  wife  not  in  manu  was  not  a  member  of  her
husband's  familia,  and  therefore  the  term  could  not
apply  to  her.    Gellius  (xviii.  6)  also  states  that  this


MATRIMONIUM.

wns  the  old  meaning  of  materfamilias.  Matrona
was  properly  a  wife  not  in  nianu,  and  equivalent
to  Cicero's  "  tantummodo  uxor;"  and  she  was
called  matrona  before  she  had  any  children.  But
these  words  are  not  always  used  in  these  their
original  and  proper  meanings.  (See  Ulp.  Frag,  iv.)

No  forms  were  requisite  in  marriage  ;  the  best
evidence  of  marriage  was  cohabitation  matrimonii
causa.  The  matrimonii  causa  might  be  proved
by  various  kinds  of  evidence.  A  marriage  Cum
conventione  might  be  effected  by  Usus,  Farreum,
and  Coemptio.

If  a  woman  lived  with  a  man  for  a  whole  year
as  his  wife,  she  became  in  manu  viri  by  virtue  of
this  matrimonial  cohabitation.  The  consent  to  live
together  as  man  and  wife  was  the  marriage :  the
usys  for  a  year  had  the  manus  as  its  result  ;  and
this  was  by  analogy  to  Usucapion  of  movables
generally,  in  which  usiis  for  one  year  gave  owner-
ship. The  Law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  provided
that  if  a  woman  did  not  wish  to  come  into  the
manus  of  her  husband  in  this  manner,  she  should
absent  herself  from  him  annually  for  three  nights
(trinodium)  and  so  break  the  usus  of  the  year.
(Gell.  iii.  2  ;  Gains,  i.  111.)  The  Twelve  Tables
probably  did  not  introduce  the  usus  in  the  case  of
a  woman  cohabiting  with  a  man  matrimonii  causa,
any  more  than  they  probablj^  did  in  the  case  of
other  things  ;  but  as  in  the  case  of  other  things
they  fixed  the  time  within  which  the  usus  should
have  its  full  effect,  so  they  established  a  positive
rule  as  to  what  time  should  be  a  sufficient  inter-
ruption of  usus  in  the  case  of  matrimonial  cohabit-
ation, and  such  a  positive  rule  was  obviously
necessary  in  order  to  determine  what  should  be  a
sufficient  legal  interruption  of  usus.

Farreum  was  a  form  of  marriage,  in  which  cer-
tain words  were  used  in  the  presence  of  ten  wit-
nesses, and  were  accompanied  by  a  certain  religious
ceremony  in  which  panis  farreus  was  employed  ;
and  hence  this  form  of  marriage  was  also  called
Confarreatio.  This  form  of  marriage  must  have
fallen  generally  into  disuse  in  the  time  of  Gains,
who  remarks  (i.  112)  that  this  legal  form  of  mar-
riage (hoe  jus)  was  in  use  even  in  his  time  for  the
marriages  of  the  Flamines  Majores  and  some  others.
This  passage  of  Gains  is  defective  in  the  MS.,  but
its  general  sense  may  be  collected  from  comparing
it  with  Tacitus  (Ann.  iv.  16)  and  Servius  (ad
Aeneid.  iv.  104,  374).  It  appears  that  certain
priestly  offices,  such  as  that  of  Flamen  Dialis,  could
only  be  held  by  those  who  were  born  of  parents
who  had  been  married  by  this  ceremony  (confar-
reati  parentes).  Even  in  the  time  of  Tiberins,  the
ceremony  of  confarreatio  was  only  observed  by  a
few.  As  to  divorce  between  persons  married  by
confarreatio,  see  Divortium.

The  confarreatio  is  supposed  to  have  been  the
mode  of  contracting  marriage  among  the  patricians,
and  it  was  a  religious  ceremony  which  put  the
wife  in  manu  viri.

Coemptio  was  effected  by  Mancipatio,  and  con-
sequently the  wife  was  in  manciple.  (Gains,  i.  1 1 8.)
A  woman  who  was  cohabiting  with  a  man  as  uxor,
might  come  into  his  manus  by  this  ceremony,  in
which  case  the  coemptio  was  said  to  be  matrimonii
causa,  and  she  who  was  formerly  uxor  became
apud  maritum  filiae  loco.  If  the  coemptio  was  ef-
fected at  the  time  of  the  marriage,  it  was  still  a
separate  act-  The  other  coemptio  which  was
called  fiduciae  causa  and  which  was  between  a


MATRIMONIUM.  741

woman  and  a  man  not  her  husband,  is  considered
under  Testamentum  and  Tutela.  If,  how-
ever, an  uxor  made  a  coemptio  with  her  husband,
not  matrimonii  causa,  but  fiduciae  causa,  the  con-
sequence was  that  she  was  in  manu,  and  thereby
acquired  the  rights  of  a  daughter.  It  is  stated  by
a  modern  writer,  that  the  reason  why  a  woman
did  not  come  in  manicipium  by  the  coemptio,  but
only  in  mauum,  is  this,  that  she  was  not  mancipated,
but  mancipated  herself,  under  the  authority  of  her
Either  if  she  was  in  his  power,  and  that  of  her
tutors,  if  she  was  not  in  the  power  of  her  father  ;
the  absurdity  of  which  is  obvious,  if  we  have  regard
to  the  form  of  mancipatio  as  described  by  Gaius  (i.
119),  who  also  speaks  (i.  118,  a)  of  mancipatio  as
being  the  form  by  which  a  parent  released  his
daughter  from  the  patria  potestas  (e  suo  Jure),
which  he  did  when  he  gave  his  daughter  in  manum
viri.  The  mancipatio  must  in  all  cases  have  been
considered  as  legally  effected  by  the  father  or  the
tutors.

In  the  course  of  time,  marriage  without  the
manus  became  the  usual  marriage.  The  manus
by  usus  fell  into  desuetude.  (Gaius,  i.  111.)

Sponsalia  were  not  an  unusual  preliminary  of
marriage,  but  they  were  not  necessary.  "  Spon-
salia," according  to  Florentinus  (Dig.  23.  tit.  1.
s.  1)  "  sunt  mentio  et  repromissio  nnptiarum  futu-
rarum."  Gellius  has  preserved  (iv.  4)  an  extract
from  the  work  of  Servius  Sulpicius  Rufus  De
Dotibus,  which,  from  the  authority  of  that  great
jurist,  may  be  considered  as  unexceptionable.
(Compare  Varro,  de  Ling.  Lat.  vi.  70.)  Sponsalia,
according  to  Servius,  was  a  contract  by  stipula-
tiones  and  sponsiones,  the  former  on  the  part  of  the
future  husband,  the  latter  on  the  part  of  him  who
gave  the  woman  in  marriage.  The  woman  who
was  promised  in  marriage  was  accordingly  called
Sponsa,  which  is  equivalent  to  Promissa  ;  the  man
who  engaged  to  marry  was  called  Sponsus.  The
Sponsalia  then  were  an  agreement  to  marry,  made
in  such  form  as  to  give  each  party  a  right  of  action
in  case  of  non-performance,  and  the  offending  party
was  condemned  in  such  damages  as  to  the  Judex
seemed  just.  This  was  the  law  (jus)  of  Sponsalia,
adds  Servius,  to  the  time  when  the  Lex  Julia
gave  the  Civitas  to  all  Latium  ;  whence  we  may
conclude  that  alterations  were  afterwards  made
in  it.

The  Sponsalia  were  of  course  not  binding,  if
the  parties  consented  to  waive  the  contract  ;
and  either  party  could  dissolve  the  contract  as
either  could  dissolve  a  marriage.  If  a  person
was  in  the  relation  of  double  sponsalia  at  the
same  time,  he  was  liable  to  Infamia.  [Infa-
MiA.]  Sometimes  a  present  was  made  by  the
future  husband  to  the  future  wife  by  way  of  earn-
est (arrha,  arrha  sponsalifia),  or  as  it  was  called
propter  nuptias  donatio.  (Cod.  5.  tit.  3.)  Sponsalia
might  be  contracted  by  those  who  were  not  under
seven  years  of  age.  The  regulation  of  Augustus,
which  was  apparently  comprised  in  the  Lex  Julia
et  Papia,  which  declared  that  no  sponsalia  should
be  valid  if  the  marriage  did  not  follow  within
two  years,  was  not  always  observed.  (Sueton.
Atig.  c.  34  ;  Dion  Cass.  liv.  16,  and  the  note  of
Reimarus.)    [Infans  ;  Impubes.]

The  consequences  of  marriage  were  —

1 .  The  power  of  the  father  over  the  children  of
the  marriage,  which  was  a  completely  new  relation,
an  effect  indeed  of  marriage,  but  one  which  had  no
3b  3


742  MATRIMONIUM.

inlluence  over  the  relation  of  the  husband  and  wife.
[Patria  Potestas.]

2.  The  liabilities  of  either  of  the  parties  to  the
pnnishments  affixed  to  the  violation  of  the  mar-
riage union.     [Adulterium  ;  Divortium.]

3.  The  relation  of  husband  and  wife  with  respect
to  property,  to  which  head  belong  the  matters  of
Dos,  Donatio  inter  virum  et  uxoreni,  Donatio  propter
nuptias,  &c.  Many  of  these  matters,  however,  are
not  necessary  consequences  of  marriage,  but  the
consequence  of  certain  acts  v/hich  are  rendered  pos-
sible by  marriage.

In  the  later  Roman  history  we  often  read  of
marriage  contracts  which  have  reference  to  Dos,
and  generally  to  the  relation  of  husband  and  wife
viewed  with  reference  to  property,  A  title  of  the
Digest  (23.  tit.  4)  treats  De  Pactis  Dotalibus,
which  might  be  made  either  before  or  after  mar-
riage.

The  Roman  notion  of  marriage  was  this :  —  it  is
the  union  of  male  and  female,  a  consortship  for  the
whole  of  life,  the  inseparable  consuetude  of  life,
an  intercommunion  of  law,  sacred  and  not  sacred.
(Dig.  "23.  tit.  2.  8.  1.)  But  it  is  not  meant  that
marriage  was  to  this  extent  regulated  by  law,  for
marriage  is  a  thing  which  is,  to  a  great  extent,
beyond  the  domain  of  law.  The  definition  or  de-
scription means  that  there  is  no  legal  separation  of
the  interests  of  husband  and  wife  in  such  matters
in  which  the  separation  would  be  opposed  to  the
notion  of  marriage.  Thus  the  wife  had  the  sacra,
the  domicile,  and  the  rank  of  the  husband.  Marriage
was  established  by  consent,  and  continued  by  dis-
sent ;  for  the  dissent  of  either  party,  when  formally
expressed,  could  dissolve  the  relation.  [Divor-
tium.]

Neither  in  the  old  Roman  law  nor  in  its  later
modifications,  was  a  community  of  property  an
essential  part  of  the  notion  of  marriage  ;  unless  Ave
assume  that  originally  all  marriages  were  accom-
panied with  the  conventio  in  manum,  for  in  that
case,  as  already  observed,  the  wife  became  filiae-
familias  loco,  and  passed  into  the  familia  of  her
husband  ;  or  if  her  husband  was  in  the  power  of
his  father,  she  became  to  her  husband's  father  in
the  relation  of  a  granddaughter.  All  her  property
passed  to  her  husband  by  a  universal  succession
(Gaius,  ii.  96,  98),  and  she  could  not  thenceforward
acquire  property  for  herself.  Thus  she  was  en-
tirely removed  from  her  former  family  as  to  her
legal  status  and  became  as  the  sister  to  her  hus-
band's children.  In  other  words,  when  a  woman
came  in  manum,  there  was  a  blending  of  the  ma-
trimonial and  the  filial  relation.  It  was  a  good
marriage  without  the  relation  expressed  by  in
manu,  which  was  a  relation  of  parent  and  child
superadded  to  that  of  husband  and  wife.  The
manus  was  terminated  by  death,  loss  of  Civit<'is,
by  DifFareatio,  and  we  may  assume  by  Mancipatio.
It  is  a  1  gitimate  consequence  that  the  wife
could  not  divorce  her  husband,  though  her  hus-
band might  divorce  her,  and  if  we  assume  that  the
marriage  accompanied  by  the  cum  conventione  was
originally  the  only  form  of  marriage  (of  which,
however,  we  believe,  there  is  no  proof)  the  state-
ment of  Plutarch  [Divortium]  that  the  husband
alone  had  originally  the  power  of  effecting  a  di-
vorce, will  consist  with  this  strict  legal  deduction.
It  is  possible,  however,  that,  even  if  the  marriage
cum  conventione  was  once  the  only  marriage,  there
might  have  been  legal  means  by  which  a  wife  in


MATRIMONIUM.

manu  could  be  released  from  the  manus  ;  for  the
will  alone  would  be  sufficient  to  release  her  from
the  marriage.  In  the  time  of  Gaius  (i.  1 37),  a
woman,  after  the  repudium  was  sent,  could  de-
mand a  remancipatio.

When  there  was  no  conventio,  the  woman  re-
mained a  member  of  her  own  familia :  she  was  to
her  husband  in  the  same  relation  as  any  othei-
Roman  citizen,  differing  only  in  this  that  her  sex
enabled  her  to  become  the  mother  of  children  Avho
were  the  husband's  children  and  citizens  of  the
state,  and  that  she  owed  fidelity  to  him  so  long  as
the  matrimonial  cohabitation  continued  by  mutual
consent.  But  her  legal  status  continued  as  it  was
before  :  if  she  was  not  in  the  power  of  her  father,
she  had  for  all  purposes  a  legal  personal  existence
independently  of  her  husband,  and  consequently
her  property  was  distinct  from  his.  It  must  have
been  with  respect  to  such  marriages  as  these,  that
a  great  part  at  least  of  the  rules  of  law  relating  to
Dos  were  established  ;  and  to  such  marriages  all
the  rules  of  law  relating  to  marriage  contracts  must
have  referred,  at  least  so  long  as  the  marriage  cura
conventione  existed  and  retained  its  strict  character.

When  marriage  was  dissolved,  the  parties  to  it
might  marry  again  ;  but  opinion  considered  it  more
decent  for  a  woman  not  to  marry  again,  A  woman
was  required  by  usage  (luos)  to  wait  a  year  before
she  contracted  a  second  marriage,  on  the  pain  of
Infamia.

At  Rome,  the  matrimonium  juris  civilis  was
originally  the  only  marriage.  But  under  the  in-
fluence of  the  Jus  Gentium,  a  cohabitation  be-
tween Peregrini,  or  between  Latini,  or  between
Peregrini  and  Latini  and  Romani,  which,  in  its
essentials,  was  a  marriage,  a  consortium  omnis
vitae  with  the  afFectio  maritalis,  was  recognised  as
such  ;  and  though  such  marriage  could  not  have
all  the  effect"  of  a  Roman  marriage,  it  had  its
general  effect  in  this,  that  the  children  of  such
marriage  had  a  father.  Thus  was  established  the
notion  of  a  valid  marriage  generally,  which  mar-
riage might  be  either  Juris  Civilis  or  Juris  Gentium.
Certain  conditions  were  requisite  for  a  valid  mar-
riage generally,  and  particular  conditions  were  ne-
cessary for  a  Roman  marriage.  In  the  system  of
Justinian,  the  distinction  ceased,  and  there  re-
mained only  the  notion  of  a  valid  marriage  gene-
rally ;  which  is  the  sense  of  Justae  nuptiae  in  the
Justinian  system.  This  valid  or  legal  marriage  is
opposed  to  all  cohabitation  which  is  not  marriage  ;
and  the  children  of  such  cohabitation  have  no
father,     (Puchta,  J??*;,  iii.  §  287,)     [Infamia.]

The  above  is  only  an  outline  of  the  Law  of
Marriage,  but  it  is  sufficient  to  enable  a  student  to
carry  his  investigations  farther.  [G.  L.]

It  remains  to  describe  the  customs  and  rites
which  were  observed  by  the  Romans  at  marriages
(ritus  nupliales  or  7iuptiarum  solemnia  jiista,  rk
pofxi^o/j-eva  rwv  ydfj-ui/).  After  the  parties  had
agreed  to  marry  and  the  persons  in  whose  potestas
they  were  had  consented,  a  meeting  of  friends  was
sometimes  held  at  the  house  of  the  maiden  for  the
purpose  of  settling  the  marriage-contract,  which
was  called  sponsalia,  and  written  on  tablets  {tabu-
lae le<fitimae),  and  signed  by  both  parties.  ( Juven.
Sat.  ii,  119,  &c„  vi.  25,  200  ;  Gellius,  iv.  4.)  The
woman  after  she  had  promised  to  become  the  wife
of  a  man  was  called  sponsa,  pacta,  dicta,  or  sperata.
(Gell.  I.  c. ;  Plant.  Trinum.  ii,  4,  99  ;  Nonius,  iv.
p,  213.)      From  Juvenal  {Sat.  vi,  27)  it  appears


MATRIMONIUM.

tliat,  at  least  during  the  imperial  period,  the  man
put  a  ring  on  the  finger  of  his  betrothed,  as  a
pledge  of  his  fidelity.  This  ring  was  probably,  like
all  rings  at  this  time,  worn  on  the  left  hand,  and
on  the  finger  nearest  to  the  smallest.  (Macrob.  Sat
vii.  13.)  The  last  point  to  be  fixed  was  the  day
on  which  the  marriage  was  to  take  place.  To-
wards the  close  of  the  republic  it  had  become  cus-
tomary to  betroth  young  girls  when  they  were  yet
children  ;  Augustus  therefore  limited  the  time
during  which  a  man  was  allowed  to  continue  be-
trothed to  a  girl  (Suet.  Aug.  34),  and  forbade  men
to  be  betrothed  to  girls  before  the  latter  had  com-
pleted their  tenth  year,  so  that  the  age  of  pubertas
being  twelve  years,  a  girl  might  not  be  compelled
to  be  betrothed  longer  than  two  years.  (Dion
Cass.  liv.  p.  609,  Steph.)

The  Romans  believed  that  certain  days  were
unfortunate  for  the  performance  of  the  marriage
rites,  either  on  account  of  the  religious  character  of
those  days  them.selves,  or  on  account  of  the  days
by  which  they  were  followed,  as  the  woman  had
to  perfoiTO  certain  religions  rites  on  the  day  after
her  wedding,  which  could  not  take  place  on  a  dies
ater.  Days  not  suitable  for  entering  upon  matri-
mQny  were  the  Calends,  Nones,  and  Ides  of  every
month,  all  dies  atri,  the  whole  months  of  May
(Ovid.  Fast.  v.  490  ;  Plut.  Quaest.  Rom.  p.  284)
and  February,  and  a  great  number  of  festivals.
(Macrob.  Sat.  i.  1 5  ;  Ovid.  Fast.  ii.  557.)  Widows,
on  the  other  hand,  might  marry  on  days  which
were  inauspicious  for  maidens.  (Macrob.  Sat.  I.  c.  ;
Pint.  Qtiaest.  Bom.  p.  289.)

On  the  wedding-day,  which  in  the  early  times
was  never  fixed  upon  without  consulting  the  au-
spices (Cic.  de  Div.  i.  16  ;  Val.  Max.  ii.  1.  §  1),
the  bride  was  dressed  in  a  long  white  robe  with  a
purple  fringe  or  adorned  with  ribands.  (Juv.  ii.
124.)  This  dress  was  called  tunica  recta  (Plin.
H.  N.  viii.  48),  and  was  bound  round  the  waist
with  a  girdle  {corona.,  cingnlum.,  or  zona^  Fcst.  s.  v.
Cingulo),  which  the  husband  had  to  untie  in  the
evening.  The  bridal  veil,  called  flammeum,  Avas
of  a  bright-yellow  colour  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxi.  8  ;
Schol.  ad  Juv.  vi.  225),  and  her  shoes  likewise.
(Catull.  Ixii.  10.)  Her  hair  was  divided  on  this
occasion  with  the  point  of  a  spear.  (Ovid.  Fast.  ii.
560  ;  Arnob.  adv.  Gent.  ii.  p.  91  ;  Plut.  Quaest.
Horn.  p.  285.)

The  only  form  of  marriage  which  was  celebrated
with  solemn  religious  rites,  was  that  by  confarrea-
tio  ;  the  other  forms  being  mere  civil  acts,  were
probably  solemnised  without  any  religious  cere-
mony. In  the  case  of  a  marriage  by  confarreatio,
a  sheep  was  sacrificed,  and  its  skin  was  spread
over  two  chairs,  upon  which  the  bride  and  bride-
groom sat  down  with  their  heads  covered.  (Serv.
ad  Jen.  iv.  374.)  Hereupon  the  marriage  was
completed  by  pronouncing  a  solemn  formula  or
prayer,  after  which  another  sacrifice  was  offered.
A  cake  was  made  oi  far  and  the  mola  salsa  pre-
pared by  the  Vestal  virgins  (Serv.  ad  Virg.  Eclog.
viii.  82),  and  carried  before  the  bride  when  she
was  conducted  to  the  residence  of  her  husband.  It
is  uncertain  whether  this  cake  is  the  same  as  that
which  is  called  mastaceum  (Juv.  Sat.  vi.  201),  and
which  was  in  the  evening  distributed  among  the
guests  assembled  at  the  house  of  the  young  hus-
band.

The  bride  was  conducted  to  the  house  of  her
husband  in  the  evening.     She  was  taken  with  ap-


MATR1M0NIU3L  743

parent  violence  from  the  arms  of  her  mother,  or
of  the  person  who  had  to  give  her  away.  On  her
way  she  was  accompanied  by  three  boys  dressed  in
the  praetexta,  and  whose  fathers  and  mothers  were
still  alive  {patrimi  et  matrimi).  One  of  them  car-
ried before  her  a  torch  of  white  thorn  (spina)  or,
according  to  others,  of  pine  wood  ;  the  two  others
walked  by  her  side  supporting  her  by  the  arm.
(Fest.  s.  V.  Patrimi  et  matiimi  ;  Varro,  ap.  Chari-
sium,  i.  p.  1 17  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xvi.  18.)  The  bride
herself  carried  a  distaff  and  a  spindle  with  wool.
(Plin.  H.  N.  viii.  48  ;  Plut.  Quaest.  Rom.  p.  271.)
A  boy  called  camillus  caft-ied  in  a  covered  vase
(cumera,  cumeriim,  or  camillMm)  the  so  called
utensils  of  the  bride  and  playthinss  for  children
{crepundia.,  Fest.  s.  v.  Cumeram  ;  Plaut.  Cisiel.  iii.
1.  5).  Besides  these  persons  who  officiated  on  the
occasion,  the  procession  was  attended  by  a  nume-
rous train  of  friends  both  of  the  bride  and  the  bride-
groom, whose  attendance  was  called  officium  and
ad.  officium  venire.  (Suet.  Calig.  25,  Claud.  26.)
Plutarch  (Quaest.  Ro?n.  init.)  speaks  of  five  wax-
candles  which  were  used  at  marriages  ;  if  these
were  borne  in  the  procession,  it  must  have  been  to
light  the  company  which  followed  the  bride  ;  but
it  may  also  be  that  they  were  lighted  during  the
marriage  ceremony  in  the  house  of  the  bride.

When  the  procession  arrived  at  the  house  of  the
bridegroom,  the  door  of  which  was  adorned  with
garlands  and  flowers,  the  bride  was  carried  across
the  threshold  by  pronvhi,  i.  e.  men  who  had  only
been  married  to  one  woman,  that  she  might  not
knock  against  it  with  her  foot,  which  v/ould  have
been  an  evil  omen.  (Plut.  Quaest.  Rom.  p.  271,  c ;
Plaut.  Cas.  iv.  4.  1.)  Before  she  entered  the
house,  she  wound  wool  around  the  door-posts  of
her  new  residence,  and  anointed  them  with  lard
(adeps  suillus)  or  wolf's  fat  (adeps  lupimis,  Serv.
ad  Aen.  iv.  19;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxviii.  9).  The
husband  received  her  with  fire  and  water,  which
the  woman  had  to  touch.  This  Avas  either  a
symbolic  purification  (for  Serv,  ad  Aen.  iv.  l04.
says  that  the  newly  married  couple  washed  their
feet  in  this  water),  or  it  was  a  symbolic  expression
of  welcome,  as  the  interdicere  aqua  et  igni  was  the
formula  for  banishment.  The  bride  saluted  her
husband  with  the  words  :  uhi  tu  Caius,  ego  Caia.
(Plut.  Quaest.  Rom.  I.  c.)  After  she  had  entered
the  house  with  distaff  and  spindle,  she  was  placed
upon  a  sheepskin,  and  here  the  keys  of  the  house
were  delivered  into  her  hands.  (Fest.  s.  v.  Clavis.)
A  repast  (coma  nnptialis)  given  by  the  husband  to
the  wliole  train  of  relatives  and  friends  who  ac-
companied the  bride,  generally  concluded  the  so-
lemnity of  the  day.  (Plaut.  Cure.  v.  2.  61  ;  Suet.
Calig.  25.)  Many  ancient  writers  mention  a  very
popular  song,  Talasius  or  Talassio,  which  was  sung
at  weddings  (Plut.  Quaest.  Rom.  I.  c. ;  Liv.  i.  9  ;
Dionys.  Ant.  Rom.  ii.  31  ;  Fest.  s.  v.  Talassionem) ;
but  whether  it  was  sung  during  the  repast  or
during  the  procession  is  not  quite  clear,  though  we
may  infer  from  the  story  respecting  the  origin  of
the  song,  that  it  was  sung  while  the  procession
was  advancing  towards  the  house  of  the  husband.

It  may  easily  be  imagined  that  a  solemnity  like
that  of  marriage  did  not  take  place  among  the
merrj'^  and  humorous  Ijjilians  without  a  variety  of
jests  and  railleries,  and  Ovid  (Fast.  iii.  675)  men-
tions obscene  songs  which  were  sung  before  the
door  of  the  bridal  apartment  by  girls,  after  the
company  had  left.  These  songs  were  probably  the
3  B  4


744  MAUSOLEUM.

old  Foscennina  [Fescenmna],  and  arc  frequently
called  Epithalamia.  At  the  end  of  the  repast  the
bride  vA'as  conducted  by  matrons  who  had  not  had
more  than  one  husband  {pronuhae)^  to  the  lectus
genialis  in  the  atrium,  which  was  on  this  occasion
magnificently  adorned  and  strewed  with  flowers.
On  the  following  day  the  husband  sometimes  gave
another  entertainment  to  his  friends,  which  was
called  repotia  (Fest.  s.  v.  ;  Horat.  Sat.  ii.  2.  60),
and  the  woman  who  on  this  day  undertook  the
management  of  the  house  of  her  husband,  had  to
perform  certain  religious  rites  (Macrob.  Sat.  i.  15),
on  which  account,  as  was  observed  above,  it  was
necessary  to  select  a  day  for  the  marriage  which
was  not  followed  by  a  dies  ater.  These  rites  pro-
bably consisted  of  sacrifices  to  the  dii  Penates.
(Cic.  de  Republ.  v.  5.)

The  rites  and  ceremonies  which  have  been  men-
tioned above,  are  not  described  by  any  ancient
writer  in  the  order  in  which  they  took  place,  and
the  order  adopted  above  rests  in  some  measure
merely  upon  conjecture.  Nor  is  it,  on  the  other
hand,  clear  which  of  the  rites  belonged  to  each  of
the  three  forms  of  marriage.  Thus  much  only  is
certain,  that  the  most  solemn  ceremonies  and  those
of  a  religious  nature  belonged  to  confarreatio.

The  position  of  a  Roman  woman  after  marriage
was  very  different  from  that  of  a  Greek  woman.
The  Roman  presided  over  the  whole  household  ;
she  educated  her  children,  watched  over  and  pre-
Berved  the  honour  of  the  house,  and  as  the  mater-
familias  she  shared  the  honours  nnd  respect  shown
to  her  husband.  Far  from  being  confined  like  the
Greek  women  to  a  distinct  apartment,  the  Roman
matron,  at  least  during  the  better  centuries  of  the
republic,  occupied  the  most  important  part  of  the
house,  the  atrium.  (Compare  Lipsius,  Elect,  i.  17  ;
Biittiger,  Aldobrandin.  Hochzeit,  p.  124,  &c. ;  Rris-
sonius,  De  Ritu  Ntiptiarum^  de  Jure  Connuhii^
Paris,  1564.  12mo.)  [L.S.]

MATRO'NA.    [Matrimonium,  p.  741,  a.]

MATRONA'LIA,  also  called  MATRO-
NA'LES  FERIAE,  a  festival  celebrated  by  the
Roman  matrons  on  the  1st  of  March  in  honour  of
Juno  Lucina.  From  the  many  reasons  which  Ovid
gives  why  the  festival  was  kept  on  this  day,  it  is
evident  that  there  was  no  certain  tradition  on  the
subject ;  but  the  prevailing  opinion  seems  to  have
been  that  it  was  instituted  in  memory  of  the  peace
between  the  Romans  and  Sabines,  which  was
brought  about  by  means  of  the  Sabine  women.  At
this  festival  wives  used  to  receive  presents  from
their  husbands,  and  at  a  later  time  girls  from  their
lovers  ;  mistresses  also  were  accustomed  to  feast
their  female  slaves.  Hen.  a  we  find  the  festival
called  by  Martial  the  Saturnalia  of  women.  (Ov.
Fast.  iii.  229,  &c.  ;  Plant.  Mil.  iii.  1.  97  ;  Tibull.
iii.  1  ;  Hor.  Carm.  iii.  8  ;  Mart.  v.  84.  11  ;  Suet.
Fesp.  19  ;  Tertull.  Idol.  14  ;  comp.  Hartung,  Die
Religion  der  Rmner,  vol.  ii.  p.  65.)

MAUSOLE'UM  (Mauo-oAeTov),  which  sig-
nified originally  t/ie  sepidchre  of  Mausolus,  was
used  by  the  Romans  as  a  generic  name  for  any
magnificent  sepulchral  edifice.  (Paus.  viii.  16.  §  3.
B.  8,  and  the  Latin  Lexicons.)

The  original  building  was  the  production  of
the  piety  of  a  wealthy  queen,  and  the  skill  of
the  great  artists  of  the  later  Ionian  and  Attic
schools  of  architecture  and  sculpture.  Mauso-
lus,  the  dynast  of  Caria,  having  died  in  b.c.
353,  his  queen  Ai'teraisia  evinced  her  sorrow  by


MAUSOLEUM.

observing  his  funeral  rites  with  the  most  expen-
sive splendour,  and  by  commencing  the  erection
of  a  sepulchral  monument  to  him,  at  Halicamas-
sus,  which  should  surpass  any  thing  the  world  had
yet  seen.  (See  Diet,  of  Biog.  arts.  Artemisia.,
Mausolus.)  She  entrusted  its  erection  to  the
architects  Phileus  (or  Phiteus,  or  Pytheus)  and
Satyrus,  who  wrote  em  account  of  the  work  and  its
sculptural  decorations  ;  and  to  four  of  the  greatest
artists  of  the  new  Attic  school,  Scopas,  Bryaxis,
Leochares,  and  either  Tiniotheus  or  Praxiteles,  for
respecting  this  name,  Vitruvius  tells  us,  the  au-
thorities varied.  These  artists  worked  in  emu-
lation with  one  another,  each  upon  one  face  of  the
building,  and,  upon  the  death  of  Artemisia,  who
only  survived  her  husband  two  years,  thej^  con-
tinued their  work  as  a  labour  of  love.  Pliny  men-
tions a  fifth  artist,  Pythis,  who  made  the  marble
quadriga  on  the  summit  of  the  building.  (Vitniv.
vii.  Praef.  §  12  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvi.  5.  s.  4.  §  9  ;
Did.  of  Biog.  under  the  names  of  the  artists.)

It  was  chiefly,  Pliny  tells  us,  on  account  of  the
works  of  these  artists  that  the  Mausoleum  became
celebrated  as  one  of  the  seven  wonders  of  the  world.
Unfortunately,  however,  the  ancient  authors,  who
have  celebrated  its  magnificence,  have  furnished
us  with  such  scanty  details  of  its  construction,
that  the  restoration  of  its  plan  is  almost  hopeless.
(Strabo,  xiv.  p.  656  ;  Cic,  Tusc.  Disp.  iii.  31  ;
Gell,  X.  18 ;  Val.  Max.  iv.  6.  ext.  1  ;  Propert  iii.
2.  19;  Suid.  Harpocr.  s.  vv.  'Aprefiiaia,  Mavaw-
Aos.)  There  are,  indeed,  coins  which  give  a  re-
presentation of  it ;  but  they  are  modern  forgeries.
(Rasche,  s.  v.  ;  Eckhel,  vol.  ii.  p.  597.)  The  edi-
fice has  so  entirely  vanished,  that  even  its  site
is  doubtful,  although  some  precious  fragments  of
its  sculptures  survive,  and  are  now  in  our  own
possession.

Pliny  is  the  only  writer  who  gives  any  thing
like  a  complete  description  of  the  edifice  ;  but
even  in  this  account  there  are  considerable  diffi-
culties. The  building,  he  tells  us,  extended  63
feet  from  north  to  south,  being  shorter  on  the
fronts,  and  its  whole  circuit  was  411  feet  (or,  ac-
cording to  the  Bamberg  MS.  440)  ;  it  rose  to  the
height  of  25  cubits  (37-5-  feet)  ;  and  was  surrounded
by  36  columns.  This  part  of  the  building  was
called  Pteron.  It  was  adorned  with  sculptures  in
relief,  on  its  eastern  face  by  Scopas,  on  the
northern  by  Bryaxis,  on  the  southern  by  Timo-
theus,  on  the  western  by  Leochares.  Above  this
pteron  was  a  pyramid  equal  to  it  in  height,  dimi-
nishing by  24  steps  to  its  summit,  which  was  sur-
mounted by  the  marble  quadriga  made  by  Pythis.
The  total  height,  including  this  ornament,  was
140  feet.

The  limits  of  this  article  do  not  admit  of  a  dis-
cussion of  the  various  proposed  restorations  of  the
plan  of  the  edifice.  They  will  be  found  enume-
rated and  carefully  examined  by  Mr.  Charles
Newton,  in  a  very  valuable  essay  On  the  Sculp-
tures from  the  Mausoleum  at  Halicamassus  in  the
Classical  Afuseum  for  July,  1847,  vol.  v.  pp.  170,
foil.,  with  a  chart  of  Halicamassus,  a  restoration
of  the  Mausoleum,  and  other  illustrations.

Thus  much  is  clear  enough  from  Pliny's  ac-
count ;  that  the  edifice  was  composed  of  an  oblong
quadrangular  cella  (the  pteron)^  suirounded  by  a
peristyle  of  columns  (which  were  in  all  probability
of  the  Ionic  order),  and  elevated  on  a  basement
(for  this  supposition  presents  the  only  means  of


MAUSOLEUM.

reconciling  the  discrepancy  between  the  total  and
partial  heights),  which  j^teron  was  surmounted  by
tlie  pyramid  ;  the  sculptures  were  of  course  on  the
frieze  of  the  order.  The  other  apparent  discre-
pancy between  the  lengths  of  the  sides  and  fronts
and  the  total  circuit  of  the  building  can  only
be  satisfactorily  explained  by  supposing  that  it
stood  within  an  enclosure,  or  upon  a  platform  of
the  larger  dimensions,  namely,  440  feet  in  peri-
meter. When  we  come  to  the  details  of  the
arrangement  of  the  parts,  we  find  most  writers
giving  the  simple  explanation,  which  most  readers
of  Pliny  would  probably  adopt  at  first  sight,  that
the  36  columns,  of  which  Pliny  speaks,  formed  a
single  peristyle  all  round  the  building.  (See,  for
example,  the  restoration  in  Hirfs  Gesch.  d.  Bau-
kunst,  PI.  X.  fig.  14,  PI.  XXX.  fig.  14.)  To  this
view  there  are  very  formidable  objections  ;  and
another,  which  has  not  only  the  merit  of  being
exceedingly  ingenious,  but  the  authority  of  a
most  accomplished  architect,  is  proposed  by  Mr.
Cockerell,  in  Mr.  Newton's  Essay.  Taking  on
the  one  hand  Pliny's  63  feet  as  the  length  of  the
longer  side  of  the  peristyle,  and  on  the  other  hand,
calculating  the  dimensions  of  the  order  from  the
existing  fragments  of  the  frieze  (which,  in  the
case  of  a  work  of  that  period  of  Greek  art,  an
architect  can  do  with  as  much  certainty  as  that
with  which  Professor  Owen  can  construct  a  di-
nornis  from  a  single  tliigh-bone),  Mr.  Cockerell
arrives  at  the  conclusion  that  the  36  pillars  were
arranged,  in  a  single  row  of  six  columns  on  each
front,  and  in  a  double  row  of  eight  on  each  side,
at  intercolumniations  of  6  feet  8  inches,  around  a
long  narrow  cella,  corresponding  in  length  to  six
of  the  columns  of  the  peristyle,  and  in  width  to
two.  (See  the  plan  and  elevation  in  the  Classical
Museum,  I.  c.)

The  researches  of  the  latest  travellers  furnish  a
strong  hope  that  good  elements  for  reconstructing
the  plan  of  the  Mausoleum  may  be  found  among
the  fragments  of  columns  which  are  scattered  about
the  city  of  Budrum,  and  worked  into  its  walls.

The  building  was  still  standing  in  the  latter
part  of  the  fourth  century  after  Christ  (Gregor.
Naz.  Epiifr.  cxviii.),  and  even  as  late  as  the  tenth  ;
but  it  shared  at  length,  with  Halicarnassus  itself,  in
the  almost  total  destruction  which  fell  upon  the  cities
of  Asia  Minor.  For  its  subsequent  history,  the
question  of  its  site,  and  the  chain  of  evidence
which  proves  that  the  marbles  now  in  the  British
Museum  are  the  very  reliefs  with  which  Scopas
and  his  rivals  adorned  the  sepulchre  of  Mausolus,
the  reader  is  referred  to  the  very  interesting  ac-
count of  these  matters  given  in  Mr.  Newton's
Essay.  All  that  can  here  be  stated  is,  that  when
the  knights  of  Rhodes  built  the  citadel  of  Plali-
carnassus  (Budncm),  in  the  fifteenth  century,  or
more  probably  when  they  strengthened  its  for-
tifications in  1522,  they  used  materials  obtained
from  the  ruins  of  the  Mausoleum,  and,  among  the
rest,  they  worked  into  the  inner  wall  of  their  for-
tress some  of  the  sculptured  slabs  which  had  formed
its  frieze.  Various  travellers,  from  Thevenot  to  the
present  time,  have  described  these  marbles,  of
which  there  is  a  sketch  in  the  Jo7iian  Antiquities
of  the  Dillettanti  Society  (vol,  ii.  Supp.  PI.  ii.).
At  length  our  ambassador  at  Constantinople,  Sir
Stratford  Canning,  obtained  the  permission  of  the
Porte  for  their  removal,  and  in  February,  1846,
thoy  were  taken  down  and  conveyed  to  England,


MEDICINA.  745

and  are  now  deposited  in  the  British  Museum,
under  the  name  of  the  Biulmni  Marbles.  They
consist  of  thirteen  slabs,  of  the  uniform  height  of
3  feet  including  the  mouldings,  or  2  feet  B\  inches
without  them,  and  varying  in  length  from  2  feet
8  inches  to  6  feet  1 1  inches.  Their  total  length  is
64  feet  11  inches,  which  is  nearly  the  same  as
that  of  each  longer  side  of  the  building ;  but
they  are  evidently  from  dilFerent  faces  of  it,  as
they  cannot  all  be  arranged  in  one  continuous
composition,  though  some  of  them  are  continuous,
and  they  show  traces  of  the  hands  of  various
artists.  Their  subject  is  the  battle  of  Greek
warriors  with  Amazons,  which  was  as  favourite
a  myth  in  Ionia  and  Caria  as  it  was  in  Attica.
Their  style  is  considered  by  competent  judges
to  be  inferior  to  what  we  might  have  expected
from  artists  of  the  school  of  Scopas  and  Prax-
iteles ;  but  their  close  resemblance  to  another
bas-relief  of  the  same  school,  that  of  the  choragic
monument  of  Lysicrates,  is  admitted  ;  and  the
points  in  which  they  are  alleged  to  be  deficient
are  just  those  in  which  we  recognise  the  inferiority
of  the  later  Attic  school  to  the  perfect  art  of
Pheidias.  The  suggestion  of  Mr.  Newton,  that
accident  may  have  preserved  to  us,  out  of  the
whole  frieze,  the  inferior  works  of  Bryaxis,  Leo-
chares,  and  Timotheus,  and  not  the  better  produc-
tions of  Scopas  or  Praxiteles,  is  not  only  inconsistent,
as  he  himself  remarks,  with  Pliny's  statement  that
the  sculptures  were  regarded  as  of  equal  merit  ;
but  also,  it  is  one  of  those  gratuitous  suppositions
made  to  escape  from  a  difficulty,  which  cannot  be
admitted  without  some  positive  proof.

In  the  Roman  Mausolea  the  form  chiefly  em-
ployed was  that  of  a  succession  of  terraces  in
imitation  of  the  rogus.  Of  these  the  most  celebrated
were  those  of  Augustus  and  of  Hadrian  ;  the  latter
of  which,  stripped  of  its  ornaments,  still  forms  the
fortress  of  modern  Rome  (the  Castle  of  S.  Angelo);
but  of  the  other,  which  was  on  a  still  larger  scale,
and  which  was  considered  as  one  of  the  most
magnificent  buildings  of  Augustus,  there  are  only
some  insignificant  ruins.  (Strabo,  v.  p.  236  ;  Suet.
Aug.  100  ;  Nardini,  Roma  Antica,  vol.  iii.  p.  75,
ed.  Nibby  ;  Hirt,  Lehre  d.  Gebmide,  pp.  349 —
351,  and  restoration  of  the  monuments  in  PI.  xxx.
fig.  21,23.)  [P.S.J

MAZO'NOMUS  (naCovSfios,  dim.  fxaCom/xioUy
Athen.  v.  30,  34 ),  from  yua^a,  a  loaf,  or  a  cake  ;
properly  a  dish  for  distributing  bread :  but  the
term  is  applied  also  to  any  large  dish  used  for
bringing  meat  to  table.  (Varro,  de  Re  Rust.  iii.  4.)
These  dishes  were  made  either  of  wood  (Pollux,
vii.  87),  of  bronze  (Athen.  iv.  31),  or  of  gold
(Athen.  V.  27).  [J.  Y.J

MEDIASTPNI,  the  name  given  to  slaves,  used
for  any  common  purpose,  and  are  said  by  the
Scholiast  upon  Horace  (Ep.  i.  14.  14)  to  be  those
"  qui  in  medio  stant  ad  quaevis  imperata  parati."
The  name  is  chiefly  given  to  certain  slaves  belong-
ing to  the  familia  rustica  (Cic,  Cat.  ii,  3  ;  Colum.
i.  9,  ii,  13),  but  it  is  also  applied  sometimes  to
slaves  in  the  city.  (Dig.  4.  tit.  9.  s.  1.  §  5,  7.  tit.
7.  s.  6.)

MEDICI'NA  (torpi/cT)),  the  name  of  that
science  which,  as  Celsus  says  {de  Medic,  lib.  i.
Praefat.),  "  Sanitatem  aegris  promittit,"  and  whose
object  Hippocrates  defines  (de  Arte,  vol.  i.  p.  7,
ed.  Kiihn)  to  be  "  the  delivering  sick  persons  from
their  disease,  and  the  diminishing  the  force    of


746


MEDICINA.


sicknesses,  and  the  not  undertaking  the  treatment
of  those  who  are  quite  overcome  by  sickness,  as
we  know  that  medicine  is  here  of  no  avail."  For
other  definitions  of  the  art  and  science  of  Medi-
cine given  by  the  ancients,  see  Pseudo-Galen  (/«-
troduct.  Sev  Medicus^  c.  6.  vol.  xiv.  pp.  68fi — 8,
ed.  Kiihn).  The  invention  of  medicine  was  almost
universally  attributed  bj'  the  ancients  to  the  gods.
(Hippocr.  de  Prisca  Medic,  vol.  i.  p.  39  ;  Pseudo-
Galen,  Introd.  cap.  i.  p.  674  ;  Cic.  Tusc.  Dis.  iii.
]  •  Plin.  H.  N.  xxix.  1 .)  Another  source  of  in-
formation was  the  observing  the  means  resorted  to
by  animals  when  labouring  under  disease.  Pliny
{H,  N.  viii.  41)  gives  many  instances  in  which
these  instinctive  efforts  taught  mankind  the  pro-
perties of  various  plants,  and  the  more  simple  sur-
gical operations.  The  wild  goats  of  Crete  pointed
out  the  use  of  the  Dictamnus  and  vulnerary  herbs  ;
dogs  when  indisposed  sought  the  Triticum  repens^
and  the  same  animal  taught  to  the  Egyptians  the
use  of  purgative,  constituting  the  treatment  called
Syrmaism.  The  hippopotamus  introduced  the  prac-
tice of  bleeding,  and  it  is  affirmed  that  the  em-
ployment of  clysters  was  shown  by  the  ibis.
(Compare  Pseudo-Galen,  Introd.  c.  1,  p.  675.)
Sheep  with  worms  in  their  liver  were  seen  seeking
saline  substances,  and  cattle  affected  with  dropsy
anxiously  looked  for  chalybeate  waters.  We  are
told  (Herod,  i.  197  ;  Strab.  xvi.  c.  1,  ed.  Tauchn. ;
Pseudo-Galen,  Introd.  I.  c.)  that  the  Babylonians
and  Chaldaeans  had  no  physicians,  and  in  cases  of
sickness  the  patient  was  carried  out  and  exposed
on  the  highway,  that  any  persons  passing  by  who
had  been  affected  in  a  similar  manner,  might  give
some  information  respecting  the  means  that  had
afforded  them  relief.  Shortly  afterwards,  these  ob-
servations of  cures  were  suspended  in  the  temples
of  the  gods,  and  we  find  that  in  Egypt  the  walls
of  their  sanctuaries  were  covered  Avith  records  of
this  description.  The  priests  of  Greece  adopted
the  same  practice,  and  some  of  the  tablets  sus-
pended in  their  temples  are  of  a  curious  character,
which  will  illustrate  the  custom.  The  following
votive  memorials  are  given  by  Hieron.  Mercuri-
alis  {de  Arte  Gymnast.  Amstel.  4to.  1672,  pp.  2,  3):
— "  Some  days  back  a  certain  Caius,  who  was
blind,  learned  from  an  oracle  that  he  should  repair
to  the  temple,  put  up  his  fervent  prayers,  cross  the
sanctuary  from  right  to  left,  place  his  five  fingers
on  the  altar,  then  raise  his  hand  and  cover  his  eyes.
He  obeyed,  and  instantly  his  sight  was  restored
amidst  the  loud  acclamations  of  the  multitude.
These  signs  of  the  omnipotence  of  the  gods  were
shown  in  the  reign  of  Antoninus."  "  A  blind
soldier  named  Valerius  Apes,  having  consulted  the
oracle,  was  informed  that  he  should  mix  the  blood
of  a  white  cock  with  honey,  to  m.ake  up  an  oint-
ment to  be  applied  to  his  eyes,  for  three  conse-
cutive days :  he  received  his  sight,  and  returned
public  thanks  to  the  gods."  "  Julian  appeared
lost  beyond  all  hope  from  a  spitting  of  blood.  The
god  ordered  him  to  take  from  the  altar  some  seeds
of  the  pine,  and  to  mix  them  with  honey,  of  which
mixture  he  was  to  eat  for  three  days.  He  was
saved,  and  came  to  thank  the  gods  in  presence  of
the  people."

With  regard  to  the  medical  literature  of  the
ancients,  "  When "  (says  Littre,  Oetivres  Com-
pletes  d"" Hippocrate^  vol.  i.  Introd.  ch.  1.  p.  3)
**  one  searches  into  the  history  of  medicine  and  the
commencement  of  the  science,  the  first  body  of


MEDICINA.

doctrine  that  one  meets  with  is  the  collection  of
writings  known  under  the  name  of  the  works  of
Hippocrates.  The  science  mounts  up  directly  to
that  origin  and  there  stops.  Not  that  it  had  not
been  cultivated  earlier,  and  had  not  given  rise  to
even  numerous  productions;  but  every  thing  that
had  been  made  before  the  physician  of  Cos  has
perished.  We  have  only  remaining  of  them  scat-
tered and  unconnected  fragments  ;  the  works  of
Hippocrates  have  alone  escaped  destruction ;  and
by  a  singular  circumstance  there  exists  a  great  gap
after  them,  as  well  as  before  them.  The  medical
works  from  Hippocrates  to  the  establishment  of
the  school  of  Alexandria,  and  those  of  that  school
itself,  are  completely  lost,  except  some  quotations
and  passages  preserved  in  the  later  writers  ;  so  that
the  writings  of  Hippocrates  remain  alone  amongst
the  ruins  of  ancient  medical  literature."  The
Asclepiadae,  to  Avhich  family  Hippocrates  belonged,
were  the  supposed  descendants  of  Aesculapius
CA(TK\-r]irios),  and  were  in  a  manner  the  lieredi-
tiiry  physicians  of  Greece.  They  professed  to  have
among  them  certain  secrets  of  the  medical  art,
which  had  been  handed  down  to  them  from  their
great  progenitor,  and  founded  several  medicjil
schools  in  different  parts  of  the  world.  Galen
mentions  (De  Meth.  Med.  i.  1.  vol,  x.  pp.  5,  6')  three,
viz.,  Rhodes,  Cnidos,  and  Cos.  The  first  of  these
appears  soon  to  have  become  extinct,  and  has  left
no  traces  of  its  existence  behind.  From  the  second
proceeded  a  collection  of  observations  called  Kvi-
Stai  Tvufxai.,  "  Cnidian  Sentences,"  a  work  of  much
reputation  in  early  times,  which  is  often  mentioned
by  Hippocrates  {de  Rat.  Vict,  in  Morh.  y(ce/<.),  and
which  appears  to  have  existed  in  the  time  of
Galen.  {Commeid.  in  Hippocr.  Z/i.czV.  vol.xv.p.  427.)
The  school  of  Cos,  however,  is  by  far  the  most
celebrated,  on  account  of  the  greater  number  of
eminent  physicians  that  sprang  from  it,  and  espe-
cially from  having  been  the  birth-place  of  the  great
Hippocrates.  We  learn  ivpm  Herodotus  (iii.  131)
that  there  were  also  two  celebrated  medical  schools
at  Crotona  in  Magna  Graecia,  and  at  Cyrene  in
Africa,  of  which  he  says  that  the  former  was  in
his  time  more  esteemed  in  Greece  than  any  other,
and  in  the  next  place  came  that  of  Cyrene.  In
subsequent  times  the  medical  profession  was  di-
vided into  different  sects  ;  but  a  detailed  account
of  their  opinions  is  foreign  to  the  object  of  the
present  work.  The  oldest,  and  perhaps  the  most
influential  of  these  sects  was  that  of  the  Dogmatiei^
founded  about  B.C.  400  by  Thessalus,  the  son,  and
Polybus,  the  son-in-law  of  Hippocrates,  and  thence
called  also  the  Hippocratici.  These  retained  their
influence  till  the  rise  of  the  Empirici,  founded  by
Serapion  of  Alexandria,  and  Philinus  of  Cos,  in  the
third  century  b.  c,  and  so  called,  because  they
professed  to  derive  their  knowledge  from  expe-
rience only  ;  after  which  time  every  member  of  the
medical  profession  during  a  long  period  ranged
himself  in  one  of  these  two  sects.  In  the  first
century  B.  c,  Themison  founded  the  sect  of  the
Methodici,  who  held  doctrines  nearly  intermediate
between  those  of  the  two  sects  already  mentioned.
About  two  centuries  later  the  Methodici  were
divided  into  numerous  sects,  as  the  doctrines  of
particular  physicians  became  more  generally  re-
ceived. The  chief  of  these  sects  were  the  Pneu-
matici  and  the  Eclectici ;  the  former  founded  by
Athenaeus  about  the  middle  or  end  of  the  first
centur}'^   A.  D.  ;   the  latter  about  the   same   time


MEDICUS.

either  by  Agathinus  of  Sparta,  or  his  pupil  Arclii-
genes.

It  only  remains  to  mention  the  principal  medical
authors  after  Hippocrates  whose  works  are  still
extant,  referring  for  more  particulars  respecting
their  writings  to  the  articles  in  the  Dictionary  of
Biography.  Celsus  is  supposed  to  have  lived  in  the
Augustan  age,  and  deserves  to  be  mentioned  more
for  the  elegance  of  his  style,  and  the  neatness  and
judiciousness  of  his  compilation,  than  for  any
original  contributions  to  the  science  of  Medicine.
Dioscorides  of  Anazarba,  who  lived  in  the  first
century  after  Christ,  was  for  many  centuries  the
greatest  authority  in  Materia  Medic  a,  and  was
nhnost  as  much  esteemed  as  Galen  in  Medicine
and  Puysiology,  or  Aristotle  in  Philosophy.  Are-
taeus,  who  probably  lived  in  the  time  of  Nero,  is
an  interesting  and  striking  writer,  both  from  the
beauty  of  his  language,  and  from  the  originality  of
his  opinions.  The  next  in  chronological  order,  and
perhaps  the  most  valuable,  as  he  is  certainly  the
most  voluminous,  of  all  the  medical  writers  of  anti-
quity, is  Galen,  who  reigned  supreme  in  all  mat-
ters relating  to  his  art  till  the  commencement  of
modern  times.  He  was  born  at  Pergamus  a.  d.
131,  came  early  in  life  to  Rome,  where  he  lived  in
great  honour,  and  passed  great  part  of  his  days,
and  diedA.  D.  201.  After  him  the  only  writers
deserving  particular  notice  are  Oribasius  of  Per-
gamus, physician  to  the  emperor  Julian  in  the
fourth  century  after  Christ  ;  Aetins  of  Amida,
who  lived  probably  in  the  sixth  century  ;  Alex-
ander Trallianus,  who  lived  something  later  ;  and
Paulus  Aegineta  who  belongs  to  the  end  of  the
seventh.  [W.  A.  G.]

ME'DICUS  (tWpos),  the  name  given  by  the
ancients  to  every  professor  of  the  healing  art,
whether  physician  or  surgeon,  and  accordingly  both
divisions  of  the  medical  profession  will  here  be
included  under  that  term.  In  Greece  and  Asia
Minor  physicians  seem  to  have  been  held  in  high
esteem  ;  for,  not  to  mention  the  apotheosis  of
Aesculapius,  who  was  considered  as  the  father  of
it,  there  was  a  law  at  Athens  that  no  female  or
slave  should  practise  it  (Hyginus,  Fah.  274)  ;
Aelian  mentions  one  of  the  laws  of  Zaleucus
among  the  Epizephyrian  Locrians,  by  which  it  was
ordered  that  if  any  one  during  his  illness  should
drink  wine  contrary  to  the  orders  of  his  physician,
even  if  he  should  recover,  he  should  be  put  to
death  for  his  disobedience  {Var.  Hist.  ii.  37)  ;
and.  according  to  Mead,  there  are  extant  several
medals  struck  by  the  people  of  Smyrna  in  honour
of  different  persons  belonging  to  the  medical  pro-
fession. {Dissertatio  de  Nummis  quibusdam  a
SiTin/rnaeis  in  Medicorum  Honor  em  percussis,  4to.
Loud.  1 724.)  If  the  decree  of  the  Athenians
(published  among  the  letters  of  Hippocrates)  be
genuine,  and  if  Soranus  (in  Vita  Hippocr.)  can  be
depended  on,  the  same  honours  were  conferred
upon  that  physician  as  had  before  been  given  to
Hei-cules ;  he  was  voted  a  golden  crown,  publicly
initiated  into  the  Eleusinian  mysteries,  and  main-
tained in  the  Prytaneum  at  the  state's  expense.
(ComiKire  Plin.  H.  N.  vii.  37.)

As  there  were  no  hospitals  among  the  ancients,
the  chief  places  of  study  for  medical  pupils  were
the  'A<TKAT]Tri^7a,  or  temples  of  Aesculapius,  where
the  votive  tablets  furnished  them  with  a  collection
of  cases.  The  Asclepiadae  [Medicina]  were
very  strict  in  examining  into  and  overlooking  the


MEDICUS.


'47


character  and  conduct  of  their  pupils,  and  the
famous  Hippocratic  oath  (which,  if  not  drawn  up
by  Hippocrates  himself,  is  certainly  almost  as
ancient)  requires  to  be  inserted  here  as  being  the
most  curious  medical  monument  of  antiquity.  "  I
swear  by  Apollo  the  physician,  by  Aesculapius,
by  Hygeia,  and  Panaceia,  and  all  the  gods  and
goddesses,  calling  them  to  witness  that  I  will  fulfil
religiously,  according  to  the  best  of  my  power  and
judgment,  the  solemn  promise  and  the  written
bond  which  I  now  do  make,  I  will  honour  as
my  parents,  the  master  who  has  taught  me  this
art,  and  endeavour  to  minister  to  all  his  neces-
sities. I  will  consider  his  children  as  my  own  bro-
thers, and  will  leach  them  my  profession,  should
they  express  a  desire  to  follow  it,  without  re-
muneration or  written  bond.  I  will  admit  to
my  lessons,  my  discourses,  and  all  my  other
methods  of  teaching,  my  own  sons,  and  those  of
my  tutor,  and  those  who  have  been  inscribed  as
pupils  and  have  taken  the  medical  oath  ;  but  no
one  else.  I  will  prescribe  such  a  course  of  regimen
as  may  be  best  suited  to  the  condition  of  my
patients,  according  to  the  best  of  my  power  and
judgment,  seeking  to  preserve  them  from  any-
thing that  might  prove  injurious.  No  induce-
ment shall  ever  lead  me  to  administer  poison,  nor
will  I  ever  be  the  author  of  such  advice :  neither
will  I  contribute  to  an  abortion.  I  will  maintain
religiously  the  purity  and  integrity  both  of  my
conduct  and  of  my  art.  I  will  not  cut  any  one
for  the  stone,  but  will  leave  that  operation  to
those  who  cultivate  it.  Into  whatever  dwellings  I
may  go,  I  will  enter  them  with  the  sole  view  of
succouring  the  sick,  abstaining  from  all  injurious
views  and  corruption,  especially  from  any  immodest
action,  towards  women  or  men,  freemen  or  slaves.
If  during  my  attendance,  or  even  unprofessional! y
in  common  life,  I  happen  to  see  or  hear  of  any
circumstances  which  should  not  be  revealed,  I  will
consider  them  a  profound  secret,  and  observe  on
the  subject  a  religious  silence.  May  I,  if  I
rigidly  observe  this  my  oath,  and  do  not  break  it,
enjoy  good  success  in  life,  and  in  [the  practice  of]
my  art,  and  obtain  general  esteem  for  ever  ;  should
I  transgress  and  become  a  perjurer,  may  the  reverse
be  my  lot."

Some  idea  of  the  income  of  a  physician  in  those
times  may  be  formed  from  the  fact  mentioned  by-
Herodotus  (iii.  131)  that  the  Aeginetans  (about
the  year  B.  c.  532)  paid  Democedes  from  the
public  treasury  one  talent  per  annum  for  his  ser-
vices, ^.  e.  (if  we  reckon,  with  Hussey,  Ancient
Weights  and  Money.,  <fcc.,  the  Aeginetan  drachma
to  be  worth  Is.  3^.)  not  quite  344/. ;  he  after-
wards received  from  the  Athenians  one  hundred
minae,  i.  e.  (reckoning,  with  Hussey,  the  Attic
drachma  to  be  worth  9^.)  rather  more  than  406/.,
and  he  was  finally  attracted  to  Samos  by  being
offered  by  Polycrates  a  salary  of  two  talents,  i.  e.
(if  the  Attic  standard  be  meant)  487/.  I0«.  It
should  however  be  added,  that  Valckenaer  doubts
the  accuracy  of  this  statement  of  Herodotus  with
respect  to  the  Aeginetans  and  Athenians  (and  ap-
parently with  reason)  on  the  ground  that  the  latter
people,  at  the  time  of  .their  greatest  wealth,  only
allowed  their  ambassadors  two  drachmae  (or
Is.  7^rf.)  per  day,  i.e.  somewhat  less  than  thirty
pounds  per  annum.  (Aristoph.  Jcham.  v.  66.)  A
physician,  called  by  Pliny  both  Erasistratus  (H.  N".
xxix.  3)  and  Cleombrotus  {H.  N.  vii.  37),  is  said


r48


MEDICUS.


by  him  to  have  received  one  hundred  talents  for
curing  king  Antiochus,  which  (if  we  suppose  the
Attic  talents  of  the  standard  of  Alexander's  coin-
age to  be  meant,  which,  according  to  Hussey,  was
worth  243Z.  15s.)  would  amoimt  to  24,375/.*  It
seems  to  have  been  not  uncommon  among  the
Greeks  in  those  times  (as  afterwards  in  the  later
Roman  empire,  see  Archiater)  for  states  to
maintain  physicians,  who  were  paid  at  the  public
cost  (Xen.  Mem.  iv.  2.  §  5  ;  Plato,  Goiy.  §  23  ;
Strabo,  iv.  p.  125;  Diod.  Sic.  xii.  13);  and  these
again  had  attendants,  for  the  most  part  slaves,  who
exercised  their  calling  among  people  of  low  condi-
tion.    (Plato,  De  Leg.  iv.  p.  720,  ed.  Steph.)

The  Romans  derived  their  knowledge  of  me-
dicine at  first  from  the  Etruscans,  and  afterwards
from  the  Greeks.  One  of  the  most  ancient  cus-
toms at  Rome  in  order  to  ward  off  epidemic  dis-
eases, and  to  appease  the  anger  of  the  gods,  was
the  interrogating  the  books  bought  by  Tarquin  of
the  Sibyl.  In  the  earlier  times  of  the  Roman
republic  physicians  are  said  by  Pliny  to  have  been
unknown  (ff.  N.  xxix.  5)  ;  and  for  some  time
afterwards  the  exercise  of  the  profession  was  in  a
great  measure  confined  to  persons  of  servile  rank  ;
for  the  richer  families  having  slaves  who  were
«ikilled  in  all  sorts  of  trades,  &c.,  generally  pos-
sessed one  or  more  that  understood  medicine  and
surgery.  (Middleton's  Essay,  De  Medicoi-um  apud
Romanos  degentium  Conditioue.,  Cantab.  1 726,  4to.
and  the  various  answers  to  it  that  appeared  on  its
publication.)  To  this  practice,  however,  there
were  many  exceptions,  e.g.  the  physician  who  was
taken  prisoner  with  Julius  Caesar  by  the  pirates
at  the  island  of  Pharmacusa  (Sueton.  J.  Cues.  4),
and  who  is  called  his  friend  by  Plutarch  (see
Casaubon's  note  on  Sueton.) ;  Archagathus,  who
being  the  first  foreign  surgeon  that  settled  at
Rome,  had  a  shop  bought  for  him  at  the  public
expense,  and  was  presented  with  the  Jus  Quiritium
B.  c.  219  (Cassius  Hemina,  ap.  Plin.  H.  N.  xxix.
6) ;  Artorius,  who  is  known  to  have  been  a  phy-
sician (Cael.  Aurel.  De  Morb.  AcuL  iii.  14.  p.  224),
and  who  is  called  the  friend  of  Augustus  (Plut,
Brut.  41),  where,  however,  it  should  be  noticed
that  some  editions  read  'Autwpios  instead  of
'ApTwpios)  ;  Asclapo,  whom  Cicero  calls  his  friend
(ad  Fam.  xiii.  20)  ;  Asclepiades,  the  friend  of
C^rassus  the  orator  (Cic.  de  Orat.  L  14);  Eude-
mus,  who  is  called  by  Tacitus  (Annul,  iv.  3)  the
friend  and  physician  of  Livia ;  and  others.  The
h:itred  borne  by  Cato  the  Censor  against  the  Greek
physicians  as  well  as  the  Greek  philosophers  at
Rome  is  well  known ;  but  it  is  not  true  that  he
caused  them  to  be  expelled  from  Rome.  (See
Sprengel,  Hist,  de  la  Med.)  With  respect  to  the
income  made  by  eminent  physicians  in  the  early
times  of  Rome,  the  writer  is  not  aware  of  any
datJi  for  ascertaining  it ;  at  the  beginning  of  the
empire,  we  learn  from  Pliny  (//.  A^.  xxix.  5)  that
Albutius,  Arruntius,  Calpetanus,  Cassius,  and  Ru-
brius  gained  250,000  sesterces  per  annum,  i.  e.
(reckoning  with  Hussey  the  mille  nummi  (sester-
liuin)  to  be  worth,  after  the  reign  of  Augustus,
11.  16s.  M.)  1.953/.  2s.  Qd.;  that  Q.  Stertinius
made  it  a  favour  that  he  was  content  to  receive


*  If,  however,  the  Alexandrian  standard,  which
is  found  in  the  coins  of  the  Ptolemies,  be  meant,  it
would  amount  (reckoning  the  drachma  as  Is.  Z^l.)
to  39,375/. ;  an  almost  incredible  sum.


MEDIX  TUTICUS.

from  the  emperor  500,000  sesterces  per  annum
(or  3906/.  bs.),  as  he  might  have  made  600,000
sesterces  (or  4687/.  10s.)  by  his  private  practice;
and  that  he  and  his  brother,  who  received  the
same  annual  income  from  the  emperor  Claudius,
left  between  them  at  their  death,  notwithstanding
large  sums  that  they  had  spent  in  beautifying  the
city  of  Naples,  the  sum  of  thirty  millions  of  ses-
terces (or  234,375/.).

Of  the  previous  medical  education  necessary  to
qualify  a  physician  at  Rome  for  the  legal  practice
of  his  profession  in  the  early  times,  we  know  no-
thing ;  afterwards,  however,  this  was  under  the
superintendence  of  the  archiatri.     [Archiater.]

Two  other  medical  titles  that  we  meet  with
imder  the  emperors  were  latrosophista  (see  the
word)  and  Actuariris.,  'AKTovdpios.  The  latter  was
a  title  at  the  court  of  Constantinople,  given  appa-
rently only  to  physicians,  and  quite  distinct  from
the  use  of  the  word  found  in  the  earlier  Latin
authors.  (See  Da  Cange,  Gloss.  Grace,  vol.  i.
p.  46,  and  Possini,  Gloss,  ad  Fach/mer.  Hist.  An-
dronici,  vol.  i.  p.  366,  &c.  and  vol.  ii.  pp.  468,  469.)
Besides  Joannes  the  son  of  Zacharias,  who  is  better
known  by  his  title  of  Actuarius  than  by  his  real
name,  several  other  physicians  are  recorded  as
having  arrived  at  this  dignity.  [  W.  A.  G.]

MEDIMNUS  (jLieSiixvos  or  /ie'Sijuvos  (riTrjphs),
the  principal  dry  measure  of  the  Greeks.  It  was
used  especially  for  measuring  corn.  It  contained
6  hedes,  12  hemiecta,  4^S  choenices,  96  xestae  (sex-
tarii),  192  cotr/lae^  and  1152  cyathi.  The  Attic
medimnus  was  equal  to  six  Roman  modii,  or  two
amphorae  (Nepos,  Att.  2  ;  Cic.in  Verr.  iii.  45,  46,
49  ;    Suidas,  s.  v.  ;  Rhemn.  Fann.  v.  64.)

Suidas  makes  the  medimnus  =  108  litrae,  con-
founding it  apparently  with  the  metretes,  the  chief
Greek  fluid  measure,  which  was  three  quarters  of
the  medimnus.  The  medimnus  contained  nearly
12  imperial  gallons,  or  1^  bushel.  This  was  the
Attic  medimnus  ;  tlie  Aeginetan  and  Ptolemaic  was
half  as  much  again,  or  in  the  ratio  of  3  :  2  to  the
Attic.  For  the  values  of  the  subdivisions  of  the
medimnus  see  the  Tables.  (Bockh,  Metrol.  Unier-
such.  pp.  202—204.)  [P.  S.]

MEDITRINA'LIA  was  one  of  the  festivals
connected  with  the  cultivation  of  vineyards.  It
took  place  on  the  eleventh  of  October,  on  which
da}'  the  people  of  Latium  began  to  taste  their  new
wine  (niustum).,  and  to  offer  libations  of  it  to  the
gods.  In  drinking  the  new  wine  it  was  customary
to  pronounce  the  words  :  "  vetus  novum  vinum
bibo,  novo  veteri  morbo  medeor."  (Varro,  de  Ling.
Lot.  vi.  21  ;  Festus,  s.  v.  Meditri7ialia.)  Varro
derives  the  name  of  the  festival  from  the  healing
power  of  the  new  wine,  but  Festus  speaks  of  a
goddess  Meditrina.  [L.  S.]

MEDIX  TUTICUS,  the  name  of  the  supreme
magistrate  among  the  Oscan  people.  Medix  ap-
pears to  have  signified  a  magistrate  of  any  kind
(meddix  apud  Oscos  nomen  magistratus  est,  Festus,
s.v.  p.  123,  ed.  MUller),  and  tuticus  to  have  been
equivalent  to  magnus  or  sumnius.  Livy,  therefore,
in  calling  the  medix  tuticus  the  sunwtus  magis-
tratus, gives  a  literal  translation  of  the  word.  In
the  time  of  the  second  Punic  war,  the  Campanians
were  governed  by  the  medix  tuticus,  who  seems
to  have  been  elected  annually  (Liv.  xxiii.  35,  xxiv.
19,  xxvi.  6);  and  we  may  infer  from  a  line  of
Ennius  (apud  Fest.  s.  v.\  "  Summus  ibi  capitur
meddix,  occiditur  alter,""  that  there  was  anothei


MENELAEIA.

map[istrate  of  the  same  name  imder  him,  who
perhaps  took  his  place  in  case  of  death,  or  of  his
being  incapacitated  by  illness  or  other  causes  from
discharti;inir  his  duties.  In  Oscan  inscriptions  the
name  occm-s  in  the  form  oivieddiss  tuvtiks;  so  that
the  orthography  of  Festus  is  more  correct  than
that  of  Livy,  which  is  placed  at  the  head  of  this
article.  (Lepsius,  Inscr.  Umbr.  et  Oscae.)

MEGALE'SIA,  MEGALENSIA,  or  MEGA-
LENSES  LUDI,  a  festival  with  games  celebrated
at  Rome  in  the  month  of  April  and  in  honour  of
the  great  mother  of  the  gods  (Cybele,  /j-eydXr]  ^eos,
whence  the  festival  derived  its  name).  The  statue
of  the  goddess  was  brought  to  Rome  from  Pessinus
in  the  year  203  B.  c,  and  the  day  of  its  arrival
Avas  solemnised  with  a  magnificent  procession,  lecti-
sternia,  and  games,  and  great  numbers  of  people
carried  presents  to  the  goddess  on  the  Capitol.
(Varro,  de  Ling,Lat.yi.  15  ;  Liv.  xxix.  14.)  The
regular  celebration  of  the  Megalesia,  however,  did
not  begin  till  twelve  years  later  (191  B.  c),  when
the  temple  which  had  been  vowed  and  ordered  to  be
built  in  203  b.  c,  was  completed  and  dedicated  by
M.  Junius  Brutus.  (Liv.  xxxvi.  36.)  But  from
another  passage  of  Livy  (xxxiv.  54)  it  appears
that  the  Megalesia  had  already  been  celebrated
in  193  B.C.  The  festival  lasted  for  six  days,  be-
ginning on  the  4th  of  April.  The  season  of  this
festival,  like  that  of  the  whole  month  in  which  it
took  place,  was  full  of  general  rejoicings  and  feast-
ing. It  was  customary  for  the  wealthy  Romans
on  this  occasion  to  invite  one  another  mutually  to
their  repasts,  and  the  extravagant  habits  and  the
good  living  during  these  festive  days  were  pro-
bably carried  to  a  very  high  degree,  whence  a
senatusconsultum  was  issued  in  161  B.  c,  pre-
scribing that  no  one  should  go  beyond  a  certain
extent  of  expenditure.  (Gellius,  ii.  24  ;  compare
xviii.  2.)

The  games  which  were  held  at  the  Megalesia
were  purely  scenic,  and  not  circenses.  They  were
at  first  held  on  the  Palatine  in  front  of  the  temple
of  the  goddess,  but  afterwards  also  in  the  theatres.
(Cic.  de  Harusp.  Resp.  11,  &c.)  The  first  ludi
scenici  at  Rome  were,  according  to  Valerius  An-
tias,  introduced  at  the  Megalesia,  e.  e.  either  in  193
or  191  B.  c.  The  day  which  was  especially  set
apart  for  the  performance  of  scenic  plays  was  the
third  of  the  festival.  (Ovid.  Fast.  iv.  377  ;  Ael.
Spartian.  Antonin.  Carac.  c.  6.)  Slaves  were  not
permitted  to  be  present  at  the  games,  and  the  ma-
gistrates appeared  dressed  in  a  purple  toga  and
praetexta,  whence  the  proverb, /Jwrpwra  Megalensis.
The  games  were  under  the  superintendence  of  the
curule  aediles  (Liv.  xxxiv.  54),  and  we  know  that
four  of  the  extant  plays  of  Terence  were  performed
at  the  Megalesia.  Cicero  {de  Harusp.  Resp.  12),
probably  contrasting  the  games  of  the  Megalesia
with  the  more  rude  and  barbarous  games  and  ex-
hibitions of  the  circus,  calls  them  maotime  casti,
sokmnes,  religiosi.  (See  Ovid.  Fast.  iv.  1 79 — 372  ;
P.  Manutius,  ad  Cic.  ad  Famil.  ii.  11.)     [L.  S.]

MELLEIREN  (fi^Wdprjv).     [Eiren.]

MEMBRA'NA.     [Liber.]

MENELAEIA  (^€i/€Act6ia),a  festival  celebrated
atTherapnae  in  Laconia,  in  honour  of  Menelaus  and
Helena,  who  were  believed  to  be  buried  there.
(Pans.  iii.  1 9.  §  9.)  Menelaus  was  to  the  Lacedae-
monians what  Nestor  was  to  the  Messenians,  a  model
of  a  wise  and  just  king,  and  hence  they  raised  him  to
the  rank  of  one  of  the  great  gods  (Isocrat.  Panath.


MENSA.


749


p.  247,  B.),  and  honoured  him  and  Helena  with
annual  and  solemn  sacrifices  at  Therapnae,  which
continued  to  be  offered  in  the  days  of  Isocrates.
{Helen.  Encom.  p.  218,  d.)  These  solemnities  are
sometimes  called  'EAevia.  (See  Creuzcr,  Symbol.
iii.  p.  38.)  [L.  S.]

MENSA  (rpciTre^a),  a  table.  The  simplest
kind  of  table  was  one  with  three  legs,  round,
called  cilliba  (Festus,  .s.  r. ;  Varro,  rfe  Lvig.  Lat.  v.


25.  p.  123,  ed.  Spengel ;  Hor.  Sat.  i.  3.  13  ;  Ovid.
Met.  viii.  662),  and  in  Greek  rpiirovs.  (Xen.
Anab.  vii,  3.  §  10;  Athen.  iv.  21,  35,  v. 28.)  It
is  shown  in  the  drinking-scene  painted  on  the  wall
of  a  wine-shop  at  Pompeii.  (Gell's  Pompeiana.,
1832,  vol.  ii.  p.  11.)  (See  woodcut.)  The  term
T^ctTre^cf,  though  commonly  used  in  Greek  for  a
table  of  any  kind,  must,  according  to  its  etjmiologj',
have  denoted  originally  a  four-legged  table.  Ac-
cordingly, in  paintings  on  vases,  the  tables  are
usually  represented  with  four  legs,  of  which  an
example  is  given   in  the  annexed  cut.     (Millin.


Peintures  de  Vases  Antiques,  vol.  i.  pi.  59.)  Horace
used  at  Rome  a  dining-table  of  white  marble,  thus
combining  neatness  with  economy.  {Sat.  i.  6.  116.)
For  the  houses  of  the  opulent,  tables  were  made  of
the  most  valuable  and  beautiful  kinds  of  wood,
especially  of  maple  {(T<pevZ6.ixviv%  Athen.  ii.  32  ;
acema^  Hor.  Sat.  ii.  8.  10;  Mart.  xiv.  90),  or  of
the  citrus  of  Africa,  which  was  a  species  of  cy-
press or  juniper.  {Citrea,  Cic  Verr.  iv.  17;  Mart.
ii.  43,  xiv.  89  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xiii.  29.)  For  this
purpose  the  Romans  made  use  of  the  roots  and
tubers  of  the  tree,  which,  when  cut,  displayed  the
greatest  variety  of  spots,  beautiful  waves,  and  curl-
ing veins.  The  finest  specimens  of  tables  so
adorned  were  sold  for  many  thousand  pounds.
(Plin.  H.  N.  xiii.  29,  xvi.  26,  84  ;  Tertull.  de
Pallio,  sub  fin.;  A.  Aikin,  On  Ornamental  Woods,
pp.  23,  24.)  Besides  the  beauty  of  the  boards
{iirid-fj/xaTa)  the*  legs  of  these  tables  were  often
very  tasteful,  being  carved  in  imitation  of  lion's  or
tiger's  feet,  and  made  of  ivory.  (Athen.  I.  c.  ;
Mart.  ii.  43.  9.)

One  of  the  principal  improvements  was  the  in-


750  MENSARII.

vention  of  the  nionopodium,  a  round  tahle  (orbis)
supported  by  a  single  foot  ;  this,  with  other
elegant  kinds  of  furniture,  was  introduced  into
Rome  from  Asia  Minor  by  Cii.  Manlius.  (Plin.
H.A^.  xxxiv.  8.)  Under  the  Roman  emperors  semi-
circular tables  were  introduced,  called  mensae
lunatae  from  comparing  them  to  the  half-moon,  and
sigmata^  because  they  had  the  form  of  that  letter,
C.  (Laraprid.  Hel  25,  29.)  This  lunate  table
was  surrounded  by  a  sofa  of  the  same  form,  called
stibadium,  which  was  adapted  to  hold  seven  or
eight  persons.     (Mart.  x.  48,  xiv.  87.)

As  the  table  was  not  very  large,  as  we  see  from
the  preceding  cut,  it  was  usual  to  place  the  dishes
and  the  various  kinds  of  meat  upon  it,  and  then  to
bring  it  thus  furnished  to  the  place  where  the
guests  were  reclining :  hence  such  phrases  as  men-
sam  apponere  or  opponere  (Plaut,  Asin.  v.  1.  2,
Most.  i.  3.  150  ;  Cic.  ad.  Att.  xiv.  21  ;  Ovid,  Met.
viii.  570),  and  mensam  auferre  or  remover e.  (Plaut.
Amphit.  ii.  2.  175  ;  Virg.  Aen.  i.  216.)  As  the
})oard  of  the  table  is  called  by  a  distinct  name
fKiOriixa  (A then.  I.  c.  ;  Pollux,  x.  81),  it  appears
that  it  was  very  frequently  made  separate  from  the
tripod  or  other  stand  {KiKXiSas)  on  which  it  was
fixed.

Among  the  Greeks  the  tables  were  not  covered
with  cloths  at  meals,  but  were  cleansed  by  the
use  of  wet  sponges  (Horn.  Od.  i.  Ill,  xx.  151  ;
Mart.  xiv.  1 44),  or  of  fragrant  herbs.  (Ovid.  Met.
viii.  QQo.)  The  Romans  used  for  the  same  pur-
])r)se  a  thick  cloth  with  a  long  woolly  nap  (gau-
s;ipe,  Hor.  I.  c.  ;  Heindorf  i?i  loc.)

Under  the  influence  of  the  ideas  of  hospitality,
which  have  prevailed  universally  in  the  primitive
states  in  society,  the  table  was  considered  sacred.
(Juv.  ii.  110.)  Small  statues  of  the  gods  were
placed  upon  it.  (Amob.  contra  Genles.,  lib.  ii.)  On
this  account  Hercules  Avas  worshipped  under  the
title  rpans^ios  and  iniTpa-n-4^ios.  The  Cretans
ate  in  public  ;  and  in  the  upper  part  of  their
avSpdov,  or  public  dining-room,  there  was  a  con-
stant table  set  apart  for  strangers,  and  another
sacred  to  Jupiter,  called  rpaTre^a  leWa,  or  Aios
^eviov.  (Athen.  iv.  22  ;  Hock's  Kreta,  vol.  iii.
pp.  120— 128.)

The  two  principal  courses  of  a  SeTiruov  and  coena,
or  a  Greek  and  Roman  dinner,  were  called  respect-
ively irpccTTi  rpdweCa,  Sevrepa  rpctTre^o,  and  mensa
prima,  mensa  secunda.     [Coena.]

The  name  of  Tpc£7r6^o  or  mensa  was  given  to  a
square  tomb-stone  (Becker,  CkariUes,  vol.  ii.
pp.191,  193)  [FuNus,  p.  o5Q,  b.]  ;  and  the  same
name  was  also  given  to  square  altars.  Every  curia
at  Rome  had  an  altar,  called  mensa,  which  was
sacred  to  Juno  Curitis.  (Dionys.  ii.  50  ;  Festus,
pp.  49,  64,  156,  ed  Muller  ;  Macrob.  Sat.  iii.  11  ;
Becker,  Rom.  Alterth.  vol.  ii.  pt.  i.  p.  34.)   [J.  Y.]

MENSA'RII,  MENSULA'RII,  or  NUMU-
LA'RII,  were  a  kind  of  public  bankers  at  Rome
who  were  appointed  by  the  state  ;  they  were  dis-
tinct from  the  argentarii,  who  were  common
bankers  and  did  business  on  their  own  account.
(Dig.  2.  tit.  13.  s.  6.)  The  mensarii  had  their
banks  {mensae)  like  ordinary  bankers  around  the
forum,  and  in  the  name  of  the  aenirium  they  of-
fered ready  money  to  debtors  who  could  give  se-
curity to  the  state  for  it.  Such  an  expediency
was  devised  by  the  state  only  in  times  of  great
distress.  The  first  time  that  mensarii  {quinqueviri
menaarii)  were  appointed  was  in  352  B.  c,  at  the


MENSURA.

time  when  the  plebeians  were  so  deeply  involved
in  debt,  that  they  were  obliged  to  borrow  nioney
from  new  creditors  in  order  to  pay  the  old  ones,
and  thus  ruined  themselves  completelj^.  (Liv.  vii.
21  ;  compare  Fenus  (Roman)  and  Argen-
tarii.) On  this  occasion  they  were  also  autho-
rized to  ordain  that  cattle  or  land  should  be  re-
ceived as  payment  at  a  fair  valuation.  Such  bankers
were  appointed  Jit  Rome  at  various  times  and
whenever  debts  weighed  heavily  upon  the  people,
but  with  the  exception  of  the  first  time  they  ap-
pear during  the  time  of  the  republic  to  have  always
been  triumviri  mensarii.  (Liv.  xxiii.  21,  xxvi.  36.)
One  class  of  mensarii,  however  (perhaps  an  inferior
order),  the  mensularii  or  numularii,  seem  to  have
been  permanently  employed  by  the  state,  and
these  must  be  meant  when  we  read  that  not  only
the  aerarium  but  also  private  individuals  deposited
in  their  hands  sums  of  money  which  they  had  to
dispose  of.  {Tacit.  AnnaL  vi.  17  ;  Dig.  16.  tit.  3.
s.  7  ;  42.  tit.  5.  s.  24.)  As  Rome  must  have  often
been  visited  by  great  numbers  of  strangers,  these
public  bankers  had  also,  for  a  certain  percentage,
to  exchange  foreign  money  and  give  Roman  coinage
instead,  and  also  to  examine  all  kinds  of  coins
whether  they  were  of  the  proper  metal  and  ge-
nuine or  not.  (Dig.  46.  tit.  3.  s.  39.)  During  the
time  of  the  empire  such  permanent  mensarii  were
under  the  control  of  the  praefectus  urbi  and  fonned
a  distinct  corporation.  (Dig.  1.  tit.  12.  s.  1  ;  Cod.
Theod.  16.  tit.  4.  s.  5.)

Bankers  appointed  by  the  state  also  existed  in
other  ancient  towns,  and  Cicero  {pro  Flacc.  19)
mentions  mensarii  at  Temnos  in  Asia  Minor  who
were  appointed  by  the  people.  [L.  S,]

MENSIS.     [Calendarium.]

MENSO'RES,  measurers  or  surveyors.  This
name  was  applied  to  various  classes  of  persons
whose  occupation  was  the  measurement  of  things.

1.  It  was  applied  to  land-surveyors  who  mea-
sured and  defined  the  extent  of  fields,  and  appear
to  have  been  the  same  as  the  agrimensores.  (Colum.
V.  1  ;  compare  Agrimensores.)

2.  To  persons  who  measured  in  the  Roman
camps  the  space  to  be  occupied  by  the  tents.  They
must  be  distinguished  from  the  metatores,  who
selected  the  place  for  a  camp.  ( Veget.  de  Re  Milil.
ii.  7.)^

3.  To  a  class  of  officers  during  the  time  of  the
empire  who  provided  quarters  for  the  soldiers  in
the  towns  through  which  they  passed  and  where
they  made  a  temporary  stay.  They  not  only  as-
signed to  each  soldier  the  house  in  which  he  was
to  be  quartered,  but  also  wrote  the  name  of  the  oc-
cupant upon  the  door-post,  and  he  who  effaced  or
destroyed  this  name  was  punished  as  a  falsi  reus.
(Cod.  Theod.  7.  tit.  8.  s.  4.)

4.  Mensor  aedificiorum  is  sometimes  applied  to
architects,  or  more  especially  to  such  architects  as
conducted  the  erection  of  public  buildings,  the
plans  of  which  had  been  drawn  up  by  other  archi-
tects.    (Plin.  Epist.  X.  28  and  29.)

5.  Mensores  fnimentarii  was  the  name  of  officers
who  had  to  measure  the  corn  which  was  conveyed
up  the  Tiber  for  the  public  granaries.  (Dig.  27.
tit.  1.  s.  26  ;  Cod.  Theod.  14.  tit.  9.  s.  9  ;  and
tit.  15.  s.  1.)  They  were  stationed  in  the  port
near  Ostia,  and  were  employed  under  the  praefectus
annonac.  Their  name  is  mentioned  in  various
ancient  inscriptions.  [L.  S.]

MENSU'RA  {ix(Tpov),  measure,  in  its  widest


MENSURA.

Reuse,  signifies  the  application  of  numl)er  to  quan-
tity ;  or,  to  speak  more  specifically,  the  comparison
of  diflFerent  quantities  by  means  of  the  standard  of
number.  So  long  as  we  regard  quantity  apart
from  number,  we  can  only  compare  two  quantities
by  the  test  of  coincidence,  by  which  we  ascertain
whether  they  are  equal  or  unequal,  and,  if  the
latter,  which  of  the  two  is  the  greater  ;  as,  for  in-
stance, in  the  case  of  two  lines.  The  next  step  is
the  comparison  of  one  magnitude  with  certain  de-
finite parts,  or  multiples,  of  the  other,  its  half  or
double,  third  or  triple,  and  so  forth.  The  last
.step,  by  which  we  attain  to  a  complete  method  of
expressing  magnitude  numerically,  is  the  choice  of
some  Jinked  magnitude^  or  Unit,  with  which  we
may  compare  all  other  magnitudes  of  the  same  kind.,
so  as  to  ascertain  what  multiple^  part.,  or  parts
of  the  unit  each  of  them  is,  if  they  are  commen-
surable, and,  if  not,  as  nearly  as  we  please.  Thus
the  unit,  in  itself,  or  in  its  parts,  forms  a  Measure  of
all  magnitudes  of  the  same  kind  as  itself.  A  set
of  fixed  measures,  one  for  each  kind  of  quantity,
with  their  subdivisions,  forms  a  Metrical  System.

The  notions  which  lie  at  the  foundation  of  ma-
thematical and  mechanical  science  determine  of
themselves  the  foundation  of  every  metrical  system.
Those  notions  are  Extension  and  Force  ;  the  former
in  its  various  kinds,  the  line.,  the  surface.,  the  solid.,
and  the  angle  ;  the  latter  in  that  manifestation  of
it  which  we  call  weight.  Now,  since  extension,
whether  linear,  superficial,  or  solid,  can  be  esti-
mated by  means  of  one  straight  line  ;  or  by  means
of  two  straight  lines  which  form  a  fixed  angle  with
one  another,  and  which,  together  with  two  other
lines  drawn  parallel  to  them,  enclose  a  surface  ;  or
by  means  of  three  straight  lines,  the  planes  passing
through  which  form  a  fixed  solid  angle,  and,  to-
gether with  three  other  planes  drawn  parallel  to
them,  form  a  solid :  — it  follows  that  all  these  three
kinds  of  magnitude  may  be  estimated  numerically
by  fixing  upon  units  which  are  respectively  a
straight  line,  a  parallelogram  having  two  adjacent
sides  and  an  angle  fixed,  and  a  parallelopiped
having  three  adjacent  edges  and  an  angle  fixed  ;
or,  simplifying  the  two  latter  cases  by  making  the
fixed  sides  equal  and  the  fixed  angles  right  angles,
the  units  are  (1)  a  straight  line  of  fixed  length.,
(2)  the  square  of  which  that  straight  line  is  a  side.,
and  (3)  the  cube  of  which  that  line  is  the  edge.
Thus  we  obtain  a  metrical  system  for  length.,  surface,
und  capacity.

For  the  measurement  of  angular  magnitude,  or,
which  is  the  same  thing,  of  distance  reckoned  along
the  circumference  of  a  circle,  one  unit  is  sufficient,
namely,  a  fixed  angle,  which  will  exactly  measure
the  sum  of  four  right  angles,  or  a  fixed  arc  of  a
fixed  circle,  which  will  exactly  measure  the  cir-
cumference of  the  circle.  Thus  we  obtain  a  me-
trical system  for  all  angular  magnitudes,  including
Time.

Again,  with  respect  to  Force,  of  which  the  test
is  weight,  since  all  forces  may  be  compared,  either
directly,  or  through  the  calculation  of  the  velocities
which  they  produce,  with  the  force  of  gravity.
There  are  two  ways  of  estimating  weight.  Either
its  measure  may  be  deduced  from  the  measure  of
capacity  ;  for,  as  the  weight  of  a  body  depends  on
the  quantity  of  matter  in  a  given  space,  estimated
"hy  the  effect  which  the  force  of  gravity  exerts  upon
it,  we  may  take  the  quantity  of  a  fixed  kind  of
matter  (water  for  example)  which  will  exactly  fill


MENSURA.


751


the  unit  of  capacity,  as  the  unit  of  weight.  Or
we  may  take  a  bulk  of  wnj  substance,  without
measuring  it,  as  the  unit  of  weight.  In  the  latter
case  it  is  evident  that,  by  measuring  the  solid  con-
tent either  of  the  unit  of  weight,  or  of  an  equal
weight  of  some  other  substance,  we  might  derive
from  our  system  of  weights  a  system  of  measures,
first,  of  capacit}--,  and  thence  of  surface,  and  thence
of  linear  distance  ;  just  as  by  the  opposite  process
we  pass  from  the  line  to  the  surface,  thence  to
capacity,  and  thence  to  weight.

The  statement  of  these  elementary  principles,  in
as  brief  a  form  as  is  consistent  with  clearness,  has
appeared  necessary,  in  order  to  the  complete  un-
derstanding of  the  metrical  systems  of  the  Greeks
and  Romans,  the  explanation  of  which  is  the  object
of  this  article.

I.   Origin  of  Measures.

1.  Of  Length. — The  first  step  in  the  construction
of  a  metrical  system  is  obviously  that  of  fixing  upon
the  unit  of  length  ;  and  nature  itself  suggests  the
choice,  for  this  purpose,  of  some  familiar  object,  of
nearly  uniform  length,  and  which  is  constantly  at
hand  to  be  referred  to.  These  conditions  are  fulfilled
by  various  parts  of  the  human  body  ;  from  which
accordingly  we  find  that  not  only  the  unit  of
length,  but  all  the  measures  of  length,  except
those  which  are  too  small  or  too  large  to  be  mea-
sured by  parts  of  the  body,  are  derived  in  every
metrical  system,  except  the  latest  formed  of  all,
the  modern  French  system,  which  is  founded  on  the
measurement  of  the  earth.  In  support  of  the
general  statement  now  made  we  have,  besides  the
antecedent  argument  from  the  nature  of  the  case,
the  testimony  of  all  writers,  the  names  of  the
measures,  and  the  general  agreement  of  their
lengths  with  the  parts  of  the  body  whose  names
they  bear;  (Horn.  //.  vi.  319,  xv.  678,  Od.  xi
310  ;  Vitruv.  iii.  1.  §  2—9,  with  Schneider's
Notes;  Hero,  Geom.  in  Anal.  Grace.  Paris,  1688,
vol.  i.  pp.  308—315,  388  ;  Diog.  Laert.  ix.  51  ;
Ukert,  Geog.  d.  Griech.  u.  Rom.  vol.  i.  pt.  2,
p.  54.)  The  chief  of  such  measures,  with  their
Greek  and  Roman  names,  are  the  following :  the
breadth  of  &  finger  (Sa/cTi/\os,  digitus)  or  thumb
(pollex)  ;  the  breadth  of  the  hand,  or  palm  (tra-
XaKXT-f},  palmus)  ;  the  span,  that  is,  the  distance
from  the  tip  of  the  thumb  to  the  tip  of  the  little
finger,  when  spread  out  as  wide  as  possible
((TTTida^^)*  ;  the  length  of  the  foot  (ttovs,  pes)  ;
the  cubit,  or  distJince  from  the  elbow  to  the  tip  of
the  middle  finger  {'"'VX^^t  cubitus)  ;  a  step  {^vyia,
gradus)  ;  a  double  step,  or  pace  (passus)  ;  and  the
distance  from  extremity  to  extremity  of  the  out-
stretched arms  (opyvia).  With  reference  to  the
last  two  measures,  it  will  be  observed  that  the
Romans  derived  them  from  the  legs,  the  Greeks
from  the  arms,  the  passus  being  one  foot  shorter
than  the  opyvtd  of  the  other,  and  the  former  (5  feet)
belonging  to  the  decimal  system,  the  latter  (6  feet)
to  the  duodecimal.  The  higher  measures  of
length  will  be  referred  to  presently.  Comp.  Pol-
lux, ii.  157,  158  ;  who  also  mentions  some  less
important  measures  ;  namely,  the  SoxjJ-^  or  Sok-
Tv\o56xfJ-Tl  or  Swpov,  which  was  the  same  as  the
iraXaiar-ff  ;    the  opdodwpov,  or  the  length  of  the

*  This  measure  was  not  in  the  Roman  system.
When  they  wished  to  express  the  Greek  span,
the  proper  word  was  dodrans,  that  is,  three  quar-
ters  (of  the  foot).


752


MENSURA.


whole  hand  from  the  wrist  to  the  tips  of  the  fin-
gers ;  the  Atxas  or  distance  from  the  tip  of  the
thumb  to  the  tip  of  the  forefinger  (Xtxavos)  when
extended,  the  lesser  span  ;  the  irvyoiu  and  Trvy/x-f]
were  modifications  of  the  irrixvs^  the  iru7a>v  being
the  distance  from  the  elbow  to  the  fingers  when
bent,  that  is,  to  the  knuckle  joints,  the  irvyfji.^  from
the  fingers  wJien  shd,  that  is,  to  the  joints  at  their
base.  Other  writers  mention  the  k6vSvXos,  knuckle,
as  equal  to  two  SaKTuXot,

In  practical  use,  such  a  system  as  this  is  suffi-
cient for  many  ordinary  purposes,  and  every  one  is
familiar  with  examples  of  the  use  of  such  mea-
sures in  their  plain  physical  sense.  But,  to  make
a  system  definite,  two  things  are  required  ;  namely,
to  fix  upon  a  precise  invariable  standard  for  the
unit,  or  principal  measure  in  the  system,  for  which
the  foot  was  naturally  chosen ;  and,  secondly,  to
determine  the  precise  relations  which  the  several
measures  bear  to  the  foot  and  to  one  another.  The
former  of  these  points  we  reserve  for  the  present,
merely  observing  that  the  foot  in  each  sj^stem  was
not  very  far  from  ours  ;  the  latter  was  accomplished
according  to  the  following  system,  which  will  be
found  to  express,  not  only  the  relations  actually
adopted  by  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  but  also  ver}'
nearly  those  which  really  exist  between  the  parts
in  a  well-made  man,  especially  according  to  the
standard  of  the  Roman  foot.  It  is  worth  while
also  to  observe  the  general  accordance,  which  re-
sults from  this  method  of  invention,  between  the
metrical  systems  of  all  nations.

The  Greek  and  Roman  systems  are  identical  in
their  modes  of  connecting  the  measures  which  are
common  to  the  two  ;  but,  to  avoid  confusion,  they
are  exhibited  separately.

1 .  In  the  Greek  system  —

4  digits     .     make     .     a  palm.

3  palms     .        "        .a  span.

4  palms     .        "        .a  foot.
1^  spans  .        "        .a  foot.
2  spans     .        "        .a  cubit.
\\  feet      .        "        .     a  cubit.
2^  feet      .        "        .     a  step.

4  cubits     .        *'        .an  opyvid  or  fathom  *
6  feet        .        "        .an  opyvLo.  or  fathom.

2.  In  the  Roman  system  —

4  digits     .     .     make     .     .     a  palm.

4  palms     .     .        "        .     .     a  foot.
1^  feet      .     .        "        .     .     a  cubit.
2^  feet      .     .        "        .     .     a  step.

5  feet       .     .        "        .     .     a  pace.

It  will  be  observed  that  in  this  account  of  the
Greek  and  Roman  systems  nothing  has  been  said
of  the  inch.  It  was  not  a  measure  derived  from
the  human  body,  but  a  subdivision  which  the
Romans  made  of  their  foot,  as  they  were  accus-
tomed to  subdivide  any  unit  whatsoever,  according
to  the  analogy  of  the  uncial  division  of  the  As.
A  more  complete  view  of  the  Greek  and  Roman
measures  of  length,  with  their  values,  reduced  to
our  system,  will  be  found  in  the  Tables  appended
to  this  work.

2.  Itinerary  Measures.  —  For  the  higher  mea-
sures of  length,  although  the  continuity  of  the
system  was  preserved  by  making  them  exact  mul-


*  This  word  is  used  as  being  about  the  value  of
the  measure,  for  want  of  an  English  word  to  ex-
prcba  its  meaning.


MENSTTRA.

j  tiples  of  a  foot,  yet  it  is  obvious  that  conve-
nience would  demand  higher  denominations,  one
of  which  would  be  regarded  as  a  new  unit.
Nay,  these  higher  measures  may  be  viewed,
with  respect  to  their  origin,  as  in  some  sense  in-
dependent of  those  smaller  measures,  with  which
they  Avere  afterwards  made  to  agree.  For,  just  as
we  have  seen  that  the  smaller  measures  of  length
are  taken  from  natural  objects,  so  we  shall  find
that,  at  an  early  period,  the  larger  measures  were
not  derived  artificially  from  the  smaller,  but  were
taken  from  distances  which  occur  in  nature  and  in
ordinary  life.  Thus,  Homer  expresses  distances
by  the  cast  of  a  stone  {II.  ii.  12  ;  and  so  even  in
later  times,  Thuc.  v.  %o,  Polyb.  v.  6),  of  a  quoit
(//,  xxiii.  431 ),  and  of  a  spear  {11.  x.  357,  xv.  358,
xxiii.  529),  and  by  the  still  more  indefinite  descrip-
tion, "  as  far  as  a  man  is  heard  clearly  when  he
shouts':  {Od.  vi.  294,  v.  400,  et  alib.),  and  again
by  a  standard  derived  from  agriculture,  which  it  is
important  to  notice  in  comparison  with  the  Roman
a^tus  {II.  X.  352  ;  see  below.)  Of  still  longer  distances
time  was  made  the  measure  ;  the  journey  of  a  day,
or  of  a  day  and  night,  on  foot,  with  a  horse,  or  with
a  ship  ;  a  system  too  frequently  employed  now,  as
well  as  in  ancient  times,  to  need  the  citation  of  ex-
amples for  its  illustration.  (Comp.  Ukert,  Geog.
d.  Griech.  u.  Rom.  vol.  i.  pt.  2,  pp.  54,  65.)  The
system  of  measurement  by  stations  or  posts  should
probably  be  referred  to  this  head,  as  it  is  most
likely  that  such  distances  would  be  fixed  according
to  the  strength  of  man  or  horse  before  the  trouble
was  taken  actually  to  measure  them  out.  Another
plan  was  that  which  Herodotus  several  times  adopts,
and  Avhich  is  also  familiar  to  all  ages,  the  descrip-
tion of  one  distance  by  comparing  it  with  another,
which  was  well  known.  It  is  true  that  in  many
cases  this  method  is  evidently  only  general  and  in-
definite, as  when  Herodotus  describes  the  length
of  the  Nile  as  equal  to  that  of  the  Danube,  but
there  are  other  cases  in  which  the  method  was
definite ;  and  especially  one  case,  in  which  it
actually  formed  the  foundation  of  the  common  sys-
tem of  itinerary  measures  among  the  Greeks,  We
refer,  of  course,  to  the  length  of  the  Olympic  foot-
race-course,  or  Stadium,  after  which  all  the  other
Greek  stadia  were  measured  out,  and  which  thus
formed  a  universall}'-  familiar  standard  of  reference
for  itinerary  measurements.  Whether  the  Olympic
stadium  was  originally  measured  out  precisely  equal
to  600  feet,  or  whether,  having  been  accidentally
(or  at  least  looselj^)  assumed,  it  was  found  to  be  so
nearly  eqiial  to  600  feet,  that  the  measure  derived
from  it  was  taken  at  exactly  600  feet,  it  is  now  im-
possible to  determine.  We  think  the  latter  more
probable  ;  but,  whichever  may  be  the  truth,  the
point  now  insisted  upon  is  not  aflFected,  namely,
that  when  an  early  Greek  writer  expressed  a  dis-
tance in  stadia,  he  did  not  mean  to  suggest  to  his
readers  the  idea  of  so  many  times  600  feet,  but  of
so  many  times  the  length  of  the  actual  objective
Olympic  stadium,  with  which  they  were  all  familiar.
The  corresponding  feature  in  the  Roman  system
furnishes  an  interesting  illustration  of  the  differences
of  national  character.  The  military  notions,  which
lie  at  the  basis  of  so  many  of  their  institutions,  are
at  once  recognised  in  their  7nile,  the  thousajid  paces
of  a  foot-march.

3.  Land  Measures.  —  Another  distinct  source
of  the  greater  measures  of  length  is  to  be  found
in  the  necessity  which  arises  at  an  early  period  iu


MENSURA.

every  civilised  community  for  determining  the
boundaries  of  land.  Herodotus  (ii.  109)  men-
tions a  tradition,  which  assigned  the  invention
of  geometry  to  such  a  necessity  which  arose  in
Egypt  in  the  reign  of  Sesostris.  Of  course  this
tradition  is  now  referred  to  merely  as  an  illustra-
tion, not  as  expressing  an  historical  fact.  As  in
the  other  cases,  the  origin  of  the  system  lies  far
back  beyond  the  reach  of  history  ;  and  all  that  can
be  done  is  to  trace,  with  some  probability,  its  suc-
cessive steps,  as  indicated  by  the  nature  of  the
case,  by  the  names  of  the  measures,  and  by  the
statements  of  ancient  writers.  Here  too,  as  in  the
itinerary  distances,  the  original  unit  of  the  system
was  probably  not  a  specific  number  of  feet,  but
some  natural  quantity,  which  was  afterwards  brought
into  accordance  with  the  standard  of  the  smaller
measures.  Also  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  these
measures  are,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  measures
of  surface,  although  in  practice  they  wore  often
used  merely  as  measures  of  length.  The  precise
fact  seems  to  be  that  the  first  natural  measure  of
the  sort  was  one  of  a  considerable  length  and  a  very
moderate  breadth  ;  that  then,  this  measure  came
to  be  used  as  a  measure  of  length  alone  ;  and  then,
for  the  measure  of  sui'face  connected  with  it.  they
did  not  revert  to  the  original  narrow  strip,  but  took
the  square  of  its  length.  This  seems  to  follow
from  what  the  ancient  writers  tell  us  of  the  actusy
which  was  the  base  of  the  Roman  system  of  land
measures,  amd  which  is  thus  defined  by  Pliny :
Actus  vocabatur  in  quo  hoves  agerentu?'  cum  aratro
uno  impetu  justo  (H.  N.  xviii.  3)  ;  by  which  he
seems  to  mean  the  distance  which  a  yoke  of  oxen
could  draw  a  plough  at  one  effort,  that  is,  a  s'oigle
furroxo :  this,  he  adds,  is  120  feet  in  length.  So
also  Homer  {II.  x.  351,  352)  describes  a  distance
as  being  "  as  far  as  are  the  furrows  of  mules."  We
have,  as  analogous  measures,  the  versus,  or  length
of  a  fuiTow  before  the  plough  was  turned,  by  which,
Varro  tells  us  (R.  R.  i.  10),  they  measured  in  Cam-
pania, the  jugum  (yoke  of  oxen)  by  which,  he  says,
they  measured  in  further  Spain,  and  the  Greek
&povpa,  a  furrow  ;  though  the  jugum  was  perhaps
never  any  thing  else  but  a  measure  of  surface,  for
it  is  defined  as  the  quantity  of  land  which  a  yoke
of  oxen  could  plough  in  a  day.  Even  with  respect
to  the  actus  itself,  a  doubt  as  to  its  origin  is  sug-
gested by  the  use  of  the  word  in  Roman  law  for
the  right  of  driving  cattle  through  a  field  (Cic.  p.
Caecin.  26),  and  also  for  the  path  reserved  between
fields  for  the  passage  of  cattle  (Dig.)  just  as  we
also  use  the  word  drove.  Possibly,  in  the  actus,  as
determined  in  length  at  120  feet,  and  in  width  at
4,  we  may  have  both  senses  of  the  word  combined.
The  length  of  this  actus,  squared,  gave  the  actus
quadratus  of  14,400  square  feet,  which,  with  its
double,  the  jugerum  of  28,800  square  feet,  formed
the  base  of  the  Roman  system  of  land  measures.
Two  jugera,  which,  according  to  Varro  (/.  c),  formed
originally  the  birth-right  of  every  Roman  citizen,
were  thence  called  heredium  ;  100  heredia  made  a
centuria  of  5,760,000  square  feet,  or  the  square  of
2400  ;  4  cerituriae,  arranged  as  a  square,  made  a
ealtus.  In  this  system,  the  smallest  subdivision,
and  that  which  connected  the  system  with  the
foot,  was  the  area  of  1 00  square  feet,  or  the  square
often  feet,  which  was  the  length  of  the  pole  [De-
CKMPEDA  ;  Pertica]  used  in  measuring  land.  To
the  Jugenim,  which  gradually  superseded  the  actus
as  the  unit  of  the  system,  the  uncial  division  was


MENSURA.  753

applied,  the  square  of  the  decempeda  (or  100
square  feet)  being  its  scruptdum  or  288th  part.
Also  36  scrupula  made  one  clima,  and  4  elimata
one  actus  quadratus.  In  the  longitudinal  actus  of
120  feet,  the  oblong  actus  of  120  x  4  (or  480),
square  feet,  and  the  actus  quadratus,  with  its
double  the  jugerum,  we  also  see  the  connection  of
the  duodecimal  system  with  the  decimal.

In  the  corresponding  part  of  the  Greek  system,
the  TvXeQpov  answers  to  the  actus,  but  with  just
the  difference  between  the  decimal  and  duodeci-
mal systems.  As  a  measure  of  length,  it  is  100
feet  (10x10  nistead  of  12  x  10)  ;  and  as  a  mea-
sure of  surface,  it  is  the  square  of  100,  or  10,000
square  feet.  The  6.povpa  was  the  quarter  of  it,
that  is,  2500  square  feet,  or  the  square  of  50
feet.  A  measuring  rod  of  10  feet,  /caAa/xos,  ap-
pears also  in  the  Greek  system,  and  of  this  the
nAedpov  was  the  square.  Also,  6  Ka\a/xol  or  10
opyviai  or  40  Trrjxeis  made  one  ^/xyua  or  chain.
This  system  was  connected  with  the  itinerary
measures  by  reckoning  6  plethra  or  100  opyviai
to  the  stadium.  (Herod,  ii.  149.)  For  a  com-
plete view  of  the  Greek  and  Roman  measures  of
length  and  surface,  see  the  Tables  ;  and,  respect-
ing the  Roman  land  measures,  compare  Actus,
AuRiMKNSORES,  Decempeda,  Jugerum,  and
Niebuhr's  Essay  On  the  Roman  Mode  of  par-
titioning Landed  Property,  History  of  Rome,  vol.
ii.  app.  i.

4.  Measures  of  Capacity.  —  The  measures  of
capacity  seem  to  have  been  arranged  on  a  similar
principle  to  those  already  noticed  ;  that  is,  they
were  not  derived  by  a  definite  process  of  calcu-
lation from  the  measures  of  length,  but  were  ori-
ginally nothing  more  than  the  names  of  different
sized  vessels  of  no  very  definite  capacity,  which,
when  the  metrical  system  came  to  be  definitively
constituted,  were  brought  into  harmony,  on  the
one  hand  with  the  measures  of  length,  on  the
other  with  those  of  weight.

The  question  still  remains,  which  of  the  three
kinds  of  measures  was  the  one  first  constructed,
and  the  one  from  which  the  others  were  derived.

II.   Whence  were  the  Greeh  and  Roman  Measures
derived  1

In  all  that  we  have  said  about  the  origin  of
measures  of  length,  it  has  neither  been  stated
nor  implied  that  those  measures,  as  definitely  fisced
hy  the  precise  determination  of  their  unit,  were  ob-
tained in  the  manner  and  order  that  has  been  de-
scribed. All  that  has  been  said  may  be  true,  aa
we  believe  it  is,  and  yet  the  question.  What  u-as
the  foot,  and  wiien'CE  was  it  derived,  still  remains
unanswered.     To  this  question  we  now  proceed.

Our  limits  quite  forbid  the  full  discussion  of  the
various  opinions  which  have  been  put  forward  on
this  subject,  or  even  the  elaborate  development
of  that  view  which  we  believe  to  be  the  correct
one  ;  and  which  is,  in  the  main,  that  which  has
been  put  forward  by  Bockh  in  his  very  careful
and  learned  work  entitled,  Metrologische  Untersu-
chungen  ilber  Gewichte,  Munzfiisse  und  Masse  des
Altcrthums  in  ihrem  Zusammenhange,'Qex\m,  1838,
8vo.,  and  to  the  principal  points  in  which  Mr.
Grote  assents,  in  his  review  of  Bdckh's  work  in
the  Classical  Museum  for  1844,  vol.  i.  p,  1.  The
two  chief  questions  involved  in  the  discussion  are
these:  —  1.  Whence  were  the  Greek  and  Rom.jm
metrical  systems  derived?  2.  In  each  of  those
3c


754


MENSURA.


systems,  which  of  the  three  kinds  of  measure
formed  the  foundation,  from  Avhich  the  other  two
were  deduced,  length,  capacity,  or  weight  ?

On  the  first  of  these  questions  our  space  allows
us  to  do  little  more  than  refer  the  reader  to  Bbckh's
elaborate  exposition  of  the  opinion,  in  which  few
competent  readers  of  his  work  will  fail  to  coin-
cide, that  the  basis  of  the  Greek  and  Roman  me-
trical systems  was  that  which  had  prevailed  from
very  early  times  among  the  Chaldaeans  at  Babylon^
from  which  or  from  some  common  original  the
Egyptians  derived  their  metrical  system  ;  and
which  was  carried  by  the  commerce  of  the  Phoe-
nicians into  Greece,  whence  it  passed  over  into
Italy.  On  the  second  question,  his  researches,  as
well  as  the  arguments  of  other  writers,  may  safely
be  said  to  have  established  the  position  that
weights  were  determijied  before  measures,  and  that
measures  were  derived  from  weights.

It  will  be  convenient  here  to  give  Bockh's  own
compendium  of  the  main  results  which  he  under-
takes to  establish,  with  Mr,  Grote's  statement  of
the  points  in  which  he  differs  from  Bockh.  We
adopt  Mr.  Grote's  translation  of  the  passage,  only
substituting  ^e^/wetora  for  Aeginaean.  "  If"  (Bockh
says,  iii.  4.  p.  26)  "  we  regard  this  relation  of  the
weights  and  measures*,  based  upon  a  given  weight
of  water,  which  is  the  key-stone  of  the  Roman
system  —  and  if  we  carry  the  application  of  this
water-weight  backwards  to  the  chief  measures  of
the  ancient  world  —  we  shall  find  a  connection
really  and  truly  organic  between  the  systems  of
the  ditterent  people  of  antiquity,  and  we  shall
arrive  at  last  at  the  fundamental  unity  (unit)  of
weight  and  measure  in  the  Babylonian  system  ;
so  that  this  supposition  is  found  to  be  verified  in
all  its  consequences  and  details.  To  give  some
preliminary  intimation  of  this  —  I  shall  show  that
the  Grecian  (or,  more  accurately,  the  Acginetan)
and  the  Roman  pound  are  in  the  ratio  of  10:9;
the  Aeginetan  pound  is  half  the  Aeginetan  mina  ;
but  the  cubical  measures  stood  normally  in  the
ratio  of  the  weights  ;  and  therefore  the  Grecian
cubic  foot  was  to  the  Roman  as  10  :  9,  and,  as  the
Roman  cubic  foot  weighs  80  pounds  of  rain-water,
so  also  the  Grecian  cubic  foot  weighs  80  Grecian
or  Aeginetan  pounds,  equal  to  40  Aeginetan  minae.
The  unity  (unit)  of  weight  (in  Greece)  however
is,  not  40  minae,  but  60  minae,  or  a  talent.  In
the  original  institutions  of  the  people  of  antiquity
everything  has  its  reason,  and  we  find  scarcely
anything  purely  arbitrary  :  nevertheless,  this  unity
(unit)  of  weight,  the  talent,  does  not  coincide  with
the  unity  of  measure  —  neither  with  the  cubic  foot,
nor  with  any  other  specific  cubical  denomination.
But  the  coincidence  reveals  itself  at  once,  as  soon
as  we  discover  that  the  Babylonian  cubic  foot,
standing  as  it  does  in  the  ratio  of  3  :  2  to  the
Grecian  f  cubic  foot,  weighs  60  Aeginetan  minae
(^  60  Babylonian  minae  =  1  Babylonian  talent)
of  rain-water."     (Class.  Mus.  vol.  i.  p.  4.)

Upon  this  Mr.  Grote  remarks  :  "  M.  Bockh  here
promises  more  than  his  volume  will  be  found  to
realise.  He  does,  indeed,  satisfactorily  show  thai
the  Ba/jylonian  talent  was  identical  with,  and  was
the  original  prototype  of,  the  Aeginetan  talent,  and
that  the  standard  and  scale  of  weight  was  strikingly


*  Namely,  that  between  the  Roman  pound  and
the  Roman  amphora  or  quadrantal.

f  By  a  curious  misprint,  Mr.  Grote  has  German,


MENSURA.

and  curiously  similar  in  Asia,  in  Egypt,  and  in
Greece.  But  lie  has  not,  I  think,  made  out  the
like  with  regard  to  the  Grecian  measures,  eith'i
of  length  or  capacity,  and  his  proof  of  the  ratio
of  3  :  2  between  the  Babylonian  and  the  Grecian
foot  loill  be  found  altogether  defective.  Nor  has  he
produced  adequate  evidence  to  demonstrate,  either
the  ratio  of  1 0  :  9  between  the  Grecian  or  Aegi-
netan pound  and  the  Roman  pound,  or  that  of  1  :  2
between  the  Aeginetan  pound  and  the  Aeginetan
mina  ;  the  ratio  bettvcen  the  Grecian  cubic  foot  and
the  Roman  cuhic  foot,  too,  as  also  that  between  the
Grecian  cubic  foot  and  any  given  Grecian  weight,
is,  as  he  proposes  it,  inadmissible.  In  fact,  there
is  no  such  thing  (properly  speaking),  as  an  Aegi-
netan pound  weight :  nor  is  there  any  fixed  normal
relation  between  Grecian  weight  and  Grecian  mea-
sures, either  of  length  or  of  capacity,  though  there  is
a  fixed  normal  relation  between  Babylonian  weight
and  Babylonian  measures,  as  also  between  Roman
weight  and  Roman  measures.''''  {Ibid.  pp.  4,  5  :  we
have  introduced  the  italics  to  call  the  reader's  at-
tention to  the  chief  points  in  which  Mr.  Grote
agrees  with,  and  differs  from,  M.  Bockh).

These  extracts  furnish  a  pretty  good  idea  of  the
present  position  of  ancient  metrical  science.  It  is
impossible  here  to  discuss  the  points  at  issue  be-
tween these  two  great  scholars  ;  but  we  must  re-
mark that,  if  Bockh  has  sometimes  failed  to  observe
his  own  distinction  between  exact  and  approximate
ratios  (see  Grote,  p.  2),  and  if  he  has  erred  through
attempting  to  establish  some  ratios  which  are  either
fanciful  or  mere  results  of  an  over-strained  calcula-
tion, or  which  are  too  strange  to  be  true,  —  Mr.
Grote  has  also  pressed  the  other  side  of  the  argu-
ment in  a  manner  which,  if  sound,  would  prevent
the  establishment  of  any  exact  ratio  between  any
two  systems,  and,  in  stating  that  there  is  no  fijced
normal  relation  between  Grecian  weight  and  Grecian
measures,  he  has  put  forward  a  proposition,  which
he  does  not  sufficiently  sustain  by  proof,  which  is
very  improbable  in  itself,  and  which  is  hardly  con-
sistent with  the  acknowledged  derivation  of  the
Greek  weights  from  the  Babylonian  ;  for  it  is  very
unlikely  that  the  Greeks  should  have  taken  their
weights  and  not  their  measures  from  the  Babylo-
nians, especially  when  it  is  remembered  that  the
Roman  system,  which  was  probably  derived  from
the  Greek,  agreed  with  the  Babylonian  both  in
weights  and  measures,  and  not  only  so,  but  also
bore,  in  its  measures  of  capacity,  a  definite  ratio
to  the  Greek  ;  and,  moreover,  there  appears  to  be
the  same  inconsistency  in  the  attempt  to  disconnect
the  Greek  and  Roman  weights,  while  admitting
the  derivation  of  both  from  the  Babylonian.  Be
this  as  it  may,  we  have  no  hesitation  in  affirming
that  the  researches  of  Bockh  are  so  important,  tliat
they  must  be  regarded  as  the  starting-point  of  all
futiure  investigations  into  the  subject.  The  fact
also  deserves  notice,  that  several  of  Bockh's  con-
clusions, which  Mr.  Grote  questions  as  exact  and
designed  ratios,  are  admitted  by  him  to  be  very
near  the  truth  ;  and  they  may  therefore,  at  all
events,  be  useful  to  us  for  the  purpose  of  assisting
the  memory.  The  rest  of  this  part  of  the  subject,
so  far  at  least  as  our  space  permits  us  to  notice  it,
will  be  found  under  Pondera.

The  question  still  remains,  how  to  determine  the
Greek  and  Roman  measures  in  terms  of  our  own,
which  can  be  done,  without  reference  to  the  doubt-
ful points  involved  in  the  foregoing  discussion.


«


MENSURA.

III.    Determination   of  the   Greek  and  Roman
Measures.

1.  Measures  of  length.  —  Before  we  can  attempt
to  fix  the  Greek  and  Roman  foot,  we  must  examine
the  question,  whether  the  former  people  (for  no
one  pretends  it  of  the  latter)  had  different  standards
of  length.  We  think  that  Ukert  has  satisfactorily
shown  that  they  had  not  difierent  standards.,  but
always  used  tlie  Olympic  stadium  and  the  foot  cor-
responding to  it.  (Ukert,  Ueberdie  Art  der  Griechen
und  Romer  die  Entfernungen  zu  bestimmen.,  und
vber  das  Stadium.,  Weimar,  1813,  8vo.;  Geog.  d.
Griech.  u.  Romer.,  vol.  i.  pt.  2.  pp.  55,  &c.)  It  is
only  possible  here  to  give  a  brief  statement  of  the
argument.

It  has  been  supposed  by  some  authors  that  there
were  other  stadia  in  use  in  Greece  besides  the
Olympic.  The  most  ancient  writers  never  either
say  or  hint  at  such  a  thing :  but  when  we  compare
the  distances  between  places,  as  stated  by  them
in  stadia,  with  the  real  distances,  they  are  found
almost  invariably  too  great  if  estimated  by  the
Olympic  stadium,  never  too  small.  Hence  the
conclusion  has  been  drawn,  that  the  Greeks  used
for  itinerary  measurements  a  stade  much  smaller
than  the  Olympic.  Major  Rennell,  who  analyses
several  of  these  statements,  gives  505^-  feet  for" the
value  of  the  itinerary  stade.  {Geography  of  Hero-
dotus., sec.  2.)  It  is,  however,  scarcely  credible
that  these  authors,  some  of  whom  expressly  inform
lis  that  the  stade  contained  600  feet,  should  reckon
distances  by  another  stade,  without  giving  any  in-
timation of  the  fact ;  especially  as  they  usually
warn  their  readers  when  they  speak  of  measures
differing  from  the  common  standard.  (Herod,  ii.  3,
]  7,  89,  95  ;  Plin.  //.  N.  vi.  26.  s.  30.)  The  real
cause  of  the  excess  in  the  itinerary  distances  of
the  Greeks  is  explained  by  Ukert  in  a  way  which
seems  decisive  of  the  question.  The  most  ancient
mode  of  reckoning  distances  among  the  Greeks,  as
among  most  other  nations,  was  by  the  number  of
days  required  to  perform  the  journey.  When  the
stadium  was  brought  into  use,  the  distances  were
still  computed  by  days'  journeys,  but  transferred
into  stadia  by  reckoning  a  certain  number  of  stadia
to  a  day's  journey.  (Herod,  iv.  85,  86.)  It  is
evident  that  nearly  all  the  distances  given  by  the
ancient  Greek  writers  were  computed.,  not  measured.
The  uncertainties  attending  this  mode  of  compu-
tation are  obvious,  and  it  is  equally  obvious  that,
as  a  general  rule,  the  results  would  be  above  the
truth.  At  sea  the  calculation  was  made  according
to  the  number  of  stadia  which  could  be  sailed  over
in  a  day  by  a  good  ship,  in  good  order,  and  with  a
fair  wind.  Any  failure  in  these  conditions  (and
some  such  there  must  always  have  been)  would
increase  the  number  of  days'  sail,  and  therefore  the
calculated  distance  when  reduced  to  stadia.  Si-
milarly by  land  a  day's  journey  was  reckoned
equal  to  the  number  of  stadia  which  a  good  tra-
veller {avT]p  ed^wvos)  could  perform  in  a  day,  which
for  obvious  reasons  would  generally  exceed  the
space  passed  over  under  ordinary  circumstances.
Even  the  Greeks  themselves  are  not  agreed  as  to
the  number  of  stadia  in  a  day's  journey.  Hero-
dotus (iv.  86)  gives  700  stadia  for  the  voyage  of
a  sailing  ship  by  day,  600  by  night.  Most  com-
monly 1000  stadia  were  reckoned  as  a  24  hours'
voyage,  but  under  unfavourable  circumstances
flcarcely  500  were  performed.     (Marin.  Tyr.  ap.


MENSURA.  755

Ptolem.  Geog.  i.  17.)  Allowance  must  also  be
made  for  the  windings  of  the  coast,  the  difficul-
ties of  the  navigation,  the  currents  of  the  sea,
the  varying  skill  of  the  seamen,  and  other  circum-
stances.

A  day's  journey  by  land  was  reckoned  at  200
or  180  stadia  (Herod,  iv.  101  ;  Pausan.  x.  33  ;
Ptol.  i.  9),  or  for  an  army  150  stadia.  (Herod,  v,
53,  54.)  And  here  also  delays  would  often  occur.
The  ancients  themselves  differ  widely  in  their  ac-
counts of  distances,  not  only  as  compared  with  the
true  distances,  but  with  one  another,  a  fact  which
the  theory  of  a  separate  itinerary  stade  cannot  ac-
count  for,  but  which  is  a  natural  result  of  their
mode  of  reckoning,  as  explained  above.

The  following  testimonies  are  advanced  in  sup-
port of  the  view  of  different  stadia.  Censorinus,
who  lived  in  the  time  of  Alexander  Severus,  after
speaking  of  the  astronomical  measurements  of
Eratosthenes  and  Pythagoras,  says  that  by  the
stadium  used  in  them  we  must  understand  "  the
stadium  which  is  called  Italic,  of  625  feet,  for
there  are  others  besides  this,  of  different  lengths,
as  the  Olympic,  which  consists  of  600  feet,  and
the  Pythian,  of  1000."  {De  Die  Natali,  c.  13.)
This  passage  is  evidently  a  complication  of  blun-
ders. The  "  Italic  stadium,"  unknown  elsewhere,
is  manifestly  the  same  as  the  Olympic,  but  reckoned
in  Roman  feet,  of  which  it  contained  625.  The
"  Olympic  of  600  feet  "  is  the  same  in  Greek  feet.
The  value  given  for  the  Pythian  stadium  is  clearly
wrong,  for  the  Olympic  race-course  was  the  longest
in  Greece  (as  appears  from  the  passage  of  Gellius
quoted  below),  and  besides  Censorinus  obviously
confounds  the  extreme  length  of  the  race  courses
with  the  portion  of  them  measured  out  for  the
race,  the  same  name,  stadium.,  being  applied  to
both  ;  for  it  is  very  possible  that  the  former
were  of  different  lengths,  though  the  latter  never
varied.

Aulus  Gellius  (i.  1)  quotes  from  Plutarch  to  the
effect  that  Hercules  measured  out  the  stadium  at
Olympia  with  his  own  feet,  making  it  600  feet
long ;  and  that  when  afterwards  other  stadia  were
established  in  Greece,  containing  the  same  number
of  feet,  these  were  shorter  than  the  Olympic  in  the
proportion  by  which  the  foot  of  Hercules  exceeded
that  of  other  men.  But  whatever  there  is  of  truth
in  this  story  is  probably  the  obscure  remnant  of
an  ancient  tradition  respecting  the  existence  of  a
standard  of  length  greater  than  the  common  one,
at  some  distant  period :  a  matter  which  will  be
presently  referred  to.

Attempts  have  been  made,  especially  by  Romd
de  I'Isle  and  Gosselin,  to  prove  the  existence  and
to  determine  the  lengths  of  different  stadia  from
the  different  lengths  assigned  by  ancient  writers  to
a  great  circle  of  the  earth.  But  surely  it  is  far
more  just  and  reasonable  to  take  these  different
values  as  a  proof  (among  various  others)  that  the
ancients  did  not  know  the  real  length  of  a  great
circle,  than,  first  assuming  that  they  had  such
knowledge,  to  explain  them  as  referring  to  different
standards.

*0n  the  whole,  therefore,  there  seems  no  reason
to  suppose  that  different  stadia  existed  before  the
third  century  of  the  Christian  aera.

From  this  period,  however,  we  do  find  varieties
of  the  stade,  the  chief  of  which  are  those  of  7  and
7^  to  the  Roman  mile.  (Wurm,  de  Pond.  &c
§58.)

Sc  2


756  MENSURA.

The  following  table  of  supposed  varieties  of  the
Btadium  is  from  Hussey's  Ancient  Weights^  <fcc.


^'}


1  Yards

Feet.

109

1

168

1

202

0

215

2

231

0

Inches.


2-2G992


9
2-4

5-124


Stade  assigned  to  Aristo
tie's    measurement   of
the  earth's  surface
Mean  geographical  stade
computed    by    Major  V
Rennell     -         -         -J
Olympic  Stade
Stade  of  7^  to  the  Ro-1
man  mile  -         -         -  J
Stade  of  7  to  the  Roman  \
mile  -         -         -J

But,  although  the  stadium  and  the  foot  connected
with  it  were  single  definite  measures  throughout
Greece,  yet  Ave  find,  in  the  Eastern  countries,
Babylon,  Syria,  and  Egypt,  and  in  some  neigh-
bourijig  Greek  states,  feet  longer  than  the  Olympic
(not  shorter^  as  Rennell's  itinerary  stadium  would
require),  the  origin  of  which  is  to  be  explained  by
the  co-existence,  in  the  Babylonian  system,  of  a
royal  or  sacred  and  a  comimn  foot  and  cubit,  which
were  so  related  to  one  another  that  the  royal  cubit
was  three  finger-breadths  longer  than  the  common.
(Herod,  i.  178  :  see  further  under  Pks.)

In  proceeding  to  determine  the  Greek  and  Roman
foot,  the  most  convenient  plan  is  first  to  fix  the
latter,  and  then  to  derive  the  former  from  it.

I.  The  Roman  foot.  There  are  five  different
ways  of  determining  the  length  of  the  Roman  foot.
These  are,  I.  From  ancient  measures  still  in  ex-
istence, including  feet  laid  down  on  sepulchral
monuments,  and  foot  rules  found  in  the  ruins  of
various  cities  of  the  Roman  empire  ;  2.  From
measurements  of  known  distances  along  roads,  both
between  mile  stones  and  between  places  ;  3.  From
measurements  of  buildings  and  obelisks  ;  4.  From
the  contents  of  certain  measures  of  capacity  ;  and  5.
From  measurements  of  a  degree  on  the  earth's  sur-
face. (For  a  full  historical  account  of  these  systems,
see  the  treatises  of  Wurm,  Hussey,  and  Bockh.)

1.  It  might  appear,  at  first  thoughts,  that  an-
cient measures  m  actual  existence  would  at  once
give  the  required   information.     But  these  mea-
sures are  found  to  differ  among  themselves.     They
are  of  two  kinds,  foot-measures  cut  upon  grave-
stones, and  brass  or   iron  measures   intended  in
all  probability  for  actual  use.     From  the  nature
of  the  case   the   latter  would   probably  be  more
exact  than  the  former,  and  in  fact  the  measures  on
the  grave-stones  are   rudely  cut,  and  their  sub-
divisions are  of  unequal  length,  so  that  they  have
no  pretensions  to  minute   accuracy  ;   but  on  the
other  hand,  it  would  be  absurd  to  suppose  that
they  would  have  been  made  very  far  wrong.     We
may  safely  conclude  that  they  would  have  about
as  much  accuracy  as   a   measure   hastily   cut  on
stone  by  a  mason  from  the  foot-rule  used  by  him
in  working.     Four  such  measures  are  preserved  in
the  capitol  at  Rome.     They  are  called  the  Statilian,
Cossutian,  Aebutian,  and  Capponian  feet.     They
have  been  repeatedly  measured,  but  unfortunat#ly
the  different  measurements  gave  different  results.
The  brass  and   iron   foot-rules,  of  which  several
exist,  do  not  precisely  agree  in  length.     There  was
anciently   a   standard   foot -measure   kept   in  the
capitol,  called  the  pes  monetalis^  which  was  pro-
I)ably  lost  at  the   burning  of  the   capitol   under
Vitelliua  or  Titus,


MENSURA.

2.  The  itinerary  measurements  are  of  two  kinds,
according  as  they  are  obtained  by  measuring  the
distance  from  one  place  to  another,  or  the  distance
from  one  mile-stone  to  another  on  a  Roman  road. ,
Both  methods  have  the  advantage  of  the  diminu-
tion of  error  which  always  results  from  determining
a  lesser  magnitude  from  a  greater,  but  both  are
subject  to  uncertainty  from  turnings  in  the  road,
and  from  the  improbability  of  the  mile-stones
havino-been  laid  down  with  minute  accuracy  ;  and
two  other  serious  objections  apply  to  the  former
mode,  namely,  the  difficulty  of  determining  the
points  where  the  measurement  began  and  ended,
and  the  changes  which  may  have  taken  place  in
the  direction  of  the  road.  Both  methods,  how-
ever, have  been  tried  ;  the  former  by  Cassini,  who
measured  the  distance  from  Nimes  to  Narbonne,
and  by  Riccioli  and  Grimaldi,  who  measured  that
between  Modena  and  Bologna,  and  the  latter  by
CassHji,  between  Aix  and  Aries.

3.  The   measurement  of   buildings  is  rather   a
verification  of  the  value  of  the  foot  as  obtained  from
other  sources  than  an  independent  evidence.     It
very  seldom  happens  that  we  know  the  number  of
ancient  feet  contained  in  the  building  measured.
We  have    one    such  example  in   the    Parthenon,
which  was  called  Hecatompedon  (hundred-footed,
Plutarch,   Pericl.  13,    Cato,  5)    from   the    width
of  its  front;  but. even  in  this  case  we  cannot  tell
exactly,  till  we  know  something  of  the  length  of
the  Greek  foot,  to  what  precise  part  of  the  front
this  measurement  applies.     Again,   there   is    the
obelisk  in  the  Piazza  del  Popolo  at  Rome,  and  the
Flaminian  obelisk,  the  heights  of  which  are  given
by  Pliny  (//.  A^.  xxxvi.  9.  s.  14).     But  the  actual
heights  of  these  obelisks,  as  compared  with  Pliny,
would  give  a  value  for  the  foot  altogether  different
from  that  obtained  from  other   sources.     Indeed
the  numbers  in  Pliny  arc  undoubtedly  corrupt,  and,
as  they  stand,  it  is  only  the  difference  of  height
between  the  two  that  can  be  of  any  service,  and
even  this  gives  a  result  by  no  means  satisfactorj'.
An  ingenious  emendation  by  Stuart  would  remove
the  difiiculty  ;    but  it  is  obvious  that  a  passage
which  requires  a  conjectural  emendation  cannot  be
taken  as    an    independent   authority.       There   is
another  mode  of  deducing  the  value  of  the  foot  from
buildings,  of  the  dimensions  of  which  we  have  no
information.     The  building  is  measured,  and  the
length  thus  obtained  is  divided  by  the  supposed
value  of  the  ancient  foot  (as   derived  from  other
evidence),  and  if  a  remainder  be  left,  this  value  of
the  foot  is  corrected  so  that  there  may  be  no  re-
mainder.    It  is  assumed  in  this  process  that  no
fractions  of  feet  were  allowed  in  the  dimensions
of  the  building,  and  also  that  the  plans  were  worked
out  with  the  most  minute  exactness,  both  of  which
assumptions  are  not  very  probable.     In  fact  these
measurements  have  given  different  values  for  the
foot.     "  Modern  architects,"  says  Mr,  Hussey,  "  do
not  allow  that  such  calculations  could  be  depended
on  in  modern  buildings,  for  detennining  the  true
length  of  the  measures  by  which  they  were  planned.
Nor  are  the  dimensions   of  the  parts  of  buildings
of  the  middle  ages  in  our  own  country,  as  Gothic
churches  and  cathedrals,  found  to  agree  exactly,  so
as  to  give  whole  numbers  of  the  standard  measure."
On  the  other  hand,  these  measurements,  like  those
on  roads,  have  the  advantage  of  involving,  in  all
probability,  very  small  errors,  and  of  the  diminu-
tion of  the  error  by  division.


MENSURA.

4.  Villalpando  and  Eisenschmidt  have  attempted
to  deduce  the  length  of  the  Roman  foot  from  the
solid  content  of  the  congius  of  Vespasian.  [Con-
Gius.]  Since  the  congius  was  the  eighth  of  the
amphora,  and  the  content  of  the  amphora  was  a
cubic  foot  [Quadrantal],  the  process  is  to  mul-
tiply the  content  of  the  congius  by  8,  and  extract
the  cube  root  of  the  product.  But  this  process  is
very  uncertain.  First,  there  is  a  doubt  about  the
content  of  the  congius  itself  [Pondera],  then  it  is
hardly  to  be  supposed  that  the  content  of  the  con-
gius was  actually  adapted  with  perfect  accuracy  to
the  length  of  the  foot,  and  last'y,  there  is  a  further
risk  of  error  in  reversing  this  process.

5.  Some  French  geographers,  and  especially  M.
Gosselin,  have  supposed  that  the  ancient  astrono-
mers were  acquainted  with  the  dimensions  of  a
great  circle  of  the  earth,  and  that  they  founded
their  whole  system  of  measures  on  the  subdivisions
of  such  a  circle.  The  results  of  M.  Gosselin's  cal-
culations agree  well  with  those  derived  from  other
sources.  But  we  need  better  evidence  than  this
agreement  to  convince  us  that  both  the  Greeks  and
Romans,  at  a  very  early  period,  formed  a  system
of  measures  on  such  scientific  principles  ;  and  it  is
incredible  that,  if  such  a  system  had  really  existed,
there  should  be  no  allu&ion  to  it  in  any  of  the  an-
cient geographers.

The  average  values  of  the  Roman  foot,  obtained
from  these  various  sources,  in  terms  of  the  English
foot,  are  the  following:  —

1 .  From  ancient  measures      ....  '5718

2.  From  itinerary  measurements      .     .  *97082

3.  From  measurements  of  buildings     .  '96994

4.  From  the  congius '9832

5.  From  the  length  of  a  degree  .     ,     .  "9724

of  which  the  first  three  are  the  most  to  be  depended
on  ;  and  of  those  three  the  average  is  "9708,  or
11*6496  inches  or  11-^*1496  inches  ;  which  we
may  take  as  the  probable  value  of  the  Roman  foot.
Cagnazzi,  whose  researches  are  said  by  Niebuhr
to  have  placed  the  true  value  of  the  Roman  foot
beyond  a  doubt  {Hist,  of  Rome.,  ii.  p.  407),  gives  it
a  greater  length  than  the  above,  namely  "29624  of
a  metre  =  "9722  of  a  foot:  but  this  calculation  is
objected  to  by  Bockh,  as  being  derived,  by  a  pro-
cess not  perfectly  true,  from  the  value  of  the  pound,
and  as  being  confirmed  only  by  one  existing  mea-
sure, and  also  as  being  at  variance  with  the  value
of  the  Greek  foot,  obtained  from  independent
sources.  {Metrolog.  Unierszich.  p.  197.)  Bockh's
own  calculation,  which  agrees  with  that  of  Wunn,
who  follows  Raper,  gives  a  value  very  little  less
than  the  above,  namely  13ri5  Paris  lines  =
•9704649  of  the  English  foot=  11*6456  inches.
As  the  general  result  we  may  take  the  Roman
foot  at  1 1  "65  inches,  English,  or,  rather  more  than
j^  of  an  inch  less  than  ours.  (The  writer  of  an
excellent  article  Weights  and  Measures  in  the
Penny  Cyclopaedia,  gives  11*62  inches  for  the
value  of  the  Roman  foot.  He  also  gives  the  fol-
lowing nile  as  representing  the  ratio  far  within  the
limits  of  probable  error:  —  61  English  feet  make
63  Roman  feet.)  For  the  other  measures  of  length
see  the  Tables.

Some  have  concluded  from  the  measurements  of
buildings  that  the  foot  was  slightly  reduced  about
the  time  of  Domitian,  which  Wurm  accounts  for
by  supposing  that  the  pes  monetalis,  after  being
destroyed  in  the  fire   under  Titus,  was  restored


MENSURA.  757

by  Domitian  in  a  careless  manner.  Both  the  fact
and  the  explanation,  however,  appear  to  be  very
doubtful.

II.  The  Greek  foot.  We  have  no  ancient  mea-
sures by  which  to  determine  the  length  of  the
Greek  foot  ;  but  we  have  the  general  testimony  of
ancient  writers  that  it  was  to  the  Roman  in  the  ratio
of  25  :  24.  The  Greek  stadium,  which  contained
600  Greek  feet,  is  said  by  Roman  writers  to  con-
tain 625  Roman  feet ;  and  also  a  Roman  mile,  or
5000  feet,  was  reckoned  equal  to  8  Greek  stadia,
or  4800  feet  ;  both  of  these  calculations  give  the
above  ratio  of  25  :  24.  (Plin.  H.N.  ii.  23.  s.  21,
108.  s.  112  ;  Colum.  v.  1  ;  Polyb.  iii.  39  ;  Strab.
vii.  p.  322,)  If  therefore  the  Roman  foot  was
*9708  of  the  English,  the  Greek  foot  was  equal  to
1*01125  English  feet,  or  12*135  inches.

This  value  is  confirmed  by  the  measurement  of
the  Parthenon.  "Stuart"  {Antiq.  Ath.  ii.  p.  8),
says  Mr.  Hussey,  "  measured  the  upper  step  of  the
basement  of  the  Parthenon,  which  is  the  platfom^
on  which  the  pillars  stand,  and  is  exactly  that  part
of  the  building  where  we  should  expect  that  the
measure  would  have  been  taken,  if  the  name  Heca-
tompedon  was  really  given  it  on  account  of  the
dimensions.  He  found  the  width  of  the  front  to
be  10]  feet  1*7  inches,  the  length  of  the  s-ide  "227
feet  7*05  inches  ;  and  since  these  two  quantities
are  very  nearly  in  the  ratio  of  100  to  225,  he  in-
ferred that  the  two  sides  really  contained  these
two  numbers  of  feet.  From  this  he  calculated  the
value  of  the  foot,  from  the  front  12*137  inches,
from  the  side  12' 138  inches  :  of  which  the  greatest
exceeds  the  value  given  above  by  only  '003  of  an
inch."  Other  measurements  of  the  Parthenon
and  of  other  buildings  at  Athens  tend  to  the  same
result.

Strabo,  however  {I.  c.)  quotes  from  Polybius
a  calculation  which  would  make  the  Greek  and
Roman  foot  equal,  but  it  is  perfectly  clear  that
there  is  a  mistake  in  this  statement.  Plutarch
again  (C.  Gracch.  7)  says  expressly  that  the  mile
is  a  little  less  than  8  stadia,  which  would  give  a
rather  smaller  ratio  than  that  of  24  :  25  for  the  ratio
of  the  Roman  to  the  Greek  foot.  It  is  on  the  autho-
rity of  this  passage  that  Bockh  gives  the  value  above
mentioned  for  the  Roman  foot.  If,  according  to
the  supposition  already  noticed,  a  slight  diminu-
tion took  place  in  the  Roman  foot,  this  would
account  for  the  diiference.  But  perhaps  we  ought
not  to  consider  this  solitary  passage  of  sufficient
weight  to  influence  the  calculation.

As  the  general  result,  we  may  take  the  Greek
foot  at  12*135  English  inches,  that  is,  rather  more
than  1-1 0th  of  aii  inch  greater  than  the  Englisli
foot.     For  the  other  measures  see  the  Tables.

2.  Measures  of  Surface.  —  These  are  easily  de-
rived from  the  measures  of  length.  See  the  Tables.

3.  Measures  of  Capacity.  —  The  determination
of  the  measures  of  capacity  is  so  inseparably  con-
nected with  the  question  of  the  settlement  of  the
Greek  and  Roman  weights,  that  it  is  better  to
speak  of  them  under  Pondera,  to  which  article
also  the  reader  is  referred  for  the  literature  of  the
whole  subject.

4.  Angular  and  Circidar  Measures. — The  chief,
and  almost  the  only  importance  of  this  part  of  the
subject  is  in  its  application  to  the  measurement
of  circles  and  degrees  on  the  earth's  surface,  and
to  the  measures  of  time.  The  former  class  of
measures  will  be  treated  of  in  the  Diciionari/  of

3c  3


J56


MERCENARlI.


Greek  and  Roman  Geography.  Respecting  the  mea-
sures of  time,  see  Annus,  Hgra,  &c.      [P.  S.]

ME'NSTRUUM.     [Servus.]

ME'NUS18  {ix-i]vv(ns).  [Ecclesia,  p.  443,  a.]

MERCENA'RII  (fiiadcoToi,  ixi(TQo(p6poi,  more
commoTil)'-  ^^voi)^  mercenary  troops.  At  an  early
period  there  was  no  such  thing  as  a  standing  army,
or  mercenary  force,  in  the  Greek  republics.  The
former  would  have  excited  jealousy,  lest  it  should
oppress  the  people,  as  the  chosen  band  did  at  Argos
(Pausan.ii.  20.  §  2  ;  Thucyd.  v.  81)  ;  and  for  the
latter  there  was  rarely  any  occasion.  The  citizens
of  every  state  formed  a  national  militia  for  the
defence  of  their  country,  and  were  bound  to  serve
for  a  certain  period  at  their  own  expense,  the
higher  classes  usually  serving  in  the  cavalry,  or
heavy-armed  infantry,  the  lower  classes  as  light-
armed  troops.  Foreigners  were  rarely  employed  ;
the  Carians,  Cretans,  and  Arcadians,  who  served
as  mercenaries  (Herod,  i.  171  ;  Pausan.  iv.  8.  §  3,
10.  §  1,  19.  §  4  ;  Wachsmuth,  Hell.  Alterth.
vol.  i.  pt.  i.  p.  30  ;  Schomann,  Ant.  jur.  pub.
Gr.  p.  159),  are  an  exception  to  the  general  rule.
In  the  Persian  war  we  find  a  small  number  of
Arcadians  offering  to  serve  under  Xerxes  (Herod,
viii.  26)  ;  and  they  seemed  to  have  used  them-
selves to  such  employment  down  to  a  much  later
period.  (Xenoph.  Hellen.y'n.  1.  §  23  ;  Schomann,
Id.  p.  409.)  The  practice  of  maintaining  a  stand-
ing force  was  introduced  by  the  tj'rants,  who  kept
guards  and  soldiers  in  their  pay  {hopv<p6poi^  /jncr-
6o(p6poi)  to  prevent  insurrections  of  the  people,
and  preserve  their  influence  abroad.  As  it  was
unsafe  to  trust  arms  in  the  hands  of  their  own  sub-
jects, they  usually  employed  foreigners.  (Thu-
eyd.  VI.  55  ;  Diod.  xi.  67 ^  72  ;  Xenoph.  Hier.  v.
3.)  Hence,  and  because  citizen  soldiers  used  to
fight  without  pay,  ^4uoi  came  to  signify  mercenaries.
(Harpoc.  s.  v.  a^uiTevofj.evovs.)  We  must  distin-
guish, however,  between  those  who  fought  as  auxi-
liaries, whether  for  pay  or  otherwise,  under  com-
mission from  their  own  country,  and  those  who
did  not.  The  former  were  iniKovpoi.,  not  ^4uoi.
(Herod,  i.  64,  iii.  45,  v.  63  ;  Thucyd.  i.  60,  ii.
70,  iii.  34,  iv.  80.)  The  terms  ^cuoi  and  ^€vik6u
implied  that  the  troops  were  independent  of,  or
severed  from,  their  own  country.

The  first  Grecian  people  who  commenced  the
employment  of  mercenaries  on  a  large  scale,  were
the  Athenians.  While  the  tribute  which  they  re-
ceived from  the  allies  placed  a  considerable  rev(>nue
at  their  disposal,  the  wars  which  their  ambition
led  them  into  compelled  them  to  maintain  a  large
force,  naval  and  military,  which  their  own  popula-
tion was  unable  to  supply.  Hence  they  swelled
their  armies  with  foreigners.  Thucydides  makes
the  Corinthian  ambassador  at  Sparta  say,  uvtjt^
7i^A.Qt]vai(t}vZvvafiis.  (i.  121.)  They  perceived  also
the  advantage  of  employing  men  of  different  na-
tions in  that  service,  for  which  from  habit  they
were  best  qualified  ;  as,  for  instance,  Cretan  archers
and  slingers,  Thracian  peltastae.  (Thucyd.  vi.  25,
vii.  27  ;  Aristoph.  Acham.  159.)  At  the  same
time  the  practice  of  paying  the  citizens  was  intro-
duced ;  a  measure  of  Pericles,  which  was  indeed
•  both  just  and  unavoidable  (for  no  man  was  bound
by  law,  or  could  be  expected,  to  maintain  himself
for  a  long  campaign)  ;  but  which  tended  to  efface
the  distinction  between  the  native  soldier  and  the
foreigner.  Other  Greek  nations  soon  imitated  the
Athenians  (Thucyd.  iv.  76),  and  the  appetite  for


MERCENARII.

pay  was  greatly  promoted  by  the  distribution  of
Persian  money  among  the  belligerents.  (Thucyd.
viii.  5,  29,  45  ;  Xenoph.  Hellen.  i.  5.  §  3.)  At
the  close  of  the  Peloponnesian  war,  large  numbers
of  men  who  had  been  accustomed  to  live  by  war
were  thrown  out  of  employment  ;  many  were  in
exile  or  discontented  with  the  state  of  things  at
home  ;  all  such  persons  were  eager  to  engage  in  a
foreign  service.  Hence  there  arose  in  Greece  a  body
of  men  who  made  arms  their  profession,  and  cared
little  on  which  side  they  fought,  provided  there
were  a  suitable  prospect  of  gaining  distinction  or
emolument.  Conon  engaged  mercenaries  with
Persian  money.  Agesilaus  encouraged  the  practice,
and  the  Spartans  allowed  the  members  of  their
confederacy  to  furnish  money  instead  of  men  for
the  same  purpose.  (Xenoph.  Hell.  iii.  4.  §  15,  iv.
3.  §  15,  V.  2.  §  21.)  The  Greeks  who  followed
Cyrus  in  his  expedition  against  Artaxerxes,  were
mercenaries.  (Xenoph.  Anab.  i.  3.  §  21.)  So  were
the  famous  peltastae  of  Chabrias  and  Iphi crates.
(Harpocr.  s.  v.  s.^vikov  iv  KopivOcf :  Aristoph.
Plut.  173.)  The  Phocians,  under  Philomelus,
Onomarchus,  and  Phayllus,  carried  on  the  sacred
war  by  the  aid  of  mercenaries,  paid  out  of  the  trea-
sures of  the  Delphian  temple.  (Diod.  xvi.  30,  &c.)
But  higher  pay  and  richer  plunder  were  in  general
to  be  found  in  Asia,  where  the  disturbed  state  of
the  empire  created  continued  occasions  for  the  ser-
vices of  Greek  auxiliaries,  whose  superior  discipline
and  courage  Tore  felt  and  acknowledged  by  the
Barbarians.  Even  the  Spartans  sent  their  king
Agesilaus  into  Egypt,  for  the  sake  of  obtaining
Persian  gold.  Afterwards  we  find  a  large  body  of
Greeks  serving  under  Darius  against  Alexander.
It  is  proper  here  to  notice  the  evil  consequences
that  resulted  from  this  employment  of  mercenaries,
especiallj'-  to  Athens,  which  employed  them  more
than  any  other  Greek  state.  It  might  be  expected
that  the  facility  of  hiring  trained  soldiers,  whose
experience  gave  them  great  advantages,  would  lead
to  the  disuse  of  military  service  by  the  citizens.
Such  was  the  case.  The  Athenian  citizens  stayed
at  home  and  became  enervated  and  corrupted  by
the  love  of  ease  and  pleasure  ;  while  the  conduct
of  wars,  carried  on  for  their  benefit,  was  entrusted
to  men  over  whom  they  had  little  control.  Even
the  general,  though  commonly  an  Athenian,  was
compelled  frequently  to  comply  with  the  humours,
or  follow  the  example  of  his  troops.  To  conciliate
them,  or  to  pay  them  their  arrears,  he  might  be
driven  to  commit  acts  of  plunder  and  outrage  upon
the  friends  and  allies  of  Athens,  which  thus  found
enemies  where  she  least  expected.  It  was  not  un-
usual for  the  generals  to  engage  in  enterprises
foreign  to  the  purposes  for  which  they  were  sent
out,  and  unconnected  with  the  interests  of  their
country,  whose  resources  they  wasted,  while  they
sought  their  own  advantage.  The  expeditions  of
Chabrias  and  Iphicrates  to  Egypt  are  examples  of
this.  But  the  most  signal  example  is  the  conduct
of  the  adventurer  Charidemus.  Upon  all  these
matters  we  may  refer  the  reader  more  particularly
to  Demosthenes,  whose  comments  upon  the  disas-
trous policy  pursued  by  his  countrymen  were  no
less  just  than  they  were  wise  and  statesmanlike.
(Demosth.  Philip,  i.  p.  46,  c.  Aristocr.  pp.  QG6^
671  ;  Tepl  rov  aTi(p.  ttjs  rpirip.  p.  1232,  &c  ;
Athen.  xii.  43  ;  Thirlwall,  Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  v.
p.  210  ;  Wachsmuth,  vol.  i.  pt.  ii.  p.  309.)  The
Romans  at  a  comparatively  early  time  introduced


METALLUM.

tTie  practice  of  paN'ing  their  own  citizens  for  their
service  in  the  army  [Stipendium],  but  merce-
nary troops,  in  the  usual  acceptation  of  the  term,
were  unknown  among  them  till  at  a  very  late
period.  [C.  R.  K.]

MERENDA.     [Coena,  p.  306,  b.]

MERIDIA'NI.     [Gladiatores,  p.  575,  b.]

METAE.     [Circus,  p.  284,  a.]

METAGEFTNIA  (pieTay^irvia),  a  festival
celebrated  by  the  Attic  demos  Melite,  in  honour
of  Apollo  Metageitnios.  The  chief  solemnities
consisted  in  offering  sacrifices,  and  the  festival  was
believed  to  commemorate  the  emigration  (yeirvia-
cris  irphs  crepovs)  of  the  inhabitants  of  Melite  to
Diomis.  (Plut.  de  Eonl.  p.  601,  b.  ;  comp.  Suidas,
and  Harpocrat.  s.  v.  M^ray^iTviuiv.)         [L.  S.]

METALLUM  (fidTaWov).  The  Greek  word
originally  signified  a  pit  or  cave,  where  anything
is  sought  for  by  digging,  hence  a  mine,  and  hence
any  mineral  found  in  a  mine,  especially  metal.  In
Latin,  the  word  means  both  a  mine  and  metal,  the
latter  sense,  however,  preponderating  in  use.  The
object  of  this  article  is  to  give  a  brief  general  view
of  the  acquaintance  which  the  Greeks  and  Romans
had  with  the  metals,  and  the  uses  to  which  they
applied  them.

The  metals  which  have  been  more  or  less  knoAvn
from  the  earliest  period  of  which  we  have  any  in-
formation are  those  which  were  long  distinguished
as  the  seven  principal  metals,  namely,  gold,  silver,
copper,  tin,  iron,  lead,  and  mercurj-.  (Some  very
interesting  information,  which  does  not  fall  within
the  province  of  this  work,  may  be  read  in  Beck-
mann's  History  of  Inventions,  by  Johnston,  vol.  ii.
pp.  23,  &c.  4th  ed.)  If  to  this  list  we  add  the
compound  of  gold  and  silver  called  eledrum,  the
compound  of  copper  and  tin  called  x"'^'^os  and  aes
(bronze),  and  steel,  we  have,  in  all  probability,  a
complete  list  of  the  metals  known  to  the  Greeks
and  Romans,  with  the  exception  of  zinc,  which
they  do  not  seem  to  have  known  as  a  metal,  but
only  in  its  ores,  and  of  brass,  which  they  regarded
as  a  sort  of  bronze.     (See  below).

The  early  Greeks  were  no  doubt  chiefly  in-
debted for  a  supply  of  the  various  metals  to  the
commerce  of  the  Phoenicians,  who  procured  them
principallj'-  from  Arabia  and  Spain,  and  tin  from
our  own  island  and  the  East.  In  the  Homeric
poems  we  find  an  allusion  to  this  traffic  as  one  in
which  the  Greeks  of  the  western  coast  were  already
engaged  ;  where  Athena  personates  Mentes,  the
ruler  of  the  Taphians,  carrying  shining  iron  to
Temesa  in  Cyprus,  to  exchange  it  for  copper.  (  Od.
i.  184,  comp.  Nitzsch's  note.)  The  Homeric  poems
furnish  ample  proofs  of  how  much  more  plentiful
copper  was  than  iron.  The  former  is  the  common
material  of  arms,  instruments,  and  vessels  of  various
sorts  [Aes]  ;  the  latter  is  mentioned  much  more
rarely,  and  is  distinguished  by  an  epithet  implying
the  difficulty  of  working  it  (ttoAu/c/atjtos,  //.  vi.  48),
and  its  adjective  is  frequently  used  metaphorically
to  express  the  greatest  stubbornness  {Od.  v.  191,
&c.  :  see  Seller  and  Jacobitz,  s.  vv.  (ridr^pos  and
(Tidiipeos).  Hesiod  carried  us  back  to  a  period
when  iron  was  unknown  {Op.  et  Di.  130,  151)  :

Tols  5'  ^j/  x^^'tfOM^''  Teuxeo,  xo^ffo*  Se  re  oIkoi,
XaAK(jJ  S'   flpya^ovTO'  /xeAas  S'  ovk  fffKe  (riSrjpos,

and  though  the  period  thus  described  is  mythical,
yet  the  idea  of  it  was  clearly  connected  with  the
belief  that  iron  had  been  the  last  discovered  of  all


METALLUM.


759


the  metals.  (See  Hcickh,  Creta,  vol.  i.  p.  260  ;
Millin,  Mineralogie  Homeriqiie.)  The  importance
of  hardening  the  copper  used  for  arms  and  armour,
and  so  forth,  is  a  presumption  in  favour  of  the
knowledge  and  use  of  tin  ;  but  we  have  also  de-
finite mention  of  this  metal  {Kaaairepos)  several
times  in  the  Iliad  ;  and  it  seems  not  improbable
than  then,  as  now,  it  was  generally  plated  on
another  metal.  (See  Liddell  and  Scott,  and  Seller
and  Jacobitz,  s.  v.  ;  Beckmann,  vol.  ii.  p.  206,  foil.)
Tlie  art  of  hardening  copper  by  the  admixture  of
tin  was  known  before  the  historical  period.  (Comp.
Aes.)  With  respect  to  steel,  it  is  a  much  disputed
point  whether  this  metal  is  the  proper  sense  of  the
word  Kvavos  in  Homer  (//.  xi.  24,  35,  Od.  vii.  87)
and  Hesiod  {Scut.  143),  but  at  all  events  it  ia
highly  probable  that  this  is  the  meaning  of  addfxas
in  Hesiod  {Scut.  231,  T/ieo(/.  161  ;  see  the  lexi-
cographers, s.  vv.,  the  commentators  on  Homer  and
Hesiod,  in  IL,  and  Beckmann,  vol.  ii.  p.  324).  It
would  appear  from  the  manner  in  which  Aeschylus
refers  to  the  Chalybes,  taken  in  connection  with
the  traditions  respecting  the  early  intercourse  of  the
Greeks  with  the  shores  of  the  Baltic,  that  the  iron
and  steel  works  of  that  people  were  known  at  a
very  early  period,  and  that  it  was  from  them  chiefly
that  the  Greeks  procured  their  iron  and  steel.
(Aesch.  Prom.  720;  Apollon.  Rhod.  ii.  1000;
Xen.  Anab.  v.  5.  §  I  ;  Ritter,  Erdkunde,  vol.  ii.
p.  776  ;  Hockh,  Creta,  vol.  i.  p.  294.)  Enough  has
already  been  said  respecting  the  early  knowledge
of  the  precious  metals,  separately  and  in  combina-
tion, under  Argentum,  Aurum,  andELECTRUM.
In  drawing  inferences,  however,  from  Homer's  al-
lusions to  these  and  the  other  materials  of  the  useful
and  fine  arts,  we  must  be  on  our  guard  not  to  make
the  poefs  imagination  our  standard  of  their  actual
abundance.  (See  further,  concerning  the  real  or
supposed  knowledge  of  metals  and  metallurgy  in  the
earliest  times,  Plin.  //.  A^.  vii.  56.  s.  57.)

If  we  turn  from  the  metals  themselves  to  the
art  of  working  them,  still  taking  the  poems  of
Homer  and  Hesiod  for  our  guide,  we  find  the
Greeks  of  that  early  period  perfectly  acquainted
with  the  processes  of  smelting  the  metal  from  the
ore  and  of  forging  heated  masses  into  the  required
shapes,  by  the  aid  of  the  hammer  and  tongs.  It
may,  indeed,  be  doubted  whether  the  x<^«''ot,  into
which  Hephaestus  throws  the  materials  of  the
shield  of  Achilles,  and  which  are  worked  by  the
blast  of  twenty  pairs  of  bellows  {(pvcrai)  are  smelt-
ing-fumaces  or  mere  smith's  forges  (//.  xviii.  470),
but  the  former  sense  seems  to  be  required  in  the
passage  of  Hesiod.  {Tlicog.  863.)  Both  Homer
and  Hesiod  refer  to  the  smith's  workshop  (xaA/c^iby
5({^os,  xaA/cejos  ^cokos)  as  a  common  lounge  and
as  a  place  of  shelter  to  which  the  poor  resorted  for
its  warmth.  {Od.  xviii.  328,  Op.  et  Di.  491.)  The
whole  of  Homer's  description  of  the  workshop  of
Hephaestus  deserves  careful  study  {II.  xviii.  369,
&c.).  The  smith's  instruments  were  the  anvil
{&K/J.WV)  with  the  block  on  which  it  rested  {hjcjxS-
deTov),  the  tongs  {nvpaypr}),  and  the  hammer
{f>aiaTi]p,  (Tipvpa,  II.  I.  c,  Od.  iii.  433 — 435).
[Incus,  Forceps,  Malleus.]  The  arts  of  casting
metals  into  moulds,  and  of  welding,  or  even  of  sol-
dering pieces  of  metal  together,  were  as  yet  unknown.
In  large  works,  hammered  plates  were  united  by
mechanical  fastenings,^  nails,  pins,  rivets,  cramps,
or  dovetails  (Seir/iot,  ^\oi,  Trepdvaj,  Keurpa),  and
specimens  of  this  sort  of  work  in  the  bronze  statues
3o  4


7fi0


METALLUM.


of  the  earliest  period  were  still  to  be  seen  in  the
time  of  Pausanias  (//.  xi.  634,  xviii.  379  ;  Paus.  x.
]  6.  §  1).  The  art  of  embossing,  or  fastening  pieces
of  one  metal  on  to  the  surface  of  another  (i/JiTraLcr-
rixi]  Te'xi'Tj,  is  referred  to  several  times  in  Homer
(//.  xi.  24,  35  ;  Lobeck,  ad  Soph.  Aj.  846,  &c.).
(filding  was  commonly  practised :  one  interesting
example  is  the  gilding  of  the  horns  of  an  ox  about
to  be  sacrificed.  (Od.  iii.  425,  &c.)  This  passage
furnishes  a  striking  instance  of  the  use  of  words
connected  with  x^'-^'^'^^  for  working  in  any  kind  of
metjil :  thus,  the  artificer  is  called  by  the  generic
term,  X"^'^^'^*  ('^'^'^)->  ^^  well  as  by  the  specific
name,  XP^^^X'^^^^  (425),  and  his  tools  are  the
ottAo  Xtt'^K^t",  oiaiu  re  xpucroj.'  dp'/d^^To  (vv.
433,  435).  Lastly,  the  image  used  to  describe  the
hissing  of  the  burning  stake  when  plunged  in  the
eye  of  Polyphemus,  shows  an  acquaintance  with  the
process  of  dipping  red-hot  iron  in  water  to  harden
it.     {Od.  xi,  391,  comp.  Soph.  Ai  720.)

The  advances  made  in  the  art  of  metallurgy  in
subsequent  times  are  chiefly  connected  with  the
improvements  in  the  art  of  statuary.  The  method
of  working,  as  described  in  Homer,  seems  to  have
long  prevailed,  namely  by  beating  out  lumps  of  the
material  into  the  form  proposed,  and  afterwards
fitting  the  pieces  together  by  means  of  pins  or
keys.  It  was  called  acpvprjAarou^  from  a^vpa.,  a
hammer.  Pausanias  (iii.  17.  §  6)  describes  this
process  in  speaking  of  a  very  ancient  statue  of
Jupiter  at  Sparca,  the  work  of  Learchus  of  Rhegium.
With  respect  to  its  supposed  antiquity,  Pausanias
can  only  mean  that  it  was  very  ancient,  and  of  the
archaic  style  of  art.  The  term  (T<pvpi]\aros  is  used  by
Diodorus  (ii.  9)  in  describing  a  very  ancient  golden
table  which  was  said  to  have  decorated  the  cele-
brated gardens  of  the  palace  of  Ninus  and  Semiramis,
at  Babylon.  Pliny  (//.  A^.  xxxiii.  4.  s.  24.)  men-
tions a  golden  statue  of  Diana  Anaitis  worked  in  the
game  way,  which  he  calls  holosph/raton.  A  statue
of  Dionysius  by  Onassimedes,  of  solid  bronze,  is
mentioned  by  Pausanias  (ix.  12.  §  3)  as  existing
at  Thebes  in  his  time.  The  next  mode,  among  the
Greeks,  of  executing  metal  works  seems  to  have
been  by  plating  upon  a  nucleus,  or  general  form,
of  wood — a  practice  which  was  employed  also
by  the  Egyptians,  as  is  proved  by  a  specimen  of
their  art  preserved  in  the  British  Museum.  The
subject  is  a  small  head  of  Osiris,  and  the  wood  is
still  remaining  within  the  metal.  It  is  probable
that  the  terms  holosphyraton  and  sphyraton  were
intended  to  designate  the  two  modes  of  hammer-
work  ;  the  first  on  a  solid  mass,  and  the  other  ham-
mering out  plates.     (Comp.  Malleus.)

It  is  extremely  difficult  to  determine  at  what
date  the  casting  of  metal  was  introduced.  That  it
was  known  at  a  very  early  period  there  can  be  no
doubt,  although  it  may  not  have  been  exercised  by
statuaries  in  European  Greece  till  a  comparatively
late  date.  The  art  of  founding  may  be  divided
into  three  classes  or  stages.  The  first  is  the  simple
melting  of  metals  either  from  the  solid  form,  or
from  the  ore  ;  the  second,  casting  the  fused  metals
into  prepared  forms  or  moulds  ;  and  the  third,
casting  into  a  mould,  with  a  core  or  internal
nucleus,  by  which  the  metal  may  be  preserved  of
a  determined  thickness.  The  first  stage  must  have
been  known  at  a  period  of  which  we  have  no  re-
cord beyond  a  passage  in  the  book  of  Job  (xxviti.
1,  2),  which  establishes  the  fact  that  some  of  the
proccBses  of  metallurgy,  such  as  the  reduction  of


METALLUM.

gold,  silver,  iron,  and  copper  from  their  ores,  wfire
well  known  when  that  book  was  composed.  The
casting  of  metal  into  moulds  must  also  have  been
practised  very  early.  There  are  no  means  of  know-
ing of  what  material  or  composition  the  forms
or  moulds  were  made,  but  in  all  probability  clay
(dried,  and  then  perhaps  baked)  was  employed  for
the  purpose.  The  circumstance  of  a  spot  whore  clay
abounded  having  been  chosen  for  the  founding  of
the  bronze  works  for  the  temple  of  Solomon  sup-
ports this  supposition.  (1  Kings,  vii.  46).  Of  coul"se
all  the  earliest  works  produced  in  this  stage  of  the
art  must  have  been  solid.  The  third  process,  that
of  casting  into  a  mould  with  a  core,  was  an  im-
portant step  in  the  statuary's  art.  Unfortunately
there  is  no  better  record  of  the  time,  nor  of  the
mode  in  which  this  was  effected  by  the  ancients,
than  the  statements  of  Pausanias  and  Pliny,  ac-
cording to  whom  the  art  of  casting  in  bronze  and  in
iron  was  invented  by  Rhoecus  and  Theodorus  of
Samos,  who  probably  lived  in  the  sixth  and  fifth
centuries  before  our  era.  (Paus.  iii.  12.  §  8,  viii.
14  §  5  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.  12.  s.  43  ;  Diet,  of
Blog.  s.  vv.  Rhoecus,  Tlieodorus.)

The  ancients  used  something  answering  the  pur-
pose of  a  solder  for  fastening  the  different  pieces  of
metal  together  ;  but  it  is  difficult  to  determine
whether  the  term  KdWrjais  means  a  solder  or  only
a  species  of  glue.  Pausanias  distinctly  speaks  of
it  as  something  different  from  nails  or  cramps,  and
gives  us  the  name  of  its  inventor,  Glaucus  of  Chios,
who  appears  to  have  lived  earlier  than  the  Samian
artists  just  referred  to  (Herod,  i.  25  ;  Paus.  x.  16.
§  1  ;  Plut.  de  Def.  Or.  47,  p.  436  ;  Diet,  of  liiog.
s.  v.).  Pliny  in  like  manner  speaks  of  a  solder
under  the  title  of  plumbum  argeniarium  {H.  N.
xxxiv.  17.  s.  48).  Many  of  the  works  in  the
British  Museum,  as  well  as  in  other  collections,
are  composed  of  pieces  of  metal  which  have  been
joined  together,  but  whether  by  clamps,  rivets,  or
soldei-ing,  it  is  now  impossible  to  determine  accu-
rately, on  account  of  the  rust  about  the  edges  of  the
plates.  The  modern  practice  of  welding  pieces  of
metal  together  seems  to  have  been  altogether  un-
known to  the  ancients.

Respecting  the  supply  and  use  of  metals  in  the
historical  period,  little  remains  to  be  added  to  what
has  been  said  under  Aes,  Argentum,  Aurum,
Caelatura,  Electrum,  Statuaria,  «&c.  Iron
was  found  chiefly  in  Laconia  and  on  the  shores  of
the  Black  Sea,  and  was  brought  especially  from
Sinope.  Stephanus  Byzantinus,  who  mentions
this  fact,  states  the  purposes  for  which  the  tv/o
sorts  of  iron  were  considered  respectively  better
fitted  {s.  V.  AaKeSaifiav).  The  whole  subject  of
metals  and  metal-work  is  treated  of  by  Pliny  in
the  thirty- third  and  thirty-fourth  books  of  his
Historia  Naturalis.

One  point  not  yet  noticed  is  the  question,  whether
the  ancients  possessed  a  knowledge  oi  zinc.  That
they  rarely  if  ever  used  it  as  an  alloy  of  copper  is
proved  by  the  analysis  of  existing  specimens  of
their  bronze  [Aes]  ;  but  that  they  were  absolutely
ignorant  of  it  can  easily  be  disproved.  One  of  the
most  important  passages  on  the  subject  is  in  Strabo
(xiii.  p.  610),  who  says  that  "  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  Andeira  (in  the  Troas)  there  is  a  certain
stone  which,  on  being  burnt,  becomes  iron  ;  then,
on  being  smelted  with  a  certain  earth,  it  distils
»|/€u5ap7upos,  and  with  the  addition  of  copper  it
becomes  what  is  called  /cpS/io  (which  may  lueau


METOECI.

either  im  alloy  in  general,  or  a  particular  kind  of
alloy),  which  some  call  opslxaKKOs  ;  and  \pevSdp-
yvpos  is  also  found  about  Tmolus."  In  all  pro-
hability  the  stofie  here  mentioned  is  the  common
zinc  ore  called  calamine,  which  Pliny  and  other
writers  call  cadmium.  If  so,  \pevddpyvpos  must  be
metallic  zinc,  and  opeixa^Kos  brass.  For  a  further
discussion  of  this  subject,  into  which  we  have  not
space  to  enter,  the  reader  is  referred  to  Beckmann,
vol.  ii.  pp.  32,  &c.

Respecting  the  use  of  metals   for  money,  see

NUMMUS.

Only  a  few  words  are  necessary  on  the  word
mdallum  in  its  other  sense.  Nearly  all  that  is
known  on  the  subject  of  the  Greek  mines,  the
mode  of  working  them,  and  the  revenues  derived
from  them  is  contained  in  Bcickh's  Essay  on  the
Silver  Mines  of  Laurion  appended  to  his  Public
Ecofiomy  of  Athens.  Respecting  the  Roman  mines,
eee  Vectigalia.  [P.  S.]

METATO'RES.  [Castra,  p.  246,  a.]
METOECI  (/xeToiKot),  is  the  name  by  which,  at
j\thens  and  in  other  Greek  states,  the  resident
aliens  were  designated,  and  these  must  be  distin-
guished from  such  strangers  as  made  only  a  transi-
tory stay  in  a  place,  ior  Harpocration  (s.  v.)  ex-
pressly mentions  as  a  characteristic  of  a  ix4toikos,
that  he  resided  permanently  in  the  place.  No  city
of  Greece  perhaps  had  such  a  number  of  resident
aliens  as  Athens,  as  none  afforded  to  strangers
greater  advantages  and  conveniences,  or  a  more
agreeable  mode  of  living.  In  the  census  instituted
by  Demetrius  Phalereus  (309  B.  c),  the  number  of
resident  aliens  at  Athens  was  10,000,  in  which
number  women  and  children  were  probably  not
included.  ( Athen.  vi.  p.  272.)  These  aliens  were
persons  from  all  parts  of  Greece,  as  well  as  from
l;arl)arous  countries,  such  as  Lydians,  Phrygians,
and  Syrians,  or  Attic  freedmen  [Libertus
(Greek)],  and  these  people  had  chosen  Athens
as  their  adoptive  country,  either  on  account  of  its
resources  for  amusement  and  instruction,  or  on  ac-
count of  the  facilities  it  afforded  for  carrying  on
mercantile  business.  The  latter  class  of  persons
seems  to  have  been  by  far  the  most  numerous.
The  jealousy  with  which  the  citizens  of  the  ancient
Greek  republics  kept  their  body  clear  of  intruders,
is  also  manifest  in  their  regulations  concerning
aliens.  However  long  they  might  have  resided  in
Athens,  they  were  always  regarded  as  strangers,
whence  they  are  sometimes  called  |eVot,  and  to
remind  them  of  their  position  they  had  on  some  oc-
casions to  perform  certain  degrading  services  to  the
Athenian  citizens.  These  services  [Hydriaphoria]
were  however  in  all  probability  not  intended  to
hurt  the  feelings  of  the  aliens,  but  were  simply
acts  symbolical  of  their  relation  to  the  citizens.

Aliens  were  not  allowed  to  acquire  landed  pro-
perty in  the  state  they  had  chosen  for  their  resi-
dence, and  were  consequently  obliged  to  live  in
liired  houses  or  apartments  (Demosth.  pro  Phorm.
p.  946  ;  Xen.  de  Vectig.  ii.  2  ;  Aristot.  Oecon.  ii.
2,  3  ;  compare  Bockh's  Pttbl.  Econ.  i.  §  24),  and
hence  the  letting  of  houses  was  a  subject  of  much
speculation  and  profit  at  Athens.  As  the  aliens
did  not  constitute  a  part  of  the  state,  and  were  yet
in  constant  intercourse  and  commerce  with  its
members,  every  alien  was  obliged  to  select  a  citizen
for  his  patron  (Trpoo-TciTTjs),  who  was  not  only  the
mediator  between  them  and  the  state,  through
whom  alone  they  could  transact  any  legal  business


METOPA.

whether  private  or  public,  but


761

as  at  the  same
time  answerable  {iy'Yvr]T7]s)  to  the  state  for  the
conduct  of  his  client.  (Etymol.  M.  s-  v.  'hirpocTTa-
aiov.)  On  the  other  hand,  however,  the  state
allowed  the  aliens  to  carry  on  all  kinds  of  industry
and  commerce  under  the  protection  of  the  law  ;  in
fact  at  Athens  nearly  all  business  was  in  the  hands
of  aliens,  who  on  this  account  lived  for  the  most
part  in  the  Peiraeeus.  (Xen.  de  Vectig.  c.  2,  de  Rep.
Ath.i.  12.)

Each  family  of  aliens,  whether  they  availed  them-
selves of  the  privilege  of  carrying  on  any  mercantile
business  or  not,  had  to  pay  an  annual  tax  (fierof-
Kiov  or  ^(viKo)  of  twelve  drachmae,  or  if  the  head
of  the  family  was  a  widow,  of  only  six  drachmae.
(Bockh,  Pid)L  Econ.  iii.  §  7  ;  Isaeus  ap.  Harpo-
crat.  s.v.  McToiKiov.)  If  aliens  did  not  pay  this
tax,  or  if  they  assumed  the  right  of  citizens,  and
probably  also  in  case  they  refused  to  select  a  pa-
tron, they  not  only  forfeited  the  protection  of  the
state,  but  were  sold  as  slaves.  [Aprostasiou
Dike.]  In  some  cases,  however,  though  they
are  of  rare  occurrence,  aliens  without  having  the
isopolity,  might  become  exempt  from  the  /xeroiKiov
( dre'Aem  fieroiKiov)  as  well  as  from  other  obliga-
tions. (Demosth.  c.  Aristocrat,  p.  691  ;  Plut.  Vit.
dec.  Oral.  p.  842  ;  Demosth.  c.  Aristog.  p.  787  ;
Suidas,  s.  V.  MeroiKiov.)  Extraordinar}'  taxes  and
liturgies  (clarcpopal  and  Xeirovpyiai)  devolved  upon
aliens  no  less  than  upon  citizens  (Demosth.  c.
Androt.  p.  612),  though  there  must  have  been  a
difference  between  the  liturgies  performed  by  citi-
zens and  those  performed  by  aliens.  In  ^yhat  thia
difference  consisted  is  nowhere  expressly  mentioned,
but  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  with  the  ex-
ception of  the  trierarchy  and  gymnasiarchy,  all
other  liturgies  might  devolve  upon  aliens,  though
perhaps  only  on  certain  occasions,  as  the  choregia
at  the  festival  of  the  Lenaea.  (Schol.  ad  Aristoph.
Plut.  954  ;  compare  Bockh,  Puld.  Econ.  iv.  §  10>)
The  extraordinary  taxes  (elacpopai)  which  aliens
had  to  paj',  seem  also  in  some  degree  to  have  dif-
fered from  those  paid  by  citizens  ;  and  it  is  clear
from  Demosthenes  (c.  Androt.  p.  609  and  612),
that  they  Avere  taxed  higher  than  citizens  of  the
same  census.  The  aliens  were  also  obliged,  like
citizens,  to  serve  in  the  regular  armies  and  in  the
fleet,  both  abroad  and  at  home,  for  the  defence  of
the  city.  (Xen.de  Vectig.  I.e.;  Thucj'd.  ii.  13,  iv.
90  ;  Demosth.  c.  Philip,  i.  p.  50  ;  Thucyd.  i.  143,
iii.  16.)  Respecting  those  fieToticoi  who  had  ob-
tained the  l(roT€\eia,  see  Civitas  (Greek).  The
heirs  of  a  jxeroiKos  who  died  in  Attica,  were  under
the  jurisdiction  of  the  polemarch.  (Demosth.  c.
Steph.  ii.  p.  1135.)

The  preceding  account  of  the  condition  of  the
aliens  at  Athens  applies  with  very  few  modifica-
tions to  most  other  parts  of  Greece.  (Comparft
Petitus,  Legg.  Att.  ii.  5.  p.  246,  &c.  ;  F.  A.  Wolf,
Proleq.  ad  Leptin.  p.  Ixvi.  &c.  ;  Hermann,  Polit.
Ant.  '%Uo.)  [L-S-]

METOPA  or  METOPE  (iuert^TTTj),  the
name  applied  to  each  of  the  spaces  between  the
triglyphs  in  the  frieze  of  the  Doric  order,  and  by
metonymy  to  the  sculptured  ornament  with  which
those  spaces  were  filled  up.  In  the  original
significance  of  the  parts  the  tnglyphs  represent
the  ends  of  the  cross-beams  or  joists  which  rested
on  the  architrave  ;  the  beds  of  these  beams  were
called  07ra(,  and  hence  the  spaces  between  thera
yueTOTTat.     (Yitruv.  iv.  2.  §  4.)     Originally  thev


•62


METRETES.


were  left  open  ;  next  they  were  filled  up  with
plain  slabs,  as  in  the  propylaea  at  Eleusis,  and
many  other  buildings,  and  lastly,  but  still  at  an
earl}'  period,  they  were  adorned  with  sculptures
either  in  low  or  high  relief.  The  earliest  existing
examples  of  sculptured  metopes  are  probably  those
of  the  middle  temple  on  the  acropolis  of  Selinus,
which  had  metopes  only  on  its  east  front,  and  in
which  the  style  of  the  sculptures  is  so  rude  as  al-
most to  remind  one  of  some  Mexican  works  of  art.
The  date  is  probably  between  620  and  580  B.C.
The  next  in  antiquity  are  those  from  the  middle
temple  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  lower  city  of
Selinus,  in  which  there  is  a  marked  improvement,
but  which  still  belong  to  the  archaic  style.  Their
date  is  in  the  former  half  of  the  5th  century  b.  c,
A  still  further  progress  may  be  observed  in  the
metopes  of  the  southern  temple  on  the  eastern
hill,  which  belongs  to  the  second  half  of  the  same
century.  In  these  the  ground  is  tufa  and  the
figures  marble  ;  the  others  are  entirely  of  tufa.
(See  figures  of  the  Selinuntine  metopes  in  the
Atlas  zu  Kugler''s  Kunstgeschichte^  pt.  ii.  pi.  5.  figs.  1
— 4  ;  comp.  Miiller,  Arch'dol.  d.  Kunst,  §  90,  n.  2).
Thus  these  Selinuntine  metopes,  with  the  works
of  the  epoch  of  perfect  art,  namely  the  metopes  of
the  temple  of  Theseus  and  of  the  Parthenon,  form
an  interesting  series  of  illustrations  of  the  progress
of  Grecian  sculpture.  The  metopes  from  the  Par-
thenon, now  in  the  British  Museum,  are  too  well
known  to  need  description :  but '  it  is  important
to  notice  the  marked  difference  in  their  style  ;
some  show  evident  traces  of  the  archaic  school,
while  others  are  worthy  of  the  hand  of  Pheidias
himself.  In  the  later  orders  the  metopes  are  not
seen,  the  whole  frieze  being  brought  to  one  surface.
This  is  the  case  even  in  some  ancient  specimens
of  the  Doric  order.  (Comp.  Columna,  and  the
plates  of  the  order  in  Mauch,  Architekton.  Ord-
nunqen.)  [P.  S.]

METRETES  (fi^rprfriis),  or  AMPHORA
METRETES  (a,fx(popevs  /ieTpTjT-^y,  the  standard
amphora)^  was  the  principal  Greek  liquid  measure.
It  contained  12  choes^  48  choenices^  72  xestae  (sex-
/am),  and  144  cotyhxe.  It  was  3-4ths  of  the  me-
dimnus^  the  chief  dry  measure.  The  Attic  me-
tretes  was  half  as  large  again  as  the  Roman  am-
phora quadrantal,  and  contained  a  little  less  than
9  gallons.  (See  the  Tables.)  If  we  take,  ac-
cording to  Bockh's  views,  the  Greek  cubic  foot  as
equal  to  53^  Roman  sextarii,  then,  since  the  Attic
metretes  contained  72  sextarii^  we  have  the  ratio
of  the  metretes  to  the  cubic  foot  as  72  :  53^  or  as
27  :  20,  or  as  135  :  100,  or  as  1*35  to  1,  or  nearly
as  4  :  3.

The  Aeginetan  metretes  was  to  the  cubic  foot
(still  following  Bockh's  calculations)  in  the  ratio
of  9:4,  and  to  the  Attic  metretes  in  the  ratio  of
5:3,  80  that  the  Aeginetan  measure  was  2-5ths
greater  than  the  Attic  ;  and  since  the  Attic  con-
tained 72  sextarii,  the  Aeginetan  contained  120,
which  is  precisely  the  content  assigned  by  Cleo-
patra, Galen,  and  Didymus,  to  the  Babylonian,
Syrian,  or  Antiochean  metretes,  which  belonged
to  the  same  system  as  the  Eginetan.  [Mensuka,
Pondera].

The  Macedonian  metretes  is  inferred  to  have
been  much  smaller  than  the  Attic,  from  the  cir-
cumstance mentioned  by  Aristotle  (Hist.  Anim.
viiL  9)  of  an  elephant's  drinking  14  of  them  at
once  ;  but  this  is  doubtful  [P.  S.]


MILLIARE.

METRO'NOMI  ({XiTpov6ixoi)  were  officers  at
Athens  belonging  to  that  class  which  we  might
term  police-officers.  They  were,  like  all  officers  of
this  kind,  appointed  by  lot.  Their  number  is  stated
differently  :  some  say  that  there  were  fifteen  (ten
for  the  Peiraeeus  and  five  for  the  city)  ;  some  say
twenty -four  (fifteen  for  the  Peiraeeus,  and  nine  for
the  city)  ;  and  others  state  that  there  were  only  ten,
five  for  the  Peiraeeus  and  five  for  the  ciry.  (Har-
pocrat,  Suidas,  Phot,  and  Lex.  Seg.  s.  v.  Merpo-
vo^oi.)  Bockh  {PublEcon.  i.  §  9.  n.  193)  would
alter  all  these  passages  of  the  grammarians  so  as  to
make  them  say,  that  the  whole  number  of  metro-
nomi  was  fifteen,  and  that  ten  were  for  the  city  and
five  for  the  Peiraeeus,  because  the  sitophylaces  were
distributed  in  the  same  manner.  But  there  does
not  appear  sufficient  ground  for  such  a  bold  altera-
tion, and  it  seems  at  any  rate  probable  that  the
number  of  these  officers,  as  the  grammarians  state,
was  necessarily  greater  in  the  port-town  than  in
the  city,  for  there  must  have  been  more  business
for  them  in  the  Peiraeeus  than  at  Athens,  which
was  not  the  case  with  the  sitophylaces.  The  duties
of  the  metronomi  were  to  watch  that  the  weights
and  measures  used  by  tradesmen  and  merchants
should  have  the  size  and  weight  prescribed  by
law,  and  either  to  punish  offenders  or  to  receive
complaints  against  them,  for  the  real  nature  of  the
jurisdiction  of  the  metronomi  is  not  known.  (Meier
and  Schomanu,  Att.  Proc.  p.  93,  &c.)       [L.  S.]

METRO'POLIS.     [CoLONiA.  p.  313,  b.]

MILLIA'RE,  MILLIA'RIUM,  or  MILLE
PASSU  UM  (fiiKiov),  the  Roman  mile,  consisted
of  1000  paces  (passtis)  of  5  feet  each,  and  was
therefore  =  5000  feet.  Taking  the  Roman  foot  at
11*6496  English  inches,  the  Roman  mile  would
be  1618  English  j^ards,  or  142  yards  less  than  the
English  statute  mile.  By  another  calculation,  in
which  the  foot  is  taken  at  1 1  "62  inches,  the  mile
would  be  a  little  more  than  1614  yai'ds.  [Men-
SURA.]  The  number  of  Roman  miles  in  a  degree
of  a  large  circle  of  the  earth  is  a  very  little  more
than  75.  The  Roman  mile  contained  8  Greek
stadia.  The  most  common  term  for  the  mile  is
mtUe  passuum,  or  only  the  initials  M.  P.  ;  some-
times the  v,'OTd  passuum  is  omitted.  (Cic.  ad  Att.
iii.  4  ;  Sallust,  Jug.  c.  114).

The  mile  stones  along  the  Roman  roads  were
called  milliaiia.  They  were  also  called  lapides;
thus  we  have  ad  tertium  lapidem  (or  without  the
word  lapidem)  for  3  miles  from  Rome,  for  Rome
is  to  be  understood  as  the  starting-point  when  no
other  place  is  mentioned.  Sometimes  we  have  in
full  ab  Urbe.,  or  a  Roma.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii.  12.
8.  bQ  ;  Varro,  R.  R.  iii.  2.)  The  laying  down  of
the  mile-stones  along  the  Roman  roads  is  commonly
ascribed  to  C.  Gracchus,  on  the  authority  of  a  pas-
sage in  Plutarch  (  Gracch.  6,  7),  which  only  proves
that  Gracchus  erected  mile-stones  on  the  roads
which  he  made  or  repaired,  without  at  all  imply-
ing that  the  system  had  never  been  used  before.
There  are  passages  in  the  historians,  where  mile-
stones are  spoken  of  as  if  they  had  existed  much
earlier  ;  but  such  passages  are  not  decisive  ;  they
may  be  anticipatory  anachronisms.  (Liv.  v.  4  ;
Flor.  ii.  6  ;  comp.  Justin,  xxii.  6.  §  9.)  A  more
important  testimony  is  that  of  Polybius  (iii.  39),
who  expressly  states  that,  in  his  time,  that  part  of
the  high  road  from  Spain  to  Italy,  which  lay  in
Gaul,  was  provided  with  mile-stones.

The  system  was  brought  to  perfection  by  Au-


MIMUS.

ptistu?,  probably  in  connection  with  that  measure-
ment of  the  roads  of  the  empire,  which  was  set
on  foot  by  Julius  Caesar,  and  the  results  of  which
are  recorded  in  the  so-called  Antonine  Itinerary.
Augustus  set  up  a  gilt  marble  pillar  in  the  forum
at  Rome,  to  mark  the  central  point  from  which
the  great  roads  diverged  to  the  several  gates  of
Rome  (Dion  Cass.  liv.  8  ;  Plut.  Galb.  24).  It  was
called  the  Milliarium  Aureumj  and  its  position  is
defined  as  being  in  capite  Romani Fori  (Plin.  H.N.
5.  s.  9),  Sid)  aedem  Saturni  (Tac.  Hist.  i.  27).
Some  remains  of  it  still  exist,  close  to  the  Arch  of
Septimius  Severus,  consisting  of  a  round  base  and
a  piece  of  fine  marble  4^  feet  in  diameter,  the  whole
being  about  10  feet  high.  (Platner  u.  Bunsen,
Beschreib.  d.  Stadt  Rom.  vol.  iii.  pt.  1.  p.  73,  pt.  2.
p.  102  ;  Platner  u.  Urlichs,  Beschreib.  Roms,  p.  20.)
It  seems  that  the  marble  pillar  was  covered,  on
each  of  its  faces,  with  tablets  of  gilt  bronze  ;  but
whether  the  information  engraved  upon  them  con-
sisted simply  of  a  list  of  the  chief  places  on  each
road,  with  their  distances,  or  whether  there  was
a  sort  of  map  of  each  set  of  roads  with  the  dis-
tances marked  upon  them,  is  now  unknown.  It  is
also  uncertain  whether  the  miles  began  to  be
reckoned  from  the  pillar  itself,  or  from  the  city
gates.  (See  De  la  Nauze,  in  the  Mem.  de  [""Acad,
des  Inscr.  vol.  xxviii.  p.  388,  &c.  ;  Ideler,  in  the
Abkandl.  d.  Berl.  Acad..  1812,  pp.  134,  164.)

The  Milliarium  Aureum  at  Byzantium,  erected
by  Constantine  in  imitation  of  that  of  Augustus,
was  a  large  building  in  the  forum  Augusteum,
near  the  church  of  S.  Sophia.  (See  Buchholz,  in
the  Zeitschrift  fur  Alterthumswissenscha/t,  1845,
No.  100,  &c.)

London  also  had  its  Milliarium  Aureum,  a  frag-
ment of  which  still  remains,  namely,  the  cele-
brated London  Stone,  which  may  be  seen  affixed
to  the  wall  of  St.  Swithin's  Church  in  Cannon
Street.

From  this  example  it  may  be  inferred  that  the
chief  city  of  each  province  of  the  empire  had  its
Milliarium  A  ureum.

Tlie  ordinary  inilliaria  along  the  roads  were
blocks  or  pillars  of  stone,  inscribed  with  some  or
all  of  the  following  points  of  information:  (1)
the  distance,  which  was  expressed  by  a  number,
with  or  without  M.  P.  prefixed :  (2)  the  places
between  which  the  road  extended :  (3)  the  name
of  the  constructor  of  the  road,  and  of  the  emperor
to  whose  honour  the  work  was  dedicated.  Several
of  these  inscriptions  remain,  and  are  collected  in
the  following  works :  Gruter,  C.  I.  pp.  cli.  &c.  ;
Muratori,  Thes.  vol.  i.  pp.  447,  &c.  ;  Orelli,  Inscr.
Lat.Sel.  Nos.  1067,  3330,  4877  ;  and  especially
Bergier,  Hist,  des  grands  Cliemins  des  Rom.  vol.  ii.
pp.  757,  &c.,  Bruxelles,  1728,  4to.

On  some  of  these  mile-stones,  which  have  been
found  in  Gaul,  the  distances  are  marked,  not  only
in  Roman  miles,  but  also  in  Gallic  Leugae,  a
measure  somewhat  greater  than  the  Roman  mile.
( For  some  further  details  respecting  these  extant
mile-stones,  see  the  article  Milliarium  in  the  Real-
Encyclop.  d.  Class.  Alterth.,  to  which  the  foregoing
article  is  considerably  indebted.)  [P.  S.]

MIMUS  iiJuixos)  is  the  name  by  which,  in
Greece  and  at  Rome,  a  species  of  the  drama  was
designated,  though  the  Roman  mimus  differed
essentially  from  the  Greek  fiiixos.

The  Greek  mimus  seems  to  have  originated
among  the  Greeks  of  Sicily   and  southern  Italy,


MIMUS.


763


and  to  have  consisted  originally  of  extempory  re-
presentations or  imitations  of  ridiculous  occurrences
of  common  life  at  certain  festivals,  like  the  Spartan
deicelistae.  At  a  later  period  these  rude  repre-
sentations acquired  a  more  artistic  form,  which  was
brought  to  a  high  degree  of  perfection  by  Sophron
of  Syracuse  (about  420  b.c.).  He  wrote  his  pieces
in  the  popular  dialect  of  the  Dorians  and  a  kind  of
rythmical  prose.  (Quinctil.  i.  8.)  The  mimes  of
^Sophron  are  designated  as  fuixoi  a-rrovSaioi,  which
were  probably  of  a  more  serious  and  ethical  cha-
racter, and  fii/jLoi  7e\oioi,  in  which  ridiculous  buf-
foonery preponderated.  Such  mimes  remained  after
the  time  of  Sophron  a  favourite  amusement  of  the
Greeks,  and  Philistion  of  Magnesia,  a  contemporary
of  Augustus,  was  a  celebrated  actor  in  them.  (See
MuUer,  Dor.  iv.  7.  §  5.)

Among  the  Romans  the  word  mimus  was  ap-
plied to  a  species  of  dramatic  plays  as  well  as  to
the  persons  who  acted  in  them.  It  is  certain  that
the  Romans  did  not  derive  their  mimus  from  the
Greeks  in  southern  Italy,  but  that  it  was  of  native
growth.  The  Greek  mimes  were  written  in  prose,
and  the  name  fufjios  was  never  applied  to  an  actor,
but  if  used  of  a  person  it  signified  one  Avho  made
grimaces.  The  Roman  mimes  were  imitations  of
foolish  and  mostly  indecent  and  obscene  occurrences
(Ovid,  Trist.  ii.  515  ;  Valer.  Max.  ii.  6.  §  7,  x.  11),
and  scarcely  differed  from  comedy  except  in  con-
sisting more  of  gestures  and  mimicry  than  of  spoken
dialogue,  which  was  not  the  case  in  the  Greek
mimes.  The  dialogue  was,  indeed,  not  excluded
from  the  Roman  mimes,  but  was  only  interspersed,
in  various  parts  of  the  representation,  while  the
mimic  acting  continued  along  with  it  and  uninter-
ruptedly from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  a  piece.
At  Rome  such  mimes  seem  originally  to  have  been
exhibited  at  funerals,  where  one  or  more  persons
(mijni)  represented  in  a  burlesque  manner  the  life
of  the  deceased.  If  there  were  several  mimi,  one
of  them,  or  their  leader,  was  called  archimiraus.
(Suet.  Vespas.  19  ;  Gruter,  Inscript.  1089.  6.)

During  the  latter  period  of  the  republic  such
farces  were  also  represented  in  theatres  ;  but  it
appears  that  they  did  not  attain  any  high  degree
of  perfection  before  the  time  of  Caesar,  for  it  is  not
until  then  that  writers  of  mimes  are  mentioned :
Cn.  Matius,  Decius  Laberius,  and  Publ.  Syrus
were  the  most  distinguished  among  them.  (Gellius,
XV.  25  ;  Suet.  Cues.  39  ;  Cic.  ad  Fam.  xii.  18.)
These  coarse  and  indecent  performances,  of  which
Sulla  was  very  fond,  had  greater  charms  for  the
Romans  than  the  regular  drama  :  hence  they  were
not  only  performed  on  the  stage,  but  even  at  re-
pasts in  the  houses  of  private  persons.  On  the
stage  they  were  performed  as  farces  after  tragedies,
and  during  the  empire  they  gradually  supplanted
the  place  of  the  Atellanae.  The  exact  time,  how-
ever, when  the  Atellanae  yielded  to  the  mimes  is
uncertain.  It  was  peculiar  to  the  actors  in  these
mimes,  neither  to  wear  masks,  nor  the  cothurnus,
nor  the  soccus,  vvhence  they  are  sometimes  called
planipedes.  (Diomed.  iii.  487  ;  Gellius,  i.  11;
Macrob.  Sat.  ii.  1.)  As  the  mimes  contained
scenes  taken  from  common  life,  such  as  exhibited
its  most  striking  features,  their  authors  are  some-
times cjilled  biologi  or  ethologi  (Cic.  pro  RaJtir.  12,
de  Orat.  ii.  59),  and  the  works  themselves  were
distinguished  for  their  richness  in  moral  sentences.
That  distinguished  and  living  persons  were  some-
times exposed  to  ridicule  in  these  mimes,  is  clear


764


MISTHOU  DIRE.


from  J.  Capitolimis  (M.  Ant.  Philos.  c.  29).  (Com-
pare Reuvens,  Collectan.  Liferar.  i.  p.  51,  &c.  ;
0?ann,  Analect.  crit.  i.  p.  67,  &c.  ;  Ziegler,  De
jMirnis  Romaiiorum.,  Gotting.  1788).  [L.  S.]

MINA.     [Talent,  m.]
MINOR.     [CuRATOvi ;  Infans.]
MINU'TIO  CA'PITIS.     [Caput.]
MIRMILLO'NES.  [Gladiatores,  p.  575, b.]
MI'SSIO.      [ExERciTus,  p.  499,  b.]
MI'SSIO.     [Gladiatores,  p.  575,  a.]
MISTHOTHORI    {fAKrdoipdpoi).       [Merce-'

NARII.]

MISTHOSEOS  DIKE  (/xjo-0c5(r€«s  Si'ktj),  also
called  ixiaOuafOis  o'ikov  Si/ctj,  is  the  action  brought
against  a  guardian  for  either  having  neglected  to
make  profitable  use  of  the  property  of  his  ward,  or
for  having  made  no  use  of  it  at  all.  Use  might  be
made  of  such  property  either  by  letting  it,  if  it
consisted  of  lands  or  houses,  or  by  putting  it  out
to  interest,  if  it  consisted  of  capital.  The  SUt)
fiiaOaxreccs  must  have  been  of  a  twofold  character,
either  public  or  private,  that  is,  it  might  be  brought
against  the  guardian,  during  the  minority  of  his
ward,  by  any  person  who  took  an  interest  in  the
welfare  of  the  orphan,  or  it  was  brought  by  the
orphan  himself  after  his  coming  of  age.  Complaints
of  this  kind  were  brought  before  the  first  archon.
In  cases  where  the  guardian  would  not  or  could
not  occupy  himself  with  the  administration  of  the
property  of  his  ward,  he  might  request  the  archon
to  let  the  whole  substance  of  his  ward's  property
to  the  highest  bidder,  provided  the  testator  had
not  expressly  forbidden  this  mode  of  acting  in  his
will.  (Demosth.  c.  Aphoh.  p.  837  ;  compare  053,
o57  ;  Lys.  c.  Diogit.  p.  906.)  The  letting  of  such
property  took  place  by  auction,  and  probably  in  the
presence  of  a  court  of  justice,  for  we  read  that  the
court  decided  in  cases  where  objections  were  made
against  the  terms  of  letting  the  property.  (Isaeus,
de  PIdloctem.  hered.  p.  141,  &c.)  The  person  who
took  the  property  had  to  pay  an  annual  per-
centage for  the  right  of  using  it,  and  this  percent-
age frequently  amounted  to  more  than  12  per  cent,
per  annum.  If  one  man  alone  was  unwilling  to
take  the  whole  property  on  such  conditions,  it
might  be  divided  and  let  to  several  persons  sepa-
rately. (Isaeus,  de  Menecl.  hered,  p.  13.)  The
tenant  or  tenants  of  the  property  of  an  orphan  had
to  give  security  (aTrori/iTj/ia)  for  it,  and  to  mort-
gage (aTroTifjLav)  his  own  estate,  and  the  archon
sent  especial  persons,  ctTroTi^TjTai,  to  value  his  pro-
perty, and  to  ascertain  whether  it  was  equivalent
to  that  of  the  orphan.  ( Suidas,  s.  v.  'Ano'^ifj.TjTal.)
The  technical  term  for  lettmg  the  property  of  an
orph.an,  whether  it  was  done  by  the  guardian  him-
self or  by  the  archon,  was  ixiadovu,  and  those  who
took  it  were  said  ixiaQovaQai  rhu  oIkov  (oIkos  here
signifies  the  whole  substance  of  the  property).  The
tenants  of  the  estate  of  an  orphan  had  the  right
and  perhaps  the  obligation  to  protect  it  against  any
other  person.  (Isaeus,  c/e  Uagn.  hered.  p.  289.)  It
is  not  ckar  what  resource  was  open  to  an  orphan
against  a  tenant  who  did  not  fulfil  his  obligations,
but  it  is  probable,  that  if  any  disputes  arose,  the
guardian  or  the  archon  alone  were  answerable  and
had  to  procure  justice  to  the  orphan.

(Meier  and  Schbma.ux),Att.  Proc.  pp.295,  532;
Biickh,  Pufd.  Econ.  p.  335,  &c.,  2d  ed.)    [L.  S.]

MISTHOU  DIKE  (fMiadov  S'lK-n  or  fiKredxrecos
SfKTj)  is  the  name  of  a  private  action  which  might
be  brought  against  persons  who  refused  to  pay  for


MODULUS.

services  which  had  been  perfomied  for  them,  pro-
vided it  had  been  agreed  that  they  should  be  paid
for  ;  and,  secondly,  against  persons  who  either  had
not  or  had  imperfectly  performed  the  services  for
which  they  were  paid.  It  made  no  ditference
whether  the  service  was  performed  b\'  physical  or
intellectual  powers,  as  teachers,  sophists,  actors,
authors,  and  similar  persons  were  paid  at  Athens
(Bockh,  PuU.  Econ.  i.  §  21),  and  it  is  natural  to
suppose  that  these  persons,  like  others,  made  agree-
ments, either  written  or  by  word  of  mouth,  re-
specting the  remuneration  to  be  given  to  them.  In
case  either  party  thought  themselves  wronged  they
might  bring  the  fxiaBov  Siktj  against  the  other.
Protagoras  had  written  a  book  called  Si'/ct;  iWep
fXKrdov^  and  an  instance  is  recorded  of  an  action  of
this  kind  in  which  he  demanded  payment  of  one
of  his  pupils.  (Diog.  Laert.  ix.  8.  §  8.)  It  is  not
improbable  that  his  work  contained  an  account  of
this  law- suit.  (Meier  and  Schomann,  Aft.  Proc.
p.534,  &c.)  [L.S.]

MITRA  (fjLLTpa),  signified  in  general  a  band  of
any  kind,  and  was  used  specifically  to  indicate,
1.  A  belt  or  girdle  worn  by  warriors  round  the
waist.  [Zona.]  2.  A  broad  band  of  cloth  worn
roimd  the  head,  to  which  the  name  of  anadema
was  sometimes  given.  [Coma,  p.  329,  b.]  3.  In
later  times,  a  band  worn  round  the  bosom  by  women,
which  the  Greeks  usually  called  aTrdSecr^uor,  and
the  'Romvins  fascia pectoraiis  or  strophium.  (Becker,
Ckarikles,  vol.  ii.  p.  329.)    [Fascia  ;  Strophium.]

MIXTA  ACTIO.     [Actio.]

MNA  (yum).     [Talentum.]'

MNE'MATA,  MNEMEIA  {{ivhixara,  fxuri-
fj.^7a).     [Funus,  p.  556.,  a.]

MNOIA  (ixvoia).     [Cosml]

MOCHLUS  (fJLox\6s).     [Janua.]

MO'DIOLUS,  the  diminutive  of  Modius,  is
used  for  various  kinds  of  small  vessels  ;  among
others,  for  the  buckets  on  the  edge  of  the  ti/m-
panum,  by  which  water  was  raised  (Vitruv.  x.
10),  and  generally  for  any  kind  of  bucket  or
small  cistern  in  hydraulic  machinery  (lb.  12,  13)  ;
for  the  well  of  an  oil  press  (Cat.  R.  ^.  20)  ;  for
the  box  of  a  wheel  (Plin.  H.  N.  ix.  4.  s.  3  ;  Vitruv
X.  14)  ;  and  for  other  kinds  of  sockets  (Vitruv.  x,
18).  [P.  S.]

MO'DIUS,  the  principal  dry  measure  of  the
Romans,  was  equal  to  one-third  of  the  amphora
(Volusius  Maecianus,  Festus,  Priscian,  ap.  Wurm,
§  67),  and  was  therefore  equal  to  nearly  two  gal-
lons English.  It  contained  16  sextarii,  32  heininaCy
64  quariai'ii,  128  acetabula,  and  192  cyathi.  Com-
pared with  the  Greek  dry  measure,  it  was  l-6th
of  the  Medimnus.  Its  contents  weighed,  accord-
ing to  Pliny,  20  pounds  of  Gallic  wheat,  which
was  the  lightest  known  at  Rome.  Farmers  made
use  of  vessels  holding  3  and  10  modii  (Colura.  xii.
18.  §  5).  The  third  part  of  the  jugerum  was
sometimes  called  modius.  [P.  S.]

MO'DULUS  (e/igaTTjs),  the  standard  measure
used  in  determining  the  parts  of  an  architectural
order.  It  was  originally  the  lower  diameter  of
the  column  ;  but  Vitruvius  takes,  in  the  Doric
order,  the  lower  semidiameter  for  the  module,  re-
taining the  whole  diameter  in  the  other  orders.
Modern  architects  use  the  semidiameter  in  all  the
orders.  The  system  of  dividing  the  module  into
minutes  was  not  used  by  the  ancient  architects,
who  merely  used  such  fractional  parts  of  it  as  were
convenient.     The  absolute  length  of  the  module


.  MOLA.

depends,  of  course,  on  the  dimensions  of  the  edi-
tice :  thus  Vitruvius  directs  that,  in  a  Doric  tetra-
style  portico,  1 -28th,  and  in  a  hexastyle  l-44th  of
the  whole  width  should  be  taken  as  the  module,
if  diastyle,  or  l-23rd  and  l-35th  respectivelv,  if
systvle.     (Vitruv.  i.  2,  iv.  3,  v.  9).  [P.  S.]

MOENIA.     [MuRus.]

MOICHEIAS  GRAPHE.     [Adulterium.]

MOLA  (/uwAos),  a  mill.  All  mills  were  an-
ciently made  of  stone,  the  kind  used  being  a  vol-
canic trachyte  or  porous  lava  {pyrites,  Plin.  //.  N.
xxxvi.  30  ;  silices,  Virg.  Moret.  23 — 27  ;  pumiceas,
Ovid.  Fast.  vi.  318),  such  as  that  which  is  now
obtained  for  the  same  purpose  at  Mayen  and
other  parts  of  the  Eifel  in  Rhenish  Prussia.  This
species  of  stone  is  admirably  adapted  for  the  pur-
pose, because  it  is  both  hard  and  cavernous,  so
that,  as  it  gradually  wears  away,  it  still  presents
an  infinity  of  cutting  surfaces.

Every  mill  consisted  of  two  essential  parts,  the
upper  mill-stone,  which  was  moveable  (catillus,
oj/oy,  rh  eVtjUuAtoj',  Deut.  xxiv.  6),  and  the  lower,
which  was  fixed  and  by  much  the  larger  of  the  two.
Hence  a  mill  is  sometimes  called  molae  in  the
plural.  The  mills  mentioned  by  ancient  authors
are  the  following  :  —

I.  The  hand-mill,  or  quern,  called  mola  manu-
una,  versatilis,  or  irusutilis.  (Plin.  //.  A^.  xxxvi.
29  ;  Gell.  iii.  3  ;  Cato,  de  lie  Rust.  10.)

The  islanders  of  the  Archipelago  use  in  the  pre-
sent day  a  mill,  which  consists  of  two  flat  round
stones  about  two  feet  in  diameter.  The  upper
stone  is  turned  by  a  handle  (kwtttj,  Schol.  in
Tlieocrit.  iv.  58)  inserted  at  one  side,  and  has  a
hole  in  the  middle  into  which  the  com  is  poured.
By  the  process  of  grinding  the  corn  makes  its  way
from  the  centre,  and  is  poured  out  in  the  state  of
flour  at  the  rim.  (Tournefort,  Voyage.,  Lett.  9.)  The
description  of  this  machine  exactly  agrees  with
that  of  the  Scottish  quern,  formerly  an  indispensable
part  of  domestic  furniture.  (Pennant,  Tour  in  Scot-
Land,  1769,  p.  231  ;  and  1772,  p.  328.)  There  can
be  no  doubt  that  this  is  the  flour-mill  in  its  most
ancient  form.  In  a  very  improved  state  it  has
been  discovered  at  Pompeii.  The  annexed  wood-
cut shows  two  which  were  found  standing  in  the
ruins  of  a  bakehouse.  In  the  left-hand  figure  the
lower  millstone  only  is  shown.  The  most  essential
part  o;  it  is  the  cone,  which  is  surmounted  by  a
projection  containing  originally  a  strong  iron  pivot.
The  upper  millstone,  seen  in  its  place  on  the  right
hiuid  of  the  woodcut,  approaches  the  form  of  an


hour-glass,  consisting  of  two  hollow  cones,  jointed


MOLA.  1U

together  at  the  apex,  and  provided  at  this  point
with  a  socket,  by  which  the  upper  stone  was  sus-
pended upon  the  iron  pivot,  at  the  same  time
touching  on  all  sides  the  lower  stone,  and  with
which  it  was  intended  to  revolve.  The  upper
stone  was  surrounded  at  its  narrowest  part  with  a
strong  band  of  iron  ;  and  two  bars  of  wood  were
inserted  into  square  holes,  one  of  which  appears  in
the  figure,  and  were  used  to  turn  the  upper  stone.
The  uppermost  of  the  two  hollow  cones  served  the
purpose  of  a  hopper.  The  corn  with  which  it  was
filled,  gradually  fell  through  the  neck  of  the  upper
stone  upon  the  summit  of  the  lower,  and,  as  it  pro-
ceeded down  the  cone,  was  ground  into  flour  by
the  friction  of  the  two  rough  surfaces,  and  fell  on
all  sides  of  the  base  of  the  cone  into  a  channel
formed  for  its  reception.  The  mill  here  represented
is  five  or  six  feet  high.

The  hand-mills  were  worked  among  the  Greeks
and  Romans  by  slaves.  Their  pistrijium  was  con-
sequently proverbial  as  a  place  of  painful  and  de-
grading labour ;  and  this  toil  was  imposed  princi-
pally on  women.  (Horn.  Od.  vii.  104  ;  Exod.  xi.
5;  Matt.  xxiv.  41.)

In  every  large  establishment  the  hand-mills  were
numerous  in  proportion  to  the  extent  of  the  family.
Thus  in  the  palace  of  Ulysses  there  were  twelve,
each  turned  by  a  separate  female,  who  was  obliged
to  grind  every  day  the  fixed  quantity  of  corn  before
she  was  permitted  to  cease  from  her  labour.  {Od.
XX.  105 — 119  ;  compai'e  Cato,  de  Re  Rust.  o6.)

II.  The  cattle-mill,  mola  asinaria  (Cato,  de  Re
Rust.  10  ;  Matt,  xviii.  6)  in  which  human  labour
was  supplied  by  the  use  of  an  ass  or  some  other
animal.  (Ovid,  Fast.  vi.  318.)  The  animal  devoted
to  this  labour  was  blind-folded.  (Apul.  Met.  ix.)
The  mill  did  not  differ  in  its  construction  from  the
larger  kinds  of  hand-mill.

III.  The  water-mill  {mola  aquaria,  v5pa\4T7]s).
The  first  water-mill,  of  which  any  record  is  pre-
served, was  connected  with  the  palace  of  Mithri-
dates  in  Pontus.  (Strabo,  xii.  3.  §  30.)  That
water-mills  were  used  at  Rome  is  manifest  from
the  description  of  them  by  Vitruvius  (x,  5.  ed.
Schneider).  A  cogged  wheel,  attached  to  the  axis
of  the  water  wheel,  turned  another  which  was
attached  to  the  axis  of  the  upper  mill -stone :  the
corn  to  be  ground  fell  between  the  stones  out  of  a
hopper  {infundibulum),  which  was  fixed  above
them.  (See  also  Bmnck,  Anal.  ii.  119;  Pallad.  de
Re  Rust.  i.  42.)  Ausonius,  as  quoted  below,
mentions  their  existence  on  the  Ruwer  near  Treves  ;
and  Venantius  Fortunatus,  describing  a  castle
built  in  the  sixth  century  on  the  banks  of  the  Mo-
selle, makes  distinct  mention  of  a  tail-race,  by
which  "  the  tortuous  stream  is  conducted  in  a
straight  channel."     {Poem.  iii.  J  0.)

IV.  The  floating-mill.  When  Rome  was  be-
sieged by  the  Goths,  A.  D.  536,  and  when  the  stop-
page of  the  aqueducts  rendered  it  impossible  to  use
the  public  corn-mills  {ol  t^s  irt^Aecos  /xvKwves)  in
the  Janiculum,  so  that  the  citizens  were  in  danger
of  starvation,  Belisarius  supplied  their  place  by
erecting  floating-mills  upon  the  Tiber.  Two  boats
being  moored  at  the  distance  of  two  feet  from  each
other,  a  water-wheel,  suspended  on  its  axis  between
them,  was  turned  by  the  force  of  the  stream,  and
put  in  motion  the  stones  for  grinding  the  corn,  by
which  the  lives  of  the  besieged  were  preserved.
(Procop.  de  Bello  Goihico,  i.  15.)

V.  The   saw  mill.      Ausonius  mentions    mills


^C6


MONETA.


situated  on  some  of  the  streams  falling  into  the
Moselle,  and  used  for  cutting  marble  into  slabs.
{Mosella,  362,  363.)

VI.  The  pepper-mill.  A  mill  for  grinding  pep-
per, made  of  boxwood,  is  mentioned  by  Petronius
(molea  buccea  piper  trivit.  Sat.  74).  [J.  Y.]

MONA'RCHIA  {ixovapxia),  a  general  name
for  any  form  of  government  in  which  the  supreme
functions  of  political  administration  are  in  the
hands  of  a  single  person.  The  term  fiovapxia  is
applied  to  such  governments,  whether  they  are  he-
reditary or  elective,  legal  or  usurped.  In  its  com-
monest application,  it  is  equivalent  to  /8a<rtAeia,
whether  absolute  or  limited.  But  the  rule  of  an
aesymnetes  or  a  tyrant  would  equally  be  called  a
fiovapxia.  (Arist.  Pol.  iii.  9,  10,  iv.  8  ;  Plato,
Folit.  p.  291,  c.  e.  p.  302,  d.  e.).  Hence  Plutarch
uses  it  to  express  the  Latin  didatura.  It  is  by  a
somewhat  rhetorical  use  of  the  word  that  it  is  ap-
plied now  and  then  to  the  hrtfxos.  (Eurip.  Suppl.
352  ;  Arist.  Pol.  iv.  4.)  For  a  more  detailed  ex-
amination of  the  subject  the  reader  is  referred  to
the  article  Rex,  Archon,  Tyrannus,  Prytanis,
Aesymnetes,  Tagus.  [C.  P.  M.]

MONE'TA,  the  mint  or  the  place  where  money
was  coined.  The  mint  of  Rome  was  a  building  on
the  Capitoline,  and  attached  to  the  temple  of  Juno
Moneta,  as  the  aerarium  was  to  the  temple  of
Saturn.  (Liv.  vi.  20.)  This  temple  was  vowed  by
Camillus,  and  dedicated  in  344  B.  c.  on  the  spot
where  the  house  of  M.  Manlius  Capitolinus  had
once  been  standing.  (Liv.  vii.  28  ;  Ov.  Fast.  vi.
]  83.)  Some  writers  describe  the  art  of  coining  as
having  been  known  to  the  Italians  from  the  earliest
times,  and  assign  its  invention  to  Janus  (Macrob.
Sat.  i.  7  ;  Athen.  xv.  p.  692)  ;  but  this  and
similar  accounts  are  nothing  more  than  fables.
The  statement  of  Pliny  {H.  N.  xxxiii.  3),  who  as-
signs the  invention  of  coining  to  Servius  Tullius,
has  somewhat  more  of  an  historical  aspect  ;  and  he
derives  the  name  pecunia  from  the  circumstance  that
the  coins  were  originally  marked  with  the  image
of  some  animal.  The  earliest  Roman  coins  were  of
aes  [Aes],  and  not  struck,  but  cast  in  a  mould.
(See  the  representation  of  such  a  mould  on  page
^45.)  The  moulds,  however,  were  sometimes  with-
out any  figure  and  merely  shaped  the  metal,  and
in  this  case,  the  image  as  well  as  the  name  of  the
gens,  &c.,  were  struck  upon  it  by  means  of  a  ham-
mer upon  an  anvil  on  which  the  form  was  fixed.
As  the  strokes  of  the  hammer  were  not  always
equal,  one  coin  though  equal  in  value  with  another
might  differ  from  it  in  thickness  and  shape.
Greater  equality  was  produced  at  the  time  when
the  Romans  began  to  strike  their  money  ;  but
when  this  custom  became  general,  is  not  known.
Respecting  the  changes  which  were  introduced  at
Rome  at  various  times  in  the  coinage  see  Aes,  As,
Argentum,  Aurum,  and  Nummus.

In  the  early  times  of  the  republic  we  do  not
read  of  any  officers  who  were  charged  with  the
superintendence  of  the  mint  ;  and  respecting  the
introduction  of  such  officers  we  have  but  a  very
vague  statement  of  Pomponius.  (Dig.  1.  tit.  2.
§  30.)  Their  name  was  triumviri  monetales,  and
Niebuhr  {Hist,  of  Rome,  iii.  p.  646)  thinks  that
they  were  introduced  at  the  time  when  the  Ro-
mans first  began  to  coin  silver,  i.  e.  269  B.  c.  The
triumviri  monetales  had  the  whole  superintend-
ence of  the  mint,  and  of  the  money  that  was  coined
in  it.     A  great  number  of  coins,  both  of  gold  and


MONETA.

silver,  is  signed  by  these  triumvirs  in  the  fol-
lowing manner:  —  III.  VIR.  AAAFF,  that  is,
triumvir  auro,  argento,  aere  jiando  feriundo  (Cic.
de  Leg.  iii.  3  ;  P.  Manut.  ad  Cic.  ad  Fam.  vii,
13)  or  III.  VIR.  A.P.F.  that  is,  ad  pecuniam
feriundam.  Other  coins  on  the  other  hand  do  not
bear  the  signature  of  a  triumvir  monetalis,  but  the
inscription  CUR.  X.  FL.  S.  C.  i.  e.  curator  dena-
riorum  Jlandorum  ejc  senatusconsulto,  or  are  signed
by  praetors,  acdiles,  and  quaestors.  Caesar  not
only  increased  the  number  of  the  triumviri  mone-
tales to  four  ;  whence  some  coins  of  his  time  bear
the  signature  IIII.  VIR.  A.P.F,,  but  entrusted
certain  slaves  of  his  own  with  the  superintendence
of  the  mint.  (Suet.  Caes.  76  ;  compare  Cic.  Philip.
vii.  1.)  The  whole  regulation  and  management  of
the  Roman  mint  and  its  officers  during  the  time  of
the  republic  is  involved  in  very  great  obscurity.

The  coining  of  money  at  Rome  was  not  a  privi-
lege belonging  exclusively  to  the  state,  but  from
the  coins  still  extant  we  must  infer  that  every
Roman  citizen  had  the  right  to  have  his  own  gold
and  silver  coined  in  the  public  mint,  and  under  the
superintendcTiice  of  its  officers.  The  individual  or
gens  who  had  their  metal  coined,  stated  its  name
as  well  as  the  value  of  the  coin.  This  was  a  kind
of  guarantee  to  the  public,  and  nearly  all  the  coins
of  the  republican  period  coined  by  a  gens  or  an  in-
dividual bear  a  mark  stating  their  value.  As  long
as  the  republic  herself  used  pure  silver  and  gold,
bad  money  does  not  seem  to  have  been  coined  by
any  one  ;  but  when,  in  90  b.  c,  the  tribune  Livius
Drusus  suggested  the  expediency  of  mixing  the
silver  which  was  to  be  coined  with  one-eighth  of
copper,  a  temptation  to  forgery  was  given  to  the
people,  and  it  appears  henceforth  to  have  occurred
frequently.  As  early  as  the  year  86  b.  c.  forgery
of  money  was  carried  to  such  an  extent,  that  no
one  was  sure  whether  the  money  he  possessed  was
genuine  or  false,  and  the  praetor  M.  Marius  Grati-
dianus  saw  the  necessity  of  interfering.  (Cic.  de
Off.  iii.  20.)  He  is  said  to  have  discovered  a
means  of  testing  money  and  of  distinguishing  the
good  from  the  bad  denarii.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii.
46.)  In  what  this  means  consisted  is  not  clear  ;  but
some  method  of  examining  silver  coins  must  have
been  known  to  the  Romans  long  before  this  time.
(Liv.  xxxii.  2.)  Sulla  inflicted  heavy  punish-
ment upon  the  coiners  of  false  money  ;  his  law
remained  in  force  during  the  empire,  and  not
only  false  coining,  but  any  crime  connected  with
the  deterioration  of  money,  was  gradually  made  to
come  under  it.  In  the  latest  times  of  the  empire
false  coining  was  treated  as  a  crimen  majestatis.
All  Roman  money  was  generally  coined  at  Rome,
but  in  some  particular  cases  the  mints  of  other
Italian  towns,  as  in  the  provinces,  were  used  ;  for
we  must  remember,  that  during  the  time  of  the
republic,  subject  countries  and  provinces  were  not
deprived  of  the  right  of  coining  their  own  money.
This  right  they  even  retained  under  the  empire  for
a  long  time,  though  with  some  modifications  ;  for
while  some  places  were  allowed  to  coin  their
money  as  before,  others  were  obliged  to  have  upon
their  coins  the  head  of  the  emperor,  or  of  some
member  of  his  family.  Silver  and  gold,  however,
were  coined  only  in  places  of  the  first  rank.  When
all  Italy  received  the  Roman  franchise,  all  the
Italians  used  the  Roman  money,  and  in  conse- '
quence  lost  the  right  to  coin  tlieir  ov;n.

It  has  been  stated  above,  that  probably  every


MONETA.

Roman  citizen  had  the  right  to  have  his  gold  and
eilver  coined,  but  none  had  the  right  to  put  his
own  image  upon  a  coin,  and  not  even  Sulla
ventured  to  act  contrary  to  this  custom.  The
coins  apparently  of  the  republican  period  with
the  portraits  of  individuals,  were,  according  to
Eckhel,  coined  at  a  later  time,  and  by  the  de-
scendants of  those  persons  whose  portraits  are
given.  Caesar  was  the  first  to  whom  this  privi-
I'-^ge  was  granted,  and  his  example  was  followed
by  many  others,  as  we  see  from  the  coins  of  Sext.
Pompeius.  The  emperors  assumed  the  right  to
put  either  their  own  images  or  those  of  members  of
their  families  upon  their  coins.

From  the  time  of  Augustus,  the  triumviri,  gene-
rally speaking,  no  longer  put  their  names  on  any
coin,  and  it  became  the  exclusive  privilege  of  the
emperor  to  coin  silver  and  gold.  The  senate  en-
trusted with  the  administration  of  the  aerarium
retained  only  the  right  of  coining  copper,  whence
almost  all  copper  coins  of  this  period  are  marked
with  S.  Cor  EX  S.  C.  But  this  lasted  only  till
the  time  of  Gallienus,  when  the  right  of  coining  all
money  became  the  exclusive  privilege  of  the  em-
perors. As,  however,  the  vast  extent  of  the  empire
rendered  more  than  one  mint  necessary,  we  find
that  in  several  provinces,  such  as  Gaul  and  Spain,
Roman  money  was  coined  under  the  superin-
tendence of  quaestors  or  proconsuls.  Roman  colo-
nies and  provinces  now  gradually  ceased  to  coin
their  own  money.  In  the  western  parts  of  the
empire  this  must  have  taken  place  during  the  first
century  of  our  ae^-a,  but  in  the  East  the  Roman
money  did  not  become  universal  till  after  the  time
of  Gallienus.  From  the  time  of  the  emperor
Aurelian  a  great  number  of  cities  of  the  empire
possessed  mints  in  which  Roman  money  was  coined,
and  during  the  latter  period  of  the  empire  the  su-
perintendents of  mints  are  called  procuratores  or
praepositi  monetae.

The  persons  who  were  employed  as  workmen  in
a  mint  were  called  monetarii.  Their  number  at
Rome  appears  to  have  been  very  great  during  the
latter  period  of  the  emi)ire,  for  in  the  reign  of
Aurelian  they  nearly  produced  a  most  dangerous
rebellion.  (Aurel.  Vict,  de  Caes.  35  ;  Vopisc
Aurel.  38.)  They  seem  generally  to  have  been
freedmcn.    (Murat.  Jnscript.  dQ\S.  n.  5.)

In  Greece  every  free  and  independent  city  had
the  right  to  coin  its  own  money.  Sparta  and
Byzantium  are  said  to  have  only  coined  iron  money
(PoU'jM,  vii.  106),  but  no  ancient  iron  coin  has
ever  been  found.  Respecting  the  time  when  money
was  first  coined  in  Greece,  see  Argentum  and
NuAiMUS.  TheGreek  term  for  money  was  pSfxia^a^
from  j/cJ/ioy,  because  the  determination  of  its  value
was  fixed  by  law  or  contract.   (Aristot.  Ethic,  v.  8.)

The  mint  at  Athens  was  called  apyvpoKOTr^7ov.
[Argyrocopeion.]  We  do  not  hear  of  any
officers  connected  with  the  management  or  the
superintendence  of  the  Athenian  mint.  How  far
the  right  of  coining  money  was  a  privilege  of  the
central  government  of  Attica  is  unknown.  But
the  extant  coins  show  that  at  least  some  demes  of
Attica  had  the  right  of  coining,  and  it  is  probable
that  the  government  of  Athens  only  watched  over
the  weight  and  the  purity  of  the  metal,  and  that
the  people  in  their  assembly  had  the  right  of  regu-
lating everything  concerning  the  coining  of  money.
( Aristoph.  Eccles.  8 1 0,  &c.)  The  Attic  gold  and
silver  coins  were  always  of  very  pure  metal,  and


MONILE.


767


we  have  only  one  instance  in  which  the  state  at  a
time  of  great  distress  used  bad  metal.  This  was
in  the  archonship  of  Antigenes  and  Callias,  B.  c.
407  and  406.  (Aristoph.  Ran.  673,  with  the  Schol,,
and  678.)  Individuals  who  coined  bad  money
were  punished  with   death.     (Demosth.  c.  Lept.

p.  508  ;   NOMISMATOS   DiAPHORAS  DiKE.)       The

place  where  money  was  coined  is  always  indicated
on  Greek  coins  ;  either  the  name  of  the  place  is
stated,  or  some  symbolical  representation  of  the
place,  as  the  owl  on  Athenian  and  a  peacock  on
Samian  coins.  These  symbols  are  generally  of  a
religious  nature,  or  connected  with  the  worship  of
the  gods  or  heroes.

For  further  information  on  this  subject  see
Eckhel,  Doctrina Numorum  Veterum.,  and  especially
the  Prolegomena  generalia  in  vol.  i.  ;  Dureau  de  la
Malle,  Economie  Politique  des  Romains.

MONETA'RII,     [MoNETA.]

MONI'LE  (bpfios),  a  necklace.  Necklaces  were
worn  by  both  sexes  among  the  most  polished  of
those  nations  which  the  Greeks  called  barbarous,
especially  the  Indians,  the  Egyptians,  and  the  Per-
sians. [Armilla.]  Greek  and  Roman  females
adopted  them  more  particularly  as  a  bridal  orna-
ment. (Lucan,  ii.  361  ;  Claud,  de  vi.  cons.  Honor.
527.)

The  simplest  kind  of  necklace  was  the  monile
baccntum.,  or  bead  necklace  (Virg.  Aen.  i.  657  ;
Lamprid.  AI.  Sev.  41),  which  consisted  of  berries,
small  spheres  of  glass,  amethyst,  &c.,  strung  to-
gether. This  is  very  commonly  shown  in  ancient
paintings.  (See  woodcut,  p.  136.)  The  head  of
Minerva  at  page  566,  exhibits  a  frequent  modifi-
cation of  the  bead  necklace,  a  row  of  drops  hanging
below  the  beads.  These  drops,  when  worn,  arrange
themselves  upon  the  neck  like  rays  proceeding
from  a  centre.  To  this  class  of  necklaces  belongs
one  in  the  Egyptian  collection  of  the  British  Museum
(see  the  annexed  woodcut),  in  which  small  golden
lizards  alternate  with  the  drops.     The  figure  in  the


7G8


MORA.


woodcut  immediately  underneath  this  exhibits  the
central  portion  of  a  very  ancient  and  exquisitely
wrought  necklace,  which  was  found  at  S.  Agatha,
near  Naples,  in  the  sepulchre  of  a  Greek  lady.  It
has  71  pendants.  Above  them  is  a  band  consisting
of  several  rows  of  the  close  chain-work,  which  we
now  call  Venetian.  [Catena.]  We  also  give
here  the  central  portions,  exhibiting  the  patterns  of
three  splendid  gold  necklaces,  purchased  from  the
Prince  of  Canino  for  the  British  Museum.  These
were  found  in  Etruscan  tombs.  The  ornaments
consist  of  circles,  lozenges,  rosettes,  ivy-leaves,  and
hippocampi.  A  heart  depends  from  the  centre  of
one  of  the  necklaces.

The  necklace  was  sometimes  made  to  resemble  a
serpent  coiled  about  the  neck  of  the  wearer,  as  was
the  case  with  that  given  as  a  nuptial  present  by
Venus  to  Harmonia,  which  was  ornamented  in  so
elaborate  a  manner,  that  Nonnus  devotes  50  lines
of  his  Dionysiaca  (v.  125,  &c.)  to  its  descrip-
tion. This  same  necklace  afterwards  appears  in
the  mythology  as  the  bribe  by  which  Eriphyle  was
tempted  to  betray  her  husband.  (ApoUodor.  iii.  4.
§  2,  iii.  6.  §§  2—6  ;  Diod.  iv.  Q5,  v.  49  ;  Serv.  m
Aen.  vi.  445.)

The  beauty  and  splendour,  as  well  as  the  va^ue
of  necklaces,  were  enhanced  by  the  insertion  of
pearls  and  precious  stones,  which  were  strung  to-
gether by  means  of  linen  thread,  silk,  or  wires  and
links  of  gold.  For  this  purpose  emeralds,  or  other
stones  of  a  greenish  hue  (smaraqdi),  were  often
employed  (virides  gemmae,  Juv.  vi.  363).  Amber
necklaces  are  mentioned  in  the  Odyssey  (xv.  459,
xviii.  295).  Some  account  of  the  various  kinds  of
links  is  given  in  the  article  Catena.  The  hooks
or  clasps  for  fastening  the  necklace  behind  the  neck
were  also  various,  and  sometimes  neatly  and  in-
geniously contrived.  Besides  a  band  encircling  the
neck,  there  was  sometimes  a  second  or  even  a  third
row  of  ornaments,  which  hung  lower  down,  passing
over  the  breast.  (Hom.  Hymn.  ii.  in  Ven.  11  ;
longa  monilia,  Ovid.  Met.  x.  264  ;  Bottiger,  Sahina,
vol.ii.  p.  129.)

Very  valuable  necklaces  were  sometimes  placed,
as  dedicated  offerings,  upon  the  statues  of  Minerva,
Venus,  and  other  goddesses  (Sueton.  Galh.  18),
and  this  was  in  accordance  with  the  description  of
their  attire  given  by  the  poets.  (Hom.  Hymn.  i.  in
Ven.  88.)  Horses  and  other  favourite  animals
were  also  adorned  with  splendid  necklaces  {aureti,
Virg.  Aen.  vii.  278  ;  gemmata  monilia,  Ovid.  Met.
X.  ri  3  ;  Claudian,  Epig.  xxxvi.  9  ;  A.  Gell.  v.  5).
[Torques.]  [J.  Y.]

MONOPO'DIUM.     [Mensa.]

MONOPTEROS.     [Templum.]

MONOXYLON.     [Navis.]

MONU'MENTUM.     [Funus,  p.  561,  a.]

MORA.  The  fact  of  an  obligatio  not  being
discharged  at  the  time  when  it  is  due,  is  followed
by  important  consequences,  which  either  may  de-
pend on  the  nature  of  the  contract,  or  may  depend
on  rules  of  positive  law.  After  such  delay  the
creditor  is  empowered  to  use  all  legal  means  to
obtain  satisfaction  for  his  demand :  he  may  bring
his  action  against  his  debtor  or  against  those  who
have  become  securities  for  him,  and,  in  the  case  of
pledge,  he  may  sell  the  thing  and  pay  himself  out
of  the  proceeds  of  the  sale.  For  particular  cases
there  are  particular  provisions:  for  instance,  the
purchaser  of  a  thing  after  receiving  it,  must  pay
interest  on  the  purchase -moliey,  if  there  is  delay  in


MORTARIUM.

paying  it  after  the  time  fixed  for  payment.  (Big.
19.  tit.  1.  s.  13.  §  20.)  The  rule  is  the  same  as  to
debts  due  to  the  Fiscus,  if  they  are  not  paid  when
they  are  due.  If  a  colonus  was  behind  in  payment
of  his  rent  for  two  years,  the  owner  (locator)  miglit
eject  him  (Dig.  19.  tit.  2.  s.  54.  §  1) :  and  a  man
lost  the  right  to  his  emphyteusis,  if  he  delayed  the
payment  of  what  was  due  (canon)  for  three  years.

These  were  cases  of  delay  in  which  there  was
simply  a  non-fulfilment  of  the  obligatio  at  the
proper  time  ;  and  the  term  Mora  is  sometimes  ap-
plied to  such  cases.  But  that  which  is  properly
Mora  is  when  there  is  delay  on  the  part  of  him
who  owes  a  dut}',  and  culpa  can  be  imputed  to
him.  Some  modern  writers  are  of  opinion  that  all
delay  in  a  person  discharging  an  obligatio  is  Mora,
except  there  be  some  impediment  which  is  created
by  causes  beyond  the  debtor's  control.  But  there
are  many  reasons  for  the  opinion  that  Mora  in  its
proper  sense  always  implied  some  culpa  on  the
part  of  the  debtor.  This  is  proved  by  the  general
rule  as  to  the  necessity  of  interpellatio  or  demand
of  the  creditor  (si  interpellatus  opportune  loco  non
solverit,  quod  apud  judicem  examinabitur)  ;  by
the  rules  about  excusationes  a  mora,  which  onl}'-
have  a  meaning  on  the  supposition  that  real  mora
is  not  always  to  be  imputed  to  a  man,  though
there  may  be  delay  in  the  discharge  of  an  obli-
gatio. That  this  is  the  true  meaning  of  Mora  is
also  shown  by  the  terms  used  with  reference  to  it
(per  eum  stetit,  per  eum  factum  est  quominus,  &c.).
This  view  is  confirmed  also  by  the  rule  that  in
every  case  of  Mora  the  particular  circumstances
are  to  be  considered,  a  rule  which  plainly  implies
that  the  bare  fact  of  delay  is  not  necessary  to  con-
stitute Mora.  In  a  passage  of  Papinian  (Dig.  1 2.
tit.  1.  s.  5)  the  doctrine  that  bare  delay  does  not
constitute  legal  Mora  is  clearly  expressed.

When  Mora  could  be  legally  imputed  to  a  man,
he  was  liable  to  loss  in  many  cases  when  he  other-
wise would  not  be  liable :  as  if  a  man  was  bound
to  give  a  thing  and  it  was  lost  or  destroyed,  lie
was  to  bear  the  loss,  if  the  fault  was  his,  that  is,
if  real  culpose  mora  could  be  imputed  to  him.  (Dig.
12.  tit.  1.  s.  5.)  In  cases  where  a  man  did  not
pay  money  when  he  ought,  he  was  liable  to  pay
interest  if  legal  Mora  could  be  imputed  to  him.
In  bonae  fidei  contractus  interest  (usurae)  was
due  if  there  was  legal  mora.  (Vangerow,  Paw-
dekten,  <i:c.  iii.  p.  188  ;  Thibaut,  System,  <£-c.  i.
§  96,  &c.  ;  Dig.  22.  tit.  1.)  [G.  L.]

MORA.     [ExERciTiJS,  p.  483.]

MORTA'RIUM,  also  called  PILA  and  PI-
LUM  (Plin.  H.N.  xviii.  3  ;  xxxiii.  26),  (oKfiot  :
17877,  Schol,  in  Hes.  Op.  et  Dies,  421  ;  l^ySis,  ap-
parently from  the  root  of  icere,  to  strike),  a  mortar.

Before  the  invention  of  mills  [Mola]  corn  w.ns
pounded   and   rubbed   in    mortars   (pistum),   and
hence  the  place  for  making  bread,  or  the  bake-
house, was  called  pidnnum.    (Serv.  in  Virg.  Aen.
\.  179.)     Also  long  after  the  introduction  of  mills
this  was  an  indispensable  article  of  domestic  furni-
ture.    (Plaut.  Aul.  i.  2.  17  ;  Cato,  de  Re  Rust.  74
— 76  ;  Colum.  de  Re  Rust,  xii,  55.)   Hesiod  {I.  c),
enumerating  the  wooden  utensils  necessary  to  a
farmer,  directs  him  to  cut  a  mortar  three  feet,  and
a  pestle  (virepoy,  kottclvov,  pistillum)  three  cubits
long.     Both  of  these  were  evidently  to  be  made       jj
from  straight  portions  of  the  trunks  or  branches  of      I
trees,  and  the  thicker  and  shorter  of  them  was  to       1
be  hollowed.     They  might  then  be  used  in    the


M  UN  Y  CHI  A.

manner  represented  in  a  painting  on  the  tomb  of
llemeses  III.  at  Thebes  (see  woodcut,  left-hand
figure  taken  from  Wilkinson,  vol.  ii.  p.  383)  ;  for
there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  Egyptians  and
the  Greeks  fashioned  and  used  their  mortars  in  the
same  mai^ner.  (See  also  Wilkinson,  vol.  iii.  p.
18],  showing  three  stone  mortars  with  metal  pes-
tles.) In  these  paintings  we  may  observe  the
thickening  of  the  pestle  at  both  ends,  and  that  two
men  pound  in  one  mortar,  raising  their  pestles
alternately  as  is  still  the  practice  in  Egypt.  Pliny
(//.  A^.  xxxvi.  43)  mentions  the  various  kinds  of
stone  selected  for  making  mortars,  according  to  the
purposes  to  which  they  were  intended  to  serve.
Those  used  in  pharmacy  were  sometimes  riiade,  as
he  says,  "of  Egyptian  alabaster.""  The  annexed
woodcut  shows  the  forms  of  two  preserved  in  the


MURUS.


'/  69  •


Egyptian  collection  of  the  British  Museum,  which
exactly  answer  to  this  description,  being  made  of
that  material.  They  do  not  exceed  three  inches  in
height :  the  dotted  lines  mark  the  cavity  within
each.  The  woodcut  also  shows  a  mortar  and
pestle,  made  of  baked  white  clay,  which  were  dis-
covered, A.  D.  1831,  among  numerous  specimens  of
Roman  potterj^  in  making  the  northern  approaches
to  London-bridge  {Archaeologia,  vol.  xxiv.  p.  199,
plate  44.)

Besides  the  uses  already  mentioned,  the  mortar
was  employed  in  pounding  charcoal,  rubbing  it
with  glue,  in  order  to  make  black  paint  {atramen-
turn,  Vitruv.  vii.  10.  ed.  Schneider)  ;  in  making
plaster  for  the  walls  of  apartments  (Plin.  //.  Ah
xxxvi.  65)  ;  in  mixing  spices  and  fragrant  herbs
and  flowers  for  the  use  of  the  kitchen  (Athen.  ix.
70  ;  Brunck,  Anal.  iii.  51)  ;  and  in  metallurgj-,  as
in  triturating  cinnabar  to  obtain  mercury  from  it
by  sublimation.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii.  41,  xxxiv.
22.)  [J.  Y.]

MOS.     [Jus,  p.657,  a.1

MO'TIIACES,  MOTHO'NES  {ix6&aKiSyfx6ew-
I'cs),     fCiviTAS,  p.  290,  b.]

MUCIA'NA  CAUTIO.     [Cautio.]

MU'LLEUS.     [Patricii.]

MULSUM.     [ViNUM.]

MULTA.     [Poena.]

MUNERA'TOR.    [Gladiatores,  p.  574, a.]

MU'NICEPS,  MUNICI'PIUM.   [Coloma  ;

FOEDERATAE    CiVITATES.]

MUNUS.     [HoNOREs.]
MUNUS.     [Gladiatores,  p.  574,  a.]
MUNY'CHIA    (Mowyx'a),    a    festival    cele-
brated in  honour  of  Artemis  Munychia.     Plutarch
(ofe  Glor.  Ath.  p.  349,  F.)   says  that  it  was  insti-
tuted to  commemorate  the  victory  over  the  Per-


sians at  Salamis,  and  that  it  was  held  ever}-  year
on  the  sixteenth  of  Munychion.  (Compare  Suidas
and  Harpocrat.  s.  v.  Mowvxiocv.)  The  sacrifices
which  were  offered  to  the  goddess  on  this  day
consisted  of  cakes  called  aficpicpuvTcs,  either  be-
cause at  this  season  the  full  moon  was  seen  in  the
west  at  the  moment  the  sun  rose  in  the  east,  or,
as  is  more  probable,  and  also  confirmed  by  most
authorities,  because  these  cakes  were  adorned  all
round  with  burning  candles.  (Athen.  xiv.  p.  645  ;
Suidas,  s.  V.  'AvdaraToi :  Hesych.  and  Etymol.
Mag,  s.  V.  'AfX(pi(pa>i/.)  Eustathius  (ad  Iliad,  xviii.)
savs  that  these  cakes  were  made  of  cheese.  [L.S.]

"MURA'LIS  CORO'NA.    [Corona.]

MUREX.     [Tribulus.]

MU'RIES.     IVestales.]

MU'RRHINA  VASA,  or  MU'RREA  VASA,
were  first  introduced  into  Rome  by  Pompey,  who
dedicated  cups  of  this  kind  to  Jupiter  Capitolinus.
(Plin.  //.  A',  xxxvii,  7.)  Their  value  was  very
great.  (Sen.  de  Benef,  vii.  9,  Ejpist.  119  ;  Mar-
tial, iii.  82.  25  ;  Dig.  33.  tit.  10.  s.  3.  §  4.)  Pliny
(l.  c.)  states  that  70  talents  were  given  for  one
holding  three  sextarii,  and  speaks  of  a  murrhine
trulla,  which  cost  300  talents.  Nero  gave  even
300  talents  for  a  capis  or  drinking  cup.

Pliny  (xxxvii.  8)  says  that  these  murrhine
vessels  came  from  the  East,  principally  from  places
within  the  Parthian  empire,  and  chiefly  from  Cara-
mania.  He  describes  them  as  made  of  a  substance
formed  by  a  moisture  thickened  in  the  earth  by
heat,  and  says  that  they  were  chiefly  valued  on
account  of  their  variety  of  colours.  Modern  writers
differ  much  respecting  the  material  ol  which  they
were  composed.  Some  think  that  they  were  va-
riegated glass,  and  others  that  they  were  made  of
onyx,  since  that  stone  presents  a  variet}'  of  colours  ;
but  the  latter  conjecture  is  overthrown  by  a  pas-
sage of  Lampridius  {Heliogah.  32),  who  speaks  of
onyx  and  murrhine  vases.  Most  recent  writers,
however,  are  inclined  to  think  that  thej^  were  true
Chinese  porcelain,  and  quote  in  support  of  their
opinion  the  words  of  Propertius  (jv.  5.  26)  :  —

"  Murreaque  in  Parthis  pocula  cocta  focis.'"

This  opinion  would  be  rendered  still  m.ore  probable
if  Ave  could  place  dependence  on  the  statement  of
Sir  W.  Gell  {Poinpeiana,  vol.  i.  pp.  98,  99\  "  that
the  porcelain  of  the  East  Avas  called  Mirrha  di
Smyrna  to  as  late  a  date  as  1555."  (Becker,
Callus.,  vol.  i.  p.  143.)

MURU§,  MOENIA  (reZxw),  the  wall  of  a
city»  in  contradistinction  to  Paries  {toixos)^  the
Avail  of  a  house,  and  Maceria,  a  boundary  Avail.
Both  the  Latin  and  Greek  words  appear  to  contain,
as  a  part  of  their  root  meaning,  the  idea  of  a^rw,
strong  Avail  ;  and  they  are  nearly  always  used  for
Avails  of  stone  or  some  other  massive  construction.
Murus  and  r^xos  are  also  used  for  the  outer  wail
of  a  large  building.

We  find  cities  surrounded  by  massive  walls  at
the  earliest  periods  of  Greek  and  Roman  historj-,
of  Avhich  Ave  have  any  records.  Homer  speaks  of
the  chief  cities  of  the  Argive  kingdom  as  "  the
walled  Tiryns,"  and  "  Mycenae  the  Avell-built
city  "  {It.  ii.  bSQ,  569),  not  only  thus,  as  in  other
passages,  proving  the  common  use  of  such  struc-
tures in  the  Homeric  period,  but  also  attesting  the
great  antiquity  of  those  identical  gigantic  walls
which  still  stand  at  Tiryns  and  Mycenae,  and
other  cities  of  Greece  and  Italy.  In  Epirus,  ia
3  D


770  MURUS.

Etruria,  and  in  Central  Italy,  especially  in  the
valleys  at  the  foot  of  the  Apennines  on  their
•western  side,  we  find  numerous  remains  of  walls,
which  are  alike,  inasmuch  as  they  are  composed
of  immense  blocks  of  stones  put  together  without
cement  of  any  kind,  but  which  ditfer  from  one
another  in  the  mode  of  their  construction.  Three
principal  species  can  be  clearly  distinguished  :  —
1.  That  in  which  the  masses  of  stone  are  of  ir-
regular shape  and  are  put  together  without  any
attempt  to  fit  them  into  one  another,  the  inter-
stices being  loosely  filled  in  with  smaller  stones  ;
as  in  the  walls  of  the  citadel  of  Tiryns,  a  portion
of  which  is  shown  in  the  following  engraving :  —


Another  specimen  of  the  buildings  at  Tiryns,  of
much  more  regular  construction,  may  be  seen  at
p.  125.

2.  In  other  cases  we  find  the  blocks  still  of  ir-
regular polygonal  shapes,  but  of  a  construction
which  shows  a  considerable  advance  upon  the
former.  The  stones  are  no  longer  unhewn  (apyol
Xidoi),  but  their  sides  are  sufficiently  smoothed  to
make  each  fit  accurately  into  the  angles  between
the  others,  and  their  faces  are  cut  so  as  to  give  the
whole  wall  a  tolerably  smooth  surface.  Examples
of  this  sort  of  work  are  very  common  in  Etruria.
The  engraving  is  taken  from  the  walls  of  Larissa
in  Argolis.


3.  In  the  third  species,  the  blocks  are  laid  in
horizontal  courses,  more  or  less  regular  (sometimes
indeed  so  irregular,  thatnone  of  the  horizontal  joints
are  continuous),  and  with  vertical  joints  either
perpendicular  or  oblique,  and  with  all  the  joints
more  or  less  accurately  fitted.  The  walls  of  My-
cenae present  one  of  the  ruder  examples  of  this
sort  of  structure  ;  and  the  following  engraving  of
the  "  Lion  Gate,'"  of  that  fortress  (so  called  from
the  rudely  sculptured  figures  of  lions)  shows  also
the  manner  in  which  the  gates  of  these  three  spe-
cies of  walls  were  built,  by  supporting  an  immense
block  of  stone,  for  the  lintel,  upon  two  others,  for
jambs,  the  latter  inclining  inwards,  so  as  to  give
more  space  than  if  they  were  upright.  A  very
large  number  of  interesting  examples  of  these  con-


MURUS.

^=c:i

CT~A..

m

ZZ^i^ZTA]

Mi

m-^

:~~iT~im

^^[J^a^-^==

!^L— ^JC,

fe

u\=

i^?:^'

structions  will  be  found  engraved  in  some  of  the
works  presently  referred  to.  We  have  only  space
for  these  three  characteristic  specimens,  one  of  each
class.  Neither  is  it  here  possible,  or  at  all  necessary,
to  discuss  the  opinions  of  ancient  writers,  most  of
whom  were  content  with  the  popular  legend  which
assigned  these  works  to  the  Cyclopes,  nor  the
theories  of  modem  scholars  and  antiquarians,  who
(with  some  of  the  ancients)  have  generally  referred
them  to  the  Pelasgians.  The  principal  conclusions
to  which  Mr.  Bunbury  has  come,  from  a  thorouirh
examination  of  the  whole  subject,  may  be  safely
regarded  as  correct:  namely,  that  while  in  sucii
works  as  the  walls  of  Tiryns  we  have  imdoubt-
edly  the  earliest  examples  of  mural  architecture,
it  is  quite  a  fallacy  to  lay  dovm  the  general  prin-
ciple, that  the  unhewn,  the  polygonal,  the  more
irregular  and  the  more  regular  rectangular  con-
structions, always  indicate  successive  steps  in  the
progress  of  the  art ;  and  that  it  is  also  erroneous  to
assign  these  works  to  any  one  people  or  to  an}'-  one
period  ;  that,  while  such  massive  structures  would
of  course  be  built  by  people  comparatively  ignorant
of  the  art  of  stone-cutting  or  of  the  tools  proper  for
it,  they  might  be  and  were  also  erected  in  later
times  simply  on  account  of  their  adaptation  to  their
purpose,  and  from  the  motive  of  saving  unnecessary
labour  ;  and  that  the  diiference  between  the  poly-
gonal and  rectangular  structures  is  generally  to  be
ascribed  not  to  a  difference  in  the  skill  of  the
workmen,  but  to  the  different  physical  characters
of  the  materials  they  employed,  —  the  one  sort  of
structure  being  usually  of  a  species  of  limestone,
which  easily  splits  into  polygonal  blocks,  and  tho
other  a  sandstone,  the  natural  cleavage  of  which
is  horizontal.  (Bunbury,  Cyclopaean  Remains  in
Central  Italy,  in  the  Classical  Museum,  1845,  vol.  ii.
pp.147,  &c.  ;  Miiller,  Arch'dol.  d.  Kunst,  §§45, 1.66",
and  the  works  there  quoted  ;  Stieglitz,  Arch'dol.  d.
Baukunsi,  vol.  i.  pp.  95 — 98  ;  Hirt,  Gesch.d.Bau-
kunst.,  vol,  i.  pp.  195,  &c.,  and  plate  vii.  from  which
the  foregoing  cuts  are  taken  ;  Atlas  zu  Kughr''s
Kunstgeschichte,  Pt.  ii.  PI.  1  ;  Gottling  in  the
Rliein.  Mus.  1843,  vol.  iv.  pp.  321,  480,  and  in
the  Arch'dologische  Zeitung,  No.  26  ;  Pompeii,
vol.  i.  c.  4,  with  several  woodcuts  of  walls  ;  Abeken,
Mittelitulien  vor  den  Zeiten  romischer  Herrschaft,
a  most  important  work,  with  numerous  engravings
of  walls).

The  examples  of  the  foregoing  class  lead  us
gradually  to  the  regular  mode  of  construction  which
prevailed  in  Greece  after  the  time  of  the  Persiail
Wars,  and  which  had  been  adopted  in  the  walls
of  temples   much   earlier.     In  the  long  walls  oi


MURUS.

Athens,  and  the  walls  of  Peiraeeus,  the  niassiveness
of  the  Cyclopaean  works  was  united  with  perfect
regularity  of  construction.  The  stones,  which  were
so  large  that  each  was  a  cart-load  (afj.a^ia7oi)  were
accurately  fitted  to  one  another  (eV  ro/j-fj  iyywvioi)^
and  held  together,  without  cement  by  metal  clamps
soldered  with  lead  into  sockets  cut  into  the  blocks
of  stone.  (Thuc.  i.  93).  The  walls  of  the  Par-
thenon, and  the  other  great  edifices  of  the  period,
were  of  similar  construction.  Sometimes  wooden
plugs  were  used  instead  of  metal  clamps.  It  is
unnecessary  to  describe  here  the  details  ojF  the
modes  in  which  the  joints  were  arranged  in  this
regular  and  massive  masonry.  So  perfect  was  the
workmanship  at  this  period  of  the  art,  that  the
joints  often  appeared  like  a  thread  ;  and  Pliny
mentions  a  temple  at  Cyzicus,  in  the  interior  wall
of  which  a  fine  thread  of  gold  was  actually  inserted
in  the  joints  of  the  masonry.  (//.  iV.  xxxvi.  15.
6.  22.)

The  materials  employed  at  this  period  were
various  sorts  of  stone,  and,  in  some  of  the  most
magnificent  temples,  marble.  The  practice  of
putting  a  facing  of  marble  over  a  wall  of  a  com-
moner material  was  introduced  in  the  next  period
of  architectural  history.  The  first  example  of  it,
according  to  Pliny  (H.  N.  xxxvi.  6.  s.  6),  was  in
the  palace  of  Mausolus,  the  walls  of  which  were  of
brick,  faced  with  slabs  (crustae)  of  Proconncsian
marble  (about  B.  c.  360).  Vitruvius  (ii.  8)  also
states  this  fact,  and  adds  that  brick  walls,  when
perfectly  perpendicular,  are  quite  as  durable  as
those  of  stone,  and,  in  proof  of  this,  he  mentions
several  examples  of  very  ancient  brick  buildings,
both  in  Greece  and  Italy.  (Comp.  Vitruv.  i.  42  ;
Pans.  i.  42,  ii.  27,  v.  5,  x.  4,  35  ;  Later.)

For  buildings  of  a  common  sort,  the  materials
employed  were  smaller  stones,  rough  or  squared,
or  flints,  as  well  as  bricks :  the  latter,  however,
were  not  nearly  so  much  used  by  the  Greeks  as  by
the  Romans.  The  diiferent  methods  of  construction
will  be  described  presently.

The  walls  of  smaller  quarried  stones  or  bricks
were  bound  together  with  various  kinds  of  mortar
or  cement,  composed  of  lime  mixed  with  different
sands  and  volcanic  earths.  The  most  durable  of
these  was  the  cement  formed  by  mixing  two  parts
of  Terra  Puteolana  (Fuzzolana,  a  volcanic  product,
which  is  found  in  various  parts  of  Italy,  besides
Puteoli)  with  one  part  of  mortar :  this  cement  had
the  property  of  hardening  rapidly  under  water:
it  was  much  used  in  aqueducts,  cisterns,  and  such
works.  (For  further  details  on  cements,  see  Vitruv.
ii.  5,  6,  V.  12,  vii.  2  ;  Plin.  //.  N.  xxxvi.  23.
8.  52,  55  ;  Pallad.  i.  10,  14  ;  Strab.  v.  p.  245  ;
Dioscor.  V,  133).

The  history  of  Roman  masonry  is  not  very  dif-
ferent from  that  of  the  Greek.  The  Cyclopean  re-
mains of  Italy  have  been  already  noticed.  The
most  ancient  works  at  Rome,  such  as  the  Career
Mamertinus,  the  Cloaca  Maccima,  and  the  Servian
Walls,  were  constructed  of  massive  quadrangular
hewn  stones,  placed  together  without  cement.
[Cloaca.]  In  most  of  the  remains,  the  stones  are
twice  as  long  as  they  are  high.  Canina  {Arch.
Jnit^.)  distinguishes  five  species  of  Roman  masonry;
namely,  (1)  when  the  blocks  of  stone  are  laid  in
alternate  courses,  lengthwise  in  one  course,  and
crosswise  in  the  next ;  this  is  the  most  common  ;  (2)
when  the  stones  in  each  course  are  laid  alternately
along  and  across  ;  this  construction  was  usual  when


MURUS.  771

the  walls  were  to  be  faced  with  slabs  of  maible  ;
(3)  when  they  are  laid  entirely  lengthwise  ;  (4)
entirely  crosswise  ;  and  (5)  when  the  courses
are  alt.  mately  higher  and  lower  than  each  other,
as  in  the  round  temple  (of  Vesta,  so  called)  upon
the  Tiber.  This  temple  also  affords  us  an  example
of  what  is  called  rustic-work^  in  which  the  stones
are  bevelled  at  their  joints,  the  rest  of  their  surfaces
being  generally  left  rough.  This  style  of  work
originated,  in  the  opinion  of  some,  from  the  desire
to  save  the  trouble  of  smoothing  the  whole  face  of
the  stones  ;  but  it  is  more  probable  that  it  was
adopted  in  order  to  give  a  bolder  and  firmer  ap-
pearance to  the  structure.  Examples  of  it  are
found  in  the  remains  of  several  Roman  fortifications
in  Germany,  and  in  the  substructions  of  tlie  bridge
over  the  Moselle  at  Coblenz  (Jikein.  Mus.  1836,
vol.  iv.  p.  310  ;  Witzschel,  in  the  Real-Encyclop.
d.  class.  Alterth.  art.  Muri).  As  by  the  Greeks,
so  by  the  Romans,  walls  of  a  commoner  sort  were
built  of  smaller  quarried  stones  {caementa)  or  of
bricks.  Vitruvius  (ii.  8)  and  Pliny  (//.  N.  xxxvi.
22.  s.  51)  describe  the  following  kinds  of  masonry,
according  to  the  mode  in  which  the  small  stones
{caementa)  were  put  together.  (The  woodcut  is
copied  from  the  Abbildungen  zu  Winckelmanri's
Werke,  Donauoschingen,  1835,  fig.  10.)


fr^^


Besides  the  large  square  blocks  of  stone  (0),
they  used  smaller  quadrangular  stones  arranged  in
regular  courses  of  equal  and  of  unequal  heights;
the  former  was  called  isodomum  (M),  the  latter
pseudisodomum  (L);  in  another  sort  of  work,  called
emplecton  (G),  the  outer  faces  of  the  \yalls  only
were  of  wrought  stones,  the  intermediate  parts
being  filled  up  with  rough  stones,  but  these,  in  the
Greek  method  of  construction,  were  well  bedded
in  mortar,  and  arranged  with  overlapping  joints,
and  the  wall  was  bonded  together  with  stones  laid
across  at  intervals,  which  were  called  ^idrovoi  (F);
but  the  workmen  of  the  time  of  Vitruvius  were  in
the  habit,  for  the  sake  of  despatch,  of  running  up
the  outer  walls  separately,  and  then  filled  the
middle  space  with  loose  rubbish,  a  sort  of  work
which  Pliny  calls  diamidon.  The  excellence  of
the  cement  which  the  Romans  used  enabled  them
to  construct  walls  of  very  small  rough  stones,  not
laid  in  courses,  but  held  together  by  the  mortar ;
this  structure  was  called  opus  hicertum  (N).  An
improvement  upon  it  in  appearance,  but  inferior  in
stability,  was  the  opus  reticulatuni,  of  which  there
were  two  kinds,  the  like  (K)  and  the  unlike  {I).
This  sort  of  work  was  composed  of  stones  or  bricks,
from  six  to  nine  inches  long,  and  about  three  inches
square  at  the  end,  which  formed  the  faces  of  the
3d  2


772


MURUS.


wall,  the  interior  beinor  filled  in  with  mortar  and
small  rongh  stones.  Vitruvius  complains  of  these
walls  as  being  apt  to  split,  on  account  of  their
having  neither  horizontal  courses  nor  covered  joints.
Another  structure  of  which  the  Romans  made
great  use,  and  which  was  one  of  the  most  durable
of  all,  was  that  composed  of  courses  of  flat  tiles  (H).
Such  courses  were  also  introduced  in  the  other
kinds  of  stone  and  brick  walls,  in  which  they  both
served  as  bond-courses,  and,  in  the  lower  part  of
the  wall,  kept  the  damp  from  rising  from  .the
ground.  Brick  walls  covered  with  stucco  were
exceedingly  common  with  the  Romans :  even
columns  were  made  of  brick  covered  with  stucco  ;
we  have  an  example  in  the  columns  of  the  basilica
at  Pompeii,  the  construction  of  which  is  explained
in  Pompeii^  vol.  i.  p.  136.  In  hot  countries,  as  in
Africa  and  Spain,  walls  were  built  of  earth  i-ammed
in  between  two  faces  or  moulds  {tabulae^  forinae)^
which  were  removed  when  it  hardened  ;  they
were  Cf\\\QA.  parictes  formacei ;  and  Pliny  mentions
watch-towers  of  this  construction,  built  by  Han-
nibal, on  the  mountains  of  Spain,  Avhich  still  stood
firm.  (^.A^.  XXXV.  14.  s.  48.)  Walls  of  turf
were  chiefly  used  in  the  ramparts  of  camps
(Agger, Vallum)  and  as  embankments  for  rivers.

With  respect  to  the  use  of  avails  as  fortifications,
we  have  not  space  to  say  much.  The  Cyclopean
walls  of  Tiryns,  Ace,  had  no  towers  ;  but  Homer
refers  to  towers  on  the  walls  of  Troy  ;  and  in  the
historical  period  we  find  that  it  was  the  practice  to
furnish  walls  with  towers  at  regular  intervals.
Some  writers  on  militaiy  affairs  recommend  them
to  be  placed  at  salient  angles  of  the  walls,  in  order
to  command  the  intervening  spaces,  whilst  others
object  to  this  position  on  account  of  the  increased
exposure  of  the  tower  itself  to  the  battering  ram.
The  account  which  Thucydidcs  gives,  in  his  se-
cond book,  of  the  siege  of  Plataeae,  is  an  inter-
esting exhibition  of  the  state  of  the  science  of
fortification  and  attack  at  the  period  of  the  Pelo-
ponnesian  war.  Much  was  done  to  advance  it  by
the  architects  and  engineers  of  the  time  of  Alex-
ander and  his  successors.  The  rules  which  have
been  established  by  the  time  of  the  Roman  em-
perors may  be  seen  exhibited  in  detail  by  Vitruvius
(i.  5),  and  the  writers  on  militar}-  affairs,  and  il-
lustrated by  the  remains  of  the  walls  of  Pompeii.
{Pompeii,  vol.  i.  pp.  Qii^  &c.)  The  system  may
be  described  in  a  few  words  as  a  broad  terrace  of
earth  {agger)  enclosed  between  two  battlemented
walls  and  furnished  with  towers,  two,  three,  or
more  stories  high,  communicating  by  arched  door-
ways with  the  agger,  and  also  having  a  sally-port.
These  towers  were  at  distances,  on  the  average,
of  the  cast  of  a  javelin,  but  varying  according  to
the  greater  or  less  exposure  of  each  part  of  the
wall.     Respecting  the  gates,  see  Porta.     [P.  S.]

MU'SCULUS  was,  according  to  the  description
of  Vegetius  {de  Re  Milit.  iv.  16),  one  of  the
smaller  military  machines,  by  Avhich  soldiers  in
besieging  a  town  were  protected  while  engaged  in
filling  up  the  ditches  round  the  besieged  place,  so
that  the  moveable  towers  {turres  umbulatoriae)  of-
the  besiegers  might  be  able  to  approach  the  walls
without  obstacle.  A  minute  description  of  a
musculus  is  given  by  Caesar  {de  Dell.  Civ.  ii.  1 0,
&c.).  The  one  which  he  describes  was  nine  feet
long,  and  was  constructed  in  the  following  man-
ner :  —  Two  beams  of  equal  length  were  placed
upon  the  ground  at  the  distance  of  four  feet  from


MUSICA.

each  other,  and  upon  them  weixi  fixed  little  pillars
five  feet  high.  Their  top-ends  were  joined  by
transverse  beams,  which  formed  a  gentle  slope  on
either  side  of  the  roof  of  which  they  formed  the
frame-work.  The  roof  was  then  entirely  covered
with  pieces  of  wood,  two  feet  broad,  which  were
fastened  with  metal  plates  and  nails.  Around  the
edge  of  this  roof  square  pieces  of  wood,  four  cubits
broad,  were  fixed  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  to-
gether the  bricks  and  mortar  with  which  the
musculus  was  then  covered.  But  that  these  mate-
rials, which  were  intended  to  protect  the  musculus
against  fire,  might  not  suffer  from  water,  the  bricks
and  mortar  were  covered  with  skins  ;  and  that
these  skins  again  might  not  suff'er  from  the  fire  or
stones  which  the  besieged  might  throw  upon  the
musculus,  the  whole  was  covered  with  rags  of  cloth.
The  whole  of  this  machine  was  constructed  under
the  cover  of  a  vinea,  and  close  by  the  Roman
tower.  At  a  moment  when  the  besieged  were  least
expecting  any  attack,  the  musculus  was  moved  on
against  the  wall  of  the  town.  The  men  engaged
under  it  immediately  began  to  undermine  the  wall
and  thus  to  make  a  breach  in  it ;  and  while  this
work  was  going  on,  the  besiegers  kept  up  a  lively
fight  with  the  besieged  in  order  to  prevent  them
from  directing  their  attacks  against  the  musculus.
(Compare  Caes.  de  Bell  Civ.  iii.  80,  de  Bell.  Alex.
1.)  The  musculus  described  by  Caesar  was  evi-
dently designed  for  diff^erent  purposes  than  the  one
mentioned  by  Vegetius,  and  the  former  appears  to
have  been  only  a  smaller  but  a  more  indestructible
kind  of  vinea  than  that  commonly  used.  (Lipsius,
Poliorc.  i.  9  ;  Guichard,  Mtmoires  Milit  ii.  p.  .58.
tab.  2.)  [L.  S.]

MUSEIA  (Mouo-eta),  a  festival  with  contests
celebrated  at  Thespiae  in  Boeotia  in  honour  of  the
Muses.  (Pans.  ix.  31.  §3.)  It  was  held  every
fifth  year  and  Avith  great  splendour.  (Plut.  Amaior.
p.  748.  F.)  From  Aeschines  (c.  Timarch.)  it  ap-
pears that  there  was  also  a  festival  called  Museia,
which  was  celebrated  in  schools.  [L.  S.]

MUSE'UM  (MoKO-eroi/)  signified  in  general  a
place  dedicatfd  to  the  Muses,  but  was  specially
the  name  given  to  an  institution  at  Alexandria,
founded  by  Ptolemy  Philadelphus, about  B.C.  280,
for  the  promotion  of  learning  and  the  support  of
learned  men.  ( Athen.  v.  p.  203.)  We  learn  from
Strabo  (xviii.  p.  794)  that  the  museum  formed
part  of  the  palace,  and  that  it  contained  cloisters
or  porticos  (TrepiTraros),  a  public  theatre  or  lecture-
room  (e|e5pa),  and  a  larsre  hall  {oIkos  M-eyas)^
where  the  learned  men  dined  together.  The  mu-
seum was  supported  by  a  common  fiind,  supplied
apparently  from  the  public  treasury  ;  and  the
whole  institution  was  under  the  superintendence
of  a  priest,  who  was  appointed  by  the  king,  and
after  Egypt  became  a  province  of  the  Roman  em-
pire, by  the  Caesar.  (Strabo,  ;.  c.)  Botanical
and  zoological  gardens  appear  to  have  been  at-
tached to  the  museum.  (Philostr.  Apollon.  vi.  24  ;
Athen.  xiv.  p.  654.)  The  emperor  Claudius  added
another  museum  to  this  institution.  (Suet.  Claud.
42,  with  Casaubon's  note.)

MU'SICA  {v  ixova-iK-i)),  signified  in  general
any  art  over  which  the  Muses  presided,  but  is  some-
times employed  to  indicate  Music  in  the  modern
acceptation  of  the  term.  I.Greek.  In  compiling
the  following  article  little  more  has  been  attempted
than  to  give  an  outline  of  facts  which  rest  upon  posi-
tive evidence,  and  at  the  same  time  to  present  thora


I


MUSICA.

in  such  a  form  as  to  serve  for  an  introdiittion  to  the
original  sources.  Hence  it  necessarily  consists  in
a  great  measure  of  technical  details,  which,  how-
ever, can  present  no  difficulty  to  persons  acquainted
with  the  first  elements  of  the  modern  theory  ;
and  nothing  has  been  said  in  the  way  of  deduction,
except  in  one  or  two  cases  where  the  interest  of
the  subject  and  the  apparent  probability  of  the
conclusions  seemed  to  permit  it.

The  term  'Apfxouiicf}  was  used  by  the  Greek
writers  to  denote  what  is  now  called  the  Science  of
Music  ;  fiovcTiK'fi  having,  as  has  been  already  re-
marked, a  much   wider   signification.     'Ap/j.ouiK'f)

4<TTIV  eTTtCTTTJ^TJ    ^eQ>pr]TlK^    KOl  TTpaKTlKT]   TTJS  TOV

Tipjxocrfx^vov  (pvaews.  'Hpfj-ocr/nivou  Se  iariv  rh  iic
(pdSyywv  Kal  hiaffT-nixarufV^  ttoiclv  Ta^iu  ix6vT(i}y^
avyicei/xevou,     (Euclid.  Int.  Harm.  p.  1.)

The  following  sevenfold  division  of  the  subject,
which  is  adopted  by  the  author  just  quoted,  as  well
as  by  others,  will  be  partly  adhered  to  in  the  pre-
sent article  :  —  I.  Of  Sounds  {-rrepl  ipQoyywu).  II.
Of  Intervals  (jcepl  dia(TTr}iJ.draiv).  III.  Of  Genera
(nepl  y4i'cov).  IV.  Of  Systems  (irepl  (Tv(rTr]/j.d-
Tuv).  V.  Of  Modes  (Trepi  t6uuu).*  VI.  Of
Transition  (nepl  /xeragoK^s).  VII.  Of  Composi-
tion (vepl  /xeXoiroiias).

A  sound  is  said  to  be  musical  when  it  has  a  de-
terminate jntch  (rdais).  When  two  sounds  differ
in  pitch,  one  is  said  to  be  more  acute  (o|us),  the
other  more  (ji^xive  ( ^apvs)  :  or,  in  common  language,
one  is  called  higher  and  the  other  lower.  The
term  ejU/xeAi^y  applied  to  a  sound  either  signifies
simply.^  that  it  is  capable  of  being  used  in  a  melody  ;
or  relative/]/^  that  it  is  capable  of  being  used  in  the
same  melody  \\\l\\  some  other  sound  or  system  of
sounds  ;  the  latter  is  its  most  common  meaning.

An  Interval  is  the  difference  or  rather  distance
between  two  sounds  o^  different  pitch.  When  we
compare  the  intervals  between  two  pairs  of  sounds,
we  judge  them  in  certain  cases  to  be  similar,  or
equal.  If  the  more  acute  sound  of  one  of  them  be
then  raised,  that  interval  is  said  to  become  greater
than  the  other.  It  is  this  property  of  intervals
(their  being  comparable  in  respect  of  magnitude)
which  enables  us  to  classify  them,  and  enumerate
their  several  kinds.

Intervals  are  either  consonant  (a-v/x^cova)  or  dis-
sonant (5id(j)ci3va,),  according  as  the  two  sounds  may
or  may  not  be  heard  at  the  same  time  without
offending  the  ear.  (Eucl.  p.  8.)  Strictly  speaking
it  is  impossible  to  define  the  limit  between  the  two
classes,  and  this  seems  to  be  acknowledged  by  the
later  writers,  who  distinguish  various  degrees  of
consonance  and  dissonance.  Originally,  the  only
intervals  reckoned  consonant  were  the  Octave  or
eighth  (Si^  iracrcou),  the  Fifth  (Sia  TreVre  or  Si'
o^etwj/),  the  Fourth  (Sib.  reaadpuv  or  (TvX\a§'fi),
and  any  interval  produced  by  adding  an  octave  to
one  of  these.  But  all  intervals  less  than  the  fourth,
or  intennediate  between  any  two  of  those  just
enumerated  (as  the  sixth,  tenth,  &c.),  were  con-
sidered as  dissonant.     The  principal  intervals,  less

*  TSvos  is  used  in  several  different  senses.  First
it  signifies  degree  of  tension,  and  so  pitch,  whence
its  application  to  denote  mode,  the  modes  being
scales  which  differed  in  pitch  :  and  tlien  it  is  taken
for  result  of  tension ;  whence  its  meaning  as  the
name  of  an  interval,  tone,  because  a  tone  is  the  in-
terval through  which  the  voice  is  most  naturally
raised  at  one  effort.  (See  Aristid.  p.  22  ;  Eucl.  19.)


MUSICA.


773


than  the  fourth,  employed  in  Greek  music  were
the  double  tone  {SiToyov),  nearly  equal  to  the
modern  major  third  ;  the  tone  and  half  (tpiti/xitS-
VLov),  nearly  the  same  as  the  minor  third  ;  the
tone  {T6vas\  equal  to  the  modern  major  tone  ;  the
half  tone  {t]j.ut6viov)  and  the  quarter  tone  {ZUais).
(Eucl.  p.  8.)  Other  writers  speak  of  6ixo^wvia  or
unison,  dvTKpwvia  or  the  consonance  of  the  octave,
and  Trapa<pcavia  or  the  consonance  of  the  fourth  and
fifth.  See  Arist.  Probl.  xix.  39,  and  Gaudentius,
p.  1 1.  The  latter  author  considers  irapacpcci/ia  to  be
intermediate  between  consonance  and  dissonance,
and  mentions  the  tritone  or  sharp  fourth  as  an  ex-
ample of  it.

If  two  strings,  perfectly  similar  except  in  length,
and  stretched  by  equal  tensions,  be  made  to  vi-
brate, the  number  of  vibrations  performed  in  a
given  time  by  each  is  inversely  proportional  to
its  length  ;  and  the  interval  between  the  sounds
produced  is  found,  to  depend  only  on  the  ratio  of
the  lengths,  i.  e.  of  the  numbers  of  vibrations.  Thus
if  the  ratio  be  \  the  interval  is  an  octave,
if  „  if  „  a  fifth,

if  „  f  „  a  fourth,

if  „  ■§■  „  a  major  tone.

The  discovery  of  these  ratios  is  attributed,  pro-
bably with  truth,  to  Pythagoras.  But  the  accounts
of  the  experiments  by  which  he  established  them
(see  Nicomachus,  p.  10)  are  plainly  false,  since
they  contradict  the  known  fact  that  when  similar
and  equal  strings  are  stretched  by  different  tensions,
the  number  of  vibrations  are  as  the  square  roots  of
the  tensions.  (See  Wheweli's  Dynamics,  part  ii.
p.331,  ed.  1834.)

The  Tovos  or  tone  was  defined  to  be  the  dif-
ference between  the  fourth  and  fifth  ;  so  that  the
corresponding  ratio  would  be  determined  either  by
experiment,  or  by  simply  dividing  §•  by  f.

It  is  remarkable  that  each  of  the  four  ratios
enumerated  above  is  supeipartictdar  * ;  i.  e.  the  two
terms  of  each  differ  from  one  another  by  unity.
And  all  the  intervals  employed  in  the  modern
theory  are  either  such  as  correspond  to  superpar-
ticular  ratios,  or  are  produced  from  such  by  com-
pounding them  with  the  octave.  Thus  the  ratio
corresponding  to  the

major  third         is    f

minor  third         „    -|-

minor  tone  „  -j^^

major  semitone  „  -ji-
lt seems  therefore  extraordinary,  that  analogy
should  not  have  led  at  once  to  the  discovery  at
least  of  the  major  and  minor  third,  as  soon  as  the
connection  between  intervals  and  ratios  had  been
observed.  However  no  such  discovery  was  then
made,  or  if  made  it  was  neglected  ;  and  this  affords
at  once  an  explanation  of  the  fact  that  intervals
less  than  the  fourth  were  reckoned  dissonant :  for
the  Zirovov,  or  double  major  tone,  is  greater  than
the  true  consonant  major  third  (which  consists  of
a  major  and  minor  tone)  by  an  interval  expressed.
by  the  ratio  -f^  .  a  difference  quite  sufficient  to  de-


*  Euclid  seems  to  consider  no  intervals  conso-
nant except  such  as  correspond  to  superparticular
{imfMSpios)  or  multiple  (TroWaTrAaaiwv)  ratios  ;
the  latter  being  such  as  y,  ^,  f,  &c.  On  this
theory  the  octave  and  fourth  (f)  would  be  dis-
sonant, but  the  octave  and  fifth  {^)  consonant.
(See  Eucl.  Sect.  Can.  p.  24.)
3  D  3


74


MUSIC  A.


stroy  the  consonance  of  the  interval.  In  fact,  wlion
a  keyed  instrument  is  tuned  according  to  the  equal
temperament,  the  major  thirds  are  too  great  by  an
interval  little  more  than  half  of  this  (yjf-  nearly),
and  yet  are  only  just  tolerable.  This  subject  is
important,  because  it  bears  immediately  upon  the
question  whether  harmony  was  used  in  the  Greek
music.

An  aggregate  of  two  or  more  intervals,  or  rather
a  series  of  sounds  separated  from  one  another  by
intervals,  constituted  a  system.  Systems  were
named  from  the  number  of  sounds  which  they  com-
prehended. Thus  an  octachord  was  a  system  of
eight  sounds,  a  pentachord  of  five,  and  so  on  :  and
usually,  though  not  necessarily,  the  number  of
sounds  corresponded  to  the  interval  between  the
two  extreme  sounds.

The  fundamental  system  in  ancient  music  was
the  ietrachord,  or  system  of  four  sounds,  of  which
the  extremes  were  at  an  interval  of  a  fourth.  In
modern  nmsic  it  is  the  octachord,  and  comprehends
an  octave  between  the  extremes.  The  important
and  peculiar  property  of  the  latter  system,  namely,
the  completeness  of  its  scale,  was  fully  understood,
as  the  name  of  the  interval  5ia  Traacov  sufficiently
indicates  (see  also  Aristides,  pp.  16,  17),  but  it  was
not  taken  in  theory  for  the  foundation  of  the  scale;
or  at  any  rate  was  considered  as  made  up  of  two
tetrachords.

The  Genus  of  a  system  depended  upon  the  dis-
tribution of  the  two  intermediate  sounds  of  the
tetrachord.  The  Greek  musicians  used  three  Ge-
nera :  —

I.  The  Diatonic,  in  which  the  intervals  between
the  four  sounds  were  (ascending),  semitone,  tone,
tone :  —


i—i:


J


II.  The  Chromatic  ;  semitone,  semitone,   tone,
and  half :  —


^


— i — I — |-


III.  The   Enharmonic  ;   diesis,   diesis,   double
tone :


'=5=^=*


^-


(The  second  note  is  meant  to  represent  a  sound
half  way  between  E  and  F,  for  which  the  modern
system  supplies  no  notation.)

Of  these  genera  the  Diatonic  was  allowed  to  be
the  most  ancient  and  natural,  and  the  Enharmonic
the  most  modem  and  difficult ;  the  latter  however
seems  soon  to  have  become  the  favourite  with
theorists  at  least,  for  Aristoxenus  complains  that  all
writers  before  his  time  had  devoted  their  treatises
almost  entirely  to  it,  to  the  neglect  of  the  two
others.     (Aristox.  pp.2  and  19.)

The  only  difference  between  the  ancient  and
modem  Diatonic  is,  that  in  the  former  all  the  tones
are  major  tones,  whereas  in  the  latter,  according
to  the  theory  generally  admitted,  major  and  minor


MUSIC  A.

tones  occur  altematelj'.  (See  Crotch's  Elements
of  Musical  Composition,  chap,  ix.)  The  interval
called  a  semitone  in  the  above  descriptions  is
therefore  strictly  neither  equal  to  the  modem  major
semitone,  nor  to  half  a  major  tone,  but  the  ear
would  hardly  appreciate  the  difference  in  melody.

Besides  these  genera,  certain  Colours  (XP<^«0  or
specific  modifications  of  them  are  enumerated.
(Eucl.  p.  10.)

The  Enharmonic  had  only  one  XP<^S  namely,
the  genus  itself  as  described  above  :  it  is  commonly
called  simply  ap/xoi/ia.

The  Chromatic  had  three  :  Ist.  XP^M"  Tovia7ov^
or  simply  XP^P-"'^  the  same  as  the  genus  ;  2nd.
XP^f^a  rjixidxiov,  in  which  intervals  of  three-eighths
of  a  tone  were  substituted  for  the  two  semitones  ;
3rd.  XP^H-"-  P-a\aK6v,  in  which  intervals  of  one
third  of  a  tone  were  similarly  employed.

The  Diatonic  had  two  x/"^«' :  1st.  Sidrovoy
(TvpTouov,  or  simply  dtaTouoi/,  the  same  as  the
genus  ;  2nd.  didrovov  fiahaKov^  in  which  an  in-
terval of  three-fourths  of  a  tone  was  substituted  for
the  second  semitone  (ascending).

The  following  table  will  exhibit  at  one  view
the  intervals  between  the  sounds  of  the  tetrachord,
taken  in  the  ascending  order,  according  to  each  of
these  XP<^«'9  the  tone  being  represented  by  unit}',
and  two  tones  and  a  half  being  supposed  to  make
up  a  fourth,  a  supposition  which  is  not  exactly
true,  but  is  commonly  adopted  by  the  ancient
writers  as  sufficiently  accurate  for  their  purpose.
(See  Eucl.  Sectio  Canonis  Theor.  xv.)

I.  Diatonic     ...   1.  BidTovov  ((Tvutovov)  i,  1,  1.

2.  SidTovov  fxaXaKSv  .  i,  -J,  ^.

II.  Chromatic   .  .   1.  XP^I^"-  {roviatov)   .  4-  i,  i-

2.  XP^^a  r]fxi6Kiov     .  f,  f ,  -J.

3.  XP^^'-'^  h-<^^oi,k6u    .  ■^,  ^,  y .

III.  Enharmonic     .     ap/xovia ^,  ^,  2.

There  seems  to  be  little  evidence  that  any  of
the  XP*^"'  were  practically  used,  except  the  three
principal  ones,  SidTovov,  XP'«'M«»  apfiouia.  But  it
would  be  wrong  to  conclude  hastily  that  the  others
would  be  impossible  in  practice,  or  necessarily  un-
pleasing.  In  the  soft  Diatonic  for  instance,  the
interval  which  is  roughly  described  as  five-fourths
of  a  tone  would  be  greater  than  a  major  tone,  but
less  than  a  minor  third  ;  now  there  are  two  in-
tervals of  this  kind  corresponding  to  the  superpar-
ticular  ratios  f  and  -J,  which  ought  therefore  by
analogy  to  be  consonant,  or  at  any  rate  capable  of
being  employed  as  well  as  the  tone  and  semitone  ;
and  although  they  are  not  used  in  modern  music,
or  at  least  not  admitted  in  theory  *,  nothing  but
experiment  can  determine  how  far  the  ear  might
become  accustomed  to  them.  If  this  view  be  cor-
rect, the  intervals  of  the  tetrachord  in  the  ^idrovov
fxaXuKSv  would  probably  correspond  to  the  ratios
if'  T"3''  h  ^"<i  similar  considerations  might  be  ap-
plied to  the  other  XP^°'^-

The  four  soimds  of  the  tetrachord  were  distin-
guished by  the  following  names  :  virdrr}  (sc.  x°P^^)
was  the  lowest ;  j/^ttj  or  uedTT]  the  highest ;  vapv-

*  See  Smith's  Harmonics,  sect  iv.  art.  10.  These
intervals  exist  in  the  natural  scales  of  the  horn,
trumpet,  &c.,  and  are  in  fact  used,  instead  of  the
minor  third  and  tone,  in  the  harmony  of  the  domi-
nant seventh,  both  by  stringed  instruments  and
voices  when  unaccompanied  by  tempered  instru-
ments.


MUSICA.
iraTr]  the  lowest  Lut  one,  and  Tvapavi]Tr)  the  highest
but  one.  Ylapau-fjTT)  was  also  frequently  called
Aixay^"^,  probably  because  in  some  ancient  instru-
ment the  corresponding  string  was  struck  by  the
forefinger  ;  and  ivapvn6.T'q  was  afterwards  called
rpiri)  in  certain  cases.  These  names  were  used  in
all  the  genera  ;  but  the  name  of  the  genus  was
commonly  added  to  Xixavhs  (thus  AiX"*'^^  hiirovos,
Xpco/aaTiKT)  or  evapixovios),  perhaps  because  the
position  of  this  sound  with  respect  to  vTrdrr]  and
vf)T7}  is  what  chieflj'-  determines  the  characier  of
the  genus.  When  the  two  lowest  intervals  of  the
tetrachord  taken  together  were  less  than  the  re-
maining one,  those  two  were  said  to  fonn  a  con-
densed inte-nial  {■nvKv6v).  Thus  the  interval  be-
tween vTOLTT]  and  Aixav^s  is  irvKv6s  in  the  En-
harmonic and  Chromatic  genera.  The  three  sounds
of  the  TvvKvhv  were  sometimes  called  ^apvirvKv6s,
f.LeaoTrvKv6$  and  o^virvKvSs^  and  sounds  which  did
not  belong  to  a  ttukvov  were  called  airvKvoi.

It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  the  tetrachord
could  long  continue  to  furnish  the  entire  scale  used
in  practice,  though  it  was  always  considered  as  the
element  of  the  more  comprehensive  systems  which
gradually  came  into  use.  The  theory  of  the  genera,
as  has  been  seen,  required  only  the  tetrachord  for
its  full  development,  though  it  certainly  could  not
have  been  invented  till  after  the  enlargement  of
the  scale.

Terpander  is  said  to  have  invented  the  seven-
stringed  lyre  (Eucl.  p.  19),  which  seems  not  to
have  been  obsolete  in  Pindar's  time  (PyfL  ii.  70) ;
its  scale  consisted  of  an  octave  with  one  sound
omitted.  (Arist.  Proh.  xix.  7,  25,  32.)  The  ad-
dition of  this  omitted  sound  (attributed  to  Lycaon


MUSICA.  775

or  Pythagoras),  would  give  an  octachordal  lyre
with  a  complete  octave  for  its  scale.  And  an  'in-
strument called  inagadis,  v/hich  must  have  had  a
still  greater  compass,  was  very  early  known,  and
is  said  to  have  had  twenty  strings  as  used  by
Anacreon.  (See  Bockh,  de  Mctr.  Find.  lib.  iii.
cap.  7,  1 1.)

When  two  tetrachords  were  joined  so  that  the
highest  sound  of  one  served  also  for  the  lowest  of
the  other,  they  were  said  to  be  eonjunct  avvt)ix-
fxeua).  But  if  the  highest  sound  of  one  were  a
tone  lower  than  the  lowest  of  the  other,  they  were
called  disjunct  {Bie^cvyfieya),  thus

B  C  D  E  F  G  A       conjunct.

EFGABCDE  disjunct.

In  the  latter  case  the  tone  (between  A  and  B)
which  separates  them  was  called  t6vos  Sia^evKTi-
k6s.    (Eucl.  p.  1 7.)

A  hendecachordal  system,  consisting  of  three
tetrachords,  of  which  the  middle  one  Avas  conjunct
with  the  lower  but  disjunct  from  the  upper,  thus

BCDEFGABCDE,

is  supposed  to  have  been  used  about  the  time  of
Pericles.  (Bockh.)  In  such  a  system  the  lowest
tetrachord  was  called  (TerpaxopBou)  vTvarSov^  the
middle  fieauu,  and  the  highest  Si6^eu7^eVwv.
Afterwards  a  single  sound  (called  Trpo(r\afx§av6-
fxeuos)  was  added  at  an  interval  of  a  tone  below
the  lowest  of  vTraTwu,  and  a  conjunct  tetrachord
(called  vir€p§oXcuct>v)  was  added  above.  And  thus
arose  a  system  of  two  complete  octaves.


which  was  called  the  greater  perfect  system.  An-
other system,  called  the  smaller  perfect  system^  was
composed   of   three   conjunct   tetrachords,   called


imarSov,  fiiawv,  and  avvri{Xfihwv ,  with  irpoaXonL.
Sayo/jLeuos,  thus.


m


-i^


3Ei3EP


-I-


t


:t


^


and  these  two  together  constituted  the  immutable
system  {(Tvar't]fj.a  duerdgoAov)  described  by  all  the
writers  later  than  Aristoxenus,  and  probably  known
to  him.  (Eucl.  p.  1 7.)

The  sounds  in  these  systems  were  named  in  the
way  before  described,  the  names  of  the  tetrachord
only  being  added,  and  ixiar\  and  irapayiiari  being
substituted  for  vitrir]  fxecruu  and  virdrr]  Sie^evy-
fi4y(tiv  respectively.  Thus,  taking  the  sounds  in
the  ascending  order,

A  Trpo(TXafji.€ai'6iJ.eyo9

B  VTrdrr)  virarcov

C  -n-apviruTr}  viraroov      1

1)  Xixo-vos  virarSiv

E  vndrt]  jxicruiv

F  irapvndTt]  fieacav

O  \ixavhs  fi4<xwv  j-T.  fieacDV.

A  fi4ar]


.^  Terpdxopdov
(       virar&v.


J-T.  ^e'o


So  far  the  sounds  are  common  to  the  greater  and
smaller  systems.     Then  follow,  in  the  greater,

B  irapafxea-T]  •\

C  rpir-n  S^eC^vyfiiucoy^  \       ^^^^         >^^^^

D  irapavqrT)  oie^etryfxeycou    I  *     '^

E  vrjTT^  Sie^evyfxevwv  <

F     rpirv  vnepfoXaicy  [r.  6Trep§oXalu,y.

G     TrapavrjTrj  vivQpsoXalwv     I  '^

A     viirt}  virepSoXaiwv  -'

The  interval  between  fiiat}  and  vapa/xea-'n  is  a
tone.  But  in  the  smaller  system  fxea-Tj  serves  also
for  the  lowest  sound  of  the  tetrachord  <rvy7]/x/x4y(i}yj
which  terminates  the  scale,  thus

A     fiea-n
JB     rpLTT]  (TvyTjixfieywy.
C     TrapayfjTT]  avyTi/jL/xcyuv,
D     v/jTTj  o'vurjfx.fxeywy.
'      3d  4


776


MUSICA.


In  adapting  the  modem  notation  to  these  scales,
we  have  represented  them  in  the  Diatonic  genus  ;
but  the  same  arrangement  of  the  tetrachords  was
adopted  in  the  others.  Those  sounds  of  the  im-
mutable system  which  were  the  same  in  all  the
genera,  namely,  TTpocT\ap.§av6(ievos^  uttottj  uTrarwy,
vTraTt]  fxiauv^  f^^o^Vi  Trapa/j.ea'q,  vf]Tr]  avvrifxfj.€V(av^
t^TT]  5<€^ei»7yueVco»',  and  vnTrj  vTtepQoXatMV^  were
called  fixed  {karruT^s),  being  in  fact,  except  the
first,  the  extreme  sounds  of  the  several  tetrachords.
The  rest,  being  the  intermediate  sounds,  on  the
position  of  which  the  genus  depended,  were  called
movable  (^KivovixevQi).

MeVrj  was  certainly  considered  a  sort  of  key  note
to  the  whole  system  (see  Arist.  Probl.  xix.  20),
and  TrpoG\afJL€av6fi€vos  was  added  to  complete  the
octave  below  ^e'cTTj.  (Arls tides,  p,  10.)  This  ad-
dition is  supposed  to  have  been  made  later  than
the  time  of  Plato,  btit  earlier  than  Aristoxenus.
(Bockh.)

Tlie  greater  of  the  two  systems  thus  described
appears  to  have  superseded  the  other  in  practice ;


MUSICA.

in  fact  it  is  evidently  the  most  natural  of  the  two.
But  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  it  was  necessarily
used  in  its  complete  form  as  the  scale  of  any  in-
stniment  ;  it  Avas  rather  a  theoretical  canon  by
which  the  scales  really  employed  were  constructed.
With  regard  to  its  jii7iess  for  use,  it  may  be  ob-
served that  in  the  Diatonic  genus  the  efi"ect  of  such
a  system  would  not  perceptibly  diflTer,  so  long  as
melody  only  was  required,  from  that  of  the  coiTe-
sponding  notes  (given  above)  as  played  on  a  mo-
dem instrument  with  or  without  temperament.
The  Chromatic  scale  is  quite  \mlike  *  anything
now  employed  ;  and  though  it  was  not  considered
the  most  difficult,  was  certainly  the  least  natural.
(Texyt/cwraToi'  Se  to  xP'^H-'^i  Aristides,  p.  19.)
But  it  is  impossible  to  form  a  decided  judgment  of
its  merits,  Avithout  a  much  greater  knowledge  of
the  rules  of  composition  than  seems  now  attainable.
The  effect  of  the  Enharmonic  must  have  been
nearlj^  the  same  as  that  of  the  Diatonic,  supposing
\iXavhs  to  be  left  out  in  each  tetrachord,  thus  :


Indeed  Plutarch  relates,  on  the  authority  of  Aris-
toxenus, that  Olympus  was  led  to  the  invention  of
this  genus  by  observing  that  a  peculiar  and  beau-
tiful character  was  given  to  melody  when  certain
notes  of  the  scale,  and  particularly  Xixo-vhs,  were
left  out.  (See  Plutarch's  Dialogue  on  Music;  Mem.
de  VAcad.  des  Inscriptions^  vol.  x.  126.)  It  is
therefore  most  probable  that  this  was  the  original
form  of  the  Enharmonic  scale,  and  that  it  was  more
ancient  than  the  highly  artificial  Chromatic.  In
this  form  it  would  be  both  natural  and  easy.  But
afterwards,  when  additional  sounds  were  inter-
posed between  B  and  C,  E  and  F,  it  Avould  of
course  become,  as  it  is  always  described,  the  most
difficult  of  all  the  Genera,  without  however  ceasing
to  be  natiu-al :  for  these  additional  sounds  could
certainly  be  neither  used  by  a  composer  nor  exe-
cuted by  a  singer  as  essential  to  the  melody,  but
must  rather  have  been  introduced  as  passing  or
ornamental  notes,  so  that  the  general  effect  of  the
genus  would  remain  much  the  same  as  before.
The  assertion  of  Aristoxenus  (see  pp.  28,  53)  that
no  voice  could  execute  more  than  two  quarter  tones
in  succession,  evidently  supports  this  view.*  Thus
the  Enharmonic  would  derive  its  distinctive  cha-
racter more  from  the  largeness  of  the  highest  in-
terval of  the  tetrachord  tlian  from  the  smallness  of
the  two  others.  Aristoxenus  (p.  23)  expressly
mentions  the  important  influence  which  the  magni-
tude of  the  interval  between  \ixay6s  and  viiTr]
had  upon  the  character  of  the  genus,  and  blames
the  musicians  of  his  own  time  for  their  propensity
to  diminish  this  interval  for  the  sake  of  sweetness
(rovTov  S'  a'^Tiov  rh  ^ov^eaOai  y\vKaiuiiv  ael).
That  a  peculiar  character  really  is  given  to  a
melody  by  the  occurrence  of  a  larger  interval  than
usual  between  certain  sounds  of  the  scale,  is  a  well
known  fact,  exemplified  in  many  national  airs,  and


*  Compare  what  is  said  (Aristid.  p.  28)  of  the
lare  uae  of  intervals  of  three  and  Jive  quarter  tones.


easily  proved  by  the  popular  experiment  of  playing
on  the  black  keys  only  of  a  pianoforte.^

The  Genus  of  a  system  was  determined,  as  has
been  explained,  by  the  magnitude  of  certain  of  its
intervals.  The  species  (e/Sos)  depended  upon  the
order  of  their  succession.  Hence,  supposing  no
system  to  be  used  which  was  not  similar  to  some
part  of  the  avaT^fxa  a/xerdSoKou^  every  system
would  have  as  many  species  as  it  had  intervals,
and  no  more.  (Eucl.  p.  14.)

The  tetrachord,  for  example,  had  three  species
in  each  genus  thus  (Diatonic),

1st.  i   1,  1.     2nd.   1,  ^,  1.     3rd.  1,  1,  i.
(where  1  stands  for  a  tone).

The  species  of  a  sj'stem  was  often  described  by
indicating  two  sounds  of  the  (TvaryjuLa  aixtraSoXov
between  which  a  similar  one  might  be  found.  Of
the  seven  species  of  the  Octachord,  the  first  was
exemplified  by  the  octave  comprehended  between
xmarri  inrarwu  and  TTapa/xfar] :  the  second  by  that
between  irapvirdTr]  (marccv  and  Tpirr]  5ie^ivyfj.4-
vwv.  and  so  on.  The  order  of  the  intervals  in
these  seven  species  would  be  as  follows  in  the
Diatonic  genus  (ascending) :

1st.  i  1,  1,  1  1,  1,  1
2nd.  1,  1,  i  1,  1,  1,  i
3rd.    1,     i,     i,     1,     1,     ^,     1


*  The  modem  minor  scale.  A,  B,  C,  D  E,  1  F,
$  G,  A,  can  hardly  be  considered  an  exception  to
this  assertion,  for  its  essential  character,  as  now
used,  depends  so  little  upon  the  Chromatic  interval
between  F  and  Z  G,  that  this  peculiarity  is  usually
got  rid  of  in  melody  by  raising  the  F  or  lowering
the  Jf  G,  according  to  circumstances.  Hence  the
popular  but  incorrect  way  of  representing  the
ascending  and  descending  minor  scales.  (See
Dehn,  Tlieoretisch-praktische  Harmonielelire,  pp.  (>7,
68.)

t  See  Bumey,  vol,  i.  p.  27,  on  the  Old  EnJiav


MUSICA.
1,     1,     1,


4th.  i,

5th.  i,  1,  1,  i,  i,  1,  X

6th.  I,  1,  X,  1,  1,  1,  1

7th.  ],  ^,  1,  1,  i  1,  1

This  distinction  of  species  is  important,  because
!t  formed  oriyinally  the  chief  difference  between  the
modes  {r6voi).  tlnfortunately  there  are  no  means
of  determining  what  was  the  real  difference  be-
tween melodies  written  in  these  several  scales  ;  and
the  difficulty  of  forming  any  probable  hypothesis
on  this  subject  is  increased  by  what  is  said  of  jueVrj
in  the  passage  quoted  above  from  the  Aristotelic
Problemata.  Tldura  yap  to,  xpvo"''o.  fieKr]  iroWd-
Kis  TTJ  fxearj  xP^to-^-,  koI  iravres  ol  ayadol  TroiriTal
TTUKua  irphs  tt]v  /xecrrju  airavTcoat,  Kav  (XTreA-
Bcaai,  raxv  itrav4pxovTai,  Trphs  Se  6.X\t]u  outoos
ov^ejx'iav.  For  since  the  position  of  fxiar]  was  de-
termined (Euclid,  p.  18)  by  the  intervals  adjacent
to  it,  any  series  of  sounds  beginning  or  e7iding  with
fi.((ri]  would  give  a  system  always  of  the  same
species.  Possibly  the  author  of  the  Problemata
does  not  use  the  term  jueV?;  in  the  same  sense  as
Euclid.

However  it  is  certain  that  the  seven  species  of
the  Octachord  above  described  were  anciently
(iiirh  Twv  apxaicau,  Euclid,  p.  15)  denoted  by  the
names  Mixolydian,  Lydian,  Phrygian,  Dorian,
J^JT^b'^iian?  Hypophrj'gian,  and  Hypodorian  ;  and
it  seems  likely  that  they  always  differed  in  pitch
as  well  as  species,  the  Mixolydian  being  the  highest,
and  the  Hypodorian  the  lowest.  Plence  it  is  con-
jectured that  there  were  originally  only  three
modes,  corresponding  to  the  three  species  of  tetra-
chord,  and  that  these  were  the  Dorian,  Phrygian,
and  Lydian  ;  because  the  Octachord  in  each  of
these  three  modes  is  made  up  of  two  similar  dis-
junct tetrachords,  which  are  of  the  first  species  in
the  Dorian,  the  second  in  the  Phr\'gian,  and  the
third  in  the  liydian.

Aristides  describes  also  six  enharmonic  modes
of  very  ancient  origiii  (aTs  ol  Trduv  iraXaiSTaToi
vphs  ras  ap/xoAas  Kex/J7?i'Tat,  p.  21)  consisting  of
different  species  of  octachords,  and  quotes  the  well
known  passage  in  Plato  {Rep.  iii.  c.  10)  as  refer-
ring to  them.  The  order  of  the  intervals  is  given
as  follows  (see  the  notes  of  Meibomius  upon  the
passage) :  —

Lydian    .     .   i,  2,  1,  x  ^,  2,  ^.

Dorian     .     .    1,  i,  i,  2,  1,  i,  x      o.

Phr>-g,an       .    1,  ^,  ^,  2,  1,  ^,  ^,     1.

lastian     .     .    J,  x,  2,  U,  1.

Mixolydian  .    ^,  ^,  1,  ],"  ^,  ^,  3.

Syntonolydian  ^,  ^,  2,  li  2.

It  will  be  observed  that  these  scales  do  not  all
comprehend  exactly  an  octave  ;  and  none  of  them
except  the  Lydian  is  coincident  with  any  part  of
the  irxxTT-nixa  a/xeTaSoXov*  None  of  them  is  de-
cidedly unnatural,  except  perhaps  the  Mixolydian.
Of  course  it  is  impossible  to  recognise  their  charac-
ters as  described  by  Plato,  in  the  absence  of  exam-
ples of  their  application  in  actual  melody.  Their
principal  interest  therefore  consists  in  the  evidence
which  they  afford  of  the  antiquity  of  etiharmonic
systems,  i.e.  of  systems  formed  by  omitting  certain
sounds  of  the  diatonic  scale.     For  unless  we  take


*  That  systems  were  not  alwai/s  restricted  to
the  immutable  form  is  proved  by  what  Euclid  says
of  compound  systems,  with  more  than  one  ixea-q. '


MUSICA.  777

this  view  of  them,  and  consider  the  quarter  tones
as  unessential  additions,  it  seems  quite  impossible
to  understand  how  they  could  be  used  at  all.

The  difference  of  species,  considered  as  tlie
characteristic  distinction  of  modes,  is  evidentlv
spoken  of  as  a  thing  antiquated  and  obsolete,  not
only  by  Aristides  (who  was  certainly  later  than
Cicero,  see  p.  70),  but  also  by  Euclid.  As  to
Aristoxenus,  the  fragments  which  remain  of  his
writings  contain  no  allusion  to  such  a  distinction
at  all.  In  his  time  it  appears  that  the  number
of  modes  was  thirteen  ;  and  later  writers  reckon
fifteen.  (Euclid,  p.  19  ;  Aristid.  pp.  2.S,  24.)  The
descriptions  of  these  fifteen  modern  modes  are  very
scant}',  but  they  indicate  pretty  plainly  that  they
were  nothing  more  than  transpositions  of  the
greater  perfect  sj/stem  ;  their  names  were  Hypo-
dorian,  Hypoiastian,  ilypophrygian,  Hypoaeolian,
Hypolydian,  Dorian,  lastian,  *  Phrygian,  Aeolian,
Lydian, Mixolydian,  Hyperiastian,  Hyperphrj^gian,
Hyperaeolian,  Hyperlydian.  The  Hypodorian  was
the  lowest  in  pitch,  and  the  irpoaKaix^avoixivoi  of
the  others  were  successively  higher  by  a  semitone  ;
and  only  that  part  of  each  scale  was  used  which'
was  within  the  compass  of  the  voice.  It  seems
likely  that  the  ancient  modes  mentioned  by  Euclid,
and  described  above,  consisting  of  octachords  taken,
as  regards  their  .7)e«es,  from  different  parts  of  the
aia-rrf^xa  a/j.cTd€o\ou^  would,  as  regards  pitch,  be
each  so  placed  as  to  lie  between  virdrr]  fxeawv  and
vrjTT]  dieCivyfieyuv  of  the  modem  mode  of  the
same  name.  For  they  certainly  did  always  differ
in  pitch,  as  the  name  rSvos  shows  ;  and  there  is  no
reason  to  believe  that  their  relative  position  was
ever  changed :  the  system  of  notation,  moreover,
confirms  this  supposition.  But  for  details  on  this
subject  we  must  refer  to  the  dissertation  of  Bockh
(iii.  8),  where  it  is  treated  at  length.  The  only
important  results,  however,  are,  first,  that  the
modes  did  anciently  differ  in  species;  secondly,
that  in  process  of  time  this  difference  either  disap-
peared entirely,  or  ceased  to  be  their  distinguishing
mark  ;  and,  thirdly,  that  their  general  p^iich  was
always  different.  The  ideas  conveyed  by  these
general  assertions  of  the  real  character  and  effect
of  the  Greek  music  are  excessively  vague  and  un-
satisfactory ;  but  an  examination  into  particulars
docs  not  tend  to  make  them  at  all  more  definite
or  clear.

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  different  rhythms
and  degrees  of  slowness  or  quickness,  as  well  as
different  metres  and  styles  of  poetrj^,  would  soon
be  appropriated  to  the  modes,  so  as  to  accord  with
tlieir  original  musical  character  ;  and  these  dif-
ferences would  in  time  naturally  supersede  the  old
distinction  of  species,  and  come  to  be  looked  on  as
their  characteristic  marks  ;  so  that  at  length  all
the  species  might  even  be  used  in  each  mode,  for
the  sake  of  additional  variety.  With  regard  to
the  poetry,  indeed,  it  is  certain  that  particular
measures  were  considered  appropriate  to  different
modes  (Plat.  Leg.  ii.  p.  670),  and  it  has  even
been  attempted  to  divide  Pindar's  Odes  into
Dorian,  Aeolian,  and  Lydian.  (Bockh,  iii.  15.)
The  rhythm  of  the  music  must  have  depended
chiefly,  if  not  entirel}',  upon  that  of  the  words,  or
else  have  been  of  a  very  simple  and  uniform
character,  since  there  is  no  mention  of  a  notation
for  it  as  distinct  from  the  metre  of  the  poetry.
Probably,  therefore,  nothing  like  the  modern
system  of  muskal  rhythm  existed  j  and  if  so,  this


78


MUSICA.


must  have  formed  one  of  the  most  essential  points
of  difference  between  the  ancient  and  modern
raiisic.  How  the  rhj-thm  of  mere  instrumental
music  was  regulated,  or  what  variety  it  admitted,
does  not  appear.  There  is  no  reason,  however,  to
believe  that  music  without  words  was  practised  to
any  extent,  tliough  it  was  certainl}'-  known  ;  for
Plato  speaks  with  disapprobation  of  those  who
used  /icAoy  koX  pvQjxbv  &vev  prj^uarajj/,  ^i\ri
Kidapicrei  re  koI  avkiiarei  irpoaxp^M-^foi  {Leg.  ii.
p.  6(^9)^  and  others  mention  it.     (Bbckh,  iii.  11.)

On  the  two  last  of  the  heads  e/mmerated  in
dividing  the  whole  subject,  very  little  real  inform-
ation can  be  obtained.  In  fact  they  could  not  be
intelligibly  discussed  without  examples,  a  method
of  illustration  which  unfortunately  is  never  em-
ployed by  the  ancient  writers.  MeraSoAi}  was  the
transition  from  one  genus  to  another,  from  one
system  to  another  (as  from  disjunct  to  conjunct  or
vice  versa ),  from  one  mode  to  another,  or  from  one
style  of  melody  to  another  (Euclid.  20),  and  the
change  was  made  in  the  same  way  as  in  modern
modulation  (to  which  fieTa€oX'f}  partly  corresponds),
viz.  by  passing  through  an  intermediate  stage,  or
using  an  element  common  to  the  two  extremes  be-
tween which  the  transition  was  to  take  place.  (See
Euclid.  21.)

MeAoTTotta,  or  composition,  was  the  application
or  use  of  all  that  has  been  described  under  the  pre-
ceding heads.  This  subject,  which  ought  to  have
been  the  most  interesting  of  all,  is  treated  of  in
such  a  very  unsatisfactory  way  that  one  is  almost
forced  to  suspect  that  only  an  exoteric  doctrine  is
contained  in  the  works  which  have  come  down  to
us.  On  composition  properly  so  called,  there  is
nothing  but  an  enumeration  of  different  kinds  of
sequence  of  notes,  viz. :  —  1.  ayayi],  in  which  the
sounds  followed  one  another  in  a  regular  ascending
or  descending  order  ;  2.  irXoKi],  in  which  intervals
were  taken  alternately  ascending  and  descending  ;
3.  TTCTTeta,  or  the  repetition  of  the  same  sound
several  times  successively ;  4.  rovi],  in  which  the
same  sound  was  sustained  continuously  for  a  con-
siderable time.  (Eucl.  22.)  Besides  this  division,
there  are  several  classifications  of  melodies,  made  on
different  principles.  Thus  they  are  divided  accord-
ing to  genus,  into  Diatonic,  &c. ;  according  to  mode,
into  Dorian,  Phrygian,  &c. ;  according  to  system,
into  grave,  acute,  and  intermediate  (imaronZr]s,
V7]ToeiSr]s,  ixe(Toeidi]s).  This  last  division  seems
merely  to  refer  to  the  general  pitch  of  the  melody;
yet  each  of  the  three  classes  is  said  to  have  a  dis-
tinct turyi  (rpSiros),  the  grave  being  tragic,  the
acute  nomic  (voij.ik6s),  and  the  intermediate  di-
ihyrambic.  Again  melody  is  distinguished  by  its
iliaracter  {-h^os),  of  which  three  principal  kinds  are
mentioned,  ^laa-raKriKov,  avffraKTiKov,  and  7](rv-
Xoo'TtK<{j/,and  these  terms  are  respectively  explained
to  mean  aptitude  for  expressing  a  magnaminous
and  heroic,  or  low  and  effeminate,  or  calm  and  re-
fined character  of  mind.  Other  subordinate  classes
are  named,  as  the  erotic,  epithalamian,  comic,  and
encomiastic.  (Euclid.  21;  Aristid.  29.)  No  account
is  given  of  i\\Q  formal  peculiarities  of  the  melodies
distinguished  by  these  different  characters,  so  that
what  is  said  of  them  merely  excites  our  curiosity
without  tending  in  the  least  to  satisfy  it.

The  most  ancient  system  of  notation  appears  to
have  consisted  merely  in  the  appropriation  of  the
letters  of  the  alphabet  to  denote  the  different
sounds  of  the  scale  ;  and  the  only  alteration  made


MUSICA.

in  it  was  the  introduction  of  nevv  signs  formed  by
accenting  letters,  or  inverting,  distorting,  and  mu'
tilating  them  in  various  ways,  as  the  compass  of
the  scale  was  enlarged.  A  great,  and  seemingly
unnecessary,  complexity  was  caused  by  the  use
of  two  different  signs  for  each  sound  ;  one  for  the
voice,  and  the  other  for  the  instrument.  These
two  signs  were  written  one  above  the  other  imme-
diately over  the  syllable  to  which  they  belonged.
They  are  given  by  several  of  the  Greek  writers,
but  most  fully  by  Alypiusi  The  instrumental
signs  appear  to  have  been  chosen  arbitrarily ;  at
least  no  law  is  now  discoverable  in  them :  but  the
vocal  (which  were  probably  more  ancient)  follow
an  evident  order.  The  sounds  of  the  middle  part
of  the  scale  are  denoted  by  the  letters  of  the  Ionian
alphabet  (attributed  to  Simonides)  taken  in  their
natural  order  ;  and  it  is  remarkable  that  these
signs  would  be  just  sufficient  for  the  sounds  com-
prised in  the  six  modes  supposed  to  be  the  most
ancient,  if  the  compass  of  each  were  an  octave  and
they  were  pitched  at  intervals  of  a  semitoile  above
one  another.  Accented  or  otherwise  altered  letters
are  given  to  the  higher  and  lower  sounds.  To
learn  the  system  perfectly  must  have  required
considerable  labour,  though  its  difficulty  has  been
much  exaggerated  by  some  modern  v/riters.  (See
Bbckh,  iii.  9.)  A  few  specimens  of  Greek  melody
expressed  in  the  ancient  notation  have  come  down
to  us.  An  account  of  them  may  be  found  in  Bur-
ney  (vol.  i.  p.  83),  where  they  are  given  in  modem
notes  with  a  conjectural  rhythm.  The  best  of
them  may  also  be  seen  in  Bockh  (iii.  12)  with  a
different  rhythm.  It  is  composed  to  the  words  of
the  first  Pythian,  and  is  supposed  by  Bbckh  to  be
certainly  genuine,  and  to  belong  to  a  time  earlier
than  the  fifteen  modes.  Its  merits  have  been  very
variously  estimated  ;  probably  the  best  that  can  be
said  of  it  is  that  no  certain  notion  can  now  be  ob-
tained of  its  real  effect  as  anciently  performed.

It  has  long  been  a  matter  of  dispute  whether
the  ancients  practised  harmony,  or  music  in  parts.
We  believe  there  are  no  sufficient  grounds  for  sup-
posing that  they  did.  The  following  are  the  facts
usually  appealed  to  on  each  side  of  the  question.
In  the  first  place,  the  writers  who  professedly
treat  of  music  make  no  mention  whatever  of  such
a  practice  ;  this  omission  constitutes  such  a  very
strong  prima  facie  evidence  against  it,  that  it  must
have  settled  the  question  at  once  but  for  supposed
positive  evidence  from  other  sources  on  the  other
side.  It  is  true  that  ixeXotroda,  which  might  have
been  expected  to  hold  a  prominent  place  in  a  theo-
retical work,  is  dismissed  very  summarily  ;  but
still  when  the  subjects  which  ought  to  be  explained
are  enumerated,  ixehoiroua  is  mentioned  with  as
much  respect  as  any  other,  whilst  harmony  is  en-
tirely omitted.  In  fact  there  seems  to  be  no  Greek
word  to  express  it ;  for  apixovia  signifies  a  well
ordered  succession  of  soimds  (see  Burney,i.  131),and
avfjicpwvLa  only  implies  the  concord  between  a  single
pair  of  sounds,  without  reference  to  succession.
That  the  Greek  musicians  were  acquainted  with
avfKfxuvia  is  proved  by  manj"-  passages,  though  we
are  not  aware  that  they  ever  mention  the  concord
of  more  than  two  sounds.  But  the  subject  of  con-
cord, so  long  as  succession  is  not  introduced,  be-
longs rather  to  acoustics  than  to  music.  There  is,
however,  a  passage  (Arist.  Probl.  xix,  18),  where
succession  of  concords  is  mentioned :  —  Aio  ri  ri
5io  vacruy  avi.L(l)(avia  ^Serai   /x6ur]  ;  fxayadiCovCi


MUSICA.
yhp  TavT-riv,  &kX7]v  Se  ovSfixiau.  MayadiCeiv
siirnified  the  singing  or  playing  in  two  parts  at  an
interval  of  an  octave  ;  and  the  word  is  derived
from  fxayadis,  the  name  of  a  stringed  instrument
which  had  sufficient  compass  to  allow  a  succession
of  octaves  to  be  played  on  it.  (This  practice  of
magadizing  could  not  fail,  of  course,  to  arise  as
soon  as  men  and  women  attempted  to  sing  the
same  melody  at  once.)  The  obvious  meaning  of
the  passage  then  is,  that  since  no  interval  except
the  octave  could  be  magadized  (the  effect  of  any
other  is  well  known  to  be  intolerable),  therefore  no
other  interval  was  employed  at  all  ;  implying  that
no  other  kind  of  counterpoint  than  magadizing  was
thought  of.  But  the  words  are  certainly  capable
of  a  somewhat  milder  interpretation.

In  the  next  place,  the  constitution  of  the  scale
was,  as  has  been  seen,  very  unfit  for  harmony,  the
beauty  of  which  depends  so  essentially  upon  the
use  of  thirds.  The  true  major  third  was  either  not
discovered  or  not  admitted  to  be  consonant  till  a
very  late  period,  Ptolemy  being  the  earliest  extant
author  who  speaks  of  the  minor  tone  (Bumey,  vol.  i.
p.  448)  ;  a  fact  which  is  so  extraordinary  and  so
contrary  to  all  that  could  have  been  anticipated,
as  to  destroy  all  confidence  in  any  a  pnori  reason-
ings on  the  subject,  and  to  exclude  all  but  actual
evidence  on  either  side.  The  positive  evidence  in
favour  of  the  existence  of  counterpoint  consists
chiefly  in  certain  indications  of  two  modes  having
been  sometimes  used  at  once.  Thus  the  expression
in  Horace  {Ejwd.  ix.  5),

"  Sonante  mistum  tibiis  carmen  lyra
Hac  Dorium,  illis  barbarum,"

is  interpreted  to  mean  that  the  lyre  was  played  in
the  Dorian  mode,  and  the  tibiae  in  the  Lydian ;
so  that  if  the  ancient  Dorian  and  Lydian  octave
were  employed,  the  former  being  of  the  fourth
species,  while  the  latter  was  of  the  second,  and
pitched  two  tones  higher,  the  series  of  intervals
heard  would  consist  of  fourths  and  major  thirds,  or
rather  double  tones.

Again,  there  are  passages  such  as  —

KloXevs  e§aive  Awpiav  KeKivQov  vfxvwv

(quoted  from  Pindar  by  the  Scholiast  on  Pi/th.  ii.
127),  which  are  supposed  to  indicate  that  poetry
written  in  one  mode  and  sung  accordingly,  was  ac-
companied by  instruments  in  another.  For  a  view
of  the  most  that  can  be  made  of  such  arguments,
see  Bockh,  iii,  10.  Our  knowledge  of  the  real
use  of  the  modes  is  so  very  imperfect,  that  not
much  reliance  can  be  placed  on  them  ;  and  at  any
rate  they  would  only  prove  the  existence  of  a  kind
of  magadizing,  modified  by  taking  scales  of  differ-
ent (instead  of  the  same)  species  for  the  two  parts,
so  as  to  avoid  the  succession  of  intervals  absolutely
the  same.  This  would  certainly  be  the  very  lowest
kind  of  counterpoint  ;  but  if  any  thing  more  had
been  practised,  it  would  be  absolutely  impossible
to  account  for  the  utter  silence  of  the  theoretical
writers,  which  is  all  but  fatal  even  to  such  a
limited  hypothesis.  It  is  only  necessarj-  to  add  that
the  influence  of  instruments  upon  the  development
of  tlie  art  ought  to  be  kept  in  view  in  considering
this  question.  The  Greeks  had  only  two  kinds  of
instrumental  music,  avX-qais  and  KiQapicris.  The
a^Kos  was  always  a  pipe  pierced  with  holes,  so  as
to  have  an  artificial  scale.  The  simple  tube  or
trumpet  does  not  appear  to  have  been  used  as  a
musical  instrument,  so  that  the  scale  of  natural


MUSICA.


779


harmonics  was  probably  unknown  ;  and  this  may
partly  account  for  the  major  third  escaping  observ-
ation. And  anything  like  the  modern  sj'stem  of
harmony  could  probably  no  more  have  been  in-
vented without  the  assistance  of  keyed  instruments
than  the  Elements  of  Euclid  could  have  been  com-
posed in  the  total  absence  of  drawing  materials.
For  a  fuller  account  of  ancient  musical  instruments
see  Bockh,  iii.  ]  1.

The  chief  authorities  on  the  subject  of  this
article  are  the  "Antiquae  Musicae  Auctores
Septem,"  viz. :  Aristoxenus,  Euclid,  Nicomachus,
Alypius,  Gaudentius,  Bacchius,  Aristides,  Quinti-
lianus,and  Martianus  Capella,  edited  by  Meibomius,
in  one  volume  (Amsterdam,  1652),  to  the  pages  of
which  the  preceding  quotations  refer;  the  Har-
monics of  Ptolemy  (  with  an  Appendix  by  Wallis,
Op.  Mathemat  vol.  iii.)  ;  the  Dialogue  of  Plutarch  ;
and  a  section  of  the  Aristotelic  Problemata;  Burney,
History  of  Music  ;  Bockh,  de  Metris  Pindari  ;
Drieberg,  Musikalische  Wissenschaften  der  Griechen;
and  Avfschlusse  uber die  Musik  der  Giieclien ;  Bode,
Gescli.  der  Lyrisch.  Dichtkunst  der  Hellenen  ;  Fort-
lage.  Das  Musikalisclie  System  der  Griechen,  Leipzig,
1847.  [W.F.D.]

2.  Roman.  It  may  well  be  believed  that  in
music  as  in  the  other  arts,  the  genius  of  Greece
had  left  little  for  Romans  to  do,  but  admire  and
imitate.  Yet  we  must  not  forget  that  another
element  had  been  introduced  into  the  arts  of  Rome,
as  well  as  into  her  language  and  government ;  one
which  was  derived  from  Etruria,  and  partook  of
an  Oriental  character.  Every  species  of  musical
instrument  found  on  Greek  works  of  art  is  found
also  on  Etruscan.  No  doubt  the  early  Roman
music  was  rude  and  coarse,  still  from  the  most
ancient  times  mention  is  made  of  hymns  and  flutes
in  their  triumphal  processions :  so  Servius  TuUius
in  his  comitia  made  two  whole  centuries  of  cor-
nicines  and  tibicines ;  and  the  Twelve  Tables  al-
lowed at  funerals  ten  players  on  the  flute,  and  en-
joined that  "  the  praises  of  great  men  should  be
sung  in  mournful  songs  (neniae)  accompanied  by
the  flute."

The  year  B.  c.  365  marks  an  era  in  Romai.
music  by  its  adaptation  to  theatrical  amusements.
It  is  in  this  year  we  find  mention  of  a  lectislernimn,
at  which  actors  were  first  brought  from  Etruria,
who,  without  verses,  danced  in  dumb  show  to  the
sound  of  the  flute.  Some  time  later  Livy  (ix.  30)
mentions  a  curious  tale  of  the  desertion  of  certain
Roman  flute-players,  who  wore  onlj'  brought  back
by  an  amusing  strattigem.  We  learn  from  Valerius
Maximus  (ii.  5)  that  the  Roman  flute-players  were
incorporated  into  a  college,  and  Ovid  {Fast.  vi.  657),
speaking  of  their  ancient  importance,  says  —

"  Temporibus  veterum  tibicinis  usus  avorura
Magnus,  et  in  magno  semper  honore  fuit
Cantabat  fanis,  cantabat  tibia  ludis,
Cantabat  moestis  tibia  funeribus."

Nero,  as  Suetonius  (Nero,  24)  tells  us,  played
on  the  flute,  and  came  in  a  sort  of  triumphal  pro-
cession through  Italy,  bearing  the  spoils  he  had
won  in  1800  musical  contests.  The  same  writer
informs  us  that  the  emperor,  to  preserve  his  voice,
used  to  lie  on  his  back  with  a  thin  plate  of  lead
on  his  stomach ;  that  he  took  frequent  emetics  and
cathartics,  and  at  last  transacted  all  business  in
writing.

There   does  not  appear  to  be  any  trace  of  a


rso


MUSTAX.


Roman  musical  system  entirely  distinct  from  the
Greek,  A  passage  in  Cicero  would  lead  us  to  sup-
pose that  the  laws  of  contrast,  of  light  and  shade,
of  loud  and  soft,  of  swelling  and  diminishing,  were
understood  by  the  Romans  {de  Orat.  iii.  44),  and
another  passage  from  Apuleius  decidedly  proves  that
the  Romans  had  instrumental  music  distinct  from
their  vocal ;  on  both  of  which  points  there  is  not
the  same  clear  evidence  to  decide  the  question
with  reference  to  the  Greeks.  Still  the  Roman
musical  writers,  as  St.  Augustin,  Macrobius,  Mar-
tianus  Capella,  Cassiodorus,  and  Boethius  (all  of
whom  flourished  between  the  fourth  and  sixth
centuries  of  the  Christian  era),  did  nothing  to  im-
prove the  science  of  music,  and  were  little  more
than  copyists  of  their  Greek  predecessors.  The
great  improvement  which  the  Romans  introduced
(rather  a  practical  than  a  theoretical  one)  was  a
simplification  of  the  musical  nomenclature,  elfected
by  rejecting. the  arbitrary  signs  in  use  among  the
Greeks,  and  substituting  for  them  the  first  fifteen
letters  of  the  Roman  alphabet.  (Hawkins,  vol.  i.
p.  279.)  This  simplification  they  were  enabled  to
make  by  a  reduction  of  the  modes  :  indeed  it  seems
very  probable  that  this  complicated  system  had  in
practice  entirely  fallen  into  disuse,  as  we  know
that  the  diatonic  i^efius  had  usurped  the  place  of
the  two  other  ffenera.

Of  all  Latin  authors  Boethius  gives  the  most
profound  account  of  the  subject.  His  work  is  a
carrying  out  of  the  old  Pythagorean  sj-stem,  and  is
a  mere  abstract  speculation  on  the  natiu-e  of  music,
which,  viewed  as  one  of  the  quadrivium  or  four
mathematical  sciences,  has  its  foundation  in  num-
ber and  proportion.  A  full  analysis  of  the  work
may  be  seen  in  Hawkins  (i.  p.  338).  It  contains,
1  St,  an  investigation  into  the  ratios  of  consonances  ;
•2nd,  a  treatise  on  several  kinds  of  proportion  ;  3rd,
a  declaration  of  the  opinions  of  different  sects  with
respect  to  the  division  of  the  monochord  and  the
general  laws  of  harmony.

Before  this  time  St.  Ambrose  had  introduced  the
practice  of  antiphonal  singing  in  the  church  at
Milan.  Of  the  nature  of  the  Ambrosian  chant  we
only  know  that  it  consisted  in  certain  progres-
sions, corresponding  with  different  species  of  the
diapason.  It  is  described  as  a  kind  of  recitation,
more  like  reading  than  singing.

It  was  by  St.  Gregory  the  Great  that  the  octave
was  substituted  for  the  tetrachord  as  the  funda-
mental division  of  the  scale.  The  first  octave  he
denoted  by  capital  letters  A,  B,  C,  &c.,  the  second
by  small  letters  a,  b,  c,  &c.,  and  when  it  became
necessary  to  extend  the  system,  marked  the  third
by  small  letters  doubled,  aa,  bb,  «&c.  There  is  no
proof  that  the  Romans,  any  more  than  the  Greeks,
had  any  notation  with  reference  to  time.  Where
vocal  music  was  united  with  instrumental,  the  time
was  marked  by  the  metre  of  the  song :  the  want
of  a  notation  of  time  would  make  us  doubt  whether
any  but  a  very  simple  style  of  merely  instrumental
music  prevailed  among  them.  (Havvkins's  History
of  Music,  vol.  i. ;  Bumey's  History  o/Music^  vol.  i. )

For  a  general  account  of  ancient  music  the
reader  is  referred  to  the  previous  article,      [B.  J.]

MUSFVUM  OPUS.     [DoMLS,  p.  431 ;  Pic-

TURA,  No.  XV.]

MUSTAX  (aiu(tto|),  moustaches.  The  different
parts  of  the  beard  [Barba]  had  different  names,
which  also  varied  with  its  age  and  appearance.
The  young  beard,   first  appearing  on   the  upper


MYSIA.
lip,  was  called  vitt]vt]  or  inr-fjv)]  irpdri]  (DIod.  v.  28|
Pliilostr.  Sen.  Imag.  i.  30,  ii.  7,  9),  and  the  youtb
just  arrived  at  pubert}',  who  was  graced  with  it,
was  TrpuTov  utttjj'tjttjs,  (Horn.  //.  xxiv.  348,  Od.
X.  279  ;  Schol.  in  loc. ;  Brunck,  Anal.  iii.  44  ;
Aelian,  F.  II.  x,  18.)  By  its  growth  and  develop-
ment it  produced  the  moustaches,  which  the  Greeks
generally  cherished  as  a  manly  ornament.  (Theocrit.
xiv.  4;  Antiphanes,  ap.  Athen.  iv,  21  ;  Pollux,
ii.  80,  X.  120.)  To  this  practice,  however,  there
seems  to  have  been  one  exception.  The  Spartan
Ephori,  when  they  were  inducted,  made  a  pro-
clamation requiring  the  people  "  to  shave  their
moustaches  and  obey  the  laws."  For  what  reason
they  gave  the  former  command  does  not  appear,
(Plut,  de  Sera  Num.  Vind.  p,  976,  ed.  Steph. ;
Proclus  in  lies.  Op.  et  Dies,  722 ;  MUller,  Dor.
iii.  7.  §  7,  iv.  2.  §  5 ;  Becker,  Charikles,  vol.  ii.
p.  391.)  [J.  Y.]

MUSTUM.     [ViNiTM.]

MUTATIO'NES.     [Mansio.]

MUTUUM.  The  Mutui  datio  is  mentioned
by  Gains  as  an  instance  of  an  obligatio  "  quae  re
contnihitur."  It  exists  when  things  "  quae  pon-
dere,  numero,  mensurave  constantj^'as  coined  money,
wine,  oil,  corn,  aes,  silver,  gold,  are  given  by
one  man  to  another  so  as  to  become  his,  but  on
the  condition  that  an  equal  quantity  of  the  same
kind  shall  be  returned.  The  difference  in  the
thing  which  is  lent  constitutes  one  of  the  differences
between  this  contract  and  commodatum.  In  the
nmtui  datio,  inasmuch  as  the  thing  became  the
property  of  the  receiver,  the  Roman  jimsts  were
led  to  the  absurdity  of  saying  that  imituum  Avas
so  called  for  this  reason  {quod  ex  meo  tuumfit).  This
contract  gave  the  lender  the  action  called  condictio,
provided  he  was  the  owner  of  the  things,  and  had
the  power  of  alienation:  otherwise  he  had  no
action  till  the  things  were  consumed.  If  the
borrower  lost  the  things  by  any  accident  as  fire,
shipwreck,  &c.,  he  was  still  bound  :  the  reason  of
which  clearly  was,  that  by  the  Mutui  datio  the
things  became  his  own.  It  was  a  stricti  juris  actio,
and  the  lender  could  have  no  interest  for  a  loan
of  money,  unless  interest  had  been  agreed  on.  The
borrowing  by  way  of  Mutuum  and  at  interest  are
opposed  by  Plautus  (Asin.  i,  3.  95).  The  Senatus-
consultum  Macedonianum  did  not  allow  a  right  of
action  to  a  lender  against  a  filiusfamilias  to  whom
he  had  given  money  "  mutua,"  even  after  the
death  of  the  father.  [Senatusconsultum  Mace-
donianum.] (Gains,  iii.  90  ;  Inst.  3.  tit.  14  ;
Dig.  12.  tit.  1.  De  Rebus  Creditis  ;  Cod.  4.  tit.  1  ;
Vangerow,  Pandekfen,  &c.  iii.  §  623.)  [G.  L.]

MY'RII  (fivploi),  the  name  given  to  the  po-
pular assembly  of  the  Arcadians,  which  was  esta-
blished after  tbe  overthrow  of  the  Spartan  supre-
macy b}'-  the  battle  of  Leuctra,  and  which  used  to
meet  at  Megalopolis  in  order  to  determine  upon
matters  affecting  the  whole  people.  (Xen.  Nell.
vi.  5.  §  6,  vii.  1.  §  38,  vii.  4.  §  2  ;  Died.  xv.  59  ;
Dem.  de  Fals.  Leg.  p.  344  ;  Aeschin,  de  Fals.  Leg.
p.  257;  Paus.  viii.  32.  §  1;  Harpocrat.  Suid.  Phot,
s.  r. ;  Schdmann,  Antiq.  Jur.  Puhl.  Gr.  p.  410.)

MY'SIA  (fiiKTia),  a  festival  celebrated  by  the
inhabitants  of  Pellene  in  Achaia,  in  honour  of
Demeter  Mysia.  The  worship  of  this  goddess
was  introduced  at  Pellene  from  a  place  called
Mysia  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Argos.  (Paus.  ii.
18.  §  3.)  The  festival  of  the  Mysia  near  Pellene
lasted  for  seven  days,  and  the  religious  solemnities


MYSTEKIA.

tiM)k  place  in  a  temple  surrounded  bj'  a  beautiful
..rove.  The  first  two  dajs  men  and  women  took
latt  in  the  celebration  together;  on  the  third  day
tlie  men  left  the  sanctuary,  and  the  women  re-
))i;iining  in  it  performed  during  the  night  certain
mysterious  rites,  during  which  not  even  male  dogs
were  allowed  to  remain  within  the  sacred  precincts.
On  the  fourth  day  the  men  returned  to  the  temple,
and  men  and  women  now  received  each  other  with
shouts  of  laughter  and  assailed  each  other  with
various  railleries.  (Pans.  vii.  27.  §  4  ;  Cornutus,
de  Nat.  Dear.  28.)  Other  particulars  are  not
Jcnown.  [L-  S.]

'  MYSTAE,  MYSTAGO'GUS  {fivarai,
fiv(rTaya>y6s).     [Eleusinia.]

MYSTE'RIA  (jj-var-npLo).  As  each  mystery  or
mystic  festival  is  described  in  a  separate  article,  a
few  general  observations  only  will  be  required  under
this  head.  The  names  by  which  they  were  de-
signated in  Greece,  are  fiva-r-npia^  TeAerai,  and
iifjyia.  The  name  opyia  (from  %opya)  originally
signified  only  sacrifices  accompanied  by  certain
ceremonies,  but  it  was  afterwards  applied  especially
to  the  ceremonies  observed  in  the  worship  of  Dio-
nysus, and  at  a  still  later  period  to  mysteries  in
general.  (Lobeck,  Aglaopham.  i.  p.  305.)  TeAer^
signifies  in  general  a  religious  festival  (Aristot.
Rliet.  ii.  24  ;  Pind.  Nem.  x.  63),  but  more  particu-
kirly  a  lustration  or  ceremony  performed  in  order
to  avert  some  calamity  either  public  or  private.
(Plato,  de  Rep.  ii.  p.  264,  e.)  Mva-rripiov  signifies,
properly  speaking,  the  secret  part  of  the  worship,
but  it  was  also  used  generally  in  the  same  sense
as  TeAeT'i],  and  for  mystic  worship.

Mysteries  in  general  may  be  defined  as  sacrifices
and  ceremonies  which  took  place  at  night  or  in
secret  within  some  sanctuary,  which  the  uninitiated
were  not  allowed  to  enter.  What  was  essential
to  them,  were  objects  of  worship,  sacred  utensils,
and  traditions  with  their  interpretations,  which
•were  withheld  from  all  persons  not  initiated.  We
must  however  distinguish  between  mysteries  pro-
perly so  called,  that  is,  such  in  which  no  one  was
allowed  to  partake  unless  he  had  undergone  a
formal  initiation,  and  the  mystic  ceremonies  of
certain  festivals,  the  perfonnance  of  which,  though
confined  to  particular  classes  of  persons,  or  to  a
particular  sex,  yet  did  not  require  a  regular  initia-
tion. Our  attention  in  this  article  will  be  confined
I  to  the  mysteries  properh'  so  called.

It  appears  to  have  been  the  desire  of  all  nations
of  antiquity  to  withhold  certain  parts  of  their  re-
i  ligious  worship  from  the  eyes  of  the  multitude  in
!  order  to  render  them  the  more  venerable.    (Strabo,
I  p.  717.)       But  that  the    ancient   mysteries   were
I  nothing  but  impositions  of  priests,  who  played  upon
'  the  superstitious  and  ignoi-ant,  is  an  opinion,  which,
;i! though   entertained   by  Limburg-Brouwer,    the
latest  writer  on  the  subject  (Ilistoire  de  la  Civilisa-
tion Morale  et  Rtlig.   des  Grecs^  vol.  iv.   p.  1.^^^),
certainly  cannot  satisfy  those  who  are  accustomed
to  seek  a  more  solid  and  vital  principle  in  all  re-
liuious  institutions  that  have  ever  had  any  lasting
inlluence   upon   mankind.      The    persons   united
;md  initiated  to  celebrate  the  mysteries  in  Greece
^ve^e  neither  all  priests,  nor  did  they  belong  to  the
ignorant  and  superstitious  classes  of  society,  but
they  were  on  the  contrary  frequently  the  most  dis-
tinguished   statesmen   and  philosophers.      It  has
been  remarked  under  ELKUSI^■IA  (p.  454, b)  that
it  is  far  more  probable  that  the  mysteries  in  the


HYSTERIA.


roi


various  parts  of  Greece  were  remains  of  the  ancient
Pelasgian  religion.  The  associations  of  persons
for  the  purpose  of  celebrating  them  must  therefore
have  been  formed  at  the  time  when  the  over-
whelming influence  of  the  Hellenic  religion  began
to  gain  the  upper  hand  in  Greece,  and  when  persons
who  still  entertained  a  reverence  for  the  worship
of  former  times,  united  together  with  the  intention
of  presei'ving  and  upholding  among  themselves,
as  much  as  possible  of  the  religion  of  their  fore-
fathers. It  is  natural  enough  that  they  formed
themselves  for  this  purpose  into  societies,  analogous
to  the  brotherhoods  in  the  church  of  Rome  (Por-
phyr.  de  Abstin.  iv.  5),  and  endeavoured  to  preserve
against  the  profanation  of  the  multitude  that  which
was  most  dear  to  them.  Hence  the  secrecy  of  all
the  Greek  mysteries,  and  hence  the  lact  that  they
were  almost  invariably  connected  with  the  worship
of  the  ancient  Pelasgian  divinities.  The  time
when  mysteries  were  established  as  such,  must
have  been  after  the  great  changes  and  disturbances
produced  by  the  Dorian  migration,  although  tra-
dition referred  their  institution  to  Orpheus,  the
Curetes,  the  Idaean  Dactyles,  Dionysus,  &:c.,  who
belong  to  a  much  earlier  period.  Tliese  tradi-
tions, however,  ma}^  in  so  far  be  regarded  as  true,
as  the  mysteries  were  only  a  continuation  and  pro-
pagation of  the  ancient  religion.  But  it  must  be
admitted  that  in  subsequent  times  new  elements
were  added  to  the  mysteries,  which  were  origin-
ally foreign  to  them.  The  development  of  philo-
sophy, and  more  especially  the  intercourse  with
the  East  and  with  Egypt,  appear  to  have  exercised
a  considerable  influence  upon  their  character.

The  most  celebrated  mysteries  in  Greece  were
those  of  Samothrace  and  Eleusis.  [Cabeiria  ;
Eleusinia.]  But  several  other  places  and  divini-
ties had  their  peculiar  mysteries,  e.g.  the  island  of
Crete  those  of  Zeus  (Strabo,  p.  718  ;  Athen.  ix.
1 8)  ;  Argolis  those  of  Hera  (Pans.  ii.  38.  §  2)  ;
Athens  those  of  Athena  and  Dionysus  (Plut  Alcib.
34  ;  Dionysia)  ;  Arcadia  those  of  Artemis  (Paus.
viii.  23.  §  3),  and  Aegina  those  of  Hecate  (Paus.
ii.  30.  §  2).  But  not  only  the  worship  of  the  great
gods,  but  also  that  of  some  ancient  heroes  was
connected  with  niYsteries.  (Paus.  iv.  34.  §  6,  ii.  J,
ii.  30,  §5;  Herod,  v.  83.)

The  benefits  which  the  initiated  hoped  to  obtain
were  security  against  the  vicissitudes  of  fortune,
and  protection  from  dangers  both  in  this  life  and
in  the  life  to  come.  Tiie  principal  part  of  the  ini-
tiation, and  that  which  was  thought  to  be  most
efficacious  in  producing  the  desired  effects,  were
the  lustrations  and  purifications,  whence  the  mys-
teries themselves  are  sometimes  called  Kaddpaia  or
KaOap/xoi.

Offences  against  and  violations  of  the  mysteries
were  at  Athens  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  archon
king,  and  the  court  in  such  cases  only  consisted  of
persons  who  were  themselves  initiated  (/xe/xur/^f-
fot),  and  were  selected  from  the  heliastae  for  the
purpose.  (Pollux,  viii.  141.)  Even  in  cases  which
were  brought  before  an  ordinary  court,  the  judges
were  only  initiated  persons,  if  the  case  had  any
connection  with  the  mysteries.  (Andocid.  de  Myst.
p.  14.)  That  no  one  but  the  initiated  might  hear
the  transactions  in  such  a  case,  the  court  was  sur-
rounded by  public  slaves  to  keep  all  profane  per-
sons at  a  distance.     (Pollux,  viii.  123.)

The  Roman  religion  had  no  such  mysteries  as
that  of  the  Greeks,  but  only  mystic  rites  and  cerp-


782


NAVARCHUS.


monies  connected  with  the  celebration  of  certain
festivals.  The  Bacchanalia  were  of  foreign  origin,
and  of  short  duration.    [Dionysia.]

A  very  full  account  of  the  Greek  mysteries  is
given  by  Limburg-Brouwer,  Hist,  de  la  Civilisat
Mor.  et  Relig.  des  Grees^  vol.  iv.  p.  180 — 415,  and
chapter  xxvi.  of  the  same  work  contains  a  useful
survey  of  the  various  opinions  upon  the  subject
which  have  been  entertained  by  modern  scholars
and  philosophers.  [L.  S.J

MYSTILE  (/iuo-TiAT?).    [CoKNA,  p.  305,  aj.

MYSTRUM  {fj.v(TTpov),  a  Greek  liquid  mea-
sure, of  which  there  were  two  sizes,  called  the
large  and  small  mystrum.  The  small,  which  was
the  more  common  of  the  two,  was  ^V  of  the  cotyla,
and  ^  of  the  cyathus,  and  therefore  contained  about
l-50th  of  an  English  pint.  (Galen,  Frag.  c.  15.)
Galen  adds  that  the  smaller  mystrum  contained  2^
drachms,  that  the  larger  was  -^  of  the  cotyla,  and
contained  3^  drachms  ;  but  that  the  most  exact
mystrum  (t^  SiKaiSruTov  fiixTTpov)  held  8  scruples,
that  is,  2§-  drachms.  According  to  this,  the  small
mystrum  would  be  f  of  the  larger.  But  in  the
13th  chapter  of  the  same  fragment  he  makes  the
large  mystrum  =  ^  of  the  cotyla  and  the  small
mystrum  \  of  the  large.  In  c.  4  he  makes  the
large  mystrum  =  3  oxybapha,  and  the  small  =  \-}.
Cleopatra  makes  the  large  =  -^q  of  the  cotyla,  the
6mall=  ^V    (Wurm,  de  Fond.  p.  130.)    [P.  S.]


N.


NAE'NIA.     [FuNus,  p.  55%  a.]
'   NAOS.     [Templum.]
NATALI'TII  LUDI.     [LudiNatalitil]
NATA'LIBUS  RESTITU'TIO.    [Ingenui.]
NATA'TIO,  NATATO'RIUM.    [Balneae,
p.  189,  b.]

NATU'RA,  NATURA'LIS  RATIO.  [Jus.]

NAVA'LES  DUU'MVIRI.     [Duumviri.]

NAVA'LES  SO'CII.  [Exercitus,  p.  509,  b.]

NAVA'LIA,  were  docks  at  Rome  where  ships

were   built,   laid   up,   and  refitted.      They  were

attached   to  the  emporium    outside  of  the   Porta

Trigemina,  and  were  connected  with   the  Tiber.

(Liv.  XXXV.  10,  xl.  51,  xlv.  2.)      The  emporium

and  navalia  were  first  included  within  the  walls

of  the  city  by  Aurelian.     (Vopisc.  Aurel.  21.)

The  docks  (yeaxroiKoi  or  vid^pia)  in  the  Peiraeeus
at  Athens  cost  1000  talents,  and  having  been  de-
stroyed in  the  anarchy  were  again  restored  and
finally  completed  by  Lycurgus.  (Isocr.  Areopag.
25;  Bockh,  FM.  Econ.  p.  201,  2nd  ed.)  They
were  under  the  superintendence  of  regular  officers
called  eirifieXTiToiX  twv  vewpicov.  [Epimeletae,
No.  5.]

NAVA'LIS  CORO'NA.  [Corona,  p.  360.]
NAVARCHUS  (vavapxos)  is  the  name  by
which  the  Greeks  designated  both  the  captain  of  a
single  ship,  and  the  admiral  of  a  fleet.  The  office
itself  was  called  vavapx'ia.  The  admiral  of  the
Athenian  fleet  was  always  one  of  the  ten  generals
((TTpaTTfyoi)  elected  every  year,  and  he  had  either
the  whole  or  at  least  the  principal  command  of  the
fleet.  (Plut.  Themist.  18.)  The  chief  officers  who
served  under  him  were  the  trierarchs  and  the  pen-
tecontarchs,  each  of  whom  commanded  one  vessel  ;
the  inferior  officers  in  the  vessels  were  the  Kv§ep-
vrirai  or  helmsmen,  the  KeXevcTTal  or  commanders
of  the  rowers,  and  the  irpcaparai  who  must  have


NAUCRARIA.

been  employed  at  the  prow  of  the  vessels.  (Xenoplu
de  Refubl.  Ath.  1,  2.  §  20  ;  compare  Stra.
tegus.)

Other  Greek  states  who  kept  a  navy  had  like-
wise their  navarchs.  A  Spartan  navarchus  is  men-
tioned by  Xenophon  {Hellen.  ii.  1.  §  7),  and
under  him  served  an  officer  called  iinaToXevs.
(Pollux,  i.  96  ;  Sturz,  Lex.  Xenoph.  ii.  p.  321.)
The  navarchia  of  Sparta  however  was  an  innova-
tion of  later  times,  when  the  Spartans  had  acquired
a  fleet  and  possessions  in  foreign  countries.  The
office  was  distinct  from  that  of  the  kings,  and
Aristotle  {Folit.  ii.  6.  p.  Qd,  ed.  Gbttling)  calls  it
(TxeS^J'  ^T€pa  fiacriXeia.  (See  Weber,  Do  Gytheo
et  Lacedaemoniorum  Feb.  Navalib.  p.  73,  &c.)

The  navarchus  in  Rhodes  seems  to  have  been
their  chief  military  officer.  We  find  him  autho-
rized to  conclude  treaties  with  foreign  nations
(Polyb.  xvii.  1),  and  sent  on  embassies  in  the
name  of  the  republic.  (Polyb.  xxx,  8  ;  Liv.  xlv.
25.)  ^      _  [L.S.]

NAUCRA'RIA  (vavKpapia)  is  the  name  of  a
division  of  the  inhabitants  of  Attica.  The  four
Attic  phylae  were  each  divided  into  three  phratries,
and  each  of  these  twelve  phratries  into  four  nau-
craries,  of  which  there  were  thus  forty-eight.  This
division  is  ascribed  to  Solon  (Photius,  *.  v.  Nou-
/cpa/Jia),  but  Herodotus  (v.  71)  in  relating  the  in-
surrection of  Cylon  mentions  magistrates  at  Aihena
called  Trpvrdvis  rwv  vavKpdpcov,  so  that  the  nau-
craries  must  have  existed  long  before  Solon.  There
is,  however,  some  difficulty  connected  with  this
passage  of  Herodotus,  inasmuch  as  Thucydides
(i.  126)  in  relating  the  same  event  mentions  th?
nine  archons  instead  of  the  prytanes  of  the  nau-
craries.  Wachsmuth  (Hellen.  Alt.  vol.  i.  p.  366,
2d  ed.)  endeavours  very  ingeniously  to  reconcile
Herodotus  and  Thucydides,  by  supposing  that  the
prytanes  of  the  naucraries  were  the  same  as  the
trittyarchs,  the  assessors  of  the  first  archon,  and
were  thus  identified  by  Thucydides  with  the  archons
themselves.  What  the  naucraries  were  previous
to  the  legislation  of  Solon  is  not  stated  anywhere,
but  it  is  not  improbable  that  they  were  political
divisions  similar  to  the  demes  in  the  constitution  of
Cleisthenes,  and  were  made  perhaps  at  the  time  of
the  institution  of  the  nine  archons  for  the  purpose
of  regulating  the  liturgies,  taxes,  or  financial  and
military  affairs  in  general.  (Bockh,  Pm6Z.  Fcon.  ii.
§  21.)  Tittmann  (Griech.  Staatsv.  p.  269)  more-
over supposes  with  some  probability,  that  they
were,  like  the  demes  of  Attica,  local  divisions.
Hence  the  grammarians  inform  us  that  vavKpapot,
or  the  chief  officer  of  every  naucrary,  was  the  same
as  the  demarch.  At  any  rate,  however,  the  nau-
craries before  the  time  of  Solon  can  have  had  no
connection  with  the  navy,  for  the  Athenians  then
had  no  navy,  and  the  word  vampapos  cannot  be
derived  from  vavs.,  a  ship,  but  from  vaiw.,  and
vavKpapos  is  only  another  form  for  vavK\7]pos  \n
the  sense  of  a  householder,  as  vavXov  was  used  for
the  rent  of  a  house.  (Pollux,  x.  20  ;  Wachsmuth,
Hellen.  Alt.\o\.  i.  p.  367  ;  Thirlwall,  ^^■s^.  o/Gr.
vol.  ii.  p.  52.)

Solon  in  his  legislation  thus  only  retained  the
old  institution  of  the  naucraries.  His  innovation
probably  was  that  he  charged  each  of  them  with
the  equipment  of  one  trireme  and  with  the  mount-
ing of  two  horsemen.  (Pollux,  viii.  108.)  AH
military  affairs,  as  far  as  regards  the  defraying  of
expences,  probably  continued  as  before  to  be  regu-


NAVIS.

lated  according  to  naucraries.  Cleisthenes  in  his
change  of  the  Solonian  constitution  retained  ,the
division  into  naucraries  for  military  and  financial
purposes  (Phot.  l.  c),  but  he  increased  their  num-
ber to  fifty,  making  five  of  each  of  his  ten  tribes,
so  that  now  the  number  of  their  ships  was  in-
creased from  forty-eight  to  fifty,  and  that  of  horse-
men from  ninety-six  to  one  hundred.  The  state-
ment of  Herodotus  (vi,  89)  that  the  Athenians  in
their  war  against  Aegina  had  only  fifty  ships  of
their  own,  is  thus  perfectly  in  accordance  with  the
fifty  naucraries  of  Cleisthenes.  The  functions  of
the  former  uavKpapoi,  as  the  heads  of  their  respective
naucraries,  were  now  transferred  to  the  demarchs.
[Demarchi.]  (Harpocrat.  s.  v.  Aijixapxos.)  The
obligation  of  each  naucrary  to  equip  a  ship  of  war
for  the  service  of  the  republic  may  be  regarded  as
the  first  form  of  trierarchy.  (Lex.  Rhetor,  p,  283.)
As  the  system  of  trierarchy  became  developed  and
established,  this  obligation  of  the  naucraries  ap-
pears to  have  gradually  ceased  and  to  have  fallen
into  disuse.  (Compare  Tuierarchia.)  [L.  S.]
NAUCRARUS.  [Naucraria.]
NAVIS  (vavs).  The  beginning  of  the  art  of
ship-building  and  of  navigation  among  the  Greeks
must  be  referred  to  a  time  much  anterior  to  the
ages  of  which  we  have  any  record.  Even  in  the
earliest  mythical  stories  long  voyages  are  men-
tioned, which  are  certainly  not  altogether  poetical
fabrications,  and  we  have  every  reason  to  suppose
that  at  that  early  age  ships  were  used  which  were
far  superior  to  a  simple  canoe,  and  of  a  much  more
complicated  structure.  The  time,  therefore,  when
boats  consisted  of  one  hollow  tree  {Monoxyla)^  or
Avhen  ships  were  merely  rafts  {Rates^  cxeSfat)
tied  together  with  leathern  thongs,  ropes,  and
other  substances  (Plin.  H.  N.  vii.  57),  belongs  to
a  period  of  which  not  the  slightest  record  has
reached  us,  although  such  nide  and  simple  boats
or  rafts  continued  occasionally  to  be  used  down
to  the  latest  times,  and  appear  to  have  been  very
common  among  several  of  the  barbarous  nations
with  which  the  Romans  came  in  contact.  (Codex  ;
compare  Quintil.  x.  2  ;  Flor.  iv.  2  ;  Fest.  s.  v.
Schedia;  Liv.  xxi.  26.)  Passing  over  the  story  of
the  ship  Argoand  the  expedition  of  the  Argonauts,
we  shall  proceed  to  consider  the  ships  as  described
in  the  Homeric  poems.

The  numerous  fleet,  with  which  the  Greeks
are  said  to  have  sailed  to  the  coast  of  Asia  Minor,
must  on  the  whole  be  regarded  as  sufficient  evi-
dence of  the  extent  to  which  navigation  was  car-
ried on  in  those  times,  however  much  of  the  detail
in  the  Homeric  description  may  have  arisen  from
the  poet's  own  imagination.  In  the  Plomeric  cata-
logue it  is  stated  that  each  of  the  fifty  Boeotian
ships  carried  120  warriors  {11.  ii.  510),  and  a  ship
which  carried  so  many  cannot  have  been  of  very
small  dimensions.  What  Homer  states  of  the
Boeotian  vessels  applies  more  or  less  to  the  ships
of  other  Greeks.  These  boats  were  provided  with
a  mast  {1<jt6s)  which  was  fastened  by  two  ropes
{TTp6Tovoi)  to  the  two  ends  of  the  ship,  so  that
when  the  rope  connecting  it  with  the  prow  broke,
the  mast  would  f^iU  towards  the  stern,  where  it
might  kill  the  helmsman.  {Od.  xii.  409,  &c.)
The  mast  could  be  erected  or  taken  down  as  ne-
cessity required.  They  also  had  sails  (IffTia),
but  no  deck  ;  each  vessel  however  appears  to
have  had  only  one  sail,  which  was  used  in  fa-
vourable wind  ;  and  the  principal  means  of  pro-


NAVIS.


732


pelling  the  vessel  lay  in  the  rowers,  who  sat  upon
benches  (KArj'tSes).  The  oars  were  fastened  to  the
side  of  the  ship  with  leathern  thongs  (rpoirol  Sep-
fxarivoi,  Od.  iv.  782),  in  which  they  were  turned
as  a  key  in  its  hole.  The  ships  in  Homer  are
mostly  called  black  (ficKaivai),  probably  because
they  were  painted  or  covered  with  a  black  sub-
stance, such  as  pitch,  to  protect  the  wood  against
the  influence  of  the  water  and  the  air  ;  sometimes
other  colours,  such  as  juiAtos,  minium  (a  red  co-
lour), were  used  to  adorn  the  sides  of  the  ships
near  the  prow,  whence  Homer  occasionally  calls
ships  fjLiATOirdprjoi^  i.  e.  red-cheeked  {11.  ii.  637,
Od.  ix.  125)  ;  they  were  also  painted  occasionally
with  a  purple  colour  ((poiviKoirdprjoi.,  Od.  xi.  124).
Herodotus  says  ( iii.  58)  that  all  ships  were  painted
with  fdAros.  When  the  Greeks  had  landed  on
the  coast  of  Troy,  the  ships  were  drawn  on  land,
and  fastened  at  the  poop  to  large  stones  with  a
rope  which  served  as  anchors  (11.  i.  436,  xiv.  77,
Od.  ix.  137,  XV.  498  ;  Moschopul.  ad  11.  i.  436).
The  Greeks  then  surrounded  the  fleet  with  a  forti-
fication to  secure  it  against  the  attacks  of  the
enemy.  This  custom  of  drawing  the  ships  upon
the  shore,  when  they  were  not  used,  was  followed
in  later  times  also,  as  every  one  will  remember
from  the  accounts  in  Caesar's  Commentaries.  There
is  a  celebi-ated  but  difficult  passage  in  the  Odyssey
(v.  243,  &c.),  in  which  the  building  of  a  boat  is
described,  although  not  with  the  minuteness  which
an  actual  ship-builder  might  wish  for.  Odysseus
first  cuts  down  with  his  axe  twenty  trees,  and  pre-
pares the  wood  for  his  purpose  by  cutting  it  smooth
and  giving  it  the  proper  shape.  He  then  bores
the  holes  for  nails  and  hooks,  and  fits  the  planks
together  and  fastens  them  with  nails.  He  rounds
the  bottom  of  the  ship  like  that  of  a  broad  trans-
port vessel,  and  raises  the  bulwark  (*«/"«),  fitting
it  upon  the  numerous  ribs  of  the  ship.  He  after-
wards covers  the  whole  of  the  outside  with  planks,
which  are  laid  across  the  ribs  from  the  keel  up-
wards to  the  bulwark  ;  next  the  mast  is  made,
and  the  sail-yard  attached  to  it,  and  lastly  the
rudder.  When  the  ship  is  thus  far  completed,  he
raises  the  bulwark  still  higher  by  wickerwork
which  goes  all  around  the  vessel,  as  a  protection
against  the  waves.  This  raised  bulwark  of  wicker-
work  and  the  like  was  used  in  later  times  also.
(Eustath.  ad  Od.  v.  256.)  For  ballast  Odysseus
throws  into  the  ship  vXt],  which  according  to  the
Scholiast  consisted  of  wood,  stones,  and  sand.
Calypso  then  brings  him  materials  to  make  a  sail
of,  and  he  fastens  the  vrripai  or  ropes  which  run
from  the  top  of  the  mast  to  the  two  ends  of  the
yard,  and  also  the  k6.\oi  with  which  the  sail  is
drawn  up  or  let  down.  The  ttcJScs  mentioned  in
this  passage  were  undoubtedly,  as  in  the  later
times,  the  ropes  attached  to  the  two  lower  comers
of  the  square  sail.  (Comp.  Nitzsch.  Anmerk.  z,
Odyss.  vol.  ii.  p.  35,  &c.  ;  Ukert,  Bemerk.  iiber
Horn.  Geogr.  p.  20.)  The  ship  of  which  the
building  is  thus  described  was  a  small  boat,  a
(TxeS^o  as  Homer  calls  it  ;  but  it  had  like  all  the
Homeric  ships  a  round  or  flat  bottom.  Greater
ships  must  have  been  of  a  more  complicated  struc-
ture, as  ship-builders  are  praised  as  artists.  (//.
v.  60,  &c.)  Below,  under  Ceruchi,  a  represent-
ation of  two  boats  is  given  which  appear  to  bear
great  resemblance  to  the  one  of  which  the  buildmg
is  described  in  the  Odyssey.  (Comp.  Thirlwalj,
Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  i.  p.  210.)


NAVIS.


It  is  a  general  opinion  that  in  the  Homeric  age
sailors  did  not  venture  out  into  the  open  sea,  but
that  such  was  really  done  is  clear  from  the  fact,
that  Homer  makes  Odysseus  say  that  he  had  lost
sight  of  land,  and  saw  nothing  but  the  sky  and
Avater  {Od.  xii.  403  ;  comp.  xiv.  302  ;  Virg,  Aen.
ill.  192,  &c.),  although  on  the  whole  it  maybe
admitted,  that  even  down  to  the  historical  times
the  navigation  of  the  ancients  was  confined  to
coasting  along  the  shore.  Homer  never  mentions
engagements  at  sea.  The  Greeks  most  renowned
in  the  heroic  ages  as  sailors  were  the  Cretans,
whose  king  Minos  is  said  to  have  possessed  a  large
fleet,  and  also  the  Phacacians.  (Thucyd.  i.  4  ;
Hom.  Orf.  viii.  110,  &c.)

After  the  times  of  the  Trojan  war,  navigation,
and  with  it  the  art  of  ship-building,  must  have  be-
come greatly  improved,  on  account  of  the  establish-
ment of  the  numerous  colonies  on  foreign  coasts,
and  the  increased  commercial  intercourse  with
these  colonies  and  other  foreign  countries.  The
practice  of  piracy,  which  was  during  tliis  period
carried  on  to  a  great  extent  not  only  between
Greeks  and  foreigners,  but  also  among  the  Greeks
themselves,  must  likewise  have  contributed  to  the
improvement  of  ships  and  of  navigation,  although
no  particulars  are  mentioned.  In  Greece  itself  the
Corinthians  were  the  first  who  brought  the  art  of
ship-building  nearest  to  the  point  at  which  we  find
it  in  the  time  of  Thucydides,  and  they  were  the
first  who  introduced  ships  with  three  ranks  of
rowers  (TpjTjpeiy,  Triremes).  About  tlie  year  700
B.C.  Ameinocles  the  Corinthian,  to  whom  this  in-
vention is  ascribed,  made  the  Samians  acquainted
with  it  (Thucyd.  i.  1 3  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  vii.  57)  ;  but
it  must  have  been  preceded  by  that  of  the  Biremes,
that  is,  ships  with  two  ranks  of  rowers,  which
Pliny  attributes  to  the  Erythraeans.*  These  in-
novations however  do  not  seem  to  have  been  gene-
rally adopted  for  a  long  time  ;  for  we  read  that
about  the  time  of  Cyrus  the  Phocaeans  introduced
long  sharp-keeled  ships  called  nevTTjKovTopoi.  (He-
rod, i.  163.)  These  belonged  to  the  class  of  long
war-ships  (vrics  fiuKpal)^  and  had  fifty  rowers,
twenty-five  on  each  side  of  the  ship,  who  sat  in
one  row.  It  is  further  stated  that  before  this
time  vessels  called  (rTpo77uAat,  with  large  roxmd
or  rather  flat  bottoms,  liad  been  used  exclusively
by  all  the  lonians  in  Asia.  At  this  period  most
Greeks  seem  to  have  adopted  the  long  ships  with
only  one  rank  of  rowers  on  each  side  ;  their  name


,T^    -^.^


*  Biremes  are  sometimes  called  by  the  Greeks
BiKpora  (Cic.  ad  Att.  xvi.  4  ;  Hirt.  Bell.  Alex.  47.)
The  name  biremis  is  also  applied  to  a  little  boat
managed  by  only  two  oars.  (Horat.  iii.  29.  6'2  ;
Lucan,  viii.  562,  x.  56.)


NAVIS.
varied  accordingly  as  they  had  fifty  (ireprriKSuTo-
poi),  or  thirty  (jpiaKSvTopoi)^  or  even  a  smaller
number  of  rowers.  A  ship  of  war  of  this  class  is
represented  in  the  previous  woodcut,  which  is  taken
from  Montfaucon,  I'Antiq.  Expliq.  vol.  iv.  part  '?,
pi.  142.

The  following  woodcut  contains  a  beautiful  frag-
ment of  a  Bireme  with  a  complete  deck.  ( Winckel-
mann,  Monum.  Antich.  inedit.  pi.  207.)  Another
specimen  of  a  small  Bireme  is  given  further  on.


The  first  Greek  people  whom  we  know  to  have
acquired  a  navy  of  importance  were  the  Corinthians,
Samians,  and  Phocaeans.  About  the  time  of  Cyrus
and  Cambyses  the  Corinthian  Triremes  were  gene-
rally adopted  by  the  Sicilian  tyrants  and  by  the
Corcyraeans,  who  soon  acquired  the  most  powerful
navies  among  the  Greeks.  In  other  parts  of  Greece
and  even  at  Athens  and  in  Aegina  the  most  common
vessels  about  this  time  were  long  ships  with  only
one  rank  of  rowers  on  each  side.  Athens,  although
the  foundation  of  its  maritime  power  had  been  laid
by  Solon  [Naucraria],  did  not  obtain  a  fleet  of
any  importance  until  the  time  of  Themistocles,  who
persuaded  them  to  build  200  Triremes  for  the  pur-
pose of  carrying  on  the  war  against  Aegina.  But
even  then  ships  Avere  not  provided  with  complete
decks  (KaTaa-rpdofiaTo)  covering  the  whole  of  the


vessel.  (Thucyd.  i.  14  ;  Herod,  vii.  144.)  Ship
with  only  a  partial  deck  or  with  no  deck  at  all,
were  called  &(ppaKToi  vrjes,  and  in  Latin  naves
apertae.  A  fine  representation  of  such  a  one  is
figured  above  from  a  coin  of  Corcyra.  The  ships
described  in  Homer  had  no  decks,  and  were  all
&(\)paKToi  (Thucyd.  i.  10),  and  the  only  protection
for  the  men  consisted  of  the  %Kpia  or  bulwark.
(Horn.  Od.  xii.  229.)  Even  at  the  time  of  the
Persian  war,  the  Athenian  ships  were  without  a
complete  deck.  (Thucyd.  i.  14.)  Ships  which  had
a  complete  deck  were  called  /caTo^paKTOj,  and
the  deck  itself  KaTacrTpwfxa.  Their  invention  is
ascribed  by  Pliny  to  the  Thasians.  At  the  time
when  Themistocles  induced  the  Athenians  to  build


\


NAVIS

a  fleet  of  200  sails,  he  also  carried  a  decree,  that
every  year  twenty  new  Triremes  should  be  built
from  the  produce  of  the  mines  of  Laurium,  (^o-
lyaen.  i.  30  ;  Plut.  Themist.  4  ;  comp.  Boekh,
Pitbl.  Econ.  p.  249,  2d  edit.)  After  the  time  of
Themistocles  as  many  as  twenty  Triremes  must
have  been  built  every  year  both  in  times  of  war
and  of  peace,  as  the  average  number  of  Triremes
which  was  always  ready  amounted  to  between
three  and  four  hundred.  Such  an  annual  addition
was  the  more  necessary,  as  the  vessels  were  of  a
light  structure  and  did  not  last  long.  The  whole
superintendence  of  the  building  of  new  Triremes
was  in  the  hands  of  the  senate  of  the  Five  Hun-
dred (Demosth.  c.  Androt.  p.  598),  but  the  actual
business  was  entrusted  to  a  committee  called  the
rpLrjpoiroiol,  one  of  whom  acted  as  their  treasurer,
and  had  in  his  keeping  the  money  set  apart  for  the
purpose.  In  the  time  of  Demosthenes  a  treasurer
of  the  TpnjpoTToioi  ran  away  with  the  money,  which
amounted  to  two  talents  and  a  half.  During  the
period  after  Alexander  the  Great  the  Attic  navy
appears  to  have  become  considerably  diminished,
as  in  307  b.  c.  Demetrius  Poliorcetes  promised  the
Athenians  timber  for  100  new  Triremes.  (Diod.
XX.  46  ;  Plut.  Demetr.  10.)  After  this  time  the
Khodians  became  the  greatest  maritime  power  in
Greece.  The  navy  of  Sparta  was  never  of  great
importance.

Navigation  remained  for  the  most  part  what  it
had  been  before :  the  Greeks  seldom  ventured  out
into  the  open  sea,  and  it  was  generally  considered
necessar}'-  to  remain  in  sight  of  the  coast  or  of  some
island,  which  also  served  as  guides  in  daytime  :  in
the  night  the  position,  rising  and  setting  of  the
different  stars  answered  the  same  purpose.  In
winter  navigation  generally  ceased  altogether.  In
cases  where  it  would  have  bsen  necessarj'-  to  coast
.  around  a  considerable  extent  of  country,  which  was
connected  with  the  main  land  by  a  narrow  neck,
the  ships  were  sometimes  drawn  across  the  neck  of
land  from  one  sea  to  the  other,  by  machines  called
6\Koi.  This  was  done  most  frequently  across  the
'isthmus  of  Corinth.  (Herod,  vii.  24  ;  Thucyd.  viii.
jl,  iii.  15,  with  the  Schol.  ;  Strab.  viii.  p.  380  ;
Polyb.  iv.  19,  V.  101.)

Now  as  regards  the  various  kinds  of  ships  used
[  by  the  Greeks,  we  might  divide  them  with  Pliny
;  according  to  the  number  of  ranks  of  rowers  em-
ployed in  them,  into  Moneres,  Biremes,  Triremes,
Quadriremes,  Quinqueremes,  &c.,  up  to  the  enor-
mous ship  with  forty  ranks  of  rowers,  built  by
Ptolemaeus  Philopator  (Plin.  I.  c.  ;  Athen,  v.
[p. 203,  &c.)  But  all  these  appear  to  have  been
I  constructed  on  the  same  principle,  and  it  is  more
[convenient  to  divide  them  into  ships  of  war  and
'  ships  of  burden  ((popriKa,  <popTTiyo\  oXKaSes^  TAoTa,
(rTpoyyvKai^naves onerariae^naves  actuariae).  Ships
-of  the  latter  kind  were  not  calculated  f(,r  qiiick
movement  or  rapid  sailing,  but  to  carry  the  greatest
possible  quantity  of  goods.  Hence  their  structure
was  bulky,  their  bottom  round,  and  although  they
were  not  without  rowers,  yet  the  chief  means  by
'which  they  were  propelled  were  their  sails.

The  most  common  ships  of  war  in  the  earlier
times  were  the  pentecontori  (irevTTj/cdvTopoi),  but
afterwards  they  were  chiefly  Triremes,  and  the  latter
'•are  frequently  designated  only  by  the  name  J'f/es,
while  all  the  others  are  called  by  the  name  indi-
cating- their  peculiar  character.  Triremes  however
were  again  divided  into  two  classes :  the  one  con-


NAVIS:  78A

sisting  of  real  men-of-war,  which  were  quick-sail-
mg  vessels  (Taxemt),  and  the  other  of  transports
either  for  soldiers  (crTpaTtcoTtSes  or  6n\iTayuyoi)
or  for  horses  {l-mr'nyoi,  lirirayayoi).  Ships  of  this
class  were  more  heavy  and  awkward,  and  were
therefore  not  used  in  battle  except  in  cases  of  ne-
cessity. (Thucyd.  i.  116.)  It  seems  to  have  been
a  common  practice  to  use  as  transports  for  soldiers
and  horses  such  Triremes  as  had  become  useless
as  men-of-war.  The  ordinary  size  of  a  war  galley
may  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  the  average
number  of  men  engaged  in  it,  including  the  crew
and  marines,  was  two  hundred,  to  whom  on  some
occasions  as  much  as  thirty  epibatae  were  added.
(Herod,  viii.  17,  vii.  184;  comp.  Epibatae  and
Bockh,  PubL  Econ.  p.  278,  &c.)  The  rapidity
with  which  these  war  galleys  sailed  mav  be
gathered  from  various  statements  in  ancient  writers,
and  appears  to  have  been  so  great,  that  even  we
caimot  help  looking  upon  it  without  astonishment,
when  we  iind  that  the  quickness  of  an  ancient
trireme  nearly  equalled  that  of  a  modem  steam-
boat. Among  the  war-ships  of  the  Athenians  their
sacred  state- vessels  were  always  included  (Pa-
RALUS ;  comp.  Bdckh,  Urkimden  iiber  d.  Seewesen
des  Att.  Siaats,  p.  76,  &c.);  but  smaller  vessels,
such  as  the  irevTTjKdvTopoi  or  rpiaKduTopoi,  are
never  included  when  the  sum  of  men-of-war  is
mentioned,  and  their  use  for  military  purposes  ap-
pears gradually  to  have  ceased.

Vessels  with  more  than  three  ranks  of  rowers  on
each  side  were  not  constructed  in  Greece  till  about
the  year  400  b.  c,  when  Dionysius  I.,  tyrant  of
Syracuse,  who  bestowed  great  care  upon  his  navy,
built  the  first  Quadriremes  (rerp^pfis),  with  which
he  had  probably  become  acquainted  through  the
Carthaginians,  since  the  invention  of  these  vessels
is  ascribed  to  them.  (Plin.  //.  A^.  vii.  57  ;  Diodor.
xiv.  41,  42.)  Up  to  this  time  no  Quinqueremes
(■jrevTTipeis)  had  been  built,  and  the  invention  of
them  is  likewise  ascribed  to  the  reign  of  Dionysius.
Mnesigeiton  {ap.  Plin.  I.  c.)  ascribes  the  invention
of  Quinqueremes  to  the  Salaminians,  and  if  this
statement  is  correct,  Dionysius  had  his  Quinque-
remes probably  built  by  a  Salaminian  ship- builder.
In  the  reign  of  Dionysius  II.  Hexeres  (e^iipeis)
are  also  mentioned,  the  invention  of  which  was
ascribed  to  the  Syracusans.  (Aelian,  V.  H.  vi.  12,
with  the  note  of  Perizonius  ;  Plin.  /.  c.)  After  the
time  of  Alexander  the  Great  the  use  of  vessels
with  four,  five,  and  more  ranks  of  rowers  became
very  general,  and  it  is  well  known  from  Polybius
(i.  63,  &c.)  that  the  first  Punic  war  was  chiefly
carried  on  with  Quinqueremes.  Ships  with  twelve,
thirty,  or  even  forty  ranks  of  rowers  (Plin.  I.e.  ;
Athen.  V.  p.  204,  &c.),  such  as  they  were  built  by
Alexander  and  the  Ptolemies,  appear  to  have  been
mere  curiosities,  and  did  not  come  into  common
use.  The  Athenians  at  first  did  not  adopt  vessels
larger  than  Triremes, probably  because  they  thought
that  with  rapidity  and  skill  they  could  do  more
than  with  large  and  unwieldy  ships.  In  the  year
B.C.  356  they  continued  to  use  nothing  but  Tri-
remes ;  but  in  330  B.  c.  the  republic  had  already
a  number  of  Quadriremes,  which  was  afterwards
increased.  The  first  Quinqueremes  at  Athens  are
mentioned  in  a  document  (in  Bockh's  Urkunden^
N.  xiv.  litt.  K.)  belonging  to  the  year  B.  c.  325.
Herodotus  (vi.  87),  according  to  the  common
reading,  calls  the  theoris,  which  in  01.  72  the
Acginetans  took  from  the  Athenians,  a  Jrevrijpiji- ;


786


NAVIS.


but  the  reading  in  this  passage  is  corrupt,  and
irevreTTjpis  should  be  written  instead  of  Tv^vriip-qs.
(Bockh,  Urkunden^  p.  76.)  After  the  j-ear  330
the  Athenians  appear  to  have  gradually  ceased
"building  Triremes,  and  to  have  constructed  Quad-
rirenies  instead.

Among  the  smaller  vessels  we  may  mention  the
it.Ka.Tos  or  a/caTtov,  which  seems  to  have  been  some-
times used  as  a  ship  of  burden.  (Herod,  vii.  186  ;
comp.  Pind.  Pyth.  xi.  62,  Nem.  v.  5.)  The  acatus
must  generally  have  been  very  small,  and  the  same
as  a  scapha,  for  Suetonius  {Cues.  64)  in  describing
Caesar's  escape  from  Alexandria,  says  that  he
jumped  into  a  scapha,  which  Plutarch,  in  narrating
the  same  event,  calls  an  acation.  From  Thucydides
(iv,  67)  with  the  remark  of  the  Scholiast,  we  must
infer  that  it  was  a  small  boat  in  which  every  person
sailing  in  it  managed  two  oars,  one  with  each  hand.
The  name  Scapha  (o-Ka^Tj)  denotes  a  small  skiff  or
life-boat,  which  was  commonly  attached  to  mer-
chantmen for  the  purpose  of  saving  the  crew  in
danger.  (Act.  Jpost.  xxvii.  30.)

Libuma.,  or  Liburnica.,  in  Greek  XiSvpvis  or  A«-
€vpv6u^  is  a  name  given  apparently  to  every  war-
ship, from  a  bireme  up  to  those  with  six  lines  of
rowers  on  each  side  (Lucian,  vol.  v.  p.  262,  ed.
Bip.  ;  Flor.  iv.  2  ;  Sueton.  Aug.  17)  ;  but  in  the
time  of  Augustus,  liburnae  even  with  six  lines  of
rowers  were  considered  small  and  swift  in  com-
parison with  the  unwieldy  ships  of  Antony  at
Actium.  (Horat.  Epod.  i.  1.)  Pliny  (x.  32)  in-
forms us  that  tbey  were  constmcted  sharp  in  the
bows  to  offer  the  least  possible  resistance  to  the
water.  They  were  usually  provided  with  a  beak,
whence  a  navis  rostrata  is  generally  the  same  as  a
Liburna.  They  were  first  constructed  by  the
Liburnians  (whence  they  derived  their  name),  and
first  used  by  the  Romans  in  the  battle  of  Actium.
(Comp.  Geil.  xvii.  3  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  ix.  5,  xvii.  3  ;
Appian,  de  Bell.  Illyr.  3  ;  Juven.  iii.  240.)

Every  vessel  at  Athens,  as  in  modern  times,  had
a  name  given  to  it,  which  was  generally  of  the
feminine  gender,  whence  Aristophanes  {Eq.  1313)
calls  the  Triremes  ttapQ^vovs,  and  one  vessel,  the
name  of  which  was  Nauphante,  he  calls  the  daugh-
ter of  Nauso.  (Bbckh,  Ifrk.  p.  81,  &c.  ;  and  a  list
of  names  in  p.  84,  &c.)  The  Romans  sometimes
gave  to  their  ships  masculine  names.  The  Greek
names  were  either  taken  from  ancient  heroines  such
as  Nausicaa,  or  they  were  abstract  words  such  as
Ef/TTAota,  OepaTrei'a,  ITpdvom,  2c«;^ou(ra,  "RyfiJ.dvr].,
&c.  In  many  cases  the  name  of  the  builder  also
was  added.

We  now  proceed  to  describe  the  principal  parts
of  ancient  vessels.

1.  The  prow  (irpcapa  or  ixeTuirov,  prora)  was
generally  ornamented  on  both  sides  with  figures,
which  were  either  painted  upon  the  sides  or  laid
in.  It  seems  to  have  been  very  common  to  repre-
sent an  eye  on  each  side  o!the  prow.  (Bbckh,  l/rk.
p.  102  ;  Becker,  Charikfes,  vol.  ii.  p.  60.)  Upon
the  prow  or  fore- deck  there  was  always  some  em-
blem (Trapao-Tj/iov,  insigiie.,  fig^ra)  by  which  the
ship  was  distinguished  from  others.  At  the  head
of  the  prow  there  projected  the  (rT6\os,  and  its  ex-
tremity was  termed  aKpo(TT6\iou,  which  was  fre-
quently made  in  the  shape  of  an  animal  or  a  helmet.
It  appears  to  have  been  sometimes  covered  with
brass  and  to  have  served  as  an  embole  (^/xgoA^)
against  the  enemy's  vessels.  (Aeschyl.  Pers.  414.)
The  aKpoaroKiov  is  sometimes  designated  by  the


NAVIS.

name  of  xv^^ci^o^  (from  x'^^i  ^  goose),  because  ix
was  formed  in  the  shape  of  the  head  or  neck  of  a
goose  or  swan,  as  in  the  accompanying  woodcut.
{Etym.  Magn.  s.  v.)  The  cheniscus  was  often
gilt  and  made  of  bronze.  (Lucian,  Ver.  Hist.  41,
Jup.  Trag.  14.)  A  cheniscus  of  bronze  is  pre-
served in  the  Roj-al  Library  at  Paris.  (Millin,
Diet,  des  beaux  Arts.)     [Insigne.]     Just  below


the  prow  and  projecting  a  little  above  the  keel  was
the  Rostrum  {qj.€o\os,  e/xgoAoj')  or  beak,  which
consisted  of  a  beam,  to  which  were  attached  sharp
and  pointed  irons,  or  the  head  of  a  ram  and  the
like.  This  efxSuKos  was  used  for  the  purpose  of
attacking  another  vessel  and  of  breaking  its  sides.
It  is  said  to  have  been  invented  b}--  the  Tyrrhenian
Pisaeus.  (Plin.  Z.  c.)  These  beaks  were  at  first
always  above  the  water  and  visible  ;  afterwards
they  were  attached  lower,  so  that  they  were  in-
visible, and  thus  became  still  more  dangerous  to
other  ships.  (Diodor.  xi.  27,  xiv.  60,75;  Polyb.  i.
26,  xvi.  5,  viii.  6.)  The  annexed  woodcuts,  taken
from  Montfaucon  (L\4iitiq.  Eorpliq.  iv.2.  tab.  133),
represent  three  different  beaks  of  ships.


NAVIS.

Connected  with  the  e/xSoXos  was  the  irpo^fxSoXi^,
which  according  to  Polkix  (i.  85)  must  have  been
a  wooden  part  of  the  vessel  in  the  prow  above  the
beak,  and  was  probably  the  same  as  the  iircariSes,
and  intended  to  ward  off  the  attack  of  the  e/x&oAos
of  a  hostile  ship.  The  command  in  the  prow  of  a
vessel  was  exercised  by  an  officer  called  irpwpevs,
who  seems  to  have  been  next  in  rank  to  the  steers-
man, and  to  have  had  the  care  of  the  gear,  and  the
command  over  the  rowers.  (Xenoph.  Oecon.  vii.
14.)

2.  The  stern  (irpv/jLvri^  pujrpis)  was  generally
above  the  other  parts  of  the  deck,  and  in  it  the
helmsman  had  his  elevated  seat.  It  is  seen  in  the
representations  of  ancient  vessels  to  be  rounder
than  the  prow,  though  its  extremity  is  likewise
sharp.  The  stern  was,  like  the  prow,  adorned  in
various  ways,  but  especially  with  the  image  of  the
tutelary  deity  of  the  vessel  (tuteki).  In  some  re-
presentations a  kind  of  roof  is  formed  over  the
head  of  the  steersman,  and  the  upper  part  of  the
stem  frequently  has  an  elegant  ornament  called
aplusire,  and  in  Greek  &(pKa(rTou^  which  consti-
tuted the  highest  part  of  the  poop.  It  formed  a
corresponding  ornament  to  the  aKpo(TT6\iov  at  the
prow.  At  the  junction  of  the  aplustre  with  the
stern  on  which  it  was  based,  we  commonly  observe
an  ornament  resembling  a  circular  shield  :  this
was  called  aainhitov  or  cunvihiaKt],  It  is  seen  on
the  two  aplustria  here  represented.     (Comp.  Apol-


lon.  Rhod.  i.  1089,  ii.  601  ;  ApoUod.  i.  9.  §  22  ;
Horn.  II  XV.  716  ;  Herod,  vi.  1 14.)  The  aplustre
rose  immediately  behind  the  gubernator,  and  served
in  some  degree  to  protect  him  from  wind  and  rain.
Sometimes  there  appears,  beside  the  aplustre,  a
pole,  to  which  a  fillet  or  pennon  {raivia)  was  at-
tached, which  served  both  to  distinguish  and  adorn
the  vessel,  and  also  to  show  the  direction  of  the
wind.  In  the  column  of  Trajan,  a  lantern  is  sus-
pended from  the  aplustre  so  as  to  hang  over  the
deck  before  the  helmsman.  The  aplustre  com-
monly consisted  of  thin  planks,  and  presented  a
broad  surface  to  the  sky.  In  consequence  of  its
conspicuous  y)lace  and  beautiful  form,  the  aplustre
was  often  taken  as  the  emblem  of  maritime  affairs  :
it  was  carried  off  in  triumph  by  the  victor  in  a
naval  engagement  (Juven.  x.  135),  and  Neptune  is


NAVIS.  787

sometimes  represented  on  medals  holding  the
aplustre  in  his  right  hand,  as  in  the  annexed  wood-
cut ;  and  in  the  celebrated  Apotheosis  of  Homer,
now  in  the  British  Museum,  the  female  personating
the  Odyssey  exhibits  the  same  emblem  in  refer-
ence to  the  voyages  of  Odysseus.


3.  The  Tpc£(^7?|  is  the  bulwark  of  the  vessel,  or
rather  the  uppermost  edge  of  it.  (Hesych.  s.v.)  In
small  boats  the  pegs  (a-KaA/jLoi,  scalmi)  between
which  the  oars  move,  and  to  which  they  are  fast-
ened by  a  thong  (rpoTroT^p),  were  upon  the  rpdcpr)^.
(Bockh,  Urhtnd.  p.  103.)  In  all  other  vessels  the
oars  passed  through  holes  in  the  side  of  the  vessel
(o^^aA/ioi,  rp-n/j-ara,  or  rfvirrnxaTa).  (Schol.
Aristoph.  Acharn.  97,  &c.)

4.  The  middle  part  of  the  deck  in  most  ships  of
war  appears  to  have  been  raised  above  the  bulwark
or  at  L^ast  to  a  level  with  its  upper  edge,  and  thus
enabled  the  soldiers  to  occupy  a  position  from
which  they  could  see  far  around  and  hurl  their
darts  against  the  enemy.  Such  an  elevated  deck
appears  in  the  annexed  woodcut  representing  a
Moneris.  In  this  instance  the  flag  is  standing
upon  the  hind-deck.  (Mazois,  Pomp.  Part  i.  tab.
xxii.  fig.  2.)


5.  One  of  the  most  interesting,  as  well  as  im-
portant parts  in  the  arrangements  of  the  Biremes,
Triremes,  &c.,  is  the  position  of  the  ranks  of
rowers,  from  which  the  ships  themselves  derive
their  names.  Various  opinions  have  been  enter-
tained by  those  who  have  written  upon  this  sub-
ject, as  the  information  which  ancient  writers  give
upon  it  is  extremely  scanty.  Thus  much,  how-
ever, is  certain,  that  the  different  ranks  of  rowers,
who  sat  along  the  sides  of  a  vessel,  were  placed
one  above  the  other.  This  seems  at  first  sight
3k  2


788  NAVIS.

very  impro'bable,  as  the  common  ships  in  later
times  must  have  had  five  ordines  of  rowers  on  each
side,  and  since  even  the  lowest  of  them  must  have
been  somewhat  raised  above  the  surface  of  the
water,  the  highest  ordo  must  have  been  at  a  con-
siderable height  above  it,  and  consequently  required
very  long  oars :  the  apparent  improbability  is  still
more  increased,  when  we  hear  of  vessels  with
thirty  or  forty  ordines  of  rowers  above  one  another.
But  that  such  must  have  been  the  arrangement  is
proved  by  the  following  facts :  First,  In  works  of
art,  in  which  more  than  one  ordo  of  rowers  is  re-
presented, they  appear  above  one  another,  as  in
the  biremes  given  on  pp.  784,  a,  791,  a,  and  in
several  others  figured  by  Montfaucon.  Secondly,
The  Scholiast  on  Aristophanes  {Acham.  1106;
compare  Aristoph.  Ban.  11 05)  states  that  the  lowest
rank  of  rowers  having  the  shortest  oars  and  con-
sequently the  easiest  work,  received  the  smallest
pay,  while  the  highest  ordo  had  the  longest  oars,
and  consequently  had  the  heaviest  work  and  re-
ceived the  highest  pay.  Thirdly,  In  the  monstrous
rea(rapaKuvTr]pr]s  of  Pto*lemaeus  Philopator,  the
description  of  which  by  Callixenus  (ap.  Athen.  v.
p.  203,  &c.)  is  as  authentic  as  it  well  can  be,  the
height  of  the  ship  from  the  surface  of  the  water  to
the  top  of  the  prow  {aKpo(rr6\iov)  was  48  cubits,
and  from  the  water  to  the  top  of  the  stern  (^^Aacra)
63  cubits.  This  height  afforded  sufficient  room
for  forty  ranks  of  rowers,  especially  as  they  did  not
sit  perpendicularly  above  one  another,  but  one
rower,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  above  representation
of  a  Bireme,  sat  behind  the  other,  only  somewhat
elevated  above  him.  The  oars  of  the  uppermost
ordo  of  rowers  in  this  huge  vessel  were  38  cubits
long.

In  ordinary  vessels  from  the  Moneris  up  to  the
Quinqueremis  each  oar  was  managed  by  one  man,
which  cannot  have  been  the  case  where  each  oar
was  38  cubits  long.  The  rowers  sat  upon  little
benches  attached  to  the  ribs  of  the  vessel,  and
called  eScoXm,  and  in  Latinybn  and  transLra.  The
lowest  row  of  rowers  was  called  ^aXafios,  the
rowers  themselves,  ^aKafurai  or  ^aXd/nioi.  (Schol.
ad  Aristoph.  Acham.  1 1 06.)  The  uppermost  ordo  of
rowers  was  called  ^pdvos,  and  iha  rowers  themselves
bpavtrai.  (Thucyd.  vi.  31.)  The  middle  ordo  or  or-
dines of  rowers  were  called  C"7«,  Qvyioi  or  ^u7rTot.
(Pollux,  i.  9.)  Each  of  this  last  class  of  rowers
had  likewise  his  own  seat,  and  did  not,  as  some
have  supposed,  sit  upon  benches  running  across
the  vessel.     (Biickh,  Urkund.  p.  103,  &c.)

We  shall  pass  over  the  various  things,  which
•were  necessary  in  a  vessel  for  the  use  and  main-
tenance of  the  crew  and  soldiers,  as  well  as  the
machines  of  war  which  were  conveyed  in  it,  and
confine  ourselves  to  a  brief  description  of  things
belonging  to  a  ship  as  such.  All  such  utensils  are
divided  into  wooden  and  hanrjing  gear  (<TKevr]
^v\iva^  and  <r/c6U7j  /cpe/ioo-ro,  Pollux,  x.  13  ;  Athen.
i.  p.  27).  Xenophon  (Oecon.  viii.  12)  adds  to
these  the  a/cf  utj  TrXe/cTo,  or  the  various  kinds  of
wickerwork,  but  these  are  more  properly  compre-
hended among  the  Kpeixaard.

1.  'l.Kevr]  ^iXiva.

1.  Oars  (Kt^Trai^  remi).  The  collective  term  for
oars  is  Ta^p6s,  which  properly  signified  nothing  but
the  blade  or  flat  part  of  the  oar  (Herod,  viii.  12 ;  Pol-
lux, i.  90),  but  was  afterwards  used  as  a  collective
expression  for  all  the  oars  with  the  exception  of


NAVIS.

the  rudder.  (Eurip.  Iph.  Taur.  1346,  Hcl.  1554  ;
Polyb.  xvi.  3.)  The  oars  varied  in  size  accordingly
as  they  were  used  by  a  lower  or  higher  ordo  of
rowers,  and  from  the  name  of  the  ordo  by  which
they  were  used,  they  also  received  their  special
names,  viz.  Kwnai,  ^aXdfxiai,  C'^yiai,  and  ^pavi-
Tides.  Bockh  (Urk. -p.  119)  has  calculated,  that
each  Trireme  on  an  average  had  170  rowers.  In
a  Quinquereme  during  the  first  Punic  war,  the
average  number  of  rowers  was  300  (Polyb.  i.
26)  ;  in  later  times  we  even  find  as  manj-^  as  400.
(Plin.  xxxii.  1.)  The  great  vessel  of  Ptolemaeus
Philopator  had  4000  rowers  (Athen.  v.  p.  204),
and  the  handle  of  each  oar  (iyx^^pi-^iov)  was  partly
made  of  lead,  that  the  shorter  part  in  the  vessel
might  balance  in  weight  the  outer  part,  and  thus
render  the  long  oars  manageable.  The  lower  part
of  the  holes  through  which  the  oars  passed,  appear
to  have  been  covered  with  leather  (Sc/cw^a),  which
also  extended  a  little  way  outside  the  hole.  (Aris-
toph. Acharn.  97,  with  the  Schol. ;  Schol.  ad  Ban.
367  ;  Suidas,  s.  v.  'AcrKWfxaTa  and  Sirpdcpa  :  com-
pare Bbckh,  Urk.  106,  &c.)  The  rappSs  also  con-
tained the  7repiVe<^,  which  must  consequently  be  a
particular  kind  of  oars.  They  must  have  derived
their  name,  like  other  oars,  from  the  class  of
rowers  by  whom  they  were  used,  Bockh  sup-
poses that  they  were  oars  which  were  not  regu-
larly used,  but  only  in  case  of  need,  and  then  by
the  Epibatae.  Their  length  in  a  Trireme  is  stated
at  from  9  to  9^  cubits,  but  in  what  part  of  the
vessel  they  were  used  is  unknown.  Respecting
oars  in  general  see  the  Appendix  in  Arnold's
Thucyd.  vol.  ii.  p.  461,  &c.

2.  T/i£  rudder  (ir-qSaXiov^  gtibemactdum).  Be-
fore the  invention  of  the  rudder,  which  Pliny
(//.  A^.  vii.  57)  ascribes  to  Tiphys,  the  pilot  of
the  ship  Argo,  vessels  must  have  been  propelled
and  guided  by  the  oars  alone.  This  circum!>t;ince
may  account  for  the  form  of  the  ancient  rudder,  as
well  as  for  the  mode  of  using  it.  It  was  like  an
oar  with  a  very  broad  blade,  and  was  commonly
placed  on  each  side  of  the  stern,  not  at  its  ex-
tremity. The  annexed  woodcut  presents  examples
of  its  appearance  as  it  is  frequently  exhibited  on
gems,  coins,  and  other  works  of  art.  The  figure
in  the  centre  is  from  one  of  Bartoli's  lamps  {Luc.
Ant.  i.  5),  and  shows  a  Triton  blowing  the  buccina,
and  holding  a  rudder  over  his  shoulder.  The  left-
hand  figure  in  the  same  woodcut  is  from  a  cameo
in  the  Stosch  collection.  It  represents  a  rudder
with  its  helm  or  tiller  crossed  by  the  cornucopia.
In  the  third  figure  taken  from  another  cameo  in


NAVIS.

the  same  collection,  Venus  leans  with  her  left
arm  upon  a  rudder  to  indicate  her  origin  from  the
sea.  The  rudder  was  managed  by  the  guher
nator  {Kv€epvi]TT]s)^  who  is  also  called  the  redor
navis  as  distinguished  from  the  magister,  A  ship
had  sometimes  one,  but  more  commonly  two  rud-
ders (Aelian,  V.  H.  ix.  40  ;  Heliod.  Aethiop.  v.
p.  241,  ed.  Comra.  ;  Acts -awn.  40),  and  they
were  distinguished  as  the  right  and  left  rudder
(Hygin.  Fab.  14)  ;  but  they  were  managed  by  the
same  steersman  to  prevent  confusion.  (Bartoli,
/.  c.  iii,  31.)  In  larger  ships  the  two  rudders  were
joined  by  a  pole  which  was  moved  by  the  guber-
nator  and  kept  the  rudders  parallel.  The  con-
trivances for  attaching  the  two  rudders  to  one
another  and  to  the  sides,  of  the  ship,  are  called
^tvyKai  (Eurip.  Helen.  1556)  or  (evKTTjpiai  {Acts,
xxvii.  40).  The  famous  ship  of  Ptolemaeus  Phi-
lopator  had  four  rudders,  each  30  cubits  in  length.
(Athen.  v.  p.  204  ;  comp.  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  6.)

3.  Ladders  {KXinaKiSes,  scalae).  Each  Trireme
had  two  wooden  ladders,  and  the  same  seems  to
have  been  the  case  in  TpiaKSvTopoi.  (Bf>ckh,  p.  125.)

4.  Poles  or  punt  poles  (kouto'l,  conti).  Three  of
these  belonged  to  every  Trireme,  which  were  of  dif-
ferent lengths,  and  were  accordingly  distinguished
as  KOVT^iS  ixeyas,  Kovrhs  jiiKphs,  and  Kovrhs  [xeaos,
Triacontores  had  probably  always  four  punt  poles.
(CoNTUS  ;  Bockh,  p.  125,  &c.)

5.  UapaaTdrai  or  supports  for  the  masts.  They
seem  to  have  been  a  kind  of  props  placed  at  the
foot  of  the  masts.  (Isidor.  Orig.  xix.  2.  11.)  The
mast  of  a  Trireme,  as  long  as  such  props  were
used,  was  supported  by  two.  In  later  times  they
do  not  occur  any  longer  in  Triremes,  and  must  have
been  supplanted  by  something  else.  The  Triacon-
tores on  the  other  hand  retained  their  irapaarTaTai.
(Bockh,  p.  126,  &c.)

6.  The  mast  {1(Tt6s,  malus).  The  ancients  had
Tessels  with  one,  two  or  three  masts.  From
Bockh's  Urkunden  we  learn  that  two  masts  were
issued  at  Athens  from  the  vewpiov  for  every  tri-
reme. The  foremast  was  called  aKareios,  while
the  mainmast  was  called  '10-765  /xeyas.  A  tria-
conter,  or  a  vessel  with  30  rowers,  had  likewise
two  masts,  and  the  smaller  mast  here  as  well  as
in  a  trireme  was  near  the  prow.  In  three-masted
vessels  the  largest  mast  was  nearest  the  stern.
The  masts  as  well  as  the  yards  were  usually  of
fir.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xvi.  76.)  The  invention  of
masts  in  navigation  is  attributed  to  Daedalus
(Plin.  H.  N.  vii.  56.)  The  part  of  the  mast  imme-
diately above  the  yard  (antenna),  formed  a  struc-
ture similar  to  a  drinking  cup,  and  bore  the  name
of  carchesium  (Kapx'ho'iov).  Into  it  the  mariners
ascended  in  order  to  manage  the  sail,  to  obtain  a
distant  view,  or  to  discharge  missiles.  (Eurip.
Hccub.  1237,  with  the  Schol.  ;  Lucil.  5a^.  3.)  The
ccruchi  or  other  tackle  may  have  been  fastened  to
its  lateral  projections  which  corresponded  to  the
hands  of  a  cup.  (Comp.  Pind,  Nem.  v.  94.)  The
carchesia  of  the  three-masted  ship  built  .  for
Hiero  II.  by  Archimedes  were  of  bronze.  Three
men  were  placed  in  the  largest,  two  in  the  next,
and  one  in  the  smallest.  Breastworks  (^wpaKia)
were  fixed  to  these  structures,  so  as  to  supply  the
place  of  defensive  armour  ;  and  pulleys  (rpoxv-
\iat,  trochleae)  for  tioisting  up  stones  and  weapons
from  below.  (Athen.  v.  43.)  The  continuation  of
the  ra.ast  above  the  carchesium  was  called  the
**distarf"  (tjAcocottj),  corresponding  to  our  top


NAVIS.  789

mast  or  top-gallant  mast.  (Apollon.  Rhod.  i.  565  ;
Athen.  xi.  49.)  The  carchesium  was  sometimes
made  to  turn  upon  its  axis,  so  that  by  means  of  its
apparatus  of  pulleys,  it  served  the  purpose  of  a
crane.  (Vitruv.  x.  2,  10,  with  Schneider's  note.)
7.  The  7/ards  {K€pas,Kepaia,antenna).  The  main-
yard  was  fastened  to  the  top  of  the  mast  by  ropes
termed  cerucid,  as  seen  in  the  annexed  woodcut.


To  the  mainyard  was  attached  the  mainsail,  which
was  hoisted  or  let  down  as  the  occasion  might  re-
quire. For  this  purpose  a  wooden  hoop  was  made
to  slide  up  and  down  the  mast,  as  we  see  it  re-
presented in  an  antique  lamp,  made  in  the  form  of
a  ship.  (Bartoli,  /.  c.  iii,  31  ;  comp,  Isid.  Ori<j.  xx.
15,)  In  the  two  extremities  of  the  yard  [cornua,
UKpoKepaiai),  ropes  (ceruchi,  Krjpovxoi)  were  at-
tached, which  passed  to  the  top  of  the  mast  ;  and
by  means  of  these  ropes  and  the  pulleys  connected
with  them,  the  yard  and  sail,  guided  by  the  hoop,
were  hoisted  to  the  height  required.  (Caes.  de
Bell.  Gall.  iii.  14  ;  Lucan,  viii.  177  ;  Val.  Flacc.  i.
469.)  There  are  numerous  representations  of  an-
cient ships  in  which  the  antenna  is  seen,  as  in  the
two  woodcuts  here  appended.  In  the  second  of
them,  there  are  ropes  hanging  down  from  the  an-
tenna, the  object  of  which  was  to  enable  the  sailors
to  turn  the  antenna  and  the  sail  according  to  the
wind.


II,  2«:6U7;  Kpcfxacrra.
1.  'TTTo^wyLiaTa.  This  part  of  an  ancient  vessel
was  formerly  quite  misunderstood,  as  it  was  be-
lieved to  be  the  boards  or  planks  covering  the  out-
side of  a  ship  and  running  along  it  in  the  direction
from  poop  to  prow.  But  Schneider  {ad  Vitruv.  x.
15.  6)  has  proved  that  the  word  means  cordage  or
tackling,  and  this  opinion,  which  is  supported  by
many  ancient  authors.  Is  confirmed  by  the  docu-
ments published  by  Bockh,  where  it  is  reckoned
among  the  cTKevr]  KpefMao-rd.  The  inro^ixaTa  were
thick  and  broad  ropes  which  ran  in  a  horizontal
direction  around  the  ship  from  the  stern  to  the
prow,  and  were  intended  to  keep  the  whole  fabric
u  B  3


790  '         NAVIS.

together.  They  ran  round  the  vessel  in  several
circles,  and  at  certain  distances  from  one  another.
The  Latin  name  for  v7:6^ca^a  is  tormentum.  (Isidor.
Grig.  xix.  4.  4  ;  Phito,  dc  Re  PubL  x.  p.  616.)
The  length  ot  these  tormenta  varied  accordint^ly  as
they  ran  around  the  higher  or  lower  part  of  the
ship,  the  latter  being  naturally  shorter  than  the
former.  Their  number  varied  according  to  the
size  of  the  ship.  The  Tessaracontores  of  Ptolemaeus
Philopator  had  twelve  viroCwfiaTa,  each  600  cu-
bits long.  (Athen.  v.  p.  204.)  Such  vTro^w/xaTa
were  always  ready  in  the  Attic  arsenals,  and  were
only  put  on  a  vessel  when  it  was  taken  into  use.
Sometimes  also  they  were  taken  on  board  when  a
vessel  sailed,  and  not  put  on  till  it  was  thought
necessary.  (Act.  Apost.  xxvii.  17.)  The  act  of  put-
ting them  on  was  called  vTro^avi/vvai  or  Sia^ajvuiiuai,
or  C^aai.  (Polyb.  xxvii.  3  ;  Appian,  i?.  C.  v.  91  ;
ApoU.  llhod.  Argon,  i.  368.)  A  Trireme  required
four  viro^cifiaTo^  and  sometimes  this  number  was
even  increased,  especially  when  the  vessel  had  to
sail  to  a  stormy  part  of  the  sea.  (Bockh,  pp.  133 —
138.)

2.  'Icrriov  (velum)^  sail.  Most  ancient  ships
had  only  one  sail,  which  was  attached  with  the
yard  to  the  great  mast.  In  a  Trireme  too  one  sail
might  be  sufficient,  but  the  trierarch  might  never-
theless add  a  second.  As  each  of  the  two  masts  of
a  Trireme  had  two  sail-yards,  it  further  follows
that  each  mast  might  have  two  sails,  one  of  which
was  placed  lower  than  the  other.  The  two  be-
longing to  the  main-mast  were  called  iVrio  ^67aA.a,
and  those  of  the  fore-mast  iVria  aicdTeia.  (Xenoph.
Jlellen.  vi.  2.  §  27  ;  Bekker,  Anecdot.  pp.  19,  10.)
The  former  were  used  on  ordinary  occasions,  but
the  latter  probably  only  in  cases  when  it  was
necessary  to  sail  with  extraordinary  sp?ed.  The
sails  of  the  Attic  war- galleys,  and  of  most  ancient
ships  in  general,  were  of  a  square  form,  as  is  seen
in  numerous  representations  on  works  of  art.  Whe-
ther triangular  sails  were  ever  used  by  the  Greeks,
as  has  been  frequently  supposed,  is  very  doubtful.
The  Romans,  however,  used  triangular  sails,  which
they  called  Sisppara,  and  which  had  the  shape  of
an  inverted  Greek  A  (v),  the  upper  side  of  which
was  attached  to  the  yard.  Such  a  sail  had  of
course  only  one  ■srous  (pes)  at  its  lower  extremity.
(Schol.  ad  Lucan.  Phars.  v.  429  ;  Isidor.  Orig.  xix.
3,  4  ;  Bockh,  pp.  138—143.)

3.  ToTrera,  cordage.  This  word  is  generally  ex-
plained by  the  grammarians  as  identical  with
cxoiyia  or  Ka\oi:  but  from  the  documents  in
Bockh  it  is  clear  that  they  must  have  been  two
distinct  classes  of  ropes,  as  the  roTreta  are  always
mentioned  after  the  sails,  and  the  axoivia  before
the  anchors.  The  (Txoiyia  {funes)  are  the  strong
ropes  to  which  the  anchors  were  attached,  and  by
which  a  ship  wiis  fastened  to  the  l.ind  ;  while  the
Toirela  were  a  lighter  kind  of  ropes  and  made  with
greater  care,  which  were  attached  to  the  masts,
yards,  and  sails.  Each  rope  of  this  kind  was  made
for  a  distinct  purpose  and  place  (TtJn-os,  whence
the  name  roirela).  The  following  kinds  are  most
worthy  of  notice:  —  a.  KahoiBia  or  k6.\oi.  What
they  were  is  not  quite  clear,  though  Bockh  thinks  it
probable  that  they  belonged  to  the  standing  tackle,
t.  e.  that  they  were  the  ropes  by  which  ^he  mast
was  fastened  to  both  sides  of  the  ship,  so  that
the  Trp6Tovoi  in  the  Homeric  ships  were  only  an
especial  kind  of  KaKwSia,  or  the  /caA^Sta  them-
ei'lves    differently   placed.      In    later   times   the


NAVIS.

irpSrovos  was  the  rope  which  went  from  the  top  of
the  mainmast  {Kapx'h'^iov)  to  the  prow  of  the  ship,
and  thus  was  what  is  now  called  the  main-stay.
b.  l/xdures  and  Kepovxoi  are  probably  names  for  the
same  ropes  which  ran  from  the  two  ends  of  the
sail-yard  to  the  top  of  the  mast.  In  more  ancient
vessels  the  Ifias  consisted  of  only  one  rope  ;  in  later
times  it  consisted  of  two,  and  sometimes  four,
which  uniting  at  the  top  of  the  mast,  and  there
passing  through  a  ring,  descended  on  the  other
side,  where  if  formed  the  inirovos,  by  means  of
which  the  sail  was  drawn  up  or  let  down.  (Bockh,
pp.  148 — 152.)  Compare  the  lower  woodcut  at
p.  789,  which  shows  a  vessel  with  two  ceruchi,  and
the  upper  woodcut  p.  789,  which  shows  one  with
four  ceruchi.  c.  dyKoiua,  hgitm  anqui?ia  (Isid.  Orig.
xix.  4.  7),  was  the  rope  which  went  from  the  middle
of  a  yard  to  the  top  of  the  mast,  and  w<is  intended
to  facilitate  the  drawing  up  and  letting  down  of  the
sail.  The  ^.yKoiva  5nr\^  of  Quadriremes  undoubt-
edly consisted  of  two  ropes.  Whether  Triremes
also  had  them  double,  is  uncertain.  (Pollux,  I.e.;
Bockh,  p.  152.)  d.  TidSts  (pedes)  were  in  later
times  as  in  the  poems  of  Homer  the  ropes  attached
to  the  two  lower  corners  of  a  square  sail.  These
Tr6d(.s  ran  from  the  ends  of  the  sail  to  the  sides  of
the  vessel  towards  the  stem,  where  they  were
fastened  with  rings  attached  to  the  outer  side  of  the


bull


(Herod,  ii.  36.)    Another  rope  is  called


irpSirovs,  propes  (Isidor.  Orig.  xix.  4.  3),  which  was
probably  nothing  else  than  the  lower  and  thinner
end  of  the  ttoi/s,  which  was  fastened  to  the  ring,
c.  "tiT^pai  were  the  two  ropes  attached  to  the  two
ends  of  the  sail-yard,  and  thence  came  down  to  a
part  of  the  ship  near  the  stern.  Their  object  was
to  move  the  yard  according  to  the  wind.  In  Latin
they  are  called  opifera,  which  is,  perhaps,  only  a
corruption  of  liypera.  (Isidor.  Orig.  xix.  4.  6.)
The  last  among  the  TOTrela  is  the  xaA.Ji/os,  or
bridle,  the  nature  of  which  is  quite  unknown.
(Bockh,  p.  154,  &c.)

4.  Uapapf^vnara.  The  ancients  as  early  as  the
time  of  Homer  had  various  preparations  raised
above  the  edge  of  a  vessel,  which  were  made  of  skins
and  wicker-work,  and  which  were  intended  as  a
protection  against  high  waves,  and  also  to  serve  as
a  kind  of  breast- work  behind  which  the  men  might
be  safe  against  the  darts  of  the  enemy.  These  eleva-
tions of  the  bulwark  are  called  Trapap^/'/xara,  and
in  the  documents  in  Bockh  they  are  either  called
Tpixiva,  made  of  hair,  or  Aeu«:c£,  white.  They
were  probably  fixed  upon  the  edge  on  both  sides
of  the  vessel,  and  were  taken  off  when  not  wanted.
Each  galley  appears  to  have  had  several  Trapap^y^ara,
two  made  of  hair  and  two  white  ones,  these  four
being  regularly  mentioned  as  belonging  to  one  ship.
(Xenoph.  Heilen.  i.  6.  §  19  ;  Bockh,  p.  159,  &c.)

5.  KaragATjjua  and  viT6§kr]/j.a.  The  former  of
these  occurs  in  Quadriremes  as  well  as  in  Triremes,
the  latter  only  in  Triremes.  Their  object  and
nature  are  very  obscure,  but  they  appear  to  have
been  a  lighter  kind  oi  napd^pv/xa.  (Volyaen.  Strut.
iv.  11,  13;  Bockh,  p.  160,  &c.)

6.  'S.xoivia  are  the  stronger  and  heavier  kinds  of
ropes.  There  were  two  kinds  of  these,  viz.  the
(Txoivia  ayKvpeia,  to  which  the  anchor  was  attached,
and  <TX°^^^"-  ^T^'^yva  or  iirlyeia  (retinacula),  by
which  the  ship  was  fastened  to  the  shore  or  drawn
upon  the  shore.  Four  ropes  of  each  of  these  two
kinds  is  the  highest  number  that  is  mentioned  as
belonging  to  one  ship.     The  thick  ropes  wore  made


XAVIS.

of  several  thinner  ones.  (Aristoph.  Pew,  36  ;
V.arro,  de  lie  Rust.  i.  135  ;  Bockh,  pp.  161—166.)
7.  The  anchor  (ayKvpa,  ancora.)  We  have  al-
ready remarked  that  in  the  Homeric  age,  anchors
were  not  known,  and  large  stones  (euval,  sleepers)
used  in  their  stead.  (Horn.  11.  i.  436,  xiv.  77,  Od.
ix.  137,  XV.  4.98.)  According  to  Pliny  (//.  A^.  57),
the  anchor  Avas  first  invented  by  Eupalamus  and
afterwards  improved  by  Anacharsis.  Afterwards,
when  anchors  were  used,  they  were  generally  made
of  iron,  and  their  form,  as  may  be  seen  from  the
annexed  figure,  taken  from  a  coin,  resembled  that
of  a  modern  anchor.     (Comp.  Virg.  Aen,  i.  169,


vi.  3.)  Such  an  anchor  was  often  termed  lidens.,
Snr\rj,  a/xcpiSoXoi  or  aix(pi(TroiJ.os.,  because  it  had
two  teeth  or  flukes  ;  but  sometimes  it  had  only
one,  and  was  then  called  eTepoffTS/xos.  The  tech-
nical expressions  in  the  use  of  the  anchor  are :
ancoram  solvere,  ayKvpav  x"^?"?  to  loose  the
anchor  ;  ancoram  jacere,  ayKvpav  ^aWnv  or  piir-
Tetv,  to  cast  anchor  ;  and  ancoram  tollere,  ayKvpav
atpeiu  or  auaipeadai,  to  weigh  anchor,  whence
alpeiv  by  itself  means  "  to  set  sail,"  ayKvpav
being  understood.  The  following  figure,  taken
from  a  marble  at  Rome,  shows  the  cable  (funis),
passing  through  a  hole  in  the  prow  {ocvlus).    Each


t:^^.>


ship  of  course  had  several  anchors  ;  the  one  in
which  St.  Paul  sailed  had  four  (^^5,  xxvii.  29),
and  others  had  eight,  (Athen.  v.  43.)  The  last  or
most  powerful  anchor,  "  the  last  hope,"  was  called
/e/JM,  sacra,  and  persons  trying  their  last  hope  were
said  sacrum  solvere.  To  indicate  where  the  anchor
Iny,  a  bundle  of  cork  floated  over  it  on  the  surface
of  the  waters.  (Paus.  viii.  12  ;  Plin.  H.  N.
xvi.  8.)

The  preceding  account  of  the  different  parts  of
the  ship  will  be  rendered  still  clearer  by  the
drawing  on  the  following  page,  in  whic.i  it  is  at-
tempted to  give  a  restoration  of  an  ancient  ^ip.

The  Romans  in  the  earlier  period  of  their  his-
tory never  conceived  the  idea  of  increasing  their
power  by  the  formation  of  a  fleet.  -  The  time,  when


NAvis.  rni

they  first  appear  to  have  become  aware  of  the
importance  of  a  fleet,  was  during  the  second
Samnite  war,  in  the  year  B.  c.  31 1.  Livy  (ix.  30),
where  he  mentions  this  event,  says :  duumviri
navales  classis  omandae  reficiendaeque  causa  were
then  for  the  first  time  appointed  by  the  people.  This
expression  suggests  that  a  fleet  had  been  in  exist-
ence before,  and  that  the  duumviri  navales  had  been
previously  appointed  by  some  ( ther  power.  [Duum-
viri.] But  Niebuhr  {Hist,  of  Rome,  iii.  p.  282)
thinks  that  the  expression  of  Livy  only  means,
that  at  this  time  the  Romans  resolved  to  build
their  first  fleet.  The  idea  of  founding  a  navy  was
probably  connected  with  the  establishment"  of  a
colony  in  the  Pontian  islands,  as  the  Romans  at
this  time  must  have  felt  that  they  ought  not  to  be
defenceless  at  sea.  The  ships  which  the  Romans
now  built  were  undoubtedly  Triremes,  which  were
then  very  common  among  the  Greeks  of  Italy,  and
most  of  them  were  perhaps  furnished  by  the  Italian
towns  subject  to  Rome.  This  fleet,  however  in-
significant it  may  have  been,  continued  to  be  kept
up  until  the  time  when  Rome  became  a  real  mari-
time power.  This  was  the  time  of  the  first  Punic
war.  That  their  naval  power  until  then  was  of  no
importance,  is  clear  from  Polybius  (i.  20),  who
speaks  as  if  the  Romans  had  been  totally  un-
acquainted with  the  sea  up  to  that  time.  In  the
year  b.  c.  260,  when  the  Romans  saw  that  without
a  navy  they  could  not  carry  on  the  war  against
Carthage  with  any  advantage,  the  senate  ordained
that  a  fleet  should  be  built.  Triremes  would  now
have  been  of  no  avail  against  the  high-bulwarked
vessels  (Quinqueremes)  of  the  Carthaginians.  But
the  Romans  would  have  been  unable  to  build  others
had  not  fortunately  a  Carthaginian  Quinquereme
been  wrecked  on  the  coast  of  Bruttium,  and  fallen
into  their  hands.  This  wreck  the  Romans  took  as
their  model,  and  after  it  built  120  (Polyb.  I.  c),  or
according  to  others  (Oros.  iv.  7)  130  ships.  Ac-
cord ng  to  Polybius  one  hundred  of  them  were
irevTTipeis,  and  the  remaining  twenty  rpiiipeis^  or,
as  Niebuhr  proposes  to  read,  rerp-t^peis.  This
large  fleet  was  completed  within  sixty  days  after
the  trees  had  been  cut  down.  (Plin.  JJ.  N.  xvi.
74.)  The  ships,  built  of  green  timber  in  this  hur-
ried WcU',  were  very  clumsily  made,  and  not  likely
to  last  ior  any  time  ;  and  the  Romans  themselves,
for  want  of  practice  in  naval  affairs,  proved  verj'
unsuccessful  in  their  first  maritime  undertaking,
for  seventeen  ships  were  taken  and  destroyed  by
the  Carthaginians  off  Messina.  (Polyb.  i.  21';
Polyaen.  fitrat.  vi.  16  ;  Oros.  iv.  7.)  C.  Duilias^
who  perceived  the  disadvantage  with  which  his
countrymen  had  to  struggle  at  sea,  devised  a  plan
which  enabled  them  to  change  a  sea  fight,  as  it
were,  into  a  fight  on  land.  The  machine,  by  which
this  was  effected,  was  afterwards  called  corrus,
and  is  described  by  Polybius  (i.  22  ;  comp.  Nie-
buhr, iii.  p.  678,  &c.  ;  CoRVUs).  From  this  time
forward  the  Romans  continued  to  keep  up  a  power-
ful navy.  Towards  the  end  of  the  Republic  they
also  increased  the  size  of  their  ships,  and  built  war
vessels  of  from  six  to  ten  ordines  of  rowers.  (Flo-
rus,  iv,  II  ;  Virg.  Aen.  viii.  691.)  The  construc-
tion of  their  ships,  however,  scarcely  differed  from
that  of  Greek  vessels  ;  the  only  great  difference
was  that  the  Roman  galleys  were  provided  with  a
greater  variety  of  destructive  engines  of  war  than
those  of  the  Greeks.  They  even  erected  turrea
I  and  tubulata  upon  the  decks  of  their  great  men-of-
3  E  4


752


NAVIS.


NAUMACHIA.


A.  Prora,  itpwpa^

B.  Ocidus^  0<pQaKii6s,

C.  lioftrum,  eix€o\os.

D.  C/ieniscus,  xVf^'^^i^oS»
K.  Puppis^  irpv/jLvr].

F.  ApLustre^  acpAaa-rov^  with  the  pole  contjviuing
ihe/aacia  or  taenia.

G.  rpdcpT)^.

H.  liemi^  Kwirai.

I.    Gubernaculum^  iTTjStiAtoi'.


war  (nawes  turritae)^  and  fought  upon  them  in  the
same  manner  as  if  they  were  standing  upon  the
walls  of  a  fortress.  Some  of  such  naves  turritae
occur  in  the  woodcuts  given  above.  (Flor.  /.  c.  ;
Plut.  Anton.  33  ;  Dion  Cass,  xxxii.  33 ;  Plin.  H.  N.
xxxii.  1  ;  comp.  Caes.  de  Bell.  Gall.  iii.  14  ;  Dion
Cass,  xxxix.  43  ;  Veget.  de  Re  Milit.  v.  14,  &c.)

For  a  more  detailed  account  of  the  ships  and
navigation  of  the  ancients,  see  Scheffer,  De  Militia
Navali,  Upsala,  1654  ;  Berghaus,  Geschichte  der
Schiff/ahrtskunde  der  vomehmsten  Volker  des  Al-
terlhums  ;  Benedict,  Geseh.  der  Schiffahrt  und  des
Handels  der  Alien  ;  Howell,  On  the  War-palleys  of
ike  Ancients  ;  A.  Jal,  Archcologie  Navale,  Paris,
1840  ;  and  for  the  Artie  navy  especially,  Bockh's
Urkunden  uber  das  Kjcewesen  des  A  tischen  Siaates,
Berlin,  1840  ;  K.  Haltaus,  Geschichte  Poms  im
ZeitaUer  der  Punischen  Kriege,  Leipzig,  1846,
^  607,  &c.)  [L.  S.]


K.  Afalus^  i(Tt6s.

L.    Velum,  lards.

M.  Antenna,  Kipaia,  Kfpas.

N.  Cornua,  aKpoKcpaiai.

0.  Cenichi,  K^pov^oi.

P.  Carchcsium,  Kapxh^i-ov.

Q.  KaKoi,  Ka\(p5ia.

R.  irpdrovos.

S.    Pedes,  Tr6Sis.

T.  Opifera,  virtpai.


NAUMA'CHIA,  was  the  name  given  to  the  re-
presentation of  a  sea-fight  among  the  Romans,  and
also  to  the  place  where  such  engagements  took
place.  These  fights  were  sometimes  exhibited  in
the  Circus  or  Amphitheatre,  sufficient  water  being
introduced  to  float  ships,  but  more  generally  in
buildings  especially  devoted  to  this  purpose.  The
first  representation  of  a  sea-fight  on  an  extensive
scale  was  exhibited  by  Julius  Caesar,  who  caused
a  lake  to  be  dug  for  th^  purpose  in  a  part  of  the
Campus  Martins,  called  by  Suetonius  the  "  Lesser
Codeta  "  (Dion  Cass,  xliii.  23  ;  Suet.  Jid.  Caes.
39)  ;  this  lake  was  afterwards  filled  up  in  the  time
of  Augustus  on  account  of  the  malaria  arising  from
the  stagnant  water  in  it.  (Dion  Cass.  xlv.  17.)
Augustus  also  dug  a  lake  {stagnum)  near  the  Tiber
for  the  same  purpose,  and  planted  around  it  a  grove
of  trees  (nemus).  (Suet.  Aug.  43  ;  Tacit.  Ann.  xii.
56,  xiv.  15.)     Thu  naumachia  was  the  first  per-


1


NAUTODICAE.

Tnanent  one  ;  it  continued  to  be  used  after  others
had  been  made,  and  was  subsequently  called  the
"vetus  naumachia."  (Suet.  Tit.  7  ;  Dion  Cass.
Ixvi.  25  ;  Ernesti,  ad  Suet.  Tib.  72.)  Claudius  ex-
hibited a  magnificent  sea-fight  on  the  lake  Fucinus.
(Tacit.  Ann.  xii.  56  ;  Suet.  Claud.  21  ;  Dion  Cass,
Ix.  33.)  Nero  appears  to  have  preferred  the  am-
phitheatre for  these  exhibitions.  (Dion  Cass.  Ixi.
9,  Ixii.  15.)  Domitian  made  a  new  naumachia,
and  erected  a  building  of  stone  around  it,  in  which
the  spectators  might  sit  to  see  the  engagement.
(Dion  Cass.  Ixvi.  8  ;  Suet.  Dom.  4,  5.)  Representa-
tions of  naumachiae  are  sometimes  given  on  the
coins  of  the  emperors.  (Scheflfer,  de  Militia  Navali^
iii.  2.  pp.  189,  191.)

The  combatants  in  these  sea-fights,  called  Nau-
machiarii  (Suet.  Claud.  21),  were  usually  captives
(Dion  Cass,  xlviii.  19)  or  criminals  condemned  to
death  (Dion  Cass.  Ix,  33),  who  fought  as  in  gladia-
torial combats,  until  one  party  was  killed,  unless
preserved  by  the  clemency  of  the  emperor.  The
ships  engaged  in  the  sea-fights  were  divided  into
two  parties,  called  respectively  by  the  names  of
different  maritime  nations,  as  Tyrians  and  Egyp-
tians (Suet.  Jul.  31),  Rhodians  and  Sicilians  (Suet.
Claud.  21  ;  Dion  Cass.  Ix.  33),  Persians  and  Athe-
nians (Dion  Cass.  Ixi.  9),  Corcyraeans  and  Corin-
thians, Athenians  and  Syracusans,  &c.  (Id.  Ixvi.
25.)  These  sea-fights  were  exhibited  with  the
same  magnificence  and  lavish  expenditure  of  human
life  as  characterised  the  gladiatorial  combats  and
other  public  games  of  the  Romans.  In  Nero's
naumachia  there  were  sea-monsters  swimming
about  in  the  artificial  lake  (Suet.  Nero,  12  ;  Dion
Cass.  Ixi.  9),  and  Claudius  had  a  silver  Triton
placed  in  the  middle  of  the  lake  Fucinus,  who  was
made  by  machinery  to  give  the  signal  for  attack
with  a  trumpet.  (Suet.  Claud.  21.)  Troops  of
Nereids  were  also  represented  swimming  about.
(Martial,  de  Sped.  26.)  In  the  sea-fight  exhibited
by  Titus  there  were  3000  men  engaged  (Dion  Cass.
Ixvi.  25),  and  in  that  exhibited  by  Domitian  the
ships  were  almost  equal  in  number  to  two  real
fleets  (paejiejiistae  classes.  Suet.  Dom.  4).  In  the
battle  on  the  lake  Fucinus  there  were  19,000  com-
batants (Tacit.  A?m.  xii.  56),  and  fifty  ships  on
each  side.    (Dion  Cass.  Ix.  33.)

NAUTA.  [ExERciTORiA  Actio.]
NAU'TICON  (vavTtKov).  [Fenus,  p.  525,b.]
NAUTO'DICAE(j'auTdSiK-a<),  are  called  apxai
or  magistrates  by  most  of  the  ancient  grammarians
(Harpocrat.  Suidas,  Lex.  Rhet.  s.  v.  NavrodiKai),
while  a  few  others  call  them  SiKa<TTai.  (Hesych.
s.  V.)  The  concurrent  authority  of  most  of  them,  !
together  with  a  passage  of  Lysias  (de  Pecun.  Pull.
p.  1 89,  Bremi),  the  only  Attic  orator  who  mentions
the  nautodicae,  renders  it  more  than  probable  that
they  were  a  magistracy.  This  can  be  the  less
doubtful  as  the  words  tiKa^nv  and  SiKaar^s  are
sometimes  used  of  magistrates  hi  their  capacity  of
flaayoDjus.  (Meier,  Att.  Proc.  p.  28  ;  see  EiSA-
GOGEis.)  All  testimonies  of  the  ancients  moreover
agree  that  the  nautodicae  had  the  jurisdiction  in
matters  belonging  to  navigation  and  commerce,  and
in  matters  concerning  such  persons  as  had  entered
their  names  as  members  of  a  phratria  without  both
their  parents  being  citizens  of  Athens,  or  in  other
words,  in  the  SUai  ifx-rrSpuu  and  Si/cai  ^evias.  The
time  when  nautodicae  were  first  instituted  is  not
mentioned,  but  the  fact  that  they  had  the  jurisdic-
tion  in   cases  where  a  person  had  assumed  the


NEBRIS.  793

rights  of  a  phrator  without  his  father  and  mother
being  citizens,  shows  that  their  institution  must
belong  to  a  time  when  it  was  sufficient  for  a  man
to  be  a  citizen  if  only  his  father  was  a  citizen,
whatever  his  mother  might  be,  that  is,  previous  to
the  time  of  Pericles  (Plut.  Perid.  37  ;  compare
CiviTAS,  p.  289),  and  perhaps  as  early  as  the
time  of  Cleisthenes.  The  nautodicae  Avere  ap-
pointed every  year  by  lot  in  the  month  of  Gamelion,
and  probably  attended  to  the  S'lKai  ifnrSpwv  only
during  the  winter,  when  navigation  ceased,  whereas
the  S'lKai  ^€vlas  might  be  brought  before  them  all
the  year  round.

It  is  a  well  known  fact  that  the  two  actions
(S'lKai  i/xTrSpctiv  and  SIkui  ^evlas)  which  we  hav«
here  assigned  to  the  nautodicae,  belonged,  at  least
at  one  time,  to  the  thesmothetae.  (Meier,  Att.
Proc.  p.  64,  &c.)  Several  modem  writers,  such  as
Bockh,  Baumstark,  and  others,  have  therefore
been  led  to  suppose  that  all  the  grammarians  who
call  the  nautodicae  apxai  are  mistaken,  and  that
the  nautodicae  were  not  elaaywyels  in  the  cases
above  mentioned,  but  SiKaaTai.  But  this  mode  of
settling  the  question  does  not  appear  to  us  to  be  as
satisfactory  as  that  adopted  by  Meier  and  Schb-
mann.  (Att.  Proc.  p.  85,  &c.)  In  all  the  speeches
of  Demosthenes  no  trace  occurs  of  the  nautodicae,
and  in  the  oration  against  Lacritus  (p.  940),  where
all  the  authorities  are  mentioned  before  whom  such
a  case  as  that  of  Lacritus  might  be  brought,  the
orator  could  scarcely  have  failed  to  mention  the
nautodicae,  if  they  had  still  existed  at  the  time.
It  is  therefore  natural  to  suppose  that  the  S'lKai
e/xirSpuv  at  the  time  of  Philip  of  Macedonia,  when
they  became  Si'/cot  efi/x-nfoi  [Emmeni  Dikai],
were  taken  from  the  nautodicae  and  transferred  to
the  thesmothetae.  And  as  the  republic  could  not
now  think  it  any  longer  necessary  to  continue  the
office  of  nautodicae,  merely  on  account  of  the  St'/cai
|6j/jas,  these  latter  were  likewise  transferred  to  the
thesmothetae,  and  the  office  of  the  nautodicae  was
abolished.  The  whole  period  during  which  nauto-
dicae existed  at  Athens  would  thus  comprehend
the  time  from  the  legislation  of  Cleisthenes  or  soon
after,  to  Philip  of  Macedonia.  One  difficulty  how-
ever yet  remains,  for  nautodicae  are  mentioned  by
Lucian  (ii.  p.  203,  ed.  Bip.)  in  a  dialogue  which
the  author  represents  as  having  taken  place  after
the  death  of  Alexander.  Those  who  are  unwilling
to  believe  that  Lucian  here,  as  in  other  places,  has
been  guilty  of  an  anachronism,  must  suppose  that
the  nautodicae  were  after  their  abolition  restored
for  a  time,  of  which  however  there  is  no  other  evi-
dence. (Compare  Bdckh,  Publ.  Econ.  i.  §  9  ;  Baum-
stark, De  Curatorihus  Emporii  et  Nautodicis  apnd
Athemenses,-pi).  65 — 78.)  [L.  S.]

NEBRIS,  a  fawn's  skin  (from  V€€p6s,  a  fawn  ;
see  Aegis),  worn  originally  by  hunters  and  others
as  an  appropriate  part  of  their  dress,  and  after-
wards attributed  to  Dionysus  (Eurip.  Bacch.  9\),
125,  157,  790,  ed.  Matt.  ;  Aristoph.  Ranae,  1209  ;
Dionys.  Perieg.  702,  946  ;  Rufus  Festus  Avien.
1129),  and  consequently  assumed  by  his  votaries
in  the  processions  and  ceremonies  which  they  ob-
served in  honour  of  him.  [Dionysia.]  The  an-
nexed woodcut,  taken  from  Sir  Wm.  Hamilton's
Vases  (i.  37),  shows  a  priestess  of  Bacchus  in  the
attitude  of  ofiering  a  nebris  to  him  or  to  one  of
his  ministers.  The  works  of  ancient  art  often
show  it  as  worn  not  only  by  male  and  female  bac-
chanals, but  also  by  Pans  and  Satyrs.     It  was


794  NEGOTIORUM  GESTORUAI  ACTIO.


commonly  put  on  in  the  same  manner  as  tlie  .legis,
or  goat-skin,  by  tying  the  two  lore  legs  over  the
right  shoulder  so  as  to  allow  the  body  of  the  skin
to  cover  the  leftside  of  the  wearer.  {Ovid.  Met  vi.
593.)  [J.  Y.]

NECRODEIPNON  (yeKpoSenrvoy).  [FuNUS,
p.  557,  b.)

NEC  Y'SI  A  (veKiaia).     [Funus,  p.  558,  a.]

NEFASTI  DIES.     [Diks.]

NEGATrVA,NEGATO'RIA  ACTIO.  [Con-
PESsoRiA  Actio.]

NEGLIGE'NTIA.     [Culpa.]

NEGOTIO'RUM  GESTO'RUM  A'CTIO.
This  was  an  action  which  a  man  might  have
against  another  who  had  managed  his  affairs  for
him  in  his  absence,  without  being  commissioned  to
do  so  (sine  mandato).  The  action  was  not  founded
either  on  contract  or  delict,  but  was  allowed  for
convenience  sake  {utilitatis  causa).  The  person
Avhose  business  was  transacted  by  another,  and  the
person  who  transacted  the  business,  might  severally
have  an  action  against  one  another  in  respect  of
that  which  "  ex  bona  fide  alterura  alteri  praestare
oportet."  The  dominus  negotii  had  a  negotiorum
gestoruni  actio  directa.  The  action  of  the  self-
constituted  agent  (gestor)  was  sometimes  called
Contrari.'i,  by  analogy  to  similar  actions  in  other
cases.  He  was  bound  to  make  good  any  loss  tliat
was  incurred  during  his  administration  by  dolus
or  culpa,  and  in  some  instances  even  loss  that  had
been  incurred  by  casus.  On  the  other  hand,  he
had  his  action  for  all  expenses  properly  incurred,
and  in  some  cases,  even  if  the  result  was  unfortu-
nate to  the  absent  person  ;  as  if  lie  paid  for  medi-
cal attendance  on  a  sick  slave,  and  the  slave  died
notwithstanding  all  his  care :  but  various  diffi-
i allies  might  easily  be  suggested  as  to  such  cases
as  these  (Dig.  3.  tit.  5.  s.  JO),  and  the  rule  must
be  qualified  by  the  condition  of  the  thing  under-
taken being  a  thing  necessary  (to  the  owner)  to
be  undertaken,  though  the  result  might  be  unpro-
fimble.  It  was  also  necessary  that  the  gestor
should  have  underUiken  the  business  not  with  the


NEMEA.

view  of  doing  it  for  nothing,  but  with  the  intention
of  establishing  a  right  against  the  negotii  domin'  s,
though  that  might  not  be  the  immediate  motive  ;o
undertaking  the  thing  (Savigny,6'^si!e»<,&c.  iii.  p.  6",
note  9.)  There  was,  however,  no  negotiorum  ges-
torum  actio  contraria,  if  the  gestor  had  done  the  acts
that  he  did,  with  the  clear  intention  of  doing  an  act
of  Liberalitas  or  Pietas.  The  edict  allowed  a  man
to  recover  the  expenses  that  he  had  been  put  to
about  another  man's  interment,  though  he  had  no
direct  authority  for  looking  after  it.  The  reason
of  the  nile  was,  that  persons  might  not  be  prevented
from  attending  to  so  necessary  a  matter  as  the  in-
terment of  a  corpse,  if  there  was  no  person  present
to  whom  the  duty  belonged.  (Dig.  11.  tit.  7.
De  Relig.  et  Sumptibus  funerum.)

It  \vas  a  much  disputed  question  what  was  the
effect  of  Ratihabitio  on  the  negotiorum  gcstio,
whether  it  was  thereby  turned  into  a  Mandatuin.
(See  Vangerow,  Pandekten.,  &c.,  iii.  p.  483.)  The
dominus  was  not  bound  by  the  negotiorum  gestio,
except  when  the  acts  done  were  such  as  were  ne-
cessary to  prevent  some  imminent  loss  or  damnge  to
his  property,  as  already  observed.  But  he  might,
if  he  pleased,  confirm  the  negotium,  though  it  was
male  gestum.

(Inst.  3.  tit.  27.  s.  3,  &c.  ;  Dig.  44.  tit.  7.  s.  5  ;
Dig.  3.  tit.  5.  De  Negotiis  Gcstls  ;  Cod.  2.  tit.  19  ;
Vangerow,  Pandekten.,  &c.  iii,  p.  479.)      [G.  L.]

NEGOTIATO'RES,  signified  specially  during
the  later  times  of  the  republic  Roman  citizens
settled  in  the  provinces,  who  lent  money  upon  in-
terest or  bought  up  corn  on  speculation,  which
they  sent  to  Rome  as  well  as  to  other  places.
Their  chief  business  however  was  lending  money
upon  interest,  and  hence  we  find  the  words  negotia^
negotiatio,  and  negotiari  used  in  this  sense.  1'he
negotiatores  are  distinguished  from  the  ptdjUcani
(Cic,  ad  Att.  ii.  16,  "  malo  negotiatoribus  satisfacere,
quam  fuhlicanis ;''"'  comp.  Cic.  Verr.  ii.  3,  pro
Place.  1 6,  pro  Leg.  Manil.  7),  and  from  the  mer-
I  catores  (Cic.  pro  Plane.  26,  '•'' negotiatoribus  comis,
I  mercatoribus  Justus  '*).  That  the  word  negotiatores
was,  during  the  later  times  of  the  republic,  always
used  in  the  signification  above  given  is  amply
proved  by  Ernesti  in  the  treatise  quoted  below,
and  is  also  sufficiently  clear  from  the  following
passages  (Cic.  pro  Place.  29,  Verr.  iii.  60,  ad  Q.
Fr.  i.  \,  pro  Place.  36  ;  Hirt.  B.  Afr.  36).  Hence
the  negotiatores  in  the  provinces  corresponded  to
the  argentarii  and  feneratores  at  Rome  ;  and  ac-
cordingly we  find  Cicero  giving  the  name  of
feneratores  to  certain  persons  at  Rome,  and  after-
wards calling  the  very  same  persons  negotiatores
when  they  are  in  the  provinces  (Cic.  ac?  Att.  v.  21,
vi.  1 — 3).  Compare  Ernesti,  De  Negotiatoribus  ia
his  Opuscula  Philologica.

NEMEA  (v4ixea,  ye/j.e7a  or  vefiaia).,  one  of  the
four  great  national  festivals  of  the  Greeks.  It  was
held  at  Nemea,  a  place  near  Cleonae  in  Argolis.
The  various  legends  respecting  its  origin  are  re-
lated in  the  argumenta  of  the  Scholiasts  to  the
Nenioa  of  Pindar,  with  which  may  be  compared
Pausanias  (ii.  15.  §  2,  &c.),  and  Apollodorus  (iii.
6.  §  4).  All  these  legends,  however,  agree  in
stating  that  the  Nemea  were  originally  instituted
by  the  Seven  against  Thebes  in  commemoration
of  the  death  of  Opheltes,  afterwards  called  Arche-
morus.  When  the  Seven  arrived  at  Nemea,  and
were  very  thirsty,  they  met  Hypsipile,  who  was
carrying  Opheltes,  the  child  of  the  priest  of  Zeii»


NEMEA.

and  of  Eun-dice.  While  she  showed  to  the  he-
roes the  way  to  the  nearest  well,  she  left  the  child
behind  lyine;  in  a  meadow,  which  during  her  ab-
sence was  killed  by  a  dragon.  When  the  Seven  on
their  return  saw  the  accident,  they  slew  the  dragon
and  instituted  funeral  games  (a7<i>»'  iinrd(pios)  to
be  held  every  third  year  (rpierripiKos).  Other
legends  attribute  the  institution  of  the  Nemean
games  to  Heracles,  after  he  had  slain  the  Nemean
l.on  :  but  the  more  genuine  tradition  was  that  he
had  either  revived  the  ancient  games,  or  at  least
introduced  the  alteration  by  which  thej'  were  from
this  time  celebrated  in  honour  of  Zeus.  That  Zeus
was  the  god  in  honour  of  whom  the  games  were
afterwards  celebrated  is  stated  by  Pindar  {Nem.
iii.  1 14,  &c.).  The  games  were  at  first  of  a  war-
like character,  and  only  warriors  and  their  sons
were  allowed  to  take  part  in  them  ;  subsequently,
however,  they  were  thrown  open  to  all  the  Greeks
{hf]ixoTiKhv  TvKriQos  crvpedpa/xe).  The  games  took
place  in  a  grove  between  Cleonae  and  Phlius,
(8trabo,  viii.  p.  i^77.)  The  various  games,  ac-
cording to  the  enumeration  of  Apollodorus  (/,  c),
were  horse-racing,  running  in  armour  in  the  stadium
(Fans.  ii.  15.  §  2),  wrestling,  chariot-racing  and
discus,  boxing,  throwing  the  spear  and  shooting
with  the  bow,  to  which  we  may  add  musical  con-
tests. (Pans.  viii.  50.  §3;  Plut.  Phi/op.  11.)
The  Scholiasts  on  Pindar  describe  the  agon  very
imperfectly  as  linriKhs  and  yvi^vucos.  The  prize
given  to  the  victors  was  at  first  a  chaplet  of  olive-
branches,  but  afterwards  a  chaplet  of  green
parsley.  When  this  alteration  was  introduced  is
not  certain,  though  it  may  be  inferred  from  an  ex-
pression of  Pindar  (Nem.  vi.  71),  who  calls  the
parsley  {(reXtvop)  the  ^ordua  XeouTos,  that  the
new  prize  was  believed  lo  have  been  introduced
by  Heracles.  The  presidency  at  these  games  and
the  management  of  them  belonged  at  different
times  to  Cleonae,  Corinth,  and  Argos,  and  from
the  first  of  these  places  they  are  sometimes  called
aywv  KXewuaios.  The  judges  who  awarded  the
prizes  were  dressed  in  black  robes,  and  an  in-
stance of  their  justice,  when  the  Argives  presided,
is  recorded  by  Pausanias  (viii.  40.  §  3).

Respecting  the  season  of  the  year  at  which  the
Nemean  games  were  celebrated,  the  Scholiast  on
Pindar  {Argiim.  ad  Nem.)  merely  states  that  they
were  held  on  the  12th  of  the  month  of  Panemus,
though  in  another  passage  he  makes  a  statement
which  upsets  this  assertion.  Pausanias  (ii.  15.  §  2)
speaks  of  winter  Nemea,  and  manifestly  distin-
guishes them  from  others  which  were  held  in
summer.  It  seems  that  for  a  time  the  celebration
of  the  Nemea  was  neglected,  and  that  they  were
revived  in  01.  53.  2,  from  which  time  Eusebius
dates  the  first  Neraead.  Henceforth  it  is  certain  that
they  were  for  a  long  time  celebrated  regularly  twice
in  every  Olympiad,  viz.  at  the  commencement  of
every  second  Olympic  year  in  the  winter,  and  soon
after  the  commencement  of  every  fourth  Olympic
year  in  the  summer.  This  has  been  shown  by
Brickh  in  an  essay  uher  die  Zeitverh'dltnisse  der
Deinosth.  Rede  gegen  Midias,  in  the  transactions
of  the  Berlin  Acad.  1818,  1819.  Histor.  PhiloL
Klassc,  p.  92,  &c.  ;  compare  Ideler,  Handb.  der
Chronol.^  ii.  p.  606,  &c.  About  the  time  of  the
battle  of  Marathon  it  became  customary  in  Argolis
to  reckon  according  to  Nemeads.

In  208  B.  c.  Philip  of  Macedonia  was  honoured
by  the  Argives  with  the  presidency  at  the  Nemean


NEXUM.  795

games  (Liv.  xxvii.  30,  &c.  ;  Polyb.  x.  26),  and
Quintius  Flamininus  proclaimed  at  the  Nenioa  the
freedom  of  the  Argives.  (Liv.  xxxiv.  41  ;  Polyb.
X.  26.)  The  emperor  Hadrian  restored  the  horse-
racing  of  boys  at  the  Nemea,  which  had  fallen  into
disuse.  But  after  his  time  they  do  not  seem  to
have  been  much  longer  celebrated,  as  they  are  no
longer  mentioned  by  any  of  the  writers  of  the
subsequent  period.  (See  Villoison,  Histoire  de
VAciid.  des  Inscript.  et  Bell.  Lett.  vol.  xxxviii.
p.  29,  «&:c. ;  &ch'6m?inn,  PlutarcJd  J gis  etCleomenes^
&c.  §x.)  [L.S.]

NE'NIA.     [FuNus,  p.  5od,  a.]

NEO'CORI  (veco/cc^pot),  signified  originally
temple-sweepers  (Hesych.  and  Suid.  s.  r.),  biit
Avas  applied  even  in  early  times  to  priestly  officers
of  high  rank,  who  had  the  supreme  superintend-
ence of  temples  and  their  treasures.  (Plat.  vi.  p.
759  ;  Xen.  Anah.  v.  3.  §  6.)  Under  the  Roman
emperors  the  word  was  especially  applied  to  those
cities  in  Asia,  which  erected  temples  to  the  Roman
emperors,  since  the  whole  city  in  every  such  case
Avas  regarded  as  the  guardian  of  the  worship  of  the
emperor.  Accordingly  we  frequently  find  on  the
coins  of  Ephesus,  Smyrna,  and  other  cities,  the
epithet  New/cJpos,  which  also  occurs  on  the  in-
scriptions of  these  cities.  None  of  these  cities,  how-
ever, was  allowed  to  assume  this  honour  without
obtaining  the  permission  of  the  Roman  senate,  as
we  learn  from  inscriptions.  (Comp.  also  lac.  Ann.
XV.  55,  6Q.)  For  further  information  on  this  sub-
ject, see  Krause,  NEf2KOP02,  Civitates  Neoeorae
sive  Acdituae,  Lips.  1844.    [Aeditui.]

NEODAMO'DEIS (yeoSayUftJSeis).  [Helotes,
p.  592.]

NEPTUNA'LIA,  a  festival  of  Neptune,  cele-
brated at  Rome,  of  which  very  little  is  known.
(Varro,  de  Ling.  Lat.  vi.  19.)  The  day  on  which
it  was  held,  was  probably  the  23d  of  July.  In
the  ancient  calendaria  this  day  is  marked  as  Nept.
ludi  et  feriae,  or  Nept.  bidi,  from  which  we  see
that  the  festival  was  celebrated  with  games.  Re-
specting the  ceremonies  of  this  festival  nothing  is
known,  except  that  the  people  used  to  build  huts
of  branches  and  foliage  (?/»iirae,  Fest.  s.  v.  Umbrae\
in  which  they  probably  feasted,  drank,  and  annised
themselves.  (Horat.  Carm.  iii.  28. 1,  &c.  ;  Tertull.
De  Sped.  6.)  [L.  S.J

NERO'NIA.       [QUINQUENNALIA.]

NEXL     [Nexum.]

NEXUM  is  defined  by  Manilius  to  be  "  omne
quod  per  libram  et  aes  geritur,  in  quo  sint  Man-
cipia."  Mucins  Scaevola  has  a  difterent  definition  :
"  quae  per  aes  et  libram  fiantut  obligentur,  praeter
quae  mancipio  dentur."  Varro  {de  Ling.  Lat.  vii.
1 05,  ed.  Miiller)  who  has  preserved  both  these  de-
finitions, prefers  the  latter,  as  being  consistent  with
the  etymology  of  the  word :  "  quod  obligatur  per
libram,  neque  suum  sit,  inde  Nexum  dictum."  As
an  illustration  he  adds  :  "  Liber  qui  suas  operas
in  servitutem  pro  pecunia  quadam  debebat,  dum
solveret,  nexus  vocatur,  ut  ab  acre  obaeratus."
The  difference  in  these  definitions  arises  solely
from  the  different  aspect  under  which  the  Nexum
is  viewed.  Every  Nexum  was  m  the  form  of  a
sale,  and  consequently,  viewed  as  to  its  formal
part,  Nexum  comprehended  Manciplum.  The  Tes-
tamenti  factio  was  also  included  under  Nexum.
Viewed  as  to  its  object  and  legal  effect,  Nexum
was  either  the  transfer  of  the  ownership  of  a  thinar,
or  the  -ti-ansfer  of  a  .thing  .to  a  creditor  as  a  secu-


'ue


NEXUM.


rity  :  accordingly  in  one  sense  Nexum  included
Mancipium,  as  explained  in  Mancipium  ;  in  an-
other sense,  Mancipium  and  Nexum  are  opposed
in  the  same  way  in  which  Sale  and  Mortgage  or
Pledge  are  opposed.  The  formal  part  of  both
transactions  consisted  in  a  transfer  per  aes  et
libram.  This  explanation  is  consistent  with  the
definitions  of  the  jurists,  and  the  uses  of  these  two
words.

The  person  who  became  Nexus  by  the  effect  of
a  Nexum  or  Nexus  (for  this  form  of  the  word  also
is  used)  was  said  Nexum  inire.  (Liv.  vii.  19.)
The  phrases  Nexi  datio,  Nexi  liberatio  respectively
express  the  contracting  and  the  release  from  the
obligation.

The  Roman  law  as  to  the  payment  of  borrowed
money  (pecunia  certa  credita ;  see  Lex  Gall.  Cisalp.
21,  22)  was  very  strict.  A  curious  passage  of
Gellius  (xx.  1 )  gives  us  the  ancient  mode  of  legal
procedure  in  the  case  of  debt,  as  fixed  by  the
Twelve  Tables.  If  the  debtor  admitted  the  debt,
or  had  been  condemned  in  the  amount  of  the  debt
by  a  judex,  he  had  thirty  days  allowed  him  for
payment.  At  the  expiration  of  this  time,  he  was
liable  to  the  Manus  Injectio  [Manus  Injectio],
and  ultimately  to  be  assigned  over  to  the  creditor
(addicius)  by  the  sentence  of  the  praetor.  The
creditor  was  required  to  keep  him  for  sixty  days
in  chains,  during  which  time  he  publicly  exposed
the  debtor  on  three  nundinae,  and  proclaimed  the
amount  of  his  debt.  If  no  person  released  the
prisoner  by  paying  the  debt,  the  creditor  might
sell  him  as  a  slave  or  put  him  to  death.  If  there
were  several  creditors,  the  letter  of  the  law  al-
lowed them  to  cut  the  debtor  in  pieces,  and  to  take
their  share  of  his  body  in  proportion  to  their  debt.
Gellius  says  that  there  was  no  instance  of  a  credi-
tor ever  having  adopted  this  extreme  mode  of  satis-
fying his  debt.  But  the  creditor  might  treat  the
debtor,  who  was  addictus,  as  a  slave,  and  compel
him  to  work  out  his  debt  ;  and  the  treatment  was
often  very  severe.

In  this  passage  Gellius  does  not  speak  of  Nexi,
but  only  of  Addicti ;  which  is  sometimes  alleged
as  evidence  of  the  identity  of  nexus  and  addictus,
but  it  proves  no  such  identity.  If  a  Nexus  is  what
he  is  here  supposed  to  be,  the  Law  of  the  Twelve
Tables  could  not  apply  ;  for  when  a  man  had  once
become  Nexus  with  respect  to  one  creditor,  he  could
not  become  Nexus  to  another  ;  and  if  he  became
Nexus  to  several  at  once,  in  this  case  the  creditors
must  abide  by  their  contract  in  taking  a  joint  se-
curity. This  Law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  only  applied
to  the  case  of  a  debtor  being  assigned  over  by  a
judicial  sentence  to  several  debtors,  and  it  provided
for  the  settlement  of  their  conflicting  claims.  The
distinction  between  a  nexum  and  a  res  judicata
is  obvious  enough,  though  some  writers  have
missed  it.

The  precise  condition  of  a  Nexus  has  however
been  a  subject  of  much  discussion  among  scholars,
and  it  is  not  easy  to  reconcile  all  the  passages  in
which  the  term  occurs  so  as  to  deduce  from  them
a  consistent  view  of  the  matter.  Sometimes  indeed
Nexus  appears  to  be  used  in  the  same  sense  as
Addictus,  which  cannot  cause  any  difficulty  if  we
consider  that  the  effect  of  being  Nexus  and  Ad-
dictus was  the  same,  aa  will  presently  be  made
probable.

As  a  Nexum  was  effected  per  aes  et  libram,  it
wns  in  the  form  of  a  sale,  and  of  course  there  was


NEXUM.

an  object  of  sale  ;  and  this  object  of  sale  might  be  a
thing  or  a  person.  We  need  not  assume  that  "  per
aes  et  libram  se  obligare,"  and  for  a  man  to  make
himself  Nexus  are  the  same.  In  the  case  of  Nexum
aes,  it  is  more  consistent  to  consider  the  aes  as  the
object  of  the  obligatio  per  aes  et  libram,  and  in  the
case  when  a  man  made  himself  Nexus  to  consider
the  man  as  the  object.  It  does  not  follow  then
that  an  obligatio  per  aes  et  libram  alwa3-s  made  a
man  Nexus  ;  but  there  is  no  difliculty  in  as-
suming that  a  man  only  became  Nexus  with  refer-
ence to  an  obligatio  per  aes  et  libram,  so  that  a
man  could  contract  an  obligatio  per  aes  et  libram.
and  at  the  same  time  could  make  himself  Nexus.  A
free  man  could  not  properly  be  the  object  of  a  sale,
but  it  requires  only  a  slight  acquaintance  with  Ro-
man law  to  perceive  that  this  difficulty  could  be
got  over  by  a  fiction.  As  in  the  case  of  Manu-
mission Per  Vindictam  there  was  a  fiction  that  the
slave  was  free  ;  so  there  might  here  be  a  fiction
that  the  freeman  was  a  slave.  And  if  this  is  not
admitted  as  a  probable  solution,  it  cannot  be  denied
that  there  is  as  much  difficulty  in  understanding
the  co-emtio  of  a  female,  who  was  sui  juris,  which
as  a  legal  fact  is  quite  certain,  as  the  formal  sale  of
a  freeman  with  his  consent.  The  notion  of  a  free-
man giving  himself  into  the  power  of  another,  so
far  from  being  foreign  to  the  notions  of  Roman
law,  as  some  writers  have  asserted,  is  perfectly
consistent  with  them,  as  we  see  in  the  instance  of
adrogation.  The  Nexum  then  being  in  the  form
of  a  sale,  the  Nexus  was  in  a  servile  condition
as  a  necessary  consequence  of  the  Nexum,  and  the
opinion  that  there  must  be  an  addictio  to  give
effect  to  the  Nexum,  is  inconsistent  with  the  no-
tion of  the  Nexum.  According  to  this  view,  a
Nexus,  as  soon  as  the  contract  of  Nexum  was
made,  was  in  the  condition  of  an  Addictus.  and
both  were  treated  as  slaves.  But  it  has  been
urged,  that  "  one  cannot  discover  any  reason  for
this  self-pledging  (nejrum),  since  every  insolvent,
even  when  there  was  no  nexum,  must  become  his
creditor's  slave  (addictus)^  and  how  can  we  under-
stand that  the  abolition  of  the  nexum  was  such  an
advantage  gained  by  the  Plebeians  (Liv.  viii,  28 ),
if  the  addictio  still  remained,  which  might  be  ob-
tained when  there  was  no  nexum  ;  and  it  cannot
be  denied  that  it  did  remain  ?  "  The  advantage
consists  precisely  in  the  difference  between  a  con-
tract which  cannot  be  enforced  against  a  person
without  the  forms  of  legal  proceeding,  and  a  con-
tract which  at  once  gives  a  man  a  power  over
his  debtor  without  any  application  to  a  court  of
justice.  The  effect  of  the  abolition  of  the  Nexum,
ni  this  its  special  sense,  while  the  Addictio  still
existed,  may  be  illustrated  by  the  supposed  case  of
a  landlord's  remedy  for  the  recovery  of  his  rent  by
distress  being  abolished,  while  his  other  remedies
under  the  contract  for  letting  and  hiring  remained.
It  is  remarked  by  Goettling  (GescMckte  der
Rom.  Staatsver/assung)  that  "  the  comparison  of
the  Adrogatio  and  the  Adoptio  gives  the  clearest
proof  of  the  correctness  of  Savigny's  view,  who  re-
jects the  notion  of  a  freeman  pledging  himself.  In
the  case  of  the  Adrogatio  of  a  Roman,  who  is  sui
juris,  there  was  no  mancipatio  which  such  person
could  effect  as  to  himself :  but  in  the  case  of  adop-
tion, a  mancipatio  occurs,  and  it  is  effected  by  the
living  father  and  the  son  together.  In  the  case  of
coemtio  it  certainly  appears,  as  if  the  woman*  of
herself  effected  a  self-mancipation  ;  she,  however,


NEXUM.

is  not  herself  audor,  but  her  guardian  is  auctor."
There  may  be  some  weight  in  this  observation,  the
point  of  which  appears  to  be  this  :  there  was  man-
cipatio  in  the  case  of  adoption,  where  the  adopted
person  was  in  the  power  of  another,  but  no  nian-
cipatio  in  the  case  of  Adrogation,  where  the
adopted  person  was  not  in  the  power  of  another.
The  tacit  conclusion  then  seems  to  be,  that  if
in  one  case  there  was  no  mancipatio  and  yet  a
person  was  brought  into  the  power  of  another
with  his  own  consent,  there  could  be  no  mancipa-
tio when  a  person  consented  to  put  himself  into  a
servile"  relation  to  another  ;  for  it  is  here  assumed
that  a  nexum  was  voluntary.  But  this  is  not  a
legitimate  conclusion.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  man-
cipatio in  the  case  of  adoption,  where  the  son  was
in  the  power  of  the  father,  was  a  sufficient  form,
considering  that  the  person  adopted  was  only  a
filius  familias  ;  and  that  Adrogation,  which  was
of  a  person  who  was  sui  juris,  was  a  very  different
matter,  and  required  other  forms  to  be  observed,
because  the  person  adrogated  was  not  a  filius-
familias.  [Adoption.]  A  nexum  effected  no
change  of  familia  like  an  adoption  or  adrogation,
and  while  its  object  was  different  from  that  of  both
of  these  ceremonies,  it  is  quite  consistent  for  its
form  to  have  been  the  same  as  the  form  of  the  one,
and  different  from  the  form  of  the  other.

The  mode  in  which  Goettling  (p.  123)  explains
this  matter  of  the  nexum  is  as  follows  :  "  A  free
citizen  can  come  into  a  mancipii  causa  when  he
cannot  pay  a  loan  {aes  confesaum)  out  of  his  own
means.  What  in  such  case  he  has  to  give  security
for,  that  to  which  he  has  bound  himself,  is  called
nexum  (namely  aes)  ;  hence  the  phrases  nexi  datio,
nexi  iiberatio.  The  person  who  does  such  an  act
is  called  nexum  (from  nexus  nexus)  iniens,  neocum
fjLciens^  but  after  he  has  received  the  loan  in  the
above  solemn  manner,  he  is  nexu  obligatus,  nexu
vinctus :  as  soon  as  he  has  failed  to  fulfil  his  obli-
gation, and  in  conseqnence  of  such  failure  has  been
addicted  (addiclus)^  and  given  in  mancipium  by
the  magistrate,  he  is  called  nexus  (adjective),  qui  se
nexum  dedit "  —  a  more  confused  account  of  the
thing,  or  one  more  remote  from  legal  precision,  can-
not be  imagined.  The  passage  of  Livy  (ii.  27)  is
not  easy  to  explain.     (Compare  Liv.  ii.  23.)

The  Lex  Poetelia  (b.  c.  326)  alleviated  the  con-
dition of  the  nexi.  So  far  as  we  can  understand
its  provisions,  it  set  all  the  nexi  free  or  made  them
sohiti  (Liv.  viii.  28,  nexi  sohdi),  and  it  enacted  that
for  the  future  there  should  be  no  nexum  {cautumque
in  piderum  ne  necterentur)^  and  that  no  debtor
should  for  the  future  be  put  in  chains.  Addictio
however  still  continued  in  force  after  the  Lex
Poetelia,  as  we  see  in  several  instances.  (Liv.
xxiii.  14;  Sail.  Cat.  33;  Cic.  pro  Flacco,  20.)
It  appears  from  the  Lex  Galliae  Cisalpinae  (c.  21,
22),  that  in  the  case  of  other  actions  there  was
only  a  Possessio  Bonorum,  but  in  the  case  of  pe-
cu  lia  certa  credita  there  was  personal  execution.
The  enactment  of  the  Lex  Julia  which  introduced
the  Bonorum  Cessio,  and  gradual  changes  in  so-
ciety, must  have  diminished  the  frequency  of  the
Addictio.  [Bonorum  Cessio.]  Li  the  system
of  Justinian,  Nexum  did  not  exist,  for  the  use  of
ao3  et  libra  in  legal  transactions  had  ceased.

Neither  the  Addictus  nor  the  Nexus  was  a  slave.
and  his  ingenuitas  was  only  in  suspense.  As  to
the  Nexum,  it  must  have  been  necessary  that  the
elFect  of  the  legal  act  by  which  the  ingenuus  was


NEXUM.


797


made  a  nexus  should  be  done  away  with  by  another
legal  act ;  and  this  seems  to  be  the  Nexi  Iiberatio
which  was  done  per  aes  et  libram.  It  also  ap-
pears from  a  passage  in  Livy  (vi.  14),  that  a
certain  person,  who  was  judicatus  pecuniae,  and  is
not  described  as  nexus,  was  released  from  his
obligation  per  aes  et  libram.  In  the  time  of  Gains
an  imaginary  form  of  payment  per  aes  et  libram
was  retained  in  cases  where  the  obligation  was
contracted  either  per  aes  et  libram  or  was  due  ex
judicati  causa,  (Gains,  iii.  173 — 175.)  There
seems  indeed  no  reason  why  this  ceremony  should
have  been  used  in  the  case  of  an  addictus  who
wished  to  be  restored  to  his  former  state,  for  the
Addictio  was  by  implication  only  to  have  an  effect
till  the  debt  was  paid.  It  might  be  contended  that
such  was  the  effect  of  the  Nexum  also,  but  we
must  distinguish  between  the  effect  of  a  sentence
of  the  Praetor  and  a  solemn  act  like  that  of  the
Nexum,  which  was  in  form  a  transfer  of  owner-
ship. The  addictus  was  protected  against  injuria
from  his  master  (Gains,  i.  141),  and  it  is  said  that
he  retained  his  name  and  tribe  ;  but  it  is  somewhat
difficult  to  understand  how  he  retained  his  tribe,
since  he  had  sustained  Tnfamia.  Upon  the  dis-
charge of  his  obligations  the  addictus,  it  seems,
returned  to  his  former  status.

It  was  Niebuhr's  opinion  that  the  Nexum,  when
it  became  a  form  of  giving  security,  had  not  its
complete  effect  until  the  debtor  was  unable  to  pay
and  was  brought  into  the  condition  of  a  debtor-
slave  by  the  addictio.  An  answer  to  this  has
been  already  given.  If  it  required  an  addictio  to
make  a  person  nexus,  what  was  the  use  of  a  Nexum
when  a  man  might  become  addictus,  even  when
there  was  no  Nexum  ?  The  only  intelligible  so-
lution of  all  these  difficulties  is  that  a  Nexum,  in
which  there  was  a  mancipatio  personae,  had  an
immediate  effect.

It  seems  to  be  a  legal  consequence  of  a  Nexum
and  an  Addictio  that  the  children,  if  they  were  in
the  power  of  the  parent,  must  follow  his  condition,
as  in  the  case  of  adrogation.

In  the  case  mentioned  in  Livy  (viii.  28),
where  the  son  is  said  to  have  been  nexus  for
his  father's  debt  {cum  se  nexum  dedisset)^  it  may
be  that  the  father  bound  his  son  onl}',  which  he
could  certainly  do  just  in  the  same  way  as  he
could  mancipate  him.  If  the  son  was  not  in  his
father's  power,  he  could  still  bind  himself  on  be-
half of  his  father.  The  expression  in  Livy  does
not  enable  us  to  determine  which  of  the  two
possible  cases  was  the  real  case,  but  it  seems  pro-
bable that  the  son  was  in  the  power  of  the  father.
Unterholzner  observes  {Lehre  des  Rom.  Rechts  von
den  Schuldverh'dltnissen,  i.  p.  31.  note  g) :  "The
legal  condition  of  the  nexi  is  one  of  the  most  ob-
scure points  in  the  old  Roman  law.  It  is  here  as-
sumed that  a  man  by  the  personae  mancipatio  came
into  this  condition.  Persons  who  were  in  the
Patria  Potestas  could  for  the  noxae  causa,  which
was  long  maintained  in  practice,  and  also  on  ac-
count of  the  debts  of  him  who  had  the  Potestas,
consequently  in  a  sense  after  the  nature  of  a  pawn,
and  by  virtue  of  the  so-called  paternal  power  of
sale,  be  mancipated.  Further,  we  must  assume
that  persons  who  were  sui  juris  could  also  manci-
pate themselves  hj  way  of  pawn,  though  no  evi-
dence of  that  has  been  preserved.  This  is  made
the  less  incredible,  since  we  carmot  doubt,  that
women  who  were  svii  juris  could  make  a  coemtio.


roe


NEXUM.


Rnd  consequently  could  mancipate  themselves  either
matrimonii  causa  or  fiduciae  causa,  whereby  how-
ever they  did  not,  like  the  nexi,  come  into  a  con-
dition similar  to  that  of  slaves,  but  only  into  a
state  of  dependence  similar  to  that  of  a  child.
The  nexi  were,  as  a  matter  of  course,  in  mancipio,
and  consequently  alieni  juris,  but  for  that  very
reason  greatly  different  from  the  addicti.  How-
ever, they  could,  like  them,  be  put  in  chains,  until
the  power  of  putnng  debtors  in  chains  was  al-
together abolished."

The  meaning  of  the  provision  in  the  Twelve
Tables,  cited  by  Gellius,  as  to  cutting  the  debtor
in  pieces  has  been  a  subject  of  much  discussion.
Taylor  in  his  essay  {^Comment,  ad  L.  Decemviralem
de  Inope  Debitors  in  partis  dissecando)  attempts  to
prove  that  Gellius  misunderstood  the  old  law,  and
that  the  words  of  the  Twelve  Tables  "  partis
secanto  :  si  plus  minusve  secuerint  se  fraude  esto,"
mean  that  the  several  creditors  are  intitled  to  have
the  "  partis,"  that  is,  the  "  operae  "  of  the  addictus
divided  or  distributed  among  them  ;  and  he  goes  on
to  explain  the  rest  of  the  law  in  these  terms :
"  Communis  sit  servus  eorum,  qui  quidem  ad-
fuerint  ;  et  sine  fraude  esto,  si  ceteri  toties  proci-
tati  suas  quoque  partis  in  Debitore  non  vindica-
verint."  But  the  arguments  of  Taylor  are  by  no
means  satisfactory.  The  conjecture  that  the
"  partis  "  are  the  shares  of  the  creditors  arising
from  the  sale  of  the  debtor,  is  also  unsupported  by
any  proof.  This  monstrous  enactment,  if  we  take
it  literally,  shocks  all  our  notions  of  humanity,  but
it  has  been  well  observed  that  it  is  by  no  means
inconsistent  with  the  spirit  of  the  old  Roman  law  ;
and  the  fact  of  an  actual  division  of  a  debtor's  body
not  being  on  record,  is  no  proof  against,  and  hardly
furnishes  a  presumption  against  the  existence  of
such  a  lavv.  The  Romans  had  no  prisons  for
debtors.  The  creditor  was  the  debtor's  jailer,  and
we  know  that  in  the  oldest  time  he  was  often  a
cruel  keeper.  When  there  were  several  creditors
who  claimed  the  body  of  a  debtor,  he  might  be
kept  by  any  one  for  the  benefit  of  himself  and  the
rest  till  the  sixty  days  were  over  ;  but  after  that
time,  if  the  creditors  could  not  agree  among  them-
selves, there  was  no  possible  mode  of  settling  their
conflicting  claims  than  that  which  the  law  of  the
Decemviri  gave  them,  and  which  they  might  adopt
if  they  chose.  Such  a  lavv  could  never  be  carried
into  effect  in  any  country,  as  the  legislators  must
have  well  known,  and  thus  while  its  terms  fully
satisfied  the  claims  of  the  creditors,  in  practice  it
may  have  turned  out  really  favourable  to  the  debtor.
(See  the  remarks  of  Gellius  on  this  part  of  the
law,  XX.  1.)  But  the  solution  of  the  difficulty  is
quite  a  different  matter  from  the  fact  of  its  ex-
istence, which  is  in  no  way  to  be  questioned  be-
cause we  cannot  explain  it.

The  various  authorities  on  the  subject  of  the
Nexum  and  Addictio  are  referred  to  by  Rein,  Das
Rom.  Privutrecht.,  p.  313,  &c.  The  writer  of  this
article  has  not  had  the  advantage  of  seeing  the
essay  of  Savigny,  Ucher  das  altromische  Schuldrecht,
Berlin,  1834.  The  whole  subject  is  still  en-
cumbered with  difficulty,  as  will  appear  from  a
reference  to  the  various  writers  on  this  subject.
The  note  of  Walter  (Geschichte  des  Rom.  Rechts,
p.  642.  n.  6)  appears  to  contain  the  true  statement
as  to  the  difference  between  the  effect  of  a  Nexum
and  a  Res  Judicata  ;  but  he  rejects  the  notion  of  a
man  selling  or  pledging  himself.  [G.  L.]


NOBILES.

NO'BILES,  NOBFLITAS.  In  the  early
periods  of  the  Roman  state  the  Patricians  were  the
Nobles  as  opposed  to  the  Plebs.  The  Patricians
possessed  the  chief  political  power  and  the  distinc-
tion which  power  gives,  Livius,  who  wrote  in
the  age  of  Augustus,  and  is  not  very  careful  in  the
use  of  tenns,  often  designates  the  Patricians  by
the  term  Nobilis  (vi.  42)  ;  and  yet  Nobilis,  in  its
proper  historic  sense,  has  a  different  meaning.

In  B.  c.  366,  the  plebeians  obtained  the  right  of
being  eligible  to  the  consulship,  and  finally  they
obtained  access  to  all  the  curule  magistracies.
Thus  the  two  classes  were  put  on  the  same  footing
as  to  political  capacity.  Those  plebeians  Avho  had
obtained  a  curule  magistracy  were  thus  elevated
above  their  own  body,  and  the  personal  distinction
of  a  father  would  confer  distinction  on  his  descend-
ants. It  is  in  the  nature  of  aristocratical  institu-
tions to  perish  if  they  are  exclusive  ;  but  they
perpetiiate  themselves  by  giving  a  plebeian  class
the  power  of  entering  within  their  narrow  limits.
Those  who  are  received  within  the  body  of  nobles
are  pleased  at  being  separated  from  their  former
companions,  and  are  at  least  as  exclusive  in  their
notions  as  the  original  members  of  the  class  which
they  harve  joined.

This  was  the  history  of  Nobilitas  at  Rome.  The
descendants  of  plebeians  who  had  filled  curule
magistracies  formed  a  class  called  Nobiles  or  men
"  known,"  who  were  so  called  by  way  of  distinction
from  "  Ignobiles  "  or  people  who  were  not  known.
The  Nobiles  had  no  legal  privileges  as  such ;  but
they  were  bound  together  by  a  common  distinctioa
derived  from  a  legal  title  and  by  a  common  interest ;
and  their  common  interest  was  to  endeavour  to
confine  the  election  to  all  the  high  magistracies  to
the  members  of  their  body,  to  the  Nobilitas.  Thus
the  descendants  of  those  Plebeians  who  had  won
their  way  to  distinction  combined  to  exclude  other
Plebeians  from  the  distinction  which  their  own
ancestors  had  transmitted  to  them.

The  external  distinction  of  the  Nobiles  was  the
Jus  Imaginum,  a  right  or  privilege  which  was  ap-
parently established  on  usage  only,  and  not  on  any
positive  enactments.  These  Imagines  were  figures
with  painted  masks  of  wax,  made  to  resemble
the  person  whom  they  represented  (Plin.  H.  N.
XXXV.  2.  expressi  cera  vultus)  ;  and  they  were
placed  in  the  Atrium  of  the  house,  apparently  in
small  wooden  receptacles  or  cases  somewhat  in  the
form  of  temples  \i,vKiva  vaiSia,  Polyb.  vi.  53).
The  Imagines  were  accompanied  with  the  tituli
or  names  of  distinction  which  the  deceased  had
acquired  ;  and  the  tituli  were  connected  in  some
way  by  lines  or  branches  so  as  to  exhibit  the
pedigree  (stemma)  of  the  family.  (Compare  the
passages  quoted  in  Becker,  p.  222,  note  53.)  These
Imagines  were  generally  enclosed  in  their  cases,
but  they  were  opened  on  festival  days  and  other
great  ceremojiials,  and  crowned  with  bay  (lau-
reatae)  :  they  also  formed  part  of  a  solemn  funeral
procession.  The  most  complete  account  of  these
Imagines  is  in  the  passage  of  Polybius,  which  has
been  already  referred  to  ;  but  there  is  frequent
mention  of  them  in  the  Roman  writers.

These  were  the  external  marks  or  signs  of  a
Nobilis  Familia  ;  a  kind  of  heraldic  distinction  in
substance.  The  origin  of  this  use  of  Imagines
from  which  the  notion  of  a  Roman  Nobilitas  must
not  be  separated,  is  uncertain.  The  term  Nobilitas,
as  already   observed,  is  applied  by  Livius  to  a


NOBILES.

period  of  Tloman  history  before  the  consulship  was
opened  to  the  Plebeians  ;  and  it  is  possible  that
the  Patricians  may  have  had  the  use  of  Imagines,
which  those  Plebeians  afterwards  adopted,  when
the  curule  magistracies  were  opened  to  them.  The
Patricians  carried  back  their  pedigrees  (stem-
mata)  to  the  remotest  historical  period  and  even
beyond  it.  (Tacit.  Ann.  iv.  9.)  It  seems  probable
that  the  Roman  Nobilitas,  in  the  strict  sense  of
tliat  term,  and  the  Jus  Imaginum,  originated  with
the  admission  of  the  Plebeians  to  the  consulship
3.  c.  366.  The  practice  of  having  Imagines,  as
aheady  observed,  may  have  existed  and  probably
did  exist  before  the  notion  of  the  Jus  Imaginum
was  established.  Indeed,  as  the  object  of  the
Patricians,  who  were  all  of  equal  rank  so  far  as
respected  their  class,  would  be  to  attach  to  them-
selves such  Plebeians  as  were  elected  to  Curule
magistracies,  it  seems  conformable  to  the  nature  of
the  thing  that  the  family  of  such  plebeians  should
be  allowed  or  invited  to  adopt  some  existing  dis-
tinction which  should  separate  them  from  the  body
to  which  they  properly  belonged.  Usage  would
soon  give  to  such  a  practice  the  notion  of  legality ;
and  thus  the  Jus  Imaginum  would  be  established,
as  many  Roman  institutions  were,  by  some  general
conviction  of  utility  or  upon  some  prevailing  notion,
and  it  would  be  perpetuated  by  custom.

A  plebeian  who  first  attained  a  Curule  office
was  the  founder  of  his  family's  Nobilitas  (princeps
nobilitatis  ;  auctor  generis).  Such  a  person  could
have  no  imagines  of  his  ancestors  ;  and  he  could
have  none  of  his  own,  for  such  imagines  of  a  man
were  not  made  till  after  he  was  dead.  (Polyb.  vi.
53.)  Such  a  person  then  was  not  nobilis  in  the
full  sense  of  the  term,  nor  yet  was  he  ignobilis.
He  was  called  by  the  Romans  a  ^  novus  homo  "
or  a  new  man  ;  and  his  status  or  condition  was
called  Novitas.  (Sail.  Jti(;i.  85  ;  the  speech  which
is  put  in  the  mouth  of  C.  Marius.)  The  term
novus  homo  was  never  applied  to  a  Patrician.
The  first  novus  homo  of  Rome  was  the  first
Plebeian  Consul,  L.  Sextius  ;  and  the  two  most
distinguished  "  novi  homines  "  were  C.  Marius  and
and  M.  Tullius  Cicero,  both  natives  of  an  Italian
municipium.

The  Patricians  would  of  course  be  jealous  of
the  new  nobility ;  but  this  new  nobility  once
formed  would  easily  unite  with  the  old  aristocracy
of  Rome  to  keep  the  political  power  in  their  hands,
and  to  prevent  more  novi  homines  from  polluting
this  exclusive  class.  (Sail.  Jtig.  63.)  As  early  as
the  second  Punic  war  this  new  class,  compounded
of  Patricians  or  original  aristocrats,  and  Nobiles
or  newly-engrafted  aristocrats,  was  able  to  exclude
novi  homines  from  the  consulship.  (Liv.  xxii.  34.)
They  maintained  this  power  to  the  end  of  the
republican  period,  and  the  consulship  continued
ahnost  in  the  exclusive  possession  of  the  Nobilitas.
The  testimony  of  Cicero,  himself  a  novus  homo,  on
this  point  is  full  and  distinct.

The  mode  in  which  the  Nobilitas  continued  to
keep  possession  of  the  great  offices  in  the  state,  is
neither  difficult  to  conjecture,  nor  to  establish  by
evidence  ;  but  the  inquiry  does  not  belong  to  this
place.

As  to  the  persons  who  would  be  included  in  the
stemma  of  a  noble  family,  it  appears  that  all  the
ascendants  of  a  man  up  to  the  ancestor  who  first
attained  a  curufe  office  would  be  comprehended,
and  of  course  all  the  intermediate  ancestors,  who


NOBILES.


r.qg


had  attained  a  like  distinction.  The  kinsfolks  on
the  mother's  side  were  also  included,  so  that  a
stemma  would  contain  both  Agnati  and  Cognati.
Adoption  would  also  increase  the  number  of  per-
sons who  would  be  comprised  within  a  stemma  ;
and  if  Affines  were  occasionally  included,  as  they
appear  to  have  been,  the  stemma  would  become  an
enormous  pedigree.

The  word  Optimates,  as  explained  by  Cicero
{pro  Sest.  45)  is  opposed  to  Populares :  he  de-
scribes the  Optimates  to  be  all  those  "  qui  neque
nocentes  sunt  nee  natura  improbi  nee  furiosi  nee
malis  doraesticis  impediti,"  This  is  no  political
definition  :  it  is  nothing  more  than  such  a  name  as
Conservative  or  any  other  like  name.  The  use  of
it  in  Livius  (iii.  39)  shows  how  he  understood  it  ;
but  Livius  is  blameable  for  using  the  term  with
reference  to  those  early  times.  Velleius  (ii.  3)
describes  the  Optimates,  as  the  Senatus,  the  better
and  larger  part  of  the  equestris  ordo,  and  such  part
of  the  Plebs  as  were  unaffected  by  pernicious  coun-
sels :  all  these  joined  in  the  attack  on  Gracchus.
This  opens  our  eyes  to  the  real  meaning  of  Opti-
mates :  they  were  the  Nobilitas  and  the  chief  part
of  the  Equites,  a  rich  middle  class,  and  also  all
others  whose  support  the  Nobilitas  and  Equites
could  connnand,  in  fact  all  who  were  opposed  to
change  that  might  affect  the  power  of  the  Nobilitas
and  the  interests  of  those  whom  the  Nobilitas
allied  with  themselves.  Optimates  in  this  sense
are  opposed  to  Plebs,  to  the  mass  of  the  people  ;
and  Optimates  is  a  wider  term  than  Nobilitas,
inasmuch  as  it  would  comprehend  the  Nobilitas
and  all  who  adhered  to  them.

The  term  Populares  is  vague.  It  could  be  used
to  signify  the  opponents  of  the  Nobilitas,  whether
the  motives  of  these  opponents  were  pure  and
honest,  or  whether  the  motives  were  self-aggran-
dizement through  popular  favour.  Of  Caesar,  who
sought  to  gain  the  popular  favour,  it  was  truly
said,  that  it  was  not  so  much  what  he  gave  to  the
people  which  made  him  formidable,  as  what  he
would  expect  to  get  from  them  in  return.  A
Popularis  might  be  of  the  class  of  the  Nobilitas,
and  very  often  was.  He  might  even  be  a  Patrician
like  Caesar:  his  object  might  be  either  to  humble
the  nobles,  or  to  promote  the  interest  of  the  people,
or  to  promote  his  own  ;  or  he  might  have  all  the
objects,  as  Caesar  had.

The  Nobilitas  is  discussed  by  Becker,  Hand-
buck der  Romischen  jilte7'thuvter,  ii.  Iste  Abth.  ;  and
there  is  probably  little  to  add  to  what  he  has  said,
and  little  to  correct  in  it.  There  are  also  some  re-
marks on  the  Roman  Nobiles  in  Zachariae,  Sul/a
(i.  5).  He  observes  of  Sulla  that  though  his  family
was  Patrician,  he  could  hardly  be  considered  as
belonging  to  the  Nobiles  in  the  strict  sense,  as  the
term  Nobilitas  implied  that  some  one  of  a  man's
ancestors  had  filled  a  curule  magistracy,  and  it
also  implied  the  possession  of  wealth.  But  thij
is  a  confused  view  of  the  matter.  Sulla's  an-
cestors had  filled  curule  magistracies  ;  and  though
his  family  was  poor,  it  was  still  Nobilis.  A
Nobilis,  though  poor,  as  Sulla  was,  was  still  No-
bilis. Want  of  wealth  might  deprive  a  man  of
influence,  but  not  of  the  Jus  Imaginum.  If  there
was  any  Patrician  whose  ancestors  had  never  filled
a  curule  magistracy,  he  would  not  be  Nobilis  in
the  strict  sense.  But  when  the  Nobilitas  had  been
formed  into  a  powerful  body,  which  was  long  be-
fore the  reforms  of  the  Gracchi,  the  distinction  of


800


NOMEN.


Patrician  was  of  secondary  importance.  It  would
seem  unlikely  that  there  was  any  patrician  gens
existing  in  the  year  b.  c.  133,  or,  indeed,  long
before  that  time,  the  families  of  which  had  not
enjoyed  the  highest  honours  of  the  state  many
times.     The  exceptions,  if  any,  would  be  few.

In  reading  the  Greek  writers  on  Roman  history,
it  is  useful  to  attend  to  the  meaning  of  the  political
terms  which  they  use.  The  Swaroi  of  Plutarch
(Tib.  Gracch.  13,  20),  and  the  trXovaioi,  are  the
Nobilitas  and  their  partisans  ;  or  as  Cicero,  after
he  was  made  consul,  would  call  them  the  Opti-
mates.  In  such  passages  as  Dion  Cassius  (xxxviii,
2),  the  meaning  of  Sui/orot  may  be  collected  from
the  context.  [G.  L.]

NODUS,  in  a  special  sense,  was  applied  to  the
following  parts  of  dress  :  —  I.  The  knot  used  in
tying  on  the  scarf  [Chlamys]  or  other  article  con-
stituting the  Amictus.  This  was  often  effected
by  the  aid  of  a  brooch  [Fibula],  a  ring,  or  some
jewel  (Virg.  Aen.  i.  320,  vi.  301,  xi.  776  ;  Claud.
de  Rapt.  Pros.  ii.  40)  ;  but  frequently  in  the
method  shown  in  the  woodcut  of  Diana  at  p.  276.
II.  The  knot  of  hair  {KdpvjxSos.,  KpwSvhos)^  either
at  the  top  or  at  the  back  of  the  head  adopted  by
both  sexes  in  fastening  their  long  hair,  which  was
turned  upwards  or  backwards  for  the  purpose
(a-ine  rursus  adducto  revocare  nodo,  Seneca,  Oedip.
ii.  ;  Virg.  Aen.  iv.  138  ;  Hor.  Epod.  xi.  28).  Ex-
amples may  be  seen  in  the  woodcuts  at  pp.  329,
597.  III.  The  knot  of  leather  worn  by  boys  of
the  poorer  classes  at  Rome  instead  of  the  golden
Bulla.  *  [J.  Y.]

NOMEN  (ovoixa\  name.  1.  Greek.  The
Greeks,  as  is  well  known,  bore  only  one  name  (Pans,
vii.  7.  §  4),  and  it  was  one  of  the  especial  rights  of
a  father  to  choose  the  names  for  his  children,  and
to  alter  them  if  he  pleased.  (Demosth.  c.  Doeot.  i.
p.  1002,  1006,  c.  Macart.  p.  1075,  &c.)  It  was
customary  to  give  to  the  eldest  son  the  name  of
the  grandfather  on  his  father's  side.  The  history
of  Greece  contains  many  instances  of  this  custom,
and  Sositheus  (ap.  Demosth.  c.  Macart.  I.e.)  says,
*'  I  gave  to  my  eldest  son,  as  is  just  (Siair^p  Kal
St/caidi/  4aTi),  the  name  of  my  father."  (Compare
Eustath.  ad  11.  v.  546.)  What  custom  was  generally
followed  in  regard  to  the  other  children  may  be
inferred  from  the  same  passage,  for  Sositheus  goes
on  to  say,  that  he  called  his  second  scJn  after  the
name  of  his  wife's  father,  the  third  after  a  relation
of  his  wife,  and  the  fourth  son  after  his  own
grandfather  on  his  mother's  side.  Mothers  seem
also  sometimes  to  have  assumed  the  right  of  giving
the  names  to  their  children  (Eurip.  Phoen.  58),
and  it  may  be  that,  as  in  the  case  described  by
Aristophanes  {Nub.  60,  &c.),  sometimes  a  quarrel
arose  between  the  parents,  if  they  could  not  agree
\ipon  the  name  to  be  given  to  a  child.  A  boy  also
sometimes  received  the  name  of  his  father,  as  in
the  cases  of  Demosthenes  and  Demades,  or  one
similar  to  that  of  his  father.  Nausinicus  thus
called  his  son  Nausiphilus,  and  Callicrates  called
his  son  Callistratus.  (Bockh,  ad  Pind.  Pyth.  iv.
p.  265.)  A  similar  method  was  sometimes  adopted
in  the  names  of  several  brothers  ;  thus  two  brothers
in  the  speech  of  Lysias  against  Diagiton  are  called
Diodotus  and  Diogiton.  In  some  cises  lastly,  the
name  of  a  son  was  a  patronymicon,  formed  from
the  name  of  the  father,  as  Phocion,  the  son  of
Phoco*.

The  day  on  which  children  received  their  names


NOMEN.
was  the  tenth  after  their  birth.  (Aristoph.  Av
922,  &c,)  According  to  some  accounts  a  child  re-
ceived its  name  as  early  as  the  seventh  or  even
fifth  day  after  its  birth.  [Amphidromia.]  The
tenth  day,  called  i^e/cctTT?,  however,  was  a  festive
day,  and  friends  and  relations  were  invited  to  take
part  in  a  sacrifice  and  a  repast,  whence  the  ex-
pressions SeKOLTTiv  ^v€iv  and  SeKOLTrjv  kariav.  If
in  a  court  of  justice  proofs  could  be  adduced  that
a  father  had  held  the  Se/caxTj,  it  was  sufficient
evidence  that  he  had  recognised  the  child  as  his
own.  (Demosth.  c.  Boeot.i.  p.  1001,  c.  Boeot.  ii.
p.  1017  ;  Isaeus,  de  Pyrrh.  hered.  p.  60.)

The  fact  that  every  Greek  had  only  one  name
rendered  it  necessary  to  have  an  innumerable
variety  of  names,  and  never  has  a  nation  shown
more  taste,  ingenuity,  and  invention  in  devising
them  than  the  ancient  Greeks.  But  however  great
the  number  of  names  might  be,  ambiguity  and  con-
fusion could  not  be  avoided  ;  and  in  reading  the
works  of  the  Greeks  we  are  not  always  certam
whether  the  same  name  in  different  passages  or
writers  belongs  to  one  or  to  several  persons.  The
Greeks  themselves  were  aware  of  this,  and  where
accuracy  was  of  importance  they  used  various
means  to  prevent  mistakes.  Sometimes  they  added
the  name  of  the  father  in  the  genitive  case,  as
'A\Ki§id87i5  6  KAeiuiov,  HKeiaTodva^  6  Havaavlou :
sometimes  they  added  the  name  of  the  place  or
country  in  which  a  person  was  born,  in  the  form  of
an  adjective,  as  ©oukuSiStjs  6  'Adrjvahs,  'HpoSoros
'AKiKapvaacrevs,  Xap/xavTiSris  Tlaiauievs^  AiKaiap-
Xos  6  Mecraifvios,  &c.  ;  sometimes  they  added  an
epithet  to  the  name,  expressing  either  the  occupa-
tion or  profession  which  a  person  followed,  or  in-
dicating the  school  to  which  he  belonged.  Instances
are  of  such  frequent  occurrence  that  it  is  superfluous
to  quote  any.  The  custom  of  adding  the  father's
name  was  called  'naTp6Qev  bvo^id^^aQai.  (Pans.  vii.
7.  §  4  ;  Xenoph.  Oeconom.  7.  §  3.)

In  common  life  the  Greeks  had  yet  another  )M
means  of  avoiding  ambiguity,  and  this  was  the  M
frequent  use  of  nicknames,  expressive  of  mental  or  ™
bodily  peculiarities  and  defects.  Thus  Demos-  '
thenes  was  from  his  childhood  called  BoraAos.
(Aeschin.  c.  Timarch. -pTp.  139,  142;  Demosth.  de
Coron.  p.  288.)  Aristophanes  (Av.  1291,  &c.)
mentions  several  names  of  birds  which  were  used
as  nicknames  ;  other  nicknames  are  preserved  in
Athenaeus  (vi.  p.  242).

(Compare  Becker,  ChariJcles,  vol.  i.  p.  23,  &c.)

2.  Roman.  In  the  earliest  history  of  Rome
there  occur  persons  who  are  designated  by  only
one  name,  such  as  Romulus,  Remus,  and  others,
while  there  are  many  also  who  bear  two  names.
The  Romans  of  a  later  age  were  themselves  un-
certain as  to  the  legitimate  number  of  names  borne
by  the  earliest  Romans  ;  and  while  Varro  (ap.
Val.  Max.,  Epitome  de  Nominwn  Ratione)^,  Ap-
pian  (Rom.  Hist.  Praef.  13),  and  others,  stated
that  the  earliest  Romans  used  only  to  have  one
name,  their  opponents  adduced  a  great  many  in-
stances in  which  persons  had  two.  This  question
will  perhaps  be  placed  in  a  more  proper  light,  and
become  more  satisfactorily  settled,  if  we  consider
separately  the  three  distinct  elements  of  which
the  Roman  nation  was  composed  in  its  origin,  and
it  will  then  be  found  that  both  Varro  and  his  op-
ponents are  right  or  wrong  according  as  their  as-
sertions are  applied  to  one  or  to  *all  of  the  three
tribes.


NOMEN.

The  Sabines,  from  the  cjirlicst  times  down  to
the  end  of  their  existence,  had  two  names  (Val.
Max.  de  Nominum  Eatione),  one  indicating  the
individual  as  such  {prae7iomen),  e.g.  AVtiws,.,  Volesus,
Pompus  (Val.  Max.  Z.c),  Talus  (Fest.  s.v.),  Caius,
Titus,  Quintus,  Appius,  &c.,  and  the  second  the
gens  to  which  the  individual  belonged,  which  ter-
mhiated  like  the  Roman  nomina  gentilicia  in  iusov
eius,  e.  g.  Tatius,  Pompilins,  Claudius,  &c.  It  is
moreover  a  feature  peculiar  to  the  Sabines  that  a
person  sometimes,  instead  of  a  praenomen  and  a
nomen  gentilicium,  had  two  nomina  gentilicia,  one
indicating  the  gens  of  his  father  and  the  other  that
of  his  mother.  The  latter  sometimes  preceded  and
sometimes  followed  the  former.  This  custom  is
clear  from  Livy  (xxxix.  13,  17),  who  mentions  a
Campanian  (Sabine)  woman,  Paculla  Minia,  who
was  married  to  a  man  who  bore  the  name  of  Cer-
rinius  from  his  gens,  and  one  of  the  sons  of  these
parents  was  called  Minius  Cerrinius.  Another
instance  is  the  name  of  the  Sabine  augur  Attius
Navius,  where,  according  to  Dionj-sius  (iii.  p.  70),
Attius  is  the  ovofxa  crvyya/eTiKov.  Dionysius,
however,  must  be  mist.iken  in  making  Navius  an
liuofia  irpoariyopiKov,  if  he  meant  this  to  be  the
same  as  the  Roman  pi-aenomen,  which  the  name
Navius  never  was.  In  all  probability  therefore
both  Attius  and  Navius  are  nomina  gentilicia.  A
third  instance  seems  to  be  Minatius  Mcigius  (Veil.
Pat.  ii.  16),  the  son  of  Decius  Magius.  This  prac-
tice must  have  been  very  common  among  the  Sa-
l)ines,  for  in  most  cases  in  which  the  two  names  of
a  person  have  come  down  to  us,  both  have  the  ter-
mination ZMS,  as  Marius  Egnatius,  Herius  Asinius
(Appian.  B.  C.  i.  40),  Statius  Gellius  (Liv.  ix.  44),
Ofilius  Calavius.  A  more  complete  list  of  such
Sabine  names  is  given  by  Gottling  {Gesch.  d.  Rom.
Siaatst\  p.  6.  note  3),  who  supposes  that  a  son  bore
the  two  nomina  gentilicia  of  his  father  and  mother
only  as  long  as  he  was  unmarried,  and  that  at  his
marriage  he  only  retained  the  nomen  gentilicium  of
his  father,  and,  instead  of  that  of  his  mother,  took
that  of  his  wife.  Of  this,  however,  there  is  not
sufficient  evidence.  Thus  much  is  certain,  that  the
Sabines  at  all  times  had  two  names,  one  a  real
praenomen,  or  a  nomen  gentilicium  serving  as  a
praenomen,  and  the  second  a  real  nomen  gentili-
cium, derived  from  the  gens  of  the  father;  The
Sabine  women  bore,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  case  of
Paculla  Minia,  likewise  two  names,  e.  g.  Vestia
Oppi;i,  Faucula  Cluvia  (Liv.  xxvi.  33),  but  whether
in  case  they  both  terminate  in  ia  they  are  nomina
gentilicia,  and  whether  the  one,  as  Gottling  thinks,
is  derived  from  the  gens  of  the  woman's  father,
and  the  other  from  that  of  her  husband,  cannot  be
decided.  Many  Sabines  also  appear  to  have  had  a
cognomen,  besides  their  praenomen  and  nomen
gentilicium  ;  but  wherever  this  occurs,  the  prae-
nomen is  generally  omitted,  e.  g.  Herennius  Bassus
(Liv.  xxiii.  43),  Calavius  Perolla  (Liv.  xxxiii.  8),
Vettius  Cato  (Appian.  B.  C.  i.  40),  Insteius  Cato,
Popaedius  Silo,  Papius  Mutilus  (Veil.  Pat.  ii,  1 6).
Such  a  cognomen  must,  as  among  the  Romans,
have  distinguished  the  several  familiae  contained
in  one  gens.

The  Latins  in  the  earliest  times  had  generall)'
only  one  name,  as  is  seen  in  the  instances  adduced
by  Varro  (ap.  Val.  Max.  I.  c),  Romulus,  Renuis,
Faustulus,  to  which  we  may  add  the  names  of  the
kings  of  the  Aborigines  (Latins),  Latinus,  Ascanius,
Capetus,  Capys,   Procas,  Numitor,  Amulius,  and


NOMEN.


801


others.  When,  therefore,  Varro  and  Appian  say
that  the  earliest  Romans  had  only  one  name,  they
were  probably  thinking  of  the  Latins.  There  oc-
cur, indeed,  even  at  an  early  period,  Latins  with
two  names,  such  as  Geminus  Metius,  Metiits
Suffetius,  Vitruvius  Vaccus,  Turnus  Herdonius,
&c.  ;  but  these  names  seem  to  be  either  two
nomina  gentilicia,  or  one  a  nomen  gentilicium  and
the  other  a  cognomen,  and  the  Latins  do  not  ap-
pear to  have  had  genuine  praenomina  such  as
occur  among  the  Sabines  and  afterwards  among
the  Romans.

The  Etruscans  in  the  Roman  historians  generally
bear  only  one  name,  as  Porsenna,  Spurinna,  which
apparently  confirms  the  opinion  of  Varro  ;  but  on
many  urns  in  the  tombs  of  Etruria  such  names
terminating  in  7hi  are  frequently  preceded  by  a
praenomen.  MUUer  {Etrnsk.  i.  p.  413,  &c.),  and
Gottling  {I.  c.  p.  31),  who  follows  him,  are  of
opinion  that  no  Etruscan  ever  bore  a  nomen  genti-
licium, and  that  the  names  terminating  in  na  are
mere  cognomina  or  agnomina.  Niebuhr  {Hist,  of
Rome,  i.  p.  381,  note  .022,  and  p.  500,  note  1 107),
on  the  other  hand,  thinks,  and  with  more  proba-
bilitj^,  that  the  Etruscan  na  corresponds  to  the
Sabine  and  Roman  ius,  and  that  accordingly  such
names  as  Porsenna,  Spurinna,  Caecina,  Perperna,
Vibenna,  Ergenna,  Mastarna,  &c.  are  real  nomina
gentilicia.

From  this  comparison  of  the  three  original  tribes,
it  is  clear  that  when  the  Romans  became  united
into  one  nation,  they  chiefly,  followed  the  custom
of  the  Sabines,  and  perhaps  that  of  the  Latins.
(Val.  Max.  I.  c.)  Originally  every  Roman  citizen
belonged  to  a  gens,  and  derived  his  name  {nomen
ot::  nomen  gentilicium)  ivom  his  gens.  This  nomen
gentilicium  generally  terminated  in  ius,  or  with  a
preceding  e,  in  c/ms,  which  in  later  times  was  often
changed  into  aeus,  as  Annius,  Anneius,  and  An-
naeus  ;  Appuleius  and  Appulaeus.  Nomina  gen-
tilicia terminating  in  ilius  or  elius,  sometimes
change  their  termination  into  the  diminutive  illus
and  e/fes,  as  Opillus,  H'ostillus,  Quintillus,  and
Ofelhis,  instead  of  Opilius^  Hostilius,  Quintilius,
and  Ofelius.  (Herat.  Sat.  ii.  2.  3,  et  passim.)  Beside*
this  nomen  gentilicium  every  Roman  had  a  name,
called  praenomen,  which  preceded  the  nomen  gen-
tilicium, and  which  was  peculiar  to  him  as  an  in-
dividual, e.  g.  Caius,  Lucius,  Marcus,  Cneius,  Sex-
tus,  &c.  In  early  times  this  name  was  given  to
boys  when  they  attained  the  age  of  pubertas,  that
is,  at  the  age  of  fourteen,  or,  according  to  others,
at  the  age  of  seventeen  (Gellius,  x.  28),  when
they  received  the  toga  virilis.  {¥^%i.  s.tt.  Pubes  ;
Scaevola  ap.  Val.  Max.  I.  c.)  At  a  late?  time  it
was  customary  to  give  to  boys  a  praenomen  on  the
ninth  day  after  their  birth,  and'  to  girk  on  the
eighth  day.  This  solemnity  was  preceded  by  a
lustratio  of  the  child,  whence  the  day  wa«^  called
dies  lustriais,  dies  nominum,  or  nominalia.  (M^crob.
Sat.  i.  1 6  ;  Tertull.  de  Idolol.  6.)  The  praenomen
given  to  a  boy  was  in  most  cases  that  of  the  father,
but  sometimes  that  of  the  grandfather  or  great-
grandfather. Hence  we  frequently  meet  with  in-
stances like  M.  TuUius,  M.  F.,  that  is,  Marcus
Tullius,  Marci  filius,  or  C.  Octavius,  C.  F.,  C.  N.,
C.  P.,  that  is,  Caius  Octavius,  Caii  filius,  Caii  nepos,
,  Caii  pronepos.  Sometimes,  however,  the  praenomen
*  was  given  without  any  reference  to  father  or  grand-
father, &c.  There  existed,  according  to  Varro,
about  thirty  praenomina,  while  nomina  gentilicia
3f


»02


NOMEN.


were  verj'-  numerous.  These  two  names,  a  prae-
nomen  and  a  nonien  gentilicium  or  simply  nomen,
wore  indispensable  to  a  Roman,  and  they  were  at
the  same  time  sufficient  to  designate  him  ;  hence
the  numerous  instances  of  Romans  being  designated
only  by  these  two  names,  even  in  cases  where  a
third  or  fourth  name  was  possessed  by  the  person.
Plebeians,  however,  in  many  cases  only  possessed
two  names,  as  C.  Marius,  Q.  Sertorius,  Cn.  Pom-
peius,  &c.  The  praenomen  characterised  a  Roman
citizen  as  an  individual,  and  gave  him,  as  it  were,
his  caput  [Caput]  at  the  time  when  he  received
it.  As  women  had  not  the  full  caput  of  men,  they
only  bore  the  feminine  form  of  the  nomen  gentili-
cium, as  Cornelia,  Sempronia,  TuUia,  Terentia,
Porcia,  &c.  In  later  times,  however,  we  find  that
women  also  sometimes  had  a  praenomen,  which
they  received  when  they  married,  and  which  was
the  f  minine  form  of  the  praenomen  of  their  hus-
bands ;  such  as  Caia,  Lucia,  Publia.  (Scaevol.  ap.
Vol.  Max.  I.  c.)  Caia  Caecilia,  the  wife  of  L.
Tarquinius,  if  the  name  be  historical,  is  an  excep-
tion to  this  rule.  (Val.  Max.  I.  c.  ;  see  Cic.  pro
JMuren.  12.)  When  Macrobius  (l.'c.)  states  that
girls  received  their  name  (he  evidently  means  the
praenomen)  on  the  eighth  day  after  their  birth,  he
alludes,  as  in  the  case  of  boys  receiving  theirs  on
the  ninth  day,  to  an  innovation  of  later  times,  and
among  the  female  praenomina  given  at  such  an
early  age  we  may  reekon  Prima,  Secunda,  Tertia,
Quarta,  Postuma,  &c.  (Varro,  de  Ling.  Lat.  ix.
60  ;  Suet.  Caes.  50  ;  Capitol.  Max.  et  Ball.  5.)
Vestal  Virgins,  at  the  appointment  to  their  priest-
hood (captio)^  when  they  left  the  patria  potestas,
received,  like  married  women,  a  praenomen,  e.fj.
Caia  Tarratia,  or  Caia  Suffetia.  (Plin.  H.  N.
xxxiv.  11.)

Every  Roman  citizen,  besides  belonging  to  a
gens,  was  also  a  member  of  a  farailia,  contained  in
a  gens,  and,  as  a  member  of  such  a  familia,  he  had
or  might  have  a  third  name  or  cognomen.  Such
cognomina  were  derived  by  the  Romans  from  a
variety  of  mental  or  bodily  peculiarities,  or  from
some  remarkable  event  in  the  life  of  the  person
who  was  considered  as  the  founder  of  the  familia.
Such  cognomina  are,  Asper,  Imperiosus,  Magnus,
Maximus,  Publicola,  Brutus,  Capito,  Cato,  Naso,
Labeo,  Caecus,  Cicero,  Scipio,  Sulla,  Torquatus,
&c.  These  names  were  in  most  cases  hereditary,
and  descended  to  the  latest  members  of  a  familia  ;
in  some  cases  they  ceased  with  the  death  of  the
person  to  whom  they  were  given  for  special  rea-
sons. Many  Romans  had  a  second  cognomen
(eoffnomen  secundum  or  agnomen\  which  was  given
to  them  as  an  honorary  distinction,  and  in  comme-
moration of  some  memorable  deed  or  event  of  their
life,  e.g.  Africanus,  Asiaticus,  Hispallus,  Cretensis,
Macedonicus,  Numantianus,  &c.  Such  agnomina
were  sometimes  given  by  one  general -to  another,
sometimes  by  the  army  and  confirmed  by  the
chief-general,  sometimes  by  the  people  in  the  co-
mitia,  and  sometimes  they  were  assumed  by  the
person  himself^  as  in  the  case  of  L.  Cornelius  Scipio
Asiaticus.  Sometimes  also  a  person  adopted  a
second  cognomen  which  was  derived  from  the  name
of  his  mother,  as  M.  Porcius  Cato  Salonianus  or
Saloninus,  who  was  the  son  of  M.  Cato  Censorius
and  of  Salonia.  (Gellius,  xiii.  19  ;  Plut.  Ckit.  Maj.

The  regular  order  in  which  these  names  followed
one  another  was  this : —  I.  praenomen  ;  2.  nomen


NOMEN.

gentilicium  ;  3.  cognomen  primum  ;  4.  cognomen
secundum  or  agnomen.  Sometimes  the  name  of
the  tribe  to  which  a  person  belonged,  was  added
to  his  name,  in  the  ablative  case,  as  Q.  Verres  Ro-
milia  (Cic.  c.  Verr.  i.  8),  C.  Claudius  Palatina
(Cic.  c.  Verr.  ii.  43),  Ser.  Sulpicius  Lemonia  (Cic.
Philip,  ix.  7).  No  one  was  allowed  to  assume  a
nomen  gentilicium  or  a-  cognomen  which  did  not
belong  to  him,  and  he  who  did  so  was  guilty  of
falsum.  (Dig.  48.  tit.  11.  s.  13.)

It  must  have  been  in  comparatively  few  cases
that  persons  had  a  fourth  name  or  agnomen,  but  the
three  others  were,  at  least  at  a  late  period,  when
the  plebeian  aristocracy  had  become  established,
thought  indispensable  to  any  one  who  claimed  to
belong  to  an  ancient  family.  (Juvenal,  v.  127.)  In
the  intercourse  of  common  life,  however,  and  espe-
cially among  friends  and  relatives,  it  was  cus-
tomary to  addr^  one  another  only  by  the  prae-
nomen or  cognomen,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  letters
of  Cicero.  It  was  but  very  seldom  that  persons
were  addressed  by  their  nomen  gentilicium.  The
most  common  mode  of  stating  the  name  of  a  per-
son in  cases  where  legal  accuracy  was  not  the  ob-
ject, was  that  of  mentioning  the  praenomen  and
cognomen,  with  the  omission  of  the  nomen  gentili-
cium, which  was  easily  understood.  Thus  Caius
Julius  Caesar  would  during  the  better  ages  of  the
republic  and  in  familiar  address  be  called  Caius,
otherwise  Caius  Caesar,  or  even  Caius  Julius,  but
never  Julius  Caesar,  which  was  only  done  during
the  latter  period  of  the  republic  and  under  the  em-
pire, as  in  Albius  Tibullus,  Cornelius  Nepos,  Me-
j  nenius  Agrippa,  &c.  A  very  common  mode  of
stating  the  name  of  a  person  during  these  latter
times,  was  that  of  merely  mentioning  the  cogno-
men, provided  the  person  bearing  it  was  sufficiently
known  or  notorious,  as  we  speak  of  Milton  and
Johnson,  without  adding  any  other  distinction,
although  there  are  many  persons  bearing  the  same
name.  The  most  common  of  these  cases  among
the  Romans  are  Verres,  Carbo,  Cato,  Caepio,
Cicero,  Caesar,  Sulla,  &c.  In  the  time  of  Augus-
tus and  Tiberius  it  became  very  common  to  invert
the  ancient  order  of  nomen  and  cognomen,  and  to
say,  e.g.  Drusus  Claudius,  or  Silvanus  Plautius,
instead  of  Claudius  Drusus  and  Plautius  Silvanus.
(Veil.  Pat.  ii.  97,  112.)

Roman  women  had  likewise  sometimes  a  cogno-
men, although  instances  of  it  are  very  rare.  It
was  sometimes,  like  that  of  men,  derived  from  per-
sonal peculiarities,  such  as  Rufa  and  Pusilla
(Herat.  Sat.  ii.  3. 216)  ;  sometimes  from  the  nomen
gentilicium  of  their  husbands,  as  Junia  Claudilla,
Ennia  Naevia  (Suet.  Calig.  12),  Li  via  Ocellina
(Suet.  Galb.  3),  and  sometimes  from  the  cognomen
of  their  husbands,  as  Caecilia  Metella,

During  the  latter  part  of  the  republic,  and  the
early  period  of  the  empire,  when  the  Roman  fran-
chise was  given  to  whole  countries  and  provinces,
the  persons  who  thus  acquired  the  civitas  fre-
quently adopted  the  praenomen  and  nomen  of  the
person  through  whose  interest  they  had  obtained
the  distinction,  or  of  the  emperor  himself.  After
the  time  of  Caracalla  (a.  d.  212),  when  all  the  free
inhabitants  of  the  empire  had  obtained  the  Roman
firanchise,  and  when  the  gentilician  relations  which
had  already  gradually  fallen  into  oblivion  were
totally  forgotten,  any  person  might  adopt  what
name  he  pleased,  either  ancient  or  newly  invented,
and  even   change  his  name,  if  he  did  not  like


NOMEN.

it  (Cod.  9.  tit.  25)  ;  and  henceforth  the  ancient
Roman  names  disappear  from  the  history  of  the
empire  with  incredible  rapidity.

if  a  person  by  adoption  passed  from  one  gens
into  another,  he  assumed  the  praenomen,  nomen,
and  cognomen  of  his  adoptive  father,  and  added  to
these  the  name  of  his  former  gens,  with  the  termi-
nation anus.  Thus  C.  Octavius,  after  being  adopted
by  his  great-uncle  C.  Julius  Caesar,  was  called  C.
Julius  Caesar  Octavianus,  and  the  son  of  L.  Aemi-
lius  Paullus,  when  adopted  by  P.  Cornelius  Scipio,
was  called  P.  Cornelius  Scipio  Aemilianus.  [Adop-
Tio  (Roman).]  There  were,  however,  two
gentes,  viz.,  the  gens  Antonia  and  the  gens  Fla-
niinia,  which,  in  case  of  any  of  their  gentiles  being
adopted  into  another  gens,  took  the-  termination
inus  instead  of  anus,  as  Antoninus  and  Flamininus,
instead  of  Antonianus  and  Flaminianus.  Some-
times also  the  cognomen  of  the  former  family  was
retained  and  added  without  any  alteration  to  the
name  of  the  adoptive  father,  as  in  the  case  of  Q.
Servilius  Caepio  Brutus.  (Eckhel,  Doctr.  Num.
vol.  V.  p.  59.)  This  was  done  only  in  case  the
cognomen  was  of  great  celebrity  ;  but  it  some-
tinies  underwent  a  change  in  the  termination.  Thus
Claudius  Marcellus,  when  adopted  by  Cfirnelius
Lentulus,  was  called  Cornelius  Lentulus  Marcelli-
nus.  (Eckhel,  Doctr.  Num.  vol.  v.  p.  59  and  p.  187.)
If  one  man  adopted  two  brothers,  the  adoptive
father  might  choose  any  praenomina  at  his  discre-
tion in  order  to  distinguish  his  adoptive  sons  from
each  other.  Thus  when  Augustus  adopted  the  two
sans  of  Agrippa,  he  gave  to  the  one  the  praenomen
Caius,  and  to  the  other  the  praenomen  Lucius.
(Veil.  Pat.  ii.  9Q.)  During  the  early  period  of  the
empire  it  appears  to  have  sometimes  occurred  that
a  person,  when  adopted  into  another  gens,  added
his  own  nomen  gentilicium  without  any  alteration
to  that  of  his  adoptive  father,  as  in  the  cases  of  C.
Plinius  Caecilius  Secundus,  and  L.  Aelius  Aure-
lius  Commodus.  (Dion  Cass.  Excerpt,  lib.  Ixxii.  c.
15.)  Besides  this,  many  other  irregularities  oc-
curred in  cases  of  adoption  during  the  period  of
the  empire,  but  it  is  not  necessary  for  our  piirpose
to  enimierate  them  here.

Slaves  had  only  one  name,  and  usually  retained

that  which  they  had  borne  before  they  came  into

slavery.     If  a  slave  was  restored  to  freedom,  he

received  the  praenomen  and  nomen  gentilicium  of

liis   former  master,  and  to  these  was  added  the

name  which  he  had  had  as  a  slave.     He  became

thus  in  some  measure  the  gentilis  of  his  former

master,  in  as  far  as  he  had  the  same  nomen  genti-

lichira,  but  he  had  none  of  the  other  claims  which

a  freeborn  gentilis  had.     (Cic.  Top.  6.)     Instances

of  such  freedom  are,  Titus  Ampius  Menander,  a

freedman  of  T.  Ampius  Balbus  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  xiii.

70)  ;    L.    Cornelius   Chrysogonus,  a  freedman   of

L.  Cornelius  Sulla  (Cic.  pro  Rose.  Am,.  2,  &c.),  M.,

TuUius  Laurea,  and  M.  Tullius  Tiro,  freedmen  of

AI.  Tullius  Cicero.     If  the   state  emancipated  a

I      Bervus  publicus,  and  gave  him  the  franchise  at  the

I      same  time,  any  praenomen  and  nomen  were  given

I      to  him,  or  he  took  these  names  from  the  magistrate

j      who  performed  the  act  of  emancipation  in  the  name

!      of  the  state,  and  then  received  a  cognomen  derived

;      from  the  name  of  the  city,  as  Romanus  or  Roma-

\      nensis.     (VaLtTo,  de  Ling.  Lot.    viii.  83;  Liv.  iv.

I      61.)  [L.  S.]

i  NOMEN.       [Fbnus,  p.  527,  a  ;     Obliga-

l        TIONES.J


NOMOS.  803

NOMENCLA'TOR.  [Ambitus,  p.  77,  a.]
NOMISMATOS  DIAPHORAS  GRAPHS
{voiiiaixaros  Siacpopas  ypa^r])  is  the  name  of  the
public  action  which  might,  at  Athena,  be  brought
against  any  one  who  coined  mon  y  either  too  light
in  weight  or  not  consisting  of  the  pure  metal  pre-
scribed by  the  law.  The  lawful  punishment  in-
flicted upon  a  person  in  case  he  was  convicted  was
death.  (Demosth.  c.  Lept.  p.  508,  c.  Timocrat.
p.  765,  &c.)  Wh;it  action  might  be  brought
against  those  who  coined  money  without  the  sanc-
tion of  the  republic,  and  how  such  persons  were
punished,  is  not  known.  (See  Petitus,  Legcf.  Att.
p.  510.)  [L.'S.]

NOMOPHY'LACES  (vo/xocpvKaKes),  were  cer-
tain magistrates  or  official  persons  of  high  authority,
who  exercised  a  control  over  other  magistrates,  and
indeed  over  the  whole  body  of  the  people,  it  being
their  duty  to  see  that  the  laws  were  duly  admi-
nistered and  obeyed.  Mention  is  made  of  such
officers  at  Sparta  and  elsewhere,  and  some  of  the
Greek  philosophers  who  wrote  on  legislation  ap-
pear to  have  thought,  that  such  a  body  of  men  was
essential  to  the  well-being  of  a  social  community.
(Schumann,  Ant.  Jur.  Pub.  Gr.  p  130  ;  Plat.
Leg.  vi.  p.  252  ;  Xen.  Oecon.  ix.  14.)  No  such
body  existed  at  Athens,  for  the}'  must  have  had  a
power  too  great  for  the  existence  of  a  democracy.
The  Senate  of  500,  or  the  Areopagitic  council,
performed  in  some  measure  the  office  of  law-
guardians  (Arist.  Pol.  vi.  5,  sub  fin.  ;  Andoc.  De
Myst.  11)  ;  but  the  only  persons  designated  by
this  name  appear  to  have  been  inferior  function-
aries (a  sort  of  police),  whose  business  it  was  to
prevent  irregularities  and  disturbances  in  the
public  assemblies.  Even  their  existence  has  been
doubted  by  modern  writers ;  some  think  they  have
been  confounded  with  the  ^ea-fModdrai.  Another
hypothesis  is,  that  the  office  was  never  introduced
until  the  thne  of  Demetrius  Phalereus,  who,  when
he  was  invested  with  the  authority  of  lawgiver  by
Cassander,  gave  to  the  Eleven  the  additional  duty
of  watching  the  conduct  of  all  the  other  magis-
trates, with  a  view  to  introduce  a  more  aristo-
cratical  government.  In  favour  of  this  opinion  it
has  been  observed,  that  the  office  of  voimorpvAaKfS
is  only  mentioned  by  grammarians,  and  they  refer
to  Deinarchus,  who  was  the  friend  and  contempo-
rary of  Demetrius.  (See  Schneider's  note  to  Arist.
Pol.  vi.  5.  §  10  ;  Wachsm.  vol.  i.  pt.  i.  p.  209  ;
Meier,  Att.  Proc.  pp.  68—73.)  [C.  R.  K.]

NOMOS  (v6iu.os).  This  word  comprehends  the
notion  not  only  of  established  or  statute  law,  but
likewise  of  all  customs  and  opinions  to  which  long
prescription  or  natural  feeling  gives  the  force  of
law;  as  Euripides  {BaccLUQ'S)  expresses  it,  rh
iv  XP^^V  H-^Kp^  vSfii/JLOU  atl  (pvaei  re  irftpvKSs.
In  the  heroic  ages,  before  the  period  of  authentic
history  begins,  we  find  in  the  Homeric  and  other
poems  traces  of  a  general  belief  among  the  Greeks
that  government  ought  to  be  controlled  by  law.
As  even  the  supreme  God  v/as  supposed  to  be
subject  to  a  higher  power.  Fate  or  'AvajK-n,  so  the
Atorpe^^y  ^acriK^ifs  was  bound  to  govern  accord-
ing to  the  rules  of  justice,  Siktj,  vojxos,  evvofiir].
(Hom.  Od.  xvii.  487  ;  Pind.  Pyth.  2.  157 ;  Herod.
iii.  38  ;  Hes.  Op.  et  Dies,  274.)  Government,
though  monarchical  and  hereditary,  was  neverthe-
less limited,  iirl  ^rjTols  yepaai  (Thuc.  i.  13).  The
monarchs  were  ^yfiropes  TjSe  fieSovres,  bound  to
consult  for  the  good  of  their  people,  and  to  listen
3  F  2


804


NOMOS.


to  the  advice  of  their  counsellors,  or  the  chief  men
of  the  state  (yepoures,  &uaKT€s,  &c.),  and  also  to
administer  justice,  SiKas,  ^euicrras^  euSiKias.  (II.
ii.  660,  xvi."  542,  Od.  xix.  li,  iv.  689.)

These  notions  of  law  and  justice  were  neces-
sarily vague.  The  regal  power,  though  limited  in
practice,  appears  to  have  been  absolute  in  theory,
and,  as  such,  was  easily  liable  to  be  abused.  We
find  complaints  of  the  abuse  of  power  in  Hesiod
(Op.  et  Dies,  39.  258)  ;  and  Wachsmuth  (Hell.  Alt.
vol.  i.  pt.  i.  c.  18)  remarks  that  the  Odyssey  contains
indications  of  a  struggle  of  the  nobility  against
the  sovereign.  That  many  beneficial  concessions
were  made  by  the  khigs  to  their  people  before  the
age  of  authentic  history,  is  not  improbable.  The
changes  introduced  by  Theseus  may  be  considered
in  this  light.  But  the  first  great  step  towards  the
establishment  of  constitutio?ial  law  appears  to  have
been  taken  by  the  Athenians,  when  they  abridged
the  power  of  the  Medontidae,  and  rendered  govern-
ment responsible.,  rrjv  fiaaiKdap  /^tereVTTjo'oi'  els
apxhv  virevOvuou.  (Paus.  iv.  5.  §  10.)

The  transition  from  customary  or  traditionary
law  to  fixed  civil  ordinances  must  have  taken  place
gradually.  When  people  came  to  unite  in  cities
((TvvcpKi(ovTo),  and  form  compact  societies,  they
began  to  feel  the  necessity  of  having  permanent
laws  to  define  and  secure  their  civil  rights.  The
notion  soon  sprang  up  that  society  was  formed  for
the  good  of  all  classes.  The  expression  rh  koiv6v,
formerly  applied  to  national  leagues  and  confede-
racies (Herod,  v.  109),  came  to  denote  a  united
body  of  citizens  ;  and  equal  laws  were  claimed  for
all.  From  this  body  indeed  were  excluded  all
such  persons  as  came  under  the  definition  of  irepf-
oiKoi,  provincials  (Herod,  vi.  58,  ix.  11),  or  serfs,
like  the  Heiots  ;  and  all  slaves  of  every  kind.  It
was  only  the  townsman  (TroAtTT/s)  and  the  free-
man who  could  enjoy  the  privileges  of  a  citizen.
The  emigrant  (aTijxr]Tos  fiejavaa-ri^s)  though,  if  he
becam?  a  resident  (ij.4toikos),  he  was  upon  certain
conditions  admitted  to  the  protection  of  the  law,
was  never  placed  on  the  same  footing  as  the
native.

Before  any  written  codes  appeared,  law  was  pro-
mulgated by  the  poets  or  wise  men,  who  sang  the
great  deeds  of  their  ancestors,  and  delivered  their
moral  and  political  lessons  in  verse.  Such  was  the
pTjrpa  (declared  law)  of  Sparta  and  Tarentum.
The  laws  of  Charondas  were  sung  as  cTKdKia  at
Athens.  (Aelian,  ii.  39  ;  Arist.  Probl.  xix.  28  ;
Athenaeus,  xiv,  p.  619  ;  Wachsra.  Hell.  Alt.  vol.  i.
pt.i.pp.201,208.)  The  influence  exercised  bythese
men  arose  in  a  great  measure  from  the  belief  that
they  were  divinely  inspired  ;  a  power  which  was
ascribed  to  most  of  the  ancient  law-makers.  Thus,
the  lavvs  of  Minos  were  said  to  be  a  revelation  from
Jupiter  (Pausan.  iii.  2.  §  4)  ;  Lycurgus  was  the
confidant  of  the  Delphic  god  ;  Zaleucus  of  Pallas.
( Wachsm.  vol.  i.  pt.  i.  p.  204.)  Some  have  supposed
that  the  use  of  v6iJ.os,'m  the  senseof  fato,  was  derived
from  the  circumstance  of  laws  having  first  been  in
verse,  as  the  same  word  denotes  measure  or  tune.
But  this  is  not  surprising,  when  we  consider  that
principles  of  harmony  are  necessary  not  only  to
music  and  poetry,  but  to  the  adjustment  of  the
various  relations  of  civil  society ;  and  both  mean-
ings may  well  be  derived  from  vefieiv  (distribuere
suum  cuiqite).

As  civilisation  advanced,  laws  were  reduced  to
writing,  in  the  shape  either  of  regular  codes  or  dis-


NOMOS.

tinct  ordinances,  and  afterwards  publicly  exhibited,
engraved  on  tablets,  or  hewn  on  columns.  (Lye.  c.
Leoc.  p.  165,  ed.  Steph. ;  Arist,  Pol.  v.  9.  §  2  ;  Plato,
Leg.  V.  p.  738.)  The  first  written  laws  we  hear  of
are  those  of  Zaleucus.  (Wachsm.  vol.  i.pt.  i.  p.  208.)
The  first  at  Athens  were  those  of  Draco,  called
^eafjiol,  and  by  that  name  distinguished  from  the
uSfjLoi  of  Solon.  ( Andoc.  de  Myst.  p.  1 1,  ed.  Steph.)
From  the  origin  of  this  word  one  would  suppose
that  it  signified  ordained  or  statute  law.  Tenets
v6fios  :  but  it  is  frequently  used  like  ^e/xis,  in  the
sense  of  natural  right  or  social  usage,  (Hom,  II.
ix.  1 34,  xi.  778,  Od.  xxiii.  296.)  The  six  inferior
archons  were  called  ^ea-fxoQirai,  because  a  great
variety  of  causes  fell  under  their  cognizance,  and,
in  the  absence  of  a  written  code,  those  who  declare
and  interpret  the  laws  may  be  properly  said  to
make  them.  (Thirl wall,  Gr.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  p.  17.)

The  laws  of  Lycurgus  were  not  written.  He
enjoined  that  they  should  never  be  inscribed  on  any
other  tablet  than  the  hearts  of  his  countrymen.
(Thirl wall,  vol.  i.  p,  336.)  Those  of  Solon  were
inscribed  on  wooden  tablets,  arranged  in  pyramidal
blocks  turning  on  an  axis,  called  &.^ov(:S  and  Kvp§eis.
(Harpocration  and  Suidas,  s.  v.  ;  Plut.  Solon.  25.)
The)'-  were  first  hung  in  the  Acropolis,  but  after-
wards brought  down  to  the  Prytaneum.  (Harpocr.
s.v.  'O  KoiTccdey  v6fx.os'.  Pausan.  i.  18.  §3.)  Ar-
chives were  established  for  the  custody  of  Athenian
laws  in  the  temple  of  the  mother  of  the  gods  (iv
r£  ix7]Tpcacp)  with  a  public  servant  (5riiJ.6(rios)  to
take  care  of  them.  (Demosth.  de  Fuls.  Leg.  381,
c,  Aristog.  1^^.^  Others  were  hung  up  in  various
public  places,  so  that  any  citizen  might  have  access
to  them,  to  read  or  take  extracts.  For  instance,
laws  which  concerned  the  jurisdiction  of  the  archon
were  hung  up  in  his  office  ;  those  which  concerned
the  senate  {^ovXcvtikoI  vdfxoi)  in  their  council-
room,  and  so  on.  (Demosth.  c.  Aristoc.  627,  643,
c.  Timoc.706  ;  Wachsm.  vol.i.  pt.i.  p.  266  ;  Meier
and  Schom.  Att.  Proc.  pp.  170,  660.)  After  the
expulsion  of  the  thirty  tyrants,  in  the  archonship
of  Euclides,  a  decree  was  passed  by  the  assembly  to
restore  the  ancient  laws,  and  appoint  a  committee
to  revise  them,  and  propose  any  alterations  or  ad-
ditions that  might  seem  necessary.  The  new  and
old  laAvs  were  all  to  be  written  out  in  the  enlarged
Ionian  alphabet,  which  had  not  come  into  use  in
Solon's  time  ;  and  the  whole  code  thus  revised  was
transcribed  on  the  walls  of  the  portico  (ets  tV
(TTohv  av4ypa\pav).  At  the  same  it  was  enacted
that  no  magistrate  should  be  allowed  to  use  an
unwritten  law  (aypdcpcp  6e  vd/JLCf}  ras  apxas  fx^
XPVadai  fJL7]5k  Trepl  ev6s,  Andoc.  de  Myst.  11 — 13,
ed.  Steph.)

According  to  these  statutes  of  Solon,  and  those
which  were  subsequently  enacted  at  various  times,
the  magistrates  and  the  judges  at  Athens  were
bound  to  administer  the  law,  executive  and  judi-
cial. The  Heliastic  body,  acting  in  their  capacity
of  judges  or  jurors  (as  to  their  legislative  see
NoMOTHETEs),  were  sworn  Trepl  ixkv  wv  v6fxoi
6jVI,  Kara  rovs  vofiohs  ^l/r](pie7adai,  Trepl  Se  wv  jx-i}
etVi,  yvdcfxr]  t^  SiKaiordTrj.  (Meier  and  Schom.
Att.  Proc.  p.  128.)  In  all  causes,  whether  civil  or
criminal,  the  parties  procured  copies  or  extracts  of
such  laws  as  were  material  to  the  questions  to  bo
tried,  and  brought  them  before  the  rjye^uiv  diKaff-
rrjplov  at  the  avaKpicis,  by  whom  they  were  con-
signed to  the  ixi^os,  and  produced  at  the  trial,  to
be  read  to  the  SiKaerrol  by  the  ypajxixarevs.     If


NOMOTHETES.

any  man  produced  before  the  judges  a  fictitious
law  {ovK  6uTa  uofxou),  he  was  punishable  with
death.  (Dcmosth.  c.  Jm-^.  807.)

As  the  diKacTTai  (chosen  as  explained  under
DiCASTKs)  perfonned  the  functions  both  of  judge
and  jur}',  it  is  evident  that  the  important  question,
how  the  laws  of  Athens  worked,  depends  on  the
discretion  which  in  practice  they  exercised  in  the
interpretation  of  the  written  law.  This  is  only  to
be  discovered  by  a  careful  perusal  of  the  Attic
orators,  and  is  too  wide  a  question  to  be  discussed
here.  Much  light  is  thrown  on  the  subject  by
Aristotle  {R/tet.  i.  15),  who,  in  treating  of  judicial
matters,  always  has  in  view  the  practice  of  the
Athenian  courts.  He  reckons  the  y6/j.oi  among
the  &Texyoi  TriVreis,  and  advises  the  orator,  when
the  law  of  the  country  is  against  him  (iav
ivavTios  77  6  yeypafifj.epos  rep  TvparyjxaTi)  to  appeal
to  the  universal  law  of  justice  or  equity  (tcj5  Kotvt^
v6jj.tfi  Ka\  rois  inieiKeaiv,  as  diKaioTepois).  For
(says  he)  if  the  written  law  is  contrary  to  justice,
it  is  not  a  law,  ov  yap  ttoisI  rh  ^pyou  rov  v6fX0v.
From  this  it  may  be  seen,  that  the  notions  enter-
tained by  the  Athenians  of  the  discretion  to  be  ex-
ercised by  a  judge  were  somewhat  different  from
our  own.  There  existed  at  Athens  no  class  of
persons  corresponding  to  our  counsel  or  attorneys,
whose  business  or  profession  it  was  to  expound  the
laws.  The  office  of  the  i^Tiynral  related  only  to
religious  observances.  [Exegetae.]  According
to  the  principle  of  the  constitution,  every  citizen
was  bound  to  watch  over  the  preservation  of  the
laws,  and  to  inform  against  and  prosecute  any  per-
sons who  transgressed  them.  The  people,  either
on  the  bench  or  in  the  assembly,  were  the  ulti-
mate judges.     (Lycurg.  c.  Leoc.  148,  ed.  Steph.)

As  to  the  difference  between  vofios  and  i/^rjc^io-^a,
and  as  to  the  manner  in  which  laws  were  enacted
or  repealed,  see  Nomothetes.  [C.  R.  K.]

NOMOTHETES  {vopLoQertis),  legislator,  is  a
word  which  may  be  applied  to  any  person  who
causes  laws  to  be  enacted.  Thus,  Pericles  and
Themistocles  are  called  vofMoOerai,  movers  or  pro-
posers of  laws.  (Lys.  c.  Nicom.  186,  ed.  Steph.)
It  is,  however,  more  commonly  given  to  those  emi-
nent men  whose  laws  have  been  celebrated  for
their  intrinsic  merit,  or  for  the  important  influence
which  they  exercised  over  the  destinies  of  their
country.  Such  were  Minos  of  Crete,  Draco  at
Athens,  Zaleucus  at  Locri  and  Charondas,  whose
laws  were  distinguished  for  their  uKpiSeia,  and
were  received  at  Rhegium,  Catana,  and  other  Chal-
cidian  states.  (Aristot.  PoL  ii.  9.  §  8  ;  Hermann,
Pol.  Ant  §  88,  89.)  Many  other  men  have  been
honoured  with  this  title,  either  for  having  im-
proved the  laws  of  their  countrymen,  or  as  having
by  their  Avritings,  their  counsel,  and  good  example,
led  to  the  introduction  of  a  sound  moral  discipline
among  them.  These  were  the  sages  or  wise  men,
called  by  Diogenes  Laertius  (i.  40)  avveroi  rives
Koi  vofxodeTiKoi.  Pittacus  of  Lesbos,  Phidon*  of
Argos,  Thales  of  Miletus,  Bias  of  Priene,  Chilon,
who  improved  the  laws  of  Lycurgus,  and  Pytha-
goras, may  be  reckoned  in  this  class.  (  Wachsm.
vol.i.  pt.i.  p.  212.)  But  the  name  of  vofxoOerrjs  is
given  KUT  e|ox V  to  Solon  and  Lycurgus  ;  for  they
not  only  introduced  codes  of  laws,  but  were  the
iowndieTs  oi  constitutions  (TroAiTeiai),  which,  though
from  time  to  time  modified  and  altered,  and
sometimes  even  suspended,  remained  more  or  less
in  force,  so  long  as  Athena  and  Sparta   existed


NOMOTHETES.  805

as  republics.  (Aristot.  Po^.  ii.  9.  §  i.)  So  high
was  the  esteem  in  which  Solon  was  held  by  the
Athenians,  as  the  foujider  of  their  social  polity,
that  although  many  important  reforms  were  e*f-
fected  at  variaus  periods,  he  still  continued  to  be
regarded  as  the  lawgiver  (6  vofioQer-qs)^  and  the
whole  body  of  laws  passed  under  his  name.
Wachsmuth  (vol.  i.  pt.  i.  p.  268)  remarks  that  on  this
account,  whenever  a  law  of  Solon  is  cited,  we  may
suspect  that  it  contains  interpolation.  On  the
other  hand,  we  should  bear  in  mind  that  in  all  the
changes  which  took  place  in  the  Athenian  consti-
tution, the  reformers  aimed  at  preserving  the  main
principles  of  Solon's  policy.  Cleisthenes,  who  esta-
blished the  Stj^uoj,  remodelled  the  (pv\a\  and  made
other  changes,  is  characterised  by  Aristotle  {Pol.
ii.  6.  §  11)  as  having  for  his  object  av^ria-ai.  t)]v
Syj/xoKpaTiay.

There  is  this  remarkable  difference  between  the
legislation  of  Solon  and  that  of  other  Greek  law-
givers, that  he  did  not  (as  they  did)  endeavour  to
secure  fixity  and  finality  for  his  institutions.  Za-
leucus and  Charondas  are  said  to  have  made  it  a
capital  crime  to  propose  new  laws.  Lycurgus  for-
bade young  men  to  censure  the  laws  ;  and  when  he
went  on  his  last  journey,  from  which  he  never  re-
turned (the  story  says),  he  bound  his  countrj'men
by  an  oath  to  observe  all  his  laws  till  his  return.
Solon  exacted  a  similar  oath  of  the  Athenians  for
only  ten  years.  (Herod,  i.  29  ;  Wachsm.  vol.  i.
pt.  i.  p.  211  ;  Thirl  wall,  Gr.  Hist.  vol.  i.  p.  295.)

But  Solon  also  devised  regulations  by  which  the
laws  might  undergo  periodical  revision,  and  be
amended  as  occasion  required.  At  the  first  Kvpia
eKK\r}aia  in  every  year,  any  person  was  at  liberty
to  point  out  defects  in  the  existing  code  or
propose  alterations.  If  bis  motion  Avas  deemed
worthy  of  attention,  the  third  assembly  might
refer  the  matter  to  a  legislative  committee,  called
vQfxoQiTai.  This  committee  was  selected  by  lot
from  the  Heliastic  body  ;  ft  being  the  intention
of  Solon  to  limit  the  power  of  the  popular  assembly
by  means  of  a  superior  board  emanating  from  itself,
composed  of  citizens  of  mature  age,  bound  by  a
stricter  oath,  and  accustomed  to  weigh  legal  prin-
ciples by  the  exercise  of  their  judicial  functions.
The  number  of  the  committee,  so  appointed,  varied
according  to  the  exigency  of  the  occasion.  The
people  appointed  five  advocates  {(tvv^ikoi)  to  attend
before  the  board  and  maintain  the  policy  of  the
existing  institution.  If  the  proposed  measure  met
the  approval  of  the  committee,  it  passed  into  law
forthwith.  Besides  this,  the  Thesmothetae  were
officially  authorised  to  review  the  whole  code,  and
refer  all  statutes  which  they  considered  unworthy
of  being  retained  to  the  yo/j-odeTai.  (Hermann,  PoL
Ant.  §  131  ;  Wachsm.  vol.  i.  pt.  i.  p.  260  ;  Thirl-
wall,  vol.  ii.  p.  46  ;  Demosth.  c.  Timocr.  706.)

Hence  appears  the  difference  between  \l/^(f)i(Tfx,a
and  vSfxos.  The  mere  resolution  of  the  people  in
assembly  was  a  \pi]((>i(riJ.a,  and  only  remained  in
force  a  year,  like  a  decree  of  the  senate.  Nothing
was  a  law  that  did  not  pass  the  ordeal  of  the
vou-oQirai.  The  democracy  of  Solon  was  therefore
one  of  that  kind,  in  which  (as  Aristotle  says),
Kvpios  ^v  6  vSfios,  aW'  ov  rh  ttA^Aos.  (Pol.  iv.  4.
§  3  ;  Hermann,  Pol.  Ant.  §  67.  n.  8  ;  Demosth.  c.
Aristae.  649,  651.)  Privilegia  required  to  be
passed  by  six  thousand  of  the  people  in  assembly,
giving  their  votes  secretly.  The  naturalization  of
a  foreigner  is  an  example  of  a  privikgium ;  for
3  F  3


806  ,  NOTA.

•which  two  votes  of  different  assemblies  were  ne-
cessary.    (Demosth.  c.  Neaer.  1375.)

Propositions  to  be  submitted  to  the  people  were
first  approved  b}'  the  senate  of  500,  and  then
called  irpo§ov\evijLaTa.  The  mover  of  a  law  was
said  ^elvai  or  ypdcpeiv  vSfxou^  the  people  who  passed
it  ^eadai.  To  indict  a  man  for  proposing  illegal
measures  Avas  called  ypdcpeaOai  riva  Trapav6,uu)i'.
As  to  the  proceedings  in  such  a  case,  see  Para-
NoMoN  Graphe.  [C.  11.  K.j

NONAE.     [Calendarium.]

NORMA  (yvufxcov),  a  square,  used  by  carpen-
ters, masons,  and  other  artificers,  to  make  their
work  rectangular.  (Philo  de  7  Orb.  Sped.  2  ;  Vi-
truv.  vii.  3;  Plin. //.  A^.  xxxvi.  22.  s.  51  ;  Pru-
dent. Psychom.  828.)  It  was  made  by  taking  three
flat  woi.den  rulers  [Regula]  of  equal  thickness,
one  of  them  being  two  feet  ten  inches  long,  the
others  each  two  feet  long,  and  joining  them  to-
gether by  their  extremities  so  as  to  assuine  the
form  of  a  right-angled  triangle.  (Isid.  Orig.  xix.
1.9.)  This  method,  though  only  a  close  approxi-
mation, must  have  been  quite  sufficient  for  all  com-
mon purposes.  For  the  sake  of  convenience,  the
longest  side,  i.  e.  the  hypotenuse  of  the  triangle,
was  discarded,  and  the  instrument  then  assumed
the  form,  in  which  it  is  exhibited  among  other
tools  in  woodcut  at  p.  283.  A  square  of  a  still
more  simple  fashion,  made  by  merely  cutting  a
rectangular  piece  out  of  a  board,  is  shown  on  an-
other sepulchral  monument,  found  at  Rome  and
published  by  Gruter  (/.  c.  p.  229),  and  copied  in
the  woodcut  which  is  here  introduced.  The  square
was  used  in  making  the  semicircular  striae  of  Ionic
columns  [Colu.mna],  a  method  founded  on  the
proposition  in  Euclid,  that  the  angle  contained  in
a  semicircle  is  a  right  angle  (Vitruv.  iii.  5.  §  14).


TNSTRVMEN .  'T:aBR  .  TIGMAR.


From  the  use  of  this  instrument  a  right  angle
was  also  called  a  normal  angle.  (Quintil.  xi.  3.  p.
446,  cd.  Spalding.)  Any  thing  mis-shapen  was
called  ahnormis.    (Ilor.  Sat.  ii.  2.  3.)       [J.  Y.]

NOTA,  which  signified  a  mark  or  sign  of  any
kind,  was  also  employed  for  an  abbreviation.
Hence  notae  signified  the  marks  or  signs  used  in
taking  down  the  words  of  a  speaker,  and  was
equival  nt  to  our  short-hand  writing,  or  steno-
graphy ;  and  notarii  signified  short-hand  writers.
It  mu»t  be  borne  in  mind,  however,  that  noiae  also


NOTA.

signified  writing  in  cipher ;  and  many  passages  in
the  ancient  reciters  which  are  supposed  to  refer
to  short-hand,  refer  in  reality  to  writing  in  cipher.
Thus  both  Julius  Caesar  and  Augustus  wrote  manv
of  their  letters  in  cij)her  {per  notas.  Suet.  JtH.
Caes.  56,  Aug.  88  ;  comp.  Gell.  xvii.  9).  Still
short-hand  was  well  known  and  extensively  em-
ployed. Among  the  Greeks  it  is  said  to  have
been  invented  by  Xenophon  (Diog.  Laert.  ii.  48),
and  their  short-  hand  writers  were  called  Taxvypd(poi^
o^vypdcpoi  and  ariixeioypdcpoi.  The  first  introduc-
tion of  the  art  among  the  Romans  is  ascribed  to
Cicero.  Plutarch,  in  speaking  of  the  speech  of
Cato  in  the  senate  on  the  punishment  of  theCatilina-
rian  conspirators,  relates,  "  They  say  that  this  is
the  only  speech  of  Cato  which  is  preserved,  and
that  it  was  owing  to  Cicero  the  consul  who  had
previously  instructed  those  clerks,  who  surpassed
the  rest  in  quick  writing,  in  the  use  of  certain
signs  which  comprehended  in  their  small  and  brief
marks  the  force  of  many  characters,  and  had
placed  them  in  different  parts  of  the  senate-house.
For  the  Romans  at  this  time  were  not  used  to
employ  nor  did  thev  possess  what  are  called  note-
writers  {(TriiJ.eioypa(poi),  but  it  was  on  this  occa-
sion, as  they  say,  that  they  were  first  established
in  a  certain  form."  {Cut  van.  c.  23,  Long's  transl.)
Cicero  himself  sometimes  wrote  in  shorthand  for
the  sake  of  brevity  or  secrecy  {hia  crr^ixdcov  scrip'
seram^  Cic.  ad  Att.  xiii.  32).  Dion  Cassius  (Iv.  7)
attributes  the  invention  of  stenography  to  Mae-
cenas. Eusebius,  in  his  Chronicon,  ascribes  it  to
Tiro,  the  freedman  of  Cicero,  and  hence  the  system
of  abbreviated  writing,  in  which  some  maimscripts
are  written,  has  received  the  name  of  Nutae  7V;o-
nianae  ;  but  there  is  no  evidence  to  show  whether
this  species  of  short-hand  was  really  the  invention
of  Tiro.  It  would  appear,  moreover,  from  several
passages  in  ancient  writers,  that  the  system  of
short-hand  employed  in  the  time  of  the  Roman
empire  must  have  been  of  a  much  simpler  and
more  expeditious  kind  than  the  Notae  Tironianae.
Thus  Seneca  says  {Ep.  90) :  "  Quid  verborura
notas,  quibus  quamvis  citata  excipitur  oratio,  et
celeritatem  linguae  manus  sequitur."  Manilius
speaks  to  the  same  effect  (iv.  197) :  —

"  Hie  et  scriptor  erit  velox,  cui  litora  verbum  est,
Quique  notis  linguam  superet,  cursinique  loquentia
Excipiet  lougas  nova  per  compendia  voces."

And  likewise  Martial  (xiv.  208) :  —

"  Currant  verba  licet ;  manus  est  velocior  illis :
Nondura  lingua  suum,  dextra  peregit  opus.**

Many  of  the  wealthy  Romans  kept  slaves,  who
were  trained  in  the  art.  (Senec.  Ep.  l.  c.)  Thus  the
eldir  Pliny,  when  travelling, used  to  carry  a  notoniM
with  him,  that  the  slave  might  be  ready  to  take
down  any  thing  that  he  wished.  (Plin.  Ep.  iii.  5.)
The  art  was  also  learnt  even  by  the  Roman  nobles,
ami  the  emperor  Titus  was  a  great  proficient  in  it.
(Suet.  Tit.  3.)  At  a  later  time,  it  seems  to  hsive
been  generally  taught  in  the  schools,  and  hence
Fulgentius  {Mytholog.  iii.  1 0)  divides  the  writing
taught  in  schools  into  two  kinds,  the  Abecedaria
and  Notaria  ;  the  former  being  the  regular  letters
of  the  alphabet.  A,  B,  C,  D,  &c.,  and  the  latter,
stenography.  There  were,  moreover,  shorthand
writers  {notarii)  by  profession,  who  were  chiefly
employed  in  taking  down  {nature,  excipere)  the
proceedings  in   the  courts  of  justice.     At  a  later


I


NOVELLAE.
period,  they  were  called  eocceptores  (Dig.  19.  tit.  2.
s.  19.  §  9).     These  short-hand  writers  were  also
employed  on  some  occasions  to  take  down  a  per-
son's vvi!l  (Dig.  29.  tit.  1.  s.  40).

This  is  the  chief  information  we  have  respect-
ing the  use  of  stenography  by  contemporary  wri-
ters. But  Isidorus,  who  lived  in  the  seventh
century  of  the  Christian  era,  gives  a  more  detailed
account  of  the  history  of  the  art  {Orig.  i.  21.
p.  {5;i6,  ed.  Gothofred).  He  ascribes  the  invention
of  the  art  to  Enniua  (?),  who  he  says  invented
1100  marks  (notae)  ;  but  the  first  person  who
practised  it  at  Rome  he  states  to  have  been  Tiro,
the  freedman  of  Cicero,  who,  however,  according
to  Isidore's  account,  used  only  notae  for  preposi-
tions. Isidore  then  goes  on  to  say  that  additional
notae  were  invented  by  Tertius  Persannius,  Phi-
largius,  and  Aquila,  a  freedman  of  Maecenas,  till
at  length  Seneca  reduced  the  whole  to  a  regular
system,  and  increased  the  number  of  notae  to
5000.  What  truth  there  may  be  in  this  account,
it  is  impossible  to  say  ;  but  the  view  which  it
gives  of  the  gradual  improvement  of  the  system
by  successive  persons  is,  from  the  nature  of  the
case,  most  probable.

The  system  of  short  hand  called  Notae  Tiro-
nianae  is  explained  in  a  work  printed  by  Gruter
in  his  Thesaurus  Inscriptionum.  This  work  is
ascribed  in  the  manuscripts  to  Tiro  and  Seneca,
but  contains  many  words,  which  were  only  used
at  a  much  later  age.  It  appears  from  this  work,
that  the  Notae  Tironianae  were  very  different
from  our  system  of  stenography,  and  were  simple
abbieviations  of  the  words,  such  as  were  used,
only  to  a  smaller  extent,  in  ordinary  writing.
We  likewise  have  some  manuscripts  written  in
Notae  Tironianae,  of  which  an  account  is  given  in
the  work  of  Kopp  quoted  below  (Carpentier,  Al-
phahetum  Tironianum,  Paris,  1747  ;  Kopp,  Pa-
ItieograpMca  Critica,  1817,  vol.  i.  ;  Becker,  (?a//Ms,
vol."i.  pp.  197,  198).

NOTA  CENSO'RIA.     [Census.]

NOTA'RII,  short-hand  writers,  were  generally
slaves  or  freedmen,  and  are  spoken  of  under
Not  A.  They  were  likewise  called  v4daam.  They
were  also  employed  by  the  emperors  (Lamprid.
Alex.  Sev.  28,  Aurel.  36  ;  Trebell.  Claud.  14),
and  in  course  of  time  the  title  of  Notarii  was
exclusively  applied  to  the  private  secretaries  of
the  emperors,  who,  of  course,  were  no  longer
slaves,  but  persons  of  high  rank.  The  short-hand
writers  were  now  called  exceptores,  as  is  remarked
under  Nota.  On  the  reorganisation  of  the  em-
pire by  Constantine,  the  Notarii  were  constituted
into  a  kind  of  imperial  chancery,  who,  in  addition
to  their  regular  duties,  were  frequently  employed
by  the  emperor  on  important  public  missions.  The
first  of  them  in  rank  was  called  Primicerius  Nota-
riorwn,  and  the  second,  Secundicerius  Notariorum.
Others  were  called  iribuni  et  notarii,  and  another
class  domestici  et  notarii,  who  probably  acted  spe-
cially as  private  secretaries  of  the  emperors.  Others
again  who  served  under  the  Praefecti  Praetorii,
were  called  Notarii  Praetoriani  (Cod.  Theod.  6.
tit.  10  ;  Casslod.  Var.  vi.  16  ;  Walter,  Geschichte
des  Romisclmi  Rechts,  §  345,  2d  ed.)

NOVA'LE.     [Aratrum.]

NOVA'TIO.     [Obligationes.]

NOVELLAE  or  NOVELLAE  CONSTITU-
TIO'NES  form  a  part  of  the  Corpus  Juris.  Most
of  them  were  published  in  Greek,  and  their  Greek


NoxALis  actio:  8or

title  is  AvTOKparopos  *lov(TTiviavov  Avyovarov
Neapai  Amra^eis.  Some  of  them  were  published
in  Latin  and  some  in  both  languages.  The  first  of
these  Novellae  of  Justinian  belongs  to  the  year
A.  D.  535  (Nov.  1 ),  and  the  latest  to  the  year  a.d.
565  (Nov.  137)  ;  but  most  of  them  were  published
between  the  years  535  and  539.  These  Constitu-
tiones  were  published  after  the  completion  of  the
second  edition  of  the  Code,  for  the  purpose  of  sup-
plying what  was  deficient  in  that  work.  Indeed
it  appears  that  on  the  completion  of  his  second
edition  of  the  Code  the  Emperor  designed  to  form
any  new  constitutions,  which  he  might  publish,
into  a  body  by  themselves  so  as  to  render  a  third
revision  of  the  Code  unnecessary,  and  that  he
contemplated  giving  to  this  body  of  law  the  name
of  Novellae  Constitutiones.  (Const.  Cordi.  s.  4.)
It  does  not  however  appear  that  any  official  com-
pilation of  these  new  constitutions  appeared  in  the
lifetime  of  Justinian.  The  Greek  text  of  the
Novellae,  as  we  now  have  them,  consists  of  1 65
Novellae  at  the  least,  or  168  as  some  mak-  it,  of
which  159  belong  to  Justinian,  and  the  rest  to
Justin  the  Second  and  to  Tiberius :  they  are
generally  divided  into  chapters.

A  large  part  of  these  Novellae  relate  to  the  ad-
ministration of  the  state  and  to  ecclesiastical  affairs ;
but  a  considerable  number  relate  to  Privatum  Jus,
and  they  modified  or  altered  many  rules  of  law.

There  is  a  Latin  Epitome  of  these  Novellae  by
Julian,  a  teacher  of  law  at  Constantinople,  which
contains  125  Novellae.  The  Epitome  was  pro-
bably made  in  the  time  of  Justinian,  and  the
author  was  probably  Antecessor  at  Constantinople.

There  is  also  another  collection  of  134  Novel-
lae, in  a  Latin  version  made  from  the  Greek  text.
This  collection  is  generally  called  Authenticum  or
Liber  Authenticorum  :  the  compiler  and  the  time
of  the  compilation  are  unknown.  This  collection
has  been  made  independently  of  the  Greek  com-
pilation. It  is  divided  into  nine  Collationes,  and
the  Collationes  are  divided  into  tituli.  This  was
the  collection  which  the  Glossatores  considered  as
having  the  authority  of  law.

The  most  complete  work  on  the  history  of  the
Novellae  is  by  Biener,  Geschichte  der  Novellen.  See
also  Beytrag  zur  Litterar-Geschichte  des  Novellen-
Auszugs  von  Julian,  Von  Haubold,  Zeitschrift,  d'C.
vol.  iv.  The  history  of  the  collections  of  the  Novellae
is  very  confused,  and  it  is  impossible  to  state  it  cor-
rectly in  a  short  space.     (Puchta,  Inst.  i.  §  147.)

After  the  publication  of  his  Codex,  Theodosius
made  various  new  enactments  under  the  name  of
Novellae  Constitutiones,  or  Novellae  Leges,  as  to
which  see  Codex  Theodosianus.  [G.  L.]

NOVENDIA'LE  (sc.  sacrum)  was  the  name
given  to  two  different  festivals.  1.  Of  a  festival
lasting  nine  days,  which  was  celebrated  as  often
as  stones  rained  from  heaven.  It  was  originally
instituted  by  Tullus  Hostiliiis,  when  there  was  a
shower  of  stones  upon  the  Mons  Albanus,  and  was
frequently  celebrated  in  later  times.  (Liv.  i.  31,
xxi.  62,  XXV.  7,  xxvi.  23,  xxvii.  37,  xxix.  34.)
2.  Of  the  sacrifice  performed  nine  days  after  a
funeral.     [FfJNUS,  p.  562,a.]

NOVI  HO'MINES.     [Nobiles.]

NOVI  O'PERIS  NUNTIA'TIO.     [Opkris

No VI    NUNTIATIO.J

NOXA.     [NoxAMs  Actio.]
NOXA'LIS  ACTIO.     If  a  filiusfamilias  or  a
slave  committed  theft  or  injuria,  the  person  injured
3  F  4


808  NOXALIS  ACTIO.

had  a  Noxalis  Actio,  or  a  legal  remedy  for  the  Noxa
or  wrong  done  to  him,  against  the  father  ( pater-
familias) or  the  owner  of  the  slave,  as  the  case
might  be  ;  but  he  had  no  action  against  the  son  or
the  slave.  The  word  Noxa  (from  nooeo)  properly
signified  injury  done  ;  in  its  legal  sense  it  compre-
hended every  delictum.  (Dig.  50.  tit.  1€,  s.  238.)
The  father  or  the  master  might  either  pay  damages
to  the  injured  person,  or  suirender  the  offender  to
him.  The  surrender  of  the  offender  was  expressed
by  the  phrase  "  noxae  dare  or  dedere  ;  "  and  the
acceptance  of  the  offender  in  satisfaction  of  the  in-
jury was  expressed  by  the  phrase  "noxae  ac-
cipere  :  "  in  these  expressions  "  noxa  ■"  does  not
mean  "punishment,"  as  is  sometimes  supposed,
but  the  meaning  of  the  expression  is  that  the  per-
son was  surrendered  in  respect  of  or  as  a  compen-
sation for  his  Noxa.  In  the  Institutes  (4.  tit.
8)  Noxa  is  defined  to  be  the  person  that  does
the  mischief,  that  is,  the  slave,  and  Noxia  the
mischief  that  is  done.

Noxales  Actiones  were  given  both  by  Leges  and
by  the  Edict.  In  the  case  of  Furtum  they  were
given  by  the  Twelve  Tables  ;  and  in  the  case  of
Damni  Injuria  by  the  Lex  Aquilia.  In  the  case
of  Injuriae  and  of  Vi  Bonorum  Raptorum,  they
were  given  by  the  Edict.  This  action  Avas  said
"caput  sequi,"  which  is  thus  explained  by  in-
stances :  if  a  son  or  slave  committed  Noxa,  the
action  was  against  the  father  or  owner,  so  long  as
the  offender  was  in  his  power  ;  if  the  offender  be-
came sui  juris,  the  injured  party  had  a  directa  actio
against  him  ;  and  if  he  ■came  into  the  power  of
another  person,  that  other  person  was  liable  to  the
action.  If  a  paterfamilias  committed  a  Noxa,  and
was  adopted  (adrogated),  the  actio  which  was
originally  against  him  {directa)^  became  an  action
against  the  adopting  person.  A  paterfaniilias  or
master  could  have  no  action  against  a  son  or  slave
in  respect  of  a  Noxa  done  to  himself,  the  ground
of  which  was  that  no  obligatio  could  be  contracted
between  such  parties  ;  and  as  the  foundation  of  all
obligatio  was  wanting  in  such  case,  it  followed  that
there  could  be  no  action  against  such  son  or  slave,
if  he  became  sui  juris,  nor  against  another  person
into  whose  power  he  might  come.  If  another  per-
son's slave  or  son  committed  Noxa,  and  then  came
into  the  power  of  the  injured  person,  it  was  a  ques-
tion between  the  two  schools  whether  the  right  of
action  was  extinguished,  or  only  suspended  so  as
to  revive  in  case  the  offending  party  was  released
from  the  power  of  the  injured  person.  The
opinion  of  the  Proculiani,  which  was  in  favour  of
the  suspension  only,  appears  more  consistent  with
the  principles  on  which  this  right  of  action  was
founded.

The  mode  of  the  "  noxae  deditio  "  was  by  man-
cipatio.  The  Proculiani  contended  that  three  man-
cipationes  were  required  by  the  Law  of  the  Twelve
Tables  [Emancipatio]  ;  but  the  Sabiniani  con-
tended that  the  Law  only  applied  to  the  case  of
voluntary  mancipations,  and  that  one  mancipatio
was  sufficient.

If  the  father  or  owner  made  no  defence  to  a
noxalis  actio,  the  offender  was  given  up  by  a  de-
cree of  the  praetor  to  the  injured  person,  and  thus
became  his  praetorian  property  {in  bonis).  If  seve-
ral slaves  committed  theft,  the  Edict  required  the
master  to  pay  only  the  amount  of  damage  which
would  be  payable,  in  case  a  single  freeman  had
committed  the  theft.


NUMMUS.

Justinian  abolished  the  noxae  datio  in  the  case
of  children  ;  observing  that  it  appeared  from  the
ancient  jurists,  that  there  might  be  an  action
against  a  filiusfamilias  in  respect  of  his  own  delicts.

As  to  damage  done  by  an  animal,  see  Paupe-

RIES.

(Gains,  iv.  75—79 ;  Instit.  4.  tit.  8  ;  Dig.  9
tit.  4.)  [G.  L.]

N  UDIPED A'LI A.  [ C alceus,  p.  22 1 ,  a.]
NUDUS  {'yviJLv6s).  These  words,  besides  de-
noting absolute  nakedness,  which  was  to  be  avai-i-
Trexouos  Koi  dxiVcoj/  (compare  Moschus,  iv.  98),
were  applied  to  any  one  who,  being  without  an
Amictus,  wore  only  his  tunic  or  indutus.  (Aris-
toph.  Eccles,  409  ;  John  xxi.  7.)  In  this  state  of
nudity,  the  ancients  performed  the  operations  of
ploughing,  sowing,  and  reaping.  (Hes.  Op.  et  Dies^
391  ;  Proclus  ad  loc. ;  Virg.  Georg.  i.  299  ;  Servius
adloc;  Aelian,  V.  H.  vi.  11,  xiii.  27  ;  Matt.  xxiv.
18.)  Thus  Cincinnatus  was  found  naked  at  the
plough  when  he  was  called  to  be  dictator,  and
sent  for  his  torja.,  that  he  might  appear  before  the
senate.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  4  ;  Aur.  Vict,  de  Vir.
Illust.  17  ;  Liv.  iii.  26.)  The  accompan3'ing  wood-
cut is  taken  from  an  antique  gem  in  the  Florentine
Collection,  and  shows  a  man  ploughuig  in  his  tunic


only.  The  light  and  thin  clothing  of  Hetaerae,
was  denoted  by  the  use  of  the  same  epithets.
(Athen.  xiii.  24,  25.)     [CoA  Vestis.]

This  term  applied  to  the  warrior  expressed  the
absence  of  some  part  of  his  armour.  (Horn.  //.  xxi.
50  ;  Jos.  Ant.  Jud.  vi.  2.  §  2  ;  Gell.  ix.  13  ;  Xen.
de  Rep.  Lac.  xi.  9.)  Hence  the  light-armed  were
called  yvfxvrir^s.  [J.  Y.]

NU'MERUS,  the  name  of  a  body  of  troops  in
the  imperial  period.     [Exercitus,  p.  500,  b.]

NUMMULA'RII  or  NUMULA'RII.  [Men-
sarii.]

NUMMUS  or  NUMUS,  coined  money.  — I.
The  chief  terms  used  in  Greek  and  Latin  for  money
are  apyvpiov^  xPVI^ciT";  vojXKrixa.,  aes,  pecunia^
moneta,  nnmrnus  (or  numtis),  and  numisma.  It
was  called  apyvptov  from  &pyvpo9,  beciuse  the
prevailing  coinages  in  Greece  were  of  silver  [Aa-
Gentum],  (so  at  a  later  period  we  have  xP'^o''^"'
and  x'*'^'^'oj',  which,  however,  are  seldom  used,
except  in  their  specific  senses,)  and  aes,  because
that  of  Rome  and  Italy  was  of  copper  [Aes]  ;
Xp^fJ-aTo,  simply  as  the  representative  of  value  ;
pecunia^  from  the  same  cause,  in  connection  with
pecus,  which  either  meant  originally  cattle,  and
thence,  in  an  early  age,  valuable  property  in  general,
or,  perhaps,  vice  versa*  ;  and  v6yn(rixa.  (sc.  d/yyu-


*  There  is  no  probability  whatever  in  the  other
reason  given  for  the  origin  of  the  word,  namely,
because  the  early  coins  had  the  image  of  cattle
stamped  upon  them.    (See  Aes.)


NUMMIJS.

oioi/),  from  vJ/Uos,  because  it  was  a  medium  of  ex-
change established  by  custom  and  law,  current  coin
(Demosth.  adv.  Timocr.  p.  805  ;  Aristoph.  Nub.
246  ;  Aristot.  Eth.  v.  8).  These  last  terms,  num-
mus  and  numisma,  were  transferred  into  the  Latin
language  through  the  Greeks  of  Sicily  and  southern
Italy,  who  applied  the  word  v6ij.os  (or,  as  it  is
also  written,  vovfifios)^  not  only  to  money  in  general,
but  specifically  to  the  chief  silver  coin  of  their
system  ;  and  thus,  in  Latin,  the  word  is  used  both
in  the  specific  sense,  as  equivalent  to  sestertius
[Sestertius],  and  in  the  generic  meaning  of  any
sort  of  money.  (Varro,  L.  L.  v.  37.  §  173,  ed.
jVIiiller  ;  Pollux,  ix.  79  ;  Muller,  Etrusk.  vol.  i.
p.  315  ;  Bockh,  Metrol.  Untersuch.  p.  310  ;  Eckhel,
Proleyoin.  General,  c.  1  ;  and  the  Greek  and  Latin
Lexicons.)  Some  writers  give  the  ridiculous  deri-
vation of  numus  from  Numa^  who,  they  say,  first
coined  money  :  here  the  process  has  been,  first,  to
fimcy  the  connection  of  the  words,  and  then  to
invent  the  fact  to  account  for  it.  (Suid.  s.  v.  'Acr-
(Tdpia  ;  Isid.  Oiiff.  xvi.  17.)  The  word  mojteta,
from  which,  through  the  French,  we  get  our  word
money,  was  a  surname  of  Juno,  in  whose  temple
the  standards  of  weight,  measure,  and  money  were
preserved :  the  epithet  itself  seems  to  correspond
in  meaning  and  derivation  (from  moneo)  to  the
name  of  the  Greek  deity  MyrnxocTuuTi.   [Moneta.]

I L  Orir/in  of  Money.  —  Aristotle  (Polit.  i.  3)
defines  vS/nKTfJLa  as  (rroix^7ov  Ka\  irepas  ttjs  aA.-
Kayrjs,  and  traces  its  invention  to  the  early  felt
necessity  of  a  common  medium  of  exchange,  to
obviate  the  inconveniences  of  barter.  At  first,  he
tells  us,  it  consisted  of  masses  of  metal  and  other
convenient  substance,  determined  by  size  and
weight,  and,  lastly,  with  marks  stamped  upon
them,  to  save  the  trouble  of  always  weighing  them.
It  is  unnecessary  to  quote  other  authorities  in  con-
firmation of  this  statement.  (Eckhel,  Froleg.  c.  2.)
The  things  which  are  essential  to  money  are  the
■nuiterial  and  the  stamp — the  former  giving  it  the
reality  of  A-alue,  the  latter  its  assurance.  In  the
early  state  of  commerce,  described  in  the  Ho-
meric poems  and  other  ancient  works,  when  the
transfer  of  commodities  was  effected  by  means  of
quantities  of  unstamped  gold,  silver,  or  copper,
Avhich  were  determined  by  weight,  money.,  pro-
perly speaking,  did  not  exist.  On  the  other  hand,
a  mere  stamp,  on  a  material  of  little  intrinsic  value,
does  not  make  it  money,  but  a  mere  token  of
credit,  which  is  sometimes  loosely  and  inaccu-
rately called  money.  This  sort  of  so-called  money
was  sometimes,  though  rarely,  employed  by  the
ancients,  and  that  chiefly  by  the  barbarous  nations  ;
the  civilised  states  preferred  the  subterfuge  of  de-
basing their  coinage  to  any  attempt  to  introduce
the  element  of  credit  avowedly  into  their  monetary
system.  They  had  nothing  like  our  paper  money
or  bills  of  exchange.

III.  Materials  of  ancient  Money.  —  The  con-
ditions which  any  material  used  for  money  must
of  necessity  answer  are  obviouslj'  the  following:
' —  it  must  exist  in  sufficient  abundance  ;  it  must
be  of  intrinsic,  that  is,  universally  acknowledged
value,  and,  as  nearly  as  possible,  of  uniform  value  ;
it  must  be  capable  of  resisting  wear  and  corrosion  ;
it  must  be  portable,  easily  divisible,  and  not  diffi-
cult to  work  into  those  sizes  and  to  mark  with
those  stamps,  which  determine  and  certify  its
quantity  and  quality.  These  conditions  are  best
fulfilled   by  the  metals  gold,  silver,  and  copper,


NUMMUS.  809

which  therefore  have  formed,  either  separately  or
in  combination  with  each  other,  the  material's  of
nearly  every  system  of  money  which  has  ever  ex-
isted. The  history  of  their  use  by  the  Greeks
and  Romans  will  be  noticed  presently  ;  but  it  is
necessary  first  to  say  a  few  words  respecting  some
other  substances,  which  were  anciently  employed
for  money.

Iron  was  used  by  the  Lacedaemonians  and  By-
zantines, probably  on  account  of  the  abundance  of
the  metal  in  Laconia  and  on  the  shores  of  the
Euxine.  (Pollux  vii.  106  ;  besides  numerous  other
testimonies.)  Aristotle,  who  in  the  passage  al-
ready quoted,  mentions  iron  and  silver  as  examples
of  the  materials  of  money,  tells  us  elsewhere  {Oecon.
ii.  2)  that  the  people  of  Clazomenae  had  iron
money  ;  and  there  are  some  obscure  testimonies
respecting  the  use  of  iron  money  in  the  earliest
age  of  Rome  (Suid.  s.  v.  'A(rcrdpia).  Not  a  speci-
men of  iron  money  is  now  extant,  a  fact  easily  ac-
counted for  by  the  liability  of  the  metal  to  rust.
(Eckhel,  Proleg.  6.)

Tin  was  coined  by  Dionysius  at  Syracuse
(Aristot.  Oecon.  ii.  2  ;  Pollux,  ix.  79)  ;  but  this
is  the  only  notice  of  such  money,  except  a  law  in
the  Digest,  which  refers  merely  to  spurious  coins.
(48.  tit.  10.)  No  specimens  are  extant.  (See
further,  Eckhel,  I.  c.)

Leaden  money  is  not  unfrequently  mentioned  by
the  poets,  and  not  a  few  coins  or  medals  of  it  are
preserved  ;  but  it  is  doubtful  whether  they  were
true  money.    (Eckliel,  /.  c.)

Leather,  wood,  and  shells  are  also  referred  to  as
materials  of  money  ;  but  such  monies  could  only
have  been  tokens,  not  true  coin.  Leather  money
is  said  to  have  been  used  by  the  Carthaginians,
Spartans,  and  Romans.  (Eckhel,  l.c.)

IV.  Distinction  between  ancient  Money  and
Medals.  —  It  is  no  longer  necessary  to  examine
the  paradoxical  assertion  of  Sebastian  Erizzo,  that
all  the  ancient  coins  which  have  come  down  to  us
are  mere  medals,  and  were  never  current  money,
(See  Eckhel,  Proleg.  c.  5.)  But  the  question  is  ver}--
important,  whether  any  among  them  were  mere
medals,  and  if  so,  how  they  are  to  be  distinguished
from  the  coins  which  were  used  as  money.  This
question  is  fully  discussed  by  Eckhel  (/.  c),  who
lays  down  the  following  as  the  chief  criteria  for
distinguishing  between  them.

When  we  find  a  continuous  series  of  coins,
having  the  same,  or  nearly  the  same  weight,  stamp,
and  style  of  workmanship  (allowing  for  the  decline
or  improvement  of  the  art)  ;  or  when  we  find  a  mul-
titude of  specimens  of  the  same  coins,  and  that  too
in  different  places  ;  when  the  stamp  upon  a  coin
expresses  its  weight  or  its  denomination  ;  in  these
cases  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  coins,
if  genuine,  were  real  money.  These  tests  are
answered  by  the  general  scries  of  Roman  copper,
silver,  and  gold  coins  ;  by  most  of  those  of  the
Greek  states  ;  by  the  gold  and  silver  coins  of
Philip,  Alexander,  and  his  successors  ;  and  by  the
cistophori  of  proconsular  Asia.  On  the  other  hand,
those  appear  to  be  medals,  and  not  coins,  which
very  much  exceed  in  size  the  ordinary  coins,  such
as  the  celebrated  and  beautiful  gold  medals  of
Lysimachus,  many  gold  medals  of  the  Roman
Empire,  and  some  silver  medals  which  occur  only
under  the  later  emperors.  The  question  of  the
copper  or  bronze  medals  is  more  difficult  to  decide
by  this  test,  on  account  of  the  large  size  of  the


810


NUMMUS.


ancient  copper  money  of  Rome.  (See  Eckhel,  I.  c.
p,  XV.)  Another  test  of  a  medal  is  its  being  of
un  unusual  or  very  elaborate  device  or  workman-
ship. Respecting  the  occasions  on  which  medals
appear  to  have  been  struck,  see  Eckhel,  I.  c.  pp.
xvi — xviii.

V.  Tests  of  tJie  gmuitieness  of  ancient  Coins.  —
As  this  work  is  intended  for  the  general  classical
student,  and  makes  no  pretension  to  be  a  perfectly
adequate  guide  for  the  special  study  of  each  branch
of  antiquity,  and  as  this  branch  of  numismatic
science,  although  of  primary  importance  for  one
who  wishes  to  examine  the  ancient  coins  them-
selves, is  yet  one  of  the  most  intricate,  and  is  com-
paratively unimportant  for  the  mere  explanation  of
the  Greek  and  Roman  writers,  it  must  suffice  to
refer  to  the  chief  writers,  quoted  at  the  end  of  this
article,  with  only  the  observation  that  the  abun-
dance of  ancient  false  money  and  modem  forged
coins  is  one  chief  cause  of  the  great  difficulties  of
the  subject.

VI.  llidoiy  of  Greek  and  Roman  Coins.  —  It
has  already  been  observed  that  the  general  defini-
tion of  money  is  a  certain  weight  of  metal  of  a
certain  value,  that  is,  of  a  certain  fineness  ;  the
weight  and  the  fineness  being  attested  by  a  stamp
upon  the  coin.  The  latter  condition  was  not  in-
troduced until  the  first  had  long  been  acted  upon  ;
and,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  many  occasions
on  which  the  stamp  upon  a  coin  is  altogether  neg-
lected, and  it  passes  current  merely  according  to  its
real  weight  and  fineness  :  one  interesting  example
of  this  has  been  noticed  under  As,  p.  140.  The
primitive  stage  in  the  invention  of  money  is  illus-
trated by  various  passages  in  the  historical  books
of  the  Old  Testament,  and  in  Homer.  Coined
money  is  never  once  mentioned  in  the  Homeric
poems  ;  but  the  instrument  of  all  the  traffic  re-
ferred to  in  them  is  either  simple  barter,  or  quan-
tities of  gold,  silver,  and  copper.  Gold  alone  is
referred  to  as  measured  by  a  definite  weight,  the
ToAavTov,  which  in  Homer  appears  to  be  quite  a
different  quantity  from  the  common  talent  of  the
historical  period.  This  word  was  originally  a
generic  term  for  weighty  and  signified  a  pair  of
scales,  and  any  thing  weighed  out,  as  well  as  a  defi-
nite weigld.  The  same  is  true  of  the  Latin  word
lib-a  :  the  original  meaning  of  the  equivalent  word
as  was  merely  uniti/,  or  a  unit,  whether  of  weight
or  of  anything  else.  The  other  principal  Greek
word,  nva,  which  is  later  than  the  Homeric  poems,
is,  undoubtedly,  of  Oriental  origin,  and  probably
means  anything  divided,  apportioned,  or  deter-
mined, akin  to  the  Hebrew  maneh,  and  to  fivdoixai,
inonere,  moneta,  &c.  These  words  concur  with  all
the  other  information  we  have  upon  the  subject,
and  with  the  very  necessity  of  the  case,  to  prove
that  every  system  of  money  is  founded  upon  a  pre-
viously  existing  system  of  weight.  It  is,  however,
of  the  utmost  importance  to  observe,  that  a  word
denoting  a  certain  weight  does  not,  of  necessity,
when  applied  to  money,  indicate  a  quantity  of
metal  of  the  same  weight.  For,  first,  the  word
talent  or  pound  may  be  applied  to  an  equivalent
value  of  gold,  silver,  or  copper,  although,  in  weight,
its  meaning  must  be  restricted  to  one  of  these
metals :  secondly,  there  may  be,  in  the  formation
of  a  monetary  system,  an  intentional  deviation  from
the  existing  standard  of  weight,  while  the  names
of  that  standard  are  preserved  :  and,  lastly,  the
progressive  deterioration,  to  which  history  informs


NUMMUS.
us  that  most  coinages  have  been  subjected,  destroys
the  meaning  of  the  terms  of  weight,  which  are
still  applied  to  the  coins.  Examples  of  the  first
cause  of  disagreement  occur  of  necessity  in  every
monetary  system  which  contains  more  than  one
metal  ;  of  the  second,  an  interesting  illustration
will  be  found  in  the  Attic  weights  and  money  ;
and  of  the  third,  we  have  a  striking  instance  in
the  progressive  diminution  of  the  Roman  as.  [As.]
Still,  however,  where  we  have  no  historical  evi-
dence of  such  discrepancies  between  the  weights
and  monies  of  a  people,  especially  in  early  periods,
we  assume  their  coiTespondence.  If  we  did  not,
the  attempt  to  reconstruct  any  ancient  system  of
weight  and  money,  and  to  express  it  in  terms  of
our  o^vn,  would  be  hopeless,  as  there  Avould  be  no
basis  whatever  for  the  investigation.  Unless  then
we  know  anything  to  the  contrary,  we  assume  a
talent  of  money  to  mean  a  talenfs  weight  of  the
metal,  which  was  chiefly  used  for  money,  namely,
among  the  Greeks,  silver  ;  and,  conversely,  that  the
weight  of  the  silver  coins,  which  make  up  the
value  of  a  talent,  gives  us  the  amount  of  talent'
toeight.

In  order  that  what  follows  may  be  better  un-
derstood, we  give  here  the  chief  denominations  of
weight  and  money  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans.
Among  all  the  Greeks,  the  unit  was  the  tdent,
which  was  thus  divided  (comp.  Pondera  and  the
tables) :  —

1  Talent*  contained    60  Minae.*
1  Mina  „  100  Drachmae.

1  Drachma    „  6  Oboli.

In  this  system  we  have  a  combination  of  the  deci-
mal and  duodecimal  systems.

Among  the  Romans,  the  imit  of  weight  and
money  was  the  As  or  Libra,  which  was  divided
on  the  duodecimal  system,  its  twelfth  part  being
called  uncia,  and  the  intermediate  parts  being
named  according  to  the  number  of  unciae  they  con-
tained, or  according  to  the  fractional  part  of  the
As  which  each  was.  In  some  parts  of  Italy,  how-
ever, (namely.  Central  Italj^  north  of  the  Apen-
nines,) the  decimal  division  of  the  As  was  used,
the  uncia  being  its  tenth  part.  (Comp.  As,  Pon-
dera, Uncia,  and  the  Tables.)

i.  History  of  Greek  Money.  —  The  invention  of
coined  money  among  the  Greeks  is  ascribed  by
tradition  to  two  sources,  noi  to  mention  the  merely
mythical  stories  of  its  origin  (Pollux,  ix.  83).  Ac-
cording to  one  account,  the  Lydians  were  the  first
of  mankind  who  coined  and  used  gold  and  silver
money  (Herod,  i.  94  ;  Xenoph.  ap.  Poll.  l.  c).
The  other  aud  prevailing  tradition  is,  that  Pheidon,
king  of  Argos,  first  coined  both  copper  and  silver
money  at  Aegina,  and  first  established  a  system  of
weights  and  measures.  (Herod,  vi.  127  ;  Ephor.
ap.  Strah.  viii.  p.  376"  ;  Ael.  V.  H.  xii.  10  ;  Poll.
/.  c. ;  Mann.  Par.  45,  46  ;  Grote,  History  of  Greece^
vol.  ii.  p.  424  :  the  date  of  Pheidon,  according  to
the  Parian  Marble,  is  b.  c.  895  ;  but  Grote,  Clinton,
Bockh,  and  MUUer  all  agree  in  placing  him  about
the  middle  of  the  eighth  century,  between  783
or  770  and  744  or  730,  b.  c.  ;  see  Grote,  /.  c.
p.  419.)  These  traditions  are  not  altogether  in-
consistent ;  only  we  must  understand  the  former
as  implying  nothing  more  than  that  a  system  of
money  existed  in  Asia  Minor  in  very  early  times  ;

*  These  were  not  coined,  but  were  monies  of
account.


NUMMUS.
which  was  adopted  by  the  Ionian  colonists,  from
whom  it  pitssed  over  into  the  Ionian  States  of
Greece  Proper,  especially  Athens,  under  the  name
of  the  Eiiboic  system  ;  a  name  which  it  probably
obtained  from  an  early  coinage  in  the  island  of
Euboea,  which  was  rich  in  copper  and  silver  ores.*
The  other  tradition,  in  all  probability,  expresses
iin  historical  fact,  except  as  to  the  circumstance
of  Pheidon's  executing  his  coinage  in  Aeginaf,
which  is  almost  certainly  an  invention  of  the  later
writers,  made  for  the  purpose  of  explaining  the
name  Aegineian,  applied  to  the  system  which  was
established  by  Pheidon  and  adopted  by  most  of
the  Dorian  states.  This  system,  as  well  as  the
former,  was  derived  from  the  East,  and  was  iden-
tical with  the  Babylonian  ;  and,  moreover,  both
systems  existed  together  in  Asia  Minor,  where
the  larger  (Babylonian)  talent  was  used  for  silver,
and  the  smaller  (Euboic)  for  gold.  Thus  it  ap-
pears that  these  two  systems  of  weight  and  money,
both  derived  originally  from  the  Chaldaeans,  may
be  distinguished  as  the  larger  Babylonian  ov  Argive
or  (generally,  but  less  properly)  Aeginetan,  and
the  smaller  Babylonian  or  Lydian  or  Ionian  or  Eu-
boic or  larger  Attic.  The  last  term  is  used  to
distinguish  the  old  Attic  scale,  which  was  iden-
tical with  the  Euboic,  from  the  scale  which  Solon
introduced,  and  which  was  considerably  less  ;  the
latter  alone  was  used  for  money,  although  the
former  continued  in  use  as  a  scale  of  weight  under
the  name  of  the  commercial  standard.  The  talents
of  the  three  systems  of  money,  which  have  been
mentioned,  are  known  respectively  as  the  A  eginetan,
the  Euho'ic,  and  the  Attic  or  Solonian.  Their  nu-
merical ratios  to  one  another  were  as  follows  :  —

Aeginetan  :  Euboic     :  :       6     :        5

Aeginetan  :  Solonian  :  :       5     :        3

Euboic  :  Solonian  :  :  U^  :    100

i.  e.  :  :  100     :     72

:  :     25     :      18

or  nearly  :  :       4     :        3

(Respecting  the   details  of  these  matters   comp.

Ponukra).

(1.)  Money  of  the  Aeginetan  Standard. — -Al-
though, according  to  the  tradition,  Pheidon  coined
copper  as  well  as  silver,  and  although  we  have  in-
dications of  a  copper  currency  among  the  Greek
states  of  Sicily  and  Magna  Graecia,  which  fol-
lowed the  Aeginetan  standard,  yet  in  Greece
Proper  copper  money  was  altogether  exceptional.
[Chalcus.]  The  ordinary  currency  in  all  the
states  was  silver,  the  principal  coins  being  the
drachmu.im^  its  double  (5i5paxMo»')»  and  quadruple
(TerpaSpaxMO"),  the   didrachm  prevailing  in  the


NUMMUS.


81]


*  Mr.  Grote's  derivation  of  the  names  Euboic
and  Aeginetan^  "from  the  people  whose  commercial
activity  tended  to  make  the  scales  most  generally
known  —  in  the  one  case,  the  Aeginetans  ;  in  the
other  case,  the  inhabitants  of  Chalcis  and  Eretria"
(vol.  ii.  p.  432)  —  is  at  least  as  probable  as  that
suggested  in  the  text.

t  The  statement  {Etym.  Mag.  s.  v.  Y.v§o'iKbv
v6pLi(Tfxa)  that  Pheidon 's  coinage  was  struck  in  a
phtce  of  Argos  called  Euboea,  obviously  arose  from
a  confusion,  in  the  head  of  the  compiler,  between
the  Aeginetan  and  Euboic  standards  ;  and  then,
after  the  frequent  fashion  of  the  grammarians,  at-
tempting to  set  right  a  blunder  by  a  wilful  mis-
statement, he  invented  the  Argolic  Euboea.


older  coinages,  and  the  tetradrachm  in  the  later.
Didrachms  are  the  prevailing  coin  among  the  ex-
tant specimens  of  Aeginetan  money :  tetradrachms
among  the  Attic.  The  didrachm,  from  its  preva-
lence in  the  early  coinages,  obtained  the  name  of
stater  {ararrip,  i.  e.  standard),  which  was  after-
wards used  specifically  as  the  name  of  the  chief
gold  coins,  beciiuse  they  were  of  the  same  weight
as  the  silver  didrachm  [Stater].  There  still
exist  numerous  Aeginetan  drachms,  didrachms,  and
tetradrachms  of  undoubted  genuineness  ;  many  of
the  highest  antiquity.  The  earliest  of  these  coin*
are  very  thick,  and  of  nide  workmanship :  they
are  stamped  with  the  figure  of  a  turtle,  the  reverse
having  no  device,  but  only  an  indented  mark,  as  if
the  coin,  at  the  time  of  striking,  had  been  laid
upon  a  puncheon,  the  impress  of  which  has  been
transferred  to  it  by  the  weight  of  the  blow.  In
the  later  coins  of  Aegina,  the  turtle  is  changed  into
a  tortoise,  and  the  other  side  bears  a  device.  (See
the  woodcut  on  p.  439.)

In  calculating  the  weight  of  the  Aeginetan  coins,
we  are  at  once  met  with  one  of  the  great  sources
of  uncertainty  in  numismatics,  namely,  the  doubt
whether  the  existing  coins  of  any  system  are  of
full  weight,  which  doubt,  in  the  great  majority  of
cases,  experience  converts  into  the  certainty  that
they  are  not.  The  chief  exception  to  the  general
debasement  of  ancient  money  was  the  silver  money
of  Athens,  which,  at  least  until  some  time  after
the  Peloponnesian  War,  was  proverbial  for  its  full
weight  and  purity.  One  method,  therefore,  is  to
take  the  best  Attic  coins  as  the  standard  of  com-
putation, not  only  for  the  Attic  system,  but  also
for  any  other  system  which  bore  a  known  deter-
mined ratio  to  the  Attic.  Now,  taking  Hussey'a
value  for  the  Attic  drachma,  QQ  5  grains  (which,
if  there  be  any  error,  is  a  little  below  the  mark),
the  Aeginetan  drachma  ought  to  weigh  between
1 10  and  111  grains. J  Its  actual  average  weight,
however,  as  obtained  by  Mr.  Hussey  from  the
coins  of  Aegina  and  Boeotia,  is  only  dQ  grains.
There  is,  of  course,  the  alternative  of  using  this  dis-
crepancy as  an  argument  against  the  ratio  of  5  :  3  for
the  systems  of  Aegina  and  Athens  ;  and  this  course
Mr.  Hussey  has  adopted.  But  Bbckh  has  shown
most  conclusively  that  this  explanation  is  totally
inadmissible.  We  have  not  space  to  discuss  the
question  at  length.  It  must  suffice  to  observe
that,  if  any  one  fact  in  ancient  metrology  is  to  be
accepted  as  established  by  testimony,  it  is  the
fact  of  this  ratio  of  5:3;  —  that  the  fact  of  the
prevailing  debasement  of  ancient  coinages,  by
which  the  discrepancy  above  noticed  may  be  ex-
plained, is  also  one  of  the  most  certain  facts  in  the
whole  subject ; — that  coins  are  actually  found  of
the  Aeginetan  system,  which  come  very  nearly  up
to  the  full  theoretical  weight,  those,  namely,  of
Melos  and  Byzantium,  both  Dorian  settlements,
and  those  of  the  Macedonian  kings  before  Alexan-
der the  Great. §  To  these  positive  arguments  it
may  be  added,  that  Mr.  Hussey's  attempt  to  ex-
plain away  the  statement  of  Pollux,  that  the  Aegi-


X  Bockh,  from  a  rather  higher  value  of  the  Attic
drachma,  gives  the  following  theoretical  weights
for  the  Aeginetan  coins :  the  didrachm  224*59
grains,  the' drachm  112"295  grains,  the  obolua
18-716  grains  (p.  77).

§  These  Mr.  Hussey  is  compelled  by  his  theory
to  erect  into  a  distinct  standard.


812


NUMMUS.


netan  talent  contained  10,000  Attic  drachmae,  as
not  referring  to  the  genuine  ancient  money,  but  to
the  coins  which  passed  as  drachmae  under  the
Roman  empire,  and  which,  either  were,  or  were
equal  to  denarii,  —  is  not  only  unsupported  by
any  .actual  evidence,  but  is  easily  proved  to  be
fallacious.  Some  minor,  but  important,  arguments
are  satisfactorily  disposed  of  by  Bockh.  (Meirol.
Untersuch.  pp.  77,  foil. ;  comp.  Grote's  Review  in
the  Classical  Museum,  1844,  vol.  i.  pp.  10,  11  ;
Hussey,  Ancient  Weights,  pp.31,  foil,,  61,  foil.)
For  the  actual  value  of  the  Aeginetan  silver
mone}^  as  compared  with  ours,  see  Drachma  and
the  Tables.

The  Aeginetan  system  of  money  was  adopted
throughout  the  Peloponnesus  (except  perhaps  in
Achaea)  in  Boeotia,  and  Northern  Greece  generally,
up  to  Thessaly,  in  Macedonia,  in  Crete,  and  gene-
rally in  the  Dorian  settlements  in  the  Aegean  and
on  the  coast  of  Asia  Minor  ;  and  also  in  the
Dorian  states  of  Italy  and  Sicily,  where,  however,
it  assumed  a  peculiar  form  though  coming  into
connection  with  the  native  Italian  system  (see
below).  In  Egypt  also,  the  coins  of  the  Ptolemies
appear  to  have  been  at  first  conformed  to  the
Aeginetan  system  ;  but  they  were  soon  very  much
debased.  One  state,  in  which  the  Aeginetan  system
was  adopted,  demands  special  notice.  At  Corinth,
as  being  a  Dorian  state,  and  from  its  proximity  to
Argos,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  Aeginetan
system  was  adopted,  to  which  in  fact  some  of  the
oldest  extant  Corinthian  coins  approach  very  near.
But  we  also  find  a  smaller  Corinthian  stater  or
didrachm  of  10  Aeginetan  obols,  which,  according
to  the  fixed  ratio  of  the  Aeginetan  to  the  Euboic
5cale  (6  :  .5,  i.e.  12  :  10)  would  be  12  Euboic
obols,  or  a  didrachm.  This  coin  seems  also  to  be
equivalent  to  that  found  in  Sicily  as  the  piece  o/  10
litrae  {ZiKikkiTpov  or  SsKaXirpos  (narrip).  Hence
it  would  seem  that  the  Euboic  scale  was  early  in-
troduced at  Corinth,  a  fact  which  might  easily
have  been  anticipated  from  the  position  and  com-
mercial activity  of  that  state.  This  Corinthian
stater  or  didrachm  seems  to  have  passed  at  a  later
period,  at  a  depression  of  1-lOth  of  its  value,  that
is,  as  9  Aeginetan  obols.  The  Attic  (Solonian)
scale  seems  also  to  have  been  introduced  at  an
early  period  into  Corinth,  and  afterwards  to  have
been  used  there  in  preference  to  the  Aeginetan
and  Euboic.  Through  Corinth,  the  Attic  standard
was  introduced  into  Sicily  and  several  states  of
Western  Greece,  such  as  Ambracia,  Anactorium,
Leucas,  Amphilochia,  Aetolia,  and  the  Locrians.

Respecting  the  gold  money  of  Acgina  and  the
other  Greek  states,  see  Stater.

(2.)  Money  of  the  Euboic  Standard.  —  In  Asia
Minor,  under  the  Persian  empire,  the  tribute  in
gold  was  paid  in  Euboic  talents :  but  we  must
here  understand  weight  alone  to  be  referred  to :
for  the  weight  of  the  existing  darics  shows  clearly
that  the  Persian  money  was  conformed  to  the
Babylonian  standard.  That  there  were  in  some
parts  of  Greece,  current  coins  of  the  Euboic
standard  of  weight,  is  proved  by  the  very  term
'E.vSoiK.hv  v6/j.i(riJ.a,  and  such  coins  are  found  among
the  extant  money  of  the  Euboean  cities  and  their
colonies,  especially  those  of  Chalcis.  First,  how-
ever, the  standard  may  be  obtained  theoretically
from  the  Attic  and  the  Aeginetan ;  and  in  this
manner,  from  Hussey's  value  of  the  Attic  drachma,
we  obtain  about  92  grains  for  the  Euboic  drachma,


NUMMUS.

or,  from  Brickh's  value,  rather  more  than  93^-  (or
93-5792,  Bockh,  p.  109).  There  tei&t  several
coins  of  Chalcis  itself,  of  Rhegium  in  Italy,  Naxos
in  Sicily,  and  other  Chalcidian  cities,  wbicli  come
quite  as  near  to  this  standard  as  could  be  expected.
(See  Bockh,  I.  c.  and  foil.)  The  Euboic  gold
money  is  singularly  scarce,  and  the  few  pieces
that  exist  only  give  rise  to  new  difficulties.
(Bockh,  I.  c.  §  5.)

(3.)  Money  of  the  Attic  (Solonian)  Standard. —
Before  the  time  of  Solon,  the  standard  of  weight
used  at  Athens  was  the  Euboic  ;  and  there  still
exist  coins,  evidentl}'  from  their  fonn  and  work-
manship among  the  most  ancient  we  possess,  which
appear  to  be  didrachms  of  the  Euboic  scale.
These  coins  are  stamped  with  the  figure  of  an  ox,
which  we  know  from  several  ancient  writers  to
have  been  the  regular  impress  upon  the  oldest
Attic  coins.  {Schol.  A.  B.  L.  ad  Horn.  II.  vi.  230  ;
Etym.  Mag.  s.  v.  iKaT6ix€r)  ;  Pollux,  ix.  60  ;  Dio-
genian.  iii.  48  ;  Hesych.  s.  vv.  $ovs  e-jrl  yXuanp,
SeKciSoiov  ;  Zenob.  ii.  70  ;  Suid.  s.  v.  fiovs  cirl
yXcoTTTis).  This  coin  was  called  fiovs,  and  its
origin  was  carried  back  mythically  to  the  time  of
Theseus,  who  was  said  to  have  first  coined  it,  and
to  have  stamped  it  with  the  figure  of  an  ox,  in
allusion  either  to  the  Mamthonian  bull,  or  to  the
Minotaur  ;  reasons  which  are  mere  guess-work.*
(Plut.  Thes.  25.)  This  didrachm  or  /Sous  was  the
chief  coin  of  the  old  Attic  system  :  in  the  Solonian
system  the  chief  coin  was  the  tetradrachm  stamped
with  the  head  of  Athena  and  the  owl,  and  this
also  received  a  name  from  its  impress,  and  was
called  yKav^.  (Philoch.  a/).  Schol.  ad  Aristojih.  Av.
1106.)  The  latter  device  continued  to  be  the
prevailing  one  throughout  the  whole  history  of  the
Athenian  coinage.  (See  the  wood-cut  on  p.  438.)
Bockh  supposes  that  the  didrachms  of  the  old
Attic  system  passed  for  tetradrachms  in  the  later
(or  Solonian)  currency.

The  politico-economical  history  of  Solon's  alter-
ation of  the  Athenian  currency  does  not  belong  to
the  present  subject.  (See  Grote's  History  of  Greece,
vol.  iii,  pp.  131,  foil.)  That  legislator  is  known  to
have  lowered  the  standard  of  money  in  order  to
relieve  debtors,  and  Plutarch  (Solon,  15)  informs
us,  on  the  testimony  of  Androtion,  that  "  SjIou
made  the  mina  of  100  drachmae,  which  had  for-
merly contained  73."  It  is  incredible  that  a  large
prime  number,  such  as  73,  should  have  been  used
as  a  multiplier  in  any  system  of  weights  ;  but  what
Plutarch  meant  to  say  was,  that  Solon  made  a  mina
or  1 00  drachmae  out  of  the  same  quantity  of  silver
which  was  formerly  used  for  73  drachmae.  The
value,  therefore,  of  the  Solonian  money  to  that  of
the  old  standard  was  as  73  :  100.  Now  this  was
very  nearly  the  proportion  of  the  old  or  connnercial
weight  to  the  new  silver  weight,  namely,  100:1 38,
=  72^ :  100, or,  more  exactlv,  as  Bockh  has  shown,
as  100  :  138|=72  :  100=18  :  25.  [PoNnEUA.]
But  why  should  Solon  have  adopted  so  singular  a
proportion  ?  Bockh  suggested  in  his  Public  Eco-
nomy of  Athens  that  it  was  probably  an  accident ;
that  Solon  intended  to  reduce  the  mina  one-fourth,
that  is,  to  make  100  drachmae  of  the  new  coinage
equal  to  75  of  the  old,  but  that  by  some  inaccuracy


*  The  ox  on  the  coins  of  Euboea  is  supposed  to
be  in  allusion  to  the  name  of  the  island,  and  pos-
sibly the  Attic  coins  may  have  borrowed  the  type
from  the  coins  of  Cuboca.


NUMMUS.
of  manafacture  the  new  coins  were  found  to  he  a
little  too  light  ;  and  as  Solon's  coina.ge  furnished
the  standard  for  all  subsequent  ones,  the  error  was
retained  ;  and  that,  in  fixing  upon  one-fourth  Jis  the
amount  of  the  reduction,  Solon  was  guided  by  the
wish  of  assimilating  the  Attic  system  to  the  Euboic,
which,  according  to  this  view,  would  be  different
from  the  old  Attic.  A  more  complete  investigation
of  the  subject  has,  however,  convinced  that  dis-
tinguished scholar  that  he  was  mistaken  in  sup-
posing the  Euboic  standard  to  be  distinct  from  the
old  Attic,  and  that  the  true  ?-eason  of  the  precise
amount  o/' debasement  adopted  by  Solon  was  in  order
to  bring  his  new  system  irdo  a  simple  definite  ratio^
namely  3  :  o  to  tJie  Aeginetan,  which  the  Pheidonian
institutions  had  established  throughout  the  greater
part  of  Greece.  (For  the  full  development  of  the
argument,  see  Bockh,  Metrologische  Vidersuchungen^
c.  ix.,  and  for  the  denominations  and  values  of  the
Attic  silver  money,  see  Drachma).

It  Avas  the  boast  of  the  Athenians  that  their
coinage  was  finer  than  all  other  money  in  Greece,
and  Xenophon  says  that  they  exchanged  it  with
profit  in  any  market  (Aristoph.  Ran.  732  ;  Xen.
Vect.  ill.  2)  :  there  is,  however,  a  distinction  to  be
made  in  this  respect  between  the  Attic  coins  of
different  ages,  which  are  easily  distinguished  by
their  form  and  workmanship.  The  most  ancient
are  very  thick  and  extremely  rude.  The  second
kind,  which  appear  to  belong  to  the  age  of  Pericles
and  Xenophon,  are  also  of  a  thick  form,  but  not  so
clumsy  in  appearance.  The  third,  which  belong  to
a  later  period,  are  broad  and  thin.  Most  of  the
extant  specimens  are  of  very  fine  silver.  Some
writers  have  supposed  that  they  are  quite  free
from  baser  metal  ;  but  the  experiments  which  have
been  made  show  that  the  finest  possess  a  small
quantity  of  alloy.  Mr.  Hussey  found  upon  trial
{Ancient  Weights  and  Money,  p.  45),  that  the  most
ancient  Athenian  coins  contained  about  ^  of  the
weight  alloy,  the  second  kind  about  giy,  and  the
more  modern  about  -^-^  ;  the  last  of  which  is  nearly
the  same  alloy  as  in  our  own  silver  coin.

The  purity  and  full  standard  of  the  Attic  silver
money,  and  the  commercial  character  of  the  people,
will  account  easily  for  its  wide  diffusion  throughout
the  Grecian  states.  It  was  adopted  at  an  early
period  by  Corinth  and  her  colonies  ;  and  thus  was
introduced  into  Sicily  and  Italy,  where  we  find  it,
not  only  in  the  coins  of  Rhegium  and  Tarentum,  but
even  in  those  of  Populonia;  but  in  most  of  these  cases,
it  existed  side  by  side  with  the  Aeginetan  stand-
ard. It  is  also  foimd  in  the  later  coins  of  Euboea
and  of  Crete,  and  in  those  of  Thasos  and  Acan-
thus. It  is  probable  that  it  prevailed  extensively
in  the  Ionian  islands  and  cities  of  the  Aegean  Sea,
but  there  are  great  difficulties  connected  with  the
coins  of  many  of  these  states,  and  some  of  them
(Chios,  for  example)  seem  to  have  had  standards
altogether  distinct  and  peculiar.  The  Attic  standard
prevailed  in  Western  Greece.  The  Thessalian
confederacy  had,  at  a  late  period,  coins  on  the
Attic  scale  ;  and  the  money  of  some  of  the  barba-
rian nations  of  Eastern  Europe  appears  to  belong
to  the  same  standard.  It  also  fonned  the  basis  of
the  later  Macedonian  coinage,  having  been  adopted
by  Philip  for  gold  [AuiiUM,  Stateh],  and  by
Alexander  for  silver.  It  was  followed  likewise
by  the  Seleucidae  in  Syria,  and  by  Philetaerus  in
I'crgamus.

There  are   many  other  points   connected    with


NUMMUS.  813

Greek  money  in  general,  and  with  the  systems  of
particular  states,  which  cannot  be  comprised  within
the  limits  of  this  article,  but  which  are  fully  treated
of  in  the  works  referred  to  at  the  end  of  it.  The
details  of  the  minting  of  the  money  and  the  laws
affecting  it  will  be  found  under  Moneta.

ii.  History  of  Roman  and  Italian  Money.  —  The
earliest  coinage  at  Rome  was  of  copper.  Its  his-
tory has  been  already  given  imder  As.

Silver  was  not  coined  at  Rome  till  b.  c.  269,  five
years  before  the  first  Punic  war  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii.
3.  s.  13)  ;  but  the  Roman  coinage  of  silver  never
appears  to  have  been  so  free  from  baser  metal  as  the
best  Athenian  coinage.  Under  the  Emperor  Gal-
lienus,  the  coinage  was  so  much  debased  that  it
contained  \  silver  and  f  alloy.  In  the  time  of  the
republic  the  impression  on  silver  coins  was  usually,
on  the  obverse,  the  head  of  Rome  Avith  a  helmet,
the  Dioscuri,  or  the  head  of  Jupiter  ;  and  on  the
reverse,  carriages  drawn  by  two  or  four  animals
(bigae,  (juadrigae),  whence  they  were  called  respec-
tively bigati  and  quadrigati,  sc.  fiummi.  The  prin-
cipal silver  coins  among  the  Romans  were  the
denarius  and  sestertius.  [Denarius,  Sester-
tius.]    Respecting  the   Roman  gold  money,  see

AURUM.

Among  the  interesting  matters  which  are  here
passed  over  for  want  of  space,  and  as  not  of  great
importance  for  the  ordinary  classical  student,  are
the  fuller  discussion  of  the  early  systems  of  the
other  states  of  Itiily  besides  Rome,  and  the  descrip-
tion of  the  coins  of  the  later  empire.  On  the  for-
mer subject,  the  reader  is  referred  to  Miiller's
Etrusker,  and  Abeken's  Mittelitalien,  on  the  latter
to  Eckhel.

iii.  Connection  of  the  Greek  and  Roman  Systems
in  Sicily  and  Lower  Italy.  —  For  the  reasons  just
assigned,  some  very  brief  remarks  must  suffice
for  this  part  of  the  subject,  though  it  is  one  of
the  most  interesting  in  the  whole  range  of  numis-
matics. It  is  also,  however,  one  of  the  most
difficult,  and  its  full  discussion  would  require  a
separate  work  of  no  small  dimensions.  We  find
in  Sicily  and  Lower  Italy  all  the  three  chief  sys-
tems which  prevailed  in  Greece,  and  also  the
Italian  system,  not  kept  distinct,  but  brought  into
connection  ;  besides  a  system  which  may  be  called
specifically  Sikelian,  as  it  is  not  found  else-
where, and  besides  also  the  Carthaginian  system.
Of  the  three  sj'stems  imported  from  Greece,  the
Aeginetan  was  naturally  brought  by  the  colo-
nists from  Corinth  and  Rhodes,  who  were  the
chief  Dorian  settlers  in  Sicily  ;  the  EuboYc  was
similarly  introduced  by  the  Chalcidian  colonists,
and  also  from  Corinth  ;  and  the  Attic  was  im-
ported through  commerce,  both  directly  and  by
way  of  Corinth.  The  Italian  is  supposed  by
Bockh  to  have  been  introduced  by  the  commercial
activity  of  the  Etruscans  at  a  very  early  period.
Undoubted  evidence  of  the  existence  of  the  last
system  is  furnished  by  the  very  words  \irpa  and
ovyicia,  which  it  is  impossible  to  explain  otherwise
than  as  being  the  Italian  libra  and  UTicia.  It  is
important  to  observe  that  we  have  here  a  mixture,
not  only  of  different  standards  of  weight  and
money,  but  also  of  different  sj'stems  of  arithmetical
computation,  the  mixed  decimal  and  duodecimal
system  of  the  Greeks  coming  into  collision  with
the  purely  duodecimal  system  of  the  Italians.

In  adapting  these  systems  to  one  another,  it
would  seem  that  the  poutid  of  the  Italian  system


814  NUMMUS.

(lUn-c^  Xlrpa)  was  identified,  not,  as  some  have
supposed,  with  the  mina^  but  with  the  half  mina  of
the  Aeginetan  scale  ;  and,  consequently,  that  120
j)uu7ids  went  to  the  tahnU  as  we  are  expressly  in-
formed by  the  Tauromenian  inscription  ;  and  that
copper  money  was  coined  in  conformity  with  this
standard.

Pollux  (ix.  80—82)  refers  to  Aristotle's  Polity
of  {tie  Himeraeans^  for  an  account  of  several  de-
nominations of  Sicilian  coins,  and  of  these  he  men-
tions the  ouyKia^  as  equal  in  value  to  one  chalcus;
the  Sj|aj,  equal  to  two  chalci ;  the  rpi^as  to  three  ;
the  T]fxi\iTpov  to  six  ;  and  the  Xirpa,  which  is  an
ohol;  the  SeKaKirpou,  he  adds,  still  quoting  Aris-
totle, is  worth  ten  obols,  and  is  tJie  Corinthian  stater.
He  then  proceeds  to  state  that  there  were  many
passages  of  the  Attic,  as  well  as  the  Dorian,  co-
medians, in  which  these  coins  were  alluded  to,  and
he  quotes  lines  from  Diphilus,  and  from  Epichar-
mus,  in  which  mention  is  made  of  the  A/t/jo,  the
7]niKirpov,  the  k^avriov  (a  diminution  of  elSs),
the  TTivrdiyKiov^  and  the  SeKaXirpos  arrarrip^  as
silver  coins.  A  little  before  this,  he  quotes  from
Aristotle's  Polity  of  the  Agrigentines  the  statement,
that  the  litra  was  equal  in  value  to  an  Aeginetan
obol.  (Compare,  to  the  same  effect,  Pollux,  iv.
1/4,  175.)

From  these  statements,  it  appears  that,  in  the
Sicilian  silver  money,  the  Euboic  and  Aeginetan
scales  were  connected  just  as  we  have  seen  that
they  already  were  in  one  of  the  systems,  from
which  the  Sicilian  money  was  derived,  namely,  in
the  Corinthian  didrachm  or  stater  of  ten  Aeginetan


NUMMUS.

obols,  which  may  be  regarded  as  forming  tha
o-TOTT/p,  or  chief  coin,  of  the  Sicilian  system  also :
that  then,  the  obol,  being  identified  with  the  hlrpa,
was  subdivided,  just  like  the  Italian  pound,  from
which  its  name  was  derived,  into  twelve  parts  or
ounces  (oyKiai,  ovyKiat,  i.  e.  unciae)^  each  of  which
was  a  clialcus  (xoA/coCs  :  what  this  chalcus  really
was,  we  shall  presently  endeavour  to  show).

As  to  the  intermediate  parts  of  the  pound  or
Xlrpa,  it  is  evident,  from  the  explanation  which
Pollux  gives  of  St^as  and  rpi^as,  that  he  supposed
tliem  to  be  named  from  the  number  of  ounces  they
contained,  as  was  clearly  the  case  with  the  irev.
rduyKiov^  according  to  the  analogy  of  which,  if  the
idea  of  Pollux  had  been  right,  5t|as  and  rpi^as
would  have  been  respectively  Si(iryKiov  and  rpiwy-
KLov  (like  teruncius).  Bentley  has  conclusively
shown  (quoted  by  Bcickh,  p.  293)  that,  in  this
matter,  the  Greek  grammarians  fell  into  a  very
natural  error,  through  not  understanding  a  system
foreign  to  that  of  their  language,  and  that,  in  fact,
the  parts  of  the  litra  were  named,  as  the  general
rule,  not  from  the  number  of  ounces  they  contained
(except  in  the  case  of  the  irevTcayKiou^  like  the
Latin  quincunx,  an  exception  easily  accounted
for  by  the  difficulty  of  expressing  the  fraction
.5-12ths  by  a  single  word),  but  from  the  fractional
part  of  the  litra  which  each  of  them  was  equal  to,
just  as  in  the  Latin  system.  The  following  table
shows  the  whole  scale,  with  the  corresponding
Latin  names,  and  with  the  values  of  the  coins  in
silver  obols  of  the  Aeginetan  standard  and  in  the
copper  coins  called  chalci :  —


erarrip  or

KOKlTpOV


'-}=


Xirpa
rifiiKirpov

ITfVTdoyKlOV

Tpias
TfTpas

oiryKia


Denominations.
1 0  Xirpai        =

12  ou7«:^oi
6       „
5       „
4       „


={


"Values.


/


2       „
1       «


H


1 0  asses,  decussis  1
afterwards        J.

denarius

as  or  libra

semis

quincunx

triens
quadrans  or   te-
runcius

sextans

u?icia


f  10  obols
(_    Aegin.

1  obol

i  „

JL

6        '»


}-{■■


2  obols  or
didrachm
Euboic
12  chalci

6       „

5      „

4       „


=.  3

=  2

==  1


Just  as  in  the  Latin  system,  so  in  the  Graeco-
Sicilian,  there  seem  to  have  been  no  coins  between
the  half  and  whole  Xirpa.  Thus,  in  the  second
passage  quoted  by  Pollux  from  Epicharmus,  a
sum  of  money  is  expressed  as  consisting  of  XlTpa
Koi  SeKdXirpos  (TTwrrip,  k^avriSv  re  /col  invTdayKiou.
Even  as  denominations  of  weight  we  have  (so  far
as  we  know)  no  tenns  corresponding  to  the  Latin
septunx,  hes^  dodrans,  dextatis,  and  deunx.  Bockh
supposes  that  this  system  was  introduced  in  Sicily
about  01.  40  or  50,  B.  c.  620  or  580.

The  worth  of  the  chief  coin  in  this  system,  the
silver  litra,  or  Aeginetan  silver  obol,  must  evidently
be  assumed  to  have  been,  like  the  Italian  libra,
tiie  value  of  a  pound-weight  of  copper.

The  gold  money  of  this  scale  has  already  been
spoken  of  under  Damaretion.

For  further  details  on  the  whole  subject,  see
BiJckh,  Metrol.  Untersuch.  c.  xix.      %

Besides  the  litra,  we  find  the  word  nummus
(^vov/xiios)  itself  in  the  Sicilian  system  ds  the  name
of  a  particular  coin.  The  Greek  origin  of  the
word  is  attested  by  several  of  the  grammarians.


(Varro,  L.  L.  v.  36.  s.  %1,  ed.  Muller  ;  Pollux,  ix.
79;  Festus,  «.  V.  ;  Suid.  s.  w.  r(^/Wos. )  Pollux  (^c.)
quotes  two  passages  from  Epicharmus,  in  which
the  word  is  used  in  the  specific  sense,  for  a  parti-
cular coin  ;  and  he  adds  the  statement,  from
Aristotle's  Polity  of  the  Tarentines,  that  vov/xfios  is
the  name  applied  by  them  to  a  coin,  on  which
Taras  was  represented  carried  on  a  dolphin.  The
grammarians  gave  the  value  of  the  Sicilian  num-
mus as  1^  Attic  obols,  in  connection  with  a  small
talent,  peculiar  to  Sicily,  or  rather  two  such  talents,
the  older  containhig  24  nummi  and  the  later  12.
From  a  careful  criticism  of  these  statements,  and
from  an  examination  of  the  extant  coins,  Bockh
comes  to  the  conclusion,  that  the  nummus  was
originally  the  same  as  the  litra,  but  that,  when
the  Attic  standard  came  into  common  use,  this
nummus  or  litra  was  diminished  by  1-1 0th,  in
order  to  bring  it  into  conformity  with  that  scale  ;
and  by  this  change  it  became  -j^  of  the  Aeginetan
obol,  which  is  equal  to  1^  Attic  obols,  or  the
fourth  part  of  an  Attic  drachma.  Thus  we  get
the  simple  law  by  which  the  Sicilian  money  waa


NUMMUS.

connected  with  the  Attic,  namely,  4  nummi  =
1  drachm.  Hence,  also,  we  see  how  the  ounce  of
the  Sicilian  system  came  to  be  identified  by  the
Greek  writers  with  the  chalcus,  in  its  specific
sense.  The  Attic  chalcus  was  -J-  of  the  obol
[Chaicus]  ;  hence  12  chaUd  would  make  up  J^
Attic  obols,  that  is  (restoring  the  1-1 0th  of  depre-
ciation), an  Aeginetan  obol,  or  a  Sicilian  litra.
The  nummus  of  the  Tarentines,  mentioned  in  the
above  passage  from  Pollux,  and  which  was  also
used  at  Herachia^  was  a  much  larger  coin,  and  is
probably  the  same  as  the  full -weighted  Aeginetan
drachma  (Spaxi^h  Traxfta),  which  came  near
enough  to  the  Attic  didrachm  to  be  identified
with  it  when  the  currencies  came  to  be  mixed.  In
fact  the  wocd  nummus  was  evidently  applied  (like
a-Tarrip  in  Greece)  to  the  chief  current  coin  in  any
system,  and  it  may  therefore  have  had  very  dif-
ferent values :  Plautus  actually  uses  it  for  the
didrachm.

For  a  further  account  of  the  Sicilian  nummus
and  small  talent,  and  the  Attico-Sicilian  system,
see  Bockh,  cc.  xxi.  xxii.

iv.  On  the  Value  of  Ancient  Money  in  terms  of
our  oicn. —  When  we  endeavour  to  express  the  value
of  ancient  coins  in  terms  of  our  own,  we  meet  with
certain  difficulties  which  require  particular  con-
sideration. If  we  take  for  example,  a  drachma,
and  a  shilling,  and  make  a  comparison  of  their
weight  and  of  the  fineness  of  the  silver  in  each,
we  at  once  obtain  a  determinate  ratio  for  the  value
of  the  one  to  the  other  ;  and  it  might  appear
to  a  thoughtless  person  that,  having  thus  found
what  fractional  part  of  a  shilling  a  drachma  is,  we
might  substitute  that  value  for  the  drachma,  its
multiples  and  parts,  wherever  they  are  mentioned
by  ancient  authors  ;  and  so  of  the  other  coins  ;
and  that  thus  we  might  express  all  ancient  money
in  terms  of  our  own.  Of  course  we  might  do  so  ;
but  it  does  not  follow  that,  after  doing  so,  we
should  at  all  obtain  what  we  are  seeking,  a  true
idea  of  the  value  of  aticient  money,  in  any  sense
which  can  throw  light  on  the  numerous  social,  and
economical,  and  political  questions,  which  the  de-
termination of  its  value  may  affect.  Even  the
coins  themselves  give  different  results  according  as
we  compare  the  gold  or  the  silver  with  our  gold
or  silver,  and  also  according  as  we  compare  them
with  the  true  value  of  the  metal  in  the  coin  and
the  value  at  which  the  coin  is  current ;  our  shilling,
for  example,  is  current  at  rather  more  than  its
real  value.  Another  source  of  disagreement,  in
comparing  the  gold  and  the  silver  coins  with  ours,
is  the  different  ratios  of  the  value  of  gold  to  that
of  silver  in  ancient  and  in  modern  times.  (See
Argentum,  Aurum.)  The  only  course  left  is
to  express  the  value  of  the  ancient  coins  in  terms
of  the  current  value  of  our  coins,  choosing  the
sovereign  or  shilling  as  the  standard  just  as  we
may  prefer,  but  in  making  use  of  the  values  so
obtained,  to  remember  that  tliey  are  comparatively
worthless,  until  by  other  investigations  we  have  as-
certained the  value  of  money  as  compared  with  com-
rnodities  at  different  periods  of  ancient  history.
Such  investigations  form  no  part  of  our  present
subject  The  reader  is  referred  for  them  to
Bockh's  Public  Economy  of  Alliens,  and  to  Jacob's
History  of  tlie  Precious  Metals.  The  Tables  ap-
pended to  this  work  are  constructed  on  the  prin-
ciple we  have  described.

It  is  unnecessary  to  make  any  attempt  to  give  a


NUNDINAE.  815

complete  list  even  of  the  chief  books  on  numisma-
tics. All  the  earlier  works  are  referred  to  in  one
or  other  of  the  few  books  which  we  now  proceed
to  mention  as  those  Avhich  are  most  important  for
the  student  who  wishes  to  pursue  the  subject  fur-
ther :  —  Eckhel,  Doctrina  Numorum  Veterum,  8
vols.  4to.,  Vindobon.  1792—1839,  some  of  the
volumes  being  second  editions  ;  Rasche,  Lexicon
Universae  Rei  Numariae,  7  vols.  8vo.,  Lips.  1785
— 1805  ;  Wurm,  de  Ponderum,  Numorum,  Men-
surarum,  ac  de  Anni  ordinandi  Rationibus,  apud
Romanos  et  Graecos.  Stutg,  1831,  8vo.  ;  Hussey,
Essay  on  the  Ancient  Weights  and.  Money,  Oxf.,
1836,  8vo.  ;  Bockh,  Metrologisc/ie  Utitersuchungeti
iiber  Gewickle,  Munzfusse,  und  Masse  des  Alter-
thums  in  ihrem  Zusammenhange,  Berlin,  1838,
8vo  ;  Grote's  Review  of  Bockh's  work,  in  the
Classical  Museum,  vol.  i.  [P.  S.]

NUNCUPATIO.  [Testamentum.J
NU'NDINAE  is  invariably  and  justly  derived
by  all  the  ancient  writers  from  novem  and  dies,  so
that  it  literally  signifies  the  ninth  day.  (Dionys.
Ant.  Rom.  ii,  28,  vii,  58  ;  Macrob.  Sat.  i.  16;
Festus,  s.  V.  Nundinalem  Cocum.)  In  ancient  Ca-
lendar ia  all  the  days  of  the  year,  beginning  with
the  first  of  January,  are  divided  into  what  we  may
call  weeks,  each  containing  eight  days  which  are
marked  by  the  letters  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  F,  G,  H.
Now  it  is  admitted  on  all  hands  that  this  division
is  made  to  mark  the  nundinae,  for  every  eighth
day,  according  to  our  mode  of  speaking,  was  a
nundinae.  There  were  thus  always  seven  ordi-
nary days  between  two  nundinae.  The  Romans
in  their  peculiar  mode  of  reckoning  added  these
two  nundinae  to  the  seven  ordinary  days,  and
consequently  said  that  the  nundinae  recurred  every
ninth  day,  and  called  them  nundinae,  as  it  were
novemdinae.  A  similar  mode  of  stating  the  num-
ber of  days  in  a  week  is  still  customary  in  Ger-
many, where,  in  common  life,  the  expression  eight
days  is  used  for  a  week,  and  the  French  and
Italians  in  the  same  manner  call  a  fortnight  quinze
jours  and  quindici  giorni.

The  number  of  nundinae  in  the  ancient  year  of
ten  months  was  38  ;  and  care  was  always  taken
that  they  should  not  fall  on  the  calends  of  January
nor  upon  the  nones  of  any  month  (Macrob.  Sat.  i.
13  ;  Dion  Cass.  xl.  47,  xlviii.  33),  and  in  order  to
effect  this,  the  355th  day  of  the  lunar  year  {dies
intercalaris)  was  inserted  in  such  a  manner  as  to
avoid  the  coincidence  of  the  nundinae  with  the
primae  calendae  or  the  nones.  Macrobius  says
that  it  was  generally  believed  that  if  the  nundinae
fell  upon  the  primae  calendae,  the  whole  year
would  be  signalised  by  misfortunes  ;  the  nones
were  avoided  because  the  birthday  of  king  Servius
TuUius  was  celebrated  on  the  nones  of  every
month,  as  it  was  known  that  he  was  bom  on  the
nones  of  some  month,  though  the  month  itself
was  not  known.  Now,  as  on  the  nundines,
the  country-folk  assembled  in  the  city,  the
patricians  feared  lest  the  plebeians  gathered  at
Rome  on  the  nones  might  become  excited  and  en-
danger the  peace  of  the  republic.  These  reasons
are  indeed  very  unsatisfactory,  as  Gottling  (Gesch.
der  Rom.  Sfaatstv.  p.  183)  has  shown,  and  it  is
more  probable  that  the  calends  of  January  were  ill
suited  to  be  nundinae,  because  this  day  was  gene-
rally spent  by  every  father  in  the  bosom  of  his
own  family,  and  that  the  nones  were  avoided,  be-
cause, as  Ovid  (Fast.  i.  58)  says,  Nonarum  tuiela


816  NUNDINAir.

deo  caret.  But  at  the  time  when  the  Julian  calen-
dar was  introduced,  these  scruples,  whatever  they
may  have  been,  were  neglected,  and  in  several
ancient  caleudaria  the  nundinae  fall  on  the  first  of
January  as  well  as  on  the  nones.  (See  Graevius,
Tliesaur.  vol.  viii.  p.  7,  and-  the  various  ancient
Caleudaria.  Both  before  and  after  the  time  of
Caesar  it  was  sometimes  thought  necessary,  for  re-
ligious reasons,  to  transfer  the  nundinae  from  the
day  on  which  they  should  have  fallen  to  another
one.  (Dion  Cass.  Ix.  24,)  The  mmdinae  them-
selves were,  according  to  Plutarch  (Quaest.  Horn.
p.  275,  b),  sacred  to  Saturn,  and,  according  to
Granius  Licinianus  (ap.  Macrob.  Sat.  i.  16)  the
Flaminica  offered  at  all  nundinae  a  sacrifice  of  a
ram  to  Jupiter.

It  is  uncertain  to  whom  the  institution  of  the
nundinae  is  to  be  ascribed,  for  some  say  that  it  was
Romulus  (Dionys.  ii.  28  ;  Tuditanus,  ap.  Macrob.
Sat.  l.  c),  and  others  that  it  was  Servius  Tullius
(Cassius  Heraina,  ajo.Mocroi.  I.e.),  who  instituted
them,  while  the  nature  of  the  things  for  which
they  were  originally  set  apart  seems  to  show  that
their  institution  was  as  old  as  the  Romulian  year
of  ten  months,  or  at  least  that  they  v/ere  instituted
at  the  time  when  the  Roman  population  extended
beyond  the  precincts  of  the  city  itself.  For  the
I  nundinae    were    originally   market-days    for   the

country-folk,  on  which  they  came  to  Rome  to  sell
the  produce  of  their  labour,  and  on  which  the  king
settled  the  legal  disputes  among  them.  When,
therefore,  we  read  that  the  nundinae  were  feriae,
or  dies  nefasti,  and  that  no  comitia  were  allowed
to  be  held,  we  have  to  understand  this  of  the  po-
pulus,  and  not  of  the  plebs  ;  and  while  for  the
populus  the  nundinae  were  feriae,  they  were  real
days  of  business  {dies  fasti  or  comitiales)  for  the
plebeians,  who  on  these  occasions  pleaded  their
causes  with  members  of  their  own  order,  and  held
their  public  meetings  (the  ancient  comitia  of  the
plebeians)  and  debates  on  such  matters  as  con-
cerned their  own  order,  or  to  discuss  which  they
were  invited  by  the  senate.  (Dionys.  vii.  58  ;  Ma-
crob. I.  c. ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  3  ;  Festus,  s.  v.  Nun-
dinas;  compare  Niebuhr,  Hist,  of  Home,  vol.  ii.  p.
213.)  How  long  this  distinction  existed  that  the
nundinae  were  nefasti  for  the  patricians  and  fasti
for  the  plebeians,  is  not  quite  clear.  In  the  law  of
the  Twelve  Tables  they  appear  to  have  been  re-
garded as  fasti  for  both  orders  (Gellius,  xx.  1.
§  49),  though,  according  to  Granius  Licinianus
ap.  Macrob.  I.  c),  this  change  was  introduced  at  a
later  time  by  the  Lex  Hortensia,  286  B.  c.  This
innovation,  whenever  it  was  introduced,  facilitated
the  attendance  of  the  plebeians  at  the  comitia  cen-
tiiriata.  In  the  ancient  caleudaria,  therefore,  the
nundinae  and  dies  fasti  coincide.  The  subjects
to  be  laid  before  the  comitia,  whether  they  were
proposals  for  new  laws  or  the  appointment  of
officers,  were  announced  to  the  people  three  nun-
dinae beforehand  (trinundino  die  proponcre,  Ma-
crob. I.  c.  ;  Cic.  ad  Fam.  xvi.  12,  Philip,  v.  3,  pro
Domo,  1 6  ;  Liv.  iii.  35.)

The  nundinae  being  thus  at  all  times  days  of
business  for  the  plebeians  (at  first  exclusively  for
them,  and  afterwards  for  the  patricians  also),  the
proceedings  of  the  tribunes  of  the  people  were  con-
fined to  these  days,  and  it  was  necessary  that  they
should  be  terminated  in  one  day,  that  is,  if  a  pro-
position did  not  come  to  a  decision  in  one  day  it
was  iost,  and  if  it  was  to  be  brought  again  before


OBELISCUS.
the  people,  the  tribunes  were  obliged  to  announce
it  three  nundines  beforehand,  as  if  it  were  quite  a
new  subject.

Instead  of  nundinae  the  form  nundiniim  is  some-
times used,  but  only  Avhen  it  is  preceded  by  a
numeral,  as  in  trinundinum,  or  trinum  nundinum.
(See  the  passages  above  referred  to.)  It  is  also
used  in  the  expression  internundinum  or  inter
nundinum,  that  is,  the  time  which  elapses  between
two  nundinae.  (Varro  and  Lucil.  apud  Nonium,
iii.  145.)  The  word  nundinae  is  sometimes  used
to  designate  a  market-place  or  a  time  for  marketing
in  general.  (Cic.  de  Leg.  Agr.  ii.  33,  Philip,
V.  40  [L.S.]

NU'NDINUM.     [Nundinae.]

NUNTIA'TIO.    [Operis  Novi  N-untiatio.]

N  U'PTIAE.     [Matrimonium.J


OBAE.     [Tribus.]

OBELISCUS  (6§eXi(TK05)  is  a  diminutive  of
OI)elus  (6§f\6s),  which  properly  signifies  a  sharp-
ened thing,  a  skewer  or  spit,  and  is  the  name  given
to  certain  works  of  Egyptian  art.*  A  detailed
description  of  such  works  would  be  inconsistent
with  the  plan  of  this  work,  but  some  notice  of
them  is  required  by  the  fact  that  several  of  them
were  transported  to  Rome  under  the  emperors.
Ammianus  Marcellinus  (xvii.  4)  says  "  that  an
obelisk  is  a  very  rough  stone  in  the  shape  of  a  kind
of  land-mark  or  boundary  stone,  rising  with  a  small
inclination  on  all  sides  to  a  great  height  ;  and  in
order  that  it  may  imitate  a  solar  ray  by  a  gradual
diminution  of  its  bulk,  it  terminates  in  a  prolonga-
tion of  four  faces  united  in  a  sharp  point.  It  is
very  carefully  smoothed."  Most  ancient  writers
consider  obelisks  as  emblematic  of  the  sun's  rays.
(Comp.  Plin.  //.  A^.  xxxvi.  14.)

An  obelisk  is  properly  a  single  block  of  stone,
cut  into  a  quadrilateral  form,  the  sides  of  which
diminish  gradually,  but  almost  imperceptibly  from
the  base  to  the  top  of  the  shaft,  but  do  not  termi-
nate in  an  apex  upon  the  top,  which  is  crowned
by  a  small  pyramid,  consisting  of  four  sidej*  termi-
nating in  a  point.  The  Egyptian  obelisks  were
mostly  made  of  the  red  granite  of  Syene,  from
which  place  they  were  carried  to  the  different  parts
of  Egypt.  They  were  generally  placed  in  paii's  at
the  entrance  to  a  temple,  and  occasionally  in  the
interior,  and  were  usually  covered  with  hierogly-
phical  inscriptions.

Obelisks  were  first  transported  to  Rome  under
Augustus,  who  caused  one  to  be  erected  in  the
Circus  and  another  in  the  Campus  Martins.  (Plin.
xxxvi.  14.)  The  former  was  restored  in  158.9,
and  is  called  at  present  the  Flaminian  obelisk.
Its  whole  height  is  about  116  feet,  and  without
the  base  about  78  feet.  The  obelisk  in  the  Campus
Martius  was  set  up  by  Augustus  as  a  sun-dial.  It
stands  at  present  on  the  Monte  Citorio,  where  it
was  placed  in  1792.  Its  whole  height  is  about
110  feet,  and  without  the  base  about  71  feet.
Another  obelisk  was  brought  to  Rome  by  Caligula,
and  placed  on  the  Vatican  in  the  Circus  of  Cali-
gula. (Plin.  xxxvi.  15,  xvi.  76.  §2.)  It  stands
at  present  in  front  of  St.  Peter's,  where  it  was


*  Herodotus  (ii.  Ill)  uses  d§e\6s  in  the  sense
of  an  obelisk.


'I


OBLIGATIONES

placed  in  1586,  and  its  whole  height  is  about  132
feet,  and  without  the  base  and  modem  ornaments
at  top  about  83  feet.  But  the  largest  obelisk  at
Rome  is  that  which  was  originally  transported
from  Heliopolis  to  Alexandria  by  Constantine,  and
conveyed  to  Rome  by  his  son  Constantius,  who
placed  it  in  the  Circus  Maximus.  (Amm.  Marc,
xvii.  4.)  Its  present  position  is  before  the  north
portico  of  the  Lateran  church,  where  it  was  placed
in  1588.  Its  whole  height  is  about  149  feet,  and
without  the  base  about  105  feet.

There  are  eight  other  obelisks  at  Rome  besides
those  mentioned  above,  but  none  of  them  are  of
historical  importance.  There  are  also  obelisks  in
various  other  places,  as  at  Constantinople,  Aries,
Florence,  Catana  in  Sicily,  &c.,  some  of  which  are
works  of  Egyptian  art,  and  others  only  imitations.

There  are  two  small  obelisks  in  the  British
Museum,  which  were  brought  by  the  French  from
Cairo.  The  preceding  brief  account  is  chiefly  taken
from  Long's  Egyptian  Antiquities,  vol.  i.  cc.  14,
lo.  London,  12mo.  1832.

OBLIGATIO'NES.  Obligatio  is  defined  (Inst.
3.  tit.  13)  to  be  "  a  bond  of  law  by  which  we  are
under  a  necessity  of  releasing  (solvendae)  some-
thing according  to  the  laws  of  our  state."  Ac-
cbrding  to  Paulus  (Dig.  44.  tit.  7.  s.  3)  the  sub-
stance of  an  obligatio  does  not  consist  in  this,  that
its  object  is  to  make  any  corporeal  thing  (corpus)
or  servitus  ours,  but  that  it  shall  bind  another  per-
son to  give  us  something,  or  to  do  something,  or
to  secure  or  make  good  something  (ad  danduvi
aliqidd,  vel  faciendum^  vet  praestandum).  This
"binding  "  is  a  "  legal  binding,"  that  is,  the  party
who  fails  to  perform  what  he  has  engaged  to  do,
is  liable  to  legal  compulsion  ;  in  other  words,  the
duty  which  he  owes  may  be  enforced  by  suit  or
action.  The  duty  must  consist  in  something  that
has  a  pecuniary  value,  or  may  be  estimated  in
money  (Dig.  40.  tit.  7.  s.  9.  §  2) :  if  the  duty  is  not
capable  of  such  estimation,  it  is  not  a  duty  which
can  be  enforced  by  legal  process.  An  agreement
which  cannot  be  enforced  because  it  is  not  con-
formable to  the  principles  of  Roman  Law,  is  not
properly  an  obligatio,  but  still  the  Romans  gave
such  agreement  the  name  of  Obligatio,  when  it
was  conformable  to  the  principles  of  the  Jus  Gen-
tium, and  added  the  term  Naturalis,  by  which  it
is  opposed  to  Civilis  and  Praetoria  or  Honoraria.
Obligationes  Civiles  were  those  which  produced  a
right  of  action  according  to  the  Jus  Civile  ;  Prae-
toriae  or  Honorariae  were  those  which  owed  their
force  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Praetor.  In  the
wider  sense  Civiles  Obligationes  comprehend  Hono-
rariae, inasmuch  as  the  Edicta  magistratuum  be-
long to  Jus  Civile  in  its  wider  sense.  [Jus,]
This  is  ths  sense  of  Civiles  when  opposed  to  Na-
turalcs  Obligationes :  Civiles  Obligationes  have
the  narrower  sense  when  Civiles,  Honorariae,
and  Naturales  are  opposed  among  one  another.
Those  obligationes,  which  were  viewed  as  based
on  the  Naturalis  Ratio,  were  peculiarly  consi-
dered as  bonae  fidei  ;  and  such  obligationes  were
the  foundation  of  bonae  fidei  actiones,  of  which
the  Roman  Law  recognised  a  limited  number,  as
emti  et  venditi  actiones  ;  locati  et  conducti  actio  ;
mandati,  negotiorum  gestorum,  tutelae  actiones  ;
commodati  actio,  and  some  others.  The  term
strictum  jus  (Cod.  5.  tit.  1 3)  is  opposed  to  bona
fides  ;  and  stricti  juris  actiones  are  opposed  to
bonae  fidei  actiones.     Viewed  with  reference  to


OBLIGATIONES.


817


the  facts  on  which  the  law  operated  to  give  Ob-
ligationes a  binding  force,  Obligationes  arose  from
Contract  and  Quasi  Contract,  and  Delict  {malefi-
ciutn,  delictum),  and  Quasi  delict.  (Inst.  3.  tit.  13.)
This  division  of  Obligationes  with  respect  to  their
origin  was  apparently  viewed  as  exhaustive;  though
it  is  doubtful  Avhether  the  Roman  jurists  really
viewed  every  obligatio  as  included  with  one  of
these  four  divisions.  For  instance,  it  is  doubtful
whether  the  actio  ad  exhibendum  was  considered
as  an  obligatio  quasi  ex  contractu,  or  an  obligatio
quasi  ex  delicto.  Gains  divides  Obligationes  into
these  :  ex  contractu  and  ex  delicto  ;  but  he  intends
to  comprehend  the  obligationes  quasi  ex  contractu
under  those  ex  contractu,  and  obligationes  quasi
ex  delicto  under  those  ex  delicto.  In  his  Aurea
(Dig.  44.  tit.  7.  s.  1)  he  distributes  obligationes  as
to  their  origin  into  obligationes  ex  contractu,  ex
delicto,  and  ex  variis  causarum  figuris  ;  and  the  ex
variis  causarum  figuris  comprehends  the  obliga-
tiones quasi  ex  contractu  and  quasi  ex  delicto  ;  in-
deed the  term  is  comprehensive  enough  to  compre-
hend all  others,  whatever  they  may  be.

Contract  (contractus)  was  made  in  four  ways  —
Re,  Verbis,  Litteris,  and  Consensu.

As  an  example  of  an  obligatio  Re,  Gains  mentions
Mutuum  [Mutuum].  Also,  if  a  man  received
what  was  not  due  from  a  person  who  payed  by
mistake,  the  payer  had  his  remedy  for  the  recovery
(condictio  indebiti)  just  as  if  it  were  a  case  of
Mutuum.  But  "  this  kind  of  obligation,"  observes
Gains  (iii.  91),  "does  not  appear  to  arise  from
contract,  because  he  who  gives  with  the  intention
of  payment,  rather  intends  to  dissolve  or  put  an
end  to  (distrahere)  a  transaction  (negoiium),  than
to  commence  or  to  constitute  (contrahere)  a  trans-
action."

To  the  contracts  made  Re,  there  also  belong

COMMODATUM,  DePOSITUM,  and  PiGNUS.

The  Obligatio  Verbis  was  contracted  by  oral
question  and  answer  between  the  parties.  The
form  of  words  might  be:  —  Dare  Spondes.^^  Spondeo
( Sponden'  tu  istud  ?  Spondeo.  Plaut.  Capt.  iv.  2.
117.)  Dabis?  Dabo;  Promittis .!»  Prnmitto  ;
Fidepromittis  ?  Fidepromitto  ;  Fidejubes  ?  Fide-
jubeo;  Facies?  Faciam.  The  words  Dare  Spondes?
Spondeo,  were  so  peculiarly  Roman  that  their  legal
effect  could  not  be  preserved,  if  their  meaning  was
transferred  into  another  language :  nor  could  a
valid  obligatio  with  a  peregrinus  be  made  by  the
use  of  the  Avord  Spondeo.  (Gains,  iii.  93,  179.)
The  evidence  of  such  an  obligatio  must  have  been
the  presence  of  witnesses.  (Cic.  pro  Rose.  Com.  5.)

It  is  to  this  form  of  contract  by  question  and
answer  (ex  inter rogatione  et  responsione)  that  the
terms  "stipulari"  and  "stipulatio"  refer.  The
word  "stipulari  "  properly  refers  to  him  who  asks
the  question  :  si  quis  ita  dari  stipuletur ;  Post  mor-
tem meam  dari  spondes  ;  vel  ita.  Cum  morieris,
spondes  ?  The  person  who  asked  the  question  was
Stipulator ;  he  who  answered  the  question  was
Promissor,  and  he  was  said  Spondere.  (Gains,  iii.
100,  105  ;  Dig.  45.  tit.  1.  s.  113.  De  Verhorum
Obligationibus.)  Sometimes  the  whole  form  of
words  which  comprises  the  question  and  the  an-
swer, is  comprehended  in  the  term  Stipulatio  (Dig.
45.  tit.  1.  s.  5.  §  1),  and  the  participle  "  Stipulata  "
is  sometimes  used  in  a  passive  sense.  (Cic.  pro
Rose.  Com.  5.)

A  stipulatio  which  contained  an  impossible  con-
dition was  invalid  {inutilis).  As  the  Stipulatio  was
36


818


OBLIGATIONES.


effected  hj  words,  it  was  a  necessary  cousequence
that  the  parties  should  have  power  to  speak  and
hear,  and  on  this  ground  was  foimded  the  rule  of
law  that  a  mutus  and  a  surdus  could  not  be  parties
to  a  Stipulatio.  As  to  the  ability  of  Pupilli  and
Infantes  with  respect  to  Obligationes,  see  Impubes
and  Infans.  The  Stipulator  might  have  another
party  to  the  contract  on  his  behalf,  who  was  called
Adstipulator.  The  Adstipulator  had  the  same
right  of  action  as  the  Stipulator,  and  therefore  a
payment  in  respect  of  the  Stipulatio  could  be  made
to  him  as  well  as  to  the  Stipulator ;  and  the  Stipu-
lator had  an  actio  Mandati  against  the  Adstipulator
for  the  recovery  of  any  thing  that  he  had  received.

There  were  some  peculiarities  in  the  Adstipula-
tio.  The  right  of  action  did  not  pass  to  the  heres
of  the  Adstipulator,  and  the  adstipulatio  of  a
slave  for  his  master  had  no  effect,  though  in  all
cases  he  could  acquire  for  his  master  by  stipulatio.
The  same  rule  of  law  appeared  to  apply  to  him  who
was  In  Mancipio,  for  he  was  servi  loco.  If  a  son
who  was  in  the  power  of  his  father,  became  his
Adstipulator,  he  did  not  acquire  any  thing  for  his
father,  though  he  acquired  for  him  by  stipulatio.
Still  his  adstipulatio  gave  the  son  a  right  of  action,
provided  he  was  released  from  the  father's  power
without  a  capitis  derainutio,  as  for  instance  by  the
father's  death  or  by  being  inaugurated  Flamen
Dialis.  The  same  rule  of  law  applied  to  a  filia-
familias  and  to  a  wife  in  manu.

Those  who  were  bound  for  the  Promissor  were
called  Sponsores,  Fidepromissores,  Fidejussores
[Intercessio].

The  Obligatio  Literis  is  illustrated  by  Gaius
(iii.  128)  by  the  instance  of  Nomina  transcripticia,
as  when  a  creditor  who  has  a  debt  due  from  a
person  in  respect  of  a  sale,  or  a  letting,  or  a  part-
nership, enters  it  in  his  book  (codices,  or  tabulae
expensi  et  accepti)  as  a  debt  (ejcjMnsum  illi  fert :
compare  Cic.  pro  Rose.  Com.  4,  5  ;  expensum  tulisse
non  dicit,  cum  iabulas  non  recital).  This  was  called
Nomen  transcripticium  a  re  in  personam.  It  Avas
called  transcriptio  a  persona  in  personam,  when,  for
instance,  "  I  have  entered  as  due  from  you  the  debt
which  Titius  owes  to  me,  that  is,  if  Titius  has
transferred  or  assigned  {delegavit)  you  to  me."

Cicero  clearly  alludes  to  this  Literarum  Obliga-
tio in  his  Oration  pro  Roscio  Comoedo.  He  says
(c.  5),  speaking  of  the  plaintiff's  demand  :  "  his
claim  is  for  a  certain  sum  of  money  (pecunia  certa),
and  this  must  be  either  '  data  '  (a  case  of  obligatio
re),  or  '  expensa  lata '  (the  Literarum  Obligatio),
or  stipulata  (an  obligatio  Verbis)."

Some  difficulty  arises  about  the  mode  of  con-
verting an  obligation  of  a  different  kind  into  an
Obligatio  Literis.  The  subject  is  discussed  by
Unterholzner  {Uel)er  die  Rede  des  Cicero  fur  den
Schauspieler  Q.  Roscius,  Zeitschrift,  vol.  i.  p.  248)  in
an  ingenious  essay,  which,  however,  was  written
before  the  publication  of  the  MS.  of  Gains  ;  and  it
has  since  been  discussed  by  himself  and  by  other
writers.  Unterholzner  conjectured  that  a  third
party,  with  the  consent  of  the  debtor  and  creditor,
made  the  entry  in  his  own  books  ;  but  there  is  no
evidence  in  support  of  this  assumption.  Theophilus
(Ad.  tit.  1.  De  Lit.  Oblig.)  represents  the  Literarum
Obligatio  as  a  Novatio  or  a  change  of  an  obligation
of  one  kind  into  an  obligation  of  another  kind,
and  this  he  says  was  effected  both  by  words  and
writing  (^-fifian-i  koI  ypd/jifiaa-i).  It  was  effected.
Recording  to  him,  by  the  creditor  writing  to  the


OBLIGATIONES.
debtor  (ypd<p€iv  prifxara  nphs  aiirhv)  to  ask  his
consent  to  the  old  obligation  being  made  into  a
new  one  of  a  different  kind,  and  by  the  debtor
consenting.  As  stated  by  him  the  Obligatio  Li-
teris might  be  an  obligatio  contracted  by  a  letter
of  the  creditor  to  the  debtor  and  the  debtor's  reply.
In  principle  there  would  be  no  objection  to  its
being  contracted  by  the  debtor's  consent  expressed
by  a  subscription  in  the  creditor's  books.  The
Literarum  Obligatio  of  Theophilus,  however,  rather
seems  to  correspond  to  the  other  kinds  of  Litera-
rum Obligatio  referred  to  by  Gaius  (iii.  134),
where  he  says  "  this  obligation  can  be  contracted
by  chirographa  and  syngrapha,  that  is,  if  a  man
writes  that  he  owes  a  sum  of  money  or  will  pay  it;
provided,  however,  there  be  no  stipulatio  on  the
same  account."  It  is  not  impossible  that  Gaius
means  that  the  creditor  might  convert  an  obliga-
tion of  another  kind  into  that  of  pecunia  expensa
by  the  bare  entry  of  it  in  his  book  ;  for  it  is  no
objection  to  this,  as  Unterholzner  has  it,  "  that  a
unilateral  writing  on  the  part  of  the  creditor  should
have  the  effect  of  putting  another  person  under  an
obligatio,"  for  an  obligatio  was  already  contracted,
which  the  creditor  would  have  to  prove,  but  if  he
could  prove  it,  the  law  gave  him  all  the  advantage
of  a  creditor  for  pecunia  certa,  if  he  had  complied
with  certain  forms.  Gaius  (iii.  137)  certainly
may  be  understood  as  asserting  that  this  obligatio
was  contracted  simply  "  expensum  ferendo  : "  but
it  seems  to  be  the  general  opinion  that  this  Lite-
rarum Obligatio  required  the  consent  of  the  debtor
either  orally  in  the  presence  of  witnesses  or  by
letter  (Cic.  pro  Rose.  Com.  5 ;  Val.  Max.  viii.  2.
§  2) ;  and  this  is  not  inconsistent  with  Gaius,  for
though  he  says  that  the  debtor  is  bound  by  the
"  expensum  ferendo,"  that  does  not  exclude  his
consent,  but  merely  shows  what  is  necessary  in
order  to  make  the  consent  an  obligatio  literis.

The  Obligationes  Consensu  were  Emtio  and
Venditio,  Locatio  Conductio,  Societas,  Mandatum.
All  Obligationes  by  contract  of  course  required
consent  and  the  evidence  of  consent  ;  but  *'  these
obligationes,"  says  Gaius  (iii.  135),  "are  said  to
be  contracted  consensu,  because  no  peculiar  form  of
words  or  writing  was  required,  but  the  consent  of
the  parties  to  the  transaction  was  sufficient."  Ac-
cordingly such  transactions  could  take  place  be-
tween persons  at  a  distance  from  one  another,  but
a  verborum  obligatio  required  the  presence  of  the
parties.  The  actions  founded  on  these  Obligationes
consensu  were  Bonae  fidei.

An  Obligatio  Civilis  implies  a  right  of  action
against  the  person  who  owes  the  duty  (qui  ob-
ligatur).  This  right  of  action  (ex  contractu)  might
be  acquired  by  any  person  who  was  sui  juris.  It
might  also  be  acquired  for  him  by  those  who  were
in  his  Potestas,  Manus,  and  Mancipium ;  and  by
free  men  and  slaves  whom  a  man  possessed  bona
fide,  with  certain  exceptions.  This  right  of  action
might  also  be  acquired  by  a  man  through  the  acts
of  a  free  man  who  was  his  agent,  so  far  that  he
could  require  the  cession  of  the  obligatio  so  ac-
quired.

•  An  Obligatio  was  terminated  (tollitur)  in  vari-
ous ways.  The  most  common  way  was  by  pay-
ment (solutio)  of  what  was  due.  A  man  with  the
consent  of  the  creditor  might  pay  another's  debt,
but  the  two  schools  differed  as  to  the  legal  conse  •
quence  of  such  payment.  The  Proculiani  as  usual
adhering  strictly  to  fundamental  principles  main-


OBLIGATIONES.

tained  that  the  debtor  was  still  under  his  obligatio,
but  if  the  money  was  demanded  of  him  by  the
creditor  he  had  a  good  plea  of  dolus  malus  {exceptio
doli  mall).

An  obligatio  might  be  terminated  by  Accepti-
latio.  An  obligatio  contracted  per  aes  et  librara
might  be  determined  in  the  same  way,  and  also
one  arising,  "ex  judicati  causa."  [Nexum.]  An
obligatio  might  also  be  determined  by  Novatio.
whiqh  is  the  change  of  an  existing  duty  {debitum)
into  another  obligation,  and  the  determination  of
the  former  obligation.  (Dig.  46.  tit.  2.  De  Nova-
tionibus  et  Delegationibus.)  This  is  explained  by
the  following  instance  (Gaius,  iii.  176):  —  If  I
stipulate  that  Titius  shall  give  me  what  is  due
from  you,  a  new  obligatio  arises  by  the  interven-
tion of  a  new  person,  and  the  former  obligation  is
determined  by  being  replaced  by  the  latter  ;  and
sometimes  a  former  obligatio  may  be  determined
by  a  subsequent  stipulatio,  though  the  subsequent
stipulatio  may  be  invalid. —  If  the  stipulation  was
from  the  same  person,  it  required  the  addition  of
something  to  effect  a  Novatio,  as  the  addition  of  a
condition,  or  a  sponsor,  or  the  circumstance  of
adding  to  or  subtracting  from  the  time  contained  in
the  terms  of  the  covenant.  As  to  the  case  of  a
condition,  it  was  the  law  in  the  time  of  Gaius  that
there  was  no  Novatio  until  the  condition  was  ful-
filled, and  till  that  time  the  former  obligatio  con-
tinued. The  opinion  of  the  great  jurist  Servius
Sulpicius  as  to  the  addition  of  a  condition  imme-
diately effecting  a  Novatio,  was  not  law  in  the
time  of  Gaius  {alio  jure  utimur).

An  obligatio  was  also  determined  by  the  Litis
•contestatio,  if  the  proceedings  had  taken  place  in  a
Legitimura  judicium.  It  is  stated  generally  under
the  articles  Litis  contestatio  and  Legitimum  judi-
cium, what  is  the  import  of  these  terms  respec-
tively. The  original  obligation  (jr)nwa/)a//soi%a^eo)
was  determined  by  the  Litis  contestatio,  and  the
defendant  {reus)  was  then  bound  {tenetur)  by  the
Litis  contestatio.  If  he  was  condemned,  the  Litis
contestatio  ceased  to  have  any  effect,  and  he  was
bound  by  the  judgment  {ex  causa  judicati).  It  was
a  consequence  of  these  doctrines  that  after  a  Litis
contestatio  in  a  Legitimum  judicium,  a  man  could
not  bring  his  action  on  the  original  contract,  for  if
his  declaration  or  demand  was  Dari  mihi  oportere,
it  was  bad  {inutilis),  for  after  the  Litis  contestatio
the  Dari  oportere  had  ceased.  In  the  case  of  a
Judicium  quod  imperio  continetur,  the  obligatio
existed  and  the  action  could  be  brought,  but  the
demand  might  be  answered  by  a  plea  {exceptio)
of  a  res  judicata  or  in  judicium  deducta.  In  the
judicia  quae  imperio,  &c.,  the  exceptio  rei  judi-
catae  corresponds  to  the  condemnatio  in  the  Legi-
tima  judicia,  and  the  Exceptio  rei  in  judicium
deductae  to  the  Litis  contestatio,  (Keller,  U^er
Litis  Contestation,  p.  11,  &c.  ;  Gaius,  iii.  180.)

Obligationes  arising  from  Contract  passed  by
universal  succession  to  the  heres.  There  were  no
means  of  transferring  Obligationes  from  the  credi-
tor to  another  person,  except  by  a  Novatio,  which
was  effected  by  the  assignee  stipulating  with  the
debitor  with  the  consent  of  the  creditor,  the  effect
of  which  was  to  release  the  debitor  from  his  former
Obligatio  and  to  bind  him  by  a  new  one.  If  this
novatio  was  not  effected,  the  assignee  could  only
sue  as  the  cognitor  or  procurator  of  the  assignor,
and  not  in  his  own  name.     (Gaius,  ii.  38,  &c.)

From  the  consideration  of  Obligationes  arising


OBLIGATIONES.  810

from  Contracts,  Gaius  (iii.  182)  passes  to  the  con-
sideration of  Obligationes  "quae  ex  delicto  ori-
untur;"  and  these  delicts  which  are  the  found-
ation of  these  obligationes,  are  Furtum,  Bona
Rapta  or  R.APiNA,  Damnum  and  Injuria.  All
these  obligationes  he  considers  to  be  comprised  in
one  genus,  whereas  the  obligationes  ex  contractu
are  distributed  into  four  genera.

The  arrangement  by  the  Roman  jurists  of  Obli-
gationes ex  delicto  with  Obligationes  ex  contractu,
was  founded  on  the  circumstance  that  both  classes
of  Obligationes  were  the  foundation  of  rights  against
a  determinate  individual  or  det-^rminate  indivi-
duals ;  but  there  is  an  important  difference  in  the
origin  of  the  two  rights.  The  rights  ex  contractu
are  rights  founded  on  lawful  acts  ;  and  rights  ex
delicto  are  rights  founded  on  infringements  of  other
rights.

The  Obligationes  quasi  ex  contractu  are  not
enumerated  by  Gaius,  but  they  are  discussed  in
the  Institutes  of  Justinian  (3.  tit.  27).  These
Obligationes  do  not  properly  arise  either  from  con-
tract or  delict,  but  inasmuch  as  they  are  founded
on  acts,  which  are  not  delicts,  they  were  considered
as  belonging  to  contract  rather  than  to  delict.  In-
stances of  these  quasi  contracts,  enumerated  in  the
Institutes,  are  "  absentis  negotiorum  gestio  "  [Ne-
GOTioRUM  Gestorum  Actio],  the  "tutelae  ju-
dicium," a  "  communis  res  sine  societate,"  as  when
a  thing  has  been  bequeathed  and  given  to  several
persons  ;  and  some  other  instances.

These  quasi  contracts  are  arranged  in  the  Insti-
tutes of  Justinian  after  Obligationes  ex  contractu  ;
and  the  Obligationes  quasi  ex  delicto  are  placed
immediately  after  the  Obligationes  ex  delicto.
Instances  of  these  Obligationes  quasi  ex  delicto,
enumerated  in  the  Institutes  (4.  tit.  5),  are,  "  si
judex  litem  suara  fecerit,"  and  the  case  of  "  de-
jectum  effusumve,"  and  others.     [Dejecti,  &c.]

The  nature  of  an  Obligatio  may  now  be  more
clearly  understood.  An  Obligatio  implies  two
subjects  or  persons  at  least,  creditor,  or  he  who
has  the  right,  and  debitor,  or  he  who  owes  the
duty :  these  two  tenns,  which  strictly  apply  to
creditor  and  debtor  in  the  common  sense,  are  also
used  to  express  generally  the  relation  of  the  parties
to  an  Obligatio.  Obligatio  (literally  a  binding)
primarily  denotes  the  facts  by  which  the  legal
relation  between  the  parties  is  established.  It
also  denotes  the  duty  or  obligation  owing  by  one
of  the  parties  to  the  contract  {debitor)  to  the  other
party  {creditor),  if  the  obligatio  is  unilateral  ;  and
the  duties  mutually  owing  from  the  one  to  the
other,  if  the  obligatio  is  bilateral.  The  word,
which,  as  opposed  to  obligatio  or  "  binding,"  ex-
presses the  determination  of  such  binding,  is
"  solutio  ;"  and  generally  some  form  of  the  word
"  solvo  "  is  the  appropriate  terra  to  express  the
legal  termination  of  the  obligatio.  But  inasmuch
as  duties  owing  by  one  party  to  the  contract,  or
duties  mutually  owing  by  the  parties  to  the  con-
tact, imply  a  right  in  the  other  party  to  the  con-
tract, or  imply  mutual  rights  in  the  parties  to  the
contract,  the  word  obligatio  is  often  used  to  express
also  the  right  which  is  established  by  the  obligatio:
and  it  is  also  used  to  express  the  whole  relation
between  debitor  and  creditor.  Thus,  the  right  of
the  Creditor  is  spoken  of  as  his  Obligatio,  and  the
duty  of  the  Debitor  as  his  Obligatio.  There  is  no
special  name  in  the  Roman  law  for  a  right  against
a  determinate  person  or  determinate  persons.  The
3g  2


«20


OBLIG  ATI  ONES.


name  for  OAvniership  is  Dominium,  to  which  is  op-
posed the  name  Obligationes  as  descriptive  of  rights
against  determinate  persons.

It  is  correctly  remarked  (Austin,  An  Outline  of
a  course  of  Lectures  on  General  Jurisprudence)
*'  that  in  the  writings  of  the  Roman  lawyers,  the
terra  obligatio  is  never  applied  to  a  duty  which
answers  to  a  right  in  rem^''  that  is,  a  right  which
is  good  against  all  the  world.  But  as  the  duty
answering  to  a  right  in  rem  is  only  the  duty  of
forbearance,  that  is,  of  not  doing  anything  to  inter-
fere with  the  right,  there  is  no  inconvenience  in  the
want  of  a  name :  the  right  to  the  exclusive  enjoy-
ment of  any  thing  (corpus)  is  ownership  ;  all  other
people  are  not  owners :  as  soon  as  an  act  is  done
which  is  an  infringement  of  an  owner^'s  right,  or  in
other  words  a  delictum  (in  one  sense  in  which  the
Romans  use  this  word)  an  obligation  arises  by
force  of  such  act  {obligatio  ex  delicto)  and  gives
the  injured  person  a  right  of  action  against  the
wrong-doer.

A  contractus  required  the  consent  of  all  the
parties  to  it.  Those  Obligationes  which  were  said
to  be  founded  on  "  consent  "  (consensus)  were  said
to  be  so  founded  only  because  consent  was  suffi-
cient (Gains,  iii.  136),  and  no  peculiar  form  of
words  or  expression  was  required  ;  whereas  in  the
Obligationes  contracted  "  re,"  "  verbis,"  and
*'  literis,"  certain  acts,  words,  or  writing  were  re-
quired. In  those  contracts  where  particular  forms
were  not  required  in  order  to  convert  them  into
Obligationes,  any  words  or  acts  were  sufficient,
which  were  evidence  of  consent.  Constraint  by
force  or  threats  (vis,  metus),  and  fraud  (dolus),
and  in  many  cases  error*  (error,  ignorantia),  either
render  an  agreement  absolutely  null,  or  give  the
party  who  has  been  constrained,  deceived,  or  in
error,  various  modes  of  defence  against  the  claims
of  the  other  party.

An  Obligatio,  as  already  observed,  supposes  two
persons  at  least.  But  there  may  be  more  than
two  parties  to  an  Obligatio,  either  as  creditores  or
debitores  or  both,  all  of  whom  are  comprehended
under  the  general  name  of  Rei.  (Cic.  de  Or.  ii.
43.)  With  reference  to  a  person  who  is  under
the  same  obligatio,  a  person  may  be  called  Cor-
reus.  But  when  there  are  several  parties  to  an
obligatio,  there  are  properly  several  Obligationes,
and  this  is  the  case  whether  the  creditor  is  one
and  the  debitores  are  several,  or  the  creditores
are  several  and  the  debitor  is  one,  or  both  the
creditores  and  debitores  are  several.  In  the  ob-
ligatio pro  rata,  the  claims  of  the  several  creditores,
or  the  duties  of  the  several  debitores,  are  deter-
minate parts  of  a  whole,  which  is  made  up  by  the
parts  being  united  in  one  formal  obligatio.  There
are  cases  when  several  creditores  may  claim  the
whole  (solidum),  or  several  debitores  may  owe
the  whole  (solidum)  ;  where  a  creditor  claims  the
whole  against  several  aebitores,  there  are  in  fact
several  obligationes  binding  on  the  several  debi-
tores. But  if  one  creditor  has  recovered  the  whole,
or  one  debtor  has  paid  the  whole,  the  entire  Ob-
ligatio is  at  an  end.     (Inst.  3.  tit.  16  (17).)

If  an  obligatio  is  unilateral,  it  only  gives  a  right
of  action  to  one  of  the  parties  to  it,  as  in  the  case
of  Mutuum,  Stipulatio,  and  others  ;  if  it  is  bila-
teral, it  gives  a  right  to  each  party  against  the
other,  as  emtio  yenditio,  and  locatio  conductio.

The  most  general  name  for  any  agreement,  the
object  of  which  was  to  establish  legal  relations


OBLIGATIONES.

between  the  parties,  is  Conventio,  Pactio,  Pactuni
Conventum,  and  its  essence  is  consent :  "  conven-
tionis  verbum  generale  est,  ad  omnia  pertinens,  de
quibus  negotii  contrahendi  transigendique  causa
consentiunt,  qui  inter  se  agunt,"  (Dig.  2.  tit.
14.)  Conventiones  were  juris  gentium,  and  as  a
genus  were  divisible  into  species.  Those  Conven-
tiones which  were  reducible  to  certain  classes  were
called  Contractus,  of  which  the  Jus  Civile  acknow-
ledged the  four  kinds  already  mentioned.  Re,
Verbis,  Literis  and  Consensu.  Of  those  Obliga-
tiones which  were  established  Re,  the  four  which
have  been  already  mentioned,  had  special  names,
Mutuum,  Commodatura,  Depositum  and  Pignus  ,
and  accordingly  they  have  been  called  by  modern
writers  Contractus  Norninati.  But  there  were
other  Obligationes  which  were  established  Re,
for  which  the  Romans  had  no  particular  name,
and  accordingly  they  have  been  called  by  modem
writers  Contractus  Innominati.

These  obligationes  are  founded  upon  something
that  has  been  given  or  done  by  one  party,  which
gives  him  a  claim  against  the  other  for  something
to  be  given  or  done  in  return.  If  the  matter  of
the  conventio  was  a  civile  negotium  or  had  a  civilis
causa,  it  formed  an  obligatio,  and  was  a  found-
ation of  an  action  "  praescriptis  verbis  "  or  "  in
factum  ; "  or  as  it  is  clearly  expressed  by  Julian
(Dig.  19.  tit.  5.  De  praescriptis  verbis,  &c,),  this  is
the  actio  "  ad  quam  necesse  est  confugere,  quoties
contractus  existunt,  quorum  appellationes  nullae
jure  civili  proditae  sunt."  All  the  events  upon
which  these  actions  could  arise  were  reduced  to
the  four  following  heads  :  "aut  do  tibi  ut  des,  aut
do  ut  facias,  aut  facio  ut  des,  aut  facio  ut  facias."
(Paulus,  Dig.  19.  tit.  5.  s.  .5.  §  1—4.)  The  bare
agreement  (pactum)  both  in  nominate  and  inno-
minate contracts  is  not  sufficient  to  establish  an
obligatio :  in  both  cases  some  act  must  be  done  to
make  the  agreement  become  a  contract,  and  to
establish  an  obligatio.  The  nominate  contracts
have  their  particular  names.  The  innominate  con-
tracts take  the  name  of  contracts  from  their  re-
semblance to  nominate  contracts ;  but  as  they  are
not  referable  to  any  one  of  such  contracts,  they
are  formed  into  a  separate  class:  still  some  of  them
have  special  names.  These  contracts,  as  it  will
appear  from  the  description  just  given  of  them,  have
their  foundation  in  an  act  (a  giving  or  doing)  by
one  of  the  parties,  and  so  far  resemble  contracts  Re.
The  transaction  is  not  completed  so  long  as  a  thing
remains  to  be  given  or  done  by  the  debitor ;  and
the  creditor  may  have  his  action  (condictio)  for  the
recovery  of  a  thing  which  he  has  given,  and  for
which  the  debtor  has  not  made  the  return  (a  giving
or  an  act)  agreed  upon.  The  creditor  has  also  his
action  generally  (praescriptis  verbis)  for  the  per-
formance of  the  contract,  if  he  prefers  that,  or  for
compensation  to  the  amount  of  the  injury  sustained
by  its  non-performance.

All  other  conventiones  were  simply  Pacta,  the
characteristic  of  which  is  that  they  were  not  ori-
ginally the  foundation  of  actions,  but  only  of  pleas
or  answers  (exceptiones)  ;  that  is,  if  an  agreement
(conventio,  pactio)  could  not  be  referred  to  some
class  of  contracts,  it  did  not  give  a  right  of  action.
When  there  was  no  civilis  causa,  there  was  no
civilis  obligatio  created  by  such  conventio,  and  it
is  added  (Dig.  2.  tit.  14.  s.  7.  §4),  "therefore  a
nuda  pactio  does  not  produce  an  obligatio  but  an
exceptio  ; "  whence  it  follows  that  a  nuda  pactio


OBLIGATIONES.

33  a  pactio  sine  causa.  Sometimes  Nuda  con-
ventio  is  used  as  equivalent  to  Nuda  pactio.  (Dig.
15.  tit.  5.  s.  15.)  It  is  a  mistake  to  say  that  Pac-
tum by  itself  means  a  one-sided  contract.  Pactum
is  a  term  as  general  as  conventio  {pactum  a pac-
tione  —  etit  autem  pactio  duorum  pluriumve  in  idem
placitmn  consensus.  Dig.  2.  tit.  14.  s.  1),  and  is  a
part  of  all  contracts  as  conventio  is.  There  might
be  a  Pactum  or  Pactio  relating  to  man-iage,  the
establishment  of  a  servitus  in  provincial  lands
(Gains,  ii.  31),  and  other  matters.  But  Pactum
as  included  in  the  law  of  Obligationes,  obtained  a
limited  signification  ;  and  it  was  used  to  signify
agreements  not  included  among  the  Contractus,  but
still  binding  agreements  as  being  founded  on  some
causa.  A  pactum  therefore  might  produce  a  naturalis
obligatio.  Some  of  these  pacta  were  in  course  of
time  made  the  foundation  of  an  actio  civilis,  and
some  were  protected  by  the  Praetor :  ait  Praetor  :
"  Pacta  conventa  quae  neque  dolo  malo  neque
adversus  leges  plebiscita  senatus-consulta  edicta
decreta  principum  neque  quo  fraus  cui  eorum  fiat
facta  erunt  servabo."  (Dig.  2.  tit.  14.  s.  7.)  The
parties  to  a  Pactum  were  said  "  pacisci."  Any-
thing might  be  the  subject  of  a  "  pactum  "  which
did  not  involve  an  illegality.  If  an  illegal  pactum
was  made,  it  was  still  illegal,  though  it  had  been
confirmed  by  a  stipulatio  or  any  other  form.  The
matter  relating  to  Pacta  is  not  arranged  in  the
Digest  under  the  head  of  Obligationes  et  Actiones
(Dig.  44.  tit.  7),  but  in  the  same  book  with  the
titles  De  Jurisdictione,  &c.

Savigny  shows  that  the  notion  of  Agreement,
{veii.rag\  is  too  narrowly  conceived  by  jurists  in
general.  He  defines  agreement  to  be  the  "  union
of  several  persons  in  one  concordant  declaration  of
will  whereby  their  legal  relations  are  determined."
Consequently  the  notion  of  agreement  must  be  ex-
tended to  other  things  than  to  contracts  which  pro-
duce obligationes :  for  instance  Traditio  or  delivery
is  characterized  by  all  the  marks  of  an  agreement ;
and  the  fact  that  the  declaration  of  their  will  by
the  parties  to  the  traditio,  is  insufficient  to  effect
Traditio  without  the  external  act  by  which  pos-
session is  acquired,  does  not  in  the  least  affect  the
essence  of  the  agreement.  The  imperfect  concep-
tion of  an  agreement  has  arisen  from  not  separating
in  some  cases  the  obligatory  agreement  from  those
acts  for  which  such  obligatory  agreement  is  gene-
rally a  preparation  and  of  which  it  is  an  accompani-
ment. This  becomes  more  apparent  if  we  consider
the  case  of  a  gift,  which  is  a  real  agreement  but
without  any  obligation :  it  is  merely  a  giving  and
receiving  by  mutual  consent.  This  general  notion
of  agreement  is  contained  in  the  words  of  Ulpian
already  quoted,  in  which  he  defines  Pactio  to  be
"  duorum  pluriumve,"  &c.  It  does  not  seem  how-
ever that  the  Romans  applied  the  terms  Pactio,
Pactum,  and  Conventio  to  any  agreements  except
those  which  were  the  foundation  of  Obligationes
of  some  kind.  (Savigny,  System  des  Heut.  Rom.
Redds,  iii.  §  140,  &c.)

Pollicitatio  is  a  proffer  or  offer  on  the  part  of  a
person  who  is  willing  to  agree  {pollicitatio  offerentis
solius  promissum.  Dig.  50.  tit.  12.  s.  3).  A  pol-
liciUitio  of  course  created  no  obligatio  until  the
proffer  or  offer  was  accepted.  The  word  is  fre-
quently used  with  reference  to  promises  made  by  a
person  to  a  state,  city,  or  other  body  politic,  such
as  the  promise  to  erect  a  building,  to  exhibit  public
Bhows,  &c.      Such  pollicitationes   were   binding,


OCHLOCRATIA.  821

when  there  was  a  causa,  as  a  promise  made  with
reference  to  a  dignity  {honor)  conferred  or  to  be
conferred.  A  pollicitatio  sine  causa  was  also
obligator}',  if  the  person  began  to  do  what  be  had
promised,  as  if  he  laid  the  foundation  of  a  building
or  cleared  the  ground.  (See  Piin.  Ep.  x.  48.  Huio
theatro  ex  privatorum  pollicitationibus  multa  de-
bcntur ;  and  v.  12.)

A  person  who  vowed  anything,  was  also  bound
{voto  obligatus).

(Gains,  iii.  88,  &c.  ;  Inst.  3.  tit.  12  (13),  4.  6;
Dig.  47.  tit.  7,  Cod.  4.  tit.  10,  De  Ohligationibus
et  Actionibus ;  Muhlenbruch,  Doctrina  Pandec-
tarum,  lib.  iii.  De  Obligationibus.  The  most  com-
plete work  on  Roman  Obligationes  is  by  Unter-
holzner,  Quellenm'dssige  zusammenstellung  der  lekre
dcs  Romischen  RecIUs  von  den  Schuldverhdltnissen,
Leipzig,  1840,  2  vols.  8vo.  ;  see  also  Thibaut,
PandektenrecU ;  Yangeioyv,  Pandekien,&c. ;  Puchta,
Inst.  vol.  iii.)  [G.  L.]

O'BOLUS  {6€o\6s),  the  smallest  of  the  four
principal  denominations  of  weight  and  money
among  the  Greeks,  was  l-6th  of  the  drachma,
1 -600th  of  the  mina,  and  1 -36,000th  of  the  talent.
As  a  coin,  the  obolus  was  of  silver  ;  and  con-
nected with  it,  at  least  in  the  Attic  system,  were
silver  coins  weighing  respectively  5,  4,  3,  2,  1^
obols,  and  -J,  ^,  and  ^  of  an  obol  ;  all  which  are
found  in  collections  of  coins.  The  1^  obol  piece
was  a  quarter  of  a  drachm.  The  Attic  obol  was
also  divided  into  8  (or  according  to  others  10)
XaAKoT.  (See  Pondera  ;  Nummus;  Drachma  ;
Chalcus  ;  and  the  Tables.)  [P,  S.]

OBSIDIONA'LIS  CORONA.     [Corona.]

OBSO'NIUM.     [Opsonium.]       •

OCCUPA'TIO.  The  word  is  used  by  Cicero
{de  Off.  i.  7)  to  express  the  acquisition  of  owner-
ship by  occupation  or  the  taking  possession  of  that
which  has  no  owner,  and  with  the  intention  of
keeping  it  as  one's  own.  Among  the  modes  of
acquiring  ownership  "naturali  ratione,"  that  is,  by
such  means  as  are  in  all  nations  acknowledged  to
be  lawful  means  of  acquiring  ownership,  Gaius  (ii.
^'a,  &c.)  enumerates  the  taking  possession  of  those
things  quae  nuUius  sunt,  as  animals  of  the  chace,
birds  and  fishes,  and  such  things  are  said  "oc-
cupantis  fieri."  The  same  applies  to  the  finding  of
things  which  have  no  owner  ;  but  there  were  par-
ticular rules  as  to  thesaurus,  treasure  found  in  the
ground.  (Inst.  2.  tit.  1.  s.  39;  Dig.  49.  tit.  14.  s.  3.
§  10  ;  and  Gaius,  ii.  7).  The  latest  legislation  about
Thesaurus  is  in  Cod.  10.  tit.  15.  Things  which
were  lost  or  thrown  out  of  a  ship  in  case  of  ne-
cessity were  not  subject  to  Occupatio.  Things
taken  in  war  were  subject  to  Occupatio.  (Inst. 2.
tit.  1.  s.  17  ;  Dig.  41.  tit.  1.  de  acquirendo  rerum
dominio.)  [G.  L.J

OCHLOCRATIA  {ox^oKparia),  the  dominion
of  the  rabble,  a  name  of  later  origin  than  the  time
of  Aristotle,  and  applied  to  that  perversion  of  a
democracy,  in  which,  through  the  introduction  of
devices  for  removing  or  counteracting  the  natural
and  wholesome  inequalities  of  society  (such  as
paying  citizens  for  attendance  in  the  popular  as-
sembly and  on  other  occasions  on  which  their
civic  functions  might  be  exercised,  increasing  the
number  and  restricting  the  duration  and  authority
of  public  offices),  the  exercise  of  iill  the  highest
functions  of  government  came  to  be  practically  in
the  hands  of  a  mere  faction,  consisting  of  the  low-
est and  poorest,  though  most  numerous,  claos  of
3g  3


822


OCREA.


citizens,  who  were  thus  tempted  to  adopt  as  one
of  their  ordinary  avocations,  that  which  they  would
otherwise  have  left  in  more  suitable  hands.  (Polyb.
vi.  4  ;  Pint,  de  Monarch.  &c.,  c.  3  ;  Thirl  wall.
Hist,  of  Greece,  c.  x.  vol.  i.  p.  410.)     [C.  P.  M.]

O'CREA  (KuvfJiis),  a  greave,  a  leggin.  A  pair
of  greaves  (Ki/Tj/xtSes)  was  one  of  the  six  articles  of
armour  which  formed  the  complete  equipment  of  a
Greek  or  Etruscan  warrior  [Arm a],  and  likewise
of  a  Roman  soldier  as  fixed  by  Servius  Tullius.
(Liv.  i.  43.)  They  were  made  of  bronze  (Alcaeus,
Frag.\.  ed.  Matthiae),  of  brass  (Hes.  Scut.  122),
of  tin  (Horn.  //.  xviii.  612,  xxi.  592),  or  of  silver
and  gold  (Virg.  Aen.  vii.  634,  viii.  624,  xi.  488),
with  a  lining  probably  of  leather,  felt,  or  cloth.
Another  method  of  fitting  them  to  the  leg  so  as  not
to  hurt  it,  was  by  the  interposition  of  that  kind  of
sponge  which  was  also  used  for  the  lining  of
helmets  [Galea],  and  which  Aristotle  describes
as  being  remarkable  for  thinness,  densit}^  and  firm-
ness. The  greaves,  lined  with  these  materials,  as
they  were  fitted  with  great  exactness  to  the  leg,
probably  required,  in  many  cases,  no  other  fasten-
ing than  their  own  elasticity.  Often,  nevertheless,
they  were  further  secured  by  two  straps,  as  may
be  seen  in  the  woodcut  at  p.  135.  Their  form  and
appearance  will  be  best  understood  from  the  ac-
companying woodcut.  The  upper  figure  is  that  of
a  fallen  warrior  represented  among  the  sculptures,
now  at  Munich,  belonging  to  the  temple  in  Aegina.
In  consequence  of  the  bending  of  the  knees,  the
greaves  are  seen  to  project  a  little  above  them.
This  statue  also  shows  very  distinctly  the  ankle-
rings  {iiriacpvpia),  which  were  used  to  fasten  the
greaves  immediately  above  the  feet.  The  lower
portion  of  the  same  woodcut  represents  the  interior
view  of  a  bronze  shield  and  a  pair  of  bronze  greaves,
which  were  found  by  Signor  Campanari  in  the


tomb  of  an  Etruscan  warrior,  and  which  are  now
preserved  in  the  British  Museum.  These  greaves
are  made  right  and  left.

That  the  Greeks  took  great  delight  in  handsome
and  convenient  greaves  may  be  inferred  from  the
epithet  iVKyrjjxiSes,  as  used  by  Homer,  and  from


ODEUM.

his  minuteness  in  describing  some  of  their  part.%
especially  the  ankle-rings,  which  were  sometimes
of  silver.  (Hom. //.  iii.  331,  xi.  18.)  The  modern
Greeks  and  Albanians  wear  greaves,  in  fonn  re-
sembling those  of  their  ancestors,  but  made  of
softer  materials,  such  as  velvet,  ornamented  with
gold,  and  fastened  with  hooks  and  eyes.

Among  the  Romans,  greaves  made  of  bronze,
and  richly  embossed,  were  worn  by  the  gladiators.
Some  such  have  been  found  at  Pompeii.  [See
woodcut,  p.  576.]  It  appears  that  in  the  time  of
the  emperors,  greaves  were  not  entirely  laid  aside
as  part  of  the  armour  of  the  soldiers.  (Lamprid.
Al.  Sever.  40.)  At  an  earlier  period,  the  heavy-
armed  wore  a  single  greave  on  the  right  leg.
(  Veget.  de  lie  Mil.  i.  20.)  Leggins  of  ox-hide  or
strong  leather,  probably  of  the  fonn  already  de-
scribed and  designated  by  the  same  names  both  in
Greek  and  Latin,  were  worn  by  agricultural  la-
bourers (Hom.  Od.  xxiv.  228  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xix.  7  ;
Pallad.  de  Re  Rust.  i.  43)  and  by  huntsmen.  (Hor.
Sat.  ii.  3.  234.)  [J.  Y.]

OCTASTY'LOS.     [Templum.]

OCTA'VAE.     [Vectigalia.]

OCTOBER  EQUUS.     [Palima.]

OCTO'PHORON.     [Lectica.]

ODE'UM  {(fSelov),  a  species  of  public  build-
ing, which  was  first  erected  during  the  flourishing
epoch  of  Greek  art  in  the  fifth  century  B.C.,  for
contests  in  vocal  and  instrumental  music  (tSitos
eV  ^  ol  pa\p(f8o]  koI  at  KidapcfSol  ijywyi^ovTO,
Hesych.  s.  v„  comp.  Suid.  s.  v.).  In  its  general
form  and  arrangements  it  was  very  similar  to  the
theatre  ;  and  it  is  sometimes  called  Searpoj/.*
(Paus.  i.  8,  ii.  3  ;  Philostr.  Vit.  Soph.  ii.  1.  p.
549.)  There  were,  however,  some  characteristic
differences :  the  Odeum  was  much  smaller  than
the  theatre  ;  and  it  was  roofed  over,  in  order
to  retain  the  sound.  (Vitruv.  v.  9.)  The  com-
paratively small  size  of  the  Odeum  is  easily  ac-
counted for,  not  only  because  the  space  required
in  the  theatre  for  the  evolutions  of  the  Chorus  was
not  wanted  here  ;  but  also  because  it  appears  to
have  been  originally  designed  chiefly  for  musical
rehearsals,  in  subordination  to  the  great  choral
performances  in  the  theatre,  and  consequently  a
much  smaller  space  was  required  for  the  audience.

Unfortunately  we  have  no  detailed  description
of  this  class  of  buildings.  Vitruvius  (/.  c.)  makes
a  passing  mention  of  the  Odeum  of  Pericles,  but
states  no  particulars  respecting  its  construction,  ex-
cept that  it  was  adorned  with  stone  pillars,  and
roofed  over  with  the  masts  and  yards  of  the  cap-
tured Persian  ships,  a  statement  which  has  led
some  writers  into  the  mistake  of  referring  the
building  to  the  time  of  Themistocles.  From  the
statement  of  Pausanias  (i.  20.  §  4)  that,  when  the
Odeum  was  rebuilt,  after  its  burning  in  the  cap-
ture of  Athens  by  Sulla,  it  was  made  of  a  form
which  was  said  to  be  in  imitation  of  the  tent  of
Xerxes,  it  may  perhaps  be  inferred  that  the  ori-
ginal building  was  actually  covered  with  that  tent.
At  all  events,  this  statement  proves  that  the  roof
must  have  been  conical.  Accordingly  Plutarch,
who  states  that  the  original  building  f  was  an
imitation  of  the  king's  tent,  describes  its  roof  as


*  See,  respecting  the  precise  meaning  of  thd
words,  the  note  on  p.  83,  a.

f  Perhaps  he  confomided  it  with  the  one  which
was  standing  in  his  time.


ODEUM.

■  sloping  all  round,  and  inclined  from  one  summit
(Peric.  13).  He  also  says  that,  in  its  intenial
arranuement,  the  building  had  many  seats  and
many  pillars.  From  a  few  other  passages,  and
from  the  scanty  remains  of  such  edifices,  we  may
conclude  further  that  the  Odeum  had  an  orchestra
for  the  choinis  and  a  stage  for  the  musicians  (of
less  depth  than  the  stage  of  the  theatre),  beliind
which  were  rooms,  which  were  probably  used  for
keeping  the  dresses  and  vessels,  and  ornaments
required  for  religious  processions.  Of  course  the
Odeum  required  no  shifting  scenes  ;  but  the  wall
at  the  back  of  the  stage  seems  to  have  been  per-
manently decorated  with  paintings.  For  ex-
ample, Vitruvius  tells  us  (vii.  5.  §  5),  that,  in  the
small  theatre  at  Tralles  (which  was  doubtless  an
Odeum),  Apaturius  of  Alabanda  painted  the  scena
with  a  composition  so  fantastic  that  he  was  com-
pelled to  remove  it,  and  to  correct  it  according  to
the  truth  of  natural  objects.  Among  the  paintings
in  the  Odeum  at  Smyrna  was  a  Grace,  ascribed
to  Apelles.  (Pans.  ix.  35.  §  6.)  The  Odea  of
later  times  were  richly  decorated.  That  of  He-
rodes  Atticus  had  its  roof  of  beams  of  cedar
adorned  with  carvings,  and  contained  numerous
works  of  art.    (Philost.  ii.  1.  p.  551.)

The  earliest  building  of  this  kind  was  that  al-
ready mentioned  as  erected  by  Pericles  at  Athens,
for  the  purpose,  according  to  Plutarch  (/.  c.)  of
celebrating  the  musical  contests  at  the  Panathe-
naca.  It  lay  on  the  left  hand  to  persons  coming
out  of  the  great  theatre,  and  therefore  at  the  foot
of  the  south-eastern  part  of  the  Acropolis.  (Vitruv.
V.  9.)  Its  proximity  to  the  theatre  suggested
some  of  the  uses  made  of  it,  namely,  as  a  refuge
for  the  audience  when  driven  out  of  the  theatre
.by  rain,  and  also  as  a  place  in  which  the  chorus
could  be  prepared.  (Vitruv.  I.  c.)  It  was  burnt
when  Athens  was  taken  by  Sulla,  B.  c.  85,  and  was
restored  by  Ariobarzanes  II.  king  of  Cappadocia  ;
wno  employed  C.  and  M.  Stallius  and  Menalip-
pus  as  the  architects  of  the  work.  Ariobarzanes
reigned  from  B.C.  63  to  about  B.C.  £1.  (Vitruv.
L  c.  ;  Pans.  i.  20.  §  4  ;  Appian.  BeU.  Mithr.  38  ;
Bockh,  Corp.  Inscr.  vol.  i.  No.  357.)  The  build-
ing is  now  entirely  destroyed.

This  was  not  the  only  Odeum  at  Athens  in  the
time  of  Hadrian  and  the  Antonines.  Pausanias,
who  in  the  passage  referred  to,  does  not  apply  the
name  of  Odeum  to  the  building,  speaks  of  an
Odeum  at  Athens  in  two  other  passages  (i.  8.  §  6,
14.  §  1),  from  a  close  examination  of  which  it  ap-
pears more  than  doubtful  whether  this  Odeum  is
the  same  as  the  former.  Stieglitz  (p.  228,  foil.)
identifies  it  with  the  Pnyx,  which  he  supposes  to
have  been  fitted  up  as  an  Odeum,  while  that  of
Pericles  was  in  ruins.  It  is  remarkable  that  Pau-
sanias nowhere  mentions  the  Pnyx,  unless  this
Odeum  be  the  same  as  it.

Another  Odeum  was  built  at  Athens  by  He-
rodes  Atticus,  and  was  the  most  magnificent  edi-
fice of  the  sort  in  the  whole  empire.  It  stood,  as
compared  with  the  Odeum  of  Pericles,  on  the
opposite  side  of  the  great  theatre,  under  the  south-
western part  of  the  Acropolis  ;  where  large  ruins
of  it  are  still  seen.  The  length  of  its  largest
diameter  was  248  feet,  and  it  is  calculated  to  have
furnished  accommodation  for  about  8000  persons.
(Leake,  Topogr.  of  Athens,  p.  61.)  This  building
was  erected  alter  Pausanias  wrote  his  first  book,  and
before  he  wrote  his  seventh.     (Paus.  vii.  20.  §  3.)


OLEA.


823


The  other  principal  Odea  were  that  of  Corinth,
also  built  by  Herodes  (Paus.  ii.  3.  §  6  ;  Philost.
I.  c.)  ;  that  of  Patrae,  which  was  next  in  magnifi-
cence  to  that  of  Herodes  at  Athens,  and  contained,
among  other  works  of  art,  a  celebrated  statue  of
Apollo  (Paus.  vii.  20.  §  6)  ;  those  of  Smyrna  and
Tralles  already  mentioned  ;  that  of  Messene,  112
feet  long,  and  93  feet  in  its  inner  diameter  ;  that
of  Nicopolis,  with  an  inner  diameter  equal  to  the
last,  but  with  an  outer  diameter  of  193  feet:  there
are  also  ruins  of  Odea  at  Laodicea,  Ephesus,  Ane-
murium,  and  other  places  in  Asia  Minor.  (See
Chandler,  Pococke,  Beaufort's  Caramania,  Leake,
and  other  topographers.)

The  first  Odeum,  properly  so  called,  at  Rome,
was  built  by  Domitian  (Suet.  Dom.  5  ;  Eutrop.
viii.  15),  and  the  second  by  Trajan.  (Amm.
Marc.  xvi.  10.)  There  are  ruins  of  such  buildings
in  the  villa  of  Hadrian  at  Tivoli,  at  Pompeii,  and
at  Catana.

As  a  general  fact,  the  Odea  were  less  strictly
reserved  for  their  special  use  than  the  theatres.
Some  of  the  extra  uses,  to  which  the  Odeum  of
Pericles  was  applied,  have  been  already  men-
tioned. It  was  also  used  sometimes  as  a  court  of
justice  (Aristoph.  Vesp.  1104,  c.  SchoL,  comp.
Pollux,  viii,  6)  ;  and  philosophical  disputations
were  held  in  the  Odea.  (Plut.  de  Exsil.  p.  604.)
Further  details  will  be  found  in  the  following
works.  (Martini,  Ueber  die  Odeen ;  Stieglitz,
Arch'dol.  d.  Baukunst,  vol.  ii.  sect.  3  ;  Hirt,  Lehre
d.  Gebdude,  pp.  Ill — 113  ;  Rose,  iiher  die  Odeen
in  Athen,  Bom,  u.  Karthago,  Soest,  1831,  4to  ;
Muller,  Arch.  d.  Kunst,  §  289  ;  Klausen,  in  Ersch
and  Gruber's  Encyklopddie ;  Baurastark,  in  the
Real  Encyclop.  d.  class.  Alterthum.)  [P.  S.]

OECUS.     [DoMus,  p.  428,  b.]

OENOMELUM.     [Vinum.]

OENO'PHORUM  {olv6(popov),  a  basket,  or
other  contrivance  for  carrying  bottles  of  wine  ;  a
wine-basket.  This  was  sometimes  used  by  those
who  took  their  own  wine  with  them  in  travelling
in  order  to  avoid  the  necessity  of  purchasing  it  on
the  road.  (Hor.  SaL  i.  6.  109  ;  Juv.  Sat.  vii.  11  ;
Pers.  Sat.  v.  140  ;  Mart.  vi.  88.)  A  slave,  called
the  wine-bearer  {penophorus,  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiv.  8.
s.  1 9 ),  carried  it  probably  on  his  back.     [J,  Y.J

OFFENDIX.     [Apkx.]

OFFICIA'LES.     [ExKRciTus,  p.  508,  b.]

OFFPCIUM  ADMISSIO'NUM.  [Admis-
sion a  lis.]

OI'KIAS  DIKE  (ot/cm?  Sjktj),  an  action  to
recover  a  house,  in  which  (as  in  any  other  action
where  property  was  the  subject  of  litigation)  the
dicasts  decided  (SieSi/cafrej/)  to  which  of  the  parties
the  house  belonged,  and  adjudged  it  to  him  (eVe-
St/cacrei').  Nothing  further  being  requisite,  the
suit  was  an  drt/iTjTos  aywv.  Certain  speeches  of
Lysias,  Isaeus,  and  Hyperides,  which  are  now  lost,
were  upon  this  subject.  The  olKias  S'ikt)  was  only
to  recover  the  house  itself ;  the  by-gone  rents,  or
mesne  profits,  were  recoverable  in  an  action  called
ivoiKiov  hiKfi.  [See  Enoikiou  Dike.]  (Meier,
Att.  Proc.  p.  492.)  [C.  R.  K.]

O'LEA,  OLPVA  (e'Aai'a)  ;  O'LEUM,  OLI'-
VUM    {^Kaiov)  ;     OLETUM,    OLIVE'TUM

The  importance  of  the  olive  was  recognised  from

the  most  remote  period  of  antiquity,  in  all  civilised

countries  where  the  temperature  admitted  of  its

cultiT9.tion  ;    and   it  was  widely  adopted  as  au

3  G  4


824  OLEA.

emblem  of  industry  and  peace.  While  it  yields  a
large  supply  of  palatable  and  highly  nutritious
food,  it  requires  less  outlay  and  less  attention  than
almost  any  other  fmit  tree,  is  subject  to  few  casu-
alties, and,  even  if  altogether  neglected,  does  not
suffer  serious  injury,  but  may  be  quickly  restored
to  fertility  by  moderate  care.  Hence,  the  honour
paid  to  it  at  Athens,  and  hence  the  title  of  "  prima
omnium  arborum  "  bestowed  upon  it  by  Columella.

Varieties.  The  Olea  Europea  is  the  only  spe-
cies of  the  natural  family  of  Oleaceae^  which  yields
the  highly  vain "d  olive  oil,  but  many  varieties  are
produced  by  different  modes  of  culture,  and  by  pecu-
liarities of  soil  and  climate.  Columella  enumerates
ten,  and  this  number  may  be  considerably  increased
from  the  works  of  other  ancient  writers.  The  fol-
lowing seem  to  have  been  the  most  important:  —
1.  Pausia  s.  Posea  ;  2.  Regia ;  3.  Orchis  s.  Or-
chitis s.  Orchita  s.  Orckas  ;  4.  Radius  ;  5.  Licinia
s.  Liciniana  ;  6.  Sergia  s.  Sergiana.  Of  these  the
Pausia^  according  to  Columella,  was  the  most
pleasant  in  flavour  (jucundissimus),  although  upon
this  point  he  is  apparently  contradicted  by  Virgil
(amara  Pausia  bacca) ;  the  Regia  was  the  hand-
somest in  appearance  ;  while  both  of  these  together
with  the  Orchis  and  the  Radius^  and  in  general,  all
the  larger  varieties,  were  better  suited  for  eating
than  for  oil.  The  Licinia^  on  the  other  hand,
yielded  the  finest  oil,  the  Sergia^  the  greatest  quan-
tity. (Cat.  R.R.I  ;  Varr.  R.  R.  7  ;  Columell.  v.
8,Ve  Arhor.  17  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xv.  6.)

Soil  and  Climate.  The  soil  considered  most
congenial  vvas  a  rich  tenacious  clay,  or  a  mixture
of  clay  and  sand,  a  gravelly  subsoil  being  essential
in  either  case  to  carry  off  the  water.  Deep  fat
mould  was  found  to  be  not  unsuitable,  but  any
land  which  retained  moisture  was  avoided,  and
also  light,  stony  ground,  for,  although  the  trees  did
not  die  in  the  latter,  th"y  never  became  vigorous.
Here  again,  however.  Columella  and  Virgil  are  at
variance,  for  while  the  former  observes  "  inimicus
est  ager  sabulo  macer  et  nuda  glarea,"  the  poet
declares

Difficlles  primum  terrae  collesque  maligni.
Tenuis  ubi  argilla  et  dumosis  calculus  arvis
Palladia  gaudent  silva  vivacis  olivae.

The  olive  is  very  impatient  of  frost,  and  scarcely
any  of  the  varieties  known  to  the  ancients  would
flourish  in  very  hot  or  very  cold  situations.  In  hot
localities,  it  was  expedient  to  form  the  plantations
on  the  side  of  a  hill  facing  the  north,  in  cold
localities  upon  a  southern  slope.  Neither  a  very
lofty  nor  a  very  low  position  was  appropriate,  but
gentle  rolling  eminences  such  as  characterised  the
country  of  the  Sabines  in  Italy,  and  the  district  of
Baetica  in  Spain.  Under  ordinary  circumstances,
a  western  exposure  lying  well  open  to  the  sun  was
preferred.  It  is  asserted  by  several  classical  authors
that  the  olive  will  not  live,  or,  at  least,  not  prove
fruitful  at  a  distance  from  the  sea  coast  greater
than  from  thirty  to  fifty  miles,  and  although  ex-
ceptions did  and  do  exist  to  this  rule  it  will  be
found  to  accord  with  general  experience.  (Cat.
R.R.I',  Varr.  i.  24  ;  Columella,  v.  8  ;  Plin.  11.  N.
xvii.  3  ;  Pallad.  iii.  18  ;  Theophr.  ir.<p.  o.  ii.  5  ;
Geopon.  ix.  4.)

Propagation  and  Culture.  Previous  to
the  formation  of  an  olive  yard  (oletum,  olivetum)  it
was  necessary  to  lay  out  a  nursery  {seminarium)
for  the  reception  of  the  young  plants.     A  piece  of


OLEA.

ground  was  selected  for  this  purpose,  freely  ex-
posed to  the  sun  and  air,  and  in  which  the  soil  was
a  rich  black  mould.  It  was  the  practice  to  trench
(pastinare)  this  to  the  depth  of  three  feet,  and
then  to  leave  it  to  crumble  down  under  the  influence
of  the  atmosphere.

The  propagation  of  the  olive  was   effected  in
various  ways.

1.  The  method  generally  adopted  was  to  fix
upon  the  most  productive  trees,  and  to  select  from
these  long,  young,  healthy  branches  (ramos  no-
vetlos)  of  such  a  thickness  as  to  be  easily  embraced
by  the  hand.  The  branches  immediately  after
being  detached  from  the  parent  stem,  were  sawed
into  lengths  of  a  foot  and  a  half  each,  great  care
being  taken  not  to  injure  the  bark  ;  these  seg-
ments, which  were  called  taleae  or  clavolae  or  trunct,
were  then  tapered  to  a  point  at  each  end  with
a  knife,  the  two  extremities  were  smeared  with
dung  and  ashes,  they  were  buried  upright  in  the
ground,  so  that  the  tops  were  a  few  fingers'  breadth
below  the  surface,  and  each  talea  was  placed  as
nearly  as  possible  in  the  same  position,  both  ver-
tically and  laterally,  as  the  branch  had  occupied
upon  the  tree.  During  the  first  year,  the  ground
was  frequently  loosened  by  the  sarculum  ;  when
the  young  roots  (radicular  seminum)  had  taken  a
firm  hold,  heavy  hand-rakes  (rastra)  were  em-
ployed for  the  same  purpose,  and  in  the  heat  of
summer  water  was  regularly  supplied.  For  two
years  no  pruning  was  resorted  to,  but  in  the  third
year  the  whole  of  the  shoots  (ramuli),  with  the
exception  of  two,  were  lopped  off ;  in  the  fourth
year,  the  weaker  of  the  remaining  two  was  de-
tached, and  in  the  fifth  year  the  young  trees
(arbusculae)  were  fit  for  being  transplanted  (habiles
translationi).  This  latter  operation  was  best  per-i
formed  in  autumn  where  the  ground  to  which  they
were  conveyed  was  dry,  but  if  it  was  moist  and
rich,  in  spring,  a  short  time  before  the  buds  were
formed.  In  the  field  which  they  were  to  occupy
permanently,  pits  (scrobes)  four  feet  every  way
were  prepared,  if  practicable,  a  year  beforehand,
so  that  the  earth  might  be  thoroughly  pulverised  ;
small  stones  and  gravel  mixed  Avith  mould  were
placed  at  the  bottom  to  the  depth  of  a  few  inches,
and  some  grains  of  barley  were  scattered  over
all.  The  young  tree  was  lifted  with  as  large
a  ball  of  earth  as  possible  attached  to  the  roots,
placed  in  the  pit  surrounded  with  a  little  manure,
and  planted  so  as  to  occupy  precisely  the  same
position,  in  relation  to  the  cardinal  points,  as  in  the
nursery.  In  rich  com  land,  the  space  left  between
each  row  was  at  least  sixty  feet,  and  between  each  ^
tree  in  the  row  forty  feet,  in  order  that  the  branches
and  roots  might  have  full  space  to  spread,  but  in
poorer  soil  twenty-five  feet,  each  way,  were  con-
sidered sufficient.  The  rows  were  arranged  so  as
to  run  from  east  to  west,  in  order  that  the  cool
breezes  might  sweep  freely  down  the  open  spaces
in  summer.  After  the  trees  had  become  firmly
fixed,  and  had  been  pnined  up  into  a  proper  shape,
that  is,  into  a  single  stem  kept  without  branches  to
the  height  of  the  tallest  ox,  the  labour  attending
upon  an  olive  yard  was  comnaratively  trifling.
Ever}'  year,  the  soil  around  the  roots  was  loosened
with  hoes  (bidens\  or  with  the  plough,  the  roots
themselves  laid  bare  (ablaqueare,  ablaqueatio),  the
young  suckers  cut  away,  and  the  lichens  scraped
from  the  bark  ;  every  third  year,  in  autumn,  manure
was  thrown  in  ;  every  eighth  year  the  trees  were


OLEA.

pnmed.  The  system  of  culture  here  indicated  was
followed  so  generally  that  it  had  become  embodied
in  a  proverb  "Veteris  proverbii  meminisse  con-
venit,  eum  qui  aret  olivetum,  rogare  fructum  ;  qui
stercoret,  exorare  ;  qui  caedat,  cogere."  (Columell.
V.  9.  §  15.)  Besides  this,  the  whole  surface  of
the  ground  was  regularly  ploughed  at  the  usual
seasons,  and  cropped  in  alternate  years,  the  manure
applied  for  these  crops  being  altogether  inde-
pendent of  that  supplied  to  the  trees  speciall)'.
Moreover,  since  olives  bore  fniit,  in  abundance  at
least,  only  once  in  two  years,  matters  were  so  ar-
ranged that  the  land  should  yield  a  crop  in  those
years  when  the  trees  were  unproductive.

2.  A  second  method  of  propagation  was  to  cut
the  roots  of  wild  olives  into  small  pieces  in  such
a  manner  that  each  should  contain  an  eye  or  rudi-
ment of  a  lateral  fibre  (radicum  oculis  sihestriiim
olearum  hortulos  excolere),  and  these  pieces  were
treated  precisely  in  the  same  manner  as  the  taleae
described  above.

3.  A  third  method  is  indicated  by  Virgil  in  the
lines

Quin  et  caudicibus  sectis,  mirabile  dictu,
Truditur  e  sicco  radix  oleagina  ligno,

and  is  still  pursued  in  some  parts  of  Italy,  where,
as  we  are  told,  "  an  old  tree  is  hewn  down  and  the
stock  cut  into  pieces  of  nearly  the  size  and  shape
of  a  mushroom,  and  which  from  that  circumstance
are  called  novoli ;  care  at  the  same  time  is  taken
that  a  small  portion  of  bark  shall  belong  to  each
novolo.  These,  after  having  been  dipped  in  manure,
are  put  5nto  the  earth,  soon  throw  up  shoots,  are
transplanted  at  the  end  of  one  year,  and  in  three
years  are  fit  to  form  an  olive  yard."

Grafting  or  budding  {inserere,  insitio,  oculos  in-
serere)  were  also  resorted  to  for  the  purpose  of  in-
troducing fine  varieties  or  of  rendering  barren  trees
fruitful.  (Cat.  li.  R.  40,  42,  43,  45  ;  Varr.  7?.  /?.
i.  40  ;  Columell.  v.  9,  De  Arbor.  17  ;  Plin.  H.N.
xviii.  19.  s.  30  ;  Pallad.  iii.  8,  18,  x.  1,  xi.  8  ;
Geopon.  ix.  5,  6,  &c.  ;  Blunt's  Vestiges  of  Ancient
Manners.,  ti-c,  in  Italy,  p.  215.)

Olive  gathering  (Oleitas,  Olivitas).  The
olive  usually  comes  to  maturity,  in  Italy,  about  the
middle  or  latter  end  of  December,  but,  according  to
the  views  of  the  proprietors,  it  was  gathered  in
various  stages  of  its  progress,  either  while  yet  green
{aU)a\  or  when  changing  colour  {varia\  or  when
fully  ripe  {nigra),  but  it  was  considered  highly
desirable  that  it  should  never  be  allowed  to  re-
main so  long  as  to  fail  of  its  own  accord.  The
fruit  was  picked  as  far  as  possible  with  the  bare
hand,  but  such  as  could  not  be  reached  from  the
ground  or  by  the  aid  of  ladders  was  beaten  down
Avith  long  reeds,  which  were  preferred  to  sticks  as
less  likely  to  injure  the  bark  of  the  branches  and
the  young  bearers,  a  want  of  attention  to  this  pre-
caution on  the  part  of  the  gatherers  (leguli)  being
in  the  opinion  of  Varro  the  cause  why  olive  trees
so  seldom  yielded  a  full  crop  for  two  vears  con-
secutively. (Varr.  li.  R.  i.  55  ;  Plin.  //.  N.  xv.  3.
fi.  6  ;  Geopon.  ix.  17.)

Different  uses.  The  fruit  (bacca)  of  the  olive
was  for  the  most  part  employed  for  one  of  two  pur-
poses.

1.  It  was  eaten  as  a  fruit,  either  fresh,  pickled,
or  preserved  in  various  ways.

2.  It  was  pressed  so  as  to  yield  the  oil  and
other  juices  which  it  contained.     And  again,  the


OLEA.  825

oil    was^  employed  for  a  variety  of  purposes,  but
chiefly  '

a.  As  an  article  of  food.

fi.  For  anointing  the  body,  and  in  this  case
was  frequently  made  a  vehicle  for  perfumes
(unguenta).
y.  For  burning  in  lamps.
Preserving   Olives.      (Condere    oleasy    oli-
varum  conditura,  conditio.)

Olives  might  be  preserved  in  various  ways,
either  when  unripe  (albae,  acerbae),  or  ripe  (nigrae),
or  half-ripe  {variae^fuscae).

Green  olives,  the  Pausia  being  used  principally
for  this  purpose,  were  preserved  in  strong  brine
(muria),  according  to  the  modern  practice,  or  they
were  beaten  together  into  a  mass,  steeped  in  water
which  was  frequently  changed,  then  pressed  and
thrown  Avith  salt  into  a  jar  of  vinegar,  to  which
various  spices  or  flavouring  condiments  were  added,
especially  the  seeds  of  the  Pistachia  Lentiscus,  or
Gum  Mastich  tree,  and  fennel.  Sometimes,  instead
of  vinegar,  inspissated  must  (sapa,  defi-utum),  or
sweet  wine  (  passum)  or  honey  were  employed,  in
which  case  the  olives  were  preserved  sweet,  and
sometimes  salt  pickle,  vinegar,  must  and  oil,  seem
to  have  been  all  mixed  together.

Half-ripe  olives  (and  here  again  the  Pausia  was
the  favourite )  were  picked  with  their  stalks  and
covered  over  in  a  jar  with  the  best  oil.  In  this
manner  they  retained  the  flavour  of  the  fresh  fruit
for  more  than  a  year.

Ripe  olives,  especially  the  orchitis,  were  sprinkled
with  salt,  and  left  untouched  for  five  days,  the  salt
was  then  shaken  ofi^,  and  they  were  dried  in  the
sun.  Or  they  were  preserved  sweet  in  defrutum
without  salt.

The  peculiar  preparation  called  Epityrum  was
made  by  taking  olives  in  any  of  the  three  stages,
extracting  the  stones,  chopping  up  the  pulp  and
throwing  the  fragments  into  a  jar  with  oil,  vinegar,
coriander  seeds,  cumin,  fennel,  rue  and  mint,  the
quantity  of  oil  being  sufficient  to  cover  up  the  com-
pound and  exclude  the  air.  In  fact,  it  was  an  olive
salad,  and,  as  the  name  imports,  eaten  with  cheese.
(Cat.  7?.  7?.  117,  118,  119  ;  Varr.  R.  R.  i.  60  ;
Columell.  xii.  49  ;  Geopon.  ix.  3,  32.)

Oil  making  {Oleum  conficere).  The  fruit  of
the  olive  tree  consists  of  two  parts,  the  pulpy
pericarp  {caro),  and  the  stone  {nucletis).

The  caro  or  pulp  yielded  two  fluids :  one  of
these  of  a  Avatery  consistence,  dark  in  colour,  bitter
to  the  taste,  flowed  from  the  olive  upon  very  slight
pressure  ;  it  was  called  afiSpyr)  by  the  Greeks,
Amurca  by  the  Latins,  and  was  extensively  used  as
a  manure  and  for  a  great  number  of  purposes  con-
nected with  domestic  economy.  The  other  fluid
which  flowed  from  the  pulp,  when  subjected  to
more  forcible  pressure,  was  the  oil  {oleum,  olivum\
mingled  however  to  a  certain  extent  with  amurca
and  other  impurities  {/races,  faeces),  and  this  was
of  different  qualities,  according  to  the  state  of  the
fruit,  and  the  amount  of  pressure.  The  finest  oil
was  made  from  the  fruit  before  it  was  fully  ripe,
and  from  this  circumstance,  or  from  its  greenish
colour,  was-  termed  Oleum  viride,  and  by  the
Greeks  oix<p6.Kivov :  the  quantity  given  out  was  how-
ever small,  and  hence  the  remark  of  Cato,  Quam.
acei-hissima  olea  oleum  fades  tarn  oleum  optimum
erit :  domino  de  matura  olea  oleum  fieri  majcimn
eapediei.

A  distinction  is  made  by  Columella,  between  tlie


826


OLEA.


oil  obtained  from  the  frait  when  green  {oleum  acer-
hum  s.  aestivtim),  when  half  ripe  (olemn  viride),
and  when  fully  ripe  (oleuni  maturum)^  and  while
he  considers  the  manufacture  of  the  first  as  inex-
pedient, in  consequence  of  the  scanty  produce,  he
strongly  recommends  the  proprietor  to  make  as
much  as  possible  of  the  second,  because  the  quantity
yielded  was  considerable,  and  the  price  so  high,  as
almost  to  double  his  receipts.

Under  ordinary  circumstances,  the  ripe  fruit
when  gathered  was  carefully  cleaned,  and  conveyed
in  baskets  to  the  fann  house,  where  it  was  placed
in  heaps  upon  sloping  wooden  floors  (in  tahulato),
in  order  that  a  portion  of  the  amurca  might  flow
out,  and  a  slight  fermentation  takes  place  {ut  ibi
mediocriter  fracescat\  which  rendered  them  more
tender  and  more  productive,  and  exactly  the  same
Bystem  is  pursued  for  the  same  reason  in  modem
times.  The  gatherings  of  each  day  (coadura  unius-
cujusqtte  diei)  were  kept  separate,  and  great  care  was
taken  to  leave  them  in  this  state  for  a  very  limited
period,  for  if  the  masses  heated,  the  oil  soon  be
came  rancid  {Olea  lecta  si  nimium  diu  fuit  in  acer-
vis,  caldore  fracescit,  et  oleum  foetidum  fit).  If,
therefore,  circumstances  did  not  allow  of  the  oil
being  made  soon  after  the  fruit  was  gathered,  the
olives  were  spread  out  and  exposed  to  the  air  so  as
to  check  any  tendency  towards  decomposition.  It
is  the  neglect  of  these  rules  and  precautions  which
renders  the  oil  now  made  in  Spain  so  offensive,  for
there  the  olives  are  frequently  allowed  to  remain
in  cellars  for  months  before  they  are  used.  Although
both  ancient  and  modern  experience  are  upon  the
whole  in  favour  of  a  slight  fermentation,  Cato,
whose  great  practical  knowledge  entitles  him  to
respect,  strongly  recommends  that  it  should  be
altogether  dispensed  with,  and  affinns  that  the
oil  would  be  both  more  abundant  in  quantity  and
superior  in  quality :  "  Quam  citissime  conficies
maxime  expediet."

The  olives  when  considered  to  be  in  a  proper
state  were  placed  in  bags  or  flexible  baskets
(fiscis),  and  were  then  subjected  to  the  action  of  a
machine  consisting  partly  of  a  bruising  and  partly
of  a  squeezing  apparatus,  which  was  constracted  in
various  ways,  and  designated  by  various  names :
Trapetum,  Mola  olearia,  Canalis  et  Solea,  Torcular,
Prelum,  Tudicula.  The  oil  as  it  issued  forth  was
received  in  a  leaden  pot  (cortina  plumbea),  placed
in  the  cistern  (lacus)  below  the  press.  From  the
Cortina  it  was  ladled  out  by  .an  assistant  (capulator),
with  a  large  flat  spoon  (concha),  first  into  one  vat
(lcd)rum  fictile),  and  then  into  another,  thirty  being
placed  in  a  row  for  this  purpose.  It  was  allowed
to  rest  for  a  while  in  each,  and  the  operation  was
repeated  again  and  again  (oleum  frequenter  capiant)
until  the  anuirca  and  all  impurities  had  been  com-
pletely removed.  In  cold  weather  when  the  oil
remained  in  union  with  the  amurca  notwithstanding
these  transferences,  the  separation  was  eflected  by
mixing  a  little  parched  salt  with  the  combined
fluids,  but  when  the  cold  was  verj-  intense,  dry
carbonate  of  soda  (nitrum)  was  found  to  answer
better.  The  oil  was  finally  poured  into  jars  (dolia
olearia),  which  had  been  previously  thoroughly
cleaned  and  seasoned,  and  glazed  with  wax  or  gum
to  prevent  absorption,  the  lids  (opercula)  were
carefully  secured,  ;uid  they  were  then  delivered  to
the  overseer  (custos)  by  whom  they  were  stored
up  in  the  vault  reserved  for  their  reception  (cella
olearia).


OLIGARCHIA.

After  a  moderate  force  had  been  applied  to  the
press,  and  a  considerable  quantity  of  oil  had  flowed
forth,  the  bruised  cake  (sumpsa)  was  taken  out  of
the  bags,  mixed  with  a  little  salt,  replaced  and
subjected  to  the  action  of  the  press  a  second,  and
again  a  third  time.  The  oil  first  obtained  (oleum
primae  pressures)  was  the  finest,  and  in  proportion
as  additional  force  was  applied  by  the  press-men
(/adores,  torcidarii),  the  quality  became  gradually
worse  {longe  melioris  saporis  quod  minor e  vi  preli
quasi  lixivium  defiuxerit).  Hence,  the  product  of
each  pressing  was  kept  distinct,  the  marketable
value  of  ( ach  being  very  difi'erent  (  plurimum  refert
noil  miscere  iterationes  multoqiie  minus  tertiationem
cum  prima  pressura).  The  lowest  quality  of  all
(oleum  ciharium)  was  made  from  olives  which  had
been  partially  damaged  by  vermin,  or  which  had
fallen  from  the  trees  in  bad  weather  into  the  mud,
so  that  it  became  necessary  to  wash  them  in  warm
water  before  they  could  be  used.

The  quantity  of  fruit  thrown  at  one  time  into  the
press  varied  from  120  to  160  modii,  according  to
the  capacity  of  the  vessels :  this  quantit}'  was  termed
Fadus,  the  amount  of  oil  obtained  from  one  factus
was  called  Hostus,  but  these  words  are  not  unfre-
quently  confounded.  (Cat.  R.  R.  7,  64,  65,  Q^  ;
Varr.  R.  R.  i.  24,  55  ;  Columell.  xii.  52  ;  Plin.
H.  N.  XV.  3.  6,  7  ;  Geopon.  ix.  17.)       [W.  R.]

OLIGA'RCHIA  (oMyapx'ia-),  the  government
of  a  few,  is  a  term,  the  application  of  which  by
writers  on  political  science  is  less  wide  than  its
etymological  signification  might  have  warranted.
(See  Polyb.  vi.  4  ;  Arist.  Pol.  iv.  3,  from  whom
we  leara  that  some  writers  used  Oligarchia  as  a
generic  name,  including  Aristocratia  as  one  of  ita
species.)  It  is  shown  elsewhere  [Aristocratia]
under  what  conditions  the  limitation  of  political
power  to  a  portion  of  the  community  was  regarded
as  a  proper  and  regular  constitution  (opd)]  iroKiTeia,
Arist.  Pol.  iii.  4,  iv.  2.)  The  term  Oligarchia  was
applied  to  that  perversion  (irap4K€acn5)  of  an^m-
tocratia  into  which  the  latter  passed,  when,  owing
to  the  rise  of  the  demus  [Democratia],  and  the
vanishing  of  those  substantial  grounds  of  pre-emi-
nence which  rendered  an  Aristocratia  not  unjust,
the  rule  of  the  dominant  portion  of  the  community
ceased  to  be  the  exponent  of  the  general  interests
of  the  state,  and  became  the  ascendanc}'-  of  a  fac-
tion, whose  eftbrts  were  directed  chiefly  towards
their  own  aggrandisement  and  the  maintenance  of
their  own  power  and  privileges  (Arist.  I.  c.  Eth.
Nicom.  viii.  12  ;  Polyb.  vi.  8.  §  4).  The  pre-
servation of  power  under  such  circumstances  of
course  depended  chiefly  upon  the  possession  of
superior  wealth  and  the  other  appliances  of  wealth
which  were  its  concomitants.  Thus  it  came  to  be
regarded  as  essentially  characteristic  of  an  oligar-
chy, that  the  main  distinction  between  the  dominant
faction  and  the  subject  portion  of  the  community
was  the  possession  of  greater  wealth  on  the  part  of  '
the  former.  Hence  the  term  Oligarchia  would
not  have  been  applied,  if  a  small  section  of  the
community,  consisting  of  poor  persons,  by  any
means  got  the  reins  of  go\ernment  into  their  hands.
(Arist.  Pol.  iv.  3,  Stj^wds  /xeV  iariv  orav  ol  (\€v6(-
poi  Kupioi  Siaiv,  oMyapx'^a  Se  orav  ol  trKovaioi.  -
A  little  further  on  he  says  :  oXiyapx'Lai  8e  otov  «
ol  irXovcioi  KoX  ivyeuecTTfpot,  6\lyoi  oures,  Kvpioi
TVS  apxvs  Siffiv.  Comp,  iv.  6  ;  PJat.  de  Rep.  viii.
pp.  550,  c.  553,3,)  The  case  of  the  wealthy  portion
being  also  the  more  numerous  would  be  a  very


OLLA.
rare  exception.  Their  dominion,  of  course,  would
not  be  an  oligarchy  ;  but  neither  would  it  be  a
democracy  (Arist.  Pol  iv.  3).  When  an  aristo-
cracy passed  in  the  natural  development  of  society
into  an  oligarchy,  the  oligarchs  would,  of  course,
be  high  born  as  well  as  rich.  But  high  birth  was
not  an  essential  condition.  It  very  commonly  hap-
pened that  the  oligarchs  were  themselves  only  a  sec-
tion of  the  old  nobility,  having  excluded  the  poorer
members  of  their  order  from  the  possession  of  power.
Aristotle  {Pol.  iv.  5)  distinguishes  various  spe-
cies of  oligarchy :  —  1.  Where  a  certain  large
amount  of  property  is  the  only  requisite  for  being
a  member  of  the  ruling  class :  2.  Where  the  pro-
perty qualification  is  not  large,  but  the  menders
of  the  government  themselves  supply  any  vacancies
that  may  occur  in  their  ranks  by  electing  others  to
fill  them  :  3.  Where  the  son  succeeds  to  the  power
of  his  father :  4.  Where,  besides  this  being  the
case,  the  rulers  govern  according  to  no  fixed  laws,
but  arbitrarily.  (Comp.  Plat.  Polit.  pp.  301,  302.)
The  first  kind,  especially  when  the  ri/xrifxa  was
not  extravagantly  high,  so  that  a  considerable
number  shared  political  power,  though  only  a  few
of  them  might  be  eligible  to  the  highest  offices,
was  sometimes  called  ri/xoKpaTia  (Arist.  Eth.  Nic.
viii.  12  ;  Xenophon,  Mem.  iv.  6.  §  12,  uses  the
terra  irXovTOKparia  •  Plato,  deRep.  viii.  p.  547,  d.,
uses  the  term  rifioKpaTia  in  a  difi"erent  sense).
It  approximates  closely  to  the  TroAtreia,  and  hence
Aristotle  {Pol.  iv.  11)  calls  it  oKiyapxict  iroXniKi].
Elsewhere  {Eth.  Nic.  I.  c.)  he  identifies  it  with
the  iroKiTiici.

These  general  divisions  of  course  admitted  of
various  modifications  ;  and  the  distribution  of  the
functions  of  government  might  be  such  as  to  create
an  oligarchy  within  an  oligarchy.  To  this  species
of  oligarchy,  the  name  hvvacn^ia  was  sometimes
applied.  (Arist.  Pol.  v.  2.  5  ;  Thuc.  iii.  62,  iv.
78  ;  Xen.  Hellen.  v.  4.  §  46.)

The  term  Aristocratia  is  not  unfrequently  ap-
plied to  what  the  more  careful  distinctions  of  the
writers  on  political  science  would  term  Oligarclda.
^,Comp.  Thuc.  iii.  82  ;  Xen.  Hellen.  v.  2.  §  7  ;
Aristoph.  Av.  125.)

Besides  the  authorities  quoted  above,  the  reader
may  consult  Wachsmuth,  Hellenisclie  Alterthums-
kunde.,  §§  36,  44,  47,  63,  64  ;  Hermann,  Lehrbuch
der  Griech.  Staatsalterthumer^  §§  58 — 61  ;  Thirl-
wall.  Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  i.  ch.  10.  [C.  P.  M.]

OLLA,  cmt.  AULA  (Plant.  Aulul.  passim)^
dim.  OLLULA  (Ae'gTjs ;  x^'^P'^h  X^'^P^  c^"«-
X^Tpls ),  a  vessel  of  any  material,  round  and  plain,
and  having  a  wide  mouth  ;  a  pot  ;  a  jar.

B.<sides  being  made  of  earthenware  (Antiphanes
ap.  Alhen.  x.  70  ;  oar paKivr],  testacea)  and  bronze
(xaA./c^,  aenea,  Aesop.  Fah.  329  ;  Cato,  de  Re  Rust.
81  ;  aenum,  Ovid.  Met.  vii.  318—321  ;  Aegrys
XaA.K€os,  Herod,  i.  48),  the  ancients  also  made
these  vessels  of  different  kinds  of  stone,  which
t  were  turned  upon  the  lathe.  At  Pleurs,  a  village
near  Chiavenna  to  the  north  of  the  Lake  of  Como,
the  manufacture  of  vessels  from  the  potstone  found
in  a  neighbouring  mountain  is  still  carried  on,  and
has  probably  existed  there  from  the  time  of  Pliny,
who  makes  express  mention  of  it  {H.N.  xxxvi.
22.  s.  44).  Some  of  these  vessels  are  nearly  two
feet  in  diameter,  and,  being  adapted  to  bear  the
fire,  are  used  for  cooking.  {Octdis  observare  ollam
pultis,  ne  aduratur,Ya.no,  ap.  Non.  Marcell.  p.  543.
ed.  Merceri ;  Festus,  s.  v.  Aulas.)


OLLA.


827


The  preceding  woodcut  is  taken  from  a  vase  in
the  British  Museum,  which  was  found  at  Canino
in  Etrnria.  The  painting  upon  it  represents  the
story  of  Medea  boiling  an  old  ram  with  a  view  to
persuade  the  daughters  of  Pelias  to  put  him  to
death.  (Ovid,  Met.  vii.  318—321  ;  Hygin.  Fab.
24.)  The  pot  has  a  round  bottom,  and  is  supported
by  a  tripod  under  which  is  a  large  fire.  The  ram,
restored  to  youth,  is  just  in  the  act  of  leaping  out
of  the  pot.  Instead  of  being  supported  by  a  sepa-
rate tripod,  the  vessel  was  sometimes  made  with
the  feet  all  in  one  piece,  and  it  was  then  called  in
Greek  Tpiirovs  [Tripos],  x^'''P^^'^^^  (Hes.  O}).  et
Dies,  748  ;  Schol.  in  Soph.  Aj.  1405),  and  rrvpia-

TOTTJS.

Besides  being  placed  upon  the  fire  in  order  to
boil  water  or  cook  victuals,  the  ancients  used  pots
to  carry  fire,  just  as  is  now  done  by  the  modem
inhabitants  of  Greece,  Italy,  and  Sicily.  (Xen.
Hellen.  iv.  5.  §  4.)  They  also  used  small  pots  con-
taining fire  and  pitch  to  annoy  the  enemy  in  sieges
by  throwing  them  from  slings  and  military  engines.

Ollae  were  also  used  to  hold  solids  and  keep
them  in  store,  while  amphorae  rendered  the  same
service  in  regard  to  liquids.  [Amphora.]  Thus
grapes  were  kept  in  jars  as  at  present.  (Columell.
R.R.  xii.  43.)  Although  pots  were  commonly  made
solely  with  a  view  to  utility,  and  were  therefore
destitute  of  ornament  and  without  handles,  yet
they  were  sometimes  made  with  two  handles
{SicDToi)  like  amphorae  ;  and,  when  they  were  well
turned  upon  the  wheel,  well  baked,  smooth  and
neat,  and  so  large  as  to  hold  six  congii  (=4^  gal-
lons nearly),  they  were,  as  we  learn  from  Plato
{Hipp.Maj.  pp.  153, 154,  ed.  Heindorf),  considered
very  beautiful.

Pots  were  used,  as  with  us,  in  gardening.  (Cato,
de  Re  Rust.  51.)  The  custom  of  placing  flower-
pots in  windows  is  mentioned  by  Martial  (xi.  19.
1,  2).  A  flower-pot,  about  six  inches  high  and
suited  to  this  application,  was  found  among  the
ruins  of  Aldborough,  the  ancient  Isurium,  and  is


828


OLYMPIA.


preserved  by  A.  Lawson  Esq.,  the  owner  of  that
place.

Another  very  remarkable  use  of  these  vessels  of
earthenware  among  the  Greeks  was  to  put  infants
into  them  to  be  exposed  (Apistoph.  Ran.  1188  ;
Schol.  ad  loc.  ;  Moeris,  s.  v.  'EyKVTpL(TiJ.hs),  or  to
be  carried  anywhere.  (Aristoph.  Thesm.  512 —
516  ;  Schol.  ad  loc.)  Hence  the  exposure  of  chil-
dren was  called  iyx^TpK^^t^  (Hesych.  s.v.),  and
the  miserable  women  who  practised  it  eYXVTpicr-
Tpiai.     (Suidas,  s.  r.)

In  monumental  inscriptions  the  term  oUa  is  fre-
quently applied  to  the  pots  which  were  used  to  re-
ceive the  ashes  of  the  slaves  or  inferior  members  of
a  family,  and  which  were  either  exposed  to  view
in  the  niches  of  the  columbarium,  or  immured
in  such  a  manner  as  to  show  the  lid  only.  Some
good  specimens  of  cinerary  ollae  are  preserved  in
the  British  Museum  in  a  small  apartment  so  con-
structed as  to  exhibit  accurately  the  manner  of
arranging  them.  (See  above,  p.  561  ;  and  nume-
rous plates  in  Bartoli's  Anticld  Sepolcri.)

The  lid  of  the  olla  was  called  eVi0i7jUa  and
operculum.  It  generally  corresponded  in  the  ma-
terial and  the  style  of  ornament  with  the  olla  itself.
(Herod,  i.  48  ;  Col.  I.  c.)  [J.  Y.]

OLY'MPIA  (dXvfnna),  usually  called  the
Olympic  games,  the  greatest  of  the  national  fes-
tivals of  the  Greeks.  It  was  celebrated  pt  Olym-
pia  in  Elis,  the  name  given  to  a  small  plam  to  the
west  of  Pisa,  which  was  bounded  on  the  north  and
north-east  by  the  mountains  Cronius  and  Olympus,
on  the  south  by  the  river  Alpheus,  and  on  the
Avest  by  the  Cladeus,  which  flows  into  the  Alpheus.
Olympia  does  not  appear  to  have  been  a  town,  but
rather  a  collection  of  temples  and  public  buildings,
the  description  of  which  does  not  come  within  the
plan  of  this  work.

The  origin  of  the  Olympic  Games  is  buried  in
obscurity.  The  legends  of  the  Elean  priests  attri-
buted the  institution  of  the  festival  to  the  Idaean
Heracles,  and  referred  it  to  the  time  of  Cronos.  Ac-
cording to  their  account,  Rhea  committed  her  new-
bom  Zeus  to  the  Idaean  Dactyli,  also  called  Cure-
tes,  of  whom  five  brothers,  Heracles,  Paeonaeus,
Epimedes,  lasius,  and  Idas,  came  from  Ida  in
Crete,  to  Olympia,  where  a  temple  had  been  erected
to  Cronos  by  the  men  of  the  golden  age  ;  and
Heracles  the  eldest  conquered  his  brothers  in  a
foot-i-ace,  and  was  crowned  with  the  wild  olive-
tree.  Heracles  hereupon  established  a  contest,
which  was  to  be  celebrated  every  five  years,  be-
cause he  and  his  brotliers  were  five  in  number.
( Paus.  V.  7.  §  4.)  Fifty  years  after  Deucalion's  flood
they  ssiid  that  Clymenus,  the  son  of  Cardis,  a  de-
scendant of  the  Idaean  Heracles,  came  from  Crete,
and  celebrated  the  festival  ;  but  that  Endymion,
the  son  of  Aethlius,  deprived  Clymenus  of  the
sovereignty,  and  offered  the  kingdom  as  a  prize  to
his  sons  in  the  foot-race  ;  that  a  generation  after
Endymion  the  festival  was  celebrated  by  Pelops  to
the  honour  of  the  Olympian  Zeus  ;  that  when  the
sons  of  Pelops  were  scattered  through  Pelopon-
nesus, Amythaon,  the  son  of  Cretheus  and  a  rela-
tion of  Endymion,  celebrated  it ;  that  to  him  suc-
ceeded Pelias  and  Neleus  in  conjunction,  then
Augeas,  and  at  last  Heracles,  the  son  of  Amphi-
tryon, after  the  taking  of  Elis.  Afterwards  Oxy-
lus  is  mentioned  as  presiding  over  the  games,  and
then  they  are  said  to  have  been  discontinued  till
their  revival  by  Iphitus.  (Paus.  v.  8.  J  1,2.^  Most


OLYMPIA.

[  ancient  writers,  however,  attribute  the  institution
of  the  games  to  Heracles,  the  son  of  Amphitryon
(Apollod.  ii.  7.  §  2  ;  Diod.  iv.  14  ;  compare  Strabo,
viii.  p.  355),  while  others  represent  Atreus  as  their
founder.  (Veil.  Pat.  i.  8  ;  Hermann,  Pol.  Ant.  §
23.  n.  10.)

Strabo  (viii. pp.  354, 355)  rejects  all  these  legends,
and  says  that  the  festival  was  first  instituted  after
the  return  of  the  Heraclidae  to  the  Peloponnesus
by  the  Aetolians,  who  united  themselves  with  the
Eleans.  It  is  impossible  to  say  what  credit  is  to  be
given  to  the  ancient  traditions  respecting  the  in-
stitution of  the  festival  ;  but  they  appear  to  show
that  religious  festivals  had  been  celebrated  at
Olympia  from  the  earliest  times,  and  it  is  difficult
to  conceive  that  the  Peloponnesians  and  the  other
Greeks  would  have  attached  such  importance  to
this  festival,  unless  Olympia  had  long  been  re-
garded as  a  hallowed  site.  The  first  historical  fact
connected  with  the  Olympian  Games  is  their  re-
vival by  Iphitus,  king  of  Elis,  who  is  said  to  have
accomplished  it  with  the  assistance  of  Lycurgus,
the  Spartan  lawgiver,  and  Cleosthenes  of  Pisa  ;  and
the  names  of  Iphitus  and  Lycurgus  were  inscribed
on  a  disc  in  commemoration  of  the  event ;  which  disc
Pausanias  saw  in  the  temple  of  Hera  at  Olvmpia.
(Paus.v.4.  §4,  V.  20.  §1;  Pint.  Z.yc.  1.23.)  It  would
appear  from  this  tradition,  as  Thirlwall  {flist.  of
Greece,  u. -p.  S86)  has  remarked,  that  Sparta  con-
curred with  the  two  states  most  interested  in  the
establishment  of  the  festival,  and  mainly  contri-
buted to  procure  the  consent  of  the  other  Pelopon-
nesians. The  celebration  of  the  festival  may  have
been  discontinued  in  consequence  of  the  troubles
consequent  upon  the  Dorian  invasion,  and  we  are
told  that  Iphitus  was  commanded  by  the  Delphic
oracle  to  revive  it  as  a  remedy  for  intestine  com-
motions and  for  pestilence,  with  which  Greece  was
then  afflicted.  Iphitus  thereupon  induced  the
Eleans  to  sacrifice  to  Heracles,  Avhom  they  had
formerly  regarded  as  an  enemy,  and  from  this  time
the  games  were  regularly  celebrated.  (Paus.  I.  c.)
Different  dates  are  assigned  to  Iphitus  by  ancient
writers,  some  placing  his  revival  of  the  Olympiad
at  B.  c.  884,  and  others,  as  Callimachus,  at  B.  c.
828.  (Clinton,  Fast.  Hell.  p.  409.  t.)  The  interval
of  four  years  between  each  celebration  of  the
festival  was  called  an  Olympiad  ;  but  the  Olym-
piads were  not  employed  as  a  chronological  aera
till  the  victory  of  Coroebus  in  the  foot-race  B.  c.
776.  [Olympias.]

The  most  important  point  in  the  renewal  of  the
festival  by  Iphitus  was  the  establishment  of  the
iKex^ipia,  or  sacred  armistice,  the  formula  for  pro-
claiming which  was  inscribed  in  a  circle  on  the
disc  mentioned  above.  The  proclamation  was
made  by  peace-heralds  {(nrov5ofp6poi\  first  in  Elis
and  afterwards  in  the  other  parts  of  Greece  ;  it  put
a  stop  to  all  warfare  for  the  month  in  which  the
games  were  celebrated,  and  which  was  called
Upofji.r]uia.  The  territory  of  Elis  itself  was  con-
sidered especially  sacred  during  its  continuance,"
and  no  armed  force  could  enter  it  without  incur-
ring the  guilt  of  sacrilege.  When  the  Spartans  on
one  occasion  sent  forces  against  the  fortress  Phyr-
cum  and  Lepreum  during  the  existence  of  the
Olympic  truce  (eV  Ta7s  'OAvinriaKaTs  <rTrovoa7s\
they  were  fined  by  the  Eleans,  according  to  the
Olympic  law,  2000  minae,  being  two  for  each  I
Hoplite.  (Thucyd.  v.  49.)  The  Eleans,  however,
pretended  ri*8l  only  that  their  lands  were  inviolable   i


OLYMPIA.

during  the  existence  of  the  truce,  but  that  by  the
orijj:iual  agreement  with  the  other  states  of  Pelo-
ponnesus their  lands  were  made  sacred  for  ever,
and  were  never  to  be  attacked  by  any  hostile  force
(Strabo,  viii.  p,  358)  ;  and  they  further  stated  that
the  first  violation  of  their  territory  was  made  by
Pheidon  of  Argos.  But  the  Eleans  themselves  did
not  abstain  from  arms,  and  it  is  not  probable  that
8iich  a  privilege  would  have  existed  without  im-
posing on  them  the  corresponding  duty  of  refrain-
ing from  attacking  the  territory  of  their  neighbours.
The  later  Greeks  do  not  appear  to  have  admitted
this  claim  of  the  Eleans,  as  we  find  many  cases  in
which  their  country  was  made  the  scene  of  war.
(Xen.  Hell.  iii.  2.  §  23,  &c.,  vii.  4,  «&c.)

The  Olympic  festival  was  probably  confined  at
first  to  the  Peloponnesians  ;  but  as  its  celebrity
extended,  the  other  Greeks  took  part  in  it,  till  at
length  it  became  a  festival  for  the  whole  nation.
No  one  was  allowed  to  contend  in  the  games  but
persons  of  pure  Hellenic  blood :  barbarians  might
be  spectators,  but  slaves  were  entirely  excluded.
All  persons  who  had  been  branded  by  their  own
states  with  Atiraia,  or  had  been  guilty  of  any
offence  against  the  divine  laws  were  not  permitted
to  contend.  (Compare  Demosth.  c.  Aristocrat,  pp.
631,  632.)  When  the  Hellenic  race  had  been  ex-
tended by  colonies  to  Asia,  Africa,  and  other  parts
of  Europe,  persons  contended  in  the  games  from
very  distant  places  ;  and  in  later  times  a  greater
number  of  conquerors  came  from  the  colonies  than
from  the  mother  country.  After  the  conquest  of
Greece  by  the  Romans,  the  latter  were  allowed  to
take  part  in  the  games.  The  emperors  Tiberius
and  Nero  were  both  conquerors,  and  Pausanias
(v.  20.  §  4)  speaks  of  a  Roman  senator  who  gained
the  victory.  During  the  freedom  of  Greece,  even
Greeks  were  sometimes  excluded,  when  they  had
been  guilty  of  a  crime  which  appeared  to  the  Eleans
to  deserve  this  punishment.  The  horses  of  Hieron
of  Syracuse  were  excluded  from  the  chariot-race
through  the  influence  of  Themistocles,  because  he
had  not  taken  part  with  the  other  Greeks  against
the  Persians.  (Plut.  Tltem.  25  ;  Aelian,  V.  H.  ix.
5.)  All  the  Lacedaemonians  were  excluded  in  the
90th  Olympiad,  because  they  had  not  paid  the  fine
for  violating  the  Elean  territory,  as  mentioned  above
(Thuc.  V.  49,  50  ;  Paus.  iii.  8.  §  2)  ;  and  similar
cases  of  exclusion  are  mentioned  by  the  ancient
writers.

No  women  were  allowed  to  be  present  or  even
to  cross  the  Alpheus  during  the  celebration  of  the
games  under  penalty  of  being  hurled  down  from
the  Typaean  rock.  Only  one  instance  is  recorded
of  a  woman  having  ventured  to  be  present,  and  she,
although  detected,  was  pardoned  in  consideration
of  her  father,  brothers,  and  son  having  been  victors
in  the  games.  (Paus.  v.  6.  §5*  ;  Ael.  F.^.x.  1.)
An  exception  was  made  to  this  law  in  favour  of
the  priestess  of  Demeter  Chamyne,  who  sat  on  an
altar  of  white  marble  opposite  to  the  Hellanodicae.
(Paus.   vi.  20.  §  6  ;   compare    Suet.  Ner.   c.  12.)

*  It  would  appear  from  another  passage  of  Pau-
sanias that  virgins  were  allowed  to  be  present,
though  mari-ied  women  were  not  (Trap04uovs  5e
oiiK  itpyovcn  S)eaaaa0ai,  vi.  20.  §  6)  ;  but  this
statement  is  opposed  to  all  others  on  the  subject,
and  the  reading  of  the  passage  seems  to  be  doubt-
ful. (See  Valckenaer,  ad  Tlieocr.  Adon.  pp.  196,
197.)  ^^


OLYMPIA.  82»

Women  were,  however,  allowed  to  send  chariots  to
the  races  ;  and  the  first  woman,  whose  horses  won
the  prize,  was  Cynisca,  the  daughter  of  Archida-
mus,  and  sister  of  Agesilaus.  (Paus.  iii.  8.  §  1.)
The  number  of  spectators  at  the  festival  was  very
great  ;  and  these  were  drawn  together  not  merely
by  the  desire  of  seeing  the  games,  but  partly
through  the  opportunity  it  afforded  them  of  carry-
ing on  commercial  transactions  with  persons  from
distant  places  (Veil.  i.  8  ;  mercatiis  Olyrnpiacus,
Justin,  xiii.  5),  as  is  the  case  with  the  Mohammedan
festivals  at  Mecca  and  Medina.  Many  of  the  per-
sons present  were  also  deputies  Cp^wpoi)  sent  to
represent  the  various  states  of  Greece  ;  and  we  find
that  these  embassies  vied  with  one  another  in  the
number  of  their  offerings,  and  the  splendour  of
their  general  appearance,  in  order  to  support  the
honour  of  their  native  cities.  The  most  illustrious
citizens  of  a  state  v/ere  frequently  sent  as  3ea?poi.
(Thuc.  vi.  16  ;  Andoc.  c.  Ale.  pp.  126,  127.  Reiske.)
The  Olympic  festival  was  a  Pentaeteris  (Trej/rae-
rrjpis),  that  is,  according  to  the  ancient  mode  of
reckoning,  a  space  of  four  years  elapsed  between
each  festival,  in  the  same  way  as  there  was  only  a
space  of  two  years  between  a  rpieTrjpis.  According
to  the  Scholiast  on  Pindar  (ad  01.  iii.  35,  Bockh),
the  Olympic  festival  was  celebrated  at  an  interval
sometimes  of  49,  sometimes  of  50  months  ;  in  the
former  case  in  the  month  of  Apollonius,  in  the
latter  in  that  of  Parthenius.  This  statement  has
given  rise  to  much  difference  of  opinion  from  the
time  of  J.  Scaliger  ;  but  the  explanation  of  Bockh
in  his  commentary  on  Pindar  is  the  most  satisfac-
tory, that  the  festival  was  celebrated  on  the  first
full  moon  after  the  summer  solstice,  which  some-
times fell  in  the  month  of  Apollonius,  and  some-
times in  Parthenius,  both  of  which  he  considers  to
be  the  names  of  Elean  or  Olympian  months :  con-
sequently the  festival  was  usually  celebrated  in  the
Attic  month  of  Hecatombaeon.  It  lasted,  after  all
the  contests  had  been  introduced,  five  days,  from
the  11th  to  the  15th  davs  of  the  month  inclusive.
(Schol.  ad  Find.  01.  v.  6.)  The  fourth  day  of  the
festival  was  the  14th  of  the  month,  which  was  the
day  of  the  full-moon  and  which  divided  the  month
into  two  equal  parts  (5j;tJjLnjfts  /iTjj'a,  Pind.  01.  iii.
19  ;  Schol.  ad  loc).

The  festival  was  under  the  immediate  superin-
tendence of  the  Olympian  Zeus,  whose  temple  at
Olympia,  adorned  with  the  statue  of  the  god  made
by  Phidias,  was  one  of  the  most  splendid  works  of
Grecian  art.  (Paus.  v.  10,  &c.)  There  Avere  also
temples  and  altars  to  most  of  the  other  gods.  The
festival  itself  may  be  divided  into  two  parts,  the
games  or  contests  (ay^u  'OKv/j-iriaKSs^  a.4QKuv
d/j.iWai,  Kpicris  aeQkaiv^  red/xhs  aed\uv,  viKacpo-
piai),  and  the  festive  rites  (eopr-f])  connected  with
the  sacrifices,  with  the  processions  and  with  the
public  banquets  in  honour  of  the  conquerors.  Thus
Pausanias  distinguishes  between  the  two  parts  of
the  festival,  when  he  speaks  of  rhv  aywva  eV
'OAvixirla  iraviiyvpiv  re  ^0\vfnriaKi\v  (v.  4.  §  4).
The  conquerors  in  the  games,  and  private  indivi-
duals, as  well  as  the  theori  or  deputies  from  the
various  states,  offered  sacrifices  to  the  different
gods  ;  but  the  chief  sacrifices  were  offered  by  the
Eleans  in  the  name  of  the  Elean  state.  The  order
in  which  the  Eleans  offered  their  sacrifices  to  the
different  gods  is  given  in  a  passage  of  Pausanias
(v.  14.  §  5).  There  has  been  considerable  dispute
among  modern  writers,  whether  the  sacrifices  were


830  OLYMPIA.

offered  by  the  Kleans  and  the  Theori  at  the  com-
niencenient  or  at  the  termination  of  the  contests ;
our  limits  do  not  allow  us  to  enter  into  the  contro-
versy, but  it  appears  most  jirobable  that  certain
sacrifices  were  offered  by  the  Eleans  as  introductory
to  the  games,  but  that  the  majority  were  not  offered
till  the  conclusion,  when  the  flesh  of  the  victims
was  required  for  the  public  banquets  given  to  the
victors.

The  contests  consisted  of  various  trials  of  strength
and  skill,  which  were  increased  in  number  from
time  to  time.  There  were  in  all  twenty -four  con-
tests, eighteen  in  which  men  took  part,  and  six  in
which  boys  engaged,  though  they  were  never  all
exhibited  at  one  festival,  since  some  were  abolished
almost  immediately  after  their  institution,  and
others  after  they  had  been  in  use  only  a  short  time.
We  subjoin  a  list  of  these  from  Pausanias  (v.  8,
§  2,  3,  9.  §  1,2;  compare  Plut.  Symp.  v.  2),  with
the  date  of  the  introduction  of  each,  commencing
from  the  Olympiad  of  Coroebus: — 1.  The  foot-race
{'8p6fios),  which  was  the  only  contest  during  the
first  1 3  Olympiads.  2.  The  Stau\os,  or  foot-race,  in
Avhich  the  stadium  was  traversed  twice,  first  intro-
duced in  01. 14.  3.  The  ZoKixos^  a  still  longer  foot-
race than  the  SmuAos,  introduced  in  01.  15.*  For
a  more  particular  account  of  the  SiouAos  and  ^6\i-
Xos  see  STADiusr.  4.  Wrestling  (TraATj)  [Lucta],
and  5,  The  Pentathlum  (ireVTaSAoj/),  which  consisted
of  five  exercises  [Pentathlum],  both  introduced
in  01. 18.  6.  Boxing  (Truy^rj),  introduced  in  01.  23.
[PuGiLATUS.]  7.  The  chariot-race,  with  four  full-
grown  horses  ('iinrwu  Te\eta>v  SpSfios,  ap/xa),  intro-
duced in  01.  25,  8.  The  Pancratium  (rayKpaTiov)
[Pancratium],  and  9.  The  horse-race  (tWoy
KcATjy),  both  introduced  in  01.  33.  10  and  II.
The  foot-race  and  wrestling  for  boys,  both  intro-
duced in  01.  37.  12.  The  Pentathlum  for  boys,
introduced  in  01.  38,  but  immediately  afterwards
abolished.  1 3.  Boxing  for  boys,  introduced  in  01.
41.  14.  The  foot-race,  in  which  men  ran  with  the
equipments  of  heavy -armed  soldiers  (ruu  birXiTuv
SpSfios),  introduced  in  01.  65,  on  account  of  its
training  men  for  actual  service  in  war.  15.  The
chariot- race  with  mules  {airijvri),  introduced  in  01.
70  ;  and  16,  The  horse-race  with  mares  (/caAiTTj),
described  by  Pausanias  (v.  9.  §  1,  2),  introduced
in  01.  71,  both  of  which  were  abolislied  in  01.  84.

17.  The  chariot-race  with  two  full-grown  horses
{'lirircav  reKeiuv  (Tvvwpis),  introduced    in  01.  93.

18,  19.  The  contest  of  heralds  (K-rjpvKes)  and
tnimpeters  {(Ta\TTiyKTai\  introduced  in  01.  96.
(African,  ap.  Euseh.  XP^^-  ^  '^AA,  oA.  p.  41  ;
Paus.  v.  22.  §  1  ;  compare  Cic.  ad  Fam.  v.  12.)
20.  The  chariot-race  with  four  foals  (irwKwv
&p/jMoriu\  introduced  in  01.99.  21.  The  chariot-
race  with  two  foals  (ttc^Aoji/  avvupis)^  introduced
in  01.  128.  22.  The  horse-race  with  foals  (ttcDAos
KeAT/s),  introduced  in  01.  131.     23.  The  Pancra-


*  Some  words  appear  to  have  dropped  out  of  the
passage  of  Pausanias.  In  every  other  case  he
mentions  the  name  of  the  first  conqueror  in  each
new  contest,  but  never  the  name  of  the  conqueror
in  the  same  contest  in  the  following  01.  In  this
passage,  however,  after  giving  the  name  of  the  first
conqueror  in  the  Diaulos,  he  adds,  t^  8e  e|?js
A/raj/^os.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  this  must
be  the  name  of  the  conqueror  in  the  Dolichos  ;
which  is  also  expressly  stated  by  Africanus  (apud
Eus.  xpov  1.  'EAA.  oA.  p.  39).


OLYMPIA.

tium  for  boys,  introduced  in  01.  1 45.  24.  There
was  also  a  horse-race  (tTTTros  /ccAtjs)  in  which  bovs
rode  (Paus.vi.  2.  §  4,  12.  §  1,  13.  §  6),  but  we
do  not  know  the  time  of  its  introduction.  Of  these
contests,  the  greater  number  were  in  existence  in
the  heroic  age,  but  the  following  were  introduced
for  the  first  time  by  the  Eleans: — all  the  contests
in  which  boys  took  part,  the  foot-race  of  Hoplites,
the  races  in  which  foals  were  employed,  the  chariot-
race  in  which  mules  were  used,  and  the  horse-race
with  mares  (KaXirri).  The  contests  of  heralds  and
trumpeters  were  also  probably  introduced  after  the
heroic  age.

Pausanias  (v.  9.  §  3)  says  that  up  to  the  77th
Olj'rapiad,  all  the  contests  took  place  in  one  day ;
but  as  it  was  found  impossible  in  that  Olj^mpiad  to
finish  them  all  in  so  short  a  time,  a  new  arrange-
ment was  made.  The  number  of  days  in  the  whole
festival,  which  were  henceforth  devoted  to  tlie
games,  and  the  order  in  which  they  were  cele-
brated, has  been  a  subject  of  much  dispute  among
modem  writers,  and  in  many  particulars  can  be
only  matter  of  conjecture.  The  following  arrange-
ment is  proposed  by  Krause  {Olympia,  p.  106)  : — ■
On  the  first  day,  the  initiatory  sacrifices  were
offered,  and  all  the  competitors  classed  and  arranged
by  the  judges.  On  the  same  day,  the  contest
between  the  trumpeters  took  place  ;  and  to  this
succeeded  on  the  same  day  and  the  next  the
contests  of  the  boj^s,  somewhat  in  the  following
order: — the  Foot-Race,  Wrestling,  Boxing,  the
Pentathlum,  the  Pancratium,  and  lastly,  the  Horse-
Race.  On  the  third  day,  which  appears  to  have
been  the  principal  one,  the  contests  of  the  men  took
place,  somewhat  in  the  following  order: — the  simple
Foot-Race,  the  Diaulos,  the  Dolichos,  Wrestlmg,
Boxing,  the  Pancratium,  and  the  Race  of  Hoplites.
On  the  fourth  day  the  Pentathlum,  either  before  or
after  the  Chariot  and  Horse- Races,  which  were
celebrated  on  this  day.  On  the  same  day  or  on
the  fifth,  the  contests  of  the  Heralds  may  have
taken  place.  The  fifth  day  appears  to  have  been
devoted  to  processions  and  sacrifices,  and  to  the
banquets  given  by  the  Eleans  to  the  conquerors  in
the  Games.

The  judges  in  the  Olympic  Games,  called  Hel-
lanodicae  ('EAAaj/oSi/cat),  were  appointed  by  the
Eleans,  who  had  the  regulation  of  the  whole  festi-
val. It  appears  to  have  been  originally  under  the
superintiendence  of  Pisa,  in  the  neighbourhood  of
which  Olympia  was  situated,  and  accordingly  we
find  in  the  ancient  legends  the  names  of  Oenomaus,
Pelops,  and  Augeas  as  presidents  of  the  Games.
But  after  the  conquest  of  Peloponnesus  b,y  the  Do-
rians on  the  return  of  the  Heraclidae,  the  Aetolians,
who  had  been  of  great  assistance  to  the  Heraclidae,
settled  in  Elis,  and  from  this  time  the  Aetolian
Eleans  obtained  the  regulation  of  the  festival,  and
appointed  the  presiding  officers,  (Strabo,  viii,  pp.
357,  358.)  Pisa,  however,  did  not  quietly  re-
linquish its  claim  to  the  superintendence  of  the
festival,  and  it  is  not  improbable  that  at  first  it  had
an  equal  share  with  the  Eleans  in  its  administra-
tion. The  Eleans  themselves  only  reckoned  three
festivals  in  which  they  had  not  had  the  presidency,
namely,  the  8th,  in  which  Pheidon  and  the  Piseans
obtained  it ;  the  34th,  which  was  celebrated  under
the  superintendence  of  Pantaloon,  king  of  Pisa ;
and  the  1 04th,  celebrated  under  the  superintend-
ence of  the  Piseans  and  Arcadians.  These  Olym-
piads the   Eleans    called  CLvoKvixiriaSes,   as  cele-


OLYMPIA.


OLYMPIA.


831


2,  4.


Tirated  contrary  to  law.     (Paus.  vi.  22

§  -1)

The  Hellanodicae  were  chosen  by  lot  from  the
whole  body  of  the  Eleans.  Pausanias  (v.  9.  §  4,  5)
has  given  an  account  of  their  numbers  at  different
periods  ;  but  the  commencement  of  the  passage
is  unfortunately  corrupt.  At  first,  he  says,  there
were  only  two  judges  chosen  from  all  the  Eleans,
but  that  in  the  25th  01.  (75th  01.  ?)  nine  Hel-
lanodicae were  appointed,  three  of  whom  had  the
superintendence  of  the  horse-races,  three  of  the
Pentathlum,  and  three  of  the  other  contests.  Two
01ympia,ds  after,  a  tenth  judge  was  added.  In
the  103rd  01.  the  number  was  increased  to  12,  as
at  that  time  there  were  12  Elean  Phylae,  and  a
judge  was  chosen  from  each  tribe  ;  but  as  the
Eleans  afterwards  lost  part  of  their  lands  in  war
with  the  Arcadians,  the  number  of  Phylae  was  re-
duced to  eight  in  the  104th  01.,  and  accordingly
there  were  then  only  eight  Hellanodicae.  But  in
the  108th  01.  the  number  of  Hellanodicae  was  in-
creased to  10,  and  remained  the  same  to  the  time
of  Pausanias.  (Paus.  ^.c.)

The  Hellanodicae  were  instructed  for  ten  months
before  the  festival  by  certain  of  the  Elean  magis-
trates, called  NojUo^uAaKey,  in  a  building  devoted  to
the  purpose  near  the  market-place,  which  was  called
'EWavoSiKaiuv.  (Paus.  vi.  24.  §  3.)  Their  office
probably  only  lasted  for  one  festival.  They  had
to  see  that  all  the  laws  relating  to  the  games  were
observed  by  the  competitors  and  others,  to  deter-
mine the  prizes,  and  to  give  them  to  the  con-
querors. An  appeal  lay  from  their  decision  to  the
Elean  senate.  (Paus.  vi.  3.  §  3.)  Their  office  was
considered  most  honourable.  They  wore  a  purple
robe  (Trop(pvpis\  and  had  in  the  Stadium  special
seats  appropriated  to  them.  (Paus.  vi.  20.  §  5,  6,
7  ;  yiekkei\  A  need.  p.  249.  4.)  Under  the  direc-
tion of  the  Hellanodicae  was  a  certain  number  of
akvTai  with  an  aKvTapxv^  at  their  head,  who
formed  a  kind  of  police,  and  carried  into  execution
the  commands  of  the  Hellanodicae.  (Lucian,  Herm.
c.  40.  vol.  i.  p.  738,  Reitz  ;  Etym.  Mag.  p.  72.
13.)  There  were  also  various  other  minor  officers
under  the  control  of  the  Hellanodicae.

All  free  Greeks  were  allowed  to  contend  in  the
games,  who  had  complied  with  the  rules  prescribed
to  candidates.  The  equestrian  contests  were  neces-
sarily confined  to  the  wealthy  ;  but  the  poorest
citizens  could  contend  in  the  athletic  contests,  of
which  Pausanias  (vi.  10.  §  1)  mentions  an  exam-
ple. This,  however,  was  far  from  degrading  the
games  in  public  opinion  ;  and  some  of  the  noblest
as  well  as  meanest  citizens  of  the  state  took  part
in  these  contests.  The  owners  of  the  chariots  and
horses  were  not  obliged  to  contend  in  person  ;  and
the  wealthy  vied  with  one  another  in  the  number
and  magnificence  of  the  chariots  and  horses  which
they  sent  to  the  games.  Alcibiades  sent  seven
chariots  to  one  festival,  a  greater  number  than  had
ever  been  entered  by  a  private  person  (Thuc.  vi.
16),  and  the  Greek  kings  in  Sicily,  Macedon,  and
other  parts  of  the  Hellenic  world  contended  with
one  another  for  the  prize  in  the  equestrian  contests.
All  persons,  who  were  about  to  contend,  had  to
prove  to  the  Hellanodicae  that  they  were  freemen,
of  pure  Hellenic  blood,  had  not  been  branded  with
Atimia,  nor  guilty  of  any  sacrilegious  act.  They
further  had  to  prove  that  they  had  undergone  the
preparatory  training  {irpoyvfivaffixara)  for  ten
months  previously,  and  the  truth  of  this  they  were


obliged  to  swear  to  in  the  BovX(VTi]piov  at
Olympia  before  the  statue  of  Zeus  "OpKios.  The
fathers,  brothers,  and  gymnastic  teachers  of  the
competitors,  as  well  as  the  competitors  themselves,
had  also  to  swear  that  they  would  be  guilty  of  no
crime  {KaKovpyrifMo)  in  reference  to  the  contests.
(Paus.  v.  24.  §  2.)  All  competitors  were  obliged,
thirty  days  previous  to  the  festival,  to  undergo
certain  exercises  in  the  Gymnasium  at  Elis,  under
the  superintendence  of  the  Hellanodicae.  (Paus.
vi.  26.  §  1—3,  24.  §  1.)  The  diiferent  contests,
and  the  order  in  which  they  would  follow  one
another,  were  written  by  the  Hellanodicae  upon  a
tablet  (\€VKwixa)  exposed  to  public  view.  (Com-
pare Dion  Cass.  Ixxix.  10.)

The  competitors  took  their  places  by  lot,  and
were  of  course  differently  arranged  according  to  the
different  contests  in  which  they  were  to  be  engaged.
The  herald  then  proclaimed  the  name  and  country
of  each  competitor.  (Compare  Plato,  Leg.  viii.  p.
833.)  When  they  were  all  ready  to  begin  the
contest,  the  judges  exhorted  them  to  acquit  them-
selves nobly,  and  then  gave  the  signal  to  com-
mence. Any  one  detected  in  bribing  a  competitor
to  give  the  victory  to  his  antagonist  was  heavily
fined  ;  the  practice  appears  to  have  been  not  un-
common from  the  many  instances  recorded  by  Pau-
sanias (v.  21).

The  only  prize  given  to  the  conqueror  was  a
garland  of  wild  olive  (k6tiuos),  which  according  to
the  Elean  legends  was  the  prize  originally  insti-
tuted by  the  Idaean  Heracles.  (Paus.  v.  7.  §  4.)
But  according  to  Phlegon's  accoimt  (Ilepi  tuv
'OXvfjLTriwv,  p.  140),  the  olive  crown  was  not  given
as  a  prize  upon  the  revival  of  the  games  by  Iphitus,
and  was  first  bestowed  in  the  seventh  Olympiad
with  the  approbation  of  the  oracle  at  Delphi.  This
garland  was  cut  from  a  sacred  olive  tree,  called
iXaia  KaWi(rTe(l>avos^  which  grew  in  the  sacred
grove  of  Altis  in  Olympia,  near  the  altars  of  Aphro-
dite and  the  Hours.  (Paus.  v.  15.  §  3.)  Heracles
is  said  to  have  brought  it  from  the  country  of  the
Hyperboreans,  and  to  have  planted  it  himself  in
the  Altis.  (Pind.  01.  iii.  14  ;  MUller,  Z)or.  ii.  12.
§  3.)  A  boy,  both  of  whose  parents  were  still
alive  {afjL(pida\ii5  irals)  cut  it  with  a  golden  sickle
(Xpvc^  Spc-n-dvep).  The  victor  was  originally
crowned  upon  a  tripod  covered  over  with  bronze
(rpiirovs  iirixaXKos),  but  afterwards,  and  in  the
time  of  Pausanias,  upon  a  table  made  of  ivory  and
gold.  (Paus.  V.  12.  §  3,  20.  §  1,  2.)  Palm
branches,  the  common  tokens  of  victory  on  other
occasions,  were  placed  in  their  hands.  The  name
of  the  victor,  and  that  of  his  father  and  of  his
country,  were  then  proclaimed  by  a  herald  before
the  representatives  of  assembled  Greece.  The
festival  ended  with  processions  and  sacrifices,  and
with  a  public  banquet  given  by  the  Eleans  to  the
conquerors  in  the  Prytaneum.  (Paus.  v.  15.  §  8.)

The  most  powerful  states  considered  an  Olympic
victory,  gained  by  one  of  their  citizens,  to  confer
honour  upon  the  state  to  which  he  belonged  ;  and
a  conqueror  usually  had  immunities  and  privileges
conferred  upon  him  by  the  gratitude  of  his  fellow-
citizens.  The  Eleans  allowed  his  statue  to  be
placed  in  the  Altis,  or  sacred  grove  of  Zeus,  which
was  adorned  with  numerous  such  statues  erected
by  the  conquerors  or  their  families,  or  at  the  ex-
pence  of  the  states  of  which  they  were  citizoms.
On  his  return  home,  the  victor  entered  the  city  in
a  triumphal  pi'ocession,  in  which  his  pmises  were


r,32


OLYMPIA.


celebrated  frequently  in  the  loftiest  strains  of
poetry.     (Compare  Athletae,  p.  167.)

Sometimes  the  victory  was  obtained  without  a
contest,  in  which  case  it  was  said  to  be  aKouirl.
This  happened  either  when  the  antagonist,  who
was  assigned,  neglected  to  come  or  came  too  late,
or  when  an  Athletes  had  obtained  such  celebrity
by  former  conquests  or  possessed  such  strength  and
skill  that  no  one  dared  to  oppose  him.  (Pans.  vi.
7.  §  2.)  When  one  state  conferred  a  crown  upon
another  state,  a  proclamation  to  this  effect  was  fre-
quently made  at  the  great  national  festivals  of  the
Greeks.     (Demosth.  de  Cor.  p.  265.)

As  persons  from  all  parts  of  the  Hellenic  world
were  assembled  together  at  the  01)''mpic  Games,  it
was  the  best  opportunity  which  the  artist  and  the
"writer  possessed  of  making  their  works  known.  In
fact,  it  answered  to  some  extent  the  same  purpose
as  the  press  does  in  modern  times.  Before  the  in-
vention of  printing,  the  reading  of  an  author's
works  to  as  large  an  assembly  as  could  be  obtained,
was  one  of  the  easiest  and  surest  modes  of  publish-
ing them  ;  and  this  was  a  favourite  practice  of  the
Greeks  and  Romans.  Accordingly,  we  find  many
instances  of  literary  works  thus  published  at  the
Olympic  festival.  Herodotus  is  said  to  have  read
his  history  at  this  festival  ;  but  though  there  are
some  reasons  for  doubting  the  correctness  of  this
statement,  there  are  numerous  other  writers  who
thus  published  their  works,  as  the  sophist  Hippias,
Prodicus  of  Ceos,  Anaximenes,  the  orator  LA^sias,
Dion  Chrysostom,  &c.  (Compare  Lucian,  Herod.
c.  3,  4.  vol.  i.  p.  834,  Reitz.)  It  must  be  borne  in
mind  that  these  recitations  were  not  contests,  and
that  they  fonned  properly  no  part  of  the  festival.
In  the  same  way  painters  and  other  artists  ex-
hibited their  works  at  Olympia.  (Lucian,  I.  c.)

The  Olympic  Games  continued  to  be  celebrated
with  much  splendour  under  the  Roman  emperors,
by  many  of  whom  great  privileges  were  awarded
to  the  conquerors.  [Athletae,  p.  167.]  In  the
sixteenth  year  of  the  reign  of  Theodosius,  A.  D.  394
COl-  293),  the  Olympic  festival  was  for  ever  abo-
lished ;  but  we  have  no  account  of  the  names  of
the  victors  from  01.  249.

Our  limits  do  not  allow  us  to  enter  into  the
question  of  the  influence  of  the  Olympic  Games
upon  the  national  character  ;  but  the  reader  will
find  some  useful  remarks  on  this  subject  in  Thirl-
wall's  Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  i.  p.  390,  &c.

There  were  many  ancient  works  on  the  subject
of  the  Olympic  Games  and  the  conquerors  therein.
One  of  the  chief  sources  from  which  the  writers
obtained  their  materials,  must  have  been  the  re-
gisters of  conquerors  in  the  games,  Avhich  were  dili-
gently preserved  by  the  Eleans.  ('HAeiwi'  is  robs
'OKvix-KioviKas  ypdixfiara.  Pans.  iii.  21.  §  1,  v.  21.
§  5,  vi.  2.  §  1  ;  Ta  'Hheiwu  ypdnixaTa  apxa7a,  v.
4.  §  4.)  One  of  the  most  ancient  works  on  this  sub-
ject was  by  the  Elean  Hippias,  a  contemporary  of
Plato,  and  was  entitled  avaypacpi]  'OKvfiirioviKwv.
{Plat  Numa,  1.)  Aristotle  also  appears  to  have
written  a  work  on  the  same  subject.  (Diog.  Laert.
V.  26.)  There  was  a  work  by  Timaeus  of  Sicilj',
entitled  ^OKv^nnovLKai  ^  ■xfioviKh.  irpa^iSia,  and
another  by  Eratosthenes  (bom  B.  c.  275)  also  called
*0\vfnriop7Kai.  (Diog.  Laijrt.  viii.  51.)  The  Athe-
nian Stesicleides  is  mentioned  as  the  author  of  an
avaypa(pi]  ruu  apxovTuv  koX  'OKvixttiovikuv  (Diog.
Laert.  ii.  56),  and  Pliny  (H.N.  viii.  34)  speaks
vi  Agiiopas  as  a  writer  of  Oli/mpionicae.


OLYMPIA.

There  were  also  many  ancient  works  on  tliC;
Greek  festivals  in  general,  in  which  the  Olympic
Games  were  of  course  treated  of.  Thus  the  work
of  Dicaearchus  Tlepi  'Aywvccu  (Diog.  Laert.  v.  47),
contained  a  division  entitled  6  'OAu/xTrt/tds.  (Athen.
xiv.  p.  620,  d.)

One  of  the  most  important  works  on  the  Olym-
pic Games  was  by  Phlegon  of  Tralles,  who  lived
in  the  reign  of  Hadrian  ;  it  was  entitled  Ilepl  rwv
'0\v/xiria}v  or  ^OKvfxiriuv  Ka\  XpoviKuu  '2,vpayci}yf],
was  comprised  in  16  books,  and  extended  from  the
first  Olympiad  to  01.  229.  We  still  possess  two
considerable  fragments  of  it.  The  important  work
of  Julius  Africanus,  'EWrji^av  'OAu/xTridSes  airh
TTJs  irpciTTjs,  &c.,  is  preserved  to  us  by  Eusebius  ;
it  comes  down  to  01.  249.  Dexippus  of  Athens,  in
his  xpo''"^^  iCTTo/Jta,  carried  down  the  Olympic
conquerors  to  01.  262.

In  modem  works  much  useful  information  on.
the  Olj'mpic  games  is  given  in  Corsini's  Dissert.
Agonisticae,  and  in  Bockh's  and  Dissen's  editions
of  Pindar.  See  also  Meier's  article  on  the  Olym-
pic Games,  and  Rathgeber's  articles  on  Olympia, .
Olyrapieion,  and  Olympischer  Jupiter  in  Ersch  and
Gruber's  Encydop'ddie  ;  Dissen,  JJehcr  die  Anord-
nung  der  Olympischen  Spiele,  in  his  Kleine  Schriften^
p.  185  ;  and  Krause,  Olympia  oder  Darstellung  der
grossen  Olympischen  Spiele,  Wien,  1838.

In  course  of  time  festivals  were  established  in
several  Greek  states  in  imitation  of  the  one  at
Olympia,  to  which  the  same  name  was  given.
Some  of  these  are  only  known  to  us  by  inscrip-
tions and  coins  ;  but  others,  as  the  Olympic  festi-
val at  Antioch,  obtained  great  celebrity.  After
these  Olympic  festivals  had  been  established  in
several  places,  the  great  Olympic  festival  is  some-
times designated  in  inscriptions  by  the  addition  of
"in  Pisa,"  eV  Uelarj.  (Compare  Bbckh,  Inscr.  n.
247.  pp.  361,  362.  n.  1068.  p.  564.)  V/e  subjoin
from  Krause  an  alphabetical  list  of  these  smaller
Olympic  festivals.     They  were  celebrated  at :  —

Aegae  in  Macedonia.  This  festival  was  in  exist-
ence in  the  time  of  Alexander  the  Great.  ( Arrian,,
Anab.\.  1 1.)

Alexandria.  (Gruter, /wser.  p.  cccxiv.  n.  240.)
In  later  times,  the  number  of  Alexandrian  con-
querors in  the  great  Olympic  Games  was  greater
than  from  an}--  other  state.

Aiiazarbus  in  Cilicia.  This  festival  was  not  in-
troduced till  a  late  period.  (Eckhel,  Docir.  Num.
iii.  p.  44.)

Antioch  in  Syria.  This  festival  was  celebrated
at  Daphne,  a  small  place,  40  stadia  from  Antioch,
where  there  was  a  large  sacred  grove  watered  by
many  fountains.  The  festival  was  originally  called
Daphnea,  and  was  sacred  to  Apollo  and  Arte-
mis (Strabo,  xvi.  p.  750  ;  Athen.  v.  p.  194),  but
was  called  Olympia,  after  the  inhabitants  of  An-
tioch had  purchased  from  the  Eleans,  in  A.  D.  44,
the  privilege  of  celebrating  Olympic  games.  It
was  not,  however,  regularly  celebrated  as  an  Olym-
pic festival  till  the  time  of  the  emperor  Commodus.
It  commenced  on  the  first  day  of  the  month  Hy-
perberetaeus  (October),  with  which  the  year  of
Antioch  began.  It  was  under  the  presidency  of
an  Alytarches.  The  celebration  of  it  was  abo-
lished by  Justin,  a.  D.  521.  The  writings  of  Li-
banius,  and  of  Chrysostom,  the  Christian  Father,
who  lived  many  years  at  Antioch,  gave  varioua
particulars  respecting  this  festival.

AtJiens.     There  were  two  festivals  of  the  name


OLYMPIAS.

of  Olympia  celebrated  at  Athens,  one  of  which  was
in  existence  in  the  time  of  Pindar  (Find.  Nem.
ii.  23,  &c.  ;  Schol.  ad  loc.)^  who  celebrates  the
aucestors  of  the  Athenian  Timodemus  as  conquerors
in  it,  and  perhaps  much  earlier  (Schol.  ad  Tkuc.  i.
126).  It  was  celebrated  to  the  honour  of  Zeus,  in
the  spring  between  the  great  Dionysia  and  the
Bendidia.  (Bockh,  Inscr.  pp.  53,  250—252.)
The  other  Olympic  festival  at  Athens  was  insti-
tuted by  Hadrian  A.  D.  131  ;  from  which  time  a
new  Olympic  aera  commenced.  (Corsini,  FaM.  Ait
vol.  ii.  pp.  105,  110,  &c.;  Spartian.  Hadr.  13.)
[Olympias.]

Attalia  in   Pamphylia.      This   festival  is  only
known  to  us  bv  coins.   (Rathgeber,  /.  c.  p.  326.)
Cyzicus.  (B5ckh,  hiscr.  n.  2810.)
Cyrene.  (Bockh,  Explicat.  Find.  p.  328.)
Dium  in  Macedonia.     These  games  Avere  insti-
tuted  by  Archelaus,  and  lasted  nine  days,  corre-
sponding to  the  number  of  the  nine  Muses.     They
were  celebrated  with  great  splendour  by  Philip  II.
and  Alexander  the  Great.    (Diodor.  xvii.  1 6  ;  Dion
Chrysost.    vol.  i.    p.   73,    Keiske  ;     Suidas,   s.  v.

Epliesus.  This  festival  appears  by  inscriptions,
in  which  it  is  sometimes  called  'kdpiava  'OKv/xiria
eV  'E(p4(rcf^  to  have  been  instituted  by  Hadrian.
(Bockh,  Inscr.  n.  2810  ;  compare  n.  2987,  3000.)
Elis.  Besides  the  great  01}nnpic  Games,  there
appear  to  have  been  smaller  ones  celebrated  yearly.
{Anecdot.  Gr.  ed.  Siebenk.  p.  do.)

Magnesia  in  Lvdia.  (Rathgeber,  I.  c.  pp.  326,
327.)  ]

Neapolis.  {CovsHm.^  Diss.  Agon.  iv.  14.  p.  103.)
Nicaea  in  Bithynia.   (Eustath.  ad Dionys.  Ferieg.
pp.  172,  173,  in  Geogr.  Min.  ed.  Bemhardy.)

Nicopolis  in  Epeirus.  Augustus,  after  the  con-
quest of  Antony,  off  Actium,  founded  Nicopolis,
and  instituted  games  to  be  celebrated  every  five
years  (070)1/  ir^vr^rripiKSs)  in  commemoration  of
his  victory.  These  games  are  sometimes  called
Olympic,  but  more  frequently  bear  the  name  of
Actia.  They  were  sacred  to  Apollo,  and  were
imder  the  care  of  the  Lacedaemonians.  (Strabo,
vii.  p.  325.)     [Actia.]

Olympus  in  Thessaly,  on  the  mountain  of  that
name.   (Schol.  ad  ApolL  Rhod.  Argonaut,  i.  599.)

Fergamos  in  M3'sia.  (Bockh,  Inscr.  n.  2810  ;
Mionnet,  ii.  610.  n.  626.)

Side  in  Pamphylia.  (Rathgeber,  p.  129.)
Smymx.  Pausanias  (vi.  14.  §  1)  mentions  nn
Agon  of  the  Smymaeans,  which  Corsini  {Diss.
Agon.  i.  12.  p.  20)  supposes  to  be  an  Olympic
festival.  The  Marmor  Oxoniense  expressly  men-
tions Olympia  at  Smyrna,  and  they  also  occur  in
inscriptions..  (Gruter,  Inscr.  p.  314.  1  ;  Bcickh,
Inscr.  ad  n.  1  720.)

Tarsus  in  Cilicia.  This  festival  is  only  known
to  us  by  coins.    (Krause,  p.  228.)

Tegea  in  Arcadia.  (Bockh,  7«scr.  n.  1513.  p.
700.)

T/iessalonica  in  Macedonia.    (Krause,  p.  230.)
Thyatira  in  Lydia.    (Rathgeber,  p.  328.)
Tralles  in  Lydia.    (Krause,  p.  233.)
Tyrus  in  Phoenicia.    (Rathgeber,  p.  328.)
OLY'MPIAS  ('OAwjUTTtcis),  the  most  celebrated
chronological   aera  among   the   Greeks,  was   the
j   period  of  four  years,  which  elapsed  between  each
!   celebration  of  the  Olympic  Games,    The  Olympiads
;   began  to  be  reckoned  from  the  victory  of  Coroebus
J   in  the  foot-race,  which  happened  in'  the  year  b.  c.


OLYMPIAS.  833

776.  ^  (Paus.  V.  8.  §  3,  viii.  26.  §  3  ;  Strab.  viii.
p.  355.)  Timaeus  of  Sicily,  however,  who  flourished
B.  c.  264,  was  the  first  writer  who  regularly  ar-
ranged events  according  to  the  conquerors  in  each
Olympiad,  with  which  aera  he  compared  the  years
of  the  Attic  Archons,  the  Spartan  Ephors,  and  that
of  the  Argive  priestesses.  (Polyb.  xii,  12.  §  1.)  His
practice  of  recording  events  by  Olympiads  was  fol-
lowed by  Polybius,  Diodorus  Siculus,  Dionysius  of
Halicamassus,  and  sometimes  by  Pausanias,  Aelian,
Diogenes  Laertius,  Arrian,  &c.  It  is  twice  adopted
by  Thucydides  (iii.  8,  v.  49)  and  Xenophon  {Hell.
i.  2.  §  1,  ii.  3.  §  1 ).  The  names  of  the  conquerors
in  the  foot-race  were  only  used  to  designate  the
Olympiad,  not  the  conquerors  in  the  other  contests.
Thucydides  {II.  cc),  however,  designates  two
Olympiads  by  the  name  of  the  conquerors  in  the
I'ancratium  ;  but  this  appears  only  to  have  been
done  on  account  of  the  celebrity  of  these  victors,
both  of  whom  conquered  twice  in  the  Pancratium.
Other  writers,  however,  adhere  so  strictly  to  the
practice  of  designating  the  Olympiad  only  by  the
conqueror  in  the  foot-race,  that  even  when  the
same  person  had  obtained  the  prize  in  other  con-
tests as  well  as  in  the  foot-race,  they  only  mention
the  latter.  Thus  Diodorus  (xi.  70)  and  Pausanias
(iv.  24.  §  2)  only  record  the  conquest  of  Xenophon
of  Corinth  in  the  foot-race,  although  he  had  also
conquered  at  the  same  festival  in  the  Pentathlum.
The  writers,  who  make  use  of  the  aeras  of  the
Olympiads,  usually  give  the  number  of  the  Olym-
piad (the  first  corresponding  to  a.  c.  776),  and  then
the  name  of  the  conqueror  in  the  foot-race.  Some
writers  also  speak  of  events  as  happening  in  the
first,  second,  third,  or  fourth  year,  as  the  case  may
be,  of  a  certain  Olympiad  ;  but  others  do  not  give
the  separate  years  of  each  Olympiad.  The  rules
for  converting  Olympiads  into  the  year  B.  c,  and
tnce  versa,  are  given  under  Chronologia,  p.  281  ;
but  as  this  is  troublesome,  we  subjoin  for  the  use
of  the  student  a  list  of  the  Olympiads  with  the  years
of  the  Christian  aera  corresponding-  to  them  from
the  beginning  of  the  Olympiads  to  a.  d.  301.  To
save  space  the  separate  years  of  each  Olympiad,
with  the  corresponding  years  B.  c,  are  only  given
from  the  47th  to  the  126th  Olympiad,  as  this  is  the
most  important  period  of  Grecian  history  ;  in  the
other  Olympiads  the  first  year  only  is  given.  In
consulting  the  following  table  it  must  be  borne  in
mind  that  the  Olympic  Games  were  celebrated
about  Midsummer  [Olympia],  and  that  the  Attic
year  commenced  at  about  the  same  time.  If,
therefore,  an  event  happened  in  the  second  half  of
the  Attic  year,  the  year  b.  c.  must  be  reduced  by  1.
Thus  Socrates  was  put  to  death  in  tl>e  1st  year  of
the  95th  Olympiad,  which  corresponds  in  the  fol-
lowing table  to  B.  c.  400  ;  but  as  his  death  hap-
pened m  Thargelion,  the  11th  month  of  the  Attic
year,  the  year  b.  c.  must  be  reduced  by  1,  which
gives  us  B.  c.  399,  the  true  date  of  his  death.


B.C.

01

B.C.

01

B.  C.

01

776.

1.

736.

11.

696.

21.

772.

2.

732.

12.

692.

22.

768.

3.

728.

13.

688.

23.

764.

4.

724.

14.

684.

24.

760.

5.

720.

15.

680.

25.

756.

6.

716.

16.

676.

26.

752.

7.

712.

17.

672.

27.

748.

8.

708.

18.

668.

28.

744.

9.

704.

19.

664.

29.

740.

10.

1-

700.

20.
3h    •

660.

30.

834


OLYMPIAS.

OLYMPIAS.

01.

B.C.

01.     1

B.C.

01

B.C.

01

B.C.

01

B.C.

01.

31.     1.

538.

3.

468.

78.

1.

398.

3,

328.

113.

1.

216.

141.     1.

32.     1.

537.

4.

467,

2.

357.

4.

327.

2.

212.

142.     1.

33.     1.

536.

61.

1.

466.

3.

356.

9(i.

1.

326.

3.

208.

143.     1.

34.     1.

535.

2.

465.

4.

395.

2.

325.

4.

204.

144.     1.

35.     1.

534.

3,

464.

79.

1.

394.

3.

324,

114.

1.

200.

145.     1.

36.     1.

533.

4.

463.

2.

393.

4.

223.

2.

196.

146.     1.

37.     L

532.

62.

1,

462.

3.

392.

97.

1.

322.

3.

192.

147.    1.

38.     1.

531.

2.

461.

4.

391.

2.

321.

4.

188.

148.     1.

39,     1.

530.

3.

460.

80.

1.

390.

3.

320.

115.

1.

184.

149.     1.

40.     1.

529.

4.

459,

2.

389.

4.

319,

2.

180.

150.     1.

41.     L

528.

63.

1.

458.

3.

388.

98.

1.

318.

3.

176.

151.     1.

42.     1.

527.

2.

457.

4.

387.

2.

317,

4.

172.

152.     1.

43.     1.

526.

3.

456.

'81.

1.

386,

3.

316.

116.

1.

168.

153.     1.

44.     1.

525.

4.

455.

2.

385.

4.

315.

2.

164.

154.     1.

45.     1.

524.

64.

1.

454.

3.

384.

99.

1.

314.

3.

160.

155.     1.

46.     1.

523.

2.

453.

4.

383.

2.

313.

4.

156.

156.     1.

47.    1.

522.

3.

452.

82.

1.

382,

3.

312.

117,

1.

152.

157.     1,

2.

521.

4.

451,

2.

381.

4.

311.

2.

148.

158.     1,

3.

520.

Qo.

1.

450,

3.

380.

100.

1.

310.

3.

144.

159.     1,

4.

519,

2.

449,

4.

379.

2.

309.

4.

140.

160.     1.

48.     1.

518,

3.

448.

83.

1.

378.

3.

308,

118.

1.

1.36.

161.     1

2.

517,

4.

447,

2.

377.

4.

307.

2.

132.

162.     1.

3.

516.

&Q.

1.

446.

3.

376.

101.

1.

306.

i

128.

163.     1

4.

515.

2.

445.

4.

375.

2.

305.

4.

124.

164.     1

49.     1.

514.

3.

444.

84.

1.

374.

3.

304.

119,

1.

120.

165.     1

2.

513,

4.

443.

2.

373.

4.

303.

2.

116.

166,     1

3.

512.

.67.

1.

442.

3.

372.

102.

1.

302.

3.

112.

167.     1

4.

51L

2.

441.

4.

371.

2.

301,

4.

108.

168.     1

50.     1.

510,

3.

440.

85.

1.

370.

3.

300.

120.

1.

104.

169.     1

2.

509.

4.

439.

2.

369.

4.

299.

2.

100.

170.     1

3.

508,

68.

1.

438.

3.

368.

103.

1.

298.

3.

9Q.

171.     1

4.

507.

2.

437.

4.

367.

2.

297-

4.

92.

172.     1

51.     1.

506,

3.

436.

86.

1.

366.

3.

296.

121.

1.

88.

173.    1

2.

505,

4.

435.

2.

365.

4.

295.

2.

84.

174.     1

3.

504.

m.

1.

434.

3.

364.

104.

1.

294,

3,

80.

175,     1

4.

503,

2.'

433.

4.

363.

2.

293.

4.

76.

176.     1

52.     1.

502.

3.

432.

87.

].

362.

3.

292.

122.

1.

72.

177,     1

2.

501,

4.

431.

2.

361.

4.

291.

2.

68.

178,     1

3.

500.

70.

1.

430.

3.

360.

105.

1.

290.

3.

64.

179.     1

4.

499.

2.

429.

4.

359.

2.

289.

4.

60.

180.     1

53.     1.

498.

3.

428.

88.

1,

358.

3.

288.

123.

1.

56.

181.     1

%

497.

4.

427.

2.

357,

4.

287.

2.

52.

182.     1

3.

496.

71.

1.

426.

3.

356.

106.

1.

286.

3.

48.

183.     1

4.

495.

2.

425.

4.

355.

2.

285.

4.

44.

184.     1

54.     1.

494.

3.

424.

89.

1.

354.

3.

284.

124.

1,

40.

185.     1

2.

493.

4.

423.

2.

353.

4.

283.

2.

36.

186.     1

3.

492.

72.

1.

422.

3.

352.

107.

1.

282.

3.

32.

187.    1

4.

491,

2.

42  L

4.

351.

2.

281.

4.

28.

188.     1

55.     1.

490.

3.

420.

90.

1.

350.

3.

280.

125.

1.

24.

189.     1

2.

489.

4.

419.

2.

349.

4.

279.

2.

20.

190.     1

3.

488.

73.

1.

418.

3.

348.

108.

1.

278,

3.

16.

191.     1

4.

487.

2.

417,

4.

347,

2.

277.

4.

12.

192.     1

56.     1.

486.

3.

416.

91.

1.

346.

3.

276.

126.

1.

8.

193.     1

2.

485,

4.

415.

2.

345,

4.

275.

2.

4.

194.     1

3.

484,

74.

1.

414.

3.

344.

109,

1.

274.

"i

4.

483.

2.

413,

4.

343.

2.

273.

4.

A.  D.

01.

57.     1.

482.

3.

412.

92.

1,

342.

3.

272.

127.

1.

1.

195.     1

2.

481.

4,

411.

2.

341.

4.

268.

128.

1.

5.

196.     1

3.

480,

75.

I.

410.

3.

340.

110.

1.

264.

129.

1.

9.

197.    1

4.

479,

2.

409.

4.

339.

2.

260.

130.

1.

13.

198.     1

58.     1.

478.

3.

408,

93.

1.

338.

3.

256.

131.

1.

17.

199.     1

2.

477.

4.

407,

2.

337.

4.

252.

132.

1.

21.

200.     1

3.

476.

76.

1.

406.

3.

336.

111.

1.

248.

133.

1.

25.

201.     1

4.

475.

2.

405.

4.

335.

2.

244.

134.

1.

29.

202.     1

59.     1.

474.

3.

404.

94.

1.

334.

3.

240.

135.

1.

33.

203.     1

2.

473.

4.

403.

2.

333.

4.

236.

136.

1.

37.

204.     1.

3.

472.

77.

1.

402.

3.

332.

112.

].

232.

137.

1.

41.

205.     1.

4.

471.

2.

401.

4.

331.

2.

228.

138.

1.

45.

206.     1.

60.     1.

470.

3.

400.

95.

1.

330.

3.

224.

139.

1.

49.

207.     1.

2.

469.

4.

399.

2

329.

4.

220.

140.

1.

53.

208     1.

OPERIS  NOVI  NUNTIATIO.


A.D.

0

.

A.D.

0

.

A.D.

0

.

57.

209.

141.

230.

1.

225.

251.

61.

210.

145.

231.

1.

229.

252.

65.

211.

149.

232.

233.

253.

69.

212.

153.

233.

1.

237.

254.

73.

213

157.

234.

1.

241.

255.

77.

214

161.

235.

1.

245.

256.

81.

215.

165.

236.

1.

249.

257.

85.

216.

169.

237.

253.

258.

89.

217.

173.

238.

257.

259.

93.

218.

177.

239.

261.

260.

97.

219.

181.

240.

1.

265.

261.

101.

220.

185.

241.

1.

269.

262.

105.

221.

189.

242.

273.

263.

109.

222.

193.

243.

1.

277.

264.

113.

223.

197.

244.

1.

281.

265.

117.

224.

201.

245.

1.

285.

266.

121.

225.

205.

246.

1.

289.

267.

125.

226.

209.

247.

293.

268.

129.

227.

213.

248.

1.

297.

269.

133.

228.

217.

249.

1.

301.

270.

137.

229.

221.

250.

Many  of  the  ancient  writers  did  not  consider
history  to  begin  till  the  Olympiad  of  Coroebiis,  and
regarded  as  fabulous  the  events  said  to  have  oc-
curred in  preceding  times.  (Censorinus,  De  Die
Natal,  c.  21  ;  African,  apzid  Euseb.  Praep.  x.  10.
p.  487,  d  ;  Clinton,  Fast.  Hell.  vol.  ii.  Introd.  p.  ii.)

The  old  Olympiad  aera  appears  only  to  have
been  used  by  writers,  and  especially  by  historians.
It  does  not  seem  to  have  been  ever  adopted
by  any  state  in  public  documents.  It  is  never
found  on  any  coins,  and  scarcely  ever  on  inscrip-
tions. There  are  only  two  inscriptions  published
by  Bockh  in  which  it  appears  to  be  used.  (Corp.
Inscr.  n.  2682,  2999.)  A  new'  Olympiad  aera,
however,  came  into  use  under  the  Roman  emperors,
which  is  found  in  inscriptions  and  was  used  in
public  documents.  This  aera  begins  in  01  227.  3.
(a.  d.  131),  in  which  year  Hadrian  dedicated  the
Olvmpieion  at  Athens  ;  and  accordingly  we  find
01."^  227.  3.  spoken  of  as  the  first  Olympiad,  01.
228.  3.  (a.  ».  135)  as  the  second  Olympiad,  &c.
(Biickh,  Corp.  Inscr.  n.  342,  446,  1345.)

(Krause,  Olympia,  p.  60,  &c.  ;  Wurra  de  Pond..,
&.C.,  §  94,  &c.)

ONYX.       [SCALPTURA.]

OPA.     [Metopa.]

OPA'LIA,  a  Roman  festival  in  honour  of  Opis,
which  was  celebrated  on  the  14th  day  before  the
Calends  of  January  (Dec.  19th),  being  the  third
day  of  the  Saturnalia,  which  was  also  originally
celebrated  on  the  same  day,  when  only  one  day
was  devoted  to  the  latter  festival.  It  was  believed
that  Opis  was  the  wife  of  Satumus,  and  for  this
reason  the  festivals  were  celebrated  at  the  same
time.  (Macrob.  Sat.  i.  12  ;  Varr.  de  Ling.  Lot.  vi.
22,  ed.  Miiller  ;  Festus,  s.  v.  Opalia.)  The  wor-
shippers of  Opis  paid  their  vows  sitting,  and  touched
the  earth  on  purpose,  of  which  she  was  the  god-
dess. (Macrob.  /.  c.)

O'PERIS  NOVI  NUNTIATIO  was  a  sum-
mary remedy  provided  by  the  Edict  against  a  per-
son who  was  making  an  Opus  Novum.  An  Opus
Novum  consisted  in  either  adding  something  in  the
way  of  building  {aedificando)  or  taking  away  some-
thing so  as  to  alter  the  appearance  of  a  thing
{fades  operis).  The  object  of  the  nuntiatio  was
either  the  maintenance  of  a  right  (jus),  or  to  pre-
vent damage  (damnum),  or  to  protect  the  public
interest  (pvblicum  jus).     The  owner  of  the  pro-


OPSONIUM.  835

perty  which  was  threatened  with  damage  by  the
Opus  Novum,  or  he  who  had  an  easement  (seryjVws)
in  such  property,  had  the  Jus  nuntiandi  (Dig.  43.
tit.  25).  Nuntiatio  consisted  in  protesting  against
and  forbidding  the  progress  of  the  Opus  Novum,  on
the  spot  where  the  work  was  proceeding  and  in
the  presence  of  the  owner  or  of  some  person  who
was  there  present  on  his  account.  The  Nuntiatio
did  not  require  any  application  to  or  interference
on  the  part  of  the  Praetor.  It  was  a  rule  of  law
that  the  Nuntiatio  must  take  place  before  the
work  was  completed :  after  it  was  completed,  the
Operis  Novi  Nuntiatio  had  no  effect,  and  redress
could  only  be  obtained  by  the  Intt-rdict  Quod  vi
aut  clam.

If  the  Opus  Novum  consisted  in  building  on  the
complainant's  grotmd,  or  inserting  or  causing  any
thing  to  project  into  his  premises,  it  was  better  to
apply  at  once  to  the  praetor,  or  to  prevent  it  per
manum,  that  is,  as  it  is  explained  "  jactu  lapilli,"
which  was  a  symbol  of  the  use  of  force  for  self-
protection.

The  Edict  declared  that  after  a  Nuntiatio  no-
thing should  be  done,  until  the  Nuntiatio  was  de-
clared illegal  (nu7itiatio  missa  or  remissa  fiat)  or  a
security  (satisdatio  de  opere  restituendo)  was  given.
If  the  person  to  whom  the  notice  was  given  per-
severed, even  if  he  had  a  right  to  do  what  he  was
doing  ;  yet  as  he  was  acting  against  the  praetor's
edict,  he  might  be  compelled  to  undo  what  he  had
done.  By  the  Nuntiatio,  the  parties  were  brought
within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  praetor.  In  cases
where  there  was  danger  from  the  interruption  of
the  work,  or  the  person  who  was  making  the  Opus
Novum  denied  the  right  of  the  nuntians,  he  was
allowed  to  go  on  upon  giving  a  cautio  or  security
for  demolition  or  restoration,  in  case  the  law  was
against  him.  When  the  cautio  was  given  or  the
nuntians  waived  it,  the  party  was  intitled  to  an
interdictum  prohibitorium  for  his  protection  in  pro-
secuting the  work.

The  effect  of  the  nuntiatio  ceased,  when  the
cautio  was  given  ;  when:  the  nuntians  died  ;  when
he  alienated  the  property  \Vi  respect  of  which  he
claimed  the  Jus  nuntiandi;  or  when  the  praetor
permitted  the  work  to  go  on  (operis  novi  niintia-
tionem  ....  remeisserit.  Lex  Gall.  Cis.  x.  ;  Dig.  39.
tit.  1.  8.  22,  ante  reinissam  nuntiaiionem  ;  Dig.  39.
tit.  1  ;  Mackeldey,  Lehrbuch,  &c.,  1 2th  ed.  §237,
&c.).  [G.  L.]

OPI'MA  SPO'LIA.     [Spolia.]

OPINATO'RES  were  officers  under  the  Ro-
man emperors,  who  were  sent  into  the  provinces  to
obtain  provisions  for  the  army.  The  provisions
had  to  be  supplied  to  them  within  a  year.  The
etymology  of  the  name  is  uncertain.  (Cod.  12.  tit.
38.  s.  11  ;  Cod.  Theod.  7.  tit.  4.  s.26  ;  11.  tit.  7.
s.  16.)

OPISTHODOMUS.     [Templum.]

OPISTOGRAPHI.     [Liber.]

OPSO'NIUM,  or  OBSO'NIUM  (o^ov,  dim.
oipdpiov  ;  oyp-fjfia,  Plut.  Sympos.  Prob.  iv.  1 ),  de-
noted every  thing  which  was  eaten  with  bread.
Among  the  ancients  loaves,  at  least  preparations
of  corn  in  some  form  or  other,  constituted  the
principal  substance  of  every  meal.  But  together
with  this,  which  was  the  staff  of  their  life,  they
partook  of  numerous  articles  of  diet  called  opsonia
or  pulmejitaria  (Cat.  de  Re  Rust.  58  ;  Hor.  Sat.  ii.
2.  20),  designed  also  to  give  nutriment,  but  still
more  to  add  a  relish  to  their  food.  Some  of  these
3u  2


836


OPSONIUM.


articles  were  taken  from  the  vegetable  kingdom,
but  were  much  more  pungent  and  savoury  tham
bread,  such  as  olives,  either  fresh  or  pickled,
radishes,  and  sesaniura.  (Plato,  de.  Reptd).  ii.  p.  85,
ed.  Bekker  ;  Xen.  Oecon.  viii.  9.)  Of  animal  food
by  much  the  most  common  kind  was  fish,  whence
the  terms  under  explanation  were  in  the  course  of
time  used  in  a  confined  and  special  sense  to  denote
fish  only,  but  fish  variously  prepared,  and  more
especially  salt  fish,  which  was  most  extensively
employed  to  give  a  relish  to  the  vegetable  diet
either  at  breakfast  (Menander,  p.  70,  ed.  Meineke),
or  at  the  principal  meal.  (Plant.  Auhd.  ii.  6.  3.)
For  the  same  reason  d\po(pdyos  meant  a  gourmand
or  epicure,  and  6\po(pa'yia  gluttony.  (Athen.  ix.
24 — 37.)  •  In  maritime  cities  the  time  of  opening
the  fish-market  was  signified  by  ringing  a  bell,  so
that  all  might  have  an  equal  opportunity  for  the
purchase  of  delicacies.  (Strab.  xiv.  1.  §  21  ;  Plut.
Sympos.  Prdh.  p.  1 1 87,  ed.  Steph.)

Of  the  different  parts  of  fishes  the  roe  was  the
most  esteemed  for  this  purpose.  It  is  still  pre-
pared from  the  fish  in  the  very  same  waters  adjoin-
ing Myus  in  Ionia,  which  were  given  to  Themis-
tocles  by  the  King  of  Persia.  (Thuc.  i.  138  ;
Corn.  Nepos.  Them.  x.  3  ;  Diod.  xi.  57.)  A  jar
was  foundat  Pompeii,  containing  caviare  made  from
the  roe  of  the  tunnv.  (Gell,  Pompeiana,  1832,
vol.i.  p.  178.)

Some  of  the  principal  rapix^'iai,  or  establish-
ments for  curing  fish,  were  on  the  southern  coast
of  Spain  (Strab.  iii.  4)::  but  the  Greeks  obtained
their  chief  supply  from  the  Hellespont  (Hermippus
ap.  Athen.  i.  49,  p.  ^7,  e)  ;  and  more  especially
Byzantium  first  rose  into  importance  after  its
establishment  by  the  Milesians  in  consequence  of
the  active  prosecution  of  this  branch  of  industry.
Of  all  seas  the  Euxine  was  accounted  by  the  an-
cients the  most  abundant  in  fish,  and  the  catching
of  them  was  aided  by  their  migratory  habits,  as  in
the  autumn  they  passed  through  the  Bosporus
towards  the  St>uth,  and  in  spring  returned  to  the
Euxine,  in  order  to  deposit  their  spawn  in  its  tri-
butary rivers.  At  these  two  seasons  they  were
caught  in  the  greatest  quantity,  and,  having  been
cured,  were  shipped  in  Milesian  bottoms,  and  sent
to  all  parts  of  Greece  and  the  Levant.  The  princi-
pal ports  on  the  Euxine  engaged  in  this  traffic
were  Sinope  and  Panticapaeum.  (Hegewisch,  Co-
lonieen  der  Griechen,  p.  80.)

Among  the  fish  used  for  curing  were  different
kinds  of  sturgeon  (auTaKaios,  Herod,  iv.  53  ;
Schneider,  Eel.  Phys.  i.  p.  Q5,  ii.  p.  48),  tunny
{(rKoix§phs,  Hermippus,  I.  c.  ;  scomber ;  irrjAafivs,
a  name  still  in  use  with  some  modification  among
the  descendants  of  the  ancient  Phocaeans  at  Mar-
seilles, Passow,  Ilundworterhuch,  s.  r.),  and  mullet.
A  minute  discussion  of  their  qualities,  illustrated
by  quotatitjns,  may  be  seen  in  Athenaeus.  (iii.  84
—93.)

Plato  mentions  the  practice  of  salting  eggs,
which  was  no  doubt  intended  to  convert  them  into
a  kind  of  opsonium  {Symp.  p.  404,  ed.  Bekker).
The  treatise  of  Apicius,  de  Opsoniis^  is  still  extant
in  ten  books.

The  Athenians  were  in  the  habit  of  going  to
markets  (eis  tov>\iov)  themselves  in  order  to  pur-
chase their  opsonia  {pi^Kuvi'iv,  Theophrast.  Cliar.
28  ;  opsonare).  [Macellum.]  But  the  opulent
Romans  had  a  slave,  called  opsonator  (6ip(iv7i$\
whose  ofl5ce  it  was  to  purchase  for  his  master.     It


ORACULUM.

was  his  duty,  by  learning  what  flavours  were  most
acceptable  to  him,  by  observing  what  most  delighted
his  eyes,  stimulated  his  appetite,  and  even  over-
came his  nausea,  to  satisfy  as  much  as  possible  all
the  cravings  of  a  luxurious  palate.  (Sen.  Epist.  47 ;
compare  Hor.  Sat.  i.  2.  9,  ii.  7.  106  ;  Plant.  Me-
naech.  ii.  2.  1,  Mil.  iii.  2.  73.)  We  may  also  infer,
from  an  epigram  of  Martial  (xiv.  217),  that  there
were  opsonatores.,  or  purveyors,  who  furnished
dinners  and  other  entertainments  at  so  much  per
head,  according  to  the  means  and  wishes  of  their
employers.  Spon  {Misc.  Ertid.  Ant.  p.  214)  has
published  two  inscriptions  from  monuments  raised
to  the  memory  of  Romans  who  held  the  office  of
purveyors  to  the  Imperial  family.  At  Athens  both
the  sale  and  the  use  of  all  kinds  of  opsonia  were
superintended  by  two  or  three  special  officers,  ap-
pointed by  the  senate,  and  called  oT^ovdfioi.  (Athen.
vi.  12.)  [J.  Y.]

O'PTIO.     [ExERciTus,  p.  506,  a.]

OPllMATES.     [NoBiLES.]

ORA'CULUM  {^avrelov,  xPVCT"fiP^ov)  was
used  by  the  ancients  to  designate  the  revelations
made  by  the  deity  to  man,  as  well  as  the  place  in
which  such  revelations  were  made.  The  deity
was  in  none  of  these  places  believed  to  appear  in
person  to  man,  and  to  communi<a,te  to  him  his
will  or  knowledge  of  the  future ;  but  all  oracular
revelations  were  made  through  some  kind  of  me-
dium, which,  as  Ave  shall  see  hereafter,  was  diffe-
rent in  the  different  places  where  oracles  existed.
It  may,  on  first  sight,  seem  strange  that  there
were,  comparatively  speaking,  so  few  oracles  of
Zeus,  the  father  and  ruler  of  gods  and  men.  But
although,  according  to  the  belief  of  the  ancients,
Zeus  himself  was  the  first  source  of  all  oracular  re-
velations, yet  he  was  too  far  above  men  to  enter
with  thera  into  any  close  relation  ;  other  gods
therefore,  especially  Apollo,  and  even  heroes,  acted
as  mediators  between  Zeus  and  men,  and  formed  as
it  were  the  organs  through  which  he  communicated
his  will.  (Soph.  Oed.  Col.  629  ;  Aesch.  Eum.  19,
611,  &c.)  The  fact  that  the  ancients  consulted
the  will  of  tbe  gods  on  all  important  occasions  of
public  and  private  life,  arose  partly  from  the  uni-
versal desire  of  men  to  know  the  issue  of  what  they
are  going  to  undertake,  and  partly  from  the  great
reverence  for  the  gods,  so  peculiar  to  the  ancients,
by  which  they  were  led  not  to  undertake  any-
thing of  importance  Avithout  their  sanction  ;  for
it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  an  oracle  was  not
merely  a  revelation  to  satisfy  the  curiosity  of  man,
but  at  the  same  time  a  sanction  or  authorisation  by
the  deity  of  wiiat  man  was  intending  to  do  or  not
to  do.  We  subjoin  a  list  of  the  (ireek  oracles,
classed  according  to  the  deities  to  whom  they  be-
longed.

I.  Oracles  of  Apollo.

L  The  oracle  of  Delphi  was  the  most  celebrated
of  all  the  oracles  of  Apollo.  Its  ancient  name  was
Pytho,  which  is  either  of  the  same  root  as  trvQ^a-
6ai,  to  consult,  or,  according  to  the  Homeric  hymn
on  Apollo  (185,  &c.)  derived  from  Trvdea-dai,  to
putrefy,  with  reference  to  the  nature  of  the  loca-
lity. Respecting  the  topography  of  the  temple  of
Apollo  see  Pausanias  (x.  14.  §  7)  and  Miiller  (in
Dissents  Pindar,  ii.  p.  628).  In  the  innermost
sanctuary  (the  fJ-vxos  &Svtov  or  fieyapop),  there
was  the  statue  of  Apollo,  which  was,  at  least,  in
later  times,  of  gold  ;  and  before  it  there  burnt  upon


ORACULUM.

an  altar  an  eternal  fire,  which  was  fed  only  with
fir-wood.  (Aesch.  Choeph.  1036  ;  Pint.  De  Et  ap.
Delplu)  The  inner  roof  of  the  temple  was  covered
all  over  with  laurel  garlands  (Aesch.  Eum.  39),  and
upon  the  altar  laurel  was  burnt  as  incense.  In  the
centre  of  this  temple  there  was  a  small  opening
(xao-yua)  in  the  ground  from  which,  from  time  to
time,  an  intoxicating  smoke  arose,  which  was  be-
lieved to  come  from  the  well  of  Cassotis.  which
vanished  into  the  ground  close  by  the  sanctuary.
(Pans.  X,  24.  §  5.)  Over  this  chasm  there  stood  a
high  tripod,  on  which  the  Pythia,  led  into  the
temple  by  the  prophetes  (irpocpT^Trjs),  took  her  seat
whenever  the  oracle  was  to  be  consulted.  The
smoke  rising  from  under  the-  tripod  affected  her
brain  in  such  a  manner  that  she  fell  into  a  state  of
delirious  intoxication,  and  the  sounds  which  she
uttered  in  this  state  were  believed  to  contain  the
revelations  of  Apollo^  These  sounds  were  care-
fully written  down  by  the  prophetes,.and  afterwards
communicated  to  the  persons  who  had  come  to  con-
sult the  oracle.  (Diod.  xvi,  26  ;  Strabo,  ix.  p.
419,  &c.  ;  Plut.  de  Orac.  De/.)

The  Pythia  (the  irpo(priTis)  was  always  a  native
of  Delphi  (Eurip.  Ion,  92),  and  when  she  had  once
entered  the  service  of  the  god  she  never  left  it,  and
was  never  allowed  to  marry.  In  early  times  she
was  always  a  young  girl  ;  but  after  one  had  been
seduced  by  Echecrates  the  Thessalian,  the  Del-
phians  made  a  law  that  in  future  no  one  should
be  elected  as  prophetess  who  had  not  attained  the
age  of  fifty  years  ;  but  in  remembrance  of  former
days  the  old  woman  Avas  always  dressed  as  a
maiden.  (Diod.  l.  c.)  The  Pythia  was  generally
taken  from  some  family  of  poor  country-people.  At
first  there  was  only  one  Pythia  at  a  time  ;  but  when
Greece  was  in  its  most  flourishing  state,  and  when
the  number  of  those  who  came  to  consult  the  oracle
was  very  great,  there  were  always  two  Pythias
who  took  their  seat  on  the  tripod  aliernattly,  and
a  third  was  kept  in  readiness  in  case  some  accident
should  happen  to  either  of  the  two  others.  (Plut.
Quaest.  Graec.  c.  9.)  The  effect  of  the  smoke  on
the  whole  mental  and  physical  constitution  is  said
to  have  sometimes  been  so  great,  that  in  her  deli-
rium she  leaped  from  the  tripod,  was  thrown  into
convulsions,  and  after  a  few  days  died.  (Plut.  de
Orac.  De/.  c.  51.)

At  first  oracles  were  given  only  once  every
year,  on  the  seventh  of  the  month  of  Bysius  (pro-
bably the  same  as  Uvdios,  or  the  month  for  con-
sulting), which  was  believed  to  be  the  birthday  of
Apollo  (Plut.  Quaest.  Gr.  c.  9),  but  as  this  one
day  in  the  course  of  time  was  not  found  sufficient,
certain  days  in  every  month  were  set  apart  for  the
purpose.  (Plut.  Alex.  14.)  The  order,  in  which
the  persons  who  came  to  consult  were  admitted,
was  determined  by  lot  (Aesch.  Eum.  32  ;  Eurip.
Ion,  422)  ;  but  the  Delphian  magistrates  had  the
power  of  granting  the  right  of  Tlpo^xavnia,  i.  e.  the
right  of  consulting  first,  and  without  the  order
being  determined  by  lot,  to  such  individuals  or
states  as  had  acquired  claims  on  the  gratitude  of
the  Delphians,  or  whose  political  ascendancy  seemed
to  give  them  higher  claims  than  others.  Such  was
the  case  with  Croesus  and  the  Lydians  (Herod,
i.  54),  with  the  Lacedaemonians  (Plut.  Per.  21),
and  Philip  of  Macedonia.  (Demosth.  c.  Phil.  iii.
p.  119.)  It  appears  that  those  who  consulted  the
oracle  had  to  pay  a  certain  fee,  for  Herodotus
states    that    the    Lydians   were    honoured    vvith


ORACULUM.


837


dreAeia  by  the  Delphians.  The  Pythia  always
spent  three  days,  before  she  ascended  the  tripod,
in  preparing  herself  for  the  solemn  act,  and  during
this  time  she  fasted,  and  bathed  in  the  Castalian
well,  an<i  dressed  in  a  simple  manner  ;  she  also
burnt  in  the  temple  laurel  leaves  and  flour  of  barley
upon  the  altar  of  the  god.  (Schol.  ad  Eurip.  Phoen.
230  ;  Plat,  de  Pyth.  Or.  c.  6.)  Those  who  con-
sulted the  oracle  had  to  sacrifice  a  goat,  or  an  ox,
or  a  sheep,  and  it  was  necessary  that  these  victims
should  be  healthy  in  body  and  soul,  and  to  ascer-
tain this  they  had  to  undergo  a  peculiar  scrutiny.
An  ox  received  barley,  and  a  sheep  chick-peas,  to
see  whether  they  ate  them  with  appetite  ;  water
was  poured  over  the  goats,  and  if  this  put  thorn
into  a  thorough  tremble  the  victim  was  good.
(Plut.  de  Or.  De/  49.)  The  victim  which  was
thus  found  eligible  was  called  offiwrrip.  (Plut.
Qjiaest.  Gr.  9.)  Wachsmuth  (Hellen.  Alt.  ii.  p.
588, 2d  ed.)  states  that  all  who  came  to  consult  the
oracle  wore  laurel-garlands  surrounded  with  ribands
of  wool  ;  but  the  passages  from  which  this  opinion
is  derived,  only  speak  of  such  persons  as  came  to
the  temple  as  suppliants.  (Herod,  vii.  14  ;  Aesch.
Choeph.  1035.)

The  Delphians,  or  more  properly  speaking  the'
noble  families  of  Delphi,  had  the  superintendence
of  the  oracle.  Among  the  Delphian  aristocracy,
however,  there  were  five  families  which  traced
their  origin  to  Deucalion,  and  from  each  of  these
one  of  the  five  priests,  called  oaioi,  was  taken.
(Eurip.  Ion,  41 1  ;  Plut.  Quaest.  Gr.  c.  9.  )  Three
of  the  names  of  these  families  only  are  known,  viz.
the  Cleomantids,  the  Thracids  (Diod.  xvi.  24  ;
Lycurg.  c.  Leocrat.  p.  158),  and  the  Laphriads.
(ilesych.  *\  v.)

The  oaioi,  together  with  the  high  priest  or  pro-
phetes,  held  their  offices  for  life,  and  had  the  con-
trol of  all  the  affairs  of  the  sanctuary  and  of  the
sacrifices.  (Herod,  viii.  136.)  That  these  noble
families  had  an  immense  influence  upon  the  oracle
is  manifest  from  numerous  instances,  and  it  is  not
improbable  that  they  were  its  very  soul,  and  that
it  was  they  who  dictated  the  pretended  revelations
of  the  god.  (See  especially,  Lycurg.  c.  Leocrat.  p.
158  ;  Herod,  vii.  141,  vi.  %^  ;  Pint.  Perid.  21  ;
Eurip.  Ion,  1219,  1222,  1110.)

Most  of  the  oracular  answers  which  are  extant,
are  in  hexameters,  and  in  the  Ionic  dialect.  Some-
times, however,  Doric  forms  also  were  used.  (Herod,
iv.  157,  159.)  The  hexameter  was,  according  to
some  accounts,  invented  by  Phemonoe,  the  first
Pythia.  This  metrical  form  was  chosen,  partly
because  the  words  of  the  god  were  thus  rendered
more  venerable,  and  partly  because  it  was  easier  to
remember  verse  than  prose.  (Plut.  de  Pyth.  Or.  1 9.)
Some  of  the  oracular  verses  had  metrical  defects,
which  the  faithful  among  thc^  Greeks  accounted  for
in  an  ingenious  manner.  (Plut.  I.  c.  c.  5.)  In  the
times  of  Theopompus,  however,  the  custom  of
giving  the  oracles  in  verse  seems  to  have  gradually
ceased  ;  they  were  henceforth  generally  in  prose,
and  in  the  Doric  dialect  spoken  at  Delphi.  For
when  the  Greek  states  had  lost  their  political
liberty,  there  was  little  or  no  occasion  to  consult
the  oracle  on  matters  of  a  national  or  political
nature,  and  the  affairs  of  ordinary  life,  such  as  the
sale  of  slaves,  the  cultivation  of  a  field,  marriages,
voyages,  loans  of  monej',  and  the  like,  on  which
the  oracle  was  then  mostly  consulted,  were  little
calculated  to  be  spoken  of  in  lofty  poetical  strains.
3h  3


838  ORACULUM.

(Plut.  de  Ptjth.  Or.  28.)  When  the  oracle  of
Delphi  lost  its  importance  in  the  eyes  of  the  an-
cients, the  number  of  persons  Avho  consulted  it
naturally  decreased,  and  in  the  days  of  Plutarch
one  Pythia  was,  as  of  old,  sufficient  to  do  ali  the
work,  and  oracles  were  only  given  on  one  day  in
every  month.

The  divine  agency  in  Pytho  is  said  to  have  first
been  discovered  by  shepherds  who  tended  their
flocks  "in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  chasm,  and
whose  sheep,  when  approaching  the  place,  were
seized  with  convulsions.  (Diod,  xvi.  26  ;  Plut.
de  Defect.  Or.  c.  42.)  Persons  who  came  near
the  place  showed  the  same  symptoms,  and  re-
ceived the  power  of  prophecy.  This  at  last  in-
duced the  people  to  build  a  temple  over  the  sacred
spot.  According  to  the  Homeric  hymn  on  Apollo,
this  god  was  himself  the  founder  of  the  Delphic
oracle,  but  the  local  legends  of  Delphi  stated  that
originallv  it  was  in  the  possession  of  other  deities,
such  as  Gaea.  Tliemis,  Phoebe,  Poseidon,  Night,
Cronos,  and  that  it  was  given  to  Apollo  as  a  pre-
sent. (Aeschyl.  Bum.  3,  &c.  ;  compare  Pans.  x.  5  ;
Ovid.  Meiam.  i,  321  ;  Argum.  ad  Find.  Pyth.;
Tzetz.  ad  Lycophr.  202.)  Other  traditions  again,
and  these  perhaps  the  most  ancient  and  genuine,
represented  A[-ollo  as  having  gained  possession  of
the  oracle  by  a  struggle,  which  is  generally  de-
scribed as  a  fight,  with  Python,  a  dragon,  who
guarded  the  oracle  of  Gaea  or  Themis.

The  oracle  of  Djlphi,  during  its  best  period,  was
believed  to  give  its  answers  and  advice  to  every
one  who  came  with  a  pure  heart,  and  had  no  evil
designs  ;  it  he  had  committed  a  crime,  the  answer
was  refused  until  he  had  atoned  for  it  (Herod,  i.
19,  22),  and  he  who  consulted  the  god  for  bad  pur-
poses was  sure  to  accelerate  his  own  ruin.  (Herod,
iv.  86;  Paus.  ii.  18.  §2.)  No  religious  institu-
tion in  all  antiquity  obtained  such  a  paramount  in-
fluence, not  oniv  in  Greece,  but  in  all  countries
around  the  Mediterranean,  in  all  matters  of  im-
portance, whether  relating  to  religion  or  to  politics,
to  private  or  to  public  life,  as  the  oracle  of  Delphi.
When  consulted  on  a  subject  of  a  religious  nature,
the  answer  was  invariably  of  a  kind  calculated
not  only  to  protect  and  preserve  r.ligious  institu-
tions, but  to  command  new  ones  to  be  established
(Demosth.  c.  Mid.  15  ;  Herod,  v.  82,  i.  16.5,  «&:c.),
so  that  it  was  the  preserver  and  promoter  of  reli-
gion throughout  the  ancient  world.  Colonies  were
seldom  or  never  founded  without  having  obtained
the  advice  and  the  directions  of  the  Delphic  god.
(Cic,  de  Div.  i.  1.)  Hence  the  oracle  was  consulte4
in  all  disputes  between  a  colony  and  its  metropolis,
as  well  as  in  cases  where  several  states  claimed
to  be  the  metropolis  of  a  colony.  (Thucyd.  i.  25,
28  ;  Dind.   XV.    18.)

The  Delphic  oracle  had  at  all  times  a  leaning
in  favour  of  the  Greeks  of  the  Doric  race ;  but
the  time  when  it  began  to  lose  its  influence  must
be  dated  from  the  period  when  Athens  and  Sparta
entered  upon  their  struggle  for  the  supremacy  in
Greece  ;  for  at  this  time  the  partiality  for  Sparta
became  so  manifest,  that  the  Athenians  and  their
party  began  to  lose  all  reverence  and  esteem  for
it  (Plut.  Demosth.  20),  and  the  oracle  became  a
mere  instrument  in  the  hands  of  a  political  party.
In  the  times  of  Cicero  and  Plutarch  many  be-
lieved that  the  oracle  had  lost  the  powers  which  it
had  possessed  in  former  days  ;  but  it  still  continued
to  be  consulted  down  to  the  times  of  the  emperor


ORACULUM.

Julian,  until  at  last  it  was  entirely  done  away
Avith  by  Theodosius.

Notwithstanding  the  general  obscurity  and  am-
biguity of  most  of  the  oracles  given  at  Delphi,
there  are  many  also  which  convey  so  clear  and
distinct  a  meaning,  that  they  could  not  possibly  be
misunderstood,  so  that  a  wise  agency  at  the  bottom
of  the  oracles  cannot  be  denied.  The  manner  in
which  this  agency  has  been  explained  at  diiferent
times,  varies  greatly  according  to  the  spirit  of  the
age.  During  the  best  period  of  their  history  the
Greeks,  generally  speaking,  had  undoubtedly  a
sincere  faith  in  the  oracle,  its  counsels  and  direc-
tions. When  the  sphere  in  which  it  had  most
benefitted  Greece  became  narrowed  and  confined  to
matters  of  a  private  nature,  the  oracle  could  no
longer  command  the  veneration  with  which  it  had
been  looked  upon  before.  The  pious  and  believing
heathens,  however,  thought  that  the  god  no  longer
bestowed  his  former  care  upon  the  oracle,  and  that
he  was  beginning  to  withdraw  from  it  ;  while  free-
thinkers and  unbelievers  looked  upon  the  oracle  as
a  skilful  contrivance  of  priestcraft  which  had  then
outgrown  itself.  This  latter  opinion  has  also  been
adopted  by  many  modern  writers.  The  early
Christians,  seeing  that  some  extraordinary  power
must  in  several  cases  have  been  at  work,  repre-
sented it  as  an  institution  of  the  evil  spirit.  In
modern  times  opinions  are  very  much  divided.
Hullmann,  for  example,  has  endeavoured  to  show
that  the  oracle  of  Delphi  was  entirely  managed  and
conducted  by  the  aristocratic  families  of  Delphi,
which  are  thus  described  as  forming  a  sort  of  hier-
archical senate  for  all  Greece.  If  so,  the  Delphic
senate  surely  was  the  wisest  of  all  in  the  history
of  the  ancient  world.  Klausen,  on  the  other  hand,
seems  to  be  inclined  to  allow  some  truly  divine  in-
fluence, and  at  all  events  thinks  that  even  in  so  far
as  it  was  merely  managed  by  men,  it  acted  in  most
cases  according  to  lofty  and  pure  moral  principles.

The  modern  literature  on  the  Delphic  oracle  is
very  rich  ;  the  most  important  works  are:  —  C.  F.
Wilster,  De  Religione  et  Oraculo  Apollinis  Delphid^
Hafniae,  1 827  ;  H.  Piotrowski,  De  Gravitate  Ora-
culi  De/phici,  Lipsiae,  1829  ;  R.  H.  Klausen,  in
Ersch  und  Gruher''s  Eiicyclop'ddie,  s.  v.  Orakel ;  K.
D.  Hullmann,  Wurdigung  des  Delphischen  Orakels^
Bonn,  1837  ;  W.  Gotte,  Das  DelpMsche  Orakel.,
in  seiiiem  politischen,  religiosen  und  sittlichen  Ein-
fluss  aufdie  aite  Welt,  Leipzig,  1839.

2.  Oracle  at  Abac  in  Phocis.  An  oracle  was  be-
lieved to  have  existed  there  from  very  early  times
(Paus.  X.  35.  §  2), and  was  held  in  high  esteem  by  the
Phocians.  (Soph.  Oed.  Tyr.  899  ;  Horod.  viii."^33.)
Some  years  before  the  Persian  invasion,  the  Pho-
cians gained  a  victory  over  the  Thessalians,in  which
they  obtained,  among  other  spoils,  four  thousand
shields,  half  of  which  they  dedicated  in  the  temple
of  Apollo  at  Abae,  and  half  in  that  of  Delphi.
(Herod,  viii.  27.)  The  oracle  was  like  many  others
consulted  by  Croesus  ;  but  he  does  not  seem  to  have
found  it  agreeing  with  his  wishes.  (Herod,  i.  46.)
In  the  Persian  invasion  of  Xerxes,  the  temple  of
Abae  was  burnt  down,  and,  like  all  other  temples
destroyed  in  this  invasion,  it  was  never  rebuilt
The  oracle  itself,  however,  remained,  and  before
the  battle  of  Leuctra  it  promised  victory  to  the
Thebans  ;  but  in  the  Phocian  or  sacred  war,  when
some  Phocian  fugitives  had  taken  refuge  in  the
ruins,  they  were  entirely  destroyed  by  the  Thebans.
(Paus.  /.  c.)      But  even  after  this  calamity  the


ORACULUM.

oracle  seems  to  have  been  consulted,  for  the  Ro-
mans, from  reverence  for  it,  allowed  the  hihabit-
ants  of  Abac  to  govern  themselves,  Hadrian  built
a  small  temple  by  the  side  of  the  old  one,  some
walls  of  which  were  still  standing  as  ruins  in  the
time  of  Pausanias  (x.  35.  §  2,  3).

3.  Oracle  on  the  hill  of  Ftoon^  in,  the  territory  of
Thebes.  The  oracle  was  here  given  through  the
medium  of  a  man  called  irpS/jLavris,  and  the  first
promantis  wa&  said  to  have  been  Teneros,  a  son  of
Apollo.  (S-trab.  ix.  p.  413  ;  Paus.  ix.  33.  §  3..)
The  oracles  were  usually  given  in  the  Aeolian
dialect,  but  when  Mys,  the  Carian,  consulted  the
god,  the  answer  was  given  in  the  Carian  language
(Paus.  I.e.),.  so  that  instead  of  the  three  Thebans
who  generally  wrote  down  the  oracles,  the  Carian
was  obliged  to  do  it  himself.  (Herod,  viii.  133.)
When  Alexander  the  Great  destroyed  Thebes,
this  oracle  also  perished.  (Paus.  ix,  33.  §  3.)  In
the  time  af  Plutarch  the  whole  district  was  com-
pletely desolate.  {De  Orac.  Def.  c.  8.)

4.  Oracle  of  Apolla  at  Ismenion,  in  Boeotia,
south  of  Thebes.  The  temple  of  Apollo  Ismenios
was  the  national  sanctuary  of  the  Thebans.  The
oracle  was  here  not  given  by  inspiration,  as  in
other  places,  but  from  the  inspection  of  the  victims.
(Herod,  viii.  134.)  On  one  occasion  it  gave  its
prophecy  from  a  huge  cobweb  in  the  temple  of
Demeter.  (Diod.  xvii.  10  ;  compare  Paus.  ix.  10.
§  2,  &c.)

5.  Oracle  of  Apollo  at  Hysiae,  on  the  frontiers
of  Attica.  This  place  contained  an  oracle  of  Apollo
with  a  sacred  well,  from  which  those  drank  who
wished  to  become  inspired.  In  the  time  of  Pausa-
nias the  oracle  had  become  extinct.  (Paus.  ix.  2.  §  1.)

6.  Oracle  of  Apollo  at  Tegyra,  was  an  ancient
and  much  frequented  oracle  in  Boeotia,  which  was
conducted  by  prophets.  The  Pythia  herself  on
one  occasion  declared  this  to  be  the  birth-place  of
Apollo.  In  the  time  of  Plutarch  the  whole  dis-
trict was  a  wilderness.  (Plut.  de  Orac.  Def.  c.  8,
Pclop.  1 6  ;  Steph.  Byz.  s.  v.  Teyvpa.)

7.  Oracle  of  Apollo  in  the  milage  of  Eutresis,  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Leuctra.  (Steph.  Byz.  s.v.
Etjrpr](Tis  ;  Eustath.  ad  Iliad,  ii.  502.)  This  oracle
became  extinct  during  the  Macedonian  period.
(Plut.  de  Orac.  Def  c.  5.)

8.  Oracle  of  Apollo  at  Orohiae,  in  Euboea.
Apollo  here  bore  the  surname  of  the  Selinuntian.
(Strab.  x.  p.  445.)

9.  Oracle  of  Apollo  in  the  Lyceum  at  Argos.
The  oracle  was  here  given  by  a  prophetess.  (Pint.
Pyrrh.  31.)

10.  Oracle  of  Apollo  Deiradiotes,  on  the  acropo-
lis of  Argos.  The  oracle  was  given  by  a  pro-
phetess, who  was  obliged  to  abstain  from  matri-
monial connections  once  in  every  month.  She  was
believed  to  become  inspired  by  tasting  of  the  blood
of  a  lamb  which  was  sacrificed  during  the  night.
This  oracle  continued  to  be  consulted  in  the  days
of  Pausanias  (ii.  24.  §  1 ).

1 1.  Oracle  of  Apollo  at  Didyma,  usually  called
the  oracle  of  the  Branchidae,  in  the  territory  of
Miletus.  This  was  the  oracle  most  generally  con-
sulted by  the  lonians  and  Aeolians.  (Herod,  i.
158  )  The  temple,  however,  was  said  to  have  been
founded  previously  to  the  arrival  of  the  lonians  on
the  coast  of  Asia  (Paus.  vii.  2.  §  4 ),  and  the  altar
was  said  to  have  been  built  by  Heracles,  and  the
temple  by  Branchus,  a  son  of  Apollo,  who  had
come  from  Delphi  as  a  purifying  priest.  (Paus.  v.


ORACULUM.


839


13.  §  6  ;  Strab.  xiv.  p.  634.)  Hence  this  oracle,
like  that  of  Delphi,  combined  purifying  or  atoning
rites  with  the  practice  of  prophesying.  (MUUer,
Dor.  ii.  2.  §  b'.)  The  real  antiquity  of  the  oracle,
however,  cannot  be  traced  further  back  than  the
latter  half  of  the  7th  century  before  our  aera.
(Soldan,  p.  553,  &c.)  The  priests  called  Branchidae,
v/ho  had  the  whole  administration  of  the  oracle,
were  said  to  be  the  descendants  of  Branchus.
The  high  priest  bore  the  name  Stephanephorus.
Among  them  was  one  family  which  possessed  the
hereditary  gift  of  prophecy,  and  was  called  the
family  of  the  Euangelidae.  (Conon,  44.)  The
oracle  was  imder  the  especial  management  of  a
prophet,  whose  office  did  not  last  for  life.  The
oracles  were  probably  inspired  in  a  manner  similar
to  that  at  Delphi.  (Pans.  v.  7.  §  3.)  Croesus  made
to  this  oracle  as  munificent  presents  as  to  that  of
Delphi.  (Herod,  i.  46,  &c.)  The  principles  which
it  followed  in  its  counsels  and  directions  were  also
the  same  as  those  followed  by  the  Delphians.  The
Persians  burnt  and  plundered  the  temple  as  had
been  predicted  by  the  Pythia  of  Delphi  (Herod,  vi.
19)  ;  but  it  was  soon  restored  and  adorned  with  a
fine  brazen  statue  of  Apollo  (Paus.  ii.  10.  §  4,  ix.
10.  §  2;  compare  Mliller,  Ancient  Art  and  its
Remains,  §  86),  which  Xerxes  on  his  retreat  car-
ried with  him  to  Ecbatana.  A  part  of  the  Bran-
chidae had  surrendered  to  Xerxes  the  treasures  of
the  temple,  and  were  at  their  own  request  trans-
planted to  Bactriana  (Strabo,  I.  c),  where  their
descendants  are  said  to  have  been  severely  punished
by  Alexander  for  their  treachery.  (Curt.  vii.  5.)
Seleucus  sent  the  statue  of  Apollo  back  to  Didyma,
because  the  oraclehad  saluted  him  as  king.  (Paus.
i.  16.  §  3  ;  Diod.  ix.  90)  The  oracle  continued
to  be  consulted  after  the  faithlessness  of  its  minis-
ters. Some  ruins  of  the  temple  at  Didyma  are
still  extant.  (Compare  the  Commentators  on  Herod,
i.  92  ;  Suid.  s.  v.  Bpa7X'5at  ;  Droysen,  G^sch.  Alex,
des  Grossen,  p.  307  ;  and  an  excellent  essay  by
W.  G.  Soldan,  Das  Orakel  der  Branchiden,  in
Zimviermann^s  Zeitschrif  /iir  die  AlterthumswisseU'
schaft,  1841.     No.  66,  &c.)

12.  Oracle  of  Apollo  at  Claros,  in  the  territory
of  Colophon.  It  was  said  to  have  been  founded  by
Cretans  under  Rhacius,  previous  to  the  settlement
of  the  lonians  in  Asia  Minor.  The  early  legends
put  this  oracle  in  connection  with  Delphi,  from
whence  Manto,  the  daughter  of  Teiresias,  came  to
Claros,  married  Rhacius  and  gave  birth  to  Mopsus,
from  whom  the  prophets  of  Claros  were  probably
believed  to  be  descended.  (Paus.  vii.  3.  §§1,  2.)
This  oracle  was  of  great  celebrity,  and  continued
to  be  consulted  even  at  the  time  of  the  Roman
emperors.  (Paus.  vii.  5.  §  1,  &c.  ;  Strab.  xiv.
p.  642  ;  Tacit.  Annal.  xii.  22.)  The  oracles  were
given  through  an  inspired  prophet,  who  was  taken
from  certain  Milesian  families.  He  was  genemlly
a  man  without  any  refined  education,  had  only  the
names  and  the  number  of  the  persons  who  consulted
the  oracle  stated  to  him,  and  then  descended  into
a  cavern,  drank  of  the  water  from  a  secret  well,
and  afterwards  pronounced  the  oracle  in  verse,
(Tacit.  JwwaZ.  ii.  54.)

13.  Oracle  of  Apollo  at  Grynea,  in  the  territory
of  the  Myrinaeans.  (Hecat.  Fragm.  211.)

14.  Oracle  of  Apollo  Gonnapaeus^  in  Lesbos.
(Schol.  Aristoph.  Nub.  145.)

15.  Oracle  of  Apollo  at  Abdera.  (Pindar,  ap,
Tzetzesy  Lycophr.  445.)

3  H  4


840


ORACULUM.


1  G.  Oracle  of  Apollo  in  Delos,  which  was  only
consulted  in  summer.  (Callim.  Hymn,  in  Del.  i.  ;
Serv.  ad  Virg.  A  en.  iv.  143.)

17.  Oracle  of  Apollo  at  Patara,  in  Lycia,  was
only  consulted  in  winter.  The  prophetess  {irpd-
fiauTis)  spent  a  night  in  the  temple  to  wait  for  the
communications  which  the  god  might  make  to  her.
(Herod,  i.  182  ;  Serv,  ac?  Virg.Aen.iv.  143.)

1 8.  Oracle  of  Apollo  at  Telmessus.  The  priests
of  this  institution  did  not  give  their  answers  by
inspiration,  but  occupied  themselves  chiefly  with
the  interpretation  of  dreams,  whence  Herodotus
(i.  78  ;  compare  Cic.  de  Div.  i.  41  ;  Arrian,  ii.  3)
calls  them  i^rjynTai.  But  they  also  interpreted
other  marvellous  occurrences.  Near  Telmessus
there  was  another  oracle  of  Apollo,  where  those
who  consulted  it  had  to  look  ■  into  a  well,  which
showed  them  in  an  image  the  answer  to  their  ques-
tions. (Paus.  vii.  21.  §  6.)

19.  Oracle  of  Apollo  at  Mallos,  in  Cilicia.
(Strab.  xiv.  p.  675,  &c.  ;  Arrian,  ii.  5.)

20.  Oracle  of  the  Saipedonian  Apollo.,  in  Cilicia,
(Diod.  Exc.  xxxviii.  12.)

21.  Orade  of  Apollo  at  Hyhla.,  in  Caria.  (Athen.
XV.  p.  672.)

22.  Oracle  of  Apollo  at  Hiera  Kome.,  on  the
Maeander,  a  celebrated  oracle  which  spoke  in  good
verses.     (Liv.  xxxviii.  1 3  ;  Steph.  Byz.  s.  v.)

II.  Oracles  of  Zeus.

1.  Oracle  of  Zeus  at  Olympia.  In  this  as  in  the
other  oracles  of  Zeus  the  god  did  not  reveal  him-
self by  inspiration,  as  Apollo  did  in  almost  all  of
his  oracles,  but  he  merely  sent  signs  which  men
had  to  interpret.  Those  who  came  to  consult  the
oracle  of  Olympia  offered  a  victim,  and  the  pri  st
gave  his  answers  from  the  nature  of  the  several
parts  of  the  victim,  or  from  accidental  circumstances
accompanying  the  sacrifice.  (Herod,  viii.  134  ;
Strab.  viii.  p.  353.)  The  prophets  or  interpreters
here  belonged  to  the  family  of  the  lamids.  In
early  times  the  oracle  was  much  resorted  to,  and
Sophocles  {Oed.  Tyr.  900)  mentions  it  along  with
the  most  celebrated  oracles  ;  but  in  later  times  it
was  almost  a.ntirely  neglected,  probably  because
oracles  from  the  inspection  of  victims  might  be
obtained  anywhere.  The  spot,  where  the  oracles
were  given  at  Olympia,  was  before  the  altar  of
Zeus.  (Find.  01-  vi.  70.)  It  was  especially  those
who  intended  to  take  part  in  the  Olympic  games
that  consulted  the  oracle  about  their  success  (Pind.
01.  viii.  2),  but  other  subjects  also  were  brought
before  it.

2.  Orach  of  Zeus  at  Dodona.  Here  the  oracle
was  given  from  sounds  produced  by  the  wind.
The  sanctuary  was  situated  on  an  eminence.
(Aeschyl.  Prom.  830.)  Although  in  a  barbarous
country,  the  oracle  was  in  close  connection  with
Greece,  and  in  the  earliest  times  apparently  much
more  so  than  afterwards.  (Horn.  //.  xvi.  233.)
Zeus  himself,  as  well  as  the  Dodonaeans,  were
reckoned  among  the  Pelasgians,  which  is  a  proof
of  the  ante-hellenic  existence  of  the  worship  of
Zeus  in  these  parts,  and  perhaps  of  the  oracle  also.
(Hesiod.  and  Ephor.  ap.  Strab.  vii.  p.  327,  &c.)
The  oracle  was  given  from  lofty  oaks  covered  with
foliage  (Horn.  Od.  xiv.  328,  xix.  297),  whence
Aeschylus  {Prom.  832  ;  compare  Soph.  Track.  1170)
mentions  the  speaking  oaks  of  Dodona  as  great
wonders.  Beech-trees,  however,  are  also  men-
tioned in  connection  with  the  Dodonaean  oracle,


ORACULUM.

which,  as  Hesiod  {Fragm.  39  ;  Soph.  Tracli.  169  :
Herod,  ii.  !jb)  said,  dwelt  in  the  stem  of  a  beech-
tree.  Hence  we  may  infer  that  the  oracle  was  not
thought  to  dwell  in  any  particular  or  single  tree,
but  in  a  grove  of  oaks  and  beeches.  The  will  of
the  god  was  made  manifest  bj^  the  rustling  of  the
wind  through  the  leaves  of  the  trees,  which  are
therefore  represented  as  eloquent  tongues.  In
order  to  render  the  sounds  produced  by  the  winds
more  distinct,  brazen  vessels  were  suspended  on
the  branches  of  the  trees,  which  being  moved  by
the  wind  came  in  contact  with  one  another,  and
thus  sounded  till  they  were  stopped.  (Suid.  s.  v.
AoSwvri  ;  Philostrat.  hnag.  ii.)  Another  mode  of
producing  the  sounds  was  this  :  —  There  were  two
columns  at  Dodona,  one  of  which  bore  a  rnetal
basin,  and  the  other  a  boy  with  a  scourge  in  his
hand  ;  the  ends  of  the  scourge  consisted  of  little
bones,  and  as  they  were  moved  by  the  wind  they
knocked  against  the  metal  basin  on  the  other
column.  (Steph.  Byz.  s.  v.  AoSwvt]  :  Suid.  s.  v.
AoZwvatov  xoA.K6rov  ;  Strabo,  Excerpt,  ex  lib.  vii.
vol.  ii.  p.  73,  ed.  Kramer.)  According  to  other
accounts  oracles  were  also  obtained  at  Dodona
through  pigeons,  which  sitting  upon  oak-trees  pro-
nounced the  will  of  Zeus.  (Dionys.  Hal.  i.  15.)  The
sounds  were  in  early  times  interpreted  by  men,
but  afterwards,  when  the  worship  of  Dione  became
connected  with  that  of  Zeus,  by  two  or  three  old
women  who  were  called  TreAetaSes  or  TeAaiOi,  be-
cause pigeons  were  said  to  have  brought  the  com-
mand to  found  the  oracle.  (Soph.  Track.  169,
with  the  Schol.  ;  Herod.  /.  c. ;  Paus.  x.  12.  §  5.)
In  the  time  of  Herodotus  (/.  c.)  the  names  of  the
three  prophetesses  were  Promeneia,  Timarete  and
Nicandra.  They  were  taken  from  certain  Dodo-
naean families,  who  traced  their  pedigree  back  to
the  mythical  ages.  There  were,  however,  at  all
times  priests  called  r6fi.ovpoi  (Strab.  I.  c.)  connected
with  the  oracle,  who  on  certain  occasions  inter-
preted the  sounds  ;  but  how  the  functions  were
divided  between  them  and  the  Pelaeae  is  not  clear.
In  the  historical  times  the  oracle  of  Dodona  had
less  influence  than  it  appears  to  have  had  at  an
earlier  period,  but  it  was  at  all  times  inaccessible
to  bribes  and  refused  to  lend  its  assistance  to  the
Doric  interest.  (Corn.  Nep.  Lysand.  3.)  It  was
chiefly  consulted  by  the  neighbouring  tribes,  the
Aetolians,  Acarnanians,  and  Epirots  (Paus.  vii.  21.
§  i  ;  Herod,  ix.  93),  and  by  those  who  would  not
go  to  Delphi  on  account  of  its  partiality  for  the
Dorians.  There  appears  to  have  been  a  very
ancient  connection  between  Dodona  and  the  Boeo-
tian Ismenion.  (Strab.  ix.  p.  402  ;  compare  MUller,
Orchom.  p.  378,  2d  edit.)

The  usual  form  in  which  the  oracles  were  given
at  Dodona  was  in  hexameters  ;  but  some  of  the
oracles  yet  remaining  are  in  prose.  In  219  B.C.
the  temple  was  destroyed  by  the  Aetolians,  and
the  Scicred  oaks  were  cut  down  (Polyb.  iv.  67),  but
the  oracle  continued  to  exist  and  to  be  consulted,
and  does  not  seem  to  have  become  totally  extinct
until  the  third  century  of  our  aera.  In  the  time  of
Strabo  the  Dodonaean  prophetesses  are  expressly
mentioned,  though  the  oracle  was  already  decaying
like  all  the  others.  (Strab.  vii.  p.  329.)

Compare  Cordes,  De  Oraculo  Dodonaeo,  Gro-
ningen,  1820"  ;  J.  Arneth,  Ueber  das  Taubetiorakel
von  Dodona^  Wien,  1840  ;  L.  von  Lassaulx,  Das
PeUisgische  Orakcl  des  Zeus  zu  Dodona.,  ein  Beitrag
zur  Religionsphilosophie,  WUrzburg,  1840.


ORACULUM.

3.  Orach  of  Zeus  Amman,  in  an  oasis  in  Libj^i,
in  the  north-  west  of  Egypt.  According  to  the
traditions  current  at  Dodona  and  Thebes  in  Egypt,
it  was  founded  by  the  latter  city  (Herod,  ii.  42,
54,  &c.),  and  the  form  in  which  the  god  was  re-
presented at  Thebes  and  in  the  Ammonium  was
the  same  ;  he  had  in  both  places  the  head  of  a
ram.  (Herod,  iv.  181.)  The  Greeks  became  ac-
quainted with  this  oracle  through  the  Cyreneans,
and  Sparta  was  the  first  city  of  Greece  which
formed  connections  with  it.  (Pans.  iii.  18.  §2.)
Its  example  was  followed  by  the  Thebans,  Olym-
pians, Dodonaeans,  Eleans,  and  others,  and  the
Athenians  sent  frequent  theories  to  the  Ammo-
nium even  before  01.  91  (Bockh,  Puhl,  Econ.  p.
240,  2d  edit.),  and  called  one  of  their  sacred  vessels
Amraonis.  (Hesych.  and  Suid.  s.  v.  "Aixfiwf  ;
Harpocrat.  s.  v.  'Aix/j-wvis.)  Temples  of  Zeus  Am-
mon  were  now  erected  in  several  parts  of  Greece.
His  oracle  in  Libya  was  conducted  by  men  who
also  gave  the  answers.  (Diod.  xvii,  51.)  Their
number  appears  to  have  been  very  great,  for  on
some  occasions  when  they  carried  the  statue  about
in  a  procession,  their  number  is  said  to  have  been
eighty.  (Diod.  iii.  50.)  In  the  time  of  Strabo
(xvii.  p.  813)  the  oracle  was  very  much  neglected,
and  in  a  state  of  decay.  The  Greek  writers,  who
are  accustomed  to  call  the  greatest  god  of  a  bar-
barous nation  Zeus,  mention  several  oracles  of  this
divinity  in  foreign  countries.  (Herod,  ii.  29  ;
Diod.  iii.  6'.)

III.  Oracles  op  other  Gods.

The  other  gods  who  possessed  oracles  were  con-
sulted only  concerning  those  particular  departments
of  the  world  and  human  life  over  which  they
presided.  Demeter  thus  gave  oracles  at  Patrae  in
Achaia,  but  only  concerning  sick  persons,  whether
their  sufferings  would  end  in  death  or  recovery.
Before  the  sanctuary  of  the  goddess  there  was  a
well  surrounded  by  a  wall.  Into  this  well  a  mir-
ror was  let  down  by  means  of  a  rope,  so  as  to  swim
upon  the  surface.  Prayers  were  then  performed
and  incense  offered,  whereupon  the  image  of  the
sick  person  was  seen  in  the  mirror  either  as  a
corpse  or  in  a  state  of  recovery.  (Pans.  vii.  21.
§  5.)  At  Pharae  in  Achaia,  there  was  an  oracle
of  Hermes.  His  altar  stood  in  the  middle  of  the
market-place.  Incense  was  offered  there,  oil-lamps
Avere  lighted  before  it,  a  copper  coin  was  placed
upon  the  altar,  and  after  this  the  question  was  put
to  tlie  god  by  a  whisper  in  his  ear.  The  person
who  consulted  him  shut  his  own  ears,  and  imme-
diat  ly  left  the  market-place.  The  first  remark
that  he  heard  made  by  any  one  after  leaving  the
market  place  was  believed  to  imply  the  answer  of
Hermes.    (Pans.  vii.  22.  §  2.)

There  was  an  Oracle  of  Pluto  and  Cora  at
Charax,  or  Acharaca,  not  far  from  Nysa,  in  Caria.
The  two  deities  had  here  a  temple  and  a  grove,
and  near  the  latter  there  was  a  subterraneous
cave  of  a  miraculous  nature,  called  the  cave  of
Charon  ;  for  persons  suffering  from  illness,  and
placing  confidence  in  the  power  of  the  gods,  tra-
velled to  this  place,  and  stayed  for  some  time  with
experienced  priests  who  lived  in  a  place  near  the
cave.  These  priests  then  slept  a  night  in  the
cavern,  and  afterwards  prescribed  to  their  patients
the  remedies  revealed  to  them  in  their  dreams.
Often,  however,  they  took  their  patients  with  them
into  the  cave,  where  they  had  to  stay  for  several


ORACULUM.


841


da3's  in  quiet  and  without  taking  any  food,  and
were  sometimes  allowed  to  fall  into  the  prophetic
sleep,  but  were  prepared  for  it,  and  received  the
advice  of  the  priests  ;  for  to  all  other  persons  the
place  was  inaccessible  and  fatal.  There  was  an
annual  panegyris  in  this  place,  probably  of  sick
persons  who  sought  relief  from  their  sufferings.
On  the  middle  of  the  festive  day  the  young  men
of  the  gymnasium,  naked  and  anointed,  used  to
drive  a  bull  into  the  cave,  which,  as  soon  as  it  had
entered,  fell  down  dead.  (Strab.  xiv.  p.  649  ;
compare  xii.  p.  579.)

At  Epidaurus  Limera  oracles  were  given  at  the
festival  of  Ino.  [Inoa].  The  same  goddess  had
an  oracle  at  Oetylon,  in  which  she  made  revela-
tions in  dreams  to  persons  who  slept  a  night  in  her
sanctuary.  (Paus.  iii.  26.  §  1.)  Hera  Acraea  had
an  oracle  between  Lechaeon  and  Pagae.  (Strab.
viii.  p.  380.)

IV.  Oracles  of  Heroes.

\.  Oracle  of  Ampldaraus, 'beiwQen  Potniae  and
Thebes,  where  the  hero  was  said  to  have  been
swallowed  up  by  the  earth.  His  sanctuary  was
surrounded  by  a  wall  and  adorned  with  columns,
upon  which  birds  never  settled,  and  birds  or  cattle
never  took  any  food  in  the  neighbourhood.  (Paus.
ix,  3.  §  2.)  The  oracles  were  given  to  persons  iu
their  dreams,  for  they  had  to  sleep  in  the  temple
(Herod,  viii.  134)  after  they  had  prepared  them-
selves for  this  incid)atio  by  fasting  one  day,  and  by
abstaining  from  wine  for  three  days.  (Philostrat.
Vii.  ApolL  ii.  37.)  The  Thebans  were  not  allowed
to  consult  this  oracle,  having  chosen  to  take  the
hero  as  their  ally  rather  than  as  their  prophet.
(Herod.  I.  c.)  Another  oracle  of  Amphiaraus  was
at  Oropus,  between  Boeotia  and  Attica,  which  was
most  frequently  consulted  by  the  sick  about  the
means  of  their  recovery.  Those  who  consulted  it
had  to  undergo  lustrations,  and  to  sacrifice  a  ram,
on  the  skin  of  which  they  slept  a  night  in  the
temple,  where  in  their  dreams  they  expected  the
means  of  their  recovery  to  be  revealed  to  them.
(Paus.  i.  34.  §  2,  &c.)  If  they  recovered,  they
had  to  throw  some  pieces  of  money  into  the  well
of  Amphiaraus  in  his  sanctuary.  The  oracle  was
said  to  have  been  founded  by  the  Thebans.  (Strab.
ix.  p.  399.)

2.  Oracle  of  Ampldlodms.  He  was  the  son  of
Amphiaraus,  and  had  an  oracle  at  Mallos  in  Cilicia,
which  Pausanias  calls  the  most  trustworthy  of  his
time.    (Paus.  i.  34.  §  2  ;  Dion  Cass.  Ixxii.  7.)

3.  Oracle  of  Trophonhis  at  Lebadeia  in  Boeotia.
(Paus.  ix.  37.  §  3.)  Those  who  wished  to  con-
sult this  oracle  had  first  to  purify  themselves  by
spending  some  days  in  the  sanctuary  of  the  good
spirit  and  good  luck  {ayadov  Aaifioyos  Koi  ayaOrji
Tu^^s),  to  live  sober  and  pure,  to  abstain-  from
warm  baths,  but  to  bathe  in  the  river  Hercyna,  to
offer  sacrifices  to  Trophonius  and  his  children,  to
Apollo,  Cronos,  king  Zeus,  Hera  Heniocha,  and  to
Demeter  Europe,  who  was  said  to  have  nursed
Trophonius  ;  and  during  these  sacrifices  a  sooth-
sayer explained  from  the  intestines  of  the  victims
whether  Trophonius  would  be  pleased  to  admit  the
consultor.  In  the  night  in  which  the  consultor
was  to  be  allowed  to  descend  into  the  cave  of  Tro-
phonius, he  had  to  sacrifice  a  ram  to  Agamedes,
and  only  in  case  the  signs  of  the  sacrifice  were
favourable,  the  hero  was  thought  to  be  pleased  to
admit  the  person  into  his  cave.     What  took  place


842


ORACULUM.


after  this  was  as  follows  :  —  Two  boys,  1 3  years  old,
led  him  again  to  the  river  Hercyna,  and  bathed
and  anointed  him.  The  priests  then  made  him
drink  from  the  well  of  oblivion  (A-);6t})  that  he
might  forget  all  his  former  thoughts,  and  from  the
well  of  recollection  {Mvrjfj.oawr])  that  he  miglit  ra-
member  the  visions  which  he  Avas  going  to  have.
They  then  showed  him  a  mysterious  representation
of  Trophonius,  made  him  worship  it,  and  led  him
into  the  sanctuary,  dressed  in  linen  garments  with
girdles  around  his  body,  and  wearing  a  peculiar
kind  of  shoes  (KprjirlSes)  which  Avere  customary  at
Lebadeia.  Within  the  sanctuary  which  stood  on
an  eminence,  there  was  a  cave,  into  which  the  per-
son was  now  allowed  to  descend  by  means  of  a
ladder.  Close  to  the  bottom,  in  the  side  of  the
cave,  there  was  an  opening  into  which  he  put  his
feet,  whereupon  the  other  parts  of  the  body  were
likewise  drawn  into  the  opening  by  some  invisible
power.  What  the  persons  here  saw  was  different
at  different  times.  They  returned  through  the
same  opening  by  which  they  had  entered,  and  the
priests  now  placed  them  on  the  throne  of  Mnemo-
syne, asked  them  what  thej'-  had  seen,  and  led
them  back  to  the  sanctuary  of  the  good  spirit  and
good  luck.  As  soon  as  they  had  recovered,  from
their  fear,  they  were  obliged  to  write  down  their
vision  on  a  little  tablet  which  was  dedicated  in  the
temple.  This  is  the  account  given  by  Pausanias,
who  had  himself  descended  into  the  cave,  and
writes  as  an  eye-witness.  (Paus.  ix.  39.  §  3,  &c.  ;
compare  Philostr.  Vit.  Apoll.  viii.  19.)  The  an-
swers were  probably  given  by  the  priests  according
to  the  report  of  what  persons  had  seen  in  the  cave.
This  oracle  was  held  in  very  great  esteem,  and
did  not  become  extinct  until  a  very  late  period:
and  though  the  army  of  Sulla  had  plundered  the
temple,  the  oracle  was  much  consulted  by  the  Ro-
mans (Orig.  c.  Ceh.  vii.  p.  355),  and  in  the  time  of
Plutarch  it  was  the  only  one  among  the  numerous
Boeotian  oracles,  that  had  not  become  silent.  (Plut.
de  Orac.  Def.  c.  5.)

4.  Oracle,  of  Calchas^  in  Daunia  in  southern
Italy.  Here  answers  were  given  in  dream?,  for
those  who  consulted  the  oracle  had  to  sacrifice  a
black  ram,  and  slept  a  night  in  the  temple,  lying
on  the  skin  of  the  victim.  (Strab.  vi.  p.  284.)

5.  Oracles  of  Asclepius  (Aesculapius).  The
oracles  of  Asclepius  were  very  numerous.  But  the
most  important  and  most  celebrated,  was  that  of
Epidaurus.  His  temple  there  was  literally  covered
with  votive  tablets,  on  which  persons  had  recorded
their  recovery  by  spending  a  night  in  the  temple.
In  the  t-mples  of  Aesculapius  and  Serapis  at  Rome,
recovery  was  likewise  sought  by  incubatio  in  his
temple.  (Suet.  Claud.  25.)  F.  A.  Wolf  has  written
an  essay,  Beitrag  zur  Gescli.  des  Somnambulismus
aus  dein  Alterthum  {Vermischte  Schrifien.,  p.  382,
&c.),  in  which  he  endeavours  to  show  that  what  is
now  called  Mesmerism,  or  animal  magnetism,  was
known  to  the  priests  of  those  temples  where  sick
persons  spent  one  or  more  nights  for  the  purpose  of
recovering  their  health.  Other  oracles  of  the  same
kind  are  mentioned  in  that  essay,  together  with
some  of  the  votive  tablets  still  extant.

6.  Oracle  of  Heracles  at  Bura  in  Achaia.  Those
who  consulted  it,  prayed  and  put  their  questions  to
the  god,  and  then  cast  four  dice  painted  with
figures,  and  the  answer  was  given  according  to  the
position  of  these  figures.  (Paua.  vii.  25.  §  6.)

7.  Oracle  of  Pasipha'c^  at  Thalamiae  in  Laconia,


ORACULUM.

where  answers  were  given  in  dreams  while  persons
spent  the  night  in  the  temple.  (Plut.  Cleom.  7,
Agis,,  9  ;   Cic.  de  Div.  i.  43.)

8.  Oracle  of  Phriocus^  in  Iberia  near  Mount
Caucasus,  where  no  rams  were  allowed  to  be  sacri-
;  ftced.     (Strab.  xi.  p.  498  ;  Tacit.  Annal.  vi.  34.)

v.  Oracles  op  the  Dead.

Another  class  of  oracles  are  the  oracles  of  tlie
dead  (yeKvouavTeTov  or  ipvxoTro/j.Tre7oy)^  in  which
those  who  consulted  called  up  the  spirits  of  the
dead,  and  offered  sacrifices  to  the  gods  of  the  lower
world.  One  of  the  most  ancient  and  most  cele-
brated places  of  this  kind  was  in  the  countrj'  of
the  'J'hesprotians  near  lake  Aornos.  (Diod.  iv.
22  ;  Herod,  v.  92.  §  7  ;  Paus.  ix.  30.  §  3.)  An-
other oracle  of  this  kind  was  at  Heraclea  on  the
Propontis.     (Plut.  Cim.  6.)

Respecting  the  Greek  oracles  in  general  see
Wachsmuth,  Hellen.  Alterlh.  ii.  p.  585,  &c.  ;  Klau-
sen,  in  Ersch  und  Gruber''s  Encyclop.  s.  v.  Orakel.

VI.  Italian  Oracles.

Oracles,  in  which  a  god  revealed  his  will  through
the  mouth  of  an  inspired  individual,  did  not  exist
in  Italy.  The  oracles  of  Calchas  and  Aesculapius
mentioned  above  were  of  Greek  origin,  and  the
former  was  in  a  Greek  heroum  on  mount  Garganus.
The  Romans,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  things,  did
not  feel  the  want  of  such  oracles  as  those  of  Greece,
for  they  had  numerous  other  means  to  discover
the  will  of  the  gods,  such  as  the  Sibylline  books,
augury,  haraspices,  signs  in  the  heavens,  and  the
like,  which  are  partly  described  in  separate  articles
and  partly  in  Divinatio.  The  only  Italian  oracles
known  to  us  are  the  following  :  —

I.Oracle  of  Faunus.  His  oracles  are  said  to
have  been  given  in  the  Saturnian  verse,  and  collec-
tions of  his  vaticinia  seem  to  have  existed  at  an
early  period.  (Aurel.Vict.  De  Orig.  gent.  Rom.  c.  4.)
The  places  where  his  oracles  were  given  were  two
groves,  the  one  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Tibur,
round  the  well  of  Albunea,  and  the  other  on  the
Aventine.  (Virg.  .4«i.  vii.  81,  «&:c. ;  Ovid,F«s^iv.
650,  &c.)  Those  who  consulted  the  god  in  the
grove  of  Albunea,  which  is  said  to  have  been  re-
sorted to  by  all  the  Italians,  had  to  observe  the
following  points  :  —  The  priest  first  offered  a  sheep
and  other  sacrifices  to  the  god.  The  skin  of  the
victim  was  spread  on  the  ground,  and  the  consul-
tor  was  obliged  to  sleep  upon  it  during  the  night,
after  his  head  had  been  thrice  sprinkled  with  pure
water  from  the  well,  and  touched  with  the  branch
of  a  sacred  beech  tree.  He  was,  moreover,  obliged
several  days  before  this  night  to  abstain  from  ani-
mal food  and  from  matrimonial  connections,  to  be
clothed  in  simple  garments,  and  not  to  wear  a  ring
on  his  fingers.  After  he  fell  asleep  on  the  sheep*
skin  he  was  believed  to  receive  his  answer  in
wonderful  visions  and  in  converse  with  the  god
himself.  (Virg.  I.  c;  Isidor.  viii.  11.  87.)  Ovid
{I.  c.)  transfers  some  of  the  points  to  be  observed
in  order  to  obtain  the  oracle  on  the  Albunea,  to
the  oracle  on  the  Aventine.  Both  may  have  had
much  in  common,  but  from  the  story  which  he  re-
lates of  Numa  it  seems  to  be  clear  that  on  the
Aventine  certain  different  ceremonies  also  were
observed.

2.  Oracles  of  Fortuna  existed  in  several  Italian
towns,  especially  in  Latium,  as  at  Antium  and
Praeneste.      In   the  former   of  these  towns   two


ORATION  ES.

sisters  Fortunae  were  worshipped,  and  their  statues
used  to  bend  forward  wlien  oracles  were  given.
(Macrob.  Sat.  i.  "23  ;  compare  liorat.  Carin.  i.  35,
1  ;  8uet.  Calig.  57  with  Erncsti's  note  ;  Domit.  15.)
At  Praeneste  the  oracles  were  derived  from  lots
(sortes),  consisting  of  sticks  of  oak  with  ancient
characters  graven  upon  them.  These  lots  were
said  to  have  been  foimd  by  a  noble  Praenestine  of
the  name  of  Numerius  Suifucius,  inside  of  a  rock
which  he  had  cleft  open  at  the  command  of  a  dream
by  which  he  had  been  haunted.  The  lots,  when
an  oracle  was  to  be  given,  were  shaken  up  together
by  a  boy,  after  which  one  was  drawn  for  the  per-
son who  consulted  the  goddess.  (Cic.  de  Divin.  ii.
41.)  The  lots  of  Praeneste  were,  at  least  w-ith  the
vulgar,  in  great  esteem  as  late  as  the  time  of  Cicei'o,
while  in  other  places  of  Latium  they  were  mostly
neglected.  The  Etruscan  Caere  in  early  times  had
likewise  its  sortes.    (Liv.  xxi.  62.)

2).  An  Oracle  of  Mars  was  in  very  ancient  times,
according  to  Dionj'sius  (i.  15),  at  Tiora  Matiena,
not  far  from  Reate.  The  manner  in  which  oracles
were  here  given  resembled  that  of  the  pigeon-
oracle  at  Dodona,  for  a  woodpecker  (picus),  a  bird
sacred  to  Mars,  was  sent  by  the  god,  and  settled
upon  a  wooden  column,  whence  he  pronounced  the
oracle.

On  Roman  oracles  in  general  see  Niebuhr,  Hist,
of  Rome,  vol.  i.  p.  508,  &c. ;  Hartung,  Die  Reiig.
der  Roiner,  vol.  i.  p.  96,  &.c.  [L.  S.J

ORA'RIUM  was  a  small  handkerchief  used  for
wiping  the  face,  and  appears  to  have  been  employed
for  much  the  same  purposes  as  our  pocket-handker-
chief. It  was  made  of  silk  or  linen.  In  the  Etym.
Mag.  (p.  804.  27,  ed.  Sylb.)  it  is  explained  by
TTpoawirov  iKjxayetov.  Aurelian  introduced  the
practice  of  giving  Oraria  to  the  Roman  people  to
use  ad  favoreni,  which  appears  to  mean  for  the
purpose  of  waving  in  the  public  games  in  token  of
applause,  as  we  use  our  hats  and  handkerchiefs  for
the  same  purpose.  (Vopisc.  Aurel.  48  ;  Casaubon
ad  loc.  ;  Augustin.  de  Civ.  Dei,  xxii.  8  ;  Prudent.
necH  'Zr^cp.  i.  86  ;  Hieron.  ad  Nepotian.  Ep.  2.)

ORATIO'NES  PRI'NCIPUM.  The  Ora-
tiones  Principum  are  frequently  mentioned  by  the
Roman  writers  under  the  Empire  ;  but  those  which
are  discussed  under  this  head  have  reference  to
legislation  only,  and  were  addressed  to  the  Senate.
Under  the  Christian  Emperors  particularly,  these
Orationes  were  only  a  mode  of  promulgating  Ijaw
as  constituted  by  the  Emperor  ;  and  we  have  an
instance  of  this  even  in  the  reign  of  Probus
("  Leges,  quas  Probus  ederet,  Senatusconsultis  pro-
priis  consccrarent,"  Prob.  Imp.  ap.  Flav.  Vopisc.
13.)  ;  and  in  a  passage  of  the  Institutes  of  Justinian
(2.  tit.  17.  s.  7),  the  expression  "  Divi  Pertinacis
oratione  cautum  est."  Under  the  earlier  Emperors,
the  Orationes  were  in  the  form  of  propositions
for  laws  addressed  to  the  Senate,  who  had  still  in
appearance,  though  not  in  reality,  the  legislative
power.  This  second  kind  of  Orationes  is  often
cited  by  the  Classical  Jurists,  as  in  the  following
instance  from  Gains  (ii.  285)  —  "  ex  oratione  Divi
Hadriani  Senatusconsultum  fectum  est."  —  "Ora-
tione Divi  Marci  .  .  quam  S.  C.  secutum  est."
(Paulus,  Dig.  23.  tit.  2   s.  16.)

Many  of  the  Orationes  of  the  Roman  emperors,
puch  as  are  quoted  by  the  Augustae  Ilistoriae
Scriptores,are  merely  communications  to  the  Senate  ;
such  for  instance  as  the  announcement  of  a  victory.
(Maxiia.  Duo,   ap.  J.  Capitol.  12,   13.)     These


ORATOR.  843

Orationes  are  sometimes  colled  Litterae  or  Epistolae
by  the  non-juristical  writers  ;  but  the  juristical
writers  appear  to  have  generally  avoided  the  use  ot
Epistola  in  this  sense,  ia  order  not  to  confound  the
Imperial  Orationes  with  the  Rescripta  which  were
often  called  Epistolae.  It  appears  that  the  Roman
jurists  used  the  terms  Libellus  and  Oratio  PrincipLs
as  equivalent,  for  the  passages  which  have  been
referred  to  m  support  of  the  opinion  that  these  two
words  had  a  different  sense  (Dig.  5.  tit.  3.  s.  20,
22),  show  that  Libellus  and  Oratio  Principis  are
the  same,  for  the  Oratio  is  here  spoken  of  by  both
names.  These  Orationes  v/ere  sometimes  pro-
nounced by  the  Emperor  himself,  but  apparently  '
they  were  commonly  in  the  form  of  a  Avritten
message,  which  was  read  by  the  Quaestors  (Dig.  1.
tit.  13) :  in  the  passage  last  referred  to,  these  Im-
perial messages  are  called  indifferentl}'-  Libri  and
Epistolae.  Suetonius  {Titus,  6)  says,  that  Titus
sometimes  read  his  father's  orationes  in  the  senate
"  quaestoris  vice."  We  frequently  read  of  Lit-
terae and  Orationes  being  sent  by  the  Emperor  to
the  Senate.  (Tacit.  Jn?i.  iii.  52,  xvi.  7.)  The
mode  of  proceeding  upon  the  receipt  of  one  of
these  Orationes  may  be  collected  from  the  pre-
amble of  the  Senatusconsultum  contained  in  tho
Digest  (5.  tit.  3).  These  Orationes  were  the  found-
ation of  the  Senatusconsulta  which  were  framed
upon  them,  and  when  the  Orationes  were  drawn
up  with  much  reuard  to  detail,  they  contained  in
fact  the  provisions  of  the  subsequent  Senatuscon-
sultum. This  appears  from  the  fact  that  the  Oratio
and  the  Senatusconsultum  are  often  cited  indif-
ferently by  the  classical  jurists,  as  appears  from
numerous  passages.  (Dig.  2.  tit.  15.  s.  8  ;  5.  tit.  3.
s.  20,  22,  40  ;  11.  tit.  4.  s.  3,  &c.)  The  Oratio  is
cited  as  containing  the  reasons  or  grounds  of  the
law,  and  the  Senatusconsultum  for  the  particular
provisions  and  words  of  the  law.  To  the  lime  of'
Septimius  Severus  and  his  son  Caracalla,  numerous
Senatusconsulta,  founded  on  Orationes,  are  men-
tioned ;  and  numerous  Orationes  of  these  two  Empe-
rors are  cited.  But  after  this  time  they  seem  to
have  fallen  into  disuse,  and  the  form  of  making
and  promulgating  Laws  by  Imperial  constitutiones
was  the  ordinary  mode  of  legislation.

There  has  been  much  discussion  on  the  amount
of  the  influence  exercised  by  the  Orationes  Princi-
pum on  the  legislation  of  the  Senate.  But  it  seems
to  be  tolerably  clear,  from  the  evidence  that  we
have,  and  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  that  the
Oratio  might  either  recommend  generally  some
legislative  measure,  aiid  leave  the  details  to  the
Senate  ;  or  it  might  contain  all  the  details  of  the
proposed  measure,  and  so  be  in  substance,  though
not  in  form,  a  Senatusconsultum  ;  and  it  would
become  a  Senatusconsultum  on  being  adopted  by
the  Senate,  which,  in  the  case  supposed,  would  bo
merely  a  matter  of  form.  In  the  case  of  an  Oratio,
expressed  in  more  general  terms,  there  is  no  reason
to  suppose  that  the  recommendation  of  the  Emperor
was  less  of  a  command  ;  it  was  merely  a  command
in  more  general  terms.

(Zimmern,  Geschichte  des  R'oin.  Privatrechis,  i.  p.
79  ;  andDirksen,  Ueber  die  Reden  der  R'oin.  Kaiser
und  deren  Einfiuss  auf  die  Gesetzgehung,  in  Rhein.
Mus.  fur  Jurisprudenz,  vol.  ii.)  [G.  L.]

ORATOR.  Cicero  remarks  {Or.  Part.  c.  28)
that  a  "certain  kind  of  causes  belong  to  Jus  Civile,
and  that  Jus  Civile  is  conversant  about  Laws
{Lex)  and  Custom  (jnos)   appertaining  to  things


{]44


ORATOR.


public  and  private,  the  knowledge  of  which,  though
neglected  by  most  orators,  seems  to  me  to  be  neces-
sary for  the  purposes  of  oratory."  In  his  treatise
on  the  Orator,  and  particularlj-  in  the  first  book,
Cicero  has  given  his  opinion  of  the  duties  of  an
orator  and  his  requisite  qualifications,  in  the  form
of  a  dialogue,  in  which  Lucius  Licinius  Crassus  and
M.  Antonius  are  the  chief  speakers.  Crassus  was
himself  a  model  of  the  highest  excellence  in  ora-
tory :  and  the  opinions  attributed  to  him  as  to  the
qualifications  of  an  orator  were  those  of  Cicero  him-
self, who  in  the  introductory  part  of  the  first  book
(c.  6)  declares  that  "  in  his  opinion  no  man  can
deserve  the  title  of  a  perfect  orator,  unless  he  has
acquired  a  knowledge  of  all  important  things  and
of  all  arts :  for  it  is  out  of  knowledge  that  oratory
must  blossom  and  expand,  and  if  it  is  not  founded
on  matter  which  the  orator  has  fully  mastered  and
understood,  it  is  idle  talk,  and  may  almost  be
called  puerile,"  According  to  Crassus  the  province
of  the  Orator  embraces  everything:  he  must  be
enabled  to  speak  well  on  all  subjects.  Conse-
quently he  must  have  a  knowledge  of  the  Jus
Civile  (i.  44,  &c.),  the  necessity  for  which  Crassus
illustrates  by  instances  ;  and  he  should  not  only
know  the  Jus  Civile,  as  being  necessary  when  he
has  to  speak  in  causes  relating  to  private  matters
and  to  privata  Judicia,  but  he  should  also  have  a
knowledge  of  the  Jus  Publicum  which  is  conver-
sant about  a  State  as  such,  and  he  should  be  fami-
liar with  the  events  of  history  and  instances  de-
rived from  the  experience  of  the  past,  Antonius
(i.  49)  limits  the  qualifications  of  the  orator  to  the
command  of  language  pleasant  to  the  ear  and  of
arguments  adapted  to  convince  in  causes  in  the
forum  and  on  ordinary  occasions.  He  further  re-  j
quires  the  orator  to  have  competent  voice  and
action  and  sufficient  grace  and  ease,  Antonius  j
(i.  58)  contends  that  an  orator  does  not  require  a
knowledge  of  the  Jus  Civile,  and  he  instances  the
case  of  himself,  for  Crassus  allowed  that  Antonius
could  satisfactorily  conduct  a  cause,  though  Anto-
nius, according  to  his  own  admission,  had  never
learned  the  Jus  Civile,  and  had  never  felt  the  want
of  it  in  such  causes  as  he  had  defended  {injure).

The  profession  then  of  the  orator,  who  with  re-
ference to  his  undertaking  a  client's  case  is  also
called  patronus  {de  Or.  i.  56,  Brut.  38)  was
quite  distinct  from  that  of  the  Jurisconsultus
[JuRiscoNSULTi],  and  also  from  that  of  the
Advocatus,  at  least  in  the  time  oF  Cicero  (ii.  74),
and  even  later  {de  Orut.  Dial.  34).  An  orator,
Avho  possessed  a  competent  knowledge  of  the  Jus
Civile,  would  however  have  an  advantage  in  it,  as
Antonius  admits  (i.59)  ;  but  as  there  were  many
essentials  to  an  orator,  which  were  of  difficult  at-
tainment, he  says  that  it  would  be  unwise  to  dis-
tract liim  with  other  things.  Some  requisites  of
oratory,  such  as  voice  and  gesture,  could  only  be
acquired  by  discipline  ;  whereas  a  competent  know-
ledge of  the  law  of  a  case  {juris  utilitas)  could  be
got  at  any  time  from  the  jurisconsulti  {periti)  or
from  books.  Antonius  thinks  that  the  Roman
orators  in  this  matter  acted  more  wisely  than  the
Greek  orators,  who  being  ignorant  of  law  had  the
assistance  of  low  fellows,  who  worked  for  hire,  and
were  called  Pragmatici  (i.  45):  the  Roman  orators
entrusted  the  maintenance  of  the  law  to  the  high
character  of  their  professed  Jurists.

So  far  as  the  profession  of  an  advocate  consists
in  the  ekilful  conduct  of  a  cause,  and  in  the  sup-


ORATOR.

porting  of  his  own  side  of  the  question  by  proper
argument,  it  must  be  admitted  with  Antonius  that
a  ver}^  moderate  knowledge  of  law  is  suflicient ;  and
indeed  even  a  purely  legal  argument  requires  not  so
much  the  accumulation  of  a  vast  store  of  legal  know-
ledge as  the  power  of  handling  the  matter  when  it
has  been  collected.  The  method  in  which  this  con-
summate master  of  his  art  managed  a  cause  is  stated
by  himself  {de  Or.  ii.  72) ;  and  Cicero  in  another
passage  {Brutus.,  37)  has  recorded  his  merits  as  an
orator.  Servlus  Sulpicius,  who  was  the  greatest
lawyer  of  his  age,  had  a  good  practical  knowledge
of  the  law,  but  others  had  this  also,  and  it  was
something  else  which  distinguished  Sulpicius  from
all  his  contemporaries  —  "Many  others  as  well  as
Sulpicius  had  a  great  knowledge  of  the  law  ;  he
alone  possessed  it  as  an  art.  But  the  knowledge
of  law  by  itself  would  never  have  helped  him  to
this  without  the  possession  of  that  art  which
teaches  us  to  divide  the  whole  of  a  thing  into  its
parts,  by  exact  definition  to  develope  what  is  im-
perfectly seen,  bv  explanation  to  clear  up  what  is
obscure  ;  first  of  all  to  see  ambiguities,  then  to  dis-
entangle them,  lastly  to  have  a  rule  by  which
truth  and  falsehood  are  distinguished,  and  by  which
it  shall  appear  what  consequences  follow  from  pre-
mises and  what  do  not."  {B'rut.Al.)  With  such
a  power  Sulpicius  combined  a  knowledge  of  letters
and  a  pleasing  style  of  speaking.  As  a  forensic
orator  then  he  must  have  been  one  of  the  first  that
ever  lived  ;  but  still  among  the  Romans  his  re-
putation was  that  of  a  jurist,  while  Antonius,  who
had  no  knowledge  of  the  law,  is  put  on  a  level  as
an  orator  {patronus)  with  L.  Crassus,  who  of  all  the
eloquent  men  of  Rome  had  the  best  acquaintance
with  the  law.

Oratory  was  a  serious  study  among  the  Romans.
Cicero  tells  us  by  what  painful  labour  he  attained
to  excellence.  {Brut.  91,  &c.)  Roman  oratory
reached  its  perfection  in  the  century  which  pre-
ceded the  Christian  aera.  Its  decline  dates  from
the  establishment  of  the  Imperial  power  under
Augustus  and  his  successors  ;  for  though  there  were
many  good  speakers,  and  more  skilful  rhetoricians
under  the  empire,  the  oratory  of  the  republic  was
rendered  by  circumstances  unsuitable  for  the  senate,
for  the  popular  assemblies,  or  for  cases  of  crimes
and  high  misdemeanours.

In  the  Dialogue  De  Oratoribus,  which  is  attri-
buted to  Tacitus,  Messala,  one  of  the  speakers,
attempts  (c.  28,  «&c.)  to  assign  the  reasons  for  the
low  state  of  oratory  in  the  time  of  Vespasian,  when
the  Dialogue  was  written,  compared  with  its  con-
dition in  the  age  of  Cicero  and  of  Cicero's  prede-
cessors. He  attributes  its  decline  to  the  neglect  of
the  discipline  under  which  children  were  formerly
brought  up,  and  to  the  practice  of  resorting  to
rhetoricians  {rhetores)  who  professed  to  teach  the
oratorical  art.  This  gives  occasion  to  speak  more
at  length  of  the  early  discipline  of  the  old  orators
and  of  Cicero's  course  of  study  as  described  in  the
Brutus.  The  old  orators  (c.  34)  learned  their  art
by  constant  attendance  on  some  eminent  orator
and  by  actual  experience  of  business :  the  orators
of  Messala's  time  were  formed  in  the  schools  of
Rhetoric,  and  their  powers  were  developed  in  exer-
cises on  fictitious  matters.  These  however,  it  is
obvious,  were  only  secondary  causes.  The  imme-
diate causes  of  the  decline  of  eloquence  appear  to
be  indicated  by  Matemus,  another  speaker  in  the
Dialogue,    who   attributes   the  former  flourishing?


ORGY  I  A.

condition  of  eloquence  to  the  political  power  which
oratory  conferred  on  the  orator  under  the  Republic,
and  to  the  party  struggles  and  even  the  violence
that  are  incident  to  such  a  state  of  society.  The
allusion  to  the  effect  produced  by  the  establish-
ment of  the  Imperial  power  is  clear  enough  in  the
following  words,  which  refer  both  to  the  Imperial
and  the  Republican  periods  :  "  cum  mixtis  omnibus
et  moderatore  uno  carentibus,  tantum  quisque  orator
saperet,  quantum  erranti  populo  persuaderi  poterat."

The  memorials  of  Roman  oratory  are  the  ora-
tions of  Cicero  ;  but  they  are  only  a  small  portion
of  the  great  mass  of  oratorical  literature.  The  frag-
ments of  the  Roman  orators  from  Appius  Caecus
and  M.  Porcius  Cato  to  Q.  Aurelius  Symmachus,
liave  been  collected  by  H.  Meyer,  ZUrich,  1  vol.
8vo.  2d  ed.  1842.  [G.  L.]

ORBUS.     [Leges  Juliae,  p.  692,  b.]

ORCA.       [SiTELLA.]

ORCHE'SIS  (6pxv(ris).     [Saltatio.J
ORCHESTRA.     [Theatrum.]
ORCINUS  LIBERTUS.     [Manumissio.]
ORCINUS  SENATOR.     [Senatus.]
ORDINA'RIUS  JUDEX.      [Judex  Peda-
net;s.]

ORDINA'RIUS  SERVUS.  [Servus.]
ORDO  is  applied  to  any  body  of  men,  who  form
a  distinct  class  in  the  community,  either  by  pos-
sessing distinct  privileges,  pursuing  certain  trades
or  professions,  or  in  any  other  way.  Thus  Cicero
(  Ferr.  ii.  6)  speaks  of  the  "  Ordo  aratorum,  sive
pecuariorum,  sive  mercatorum."  In  the  same  way
the  whole  body  of  sacerdotes  at  Rome  is  spoken  of
as  an  ordo  (Festus,  s.  r.  Ordo  Sacerdofum),  and
separate  ecclesiastical  corporations  are  called  by  the
same  title.  (Ordo  collegii  nostril  Orelli,  Inscr.  n.
2417  ;  Ordo  Sevirallum,  Id.  n.  2229.)  The  liber-
tini  and  scribae  also  formed  separate  ordines.  (Suet.
de  Grammat.  18  ;  Cic.  Verr.  i.  47,  iii.  79.)  The
Senate  and  the  Equites  are  also  spoken  of  re-
spectively as  the  Ordo  Senatorius  and  Ordo  Eques-
tris  [Senatus  ;  Equites]  ;  but  this  name  is
never  applied  to  the  Plebes.  Accordingly,  we  find
the  expression  "  Uterque  Ordo  "  used  without  any
further  explanation  to  designate  the  Senatorial
and  Equestrian  ordines.  (Suet.  J  m^.  15  ;  Veil.  Pat.
ii.  100.)  The  Senatorial  Ordo,  as  the  highest,  is
sometimes  distinguished  as  "  amplissimus  Ordo."
(Plin.  Ep.  X.  3  ;  Suet.  Ofho,  8,  Vesp.  2.)

The  senate  in  colonies  and  municipia  was  called
Ordo  Decurionum  (Dig.  .59.  tit.  2.  s.  2.  §  7  ;  Orelli,
Inscr.  n.  1167  ;  Colonia,  p.  31 8,  a),  and  sometimes
simply  Ordo  (Tacit.  Hist.  ii.  52  ;  Dig.  50.  tit.  2.
s.  2.  §  3  ;  Orelli,  n.  3734),  Ordo  amplissimus
(Cic.  pro  Cael.  2),  or  Ordo  splendidissimus  (Orelli,
n.  1180,  1181).

The  term  Ordo  is  also  applied  to  a  company
or  troop  of  soldiers,  and  is  used  as  equivalent
to  Centuria :  thus  centurions  are  sometimes  called
"qui  ordines  duxerant "  (Cic.  Phil.  i.  8;  Cacs.
Bell.  Civ.  i.  13),  and  the  first  centuries  in  a  legion
"primi  ordines."  (Caes.  Bell.  Gall.  v.  28,  44.)
Even  the  centurions  of  the  first  centuries  are  oc-
casionally called  "  Primi  Ordines."  (Caes.  Bell.
Gall.  v.  30,  vi.  7  ;  Liv.  xxx.  4  ;  Gronov.  ad  he.)
[Comp.  Exekcitus,  p.  501,  b.]

OR'GANON.     [Hydraula  ;  Machina.]
O'RGIA.     [Hysteria.]
ORGYIA     (op7Uid),    a    Greek    measure     of
length,   derived  from  the  human  body,  was  the
distance  from  extremity  to  extremity  of  the  out-


OSCHOPHORIA.  845

stretched  arms,  whence  the  name,  from  6p4y(o.
(Xen.  Mem.  ii.  3.  §  19  ;  Pollux,  ii.  158.)  It  wa.s
equal  to  6  feet  or  to  4  cubits,  and  was  1-1 00th  of
the  stadium.  (Herod,  ii.  149.)  It  may  be  ex-
pressed nearly  enough  in  English  by  the  word
fathom.  (Comp.  Mensura  and  the  Tables.)  [P.S.]
ORICHALCUM  (opei'xaX/cos),  a  metallic  com-
pound, akin  to  copper  and  bronze,  which  was
highly  prized  by  the  ancients.  (See  the  passages
in  Forcellini,  and  the  other  Latin  Lexicons.)  The
word  has  given  rise  to  much  doubt ;  but  the  truth
seems  to  be  that  it  denotes  brass^  with  which  the
ancients  became  acquainted  by  fusing  zinc  ore
(cadmium^  calamine)  with  copper,  although  they
appear  to  have  had  scarcely  any  knowledge  of
zinc  as  a  metal.  They  appear  to  have  regarded
orichalcum  as  a  sort  of  bronze.  How  little  ac-
quainted they  were  with  its  true  formation  is
shown  by  the  fact  that,  deceived  by  its  colour,
they  supposed  gold  to  be  one  of  its  constituents,
and  then  perpetuated  their  error  by  a  false  ortho-
graphy, aurichalcum.  The  true  derivation  is  no
doubt  from  opos  and  x«'^k<^s>  that  is,  motintai?i-
bronze,  so  called  probably  because  it  was  obtained
by  fusing  copper  with  an  ore  (metal  as  found  in
the  mountain),  and  not  with  an  already  reduced
metal.  (See  especially  Strabo,  with  Groskurd's
note,  and  Beckman,  as  quoted  in  the  article  Me-
tallum.)  [P.  S.]

ORIGINA'RIL     [Colonatus,  p.  311,  b.]
ORNAME'NTA  TRIUMPHA'LIA.    [Tri-

UMPHUS.]

ORNA'TRIX  [Coma,  p.  330,  b].
ORTHODO'RON.  [Mensura.]
OSCHOPHO'RIA  (daxo(p6pia  or  w(Txo(p6pia),
an  Attic  festival,  which  according  to  some  writers
was  celebrated  in  honour  of  Athena  and  Dionysus
(Phot.  p.  322,  Bekk,),  and  according  to  others  in
honour  of  Dionysus  and  Ariadne.  (Plut.  Thes.  23.)
The  time  of  its  celebration  is  not  mentioned  by  any
ancient  writer,  but  Corsini  (Fast.  Att.  ii.  p.  354)
supposes  with  great  probability  that  it  was  held  at
the  commencement  of  the  Attic  month  Pyanepsion.
It  is  said  to  have  been  instituted  by  Theseus.  Its
name  is  derived  from  S)(tx°^i  oax^^^  or  oaxv,  a
branch  of  vines  with  grapes,  for  it  was  a  vintage
festival,  and  on  the  day  of  its  celebration  two
youths,  called  ocrxocpSpoi,  whose  parents  were  alive,
and  who  were  elected  from  among  the  noblest  and
wealthiest  citizens  (Schol.  ad  Nicand.  Alexiph.
109),  carried,  in  the  disguise  of  women,  branches
of  vines  with  fresh  grapes  from  the  temple  of
Dionysus  in  Athens,  to  the  ancient  temple  of
Athena  Sciras  in  Phalerus.  These  youths  were
followed  by  a  procession  of  persons  who  likewise
carried  vine-branches,  and  a  chorus  sang  hymns
called  o}(Txo(popiKa  fifXrj,  which  were  accompanied
by  dances.  (Athen.  xiv.  p.  681.)  Jn  the  sacrifice
which  was  offered  on  this  occasion,  women  also
took  part  ;  they  were  called  d€Lirvo(t>6poi,  for  they
represented  the  mothers  of  the  youths,  carried  the
provisions  {u^a  Kal  airia)  for  them,  and  related
stories  to  them.  During  the  sacrifice  the  staff  of
the  herald  was  adorned  with  garlands,  and  when
the  libation  was  performed  the  spectators  cried
out  e'AeAei",  toi»,  lov.  (Plut.  Thes.  22.)  The  ephebi
taken  from  all  the  tribes  had  on  this  day  a  contest
in  racing  from  the  city  to  the  temple  of  Athena
Sciras,  during  which  they  also  carried  the  o<txi7,
and  the  victor  received  a  cup  filled  with  five  dif-
ferent things  (ireuTdTr\oos,irevratr\6a^oTirct/Tair\r}),


846  OVATIO.

\'\7..  wine,  honey,  cheese,  flour,  and  a  little  oil.
(Athen.  xi.  p.  4,9.5.)  According  to  other  accounts
the  victor  only  drank  from  this  cup.  The  story
which  was  symbolically  represented  in  the  rites
and  ceremonies  of  this  festival,  and  which  was  said
to  have  given  rise  to  it,  is  related  bv  Plutarch
(nes.  22,  23)  and  by  Proclus  (p.  388,  ed.  Gais-
ford).  (Compare  Bekker's  Jw«/o<.  p.  318  ;  Ety-
mol,  Magn.  and  Hesych.  s.  v.  '^O.crxo'-  ;  Suidas,  s.  v.
'n,(rxo(p6pia  and  waxo(t>(^pos.)  [L.  S.]

OSCILLUM,  a  diminutive  through  osculum
from  OS,  meaning  "a  little  face,"  was  the  term
applied  to  faces  or  heads  of  Bacchus,  which  were
suspended  in  the  vineyards  to  be  turned  in  cverv'-
direction  by  the  wind.  Whichsoever  way  they
looked,  the)'  were  supposed  to  make  the  vines  in
that  quarter  fruitful.  {Wv^.Georg.  ii.  388 — 392.)
The  left-hand  figure  in  the  annexed  woodcut  is
taken  from  an  oscillum  of  white  marble  in  the
British  Museum.  The  back  of  the  head  is  want-
ing, and  it  is  concave  within.  The  mouth  and
pupils  of  the  eyes  are  perforated.  It  represents
the  countenance  of  Bacchus  with  a  beautiful,  mild,
and  propitious  expression  (mnUe,  ho?iestum,  Virg.
/.  c),  A  fillet,  spirally  twisted  about  a  kind  of
Avreath,  surrounds  the  head,  and  descends  by  the
cars  towards  the  neck.  The  metallic  ring,  by
which  the  marble  was  suspended,  still  remains.
Th'.;  other  figure  is  from  an  ancient  gem  (Maffei,
Gem.  Ant.  iii.   64),  representing  a  tree  with  four


oscilla  hung  upon  its  branches.  A  Syrinx  and  a
Pedum  are  placed  at  the  root  of  the  tree.

From  this  noun  came  the  verb  osciUo,  meaning
*'  to  swing."  Swinging  (osciUatio)  was  among  the
bodil}'  exercises  practised  by  the  Romans,  and  was
one  of  the  amusements  at  the  Feriae  Latinae,
(Festus,  S.V.;  Hygin.  Fab.  130  ;  Wunder,  Corn-
ment.  ad  Cic.  pro  Plane,  p.  93  ;  Feriae,  p.
530,  a.]  [J-Y.]

O'SCINES.     [Augur,  p.  1 75,  b.]

OSTIA'RIUM  was  a  tax  upon  the  doors  of
houses,  which  was  probably  imposed  along  with
the  Columnarium  by  the  Ux  sumtuaria  of  Julius
Caesar.  It  was  levied  by  Metellus  Scipio  in  Syria,
together  with  the  Columnarium,  on  which  see  Co-
lumnarium (Caes.  B.C.  iii.  32  ;  Cic.  ad  Fain.
iii.  8).

OSTIA'RIUS.     [DoMUS,  p.  427,  b.]

O'STIUM.     [Janua.]

OSTRACISMUS.     [Exsilium,  p.  514.]

O'STRACON  {txTrpaKov).     [Fictile.]

OVA'TIO,  a  lesser  triumph, ;  the  terms  era-
ployed  by  the  Greek  AVTiters  on  Roman  history  are
€(;o,  ewao-TTjy,  Tre^s  SrpiafjiSos.  The  circumstances
by  which  it  was  distinguished  from  the  more  im-
posing solemnity  [TriumphusJ  were  the  follow-
ing:—  The  general  did  not  enter  the  city  in  a


PAEAN.

chariot  drawn  by  four  horses,  but  on  foot  ;  he  wns
not  arrayed  in  the  gorgeous  gold  embroidered  robe,
but  in  the  simple  toga  praetexta  of  a  magistrate  ;
his  brows  Avcre  encircled  with  a  wreath  not  of
laurel  but  of  myrtle  ;  he  bore  no  sceptre  in  his
hand  ;  the  procession  was  not  heralded  bv  trum-
pets, headed  by  the  senate  and  thronged  with  vic-
torious troops,  but  was  enlivened  by  a  crowd  of
flute-players,  attended  chiefly  by  knights  and  ple-
beians, frequently  without  soldiers  ;  the  ceremonies
were  concluded  by  the  sacrifice  not  of  a  bull  but
of  a  sheep.  (Plut.  Marcell.  c.  22  ;  Dionys.  v.  47  ;
Gell.  V.  6;  Liv.  iii.  10,  xxvi.  21.)  The  word
ovatio  seems  clearly  to  be  derived  from  the  kind  of
victim  offered,  and  we  need  pay  little  respect  to
the  opinion  of  Festus  (s.  v.  Ovantes),  who  supposes
it  to  have  been  formed  from  the  glad  shout  0  !  O !
frequently  reiterated,  nor  to  that  of  Dionysius,
whose  system  required  him  to  trace  every  custom
to  a  Grecian  origin,  and  who  therefore  maintains
that  it  is  corrupted  from  the  Bacchanalian  etoi.
Dion3'sius  makes  another  mistake  in  assigning  a
laurel  chaplet  to  the  conqueror  on  these  occasions,
since  all  the  Roman  writers  agree  with  Plutarch
in  representing  that  the  myrtle  crown,  hence  called
Ovalis  Corona.,  was  a  characteristic  of  the  ovation,
(Festus,  s.v.  Ovalis  Corona;  Plin.  H.N.  xv.  29  ;
Plut.  ;  Gell.  II.  cc.)     Compare  Corona,  p.  361.

In  later  times,  the  victor  entered  upon  horse-
back (Serv.  in  Virg.  Aen.  iv.  543),  and  the  ova-
tions celebrated  by  Octavianus,  Drusus,  Tiberius,
&c.,  are  usually  recorded  by  Dion  Cassius  by  a
reference  to  this  circumstance.  (Dion  Cass,  xlviii.
31,  xlix.  15,  liv.  8,  33,  Iv.  2.)

An  ovation  was  granted  when  the  advantage
gained,  although  considerable,  was  not  sufficient  to
constitute  a  legitimate  claim  to  the  higher  distinc-
tion of  a  triumph,  or  when  the  victory  had  been
achieved  with  little  bloodshed,  as  in  the  case  of
Postumius  Tubertus,  avIio  first  received  this  honour
(Plin.  H.N.  XV.  29)  ;  or  when  hostilities  had  not
been  regularly  proclaimed  (Festus,  Gell.  //.  cc.)  ;
or  when  the  war  had  not  been  completely  termi-
nated, which  was  one  of  the  ostensible  reasons  for
refusing  a  triumph  to  Marcellus  on  his  return  from
Sicily  (Plut.  I.e.;  Liv.  xxvi.  21)  ;  or  when  the
contest  had  been  carried  on  against  base  and  un-
worthy foes,  and  hence  when  the  servile  bands  of
Athenion  and  Spartacus  were  destroyed  by  Per-
perna  and  Crassus,  these  leaders  celebrated  ova-
tions only  (Floras,  iii.  19  ;  Plin.  Gell.  ^.  c),  al-
though the  latter  by  a  special  resolution  of  the  se-
nate was  permitted  to  wear  a  laurel  crown.  [W.R.]
OVFLE.  [CoMiTiA,  p.  336,  b.]
OU'SIAS  DIKE.  [Enoikiou  Dike.]
OXYBAPHUM.     [Acetabulum.]


PA'CTIO,  PACTUM.^  [Obligationes.]
PAEAN  (vai-fiwu,  iraidv,  Traiciu),  a  hymn  or
song  which  was  originally  sung  in  honour  of
Apollo,  and  seems  to  be  as  old  as  the  worship  of
this  deity.  The  etymology  of  the  word  is  doubt-
ful. Some  suppose  that  it  obtained  its  name  from
Paeon,  the  god  of  healing  ;  but  in  the  Homeric
poems  Paeon  is  always  spoken  of  as  a  separate
divinity,  distinct  from  Apollo.  Other  writers,
with  still  less  probability,  connect  it  with  nalw,  to
strike.


PAEDAGOGUS.

The  paean  was  alwaj's  of  a  joyous  nature,  and
its  tune  and  sounds  expressed  hope  and  confidence.
The  sound  of  l-f}  appears  to  have  been  invariably
connected  with  it.  (Athen.xv.  pp.696,  e.f,  701,  b.c.)
It  was  sung  by  several  persons,  one  of  whom  pro-
bably led  the  others,  and  the  singers  either  marched
onwards  or  sat  together  at  table.  Thus  Achilles
after  the  death  of  Hector  calls  upon  his  companions
to  return  to  the  ships,  singing  a  paean  on  accovmt
of  the  glory  they  had  gained  (11.  xxiii.  391);  and
the  Achaeans,  after  restoring  Chryseis  to  her
father,  are  represented  as  singing  a  paean  to  Apollo
at  the  end  of  the  sacrificial  feast,  in  order  to  ap-
pease his  wrath.  (11.  i.  473.)  From  these  pas-
sages it  is  clear  that  the  paean  was  a  song  of
thanksgiving,  when  danger  was  passed,  and  also  a
hymn  to  propitiate  the  god.  It  was  sung  at  the
solemn  festivals  of  Apollo,  especially  at  the  Hya-
cinthia  (els  ri  'TaKivBia  eVl  rhy  Traiava,  Xen.
Hell,  iv,  5.  §  11,  Affes.  ii.  17),  and  was  also  sung
from  very  early  times  in  the  temples  of  the  god.
(Horn.  Hymn,  ad  JpoU.  514  ;  Eurip.  /ow,  125,
&c.)

The  paean  was  also  sung  as  a  battle  song,  both
before  an  attack  on  the  enemy  and  after  the  battle
was  finished.  (Thucyd.  i.  50,  iv.  43,  ii.  91,  vii.  44  ;
Xen.  Anab.  i.  8.  §  17,  &c.)  This  practice  seems
to  have  chiefly  prevailed  among  the  Dorians,  but
it  was  also  common  among  the  other  Greek  states.
The  origin  of  it  is  said  to  have  arisen  from  the  fact,
that  Apollo  sang  it  after  his  victory  over  the  Pythian
dragon.  The  paean  sung  previous  to  an  engage-
ment was  called  by  the  Spartans  Traiau  if.i§aTr)pios.
(Plut.  Li/c.  22.)  The  Scholiast  on  Thucydides  (i.
50)  says,  that  the  paean  which  was  sung  before
the  battle  was  sacred  to  Ares,  and  the  one  sung
after  to  Apollo  ;  but  there  are  strong  reasons  for
believing  that  the  paean  as  a  battle-song  was  in
later  times  not  particularly  connected  with  the
worship  of  Apollo.  (Bode,  Gesch.  der  lyrisch.
Dichtkunst  der  Hellenen^  vol.  i.  pp.  9,  10,  &c.)  It
is  certain  that  the  paean  was  in  later  times  sung
to  the  honour  of  other  gods  besides  Apollo,  Thus
Xenophon  relates  that  the  Lacedaemonians  on  one
occasion  sang  a  paean  to  Poseidon,  to  propitiate
him  after  an  earthquake  (Hell.  iv.  7.  §  4),  and  als*
that  the  Greek  army  in  Asia  sang  a  paean  to
Zeus.     (Ancd}.n\.2.%Q.)

In  still  later  times,  paeans  were  sung  in  honour
of  mortals.  Thus  Aratus  sang  paeans  to  the
honour  of  the  Macedonian  Antigonus  (Plut.  Cleom.
1 6)  ;  a  paean  composed  by  Alexinus  was  sung  at
Delphi  in  honour  of  the  Macedonian  Craterus  ;  and
the  Rhodians  celebrated  Ptolemaeus  I.,  king  of
Egypt,  in  the  same  manner.  (Athen.  xv.  p.  GdQ,
e.  f.)  The  Chalcidians,  in  Plutarch's  time,  still
continued  to  celebrate  in  a  paean  the  praises  of
their  benefactor,  Titus  Flaminius.  (Plut.  Flam.  1 6.)

The  practice  of  singing  the  paean  at  banquets,
and  especially  at  the  end  of  the  feast,  when  liba-
tions were  poured  out  to  the  gods,  was  very  an-
cient. It  is  mentioned  by  Alcman,  who  lived  in
the  seventh  century  b.  c.  (Strab.  x.  p.  482.)  The
paean  continued  to  be  sung  on  such  occasions  till  a
late  period.  (Xen.  Symp.  ii.  1  ;  Plut.  Symp.  vii.  8.
§4.)

(Miiller,  Hist,  of  Greek  Literature^  pp.  19,  20,
Dorians,  ii.  6.  §  4  ;  Bode,  Gesch.  der  lyrisch.^  (tc.
vol.  i.  pp.  7 — 77.)

PAEDAGO'GIA.     [Paedagogus.]

PAEDAGO'GUS  (irai5ayo>y6s),  a  tutor.     The


PAEDAGOGUS.


847


office  of  tutor  in  a  Grecian  family  of  rank  and
opulence  (Plato,  de  Repub.  i.  p.  87,  ed.  Bekker,  de
Leg.  vii.  pp.  41, 42)  was  assigned  to  one  of  the  most
trustworthy  of  the  slaves.  The  sons  of  his  master
were  committed  to  his  care  on  attaining  their  sixth
or  seventh  year,  their  previous  education  having
been  conducted  by  females.  They  remained  with
the  tutor  (magister)  until  they  attained  the  age  of
puberty.  (Ter.  Andr.  i.  1.  24.)  His  duty  was
rather  to  guard  them  from  evil,  both  physical  and
moral,  than  to  communicate  instruction,  to  cultivate
their  minds,  or  to  impart  accomplishments.  He
went  with  them  to  and  from  the  school  or  the
Gymnasium  (Plato,  Lysis,  p.  118);  he  accom-
panied them  out  of  doors  on  all  occasions  ;  he  was
responsible  for  their  personal  safety,  and  for  their
avoidance  of  bad  company.  (Bato,  ap.  Athe?i.  vii.  p.
279.)  The  formation  of  their  morals  by  direct  su-
perintendence belonged  to  the  Trai5ov6/j.oi  as  public
officers,  and  their  instruction  in  the  various  branchesi
of  learning,  i.  e.  in  grammar,  music,  and  gymnas-
tics, to  the  SiSdcTKaAoi  or  praeceptores,  whom  Plato
(II.  cc),  Xenophon  (de  Lac.  Rep.  ii.  1,  iii.  2),
Plutarch  (de  Lib.  Ed.  7),  and  Quintilian  (Inst.  Or.
i.  1.  8,9)  expressly  distinguish  from  the /xaserfa^og/.
These  latter  even  carried  the  books  and  instru-
ments which  were  requisite  for  their  young  masters
in  studying  under  the  sophists  and  professors.

This  account  of  the  office  is  sufficient  to  explain
why  the  iraidaywySs  so  often  appears  on  the
Greek  stage,  both  in  tragedy,  as  in  the  Medea,
Phoenissae,  and  Ion  of  Euripides,  and  in  comedy,
as  in  the  Bacchides  of  Plautus.  The  condition  of
slavery  accounts  for  the  circumstance,  that  the
tutor  was  often  a  Thracian  (Plato,  Alcib.  i.  p.  341,
ed.  Bekker),  an  Asiatic,  as  is  indicated  by  such
names  as  Lydus  (Plant.  I.  c),  and  sometimes  an
eunuch.  (Herod,  viii.  75  ;  Corn.  Nep.  Themist.  iv.
3  ;  Polyaen.  i.  30.  §  2.)  Hence  also  we  see  why
these  persons  spoke  Greek  with  a  foreign  accent
(vTro€ap§apL(ovTes,  Plato, Lysis,  p.  1 45, ed.  Bekker).
On  rare  occasions,  the  tutor  was  admitted  to  the
presence  of  the  daughters,  as  when  the  slave,  sus-
taining this  office  in  the  royal  palace  at  Thebes,
accompanies  Antigone  while  she  surveys  the  be-
sieging army  from  the  tower.  (Eaiip.  Pkoen.  87 —
210.)

Among  the  Romans  the  attendance  of  the  tutor
on  girls  as  well  as  boys  was  much  more  frequent,
as  they  were  not  confined  at  home  according  to
the  Grecian  custom.  (Val.  Max.  vi.  1.  §  3.)  As
luxury  advanced  under  the  emperors,  it  was  strik-
ingly manifested  in  the  dress  and  training  of  the
beautiful  young  slaves  who  were  destined  to  be-
come paedagogi,  or,  as  they  were  also  termed,
paedagogia  and  pueri  paedagogiani.  (Plin.  //.  A''.
xxxiii.  12.  s.  54 ;  Sen.  Epist.  124,  De  Vita  beata,
17  ;  TertuU.  Apol.  13.)  Augustus  assigned  to
them  a  separate  place,  near  his  own,  at  the  public
spectacles.  (Sueton.  Aug.  44.)  Nero  gave  offence
by  causing  free  boys  to  be  brought  up  in  the  deli-
cate habits  of  paedagogi.  (Sueton.  Ner.  28.)  After
this  period  numbers  of  them  were  attached  to  the
imperial  family  for  the  sake  of  state  and  orna-
ment, and  not  only  is  the  modern  word  page  a
corruption  of  the  ancient  appellation,  but  it  aptly
expresses  the  nature  of  the  service  which  the  pae-
dagogia at  this  later  era  afforded.

In  palaces  and  other  great  houses  the  pages  slept
and  lived  in  a  separate  apartment,  which  was  also
called  paedagogium.  (Plin.  Epist.  vii.  27.)    [ J.  Y.]


V,4fi


PAENULA.


PAEDO'NOMUS  (7raj5oi/o/xos),  was  a  magis-
trate at  Sparta,  who  had  the  general  superintend-
ence of  the  education  of  the  boys.  His  office  was
considered  very  lionourable,  and  he  was  always
chosen  from  the  noblest  citizens.  He  had  to  make
a  general  inspection  of  the  boys,  and  to  punish
severely  all  those  who  had  been  negligent  or  idle ;
for  which  pxirpose  jxaariyocpopoi  were  assigned  to
him  by  Lycurgus.  Those  who  were  refractory  he
might  bring  before  the  Ephors.  The  more  imme-
diate inspection  of  the  gymnastic  exercises  of  the
boys  belonged  to  magistrates  called  fiiSia7oi.  [Bi-
DiAEi.]  (Xen.  Rep.  Lac.  ii.  2,  iii.  10,  iv.  6 ;  Plut.
Li/c.  17  ;  Hesj'chius,  s.  v. ;  Krause,  Gymnastik  und
Ayon.  der  Helhnen.,  pp.  254,  677.)

PAEDOTRPBAE  (TratSorptgar),  [Gymnasi-
um, p.  581,  b.]

PAE'NULA  was  a  thick  cloak,  chiefly  used  by
the  Romans  in  travelling  instead  of  the  toga,  as  a
protection  against  the  cold  and  rain.  (Cic.  -pro  Mil.
20 ;  Quintil,  vi.  3.  §  6Q.)  Hence  we  find  the  ex-
pression oi sdndere paeiiulam  (Cic.  ad  Ait.  xiii.  33)
used  in  the  sense  of  greatly  pressing  a  traveller  to
stay  at  one's  house.  The  paenula  was  worn  by
women  as  well  as  by  men  in  travelling.  (Dig.  34.
tit.  2.  s.  23.)  It  appears  to  have  been  a  long  cloak
without  sleeves,  and  with  only  an  opening  for  the
head,  as  is  shown  in  the  following  figure  taken
from  Bartholini.  If  this  is  a  real  example  of  a
paenula,  it  would  seem  that  the  dress  was  sewed
in  front  about  half  wa}''  down,  and  was  divided
into  two  parts,  which  might  be  thrown  back  by
the  wearer  so  as  to  leave  the  arms  comparatively
free:  it  must  have  been  put  on  over  the  head.
This  figure  explains  the  expression  of  Cicero  {pro
Mil.  I.  f?.),  "  paenula  irretitus  ;  "  and  of  the  author
of  the  Dialogus  de  Oratoribus  (c.  39),  "  paenulis
adstricti  et  velut  inclusi."


Under  the  emperors  the  paenula  was  worn  in
the  city  as  a  protection  against  the  rain  and  cold
(Juv.  V.  79),  but  women  were  forbidden  bj'  Alex-
ander Sevenas  to  wear  it  in  the  city.  (Lamprid.
Alex.  Sev.  27.)  At  one  time,  however,  the  paenula
appears  to  have  been  commonly  worn  in  the  city
instead  of  the  toga,  as  we  even  find  mention  of
orators  wearing  it  when  pleading  causes  {Dial,  de
Oral.  39),  but  this  fashion  was  probably  of  short
duration.


PALA.

The  paenula  was  usually  made  of  wool  (Plin.
H.  N'.  viii.  48.  s.  73),  and  particularly  of  that  kind
which  was  called  Gausapa  [Gausapa]  (  paenula
gausapina,  Mart.  xiv.  145).  It  was  also  some-
times made  of  leather  {paenula  scoriea.  Mart.  xiv.
130).  Seneca  {Quaest.  Nat.  iv.  6)  speaks  of
"  paenulae  aut  scorteae,"  but  he  appears  only  to
use  this  expression  because  paenulae  were  usually
made  of  wool.  (Bartholini,  rfc  i^oeww/a;  Becker,
Gallus.,  vol.  ii.  p.  93.)

PAGANA'LIA.     [Pagi.]

PAGA'NI.     [Pagi.]

PAGA'NICA.     [PiLA.]

PAGI,  were  fortified  places,  to  which  the  coun-
try-people might  retreat  in  case  of  an  hostile  in-
road, and  are  said  to  have  been  instituted  by
Servius  Tullius  (Dionj^s.  iv.  15)  ;  though  the  divi-
sion of  the  country-people  into  pagi  is  as  old  as
the  time  of  Numa  (Dionys.  ii.  76.)  Each  of  the
covmtry-tribes  was  divided  into  a  certain  number
of  pagi ;  which  name  was  given  to  the  country  ad-
joining the  fortified  village,  as  well  as  to  the  village
itself.  There  was  a  magistrate  at  the  head  of  each
pagus,  who  kept  a  register  of  the  names  and  of
the  property  of  all  persons  in  the  pagus,  raised  the
taxes,  and  summoned  the  people,  when  necessarj',
to  war.  Each  pagus  had  its  own  sacred  rites,  and
an  annual  festival  called  Paganalia.  (Dionys.  iv.
15  ;  Varro,  de  Ling.  Lot.  vi.  24,  26,  ed.  Miiller  ;
Macrob.  Saturn,  i.  16  ;  Ovid,  Fast.  i.  669.)  The
Pagani,  or  inhabitants  of  the  pagi,  had  their  re-
gular meetings,  at  which  they  passed  resolutions,
many  of  which  have  come  down  to  us.  (Orelli,
Inscr.  n.  3793,  4083,  106,  202,  2177.)  The  di-
vision of  the  country -people  into  pagi  continued  to
the  latest  times  of  the  Roman  empire,  and  we  find
frequent  mention  of  the  magistrates  of  the  pagi
under  the  names  of  Magistri,  Praefecli  or  Prae.^
positi  pagorum.  (Orelli,  Inscr.  n.  121,  3795,  3796  t
Cod.  Theod.  2.  tit.  30.  s.  1  ;  8.  tit.  15.  s.  1;  Wal-
ter, Geschichte  des  Rom.  Redds,  §§  26,  164,  247,
366,  2d  ed.)

The  term  Pagani  is  often  used  in  opposition  to
milites,  and  is  applied  to  all  who  were  not  soldiers,
even  though  they  did  not  live  in  the  country.
{Milites  et  pagani.,  Plin.  Ep.  x.  1 8  ;  Juv.  xvi.  32  ;
Suet.  Aug.  27,  Galh.  19  ;  Dig.  11.  tit.  4.  s.  1  ;  48.
tit.  19.  s.  14,  &c.).  Hence  we  find  Pagani  or  citi-
zens applied  as  a  term  of  reproach  to  soldiers  who
did  not  perform  their  duty  (Tacit.  Hist.  iii.  24),
in  the  same  way  as  Julius  Caesar  addressed  his
rebellious  soldiers  on  one  occasion  as  Quirites.
The  Christian  writers  gave  the  name  of  Pagani
to  those  persons  who  adhered  to  the  old  Roman
religion,  because  the  latter  continued  to  be  gene-
rally believed  by  the  country -people,  after  Chris-
tianity became  the  prevailing  religion  of  the  in-
habitants of  the  towns.  (Isidorus,  viii.  10  ;  Cod.
Theod.  16.  tit.  10  ;  Cod.  Just.  1.  tit.  11.)

PALA  (tttuov,  (TKaTTavr),  aKacpiov,  yua/ce'AXa),  a
spade.  (Cato  de  Re  Rust.  10  ;  Plin.  //.  N.  xvii.
17.  s.  27,  xvii.  22.  s.  35.)  The  spade  was  but  little
used  in  ancient  husbandry,  the  ground  having  been
broken  and  turned  over  by  the  plough,  and  also
by  the  use  of  largo  hoes  and  rakes.  [Ligo  ;  Ras-
TRtJM.]  But  in  some  cases  a  broad  cutting  edge
was  necessary  for  this  piirpose,  as,  for  example,
when  the  ground  was  full  of  the  roots  of  rushes  or
other  plants.  (Plin.  //.  N.  xviii.  8.)  Also  in  gar-
dening it  was  an  indispensable  instrument,  and
it  was  then  made  on  the  same  principle  as  the


PALAESTRA.

plough -share,  viz.  by  casing  its  extremity  with
iron.  (Colum.  x.  45.)  The  annexed  woodcut,  taken
from  a  funeral  monument  at  Rome  (Fabretti,  Tn-
scrip.  Ant.  p.  574),  exhibits  a  deceased  countrjnnan
with  his  faix  and  bidens,  and  also  with  a  pala,
modified  by  the  addition  of  a  strong  cross-bar,  by
the  use  of  which  he  was  enabled  to  drive  it  nearly
twice  as  deep  into  the  ground  as  he  could  have
done  without  it.    In  this  form  the  instrument  was


PALILIA.


849


called  btpalium^  being  employed  in  trenching  (pas-
tinatio)^  or,  when  the  ground  was  full  of  roots  to
a  considerable  depth,  in  loosening  them,  turning
them  over,  and  extirpating  them,  so  as  to  prepare
the  soil  for  planting  vines  and  other  trees.  By
means  of  this  implement,  which  is  still  used  in
Italy  and  called  vanga^  the  ground  was  dug  to  the
depth  of  two  spades  or  nearly  two  feet.  (Plin,
//.  A^:  xviii.  26.  s.  62  ;  Cat.  de  Re  Rust.  6,  45,
151  ;  Varr.  de  Re  Rust.  i.  37  ;  Col.  de  Re  Rust.
V.  6.  p.  214,  xi.  3.  p.  450,  ed.  Bip.)

Cato  (Ibid.  11)  mentions  wooden  spadea  (palas
ligneas)  among  the  implements  necessary  to  the
husbandman.  One  principal  application  of  them
was  in  winnowing.  The  winnowing-shovel,  also
called  in  Latin  ventilabrum^  is  still  generally  used
in  Greece,  and  the  mode  of  employing  it  is  ex-
hibited by  Stuart  in  his  "  Antiquities  of  Athens."
The  com  which  has  been  threshed  lies  in  a  heap
upon  the  floor,  and  the  labourer  throws  it  to  a  dis-
tance with  the  shovel,  whilst  the  wind,  blowing
strongly  across  the  direction  in  which  it  is  thrown,
drives  the  chaif  and  refuse  to  one  side.  (Theocrit.
vii.  156  ;  Matt.  iii.  12  ;  Luke,  iii.  17.)  The  fruit  of
leguminous  plants  was  purified  and  adapted  to  be
used  for  food  in  the  same  manner.  (Horn.  //.  v.
499—502,  xiii.  588—592.)

The  term  pula  was  applied  anciently,  as  it  is  in
modern  Italian,  to  the  blade  or  broad  part  of  an
oar.  [Remus.]  In  a  ring  the  broad  part,  which
held  the  gem,  was  called  by  the  name  of  pala
[Annulus.]  |"J.  Y.]

PALAESTE.  [Palmus;  MENsuRA,p.751,b.]

PALAESTRA  (Tra\ai(npa)  properly  means  a
place  for  wrestling  (ira\aieiv,  ttccAtj),  and  appears
to  have  originally  formed  a  part  of  the  gymna-
aium.     The  word  was,  however,  used  in  different


senses  at  various  periods,  and  its  exact  meaning,
especially  in  relation  to  the  gymnasium,  has  occa-
sioned much  controversy  among  modern  writers.
It  first  occurs  in  Herodotus  (vi.  126,  128),  who
says  that  Cleisthenes  of  Sicyon  built  a  dromos  and
a  palaesti-a,  both  of  which  he  calls  by  the  general
name  of  palaestra.  At  Athens,  however,  there
was  a  considerable  number  of  palaestrae,  quite
distinct  from  the  gymnasia,  which  were  called
by  the  names  either  of  their  founders,  or  of  the
teachers  who  gave  instruction  there  ;  thus,  for  ex-
ample, we  read  of  the  palaestra  of  Taureas.  (Plat.
Charmid.  init.)  Krause  {Gymnastik  und  Ago7iistik
der  Hellenen.,  p.  117,  &c.)  contends  that  the  pa-
laestrae at  Athens  were  appropriated  to  the  gym-
nastic exercises  of  boys  and  youths  (iratSes  and
fteipctKta),  and  the  gymnasia  to  those  of  men  ;  but
Becker  (Charikles.,  vol.  i.  pp.  311,  335,  &c.)  has
shown  that  this  cannot  be  the  true  distinction,  al-
though it  appears  that  certain  places  were,  for  obvious
reasons,  appropriated  to  the  exclusive  use  of  boys.
(Aesch.  0.  Timarch.  p.  35,  Reiske.)  But  that  the
boys  exercised  in  the  gymnasia  as  well,  is  plain
from  many  passages  (Antiph.  de  Caed.  invuL  p.
661,  Reiske  ;  irais  uipalos  anh  yv/nuaa-iuv,  Aristoph.
Av.  138,  140)  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  we  read
of  men  visiting  the  palaestrae.  (Lucian,  Nacig.  4.
vol.  iii.  p.  251,  Reitz.)

It  appears  most  probable  that  the  Palaestrae
were,  during  the  flourishing  times  of  the  Greek
republics,  chiefly  appropriated  to  the  exercises  of
wrestling  and  of  the  pancratium,  and  were  prin-
cipally intended  for  the  athletae,  who,  it  must
be  recollected,  were  persons  that  contended  in  the
public  games,  and  therefore  needed  special  tram-
ing.  This  is  expressly  stated  by  Plutarch  {Symp.
ii.  4),  who  says,  "  that  the  place  in  which  all  the
athletae  exercise  is  called  a  palaestra  ;"  and  we
also  learn  from  Pausanias  (v.  15.  §  5,  vi.  21.  §  2),
that  there  were  at  Olympia  palaestrae  especially
devoted  to  the  athletes.  In  Athenaeus  (x.  p.
417,  f.)  we  read  of  the  great  athletes  Damippus
coming  out  of  the  palaestra  ;  and  Galen  ( Trept  rot)
hia.  fjLLKpas  crcpaipas  yvfiuaaiov,  c.  5)  places  the
athletae  in  the  palaestra.    (Krause,  Ibid.  p.  115.)

The  Romans  had  originally  no  places  correspond-
ing to  the  Greek  gymnasia  and  palaestrae  ;  and
when  towards  the  close  of  the  republic,  wealthy
Romans,  in  imitation  of  the  Greeks,  began  to  build
places  for  exercise  in  their  villas,  they  called  them
indifferently  gymnasia  SMid  palaestrae.  (Cic.  ad  A  tt.
i.  4,  8,  9,  10,  ad  Qu.  Fr.  iii.  1.  §  2,  Verr.  v.  72.)
The  words  were  thus  used  by  the  Romans  as
synonymous  ;  and  accordingly  we  find  that  Vitru-
vius  (v.  11)  gives  a  description  of  a  Greek  gym-
nasium ander  the  name  of  palaestra,

PALA'RIA.     [Palus.]

PALATI'NI  LUDI.     [Ludi  Palatini.]

PALE  {TrdK-n).     [Lucta.]

PALI'Ll A,  a  festival  celebrated  at  Rome  every
year  on  the  21st  of  April,  in  honour  of  Pales,  the
tutelary  divinity  of  shepherds.  Some  of  the  ancient
writers  called  this  festival  Parilia^  deriving  the
name  from  pario,  because  sacrifices  were  offered
on  that  day  joro  partu  pecoris.  (Fest.  s.  v.  Pales  ;
compare  Popuktna  sacra;  Varro,  de  Ling.  ImI.
vi.  15  ;  Dionys.  i.  88.)  The  21st  of  April  was  the
day  on  which,  according  to  the  early  traditions  of
Rome,  Rotnulus  had  commenced  the  building  of
the  city,  so  that  the  festival  was  at  the  same  time
solemnised  as  the  dies  natalitius  of  Rome  (Fest.
3  I


fl.w


PALILIA.


8.  V.  Parilibus ;  Cic.  de  Divin.  ii.  47  ;  Varro,  de
Re  Rust.  ii.  1  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  QQ)  ;  and  some
of  the  rites  customary  in  later  times  were  said  to
have  been  first  performed  by  Romulus  when  he
fixed  the  pomoerium.  (Dionys.  /.  c.)  Ovid  {Fast.
iv,  731,  &c.)  gives  a  description  of  the  rites  of  the
Palilia,  which  clearly  shows  that  he  regarded  it  as
a  shepherd-festival,  such  as  it  must  originally  have
been  when  the  Romans  were  real  shepherds  and
husbandmen,  and  as  it  must  have  continued  to  be
among  countrj-^-people  in  his  own  time,  as  is  ex-
pressly st<ited  by  Dionysius  ;  for  in  the  city  itself
it  must  have  lost  its  original  character,  and  have
been  regarded  only  as  the  dies  natalitius  of
Rome.  The  connection,  however,  between  these
two  characters  of  the  festival  is  manifest,  as  the
founders  of  the  city  were,  as  it  were,  the  kings  of
shepherds,  and  the  founders  of  a  religion  suited  to
shepherds.

The  first  part  of  the  solemnities,  as  described
by  Ovid,  was  a  public  purification  by  fire  and
smoke.  The  things  bunit  in  order  to  produce
this  purifying  smoke  were  the  blood  of  the  Oc-
tober-horse^  the  ashes  of  the  calves  sacrificed  at
the  festival  of  Ceres,  and  the  shells  of  beans.
The  people  were  also  sprinkled  with  water  ;  they
washed  their  hands  in  spring-water,  and  drank
milk  mixed  with  must.  (Ovid.  Fast.  I.  c. ;  compare
Propert.  iv,  1.  20.)  As  regards  the  October-horse
(equus  October)  it  must  be  observed  that  in  early
times  no  bloody  sacrifice  was  allowed  to  be  ofi«red
at  the  Palilia,  and  the  blood  of  the  October-
horse,  mentioned  above,  was  the  blood  which  had
dropped  from  the  tail  of  the  horse  sacrificed  in
the  month  of  October  to  Mars  in  the  Campus
Martins.  This  blood  was  preserved  by  the  Vestal
virgins  in  the  temple  of  Vesta  for  the  purpose  of
being  used  at  the  Palilia.  (Solin.  p.  2,  d  ;  Fest.
s.  V.  October  equus;  Plut.  Romul.  12.)  When
towards  the  evening  the  shepherds  had  fed  their
flocks,  laurel-branches  were  used  as  brooms  for
cleaning  the  stables,  and  for  sprinkling  water
through  them,  and  lastly  the  stables  were  adorned
with  laurel-boughs.  Hereupon  the  shepherds  burnt
sulphur,  rosemary,  fir- wood,  and  incense,  and  made
the  smoke  pass  through  the  stables  to  purify
them  ;  the  flocks  themselves  were  likewise  puri-
fied by  this  smoke.  The  sacrifices  which  were
offered  on  this  day  consisted  of  cakes,  millet,  milk,
and  other  kinds  of  eatables.  The  shepherds  then
offered  a  prayer  to  Pales.  After  these  solemn
rites  were  over,  the  cheerful  part  of  the  festival
began :  bonfires  were  made  of  heaps  of  hay  and
straw,  and  under  the  sounds  of  cymbals  and  flutes
the  sheep  were  again  purified  by  being  compelled
to  run  three  times  through  the  fire,  and  the  shep-
herds themselves  did  the  same.  The  festival  was
concluded  by  a  feast  in  the  open  air,  at  which  the
people  sat  or  lay  upon  benches  of  turf,  and  drank
plentifully.  (TibuU.  ii.  5.  87,  &c.  ;  compare  Pro-
pert,  iv.  4.  75.)

In  the  city  of  Rome  the  festival  must,  at  least
in  later  times,  have  been  celebrated  in  a  different
manner  ;  its  character  of  a  shepherd-festival  was
forgotten,  and  it  was  merely  looked  upon  as  the
day  on  which  Rome  had  been  built,  and  was  cele-
brated as  such  with  great  rejoicings.  (Athcn.  viii.
p.  361.)  In  the  reign  of  Caligula  it  was  decreed
that  the  day,  on  which  this  emperor  had  come  to
the  throne,  should  be  celebrated  under  the  name
of  Palilia,  as  if  the  empire  had  been  revived  by


PALLIUM.

him,  and  had  commenced  its  second  existence,
(Suet.  Calig.  16.)  Athenaeus  (/.  c.)  says,  that
before  his  time  the  name  Palilia  had  been  changed
into  Romana  ('Pafiala).  Whether  this  change
of  name  was  occasioned  by  the  decree  in  the
reign  of  Caligula  just  mentioned,  is  unknown.
(Comp.  Hartung,  Die  Relig.  der  Romer,  vol.  iu
p.  150,  &c.)  [L.S.J

PALIMPSESTUS.     [Liber.]

PALLA.     [Pallium.]

PALLACE  (iraWaici}).     [Concubina]

PALLIA'TA    FA'BULA.      [Comoedia,   p.
346.]

PA'LLIUM,  dim.  PALLIOLUM,;>oe^  PAL-
LA (Plant.  Men.  ii.  3.  41 — 47  ;  Ovid.  Amor.  iii.
1.  12,  iii.  2.  25)  {l/xaTLOU,  dim.  //LtoTiSioi/  ;  Ion.
and  poet,  (papas).  The  English  cloak,  though  com-
monly adopted  as  the  proper  translation  of  these
terms,  conveys  no  accurate  conception  of  the  form,
material,  or  use  of  that  which  they  denoted.  The
article  designated  by  them  was  always  a  rectan-
gular piece  of  cloth,  exactly,  or  at  least  nearly,
square  (j^Tpdrywva  IfiaTia,  Posidonius  ap.  J  then.
V.  p.  213  ;  quadrangulus,  TertuU.  de  Pallio,  1).
Hence  it  could  easily  be  divided  without  loss  or
waste  into  four  parts.  (John,  xix.  23.)  It  w.is
indeed  used  in  the  very  form  in  which  it  was
taken  from  the  loom  [Tela],  being  made  entirely
by  the  weaver  (rh  Ifidriov  v(prjyai.  Plat.  Charm.
pp.  86,  98.  ed.  Heindorf ;  Hipp.  Mi?i.  p.  210,  ed.
Bekker),  without  any  aid  from  the  tailor  except
to  repair  (sarcire,  aKe7(xdai)  the  injuries  which  it
sustained  by  time.  Although  it  was  often  orna-
mented, more  especially  among  the  northern  na-
tions of  Europe,  with  a  fringe  [Fimbriae],  yet
this  wg,s  commonly  of  the  same  piece  with  the
pallium  itself.  Also  whatever  additional  richness
and  beauty  it  received  from  the  art  of  the  dyer,
was  bestowed  upon  it  before  its  materials  were
woven  into  cloth  or  even  spun  into  thread.  Most
commonly  it  was  used  without  having  undergone
any  process  of  this  kind.  The  raw  material,  such
as  wool,  flax,  or  cotton,  was  manufactured  in  its
natural  state,  and  hence  blankets  and  sheets  were
commonly  white  (A.€i//ca  i^oLTia,  Artemidor.  ii.  3),
although  from  the  same  cause  brown,  drab,  and
grey  were  also  prevailing  colours.  The  more*
splendid  and  elegant  tints  were  produced  by  the
application  of  the  murex  (muricata,  conchyliaiay
purpurea.,  vestis;  vopcpvpovv,  aXovpyri  Ifidrta,  He-
raclides  Pont.  ap.  AtJmi.  xii.  p.  512),  the  kermes
{coccirieus,  kSkkivov),  the  argol  (/ticatus),  and  the
saffron  {croceus,  KpoKwrou).  [Crocota.]  Pale
green  was  also  worn  (ofitpaKivov,  Pollux,  Onom.
vii.  56).  Black  and  grey  pallia  were  either  made
from  the  wool  of  black  sheep  (Theocrit.  v.  98)  or
were  the  result  of  the  art  of  the  dyer.  They  were
worn  in  mourning  (fxeXava  IfiaTia,  Xen.  Hist.  Or.
i.  7.  §  8  ;  Artemidor.  I.  c;  (paiav  eV0f/Ta,  Inscrip-
tion in  Fellows '9  Journal,  1838,  p.  31),  and  by
sorceresses.  (Hor.  Sat.  i.  8.  23.)  The  pallium  of
one  colour  {iSidxpoov  iyLariov,  literally  "  the  self-
coloured,"  Artem.  /.  c.)  was  distinguished  from  the
variegated  (iroiKiKou)  ;  and  of  this  latter  class  the
simplest  kinds  were  the  striped  {()aSS<i}T6i',  Xen.
Cyrop.  viii.  8.  §  8),  in  which  the  effect  was  pro-
duced by  inserting  alternately  a  woof  of  different
colours,  and  the  check  or  plaid  (scutulaturn,  tesse-
latum),  in  which  the  same  colours  were  made  to
alternate  in  the  warp  also.  Zeuxis,  the  painter,
exhibited  at  the  Olympic  games  a  plaid  having


PALLIUM.

his  name  woven  in  the  squares  {tesserae,  irXivOia)
in  golden  letters.  (Plin.  //.  A^.  xxxv.  9.  s.  36.  2.)
An  endless  variety  was  produced  by  interweaving
sprigs  or  Howers  in  the  woof  (^vflect  ireKoiKiA-
uivov.  Plat.  Republ.  viii.  p.  401,  ed.  Bekker).  By
the  same  process  carried  to  a  higher  degree  of
complexity  and  refinement,  whole  figures  and
even  historical  or  mythological  subjects  were  in-
troduced, and  in  this  state  of  advancement  the
weaving  of  pallia  was  the  elegant  and  worthy  em-
plovment  of  females  of  the  first  distinction  (Hom,
//.  'iii.  125—128,  xxii.  440,  441),  and  of  Athena,
the  inventress  of  the  art,  herself.  (Apollon.  Rhod.
i.  721 — 768.)  The  greatest  splendour  was  im-
parted by  the  use  of  gold  thread.  (Virg.  Aen.  iv.
262—264  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  viii.  48,  xxxiii.  1 9  ;  Anson.
Epig.  37  ;  Themist.  Orat  21  ;  Q.  Curt.  iii.  3.  17.)
Homer  represents  Penelope  weaving  a  purple
blanket  for  Ulj^sses,  which  also  displayed  a  beau-
tiful hunting-piece  wrought  in  gold.  {Od.  xix.
225 — 235.)  The  epithet  Si7rAa|,  which  is  com-
monly applied  by  the  poets  to  these  figured  palls,
probably  denoted  that  they  were  made  on  the
principle  of  a  quilt  or  a  Scotch  carpet,  in  which
two  cloths  of  different  colours  are  so  interlaced  as
to  form  one  double  cloth,  which  displays  a  pattern
of  any  kind  according  to  the  fancy  of  the  artist.

Although  pallia  were  finished  for  use  without
the  intervention  of  the  tailor,  they  were  sub-
mitted to  the  embroiderer  {Plirygio ;  ttoikiXttjs,
ir\oviiLapi6s  :  Aesch.  c.  Tiinarch.  p.  118,  ed.  Reiske  ;
Schol.  ad  he.)  ;  and  still  more  commonly  to  the
fuller  [FuLLo],  who  received  them  both  when
they  were  new  from  the  loom,  and  when  the}'
were  sullied  through  use.  Hence  it  was  a  re-
commendation of  this  article  of  attire  to  be  well-
trodden  (eOo-TiTTTov,  Apollon.  Rhod.  ii,  30)  and
well  washed  (euTrAwj/es,  Hom.  Od.  viii.  425).  Tlie
men  who  performed  the  operation  are  called  ol
it\vvt]s,  i.  e.  the  washers,  in  an  inscription  found
in  the  stadium  at  Athens.  Another  appellation
which  they  bore,  viz.  oi  (TTi€iLS^  the  treaders
(Schol.  in  ApolL  Rhod.  I.  c),  is  well  illustrated
by  the  woodcut,  representing  them  at  their  work,
in  p.  552.

Considering  pallium  and  palla,  ifxdTiov  and
(papos,  as  generic  terms,  we  find  specific  terms
included  under  them,  and  denoting  distinctions
which  depended  on  the  materials  of  which  the
cloth  was  made.  Among  the  Greeks  and  Romans
by  far  the  most  common  material  was  wool,
(i'laut.  Mil.  iii.  1.  93  ;  Xen.  Oecon.  vii.  36  ;
Theocrit.  l.  c.)  The  garment  made  of  it  (laneum
palliuni^Cic.  de  Nat.Deor.  iii.  35)  was  called  (from,
the  root  oi  lana,  wool),  in  Latin  Laena,  in  Greek
X^ouva :  and  as  the  garment  varied,  not  only  in
colour  and  ornament,  but  also  in  fineness,  in  close-
ness of  texture  {lixaTiwi/  \€TrT6TT}Tas,  Aelian,  V.H.
iv.  3),  and  in  size,  some  of  these  differences  were
expressed  by  the  diminutives  of  X'^o*''"?  such  as
X^aiviov,  X?^avh  (Herod,  iii.  139;  Athen.  xii.  pp.
545,  a,  548,  a,  553,  a),  x^a^'Sto"  (Herod,  i.  195,
compared  witli  Strabo,  xvi.  1.  §  20  ;  Plut.  Symp.
■  Probl.  vi.  6  ;  Dionys.  Ant.  Rom.  vii.  9),  x^"*"'*^-
Kiov  (Aristoph.  Acliam.  518  ;  Aesch.  c.  Timarch.
p.  142 ;  Alciphron,  i.  38),  and  x^°-^'-^'^'^^'^°^-
(Aristoph.  Pax,  1002.)  In  like  manner  we  find
the  pallium  not  only  designated  by  epithets  added
to  the  general  terms  in  order  to  denote  that  it  was
made  of  flax,  e.g.  i/iaTiov  Kivovv,  \ivoio  vi6'KKvTa
(pdpia  (Orpheus,  de  Lapid.  702),  pallium  lineum


PALLIUM.  851

(Isid.  Hisp.  Orig.  xix.  25),  but  also  distinguished
by  the  specific  terms  linteum,  linteamen ;  sindon
(Mart.  Epig.  iv.  12)  ;  aiuh^v  (Herod,  ii.  86.;
Mark,  xiv.  51,  52)  ;  and  its  diminutive  (Tivhoviov.
(Palladii,  Vita  Serap.)  A  coarse  linen  pallium  was
also  called  (pucruv  (Pollux,  vii.  c.  16),  and  a  fine
one  6e6ur],  dim.  odoviov.  (Hom.  //.  iii,  141,  xviii.
595  ;  Brunck,  Anal.  iii.  81.)  These  specific  terms
are  no  doubt  of  Egyptian  origin,  having  been  in-
troduced among  the  Hebrews,  the  Greeks,  and
the  Romaris,  together  with  the  articles  of  merchan-
dize to  which  they  were  applied.  On  the  same
principle  a  cotton  pallium  is  called  palla  carhasea
(Prudent.  Psychom.  186,  187),  and  a  silk  shawl  is
denominated  pallium  Sericum  (Stat.  Sylv.  iii.  4.
89),  and  od6vLov'2,-r]piH6v.  (Arrian,Per.  Mar.Eryth.
pp.  164,  170,  173,  177,  ed.  Blancardi.)

The  following  instances  of  the  application  of
pallia  to  the  purposes  of  common  life,  show  that  it
is  an  error  to  translate  the  word  in  all  cases  by
"cloak"  or  "garment,"  and  although  in  some  of
these  cases  the  application  may  have  been  accidental,
it  serves  not  the  less  on  that  account  to  demonstrate
the  form  and  properties  of  the  thing  spoken  of,
and  the  true  meaning  of  the  various  names  by
which  it  was  called.

I.  They  were  used  to  spread  over  beds  and
couches,  and  to  cover  the  body  during  sleep  (ijxa.'
riov,  Aelian,  V.  H.  viii.  7,  xii.  1 ;  Deut.  xxiv.  1 3  ;
IfxaTia-fxhs,  Theophrast.  Cha?:  23  ;  (pdpos,  Soph.
Track.  916,  compare  537  ;  x^°-^^°->  Theocrit.  xviii.
19,  xxiv.  25  ;  Hom.  Od.  xiv.  500—521,  xvii.
86,  179,  XX.  4,  95,  143  ;  Hymn,  in  Ven.  159—
184;  x^ct^'iCTKioj/,  Alciphron,  I.  c. ;  pallium,  Jifv.
vi.  202  ;  Spartian,  Hadr.  22).  In  many  of  these
cases  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  the  same  pallium
which  was  worn  as  a  garment  by  day  served  to
sleep  in  at  night,  in  exact  agreement  with  the
practice  which  to  the  present  day  prevails  among
the  Bedouin  Arabs,  who  constantly  use  their  large
hykes  for  both  purposes.  [Lectus  ;  Lodix  ;
Tapes.]

I I.  They  were  spread  on  the  ground  and  used
for  carpets.  Clitns,  the  friend  of  Alexander,  when
he  held  a  levee,  appeared  walking  eVi  nopipvpa>v
Ifxariwu.  (Athen.  xii.  p.  539,  c.)  This  was  an
affectation  of  Eastern  luxury.  When  the  people
at  Jerusalem  spread  their  hykes  upon  the  ground
(as  recorded  in  St.  Matt.  xxi.  8  ;  St.  Mark,  xi.  8  ;
St.  Luke,  xix.  36)  they  intended  thereby  to  recog-
nise Jesus  as  a  king.    [Tapes.]

III.  They  were  hung  over  doors  (Prudent,  adv.
Sym.  ii.  726),  and  used  as  awnings  or  curtains.
(Athen.  xii.  p.  518,  a.)

IV".  At  the  bath,  persons  wiped  and  rubbed
themselves  not  only  with  linen  sheets  (linteis),  but
with  very  soft  blankets  (palliis  ex  moUissima  lana
factis,  Petron.  Sat.  28).  The  coarse  linen  cloth
used  for  this  purpose  was  called  salxtnum.  (ad€avov).

V.  Agamemnon  (Hom.  II.  viii.  221)  holds  in
his  hand  "  a  great  purple  <pdpos  "  to  serve  as  a
banner  floating  in  the  air.

VI.  Pallia,  especially  of  linen  and  cotton,  were
used  for  sails  {(pwaawves,  Lycophron,  v.  26  ;  Xiv6-
KpoKov  (pdpos,  Eurip.ii/ec.  1080  ;  Hom.  Od.  v.  258).

VII.  When  Antony's  ships  were  on  fire,  his
soldiers,  having  failed  to  extinguish  it  by  water,
which  they  could  not  obtain  in  suflficient  quantity,
threw  upoa  it  their  thick  blankets  {IfidTia  amiai.
Tb.  iroxeo,  Dion  Cass.  1.  34).

VIII.  Thick  coarse   blankets,  which    had  not

3i  2


8S2  PALLIUM.

l)een  to  the  fuller  (iixdria  ayvdirra^  Pint.  Si/mp.
Probl.  vi.  6),  were  wrapped  round  ice  and  snow  to
keep  them  from  melting.

IX.  A  fine  white  blanket  was  sometimes  used
as  a  shroud  ((papos  ra(pi)iov,  Hom.  II.  xviii.  353  ;
Od.  ii.  94 — 100  ;  IfJ-dTiov,  Xen.  Ci/rop.  vii.  3.
§  13).

X.  In  Asia,  horses  and  other  animals  used  to
ride  upon,  were  covered  with  beautiful  pallia,  espe-
cially upon  occasions  of  ceremony  or  of  rejoicing.
Cyrus  had  200  horses  covered  with  striped  cloths.
(Xen.  Q/rop.  viii.  3.  §  16.)  When  the  Persian
ambassador,  a  few  years  ago,  went  to  the  levee  in
London,  his  horses  were  in  like  manner  covered
pa€S(aTo7s  i/xaTiois.  Compare  St.  Matt.  xxi.  7  ;
St.  Mark,  xi.  7  ;  St.  Luke,  xix.  35.    [Tapes.]

XI.  The  newly-born  infant  was  wrapped  in  a
blanket  {(pdpos,  Hom.  Hymn,  in  Apoll.  121).  [In-
cunabula.]

XII.  Lastly,  the  pallium  was  the  most  common
article  of  the  Amictus.  [Chlamys.]  Hence  we
find  it  continually  mentioned  in  conjunction  with
the  Tunica,  which  constituted  the  indutus.  Such
phrases  as  "  coat  and  waistcoat,"  or  "  shoes  and
stockings,''  are  not  more  common  with  us  than
such  as  those  which  follow,  in  ancient  authors:
tunica  pallimnque  (Cic.  in  Verr.  v.  52  ;  Plant.
Epid.  V.  2.  61)  ;  lixdriov  koL  xtTCiJi/  in  the  will  of
a  certain  philosopher  (Diog.  Laert.  v.  72)  ;  rh
Ifxdriov  Koi  rhv  x^'^^^''^'^^^  5  ^^P^^  ^^e  x^'''^^
(Hom.  II.  xxiv.  588,  Od.  viii.  425)  ;  X'^«*'''«*'
t'  t]5€  x'TcDva  (Hom.  11.  ii.  262,  Od.  iv.  50,
V.  229,  viii.  455,  x.  365,  451,  xiv.  132,  154,
320,  341,  XV.  330,  xvii.  89)  ;  x^"»'^s  Kai
XiTwvia-Kos.  (Antiphanes,  ap.  Athen.  xii.  p.  545,
a.)  The  following  passages  also  exemplify  the
practice  of  naming  these  two  articles  of  dress  to-
gether: A.  Gell.  vi.  10  ;  Plant.  Trin.  v.  2.  30  ;
Athen.  v.  p.  198,  c,  d,  f ;  Theophrast.  Char.  21  ;
St.  Matt.  v.  40  ;  St.  John,  xix.  23—25.

But  although  the  pallium  and  tunica  were  al-
ways regarded  as  essential  parts  of  an  entire  dress,
yet  each  of  them  might  be  worn  without  the  other.
Cases  in  which  the  tunic  was  retained  and  the
blanket  laid  aside,  are  explained  under  the  article
NuDus.  It  is  also  evident  that  the  pallium  would
not  be  the  most  convenient  kind  of  dress  when  the
wearer  of  it  had  occasion  to  run  ;  and  we  find  that
in  such  circumstances  he  either  put  it  away  entirely
(Hom.  //.  ii.  183,  Od.  xiv.  500)  or  folded  it  up
as  a  Scottish  Highlander  folds  his  plaid,  and  threw
it  round  his  neck  or  over  his  shoulder.  (Pl&ut.
Capt.  iv.  1.  12,  iv.  2.  9  ;  Ter.  Phor.  v.  6.  4.)
On  the  other  hand,  to  wear  the  pallium  without
the  under-clothing  indicated  poverty  or  severity  of
manners,  as  in  the  case  of  Socrates  (Xen.  Mem.  i.
6.  §  2),  Agesilaus  (Aelian,  V.II.  vii.  13),  and
Gelon,  king  of  Syracuse.  (Diod.  Sic.  xi.  26.)

The  pallium  was  no  doubt  often  folded  about
the  body  simply  with  a  view  to  defend  it  from
cold,  and  without  any  regard  to  gracefulness  of  ap-
pearance. It  is  thus  seen  on  the  persons  of  Poly-
nices  and  Parthenopaeus  in  the  celebrated  intaglio,
now  preserved  at  Berlin,  representing  five  of  the
heroes  who  fought  against  Thebes,  and  copied  on
an  enlarged  scale  in  the  annexed  woodcut.  The
names  of  the  several  heroes  are  placed  beside  them
in  Etniscan  letters.  This  precious  relic  was  found
at  Perugia.  (Winckelmann,  Descript.  des  Pierres
gravies  de  Stosch,  p.  344—347).  By  a  slight
adaptation,  the  mode  of  wearing  it  was  rendered


PALLIUM.


both  more  graceful  and  more  convenient.  It  was
first  passed  over  the  left  shoulder,  then  drawn  be-
hind the  back  and  under  the  right  arm,  leaving  it
bare,  and  then  thrown  again  over  the  left  shoulder.
Of  this  Ave  see  an  example  in  a  bas-relief  engraved
by  Dodwell.  (Tour  through  Greece,  vol.  i.  p.  243.)
Another  very  common  method  was  to  fasten  the
pallium  with  a  brooch  [Fibula]  over  the  right
shoulder  (d^^tTrepomo-^ut,  Horn.  II.  x.  131 — 136  ;
Stat.  Theb.  vii.  658,  659  ;  Apul.  Flor.  ii.  1),  leaving
the  right  arm  at  liberty,  and  to  pass  the  middle
of  it  either  under  the  left  arm  so  as  to  leave  that
arm  at  liberty  also,  or  over  the  left  shoulder  so  as
to  cover  the  left  arm.  We  see  Phocion  attired  in
the  last-mentioned  fashion  in  the  admired  statue  of
him  preserved  in  the  Vatican  at  Rome.  (Mus.  Pio-
Ckment.  vol.  i.  tav.  43.)  (See  woodcut)  The
attachment  of  the  pallium  by  means  of  the  brooch
caused  it  to  depend  in  a  graceful  manner  (demissa


ex  humerisy  Virg.  Aen.  iv.  263),  and  contributed
mainly  to  the  production  of  those  dignified  and
elegant  forms  which  we  so  much  admire  in  ancient
sculptures.  When  a  person  sat,  he  often  allowed
his  pallium  to  fall  from  his  shoulder,  so  as  to  en-
velope the  lower  part  of  his  body  only.

The  sagum  of  the  northern  nations  of  Europe
(see  woodcut,  p.  2 13)  was  a  woollen  pallium^/as-


PALLIUM.

tehed,  like  that  of  the  Greeks,  by  means  of  a
brooch,  or  with  a  large  thorn  as  a  substitute  ior  a
brooch.  (Tacit.  Germ.  17  ;  Strabo,  iv.  4.  3.)  The
Crauls  wore  in  summer  one  which  was  striped  and
chequered,  so  as  to  agree  exactly  with  the  plaid
which  still  distinguishes  their  Scottish  descendants  ;
im  winter  it  was  thick  and  much  more  simple  in
colour  and  pattern.  (Died.  Sic.  v.  30.)  The  Greeks
and  Romans  also  wore  different  pallia  in  summer
and  in  winter.  The  thin  pallium  made  for  summer
wear  was  called  Ai75os,  dim.  Kr]Sdpiou  (Aristoph.
Aves,  713 — 717)  and  uit^lpov  dim.  aireipiou  (Horn.
Od.  ii.  102,  vi.  179  ;  Xen.  Hist.Gr.  iv.  5.  §  4)
in  contradistinction  from  the  warm  pallium  with  a
long  nap,  which  was  worn  in  winter  {laena.  Mart,
xiv.  136  ;  x^«'*'«,  Moeris,  s.  v.;  Hom.  II.  xvi.  224,
Od.  xiv.  529  ;  Plut.  de  And.  p.  73,  ed.  Steph.  ;
i-X^aivoi^  Callim.  Hymn,  in  Dian.  1 15).  This  dis-
tinction in  dress  was,  however,  practised  only  by
those  who  could  afford  it.  Socrates  wore  the  same
oallium  both  in  summer  and  winter.  (Xen.  Mem.
i.  6.  §  2.)

One  kind  of  blanket  was  worn  by  boys,  another
by  men  (t6  irajSiKoi',  rh  avSpslov  IfiaTiov,  Plut.  de
And.  init.).  Women  wore  this  garment  as  well  as
men,  "  Phocion's  wife,"  says  i^elian  {V.  H.  y\\.
9), "  wore  Phocion's  pallium  :  "  but  Xanthippe,  as
related  by  the  same  author  (vii.  10),  would  not
wear  that  of  her  husband  Socrates.  (See  also  Hom.
Od.  V.  229,  230,  x.  542,  543  ;  Plant.  Men.  iv.  2.
36  ;  Herod,  v.  87.)  When  the  means  were  not
wanting,  women  wore  pallia,  which  were  in  gene-
ral smaller,  finer,  and  of  more  splendid  and  beauti-
ful colours  than  those  of  men  {^oi/xdria  huSpela,
Aristoph.  Eccles.  26,  75,  333),  although  men  also
sometimes  displayed  their  fondness  for  dress  by
adopting  in  these  respects  the  female  costume.
Thus  Alcibiades  was  distinguished  by  his  purple
pallium  which  trailed  upon  the  ground  (Plut.  Alcib.
pp.  350,  362,  ed.  Steph.)  ;  for  a  train  was  one  of
the  ornaments  of  Grecian  as  well  as  Oriental  dress
(tfiaricDV  €A|6is,  Plato,  Alcib.  i.  p.  341,  ed.  Bekker  ;
Ovid.  Mei.  xi.  166  ;  Quintil.  xi.  3),  the  general
rule  being  that  the  upper  garment  should  reach  the
knee,  but  not  the  ground.  (Aelian,  V.  H.  xi.  10;
Theophrast.  Cluir.  4.)

Philosophers  wore  a  coarse  and  cheap  pallium,
which  from  being  exposed  to  much  wear  was
called  TpiSwv  and  rpiSdoviov.  (Aristoph.  Plut.  897  ;
Athen.  v.  p.  211,  e  ;  Themist.  Oral.  x.  p.  155,  ed.
Dindorf  ;  palliastrum,  Apul.  Ftorid.  i.)  The  same
was  worn  also  by  poor  persons  (Isaeus,  de  Die.
p.  94,  ed.  Reiske  ;  Polyaen.  Strat.  vii.  35),  by  the
Spartans  (Athen,  xii.  p.  535,  e  ;  Aelian,  V.  H.  vii.
13),  and  in  a  later  age  by  monks  and  hermits
{(paibv  rpi§wuiov,  Synes.  Epist.  147  ;  sagum  rusti-
cum,  Hieron.  Vita  Hilar.).  These  blanketeers
(Tpi€ui/o(p6poi^  Palladii,  Hist.  Laus.  in  vita  Serap.)
often  went  without  a  tunic,  and  they  sometimes
supplied  its  place  by  the  greater  size  of  their  pal-
lium. It  is  recorded  of  the  philosopher  Antisthenes,
that  "  he  first  doubled  his  pallium  "  (Diog.  Laert.
vi.  6,  13),  in  which  contrivance  he  was  followed
by  his  brother  Cynics  (Brunck,^waZ.  ii.  22  ;  Hor,
Epist.  i.  7.  25),  and  especially  by  Diogenes,  who
also  slept  and  died  in  it,  and  who  according  to
some  was  the  first  inventor  of  this  fashion.  (Diog.
Laert.  vi.  22,  77.)  The  large  pallium,  thus  used,
was  called  ZiirKois  (diplois,  Isid.  Hisp,  On^.  xix.
24),  and  also  Exomis,  because,  being  worn  with-
out the  fibula,  it  left  the  right  shoulder  bare,  as


PALUDAMENTUM.


853


seen  in  the  preceding  figure  of  Polynices,  and  in
the  bas-relief  in  DodwelPs  Tour  already  referred
to  (Plant.  Mil.  iv.  4.  43  ;  Aelian,  V.  H.  ix.  34)  ;
and,  when  a  girdle  was  added  round  the  waist,  it
approached  still  more  to  the  appearance  of  the
single-sleeved  tunic,  the  use  of  which  it  superseded.

Under  the  Roman  republic  and  the  early  Em-
perors, the  Toga  was  worn  by  men  instead  of  the
pallium.  They  were  proud  of  this  distinction,  and
therefore  considered  that  to  be  palliatus  or  sagatus
instead  of  being  togatus  indicated  an  affectation  of
Grecian  or  even  barbarian  manners.  {Graeco  pallia
ajnictus,  Plin.  Epist.  iv,  11;  Graeci  palliati,  Plaut.
Cm-c.  ii.  3.  9  ;  Cic  Phil.  v.  5,  xiv.  1  ;  Sueton.
Jul.  48  ;  Val.  Max.  ii.  6.  §  10.)  Caecina,  on  his
return  from  the  north  of  Europe,  offended  the
Romans  {togatos)  by  addressing  them  in  a  plaid
(versicolore  sagulo)  and  trowsers.  [Braccae.]
(Tacit,  Hist.  ii.  20.)  [J.  Y.]

PA'LMIPES,  i.  e.  pes  et  palmus,  a  Roman
measure  of  length,  equal  to  a  foot  and  a  palm  ;  or
a  foot  and  a  quarter,  or  15  inches,  or  20  digits.
(Plin.  H.  N.  xvii.  20.  s.  32  ;  Vitruv.  v.  6).  [P.  S.  j

PALMUS,  properly  the  width  of  the  open
hand,  or,  more  exactly,  of  the  four  fingers,  was
used  by  the  Romans  for  two  different  measures  of
length,  namely,  as  the  translation  of  the  Greek
TToAaicTTifj,  or  Swpov  in  old  Greek,  and  a-rridafxi]
respectively.  In  the  former  sense  it  is  equal  to
4  digits,  or  3  inches,  or  l-4th  of  a  foot,  or  l-6th
of  the  cubit,  [Mensura,  p.  751,  b.]  Jerome  (m
Ezech.  40)  expressly  states  that  this  was  its  proper
meaning,  but  that  the  Greek  crinQaix-l]  was  also
called  by  some  pabnus ;  or,  for  the  sake  of  dis-
tinction, palma;  in  which  sense  it  would  be  3-4 ths
of  a  foot.  Hence  some  writers  distinguish,  in  the
old  Roman  metrical  system,  a  palmus  major  of  9
inches,  and  a  palmus  minor  of  3  inches,  and  they
suppose  that  the  former  is  referred  to  by  Varro
(^.  7?.  iii.  7).  Ideler  has,  however,  shown  that
this  supposition  is  groundless,  that  Varro  refers  to
the  common  palm  of  4  digits  (3  inches),  and  the
larger  palm  only  occurs  in  later  Roman  writers.
{Ueber  die  L'dngen  und  Flackemnasse  der  Alten,
p.  129).  From  this  large  palmus  of  9  inches  the
modem  Roman  palmo  is  derived,  [P.  S.]

PALUDAMENTUM,  according  to  Varro  {L.L.
vii.  37)  and  Festus  (s,  r,),  originally  signified
any  military  decoration  ;  but  the  word  is  always
used  to  denote  the  cloak  worn  by  a  Roman  general
commanding  an  army,  his  principal  officers  and
personal  attendants,  in  contradistinction  to  the
sagum  [SagumJ  of  the  common  soldiers  and  the
toga  or  garb  of  peace.  It  was  the  practice  for  a
Roman  magistrate  after  he  had  received  the  impe-
rium  from  the  Comitia  Curiata  and  offered  up  his
vows  in  the  Capitol,  to  march  out  of  the  city  arrayed
in  the  paludamentum  (exire  paludatus^Ck.  ad Fam.
viii,  10)  attended  by  his  lictors  in  similar  attire
(palmiatis  lictoribus,  Liv,  xli.  10,  xiv.  39),  nor
could  he  again  enter  the  gates  until  he  had  formally
divested  himself  of  this  emblem  of  military  power,
a  ceremony  considered  so  solemn  and  so  indispens-
able that  even  the  emperors  observed  it.  (Tacit.
Hist.  ii.  89  ;  compare  Sueton.  Vitell.  c.  1 1.)  Hence
Cicero  declared  that  Verres  had  sinned  "  contra
auspicia,  contra  omnes  divinas  et  humanas  reli-
giones,"  because,  after  leaving  the  city  in  his  palu-
damentum (cum  paludatus  exisset).,  he  stole  back  in
a  litter  to  visit  his  mistress.  {In  Verr.  v.  13.)

The  paludamentum  was  open  in  front,  reached
3i  3


854


PALUDAMENTUM.


down  to  the  knees  or  a  little  lower,  and  hung
loosely  over  the  shoulders,  being  fastened  across
the  chest  by  a  clasp.  A  foolish  controversy  has
arisen  among  antiquaries  with  regard  to  the  posi-
tion of  this  clasp,  some  asserting  that  it  rested  on
the  right  shoulder,  others  on  the  left,  both  parties
appealing  to  ancient  statues  and  sculptures  in  sup-
port of  their  several  opinions.  It  is  evident  from
the  nature  of  the  garment,  as  represented  in  the
annexed  illustrations,  that  the  buckle  must  have
shifted  from  place  to  place  according  to  the  move-
ments of  the  wearer  ;  accordingly,  in  the  following
cut,  which  contains  two  figures  from  Trajan's  column.


one  representing  an  officer,  the  other  the  emperor
with  a  tunic  and  fringed  paludamentum,  we  ob-
serve the  clasp  on  the  right  shoulder,  and  this
would  manifestly  be  its  usual  position  when  the
cloak  was  not  used  for  warmth,  for  thus  the  right


PAlVtBOEOTIA.

hand  and  arm  would  be  free  and  unembjirrassed  j'
but  in  the  preceding  cut,  copied  from  the  Raccolta
Maffei,  representing  also  a  Roman  emperor,  we
perceive  that  the  clasp  is  on  the  left  shoulder  ;
while  in  the  cut  below,  the  noble  head  of  a  warrior
from  the  great  Mosaic  of  Pompeii,  we  see  the
paludamentum  flying  back  in  the  charge,  and  the
clasp  nearly  in  front.  It  may  be  said  that  the  last
is  a  Grecian  figure  ;  but  this,  if  true,  is  of  no  im-
portance, since  the  chlarays  and  the  paludamentum.
were  essentiall)-,  if  not  absolutely,  the  same.  Nonius
Marcellus  considers  the  two  terms  synonymous,
and  Tacitus  (Ann.  xii.  56)  tells  how  the  splendid
naumachia  exhibited  by  Claudius  was  viewed  by
Agrippina  dressed  chlamyde  auraia,  while  Pliny
(//.  A^.  xxxiii.  3)  and  Dion  Cassius  (Ix.  33)  in
narrating  the  same  story  use  respectively  the  ex-
pressions paludamento  aurotexiili^  and  x-^^^M"^*
hiaxpvotf.


The  colour  of  the  paludamentum  was  commonly
white  or  purple,  and  hence  it  was  marked  and  re-
membered that  Crassus  on  the  morning  of  the
fatal  battle  of  Carrhae  went  forth  in  a  dark-colour  d
mantle.  (Val.  Max.  i.  6.  §  11  ;  compare  Plin.
//.  N.  xxii.  1  ;  Hirtius,  de  hello  J/ricano^  c.
57.)  [W.R.]

PALUS,  a  pole  or  stake,  was  used  in  the  mili-
tary exercises  of  the  Romans.  It  was  stuck  into
the  ground,  and  the  tirones  had  to  attack  it  as  if  it
had  been  a  real  enemy  ;  hence  this  kind  of  exer-
cise is  sometimes  called  P«/ana.  (Veget.  i.  11).
Juv(?nal  (vi.  247)  alludes  to  it  when  he  says,
"  Quis  non  vidit  vulnera  pali  ?  "  and  Martial  (vii.
32,  8)  speaks  of  it  under  the  name  of  stipes.  "  Au4,
nudi  stipitis  ictus  hebes."  {Becker, Ga/lus,\.  p.  278.)

PAMBOEO'TIA  (irafxeoiUTia),  a  festive  pane-
gyris  of  all  the  Boeotians,  which  the  grammarians
compare  with  the  Panathenaea  of  the  Atticans,
and  the  Panionia  of  the  lonians.  The  principal
object  of  the  meeting  was  the  common  worship  of
Athena  Itonia,  who  had  a  temple  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Coronea,  near  which  the  panegyris
was  held.  (Strabo,  ix.  p.  411  ;  Pans.  ix.  34.  §  1.)
From  Polybius  (iv.  3,  ix.  34)  it  appears  that  during,
this  national  festival  no  war  was  allowed  to  be
carried  on,  and  that  in  case  of  a  war  a  truce  was
always  concluded.  This  panegyris  is  also  men-,
tioned  by  Plutarch.  (Amat.  Narrat.  p.  774,  f.)
It  is  a  disputed  point  whether  the  Pamboeotia  had
anything  to  do  with  the  political  constitution  of
Boeotia,  or  with  the  relation  of  its  several  towns
to  Thebes  ;  but  if  so,  it  can  have  been  only  pre-
vious to  the  time  when  Thebes  had  obtained  the
undisputed  supremacy  in  Boeotia.  The  question
is  discussed  in  Sainte  Croix,  Des  Gouvernemenh  fi-
dirat.  p.  211,  &c. ;  Raoul-Rochette,  Sur  la  Forme


PANATHENAEA.

*t  VAdministr.  de  PEtat  federatif  des  Beotiens,  in
the  Mem.  de  VAcad.  des  Inscript.  vol.  viii.  (1827)
p.  214,  &c.  ;  Wachsmuth,  Hell.  Alt.  vol.  i.  p.  176.
2d  edit.  [L.  S.]

PANATHENAEA  (Uauae-fivaia),  the  greatest
and  most  splendid  of  the  festivals  celebrated  in
Attica  in  honour  of  Athena,  in  tlie  character  of
Athena  Polias,  or  the  protectress  of  the  city.  It
was  said  to  have  been  instituted  by  Erichthonius
(Harpocrat.  s.  v.  Uavad-ftvaia ;  Marm.  Par.  Ep.  10),
and  its  original  name,  until  the  time  of  Theseus,
was  believed  to  have  been  Athenaea  ;  but  when
Theseus  united  all  the  Atticans  into  one  body,  this
festival,  which  then  became  the  common  festival  of
all  Atticans,  was  called  Panathenaea.  (Paus,  viii.
2.  §  1  ;  Plut  Thes.  24  ;  Apollod.  iii.  14.^  §  6  ;
Hygin.  Poet.  Astron.  ii.  13;  Suid.  s.  v.  UavaQ-hvaia.)
According  to  this  account  it  would  seem  as  if  the
name  of  the  festival  were  derived  from  that  of  the
city  ;  but  the  original  name  Athenaea  was  un-
doubtedly derived  from  that  of  the  goddess,  and
the  subsequent  appellation  Panathenaea  merely  sig-
nifies the  festival  of  Athena,  common  to  or  cele-
brated by  all  the  Attic  tribes  conjointly.  Pana-
thenaea are  indeed  mentioned  as  having  been  cele-
brated previous  to  the  reign  of  Theseus  (Apollod.
iii.  15.  §  7  ;  Diod.  iv.  60),  but  these  writers
merely  transfer  a  name  common  in  their  own  days
to  a  time  when  it  was  not  yet  applicable.  The
Panathenaea,  which,  as  far  as  the  character  implied
in  the  name  is  concerned,  must  be  regarded  as  an
institution  of  Theseus,  were  celebrated  once  in
every  year.  (Harpocrat.  Suid.  s.  v.)  All  writers
who  have  occasion  to  speak  of  this  festival  agree
in  distinguishing  two  kinds  of  Panathenaea,  the
greater  and  the  lesser,  and  in  stating  that  tlie
fonner  was  held  every  fourth  year  (7re>/TaeTij/)ts),
while  the  latter  was  celebrated  once  in  every
year.  Libanius  (  A  rgum.  ad  Demosth.  Mid.  p.  5 1 0  ),
by  mistake  calls  the  lesser  Panathenaea  a  Tpierrjpis.
The  time,  when  the  lesser  Panathenaea  (which
are  mostly  called  Panathenaea,  without  any  epithet,
while  the  greater  are  generally  distinguished  by
the  adjective  ixeydKa)  were  celebrated,  is  described
by  Proclus  (ad  Plat.  Tim.  p.  26,  &c.)  in  a  vague
manner  as  following  the  celebration  of  the  Bendi-
deia  ;  from  which  Meursius  infers  that  the  Pana-
thenaea were  held  on  the  day  after  the  Bendideia,
that  is,  on  the  20th  of  Thargelion.  Petitus  (Leg.
Att.  p.  18),  on  the  other  hand,  has  shown  from
Demosthenes  (c.  Timocrai.  p.  708),  that  the  Pana-
thenaea must  have  fallen  in  the  month  of  Heca-
tombaeon,  and  Corsini  {Fast.  Att.  ii.  357,  &c.)
has  further  proved  from  the  same  passage  of  De-
mosthenes, that  the  festival  must  have  commenced
before  the  20th  of  this  month,  and  Ave  may  add
that  it  was  probably  on  the  17th.  Clinton  (Fast.
Hell.  ii.  p.  332,  &c.)  has  revived  the  opinion  of
Meursius.  (Compare  H.  A.  Mliller,  Panat/ienaica^
c3.)

The  great  Panathenaea  were,  according  to  the
unanimous  accounts  of  the  ancients,  a  pentaeteris,
and  were  held  in  the  third  year  of  every  Olympiad.
(Bockh,  Staatsh.  ii.  p.  165,  &c.)  Proclus  (ad  Plat.
Tim.  p.  9)  says  that  the  great  Panathenaea  were
held  on  the  28th  of  Hecatombaeon,  This  state-
ment, however,  must  not  lead  us  to  suppose  that
the  great  Panathenaea  only  lasted  for  one  day  ;
but  Proclus  in  mentioning  this  particular  day  w.as
probably  thinking  of  the  most  solemn  day  of  the
festival  on  which  the  great  procession  took  place


PANATHENAEA.


855


(Thucyd.  vi.  56),  and  which  was  in  all  probability
the  last  day  of  the  festival,  for  it  is  expressly  stated
that  the  festival  lasted  for  several  days.  (Schol.  ad
Eurip.  Hecuh.  464  ;  Aristid.  Panatli.  p.  147.)  We
have,  moreover,  every  reason  to  suppose  with
Bockh,  that  the  great  Panathenaea  took  place  on
the  same  days  of  the  month  of  Hecatombaeon,  on
which  the  lesser  Panathenaea  were  held,  and  that
the  latter  were  not  celebrated  at  all  in  those  years
in  which  the  former  fell.  Now  if,  as  we  have
supposed,  the  lesser  Panathenaea  commenced  on
the  17th,  and  the  last  day  of  the  greater  festival
fell  on  the  28th  of  Hecatombaeon,  we  may  perhaps
be  justified  in  believing  that  the  lesser  as  well  as
the  greater  Panathenaea  lasted  for  twelve  days,
that  is,  from  the  17th  to  the  28th  of  Hecatom-
baeon. This  time  is  not  too  long,  if  we  consider
that  the  ancients  themselves  call  the  Panathenaea
the  longest  of  all  festivals  (Schol.  ad  Aristoph.  Nub.
385),  and  if  we  bear  in  mind  the  great  variet)'^  of
games  and  ceremonies  that  took  place  during  the
season.  When  the  distinction  between  the  greater
and  lesser  Panathenaea  was  introduced,  is  not  cer-
tain, but  the  former  are  not  mentioned  before  01.
66.  3  (Thucyd.  vi.  56,  i.  20  ;  Herod,  v.  56\  and
it  may  therefore  be  supposed  that  they  were  in-
stituted a  short  time  before  01.  66,  perhaps  by
Peisistratus,  for  about  his  time  certain  innovations
were  made  in  the  celebration  of  the  Panathenaea,
as  is  mentioned  below.  The  principal  difference
between  the  two  festivals  was,  that  the  greater
one  was  more  solemn,  and  that  on  this  occasion
the  peplus  of  Athena  was  carried  to  her  temple  in
a  most  magnificent  procession  which  was  not  held
at  the  lesser  Panathenaea.

The  solemnities,  games,  and  amusements  of  the
Panathenaea  were :  rich  sacrifices  of  bulls,  foot,
horse,  and  chariot  races,  g3^mnastic  and  musical
contests,  and  the  larapadephoria  ;  rhapsodists  re-
cited the  poems  of  Homer  and  other  epic  poets,
philosophers  disputed,  cock-fights  were  exhibited,
and  the  people  indulged  in  a  variety  of  other
amusements  and  entertainments.  It  is,  however,
not  to  be  supposed  that  all  these  solemnities
and  games  took  place  at  the  Panathenaea  from
the  earliest  times.  Gymnastic  contests,  horse  and
chariot  races  and  sacrifices  are  mentioned  in  the
legends  belonging  to  the  period  anterior  to  the
reign  of  Theseus.  (Apollod.  and  Diod.  II.  cc.  ;
Plut.  Thes.  24.)  The  prize  in  these  contests  was
a  vase  with  some  oil  frcm  the  ancient  and  sacred
olive  tree  of  Athena  on  the  Acropolis.  (Pind.  Netn.
X.  35,  &c.  ;  Schol.  ad  Soph.  Oed.  Col.  698.)  A
great  many  of  such  vases,  called  Panathenaic  vases
(aiJ.(pops7s  TIava6r]vaiKoi,  Athen.  v.  p.  199),  have  in
late  years  been  foimd  in  Etniria,  southern  Italy,
Sicily,  and  Greece.  They  represent  on  one  side
the  figure  of  Athena,  and  on  the  other  the  various
contests  and  games  in  which  these  vases  were
given  as  prizes  to  the  victors.  The  contests  them-
selves have  been  accurately  described  from  these
vases  by  Ambrosch  (Amial.  deW  Instit.  1833.  p. 64
— 89),  and  the  probable  order  in  which  they  took
place  has  been  defined  by  Miiller  (I.  c.  p.  80,  &c.).

The  poems  of  Homer  were  read  by  rhapsodists
only  at  the  great  Panathenaea  (Lycurg.  c.  Leocrat.
p.  161),  and  this  custom  commenced  in  the  time  of
Pisistratus  or  of  his  son  Hipparchus,  after  these
poems  had  been  collected.  Afterwards  the  works
of  other  epic  poets  also  were  recited  on  this  occa-
sion. (Plat.  Hipparch.  p.  228,  b  ;  Aelian,  F.  //.
3  I  4


use


PANATHENAEA.


viii.  2.)  Songs  in  praise  of  Harmodius  and  Aris-
togiton  appear  to  have  been  among  the  standing
customs  at  the  Panathenaea,  Musical  contests  in
singing  and  in  playing  the  flute  and  the  cithara
were  not  introduced  until  the  time  of  Pericles  ;
they  were  held  in  the  Odeum.  (Pint.  PericL
13.)  The  first  who  gained  the  victory  in  these
contests  was  Phrynis,  in  01.  81,  1.  (Schol.  ad
Jristoph.  Nub.  971  ;  Marm.  Par.  Ep.  64.)  The
prize  for  the  victors  in  the  musical  contests  Avas,
as  in  the  gymnastic  contests,  a  vase,  but  with
an  additional  chaplet  of  olive  branches.  (Suid.
s.  V.  Tiava.Qi\vaia.)  Cyclic  choruses  and  other  kinds
of  dances  were  also  performed  at  the  Panathenaea
(Lys.  de  Muner.  accept,  p.  161),  and  the  pyrrhic
dance  in  armour  is  expressly  mentioned.  (Aris-
toph.  Nub.  988,  with  the  Schol.)  Of  the  dis-
cussions of  philosophers  and  orators  at  the  Pana-
thenaea we  still  possess  two  specimens,  the  Xdyos
Uayadr]vaiK6s  of  Isocrates,  and  that  of  Aristides.
Herodotus  is  said  to  have  recited  his  history  to  the
Athenians  at  the  Panathenaea.  The  management
of  the  games  and  contests  was  entrusted  to  persons
called  adKoderai,  whose  number  was  ten,  one  being
taken  from  every  tribe.  Their  office  lasted  from
one  great  Panathenaic  festival  to  the  other.  (Pol-
lux, viii.  8.  6.)  It  was  formerly  believed,  on  the
statement  of  Diogenes  Laertius  (iii.  56  ;  compare
Suidas,  s.  v.  TeTpaXoyia),  that  dramatic  represent-
ations also  took  place  at  the  Panathenaea,  but  this
mistake  has  been  clearly  refuted  by  Btickh.  {Graec.
Trag.  Princip.  p.  207.)

The  lampadephoria  or  torch-race  of  the  Pana-
thenaea has  been  confounded  by  many  writers,  and
even  by  Wachsmuth  {Hell.  Alt.  ii.  2.  p.  246  ;
ii.  p.  573,  2d  ed.),  with  that  of  the  Bendideia.
On  what  day  it  was  held,  and  in  what  relation
it  stood  to  the  other  contests,  is  unknown,  though
it  is  clear  that  it  must  have  taken  place  in  the
evening.  It  has  been  supposed  by  some  writers
that  the  lampadephoria  took  place  only  at  the
great  Panathenaea,  but  this  rests  upon  the  feeble
testimony  of  Libanius  (Argum.  ad  Demosth.  Mid.
p.  510),  while  all  other  writers  who  mention
this  lampadephoria,  speak  of  it  as  a  part  of  the
Panathenaea  in  general,  without  the  epithet
fjieyaKa,  which  is  itself  a  sufficient  proof  that  it
was  common  to  both  festivals.  The  same  is  implied
in  a  statement  of  the  author  of  the  Etymologicum
Magnum  (s.  v.  K^pafieiKSs).  The  prize  of  the
victor  in  the  lampadephoria  was  probably  the
lampas  itself,  which  he  dedicated  to  Hermes.
(Bockh,  Corp.  Inscript.  i.  n.  243,  250.)

It  is  impossible  to  determine  the  exact  order  in
which  the  solemnities  took  place.  We  may,  how-
ever, believe  that  those  parts  which  were  the  most
ancient  preceded  those  which  were  of  later  intro-
duction. Another  assistance  in  this  respect  are  the
sculptures  of  the  Parthenon  (now  in  the  British
Museum),  in  which  a  series  of  the  solemnities  of
the  Panathenaea  is  represented  in  the  great  pro-
cession. But  they  neither  represent  all  the  so-
lemnities—  for  the  lampadephoria  and  the  gym-
nastic contests  are  not  represented  —  nor  can  it
be  supposed  that  the  artists  should  have  sacrificed
beauty  and  symmetry  merely  to  give  the  solemnities
in  precisely  the  same  order  as  they  succeeded  one
another  at  the  festival.  In  fact  we  see  in  these
sculptures  the  flute  and  cithara  players  represented
as  preceding  the  chariots  and  men  on  horseback,
though  the  contests  in  chariot  and  horse  racing


PANATHENAEA.

probably  preceded  the  musical  contests.  But  we
may  infer  from  the  analogy  of  other  great  festivals
that  the  solemnities  commenced  with  sacrifices.
The  sacrifices  at  the  Panathenaea  were  very  muni-
ficent ;  for  each  town  of  Attica,  as  well  as  every
colony  of  Athens,  and,  during  the  time  of  her  great-
ness, every  subject  town,  had  to  contribute  to  this
sacrifice  by  sending  one  bull  each.  {^cho\.  Aristoph.
Nvb.  385.)  The  meat  of  the  victims  appears  to
have  been  distributed  among  the  people  ;  but
before  the  feasting  commenced,  the  public  herald
prayed  for  the  welfare  and  prosperity  of  the  re-
public. After  the  battle  of  Marathon  the  Plataeans
were  included  in  this  prayer.   (Herod,  vi.  111.)

The  chief  solemnity  of  the  great  Panathenaea
was  the  magnificent  procession  to  the  temple  of
Athena  Polias,  which,  as  stated  above,  probably
took  place  on  the  last  day  of  the  festive  season.
The  opinion  of  Creuzer  («S'y?n6o/.  ii.  p.  810)  that
this  procession  also  took  place  at  the  lesser  Pana-
thenaea, is  opposed  to  all  ancient  authorities  with
the  exception  of  the  Scholiasts  on  Plato  {Republ.
init.)  and  on  Aristophanes  {Eguit.  566),  and  these
scholiasts  are  evidently  in  utter  confusion  about
the  whole  matter.  The  whole  of  this  procession  is
represented  in  the  frieze  of  the  Parthenon,  the
work  of  Phidias  and  his  disciples.  The  description
and  explanation  of  this  magnificent  work  of  art,
and  of  the  procession  it  represents,  would  lead  us
too  far.  (See  Stuart,  Antiq.  of  Athens,  vol.  ii.  ;
Leake,  Topogr.  of  Athens,  p.  215,  &c.  ;  C.  0.
Miiller,  Ancient  Art  and  its  Rem.  §118  ;  H.  A.
Miiller,  Panaih.  p.  98,  &c.)  The  chief  object  of
this  procession  was  to  carry  the  peplus  of  the  god-
dess to  her  temple.  It  was  a  crocus-coloured
garment  for  the  goddess,  and  made  by  maidens,
called  epyacTT'ivai.  (Hesych.  s.  v.  ;  compare  Ar-
RHEPHORIA.)  In  it  were  woven  Enceladus  and  the
giants,  as  they  were  conquered  by  the  goddess.
(Eurip.  Hecub.  466  ;  Schol.  ad  Aristoph.  Equit.
566  ;  Suid.  s.  v.  UiivXos  ;  Virg.  Cir.  29,  inc.  ;
compare  Plat.  Euthyd.  p.  6.)  Proclus  {ad  Plat.
Tim.)  says  that  the  figures  on  the  peplus  repre-
sented the  Olympic  gods  conquering  the  giants,
and  this  indeed  is  the  subject  represented  on  a
peplus  worn  by  an  Athena  preserved  in  the  Mu-
seum of  Dresden.  On  one  occasion  in  later  times,
when  the  Athenians  overwhelmed  Demetrius  and
Antigonus  with  their  flatteries,  they  also  decreed
that  their  images,  along  with  those  of  the  gods,
should  be  woven  into  the  peplus.  (Plut.  Demetr.
10.)  The  peplus  was  not  carried  to  the  temple  by
men  but  was  suspended  from  the  mast  of  a  ship
(Schol.  Horn.  II.  v.  734  ;  Philostr.  Vit  Soph.  i.  5.
p.  550 ;  compare  Bdckh,  Graec.  Trag.  Princ.  p.  1 93  ;
Schol.  ad  Aristoph.  Pax,  418)  ;  and  this  ship,
which  was  at  other  times  kept  near  the  Areiopagus
(Paus.  i.  29.  §  1),  was  moved  along  on  land,  it  is
said,  by  subterraneous  machiiies.  What  these  ma-
chines may  have  been  is  involved  in  utter  obscurity.
The  procession  proceeded  from  the  Cerameicus,  near
a  monument  called  Leocorium  (Thucyd.  i.  20),  to
the  temple  of  Demeter  at  Eleusis,  and  thence  along
the  Pelasgic  wall  and  the  temple  of  Apollo  Pythius
to  the  Pnyx,  and  thence  to  the  Acropolis,  where
the  statue  of  Minerva  Polias  was  adorned  with  the
peplus.

In  this  procession  nearly  the  whole  population
of  Attica  appears  to  have  taken  part,  either  on  foot,
on  horseback,  or  in  chariots,  as  may  be  seen  in  the
frieze  of  the  Parthenon.     Aged  men  carried  olive


PANCRATIUM.

branches,  and  were  called  da\\o(f>6poi  (Et}Tn.  M.
and  Hesych.  s.  v.)  ;  young  men  attended,  at  least
in  earlier  times,  in  armour  (Thucyd,  vi.  5fi),  and
maidens  who  belonged  to  the  noblest  families  of
Athens  carried  baskets,  conUiining  offerings  for  the
goddess,  whence  they  were  called  Kavr]<p6poi.  (Har-
pocrat.  s.  V.  Kavr)^6pos  ;  compare  Thucyd.  /.  c.)
Respecting  the  part  which  aliens  took  in  this  pro-
cession, and  the  duties  they  had  to  perform,  see
Hydriaphoria.

Men  who  had  deserved  well  of  the  republic  were
rewarded  with  a  gold  crown  at  the  great  Pana-
thenaea,  and  the  herald  had  to  announce  the  event
during  the  gymnastic  contests.  (Demosth.  de  Coron.
p.  265  ;  compare  Meurs.  Pawa//i.  p.  4H.)  Prisoners
also  were  allowed  to  enjoy  freedom  during  the
great  Panathenaea.  (Ulpian,  arf  Demosth.  c.  Tirno-
crat.  p.  740  ;  compare  Demosth.  de  Fals.  Leg.
p.  394.)

(Compare  J.  Meursii,  Panathenaea,  liber  singu-
laris,  Lugd.  Bat.  1619  ;  C.  Hoffmann,  Panathe-
naikos,  Cassel,  1835,  8vo.  ;  H.  A.  Miiller,  Pa-
nathenaica^  Bonn,  1837,  8vo.  ;  C.  0.  MUller's
Dissertation,  Qiio  anni  tempore  Panathenaea  minora
eelebrata  sint,  which  is  reprinted  in  the  Philological
Museum,  vol.  ii.  pp.  227 — 235.)  [L.  S.]

PANCRATIASTAE.     [Pancratium.]

PANCRA'TIUM  {TrayKpanov)  is  composed  of
itav  and  Kpdros,  and  accordingly  signifies  an
athletic  game,  in  which  all  the  powers  of  the
fighter  were  called  into  action.  The  pancratium
was  one  of  the  games  or  gymnastic  contests  which
were  exhibited  at  all  the  great  festivals  of  Greece;
it  consisted  of  boxing  and  wrestling  (7ru7/i^  and
7roA.i7),  and  was  reckoned  to  be  one  of  the  heavy  or
hard  exercises  (ayaiuiafxara  fiapea  or  ^apvrepa),
on  account  of  the  violent  exertions  it  required,  and
for  this  reason  it  was  not  much  practised  in  the
gymnasia ;  and  where  it  was  practised,  it  was  pro-
bably not  without  modifications  to  render  it  easier
for  the  boys.  According  to  the  ancient  physicians
it  had  very  rarely  a  beneficial  influence  upon  health,
(H.  Mercurial.  De  Art.  Gymnast,  v.  7.)

At  Sparta  the  regular  pancratium  was  forbidden,
but  the  name  was  there  applied  to  a  fierce  and
irregular  fight  not  controlled  by  any  rules,  in  which
even  biting  and  scratching  were  not  uncommon,
and  in  which,  in  short,  every  thing  was  allowed  by
which  one  of  the  parties  might  hope  to  overcome
the  other.  In  Homer  we  neither  find  the  game
nor  the  namp  '>f  the  pancratium  mentioned,  and  as
it  was  not  introduced  at  the  Olympic  games  until
01.  33  (Pans.  v.  8.  §  3),  we  may  presume  that  the
game,  though  it  may  have  existed  long  before  in  a
rude  state,  was  not  brought  to  any  degree  of  per-
fection until  a  short  time  before  that  event.  It  is
scarcely  possible  to  speak  of  an  inventor  of  the
pancratium,  as  it  must  have  gradually  arisen  out  of
a  rude  mode  of  fighting,  which  is  customary  among
all  uncivilized  nations,  and  which  was  kept  up  at
Sparta  in  its  original  state.  But  the  Greeks  re-
garded Theseus  as  the  inventor  of  the  pancratium,
who  for  want  of  a  sword  was  said  to  have  used
this  mode  of  fighting  against  the  Minotaurus.
(Schol.  ad  Pind.  Nem.  v.  89.)  Other  legends  re-
presented Heracles  as  having  been  victor  in  the
pancratium  (Paus.  v,  8.  §  1  ;  Hygin.  Fab.  273),
and  later  writers  make  other  heroes  also  fight  the
pancratium  (Lucan,  Pharsal.  iv.  613,  &c.)  ;  but
these  are  mere  fictions.  Aiter  the  pancratium  was
oiice  introduced  at  Olympia,  it  soon  found  its  way


PANCRATIUM.


857


also  into  the  other  great  games  of  Greece,  and  in
the  times  of  the  Roman  emperors  we  also  find  it
practised  in  Italy.  In  01.  145  the  pancratium  for
boys  was  introduced  at  the  Olympic  games,  and
the  first  boy  who  gained  the  victory  was  Phaedimus,
a  native  of  a  town  in  Troas.  (Paus.  v.  8,  in  fin.)
This  iimovation  had  been  adopted  before  in  others
of  the  national  games,  and  in  the  61st  Pythiad  (01.
108),  we  find  a  Theban  boy  of  the  name  of  Olaidea
as  victor  in  the  pancratium  in  the  Pythian  games.
(Paus.  X.  7.  §  3.)  At  the  Isthmian  games  the
pancratium  for  boys  is  not  mentioned  til)  the  reign
of  Doraitian  (Corsini,  Dissert.  Jgon.-p.  101)  ;  but
this  may  be  merely  accidental,  and  the  game  may
have  been  practised  long  before  that  time.

Philostratus  (Imag.  ii.  6)  SJiys  that  the  pancra-
tium of  men  was  the  most  beautiful  of  all  athletic
contests  ;  and  the  combatants  must  certainly  have
shown  to  the  spectators  a  variety  of  beautiful  and
exciting  spectacles,  as  all  the  arts  of  boxing  and
wrestling  appeared  here  united.  (Aristot.  Phet.  i.
5  ;  Plut.  Sympos.  ii.  p.  638,  c.)  The  combatants
in  the  pancratium  did  not  use  the  cestus,  or  if
they  did,  it  was  the  'lixavres  /naAaKwrepoi  [Ces-
tus], so  that  the  hands  remained  free,  and  wounds
were  not  easily  inflicted.

The  name  of  these  combatants  was  pancratiastae
(irayKpaTiacrTai)  or  Trd/x/jLaxoi.  (Pollux  iii.  30.  5.)
They  fought  naked,  and  had  their  bodies  anointed
and  covered  with  sand,  by  which  they  were  en-
abled to  take  hold  of  one  another.  (  Philostr.  /.  c.  ;
Aristoph.  Pax,  848.)  In  cases  where  the  contests
of  the  pancratiastae  were  not  regulated  by  strict
rules,  it  might,  as  at  Sparta,  sometimes  happen,
that  the  fighters  made  use  of  their  teeth  and  nails
(Philostr.  /.  c. ;  Lucian,  Demonax,  c.  49  ;  Plut.
Lac.  Apophth.  p.  234,  d.)  ;  but  such  irregularities
probably  did  not  occur  at  any  of  the  great  public
games.

When  two  pancratiastae  began  their  contest,
the  first  object  which  each  of  them  endeavoured
to  accomplish,  was  to  gain  a  favourable  posi-
tion, each  trying  to  make  the  other  stand  so  that
the  sun  might  shine  in  his  face,  or  that  other
inconveniences  might  prevent  his  fighting  with
success.  This  struggle  {ayiiiv  ircpX  ttjs  crdaews^
Aeschin.  c.  Ciesiph.  p.  83,  ed.  Steph.)  was  only  the
introduction  to  the  real  contest,  though  in  certain
cases  this  preparatory  struggle  might  terminate  the
whole  game,  as  one  of  the  parties  might  wear  out
the  other  by  a  series  of  stratagems,  and  compel
him  to  give  up  further  resistance.  Sostratus  of
Sicyon  had  gained  many  a  victory  by  such  tricks.
(Paus.  vi.  4.  §  1.)  When  the  real  contest  began,
each  of  the  fighters  might  commence  by  boxing  or
by  wrestling,  accordingly  as  he  thought  he  should  be
more  successful  in  the  one  than  in  the  other.  The
victory  was  not  decided  until  one  of  the  parties
was  killed,  or  lifted  up  a  finger,  thereby  declaring
that  he  was  unable  to  continue  the  contest  either
from  pain  or  fatigue.  ( Faber,  ^(/omsif.  i.  8.)  It
usually  happened  that  one  of  the  combatants,  by
some  trick  or  other,  made  his  antagonist  fall  to  the
ground,  and  the  wrestling,  which  then  commenced,
was  called  avaKKivoTrdht],  and  continued  until  one
of  the  parties  declared  himself  conquered  or  was
strangled,  as  was  the  case  at  Olympia  with  Arrhi-
chion  or  Arrachion  of  Phigalia,  in  01.  54.  (Paus.
viii.  40.  §l,&c. ;  Euseb.  Chron.  p.  150,  Seal ig.)
A  lively  description  of  a  struggle  of  this  kind  is
given  by  Philostratus  (/.  c).     Sometimes  one  of


Z58  PANDECTAE.

the  fighters  fell  down  on  his  back  on  purpose  that
he  might  thus  ward  off  the  attacks  of  his  antago-
nist more  easily,  and  this  is  perhaps  the  trick  called
vTTTiacTixds.  The  usual  mode  of  making  a  person
fall  was  to  put  one  foot  behind  his,  and  then  to
push  him  backward,  or  to  seize  him  round  his
body  in  such  a  manner  that  the  upper  part  being
the  heavier  the  person  lost  his  balance  and  fell.
Hence  the  expressions  /ueVoj/  XaixSdv^iv^  fxeaoKa-
ge?j/,  fidaou  alp^7v,  to  /xeaa  exetJ',  Slo.  fi-qpwv
(nra.v^  &c.  (Scalig.  ad  Euseb.  Chron.  p.  48.)  The
annexed   woodcut   represents   two  pairs   of  Pan-


cratiastae  ;  the  one  on  the  right  hand  is  an  ex-
ample of  the  avaK\ivo7rd\ri,  and  that  on  the
laft  of  the  iJ.€(roXa§(7u.  They  are  taken  from
Krause's  Gymnastik  und  Agoidstik  d.  Hellen.  Taf.
xxi.  b.  Fig.  35,  b.  31,  b.,  where  they  are  copied
respectively  from  Grivaud,  Rec.  d.  Mon.  Ant
vol,  i,  pi.  20,  21,  and  Krause,  Signorum  vet.  icones^
tab.  10.

At  Rome  the  pancratium  is  first  mentioned  in
the  games  which  Caligula  gave  to  the  people.  (Dion
Cass.  lix.  13.)  After  this  time  it  seems  to  have
become  extremely  popular,  and  Justinian  (Novell.
cv.  c.  1,  provided  TrdyKapirov  be,  as  some  suppose,
a  mistake  for  irayKpaTiov)  made  it  one  of  the  seven
solemnities  (irpJoSot)  which  the  consuls  had  to
provide  for  the  amusement  of  the  people.

Several  of  the  Greek  pancratiastae  have  been
immortalised  in  the  cpinician  odes  of  Pindar,
namely  Timodemus  of  Athens  {Nem.  ii.),  Melissus
and  Strepsiades  of  Thebes  {Isth.  iii.  and  vi.),  Aris-
toclides,  Cleanderand  Phylacides  of  Aegina  {Nem.
iii.,  Isth.  iv.  v.  and  vi.),  and  a  boy  Pytheas  of
Aegina.  {Nem.  v.)  But  besides  these  the  names
of  a  great  many  other  victors  in  the  pancratium  are
known.  (Compare  Fellows,  Discoveries  in  Lycia^
p.  313,  Lond.  1841.)

The  diet  and  training  of  the  pancratiastae  was
the  same  as  that  of  other  Athletae.    [Athletae.J

(Compare  Hieron.  Mercurialis,  de  Arte  Gymnas-
tica  ;  J.  H.  Krause,  Die  Gymnastik  und  Agonistik
der  Hellenm,  vol.  i.  pp.  534—556.)  [L.  S.]

PANDECTAE  or  DIGESTA.  In  the  last
month  of  the  year  a.  d.  530,  Justinian  by  a  Con-
stitution addressed  to  Tribonian  empowered  him
to  name  a  commission  for  the  purpose  of  forming  a
Code  out  of  the  writings  of  those  Jurists  who  had
enjoyed  the  Jus  Respondendi,  or,  as  it  is  expressed
by  the  Emperor,  "  antiquorum  prudentium  quibus
auctoritatem  conscribendarum  interpretandarumque
legum  sacratissimi  principes  praebuerunt."  The
compilation  however  comprises  extracts  from  some
■writers  of  the  Republican  period  {Const.  Deo
Auctore),  and  from  Arcadius  Charisius  and  Her-


PANDECTAE.

mOgenianus.  Ten  years  were  allowed  for  the  com-
pletion of  the  work.  The  instructions  of  the
Emperor  were,  to  select  what  was  useful,  to  omit
what  was  antiquated  or  superfluous,  to  avoid  un-
necessary repetitions,  to  get  rid  of  contradictions,
and  to  make  such  other  changes  as  should  produce
out  of  the  mass  of  ancient  Juristical  writings  a
useful  and  complete  body  of  law  {jus  antiquum).
The  compilation  was  to  be  distributed  into  Fifty
Books  and  the  Books  were  to  be  subdivided  into
Titles  {Tituli).  The  work  was  to  be  named
Digesta,  a  Latin  term  indicating  an  arrangement
of  materials,  or  Pandectae,  a  Greek  word  express-
ive of  the  comprehensiveness  of  the  work.  The
name  Digesta  had  been  already  used  by  Salvius
Julianus  for  the  title  of  his  chief  work.  The  term
Pandectae  had  also  been  applied  to  compilations
which  contained  various  kinds  of  matter.  (A.  Gell.
Praef.)  It  was  also  declared  that  no  commen-
taries should  be  written  on  this  compilation,  but
permission  was  given  to  make  Paratitla  or  references
to  parallel  passages  with  a  short  statement  of  their
contents.  {Const.  Deo  Auctore,  s.  12.)  It  was
also  declared  that  abbreviations  (sigla)  should  not
be  used  in  forming  the  text  of  the  Digest.  The
work  was  completed  in  three  years  (17  Cal.  Jan.
533)  as  appears  by  a  Constitution  both  in  Greek
and  Latin  which  confirmed  the  work  and  gave  to
it  legal  authority.  {Const.  Tanta,  &c.,  and  AeSwKei/.)

Besides  Tribonian,  who  had  the  general  conduct
of  the  undertaking,  sixteen  other  persons  are  men-
tioned as  having  been  employed  on  the  work,
among  whom  were  the  Professors  Dorotheus  and
Anatolius,  who  for  that  purpose  had  been  invited
from  the  law-school  of  Berytus,  and  Theophilus
and  Cratinus  who  resided  at  Constantinople.  The
compilers  made  use  of  about  two  thousand  different
treatises,  which  contained  above  3,000,000  lines
{versus,  (TTixot),  but  the  amount  retained  in  the
compilation  was  only  150,000  lines.  Tribonian
procured  this  large  collection  of  treatises,  many  of
which  had  entirely  fallen  into  oblivion,  and  a  list
of  them  was  prefixed  to  the  work,  pursuant  to  the
instructions  of  Justinian.  {Const.  Tanta,  &c.  s.  16  )
Such  a  list  is  at  present  only  found  in  the  Floren-
tine MS.  of  the  Digest,  but  it  is  far  from  being
accurate.  Still  it  is  probably  the  Index  mentioned
in  the  Constitution,  Tanta,  &c.  (Puchta,  Bemer-
kungen  ueber  den  Index  Florentinus^  in  Rliein.  Mus.
vol.  iii.  pp.  365 — 370.)

The  work  is  thus  distributed  into  Fifty  Books,
which,  with  the  exception  of  three  books,  are  sub-
divided into  Titles,  of  which  there  are  said  to  be
422.  The  books  30,  31,32,  are  not  divided  into
Titles,  but  have  one  common  Title,  De  Legatis  et
Fideicommissis  ;  and  the  first  Title  of  the  45th
book,  De  Verborum  Obligationibus,  is  really  divided
into  three  parts,  though  they  have  not  separate
Rubricae.  Under  each  Title  are  placed  the  ex-
tracts from  the  several  jurists,  numbered  1,  2,  3,
and  80  on,  with  the  writer's  name  and  the  name
and  division  of  the  work  from  which  the  extract  is
made.  These  extracts  are  said  to  amount  to  9123.
No  name,  corresponding  to  Liber  or  Titulus,  is
given  to  these  subdivisions  of  Tituli  which  are
formed  by  the  extracts  from  the  several  writers,
but  Justinian  {Const.  Tanta,  &c.  s.  7)  has  called
them  '*  leges,"  and  though  not  "laws  "  in  the  strict
sense  of  the  term,  they  were  in  fact  "  law  ; "  and
in  the  same  sense  the  Emperor  calls  the  jurists
'*  legislatores."  {Const.  Tanta,  &c.  s.  16.)  The  Fiity


PANDECTAE.

Books  differ  materially  both  in  bulk,  mmiber  of
titles,  and  number  of  extracts.  The  Glossatores
and  their  followers,  in  referring  to  the  Digest,  some-
times indicate  the  work  by  P,  p,  or  n,  and  some-
times by  D  or  ff,  wliich  according  to  some  writers
represents  D,  and  according  to  others  represents  n.
The  oldest  printed  English  work  in  which  the
Digest  is  cited  is  Bracton's  Treatise  on  the  Law  of
England^  and  his  mode  of  citation  is  that  of  thef
(jlossatores.  ( Two  Discourses  by  G.  Long,  London,
1847,  p.  107.)

There  was  also  a  division  of  the  whole  Fifty
Books  into  Seven  larger  masses,  called  Partes,
which  corresponded  to  the  seven  main  divisions  of
the  works  on  the  Edict,  and  had  also  a  special
reference  to  the  course  of  instruction  then  estab-
lished. Thus  the  first  Pars  comprises  Four  Books,
the  second  Pars  comprises  seven  Books,  and  so  on.
(Cojist.  Tanta,  &c.  8.  2.  "  Igitur  prima  quidem
pars,"  &c.)

The  number  of  writers  from  whose  works  ex-
tracts were  made  is  thirty-nine,  comprehending
those  Jurists  from  whom  extracts  were  made  at
second  hand,  as  Q.  Mucius  Scaevola,  the  Pontifex,
from  whom  four  fragments,  and  Aelius  Gallus
from  whom  one  fragment  is  taken  ;  but  omitting
Servius  Sulpicius  Rufus,  who  is  represented  by
Alfenus,  distinguishing  Aelius  Gallus  from  Julius
Aquila,  Venuleius  from  Claudius  Saturninus  ;  as-
suming that  there  is  only  one  Pomponius,  and
omitting  Sabinus  whose  name  is  erroneously  in-
serted in  the  Florentine  Index.  (Zimmern,  Ges-
chichte  des  Rom.  Privatrechts,  p.  224.)

The  following  is  the  list  of  Jurists  from  whose
writings  the  Digest  was  constructed,  as  it  is  given
in  the  Palingenesia  of  Hommelius,  who  has  ar-
ranged the  matter  taken  from  each  writer  under
his  name,  and  placed  the  names  in  alphabetical
order.  The  dates  of  the  Jurists  are  chiefly  founded
on  the  authority  of  Zimmern.  The  figures  in  the
third  column  indicate  the  proportions  contributed
to  the  Digest  by  each  Jurist,  estimated  in  the
pages  of  Hommelius :  (a)  denotes  that  the  contri-
bution is  under  one  page  of  the  Palingenesia.
This  list  includes  Sabinus.  The  extracts  from
many  of  the  writers  are  few  and  short :  those  from
Ulpian  are  more  than  a  third  of  the  w^hole  ;  and
next  to  these  the  extracts  from  Paulus,  Papinian,
JuHanus,  Pomponius,  Q.  Cervidius  Scaevola,  and
Gaius,  are  the  largest.

DATE.

Sextus  Caecilius  J/ricanus  .  Hadrian  and  the
Antonini     .    24
Al/enus  Varus,     a    piipil    of
Servius  Sulpi-
cius Rufus  and
contemporary
with  Cicero        9
Fnrius  Anthianus .  Unknown     .    .    (a)

Julius  Aquila  .   .  perhaps  about  the

time    cf    Sep.
Severus    .     .  (a)
Aurelius  Arcadius  Charisius,  Constan-

tino the  Great   2\
Calllstratus   Caracalla     .     .17^
Juventius  Celsus  .  .  .  Domitian       and

Hadrian      .    23
Florentinus    Alex.  Severus       4
Claius  .  .  .  Hadri:in  and  the
Antonini     .    72


PANDECTAB.


859


C.  Aelius*

Claudius

Priscus

Salviug

M.  Antistius
Aemilius-
Lucius  Volusius
Lucius  Ulpius
Aelius

Junius
Rutilius
Arriiis
Herennius

Quintus


Gallus


Priscus

Lucius  Aemilius

Justus
Julius

Licinius.'

Licinius

Massurius

Claudius

Qu.  Cervidius

Paternus

Clemens


contemporary
of  Cicero     .     (a)
Hermogenianus^    Constantine

the  Great     .     9^
Javolenus  .  Nerva   and  Ha-
drian .     .     .23^
Julianus  .  .  a  pupil  of  Javo-
lenus ...  90
Laheo  .  .  .  Augustus    .     .12
Mucer.  .  .  Alex.  Severus  .   10
Muecianus    Antoninus  Pius     8
Marcellus  .  The  Antonini  .  32^
Marcianus    Caracalla        and

Alex.  Severus  38
Mauricianus  Antoninus  Pius   1^
Maacimus  .  Unknown     .     .  (a)
Menander .  Caracalla      .     .    3
Modesti7ius    a    pupil    of    D.

Ulpianus      .41^
Mucius  Scaevola,       Pontifex
Maximus,  con-
sul B.  c.  95  .     1
Ner alius     .  Trajan  .     .     .10
Papinianus    S.   Severus    and
Caracalla       104
M.  Aurelius    .     2^
Alex.  Severus  297
Antoninus  Pius  80


Papirius  .
Paulus  .  .
Pomponius
Proculus .  .
Rufinus  .  .
Sahinus  .  .
Saturninus
Scaevola  .  .
Tarrentenus
Terentius     .


Otho.P   .     .

Caracalla    .

Tiberius

The  Antonini  ,

The  Antonini

Commodus


Hadrian  and  the


6

H

1

(«)


Q.  Sep.  Florens

Claudius

Salvius  Abumus  Valens


Antonini       .     3^
Tertullianus  S.   Severus    and

Caracalla     .     1  \
Tryphoninus  S.   Severus   and
Caracalla     .  22
Hadrian  and  An-
toninus Pius      3
Venuleius  .  The  Antonini  .   10
Domitiua  Ulpianus   .  S.    Severus    and

Alex.  Severus  610

It  follows  from  the  instructions  of  the  Emperor
and  the  plan  of  the  work  that  the  extracts  from
the  Jurists  are  not  always  given  in  their  exact
words.  It  is  probable  that  many  short  passages
were  interpolated,  or  altered,  as  a  matter  of  neces-
sity, though  there  seems  to  be  no  reason  for  sup-
posing that  these  changes  were  carried  fartlier  than
the  nature  of  the  case  required.  Still  there  is  no
doubt  that  the  changes  are  such  that  the  extracts
from  the  old  Jurists  cannot  be  used  for  many  pur-
poses without  some  caution  and  judgment.

The  distribution  of  the  matter  of  the  Digest  into
Books  and  Titles  has  evidently  been  made  accord-
ing to  a  plan,  as  will  be  obvious  on  inspecting  the
list  of  Tituli  prefixed  to  the  editions.  Thus  the
28th  book  treats  of  testaments,  of  the  institution
of  a  heres,  &c.,  and  the  29th  of  military  testaments,
and  of  codicils,  &c. ;  in  fact  of  matters  appertaining
to  universal  succession  by  testament:  the  30th,
31st,  and  32d  books  treat  of  legacies  and  fiduciary

*  He  must  not  be  confounded  with  C.  Aquilius
Gallus,  one  of  the  masters  of  Servius  Sulpicius,
from  whom  there  is  no  extract  in  the  Digest.


860


PANDECTAE.


bequests.  There  is  a  method  of  arrangement
therefore  so  far  as  generally  to  bring  things  of  the
same  kind  together,  but  the  compilation  has  no
claims  to  being  considered  as  a  scientific  arrange-
ment of  the  matter  of  law.  And  indeed  the  com-
pilers were  evidently  fettered  in  this  respect  by
the  Emperor's  instructions,  which  required  them  to
arrange  {digerere)  the  whole  body  of  the  law  com-
prised in  the  Digest,  according  to  the  Code  and
the  Edictum  Perpetuum.

It  has  long  been  a  matter  of  dispute  whether
the  compilers  of  the  Digest  were  guided  by  any,
and  if  any,  by  what  principle  in  the  arrangement
of  the  several  extracts  under  the  respective  Titles.
This  subject  is  exammed  in  a  very  learned  essay
by  Bluhme,  entitled  "  Die  Ordnung  der  Fragmente
in  den  Pandektentiteln."  (Zeitschrift,  vol.  iv.)  The
investigation  is  of  course  founded  on  the  titles  of  the
several  works  of  the  Jurists,  which  as  already  ob-
served are  given  at  the  head  of  each  extract :  thus,
for  instance,  in  the  beginning  of  the  3d  book,  the
first  seven  extracts  are  headed  as  follows  :  "  Ulpi-
anus  Libro  sexagesimo  quarto  ad  Edictum  ; ''
**  Idem  Libro  primo  Fideicommissorum  ;  "  "  Idem
Libro  quarto  ad  Sabinum  ; "  "  Idem  Libro  quinto
ad  Sabinum  ;"  "  Paulus  Libro  primo  ad  Sabinum  ;"
"Julianus  Libro  trigesimo  tertio  Digestorum  ;  "
**  Paulus  Libro  secundo  ad  Sabinum."  These  will
serve  as  samples  of  the  whole  and  will  explain
the  following  remarks  from  Bluhme,  whose  con-
clusions are  these  :  "  The  compilers  separated  all
the  writings  from  which  extracts  were  to  be  made,
into  three  parts,  and  formed  themselves  into  three
committees.  Each  committee  read  through  in  order
the  books  that  had  fallen  to  its  lot,  yet  so  that
books  which  were  closely  related  as  to  their  con-
tents, were  extracted  at  the  same  time.  The  books
were  compared  with  the  Code  of  Justinian,  and
what  was  selected  for  the  new  compilation,  was
placed  under  a  Title  taken  either  from  the  Code,
the  Edict,  or  in  case  of  necessity  from  the  work
itself  which  was  extracted.  What  came  under  the
same  title  was  compared  ;  repetitions  were  erased,
contradictions  were  got  rid  of,  and  alterations  were
made,  when  the  contents  of  the  extracts  seemed  to
require  it.  When  the  three  committees  had  finished
their  labours,  the  present  Digest  was  formed  out  of
the  three  collections  of  extracts.  In  order  to  ac-
complish this,  they  made  that  collection  the  founda-
tion of  each  Title  which  contained  the  most
numerous  or  at  least  the  longest  extracts.  With
these  they  compared  the  smaller  collections,  strik-
ing out,  as  they  had  done  before,  repetitions  and
contradictions,  making  the  necessary  additions,  and
giving  more  exact  definitions  and  general  princi-
ples. What  remained  over  of  the  smaller  collections
without  having  had  an  appropriate  place  assigned
to  it,  was  placed  after  the  first  collection,  and  its
place  in  the  series  after  the  first  collection  was
generally  determined  by  the  number  of  extracts."

"  The  Digest  does  not  seem  to  have  been  sub-
jected to  any  further  revision."

Bluhme  remarks  that,  although  the  Constitutions,
Deo  Auctore^  Imperatoriam^  Tanto,  and  Corrft,  con-
tain much  information  on  the  economy  of  the
Digest  and  the  mode  of  proceeding  of  the  compilers,
only  the  two  following  facts  are  distinctly  stated  :
1.  That  the  extracts  from  the  writings  of  the
Jurists  were  arranged  according  to  the  titles  of  the
Code  and  the  Edict.  2.  Tliat  the  extracts  were
compared  with  the  Code.    Accordingly  everything


PANDECTAE.

else  must  be  proved  from  an  examination  of  the
work  itself,  and  this  is  the  object  of  Bluhme's
laborious  essay.  He  observes  that  if  a  person  will
examine  the  extracts  in  the  titles  De  Verborum
Significatione  and  De  Regulis  Juris  (50.  tit.  16,  17)
he  will  find  a  regular  order  observable  in  the  titles
of  the  juristical  works  from  which  the  extracts  are
taken.  Generally,  the  series  of  the  books  quoted
shows  that  the  original  order  of  the  works  from
which  the  extracts  were  to  be  made,  has  not  been
altered  ;  and  the  several  works  generally  follow  in
both  these  titles  in  the  same  order.  A  similar  re-
mark applies  to  the  title  De  Verborum  Obliga-
tionibus  (Dig.  45.  tit.  1),  though  there  is  a  varia-
tion in  all  the  three  titles  as  to  the  relative  order
of  the  three  masses,  which  are  presently  to  be
mentioned.  "  In  the  remaining  titles  of  the  Di-
gest," adds  Bluhme,  "  at  first  sight  it  appears  as
if  one  could  find  no  other  distinction  in  the  titles
of  the  extracts  than  this,  that  one  part  of  them  has
a  certain  kind  of  connection,  and  another  part
merely  indicates  a  motley  assemblage  of  books  out
of  which  the  extracts  have  been  made.  But  on  a
closer  comparison  not  only  are  three  aiasses  clearly
distinguishable,  but  this  comparison  leads  to  the
certain  conclusion,  that  all  the  writings  which  were
used  in  the  compilation  of  the  Digest,  may  be  re-
ferred to  three  classes.  The  Commentaries  on  Sa-
binus  (Ad  Sabinum),  on  the  Edict  (Ad  Edictum),
and  Papinian's  writings  are  at  the  head  of  these
three  classes.  We  may  accordingly  denote  these
three  masses  respectively  by  the  names  Sabinian,
the  Edict,  and  Papinian.  In  each  of  these  classes
the  several  works  from  which  extracts  are  made,
always  follow  in  regular  order."  This  order  is
shown  by  a  table  which  Bluhme  has  inserted  in
his  essay.

This  article,  if  read  in  connection  with  the  arti-
cles Codex  and  Institutiones,  will  give  some
general  notion  of  the  Legislation  of  Justinian,  the
objects  of  which  cannot  be  expressed  better  than
in  the  following  words  :  —

"  Justinian's  plan  embraced  two  principal  works,
one  of  which  was  to  be  a  selection  from  the  Jurists
and  the  other  from  the  Constitutiones.  The  first,
the  Pandect,  was  very  appropriately  intended  to
contain  the  foundation  of  the  law :  it  was  the  first
work  since  the  date  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  which  in
itself  and  without  supposing  the  existence  of  Jin}'
other,  might  serve  as  a  central  point  of  the  whole
body  of  the  law.  It  may  be  properly  called  a  Code,
and  the  first  complete  Code  since  the  time  of  the
Twelve  Tables,  though  a  large  part  of  its  contents
is  not  Law,  but  consists  of  Dogmatic  and  the  in-
vestigation of  particular  cases.  Instead  of  the  in-
sufficient rules  of  Valentinian  III.,  the  excerpts  in
the  Pandect  are  taken  immediately  from  the  writ-
ings of  the  Jurists  in  great  numbers,  and  arranged
according  to  their  matter.  The  Code  also  has  a
more  comprehensive  plan  than  the  earlier  codes,
since  it  comprises  both  Rescripts  and  Edicts.  These
two  works,  the  Pandect  and  the  Code,  ought  pro-
perly to  be  considered  as  the  completion  of  Jus-
tinian's design.  The  Institutiones  cannot  be  viewed
as  a  third  work,  independent  of  both :  it  serves  as
an  introduction  to  them  or  as  a  manual.  Lastly,  the
Novellae  are  single  and  subsequent  additions  and
alterations,  and  it  is  merely  an  accidental  circum-
stance that  a  third  edition  of  the  Code  was  not
made  at  the  end  of  Justinian's  reign,  which  would
have  comprised  the  Novellae  which  had  a  permanent


PANDIA.

Rpplication."  (Savigny,  Gescliichte  des  Rom.  Rechts
im  Mittelalter^  i.  p.  14.)

There  are  numerous  manuscripts  of  the  Digest,
both  in  libraries  of  the  Continent  and  of  Great
Britain.  A  list  of  the  MSS.  of  the  Corpus  Juris
in  the  libraries  of  this  country,  which  are  princi-
pally in  the  Colleges  of  Oxford  and  Cambridge,
is  given  by  Dr.  Hach  in  the  Zeitschrift  (vol.  v.).
But  the  MSS.  of  the  Digest  generally  contain
only  parts  of  the  work,  and  are  not  older  than  the
twelfth  century.  The  MS.  called  the  Florentine
is  complete  and  probably  as  old  as  the  seventh
century.  It  is  generally  said  that  it  had  been
kept  at  Amalfi  time  out  of  mind,  and  was  given
to  the  Pisans  by  Lotharius  the  Second,  after  the
capture  of  Amalfi  A.  D.  1137,  as  a  memorial  of  his
gratitude  to  them  for  their  aid  against  Roger  the
Norman.  The  Pisans  kept  it  till  their  city  was
taken  by  the  Florentines  under  Gino  Caponi  a.  d.
1 406,  who  carried  this  precious  MS.  to  Florence
where  it  is  still  preserved.  There  is  however
pretty  good  evidence  that  the  MS.  was  not  found
at  Amalfi.  Odofredus  says,  that  it  was  transmitted
to  Pisa  by  Justinian,  and  Bartolus  adds,  that  it
alwa3's  had  been,  and  then  was  at  Pisa.  At  any
rate  it  is  the  oldest  MS.  of  the  Pandectae.  An
exact  copy  of  this  MS.  was  published  at  P'lorence
in  1553,  folio,  with  the  title  "Digestorum  seu
Pandcctarum  Libri  Quinquaginta  Ex  Florentinis
Pandectis  repraesentati  ;  Florentiae  In  Officina
Laurentii  Tarrentini  Ducalis  Typographi  MDLIII
Cum  Summi  Pontif.  Car.  V.  Imp.  Henrici  II  Gal-
lorum  Regis,  Eduardi  VI  Angliae  regis,  Cosmi
Medicis  Ducis  Florent.  II  Privilegio."  The  facts
relating  to  the  history  of  the  MS.  appear  from  the
dedication  of  Franciscus  Taurellius  to  Cosmo  I.,
Duke  of  Florence.  Laelio  Torelli  and  his  son
Francisco  superintended  the  printing  of  the  edition
of  this  splendid  work,  which  is  invaluable  to  a
scholar.  The  orthography  of  the  MS.  has  been
scrupulously  observed.  Those  who  cannot  consult
this  work  may  be  satisfied  with  the  edition  of
the  Corpus  Juris  by  Charondas,  which  the  distin-
guished printer  of  that  edition,  Christopher  Planti-
nus,  affirms  to  be  as  exact  a  copy  of  the  Florentine
edition  as  it  could  be  made.  (Antwerp,  1575).
As  to  the  other  editions  of  the  Digest,  see  Cor-
pus Juris.  [G.  L.]

PA'NDIA  (TTcivSto),  an  Attic  festival,  the  real
character  of  which  seems  to  have  been  a  subject
of  dispute  among  the  ancients  themselves  ;  for  ac-
cording to  the  Etymologicura  M.  (s.  v.  Tldv^ia  ;
comp.  Phot.  s. «,),  some  derived  it  from  Pandia,
who  is  said  to  have  been  a  goddess  of  the  moon
(this  is  also  Wachsmuth's  opinion,  ii.  p.  485)  ;
others  from  the  Attic  king  Pandion  ;  others  again
from  the  Attic  tribe  Dias,  so  that  the  Pandia
would  have  been  in  the  same  relation  to  this  tribe
as  the  Panathenaea  to  Athens :  and  others  from
At({s,  and  call  it  a  festival  of  Zeus.  Welcker
{Aeschyl.  Trilog.  p.  303)  considers  it  to  have  been
originally  a  festival  of  Zeus  celebrated  by  all  the  At-
tic tribes,  analogous  to  the  Panathenaea,  and  thinks
that  when  the  confederacy,  of  which  this  festival
was  as  it  were  the  central  point,  became  dissolved,
the  old  festival  remained,  though  its  character  was
changed.  It  was  celebrated  at  Athens  in  the  time
oi  Demosthenes  (c.  Mid.  p.  517).  Taylor  in  his
note  on  this  passage  strangely  confounds  it  with
the  Diasia,  though  it  is  well  known  that  this  fes-
tival was  held  on  the  19th  of  Muiiychion,  while


PANIONIA.


861


the  Pandia  took  place  on  the  1 4th  of  Elaphebolipn.
(Compare  Suidas  and  Hesych.  s.  v.  UdvSta  ;  BiJckh,
Abha?idl.  der  Berlin.  Akademie,  1818,  p.  65,
&c.)  [L.  S.]

PANE'GYRIS  (iravfiyvpis)  signifies  a  meeting
or  assembly  of  a  whole  people  for  the  purpose  of
worshipping  at  a  common  sanctuary.  But  tlie
word  is  used  in  three  ways  : —  1.  For  a  meeting  of
the  inhabitants  of  one  particular  town  and  its
vicinity  [Ephesia]  ;  2.  For  a  meeting  of  the  in-
habitants of  a  whole  district,  a  province,  or  of  the
whole  body  of  people  belonging  to  a  particular
tribe  [Delia,  Pamboeotia,  Panionia]  ;  and
3.  For  great  national  meetings,  as  at  the  Olympic,
Pythian,  Isthmian,  and  Nemean  games.  Although
in  all  panegyreis  which  we  know,  the  religious
character  forms  the  most  prominent  feature,  other
subjects,  political  discussions  and  resolutions,  as
well  as  a  variety  of  amusements,  were  not  excluded,
though  they  were  perhaps  more  a  consequence  of
the  presence  of  many  persons  than  objects  of  the
meeting.  As  regards  their  religious  character,  the
panegyreis  were  real  festivals  in  which  prayers
were  performed,  sacrifices  ofi'ered,  processions  held,
&c.  The  amusements  comprehended  the  whole
variety  of  games,  gymnastic  and  musical  contests,
and  entertainments.  Every  panegyris,  moreover,
was  made  by  tradespeople  a  source  of  gain,  and  it
may  be  presumed  that  such  a  meeting  was  never
held  without  a  fair,  at  which  all  sorts  of  things
were  exhibited  for  sale.  (Paus.  x.  32.  §  9  ;  Strab.
X.  p.  486;  Dio  Chr}'sost.  Orat.  xxvii.  p.  528.)  In
later  times,  when  the  love  of  gain  had  become
stronger  than  religious  feeling,  the  fairs  appear  to
have  become  a  more  prominent  characteristic  of  a
panegyris  than  before ;  hence  the  Olympic  games
are  called  mercaius  Olympiacus  or  ludi  et  mercatua
Olympiorum.  (Justin,  xiii.  5 ;  Veil.  Pat.  i.  8.)
Festive  orations  were  also  frequently  addressed  to
a  panegyris,  whence  they  are  called  x6yoi  travt}-
yvpiKoi.  The  Panegyricus  of  Isocrates,  though  it
was  never  delivered,  is  an  imaginary  discourse  of
this  kind.  In  later  times  any  oration  in  praise  of
a  person  was  called  panegyricus,  as  that  of  Pliny
on  the  emperor  Trajan.

Each  panegyris  is  treated  of  in  a  separate  article.
For  a  general  account  see  Wachsmuth,  Hell.  Alt.
i.  p.  1 49,  &c. ;  Bockh,  ad  Find.  01.  vii.  p.  1 75,
&c. ;  Hermann,  Polit.  Ant.  §  10.  [L.  S.]

PANELLE'NIA  {iraviXKiivia),  a  festival,  or
perhaps  rather  a  panegyris  of  all  the  Greeks,  which
seems  to  have  been  instituted  by  the  emperor
Hadrian,  with  the  well-meant  but  impracticable
view  of  reviving  a  national  spirit  among  the  Greeks.
(Philostr.  Vit.  Soph.  ii.  1.  5;  Bockh,  Corp.  Inscrip.
i.  p.  789,  ii.  p.  580.)  [L.  S.]

PANIO'NIA  {iravidivia),  the  great  national
panegyris  of  the  lonians  on  mount  Mycale,  where
their  national  god  Poseidon  Heliconius  had  his
sanctuary,  called  the  Panionium.  (Herod,  i.  148 ;
Strab.  viii.  p.  384;  Paus.  vii.  24.  §  4.)  One  of
the  principal  objects  of  this  national  meeting  was
the  common  worship  of  Poseidon,  to  whom  splendid
sacrifices  were  offered  on  the  occasion.  (Diodor.
XV.  49.)  As  chief-priest  for  the  conduct  of  the
sacrifices,  they  always  appointed  a  young  man  of
Priene,  with  the  title  of  king,  and  it  is  mentioned
as  one  of  the  peculiar  superstitions  of  the  lonians
on  this  occasion,  that  they  thought  the  bull  which
they  sacrificed  to  be  pleasing  to  the  god  if  it  roared
at  the  moment  it  was  killed,    (Strab.  I.  c.)     But


fi62  PANTOMIMUS.

Teligious  worship  was  not  tlie  only  object  for  wliich
they  assembled  at  the  Panloniuin  ;  on  certain  emer-
gencies, especially  in  case  of  any  danger  threaten-
ing their  country,  the  I&nians  discussed  at  these
meetings  political  questions,  and  passed  resolutions
which  were  binding  upon  all.  (Herod,  i.  141,  170.)
But  the  political  union  among  the  lonians  appears
nevertheless  to  have  been  very  loose,  and  their
confederacy  to  have  been  without  any  regular  in-
ternal organization,  for  the  Lydians  conquered  one
Ionian  town  after  another,  without  there  appearing
anything  like  the  spirit  of  a  political  confederacy  ;
and  we  also  find  that  single  cities  concluded  sepa-
rate treaties  for  themselves,  and  abandoned  their
confederates  to  their  fate.     (Herod,  i.  169.)

Diodorus  (xv.  49)  says  that  in  later  times  the
lonians  used  to  hold  their  meeting  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Ephesus  instead  of  at  Mycale.  Strabo,
on  the  other  hand,  who  speaks  of  the  Panionic
panegyris  as  still  held  in  his  own  time,  does  not
only  not  mention  any  such  change,  but  appears  to
imply  that  the  panegyris  was  at  all  times  held  on
the  same  spot,  viz.  on  mount  Mycale.  Diodorus
therefore  seems  to  consider  the  Ephesian  panegyris
[Ephesia]  as  having  been  instituted  instead  of
the  Panionia.  But  both  panegyreis  existed  simul-
taneously, and  were  connected  with  the  worship  of
two  distinct  divinities,  as  is  clear  from  a  com-
parison of  two  passages  of  Strabo,  viii.  p.  384,  xiv.
p.  6?>9.

(Compare  Tittmann's  Griech.  Staatsv.  p.  668,
&c.  ;  Thirlwall,  Hist,  of  Greece,  ii.  p.  102;  C.
F.  Hermann,  Lehrb.  der  Gottesd.  Alterth.  §  QQ.  n.
2,  3.)  [L.  S.]

PANO'PLIA.     [Arma.]

PANTOMFMUS  is  the  name  of  a  kind  of
actors  peculiar  to  the  Romans,  who  very  nearly  re-
sembled in  their  mode  of  acting  the  modem  dancers
in  the  ballet.  They  did  not  speak  on  the  stage,
but  merely  acted  by  gestures,  movements,  and  atti-
tudes. All  movements,  however,  were  rhythmical
like  those  in  the  ballet,  whence  the  general  term
for  them  is  saltatio,  saltare ;  the  whole  art  was
called  musica  muta  (Cassiodor.  Var.  i.  20)  ;  and  to
represent  Niobe  or  Leda  was  expressed  by  saltare
Nioben  and  saltare  Ledum.

Mimic  dancers  of  this  kind  are  common  to  all
nations,  and  hence  we  find  them  in  Greece  and
Italy  ;  in  the  former  country  they  acquired  a  degree
of  perfection  of  which  we  can  scarcely  form  an  idea.
But  pantomimes  in  a  narrower  sense  were  peculiar
to  the  Romans,  to  whom  we  shall  therefore  confine
ourselves.  During  the  time  of  the  republic  the
name  pantomimus  does  not  occur,  though  the  art
itself  was  known  to  the  Romans  at  an  early  period  ;
for  the  first  histriones  said  to  have  been  introduced
from  Etruria  were  in  fact  nothing  but  pantomimic
dancers  [Histrio,  p.  612],  whence  we  find  that
under  the  empire  the  names  histrio  and  pantomimus
were  used  as  synonymous.  The  pantomimic  art,
however,  was  not  carried  to  any  degree  of  perfec-
tion until  the  time  of  Augustus  ;  whence  some
writers  ascribe  its  invention  to  Augustus  himself,
or  to  the  great  artists  who  flourished  in  his  reign,
(Suidas,  s.  v.  "Opxv^^s  Trai/rdfxifios.)  The  greatest
pantomimes  of  this  time  were  Bathyllus,  a  freedman
and  favourite  of  Maecenas,  and  Pylades  and  Hylas.
(Juv.  vi.  63;  Suet.  Atig.  45  ;  Macrob.  Sat.  ii.  7  ;
Athen.  i.  p.  70.)  The  great  popularity  which
the  pantomimes  acquired  at  Rome  in  the  time  of
Augustus  through  these  distinguished  actors,  was


PANTOMIMUS.

\  the  cause  of  their  spreading  not  only  in  Italy  but
also  in  the  provinces,  and  Tiberius  found  it  nocos-
sary  to  put  a  check  upon  the  great  partiality  Utt
them :  he  forbade  all  senators  to  frequent  the
houses  of  such  pantomimes,  and  the  equites  were
not  allowed  to  be  seen  walking  with  them  in  the
streets  of  Rome,  or  to  attend  their  performances  in
any  other  place  than  the  public  theatres,  for  wealthy
Romans  fn^quently  engaged  male  and  female  pan-
tomimes to  amuse  their  guests  at  their  repasts.
(Tacit.  Annal.  i.  77.)  But  Caligula  was  so  fi)nd  of
pantomimes  that  one  of  them,  M.  Lepidus  Mnester,
became  his  favourite  ;  and  through  his  influence
the  whole  class  of  pantomimes  again  recovered
their  ascendancy.  (Suet.  Calig.  3(J,  b5,  57  ;  Tacit.
Annul,  xiv.  21.)  Nero  not  only  patronised  them,
but  acted  himself  as  pantomime  (Suet.  A^ero,  16,
26),  and  from  this  time  they  retained  the  highest
degree  of  popularity  at  Rome  down  to  the  latest
period  of  the  empire.

As  regards  their  mode  of  acting,  we  must  first
state  that  all  pantomimes  wore  masks,  so  that  the
features  of  the  countenance  were  lost  in  their  act-
ing. All  the  other  parts  of  their  body,  however,
were  called  into  action,  and  especially  the  arms
and  hands,  whence  the  expressions  manus  loquacis-
simae,  digiti  damosi,  X^^P^^  ■jra/.icpwvoi,  &c.  Not-
withstanding their  acting  with  masks,  the  ancients
agree  that  the  pantomimes  expressed  actions,  feel
ings,  passions,  &c.,  more  beautifully,  correctly,
and  intelligibly  than  it  would  be  possible  to  do
by  speaking  or  writing.  They  were,  however,  as-
sisted in  their  acting  by  the  circumstance  that  they
only  represented  mythological  characters,  which
were  known  to  every  spectator.  (Juv.  vi.  63,  v.
121;  Herat.  Epist.  ii.  2.  125;  Sueton,  Nero,  54;
Veil.  Pat.  ii.  83.)  There  were,  moreover,  certain
conventional  gestures  and  movements  which  every
body  understood.  Their  costume  appears  to  have
been  like  that  of  the  dancers  in  a  ballet,  so  as  to
show  the  beauty  of  the  human  form  to  the  greatest
advantage ;  though  the  costume  of  course  varied
according  to  the  various  characters  which  were  re-
presented. S' e  the  manner  in  which  Plancus  is
described  by  Velleius  (ii.  83)  to  have  danced  the
character  of  Glaucus.  In  the  time  of  Augustus
there  was  never  more  than  one  dancer  at  a  time
on  the  stage,  and  he  represented  all  the  characters
of  the  story,  both  male  and  female,  in  succession.
(Lucian,  de  Saltut.  c.  67;  Jacobs,  ad  Anthol.  ii.  1,
p.  308.)  This  remained  the  custom  till  towards
the  end  of  the  second  century  of  our  aera,  when
the  several  parts  of  a  story  began  to  be  acted  by
several  pantomimes  dancing  together.  Women,
during  the  earlier  period  of  the  empire,  never  ap-
peared as  pantomimes  on  the  stage,  though  they
did  not  scruple  to  act  as  such  at  the  private  parties
of  the  great.  During  the  latter  time  of  the  empire
women  acted  as  pantomimes  in  public,  and  in  some
cases  they  threw  aside  all  regard  to  decency,  and
appeared  naked  before  the  public.  The  Christian
writers  therefore  represent  the  pantomimic  exhibi-
tions as  the  school  of  every  vice  and  licentiousness.
(Tertull.  deSpect.  p.  269,  ed.  Paris;  see  also  Senec.
Quae^t.  Nat.  vii.  32 ;  Plin.  Epist.  v.  24;  Aramian.
Marc.  xiv.  6  ;  Procop.  A?iecdot.  9.)

Mythological  love  stories  were  from  the  first  the
favourite  subjects  of  the  pantomimes  (Ovid.  licmed.
Am.  753),  and  the  evil  effects  of  such  sensual  re-
presentations upon  women  are  described  in  stron*
colours  by  Juvenal  (vi.  63,  &c.).    Every  represent-


PARACATABOLE.

at^nn  was  based  upon  a  text  written  for  the  pur-
pose. This  text  was  called  the  Canticum  (Macrob.
Sat.  ii.  7;  Plin.  Epist.  vii.  24),  and  was  mostly
written  in  the  Greek  language.  Some  of  them
may  have  represented  scenes  from,  or  the  whole
subjects  of  Greek  dramas  ;  but  when  Arnobius
{adv.  Gent.  4,  compare  Antholog.  i.  p.  249)  states,
that  whole  tragedies  of  Sophocles  and  Euripides
were  used  as  texts  for  pantomimic  representations,
he  perhaps  only  means  to  say  that  a  pantoraimus
sometimes  represented  the  same  story  contained  in
such  a  tragedy,  without  being  obliged  to  act  or
dance  every  sentiment  expressed  in  it.  The  texts
of  the  pantomimes  or  cantica  were  sung  by  a  chorus
standing  in  the  background  of  the  stage,  and  the
sentiments  and  feelings  expressed  by  this  chorus
were  represented  by  the  pantomimus  in  his  dance
and  gesticulation.  The  time  was  indicated  by  the
scabellum^  a  peculiar  kind  of  sole  made  of  wood  or
metal,  which  either  the  dancer  or  one  of  the  chorus
wore.  The  whole  performance  was  accompanied
by  musical  instruments,  but  in  most  cases  by  the
flute.  In  Sicily  pantomimic  dances  were  called
l3a\\i(rfjLol^  whence  perhaps  the  modern  words  ball
and  ballet.  (Compare  Lessing,  Ahliandlung  von  den
I'antomimen  der  Alien ;  Grysar,  m  Ersch  and
Gruher''s  Encydop.  s.  v.  Pajitomimische  Kunst  des
Alterthums  ;  Welcker,  Die  griechischen  Tragodien,
pp.  1317,  1409,  1443,  1477.)  [L.  S.]

PAPY'RUS.     [Liber.]

PAR  IMPAR  LUDERE  (apTiafffiSs,  aprid-
(eiv,  apTia  fj  irefjiTTO.  iral^eiv),  the  game  at  odd
and  even,  was  a  favourite  game  among  the  Greeks
and  Romans.  A  person  held  in  his  hand  a  certain
number  of  astragali  or  other  things,  and  his  op-
ponent had  to  guess  whether  the  number  was  odd
or  even.  (Pollux,  ix.  101  ;  Plato,  Zys.  p.  207  ;  Hor.
Sai.  ii.  3.  248  ;  Suet.  Aug.  71  ;  Nux  Eleg.  79  ;
Becker,  Gallus,  vol.  ii,  p.  233.)

PARA'BASIS.     [CoMOEDiA.]

PARA'BOLON  (irapaSoKou  or  irapa€6\iov),
a  small  fee  paid  by  the  appellant  party,  on  an  ap-
peal (e(/)e(riy)  from  an  inferior  to  a  superior  tribu-
nal ;  as  for  instance,  from  an  arbitrator  or  a
magistrate,  or  from  the  court  of  the  STjyutJrai,  or
from  the  Senate  of  Five  Hundred,  to  the  jury  or
Heliastic  court  As  to  the  sum  to  be  paid,  and
other  particulars,  we  are  uninformed.  (Pollux,  viii.
b-2,63  ;  Meier,  ^«.Proc.  pp.  767,  772.)   [C.R.K.]

PARACATA'BOLE  (TrupaKaTagoAi?),  a  sum  of
money  required  of  a  plaintiff  or  petitioner  in  certain
cases,  as  a  security  that  his  complaint  or  demand
was  not  frivolous,  or  made  on  slight  and  insuffi-
cient grounds.  Such  was  the  deposit  made  in
certain  inheritance  causes,  viz.  a  tenth  part  of  the
value  of  the  property  sought  to  be  recovered.
[Heres.]  So  also  in  the  proceeding  termed
ej/eTr/cTKTj/x/ia,  which  was  a  suit  instituted  against
the  pul)lic  treasury  by  a  creditor  to  obtain  payment
out  of  his  debtor's  confiscated  goods,  a  fifth  part  of
the  value  was  deposited.  It  was  returned  to  the
petitioner,  if  successful  ;  otherwise  it  went  to  the
state.  (Suidas,  s.  v.  'EvitriaKfiiip.a.)  The  money
was  deposited  either  at  the  avaKpiais^  or  on  the
commencement  of  the  cause.  The  word  irapa-
KaTa€o\T]  signifies  both  the  paying  of  the  deposit,
and  the  money  deposited  ;  and,  being  a  word  of
more  general  import,  we  find  it  used  to  denote
other  kinds  of  deposits,  as  the  TrpvTavela  and
vupdiTTacris.  (Pollux,  viii.  32;  Meier,  Ait.  Proc.
pp.  604,  616—621.)  [C.  R.  K.]


PARADISUS.


003


PARACATATHE'CE  (irapaicaTaeiiKri),  ge-
nerally signifies  a  deposit  of  something  valuable
with  a  friend  or  other  person,  for  the  benefit  of  the
owner.  Thus,  if  I  deliver  my  goods  to  a  friend,
to  be  taken  care  of  for  me  ;  or  if  I  deposit  money
with  a  banker  ;  such  delivery  or  bailment,  or  the
goods  bailed  or  delivered,  or  the  money  deposited,
may  be  called  itapaKaTaBi\K-q  (Herod,  vi.  86  ;
Demosth.  pro  Phorm.  946);  and  the  word  is  often
applied  metaphorically  to  any  important  trust  com-
mitted by  one  person  to  another.  (Demosth.
c.  Aphoh.  840  ;  Aesch.  c.  Timarch.  26,  ed.  Steph.,
de  Fals.  Leg.  47.)  As  every  bailee  is  bound  to
restore  to  the  bailor  the  thing  deposited  ;  either  on
demand  (in  case  of  a  simple  bailment),  or  on  per-
formance of  the  conditions  on  which  it  was  re-
ceived ;  the  Athenians  gave  a  TrapaKorad^KTjs  SIktj
against  a  bailee  who  unjustly  withheld  his  property
from  the  owner,  aireo-Tc'pTjtre  r^v  rrapaKaTaOriKrjy.
(Pollux,  vi.  154.)  An  example  of  such  an  action
against  a  banker  is  the  rpaire^iTiKhs  \6yos  of
Isocrates.  A  pledge  given  to  a  creditor  could  not
be  recovered,  except  on  payment  of  the  money
owed  to  him  ;  but,  after  selling  the  article,  and
satisfying  his  debt  out  of  the  proceeds,  he  would
of  course  be  bound  to  restore  the  surplus  (if  any)
to  the  pledgor.  It  follows  from  the  nature  of  the
irapaK.  StKTj  that  it  was  drt/trjTos,  but  it  is  not  im-
probable that  the  additional  penalty  of  arifxia
might  be  inflicted  on  a  defendant  who  fraudulently
denied  that  he  had  ever  received  the  deposit.

The  difficulty  of  procuring  safe  custody  for
money,  and  the  general  insecurity  of  movable  pro-
perty in  Greece,  induced  many  rich  persons  to
make  valuable  deposits  in  the  principal  temples,
such  as  that  of  Apollo  at  Delphi,  Jupiter  at  Olym-
pia,  and  others.  (Meier,  Ait.  Proc.  pp.  512 — 515.)
It  may  be  observed  that  ridea-dai,  irapaKara-
riOsaOai,  in  the  middle  voice,  are  always  used  of  a
person  making  a  deposit  /or  his  own  benefit,  with
the  intention  of  taking  it  up  again.  Hence  the
expression  ^icxQai  X"P"'i  to  confer  an  obligation,
which  gives  the  right  (as  it  were)  of  drawing  upon
the  obliged  party  for  a  return  of  the  favour  at
some  future  time.  Ko/xl^ecrOai  is  to  recover  your
property  or  right.  (Isocrat.  c.  Euthyn.  400,  ed.
Steph.)  [C.  R.  K.]

PARADT'SUS  (TrapaSezo-os),  was  the  name
given  by  the  Greeks  to  the  parks  or  pleasure-
grounds,  which  surrounded  the  country  residences
of  the  Persian  kings  and  satraps.  They  were
generally  stocked  with  animals  for  the  chace,  were
full  of  all  kinds  of  trees,  watered  by  numerous
streams,  and  enclosed  with  walls.  (Xen.  Anab.  i.
4.  §  10,  Cyr.  i.  3.  §  14,  4.  §5,  Hell.  iv.  1.  §33,
Oec.  iv.  13  ;  Diod.  Sic.  xvi.  41  ;  Curt.  viii.  i.  §  11,
12  ;  Gell.  ii.  20.)  These  paradises  were  frequently
of  great  extent  ;  thus  Cyrus  on  one  occasion  re-
viewed the  Greek  army  in  his  paradise  at  Celaenae
(Xen.  Anab.  i.  2.  §  9),  and  on  another  occasion
the  Greeks  were  alarmed  by  a  report  that  there
was  a  great  army  in  a  neighbouring  paradise.  {Id.
ii.  4.  §  1 6.)

Pollux  (ix.  13)  says  that  irapddeKTOK  was  a
Persian  word,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the
Greeks  obtained  it  from  the  Persians.  The  word,
however,  seems  to  have  been  used  by  other  Eastern
nations,  and  not  to  have  been  peculiar  to  the  Per-
sians. Gesenius  (Lexicon  Hebraicum,  p.  838.
Lips.  1833)  and  other  writers  suppose  it  to  be  the
same  as  the  Sanskrit  joorotfcsa,  but  this  word  dots


SCjI


PARAGRAPHE.


not  mean  a  lattd  elevated  and  cultivated^  as  Ge-
senius  and  others  state,  but  merely  a.  foreign  covntry,
whence  is  derived  paradesint^  a  /oreic/ner.  The
word  occurs  in  Hebrew  (D^^nB,  paredes)  as  early
as  the  time  of  Solomon  {Eccles.  ii.  5  ;  Cant.  ir.
J  3),  and  is  also  found  in  Arabic  (^rrfaws),  and
Armenian  (pardes,  Schroeder,  Dissert.  Thesaur.
Ling.  A  mien,  praemiss.  p.  56).

PARAGAUDA  (TrapoywSijs),  the  border  of  a
tunic  LLiMBUs],  enriched  with  gold  thread,  worn
by  ladies,  but  not  allowed  to  men  except  as  one  of
the  insignia  of  office.      These  borders  were  among
the  rich  presents  given  by  Furius  Placidus  a.d.
343,  when  he  was  made  consul  {lineae  paragaudae^
Vopisc.   Aurel.   15).      Under  the  later  emperors
the  manufacture  of  them  was  forbidden  except  in
their  own  gynaecea.  (Cod.  11.  tit.  8.  s.  1,  2.)    The
term   paragauda,  which  is    probably  of  Oriental
origin,  seems  also  to  have  been  converted  into  an
adjective,  and  thus  to  have  become  the  denomina-
tion of  the  tunic,  which  was  decorated  with  such
borders.  ( Lydus  de  Mag.  i.  1 7,  ii.  4. 1 3.)    [J.  Y.  ]
PARAGRAPHE    (irapaypa(pi]).     This    word
does  not  exactly  correspond  with  any  term  in  our
language,  but  may  without  much  impropriety  be
called  a  plea.     It  is  an  objection  raised  by  the  de-
fendant to  the  admissibility  of  the  plaintiff's  ac-
tion :  "  exceptio  rei  adversus  actorem,  actionemve,
querentis  aut  de   foro  hand  competente,   aut   de
tempore,  modove  procedendi  illegitimo.'"     (Reiske,
l7tdex  Gr.  in  Orat.)  Sir  William  Jones,  in  the  pre-
face to  his  translation  of  Isaeus,  compares  it  with  a
demurrer.     But  this  is  not  so  correct  ;  because  a
demurrer  is  an  objection  arising  out  of  the  adver-
sary's own  statement  of  his   case  ;    whereas  the
irapaypa^i]  was  an  objection  depending  on  facts
stated  by  the    defendant   himself,    and    therefore
rather  resembles  a  plea,  or  (more  strictly)  a  special
plea.       This  appears  from  the  irapaypa(piKoi  \6yoi
of  Demosthenes,  in  which  we  find  the  defendant
introducing  new  allegations   into  the  cause,  and
supporting  them    by  proof.     Thus,  in  the   speech
against  Nausimachus  and  Xenopithes,  the  ground
of  objection  is,'  that  the  father  of  the  defendants
having  obtained  a  release  from  the  plaintiffs,  it
was  no  longer  open  to  the  plaintiffs  to  bring  an  ac-
tion for  the  same  cause.     But  the  first  mention  of
this   release  is  made  by  the  defendants  in  their
plea.      In  the  speech  against  Zenothemis  the  de-
fendant objects,  that  the  ifiiropiKi]  S'lkt}  does  not
lie,  because  there  was  no  written  contract  between
him  and  the  plaintiff  on  a  voyage  to  or  from  Athens  ;
and  this   (says  he)   appears  from  the  declaration
itself  (iv  T(f  eyK\-f)iJ.aTi).     As  parties  could  not
be  defeated  at  Athens  by  a  technical  objection  to
the  pleadings,  the   defendant  in  the  above  case,
notwithstanding    the   defective    statement   of  the
plaintiff  in  the  declaration,  was  compelled  to  bring
forvrard  his  objection  by  plea,  and  to  support  it
before  the  jury.     In   the  speech  against  Phormio,
the  plaintiff  says  that  as  the  defendant  only  denies
that  he  has  committed  a  breach  of  the  contract,
thece  was  no  occasion  for  a  irapaypacp'f] :  the  ques-
tion merely  was,  whether  the  plaintiff's  charge  was
true.     It  seems  that  a  Trapaypaipi}  might  be  put  in,
not  only  when  the  defendant  could   show  that  the
cause  of  action  was  discharged,  or  that  ii;  was  not
maintainable  in  point  of  law  ;  but  also  when  the
form  of  action  was  misconceived,  or  when  it  was
commenced  at  a  wrong  time,  or  brought   before
the  wrong  magistrate  (^yefiiev  BiKaiTTTjpiov.)     In


PARAGRAPHE.

the  last  case  the  irapaypacpi]  would  answer  to  our
plea  to  the  jurisdiction.  (Demosth.  c.  Pantaen.  976-
Suidas,  s.  V.  Tlapaypacpi]  and  fifdvSiKia.)

The  vapaypaf-f},  like  every  other  answer  (auri-
ypcup-h)  made  by  the  defendant  to  the  plaintiti's
charge,  was  given  in  writing  ;  as  the  word  itself
implies.  (Demosth.  c.  Phorm.  912.)  If  the  de-
fendant  merely  denied  the  plaintiff's  allegations,  or
(as  we  might  say)  pleaded  tJie  general  issue,  he  was
said  fi/dvSiKlav  or  r^v  cvdelav  tlatevai,  or  ctTro-
KoyiiaQai  r^v  (vdvSiKiav  ii(Tiuiv.  In  this  case  a
court  was  at  once  held  for  the  trial  of  the  cause.
If,  however,  he  put  in  a  rrapaypacpi],  he  maintained
that  the  cause  was  not  fla-aywyiixos  (napeypdixl/aTo
ti\)  eia-aytoyifiou  chai  r^v  diKtjv),  and  in  that  case
a  court  was  to  be  held  to  try  the  preliminary
question,  whether  the  cause  could  be  brought  into
court  or  not.  Upon  this  previous  trial  the  defend-
ant was  considered  the  actor,  and  hence  is  said  by
Demosthenes  (c.  Phorm.  908)  KaTr]yopc7v  rov
di(aKovTos.  He  began,  and  had  to  maintain  the
ground  of  objection  which  he  relied  upon.  (Demosth.
c.  Steph.  1103.)  If  he  succeeded,  the  whole  cause
was  at  an  end  ;  unless  the  objection  was  only  to  the
form  of  action,  or  some  other  such  technicality,  in
which  case  it  might  be  recommenced  in  the  proper
manner.  If,  however,  the  plaintiff  succeeded,  the
jury  merely  decided  (l(Tay<6yifiov  elvai  r^v  SUrjv,
and  then  the  original  action,  which  in  the  mean-
time had  been  suspended,  was  proceeded  with.
(Demosth.  c.Zenoth.  888  ;  Lys.  de  Pull.  Pec.  148,
ed.  Steph.)  Both  parties  on  the  trial  of  the
irapaypacp-f]  were  liable  to  the  eiru€€\ia,  on  failure
to  obtain  a  fifth  part  of  the  votes.

The  course  of  proceeding  on  a  irapaypacp^  was
obviously  calculated  to  delay  the  progress  of  the
cause,  and  was  therefore  not  looked  on  with  favour
by  the  dicasts.  Tlporpdaeis,  vTrufiocriai,  irapaypa-
<^ai,  TO  6/c  ruu  i/d/xcju,  excuses,  delays,  pleas,  legal
objp,ctions,  are  classed  together  by  the  orator  as
being  the  manoeuvres  of  defendants  to  defeat
justice.  Hence  we  find  in  the  extant  irapaypa<pi-
Kol  \6yoi,  that  the  defendant,  in  order  to  remove
the  prejudice  of  the  dicasts  against  himself,  not  only
supports  the  ground  of  the  irapaypacpi],  but  dis-
cusses the  general  merits  of  the  cause,  and  en-
deavours to  show  that  there  is  no  foundation  for
the  plaintiff's  complaint.  And  there  is  no  doubt
that  the  dicasts  were  materially  influenced  by  such
discussion,  however  in  strictness  irrelevant.  (De-
mosth. c.  Mid.  541,  c.  Lacr.  924,  c.  Steph.  1117,
pro  Phorm.  944,  Argum.  Or.  c.  Zenoth.)  The
same  observation  applies  to  the  Siafiaprvpia.  [See
Heres.]  (Isaeus,  de  Philoct.  her.  60,  de  Apoll.
her.  63.  ed.  Steph.  ;  Demosth.  c.  Leach.  1097.)

There  was  no  such  thing  as  this  proceeding  by
Trapaypa<p^,  until  after  the  expulsion  of  the  thirty
tyrants,  when  a  law  was  passed  on  the  proposal  of
Archinus,  &u  ris  SiKd^rjrai  iraph  tovs  opKovs,  i^-
eTuai  TfjJ  (pfvyouTi  irapaypd^aa-Qai,  robs  Se  &p-
Xouras  ircpl  tovtov  Tzpwrov  elcrdyfiu,  \4yfiu  Sh
irpSrepou  rov  Trapaypaxl/dfievov,  dirdrepos  S'  ttv
riTT-ndij,  T^u  iircoeeXlau  6<p€l\€iu.  The  object  of
this  law  appears  to  have  been,  to  enable  any  person
against  whom  an  information  or  prosecution  might
be  brought,  or  action  commenced,  for  any  matter
arising  out  of  the  late  political  troubles,  to  obtain
the  benefit  of  the  general  amnesty,  by  specially
pleading  the  same,  and  so  bringing  his  defence  in
a  more  solemn  manner  before  the  court.  The  same
privilege  was  afterwards  extended  to  other  grounda


PARANOIAS  GRAPHE.

of  defence.  (See  the  opening  of  the  speech  of  Tso-
crat:'s  against  Calliniachus.)  Before  this  time  all
special  objections  to  the  adversary's  course  of  pro-
ceeding seem  to  have  been  called  auTLypa<pa\,  and
sometimes  i^iojjLoaiat^  because  an  oath  Avas  taken
by  the  party  who  tendered  them,  (Lj'sias,  c.
Panel.  166,  *ed.  Steph.  ;  Aristoph,  Ecdes.  1026  ;
Schol.  ad  loc.  ;  Suidas,  s.  v.  ^E^coixoaia  ;  Meier,
Att.  Proc.  pp.  644—650.)  [C.  R.  K.]

PA'RALUS  (TrdpaKos),  and  SALAMl'NIA
{aaXajjiLvia).  The  Athenians  from  very  early
times  kept  for  public  purposes  two  sacred  or  state
vessels,  the  one  of  which  was  called  Paralus  and
the  oi\\tv  Scdaminia :  the  crew  of  the  one  bore  the
name  of  'irapa\7Tai  or  ircipa\oi,  and  that  of  the
other  <TaXafilvioi.  (Phot.  s.  v.  TldpaXos  and
TTapaKoi.)  In  the  former  of  these  two  articles
Photius  erroneously  regards  the  two  names  as  be-
longing to  one  and  the  same  ship.  (Pollux,  vii.  116  ;
Hosycli.  s.  V.  HapaKiT'qs.)  The  Salarainia  was
also  called  A-qXia  or  Q^copis,  because  it  was  used  to
convey  the  ^ecvpol  to  Delos,  on  which  occasion  the
ship  was  adorned  with  garlands  by  the  priest  of
.A.pollo.  (Plat.  Phaed.  p.  58,  c.)  Both  these  ves-
sels were  quick-sailing  triremes,  and  were  used  for
a  variety  of  state  purposes  :  they  conveyed  theories,
despatches,  &c.  from  Athens,  carried  treasures
from  subject  countries  to  Athens,  fetched  state  cri-
minals from  foreign  parts  to  Athens,  and  the  like.
(Thucyd.  vi.  53,  61.)  In  battles  they  were  fre-
quently used  as  the  ships  in  which  the  admirals
sailed.  These  vessels  and  their  crew  were  always
kept  in  readiness  to  act,  in  case  of  any  necessity
arising  ;  and  the  crew,  although  they  could  not  for
the  greater  part  of  the  year  be  in  actual  service,
received  their  regular  pay  of  four  oboli  per  day  all
the  year  round.  This  is  expressly  stated  only  of
the  Paralus  (Harpocrat.  and  Phot.  s.  v.  UdpaXos).,
but  may  be  safely  said  of  the  Salaminia  also.  The
statement  of  the  scholiast  on  Aristophanes  (Av.
147  ;  comp.  Suidas,  s.».  ^aXaju-ivia  vavs\  that  the
Salaminia  was  only  used  to  convey  criminals  to
Athens,  and  the  Paralus  for  theories,  is  incorrect,
at  least  if  applied  to  the  earlier  times.  When
Athens  had  become  a  great  maritime  power,
and  when  other  ships  were  employed  for  purposes
for  which  before  either  the  Salaminia  or  the  Paralus
had  been  used,  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  these
two  vessels  were  chiefly  employed  in  matters  con-
nected with  religion,  as  theories,  and  in  extraordi-
nary cases,  such  as  when  a  state  criminal  like
Alcibiades  was  to  be  solemnly  conveyed  to  Athens.
The  names  of  the  two  ships  seem  to  point  to  a
very  early  period  of  the  history  of  Attica,  when
there  was  no  navigation  except  between  Attica
and  Salamis,  for  which  the  Salaminia  was  used,
and  around  the  coast  of  Attica,  for  which  purpose
the  Paralus  was  destined.  In  later  times  the
names  were  jetained,  although  the  destination  of
the  ships  was  principally  to  serve  the  purposes  of
religion,  whence  they  are  frequently  called  the
sacred  ships.  (Bockh,  P?M.  Econ.  of  Athens.,  p.
240,  2d  ed.  ;  Goller,  ad  Tliucyd.  iii.  33  ;  Scho-
mann,  ad  Isaeum,  p.  296.)  [L.  S.]

PARANOIAS  GRAPHE  {Trapavoias  ypacp-f}).
This  proceeding  may  be  compared  to  our  commis-
sion of  lunacy,  or  writ  de  lunatico  inquirendo.  It
was  a  suit  at  Athens  that  might  be  instituted  by  a
son  or  other  relation  against  one  who,  by  reason  of
madness  or  mental  imbecility,  had  become  inca-
pable of  managing  his  own  affairs.     If  the  cora-


PARANOMON  GRAPHE.  865

plaint  was  well  grounded,  the  court  decreed  that
the  next  heir  should  take  possession  of  the  lunatic's
property,  and  probably  also  made  some  provision  for
his  being  put  in  confinement,  or  imder  proper  care
and  guardianship.  (Suidas,  s.  v.  Uapavoia :  Xen.
Mem.  i.  2.  §  49  ;  Aristoph.  Nub.  844  ;  Aesch.  c.
Ctes.  89,  ed.  Steph.)  It  is  related  of  Sophocles,
that  having  continued  to  write  tragedies  to  an  ad-
vanced age,  and  by  reason  thereof  neglected  his
family  affairs,  he  was  brought  before  the  court  by
his  sons,  and  accused  of  lunacy  :  that  he  then  read
to  the  judges  his  Oedipus  Coloneus,  which  he  had
just  composed,  and  asked  them  if  a  man  out  of  hts
mind  could  write  such  a  poem  as  that  ;  whereupon
they  acquitted  him.  (Cic.  de  Senect.  7.)  The  story
is  told  differently  by  the  anonymous  author  of  the
life  of  Sophocles  ;  who  speaks  of  the  suit  as  taking
place  between  lophon  and  his  father,  and  seems  to
intimate  that  it  was  preferred  before  the  (ppdropes.
In  this  last  point  he  is  supported  by  the  Scholiast
on  Aristophanes,  but  it  can  hardly  be  correct  ;  a»
we  have  no  other  authority  for  supposing  that  the
(ppdropes  had  such  a  jurisdiction,  and  Pollux  (viii.
89)  expressly  says  that  the  irapavoias  ypa(p7]  came
before  the  archon  ;  to  whom  indeed  it  peculiarly
belonged,  as  being  a  matter  connected  with  family
rights  ;  and,  if  so,  we  are  to  understand  that  it
came  before  the  archon  in  the  regular  way,  as
iiyefxoov  diKaarrjpiov.  (Meier,  J  «.  Proc.  pp.  296 —
298.)  It  is  highly  probable  that  there  was  some,
foundation  for  this  anecdote  of  Sophocles.  He
might  perhaps  have  given  offence  to  his  sons  by
that  penuriousness  which  is  said  to  have  crept  upon
him  in  his  old  age  ;  and  lophon  being  a  poet,  and
lying  under  the  suspicion  of  being  assisted  by  hia
father,  might  possibly  be  induced  by  a  mean  jea-
lousy to  bring  this  charge  against  him.  (See  Aris-
toph. Ran.  78,  Pax,  697.)  The  play  of  Oed.  Col.  ap-
pears to  exhibit  the  wounded  feelings  of  the  writer.
(See  more  especially  337,  441.)  [C.  R.  K.]

PARANOMON  GRAPHE  (Trapay6ixwu  ypa-
(pv).  An  indictment  for  propounding  an  illegal,  or
rather  unconstitutional  measure  or  law.  We  have
seen  [Nomothetes]  that  any  Athenian  citizen
was  at  liberty  to  make  a  motion  in  the  popular
assembly,  to  pass  a  new  law.  or  amend  sin  old  one.
In  order  to  check  rash  and  hasty  legislation,  the
mover  of  any  law  or  decree,  though  he  succeeded
in  causing  it  to  be  passed,  was  still  amenable  lo
criminal  justice,  if  his  enactment  was  found  to  be
inconsistent  with  other  laws  that  remained  in  force,
or  with  the  public  interest.  (Demosth.  c.  Timoc.
710,  711.)  Any  person  might  institute  against
him  the  ypacp^  TrapavS/JLwv  within  a  year  from  the
passing  of  the  law.  If  he  was  convicted,  not  only
did  the  law  become  void,  but  any  punishment
might  be  inflicted  on  him,  at  the  discretion  of  the
judges  before  whom  he  was  tried  ;  for  it  was  a
TifxriTh  aywu.  A  person  thrice  so  convicted  lost
the  right  of  proposing  laws  in  future.  The  cogni-
zance of  the  cause  belonged  to  the  Thesmothetae.
(Schomann,  Anf.Jur.  Pub.  Gr.  p.  244.)  The  pro-
secutor was  compelled  to  take  an  oath,  called  by
the  same  name  as  that  taken  to  obtain  delay  in
courts  of  justice  (vtrcofMoaia),  because  it  had  the
effect  of  defying  the  operation  of  the  proposed
measure,  which  otherwise  might  have  come  into
force  immediately.  (Schnmann,  Id.  p.  224.)  Ex-
amples of  such  prosecutions  are  the  speech  of  De-
mosthenes against  Timocrates,  and  that  of  Aes-
chines  against  Ctesiphon.  They  both  corameut  on
3  K


866


PARAPRESBEIA.


the  importance  of  the  prosecution,  as  tending  to
preserve  the  existing  laws,  and  maintain  constitu-
tional liberty.  (Demosth.  c.  Tim.  74M,  749  ;  Aesch.
c,  Ctes.  54,  82,  ed.  Steph.)  Notwithstanding  this
check,  the  mania  for  legislation  appears  to  have  in-
creased so  greatly  at  Athens  in  later  times,  that
Demosthenes  (c.  Lepti?i.  485)  declares  that  vj/Tj^io"-
fMOLTWu  ouS'  oTiovv  Siacp^povcTiu  oi  vdixoi.  This
arose  from  the  relaxation  of  that  precautionary  law
of  Solon,  which  required  every  measure  to  be  ap-
proved by  the  vo/xoderai,  before  it  could  pass  into
law.  (NoMOTHETES,  and  Schoraann,  Id.  p.  229.)
It  is  obvious  that,  while  the  people  in  assembly
had  the  power  of  making  decrees  which  could  re-
main in  force  for  a  year,  if  they  wished  to  evade
the  law  of  Solon,  all  they  had  to  do  was  to  renew
their  decree  from  year  to  year,  and  thus  in  practice
the  \l/7}(pi(T/j.a  became  vS/xos.

If  the  year  had  elapsed,  the  propounder  of  the
law  could  not  be  punished,  though  the  law  itself
might  be  repealed  m  the  ordinary  way  by  the  in-
stitution of  proceedings  before  the  vofioO^rai,  before
whom  it  was  defended  by  the  five  avvdiKoi.  The
speech  against  Leptines  was  made  in  a  proceeding
against  the  law  itself,  and  not  against  the  mover.
As  the  author  of  the  second  argument  says,  TrapeA-
Q6vTos  Tov  xP'^'^ov,  eV  ^  vireuOuvos  ^u  Kplcrei  Kal
Tijjicopic^  ypdcpwv  Tis  u6iJ.ov,  icpaivero  AeTrrli/Tjs
OLKivSvyos.  bdev  nphs  avrhy,  aW'  ov  KaT  avrov
6  \6yos.  (Hermann,  Pol.  Ant.  §  132.)  [C.  R.  K.]
PARANYMPHUS  (irapduvfxcpos).  [Matri-
MONiUM,  p.  737,  a.]
PARAPETASMA.  [Velum.]
PARAPHERNA.  [Dos.]
PARAPRESBEIA  (Trapairpeo-geta),  Bignifies
any  corrupt  conduct,  misfeasance,  or  neglect  of
duty  on  the  part  of  an  ambassador  ;  for  which  he
was  liable  to  be  called  to  account  and  prosecuted
on  his  return  home.  (Demosth,  c.  Mid.  515,  de
Fj^s.  Leg.  342.)  Ambassadors  were  usually  elected
by  the  people  in  assembly  ;  they  either  had  in-
structions given  to  them,  or  not ;  in  the  latter  case
they  were  called  avTOKparopes^  envoys  with  full
powers,  or  plenipotentiary.  (Thucyd.  v.  45  ;  Aesch.
c.  Ctes.  62,  ed.  Steph.)  To  act  contrary  to  their
instructions  (Trapa  rh  ypifcpia'fjia  irpecrSevftv)  was  a
high  misdemeanour.  (Demosth.  de  Fals.  Leg.  346.)
On  their  return  home  they  were  required  imme-
diately to  make  a  report  of  their  proceedings
(ttTToyytWeij'  t)]v  TrpeaSelav)  first  to  the  Senate  of
Five  Hundred,  and  afterwards  to  the  people  in
assembly.  (Aesch.  de  Fals.  Leg.  30,  ed.  Steph.  ;
Aristoph,  Ack  61  ;  Schbmann,  Ant.  jur.  pub.  Gr.
p.  234.)  This  done,  they  weve  functi  officio  ;  but
still,  like  all  other  persons  who  had  held  an  office
of  trust,  they  were  liable  to  render  an  account
(fvdvvas)  of  the  manner  in  which  they  had  dis-
charged their  duty.  (Demosth.  de  Fals.  Leg.  367,
406.)  The  persons  to  whom  such  account  was  to
be  rendered  were  the  \oyt(TTal,  and  the  officers
associated  with  them,  called  eijdvvm.  A  pecuniary
account  was  only  rendered  in  cases  where  money
had  passed  through  the  hands  of  the  party  ;  in
other  cases,  after  stating  that  he  had  neither  spent
nor  received  any  of  the  public  money,  the  accounting
party  was  discharged,  unless  there  was  reason  for
thinking  that  he  deserved  to  be  proceeded  against
for  misconduct.  The  Koyiarai  themselves  had
power  to  summon  the  party  at  once  to  appear  as  a
criminal,  and  undergo  the  avaKpiais  in  their  office
(^Ao^KTT^pjov),  upon  which  they  would  direct  the


FA  R  AS  AN  G  A.

(Tw-qyopoi  to  prosecute  ;  and  this  probably  was  the
ordinary  course  in  case  of  any  pecuniary  malver-
sation. Accusations,  however,  of  a  more  general
nature  were  commonly  preferred  by  individuals,
giving  information  to  the  Aoyjo-rai,  who,  for  the
purpose  of  giving  any  citizen  an  opportunity  of  so
doing,  caused  their  Ki]pv^  to  make  proclamation  in
public  assembly,  that  such  a  person  was  about  to
render  his  account,  and  to  ask  if  any  one  intended
to  accuse  him.  If  an  accuser  appeared,  his  charge
would  be  reduced  to  the  form  of  a  ypa(p%  and
the  prosecution  would  be  conducted  in  the  usual
way,  the  Ao7t(rTot  being  the  superintending  magis-
trates. (Pollux,  viii.  40,  45  ;  Schomann,  Id.  p.
240;  Meier, ^«.Froc. pp. 2 14 — 224.)  Magistrates,
who  were  annually  elected,  rendered  their  accounts
at  the  end  of  the  official  year  ;  but  ambassadors,
who  were  extraordinary  functionaries,  had  no  time
limited  for  this  purpose.  Aeschines  delayed  giving
an  account  of  his  embassy  to  Philip  for  three  years.
(Demosth.  de  Fals.  Leg.  374  ;  Thirl  wall,  Gr.  Hist.
vol,  vi.  p.  26.)  We  can  hardly  suppose,  however
(as  Thirlwall  states),  that  the  time  of  rendering
the  account  was  optional  with  the  ambassador  him-
self ;  since,  not  to  mention  the  power  of  the  Xoyicr-
rai^  it  was  open  to  any  man  to  move  for  a  special
decree  of  the  people,  that  the  party  should  be  called
to  account  immediately.  The  ypa(p^  TrapairpeaSeias
was  a  t/jU7Jt5s  aydv  (MeieT^Att.  Proc.  p.  193)  ;  and
as  it  might  comprise  charges  of  the  most  serious
kind,  such  as  treachery  and  treason  against  the
state,  the  defendant  might  have  to  apprehend  the
heaviest  punishment.  Aeschines  {de  Fals.  Leg.  28,
52)  reminds  the  dicasts  of  the  great  peril  to  which
he  is  exposed,  and  makes  a  merit  of  submitting  to
his  trial  without  fear.  Besides  the  ypacpij,  an
etVaTyeAta  might  be  brought  against  an  ambassador;
upon  which  the  accused  would  be  committed  to
prison,  or  compelled  to  give  bail  for  his  appearance.
This  course  was  taken  by  Hyperides  against  Philo-
crates,  who  avoided  his  trial  by  voluntary  exile.
(Aeschin.  c.  Ctes.  65,  ed.  Steph.)  [C.  R.  K.]

PARASANGA  (6  -irapaa-dyyrjs),  a  Persian
measure  of  length,  frequently  mentioned  by  the
Greek  writers.  It  is  still  used  by  the  Persians,
who  call  it  /ersejtg,  which  has  been  changed  in
Arabic  into /arsakh.

According  to  Herodotus  (ii.  6,  v.  53,  vi.  42)  the
parasang  was  the  half  of  the  Egyptian  schoenus,
and  was  equal  to  30  Greek  stadia.  Suidas
(*.  r.)  and  Hesychius  (s.  v.)  assign  it  the  same
length  ;  and  Xenophon  must  also  have  calculated
it  at  the  same,  as  he  says  (Anab.  ii,  2,  §  6)  that
16,050  stadia  are  equal  to  535  parasangs  (16,050
4.535=30.)  Agathias  (ii.  21),  however,  who
quotes  the  testimony  of  Herodotus  and  Xenophon
to  the  parasang  being  30  stadia,  says  that  in  his
time  the  Iberi  and  Persians  made  it  only  21  stadia.
Strabo  (xi.  p.  5 1 8)  also  states,  that  some  writers
reckoned  it  at  60,  others  at  40,  and  others  at  30
stadia  ;  and  Pliny  (H.  N.  vi.  26.  s.  30)  informs
us,  that  the  Persians  themselves  assigned  diffijrent
lengths  to  it.  Modern  English  travellers  estimate
it  variously  at  from  3^  to  4  English  miles,  which
nearly  agrees  with  the  calculation  of  Herodotus.
These  variations  may  probably  be  accounted  for
by  the  fact,  to  which  attention  has  been  called
under  Mensura,  that  itinerary  distances  were
originally  indefinite,  and  therefore  that  the  values
of  the  parasang,  at  least  those  given  by  the  earlier
Greek  writers,  were  only  computed  values.     This


PARASITI.

view  is  confinned  by  the  opinion  of  the  best
Orientiil  scholars  respecting  the  etymology  of  the
word.  (Comp.  Ukert,  Geoyr.  d.  Griech.  u.  Rom.
vol.  i.  pt.  2,  p.  77,  and  iiber  die  Art  d.  Gr.  u.  R.
die  Entfernungen  zu  hestimnien,)  Its  true  etymo-
logy is  doubtful.  Rodiger  {in  Ersch  und  Gruber''s
Encyclop'ddie,  s.  v.  Fa7-as.)  supposes  the  latter  part
of  the  word  to  be  the  same  as  the  Persian  seng,  "•  a
stone,"  and  the  former  part  to  be  connected  with  the
Sanskrit  para, "  end,"  and  thinks  that  it  may  have
derived  its  name  from  the  stones  placed  at  the  end
of  certain  distances  on  the  public  roads  of  Persia.
PARASE'MON  (irapda-T^iJLov).  [Insigne.]
PARASI'TI  (TraparrtTOi)  properly  denotes  per-
sons who  dine  with  others.  In  the  early  history
of  Greece  the  word  had  a  very  different  meaning
from  that  in  which  it  was  used  in  later  times.  To
Se  Tou  Trapaffirov  ovoixxx.  irdXai  fxkv  ?iu  aefivhv  Kol
Up6v,  says  Athenaeus  (vi.  p.  234),  and  he  proves
from  A'arious  decrees  {•^t](pi(xp.aTa)  and  other  autho-
rities that  anciently  the  name  irapdcriTos  was  given
to  distinguished  persons,  who  were  appointed  as
assistants  to  certain  priests  and  to  the  highest  ma-
gistrates. As  regards  the  priestly  and  civil  parasites,
the  accounts  of  their  office  are  so  obscure  that  we  are
scarcely  able  to  form  any  definite  notion  of  it.  An
ancient  law  (Athen.  /.  c.)  ordained  that  each  of  the
priestly  parasites  should  select  from  the  fiovKoKia
the  sixth  part  of  a  medimnus  of  barley,  and  supply
with  it  the  Athenians  who  were  present  in  the
temple,  according  to  the  custom  of  their  fathers  ;
and  this  sixth  of  a  medimnus  was  to  be  given  by
the  parasites  of  Acharnae.  The  meaning  of  this
very  obscure  law  is  discussed  by  Preller.  {Polemcnis
Fragm.  p.  115,  &c.)  Thus  much,  however,  is
clear,  that  the  parasites  were  elected  in  the  demos
of  Attica  from  among  the  most  distinguished  and
most  ancient  families.  We  find  their  number  to
have  been  twelve,  so  that  it  did  not  coincide  with
that  of  the  demes.  This  may  be  accounted  for  by
supposing  that  in  one  demos  two  or  more  gods  were
worshipped,  whose  service  required  a  parasite  ;  while
in  anotbcr  there  was  no  such  divinity.  The  gods
in  whose  service  parasites  are  mentioned,  are  He-
racles, Apollo,  the  Anaces,  and  Athena  of  Pallene.
Their  services  appear  to  have  been  rewarded  with
a  third  of  the  victims  sacrificed  to  their  respective
gods.  Such  officers  existed  down  to  a  late  period
of  Greek  history,  for  Clcarchus,  a  disciple  of  Ari-
stotle, said  that  parasites  in  his  own  days  con-
tinued to  be  appointed  in  most  Grecian  states  to
the  most  distinguished  magistrates.  (Athen.  vi.  p.
235.)  These,  however,  must  have  been  different
from  the  priestly  parasites.  Solon  in  his  legislation
called  the  act  of  giving  public  meals  to  certain
magistrates  and  foreign  ambassadors  in  the  pry-
taneum,  ■n-apaaire'iu  (Plut.  Sol.  24),  and  it  may  be
that  the  parasites  were  connected  with  this  insti-
tution. (Compare  Pollux,  vi,  c.  7.)

The  class  of  persons  whom  we  call  parasites  was
very  numerous  in  ancient  Greece,  and  appears  to
have  existed  from  early  times,  though  they  were
not  designated  by  this  name.  The  comedies  of
Aristophanes  contain  various  allusions  to  them,  and
Philippus,  who  is  introduced  in  the  Symposium  of
Xenophon,  as  well  as  a  person  described  in  some
verses  of  Epicharmus  preserved  in  Athenaeus,  are
perfect  specimens  of  parasites.  But  the  first  writer
who  designated  these  persons  by  the  name  of
irapdariTOL  was  Alexis  in  one  of  his  comedies.
(Athen.  vi.  p.  235.)     In  the  so  called  middle  and


PAREDKI.


867


new  Attic  comedy,  and  in  their  Roman  imitations,
the  parasites  are  standing  characters,  and  although
they  are  described  in  very  strong  colours  in  these
comedies,  yet  the  description  does  not  seem  to  be
much  exaggerated,  if  we  may  judge  from  other  ac-
counts of  real  parasites.  We  shall  not  therefore
be  much  mistaken  in  borrowing  our  description  of
parasites  chiefly  from  these  comedies.

The  characteristic  features  common  to  all  para-
sites are  importunity,  love  of  sensual  pleasures,  and
above  all  the  desire  of  getting  a  good  dinner  with-
out paying  for  it.  According  to  the  various  means
they  employed  to  obtain  this  object,  they  may  be
divided  into  three  classes.  The  first  are  the
yeAu,TOTroioi  or  jesters  ;  who,  in  order  to  get  some
invitation,  not  only  tried  to  amuse  persons  with
their  jokes,  but  even  exposed  their  own  person  to
ridicule,  and  would  bear  all  kinds  of  insult  and
abuse  if  they  could  only  hope  to  gain  the  desired
object.  Among  these  we  may  class  Philippus  in
the  Symposium  of  Xenophon,  Ergastilus  in  the  Cap-
tivi,  and  Gelasimus  in  the  Stichus  of  Plautua.  Thi»
second  class  are  the  K6\aKcs  or  flatterers  {assenta-
tores).,  who,  by  praising  and  admiring  vain  persons,
endeavoured  to  obtain  an  invitation  to  their  house.
Gnatho  in  the  Eunuchus  of  Terence,  and  the  Arto-
trogus  in  the  Miles  Gloriosus  of  Plautus,  are  ad-
mirable delineations  of  sucli  characters.  The  third
class  are  the  SiepaircvTiKoi  or  the  officious,  who  by  a
variety  of  services  even  of  the  lowest  and  most  de-
grading description  endeavoured  to  acquire  claims
to  invitations.  (Plut,  de  AduL23,  de  Educat.  17.)
Characters  of  this  class  are  the  parasites  in  the
Asinaria  and  Menaechmi  of  Plautus,  and  more
especially  the  Curculio.ind  Saturio  in  the  Persae  of
Plautus,  and  the  Phormio  of  Terence.  From  the
various  statements  in  comedies  and  the  treatise  of
Plutarch,  De  Adulaioris  et  Amici  Discrimine,  we
see  that  parasites  always  tried  to  discover  where  a
good  dinner  was  to  be  had,  and  for  this  purpose
they  lounged  about  in  the  market,  the  palaestrae,
the  baths,  and  other  public  places  of  resort.  After
they  had  fixed  upon  a  person,  who  was  in  most
cases  probably  an  inexperienced  young  man,  they
used  every  possible  means  to  induce  him  to  invite
them.  No  humiliation  and  no  abuse  could  deter
them  from  pursuing  their  plans.  Some  examples
of  the  most  disgusting  humiliations  which  parasites
endured,  and  even  rejoiced  in,  are  mentioned  by
Athenaeus  (vi.  p.  249)  and  Plutarch.  (De  Occult,
viv.  1,  Sympos.  vii.  6  ;  compare  Diog.  Laert.  ii,
67.)  During  the  time  of  the  Roman  emperors  a
parasite  seems  to  have  been  a  constant  guest  at  the
tables  of  the  wealthy.  (Lucian,  de  Parasit.  58.)

(Compare  Becker,  Charikles.,  vol.  i.  p.  490;  Le
Beau,  in  the  Histoire  de  VAca/I.  des  Inscript.  vol.
xxxi.  p,  51,  &c. ;  M,  H.  E.  Meyer,  in  Ersch  und
Gruher's  Ena/clopddie,  s.  v.  Parasiien.)        [L.  S.]

PARA8TADES.     [Antae.]

PARA 'STASIS  (Trapd(TTa(ris),  a  fee  of  one
drachm  paid  to  an  arbitrator  by  the  plaintiff,  on
bringing  his  cause  before  him  ;  and  by  the  de-
fendant, on  putting  in  his  ansAver.  The  same
name  was  given  to  the  fee  (perhaps  a  drachm)
paid  by  the  prosecutor  in  most  public  causes.
(Harpocr.  s.  v.  Uapda-Taats  ;  Meier,  Att.  Proc.
pp.  614,  615.)  [Compare  Diaetetae,  p.
397,  b.]  [C.  R.  K.J

PARASTATAE.     [Hendeca.]

PARAZO'NIUM.     [Zona.]

PAREDRI    (irdpiSpoi).      Each   of  the   three
3k  2


868


PARIES.


superior  archons  was  at  liberty  to  have  two  asses-
sors (irdpthpoi.)  chosen  by  himself,  to  assist  him
by  advice  and  otherwise  in  the  performance  of  his
various  duties.  The  assessor,  like  the  magistrate
himself,  had  to  undergo  a  ^oKifxaaia  in  the  Senate
of  Five  Hundred  and  before  a  judicial  tribunal,
before  he  could  be  permitted  to  enter  upon  his
labours.  He  was  also  to  render  an  account  (iuOvvr))
at  the  end  of  the  year.  The  office  is  called  an
°-PX^  '^J  Demosthenes  (c.  Neaer.  1369).  The
duties  of  the  archon,  magisterial  and  judicial,  were
so  numerous,  that  one  of  the  principal  objects  of
having  assessors  must  have  been  to  enable  them
to  get  through  their  business.  We  find  the  -rrd-
peSpo9  assisting  the  archon  at  the  \v^ls  Siktjs.
(Demosth.  c.  Theoc.  1332.)  He  had  authority  to
keep  order  at  public  festivals  and  theatres,  and  to
impose  a  fine  on  the  disorderly.  (Demosth.  c.  Mid.
572.)  As  the  archons  were  chosen  by  lot  (kAtj-
ptarol),  and  might  be  persons  of  inferior  capacity,
and  not  very  well  fitted  for  their  station,  it  might
often  be  useful,  or  even  necessary  for  them,  to  pro-
cure the  assistance  of  clever  men  of  business.
(Demosth.  c.  Neaer.  1372.)  And  perhaps  it  was
intended  that  the  irdpeSpoi  should  not  only  as-
sist, but  in  some  measure  check  and  control  the
power  of  their  principals.  They  are  spoken  of
as  being  fioi-jOol,  (rvjxSovKoi  koX  ^v\aK€s.  Demo-
sthenes accuses  Stephanus  of  buying  his  place  of
the  "Apxiiou  ^aaiXeus  (c.  Neaer.  1369).  It  was
usual  to  choose  relations  and  friends  to  be  asses-
sors ;  but  they  might  at  any  time  be  dismissed,  at
least  for  good  cause.  (Demosth.  c.  Neaer.  1373.)
The  Thesmothetae,  though  they  had  no  regular
irdpeSpoi.,  used  to  have  counsellors  {(rvfjL§ov\oi),
who  answered  the  same  purpose.  (Demosth.  c.  Theoc.
1330  ;  Schomann,  Ant.  Jur.  Pub.  Gr.  p.  245  ;  Meier,
Att.  Proc.  pp.  57 — 59.)  The  office  of  TrapeSpos  was
called  TrapeSpia.,  and  to  exercise  it  irapedpeveiu.

From  the  irdpedpoi  of  the  archons,  we  must  dis-
tinguish those  who  assisted  the  etidvuoi  in  examin-
ing and  auditing  magistrates'  accounts.  The  efjdvvoi
were  a  board  of  ten,  and  each  of  them  chose  two
assessors-  ( Schomann,  Ant.  Jur.  Pub.  Gr.  p.  240  ;
Meier,  Atl.  Proc.  p.  102.)  [Euthyne.]    [C.R.K.]

PAREISGRAPHE  (irapsiaypacpi]),  signifies  a
fraudulent  enrolment  in  the  register  of  citizens.
For  this  an  indictment  lay  at  Athens  called  ^^vlas
ypa<p^  :  and,  besides,  the  Sij^orat  might  by  their
Siayp-qcpKris  eject  any  person  who  was  illegally  en-
rolled among  them.  Prom  their  decision  there
might  be  an  appeal  to  a  court  of  dicasts  ;  of  v/hich
the  speech  of  Demosthenes  against  Eubulides
furnishes  an  example.  If  the  dicasts  confirmed
the  decision  of  the  Sjj/*<^Tai,  the  appellant  party
was  sold  for  a  slave.  Spurious  citizens  are  some-
times called  TrapeyypaTTTOi^  Trapeyyeypaixjxivoi.
(Aesch.  de  Fals.  Leg.  38,  51,  ed.  Steph.)  The  ex-
pression Trapsicrypacprjs  ypa<p^  is  not  Attic.  (Scho-
mann, Ant.  Jur.  Pub.Gr.  p.  206  ;  Meier,  J tt, Proc.
pp.  347—349.)  [C.  R.  K.]

PARENTA'LIA.     [Funus,  p.  562,  b.]

PA'RIES(Torxos),the  wall  of  a  house,  in  con-
tradistinction to  MuRUS  (T6iX0j),  the  wall  of  a
city,  and  maceries  (Teixiov),  a  small  enclosure,  such
as  a  court-yard  ;  sometimes  rdxiop  is  used  for  the
wall  of  a  house.  (Sjc  Liddell  and  Scott.)  Among
the  numerous  methods  employed  by  the  ancients  in
constructing  walls  we  find  mention  of  the  follow-
ing :  —

I.  The  paries  cratitiuSf  i.e.  the  wattled  or  the


PARIES.

lath-and-plaster  wall,  made  of  canes  or  hurdles
[Crates],  covered  with  clay.  (Plin.  //.  N.  xxxv.
14.  s.  48  ;  Festus,  s.v.  Solea.)  These  were  used
in  the  original  city  of  Rome  to  form  entire  houses
(Ovid.  Fast.  iii.  183,  vi.  261  ;  Vitruv.  ii.  1)  ;  after-
wards they  were  coated  with  mortar  instead  of  clay,  _
and  introduced  like  our  lath-and-plaster  walls  in
the  interior  of  houses.

II.  Vitruvius  (Z.  c.)  mentions  as  the  next  step,
the  practice,  common  in  his  time  among  the  Gauls,
and  continued  to  our  own  in  Devonshire,  of  drying
square  lumps  of  claj^  and  building  them  into  walls,
which  were  strengthened  by  means  of  horizontal
bond-timbers  {jvxjamenta)  laid  at  intervals,  and
which  were  then  covered  with  thatch.

III.  The  paries  /brmaceus,  i.e.  the  yjz'se  wall,
made  of  rammed  earth.  [Forma.]

IV.  In  districts  abounding  with  wood,  log-houses
were  common,  constructed,  like  those  of  the  Sibe-
rians and  of  the  modem  Americans  in  the  back
settlements,  of  the  trunks  of  trees,  which,  having
been  more  or  less  squared,  were  then  laid  upon
one  another  in  an  horizontal  position,  and  had  their
interstices  filled  with  chips  (schidiis).,  moss,  and
cla}'.  After  this  manner  the  Colchians  erected
houses  several  stories  high.  (Vitruv.  I.  c;  com-
pare Herod,  iv.  108  ;  Vitruv.  ii.  9.)

V.  The  paries  lateritius.,  i.  e.  the  brick  wall.
[Later.]  Among  the  Romans  the  ordinary  thick-
ness of  an  outside  wall  was  18  inches  (sesguipes)^
being  the  length  of  the  common  or  Lydian  brick  ;
but,  if  the  building  was  more  than  one  story  high,
the  walls  at  Ihe  bottom  were  either  two  or  three
bricks  thick  [diplinthii  aut  triplinthii)  according  to
circumstances.  The  Egyptians  sometimes  exhibited
a  chequered  pattern,  and  perhaps  other  devices,
upon  the  walls  of  their  houses  by  the  alternation
of  white  and  black  bricks.  (Ath.  v.  p.  208,  c.)
The  Romans,  probably  in  imitation  of  the  Etru-
rians, often  cased  the  highest  part  of  a  brick  wall
with  a  range  of  terra  cottas  {strudura  and  lorica
iestacea,  Vitruv,  ii.  8  ;  Pal  lad.  de  Re  Rust.  i.  II),
eighteen  inches  high,  with  projecting  cornices,  and
spouts  for  discharging  the  water  from  the  roof.
[Antefixa.]

VI.  The  reticidata  strudura  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvj.
22.  s.  51),  i.  e.  the  reticulated,  or  resembling  net-
work. This  structure  consists  in  placing  square  or
lozenge -shaped  stones  side  by  side  upon  their
edges,  the  stones  being  of  small  dimensions  and
cemented  by  mortar  {materia  ex  calce  et  arena).  In
many  cases  the  mortar  has  proved  more  durable
than  the  stone,  especially  where  volcanic  tufa  is
the  material  employed,  as  at  Baiae  in  the  Bay  of
Naples,  and  in  the  villa  of  Hadrian  near  Tivoli.
This  kind  of  building  is  very  common  in  the  an-
cient edifices  of  Italy.  Vitruvius  says  (ii.  8),  that
it  was  universally  adopted  in  his  time.  Walls
thus  constructed  were  considered  more  pleasing  to
the  eye,  but  less  secure  than  those  in  which  the
stones  lay  upon  their  flat  surfaces.  The  front  of
the  wall  was  the  only  part  in  which  the  structure
was  regular,  or  the  stones  cut  into  a  certain  form,
the  interior  being  rubble-work  or  concrete  {far-
tura)^  i.  e.  fragments  and  chippings  of  stone  (cae-
menta,  X^^^O  imbedded  in  mortar.  Only  part  of
the  wall  was  reticulated :  to  give  it  firmness  and
durability  the  sides  and  base  were  built  of  brick  or
of  squared  stones,  and  horizontal  courses  of  bricks,
were  laid  at  intervals,  extending  through  the
length  and  thickness  of  the  wall.     These  circum-


PARIES.

stances  are  well  exemplified  in  the  annexed  wood-
cut, which  is  copied  from  the  drawing  of  a  wall  at
Pompeii,  executed  on  the  spot  by  Mr.  Mocatta.


PARIES.


86d


VII.  The  structura  antiqua  or  incerta,  i.  e.  the
wall  of  irregular  masonrj^  built  of  stones,  which
were  not  squared  or  cut  into  any  exact  form.  The
necessarj'-  consequence  of  this  method  of  construc-
tion was,  that  a  great  part  of  the  wall  consisted  of
mortar  and  rubble-work,   (Vitruv.  I.  c.)

VIII.  The  emplecton,  i.  e.  the  complicated  wall,
consisting  in  fact  of  three  walls  joined  together.
Each  side  presented  regular  masonry  or  brickwork  ;
but  the  interior  was  filled  with  rubble  {fartura).
To  bind  together  the  two  outside  walls,  and  thus
render  the  whole  firm  and  durable,  large  stones  or
courses  of  brickwork  {coagmenta)  were  placed  at
intervals,  extending  through  the  whole  thickness
of  the  wall,  as  was  done  also  in  the  Structura  Re-
ticulata. Walls  of  this  description  are  not  uncom-
mon, especially  in  buildings  of  considerable  size.

IX.  The  paries  e  lapide  quadraio,  i.  e.  the  ashlar
wall,  consisting  entirely  of  stones  cut  and  squared
by  the  chisel.  [Dolabra.]  This  was  the  most
perfect  kind  of  wall,  especially  when  built  of  mar-
ble. The  construction  of  such  walls  was  carried  to
the  highest  perfection  by  the  architects  of  Greece  ;
the  temples  of  Athens,  Corinth,  and  many  cities  of
Asia  Minor  still  attesting  in  their  ruins  the  ex-
treme skill  bestowed  upon  the  erection  of  walls.
Considerable  excellence  in  this  art  must  have  been
attained  by  the  Greeks  even  as  early  as  the  age  of
Homer,  who  derives  one  of  his  similes  from  the
*'  nicely  fitted  stones  "  of  the  wall  of  a  house.  {II.
xvi.  212.)  But  probably  in  this  the  Greeks  only
copied  the  Asiatics  ;  for  Xenophon  came  to  a  de-
serted city  in  Mesopotamia,  the  brick  walls  of
which  were  capped  by  a  parapet  of  "  polished  shell
marble."  {Anab.  iii.  4.  §  10.)  Besides  conferring
the  highest  degree  of  beauty  and  solidity,  another
important  recommendation  of  ashlar  walls  was,
that  they  were  the  most  secure  against  fire,  an
advantage,  to  which  St.  Paul  alludes,  when  he
contrasts  the  stones,  valuable  both  for  material  and


for  workmanship  (Xidovs  rifiiovs),  and  the  gold
and  silver,  which  were  exhibited  in  the  walls  of
such  a  temple  as  that  just  mentioned,  with  the
logs  of  wood,  the  thatch,  the  straw  and  cane,  em-
ployed in  building  walls  of  the  four  first  kinds.
(1  Cor.  iii.  10—15.)  Vitruvius  also  strongly  ob-
jects to  the  paries  cratitius  on  account  of  its  great
combustibility  (ii.  8.  ad  Jin.).  Respecting  walls  of
this  kind  see  further  under  Murus.

Cicero,  in  a  single  passage  of  his  Topica  (§  4),
uses  four  epithets  which  were  applied  to  walls.  He
opposes  the  paries  solidus  to  the  Jbrnicatus,  and
the  communis  to  the  diredus.  The  passage  at  the
same  time  shows  that  the  Romans  inserted  arches
[Fornix]  into  their  "common"  or  party  walls.
The  annexed  woodcut,  representing  a  portion  of


the  supposed  Thermae  at  Treves  (Wyttenbach's
Guide,  p.  60),  exemplifies  the  frequent  occurrence
of  arches  in  all  Roman  buildings,  not  only  when
they  were  intended  for  windows  or  doorways,  but
also  when  they  could  serve  no  other  use  than  to
strengthen  the  wall.  In  this  "  paries  fomicatus  "
each  arch  is  a  combination  of  two  or  more  concen-
tric arches,  all  built  of  brick.  This  specimen  also
shows  the  alternation  of  courses  of  brick  and  stonej
which  is  a  common  characteristic  of  Roman  ma-
sonry. The  "  jDanVs  solidus,''''  i.  e.  the  wall  without
openings  for  windows  or  doorways,  was  also  called
"  a  blind  wall  "  (Virg.  Aen.  v.  589)  ;  and  the
paries  communis  (Ovid.  Met.  iv.  QQ  ;  Koivhs  Totxos,
Thucyd.  ii.  3),  which  was  the  boundary  between
two  tenements  and  common  to  them  both,  was
called  intergerinus,  al.  intergerivus  (Festus,  s.  v.;
Plin.  H.N.  XXXV.  14.  s.  49),  and  in  Greek  p-^ad-
Tojxos  (Athen.  vii.  p,  281,d),  oriueo-Jroixov.  {Eph.
ii.  14.)  The  walls,  built  at  right  angles  to  the
party-wall  for  the .  convenience  of  the  respective
families,  were  the  parietes  directi.

Walls  were  adorned,  especially  in  the  interior  of
buildings,  in  a  great  variety  of  ways.  Their  plane
surface  was  broken  by  panels.  [Abacus,]  How-
ever coarse  and  rough  their  construction  might  be,
every  unevenness  was  removed  by  a  coating,  two
or  three  inches  thick,  of  mortar  or  of  plaster  with
rough- cast,  consisting  of  sand  together  with  stone,
brick,  and  marble,  broken  and  ground  to  various
degrees  of  fineness.  (Vitruv.  vii.  3  ;  Acts,  xxiii.
3.)  Gypsum  also,  in  the  state  which  we  call
plaster  of  Paris,  was  much  used  in  the  more
3k  3


870


PARMA.


splendid  edifices,  and  was  decorated  with  an  end-
less variety  of  tasteful  devices  in  bas-relief.  Of
these  ornaments,  wrought  in  stucco  (opus  albarium),
specimens  remain  in  the  "  Baths  of  Titus"  at  Rome.
When  the  plasterer  {tector,  Kovi6.rr\s)  had  finished
his  work  {trullissatio^  i.  e.  trowelling  ;  opus  tecto-
rium)^  in  all  of  which  he  was  directed  by  the  use
of  the  square  [Norma],  the  rule,  and  the  line  and
plummet  [Perpendiculum],  and  in  which  he
aimed  at  producing  a  surface  not  only  smooth  and
shining,  but  as  little  as  possible  liable  to  crack  or
decay  (Vitruv.  vii.  3),  he  was  often  succeeded  by
the  painter  in  fresco  (udo  tectorio,  Vitruv.  I.  c).  In
many  cases  the  plaster  or  stucco  was  left  without
any  additional  ornament ;  and  its  whiteness  and
freshness  were  occasionally  restored  by  washing  it
with  certain  fine  calcareous  or  aluminous  earths
dissolved  in  milk  (panietomum,  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.
0".  s.  18  ;  terra  Selinusia,  16.  s.  .^6).  A  painted
wall  was  commonly  divided  by  the  artist  into
rectangular  compartments,  which  he  filled  accord-
ing to  his  taste  and  fancy  with  an  endless  variety
of  landscapes,  buildings,  gardens,  animals,  &c.
(Vitruv.  vii.  .5.)

Another  method  of  decorating  walls  was  by  en-
crusting them  with  slabs  of  marble  (crustae).  The
blocks,  designed  for  this  purpose,  were  cut  into
thin  slabs  by  the  aid  of  saw-mills,  [Mola.]  Vari-
ous kinds  of  sand  were  used  in  the  operation,  ac-
cording to  the  hardness  of  the  stone  ;  emery  {naxia^
Plin.  //.  N.  xxxvi.  6.  s.  9)  being  used  for  the
hardest.  This  art  was  of  high  antiquity,  and  pro-
bably Oriental  in  its  origin.  The  brick  walls  of
the  Mausoleum  at  Halicarnassus,  built  as  early  as
355  B.  c,  were  covered  with  slabs  of  Proconnesian
marble  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvi.  6)  ;  and  this  is  the
most  ancient  example  upon  record.  In  the  time
of  Pliny  {H.  N.  xxxv.  1)  slabs  of  a  uniform  colour
were  sometimes  inlaid  with  variously  coloured  ma-
terials in  such  a  way  as  to  represent  animals  and
other  objects.  In  short  the  beautiful  invention
now  called  Florentine  Mosaic  was  then  in  use  for
the  decoration  of  the  walls  of  apartments.  [Em-
BLEMA.]  The  common  kind  of  Mosaic  was  also
sometimes  used  in  walls  as  well  as  in  floors  and
ceilings.  The  greatest  refinement  was  the  attempt
to  produce  the  effect  of  mirrors,  which  was  done
by  inserting  into  the  wall  pieces  of  black  glass
manufactured  in  imitation  of  obsidian.  (Plin.  H.  N.
xxxvi.  26.  s.  Q1.)  [DoMUS  p.  431  ;  Pictura,
§  XV.]  [J.Y.]

PARILI'LIA.     [Palilia.]

PARMA,  dim.  PARMULA  (Hor.  Carm.  ii.
7.  10),  a  round  shield,  three  feet  in  diameter,
carried  by  the  velites  in  the  Roman  army.  Though
small,  compared  with  the  Clipeus,  it  was  so
strongly  made  as  to  be  a  very  effectual  protection.
(Polyb.  vi.  20.)  This  was  probably  owing  to  the
use  of  iron  in  its  frame- work.  In  the  Pyrrhic
dance  it  was  raised  above  the  head  and  struck
with  a  sword  so  as  to  emit  a  loud  ringing  noise.
(Claud,  de  VL  Cons.  Honor.  628.)  The  parma  was
also  worn  by  the  Equites  ( Sallust,  Frc^. //is^.
IV.)  ;  and  for  the  sake  of  state  and  fashion  it  was
sometimes  adorned  with  precious  stones.  (Propert.
iv.  2.  21.)

We  find  the  term  parma  often  applied  to  the
target  [Cktra],  which  was  also  a  small  round
shield,  and  therefore  very  similar  to  the  parma.
(Propert.  iv.  2.  40  ;  Mela,  i.  5,  §  1  ;  Virg.  Aen.
X.  817.)     Virgil,  in  like  manner,  applies  the  term


PAROPSIS.

to  the  clipeus  of  the  Palladium,  because,  the  statue
being  small,  the  shield  was  small  in  proportion.
{Aen.  ii.  175.)

The  annexed  woodcut  represents  a  votive  parma,


embossed  ((r(pvp'f]\aTov)  [Malleus]  and  gilt,  re-
presenting on  its  border,  as  is  supposed,  the  taking
of  Rome  by  the  Gauls  under  Brennus  and  its  re-
covery by  Camillus.  It  belonged  formerly  to  the
Woodward ian  Museum,  and  is  supposed  by  anti-
quaries to  have  been  made  in  the  time  of  Claudius
or  Nero.  The  boss  {umbo)  is  a  grotesque  face,
surrounded  with  ram's  honis,  foliage,  and  a  twisted
beard.  (Dodwell,  de  Parma  Woodtvardiana^  Oxon.
1713.)  Compare  Bernd,  Das  Wappemvesen  der
Griechen  und  Romer^  Bonn,  1841.  [J.  Y.]

PA'ROCHI,  were  certain  people  who  were
paid  by  the  state  to  supply  th^  Roman  magistrates,
ambassadors,  and  other  official  persons,  when  they
were  travelling,  with  those  necessaries  which  they
could  not  conveniently  carry  with  them.  They
existed  on  all  the  principal  stations  on  the  Roman
roads  in  Italy  and  the  provinces,  where  persons
were  accustomed  to  pass  the  night.  But  as  many
magistrates  frequently  made  extortionate  demands
from  the  parochi,  the  lex  Julia  de  Repctundis  of
Julius  Caesar,  B.  c.  59,  defined  the  things  which
the  parochi  were  bound  to  supply,  of  which  hay,
fire-wood,  salt,  and  a  certain  immber  of  beds  ap-
pear to  have  been  the  most  important  (Hor.  Sat.  i.
5.  46  ;  Cic.  ad  Att.  v.  16,  xiii.  2  ;  Heindorf,  ad
Hor.  I.  c.')

PAROPSIS  (Trapo^ls).  Two  different  mean-
ings are  given  to  this  word  by  the  Greek  gramma-
rians ;  some  interpret  it  as  meaning  any  food  eaten
with  the  oi|/ov  [Opsonium],  as  the  fJ.d(a,  a  kind
of  fnimenty  or  soft  cake,  broth,  or  any  kind  of  con-
diment or  sauce  (Pollux,  vi.  56,  x.  87  ;  Herasterh.
ad  loc.)  ;  and  others  a  saucer,  plate,  or  small  dish.
(Hesych.  and  Suidas,  s.  v.)  It  is  plain,  however,
from  the  numerous  passages  collected  by  Athenaeus
(ix.  pp.  367,  368),  that  the  word  was  used  in  both
significations,  and  was  the  name  of  the  dish  or
plate  as  well  as  of  its  contents.  (Compare  Xen.  Cyr.
i.  3.  §  4  ;  Plut.  de  Adul.  et  Amic.  9  ;  St.  Matth.
xxiii.  26.)  The  Roman  writers  seem  always  to
use  it  in  the  sense  of  a  dish  or  plate  (Juv.  iii.  1 42  ;
Mart.  xi.  27.  5)  ;  and  according  to  Charisius  it  was
so  called,  "  quia  in  eo  reponuntur  obsonia,  et  ex  eo
in  mensa  comeduntur."  The  word  is  also  written
Parapsis.  (Hesvch.  s.v.  ■  Suet.  Galb.  12;  Petron.
34;  Dig.  34.  tit.  2.  s.  19.  §  9.)


PASTOPHORUS.

PARRICFDA,    PARRICI'DIUM.       [Lex
Cornelia,  p.  687.]

PARTHE'NIAE  (TrapQevlai  or  -nape^velai),
are,  according  to  the  literal  meaning  of  the  word,
children  born  by  unmarried  women  {irapQevoi,  Hom.
11.  xvi.  180).  Some  writers  also  designated  by
this  name  those  legitimate  children  at  Sparta  who
were  bom  before  the  mother  was  introduced  into
the  house  of  her  husband.  (Hesych.  s.  v.;  MUlIer,
Dor.  iv.  4.  §  2.)  The  partheniae,  however,  as  a
distinct  class  of  citizens,  appear  at  Sparta  after  the
first  Messenian  war  and  in  connection  with  the
foundation  of  Tarentum  ;  but  the  legends  as  to  who
they  were  differ  from  one  another.  Hesychius
says  that  they  were  the  children  of  Spartan  citi-
j^ens  and  female  slaves  ;  Antiochus  (ap.  Strab.  vi.
p.  278,  &c.)  states,  that  they  were  the  sons  of  those
Spartans  who  took  no  part  in  the  war  against  the
Messenians.  These  Spartans  were  made  Helots,
and  their  children  were  called  partheniae,  and  de-
clared &Tijxoi.  When  they  grew  up,  and  were
unable  to  bear  their  degrading  position  at  home,
they  emigrated,  and  became  the  founders  of  Taren-
tum. Ephorus  {ap.  Strab.  vi.  p.  279)  again  related
the  story  in  a  different  manner.  When  the  Messe-
nian war  had  lasted  for  a  considerable  number  of
years,  the  Spartan  women  sent  an  embassy  to  the
camp  of  their  husbands,  complained  of  their  long
absence,  and  stated  that  the  republic  would  suffer
for  want  of  an  increase  in  the  number  of  citizens
if  the  war  should  continue  much  longer.  Their
husb.-mds,  who  were  bound  by  an  oath  not  to  leave
the  field  until  the  Messenians  were  conquered,  sent
home  all  the  young  men  in  the  camp,  who  were
not  bound  by  that  oath,  and  requested  them  to
cohabit  with  the  maidens  at  Sparta.  The  children
thus  produced  were  called  partheniae.  On  the
return  of  the  Spartans  from  Messenia,  these  par-
theniae were  not  treated  as  citizens,  and  accord-
ingly united  with  the  Helots  to  wage  war  against
the  Spartans.  But  when  this  plan  was  found  im-
practicable, they  emigrated  and  founded  the  colony
of  Tarentum.  (Compare  Theopomp.  ap.  Allien,  vi.
p.  271  ;  Epeunactae.)  These  stories  seem  to  be
nothing  but  distortions  of  some  historical  fact.
The  Spartans  at  a  time  of  great  distress  had  per-
haps allowed  marriages  between  Spartans  and
slaves  or  Laconians,  or  had  admitted  a  number  of
persons  to  the  franchise,  but  afterwards  endeavoured
to  curtail  the  privileges  of  these  new  citizens,  which
led  to  insurrection  and  emigration.  (See  Thirlwall,
Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  i.  p.  352,  «&c.)  [L.  S.]

PA  SCUA  PU'BLICA.     [Scriptura.]

PASSUS  (from  pando),  a  measure  of  length,
Tvhich  consisted  of  five  Roman  feet.  (Colum.  v,  1  ;
Vitruv.  X.  1 4.)  [Mensura.]  The  joossms  was  not
the  single  step  {gradus)^  but  the  double  step  ;  or,
more  exactly,  it  was  not  the  distance  from  heel  to
heel,  when  the  feet  were  at  their  utmost  ordinary
extension,  but  the  distance  from  the  point  which
the  heel  leaves  to  that  in  which  it  is  set  down.
The  mille  passuum,  or  thousand  paces,  was  the
common  name  of  the  Roman  mile.  [Milliare.]
In  connecting  the  Greek  and  Roman  measures,  the
word  passus  was  sometimes  applied  to  the  extension
of  the  arms,  that  is,  the  Greek  opyvid,  which,
however,  differed  from  the  true  passus  by  half-a-
foot ;  and,  conversely,  the  gradtts  was  called  by
Greek  writers  ^VH-^  ^r  "^^  ^rj/xa  rh  arrKovv,  and
the  passus  to  firjixa  rh  dnrXovv.  [P.S-]

PASTO'PHORUS  (ircuTTO(p6po5).    The  shawl.


PATERA.


871


richly  interwoven  with  gold  (xpvaoiracrros),  and
displaying  various  symbolical  or  mythological
figures,  was  much  used  in  religious  ceremonies  to
conduce  to  their  splendour,  to  explain  their  signifi-
cation, and  also  to  veil  their  solemnity.  The
maidens,  who  carried  the  figured  peplus  in  the
Panathenaea  at  Athens,  were  called  a^^-n<p6poi.
In  Egypt,  the  priests  of  Isis  and  Osiris,  who  pro-
bably fulfilled  a  similar  office,  were  denominated
iracTTocpdpoi,  and  were  incorporated.  (Diod,  i.  29  ;
Porphyr.  de  Abstin.  iv.  8  ;  Apul.  Met.  xi.  pp.'
124,  128,  ed.  Aldi.)  They  appear  to  have  ex-
tended themselves  together  with  the  extension  of
the  Egyptian  worship  over  parts  of  Greece  and
Italy,  so  that  "  the  College  of  the  Pastophori  of
Industria,"  a  city  of  Liguria,  is  mentioned  in  an
inscription  found  near  Turin.  (Maffei,  Mus.  Veron.
p.  230.)  The  Egyptian  college  was  divided  into
minor  companies,  each  containing  ten  pastophori,
and  each  having  at  its  head  a  leader  who  was
called  decurio  quinquennalis,  because  he  was  ap-
pointed for  five  years.  (Apul.  Met.  xi.  ad  fin.)
Besides  carrying  the  ttcotJs,  or  sacred  ornamental
shawl,  they  performed  other  duties  in  connection
with  the  worship  of  the  temple.  It  was  the  office
of  this  class  of  priests  to  raise  the  shawl  with  the
performance  of  an  appropriate  chaunt,  so  as  to  dis-
cover ttie  god  seated  or  standing  in  the  adytum
(Clem.  Alex.  Paedag.  iii.  2),  and  generally  to  show
the  temple  with  its  sacred  utensils,  of  which,  like
modern  sacristans,  they  had  the  custody.  (Hora-
pollo,  Hier.  i.  41.)  In  consequence  of  the  sup-
posed influence  of  Isis  and  her  priesthood  in
healing  diseases,  the  pastophori  obtained  a  high
rank  as  physicians.  (Clem.  Alex.  Strom,  vi.  4.
p.  758,  ed.  Potter.)

It  must  be  observed,  that  according  to  another
interpretation  of  iraffrds,  the  pastophori  were  so
denominated  from  carrj'ing,  not  a  shawl,  but  a
shrine  or  small  chapel,  containing  the  image  of  the
god.  Supposing  this  etymology  to  be  correct,  it  is
no  less  true  that  the  pastophori  sustained  the  vari-
ous offices  which  have  here  been  assigned  to  them.

It  was  indispensably  requisite,  that  so  numerous
and  important  a  body  of  men  should  have  a  resi-
dence appropriated  to  them  in  the  temple  to  which
they  belonged.  This  residence  was  called  iraaro-
<p6piov.  The  common  use  of  the  term,  as  applied
by  the  Greeks  to  Egyptian  temples,  led  to  its  ap-
plication to  the  corresponding  part  of  the  temple  at
Jerusalem  by  Josephus  (Bell.  Jud.  iv.  12),  and  by
the  authors  of  the  Alexandrine  version  of  the  Old
Testament.  (1  Cliron.  ix.  26,  33,  xxiii.  28  ;  Jer.
XXXV.  4  ;  1  Mace.  iv.  38,  57.)  [J.  Y.]

PATER-  FAMI'LIAE.    [Familia  ;  Matri-

MONIUM  ;    PaTRIA  PoTESTAS]

PATER  PATRA'TUS.  [Fetiales.]
PATERA,  dim.  PATELLA  {<fi6Xt]\  a  round
dish  ;  a  plate  ;  a  saucer.  Macrobius  {Sat.  v.  21),
explaining  the  difference  between  the  patera  and
the  Carchesium,  says  that  the  former  received  its
name  from  its  flat  expanded  form  (  planum  ac  pa-
tens). The  paterae  of  the  most  common  kind  are
thus  described  by  Festus  {s.  v.  Patellae)^  "  Vasa
picata  parva,  sacrifices  faeiendis  apta."  {Nigra
patella.  Mart.  v.  120  ;  Ruhicunda  testa,  xiv.  114.)
They  were  small  plates  of  the  common  red  earthen-
ware, on  which  an  ornamental  pattern  was  drawn
in  the  manner  described  under  the  article  of  Fic-
tile, and  which  were  sometimes  entirely  black.
Numerous  specimens  of  them  may  be  seen  in  the
3  K  4


872


PATERA.


British  Museum,  and  in  other  collections  of  ancient
fictile  vases.  The  more  valuable  paterae  were
metallic,  being  chiefly  of  bronze  :  but  every  family,
raised  above  poverty,  possessed  one  of  silver
(apyvpis),  together  with  a  silver  salt-cellar.  [Sali-
NUM.]  (Plin.  //.  N.  xxxiii.  12.  s.  54.)  In  opulent
houses  there  was  a  plate  of  gold  (xpucis,  Athen.
xi.  pp.  497,  502  ;  Find.  01.  vii.  1—3  ;  Yivg.Georg.
ii.  J  92).  These  metallic  plates  were  often  adorned
with  figures,  engraved  or  embossed  upon  them.
(Cic.  Verr.  iv.  21  ;  Xen.  Anab.  iv.  7.  §  27,  vii.  3.
§  27.)  A  beautiful  specimen  is  presented  in  the
woodcut  to  the  article  Libra  ;  and  the  accompany-
ing woodcut  exhibits  a  highly  ornamented  dish,
also  of  bronze,  designed  to  be  used  in  the  worship
of  Mars,  and  found  at  Pompeii.  (Donaldson's
Pomp.  vol.  ii.  pi.  78.)  The  view  of  the  upper  sur-
face is  accompanied  by  a  side-view,  showing  the


form  and  depth  of  the  vessel.  The  ornamental
paterae  sometimes  represented  leaves  of  fern,  which
probably  diverged  from  the  centre  (Jilicatae,  Cic.
Parad.  i.  §  2).  Gems  were  set  in  others.  (Cic.
Verr.  iv.  24  ;  Virg.  Aen.  i.  728,  739.)  We  read
also  of  an  amber  dish  (electrinam),  having  in  the
centre  the  countenance  of  Alexander  the  Great,
nnd  his  history  represented  on  the  border.  (Treb.
]*oll.  Trig.  Tyr.  13.)  The  annexed  woodcut  con-
tains a  view  and  section  of  a  plate  of  white  marble


PATINA.

in  the  British  Museum,  which  was  fomid  in  the
ruins  of  Hadrian's  Villa,  and  purchased  by  Mr.
Tovvnley.  It  is  14  inches  in  diameter,  and  \\
high.  It  is  cut  with  skill  and  delicacy,  the  marble
not  being  much  more  than  a  quarter  of  an  inch
thick.  In  the  centre  is  sculptured  a  female  bac-
chante in  a  long  tunic  and  with  a  scarf  [Chlamys]
floating  over  her  head.  This  centre-piece  is  en-
circled by  a  wreath  of  ivy.  The  decorations  indi-
cate the  appropriation  of  the  plate  to  the  worship
of  Bacchus.

Plates  were  sometimes  made  so  as  to  be  used
with  either  side  downward,  and  were  then  distin-
guished by  the  epithet  afxcpidsTos.  (Hom.  II.  xxiii,
270,  616.)  In  these  the  under  surface  was  orna-
mented as  well  as  the  upper.  The  Massilians  and
other  Ionic  Greeks  commonly  placed  the  under
surface  uppermost.  Plates  Avere  further  distin-
guished from  one  another  by  being  either  with  or
without  a  base  (ttu^jui^v),  a  boss  in  the  middle
(6/A^aA.a)T^,  iJ.e(T6ix(pa\os,  (pQois),  feet  {fiaXavooT^ ),
and  handles.  (Athen.  xi.  pp.  501,  502.)  In  the
preceding  woodcuts  the  bronze  patera  has  one
handle :  both  the  paterae  are  made  to  stand  upon
a  low  base.

Small  plates  were  sometimes  used  in  cooking
(Plin.  //.  A^.  xxx.  8.  s.  2j  ),  an  operation  more  com-
monly performed  in  pots  [Olla]  and  basins  or
bowls.  [Patina.]  They  were  used  at  meals  to
eat  upon  as  we  use  them  (Varro,  Eumen.  ap.  Non.
Marc.  XV.  6  ;  Hor.  Epist  i.  5.  2),  although  it  ap-
pears that  very  religious  persons  abstained  from
this  practice  on  account  of  the  customary  employ-
ment of  them  in  sacrificing  to  the  gods.  (Cic  de
Fin.  ii.  7.)  A  larger  plate,  in  fact,  a  round  dish,
was  used  to  bring  to  table  such  an  article  of  food
as  a  flat  fish.  (Mart.  xiii.  81.)  Mustard  (Plin.
//.  A^.  xix.  8.  s.  54)  and  ointments  (Xenophanes,
p.  68,  ed.  Karsten)  were  brought  in  saucers.  The
Greeks  also  drank  wine  out  of  plates  or  saucers
( Xen.  Conv.  ii.  23),  as  we  see  in  the  woodcut
under  Symposium,  which  represents  a  symposium,
and  in  which  the  second  and  third  figm-es  from
the  right  h.and  have  each  a  saucer.

The  use  of  paterae  at  meals  no  doubt  gave  origin
to  the  employment  of  them  in  sacrifices.  On
these  occasions  they  held  either  solid  food  (/xiKphv
Kpias,  Varro,  Man.  ap.  Non.  Marc.  I,  c.  ;  cifjos,
Ovid,  Fast.  vi.  310),  or  any  liquid  intended  to  be
poured  out  as  a  libation.  (Virg.  Ae7i.  iii.  67,  iv.
60,  V.  98,  vi.  249,  vii.  133,  xii.  174  ;  Ovid.
Met.  ix.  IGO,  Fast.  ii.  634,  iv.  934  ;  Val.  Flacc.
V.  192  ;  Juv.  iii.  26  ;  Ueliodor.  Aeihiop.  ii.  p.  98  ;
Athen.  xi.  p.  482.)  We  find  them  continually
represented  in  conjunction  with  the  other  instru-
ments of  sacrifice  upon  coins,  gems,  altars,  bas-
reliefs,  and  the  friezes  of  temples.  In  the  ancient
Doric  temple  at  Rome,  now  dedicated  to  St.
Adrian,  the  tasteful  patera  and  the  cranium  of  the
bull  are  alternately  sculptured  on  the  metopes.
(Labacco,  Ant.  di  Roma^  16,  17.)

Plates  of  the  most  precious  materials  and  of  the
finest  workmanship  were  sometimes  given  as  prizes
at  the  public  games.  (Horn.  II.  xxiii.  270  ;
Pind.  Isth.  i.  20  ;  Schol.  in  Find.  Nem.  ix.  121,
123.)  [J.  Y.]

PATFBULUM.     [Fi/RCA.]

PA'TINA  (\fKdur),  dim.  Xckclviov  al.  XcKapiov^
XeKavia-Kri,  Athen.  vi.  p.  268,  AeKavls,  second  dim.
XiKavidiQu,  Bekker,  Anec.  794),  a  basin  or  bowl  o{
earthenware,  rarely  of  bronze  (Pallad.  de  Be  Rust.


PATRIA  POTESTAS.
i."40  ;  Plin.  H.N.  xxxiv.    11.   s.  25)  or  silver.
(Treb.  Poll.  Claud,  p.  208,  c.)

A  patina,  covered  with  a  lid  {operculum)^  was
sometimes  used  to  keep  grapes  instead  of  a  jar
(Col,  de  Re  Rust.  xii.  43),  a  proof  that  this  vessel
was  of  a  form  intermediate  between  the  Patera
and  the  Olla,  not  so  flat  as  the  former,  nor  so
deep  as  the  latter.  Hence  it  is  compared  to  the
crater.  (Schol.  in  Aristoph.  Acham.  1109.)
[Crater,]  This  account  of  its  shape  accords  with
a  variety  of  uses  to  which  it  was  applied,  viz.,  to
hold  water  and  a  sponge  for  washing  (Aristoph.
Vesp.  598),  and  clay  for  making  bricks  {Aves,
1143,  1146),  in  vomiting  {Nicb.  904),  and  in  smelt-
ing the  ore  of  quicksilver.  (Plin,  H.N.  xxxiii,  8,
s.  41.)  But  its  most  frequent  use  was  in  cookery
and  pharmacy.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxiii.  2.  s,  33.)  Al-
though the  patera  and  the  olla  were  also  used,  the
articles  of  diet  were  commonly  prepared,  some-
times over  a  fire  (Plant.  Pseud,  iii.  2.  51  ;  Plin,
//■.  A',  xviii,  11,  s,  26,  xxii,  25,  s,  80),  and  some-
times without  fire,  in  a  patina,  and  more  especially
when  they  were  accompanied  with  sauce  or  fluid.
{Yiov.Sat.  i.  3.  80.)  Hence  the  word  occurs  in
almost  every  page  of  Apicius  De  Opsoniis  [Opso-
niitm]  ;  and  hence  came  its  synonym,  o-^o^okt].
(Photius,  Zea:-.  s.  V.)  In  the  same  bowl  the  food
was  commonly  brought  to  table  (Xen.  Cyrop.  i,  3,
§  4  ;  Athen.  iv.  p.  149,  f.  ;  Plant.  Mil.  iii,  1,  164  ;
Ter.  Enn.  iv,  7.  46  ;  Hor,  Sat.  ii,  8.  43),  an  example
of  which  is  XeKaviou  twv  Xaytpav  Kpeuv,  i.  e.  "  a
basin  of  stevved  hare,"  (Aristoph.  Acharn.  1109.)
But  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  dishes  [Lanx,  Pa-
tera] were  used  to  bring  to  table  those  articles  of
food,  the  form  and  solidity  of  which  were  adapted
to  such  vessels.

The  silver  bowl  was  sometimes  ornamented,  as
with  ivy-leaves  {hederata^  Treb.  Poll.  /,  c),  or  by
the  insertion  of  mirrors  (speeillata,  Fl,  Vopisc,  Pro-
Ims,  p.  234,  ed.  Salmasii).  These  bowls  weighed
from  10  to  20  lbs,  each,  Vitellius,  wishing  to  ob-
tain an  earthenware  bowl  of  immense  size,  had  a
furnace  constructed  on  purpose  to  bake  it.  (Plin,
H  N.  XXXV.  12.  s.  46  ;  Juv.  iv.  130—134.)

A  method  of  divination  by  the  use  of  a  basin
(XeKavofxavrda)  is  mentioned  by  Tzetzes  on  Lyco-
phron,  V.  813.  [J.  Y.J

PATRES.     [Patricii  ;  Senatus.]

PATRIA  POTESTAS.  Potestas  signifies  ge-
nerally a  power  or  faculty  of  any  kind  by  which
we  do  any  thing,  "  Potesta?,"  says  Paulus  (Dig.
50.  tit.  16.  s,  215),  "has  several  significations:
when  applied  to  Magistratus,  it  is  Imperiura  ;  in
the  case  of  Children,  it  is  the  Patria  Potestas  ;  in
the  case  of  Slaves,  it  is  Dominium."  According
to  Paulus  then,  Potestas,  as  applied  to  Magis-
tratus, is  equivalent  to  Imperium,  Thus  we  find
Potestas  associated  with  the  adjectives  Praetoria,
Consularis.  But  Potestas  is  applied  to  Magis-
tratus who  had  not  the  Imperium,  as  for  instance
to  Quaestors  and  Tribuni  Plebis  (Cic,  pro  Cluent.
c,  27)  ;  and  Potestas  and  Imperium  are  often  op-
posed in  Cicero.  Both  the  expressions  Tribuni-
cium  Jus  and  Tribunicia  Potestas  are  used  (Tacit,
Ann.  i.  2,  3).  Thus  it  seems  that  this  word
Potestas,  like  many  other  Roman  terms,  had  both
a  wider  s'gnification  and  a  narrower  one.  In  its
wider  signification  it  might  mean  all  the  power
that  was  delegated  to  any  person  by  the  State,
whatever  might  be  the  extent  of  that  power.  In
its   narrower  significations,  it  was   on   the   one


PATRIA  POTESTAS;


873


hand  equivalent  to  Imperium  ;  and  on  the  other,
it  expressed  the  power  of  those  functionaries  who
had  not  the  Imperium.  Sometimes  it  was  used
to  express  a  Magistratus,  as  a  person  (Sueton.
Claud.  13  ;  Juv.  Sat.  x.  100)  ;  and  hence  in  the
Italian  language  the  word  Podesta  signifies  a
Magistrate.

Potestas  is  also  one  of  the  words  hy  which  is
expressed  the  power  that  one  private  person  has
over  another,  the  other  two  being  Manus  and
Mancipium,  The  Potestas  is  either  Dominica,
that  is,  ownership  as  exhibited  in  the  relation  of
Master  and  Slave  [Servcs]  ;  or  Patria  as  ex-
hibited in  the  relation  of  Father  and  Child,  The
Mancipium  was  framed  after  the  analogy  of  the
Potestas  Dominica.    [Mancipium.]

Patria  Potestas  then  signifies  the  power  which
a  Roman  father  had  over  the  persons  of  his  children,
grandchildren,  and  other  descendants  {filiifamilias,
filiaef'amilias),  and  generally  all  the  rights  which
he  had  by  virtue  of  his  paternity.  The  found-
ation of  the  Patria  Potestas  was  a  Roman  mar-
riage, and  the  birth  of  a  child  gave  it  full  effect.
[Matrimonium.J

It  does  not  seem  that  the  Patria  Potestas  was
ever  viewed  among  the  Romans  as  absolutely
equivalent  to  the  Dominica  Potestas,  or  as  involv-
ing ownership  of  the  child  ;  and  yet  the  original
notion  of  the  Patria  came  very  near  to  that  of  the
Dominica  Potestas.  Originally  the  father  had  the
power  of  life  and  death  over  his  son  as  a  member
of  his  familia :  he  could  sell  him  and  so  bring  him
into  the  mancipii  causa  ;  and  he  had  the  jus  noxae
dandi  as  a  necessary  consequence  of  his  being
liable  for  the  delicts  of  his  child.  He  could  also
give  his  child  in  adoption,  and  emancipate  a  child
at  his  pleasure.

The  fiuher  could  exheredate  his  son,  he  could
substitute  another  person  as  heir  to  him  [Heres],
and  he  could  by  his  will  appoint  him  a  tutor.

The  general  rights  and  disabilities  of  a  filius-
familias  may  be  thus  briefly  expressed  —  "The
child  is  incapable,  in  his  private  rights,  of  any
power  or  dominion  ;  in  every  other  respect  he  is
capable  of  legal  rights,"  (Savigny,  System,  &c.
ii,  52.)  The  incapacity  of  the  child  is  not  really
an  incapacity  of  acquiring  legal  rights,  for  the
child  could  acquire  by  contract,  for  instance  ;  but
every  thing  that  he  acquired,  was  acquired  for  his
father.

As  to  matters  that  belonged  to  the  Jus  Publi-
cum, the  son  laboured  under  no  incapacities :  he
could  vote  at  the  Comitia  Tributa,  he  could  fill  a
magistratus  ;  and  he  could  be  a  tutor :  for  the
Tutela  was  considered  a  part  of  Jus  Publicum.
(Dig.  1.  tit.  6.  s.  9  ;  Liv.  xxiv.  44  ;  Gell.  ii.  2.)

The  child  had  Clonnubium  and  Commercium,
l.'ke  any  Roman  citizen  who  was  sui  juris,  but
these  legal  capacities  brought  to  him  no  present
power  or  ownership.  His  marriage  with  his  father's
consent  was  legal  (jtistuju),  but  if  it  was  accom-
panied with  the  In  Manum  conventio,  liis  wife
came  into  the  power  of  his  father,  and  not  into  the
power  of  the  son.  The  son's  children  were  in  all
cases  in  the  power  of  their  grandfather,  when  the
son  was.  The  son  could  also  divorce  his  wife  with
his  father's  consent.

Inasmuch  as  he  had  Commercium,  he  could  he
a  witness  to  Mancipationes  and  Testaments  ;  but
he  could  not  have  property  nor  servitutes.  He
had  the  testamenti  factio,  as  already  stated,  so  Jar


874  PATRU  POTESTAS.

as  to  be  a  witness  to  a  testament  ;  but  he  could
not  make  a  testament,  for  he  had  nothing  to  dis-
pose of ;  and  he  could  not  have  a  heres.

He  could,  as  already  observed,  acquire  rights
for  his  father  by  contract,  but  none  for  himself,
except  in  the  case  of  an  Adstipulatio,  an  instance
which  shows  the  difference  between  a  son  and  a
slave.  [Obligationes.]  But  a  filius  pubes  could
incur  obligationes  and  could  be  sued,  like  a  pater-
familias. (Dig.  45.  tit.  1.  s.  141.  §  2  ;  44.  tit.  7.
8.  39.)  The  foundation  of  these  rules  of  law  was
the  maxim  that  the  condition  of  a  master  could  be
improved  by  the  acts  of  his  slaves,  but  not  made
worse  ;  and  this  maxim  applied  equally  to  a  son
and  a  slave.  Between  the  father  and  the  son  no
civiles  obligationes  could  exist ;  neither  of  them
consequently  could  have  a  right  of  action  against
the  other.  But  naturales  obligationes  might  be
established  between  them.  Some  writers  have
supposed  that  there  was  a  difference  between  the
capacities  and  incapacities  of  a  fdiusfamilias  and  a
filiafamilias  as  to  obligationes  ;  but  the  reasons
alleged  by  Savigny  seem  conclusively  to  show  that
there  was  no  difference  at  all.  {System,  &c.  ii.
Beylage,  v.)

In  the  case  of  delict  by  a  filiusfamilias  noxales
actiones  were  allowed  against  the  father.  (Gains,
iv.  75.)  But  Justinian  abolished  the  noxae  deditio
in  the  case  of  a  filius  or  filiafamilias,  "  cum  apud
veteres  legum  commentatores  invenimus  saepius
dictum,  ipsos  filiosfamilias  pro  suis  delictis  posse
conveniri."  (Inst.  4.  tit.  8.  s.  7  ;  Dig.  43.  tit.
29.  s.  1.  3.  §  4  )  LNoxALis  Actio  ;  Filius-
familias.]

The  incapacity  of  the  child  to  acquire  for  him-
self and  his  capacity  to  acquire  for  his  father,  as
well  as  their  mutual  incapacity  of  acquiring  rights
of  action  against  one  another,  are  viewed  by  some
modern  writers  as  a  consequence  of  a  legal  unity
of  person,  while  others  affirm  that  there  is  no  trace
of  such  a  fiction  in  the  Roman  law,  and  that  the
assumption  is  by  no  means  necessary  to  explain
the  rule  of  law.  (Bocking,  Inst.  i.  228,  n.  20.)
Indeed  the  fiction  of  such  a  unity  is  quite  unneces-
sary, for  the  fundamentiil  maxim,  already  referred
to,  that  a  man  may  be  made  richer  but  not  poorer
by  his  slaves  and  children  is  a  simple  positive
rule.  Though  the  child  could  not  acquire  for  him-
self, yet  all  that  he  did  acquire  for  his  father,
might  become  his  own  in  the  event  of  his  father's
death,  a  circumstance  which  materially  distin-
guished the  acquisitions  of  a  son  from  those  of  a
slave  ;  and  accordingly  the  son  is  sometimes,  though
not  with  strict  propriety,  considered  as  a  kind  of
joint  owner  with  his  father.

The  rule  as  to  the  incapacity  of  a  filiusfamilias
for  acquiring  property  was  first  varied  about  the
time  of  Augustus,  when  the  son  was  empowered
to  acquire  for  himself  and  to  treat  as  his  own
whatever  he  got  in  military  service.  This  was  the
Castrense  Peculium,  Avith  respect  to  which  the  son
was  considered  as  a  person  sui  juris.  (Juv.  Sat.
xvi.  51  ;  Gains,  ii.  106.)  But  if  the  filiusfamilias
died  without  having  made  any  disposition  of  this
peculium,  it  came  to  the  father,  and  this  continued
to  be  the  law  till  Justinian  altered  it ;  but  in  this
case  the  property  came  as  Peculium,  not  as  Here-
ditas.  The  privileges  of  a  filiusfamilias  as  to  the
acquisition  of  property  were  extended  under  Con-
stantine  to  his  acquisitions  made  during  the  dis-
charge of  civil  offices,  and  as  this  new  privilege


PATRIA  POTESTAS.

was  framed  after  the  analogy  of  the  Castrense  Pe-
culium, it  was  designated  by  the  name  Quasi  Cas-
trense Peculium.  Further  privileges  of  the  same
kind  were  also  given  by  Constantine  and  extended
under  subsequent  emperors  {bona  quae  patri  non
adqniruntur).

The  Patria  Potestas  began  with  the  birth  of  a
child  in  a  Roman  marriage.  If  a  Roman  had  by
mistake  married  a  woman  with  whom  he  had  no
connubium,  thinking  that  connubium  existed,  he
was  allowed  to  prove  his  case  {causae  erroris  pro-
batio),  upon  doing  which  the  child  that  had  been
born  and  the  wife  also  became  Roman  citizens,
and  from  that  time  the  son  was  in  the  power  of
the  father.  This  causae  probatio  was  allowed  by
a  Senatus-consultum  (Gains,  i.  67),  which,  as  it
appears  from  the  context,  and  a  comparison  with
Ulpian's  Fragments  (vii.  4),  was  an  amendment
of  the  Lex  Aelia  Sentia.  Other  instances  of  the
causae  probatio  are  mentioned  by  Gains.

It  was  a  condition  of  the  Patria  Potestas  that
the  child  should  be  begotten  in  matrimonium  le-
gitimum.  (Gains,  i.  55 — 107  ;  Inst.  1.  tit.  9— II.)
By  the  old  law,  the  subsequent  marriage  of  the
parents  did  not  legitimate  a  child  born  before  the
marriage.  But  it  seems  to  have  early  become  the
fashion  for  the  Emperor,  as  an  act  of  grace,  to
place  such  child  on  the  same  footing  as  legitimate
children.  The  legitimation  per  subsequens  matri-
monium only  became  an  established  rule  of  lav/
under  Constantine,  and  was  introduced  for  the  ad-
vantage of  children  who  were  born  in  concubinage.
[CoNcuBiNA.]  In  the  time  of  Theodosius  II.,
the  rule  was  established  by  which  a  child  was
legitimated  per  oblationem  curiae.  To  these  two
modes  of  legitimation,  Justinian  added  that  per
rescriptum  principis.  The  child  thus  legitimated
came  into  the  familia  and  the  potestas  of  his  father,
as  if  he  had  been  born  in  lawful  marriage.

The  Patria  Potestas  could  also  be  acquired  by
either  of  the  modes  of  Adoption.  [Adoptio,
p.  15,  b.]

The  Patria  Potestas  was  dissolved  in  various
ways.  It  was  dissolved  by  the  death  of  the  father,
upon  which  event,  the  grandchildren,  if  there  were
any,  who  had  hitherto  been  in  the  power  of  their
grandfather,  came  into  the  power  of  their  father
who  was  now  sui  juris.  It  could  also  be  dissolved
in  various  ways  during  the  lifetime  of  the  father.
A  maxima  or  media  capitis  diminutio  either  of
the  parent  or  child  dissolved  the  Patria  Potestas  ;
though  in  the  case  of  either  party  sustaining  a
capitis  diminutio  by  falling  into  the  hands  of  an
enemy,  the  relation  might  be  revived  by  Post-
liminium. A  father  who  was  adrogated,  and  conse-
quently sustained  a  minima  capitis  diminutio,  came
together  with  his  children,  who  had  hitherto  been
in  his  power,  into  the  power  of  his  adoptive  father.
The  emancipation  of  the  child  by  the  father  was  a
common  mode  of  dissolving  the  Patria  Potestas,
and  was  accompanied  by  the  Minima  Capitis  dimi-
nutio. If  a  son  was  elected  Flamen  Dialis  or  a
daughter  was  chosen  a  Vestal,  the  Patria  Potestas
ceased  ;  and  in  the  later  period,  it  was  also  dis-
solved by  the  son's  attaining  certain  civil  or  eccle-
siastical honours.  The  Potestas  of  the  father
might  cease  without  the  son  becoming  sui  juris,  as
in  the  case  of  the  son  being  given  in  adoption.

The  terra  Patria  Potestas  strictly  expresses  the
power  of  the  father,  as  such,  which  arises  from  the
paternal  relation  ;  but  the  term  also  imports  the


PATRICII.

rights  of  the  child  as  a  filiusfaniilias  or  filiafamilias.
Of  these  rights,  the  most  important  was  the  ca-
pacity of  being  the  suus  heres  of  the  father.  Gene-
rally, the  parent  could  emancipate  his  child  at  his
pleasure,  and  thus  deprive  him  of  the  rights  of
agnation  ;  but  the  law  in  this  respect  was  altered
by  Justinian  (Nov.  89,  c.  11),  who  made  the  con-
sent of  the  child  necessary.  (Savigny,  System,  &c.,
ii.  49,  &c.  ;  Puchta,  Inst.  iii.  142  ;  Bocking,  Inst.
i.  224.)  [G.  L.]

PATRI'CII.  This  word  is  a  derivative  from
pater,  which  in  the  early  times  invariably  denoted
a  patrician,  and  in  the  later  times  of  the  republic
frequently  occurs  in  the  Roman  writers  as  equiva-
lent to  senator.  Patricii  therefore  signifies  those
who  belonged  to  the  patres  "  rex  patres  eos  (sena-
tores)  voluit  nominari,  patriciosque  eorum  liberos."
(Ck.de  Re  Publ.  ii.  12  ;  Liv.  i.  8  ;  Dionys.  ii.  8.)
It  is  a  mistake  in  these  writers  to  suppose  that
the  patricii  were  only  the  offspring  of  the  patres
in  the  sense  of  senators,  and  necessarily  connected
with  them  by  blood.  Patres  and  patricii  were
originally  convertible  terms.  (Plut.  Romul.  13  ;
livdus,  de  Mens.  i.  20,  de  Mag.  i.  16  ;  Niebuhr,
Hist,  of  Rome,  i.  p.  336.)  The  words  patres  and
patricii  have  radically  and  essentially  the  same
meaning,  and  some  of  the  ancients  believed  that
the  name  patres  was  given  to  that  particular  class
of  the  Roman  population  from  the  fact  that  they
were  fathers  of  families  (Plut.  Dionys.  I.  c.)  ;
others,  that  they  were  called  so  from  their  age
(Sallust,  C'atil.  6)  ;  or  because  they  distributed
land  among  the  poorer  citizens,  as  fathers  did
among  their  children.  (Fest.  s.v.  Patres  Senatores;
Lyd.  de  Mens.  iv.  50.)  But  most  writers  justly
refer  the  name  to  the  patrocinium  which  the  pa-
tricians exercised  over  the  whole  state,  and  over
all  classes  of  persons  of  whom  it  was  composed.
(Plut.  and  Sallust,  /.  c. ;  Zonaras,  vii.  8  ;  Suidas,

S.  V.     HaTplKLOl.)

In  considering  who  the  patricians  were,  we  have
to  distinguish  three  periods  in  the  history  of  Rome.
The  first  extends  from  the  foundation  of  the  city
down  to  the  establishment  of  the  plebeians  as  a
second  order  ;  the  second,  from  this  event  down  to
the  time  of  Constantino,  during  which  time  the
patricians  were  a  real  aristocracy  of  birth,  and  as
such  formed  a  distinct  class  of  Roman  citizens  op-
posed to  the  plebeians,  and  aftervvards  to  the  new
plebeian  aristocracy  of  the  nobiles  :  the  third  period
extends  from  Constantino  down  to  the  middle  ages,
during  which  the  patricians  were  no  longer  an
aristocracy  of  birth,  but  wore  persons  who  merely
enjoyed  a  title,  first  granted  by  the  emperors  and
afterwards  by  the  popes  also.

First  Period :  from  the  foundation  of  the  city,  to
the  establishment  of  the  plebeian  order.  Niebuhr's
researches  into  the  early  history  of  Rome  have
established  it  as  a  fact  beyond  all  doubt,  that  dur-
ing this  period  the  patricians  comprised  the  whole
body  of  Romans  who  enjoyed  the  full  franchise,
that  they  were  the  populus  Romanus,  and  that
there  were  no  other  real  citizens  besides  them.
(Niebuhr,  Hist,  of  Rome,  ii.  pp.  224,  225.  note  507;
Cic.  pro  Caecin.  35.)  The  patricians  must  be  re-
garded as  conquerors  who  reduced  the  earlier  in-
habitants of  the  places  they  occupied  to  a  state  of
servitude,  which  in  our  authorities  is  designated  by
the  terms  cliens  and  plebs.  The  other  parts  of  the
Roman  population,  namely  clients  and  slaves,  did
not  belong  to  the  populus  Romanus,  or  sovereign


PATRICII.


875


people,  and  were  not  burghers  or  patricians.  The
senators  were  a  select  body  of  the  populus  or  pa-
tricians, which  acted  as  their  representative.  The
burghers  or  patricians  consisted  originally  of  three
distinct  tribes,  which  gradually  became  united
into  the  sovereign  populus.  These  tribes  had
founded  settlements  upon  several  of  the  hills  which
were  subsequently  included  within  the  precincts  of
the  city  of  Rome.  Their  names  were  Ramnes,
Titles,  and  Luceres,  or  Ramnenses,  Titienses,  and
Lucerenses.  Each  of  these  tribes  consisted  of  ten
curiae,  and  each  curia  of  ten  decuries,  which
were  established  for  representative  and  military
purposes.  [Senatus.]  The  first  tribe,  or  the
Ramnes,  were  a  Latin  colony  on  the  Palatine
hill,  said  to  have  been  founded  by  Romulus.  As
long  as  it  stood  alone,  it  contained  only  one  hun-
dred gentes,  and  had  a  senate  of  one  hundred
members.  When  the  Titles,  or  Sabine  settlers
on  the  Quirinal  and  Viminal  hills,  under  king
Tatius,  became  united  with  the  Ramnes,  the  num-
ber of  gentes  as  well  as  that  of  seiiators  was
increased  to  200.  These  two  tribes  after  their
union  continued  probably  for  a  considerable  time
to  be  the  patricians  of  Rome,  until  the  third
tribe,  the  Luceres,  which  chiefly  consisted  of
Etruscans,  who  had  settled  on  the  Caelian  Hill,
also  became  united  with  the  other  two  as  a
third  tribe.  When  this  settlement  was  made  is
not  certain ;  some  say  that  it  was  in  the  time  of
Romulus  (Fest.  s.  v.  Caelius  Mons  and  Luceres ;
Varro,  de  Ling.  Lat.  v.  55)  ;  others  that  it  took
place  at  a  later  time.  (Tacit.  Annal.  iv.  65  ;  Fest.
s.  V.  Tuscum  vicum.)  But  the  Etruscan  settlement
was  in  all  probability  older  than  that  of  the  Sabines
(see  Gottling,  Gesch.  der  Rom.  Staatsverf  p.  54,
&c.),  though  it  seems  occas'onally  to  have  received
new  bands  of  Etruscan  settlers  even  as  late  as  the
time  of  the  republic.

The  amalgamation  of  these  three  tribes  did  not
take  place  at  once  :  the  union  between  Latins  and
Sabines  is  ascribed  to  the  reign  of  Romulus,  though
it  does  not  appear  to  have  been  quite  perfect,  since
the  Latins  on  some  occasions  claimed  a  superiority
over  the  Sabines.  (Dionys.  ii.  62.)  The  Luceres
existed  for  a  long  time  as  a  separate  tribe  with-
out enjoying  the  same  rights  as  the  two  others
until  Tarquinius  Priscus,  himself  an  Etruscan,
caused  them  to  be  placed  on  a  footing  of  equality
with  the  others.  For  this  reason  he  is  said  to
have  increased  the  number  of  senators  to  300
(Dionys.  iii.  67  ;  Liv.  i.  35  ;  Cic.  de  Re  Pull.
ii.  20  ;  compare  Senatus),  and  to  have  added  two
Vestal  virgins  to  the  existing  number  of  four.
(Dionys.  I.  c.  ;  Fest.  s.  v.  Sex  Vestae  saeerdotes ;
Niebuhr,  Hist,  of  Rome,  i.  p.  302,  &c.)  The  Lu-
ceres, however,  are,  notwithstanding  this  equalisa-
tion, sometimes  distinguished  from  the  other  tribes
by  the  name  patres  minorum  gentium;  though
this  name  is  also  applied  to  other  members  of  the
patricians,  e.  g.  to  those  plebeian  families  who
were  admitted  by  Tarquinius  Priscus  into  the  three
tribes,  and  in  comparison  with  these,  the  Luceres
are  again  called  patres  majorum  gentium.  (Compare
Niebuhr,  i.  p.  304,  and  Gottling,  p.  226,  &c.)
That  this  distinction  between  patres  majorum  and
minorum  gentium  was  kept  up  in  private  life,  at  a
time  when  it  had  no  value  whatever  in  a  political
point  of  view,  is  clear  from  Cicero  ( ad  Fam.  ix.
21).  TuUus  Hostilius  admitted  several  of  the
noble   gentes  of  Alba   among    the   patricians  (w


876


PATRTCII.


jmtres  legit,  Liv.  i.  30),  viz.,  the  TuUii  (Julii  ?),
Servilii,  Quinctii,  Geganii,  Curiatii,  and  Cloelii,  to
which  Dionysius  (iii.  29)  adds  the  gens  Metilia.
Ancus  Marcius  admitted  the  Tarquinii  (Dionys.
iii.  48),  Tarquinius  Priscus  the  TiiUii  (Dionys.
iv.  3),  Servius  Tullius  the  Octavii  (Sueton.  Aug.
1,  Sec),  and  even  Tarquinius  Superbus  seems  to
have  had  similar  intentions.  (Dionys.  iv.  57  ;
Sueton.  VitelL  1.)  We  do  not  hear  that  the  num-
ber of  gentes  was  increased  by  these  admissions,
and  must  therefore  suppose  that  some  of  them  had
already  become  extinct,  and  that  the  vacancies
which  thus  arose  were  filled  up  with  these  new
burghers.  (Gbttling,  p.  222.)  During  the  time  of
the  republic,  distinguished  strangers  and  wealthy
plebeians  were  occasionally  made  Roman  patricians,
e.  g.  Appius  Claudius  and  his  gens  (Liv.  x.  8  ;
compare  ii.  16;  Dionys.  v.  40  ;  Sueton.  Tib.  1 ),
and  Domitius  Ahenobarbus.  (Suet.  Nero,  1.)  As
regards  the  kingly  period  the  Roman  historians
speak  as  if  the  kings  had  had  the  power  of  raising
a  gens  or  an  individual  to  the  rank  of  a  patrician  ;
but  it  is  evident  that  the  king  could  not  do  this
withouf  the  consent  of  the  patres  in  their  curies  ;
and  hence  Livy  (iv.  4)  makes  Canuleius  say,  "  per
cooptationem  in  patres,  aut  ab  regibus  lecti,"  which
lectio,  of  course,  required  the  sanction  of  the  body
of  patricians.  In  the  time  of  the  republic  such  an
elevation  to  the  rank  of  patrician  could  only  be
granted  by  the  senate  and  the  populus.  (Liv.  iv.
4,  X.  8,  compare  especially  Becker,  Handb.  der
Rom.  Alterth.  ii.  1.  p.  26.  &c.)

Since  there  were  no  other  Roman  citizens  but
the  patricians  during  this  period,  we  cannot  speak
of  any  rights  or  privileges  belonging  to  them  exclu-
sively ;  they  are  all  comprehended  under  Civitas
(Roman)  and  Gens.  Respecting  their  relations  to
the  kings  see  Comitia  Curiata  and  Senatus.
During  this  early  period  we  can  scarcely  speak  of
the  patricians  as  an  aristocrac}^,  unless  we  regard
their  relation  to  the  clients  in  this  light.   [Cliens.]

Second  Period :  from  the  establishment  of  the
plebeian  order  to  the  time  of  Constantine.  When
the  plebeians  became  a  distinct  class  of  citizens,
who  shared  certain  rights  Avith  the  patricians,  the
latter  lost  in  so  far  as  these  rights  no  longer
belonged  to  them  exclusively.  But  by  far  the
greater  number  of  rights,  and  those  the  most  im-
portant ones,  still  remained  in  the  exclusive  pos-
session of  the  patricians,  who  alone  Avere  cives
optima  jure,  and  were  the  patres  of  the  nation  in
the  same  sense  as  before.  All  civil  and  religious
offices  were  in  their  possession,  and  they  continued
as  before  to  be  the  populus,  the  nation  now  con-
sisting of  the  populus  and  the  plebes.  This  dis-
tinction, which  Livy  found  in  ancient  documents
(xxv.  12),  seems  however  in  the  course  of  time  to
have  fallen  into  oblivion,  so  that  the  historian
seems  to  be  scarcely  aware  of  it,  and  uses  populus
for  the  whole  body  of  citizens  including  the  ple-
beians. Under  the  Antonines  the  term  populus
signified  all  the  citizens,  with  the  exception  of  the
patricii.  (Gains,  i.  3.)  In  their  relation  to  the
plebeians  or  the  commonalty,  the  patricians  now
were  a  real  aristocracy  of  birth.  A  person  born  of
a  patrician  family  was  and  remained  a  patrician,
whether  he  was  rich  or  poor,  whether  he  was  a
member  of  the  senate,  or  an  eques,  or  held  any  of
the  great  offices  of  the  state,  or  not :  there  was  no
power  that  could  make  a  patrician  a  plebeian,  ex-
cept his  owB  free  will,  for  every  patrician  might


PATRICIT.

by  adoption  into  a  plebeian  family,  or  by  a  solemn
transition  from  his  own  order  to  the  plebs,  become
a  plebeian,  leaving  his  gens  and  cm-ia  and  re-
nouncing the  sacra.  As  regards  the  census,  he
might  indeed  not  belong  to  the  wealthy  classes,
but  his  rank  remained  the  same.  Instances  of  re-
duced patricians  in  the  latter  period  of  the  republic
are,  the  father  of  M.  Aemilius  Scaurus  and  the
family  of  the  Sullas  previous  to  the  time  of  the
dictator  of  that  name.  (Suet.  Aug.  2  ;  Liv.
iv.  16  ;  Plin.  //.  N.  xviii.  4  ;  Zonar.  vii.  15  ;
Ascon.  Ped.  in  Scaur,  p.  25,  ed.  Orelli.)  A  plebeian,
on  the  other  hand,  or  even  a  stranger,  might,  as  we
stated  above,  be  made  a  patrician  by  a  lex  curiata.
But  this  appears  to  have  been  done  very  seldom  ;
and  the  consequence  was,  that  in  the  course  of  a
few  centuries  the  number  of  patrician  families  be-
came so  rapidly  diminished,  that  towards  the  close
of  the  republic  there  were  not  more  than  fifty  such
families.  (Dionys.  i.  85.)  Julius  Caesar  by  the
lex  Cassia  raised  several  plebeian  families  to  the
rank  of  patricians,  in  order  that  they  might  be  able
to  continue  to  hold  the  ancient  priestly  offices
which  still  belonged  to  their  order.  (Suet.  Cues.
41  ;  Tacit.  A?mal.  xi.  25  ;  Dion  Cass,  xliii.  47,
xlv.  2.)  Augustus  soon  after  found  it  necessary
to  do  the  same  by  a  lex  Saenia.  (Tacit.  I.  c. ;  Dion
Cass.  xlix.  43,  Iii.  42.)  Other  emperors  followed
these  examples  :  Claudius  raised  a  number  of  sena-
tors and  such  persons  as  were  born  of  illustrious
parents  to  the  rank  of  patricians  (Tacit.  I.  c. ;  Suet.
0th.  1)  ;  Vespasian,  Titus,  and  other  emperors  did
the  same.  (Tacit.  Agric.  9  ;  Capitol.  M.  Antonin.
1  ;  Lamprid.  Commod.  6.)  The  expression  for  this
act  of  raising  persons  to  the  rank  of  patricians  was
in  pafricios  or  in  familiam  patriciam  adligere.

Although  the  patricians  throughout  this  whole
period  had  the  character  of  an  aristocracy  of  birth,
yet  their  political  rights  were  not  the  same  at  all
times.  The  first  centuries  of  this  period  are  an
almost  uninterrupted  struggle  between  patricians
and  plebeians,  in  which  the  former  exerted  every
means  to  retain  their  exclusive  rights,  but  which
ended  in  the  establishment  of  the  political  equality
of  the  two  orders.  [Plebs.]  Only  a  few  insigni-
ficant priestly  offices,  and  the  performance  of  certain
ancient  religious  rites  and  ceremonies,  remained
the  exclusive  privilege  of  the  patricians  ;  of  which
they  were  the  prouder,  as  in  former  days  their  re-
ligious power  and  significance  were  the  basis  of
their  political  superiority.  (See  Ambrosch,  Studien
und  Andeutungen,  the.  p.  58,  &c.)  At  the  time
when  the  struggle  between  patricians  and  plebeians
ceased,  a  new  kind  of  aristocracy  began  to  arise
at  Rome,  which  was  partly  based  upon  wealth  and
partly  upon  the  great  offices  of  the  republic,  and
the  term  Nobiles  was  given  to  all  persons  Avhoso
ancestors  had  held  any  of  the  curule  ofiices.  (Ccmi-
pare  Nobiles.)  This  aristocracy  of  nobiles  threw
the  old  patricians  as  a  body  still  more  into  the
shade,  though  both  classes  of  aristocrats  united  as
far  as  was  possible  to  monopolise  all  the  great
offices  of  the  state  (Liv.  xxii.  34,  xxxix.  41);
but  although  the  old  patricians  were  obliged  in
many  cases  to  make  common  cause  with  the  nobiles,
yet  they  could  never  suppress  the  feeling  of  their
own  superiority  ;  and  the  veneration  which  histori-
cal antiquity  alone  can  bestow,  always  distinguished
them  as  individuals  from  the  nobiles.  How  much
wealth  gradually  gained  the  upper  hand,  is  seen
from  the  measure  adopted  about  the  time  of  the


PATRICII.

lirst  Punic  war,  by  which  the  expenses  for  the
public  games  wore  no  longer  given  from  the  aera-
rium,  but  were  defrayed  hj  the  aedilos  ;  and  as
their  office  was  the  first  step  to  the  great  offices  of
the  republic,  that  measure  was  a  tacit  exclusion  of
the  poorer  citizens  from  those  offices.  Under  the
emperors  the  position  of  the  patricians  as  a  body
was  not  improved  ;  the  filling  up  of  the  vacancies
in  their  order  by  the  emperors  began  more  and
more  to  assume  the  character  of  an  especial  honour,
conferred  upon  a  person  for  his  good  services  or
mercl}'  as  a  personal  favour,  so  that  the  transi-
tion I'rom  this  period  to  the  third  had  been  gra-
dually preparing.

Respecting  the  great  political  and  religious  privi-
leges which  the  patricians  at  first  possessed  alone,
but  afterwards  were  compelled  to  share  with  the
plebeians,  see  Plebs  and  the  articles  treating  of
the  sevciTil  Roman  magistracies  and  priestly  offices.
Compare  also  Gens  ;  Curia  ;  Senatus.

In  their  dross  and  appearance  the  patricians
were  scarcely  distinguished  from  the  rest  of  the
citizens,  unless  they  were  senators,  curule  magis-
trates, or  equites,  in  which  case  they  wore  like
others  the  ensigns  peculiar  to  these  dignities.  The
only  thing  by  which  they  appear  to  have  been  dis-
tinguished in  their  appearance  from  other  citizens,
was  a  peculiar  kind  of  shoes,  which  covered  the
whole  foot  and  part  of  the  leg,  though  they  were
not  as  high  as  th&  shoes  of  senators  and  curule
magistrates.  These  shoes  Avere  fastened  with  four
strings  {corrigiae  or  lora  patricia)  and  adorned  with
a  lunula  on  the  top.  (Senec.  De  Trmiquil.  Anim.
1 1  ;  Plut.  Quaest.  Rom.  75  ;  Stat.  Silv.  v.  2.  27  ;
Martial,  i.  50,  ii.  29.)  Festus  (s.  v.  Mulleos)
states  that  mulleus  was  the  name  of  the  shoes
worn  by  the  patricians  ;  but  the  passage  of  Varro
which  he  adduces  only  shows  that  the  mullei  (shoes
of  a  purple  colour)  wore  worn  by  the  curule  magis-
trates. (Compare  Dion  Cass,  xliii.  43.)

Tiiird  Period  :  from  the  lime  of  Constantine  to
the  middle  ages.  From  the  time  of  Constantine  the
dignity  of  patricius  was  a  personal  title,  which
conferred  on  the  person,  to  whom  it  was  granted,  a
very  high  rank  and  certain  privileges.  Hitherto
patricians  had  been  only  genuine  Roman  citizens,
and  the  dignity  had  descended  from  the  father  to
his  children  ;  but  the  new  dignity  was  created  at
Constantinople,  and  was  not  bestowed  on  old  Ro-
man families  ;  it  was  given,  without  any  regard
to  persons,  to  such  men  as  had  for  a  long  time  dis-
tinguished themselves  by  good  and  faithful  services
to  the  empire  or  the  emperor.  This  new  dignity
was  not  hereditary,  but  became  extinct  with  the
death  of  the  person  on  whom  it  was  conferred  ;
and  when  during  this  period  we  read  of  patrician
families,  the  meaning  is  only  that  the  head  of  such
a  family  was  a  patricius.  (Zosim.  ii.  40  ;  Cassiodor.
Variar.  vi.  2.)  The  name  patricius  during  this
period  assumed  the  conventional  meaning  of  father
of  the  emperor  (Ammian.  Marcellin.  xxix.  2  ;  Cod.
12.  tit.  3.  §5),  and  those  who  were  thus  distinguished
occupied  the  highest  rank  among  the  illustres  ;  the
consuls  alone  ranked  higher  than  a  patricius.
(Isidor.  ix.  4.  1.3;  Cod.  3.  tit.  24.  s.  3  ;  12.  tit.
3.  s.  3.)  The  titles  by  which  a  patricius  was  dis-
tmguished  were  magnificentia,  celsitudo,  eminentia,
and  magnitude.  They  were  either  engaged  in
actual  service  (for  they  generally  held  the  highest
offices  in  the  state,  at  the  court  and  in  the  pro-
vinces), and  were  then  called  patridi  praesmtalesy


PATRONOMI.  877

or  they  had  only  the  title  and  were  called  patridi
codicil/ares  or  Jio/iorarii.  (Cassiod.  viii.  9  ;  Savaron
ad  Sidon.  Apoll.  i,  3.)  All  of  them,  however,  were
distinguished  in  their  appearance  and  dress  from
ordinary  persons,  and  seldom  appeared  before  the
public  otherwise  than  in  a  carriage.  The  emperors
were  generally  very  cautious  in  bestowing  this  great
distinction,  though  some  of  the  most  arbitrary
despots  conferred  the  honour  upon  young  men  and
even  on  eunuchs,  Zeno  decreed  that  no  one  should
be  made  patricius  who  had  not  been  consul,  prae-
fect,  or  magister  militum.  (Cod.  3.  tit.  24.  s.  3.)
Justinian,  however,  did  away  with  some  of  these
restrictions.  The  elevation  to  the  rank  of  patricius
was  testified  to  the  person  by  a  writ  called  diploma.
(Sidon.  Apollin.  v.  1  6  ;  Suidas,  s.  v.  TpaixixaTeidiou  ;
compare  Cassiodor.  vi.  2,  viii.  21,  &c.)

This  new  dignity  was  not  confined  to  Romans
or  subjects  of  the  empire,  but  was  sometimes  grant-
ed to  foreign  princes,  such  as  Odoacer,  the  chief  of
the  Heruli,  and  others.  When  the  popes  of  Rome
had  established  their  authority,  they  also  assumed
the  right  of  bestowing  the  title  of  patricius  on
eminent  persons  and  princes,  and  many  of  the
German  emperors  were  thus  distinguished  by  the
popes.  In  several  of  the  Germanic  kingdoms  the
sovereigns  imitated  the  Roman  emperors  and  popes
bj--  giving  to  their  most  distinguished  subjects  the
title  of  patricius,  but  these  patricii  were  at  all
times  much  lower  in  rank  than  the  Roman  patricii,
a  title  of  which  kings  and  emperors  themselves
were  proud.

(Rein,  in  Ersch  und  Gruher''s  Encyclop'ddiey
s.  V.  Patricier,  and  for  the  early  period  of  Roman
History,  Giittling's  Gesch.  der  Rom.  Staatsverf.
p.  51,  &c.,  Becker's  Handhuch.  I.  c,  and  p.  133,
&c.)  [L.  S.]

PATRIMI  ET  MATRIMI,  also  called  Pa-
trimes  et  Matrimes,  were  those  children  whose
parents  were  both  alive  (Festus,  s.  v.  Flaminia  ;
Matrimes  ;  called  by  Dionysius,  ii.  22,  aixcpidaXfls) ;
in  the  same  way  as  pater  patrimus  signifies  a
father,  whose  own  father  is  still  alive.  (Festus,  s.  v.
Pater  Pair.)  Servius  {ad  Virg.  Georg.  31),  how-
ever, confines  the  term  patrimi  et  matrimi  to  chil-
dren born  of  parents  who  had  been  married  by
the  religious  ceremony  called  confarreatio :  it  ap-
pears probable  that  this  is  the  correct  use  of  the
term,  and  that  it  was  only  applied  to  such  children
so  long  as  their  parents  were  alive.  We  know
that  the  flamines  majores  were  obliged  to  have
been  born  of  parents  who  had  been  married  by  con-
farreatio (Tac.  An7i.  iv.  16  ;  Gains,  i.  1 12)  ;  and
as  the  children  called  patrimi  et  matrimi  are  almost
always  mentioned  in  connection  with  religious
rites  and  ceremonies  (Cic.  de  Har.  resp.  1 1  ;  Liv.
xxxvii.  3  ;  Gell.  i.  1 2  ;  Tacit.  Hist.  iv.  53  ;  Macrob.
Saturn.  6  ;  Vopisc.  Aurel.  19  ;  Orelli,  Inscr.  n.
2270),  the  statement  of  Servius  is  rendered  more
probable,  since  the  same  reason,  which  confined
the  office  of  the  flamines  majores  to  those  born  of
parents  who  had  been  married  by  confarreatio,
would  also  apply  to  the  children  of  such  marriages,
who  would  probably  be  thought  more  suitable  for
the  service  of  the  gods  than  the  offspring  of  other
marriages.  (Rein,  Das  Rom.  Privatrechi.  p.  177  ;
Gottling,  Gesch.  d.  Rom.  Staatsv.  p.  90.)

PATRO'NOMI  (Trarpoyt^juoi),  were  magistrates
at  Sparta,  who  exercised,  as  it  were,  a  paternal
power  over  the  whole  state.  Pausanias  (ii.  9.  §  1 )
says,  that  they  were  instituted  by  Cleomencs  III,


878


PATRON  US.


(B.C.  236 — 221),  who  destroyed  the  power  of  the
y€povaia  by  establishing  patronomi  in  their  place.
The  ycpovffia,  however,  was  not  abolished  by  Cleo-
menes,  as  it  is  again  spoken  of  by  Pausanias  (iii.  1 1.
§  2),  and  also  in  inscriptions.  The  patronomi  are
mentioned  by  Philostratus  ( Vit.  Apollon.  iv.  32)
among  the  principal  magistrates  along  with  the
gymnasiarchs  and  ephori  ;  and  their  office  is  also
spoken  of  by  Plutarch.  {An  sent  sit  resp.  ger.
C.24.)  Their  number  ia  uncertain;  but  Biickh
{Corp.  Inscrip.  vol.  i.  p.  605)  has  shown  that
they  succeeded  to  the  powers  which  the  ephori
formerly  possessed,  and  that  the  first  patronomus
was  the  ^ndvvfxos  of  the  state,  that  is,  gave  his
name  to  the  year  as  the  first  ephor  had  formerly
done.     (Compare  MUUer,  Dor.  iii.  7.  §  8.)

PATRO'NUS.  The  act  of  manumission  created
a  new  relation  between  the  manumissor  and  the
slave,  which  was  analogous  to  that  between  father
and  son.  The  manumissor  became  with  respect
to  the  manumitted  person  his  Patronus,  and  the
manumitted  person  became  the  Libertus  of  the
manumissor.  The  word  Patronus  (from  Pater)
indicates  the  nature  of  the  relation.  If  the  manu-
missor was  a  woman,  she  became  Patrona  ;  and
the  use  of  this  word  instead  of  Matrona  appears
to  be  explained  by  the  nature  of  the  patronal
rights.  Viewed  with  reference  to  the  early  ages
of  Rome,  this  patronal  relation  must  be  considered
a  part  of  the  ancient  Clientela  ;  but  from  the  time
of  the  Twelve  Tables  at  least,  which  contained
legislative  provisions  generally  on  the  subject  of
patronal  rights,  we  ma.y  consider  the  relation  of
Patronus  and  Libertus  as  the  same  both  in  the
case  of  Patrician  and  Plebeian  manumissores.

The  Libertus  adopted  the  gentile  name  of  the
Manumissor.  Cicero's  freedman  Tiro  was  called
M.  TuUius  Tiro.

The  Libertus  owed  respect  and  gratitude  to  his
patron,  and  in  ancient  times  the  patron  might
punish  him  in  a  summary  way  for  neglecting
those  duties.  This  obligation  extended  to  the
children  of  the  Libertus,  and  the  duty  was  due  to
the  children  of  the  patron.  In  later  times,  the
patron  had  the  power  of  relegating  an  ungrateful
freedman  to  a  certain  distance  from  Rome,  under
a  law  probably  passed  in  the  time  of  Augustus.
(Tacit.  Ann.  xiii.  26  ;  Dion  Cass.  Iv.  13.)  In  the
time  of  Nero  it  was  proposed  to  pass  a  Senatus-
consultum  which  should  give  a  patron  the  power
of  reducing  his  freedman  to  slavery,  if  he  miscon-
ducted himself  towards  his  patron.  The  measure
was  not  enacted,  but  this  power  was  given  to  the
patron  under  the  later  emperors.  The  Lex  Aelia
Sentia  gave  the  patron  a  right  of  prosecuting  his
freedman  for  ingratitude  {ut  ingratum  accusare).
(Dig.  40.  tit.  9.  8.  30.)  An  ingratus  was  also
called  Libertus  Impius,  as  being  deficient  in  Pietas.

If  the  Libertus  brought  an  action  against  the
Patronus  {in  jus  vocavtt),  he  was  himself  liable  to
a  specinl  action  on  the  case  (Gaius,  iv.  46)  ;  and
he  could  not,  as  a  general  rule,  institute  a  capital
charge  against  his  patron.  The  Libertus  was
bound  to  support  the  patron  and  his  children  in
case  of  necessity,  and  to  undertake  the  manage-
ment of  his  property  and  the  tutela  of  his  children  :
if  he  refused,  he  was  ingratus.  (Dig.  37.  tit.  14.
s.  19.)

If  a  slave  were  the  property  of  several  masters
and  were  manumitted  by  all  of  them,  and  became
a  Roman  citizen,  all  of  them  were  his  Patroni.


PATRONUS.

The  manumissor  could  secure  to  himself  further
rights  over  his  libertus  by  a  stipulatio  or  by  taking
an  oath  from  him.  The  subjects  of  such  agree-
ments were  gifts  from  the  libertus  to  the  patronus
{dona  et  munera)  and  services  {operae).  The  oath
was  not  valid,  unless  the  person  was  a  libertus
when  he  took  it.  If  then  he  took  the  oath  as  a
slave,  he  had  to  repeat  it  as  a  freeman,  which  seems
to  be  the  meaning  of  the  passage  of  Cicero  in  which
he  speaks  of  his  freedman  Chrysogonus.  {Ad  AtL,
vii.  2  ;  compare  Dig.  38.  tit.  1.  s.  7.)  These  Operae
were  of  two  kinds,  Officiales  which  consisted  in
respect  and  affection  ;  and  Fabriles  which  are  ex-
plained b}'^  the  term  itself.  The  officiales  deter-
mined by  the  death  of  the  Patronus,  unless  there
was  an  agreement  to  the  contrary  ;  but  the  fabriles
being  of  the  nature  of  money  or  money's  worth
passed  to  the  heredes  of  the  Patronus,  like  any
other  property.  The  Patronus,  when  he  commanded
the  operae  of  his  libertus,  was  said  "  ei  operas  in-
dicere  or  imponere.^'  (Gains,  iv.  162  ;  Dig.  38.
tit.  2.  s.  29.)

The  Patron  could  not  command  any  services
which  were  disgraceful  {tiirpes)  or  dangerous  to
life,  such  as  prostitution  or  fighting  in  the  amphi-
theatre ;  but  if  the  libertus  exercised  any  art  or
calling  {artificium),  even  if  he  learned  it  after  his
manumission,  the  operae  in  respect  of  it  were  due
to  the  patron.

The  Lex  Julia  et  Papia  Poppaea  released  freed-
men  (except  those  who  followdii  the  ars  ludicra  or
hired  themselves  to  fight  with  beasts)  from  all  ob-
ligation as  to  gifts  or  operae,  who  had  begotten  two
children  and  had  them  in  their  power,  or  one  child
five  years  old.  (Dig.  3^.  tit.  1.  De  Operis  Liber-
torttnt,  s.  37.)

If  liberty  was  given  directly  by  a  testament,  the
testator  was  the  manumissor,  and  his  patronal
rights  would  consequently  belong  to  his  children :
if  it  was  given  indirectly,  that  is,  per  fideicommis-
sum,  the  person  who  performed  the  act  of  manu-
mission was  the  patronus.  In  those  cases  where  a
slave  obtained  his  freedom  under  the  Senatuscon-
sultum  Silanianum,  the  Praetor  could  assign  him
a  Patronus  ;  and  if  this  was  not  done,  that  person
was  the  Patron  of  whom  the  libertus  had  last  been
the  slave.  (Dig.  38.  tit.  16.  s.  3.)

The  patronal  rights  were  somewhat  restricted,
when  the  act  of  manumission  was  not  altogether
the  free  act  of  the  manumissor.  For  instance,  the
Manumissor  per  fideicommissum  had  all  the  patro-
nal rights,  except  the  power  to  prosecute  for  ingra-
titude, the  right  to  be  supported  by  the  libertus,
and  to  stipulate  for  munera  and  operae:  his  rights
against  the  property  of  the  libertus  were  however
the  same  as  those  of  any  other  manumissor.  (Frag.
Vat.  §  225  ;  Dig.  38.  tit.  2.  s.  29.)  If  a  slave
had  given  money  to  another  person  in  order  that
this  other  person  might  purchase  and  manumit
him,  the  manumissor  had  no  patronal  rights,  and
he  lost  even  the  name  of  patron,  if  he  refused  to
perform  the  act  for  which  he  had  received  the
money  and  allowed  the  slave  to  compel  him  to  per-
form his  agreement,  which  the  slave  could  do  by  a
constitution  of  M.  Aurelius  and  L.  Verus.  (Dig.  40.
tit.  1.  s.  4,  5.)  If  a  master  manumitted  his  slave
in  consideration  of  a  sum  of  money,  he  retained  all
patronal  rights,  but  he  could  not  stipulate  for  operae.
A  person  who  purchased  a  slave,  and  on  the  occa-
sion of  the  purchase  agreed  to  manumit  him,  had
all  patronal  rights,  except  the  right  of  prosecuting


PATRON  us.

for  ingratitude,  in  case  the  slave  compelled  him  to
manumit  pursuant  to  the  constitution  of  M.  Aure-
lius  and  L.  Verus.  (Dig.  40.  tit.  9.  s.  30.)

It  was  the  duty  of  the  patron  to  support  his
freedman  in  case  of  necessity,  and  if  he  did  not,  he
lost  his  patronal  rights :  the  consequence  was  the
same  if  he  brought  a  capital  charge  against  him.
The  Lex  Aelia  Sentia,  among  its  various  provi-
sions, contciined  several  that  related  to  the  rights
and  duties  of  the  patron.

A  capitis  diminutio,  either  of  the  Patron  or  the
Libertus,  dissolved  the  relation  between  them.
(See  Tacit,  ^zs^.  ii.  92,  where  "jura  libertorum  "
means  "jura  patronorum,"  or  "jura  in  libertos.")
The  relation  was  dissolved  when  the  Libertus
obtained  Ligenuitas  by  the  Natalium  Restitutio,
but  not  Avhen  he  merely  obtained  the  jus  aureorum
annulorum.  [Ingenuus.]

The  most  important  of  the  Patronal  rights  re-
lated to  the  property  of  Liberti  who  died  intestate
or  having  made  a  testament.

The  subject,  so  far  as  concerns  the  Ante-Justi-
nian period,  may  be  distributed  under  the  two  fol-
lowing heads  :  —  L  the  ordinary  rules  of  law,  and
2.  the  extraordinary  :  the  former  comprehend  the
rules  of  the  old  civil  law,  and  the  Edict  on  the
Bonorum  Possessio  ;  and  the  latter,  the  Bononmi
Possessio  contra  tabulas  liberti  and  contra  sues
non  naturales,  the  Bonorum  Possessio  contra  tabu-
las  libertae,  and  the  right  to  a  virilis  pars  which
was  given  by  the  Lex  Papia  Poppaea,

By  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  if  a  freedman
died  intestate,  without  sui  heredes,  the  patronus
was  his  heir.  This  right  was  viewed  as  a  right  of
Agnation.  The  Legitima  patronorum  tutela  was
not  expressly  mentioned  in  the  Twelve  Tables,
but  it  was  a  legal  consequence  of  the  rule  as  to
inheritance.  (Ulp.  Fni^.  xi.  3.)  In  the  case  of  an
intestate  liberta,  who  could  not  have  a  suus  heres,
the  patron  was  heres.  The  Senatusconsultum  Orfi-
tianum,  which  was  passed  after  Gains  wrote  (iii.
5\),  and  in  the  last  year  but  one  of  the  reign  of
M.  Aurelius,  made  an  alteration  in  this  respect.
The  passage  of  Ulpian  (Frag.  xxix.  2),  which  was
written  when  this  Senatusconsultum  was  in  force,
says,  that  if  a  liberta  died  intestate,  the  patron  suc-
ceeded to  her  property,  because  a  mother  could  not
have  sui  heredes  ;  yet  Ulpian  himself  (lib.  12,  ad
Subinum;  Dig.  38.  tit.  17.  s.  1)  says,  that  whether
the  mother  was  Ingenua  or  Libertina,  the  children
could  succeed  to  her  inheritance  by  the  Senatus-
consultum Orfitianura.  This  apparent  contradic-
tion is  removed  by  the  supposition  that  the  Sena-
tusconsultum gave  the  children  in  such  cases  an
equal  right  with  the  patron.

These  patronal  rights  belonged  both  to  a  Patro-
nus and  a  Patrona,  and  to  the  liberi  of  a  Patronus.
(Ulp.  Frag,  xxvii.)  The  male  children  of  the  pa-
tronus had  the  same  rights  as  the  patronus  himself ;
but  the  females  had  only  the  rights  which  the
Twelve  Tables  gave  to  the  males,  and  they  had  not
the  Bonorum  Possessio  contra  tabulas  testamenti
liberti  aut  ab  intestate  contra  sues  heredes  non
naturales,  until  these  rights  were  given  them  by
the  Lex  Papia  Poppaea.  ( Ulp.  Frag.  xxix.  4,  5. )
A  difficulty  which  is  raised  by  a  passage  in  Jus-
tinian's legislation  on  the  patronal  rights  is  dis-
cussed by  Unterholzner.  {Zeitschrift,  v.  p.  37.)  It
seems  that  the  children  of  a  Patrona  had  not  by
the  Twelve  Tables  the  same  rights  as  the  children
of  a  Patronus,  but  the  Lex  Papia  Poppaea  probably


PATRONUS.


879


made  some  change  in  this  respect.  (Zeifschri/t,  v.
p.  43,  &c.)

In  order  that  these  patronal  rights  should  exist,
it  was  necessary  that  the  libertus  must  have  been
made  free  by  a  Roman  citizen,  and  have  become  a
Roman  citizen  by  the  act  of  manumission.  Ac-
cordingly, if  a  person  obtained  the  citizenship,  it
was  necessary  that  he  should  have  a  special  grant
of  the  jus  patronatus,  in  order  that  he  might  have
patronal  rights  against  his  then  freedmen,  who
must  also  at  the  same  time  become  Roman  citizens.
(Plin.  Fp.  X.  6.)  A  capitis  diminutio,  as  already
observed,  either  of  the  patron  or  the  libertus,  de-
stroyed the  'patronal  rights  to  the  inheritance.
(Gains,  iii.  51.)

If  there  were  several  patroni  or  patronae,  they
divided  the  inheritance  equally,  though  their  shares
in  the  libertus  when  a  slave  might  have  been  un-
equal. These  patronal  rights  resembled  a  joint-
tenancy  in  English  Law,  for  the  survivor  or  survi-
vors of  the  patroni  had  all  the  patronal  rights
to  the  exclusion  of  any  children  of  a  deceased
patronus.  A  son  of  a  patron  also  claimed  the  in-
heritance to  the  exclusion  of  the  grandson  of  a
patron.  If  the  patroni  were  all  dead,  leaving  several
children,  the  hereditas  was  divided  among  all  the
children  equally  (m  capita),  pursuant  to  the  law  of
succession  in  the  case  of  Agnation,  ((raius,  iii.
lb",  59,  &c.)

A  Senatusconsultum,  which  was  passed  in  the
time  of  Claudius,  allowed  a  patron  to  assign  his
patronal  rights  to  the  inheritance  of  a  libertus,  to
any  of  his  children  whom  he  had  in  his  power,  to
the  exclusion  of  the  rest.  (Dig.  38.  tit.  4.)

The  Edict  extended  the  Bonorum  Possessio  to
Patroni.  The  Patronal  rights  of  the  Civil  Law
were  founded  on  an  assumed  Agnatio  :  those  of  the
Edict  were  founded  on  an  assumed  Cognatio.  The
Eldict  called  to  the  Bonorum  Possessio  of  Liberti,
1.  their  children  ;  2.  their  heredes  legitimi  ;  3.  their
cognati,  who  must  of  course  be  descendants  ;  4.  the
familia  of  the  Patronus  ;  5.  the  patronus  and  pa-
trona, and  their  children  and  parents,  by  which
provision  was  made  in  case  the  Patronus  or  Pa-
trona had  sustained  a  capitis  diminutio,  and  so
could  not  be  called  in  the  fourth  order  ;  6.  the
husband  or  wife  of  the  freedwoman  or  freedman  ;
7.  the  cognati  of  the  manumissor.

Originally,  if  the  freedman  made  a  will,  he  could
pass  over  (praeterire)  the  patron.  But  by  the
Edict,  unless  he  left  him  as  much  as  one  half  of
his  propertj"^,  the  patron  or  his  male  children  could
obtain  the  Bonorum  possessio  contra  tabulas  of
one  half  of  the  property.  If  the  libertus  died
intestate,  leaving  no  suus  heres,  except  an  adopted
child,  or  a  wife  in  manu,  or  a  nurus  in  the
manus  of  his  son,  the  patron  had  a  bonorum
possessio  of  one  half  against  these  sui  heredes.
But  if  the  libertus  had  children  of  his  own  blood
(naturales)  either  in  his  power  at  the  time  of  his
death  or  emancipated  or  given  in  adoption,  and  if
these  children  were  made  heredes  by  his  testament
or  being  praeteriti  claimed  the  Bonorum  possessio
contra  tabulas,  the  patron  had  no  claim  on  the
freedman 's  property.  The  patron  was  not  excluded,
if  the  children  of  the  freedman  were  exheredated.
(Gains,  iii.  40;  Dion  Cass.  li.  15,  and  the  note
of  Reimarus.)

By  the  Lex  Papia  Poppaea,  if  a  freedman  had  a
property  amounting  to  a  hundred  thousand  sestertii
and  fewer  than  three  children,  the  patronus  had  an


880


PATRONUS


equal  share  (virilispars)  with  the  children,  whether
the  freedinan  died  testate  or  intestate  ;  and  a
patrona  ingenua,  who  had  three  children,  enjoyed
the  same  privilege.  Before  the  Lex  Papia,  Patronae
had  only  the  rights  which  the  Twelve  Tables  gave
them  ;  but  this  Lex  put  Ingenuae  patronae  who
had  two  children,  and  Libertinae  patronae  Avho
had  three  children,  on  the  same  footing  with  re-
spect to  the  Bonorum  possessio  contra  tabulas  and
with  respect  to  an  adopted  son,  a  wife  in  manu,  or
a  nurus  in  manu  filii,  as  the  Edict  had  placed  Pa-
troni.  The  Lex  did  the  same  for  daughters  of  the
Patronus  who  had  three  children.  The  Lex  also
gave  to  a  Patrona  ingenua,  but  not  to  a  Libertina,
who  had  three  children,  the  same  rights  that  it
g-ave  to  a  Patronus.

According  to  the  old  law,  as  the  liberta  was
in  the  legitima  tutela  of  her  patron,  she  could  make
no  disposition  of  her  property  without  his  consent
( patrono  auctore).  The  Lex  Papia  freed  a  liberta
from  this  tutela,  if  she  had  four  children,  and  she
could  consequently  then  make  a  will  without  the
consent  of  her  patronus,  but  the  law  provided  that
the  patronus  should  have  an  equal  share  with  her
surviving  children.

In  the  case  of  a  liberta  dying  intestate,  the
Lex  Papia  gave  no  further  rights  to  a  Patrona,
who  had  children  {liberls  honoratae)  than  she  had
before  ;  and  therefore  if  there  had  been  no  capitis
diminutio  of  the  Patrona  or  the  Liberta,  the  Pa-
trona inherited  the  property,  even  if  she  had  no
children,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  children  of  the
liberta.  If  the  liberta  made  a  will,  the  Lex  Papia
gave  to  the  Patrona,  who  had  the  number  of  chil-
dren required  by  that  law,  the  same  rights  which
the  Edict  gave  to  the  Patronus  contra  tabulas  li-
berti.  The  same  Lex  gave  to  the  daughter  of  a
patrona,  who  had  a  single  child,  the  same  rights
that  the  patronus  had  contra  tabulas  liberti.  (Gaius,
iii.  53  ;  a  passage  which  Unterholzner  proposes  to
correct,  but  on  very  insufficient  grounds,  Zeitschrift,
V.  p.  45.)

The  rules  of  law  as  to  the  succession  of  the
Patroims  to  the  property  of  Latini  Liberti  differed
in  various  respects  from  those  that  have  been  ex-
plained. Being  viewed  as  a  peculium,  it  had  the
incidents  of  such  property.  It  came  to  the  extranei
heredes  of  the  manumissor,  but  not  to  his  exhere-
dated  children,  in  both  which  respects  it  differed
from  the  property  of  a  Libertus  who  was  a  Civis
Romanus.  If  there  were  several  patrons,  it  came
to  them  in  proportion  to  their  interests  in  the
former  slave,  and  it  was  consistent  with  this  doc-
trine that  the  share  of  a  deceased  patronus  should
go  to  his  heres.  The  Senatusconsultum  Largianum,
which  was  passed  in  the  time  of  Claudius,  enacted
that  the  property  of  Latini  should  go  first  to  those
who  had  manumitted  them,  then  to  their  liberi
who  were  not  expressly  exheredated,  according  to
proximity,  and  then  according  to  the  old  law,  to
the  heredes  of  the  manumissor.  The  only  effect
of  this  Senatusconsultum  was  to  prefer  liberi,  who
were  not  expressly  exheredated,  to  extranei  heredes.
Accordingly,  an  emancipated  son  of  the  patronus,
who  was  praeteritus,  and  who  could  not  claim  the
Bonorum  possessio  of  his  father's  property  contia
tabulas  testamenti,  had  a  claim  to  the  property  of
a  Latinus  prior  to  the  extranei  heredes.

As  to  the  Dediticii  under  the  Lex  Aelia  Scntia,
there  were  two  rules.  The  property  of  those  who
on  their  manumission  \rould  have  become  Roman


PECHUS.

citizens,  but  for  the  impediments  thereto,  came
to  their  patroni  as  if  they  liad  been  Roman  citizens :
they  had  not  however  the  testamenti  factio.  The
property  of  those,  who  on  their  manumission  would
have  become  Latini,  but  for  the  impediments  thereto,
came  to  their  patroni  as  if  they  had  been  Latini ,
on  this  Gaius  remarks  that  in  this  matter  the
legislator  had  not  very  clearly  expressed  his  in-
tentions. He  had  already  made  a  similar  remark
as  to  a  provision  of  the  Lex  Papia  (iii.  47).

As  to  the  other  meanings  of  the  word  Patronus,
see  Cliens  and  Orator.

The  subject  of  the  Patronatus  is  one  of  con-
siderable importance  towards  a  right  understanding
of  many  parts  of  the  Roman  polity.  This  imperfect
outline  may  be  filled  up  by  referring  to  the  follow-
ing authorities.  (Gaius,  iii.  39 — 76  :  Ul plan,  i^ra*/.
tit.  xxvii.  xxix.  ;  Dig.  37.  tit.  14,  15  ;  38.  tit.  1,  2,
3,  &c. ;  the  Index  to  Paulus,  ScJit.  Recept.  ;  and  for
Justinian's  legislation.  Inst.  3.  tit.  8,  &c.  ;  Unter^
holzner,  Ueber  das  patronatische  ErbrecJit.,  Zeit-
scltrlft^  v.,  and  the  article  Gens,  with  the  references
in  Rein,  Das  Rom.  PrivatrecU,  p.  285,  and  in
Walter,  Geschichte  des  Rom.  Rechfs,  pp.  507 — 516,
and  684—689.)  [G.  L.]

PAVIMENTUM.  [Domus,  p.  431,  a ;  Viae.]

PAVONACEUM.    [Tegula.]

PAUPE'RIE,  ACTIO  DE.    [Pauperies.]

PAUPE'RIES  was  the  legal  term  for  mischief
done  by  an  animal  (quadrupes)  contrary  to  the
nature  of  the  animal,  as  if  a  man's  ox  gored  an-
other man.  In  such  cases,  the  law  of  the  Twelve
Tables  gave  the  injured  person  an  action  against
the  owner  of  the  animal  for  the  amount  of  the
damage  sustained.  The  owner  was  bound  either
to  pay  the  full  amount  of  damages  or  to  give  up
the  animal  to  the  injured  person  {noxae  dare).
Pauperies  excluded  the  notion  of  Injuria  ;  it  is  de-
fined to  be  "  damnum  sine  injuria  facientis  factum,''
for  an  animal  could  not  be  said  to  have  done  a
thing  "  injuria,  quod  sensu  caret."  The  actio  de
pauperie  belonged  to  the  class  of  Noxales  Actiones.
According  to  the  old  law,  if  a  bear  got  away  from
his  master,  he  was  not  liable  ;  because  Avhen  the
animal  got  away,  it  ceased  to  be  the  master's  pro-
perty. But  the  Aedile's  edict  declared  that  it
was  not  lawful  to  keep  a  dog,  boar,  wild  boar,'
bear,  or  lion,  in  any  place  which  v/as  a  place  of
public  resort.  If  this  rule  was  violated,  and  any
damage  was  done  by  one  of  these  beasts  to  a  free-
man, the  judex  might  condemn  the  owner  in  such
sum  as  he  should  think  to  be  "bonum  et  aequum."
If  damage  was  done  to  any  thing  else,  the  judex
might  condemn  the  owner  in  double  the  amount  of
the  damage.  There  might  also  be  an  actio  d&
pauperie  in  addition  to  the  aedilitiae  actiones.  (Dig.
9.  tit.  1  ;   Inst.  4.  tit.  9.)  [G.  L.]

PAUSA'RII,  was  the  name  given  to  the  priests
of  Isis  at  Rome,  because  they  were  accustomed  in
the  processions  in  honour  of  Isis  to  make  pauses
{pausae)  at  certain  chapels  or  places,  called  man-
siones,  by  the  road's  side,  to  sing  hymns  and  per-
form other  sacred  rites.  (Orelli,  In:scr.  n.  1885  ;
Spartian.  Fescen.  Nig.  6,  CaracalL  9 ;  Salm.  ad
loc.)

The  portisadus,  or  commander  of  the  rowers  in
a  vessel,  was  semietimes  called /)a?/sariMs  (Sen.  Ep.
56),  because  the  rowers  began  and  ceased  (pausa)
their  strokes  according  to  his  commands.  [Poutis-

CULUS.]

PECHUS  (tttixvs).     [Cubitus  ;  Mensura.J


PECULATUS.

PECTEN  (KTeis),  a  comb.  The  Greeks  and
Romans  used  combs  made  of  box-wood  (Brunek,
Anal.  i.  221;  Ovid.  Fast,  tk  23;  Mart.  xiv.  25),
which  they  obtained,  as  we  do,  from  the  shores  of
the  Eiixiiie  sea.  The  mountain  ridge  of  Cytorus
in  Galatia  was  particularly  celebrated  for  this  pro-
duct. (Ovid.  Met.  iv.  311.)  The  Egyptians  had
ivory  combs  (Apul.  Met.  xi.  p.  121,  ed.  Aldi),
which  also  came  into  use  by  degrees  among  the
Romans.  (Claudmn^  de  Nupt.  Honor.  102.)  The
golden  comb,  ascribed  to  the  goddesses,  is  of  course
imaginary.  (CaWim.  in  Lav.  Pall.  SI.)  The  wooden
combs,  found  in  Egyptian  tombs,  are  toothed  on
one  side  only  ;  but  the  Greeks  used  them  with
teeth  on  both  sides,  as  appears  from  the  remains  of
combs  found  t  Pompeii  (Donaldson's  Pompeii,
vol.  ii.  pi.  78),  and  from  the  representation  of  three
combs,  exactly  like  our  small-tooth  combs,  on  the
Am3'claean  marbles.  {Memoirs  relating  to  Turkey,
edited  by  Walpole,  p.  452.)

The  principal  use  of  the  comb  was  for  dressing
the  hair  (Ovid.  Amor.  i.  14.  15,  Met.  xii.  409),
in  doing  which  the  Greeks  of  both  sexes  were  re-
markably careful  and  diligent.  (Herod,  vii.  208.)
To  go  with  uncombed  hair  was  a  sign  of  affliction.
(Soph.  Oed.  Co/.  1257.)

A  comb  with  iron  teeth  was  used  in  com-fiekls
to  separate  the  grain  from  the  straw,  whilst  it
was  yet  standing.  (Col.  de  Re  Rust.  ii.  2L)  This
method  of  reaping  was  called  pectinare  segeiem.
A  painting  in  the  sepulchral  grotto  of  El  Kab  in
Egypt  represents  a  man  combing  flax  for  the  pur-
pose of  separating  the  Mnseed  from  the  stem.  The
rake  used  in  making  hay  is  called  rarus  pectcn
(Ovid.  Rem.  Amor.  192),  because  its  teeth  are  far
apart ;  but  this  may  be  only  a  poetical  use  of  the
term.

Two  portions  of  the  Greek  Iyi?e  were  called  the
combs  (Eratosth.  Catasier.  24)  ;  they  may  have
been  two  rows  of  pegs,  to  which  the  strings  were
tied.  The  use  of  the  comb  in  weaving,  and  the
transference  of  its  name  to  the  plectrum,  are  ex-
plained under  Tela.  [J.  Y.]

PECUA'RII,  the  name  given  to  persons  who
pastured  their  cattle  on  the  public  lands  (pascua),
for  which  they  were  bound  to  pay  a  tax  to  the
state,  called  Scriptura.  But  in  the  earlier  times
of  the  republic  manj'  persons  supported  their  cattle
on  the  public  pastures  without  paying  this  tax  at
all,  or  paying  less  than  was  legally  due  ;  and  hence
the  word  pecuarii  was  frequently  employed  to
signify  those  persons  who  thus  illegally  made  use
of  the  public  pastures.  They  were  often  prose-
cuted by  the  aediles  and  fined  (Ov.  Fast.  v.  283 —
294;  Liv.  X.  23,  47,  xxxiii.  42,  xxxv.  10;  Fes-
tus,  p.  238.  ed.  Miiller.)

PECULATUS  is  properly  the  misappropriation
or  theft  of  public  property  (pecunia  publica),
whether  it  was  done  by  a  functionary  or  by  a
private  person.  Labeo  defines  it  thus,  "pecuniae
publicae  aut  sacrae  furtum,  non  ab  eo  factum,
cujus  periculo  est"  The  person  guilty  of  this
offence  was  Peculator.  Cicero  {de  Of.  iii.  18)
enumerates  Peculatores  with  sicarii,  venefici,  testa-
mentarii  and  fures.  The  origin  of  the  word  ap-
pears to  be  Pecus,  a  term  Avhich  originally  denoted
that  kind  of  movable  property  which  was  the  chief
sign  of  wealth.  Originally  trials  for  Peculatus  were
before  the  Populus,  or  before  the  Senate.  (Liv.  v.
32,  xxxvii.  57,  xxxviii.  54.)  In  the  time  of
Cieero  matters  of  peculatus  were  one  of  the  Quaes-


PEDUM.


881


tiones  perpetuae,  which  imply  some  Lex  de  Pecu-
lalm,  and  such  a  Lex  is  by  some  writers  emim  rated
am-ong  the  Leges  Sullanae,  but  without  stating  the
authority  for  this  assertion.  Two  Leges  relating
to  Peculatus  are  cited  in  the  Digest,  Lex  Julia
Peculatus  and  Lex  Julia  de  Residuis  (Dig.  48.
tit.  13)  ;  but  these  may  be  the  same  Lex,  though
quoted  as  two  Leges,  just  as  the  Lex  Julia  de
Adulteriis  comprised  a  provision  De  Fundo  Dotali,
which  chapter  is  often  quoted  as  if  it  were  a  sepa-
rate Lex.  Matters  relating  to  sacrilege  were  also
comprised  in  the  Lex  Julia  Peculatus  {ne  quis  ex
pecunia  sacra,  religiosa  publicave  auferat,  &c.)  ;
matters  relating  to  the  debasement  of  the  coinage  ;
the  erasing  or  cancelling  of  tabulae  publicae,  &c.
The  Lex  de  Residuis  applied  to  those  who  had  re-
ceived public  money  for  public  purposes  and  had
retained  it  {apttd  quern  pecunia  puUiea  resedit).
The  penalty  under  this  Lex,  on  conviction,  was  a
third  part  of  the  sum  retained.  The  punishment
which  was  originally  aquae  et  ignis  interdictio,  Avas
changed  into  Deportatio  under  the  Empire :  the
offender  lost  all  his  rights,  and  his  property  was
forfeited.  (Inst.  4.  tit.  18.  §9.)  Under  the  Em-
pire sacrilege  was  punished  with  death.  A  "  Sa-
crilegus "  is  one  who  plunders  public  sacred
places.  (Rein,  Das  Criminalrecht  der  Romer,
p.  672.)  [G.  L.]

PECU'LIO,  ACTIO  DE.    [Servus.]

PECU'LIUM.     [Servus,]

PECU'LIUM  CASTRENSE.     [Patria  Po-

TESTAS.]

PECU'NIA.     [NuMMus.]
PECU'NIA.     [Heres,  p.  598,  a.]
PECU'NI A  CERTA.  [Obligationes,  p.  818.]
PECU'NIAE      REPETUNDAE.       [Repe-

TUNDAE.]

PEDA'NEUS  JUDEX.  [Judbtx  Pedaneus.]

PEDA'RIL     [Senatus.]

PEDI'SEQUT,  a  class  of  slaves,  whose  duty
was  to  follow  their  master  when  he  went  out  of
his  house.  This  name  does  not  appear  to  have
been  given  to  any  slave,  who  accompanied  his
master  ;  but  the  pedisequ-i  seem  to  have  formed  a
special  class,  which  was  almost  the  lowest  of  all.
(Nep.  Attie.  13  ;  Plaut.  MiL  Glor.  iv.  2.  18.)
There  was  a  similar  class  of  female  slaves,  called
pedisequae.  (Plaut.  A  sin.  i.  3.  31.)  Compare
Becker,  Gallus,  vol.  i.  p.  101.

PEDUM  (Kopvvq,  Xay<a§6\os,  Theocrit.  vii.  43,
128),  a  crook.  The  accompajiying  woodcut  is
taken  from  a  painting  found  at  Civita  Vecchia.
{Ant.  d''Ercolano,  vol.  iii.  tav.  53.)     It  shows  the


3l


882


PELLIS.


crook  in  the  hand  of  a  shepherdess,  who  sits  upon
a  rock,  tending  sheep  and  other  cattle.     (See  also

woodcut  to  OSCILLUM.)

On  account  of  its  connection  with  pastoral  life
the  crook  is  continually  seen  in  works  of  ancient
art  in  the  hands  of  Pan  (Sil.  Ital.  Pun.  xiii.  334),
and  of  satyrs,  fauns,  and  shepherds.  It  was  also
the  usual  attribute  of  Thalia,  as  the  Muse  of
Pastoral  poetry.  (Combe,  Anc.  Marbles  of  Br.
Museum,  Part  iii.  pi,  5.)  [J.  Y.]

PEGMA  (7rij7;iia),  a  pageant,  i.  e.  an  edifice  of
wood,  consisting  of  two  or  more  stages  {4abulata\
which  were  raised  or  depressed  at  pleasure  by
means  of  Imlance- weights  (ponderibtte  reductis,
Claudian,  de  MaUii  Theod.  Cons.  323—328  ;  Sen.
Epist.  89).  These  great  machines  were  used  in
the  Roman  amphitheatres  (Juv,  iv.  121 ;  Mart.  i.  2.
2 ;  Sueton,  Claud.  34),  the  gladiators  who  fought
upon  them  being  called  pegmares.  {Codig.  26.)
Thi-y  were  suppca-ted  upon  wheels  so  as  to  be
drawn  into  the  circu^,  glittering  with  silver  and  a
profusion  of  wealth.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii.  3.  s.  16..)
At  other  times  they  exhibited  a  magnificent  though
dangerous  (Vopisc.  Casin.  15)  display  of  fire-
works. (Claudian,  I.  c.)  Accidents  sometimes  hap-
pened to  the  musicians  and  other  performers  who
were  carried  upon  them.    (Phaedr.  v.  7.  7.)

The  pegmata  mentioned  by  Cicero  (adAtt.  iv.  8)
may  have  been  movable  book-cases.         [J.  Y.]

PEGMARES.     [Pegma.]

PELATAE  (ireAdTai),  are  defined  by  Pollux
(iii.  82)  and  other  authorities  to  be  free  labourers
working  for  hire,  like  the  ^ryres,  in  contradistinc-
tion to  the  Helots  and  Penestae,  who  were  bonds-
men or  serfs,  having  lost  their  freedom  by  conquest
or  otherwise.  Aristotle  {ap.  Phot.  s.  v,  UfAdTai)
thus  connects  their  name  with  ire'Aas :  HeXarai,  he
says,  from  TreAas,  olov  eyyiffra  Sia  ireviav  rrpocr-
iovres :  i.  e.  persons  who  are  obliged  by  poverty
to  attach  themselves  to  others.  Timaeus  {Lea
Plat.  s.  V.)  gives  the  same  explanation.  Ue\d.Trjs,
6  clutI  Tpotpwv  i)irr]p€Tcov  Kol  Trpo(nr€\d^wu.  In
the  later  Greek  writers,  such  as  Dionysius  of
Halicarnassus,  and  Plutarch,  the  word  is  used  for
the  Latin  cliens,  though  the  relations  expressed
by  the  two  terms  are  by  no  means  similar.  Plu-
tarch (Ages.  c.  6)  also  uses  the  word  rather  loosely
for  Helots,  and  we  are  told  of  a  nation  of  Illyrians
(the  Ardiaei)  who  possessed  300,000  Prospelatae,
compared  by  Theopompus  (ap.  Alh.  vi.  p.  271,
d.  e.)  with  the  Helots  of  Laconia.  (Miiller,  Dor.
iii.  4.  §  7  ;  Wachsmuth,  Hellen.  Alterthumsk.  vol.  i.
pp.  361,  811,  2d  ed.  ;  Hermann,  Griech.  Staaisal-
terth.  §  101,  n.  9.)  [R.  W.]

PELLEX.       [CONCUBINA.]

PELLIS  (8ep/io,  lopd\  the  hide  or  skin  of  a
quadruped.  Before  weaving  was  introduced  into
Europe  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  its  inhabit-
ants were  universally  clothed  in  skins.  The  prac-
tice continued  among  the  less  civilised  nations
(Virg.  Georg.  iii.  383  ;  Tacit.  Germ.  17,  46;  Ovid,
Trid.  iii.  10.  19),  and  is  often  ascribed  by  the
poets  to  heroes  and  imaginary  beings  [Comp.
Aegis;  Nebris.]  The  term  cricrvpa  or  a-ia-vpua^
denoted  an  article  of  domestic  furniture,  which  was
made  by  sewing  together  several  goat-skins  with
the  hair  on.  (SchoL  in  Aristoph.  Aves,  122.)  The
sheep-skin  (ota^  vAkos,  Sicpdcpa)  was  worn  not
only  by  the  Lacedaemonian  helots,  but  frequently
by  the  laborious  poor,  as  is  still  the  case  in  many
parts  of  Europe.     The  lamb-skin  was  called  ap-


PENESTAE.

vaKis,  and  a  dress,  supposed  to  have  had  a  sheep-
skin sewed  to  it  below,  Karwv&Ki].

VYAjTA  {itiXrti),  a  small  shield.  Iphicrates,
observing  that  the  ancient  Ci.ipeus  was  cumbrous
and  inconvenient,  introduced  among  the  Greeks
a  much  smaller  and  lighter  shield,  from  which
those  who  bore  it  took  the  name  of  peliastae.
[ExERciTUS,  p.  487,  b.]  It  consisted  principally
of  a  frame  of  wood  or  wickerwork  (Xen.  Anab.
ii.  1.  §6),  covered  with  skin  or  leather,  without
the  metallic  rim.  [Antvx.]  (Timaeus,  Leoo.
Plat,  s.  V.)  Light  and  small  shields  of  a  great
variety  of  shapes  were  used  by  aiamerous  nations
before  the  adoption  of  them  by  the  (Greeks.  The
round  target  or  cetra  was  a  species  of  the  Pelta,
and  was  used  especially  by  the  people  of  Spain
and  Mauritania.  [Cetra. J  The  Pelta  is  also
said  to  have  been  quadrangular.  (Schol.  in  Thucyd.
ii.  29.)  A  light  shield  of  similar  construction  was
part  of  the  national  armour  of  Thrace  (Thucyd.
ii.  29;  Eurip.  Alces.  516,  Rlies,  407;  Max.  Tyr.
Diss,  vii.)  and  of  various  parts  of  Asia,  and  was  on
this  account  attributed  to  the  Amazons,  in  whose
hands  it  appears  on  the  works  of  ancient  art  some-
times elliptic,  as  in  the  bronzes  of  Siris  (woodcut,
p.  712),  and  at  other  times  variously  sinuated  on
the  margin,  but  most  -commonly  with  a  semicir-
cular indentation  on  one  side  {lunatis  peUis^  Virg.
Aen.  i.  490,  xi.  663).  An  elegant  form  of  the
pelta  is  exhibited  in  the  annexed  woodcut,  taken
from  a  «epulchral  urn  in  the  Capitoline  Museum  at
Rome,  and  representing  Penthesileia,  Queen  of  the
Amazons,  in  the  act  of  offering  aid  to  Priam.


PELTASTAE.       [Exercitus,    p.
Pelta.]

PENATES.  See  Did.  of  Gr.  and  Rom.  Biogr.
and  Myth.

PENESTAE  (Trej/eVrot),  probably  from  ireVeo--
0aj,  operari.  (Dionys.  ii.  9.)  The  Penestae  of
Thessaly  are  generally  conceived  to  have  stood  in
nearly  the  same  relation  to  their  Thessalian  lords
as  the  Helots  of  Laconia  did  to  the  Dorian  Spar-
tans, although  their  condition  seems  to  have  been
on  the  whole  superior.  (Plat.  Leg.  vi.  p.  776.)
They  were  the  descendants  of  the  old  Pelasgic  or
Aeolian  inhabitants  of  Thessaly  proper,  and  the
following  account  is  given  of  them  by  an  author


PENTATHLON.

called  Archemachus,  in  his  Euboica.  (Athen.  vi.
p.  264.)  "•  The  Aeolian  Boeotians  who  did  not
emigrate  when  their  country  Thessaly  was  con-
quered by  the  Thessalians  (compare  Thuc.  i.  12),
surrendered  themselves  to  the  victors  on  condition
that  they  should  not  be  carried  out  of  the  country
(whence,  he  adds,  they  were  formerly  called
Mez/eVroj,  but  afterwards  nei/eVrat),  nor  be  put  to
death,  but  should  cultivate  the  land  for  the  new
owners  of  the  soil,  paying  by  way  of  rent  a  portion
of  the  produce  of  it :  and  many  of  them  are  richer
than  their  masters."  They  were  also  called
ApLTp^is.  It  appears  then  that  they  occupied  an
intermediate  position  between  freemen  and  pur-
chased slaves,  being  reduced  to  servitude  by  con-
quest, and  resembling,  in  their  fixed  payments,
the  'EKTTifjLSpioi  of  Attica.  Moreover,  they  were
not  subject  to  the  whole  community,  but  belonged
to  particular  houses,  whence  also  they  were  called
&e(r<Ta\oiK4Tai.  They  were  very  numerous,  for
instance,  in  the  families  of  the  Aleuadae  and
Scopadae.  (Theocr.  xvi.  35  ;  Miiller,  Dor.  iii.  4.
§  6.)  We  may  add  that  amongst  the  Thessalian
Penestae  Theopompus  includes  the  descendants  of
the  conquered  Magnesians  and  Perrhaebians
(Athen.  vi.  p.  265),  a  statement  which  can  only
apply  to  a  part  of  these  nations,  as,  though  reduced
to  dependence,  they  were  not  made  entirely  sub-
ject.   (Herod,  viii.  132  ;  Mull.  /.  c.)

From  a  passage  in  Demosthenes  (c.  Arist.  687,
1)  it  appears  that  the  Penestae  sometimes  accom-
panied their  masters  to  battle,  and  fought  on  horse-
back, as  their  knights  or  vassals :  a  circumstance
which  need  not  excite  surprise,  as  Thessaly  wag
so  famous  for  cavalry.  The  Penestae  of  Thessaly
also  resembled  the  Laconian  Helots  in  another  re-
spect ;  for  they  often  rose  up  in  arms  against  their
lords.  (Arist.  Pol.  ii.  6.)  There  were  Penestae
amongst  the  Macedonians  also.  (Miiller,  I.  c.  ;
"Wachsmuth,  Alterthumsk.  Hellen.  vol.  i.  pp.  177,
402,  403,  642,  2d  ed. ;  Thirlwall,  Hist,  of  Greece,
vol.  i.  p.  437;  Clinton,  Fast.  Hell.  Appendix,  c.
22.)  [R.  W.]

PENICILLUS.     [PicTURA,  No.VL]

PENTACOSIOMEDIMNI.  [Census,  p.
266,  a.]

PENTADORON.    [Later.]

PENTAETE'RIS  (TrevTaeTVfxls).  [Olympia,
p.  829,b.]

PENTALITHUS  (ir^vrdkieos).  [Gymna-
sium, p.  582,  a  ;  Talus.]

PENTASPASTON.     [Machina.]

PENTATHLON  {trivTaeXov,  quinquertium)
was  next  to  the  pancratium  tiie  most  beautiful  of
all  athletic  performances.  (Herod,  ix.  33  ;  Pans,
iii.  11.  §  6.)  It  does  not  appear  to  have  been
known  in  the  heroic  ages  of  Greece,  although
Apollodorus  (ii.  4.  §  4),  according  to  the  usual
practice  of  later  times,  describes  Perseus  as  killing
Acrisius  in  the  pentathlon,  and  although  its  inven-
tion was  attributed  to  Peleus.  (Schol.  ad  Find.
Nem.  vii.  11.)  These  accounts  are  fabulous  ;  the
pentathlon  was  not  practised  until  the  time  when
the  great  national  games  of  Greece  began  to  flourish.
The  persons  engaged  in  it  were  called  pentathli
(ireuraeKoi,  Herod,  ix.  75  ;  Pans.  i.  29.  §  4).  The
pentathlon  consisted  of  five  distinct  kinds  of  games,
viz.  leaping  (a\jLia),  the  foot-race  (Spd/xos),  the
throwing  of  the  discus  (diffKos),  the  throwing  of  the
spear  (aiyvvvos  or  olkovtiov),  and  wrestling  (ttoAtj)
(Schol.  ad  Flat,  Amat.   p.  135  ;   Siraonides    in


PENTATHLON.


883


Anthol  Palat.  vol.  ii.  p.  626,  ed.  Jacobs),  which
were  all  performed  in  one  day  and  in  a  certain
order,  one  after  the  other,  by  the  same  athletae.
(Schol.  ad  Soph.  El.  QQ 1  ;  Paus.  iii.  1 1 .  §  6.)  The
pentathlon  was  introduced  in  the  Olympic  games
in  01.  18,  and  we  may  presume  that  soon  after  this
it  was  also  introduced  at  the  other  national  games,
as  well  as  at  some  of  the  less  important  festivals,
such  as  the  Erotidia  in  Thespiae.  (Bockh,  Corp.
Inscript.  n.  1 590.)

The  order  in  which  the  different  games  of  the
pentathlon  followed  one  another  has  been  the  sub-
ject of  much  discussion  in  modem  times.  The  most
probable  opinion,  however,  is  Bockh's  (Comment,
ad  Find.  Nem.  vii.  71,  &c.),  which  has  been  adopted
by  Dissen,  Krause,  and  others,  although  G.  Her-
mann has  combated  it  in  a  little  work  called  De
Sogenis  Aeginetae  victoria  quinquert.  Lipsiae  1822.
The  order  adopted  by  Bdckh  is  as  follows:  —
1.  The  aXfxa.  This  was  the  most  prominent  part
of  the  pentathlon,  and  was  sometimes  used  to  de-
signate the  whole  game.  It  was  accompanied  by
flute-music.  (Paus.  v.  7.  §  4,  v.  17.  §  4.)  Other
writers,  as  Pausanias  himself  (vi.  14.  §  5)  and
Plutarch  {De  Mas.  c.  26)  speak  as  if  the  wholo
pentathlon  had  been  accompanied  by  the  flute,  but
in  these  passages  the  whole  game  se^ms  to  be  men-
tioned instead  of  that  particular  one  which  formed
the  chief  part  of  it.  2.  The  foot-race.  3.  The
discus.  4.  The  throwing  of  the  spear.  5.  Wre^
ling.  In  later  times,  probably  after  01.  77,  the
foot-race  may  have  been  the  fourth  game  instead  of
the  second,  so  that  the  three  games  which  gave  to
the  pentathlon  its  peculiar  character,  viz.  leaping,
discus,  and  the  spear,  preceded  the  foot-race  and
wrestling,  and  thus  formed  the  so-called  rpiayfxSs.
The  foot-race  of  the  pentathlon  was  probably  the
simple  stadion  or  the  diaulos,  and  not  a  race  in
armour  as  has  been  supposed  by  some  ;  for  the
statues  of  the  victors  in  the  pentathlon  are  never
seen  with  a  shield  but  only  with  the  halteres,  be-
sides which  it  should  be  remembered  that  the  race
in  armour  was  not  introduced  at  Olympia  until
01.  Q5  (Paus.  V.  8.  §  3),  while  the  pentathlon  had
been  performed  long  before  that  time.  It  is  more-
over highly  improbable  that  even  after  01.  (i5  the
race  in  armour  should  have  formed  a  part  of  the
pentathlon.  In  01.  38  the  pentathlon  for  boys  was
introduced  at  Olympia,  but  it, was  only  exhibited
this  one  time  and  afterwards  abolished.  (Paus.
V.  9.  §  1.)

In  leaping,  racing,  and  in  throwing  the  discus
or  spear,  it  was  easy  enough  to  decide  who  won
the  victory,  even  if  several  athletae  took  part  in  it
and  contended  for  the  prize  simidtaneously.  In
wrestling,  however,  no  more  than  two  persoifis
could  be  engaged  together  at  a  time,  and  it  is  not
clear  how  the  victory  was  decided,  if  there  were
several  pairs  of  wrestlers.  The  arrangement  pro-
bably was,  that  if  a  man  had  conquered  his  an-
tagoin'st,  he  might  begin  a  fresh  contest  with  a
second,  third,  &c.,  and  he  who  thus  conquered  the
greatest  number  of  adversaries  was  the  victor.  It
is  difficult  to  conceive  in  what  manner  the  prize
was  awarded  to  the  victor  in  the  whole  pentathlon  ;
for  an  athlete  might  be  conquered  in  one  or  two
games  and  be  victorious  in  the  others,  whereas  it
can  have  occurred  but  seldom  that  one  arid  the
same  man  gained  the  victory  in  all  the  five.  Who
of  the  pentathli  then  was  the  victor.?  Modem
writers  have  said  that  the  prize  was  either  awarded
3t  2


884  PENTECOSTE.

to  him  who  had  been  victorious  in  all  the  five  games,
or  to  the  person  who  had  conquered  his  antagonist
in  at  least  three  of  the  games  ;  but  nothing  can  be
determined  on  this  point  with  any  certainty.  That
the  decision  as  to  who  was  to  be  ^e^varded  was
considered  difficult  by  the  Greeks  themselves, seems
to  be  implied  by  the  fact  that  at  Olympia  there
v/ere  three  hellanodicae  for  the  pentathlon  alone.
(Pans.  V.  9.  §  5.)

As  regards  the  Tpiayfx6s  mentioned  above,  several
statements  of  ancient  writers  suggest,  that  the
whole  of  the  pentathlon  was  not  always  performed
regularly  and  from  beginnmg  to  end  ;  and  the
words  by  which  they  designate  the  abridged  game,
TpiayfxSs,  aTTOTpid^eiu^  and  rpial  Trepiuuai,  lead  us
to  suppose  that  the  abridged  contest  only  consisted
of  three  games,  and  most  probably  of  those  three
which  gave  to  the  pentathlon  its  peculiar  character,
viz.  leaping  and  throwing  the  discus  and  the  spear.
(Dion  Chrysost.  Aioy.  i.  p.  279,  ed.  Reiske  ;  Schol.
cul  Aristi4.  ap.  Phot.  Cod.  p.  409,  Bekker  ;  MuUer,
Ancient  Art  and  its  Rem.  §  423.  3.)  The  reason
for  abridging  the  pentathlon  in  this  manner  may
have  been  the  wish  to  save  time,  or  the  circum-
stance that  athletae  who  had  been  conquered  in
the  first  three  games  were  frequently  discouraged,
and  declined  continuing  the  contest.  When  the
triagmos  was  introduced  at  Olympia  is  not  men-
tioned any  where,  but  Krause  infers  with  great
probabilitv  from  Pausanias  (v.  9.  §  3)  that  it  was
in  01.  77."

The  pentathlon  required  and  developed  very
great  elasticity  of  all  parts  of  the  body,  whence  it
was  principally  performed  by  young  men  (Schol.
ad  Plat.  Amai.  p.  135,  d,  &c.)  ;  and  it  is  probably
owing  to  the  fact,  that  this  game  gave  to  all  parts
of  the  body  their  harmonious  development,  that
Aristotle  {Rhet.  i.  5)  calls  the  pentathli  the  most
handsome  of  all  athletae.  The  pentathlon  was  for
the  same  reason  also  regarded  as  very  beneficial  in
a  medical  point  of  view,  and  the  Elean  Hysmon,
who  had  from  his  childhood  suffered  from  rheuma-
tism, was  cured  by  practising  the  pentathlon,  and
became  one  of  the  most  distinguished  athletae.
(Pans.  vi.  3.  §  4.)  (Compare  G.  Fr.  Philipp,  De
Pentathlo  sive  Quinquertio  Commentatio,  Berlin,
1827;  Krause,  Gymnastik  und  Agonistik  der  Hel-
/e«e«.  pp.  476— 497.)  [L.S.]

PENTECO'NTERUS  {irevTiqKSvropos).  [Na-
vis,  p.  784,  a.]

PENTECOSTE  (irevr-nKoarTii),  a  duty  of  two
per  cent,  levied  upon  all  exports  and  imports  at
Athens.  (Harpocr.  s.  v.  U€UTr)KO(TT'fi.)  Thus,  it
was  levied  on  corn  (Demosth.  c.  Neaer.  1353)  ;
which,  however,  could  only  be  imported,  export-
ation being  prohibited  by  law  (Demosth.  c.  Lacr.
941)  ;  and  also  on  woollen  cloth,  and  other  manu-
factured goods.  (Demosth.  c.  Mid.  558.)  On  im-
ports the  duty  was  payable  on  the  unloading
(Demosth.  c.  Zacr.  932) ;  on  exports,  probably,
when  they  were  put  on  board.  The  money  was
collected  by  persons  called  TrevTTjKOffToKSyoi,  who
kept  a  book  in  which  they  entered  all  customs  re-
ceived. Demosthenes  refers  to  their  entry  (eiTro-
ypacpif).,  to  prove  that  a  ship  was  not  laden  with
more  than  a  certain  quantity  of  goods,  (c.  Phorm.
909.)  The  merchant  who  paid  the  duty  was
said  ireuTTiKovTeveffdai.  All  the  customs  appear
to  have  been  let  to  farm,  and  probably  from  year
to  year.  They  were  let  to  the  highest  bidders  by
the  ten  irwATjToI,  acting  under  the  authority  of  the


PEPLTJM.

senate.  The  farmers  were  called  reAwz/ai,  and  were
said  wvelrrOat  t^v  ttci'ttjkoo-t^*'.  They  might  either
collect  the  duty  themselves,  or  employ  others  for
that  purpose.  Several  persons  often  joined  together
in  the  speculation,  in  which  case  the  principal,  in
whose  name  the  bidding  took  place,  and  who  was
responsible  to  the  state,  was  called  etpxwvTjs  or
TcXwpdpxvs.  Sureties  were  usually  required.
(Demosth.  c.  Timocr.  713  ;  Andoc.  de  Myst.  17,  ed.
Steph.)  Whether  the  customs  on  different  articles
of  merchandise  were  farmed  altogether,  or  sepa-
rately, does  not  appear.  The  corn-duty  at  least
was  kept  distinct  (Demosth.  c.  Neaer.  1353):  and
this  was  the  case  with  another  tax.  (Aesch.  c.
Timarch.  1  6.)  With  respect  to  the  amount  of  the
revenue  derived  from  this  source,  the  reader  may
consult  Bockh  (Publ.  Econ.  of  Athens^  p.  815,  &c.,
2d  ed.).  The  ir^vri^Koari]  has  been  thought  by
some  to  be  the  same  with  the  eWifMeuiov.,  men-
tioned by  Pollux  (viii.  132,  ix.  30),  but  this  was
more  probably  a  duty  paid  for  the  use  of  the  har-
bour, whether  goods  were  unladen  or  not  ;  and  was
perhaps  the  same  as  the  e/caTotrT'//,  mentioned  by
Xenophon  (^de  Rep.  Ath.  i.  17)  as  being  paid  by
foreign  ships  entering  the  Peiraeeus,  and  alluded  to
by  Aristophanes.  {Vesp.  658.)  Bockh's  conjec-
ture, that,  besides  a  personal  harbour  due,  a  duty
was  levied  of  one  per  cent,  on  all  the  goods  on
board,  appears  less  probable  ;  for  it  would  be  un-
reasonable to  exact  a  customs  duty  on  goods  not
landed  ;  and,  if  they  were  to  be  landed,  why
should  the  irevTr]Ko<rrii  be  required  in  addition  to
the  eKaTooTT-fi.  [C.  R.  K.]

PENTECOSTYS  (vevr-nKoaTis).  [Exekci-
TUS,  p.  483,  a.]

PEPLUM  (ireVXos),  a  shawl,  differing  from
the  Chlamys  in  being  much  larger,  and  from  the
Pallium  in  being  finer  and  thinner  and  also  con-
siderably larger.  It  was  sometimes  used  as  a
cover  to  protect  valuable  articles  of  furniture  (Horn.
//.  v.  194)  or  to  adorn  a  throne  (Od.  vii.  96),  but
most  commonly  as  a  part  of  the  dress  of  females
(Horn.  II.  V.  315,  734,  735,  viii.  384,  Od.  xv,  123
—  128,  eauSs,  II.  xiv.  178;  Eurip.  Hec.  1013,
Med.  791  ;  Theocrit.  i.  33)  ;  although  instances
occur,  even  among  the  Greeks,  in  which  it  is  worn
by  the  other  sex,  unless  we  suppose  the  term  to  be
in  these  instances  improperly  put  for  (papas.  (Eurip.
Ion,  1033  ;  Theocrit.  vii.  17.)  In  Persia  and
other  Eastern  countries  the  shawl  was  no  doubt
worn  anciently,  as  it  is  at  the  present  day,  by
both  sexes.  (Aeschyl.  Pers.  204,  474, 1030, 1061.)
Also  in  Bacchanalian  processions  it  was  worn  by
men  both  in  allusion  to  Oriental  habits,  and  because
they  then  avowedly  assumed  the  dress  of  females.
(Eurip.  Bacch.  783—791.)  Women  of  high  rank
wore  their  shawls  so  long  as  to  trail  upon  the  ground.
(TpcodSas  e\KecrnrfTr\ovs,  Horn.  IL  vi.  442  ;  'EAcvtj
Tavvireir\os,  Od.iv.  305.)  Like  all  other  pieces
of  cloth  used  for  the  Amictus,  it  was  often
fastened  by  means  of  a  brooch  [Fibula]  (Soph.
Track  920  ;  Callim.  Lav.  Pall.  70  ;  ApoUon.
Rhod.  iii.  833),  and  was  thus  displayed  upon  the
statues  of  female  divinities,  such  as  Diana  (Brunck,
Anal.  iii.  206)  and  the  goddess  Rome.  (Sidon.
Apollin.  Carm.  v.  18.)  It  was,  however,  fre-
quently worn  without  a  brooch  in  the  manner
represented  in  the  annexed  woodcut,  which  is
copied  from  one  of  Sir  Wm.  Hamilton's  vaseg
(vol.  iii.  pi.  58).  Each  of  the  females  in  this  group
wears  a  shift  falling  down  to  her  feet  [Tunica],


PEPLUM.


and  over  it  an  ample  shawl,  which  she  passes  en-
tirely round  her  body  and  then  throws  the  loose
extremity  of  it  over  her  left  shoulder  and  behind
her  back,  as  is  distinctly  seen  in  the  sitting  figure.
The  shawl  was  also  often  worn  so  as  to  cover  the
head  while  it  enveloped  the  body,  and  more  espe-
cially on  occasion  of  a  funeral  (see  woodcut.s,  p.
557),  or  of  a  marriage,  when  a  very  splendid  shawl
(iraa-Tds,  1  Maccab.u  27)  was  worn  by  the  bride.
The  following  woodcut  (from  Bartoli,  Admir.  Rom.
Ant.  pi.  57)  may  be  supposed  to  represent  the  mo-
ment when  the  bride,  so  veiled,  is  delivered  to  her
husband  at  the  door  of  the  nuptial  chamber.  He
wears  the  Pallium  only  ;  she  has  a  long  shift  be-
neath her  shawl,  and  is  supported  by  the  pronuba.


Thus  veiled  the  poets  represented  Aurora  and
Night,  but  with  this  difference,  that  the  one  arose
expanding  a  shawl  dyed  with  saifron  (KpoKdireirXoi
"Hcos,  Horn.  11.  viii.  1,  xxiii.  227),  whereas  a  black
one  enveloped  the  other  {fie\diJLrr€w\os  Nvl,  Eurip.
Ion,  1150).

Of  all  the  productions  of  the  loom  shawls  were
those  on  which  the  greatest  skill  and  labour  were
bestowed.  So  various  and  tasteful  were  the  sub-
jects Avhich  they  represented,  that  poets  delighted
to  describe  them.     The  art  of  weaving  them  was


PER  PIGNORIS  CAPIONEM.      885

entirely  Oriental  (fiapSdpav  xxpafffxara,  Eurip.  /ok,
1159)  ;  those  of  the  most  splendid  dyes  and  curious
workmanship  were  imported  from  Tyre  and  Sidon
(Hom.  //.  vi.  289 — 294)  :  a  whole  book  was  written
by  Polemo  "  Concerning  the  Shatvls  at  CaHhage.''^
(Athen.  xii.  p.  541.)  Hence  "  Shawls  "  {ireirkoi,
Clem.  Alex.  Strom,  vi.  1.  p.  736,  ed.  Potter)  was
one  of  the  titles  of  works  of  an  imaginative  or
descriptive  character,  and  was  adopted  to  intimate
the  variety  of  their  subjects  and  the  beautiful  mode
of  displaying  them.  A  book,  intended  to  depict
some  of  the  characters  in  the  Iliad,  and  denomi-
nated "  The  Shawl,"  was  ascribed  to  Aristotle.
(Eustath.  in  11.  ii.  557.)  Varro  also  wrote  a  Peplo-
graphy  {x€TrXoypa(pia,  C'lc.  ad  Att.  xvi.  11.)  As
a  specimen  of  the  subjects  delineated  a  shawl  may
be  mentioned,  which  exhibited  the  frame  of  the
world.  (Mart.  Capella,  L.  vi.  in  Mattaire's  Cor-
pus Poetarum,  vol.  ii.  p.  1446.)  Euripides  describes
one  which  represented  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars,
and  which,  with  various  others  containing  hunting-
pieces  and  a  great  variety  of  subjects,  belonged  to
the  temple  of  Apollo  at  Delphi,  and  was  used  to
form  a  magnificent  tent  for  the  purpose  of  an  enter-
tainment {Io?i,  1141 — 1162)  ;  for  it  is  to  be  ob-
served, that  stores  of  shawls  were  not  only  kept  by
wealthy  individuals  (Hom.  Od.  xv.  104 — 10>{),
but  often  constituted  a  very  important  part  of  the
treasures  of  a  temple  (Eurip.  Ion,  329,  330),  having
been  presented  to  the  divinity  on  numerous  occa-
sions by  suppliants  and  devotees.  (Hom.//.  vi.271
—304  ;  Virg.  Aen.  i.  480,  Cir.  21—35.)  [Com-
pare DoNARiA  ;    Panathenaea  ;     Pastopho-

RUS.]  [J.  Y.J

PER  CONDICTIO'NEM.  This  Legis  Actio,
says  Gains,  was  so  called  because  the  plaintiff  gave
notice  to  the  defendant  to  be  present  on  the
thirtieth  day  after  the  notice  in  order  that  a  judex
might  be  appointed.  (Comp.  Gell.  x.  24.)  It  was
an  actio  in  personam  and  applicable  to  those  cases
in  which  the  plaintiff  required  the  defendant  to
give  something  (qua  iniendit  dart  oportere).  This
Legis  Actio  was  introduced  by  a  Lex  Silia  in  the
case  of  a  fixed  sum  of  money  (certa  pecunia),  and
by  a  Lex  Calpurnia  in  the  case  of  any  definite
thing.  Gaius  observes  that  it  does  not  appear  why
this  form  of  action  was  needed,  for  in  a  case  of
"  dari  oportere  "  there  was  the  Sacramentum,  and
the  Per  Judicis  postulationem.  The  name  Con-
dictio  was  applied  to,  actiones  in  personam,  after
the  legis  actiones  fell  into  disuse,  though  impro-
perly, for  the  notice  {denuniiatio)  whence  the  legis
actio  took  its  name  was  discontinued.  (Gaius,  iv.
18,  &c.)  [G.L.]

PER  JUDICIS  POSTULATIO'NEM  was
one  of  the  Legis  Actiones.  The  passage  in  Gaius
is  wanting  in  which  this  form  of  action  is  described.
There  are  some  remarks  on  this  Actio  by  Puchta,
/«*!  ii.  §  154,  162.  [G.L.]

PER  MANUS  INJECTIO'NEM.  [Manus
Injectio.]

PER  PI'GNORIS  CAPIO'NEM  or  CAP-
TIO'NEM.  This  was  one  of  the  Legis  Actiones
or  old  Forms  of  procedure,  which  in  some  cases
was  founded  on  custom  (twos),  in  others  on  enact-
ments Qecc).  It  was  founded  on  military  usage  in
the  following  cases.  A  soldier  might  seize  as  a
pledge  (pig7ius  capere)  anything  belonging  to  the
person  who  had  to  fiu:nish  the  aes  militare,  in  case
he  did  not  make  the  proper  payments  ;  he  mi^ht
also  make  a  seizure  in  respect  of  the  money  due
3l  3


888


PERA.


to  liira  for  the  purchase  of  a  horse  (aes  equestre),
and  also  in  respect  of  the  allowance  for  the  food  of
his  horse  (aes  hordearium),  upon  what  belonged  to
the  person  whose  duty  it  was  to  make  the  pay-
ment. Originally,  such  payments  were  fixed  upon
particular  persons,  and  not  made  out  of  the  Aera-
rium  (Liv.  i.  43  ;  Gains,  iv.  27).  The  Law  of  the
Twelve  Tables  allowed  a  pignoris  capio  in  respect
of  pay  due  for  the  hire  of  a  beast,  when  the  hire
money  was  intended  for  a  sacrifice.  By  a  special
law  (the  name  is  not  legible  in  the  MS,  of  Gaius)
the  publicani  had  the  right  pignoris  capionis  in  re-
spect of  vectigalia  publica  which  were  due  by  any
lex.  The  thing  was  seized  ( pignus  capiebatur)
with  certain  formal  words,  and  for  this  reason  it
was  by  some  considered  to  be  a  legis  actio.  Others
did  not  allow  it  to  be  a  legis  actio,  because  the
proceeding  was  extra  jus,  that  is,  not  before  the
Praetor,  and  generally  also  in  the  absence  of  the
person  whose  property  was  seized.  The  pignus
could  also  be  seized  on  a  dies  nefastus,  or  one  on
which  a  legis  actio  was  not  permitted.

It  appears  from  a  passage  of  Gaius,  in  which  he
speaks  of  the  legal  fiction  that  was  afterwards  in-
troduced into  the  Formula  by  which  the  publicani
recovered  the  vectigalia,  that  the  thing  seized  was
only  taken  as  a  security  and  was  redeemed  by
payment  of  the  sum  of  money  in  respect  of  which
it  was  seized.  In  case  of  non-payment,  there  must
however  have  been  a  power  of  sale,  and  accordingly
this  pignoris  capio  resembled  in  all  respects  a
pignus  proper,  except  as  to  the  want  of  consent  on
the  part  of  the  person  whose  property  was  seized.
It  does  not  appear  whether  this  legis  actio  was  the
origin  of  the  law  of  pledge,  as  subsequently  de-
veloped ;  but  it  seems  not  improbable.  (Gaius,  iv.
26,  &c.  ;  Cic.  Verr.  iii.  11  ;  Pignoris  capio,  Gell.
vii.  10.)  [G.L.]

PERA,  dim.  PE'RULA  (Tr^pa),  a  wallet,  made
of  leather,  worn  suspended  at  the  side  by  rustics
and  by  travellers  to  carry  their  provisions  (Mart,
xiv.  81)  and  adopted  in  imitation  of  them  by  the
Cynic  philosophers.  (Diog.  Laert.  vi.  13  ;  Brunck,
Anal.  i.  223,  ii.  22,  28  ;  Auson.  Epig.  53.)     The


•S>^'


PERGULA.

preceding  woodcut  is  the  representation  of  a  goat-
herd with  his  staff  and  wallet  from  the  column  of
Theodosius,  formerly  at  Constantinople.  (Menes-
trier,  Description  de  la  Col.  Hist.  Par.  1702.  pi.
16.)  [J.  Y.]

PERDUE'LLIO.  [Majestas,  p.  725.]
PERDUELLIO'NIS  DUU'MVIRI  were  two
officers  or  judges  appointed  for  the  purpose  of  try-
ing persons  who  were  accused  of  the  crime  of
perduellio.  Niebuhr  believes  that  they  were  the
same  as  the  quaestores  parricidii,and  Walter  (Gesch.
des  Rom.  Rechts,  p.  24.  note  19)  agrees  with  him,
though  in  a  later  part  of  his  work  (p.  855.  note
20)  he  admits  that  they  were  distinct.  It  ap-
pears from  a  comparison  of  the  following  passages,
—  Liv.  i.  26  ;  Dig.  i.  tit.  2.  s.  2.  §  23  ;  Fest.  s.  v.
Pariei  and  Sororium, — either  that  some  of  the
ancient  writers  confound  the  duumviri  perduel-
lionis  and  the  quaestores  parricidii,  or  that,  at
least  during  the  kingly  period,  they  were  the
same  persons  ;  for  in  giving  an  account  of  the
same  occurrence,  some  writers  call  the  judges
quaestores  parricidii,  while  others  call  them  duum-
viri perduellionis.  After  the  establishment  of  the
republic,  however,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that
they  were  two  distinct  offices,  for  the  quaestores
were  appointed  regularly  every  year,  whereas  the
duumviri  were  appointed  very  rarely  and  only
in  cases  of  emergency,  as  had  been  the  case  during
the  kingly  period.  (Liv.  ii.  41,  vi.  20  ;  Dion  Cass,
xxxvii.  27.)  Livy  (i.  26)  represents  the  duumviri
perduellionis  as  being  appointed  by  the  kings,  but
from  Junius  Gracchanus  (Dig.  1.  tit.  13.  s.  1  ;  com-
pare Tacit.  Annal.  xi.  22)  it  appears  that  they
were  proposed  by  the  king  and  appointed  by  the
populus  {reges  populi  sujfragio  creabant).  During
the  early  part  of  the  republic  they  were  appointed
by  the  comitia  curiata,  and  afterwards  by  the
comitia  centuriata,  on  the  proposal  of  the  consuls.
(Dig.  1.  tit.  2.  s.  2.  §  23  ;  Cic.  pro  Rabir.  4,  &c.)
In  the  case  of  Rabirius  (b.  c.  63),  however,  this
custom  was  violated,  as  the  duumviri  were  ap-
pointed by  the  praetor  instead  of  by  the  comitia
centuriata.  (Dion  Cass.  I.  c.  ;  Cic.  I.  c.  ;  Suet.  Caes.
12.)  In  the  time  of  the  emperors  no  duumviri
perduellionis  were  ever  appointed.

The  punishment  for  those  who  were  found  guilty
of  perduellio  was  death  ;  they  were  either  hanged
on  the  arbor  infelix  or  thrown  from  the  Tarpeian
rock.  But  when  the  duumviri  found  a  person
guilty,  he  might  appeal  to  the  people  (in  early  times
the  populus,  afterwards  the  comitia  centuriata),  as
was  done  in  the  first  case  which  is  on  record  (Liv.
i.  26),  and  in  the  last,  which  is  that  of  Rabirius,
whom  Cicero  defended  before  the^eople  in  an
oration  still  extant.  Marcus.  "Horatius  who  had
slain  his  sister,  was  acquitted,  but  was  neverthe-
less obliged  to  undergo  some  symbolical  punish-
ment, as  he  had  to  pass  under  a  yoke  with  his
head  covered.  The  house  of  those  who  were  exe-
cuted for  perduellio,  was  razed  to  the  ground,  and
their  relatives  were  not  allowed  to  mourn  for  them.
(Dig.  3.  tit.  2.  s.  11.  §  3  ;  comp.  Beckev,  Handbuch
der  R'6m.  Alterth.  ii.  2.  p.  329,  &c.)  [L.  S.]

PEREGRI'NUS.  [Civitas  (Roman.)]
PE'RGULA,  appears  to  have  been  a  kind  of
booth  or  small  house,  which  afforded  scarcely  any
protection  except  by  its  roof,  so  that  those  who
passed  by  could  easily  look  into  it.  It  served
both  as  a  workshop  (Dig.  5.  tit.  1.  s.  19)  and  a
stall  where  things  were  exhibited  for  sale.    We


PERIOECI.

find,  for  instance,  that  painters  exhibited  their
works  in  a  pergula  that  they  might  be  seen  by
those  who  passed  by  (Lucil.  aj>.  Laetant.  i.  22),
and  Apelles  is  said  to  have  concealed  himself  in
his  pergula  behind  his  pictures  that  he  might  over-
hear the  remarks  of  those  who  looked  at  them,
(Plin.  H.  N.  XXXV.  36.  §  12.)  Such  places  were
occupied  by  persons,  who,  either  by  working  or
sitting  in  them,  wished  to  attract  the  attention  of
the  public.  (Salmas.  ad  Seript  Hist.  Aug.  pp.  45S,
459.)  Hence  we  find  them  inhabited  by  poor
philosophers  aaid  grammarians  who  gave  instruction
and  wished  te  attract  notice'  in  order  to  obtain
pupils.  (Suet  Aug.  94,  delUustr.  Grammat  ItJ  ;
Flav.  Vopisc.  Satumin.  10  ;  Juven.  xi.  137.)

It  should  be-  observed  that  scholars  do  not  agree
as  to  the  real  meaning  of  pergula:  Scaliger  (a^/
Plant.  Pseud,  x  2.  79)  describes  it  as  a  part  of  a
house  built  out  into  the  street,  as  in  some  old
houses  of  modem  times  ;  Ernesti  {ad  Suet.  Aug.
94)  thinks  that  a  pergula  is  a  little  room  in  the
upper  part  of  a  house  which  was  occasionally  used
by  poor  philosophers  as  an  observatory.  But  neither
of  these  two  definitions  is  so  applicable  to  all  the
passages  in  which  the  word  occurs  as  that  which
we  have  proposed.  [L.  S.]

PERIACTOS  (Trepfa/CTos;),  a  theatrical  machine,
consisting  of  three  scenes,  placed  in  the  form  of  a
triangle  (or  rather,  triangular  prism)  on  a  revolving
platform,  so  that,  by  simply  turning  the  machine,
the  scene  could  lie  changed.  It  was  chiefly  used
when  a  god  was  to  be  introduced  with  the  accom-
paniment of  thunder.  The  name  was  also  applied
to  the  space  which  was  provided  for  the  machine
in  the  erection  of  the  theatre.  (Vitruv.  v.  7 ;
Pollux,  iv.  126.)  [P.S.J

PERIDEIPNON  {Trepi^iiTTuov).  [Funus,
p.  557,  b.]

PERIDRO'MIDES.     [Xvstus.]

PERIOECI  (jcpioiKOL).  This  word  properly
denotes  the  inhabitants  of  a  district  lying  around
some  particular  locality,  but  is  generally  used  to
describe  a  dependent  population,  living  without
the  walls  or  in  the  country  provinces  of  a  domin-
ant city,  and  although  personally  free,  deprived  of
the  enjoyment  of  citizenship,  and  the  political
rights  conferred  by  it.  The  words  (tvvoikqi  and
fxiroiKoi  have  an  analogous  meaning.

A  political  condition  such  as  that  of  the  Perioeci
of  Greece,  and  like  the  vassalage  of  the  Gecmanic
nations,  could  hardly  have  originated  in  anything
else  than  foreign  conquest,  and  the  Perioeci  of
liaconia  furnish  a  striking  illustration  of  this.
Their  origin  dates  from  the  Dorian  conquest  of  the
Peloponnesus,  when  the  old  inhabitants  of  the
country,  the  Achaians,  submitted  to  their  con-
querors on  certain  conditions,  by  which,  according
to  Ephorus  (Strab.  viii.  p.  364),  they  were  left
in  possession. of  their  private  rights  of  citizenship
(iffoTiula),  such  as  the  right  of  intermarriage  with
the  Dorians,  and  also  of  their  political  franchise.
They  sulfered  indeed  a  partial  deprivation  of  their
lands,  and  were  obliged  to  submit  to  a  king  of
foreign  race,  but  still  they  remained  equal  in
law  to  their  conquerors,  and  were  eligible  to
all  offices  of  state  except  the  sovereignity.  'I(t6-
vofjLui  fji€T€xovT(s  Koi  TToAiTeios  Koi  apx^ioov.
(Arnold.  Thucyd.  vol.  i.  p.  641.)  But  this  state
of  things  did  not  last  long  :  in  the  next  generation
after  the  conquest,  either  from  the  lust  of  increased
dominion  on  the  part  of  the  Dorians*  or  from  an


PERIOECI.


887


unsuccessful  attempt  by  the  Achaians  to  regain
their  independence,  the  relation  between  the  two
parties  was  changed.  The  Achaians  were  reduced
from  citizens  to  vassals  ;  they  were  made  tributary
to  Sparta  (o-wreAeTs),  and  their  lands  were  sub-
jected to  a  tax,  perhaps  not  so  much  for  the  sake
of  revenue  as  in  token  of  their  dependence  (Ephor.
I.  c.)  ;  they  lost  their  rights  of  citizenship  (lao-
Tifiia\  such  as  that  of  intermarriage  with  the  Do-
rians, the  right  of  voting  in  the  general  assembly,
and  their  eligibility  to  important  offices  in  the
state,  such  as  that  of  a  senator,  &c.  It  does  not,
however,  appear  that  the  Perioeci  (especially  in  the
Historic  times)  were  generally  an  oppressed  peo-
ple, though  kept  in  a  state  of  political  inferiority
to  their  conquerors.  On  the  contrary,  the  most
distinguished  amongst  them  were  admitted  to  offices
of  trust  (Thucyd.  viii.  61),  and  sometimes  invested
with  naval  command  (Id.  viii,  22),  but  probably
only  because  they  were  better  suited  for  it  than  the
Spartans  themselves,  who  did  not  set  a  high  value  on
good  sailorship.  Moreover,  the  Perioeci  sometimes
served  as  heavy -armed  soldiers  or  troops  of  the  line  :
at  the  battle  of  PJataeae,  for  instance,  they  supplied
10,000  men,  5000  hoplites  and  5000  light-armed
(Herod,  ix.  61),  a  circumstance  which  seems  to
imply  a  difference  of  rank  connected  with  a  dif-
ference of  occupation  amongst  the  Perioeci  them-
selves. Again,  at  Sphacteria  292  prisoners  were
taken,  of  whom  120  were  Spartans  and  the  rest
irepioiKM.  (MUller,  iii.  2.  §  3.)  We  also  read  of
KaKol  Kayadol,  "  or  accomplished  and  well-bom  "
gentlemen,  amongst  the  Perioeci  serving  as
i-olunteers  in  the  Spartan^  service.  (Xen.  Hell.  v.
3.  §  9.)  But  still  it  is  not  to  be  expected,  it  is
not  natural,  that  men  competent  to  the  discharge
of  high  functions  in  a  statev  and  bearing  its
burdens,  should  patiently  submit  to  an  exclusion
from  all  political  rights.  Accordingly  we  find,  that
on  the  rising  of  the  Helots  in  b.  c.  464,  some  of
the  Perioeci  joined  them.  (Thucyd,  i,  101,)  When
the  Thebans  invaded  Laconia  (b.  c.  369),  the
Perioeci  were  ready  to  help  them.  (Xen.  Hell,  vi,
5.  §  25,)  In  connection  with  the  insurrection  of
Ginadon  we  are  told  that  the  Perioeci  were  most
bitter  against  the  ruling  Spartans,  (Id.  iii.  3.  §  6.)
From  these  and  other  facts  (Clin.  F.  H.  Append,
xxii.)  it  appears  that  the  Perioeci  of  Laconia,  if
not  an  oppressed,  were  sometimes  a  disaffected  and
discontented  class  ;  though  in  cases  of  strong  ex-
citement, or  of  general  danger  to  the  whole  of
Greece,  they  identified  themselves  with  their  con-
querors. The  very  relation  indeed  which  subsisted
between  them  was  sufficient  to  produce  in  Sparta  a
jealousy  of  her  subjects,  with  corresponding  feelings
on  their  part.  Nor  can  we  suppose  that  the  Dorians
would  willingly  permit  the  Perioeci  to  acquire
strength  and  opulence,  or  even  to  settle  in  large
towns.  (ThirlwaW,  Hist. o/Greece,\o\.i.  p. 307.)  In
fact  it  is  stated  by  Isocrates  {Panath.  p.  307),  that
the  Dorians  intentionally  weakened  the  Achaians
by  dispersing  them  over  a  great  number  of  hamlets,
which  they  called  irSXeis^  though  they  were  less
powerful  than  the  country  parishes  of  Attica,  and
were  situated  in  the  most  unproductive  parts  of
Laconia,  the  best  land  of  which  was  reserved  for  the
Spartans.  It  is  not,  however,  necessary  to  under-
stand the  orator  as  speaking  of  a  uniform  practice  ;
and  another  of  his  statements,  to  the  effect  that  the
Ephori  could  put  any  of  the  Perioeci  to  death
(p.  271)  without  trial,  is  either  a  perYersion  of  the
3l  4


888  PERIOECr.

truth,  or  arose  from  his  confounding  the  Perioeci
with  the  Helots.

Still  the  grievances  of  the  Perioeci  were  not
after  all  intolerable,  nor  do  they  seem  to  have  been
treated  with  wantonness  or  insolence.  The  distance
at  which  many  of  them  lived  from  Sparta,  must  have
rendered  it  impossible  for  them  to  share  in  the  ad-
ministration of  the  state,  or  to  attend  the  public
assemblies;  a  circumstance  which  must  in  some
measure  have  blunted  their  sense  of  their  political
inferiority.  Nor  were  they  subjected  to  the  re-
straints and.  severe  discipline  which  the  necessity
of  maintaining  their  political  supremacy  imposed
upon  the  Spartans,  making  them  more  like  an
*'  army  of  occupation  in  a  conquered  country,"  or  a
"  beleagured  garrison,"  than  a  society  of  men
united  for  civil  government  and  mutual  advantage.
By  way  of  compensation,  too,  the  Perioeci  enjoyed
many  advantages  (though  not  considered  as  privi-
leges) which  the  Spartans  did  not.  The  trade  and
manufactures  of  the  country  were  exclusively  in
their  hands,  and  carried  on  by  them  with  the  more
facility  and  profit  as  they  occupied  maritime  towns.
The  cultivation  of  the  arts  also,  as  well  in  the
higher  as  in  the  lower  departments,  was  confined
to  the  Perioeci,  the  Spartans  considering  it  beneath
themselves  ;  and  many  distinguished  artists,  such
as  embossers  and  brass -founders,  were  found  in  the
Laconian  schools,  all  of  whom  were  probably
Perioeci.  (Miiller,  Dor.  iii.  2.  §  3.)  Nor  is  there
wanting  other  evidence,  though  not  altogether  free
from  doubts,  to  show  that  the  Spartan  provincials
were  not  in  the  least  checked  or  shackled  in  the
development  of  their  intellectual  powers.  (Thirl-
wall  and  Miiller,  U.  cc.)  Moreover,  it  seems  natural
to  suppose  that  they  enjoyed  civil  rights  in  the  com-
munities to  which  they  belonged,  and  which  other-
wise would  scarcely  have  been  called  Tc6h.^is  ;  but
whether  or  no  these  cities  had  the  power  of  elect-
ing their  own  chief  magistrate  is  a  matter  of  conjec-
ture. Ephorus,  indeed  {I.  c),  informs  us  that  on  the
conquest  of  the  Peloponnesus  by  the  Dorians,  they
divided  the  country  of  Laconia  into  six  districts,
four  of  which  were  left  in  the  possession  of  the
Achaians,  and  governed  by  magistrates  sent  from
Sparta  ;  but  we  do  not  know  how  long  this  prac-
tice lasted,  nor  can  we  draw  any  conclusions  with
respect  to  the  government  of  Laconia  in  general
from  the  example  of  Cythera,  to  vvhich  a  Spartan
officer  was  annually  sent  under  the  peculiar  title
of  Kv0?7poSiK7js,  or  the  "Justice  of  Cythera."

The  number  of  Laconian  (as  they  are  called)
or  subject  cities,  is  said  to  have  formerly  amounted
to  100.  (Strab.  viii.  p.  362.)  Several  of  them  lay
on  the  coast,  as  Gythium,  ttle  port  of  Sparta  ;
whence  the  whole  coast  of  Laconia  is  called  ^
irepioiKh.  (Thucyd.  iii.  16.)  Many,  however,  lay
more  inland,  as  Thuria  (Thucyd.  i.  101)  and
Cardamyle,  which  seems  to  have  belonged  to  the
old  Messenia.  The  inhabitants  of  the  district  of
Sciros  {v  S/fiptTts),  on  the  confines  of  Arcadia,  seem
to  have  been  distinct  from  the  other  Perioeci
(Xen.  Hell.  v.  2.  §  24),  and  in  battleweie  posted  by
themselves  on  the  left  wing.  (Thucyci.  v.  67.)  An
enumeration  of  the  principal  of  thesp  cities  is  given
in  Clinton.  (Fast.  Hell.  App.  c.  22.)  The  Perioeci
also  occupied  the  island  of  Cythera,  at  the  port  of
which  the  Lacedaemonian  merchants  usually  put
in,  on  their  voyages  home  from  Egypt  and  Libye.
(Thucyd.  iv.  53,  vii.  57.)  We  have  said  that
^e  Perioeci  living  in  these  towns  were  the  de-


PERIOECL

scendants  of  the  old  inhabitants  of  the  country,  but
we  must  not  suppose  they  were  exclusively  so.
Some  of  them  on  the  contrary  were  foreigners,
who  had  either  accompanied  the  Dorians  on  their
invasion  of  Laconia,  or  been  afterwards  invited  by
them  to  supply  the  place  of  the  dispossessed
Achaians.  One  of  these  cities,  Boia,  is  even  said
to  have  been  founded  by  a  Heracleid  chief  (Strab.
p.  364)  ;  and  another,  Geronthrae,  was  peopled  by
colonists  sent  from  Sparta,  after  it  was  evacuated
by  the  old  inhabitants.   (Paus.  iii.  22.  §  5.)

The  number  of  Perioeci  in  the  Persian  war
is  thus  determined  by  Clinton  (l.  c.)  :  —  "At  the
battle  of  Plataeae  in  B.  c.  479,  the  Perioeci  supplied
1 0,000  men.  If  we  assume  this  proportion  to  be
the  same  as  that  which  the  Spartan  force  bore  to
the  whole  number  on  the  same  occasion,  or  five-
eighths  of  the  whole  number  of  citizens,  this
would  give  16,000  for  the  males  of  full  age,
and  the  total  population  of  this  class  of  the
inhabitants  of  Laconia  would  amount  to  about
66,000  persons."

In  the  later  times  of  Spartan  history,  the
Perioecian  towns  of  the  coast  (Laconicae  orae  cas-
tella  et  vici)  were  detached  from  Sparta  by  T.
Quintius  Flamininus,  and  placed  under  the  protec-
tion of  the  Achaian  league.  (Miiller,  iii.  2.  §  1  ;
Liv.  xxxiv.  29,  30,  xxxviii.  31.)  Subsequently
to  this  the  emperor  Augustus  released  24  towns
from  their  subjection  to  Sparta,  and  formed  them
into  separate  communities,  xmder  laws  of  their  own.
They  were  consequently  called  Eleuthero-Lacones.
(Paus.  iii.  21.  §  6.)  But  even  in  the  time  of  Pausa-
nias  some  of  the  Laconian  towns  were  not  aura-
v6ij.oi,  but  dependent  upon  Sparta  ((ruvreXovacu  is
'2,iTaipTi]u).

A  class  of  Perioeci,  and  also  of  Helots,  has  been
said  by  Miiller  to  be  the  basis  of  the  Dorian  form  of
government :  we  may  therefore  expect  to  find  Peri-
oeci amongst  other  Dorian  communities, as  well  as  at
Sparta,  as,  for  instance,  Elis  and  Argos,  and  the
Boeotian  Thebes :  the  dependent  towns  of  which
states  formed  separate  communities,  as  Thespiae
under  Thebes,  the  Tryphylian  cities  in  Elis,  and
Orneae  under  Argos,  though  they  could  not  be  called
avTov6fioi.  (Wachsmuth,  i.  1.  p.  161.)  From  the
last  mentioned  town,  which  was  long  independent,
but  reduced  about  B.  c.  580,  all  the  Argive  Perioeci
derived  their  name  of  Orneatae.  About  the  time
of  the  Persian  war,  however,  the  inhabitants  of  the
towns  surrounding  Argos  were  received  into  the
city  as  (tvuoiicoi,  and  admitted  to  the  rights  of
citizenship  ;  a  change  which  was  attended  with  a
revolution  in  the  constitution  of  Argns,  and  gave
additional  force  to  its  democracy.  (Miiller,  iii.  4.
§  2.)  The  Dorian  cities  of  Crete  also  had  their
Perioeci  (Arist.  Pol.  ii.  7),  as  well  as  the  colonies
of  Cyrene  and  Thera,     (Herod,  iv.  161.)

The  Perioeci  of  antiquity  hav  been  compared
to  other  bodies,  such  as  theplebs  of  Rome,  and  the
communities  of  the  Athenian  demi  or  parishes.
But  the  only  resemblance  they  bore  to  the  latter
was  in  the  similarity  of  their  position  relative  to
the  chief  city  of  their  country,  nor  did  the  former
body  stand  in  the  same  relation  to  the  Patricians
as  the  Laconian  provincials  did  to  the  Spartan
citizens.  Modern  history  furnishes  fitter  objects
of  comparison  in  the  Norman  conquest  of  England
and  the  city  of  Augsburg.  (Arnold,  Thucyd.  vol.  i.
App.  1  and  2.)  The  burghers  or  free  citizens  of
Augsburg  lived  in  the  city,  while  there  grew  up


PERISCELIS.

about  them  a  distinct  and  large  community  living
without  the  city,  chiefly  formed  of  the  eman-
cipated vassals  of  the  dominant  class,  and  called
"  Pfahlbiirger,"  or  citizens  of  the  "  pale,"  the
suburbs  in  v/hich  they  lived  being  surrounded  by
p?.lisades.  The  Norman  conquest  of  England  pre-
sents a  striking  parallel  to  the  Dorian  conquest  of
Laconia,  both  in  its  achievement  and  consequences.
The  Saxons,  like  the  old  Achaians,  were  deprived
of  their  lands,  excluded  from  all  offices  of  trust  and
dignit}-,  and  reduced,  though  personally  free,  to  a
state  of  political  slavery.  The  Normans  on  the
contrary,  of  Avhatever  rank  in  their  own  country,
were  all  nobles  and  warriors,  compared  with  the
conquered  Saxons,  and  for  a  long  time  enjoyed  ex-
clusively the  civil  and  ecclesiastical  administration
of  the  land-

For  further  details  see  Arnold,  Thucyd.  lib.  L  c.
101,  and  Appendix  ii.  ;  Thierry,  Histoire  de  la
Conqutte  de  CAngleterre  par  les  Normands,  Livres
iv.— vii.  [R.  W.]

PERFPOLI  (irephoXoi).     [EPHEBUS.]

PERI'PTEROS.     [Tkmplum.]

PERPSCELIS  (Trejoio-zceAts,  Long.  Past.  I  2  ;
Menander,  ap.  I'olluc.  ii.  194,  v.  100,  Hor.  Ep.  i.
17.  5G  ;  Petron.  67).  Much  controversy  has  arisen
with  regard  to  the  true  meaning  of  this  word.
The  etymology  points  out  merely  that  it  was  some-
thing worn  round  the  leg  (Trepi  <tk4\os),  but  from
the  context  of  the  passage  in  Horace  where  it  is
found  we  must  at  once  infer  that  it  was  a  trinket.
The  Scholiast  explains  it  as  "  ornamentum  pedis
circum  crura,"  and  hence  we  can  scarcely  doubt
that  it  denotes  an  anklet  or  bangle,  especially  since
we  know  that  these  were  commonly  worn  not  only
by  the  Orientals,  the  Egyptians,  and  the  Greeks,
but  by  the  Roman  ladies  also.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii.
3.  s.  12  ;  compare  Wilkinson's  Ancient  Egyptians^
vol.  iii,  p.  374.)  This  explanation  perfectly  ac-
cords with  the  expressions  of  TertuUian  {de  Cultu
Feininarum.,  ii.  sub  fin.),  where  the  periscdium  is
spoken  of  as  decorating  the  leg  in  the  same  manner
as  the  bracelet  adorns  the  wrist  and  the  necklace
the  throat.  The  anklet  is  frequently  represented
in  the  paintings  of  Greek  figures  on  the  walls  of
Pompeii,  as  in  the  following  representation  of  a
Nereid.     (^Aluseo  Borbonico^  vol.  vi.  tav.  xxxiv.)


It  must  be  observed,  however,  that  the  Greek
lexicographers  Hesychius,  Photius,  and  Suidas,  in-
terpret irepi(jKi\r\  and  "mpiaKiKia  by  ^paKKia,
(peij.iv6\ia^  and  St.  Jerome  {Epist.  ad  FaUol.)  ex-
pressly states  that  the  Greek  it^piaK^Xri  were  the
same  with  the  Latin  feminalia^  that  is,  drawers
reaching  from  the  navel  to  the  knees.  In  the
Septuagint    we    find   rrepiaKiXes   (sc.  tvZvfxa)    in


PERSONA.  889

Exod.  xxviii.  42,  xxxix.  28,  Levit.  vi.  10,  and
nepiaKe\iov  in  Levit.  xvi.  4,  which  our  translators
uniformly  render,  and  apparently  with  accuracy,
linen  breeches.  [W.  R.J

PERISTIARCHUS  (jrepiaTiapxos).    [EccLK-
SI  A,  p.  441,  b.]

PERISTRO'MA.  [Tapes  ;  Velum.]
PERISTY'LIUM  (iripiaTiXioy),  as  its  name
implies,  was  a  continued  row  or  series  of  rows  of
columns  all  round  a  court  or  building,  in  contra-
distinction to  PoRTicus  {(TT6a\  in  which  the  pillars
did  not  surround  a  space,  but  were  arranged  in
one  or  more  parallel  lines.  The  enclosed  court
was  also  called  peristylium.  The  chief  specific  use
of  the  word  is  in  relation  to  the  ancient  dwelling-
houses.     [DoMus,  p.  428,  a.]  [P.  S.]

PERJU'RIUM.       [JUSJURANDUM.]

PERIZO'MA  (TrepiXw/ia).  [Subligaculum.]
PERO  (apSvKr},  dim.  ap€v\ls;  /cap§aTiVr?,  Xen.
Anab.  iv.  5.  §  14),  a  low  boot  of  untanned  hide
(crudus,  Virg.  Aen.  vii.  690  ;  Brunck,  Anal.  i.
230),  worn  by  ploughmen  ( peronatus  araior^  Pers.
V.  ]  02)  and  shepherds,  as  exemplified  in  the  wood-
cut, at  p.  808,  and  by  others  employed  in  rural  occu-
pations. (Juv.  xiv.  186.)  It  had  a  strong  sole
(Theocrit.  vii.  26),  and  was  adapted  to  the  foot
with  great  exactness.  (Galen,  in  Hippoc.  Lib.  iv.)
It  was  also  called  injXuirdTis  on  account  of  its
adaptation  for  walking  through  clay  and  mire.
In  the  Greek  mythology  Perseus  was  represented
wearing  boots  of  this  description  with  wings  at-
tached to  them.  (Lycophron,  839.)  Diana  wore
them,  when  accoutred  for  the  chace.  (Brunck,  ^wa^.
iii.  206.)     [Cothurnus.]

The  term  apSvXr]  is  applied  to  an  appendage  to
the  Greek  chariot.  (Eurip.  Hippol.  1179,  Here.
Fur.  1275.)  It  seems  to  have  been  a  shoe  fast-
ened to  the  bottom  of  the  chariot,  into  which  the
driver  inserted  his  foot  to  assist  him  in  driving  and
to  prevent  him  from  being  thrown  out.  [J.  Y.]
PERPE'TUA  ACTIO.  [Actio.]
PERSAE  or  STATUAE  PERSICAE  were
figures  which  were  used  in  place  of  columns,  like
the  Caryatides,  Atlantes,  and  Telamones.  The
tradition  respecting  their  invention  is  that  they
were  first  used  in  the  Porticus  Persica  which  was
built  at  Sparta  out  of  the  spoils  of  the  battle  of
Plataeae  (Vitruv.  i.  1.  §  6).  Pausanias,  however,
(iii.  2)  describes  the  statues  of  the  conquered  Per-
sians, as  being  iirl  tS>v  kiSvwv.  [P-S.J
PERSECUTO'RIA  ACTIO.  [Actio.]
PERSO'NA  {larva,  vpSawKov  or  ■npo(ru}Truov\
a  mask.  Masks  were  worn  by  Greek  and  Roman
actors  in  nearly  all  dramatic  representations.  This
custom  arose  undoubtedly  from  the  practice  of
smearing  the  face  with  certain  juices  and  colours,
and  of  appearing  in  disguise,  at  the  festivals  of
Dionysus.  [Dionysia.]  Now  as  the  Greek  drama
arose  out  of  these  festivals,  it  is  highly  probable
that  some  mode  of  disguising  the  face  was  as  old  as
the  drama  itself.  Choerilus  of  Samos,  however,  is
said  to  have  been  the  first  who  introduced  regular
masks.  (Suid.  s.  v.  XoipiWos.)  Other  writers
attribute  the  invention  of  masks  to  Thespis  or
Aeschylus  (Horat.  ad  Pis.  278),  though  the  latter
had  probably  only  the  merit  of  perfecting  and  com-
pleting the  whole  theatrical  apparatus  and  costume.
Phrynichus  is  said  to  have  first  introduced  female
masks.  (Suid.  s.  v.  ^pvvixos.)  Aristotle  (PotV.'ii.
22)  was  unable  to  discover  who  had  first  intro-
duced the  use  of  masks  in  comedy.     Some  maska


890


PERSONA.


covered,  like  the  masks  of  modem  times,  only  the
face,  but  they  appear  more  generally  to  have  covered
the  whole  head  down  to  the  shoulders,  for  we
find  always  the  hair  belonging  to  a  mask  described
as  being  a  part  of  it ;  and  this  must  have  been  the
case  in  tragedy  more  especially,  as  it  was  necessary
to  make  the  head  correspond  to  the  stature  of  an
actor  which  was  heightened  by  the  cothurnus.

I.  Tragic  Masks.  It  may  at  first  seem  strange
to  us,  that  the  ancients,  with  their  refined  taste  in
the  perception  of  the  beautiful  in  form  and  expres-
sion, should  by  the  use  of  masks  have  deprived
the  spectators  in  their  theatres  of  the  possibility  of
observing  the  various  expressions,  of  which  the
human  face  is  capable,  and  which  with  us  contri-
bute so  much  to  theatrical  illusion.  But  it  must  be
remembered,  that  in  the  large  theatres  of  the  an-
cients it  would  have  been  impossible  for  the  greater
part  of  the  audience  to  distinguish  the  natural
features  of  an  actor.  The  features  of  the  masks
were  for  this  same  reason  very  strong  and  marked.
Again,  the  dramatis  personae  of  most  of  the  ancient
tragedies  were  heroes  or  gods,  and  their  characters
were  so  well  known  to  the  spectators,  that  they
were  perfectly  typical.  Every  one  therefore  knew
immediately  on  the  appearance  of  such  a  character
on  the  stage,  who  it  was,  and  it  would  have  been
difficult  for  a  Greek  audience  to  imagine  that  a
god  or  hero  should  have  had  a  face  like  that  of
an  ordinary  actor.  The  use  of  the  cothurnus
also  rendered  a  proportionate  enlargement  of  the
countenance  absolutely  necessary,  or  else  the  figure
of  an  actor  would  have  been  ridiculously  dispro-
portionate. Lastly,  the  solemn  character  of  ancient
tragedy  did  not  admit  of  such  a  variety  of  expres-
sions of  the  countenance  as  modern  tragedies  ;  the
object  of  which  seems  to  be  to  exhibit  the  whole
range  of  human  passions  in  all  their  wild  and  self-
devouring  play.  How  widely  different  are  the
characters  of  ancient  tragedy !  It  is,  as  MUller
{Hist,  of  the  Lit.  of  Anc.  Greece,  i.  p.  298)  justly
remarks,  perfectly  possible  to  imagine,  for  example,
the  Orestes  of  Aeschylus,  the  Ajax  of  Sophocles,
or  the  Medea  of  Euripides,  throughout  the  whole
tragedy  with  the  same  countenance,  though  it  would
be  difficult  to  assert  the  same  of  a  character  in  any
modern  drama.  But  there  is  no  necessity  for  sup-
posing that  the  actors  appeared  throughout  a  whole
piece  with  the  same  countenance,  for  if  circum-
stances required  it,  they  might  surely  change  masks
during  the  intervals  between  the  acts  of  a  piece.
Whether  the  open  or  half-open  mouth  of  a  tragic
mask  also  contributed  to  raise  the  voice  of  the  actor,
as  Gellius  (v.  7)  thinks,  cannot  be  decided  here,
though  we  know  that  all  circumstances  united  to
compel  a  tragic  actor  to  acquire  a  loud  and  sonorous
voice.

The  masks  used  in  ancient  tragedies  were  thus,
for  the  most  part,  typical  of  certain  characters,  and
consequently  differed  according  to  the  age,  sex,
rank,  and  other  peculiarities  of  the  beings  who
were  represented.  Pollux,  from  whom  we  derive
most  of  our  information  on  this  subject,  enumerates
(iv.  133,  Ac.)  25  typical  or  standing  masks  of
tragedy,  six  for  old  men,  seven  for  young  men,
nine  for  females,  and  three  for  slaves.  The  num-
ber of  masks  which  were  not  typical,  but  represented
certain  individuals  with  their  personal  peculiarities,
such  as  the  blind  Thamyris,  the  hundred-eyed
Argus,  &c.,  must  have  been  much  more  numerous,
for  Pollux  by  way  of  example  mentions  thirty  of


PERSONA.

such  peculiar  masks.     The  standing  masks  of  tra.
gedy  are  divided  by  Pollux  into  five  classes.

I.  Tragic  masks  for  old  men.  The  mask  for  the
oldest  man  on  the  stage  was  called  |i>piay  av'^p,
from  the  circumstance  of  the  beard  being  smoothly
shaved.  The  hair,  which  was  in  most  cases  attached
to  the  masks,  was  white,  and  hung  down  with  tho
exception  of  a  part  above  the  forehead,  which  rose
in  an  acute  angle,  or  in  a  round  shape,  .ind  left  the
temples  uncovered.  This  rising  part  of  the  hair
was  called  ojkos.  The  cheeks  of  this  mask  were
flat  and  hanging  downwards.  A  second  mask  for
old  men,  called  XevKhs  h.vi\p,  had  grey  hair,  floating
around  the  head  in  locks,  a  full  beard  and  a  promi-
nent forehead,  above  which  the  hair  formed  a
small  uyKos.  The  countenance  was  probably  pale,
as  the  adjective  Aeu/cJs  seems  to  indicate.  A  third
mask,  called  airapToirdXios,  had  black  hair  inter-
spersed with  grey,  and  was  somewhat  pale.  It
probably  represented  a  hero  of  from  40  to  50  years
of  age,  and  in  a  suffering  condition.  The  fourth
mask,  fichas  a.vi]p,  represented  a  hero  in  his  full
vigour,  with  black  and  curly  hair  and  beard,  strong
features  and  a  high  oyKos.  This  was  probably  the
mask  for  most  of  the  tragic  heroes  who  were  not
very  much  advanced  in  age.  For  a  secondary  class
of  heroes  there  were  two  other  masks,  the  \avQ6s
and  the  ^avtiSrepos  avf]p :  the  former  represented
a  fair  man  with  floating  locks,  a  low  uyKos,  and  a
good  colour  in  his  countenance  ;  the  second  or
fairer  man,  was  pale  and  of  a  sickly  appeanince.

2.  Tragic  masks  for  young  men.  Among  these
are  mentioned,  1.  The  veavia-Kos  irdyxpWTos,  a
mask  intended  to  represent  a  man  who  had  just
entered  the  age  of  manhood,  and  was  yet  unbearded,  ■
but  of  a  blooming  and  brownish  complexion,  and
with  a  rich  head  of  hair.  The  name  TrayxP^'^'Tos
probably  indicates  that  the  mask  might  be  used
in  a  great  variety  of  parts.  2,  The  ufaviarKos  ovXos,
or  ^aj/66s  or  inr4poyKo^,  a  fair  youth  of  a  haughty
or  impudent  character  ;  his  hair  was  curly  and
formed  a  high  oyKos  ;  his  character  was  indicated
by  his  raised  eye-brows.  3.  fieaplaKos  irdpovKos,
resembled  the  preceding  mask,  but  was  somewhat
5'^ounger.  The  counterpart  of  these  two  was,  4.  The
OTraAJs,  a  young  man  of  a  delicate  and  white  com-
plexion, with  fair  locks  and  a  cheerful  countenance
like  that  of  a  youthful  god.  5.  Uiuapds.  There
were  two  masks  of  this  name,  both  representing
young  men  of  an  irascible  appearance,  of  yellow
complexion  and  fair  hair  ;  the  one,  however,  was
taller  and  younger,  and  his  hair  was  more  curly
than  that  of  the  other.  6.  'Hxpt^s,  a  mask  quite
pale,  with  hollow  cheeks  and  fair  floating  hair.
It  was  used  to  represent  sick  or  wounded  persons.
7.  The  Trdpwxpos  might  be  used  for  the  ■ndyxpW''o^
if  this  character  was  to  be  represented  in  a  suffer-
ing or  melancholy  situation.

3.  Tragic  masks  for  male  slaves.  Pollux  men-
tions three,  viz.  the  S^pdepias,  which  had  no  oynos
and  wore  a  band  round  the  smooth  white  hair.
The  countenance  was  pale,  the  beard  gray,  the
nose  sharp,  and  the  expression  of  the  eyes  melan-
choly. The  (r<prfvoTrdoyo)u,  or  the  pointed  beard,  re-
presented a  man  in  his  best  years,  with  a  high  and
broad  forehead,  a  high  oyKos,  hardened  features,
and  a  red  face.  The  avda-i/xos,  or  the  pug-nose,  was
an  impudent  face  with  fair  rising  hair,  of  a  red
colour  and  without  beard.

4.  Tragic  masks  for  female  slaves.  Of  these  five
specimens  are  mentioned,  viz.  the  iroAtA  KardKOfios,


PERSONA.

in  earlier  times  called  Trapaxpuixos^  represented  an
old  woman  with  long  white  hair,  with  noble  but
pale  features,  to  indicate  a  person  who  had  seen
better  days  ;  the  ypdidiov  iXevdepov^  an  old  freed-
woman  ;  the  ypdiBiov  oIkstikSv,  the  old  domestic
slave  ;  the  oiKCTiKhv  fx.ea6Kovpou,  a  domestic  slave
of  middle  age  ;  and  lastly  the  Si^depiTis,  a  yoimg
female  slave.

5.  Tragic  ma^  for  free  women.  The  first  of  these,
called  KaraKOfios,  represented  a  pale  lady,  with  long
black  hair  and  a  sad  expression  in  her  countenance.
She  generally  shared  the  sufferings  of  the  principal
hero  in  a  play.  The  second,  called  fieaSKOvpos
a)Xf>a,  resembled  the  former,  with  the  exception
that  her  hair  was  half  shorn.  She  was  a  woman
of  middle  age,  and  was  probably  intended  to  repre-
sent the  wife  of  the  chief  hero,  if  he  was  not  too
advanced  in  age.  The  third  is  the  ixeadKovpos
irp6(T(paTos,  representing  a  newly  married  woman
in  full  bloom  with  long  and  floating  hair.  The
fourth  is  the  Kovpifios  TrapfieVos,  a  maiden  of  mature
age,  with  short  hair  divided  on  the  middle  of  the
forehead,  and  lying  smoothly  around  the  head.
The  colour  of  her  countenance  was  rather  pale.
There  was  another  mask  of  the  same  name,  but  it
differed  from  the  former  by  the  following  circum-
stances: —  the  hair  was  not  divided  on  the  forehead
or  curled,  but  wildly  floating,  to  indicate  that  she
had  had  much  suffering  to  go  through.  The  last
is  the  K6pr},  or  young  girl.  This  mask  represented
the  beauties  of  a  maiden's  face  in  their  full  bloom,
such  as  the  face  of  Danae,  or  any  other  great
beauty  was  conceived  to  have  been.

The  account  which  Pollux  gives  of  the  tragic
masks  comprehends  a  great  number,  but  it  is  small
in  comparison  with  the  great  variety  of  masks  which
the  Greeks  must  have  used  in  their  various  trage-
dies, for  every  hero  and  every  god  who  was  known
to  the  Greeks  as  being  of  a  particular  character,
must  have  been  represented  by  a  particular  mask,
so  that  the  spectators  were  enabled  to  recognise
him  immediately  on  his  appearance.  For  this
very  reason  the  countenances  of  the  gods,  heroes,
and  heroines,  must,  in  point  of  beautj'^,  have  been
as  similar  as  possible  to  their  representations  in
statues  and  paintings,  to  which  the  eyes  of  the
Greeks  were  accustomed  ;  and  the  distorted  masks
with  widely  open  mouths,  which  are  seen  in  great
numbers  among  the  paintings  of  Herculaneum  and
Pompeii  (see  the  annexed  woodcut  from  Museo
liorbon.  vol.  i.  tab.  20)  would  give  but  a  very  in-
adequate notion  of
the  masks  used  at
Athens  during  the
most  flourishing  pe-
riod of  the  arts.  All
the  representations
of  tragic  masks  be-
longing to  this  pe-
riod, do  not  show
the  slightest  trace
of  exaggeration  or

distortion  in  the  features  of  the  countenance,  and
the  mc'Uth  is  not  opened  wider  than  would  be  neces-
sary to  enable  a  person  to  pronounce  such  sounds
as  oh  or  ha.  In  later  times,  however,  distortions
and  exaggerations  were  carried  to  a  very  great
extent,  but  more  particularly  in  comic  masks,  so
that  they  in  some  degree  were  more  caricatures
than  representations  of  ideal  or  real  countenances.
(ApoUon.  Vit.  ApoUon.  v.  9.  p.  195,  ed.  Olear;


PERSONA.


891


Lucian,  de  Saltat.  27,  Anach.  23,  Nigrin.  1 1 ,  Somn'
s.  Gall.  26.)

The  annexed  woodcut  re-
presents some  masks,  one  ap-
parently comic  and  the  other
tragic,  which  are  placed  at  the
feet  of  the  choragus  in  the
celebrated  mosaic  found  at
Pompeii.  {Museo  Borbon.  vol.
ii.  tab.  5Q  ;  Gell,  Pomp.  vol.  i.
pi.  45.)

II.  Comic  Masks.  —  In  the  old  Attic  comedy,
in  which  living  and  distinguished  persons  were  so
often  brought  upon  the  stage,  it  was  necessary  that
the  masks,  though  to  some  extent  they  may  have
been  caricatures,  shoiild  in  the  main  points  be
faithful  portraits  of  the  individuals  whom  they
were  intended  to  represent,  as  otherwise  the  object
of  the  comic  poets  could  not  have  been  attained.
The  chorus  on  the  other  hand,  as  Avell  as  certain
phantastic  dramatis  personae,  rendered  sometimes
a  complete  masquerade  necessary  ;  as  in  those  cases
when  the  choreutae  appeared  with  the  heads  of
birds  or  of  frogs,  &c.  "We  may  remark  here,  by
the  way,  that  the  chorus  of  tragedy  appeared  gene-
rally without  masks,  the  Eumenides  of  Aeschylus
being  probably  only  an  exception  to  the  general
rule.  The  masks  of  the  characters  in  the  old  Attic
comedy  were  therefore,  on  the  whole,  faithful  to
life,  and  free  from  the  burlesque  exaggerations  which
we  see  in  the  masks  of  later  times.  A  change  was
made  in  the  comic  masks,  when  it  was  forbidden  to
represent  in  comedy  the  archon  by  imitating  his
person  upon  the  stage  (Schol.  ad  Aristoph.  Nub.
31),  and  still  more,  shortly  after,  by  the  extension
of  this  law  to  all  Athenian  citizens.  (Schol.  ad
Aristoph.  Ach.  1149,  Av.  1297;  Suid.  s.v.  'AvtI-
fxaxos.)  The  consequence  of  such  laws  was,  that
the  masks  henceforth,  instead  of  individuals,  repre-
sented classes  of  men,  i.  e.  they  were  masks  typical
of  men  of  certain  professions  or  trades,  of  a  particu-
lar age  or  station  in  life,  and  some  were  grotesque
caricatures.  A  number  of  standing  characters  or
masks  was  thus  introduced  in  comedy.  Pollux
gives  a  list  of  such  standing  masks,  which  are
divided,  like  those  of  tragedy,  into  five  classes.

1 .  Comic  masks  for  old  men.  Nine  masks  of
this  class  are  mentioned.  The  mask  representing
the  oldest  man  was  called  TrctTTTros  irpwros :  his
head  was  shaved  to  the  skin,  he  had  a  mild  ex-
pression about  his  eyebrows,  his  beard  was  thick,
his  cheeks  hollow,  and  his  eyes  melancholy.  His
complexion  was  pale,  and  the  whole  expression  of
the  countenance  was  mild.  2.  The  Trdinros  (irepos
was  of  a  more  emaciated  and  more  vehement  ap-
pearance, sad  and  pale  ;  he  had  hair  on  his  head
and  a  beard,  but  the  hair  was  red  and  his  ears
broken.  3.  The  riy^fiiiiv^  likewise  an  old  man,
with  a  thin  crown  of  hair  round  his  head,  an  aqui-
line nose,  and  a  flat  countenance.  His  right  eye-
brow was  higher  than  the  left.  4.  The  irpecrguTrjr
had  a  long  and  floating  beard,  and  likewise  a  crown
of  hair  round  his  head  ;  his  eyebrows  were  raised,
but  his  whole  aspect  was  that  of  an  idle  man.  5.
The  fpiJ.(i>veio5  was  bald-headed,  but  had  a  beard
and  raised  eyebrows,  and  was  of  angry  appearance.

6.  The  iropvoSo(TK6s  resembled  .the  mask  called
\vKQiJ.r)Seios,  but  his  lips  were  contorted,  the  eye-
brows contracted,  and  the  head  without  any  hair.

7.  The  ipfidveios  Scvrepos  had  a  pointed  beard,
but  waa  otherwise  without  hair.     8.  The  c<pf]vo'


892


PERSONA.


TTwyuiv^  or  pointed  beard,  Avas  likewise  bald-headed,
had  extended  eye-brows,  and  was  looking  ill-tem-
pered. 9.  The  \vKoy.T]deios  had  a  thick  beard,
was  conspicuous  on  account  of  his  long  chin,  and
the  form  of  his  eyebrows  expressed  great  curiosity.

The  annexed  comic
mask,  representing  an  old
man,  is  taken  from  the
Museo  Borbon.  vol.  i.
tab.  A.

2.  Comic  masks  for
young  men,  Pollux  enu-
merates ten  masks  of  this
kind.  1 .  The  irdyxp'n(J"''os
formed  the  transition  from
the  old  to  the  young  men  ;

he  had  but  few  wrinkles  on  his  forehead,  showed
a  muscular  constitution  (yvf^vacTTiKos),  was  rather
red  in  the  face,  the  upper  part  of  his  head  was
bald,  his  hair  was  red,  and  his  eyebrows  raised.
2.  The  veaviaKos  ixeXas  was  yoimger  than  the  pre-
ceding one,  and  with  low  eyebrows.  He  repre-
sented a  young  man  of  good  education  and  fond  of
gymnastic  exercises.  8.  The  veauiaKos  ovXos,,  or
the  thick-haired  young  man,  was  young  and  hand-
some, and  of  a  blooming  countenance,  his  eyebrows
were  extended,  and  there  was  only  one  wrinkle
upon  his  forehead.  4.  The  veaviaKos  a7ra\ds,  his
hair  was  like  that  of  the  irdyxpVf^'^os,  but  he  was
the  youngest  of  all,  and  represented  a  tender  youth
brought  up  in  seclusion  from  the  Avorld.  5.  The
aypo7Kos  or  rustic  young  man,  had  a  dark  com-
plexion, broad  lips,  a  pug-nose,  and  a  crown  of  hair
round  his  head.  6.  The  eTriVeto'Tos  (rTpaTiu>T7)5
or  the  formidable  soldier,  with  black  hair  hanging
over  his  forehead.  7.  The  CTrlrrcicrTos  SevTspos
was  the  same  as  the  preceding,  only  younger  and
of  a  fair  complexion.  8.  The  kSAo.^  or  the  flatterer,
and  9.  The  irapdcriTos  or  parasite  were  dark  (com-
pare Athen.  vi.  p.  237),  and  had  aquiline  noses.
Both  were  apparently  of  a  sympathising  nature  ;
the  parasite,  however,  had  broken  ears,  was  merry-
looking,  and  had  a  wicked  expression  about  his
eyebrows.  1 0.  The  e'lKoyiKSs  represented  a  stranger
in  splendid  attire,  his  beard  was  shaved  and  his
cheeks  pierced  through.  The  (nKe\iK6s  was  another
parasite.

3.  Comic  masks  for  male  slaves.  Of  this  class
seven  masks  are  mentioned.  1.  The  mask  repre-
senting a  very  old  man  was  called  irdinros,  and  had
grey  hair  to  indicate  that  he  had  obtained  his
liberty.  2.  The  ijyeixiiv  ^epdirwi/  had  his  red  hair
platted,  raised  eyebrows,  and  a  contracted  forehead.
He  was  among  slaves  the  same  character  as  the
Trpeo-guTTjs  among  freemen.  3.  The  kcitw  Tpixlas,
or  Kdru)  Tcrpixf^tf-^vos^  was  half  bald-headed,  had
red  hair  and  raised  eyebrows.  4.  The  olXos
^epdirwv,  or  the  thick-haired  slave,  had  red  hair
and  a  red  countenance  ;  he  was  without  eyebrows,
and  had  a  distorted  countenance.  5.  The  ^epdnuv
fiiaos  was  bald-headed  and  had  red  hair.  6.  The
depdirwu  t4tti^  was  bald-headed  and  dark,  but
had  two  or  three  slips  of  hair  on  his  head  and  on
his  chin,  and  his  countenance  was  distorted.  7.
The  iiriffeicrros  ^jyejitcJjv,  or  the  fierce-looking  slave,
resembled  the  Tjyeixioi/  S^epdway  with  the  exception
of  the  hair.

4.  Comic  masks  for  old  women.  Pollux  men-
tions three,  viz.  the  ypatSiov  l(rxvhv  or  \vKal-
viov,  a  tall  woman  with  many  but  small  wrinkles,
and   pale   but  with  animated   eyes  ;  the  iraxem


PERSONA.

ypavs,  or  the  fat  old  woman  with  large  wrinkles,
and  a  band  round  her  head  keeping  the  hair  to-
gether ;  and  the  ypaChiov  olKovpov,  or  the  domestic
old  woman.  Her  cheeks  were  hollow,  and  she  had
only  two  teeth  on  each  sids  of  her  mouth.

5.  Comic  masks  for  poting  women.  Pollux  men-
tions fourteen,  viz.  —  1.  The  yvu^  XeKTiKij,  or  the
talkative  woman  ;  her  hair  was  smoothl}'  combed
down,  the  eyebrows  rather  raised,  and  the  com-
plexion white.  2.  The  yw^  ov\r)  was  only  dis-
tinguished for  her  fine  head  of  hair.  3.  The  Kop-,]
had  her  hair  combed  smoothly,  had  high  and  black
eyebrows,  and  a  white  complexion.  4.  The  \pivdo-
Kopr]  had  a  whiter  complexion  than  the  former,  her
hair  was  bound  up  above  the  forehead,  and  she  was
intended  to  represent  a  young  woman  who  had  not
been  married  more  than  once.  5.  Another  mask  of
the  same  name  was  only  distinguished  from  the
former  by  the  irregular  manner  in  which  the  hair
was  represented,  6.  The  mrapTOTr6\ios  \eKriK-h,
an  elderly  woman  who  had  once  been  a  prostitute,
and  whose  hair  was  partly  grey.  7.  The  traWaKri
resembled  the  former,  but  had  a  better  head  of
hair.  8.  The  rcKeiov  eraipLKhv  was  more  red  in
the  face  than  the  \pevdoK6pr},  and  had  locks  about
her  ears.  9.  The  eTaipidLou  was  of  a  less  good  ap-
pearance, and  wore  a  band  round  the  head.  10.
The  8idxpv(ros  kraipa  derived  the  name  from  the
gold  with  which  her  hair  was  adorned.  11.  The
Bid/xiTpos  eraipa^  from  the  variegated  band  wound
around  her  head.  12.  The  Xa/nrdSiov,  from  the  cir-
cumstance of  her  hair  being  dressed  in  such  a  man-
ner that  it  stood  upright  upon  the  head  in  the  form
of  a  lampas.  13.  The  avpa  wepixovpos  represented
a  female  slave  newly  bought  and  wearing  only  a
white  chiton.  14.  The  Trapay\iy}(pi(n6v  was  a  slave
distinguished  by  a  pug-nose  and  her  hair  ;  s]\e
attended  upon  hetaerae,  and  wore  a  crocus  coloured
chiton.

Numerous  as  these  masks  are,  the  list  cannot  by
any  means  be  considered  as  complete,  for  we  know
that  there  were  other  standing  masks  for  persons
following  particular  kinds  of  trade,  which  are  not
mentioned  in  Pollux.  Maeson  of  Megara,  for  ex-
ample, is  said  to  have  invented  a  peculiar  mask
called  after  his  own  name  p-aiawv.,  another  for  a
slave,  and  a  third  to  represent  a  cook.  (Athen.  xiv.
p.  Qbd.)  From  this  passage  of  Athenaeus  we  also
learn  that  Stephanus  of  Byzantium  wrote  a  work
TTept  irpoaciTTwu.

III.  Masks  used  in  the  Satyric  Drama.
The  masks  used  m  this  species  of  the  Greek  drama
were  intended  to  represent  Satyrs,  Silenus,  and
similar  companions  of  Dionysus,  whence  the  ex-
pressions of  the  countenances  and  the  form  of  their
heads  may  easily  be  imagined.  Pollux  only  men-
tions the  grey-headed  Satyr,  the  unbearded  Sat^'r,
Silenus,  and  the  iraTT'Tros,  and  adds  that  the  charac-
ters of  all  the  other  Satyric  masks  either  resembled
these,  or  were  sufficiently  expressed  in  their  names,
e.g.  the  Papposilenus  was  an  old  man  with  a  very
predominant  animal  character.  (Compare  Eichstadt,
de  Dramate  Comico-Satyrico,  p.  81.)  A  grotesque
mask  of  a  Satyr,  together  with  one  of  the  finest
specimens  of  a  tragic  mask,  is  contained  in  the
Townly  Gallery  in  the  British  Museum,  and  is  re-
presented on  the  following  page.

As  regards  the  earliest  representations  of  the  re-
gular drama  among  the  Romans,  it  is  expressly
stated  by  Diomedes  (iii.  p.  486,  ed.  Putsch.),  that
masks  were  not  used,  but  merely  the  galerus  or


PES.


PETAURUM.


893


wig,  and  that  Rosclus  Gallus,  about  the  year  100
«.  c,  was  the  first  who  introduced  the  use  of  masks.
It  should,  however,  be  remembered  that  masks  had
been  used  long  before  that  time  in  the  Atellanao
(Fest.  s.  V.  Personata\  so  that  the  innovation  of
Roscius  must  have  been  confined  to  the  regular
drama,  that  is,  to  tragedy  and  comedy.  As  for  the
forms  of  Roman  masks,  it  may  be  presumed  that,
being  introduced  from  Greece  at  so  late  a  period,
they  had  the  same  defects  as  those  used  in  Greece
at  the  time  when  the  arts  were  in  their  decline,
and  this  supposition  is  confirmed  by  all  works  of
art,  and  the  paintings  of  Herculaneum  and  Pompeii,
in  which  masks  are  represented  ;  for  the  masks
appear  unnaturally  distorted  and  the  mouth  always
wide  open.  The  expressions  of  Roman  writers
also  support  this  supposition.  (Gellius,  v.  7  ;  Juv.
iii.  175.)  We  may  mention  here  that  some  of  the
oldest  MSS.  of  Terence  contain  representations  of
Roman  masks,  and  from  these  MSS.  they  have
been  copied  in  several  modern  editions  of  that  poet,
as  in  the  edition  published  at  Urbino  in  1726,  foL,
and  in  that  of  Dacier.  The  cut  annexed  contains
representations  of  four  of  these  masks  prefixed  to
the  Andria.


When  actors  at  Rome  displeased  their  audience
and  were  hissed,  they  were  obliged  to  take  oflF  their
masks  ;  but  those  who  acted  in  the  Atellanae  were
not  obliged  to  do  so.  (Fest.  s.  v.  Personata  fabula  ;
Macrob.  Sat.  ii.  7.)  The  Roman  mimes  never  wore
masks.  [Mimus.]  (Compare  Fr.  De  Ficoroni,
Disserfatio  de  Larvis  scerdcis  et  Fiquris  comicis  ant.
JRom.^  Rome  1736  and  1750,  4to  ;  Fr.  Stieve,  Disser-
tatin  de  reiscenicae  apvd  Romanos  Origine.)  [L.  S.]

PE'RTICA,  the  pole,  used  by  tlie  Agrimkn-
80RES,  was  also  called  Decempeda  because  it  was
ten  feet  long.  On  account  of  its  use  in  assigning
lands  to  the  members  of  a  colon}^  it  is  sometimes
represented  on  medals  by  the  side  of  the  augurial
plough.  (Propert.  iv.  1.  30.)  [J.  Y.]

PES  (iroCs),  a  foot,  the  standard  measure  of
length  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  as  well  as
among  nearly  all  other  nations,  both  ancient  and


modem.  Yery  little  needs  to  be  added  to  what
has  been  said  of  the  Greek  and  Roman  feet  under
Mensura.

The  Romans  applied  the  uncial  division  [As]  to
the  foot,  which  thus  contained  12  unciae.,  whence
our  inches  ;  and  many  of  the  words  used  to  express
certain  numbers  of  unciae  are  applied  to  the  parts
of  the  foot.  (Veget.  de  Re  Milit.  i.  5  ;  PI  in.  H.N.
xxvii.  5.  s.  11,  xiii.  15.)  It  was  also  divided  into
1 6  digiti  (finger-breadths) :  this  mode  of  division
was  used  especially  by  architects  and  land-sur-
veyors, and  is  found  on  all  the  foot-measures  that
have  come  down  to  us.  Pollex  (the  thumb),  which
is  used  in  modem  Latin  for  an  inch,  is  not  found
in  the  ancient  writers,  but  Pliny  {H.N.  xxvii.  9,
XV.  24,  xiii.  23)  uses  the  adjective  poUicaris  (of  a
thumb's  breadth  or  thickness).

From  the  analogy  of  the  as,  we  have  also  dupon-
dium  for  2  feet  (Colum.  iii.  15,  &c.),  and/)es  sester-
tius for  21  feet.  (Leg.  XII.  Tab.,  Tab.  viii.)  The
chief  subdivisions  and  multiples  of  the  foot  will  be
found  mentioned  under  Mensura,  and  more  fully
described  in  their  proper  places.  (See  also  the
Tables.)  One  itinerary  measure,  which  has  been
omitted  in  its  proper  place,  is  the  Leucja,  or  Leuca^
which  was  a  (Gallic  measure  =  1500  passus  or  1^
mile.  (Ammian.  Marc.  xvi.  12;  Itin.  Antonin.)
Stones  are  still  found  on  the  roads  in  France  with
distances  marked  on  them  in  Leugae,  [Milliare.]

The  square  foot  {pes  quadratus)  is  called  by
Frontinus  constratus,  and  by  Boethius  contractus.
Frontinus  applies  the  term  quadratus  to  the  cubic
foot,  and  the  same,  as  a  measure  of  capacity,  was

called  QUADRANTAL.

Certain  peculiar  foot-measures,  differing  from  the
ordinary  ones,  are  mentioned  by  ancient  writers.
The  Samian,  which  was  the  same  as  the  Egyptian
foot,  is  known  from  the  length  of  the  Egyptian
cubit  as  derived  from  the  Kilometer  (namely,
177427857  6  inches)  to  have  contained  11-82852384
inches,  or  more  than  \]^  inches.  A  larger  foot
than  the  common  standard  seems  to  have  been
used  in  Asia  Minor.  Heron  (de  Mens.  p.  368)
names  the  Royal  or  Philaeterian  foot  as  being  16
finger-breadths,  and  the  Italian  as  13^,  and  he  also
mentions  a  mile  (fiiXiov)  of  5400  Italian  or  4500
royal  feet.  Ideler  supposes  that  the  Italian  foot
means  the  common  Roman,  and  the  royal  a  Greek
foot  larger  than  the  common  standard,  correspond-
ing to  the  stadium  of  7  to  the  mile,  which  had
been  introduced  before  Heron's  time,  namely,
the  tenth  century.  The  Pes  Drusianus  or  foot  of
Drusus,  contained  13^  Roman  inches  =  13*1058
English  inches.  It  was  used  beyond  the  bound-
aries of  Italy  for  measuring  land,  and  was  the
standard  among  the  Tungri  in  Lower  Germany.

(Hussey,  on  Ancierd  Weights,   &c..  Appendix  ;
Wurm,  de  Pond,  chaps.  6  and  7  ;  Bockh's  Metrolog.
Untersuch.  pp.  196,  &c.  ;  Ideler,  Langen  u7id  Ft'd-
chenmasse  ;  Freret,  Observations  sur  le  Rajrport  des
Mestcres  Grecques  et  des  Mesures  Romaines,  Mdm.
de  I'Acad.  d'Inscrip.  t.  xxiv.  pp.  551,  &c.     [P.S.]
PESSI  (Treo-o-oO-     [Latritnculi.]
PE'SSULUS.     [Janua,  p.  626,  b.]
PETALISMUS   (7r6TaAi(r/t<{s).      [Exsihum,
p.  515,  a.]

PE'TASUS.     [PiLEUS.]
PETAURISTAE.     [Pktaijrum.]
PETAURUM  (ire'ravpoj',  ire'reupoj/)  is  said  by
the  Greek  grammarians  to  have  been  a  pole  or  board,
on  which  fowls  roosted.  (Hesych.  s.  v. ;  Pollux,  x.


894


PHALERA.


156.)  We  also  find  the  name  of  Petaurum  in  the
Roman  games,  and  considerable  doubt  has  arisen
respecting  its  meaning.  It  seems,  however,  to
have  been  a  board  moving  up  and  down,  with  a
person  at  each  end,  and  supported  in  the  middle,
something  like  our  see-saw  ;  only  it  appears  to
have  been  much  longer,  and  consequently  went  to
a  greater  height  than  is  common  amongst  us.
Some  writers  describe  it  as  a  machine,  from  which
those  who  exhibited  were  raised  to  a  great  height
and  then  seemed  to  fly  to  the  ground  ;  but  this  in-
terpretation does  not  agree  so  well  with  the  pas-
sages of  the  ancient  authors  as  the  one  previously
mentioned.  (Lucil.  ap.  Fest.  s.  v.  Petaurist.  ;  Juv.
xiv.  265  ;  Mart.  xi.  21.  3  ;  Manil.  v.  433.)  The
persons,  who  took  part  in  this  game,  were  called
Petauristae  or  Petauristarii ;  but  this  name  seems
to  have  been  also  applied  in  rather  a  wider  signifi-
cation. (Compare  Petron.  53.)

PETITOR.     [Actor.]

PETO'RRITUM,  a  four-wheeled  carriage,
which,  like  the  Essedum,  was  adopted  by  the
Romans  in  imitation  of  the  Gauls.  (Hor.  Sat.  i.  6.
104.)  It  differed  from  the  Harmamaxa  in  being
uncovered.  Its  name  is  obviously  compounded  of
petor^  four,  and  rit,  a  wheel.  Festus  (s.  v.)  in  ex-
plainivig  this  etymology  observes  that  petor  meant
four  in  Oscan  and  in  Aeolic  Greek.  There  is  no
reason  to  question  the  truth  of  this  remark  ;  but,
since  Petor  meant  four  in  many  other  European
languages,  it  is  more  probable  that  the  Romans
derived  the  name,  together  with  the  fashion  of  this
vehicle,  from  the  Gauls.  Gellius  (xv.  30)  expressly
savs  that  it  is  a  Gallic  word.  [J.  Y.]

>EZETAERI  (TreCeVatpot).  [Exercitus,  p.
488,  b.]

PHALANGAE  or  PALANGAE  {(pi\ayy^s\
any  long  cylindrical  pieces  of  wood,  such  as  trunks
or  branches  of  trees  (Herod,  iii.  97  ;  Plin.  H.  N.
xii.  4.  8.  8),  truncheons  (Plin.  H.  N.  vii.  56.
s.  57),  and  poles  used  to  carry  burthens.  The
carriers  who  used  these  poles  were  called  phaJan-
garii  (^Gloss.Ant.  s.v.\  and  also  kexaphori,  letra-
phori,  &c.,  according  as  they  worked  in  parties  of
six,  four,  or  tvvo  persons.

The  word  was  especially  used  to  signify  rollers
placed  under  ships  to  move  them  on  dry  land,  so
as  to  draw  them  upon  shore  or  into  the  water
(Sovpareoi  KvXivSpoi,  Brunck,^«a/.  iii.  89  ;  Apoll.
Rhod.  i.  375—389).  This  was  effected  either  by
making  use  of  the  oars  as  levers,  and  at  the  same
time  fastening  to  the  stem  of  the  ship  cables  with
a  noose  (firjpivdos)^  against  which  the  sailors
pressed  with  their  breasts,  as  we  see  in  our  canal
navigation  (Orph.  Argon.  239—249,  270—273),
or  by  the  use  of  machines.  (Hor.  Cann.  i.  4.  2.)
Rollers  were  employed  in  the  same  manner  to
move  military  engines  (Caesar,  Bell.  Civ.  ii.  10).

PHALANX  {<pd\ay^).  [Exercitus, pp.  482, b,
488.]

PHALA'RICA.     [Hasta,  p.  589,  a.]

PH  A'LERA  {(pdXapov)^  a  boss,  disc,  or  crescent
of  metal,  in  many  cases  of  gold  (Herod,  i.  215  ;
Athen.  xii.  p.  550  ;  Claudian,  £^pi^.  34)  and  beau-
tifully wrought  so  as  to  be  highly  prized.  (Cic.
Verr.  iv.  12.)  Ornaments  of  this  description,
being  used  in  pairs,  are  scarcely  ever  mentioned
except  in  the  plural  number.  The  names  for  them
are  evidently  fonried  from  the  term  (p6.\os^  which
is  explained  under  Galea.  (Compare  Hom.  II.
xri.  106.)     Besides  the  metallic  ornaments  of  the


PHARETRA.

helmet  similar  decorations  were  sometimes,  though
very  rarely,  worn  by  warriors  on  other  parts  of
their  dress  or  armour,  probably  upon  the  breast.
(Virg.  Aen.  ix.  359,  458.)  The  negro  slaves  who
were  kept  by  opulent  Romans  wore  them  sus-
pended round  their  necks.  (Sueton.  Nero,  30.)
Also  the  tiara  of  the  king  of  Persia  was  thus
adorned.  (Aeschyl.  Pers.  668.)  But  we  most
commonly  read  of  phalerae  as  ornaments  attached
to  the  harness  of  horses  (Xen.  Hellen.  iv.  1.  §  39  ;
Virg.  Aen.  v.  310  ;  Gell.  v.  5  ;  Claudian,  Epig.  36),
especially  about  the  head  (a/xTrvKT-fipia  (pd\apa.
Soph.  Oed.  Col.  1069  ;  Eurip.  Suppl.  586  ;  Greg.
Cor.  de  Dialect,  p.  508,  ed.  Schafer),  and  often  worn
as  pendants  (pensiliu,  Plin. /f.  iV.  xxxvii.  12.  s.
74),  so  as  to  produce  a  terrific  effect  when  shaken
by  the  rapid  motions  of  the  horse  {turbantttr  pha-
lerae, Claudian,  in  iv.  Cons.  Honor.  548).  These
ornaments  were  often  bestowed  upon  horsemen  by
the  Roman  generals  in  the  same  manner  as  the
Armilla,  the  Torques,  the  hasta  pura  [HastaJ,
and  the  crown  of  gold  [Corona],  in  order  to  make
a  public  and  permanent  acknowledgment  of  bravery
and  merit.  ( Juv.  xvi.  60  ;  Gell.  ii.  11.)     [J.Y.]

PHALLUS.     [DioNYSiA,  p.  411,  a.]

PHALOS  (0o\os).     [Galea.]

PHARETRA  ((paperpa,  ap.  Herod.  (papeTpeu>v\
a  quiver.  A  quiver,  full  of  arrows,  was  the  usual  ac-
companiment of  the  bow.  [Arcus.]  It  was  conse-
quently part  of  the  attire  of  every  nation  addicted
to  archery.  Virgil  applies  to  it  the  epithets  Cressa,
Lyda,  Thre'issa  {Georg.  iii.  345,  Aen.  vii.  816,
xi.  858)  ;  Ovid  mentions  the  pharetratus  Geta  {De
Ponto,  i.  8.  6)  ;  Herodotus  represents  it  as  part
of  the  ordinary  armour  of  the  Persians  (vii.  61).
The  quiver,  like  the  bow-case  (cori/i?is),  was  prin-
cipally made  of  hide  or  leather  (Herod,  ii.  141),
and  was  adorned  with  gold  (Anacr.  xiv.  6  ;  aurata,
Virg.  Aen.  iv.  138,  xi.  858),  painting  (Ovid,
Epist.  Her.  xxi.  173),  and  braiding  (TroXvppaTrrov,
Theocrit.  xxv.  265).  It  had  a  lid  (Trw^a,  Hom.
II.  iv.  116,  Od.  ix.  314),  and  was  suspended
from  the  right  shoulder  by  a  belt  [Balteus],
passing  over  the  breast  and  behind  the  back.  (Hes.
I.  c.)     Its  most  common  position  was  on  the  left


PHAROS.

hip,  in  the  usual  place  of  the  sword  [Gladius],
and  consequently,  as  Pindar  says,  "under  the
elbow"  {OL  ii.  150.  s.  91)  or  "under  the  arm"
( uTTcoAeViov,  Theocrit.  xvii.  30).  It  was  worn  thus
hy  the  Scythians  (Schol.  in  Find.  I.e.)  and  by  the
Egyptians  (Wilkinson,  Man.  and  Cust.  vol.  i.  pp.
311,  391),  and  is  so  represented  in  the  preceding
tiijure  of  the  Amazon  Dinomache,  copied  from  a
(ireek  vase.  (Hope,  Costume  of  tlie  Ancients^  i.  22.)
The  left-hand  figure  in  the  same  woodcut  is  from
one  of  the  Aegina  marbles.  It  is  the  statue  of  an
Asiatic  archer,  whose  quiver  (fractured  in  the
original)  is  suspended  equally  low,  but  with  the
opening  towards  his  right  elbow,  so  that  it  would
be  necessary  for  him  in  taking  the  arrows  to  pass
his  hand  behind  his  body  instead  of  before  it.  To
this  fashion  was  opposed  the  Cretan  method  of
carrying  the  quiver,  which  is  exemplified  in  the
woodcut,  p.  276,  and  is  uniformly  seen  in  the
ancient  statues  of  Diana,  [J.  Y.]

PHARMACON  GRAPHE  ((pap ^laKwv  or  (j^ap-
fxaKiias  ypa(pT)\  an  indictment  against  one  who
caused  the  death  of  another  by  poison,  whether
piven  with  intent  to  kill  or  to  obtain  undue  influ-
ence. (Pollux,  viii.  40,  117  ;  Demosth.  c  ^mtocr.
627  ;  Argum.  in  Or.  Antiph.  Karriy.  <papix.)  It
■was  tried  by  the  court  of  Areiopagus.  That  the
malicious  intent  was  a  necessary  ingredient  in  the
crime,  may  be  gathered  from  the  expressions  4k
irpovolas^  €|  iirtSovKrjs  Kol  irpo^ovKris,  in  Antiphon
(I.e.  iii.  112,  ed.  Steph.).  The  punishment  was
death,  but  might  (no  doubt)  be  mitigated  by  the
court  under  palliating  circumstances.  We  have
examples  of  such  ypacpal  in  the  speech  of  Antiphon
already  cited,  and  that  entitled  rrepl  rod  xopevrov.
(Meier,  Att.  Proc.  p.  311.)  Among  the  Greeks,
women  appear  to  have  been  most  addicted  to  this
crime,  as  we  learn  from  various  passages  in  ancient
authors.  Such  women  are  called  (pap/xaKiScs  and
(papfxaKevrpiai.  Poisonous  drugs  were  frequently
administered  as  love  potions,  or  for  other  purposes
of  a  similar  nature.  Men  whose  minds  were  af-
fected by  them  were  said  (papfiaK^v.  Wills  made
hy  a  man  under  the  influence  of  drugs  (virh  (papfxa-
Kwv)  were  void  at  Athens.    (Demosth.  c.  Steph.

1 133  ^  rr*  R  K  1

PHAROS  or  PHARUS  (<pApos),  a  light-house.
The  most  celebrated  light-house  of  antiquity  was
that  situated  at  the  entrance  to  the  port  of  Alex-
andria.    It  was  built  by  Sostratus  of  Cnidos  on  an
island,  which  bore  the  same  name,  by  command  of
one  of  the  Ptolemies,  and  at  an  expense  of  800
talents.    (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvi.  12  ;  Steph.  Byz.  s.v.
^dpos  ;  Achill.  Tat.  v.  6.)     It  was  square,  con-
structed of  white  stone,  and  with  admirable  art ;
exceedingly   lofty,   and   in   all   respects  of  great
I    dimensions.    (Caesar,  ^e^.  Civ.  iii.  112.)     It  con-
I    tained  niany  stories  (iro\v6po(pov,  Strabo,  xvii.  1.
j    §  6),  which  diminished  in  width  from  below  up-
I    wards.    (Herodian,  iv.  3.)     The  upper  stories  had
[    wiudovvs  looking  seawards,  and  torches  or   fires
I    were  kept  burning  in  them  by  night  in  order  to
guide  vessels  into  the  harbour.    (Val.  Flacc.  vii.
84  ;  see  Bartoli,  Luc.  Ant.  iii.  12.)

Pliny  (l.  c.)  mentions  the  light-houses  of  Ostia
and  Ravenna,  and  says  that  there  were  similar
towers  at  many  other  places.  They  are  repre-
I  sented  on  the  medals  of  Apamea  and  other  mari-
time cities.  The  name  of  Pharos  was  given  to
them  in  allusion  to  that  at  Alexandria,  which  was
the  model  for  their  construction.    (Herodian,  I.  c. ;


PHASIS.  895

Sueton.  CYawcf.  20  ;  Bnmck,  Anal.  ii.  186.)  The
Pharos  of  Bnindusium,  for  example,  was,  like  that
of  Alexandria,  an  island  with  a  light-house  upon
it.  (Mela,  ii.  7.  §  13  ;  Steph.  Byz.  I.  c.)  Suetonius
(Tiber.  74)  mentions  another  pharos  at  Capreae.

The  annexed  woodcut  shows  two  phari  remain-
ing in  Britain.  The  first  is  within  the  precincts
of  Dover  Castle.  It  is  about  40  feet  high,  octago-
nal externally,  tapering  from  below  upwards,  and
built  with  narrow  courses  of  brick  and  much  wider
courses  of  stone  in  alternate  portions.  The  space
within  the  tower  is  square,  the  sides  of  the  octagon
without  and  of  the  square  within  being  equal,  viz.,
each  15  Roman  feet.  The  door  is  seen  at  the
bottom.  (Stukely,  Itin.  Curios,  p.  129.)  A  similar
pharos  formerly  existed  at  Boulogne,  and  is  sup-
posed to  have  been  built  by  Caligula.  (Sueton.  Calig.
46  ;  Montfaucon,  Supplem.  vol.  iv.  L.  vi.  3, 4.)  The
round  tower  here  introduced  is  on  the  summit  of  a
hill  on  the  coast  of  Flintshire.  (Pennant,  Par.  of
Whiteford  and  Holywell.,  p.  1 1 2.)  [J.  Y.]


PHAROS  ((papas).     [Pallium.]

PHASE'LUS  ((pd(r'f)\os).,  was  a  vessel  rather
long  and  narrow,  apparently  so  called  from  its  re-
semblance to  the  shape  of  a  phaselus  or  kidney-
bean.  It  was  chiefly  used  by  the  Egyptians,
and  was  of  various  sizes,  from  a  mere  boat  to  a
vessel  adapted  for  long  voyages.  (Virg.  Georg.  iv.
289  ;  Catull.  4  ;  Martial,  x.  30.  13  ;  Cic.  ad  Att.
i.  13.)  Octavia  sent  ten  triremes  of  this  kind,
which  she  had  obtained  from  Antony,  to  assist  her
brother  Octavianus  ;  and  Appian  (Bell.  Civ.  v.  95)
describes  them  as  a  kind  of  medium  between  the
ships  of  war  and  the  common  transport  or  merchant
vessels.  The  phaselus  was  built  for  speed  (Catull.
I.  c. phaselus  ille — navium  celerrimus),  to  which  more
attention  seems  to  have  been  paid  than  to  its
strength  ;  whence  the  epithet  fragilis  is  given  to
it  by  Horace.  (Carm.  iii.  2.  27,  28.)  These  ves-
sels were  sometimes  made  of  clay  (fctilibus  phaselisy
Juv.  XV.  127),  to  which  the  epithet  of  Horace  may
perhaps  also  refer.

PHASIS  ((p(i(ris)^  was  one  of  the  various  me-
thods by  which  public  offenders  at  Athens  might
be  prosecuted  ;  but  the  word  is  often  used  to  de-
note any  kind  of  information  ;  as  Pollux  (viii,  47)
says,  Koivws  (pd(reis  iKoKovvro  vacrai  al  fxr)vu(r€is
Tu>v  \avQav6vTU)V  aSiKrifxdTcoK  (See  Aristoph.  Eq.
300,  and  Achai-n.  823,  826,  where  the  word  (pav~
rdCco  is  used  in  the  same  sense  as  <palva>.)  The
word  (rvKO(pdvTi}s  is  derived  from  the  practice  of
laying  information  against  those  who  exported  figs.
[Sycophantks.J

Though  it  is  certain  that  the  ^ettris  was  distin^
guished  from  other  methods  of  prosecution  (De-
mosth. c.  Aristog.  793  ;  Isocr.  c.  Callim.  375,  ed.


896


PHASIS.


Steph.),  we  are  not  informed  in  what  its  peculiari-
ties consisted.  According  to  Pollux  (/.  c),  it
might  be  brouglit  against  those  who  committed
offences  against  the  mine  laws,  or  the  customs,  or
any  other  part  of  the  revenue  ;  against  any  persons
who  brought  false  accusations  against  others  for
such  offences  ;  and  against  guardians  who  injured
their  wards.  The  charge,  as  in  the  ypa(p^,  was
made  in  writing  (eV  ypa/jL/xaTe'Kf}),  with  the  name
of  the  prosecutor,  and  the  proposed  penalty  (rifxr)iJ.a)
affixed,  and  also  the  names  of  the  KATjryjpes.  The
same  author  says,  i^aivovro  Se  irphs  rhv  &pxovTa.
Here  we  must  either  understand  the  word  &pxofTa
to  be  used  in  a  more  general  sense,  as  denoting
any  magistrate  to  whom  a  jurisdiction  belonged,  or
read  with  Schoraann  (de  Comit.  178)  tovs  ^pxovras.
For  it  is  clear  that  the  archon  was  not  the  only
person  before  whom  a  ^aais  might  be  preferred.
In  cases  where  com  had  been  carried  to  a  foreign
port,  or  money  lent  on  a  ship  which  did  not  bring
a  return  cargo  to  Athens,  and  probably  in  all  cases
of  offence  against  the  export  and  import  laws,  the
information  was  laid  before  the  eVt/ieATjral  tov
ifXTTopiov.  (Demosth.  c.  Tlveocr.  1323.)  Where
public  money  had  been  embezzled,  or  illegally  ap-
propriated, for  which  a  <^a.(ns  was  maintainable,
the  aruuSiKoi  were  the  presiding  magistrates.  (Isocr.
c.  Callim.  372  ;  Lys.  de  Puhl.  Pecun.  149,  de
Aristoph.  bo?i.  154,  ed.  Steph.)  Offences  relating
to  the  mines  came  before  the  thesmothetae.  (Meier,
Att.  Proc.  p.  64.)  Injuries  done  by  guardians  to  their
wards  or  wards'  estate,  whether  a  public  prosecu-
tion or  a  civil  action  was  resorted  to,  belonged  to
the  jurisdiction  of  the  archon,  whose  duty  it  was  to
protect  orphans.  (Suidas.  s.  v.  ^dais  ;  Demosth.  c.
Onet.  865,  c,  Lacr.  940,  c.  Nausim.  991.)  All
(pda-eis  were  Ti/iTjrol  aycoves^  according  to  Pollux
(viii.  48),  and  he  says  rb  TLfxrjOev  iyiyj/ero  twv
a5 iKovfisvav^  el  kol  6,Wos  virep  avroov  (pr}t/eicv.
By  this  we  are  to  understand  that  the  rifiTj/xa  went
to  the  state,  if  the  prosecution  was  one  of  a  purely
public  nature,  that  is,  where  the  offence  imme-
diately affected  the  state  ;  but  where  it  was  of  a
mixed  nature,  as  where  a  private  person  was  in-
jured, and  the  state  only  indirectly,  in  such  case
compensation  was  awarded  to  the  private  person.
This  was  the  case  in  prosecutions  against  fraudulent
guardians.  On  the  same  ground,  wherever  the
prosecutor  had  an  interest  in  the  cause,  beyond
that  which  he  might  feel  as  the  vindicator  of  public
justice  ;  as  where  he,  or  some  third  person  on
whose  behalf  he  interposed,  was  the  party  directly
injured,  and  might  reap  advantage  from  the  result  ;
he  was  liable  to  the  €7rw§€Aia,and  also  to  the  pay-
ment of  the  TrpvTaue7a,  just  as  he  would  be  in  a
private  action.  Probably  this  liability  attached
upon  informations  for  carrying  corn  to  a  foreign
port,  as  the  informer  there  got  half  the  penalty  if
successful.  (Demosth.  c.  Theocr.  1325.)  Where
the  (pdais  was  of  a  purely  public  nature,  the  pro-
secutor would  be  subject  only  to  the  payment  of
the  irapdffTaais^  and  to  the  thousand  drachms,  if
he  failed  to  obtain  a  fifth  part  of  the  votes,  accord-
ing to  the  common  practice  in  criminal  causes.
(Demosth.  c.  T/ieocr.  1323.)  Whether  in  those  of
a  mixed  nature  he  was  liable  to  these  payments,
as  well  as  to  the  Trpvravela  and  ivuSeKla^  is  a
question  which  has  been  much  discussed,  but  can-
not be  settled.  We  have  no  speech  left  us  by  the
orators  on  the  subject  of  a  <pd<Tis^  but  only  mention
of  a  lost  speech  of   Lysias  "Tphs  r^v   (pdaiv  rod


PHONOS.
opcpaviKov  oXkov.      (See  Bockh,   Puhl.  Econ.  cf
Alliens,   p.  368,   &c.  2d  ed.  ;  Meier,   Ait.   Proc.
pp.  247—252,  732  ;  Platner,  Proc.  und  Kl.  vol.
ii.  pp.  9— 17.)  [C.R.K.]

PHEIDFTIA  ((^etSiVia).     [Syssitia.]

PHENACE  {(p^udK-n).     [Coma,  p.  330,  a.]

PHERNE  (fpepv-fi).     [Dos.]

PHIALA.     [Patera.]

PHONOS  ((I)6pos),  Homicide,  was  either  ckov-
(Tios  or  aKovaios,  a  distinction  which  corresponds  in
some  measure,  but  not  exactly,  with  our  murder
and  manslaughter;  for  the  <p6vos  kKovaios  might
fall  within  the  description  of  justifiable  homicide,
while  (povos  aKovaios  might  be  excusable  homicide.
According  to  the  different^  circumstances  under
which  the  homicide  was  committed,  the  tribunal
to  which  the  case  was  referred,  and  the  modes  of
proceeding  at  Athens,  varied.  All  cases  of  murder
(with  one  exception,  to  be  hereafter  noticed)  were
tried  by  the  court  of  Areiopagus  ;  other  cases  of
homicide  were  (by  the  statutes  of  Draco)  to  be
tried  by  the  icperai.  All  (poviKoL  St'/cai  belonged
to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  &px^v  fiacriXevs  as  ^776-
/jLcbu  SiKaa-Trjpiov.  He  was  anciently  the  sole  judge
in  cases  of  unintentional  homicide  ;  for  such  an  act
was  considered  in  a  religious  point  of  view,  as
being  a  pollution  of  the  city  ;  and  it  became  his
duty,  as  guardian  of  religion,  to  take  care  that  the
pollution  (&yos)  was  duly  expiated.  Draco,  how-
ever, established  the  e^e'raj,  first  as  a  court  of
appeal  from  the  &px<^y  ySacriAeus  ;  and  soon  after
they .  began  to  perform  the  office  of  SiKaaTol,  he
being  the  presiding  magistrate.  (Suidas,  s.  v.  'H76-
fiouia  SiKaa-TT^piov ;  Pollux,  viii.  90,  125.)  In
discussing  this  subject  we  have  to  consider  the
various  courts  established  at  Athens  for  the  trial  of
homicide,  the  different  species  of  crime  therein  re-
spectively prosecuted,  the  manner  of  proceeding
against  the  criminal,  and  the  nature  of  the  punish-
ment to  which  he  was  liable.  All  these  points
are  fully  discussed  by  Matthiae  in  his  treatise  de
Judiciis  A  then,  in  the  Miscellanea  Philologica,
vol.  i.,  to  which  more  particular  references  are
given  in  this  article.

Solon,  who  seems  to  have  remodelled  the  court
of  Areiopagus,  enacted  that  this  court  should  try
cases  of  murder  and  malicious  wounding,  besides
arson  and  poisoning.  (Demosth.  c.  Aristocr.  627.)
One  would  be  deemed  a  murderer,  who  instigated
another  to  commit  the  deed,  provided  the  purpose
were  accomplished.  (Demosth.  c.  Conon.  1 264, 1 265 ;
Matth.  p.  148.)  Besides  the  court  of  Areiopagus,
there  were  four  other  courts,  of  which  the  icpcrai
were  judges  ;  rh  iirl  HaWaSicf,  to  iirl  AeXcpivicf,  rh
eVt  TIpvTaveicj},  and  rh  iu  OpeoTTOt.  (Harpocr.  et
Suid.  s.  V.  'Ecperai.)  To  the  court  eirl  Ua\.\adi(f)
belonged  cases  of  accidental  homicide,  manslaughter,
and  attempts  to  commit  murder  (fiovKevaeis).  Such
a  case  as  that  mentioned  by  Demosthenes  (c.  Neaer.
1348)  of  an  unlawful  blow  followed  by  death,
would  be  manslaughter.  It  seems  also  that  this
court  had  a  conciu-rent  jurisdiction  with  the  Areio-
pagus in  charges  of  murderous  conspiracy,  which
was  carried  into  effect.  The  law  perhaps  allowed
the  prosecutor  to  waive  the  heavier  charge,  and
proceed  against  the  offender  for  the  conspiracy
only.  ( Harpocr.  s.  V.  BouAeuo-ews  ;  Antiph.  TtrpaA.
126,  ed.  Steph.  ;  Matth.  p.  150.)  As  to  the  sup-
posed origin  of  this  court,  see  Harpocr.  s.  v.  'EttI
HaXKaUtf  ;  Pollux,  viii  118.  To  the  court  eVj
Li\<^\.v[<f  were  referred  cases  where  the  party  con-


PHONOS.

fessed  the  deed,  but  justified  it  ;  &v  ris  SfioXoyf)
fxev  KTcTuat,  ivvo/nuis  Se  <pfi  SeSpaKevai.  Demo-
Bthenes  calls  it  aytcvraToy  koI  (ppuccoSearaTov  (c.
Aristocr.  644  ;  Harpocr.  s.  v.  'EttI  Ae\(piv'i(^  ;  Pol-
lux, viii,  119).  As  to  the  origin  of  this  court  see
Matth.  p.  152.  In  the  rh  eiri  UpvTavdcf  the  objects
of  prosecution  were  inanimate  things,  as  wood,
stone,  or  iron,  which  had  caused  the  death  of  a
man  by  falling  on  him.  (Harpocr.  s.  v.  'EttI  ITpuTa-
v^icf  ;  Pollux,  viii.  120  ;  Demosth.  c.  Aristocr.  645.)
Draco  enacted  that  the  cause  of  death  should  be  cast
out  of  the  boundaries  of  the  land  (vrrcpopi(€cr6ai),
in  which  ceremony  the  ^/5x«>'  fiaaiXevs  was  as-
sisted by  the  <pv\ogacriAe7s.  (Meier,  Att.  Proc.  p.
117;  Suidas,  s.  v.  Nikoov  ;  Aesch.  c.  Ctesiph.  88,  ed.
Steph.)  This  was  a  relic  of  very  rude  times,  and
may  be  not  inaptly  compared  with  our  custom  of
giving  deodands.  Matthiae  (p.  154)  thinks  there
was  an  ulterior  object  in  the  investigation,  viz.,  that
by  the  production  of  the  instrument  by  which
death  was  inflicted,  a  clue  might  be  found  to  the
discovery  of  the  real  murderer,  if  any.  The  court
iv  (ppeaT7o7  was  reserved  for  a  peculiar  case  ;  Avhere
a  man,  after  going  into  exile  for  an  unintentional
homicide,  and  before  he  had  appeased  the  relations
of  the  deceased,  was  charged  with  having  com-
mitted murder.  He  was  brought  in  a  ship  to  a
place  in  the  harbour  called  eV  (ppearToT,  and  there
pleaded  his  cause  on  board  ship,  while  the  judges
remained  on  land.  If  he  was  convicted,  he  suf-
fered the  punishment  of  murder  ;  if  acquitted,  he
suffered  the  remainder  of  his  former  punishment.
The  object  of  this  contrivance  was  to  avoid  pollu-
tion (for  the  crime  of  the  first  act  had  not  yet  been
expiated),  and  at  the  same  time  to  bring  the  second
offence  to  trial.  (Demosth.  c.  Aristocr.  646  ;  Har-
pocr. s,  v.  'Ev  ([)peaTTo2 1  Pollux,  viii.  120  ;  Matth.
p.  155.)

To  one  or  other  of  these  courts  all  (poviKal  5i/cat
were  sent  for  trial  ;  and  it  was  the  business  of  the
&PXOOV  fiaaiKehs  to  decide  which.  The  task  of  pro-
secution devolved  upon  the  nearest  relatives  of  the
deceased  ;  and  in  case  of  a  slave,  upon  the  master.
To  neglect  to  prosecute,  without  good  cause,  was
deemed  an  offence  against  religion,  that  is,  in  any
relation  not  further  removed  than  a  first  cousin's
son  (avexl/iadovs).  Within  that  degree  the  law  en-
joined the  relations  to  prosecute,  under  penalty  of  an
acregeias  -ypacpi]^  if  they  failed  to  do  so.  (Demosth.
c.  Androt.  593,  c.  Macart  1069,  c.  Euerg.  et
Mnes.  1160,  1161  ;  Antiph.  deHer.  caed.  135,  ed.
Steph.)  They  might,  however  (without  incurring
any  censure),  forbear  to  prosecute,  where  the  mur-
dered man  had  forgiven  the  murderer  before  he
died  (Demosth.  c.  Pantaen.  983)  ;  or,  in  cases  of
involuntary  homicide,  where  the  offender  gave  the
satisfaction  which  the  law  required  ;  unless  the  de-
ceased had  given  a  special  injunction  to  avenge
him.  (Lysias,  c.  Agor.  133,  138,  ed.  Steph.  ;
Matth.  p.  170.)

The  first  step  taken  by  the  prosecutor  was,  to
give  notice  to  the  accused  to  keep  away  from  all
public  places  and  sacrifices.  This  was  called  Tcp6p-
()-n(TiSy  and  was  given  at  the  funeral  of  the  de-
ceased. (Antiph.  de  Her.  caed.  130,  139,  de  Chpr.
14l,ed.  Steph. ;  Demosth.  c.Leptin.  505,  c.  Aristocr.
G32,  c.  Euerg.  1160.)  After  this,  he  gave  a  pub-
lic notice  in  the  market-place,  warning  the  accused
to  appear  and  answer  to  the  charge  :  here  he  was
said  Trpoenre7v  or  Trpoayopeveiv  (pdyov.  (Demosth.  c.
Macart.  1068,    c.  Neaer.  1348.)     The  next  thing


PHONOS.


897


was,  to  prefer  the  charge  before  the  king-archon.
To  such  charge  the  term  iTria-KriirTecrOai  or  eVel-
Uvai  was  peculiarly  applied.  (Pollux,  viii.  33, 118;
Harpocr.  s.  v.  'ETrcaK-fiyparo  ;  Antiph.  Karrjy.  (pap/n.
Ill,  ed.  Steph.)  The  charge  was  delivered  in
writing  ;  the  prosecutor  was  said  aTroypd(pe(r6ai
S'lKTiu  (povov.  (Antiph.  de  Chor.  145,  ed.  Steph.)
The  king-archon  having  received  it,  after  first
warning  the  defendant  airdx^o'daL  twu  fivaTT]pia>v
KoX  Tcov  dWeav  vojj.ifMQ}u  (Pollux,  viii.  C<6,  90),  pro-
ceeded in  due  form  to  the  avaKpiais.  The  main
thing  to  be  inquired  into  was  the  nature  of  the
offence,  and  the  court  to  which  the  cognizance  ap-
pertained. The  evidence  and  other  matters  were
to  be  prepared  in  the  usual  way.  Three  months
were  allowed  for  this  preliminary  inquiry,  and
there  were  three  special  hearings,  one  in  each
month,  called  SiaSiKaa-iai,  or  (according  to  Bekker's
reading)  TrpoSiKaa-'iai  (Antiph.  de  Chor.  146,  ed,
Steph.)  ;  after  which,  in  the  fourth  month,  the
king-archon  clariyeT^i/  Siktjv.  (Matth.  p.  160.)  The
defendant  was  allowed  to  put  in  a  irapaypacpr],  if
he  contended  that  the  charge  ought  to  be  tried  in .
one  of  the  minor  courts.  (Pollux,  viii.  57.)

All  the  (poviKo.  hiKaa-riipia  were  held  in  the  open
air,  in  order  that  the  judges  might  not  be  under
the  same  roof  with  one  suspected  of  impurity  ;  nor
the  prosecutor  with  his  adversary.  (Antiph.  deHer.
caed.  130,  ed.  Steph.)  The  king-archon  presided,
with  his  crown  taken  off.  (Pollux,  viii.  90.)  The
parties  were  bound  by  the  most  solemn  oaths  ;  the
one  swearing  that  the  charge  was  true,  that  he
bore  such  a  relationship  to  the  deceased,  and  that
he  would  in  conducting  his  case  confine  himself  to
the  question  at  issue  ;  the  other  declaring  the
charge  to  be  false.  (Antiph.  de  Her.  caed.  130,
140,  de  Chor.  143,  ed.  Steph. ;  Demosth.  c.  Euerg.
1161  ;  Matth.  p.  163.)  The  witnesses  on  both
sides  were  sworn  in  like  manner  (Antiph.  de  Her.
caed.  130,  131,  ed.  Steph.  ;  Meier,  Att.  Proc.
p.  675)  ;  and  slaves  were  allowed  to  appear  as
witnesses.  (Meier,  Ait.  Proc.  p.  667.)  Either
party  was  at  liberty  to  make  two  speeches,  the
prosecutor  beginning,  as  may  be  seen  from  the
rerpaXoyia  of  Antiphon  ;  but  both  were  obliged  to
confine  themselves  to  the  point  at  issue.  (Lys.  c,
Simon.  100  ;  Antiph.  de  Chor.  143,  ed.  Steph.)
Advocates  {a-vurjyopoi)  were  not  admitted  to  speak
for  the  parties  anciently,  but  in  later  times  they
were.  (Matth.  p.  164.)  Two  days  were  occupied  in
the  trial.  After  the  first  day  the  defendant,  if
fearful  of  the  result,  was  at  liberty  to  fly  the  coun-
try, except  in  the  case  of  parricide.  Such  flight
could  not  be  prevented  by  the  adversary,  but  the
property  of  the  exile  was  confiscated.  (Pollux,  viii.
117;  Demosth. c.^mfocr.  634,643;  Matth.  p.  1 67.)
On  the  third  day  the  judges  proceeded  to  give  their
votes  ;  for  which  two  boxes  or  urns  were  provided
(vSpiai  or  a.fjL(pop€7s).,  one  of  brass,  the  other  of
wood  ;  the  former  for  the  condemning  ballots,  the
latter  for  those  of  acquittal.  An  equal  number  of
votes  was  an  acquittal  ;  a  point  first  established
(according  to  the  old  tradition)  upon  the  trial  of
Orestes.    (Aeschyl.  Eumen.  753  ;  Matth.  p.  165.)

As  the  defence  might  consist  either  in  a  simple
denial  of  the  killing,  or  of  the  intention  to  kill,  or
in  a  justification  of  the  act,  it  is  necessary  to  in-
quire what  circumstances  amounted  to  a  legal  justi-
fication or  excuse.  We  learn  from  Demosthenes
(c.  Aristocr.  637)  that  it  was  excusable  to  kill  an-
other unintentionally  in  a  gymnastic  combat,  or
3  M


898


PHONOS.


to  kill  a  friend  in  tattle  or  am"buscade,  mistaking
him  for  an  enemy  ;  that  it  was  justifiable  to  slay
an  adulterer  if  caught  in  ipso  delicto,  or  a  paramour
caught  in  the  same  way  with  a  sister  or  daugh-
ter, or  even  with  a  concubine,  if  her  children  would
be  free.  (As  to  an  adulterer,  see  Lys.  de  Eratosth.
coed.  94,  ed.  Steph.)  It  was  lawful  to  kill  a  rob-
ber at  the  time  when  he  made  his  attack  {evOvs
a/jLvvS/xevov)  but  not  after.  (Demosth.  c.Arisiocr.
629.)  By  a  special  decree  of  the  people,  made  after
the  expulsion  of  the  thirty  tyrants,  it  was  lawful  to
kill  any  man  who  attempted  to  establish  a  tyranny,
or  put  down  the  democracy,  or  committed  treason
against  the  state.  (Lycurg.  c.  Leocr.  165  ;  Andoc*
de  Myst.  13,  ed.  Steph.)  A  physician  was  ex-
cused w^ho  caused  the  death  of  a  patient  by  mis-
take or  professional  ignorance.  (Antiph.  rerpaK
127,  ed.  Steph.)  This  distinction,  however,  must
be  observed.  Justifiable  homicide  left  the  perpe-
trator entirely  free  from  pollution  (Kadap6v).  That
which,  though  unintentional,  was  not  perfectly
free  from  blame,  required  to  be  expiated.  See
the  remarks  of  Antiphon  in  the  TerpaAoyluy  B.
123.

It  remains  to  speak  of  the  punishment.

The  courts  were  not  invested  with  a  discre-
tionary power  in  awarding  punishment  ;  the  law
determined  this  according  to  the  nature  of  the
crime.  (Demosth.  c.  A^eaer.  1372.)  Wilful  murder
was  punished  with  death.  (Antiph.  de  Her.  coed.
130,  ed.  Steph.  ;  Demosth.  c.  Mid.  528.)  It  was
the  duty  of  the  Thesmothetae  to  see  that  the  sen-
tence was  executed,  and  of  the  Eleven  to  execute
it.  (Demosth.  c.Arisiocr.  630  ;  Meier,  Att.  Proc.
p.  74  ;  Schumann,  Ant.  Jur.  PM.  Gr.  p.  246.)  We
have  seen  that  the  criminal  might  avoid  it  by  fly-
ing before  the  sentence  was  passed.  Malicious
wounding  was  punished  with  banishment  and  con-
fiscation of  goods.  (Lys.  c.  Simon.  100  ;  Matth.
p.  148.)  So  were  attempts  to  murder  {^ovX^vacis).
But  where  the  design  was  followed  by  the  death
of  him  whose  life  was  plotted  against,  and  the
crime  was  treated  as  a  murder,  it  might  be  punished
with  death,  at  least  if  it  was  tried  in  the  Areio-
pagus  ;  for  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  minor  courts
(except  that  eV  (ppeaTTo7)  had  the  power  of  inflicting
capital  punishment.  (Matth.  p.  150  ;  Schomann,
Ant.Jnr.Puhl.  Gr.p.294  ;  Meier,  Att.  Proc.  p.  313.)
If  the  criminal  who  was  banished,  or  who  avoided
his  sentence  by  voluntary  exile,  returned  to  the
country,  an  evdei^is  might  forthwith  be  laid  against
him,  or  he  might  be  arrested  and  taken  before  the
Thesmothetae,  or  even  slain  on  the  spot.  (Suidas,
s.  r.  "Ej/Setlis  ;  Matth.  p.  168.)  The  proceeding  by
airaywyi}  (arrest)  might  perhaps  be  taken  against
a  murderer  in  the  first  instance,  if  the  murder  was
attended  with  robbery,  in  which  case  the  prosecu-
tor was  liable  to  the  penalty  of  a  thousand  drachms
if  he  failed  to  get  a  fifth  of  the  votes.  (Demosth.  c.
Aristocr.  647  ;  Meier,  Att.  Proc.  p.  231.)  But  no
murderer,  even  after  conviction,  could  lawfully  be
killed,  or  even  arrested,  in  a  foreign  country.
(Demosth.  c.  Aristocr.  631,  632.)  The  humanity
of  the  Greeks  forbade  such  a  practice.  It  was  a
principle  of  international  law,  that  the  exile  had  a
safe  asylum  in  a  foreign  land.  If  an  Athenian  was
killed  by  a  foreigner  abroad,  the  only  method  by
which  his  relations  could  obtain  redress,  was  to
seize  natives  of  the  murderer's  country  (not  more
than  three),  and  keep  them  until  the  murderer  was
given  up  for  judgment.  (Demosth.  c.  Aristocr.  647 ;


PHTHORA  TON  ELEUTHERON.
Pollux,  viii.  50  ;  Harpocr.  and  Suidas,  s.  v.  'AvSpo-

Those  who  were  convicted  of  unintentional
homicide,  not  perfectly  excusable,  were  condemned
to  leave  the  country  for  a  year.  They  were  obliged
to  go  out  (i^epx^crOai)  by  a  certain  time,  and  by
a  certain  route  (raKTrjv  6S6v)^  and  to  expiate
their  offence  by  certain  rites.  Their  term  of  absence
was  called  aTreyiavTicrfi6s.  It  was  their  duty  also
to  appease  {al5e7cr6ai)  the  relations  of  the  deceased,
or  if  he  had  none  within  a  certain  degree,  the
members  of  his  clan,  either  by  presents  or  by
humble  entreaty  and  submission.  If  the  convict
could  prevail  on  them,  he  might  even  return  before
the  year  had  expired.  The  word  alSeladai  is  used
not  only  of  the  criminal  humbling  himself  to  the
relations,  but  also  of  their  forgiving  him.  (Harpocr.
s.  V.  ''TTro(p6via  ;  Demosth.  c.  Pantaen.  983,  c.  Ma-
cart.  1069,  c.  Aristocr.  643  ;  Matth.  p.  170.)  The
property  of  such  a  criminal  was  not  forfeited,  and
it  was  unlawful  to  do  any  injury  to  him  either  on
his  leaving  the  country  or  during  his  absence.
(Demosth.  c.  Aristocr.  634.)

Such  was  the  constitution  of  the  courts,  and  the
state  of  the  law,  as  established  by  Solon,  and
mostly  indeed  by  Draco  ;  for  Solon  retained  most
of  Draco's  (poviKol  vSfioi.  (Demosth.  c.  Euerg.  1161,
c.  Aristocr.  636.)  But  it  appears  that  the  jurisdic-
tion of  the  i<pirai  in  later  times,  if  not  soon  after
the  legislation  of  Solon,  was  greatly  abridged  ;
and  that  most  of  the  tpoviKoX  S'lKai  were  tried  hj  a
common  jury.  It  is  probable  that  the  people  pre-
ferred the  ordinary  method  of  trial,  to  which  they
were  accustomed  in  other  causes,  criminal  as  well
as  civil,  to  the  more  aristocratical  constitution  of  the
court  of  icperat.  Their  jurisdiction  in  the  courts
iu  (ppeoTTol  and  iirl  UpvTaveicf},  was,  no  doubt,
still  retained  ;  and  there  seem  to  have  been  other
peculiar  cases  reserved  for  their  cognizance.  (Pol-
lux, viii.  125  ;  Matth,  p.  158  ;  Schomann,  A7it.
Jur.  Pvb.  p.  296.)  Whether  the  powers  of  the
Areiopagus,  as  a  criminal  couH,  were  curtailed  by
the  proceedings  of  Pericles  and  Ephialtes,  or  only
their  administrative  and  censorial  authority  as  a
council,  is  a  question  which  has  been  much  dis-
cussed. The  strong  language  of  Demosthenes
(c.  Aristocr.  641)  inclines  one  to  the  latter  opinion.
See  also  Dinarchus  (c.  Aristog.  init.),  from  which
it  appears  there  was  no  appeal  from  the  decision
of  that  court.  (Matth.  166  ;  Platner,  Proc.  und
Klag.  vol.  i.  p.  27  ;  Schomann,  Ant.  Jur.  Pub.  p.  301 ;
Thirlwall,  Gr.  Hist.  vol.  iii.  c.  17.  p.  24.)

No  extraordinary  punishment  was  imposed  by
the  Athenian  legislator  on  parricide.  Suicide  was
not  considered  a  crime  in  point  of  law,  though  it
seems  to  have  been  deemed  an  offence  against  re-
ligion ;  for  by  the  custom  of  the  country  the  hand
of  the  suicide  was  buried  apart  from  his  body.
(Aesch.  c.  Ctes.  88,  ed.  Steph.)  [C.  R.  K.]

PHORBEIA  (<}>op§da).    [Capistrum.J
PHORMINX  (<p6pfxiyO.     [Lyra.]
PHOROS  (<p6pos),  literally  that  which  is  brought
in,  was  specially  used  to  signify  the  tribute  paid  by
the  Attic  states  to  Athens,  which  is  spoken  of  under
Tblos.

PHRA'TRIA.  [CiviTAS,pp.  289, 290;  Tribus
(Greek).]

PHRY'GIO.     [Pallium,  p.  851,  a.]
PHTHORA   TON   ELEUTHERON  {tpeoph
rwv  iKevQ4pwv),  was  one  of  the  offences  that  might
be  criminally  prosecuted  at  Athens.     The  word


PHYLOBASILEIS.

<p8opd  may  signify  any  sort  of  corruption,  bodily  or
mental  ;  but  the  expression  <pO.  r.  e.  comprehends,
if  it  is  not  limited  to,  a  crime  too  common  among
the  Greeks,  as  appears  from  a  law  cited,  by  Aes-
chines  (c.  Timarch.  2,  ed.  Steph.).  On  this  subject
see  Proagogeias  Graphe,  and  Schomann,  Ant.
Jur.  Pub.  Gr.  pp.  335,  338.  [C.  R.  K.j

PHYGE  {(pvyi]).     [ExsiLiUM.]

PHYLARCHI  ((/)i^A.apxoO,  generally  the  pre-
fects of  the  tribes  in  any  state,  as  at  Epidaranus,
where  the  government  was  formerly  vested  in  the
<pv\apxoi^  but  afterwards  in  a  senate.  (Arist.  Folit.
V.  1.)  At  Athens  the  officers  so  called  were  (after
the  age  of  Cleisthenes)  ten  in  number,  one  for  each
of  the  tribes,  and  were  specially  charged  with  the
command  and  superintendence  of  the  cavalry.
(Harpocr.  s.  v. ;  Pollux,  viii.  94.)  There  can  be  but
little  doubt,  that  each  of  the  Phylarchs  commanded
the  cavalry  of  his  own  tribe,  and  they  were  them-
selves colhctively  and  individually  under  the  con-
trol of  the  two  Hipparchs,  just  as  the  Taxiarchs
were  subject  to  the  two  Strategi.  According  to
Pollux  (viii.  94 ),  they  were  elected  one  from  each
tribe  by  the  Archons  collectively;  but  his  authority
can  hardly  be  considered  as  conclusive  on  this  point.
Herodotus  (v.  19)  infonus  us  that  when  Cleisthenes
increased  the  number  of  the  tribes  from  four  to  ten,
he  also  made  ten  Phylarchs  instead  of  four.  It  has
been  thought,  however  (Titmsinn,  Staatsv.  pp.  274,
275),  that  the  historian  should  have  said  ten
Phylarchs  in  the  place  of  the  old  <pv\o6a<Ti\us,
who  were  four  in  number,  one  for  each  of  the  old
tribes.  (See  Wachsrauth,  Hellen.  Alterthumsk.
vol.  i.  pp.  425,  543,  vol.  ii.  p.  326, 2d  ed.)  [R.W.]

PHYLOBASILEIS  (,(\>vKoSa(n\u^).  The
origin  and  duties  of  the  Athenian  magistrates,  so
called,  are  involved  in  much  obscurity,  and  the
little  knowledge  we  possess  on  the  subject  is  de-
rived almost  entirely  from  the  grammarians.  In
the  earliest  times  they  were  four  in  number,  re-
presenting each  one  of  the  four  tribes,  and  probably
elected  (but  not  for  life)  from  and  by  them.
(Hesych.  s.v.)  They  were  nominated  from  the
Eupatridae,  and  during  the  continuance  of  royalty
at  Athens,  these  "  kings  of  the  tribes  "  were  the
constant  assessors  of  the  sovereign,  and  rather  as
his  colleagues  than  counsellors.  (Thirlwall,  Hist,
of  Greece^  vol.  ii.  p.  11.)  From  an  expression  in
one  of  the  laws  of  Solon  (Plut.  Solon,  19),  it  ap-
pears that  before  his  time  the  kings  of  the  tribes
exercised  a  criminal  jurisdiction  in  cases  of  murder
or  high  treason  ;  in  which  respect,  and  as  con-
necteid  with  the  four  tribes  of  the  city,  they  may
be  compared  with  the  "  duumviri  perduellionis  "  at
Rome,  who  appeared  to  have  represented  the  two
ancient  tribes  of  the  Ramnes  and  Titles.  (Nie-
buhr.  Hist,  of  Home,  vol.  i.  p.  304.)  They  were
also  intrusted  (but  perhaps  in  later  times)  with
the  performance  of  certain  religious  rites,  and  as
they  sat  in  the  ^aaiKeiov  (Poll.  viii.  ill),  they
probably  acted  as  assessors  of  the  &pxc}V  fiacriKivs,
or  "  Rex  sacrificulus,"  as  they  had  formerly  done
of  the  king.  Though  they  were  originally  con-
nected with  the  four  ancient  tribes,  still  they  were
not  abolished  by  Cleisthenes  when  he  increased
the  number  of  tribes  and  otherwise  altered  the
constitution  of  Athens  ;  probably  because  their
duties  were  mainly  of  a  religious  character.
(Wachsmuth,  Hellen.  Alterthumsk.  vol.  ii.  p.  426,
2d  ed.)  They  appear  to  have  existed  even  after
his  time,   and  acted  as  judges,  but  in  unimpor-


PICTURA.  899

tant  or  merely  formal  matters.  They  presided,
we  are  told  (Poll.  viii.  120),  over  the  court  of  the
Ephetae,  held  at  the  Prytaneium,  in  the  mock
trials  over  instruments  of  homicide  (at  rwv  a-^vx(»v
SiKai),  and  it  was  part  of  their  duty  to  remove
these  instruments  beyond  the  limits  of  their
country  (rh  i/xTreahv  &\l/vxoy  virepopiaai).  We
may  reasonably  conclude  that  this  jurisdiction  was
a  relic  of  more  important  functions,  such  as  those
described  by  Plutarch  (Solon,  19),  from  which,
and  their  connection  with  the  Prytaneium,  it  has
been  conjectured  that  they  were  identical  with  the
old  Prytanes.  (MUller,  Eumen.  §  67.)  Plutarch
(I.  e.)  speaks  of  them  both  as  fiaaiXels  and  trpv-
Tavus.  In  a  ^i\<pi<Tixa,  quoted  by  Andocides  (de
Myst.  p.  11),  the  title  of  fiaffiXus  seems  to  be  ap-
plied to  them.  [R.  W.]

PHYLON  (4,v\ov).     [Tribus.]

PICTU'RA ('ypa<pi],  ypa<piK'fi,  (wypa<})la),  paint-
ing. I.  The  art  of  imitating  the  appearances  of
bodies  upon  an  even  surface,  by  means  of  light
and  shade  or  coloiu-,  was  an  art  most  extensively
cultivated  by  the  ancients,  but  especially  by  the
Greeks,  amongst  whom  it  was  certainly  carried  to
the  highest  degree  of  technical  development.

II.  Authorities.  The  principal  original  sources
of  information  upon  the  history  of  ancient  art,  are
Pausanias,  the  elder  Pliny,  and  Quintilian  ;  the
writings  also  of  Cicero,  Lucian,  Aelian,  Aristotle,
Athenaeus,  Plutarch,  the  elder  and  younger  Phi-
lostratus,  contain  many  hints  and  maxims  inva-
luable to  the  historian  of  art.  The  best  modern
works  on  the  subject  are:  Junius,  De  Pictura
Veterum  and  Catalogus  Artificum,  Roter.  1694,
folio,  which  contain  almost  all  the  passages  in
ancient  authors  relating  to  the  arts  ;  but  the  Cata-
logue is  the  more  valuable  portion  of  the  work  ;
Siilig,  Catalogus  Artificum,  Dresden  1827,  8vo.,
an  indispensable  supplement  to  the  Catalogue  of
Junius  ;  this  excellent  work,  written  equally  for
the  scholar  and  the  artist,  has  been  translated  into
English  under  the  title  of  a  Dictionary  of  the
Artists  of  Antiquity,  1837*;  a  further  supple-
ment to  Siilig,  of  great  importance,  is  the  work  of
M.  Raoul-Rochette,  Lettre  a  M.  Schorn,  Supple-
ment au  Catalogue  dcs  Artistes  de  V Antiquite
Grecque  et  Romaine,  Paris  1845  ;  MUller,  Hand-
buck  der  Arch'dologie  der  Kunst,  Breslau  1848,  8vo.,
3rd  ed.  by  Welcker,  a  most  useful  work,  but
written  more  for  the  antiquary  than  the  artist  ;
the  2nd  edition  has  recently  been  translated  by
Mr.  Leitch  ;  Biittiger,  Ideen  zur  Arch'dologie  der
Malerei,  Dresden  1811,  8vo.,  first  part,  from  the
earliest  times  until  Polygnotus  and  his  contem-
poraries, inclusive  ;  Durand,  Histoire  de  la  Pein-
ture  Ancienne,  London  1725,  folio,  a  translation  of
book  XXXV.  of  Pliny,  with  copious  notes  ;  Carlo
Dati,  Vite  dei  Pittori  Antichi,  Florence  1667,
4 to.,  the  lives  of  Zeuxis,  Parrhasius,  Apelles,  and
Protogenes  ;  Thiersch,  tfeber  die  Epochen  der  bil~
denden  Kunst  unter  den  Griechen,  MUnchen  1829,
8vo.,  2nd  ed.  ;  Raoul-Rochette,  Reche^ch^s  sur
VEmploi  de  la  Peinture,  Sec,  Paris  1836,  4to.  ;
John,  Malerei  der  Alten,  Berlin  1836,  8vo.  ;  Le-
tronne,  Lettres  d'un  Antiquaire  a  un  Artiste,
Paris  1840,  8vo. ;  Nagler,  Neues  allgemei7ies  Kiinst-

*  An  important  error,  however,  among  many
others,  in  this  translation,  demands  notice  ;  the
term  enamel  is  throughout  erroneously  used  in  the
place  of  encaustic.

Zu  2


900


PICTURA.


ler-Leaicon^  Munchen,  17  vols.  8vo.,  not  yet  com-
pleted ;  and  the  lectures  of  Fuseli  upon  ancient
painting,  and  of  Flaxman  upon  sculpture.  Other
•works  have  been  written  upon  general  and  par-
ticular subjects  bearing  more  or  less  upon  painting,
such  as  those  of  Hej-ne,  Meyer,  Hirt,  Hermann,
Kugler,  Vblkel,  Jacobs,  Creuzer,  Grund,  Caylus,
lievesque,  Millin,  D'Hancarville,  Quatremere  de
Quincy,  Inghirami,  Visconti,  Millingen,  and  others,
too  numerous  to  mention  here.  Of  the  celebrated
work  of  Winckelmann,  Gescldehte  der  Kunst  des
Alterthums^  only  a  very  small  portion  is  devoted
to  painting.

III.  Painting  in  its  earliest  state.  The  legends
relating  to  the  origin  of  painting  in  Greece,
though  they  may  have  no  real  historical  value,  are
at  least  interesting  to  the  lovers  of  art.  One
legend,  which  is  recorded  by  Pliny  (/T.  A^.  xxxv.
12.  s.  A'S)  and  is  adverted  to  by  Athenagoras
(Legat.  pro  Christ.  14.  p.  59,  ed.  Dechair),  relates
the  origin  of  the  delineation  of  a  shadow  {aKia,
cTKiaypacpT],  Pollux,  vii.  128),  which  is  the  essen-
tial principle  of  design,  the  basis  of  the  imitative
and  plastic  arts.  The  legend  runs  as  follows  :  —
The  daughter  of  a  certain  Dibutades,  a  potter  of
Sicyon,  at  Corinth,  struck  Avith  the  shadow  of  her
lover  who  was  about  to  leave  her,  cast  by  her
lamp  upon  the  wall,  drew  its  outline  {umbram  ex
facie  lineis  circ.umscripsit)  with  such  force  and
fidelity,  that  her  father  cut  away  the  plaster
within  the  outline,  and  took  an  impression  from
the  wall  in  clay,  which  he  baked  with  the  rest  of
his  pottery.  {Diet,  of  Biog.  s.  v.)  There  seem  to
be,  however,  other  claimants  to  the  honour  of
having  invented  skiagraphy  {(TKiaypacpia).  Athe-
nagoras {I.  c.)  mentions  Saurias  of  Samos,  who
traced  his  horse's  shadow  in  the  sun  with  the
point  of  his  spear,  and  Crato  of  Sicyon,  whom  he
styles  the  inventor  of  drawing  or  outline  (ypacpiK^),
for  he  was  the  first  to  practise  the  art  upon  tablets
■with  prepared  grounds  (eV  TriVa/ct  \eXevKw/x4ucf).
Pliny  (//.  A'",  vii.  57)  mentions  upon  the  testimony
of  Aristotle,  that  Eucheir  (Eu^eip),  a  relation  of
Daedalus,  invented  painting  in  Greece.  (Diet,  of
Biog.  s.v.)  Although  Pliny's  account  {H.  N.  xxxv.
5)  of  the  origin  and  progress  of  painting  in  Greece
is  somewhat  circumstantial,  his  information  can  still
not  be  considered  as  authentic  matter  of  history  ;
and  the  existence  of  several  of  the  most  ancient
artists,  mentioned  by  Pliny  and  many  Greek  wri-
ters, is  verj'-  questionable.  Besides  those  already
spoken  of,  we  find  mention  made  of  Philocles  of
Egypt  ;  Cleanthes,  Ardices,  and  Cleophantus,  of
Corinth  ;  Telephanes  of  Sicyon,  Eugrammus,  and
others.  (Upon  the  meanings  of  some  of  these
names  see  Bottiger,  Ideen  zur  Arch'dologie,  p.  138,
and  Thiersch,  Epoch.  &c.,  note  22,  and  Diet,  of
Biog.  art.  C'heirisophits.)

Sculpture  is  generally  supposed  to  be  a  more
ancient  art  than  painting ;  but  this  arises  from  an
imperfect  comprehension  of  the  nature  of  the  two
arts,  which  are  owe  in  origin,  end,  and  principle,
and  differ  only  in  their  development.  Design  is
the  basis  of  both,  colour  is  essential  to  neither,  nor
can  it  be  said  to  belong  more  particularly  to  the
latter  (ypacpiK-f))  than  to  the  former  (TrKaa-TiK-fi).
Coloured  works  in  plastic,  in  imitation  of  nature,
were  in  ancient  times  as  common,  and  probably
more  so,  than  coloured  designs:  the  majority  of  the
illustrations  upon  the  vases  are  colourless.  The
staining  of  the  human  body,  or  the  colouring  of


PICTURA.

images,  is  the  common  notion  of  the  origin  of  paint,
ing  ;  but  smiple  colouring.,  and  painting,  strictly
speaking,  are  quite  distinct  ;  the  distinction  be-
tween "  to  colour,"  xpco^etj/,  colorem  inclucere,  and
"to  paint,"  C^Tpa^eii/,  pingerc,  delineare.  (Pollux,
vii.  126.)  The  colouring  of  the  early  wooden
images,  the  ancient  i,6aua,  or  the  ep^uat,  the  ttoA.-
AaSia,  and  the  haihoKa,  must  certainly  have  pre-
ceded zxij  important  essays  in  painting,  or  the
representation  of  foims  upon  an  even  surface  by
means  of  colour  and  light  and  shade  combined.
But  this  is  no  stage  in  the  art  of  painting,  and
these  figures  were  most  probably  coloured  by  the
artists  who  made  them,  by  the  old  TrAao-rat  or
ep/xoyXvcpai,  themselves  ;  the  existence,  however,
of  the  art  of  design  is  established  by  the  existence
of  the  plastic  art.

We  will  now  as  briefly  as  possible  consider  the
gradual  development  of  painting,  and  the  informa-
tion relating  to  its  progressive  steps,  preserved  in
ancient  writers.  The  simplest  form  of  design  or
drawing  (ypa<piKr])  is  the  outline  of  a  shadow,  with-
out any  intermediate  markings,  or  the  shape  of  a
shadow  itself  (a  silhouette),  in  black,  Avhite,  or  in
colour  (umbra  hominis  lineis  circttmducta)  ;  this
kind  of  drawing  was  termed  fficiaypacpia.  But  this
simple  figure  or  shade,  cr/fta  (aKiaypd^jxa),  when
in  colour  was  also  essentially  a  monochrom  (ixovo-
Xpd!>iJ.aTov).  The  next  step  was  the  outline,  the
"  pictura  linearis,"  the  monogram  (fiovSypajxjxov)  ;
this  is  said  to  have  been  invented  by  Philocles  of
Egypt  or  Cleanthes  of  Corinth,  but  first  developed
in  practice  by  Ardices  of  Corinth  and  Telephanes
of  Sicyon :  it  was  the  complete  outline  with  the
inner  markings,  still  without  colour  ;  such  as  we
find  upon  the  ancient  vases,  or  such  as  the  cele-
brated designs  of  Flaxman,  which  are  perfect
monograms.  These  outlines  were  most  probably
originally  practised  upon  a  white  ground  (iv  ivivaKi
\e\evKwiJ.€i/a}),  for  Pliny  remarks  that  they  were
first  coloured  by  Cleophantus  of  Corinth,  who  used
"  testa  trita,"'  by  which  we  should  perhaps  under-
stand that  he  was  the  first  to  draw  them  upon  a
coloured  or  red  ground,  such  as  that  of  the  vases.
(Plin.  ff.  N.  xxxv.  5.)

The  next  step  is  the  more  perfect  form  of  the
monochrom,  alluded  to  above  ;  in  this,  light  and
shade  were  introduced,  and  in  its  most  perfect  state
it  was,  in  everything  that  is  essential,  a  perfect
picture.  These  "  monochromata  "  were  practised
in  all  times,  and  by  the  greatest  masters.  Pliny,
speaking  of  Zeuxis  (H.  N.  xxxv.  36),  says,  "  pinxit
et  monochromata  ex  albo  ; "  ex  albo,  that  is,  in
gray  and  gray,  similar  to  the  chiariscuri  of  the
Italians.  They  are  described  by  Quintilian  (xi.  3.
§  46),  "  qui  singulis  pinxerunt  coloribus,  alia  tamen
eminentiora,  alia  reductiora  fecerunt."  They  were
painted  also  red  in  red.  Pliny  (H.  N.  xxxiii.  39)
tells  us  that  the  old  masters  painted  them  in  ver-
milion, "  Cinnabari  veteres,  quae  etiam  nunc  vocant
monochromata,  pingebant,"  and  also  in  red  lead,
but  that  afterwards  the  rubrica  or  red  ochre  was
substituted  for  these  colours,  being  of  a  more  de-
licate and  more  agreeable  tint.

Hygiemon,  Dinias,  and  Charmadas,  are  men-
tioned by  Pliny  (H.  N.  xxxv.  34)  as  having  been
famous  ancient  monochromists  ;  their  age  is  not
known,  but  they  most  probably  practised  the
simpler  form,  such  as  we  find  upon  the  most  ancient
vases.  Four  monochroms  in  the  latter  style,  red
inured,  were   discovered   in  Herculaneum.     (La


PICTURA.

Ardiddta  d''Ercolano,  vol.  i.  plates  1,  2,  3,  4.)
They  are  paintings  of  a  late  date  and  are  of  con-
siderable merit  in  every  respect,  but  the  colours
have  been  nearly  destroyed  by  the  heat,  and  the
pictures  are  in  some  places  defaced  ;  they  are
painted  upon  marble.  They  were  probably  all
executed  by  the  same  artist,  Alexander  of  Athens.
AAEEANAP05  A0HNAIO2  EFPA^EN,  is  an  in-
scription upon  one  of  them  (pi.  1),  which  represents
five  females,  with  their  names  attached,  two  of
•whom  are  playing  at  the  ancient  game  of  the  ta/i
{a(TTpaya\i(Tix6s).  These  tablets  are  in  the  col-
lection of  ancient  paintings  of  the  Museo-Borbonico
at  Naples,  Nos.  408,  409,  410,  411.  ,

The  next  and  last  essential  step  towards  the
full  development  or  establishment  of  the  art  of
painting  (^w7pa^io)  was  the  proper  application  of
local  colours  in  accordance  with  nature.  This  is,
however,  quite  a  distinct  process  from  the  simple
application  of  a  variety  of  colours  before  light  and
shade  were  properly  understood,  although  each  ob-
ject may  have  had  its  own  absolute  colour.  The
local  colour  of  an  object  is  the  colour  or  appearance
it  assumes  in  a  particular  light  or  position,  which
colour  depends  upon,  and  changes  with,  the  light  and
the  surrounding  objects  ;  this  was  not  thoroughly
imdorstood  until  a  very  late  period,  but  there  will
be  occasion  to  speak  of  this  hereafter.  Probably
Eumarus  of  Athens,  and  certainly  Cimon  *  of
Cleonae,  belonged  to  the  class  of  ancient  tetra-
chromists  or  polychromists,  for  painting  in  a  variety
of  colours,  without  a  due  or  at  least  a  partial  ob-
servance of  the  laws  of  light  and  shade,  is  simply
polychromy  ;  and  a  picture  of  this  latter  descrip-
tion is  a  much  more  simple  effort  than  the  rudest
forms  of  the  monochrom  in  chiaroscuro.  There  are
a  few  examples  of  this  kind  of  polychrom  upon  the
most  ancient  vases.  In  the  works  of  Eumarus  of
Athens,  however,  there  must  have  been  some  at-
tention to  light  and  shade,  and  in  those  of  Ciraon
of  Cleonae  still  more.

IV.  Painting  in  Asia  Minor  and  in  Magna
Graecia.  It  is  singular  that  the  poems  of  Homer
do   not   contain   any  mention   of  painting  as  an


PICTURA.


901


*  These  two  names  are  generally  connected
with  each  other,  but  Eumarus  must  have  preceded
Cimon  some  time.  He  was  the  first,  according  to
Pliny  (//■.  N.  xxxv.  34),  who  distinguished  the
male  from  the  female  in  painting :  "  qui  primus  in
pictura  marem  feminamque  discreverit, .  .  .  figuras
omnes  imitari  ausum."  The  most  obvious  dis-
tinction which  here  suggests  itself  can  scarcely  be
alluded  to  by  Pliny,  or  Eumarus  must  belong  to  a
very  early  period,  for  we  find  that  distinction  very
decidedly  given  on  even  the  most  ancient  vases,
whenever  the  figure  is  naked.  That  Eumaiiis
dared  or  ventured  to  imitate  all  figures,  may  imply
that  he  made  every  distinction  between  the  male
and  the  female,  giving  also  to  each  sex  a  character-
istic style  of  design,  and  even  in  the  compositions,
draperies,  attitudes,  and  complexions  of  his  figures,
clearly  illustrating  the  dispositions  and  attributes
of  each,  exhibiting  a  robust  and  vigorous  form  in
the  males,  and  making  the  females  slighter  and
more  delicate.  These  qualities  are  all  perfectly
compatible  with  the  imperfect  state  of  the  art  of
even  so  early  a  period,  and  they  may  also  be  very
evident,  notwithstanding  ill-arranged  composition,
defective  design,  crude  colour,  and  a  hard  and
tisteless  execution.


imitative  art,  nor  is  there  mention  of  any  artist,
similar  to  Hephaestus,  who  might  represent  the
class  of  painters.  This  is  the  more  remarkable,
since  Homer  speaks  of  rich  and  elaborate  em-
broidery as  a  thing  not  uncommon  ;  it  is  sufficient
to  mention  the  splendid  Diplax  of  Helen  {IL  iii,
126),  in  which  were  worked  many  battles  of  the
Greeks  and  Trojans  fought  on  her  account.  This
embroidery  is  actual  painting  in  principle,  and  is
a  species  of  painting  in  practice,  and  it  was  consi-
dered such  by  the  Romans,  who  termed  it  "  pictura
textilis  "  (Cic.  Verr.  \\.  4.  1),  "  textili  stragulo,
magnificis  operibus  picto  "  (Id.  Tusc.  v.  21)  ;  that
is,  painted  with  the  needle,  embroidered,  acu picto.
(Ovid.  Met.  vi.  23  ;  Virg.  Aen.  ix.  582.)  The
various  allusions  also  to  other  arts,  similar  in
nature  to  painting,  are  sufficient  to  prove  that  paint-
ing must  have  existed  in  some  degree  in  Homer's
time,  although  the  only  kind  of  painting  he  notices
is  the  "  red-cheeked  "  and  "  purple-cheeked  ships"
{vries  iui\TOTrdpr}oi,  11.  ii.  637  ;  V€as  (poivtKOTrapTJ-
ovs,  Od.  xi.  123),  and  an  ivory  ornament  for  the
faces  of  horses,  which  a  Maeonian  or  Carian  wo-
man colours  with  purple.  {IL  iv.  141.)  The  de-
scription of  the  shield  of  Achilles,  worked  by
Hephaestus  in  various-coloured  metals,  satisfac-
torily establishes  the  fact  that  the  plastic  art  must
have  attained  a  considerable  degree  of  development
in  the  time  of  Homer,  and  therefore  determines  also
the  existence  of  the  art  of  design.  (Ars  delineandi ;
ypacpiKT].)

Painting  seems  to  have  made  considerable  pro-
gress in  Asia  Minor,  while  it  was  still  in  its  infancy
in  Greece,  for  Candaules,  king  ofLydia(B.c.  716),
is  said  to  have  purchased  at  a  high  price  a  paint-
ing of  Bularchus,  Avhich  represented  a  battle  of
the  Magnetes.  (  Plin. //".  iV.  xxxv.  34.)  It  would
appear  from  the  expression  of  Pliny  {H.  N.  vii.  39)
that  Candaules  paid  the  painter  as  much  gold  coin
as  would  cover  the  picture.  It  must  be  confessed
that  the  tradition  is  very  doubtful  (see  Diet,  of
Biog.  art.  Bularchus)  ;  but  this  painting  of  Bularchus
is  not  an  isolated  fact  in  evidence  of  the  early
cultivation  of  painting  in  Asia  ;  there  is  a  remark-
able passage  in  Ezekiel,  who  prophesied  about
600  B.  c,  relating  to  pictures  of  the  Assyrians
(xxiii.  14,  15) :  "Men  pourtrayed  upon  the  wall,
the  images  of  the  Chaldeans  pourtrayed  with  ver-
milion., girded  with  girdles  upon  their  loins,  ex-
ceeding in  dyed  attire  upon  their  heads,  all  of  them
princes  to  look  to,  after  the  manner  of  the  Babylo-
nians of  Chaldea,  the  land  of  their  nativity."

The  old  Ionic  or  Asiatic  painting,  the  "genua
picturae  Asiaticum,"  as  Pliny  {H.  N.  xxxv.  10.
s.  36)  terms  it,  most  probably  flourished  at  the
same  time  with  the  Ionian  architecture,  and  con-
tinued as  an  independent  school  until  the  sixth
century  b.  c,  when  the  lonians  lost  their  liberty,
and  with  their  liberty  their  art.  Herodotus  (i.
164)  mentions  that  when  Harpagus  besieged  the
town  of  Phocaea  (b.  c.  544),  the  inhabitants  col-
lected all  their  valuables,  their  statues  and  votive
offerings  from  the  temples,  leaving  only  their
paintings.,  and  such  works  in  metal  or  of  stone  as
could  not  easily  be  removed,  and  fled  with  them
to  the  island  of  Chios  ;  from  which  we  m.ay  con-
clude that  paintings  were  not  only  valued  by  tho
Phocaeans,  but  also  common  among  them.  He-
rodotus (iv.  88)  also  informs  us  that  Mandrocles  of
Samos,  who  constructed  for  Dareiua  Hystaspis  tho
bridge  of  boats  across  the  Bosporus  (b.  c.  608),
3  M  3


902


PICTURA.


had  a  picture  painted,  representing  the  passage  of
Dareius's  army,  and  the  king  Beated  on  a  throne
reviewing  the  troops  as  they  passed,  which  he  de-
dicated in  the  temple  of  Hera  at  Samos.

After  the  conquest  of  Ionia,  Samos  became  the
seat  of  the  arts.  (Herod,  iii.  60.)  The  Heraeum
at  Samos,  in  which  the  picture  of  Mandrocles  was
placed,  was  a  general  depository  for  works  of  art,
and  in  the  time  of  Strabo  appears  to  have  been
particularly  rich  in  paintings,  for  he  terms  it  a
"  picture-gallery "  (TrivaKodrjKrj,  xiv.  p.  637).
Consecrated  or  votive  pictures  on  panels  or  tablets
(TTti/aKes  avaK^ifihoi^  or  ypacpaX  avaK^ifiivai)  con-
stituted a  considerable  portion  of  the  avad-r^fiaTa
or  votive  offerings  in  the  temples  of  Greece,  most
of  which  in  a  later  period  had  a  distinct  building
or  gallery  {oXKT]fxa)  attached  to  them  disposed  for
the  reception  of  pictures  and  works  of  this  class.
(Pans.  i.  22.  §  4,  x.  25.  §  1,  2  ;  Ath.  xiii.  p.  606,  b.;
Strab.  ix.  p.  396.)

After  the  decline  of  the  Ionian  art,  painting
flourished  amongst  the  Greeks  in  Italy  and  Sicily,
and  especially  in  Crotona,  Sybaris,  and  Tarentum.
Aristotle  {de  Mirab.  Auscult  c.  99)  speaks  of  a
magnificent  cloth  or  pallium  (l/xaTiov)  of  Alcis-
thenes  of  Sybaris,  which  measured  1 5  cubits,  was
of  the  richest  purple,  and  in  it  were  worked  the
representations  of  cities,  of  gods,  and  of  men.  It
came  afterwards  into  the  possession  of  the  tyrant
Dionysius  the  elder,  who  sold  it  to  the  Carthagi-
nians for  120  talents.  This  is  sufficient  evidence
of  the  existence  of  painting  among  the  Italiots,
and  even  of  painting  of  a  high  degree.

Pliny  would  induce  us  to  believe  that  painting
was  established  throughout  Italy  as  early  as  the
time  of  Tarquinius  Priscus  (H.  N.  xxxv.  6).  He
mentions  some  most  ancient  paintings  at  Caere  ;
and  a  naked  group  of  Helen  and  Atalanta,  of
beautiful  forms,  painted  upon  the  wall  of  a  temple
at  Lanuvium,  and  some  paintings  by  the  same
artist  in  the  temple  of  Juno  at  Ardea,  accompanied
with  an  inscription  in  ancient  Latin  characters,
recording  the  name  of  the  artist  and  the  gratitude
of  Ardea.    (H.  N.  xxxv.  6,  37.)

V.  Painting  in  Greece.  Cimon  of  Cleonae  is
the  first  important  personage  we  meet  with  in  the
history  of  painting  in  Greece.  His  exact  period
is  very  uncertain,  but  he  was  probably  a  contem-
porarj'  of  Solon,  and  lived  at  least  a  century  before
Polygnotus.  It  is  not  at  all  necessary,  as  Pliny
supposes,  that  he  must  have  preceded  Bularchus,
which  would  place  him  very  much  earlier ;  as  he
may  easily  have  acquired  the  art  in  one  of  the
Ionian  cities,  for  in  the  time  of  Solon  there  was  a
very  extensive  intercourse  between  Greece  and  the
Asiatic  colonies.  The  superior  quality  of  the
works  of  Cimon,  to  which  Pliny  and  Aelian  bear
sufficient  testimony,  is  a  strong  reason  for  assigning
him  a  later  date  ;  but  his  having  been  contem-
porary with  Dionysius  of  Colophon,  who  imitated
the  works  of  Polygnotus,  is  quite  out  of  the  ques-
tion. This  has  been  inferred  from  the  occurrence
of  the  name  Cimon  in  connection  with  that  of
Dionysius  in  Simonides  (Anthol.  Pal.  ix.  758,  and
in  Append,  ii.  p.  648)  ;  but  as  Muller  (Arch'dologie,
%  99.  1 )  has  observed,  MIkwv  ought  to  be  there
most  probably  substituted  for  Kl/xuv.

Cimon  improved  upon  the  inventions  of  Eumarus  ;
he  was  the  first  who  made  foreshortenings  (cata-
graplui)^  and  drew  the  figure  in  a  variety  of  atti-
tudes ;  he  first  made  muscular  articulationSj  indi-


PICTURA.

cated  the  veins,  and  gave  natural  folds  to  drapery.
(Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.  34.)  The  term  "  catagrapha,**
which  Pliny  uses,  evidently  signifies  any  oblique
view  of  the  figure  or  countenance  whatever,  whether
in  profile  or  otherwise  ;  in  teclinical  language, /ore-
shortenings.

We  learn  from  Aelian  (  V.  H.  viii.  8)  that  Cimon
was  much  better  paid  for  his  works  than  any  of  his
predecessors.  This  alone  implies  a  great  superiority
in  his  works.  He  appears  to  have  emancipated
painting  from  its  archaic  rigidity  ;  and  his  works
probably  occupied  a  middle  place  between  the
productions  of  the  earlier  school  and  those  of  Poly-
gnotus of  Thasos.

At  the  time  of  Polygnotus  (b.  c.  460),  partly  on
account  of  the  changes  which  took  place  in  the
Greek  character  subsequent  to  the  Persian  invasion,
and  partly  in  consequence  of  his  own  great  works
in  Athens  and  at  Delphi,  painting  attracted  the
attention  of  all  Greece  ;  but  previous  to  this  time,
thS  only  cities  that  had  paid  any  considerable  at-
tention to  it,  were  Aegina,  Sigyon,  Corinth,  and
Athens.  Sicyon  and  Corinth  had  long  been  famous
for  their  paintings  upon  vases  and  upon  articles  of
furniture  ;  the  school  of  Athens  was  of  much  later
date  than  the  others,  and  had  attained  no  celebrity
whatever,  until  the  arrival  of  Polygnotus  from
Thasos  raised  it  to  that  pre-eminence  which,
through  various  circumstances,  it  continued  to
maintain  for  more  than  two  centuries,  although
very  few  of  the  great  painters  of  Greece  were  na-
tives of  Athens.

It  has  been  attempted  hitherto,  as  far  as  our
space  would  admit  of,  to  trace  the  progressive  steps
of  Grecian  painting  from  its  infancy,  until  it  at-
tained that  degree  of  development  requisite  to  en-
title it  to  the  name  of  an  independent  art ;  but
before  entering  upon  the  consideration  of  the  paint-
ing of  the  Greeks  in  its  complete  development,  it
will  be  well  to  examine  both  their  technic  systems
and  their  mechanical  means.

VI.  Technic.  —  Vehicles^  Materials^  d;c.  ((pdp-
fiana,  ii\ai,  &c.,  Pollux,  vii.  128).  The  Greeks
painted  with  wax,  resins,  and  in  water  colours,  to
which  they  gave  a  proper  consistency,  according  to
the  material  upon  which  they  painted,  with  gum
(gu?nmi),  glue  (glutinum)^  and  the  white  of  egg
{ovi  albumen)  ;  gum  and  glue  were  the  most  com-
mon. It  does  not  appear  that  they  ever  painted
in  oil  ;  tlie  only  mention  of  oil  in  ancient  writers
in  connection  with  painting,  is  the  small  quantity
which  entered  into  the  composition  of  encaustic  var-
nish, to  temper  it.  (Vitruvius,  vii.  9  ;  Plin.  H.  N".
xxxiii.  40.)  They  painted  upon  wood,  clay,  plaster,
stone,  parchment,  and  canvas  ;  the  last  was,  accord-
ing to  one  account  (Plin.  //.  iV".  xxxv.  33),  not  used
till  the  time  of  Nero  ;  and  though  this  statement
appears  to  be  doubtful  ("  depictam  in  tabula
sipariove  imaginem  rei,"  (Quint.  List.  Or.  vi.  1.  §
32  ;  see  Raoul-Rochette,  p.  331),  the  use  of  can-
vas must  have  been  of  late  introduction,  as  there
is  no  mention  of  it  having  been  employed  by  the
Greek  painters  of  the  best  periods.  They  generally
painted  upon  panels  or  tablets  (7rjj/a/ces,  jrij/axm,
tabulae,  tabellae),  and  very  rarely  upon  walls  ;
and  an  easel  similar  to  what  is  now  used,  was
common  among  the  ancients,  who  called  it  oKpiSai
or  KaXvSas.  (Pollux,  vii.  129.)  Even  in  the
time  of  Pliny,  when  wall-painting  was  common,
those  only  who  painted  easel-pictures  (tabulae)
were  held  in  esteem  :  "  sed  nulla  gloria  artificum  est


PICTURA.

nis:  eonim  qui  tahulas  pinxere  "  (H.N.kxxv.  37)  ;
that  is,  those  who  painted  history  or  fable  upon
panels,  in  what  is  termed  the  historic  or  great
style,  the  megalographia  of  Vitruvius  (vii.  4,  5),
and  the  xPVf^Toypc-fpta  of  Plutarch.  (Arat.  13.)
These  panels,  when  finished,  were  fixed  into  frames
of  various  descriptions  and  materials  (Plin.  H.  N.
XXXV.  45),  and  encased  in  walls.  (Plin.  //.  N.
XXXV.  10 ;  Cic.  in  Verr.  iv.  55  ;  Dig  19.  tit.  1.  s.
17.  §  3  ;  Muller,  Arch.  §  319.  5  ;  see  Raoul-Ro-
chette,  Sur  VEmploi  de  la  Peinture^  d;c.,  and  Le-
tronne,  Lettres  d''un  Antiquaire,  c&c,  works  devoted
to  the  discussion  of  this  subject.)  The  ornamental
panel-painting  in  the  houses  of  Pompeii  is  evi-
dently an  imitation  of  this  more  ancient  and  more
costly  system  of  decorating  walls.  The  wood  of
which  these  panels  or  tablets  were  generally  made
was  Larch  {Abies  Larix^  Larix  femina^  'EKdrr]^
Theophr.  H.  PL  iii.  9.  7  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xvi.  73),
and  they  were  grounded  or  prepared  for  painting
with  chalk  or  white  plaster  ;  this  prepared  ground
was  termed  \(VKco/xa,  which  term  was  applied  also
to  the  tablet  itself  when  thus  prepared.  (Suidas,
s.  V.  ;  iv  TrivaKi  AeA-eu/cwjuevy,  Athenag.  I.  c.)

The  style  or  cestrum  used  in  drawing,  and  for
spreading  the  wax  colours,  pointed  at  one  end  and
broad  and  flat  at  the  other,  was  termed  ypa(f>is  by
the  Greeks  and  cestrum  by  the  Romans  ;  it  was
generally  made  of  metal.  There  is  a  representa-
tion of  an  instrument  of  this  description  in  one  of
the  paintings  of  Herculaneum.  (Antichita  d''Erco-
lano^  vol.  iii.  pi.  45.)  The  hair  pencil  (penicillus,
penicillum)  was  termed  viroypacpis^  and  apparently
also  l)a€5iov  (xp'*'C^^^  ^'"^  "^^^  f>a€8iov,  Timaeus,
Lex.  Plat.  s.  v.  Xpaivciy  :  see  Letronne,  Encaustic,
Joum.  des  Sav.  Sept.  1835,  on  the  meaning  of
f)a§diou).

The  ancients  used  also  a  palette  very  similar  to
that  used  by  the  modems,  although  it  appears  that
there  is  no  absolute  mention  of  the  palette  in  any
ancient  author.  The  fact,  however,  is  sufficiently
attested  by  the  figure  of  Painting  discovered  in  the
so-called  Pantheon  at  Pompeii,  which  holds  the
palette  and  brushes  in  her  left  hand.  (Zahn,  Die
schonsten  omamente  und  merkwurdigsten  gem'dlde
atcs  Pompeii  Herktdanum  und  Stabiae,  Berlin  1828.)
In  the  same  work  (plate  98)  a  female  who  is
painting  is  represented  holding  something  in  her
left  hand  which  appears  to  be  a  palette,  but  it  is
not  well  defined  even  in  the  original.  (Museum  of
Naples,  No.  383.  "  La  femme  Peintre,"  Pompei.
In  the  Antichita  d'^Ercolano,  it  is  given  as  a  female
copying  a  Hermes,  vol.  vii.  pi.  1.)  In  the  grotesque
drawing  of  a  portrait -painter  at  work,  copied  by
Mazois  {Les  Ruines  de  Pompei,  part  ii.  p.  68)  from
a  picture  in  the  Casa  Carolina  at  Pompeii,  a  small
table  serves  as  a  palette  and  stands  close  to  his
right  hand  ;  it  appears  to  have  seventeen  different
tints  upon  it.  It  is  most  probable  that  the  "  tabella  "
of  Pliny  and  the  mviKiov  of  Pollux  (or  even  the
TTv^iov,  X.  59)  signified  also  palette  as  well  as
tablet.

The  ancient  authors  have  left  us  less  information
concerning  the  media  or  vehicles  ((pap/xaKa)  used
by  the  painters  of  antiquity  than  on  any  other
matter  connected  with  ancient  painting.  Gum  and
glue,  commis,  gummi,  glutinum,  glutinum  taurinum,
were  evidently  in  common  use.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.
25  ;  Vitruv.  vii.  10.)  Pliny  {H.  N.  xiii.  20)  speaks
of  sarcocolla  (Penaea  Sarcocolla,  Linnaeus)  as  a
gum  most  useful  to  painters.     The  Greeks  received


PICTURA.


903


it  from  Persia.  (Diosc.  iii.  99.)  Its  substance  has
been  analyzed  by  M.  Pelletier.  (See  Merat,  Diet,
Med.  Scien.)

Mastich,  a  resin  of  the  Pistacia  Lentiscus.  now
much  used  by  painters,  is  also  mentioned  by  Greek
and  Roman  writers  (Plin.  H.  N.  xii.  36,  xxiv.  28  ;
Diosc.  i.  96  ;  Theophr.  H.  PL  vi.  4)  ;  the  best  was
produced  in  the  island  of  Chios.  It  was  termed
}r)Tiur]  (Txiviutj  and  fiaa-TixTi,  also  aKaudiu^  juacr-
rixv,  resina  lentisciria,  madiche.  There  were  va-
rious kinds  ;  Pliny  mentions  a  kind  from  Pontua
which  resembled  bitumen.  This  resin  was  not
improbably  mixed  with  the  Punic  wax  prepared
for  painting  in  encaustic,  for  the  Abate  Requeno,
who  made  many  experiments  in  encaustic  (Saggi
sul  ristabilimento  deW  antica  arte  del  Greci  e  Ro-
mani  pittori,  Parma  1787),  asserts  that  it  amalga-
mates well  with  wax  ;  the  same  writer  is  also  of
opinion  that  the  ancient  encaustic  painters  used
also  amber  (succinuin)  and  frankincense  or.olibanum
(Thus  masculum)  in  the  preparation  of  their  colours.
Pliny  {H.  N.  xxxiv.  26),  speaking  of  verdigris,
remarks  that  it  was  sometimes  mixed  Avith  frank-
incense. He  also  mentions  (xiv,  25)  other  resins
and  substances  which  are  useful  to  painters,  and
(xxiv,  22)  particularly  turpentine  {Terebinthina),
of  which,  as  now,  there  were  formerly  various
kinds.  (See  Geoffroy,  Mater.  Med.  ;  and  Excurs.
vi.  ad  Plin.  H.  N.  xxiv.  22,  ed.  Lemaire.)

The  method  of  preparing  wax,  or  Punic  wax  {cera
Punica),  as  it  was  termed,  is  preserved  in  Pliny
{H.N.  xxi.  49)  and  Dioscorides  (ii.  105).  It  was
the  ordinary  yellow  wax,  purified  and  bleached,  by
being  boiled  three  distinct  times  in  sea-water,  with
a  small  quantity  of  nitre,  applying  fresh  water  each
time.  When  taken  out  of  the"  water  the  third
time,  it  was  covered  with  a  thin  cloth  and  placed
in  the  sun  to  dry.  Wax  thus  purified  was  mixed
with  all  species  of  colours  and  prepared  for  paint-
ing ;  but  it  was  applied  also  to  many  other  uses,  as
polishing  statues,  walls,  &c.

Pliny  speaks  of  two  kinds  of  bitumen  or
asphaltum  {&(T<p(iKTos),  the  ordinary,  and  a  white
Babylonian  bitumen  {H.  N.  xxxv.  51).  It  was  used
as  a  varnish  for  bronze  statues.  For  an  account  of
the  colours  used  by  the  ancient  painters,  see  the
articie  Co  lores,  and  John,  Malerci  der  At  ten,  d-c.

VII.  Methods  of  Painting.  There  were  two
distinct  classes  of  painting  practised  by  the  an-
cients ;  in  water  colours,  and  in  wax  ;  both  of
which  were  practised  in  various  ways.  Of  the
former  the  principal  were  fresco,  al  fresco  ;  and  the
various  kinds  of  distemper  (a  tempera),  with  glue,
with  the  white  of  lig^,  or  with  gums  (a  guazzo)  ;
and  with  wax  or  resins  when  these  were  rendered
by  any  means  vehicles  that  could  be  worked  with
water.*  Of  the  latter  the  principal  was  through
fire  (5icb  irwpbs)  termed  encaustic  {iyKava-TiKT}^
encaustica).  The  painting  in  wax,  Kr}poypa<t>ia,  or
ship  painting,  inceramenta  navium  (Liv.  xxviii.  46),
was  distinct  from  encaustic.     Compare  Athenaeus,


*  Wax  becomes  a  water  colour  medium,  when
boiled  with  sarcocolla  or  mastich,  according  to  the
Abate  Requeno,  who  mixed  five  ounces  of  mastich
with  two  of  wax,  which  when  boiled  he  cooled  in
a  basin  of  cold  water  ;  turpentine  becomes  such
when  well  mixed  with  the  white  of  egg  and  water.
The  yolk  of  egg,  when  mixed  with  vinegar,  also
makes  a  good  working  vehicle  for  this  species  of
painting,  but  it  does  not  require  water.
3  M  4


904


PICTURA,


V.  p.  204,  b.  ;  KTipoypatpia.  KareTreiroiKiXTO,  Avhich
is  distinct  from  dKoves  .  .  .  .  eV  iyKavfiaai  'Ypa<p6-
fxevai  S:(i  irvphs.  Pint.  Mor.  Aniator.  16.)

Fresco  was  probably  little  employed  by  the
ancients  for  works  of  imitative  art,  but  it  appears
to  have  been  the  ordinary  method  of  simply  colour-
ing walls,  especially  amongst  the  Romans.  The
walls  were  divided  into  compartments  or  panels,
which  were  termed  abaci,  ^ga/ces  ;  the  composition
of  the  stucco  and  the  method  of  preparing  the  walls
for  painting  is  described  by  Vitruvius  (vii.  3).
They  first  covered  the  wall  with  a  layer  of  ordi-
nary'- plaster,  over  which,  when  dry,  were  succes-
sively added  three  other  layers  of  a  finer  quality,
mixed  with  sand  ;  above  these  were  placed  still
three  layers  of  a  composition  of  chalk  and  marble
dust,  the  upper  one  being  laid  on  before  the  under
one  was  quite  dry,  and  each  succeeding  coat  being
of  a  finer  quality  than  the  preceding.  By  this  pro-
cess the  different  layers  were  so  bound  together,
that  the  whole  mass  formed  one  solid  and  beautiful
slab,  resembling  marble,  and  was  capable  of  being
detached  from  the  wall  and  transported  in  a  wooden
frame  to  any  distance.  (Vitruv.  ii.  8  ;  Plin.  H.  N.
XXXV.  49.)  Vitruvius  remarks  that  the  composition
of  the  ancient  Greek  walls  was  so  excellent,  that
persons  were  in  the  habit  of  cutting  away  slabs  from
them  and  converting  them  into  tables,  which  had
a  very  beautiful  appearance.  This  colouring  al
fresco,  in  which  the  colours  were  mixed  simply  in
water,  as  the  term  implies,  was  applied  when  the
composition  was  still  wet  (tido  tedorio)^  and  on  that
account  was  limited  to  certain  colours,  for  no
colours  except  earths  can  be  employed  in  this  way,
that  have  not  already  stood  the  test  of  fire.  Pliny
{H.  N.  XXXV.  31)  mentions  those  colours  which  could
not  be  so  employed :  Purpurissum,  Indicura,  Caeru-
leum,  Melinum,  Auripigmentum,  Appianum,  and
Cerussa  ;  instead  of  Melinum  they  used  Parae-
tonium,  a  white  from  Egypt,  which  was  by  the  Ro-
mans considered  the  best  of  whites.     [Colores.]

The  care  and  skill  required  to  execute  a  work  in
fresco,  and  the  tedious  and  expensive  process  of
preparing  the  walls,  must  have  effectually  excluded
it  from  ordinary  places.  The  majority  of  the  walls
in  Pompeii  are  in  common  distemper  ;  but  those  of
the  better  houses,  not  only  in  Pompeii  but  in  Rome
and  elsewhere,  especially  those  which  constitute
the  grounds  of  pictures,  are  in  fresco.  All  the
pictures,  however,  are  apparently  in  distemper  of  a
superior  kind,  or  a  guazzo,  but  the  impasto  is  of  va-
rious qualities  ;  in  some  it  appears  to  have  the  con-
sistency of  oil  painting  without  its  defects,  in  others
it  is  very  inferior.

Ordinary  distemper,  that  is,  with  glue  or  size,  is
probably  the  most  ancient  species  of  painting  ;
many  of  the  ancient  ornamental  friezes  and  painted
bassi-relievi  in  the  temples  and  ruins  in  Egypt,  and
also  many  of  the  most  ancient  remains  in  Italy,  are
painted  in  this  manner.

The  fresco  walls,  when  painted,  were  covered
with  an  encaustic  varnish,  both  to  heighten  the
colours  and  to  pres'-rve  them  from  the  injurious
effects  of  the  sun  or  the  weather.  Vitruvius  (vii.  9)
describes  the  process  as  a  Greek  practice,  which
they  termed  Kavais.  When  the  wall  was  coloured
and  dry,  Punic  wax,  melted  and  tempered  with  a
little  oil,  was  rubbed  over  it  with  a  hard  brush
{seta)  ;  this  "was  made  smooth  and  even  by  apply-
ing a  cauterium  {KavTi]piQv\  or  an  iron  pan,  filled
with  live  coals,  over  the  surface,  a«  near  to  it  as


PICTURA.

was  just  necessary  to  melt  the  wax  :  it  was  then
rubbed  with  a  candle  (wax  ?)  and  a  clean  linen
cloth,  in  the  way  that  naked  marble  statues  were
done.  (Compare  Plin.  //.  N.  xxxiii.  40.)  The
Abate  Requeno  supposes  that  the  candles  were  used
as  a  species  of  delicate  cauterium,  simply  to  keep
the  wax  soft,  that  it  might  receive  a  polish  from  the
friction  of  the  linen  ;  but  it  is  a  subject  that  pre-
sents considerable  difficulty.

This  kind  of  varnish  was  applied  apparently  to
plain  walls  only,  for  Sir  Humphry  Davy  discovered
no  remains  whatever  in  the  Baths  of  Titus,  of
an  encaustic  varnish  upon  paintings,  although  the
plain  walls  had  generally  traces  of  a  red  varnish
of  this  description.  Neither  Pliny  nor  Vitruvius
mention  anythingaboutcolour,  but  this  is  evidently
a  most  simple  addition,  and  does  not  interfere  at
all  either  with  the  principle  or  the  application  of
the  varnish.  Paintings  may  have  possibly  been
executed  upon  the  walls  after  they  were  thus
varnished.

A  method  apparently  very  generally  practised
by  the  Roman  and  later  Greek  painters  was  En-
caustic, which,  according  to  Plutarch  (/.  c),  was
the  most  durable  of  all  methods  ;  it  was  in  very
little  iise  by  the  earlier  painters,  and  was  not
generally  adopted  until  after  the  time  of  Alexander.
Pliny  (H.  N.  XXXV.  39)  defines  the  term  thus  :
"  ceris  pingere  ac  picturam  inurere,"  to  paint  with
wax  or  wax  colours,  and  to  burn  in  the  picture  after-
wards with  the  cauterium  ;  it  appears  therefore  to
have  been  the  simple  addition  of  the  process  of  burn-
ing in  to  the  ordinary  method  of  painting  with  wax
colours.*  Cerae  (waxes)  was  the  ordinary  term
for  painters'  colours  amongst  the  Romans,  but  more
especially  encaustic  colours  and  they  kept  them
in  partitioned  boxes,  as  painters  do  at  present.
("  Pictores  loculatas  magnas  habent  arculas,  ubi
discolores  sint  cerae,"  Varro,  de  Re  Rust.  iii.  17.)
They  were  most  probably  kept  dry  in  these  boxes,
and  the  wet  brush  or  pencil  was  rubbed  upon  them
when  colour  was  required,  or  they  were  moistened
by  the  artist  previous  to  commencing  work.  From
the  term  cerae,  it  would  appear  that  wax  consti-
tuted the  principal  ingredient  of  the  colouring
vehicle  used,  but  this  does  not  necessarily  follow,
and  it  is  very  improbable  that  it  did  ;  there  must
have  been  a  great  portion  of  gum  or  resin  in  the
colours,  or  they  could  not  have  hardened.  Wax
was  undoubtedly  a  most  essential  ingredient,  since
it  apparently  prevents  the  colours  from  cracking :
cerae  therefore  might  originally  simply  mean  colours
which  contained  wax,  in  contradistinction  to  those
which  did  not,  but  was  afterwards  applied  gene-
rally by  the  Romans  to  the  colours  of  painters,  as

*  There  were  various  kinds  of  encaustic,  with
the  pencil  and  with  the  cestrum  ;  but  the  difference
between  them  and  the  common  process  in  which
the  cauterium  or  heater  was  not  applied  cannot
have  been  very  great,  for  Pausias,  whose  style  was
in  encaustic  with  the  cestrum,  nevertheless  un-
dertook to  repair  the  paintings  of  Polygnotus  at
Thespiae,  which  were  painted  in  the  ordinary
manner  in  water  colours  with  the  pencil.  Pliny
{H.  N.  XXXV.)  in  enumerating  the  most  celebrated
painters  of  antiquity  speaks  separately  of  those  who
excelled  in  either  class  ;  chap.  36  is  devoted  to
those  who  painted  in  the  ordinary  method  with
the  pencil,  and  chap.  40  principally  to  those  who
painted  in  encaustic.


PICTURA.

for  instance  by  Statius  (S^/lv.  i.  1.  100),  "  Apelleae
cuperentte  scribere  cerae."  The  sponge  ((nroyyia,
sponijia),  spoken  of  by  Pliny  and  other  writers  in
connection  with  painting,  affords  some  proof  that
painting  in  water  colours  was  the  method  generally
practised  by  the  ancient  painters  ;  which  is  also
corroborated  by  the  small  vessel  placed  close  to  the
palette  or  table  of  the  portmit-painter  of  the  Casa
Carolina  of  Pompeii,  evidently  for  the  purpose  of
washing  his  single  brush  in.  Seneca  (Ep.  121.  5)
notices  the  facility  and  rapidity  with  which  a
painter  takes  and  lays  on  his  colours.  That  wax
or  resins  may  be  used  as  vehicles  in  water-colours
has  been  already  mentioned.

The  origin  of  encaustic  painting  is  unknown.  It
was  practised  in  two  ways  with  the  cestnim,
namely,  in  wax  and  on  ivory  ;  and  in  a  third  man-
ner with  the  pencil.  The  last  method,  according
to  Pliny,  was  applied  chiefly  to  ship-painting  ;  the
colours  were  laid  on  hot.  His  words  are, — "  En-
causto  pingendi  duo  fuisse  antiquitus  genera  con-
stat, cera,  et  in  ebore,  cestro  id  est  vinculo,  donee
classes  pingi  coepere.  Hoc  tertium  accessit,  reso-
lutis  igni  ceris  penicillo  utendi,  quae  pictura  in
navibus  nee  sole  nee  sale  ventisque  corrumpitur."
(//.  A'.  XXXV.  41.)  This  passage,  from  its  concise-
ness, presents  many  difficulties.  "  Cera,  cestro,"  that
is,  in  wax  with  the  cestrum  ;  this  was  the  method
of  Pausias  :  "  in  ebore,  cestro  ; "  this  must  have
been  a  species  of  drawing  with  a  hot  point,  upon
ivory,  for  it  was,  as  is  distinctly  said,  without  wax,
"  cera,  et  in  ebore."  The  third  method,  "  resolutis
igni  ceris  penicillo  utendi,"  though  first  employed
on  ships,  was  not  necessarily  confined  to  ship-
painting  ;  and  if  the  assertion  of  Pliny  is  correct,
it  must  have  been  a  very  different  style  of  painting
from  the  ship-colouring  of  Hftmer,  since  he  says  it
was  of  a  later  date  than  the  preceding  methods.
The  "  hiceramenta  navium  "  of  Livy,  and  the  Kvpo-
ypacpia  of  Athenaeus,  mentioned  above,  may  have
been  executed  in  this  third  method  of  Pliny  ;  the
use  of  the  cauterium,  or  process  of  burning  in,  is
here  not  alluded  to,  but  since  he  defined  encaustic  to
be  "  ceris  pingere  ac  picturam  inurere"  (//.  A'',  xxxv.
39),  its  employment  maybe  understood  in  this  case
also.  It  is  difficult,  however,  to  understand  what
effect  the  action  of  the  cauterium  could  have  in  the
second  method  (in  ebore,  cestro),  which  was  without
wax.  It  would  appear,  therefore,  that  the  definition
alluded  to  is  the  explanation  of  the  first  mentioned
method  only  ;  and  it  is  probable  that  the  ancient
methods  of  painting  in  encaustic  were  not  only
three,  but  several  ;  the  Kavais  of  Vitruvius,  men-
tioned also  by  himself,  is  a  fourth,  and  the  various
modes  of  ship  painting  add  others  to  the  number.
Pliny  (H.  N.  xvi.  23)  himself  speaks  of  "  zopissa,"
a  composition  of  wax  and  pitch,  which  was  scraped
from  ships  ;  and  it  is  difficult  to  suppose  that  the
higher  class  of  encaustic  was  practised  with  the
cestrum  only,  since  the  pencil  is  such  an  infinitely
more  efficient  instrument  for  the  proper  mixing  and
application  of  colours.  (K^pdcraadat  ra  XP'^M"'^",
Kal  eijKaipov  Troietcrflai  t^v  iin€o\T]u  avTwv,  Lucian,
Imag.  7.  vol.  ii.  p.  465,  r.)  The  wax  painting
on  the  fictile  vases,  mentioned  by  Athenaeus  (v.
p.  200.  6),  can  have  been  scarcely  executed  Avith
the  cestrum  ;  and  it  is  also  unlikely  that  it  was
done  with  hot  colours,  as  the  painting  of  the  "  fig-
linum  opus  "  mentioned  by  Pliny  {H.  N.  xxxvi.
64)  may  have  been.  But  as  there  were  various
methods  of  painting  in  encaustic,  it  follows  that


PICTURA.


905


the  colours  designed  for  this  species  of  painting
were  also  variously  prepared,  and  those  which
were  suited  for  one  style  may  have  been  quite  un-
fit for  another.  All  these  styles,  however,  are
comparatively  simple,  compared  with  that  of  Pau-
sias, in  wax  with  the  cestrum,  "  cera,  cestro  ; "  and
it  is  difficult  for  a  modern  practitioner  to  imder-
stand  how  a  large  and  valuable  picture  could  be
produced  by  such  a  method  ;  unless  these  colours
or  cerae,  which  painters  of  this  class,  according  to
Varro  {I.  c),  kept  in  partitioned  boxes,  were  a
species  of  wax  crayons,  which  Avere  worked  upon
the  panel  with  the  broad  end  of  the  cestrum
(which  may  have  had  a  rough  edge)  within  an  out-
line or  monogram,  previously  drawn  or  cut  in,  with
the  pointed  end,  and  were  afterwards  fixed,  and
toned  or  blended  by  the  action  of  the  cauterium.
Painters  were  in  the  habit  of  inscribing  the  word
(ueKavaiu,  "  burnt  it  in,"  upon  pictures  executed
in  encaustic,  as  NiKias  iveKavaev,  Ava'nnros  eVe-
icavcreu.     (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.  10,  39.)

VIII.  Polychromy.  < The  practice  of  varnishing
and  polishing  marble  statues  has  been  already  inci-
dentally noticed.  The  custom  was  very  general  ;
ancient  statues  were  also  often  painted,  and  what
is  now  termed  polychrome  sculpture  was  very  com-
mon in  Greece,  for  the  acrolithic  and  the  chrys-
elephantine statues  were  both  of  this  description.
Many  works  of  the  latter  class,  which  were  of  ex-
traordinary magnificence  and  costliness,  are  de-
scribed by  Pausanias.  The  term  polychromy,  thus
applied,  was  apparently  unknown  to  the  ancients  ;
this  species  of  painting  is  called  by  Plutarch
{De  Glor.  Athen.  6)  ayaXfidTwv  €yKav(ns,ar\di  ap-
pears to  have  been  executed  by  a  distinct  class  of
ai-tists  (ayaAfidTCtiv  eyKavaTol).  They  are  men-
tioned also  by  Plato  (De  Repuhl.  iv.  420.  c),  ot
OLvZpidvTas  ypd(povTes :  and  if  it  is  certain  that
Plato  here  alludes  to  painting  statues,  it  is  clear
that  they  were  occasionally  entirely  painted,  in
exact  imitation  of  nature  ;  for  he  expressly  re-
marks, that  it  is  not  by  applying  a  rich  or  beautiful
colour  to  any  particular  part,  but  by  giving  its
local  colour  to  each  part,  that  the  whole  is  made
beautiful  (d\A'  &9pei  et  ra  irpoaiiKOVTa  kKdcrrois
a.-Kohib6vres,  rh  o\ov  KaXhu  iroiov/jieu).  That  this
was,  however,  not  a  general  practice,  is  evident
from  the  dialogue  between  Lycinus  and  Pol}---
stratus,  in  Lucian  {Imag.  5 — 8),  where  it  is  clearly,
though  indirectly,  stated,  that  the  Venus  of  Cni-
dus  by  Praxiteles,  and  other  celebrated  statues,
were  not  coloured,  although  they  may  have  been
ornamented  in  parts  and  covered  with  an  encaustic
varnish.

The  practice  of  colouring  statues  is  undoubtedly
as  ancient  as  the  art  of  statuary  itself ;  although
they  were  perhaps  originally  coloured  more  from  a
love  of  colour  than  from  any  design  of  improving
the  resemblance  of  the  representation.  The  Jupiter
of  the  Capitol,  placed  by  Tarquinius  Priscus,  was
coloured  with  minium.  (Plin.  //.  A'',  xxxv.  45.)  In
later  times  the  custom  seems  to  have  been  reduced
to  a  system,  and  was  practised  with  more  reserve.
Considerable  attention  also  seems  to  have  been
paid  to  the  effect  of  the  object  as  a  work  of  art.
Praxiteles  being  asked  which  of  his  marble  works
he  most  admired,  answered,  those  which  Nicias  had
had  a  band  in,  "  quibus  Nicias  manimi  admo-
visset,''  so  much,  says  Pliny  (H.  N.  xxxv,  40),  did
he  attribute  to  his  circumlitio.  Nicias,  ther&-
fore,  who  painted  in  encaustic,  seems  in  his  youth


906


PICTURA.


to  have  been  an  ayaXfiaTuv  iyKouariis,  or  painter
of  statues,  and  from  the  approval  of  Praxiteles,
excelled  apparently  in  this  description  of  painting
or  colouring.

This  view  differs  very  materially  from  those
which  have  been  hitherto  advanced  upon  this  sub-
ject, but  it  has  not  been  adopted  without  mature
consideration.

In  the  "  circumlitio  "  of  Nicias,  the  naked  form
was  most  probably  merely  varnished,  the  colouring
being  applied  only  to  the  eyes,  eyebrows,  lips,  and
hair,  to  the  draperies,  and  the  various  orriaments  of
dress  ;  and  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  fine
statues,  especially  of  females,  when  carefully  and
tastefully  coloured  in  this  way,  must  have  been  ex-
tremely beautiful  ;  the  encaustic  varnish  upon  the
white  marble  must  have  had  very  much  the  effect
of  a  pale  transparent  flesh.  Gold  was  also  abun-
dantly employed  upon  ancient  statues  ;  the  hair  of
the  Venus  de  Medicis  was  gilded,  and  in  some,  glass
eyes  and  eyelashes  of  copper  were  inserted,  examples
of  which  are  still  extant.    *•

The  practice  also  of  colouring  architecture  seems
to  have  been  universal  amongst  the  Greeks,  and
very  general  amongst  the  Romans.  It  is  difficult
to  define  exactly  what  the  system  was,  for  there  is
scarcely  any  notice  of  it  in  ancient  writers  ;  a  few
casual  remarks  in  Vitruvius  and  Pausanias  are  all
we  possess  of  any  value.  Our  information  is  drawn
chiefly  from  the  observations  of  modern  travellers  ;
for  traces  of  colour  have  been  found  upon  most  of
the  architectural  ruins  of  Greece,  and  upon  the
ancient  monuments  of  Italy  and  Sicily  ;  but  with
the  exception  of  the  Doric  ruins  at  Corinth  and  the
temple  of  Aegina,  which  are  not  of  marble,  the
colouring  .was  confined  to  the  mouldings  and  other
ornaments,  th§  friezes,  the  metopes,  and  the  tym-
pana of  the  pediments.  The  exterior  of  the  wall
of  the  cella  of  the  Aegina  temple,  and  the  columns
of  the  Corinthian  ruins,  were  covered  with  stucco
and  coloured  red.  It  does  not  appear  that  the  ex-
terior walls  when  of  marble  were  ever  coloured,
for  no  traces  of  colour  have  been  found  upon  them.
At  an  early  age,  before  the  use  of  marble,  when
the  temples  and  public  edifices  were  constructed
mostly  of  wood,  the  use  of  colour  must  have  been
much  more  considerable  and  less  systematic  ;  but
during  the  most  refined  ages,  the  colouring,  other-
wise quite  arbitrary,  appears  to  have  been  strictly
confined  to  the  ornamental  parts.  From  the  traces
found  upon  ancient  monuments  we  are  enabled  to
form  a  very  tolerable  idea  of  the  ancient  system  of
decorating  mouldings.  They  were  painted  in  va-
rious ways  and  in  a  great  variety  of  colours,  and  a
tasteful  combination  of  colours  must  have  added
greatly  to  the  effect  of  even  the  richest  mouldings.
The  ordinary  decorations  were  foliage,  ova,  and
beads  ;  but  upon  the  larger  mouldings  on  which
foliage  was  ptiinted,  the  outlines  of  the  leaves  were
first  engraved  in  the  stone.  Gilding  and  metal
work  were  also  introduced,  particularly  in  the
Doric  order  ;  the  architrave  of  the  Parthenon  at
Athens  was  decorated  with  gilded  shields.  Friezes
that  were  adorned  with  sculpture  appear  to  have
been  invariably  coloured,  as  also  the  tympana  of
the  pediments  ;  in  the  Parthenon  these  parts  were
of  a  pale  blue,  in  some  of  the  Sicilian  monuments
red  has  been  found.  Some  interior  polychrome
cornices  of  Pompeii  are  given  in  the  work  of  Zahn
(/)ie  schonsten  Omamenle,  cfrc,  pi.  91).

In  later  times,  amongst  the  Romans,  the  practice


PICTURA.

of  colouring  buildings  seems  to  have  degenerated
into  a  mere  taste  for  gaudy  colours.  Pliny  and
Vitruvius  both  repeatedly  deplore  the  corrupt  taste
of  their  own  times.  Vitruvius  (vii.  5)  observes
that  the  decorations  of  the  ancients  were  taste-
lessly laid  aside,  and  that  strong  and  gaudy  colour-
ing and  prodigal  expense  were  substituted  for  the
beautiful  effects  produced  by  the  skill  of  the  ancient
artists.  Pompeii,  with  much  that  is  chaste  and
beautiful,  has  many  traces  also  of  what  Vitruvius
and  Pliny  complain  of.  Plate  99  of  Zahn  affords  a
beautiful  specimen  of  the  ancient  wall-painting  of
Pompeii,  in  courts  and  interiors.  For  a  further
account  of  this  subject,  see  Kugler,  "  Ueber  die
Polychromie  der  Griechischen  Architectur  imd
Sculptur  und  ihre  Grenzen,"  Berlin,  1835.

IX.  Vase  Painting.  The  fictile-vase  painting
of  the  Greeks  was  an  art  of  itself,  and  was  prac-
tised by  a  distinct  class  of  artists  (Aristoph.  Ecd.
995,  99Q,  Bekker),  who  must  have  required  a
peculiar  instruction,  and  probably  exercised  their
art  according  to  a  prescribed  system.  It  is,  how-
ever, impossible  to  say  anything  positive  regarding
the  history  of  this  branch  of  ancient  painting,  as
scarcely  anj-thing  is  known.  The  designs  upon
these  vases  (which  the  Greeks  termed  \i]Kvdoi)
have  been  variously  interpreted,  but  they  have  been
generally  considered  to  be  in  some  way  connected
with  the  initiation  into  the  Eleusinian  and  other
mysteries.  (Lanzi,  De''  Vast  Antichi  dipinti ;
Christie,  Disquisitions  upon  the  painted  Greek
Vases  ;  Bottiger,  Ideen^  <fcc.)  They  were  given  as
prizes  to  the  victors  at  the  Panathenaea  and  other
games,  and  seem  to  have  been  always  buried  with
their  owners  at  their  death,  for  they  have  been
discovered  only  in  tombs.

Vase  painting  cannot  be  adduced  to  determine
the  general  nature  or  character  of  ancient  painting
as  a  liberal  or  imitative  art ;  though  the  rude  de-
signs upon  the  vases  throw  considerable  light  upon
the  progressive  development  of  the  art,  as  relates
to  style  of  design,  and  in  some  degree  upon  the
principles  of  Grecian  composition  of  the  early  times  ;
but  their  chief  interest  and  value  consist  in  the
faithful  pictures  they  afford  of  the  traditions,  cus-
toms, and  habits  of  the  ancients.

The  ancient  vase-painters  were  probably  attached
to  the  potteries,  or  the  establishments  in  which
the  vases  were  made  ;  or  themselves  constituted
distinct  bodies,  which  from  the  general  similarity
of  style  and  execution  of  the  designs  upon  the
vases,  is  not  improbable.  They  do  not  seem  to
have  been  held  in  any  esteem,  for  their  names  have
not  been  preserved  by  any  ancient  writer  ;  and  we
only  know  the  names  of  very  few,  from  their  being
inscribed  upon  the  vases  themselves,  as  Taleides,
Assteas,  Lasimos,  Calliphon,  and  a  few  others.
(Millin,  Peintures  de  Vases  Antiques^  vol.  i.  pi,  3.
pi.  44.  vol.  ii.  pi.  37.  pi.  61  ;  Millingen,  ^«c.  Uned.
Mon.  pi.  27.)

The  words  Ka\6s  and  Ka\^,  found  frequently
upon  the  ancient  vases,  are  explained  to  be  simple
acclamations  of  praise  or  approval,  supposed  to  be
addressed  to  the  person  to  whom  the  vase  was  pre-
sented ;  the  words  are  frequently  preceded  or  fol-
lowed by  a  name,  evidently  that  of  the  person  for  '
whom  the  vase  was  designed.  The  inscription
also  v  irals  Ka\^  has  been  found  on  some  vases,
which  have  probably  been  designed  as  presents  for
young  females.  D'Hancarville  {Collection  of  Vases^
(Sic.  Introd.)  supposes  that  vase  painting  had  eu-


PICTURA.

circly  ceased  about  the  time  of  the  destruction  of
Corinth,  and  that  ths  art  of  manufacturing  vases
began  to  decline  towards  the  reign  of  Trajan,  and
arrived  at  its  last  period  about  the  time  of  the  Anto-
nines  and  Septimius  Severus.  Vase  painting  had
<^vidently  ceased  long  before  the  time  of  Pliny,  for
in  his  time  the  painted  vases  were  of  immense
value  and  were  much  sought  after  ;  but  the  manu-
facture of  the  vases  themselves  appears  to  have  been
still  extensive,  for  he  himself  mentions  sixteen
celebrated  potteries  of  his  owti  time,  eight  in  Italy
and  six  elsewhere.  The  vases,  however,  appear  to
have  been  merely  remarkable  for  the  fineness  or
durability  of  the  clay  and  the  elegance  of  their
shapes.  {H.  N.  xxxv.  46.)  For  the  composition  of
the  clay,  with  which  these  fictilia  were  made,
see  Fictile.

Even  in  the  time  of  the  empire  painted  vases
were  termed  "  operis  antiqui,"  and  were  then
sought  for  in  the  ancient  tombs  of  Campania  and
other  parts  of  Magna  Graecia.  Suetonius  {Jul.
Goes.  81)  merrtions  the  discovery  of  some  vases  of
this  description  in  the  time  of  Julius  Caesar,  in
clearing  away  some  very  ancient  tombs  at  Capua.
It  is  also  remarkable  that  not  a  single  painted
vase  has  been  yet  discovered  in  either  Pompeii,
Herculaneum,  or  Stabiae,  which  is  of  itself  almost
sufficient  to  prove  that  vase  painting  was  not
practised,  and  also  that  painted  vases  were  ex-
tremely scarce.  We  may  form  some  idea  of  their
immense  value  from  the  statement  of  Pliny  {H.N.
xxxv.  46),  that  they  were  more  valuable  than  the
Murrhine  vases.  [Murrhina  Vasa.]  The  paint-
ings on  the  vases,  considered  as  works  of  art,  vary
exceedingly  in  the  detail  of  the  execution,  although
in  style  of  design  they  may  be  arranged  in  two
principal  classes,  the  black  and  the  yellow  ;  for
those  which  do  not  come  strictly  under  either  of
these  heads,  are  either  too  few  or  vary  too  slightly
to  require  a  distinct  classification.  The  majority
of  the  vases  that  have  been  as  yet  discovered  have
been  found,  in  ancient  tombs,  about  Capua  and
Nola.

The  black  vases,  or  those  with  the  black  figures
upon  the  stained  reddish-yellow  terra  cotta,  the
best  of  which  were  found  at  Nola,  are  the  most
ancient,  and  their  illustrations  consist  principally
of  representations  from  the  early  mythological  tra-
ditions ;  but  the  style  of  these  vases  was  some-
times imitated  by  later  artists.  (Plate  bQ^  vol.  iv.
of  D'Hancarville  is  an  example.)  The  inferior  ex-
amples of  this  class  have  some  of  them  traces  of  the
graphis  or  cestrum  upon  them,  which  appear  to
have  been  made  when  the  clay  was  still  soft  ;  some
also  have  lines  or  scratches  upon  the  figures,  which
have  been  added  when  the  painting  was  completed.
The  style  of  the  design  of  these  black  figures,  or
skiagrams,  is  what  has  been  termed  the  Egyptian
or  Daedalian  style.  The  varieties  in  this  style
are,  occasionally  a  purple  tint  instead  of  the  black  ;
or  the  addition  of  a  red  sash,  or  white  vest,  and
sometimes  a  white  face  and  white  hands  and
feet.  A  curious  and  interesting  example  of  this
kind  of  polychrom,  in  black,  red,  and  white,  was
discovered  near  Athens  in  1813,  representing  on
one  side  a  Minerva  with  a  spear  and  shield,  in  the
Daedalian  style  ;  and  on  the  reverse,  in  a  some-
what better  style,  a  young  man  driving  a  biga
of  most  ancient  construction  ;  it  is  supposed  to
represent  Erichthonius.  Near  the  Minerva  is
the   following   inscription,  written   from  right  to


PICTURA.


907


left:  TON  A0ENEON  A0AON  EMI,  rSiv  'Mrf-
v4wv  dLdKov  elfil^  "  I  am  the  prize  of  the  Athe-
naea "  (Panathenaea).  It  is  supposed  to  be  of
the  time  of  Solon.  (Millingen,  Anc.  lined.  Mon.
pl.l.;

The  vases  with  the  yellow  monograms,  or  rather
the  black  monograms  upon  the  yellow  grounds,
constitute  the  mass  of  ancient  vases.  Their  illus-
trations are  executed  with  various  degrees  of  merit :
those  of  inferior  execution,  also  of  this  class,  have
traces  of  the  graphis  upon  them,  which  appear  to
have  been  drawn  upon  the  soft  clay  ;  the  only
colour  upon  these,  independent  of  that  of  the  clay,
is  the  dark  back-ground,  generally  b'ack,  which
renders  the  figures  very  prominent.  The  designs
upon  the  better  vases  are  also  merely  monograms,
with  the  usual  dark  back-grounds,  but  there  is  a
very  great  difference  between  the  execution  of
these  and  that  of  those  just  alluded  to  ;  there  are
no  traces  whatever  of  the  graphis  upon  them,  their
outlines  are  drawn  with  the  hair  pencil,  in  colour,
similar  to  that  of  the  back-ground,  which  is  a
species  of  black  varnish,  probably  asphaltum  ;  or
perhaps  rather  prepared  with  the  gagates  lapis
(jet  ?)  {yaydr-qs)  of  Pliny,  for  he  remarks  that  it
is  indelible  when  used  on  this  kind  of  earthenware.
{H.  N.  xxxvi.  34.)

The  best  of  these  vases,  which  probably  belong
to  about  the  time  of  Alexander,  are  conspicuous
for  a  very  correct  style  of  design,  although  they
are  invariably  carelessly  executed,  especially  in  the
extremities,  but  exhibit  at  the  same  time  a  surpris-
ing facility  of  hand.  The  celebrated  vase  of  Sir
W.  Hamilton's  collection,  now  in  the  British  Mu-
seum, the  paintings  of  which  represent  Hercules
and  his  companions  in  the  gardens  of  the  Hespe-
rides,  and  the  race  of  Atalanta  and  Hippomenes,
exhibits,  for  design,  composition,  and  execution,
perhaps  the  finest  specimen  of  ancient  vase  paint-
ing that  has  been  yet  discovered :  the  style  of  de-
sign is  perfect,  but  the  execution,  though  on  the
whole  laborious,  is  in  many  parts  very  careless.
(D'Hancarville,  plates  127,  128,  129,  130.)

There  appears  to  be  no  example  of  the  more
perfect  monochrom  (see  No.  III.)  upon  ancient
vases,  and  examples  of  the  polychrom  are  very-
rare.  In  Sir  W.  Hamilton's  collection  there  are  a
fevv  examples  in  which  various  colours  have  been
added  after  the  ordinary  monogram  has  been  com-
pleted, for  they  are  not  incorporated  with  the  vase,
as  the  black  and  ground  tints  are,  but  are  subject
to  scale  and  are  easily  rubbed  off.  They  consist  of
white,  red,  yellow,  and  blue  coloiu-s.  These  vases
are  apparently  of  a  later  date  than  the  above  ;  for
the  style  of  design  is  very  inferior.

The  Museums  of  Naples,  Paris,  London,  and
other  cities  afford  abundant  examples  of  these  an-
cient vases  ;  the  Museo  Borbonico  at  Naples
contains  alone  upwards  of  2500  specimens.  The
subjects  of  the  illustrations  are  almost  always  con-
nected with  ancient  mythology,  and  the  execution
is  generally  inferior  to  the  composition.

No  opinion  of  the  style  of  the  designs  upon
ancient  vases  can  be  formed  from  the  generality  of
the  great  works  purporting  to  illustrate  them,  which
have  been  published  of  late  years.  Very  few  are
at  all  accurate  in  the  lines  and  proportions,  espe-
cially of  the  extremities  ;  and  in  some,  even  the
composition  is  not  faithfully  imitated.  This  is
particularly  the  case  with  the  splendid  works  pub-
lished by  Dubois-Maissonneuve,  Labordc,  and  some


908


PICTURA.


others,  in  which  the  illustrations  are  drawn  with  a
care,  precision,  and  uniformity  of  character  quite
foreign  to  the  paintings  on  the  vases.  They  all
appear  to  be  drawn  rather  according  to  common
and  perfect  standards  of  the  different  styles,  than
to  be  the  faithful  imitations  of  distinct  original
designs.  Plates  25  and  26  of  the  first  volume  of
Maissonneuve,  purporting  to  be  faithful  imitations
of  the  design  upon  the  celebrated  Nola  vase,
(in  the  Museum  at  Naples,  No.  1846,)  repre-
senting a  scene  from  the  destniction  of  Troy,  bear
hut  little  resemblance  to  the  original.  This  remark
is  applicable  also  to  the  work  of  D'Hancarville  and
other  earlier  productions,  but  in  a  less  degree.
Perhaps  the  work  which  illustrates  most  faithfully
the  style  of  the  designs  upon  ancient  vases,  as  far
as  it  goes,  is  that  in  course  of  publication  by
Gerhard  (Auserlesene  Griechische  Vascnbilder,  Ber-
lin 1839).  The  specimens  also  of  ancient  paintings,
published  by  Raoul-Rochette  {Feintures  Antiqties),
have  every  appearance  of  being  faithful  imitations
of  the  originals.

X.  Remains  of  Ancient  Painting.  There  is  a
general  prejudice  against  the  opinion  that  the
painting  of  the  Greeks  equalled  their  sculpture  ;
and  the  earlier  discoveries  of  the  remains  of  ancient
paintings  at  Pompeii  and  Herculaneum  tended
rather  to  increase  this  prejudice  than  to  correct  it.
The  style  of  the  paintings  discovered  in  these  cities
was  condemned  both  by  Pliny  and  Vitravius,  and
yet  almost  every  species  of  merit  may  be  discovered
in  them.  What  therefore  must  have  been  the  pro-
ductions which  the  ancients  themselves  esteemed
their  immortal  works,  and  which  singly  were  esti-
mated equal  to  the  wealth  of  cities  ?  (Plin.  //.  A^.
XXXV.  32.)

These  remains  of  Pompeii  and  Herculaneum  in-
duced Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  to  form  a  decided
opinion  upon  ancient  painting.  He  remarks  (Notes
to  Fresn.  37),  "  From  the  various  ancient  paint-
ings which  have  come  down  to  us  we  may  form  a
judgment  with  tolerable  accuracy  of  the  excellencies
and  the  defects  of  the  arts  amongst  the  ancients.
There  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  the  same  correct-
ness of  design  was  required  from  the  painter  as
from  the  sculptor  ;  and  if  what  has  happened  in
the  case  of  sculpture,  had  likewise  happened  in  re-
gard to  their  paintings,  and  we  had  the  good
fortune  to  possess  what  the  ancients  themselves
esteemed  their  masterpieces,  I  have  no  doubt  but
we  should  find  their  figures  as  correctly  drawn  as
the  Laocoon,  and  probably  coloured  like  Titian."
This  opinion  has  been  further  confirmed  by  later
discoveries  at  Pompeii  ;  especially  by  the  great
mosaic  of  the  Casa  del  Fauno  discovered  in  1831,
supposed  to  represent  the  battle  of  Issus.  (Mosaic,
No.  XV.)  But  the  beauty  of  ancient  sculpture
alone  is  itself  a  powerful  advocate  in  favour  of  this
opinion  ;  for  when  art  has  once  attained  such  a
degree  of  excellence  as  the  Groek  sculpture  evinces,
it  is  evident  that  nothing  mediocre  or  even  inferior
could  be  tolerated.  The  principles,  which  guide
the  practice  of  both  arts,  are  in  design  and  propor-
tion the  same  ;  and  the  style  of  design  in  painting
cannot  have  been  inferior  to  that  of  sculpture.
Several  of  the  most  celebrated  ancient  artists  were
both  sculptors  and  painters  ;  Pheidias  and  Eu-
phranor  were  both  ;  Zeuxis  and  Protogcnes  were
both  modellers  ;  Polygnotus  devoted  some  atten-
tion to  statuary  ;  and  Lysippus  consulted  Eupom-
pus  upon  style  in  sculpture.  The  design  of  Pheidias


PICTURA.

and  Euphranor  in  painting  cannot  have  been  in-
ferior in  style  to  that  of  their  sculpture  ;  nor  can
Eupompus  have  been  an  inferior  critic  in  his  own
art  than  in  that  of  Lysippus.  We  have  besides  the
testimony  of  nearly  all  the  Greek  and  Roman
writers  of  every  period,  who  in  general  speak  more
frequently  and  in  higher  terms  of  painting  than  of
sculpture.  "  Si  quid  generis  istias  modi  me  de-
lectat,  pictura  delectat,"  says  Cicero  (ad  Fam.  vii.
23).

The  occasional  errors  in  perspective,  detected  in
some  of  the  architectural  decorations  in  Pompeii,
have  been  assumed  as  evidence  that  the  Greek
painters  generally  were  deficient  in  perspective.
This  conclusion  by  no  means  follows,  and  is  entirely
confuted  by  the  mosaic  of  the  battle  of  Issus,  in
which  the  perspective  is  admirable  ;  in  many  other
works  also  of  minor  importance  the  perspective  has
been  carefully  attended  to.  We  know,  moreover,
that  the  Greeks  were  acquainted  with  perspective
at  a  very  early  period  ;  for  Vitruvius  (vii.  praef.)
saj's,  that  when  Aeschylus  was  exhibiting  trage-
dies at  Athens,  Agatharchus  made  a  scene,  and  left
a  treatise  upon  it.  By  the  assistance  of  this,  De-
mocritus  and  Anaxagoras  wrote  upon  the  same
subject.  (See  Did.  of  Biog.  art.  Agatharchus.)
This  class  of  painting  was  termed  scenography
((TKTjuoypacpla)  by  the  Greeks,  and  appears  to  have
been  sometimes  practised  by  architects.  Cleis-
thenes  of  Eretria  is  mentioned  as  architect  and
scenograph  (<TKT]uoypd({)os).  (Diog.  ii.  125.)  Se-
rapion,  Eudorus,  and  others,  were  celebrated  as
scene-painters.  (Plin.  II.  N.  xxxv.  37.  40.)  Scene-
painting  was  not  perhaps  generally  practised  until
after  the  time  of  Aeschylus,  for  Aristotle  (Poet.  4)
attributes  its  introduction  to  Sophocles.

The  most  valuable  and  the  most  considerable  of
the  ancient  paintings,  that  have  been  yet  discovered,
are  :  — The  so-called  Aldobrandini  Marriage,  Nozze
Aldobrandine,  originally  the  property  of  the  Aldo-
brandini family,  which  was  found  on  the  Esquiline
Mount  during  the  pontificate  of  Clement  VIII.,
Ippolito  Aldobrandini,  and  was  placed  by  Pius
VII.  in  the  Vatican  ;  this  painting,  which  is  on
stucco  and  contains  ten  rather  small  figures  in  three
groups,  is  a  work  of  considerable  merit  in  composi-
tion, drawing,  and  colour,  and  is  executed  with
great  freedom  (Bottiger  and  Meyer,  Die  Aldo-
brandinische  Hochzeit,  Dresden  1810)  ;  and  the
following  paintings  of  the  Museo  Borbonico  at
Naples,  which  are  conspicuous  for  freedom  of  exe-
cution and  general  technical  excellence :  the  two
Nereids  found  in  Stabiae,  Nos.  561  and  562,  Cat.  ;
Telephus  nourished  by  the  roe,  &c.,  from  Hercu-
laneum, No.  495  ;  Chiron  and  Achilles,  also  from
Herculaneum,  No.  730  ;  Briseis  delivered  to  the
heralds  of  Agamemnon,  from  Pompeii  (Sir  W.
Gell,  Pompeimia,  pi.  39  and  40),  No.  684  ;  and
the  nine  Funambuli  or  Rope-dancers,  which  are
executed  with  remarkable  skill  and  facility.  (Mus.
Borb.,  Ant.  d'Ercol.,  and  Zahn  contain  engravings
from  these  works  ;  for  facsimiles  of  ancient  paint-
ings, see  "  Recueil  de  Peintures  antiques,  imite'es
fidelement  pour  les  couleurs  et  pour  le  trait,
d'apres  les  desseins  colorids  faits  par  P.  S.  Bartoli,"
&c.  Paris  1  757,  folio.)

XL  Period  of  Development. — Essential  Style.
With  Polygnotus  of  Thasos  (b.  c.  463)  painting
was  fully  developed  in  all  the  essential  principles
of  imitation,  and  was  established  as  an  independent
art  in  practice.     The  works  of  Polygnotus  were


PICTURA.

conspicuous  for  expression,  character,  and  design  ;
the  more  minute  discriminations  of  tone  and  local
colour,  united  with  dramatic  composition  and  eft'ect,
were  not  accomplished  until  a  later  period.  The
limited  space  of  this  article  necessarily  precludes
anything  like  a  general  notice  of  all  the  various
productions  of  Greek  painters  incidentally  men-
tioned in  ancient  writers.  With  the  exception,
therefore,  of  occasionally  mentioning  works  of  ex-
traordinary celebrity,  the  notices  of  the  various
Greek  painters  of  whom  we  have  any  satisfactory
knowledge  will  be  restricted  to  those  who,  by  the
quality  or  peculiar  character  of  their  works,  have
contributed  towards  the  establishment  of  any  of
the  various  styles  of  painting  practised  by  the  an-
cients. A  fuller  account  of  each  artist  will  be  found
under  the  respective  names  in  the  Dictionary  of
Greek  and  Roman  Biography.

Polygnotus  is  frequently  mentioned  by  ancient
writers,  but  the  passages  of  most  importance  re-
lating to  his  style  are  in  the  Poetica  of  Aristotle  (c.
2  and  6)  and  the  Imagines  of  Lucian  (c.  7).  The
notice  in  Pliny  {H.  N.  xxxv,  35)  is  very  cursory  ;
he  mentions  him  amongst  the  many  before  Olymp.
90,  from  which  time  he  dates  the  commencement  of
his  history,  and  simply  states  that  he  added  much
to  the  art  of  painting,  such  as  opening  the  mouth,
showing  the  teeth,  improving  the  folds  of  draperies,
painting  transparent  vests  for  women,  or  giving
them  various  coloured  head-dresses.  Aristotle
speaks  of  the  general  character  of  the  design  and
expression  of  Polygnotus,  Lucian  of  the  colour  ;  in
which  respects  both  writers  award  him  the  highest
praise.  Aristotle  (c.  2),  speaking  of  imitation,
remarks  that  it  must  be  either  superior,  inferior,  or
equal  to  its  model,  which  he  illustrates  by  the  cases
of  three  painters  :  "  Polygnotus,"  he  says,  "  paints
men  better  than  they  are,  Pauson  worse,  and
Dionysius  as  the}--  are."  This  passage  alludes  evi-
dently to  the  general  quality  of  the  design  of
Polygnotus,  which  appears  to  have  been  of  an  ex-
alted and  ideal  character.  In  another  passage  (c.
6)  he  speaks  of  him  as  an  oryaQhs  rjQoypdtpos,  or
an  excellent  delineator  of  moral  character  and  ex-
pression, and  assigns  him  in  this  respect  a  com-
plete superiority  over  Zeuxis.  From  the  passage
in  Lucian,  we  may  infer  that  Polygnotus,  Euphra-
nor,  Apelles,  and  Action,  were  the  best  colourists
among  the  ancients  according  to  the  general  opinion
{&piaToi  iyevovro  KepdaaaOai  to,  xpwjLiara,  Koi  eij-
Kaipov  Trote7(T0ai  tV  i'Ti€o\^v  avrcov).  He  notices
also  in  the  same  passage  the  truth,  the  elegance,  and
the  flowing  lightness  of  the  draperies  of  Polygnotus,

Pausanias  mentions  several  of  the  works  of
Polygnotus,  but  the  most  miportant  w^ere  his  two
great  paintings,  or  series  of  paintings,  in  the  Lesche
of  the  temple  of  Apollo  at  Delphi,  to  a  description
of  which  Pausanias  devotes  seven  chapters,  (x.
25— 31,  Diet.  ofBiog.  s.  v.)

The  painting  of  the  destruction  of  Troy  (and  the
other  was  similar  in  style)  seems  to  have  contained
three  rows  of  figures,  with  the  names  of  each  written
near  them,  in  distinct  groups,  covering  the  whole
wall,  each  telling  its  own  story,  but  all  contributing
to  relate  the  tale  of  the  destruction  of  Troy.  It  is
evident  from  this  description  that  we  cannot  decide
upon  either  the  merits  or  the  demerits  of  the  com-
position, i'rom  the  principles  of  art  v/hich  guide  the
rules  of  composition  of  modem  times.  Neither
perspective  nor  composition,  as  a  whole,  are  to  be
expected  in  such  works  as  these,  for  they  did  not


PICTURA.


909


constitute  single  compositions,  nor  was  any  unity
of  time  or  action  aimed  at ;  they  were  painted
histories,  and  each  group  was  no  further  connected
with  its  contiguous  groups,  than  that  they  all
tended  to  illustrate  different  facts  of  the  same  story.

Polygnotus  has  been  termed  the  Michel  Angelo
of  antiquity.  His  style  was  strictly  ethic,  for  his
whole  art  seems  to  have  been  employed  in  illus-
trating the  human  character  ;  and  that  he  did
it  well,  the  surname  of  Ethograph  C}i6o'Ypd(\>os)
given  to  him  by  Aristotle  and  others  sufficiently
testifies.  His  principles  of  imitation  may  be  de-
fined to  be  those  of  individual  representation  inde-
pendently of  any  accidental  combination  of  acces-
sories ;  neither  the  picturesque,  nor  a  general  and
indiscriminate  picture  of  nature,  formed  any  part
of  the  art  of  Polygnotus  or  of  the  period.  Whatever,
therefore,  was  not  absolutely  necessary  to  illustrate
the  principal  object,  was  indicated  merely  by  sym-
bol :  two  or  three  warriors  represented  an  army  ;
a  single  hut,  an  encampment ;  a  ship,  a  fleet  ;  and
a  single  house,  a  city :  and,  generally,  the  laws  of
basso-rilievo  appear  to  have  been  the  laws  of
painting,  and  both  were  still  to  a  great  extent  sub-
servient to  architecture.

The  principal  contemporaries  of  Polj'gnotus  were
Dionysius  of  Colophon,  Pleistaenetus  and  Panaenus,
of  Athens,  brothers  (or  the  latter,  perhaps,  a  ne-
phew) of  Pheidias,  and  Micon,  also  of  Athens.

Dionysius  was  apparently  an  excellent  portrait-
painter,  the  Holbein  of  antiquity  ;  for  besides  the
testimony  of  Aristotle,  quoted  above,  Plutarch
{Timol.  36)  remarks  that  the  works  of  Dionysius
wanted  neither  force  nor  spirit,  but  that  they  had
the  appearance  of  being  too  much  laboured.  Po-
lygnotus also  painted  portraits.     (Plut.  Cimon,  4.)

Panaenus  assisted  Pheidias  in  decorating  the
statue  and  throne  of  the  Olympian  Jupiter,  Micon
was  particularly  distinguished  for  the  skill  with
which  he  painted  horses.    {Diet.  ofBiog.  s.vv.)

Prize  contests  also  were  already  established,  in
this  early  period,  at  Corinth  and  at  Delphi,  Pliny
(//.  A'^  xxxv.  35)  mentions  that  Panaenus  was
defeated  in  one  of  these  at  the  Pythian  games,  by
Timagoras  of  Chalcis,  who  himself  celebrated  his
own  victory  in  verse.

The  remarks  of  Quintilian  (Inst.  Orator,  xii.  10)
respecting  the  style  of  this  period  are  very  curious
and  interesting,  although  they  do  not  accord  en-
tirely with  the  testimonies  from  Greek  writers
quoted  above.  He  says,  that  notwithstanding  the
simple  colouring  of  Polygnotus,  which  was  little
more  than  a  rude  foundation  of  what  was  after-
wards accomplished,  there  were  those  who  even
preferred  his  style  to  the  styles  of  the  greatest
painters  who  succeeded  him  ;  not,  as  Quintilian
thinks,  without  a  certain  degree  of  affectation.

XII.  Establishment  of  Painting. — Dramatic  style.
In  the  succeeding  generation,  about  420  b.  e.,
through  the  efforts  of  ApoUodorus  of  Athens  and
Zeuxis  of  Heraclea,  dramatic  effect  was  added  to
the  essential  style  of  Polygnotus,  causing  an  epoch
in  the  art  of  painting,  which  henceforth  compre-
hended a  unity  of  sentiment  and  action,  and  the
imitation  of  the  local  and  accidental  appearances  of
objects,  combined  with  the  historic  and  generic  re-
presentation of  Polygnotus.  The  contemporaries
of  ApoUodorus  and  Zeuxis,  and  those  who  carried
out  their  principles,  were,  Parrhasius  of  Ephesus,
Eupompus  of  Sicyon,  and  Timanthes  of  Cythnus,
all   painters  of  the   greatest   fame.     Athens  and


010


PICTURA.


Scyon  were  the  principal  seats  of  the  art  at  this
period.

ApoUodorus,  says  Plutarch,  invented  tone  ((pOopctv
Kol  a.TrSxpvo'iv  (TKias),  wliich  is  well  defined  by
Fuseli  (Lee.  I)  as  "the  element  of  the  ancient
'Apfioy-f],  that  imperceptible  transition,  which,  with-
out opacity,  confusion,  or  hardness,  united  local
colour,  demitint,  shade,  and  reflexes."  This  must,
however,  not  be  alto/rether  denied  to  the  earlier
painters  ;  for  Plutarch  himself  {Timol.  36)  attri-
butes the  same  property  to  the  works  of  Dionysius
(icrxvy  <exovTa  Koi  t6vov)^  though  in  a  less  degree.
The  distinction  is,  that  what  in  the  works  of  Dio-
nysius was  really  merely  a  gradation  of  light  and
skade,  or  gradual  diminution  of  light,  was  in  those
of  ApoUodorus  a  gradation  also  of  tints,  the  tint
gradually  changing  according  to  the  degree  of  light.
The  former  was  termed  t6vos,  the  latter  apfioyri  ;
but  the  English  term  tone,  when  applied  to  a  co-
loured picture,  comprehends  both  ;  it  is  equivalent
to  the  "  splendor  "  of  Pliny.  (//.  N.  xxxv.  11.)

ApoUodorus  first  painted  men  and  things  as  they
really  appeared  ;  this  is  what  Pliny  (H.  N.  xxxv.
36)  means  by  "  Hie  primus  species  exprimere  insti-
tuit."  The  rich  efi'ect  of  the  combination  of  light
and  shade  with  colour  is  also  clearly  expressed  in
the  words  which  follow :  "  primusque  gloriam
penicilto  jure  contulit  ;  '■"  also,  "  neque  ante  eum
tabula  ullius  ostenditur,  quae  teneat  oculos."  We
may  almost  imagine  the  works  of  a  Rembrandt  to
be  spoken  of  ;  his  pictures  rivetted  the  eye.
Through  this  striking  quality  of  his  works,  he  was
surnamed  the  shadower,  aKiaypdcpo'!.  (Hesychius,
*,  V.  Comp.  further  Diet,  of  Biog,  s.  v.)

Zeuxis  combined  a  certain  degree  of  ideal  form
with  the  rich  eifect  of  ApoUodorus.  Qaintilian
(I.e.)  says  that  he  followed  Homer,  and  was
pleased  with  powerful  forms  even  in  women.
Cicero  (Brut.  18)  also  praises  his  design.  Zeuxis
painted  many  celebrated  works,  but  the  Helen  of
Croton,  which  was  painted  from  five  of  the  most
beautiful  virgins  in  the  city,  was  the  most  re-
nowned, and  under  which  he  inscribed  three  verses
(156—158)  in  the  third  book  of  the  Iliad.  (Valer.
Max.  iii.  7.  §  3  ;  Cic.  de  Invent,  ii.  1  ;  Aelian,
V.  II.  iv.  12,  &c.)  Stobaeus  (Serm.  61)  relates
an  anecdote  of  the  painter  Nicomachus  and  this
Helen,  where  the  painter  is  reported  to  have  ob-
served to  one  who  did  not  understand  why  the
picture  was  so  much  admired,  "  Take  my  eyes
and  you  will  see  a  goddess."  We  learn  from
another  anecdote,  recorded  by  Plutarch  (Pericl.  13),
that  Zeuxis  painted  very  slowly.

Parrhasius  is  spoken  of  by  ancient  writers  in
terms  of  the  very  highest  praise.  He  appears  to
have  combined  the  magic  tone  of  ApoUodorus,  and
the  exquisite  design  of  Zeuxis,  with  the  classic  in-
vention and  expression  of  Polygnotus  ;  and  he  so
defined  all  the  powers  and  ends  of  art,  says  Quin-
tilian  (I.  c),  that  he  was  called  the  "  Legislator."
He  was  himself  not  less  aware  of  his  ability,  for
he  termed  himself  the  prince  of  painters.  ('EAA^-
vxav  irpura  (pepoura  rexvrjs,  Athen.  xii,  p.  543,  c.)
He  was,  says  Pliny  (H.N.  xxxv.  36),  the  most
insolent  and  most  arrogant  of  artists.  (Compare
Athen.  xv.  p.  687,  b.  ;  and  Aelian,  V.  II.  ix.  11.)
Timanthes  of  Cythnus  or  Sicyon,  was  distin-
guished for  invention  and  expression  ;  the  par-
ticular charm  of  his  invention  was,  that  he  left
much  to  be  supplied  by  the  spectator's  own  fancy ;
and  although  his  productions  were  always  admir-


PICTURA.

able  works  of  art,  still  the  execution  was  surpassed
by  the  invention.  As  an  instance  of  the  ingenuity
of  his  invention,  Pliny  (//.  A^.  xxxv.  36.  §  6)  men-
tions a  sleeping  Cyclops  that  he  painted  upon  a
small  panel,  yet  conveyed  an  idea  of  his  gigantic
form  by  means  of  some  small  satyrs  who  were
painted  measuring  his  thumb  with  a  thyrsus.  He
was  celebrated  also  for  a  picture  of  the  sacrifice  of
Iphigenia.  (See  the  admirable  remarks  of  Fuseli
upon  this  picture.  Lecture  i.)  Timanthes  defeated
Parrhasius  in  a  professional  competition,  in  which
the  subject  was  the  contest  of  Ulysses  and  Ajax
for  the  arms  of  Achilles.  (Aelian,  I.  c.  ;  Plin.  I.  c.)

Eupompus  of  Sicyon  was  the  founder  of  the
celebrated  Sicyonian  school  of  painting  which  was
afterwards  established  by  Pamphilus.  Such  was
the  influence  of  Eupompus's  style,  that  he  added  a
third,  the  Sicyonic,  to  the  only  two  distinct  styles
of  painting  then  recognized,  the  Helladic  or  Grecian
and  the  Asiatic,  but  subsequently  to  Eupompus  dis-
tinguished as  the  Attic  and  the  Ionic  ;  which  with
his  own  style,  the  Sicyonic,  henceforth  constituted
the  three  characteristic  styles  of  Grecian  paint-
ing. (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.  36.  s.  7.)  We  may  judge,
from  the  advice  which  Eupompus  gave  Lysippus,
that  the  predominant  characteristic  of  this  style  was
individuality  ;  for  upon  being  consulted  by  Lysip-
pus whom  of  his  predecessors  he  should  imitate,  he
is  reported  to  have  said,  pointing  to  the  surrounding
crowd,  "  Let  nature  be  your  model,  not  an  artist."
(Plin.  II.N.xxxiv.  19.  s.  6.)  This  celebrated
maxim,  which  eventually  had  so  much  influence
upon  the  <irts  of  Greece,  was  the  first  professed
deviation  from  the  principles  of  the  generic  style  of
Polygnotus  and  Pheidias.

XIII.  Period  of  Refinement.  The  art  of  this
period,  which  has  been  termed  the  Alexandrian,
because  the  most  celebrated  artists  of  this  period
lived  about  the  time  of  Alexander  the  Great,  was
the  last  of  progression  or  acquisition  ;  but  it  only
added  variety  of  effect  to  the  tones  it  could  not  im-
prove, and  was  principally  characterised  by  the
diversity  of  the  styles  of  so  many  contemporary
artists.  The  decadence  of  the  art  immediately
succeeded  ;  the  necessary  consequence,  when,  in-
stead of  excellence,  variety  and  originality  became
the  end  of  the  artist.  "  Floruit  circa  Philippum,
et  usque  ad  successores  Alexandri,"  says  Quinti-
lian  (/.  c),  "pictura  praecipue,  sed  diversis  virtuti-
bus  ;  "  and  he  then  enumerates  some  of  the  princi-
pal painters  of  this  time,  with  the  excellencies  for
which  each  was  distinguished.  Protogenes  was
distinguished  for  high  finish  ;  Pamphilus  and  Me-
lanthius  for  composition  ;  Antiphilus  for  facility  ;
Theon  of  Samos  for  his  prolific  fancy  ;  and  for
grace  Apelles  was  unrivalled  ;  Euphranor  was  in
all  things  excellent ;  Pausias  and  Islcias  were  re-
markable for  chiaroscuro  of  various  kinds  ;  Nico-
machus was  celebrated  for  a  bold  and  rapid  pencil;
and  his  brother  Aristeides  surpassed  all  in  the  depth
of  expression.  There  were  also  other  painters  of
great  celebrity  during  this  period :  Philoxenus  of
Eretria,  Asclepiodorus  of  Athens,  Atheniou  of
Maronea,  Echiori,  Cydias,  Philochares,  Theomnes-
tus,  Pyreicus,  &c.

This  general  revolution  in  the  theories  and  prac-
tice of  painting  appears  to  have  been  greatly  owing
to  the  principles  taught  by  Eupompus  at  Sicyon.
Pamphilus  of  Amphipolis  succeeded  Eupompus  in
the  school  of  Sicyon,  which  from  that  time  became
the  most  celebrated  school  of  art  in  Greece.     Pam-


PICTURA.

philus  had  the  reputation  of  being  the  most  scientific
artist  of  his  time  ;  and  such  was  his  authority,
says  Pliny  {H.  N.  xxxv.  36),  that  chiefly  through
his  influence,  first  in  Sicyon,  then  throughout  all
Greece,  noble  youths  were  taught  the  art  of  draw-
ing before  all  others :  the  first  exercise  was  pro-
bably to  draw  a  simple  line,  (rpa^yu^v  eXuvaat,
Pollux,  vii.  128  ;  see  further,  respecting  the  school
of  Pamphilus,  Did.  of  Biog.  s.  v.)

Nicomachus  of  Thebes  was,  according  to  Pliny
(Z.  c),  the  most  rapid  painter  of  his  time  ;  but
he  was  as  conspicuous  for  the  force  and  power
of  his  pencil  as  for  its  rapidity  ;  Plutarch  {Timol.
36)  compares  his  paintings  with  the  verses  of
Homer.  Nicomachus  had  many  scholars,  of  whom
Philoxenus  of  Eretria  was  celebrated  as  a  painter
of  battles  ;  a  battle  of  Alexander  and  Dareius  by
him  is  mentioned  by  Pliny  {H.  N.  xxxv.  36)  as  one
of  the  most  celebrated  paintings  of  antiquity  ;  but
they  were  all  surpassed  by  his  own  brother  Aris-
teides,  who  appears  to  have  been  the  greatest  master
of  expression  among  the  Greeks.  We  must,  how-
ever, apply  some  modification  to  the  expression
of  Pliny  (/.  c),  that  Aristeides  first  painted  the
mind  and  expressed  the  feelings  and  passions  of
man,  since  ^07j,  as  it  is  explained  by  Pliny  in  this
passage,  cannot  be  denied  to  Polygnotus,  Apollo-
dorus,  Parrhasius,  Timanthes,  and  many  others.
(See  further  Diet,  of  Biog.  art.  Aristeides.)

Pausias  of  Sicyon  painted  in  encaustic,  with  the
oestrum,  and  seems  to  have  surpassed  all  others  in
this  method  of  painting  ;  he  was  the  pupil  of  Pam-
philus, and  the  contemporary  of  Apelles.  Pausias
was  conspicuous  for  a  bold  and  powerful  efl^ect  of
light  and  shade,  which  he  enhanced  by  contrasts
and  strong  foreshortenings.     {Diet,  of  Biog.    s.  v.)

Apelles  was  a  native  of  Ephesus  or  of  Colo-
phon (Suidas,  s.  v.),  according  to  the  general
testimony  of  Greek  writers,  although  Pliny  (/.  c.)
terms  him  of  Cos.  Pliny  asserts  that  he  sur-
passed all  who  either  preceded  or  succeeded  him  ;
the  qualit}%  however,  in  which  he  surpassed  all
other  painters  will  scarcely  bear  a  definition  ;  it
has  been  termed  grace,  elegance,  beauty,  X"P'S
venustas.  Fuseli  {Lee.  1)  defines  the  style  of  it.
Apelles  thus :  —  "His  great  prerogative  consisted
more  in  the  iniison  than  the  extent  of  his  powers  ;
he  knew  better  what  he  could  do,  what  ought  to
be  done,  at  what  point  he  could  arrive,  and  what
lay  beyond  his  reach,  than  any  other  artist.  Grace
of  conception  and  refinement  of  taste  were  his  ele-
ments, and  went  hand  in  hand  with  grace  of  exe-
cution and  taste  in  finish  ;  powerful  and  seldom,
possessed  singly,  irresistible  when  united."

The  most  celebrated  work  of  Apelles  was  per-
haps his  Venus  Anadyomene,  Venus  rising  out  of
the  waters.     {Diet,  of  Biog.  art.  Apelles.)

He  excelled  in  portrait,  and  indeed  all  his
works  appear  to  have  been  portraits  in  an  ex-
tended sense  ;  for  his  pictures,  both  historical  and
allegorical,  consisted  nearly  all  of  single  figures.
He  enjoyed  the  exclusive  privilege  of  painting  the
portraits  of  Alexander.  {Uor.  JiJp.  ii.  1.  239.)  One
of  these,  which  represented  Alexander  wielding
the  thund'rbolts  of  Jupiter,  termed  the  Alexander
Kepavuo(f)6pos  appears  to  have  been  a  masterpiece
of  effect  •,  the  hand  and  lightning,  says  Pliny,
seemed  to  start  from  the  picture,  and  Plutarch
{Alex.  4)  informs  us  that  the  complexion  was
browner  than  Alexander's,  thus  making  a  finer
contrast  with  the  fire  in  his  hand,  which  apparently


PICTURA.


911


constituted  the  light  of  the  picture.  Pliny  {l.  c.)
tells  us  that  Apelles  glazed  his  pictures  in  a  manner
peculiar  to  himself,  and  in  which  no  one  could
imitate  him.  When  his  works  were  finished  he
covered  them  with  a  dark  transparent  vamish
(most  probably  containing  asphaltum),  which  had
a  remarkable  effect  in  harmonizing  and  toning  the
colours,  and  in  giving  brilliancy  to  the  shadows.
Sir  ,J.  Reynolds  discovered  in  this  account  of  Pliny
"an  artist-like  description  of  the  effect  of  glazing
or  scumbling,  such  as  was  practised  by  Titian  and
the  rest  of  the  Venetian  painters."  {N^otes  to
Fresn.  37.)  There  is  a  valuable  though  incidental
remark  in  Cicero  {de  Nat.  Deor.  i.  27),  relating  to
the  colouring  of  Apelles,  where  he  says,  that  the
tints  of  the  Venus  Anadyomene  were  not  blood,
but  a  resemblance  of  blood.  The  females,  and  the
pictures  generally,  of  Apelles,  were  most  probably
simple  and  unadorned  ;  their  absolute  merits,  and
not  their  ejict,  constituting  their  chief  attraction.
See  further  Diet,  of  Biog.  s.  v.

Protogenes  of  Caunus,  a  contemporary  of  Apel-
les, was  both  statuary  and  painter  ;  he  was  re-
markable for  the  high  finish  of  his  works,  for  a
detailed  account  of  which,  as  well  as  of  his  life  and
his  relations  with  Apelles,  see  Diet,  of  Biog.  art
Protogenes.

Euphranor,  the  Isthmian,  was  celebrated  equally
as  painter  and  statuary  ;  he  was,  says  Pliny  (//.  iV.
xxxv.  40),  in  all  things  excellent,  and  at  all  times
equal  to  himself.  He  was  distinguished  for  a  pecu-
liarity of  style  of  design  ;  he  was  fond  of  a  muscular
limb,  and  adopted  a  more  decided  anatomical  dis-
play generall}',  but  he  kept  the  body  light,  in  pro-
portion to  the  head  and  limbs.  Pliny  says  that
Euphranor  first  represented  heroes  with  dignity.
Parrhasius  was  said  to  have  established  the  canon
of  art  for  heroes  ;  but  the  heroes  of  Parrhasius
were  apparently  more  divine,  those  of  Euphranor
more  human.  We  have  examples  of  both  these
styles,  in  the  kindred  art  of  sculpture,  in  the  Apollo
and  the  Laocodn,  and  in  the  Meleager  and  the
Gladiator,  or  the  Antinous  and  the  Discobolus.
It  was  to  this  distinction  of  style  which  Euphranor
apparently  alluded,  when  he  said  that  the  Theseus
of  Parrhasius  had  been  fed  upon  roses,  but  his  own
upon  beef.  (Plut.  de  Glor.  Athen.  2  ;  Plin.  I.  c.)
Euphranor  painted  in  encaustic,  and  executed  many
famous  works  ;  the  principal  were  a  battle  of  Man-
tineia,  and  a  picture  of  the  twelve  gods.  (Plin.  /.  c.  ;
Plut.  I.  c.  ;  Pans.  i.  3  ;  Lucian,  Bnag.  7  ;  Valer.
Max.  viii.  11.  §  5  ;  Eustath.  ad  II.  i.  .529,  &c.)

Nicias  of  Athens  was  celebrated  for  the  delicacy
with  which  he  painted  females,  and  for  the  rich
tone  of  chiaroscuro  which  distinguished  his  paint-
ings. He  also  painted  in  encaustic.  His  most
celebrated  work  was  the  t/envia,  or  the  region  of
the  shades,  of  Homer  {neeromantia  Homeri).,  which
he  declined  to  sell  to  Ptolemy  I.  of  Egypt,  who
had  offered  60  talents  for  it,  and  preferred  pre-
senting to  his  native  city,  Athens,  as  he  was  then
sufficiently  wealthy.  Nicias  also  pamted  some  of
the  marble  statues  of  Praxiteles.  (Plin.  H.  N.
xxxv.  40;  Plut.  Mor.Epicur.  11  ;  see  No.VIII.)

Athenion  of  Maronea,  who  painted  also  in  en-
caustic, Avas,  according  to  Pliny  (Z.  c),  compared
with,  and  even  preferred  by  some  to  Nicias  ;  he
was  more  austere  in  colouring,  but  in  his  austerity
more  pleasing,  and  if  he  had  not  died  young,  says
Pliny,  he  would  have  surpassed  all  men  in  pauit-
ing.     He  appears  to  have  looked  upon  colours  as  .?


912


PICTURA.


mere  means,  to  have  neglected  pictorial  effect,  and,
retaining  individuality  and  much  of  the  refinement
of  design  of  his  contemporaries,  to  have  endeavoured
to  combine  them  with  the  generic  style  of  Poly-
gnotus  and  Pheidias  {ut  in  ipsa  pictura  eruditio
eluceat).  His  picture  of  a  groom  with  a  horse  is
mentioned  by  Pliny  as  a  remarkable  painting.

Philochares,  the  brother  of  the  orator  Aeschines,
was  also  a  painter  of  the  greatest  merit,  according
to  Pliny  (H.N.xxxy.  10),  although  he  is  contemp-
tuously termed  by  Demosthenes  (Fals.  Legal,  p.  4 1 5,
Reiske)  "  apainter  of  perfume-pots  and  tambours  "
(aXa§a(TrpoQT]Kas  KaX  TyfiTrava).

Echion  also,  of  uncertain  country,  is  mentioned
by  Cicero  {Brut.  18)  and  Pliny  (H.A'.xxxv.  36)
as  a  famous  painter.  Pliny  speaks  of  a  picture  of  a
bride  by  him  as  a  noble  painting,  distinguished  for
its  expression  of  modesty.  A  great  compliment  is
also  incidentally  paid  to  the  works  of  Echion  by
Cicero  (Parad.  v.  2),  where  he  is  apparently
ranked  with  Polycletus.

Theon  of  Samos  was  distinguished  for  what  the
Greeks  termed  (pavraaiai,  according  to  Quintilian
(I.  c),  who  also  ranks  him  with  the  painters  of  the
highest  class.  Pliny  (H.  N'.  xxxv.  40),  however,
classes  him  with  those  of  the  second  degree.  Aelian
gives  a  spirited  description  of  a  young  warrior
painted  by  Theon.  (  V.  H.  ii.  44.)

XIV.  Decline.  The  causes  of  the  decline  of
painting  in  Greece  are  very  evident.  The  political
revolutions  with  which  it  was  convulsed,  and  the
various  dynastic  changes  which  took  place  after  the
death  of  Alexander,  were  perhaps  the  principal
obstacles  to  any  important  efforts  of  art  ;  the  in-
telligent and  higher  classes  of  the  population,  upon
whom  painters  chiefly  depend,  being  to  a  great  ex-
tent engrossed  by  politics  or  engaged  in  war.
Another  influential  cause  was,  that  the  public
buildings  were  already  rich  in  works  of  art,  almost
even  to  the  exhaustion  of  the  national  mythology
and  history  ;  and  the  new  rulers  found  the  transfer
of  works  already  renowned  a  more  sure  and  a  more
expeditious  method  of  adorning  their  public  halls
and  palaces,  than  the  more  tardy  and  hazardous
alternative  of  requiring  original  productions  from
contemporary  artists.

The  consequence  was,  that  the  artists  of  those
times  were  under  the  necessity  of  trying  other
fields  of  art  ;  of  attracting  attention  by  novelty  and
A'ariety  :  thus  rhyparography  {^vnapoypacpla}^  por-
nography, and  ail  the  lower  classes  of  art,  attained
the  ascendancy  and  became  the  characteristic  styles
of  the  period.  Yet  during  the  early  part  of  this
period  of  decline,  from  about  B,  c.  300,  until  the
destruction  of  Corinth  by  Mummius,  B.C.  146,
there  were  still  several  names  which  upheld
the  ancient  glory  of  Grecian  painting,  but  subse-
quent to  the  conquest  of  Greece  by  the  Romans,
what  was  previously  but  a  gradual  and  scarcely
sensible  decline,  then  became  a  rapid  and  a  total
decay.

In  the  lower  descriptions  of  painting  which  pre-
vailed in  this  period,  Pyreicus  was  pre-eminent  ;
he  was  termed  Rhyparographos  {()ywapo'Ypd<pos\
on  account  of  the  mean  quality  of  his  subjects.  He
belonged  to  the  class  of  genre-painters,  or  "  peintres
de  genre  bas,"  as  the  French  term  them.  The
Greek  ()VTTapoypa(pia  therefore  is  apparently  equi-
valent to  our  expression,  the  Dutch  style.  (See
Did.  of  Biog.  art  Pyreicus.)

I'oruography,  or  obscene  painting,  which,  in  the


PICTURA.

time  of  the  Romans,  was  practised  with  the  grossest
licence  (Propert.  ii.  6  ;  Sueton.  Tib.  43  ;  and  Vit.
Hor.),  prevailed  especially  at  no  particular  period
in  Greece,  but  was  apparently  tolerated  to  a  con-
siderable extent  at  all  times.  Parrhasius,  Aristeides,
Pausanias,  Nicophanes,  Chaerephanes,  Arellius,
and  a  few  other  Tropvoypd^oi  are  mentioned  as
having  made  themselves  notorious  for  this  species
of  licence.  (Athen.  xiii.  p.  567,  b  ;  Plut.  de  aud.
Poet.  3  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.  37.)

Of  the  few  painters  who  still  maintained  the
dignity  of  the  dying  art,  the  following  may  be  men-
tioned :  Mydon  of  Soli  ;  Nealces,  Leontiscus,  and
Timanthes,  of  Sicyon  ;  Arcesilaus,  Erigonus,  and
Pasias,  of  uncertain  country  ;  and  Metrodorus  of
Athens,  equally  eminent  as  a  painter  and  as  a
philosopher.  The  school  of  Sicyon,  to  which  the
majority  of  the  distinguished  painters  of  this  period
belonged,  is  expressly  mentioned  by  Plutarch
{Aral.  12)  as  the  only  one  which  still  retained  any
traces  of  the  purity  and  the  greatness  of  style  of
the  an  of  the  renowned  ages.  It  appears  to  have
been  still  active  in  the  time  of  Aratus,  about  250
B.  c,  who  seems  to  have  instilled  some  of  his  own
enterprising  spirit  into  the  artists  of  his  time.
Aratus  was  a  great  lover  of  the  arts,  but  this  did
not  hinder  him  from  destroying  the  portraits  of  the
Tyrants  of  Sicyon  ;  one  only,  and  that  but  par-
tially, was  saved.  (Plut.  Arat.  13.)

It  was  already  the  fashion  in  this  age  to  talk  of
the  inimitable  works  of  the  great  masters  ;  and  the
artists  generally,  instead  of  exerting  themselves  to
imitate  the  masterpieces  of  past  ages,  seem  to  have
been  content  to  admire  them.  All  works  bearing
great  names  were  of  the  very  highest  value,  and
were  sold  at  enormous  prices.  Plutarch  mentions
that  Aratus  bought  up  some  old  pictures,  but  par-
ticularly those  of  Melanthus  and  Pamphilus,  and
sent  them  as  presents  to  Ptolemy  III.  of  Egypt,
to  conciliate  his  favour,  and  to  induce  him  to  join
the  Achaean  league.  Ptolemy,  who  was  a  great
admirer  of  the  arts,  was  gratified  with  these  pre-
sents, and  presented  Aratus  with  150  talents  in  con-
sideration of  them.  (Plut.  J  ra^.  12.)  These  were,
however,  by  no  means  the  first  works  of  the  great
painters  of  Greece,  which  had  found  their  way  into
Egypt.  Ptolemy  Soter  had  employed  agents  in
Greece  to  purchase  the  works  of  celebrated  masters.
(Plut.  Mar.  Epicur.  c.  11.)  Athenaeus  also  (v.
p.  196,  e.)  expressly  mentions  the  pictures  of  Si-
cyonian  masters  which  contributed  to  add  to  the
pomp  and  display  of  the  celebrated  festival  of
Ptolemy  Philadelphus  at  Alexandria.

From  the  time  of  Alexander  the  spirit  of  the
Greeks  animated  Egyptian  artists,  who  adopted
the  standard  of  Grecian  beauty  in  proportion  and
character.  Antiphilus,  one  of  the  most  celebrated
painters  of  antiquity,  was  a  native  of  Egypt,  per-
haps of  Naucratis.  {Diet,  of  Biog.  s.  v.)  Many
other  Greek  painters  also  were  established  in  Egypt,
and  both  the  population  and  arts  of  Alexandria
were  more  Greek  than  Egyptian.  (Quint,  xii.  10  ;
Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.  37  and  40  ;  Athen.  v.  p.  196.)

Amongst  the  most  remarkable  productions  of
this  period  were,  the  celebrated  ship  of  Hiero  II.
of  Syracuse,  which  had  Mosaic  floors,  in  which
the  whole  history  of  the  fall  of  Troy  was  worked
with  admirable  skill  (Athen.  v.  p.  207,  c),  and  the
immense  ship  of  Ptolemy  Philopator,  on  the  prow
and  stem  of  which  were  carved  colossal  figures,
eighteen  feet  in  height ;   and   the  whole  vessel.


PICTURA.

both  interior  and  exterior,  was  decorated  with  paint-
ing of  various  descriptions.     (Athen.  v.  p.  204,  a.)

Nearly  a  century  later  than  Aratus  we  have  still
mention  of  two  painters  at  Athens  of  more  than
ordinary  distinction,  Heracleides  a  Macedonian,
and  Metrodorus  an  Athenian.  The  names  of
several  painters,  however,  of  these  times  are  pre-
served in  Pliny,  but  he  notices  them  only  in  a
cursory  manner.  When  Aemilius  Paulus  had  con-
quered Perseus,  b.  c.  168,  he  commanded  the
Athenians  to  send  him  their  most  distinguished
painter  to  perpetuate  his  triumph,  and  their  most
approved  philosopher  to  educate  his  sons.  The
Athenians  selected  Metrodorus  the  painter,  pro-
fessing that  he  was  pre-eminent  in  both  respects.
Heracleides  was  a  Macedonian,  and  originally  a
ship-painter  ;  he  repaired  to  Athens  after  the  de-
feat of  Perseus.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.  40.)  Plutarch
in  his  description  of  the  triumph  of  Aemilius  Paulus
{in  Vit.  32)  says,  that  the  paintings  and  statues
brought  by  him  from  Greece  were  so  numerous
that  they  required  250  waggons  to  carry  them  in
procession,  and  that  the  spectacle  lasted  the  entire
day.  Aemilius  appears  at  all  times  to  have  been
a  great  admirer  of  the  arts,  for  Plutarch  {Aemil.
Paul.  6)  mentions  that  after  his  first  consulship
he  took  especial  care  to  have  his  sons  educated  in
the  arts  of  Greece,  and  amongst  others  in  painting
and  sculpture  ;  and  that  he  accordingly  entertained
masters  of  those  arts  (TrAaa-rat  koX  ((>yypd<poi)  in
his  family.  From  which  it  is  evident  that  the
migration  of  Greek  artists  to  Rome  had  already
commenced  before  the  general  spoliations  of  Greece.
Indeed  Livy  (xxxix.  22)  expressly  mentions,  that
many  artists  came  from  Greece  to  Rome  upon  the
occasion  of  the  ten  days  games  appointed  by  Ful-
vius  Nobilior,  b.  c.  186.  But  Rome  must  have
had  its  Greek  painters  even  before  this  time  ;  for
the  picture  of  the  feast  of  Gracchus's  soldiers  after
the  battle  of  Beneventum,  consecrated  by  him  in
the  temple  of  Liberty  on  the  Aventine,  B.  c.  2 1 3
(Liv.  xxiv.  16),  was  in  all  probability  the  work  of
a  Greek  artist.

The  system  adopted  by  the  Romans  of  plujider-
jng  Greece  of  its  works  of  art,  reprobated  by
Polybius  (ix.  3),  was  not  without  a  precedent.
The  Carthaginians  before  them  had  plundered  all
the  coast  towns  of  Sicily  ;  and  the  Persians,  and
even  the  Macedonians,  carried  off  all  works  of  art
as  the  lawful  prize  of  conquest,  (Diodor.  xiii.  90  ;
Polyb.  ix.  6.  §  1 ;  Liv.  xxxi.  26;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiv.
19,  xxxv.  36.)  The  Roman  conquerors,  however,
at  first  plundered  with  a  certain  degree  of  modera-
tion (Cic.  in  Verr.  v.  4)  ;  as  Marcellus  at  Syracuse,
and  Fabnis  Maximus  at  Tarentum,  who  carried
away  no  more  works  of  art  than  were  necessary  to
adorn  their  triumphs,  or  decorate  some  of  the
public  buildings.  (Cic.  in  Verr.  v.  .52,  &c. ;  Plut.
Fah.  Max.  22,  Marcel.  30.)  The  works  of  Greek
art  brought  from  Sicily  by  Marcellus,  were  the
first  to  inspire  the  Romans  with  the  desire  of
adorning  their  public  edifices  with  statues  and
paintings  ;  which  taste  was  converted  into  a  pas-
sion when  they  became  acquainted  with  the  great
treasures  and  almost  inexhaustible  resources  of
Greece  ;  and  their  rapacity  knew  no  bounds.
Plutarch  says  that  Marcellus  {in  Vit.  21)  was
accused  of  having  corrupted  the  public  morals
through  the  introduction  of  works  of  art  into
Rome  ;  since  from  that  period  the  people  wasted
much  of  their  time  in  disputing  about  arts  and


PICTURA.  913

artists.  But  Marcellus  gloried  in  the  fact,  and
boasted  t  pen  before  Greeks,  that  he  was  the  first
to  teach  the  Romans  to  esteem  and  to  admire  the
exquisite  productions  of  Greek  art.  We  learn
from  Livy  (xxvi.  21)  that  one  of  the  ornaments  of
the  triumph  of  Marcellus,  214  b.  c,  was  a  picture
of  the  capture  of  Syracuse.

These  spoliations  of  Greece,  of  the  Grecian  king-
doms of  Asia,  and  of  Sicilj',  continued  uninterrupt-
edly for  about  two  centuries  ;  yet,  according  to
Muciaims,  says  Pliny  {H.  N.  xxxiv.  17),  such
was  the  inconceivable  wealth  of  Greece  in  works
of  art,  that  Rhodes  alone  still  contained  upwards
of  3000  statues,  and  that  there  could  not  have
been  less  at  Athens,  at  Olympia,  or  at  Delphi.
The  men  who  contributed  principally  to  fill  the
public  edifices  and  temples  of  Rome  with  the
works  of  Grecian  art,  were  Cn.  Manlius,  Fulvius
Nobilior,  who  plundered  the  temples  of  Ambracia
(Liv.  xxxviii.  44),  Mummius,  Sulla,  Lucullus,
Scaurus,  and  Verres.  (Liv.  xxxix.  5,  6,  7  ;  Plin.
H.  N.  xxxiii.  53,  xxxiv.  17,  xxxvii.  6.)

Mummius,  after  the  destruction  of  Corinth,  B.  c.
146,  carried  off  or  destroyed  more  works  of  art
than  all  his  predecessors  put  together.  Some  of  his
soldiers  were  found  by  Polybius  playing  at  dice
upon  the  celebrated  picture  of  Dionysus  by  Aris-
teides.  (Strab.  viii.  p.  381.)  Many  valuable  works
also  were  purchased  upon  this  occasion  by  Attains
III.,  and  sent  to  Pergamus  ;  but  they  all  found
their  way  to  Rome  on  his  death,  B.C.  133,  as  he
bequeathed  all  his  property  to  the  Roman  people.
(Plin.  //.  A^.  xxxiii.  53.)  Scaurus,  in  his  aedile-
ship,  B.  c.  58,  had  all  the  public  pictures  still  re-
maining in  Sicyon  transported  to  Rome  on  account
of  the  debts  of  the  former  city,  and  he  adorned  the
great  temporary  theatre  which  he  erected  upon  that
occasion  with  3000  bronze  statues.  (Plin.  H.  N.
xxxv.  40,  xxxvi.  24.)  Verres  ransacked  Asia  and
Achaia,  and  plundered  almost  every  temple  and
public  edifice  in  Sicily  of  Avhatever  was  valuable
in  it.  Amongst  the  numerous  robberies  of  Verres,
Cicero  {in  Verr.  iv.  bb)  mentions  particularh'
twenty-seven  beautiful  pictures  taken  from  the
temple  of  Minerva  at  Syracuse,  consisting  of  por-
traits of  the  kings  and  tyrants  of  Sicil3\

From  the  destruction  of  Corinth  by  Mummius,
and  the  spoliation  of  Athens  by  Sulla,  the  higher
branches  of  art,  especially  in  painting'  experienced
so  sensible  a  decay  in  Greece,  that  only  two
painters  are  mentioned  who  can  be  classed  with
the  great  masters  of  former  times  :  Timomachus  of
Byzantium,  contemporary  with  Caesar  (Plin.  FI.N.
xxxv.  40,  &c.),  and  Aetion,  mentioned  by  Lucinn
{Imag.  7  ;  Herod.  5),  who  lived  apparently  about
the  time  of  Hadrian.  (Miiller,  Arch'dol.  §  211.  1.)
Yet  Rome  was,  about  the  end  of  the  republic,  full
of  painters,  who  appear,  however,  to  have  been
chiefly  occupied  in  portrait,  or  decorative  and  ara-
besque painting:  painters  must  also  have  been
very  numerous  in  Egypt  and  in  Asia.  Paintings
of  various  descriptions  still  continued  to  perform  a
conspicuous  part  in  the  triumphs  of  the  Roman
conquerors.  In  the  triumph  of  Pompey  over  Mithri-
dates  the  portraits  of  the  children  and  family  of
that  monarch  were  carried  in  the  procession  (Ap-
pian,  de  Bell.  Mithrid.  117);  and  in  one  of  Caesar's
triumphs  the  portraits  of  his  principal  enemies  in
the  civil  war  were  displayed,  with  the  exception  of
that  of  Pompey.  (Id.  de  Bell.  Civil,  ii.  101.)

The  school  of  art  at  Rhodes  appears  to  have  been
8  N


914


PICTURA.


the  only  one  that  had  experienced  no  great  change;
for  works  of  the  highest  class  in  sculpture  were  still
produced  there.  The  course  of  painting  seems  to
have  been  much  more  capricious  than  that  of  sculp-
ture ;  in  which  masterpieces,  exhibiting  various
beauties,  appear  to  have  been  produced  in  nearly
every  age,  from  that  of  Pheidias  to  that  of  Hadrian.
A  decided  decay  in  painting,  on  the  other  hand,  is
repeatedly  acknowledged  in  the  later  Greek  and
in  the  best  Roman  writers.  One  of  the  causes
of  this  decay  may  be,  that  the  highest  excellence
in  painting  requires  the  combination  of  a  much
greater  variety  of  qualities  ;  whereas  invention  and
design,  identical  in  both  arts,  are  the  sole  elements
of  sculpture.  Painters  also  are  addicted  to  the
pernicious,  though  lucrative,  practice  of  dashing  off
or  despatching  their  works,  from  which  sculptors,
from  the  very  nature  of  their  materials,  are  ex-
empt :  to  paint  quickly  was  all  that  was  required
from  some  of  the  Roman  painters.  (Juv.  ix.  146.)
Works  in  sculpture  also,  through  the  durability  of
their  material,  are  more  easily  preserved  than
paintings,  and  tl\ey  serve  therefore  as  models  and
incentives  to  the  artists  of  after  ages.  Artists,
therefore,  who  may  have  had  ability  to  excel  in
sculpture,  would  naturally  choose  that  art  in  pre-
ference to  painting.  It  is  only  thus  that  we  can
account  for  the  production  of  such  works  as  the
Antinous,  the  Laocoon,  the  Torso  of  Apollonius,
and  many  others  of  surpassing  excellence,  at  a
period  when  the  art  of  painting  was  comparatively
extinct,  or  at  least  principally  practised  as  mere
decorative  colouring,  such  as  the  majority  of  the
paintings  of  Rome,  Herculaneum,  and  Pompeii,
now  extant ;  though  it  must  be  remembered  that
these  were  the  inferior  works  of  an  inferior  age.

XV.  Roman  Painting.  The  early  painting  of
Italy  and  Magna  Graecia  has  been  already  noticed,
and  we  know  nothing  of  a  Roman  painting  inde-
pendent of  that  of  Greece,  though  Plhiy  (//".  A^.
XXXV.  7)  tells  us  that  it  was  cultivated  at  an  early
period  by  the  Romans.  The  head  of  the  noble
house  of  the  Fabii  received  the  surname  of  Pictor,
which  remained  in  his  family,  through  some  paint-
ings which  he  executed  in  the  temple  of  Salus  at
Rome,  R.  c.  304,  which  lasted  till  the  time  of  the
emperor  Claudius,  when  they  were  destroyed  by
the  fire  that  consumed  that  temple.  Pacuvius  also
the  tragic  poet,  and  nephew  of  Ennius,  distin-
guished himself  by  some  paintings  in  the  temple  of
Hercules  in  the  Forum  Boarium,  about  180  b.  c.
Afterwards,  says  Pliny  {I.  c),  painting  was  not
practised  hy  polite  hands  {honestis  manibus)  amongst
the  Romans,  except  perhaps  in  the  case  of  Turpi-
lius,  a  Roman  knight  of  his  own  times,  who  exe-
cuted some  beautiful  works  with  his  left  band  at
Verona.  Yet  Q.  Pedius,  nephew  of  Q.  Pedius,
coheir  of  Caesar  with  Augustus,  was  instmcted  in
painting,  and  became  a  great  proficient  in  the  art,
though  he  died  when  young.  Antistius  Labeo  also
timused  himself  with  painting  small  pictures.

Julius  Caesar,  Agrippa,  and  Augustus  were
among  the  earliest  great  patrons  of  artists.  Sue-
tonius {Jul.  Goes.  47)  informs  us  that  ('aesar  ex-
pended great  sums  in  the  purchase  of  pictures  by
the  old  masters  ;  and  Pliny  (//.  N.  xxxv.  40)
mentions  that  he  gave  as  much  as  80  talents  for  two
pictures  by  his  contemporary  Timomachus  of  By-
zantium, one  an  Ajax,  and  the  other  a  Medea  me-
ditating the  murder  of  her  children.  These  pictures,
which  were  painted  in  encaustic,  were  very  cele-


PICTURA.

brated  works  ;  they  are  alluded  to  by  Ovid  {Trist\
ii.  525),  and  are  mentioned  by  many  other  ancient
writers.

There  are  two  circumstances  connected  with  the
earlier  history  of  painting  in  Rome  which  deserve
mention.  One  is  recorded  by  Livy  (xli.  28),  who
informs  us  that  the  Consul  Tib.  Sempronius  Grac-
chus, dedicated  in  the  temple  of  Mater  Matuta,
upon  his  return  from  Sardinia,  B.C.  174,  a  picture
of  apparently  a  singular  description ;  it  consisted
of  a  plan  of  the  island  of  Sardinia,  with  repre-
sentations of  various  battles  he  had  fought  there,
painted  upon  it.  The  other  is  mentioned  by  Pliny
{H.  N.  xxxv.  7),  who  saj's  that  L.  Hostilius  Man-
cinus,  B.  c.  147,  exposed  to  view  in  the  forum  a
picture  of  the  taking  of  Carthage,  in  which  he  had
performed  a  conspicuous  part,  and  explained  its
various  incidents  to  the  people.  Whether  these
pictures  were  the  productions  of  Greek  or  of  Roman
artists  is  doubtful  ;  nor  have  we  any  guide  as  to
their  rank  as  works  of  art.

The  Romans  generally  have  not  the  slightest
claims  to  the  merit  of  having  promoted  the  fine
arts.  We  have  seen  that  before  the  spoliations  of
Greece  and  Sicily,  the  arts  were  held  in  no  consi-
deration in  Rome  ;  and  even  afterwards,  until  the
time  of  the  emperors,  painting  and  sculpture  seem
to  have  been  practised  very  rarely  by  Romans  ;
and  the  works  which  were  tlien  produced  were
chiefly  characterised  by  their  bad  taste,  being  mere
military  records  and  gaudy  displays  of  colour,  al-
though the  city  was  crowded  with  the  finest  pro-
ductions of  ancient  Greece.

There  are  three  distinct  periods  observable  in
the  history  of  painting  in  Rome.  The  first,  or  great
period  of  Graeco-Roman  art,  may  be  dated  from
the  conquest  of  Greece  until  the  time  of  Augustus,
when  the  artists  were  chiefly  Greeks.  The  second,
from  the  time  of  Augustus  to  the  so-called  Thirty
Tyrants  and  Diocletian,  or  from  the  beginning  of
the  Christian  era  until  about  the  latter  end  of  the
third  century  ;  during  which  time  the  great  ma-
jority of  Roman  works  of  art  were  produced.  The
third  comprehends  the  state  of  the  arts  during  the
exarchate  ;  when  Rome,  in  consequence  of  the
foundation  of  Constantinople,  and  the  changes  it
involved,  suffered  similar  spoliations  to  those  which
it  had  previously  inflicted  upon  Greece.  This  was
the  period  of  the  total  decay  of  the  imitative  arts
amongst  the  ancients.

The  establishment  of  Christianity,  the  division
of  the  empire,  and  the  incursions  of  barbarians,
were  the  first  great  causes  of  the  important  revo-
lution experienced  by  the  imitative  arts,  and  the
serious  check  they  received  ;  but  it  was  reserved
for  the  fanatic  fury  of  the  iconoclasts  effectually  to
destroy  all  traces  of  their  former  splendour.

Of  the  first  of  these  three  periods  sufficient  has
been  already  said  ;  of  the  second  there  remain  still
a  few  observations  to  be  made.  About  the  be-
ginning of  the  second  period  is  the  earliest  age  in
which  we  have  any  notice  of  portrait  painters.
{imaginum  pictores),  as  a  distinct  class.  Pliny
mentions  particularly  Dionysius  and  Sopolis,  as  the
most  celebrated  at  about  the  time  of  Augustus,
or  perhaps  earlier,  who  filled  picture  galleries  with
their  works.  About  the  same  age  also  Lala  of
Cyzicus  was  very  celebrated  ;  she  painted,  however,
chiefly  female  portraits,  but  received  greater  prices
than  the  other  two.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.  37,  40.)

Portraits  must  have  been  exceedingly  numeroaa


PICTURA.

amongst  the  Romans  ;  Varro  made  a  collection  of
the  portraits  of  700  eminent  men.  (Plin.  H.  N.
XXXV.  2.)  The  portraits  or  statues  of  men  who
had  performed  any  public  service  were  placed  in
the  temples  and  other  public  places  ;  and  several
edicts  were  passed  by  the  emperors  of  Rome  re-
specting the  placing  of  them.  (Sueton.  Tiber.  26,
Calig.  34.)  The  portraits  of  authors  also  were
placed  in  the  public  libraries ;  they  were  appa-
rently fixed  above  the  cases  which  contained  their
writings,  below  which  chairs  were  placed  for  the
convenience  of  readers.  (Cic.  ud  Attic,  iv.  10  ;
Sueton.  Tiber.  70,  Cali(j.  34.)  They  were  painted
also  at  the  beginning  of  manuscripts.  (Martial,  xiv.
186.)  Respecting  the  imagines  or  wax  portraits,
which  were  preserved  in  "armaria  "  in  the  atria
of  private  houses  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.  2  ;  Senec.  de
Benef.'m.  28),  there  is  an  interesting  account  in
Polybius  (vi.  53).  With  the  exception  of  Aetion,
as  already  mentioned,  not  a  single  painter  of  this
period  rose  to  eminence :  although  some  were  of
course  more  distinguished  than  others  ;  as  the
profligate  Arellius  ;  Fabullus,  who  painted  Nero 'a
golden  house  ;  Dorotheas,  who  copied  for  Nero  the
Venus  Anadyomene  of  Apelles  ;  Cornelius  Pinus,
Accius  Priscus,  Marcus  Ludius,  Mallius,  and  others.
(Plin.  H.N.  xxxv.  37,  &.c.)  Portrait,  decorative,
and  scene  painting  seem  to  have  engrossed  the  art.
Pliny  and  Vitruvius  regret  in  strong  terms  the  de-
plorable state  of  painting  in  their  times,  which  was
but  the  commencement  of  the  decay  ;  Vitruvius
has  devoted  an  entire  chapter  (vii.  5)  to  a  lament-
ation over  its  fallen  state  ;  and  Pliny  speaks  of  it
as  a  dying  art.  {H.  N.  xxxv.  11.)  The  latter
writer  instances  {H.N.  xxxv.  33)  as  a  sign  of  the
madness  of  his  time  {nostrae  aetatis  insaniam)^  the
colossal  portrait  of  Nero,  120  feet  high,  which  was
painted  upon  canvas,  a  thing  unknown  till  that
time.

Marcus  Ludius,  in  the  time  of  Augustus,  became
very  celebrated  for  his  landscape  decorations,  which
were  illustrated  with  figures  actively  empioyed  in
occupations  suited  to  the  scenes  ;  the  artist's  name,
however,  is  doubtful.  (See  Diet,  of  Biocj.  s.  v.)
This  kind  of  painting  became  universal  after  his
time,  and  apparently  with  every  species  of  licence.
Vitruvius  contrasts  the  state  of  decorative  painting
in  his  own  age  with  what  it  was  formerly,  and  he
enumerates  the  various  kinds  of  wall  painting  in
use  amongst  the  tincients.  They  first  imitated  the
arrangement  and  varieties  of  slabs  of  marble,  then
the  variegated  frames  and  cornices  of  panels,  to
which  were  afterwards  added  architectural  decora-
tions ;  and  finally  in  the  exedrae  were  painted
tragic,  comic,  or  satyric  scenes,  and  in  the  long
galleries  and  corridors,  various  kinds  of  landscapes,
or  even  subjects  from  the  poets  and  the  higher
walks  of  history.  But  these  things  were  in  the
time  of  Vitruvius  tastelessly  laid  aside,  and  had
given  place  to  mere  gaudy  display,  or  the  most
phantastic  and  wild  conceptions,  such  as  many  of
the  paintings  which  have  been  discovered  in
Pompeii.

Painting  now  came  to  be  practised  by  slaves,
.ind  painters  as  a  body  were  held  in  little  or  no
esteem.  Respecting  the  depraved  application  of
the  arts  at  this  period  see  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.  33  ;
Petron.  Sat.  88  ;  Propert.  ii.  6  ;  Sueton.  Tib.  43  ;
Juven.  ix.  145,  xii.  28.

Mosaic,  or  pictura  de  musivo^  opus  musivum^  was
rery  general  in  Rome  in  the  time  of  the  early  em-


PIGNUS.  915

perors.  It  was  also  common  in  Greece  and  Asia
Minor  at  an  earlier  period,  but  at  the  time  of
which  we  are  now  treating  it  began  to  a  great
extent  even  to  supersede  painting.  It  was  used
chiefly  for  floors,  but  walls  and  also  ceilings  -were
sometimes  ornamented  in  the  same  way.  (Plin.
//.  N.  xxxvi.  60,  64  ;  Athen.  xii.  p.  "542,  d.  ;
Senec.  Ep.  86;  Lucan,  x.  116.)  There  were
various  kinds  of  mosaic  ;  the  lithostrota  were  dis-
tinct from  the  picturae  de  mudvo.  There  were
several  kinds  of  the  former,  as  the  sectile^  the  tes-
sellatuin^  and  the  vermiculatum.,  which  are  all
mechanical  and  ornamental  styles,  unapplicable  to
painting,  as  they  were  worked  in  regular  figures.
As  a  general  distinction  between  musivum  and
lithostrotum,  it  may  be  observed  that  the  picture
itself  was  de  musivo  or  opus  musivum,  and  its
frame,  which  was  often  very  large  and  beautiful,  was
lithostrotum.  The  former  was  made  of  various
coloured  small  cubes  (tesserae  or  tessellae),  of  dif-
ferent materials,  and  the  latter  of  small  thin  slabs,
crustae,  of  various  marbles,  &c.  ;  the  artists  were
termed  musirarii,  and  quadratarii  or  tessel/.arii  re-
spectively. Pliny  (H.  N.  xxxvi.  60)  attributes  the
origin  of  mosaic  pavements  to  the  Greeks.  He  men-
tions the  "  asarotus  oecus  "  at  Pergamum,  by  Sosus,
the  most  celebrated  of  the  Greek  musivarii,  the
pavement  of  which  represented  the  remnants  of  a
supper.  He  mentions  also  at  Pergamum  the  iamous
Cantharus  with  the  doves,  of  which  the  '  Doves  of
the  Capitol '  is  supposed  to  be  a  copy.  {Mus.  Cap.
iv.  69.)  Another  musivarius  of  antiquity  was
Dioscorides  of  Samos,  whose  name  is  found  upon  two
mosaics  of  Pompeii.  {Mus.  Barb.  iv.  34.)  Five
others  are  mentioned  by  Mliller.  {Archaol.  §  322,
4.)  There  are  still  many  great  mosaics  of  the
ancients  extant.  (See  the  works  of  Ciarapini,
Furietti,  and  Laborde.)  The  most  intereatiiig  and
most  valuable  is  the  one  lately  discovered  in  Pom-
peii, which  is  supposed  to  represent  the  battle  of
Issus.  This  mosaic  is  certainly  one  of  the  most
valuable  relics  of  ancient  art,  and  the  design  and
composition  of  the  work  are  so  superior  to  its  exe-
cution, that  the  original  has  evidently  been  the
production  of  an  age  long  anterior  to  the  degenerate
period  of  the  mosaic  itself.  The  composition  is
simple,  forcible,  and  beautiful,  and  the  design  ex-
hibits in  many  respects  merits  of  the  highest  order.
(See  Nicolini,  Qmdro  in  musaico  scoperto  in  Pom'
peii;  Mazois,  Fompci,  iv.  48  and  4.9  ;  and  Miiller,
Denkm'dler  der  alien  Kunst,  i.  55.)  [R.N. W.J

PIGNORATPCIA  ACTIO.     [Pignus.]
PI'GNORIS  CA'PIO.     [Per  Pignokis  Ca-

PIONE.H.]

PIGNUS,  a  pledge  or  security  for  a  debt  or  de-
mand, is  derived,  says  Gains  (Dig.  50.  tit.  16.  s.
238),  from  pugnus  "  quia  quae  pignori  dantur,
manu  traduntur."  This  is  one  of  several  instances
of  the  failure  of  the  Roman  Jurists  when  they  at-
tempted etymological  explanation  of  words.  [Mu-
TUUM.]  The  ehment  of  pignus  {pig)  is  contained
in  the  word  pa{n)g-o,  and  its  cognate  forms.

A  thing  is  said  to  be  pledged  to  a  man  when  it
is  made  a  security  to  him  for  some  debt  or  demand.
It  is  called,  says  Ulpian,  Pignus  when  the  posses-
sion of  the  thing  is  given  to  him  to  whom  it  is
made  a  security,  and  Hypotheca,  when  it  is  mad*
a  security  without  being  put  in  his  possession.
(Dig.  13.  tit.  7.  s.  9.  §  2;  Isidor.  Orig.  v.  25  ;
see  also  Cic.  ad  Fam.  xiii.  56.)  The  agreement
for  pledge  which  was  made  without  deliyery  of  the
3  N  2


pro-
The


S16  HGNUS.

thing  by  baro  agreement  (nuda  conventio)
perly  Hypotheca.  (Inst.  4.  tit.  6.  §  7.)
law  relating  to  Pignus  and  Hypotheca  was  in  all
essentials  the  same.  The  object  of  the  pledging  is
that  the  pledgee  shall  in  case  of  necessity  sell  the
pledge  and  pay  himself  his  demand  out  of  the  pro-
ceeds. The  original  nature  of  pledge  perhaps  was
simply  the  power  of  holding  a  debtor's  property  as
a  means  of  compelling  hira  to  pay  ;  and  a  power  of
sale  would  be  a  matter  of  agreement :  but  the
later  Roman  jurists  viewed  a  power  of  sale  as  a
part  of  the  contract  of  pledge.

A  pledge  may  be  given  (res  hypothecae  dari
potest)  for  any  obligation,  whether  money  borrowed
{mutua  pecunia),  dos,  in  a  case  of  buying  and  sell-
ing, letting  and  hiring,  or  mandatum  ;  whether
the  obligatio  is  conditional  or  unconditional  ;  for
part  of  a  sum  of  money,  as  well  as  for  the  whole.
(Dig.  20.  tit.  1.  s.  5.)  Any  thing  could  be  the  ob-
ject of  pledge  which  could  be  an  object  of  sale
(Dig.  20.  tit.  1.  s.  9  ;  Dig.  20.  tit.  3.  Quae  res
pignori  vel  hypothecae  datae  obligari  non  possunt),
and  it  might  be  a  thing  corporeal  or  incorporeal  ;
a  single  thing  or  a  imiversity  of  things.  If  a
single  thing  was  pledged,  the  thing  with  all  its  in-
crease was  the  security,  as  in  the  case  of  a  piece
of  land  which  was  increased  by  alluvio.  If  a  shop
{taberna)  was  pledged,  all  the  goods  in  it  were
pledged,  and  if  some  of  them  were  sold  and  others
brought  in,  and  the  pledger  died,  the  pledgee's
security  was  the  shop  and  all  that  it  contained  at
the  time  of  the  pledger's  death.  (Dig.  20.  tit.  1.
s.  34.)  If  ail  a  man's  property  was  pledged,  the
pledge  comprehended  also  his  future  property,  un-
less such  property  was  clearly  excepted.  A  man
might  also  pledge  any  claim  or  demand  that  he
had  against  another,  whether  it  was  a  debt  (nomen)
or  a  thing  (corpus).     (Dig.  13.  tit.  7.  s.  18.)

The  act  of  pledging  required  no  particular  form,
in  which  respect  it  resembled  contracts  made  by
consensus.  Nothing  more  was  requisite  to  establish
the  validity  of  a  pledge  than  proof  of  the  agree-
ment of  the  parties  to  it.  It  was  called  Contractus
pigneratitius,  when  it  was  a  case  of  Pignus  ;  and
Pactum  hypothecae,  when  it  was  a  case  of  Hypo-
theca :  in  the  former  case,  tradition  was  necessary.
A  man  might  also  by  his  testament  make  a  Pignus
(Dig.  13.  tit.  7.  s.  26)  ;  for  the  Romans  applied
the  notion  of  pignus  to  an  annual  payment  left  by
way  of  legacy,  and  charged  or  secured  on  land,
(Dig.  34.  tit.  1.  s.  12.)  The  intention  of  a  man  to
pledge  could  in  any  case  be  deduced  either  from
his  Avords  or  from  any  acts  which  admitted  of  no
other  interpretation  than  an  intention  to  pledge.

A  man  could  only  pledge  a  thing  when  he  was
the  owner  and  had  full  power  of  disposing  of  it  ;
but  a  part  owner  of  a  thing  could  pledge  his  share.
A  man  could  pledge  another  man's  property,  if  the
other  consented  to  the  pledge  at  the  time  or  after-
wards ;  but  in  either  case  this  must  properly  be
considered  the  pledge  of  the  owner  for  the  debt  of
another.  If  a  man  pledged  a  thing,  which  was  not
his,  and  afterwards  became  the  owner  of  it,  the
pledge  was  valid.  (Dig.  13.  tit.  7.  s.  20;  20.  tit.
2.  8.  5.)

The  amount  for  which  a  pledge  was  security  de-
pended on  the  agreement :  it  might  be  for  principal
and  interest,  or  for  either  ;  or  it  might  comprehend
principal  and  interest,  and  all  costs  and  expenses
which  the  pledgee  might  be  put  to  on  account  of  the
thing  pledged.     (Dig.  13.  tit.  17.  fc  8,  25.)     For


PIGNUS.

instance  a  creditor  would  be  entitled  to  his  neces-
sary expenses  concerning  a  slave  or  an  estate  which
had  been  pignerated.

Pignus  might  be  created  by  a  judicial  sentence,
as  for  instance  by  the  decree  of  the  praetor  giving  to
a  creditor  power  to  take  possession  of  his  debtor's
property  (missio  crcditoris  in  bona  debitoris),  either
a  single  thing,  or  all  his  property,  as  the  case  might
be.  But  the  permission  or  command  of  the  magis-
tratus  did  not  effect  a  pledge,  unless  the  person
actually  took  possession  of  the  thing.  The  follow-
ing are  instances  :  —  the  immissio  damni  infecti
causa  [Damnum  Infectum]  :  legatorum  servan-
dorum  causa,  which  had  for  its  object  the  securing
of  a  legacy  which  had  been  left  sub  conditione  or
die  (Dig.  36'.  tit.  4) :  missio  ventris  in  posses-
sionem, when  the  pregnant  widow  was  allowed  to
take  possession  of  the  inheritance  for  the  protec-
tion of  a  postumus :  and  the  missio  rei  servandae
causa.  The  right  which  a  person  obtained  by
such  Immissio  was  called  Pignus  Praetorium.  It
Avas  called  Pignoris  capio,  when  the  Praetor  al-
lowed the  goods  of  a  person  to  be  taken  who  was
in  contempt  of  the  court,  or  allowed  his  person  to
be  seized  after  a  judgment  given  against  him  (ex
cmisajudicati).

There  was  also  among  the  Romans  a  tacita
hypotheca,  which  existed  not  by  consent  of  the
parties,  but  by  rule  of  law  (ipso  Jure),  as  a  conse-
quence of  certain  acts  or  agreements,  which  were
not  acts  or  agreements  pertaining  to  pledging.
(Dig.  20.  tit.  2.  In  quibus  causis  pignus  vel  hypo-
theca tacite  contrahitur.)  These  Hypothecae  were
general  or  special.  The  following  are  instances  of
what  were  General  Hypothecae.  The  Fiscus  had  a
general  hypotheca  in  respect  of  its  claims  on  the
property  of  the  subject,  and  on  the  property  of  its
agents  or  officers :  the  husband,  on  the  property
of  him  who  promised  a  Dos :  and  legatees  and
fideicommissarii  in  respect  of  their  legacies  or  fidei-
commissa,  on  that  portion  of  the  hereditas  of  him
who  had  to  pay  the  legacies  or  fideicommissa.
There  were  other  cases  of  general  hypothecae.

The  following  are  instances  of  Special  hypo-
thecae :  —  The  lessor  of  a  Praedium  urbanum  had
an  hypotheca,  in  respect  of  his  claims  arising  out
of  the  contract  of  hiring,  on  every  thing  which  the
lessee  (inquilinus)  brought  upon  the  premises  for
constant  use  (invecta  et  illata).  The  lessor  of  a
Praedium  rusticum  had  an  hypotheca  on  the  fruits
of  the  farm  as  soon  as  thej'  were  collected  by  the  les-
see (colouus).  (Dig.  20.  tit.  2.  s.  7;  19.  tit.  2.  s.  24.)
A  person  who  lent  money  to  repair  a  ruinous
house,  had  an  hypotheca  on  the  house  and  the
ground  on  which  it  stood,  provided  the  money
were  laid  out  on  it ;  but  there  was  no  hj'^potheca,
if  the  money  was  lent  to  build  a  house  with  or  to
enlarge  it  or  ornament  it.  Pupilli  and  minorcs
had  an  hypotheca  on  things  which  were  bought  with
their  money.

The  person  who  had  given  a  pledge,  was  still
the  OAvner  of  the  thing  that  was  pledged.  He  could
therefore  use  the  thing,  and  enjoy  its  fniits,  if  he
had  not  given  up  the  possession.  But  the  agree-
ment might  be  that  the  creditor  should  have  the
use  or  profit  of  the  thing  instead  of  interest,  which
kind  of  contract  was  called  Antichresis  or  mutual
use  :  and  if  there  was  no  agreement  as  to  use,  the
creditor  could  not  use  the  thing,  even  if  it  Avas  in
his  possession.  The  pledger  could  also  sell  the
thing  pledged,  unless  there  were  some  agreement


PIGNUS.
to  the  contrary,  but  such  sale  did  not  affect  the
right  of  the  pledgee.  (Dig.  13.  tit.  7.  s.  18.  §.2.)
If  the  pledger  sold  a  movable  thing  that  was  pig-
iierated,  or  that  was  specially  hypothecated,  with-
out the  knowledge  and  consent  of  the  creditor,  he
was  guilty  of  furtum.  (Dig.  47.  tit.  2.  s.  19.  §  6,
and  s.  68.  pr.)  If  the  pledger  at  the  time  of  a
pignus  being  given  was  not  the  owner  of  the  thing,
but  had  the  possession  of  it,  he  could  still  acquire
the  property  of  the  thing  by  usucapion,  for  the
pledging  was  not  an  interruption  of  the  usucapio.

[POSSESSIO.]

The  creditor  could  keep  possession  of  a  pigner-
ated  thing  till  his  demand  was  fully  satisfied,  and
he  could  maintain  his  right  to  the  possession  against
any  other  person  who  obtained  possession  of  the
thing.  He  could  also  pledge  the  thing  that  was
pledged  to  him  ;  that  is,  he  could  transfer  the
pledge.  (Dig.  20.  tit.  1.  s.  13.  §  2.)  He  had  also
the  right,  in  case  his  demand  was  not  satisfied  at
the  time  agreed  on,  to  sell  the  thing  and  satisfy  his
demands  out  of  the  proceeds  (jus  distrahendi  sive
vrjidendi  pignus).  (Cod.  8.  tit.  27  (28).)  This
power  of  sale  might  be  qualified  by  the  terms  of
the  agreement  ;  but  a  creditor  could  not  be  de-
prived of  all  power  of  sale  ;  nor  could  he  be  com-
pelled to  exercise  his  power  of  sale.  Gains  (ii.  64)
illustrates  the  maxim  that  he  who  was  not  the
owner  of  a  thing,  could  in  some  cases  sell  it,  by
the  example  of  the  pledgee  selling  a  thing  pledged ;
but  he  properly  refers  the  act  of  sale  to  the  will
of  the  debtor,  as  expressed  in  the  agreement  of
pledging  ;  and  thus  in  legal  effect,  it  is  the  debtor
who  sells  by  means  of  his  agent,  the  creditor.  An
agreement  that  a  pledge  should  be  forfeited  in  case
the  demand  was  not  paid  at  the  time  agreed  on,
was  originally  very  common  ;  but  it  was  declared
by  Constantine,  A.  d.  326,  to  be  illegal.  [Commis-
SORIA  Lex.]  In  case  of  a  sale  the  creditor,  ac-
cording to  the  later  law,  must  give  the  debtor
notice  of  his  intention  to  sell,  and  after  such  notice
he  must  wait  two  years  before  he  could  legally
make  a  sale.  If  any  thing  remained  over  after
satisfying  the  creditor,  it  was  his  duty  to  give  it  to
the  debtor  ;  and  if  the  price  was  insufficient  to
satisfy  the  creditor's  demand,  his  debtor  was  still
his  debtor  for  the  remainder.  If  no  purchaser  at
a  reasonable  price  could  be  found,  the  creditor
might  become  the  purchaser,  but  still  the  debtor
had  a  right  to  redeem  the  thing  within  two  years
on  condition  of  fully  satisfying  the  creditor.  (Cod.
8.  tit.  34.  s.  3.)

If  there  were  several  creditors  to  whom  a  thing
was  pledged  which  was  insufficient  to  satisfy  them
all,  he  whose  pledge  was  prior  in  time  had  a  pre-
ference over  the  rest  (potior  est  in  piynore  gui  prius
credidit  pecuiiiam  et  accepit  hypothecam.  Dig.  20.
tit.  4.  8.  II).  There  were  some  exceptions  to  this
rule ;  for  instance,  when  a  subsequent  pledgee  had
lent  his  money  to  save  the  pledged  thing  from  de-
struction, he  had  a  preference  over  a  prior  pledgee.
(Dig.  20.  tit.  4.  s.  5,  6.)  This  rule  has  been
adopted  in  the  English  Law  as  to  money  lent  on
ships  ai.d  secured  by  bottomrj'-  bonds.

Certain  hypothecae,  both  tacitae  and  founded  on
contract,  had  a  preference  or  priority  (pricilcgium)
\  over  all  other  claims.  The  Fiscus  had  a  preference
j  in  respect  of  its  claims  ;  the  wife  in  respect  of
her  dos  ;  the  lender  of  money  for  the  repair  or
restoration  of  a  building  ;  a  pupillns  with  whose
money  a  thing  had  been  bought.     Of  those  bypo-


PIGNUS.  917

thecae  which  were  founded  on  contract,  the  fol-
lowing were  privileged :  the  hypothecae  of  those
who  had  lent  money  for  the  purchase  of  an  im-
movable thing,  or  of  a  shop,  or  for  the  building,
mainttiining,  or  improving  of  a  house,  &c.,  and  had
contracted  for  an  hypotheca  on  the  thing  ;  there
was  also  the  hypotheca  which  the  seller  of  an
immovable  thing  reserved  by  contract  until  he  was
paid  the  purchase-money.  Of  these  claimants,  the
Fiscus  came  first ;  then  the  wife  in  respect  of  her
dos ;  and  then  the  other  privileged  creditors,  ac-
cording to  their  priority  in  point  of  time.

In  the  case  of  unprivileged  creditors,  the  ge-
neral rule  as  already  observed  was,  that  priority  ia
time  gave  priority  of  right.  But  an  hypotheca
which  could  be  proved  by  a  writing  executed  in  a
certain  public  form  (ifistr amentum  puhlica  con-
fectum),  or  which  Avas  proved  by  the  signatures
of  three  reputable  persons  (instrumentum  quasi
publice  confectum),  had  a  priority  over  all  those
which  could  not  be  so  proved.  If  several  hypo-
thecae of  the  same  kind  were  of  the  same  date,  he
who  was  in  possession  of  the  thing  had  a  priority.

The  creditor  who  had  for  any  reason  the  priority
over  the  rest,  was  intitled  to  be  satisfied  to  the
full  amount  of  his  claim  out  of  the  proceeds  of  the
thing  pledged.  A  subsequent  creditor  could  ob-
tain the  rights  of  a  prior  creditor  in  several  ways.
If  he  furnished  the  debtor  with  money  to  pay  off
the  debt,  on  the  condition  of  standing  in  his  place,
and  the  money  was  actually  paid  to  the  prior
creditor,  the  subsequent  creditor  stepped  into  the
place  of  the  prior  creditor.  (Dig.  20.  tit.  3.  s.  3.)
Also,  if  he  purchased  the  thing  on  the  condition
that  the  purchase-money  should  go  to  satisfy  a
prior  creditor,  he  thereby  stepped  into  his  place.
A  subsequent  creditor  could  also,  without  the  con-
sent either  of  a  prior  creditor  or  of  the  debtor,  pay
off  a  prior  creditor,  and  stand  in  his  place  to  the
amount  of  the  sum  so  paid.  This  arrangement,
however,  did  not  affect  the  rights  of  an  inter-
mediate pledgee.    (Dig.  20.  tit.  4.  s.  1 6.)

The  creditor  had  an  actio  hypothecaria  or  pig-.
noraticia  in  respect  of  the  pledge  against  every
person  who  was  in  possession  of  it  and  had  not  a
better  right  than  himself.  This  right  of  actioji
existed  indifferently  in  the  case  of  Pigaus  and
Hypotheca.  The  hypothecaria  actio  was  designed
to  give  effect  to  the  right  of  the  pledgee,  and  con-
sequently for  the  delivery  of  the  hypothecated
thing  or  the  payment  of  the  debt.  A  creditor  wh»
had  a  Pignus,  had  also  a  right  to  the  Interdictum
retinendae  et  recuperandae  possessionia,  if  he  waa
disturbed  in  his  possession.

The  pledgee  was  bound  to  restore  a  pignus  on
payment  of  the  debt  for  which  it  had  been  given  ;
and  up  to  that  time  he  was.  bound  to  take  proper
care  of  it.  On  payment  of  the  debt,  he  might  be
sued  in  an  actio  pignoraticia  by  the  pledger,  foe
the  restoration  of  the  thing,  and  for  any  daanage
that  it  had  sustained  through  bis  negleet.  The
remedy  of  the  pledgee  against  tliie  pledger  for  hia
proper  costs  and  charges  in  respect  of  the  pledge,
and  for  any  dolus  or  culpa  on  the  par*  of  the
pledger  relating  thereto,  was  by  an  actio  pigno-
raticia contraria.

The  pledge  was  extinguished  if  the  thing;
perished,  foF  the  loss  was  the  owner's;  it  was  also,
extinguished  if  the  thing  was.  changed  so  as  nck
longer  to-  be  the  same,  as  if  a  man  should  have  all
the  timber  in  a  merchant's  yard  as  a  security,  and
3n  3


918  PILA.

the  timber  should  be  used  in  building  a  ship  (Dig.
13.  tit.  7.  s.  18.  §3);  if  there  was  confusio,  as
when  the  pledgee  became  the  o^vne^  of  the  thing
that  was  pledged.  It  was  also  extinguished  by
the  payment  of  the  debt ;  and  in  some  other  ways.

The  law  of  pledge  at  Rome  was  principally
founded  on  the  Edict.  Originally  the  only  mode
of  giving  security  was  by  a  transfer  of  the  Quiri-
tarian  ownership  of  the  thing  by  Mancipatio  or  In
jure  cessio,  if  it  was  a  Res  Mancipi,  on  the  condi-
tioii  of  its  being  re-conveyed,  when  the  debt  was
paid  {sub  lege  remancipationis  ov  svh  fiduda).  [Fl-
DUCIA.J  Afterwards  a  thing  was  given  to  the
creditor  with  the  condition  that  he  might  sell  it  in
case  his  demand  was  not  satisfied :  there  was  no
transfer  of  the  ownership.  But  so  long  as  the
creditor  could  not  protect  his  possession  by  legal
means,  this  was  a  very  insufficient  security.  Ulti-
mately the  Praetor  gave  a  creditor  a  right  of  action
{actio  in  rem)  under  the  name  Serviana  actio  for
the  recovery  of  the  property  of  a  colonus  Avhich
was  his  security  for  his  rent  {pro  mercedUms fundi);
and  this  right  of  action  was  extended  under  the
name  of  quasi  Serviana  or  hypothecaria  generally
to  creditors  who  had  things  pignerated  or  hypothe-
cated to  them.  (Inst.  4.  tit.  6.  s.  7.)  As  to  the
Interdictum  Salvianum,  see  Interdictum.

The  progress  of  pledge  in  the  Roman  system
was  from  the  clumsy  contrivance  of  a  conveyance
and  reconveyance  of  the  ownership,  to  the  delivery
(traditio)  of  a  thing  without  a  conveyance  and
upon  an  agreement  that  it  should  be  a  security
(pignus),  and  finally  to  the  simple  Pactum  hy-
polhecae,  in  which  case  there  was  no  delivery,  and
all  that  the  creditor  got,  was  a  right  to  have  some
particular  thing  of  the  debtor  subject  to  be  sold  to
pay  his  debt.  The  hypotheca  was  the  last  stage
in  the  development  of  the  Roman  law  of  Pledge.
It  gave  facilities  for  pledging  beyond  what  existed
when  the  Pignus  was  only  in  use,  because  things
could  be  hypothecated  without  a  transfer  of  owner-
ship or  a  giving  of  possession,  such  as  mere  rights
of  action,  debts,  and  the  like.  In  fact.  Pawn  or
Pledge  under  the  form  of  Hypotheca  was  perfected
by  the  Romans,  and  there  is  nothing  to  add  to  it.

The  Roman  Law  of  Pledge  has  many  points  of
resemblance  to  the  English  Law,  but  more  is  com-
prehended under  the  Roman  Law  of  Pledge  than
the  English  Law  of  Pledge,  including  in  that  term
Mortgage.  Many  of  the  things  comprehended  in
the  Roman  Law  of  Pledge  belong  to  the  English
Law  of  Lien  and  to  other  div^ions  of  English
Law  which  are  not  included  under  Pledge  or
Mortgage.

(Dig.  20.  tit.  1,  2,  3,  &c. ;  Cod.  8.  tit.  U— 35;
Gaius,  ii.  59—61  ;  Dig.  13.  tit.  7,  and  Cod.  4.
tit.  24.  De  Pignoraticia  Actione  vel  contra;  Puchta,
Ind.  i.  §  246,  &c.  ;  there  is  an  English  treatise
intitled  "  The  Law  of  Pledges  or  Pawns  as  it  was
in  use  among  the  Romans,  &c.,  by  John  AyiifFe,
London,  1732,"  which  appears  to  contain  all  that
can  be  said,  but  tlie  author's  method  of  treating
the  subject  is  not  perspicuous.)  [G.  L.]

PILA  {<r(pa7pa),  a  ball.  The  game  at  ball
((T<paipi(rriKii)  was  one  of  the  most  favourite
gymnastic  exercises  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans
from  the  earliest  times  to  the  fall  of  the  Roman
empire.  As  the  ancients  were  fond  of  attributing
the  invention  of  all  games  to  particular  persons  or
occasions,  we  find  the  same  to  be  the  case  with  re-
spect to  the  origin  of  this  game  (Herod.  I.  94  ;


PILA.

Athcn.  i.  p.  14,  d.  e.  ;  Plin.  vii.  56),  but  such
statements  do  not  deserve  attention.  What  is
more  to  the  purpose  in  reference  to  its  antiquity  is,
that  we  find  it  mentioned  in  the  Odyssee  (vi.  100,
&c.  viii.  370,  &c.),  where  it  is  played  by  the
Phaeacian  damsels  to  the  sound  of  music,  and  also
by  two  celebrated  performers  at  the  court  of  Alci-
nous  in  a  most  artistic  manner  accompanied  with
dancing.

The  various  movements  of  the  body  required  in
the  game  of  ball  gave  elasticity  and  grace  to  the
figure  ;  Avhence  it  was  highly  esteemed  by  the
Greeks.  The  Athenians  set  so  high  a  value  on  it,
that  they  conferred  upon  Aristonicus  of  Carystus
the  right  of  citizenship,  and  erected  a  statue  to
his  honour,  on  account  of  his  skill  in  this  game.
(Athen.  i.  p.  19,  a.  ;  compare  Suidas,  s.  v.  ''Opxv<^-)
It  was  equally  esteemed  by  the  other  states  of
Greece  ;  the  young  Spartans,  when  they  were
leaving  the  condition  of  ephebi,  were  called  (rcpai-
pe7s  (Pans.  iii.  14.  §  6  ;  Bockh,  Corp.  Inscr.  n.
1386,  1432),  probably  because  their  chief  exercise
was  the  game  at  ball.  Every  complete  Gymnasium
had  a  room  {acpaipia-T^piov,  (xcpaipicrTpa)  devoted  to
this  exercise  [Gymnasium],  where  a  special
teacher  {acpaipio'TiK^s)  gave  instruction  in  the  art  ;
for  it  required  no  small  skill  and  practice  to  play
it  well  and  gracefully.

The  game  at  ball  was  as  great  a  favourite  with
the  Romans  as  the  Greeks,  and  was  played  at
Rome  by  persons  of  all  ages.  Augustus  used  to
play  at  ball.  (Suet.  Aug.  83.)  Pliny  {Ep.  iii.  1)
relates  how  much  his  aged  friend  Spurinna  exer-
cised himself  in  this  game  for  the  purpose  of  ward-
ing oflF  old  age  ;  and  under  the  empire  it  was
generally  played  before  taking  the  bath,  in  a  room
{sphaeristerium)  attached  to  the  baths  for  the  pur-
pose ;  in  which  we  read  of  the  pilicrepus  or  player
at  tennis.     (Sen.  Ep.  51  ;  Orelli,  hiscr.  n.  2591.)

The  game  at  ball  was  played  at  in  various  ways  ;
the  later  Greek  writers  mention  five  diflferent
modes,  oupavia,  iiriarKvpos,  cpaivivSa,  apTraarSu^
a7rJppa|is,  and  there  were  probably  many  other
varieties.  I.  Oi/pavia  was  a  game,  in  which  the
ball  was  thrown  up  into  the  air,  and  each  of  the
persons  who  played  strove  to  catch  it,  before  it  fell
to  the  ground.  (Pollux,  ix.  106  ;  Hesych.  and
Phot.  S.V.;  Eustath.  ad  Od.  viii.  372.  p.  1601.)
2.  'ETTicr/cupos,  also  called  i(j)r}§iK-f]  and  iiriKoivos,
was  the  game  at  foot-ball,  played  in  much  the
same  way  as  with  us,  by  a  great  number  of  per-
sons divided  into  two  parties  opposed  to  one  an-
other. (Pollux,  ix.  104.)  This  was  a  favourite
game  at  Sparta,  where  it  was  played  with  great
emulation.  (Siebelis,  ad  Pans.  iii.  14.  §  6.)  3.
^aLuipSa,  called  ecperivSa  by  Hesychius  {s. «.),  was
played  by  a  number  of  persons,  who  threw  the
ball  from  one  to  another,  but  its  peculiarity  con-
sisted in  the  person  who  had  the  ball  pretending
to  throw  it  to  a  certain  individual,  and  while  the
latter  was  expecting  it,  suddenly  turning,  and
throwing  it  to  another.  Various  etymologies  of
this  word  are  given  by  the  grammarians.  (Pollux,
ix.  105  ;  Etym.  Mag.  s.  v.  ^evvis  ;  Athen.  i.  p.
15,  a.)  4.  ApiraaTdu,  which  was  also  played  at
by  the  Romans,  is  spoken  of  under  Harpastum.
5.  'Airdp^a^is,  was  a  game  in  which  the  player
threw  the  ball  to  the  ground  with  such  force  as  to
cause  it  to  rebound,  when  he  struck  it  down  again
with  the  palm  of  his  hand  and  so  went  on  doing
many  times :  the  number  of  times  was  counted.


PILENTUM.

(Pollux,  ix.  105.)  We  learn  from  Plato  {Theact.
p.  146)  that  in  one  game  of  ball,  played  at  by
boys,  though  we  do  not  know  what  kind  it  was,
the  boy  who  was  conquered  was  called  ass  {ivos)  ;
and    the   one    who   conquered   was   named   king

Among  the  Romans  the  game  at  ball  was  also
played  at  in  various  ways.  Pila  was  used  in  a  gene-
ral sense  for  any  kind  of  ball :  but  the  balls  among
the  Romans  seem  to  have  been  of  three  kinds  ;
the  pila  in  its  narrower  sense,  a  small  ball ;  the
follis,  a  great  ball  filled  with  air  [Follis]  ;  and
the  paganica,  of  which  we  know  scarcely  anything,
as  it  is  only  mentioned  in  two  passages  by  Martial
(vii.  32.  7,  xiv.  43),  but  from  the  latter  of  which
we  may  conclude  that  it  was  smaller  than  the
follis  and  larger  than  the  pila.  Most  of  the  games
at  ball  among  the  Romans  seem  to  have  been
played  at  with  the  pila  or  small  ball.  One  of  the
simplest  modes  of  playing  the  ball,  where  two  per-
sons standing  opposite  to  one  another  threw  the
ball  from  one  to  the  other,  was  called  datatim
Itidere.  (Phiut.  Cure.  ii.  3.  17.)  But  the  most
favourite  game  at  ball  seems  to  have  been  the
ti'igon  or  pila  trigonalis^  which  was  played  at  by
three  persons,  who  stood  in  the  form  of  a  triangle,
eV  rpiyavcf.  We  have  no  particulars  respecting
it,  but  we  are  told  that  skilful  players  prided
themselves  upon  catching  and  throwing  the  ball
with  their  left  hand.     (Mart,  xiv.  46,  vii.  72.  9).

The  ancient  physicians  prescribed  the  game  at
ball,  as  well  as  other  kinds  of  exercise,  to  their
patients  ;  Antyllus  {ap.  Oribas.  vi.  32)  gives  some
interesting  information  on  this  subject.

The  persons  playing  with  the  pila  or  small  ball
in  the  annexed  woodcut  are  taken  from  a  painting
in  the  baths  of  Titus  (Descr.  des  Bains  de  Tit?is,
pi.  17)  ;  but  it  is  difficult  to  say  what  particular
kind  of  game  they  are  playing  at.  Three  of  the
players  have  two  balls  each.


(BUrette,  De  la  Spheristiqtie,  p.  214,  &c.,  in
Mem.  de  VAcad.  des  Inscr.  vol.  i.  ;  Krause,  Gym-
nastik  u.  Agon.  d.  Hell.  p.  299,  &c.  ;  Becker,
Gallus,  vol.  i.  p.  268,  &c.)

PILA.       [MORTARIUM.]

PILA'NI.  [ExERciTus,  p.  501,  b.]
PILENTUM,  a  splendid  four-wheeled  carriage,
furnished  with  soft  cushions,  which  conveyed  the
Roman  matrons  in  sacred  processions,  and  in  going
to  the  Circensian  and  other  games.  (Virg.  Aen.  viii.
666  ;  Hor.  Epist.  ii.  1.  192  ;  Claudian,  Z>e  Nupt.
Honor.  285  ;  Isid.  Orig.  xx.  12.)  This  distinction
was  granted  to  them  by  the  Senate  on  account  ot
their  generosity  in  giving  their  gold  and  jewels  on
a  particular  occasion  for  the  service  of  the  state.


PILEUS.  919

(Li v.  V.  25.)  The  Vestal  virgins  were  conveyed
in  the  same  manner.  (Prudentius  contra  Sym.  ii,
sub  fin.)  The  pilentum  was  probably  very  like
the  Harmamaxa  and  Carpentum,  but  open  at
the  sides,  so  that  those  who  sat  in  it  might  both
see  and  be  seen.  [J.  Y,]

PPLEUS  or  PFLEUM  (Non.  Marc.  iii.  ',pilea
virorum  sunt.,  Serv.  in  Virg.  Aen.  ix.  616).  dim.
PILE'OLUS  or  PILE'OLUM  (Colum.  de  Arbor.
25)  ;  (ttIKos^  dim.  irihiov,  second  dim.  iriAiSLov ;
iriXr}fxa,  iriXouTSv),  any  piece  of  felt ;  more  espe-
cially, a  skull-cap  of  felt,  a  hat.

There  seems  no  reason  to  doubt  that  felting  (r]
-rriATiTiK-f],  Plat.  Polit.  ii.  2.  p.  296,  ed.  Bekker)  is
a  more  ancient  invention  than  weaving  [Tela],  nor
that  both  of  these  arts  came  into  Europe  from  Asia.

From  the  Greeks,  who  were  acquainted  with
this  article  as  early  as  the  age  of  Homer  (II.  x.
265)  and  Hesiod  (Op.  et  Dies.,  542,  546),  the  use
of  felt  passed  together  with  its  name  to  the  Ro-
mans. Among  them  the  employment  of  it  was
always  far  less  extended  than  among  the  Greeks.
Nevertheless  Pliny  in  one  sentence,  "  Lanae  et
per  se  coactae  vestem  faciunt,"  gives  a  very  exact
account  of  the  process  of  felting.  (H.  N.  viii.  48.
s.  73.)  A  Latin  sepulchral  inscription  (Gruter,
p.  648.  n.  4)  mentions  "  a  manufacturer  of  woollen
felt "  (lanarius  coactilarius),  at  the  same  time  in-
dicating that  he  was  not  a  native  of  Italy  (Lari-
seus).

The  principal  use  of  felt  among  the  Greeks  and
Romans  was  to  make  coverings  of  the  head  for  the
male  sex,  and  the  most  common  kind  was  a  simple
skull-cap.  It  was  often  more  elevated,  though  still
round  at  the  top.  In  this  shape  it  appears  on
coins,  especially  on  those  of  Sparta,  or  such  as  ex-
hibit the  symbols  of  the  Dioscuri ;  and  it  is  thus
represented,  with  that  addition  on  its  summit,
which  distinguished  the  Roman  flamines  and  salii,
in  three  figures  of  the  woodcut  to  the  article  Apex.
But  the  apex,  according  to  Dionysius  of  Halicar-
nassus,  was  sometimes  conical  ;  and  conical  or
pointed  caps  were  certainly  very  common.

In  the  Greek  and  Roman  mythology  diiferent
kinds  of  caps  were  symbolically  assigned  to  indi-
cate the  occupations  of  the  wearers.  The  painter
Nicomachus  first  represented  Ulysses  in  a  cap,  no
doubt  to  indicate  his  sea-faring  life.  (Plin.  H.  N.
xxxvi.  §  22.)  The  woodcut  on  the  following  page
shows  him  clothed  in  the  Exomis,  and  in  the  act  of
offering  wine  to  the  Cyclops.  (Winckelmann,iWow,
Ined.n.  154  ;  Homer,  Od.  ix.  345 — 347.)  He  here
wears  the  round  cap  ;  but  more  commonly  both  he
and  the  boatman  Charon  (see  woodcut,  p.  512)
have  it  pointed.  Vulcan  (see  woodcut,  p.  726)
and  Daedalus  wear  the  caps  of  common  artificers.

A  cap  of  very  frequent  occurrence  in  the  works
of  ancient  art  is  that  now  generally  known  by  the
name  of  "  the  Phrygian  bonnet."  The  Mysian
pileus,  mentioned  by  Aristophanes  (Acham.  429),
must  have  been  one  of  this  kind.  For  we  find  it
continually  introduced  as  the  characteristic  symbol
of  Asiatic  life  in  paintings  and  sculptures  of  Priam
(see  woodcut,  p.  882)  and  Mithras  (woodcut  on
title-page),  and  in  short  in  all  the  representations,
not  only  of  Trojans  and  Phrygians,  but  of  Amazons
(woodcut,  p.  894),  and  of  all  the  inhabitants  of
Asia  Minor,  and  even  of  nations  dwelling  still
further  east.  The  representations  of  this  Phrygian,
or  Mysian,  cap  in  sculptured  marble  show  that  it
was  made  of  a  strong  and  stiff  material  and  of  ^
3  N  4


P20


PILE  US.


conical  form,  though  bent  forwards  and  down-
wards. By  some  Asiatic  nations  it  Avas  worn
erect,  as  by  the  Sacae,  whose  stiff  peaked  caps
Herodotus  describes  under  the  name  of  KvpSaalai.
The  form  of  those  worn  by  the  Armenians  (iriXo-
(p6poi  'Apfievioi,  Brunck,  Anal.  ii.  146)  is  shown
on  various  coins,  which  were  struck  in  the  reign
of  Venis  on  occasion  of  the  successes  of  the  Roman
army  in  Armenia,  a.  d.  161.  It  is  sometimes
erect,  but  sometimes  bent  downwards  or  truncated.
The  truncated  conical  hat  is  most  distinctly  seen
on  two  of  the  Sarmatians  in  the  group  at  page  213.

Among  the  Romans  the  cap  of  felt  was  the
emblem  of  liberty.  When  a  slave  obtained  his
freedom  he  had  his  head  shaved,  and  Avore  instead
of  his  hair  an  undyed  pileus  (TrfAeoi/  X^vkov,  Diod.
Sic.  Exc.  Leg.  22.  p.  625,  ed.  Wess.  ;  Plant.
Amphit.  i.  1.  306  ;  Persius,  v.  82).  Hence  the
phrase  sei'vos  ad  pileum  vocare  is  a  smnmons  to
liberty,  by  which  slaves  were  frequently  called
upon  to  take  up  arms  with  a  promise  of  liberty.
(Liv.  xxiv.  32.)  The  figure  of  Liberty  on  some
of  the  coins  of  Antoninus  Pius,  struck  A.  D.  1 45,
holds  this  cap  in  the  right  hand.

In  contradistinction  to  the  various  forms  of  the
felt  cap  now  described,  we  have  to  consider  others
more  nearly  corresponding  with  the  hats  worn  by
Europeans  in  modem  times.  The  Greek  word
x6To<ros,  dim.  ir€Td<riou^  derived  from  iriravvvjxi^
**  to  expand,"  and  adopted  by  the  Latins  in  the
form  pelasus,  dim.  petasunculus,  well  expressed  the
distinctive  shape  of  these  hats.  What  was  taken
from  their  height  was  added  to  their  width.  Those
already  described  had  no  brim :  the  petasus  of
every  variety  had  a  brim,  which  was  either  exactly
or  nrarly  circular,  and  which  varied  greatly  in  its
width.  In  some  cases  it  is  a  circular  disk  without
any  crown  at  all,  and  often  there  is  only  a  depres-
sion or  slight  concavity  in  this  disk  fitted  to  the
top  of  the  head.  Of  this  a  beautiful  example  is
presented  in  a  recumbent  statue  of  Endyniion,
habited  as  a  hunter,  and  sleeping  on  his  scarf:
this  statue  belongs  to  the  Townley  Collection  in


PILEUS.
the  British  Museum,  and  shows  tlie  mode  of  wear-
ing the  petasus  tied  under  the  chin.  In  other  in-
stances, it  is  tied  behind  the  neck  instead  of  being
tied  before  it.  (See  the  next  woodcut.)  Very
frequently  we  observe  a  boss  on  the  top  of  the  pe-
tasus, in  the  situation  in  which  it  appears  in  the
Avoodcuts,  pages  259,  379.  In  these  woodcuts
and  in  that  here  introduced  the  brim  of  the  petasus
is  surmounted  by  a  crown.  Frequently  the  crown
is  in  the  form  of  a  skull-cap  ;  we  also  find  it  sur-
rounded with  a  very  narrow  brim.  The  Greek
petasus  in  its  most  common  form  agreed  with  the
cheapest  hats  of  undyed  felt,  now  made  in  Eng-
land. On  the  heads  of  rustics  and  artificers  in
our  streets  and  lanes  we  often  see  forms  the  exact
counterpart  of  those  which  we  most  admire  in  the
works  of  ancient  art.  The  petasus  is  also  still
commonly  Avorn  by  agricultural  labourers  in  Greece
and  Asia  Minor.  In  ancient  times  it  Avas  pre-
ferred to  the  skull-cap  as  a  protection  from  the  sun
(Sueton.  Aug.  82),  and  on  this  account  Caligula
pennitted  the  Roman  senators  to  wear  it  at  the
theatres.  (Dion  Cass.  lix.  7.)  It  was  used  by
shepherds  (Callim.  Frag.  125),  hunters,  and  tra-
vellers. (Plant,  Amphitr.  Prol.  143,  i.  1.  287,
Pseud,  ii.  4.  45,  iv.  7.  90  ;  Brunck,  Anal.  ii.  1  70.)
The  annexed  woodcut  is  from  a  fictile  A'ase  belong-
ing to  Mr.  Hope  {Costume.,  i.  71),  and  it  repre-
sents a  Greek  soldier  in  his  hat  and  pallium.     The


ordinary  dress  of  the  Athenian  ephebi,  well  exhi-
bited in  the  Panathenaic  Frieze  of  the  Parthenon,
now  preserved  in  the  British  Museum,  was  the  hat
and  scarf.  [Chlamys.]  (Brunck,  Anal.  i.  5,
ii.  41  ;  Philemon,  p.  367,  ed.  Meineke  ;  Pollux,
X.  164.)  Among  imaginary  beings  the,  same  cos-
tume was  commonly  attributed  to  Mercury  (Arnob.
adv.  Gent.  vi.  ;  Martianus  Capella,  ii.  1 76  ;  Ephip-
pus  ap.  Athen.  xii.  p,  537.  f),  and  sometimes  to
the  Dioscuri.

Ancient  authors  mention  three  varieties  of  the
petasus,  the  Thessalian  (Dion  Cass.  /.  c. ;  Callim.
Frag.  124  ;  Schol.  in  Soph.  Oed.  Col.  316),  the
Arcadian  (Brunck,  AnaLu.  384  ;  Diog.  Laert.  vi.
102),  and  the  Laconian  (Arrian.  Tact.  p.  12,  ed.
Blancardi)  ;  but  they  do  not  say  in  Avhat  the  dif-


PISTOR.

ference  consisted  In  liKe  manner  it  is  by  no
means  clear  in  what  respects  the  Causia  differed
from  the  petasus,  although  they  are  distinctly  op-
posed to  one  another  by  a  writer  in  Athenaeus
(xii.  p,  537,  e).  Moreover  in  the  later  Greek  au-
thors we  find  TTiAos  used  to  denote  a  bat  of  other
materials  besides  felt.    (Athcn.  vi.  p.  274.)

On  the  use  of  felt  in  covering  the  feet  see  Udo.

Felt  was  likewise  used  for  the  lining  of  helmets.
[Galka.]  For  further  illustrations  of  this  subject,
see  Yates's  Tcxtnnmn  Antiqnorum^  P.I.  Appen-
dix  D.  [J.  Y.j

PILI'CREPUS.     [Pila.]

PILUM.     [Hasta.]

PINACOTHE'CA  (7rtVa|,  ^t]ki]\  a  picture-
gallery.  Marcellus,  after  the  capture  of  Syracuse,
first  displayed  the  works  of  Greek  painters  and
sculptors  to  his  countrymen,  whose  taste  for  the  fine
arts  was  gradually  matured  by  the  conquests  of  L.
Scipio,  Flamininus,  and  L.  PauUus,  and  grew  into
a  passion  after  the  spoils  of  Achaia  had  been  trans-
ported by  Mummius  to  Rome.  Objects  of  this
description  were  at  first  employed  exclusively  for
the  decoration  of  temples  and  places  of  public  resort,
but  private  collections  were  soon  formed  ;  and  to-
wards the  close  of  the  republic  we  find  that  in  the
houses  of  the  more  opulent  a  room  was  devoted  to
the  reception  of  paintings  and  statues.  (Varro,
R.  R.  i.  2.  h%  ;  Cic.  in  Verr.  i.  21.)  In  the
time  of  Augustus,  Vitruvius  includes  the  pinaco-
theca  among  the  ordinary  apartments  of  a  complete
mansion,  and  gives  directions  that  it  should  be  of
ample  size  and  facing  the  north,  in  order  that  the
light  might  be  equable  and  not  too  strong.  ( Vitruv.
i.  2,  vi.  5.  7  ;  compare  Plin.  //.  A^.  xxxv.  2.  7.
1 1  ;  Mazois,  Le  Palais  de  Scaurus,  cap.  ix.  ;
Becker,  Gal/us,  vol.  i.  p.  92.)  [W.  R.]

PISCATO'RII  LUDI.    [Ludi  Piscatorii.]

PISCI'NA,  properly  a  fish-pond,  either  of  salt-
water or  of  fresh  (see  the  passages  in  Forcellini
and  Freund)  denotes  also  any  kind  of  reservoir,
especially  those  connected  with  the  aqueducts  and
the  baths^  (Aquaeductus,  p.  114,  a  ;  Balneae,
pp.189,  b.,  19.   a.)  [P.  S.]

PISTILLUM.       [MORTARIUM.]

PISTOR  (apToiroios),  a  baker,  from  pinsere  to
pound,  since   corn    was   pounded  in   mortars  be-
fore the  invention  of  mills.     [Mola.]     At  Rome
bread  was  originally  made  at  home  by  the  women
of  the  house  ;  and  there  were  no  persons  at  Rome
who  made  baking  a  trade,  or  any  slaves  specially
kept  for  this  purpose  in  private  houses,  till  B.  c.
173.     (Plin. /f.A^.  xviii.  11.  s.  28.)     In  Varro 's
;    time,  however,  good  bakers  were    highly  prized,
;    and  great  sums  were  paid  for  slaves  who  excelled
j    in  this  art.     (Gell.  xv.  19.)     The  name  was  not
I    confined  to  those  who  made  bread  only,  but  was
I    also  given   to   pastry-cooks  and  confectioners,    in
I    Avhich   case   however    they   were   usually   called
!    pistores  dulciarii  or  candidarii.     (Mart.  xiv.  222  ;
I    Orelli,  Inscr.  n,  4263.)     The  bakers  at  Rome,  like
most  other  tradespeople,  fonned  a  collegium.  (Dig.
3.  tit.  4.  s.  1  ;  27.  tit,  1.  s.  46.)

Bread  was  often  baked  in  moulds  called  artoptae,
and  the  loaves  thus  baked  were  tenned  artopticii.
(Plin.  //.  N.  xviii.  11.  s.  27,  28  ;  Plant.  Aui'uL  ii.
9.  4.)  In  one  of  the  bakehouses  discovered  at
j  Pompeii,  several  loaves  have  been  found  apparently
baked  in  moulds,  which  may  therefore  be  regarded
as  artopticii;  they  are  represented  below.  They
are  flat  and  about  eight  inches  in  diameter.


PLAGIUM.


^^lll.^


Bread  was  not  generally  made  at  home  at
Athens,  but  was  sold  in  the  market-place  chiefly
by  women,  called  apTOTruXiSes.  (Compare  Aristoph.
Vesp.  1389,  &.C.)  These  women  seem  to  have
been  what  the  fish-women  of  London  are  at  pre-
sent ;  they  excelled  in  abuse,  whence  Aristophanes
(Ran.  856)  says,  \oiSope7adai  lixnrep  aproiruMSas.
(Becker,  Chariklcs,  vol.  i.  p.  284.)

PISTRFNUM.     [Mola  ;  Mortarium.]

PLAGA.     [Rete.]

PLxlGIA'RIUS.     [Plagium.]

PLA'GIUM.  This  offence  was  the  subject  of
a  Fabia  Lex,  which  is  mentioned  by  Cicero  (Pro
Rabirio,  c.  3),  and  is  assigned  to  the  consulship  of
Quintus  Fabius  and  M.  Claudius  Marcellus,  B.  c.
183  ;  but  without  sufficient  reason.  The  chief
provisions  of  the  Lex  are  collected  from  the  Digest
(48.  tit.  15.  s.  6)  :  "if  a  freeman  concealed,  kept
confined,  or  knowingly  w^ith  dolus  mains  purchased
an  ingenuus  or  libertinus  against  his  will,  or  par-
ticipated in  any  such  acts  ;  or  if  he  persuaded
another  person's  male  or  female  slave  to  run  away
from  a  master  or  mistress,  or  without  the  consent
or  knowledge  of  the  master  or  mistress  concealed,
kept  confined,  or  purchased  knowingly  with  dolus
malus  such  male  or  female  slave,  or  participated  in
any  such  acts,  he  was  liable  to  the  penalties  of  the
Lex  Fabia."  The  penalty  of  the  Lex  was  pecu-
niary, and  the  consequence  was  Infamia  ;  but  this
fell  into  disuse,  and  persons  who  offended  against
the  lex  were  punished,  either  by  being  sent  to
work  in  the  mines  or  by  crucifixion,  if  they  were
humiliores,  or  with  confiscation  of  half  of  their
property  or  perpetual  relegation,  if  they  were
honestiores.  The  crime  of  kidnapping  men  became
a  common  practice  and  required  vigilant  pursuit
(Suetonius,  Octavian.  c.  32).  A  Senatusconsultum
ad  Legem  Fabiara  did  not  allow  a  master  to  give
or  sell  a  runaway  slave,  which  was  technically
called  "  fugani  vendere  ; "  but  the  provision  did
not  apply  to  a  slave  who  was  merely  absent,  nor
to  the  case  of  a  runaway  slave  when  the  master
had  commissioned  any  one  to  go  after  him  and
sell  him :  it  was  the  object  of  the  provision  to  en-
courage the  recovery  of  runawaj'  slaves.  The  name
of  the  Senatusconsultum,  by  which  the  Lex  Fabia
was  amended,  does  not  appear.  The  word  Plagium
is  said  to  come  from  the  Greek  irXdyios^  oblique,
indirect,  dolosus.  But  this  is  doubtful.  Schrader
(Inst.  4.  tit.  18.  §  10)  thinks  that  the  derivation
from  plaga  (a  net)  is  more  probable.  He  who
committed  plagium  was  plagiarius,  a  word  which
Martial  (Ep.  i.  53)  applies  to  a  person  who  falsely
gave  himself  out  as  the  author  of  a  book  ;  and  in
this  sense  the  word  has  come  into  common  use  in
our  language.  (Dig.  48.  tit.  15  ;  Cod.  9.  tit.  20  ;
Paulus,  S.  R.  i.  tit.  6  a.  ;  Rein,  Das  Criminalrecht
dcr  K6mer^  p.  386.)  [G.  L.]


922


PLANETAE.


PLANE  TAE,  s.  Stellae  err  antes  {irXavt}-
rai  s.  TrXavwfXcvoi  aarepes  as  opposed  to  to.  aTrXavrj
rwu  &aTpwv).  The  popular  astronomy  ot  the  early
Greeks  was  chiefly  confined,  as  is  pointed  out  else-
where [Astronomia],  to  a  knowledge  of  the
tnoming  and  evening  risings  and  settings  of  the
brightest  stars  and  most  remarkable  constellations,
since  upon  these  observations  the  formation  and
regulation  of  the  primitive  kalendars  in  a  great
measure  depended.  No  single  star  was  more  likely
to  attract  attention  under  such  circumstances  than
the  planet  Venus,  and  accordingly  77ie  Morning
Star  {'EwacpSpos)  is  placed  first  among  the  stellar
progeny  of  Erigeneia  in  the  Theogony  (381)  —

Tovs  8e  ;u,6t'  (sc.  av4fxovs)  aarepa  tIktcv  'Eaxr-
(p6pov  'HpiyiVfia

&arpa  re  XaixTrerouPTa  rd  t'  ovpavhs  i(Tr€<pd-

.while  both  the  Morning  Star  ('E«(r(/)Jpos),  and  the
Evening  Star  ("Ea-irepos),  are  named  in  the  Ho-
meric poems  {11.  xxii.  317,  xxiii.  226,  comp.  Od.
xiii.  93),  where  they  are  evidently  regarded  as
distinct  from  one  another.  According  to  Apollo-
dorus,  in  the  second  book  of  his  work  Ilept  ^(cov,
Pythagoras  was  the  first  who  surmised  that  4>co(T-
(popos  and  "Earr^pos  were  one  and  the  same,  but  by
Phavorinus  the  honour  of  this  discovery  is  ascribed
to  Parmenides.  The  latter  certainly  looked  upon
this  body,  which  he  called  both  'Ewos  and^'Eo-Trepos,
as  altogether  diiFerent  in  its  nature  from  the  fixed
stars,  for  he  placed  it  in  his  highest  region  or  aether  ;
below  it,  but  also  in  the  aether,  was  the  sun,  and
below  the  sun,  in  the  fiery  region  (eV  t^  TrupwSet),
which  he  calls  oi/pavhs,  were  the  fixed  stars.  The
terra  irXavrjTai  seems,  if  we  can  trust  Plutarch  and
Stobaeus,  to  have  been  recognised  as  early  as  the
epoch  of  Anaximander,  according  to  whom  the  sun
stood  highest  in  the  universe,  next  below  was  the
moon,  and  then  the  fixed  stars  and  the  planets  (irrrh
5e  avTOVs  Tcl  ciTrAai'^  reau  &(rrpwv  Koi  tovs  irKavT]-
ras).  Empedocles  supposed  the  fixed  stars  to  be
imbedded  in  the  crystalline  sphere,  which,  accord-
ing to  his  system,  enveloped  all  things,  but  the
planets  to  be  detached  from  it,  thus  implying  the
necessity  felt  for  some  theory,  which  should  account
for  their  erratic  course.  Democritus  wrote  a  trea-
tise Ilepi  Twv  Ti\avT\TU)V,  among  which  he  reckoned
the  Son,  the  Moon,  and  ^wacpopos,  but,  as  yet,
their  number  had  not  been  determined.  This  is
expressly  affirmed  by  Seneca  (Qiiaest.  Nat.  vii.
3),  "  Democritus  subtilissimus  antiquorum  omnium
suspicari  ait  se  plures  Stellas  esse  quae  currant  ;
sed  nee  numerum  illarum  posuit,  nee  nomina,  non-
dum  comprehensis  quinque  siderum  cursibus.  Eu-
doxus  ab  iEgypto  hos  motus  in  Graeciam  transtu-
lit."  But  although  Eudoxus  may  have  been  the
first  to  communicate  scientific  details  with  respect
to  the  orbits  and  movements  of  the  planets,  Philo-
laus,  a  Pythagorean,  who  flourished  more  than  a
century  earlier,  was  certainly  acquainted  with  the
whole  five,  for  he  maintained  that  there  was  a
central  fire  around  which  the  ten  heavenly  bodies
(8eKa  afiiiiara  ^ua)  revolved.  Of  these,  the  most
remote  from  the  centre  was  ohpavhs,  that  is,  the
sphere  containing  the  fixed  stars,  next  in  order
were  the  planets,  then  the  sun,  then  the  moon,  theft
the  earth,  and,  below  the  earth,  the  Anticthon
(J>.VTixQov,  see  Arist.  de  Coeh,  ii.  13),  thus  com-
pleting the  number  ten  if  we  reckon  the  planets  as
fiye»    In  the  Timacus  of  Plato,  the  planets  are


PLANETAE.

mentioned  specifically  as  five  in  number  y'li^ios  wal
a^K-qvy]  /cai  ttcVte  6.K\a  &crTpa  iirLKXrjv  exovra
iT\avi]rai),  and  in  the  same  passage,  we  fur  the
first  time  meet  with  the  name  Hermes  as  connected
with  one  of  these  {kwacpopov  Se  koX  rhv  Uphu  'Ep.
fjLov  Xcyofj-euov).  It  is  not,  however,  until  we  come
down  to  the  Epinomis,  the  work  of  some  disciple
of  Plato,  that  the  whole  five  are  enumerated,  each
with  a  distinguishing  appellation  derived  from  a
god  :  rhv  rod  Kpdyov,  rhu  rod  Aihs^  rhu  tov  "Apeos,
Ti]if  TVS  'AcppoS'iTTjs,  rhv  TOV  'Epfiov.  In  the  tract,
Ufpl  k6(Tij.ov,  found  among  the  writings  of  Aristotle,
although  probably  not  from  his  pen,  we  are  fur-
nished with  a  second  set  of  names  —  ^aivwv  for  the
star  of  Kronus  ;  ^a4dwu,  for  that  of  Zeus  ;  Ilupdeis,
for  that  of  Ares  ;  ^cocrcpSpos,  for  that  of  Aphrodite ;
^TiXSwv,  for  that  of  Hermes  ;  and  these  seem  to
have  been  the  ordinary  designations  employed  by
men  of  science.  It  is  here  stated  also,  that  'n.vp6iis
was  by  some  termed  the  star  of  Herakles,  and
that  StIaSwi/  was  by  some  termed  the  star  of  Apollo.
Pliny  gives  additional  variations,  for  in  his  list
they  are  catalogued  as  SiDUS  Saturni,  Jovis,
Martis  s.  Herculis,  Veneris  s.  Junonis  s.
IsiDis  s.  Matris  D^v^i  {Lucifer,  Vesper).,  Mer-
CURI  s.  Apollinis  ;  and  these  may  be  still  farther
increased  from  Achilles  Tatius,  the  grammarians
and  the  lexicographers.

The  Earth  being  generally  regarded  as  the  centre
of  the  Universe,  the  Moon  was  believed  to  be
nearest  to  it,  then  the  Sun,  Venus,  and  Mercury  ;
beyond  these  was  Mars,  beyond  Mars  Avas  Jupiter,
beyond  Jupiter  was  Saturnus,  the  fixed  stars  being
the  most  remote  of  all.  But  while  astronomers
for  the  most  part  agreed  in  placing  the  Sun,  Venus,
and  Mercury  between  the  Moon  and  Mars,  the
greatest  diversity  of  opinion  obtained  with  regard
to  their  relative  position.  According  to  some,  the
Sun  was  the  nearest  of  the  three  to  the  Earth,  ac-
cording to  others  the  most  distant,  while  a  third
set  of  philosophers  assigned  to  it  the  middle  place
between  Venus  and  Mercury.  In  like  manner,
some  supposed  that  Mercury  was  neater  to  the
Earth  than  Venus,  others  the  reverse,  and  every
possible  combination  of  the  three  bodies  was  ex-
hausted.

Saturnus  was  believed  to  perform  a  complete
revolution  in  thirty  solar  years,  Jupiter  in  twelve,
calculations  approaching  very  nearly  to  the  truth.
The  period  of  Mars  was  fixed  at  two  years,  a  de^
termination  less  accurate  than  the  two  former,
but  not  very  wide  of  the  truth.  As  to  Venus  and
Mercury,  not  even  an  approximation  was  made,  for
they  were  both  believed  to  perform  their  revolution
in  exactly,  or  very  nearly  the  same  time  as  the  Sun  :
Pliny,  who  affects  great  precision  in  this  matter,
fixes  348  days  for  Venus,  and  339  days  for  Mercury.
Saturnus  being  thus  removed  to  a  great  distance
from  the  source  of  heat  was  naturally  viewed  as
possessing  a  cold  and  icy  character  (gelidae  ac
rigentis  naturae  — frigida  stella  Saturni).,  Mars,  on
the  other  hand,  as  of  a  hot  and  fiery  nature,
while  Jupiter  which  lay  between  them  enjoyed  a
temperature  made  up  by  the  combination  of  the
extremes.  The  astrologers  caught  up  these  notions,
and  uniting  them  with  the  legends  of  raythologj',
adapted  them  to  their  own  purpose,  uniformly
representing  the  influence  of  Saturnus  as  malign,
I  and  that  of  Jupiter  as  propitious.
I  Haec  tamen  ignorat,  quid  sidus  triste  minetur
1      Saturni,  Juv.  vi.  569.


PLAUSTRUM.

Satuniumque  gravera  nostro  Jove  frangimus  una.
Pers.  V.  48.

Te  Jovis  impio
Tutela  Saturno  refulgens
Eripuit.

Hor.  Carm.  ii.  16.  22.

It  must  be  understood  that  in  the  above  remarks,
we  have  confined  ourselves  entirely  to  the  popular
notions  which  prevailed  among  the  ancients  with-
out attempting  to  trace  the  progress  of  scientific
observation,  a  subject  which  belongs  to  a  fonnal
history  of  astronomy,  but  does  not  fall  within  our
limits.  (Plut.  de  FlacUis  Philos.  ii.  14,  15,  16  ;
Stob.  Ed.  F/ii/s.  i.  23.  §  1,  25.  §  1 ;  Diogen.  Laert.
viii.  14,  ix.  23  ;  Arat.  Phaen.  454  ;  Gemini  Ele-
menta  Astron.  c,  1  ;  Achill.  Tat.  Tsag.  ad  Arat.
Phaen.  xvii.  ;  Lydus,  De  Mens.  v.  &c.  ;  Cic.  de
Nat.  Deor.  ii.  20  ;  PI  in.  H.N.  ii.  6.  8  ;  Tac.  Hist.
V.  4  ;  Macrob.  Somn.Scip.  4.)  [W.  K.]

PLA'STICA.     [Statuaria.]

PLAUSTRUM  orPLOSTRUM.(/m.  PLOS-
TELLUM  (a/j.a^a,  dim.  a/j.a^is)^  a  cart  or  waggon.
This  vehicle  had  common^  two  wheels,  but  some-
times four,  and  it  was  then  called  the  plaustrum
majus.  The  invention  of  four-wheeled  waggons  is
attributed  to  the  Phrj-gians.     (Plin.  H.  N.  vii.  56.)

Besides  the  wheels  and  axle  the  plaustrum  con-
sisted of  a  strong  pole  (temo),  to  the  hinder  part  of
■which  was  fastened  a  table  of  wooden  planks.
The  blocks  of  stone,  or  other  things  to  be  carried,
were  either  laid  upon  this  table  without  any  other
support,  or  an  additional  security  was  obtained
by  the  use  either  of  boards  at  the  sides  (vireprepia,
Piom.  Od.  vi.  70  ;  Plato,  T/ieaet.  p.  467,  Heindorf.)
or  of  a  large  wicker  basket  tied  upon  the  cart
(treipiys,  Plom.  //.  xxiv.  267,  Od.  xv.  131).  The
annexed  woodcut,  taken  from  a  bas-relief  at  Rome,
exhibits  a  cart,  the  bod}^  of  which  is  supplied  by  a
basket  Similar  vehicles  are  still  used  in  many
parts  of  Europe,  being  employed  more  especially
to  carry  charcoal.


PLEBES.


923


In  many  cases,  though  not  universally,  the
wheels  were  fastened  to  the  axle,  which  moved,  as
in  our  children's  carts,  within  wooden  rings  adapt-
ed for  its  reception  and  fastened  to  the  body.
•These  rings  were  called  in  Greek  afia^dirodes^  in
Latin  arbusculae.  The  parts  of  the  axis,  which  re-
volved within  them,  were  sometimes  cased  with
iron.  (Vitruv.  x.  20.  §  14.)  The  commonest  kind
of  cart-wheel  was  that  called  tpnpanum,  "  the
drum,"  from  its  resemblance  to  the  musical  instru-
ment of  the  same  name.  (Varro,  de  Re  Rust.  iii.  5  ;
Virg.  Gearg.  ii.  444.)  It  Avas  nearly  a  foot  in
thickness,  and  was  made  either  by  sawing  the
trunk  of  a  tree  across  in  an  horizontal  direction,  or
by  nailing  together  boards  of  the  requisite  shape
and    size.     It    is   exemplified    in   tho    preceding


woodcut,  and  in  the  sculptures  on  the  arch  of
Septimius  Severus  at  Rome.  Although  these
Avheels  were  excellent  for  keeping  the  roads  in
repair  and  did  not  cut  up  the  fields,  yet  they
rendered  it  necessary  to  take  a  long  circuit  in
turning.  They  advanced  slowlj-.  (Virg.  Georg.  i.
138.)  They  also  made  a  loud  creaking,  which
was  heard  to  a  great  distance  {stridentia  pkmstra,
Virg.  Georg.  iii.  536  ;  gementia,  Aen.  xi.  138).
Their  rude  construction  made  them  liable  to  be
overturned  with  their  load  of  stone,  timber,  manure,
or  skins  of  wine  (Juv.  iii.  241 — 243),  whence  the
Emperor  Hadrian  prohibited  heavily  loaded  wag-
gons from  entering  the  city  of  Rome.  (Spartian.
Hadr.  22.)  The  waggoner  was  sometimes  required
to  aid  the  team  with  his  shoulder.  Accidents  of
this  kind  gave  origin  to  the  proverb  "  Plaustrum
perculi,"  meaning  "  I  have  had  a  misfortune.'*
(Plant.  Epid.  iv.  2.  22.)  Carts  of  this  description,
having  solid  wheels  without  spokes,  are  still  used
in  Greece  (Dod well's  Tour,  vol.  ii,  pp.  102,  103)
and  in  some  parts  of  Asia.  (Sir  R.  K.  Porter's
Travels,  vol.  ii.  p.  533.)  [J.  Y.J

PLEBE'II  LUDI.     [LuDi  Plebeii.]

PLEBES  or  PLEBS.  PLEBEII.  This  word
contains  the  same  root  as  im-pleo,  com-pleo,  &c.,
and  is  therefore  etymologically  connected  with
7rA.^0os,  a  term  which  was  applied  to  the  plebeians
by  the  more  correct  Greek  writers  on  Roman  his-
tor3%  while  others  wrongly  called  them  Srj/xos  or  ol
dr]/j.oTiKoi.

The  plebeians  were  the  body  of  commons  or  the
commonalty  of  Ptome,  and  thus  constituted  one  of
the  two  great  elements  of  which  the  Roman  nation
consisted,  and  which  has  given  to  the  earlier  periods
of  Roman  history  its  peculiar  character  and  in-
terest. Before  the  time  of  Niebuhr  the  most  in-
consistent notions  were  entertained  by  scholars  with
regard  to  the  plebeians  and  their  relations  to  the
patricians  ;  and  it  is  one  of  his  peculiar  merits  to
have  pointed  out  the  real  position  which  they  oc-
cupied in  the  history  of  Rome.

The  ancients  themselves  do  not  agree  respecting
the  time  when  the  plebeians  began  to  form  a  part
of  the  Roman  population.  Dionysius  and  Livy
represent  them  as  having  formed  a  part  of  the  Ro-
mans as  early  as  the  time  of  Romulus,  and  seem
to  consider  them  as  the  clients  of  the  patricians,  or
as  the  low  multitude  of  outcasts  who  flocked  to
Rome  at  the  time  when  Romulus  opened  the  asy-
lum. (Dionys.  i.  8  ;  Liv.  i.  8.)  If  there  is  any
truth  at  all  in  these  accounts  of  the  early  existence
of  the  plebeians,  we  can  only  conceive  them  to
have  been  the  original  inhabitants  of  the  districts
occupied  by  the  new  settlers  (Ramnes  or  Romans),
who,  after  their  territory  was  conquered,  were  kept
in  that  state  of  submission  in  which  conquered  na-
tions were  so  frequently  held  in  early  times.
There  are  also  some  other  statements  referring  to
such  an  early  existence  of  the  plebeians  ;  for  the
clients,  in  the  time  of  Romulus,  are  said  to  have
been  formed  out  of  the  plebeians.  (Dionys.  ii.  9  ;
Plut.  Rofnul.  13  ;  Cic.  de  Re  Publ.  ii.  9  ;  Fest.
s.  V.  Patrocinia.)  In  the  early  times  of  Rome  the
position  of  a  client  was  in  many  respects  undoubt-
edly far  more  favourable  than  that  of  a  plebeian,
and  it  is  not  improbable  that  some  of  the  plebeians
may  for  this  reason  have  entered  into  the  relation
of  clientela  to  some  patricians,  and  have  given  up
the  rights  which  they  had  as  free  plebeians  ;  and
occurrences  of  this  kind  may  have  given  rise  to  the


924


PLEBES.


story  mentioned  by  the  writers  just  referred  to.  A
recent  writer.  Dr.  W.  Ihne  {Forschungen  auf  dem
Gebieteder  Rom.  Ver/'assungsgeschichie,Frank{.  1 847)
has  undertaken  with  very  plausible  arguments  to
prove  that  originally  plebeians  and  clients  were  the
same  people,  and  that  originally  all  the  plebeians
were  clients  of  the  patricians,  from  which  dependent
relation  they  gradually  emancipated  themselves.

"Whatever  may  be  thought  of  the  existence  of
plebeians  at  Rome  in  the  earliest  times,  their  num-
ber at  all  events  cannot  have  been  very  great.  The
time  when  they  first  appear  as  a  distinct  class  of
Roman  citizens  in  contradistinction  to  the  patri-
cians, is  in  the  reign  of  TuUus  Hostilius.  Alba,
the  head  of  the  Latin  confederacy,  was  in  his  reign
taken  by  the  Romans  and  razed  to  the  ground.
The  most  distinguished  of  its  inhabitants  were
transplanted  to  Rome  and  received  among  the  patri-
cians ;  but  the  great  bulk  of  Alban  citizens,  some
of  whom  were  likewise  transferred  to  Rome,  and
received  settlements  on  the  Caelian  hill,  were  kept
in  a  state  of  submission  to  the  populus  Romanus  or
the  patricians.  This  new  population  in  and  about
Rome,  combined, perhaps,  with  the  subdued  original
inhabitants  of  the  place,  which  in  number  is  said  to
have  been  equal  to  the  old  inhabitants  of  the  city
or  the  patricians,  were  the  plebeians.  They  were
Latins,  and  consequently  of  the  same  blood  as  the
Ramnes,  the  noblest  of  the  three  patrician  tribes.
(Liv.  i.  30  ;  Dionys.  iii.  29,  31  ;  Val.  Max.  iii.  4.
§  L)  After  the  conquest  of  Alba,  Rome,  in  the
reign  of  Ancus  Marcius,  acquired  possession  of  a
considerable  extent  of  country  containing  a  number
of  dependent  Latin  towns,  as  Medullia,  Fidenae,
Politorium,  Tellenae,  and  Ficana.  Numbers  of
the  inhabitants  of  these  towns  were  again  trans-
planted to  Rome,  and  incorporated  with  the  ple-
beians already  settled  there,  and  the  Aventine  was
assigned  to  them  as  their  habitation.  (Liv.  i.  33  ;
Dionys.  iii.  31,  37.)  Many,  however,  remained  in
their  original  homes,  and  their  lands  were  given
back  to  them  by  the  Romans,  so  that  they  re-
mained free  land-owners  as  much  as  the  conquerors
themselves,  and  thus  were  distinct  from  the  clients.

The  order  of  plebeians  or  the  commonalty,  which
had  thus  gradually  been  formed  by  the  side  of  the
patricians,  and  which  far  exceeded  the  populus  in
number,  lived  partly  in  Rome  itself  in  the  districts
above  mentioned,  and  partly  on  their  former  estates
in  the  country  subject  to  Rome,  in  towns,  villages,
or  scattered  farms.  The  plebeians  were  citizens,
but  not  Optimo  jure  ;  they  were  perfectly  distinct
from  the  patricians,  and  were  neither  contained  in
the  three  tribes,  nor  in  the  curiae  nor  in  the  patri-
cian gentes.  They  were  consequently  excluded
from  the  comitia,  the  senate,  and  all  civil  and
priestly  offices  of  the  state.  Dionysius  is  greatly
mistaken  in  stating  that  all  the  new  citizens  were
distributed  among  the  patrician  curios,  and  under
this  error  he  labours  throughout  his  history,  for  he
conceives  the  patricians  and  plebeians  as  having
been  united  in  the  comitia  ciiriata  (iv.  12,  ix.  41).
That  the  plebeians  were  not  contained  in  the  curies,
is  evident  from  the  following  facts  :  —  Dionysius
himself  (iv.  76,  78)  calls  the  curies  a  patrician  as-
sembly ;  Livy  (v.  46)  speaks  of  a  lex  curiata,  which
was  made  without  any  co-operation  on  the  part  of
the  plebeians  ;  and  those,  who  confirm  the  election
of  kings  or  magistrates  and  confer  the  imperium,
are  in  some  passages  called  patricians,  and  in  others
curiae  (Dionys.  ii.  60,  vi.  i)0,  x.  4  ;  Liv.  vi.  42  ;


PLEBES.
compare  Niebuhr,  Flist.  of  Rome,  ii.  p.  120  ;  Becker,
Handhuch der  Rom.  Alterth.n.  1.  p.  133,  &c.),  which
shows  that  both  were  synonymous.  That  the  ple-
beians did  not  belong  to  the  patrician  genres,  is
expressly  stated  by  Livy  (x.  8).  The  only  point
of  contact  between  the  two  estates  was  the  army,
for  after  the  conquest  of  Alba,  Tullus  Hostilius
doubled  the  number  of  legions  of  the  Roman  army.
(Liv.  i.  30.)  Livy  also  states  that  Tullus  Hostilius
formed  ten  new  turmae  of  equites,  but  whether
these  new  turmae  consisted  of  Albans,  as  Livy
says,  or  whether  they  were  taken  from  the  three
old  tribes,  as  Gottling  (Gesch.  d.  Rom.  Siaatsv.
p.  22.5)  thinks,  is  only  matter  of  speculation.  The
plebeians  were  thus  obliged  to  fight  and  shed  their
blood  in  the  defence  and  support  of  their  neAv  fel-
low-citizens without  being  allowed  to  share  any  of
their  rights  or  privileges,  and  without  even  the
right  of  intermarriage  (connuhium).  In  all  judi-
cial matters  they  were  entirely  at  the  mercy  of  the
patricians,  and  had  no  right  of  appeal  against  aiiy
unjust  sentence,  though  they  were  not,  like  the
clients,  bound  to  have  a  patronus.  They  continued
to  have  their  own  sacra  which  they  had  had  before
the  conquest,  but  they  were  regulated  by  the  pa-
trician pontiffs.  (Fest.  s.  v.  Municipulia  sacra.)
Lastly,  they  were  free  land -owners,  and  had  their
own  gentes.  That  a  plebeian,  when  married  to  a
plebeian  woman,  had  the  patria  potestas  over  his
children,  and  that  if  he  belonged  to  a  plebeian
gens,  he  shared  in  the  jura  and  sacra  gentilicia  of
that  gens,  are  points  which  appear  to  be  self-evi-
dent.

The  population  of  the  Roman  state  thus  con-
sisted of  two  opposite  elements  ;  a  ruling  class  or
an  aristocracy,  and  the  commonalty,  which,  though
of  the  same  stock  as  the  noblest  among  the  rulers,
and  exceeding  them  in  numbers,  yet  enjoyed  none
of  the  rights  which  might  enable  them  to  take  a
part  in  the  management  of  public  affairs,  religious
or  civil.  Their  citizenship  resembled  the  relation
of  aliens  to  a  state,  in  which  they  are  merely  tole-
rated on  condition  of  performing  certain  services,
and  they  are,  in  fact,  sometimes  called  peregrini.
While  the  order  of  the  patricians  was  perfectly
organized  by  its  division  into  curiae,  decuriae,
and  gentes,  the  commonalty  had  no  such  organiza-
tion, except  its  division  into  gentes  ;  its  relations
to  the  patricians  also  were  in  no  way  defined,
and  it  consequently  had  no  means  of  protecting
itself  against  any  arbitrary  proceedings  of  the
rulers.  That  such  a  state  of  things  could  not  last,
is  a  truth  which  must  have  been  felt  by  every  one
who  was  not  blinded  bv  his  own  selfishness  and
love  of  dominion.  Tarquinius  Priscus  was  the  first
who  conceived  the  idea  of  placing  the  plebeians  on
a  footing  of  equality  with  the  old  burghers,  by  di-
viding them  into  three  tribes,  which  he  intended
to  cidl  after  his  own  name  and  those  of  his  friends.
(Verrius  Flaccus,  ap.  Fest.  s.  v.  Navia  ;  Liv.  i.  36,
&c.  ;  Dionys.  iii.  71  ;  Cic.  de  Re  Pull.  ii.  20.)  But
this  noble  plan  was  frustrated  by  the  opposition  of
the  augur  Attus  Navius,  who  probably  acted  the
part  of  a  representative  of  the  patricians.  All  that
Tarquinius  could  do  was  to  effect  the  admission  of
the  noblest  plebeian  families  into  the  three  old
tribes,  who,  however,  were  distinguished  I'rom  the
old  patrician  families  by  the  names  of  Ramnes,
Tities,  and  Luceres  secundi,  and  their  gentes  are
sometimes  distinguished  by  the  epithet  minorea,
03  they  entered  into  the  same  relation  in  which  the


PLEBES,

Luceres  had  been  to  the  first  two  tribes,  before  the
time  of  Tarquinius.  (Fast.  5.  v.  Sex  Vestae  Sacer-
dotes;  Cic.  do  Re  Publ.  ii.  20  ;  Liv.  i.  35,  47.)
This  measure,  although  an  advantage  to  the  most
distinguished  plebeian  families,  did  not  benefit  the
plebeians  as  an  order,  for  the  new  patricians
must  have  become  alienated  from  the  commonalty,
while  the  patricians  as  a  body  were  considerably
strengthened  by  the  accession  of  the  new  families.

It  was  reserved  to  his  successor,  Servius  Tullius,
to  give  to  the  commonalty  a  regular  internal  organi-
zation and  to  determine  their  relations  to  the  pa-
tricians. The  intention  of  this  king  was  not  to
upset  the  old  constitution,  but  only  to  enlarge  it  so
as  to  render  it  capable  of  receiving  within  itself
the  new  elements  of  the  state.  He  first  divided
the  city  into  four,  and  then  the  subject  country
around,  which  was  inhabited  by  plebeians,  into
twenty-six  regions  or  local  tribes  (Liv.  i.  43  ;
Dionys.  iv.  14,  &c.),  and  in  these  regions  he
assigned  lots  of  land  to  those  plebeians  who  were
yet  without  landed  property.  Niebuhr  (ii.  p.  162)
thinks  that  these  allotments  consisted  of  seven
jugera  each,  an  opinion  Avhich  is  controverted  by
Gottling  (p.  239,  &c.).  As  regards  the  four  city-
tribes,  it  should  be  observed  that  the  Aventine
and  the  Capitol  were  not  contained  in  them :  the
former  forming  a  part  of  the  country  tribes,  and
the  latter  boing,  as  it  were,  the  city  of  the  gods.
(Varro,  de  Ling.  Lot.  v.  56,  ed.  Miiller.)  The
twenty-six  country  tribes  are  not  mentioned  by
liivy  in  his  account  of  the  Servian  constitution,  and
where  he  first  speaks  of  the  whole  number  of  tribes
(ii.  21  ;  compare  Dionys.  vii.  64),  he  only  men-
tions twenty-one  instead  of  thirty.  Niebuhr  (i.
p.  418)  is  undoubtedly  right  in  reconciling  this
number  with  the  thirty  tribes  of  Servius  by  the
supposition,  that  in  the  war  with  Porsenna  Rome
lost  one  third  of  her  territory,  i.  e.  ten  tribes,  so
that  there  were  only  twenty  left.  As,  there-
fore, after  the  immigration  of  the  Claudii  and  their
clients,  a  new  tribe  was  formed  (Liv.  ii.  16),
Livy  is  right  in  mentioning  onl)'^  twenty-one  tribes.
These  thirty  Servian  tribes  did  not,  at  least  origi-
nally, contain  any  patricians,  and  even  after  the
Claudii  had  come  to  Rome,  it  is  not  necessary  to
suppose  that  the  gens  Claudia,  which  was  raised  to
the  rank  of  patrician,  was  contained  in  the  new
tribe,  but  the  new  tribe  probably  consisted  of  their
clients  to  whom  lands  were  assigned  beyond  the
Anio.  (Liv.  /.  c. ;  compare  Tribus.)  Some  of  the
clients  of  the  patricians,  however,  Avere  probably
contained  in  the  Servian  tribes.  (Dionys.  iv.  22,
&c.)  Each  tribe  had  its  praefect  called  tribunus.
(Dionys.  iv.  14  ;  Appian,  D.  C.  iii.  23  ;  Tribunus.)
The  tribes  had  also  their  own  sacra,  festivals,  and
meetings  (comitia  tributa\  which  were  convoked
by  their  tribunes.

This  division  into  tribes  with  tribunes  at  their
heads  was  no  more  than  an  internal  organization
of  the  plebeians,  analogous  to  the  -division  of  the
patricians  into  thirty  curiae,  without  conferring
upon  them  the  right  to  mterfere  in  any  way  in  the
management  of  public  affairs,  or  in  the  elections,
which  were  left  entirely  to  the  senate  and  the
curiae.  These  rights,  however,  they  obtained  by
another  regiilation  of  Servius  Tullius,  which  was
made  wholly  independent  of  the  thirty  tribes.  For
this  purpose  he  instituted  a  census,  and  divided
the  whole  body  of  Roman  citizens,  plebeians  as
well  as  patricians,  into  five  classes,  .according  to


PLEBES.  925

the  amount  of  their  property.  Taxation  and  the
military  duties  were  arranged  according  to  these
classes  in  such  a  manner,  that  the  heavier  burdens
fell  upon  the  wealthier  classes.  The  whole  body
of  citizens  thus  divided  was  formed  into  a  great
national  assembly  called  comitiatus  maxiraus  or
comitia  centuriata.  [Comitia,  p.  333,  &c.]  In
this  assembly  the  plebeians  now  met  the  patricians
apparently  on  a  footing  of  equality,  but  the  votes
were  distributed  in  such  a  way  that  it  was  always
in  the  power  of  the  wealthiest  classes,  to  which  the
patricians  naturally  belonged,  to  decide  a  question
before  it  was  put  to  the  vote  of  the  poorer  classes.
A  great  number  of  such  noble  plebeian  families,  as
after  the  subjugation  of  the  Latin  towns  had  not
been  admitted  into  the  curies  by  Tarquinius  Pris-
cus,  were  now  constituted  by  Servius  into  a  nimiber
of  equites,  with  twelve  suffragia  in  the  comitia
centuriata.  [Equitks,  p.  471.]  Lastly,  Servius
Tullius  is  said  to  have  regulated  the  commer-
cimn  between  the  two  orders  by  about  fifty  laws.
(Dionys.  iv.  13  ;  N6/xovs  tovs  ixeu  avvaWaKi  i~
Kovs  Kal  robs  irepl  tuu  aBiKrjfxdrwu  ;  compare  v.  2,
vi.  22  ;  Gottling,  p.  240  ;  Becker,  /.  c.  p.  1  o6.)

In  this  constitution  the  plebeians,  as  such,  did
not  obtain  admission  to  the  senate,  nor  to  the  highest
magistracy,  nor  to  any  of  the  priestly  offices.  To
all  these  offices  the  patricians  alone  thought  them-
selves entitled  by  divine  right.  The  plebeians
also  continued  to  be  excluded  from  occupying  any
portion  of  the  public  land,  which  as  yet  was  only
possessed  by  the  patricians,  and  were  only  allowed
to  keep  their  cattle  upon  the  common  pasture,  for
which  they  had  to  pay  to  the  state  a  certain  sum.
It  is  true  that  by  the  acquisition  of  wealth  ple-
beians might  become  members  of  the  first  property
class,  and  that  thus  their  votes  in  the  comitia
might  become  of  the  same  Aveight  as  those  of  the
wealthy  patricians,  but  the  possibility  of  acquiring
such  wealth  was  diminished  by  their  being  ex-
cluded from  the  use  of  the  ager  publicus.  Niebuhr
(i.  p.  430,  &c.)  infers  from  the  nature  of  the  Ser-
vian constitution  that  it  must  have  granted  to  the
plebeians  greater  advantages  than  those  mentioned
by  our  historians:  he  conceives  that  it  gave  to
them  the  right  of  appeal  to  their  own  assembly,  and
to  pass  sentence  upon  such  as  grossly  infringed  their
liberties,  in  short  that  the  Servian  constitution
placed  them  on  the  same  footing  in  regard  to  the
patricians,  as  was  afterwards  permanently  effected
by  the  laws  of  C.  Licinius  and  L.  Scxtius.  There
is  no  doubt  that  such  might  and  should  have  been
the  case,  but  the  arguments  which  he  brings  for-
ward in  support  of  his  hypothesis  do  not  appear  to
be  convincing,  as  has  been  pointed  out  by  Gottling
(p.  265,  &c.).  All  that  we  know  for  certain  is,
that  Servius  gave  to  the  body  of  the  plebeians  an
internal  organization  by  the  establishment  of  the
thirty  plebeian  tribes,  and  that  in  the  comitia  cen-
turiata he  placed  them,  at  least  apparently,  on  a
footing  of  equality  with  the  populus.  Whether  he
intended  to  do  more,  or  would  have  done  more  if
it  had  been  in  his  power,  is  a  different  question.
But  facts,  like  those  stated  above,  were  suflicient
at  a  later  period,  when  the  benefits  actually  con-
ferred upon  the  plebeians  were  taken  away  from
them,  to  make  the  grateful  commonalty  look  upon
that  king  as  its  great  patron,  and  even  regard  him
as  having  granted  Jill  those  rights  which  subse-
quently they  acquired  after  many  years  of  hard
struggle.     Thus  what  he  actually  had  done,  was


»2©


PLEBES.


exaggerated  to  what  he  possibly  might  have  done,
or  would  have  wished  to  do.  In  this  light  we
have  to  regard  the  story  that  he  intended  to  lay
down  his  royal  dignity  and  to  establish  the  govern-
ment of  two  consuls,  one  of  whom  was  to  have
been  a  plebeian.

During  the  reign  of  the  last  king  the  plebeians
not  only  lost  all  they  had  gained  by  the  legislation
of  his  predecessor  (Dionys.  iv.  43,  44)  ;  but  the
tyrant  also  compelled  them  to  work  like  slaves  in
his  great  architectural  works,  such  as  the  cloacae
and  the  circus.

On  the  establishment  of  the  republic,  the  comitia
centuriata,  and  perhaps  the  whole  constitution,
such  as  it  had  been  before  the  reign  of  the  last  Tar-
quinius,  were  restored,  so  that  the  patricians  alone
continued  to  be  eligible  to  all  the  public  offices.
(Liv.  iv.  6,  vi.  40,  &c.,  x.  8.)  That  the  comitia
centuriata  were  restored  immediately  after  the
banishment  of  the  Tarquins,  may  be  inferred  from
the  words  of  Livy  (i.  60),  who  says,  that  the  first
consuls  were  elected  ex  commentariis  Servii  Tullii^
for  these  words  probably  refer  to  the  comitia
centuriata,  in  which,  according  to  the  regulations
of  king  Servius,  the  elections  were  to  be  held.
There  was  still  no  connubium  between  the  two
orders,  and  the  populus  was  still  in  every  respect
distinct  from  the  plebs.  Considering  the  fact  that
the  patricians  reserved  for  themselves  all  the
powers  which  had  formerly  been  concentrated  in
the  king,  and  that  these  powers  were  now  given  to
a  number  of  patrician  officers,  we  must  admit  that
the  plebeians  at  the  commencement  of  the  republic
were  worse  off  than  if  the  kingly  rule  had  con-
tinued under  the  institutions  introduced  by  Ser-
vius. They,  however,  soon  gained  some  advantages.
The  vacancies  which  had  occurred  in  the  senate
during  the  reign  of  the  last  king  were  filled  up
with  the  most  distinguished  among  the  plebeian
equites  (patres  conscripti,  Liv.  ii.  1  ;  Dionys.  v.  13  ;
Feats.v.  Qui  patres;  Plut.  PMic.  11  ;  Sknatus),
and  Valerius  Publicola  carried  a  number  of  laws  by
which  the  relations  between  patricians  and  ple-
beians were  more  accurately  defined  than  they  had
hitherto  been,  and  which  also  afforded  some  pro-
tection to  the  plebeians.  [Leges  Valkriae.]  Both
orders  acted  in  common  only  in  the  army  and  the
comitia  centuriata,  in  which,  however,  the  patri-
cians exercised  an  overwhelming  influence  through
the  number  of  their  clients  who  voted  in  them  ;
and  in  addition  to  this  all  decrees  of  the  centuries
Btill  required  the  sanction  of  the  curiae.  Notwith-
standing these  disadvantages,  the  plebeians  occu-
pied a  position  which  might  soon  have  enabled
them  to  rise  to  a  perfect  equality  with  the  patri-
cians, had  not  a  great  calamity  thrown  them  back,
and  put  an  end  to  their  political  progress.  This
was  the  unfortunate  war  with  Porsenna,  in  which
a  great  number  (a  third)  of  the  plebeians  lost  their
estates,  became  impoverished,  and  perhaps  for  a
time  subject  to  the  Etruscans.

In  the  meanwhile,  the  patricians,  not  satisfied
with  the  exercise  of  all  the  authority  in  the  state,
appear  not  seldom  to  have  encroached  upon  the,
rights  granted  to  the  plebeians  by  the  Valerian
laws.  (Liv.  ii.  27.)  Such  proceedhigs,  and  the
merciless  harshness  and  oppression  on  the  part  of
the  rulers,  could  not  fail  to  rouse  the  indignation
and  call  forth  the  resistance  of  the  plebeians,  who
gradually  became  convinced  that  it  was  impos-
sible to  retain  what  they  possessed  without  acquir-


PLEBES.

ing  more.  The  struggle  which  thus  originated  be*
tween  the  two  parties,  is,  as  far  as  the  commonalty
is  concerned,  one  of  the  noblest  that  has  ever  been
carried  on  between  oppressors  and  oppressed.  On
the  one  hand  we  see  a  haughty  and  faithless  oli-
garchy applying  all  means  that  the  love  of  dominion
and  selfishness  can  devise  ;  on  the  other  hand,  a
commonalty  forbearing  to  the  last  in  its  opposition
and  resistance,  ever  keeping  within  the  bounds  of
the  existing  laws,  and  striving  after  power,  not  for
the  mere  gratification  of  ambition,  but  in  order  to
obtain  the  means  of  protecting  itself  against  fraud
and  tyranny.  The  details  of  this  struggle  belong
to  a  history  of  Rome  and  cannot  be  given  here  ;  we
can  only  point  out  in  what  manner  the  plebeians
gradually  gained  access  to  all  the  civil  and  religi-
ous offices,  until  at  last  the  two  hostile  elements
became  united  into  one  great  body  of  Roman  citi-
zens with  equal  rights,  and  a  state  of  things  arose
totally  different  from  what  had  existed  before.

After  the  first  secession,  in  B.  c.  494,  the  ple-
beians gained  several  great  advantages.  First,  a
law  was  passed  to  prevent  the  patricians  from
taking  usurious  interest  of  money  which  they  fre-
quently lent  to  impoverished  plebeians  (Dionys.
vi.  83)  ;  secondly,  tribunes  were  appointed  for  the
protection  of  the  plebeians  [Tribuni]  ;  and  lastl}-^,
plebeian  aediles  were  appointed.  [Aediles.]
Shortly  after,  they  gained  the  right  to  summon
before  their  own  comitia  tributa  any  one  who  had
violated  the  rights  of  their  order  (Fest.  s.v.  Sacer
mons  ;  Gottling,  p.  300,  &c.),  and  to  make  decrees
(plelnscita),  which,  however,  did  not  become
binding  upon  the  whole  nation  imtil  the  j^ear  B.  c.
4i9.  [Plebiscitum.]  A  few  years  after  this
(445,  B.  c),  the  tribune  Canuleius  established,  by
his  rogations,  the  connubium  between  patricians
and  plebeians.  (Liv.  iv.  44,  v.  11,  12  ;  Dionys.  x.
60,  xi.  28  ;  Cic,  de  Be  Publ.  ii.  37.)  He  also
attempted  to  divide  the  consulship  between  the
two  orders,  but  the  patricians  frustrated  the  realisa-
tion of  this  plan  by  the  appointment  of  six  mili-
tary tribunes,  who  were  to  be  elected  from  both
orders.  [Tribuni.]  But  that  the  plebeians
might  have  no  share  in  the  censorial  power,
with  which  the  consuls  had  been  invested,  the
military  tribunes  did  not  obtain  that  power,  and
a  new  curule  dignity,  the  censorship,  was  esta-
blished, with  which  patricians  alone  were  to  be  in-
vested. [Censor.]  Shortly  after  the  taking  of
Rome  by  the  Gauls,  we  find  the  plebeians  again  in
a  state  little  better  than  that  in  which  they  had
been  before  their  first  secession  to  the  mons  sacer.
In  b.  c.  421,  however,  they  were  admitted  to  the
quaestorship,  which  opened  to  them  the  way  into
the  senate,  where  henceforth  their  number  con-
tinued to  increase.  [Quaestor  ;  Senatus.]  In
b.  c.  367,  the  tribunes  L.  Licinius  Stolo  and  L.
Sextius  placed  themselves  at  the  head  of  the  com-
monalty, and  resumed  the  contest  against  the
patricians.  After  a  fierce  struggle,  which  lasted
for  several  years,  they  at  length  carried  a  rogation,
according  to  which  decemvirs  were  to  be  appointed
for  keeping  the  Sibylline  books  instead  of  duum-
virs, of  whom  half  were  to  be  plebeians.  (Liv.  vi.
37, 42.)  The  next  great  step  was  the  restoration  of
the  consulship,  on  condition  that  one  consul  should
always  be  a  plebeian.  A  third  rogation  of  Licinius,
which  was  only  intended  to  afford  momentary  re-
lief to  the  poor  plebeians,  regulated  the  rate  of  in*
terest.     From  this  time  forward  the  plebeians  als«


PLEBES.

appear  in  the  possession  of  the  right  to  occup}^  parts
of  th6  ager  publicus.  (Livy,  vii.  16  ;  Niebuhr,  iii.
p,  1,  &c.)  In  B.  c.  366,  L.  Sextius  Lateranus  was
the  first  plebeian  consul.  The  patricians,  however,
who  always  contrived  to  yield  no  more  than  what
it  was  absoiutely  impossible  for  them  to  retain,
stripped  the  consulship  of  a  considerable  part  of  its
power  and  transferred  it  to  two  new  curule  offices,
viz.,  that  of  praetor  and  of  curule  aedile.  [Aediles  ;
Praetor.]  But  after  such  great  advantages  had
been  once  gained  by  the  plebeians,  it  was  impos-
sible to  stop  them  in  their  progress  towards  a  perfect
equality  of  political  rights  with  the  patricians.  In
B.  c  356  C.  Marcius  Rutilus  was  the  first  plebeian
dictator  ;  in  B.  c  351,  the  censorship  was  thrown
open  to  the  plebeians,  and  in  B.  c.  336  the  praetor-
ship.  The  Oguhiian  law,  in  b.  c.  300,  also  opened
to  them  the  offices  of  pontifex  and  augur.  These
advantages  were,  as  might  be  supposed,  not  gained
without  the  fiercest  opposition  of  the  patricians
and  even  after  they  were  gained  and  sanctioned  by
law,  the  patricians  exerted  every  means  to  obstruct
the  operation  of  the  law.  Such  fraudulent  attempts
led,  in  b.  c.  286,  to  the  last  secession  of  the  ple-
beians, after  which,  however,  the  dictator  Q.  Hor-
tensius  successfully  and  permanently  reconciled  the
two  orders,  secured  to  the  plebeians  all  the  rights
they  had  acquired  until  then,  and  procured  for  their
plebiscita  the  full  power  of  leges  binding  upon  the
whole  nation.

In  a  political  point  of  view  the  distinction  be-
tween patricians  and  plebeians  now  ceased,  and
Rome,  internally  strengthened  and  united,  entered
upon  the  happiest  period  of  her  history.  How
completely  the  old  distinction  was  now  forgotten,
is  evident  from  the  fact  that  henceforth  both  con-
suls were  frequently  plebeians.  The  government
of  Rome  had  thus  gradually  changed  from  an  op-
pressive oligarchy  into  a  moderate  democracy,  in
which  each  party  had  its  proper  influence  and  the
power  of  checking  the  other,  if  it  should  venture  to
assume  more  than  it  could  legally  claim.  It  was
this  constitution,  the  work  of  many  generations,
thai  excited  'the  admiration  of  the  great  statesman
Polybius.

We  stated  above  that  the  plebeians  during  their
struggle  with  the  patricians  did  not  seek  power  for
the  mere  gratification  of  their  ambition,  but  as  a
necessary  means  to  protect  themselves  from  op-
pression. The  abuse  which  they,  or  rather  their
tribiuies,  made  of  their  power,  belongs  to  a  much
later  time,  and  no  traces  of  it  appear  until  more
than  half  a  century  after  the  Hortensian  law  ;  and
even  then,  this  power  was  only  abused  by  indivi-
duals, and  not  on  behalf  of  the  real  plebeians,  but
of  a  degenerating  democratical  party,  which  is  un-
fortunately designated  by  later  writers  by  the  name
of  plebeians,  and  thus  has  become  identified  with
them.  Those  who  know  the  immense  influence
which  religion  and  its  public  ministers  had  upon
the  whole  management  of  the  state,  will  not
Avonder  that  the  plebeians  in  their  contest  with
the  aristocracy  exerted  themselves  as  much  to  gain
access  to  the  priestly  offices  as  to  those  of  a  purely
political  character  ;  as  the  latter  in  reality  would
have  been  of  little  avail  without  the  former.  The
office  of  curio  maximus,  which  the  plebeians  sought
and  obtained  nearly  a  century  after  the  Ogulnian
law  (Liv.  xxvii.  6,  8),  seems  indeed  to  aftbrd
ground  for  supposing  thai;  in  this  instance  the  ple-
beians sought  a  distinction  merely  for  the  pur-


PLEBISCITUM.


927


pose  of  extending  their  privileges  ;  but  Ambrosch
{Stitdien  u.  Andeutunge?{,  p.  95)  has  rendered  it
more  than  probable  that  the  office  of  curio  maxi-
mus was  at  that  time  of  greater  political  import-
ance than  is  generally  believed.  It  is  also  well
known  that  such  priestly  offices  as  had  little  or  no
connection  with  the  management  of  public  affairs,
such  as  that  of  the  rex  sacrorum,  the  flamines,
salii,  and  others,  were  never  coveted  by  the  ple-
beians, and  continued  to  be  held  by  the  patricians
down  to  the  latest  times.  (Dionys.  v.  1  ;  Cic.  pro
Dom.  14  ;  Fest,  s.  v.  Major.  Jlam.)

After  the  passing  of  the  Hortensian  law,  the
political  distinction  between  patricians  and  ple-
beians ceased,  and  with  a  few  unimportant  ex-
ceptions, both  orders  were  placed  on  a  footing  of
perfect  equality.  Henceforth  the  name  populus  is
sometimes  applied  to  the  plebeians  alone,  and
sometimes  to  the  whole  body  of  Roman  citizens,
as  assembled  in  the  comitia  centuriata  or  tributa.
(Liv.  xxvii.  5  ;  Cic.  ad  Aft.  iv.  2  ;  Gell.  x.  20.)
The  term  plebs  or  plebecula,  on  the  other  hand,
was  applied  in  a  loose  manner  of  speaking  to  the
multitude  or  populace  in  opposition  to  the  nobiles
or  the  senatorial  party.  (Sallust,  Jug.  63  ;  Cic.
ad  Att.  i.  16  ;  Hor.  Epist.  ii.  1.  158  ;  Hirt.  Bell.
Alex.  5,  &c.)

A  person  who  was  bom  a  plebeian,  could  only
be  raised  to  the  rank  of  a  patrician  by  a  lex  curiata,
as  was  sometimes  done  during  the  kingly  period,
and  in  the  early  times  of  the  republic.  Caesar  was
the  first  who  ventured  in  his  own  name  to  raise
plebeians  to  the  rank  of  patricians,  and  his  example
was  followed  by  the  emperors.    [Patricii.]

It  frequently  occurs  in  the  history  of  Rome  that
one  and  the  same  gens  contain  plebeian  as  Avell
as  patrician  families.  In  the  gens  Cornelia,  for
instance,  we  find  the  plebeian  families  of  the  B;ilbi,
Mammulae,  Merulae,  &c.,  along  with  the  patrician
Scipiones,  SuUae,  Lentuli,  &c.  The  occurrence  of
this  phenomenon  may  be  accounted  for  in  different
ways.  It  may  have  been,  that  one  branch  of  a
plebeian  family  was  made  patrician,  while  the
others  remained  plebeians.  (Cic.  Brzd.  16,  de  Leg.
ii.  3  ;  Sueton,  Ner.  1.)  It  may  also  have  hap-
pened that  two  families  had  the  same  nomen  gen-
tilicium  without  being  actual  members  of  the  same
gens.  (Cic.  Brut.  16  ;  Tacit.  Annal.  iii.  48.)  Again,
a  patrician  family  might  go  over  to  the  plebeians,
and  as  such  a  family  continued  to  bear  the  name
of  its  patrician  gens,  this  gens  apparently  contained
a  plebeian  family.  (Liv.  iv.  16  ;  Plin.  H.N.  xviii.
4.)  At  the  time  when  no  connubium  existed  be-
tween the  two  orders,  a  marriage  between  a  patri-
cian and  a  plebeian  had  the  consequence,  that  the
same  nomen  gentilicium  belonged  to  persons  of  the
two  orders.  (Niebuhr,  ii.  p.  337,  n.  756  ;  Suet.
Ang.  2.)  When  a  peregrinus  obtained  the  ci vitas
through  the  influence  of  a  patrician,  or  when  a
slave  was  emancipated  by  his  patrician  master,
they  generally  adopted  the  nomen  gentilicium  of
their  benefactor  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  xiii.  35,  36,  c.  Verr.
iv.  17  ;  Appian,  Civil.  100),  and  thus  appear  to
belong  to  the  same  gens  with  him.  (Comp.  Becker,
I.  c.  p.  133,  &c.  ;  Ihne,  l.  c.)  [L-  S.]

PLEBISCI'TUM,  a  name  properly  applied  to
a  law  passed  at  the  Comitia  Tributa  on  the  roga-
tion of  a  Tribune.  According  to  Laelius  Felix
(GelHus,  XV.  27,  and  the  note  in  the  edition  of
Gronovius),  he  who  had  authority  to  convene  not
the  universus  populus,  but  only  a  part,  could  hold


.928


PLUMARII.


n  Concilium,  but  not  Comitia  ;  and  as  tlie  Tribunes
could  not  summon  the  Patricii  nor  refer  any  matter
to  tliem,  what  was  voted  upon  the  proposal  of  the
tribunes  was  not  a  Lex,  but  a  Scitum.  But  in
course  of  time  Plebiscita  obtained  the  force  of
Leges,  properly  so  called,  and  accordingly  they  .are
sometimes  included  in  the  term  Leges.     [Lex.]

The  progress  of  change  as  to  this  matter  appears
from  the  following  passages.  A  Lex  Valeria,
passed  in  the  Comitia  Centuriata  B.  c.  449  (Liv.
iii.  55,  67)  enacted  that  the  Populus  should  be
bound  {tcnerctur)  by  that  which  the  Plebs  voted
tributim ;  and  the  same  thing  is  expressed  in  other
words  thus :  "  Scita  plebis  injuncta  patribus."
A  Lex  Publilia,  339  b.  c.  (Liv.  viii.  12),  was
passed  to  the  effect  that  Plebiscita  should  bind  all
the  Quirites  ;  and  a  Lex  Hortensia  B.  c.  286,  to
the  effect  that  Plebiscita  should  bind  all  the
populus  {imiversus  populus)  as  Gaius  (i.  3)  ex-
presses it  ;  or,  "  ut  eojure,  quod  plebes  statuisset,
omnes  Quirites  tenerentur,"  according  to  Liielius
Felix,  as  quoted  by  Gellius  ;  and  this  latter  is  also
the  expression  of  Pliny  {Hist.  Nat.  xv.  10).  The
Lex  Hortensia  is  referred  to  as  the  Lex  which
put  Plebiscita  as  to  their  binding  force  exactly  on
the  same  footing  as  Leges.  The  effect  of  these
Leges  is  discussed  in  Lex  under  the  several  heads
of  Valeriae,  Publiliae,  Hortensia.

The  principal  Plebiscita  are  mentioned  under
Lex.  [G.  L.]

PLECTRUM.     [Lyra.]

PLEMO'CHOAE  (TrAr/juoxf^aj.)  [Eleu-
SINIA,  p.  454,  a.]

PLETHRON  (ir\46pov)  was  originally  a  mea-
sure of  surface,  which  is  the  only  sense  of  the  word
ireX^Qpov  in  Homer.  (//.  xxi.  407,  Od.  xi.  577.)
It  seems  to  have  been  the  fundamental  land  mea-
sure in  the  Greek  system,  being  the  square  of  100
feet,  that  is,  10,000  square  feet.  The  later  Greek
writers  use  it  as  the  translation  of  the  'Roms.n  juge-
rum,  probal)ly  because  the  latter  was  the  standard
land  measure  in  the  Roman  system  ;  but,  in  size,
the  pkthron  answered  more  nearly  to  the  Roman
actus,  or  half-jugerum,  which  was  the  older  unit
of  land  measures.  The  plethron  would  answer  ex-
actly to  the  actus,  but  for  the  difference  caused  by
the  former  being  decimal  (100x100),  and  the
other  partly  duodecimal  (120  x  120).  The  plethron
contained  4  arurae  of  2500  square  feet  each.

2.  As  frequently  happened  Avith  the  ancient
land  measures,  the  side  of  the  plethron  was  taken
as  a  measure  of  length,  with  the  same  name.  This
plethron  was  equal  to  100  feet  (or  about  101
English  feet)  =  66^7r'»]X€'S  =  10  6.Kaivai  or/cctAo-
fxoi.  It  was  also  introduced  into  the  system  of
itinerary  measures,  being  l-6th  of  the  stadium.
(Herod,  ii.  124  ;  comp.  Mknsura,  p.  753,  b.,  and
the  Tables).  [P.  S.]

PLINTHUS  (irAtV^os),  any  rectangular  paral-
lelepiped. 1.  A  brick  or  tile.  [Later].  2,  The
quadr.angular  piece  of  stone  which  should  properlj'-
form  the  lowest  member  of  the  base  of  a  column,
and  which  may  be  supposed  to  have  originated  in
the  use  of  a  tile  or  a  flat  piece  of  wood  to  prevent
the  shaft  from  sinking  into  the  ground  ;  although
very  frequently  the  plinth  is  wanting,  the  highest
step  or  other  basement  forming  a  sort  of  continuous
plinth  or  y)o«?iM7/i.     [Spira],  [P.  S.]

PLUMA'RIl,  a  class  of  persons,  mentioned  by
Vitruvius  (vi.  7,  p.  177,  ed.  Bip.),  Varro  {ap.
Nonium,\\.  p.  716),  and  in  inscriptions.     It  can-


POCULUM.
not  be  decided  with  certainty  what  their  exact  oc-
cupation was:  their  name  would  lead  us  to  suppose
that  it  had  something  to  do  with  feathers  (plumae).
Salmasius  (ad  Vopisc.  Carin.  c.  20)  supposes  that
they  were  persons  who  wove  in  garments  golden  or
purple  figures  made  like  feathers.  The  word,  how-
ever, probably  signifies  all  those  who  work  in  fea-
thers, as  lanarii  those  who  work  in  wool,  and
argentarii  those  who  work  in  silver.  Seneca  {Ep.
90)  speaks  of  dresses  made  of  the  feathers  of  birds.
(Becker,  GaUus,  vol.  i.  pp.  44—48.)

PLU'TEUS,  appears  to  have  signified  in  general
any  kind  of  protection  or  shelter,  and  was  hence
used  in  the  following  special  significationa  :  —  1.
A  kind  of  shed  made  of  hurdles  and  covered  with
raw  hides,  which  could  be  moved  forward  by  small
wheels  attached  to  it,  and  under  which  the  besiegers
of  a  town  made  their  approaches.  (Festus,  s.  v.  ;
Veget.  iv.  15  ;  Liv.  xxxiv.  17.)  2.  A  parapet  or
breastwork  made  of  boards  and  similar  materials,
placed  on  the  vallum  of  a  camp,  on  moveable
towers  or  other  military  engines,  on  rafts,  the  decks
of  ships,  &c.  (Festus,  s.  v.  ;  Caes.  Bell.  Gall.  vii.
25,  41,  72,  Dell.  Civ.  i.  25.)  3.  The  board  at
the  side  of  a  bed.  The  side  at  wliich  a  person
entered  the  bed  was  open  and  called  sponda :  the
other  side,  Avhich  was  protected  by  a  board,  was
called  pluteus.  (Suet.  Cal.  26  ;  Martial,  iii.  91.)
[Lectus,  p.  674,  b.]  4.  Cases  of  some  kind  upon
the  walls  of  houses  on  which  small  statues  and
busts  were  placed.  (Dig.  29.  tit.  1.  s.  17  ;  Juv.
ii.  7.)

PLYNTE'RIA  (TrXvurripia),  from  TrAvueiu,  to
wash,  was  a  festival  celebrated  at  Athens  every
year,  on  the  22nd  of  Thargelion,  in  honour  of
Athena,  surnamed  Aglauros  (Phot.  Lex.  s.  v. ;  Plut.
Alcib.  34  ;  Harpocrat.  Suid.  s.  v.),  whose  temple
stood  on  the  Acropolis.  (Herod,  viii.  53  ;  Hesycli.
s.  r.  U^vyriipia.)  Plutarch  states  that  the  festival
took  place  on  the  25th,  but  probably  only  because
it  lasted  for  several  days.  (Dodwell,  de  Cyclis,  p.
349  ;  comp.  Philol  Mus.  ii.  p.  234.)  The  day  of
this  festival  was  at  Athens  among  the  airocppddes
or  dies  nefasti;  for  the  temple  of  the  goddess  was
surrounded  by  a  rope  to  preclude  all  communi-
cation with  it  (Pollux,  viii.  141)  ;  her  statue  was
stripped  of  its  garments  and  ornaments  for  the  pur-
pose of  cleaning  them,  and  was  in  the  meanwhile
covered  over  to  conceal  it  from  the  sight  of  man.
(Plut.  I.e. ;  Xen.  Hcllen.  i,  4.  §  12.)  The  persons
who  performed  this  service  were  called  irpa^icp-
yiSai.  (Plut.  I.  c.  ;  Hesych.  s.  v.)  The  city  was
therefore,  so  to  speak,  on  this  day  Avithout  its
protecting  divinitj-,  and  any  undertaking  com-
menced on  it  was  believed  to  be  necessarily  ini-
successful.  A  procession  was  also  held  on  the  day
of  the  Plynteria,  in  which  a  quantity  of  dried  figs,
called  7)yr]Topia,  was  carried  about.  (Etymol.
Magn.  ;  Hesych.  s.  v.  'HyrjTopla ;  Phot.  Lex.
s.  V.)  [L.  S.]

PNYX.     [EccLEsiA,  p.  440,  a.]

PO'CULUM  was  any  kind  of  drinking-cup.  It
must  be  distinguished  from  the  Crater  or  vessel  in
which  the  wine  was  mixed  [Crater],  and  from
the  Cyathus,  a  kind  of  ladle  or  small  cup,  which
was  used  to  convey  the  wine  from  the  Crater  to
the  Poculum  or  drinking-cup.  [Cyathus.]  Thus
Horace  (6'«r;«.  iii.  19.  11)  —


!


"  tribus  aut  novem
Miflcentur  cyathis  pocula  commodiifl.''


I


POLEMARCHUS.

PO'DIUM,  in  architecture,  is  a  continued  pe-
destal, for  supporting  a  row  of  columns,  or  serving
for  a  parapet,  or  forming  a  sort  of  terrace,  as  the
podium  in  the  theatre  and  amphitheatre.  (Vitruv.
iii.  3,  V,  7,  vii.  4  ;  Amphitheatrum.)       [P.  S.]

POENA  (Greek,  iroiwf]).  The  Roman  sense  of
this  word  is  explained  by  Ulpian  (Dig,  50.  tit.  16.
s.  ]  3)  at  the  same  time  that  he  explains  Fraus
and  Multa.  Fraus  is  generally  an  offence,  Noxa  ;
and  Poena  is  the  punishment  of  an  offence,  Noxae
vindicta.  Poena  is  a  general  name  for  any  punish-
ment of  any  offence  :  Multa  is  the  penalty  of  a
particular  offence,  which  is  now  (in  Ulpian's  time)
pecuniary.  Ulpian  says  in  his  time  because  by
the  Law  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  the  Multa  was
pecuaria  or  a  certain  number  of  oxen  and  sheep.
(Plin.  xviii.  3  ;  Festus,  s.vv.  Multam,  PecuLatus.)
[Lex  Aternia  Tarpeia.]  Ulpian  proceeds  to
say  that  Poena  may  affect  a  person's  caput  and
existimatio,  that  is,  Poena  may  be  loss  of  citizen-
ship and  Infamia.  A  Multa  was  imposed  accord-
ing to  circumstances,  and  its  amount  was  deter-
mined by  the  pleasure  of  him  who  imposed  it.  A
Poena  was  only  inflicted  when  it  was  imposed  by
some  lex  or  some  other  legal  authority  {quo  alio
jure).  When  no  poena  was  imposed,  then  a  multa
or  penalty  might  be  inflicted.  Every  person  who
had  jurisdictio  (this  seems  to  be  the  right  reading
instead  of  judicatio)  could  impose  a  multa  ;  and
these  were  magistratus  and  praesides  provinciarum.
A  Poena  might  be  inflicted  by  any  one  who  was
intrusted  with  the  judicial  prosecution  of  the  offence
to  which  it  was  affixed.  The  legal  distinction  be-
tween Poena  and  Multa  is  not  always  observed  by
the  Roman  writers.  [G.  L.j

POLEMARCHUS  (TTo\4fiapxos).  An  account
of  the  functions  of  the  Athenian  magistrate  of  this
name  is  given  under  Archon.  Athens,  however,
was  not  the  only  state  of  Greece  which  had  officers
so  called.  We  read  of  them  at  Sparta,  and  in
various  cities  of  Boeotia.  As  their  name  denotes,
they  were  originally  and  properly  connected  with
military  affairs,  being  entrusted  either  with  the
command  of  armies  abroad,  or  the  superintendence
of  the  war  department  at  home :  sometimes  with
both.  The  polemarcbs  of  Sparta  appear  to  have
ranked  next  to  the  king,  when  on  actual  service
abroad,  and  were  generally  of  the  royal  kindred  or
house  (7€//os).  (Herod,  vii.  173.)  They  com-
manded single  morae  (Xen.  Rep.  Lac.  xi.  4),  so
that  they  would  appear  to  have  been  six  in  number
(Miiller,  Dor.  iii.  12.  §  4),  and  sometimes  whole
armies.  (Herod.  I.  c.)  They  also  formed  part  of
the  king's  council  in  war,  and  of  the  royal  escort
called  Sa/jLocria  (Xen.  Hell.  vi.  4,  §  14),  and  were
supported  or  represented  by  the  officers  called
cvfx(pope7s.  (Miiller,  iii.  12.  §5.)  The  polemarchs
of  Sparta  had  also  the  superintendence  of  the  public
tables  :  a  circumstance  which  admits  of  explana-
tion from  the  fact  that  Lycurgus  is  said  to  have
instituted  the  syssitia  for  the  purposes  of  war,  and
therefore  as  military  divisions  ;  so  that  the  Lace-
daemonians would  eat  and  fight  in  the  same  com-
pany. (Miiller,  iii.  12.  §4.)  But  in  addition  to
their  military  functions,  and  the  duties  connected
therewith,  the  polemarchs  of  Sparta  had  a  civil  as
well  as  a  certain  extent  of  judicial  power  (Id.  iii.  7.
§  8),  in  which  respect  they  resembled  the  &px<»}v
iroKcfxapxos  at  Athens.  In  Boeotia  also  there
were  magistrates  of  this  name.  At  Thebes,  for
instance,  there  appears  to  have  been  two,  perhaps


POLUS.


929


olected  annuallj'-,  and  from  what  happened  when
Phoebidas,  the  Lacedaemonian  commander,  seized
the  Cadmeia  or  citadel  of  Thebes  (b.  c.  382),  we
may  infer  that  in  times  of  peace  they  were  in-
vested with  the  chief  executive  power  of  the  state,
and  the  command  of  the  city,  having  its  military
force  under  their  orders.  (Xen.  Hell.  v.  2.  §  30.)
They  are  not,  however,  to  be  confounded  with  the
Boeotarchs.  AtThespiae  also  (Plut.  Demetr.  c.  39)
there  were  officers  of  this  name,  and  likewise  in
Aetolia  (Polyb.  iv.  79)  and  Arcadia.  At  Cynaetha
in  the  latter  country  the  gates  of  the  city  were
entrusted  to  the  special  care  of  the  Polemarchs :
they  had  to  keep  guard  by  them  in  the  day-time,
and  to  close  them  at  night,  and  the  keys  were  al-
ways kept  in  their  custody.  (Id.  iv.  18.)   [R.  W.}

POLE'TAE  (irwAfJTaj),  a  board  of  ten  officers,
or  magistrates  (for  they  are  called  a-px'h  by  Har-
pocration),  whose  duty  it  was  to  grant  leases  of  the
public  lands  and  mines,  and  also  to  let  the  revenues
arising  from  the  customs,  taxes,  confiscations,  and
forfeitures.  Of  such  letting  the  word  TtwKiiv  (not
fxiaQovv)  was  generally  used,  and  also  the  correla-
tive words  uveiaQai  and  trpiaadat.  Their  official
place  of  business  was  called  irwKrtT-fjpioj/.  One  was
chosen  from  each  tribe.  A  chairman  presided  at
their  meetings  (eVpuToi/eve).  In  the  letting  of  the
revenue  they  were  assisted  by  the  managers  of  the
theoric  fund  {rh  ^ewpiKdv)^  and  they  acted  under
the  authority  of  the  Senate  of  Five  Hundred,  who
exercised  a  general  control  over  the  financial  de-
partment of  the  administration.  Resident  aliens,
who  did  not  pay  their  residence-tax  (/xeToi/fjov),
were  summoned  before  them,  and  if  found  to  have
committed  default,  were  sold  in  a  room  called
ira\7]Tiipiov  rod  fieroiKlov.  (Demosth.  c.  Aristog,
787.)  Other  persons  who  had  forfeited  their  free-
dom to  the  state  were  also  sold  by  the  TrwA^rat,
as  foreigners  who  had  been  convicted  of  Usurping
the  rights  of  citizenship.  (Harpoc.  and  Suid.  s.  vv.
ritwA-T/Tal  and  fxiTo'iKiov  •  Pollux,  viii.  99  ;  Bdckh,
Publ.  Econ.  of  Athens^  p.  lob,  2d  ed.;  Meier,  de
ho7i.  damn.  p.  41,)  [C,  R,  K,]

POLITEIA,  POLI'TES  (TroAixeta,  TToAtTTjs).
[CiviTAS  (Greek),]

POLITOPHY'LACES  (Tro\iTO(p{)\aKis\

[Tagus.]

POLLICA'RIS.     [Pes.]

POLLICITA'TIO.     [Obligationes,  p,821.]

POLLINCTO'RES.     [Funus,  p,  558,  a.]

POLUS  {it6Kos\  in  astronomy,  is  a  very  diffi-
cult word  to  explain  in  a  perfectly  satisfactory
manner,  on  account  of  the  various  senses  in  which
it  is  used.  In  such  a  case,  the  only  safe  guide  to
the  original  meaning  of  a  word  is  to  determine,  if
possible,  its  sense  in  the  earliest  passage  in  which
it  occurs,  and  to  compare  that  sense  with  what  is
known  of  the  etymology  of  the  word.  Now  it  is
evident  that  it6Kos  contains  the  root  IlEA,  which
we  find  in  irtKoixai  and  other  words,  and  the
fundamental  idea  attached  to  which  appears  to  be
that  of  motion.  Then,  turning  to  the  Greek  au-
thors, we  find  the  word  first  occurring  in  the  well-
known  passage  in  which  Aeschylus  (Prom.  427)
speaks  of  Atlas  as  supporting  on  his  shoulders  the
pole  of  heaven,  that  is,  the  vauli  of  the  sky,  which
was  called  ttSAos  in  accordance  with  the  notion,
which  prevailed  from  the  time  of  Thales,  that  the
sky  was  a  hollow  sphere,  which  moved  continually
round  the  earth,  carrying  the  heavenly  bodies  witb
it    (Comp.  Eurip.  Or.  1 685  ;  Pseudo-Plat.  Axioch


no


POMOERIUM.


p.  371,  b;  Aristoph.  Av.  179  ;  Alex.  ap.  Ath.
p.  60,  a  ;  Ukert,  Geog.  d.  Griech.  u.  Rom.  vol.  i.
pt.  ii.  p.  115  ;  Grote,  History  of  Greece^  vol,  ii.
pp.  154,  155.)  The  next  passage,  in  order  of
time,  is  that  in  which  Herodotus  (ii.  109)  says
that  the  Greeks  learnt  from  the  Babylonians  it6\ov
KaX  yvw/mova  Kal  to  SvaimiSeKa  fJLcpea  rrjs  rjfjLfpr^s,
where  the  later  commentators  and  lexicographer*
for  the  most  part  explain  the  word  as  meaning  an
astronomical  instrument,  different  from  the  yvu^wv
or  sun  dial.  Mr.  Grote  {I.  c.)  interprets  the  pas-
sage as  signifying  that  the  Greeks  "  acquired  from
the  Babylonians  the  conception  of  tlie  pole,  or  of
the  heavens  as  a  complete  hollow  sphere,  revolving
round  and  enclosing  the  earth."  But  Herodotus
certainly  seems  to  be  speaking  of  something  more
definite  and  specific  than  a  mere  conception  respect-
ing the  sky  ;  and,  on  the  whole,  the  most  probable
explanation  is  that  of  Scaliger  and  Salmasius,  as
modified  by  recent  astronomers  and  scholars  (see
Bailly,  Delambre,  Letronne,  and  Creuzer,  as  quoted
by  Bahr,  ad  Zoc),  namely,  that  the  word  signifies
tJie  concave  liemispherical  sun-dial,  made  in  imitation
of  the  heavenly  sphere,  and  hence  called  by  the
same  name,  Trt^Aos,  which  was  the  earliest  form  of
the  sun-dial,  inasmuch  as  it  required  less  skill  than
the  delineation  of  a  sun-dial  on  a  plane  surface.
The  yuiifiuv  was  not  another  different  sort  of  sun-
dial, but  the  index,  or,  as  we  still  say,  gnomon  of
the  dial  itself,  the  shadow  of  which,  falling  upon
the  meridian  lines  of  the  sun-dial,  indicated  the
hours  of  the  day  as  marked  by  the  motion  of  the
sun  in  the  true  heavenly  ir6\os  ;  so  that,  in  fact,
the  words  tt6Kov  koX  yuwfiova  together  describe  the
instrument.  Pollux  (ix.  46)  explains  ir6\os  as
meaning  Q}po\6yiov,  in  a  passage  which  he  quotes
from  the  Gerytades  of  Aristophanes  ;  and  Lucian
(Lexiph.  4)  speaks  of  the  yuufxoiv  overshadowing
the  middle  of  the  ttSXos,  —  a  striking  confirmation
of  the  explanation  we  have  given.  The  yvea/xuv
alone  was,  in  fact,  not  originally  a  sun-dial,  but  a
mere  upright  stile,  the  length  of  the  shadow  of
which  was  measured,  to  obtain  a  rough  notion  of
the  altitude  of  the  sun  and  thence  of  the  time  of
the  day  :  afterwards,  a  dial  was  added  with  lines
marked  upon  it,  so  as  to  form  a  true  sun-dial,  which
was  still  called  yuwfxwv.  The  simple  gnomon  was
used  by  the  Greek  geographers  to  determine  the
latitude  of  places.     (Comp.  Horologium.*)

For  the  other  meanings  of  irdAos,  see  the  Greek
Lexicons.  [P.  S.]

POLY'MITA.     [Tela.]

POMOE'RIUM.  This  word  is  compounded  of
post  and  moerium  (murus),  in  the  same  manner
as  pomeridiem  of  post  and  meridiem,  and  thus  sig-
nifies a  line  running  by  the  walls  of  a  town  (  pone
or  post  muros).  The  pomoerium,  however,  did  not
consist  of  the  actual  walls  or  fortifications  of  a  place,
but  was  a  symbolical  wall,  and  the  course  of  the
pomoerium  itself  was  marked  by  stone  pillars  (cippi
pomoerii,  Varro,  de  Ling.  Lai.  v.  143,  ed.  Miiller),
erected  at  certain  intervals.  The  custom  of  making
a  pomoerium  was  common  to  the  Latins  and  Etrus-


*  In  the  article  Horologium  will  be  found
statements  differing  in  some  minor  points  from
those  in  this  article  :  such  differences  are  unavoid-
able when  a  difficult  subject  is  discussed  by  differ-
ent writers  ;  and  they  may  even  be  useful  to  the
reader  who  wishes  to  examine  the  question  tho-
roughly.    [Ed.]


POlVfOERTaM.

cans,  and  the  manner  in  which  it  was  done  in  the
earliest  times,  when  a  town  was  to  be  founded,
was  as  follows  :  —  A  bullock  and  a  heifer  were
yoked  to  a  plough,  and  a  furrow  was  drawn  around
the  place  which  was  to  be  occupied  by  the  new
town,  in  such  a  manner  that  all  the  clods  fell  in-
ward. The  little  mound  thus  formed  was  the
symbolical  wall,  and  along  it  ran  the  pomoerium,
within  the  compass  of  which  alone  the  city-auspices
(auspicia  urhand)  could  be  taken.  (Varro,  de  Ling.
Lat.  I.  c.)  That  the  actual  walls  or  fortifications
of  a  town  ran  near  it,  may  naturally  be  supposed,
though  the  pomoerium  might  either  be  within  or
without  them.  This  custom  was  also  followed  in
the  building  of  Rome,  and  the  Romans  afterwards
observed  it  in  the  establishment  of  their  colonies.
The  sacred  line  of  the  Roman  pomoerium  did  not
prevent  the  inhabitants  from  building  upon  or
taking  into  use  any  place  beyond  it,  but  it  was
necessary  to  leave  a  certain  space  on  each  side  of
it  unoccupied  so  as  not  to  unhallow  it  by  profane
use.  (Liv.  i.  44.)  Thus  we  find  that  the  Aven-
tine,  although  inhabited  from  early  times,  was  for
many  centuries  not  included  within  the  pomoe-
rium. (Gell.  xiii.  14.)  The  whole  space  included
in  it  was  called  ager  ejfatus  or  fines  effuti.  The
pomoerium  of  Rome  was  not  the  same  at  all  times  ;
as  the  city  increased  the  pomoerium  also  was  ex-
tended, but  this  extension  could,  according  to  an-
cient usage,  be  made  only  by  such  men  as  had  by
their  victories  over  foreign  nations  increased  the
boundaries  of  the  empire  (Tacit.  Annul,  xii.  23),
and  neither  could  a  pomoerium  be  formed  nor
altered  without  the  augurs  previously  consulting
the  will  of  the  gods  by  augury,  whence  the  jus
pomoerii  of  the  augurs.  (Dionys.  iv.  13  ;  Cic.  de
Div.  ii.  35.)  The  formula  of  the  prayer  which  the
augurs  performed  on  such  occasions,  and  which  was
repeated  after  them  by  the  people  who  attended,  is
preserved  in  Festus  (s.  v.  Prosimurium).

The  original  pomoerium  of  Romulus  ran,  accord-
ing to  Gellius  (J.  c),  around  the  foot  of  the  Pala-
tine, but  the  one  which  Tacitus  (Annul,  xii.  24)
describes  as  the  pomoerium  of  Romulus  comprised
a  much  wider  space,  and  was,  as  Niebuhr  thinks
(Hist,  of  Rom.  i.  p.  288  ;  compare  Bunsen,  Bes-
chreib.  d.  Stadt  Rom,  i.  p.  138  ;  Sachse,  Beschreib.
von  Rom.  i.  p.  50),  an  enlargement  of  the  original
compass,  taking  in  a  suburb  or  borough.  Niebuhr
also  believes  that  pomoerium  properly  denotes  a
suburb  taken  into  the  city.  The  Rv^mulian  pomoe-
rium, according  to  Tacitus,  ran  from  the  Forum
Boariuni  (the  arch  of  Septimius  Severus)  through
the  valley  of  the  Circus  so  as  to  include  the  ara
maxima  Herculis  ;  then  along  the  foot  of  the  Pala-
tine to  the  ara  Consi,  and  thence  from  the  Septi-
zonium  to  the  curiae  veteres  (a  little  below  the
baths  of  Trajan),  along  the  top  of  the  Velia  to  the
Sacellum  Larium,  and  lastly  by  the  via  sacra  to
the  Forum.  From  the  eastern  side  of  the  Forum
to  the  Velabrum  there  was  a  swamp,  so  that
Tacitus  does  not  mention  the  line  of  the  pomoe-
rium here.  Servius  Tullius  again  extended  the
pomoerium  (Liv.  i.  44  ;  Dionys.  iv.  1 3),  but  the
Aventine  was  not  included,  either  because  the
auspices  here  taken  by  Remus  had  been  unfavour-
able, or,  which  is  more  probable,  because  there
stood  on  this  hill  the  temple  of  Diana,  the  common
sanctuary  of  the  Latins  and  Romans.  (Gell.  /.  c.  ;
Varro,  de  Ling.  Lat.  v.  43.)  The  Aventine  did  not
become  included  within  the  pomoerium  until  the


PONDERA

time  of  the  Emperor  Claudius.  (Gell.  I.  c.  ;  Tacit.
Annal.  xii.  23.)  Dionysius  {l.  c.)  states  that  down
to  his  time  nobody  had  extended  the  pomoerium
since  the  time  of  King  Servius,  although  we  know
from  authentic  sources  that  at  least  Augustus  en-
larged the  pomoerium  (Bunsen,  I.e.  p.  139),  and
the  same  is  said  ot  Sulla  and  J.  Caesar.  (Tacit.
AnncU.  I.e.;  Gell.  I.e.;  Fest.  s.v.  Prosimurium ;
Cic.  ad  Alt.  xiii.  20  ;  Dion  Cass,  xliii.  50,  xliv.  49.)
The  last  who  extended  the  pomoerium  of  Rome
was  the  Emperor  Aurelian,  after  he  had  enlarged
the  walls  of  the  city.  (Fl.  Vopisc.  Div.  Aurel.  21  ;
comp.  Becker,  Haridbttch  der  Horn.  Alterth.  i.  p.
92,  &c.)  [L.  S.]

POMP  A  {Trofiirf})^  a  solemn  procession,  as  on
the  occasion  of  a  funeral,  triumph,  &c.  (Cic.  pro
Mil.  13  ;  Suet.  Jul.  Cues.  37,  &c.)  It  is,  how-
ever, more  particularly  applied  to  the  grand  pro-
cession with  which  the  games  of  the  Circus  com-
menced (Pompa  Circensis).     [Circus.]

PONDERA  ((TTadfMol),  The  considerations,
which  lie  at  the  basis  of  the  whole  subject  of
weights  and  measures,  both  generally,  and  with
special  reference  to  the  ancient  Greek  and  Roman
systems,  have  already  been  mentioned  in  the  in-
troductory part  of  the  article  Mensura.  In  the
present  article  it  is  proposed  to  give  a  brief  general
account  of  the  Greek  and  Roman  si/stems  of  weights.

1.  Early  Greek  Weights.  — It  has  been  already
stated,  in  the  article  Mensura,  that  all  the  know-
ledge we  have  upon  the  subject  goes  to  prove  that,
in  the  Greek  and  Roman  metrical  S5^stems,  weights
preceded  measures  ;  that  the  latter  were  derived
from  the  former ;  and  both  from  a  system  which
had  prevailed,  from  a  period  of  unknown  antiquity,
among  the  Chaldaeans  at  Babylon.  This  system
was  introduced  into  Greece,  after  the  epoch  of  the
Homeric  poems ;  for,  of  the  two  chief  denomina-
tions used  in  the  Greek  system,  namely,  raAavTov
{talentum)  and  fiva  (mina).  Homer  uses  only  the
former,  which  is  a  genuine  Greek  word,  meaning
weight,  the  other  being  an  Oriental  word  of  the
same  meaning.  (See  Nummus,  p.  810  ;  where
some  things,  which  more  properly  belong  to  this
article,  have  been  necessarily  anticipated.)  Homer
uses  TuKavTov,  like  /xerpov,  in  a  specific  sense  (//.
xxiii.  260 — 270)  ;  and  indeed  in  all  languages  the
earliest  words  used  for  weight  are  merely  generic
terms  specifically  applied;  such  are  TaXaurov,
maneh  {fJ^va),  libra,  and  our  own  pound,  from
pondus.  Hence  the  introduction  of  the  foreign
word  maneh  {jJ-va)  by  the  side  of  the  native  word
rdAauTov  indicates  the  introduction  of  a  new
standard  of  weight  ;  which  new  standard  soon
superseded  the  old  ;  and  then  the  old  word  rdXav-
rov  was  used  as  a  denomination  of  weight  in  the
new  system,  quite  different  irom  the  weight  which
it  signified  before.  This  last  point  is  manifest
from  the  passages  in  Homer,  in  which  the  word  is
used  in  a  specific  sense,  especially  in  the  description
of  the  funeral  games  (l.  c),  where  the  order  of  the
prizes  proves  that  the  talent  must  have  been  a  very-
much  smaller  weight  than  the  later  talent  of  60
minae,  or  about  82  pounds  avoirdupois ;  and  traces
of  this  ancient  sm.-ill  talent  are  still  found  at  a  very
much  later  period.  Thus  we  arrive  at  the  first
position  in  the  subject,  that  the  Greek  system  of
weight  was  post- Homeric.

2.  The  Greek  System  in  the  Historical  Period.
—  Of  course,  by  the  Greek  system  here  is  meant
the  system  which  prevailed  throughout  Greece  in


PONDERA.


931


the  historical  times,  and  which  contained  four
principal  denominations,  which,  though  different  at
different  times  and  places,  and  even  at  the  same
place  for  different  substances,  always  bore  the
same  relation  to  each  other.  These  were  the  Talent
{rdKavrov),  which  was  the  largest,  then  the  Mina
IfJ-va),  the  Drachma  (Spax/J-v),  and  the  Obol
(6§o\6s).  The  two  latter  terms  are,  in  all  pro-
bability, genuine  Greek  words,  introduced  for  the
purpose  of  making  convenient  subdivisions  of  the
standard,  SpoxM^  signifying  a  handful,  and  6§oA6s
being  perhaps  the  same  as  6€i\6s,  and  signifying
a  small  wedge  of  silver;  so  that  these  words  again
fall  under  the  description  oi generic  terms  specifically
applied.

These  weights  were  related  to  one  another  as
follows :  —


I  Talent  contained
1  Mina  „

1  Drachma      „


-  60  Minae.

-  100  Drachmas.
'       6  Obols.


Their  relative  values  are  exhibited  more  fully
in  the  following  table  :  —

Obol


6

Drachma

600

100

Mina

36,000

6000

60

Talent.

3.  Derivation  of  this  System  from  Babylon.  —
Now,  in  this  system,  the  unhellenic  word  ixva
indicates,  as  already  observed,  the  source  from
which  the  standard  was  derived.  This  word  is
undoubtedly  of  Semitic  origin  ;  and  it  seoms  to
belong  more  especially  to  the  Chaldee  dialect,  in
which  it  signifies  number  or  measure  in  its  widest
sense,  the  proper  word  for  weight  being  tekel  or
sheM.*  (See  Dan.  v.  25,  26,  where  both  words
occur).  In  Hebrew  it  is  used  as  a  specific  weight,
equal  to  50  or  60  shekels  f  (1  Kings,  x.  17  ;  Ezra,
ii.  Qd  ;  Nehem.  vii.  71,  72  ;  Ezek.  xlv.  12).  The
word  was  also  used  in  Egypt,  in  the  sense  of  a
fluid  measure  and  also  of  a  weight  of  water.  (See
Bockh,  Metrol.  Untersuch.  c.  iv.)  From  an  ex-
amination of  several  passages  of  the  Greek  writers,
by  the  light  of  the  etymological  signification  of  the
word  jJLva,  Bockh  arrives  at  the  following  conclu-
sions, which,  if  not  strictly  demonstrated,  are
established  on  as  strong  grounds  as  we  can  pro-
bably ever  hope  to  obtain  in  so  difficult  a  subject :

(1)  that  in  the  astronomical  observations  of  the
Chaldees  and  Egyptians,  time  was  measured  by  the
running  out  of  the  water  through  an  orifice  :  —

(2)  that  the  quantity  of  the  water  which  so  ran
out  was  estimated  both  by  measure  and  by  weight:
—  (4)  that  this  mode  of  measuring  time  led  na-
turally to  the  determination  of  a  connected  system
both  of  weights  and  measures,the  unit  of  which  was
the  maneh  (/J-va),  which  originally  signified  a  defi-
nite quantity  of  water,  determined  either  by  weight  or
measure,  and  was  afterwards  used  especiall}'  in  the
sense  of  a  definite  weight :  —  (5 )  that  this  system
passed  from  Assyria  to  Phoenicia,  and  thence  to


*  The  t  and  sh  are  merely  dialect  variations.

+  Which  is  the  tnie  value  is  doubtful.  Perhaps
the  two  values  were  used  at  different  places,  ac-
cording as  the  duodecimal  or  decimal  system  pre-
vailed.

So  2


932


PONDERA.


the  Greeks,  wlio  are  expressly  stated  to  have  de-
rived from  Babylon  their  method  of  dividing  the
day  and  measuring  time,  and  other  important
usages,  and  whose  most  ancient  talent  (the  Aegi-
netan)  was  still,  in  the  historical  times,  identical
with  the  Babylonian.

4.  The  Babylonian  Talent. — The  Babj^lonian
talent  itself  was  current  in  the  Persian  Empire
as  the  standard  weight  for  silver.  Under  Dareius
the  son  of  Hystaspes,  the  silver  tribute  of  the
provinces  was  estimated  by  the  Babylonian  talent,
their  gold  tribute  by  the  Eubo'ic ;  and  coined
silver  was  also  paid  from  the  royal  treasury  ac-
cording to  the  Babylonian  talent.  (Herod,  iii.  89,
foil.  ;  Aelian.  V.  H.  i.  22.)  Now  the  two  stand-
ards here  mentioned  are  connected  by  Herodotus
by  the  statement  that  the  Babylonian  talent  is
equal  to  70  Eubo'ic  minae^  which,  since  every  ta-
lent contained  60  minae,  gives  70  :  60  for  the  ratio
of  the  Babylonian  talent  to  the  Euboic.  There
are,  however,  very  sufficient  reasons  for  con-
cluding that  70  is  here  a  round  number,  not  an
exact  one.  (See  Bockh,  c.  v.)  Pollux  gives  the
same  ratio  (70  :  60)  for  that  of  the  Babylonian  to  the
Attic  talent ;  for  he  says  that  the  Babylonian  talent
contained  70  Attic  minae  and  7000  Attic  drachmae
(ix.  86) :  and  it  is  probable  that  this  statement  is
founded  on  the  testimony  of  Herodotus,  but  that
Pollux  substituted  the  familiar  Attic  standard  for
the  less  known  Euboic,  which  two  standards  he
knew  to  have  some  close  connection  with  each
other,  and  so  he  fell  into  the  error  of  making  them
precisely  equal.  The  same  correction  must  be  ap-
plied to  the  testimony  of  Aelian  {l.  c),  who  makes
the  Babylonian  talent  equal  to  72  Attic  minae  ;  and
in  this  statement,  so  corrected,  we  have  probably  the
true  ratio  of  the  Babylonian  talent  to  the  Euboic,
namely  72 :  60  or  6  :  5.  In  such  arguments  as
these,  it  is  extremely  important  to  remember  that
the  evidence  is  not  that  of  Pollux  and  Aelian,  who
could  not  possibly  give  any  independent  testimony
on  such  a  subject,  but  that  of  the  Jincient  au-
thorities whom  they  followed,  and  by  whom  the
term  Attic  may  have  been  used  truly  as  equivalent
to  Euboic  ;  for  the  Attic  standard  before  the  legis-
lation of  Solon  was  the  same  as  the  Euboic,  and
this  standard  was  still  retained  in  commerce  after
Solon's  alterations.*  In  this  sense  there  can  be
little  doubt  that,  in  the  st^itement  of  Aelian,  we
have  the  testimony  of  some  ancient  writer,  who
gave  a  more  exact  value  than  the  round  number
which  Herodotus  deemed  sufficient  for  his  purpose
as  an  historian  ;  and  the  truth  of  his  testimony  is
confirmed,  not  only  by  the  greater  exactness  of
the  number,  but  by  its  very  nature  ;  for,  not  only
do  we  find  in  70  (=7  x  10)  a  prime  factor  which
is  most  unlikely  to  have  entered  into  a  system  of

*  It  is  necessary  here  to  caution  the  student
against  an  error,  which  he 'might  mistake  for  an
ingenious  discovery  ;  into  which  Bockh  himself
fell  in  his  PuJdic  Economy  of  Alliens  ;  and  which
Mr.  Hussey  has  adopted  ;  and  to  which  therefore
the  English  student  is  much  exposed.  This  error
consists  in  assuming  that  both  Herodotus  and  Aelian
may  be  right ;  and  thus  that  the  Babylonian  talent
was  equal  to  70  Eubo'ic  or  72  Attic  minae  ;  and
therefore  that  the  ratio  of  the  Euboic  talent  to  the
Attic  was  72  :  70.  It  will  presently  be  shown  that
this  ratio  was  not  72  :  70,  but  100  :  72,  i.  e.
72  :  51-84.


I^ONDEHA.

weights,  namely  7,  but  in  72  (=6  x  12'»  as  well
as  in  60  (5  x  12)  we  have  the  duodecimal  computa-
tion which  we  know  to  have  prevailed  most  exten-
sively in  the  early  metrical  systems.  The  division
of  the  day  into  12  hours,  which  Herodotus  ex-
pressly ascribes  to  the  Babylonians,  is  not  only  a
striking  example  of  this,  but  a  fact  peculiarly  im-
portant in  connection  with  the  idea  that  the  mea-
surement of  time  by  water  led  to  the  invention
of  the  Babylonian  system  of  weights.  It  is  also
important  to  observe  that  these  two  ancient  sys-
tems, the  Babylonian  and  the  Euboic,  differ  from
one  another  in  a  proportion  which  is  expressed  by
multiplying  12  by  the  numbers  which  form  the
bases  of  the  decimal  and  duodecimal  systems  re-
spectively, namely,  6  and  5.  In  connection  with
this  fact,  it  is  interesting  to  observe  that  the
Hebrew  talent,  which  was  no  doubt  essenti.illy  the
same  as  the  Babylonian,  is  made,  by  different  com-
putations, to  consist  of -60  or  50  maneh.

Indeed,  the  whole  of  the  Hebrew  S3'stem  throws
important  light  on  the  Babylonian,  and  on  its  cori-
nection  with  the  Greek.  The  outline  of  this  sys-
tem is  as  follows  :  —

Gerah


10


20


1000


60,000


Bekah


100


6000


Shekel


50


3000


Maneh


60       Kikkat


where  the  principal  unit  is  the  Shekel.,  which  can
be  identified  with  the  principal  unit  of  the  old
Greek  system  (in  its  chief  application  to  coined
monej'),  namely,  the  didrachm  or  old  stater.  Hence
we  have  the

Kikkar  equivalent  to  the  talent

Maneh  „  mina

Shekel  „  didrachm  or  stater

Bekah  „  drachma.

To  this  part  of  the  subject,  which  we  have  not
space  to  pursue  further,  Bockh  devotes  a  long  and
elaborate  chapter  (c.  vi.  Hebr'disches,  Ph'onicisches^
und  Syrisches  Gewicht  und  Geld).

5.  The  Acgi7ietan  Talent.  —  Retunn'ng  to  the
connection  between  the  Babj'lonian  and  Greek
talent,  we  have  seen  that  the  Babylonian  talent
contained  72  Euboic  minae.  It  will  presently
appear  that  the  Euboic  talent  and  mina  were  the
same  as  the  great  Attic  talent  and  mina,  which
were  in  use  before  the  reduction  effected  in
them  by  Solon  ;  and  further  that  the  nature  of
that  reduction  was  such  that  the  Old  Attic
(Euboic)  talent  was  equivalent  to  8333^  New
Attic  (Solonian)  drachmae,  and  the  Eubo'ic  mina
to  13{jf  Solonian  drachmae.  Now  the  Baby-
lonian talent  contained  72  Euboic  minae,  that  is
(138^  X  72=)  10,000  Solonian  drachmae.  But
10,000  Solonian  drachmae  were  equivalent  to  an
Aeginetan  talent.  (Pollux,  ix.  76,  86  ;  comp.
NiJMMUS,  p.  810,  a.)  Therefore,  the  Aeginetan
Talent  was  equivalent  to  the  Babylonian.  What  is
meant  precisely  by  the  Aeginetan  talent^  and  how
this  talent  was  established  in  Greece  by  the  legia-
lation  of  Pheidon,  has  already  been  explained
under  Nummus.  The  only  step  remaining  to
complete  the  exposition  of  the  outline  of  the  sub-


i


PONDERA;
ject  is  the  obvious  remark  that  Pheidon  must  have
arranged  his  standard  of  weights  by  tliat  which
had  already  been  introduced  into  Greece  by  the
commerce  of  the  Phoenicians,  namely,  the  Baby-
lonian.

6.  The  Evbo'ic  Talent.  —  In  the  foregoing  re-
marks, tJie  Eubo'ic  talent  has  been  continually
referred  to  as  a  standard  with  which  to  compare
the  Babylonian.  We  have  now  to  investigate
independently  its  origin  and  value.  The  name
Eubo'ic,  like  the  name  Aeyinetan,  is  calculated  to
mislead,  as  we  see  in  the  absurd  explanations
by  which  some  of  the  grammarians  attempt  to  ac-
count for  its  origin.  (See  Nuiumus,  p.  810.)
That  the  name  comes  from  the  island  of  Euboea,
and  that  the  Euboic  standard  was  not  only  used
there,  but  was  widely  diffused  thence  by  the  Chal-
cidic  colonies,  admits  of  no  reasonable  doubt  ;  but
it  is  not  very  probable  that  the  standard  originated
there.  The  most  important  testimony  respecting
it  is  the  statement  already  quoted,  that  Dareius
reckoned  the  gold  tribute  of  his  satrapies  in  Euboic
talents.  (Herod,  iii,  89,  ^o.)  Bbckh  (c.  viii.)
thinks  it  incredible  that  the  Persian  king  should
have  made  this  use  of  a  Greek  standard  ;  and,
before  him,  the  best  of  all  the  writers  on  metro-
logy, Raper,  had  acknowledged  the  Oriental  origin
of  the  standard.  {Philos.  Trans,  vol.  Ixi.  p.  486.)
This  view  derives  also  some  support  from  the
curious  numerical  relation  already  noticed  between
the  Babylonian  and  Euboic  scales  ;  which  suggests
the  idea  that  the  minae  of  the  two  scales  may
have  been  derived  from  the  subdivision  of  the
same  primary  unit,  in  the  one,  into  parts  both
decimal  and  duodecimal,  that  is,  sexagesimal  (60),
in  the  other,  into  parts  purely  duodecimal  (72)  ;
and  then,  for  the  sake  of  uniformity,  a  talent  of
the  latter  scale  was  introduced,  containing,  like
the  other,  60  minae.  Bo  this  as  it  may,  it  can
be  affirmed  with  tolerable  safety  that  the  Euboic
talent  is  derived  from  a  standard  of  weight  used
for  gold,  which  existed  in  the  East,  in  the  earliest
historical  period,  by  the  side  of  the  Babylonian
standard,  which  was  used  chiefly  for  silver:  that,
at  an  early  period,  it  was  introduced  by  commerce
into  Euboea,  from  which  island  it  derived  the
name  by  which  it  was  known  to  the  Greeks,  on
account  of  its  diffusion  by  the  commercial  activity
of  the  Euboeans,  just  as  the  Babylonian  standard
obtained  its  Greek  name  from  the  commercial  ac-
tivity of  the  Aeginetans.    (Comp.  Nummus,  I.  c.)

The  examination  of  the  testimonies  respecting
the  value  of  this  standard  involves  a  discussion  too
intricate  to  be  entered  upon  here,  although  it  is
one  of  the  most  interesting  points  of  the  whole  sub-
ject. We  must  be  content  to  refer  the  reader  to
the  masterly  argument  of  Bockh  (c.  viii,),  who  comes
to  the  following  conclusions :  —  that  the  Euboic
standard  was  not,  as  some  have  thought,  the  same
as  the  Aeginetan  ;  nor  the  same,  or  but  slightly
different  from,  the  Solonian  Attic  ;  but  the  same
as  the  old  (ante-Solonian)  Attic:  —  that  its  true
ratio  to  the  Babylonian,  or  Aeginetan,  was  that
given  in  round  numbers  by  Herodotus,  as  60  :  70,
and  in  exact  numbers  by  Aelian  (who  by  Attic
means  old  Attic)  as  fJO  :  72,  that  is,  5  :  6  ;  and  that
its  ratio  to  the  Solonian  was,  as  will  presently  be
shown,  25  :  18.  These  views  are  confirmed,  not
only  by  the  consistency  of  the  results  to  which  they
lead,  but  by  the  decisive  evidence  of  the  existing
coins  of  the  Euboic  standard.  [Nummus.]


PONDERA.  933

These  two  standards  form  the  foundation  of  the,
whole  system  of  Greek  weights.  But  the  second
received  an  important  modification  by  the  legis-
lation of  Solon  ;  and  this  modification  became*
under  the  name  of  the  Attic  silver  talent,  the  chief
standard  of  weight  throughout  the  East  of  Europe,
and  the  West  of  Asia.  We  proceed  to  notice  both
of  the  Attic  standards.  j

7.  The  Old  Attic  Talent,  and  the  Solonian  Ta-
lent.—  We  have  already  noticed,  under  Nummus
(pi  812,  b.),  Plutarch's  account  of  the  reduction
effected  by  Solon  in  the  Attic  system  of  weights
and  money,  according  to  which  the  old  weights
were  to  the  new  in  the  proportion  of  100  :  73.
An  important  additional  light  is  thrown  on  this
matter  by  an  extant  Athenian  inscription,  from
which  we  obtain  a  more  exact  statement  of  the
ratio  than  in  Plutarch's  account,  and  from  which
we  also  learn  that  the  old  system  continued  in  use»
long  after  the  Solonian  reduction,  for  all  commodities,
except  such  as  were  required  by  law  to  be  weighed
according  to  the  other  standard,  which  was  also  the
one  always  used  for  money,  and  is  therefore  called
the  silver  standard,  the  old  system  being  called
the  commercial  standard,  and  its  mina  the  commer-
cial mina  (r]  fj.va  t]  i/jLiropiK-f}).  The  inscription,
which  is  a  decree  of  uncertain  date  (about  01.  155,,
B.  c.  160,  according  to  Bockh,  C.  /.  No.  123,  §  4,
vol,  i.  p.  164),  mentions  the  commercial  mina  a^
weighing  "138  drachmae  ^recpavrjipopov,  accord-
ing to  the  standard  weights  in  the  mint  "  fARGY-
rocopeion],  that  is,  ot  course,  138  drachmae  of
the  silver,  or  Solonian,  standard.  This  wouid  give
the  ratio  of  the  old  to  the  new  Attic  weights  as
138  :  100,  or  100  :  72^,  certainly  a  very  curious
proportion.  It  appears,  however,  on  closer  re-
search, that  this  ratio  is  still  not  quite  exact.  It
often  happens  that,  in  some  obsciu-e  passage  of  a
grammarian,  we  find  a  statement  involving  minute
details,  so  curious  and  so  inexplicable,  till  the  clue
is  found,  that  the  few  scholars  who  notice  the
passage  reject  it  as  unintelligible,  without  con-
sidering that  those  strange  minutiae  are  the  best
evidence  that  the  statement  is  no  invention  ;  and
that  the  grammarian,  who  copied  the  statement,
without  troubling  himself  to  understand  it,  has
preserved  a  fact,  which  more  systematic  writers
have  lost  or  perverted.  Such  passages  are  grains
of  pure  gold  amidst  the  mud  which  forms  the  bulk,
of  the  deposit  brought  down  to  us  by  those  writers.,
A  striking  instance  is  now  before  us,  in  a  passage,
of  Priscian  (de  Re  Numm.)  in  which,  following  a
certain  Dardanus,  he  says :  "  Talentum  Athenienso
parvum  minae  sexaginta,  mo^^wMW  minae  octingenta
tres  et  unciae  quattuor."  Taking  the  last  words
to  be  the  Roman  mode  of  expressing  83^,  and  as-
suming, what  is  obvious,  that  the  minae  meant  in
the  two  clauses  are  of  the  same  standard,  namely,
the  common  Attic  or  Solonian  (for,  as  a  general
rule,  this  standard  is  to  be  understood,  where  no
other  is  specified),  and  understanding  by  the  great
Attic  talent  that  of  the  commercial  standard,  and
by  the  ^lall,  thq  silver,  or  Solonian,  we  obtain  this'
result,  —  that  the  ratio  of  the  old  Attic  or  commercial
talent  to  the  new  Attic  or  Solonian,  was  as  83^  :  60,
or  as  V6%%  :  100,  or  as  100  :  72.  For  the  masterly
argument  by  which  Bockh  sustains  the  truth  of
this  statement,  we  must  refer  to  his  own  worfc
(c.  viii.).  It  is  easy  to  understand  how,  in  process
of  time,  the  fraction  came  to  be  neglected,  so  that,
in  thQ  decree  quoted,  the  commerjcial  mina,  of  100
3  o  3


»34


PONDERA.


tommercial  drachmae  was  spoken  of  as  containing
138  silver  drachmae  instead  of  138^,  and  how,
further,  when  PlutJirch  came  to  calculate  how  many-
drachmae  of  the  old  scale  were  contained  in  the
Solonian  mina,  he  gave  an  integral  number  73,
instead  of  72ff,  and  thus,  by  these  two  rejections
effractions,  the  true  ratio  of  100  :  72  was  altered
to  100  :73.*

8.  Ratios  of  the  three  Greek  Systems  to  each  otiter.
— The  importance  of  this  calculation  is  made  mani-
fest, and  its  truth  is  confirmed,  by  comparing  tfte
result  with  the  statements  which  we  have  of  the
ratio  of  the  Aeginetan  standard  to  the  Solonian.
That  ratio  was  5  :  3,  according  to  the  state-
ment of  Pollux,  that  the  Aeginetan  talent  con-
tained 10,000  Attic  drachmae,  and  the  drachma
10  Attic  obols.  (Poll.  ix.  76,  86.)  Mr.  Hussey
(who  was  the  first,  and,  after  the  reply  of  Bdckh,
ought  to  be  the  last,  to  call  this  statement  in  ques-
tion) observes  that  this  value  would  give  an  Aegi-
netan drachma  of  110  grains,  whereas  the  existing
coins  give  an  average  of  only  96  ;  and  he  explains
the  statement  of  Pollux  as  referring  not  to  the
Attic  silver  drachmae  of  the  full  weight,  but  to  the
lighter  drachma  which  was  current  in  and  after
the  reign  of  Augustus,  and  which  was  about  equal
to  the  Roman  denarius.    [Drachma.]

On  the  other  hand,  Biickh  adheres  to  the  pro-
portion of  5  :  3,  as  given  by  Pollux,  who  could  not
(he  contends)  have  meant  by  drachmae  those  equal
to  the  denarii,  because  he  is  not  making  a  calcula-
tion of  his  own,  suited  to  the  value  of  the  drachma
in  his  time,  but  repeating  the  statement  of  some
ancient  writer  who  lived  when  the  Attic  and
Aeginetan  currencies  were  in  their  best  condition.
Mr.  Hussey  himself  states  (p.  34),  and  for  a  si-
milar reason  to  that  urged  by  Bockh,  that  when
Pollux  speaks  of  the  value  of  the  Babylonian
talent  in  relation  to  the  Attic,  he  is  to  be  under-
stood as  referring  to  Attic  money  of  the  full
weight:  and  Bockh  adds  the  important  remark,
that  where  Pollux  reckons  by  the  lighter  drachmae,
as  in  the  case  of  the  Syrian  and  small  Egyptian
talents,  this  only  proves  that  those  talents  had  but
recently  come  into  circulation.  Bockh  thinks  it
very  probable  that  Pollux  followed  the  authority
of  Aristotle,  whom  he  used  much,  to  which  he
makes  frequent  references  in  his  statements  re-
specting measures  and  money,  and  who  had  fre-
quent occasions  for  speaking  of  the  values  of  money
in  his  political  works.

Again,  as  the  Aeginetan  standard  was  that
which  prevailed  over  the  greater  part  of  Greece  in
early  times,  we  should  expect  to  find  some  definite
proportion  between  it  and  the  old  Attic  before
Solon:  and,  if  we  take  the  statement  of  Pollux,
we  do  get  such  a  proportion,  namely,  that  of  6  :  5,
the  same  which  has  been  obtained  from  the  fore-
going investigation.

Bockh  supports  his  view  by  the  evidence  of  ex-

*  The  commercial  weights  underwent  a  change
by  the  decree  mentioned  above,  which  orders  that
12  drachmae  of  the  silver  standard  shall  be  added  to
the  mina  of  138  drachmae  ;  that  to  every  five  com-
mercial minae  one  commercial  mina  shall  be  added  ;
and  to  every  commercial  talent  five  commercial
aaicae.     Thus  we  shall  have  —

the  mina  =  ISO  drachmae  (silver),
5  minae    =       6  minae  (commercial),
the  talent  =    65  minae  (commercial).


PONDERA.

isting  coins,  especially  the  old  Macedonian,  before
the  adoption  of  the  Attic  standard  by  Philip  and
Alexander,  which  give  a  drachma  of  about  110
grains,  which  is  to  the  Attic  as  5  :  3.  The  iden-
tity of  the  old  Macedonian  standard  with  the
Aeginetan  is  proved  by  Bockh  (Metrol.  p.  89  ;
compare  Miiller,  Dor.  iii.  10.  §  12.  and  Aeyinet.
pp.  54 — 58).  There  are  also  other  very  ancient
Greek  coins  of  this  standard,  which  had  their
origin,  in  all  probability,  in  the  Aeginetan  system.
[NuMMUs,  p.  812,  a.]

The  lightness  of  the  existing  coins  referred  to
by  Hussey  is  explained  by  Bfickh  from  the  well-
kno^vn  tendency  of  the  ancient  mints  to  depart
from  the  full  standard.

Mr.  Hussey  quotes  a  passage  where  Herodotus
(iii.  131)  states  that  Democedes,  a  physician,  after
receiving  a  talent  in  one  year  at  Aegina,  obtained
at  Athens  the  next  year  a  salary  of  100  minae,
which  Herodotus  clearly  means  was  more  than
what  he  had  before.  But,  according  to  Pollux's
statement,  says  Mr.  Hussey,  the  two  sums  were
exactly  equal,  and  therefore  there  was  no  gain.
But  Herodotus  says  nothing  of  different  standards  ;
surely  then  he  meant  the  same  standard  to  be  ap-
plied in  both  cases.

From  comparing  statements  made  respecting  tlie
pay  of  soldiers,  Hussey  (p.  61)  obtains  4  :  3  as
about  the  ratio  of  the  Aeginetan  to  the  Attic
standard.  Bockh  accounts  for  this  by  supposing
that  the  pay  of  soldiers  varied,  and  by  the  fact  that
the  Aeginetan  money  was  actually  lighter  than  the
proper  standard,  while  the  Attic  at  the  same  period
was  very  little  below  the  full  weight.

There  are  other  arguments  on  both  sides,  but
what  has  been  said  will  give  a  sufficiently  complete
view  of  the  question.

As  the  result  of  the  whole  investigation,  we  get
the  following  definite  ratios  between  the  three
chief  systems  of  Greek  weights  :

Aeginetan  :  Euboic     :  :  6  '.  B

Aeginetan  :  Solonian  :  :  5  :  3

Euboic       :  Solonian  :  :  138f  :  100

i.e.  :  :  100    :    72

:  :    25    :    18

or  nearly  :  :      4    :      3

The  reason  of  the  strange  ratio  between  the
Solonian  and  old  Attic  (Euboic)  system  seems  to
have  been  the  desire  of  the  legislator  to  establish
a  simple  ratio  between  his  new  system  and  the
Aeginetan.  Respecting  the  diffusion  of  the  three
systems  throughout  Greece,  see  Nummus.

9.  Otiier  Grecian  Systems.  —  Our  information  re-
specting the  other  standards  used  in  Greece  and  the
neighbouring  countries  is  very  scanty  and  confused.
Respecting  the  Egyptian^  Alexayidrian^  or  Ptoleniaio
Talent,  the  reader  is  referred  to  Bockh,  c.  x.  The
Tyrian  Talent  appears  to  have  been  exactly  equal
to  the  Attic.  A  Rhodian  Talent  is  mentioned  by
Festus  in  a  passage  which  is  manifestly  corrupt  («.  v.
Talentum).  The  most  probable  emendation  of  the
passage  gives  4000  cistophori  or  7500  denarii  as  the
value  of  this  talent.  A  Syrian  Talent  is  mentioned,
the  value  of  which  is  very  uncertain.  There  were
two  sizes  of  it.  The  larger,  which  was  six  times
that  used  for  money,  was  used  at  Antioch  for  weigh-
ing wood.  A  Cilician  Talent  of  3000  drachmae,  or
half  the  Attic,  is  mentioned  by  Pollux  (ix.  6).

A  much  smaller  talent  was  in  use  for  gold.  It
was  equal  to  6  Attic  drachmae,  or  about  f  oz.     It


i


PONDERA.

was  called  the  gold  talent,  or  the  Sicilian  talent
from  its  being  much  used  by  the  Greeks  of  Italy
and  Sicily.  This  talent  is  perhaps  connected  with
the  small  talent  which  is  the  only  one  that  occurs
in  Homer.  The  Italian  Greeks  divided  it  into
24  nummi,  and  afterwards  into  12  (Pollux,  ix.  6  ;
Festus,  s.  V.  Talentum).  [Compare  Nummus,  p.
814.]

This  small  talent  explains  the  use  of  the  terra
great  talent  (magnum  talentum),  which  we  find  in
Latin  authors,  for  the  silver  Attic  talent  was  great
in  comparison  with  this.  But  the  use  of  the  term
by  the  Romans  is  altogether  very  inexact ;  and  in
some  cases,  where  they  follow  old  Greek  writers,
they  use  it  to  signify  the  old  Attic  or  Euboic
Talent.

There  are  other  talents  barely  mentioned  by  an-
cient writers.  Hesychius  (s.  v.)  mentions  one  of
100  pounds  (\iTpccu\  Vitruvius  (x.  21)  one  of
120  ;  Suidas  (s.  r.),  Hesychius,  and  Epiphanius
(de  Mens,  et  Pond.)  of  125  ;  Dionysius  of  Halicar-
nassus  (ix.  27)  one  of  125  asses,  and  Hesychius
three  of  165,  400,  and  1125  pounds  respectively.

Where  talents  are  mentioned  in  the  classical
writers  without  any  specification  of  the  standard,
we  must  generally  understand  the  Attic.

10.  Comparison  of  Grecian  Weights  with  our  own.
—  In  calculating  the  value  of  Greek  Aveights  in
terms  of  our  own,  the  only  safe  course  is  to  follow
the  existing  coins  ;  and  among  these  (for  the  reasons
stated  under  Nummus,  p.  811,  b.),  it  is  only  the
best  Attic  coins  that  can  be  relied  on  with  any  cer-
tainty, although  there  are  many  other  coins  which
aiford  valuable  confirmatory  evidence,  after  the
standards  to  which  they  belong  have  been  fixed.

Mr.  Hussey's  computation  of  the  Attic  drachma,
from  the  coins,  is  perhaps  a  little  too  low,  but  it  is
80  very  near  the  truth  that  we  may  safely  follow
it,  for  the  sake  of  the  advantage  of  using  his
numbers  without  alteration.  He  makes  the
drachma  66'5  grains.  [Drachma:  comp.  Num-
mus, p.  811,  b. :  for  the  other  weights  see  the
Tables.]

11.  Roman  Weights. — The  outlineof  the  Roman
and  Italian  system  of  weights,  which  was  the  same
as  the  ancient  system  of  copper  money,  has  been
already  given  under  As.  The  system  is  extremely
simple,  but  its  conversion  into  our  own  standard
is  a  question  of  very  considerable  difficulty.  The
following  are  the  different  methods  of  computing
it:  —

(1)  The  Roman  coins  furnish  a  mode  of  calcu-
lating the  weight  of  the  libra,  which  has  been  more
relied  on  than  any  other  by  most  modem  writers.
The  As  will  scarcely  help  us  in  this  calculation,
because  its  weight,  though  originally  a  pound,  was
very  early  diminished,  and  the  existing  specimens
differ  from  each  other  very  greatly  [As],  but  speci-
mens, which  we  may  suppose  to  be  asses  lihrales,
may  of  course  be  used  as  confirmatory  evidence.
We  must  therefore  look  chiefly  to  the  silver  and
gold  coins.  Now  the  average  weight  of  the  exfcmt
specimens  of  the  denarius  is  about  60  grains,  .and
in  the  early  ages  of  the  coinage  84  denarii  went  to
the  pound.  [Dknarius.]  The  pound  then,  by
this  calculation,  would  contain  5040  grains.  Again,
the  aurd  of  the  early  gold  coinage  were  equal  in
weight  to  a  ser«/)M/M7ft  and  its  multiples.  [Aurum.]
Now  the  scrupulum  was  the  288th  part  of  the
pound  [Unci a],  and  the  average  of  the  scrupular
ourei  has  been  found  by  Letronne  tc  be  about  1 7^


PONDERA.


935


grains.  Hence  the  pound  will  be  288x17^=
5040  grains,  as  before.  The  next  aurei  coined
were,  according  to  Pliny,  40  to  the  pound,  and
therefore,  if  the  above  calculation  be  right,  =  1 26
grains  ;  and  we  do  find  many  of  this  weight.  But,
well  as  these  results  hang  together,  there  is  great
doubt  of  their  truth.  For,  besides  the  uncertainty
which  always  attends  the  process  of  calculating  a
larger  quantity  from  a  smaller  on  account  of  the
multiplication  of  a  small  error,  we  have  every
reason  to  believe  that  the  existing  coins  do  not
come  up  to  their  nominal  weight,  for  there  was  an
early  tendency  in  the  Roman  mint  to  make  money
below  weight  (Plin.fl".  A'.xxxiii.  13.s,46  ;  compare
As,  Aurum,  Denarius),  and  we  have  no  proof
that  any  extant  coins  belonged  to  the  very  earliest
coinage,  and  therefore  no  security  that  they  may
not  have  been  depreciated.  In  fact,  there  are  many
specimens  of  the  denarius  extant,  which  weigh  more
than  the  above  average  of  60  grains.  It  is  there-
fore probable  that  the  weight  of  5040  grains,  ob-
tained from  this  source,  is  too  little.  Hence,
Wurm  and  Bockh,  who  also  follow  the  coins,  give
it  a  somewhat  higher  value,  the  former  making  it
5053-635  grains,  and  the  latter  5053-28.  (Hussey,
c.  9  ;  Wurm,  c.  2  ;  Bockh,  c.  1 1 ).

(2)  Another  mode  of  determining  the  pound  is
from  the  relation  between  the  Roman  weights  and
measures.  The  chief  measures  which  aid  us  in
this  inquiry  are  the  amphora  or  quadrantal,  and
the  congius.  The  solid  content  of  the  amphora
was  equal  to  that  of  a  cube,  of  which  the  side  was
one  Roman  foot,  and  the  weight  of  water  it  con-
tained was  80  pounds.  [Quadrantal.]  Hence,
if  we  can  ascertain  the  length  of  the  Roman  foot
independently,  it  will  give  us  the  solid  content  of
the  amphora,  from  which  we  can  deduce  the  weight
of  the  Roman  pound.  Taking  the  Roman  foot  at
11*65  inches,  its  cube  is  1581*167  cubic  inches  =
5*7025  imperial  gallons  —  57-025  pounds  avoirdu-
pois, the  80th  part  of  which  is  *7128  of  a  pound,
or  4989  grains.  But  there  are  many  disturbing
elements  in  this  calculation,  of  which  the  chief  is
our  ignorance  of  the  precise  density  of  the  fluid,
80  pounds  of  which  filled  the  amphora.

It  might,  at  first  thought,  appear  that  the  result
might  be  obtained  at  once  from  the  congius  of
Vespasian,  which  professes  to  hold  10  Roman
pounds  [Congius],  and  the  content  of  which  has
been  twice  examined.  In  1630,  Auzout  found  it
to  contain  51463*2  grains  of  distilled  water,  which
would  give  5146-32  grains  for  the  Roman  pound.
In  1721,  Dr.Hase  found  it  to  contain  52037*69
grains,  giving  5203*77  grains  for  the  Roman  pound.
Both  these  results  are  probably  too  high,  on  ac-
count of  the  enlargement  which  the  vessel  has
undergone  by  the  corrosion  of  its  inner  surface  ;
and  this  view  is  confirmed  by  the  fact,  that  the
earlier  of  the  two  experiments  gave  it  the  smaller
content.  (See  Wurm,  p.  78;  Bockh,  pp.  166,
167.)  Again,  the  nature  of  the  fluid  employed  in
the  experiment,  its  temperature,  and  the  height  of
the  barometer,  would  all  influence  the  result,  and
the  error  from  these  sources  must  occur  twice,
namely,  at  the  original  making  of  the  congius  and
at  the  recent  weighing  of  its  contents.  We  can,
therefore,  by  no  means  agree  with  Mr.  Hussey  in
taking  the  weight  of  5204  grains,  as  obtained  from
this  experiment,  to  be  the  nearest  approximation
to  the  weight  of  the  Roman  pound.  On  the  con-
trary, if  this  method  were  followed  at  all,  we
3o  4


936


PONDERA,


should  he  compelled  to  prefer  the  theoretical  cal-
culation from  the  quadrantal  already  given,  and  to
say  that  the  value  of  5053'28  (or  5053-635)
grains,  obtained  from  the  coins  is  too  high,  rather
than  too  low.

(3)  Another  method  is  from  existing  Roman
weights^  of  which  we  possess  many,  but  differing
so  greatly  among  themselves,  that  they  can  give
no  safe  independent  result,  and  their  examination
is  little  more  than  a  matter  of  curiosity.  A  full
account  of  them  will  be  found  in  Bockh,  pp,  168 —
196.

(4)  The  determination  of  the  Roman  pound
from  its  ratio  to  tlie  Attic  talent^  namely,  as  1  :  80
(see  Bockh,  c.  9)  is  not  to  be  much  relied  on  ;
since  we  do  not  know  whether  that  ratio  was  exact,
or  only  approximate.

On  the  whole,  the  result  obtained  from  the  coins
is  probably  nearest  to  the  truth.

12.  Connection  hetwee7t  Weights  and  Measures.
—  Upon  the  interesting,  but  very  difficult,  subjects
of  the  connection  of  the  Greek  and  Roman  weights
with  one  another,  and  of  both  with  the  Greek
measures,  our  space  does  not  permit  us  to  add  any-
thing to  the  passages  quoted  from  Bockh  and
Grote  under  Mensura,  p.  754  ;  and  to  what  is
said  under  Quadrantal.

13,  Authorities. —  The  following  are  the  chief
authorities  on  the  subject  of  ancient  weights,
money,  and  measures.

i.  Ancient  Authorities.  —  In  addition  to  the  classic
writers  in  general,  especially  the  historians  and
geographers,  (1)  the  Ancient  Grammarians  and
lexicographers  contain  many  scattered  notices,
some  of  which  are  preserved  from  the  last  metro-
logical  treatises  of  Dardanus,  Diodorus,  Polemar-
chus,  and  others.  (2)  We  possess  a  number  of
small  metrological  treatises^  which  are  printed  in
the  fifth  volume  of  Stephanus's  Thesaurus  Linguae
Graecae,  and  with  the  works  of  Galen,  o\.  xix.
ed.  Klihn.  The  most  important  of  them  are,  that
ascribed  to  Dioscorides,  the  piece  entitled  Trepl
ficTpav  vypS)v,  and  the  extract  from  the  Ko<Tfir]TiKa
of  Cleopatra.  Besides  these,  we  have  a  good
treatise  on  the  subject,  printed  in  the  Benedictine
Analeeta  Graeca^  pp.  393,  foil.,  and  in  Montfaucon's
Pale.ogra.phie  Grecque,  pp.  369,  foil. : — two  works,
of  but  little  value,  ascribed  to  Epiphanius,  entitled
rrepl  fjLerpwv  Kal  tXTadfxuu  and  ircpl  irr)\iK6Tr]Tos
/jLCTpuv,  printed  in  the  Varia  Sacra  of  Steph.  Le
Moyne,  vol.  i.  pp.  470,  foil. :  —  various  writings  of
Heron  (see  Diet,  of  Diog.  s.v.)\  —  and  a  treatise
by  Didymus  of  Alexandria,  /LieVpa  iiapfxapwv  /cal
iravToiav  ^v\(av,  published  by  Angelo  Mai  from  a
MS.  in  the  Ambrosian  Library  at  Milan,  1817,
8vo.  Certain  difficulties  respecting  the  authorship
of  some  of  these  works  are  discussed  by  Bockh,
c.  2.  In  Latin,  we  have  two  workr  by  Priscian  ;
the  one  in  prose,  entitled,  De  Figuris  et  Nomiiiibus
Nttmerorum  et  de  Nummis  ac  Po7ideribus  ad
Symmachum  Liber;  the  other  is  the  poem  De
Fonderibus  et  Afensuris,  in  208  hexameter  verses,
which  is  commonly  ascribed  to  Rhemnius  Fannius,
and  which  is  printed  in  Wemsdorf 's  Foetae  Latini
Minores,  vol.  v.  pt.  1.  pp.  212,  foil.,  and  in  Weber's
Corpus  Poetarum  Latinorwn,  pp.  1369,  1370.
The  statements  of  all  these  metrological  writers
must  be  used  with  great  caution  on  account  of  their
late  age.  (3)  The  chief  Existing  Monuments  such
as  buildings,  measures,  vessels,  weights,  and  coins,
have  been  mentioned  in  the  articles  Mbnsura,


.    PONS.

and   NuMivfUS.      Further  information  TeSpecting
them  will  be  found  in  Biickh,

ii.  Modem  Works  :  see  the  list  given  at  the  end
of  the  article  Nummus.  The  present  position  of
our  knowledge  is  marked  by  the  work  of  Biickh,
so  often  referred  to,  with  Mr.  Grote 's  review  of  it.
There  is  no  satisfactory  English  work  on  the  sub-
ject. The  best,  so  far  as  it  goes,  is  the  treatise  of
Raper,  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions.,  vol.  Ixi.
Mr.  Hussey's  work  is  very  useful,  but  its  value
is  much  impaired  by  the  want  of  more  of  that
criticism,  at  once  ingenious  and  sound,  which  has
guided  Bockh  to  so  many  new  and  firm  results
amidst  intricacies  which  were  before  deemed  hope-
less.

For  a  general  view  of  the  value  of  the  several
weights,  measures,  and  money  in  terms  of  our  own,
see  the  Tables  at  the  end  of  this  work.        [P.  S."}

PONDO.     [Libra.]

PONS  (y4<pvpa),  a  bridge.  The  most  ancient
bridge  upon  record,  of  which  the  construction  has
been  described,  is  the  one  erected  by  Nitocris  over
the  Euphrates  at  Babylon.  (Herod,  i.  186.)  It
was  in  the  nature  of  a  drawbridge  ;  and  con-
sisted merely  of  stone  piers  without  arches,  but
connected  with  one  another  by  a  framework  of
planking,  which  was  removed  at  night  to  prevent
the  inhabitants  from  passing  over  from  the  different
sides  of  the  river  to  commit  mutual  depredations.
The  stones  were  fastened  together  by  iron  cramps
soldered  with  lead  ;  and  the  piers  were  built  whilst
the  bed  of  the  river  was  free  from  water,  its  course
having  been  diverted  into  a  large  lake,  which  was
again  restored  to  the  usual  channel  when  the  work
had  been  completed.  (Herod.  /.  c.)  Compare  the
description  given  by  Diodorus  Siculus  (ii.  8,  vol.  i.
p.  121,  ed.  Wesseling),  who  ascribes  the  work  to
Semiramis.

Temporary  bridges  constructed  upon  boats,
called  (TxeSmi  (Hesych.  s.  v.  ;  Herod,  vii,  36  ;
Aesch.  Pers.  69,  ed.  Blomf.,  et  Gloss.),  were  also
of  very  early  invention.  Dareius  is  mentioned  as
having  thrown  a  bridge  of  this  kind  over  the
Thracian  Bosporus  (Herod,  iv.  83,  85)  ;  but  we
have  no  details  respecting  it,  beyond  the  name  of
its  architect,  Mandrocles  of  Samos.  (Herod,  iv.  87,
88.)  The  one  constructed  by  order  of  Xerxes
across  the  Hellespont  is  more  celebrated,  and  has
been  minutely  described  by  Herodotus  (vii.  36).
It  was  built  at  the  place  where  the  Chersonese
forms  almost  a  right  angle,  between  the  towns  of
Sestos  and  Madytus  on  the  one  side,  and  Abydos
on  the  other.  The  first  bridge,  which  was  con-
structed at  this  spot,  was  washed  away  by  a  storm
almost  immediately  after  it  was  completed  (Herod,
vii.  34),  and  of  this  no  details  are  given.  The
subsequent  one  was  executed  under  the  directions
of  a  different  set  of  architects.  (Id.  36.)  Both  of
them  appear  to  have  partaken  of  the  nature  of
suspension  bridges,  the  platform  which  formed  the
passage-way  being  secured  upon  enormous  cables
formed  by  ropes  of  flax  (\evKo\lvov)  and  papyrus
(fiv€\iuuu)  twisted  together,  and  then  stretched
tight  by  means  of  windlasses  (uuoi)  on  each  side.

The  bridges  hitherto  mentioned  cannot  be
strictly  denominated  Greek,  although  the  archi-
tects by  whom  the  two  last  were  constructed  were
natives  of  the  Greek  islands.  But  the  frequent
mention  of  the  word  in  Homer  proves  that  bridges
were  not  xmcommon  in  the  Greek  states,  or  at  least
in  the  western  part  of  Asia  Minor,  during  his  time.


PONS.

Tlie  Greek  term  for  a  permanent  bridge  is  yf<pvpa^
which  the  ancient  etymologists  connected  with  the
Gephyraei  {Ti<pvpaioi),  a  people  whom  Herodotus
(v.  57)  states  to  have  been  Phoenicians,  though
they  pretended  to  have  come  from  Eretria ;  and
the  etymologists  accordingly  tell  us  that  the  first
bridge  in  Greece  was  built  by  this  people  across
the  Cephissus ;  but  such  an  explanation  is  opposed
to  sound  etymology  and  common  sense.  As  the
rivers  of  Greece  were  small,  and  the  use  of  the  arch
known  to  them  only  to  a  limited  extent  [Arcus],
it  is  probable  that  their  bridges  were  built  entirely
of  wood,  or,  at  best,  were  nothing  more  than  a
wooden  platform  supported  upon  stone  piers  at
each  extremity,  like  that  of  Nitocris  described
above.  Pliny  {II.  N.  iv.  1)  mentions  a  bridge
over  the  Acheron  1000  feet  in  length  ;  and  also
says  (iv.  21)  that  the  island  Euboea  was  joined
to  Boeotia  by  a  bridge  ;  but  it  is  probable  that
both  these  works  were  executed  after  the  Roman
conquest.

In  Greece  also,  as  well  as  in  Italy,  the  term
bridge  was  used  to  signify  a  roadway  raised  upon
piers  or  arches  to  connect  the  opposite  sides  of  a
ravine,  even  where  no  water  flowed  through  it
(j\v  yccpvpav^  %  iirl  ry  vdvei  ^i',  Xen.  Anah.
vi.  5.  §  2-2).

The  Romans  were  undoubtedly  the  first  people
who  applied  the  arch  to  the  construction  of  bridges,
by  which  they  were  enabled  to  erect  structures
of  great  beauty  and  solidity,  as  well  as  utility  ;
for  by  this  means  the  openings  between  the  piers
for  the  convenience  of  navigation,  which  in  the
bridges  of  Babylon  and  Greece  must  have  been  very
narrow,  could  be  extended  to  any  necessary  span.

The  width  of  the  passage-way  in  a  Roman
bridge  was  commonly  narrow,  as  compared  with
modern  structures  of  the  same  kind,  and  corre-
sponded Avith  the  road  {via)  leading  to  and  from
it.  It  was  divided  into  three  parts.  The  centre
one,  for  horses  and  carriages,  was  denominated
agger  or  iter;  and  the  raised  footpaths  on  each
side  {(lecursoria),  which  were  enclosed  by  parapet
walls  similar  in  use  and  appearance  to  the  gluteus
in  the  basilica.     [Basilica,  p.  199,  b.]

Eight  bridges  across  the  Tiber  are  enumerated
by  P.  Victor  as  belonging  to  the  city  of  Rome.
1.  Of  these  the  most  celebrated,  as  well  as  the
most  ancient,  was  the  Pons  Sublicius,  so  called
because  it  was  built  of  wood ;  sublices^  in  the  lan-
guage of  the  Formiani,  meaning  wooden  beams.
(Festus,  s.  V.  Stiblicium.)  It  was  built  by  Ancus
"Martins,  when  he  united  the  Janiculum  to  the  city
(Liv.  i.  33;  Dionys.  iii.  p.  183),  and  became  re-
nowned from  the  well-known  feat  of  Horatius
Codes  in  the  war  with  Porsenna.  (Liv.  ii.
10;  Val.  Max.  iii.  2.  §  1  ;  Dionys.  v.  pp.  295,
296'.)  In  consequence  of  the  delay  and  difficulty
then  experienced  in  breaking  it  down,  it  was  re-
constructed without  nails,  in  such  a  manner  that
each  beam  could  be  removed  and  replaced  at  plea-
sure. (Plin.  //.  N.  xxxvi.  23.)  It  was  so  rebuilt
by  the  pontifices  (Dionys.  iii.  p.  183),  from  which
fact,  according  to  Varro  {De  Ling.  Lat.  v.  83),
they  derived  their  name;  and  it  was  afterwards
considered  so  sacred,  that  no  repairs  could  be  made
in  it  without  previous  sacrifice  conducted  by  the
pontifex  in  person.  (Dionys.  ii.  I.  c.)  In  the
age  of  Augustus  it  was  still  a  wooden  bridge,  as
is  manifest  from  the  epithet  roboreo^  used  by  Ovid
(^Fitst.  V.  621)  ;  in  which  state  it  appears  to  have


PONS.  937

remained  at  the  time  of  Otho,  when  it  was  carried
away  by  an  inundation  of  the  Tiber.  (Tacit.  Hist.
i.  8G,  who  calls  it  pons  szMicius.)  In  later  ages  it
was  also  called  pons  Aemiliis^  probably  from  the
name  of  the  person  by  whom  it  was  rebuilt ;  but
who  this  Aemilius  was  is  uncertain.  It  may  have
been  Aemilius  Lepidus  the  triumvir,  or  probably
the  Aemilius  Lepidus  who  was  censor  with  Muna-
tius  Plancus,  under  Augustus,  ten  years  after  the
pons  sublicius  fell  down,  as  related  by  Dion  Cassius
(p.  423,  c.)  We  learn  from  P.  Victor,  in  his  de-
scription of  tlie  Regio  xi.,  that  these  two  bridges
were  one  and  the  same — "Aemilius  qui  ante  sub-
licius." It  is  called  Aemilian  by  Juvenal  {Sat.
vi,  32)  and  Lampridius  {Ileliog.  c.  17),  but  it  i$
mentioned  by  Capitolinus  {Antonin  Pius,  c.  8)  as
the  pons  Sublicius  ;  which  passage  is  alone  suffi-
cient to  refute  the  assertion  of  some  writers  that  it
was  built  of  stone  at  the  period  when  the  name  of
Aemilius  was  given  to  it.  (Nardini,  Horn.  Anl.
viii.  3.)

This  bridge  was  a  fjlvourite  resort  for  beggars,
who  used  to  sit  upon  it  and  demand  alms.  (Senec.
De  Fit.  Beat.  25.)  Hence  the  expression  of  Jii'>
renal  (xiv.  134),  aliquis  de  ponte^  for  a  beggar.
(Compare  also  Juv.  iv,  116.)

It  was  situated  at  the  foot  of  the  Aventine,  and
was  the  bridge  over  which  C.  Gracchus  directed
his  flight  when  he  was  overtaken  by  his  opponents.
(Plut,  Gracch.  p.  842,  c. ;  compare  Val,  Max.  iv.  7.
§  2;  Ovid.  Fast.  vi.  477.)

II.  Pons  Palatinus  formed  the  communica-
tion between  the  Palatine  and  its  vicinities  and
the  Janiculum,  and  stood  at  the  spot  now  occupied
by  the  "  ponte  Rotto."  It  is  thought  that  the
words  of  Livy  (xl.  51 )  have  reference  to  this  bridge.
It  was  repaired  by  Augustus.  {Inscrip.  ap.  Grut.
p.  160.  n.  1.)

III,  IV.  Pons  Fabricius  and  Pons  Cestius
were  the  two  which  connected  the  Insula  Tiberina
with  the  opposite  sides  of  the  river ;  the  first  with
the  city,  and  the  latter  with  the  Janiculum.  Both
are  still  remaining.  The  pons  Fabricius  was  ori-
ginally of  wood,  but  was  rebuilt  by  L.  Fabricius^
the  curator  viarum,  as  the  inscription  testifies,  a,
short  time  previous  to  the  conspiracy  of  Catiline
(Dion  Cass,  xxxvii.  p.  50)  ;  which  passage  of  Dion
Cassius,  as  well  as  the  words  of  the  Scholiast  on
Horace  {Sat.  ii.  3.  36),  warrant  the  assumption  that
it  was  then  first  built  of  stone.  It  is  now  called
"  Ponte  quattro  capi."  The  pons  Cestius  is,  by
some  authors,  supposed  to  have  been  built  during
the  reign  of  Tiberius  by  (Cestius  Gallus,  the  per-
son mentioned  by  Pliny  (x.  60  ;  Tacit.  Ann.  vi.
31),  though  it  is  more  reasonable  to  conclude
that  it  was  constructed  before  the  termination  of
the  republic,  as  no  private  individual  would  have
been  permitted  to  give  his  own  name  to  a  public
work  under  the  empire.  (Nardini,  I.  c.)  The  in-
scriptions now  remaining  are  in  commemoration  of
Valentinianus,  Valens,  and  Gratianus,  the  emperors
by  whom  it  was  restored.  Both  these  bridges  are
represented  in  the  following  woodcut :  that  on  the
right  hand  is  the  pons  Fabricius,  and  is  curious  as
being  one  of  the  very  few  remaining  works  which
bear  a  date  during  the  republic  ;  the  pons  Cestius
on  the  left  represents  the  efforts  of  a  much  later
age  ;  and,  instead  of  the  buildings  now  seen
upon  the  island,  the  temples  which  originally
stood  there,  as  well  as  the  island  itself,  have  been
restored.


^38


PONS.


poNa


V.  Pons  Janiculensis,  which  led  direct  to  the
Janiculum.  The  name  of  its  founder  and  the
period  of  its  construction  are  unknown  ;  but  it
occupied  the  site  of  the  present  "  ponte  Sisto,"
which  was  built  by  Sixtus  IV.  upon  the  ruins  of
the  old  bridge.

VI.  Pons  Vaticanus,  so  called  because  it  formed
the  communication  between  the  Campus  Martius
and  Campus  Vaticanus.  When  the  waters  of  the
Tiber  are  very  low,  vestiges  of  the  piers  are  still
discernible  at  the  back  of  the  Hospital  of  San
Spirito.  By  modern  topographists  this  bridge  is
often  called  "  Pons  Triumphalis,"  but  without  any


classical  authority  ;  the  inference,  however,  is  not
improbable,  because  it  led  directly  from  the  Cam-
pus to  the  Clivus  Cinnae  (now  Monte  Mario),  from
which  the  triumphal  processions  descended.

VII.  Pons  Aelius,  built  by  Hadrian,  which
led  from  the  city  to  the  Mausoleum  [Mausoleum]
of  that  emperor,  now  the  bridge  and  castle  of  St.
Angelo.  (Spart.  Hadr.  c.  1.9  ;  Dion  Cass.  Ixix.
p,  797,  E.)  A  representation  of  this  bridge  is  given
in  the  following  woodcut,  taken  from  a  medal  still
extant.  It  aflfords  a  specimen  of  the  style  employed
at  the  period  when  the  fine  arts  are  considered  to
have  been  at  their  greatest  perfection  at  Rome.


VIII.  Pons  Milvius,  on  the  Via  Flaminia,  nov/
ponte  Molle,  was  built  by  Aemilius  Scaurus  the
censor  (Aur.  Vict.  De  Viris  Illustr.  c.  27.  §  8),
and  is  mentioned  by  Cicero  about  forty-five  years
after  its  formation.  Upon  this  bridge  the  ambassa-
dors of  the  Allobroges  were  arrested  by  Cicero's
retainers  during  the  conspiracy  of  Catiline.  (Cic.
in  Cat.  iii.  2.)  Catulus  and  Pompey  encamped
here  against  Lepidus  when  he  attempted  to  annul
the  acts  of  Sulla.  (Florus,  iii.  23.)  Its  vicinity
was  a  favourite  place  of  resort  for  pleasure  and  de-
bauchery in  the  licentious  reign  of  Nero.  (Tacit.
Ann.  xiii.  47.)  And  finally,  it  was  at  this  spot  that
the  battle  between  Maxentins  and  Constantine,
which  decided  the  fate  of  the  Roman  empire,  took
place.   (A.  D.  312.)


The  Roman  bridges  without  the  city  were  fir
too  many  to  be  enumerated  here.  They  formed
one  of  the  chief  embellishments  in  all  the  public
roads  ;  and  their  numerous  and  stupendous  re-
mains, still  existing  in  Italy,  Portugal,  and  Spain,
attest,  even  to  the  present  day,  the  scale  of  grandeur
with  which  their  works  of  national  utility  were
always  carried  on.  Subjoined  is  a  representation
of  the  bridge  at  Ariminum  {Rimini),  which  remains
entire :  it  was  commenced  by  Augustus  and  ter-
minated by  Tiberius,  as  we  learn  from  the  inscrip-
tion, which  is  still  extant.  It  is  introduced  in
order  to  give  the  reader  an  idea  of  the  style  of  art
during  the  age  of  Vitruvius,  that  peculiar  period  of
transition  between  the  austere  simplicity  of  the  re-
public and  the  profuse  magnificence  of  the  empire.


The  bridge  thrown  across  the.  bay  of  Baiae  by  I  the  useless  undertaking  of  a  profligate  prince,  docs
Caligula  (Dion  Cass.  lix.  p.  652,  b  ;  Suet.6W.  19),  1  i.ot  require  any  further  notice  ;  but  the  bridge


PONS.

^hicli  Trajan  built  across  the  Danube,  which  is
one  of  the  greatest  efforts  of  human  ingenuity,
must  not  pass  unmentioned.  A  full  account  of
its  construction  is  given  by  Dion  Cassius  (Ixviii.
p,  776,  B.) ;  and  it  is  also  mentioned  by  the  younger
Pliny  (JEp.  viii.  4  ;  compare  Procopius,  De  Aedi-
adis).  The  form  of  it  is  given  in  the  annexed
woodcut,  from  a  representation  of  it  on  the  column


PONS.  93.^

of  Trajan  at  Rome  ;  which  has  given  rise  to
much  controversy,  as  it  does  not  agree  in  many
respects  with  the  description  of  Dion  Cassius.  The
inscription,  supposed  to  have  belonged  to  this
bridge,  is  quoted  by  Leunclav.  p.  1041.  6,  and  by
Gruter,  448.  3.

Sub  jugum  ecce  rapitur  et  Danuvius,


It  will  be  observed  that  the  piers  only  are  of
stone,  and  the  superstructure  of  wood.

The  Conte  Marsigli,  in  a  letter  to  Montfaucon
(Giomale  de'  Letterati  c?'  Italia^  vol,  xxii.  p.  116),
gives  the  probable  measurements  of  this  structure.
from  observations  made  upon  the  spot,  which  will
serve  as  a  faithful  commentary  upon  the  text  of
Dion.  He  considers  that  the  whole  line  consisted
of  23  piers  and  22  arches  (making  the  whole  bridge
about  3010  feet  long,  and  48  in  height),  which  are
much  more  than  the  number  displayed  upon  the
column.  But  this  is  easily  accounted  for  without
impairing  the  authority  of  the  artist's  work.  A
few  arches  were  sufficient  to  show  the  general
features  of  the  bridge,  without  continuing  the  mono-
tonous uniformity  of  the  whole  line,  which  would
have  produced  an  effect  ill  adapted  to  the  purposes
of  sculpture.  It  was  destroyed  by  Hadrian  (Dion
Cass.  I.  c),  under  the  pretence  that  it  would  facili-
tate the  incursions  of  the  barbarians  into  the  Roman
territories,  but  in  reality,  it  is  said,  from  jealousy
and  despair  of  being  able  himself  to  accomplish
any  equally  great  undertaking  ;  which  is  supposed
to  be  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  he  afterwards  put
to  death  the  architect,  Artemidorus,  under  whose
directions  it  was  constructed.

The  Romans  also  denominated  by  the  name  of
pontes  the  causeways  which  in  modem  language
are  termed  "  viaducts."  Of  these  the  Pons  ad
Nonam^  now  called  ponte  Nono,  near  the  ninth
mile  from  Rome  on  the  Via  Praenestina  is  a  fine
specimen.

Amongst  the  bridges  of  temporary  use,  which
were  made  for  the  immediate  purposes  of  a  cam-
paign, the  most  celebrated  is  that  constructed  by
Julius  Caesar  over  the  Rhine  within  the  short
period  of  ten  days.  It  was  built  entirely  of  wood,
and  the  whole  process  of  its  construction  is  mi-
nutely detailed  by  its  author  {De  Bell.  Gall.  iv.  1 7).
An  elevation  of  it  is  given  by  Palladio,  constructed
in  conformity  with  the  account  of  Caesar,  which
has  been  copied  in  the  edition  of  Oudendorp  and
in  the  Delphin  edition.

Vegetius  (iii.  7),  Herodian  (viii,  4,  8),  and
Lucan  (iv.  420)  mention  the  use  of  casks  (rfo/w,
cupae)  by  the  Romans  to  support  rafts  for  the  pas-


sage of  an  army  ;  and  Vegetius  (I.  c.)  says  that  it
was  customary  for  the  Roman  army  to  carry  with
them  small  boats  (monoxuli)  hollowed  out  from  the
trunk  of  a  tree,  together  with  planks  and  nails,  so
that  a  bridge  could  be  constructed  and  bound  to-
gether with  ropes  upon  any  emergency  without
loss  of  time.  Pompey  passed  the  Euphrates  by  a
similar  device  during  the  Mithridatic  war.  (Florus,
iii,  5,)  The  preceding  woodcut,  taken  from  a  bas-
relief  on  the  column  of  Trajan,  will  afford  an  idea
of  the  general  method  of  construction  and  form  of
these  bridges,  of  which  there  are  several  designs
upon  the  same  monument,  all  of  which  greatly  re-
semble each  other.

When  the  Comitia  were  held,  the  voters,  in  order
to  reach  the  enclosure  called  septum  and  ovile,
passed  over  a  wooden  platform,  elevated  above  the
ground,  which  was  called  jmns  suffragiorum^  in
order  that  they  might  be  able  to  give  their  votes
without  confusion  or  collusion.

Pons  is  also  used  to  signify  the  platform  (cttj-
€ddpa,  aTToSdOpa.)  used  for  embarking  in  or  dis-
embarking from,  a  ship.

**  Interea  Aeneas  socios  de  puppibus  altis
Pontibus  exponit."         Virg.  Aen.  x.  288.

The  method  of  using  these  pontes  is  represented
in  the  annexed  woodcut,  taken  from  a  very  curious
intaglio  representing  the  history  of  the  Trojan  war,
discovered  at  Bovillae  towards  the  latter  end  of  the
17th  century  ;  which  is  given  by  Fabretti,  Syntawna
de  Column.  Trajani^  p.  315.  (See  further,  Hirt,
Lehre  der  Geb'dude,  §  x.)  [A.  R.J


PO'NTIFEX  (UpoSiSdiTKaXos,  UpovSjjLos^  Upo-
<pv\a^^  iepo<pdvTT]s).  The  origin  of  this  word  is
explained  in  various  ways.  Q,  Scaevola,  who  was
himself  pontifex  maximus,  derived  it  from  posse
and /acere,  and  Varro  from  pons,  because  the  pon-
tiffs, he  says,  had  built  the  pons  sublicius,  and
afterwards  frequently  restored  it,  that  it  might  be


940


PONTIFEX.


possible  to  perform  sacrifices  on  each  side  of  the
Tiber.  (Varro,  de  Ling.  Lat.  v.  83,  ed.  Miiller  ;
Dionys.  ii.  73.)  This  statement  is,  however,  con-
tradicted by  the  tradition  which  ascribes  the  build-
ing of  the  pons  sublicius  to  Ancus  Martins  (Liv.  i.
33),  at  a  time  when  the  pontiffs  had  long  existed
and  borne  this  name.  Gottling  {Gesch.  d.  Rom.
Staatsv.  p.  173)  thinks  that  ■pontifex  is  only  another
form  for  pompifex.,  which  would  characterise  the
pontiffs  only  as  the  managers  and  conductors  of
public  processions  and  solemnities.  But  it  seems
far  more  probable  that  the  word  is  formed  from
pons  and  facere  (in  the  signification  of  the  Greek
p^C^iv^  to  perform  a  sacrifice),  and  that  consequently
it  signifies  the  priests  who  offered  sacrifices  upon
the  bridge.  The  ancient  sacrifice  to  which  the
name  thus  alludes,  is  that  of  the  Argeans  on  the
sacred  or  sublician  bridge,  which  is  described  by
Dionysius  (i.  38 ;  compare  Argei).  Greek  writers,
moreover,  sometimes  translate  the  word  pontiffs  by
•yc(pvpoiroiol.

The  Roman  pontiffs  formed  the  most  illustrious
among  the  great  colleges  of  priests.  Their  insti-
tution, like  that  of  all  important  matters  of  reli-
gion, was  ascribed  to  Nuraa.  (Liv.  i.  20  ;  Dionj^s.
ii.  73.)  The  number  of  pontiffs  appointed  by  this
king  was  four  (Liv.  x.  6),  and  at  their  head  was
the  pontifex  maximus,  who  is  generally  not  included
•when  the  number  of  pontiffs  is  mentioned.  Cicero
{de  Re  Pvhl.  ii.  14),  however,  includes  the  pontifex
maximus  when  he  says  that  Numa  appointed  five
pontiffs.  Niebuhr  {Hist,  of  Rome.,  i.  p.  302,  &c.  ;
compare  iii.  p.  410  ;  Liv.  x.  6  ;  Cic.  de  Re  Puhl.
ii.  9 )  supposes  with  great  probability,  that  the  ori-
ginal number  of  four  pontiffs  (not  including  the
pontifex  maximus)  had  reference  to  the  two  earliest
tribes  of  the  Romans,  the  Ramnes  and  Titles,  so
that  each  tribe  was  represented  by  two  pontiffs.
In  the  year  b.  c.  300,  the  Ogulnian  law  raised  the
number  of  pontiffs  to  eight,  or,  including  the  pon-
tifex maximus,  to  nine,  and  four  of  them  were  to
be  plebeians.  (Liv.  x.  6.)  The  pontifex  maximus,
however,  continued  to  be  a  patrician  down  to  the
year  b.  c.  254,  when  Tib.  Coruncanius  was  the  first
plebeian  who  was  invested  with  this  dignity.  (Liv.
Epit.  18.)  This  number  of  pontiffs  remained  for
a  long  time  unaltered,  until  in  8 1  B.  c.  the  dictator
Sulla  increased  it  to  fifteen  (Liv.  Epit.  89),  and
J.  Caesar  to  sixteen.  (Dion  Cass.  xlii.  51.)  In
both  these  changes  the  pontifex  maximus  is  in-
cluded in  the  number.  During  the  empire  the
number  varied,  though  on  the  whole  fifteen  ap-
pears to  have  been  the  regular  number.

The  mode  of  appointing  the  pontiffs  was  also
different  at  different  times.  It  appears  that  after
their  institution  by  Numa,  the  college  had  the
right  of  co-optation,  that  is,  if  a  member  of  the  col-
lege died  (for  all  the  pontiffs  held  their  office  for
life),  the  members  met  and  elected  a  successor,
who  after  his  election  was  inaugurated  by  the
augurs.  (Dionys.  ii.  22,  73.)  This  election  was
sometimes  called  captio.  (Gellius,  i.  12.)  In  the
year  212  b.  c.  Livy  (xxv.  5)  speaks  of  the  election
of  a  pontifex  maximus  in  the  comitia  (probably
the  comitia  tributa)  as  the  ordinary  mode  of  ap-
pointing this  high-priest.  But  in  relating  the
events  of  the  year  181  B.  c.  he  again  states  that
the  appointment  of  the  chief  pontiff  took  place  by
the  co-optation  of  the  college.  (Liv.  xl.  42,)  How
these  anomalies  arose  (unless  Livy  expresses  him-
self carelessly)  is  uncertain  (see  Qottling,  I,  c.  p.


PONTIFEX.

375)  ;  for,  as  far  as  we  know,  the  first  attempt  to
deprive  the  college  of  its  right  of  co-optation,  ana
to  transfer  the  power  of  election  to  the  people,  was
not  made  until  the  year  b.  c.  145,  by  the  tribune
C.  Licinius  Crassus  ;  but  it  was  frustrated  by  the
praetor  C.  Laelius.  (Cic.  de  Am.  25,  Brut.  21,  de
Nat.  Deor.  iii.  2.)  In  104  B.C.  the  attempt  was
successfully  repeated  by  the  tribune  Cn.  Domitius
Ahenobarbus :  and  a  law  (Lex  Domitia)  was  then
passed,  which  transferred  the  right  of  electing  the
members  of  the  great  colleges  of  priests  to  the
people  (probably  in  the  comitia  tributa)  ;  that  is,
the  people  elected  a  candidate,  who  was  then  made
a  member  of  the  college  by  the  co-optatio  of  the
priests  themselves,  so  that  the  co-optatio,  although
still  necessary,  became  a  mere  matter  of  form.  ( Cic.
de  Lex).  Agr.  ii.  7,  Epist.  ad  Brut.  i.  5  ;  Veil.
Pat.  ii.  12  ;  Sueton.  Nero.,  2.)  The  lex  Domitia
was  repealed  by  Sulla  in  a  lex  Cornelia  de  Sacer-
dotiis  (81  B.  c),  which  restored  to  the  great  priestly
colleges  their  full  right  of  co-optatio.  (Liv.  Epit.
89  ;  Pseudo-Ascon.  in  Divinat.  p.  102,  ed.  Orelli ;
Dion  Cass,  xxxvii.  37.)  In  the  year  63  B.  c.  the
law  of  Sulla  was  abolished,  and  the  Domitian  law
was  restored,  but  not  in  its  full  extent ;  for  it  was
now  determined,  that  in  case  of  a  vacancy  the
college  itself  should  nominate  tvvo  candidates,  and
the  people  elect  one  of  them.  This  mode  of  pro-
ceeding is  expressly  mentioned  in  regard  to  the
appointment  of  augurs,  and  was,  no  doubt,  the
same  in  that  of  the  pontiffs.  (Cic.  Philip,  ii.  2.)
Julius  Caesar  did  not  alter  this  modified  lex  Domi-
tia, but  M.  Antonius  again  restored  the  right  of
co-optatio  to  the  college.     (Dion  Cass.  xliv.  53.)

The  college  of  pontiffs  had  the  supreme  superin-
tendence of  all  matters  of  religion,  and  of  things
and  persons  connected  with  public  as  well  as  pri-,
vate  worship.  A  general  outline  of  their  rights
and  functions  is  given  by  Livy  (i.  20)  and  Diony-
sius (ii.  73).  This  power  is  said  to  have  been
given  to  them  by  Numa  ;  and  he  also  entrusted  to
their  keeping  the  books  containing  the  ritual  or-
dinances, together  with  the  obligation  to  give  in-
formation to  any  one  v;ho  might  consult  them  on
matters  of  religion.  They  had  to  guard  against
any  irregularity  in  the  observance  of  religious  rites
that  might  arise  from  a  neglect  of  the  ancient
customs,  or  from  the  introduction  of  foreign  rites.
They  had  not  only  to  determine  in  what  manner
the  heavenly  gods  should  be  worshipped,  but  also
the  proper  form  of  burials,  and  how  the  souls  of  the
departed  (manes)  were  to  be  appeased  ;  in  like
manner  what  signs  either  in  lightning  or  other
phenomena  were  to  be  received  find  attended  to.
They  had  the  judicial  decision  in  all  matters  of  re-
ligion, whether  private  persons,  magistrates,  or
priests  were  concerned,  Jind  in  cases  where  the  ex-
isting laws  or  customs  were  found  defective  or  in-
sufficient, they  made  new  laws  and  regulations
{decreta  pontijicum)  in  which  they  always  followed
their  own  judgment  as  to  what  was  consistent
with  the  existing  customs  and  usages.  (Gell.  ii.
28,  X.  15.)  They  watched  over  the  conduct  of
all  persons  who  had  anything  to  do  with  the
sacrifices  or  the  worship  of  the  gods,  that  is,  over
all  the  priests  and  their  servants.  The  forms  of
worship  and  of  sacrificing  were  determined  by  the
pontiffs,  and  whoever  refused  to  obey  their  injunc-
tions was  punished  bj'  them,  for  they  were  "  rerum
quae  ad  sacra  et  religiones  pertinent,  judices  et
vindices."   (Fest.  s.  v.  Maadmus  pontifex  ;  compare


PONTIFEX.

Cic.  de  Leg.  \\.  8,  12.)  The  pontiffs  themselves
were  not  subject  to  any  court  of  law  or  punish-
ment, and  were  not  responsible  either  to  the  senate
or  to  the  people.  The  details  of  these  duties  and
functions  were  contained  in  books  called  libri
pontificii  or  pontificales,  coramentarii  sacrorum  or
sacrorum  pontificaliura  (Fest.  s.  v.  Aliuta  and
Occisum),  which  they  were  said  to  have  received
from  Numa,  and  which  were  sanctioned  by  Ancus
Martins.  This  king  is  said  to  have  made  public
that  part  of  these  regulations  which  had  reference
to  the  sacra  publica  (Liv.  i.  32)  ;  and  when  at  the
commencement  of  the  republic  the  wooden  tables
on  which  these  published  regulations  were  written
had  fallen  into  decay,  they  were  restored  by  the
pontifex  maximus  C.  Papirius.  (Dionys.  iii.  36.)
One  part  of  these  libri  pontificales  was  called  Indi-
gitamenta,  and  contained  the  names  of  the  gods  as
well  <is  the  manner  in  which  these  names  were  to
be  used  in  public  worship.  (Serv.  ad  Virg.  Georg.
i.  21.)  A  second  part  must  have  contained  the
formulas  of  the  jus  pontificium.  (Cic.  de  Re  Puhl.
ii.  31.)  The  original  laws  and  regulations  con-
tained in  these  books  were  in  the  course  of  time
increased  and  more  accurately  defined  by  the  de-
crees of  the  pontiffs,  whence  perhaps  their  name
commentani.  (Plin.  //.  A^.  xviii.  3  ;  Liv.  iv.  3  ;
Cic.  Brut.  14.)  Another  tradition  concerning  these
books  stated  that  Numa  communicated  to  the
pontiffs  their  duties  and  rights  merely  by  word  of
mouth,  and  that  he  had  buried  the  books  in  a
stone  chest  on  the  Janiculum.  (Plut,  Num.  22  ;
Plin.  //.  N.  xiii.  27  ;  Val.  Max.  i.  1. 12  ;  August.
de  Civit.  Dei.,  vii.  34.)  These  books  were  found
in  181  B.  c,  and  one  half  of  them  contained  ritual
regulations  and  the  jus  pontificium,  and  the  other
half  philosophical  inquiries  on  the  same  subjects,
and  were  written  in  the  Greek  language.  The
books  were  brought  to  the  praetor  urbanus  Q.
Petilius,  and  the  senate  ordered  the  latter  half  to
be  burnt,  while  the  former  was  carefully  preserved.
Respecting  the  nature  and  authenticity  of  this
story,  see  Hartung,  Die  Relig.  d.  Rom.  i.  p.  214.
The  annales  maximi  were  records  of  the  events  of
«ach  year  kept  by  the  pontifex  maximus,  from  the
commencement  of  the  state  to  the  time  of  the
pontifex  maximus,  P.  Mucins  Scaevola,  b.  c.
133.

As  to  the  rights  and  duties  of  the  pontiffs,  it  must
first  of  all  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  pontiffs  were
not  priests  of  any  particular  divinity,  but  a  college
which  stood  above  all  other  priests,  and  superin-
tended the  whole  external  worship  of  the  gods.
(Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  8.)  One  of  their  principal  duties
was  the  regulation  of  the  sacra  both  publica  and
privata,  and  to  watch  that  they  were  observed  at
the  proper  times  (for  which  purpose  the  pontiffs
originally  had  the  whole  regulation  of  the  calendar,
Sr;e  Calendarium,  p.  230,  &c.),  andin  their  proper
form.  In  the  management  of  the  sacra  publica
they  were  in  later  times  assisted  in  certain  per-
formances by  the  triumviri  epulones  [Epulones],
and  had  in  their  keeping  the  funds  from  which
the  expences  of  the  sacra  publica  were  defrayed.
[Sacra.]

The  pontiffs  convoked  the  assembly  of  the  curies
(comitia  calata  or  curiata)  in  cases  where  priests
were  to  be  appointed,  and  flamines  or  a  rex  sacro-
rum were  to  be  inaugurated  ;  also  when  wills  were
to  be  received,  and  when  a  detestatio  sacrorum  and
adoption  by  adrogatio  took  place.     (GelL  v.  19,


PONTIFEX.


941


XV,  27  ;  Adoptio.)  Whether  the  presence  of  the
pontiffs  together  with  that  of  the  augurs  and  two
flamines  was  necessary  in  the  comitia  curiata  also
in  cases  when  other  matters  were  transacted,  as
Niebuhr  thinks  (i.  p.  342,  ii.  p.  223),  does  not
appear  to  be  quite  certain.  The  curious  circum-
stance that  on  one  occasion  the  pontifex  maximus
was  commanded  by  the  senate  to  preside  at  the
election  of  tribunes  of  the  people,  is  explained  by
Niebuhr  (ii.  p.  359,  &c.).

As  regards  the  jurisdiction  of  the  pontiffs,
magistrates  and  priests  as  well  as  private  indivi-
duals were  boimd  to  submit  to  their  sentence,  pro-
vided it  had  the  sanction  of  three  members  of  the
college.  (Cic.  de  Harusp.  Resp.  6.)  In  most  cases
the  sentence  of  the  pontiffs  only  inflicted  a  fine
upon  the  offenders  (Cic.  Philip,  xi.  8  ;  Liv.  xxxvii.
51,  xl.  42),  but  the  person  fined  had  a  right  to
appeal  to  the  people,  who  might  release  him  from
the  fine.  In  regard  to  the  Vestal  virgins  and  the
persons  who  committed  incest  with  them,  the
pontiffs  had  criminal  jurisdiction  and  might  pro-
nounce the  sentence  of  death.  (Dionj's.  ix.  40  ;
Liv.  xxii.  57  ;  Fest.  s.  v.  Probrum.)  A  man  who
had  violated  a  Vestal  virgin  was  according  to  an
ancient  law  scourged  to  death  by  the  pontifex
maximus  in  the  comitium,  and  it  appears  that
originally  neither  the  Vestal  virgins  nor  the  male
offenders  in  such  a  case  had  any  right  of  appeal.
Gottling  (p.  185)  considers  that  they  had  the
right  of  appeal,  but  the  passage  of  Cicero  {de  Re
Pvhl.  ii.  31)  to  which  he  refers,  does  not  support
his  opinion.  Incest  in  general  belonged  to  the
jurisdiction  of  the  pontiffs,  and  might  be  punished
with  death.  (Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  1 9.)  In  later  times
we  find  that  even  in  the  case  of  the  pontiffs  having
passed  sentence  upon  Vestal  virgins,  a  tribune  in-
terfered and  induced  the  people  to  appoint  a
quaestor  for  the  purpose  of  making  a  fresh  inquiry
into  the  case  ;  and  it  sometimes  happened  that
after  this  new  trial  the  sentence  of  the  pontiffs
was  modified  or  annulled.  (Ascon.  ad  Milan,  p.
46,  ed.  Orelli.)  Such  cases,  however,  seem  to  have
been  mere  irregularities  founded  upon  an  abuse
of  the  tribunitian  power.  In  the  early  times  the
pontiffs  were  in  the  exclusive  possession  of  the
civil  as  well  as  religious  law,  until  the  former  was
made  public  by  C.  Flavins.  [Actio,]  The  regu-
lations which  served  as  a  guide  to  the  pontiffs  in
their  judicial  proceedings,  formed  a  large  collection
of  laws,  which  was  called  the  jus  pontificium,  and
formed  part  of  the  libri  pontificii.  (Cic.  de  Orat.  i.
43,  iii.  '6^,  pro  Domo,  13  ;  compare  Jus,  pp.  656,
Q57.')  The  new  decrees  which  the  pontiffs  made
either  on  the  proposal  of  the  senate,  or  in  cases
belonging  to  the  sacra  privata,  or  that  of  private
individuals,  were,  as  Livy  (xxxix.  16)  says,  in-
numerable. (Compare  Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  23  ;  Ma-
crob.  Sat.  iii.  3  ;  Dionys.  ii.  73.)

The  meetings  of  the  college  of  pontiffs,  to  which
in  some  instances  the  flamines  and  the  rex  sa-
crorum were  summoned  (Cic.  de  Harusp.  Resp.  6),
were  held  in  the  curia  regia  on  the  Via  Sacra,  to
which  was  attached  the  residence  of  the  pontifex
maximus  and  of  the  rex  sacrorum.  (Suet.  Caes.  46  ;
Serv.  ad  Aen.  viii.  363  ;  Plin.  Epist.  iv.  11.)  As
the  chief  pontiff  was  obliged  to  live  in  a  domus
publica,  Augustus,  when  he  assumed  this  dignity,
changed  part  of  his  own  house  into  a  domus  pub-
lica. (Dion  Cass.  liv.  27.)  All  the  pontiffs  were
in  their  appearance  distinguished  by  the  conic  cjip


542


PONTIFEX.


called  tutulus  or  galerus,  with  an  apex  upon  it,  and
the  toga  praetexta.

The  pontifex  raaximus  was  the  president  of  the
college  and  acted  in  its  name,  whence  he  alone  is
frequently  mentioned  in  cases  in  which  he  must  be
considered  only  as  the  organ  of  the  college.  He
was  generally  chosen  from  among  the  most  dis-
tinguished persons,  and  such  as  had  held  a  curule
magistracy,  or  were  already  members  of  the  col-
lege. (Liv.  XXXV.  5,  xl.  42.)  Two  of  his  especial
duties  were  to  appoint  (capere)  the  Vestal  virgins
and  the  flamines  [Vestales  ;  Flamen],  and  to
be  present  at  every  marriage  by  confarreatio.
When  festive  games  were  vowed  or  a  dedication
made,  the  chief  pontiif  had  to  repeat  over  before
the  persons  who  made  the  vow  or  the  dedication,
the  formula  with  which  it  was  to  be  performed
(praeire  verlm^  Liv.  v.  40,  ix.  46,  iv.  27).  During
the  period  of  the  republic,  when  the  people  exer-
cised sovereign  power  in  every  respect,  we  find
that  if  the  pontiif  on  constitutional  or  religious
groimds  refused  to  perform  this  solemnity,  he  might
be  compelled  by  the  people.

A  pontifex  might,  like  all  the  members  of  the
great  priestly  colleges,  hold  any  other  military,
civil  or  priestly  office,  provided  the  different  offices
did  not  interfere  with  one  another.  Thus  we  find
one  and  the  same  person  being  pontiff,  augur,  and
decemvir  sacrorum  (Liv.  xl.  42)  ;  instances  of  a
pontifex  raaximus  being  at  the  same  time  consul,
are  very  numerous.  (Liv.  xxviii.  38  ;  Cic.  de
Harusp.  Resp.  6  ;  compare  Ambrosch,  Studien  und
Andeutungen^  p.  229,  note  105.)  But  whatever
might  be  the  civil  or  military  office  which  a  ponti-
fex maximua  held  beside  his  pontificate,  he  was
not  allowed  to  leave  Italy.  The  first  who  violated
this  law  was  P.  Licinius  Crassus,  in  b.  c.  131
(Liv.  Epit.  59  ;  Val.  Max.  viii.  7.  6  ;  Oros.  v.
10)  ;  but  after  this  precedent,  pontiffs  seem  to
have  frequently  transgressed  the  law,  and  Caesar,
though  pontifex  maximus,  went  to  his  province  of
Gaul.

The  college  of  pontiffs  continued  to  exist  until
the  overthrow  of  paganism  (Arnob.  iv.  35  ;  Sym-
mach.  Epit.  ix.  128,  129)  ;  but  its  power  and  in-
fluence were  considerably  weakened  as  the  em-
perors, according  to  the  example  of  Caesar,  had
the  right  to  appoint  as  many  members  of  the  great
colleges  of  priests  as  they  pleased.  (Dion  Cass,
xlii.  51,  xliil  51,  li.  20,  liii.  17  ;  Suet  Cues.  31.)
In  addition  to  this,  the  emperors  themselves  were
always  chief  pontiffs,  and  as  such  the  presidents  of
the  college  ;  hence  the  title  of  pontifex  maximus
(P.  M.  or  PON.  M.)  appears  on  several  coins  of
the  emperors.  If  there  were  several  emperors  at
a  time,  only  one  bore  the  title  of  pontifex  maxi-
mus ;  but  in  the  year  A.  D.  238,  we  find  that
each  of  the  two  emperors  Maximus  and  Balbinus
assumed  this  dignity.  (Capitol.  Maxim,  et  Balb.
8.)  The  last  traces  of  emperors  being  at  the
same  time  chief  pontiffs  are  found  in  inscriptions
of  Valentinian,  Valens,  and  Gratianus.  (Orelli,
Jnscript.  n.  1117,  1118.)  From  the  time  of
Theodosius  the  emperors  no  longer  appear  in  the
dignity  of  pontiff ;  but  at  last  the  title  was  as-
sumed by  the  Christian  bishop  of  Rome.

There  were  other  pontiffs  at  Rome  who  were
distinguished  by  the  epithet  minores.  Various
opinions  have  been  entertained  as  to  what  these
pontifices  minores  were.  Niebuhr  (i.  p.  302.  n.
77-^)  thinks  that  they  were  originally  the  pontiffs


PORISTAE,

of  the  Luceres  ;  that  they  stood  in  the  same  re-
lation to  the  other  pontiffs  as  the  patres  minorum
gentium  to  the  patres  majorum  gentium  ;  and  that
subsequently,  when  the  meaning  of  the  name  was
forgotten,  it  was  applied  to  the  secretaries  of  the
great  college  of  pontiffs.  In  another  passage  (iii.
p.  411)  Niebuhr  himself  demonstrates  that  the
Luceres  were  never  represented  in  the  college  of
pontiffs,  and  his  earlier  supposition  is  contradicted
by  all  the  statements  of  ancient  writers  who  men-
tion the  pontifices  minores.  Livy  (xxii.  57  ;
compare  Jul.  Capitol.  Opil.  Macrin.  7),  in  speak-
ing of  the  secretaries  of  the  college  of  pontiffs,
adds,  "  quos  nunc  minores  pontifices  appellant  ;  "
from  which  it  is  evident  that  the  name  pontifices
minores  was  of  later  introduction,  and  that  it  was
given  to  persons  who  originally  had  no  claims  to  it,
that  is,  to  the  secretaries  of  the  pontiffs.  The
only  natural  solution  of  the  question  seems  to  be
this.  At  the  time  when  the  real  pontiffs  began  to
neglect  their  duties,  and  to  leave  the  principal
business  to  be  done  by  their  secretaries,  it  became
customary  to  designate  these  scribes  by  the  name
of  pontifices  minores.  Macrobius  {Sat.  i.  15),  in
speaking  of  minor  pontiffs  previous  to  the  time  of
Cn.  Flavins,  makes  an  anachronism,  as  he  transfers
a  name  customary  in  his  own  days  to  a  time
when  it  could  not  possibly  exist.  The  number  of
these  secretaries  is  uncertain  ;  Cicero  {de  Harusp.
Resp.  6)  mentions  the  name  of  three  minor  pontiffs.
The  name  cannot  have  been  used  long  before  the
end  of  the  republic,  when  even  chief  pontiffs  began
to  show  a  disregard  for  their  sacred  duties,  as  in
the  case  of  P.  Licinius  Crassus  and  Julius  Caesar.
Another  proof  of  their  falling  off  in  comparison
with  former  days,  is  that  about  the  same  time  the
good  and  luxurious  living  of  the  pontiffs  became
proverbial  at  Rome.  (Horat.  Carm.  ii.  14.  26,  &c.  ;
Mart.  xii.  48.  12  ;  Macrob.  Sat.  ii.  9.)  [L.  S.]
PONTIFICA'LES  LUDL    [Ludi  Pontifi-

PONTIFFCIUM  JUS.    [Jus,  pp.  656,  657.]
POPA.     [Caupona  ;  Sacrificium.]
POPFNA.     [Caupona.]
POPULA'RES.     [NoBiLEs,  p.  799,  b.]
POPULA'RIA.  [Amphitheatrum,  p.  88,b.]
POPULIFU'GIA    or    POPLIFU'GIA,    the
day  of  the  people's  flight,  was  celebrated  on  the
Nones  of  July,  according  to  an  ancient  tradition
preserved  by    Varro    {De  Ling.  Lot.  vi.    18,  ed.
MUlier),    in  commemoration    of  the  flight  of  the
people,  when  the  inhabitants  of  Ficulea,  Fidenae,
and  other  places  round  about,   appeared  in  anns
atjainst  Rome  shortly  after  the  departure  of  the
Gauls,  and  produced  such  a  panic  that  the  Romans
suddenly  fled   before  them.     Macrobius  {Saturn.
iii.  2),  however,  says  that  the  Populifugia  was  cele-
brated in  commemoration  of  the  flight  of  the  people
before  the  Tuscans,  while  Dionysius  (ii.  76)  refers
its  origin  to  the  flight  of  the  people  on  the  death  of
Romulus.      Niebuhr  {Hist,  of  Rome.,  vol.  ii.  p.
573)  seems  disposed  to  accept  the  tradition  pre-
served by  Varro  ;  but  the  different  accounts  of  its
origin  given  by  Macrobius  and  Dionysius  render
the  story  uncertain.

PO'PULUS.  [Patricii.]
PORISTAE  {iropia-ral),  were  magistrates  at
Athens,  who  probably  levied  the  extraordinary
supplies.  {TlopKrral  elaiv  apxh  tjs  'AO^j^o'ji',
7)Tis  TTopovs  ^C'^Tcj,  Bckker,  Anec.  p.  294.  19.)
Antiphon  {De  Char.  p.  791,  Reiske)  classes  them


PORTA.

with  the  Poletae  and  Practores  ;  and  Demosthenes
{Philip,  i.  p.  49.  15)  joins  tu'V  XPW"'"''*"'  Ta/xiai
Kol  iropiaTai,  from   which  it  would  appear  that
they  were  public  officers  in  his  time,  although  the
words    do  not    necessarily  prove  this.      (Bbckh,
PM.  Econ.  of  Athens,  p.  166,  2d  ed.)
PORNAE  (iropvai).     [Hetaerae.]
PORPE  (TrdpTTTj).     [Fibula.]
PORTA  (ttuAt;,  dim.  irvhis),  the  gate  of  a  city,
citadel,  or  other  open  space  inclosed  by  a  wall,  in
contradistinction  to  Janua,  which  was  the  door  of
a  house  or  any  covered  edifice.     The  terms  porta
and  ituAtj  are  often  found  in  the  plural,  even  when
applied  to  a  single  gate,    because  it  consisted  of
two  leaves.     (Thucyd.  ii.  4  ;  Yirg.Aen.  ii.  330.)

The  gates  of  a  city  were  of  course  various  in
their  number  and  position.  The  ancient  walls  of
Paestuni,  Sepianum,  and  Aosta,  still  remain  and
inclose  a  square  :  in  the  centre  of  each  of  the  fovu"
walls  was  a  gate.  If,  instead  of  being  situated  on
a  plain,  a  city  was  built  on  the  summit  of  a  pre-
cipitous hill,  there  was  a  gate  on  the  sloping  de-
clivity which  afforded  the  easiest  access.  If,  in
consequence  of  the  unevenness  of  the  ground,  the
form  of  the  walls  was  irregular,  the  number  and
situation  of  the  gates  varied  according  to  the  cir-
cumstances. Thus  Megara  had  6  gates  (Rein-
ganum,  Megaris,  pp.  125,  126)  ;  Thebes,  in  Boeo-
tia,  had  7  ;  Athens  had  8  (Ersch  u.  Gruber,  Encyc.
s.v.  Attica,  pp.240,  241)  ;  and  Rome  20,  or  per-
haps even  more.

The  jambs  of  the  gate  were  surmounted,  1.  by  a
lintel,  which  was  large  and  strong  in  proportion  to
ihe  width  of  the  gate :  examples  of  extremely
massive  jambs  and  lintels  are  presented  by  the
gates  in  the  so-called  Cyclopean  Walls  ;  see,  for
instance,  the  engraving  of  the  celebrated  Lion-
Gate  at  Mycenae,  under  MuRUS,  p.  770,  b.  The
lintel  of  the  centre  gate  leading  into  the  Athenian
Acropolis,  is  17  feet  long.  2.  by  an  arch,  as  we
see  exemplified  at  Pompeii,  Paestum,  Sepianum,
Volterra,  Suza,  Autim,  Bezantjon,  and  Treves.  3.
At  Arpinum,  one  of  the  gates  now  remaining  is
arched,  whilst  another  is  constructed  with  the
stones  projecting  one  beyond  another,  after  the
manner  represented  in  the  wood-cut,  at  p.  125.
(Keppel  Craven,  Excursions  in  tloe  Abruzzi,  vol.  i.
p.  108.)

At  Como,  Verona,  and  other  ancient  cities  of
Lombard}--,  the  gate  contains  two  passages  close
together,  the  one  designed  for  carriages  entering,
and  the  other  for  carriages  leaving  the  city.  The
same  provision  is  observed  in  the  magnificent  ruin
of  a  gate  at  Treves.  (See  the  following  woodcut,
showing  a  view  of  it,  together  with  its  plan.)  In
other  instances  we  find  only  one  gate  for  carriages,
but  a  smaller  one  on  each  side  of  it  (TrapaTri'Ats,
Heliodor.  viii.  p.  394)  for  foot-passengers.  (See
the  plan  of  the  gate  of  Pompeii,  p.  256.)  Each  of
the  fine  gates  which  remain  at  Autun  has  not
only  two  carriage-ways,  but  exterior  to  them  two
sideways  for  pedestrians.  (Millin,  Voyage  dans
les  Departemens,  &c.  vol.  i.  ch.  22.  Atlas,  PI.  18.
Figs.  3,  4.)  When  there  were  no  sideways,  one
of  the  valves  of  the  large  gate  sometimes  contained
a  wicket  (  portula,  irvXis  :  pivoirvAT}),  large  enough
to  admit  a  single  person.  The  porter  opened  it
when  any  one  wished  to  go  in  or  out  by  night.
I  (Polyb.  viii.  20,  24  ;  Liv.  xxv.  9.)
I  The   contrivances   for   fastening  gates  were   in

1      geueral  the  same  as  those  used  for  doors  [Janua],


PORTA.  943

but  larger  in  proportion.  The  wooden  bar  placed
across  them  in  the  inside  (fxox>^6s)  was  kept  in
its  position  by  the  following  method.  A  hole,
passing  through  it  perpendicularly  (PaKavoSdK-r],
Aen.Tact.  18),  admitted  a  cylindrical  piece  of  iron,
called  fid\avos,  which  also  entered  a  liole  in  the
gate,  so  that,  until  it  was  taken  out,  the  bar  could
not  be  removed  either  to  the  one  side  or  the  other.
(Thucyd.  ii.  4  ;  Aristoph.  Vesp.  200  ;  ^eSaXdvcoTai,
Aves,  1159.)  Another  piece  of  iron,  fitted  to  the
fiaKavos  and  called  $a\avdypa,  was  used  to  ex-
tract it.  (Aen.  Tact.  I.  c.)  When  the  besiegers,  for
want  of  this  key,  the  fiaXapdypa,  were  unable  to
remove  the  bar,  they  cut  it  through  with  a  hatchet
(Thucyd.  iv.  Ill;  Polyb.  viii.  23,  24),  or  set  it
on  fire.     (Aen.  Tact.  1 9.)

The  gateway  had  commonly  a  chamber,  either
on  one  side  or  on  both,  which  served  as  the  resi-
dence of  the  porter  or  guard.  It  was  called  irvXdov
(Polyb.  viii.  20,  23,  24).  Its  situation  is  shown
in  the  following  plan.  (See  wood-cut.)  But  the
gate-way  was  also,  in  many  cases,  surmounted  by
a  tower,  adapted  either  for  defence  (portis  turres
imposuit,  Caes.  B.  G.  viii.  9;  Virg.  Aen.  vi.  552 —
554)  or  for  conducting  the  general  business  of  go-
vernment. In  the  gates  of  Como  and  Verona  this
edifice  is  3  stories  high.  At  Treves  it  was  4
stories  high  in  the  flanks,  although  the  4  stories
remain  standing  in  one  of  them  only,  as  may  be
observed  in  the  annexed  wood-cut.     The  length


kJF--^Li^         \  i


of  this  building  is  115  feet;  its  depth  47  in  the
middle,  67  in  the  flanks;  its  greatest  height,  92.
All  the  4  stories  are  ornamented  in  every  direc-
tion with  rows  of  Tuscan  columns.  The  gateways
are  each  1 4  feet  wide.  The  entrance  of  each  ap-
pears to  have  been  guarded,  as  at  Pompeii  (see
p.  256),  first  by  a  portcullis,  and  then  by  gates  of
wood  and  iron.  The  barbican,  between  the  double
portcullis  and  the  pair  of  gates,  was  no  doubt
open  to  the  sky,  as  in  the  gates  of  Pompeii.
This  edifice  waa  probably  erected  by  Constantine.


S44


PORTICOS.


(Wj'ttenbach's  Roman  Ant.  of  Treves.,  pp.  9—^39.)
Its  rows  of  ornamental  windows  and  the  general
style  of  its  architecture,  afford  sufficient  indica-
tions, that  although  very  strong,  it  was  not  intended
solely,  nor  principally,  for  the  purposes  of  defence,
but  to  be  applied  in  time  of  peace  to  the  various
objects  of  civil  government.  To  these  latter  pur-
poses the  gate  house  (TTv\(t}v)  was  commonly  de-
voted, more  especially  in  Eastern  countries.  Plence
Polybius  (xv.  29)  calls  a  building  at  Alexandria
rhv  xpTj/xortflTTtKJ)!'  irvX&va  rwv  ^aaiXeiccy,  i.  e.
**  the  gate-house  of  the  palace,  used  for  the  trans-
action of  public  business."  In  the  Old  Testa-
pient  the  references  to  this  custom  are  very  fre-
quent. By  metonymy  "  the  gates  "  meant  those
who  administered  justice  at  the  gates  and  wielded
the  powers  of  government.  (Horn.  II,  ix.  312  ;
Matt  XV  i.  18.)

Statues  of  the  gods  were  often  placed  near  the
gate,  or  even  within  it  in  the  barbican,  so  as  to
be  ready  to  receive  the  adoration  of  those  who
entered  the  city.  (Fans.  iv.  33.  §  4 ;  Lucret.  i.
314  ;  Acts,  xiv.  13.)  The  probable  position  of  the
statue  was  the  point  S  in  the  above  plan.  The
gate  was  sometimes  much  ornamented.  Sculp-
tured elephants,  for  example,  were  placed  upon
the  Porta  Aurea  at  Constantinople.  [J.  Y.]

PORTENTUM.     [Prodigium.]

PO'RTICUS  ((TTod),  a  walk  covered  with  a
roof,  which  is  supported  by  columns,  at  least  on
one  side.  A  porticus  was  either  attached  to
temples  and  other  public  buildings,  or  it  was  built
independent  of  any  other  edifice.  Such  shaded
walks  and  places  of  resort  are  almost  indispensable
in  the  southern  countries  of  Europe,  where  people
live  much  in  the  open  air,  as  a  protection  from  the
heat  of  the  sun  and  from  rain.  This  was  the  case
in  ancient  times  to  a  much  greater  extent  than  at
present.  The  porticoes  attached  to  the  temples
were  either  constructed  only  in  front  of  them,  or
went  round  the  whole  building,and  temples  received
different  names  according  to  these  different  porticoes,
and  according  to  the  arrangement  of  the  columns
of  the  porticoes.  [Templum.]  They  were  origin-
ally intended  as  places  for  those  persons  to  assemble
and  converse  in  who  visited  the  temple  for  various
purposes.  As  such  temple -porticoes,  however,  were
found  too  small  or  not  suited  for  the  various  pur-
poses of  private  and  public  life,  most  of  the  Greek
towns  had  independent  porticoes,  some  of  which
were  very  extensive,  especially  in  their  places  of
public  assembly  [Agora]  ;  and  as  the  Greeks,
in  all  their  public  v.roiks,  soon  went  beyond  the
limits  of  mere  utility,  these  public  walks  were  not
only  built  in  the  most  magnificent  style,  but  were
adorned  with  pictures  and  statues  by  the  best
masters.  Of  this  kind  were  the  Poecile  (cTToa
ttojkjAtj)  and  (rroa  fiaaiXnos  at  Athens  (Athen.
xiii.  p.  577  ;  Pans.  i.  3.  §  1,  &c.),  and  the  (ttoo,
UfpaiK-h  at  Sparta.  (Pans.  iii.  11.  §  3.)  The
Skias  at  Sparta,  where  the  popular  assemblies
were  held,  seems  to  have  been  a  building  of  the
same  kind.  (Paus.  iii.  12.  §  8.)  In  most  of  these
stoae,  seats  [Exedrae]  were  placed,  that  those
who  were  tired  might  sit  down.  They  were  fre-
quented not  only  by  idle  loungers,  but  also  by
philosophers,  rhetoricians,  and  other  persons  fond
of  intellectual  conversation.  The  Stoic  school  of
philosophy  derived  its  name  from  the  circumstance,
that  the  founder  of  it  used  to  converse  with  his
disciples  in  a  stoa.     The  Romans  derived  their


PORTORIUM.

great  fondness  for  such  covered  v/alks  from  thff
Greeks  ;  and  as  luxuries  among  them  were  carried
in  everything  to  a  greater  extent  than  in  Greece,
wealthy  Romans  had  their  private  porticoes,  some-
times in  the  city  itself,  and  sometimes  in  their
country-seats.  In  the  public  porticoes  of  Rome»
which  were  exceedingly  numerous  and  very  ex-
tensive (as  that  around  the  Forum  and  the  Campus
Martins),  a  variety  of  business  was  occasionally
transacted :  we  find  that  law-suits  were  conducted
here,  meetings  of  the  senate  held,  goods  exhibited
for  sale,  &c.  (See  Pitiscus,  Lexicon,  s.  v.  Porticus^
who  has  given  a  complete  list  of  all  the  porticoes
of  Rome.)  [L.S.]

PORTrSCULUS  (K6Aeuo-T^s),  an  officer  in  a
ship,  who  gave  the  signal  to  the  rowers,  that  they
might  keep  time  in  rowing.  The  same  name  was
also  given  to  the  pole  or  hammer,  by  the  striking
of  which  he  regulated  the  motion  of  the  oars.
(Festus,  s,  V.)  The  duties  of  this  officer  are  thus
described  by  Silius  Italicus  (vi.  360,  &c.) :  —

*'  Mediae  stat  margine  puppis.
Qui  voce  alternos  nautarum  temperet  ictus,
Et  remis  dictet  sonitum,  pariterque  relatis
Ad  sonitum  plaudat  resonantia  caerula  tonsis.'*

This  officer  is  sometimes  called  Hortator  (Ovid,
Met.  iii.  618;  Plant.  Merc.  iv.  2.  5  ;  Virg.  Aen.
iii.  128)  or  Pausarius.  (Compare  Blomfield,  ad
Aesch.  Pers.  403.)

PORTITO'RES.  [PoRTORiuM ;  Publicani.]
PORTO'RIUM  was  one  branch  of  the  regular
revenues  of  the  Roman  state,  consisting  of  the
duties  paid  on  imported  and  exported  goods :
sometimes,  however,  the  name  portorium  is  also
applied  to  the  duties  raised  upon  goods  for  being
carried  through  a  country  or  over  bridges.  (Plin.
H.N.  xii.  31  ;  Sueton.  Vitell.  14.)  A  portorium,
or  duty  upon  imported  goods,  appears  to  have
been  paid  at  a  very  early  period,  for  it  is  said  that
Valerius  Publicola  exempted  the  plebes  from  the
portoria  at  the  time  when  the  republic  was  threat-
ened with  an  invasion  by  Porsenna.  (Liv.  ii.  9  ;
compare  Dionys.  v.  22.)  The  time  of  its  intro-
duction is  uncertain  ;  but  the  abolition  of  it  as-
cribed to  Publicola  can  only  have  been  a  temporary
measure  ;  and  as  the  expenditure  of  the  republic
increased,  new  portoria  must  have  been  intro-
duced. Thus  the  censors  M.  Aemilius  Lepidus
and  M.  Fulvius  Nobilior  instituted  portoria  et  vec-
tigalia  multa  (Liv.  xl.  51),  and  C.  Gracchus  again
increased  the  number  of  articles  which  had  to  pay
portoria.  (Veil.  Pat.  ii.  6.)  In  conquered  places
and  in  the  provinces  the  import  and  export  duties,
which  had  been  paid  there  before,  were  generally
not  only  retained,  but  increased,  and  appropriated
to  the  aerarium.  Thus  we  read  of  portoria  being
paid  at  Capua  and  Puteoli  on  goods  which  were
imported  by  merchants.  (Liv.  xxxii.  7.)  Sicily,
and  above  all,  Asia  furnished  to  the  Roman  trea-
sury large  sums  Avhich  were  raised  as  portoria.
(Cic.  c.  Verr.  ii.  75,  pro  Leg.  Manil.  6.)  Jn  some
cases,  however,  the  Romans  allowed  a  suliject
nation,  as  a  particular  favour,  to  raise  for  them-
selves whatever  portoria  they  pleased  in  their
ports,  and  onh'  stipulated  that  Roman  citizens
and  socii  Latini  should  be  exempted  from  them.
(Liv.  xxxviii.  44  ;  Gruter,  Inscript.  p.  500.)  In
the  year  60  b.  c.  all  the  portoria  in  the  ports  (»f
Italy  were  done  away  with,  by  a  lex  Caecilia
carried  by  the  praetor  Q.  Metellus  Nepos.     (Dioa


PORTORIUM.

Cass,  xxxvii.  51  :  Cic.  ad  Att.  ii.  16.)  It  appears,
however,  that  the  cause  of  this  abolition  was  not
any  complaint  by  the  people  of  the  tax  itself,  but
of  the  portitores,  i.  e.  the  persons  who  collected  it,
and  who  greatly  annoyed  the  merchants  by  their
unfair  conduct  and  vexatious  proceedings.  [Publi-
CANi.J  Thus  the  republic  for  a  time  only  levied
import  and  export  duties  in  the  provinces,  until
Julius  Caesar  restored  the  duties  on  commodities
imported  from  foreign  countries.  (Suet,  Cues.  43.)
During  the  trixmivirate  new  portoria  were  intro-
duced (Dion  Cass,  xlviii.  34),  and  Augustus  partly
increased  the  old  import  duties  and  partly  insti-
tuted new  ones.  The  subsequent  emperors  in-
creased or  diminished  this  branch  of  the  revenue
as  necessity  required,  or  as  their  own  discretion
dictated.

As  regards  the  articles  subject  to  an  import
duty,  it  may  be  stated  in  general  terms,  that  all
commodities,  including  slaves,  Avhich  were  im-
ported by  merchants  for  the  purpose  of  selling
them  again,  were  subject  to  the  portorium  ;
whereas  things  which  a  person  brought  with  him
for  his  own  use,  were  exempted  from  it.  A  long
list  of  such  taxable  articles  is  given  in  the  Digest
(39.  tit.  4.  s.  16  ;  compare  Cic.  e.  Verr.  ii.  72,  74).
Many  things,  however,  which  belonged  more  to
the  luxuries  than  to  the  necessaries  of  life,  such  as
eunuchs  and  handsome  youths,  had  to  pay  an
import  duty,  even  though  they  were  imported  by
persons  for  their  own  use.  (Suet.  De  clar.  Rhet.
1  ;  Cod.  4.  tit.  42.  s.  2.)  Things  which  were  im-
ported for  the  use  of  the  state  Avere  also  exempt
from  the  portorium.  But  the  governors  of  pro-
vinces (praesides),  when  they  sent  persons  to  pur-
chase things  for  the  use  of  the  public,  had  to  write
a  list  of  such  things  for  the  publicani  (  portitores)
to  enable  the  latter  to  see  whether  more  things
were  imported  than  what  were  ordered  (Dig.  39.
tit.  4.  s.  4)  ;  for  the  practice  of  smuggling  appears
to  have  been  as  common  among  the  Romans  as  in
modern  times.  Respecting  the  right  of  the'  porti-
tores to  search  travellers  and  merchants,  see  Pub-
licani. Such  goods  as  were  duly  stated  to  the
portitores  were  called  scripta^  and  those  which
were  not,  inscripta.  If  goods  subject  to  a  duty
were  concealed,  they  were,  on  their  discovery,  con-
fiscated.    (Dig.  39.  tit.  4.  s.  16.)

Respecting  the  amount  of  the  import  or  export
duties  we  have  but  very  few  statements  in  the
ancient  writers.  In  the  time  of  Cicero  the  por-
torium in  the  ports  of  Sicily  was  one -twentieth
(vicesima)  of  the  value  of  taxable  articles  (Cic.
c.  Verr.  ii.  75)  ;  and  as  this  was  the  customary
rate  in  Greece  (Bbckh,  Publ.  Econ.  p.  325,  2d
edit.),  it  is  probable  that  this  was  the  average
sum  raised  in  all  the  other  provinces.  In  the
times  of  the  emperors  the  ordinary  rate  of  the  por-
torium appears  to  have  been  the  fortieth  part
{qiiadragesima)  of  the  value  of  imported  goods,
(Suet.  Vespas.  1  ;  Quintil.  Declam.  359  ;  Symmach.
Epist.  V.  62,  65.)  At  a  late  period  the  exorbitant
sum  of  one-eighth  (octava^  Cod.  4.  tit.  61.  s.  7)  is
mentioned  as  the  ordinary  import  duty  ;  but  it  is
uncertain  whether  this  is  the  duty  for  all  articles
of  commerce,  or  merely  for  certain  things.

The  portorium  was,  like  all  other  vectigalia,
farmed  out  by  the  censors  to  the  publicani,  who
collected  it  through  the  portitores.  [Vectigalia  ;
Publicanl]  (Burmann,  De  Vedigalibus  Populi
Rom.  pp.50 — 77  ;  R.Boss?,  Grundz'uge  desFinanz-


POSSESSIO.


045


wesens  im  Rom.  Siaat,  Braunschweig  1803,  2
vols.  ;  Hegewisch,  Versuch  uber  die  Rom.  Finan-
;cera,  Altona,  1804.)  [L.  S.]

PORTUMNA'LIA,  or  PORTUNA'LIA,  a
festival  celebrated  in  honour  of  Portumnus,  or
Portunns,  the  god  of  harbours.  (Varro,  De  Ling.
Lat.  vii.  19,  ed.  Miiller.)  It  was  celebrated  on
the  17th  day  before  the  Kalends  of  September.
{Calendarium  Maff.)

POSCA,  vinegar  mixed  with  water,  was  the
common  drink  of  the  lower  orders  among  the
Romans,  as  of  soldiers  when  on  service  (Spart.
Hadr.  10),  slaves  (Plant.  Mil.  iii.  2.  23),  &c.

POSEIDO'NIA  (TTOo-etSwz/ia),  a  festival  held
every  year  in  Aegina  in  honour  of  Poseidon.
(Athen.  xiii.  p.  588  ;  Plut.  Quaest.  Gr.  44.)  It
seems  to  have  been  celebrated  by  all  the  inhabit-
ants of  the  island,  as  Athenaeus  (xiii,  p.  590)
calls  it  a  panegyris,  and  mentions  that  during  one
celebration  Phryne,  the  celebrated  hetaera,  walked
naked  into  the  sea  in  the  presence  of  the  assem-
bled Greeks,  The  festival  is  also  mentioned  by
Theodoretus  {Tkerap.  7),  but  no  particulars  are
recorded  respecting  the  way  in  which  it  was  cele-
brated.  (Comp.  Miiller,  Aeginet.  p.  148.)      [L.  S.]

POSSE'SSIO.  Paulus  (Dig.  41,  tit.  2.  s.  1)
observes,  "  Possessio  appellata  est,  ut  et  Labeo
ait,  a  pedibus  *,  quasi  positio :  quia  naturaliter
tenetur  ab  eo  qui  insistif'  The  absurdity  of  the
etymology  and  of  the  reason  are  equal.  The  ele-
ments of  Possidere  are  either  pot  (pot-is),  and
sedere ;  or  the  first  part  of  the  word  is  related  to
aptid.,  and  the  cognate  Greek  form  of  ivgt\  (irpSs).

Possessio,  in  its  primary  sense,  is  the  power  by
virtue  of  which  a  man  has  such  a  mastery  over  a
corporeal  thing  as  to  deal  with  it  at  his  pleasure
and  to  exclude  other  persons  from  meddling  with
it.  This  condition  or  power  is  called  Detention,
and  it  lies  at  the  bottom  of  all  legal  senses  of  the
word  Possession,  This  Possession  is  no  legal  state
or  condition,  but  it  may  be  the  source  of  rights,
and  it  then  becomes  Possessio  in  a  juristical  or
legal  sense.  Still  even  in  this  sense,  it  is  not  in
any  way  to  be  confounded  with  Property  (pro-
prielas).  A  man  may  have  the  juristical  posses-
sion of  a  thing  without  being  the  proprietor  ;  and  a
man  may  be  the  proprietor  of  a  thing  without  hav-
ing the  Detention  of  it,  or  even  the  juristical  pos-
session. (Dig.  41.  tit.  2.  s.  12.)  Ownership  is  the
legal  capacity  to  operate  on  a  thing  according  to  a
man's  pleasure  and  to  exclude  everybody  else  from
doing  so.  Possession,  in  the  sense  of  Detention,
is  the  actual  exercise  of  such  a  power  as  the  owner
has  a  right  to  exercise.

Detention  becomes  juristical  possession  and  the
foundation  of  certain  rights,  when  the  Detainer
has  the  intention  (animus)  to  deal  with  the  thing
as  his  own.  If  he  deal  with  it  as  the  property  of
another,  as  exercising  over  it  the  rights  of  another,
he  is  not  said  "  possidere  "  in  a  juristical  sense  ;
but  he  is  said  "  alieno  nomine  possidere."  This
is  the  case  with  the  Commodatarius  and  with  him
who  holds  a  deposit.    (Dig.  41.  tit,  2.  s.  18,  30,)

When  the  Detention  is  made  a  juristical  Pos-
sessio by  virtue  of  the  animus,  it  lays  the  found-
ation of  a  right  to  the  Interdicts,  and  by  virtue  of
Usucapion  it  may  become  ownership.  The  right
to  the  Interdicts  is  simply  founded  on  a  juristical
possession,  in  whatever  way  it  may  have  originated.


"Sedibus."  — Ed.  Flor.
3p


SiiG


POSSESSIO.


except  that  it  must  not  hiive  originated  illegally
with  respect  to  the  person  against  whom  the  Inter-
dict is  claimed.  [Interdictum.]  Simply  by
virtue  of  being  possessor,  the  possessor  has  a  better
right  than  any  person  who  is  not  possessor.  (Dig.
43.  tit.  17.  s.  1,  2.)  Usucapion  requires  not  only
a  juristical  possessio,  but  in  its  orgin  it  must  have
been  bona  fide  and  founded  on  a  justa  causa,  that
is,  on  some  legal  transaction.  He  who  buys  a
thing  from  a  man  who  is  not  the  owner,  but  whom
he  believes  to  be  the  owner,  and  obtains  possession
of  the  thing,  is  a  bona  fide  possessor  with  a  justa
causa.     [UsucAPio.]

The  right  which  is  founded  on  a  juristical  pos-
sessio is  a  Jus  possessionis,  or  right  of  possession,
that  is,  a  right  arising  from  a  juristical  posses-
sion. The  expression  Jus  possessionis  is  used  by
the  Roman  Jurists.  The  right  to  possess,  called
by  modern  Jurists,  Jus  possidendi,  belongs  to  the
theory  of  Ownership.

All  Juristical  Possessio  then,  that  is,  Possessio
in  the  Roman  Law,  as  a  source  of  rights,  has
reference  only  to  Usucapion  and  Interdicts  ;  and
all  the  rules  of  law  which  treat  Possession  as  a
thing  of  a  juristical  nature  have  no  other  object
than  to  determine  the  possibility  of  Usucapion  and
of  the  Interdicts.  (Savigny,  Das  Recht  des  Besitzes,
p.  24,  &c.)

In  answer  to  the  question  to  which  class  of
Rights  Possession  belongs,  Savigny  observes  (§  6),
—  So  far  as  concerns  Usucapion,  one  cannot  sup-
pose the  thing  to  be  the  subject  of  a  question.  No
one  thinks  of  asking,  to  what  class  of  rights  a
justa  causa  belongs,  without  which  tradition  can-
not give  ownership.  It  is  no  right,  but  it  is  a
part  of  the  whole  transaction  by  which  ownership
is  acquired.  So  is  it  with  Possession  in  respect  to
Usucapion.

The  right  to  Possessorial  Interdicts  belongs  to
the  Law  of  Obligationes  ex  maleficiis.  "  The  right
to  possessorial  Interdicts  then  belongs  to  the  Law
of  Obligationes,  and  therein  possession  is  only  so
far  considered,  as  containing  the  condition  without
which  the  Interdicts  cannot  be  supposed  possible.
The  Jus  Possessionis  consequently,  that  is  the
right,  which  mere  possession  gives,  consists  simply
in  the  claim  which  the  Possessor  has  to  the  Inter-
dicts, as  soon  as  his  possession  is  disturbed  in  a
definite  form.  Independent  of  this  disturbance,
bare  possession  gives  no  rights,  neither  a  Jus  Obli-
gationis,  as  is  self-evident,  nor  yet  a  right  to  the
thing,  for  no  dealing  with  a  thing  is  to  be  consi-
dered as  a  legal  act  simply  because  the  person  so
dealing  has  the  possession  of  the  thing."  (Savigny,
p.  34.)

The  term  Possessio  occurs  m  the  Roman  jurists
in  various  senses.  There  is  Possessio  generally,
and  Possessio  Civilis,  and  Possessio  Naturalis.

Possessio  denoted  originally  bare  Detention.
But  this  Detention  under  certain  conditions  be-
comes a  legal  state,  inasmuch  as  it  leads  to  owner-
ship through  Usucapion,  Accordingly  the  word
Possessio,  which  required  no  qualification  so  long
as  there  was  no  other  notion  attached  to  Possessio,
requires  such  qualification  when  Detention  becomes
a  legal  state.  This  Detention  then,  when  it  has
the  conditions  necessary  to  Usucapion,  is  called
Possessio  Civilis  ;  and  all  other  Possessio  as  op-
posed to  Civilis  is  Naturalis.  But  Detention  may
also  be  the  foundation  of  Interdicts,  which  notion
of  possession   is  always  expressed   by  Possessio


esse  in  possessione.'


POSSESSIO.

simply;  and  this  is  the  meaning  of  Possessio,  when
it  is  used  alone,  and  yet  in  a  technical  sense.  As
opposed  to  this  sense  of  Possessio  all  other  kinds
of  Detention  are  also  called  Naturalis  Possessio,
the  opposition  between  the  Natural  and  the  Juris-
tical Possession  (possessio)  being  here  expressed
just  in  the  same  way  as  this  opposition  is  denoted
in  the  case  of  the  Civilis  Possessio.  There  is  there-
fore a  twofold  Juristical  Possessio :  Possessio
Civilis  or  Possession  for  the  purpose  of  Usucapion  ;
and  Possessio  or  Possession  for  the  purpose  of  the
Interdicts.  It  follows  that  Possessio  is  included
in  Possessio  Civilis,  which  only  requires  more  con-
ditions than  Possessio.  If  then  a  man  has  Pos-
sessio Civilis,  he  has  also  Possessio,  that  is  the
right  to  the  Interdicts  ;  but  the  converse  is  not
true.  Possessio  Naturalis,  as  above  observed,  has
two  significations,  but  they  are  both  negative,  iind
merely  express  in  each  case  a  logical  opposition,
that  is,  they  are  respectively  not  Possessio  Civilis,
or  Possessio  (ad  Interdicta).  The  various  expres-
sions used  to  denote  bare  Detention  are  "  tenere,"
"  corporaliter  possidere,"
(Savigny,  p.  109.)

In  the  case  of  a  thing  being  pignorated,  the  per-
son who  pledges  it  has  still  the  possessio  ad  usu-
capionem,  but  the  pledgee  alone  has  the  possessio
ad  interdicta.  It  is  not  a  Possessio  Civilis  which
is  the  foundation  of  the  pledger's  title  by  usu-
capion ;  but  by  a  special  fiction  he  is  considered  to
have  such  Possession,  and  so  the  case  is  a  special
exception  to  the  general  rule,  "  sine  possessione
usucapio  contingere  non  potest"

Possessio  Justa  is  every  Possessio  that  is  not
illegal  in  its  origin,  whether  such  Possessio  be
mere  Detention  or  Juristical  Possessio.  The  word
Justa  is  here  used,  not  in  that  acceptation  in
which  it  has  reference  to  Jus  Civile  and  is  equiva-
lent to  Civilis  or  Le^itima;  but  in  another  sense,
which  is  more  indefinite  and  means  "  rightful "
generally,  that  is,  not  Avrongful.  The  creditor  who
is  in  possession  of  a  pledge,  has  a  Justa  Possessio,
but  not  a  Civilis  Possessio:  he  has,  however,  a
Juristical  Possessio,  that  is,  Possessio^  and  con-
sequently a  right  to  the  Interdicts.  The  Missio
in  Possessionem  is  the  foundation  of  a  Justa  Pos-
sessio, but,  as  a  general  rule,  not  of  a  Juristical
Possessio.  Possessio  Injusta  is  the  logical  opposite
of  Justa,  and  in  the  case  of  Possessio  Injusta  there
are  three  special  Vitia  possessionis,  that  is  when
the  Possession  has  originated  Vi,  Clam,  or  Precario.
(Terentius,  Eunuch,  ii.  3.  Hanc  tu  mild  vel  vt,
vel  dam,  vel  precario  fac  tradas :  Dig.  43,  tit.  17.
s.1,2.)

With  respect  to  the  causa  Possessionis,  there
was  a  legal  maxim :  Nemo  sibi  ipse  causam  pos-
sessionis mutare  potest,  which  applies  both  to
Civilis  and  Naturalis  Possessio.  This  rule  is  ex-
plained by  Savigny  by  means  of  Gains  (ii.  52,  &c.)
as  having  reference  to  the  old  usucapio  pro  herede,
and  the  meaning  of  it  was  that  if  a  person  had  once
begun  to  possess  with  any  particular  causa,  he  could
not  at  his  pleasure  change  such  Possessio  into  a
Possessio  pro  herede.     (  Savigny,  p.  6Q.)

A  Possessor  bonae  fidei  is  he  who  believes  that
no  person  has  a  better  right  to  possess  than  him-
self. A  Possessor  malae  fidei  is  he  who  knows
that  he  has  no  right  to  possess  the  thing.  (Savigny,

Besides  these  various  meanings  of  Possessio,  Pos-
sessor, Possidere,  at  the  bottom  of  ail  which  lies


POSSESSIO.

the  notion  of  Possession  in  the  sense  of  Detention,  ■
there  are  some  other  meanings.  "  To  have  owner-
ship "  is  sometimes  expressed  by  Possidere,  the
thing,  which  is  the  object  of  ownership,  is  some-
times Possessio,  and  the  owner  is  Possessor.  This
iise  of  the  word  occurs  frequently  in  the  Code  and
I'andect,  and  also  in  Cicero,  Quintilian,  Plorace,
and  other  writers.  But  it  is  remarked  by  Savigny
that  these  meanings  of  Possidere,  Possessio,  &c.,
always  refer  to  land  as  their  object.  The  plirase
"  Possessio  populi  Romani,"  is  applied  by  Cicero
to  public  land,  and  it  is  translated  by  Plutarch
(^Pomp.  ii9),  KrrifjLa  tov  drifMov  'Pa/jLaiccK

Possessio  also  denotes  the  relation  of  a  defend-
ant with  respect  to  a  plaintiff.  For  instance,  when
ownership  is  claimed,  the  demand  must  be  against
a  person  in  possession  ;  but  this  does  not  mean
that  such  person  must  have  a  juristical  possession.
In  a  Vindicatio  accordingly  the  plaintiff  is  called
Petitor,  and  the  defendant  is  named  Possessor,  be-
cause in  fact  he  has  the  possession  of  that  which
the  plaintiff  claims.  The  procedure  by  the  Vindi-
catio was  also  adapted  to  the  case  of  an  hereditas ;
and  here  also  the  term  possessor  was  applied  to
the  defendant.  In  many  cases  the  possessor  was
really  such,  and  one  object  of  the  hercditatis  pe-
titio  was  to  recover  single  things  which  the  de-
fendant possessed  pro  herede  or  pro  possessore.
But  the  term  possessor  was  not  limited  to  such
cases,  for  the  defendant  is  called  possessor  when
the  petitio  is  not  about  a  matter  of  possession.  He
is  called  Juris  possessor,  because  lie  refuses  to  do
something  which  the  heres  claims  of  him  to  do,
or  because  lie  asserts  his  right  to  a  portion  of  the
hereditas.     (Savigny,  p.  87.)

The  juristical  notion  of  Possession  implies  a
thing  which  can  be  the  object  of  ownership :  it
also  implies  that  the  Possessor  can  be  no  other
than  a  person  who  has  a  capacity  for  ownership.

The  notion  of  possession  is  such  that  only  one
person  at  a  time  can  possess  the  whole  of  a  thing
(plures  eandem  rem  in  solidum  possidere  non  pos-
sunt).  When  several  persons  possess  a  thing  in
common,  so  that  their  possession  is  mutually  limited,
each  in  fact  possesses  only  a  fractional  part  of  the
thing,  but  does  not  possess  the  other  parts,  and
though  the  division  into  parts  is  only  ideal,  this
does  not  affect  the  legal  consideration  of  the  matter.
Persons  may  also  possess  the  same  thing  in  dif-
ferent senses,  as  in  the  case  of  the  debtor  and  his
creditor  who  has  received  from  him  a  pignus.

Though  things  incorporeal  are  not  strictly  ob-
jects of  possession,  yet  there  is  a  Juris  quasi  pos-
sessio of  them,  as  for  instance  in  the  case  of  ser-
vitutes.  The  exercise  of  a  right  of  this  kind  is
analogous  to  the  possession  of  a  corporeal  thing :  in
other  words,  as  real  possession  consists  in  the  exer-
cise of  ownership,  so  this  kind  of  possession,  which
is  fashioned  from  analogy  to  the  other,  consists  in
the  exercise  of  a  jus  in  re  or  a  right  which  is  not
ownership.  In  the  case  of  Possession,  it  is  the
thing  (corjjus)  which  is  possessed,  and  not  the
proi)erty :  by  analogy  then  we  should  not  say  that
the  servitus  or  the  jus  in  re  is  possessed.  But  as
in  the  case  of  a  jus  in  re  there  is  nothing  to  which
the  notion  of  possession  can  be  attached,  while  in
the  case  of  ownership  there  is  the  thing  to  which
we  apply  the  notion  of  possession,  we  are  com-
pelled to  resort  to  the  expression  Juris  Quasi  Pos-
sessio, by  which  nothing  more  is  meant  than  the
exercise  of  a  jus  in  re,  which  exercise  has  the  same


POSSESSIO.


947


relation  to  the  jus  in  re,  that  proper  possession  has
to  ownership.     (Savigny,  p.  166.)

In  order  to  the  acquisition  of  juristical  Possessio,
apprehension  and  animus  are  necessary.  The  ap-
prehension of  a  corporeal  thing  is  such  a  dealing
with  it  as  empowers  the  person  who  intends  to
acquire  the  possession  to  operate  on  the  thing  to
the  exclusion  of  all  other  persons.  Actual  cor-
poreal contact  with  the  thing  is  not  necessary  to
apprehension  :  it  is  enough  if  there  is  some  act  on
the  part  of  the  person  who  intends  to  acquire  pos-
session, which  gives  him  the  physical  capacity  to
operate  on  the  thing  at  his  pleasure.  Thus  in  the
case  of  a  piece  of  ground,  he  who  enters  upon  part
is  considered  to  have  entered  upon  the  whole.  A
man  may  acquire  possession  of  what  is  contained
in  a  thing  by  delivery  of  the  key  which  gives  him
access  to  the  contents,  in  the  presence  of  (apud)
the  thing.  The  case  mentioned  in  the  Digest
(Dig.  18.  tit.  1.  s.  74)  is  that  of  the  key  of  a
granary  being  delivered  in  sight  of  the  granary
{apud  horrea).  The  delivery  of  the  key  is  not  a
symbolical  delivery,  as  some  have  supposed,  but
it  is  the  delivery  of  the  means  of  getting  at  the
thing.  (Compare  Lord  Hardwicke's  remarks  on
this  matter.  Ward  v.  Turner,  2  Vez.)

The  animus  consists  in  the  will  to  treat  as  one's
own  the  tiling  that  is  the  object  of  our  apprehen-
sion. All  persons  therefore  who  are  legally  in-
competent to  will,  are  incompetent  to  acquire  a
juristical  possession.  Infantes  and  furiosi  are
examples  of  such  persons.  If  a  man  has  the  de-
tention of  a  tiling,  he  can  acquire  the  Possessio  by
the  animus  alone  ;  for  the  other  condition  has
been  already  complied  with.

In  order  that  juristical  possession  may  be  ac-
quired, there  must  always  be  the  animus  on  the  part
of  him  who  intends  to  acquire  the  possession  ;  but
the  act  of  apprehension  {corpus)  may  be  effected
by  another  as  his  representative,  if  that  other  does
the  necessary  acts,  and  with  the  intention  of  ac-
quirhig  the  possession  for  the  other,  and  not  for
himself.  (Paulus,  S.  li.  v.  tit.  2.  s.  1.)  There
must  be  a  certain  relation  between  the  person  for
whom  possession  is  thus  acquired  and  the  person
who  acquires  it  for  him,  either  of  legal  power  (po-
testas),  or  of  agency :  the  former  is  the  case  of  a
slave  or  filius  familias  who  obeys  a  command,  and
the  latter  is  the  case  of  an  agrnt  who  follows  in-
structions (mandatum).  A  person,  who  is  already
the  representative  of  another,  and  has  the  Possessio
of  a  thing,  may  by  the  animus  alone  cease  to  have
the  Possessio  for  himself  and  have  it  for  that  other,
retaining  only  the  bare  detention.

Possessio,  that  is  the  Right  of  Possession,  can
be  transferred,  without  the  transfer  of  ownership.
In  this  case  of  derivative  Possessio  the  apprehen-
sion is  tlie  same  as  in  the  case  of  acquiring  a
juristical  possessio  ;  but  the  animus  with  which
the  thing  is  apprehended,  cannot  be  the  "  animus
domini,"  but  merely  the  "animus  possidendi,'"
that  is,  the  will  to  acquire  the  Jus  Possessionis,
which  the  Possessor  transfers,  and  nothing  more.
The  Detention  of  a  thing  may  be  transferred  with-
out the  ownership,  but  the  transfer  of  the  deten-
tion is  not  always  accompanied  by  a  transfer  of  the
Jus  Possessionis.  There  are  three  classes  into
which  all  acts  may  be  distributed  which  are  ac-
companied with  a  transfer  of  Detention  :  1,  those
which  are  never  the  foundation  of  a  derivative
',  those  which  always  are,  and  3,  those
3p  2


348


POSSESSIO.


which  are  sometimes.  The  First  class  compre-
hends such  cases  as  those  when  the  detention  of  a
thing  is  transferred  to  an  agent  ( procurator)^  and
the  case  of  a  Commodatum.  [Commodatum.]
The  Second  class  comprehends  the  case  of  the
Emphyteuta,  which  is  a  Possessio,  but  only  a  de-
rivative one,  as  the  Emphyteuta  has  not  the  animus
domini  ;  it  also  comprehends  the  case  of  the  cre-
ditor who  receives  the  detention  of  a  pignus  by  a
contractus  pignoris,  and  with  the  detention,  the  Jus
Possessionis  ;  but?  it  does  not  comprehend  the  case
of  a  Pignus  praetorium,  Pignus  in  causa  judicati
captum,  nor  a  Pactum  hypothecae.  In  the  case  of
a  contractus  Pignoris,  when  the  thing  was  deli-
vered to  the  creditor,  he  had  Possessio,  that  is,  a
right  to  the  Interdicts,  but  not  Possessio  Civilis,
that  is,  the  Right  of  Usucapion.  The  debtor  had
no  Possessio  at  all,  but  by  virtue  of  an  exception  to
a  general  rule,  the  usucapion  that  had  been  com-
menced, still  continued.  The  Third  class  compre-
hends Depositum  and  Precarium.

The  Right  of  Possession  consists  in  the  right  to
the  protection  of  the  Interdict  [Interdictum],
and  this  protection  is  also  extended  to  Jura  in  re.
The  relation  of  the  .luris  quasi  possessio  to  Pos-
sessio has  been  already  explained.  The  objects  of
this  Juris  quasi  possessio  are  Personal  servitutes,
Real  servitutes,  and  Jura  in  re  which  do  not
belong  to  the  class  of  Servitutes,  of  which  Super-
ficies is  the  only  proper  instance.  (Savigny,  p.  525.)
In  all  the  cases  of  Juris  quasi  possessio,  the  ac-
quisition and  the  continuance  of  the  right  of  pos-
session depend  on  the  corpus  and  animus  ;  and  the
animus  is  to  be  vievved  exactly  in  the  same  way
as  in  the  case  of  possession  of  a  corporeal  thing.
The  exercise  of  Personal  servitutes  (particularly
usus  and  ususfructus)  is  inseparable  from  the
natural  possession  of  the  thing  ;  and  the  posses-
sion of  them  is  consequently  acquired  in  the  same
way  as  the  possession  of  a  corporeal  thing.  As  to
the  Juris  quasi  possessio  of  Real  Servitutes,  there
are  two  cases :  either  he  who  has  a  right  to  the
Servitus,  must  do  some  act,  which  if  he  had  not
the  right,  he  might  be  forbidden  to  do  (servitus
quae  in  patiendo  consisit) ;  or  the  owner  of  property
has  no  right  to  do  some  particular  thing,  which,  if
the  right  did  not  exist,  he  might  do  {servitus  quae
in  lion  faciendo  consistit).  As  to  the  first  class,
which  may  be  called  Positive  Servitutes,  the
acquisition  of  the  Juris  quasi  possessio  consists
merely  in  doing  some  act,  which  is  the  object  of
the  right,  and  the  doing  of  this  act  must  be  for  the
purpose  of  exercising  the  right.  (Dig.  8.  tit.  6.
8. 25.)  This  rule  applies  to  the  Jus  Itineris,
Actus,  Viae,  and  others,  which  are  independent  of
the  possession  of  any  other  property  by  the  person
who  claims  the  Jus.  Such  an  act  as  the  Jus  tigni
immittendi,  or  the  driving  a  beam  into  the  wall  of
one's  neighbour's  house,  is  a  right  connected  with
the  possession  of  another  piece  of  property,  and  the
possession  of  this  right  consists  in  the  exercise  of
it.  As  to  the  second  class  which  may  be  called
Negative  Servitutes,  the  Juris  quasi  possessio  is
acquired  in  consequence  of  the  person  whose  right
is  thereby  limited,  attempting  to  do  some  act  con-
trary to  the  right  of  the  person  who  claims  the
servitus,  and  meeting  with  opposition  to  such  act
and  acquiescing  in  the  opposition.  (Dig.  8.  tit.  5.
s.  6.)  This  Juris  quasi  possessio  may  also  be
founded  on  a  legal  title,  that  is,  on  any  juristical
transaction  which  can  give  such  right.


POSSESSIO.

Every  possession  continues  so  long  as  the  corpus
and  the  animus  continue.  (Savigny,  p.  339.)  If
both  cease  or  either  of  them  ceases,  the  possession
is  gone.  (Dig.  41.  tit.  2.  s.  3.  46.)  As  to  the
corpus,  the  possession  is  lost,  when  in  consequence
of  an}'  event  the  possessor  cannot  operate  on  the
thing  at  his  pleasure,  as  before.  In  the  case  of
moveable  things,  the  possession  is  lost,  when  an-
other person  has  got  hold  of  them,  either  by  force
or  secretly  :  in  the  case  of  immoveable  things,  it  is
lost  when  a  man  has  turned  another  out  of  the  pos-
session ;  but  if  in  the  absence  of  the  possessor,  an-
other occupies  his  land  without  his  knowledge,  he
does  not  lose  the  possession  till  he  attempts  to  ex-
ercise ownership  over  the  land  and  is  prevented  by
the  person  then  in  possession  of  it,  or  through  fear
does  not  attempt  to  recover  his  possession.  The
possession  thus  acquired  by  the  new  possessor  is  a
violenta  possessio.  If  the  former  possessor  knows
the  fact  and  acquiesces  by  doing  nothing,  he  loses
the  possession  by  the  animus  alone.  In  the  case
of  possession  being  lost  by  animus  alone,  it  may
be  effected  either  expressly  or  tacitly  ;  the  only
thing  necessary  is  that  there  must  be  an  intention
to  give  up  the  possession.  The  possession  is  lost
corpore  et  animo,  when  the  possessor  gives  up  a
thing  to  another  to  possess  as  his  ov/n.  In  the
case  of  a  Juris  quasi  possessio,  as  well  as  in  that
of  Possessio  proper,  the  continuance  of  the  possessio
depends  on  the  corpus  and  animus  together.
There  can  be  no  Juris  quasi  possessio  without  the
animus  possidendi  ;  and  if  there  be  merely  the
animus  possidendi,  the  Juris  quasi  possessio  must
cease.

Possessio  can  be  lost  by  means  of  a  person  who
represents  the  Possessor.  Such  person  may  him-
self acquire  the  possession  by  exercising  the  animus
possidendi,  when  it  is  accompanied  with  a  suflicient
corporeal  act :  in  the  case  of  moveable  things,  this
is  furtum  ;  in  the  case  of  immoveable  things,  it  ia
violent  dispossession.  The  possession  can  be  lost
through  the  representative,  in  all  cases  in  which  it
would  have  been  lost  by  the  possessor,  if  there  had
been  no  representation.

In  manj'  of  the  systematic  expositions  of  Roman
Law,  the  theory  of  Possessio  is  treated  as  intro-
ductory to  the  theory  of  Ownership  (Dominium),
The  view  which  has  been  here  given  of  it,  is  also
not  universally  acquiesced  in,  but  it  is  the  correct
view.  For  instance,  Gans  in  his  chapter  on  Pos-
session (System  des  Rom.  Civilrechts  im  Grimdrisse^
(&c.)  begins  with  the  two  following  sections  :  —

§  1 03.  Darstellung  der  verschiedenen  hersch-
enden  Meinungen  Uber  den  Besitz.  —  Der  Besitz
ist  kein  blesses  Factum,  und  ensteht  nicht  als
Recht,  durch  den  um weg  des  Unrechts.

§  104.  Der  Besitz  als  das  Eigenthum  nach  der
Seite  des  bloss  besonderen  willens. — Anfangendes.
prasumtives  Eigenthum.

Savigny's  view  on  the  contrary  is  briefly  this :
"  Possession  is  a  Fact  (Factum),  so  far  as  a  mere
factish  (unjuristical)  relation  (detention)  is  the
foundation  of  it.  But  Possession  is  also  a  Right,
so  far  as  rights  are  connected  with  the  bare  exist-
ence of  the  relation  of  Fact.  Consequently  Posses-
sion is  both  Fact  and  Right."

Also — "The  only  Right  arising  from  bare  Pos-
session is  a  Right  to  the  Interdicts " — and  "  the
Right  to  the  Interdicts  is  fouuded  on  the  fact  of
the  Exercise  of  Ownership  being  obstinicted  wrong-
fully, as  for  instance,  by  force."


POSSESSIO.

On  what  ground  is  bare  Possession  to  be  main-
tained, if  it  is  not  a  Right  ?  The  answer  is,  that
Possession  cannot  be  disturbed  except  by  force,
and  force  is  not  allowed.  The  fundamental  notion
then  is  this  ;  a  violent  disturbance  of  Possession  is
an  attack  on  a  man's  personality,  on  his  freedom.

It  is  shown  in  the  article  Agrariae  Leges  that
the  origin  of  the  Roman  doctrine  of  Possession  may
probably  be  traced  to  the  Possessio  of  the  Ager
Publicus.  Possessio,  Possessor,  and  Possidere  are
the  proper  technical  terms  used  by  the  Roman
writers  to  express  the  possession  and  the  enjoy-
ment of  the  Public  Lands.  These  terms  did  not
express  ownership  {ex  jure  Quiritium)  :  they  had
i-n  fact  no  more  relation  to  ownership  than  the
Possessio  of  which  this  article  treats.  Still  the
notion  of  this  kind  of  use  and  enjoj-ment  was
Buch,  that  one  may  easily  conceive  how  the  term
Possessio  became  applicable  to  various  cases  in
which  there  was  no  Quiritarian  ownership,  but
something  that  had  an  analogy  to  it.  Thus  in  the
case  of  Damnum  infectum,  with  reference  to  the
second  niissio  in  possessionem  {ex  secundo  dccreto)^
the  Praetor  says  "  possidere  jubebo,"  which  is
equivalent  to  giving  bonitarian  ownership  with  the
power  of  usucapion.  A  ususfructus  which  could
only  be  maintained  by  the  Jus  Praetorium,  was  a
Possessio  ususfructus  as  opposed  to  Dominium
ususfructus.  The  expressions  Hereditatis  or  bo-
norum  possessio  do  not  mean  the  actual  possession
of  the  things,  but  the  peculiar  character  of  the
Praetoria  hereditas  :  for  this  Bonorum  possessio
has  the  same  relation  to  the  Hereditas  that  Boni-
tarian has  to  Quiritarian  ownership.  [Dominium  ;
Heres.]  Now  there  is  a  clear  analogy  in  all
these  instances  to  the  Possessio  of  the  Ager
Publicus,  which  consists  in  this,  that  in  both  cases
an  actual  exclusive  enjoyment  of  a  particular  per-
son to  a  particular  thing  is  recognized.  This  will
also  explain  how  property  in  provincial  ground
came  to  be  called  Possessio  :  such  property  was
not  Quiritarian  ownership,  but  it  was  a  right  to
the  exclusive  enjoyment  of  the  land,  a  right  which
the  word  Possessio  sufficiently  expressed.  Thus
the  name  Possessio  was  transferred  from  the  Right
to  its  Object  ;  and  Ager  and  Possessio  were  thus
opposed :  Ager  was  a  piece  of  land  which  was
the  object  of  Quiritarian  ownership,  and  Possessio
a  piece  of  land  which  was  either  accidentally  an
object  only  of  Bonitarian  ownership,  as  a  fundus
Italicus  of  which  there  had  been  merely  tradition  ;
or  it  was  land  that  could  not  be  the  object  of  Quiri-
tarian ownership,  such  as  Provincial  land  (Javo-
lenus,  Dig.  50.  tit  16.  s.  115),  and  the  old  AgQt
Publicus.

Other  matters  relating  to  Possessio  appear  to  be
explained  by  this  view  of  its  historical  origin.  The
Interdictum  recuperandae  possessionis  relates  only
to  land,  a  circumstance  which  is  consistent  with
the  hypothesis  of  the  origin  of  Possessio.  The
nature  of  the  Precarium  also  is  explained,  when
we  know  that  it  expressed  originally  the  relation
between  the  Patronus  and  the  Cliens  who  occupied
the  Possessio  of  the  Patroims  as  a  tenant  at  will
and  could  be  ejected  by  the  Interdictum  de  pre-
cario,  if  he  did  not  quit  on  notice.  Further,  we
may  thus  explain  the  apparent  inconsistency  in  the
case  of  a  lessee  of  Ager  Vectigalis,  who  though  he
had  only  a  jus  in  re,  had  yet  juristical  Possessio  :
the  Ager  Vectigalis  was  in  fact  fashioned  accord-
ing to  the  analogy  of  the  old  Ager  Publicus,  and  it


POSTLIMINIUM.


949


was  a  simple  process  to  transfer  it  to  that  notion  of
Possessio  which  had  existed  in  the  case  of  the  Ager
Publicus.     [Emphyteusis.]

This  article  read  in  connection  with  the  article
on  the  Agrariae  Leges,  and  the  Licinian  Roga-
tions [Lex,  pp.  693,  694],  will  give  the  reader  an
outline  of  the  law  of  Possession  both  in  relation  to
the  Ager  Publicus  and  Privatus.

The  preceding  view  of  possession  is  from
Savigny,  Das  Recht  des  Besiizes,  fifth  ed.  1827.
There  is  an  analysis  of  this  excellent  work  by
Warnkonig,  "  Analyse  du  traite  de  la  possession
par  M,  de  Savigny,  Liege  1824  ;"  and  a  summary
view  of  Savigny's  Theory  is  given  by  Mackeldey,
Lekrbuch,  <L'c.  ii.  p.  7.  See  also  Puchta,  Inst.  ii.
§  224  ;  Gains,  iv.  138—170  ;  Inst.  4.  tit.  15  ;
Dig.  41.  tit.  2,  3  ;  43.  tit.  16—23,  26,  31  ;  Cod.
7.  tit.  32  ;  8.  tit.  4,  5,  6,  9  ;  Cod.  Theod.  4.  tit.
22,  23.  [G.  L.]

POSSE'SSIO  BONORUM.  [Bonorum  Pos-
sessio.]

POSSE'SSIO  CLANDESTI'NA.  [Inter-
dictum.]

POSTPCUM.     [Janua.]

POSTLIMPNIUM,  JUS  POSTLIMPNII.
"  There  are,"  says  Pomponius  (Dig.  49.  tit.  15.
s.  1 4),  "  two  kinds  of  Postliminium,  for  a  man
may  either  return  himself  or  recover  something."
Postliminium  is  further  defined  by  Paulus  (Dig.
49.  tit.  15.  8. 19)  to  be  the  "right  of  recovering  a
lost  thing  from  an  extraneus  and  of  its  being  re-
stored to  its  former  status,  which  right  has  been
established  between  us  (the  Romans)  and  free  peo-
ple and  kings  by  usage  and  laws  {moribus  ac
legibus)  ;  for  what  we  have  lost  in  war  or  even  out
of  war,  if  we  recover  it,  we  are  said  to  recover
postliminio  ;  and  this  usage  has  been  introduced
by  natural  equity,  in  order  that  he  who  was
wrongfully  detained  by  strangers,  should  recover
his  former  rights  on  returning  into  his  own  terri-
tories {in  fines  suos).''''  Again  Paulus  says,  "  a
man  seems  to  have  returned  Postliminio,  when  he
has  entered  our  territory  {in  fines  nosiros  intra-
verit)  ;  as  a  foundation  is  laid  for  a  Postliminium
{sicuti  admittitur*)  {?)  when  he  has  gone  beyond  our
territories  {ubi  fines  nostras  excessit).  But  if  a  man
has  come  into  a  state  in  alliance  {soda)  or  friend-
ship with  Rome,  or  has  come  to  a  King  in  alliance
or  friendship  with  Rome,  he  appears  to  have  forth-
with returned  by  Postliminium,  because  he  then
first  begins  to  be  safe  under  the  name  of  the  Roman
state."  These  extracts  are  made  for  the  purpose
of  clearing  up  the  Etymology  of  this  word,  as  to
which  there  was  a  difference  of  opinion.  (Cic.
Top.  8.)  The  explanation  of  Scaevola,  as  given
by  Cicero,  has  reference  to  the  etymology  of  the
word,  post  and  limen  :  "  what  has  been  lost  by  us
and  has  come  to  an  enemy  and  as  it  were  has  gone
from  its  own  limen,  and  then  has  afterwards  {post)
returned  to  the  same  limen,  seems  to  have  returned
by  Postliminium."  According  to  this  explanation,
the  limen  was  the  boundary  or  limit  within  Avhich
the  thing  was  under  the  authority  of  Rome  and
an  object  of  Roman  law.  A  recent  writer  (Goet-
tling,  Geschichte  der  Rom.  Staatsverfassung,  p.  117)
suggests  that  Postliminium  must  be  viewed  in  a
sense  analogous  to  Pomoerium.  There  is  a  fanciful
explanation  of  the  matter  by  Plutarch  '  {Quaest.
Rom.  5)  in  his  answer  to  the  question.  Why  are


Sicuti  amittitur,"  Flor.,  Geb.  et  Spwng.
3  p  3


950


POSTLIMINIUM.


those  who  have  been  fiilsely  reported  to  have  died
in  a  foreign  land,  not  received  into  the  house
through  the  door,  in  case  of  their  return,  but  let
down  through  an  opening  in  the  roof?

If  a  Roman  citizen  during  war  came  into  the
power  of  an  enemy,  he  sustained  a  diminutio
capitis  maxima,  and  all  his  civil  rights  were  in
abcA^ance.  Being  captured  by  the  enemy,  he  be-
came a  slave  ;  but  his  rights  over  his  children,  if
he  had  any,  were  not  destroyed,  bxit  were  said  to
be  in  abe3'ance  {peiidere)  by  virtue  of  the  Jus
Postliminii :  when  he  returned,  his  children  were
again  in  his  power :  and  if  he  died  in  captivity,
they  became  sui  juris.  Whether  their  condition
as  sui  juris  dated  from  the  time  of  the  captivity  or
of  the  death,  was  a  disputed  matter  (Gains,  i.  129)  ;
but  Ulpian,  who  wrote  after  Gaius,  declares  that
in  such  case  he  must  be  considered  to  have  died,
when  he  was  made  captive  ;  and  this  is  certainly
the  true  deduction  from  the  premises.  In  the  case
of  a  filius  or  nepos  being  made  a  captive,  the  pa-
rental power  was  suspended  (in  suspenso).  If  the
son  returned,  he  obtained  his  civic  rights  and  the
father  resumed  his  parental  power  ;  which  is  the
case  mentioned  in  the  Digest  (49.  tit.  15.  s.  14).
As  to  a  wife,  the  matter  was  different :  the  hus-
band did  not  recover  his  Avife  jure  postliminii,  but
the  marriage  was  renewed  by  consent.  This  rule
of  law  involves  the  doctrine,  that  if  a  husband  was
captured  by  the  enemy,  his  marriage,  if  an}^  then
existed,  was  dissolved.  If  a  Roman  was  ransomed
by  another  person,  he  became  free,  but  he  was  in
the  nature  of  a  pledge  to  the  ransomer,  and  the
Jus  Postliminii  had  no  effect  till  he  had  paid  the
ransom  money.

Sometimes  by  an  act  of  tlie  state  a  man  was
given  up  bound  to  an  enemy  ;  and  if  tlie  enemy
would  not  receive  him,  it  was  a  question  whether
he  had  the  Jus  Postliminii.  This  v/as  the  case
with  Sp.  Postumius  who  Avas  given  up  to  the
Samnites,  and  with  C.  Hostilius  Mancinus  who
was  given  up  to  the  Numantines  ;  but  the  better
opinion  was  that  they  had  no  Jus  Postliminii  (Cic.
De  Or.  i.  40,  De  Of.  iii.  30,  To/).  8,  Pro  Cae-
cina,  c.  34  ;  Dig.  49.  tit.  15.  s.  4  ;  50.  tit.  7.  s.  17)  :
and  Mancinus  was  restored  to  his  civic  rights  by  a
Lex.     (Dig.  50.  tit.  7.  s.  17.)

Cicero  {Pro  Balbo,  c.  12)  uses  the  word  Postli-
minium in  a  different  sense  ;  for  he  applies  it  to
the  case  of  a  man  who  had,  by  his  own  voluntary
act,  ceased  to  be  a  citizen  of  a  state,  and  subse-
quently resumed  his  original  civic  rights  liy  Postli-
minium.

It  appears  that  the  Jus  Postliminii  was  founded
on  the  fiction  of  the  captive  having  never  been
absent  from  home  ;  a  fiction  which  was  of  easy  ap-
plication, for  as  the  captive  during  his  absence
could  not  do  any  legal  act,  the  interval  of  captivity
was  a  period  of  legal  non-activity,  which  was  ter-
minated by  his  showing  himself  again.

The  Romans  acknowledged  capture  in  war  as
the  source  of  ownership  in  other  nations,  as  they
claimed  it  in  their  own  case.  Accordingly  things
taken  by  the  enemy  lost  their  Roman  owners  ;  but
when  they  were  recovered,  they  reverted  to  their
original  owners.  This  was  the  case  with  land  that
had  be'^n  occupied  by  the  enemy,  and  with  the  fol-
lowing moveables,  which  are  enumerated  by  Cicero
as  Res  Postliminii  (Top.  8),  "homo  (that  is  slaves),
navis,  mulus  clitellarius,  equus,  equa  quae  fraena
recipere  solet."  (Compare  Festus,  s.v.  Postliminium.)


POSTLIMINIUM,

Arms  were  not  Res  Postliminii,  for  it  was  a  maxim
that  they  could  not  be  honourably  lost.

The  recovery  above  referred  to  seems  to  mean  the
recovery  by  the  Roman  state  or  by  the  original
owner.  If  an  individual  recaptured  from  an  enemy
what  had  belonged  to  a  Roman  citizen,  it  would  be
consistent  that  we  should  suppose  that  the  thing
recaptured  was  made  his  own  bj"  the  act  of  cap-
ture ;  but  if  it  was  a  res  postliminii,  this  might
not  be  the  case.  If  a  thing,  as  a  slave,  was
ransomed  by  a  person  not  the  owner,  the  owner
could  not  have  it  till  he  had  paid  the  ransom :  but
it  does  not  appear  to  be  stated  how  the  matter
was  settled,  if  a  Roman  citizen  recaptured  property
(of  the  class  res  postliminii)  that  had  belonged
to  another  Roman  citizen.  This  apparent  diffi-
culty may  perhaps  be  solved  thus  :  in  time  of  war
no  Roman  citizen  could  individually  be  considered
as  acting  on  his  own  behalf  under  any  circum-
stances, and  therefore  whatever  he  did  was  the  act
of  the  State.  It  is  a  remark  of  Labeo  (Dig.  49.
tit.  15.  s.  2(3),  "Si  quid  bello  captnm  est,  in
praeda  est,  non  postliminio  redit ; "  and  Pomponius
(Dig.  49.  tit.  15.  s.  20)  states,  that  if  the  enemy
is  expelled  from  Roman  lands,  the  lands  return  to
their  former  owners,  being  neither  considered  pub-
lic land  nor  praeda  ;  in  making  which  remark  he
evidently  assumes  thegeneral  doctrine  laid  down  by
Labeo.  Paulus  also,  in  his  remark  on  Labeo's  rule
of  law,  merely  mentions  an  exception  to  the  rule,
which  is  of  a  peculiar  kind.  If  then  anything  taken
in  war  was  booty  (praeda).,  to  what  did  the  Jus
Postliminii  apply  ?  It  applied  at  least  to  all  that
Avas  restored  by  treaty  or  was  included  in  the  terms
of  suri'ender,  and  slaves  no  doubt  were  a  very  im-
portant part  of  all  such  things  as  were  captured  or
lost  in  time  of  Avar  ;  and  they  Avere  things  that
could  be  easily  identified,  and  restored  to  their
owners.  It  also  applied  to  a  slave  Avho  escaped
from  the  enemy  and  returned  to  his  master.  The
maxim  "quae  res  hostiles  apud  nos  sunt,  occu-
pantium  fiunt "  (Dig.  40.  tit.  1.  s.  51)  has  no
reference  to  capture  from  the  enem}',  as  it  some-
times seems  to  be  supposed.  (Miihlenbruch,  Doct.
Pand.  p.  242.)

It  may  be  objected  that  the  explanation  of  one
difficulty,  that  has  been  already  suggested,  raises
another.  According  to  this  explanation,  if  a  man
in  time  of  Avar  recaptured  his  own  slave,  it  Avould
be  praeda,  and  he  Avould  not  at  once  recover  the
ownership,  as  above  supposed.  The  answer  is,
that  it  may  be  so,  and  that  this  matter  of  Postli-
minium, particularly  as  regards  things,  Avaits  for  a
careful  investigation.  As  a  general  rule  all  move-
ables belonging  to  an  enemy,  which  Avere  captured
by  a  Roman  army,  Avere  Praeda,  a])parently  not
the  property  of  the  individual  soldier  Avho  hap-
pened to  lay  his  hands  on  them,  but  the  property
of  the  state  or  at  least  of  the  army.  Noav  the
difficulty  is  to  ascertain  AAhether  all  moveables  so
taken  Avere  Praeda,  except  Res  Postliminii ;  or
Avhether  all  things  so  taken  Avere  Praeda,  Res
Postliminii  included.  In  the  former  case,  the
Res  Postliminii  would  be  the  property  of  the
owner  when  he  could  prove  them  to  have  been
his,  as  in  the  case  mentioned  by  Livy  (a-.  1 6")  :  in
the  latter,  when  a  thing  had  become  Praeda,  it
had  lost  its  capacity  (if  Ave  may  so  speak)  of  being
a  Res  Postliminii.  The  distinction  here  made  is  a
fundamental  one.  The  difficulty  partly  arises
from  the  expression  of  Labeo  above  quoted,  Si


PRAECINCTIO

quid  &c.,  where  the  Florentine  reading  has  been
followed.  But  Bynkershoek  {Op.  Omn.  \.  p.  76)
amends  the  reading  into  Si  quod,  &c.,  the  propriety
of  which  may  be  doubted.     [Praeda.]

If  a  man  made  a  will  before  he  was  taken  cap-
tive, and  afterwards  returned,  the  will  was  good
jure  postliminii.  If  he  died  in  captivity,  the  will
was  good  by  the  Lex  Cornelia.  The  law  of
Postliminium  applied  to  time  of  peace  as  well  as
war,  when  the  circumstances  were  such  that  the
person  or  the  thing  could  become  the  property  of
another  nation  (Dig.  'iQ.  tit.  15.  s.  5),  as  for
instance  of  a  nation  that  had  neither  an  araicitia,
hospitium,  nor  a  foedus  with  Rome  ;  for  such
might  be  the  relation  of  a  nation  to  Rome,  and  yet
it  might  not  be  Hostis.  A  nation  was  not  Hostis,
in  the  later  acceptation  of  that  term,  till  the  Ro-
mans had  declared  war  against  it,  or  the  nation
had  declared  war  against  Rome.  Robbers  and
Pirates  were  not  hostes,  and  a  person  who  was
captured  by  them  did  not  become  a  slave,  and
therefore  had  no  need  of  the  Jus  Postliminii.
There  are  some  remarks  on  Postliminium  in  Walter,
GeschicJdc  des  Rom.  Rechts,  p.  50,  and  the  notes,
Isted.  [G.  L.]

POSTSIGNA'NI.     [ExERCiTus,  p.  502,  b.]
PO'STUMUS.     [Heres,  p.  601,  a.]
POTESTAS.     [Patria  Potestas.]
PRA'CTORES   (npaKTopes),  subordinate  offi-
cers ((jyoiJ.a  vTn]pecrias,  say^  Pollux,  viii.  114)  who
collected  the  fines  and  penalties    (i^n6o^as  and
ri/x-fi/xaTo)  imposed  by  magistrates  and  courts  of
justice,  and  payable  to  the  state.     The  magistrate
who  imposed  the  fine,  or  the  Tiyejxwv  ZiKaarripiov^
gave  notice  thereof  in  writing  to  the  irpaKTopei.
He    was  then    said    iiriypdcpeiu   rh    Ti/xTjfia   to7s
TTpaKTopaiv^  and  the   debtor's  name  TrapaSoOrivaL
To7s  TTpaKTopcnu.     If  the  fine,  or  any  part  thereof
was  to  go  to  a  temple,  the  like  notice  was  sent  to
the  rajxiai  of  the  god  or  goddess  to  whom  the
temple  belonged.    (Aesch.  c.  TimarcJi.  5  ;  Andoc.
de  Myst.  11,  ed.  Steph.  ;  Demosth.  c.  2%eocr.  1 328.)
The  name  of  the  debtor,  with  the  sum  which  he
was  condemned  to  pay,  was  entered  by  the  irpiic-
Topes  in  a  tablet  in  the   Acropolis.     Hence   the
debtor  was  said  to  be  iyyeypafifxevos  rep  SrjfxoaiM^
or  eV  TTJ  aKpoTv6\€L.     It  was  the  business  of  the
TvpaKTopss  to  demand  payment  of  this  sum,  and,  if
they  received  it,  to  pay  it  over  to  the  airoSeKrai,
and  also  to  erase  the  name  of  the  debtor  in  the  re-
gister (i^a\eicp€iv  or  aTraXeicpciv).     Such  erasure
usually  took  place  in  the  presence  of  some  members
of  the  senate.     An   evdei^is  lay  against  any  man
who  made  or  caused  to  be  made  a  fraudulent  entry
or  erasure  of  a  debt.  (Harpoc.  and  Suidas,  s.  v.
Aypa(plov,   aTroSe/crai,    \l/evbeyypa(pi] :  Andoc.  de
Myst.  11,  ed.   Steph.  ;  Demosth.  c.  Aristog.  778,
c.  Theoc.  1338.)     The  collectors  took  no  steps  to
enforce  payment ;  but  after  the  expiration  of  the
ninth  TrpvTaveia  from  the  registering  of  the  debt,
(or   in  case  of  a  penalty   imposed  on  a   ypa.(p^
liSpews,  after  the  expiration  of  eleven  days),  if  it
still  remained  unpaid,  it  was  doubled,  and  an  entry
made   accordingly.     (Aesch.    c.    Tiviarch.   3,    cd.
Steph.  ;  Demosth.  c.  Pant.  973,  c.  Theocr.   1322,
c.  Neaer.  1347.)     Thereupon  immediate  measures
might  be  taken  for  sei/.ure  and  confiscation  of  the
debtor's  goods  ;  but  here  the  TrpaKTopes  had  no
further  duty  to  perform,  except  perhaps  to  give  in-
formation of  the  default  to  the  senate.      [C.  R.  K.]
PRAECI'NCTTO.  [AMniiTHEATRUM,  p.  87.]


PRAEDA.


951


PRAECO'NES,  criers,  were  employed  for  va-
rious purposes  :  1.  In  sales  by  auction,  they  fre-
quently advertised  the  time,  place,  and  conditions
of  sale  :  they  seem  also  to  have  acted  the  part  of
the  modem  auctioneer,  so  far  as  calling  out  the
biddings  and  amusing  the  company,  though  the
property  was  knocked  down  by  the  magister  auc-
tionis.  (Hor.  Ars  Poet.  419  ;  "Cic.  ad  Ait.  xii.  40,
de  Of.  ii.  23.)  [Auctio.]  2.  In  all  public  as
semblies  they  ordered  silence.  (Li v.  iii.  47  ;  Plaut.
Poen.  prol.  11.)  3.  In  the  comitia  they  called
the  centuries  one  by  one  to  give  their  votes,  pro-
nounced the  vote  of  each  century,  and  called  out
the  names  of  those  who  were  elected.  (Cic.  c.
Verr.  v.  15,  fro  Mil.  35.)  They  also  recited  the
laws  that  were  to  be  passed.  4.  In  trials,  they
summoned  the  accuser  and  the  accused,  the  plaintiff
and  defendant.  (Suet.  7\i.  11.)  5.  In  the  public,
games,  they  invited  the  people  to  attend,  and  pro-
claimed the  victors.  (Cic.  ac?  jPajw.  V.  12.)  6.  In
solemn  funerals  they  also  invited  people  to  attend
by  a  certain  form  ;  hence  these  funerals  were  called
Funera  Indictiva.  (Festus,  s.  v.  Quirites;  Suet.
Jul.  84.)  7.  When  things  were  lost,  they  cried
them  and  searched  for  them.  (Plaut.  Merc.  iii.  4.
78  ;  Petron.  57.)  8.  In  the  infliction  of  capital
punishment,  they  sometimes  conveyed  the  com-
mands of  the  magistrates  to  the  lictors.  (Li v.  xxvi.
15.)

Their  office,  called  praeconium,  appears  to  have
been  regarded  as  rather  disreputable  :  in  the  time
of  Cicero  a  law  was  passed  preventing  all  persons
who  had  been  praecones  from  becoming  decuriones
in  the  municipia.  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  vi.  18.)  Under
the  early  emperors,  however,  it  became  very  pro-
fitable (Juv.  iii.  157,  vii.  6  ;  Martial,  v.  6Q.  11,
vi.  8.  5),  which  was  no  doubt  partly  owing  to
fees,  to  which  they  were  entitled  in  the  courts  of
justice  and  on  other  occasions,  and  partly  to  the
bribes  which  they  received  from  the  suitors,  &c.

PRAECO'NIUM.     [Praecones.]

PRAEDA  signifies  moveable  things  taken  by
an  enemy  in  war.  Such  things  Avere  either  dis-
tributed by  the  Imperator  among  the  stddiers  (Liv.
ii.  42,  vi.  13  ;  Sail.  Jug.  68),  or  sold  by  the
quaestors,  and  the  produce  was  brought  into  the
Aerarium :  —

"istos  captivos  duos,
Here  quos  emi  de  praeda  de  Quaestoribus."
(Plaut.  Capt.  i.  2.  1.)

The  difference  between  Praeda  and  Manubiae
is  explained  by  Gellius  (xiii.  24)  to  be  this :  —
Praeda  is  the  things  themselves  that  are  taken  in
war,  and  Manubiae  is  "•  pecunia  per  quaestorem
populi  Romani  ex  praeda  vendita  contracta :  "  nor
can  any  objection  to  this  explanation  be  derived
from  the  words  of  Cicero  {de  Leg.  Agr.  ii.  22).
When  prisoners  were  sold,  thej"-  were  said  to  be
sold  "  sub  corona,"  the  true  explanation  of  which
expression  is  probably  that  given  by  Gellius  {est
autem  alia,  d-c.  vii.  4).  The  mode  of  sale  of  other
things  than  slaves  was  at  first  probably  in  detail,
but  afterwards  in  the  lump,  that  is,  the  whole
praeda  might  be  sold  to  the  liighest  bidder,  or  it
might  be  sold  in  large  masses  which  contained  a
great  number  of  separate  things,  in  which  cases
the  whole  or  the  mass  would  pass  to  the  purchaser
as  a  universitas,  and  he  might  retail  it  if  he  chose.
This  mode  of  sale  in  the  luriip  was  called  "sectionem
venire/'  and  the  purchaser  was  called  sector.  It
3  p  4


952


PRAEFECTUS  ANNONAE.


was  the  practice  to  set  up  a  spear  at  such  sales,
which  was  afterwards  used  at  all  sales  of  things
by  a  niagistratus  in  the  name  of  the  people.
[Srctio.]

Corresponding  to  the  acquisition  of  moveable
things  in  warfare,  and  their  being  made  private  pro-
perty, is  the  transfer  of  Ager  publicus,  which  was
acquired  in  war,  to  individuals  by  a  Lex  Agraria
or  de  coloniis  deducendis  or  by  a  sale  by  the  quaes-
tors (ager  quaestorius).  [Postliminium.]  [G.  L.]
PRAEDIATOR.  [Praes.]
PRAEDIATO'RIUM  JUS.  [Praes.]
PRAE'DIUM.  This  word  originally  signified
according  to  Varro  {L.  L.  v.  40,  ed.  Muller)  any
property  which  was  made  a  security  to  the  State
by  a  Praes  :  "  Praedia  dicta,  item  ut  praedes,  a
praestando,  quod  ea  pignori  data  publice  mancupis
tidem  praestent."  Subsequently  the  word  was
limited  to  signify  land  generally.  In  this  sense
Praedia  were  divided  into  Rustica  and  Urbana,
of  which  the  following  definition  has  been  given  :
Rustica  are  those  on  which  there  are  no  aedes  or
which  are  in  the  countrj"-  {in  agro)  ;  and  Urbana
are  those  which  are  in  the  city  and  comprise  build-
ings. Those  incorporeal  things  which  consisted
not  in  the  ownership  of  Praedia,  but  in  certain
rights  with  respect  to  them,  were  called  Jura
Praediorum.  As  to  a  diiference  in  the  mode  of
transferring  such  Jura  in  the  case  of  Praedia  Rus-
tica and  Urbana  see  Gaius  (ii.  29).  A  Praedium
which  was  liable  to  a  servitiis  was  said  '•  servire,"
and  was  "  a  praedium  servieus."

Provincialia  Praedia  were  either  stipendiaria  or
tributaria :  the  former  were  in  those  provinces
which  were  considered  to  belong  to  the  Populus
Romanus  ;  and  the  latter  in  those  provinces  which
were  considered  to  belong  to  the  Caesar.  (Gaius,
ii.  21.)  [G.  L.]

PRAEFECTU'RA.  [Colonia,  pp.  318,  b,
319,  a.]

PRAEFECTUS  AERA'RII.  [Aerarium.]
PRAEFECTUS  ANNO'NAE,the  praefect  of
the  provisions,  especially  of  the  corn-market,  was
not  a  regular  magistrate  under  the  republic,  but
was  only  appointed  in  cases  of  extraordinary
scarcity,  when  he  had  the  entire  charge  of  supply-
ing the  capital  with  provisions,  especially  with
corn,  and  fixed  the  price  at  which  the  latter  was
to  be  sold.  This  magistrate  was  appointed  for  the
first  time  in  B.C.  439.  (Liv.  iv.  12;  Niebuhr,
Hist,  of  Rome,  ii.  p.  418.)  The  superintendence
of  the  corn-market  throughout  the  whole  republic
was  at  a  later  period  entrusted  to  Pompej'  for  a
period  of  five  years  (Dion  Cass,  xxxix.  9  ;  Cic.  ad
Att.  iv.  1  ;  Liv.  Epit.  104)  ;  and  in  accordance
■\vith  this  example  Augustus  took  the  same  super-
intendence upon  himself,  and  commanded  that  two
persons,  who  had  been  praetors  five  yejirs  before,
should  be  appointed  every  year  for  the  distribution
of  the  com.  (Dion  Cass.  liv.  1  ;  cm-am  fmme7iti
populo  dividundi^  Suet.  Awj.  37.)  Subsequently
Augustus  assigned  this  duty  to  two  persons  of
consular  rank  (Dion  Cass.  Iv.  26,  31)  ;  but  he
also  created  an  officer  under  the  title  of  Pruefectus
Annonae,  who  must  be  distinguished  from  the
above-mentioned  officers.  This  office  was  a  per-
manent one,  and  appears  to  have  been  only  held
by  one  person  at  a  time  :  he  had  jurisdiction  over
all  matters  appertaining  to  the  cora-market,  and,
like  the  Praefectus  Vigilum,  was  chosen  from  the
Equites,  and  was  not  reckoned  among  the  ordinary


PRAEFECTUS  PRAETORIO.
magistrates.  (Dion  Cass.  lii.  24  ;  Dig.  1.  tit.  2.
s.  2.  §  33  ;  14.  tit  1.  s.  1.  §  18.  tit.  5.  s.  8  ;  48.
tit.  2.  s.  13.)  The  Praefectus  Annonae  continued
to  exist  till  the  latest  times  of  the  empire  :  respect-
mg  his  duties  in  later  times  see  AValter,  Gesch.
des  Horn.  Rechts^  %  360,  2d  ed.  Comp.  Frumen-
TARiAE  Leges.

PRAEFECTUS  AQUA'RUM.  [Aquae
Ductus,  p.  115,  b.]

PRAEFECTUS  CASTRO'RUM,  praefect  of
the  camp,  is  first  mentioned  in  the  reign  of
Augustus,  There  was  one  to  each  legion.  (Veil.
Pat.  ii.  1 1 9  ;  Tac.  A7in.  i.  20,  xiv.  37.)  We  learn
from  Vegetius  (ii.  10)  that  it  was  his  duty  to  at-
tend to  all  matters  connected  with  the  making  of
a  camp,  such  as  the  vallum,  fossa,  &c.,  and  also  to
the  internal  economy  of  it.

PRAEFECTUS  CLASSIS,  the  commander  of
a  fleet.  This  title  was  frequently  given  in  the
times  of  the  republic  to  the  commander  of  a  fleet
(Liv.  xxvi.  48,  xxxvi.  42)  ;  but  Augustus  ap-
pointed two  permanent  officers  with  this  title,  one
of  whom  was  stationed  at  Ravenna  on  the  Ha-
driatic  and  the  other  at  Misenum  on  the  Tuscan
sea,  each  having  the  command  of  a  fleet.  (Suet,
Aug.  49  ;  Veget.  iv.  32  ;  Tac.  Hist  iii.  12.)
PRAEFECTUS  FABRUM.  [Fabri.]
PRAEFECTUS  JURI  DICUNDO.  [Co-
lonia, p.  31 8,  b.]

PRAEFECTUS  PRAETO'RIO,  was  the  com-
mander of  the  troops  who  guarded  the  emperor's
person.  [Praetorianl]  This  office  was  insti-
tuted by  Augustus,  and  was  at  first  only  military,
and  had  comparatively  small  power  attached  to  it
(Dion  Cass.  lii.  24,  Iv.  10  ;  Suet.  Aiig.  49)  ;  but
under  Tiberius,  who  made  Sejanus  commander  of
the  praetorian  troops,  it  became  of  much  greater
importance,  till  at  length  the  power  of  these  prae-
fects  became  second  only  to  that  of  the  emperors.
(Tac,  Ann.  iv.  1,  2  ;  Aurel.  Vict,  de  Cues.  9.)  The
relation  of  the  praefectus  praetorio  to  the  emperor
is  compared  to  that  of  the  magister  equitum  to  the
dictator  under  the  republic.  (Dig.  1.  tit.  11.)  From
the  reign  of  Severus  to  that  of  Diocletian,  the
praefects,  like  the  vizirs  of  the  East,  had  the  super-
intendence of  all  departments  of  the  state,  the
palace,  the  arm}',  the  finances,  and  the  law  :  they
also  had  a  court  in  which  they  decided  cases.  (Dig.
12.  tit.  1.  s.  40.)  The  office  of  praefect  of  the
praetorium  was  not  confined  to  military  officers  ;  it
was  filled  by  Ulpian  and  Papinian,  and  other  dis-
tinguished jurists.

Originally  there  were  two  praefects  ;  afterwards
sometimes  one  and  sometimes  two  ;  from  the  time
of  Commodus  sometimes  three  (Lamprid,  Commod.
6),  and  even  four.  They  were  as  a  regular  rule
chosen  only  from  the  equites  (Dion  Cass.  lii.  24  ;
Suet.  Tit  6  ;  Lamprid.  Commod.  4)  ;  but  from  the
time  of  Alexander  Severus  the  dignity  of  senator
was  always  joined  with  their  office.  (Lamprid.
Alex.  Sevr2\.)

Under  Constantine  the  praefects  were  deprived
of  all  military  command,  and  changed  into  go-
vernors of  provinces.  He  appointed  four  such
praefects  :  the  one,  who  commonly  attended  on  the
imperial  court,  had  the  command  of  Thrace,  the
whole  of  the  East,  and  Egypt  ;  the  second  had  the
command  of  Illyricum,  Macedonia,  and  Greece,
and  usually  resided  first  at  Sirmium.,  afterwards  at
Thessalonica  ;  the  third  of  Italy  and  Africa  ;  the
fourth,  who  resided  at  Treves,  of  Gaul,  SjKiin,  and


PRAEFECTUS  URBI.

Britain.  (Zosimus,  ii.  33.)  These  praefects  were
the  proper  representatives  of  the  emperor,  and
their  power  extended  over  all  departments  of  the
state :  the  array  alone  was  not  subject  to  their
jurisdiction.  (Walter,  Gesch.  des  Horn.  Rechts,
§§  269,  341  ;  Gibbon,  Decline  and  Fall,  c.  17.)

PRAEFECTUS     SOCIO'RUM.      [Exerci-
Tus,  p.  457,  b.]

PRAEFECTUS  VFGILUM.     [Exercitus,
p.  510,  a.]

PRAEFECTUS  URBI,  praefect  or  warden  of
the  city,  was  originally  called  Custos  Urhis.     (Ly-
dus,  De  Magistr.  i.  34,  38.)    The  name  Praefectus
Urbi  does  not  seem  to  have  been  used  till  after
the  time  of  the  Decemvirs.     The  dignity  of  Cus-
tos Urbis,  being  combined  with  that  of  Princeps
Senatus,  was  conferred  by  the  king,  as  he  had  to
appoint  one  of  the  decern  primi  as  princeps  sena-
tus.    (Liv.  i.  59,  60  ;  Dionys.ii.  12.)     The  func-
tions of  the  custos  urbis,  however,  were  not  ex-
ercised except    in  the  absence  of   the  king  from
Rome  ;  and  then  he  acted  as  the  representative  of
the  king  ;  but  whether  he  also  had  the  right  to
convoke  the  assembly  of  the  populus,  is  doubtful,
but  on  any  emergency  he  might  take  such  mea-
sures as  he  thought  proper  ;  for  he  had  the  im-
perium  in  the  city.     (Tacit.  Annul,  vi.  11  ;    Liv.
i.  59,    iii.  24.)      Romulus   is    said   to    have   con-
ferred this  dignity  upon  Denter  Romulius,  TuUus
Hostilius   upon   Numa   Martins,   and   Tarquinius
Superbus  upon  Sp.  Lucretius.     During  the  kingly
period  the  office   of  warden  of  the  city  was  pro-
bably for  life.  Under  the  republic  the  office  and  its
name  of  custos  urbis  remained  unaltered  ;  but  in
487  B.  c.  it  was  elevated  into  a  magistracy,  to  be
bestowed  by  election.  (Lydus,  De  Magistr.  i.  38.)
The  custos  urbis  was,  in  all  probability,  elected  by
the  curiae,  instead  of  whom  Dionysius   (viii.  64)
mentions  the   senate.     Persons    of   consular  rank
were  alone   eligible  ;  and  down  to  the  time  of  the
Dccenivirate  every  praefect  that  is  mentioned  occurs
previously  as  consul.     The  only  exception  is  P.
Lucretius  in  Livy  (iii.  24),  whose  name,  however,
is   probably   wrong.      (Niebuhr,  ii.    p.  120,   note
255.)     In   the  early  period  of  the   republic   the
warden  exercised  within  the  city  all  the  powers  of
the  consuls,  if  they  Avere  absent :  he  convoked  the
senate  (Liv.  iii.  9  ;    Cell.  xiv.  7.  §  4),  held  the
comitia  (Liv.  iii.  24),  and,  in  times  of  war,  even
levied  civic  legions,  which  were  commanded  by  him.
When  the  office  of  praetor  urbanus  was  insti-
tuted, the  wardenship  of  the  city  was  swallowed
up  in  it  (Lydus,  De  Mens.  19,  De  Magistr.  ii.  6)  ;
but  as  the  Romans  were  at  all  times  averse  to
dropping  altogether  any  of  their  old  institutions,  a
praefectus  urbi,  though  a  mere  shadow  of  the  former
office,  was  henceforth  appointed  every  year,  only
for  the  time  that  the    consuls    were  absent  from
Rome  for  the  purpose  of   celebrating  the  Feriae
s      Latinae.    This  praefectus  had  neither  the  power
j      of  convoking  the  senate  nor  the  right  of  speaking
j     in  it  ;  as  in  most  cases  he  was  a  person  below  the
j     senatorial    age,    and  was    not    appointed    by  the
1     people,  but  by  the  consuls.     (Gell.  xiv.  8.)  When
Varro,  in  the  passage  of  Gcllius  here  referred  to,
j     claims  for  the  praefectus    urbi  the  right  of  con-
1      Yoking  the  senate,  he  is  probably  speaking  of  the
t      power  of  the  praefect  such  as  it  was  previously  to
I     the    institution   of  the    office  of  praetor   urbauus.
j     Of  how  little  importance  the  office  of  praefect  of
j     tlie  city  liad  gradually  become,  may  be  inferred


PRAEFECTUS  URBL


953


from  the  facts,  that  it  was  always  given  to  young
men  of  illustrious  families  (Tacit.  Annal.  iv.  36),
and  that  Julius  Caesar  even  appointed  to  it  several
youths  of  equestrian  rank  under  age.  (Dion  Cass,
xlix.  42,  xliii.  29,  48.)  During  the  empire  such
praefects  of  the  city  continued  to  be  appointed  so
long  as  the  Feriae  Latinae  were  celebrated,  and
were  even  invested  with  some  kind  of  jurisdiction.
(Tacit.  Annal  vi.  11  ;  Suet.  Nero,  7,  Claud.  A  ;
Dion  Cass.  liv.  17  ;  J.  Capitol.  Antonin.  Phil.  4.)
On  some  occasions,  however,  no  praefectus  urbi
was  appointed  at  all  ;  and  then  his  duties  were
performed  by  the  praetor  urbanus.  (Dion  Cass,
xli.  14,  xlix.  16  ;  comp.  Becker,  Handb.  der  Rom.
Alterth.  vol.  ii.  pt.  ii.  p.  146.)

An  office  very  different  from  this,  though  bear-
ing the  same  name,  was  instituted  by  Augustus  on
the  suggestion  of  Maecenas.  (Dion  Cass.  Hi.  21  ;
Tacit.  /.  c.  ;  Suet.  Aug.  37.)  This  new  praefectus
urbi  was  a  regular  and  permanent  magistrate,
whom  Augustus  invested  with  all  the  powers
necessary  to  maintain  peace  and  order  in  the  city.
He  had  the  superintendence  of  butchers,  bankers,
guardians,  theatres,  &c.  ;  and  to  enable  him  to
exercise  his  power,  he  had  distributed  throughout
the  city  a  number  of  milites  stationarii,  whom  we
may  compare  to  a  modem  police.  He  also  had
jurisdiction  in  cases  between  slaves  and  their
masters,  between  patrons  and  their  freed  men,  and
over  sons  who  had  violated  the  pietas  towards
their  parents.  (Dig.  1.  tit.  12.  s.  1.  §  5 — 14  ;
37.  tit.  15.  s.  1.  §2.)  His  jurisdiction,  however,
became  gradually  extended  ;  and  as  the  powers  of
the  ancient  republican  praefectus  urbi  had  been
swallowed  up  by  the  office  of  the  praetor  urbanus,  so
now  the  power  of  the  praetor  urbanus  was  gradu-
ally absorbed  by  that  of  the  praefectus  urbi  ;  and
at  last  there  was  no  appeal  from  his  sentence,  ex-
cept to  the  person  of  the  princeps  himself,  while
anybody  might  appeal  from  a  sentence  of  any
other  city  magistrate,  and,  at  a  later  period,  even
from  that  of  a  governor  of  a  province,  to  the  tri-
bunal of  the  praefectus  urbi.  (Vopisc.  Florian.  5,
6  ;  Suet.  Aug.  33  ;  Dion  Cass.  Hi.  21,  33  ;  Dig.
4.  tit.  4.  s.  38.)  His  jurisdiction  in  criminal  mat-
ters was  at  first  connected  with  the  quaestiones
(Tacit.  Annul,  xiv.  41,  with  the  note  of  Lipsius)  ;
but  from  the  third  century  he  exercised  it  alone,
and  not  only  in  the  city  of  Rome,  but  at  a  distance
of  one  hundred  miles  from  it,  and  he  might  sen-
tence a  person  to  deportatio  in  insulam.  (Dig.  1.
tit.  12.  s.  1.  §  3  and  4.)  During  the  first  period
of  the  empire  and  under  good  emperors,  the  office
was  generally  held  for  a  number  of  years,  and  in
many  cases  for  life  (Dion  Cass.  Hi.  21,  24,
Ixxviii.  14  ;  J.  Capitol.  Antonin.  Pius,  8  ;  Lam-
prid.  Commod.  14  ;  Vopisc.  Carin.  16;  ;  but  from
the  time  of  Valerian  a  new  praefect  of  the  city  oc-
curs almost  every  year.

At  the  time  when  Constantinople  was  madt^'the
second  capital  of  the  empire,  this  city  also  received
its  praefectus  urbi.  The  praefects  at  this  time
were  the  direct  representatives  of  the  emperors,
and  all  the  other  officers  of  the  administration  of
the  city,  all  corporations,  and  all  public  institu-
tions, were  under  their  control.  (Cod.  1 .  tit.  28.
s.  4  ;  Symmach.  Epist.  x.  37,  43  ;  Cassiod.  Va-
riar.  vi.  4.)  They  also  exercised  a  superinten-
dence over  the  importation  and  the  prices  of  pro-
visions, though  these  subjects  were  under  the  more
immediate  regulation  of  other  officers,      (Cod.  1.


954  PRAEJUDICIUM.

tit.  28.  s.  1  ;  Orelli,  lusa-ipt.  n.  3116.)  The  prae-
fects  of  the  city  had  every  month  to  make  a  report
to  the  emperor  of  the  transactions  of  the  senate
(Symmach.  Epist.  x.  44),  where  they  gave  their
vote  before  the  consulares.  They  were  the  medium
through  which  the  emperors  received  the  petitions
and  presents  from  their  capital.  (Symmach.  Epist.
X.  26.  29,  35  ;  Cod.  12.  tit.  49.)  At  the  election
of  a  pope  the  praefect  of  Rome  had  the  care  of  all
the  external  regulations.  (Symmach.  Epist.  x.
71—83.)  [L.  S.]

PRAETICAE.     [FuNus,  p.  558,  b,]
PRAEFU'RNIUM.      [Balnkae,  p.  192,  b  ;
Fornax.]

PRAEJUDFCIUM.  This  word,  as  appears
from  its  et3"mology,  has  a  certain  relation  to  Judi-
cium, to  which  it  is  opposed  by  Cicero  {Divinat.  4)  :
*'  de  quo  non  praejudicium,  sed  plane  jam  judicium
factum."  The  commentator,  who  goes  under  the
name  of  Asconius,  observes  on  this  passage,  that  a
praejudicium  is  something,  which  when  established
becomes  an  exemplum  for  the  judices  (judicaturi)
to  follow  ;  but  this  leaves  us  in  doubt  whether
he  means  something  established  in  the  same  cause,
by  way  of  preliminary  inquiry,  or  something  estab-
lished in  a  different,  but  a  like  cause,  which  would
be  what  we  call  a  precedent.  Quintilian  (Inst.
Orat.  v.  1.  2)  states  that  it  is  used  both  in  the  sense
of  a  precedent,  in  which  case  it  is  rather  exemplum
ihaw  praejudicium  (res  ex  paribus  causis  judicatae) ;
and  also  in  the  sense  of  a  preliminary  inquiry  and
determination  about  something  which  belongs  to
the  matter  in  dispute  (judiciis  ad  ipsam  causam
periine?iti(ms),  from  whence  also  comes  the  name
Praejudicium.  This  latter  sense  is  in  conformity
with  the  meaning  of  Praejudiciales  Actiones  or
Praejudicia  in  which  there  is  an  Intentio  only  and
nothing  else.  (Gains,  iv.  44.)  These  accordingly
were  called  Praejudiciales  Actiones  which  had  for
their  object  the  determination  of  some  matter,
which  was  not  accompanied  by  a  condemnatio.
"  A  praejudicium  is  an  actio,  which  has  not  any
condemnatio  as  a  consequence,  but  only  a  judicial
declaration  as  to  the  existence  of  a  Ifegal  relation.
The  name  of  this  kind  of  actions  comes  from  the
circumstance  that  they  serve  as  preliminary  to
other  and  future  actions.  All  these  Actiones  are
in  rem,  that  is,  they  avail  not  exclusively  against  a
detenninate  person  who  owes  a  duty,  like  actions
which  are  founded  on  Obligationes."  (Savigny,
K^t/siem,  Sic.  vol.  i.  p.  356.)  For  instance,  the  ques-
tion might  be.  Whether  a  man  is  a  father  or  not,  or
Whether  he  has  a  Potestas  over  his  child  :  these
•were  the  subject  of  Praejudiciales  Actiones.  If  a
father  denied  that  the  child  who  was  bom  of  his
wife,  or  with  which  she  was  then  pregnant,  was
his  child,  this  was  the  subject  of  a  "  Praejudicium
cura  patre  de  partu  agnoscendo."  If  a  Judex
should  have  declared  that  the  child  must  be  main-
tained by  the  reputed  father,  there  must  still  be
the  Praejudicium  to  ascertain  wliether  the  reputed
father  is  the  tnie  father.  If  it  was  doubtful
whether  the  mother  was  his  wife,  there  must  be
a  praejudicium  on  this  matter  before  the  praeju-
dicium de  partu  agnoscendo.  These  praejudical
actions  then,  were,  as  it  appears,  actions  respecting
Status  ;  and  they  were  either  Civiles  or  Praetoriae.
It  was  a  Civilis  Actio  when  the  question  was  as
to  libertas  ;  the  rest  seem  to  have  been  Praetoriae
Actiones.  Quintilian  makes  a  third  class  of  Praeju-
dicia, *'cum (/e cadem  causa pronuntiatum  est,"  &c.


PRAES.

Sometimes  Praejudicium  means  inconvenience,
damage,  injury,  which  sense  appears  to  arise  from
the  notion  of  a  thing  being  prejudged,  or  decided
without  being  fairly  heard  ;  and  this  sense  of  the
word  seems  to  be  very  nearly  the  same  in  which
it  occurs  in  our  law  in  the  phrase  "  without  pre-
judice to  other  matters  in  the  cause."

(Gains,  iii.  123,  iv,  44  ;  Dig.  25.  tit.  3  ;  Dig.  22.
tit.  3.  s.  8  ;  Dig.  43.  tit.  30.  De  liberis  exhibendis ;
Inst.  4.  tit.  6.  s.  1 3  ;  and  Theophilus,  Paraphr.  ad
Inst.  4.  tit.  6.  s.  1 3.)  [G.  L.]

PRAELU'SIO.     [Gladiatores,  p.  575,  a.]

PRAENO'MEN.     [Nomen.]

PRAEPETES.     [AuGdR,  p.  175,  b.]

PRAEPO'SITUS,  which  means  a  person
placed  over,  was  given  as  a  title  in  the  later  times
of  the  Roman  empire  to  many  officers :  of  these
the  most  important  was  the  Praepositus  Sacri  Cu-
hiculi,  or  chief  chamberlain  in  the  emperor's  palace.
(Cod.  12.  tit.  5  ;  Cod.  Theod.  6.  tit.  8.)  Under
him  was  the  Primicerius,  together  with  the  Cubi-
cularii  and  the  corps  of  Silentiarii,  commanded  by
three  decuriones,  who  preserved  silence  in  the  in-
terior of  the  palace.  (Cod.  12.  tit.  16  ;  Walter,
Gesch.  des  Rom.  Rechts,  §  340,  2d  ed.)

PRAEROGATI'VA.  [Comitia,  pp.  338,  b,
339,  b.]

PRAES.     If  we  might   trust  a  definition  by
Ausonius  (Idyll,  xii.  9),  he    was  called  Vas  who
gave  security  for  another  in  a  Causa  Capitalis  ;  and
he  who  gave  security  for  another  in  a  civil  action
was  Praes.     But  this  authority  cannot  be  trusted,
and  the  usage  of  the  .words  Vas  and  Praes  was
certainly  not  always  confonnable  to  this  definition.
According  to  Varro  (Ling.  Lot.  vi.  74,  ed.  MUller),
an}^  person  was  Vas,  who  promised  Vadimonium  for
another,  that  is,  gave  security  for  another  in  any
legal  proceeding.     Festus  {s.v.  Vadem)  says  that
Vas  is  a  Sponsor  in  a  res  capitalis.     If  Vas  is  genus,
of  which  Vas  in  its  special  sense,  and  Praes  are
species,  these  definitions  will  be  consistent.  (Comp.
Sallust.  Jug.   35,  61  ;   Herat.  <S«f!.   i.  1.    11,  and
Heindorf's   note.)      Under   Manceps   Festus  re-
marks, that  Manceps  signifies  him  who  buys  or
hires  any  public  property  (qui  a  populo  emit  con-
ducitve),  and  that  he  is  also  called  Praes  because
he  is  bound  to  make  good  his  contract  (praestare
quod  promisit).,  as  well  as  he  who   is  his  Praes.
(See  also  Varro,  I.  c.)     According  to  this,  Praes  is
a  surety  for  one  who  buys  of  the  state,  and  so  called
because    of    his   liability    (jrraestare).      But   tlie
etymology  at  least  is  doubtful,  and  we  are  inclined
to  think,  false.     The  passage  of  Festus  explains  a
passage  in  the  Life  of  Atticus  (C.  Nep.  6),  in  which
it  is  said  that  he  never  bought  anything  at  public
auction  (ad  hastam  pvhlicam)  and  never  was  either
Manceps  or  Praes.     A  case  is  mentioned  by  Gcl-
lius  (vii.  19)  in  which  a  person  was  committed  to    m
prison  who  could  not  obtain  Praedes.     The  goods    "
of  a  Praes  were  called  Praedia  (Pseudo-Ascon.  in
Verr.  ii.  1.  54),  and  in  Cicero  (I.  c.)  and  Liv}'  (xxii.
60)  "  praedibus  et  pracdiis  "  come  together.     The
phrase  "  praedibus  cavere,"  to  give  security,  occurs
in  the  Digest  (10.  tit.  3.  s.  6),  where  some  editions
have  "  pro  aedibus  cavere."    (See  the  various  read-
ings ed.  Gebauer  and  Spangenberg. )     The  phrase
"  praedes  vendere  "  means  to  sell,  not  the  praedes
properly  so  called,  but  the  things  which  are  given
as  a  security.

Praediatores  are  supposed  by  Brissonius  to  be  the
same  as  Praedes  (Cic.  pro  Balb.  c.  20,  ad  Alt.  xii.


PRAESCRIPTIO.

14,  17  ;  Suoton.  Claud,  c.  9  ;  Val.  Max.  viii.  12),
at  least  so  far  as  they  were  sureties  to  the  State.
But  praediator  is  defined  by  Gaius  (ii.  61)  to  be
one  "  who  buys  from  the  people,"  and  from  the
context  it  is  clear  that  it  is  one  who  buys  a  Prae-
dium,  which  is  further  defined  to  be  a  thing  pledged
to  the  populus  "  res  obligata  populo."  The  Prae-
diator then  is  he  who  buys  a  Praedium,  that  is,  a
thing  given  to  the  populus  as  a  security  by  a
Praes  ;  and  the  whole  law  relating  to  such  matters
was  called  Jus  Praediatorium.  [G.  L.]

PRAESCRI'PTIO,  or  rather  TEMPORIS
PRAESCRIPTIO,  signifies  the  Exceptio  or  an-
swer which  a  defendant  has  to  the  demand  of  a
plaintiff,  founded  on  the  circumstance  of  the  lapse
of  time.  The  word  has  properly  no  reference  to
the  plaintiff's  loss  of  right,  but  to  the  defendant's
acquisition  of  a  right  by  which  he  excludes  the
plaintiff  from  prosecuting  his  suit.  This  right  of
a  defendant  did  not  exist  in  the  old  Roman  law.
When  the  Praetors  gave  new  actions  by  their
Edict,  they  attached  to  them  the  condition  that
those  actions  must  be  brought  within  a  year  {intra
an?ium  judicium  dabo),  that  is  a  year  from  the  time
v/hen  the  right  of  action  accrued.  These  actions
then  were  exceptions  from  the  old  rule,  that  all
actiones  were  perpetuae.  This  rule  became  ex-
tended by  the  Longi  temporis  praescriptio,  which
established  that  in  actions  about  ownership,  or
jura  in  re,  ten,  or  in  some  cases  twenty  years,
would  give  a  praescriptio,  when  the  l-'ossessor
could  show  that  he  had  complied  with  the  main
conditions  of  Usucapion,  without  having  acquired
ownership  by  Usucapion,  for  if  he  had,  he  had
no  need  of  any  Exceptio.  This  rule  was  further
extended  by  Constantine,  and  a  period  of  30  or
40  years,  for  it  seems  that  the  time  was  not
quite  settled,  was  to  be  considered  as  sufficient
for  a  praescriptio,  though  the  defendant  had  not
complied  with  the  conditions  of  Usucapion.  A
general  constitution  was  made  by  Theodosius,
A.  D,  424,  which  with  some  variations  appears  in
both  the  Codes  (Cod.  Theod.  4.  tit.  14  ;  Cod.  7.
tit.  39.  s.  3)  ;  and  it  enacted  that,  as  in  the  case
of  the  actiones  alread}^  mentioned,  there  should  be
no  hereditatis  petitio  after  30  years,  and  that  after
the  same  time  no  personal  action  should  be  brought.
The  actio  finiura  regundorum  was  excepted,  and
also  the  action  of  a  creditor  for  his  pignus  or  hypo-
theca  against  the  debtor,  but  not  against  others.
Praejudiciales  actiones  as  to  Status  are  not  enume-
rated among  those  against  which  there  was  a
Praescriptio,  but  they  seem  to  be  included  in  the
general  words  of  the  law.  Justinian,  by  a  con-
stitution of  the  year  530  (Cod.  7.  tit.  40.  s.  1),
established  the  general  rule  of  30  years  for  all
actions,  with  the  exception  of  the  actio  hypothecaria,
for  which  he  required  40  years.  His  constitution
enumerates  the  following  actions  to  which  the
praescriptio  of  30  years  would  apply :  Familiae
herciscundae,  Communidividundo,  Fin ium  regundo-
rum. Pro  Socio,  Furti  et  Vi  Bonorum  Raptorura  ;
and  it  adds,  "neque  alterius  cujuscunque  perso-
nalis actio  vitam  longioreni  esse  triginta  annis,  &c.,
sed  ex  quo  ab  initio  competit,  et  semel  nata  est,
&c.,  post  memoratum  tempus  finiri."  It  thus  ap-
pears that  all  actions  were  originally  perpetuae,
that  is,  the  right  of  action  contiimed  without  any
inteiTuption  from  the  lapse  of  time  ;  then  some
were  made  subject  to  Praescriptio,  and  finally  all
were  made  so.     In  consequence  of  this  change  the


PRAESCRIPTIO.


955


term  Perpetuae,  originally  applied  to  actions  that
were  not  subject  to  praescriptio,  was  used  to  signify
an  actio  in  which  30  years  were  necessary  to  give
a  Praescriptio,  as  opposed  to  actiones  in  which  the
right  to  a  Praescriptio  accrued  in  a  shorter  time.
(Inst.  4.  tit.  12.)

The  conditions  necessary  to  establish  a  Prae-
scriptio were,  1.  Actio  Nata,  for  there  must  be  a
right  of  action  in  order  that  a  praescriptio  may
have  an  origin,  and  the  date  of  its  origui  must  be
fixed  by  the  date  of  the  right  of  action,  2.  There
must  be  a  continuous  neglect  on  the  part  of  the
person  entitled  to  bring  the  action,  in  order  that
the  time  of  the  Praescriptio  may  be  reckoned
uninterruptedly.  3.  Bona  fides  was  not  a  neces-
sary ingredient  in  a  Praescriptio,  as  such,  because
it  was  the  neglect  of  the  plaintiff  which  laid  the
foundation  of  the  Praescriptio.  But  the  longi  tem-
poris praescriptio  was  made  like  to  Usucapion  as
to  its  conditions,  of  which  bona  fides  was  one.
Justinian  (Cod.  7.  tit.  39.  s.  8)  required  a  bona
fides  in  the  case  of  a  thirty  year  Praescriptio,  but
this  was  no  new  rule  except  so  far  as  the  Pos-
sessor claimed  the  benefit  of  Usucapio  ;  and  as  the
longi  temporis  praescriptio,  as  an  independent  rule
of  law,  disappeared  from  the  legislation  of  Justinian,
the  bona  fides  as  a  condition  of  praescriptio  went
with  it.  4.  The  lapse  of  time,  which  was  30  years  ;
but  to  this  there  were  man}^  exceptions.

The  sources  on  the  subject  of  Praescriptio  are
referred  to  in  Brinkmann's  Institutiones  Juris
Romani,  and  MUhlenbruch's  Doctrina  Pandecta-
rum^  §  261,  and  §  481,  on  the  distinction  being
ultimately  abolished  between  Praescriptio  and
Usucapio  ;  Savignj',  System  des  heutiyen  Rom.
Rechts,  vol.  v.,  from  whom  this  outline  is  taken.
See  also  Usucapio.

Praescriptio  had  a  special  sense  in  Roman  plead-
ings, which  Gaius  has  explained  as  existing  in  his
time  (iv.  130).  These  Praescriptiones  were  pro
actore,  and  not  pro  reo  ;  and  an  example  will  ex-
plain the  term.  It  often  happens  that  an  obligatio
IS  such  that  a  man  is  bound  to  another  to  do  cer-
tain acts  at  certain  times,  as  for  instance,  yearly,
half  yearly,  or  monthly.  The  payment  of  interest
on  money  would  be  an  example.  At  the  close  of
any  of  these  certain  periods,  the  party  to  whom
the  obligatio  was  due,  might  sue  for  what  was
due,  but  not  for  what  was  not  due,  though  an  ob-
ligatio was  contracted  as  to  future  time.  When
a  debt  had  become  due  in  consequence  of  an
obligatio,  there  was  said  to  be  a  Praestatio,  or  it
was  said,  "  aliquid  jam  praestari  oportet :  "  when
the  obligatio  existed,  but  the  Praestatio  was  not
due,  it  was  "futura  praestatio,"  or  it  was  said,
"  praestatio  adhuc  nulla  est."  If  then  the  plaintiff
v/ished  to  limit  his  demand  to  what  was  due,  it
was  necessary  to  use  the  following  Praescriptio:
"  Ea  res  agatur  cujus  rei  dies  fuit"  (Compare  Cic.
de  Or.  i.  37.)  The  name  of  Praescriptiones,  ob-
serves Gaius,  is  manifestly  derived  from  the  cir-
cumstance of  their  being  prefixed  (praescribuntur)
to  the  formulae,  that  is,  they  came  before  the  In-
tentio.  In  the  time  of  Gaius  the  Praescriptiones
were  only  used  by  the  actor  ;  but  formerly  they
were  used  also  in  favour  of  a  defendant  (reus),
as  in  the  following  instance :  *'  Ea  res  agatur  quod
praejudicium  hereditati  non  fiat,"  which  in  the
time  of  Gaius  was  turned  into  a  kind  of  exceptio
or  answer,  when  the  petitor  hereditatis,  by  using
a  different  kind  of  actio,  was  prejudging  the  ques-


d56


PRAETOR.


tion  of  the  hereditas  {cum  petitor,  &c.  .  .  .  praeju-
dicium  hereditati  faciat).  Compare  Gaius  Dig.
10.  tit.  2.  s.  1  ;  and  see  Praejudicium).

Savigny  shows  that  in  the  legislation  of  Jus-
tinian, Praescriptio  and  Exceptio  are  identical  and
that  either  tenn  can  be  used  indifferently.  He
observes  that  the  Praescriptiones  which  in  the  old
form  of  procedure  were  introduced  into  the  formula
for  the  benefit  of  the  defendant,  were  properly  Ex-
ceptiones,  and  it  was  merely  an  accident  that  cer-
tain Excoptiones  were  placed  before  the  intentio
instead  of  being  placed  at  the  end  of  the  formula,
as  was  the  usual  practice.  Subsequently,  as  ap-
pears from  Gaius,  only  ths  Praescriptiones  pro
actore  were  prefixed  to  the  formula  ;  and  those
pro  reo  were  placed  at  the  end,  and  they  retained,
though  improperly,  the  name  of  Praescriptiones.
Thus  Exceptio  and  Praescriptio  came  to  be  used  as
equivalent  terms,  a  circumstance  to  which  the  disuse
of  the  Ordo  judiciorum  contributed.  Yet  in  the
case  of  particular  exceptiones,  one  or  other  of  the
names  was  most  in  use,  and  the  indiscriminate
employment  of  them  was  an  exception  to  the
general  rule.  The  prevalence  of  one  or  the  other
name  in  particular  cases  is  easily  explained  :  thus,
the  Doli  and  Rei  Judicatae  Exceptiones  were  al-
ways at  the  end  of  the  Formula,  and  the  Temporis
and  Fori  Praescriptiones  in  earlier  times  were
placed  at  the  beginning.  Savigny  adds  that  in
modern  times  Praescriptio  has  acquired  the  sense
of  Usucapion,  but  this  is  never  the  sense  of  the
word  Praescriptio  in  the  Roman  law.  Though
Exceptio  and  Praescriptio  came  to  be  used  as
equivalent,  yet  neither  Exceptio  nor  Praescriptio
is  used  in  the  sense  of  Temporis  praescriptio  with-
out the  addition  of  the  words  Temporis,  Temporalis,
triginta  annorura,  &c.  (Savigny,  System^  <fcc.  iv.
309,  v.  163.)  [G.L.]

PRAESES.     [Provincia.]

PRAESUL.     [Salii.]

PRAETE'RITI  SENATO'RES.  [Senatus.]

PRAETEXTA.     [Toga.]

PRAETOR.  According  to  Cicero  {de  Leg.  iii.  3)
Praetor  was  a  title  which  designated  the  consuls
as  the  leaders  of  the  armies  of  the  state  ;  and  he
considers  the  word  to  contain  the  same  elemental
parts  as  the  verb  praeire.  The  period  and  office  of
the  command  of  the  consuls  might  appropriately  be
called  Praetorium.  (Liv.  viii.  Jl.)  Praetor  was
also  a  title  of  office  among  the  Latins  :  and  it  is
the  name  which  Livy  gives  to  the  strategus  of  the
Achaeans.

The  first  praetor  specially  so  called  was  ap-
pointed in  the  year  B.  c.  366,  and  he  was  chosen
only  from  the  Patricians,  who  had  this  new  office
created  as  a  kind  of  indemnification  to  themselves
for  being  compelled  to  share  the  consulship  with
the  Plebeians.  (Liv.  vi.  42,  vii.  1.)  No  Plebeian
praetor  was  appointed  till  the  year  b.  c.  337.  The
Praetor  was  called  coUega  consulibus,  and  was
elected  with  the  same  auspices  at  the  Comitia
Centuriata.  The  consuls  were  elected  first,  and
then  the  praetors.  (Liv.  xlv.  44.)

The  Praetorship  was  originally  a  kind  of  third
consulship,  and  the  chief  functions  of  the  praetor
{jus  in  urbe  dicere,  Liv.  vi.  42  ;  jura  reddere,  Liv.
vii,  1)  were  a  portion  of  the  functions  of  the  con-
suls, who  according  to  the  passage  of  Cicero  above
referred  to,  were  also  called  judices  a  judicando.
The  praetor  sometimes  commatided  the  armies  of
the  state  j  and  while  the  consuls  were  absent  with


PRAETOR.

the  armies,  he  exercised  their  functions  Avithin  the
city.  He  was  a  Magistratus  Curulis  and  he  had
the  Imperium,  and  consequently  was  one  of  the
Magistratus  Majores :  but  he  owed  respect  and
obedience  to  the  consuls.  (Pol3'b.  xxxiii.  1.)  His
insignia  of  office  were  six  lictors,  whence  he  is
called  by  Polj'^bius  Tjyf/xwv  or  a-rpaTriyhs  e^aTreXe-
Kvs,  and  sometimes  simply  e|a7reA€Kus.  Plutarch
{Sulla,  5)  uses  the  expression  arpar'qyia  TToXiriKT].
At  a  later  period  the  Praetor  had  only  two  lictors
in  Rome.  (Censorinus,  c.  24.)  The  praetorship
was  at  first  given  to  a  consul  of  the  preceding  year
as  appears  from  Livy.  L.  Papirius  was  praetor
after  being  consul.  (Liv.  x.  47.)

In  the  year  B.C.  246  another  Praetor  was  ap-
pointed, whose  business  was  to  administer  justice
in  matters  in  dispute  between  peregrin  i,  or  pere-
grini  and  Roman  citizens  ;  and  accordingly  he  was
called  Praetor  Peregrinus.  (Dig.  1.  tit.  2.  s.  28.)
The  other  Praetor  was  then  called  Praetor  Urbanus
"  qui  jus  inter  cives  dicit,"  and  sometimes  simply
Praetor  Urbanus  and  Praetor  Urbis.  The  two
Praetors  determined  by  lot  which  functions  they
should  respectively  exercise.  If  either  of  them
was  at  the  head  of  the  army,  the  other  performed
all  the  duties  of  both  within  the  city.  Some-
times the  military  imperium  of  a  Praetor  was  pro-
longed for  a  second  year.  When  the  territories  of
the  stiite  were  extended  beyond  the  limits  of
Italy,  new  praetors  Avere  made.  Thus  two  prae-
tors were  created  b.  c.  227,  for  the  administration
of  Sicily  and  Sardinia,  and  two  more  were  added
when  the  two  Spanish  provinces  were  formed  B.  c.
197.  When  there  were  six  praetors,  two  stayed
in  the  city,  and  the  other  four  went  abroad.
(Liv.  xlv.  44).  The  Senate  determined  their
provinces,  which  were  distributed  among  them  by
lot.  (Liv.  xxxii.  27,  28.)  After  the  discharge  of
his  judicial  functions  in  the  city,  a  Praetor  often
had  the  administration  of  a  province  with  the  title
of  Propraetor,  and  sometimes  with  the  title  of  Pro-
consul. Sulla  increased  the  number  of  Praetors
to  eight,  which  Julius  Caesar  raised  successively  to
ten,  twelve,  fourteen,  and  sixteen.  (Dion  Cassius,
xlii.  5i,  xliii.  o\,  and  the  notes  of  Reimarus.)
Augustus  after  several  changes  fixed  the  number
at  twelve.  Under  Tiberius  there  were  sixteen.
Two  praetors  were  appointed  by  Claudius  for  mat-
ters relating  to  Fideicommissa,  when  the  business
in  this  department  of  the  law  had  become  con-
siderable, but  Titus  reduced  the  number  to  one  ;
and  Nerva  added  a  Praetor  for  the  decision  of
matters  between  the  Fiscus  and  individuals.
"  Thus,"  says  Pomponius,  speaking  of  his  own
time,  "  eighteen  praetors  administer  justice  {jus
dicunt)  in  the  State."  (Dig.  1.  tit.  2.  s.  34.)  M.
Aurelius,  according  to  Capitolinus  {M.  Ant.  c.  1 0),
appointed  a  Praetor  for  matters  relating  to  tutcLi,
which  must  have  taken  place  after  Pomponius
wrote.  [Pandectae.]  The  main  duties  of  the
Praetors  were  judicial,  and  it  appears  that  it  was
found  necessary  from  time  to  time  to  increase  their
number,  and  to  assign  to  them  special  departments
of  the  administration  of  justice.

Sometimes,  extraordinary  duties  were  imposed
on  them,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Praetor  Peregrinus
(b.  c.  144)  who  was  commissioned  by  a  Senatus-
consultum  to  look  after  the  repair  of  certain  aque-
ducts and  to  prevent  the  improper  use  of  the  water.
(Frontinus,  De  Aquaeduct,  lib.  1.)

The   Praetor    Urbanus  was    specially    named


PRAETORIANI.

Praetor,  and  lie  was  the  first  in  rank.  His  duties
confined  him  to  Rome,  as  is  implied  by  the  name,
and  he  could  only  leave  the  city  for  ten  days  at  a
time.  It  was  part  of  his  duty  to  superintend  the
Ludi  Apollinares.  He  was  also  the  chief  magis-
trate for  the  administration  of  justice,  and  to  the
Edicta  of  the  successive  praetors  the  Roman  Law
owes  in  a  great  degree  its  developement  and  im-
provement. Both  the  Praetor  Urbanus  and  the
Praetor  Peregrinus  had  the  Jus  Edicendi  (Gaius,
i.  2),  and  their  functions  in  this  respect  do  not  ap-
pear to  have  been  limited  on  the  establishment  of
the  imperial  power,  though  it  must  have  been
gradually  restricted  as  the  practi(;e  of  Imperial
Constitutions  and  Rescripts  became  common.  [Edic-
TUM.]  The  limits  of  these  two  praetors'  adminis-
tration were  expressed  by  the  term  Urbanae  Pro-
vinciae.

The  chief  judicial  functions  of  the  Praetor  in
civil  matters  consisted  in  giving  a  judex.  [Judex.]
It  was  only  in  the  case  of  Interdicts,  that  he  de-
cided in  a  summary  way.  [Interdictum.]  Pro-
ceedings before  the  praetor  were  technically  said
to  be  injure.

The  Praetors  also  presided  at  trials  of  criminal
matters.  These  were  the  Quaestiones  perpetuae
(Cic.  Brut.  c.  27),  or  the  trials  for  Repetundae,
Ambitus,  Majestas,  and  Peculatus,  which,  when
there  were  six  praetors,  were  assigned  to  four  out
of  the  number,  Sulla  added  to  these  Quaestiones
those  of  Falsum,  De  Sicariis  et  Veneficis,  and  De
Parricidis,  and  for  this  purpose  he  added  two  or
according  to  some  accounts  four  praetors,  for  the
accounts  of  Pomponius  and  of  other  writers  do  not
agree  on  this  point.  (Sueton.  Caesar^  41  ;  Dion
Cass.  xlii.  51.)  On  these  occasions  the  Praetor
presided,  but  a  body  of  judices  determined  by  a
majority  of  votes  the  condemnation  or  acquittal  of
the  accused.     [Judicium.]

The  Praetor  when  he  administered  justice  sat
on  a  sella  Cunilis  in  a  Tribunal,  which  was  that
part  of  the  Court  which  was  appropriated  to  the
Praetor  and  his  assessors  and  friends,  and  is  op-
posed to  the  Subsellia,  or  part  occupied  by  the
Judices,  and  others  who  were  present.  (Cic.  Brut.
fi4.)  But  the  Praetor  could  do  many  ministerial
acts  out  of  court,  or  as  it  was  expressed  e  piano.,  or
ex  aequo  loco,  which  terms  are  opposed  to  e  tribunali
or  ex  superiore  loco  :  for  instance,  he  could  in  cer-
tain cases  give  validity  to  the  act  of  manumission
•when  he  was  out  of  doors,  as  on  his  road  to  the
bath  or  to  the  theatre.  (Gaius,  i.  20.)

A  person  who  had  been  ejected  from  the  senate
could  recover  his  rank  by  being  made  Praetor
(Dion  Cassius,  xxxvii.  30  ;  Plutarch,  Cicero,  17).
Sallustius  was  made  praetor  eVl  t(j5  t)]v  fiov\^u
ava\a€e7u.  (Dion  Cassius,  xlii.  52.)

The  Praetors  existed  with  varying  numbers  to
a  late  period  in  the  Empire,  and  they  had  still
jurisdictio.  (Cod.  7.  tit.  62.  s.  17;  5.  tit. 71.  s.  18.)

The  functions  of  the  Praetors,  as  above  ob-
served, were  chiefly  judicial,  and  this  article  should
be  completed  by  a  reference  to  Edictum,  Impe-
RiUM,  Judex,  Jurisdictio,  Magistratus,  Pro-
viNciA.  To  the  authorities  referred  to  under
Edictum  may  be  added,  "  Die  Pratorischen  Edicte
der  Rcimer,  &c.,  von  D.  Eduard  Schrader,  Weimar,
JJil.5."  [G.  L.]

PRAETO'RIA  A'CTIO.     [Actio.]

PRAETO'RIA  COHORS.    [Praetoriani.]

PRAETORIA'NI,    sc.    inilites,   or  Praetoriae


PRAETORIANI.  957

Cohortes,  a  body  of  troops  instituted  by  Augustus
to  protect  his  person  and  his  power,  and  called
by  that  name  in  imitation  of  the  Praetoria  Co-
hors,  or  select  troop,  which  attended  the  person  ol
the  praetor  or  general  of  the  Roman  anny.  (Sal-
lust,  Cat.  GO;  Cic.  Cat.  ii.  11  ;  Caes.  Bell.  Gall.
i.  40.)  This  cohort  is  said  to  have  been  first
formed  by  Scipio  Africanus  out  of  the  bravest
troops,  whom  he  exempted  from  all  other  duties
except  guarding  his  person,  and  to  whom  he  gave
sixfold  pay  (Festus,  s.  v.)  ;  but  even  in  the  early
times  of  the  republic  the  Roman  general  seems  to
have  been  attended  by  a  select  troop.  (Liv.  ii.  20.)
In  the  time  of  the  civil  wars  the  number  of  the
praetorian  cohorts  was  greatly  increased  (Appian,
Bell.  Civ.  iii.  67,  v.  3)  ;  but  the  establishment  of
them  as  a  separate  force  was  owing  to  the  policy
of  Augustus.  They  originally  consisted  of  nine
(Tac.  Ann.  iv.  5;  Suet.  Atig.  49)  or  ten  cohorts
(Dion  Cass.  Iv.  24),  each  consisting  of  a  thousand
men,  horse  and  foot.  They  were  chosen  only
from  Italy,  chiefly  from  Etruria  and  Umbria,  or
ancient  Latiura,  and  the  old  colonics  (Tac.  I.  c.
Hist.  i.  84),  but  afterwards  from  Macedonia,
Noricum,  and  Spain  also.  (Dion  Cass.  Ixxiv.  2.)
Augustus,  in  accordance  with  his  general  policy
of  avoiding  the  appearance  of  despotism,  stationed
only  three  of  these  cohorts  in  the  capital,  and  dis-
persed the  remainder  in  the  adjacent  towns  of
liaXj.  (Suet.  Aug.  49.)  Tiberius,  however,  under
pretence  of  introducing  a  stricter  discipline  among
them,  assembled  them  all  at  Rome  in  a  permanent
camp,  which  was  strongly  fortified.  (Tac.  Ann.
iv.  2;  Suet.  Tiber.  37;  Dion  Cass.  Ivii.  19.)  Their
number  was  increased  by  Vitellius  to  sixteen  co-
horts, or  16,000  men.    (Tac.  Hist.  ii.  93.)

The  Praetorians  were  distinguished  by  double
pay  and  especial  privileges.  Their  term  of  service
was  originally  fixed  by  Augustus  at  twelve  years
(Dion  Cass.  liv.  25),  but  was  afterwards  increased
to  sixteen  years  ;  and  when  they  had  served  their
time,  each  soldier  received  20,000  sesterces.  (Id.
Iv.  23  ;  Tac.  Ann.  i.  17.)  All  the  Praetorians
seem  to  have  had  the  same  rank  as  the  centurions
in  tlie  regular  legions,  since  we  are  told  by  Dion
(Iv.  24)  that  they  had  the  privilege  of  carrying  a
vitis  (^d§8os)  like  the  centurions.  The  Praetorians,
however,  soon  became  the  most  powerful  body  in
the  state,  and  like  the  janissaries  at  Constantinople,
frequently  deposed  and  elevated  emperors  accord-
ing to  their  pleasure.  Even  the  most  powerful
of  the  emperors  were  obliged  to  court  their  favour ;
and  they  always  obtained  a  liberal  donation  upon
the  accession  of  each  emperor.  After  the  death
of  Pertinax  (a.  D.  193)  they  even  offered  the  em-
pire for  sale,  which  was  purchased  by  Didius
Julianus  (Dion  Cass.  Ixxiii.  11  ;  Spartian.  Julian.
2,  Herodian.  ii.  7)  ;  but  upon  the  accession  of
Sevenis  in  the  same  year  they  were  disbanded,  on
account  of  the  part  they  had  taken  in  the  death  of
Pertinax,  and  banished  from  the  city.  (Dion  Cass.
Ixxiv.  1.)  The  emperors,  however,  could  not  dis-
pense with  guards,  and  accordingly  the  Praetorians
were  restored  on  a  new  model  by  Severus,  and
increased  to  four  times  their  ancient  number.  In-
stead of  being  levied  in  Italy,  Macedonia,  Nori-
cum, or  Spain,  as  formerly,  the  best  soldiers  were
now  draughted  from  all  the  legions  on  the  frontiers;
so  that  the  praetorian  cohorts  now  formed  the
bravest  troops  of  the  empire.  (Dion  Cass.  Ixxiv.  2;
Herodian.  iii.  13.)    Diocletian  reduced  their  nun;-


958


PRIMICERIUS.


"bers  and  .ibolished  their  privileges  (Aui'el.  Vict.
de  Cues.  39)  ;  they  were  still  allowed  to  remain  at
Rome,  hut  had  no  longer  the  guard  of  the  em-
peror's person,  as  he  never  resided  in  the  capital.
Their  numbers  were  again  increased  by  Maxentius,
but  after  his  defeat  by  Constantino,  a.  d.  312,  they
were  entirely  suppressed  by  the  latter,  their  for-
tified camp  destroyed,  and  those  who  had  not
perished  in  the  battle  betAveen  Constantino  and
Maxentius  were  dispersed  among  the  legions.
(Zosimus,  ii.  17;  Aurel.  Vict,  de  Caes.  40.)  The
new  form  of  government  established  by  Constantino
did  not  require  such  a  body  of  troops,  and  accord-
ingly they  were  never  revived.  The  emperor's  body
guards  now  only  consisted  of  the  Domestici,  horse
and  foot  under  two  comites,  and  of  the  Protectores.
(Cod.  12.  tit.  17;  Cod.  Theod.  6.  tit.  24.)

The  commanders  of  the  Praetorians  were  called
Prakpecti  Pkaetorio,  whose  duties,  powers,
6cc.  are  mentioned  in  a  separate  article.

PRAETO'RIUM  was  the  name  of  the  general's
tent  in  the  camp,  and  was  so  called  because  the
name  of  the  chief  Roman  magistrate  was  originally
praetor,  and  not  consul.  [Castra,  p.  249.]  The
officers  who  attended  on  the  general  in  the  Prae-
torium,  and  formed  his  council  of  war,  were  called
by  the  same  name.  (Liv.  xxx.  5.)  The  word  was
also  used  in  several  other  significations,  which
were  derived  from  the  original  one.  Thus  the
residence  of  a  governor  of  a  province  was  called
the  Praetorium  (Cic.  c.  Verr.  iv.  28,  v.  35  ;
St.  John,  xviii.  28,  33)  ;  and  the  same  name  was
ulso  given  to  any  large  house  or  palace.  (Suet.
Aziff.  72,  Cal.  37  ;  Juv.  i.  75  ;  praetoria  violuptati
tantum  dcsetTientia,  Dig.  50.  tit.  16.  s.  198.)  The
camp  of  the  Praetorian  troops  at  Rome,  and  fre-
quently the  Praetorian  troops  themselves,  were
called  by  this  name.     [Praetoriani.]

PRAEVARICA'TOR.  [Senatusconsultum
Turpilianum.]

PRA'NDIUM.     [Coena,  p.  306,  b.]

PRECA'RIUM.       [INTERDICTUM.]

PRELUM,  or  PRAELUM,  is  a  part  of  a
press  used  by  the  ancients  in  making  wine,  olive-
oil,  and  paper.  The  press  itself  was  called  tor-
cuiar ;  and  the  prelum  was  that  part  which  was
either  screwed  or  knocked  down  upon  the  things
to  be  pressed,  in  order  to  squeeze  out  the  last
juices.  (Serv.  ad  Virg.  Georg.  ii.  242;  Vitruv.  vi.  9.)
Sometimes,  however,  prelum  and  torcular  are  used
as  convertible  terms,  a  part  being  named  instead
of  the  whole.  As  regards  the  pressing  of  the
grapes,  it  should  be  remembered  that  they  were
first  trodden  with  the  feet ;  but  as  this  process  did
not  press  out  all  the  juice  of  the  grapes,  they  were
afterwards,  with  their  stalks  and  peels  {scopi  et
foUiculi)^  put  under  the  prelum.  (Varro,  de  Re
Hud.  i.  54  ;  comp.  Colum.  xii.  38.)  Cato  {de  Re
Rust.  31)  advised  his  countrymen  always  to  make
the  prelum  of  the  wood  of  black  maple  {carpinus
utra).  After  all  the  juice  was  pressed  out  of  the
grapes,  they  were  collected  in  casks,  water  was
poured  upon  them,  and  after  standing  a  night  they
were  pressed  again.  The  liquor  thus  obtained
was  called  lora  ;  it  was  preserved  in  casks,  and
was  used  as  a  drink  for  workmen  during  the
winter.  (Varro,  I.  c)  Respecting  the  use  of  the
prelum  in  making  olive-oil,  and  in  the  manufacture
of  paper,  see  Plin.  //.  N.  xv.  1,  xiii.  25  ;  Colum.
xiL50.  [L.S.I

PRIMICE'RIUS,   a  name   given    to   various


PROBOLE.

officers  and  dignitaries  under  the  later  Roman"
empire,  is  explained  by  Suidas  (s.  v.)  to  be  the  per-
son who  holds  the  first  rank  in  any  thing.  The
etymology  of  the  word  is  doubtful :  it  is  supposed
that  a  person  was  called  Primicenus  because  his
name  stood  first  in  the  wax  {cera\  that  is,  the
tablet  made  of  wax,  which  contained  a  list  of  per-
sons of  any  rank.

The  word  Primicerius  does  not  seem  to  have
been  always  applied  to  the  person  who  was  at  the
head  of  any  department  of  the  state  or  array,  but
also  to  the  one  second  in  command  or  authority  ;
as,  for  instance,  the  Primicerius  Sacri  Cubiculi,
who  was  under  the  Praeposlfus  Sacri  Cabiculi.
[Praetositus.]  Various  Primicerii  are  men-
tioned, as  the  Primicerius  Domesticorum  and  Pro-
tcctorum  (Cod.  12.  tit.  17.  s.  2),  Fabricae  (Cod.
11.  tit.  9.  s.  2),  Meusorum  (Cod.  12.  tit.  28.  s.  1),
Notariorum  (Cod.  12.  tit.  7),  &c.

PRIMIPILA'RES.     [ExERciTus,  p.  508,  b.]
PRIMIPI'LUS.     [ExERciTus,  p.  505.]
PRINCEPS  JUVENTU'TIS.    [Equites.]
PRINCEPS  SENATUS.     [Senatus.]
PRINCIPA'LIS  PORTA.  [Castra,  p.  249.}:
PRI'NCIPES.     [ExERciTus,  pp.  495—497.]
PRINCPPIA.     [EXERCITUS,  p.  502,  b.]
PRIVILE'GIUM.     [Lex,  p.  683,  b.]
PROAGOGEIAS     GRAPHE    {-Kpoaywydas
ypacpT})^  a  prosecution  against  those  persons  who
performed  the   degrading  office  of  pimps  or  pro-
curers (irpoaywyoi).      By  the   law  of  Solon    the
heaviest  punishment   (ra  ixiyiara  eTriTifiia)  was
inflicted  on  such  a  person  {idv  tis  i\evd€pov  TraTSa
ri  ywcuKa  irpoaywyevar},  Aesch.  c.  Timarch  3.  26.
ed,  Steph.).     According  to  Plutarch  {Sol.  23),  a
penalty  of  twenty  drachms  was  imposed  for  the
same   offence.     To  reconcile  this   statement   with
that  of  Aeschines,  we  may  suppose  with  Plainer
{Proc.   und  Klag.  vol.   ii.  p.  216)   that   the   law
mentioned  by  Plutarch  applied  only  to  prostitutes.
An  example  of  a  man  put  to  death  for  taking  an
Olynthian  girl  to  a  brothel  (irTTjcras  eV  ot/c7J/.iaTos)
occurs  in  Dinarchus  (c.  Demosth.  93,  ed.  Steph.).
A  prosecution  of  a  man  by  Hyperides  eVl  irpoa-
ywyicf,  is  mentioned  by  Pollux  (iii.  27).    A  charge
(probably  false)  was  brought  against  Aspasia  for
getting  freeborn  women  into  her  house  for  the  use
of  Pericles.     (Plut.  Pericl.  32  ;  Aristoph.  Achani.
527.)     In  connection  with    this    subject  see  the
Hetaireseos    Graphe    and    Phthoras    ton
Eleutiieron    Graphe.     (Meier,  Att.  Proc.  p.
332.)  ^  [C.  R.  K.]

PRO  BOLE  (irpoSoA'f))^  an  accusation  of  a  cri-
minal nature,  preferred  before  the  people  of  Athens
in  assembly,  with  a  view  to  obtain  their  sanction
for  bringing  the  charge  before  a  judicial  tribunal.
It  may  be  compared  in  this  one  respect  (viz.,  that
it  was  a  preliminary  step  to  a  more  formal  trial)
with  our  application  for  a  criminal  information  ;
though  in  regard  to  the  object  and  mode  of  pro-
ceeding there  is  not  much  resemblance.  The
TrpoSoKi]  was  reserved  for  those  cases  where  the
public  had  sustained  an  injury,  or  where,  from  the
station,  power,  or  influence  of  the  delinquent,  the
prosecutor  might  deem  it  hazardous  to  proceed  in
the  ordinary  way  without  being  authorised  by  a
vote  of  the  sovereign  assembly.  In  this  point  it
differed  from  the  el(rayyi\ia,  that  in  the  latter
the  people  were  called  upon  either  to  pronoiuicc
final  judgment  or  to  direct  some  peculiar  method
of  trial  J  whereas  in  the  irpoSoA-fj,  after  the  judg-


PROBOLE.

meut  of  the  assembly,  the  parties  proceeded  to
trial  ill  the  usual  manner.  The  court  before  whom
they  appeared,  however  influenced  they  might  be
by  the  praejudlcium  of  the  people,  were  under  no
legal  compulsion  to  abide  by  their  decision  ;  and
on  the  other  hand  it  is  not  improbable  that  if  the
people  refused  to  give  judgment  in  favour  of  the
complainant,  he  might  still  proceed  against  his  ad-
versary by  a  7pa<|)7J,  or  a  private  action,  according
to  the  nature  of  the  case.  (Platner,  Proc.  und  KL
vol.  i.  p.  382.)

The  cases  to  which  the  TvpoSoKi]  was  applied
were  complaints  against  magistrates  for  official  mis-
conduct or  oppression  ;  against  those  public  in-
formers and  mischief-makers  who  were  called  cvko-
KpduTai  ;  against  those  who  outraged  public  decency
at  the  religious  festivals  ;  and  against  all  such  as
by  evil  practices  exhibited  disaffection  to  the  state.
(Harpoc.  and  Suidas,  s.  v.  Karax^^porovia  ;  Pollux,
viii.  46  ;  Aesch.  de  Fals.  Leg.  47  ;  Isocr.  xepi
avTih.  344,  ed.  Steph.)

With  respect  to  magistrates,  Schomann  {de  Comit.
p.  231)  thinks  that  the  ■npo€oKai  could  only  be
brought  against  them  at  those  d-mx^ipoToviai  which
were  held  at  the  first  Kvpta  (KKArjaia  in  every  Pry-
taneia,  when  the  people  inquired  into  the  conduct  of
magistrates,  with  a  view  to  continue  them  in  office
or  depose  them,  according  to  their  deserts.  An
example  of  magistrates  being  so  deposed  occurs  in
Demosth.  c.  Theocr.  1330.  The  people  (says  Scho-
mann) could  not  proceed  to  the  iirix^iporovia  ex-
cept on  the  complaint  (Trpo€o\-i])  of  some  individual ;
the  deposed  magistrate  was  afterwards  brought  to
trial,  if  the  accuser  thought  proper  to  prosecute  the
matter  further.  There  appears,  however,  to  be  no
authority  for  limiting  the  irpoSoXai  against  magi-
strates to  these  particular  occasions  ;  and  other
writers  have  not  agreed  with  Schbrnann  on  this
point.  (Platner,  Proc.  und  KL  vol.  i.  p.  385  ;
Meier,  Att.  Proc.  p.  273.)

An  example  of  a  irpoBoXri  against  Sycophants  is
that  which  the  people,  discovering  too  late  their
error  in  putting  to  death  the  generals  who  gained
the  battle  of  Arginusae,  directed  to  be  brought
against  their  accusers.  (Xen.  Hell.  i.  7.  §  39.)
Another  occurs  in  Lysias  (c.  Afjorat.  135,  ed.
Steph.),  where  the  words  (rv\\r}€Sr}v  airai'T^s  Kal
eV  Tcp  S7)u(t}  Kal  iu  rep  SiKa(Tr7]pl({)  cvKOCpavTias
Kareyj/wT^.,  describe  the  course  of  proceeding
in  this  method  of  prosecution.  (Schomann,  de
Com.  p.  234.)

Those  who  worked  the  public  mines  clandes-
tinely, and  those  who  were  guilty  of  peculation  or
embezzlement  of  the  public  money,  were  liable  to
a  irpoBoK-i].  A  case  of  embezzlement  is  referred  to
by  Demosthenes  c.  Mid.  584.  (Schomann,  I.  c.  ;
Platner,  Proc.  U7id  Kl.  vol.  i.  p.  381.)

But  the  irpoSoKi\  which  has  become  most  cele-
brated, owing  to  the  speech  of  Demosthenes  against
Meidias,  is  that  which  was  brought  for  misbeha-
viour at  public  festivals.  We  learn  from  the  laws
cited  in  that  speech  (517,  518,571)  that  irpoSoXal
A\ore  enjoined  against  any  persons  who,  at  the
Dionj'sian,  Thargelian,  or  Eleusinian  festival  (and
the  same  enactment  was  probably  extended  to
other  festivals),  had  been  guilty  of  such  an  offence
as  would  fall  within  the  description  of  aaiSeia
TTcp'i  kopT{]v.  A  riot  or  disturbance  during  the
ceremony,  an  assault,  or  other  gross  insult  or  out-
rage, committed  upon  any  of  the  performers  or
spectators  of  the  games,  wliethcr  citizen  or  foreigner,


PROBOLE.  .059

and  even  upon  a  slave,  much  more  upon  a  magistrato
or  officer  engaged  in  superintending  the  performance ;
an  attempt  to  imprison  by  legal  process,  and  even
a  levying  of  execution  upon  the  goods  of  a  debtor,
during  the  continuance  of  the  festival,  was  held  to
be  a  profanation  of  its  sanctity,  and  to  subject  the
offender  to  the  penalties  of  these  statutes.  For
anj'  such  offence  complaint  was  to  be  made  to  the
Prytanes  {i.  e.  the  Proedri),  who  were  to  bring  for-
ward the  charge  at  an  assembly  to  be  held  "soon
after  the  festival  in  the  theatre  of  Dionysus.  The
defendant  was  to  be  produced  before  the  assembly.
Both  parties  were  heard,  and  then  the  people  pro-
ceeded to  vote  by  show  of  hands.  Those  who
voted  in  favour  of  the  prosecution  were  said  /cara-
X^ipoToyeTv,  those  who  were  against  it  anox^ipo-
Tov^lv.  The  complainant  was  said  Trpo€dX\eadai
rhv  adiKovuTa,  and  the  people,  if  they  condemned
him,  TTpoKaTcvyvovvai.  (Demosth.  c.  Mid.  578,  583,
586.)

Some  difficulty  has  arisen  in  explaining  the  fol-
lowing words  in  the  law  above  referred  to  :  —  tos
TrpoSoXas  TrapaSidoTwaav  tiaai  av  fxT]  €iCTCTi(r/j.4uai
ccaiu.  Platner  (Proc.  7md  Kl.  vol.  i.  p.  384)  and
Schomann  (de  Com.  p.  238)  suppose  that  by  these
words  the  Prytanes  are  commanded  to  bring  before
the  people  those  complaints,  for  which  satisfaction
has  not  been  m.ade  by  the  offender  to  the  prose-
cutor ;  and,  to  show  that  a  compromise  would  be
legal,  Platner  refers  to  Demosthenes,  c.  Mid.  563,
583  ;  to  which  we  may  add  the  circumstance  that
Demosthenes  is  said  to  have  compromised  his  charge
against  Meidias  for  a  sum  of  money.  Meier  (Ait.
Proc.  p.  275)  explains  it  thus  :  that  the  Prytanes
(or  rather  Proedri)  were  to  bring  before  the  people
all  the  TrpogoAat,  except  those  of  a  trifling  cha-
racter, for  which  they  were  themselves  empowered
to  impose  a  fine.  (As  to  the  power  of  fining  see
AU.  Proc.  p.  34.)  If  we  suppose  the  complaint  to
take  the  name  of  TrpogoA??  upon  its  being  presented
to  the  Proedri,  the  expression  e/CTeTtcr/ieV?)  izpoSoXi]
will  cause  no  difficulty  ;  for  as  Si/ctji'  riv^iv  signifies
to  pay  the  damages  awarded  in  an  action,  so  irpo-
€oAt]v  riv^iv  may  signify,  to  pay  the  fine  imposed
by  the  magistrates  before  whom  the  charge  was
brought  ;  and  nrpoSoX^v  is  not  used  improperly  for
eVigoA'jV,  any  more  than  Si/ctjj/  is  for  ri/xTjfxa  in  the
other  case.  Perhaps  there  is  more  force  in  another
objection  urged  by  Platner,  viz.,  that  (according  to
this  interpretation)  the  not  bringing  the  case  before
the  assembly''  is  made  to  depend  on  the  fion-pai/-
7nent,  and  not  (as  might  have  been  expected)  on
the  imposition  of  the  fine.

The  people  having  given  their  sentence  for  the
prosecution,  the  case  was  to  be  brought  into  the
court  of  Heliaea.  In  certain  cases  of  a  serious
nature  the  defendant  might  be  required  to  give
bail  for  his  appearance,  or  (in  default  thereof)  go
to  prison.  (Meier,  Att.  Proc.  p.  276.)  The  persons
on  whom  devolved  the  vyeuov'ia  SiKacrTTjplov  were,
according  to  Pollux  (viii.  87),  the  Thesmothetae.
Meier  (/.  c.)  thinks  this  would  depend  on  the
nature  of  the  cause,  and  that  upon  a  charge  for  the
profanation  of  a  festival,  the  cognizance  would  be-
long to  such  of  the  three  superior  archons  as  had
the  superintendence  thereof.  This  would  (no
doubt)  follow  from  the  ordinary'  principles  of  Athe-
nian jurisprudence  ;  but  it  may  be  conceived  that
the  extraordinary  nature  of  the  complaint  by  Trpn-
§oK^  might  take  it  out  of  the  common  course  of
practice.  (Platner,  p.  385.)   The  dicasts  had  to  pro-


9G0


PROBOULL


nounce  their  verdict  on  the  giiilt  of  the  party,  and
to  assess  the  penalty,  which  might  be  death,  or
only  a  pecuniary  fine,  according  to  their  discretion.
The  trial  (it  seems)  was  attended  with  no  risk  to
the  prosecutor,  who  was  considered  to  proceed  under
the  authority  of  the  popular  decree.  (Meier,  Att.
Froc.  p.  277.)  [C.  R.  K.]

PROBOULEUMA  (TrpoeouXcvfMo).  [Boule,
p.  210,  b.]

PROBOULI  (irpo^ouAot),  a  name  applicable
to  any  persons  who  are  appointed  to  consult  or  take
measures  for  the  benefit  of  the  people.  Thus,  the
delegates  who  were  sent  by  the  twelve  Ionian
cities  to  attend  the  Panionian  council,  and  deliberate
on  the  affairs  of  the  confederacy,  were  called  Trp6-
€ovhoi.  (Herod,  vi.  7. )  So  were  the  deputies  sent
by  the  several  Greek  states  to  attend  the  congress
at  the  Isthmus,  on  the  occasion  of  the  second  Per-
sian invasion  (Herod,  vii.  1 72)  ;  and  also  the  en-
voi's whom  the  Greeks  agreed  to  send  annually  to
Plataea.  (Plutarch,  ^m^.  21.)  The  word  is  also
used  like  vofxocpvAaKes,  to  denote  an  oligarchical
body,  in  whom  the  government  of  a  state  was
vested,  or  who  at  least  exercised  a  controlling  power
over  the  senate  and  popular  assemblies.  Such  were
the  sixty  senators  of  Cnidus  ;  and  a  similar  body
appears  to  have  existed  at  Megara,  where,  although
democracy  prevailed  at  an  earlier  period,  the  go-
vernment became  oligarchical  before  the  beginning
of  the  Peloponnesian  war.  (Arist.  Pol.  iv.  12.  §  8,  vi.
5.  §  1 3  ;  MuUer,  Dor.  iii.  .9.  §  10  ;  Wachsmuth,  Al-
ierth.  vol.  i.  pt.  2.  p.  91  ;  Schomann,  Antiq.jur.publ.
p.  82.)  A  body  of  men  called  irpoSovXoi  were  ap-
pointed at  Athens,  after  the  end  of  the  Sicilian  war,
to  act  as  a  committee  of  public  safety.  Thucydides
(  viii.  1 )  calls  them  apx^v  riva  TrpeaivTepuv  av8pwv,
o'Itiu€s  Tr€p\  Twv  TtapSvruv  uis  hu  Kaiphs  p  Trpo§ov-
\ev(Tovai.  They  were  ten  in  number.  (Suidas,  s.  v.
np6§ov\oi.)  Whether  their  appointment  arose  out
of  any  concerted  plan  for  overturning  the  constitu-
tion, is  doubtful.  The  ostensible  object  at  least  was
different  ;  and  the  measures  which  they  took  for
defending  their  country,  and  prosecuting  the  war,
appear  to  have  been  prudent  and  vigorous.  Their
authority  did  not  last  much  longer  than  a  year  ;
for  a  year  and  a  half  afterwards  Pisander  and  his
colleagues  established  the  council  of  Four  Hundred,
by  which  the  democracy  was  overthrown.  (Thucyd.
viii.  67  ;  Wachsmuth,  vol.  i.  pt.  2.  p.  197.)  the
first  step  which  had  been  taken  by  Pisander  and
his  party,  was  to  procure  the  election  of  a  body  of
men,  called  |u77pa^6rs  auTOKparopes,  who  were
to  draw  up  a  plan,  to  be  submitted  to  the  people,
for  remodelling  the  constitution.  Thucydides  says
they  were  ten  in  number.  Harpocration  (s.  v.
^vyypa(p(7s)  cites  Androtion  and  Philochorus  as
having  stated  that  thirty  were  chosen,  and  adds,
'O  5e  &ovKu5iSris  twu  Scko  4fjLVTffj.6v€V(Te  /xdi/ov  twv
■trpoSoxiKwv.  This  and  the  language  of  Suidas  (s.u.
llp6Qov\oi)  have  led  Schomann  to  conjecture  that  the
Trp6Sov\oi  were  elected  as  <TVYypa(f)€7s,  and  twenty
more  persons  associated  with  them,  making  in  all
the  thirty  mentioned  by  Androtion  and  i'hilochorus.
{Ant.  jur.  publ.  181.)  Others  have  thought  that
the  (rvyypa(}}e7s  of  Thucydides  have  been  con-
founded by  grammarians  with  the  thirty  tyrants,
who  were  first  chosen  ot  rohs  irarpiovs  vofiovs
avyypdypcaai  KaO"  ovs  iro\iTevaov(ri.  (Xen.  Hell.
ii.  3.  §  2  ;  Goeller,  ad  TIiuc.  viiL  67.)  These
Athenian  irpSSovKoi  are  alluded  to  by  Aristophanes
in  the  Lysistmta  (467),  which  was  acted  the  year


PROCONSUL.

after  the  Sicilian  defeat,  and  by  Lysias,  c.  Eratosth.
126,  ed.  Steph.  [C.  R.  K.l

PROCHEIROTO'NIA  {irpox^iporovia).

[Boule,  p.  211,  a.]

PROCLE'SIS       iTrp6K\'r)(Jls).  [DiAETETAE,

p.  398,  b.]

PROCONSUL  is  an  officer  who  acts  in  the
place  of  a  consul  without  holding  the  office  of  con-
sul itself  ;  though  the  proconsul  was  generally  one
who  had  held  the  office  of  consul,  so  that  the  pro-
consulship  was  a  continuation,  though  a  modified
one,  of  the  consulship.  The  first  time  that  we
meet  with  a  consul,  whose  imperium  was  prolonged
after  the  year  of  his  consulship,  is  at  the  com-
mencement of  the  second  Samnite  war,  at  the  end
of  the  consular  year  327  b.  c,  when  it  was  thonght
advisable  to  prolong  the  imperium  {imperium  pro-
rogare)  of  Q.  Publilius  Philo,  whose  return  to  Rome
would  have  been  followed  by  the  loss  of  most  of
the  advantages  that  had  been  gained  in  his  cam-
paign. (Liv.  viii.  23,  26.)  The  power  of  proconsul
was  conferred  by  a  senatusconsultum  and  plebis-
citum,  and  was  nearly  equal  to  that  of  a  regular
consul,  for  he  had  the  imperium  and  jurisdictio,
but  it  differed  inasmuch  as  it  did  not  extend  over
the  city  and  its  immediate  vicinity  (see  Niebuhr,
Hisft.  of  Rome.,  iii.  p.  1 86,  who  infers  it  from  Gaius,  iv.
104,  105),  and  was  conferred  without  the  auspicia
by  a  mere  decree  of  the  senate  and  people,  and  not
in  the  comitia  for  elections.  (Liv.  ix.  42,  x.  22,
xxxii.  28,  xxiv.  13.)  Hence  whenever  a  procon-
sul led  his  army  back  to  Rome  for  the  purpose  of
holding  a  triumph,  the  imperium  {in  urhe)  was
especially  granted  to  him  by  the  people,  which
was,  of  course,  not  necessary  when  a  consul  tri-
umphed during  the  year  of  his  office.  Livy  (iii.
4),  it  is  true,  mentions  men  appointed  with  pro-
consular power  at  a  much  earlier  period  than  the
time  of  Publilius  Philo  ;  but  there  is  this  difference,
that  in  this  earlier  instance  the  proconsular  power
is  not  an  imperium  prorogatum.,  but  a  fresh  ap-
pointment as  commander  of  the  reserve,  and
Niebuhr  {Hist,  of  Rome,  ii.  p.  123)  justly  remarks
that  Livy  here  probably  applies  the  phraseology  of
a  much  later  time  to  the  commander  of  the  reserve  ;
and  this  is  the  more  probable  as  Dionysius  (ix.  12)
speaks  of  this  avTiarpaTriySs  as  having  been  ap-
pointed by  the  consuls.  Nineteen  3'^ears  after  the
proconsulship  of  Publilius  Philo,  308  B.  c,  Livy
(ix.  42)  relates  that  the  senate  alone,  and  without
a  plebiscitum,  prolonged  the  imperium  of  the  consul
Q.  Fabius  Maxiraus  Rullianus  ;  but  it  is  manifest
that  here  again  Livy  transfers  a  later  institution  to
a  time  when  it  did  not  yet  exist  ;  for  it  was  only
by  the  lex  Maenia  (236  B.  c.)  that  the  Senate  ob'
tained  the  right  to  prolong  the  imperium.

When  the  number  of  Roman  provinces  had  be-
come great,  it  was  customary  for  the  consuls,  who
during  the  latter  period  of  the  republic  spent  the
year  of  their  consulship  at  Rome,  to  undertake  at
its  close  the  conduct  of  a  war  in  a  province,  or  its
peaceful  administration.  (Cic.  de  Nat.  Deor.  ii.  3  ;
Liv.  xxxiii.  25  ;  Cic.  ad  Fam.  viii.  5.  13.)  There
are  some  extraordinar}'  cases  on  record  in  which  a
man  obtained  a  province  with  the  title  of  proconsul
without  having  held  the  consulship  before.  The
first  case  of  this  kind  occurred  in  B.  c.  211,  when
young  P.  Cornelius  Scipio  was  created  proconsul  of
Spain  in  the  comitia  centuriata,  (Liv.  xxvi.  18.)
During  the  last  period  of  the  republic  such  cases
occurred  more  frequently.     (Pint.  Aemil.  FatU.  4  j


I


PRODIGIUM.

Cic.  de  Leg.  i.  20.)  Respecting  the  powers  and
jurisdiction  of  the  proconsuis  in  the  provinces,  see
Provincia.

After  the  administration  of  the  empire  was
newly  regulated  by  Constantine,  parts  of  certain
dioceses  were  under  tlie  administi-ation  of  pro-
consuls. Thus  a  part  of  the  diocese  of  Asia,  called
Asia  in  a  narrower  sense,  Achaia  in  the  diocese
of  Macedonia,  and  the  consular  province  in  the
diocese  of  Africa,  were  governed  by  proconsuls.
(Walter,  Geschichte  des  Romischen  Rechts,  §  366,
2d  edit.)  [L.  S.j

PROCUBITO'RES.    [Exrrcitus,  p.  503,  a.]

PROCURATOR  is  the  person  who  has  the
management  of  any  business  committed  to  him  by
another.  Thus  it  is  applied  to  a  person  who  main-
tains or  defends  an  action  on  behalf  of  another,  or,
as  we  should  say,  an  attorney  [Actio]  :  to  a
steward  in  a  family  [Calculator]  :  to  an  officer
in  the  provinces  belonging  to  the  Caesar,  who  at-
tended to  the  duties  discharged  by  the  quaestor  in
the  other  provinces  [Provincia]  :  to  an  officer
engaged  in  the  administration  of  the  Fiscus  [Fis-
cus] :  and  to  various  other  officers  under  the
empire.

PRODI'GIUM  in  its  widest  acceptation  de-
notes any  sign  by  which  the  gods  indicated  to  men
a  future  event,  whether  good  or  evil,  and  thus  in-
cludes omens  and  auguries  of  every  description.
(Virg.  Aen.  v.  638  ;  Servius,  ad  loc. ;  Plin.  H.N.
xi.  37  ;  Cic.  in  Verr.  iv.  49.)  It  is,  however,
generally  employed  in  a  more  restricted  sense  to
signify  some  strange  incident  or  wonderful  appear-
ance which  was  supposed  to  herald  the  approach
of  misfortune,  and  happened  under  such  circum-
stances as  to  announce  that  the  calamity  was  im-
pending over  a  whole  community  or  nation  rather
than  private  individuals.  The  word  may  be  con-
sidered synonymous  with  ostentum^  monstrutn,  por-
tentum.  "  Quia  enira  ostendunt,  portendunt,  mons-
trant,  praedicunt  ;  ostenta,  portenta,  monstra,  pro-
digia  diountur."  (Cic.  de  Div.  i.  42.)  It  should
be  observed,  however,  that  prodigium  must  be  de-
rived from  ago^  and  not  from  dico,  as  Cicero  would
have  it.

Since  prodigies  were  viewed  as  direct  manifesta-
tions of  the  wrath  of  heaven,  and  warnings  of
coming  vengeance,  it  was  believed  that  this  wrath
might  be  appeased,  and  consequently  this  venge-
ance averted,  by  prayers  and  sacrifices  duly  offered
to  the  offended  powers.  This  being  a  matter  which
deeply  concerned  the  public  welfare,  the  necessary
rites  were  in  ancient  times  regularly  performed,
under  the  direction  of  the  pontifices,  by  the  consuls
before  they  left  the  city,  the  solemnities  being
called  procmntio  prodigioruin.  Although  from  the
very  nature  of  the  occurrences  it  was  impossible  to
anticipate  and  provide  for  every  contingency,  we
have  reason  to  know  that  rules  for  expiation,  ap-
plicable to  a  great  variety  of  cases,  were  laid  down
in  the  Oitenfaria,  the  Libri  Ritiiales,  and  other  sJicred
books  of  the  Etrurians  (Cic.  de  Div.  i.  33  ;  Miiller,
Etrtcsker,  vol.  i.  pp.  33,  36,  343,  vol,  ii.  pp.  30,  99,
122, 131,  146,  337),  with  the  contents  of  which  the
Roman  priests  were  well  acquainted  ;  and  when  the
prodig}'  was  of  a  very  terrible  or  unprecedented
nature  it  was  usual  to  seek  counsel  from  some  re-
nowned Tuscan  seer,  from  the  Sibylline  books,  or
even  from  the  Delphic  oracle.  Prodigies  were  fre-
quently suffered  to  pass  unheeded  when  they  were
considered  to   have  no  direct  reference  to  public


PRODOSIA.  061

affairs,  as,  for  example,  when  the  manrel  reported
had  been  observed  in  a  private  mansion  or  in  some
town  not  closely  connected  with  Rome,  and  in  this
case  it  was  said  non  suscipi^  but  a  regular  record  of
the  more  important  was  carefully  preserved  in  the
Annals,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  numerous  details
dispersed  throughout  the  extant  books  of  Livy.
(See  Liv.  ii.  42,  iii.  10,  xxiv.  44,  xxxvii.  3,  xliii.
13  ;  Miiller,  die  Etrusker,  vol.  ii.  p.  191  ;  Hartung,
die  Religion  der  Romer,  vol.  i.  p,  96  ;  and  for  an
interesting  essjzy  on  the  illustrations  of  Natural
History  to  be  derived  from  the  records  of  ancient
prodigies,  Heyne,  Ojmsc.  Acad.  vol.  iii.  pp.  198,
255.)  [W.  R.]

PRO'DOMUS.      [DoMus,  p.  425,  b  ;    Tem-

PLUM.]

PRODO'SIA  i^irpodoffla).  Under  this  term
was  included  not  only  every  species  of  treason,
but  also  every  such  crime  as  (in  the  opinion  of  the
Greeks)  would  amount  to  a  betraying  or  desertion
of  the  interest  of  a  man's  country.  The  highest
sort  of  treason  was  the  attempt  to  establish  a  des-
potism {rvpavv'is),  or  to  subvert  the  constitution
{KaTa\veiv  tiV  iroAtTetav),  and  in  democracies
KaTaAvc-iv  rov  bri^xov  or  tJ»  TrXr,Qos.  Other  kinds
of  treason  were  a  secret  correspondence  with  a
foreign  enemy  ;  a  betraying  of  an  important  trust,
such  as  a  fleet,  army,  or  fortress  ;  a  desertion  of
post  ;  a  disobedience  of  orders,  or  any  other  act  of
treachery,  or  breach  of  duty  in  the  public  service.
(Demosth.  pro  Cor.  242,  c.  Lept.  481,  c.  Timoc.
74:5,  c.  Timoth.  1204,  pro  Cor.  Trierarch.  1230  ;
Lys.  c.  Agor.  130,  131,  ed.  Steph.  ;  Lycurg.  c.
Lcocr.  155,  ed.  Steph.)  It  would  be  a  betrayal  of
the  state,  to  delude  the  people  by  false  intelli-
gence or  promises  ;  or  to  disobey  any  special  de-
cree, such  as  that  (for  instance)  which  prohibited
the  exportation  of  arms  or  naval  stores  to  Philip,
and  that  which  (after  Philip  had  taken  possession
of  Phocis)  forbade  Athenian  citizens  to  pass  the
night  out  of  the  city.  (Demosth.  c.  Lept.  4o7,  498,
pro  Cor.  238,  de  Feds.  Leg.  433.)  But  not  onh-
would  orcr^  acts  of  disobedience  or  treachery  amount
to  the  crime  of  irpodoaia,  but  also  the  neglect  to
perform  those  active  duties  which  the  Gr .eks  in
general  expected  of  every  good  citizen.  Cowardice
in  battle  (SejAm)  would  be  an  instance  of  this
kind  ;  so  would  any  breach  of  the  oath  taken  by
the  ^(pr]§oi  at  Athens  ;  or  any  line  of  conduct  for
which  a  charge  of  disaffection  to  the  people  (fxiao-
Sr)/j.ia)  might  be  successfully  maintained.  (Xen.
Cyrop.  vi.  4.  §  14,  vi.  3.  §  27  ;  Eurip.  Phoeniss.
1003  ;  Andoc.  c.  Alcib.  30,  ed.  Steph.  ;  Lycurg.  c.
I^eoc.  157,  ed.  Steph.";  Demosth.  pro  Cor.  242.)
Thus,  we  find  persons,  whose  offence  was  the  pro-
pounding unconstitutional  laws,  or  advising  bad
measures,  or  the  like,  charged  by  their  political
opponents  with  an  attempt  to  overthrow  the  con-
stitution. (Demosth.  Trepi  avvra^.  170  ;  Aesch.
c.  Timarch.  1,  c.  Ctes.  82,  ed.  Steph.  ;  Lys.  pro
Poh/st.  159,  ed.  Steph.)  Of  the  facility  with  which
such  charges  might  be  made  at  Athens,  especially
in  times  of  political  excitement,  when  the  most
eminent  citizens  were  liable  to  be  suspected  of
plots  against  the  state,  history  affords  abundant
proof ;  and  Greek  history,  no  less  than  modem,
shows  the  danger  of  leaving  the  crime  of  treason
undefined  by  the  law,  and  to  be  interpreted  by
judges.  (Aristoph.  Eg.  236,  475,  862,  Vesp.  483,
953  ;  Wachsmuth,  i/eZ/. -4^^.  vol.  i.  pt.  ii.  p.  154,
vol.  ii.  pt.  i.  p.  178.)    One  of  the  most  remarkable


962  PRODOSIA.

trials  for  constructive  treason  at  Athens  was  that
of  Leocrates,  who  left  the  city  after  the  defeat  at
Chaeroneia,  and  was  prosecuted  by  Lycurgus  for
desertion  of  his  country.  The  speech  of  Lycurgus
is  preserved  to  us,  and  is  a  good  specimen  of  his
eloquence.  Tlie  facts  of  the  case  are  stated  in  p.
150,  ed.  Steph.  The  nature  of  the  charge  may  be
Seen  from  various  expressions  of  the  orator,  such  as

ItpoSobs    TOVS    VfioS     KCll    TO     IStJ     KOt    TOS    cV    Tols

vo/xois  ^vaias  (147),  fJ-h  fior]6ii(ra5  rots  iraTpiois
hpo7s,  iyKaraXiTruv  tt]U  ndXiu  (148),  ou  (rvfiSe-
§\7)fj.evos  ovSeu  ets  r^u  rris  TrdAewy  (TWTrjpiav
(153),  (pevyuv  rhy  vircp  rris  iraTpidos  kIvSwov
(154).  and  the  like.  The  defence  of  the  accused
was,  that  he  did  not  leave  Athens  with  a  traitor-
ous intention  (eVi  irpoBoaia),  but  for  the  purposes
oi  trade  (eVl  i^iiropia).  (See  Argument,  and  p.
155.)

The  ordinary  method  of  proceeding  against  those
who  were  accused  of  treason  or  treasonable  prac-
tices was  by  dcrayy^Xia^  as  in  the  case  of  Leo-
crates.  (  Pollux,  viii.  52.)  In  some  cases  a  ypa(pii
might  be  laid  before  the  Thesmothetae.  (Demosth.
c.  Steph.  1 1 37.)  We  read  of  an  old  law,  by  which
the  jurisdiction  in  trials  for  high  treason  was  given
to  the  archon  ^dfriKevs.  (Meier,  Ait.  Proc.  p.  50.)
But  it  could  hardly  be  expected  that  in  a  Greek
city  state  offences  would  always  be  prosecuted  ac-
cording to  the  forms  of  law  ;  and  we  find  various
instances  in  which  magistrates,  generals,  and
others,  took  a  summary  method  for  bringing
traitors  and  conspirators  to  justice.  Thus  a  certain
person,  named  Antiphon,  who  had  promised  Philip
to  burn  the  Athenian  arsenal,  was  seized  by  the
council  of  Areiopagus,  and  afterwards  put  to  the
torture,  and  condemned  to  death  by  the  people.
(Demosth.  pro  Cor.  271  ;  Aesch.  c.  Ctes.  89,  ed.
St  ph.)  As  to  the  power  of  the  Areiopagus,  see
further  Lycurg.  c.  Leoc.  154.  The  people  in  as-
sembly might  of  course  direct  any  extraordinary
measures  to  be  taken  against  suspected  persons,  as
they  did  in  the  affair  of  the  Hermes  busts  (Thucyd.
vi.  60,  61),  and  by  their  ypiifpiafxa  might  supersede
even  the  form  of  a  trial.  So  fearful  were  the
Athenians  of  any  attempt  to  establish  a  tyranny
or  an  oligarchy,  that  any  person  who  conspired  for
such  purpose,  or  any  person  who  held  an  office
under  a  government  which  had  overthrown  the
constitution,  might  be  slain  with  impunity.  Every
citizen  indeed  was  under  an  obligation  to  kill  such
a  person,  and  for  so  doing  was  entitled  by  law  to
honours  and  rewards.  (Andoc.  de  Myst,  12,  13,
ed.  Steph.  ;  Lys.  Arj/t.  KaraX.  airoX.  172,  ed.
Steph.)

The  regular  punishment  appointed  by  the  law
for  most  kinds  of  treason  appears  to  have  been
death  (Xen.  Hellen,  i.  7.  §  22  ;  Demosth.  pro
Cor.  238  ;  Lycurg.  c.  Uoc.  148,  152,  ed.  Steph.),
which,  no  doubt,  might  be  mitigated  by  decree  of
the  people,  as  in  the  case  of  Miltiades  (Herod,  vi.
136)  and  many  others.  The  less  heinous  kinds  of
TTpohoa'ia  were  probabh'  punished  at  the  discretion
of  the  court  which  tried  them.  (Demosth.  c.  Timoc.
740,  c.  Tkeocr.  1344.)  The  goods  of  traitors,  who
suffered  death,  were  confiscated,  and  their  houses
razed  to  the  ground  ;  nor  were  they  permitted  to
be  buried  in  the  country,  but  had  their  bodies  cast
out  in  some  place  on  the  confines  of  Attica  and
Megara.  Therefore  it  was  that  the  bones  of  The-
mistocles,  who  had  been  condemned  for  treaaon,
were  brought  over  and   buried   secretly   by  hia


PROMETHEIA.

friends.  (Thucyd.  i.  138.)  The  posterity  of  a
traitor  became  iriixoi^  and  those  of  a  tyrant  were
liable  to  share  the  fate  of  their  ancestor.  (Meursius,
Them.  Att.  ii.  2, 15  ;  Platner,  Proc.  und  Klag.  vol.
ii.  p.  82  ;  Meier,  ^«.  Proc.  p.  341,  Z>e  hon.  damn.
pp.  11 — 13,  136.)  Traitors  might  be  proceeded
against  even  after  their  death,  as  we  have  seen
done  in  modern  times.  Thus,  the  Athenians  re-
solved to  prosecute  Phrj-nichus,  who  had  been  most
active  in  setting  up  the  oligarchy  of  the  Four
Hundred  (rbv  v^Kphv  Kpivtiv  irpoSoo-fas),  and
also  to  subject  his  defenders  to  the  punishment  of
traitors,  in  case  of  a  conviction.  This  was  done.
Judgment  of  treason  was  passed  against  Phryni-
chus.  His  bones  were  dug  up,  and  cast  out  of
Attica  ;  his  defenders  put  to  death  ;  and  his  mur-
derers honoured  with  the  freedom  of  the  city.
(Thuc.  viii.  92  ;  Lysias,  c.  Agor.  136  ;  Lycurg.  c.
Leocr.  ]  64,  ed.  Steph.)  [C.  R.  K.J

PROEDRI  (TrpdeSpot).  [BouLE,  pp.  210,  212.]

PROEFSPHORA     [Eisphora.]

PROEISPHORAS  DIKE  (npo^iafpopas  SIkt]),
an  action  brought  by  a  member  of  a  Symmoria,  to
recover  a  rate  paid  on  account  of  another.  The
Symmoriae  being  so  aixanged,  that  three  hundred
of  the  richest  men  were  selected  to  form  a  superior
board,  responsible  to  the  state  in  the  first  instance
for  the  collection  of  a  property  tax  ;  the  people
passed  a  decree,  in  case  of  need,  commanding  them
to  pay  the  whole  tax  in  advance.  These  then
were  entitled  to  be  reimbursed  by  the  rem.aiiiing
nine  hundred  of  the  Symmoriae,  and  each  of  them
probably  had  a  certain  number  assigned  to  him  by
the  Strategi  for  that  purpose  ;  against  whom  he
might  bring  actions  for  -contribution  according  to
their  respective  assessments.  To  recover  money
so  advanced  was  called  Trpoeia-tpopav  Ko/j-i^eaOai.
(Demosth.  c.  Pantaen.  977,  c.  Phuenipp.  1046,  c.
Polycl.  1208.)  This  cause,  like  others  relating  to
the  property  tax  and  the  trierarchy,  belonged  to
the  jurisdiction  of  the  Strategi.  (Bockh,  Ptd>L
Econ.  of  Atli£ns.,  pp.  450,  526,  533, 2d  ed.  ;  Meier,
Att.  Proc.  pp.  1 07,  550.)  [C.  R.  K.]

PROELIA'LES  DIES.    [Dies.]

PROERO'SlAor  PROERO'SIAE  (irpoypdaia
or  7rpor]po(Tiai)  were  sacrifices  (or,  according  to
other  writers,  a  festival)  offered  to  Demeter  at  the
time  when  the  seeds  were  sown,  for  the  purpose  of
obtaining  a  plentiful  harvest,  (Suidas,  Hcsych.,
Etymol.  Mag.  s.  v. ;  Arrian  in  Epictet.  iii.  21.)
According  to  Suidas  the  Athenians  performed  this
sacrifice  in  01.  5.  on  behalf  of  all  the  Greeks  ;  but
from  all  the  other  accounts  it  would  appear  that
the  Athenians  did  so  at  all  times,  and  that  the  in-
stance mentioned  by  Suidas  is  only  the  first  time
that  proerosia  were  oftered  by  the  Athenians  for  fll
all  the  Greeks.  They  are  said  to  have  been  insti-  ^
tuted  by  the  command  of  some  oracle  at  a  time
when  all  the  world  was  suffering  from  scarcity  or
from  a  plague.  (Suid.  s.  v.  Eipeaiwyr}  ;  compare
Lvcurg.  Fragm.  c.  Me?iesaech.)  [L.  S.J

'PROFESTl  DIES.     [Dies,]

PROG AMEIA  {irpoyiixua).  [Matrimonium,
p.  737,  a.]

PROIX  {irpo-'il).     [Dos,  p.  436.]

PROLETA'RIL     [Caput.]

PROMETHEIA  (irpoixr}0€ia),  a  festival  cele-
brated at  Athens  in  honour  of  Prometheus.     (Xe-
noph.  de  Re  Puhl.  Ath.  3.   §  4  ;  Harpocrat.  s.  v,
Aa/xirds.)     The  time  at  which  it  was  solemnised  '
not  known,  but  it  was  one  of  the  five  Attic  festi-


dis        I


PROPYLAEA.

vals,  wliich  were  held  with  a  torch-race  in  the
Ceraniicus  (Harpocrat.  l.  c. ;  Schol.  ad  Aristoph.
Ran.  131  ;  comp.  Lampadephoria),  for  which
the  gymr.asiarchs  had  to  supply  the  youths  from
the  gymnasia.  Prometlieus  himself  was  believed
to  have  instituted  this  torch-race,  whence  he  was
called  the  torch  bearer.  (Hygin.  Poet.  A  sir.  ii.  15  ;
Eurip,  Phoeniss.  1139  ;  Philostrat.  Vit.  Sophist,  ii.
20.)  The  torch-race  of  the.  Prometheia  commenced
at  the  so-called  altar  of  Prometheus  in  the  aca-
demia  (Paus.  i.  30.  §  2  ;  Schol.  ad  Soph.  Oed.  Col.
53),  or  in  the  Ceramicus,  and  thence  the  youths
with  their  torches  raced  to  the  city.  (Welcker,
Die  Aeschyl.  Trilog.  p.  120,  &c.)  [L.  S.]

PROMISSOR.     [Obligationes,  p.  817,  b.]
PROMNE'STRIAE    (irpofLpiiaTpiai).      [Ma-

TRIMONITJM,  p.  736,  b.]

PROMULSIS.     [Coena,  p.307,a.]
PROMUS.     [Cella  ;  Servus.]
PRONA'OS.     [Templum.J
PRO'NUBAE,   PRO'NUBI.       [Matrimo-
NiUM,  pp.  743,  b,  744,  a.]

PROPHETES,  PROPHE'TIS.  [Oraculum,
p.  837,  a.]

PROPNIGE'UM.     [Balneae,  p.  192,  b.]
PROPRAETOR.     [Provincia.]
PROPRI'ETAS.     [Dominium.]
PROPYLAEA  (irpovvXaia),  the  entrance  to
a  temple,  or  sacred  enclosure,  consisted  of  a  gate-
way flanked  by  buildings,  whence  the  plural  form
of  the  word.     The  Egyptian  temples  generally  had
magnificent  propylaea.,  consisting  of  a  pair  of  oblong
truncated  pyramids  of  solid  masonry,  the  faces  of
which  were  sculptured  with  hieroglyphics.     (See
Herod,  ii.  63,  101,  121,  and  other  passages  ;  the
modern  works  on  Egyptian  antiquities  ;  the  Atlas
to  Kugler's  Kunstycschichte^  sect.  1.  pi.  5.  fig.  1.)

In  Greek,  except  when  the  Egyptian  temples
are  spoken  of,  the  word  is  generally  used  to
signify  the  entrance  to  the  Acropolis  of  Athens,
which  was  the  last  completed  of  the  great  works
of  architecture  executed  under  the  administration
of  Pericles.  The  building  of  the  Propylaea  occu-
pied five  years,  B.C.  437 — 432,  and  cost  2012
talents.  The  name  of  the  architect  was  Mnesicles.
(Plut.  Per.  1 3  ;  Thuc.  ii.  1 3,  with  Poppo's  Notes  ;
Aristoph.  Equit.  1326  ;  Demosth.  de  Rep.  Ord.  28.
p.  174.  23,  ed.  Bekker  ;  Harpocrat.  Suid.  s.v. ;
C'lc.de  Off.  ii.  17.)  The  edifice  was  of  the  Doric
order,  and  presented  in  front  the  appearance  of  a
hexastyle  portico  of  white  marble,  with  the  central
intercolunmiation  wider  than  the  rest,  and  with
two  advanced  wings,  containing  chambers,  the
northern  one  of  which  (that  on  the  left  hand)  Avas
adorned  with  pictures,  which  are  fully  described
by  Pausanias  (i.  22.  §§  4 — 7),  and  among  which
were  works  by  Polygnotus,  and,  probably,  by
Protogenes.  (See  Diet,  of  Biog.  s.  vv.)  On  the
right  hand,  and  in  front  of  the  Propylaea,  stood
the  temple  of  Nike  Jpteros,  and  close  to  the  en-
trance the  statue  of  Hermes  Propyiaeus ;  and  the
propylaea  themselves  were  adorned  with  numerous
statues.  (Paus.  I.e.)  A  broad  road  led  straight
from  the  Agora  to  the  Propylaea,  which  formed
the  only  entrance  to  the  Acropolis,  and  the  imme-
diate approach  to  which  was  by  a  flight  of  steps,
in  the  middle  of  which  there  was  left  an  inclined
])lane,  paved  with  Pentelic  marble,  as  a  carriage-
way for  the  processions.  Both  ancient  and  modern
M-riters  have  agreed  in  considering  the  Propylaea
as  one  of  the  most  perfect  works  of  Grecian  art.


PROSCRIPTIO.  963

(For  fuller  descriptions  and  restored  views,  see
Stuart,  ii.  5  ;  Leake,  Topog.  c.  8  ;  Miiller,  Ar-
ch'dol.  d.  Kunst,  §  109.  n.  1,  3  ;  and  a  beautiful
elevation  and  plan  in  the  Atlas  to  Kugler's  Kunst-
geschichte,  sect.  2,  pi.  3.  figs.  12,  13.)

The  great  temple  at  Eleusis  had  two  sets  of
propylaea,  the  smaller  forming  the  entrance  of  the
inner  enclosure  {ir6pi€o\os),  and  the  greater,  of
the  outer.  The  latter  were  an  exact  copy  of  the
Athenian  propylaea.  (Miiller,  /.  c.  n.  5.)  There
were  also  propylaea  at  Corinth,  surmounted  by-
two  chariots  of  gilt  bronze,  the  one  carrying  Phae-
thon,  and  the  other  the  Sun  himself.  (Paus.  ii.  3.
§2.)  [P.S.]

PRORA.  [Navis,  p.  786,  a.]
PROSCE'NIUM.  [Theatrum.]
PROSCLE'SIS  (Trp6aKKr]ais).  [Dike.]
PROSCRIPTIO.  The  verb  proscribere  pro-
perly signifies  to  exhibit  a  thing  for  sale  by  means
of  a  bill  or  advertisement :  in  this  sense  it  occurs
in  a  great  many  passages.  But  in  the  time  of
Sulla  it  assumed  a  very  different  meaning,  for  he
applied  it  to  a  measure  of  his  own  invention  (Veil.
Pat.  ii.  28),  namely,  to  the  sale  of  the  property  of
those  who  were  put  to  death  at  his  command,  and
who  were  themselves  caWedi  proscripti.  Towards
the  end  of  the  year  82  b.  c.  Sulla,  after  his  return
from  Praeneste,  declared  before  the  assembly  of
the  people  that  he  would  improve  their  condition,
and  punish  severely  all  those  who  had  supported
the  party  of  Marius.  (Appian.  B.  C.  i.  95.)  The
people  Jippear  tacitly  to  have  conceded  to  him  all
the  power  which  he  wanted  for  the  execution  of
his  design,  for  the  lex  Cornelia  de  proscriptione  et
proscriptis  was  sanctioned  afterwards  when  he  was
made  dictator.  (Cic.  de  Leg.  i.  15,  de  Leg.  Agr.
iii.  2,  &c. ;  Appian.  B.  C.  i.  98.)  This  law,  which
was  proposed  by  the  interrex  L.  Valerius  Flaccus
at  the  command  of  Sulla,  is  sometimes  called  lex
Cornelia  (Cic.  c.  Verr.  i.  47),  and  sometimes  lex
Valeria.  Cicero  {pro  Rose.  Am.  43)  pretends  not
to  know  whether  he  should  call  it  a  lex  Cornelia
or  Valeria.  (Comp.  Schol.  Gronov.  p.  435,  ed.
Orelli.)

Sulla  drew  up  a  list  of  the  persons  whom  he
wished  to  be  killed  ;  and  this  list  was  exhibited
in  the  forum  to  public  inspection.  Every  person
contained  in  it  was  an  outlaw,  who  might  be
killed  by  any  one  who  met  him  Avith  impunity,
even  by  his  slaves  and  his  nearest  relatives.  All
his  property  was  taken  and  publicly  sold.  It  may
naturally  be  supposed  that  such  property  was  sold
at  a  very  low  price,  and  was  in  most  cases  pur-
chased by  the  friends  and  favourites  of  Sulla  ;  in
some  instances  only  a  part  of  the  price  was  paid
at  which  it  had  been  purchased.  (Sallust,  Fragm.
p.  238,  ed.  Gerlach.)  The  property  of  those  who
had  fallen  in  the  ranks  of  his  enemies  was  sold  in
the  same  manner.  (Cic.  pro  Rose.  Am.  43.)  Those
who  killed  a  proscribed  person,  or  gave  notice  of
his  place  of  concealment,  received  two  talents  as  a
reward  ;  and  whoever  concealed  or  gave  shelter  to
a  proscribed,  was  punished  with  death.  (Cic.  c.
Verr.  i.  47,  Plut.  Sull.  31  ;  Suet.  Caes.  11.)  But
this  was  not  all  ;  the  proscription  was  regarded  as
a  corruption  of  blood,  and  consequently  the  sons
and  grandsons  of  proscribed  persons  were  for  ever
excluded  from  all  public  offices.  (Plut.  ^.  c;  Veil.
Pat.  ii.  28 ;  Quinctil.  xi.  1.  85.)

After  this  example  of  a  proscription  had  once
been  set,  it  was  readily  adopted  by  those  in  power
3q  2


964  PROTHESMIA,

during  the  civil  commotions  of  subsequent  years.
This  was  the  case  during  the  triumvirate  of
Antonius,  Caesar,  and  Lepidus.  (43  B.  c.)  Their
proscription  was  even  far  more  formidable  than
that  of  Sulla,  for  2000  equites  and  300  senators
are  said  to  have  been  murdered,  and  the  motive  of
the  triumvirs  was  nothing  but  a  cold-blooded
thirst  for  vengeance.  Fortunately  no  more  than
these  two  ciises  of  proscription  occur  in  the  history
of  Rome.  (Appian,  B.  C.  iv.  5  ;  Veil.  Pat.  ii.  QQ  ;
^nel.Auq.  27;  Liv.  EpU.  lib.  120.)  [L.  S,]
PROSTAS.  [DoMUS,  p.  425,  b.]
PROSTATES  (Trpoo-TciTTjs).  [Libertus,  p.
705,  a  ;  Metoeci.]

PRO'STATES  TOU  DEMOU  (irpoo-TOTT/s  toG
hi]jxov).  a  leader  of  the  people,  denoted  at  Athens
and  in  other  democratical  states,  a  person  who  by
his  character  and  eloquence  placed  himself  at  the
head  of  the  people,  and  whose  opinion  had  the
greatest  sway  amongst  them  (Plato,  Rep.  viii.
p.  5G5.  c.)  :  such  was  Pericles.  It  appears,  how-
ever, that  TrppaTaTrjs  rod  Stj/j-ov  was  also  the  title
of  a  public  officer  in  those  Dorian  states  in  which
the  government  was  democratical.  Thus  Ave  read
of  a  TrpoaraTTis  rov  S-f}fiov  atCorcyra(Thuc.iii.  70),
at  Svracuse  (Thuc.  vi.  35),  at  Elis  (Xen.  Hell.
iii.  2.  §  27),  at  Mantineia  (Xen.  HeU.  v.  2.  §  3),
and  at  other  places.  (Miiller,  Dor.  iii.  9.  §  1  ;
Wachsmuth,  HdL  AlteHhumsk.  vol.  i.  p.  819,  2d
ed. ;  Arnold,  ad  Time.  vi.  35 ;  G.  C.  Muller,  de
Corcyr.  Rep.  p.  49  ;  K.  F.  Hermann,  Ldirbuch.,  &c.
§  QQ.  n.  3,  4.)

PROSTIME'MA  (irpoaTifirjfxa).     [Timema.]
PROSTOON.     [DoMUS,  p.  425,  a.]
PROSTY'LOS.     [Templum.]
PROTELEIA  GAMON   (TrporeAeja  ydfiav).
[Matrimoniitm,  p.  737,  a.]

PROTHESIS  (TrpSOeais).  [F  UN  US,  p.  555,  a.]
PROTHE'SMIA  (-n-poeerTfila),  the  term  limited
for  bringing  actions  and  prosecutions  at  Athens.
In  all  systems  of  jurisprudence  some  limitation  of
this  sort  has  been  prescribed,  for  the  sake  of  quiet-
ing possession,  and  affording  security  against
vexatious  litigation.  The  Athenian  expression
Trpodea/xias  uSjulos  corresponds  to  our  statute  of
limitations.  The  time  for  commencing  actions  to
recover  debts,  or  compensation  for  injuries,  ap-
pears to  have  been  limited  to  five  years  at  Athens.
Toty  aSiKovfifyoLS  6  'Sokwv  ra  ir4uTe  cttj  'iKavhp
Tjyffo-aT  clvai  flinrpd^cKrdai.  (Demosth.  pro
Phorni.  952,  c.  Nausim.,  989 ;  Harpoc.  s.  v.  Tipo-
tfea-fiias  vd/uLos.)  Inheritance  causes  stood  on  a
peculiar  footing.  When  an  estate  had  been  ad-
judged to  a  party,  he  was  still  liable  to  an  action
at  the  suit  of  a  new  claimant  for  the  whole  period
of  his  life  ;  and  his  heir  for  five  years  after-
wards. This  arose  from  the  anxiety  of  the  Athe-
nians to  transmit  inheritance  in  the  regular  line
of  succession.  [Heres  (Greek).]  The  liability
of  bail  continued  only  for  a  year  {iyyvai  iireTeioi
^(Tuv),  and  of  course  no  proceeding  could  be  taken
against  them  after  the  expiration  of  the  year,
(Demosth.  c.  Apatur.  901.)  It  is  doubtful  whether
any  period  was  prescribed  for  bringing  criminal  pro-
secutions, at  least  for  offences  of  the  more  serious
kind,  though  of  course  there  would  be  an  indis-
position in  the  jury  to  convict,  if  a  long  time  had
elapsed  since  the  offence  was  committed.  (Lys.  c.
Simon.  98,  irfp\  rov  arjKov,  109,  c.  Agor.  137,
ed.  Steph.)  Certain  cases,  however,  must  be  ex-
cepted.    The  ypacj)^  Trapav6fiwv  could    only  be


PROVINCIA.

brought  within  a  year  after  the  propounding  of  the
law.^  (UapavSfiojv  7pa<^4  and  Schom.  de  Comit.
p.  278.)  And  the  evQvvai  against  magistrates  were
limited  to  a  certain  period,  according  to  Pollux
(viii.  45).  Amnfsties  or  pardons,  granted  by
special  decrees  of  the  people,  scarcely  belong  to
this  subject.  (See  Aesch.  c.  Timarch.,  6,  ed.  Steph.)
The  term  irpodeafiia  is  applied  also  to  the  time
which  was  allowed  to  a  defendant  for  paying  da-
mages, after  the  expiration  of  which,  if  he  had  not
pjiid  them,  he  was  called  inrep-fifiepos,  virepirpSdea-'
Atos,  or  iKTrpdOea-fios.  (Meier,  Att.  Proc.  pp.  636,
746.)  [C.  R.  K.]

PRO'THYRON.  [Aithousa  ;  Domus,  p.
424,  b  ;  Janua,  p.  627,  a.J

PROTRYGAEA  {irporpvyaiaX  a  festival  cele-
brated in  honour  of  Dionysus,  sumamed  Protrvges,
and  of  Poseidon.  (Hesych.  .f.  v.;  Aelian.  V.  H.
iii.  41.)  The  origin  and  mode  of  celebration  of
this  festival  at  Tyre  are  described  by  Achilles
Tatius  (ii.  init.).  [L.  S.]

PROVI'NCIA.  The  original  meaning  of  this
word  seems  to  be  "  a  duty  "  or  "  matter  entrusted
to  a  person,"  as  we  see  in  various  passages.  The
word  is  an  abbreviated  form  of  Providentia,  as
Hugo  has  suggested.  All  other  proposed  deriva-
tions ought  to  be  rejected.  In  the  Medicean  MS.
of  Livy  (xxi.  17),  the  word  is  written  Provintia,
and  also  in  Ulpian,  Frag.  xi.  20,  ed.  Rocking.
That  the  word  originally  had  not  the  signification
of  a  territory  merely  appears  from  such  expressions
as  Urbana  Provincia  (Liv.  xxxi.  6) ;  and  the  ex-
pression Urbana  Provincia  was  still  used,  after
the  term  Provincia  was  used  to  express  a  ter-
ritory beyond  Italy  which  had  a  regular  orga-
nization and  was  under  Roman  administration.
This  is  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word,  that  of  a
foreign  territory  in  a  certain  relation  of  subordina-
tion to  Rome.  But  the  word  was  also  used,  before
the  establishment  of  any  provincial  governments,
to  denote  a  district  or  enemy's  country  which  was
assigned  to  a  general  as  the  field  of  his  operations.

The  Roman  State  in  its  complete  development
consisted  of  two  parts  with  a  distinct  organization,
Italia  and  the  Provinciae.  There  Avere  no  Pro-
vinciae  in  this  sense  of  the  word  till  the  Romans
had  extended  their  conquests  beyond  Italy  ;  and
Sicily  (Cic.  Verr.  ii.  2)  was  the  first  country  that
was  made  a  Roman  Province,  B.  c.  241  ;  Sardinia
was  made  a  Province  B.  c.  235.  The  Roman  pro-
vince of  Gallia  Ulterior  in  the  time  of  Caesar  was
sometimes  designated  simply  bv  the  terra  Provincia
(Caesar,  Bell.  Gall.  i.  ],  7,  &c.)

A  conquered  country  received  its  provincial
organization  either  from  the  Roman  commander,
whose  acts  required  the  approval  of  the  Senate  ;
or  the  government  was  organized  by  the  com-
mander and  a  body  of  commissioners  appointed  by
the  Senate  out  of  their  own  number.  (Plutarch,
Luadl.  35,  36.)  The  mode  of  dealing  with  a  con-
quered country  was  not  uniform.  When  constituted
a  Provincia,  it  did  not  become  to  all  purposes  an
integral  part  of  the  Roman  State  ;  it  retained  its
national  existence,  though  it  lost  its  sovereignty.
The  organization  of  Sicily  was  completed  by  P.
Rupilius  with  the  aid  of  ten  legates,  and  his  con-
stitution is  sometimes  referred  to  under  the  name
of  Leges  Rupiliae.  The  island  was  formed  into
two  districts,  with  Syracusae  for  the  chief  town  of
the  eastern  and  Lilybaeum  of  the  western  district :
the  whole  isl.ind  was  administered  by  a  governor


I


PROVINCIA.

nnnually  sent  from  Home.  He  was  assisted  by
two  (Quaestors  and  was  accompanied  by  a  train  of
praecones,  scribae,  haruspices,  and  other  persons,
who  formed  his  Cohors.  The  Quaestors  received
from  the  Roman  aerarium  the  necessary  sums  for
the  administration  of  the  ishind,  and  they  also  col-
lected the  taxes,  except  those  which  were  let  by
the  Censors  at  Rome.  One  quaestor  resided  at
Lilybaeum,  and  the  other  with  the  governor  or
Praetor  at  Syracusae.  The  governor  could  dismiss
the  quaestors  from  the  province,  if  they  did  not
conform  to  his  orders,  and  could  appoint  Legati  to
do  their  duties.  The  whole  island  was  not  treated
exactly  in  the  same  way.  Seventeen  conquered
towns  forfeited  their  land,  which  was  restored
on  condition  of  the  payment  of  the  decimae  and
the  scriptura.  But  this  restoration  must  not  be
understood  as  meaning  that  the  ownership  of  the
land  was  restored,  for  the  Roman  State  became  the
owner  of  the  land,  and  the  occupiers  had  at  most
a  Possessio.  These  taxes  or  dues  were  let  to  farm
by  the  censors  at  Rome.  Three  cities,  Messana,
Tauromenium,  and  Netum,  were  made  Foederatae
Civitates  and  retained  their  land.  [Foederatae
CiviTATES.]  Five  other  cities,  among  which  were
Panormus  and  Segesta,  were  Liberae  et  Imnmnes,
that  is,  they  paid  no  decimae ;  but  it  does  not  ap-
pear whether  they  were  free  from  the  burdens  to
which  the  Foederatae  Civitates  as  such  were  sub-
.iect  by  virtue  of  their  Foedus  with  Rome.  Before
the  Roman  conquest  of  Sicily,  the  island  had  been
subject  to  a  payment  of  the  tenth  of  wine,  oil,  and
other  products,  the  collecting  of  which  had  been
determined  with  great  precision  by  a  law  or  re-
gulation of  King  Hiero  {Lex  Hieronica).  The
regulations  of  Hiero  were  preserved  and  these
tenths  were  let  to  farm  by  the  Quaestors  in  Sicily
to  Sicilians  and  Romans  settled  in  Sicily :  the
tenths  of  the  first-mentioned  towns  were  let  to
farm  to  Romans  in  Rome.  The  towns  which  paid
i  the  tenths  were  called  by  the  general  name  of
Stipendiariae.

For  the  administration  of  justice  the  island  was
divided  into  Fora  or  Conventus,  which  were  terri-
!  torial   divisions.      Sicilians  who   belonged  to  the
1  same  town  had  their  disputes  settled  according  to
i  its  laws  ;  citizens  of  dilferent  towns  had  their  dis-
!  putes   decided   by  judices   appointed   by   the  go-
j  vernor  ;  in  case  of  disputes  between  an  individual
j  and  a  community,  the  Senate  of  any  Sicilian  town
i  might  act  as  judices,  if  the  parties  did  not  choose
;  to  have  as  judices  the  Senate  of  their  own  towns ;
:  if  a  Roman  citizen  sued  a  Sicilian,  a  Sicilian  was
judex ;  if  a  Sicilian  sued  a  Roman  citizen,  a  Ro-
man was  judex  ;  but  no  person  belonging  to  the
C(jhors  of  a  Praetor  could  be  judex.     These  were
the  provisions  of  the   Rupiliae   Leges.     Disputes
lictween  the  lessees  of  the  tenths  and  the  Aratores
v\(  re  decided  according  to  the  rules  of  Hiero.   (Cic.
Verr.  ii,  13.)     The  settlement  of  the   Municipal
coiistitution  of  the  towns  was  generally  left  to  the
citizens  ;  but  in  some  instances,  as  in  the  case  of
C.  Claudius  Marcellus  and  the  town  of  Alesa,  a
j  constitution  was  given  by  some  Roman  at  the  re-
I  quest,  as  it  appears,  of  the  town.     The  Senate  and
I  the  People  still  contiimed  as  the  component  parts
1  of  the  old  Greek  cities.     Cicero  mentions  a  body
i  of  130  men  called  censors  who  were  appointed  to
j  take  the  census  of  Sicily  every  five  years,  after
I  tiie  fashion  of  the  Roman  census    {in    Verr.   il.
S5^&c.)    The   island  was  also  bound  to  furnish


PROVINCIA.  965

and  maintain  soldiers  and  sailors  for  the  service  of
Rome,  and  to  pay  tributum  for  the  carrying  on  of
wars.  The  govemor  could  take  provisions  for  the
use  of  himself  and  his  cohors  on  condition  of  pa}'-
ing  for  them.  The  Roman  State  had  also  the
Portoria  which  were  let  to  farm  to  Romans  at
Rome.

The  governor  had  complete  Jurisdictio  in  the
island  with  the  Imperium  and  Potestas.  He  could
delegate  these  powers  to  his  quaestors,  but  there
was  always  an  appeal  to  him,  and  for  this  and
other  purposes  he  made  circuits  through  the  dif-
ferent Conventus.

Such  was  the  organization  of  Sicilia  as  a  pro-
vince, which  may  be  taken  as  a  sample  of  the
general  character  of  Roman  provincial  government.
Sicily  obtained  the  Latinitas  from  C.  Julius  Caesar,
and  the  Civitas  was  given  after  his  death  (Cic.  ad
Att.  xiv.  12)  ;  but  notwithstanding  this  there  re-
mained some  important  distinctions  between  Sicily
and  Italy.  The  chief  authority  for  this  account  of
the  Provincial  organization  of  Sicily  is  the  Verrine
orations  of  Cicero.

Hispania  was  fonned  into  two  Provinces,  Citerior
or  Tarraconensis  between  the  Iberus  and  the
PjTenees,  and  Ulterior  or  Baetica  south  of  the
Iberus.  Hispania  Citerior  was  divided  into  seven
Conventus,  —  Carthaginiensis,  Tarraconensis,  Cae-
saraugustanus,  Cluniensis,  Asturum,  Lucensis,  and
Bracarum.  The  diversity  of  the  conditiori  of  the
several  parts  of  the  Province  appears  from  the
enumeration  of  Coloniae,  Oppida  Civium  Roma-
norum,  Latini  veteres,  Foederati,  Oppida  stipen-
diaria.  Hispania  Baetica  was  divided  into  ibur
Juridici  conventus,  • —  Gaditanus,  Cordubensis,
Astigitanus,  Hispalcnsis.  The  oppida  consisted  of
Coloniae,  Municipia,  Latio  antiquitus  donata,  which
appear  to  be  equivalent  to  Latini  veteres.  Libera,
Foederata,Stipendiaria.  (Plin.//.  A^iii.  1,3.)  The
Provincia  of  Lusitania  was  divided  into  three  Con-
ventus, —  Emeritensis,  Pacensis,  and  Scalobitanus.
The  classes  of  Oppida  enumerated  are  Coloniae,
Municipia  Civium  Romanorum,Oppida  Latii  antiqui
or  veteris,  Stipendiaria.  (Piin. //.  A%iv.  22.)  This
example  will  give  some  idea  of  the  Roman  mode
of  administering  a  province  for  judicial  purposes.
All  Hispania  received  the  Latinitas  from  Vespasian.
( 'PXm.H.  N.  ii.  3.)  The  province  paid  a  fixed  vccti-
gal  or  land-tax  in  addition  to  the  tributum  which
was  collected  by  Praefecti,  and  in  addition  to  being
required  to  deliver  a  certain  quantity  of  corn.  And
the  Praetor  had  originally  the  right  to  purchase  a
twentieth  part  at  what  price  he  pleased.  (Li  v.  xliii,
2  ;  compare  Tacit.  Agric.  19  ;  and  Cic.  in  Verr.
iii.  81,  de  aestimuio  frumento.)

This  organization  was  not  confir.ed  to  the  Western
Provinces.  In  Asia,  for  instance,  ther(?  was  a
Smyrnaeus  Conventus  which  was  frequented  by
a  great  part  of  Aeolia  ;  the  term  conventus  was
applied  both  to  the  territorial  division  made  for
the  administration  of  justice  and  also  to  the  chief
city  or  place  "in  quern  conveniebant."  Ephesus
gave  name  to  another  Conventus.  As  the  Con-
ventus were  mainly  formed  for  judicial  purposes,
the  term  Jurisdictio  is  sometimas  used  as  an  equi-
valent. Thus  Pliny  {H.N.  v.  29)  speaks  of  the
Sardiana  Jurisdictio,  which  is  the  same  as  Sar-
dianus  conventus.  The  object  of  this  division  is
further  shown  by  such  phrases  as  ""eodem  discep-
tant  foro,"  "  Tarracone  disceptant  populi  xliii."

Strabo  remarks  (xiii.  p.  629)  that  the  boundaries
3q  3


966  PROVINCIA.

of  Phrygia,  Lydia,  Caria,  and  Mysia  were  con-
fused, and  that  the  Romans  had  added  to  the
confusion,  by  not  attending  to  the  subsisting  na-
tional divisions,  but  making  the  administrative
divisions  different  (ras  StotKTjo-ets),  in  which  are
the  Fora  (aySpas  MS.)  and  the  administration  of
justice.  The  word  aySpa  probably  represents  Con-
ventus  (as  to  the  reading,  see  Casaubon's  note).
The  Conventus,  it  appears,  were  sometimes  held
(conventus  acti)  in  th©  winter  (Caesar,  Bell.  Gall.
i.  .54,  vi.  44)  ;  but  in  Caesar's  case  this  might  be  a
matter  of  convenience.  Cicero  proposed  to  do  the
same  in  his  province  {ad  Att.  v.  14).  The  ex-
pression "  forum  agere  '■"  is  equivalent  to  "  con-
ventum  agere."  (Praetor  Romanus  conventus  agit,
Liv.  xxxi.  29.)

The  Conventus  were  attended  by  the  Romans
who  were  resident  in  the  province,  among  whom
were  the  publicani,  and  generally  by  all  persons
who  had  any  business  to  settle  there.  The  judices
for  the  decision  of  suits  were  chosen  from  the  per-
sons who  attended  the  conventus.  Other  acts
were  also  done  there,  which  were  not  matters  of
litigation  but  which  required  certain  forms  in  order
to  be  legal.  In  the  case  of  manumission  by  per-
sons under  thirty  years  of  age  certain  forms  were
required  by  the  Lex  Aelia  Sentia,  and  in  the  pro-
vinces it  was  effected  on  the  last  day  of  the  Con-
ventus (Gains,  i.  20)  ;  from  which  it  appears  that
Conventus  means  also  the  time  during  which  busi-
ness was  transacted  at  the  place  "  in  quem  conve-
niebant."

The  governor  upon  entering  on  his  duties  pub-
lished an  edict,  which  was  often  framed  upon  the
Edictum  Urbanum.  Cicero  when  Proconsul  of
Cilicia  says  that  as  to  some  matters  he  framed  an
edict  of  his  own,  and  as  to  others  he  referred  to
the  Edicta  Urbana.  {Ad  Att.  vi,  1.)  Though
the  Romans  did  not  formally  introduce  their  law
into  the  provinces,  and  so  much  of  it  as  applied
to  land  and  the  status  of  persons  was  inapplicable
to  Provincial  land  and  Proviucial  persons,  great
changes  were  gradually  introduced  by  the  edictal
power  both  as  to  the  forms  of  procedure  and  all
other  matters  to  which  the  Roman  Law  was  ap-
plicable ;  and  also  by  special  enactments.  (Gains,
i.l83,  185,  iii.  122.)

There  was  one  great  distinction  between  Italy
and  the  Provinces  as  to  the  nature  and  property  in
land.  Provincial  land  could  not  be  an  object  of
Quiritarian  ownership,  and  it  was  accordingly  ap-
propriately called  Possessio.  The  ownership  of
Provincial  land  was  either  in  the  Populus  or  the
Caesar  :  at  least  this  was  the  doctrine  in  the  time
of  Gains  (ii.  7).  Provincial  land  could  be  trans-
ferred without  the  forms  required  in  the  case  of
Italian  land,  but  it  was  subject  to  the  payment  of
a  land-tax  (vectigal).  Sometimes  the  Jus  Italicum
was  given  to  certain  provincial  towns,  by  which
their  lands  were  assimilated  to  Italian  land,  for  all
legal  purposes.  With  the  Jus  Italicum  such  towns
received  a  free  constitution  like  that  of  the  towns
of  Italy,  with  magistrates,  as  decemviri,  quin-
quennales  (censores)  and  aediles  ;  and  also  a  juris-
dictio.  It  was  a  ground  of  complaint  against  Piso
that  he  exercised  jurisdictio  in  a  Libera  Ci vitas.
(Cic.  de  Prov.  Cons.  3.)  Towns  possessing  the
Jus  Italicum  in  Hispania,  Gallia  and  other  coun-
tries are  enumerated.  The  Latinitas  or  Jus  Latii
also,  which  was  conferred  on  many  provincial
towns,  appears  to  have  carried  with  it  a  certain


PROVINCIA.

jurisdictio  ;  and  those  who  filled  certiin  magis,
tratus  in  these  towns  thereby  obtained  the  Roman
Civitas.  (Strabo,  p.  186,  Casaub.)  It  is  not
easy  to  state  what  was  the  precise  condition  of  tho
Coloniae  Romanae  and  Latinae  which  were  esta-
blished in  the  Provinces  :  if  the  name  is  a  certain
indication  of  their  political  condition,  that  is  pretty
well  ascertained.

It  has  been  stated  that  the  terms  Italia  and
Provinciae  are  opposed  to  one  another  as  the  com-
ponent parts  of  the  Roman  State,  after  it  had  re-
ceived its  complete  developement.  Under  the  Em-
perors we  find  Gallia  Cisalpina  or  Citerior  an  in-
tegral part  of  Italy  and  without  a  governor,  the
Provincial  organization  having  entirely  disappeared
there.  In  the  year  B.  c.  49  when  Caesar  crossed
the  Rubicon  on  his  march  towards  Rome,  it  was  a
Province  of  which  he  was  Proconsul,  a  circumstance
which  gives  a  distinct  meaning  to  this  event.
Cicero  still  calls  it  Provincia  Gallia  at  the  epoch
of  the  battle  of  Mutina.  In  the  autumn  of  b.  c.
43  D.  Brutus  the  Proconsul  of  the  Provincia
Gallia  was  murdered,  and  from  that  time  we  hear
of  no  more  Proconsuls  of  this  Province,  and  it  is  a
reasonable  conjecture  that  those  who  then  had  all
the  political  power  were  unwilling  to  allow  any
person  to  have  the  command  of  an  army  in  a  dis-
trict so  near  to  Rome.  The  name  Italia  was  how-
ever applied  to  this  part  of  Italia  before  it  became
an  integral  portion  of  the  Peninsula  by  ceasing  to
be  a  Provincia.  (Caesar,  Bell.  Gall.  i.  54,  v.  1,  vi.
44,  &c. ;  Cic.  Phil.  v.  12.)  On  the  determination
of  the  Provincial  form  of  government  in  Gallia
Cisalpina,  it  was  necessary  to  give  to  this  part  of
Italy  a  new  organization  suited  to  the  change  of
circumstances,  particularly  as  regarded  the  adminis-
tration of  justice,  which  was  effected  by  the  Lex
Rubria  de  Gallia  Cisalpina.  The  Proconsul  of
Gallia  Cisalpina  had  the  Imperium,  but  on  his
functions  ceasing,  the  Jurisdictio  was  placed  in  the
hands  of  local  magistrates  who  had  not  the  Impe-
rium. These  magistratus  could  give  a  judex  ;  in
some  cases  their  jurisdiction  was  unlimited  ;  in
others  it  did  not  extend  to  cases  above  a  certain
amount  of  money  ;  they  could  remit  a  novi  operis
nuntiatio,  require  a  Cautio  in  case  of  Damnum  In-
fectum,  and  if  it  was  not  given,  they  could  grant
an  action  for  damages.

The  Roman  provinces  up  to  the  battle  of  Actiura
as  enumerated  by  Sigonius  are :  Sicilia  ;  Sardinia
et  Corsica  ;  Hispania  Citerior  et  Ulterior  ;  Gal-
lia Citerior  ;  Gallia  Narbonensis  et  Comata  ;  II-
lyricum  ;  Macedonia  ;  Achaia  ;  Asia  ;  Cilicia  ;
Syria  ;  Bithynia  et  Pontus  ;  Cyprus  ;  Africa  ;  Cy-
renaica  et  Creta  ;  Numidia  ;  Mauritania.  Those
of  a  subsequent  date  which  were  cither  new,  or
arose  from  division  are  according  to  Sigonius:
Rhaetia  ;  Noricum  ;  Pannonia  ;  Moesia  ;  Dacia  ;
Britannia  ;  Mauritania  Caesariensis  and  Tingi-
tana  ;  Aegyptus  ;  Cappadocia  ;  Galatia  ;  Rhodiis ;
Lycia  ;  Commagene  ;  Judaea  ;  Arabia  ;  Mesopo-
tamia ;  Armenia  ;  Assyria.  The  .accuracy  of  thi»
enumeration  is  not  warranted.  It  will  appear  that
it  does  not  contain  Lusitania,  which  is  one  of  the
two  divisions  of  Hispania  Ulterior,  the  other  being
Baetica :  Lusitania  may  however  not  have  had  a
separate  governor.  Originally  the  whole  of  Spain,
so  far  as  it  was  organized,  was  divided  into  the  two
provinces  Citerior  and  Ulterior  ;  the  division  of
L^lterior  into  Baetica  and  Lusitania  belonged  to  a
later  period.     Under  Augustus  Gallia  was  divided


PROVINCIA.

into  four  provinces:  Narbonensis,  Celtica  or  Lug-
tlunensis,  Belgic.i,  and  Aquitnnia.  The  Provincia
of  Caesar's  Commentaries,  from  which  term  the
Tnodi'rn  name  Provence  is  derived,  appears  to  have
corresponded  to  the  subsequent  province  Narbo-
nensis. He  liad  also  the  Province  of  Gallia  Cis-
alpina,  or  Citerior  (Caesar,  Bell.  Gall.  i.  54)  which,
as  already  explained,  was  subsequently  incorpo-
rated with  Italia  as  an  integral  part  of  it.  Cicero
speaks  of  the  two  Galliae,  as  then  united  in  one
Impcrium  under  C.  Julius  Caesar,  and  he  further
distinguishes  them  by  the  names  of  Citerior  and
Ulterior.  {De  Prov.  Cons.  ii.  15,  16.)  The  same
expressions  are  used  by  Caesar  in  his  Commen-
taries. (Bell.  Gall.  i.  7,  V.  ],  2.)

Strabo  (xvii.  p.  SiO,  Casaub.)  gives  the  division
into  Provinces  (eTrapxiat)  as  constituted  by  Augus-
tus. The  provinces  of  the  Populus  (Sfj/uos)  were  two
consular  provinces  (uiraTiical),  and  ten  praetorian
provinces  ((TTpaTr^yiai).  The  rest  of  the  eparchies,
he  says,  belong  to  the  Caesar.  Lusitania  is  not
enumerated  among  the  eparchies  of  the  Populus,
and  if  it  was  a  distinct  eparchy,  it  must  have  be-
longed to  the  Caesar  according  to  the  principle  of
the  division  of  the  provinces,  as  stated  by  Strabo.
The  list  of  provinces  in  the  "  Demonstratio  Pro-
vinciarum "  {Mythog.  Vat.  Bode)  mentions  the
Province  of  Asturia  et  Galloeca  Lusitania.  Dion
Cassius  (liii.  12)  states  the  distribution  of  the
Provinces  by  Augustus  as  follows  :  the  Provinces
of  Africa,  Numidia,  Asia,  Hellas  (Achaea)  with
Epirus,  Dalmatia,  Macedonia,  Sicilia,  Creta  with
the  Cyrenaica,  Bithynia  with  the  adjacent  Pontus,
Sardinia,  and  Baetica  belonged  to  the  Senate  and
the  people  i^r\jxos  and  yepouaia).  Tarraconensis,
Lusitania,  all  Gallia,  Coele  Syria,  Phoenico,  Cilicia,
Cyprus,  and  Aegyptus,  belonged  to  Augustus.  He
afterwards  took  Dalmatia  from  the  Senate,  and
gave  to  them  Cyprus  and  Gallia  Narbonensis,  and
other  changes  were  made  subsequently.

At  first  Praetors  were  appointed  as  governors  of
provinces,  but  afterwards  they  were  appointed  to
the  government  of  provinces,  upon  the  expiration
of  their  year  of  office  at  Rome,  and  with  the  title
of  Propraetores.  In  the  later  times  of  the  re-
public, the  consuls  also,  after  the  expiration  of  their
3'ear  of  office,  received  the  government  of  a  province
with  the  title  of  Proconsules  :  such  provinces  were
called  Consulares.  Cicero  was  Proconsul  of  Cilicia
K.  c.  55,  and  his  colleague  in  the  consulship,  C.
Antonius,  obtained  the  proconsulship  of  Macedonia
immediately  on  the  expiration  of  his  consular  office.
The  provinces  were  generally  distributed  by  lot,
but  the  distribution  was  sometimes  arranged  by
agreement  among  the  persons  entitled  to  them.
By  a  Sempronia  Lex  the  proconsular  provinces
were  aimually  determined  before  the  election  of
the  consuls,  the  object  of  which  was  to  prevent  all
disputes.  A  Senatusconsultum  of  the  year  55
B.  c,  provided  that  no  consul  or  praetor  should
have  a  province  till  after  the  expiration  of  five
years  from  the  time  of  his  consulship  or  praetor-
ship.  A  province  was  generally  held  for  a  year,
but  the  time  was  often  prolonged.  When  a  new
governor  arrived  in  his  province,  his  predecessor
Avas  required  to  leave  it  within  thirty  days.  A
Lex  Julia  passed  in  the  time  of  C.  Julius  Caesar
limited  the  holding  of  a  Praetoria  Provincia  to  one
year,  and  a  Consularis  Provincia  to  two  years.
(Dion  Cassius,  xliii.  25  ;  Cic.  Phil.  i.  8,  v.  3.)  The
governors  of  provinces  ha^  no  pay  as  sixch,  but  ccr-


PROVINCIA.  967

ta  .n  expenses  were  provided  for  out  of  the  Aerarium.
Augustus  first  attached  pay  to  the  office  of  pro-
vincial governor.  (Dion  Cassius,  liii.  15  ;  Sueton.
August.  36.)

The  governor  of  a  province  had  originally  to  .ic-
count  at  Rome  {ad  urhem)  for  his  administration
from  his  own  books  and  those  of  his  Quaestors  ;
but  after  the  passing  of  a  Lex  Julia  B.C.  61,  he
was  boimd  to  deposit  two  copies  of  his  accounts
(rationes)  in  the  two  chief  cities  of  his  province
and  to  forward  one  (totidem  verbis)  to  the  Aerarium.
(Cic.  ad  Fam.  ii.  17,  v.  20,  ad  Attic,  vi.  7.)  If
the  governor  misconducted  himself  in  the  adminis-
tration of  the  province,  the  provincials  applied  to
the  Roman  Senate,  and  to  the  powerful  Romans
who  were  their  Patroni.  The  offences  of  Repe-
tundae  and  Peculatus  were  the  usual  grounds  of
complaint  by  the  provincials  ;  and  if  a  governor
had  betrayed  the  interests  of  the  State,  he  was
also  liable  to  the  penalties  attached  to  Mnjestas.
Quaestinnes  were  established  for  inquiries  into
these  offences  ;  yet  it  was  not  always  an  easy
matter  to  bring  a  guilty  governor  to  the  punish-
ment that  he  deserved.

With  the  establishment  of  the  Imperial  powet-
under  Augustus,  a  considerable  change  was  made
in  the  administration  of  the  provinces.  Augustus
took  the  charge  of  the  provinces  where  a  large
military  force  was  required  ;  the  rest  were  left  to
the  care  of  the  Senate  and  the  Roman  people.
(Strabo,  xvii.  p.  840.)  Accordingly  we  find  in
the  older  jurists  (Gains,  ii.  21)  the  division  of
provinciae  into  those  which  were  "  propriae  Populi
Romani,"  and  those  which  were  "  propriae  Cae-
saris,"  and  this  division  with  some  modifications
continued  to  the  third  centur3\  The  Senatorian
provinces  were  distributed  among  consulares  and
those  who  had  filled  the  office  of  Pnietor,  two  pro-
vinces being  given  to  the  consulares  and  the  rest  to
the  Praetorii :  these  governors  were  called  Pro-
consules, or  Praesides,  which  latter  is  the  usual
term  employed  by  the  old  jurists  for  a  provincial
governor.  The  Praesides  had  the  jurisdictio  of
the  Praetor  Urbanus  and  the  Praetor  Peregrinus  ;
and  their  Quaestors  had  the  same  jurisdiction  that
the  Curule  Aediles  had  at  Rome.  (Gains,  i.  6. )
The  Imperial  provinces  were  governed  by  Legati
Caesaris  with  Praetorian  power,  the  Proconsular
power  being  in  the  Caesar  himself,  and  the  Legati
being  his  deputies  and  representatives.  The  Legati
were  selected  from  those  who  had  been  consuls  or
praetors,  or  from  the  Senators.  They  held  their
office  and  their  power  at  the  pleasure  of  the  Em-
peror ;  and  he  delegated  to  them  both  military
command  and  jurisdictio,  just  as  a  Proconsul  in
the  Republican  period  delegated  these  powers  to
his  Legati.  These  Legati  had  also  Legati  under
them.  No  quaestors  were  sent  to  the  provinces  of
the  Caesar,  and  for  this  reason  observes  Gains,  this
edict  {hoc  edictuni)  is  not  published  in  those  pro-
vinces, by  Avhich  he  appears,  from  the  context,  to
mean  the  edict  of  the  Curule  Aediles.  In  place
of  the  quaestors,  there  were  Procuratores  Caesaris,
who  were  either  Equites  or  freedmen  of  the  Caesar,
Egypt  was  governed  by  an  Eques  with  the  title  of
Praefectus.  The  Procuratores  looked  after  the
taxes,  paid  the  troops,  and  generally  were  intrusted
with  the  interests  of  the  Fiscus.  Judaea,  w^hich
was  a  part  of  the  province  of  Syria,  was  governed
by  a  Procurator  who  had  the  powers  of  a  Legatus.
It  appears  that  there  were  also  Procuratores  Cae-
3q  4


968  PROVINCIA.

saris  in  the  Senatorinn  provinces,  who  collected
certain  dues  of  the  Fisciis,  which  were  independent
of  what  was  due  to  tlie  Aerarium.  The  regular
taxes,  as  in  the  Republican  period,  were  the  poll-
tax  and  land-tax.  The  taxation  was  founded  on
a  census  of  persons  and  property,  which  was  esta-
blished by  Augustus.  The  Portoria  and  other  dues
were  farmed  by  the  Publicani,  as  in  the  Repub-
lican period-

The  governors  of  the  Senatorial  provinces  and
the  legati  of  the  Caesar  received  their  instructions
from  him,  and  in  all  cases  not  thus  provided  for
they  had  to  apply  to  the  Caesar  for  special  direc-
tions. The  Rescripta  of  the  Emperors  to  the  pro-
vincial governors  are  numerous.  Justice  was  ad-
mniistered  in  the  provinces  according  to  the  laws
of  th  ■  Provinces,  and  such  Roman  laws  as  were
specially  enacted  for  them,  and  according  to  Im-
perial Constitutiones,  Senatusconsulta  and  the
Edict  of  the  governors.  In  some  instances  the
provisions  of  Roman  laws  were  extended  to  the
provinces.  (Gains,  L  47  ;  Ulp.  Frag,  xi.  20.)

The  organization  of  the  Italian  towns  under  the
Empire  has  been  already  explained  in  the  article
CoLONiA  ;  and  the  same  observations  apply  in
general  to  the  Senates  of  Provincial  towns  which
have  been  made  with  respect  to  the  functions  of
the  Senates  of  Italian  towns.  Even  in  the  pro-
vinces the  names  Senate  and  Senator  occur  in  the
sense  respectively  of  Curia  and  Decuriones.  But
there  was  a  great  distinction  between  the  Magis-
tratus  of  Provincial  and  those  of  Italian  towns.
The  functions  of  these  personages  in  the  Provincial
towns  were  generally  Munera  {burdens)  and  not
Honores.  [IIonoues.]  Such  Honorcs  as  have
reference  to  religious  functions  they  certainly  had,
and  probably  others  also  ;  but  they  had  nothing
corresponding  to  the  Duumviri  Juri  dicundo  of  the
Italian  towns,  that  is,  no  functionary  ''qui  jus
dicebat."  The  only  exception  were  such  towns
as  had  received  the  Jus  Italicum,  the  effect  of
which,  as  elsewhere  explained,  appears  to  have
been,  in  brief,  to  give  to  a  certain  city  and  district
the  same  character  that  it  would  have  had,  if
it  had  been  a  part  of  the  Italic  soil  ;  but  only  so
far  as  .affected  the  whole  district :  it  did  not  aifect
the  status  of  individuals.  Freedom  from  the  land-
tax,  and  a  free  constitution  in  Italian  form,  with
Duumviri  J.  D.,  Quinquennales,  Aediles,  and  Juris-
dictio  were  essential  ingredients  of  this  Jus  Italicum,
Sicily  received  the  Civitas  after  the  death  of  C.
Julius  Caesar,  and  from  the  occurrence  of  the  men-
tion of  Duumviri  in  tiie  inscriptions  of  a  Sicilian
town,  Savigny  dravi^s  the  probable  inference  that
the  Sicilian  towns  received  the  Jus  Italicum  also  :
at  least  if  in  any  case,  we  can  show  that  any  pro-
vincial city  had  Duumviri,  we  may  conclude  that
such  city  had  the  Jus  Italicum  and  consequently
Magistratus  with  Jurisdictio.  The  regular  Juris-
dictio  in  all  the  provinces  was  vested  in  the  governor,
who  exercised  it  personally  and  by  his  legati :
with  reference  to  his  circuits  in  the  provincia  the
governor  in  the  later  ages  of  the  Empire  was  called
Judex  Ordinarius  and  sometimes  simply  Judex,
The  towns  which  had  the  Jus  Italicum  were,  as
already  observed,  not  under  his  immediate  Juris-
dictio, though  a  right  of  appeal  to  the  governor
from  ihe  judgment  of  the  Duumviri  must  be  con-
sidered as  always  existing.  The  provincial  towns
had  the  management  of  their  own  revenue  ;  and
&ome  of  the  principal  towns  could  coin  money.     It


PROVINCIA.

does  not  appear  that  the  religion  of  the  provinciala
was  ever  interfered  with,  nor  had  it  been  put  under
any  restraint  in  the  Republican  period.

The  constitution  of  Caracalla,  which  gave  the
Civitas  to  all  the  provinces  and  towns  of  the  Empire,
merely  affected  the  personal  status  of  the  people.
The  land  remained  Provincial  land,  when  the  Jus
Italicum  had  not  been  communicated  to  it.  and  the
cities  which  had  not  received  the  Jus  Italicum,
were  immediately  under  the  Jurisdictio  of  the
governors.  This  constitution  however  must  have
made  considerable  changes  in  the  condition  of  the
provincials,  for  when  they  all  became  Roman  citi-
zens, the  Roman  incidents  of  marriage,  such  as  the
Patria  Potestas,  and  the  Roman  Law  of  succession
in  case  of  intestacy  would  seem  to  be  inseparable
consequents  of  this  change,  at  least  so  far  as  the
want  of  the  Jus  Italicum  did  not  render  it  in-
applicable.

The  const  tution  of  the  provincial  towns  was
materially  affected  by  the  establishment  of  De-
fensores,  whose  complete  title  is  "  Defensores  Civi-
tatis  Plebis  Loci."  Until  about  the  time  of  Con-
stantine,  so  far  as  the  Pandect  shows.  Defensor
was  the  title  of  persons  who  were  merely  em-
ployed in  certain  municipal  matters  of  a  temporary
kind.  In  the  year  A.  D,  365,  the  Defensores  ap-
pear as  regularly  established  functionaries.  (Cod.
1.  tit.  oB.  Do  Defcnsorlhus.)  They  Avere  elected
by  the  Decuriones  and  all  the  city  ;  but,  unlike
the  magistratus,  they  could  not  be  elected  out  of
the  body  of  Decuriones.  The  office  was  originally
for  five  years,  but  after  the  time  of  Justinian  only
for  two  years.  The  principal  business  of  the  De-
fensor was  to  protect  his  town  against  the  op-
pression of  the  Governor.  (Cod.  1.  tit,  55.  8.4,)
He  had  a  limited  Jurisdictio  in  civil  matters,
which  Justinian  extended  from  matters  to  the
amount  of  60  solidi  to  matters  to  the  amount  of
300  solidi.  There  was  an  appeal  from  him  to  the
Governor.  (Nov.  15.  c,  5.)  He  could  not  impose
a  Multa  ;  but  he  could  appoint  a  Tutor.  In  cri-
minal matters,  he  had  only  Jurisdictio  in  some  of
the  less  important  cases.

The  number  of  Senators  both  in  the  Italic  and
provincial  towns  seems  to  have  been  generally  one
hundred  ;  and  this  was  the  number  in  Capua.  (Cic.
in  Rull.  ii.  35.)  But  the  number  was  not  in  all  places
the  same.  Resides  the  actual  members,  the  Album
Decurionura  comprised  others  who  were  merely
honorary  members.  The  Album  of  the  town  of
Canusium,  of  the  year  a.  d.  223,  which  has  been
preserved,  consists  of  148  members,  of  whom  30
were  Patroni,  Roman  Senators,  and  2  were  Patroni,
Roman  Equites  ;  the  remainder  were  7  quinquen-
nalicii,  a  term  which  is  easily  explained  by  re-
ferring to  the  moaning  of  the  term  Quinquennales
[Colonia],  4  allecti  inter  quinquennales,  22  duum-
viralicii,  19  aedilicii,  21  pedani,  34  praetextati.
The  distinction  between  Ped.ani  and  Praetextati
Savigny  professes  himself  unable  to  explain.  In
many  towns  the  first  persons  in  the  list  of  actual
senators  were  distinguished  from  the  rest,  and
generally  the  first  Ten,  as  Decemprimi  ;  of  which
there  is  an  example  in  Livy  (xxix.  15.  magistratus
denosque  principes)  ;  and  in  the  case  of  Ameria,
and  of  Centuripae  in  Sicily  (Cic,  pro.  Jios.Amer.
c.  9,  In  Verrem,  ii.  67).

It  has  been  previously  shown  that  at  the  time
when  the  Roman  Respublica  had  attained  its  com-
plete develnperaeut,  Italia  and  the  Provinciae  were


PROVINCIA.
tlie  two  great  component  parts  of  the  Empire  ;  and
one  great  distinction  between  them  was  this,  that
in  Italia  the  towns  had  magistratiis  with  Juris-
dictio  ;  in  the  provinces,  except  in  places  which
had  received  the  Jus  Italicum,  the  governor  alone
had  Jurisdictio.  But  with  the  growth  and  develope-
ment  of  the  Imperial  power,  a  greater  uniformity-
was  introduced  into  the  administration  of  all  parts
of  the  Empire  ;  and  ultimately  Italy  itself  was
under  a  Provincial  form  of  goveniment.  [CoLO-
NiA.]  As  above  shown,  the  relation  of  the  Governor
to  the  province  was  not  the  same,  when  a  city  had
magistratus,  and  when  it  had  not  ;  and  consequently
it  was  in  this  respect  not  the  same  in  Italy  as  in  the
Provinces.

The  constitution  of  Constantine  was  based  on  a
complete  separation  of  the  Civil  and  Military
power,  which  were  essentially  united  in  the  old
system  of  provincial  government:  Justinian  how-
ever ultimately  re-united  the  civil  and  military
power  in  the  same  person.  The  governor  who  had
Civil  power  was  called  Rector,  Judex,  Judex  Ordi-
narius  ;  and  of  these  governors  there  were  three
classes,  Consulares,  Correctores,  Praesides,  among
whom  the  only  distinction  was  in  the  extent  and
rank  of  their  government.  In  the  writings  of  the
older  jurists,  which  are  excerpted  in  the  Pandect,
the  Praeses  is  a  general  name  for  a  Provincial
governor.  (Dig,  8.  tit.  18.)  The  military  power
was  given  to  Duces  who  were  under  the  gineral
superintendence  of  the  Magistri  Militum.  Some
of  these  Duces  were  called  Comites,  which  was
originally  a  title  of  rank  given  to  various  function-
aiies  and  among  them  to  the  Duces  ;  and  when
the  title  of  Comes  was  regularly  given  to  certain
Duces,  who  had  important  commands,  the  name
Dux  was  dropped,  and  Comes  became  a  title.  This
was  more  particularly  the  case  with  important
commands  on  the  frontier.  (Cod.  Theod.  7.  tit.  I.
s.  9.)  The  Conies  is  mentioned  in  Imperial  Con-
stitutions before  the  Dux,  whence  we  infer  his
higher  rank.  (Cod.  Theod.  8.  tit.  7.  s.  1 1.  Ad
magistros  7nilitu?n,  et  comites^  et  duces  omnes.)

It  remains  to  add  a  few  remarks  on  the  exercise
of  the  Jurisdictio,  so  far  as  they  have  not  been
anticipated  in  speaking  of  the  functionaries  them-
selves. In  Italj'.  and  in  the  towns  which  had  the
privileges  of  Italian  towns,  all  matters  as  a  general
nile  came  before  the  magistratus  in  the  first  in-
stance ;  but  in  certain  excepted  matters,  and  in
cases  where  the  amount  in  question  was  above  a
certain  sum  (the  precise  amount  of  which  is  not
known),  the  matter  came  before  the  governor  of  the
province  in  the  first  instance,  or  in  Italy  before  the
Roman  Praetor.  Until  the  middle  of  the  fourth
century  a.  d.  all  matters  in  the  Provincial  towns,
■which  had  not  magistratus,  came  before  the  governor
in  the  first  instance  ;  but  about  this  time  the  De-
fensor acquired  a  power,  like  that  of  the  magis-
tratus of  the  privileged  towns,  though  more  limited.
The  old  form  of  proceeding  in  civil  matters  has
been  explained  elsewhere  [Judex]  :  the  magis-
tratus empowered  the  Judex  to  make  a  condem-
natio  ;  and  this  institution  was  the  Ordo  Judi-
ciorum  Privatorum.  That  which  the  magistratus
did  without  the  aid  of  a  Judex  was  Extra  Ordi-
nem.  [Interdictum.]  The  same  institution  pre-
vailed in  those  towns  which  had  a  magistratus,  for
it  was  of  the  essence  of  a  Magistratus  or  of  Juris-
dictio to  name  a  Judex.  (Lex  Gall.  Cisalp.  c.  20.)
Under  the  emperors,  it  gradually  became  common


PROVINCIA.


969


for  the  magistratus  to  decide  various  cases  without
the  aid  of  a  Judex,  and  these  are  the  Extraordi-
nariae  Cognitiones  spoken  of  in  the  Digest  (50.
tit.  \'6).  In  the  reign  of  Diocletian  the  Ordo  Judi-
ciorum,  as  a  general  rule,  was  abolished  in  the  pro-
vinces and  the  pedanei  judices  (hoc  est  qui  negotia
humiliora  disceptent)  were  only  appointed  by  the
praeses  when  he  was  very  much  occupied  with
business,  or  for  some  trifling  matters  [Judex
Pedaneus]  ;  (Cod.  3.  tit.  3.  s.  2)  ;  and  in  the
time  of  Justinian  the  institution  had  entirely  dis-
appeared (Inst.  4.  tit.  15.  s.  8),  and,  as  it  is  con-
jectured, both  in  Rome  and  the  Municipia.

By  the  aid  of  the  Judices,  two  Praetors  were
able  to  conduct  the  whole  judicial  business  between
citizens  and  Peregrini  at  Rome  ;  and  by  the  aid
of  the  same  institution,  the  judicial  business  was
conducted  in  the  Jurisdictiones  out  of  Rome.  In
no  other  way  is  it  conceivable  how  the  work  could
have  been  got  through.  But  when  the  Ordo
Judiciorum  was  abolished,  the  difficulty  of  trans-
acting the  business  must  have  been  apparent.  How
this  was  managed,  is  explained  by  Savigny,  by  re-
ferring to  the  growth  of  another  institution.  JEven
in  the  time  of  the  Republic,  the  Praetors  had  their
legal  advisers,  especially  if  they  were  not  jurists
themselves  ;  and  when  all  the  power  became  con-
centrated in  the  Caesars,  they  were  soon  obliged
to  form  a  kind  of  college,  for  the  dispatch  of  busi-
ness of  various  kinds  and  particularly  judicial
matters  which  were  referred  to  the  Caesar.  This
college  was  the  Caesar's  Consistorium  or  Audito-
rium. The  Provincial  governors  had  their  body  of
assessors,  which  were  like  the  Caesar's  Audito-
rium (Dig.  1.  tit.  22)  ;  and  it  is  a  conjecture  of
Savigny,  which  has  the  highest  probability  in  its
favour,  that  the  new  institution  was  established  in
the  municipal  towns  and  in  the  provincial  towns,
so  that  here  also  the  magistratus  and  the  Defensor
had  their  assessors.

Besides  the  Jurisdictio,  which  had  reference  to
Litigation,  the  so-called  Contentiosa  Jurisdictio,
there  was  the  Voluntaria.  Matters  belonging  to
this  Jurisdictio,  as  Manumission,  Adoption,  Eman-
cipation, could  only  be  transacted  before  the  Magis-
tratus Populi  Romani,  and,  unless  these  powei-s
were  specially  given  to  them,  the  Municipal  Magis-
trates had  no  authority  to  give  the  legal  sanction
to  such  proceedings  ;  though  in  the  old  Municipia
it  is  probable  that  the  power  of  the  magistratus
was  as  little  limited  in  the  Voluntaria  as  in  the
Contentiosa  Jurisdictio.  In  the  Imperial  period  it
was  usual  to  perform  many  acts  before  the  public
authorities,  and  in  the  three  cases  of  large  Gifts,
the  making  of  a  Will,  and  the  Opening  of  a  Will,
it  was  necessary  for  these  acts  to  be  done  before
a  public  authority.  Such  acts  could  be  done  before
a  provincial  governor  ;  and  also  before  the  Curia
of  a  city  in  the  presence  of  a  Magistratus  and
other  persons.  (Compare  the  Constitution  of  Ilono-
rius.  Cod.  Theod.  12.  tit.  1.  s.  151,  and  a  Novel  of
Valentinian,  Nov.  Theod.  tit.  23,  with  Savigny 'a
remarks  on  them.)

Though  the  general  administration  of  the  Roman
provinces  is  adequately  understood,  there  are  dif-
ferences of  opinion  as  to  some  matters  of  detail  ;
one  cause  of  which  lies  in  the  differences  which
actually  existed  in  the  administration  of  the  pro-
vinces and  which  had  their  origin  in  the  different
circumstances  of  their  conquest  and  acquisition,
and  in  the  diversity  of  the  native  customary-  law  iij


970


PRY  TAN  ETON.


the  different  provinces,  with  a  large  part  of  which
the  Romans  originally  did  not  interfere.  A  general
riew  of  the  Provinces  should  therefore  be  completed
and  corrected  by  a  view  of  the  several  provinces.

The  authorities  for  this  view  of  the  Provincial
government  have  been  generally  referred  to.  They
are,  more  particularly,  Sigonius,  De  Antiquo  Jure
Provinciarum,  Lib.  i. — iii.  ;  Goettling,  Geschichte
der  Romischen  Staatsverfassung  ;  Walter,  GescJdchte
des  Romischen  Redds,  where  the  authorities  are
very  conveniently  collected  and  arranged,  and
chap.  xxxi.  Notes  76,  79,  wherein  he  differs  from
Savigny  as  to  the  Jus  Italicum  ;  in  chapter  xxxvii.
Walter  has  described  the  provincial  divisions  of
the  Empire,  which  existed  about  the  middle  of  the
fifth  century  a.  d.  ;  Savigny,  Geschichte  des  Rom.
R.  im  Mittelalter,  vol.  i.  ;  Puchta,  Ueber  den  Inhalt
der  Lex  Riibria,  Zeitschrift,  &c.,  vol.  x.       [G.  L.]

PROVOCATIO.     [Appellatio,  p.  107,  a.]

PROVOCATO'RES.  [Gladiatores,  p.  575,
b.]

PROXE'NIA,  PRO'XENUS  (irpo^^pia,
TrpS^evos).    [HospiTiUM.]

PRUDENTES.     [Jurisconsctlti.]

PRYTANEIUM  (irpuTaveTou).  The  irpvTav67a
of  the  ancient  Greek  states  and  cities  v/ere  to  the
communities  living  around  them,  the  common
houses  of  which  they  in  some  measure  represented,
what  private  houses  were  to  the  families  which
occupied  them.  Just  as  the  house  of  each  family
was  its  home,  so  was  the  TrphTaueliou  of  every  state
or  city  tlie  common  home  of  its  members  or  inha-
bitants, and  was  consequently  called  the  iarla
-irdXeas,  the  "focus"  or  "  penetrale  urbis,"  (Cic.
de  Leg.  ii.  12  ;  Liv.  xli.  20  ;  Dionys.  ii.  23,  65.)
This  correspondence  between  the  irpvrav^lov,  or
home  of  the  city,  and  the  private  home  of  a  man's
family,  was  at  Athens  very  remarkable.  A  per-
petual fire  or  -nvp  ^crSearov  was  kept  continually
burning  on  the  public  altar  of  the  city  in  the  Pry-
taneium,  just  as  in  private  houses  a  fire  was  kept
up  on  the  domestic  altar  in  the  inner  court  of  the
house.  (Pollux,  i.  7  ;  Arnold,  ad  Thucyd.  ii.  15.)

The  same  custom  was  observed  at  the  Pry-
taneium  of  the  Eleans,  where  a  fire  was  kept  bm-n-
ing  night  and  day.  (Paus.  v.  15.  §5.)  Moreover
the  city  of  Athens  exercised  in  its  I*rytaneium  the
duties  of  hospitality,  both  to  its  own  citizens  and
strangers.  Thus  foreign  ambassadors  were  enter-
tained here,  as  well  as  Athenian  envoys  on  their
return  home  from  a  successful  or  well  conducted
mission.  ( A ristoph.  J cAarH.  125  ;  Pollux,  ix.  40.)
Here,  too,  were  entertained  from  day  to  day  the
successive  Prytanes  or  Presidents  of  the  Senate,
together  with  those  citizens  who,  whether  from  per-
sonal or  ancestral  services  to  the  states,  were
honoured  with  what  was  called  the  aiTTjais  iv
UpvTaveicf},  the  "  victus  quotidianus  in  Prytaneo  "
(Cic.  de  Oral,  i.  54),  or  the  privilege  of  taking
their  meals  there  at  the  public  cost.  This  was
granted  sometimes  for  a  limited  period,  some-
times for  life,  in  which  latter  case  the  parties
enjoying  it  were  called  a^lffiToi.  The  custom
of  conferring  this  honour  on  those  who  had  been
of  signal  service  to  the  state  and  their  descend-
ants, was  of  so  great  antiquity  that  one  instance
of  it  was  referred  to  the  times  of  Codnis  ;  and
in  the  case  to  which  we  allude  the  individual
thus  honoured  was  a  foreigner,  a  native  of  Delphi.
(Lycurg.  c.  Leucr.  p.  158.)  Another  illustration  of
the  txses  to  which  the  Prytaneium  was  dedicated,


PSEPHISMA.

is  found  in  the  case  of  the  daughters  of  Aristeides,
who  on  the  death  of  their  father  were  considered
as  the  adopted  children  of  the  state,  and  married
from  (eKSoSeTo-at)  that  common  home  of  the  citv,
just  as  they  would  have  been  from  their  father's
home  had  he  been  alive.  (Plut.  Arist.  c.  27.)
Moreover,  from  the  ever-burning  fire  of  the  Piy-
taneium,  or  home  of  a  mother  state,  was  carried
the  sacred  fire  which  was  to  be  kept  burning  in
the  prytaneia  of  her  colonies  ;  and  if  it  happened
that  this  was  ever  extinguished,  the  flame  was
rekindled  from  the  prytaneium  of  the  parent  city.
(Duker,  ad  Thucyd.  i.  24.)  Lastly,  a  Prytaneium
was  also  a  distinguishing  mark  of  an  independent
state,  and  is  mentioned  as  such  by  Thucydides  (ii.
15),  who  infonns  us  that  before  the  time  of
Theseus,  every  city  or  state  (ttSXis)  of  Attica  pos-
sessed a  prytaneium.  The  Achaeans,  we  are  told
(Herod,  vii.  197),  called  their  prytaneium  Xiiirov
(from  Aecjy,  populus),  or  the  "  town-hall,"  and
exclusion  from  it  seems  to  have  been  a  sort  of  civil
excommunication.

The  Prytaneium  of  Athens  lay  under  the
Acropolis  on  its  northern  side  (near  the  ayopd),
and  was,  as  its  name  denotes,  originally  the  place
of  assembly  of  the  llpvrp.i>iLS  :  in  the  earliest  times
it  probably  stood  on  the  Acropolis.  Officers  called
Ylpvraveis  were  entrusted  with  the  cliief  magi-
tracy  in  several  states  of  Greece,  as  Corcyra,
Corinth,  Miletus,  and  the  title  is  sometimes 'sy-
nonymous with  fiaaiKf:h,  or  princes,  having  appa-
rently the  same  root  as  irpuTos  or  TrpoTaros.  At
Athens  they  were  in  early  times  probably  a  ma-
gistracy of  the  second  rank  in  the  state  (next  to
the  Archon),  acting  as  judges  in  various  cases
(perhaps  in  conjiuiction  with  him),  and  sitting  in
the  Prytaneium.  That  this  was  the  case  is  ren-
dered probable  by  the  fact,  that  even  in  aftertinies
the  fees  paid  into  court  by  plaintiff  and  defendant,
before  they  could  proceed  to  trial,  and  received  by
the  dicasts,  were  called  irpvrav^la.  (Pollux,  vii).
38.)  This  court  of  the  Prytaneium,  or  the  t^  eVl
Upvrave'iu),  is  said  (Pollux,  viii.  120)  to  have  been
presided  over  by  the  <pvXo€aai\us,  who  perhaps
were  the  same  as  the  irpvTavets.

In  later  ages,  however,  and  after  the  establish-
ment of  the  courts  of  the  Heliaea,  the  court  of  the
Prytaneium  had  lost  what  is  supposed  to  have  been
its  original  importance,  and  was  made  one  of  the
courts  of  the  Ephetae,  who  held  there  a  species  of
mock  trial  over  the  instruments  by  which  any  indi-
vidual had  lost  his  life,  as  well  as  over  persons  who
had  committed  murder,  and  were  not  forthcoming
or  detected.

The  tablets  or  &^ovis  otherwise  Kvp€eis,  on
which  Solon's  laws  were  written  (Plut.  5o/.  25),
were  also  deposited  in  the  Prytaneium  (Paus.  i.
18.  §  3)  ;  they  were  at  first  kept  on  the  Acropolis,
probably  in  the  old  Prytaneium,  but  afterwards
removed  to  the  Prytaneium  in  the  ayopd,  that
they  might  be  open  to  public  inspection.  (Pollux,
viii.  128.)  Ephialtes  is  said  to  have  been  the  author  ..
of  this  measure  (Harpocrat.  s.  v.  'O  udrwQiv  v6fJLOs),  j
but  their  removal  may  have  been  merely  the  con-  *
sequence  of  the  erection  of  a  new  Prytaneium  on
the  lower  site  in  the  time  of  Pericles.  (Thirlwall,
Hi:,t.  of  Greece,  vol.  ii.  p.  54.)  [R.  W.]

PRYTANES  (-rrpvTavus).  [BoULE,  pp.  210,
212  ;  Prytaneium.]

PSEPHISMA  {^<pi(Tiia).  [Boule,  pp.  210,
211  ;  N0MOTHETBS.J


)


PSEPHUS.
PSEPHUS  (rl'ri4>os).  The  Athenian  dlcasts,
in  giving  their  verdict,  voted  by  ballot.  For  this
purpose  thev  used  either  sea-shells,  xotptVai  (Aris-
toph.  Vesp.'33?j,  349,  Eg.  1332),  or  beans  (hence
the  Sfj^os  is  called  Kva/xorpu)^  by  Aristophanes,
Eq.  41),  or  balls  of  metal  (andvSvKoi)  or  stone
(»|/77</)oi).  These  last  were  the  most  common  :  hence
\l/7i(pi(€(T6ai,  and  its  various  derivatives,  are  used  so
often  to  signify  votwg,  determining^  &c.  The  balls
were  either  pierced  {T€rpvTn]fx4vai)  and  whole
(TrATjpeis),  the  former  for  condemnation,  the  latter
for  acquittal  (Aesch.  c.  Timarch.  11,  ed.  Steph.  ;
Harpoc.  s.  i\  TiTpvTTrijxivrii)  •  or  they  were  black
and  white,  for  the  same  purposes,  respectively,  as
the  follovving  lines  show  (Ovid.  Met.  xv.  41)  :  —

"  Mos  erat  antiquus  niveis  atrisque  lapillis.
His  damnare  reos,  illis  absolvere  culpa."

There  might  be  three  methods  of  voting.  First,
the  secret  method,  called  Kpv€Sriv  t|/7?^iC'f(r(?at,
when  each  dicast  had  two  balls  given  him  (say  a
black  and  a  white)  ;  two  boxes  (kuSoi,  KaSto-Ko:,
or  a/j-cpopels)  were  prepared,  one  of  brass,  called
the  judgment-box  (/cuptos),  into  which  the  dicast
put  the  ball  by  which  he  gave  his  vote,  and  the
other  of  wood,  called  &Kvpos,  into  which  he  put
the  other  ball,  and  the  only  object  of  which  Avas
to  enable  him  to  conceal  his  vote.  Each  box  had  a
neck  or  funnel  (ktj/u^s,  i.  e.  iiridrifjLa  fiias  ^pr^cpov
Xclipav  exoj'),  into  which  a  man  could  put  his  hand,
but  only  one  ball  could  pass  through  the  lower  part
into  the  box.  (Aristoph.  Vesp.  99,  751.)  Secondly,
there  might  be  only  one  box,  in  which  the  dicast
put  which  of  the  two  balls  he  pleased,  and  return-
ed the  other  to  the  officer  of  the  court.  Thirdly,
there  might  be  two  boxes,  one  for  condemnation,
the  other  for  acquittal,  aud  only  one  ball,  (Harpoc.
s.  V.  KaSicKos.)  The  first  method  was  most  com-
monly practised  at  Athens.  Where,  however,
there  were  several  parties  before  the  court,  as  in
inheritance  causes,  to  one  of  whom  an  estate  or
other  thing  was  to  be  adjudged,  it  was  customary
to  have  as  many  ballot-boxes  as  there  were  parties,
or  at  least  parties  in  distinct  interests  ;  and  the
dicast  put  the  white  or  whole  ball  into  the  box  of
that  person  in  whose  favour  he  decided.  [Heres
(Greek).]  The  same  system  of  balloting  was
employed  when  the  dicasts  voted  on  the  question
of  damages.  Hence  the  verdict  on  the  question,
c/uil/j/  or  not  guilty,  ot  for  the  plaintiff  or  defendant
(to  distinguish  it  from  the  other),  is  called  irpwTr)
yprjcpos.  (Aesch.  c.  Gees.  82,  ed.  Steph.  ;  Demosth.
de  Fals.  Leg.  434,  c.  Aristocr.  6/6,  c.  Aristog.  795,
c.  Neaer.  1347.)  A  curious  custom  was  in  vogue
in  the  time  of  Aristophanes.  Each  dicast  had  a
waxen  tablet,  on  which,  if  the  heavier  penalty  was
awarded,  he  drew  a  long  line  (lengthway  on  the
tablet)  ;  if  the  lighter  penalty,  he  drew  a  short
line  (breadthway  on  the  tablet).  We  must  sup-
pose, not  that  the  voting  took  place  in  this  way,
but  that,  on  the  votes  being  counted,  the  jurors
took  a  note  of  the  result  for  their  own  satisfaction  ;
unless  we  resort  to  this  hypothesis,  viz.  that  the
drawing  lines  on  the  tablets  was  an  act  preliminary
to  the  division,  whereby  the  jury  intimated  to  the
parties  how  the  matter  was  likely  to  go,  unless
they  came  to  a  compromise.  Such  intimation
might  be  necessary  in  those  cases,  where,  the  esti-
mates of  the  parties  being  widely  different,  the
one  proposing  too  high  a  penalty,  the  other  too  low
a  one,  the  jury  wished  to  inform   the  more  im-


PSEUDENGRAPHES  GRAPHE.    .971

reasonable  party,  that,  unless  he  offered  them  some
better  alternative,  they  should  adopt  the  estimate
of  his  adversary,  (As  to  this  point,  see  Meier,
Att.  Proc.  p.  IBl.)  The  tablet  is  called  by  Aristo-
phanes TTivoLKiov  tiijl7]tik6i'.  In  the  expression
Ti/j-av  T^v  fiaKpav,  we  understand  ypaixfXT^v  or
Tifx-qaiv  (Vesp.  106,  167,  850).  See  Pollux,  viii.
16,  17,  123;  Meier,  Att.  Proc.  pp.720,  726;
Platner,  Proc.  und  Klag.  vol.  i.  p.  188  ;  Wachs-
muth,  vol.  ii.  pt.  i.  p.  844.

In  the  popular  assemblies  the  common  method
of  voting  was  by  show  of  hands.  [Cheirotonia.]
There  were  some  occasions,  however,  when  the
ballot  was  employed  ;  as  Avhere  it  was  deemed  im-
portant that  the  voting  should  be  secret,  or  that
the  numbers  should  be  accurately  counted.  Thus,
to  pass  a  law  for  the  naturalization  of  a  foreigner,
or  for  the  release  of  a  state  debtor,  or  for  the  resto-
ration of  a  disfranchised  citizen,  and  indeed  in
every  case  of  a  privilegium,  it  was  necessary  that
six  thousand  persons  should  vote  in  the  majority,
and  in  tecret.  (Andoc.  de  Myst.  1 2,  ed.  Steph.  ;
Demosth.  c.  Timoc.  715,  719,  c.  Neaer.  1375.)
On  the  condemnation  of  the  ten  generals  who
gained  the  battle  of  Arginusae,  the  people  voted
by  ballot,  but  openh',  according  to  the  second  of
the  plans  above  mentioned.  The  voting  was  then
by  tribes,  Kara  (pvKds.  (Xen.  Hell.  i.  7.  §  9.)
Secret  voting  by  the  Senate  of  Five  Hundred  is
mentioned  in  Aeschines  (c.  Timarch.  5,  ed.  Steph.);
and  in  ostracism  the  voting  was  conducted  in  secret.
(Schomann,  De  Comit.  pp.  121  —  128,  245.)

The  people  or  jury  were  said  y\iif](pi^iadai,  \p7i(j)ov
(^cp^iv  or  ^etrdai,  to  vote,  or  give  their  vote  or
judgmetit.  'Vri^ov  riOivai,  to  cast  accounts,  is  used
with  a  different  allusion.  (Demosth.  pro  Cor.  304.)
The  presiding  magistrate  or  officer,  who  called  on
the  people  to  give  their  votes,  was  said  eTn\l/7](pi^eiv^
\p'n(pou  iirdyeiv  or  didouai,  though  the  last  expres-
sion is  also  used  in  the  sense  of  voting  in  favour  of
a  person.  "^rjcpiCeadai,  to  vote,  to  resolve,  airo-
\pr)(pi^e(rdai,  to  acquit,  and  other  derivations  from
\pr)(j)os,  are  often  used  metaphorically,  where  the
method  of  voting  was  x^^P^"'''^^''^-)  firid  conversely.
XeipoToi/etj/,  however,  is  not  used,  like  rpT]<pi^e<T6ai,
with  the  accusative  of  the  thing  voted.  As  to
this  see  Schomann,  rfe  Comitiis,  p.  123.   [C.  R.  K.]

PSEUDENGRAPHES  GRAPHE  (i//6u.
5e77pa(^7js  ypacpr)).  It  is  shown  under  Prac-
TORES  that  the  name  of  every  state  debtor  at
Athens  was  entered  in  a  register  by  the  practores,
whose  duty  it  was  to  collect  the  debts,  and  erase
the  name  of  the  party  when  he  had  paid  it.  The
entr}'  was  usually  made  upon  a  return  by  some
magistrate,  to  whom  the  incurring  of  the  debt  be-
came officially  known  ;  as,  for  instance,  on  a  re-
turn by  the  TrwKrJTai,  that  such  a  person  had
become  a  lessee  of  public  lands,  or  farmer  of
taxes,  at  such  a  rent  or  on  such  terms.  In  case,
however,  the  authorities  neglected  to  make  the
proper  return,  any  individual  might,  on  his  own
responsibility,  give  information  to  the  registering
officers  of  the  existence  of  the  debt ;  and  thereupon
the  officers,  if  they  thought  proper,  might  make  an
entry  accordingly,  though  it  would  probably  be
their  duty  to  make  some  inquiry  before  so  doing.
If  they  made  a  false  entr}',  either  wilfully,  or  upon
the  suggestion  of  another  person,  the  aggrieved
party  might  institute  a  prosecution  against  them,
or  against  the  person  upon  whose  suggestion  it  was
,  made.     Such  prosecution  was  called  7/Ja^^  if^ey-


972      PSEUDOCLETEIAS  GRAPHE.

beyypa(pr}s.  It  would  He  also,  where  a  man  was
registered  as  debtor  for  more  than  was  really  due
from  him.  And  the  reader  must  understand  the  like
remedy  to  be  open  to  one,  who  was  falsely  recorded
as  a  debtor  by  the  ra/xlai  tuv  ^cSiv.  Whether
this  form  of  proceeding  could  be  adopted  against
magistrates  for  making  a  false  return,  or  whether
the  remedy  against  them  could  only  be  at  the
iirix^ipoTovlai  or  fiidvvat^  we  cannot  say.  The
•ypacp^  rpevSeyypacpris  was  brought  before  the
Thesmothetae.  If  the  defendant  was  convicted,
the  name  of  the  complainant  was  struck  out  of  the
register,  and  that  of  the  defendant  was  entered  in
his  stead,  as  debtor  for  the  same  amount.  The
ypa(pi]  $ov\€va-€ws  was  similar  to  this  ;  only  it  lay
in  those  cases  where  a  man,  who  had  been  a  state
debtor,  had  paid  all  that  was  due,  but  his  name
was  not  erased,  or  having  been  erased,  was  re-
entered. We  may  presume,  that  fraudulent  or
malicious  motives  were  necessary  to  be  proved  on
guch  a  charge  ;  but  it  is  reasonable  also  to  suppose
that  in  any  case  of  gross  negligence,  fraud  or
malice  might  (as  matter  of  course)  be  presumed  by
the  dicasts.  (Pollux,  viii.  40,  43  ;  Ilarpoc.  and
Suid,  s.  vv.  BovXeucrews,  ^evSeyypaip-f],  \p€v^4y-
ypcupos  5lk7]  ;  Bbckh,  Publ.  Econ.  of  Athens,  pp.
349,  390,  2d  ed.  ;  Meier,  Ait.  Proc.  p.  337  ;
Plainer, P/-oc.7<wrf  Klag.  vol.ii.  p.  117.)  [C.  R.  K.]
PSEUDOCLETEIAS  GRAPHE  (v|/€ySo-
kK7]Tiias  ypa<pT]),  a  prosecution  against  one,  who
had  appeared  as  a  witness  {KK'r)T'r]p  or  KXr^Tcop)  to
prove  that  a  defendant  had  been  duly  summoned,
and  thereby  enabled  the  plaintiff  to  get  a  judgment
by  default.  To  prevent  fraud,  the  Athenian  law
directed  that  the  names  of  the  witnesses  who  at-
tended the  summons  should  be  subscribed  to  the
bill  of  plaint  or  indictment  (e7/c\7jjLia),  so  that  the
defendant,  if  he  never  had  been  summoned,  and
judgment  had  nevertheless  been  given  against  him
by  default,  might  know  against  whom  to  proceed.
The  false  witness  (KXTjrfip)  was  liable  to  be  crimi-
nally prosecuted,  and  punished  at  the  discretion
of  the  court.  Even  death  might  be  inflicted  in  a
case  of  gross  conspiracy.  (Demosth.  c.  Nlcost.
1252.)  A  person  thrice  convicted  of  this  offence
was,  as  in  the  case  of  other  false  testimony,  ipso
jure  disfmnchised  ;  and  even  for  the  first  offence  the
jur)'  might,  if  they  pleased,  by  a  Trpoar^jUTjo-ts  inflict
the  penalty  of  disfranchisement  upon  him.  (Andoc.
de  Afifst.  10,  cd.  Steph.  ;  Meier,  de  Don.  Damn.
p.  125.)  Here  we  may  observe  this  distinction,
that  the  proceeding  against  the  false  witness  to  a
summons  was  of  a  criminal  nature,  while  the  wit-
ness in  the  cause  (fidprvp)  was  liable  only  to  a  civil
action.  The  cause  might  be  that  the  former  offence
was  more  likely  to  do  mischief.  The  magistrate,
before  whom  the  defendant  neglected  to  appear,
when  by  the  evidence  of  the  witness  it  was  shown
that  he  had  been  duly  summoned,  had  no  discre-
tion but  to  pronounce  judgment  against  him  ;
whereas  the  dicasts,  to  whom  the  witness  gave
false  evidence  at  the  trial,  might  disbelieve  him
and  find  their  verdict  according  to  the  truth.  If
the  fraud  was  owing  to  a  conspiracy  between  the
plaintiff  and  the  witness,  it  is  probable  that  an
action  at  the  suit  of  the  defendant  would  lie  against
the  former,  to  recover  compensation  ;  for,  though
the  conviction  of  the  witness  would  lead  to  a  re-
versal of  the  judgment,  still  he  (the  defendant)
might  have  suffered  damage  in  the  meantime,
v/liich  the  setting  aside  of  the  judgment  would  not


PUBLICANI.

repair.  Such  action  (it  has  been  conjectured)
might  be  a  St/cTj  (rvKocpavTias,  or  perhaps  KaKorex'
viu)V.  If  the  name  of  the  witness  had  been  fraudu-
lently used  by  the  plaintiff,  and  the  witness  had
thereby  been  brought  into  trouble,  we  may  con-
clude, by  analogy  to  the  case  of  other  witnesses,
that  he  had  a  Siktj  /SXagrjs  against  the  plaintiff.
(Demosth.  c.  Aphob.  849.)  The  ypa<p))  v^euSo-
K\T]Tfias  came  before  the  Thesmothetae,  and  the
question  at  the  trial  simply  was,  whether  the  de-
fendant in  the  former  cause  had  been  summoned  or
not.  (Platner,  Proc.  und  Klag.  vol.  i.  p.  4 1  7  ;
Meier,  Att.  Proc.  pp.  336,  577,  758.)  [C.  R.  K.]

PSEUDODI-'PTEROS.     [Templum.]

PSEUDOMARTYRION  GRAPHE  (i/.6w5o..
fiapTvpiwv  ypa<p'fi).     [Martvria,  p.  734,  b.]

PSILI  (T|/i\ot).     [Arma.]

PSYCTER  (xpvKT-fjp,  dim.  xl/vKTripiSioy),  a  wine-
cooler.  (Plat.  Conviv.  p.  332,  d  ;  Tim.  Lex.  Plat,
s.v.  ;  Menander,  p.  177,  ed.  Meineke  ;  Athen.  xi.
pp.  469,  502,  503.)  The  vessel  specially  adapted
for  this  operation,  was  sometimes  made  of  bronze
(Athen.  iv.  p.  142)  or  silver  (v.  p.  199).  One  of
earthenware  is  preserved  in  the  Museum  of  Anti-
quities at  Copenhagen.  It  consists  of  one  deep
vessel  for  holding  ice,  which  is  fixed  within  another
for  holding  wine.  The  wine  was  poured  in  at  the
top.  It  thus  surrounded  the  vessel  of  ice  and  was
cooled  by  the  contact.  It  was  drawn  off  so  as  to
fill  the  drinking-cups  by  means  of  a  cock  at  the
bottom.  Thus  the  \pvKT'f}p  was  a  kind  of  Crater  ;
and  accordingly,  where  Phylarchus  (ap.  Athen.  iv.
p.  142)  in  describing  the  mode  of  life  of  Cleomenes,
King  of  Sparta,  uses  the  former  term,  Plutarch
(C/eom.  p.  1486,  ed.  Steph.)  adopts  the  latter.

The  size  of  the  \l/vKTr]p  was  very  various.  It
contained  from  2  quarts  (Plat.  /.  c.)  to  a  great
number  of  gallons.  (Athen.  v.  p.  199,  d.  f.)  Jt  was
sometimes  given  as  a  prize  to  the  winners  in  the
game  of  the  Cottabos.  [J.  Y.]

PUBES,    PUBERTAS.       [Curator  ;    Im-

PUBES  ;    InFANS.]

PUBLICA'N I,  farmers  of  the  public  revenues
of  the  Roman  state  {vectigalia).  Their  name  is
formed  from  publicum,  which  signifies  all  that  be-
longs to  the  state,  and  is  sometimes  used  as  sy-
nonymous with  vectigal.  (Dig.  39.  tit.  4.  s.  1.
§  1  ^',  50.  tit.  1 6.  s.  16;  Suet.  Nero,  1  ;  Cic.  pro
Rabir.  Post.  2  ;  Val.  Max.  vi.  9.  §  7.)  The  re-
venues which  Rome  derived  from  conquered  coun-
tries, consisting  chiefly  of  tolls,  tithes,  harbour
duties,  the  scriptura  or  the  tax  which  was  paid
for  the  use  of  the  public  pasture  lands,  and  the
duties  paid  for  the  u>e  of  mines  and  salt-works
(salinae),  were  let  out,  or,  as  the  Romans  ex-
pressed it,  were  sold  by  the  censors  in  Rome  itself
to  the  highest  bidder.  (Cic.  de  Leg.  Agr.  ii.  21,
c.  Verr.  iii.  7.)  This  sale  generally  took  place  in
the  month  of  Quinctilis  and  was  made  for  a  lus-
trum. (Macrob.  Sat.  i.  12.)  The  terms  on  which
the  revenues  were  let,  were  fixed  by  the  censors
in  the  so-called  leges  censoriae.  (Cic.  ad  Quint.  Frat.
i.  1  ;  Varro,  dc  Re  Rust.  ii.  1  ;  Fest.  s.  %i.  Pro-
duit.)  The  people  or  the  senate  however  sometimes
modified  the  terms  fixed  V)y  the  censors  in  order  to
raise  the  credit  of  the  publicani  (Pint.  Flamin.  19  ;
Polyb.  vi.  1  7  ;  Liv.  xxxix.  44),  and  in  some  cases
even  the  tribunes  of  the  people  interfered  in  this
branch  of  the  administration.  (Liv.  xliii.  16.)  The
tithes  raised  in  the  province  of  Sicily  alone,  with
the  exception  of  those  of  wine,  oil,  and  garden


1


PUBLICAN  I.

produce,  were  not  sold  at  Rome,  but  in  the  dis-
tricts of  Sicily  itself,  according  to  a  practice  estab-
lished by  Hiero.  (Cic.  c.  Verr.  ii.  3,  64,  &c.)  The
persons  who  undertook  the  farming  of  the  public
revenue  of  course  belonged  to  the  wealthiest  Ro-
mans. Their  wealth  and  consequent  influence  may
be  seen  from  the  fact,  that  as  early  as  the  second
Punic  war,  after  the  battle  of  Cannae,  when  the
aerarium  was  entirely  exhausted,  the  publicani  ad-
vanced large  sums  of  money  to  the  state,  on  condi-
tion of  repayment  after  the  end  of  the  war.  ( Val.
Max.  V.  6.  §  8  ;  Liv.  xxiv.  18  ;  compare  xxiii.
48,  &c.)  But  Avhat  class  of  Romans  the  publicani
were  at  this  time  is  not  stated  ;  scarcely  half  a
century  later  however  we  find  that  they  were
principally  men  of  the  equestrian  order  (Liv.  xliii.
Ifi)  ;  and  down  to  the  end  of  the  republic,  as  well
as  during  the  early  part  of  the  empire,  the  farming
of  the  public  revenues  was  almost  exclusively  in
the  hands  of  the  equites  ;  whence  the  word  equites
and  publicani  are  sometimes  used  as  synonymous.
(Cic.  c.  Verr.  i.  51,  ii.  7J,  ad  Att.W.  1  ;  Suet.
Aug.  24  ;  Tacit. ^w««^.  iv.  6.)

The  publicani  had  to  give  security  to  the  state
for  the  sum  at  which  they  bought  one  or  more
branches  of  the  revenue  in  a  province  ;  but  as  for
this  reason  the  property  of  even  the  wealthiest  in-
dividual must  have  been  inadequate,  a  number  of
equites  generally  united  together  and  formed  a
company  (socii,  societas  or  corpus),  which  was  re-
cognized by  the  state  (Dig.  3.  tit.  4.  s.  1),  and  by
which  they  were  enabled  to  carry  on  their  under-
takings upon  a  large  scale.  Such  companies  ap-
pear as  early  as  the  second  Punic  war.  (Liv.
xxiii.  48,  49.)  The  shares  which  each  partner  of
such  a  company  took  in  the  business,  were  called
partes,  and  if  they  were  small,  particulae.  (Cic.
pro  Rahir.  Post.  2  ;  Val.  Max.  vi.  9.  §  7.)  The
responsible  person  in  each  company,  and  the  one
who  contracted  with  the  state,  was  called  manceps
(Fest.  s.  V.  Manceps  ;  Pseudo-Ascon.  in  Divinat.  p.
113,  ed.  Orelli.)  [Manceps]  ;  but  there  was  also  a
magister  to  manage  the  business  of  each  society,
who  resided  at  Rome,  and  kept  an  extensive  cor-
respondence with  the  agents  in  the  provinces.  (Cic.
ad  Att.  V.  15,  c.  Verr.  ii.  74.)  He  seems  to  have
held  his  office  only  for  one  year  ;  his  representa-
tive in  the  provinces  was  called  sub  magistro,  who
had  to  travel  about  and  superintend  the  actual
business  of  collecting  the  revenues.  The  apxire-
Xu}Ui]s  in  St,  Luke  (xix.  2)  was  probably  such  a
sub  magistro.  The  magister  at  Rome  had  also  to
keep  the  accounts  which  were  sent  in  to  him  {tabu-
lae accepti  et  eapensi).  The  credit  of  these  com-
panies of  publicani  and  the  flourishing  state  of
their  finances  were  of  the  utmost  importance  to
the  state,  and  in  fact  its  very  foundation :  of
this  the  Romans  were  well  aware  ( Cic.  pro  Leg.
Manil.  6),  and  Cicero  therefore  calls  them  the
*'  ornamentum  civitatis  etfirmamentum  reipublicae."
(Comip.  pro  Pla7ic.  9.)  It  has  been  already  men-
tioned that  the  publicani,  in  case  of  need,  acted
as  a  kind  of  public  bank  and  advanced  sums  of
money  to  the  state  (compare  Cic.  ad  Fam.  v.  20),
which  therefore  thought  them  worthy  of  its  es-
pecial protection.  But  they  abused  their  power
at  an  early  period,  in  the  provinces  as  well  as  at
Borne  itself;  and  Livy  (xlv.  18)  says,  "  ubi  pub-
licanus  est,  ibi  aut  jus  publicum  vanum,  aut  liber-
tas  sociis  nulla."  (Compare  Liv.  xxv.  3,  4.)
Nobody  but  a  Roman  citizen  was  allowed  to


PUBLICAN!


97n


become  a  member  of  a  company  of  publicani ;  freed-
men  and  slaves  were  excluded.  (Pseudo-Ascon.  in
Divinat.  p.  113  ;  Cic.  c.  Verr.  iii.  39.)  No
Roman  magistrate  however,  or  governor  of  a  pro-
vince, was  allowed  to  take  any  share  whatever  in
a  company  of  publicani  (Cic.  c.  Verr.  iii.  57),  a  regu-
lation which  was  chiefly  intended  as  a  protection
against  the  oppression  of  the  provincials.  During
the  later  period  of  the  empire  various  changes
were  introduced  in  the  farming  of  the  public  reve-
nues. Although  it  was,  on  the  whole,  a  rule  that
no  person  should  be  compelled  to  take  any  share
in  a  company  of  publicani,  yet  such  cases  some-
times occurred.  (Burmann,  Vectig.  Fop.  Rom.
p.  138,  &c.)  From  the  time  of  Constantine  the
leases  of  the  publicani  were  generally  not  longer
than  for  three  years.  (Cod.  4.  tit.  61,  s.  4.)
Several  parts  of  the  revenue  which  had  before  been
let  to  publicani,  were  now  raised  by  especial  offi-
cers appointed  by  the  emperors.  (Burmann,  I.  c,
p.  141,&c.)

All  the  persons  hitherto  mentioned  as  members
of  these  companies,  whether  they  held  «any  office
in  such  a  company  or  not,  and  merely  contributed
their  shares  and  received  their  portions  of  the
profit  (Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  19  ;  Nepos,  Atf.  6),  did  not
themselves  take  any  part  in  the  actual  levying  or
collecting  of  the  taxes  in  the  provinces.  This  part
of  the  business  was  performed  by  an  inferior  class
of  men,  who  were  said  operas  publicanis  dare,  or
esse  in  operis  societatis.  (Val.  Max.  vi.  9.  §  8  ;
Cic.  c.  Verr.  iii.  41,  ad  Fam.  xiii.  .9  ;  compare
c.  Verr.  ii.  70,  pro  Plane.  19.)  They  were  en-
gaged by  the  publicani,  and  consisted  of  freemen
as  well  as  slaves,  Romans  as  well  as  provincials.
(Cic.  c.  Verr,  ii.  77,  de  Prov.  Cons.  5.)  This
body  of  men  is  called  familia  publicanorum,  and
comprehended,  according  to  the  praetor's  edict
(Dig.  39.  tit.  4.  s.  1),  .all  persons  who  assisted  the
publicani  in  collecting  the  vectigal.  Various  laws
were  enacted  in  the  course  of  time,  which  were
partly  intended  to  support  the  servants  of  the
publicani  in  the  performance  of  their  duty,  and
partly  to  prevent  them  from  acts  of  oppression,
(See  Digest.  39.  tit.  4  :  De  PMicanis  et  vecti-
galib.  et  commissis  ;  Gains,  iv.  28.)

The  separate  branches  of  the  public  revenue  in
the  provinces  (decumae,  portoria,  scriptura,  and
the  revenues  from  the  mines  and  saltworks)  were
mostly  leased  to  separate  companies  of  publicani  ;
whence  they  were  distinguished  by  names  de-
rived from  that  particular  branch  which  they  had
taken  in  farm  ;  e.  g.  decumani,  pecuarii  or  scrip-
turarii,  salinarii  or  mancipes  salinarum,  Sec.  ( Pseudo-
Ascon.  /.  c. ;  compare  Decumae,  Portorium,
Salinae,  Scriptura.)  On  some  occasions,  how-
ever, one  company  of  publicani  farmed  two  or
more  branches  at  once  ;  thus  we  have  an  instance
of  a  societas  farming  the  portorium  and  the  scrip-
tura  at  the  same  time.  (Cic.  c.  Verr.  ii.  70.)
The  commentator,  who  goes  by  the  name  of
Asconius,  asserts  that  the  portitores  were  publi-
cani who  fiirmed  the  portorium  ;  but  from  all
the  passages  where  they  are  mentioned  in  ancient
writers,  it  is  beyond  ail  doubt  that  the  portitores
were  not  publicani  properly  so  called,  but  only
their  servants  engaged  in  examining  the  goods
imported  or  exported,  and  levying  the  custom-
duties  upon  them.  They  belonged  to  the  same
class  as  the  publicans  of  the  New  Testament.
(St.  Luke,  V.  27,  29.)     Respecting  the  impudent


i)74    PUBLICIANA  IN  REM  ACTIO.

way  in  which  these  inferior  officers  sometimes  be-
haved towards  travellers  and  merchants,  see  Plant.
Menaech.  i.  2.  5,  &c.  ;  Cic.  ad  Quiiit.  Fr.  i,  1  ;
Pint,  de  CwnostV.  p.  5 1 8,  e.  (Compare  Burmann,
de  Vediq.  c.  9.)  [L.  S.]

PUBLICIA'NA  IN  REM  ACTIO,  was  given
to  him  who  had  obtained  possession  of  a  thing  ex
justa  causa,  and  had  lost  the  Possession  before  he
had  acquired  the  ownership  by  Usucapion.  This
was  a  Praetorian  action,  so  called  from  a  Praetor
Publicius  ;  and  the  fiction  by  which  the  Possessor
was  enabled  to  sue,  was  that  he  had  obtained  the
ovvnership  by  Usucapion.  (Gains,  iv.  36,  where
the  intentio  is  given.)  This  actio  was  an  incident
to  every  kind  of  possessio  which  was  susceptible
of  Usucapion  (the  thirty  years'  excepted).  In
the  old  Roman  Law,  this  Actio  resembled  the
Vindicatio,  and  in  the  newer  Roman  Law  it  was
still  more  closely  assimilated  to  it,  and  consequently
in  this  actio,  mere  Possession  was  not  the  only
thing  considered,  but  the  matter  was  likened  to
the  case  where  ownership  and  Possession  were  ac-
quired at  the  same  time  by  Occupatio  or  Traditio.
Accordingly  Possessio  for  the  purposes  of  Usuca-
pion may  be  viewed  in  two  ways :  viewed  with
respect  to  the  ownership  of  which  it  is  the  founda-
tion, it  is  an  object  of  jurisprudence  as  bare  Pos-
Bessiwi  ;  viewed  with  reference  to  the  Publiciana
Actio,  which  is  incident  to  it,  it  is  viewed  as
ownership.  The  owner  of  a  thing  might  avail
himself  of  this  action,  if  he  had  any  difficulty  in
proving  his  ownership.

This  action  was  introduced  for  the  protection  of
those  who  had  a  civilis  possessio,  but  that  onh',
and  consequently  could  not  recover  a  thing  by  the
Rei  vindicatio,  an  action  which  a  man  coidd  only
have,  when  he  had  the  Quiritarian  ownership  of  a
thing.  According  to  the  definition  a  man  could
have  this  actio  both  for  a  thing  which  he  had
in  bonis  and  for  a  thing  of  which  he  had  a  civilis
possessio,  without  having  it  in  bonis.  When  he
had  the  thing  in  bonis  his  action  was  good  against
the  Quiritarian  owner,  for  if  such  owner  pleaded
his  ownership,  the  plaintiff  might  reply  that  the
thing  had  been  sold  «ind  delivered  and  therefore
was  his  in  bonis.  The  Publiciana  actio  of  the
plaintiff  who  had  a  civilis  possessio,  without  having
the  thing  in  bonis,  was  not  good  against  the
owner,  who  had  the  right  of  ownership,  in  fact,
while  the  plaintiff  had  it  only  in  fiction  ;  nor  was
it  valid  against  another  who  had  a  Civilis  possessio
as  good  as  his  own.  His  action  was  good  against  a
Possessor  who  had  not  a  civilis  possessio.  In  this
action  the  plaintiff  had  to  prove  that  he  possessed
civiliter,  before  the  time  when  he  lost  the  pos-
session.    [Possessio.]

The  object  of  the  action  was  the  recovery  of  the
thing  and  all  that  belonged  to  it  (cum  omni  causa).
In  the  legislation  of  Justinian,  the  distinction  be-
tween Res  Mancipi  and  Nee  Mancipi  was  abolished,
and  ownership  could  in  all  cases  be  transferred  by
tradition.  The  Publiciana  actio  therefore  became
useless  for  any  other  purpose  than  a  case  of  bonae
fidei  possessio,  and  this  seems  to  explain  why  the
words  "  non  a  domino  "  appear  in  the  Edict  as
cited  in  the  Digest  (6.  tit.  2.  s.  1),  while  they  do
not  appear  in  Gaius  (iv.  36).

The  Publiciana  actio  applied  also  to  Servitutes,
the  right  to  which  had  not  been  transferred  by
Alancipatio  or  In  jure  cessio,  but  which  had  been
enjoyed    with  the  consent  of  the   owner   of  the


PUGILATUS.

land.  As  the  legislation  of  Justinian  rendered
the  old  forms  of  transfer  of  servitutes  unnecessar}%
the  Publiciana  actio  could  then  only  apply  to  a
case  of  Possessio.

(Dig.  6.  tit.  2  ;  Inst.  4.  tit.  6  ;  Savigny,  Das
Recht  des  Besitzes,  p.  13,  .^th  ed.  ;  Puchu,  Inst.
ii.  §  233  ;  Mackeldey,  Lehrbuch,  12th  ed.  §  270,
and  the  notes).  [G.  L.]

PU'BLTCUM.     [Aerarium,  p.  23,b.]

PUBLICUM,  PRIVATUM  JUS.  [Jus,  p.
657,  b.]

PU'BLICUS  AGER.     [Ager.]

PUER.     [Servus.]

PUGILA'TUS  (ttuI,  ■7nrY/x-f],irvyfiaxia,  irvyixo-
(Txivri\  boxing.  The  fist  (pugnus^  iri^)  being  the
simplest  and  most  natural  weapon,  it  may  be
taken  for  granted  that  boxing  was  one  of  the
earliest  athletic  games  among  the  Greeks.  Hence
even  gods  and  several  of  the  earliest  heroes  are
described  either  as  victors  in  the  Truy^T],  or  as  dis-
tinguished boxers,  such  as  Apollo,  Heracles,  Ty-
deus,  Polydeuces,  &c.  (Pans.  v.  7.  §  4  ;  Theocrit.
xxiv.  113  ;  Apollod.  iii.  6.  §  4  ;  Pans.  v.  8.  §  2.)
The  Scholiast  on  Pindar  (Nem.  v.  89)  says  that
Theseus  was  believed  to  have  invented  the  art  of
boxing.  The  Homeric  heroes  are  well  acquainted
Avith  it.  (Hom.  11.  xxiii.  691,  &c.  ;  compare  Od.
viii.  103,  &c.)  The  contest  in  boxing  was  one  of
the  hardest  and  most  dangerous,  whence  Homer
gives  it  the  attribute  aXeyai/i}.  {II.  xxiii.  653.)
Boxing  for  men  was  introduced  at  the  Olympic
games  in  01.  23,  and  for  boys  in  01.37.  (Pans.
V.  8.  §  3.)  Contests  in  boxing  for  boys  are  also
mentioned  in  the  Nemea  and  Isthmia.     (Paus.  vi.

In  the  earliest  times  boxers  (pugiles,  vvKrai)
fought  naked,  with  the  exception  of  a  C^^/J-a  round
their  loins  (Hom.  //.  xxiii.  683  ;  Virg.  Aen.  v.
421)  ;  but  this  was  not  used  when  boxing  was  in-
troduced at  Olympia,  as  the  contests  in  wrestling
and  racing  had  been  carried  on  here  by  persona
entirely  naked  ever  since  01.  15.  Respecting  the
leathern  thongs  with  which  pugilists  surrounded
their  fists,  see  Cestus,  where  its  various  forms  are
illustrated  by  wood-cuts.

The  boxing  of  the  ancients  appears  to  have  re-
sembled the  practice  of  modem  times.  Some  par-
ticulars, however,  deserve  to  be  mentioned.  A
peculiar  method,  which  required  great  skill,  was
not  to  attack  the  antagonist,  but  to  remain  on  the
defensive,  and  thus  to  wear  out  the  opponent,
until  he  was  obliged  to  acknowledge  himself  to  be
conquered.  (Dio  Chrysost.  Melanc.  ii.  orat.  29  ;
Eustath.  ad  II.  p.  1322.  29.)  It  was  considered
a  sign  of  the  greatest  skill  in  a  boxer  to  conquer
without  receiving  any  wounds,  so  that  the  two
great  points  in  this  game  were  to  inflict  blows,
and  at  the  same  time  not  to  expose  oneself  to
any  danger  (nXrjy^  Kal  (puXaK-f],  J.  Chrysost.
Serm.  vii.  1  ;  Plut.  Sr/mpos.  ii.  5  ;  compare  Paus.
vi.  12.  §  3).  A  pugilist  used  his  right  arm  chiefly
for  fighting,  and  the  left  as  a  protection  for  his
head,  for  all  regular  blows  were  directed  against
the  upper  parts  of  the  body,  and  the  wounds  in-
flicted upon  the  head  were  often  very  severe  and
fatal.  In  some  ancient  representations  of  boxers
the  blood  is  seen  streaming  from  their  noses,  and
their  teeth  were  frequently  knocked  out.  (Apol-
Ion.  Rhod.  ii.  785  ;  Theocrit.  ii.  126  ;  Virg.
Aen.  V.  469  ;  Aelian.  V.  H.  x.  19.)  The  ears
especially    were    exposed   to   great   danger,  and


PUGIO.

with  regular  pugilists  they  were  generally  much
mutilated  and  broken.  (Plat.  Gorg.  p.  516;
Protag.  p.  342  ;  Martial,  vii.  32.  5.)  Hence  in
works  of  art  the  ears  of  the  pancratiasts  always
appear  beaten  flat,  and  although  swollen  in  some
parts,  are  yet  smaller  than  ears  usually  are.  In
order  to  protect  the  ears  from  severe  blows,  little
covers,  called  a^ucpaJTiSes,  were  invented.  (Pollux,
ii.  82  ;  Etyrool.  Mag.  «.  v.)  But  these  ear-covers
which,  according  to  the  Etymologist,  were  made
of  brass,  were  undoubtedly  never  used  in  the
great  public  games,  but  only  in  the  gymnasia  and
palaestrae,  or  at  most  in  the  public  contests  of
boxing  for  boys  ;  they  are  never  seen  in  any
ancient  work  of  art.

The  game  of  boxing,  like  all  the  other  gymnas-
tic and  athletic  games,  was  regulated  by  certain
rules.  Thus  pugilists  were  not  allowed  to  take
hold  of  one  another,  or  to  use  their  feet  for  the
purpose  of  making  one  another  fall,  as  was  the
case  in  the  pancKxtium.  (Plut,  Symp.  ii.  4  ;  Iju-
cian,  Anach.  3.)  Cases  of  death  either  during  the
light  itself  or  soon  after,  appear  to  have  occurred
rather  frequently  (Schol.  ad  Pind.  01.  v.  34),  but
if  a  fighter  wilfully  killed  his  antagonist,  he  was
severely  punished.  (Paus.  viii.  40.  §  3,  vi.  9.
§  3.)  If  both  the  combatants  were  tired  without
wishing  to  give  up  the  fight,  they  might  pause
a  while  to  recover  their  strength  ;  and  in  some
cases  they  are  described  as  resting  on  their  knees.
(Apollon.  Rhod.  ii.  86  ;  Stat.  Tlitb.  vi.  796.)  If
the  fight  lasted  too  long,  recourse  was  had  to  a
plan  called  Khifia^,  that  is,  both  parties  agreed  not
to  move,  but  to  stand  still  and  receive  the  blows
without  using  any  means  of  defence,  except  a  cer-
tain position  of  the  hands.  (Eustath.  ad  II.  xxiii.
p.  1324  ;  Paus.  viii.  40.  §  3.)  The  contest  did
not  end  until  one  of  the  combatants  was  compelled
by  fatigue,  wounds  or  despair,  to  declare  him-
self conquered  (aTrayopeueir,  Paus.  vi.  10.  §  1),
which  was  generally  done  by  lifting  up  one  hand.
(Plut.  Li/curg.l9.)

The  lonians,  especially  those  of  Saraos,  were  at

all  times   more    distinguished   pugilists   than  the

Dorians,  and   at    Sparta  boxing  is  said  to    have

been  forbidden  by  the  laws  of  Lycurgus.  (Paus.

i  vi.  2.  §  4  ;  Plut.  Lyciirg.  19.)     But  the  ancients

j  generally  considered  boxing   as  a  useful  training

for  military  purposes,  and  a  part  of  education  no

less  important  than  any  other  gymnastic  exercise.

(Lucian,  AtiucIi.  3  ;  Plut.  Cat.  Maj.  20.)    Even  in

I  a   medical    point   of    view,   boxing   was    recom-

i  mended  as  a  remedj-  against  giddiness  and  chronic

I  lieadaches.     (Aretaeus,  De  Morb.  diut.  cur.  i.  2.)

I       In  Italy  boxing  appears  likewise  to  have  been

practised  from  early  times,  especially  among  the

'  Etruscans.     (Liv.    i.    35  ;   Dionys.  vii.    72 )      It

i  contirmed   as  a  popular   game  during   the  whole

]  period  of  the  republic  as   well  as  of  the  empire.

j  (Suet.  Aiig.  45  ;  Cic.  De  Leg.  ii.  15,  18  ;    Tacit.

;  Annal.  xvi,  21  ;  Suet.  Calig.  18.)     See   Krause,

I  Die  Gynmastik  und  Ago?i.  d.  Heilenen,  pp.  497 —

i  534.  [L.  S.]

PUGILLA'RES.     [Tabulae.]

PU'GIO  (jJidxaipa,   dim.  ixaxaipiov ;  e7X€i/)i-

I  Siov),  a  dagger  ;  a  two-edged  knife,  commonly  of

'  bronze,  with  the  handle  in  many  cases  variously

ornamented  or  enriched,  sometimes  made  of  the

hard  black  wood  of  the  Syrian  terebinth.  (Theophr.

j  //.  P.  V.  3,  §  2.)  The  accompanying  woodcut  shows

1  three  ancient  daggers.     The  two  upper  figures  are


PULVINAR.  075

copied  from  Beger  (Thes.  Brand,  vol.  iii.  pp.  398,
419)  :  the  third  represents  a  dagger  about  a  foot
long,  which  was  found  in  an  Egyptian  tomb,  and
is  preserved  in  the  Museum  at  Leyden.  The
middle  figure  is  entirely  of  metal.  The  handles
of  the  two  others  were  fitted  to  receive  a  plate  of
wood  on  each  side.  The  lowermost  has  also  two
bosses  of  ivory  or  horn,  and  shows  the  remains  of
a  thin  plate  of  gilt  metal,  Avith  which  the  wood
was  covered.


In  the  heroic  ages  the  Greeks  sometimes  wore
a  dagger  suspended  by  the  sword  on  the  left  side
of  the  body  [Gladius],  and  used  it  on  all  oc-
casions instead  of  a  knife.  (Hom.  U.  iii.  271  ;
Athen.  vi.  p.  232,  c.)  The  custom  is  continued  to
the  present  day  among  the  Amauts,  who  are  de-
scended from  the  ancient  Greeks.  (Dodwcll,
Tour,  vol.  i.  p.  133.)  The  Romans  (see  wood-
cuts, pp.  2,  554),  wore  the  dagger  as  the  Persians
did  [AciNACEs]  on  the  right  side,  and  conse-
quently drew  it  with  the  thumb  at  the  upper  part
of  the  hilt,  the  position  most  effective  for  stabbing.
The  terms  pugio  and  iyx^ipi^Siov  denote  both  its
smallness  and  the  manner  of  grasping  it  in  the
hand  (7ri;|,  pugnus).  In  the  same  way  we  must
understand  "  the  two  swords  "  {dvos  gladios,  Gell.
ix.  13)  worn  by  the  Gallic  chieftain,  slain  by
Manlius  Torquatus  ;  and  the  monuments  of  the
middle  ages  prove  that  the  custom  long  continued
in  our  own  and  in  adjoining  countries.  (See  Sto-
thard,  Mo?i.  Effigies  of  Gt.  Britain.)  Among  some
of  the  northern  nations  of  Europe,  a  dirk  was  con-
stantly worn  on  the  side,  and  was  in  readiness  to
be  drawn  on  every  occasion.  (Ovid.  Trist.  v.  8.
1 9,  20.)  The  Chalybes  employed  the  same  weapon,
stabbing  their  enemies  in  the  neck.  (Xen.  Anah.
iv.  7.  §  16.)  For  the  Greek  horsemen  the  dagger
was  considered  preferable  to  the  long  sword  as  a
weapon  of  oflfence.  (Xen.  de  Re  Eqtiest.  xii.
11.)  [J.Y.]

PULLA'RIUS.     [Augur,  p.  176,  a,J

PU'LPITUM     [Theatrum.]

PULVI'NAR.  A  representation  of  the  mode
of  using  cushions  or  pillows  (pulvini),  to  recline
upon  at  entertainments,  is  given  in  the  wood-cut
under  Symposium.  The  most  luxurious  of  such
cushions  were  stuffed  with  swan's-down.  (Mart,
xiv.  161.)  An  ancient  Egj'^ptian  cushion  is  pre-
served in  the  British  Museum.  In  reference  to
this  practice,  the  Romans  were  in  the  habit  of
placing  the  statues  of  the  gods  upon  pillows  at  the
lectisternia.  [Epulones  ;  Lectisternium.]  The
couches  provided  for  this  purpose  in  the  temples
were  called  ptdvinaria.  {Hot.  Carm.  i.  37.  3  ;
Ovid.  Met.  xiv.  827  ;  Cic.  in  Cat.  iii.  10,  Harusp.
5,  Dom.  53,  Tusc  iv.  2  j  Val.  Max.  iii.  7.  §  1  j


676  PYANEPSIA.

Servius,  in  Virg.  Georg.  iii.  533.)  There  was  also
a  pulvinar,  on  which  the  images  of  the  gods  were
laid,  in  the  Circus.  (Sue ton.  August.  45,  Claud.
4.)  [J.  Y.]

PULVI'NUS.     [Pulvinar.]

PUPILLA,    PUPILLUS.      [Impubes  ;  In-

FANS  ;    TUTELA.]

PUPILLA'RIS  SUBSTITUTIO.  [Heres,
p.  5.99.]

PUFPIS.     [Navis,  p.7»7,a.]

PU'TEAL,  properly  means  the  enclosure  sur-
rounding the  opening  of  a  well,  to  protect  persons
from  falling  into  it.  It  was  either  round  or  square,
and  seems  usually  to  have  been  of  the  height
of  three  or  four  feet  from  the  ground.  There  is  a
round  one  in  the  British  Museum,  made  of  marble,
which  was  found  among  the  ruins  of  one  of
Tiberius's  villas  in  Capreae  ;  it  exhibits  five  groups
of  fauns  and  bacchanalian  nymphs  ;  and  around
the  edge  at  the  top  may  be  seen  the  marks  of  the
ropes  used  in  drawing  up  water  from  the  well.
Such  putealia  seem  to  have  been  common  in  the
Roman  villas  :  the  putealia  signata,  which  Cicero
{ad  Att.  i.  10)  wanted  for  his  Tusculan  villa,  must
have  been  of  the  same  kind  as  the  one  in  the
Biitish  Museum  ;  the  signata  refers  to  its  being
adorned  with  figures.  It  was  the  practice  in  some
cases  to  surround  a  sacred  place  with  an  enclosure
o)x;n  at  the  top,  and  such  enclosures  from  the
great  similarity  thej'  bore  to  Putealia  were  called
by  this  name.  There  was  a  Puteal  of  this  kind
at  Rome,  called  Puteal  Scrihonianum  or  Puteal
Ltbo?iis^  which  is  often  exhibited  on  coins  of  the
Scribonia  gens,  and  of  which  a  specimen  is  given
below.  The  puteal  is  on  the  reverse  of  the  coin
adorned  with  garlands  and  two  lyres.  It  is  gene-
rally stated  that  there  were  two  putealia  in  the
Roman  forum  ;  but  C.  F.  Hermann,  who  has  care-
fully examined  all  the  passages  in  the  ancient
writers  relating  to  this  matter  (Ind.  Led.  Mar-
burg. 1840),  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  there
was  only  one  such  puteal  at  Rome.  It  was  in  the
forum,  near  the  Arcus  Fabianus,  and  was  dedi-
cated in  very  ancient  times  either  on  account  of
the  whetstone  of  the  Augur  Navius  (comp.  Liv.  i.
36),  or  because  the  spot  had  been  struck  by  light-
ning. It  was  subsequently  repaired  and  re-dedi-
cated by  Scribonius  Libo,  who  had  been  com-
manded to  examine  the  state  of  the  sacred  places
(Festus,  s.  V.  Scrihonianum).  Libo  erected  in  its
neighbourhood  a  tribunal  for  the  praetor,  in  con-
sequence of  which  the  place  was,  of  course,  fre-
quented by  persons  who  had  law-suits,  such  as
money-lenders  and  the  like.  (Comp.  Hor.  Sat.  ii.
6.  35,  Epist.  i.  19.  8  ;  Ov.  Remed.  Amor.  561  ;
Cic.  pro  Sex.  8  ;  C  F.  Hermann,  I.  c.)


PUTI'CULAE,  PUTFCULI.  [Funus,  p.
560,  b.]

PYANE'PSIA  (TTvavi^ta),  a  festival  cele-
brated at  Athens  every  year  on  the  seventh  of  Py-
anepsion,  in  honour  of  Apollo.  (Harpocrat.  Hesych.
Suidas.  8.  r.  Uvavi^ia.)     It  was  said  to  have  been


PYTHIA.

instituted  by  Theseus  after  his  return  from  Crete.
(Plut.  Thes.^  22.)  The  festival  as  well  as  the
month  in  which  it  took  place,  are  said  to  have  de-
rived their  names  from  trvaixos^  another  form  for
KvafMos,  i.  e.  pulse  or  beans,  which  were  cooked  at
this  season  and  carried  about.  (Harp,  and  Suid.  I.e. ;
Athen.  ix.  p.  408.)  A  procession  appears  to  have
taken  place  at  the  Pyanepsia,  in  which  the  dpiaiwvq
was  carried  about.  This  elp^ariwur)  was  an  olive-
branch  surrounded  with  wool  and  laden  with  the
fruits  of  the  year  ;  for  the  festival  was  in  reality  a
harvest  feast.  It  was  carried  by  a  boy  whose  parents
were  still  living,  and  those  who  followed  him  sang
certain  verses,  which  are  preserved  in  Plutarch.
(I.  c.  ;  compare  Clem.  Alex.  Strom,  iv.  p.  474  ;
Eustath.  ad  11.  xxii.  ;  Suid.  s.  v.  Elpeaicavq  ;  and
Etymol.  Mag.  where  a  different  account  is  given.)
The  procession  went  to  a  temple  of  Apollo,  and
the  olive-branch  was  planted  at  its  entrance.  Ac-
cording to  others,  every  Athenian  planted,  on  the
day  of  the  Pyanepsia,  such  an  olive  branch  before
his  own  house,  where  it  was  left  standing  till  the
next  celebration  of  the  festival,  when  it  was  ex-
changed for  a  fresh  one.  (Schol.  ad  Aristoph.
Plut.  1050.)  [L.  S.]

PYCNOSTY'LOS.     [Templum.]
PYELUS  (TTueAos).     [Funus,  p.  555,  b.]
PYGME.     [Mensura,  p.  752,  a.]
PYGON.     [Mensura,  p.  752,  a.]
PYLA'GORAE  {TrvKay6pai).     [Amphictyo-
NES,  p.  80,  b.]

PYRA.  [Funus,  p.  559,  b.]
PYRGUS  {■nvpyos\  a  tower.  1.  The  towers
used  in  fortification  and  in  war  are  spoken  of  under
TuRRis.  2.  An  army  drawn  up  in  a  deep  oblong
column.  [Turris,  No.  VI.]  3.  A  dice-box,  so
called  from  its  resemblance  to  a  tower  [Fri-
Tii.LUS.].  4.  The  territory  of  the  town  of  Teos
was  distributed  among  a  certain  number  of  towers
(TTup-yot),  to  each  of  which  corresponded  a  sym-
mory  or  section  of  the  citizens  (Bockh,  Coip.  Inscr.
No.  3064  ;  and  the  elucidations  of  Grote,  Hist,  of
Greece.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  247,  248).
PY'RRHICA.  [Saltatio.]
PY'THIA  (iruflia),  one  of  the  four  great  na-
tional festivals  of  the  Greeks.  It  was  celebrated
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Delphi,  anciently  called
Pytho,  in  honour  of  Apollo,  Artemis,  and  Leto.
The  place  of  this  solemnity  was  the  Crissaean
plain,  which  for  this  purpose  contained  a  hippo-
dromus  or  race-course  (Pans.  x.  37.  §  4),  a  Rtadiura
of  1000  feet  in  length  (Censorin.  de  Die  Nat.  13),
and  a  theatre,  in  which  the  musical  contests  took
place.  (Lucian,  adv.  indoct.  9.)  A  gymnasium,
prytaneium,  and  other  buildings  of  this  kind,  pro-
bably existed  here,  as  at  Olympia,  although  they
are  not  mentioned.  Once  the  Pythian  games  were
held  at  Athens,  on  the  advice  of  Demetrius  Polior-
cetes  (01.  122.  3  ;  see  Plut.  Demetr.  40  ;  Corsini,
Fast.  Ait.  iv.  p.  77),  because  the  Aetolians  were  in
possession  of  the  passes  around  Delphi.

The  Pythian  games  were,  according  to  most
legends,  instituted  by  Apollo  himself  (Athcn.  xv,
p.  701  ;  Schol.  Argum.  ad  Pind.  Pyth.) :  other
traditions  referred  them  to  ancient  heroes,  such  as
Amphictyon,  Adrastus,  Diomedes,  and  others.
They  were  originally  perhaps  nothing  more  than
a  religious  panegyris,  occasioned  by  the  oracle  of
Delphi,  and  the  sacred  games  are  said  to  have
been  at  first  only  a  musical  contest,  which  con-
sisted in  singing   a  hymn  to  the  honour  of  ihfc


PYTHIA.

Pythian  god  with  the  accompaniment  of  the  ci-
thara.  (Paus.  x.  7.  §  2  ;  Strab.  ix.  p.  421.)  Some
of  the  poets,  however,  and  mythographers  repre-
sent even  the  gods  and  the  early  heroes  as  en-
gaged in  gymnastic  and  equestrian  contests  at  the
Pythian  games.  But  such  statements,  numerous
as  they  are,  can  prove  nothing  ;  they  are  ana-
chronisms in  which  late  writers  were  fond  of  in-
dulging. The  description  of  the  Pythian  games
in  which  Sophocles,  in  the  Electra,  makes  Orestes
take  part,  belongs  to  this  class.  The  Pythian
games  must,  on  account  of  the  celebrity  of  the
Delphic  oracle,  have  become  a  national  festival  for
all  the  Greeks  at  a  very  early  period  ;  and  when
Solon  fixed  pecuniary  rewards  for  those  Athenians
who  were  victors  in  the  great  national  festivals,
the  Pythian  agon  was  undoubtedly  included  in
the  number,  though  it  is  not  expressly  mentioned.
(Diog.  Laert.  i.  55.)

Whether  gymnastic  contests  had  been  performed
at  the  Pythian  games  previous  to  01,  47,  is  un-
certain. Bockh  supposes  that  these  two  kinds
of  games  had  been  connected  at  the  Pythia  from
early  times,  but  that  afterwards  the  gymnastic
games  were  neglected :  but  however  this  may  be,
it  is  certain  that  about  01.  47  they  d!d  not  exist
at  Delphi.  Down  to  01. 48  the  Delphians  them-
selves had  been  the  agonothetae  at  the  Pythian
games,  but  in  the  third  year  of  this  Olympiad,
when  after  the  Crissaean  war  the  Amphictyons
took  the  management  under  their  care,  they  natu-
rally became  the  agonothetae.  (Strab.  ix.  p.  421  ;
Paus.  X.  7.  §  3.)  Some  of  the  ancients  date  the
institution  of  the  Pythian  games  from  this  time
(Phot.  Cod.  p.  533,  ed.  Bekker),  and  others  say
that  henceforth  they  were  called  Pythian  games.
Owing  to  their  being  under  the  management  of
the  Amphictyons  they  are  sometimes  called  'A/z-
<piKTvoviKa  S,d\a.  (Heliod.  ^e^A.  iv.  1.)  From  01.
48.  3,  the  Pythiads  were  occasionally  used  as  an
aera,  and  the  first  celebration  under  the  Amphic-
tyons was  the  first  Pythiad.  Pausanias  (/.  c.)
expressly  states  that  in  this  year  the  original
musical  contest  in  KiOapcpSla  was  extended  by  the
addition  of  ouAySta,  i.  e.  singing  with  the  ac-
companiment of  the  flute,  and  by  that  of  flute-
playing  alone.  Strabo  (/.  c. )  in  speaking  of  these
innovations  does  not  mention  the  avKcfidia,  but
states  that  the  contest  of  cithara-players  (Kidapia-
Tai)  was  added,  while  Pausanias  assigns  the  in-
troduction of  this  contest  to  the  eighth  Pythiad.
One  of  the  musical  contests  at  the  Pythian  games
in  which  only  flute  and  cithara-players  took  part,
Avas  the  so-called  vS/xos  UvdiKos,  which,  at  least
in  subsequent  times,  consisted  of  five  parts,  viz.
avdKpovais^  &fnreipa,  »coTa/ceAeu(r/xcJs,  laixSoi  KaX
5ci/cTu\ot,  and  avpiyy^s.  The  whole  of  this  v6jxos
was  a  musical  description  of  the  fight  of  Apollo
with  the  dragon  and  of  his  victory  over  the
monster.  (Strabo,  ^.c.)  A  somewhat  different  ac-
count of  the  parts  of  this  v6fJL0S  is  given  by  the
Scholiast  on  Pindar  {Argum.  ad  Pyth.)  and  by
Pollux  (iv.  79,  81,  84).

Besides  these  innovations  in  the  musical  con-
tests which  were  made  in  the  first  Pythiad,  such
gymnastic  and  equestrian  games  as  were  then
customary  at  Olympia,  were  either  revived  at
Delphi  or  introduced  for  the  first  time.  The
chariot-race  with  four  horses  was  not  introduced
•  till  the  second  Pythiad.  (Paus.  x.  7.  §  3.)  Some
.gainea  on  the  other  hand  were  adopted,  which  had


PYTHIA.


977


not  yet  been  practised  at  Olympia,  viz.  the
hoKixos  and  the  ZiavKos  for  boys.  In  the  first
Pythiad  the  victors  received  XP'^A"*'"''*  as  their
prize,  but  in  the  second  a  chaplet  was  established
as  the  reward  for  the  victors.  (Paus.  and  Schol.
ad  Pind.  I.  c.)  The  Scholiasts  on  Pindar  reckon
the  first  Pythiad  from  this  introduction  of  the
chaplet,  and  their  system  has  been  followed  by-
most  modern  chronologers,  though  Pausanias  ex-
pressly assigns  this  institution  to  the  second
Pythiad.  (See  Clinton,  F.  H.  p.  195  ;  Krause,
Die  Pyth.Nem.,  &c.  p.  21,  &c.)  The  ouAtjjSt'a,
which  was  introduced  in  the  first  Pythiad,  was
omitted  at  the  second  and  ever  after,  as  only
elegies  and  Stprfvoi  had  been  sung  to  the  flute,
which  were  thought  too  melancholy  for  this  so-
lemnity. The  redp'nnros  or  chariot-race  with  four
horses  however  was  added  in  the  same  Pythiad.
In  the  eighth  Pythiad  (01.  55.  3)  the  contest  in
playing  the  cithara  without  singing  was  introduced  ;
in  Pythiad  23  the  foot-race  in  arms  was  added  ;
in  Pythiad  48  the  chariot-race  with  two  full-
grown  horses  (^avvwpiSos  SpojjLos)  was  performed  for
the  first  time  ;  in  Pythiad  53  the  chariot-race  with
four  foals  was  introduced.  In  Pythiad  61  the
pancratium  for  boys,  in  Pythiad  63  the  horse-race
with  foals,  and  in  Pythiad  69  the  chariot-race
with  two  foals  were  introduced.  (Paus.  I.  c.)
Various  musical  contests  were  also  added  in  the
course  of  time,  and  contests  in  tragedy  as  well  as
in  other  kinds  of  poetry  and  in  recitations  of  his-
torical compositions  are  expressly  mentioned.
(Philostr.  Vit.  Soph.  ii.  27.  2';  FM.  Sympos.  ii.
4.)  Works  of  art,  as  paintings  and  sculptures,
were  exhibited  to  the  assembled  Greeks,  and
prizes  were  awarded  to  those  who  had  produced
the  finest  works.  (Plin.  xxxv.  35.)  The  musical
and  artistic  contests  were  at  all  times  the  most
prominent  feature  of  the  Pythian  games,  and  in
this  respect  they  even  excelled  the  Olympic
games.

Previous  to  01.  48  the  Pythian  games  had  been
an  ewaeTTjpis,  that  is,  they  had  been  celebrated
at  the  end  of  every  eighth  year  ;  but  in  01.  48.  3,
they  became  like  the  Olympia  a  TrevTaerrfpls,  i.  e.
they  were  held  at  the  end  of  every  fourth  year,  and
a  Pythiad  therefore  ever  since  the  time  that  it  was
used  as  an  aera,  comprehended  a  space  of  four  years,
commencing  with  the  third  year  of  every  Olympiad.
(Paus.  I.e.;  Diod.  XV.  60  ;  compare  Clinton, .F. /T.
p.  195.)  Others  have,  in  opposition  to  direct
statements,  inferred  from  Thucydides  (iv.  117,
V.  1)  that  the  Pythian  games  were  held  towards
the  end  of  the  second  year  of  every  Olympiad.
Respecting  this  controversy,  see  Krause,  I.e.  p. 29,
&c.  As  for  the  season  of  the  Pythian  games,  they
were  in  all  probability  held  in  the  spring,  and
most  writers  believe  that  it  was  in  the  month  of
Bysius,  which  is  supposed  to  be  the  same  as  the
Attic  Munychion.  Bockh  (ad  Corp.  Inseript.
n.  1 688)  however  has  shown  that  the  games  took
place  in  the  month  of  Bucatius,  which  followed
after  the  month  of  Bysius,  and  that  this  month
must  be  considered  as  the  same  as  the  Attic  Mu-
nychion. The  games  lasted  for  several  days,  as  is
expressly  mentioned  by  Sophocles  {Elect.  690,  &c.),
but  we  do  not  know  how  many.  When  ancient
writers  speak  of  the  day  of  the  Pythian  agon,  they
are  probably  thinking  of  the  musical  agon  alone,
which  was  the  most  important  part  of  the  games,
and  probably  took  place  on  the  7th  of  Bucatius.
3  K


P78


PYTHIA.


It  13  quite  impossible  to  conceive  that  all  the  nu-
merous games  should  have  taken  place  on  one  day.

The  concourse  of  strangers  at  the  season  of  this
panegyris,  must  have  been  very  great,  as  un-
doubtedly all  the  Greeks  were  allowed  to  attend.
The  states  belonging  to  the  amphictyony  of  Delphi
had  to  send  their  theori  in  the  month  of  Bysius,
some  time  before  the  commencement  of  the  festival
itself.  (Bockh,  Corp.  Inner.  I.e.)  All  theori  sent
by  the  Greeks  to  Delphi  on  this  occasion,  were
called  Uvda'iffTai  (Strab.  ix.  p.  404),  and  the  theo-
ries sent  by  the  Athenians  were  always  particu-
larly brilliant.  (Schol.  ad  Aristoph.  Av.  1 5S5.)  As
regards  sacrifices,  processions,  and  other  solemni-
ties, it  may  be  presumed  that  they  resembled  in  a
great  measure  those  of  Olympia.  A  splendid,
though  probably  in  some  degree  fictitious,  descrip-
tion of  a  theoria  of  Thessalians  may  be  read  in
Heliodorus  (Aeth.  ii.  34).

As  to  the  order  in  which  the  various  games
were  performed,  scarcely  anything  is  known,  with
the  exception  of  some  allusions  in  Pindar  and  a
few  remarks  of  Plutarch.  The  latter  (Symp.  ii.  4  ;
comp.  Philostr.  Apotl.  Tyan.  vi.  10)  says  that  the
musical  contests  preceded  the  gymnastic  contests,
and  from  Sophocles  it  is  clear  that  the  gymnastic
contests  preceded  the  horse  and  chariot  races.
Every  game,  moreover,  which  was  performed  by
men  and  by  boys,  was  always  first  performed  by
the  latter.  (Plut,  Symp.  ii.  5.)

We  have  stated  above  that,  down  to  01.  48,  the
Delphians  had  the  management  of  the  Pythian
games  ;  but  of  the  manner  in  which  they  were
conducted  previous  to  that  time  nothing  is  known.
When  they  came  under  the  care  of  the  Amphic-
tyons,  especial  persons  were  appointed  for  the  pur-
pose of  conducting  the  games  and  of  acting  as
judges.  They  were  called  'EirifjLiXTjral  (Plut.
Si/mp.  ii.  4,  vii.  5)  and  answered  to  the  Olym-
pian Hellanodicae.  Their  number  is  unknown.
(Krause,  I.  c.  p.  44.)  In  later  times  it  was  decreed
by  the  Amphictyons  that  king  Philip  with  the
Thessalians  and  Boeotians  should  undertake  the
management  of  the  games  (Diod.  xvi.  60),  but
afterwards  and  even  under  the  Roman  emperors
the  Amphictyons  again  appear  in  the  possession  of
this  privilege.  (Philostr.  Vit.  Soph.  ii.  27.)  The
4irifx€\7}Tal  had  to  maintain  peace  and  order,  and
were  assisted  by  fiaa-riyocpSpoi^  who  executed  any
punishment  at  their  command,  and  thus  answered
to  the  Olympian  aKinai.  (Luc.  adv.  indoct.  9,  &c.)

The  prize  given  to  the  victors  in  the  Pythian
games  was  from  the  time  of  the  second  Pythiad  a
laurel  chaplet ;  so  that  they  then  became  an  aryiiv
a-recpavLTris,  while  before  they  had  been  an  dycbi/
XPV/^a-rirrjs.  (Paus.  x.  7.  §  3  ;  Schol.  in  Argum.
ad  Pind.  Pyth.)  In  addition  to  this  chaplet,  the
victor  here,  as  at  Olympia,  received  the  symbolic
palm  branch,  and  was  allowed  to  have  his  own
statue  erected  in  the  Crissaean  plain.  (Plut.  Symp.
viii.  4  ;  Paus.  vi.  15.  §  3,  17.  §  1  ;  Justin,  xxiv.
7,  10.)

The  time  when  the  Pythian  games  ceased  to  be
solemnised  is  not  certain,  b"t  they  probably  lasted
as  long  as  the  Olympic  games,  i.  e.  down  to  the
year  a.  d.  394.  In  a.  D.  191  a  celebration  of  the
Pythia  is  mentioned  by  Philostratus  (  Vit  Soph.
ii.  27),  and  in  the  time  of  the  emperoi  Julian  they
still  continued  to  be  held,  as  is  manifest  from  his
own  words.  (Jul.  Epist.  pro  Argiv.  p.  35,  a.)

Pythian  games  of  less  importance  were  celebrated


QUADRAGESIMA.

in  a  great  many  other  places  where  the  worship
of  Apollo  was  introduced  ;  and  the  games  of  Del-
phi are  sometimes  distinguished  from  these  lesser
Pythia  by  the  addition  of  the  words  iv  AcKcpois.
But  as  by  far  the  greater  number  of  the  lesser
Pythia  are  not  mentioned  in  the  extant  ancient
writers,  and  are  only  known  from  coins  or  inscrip-
tions, we  shall  only  give  a  list  of  the  places  where
they  were  held  :  —  Ancyra  in  Galatia,  Aphrodisias
in  Caria,  Antiochia,  Carthaea  in  the  island  of  Ceos
(Athen.  X.  p.  456,  467),  Carthage  (Tertull.  Scorf\
6),  Cibyra  in  Phrygia,  Delos  (Dionys.  Perieg.
527),  Emisa  in  Syria,  Hierapolis  in  Phrygia,
Magnesia,  Megara  (Schol.  ad  Pind.  Nem.  v.  84,
01.  xiii.  155  ;  Philostr.  Vit.  Soph.  i.  3),  Miletus,
Neapolis  in  Italy,  Nicaea  in  Bithynia,  Nicomedia,
Pergamus  in  Mysia,  Perge  in  Pamphylia,  Perin-
thus  on  the  Propontis,  Philippopolis  in  Thrace,
Side  in  Pamphylia,  Sicyon  (Pind.  01.  xiii.  105,
with  the  Schol.  ;  Nem.  ix.  51),  Taba  in  Caria,
Thessalonice  in  Macedonia,  in  Thrace,  Thyatira,
and  Tralles  in  Lydia,  Tripolis  on  the  Maeander
in  Caria.  (Krause,  Die  Pythien,  Nemeen  und  Istk-
mtew,  pp.  1—106.)  [L.S.J

PYTHIA.  [Okaculum,  p.  837,  a.]
PYTHII  {trveioi)^  called  noi0iot  in  the  Lace-
daemonian dialect  (Photius,  s. ».),  were  four  per-
sons appointed  by  the  Spartan  kings,  two  by  each,
as  messengers  to  the  temple  of  Delphi  {QeoirpS-
TTOL  is  A€\<pov7).  Their  office  was  highly  honour-
able and  important :  they  were  always  the  mess-
mates of  the  Spartan  kings.  (Herod,  vi.  57  ;  Xen.
Rep.  Lac.  xv.  5  ;  Miiller,  Dor.  iii.  1.  §  9.)

PYXIS,  dim.  PYXIDULA  (iri^is.dim.  irv^i-
Siov)^  a  casket;  a  jewel-box.  (Mart.  ix.  38.)
Quintilian  (viii.  6.  §  35)  produces  this  term  as  an
example  of  catachresis,  because  it  properly  denoted
that  which  was  made  of  box  {ttv^os),  but  was  ap-
plied to  things  of  similar  form  and  use  made  of
any  other  material.  In  fact,  the  caskets  in  which
the  ladies  of  ancient  times  kept  their  jewels  and
other  ornaments,  were  made  of  gold,  silver,  ivory,
mother-of-pearl,  tortoise-shell,  &c.  They  were  also
much  enriched  with  sculpture.  A  silver  coffer,
2  feet  long,  1^  wide,  and  1  deep,  most  elaborately
adorned  with  figures  in  bas-relief,  is  described  by
Bottiger.  (S(^i7ia,  vol.  i.  pp.  64 — 80.  plate  iii.)
The  annexed  woodcut  (from  Ant.  d''Ercolano,  vol.
ii.  tab.  7)  represents  a  very  plain  jewel-box,  out  of
which  a  dove  is  extracting  a  riband  or  fillet.    Nero


deposited  his  beard  in  a  valuable  pyxis,  when  he
shaved  for  the  first  time.     [Barba.]

The  same  term  is  applied  to  boxes  used  to  con-
tain drugs  or  poison  ^^Cic.  pro  Caelio,  25 — 29  ;
Quintil.  vi.  3.  §  25)  ;  and  to  metallic  rings  em-
ployed in  machinery.  (Plin.  H.N.  xviii.  11.  s.
29.)  [J.  Y.]


QUADRAGE'SIMA,  the  fortieth  part  of  the
imported  goods,  was  the  ordinary  rate  of  the  Por-


QUADRANTAL.

torium.  (Suet.  Vespas.  1.  ;  Quintil.  Declam.  359  ;
Symmach.  Epist.  v.  62,  Q5.)  Tacitus  {Ann.  xiii.
51)  says  that  the  Quadragesima  was  abolished  by
Nero  and  had  not  been  imposed  again  (manei
abolitio  quadrcu/esimae)  ;  but  it  appears  most  pro-
bable that  this  Quadragesima  abolished  by  Nero
was  not  the  Portorium,  but  the  tax  imposed  by
Caligula  (Suet.  Cat.  40)  of  the  fortieth  part  of  the
value  of  all  property,  respecting  which  there  was
any  law-suit.  That  the  latter  is  the  more  probable
opinion  appears  from  the  fact,  that  we  never  read
of  this  tax  upon  law-suits  after  the  time  of  Nero,
while  the  former  one  is  mentioned  to  the  latest
times  of  the  empire.  Considerable  difficulty,  how-
ever, has  arisen  in  consequence  of  some  of  the
coins  of  Galba  having  Quadragesima  Remissa  upon
them,  which  is  supposed  by  some  writers  to  con-
tradict the  passage  of  Tacitus,  and  by  others  to
prove  that  Galba  abolished  the  Quadragesima  of
the  portorium.  The  words,  however,  do  not  neces-
sarily imply  this  ;  it  was  common  in  seasons  of
scarcity  and  want,  or  as  an  act  of  special  favour,  for
the  emperors  to  remit  certain  taxes  for  a  certain
period,  and  it  is  probable  that  the  coins  of  Galba
were  struck  in  commemoration  of  such  a  remission,
and  not  of  an  abolition  of  the  tax.  (See  Bur-
mann,  de  Veciigal.  p.  64,  &c.,  who  controverts  the
opinions  of  Spanheim,  de  Praest.  et  Usu  Numism.
vol.  ii.  p.  549.)

QUADRANS.    [As,  pp.  140,  b,  141,  a.]

QUADRANTAL,  or  AMPHORA  QUAD-
RANTAL, or  AMPHORA  only,  was  the  princi-
pal Roman  measure  of  capacity  for  fluids.  AH  the
Roman  measures  of  capacity  were  founded  on
weight,  and  thus  the  amphora  was  originally  the
space  occupied  by  eighty  pounds  of  wine.  (Festus,
s.v.)

There  is  also  preserved  to  us  by  Festus  {s.  v.
Publica  Pondera^  p.  246,  MUller),  a  plebiscitum
(the  Sillian)  of  unknown  date,  regulating  the  weights
and  measures,  to  the  following  effect :  —  Ex  pon-
deribus  publicise,  quibus  hac  tempestate  populus  oetier
solet,  uti  coaequetur  sedulum,  uti  quadrantal  vini
octoginta  panda  siet :  congius  vini  decern  p.  (i.  e.
pondo)  siet :  sex  sextari  congius  siet  vini  ;  duode-
quinquaginta  sextari  quadrantal  siet  vini:  —  that
is,  that  the  quadrantal  should  contain  80  pounds
of  wine*,  and  the  congius  10  ;  and  that  the  sexta-
rius  should  be  l-6th  of  the  congius,  and  l-48th  of
the  quadrantal.  The  quadranUil  was  subdivided
into  2  urnae,  8  congii,  48  sextarii,  96  Iteminae,
192  quartarii,  384  acetabula,  576  cyathi,  and  2304
ligulae.  As  compared  with  the  Roman  dry  measure,
the  quadrantal  was  three  times  the  modius.  The
only  measure  larger  than  the  quadrantal  was  the
adeus  of  20  amphorae,  which  was  used,  as  well  as
the  amphora  itself,  in  estimating  the  produce  of  a
vineyard.     [Culeus  :  comp.  Amphora  sub  fin.]

The  quadrantal  was  connected  with  the  mea-
sures of  length,  by  the  law,  that  it  was  the  cube
of  the  foot,  whence  its  name  quadrantal,  or,  as
other  writers  give  it  (using  the  Greek  kv€os  in-
stead of  the    Latin  quadrantal)    amphora    cubus.

*  The  Romans  were  aware  that  there  is  a  differ-
ence in  the  specific  gravity  of  wme  and  of  water,
and  in  the  different  sorts  of  each,  but,  for  the  sake
of  simplicity,  they  regarded  them  as  of  the  same
specific  gravity:  when,  however,  they  wished  a
very  exact  determination,  they  used  rain  water.
(Biickh,  c.  3.)


QUADRANTAL.  979

(Cato,  R.  R.  57  ;  Cell.  i.  20  ;  Priscian.  Carm.  do
Mens,  et  Pond.  vv.  59 — 63  :  —

"  Pes  longo  in  spatio  latoque  altoque  notetur  :
Angulus  ut  par  sit,  quem  claudit  linea  triplex
Quatuor  et  medium  quadris  cingatur  inane  :
Amphora  fit  cubus,  quam  ne  violare  liceret,
Sacravere  Jovi  Tarpeio  in  monte  Quirites."

A  standard  model  of  the  Amphora  was  kept
with  great  care  in  the  temple  of  Jupiter  in  the
Capitol,  and  was  called  amplwra  CapitoUna  (  Pris-
cian. I.e.;  Capitolin.  Maximin.  4).  There  still
exists  a  cangius  which  professes  to  have  been  made
according  to  this  standard.  [Congius,]  For  a
full  account  of  this  congius,  see  H.  Hase,  Abhandl.
d.  Berl.  Akad.  1824.

There  are  two  questions  of  very  great  interest
connected  with  the  Roman  quadrantal;  namely,
(1),  whether  the  equality  to  the  cubic  foot  was
originally  exact,  or  only  approximate,  and  (2),
whether  there  was  any  exact  ratio  between  the
Roman  and  the  Grecian  measures.  The  full  dis-
cussion of  these  questions  would  be  inconsistent
both  with  the  limits  and  with  the  chief  object  of
this  work.  A  general  statement  of  the  matters  in
dispute  will  be  found  under  Mknsura,  p.  754,
It  may  here  be  added  that,  whether  there  was  or
was  not  originally  any  precise  ratio  between  the
Greek  and  Roman  measures  of  capacity,  they  were
at  least  so  nearly  related  to  one  another,  that,  when
the  two  systems  came  to  exist  side  by  side,  it  was
found  easy  to  establish  the  following  definite  ratios.
Of  the  liquid  measures  ;  the  Roman  amphora,  or
quadrantal,  was  2-5ths  of  the  Aeginetan,  and
2-3rds  of  the  Attic  amphora  or  metretes  ;  and  the
congius  of  the  Roman  system  was  equal  to  the
Xovs  of  the  Attic.  Again,  comparing  the  Roman
liquid  with  the  Greek  dry  measures,  the  quadrantal
was  l-3rd  of  the  Aeginetan,  and  one  half  of  the
Attic,  medimnus.  Consequently,  of  the  dry  measures,
the  modius  (which  was  l-3rd  of  the  quadrantal)
was  l-9th  of  the  Aeginetan,  and  l-6th  of  the  Attic,
medimnus.  The  connecting  subordinate  unit  in  all
these  sets  of  measures  is  the  Roman  sextarius,  or
sixth  part  of  the  congius,  which  was  introduced  into
the  Greek  system  under  the  name  of  leaTTjy,  and
which  stands  to  the  several  measures  now  men-
tioned in  the  following  relations  :  —

1.  Liquid  Measures.

The  Roman  quadrantal    =     48  sextarii
„    Attic  metretes  =     72       „

„    Aeginetan  „  =  120       „

2.  Dry  Measures.

The  Roman  modius  =     1 6  sextarii

„     Attic  medimnus         =:     96       „
„     Aeginetan    „  =144       „

The  |€<rTT;s,  or  Roman  sextarius,  is  not  to  be  con-
founded with  tlie  genuine  Attic  e/frews  or  sixth
of  the  medimnus,  which  was  equal  to  the  Roman
modius.  (On  the  whole  of  this  part  of  the  sub-
ject, see  Biickh,  cc.  iii.  xi.  xv. — xvii.)

From  the  preceding  remarks  it  will  be  seen
that  the  only  safe  mode  of  computing  the  content
of  the  amphora  in  terras  of  our  own  measures  of
capacity  is  b}'  deducing  it  from  the  value  already
assigned  to  the  Roman  pound,  on  the  authority
chiefly  of  the  coins.  That  value  may  be  taken,  in
round  numbers,  at  5050  grains.  Now  the  im-
perial gallon  contains  70,000  grains.  Therefore
3r  2


980  QUAESTOR.

the  Roman  amphora  = /'ii!^iJi^=\  5.77   im-

V      70UU0       /      "
perial  gallons,  or  a  little  more  than  5^  gallons,  or
than  5  gallons  and  6  pints.     If  we  were  to  make
the  computation  directly  from  the  congius  of  Ves-
pasian, we  should  have  a  somewhat  higher  value  ;
which,  as  has  already  been  shown  under  Pondera,
arises  probably  from  a  source   of  error.     On  the
other  hand,  the  computation  from  the  Roman  cubic
foot  gives  a  somewhat  lower  value  [Pondera]  ;
but,   as   already   intimated,    it    is   very  doubtful
whether  the  true  content  of  the  amphora  was  ex-
actly a  cubic  foot,  and  in  fact,  if  Bockh  be  right,
it  was  a  little  more.     At  all  events,  the  value  of  5
gallons  6  pints  is  quite  near  enough  to  the  truth
for  all  the  purposes  of  the  classical  student.     (See
the  Tables.)     On  the  other  hand,  if  we  were  to
reckon  the  quadrantal  at  exactly  6  gallons,  and
consequently  the  sextarius,  which  is  the  small  unit
of  the  system,  at  exactly  1  pint  (instead  of  '96)
we  should  obtain  a  system  so  extremely  simple,
and   with  so  small  a  limit  of  error  (namely  less
than  yi^  iu  a  pint),  that  it  would  probably  be
allowable  to  adopt  it  in  the  ordinary  reading  of  the
classic   authors  ;    indicating,    however,    the    small
error,  by  prefixing  in  each  case  the  words  a  little  less
than;  and  correcting  it,  when  the  numbers  are  large,
by  taking  from  the  result  l-25th  of  itself.    [P.  S.]
QUADRI'GAE.     [CuRRxrs,  p.  379.]
QUADRIGATUS.     [Denarius.]
QLIADRIRE'MES.     [Navis,  p.  785,  b.]
QUA'DRUPES.     [Pauperies.]
QUADRUPLATOR'ES,   public  informers  or
accusers,  were  so  called,  either  because  they  re-
ceived a  fourth  part  of  the  criminal's  property,  or
because  those  who  were  convicted  were  condemned
to  pay  fourfold  {quadrupli  damnari),  as  in  cases  of
violation  of  the  laws  respecting  gambling,  usury.
&c.  (Pseudo-Ascon,  in  Cic.  Divin.  p.  110,  in  Verr.
ii.  p.  208,  ed.  Orelli ;  Festus,  s.  v.)     We  know
that    on  some    occasions    the    accuser   received  a
fourth  part  of  the  property  of  the  accused   (Tac.
AnnAv.  21)  ;  but  the  other  explanation  of  the  word
may  also  be  correct,  because  usurers,  who  violated
the  law,  were  subjected  to  a  penalty  of  four  times
the  amount  of  the  loan.     (Cato,  de  Re  Rust,  init.)
When  the  general  right  of  accusation  was  given,
the  abuse  of  which  led  to  the  springing  up  of  the
Quadruplatores,    is  uncertain  ;   but  originally   all
fines  went  into  the  common  treasury,  and  while
that  was  the  case  the  accusations  no  doubt  were
brought  on  behalf  of  the  state.     (Niebuhr,  Hist,
of  Rome.,  vol.  iii.  p.  37.)     Even  under  the  republic
an  accusation  of  a  public  officer,  who  had  merited
it  by   his  crimes,   was  considered  a  service  ren-
dered to  the  state  ;  the  name  of  Quadruplatores
geems  to  have  been  given  by  way  of  contempt  to
mercenary  or  false  accusers.  (Cic.  Div.  ii.  7,  c.  Verr.
ii.  7;  Plant.  Pers.  i.  2.  10  ;  Liv.  iii.  72.)     Seneca
{de  Benef.  vii.  25)  calls  those  who  sought  great
returns    for  small   favours,  Quadruplatores  benefi-
ciorum  suorum.

QUADRUPLICA'TIO.     [Actio.]
QUADRUSSIS.     [As.]
QUAESTIONES,    QUAESTIONES    PER-
PETUAE.       [Judex,    p.   648,  b ;     Praetor,
p.  957,  a.]

QUAESTOR  is  a  name  which  was  given  to
two  distinct  classes  of  Roman  officers.  It  is  de-
rived from  quaero.,  and  Varro  (J)e  Ling.  Lat.  v.
81   gives  a  definition  which  embraces  the  principal


QUAESTOR.

functions  of  both  classes  of  officers :  "  Quaestores
a  quaerendo,  qui  conquirerent  publicas  pecunias  et
maleficia."  The  one  class  therefore  had  to  do
with  the  collecting  and  keeping  of  the  public  re-
venues, and  the  others  were  a  kind  of  public  ac-
cusers. The  former  bore  the  name  of  quaestores
classici,  the  latter  of  quaestores  parricidii.  (Dig.  1
tit.  2.  s.  2.  §  22,  23.)

The  quaestores  parricidii  were,  as  we  have  said,
public  accusers,  two  in  number,  who  conducted  the
accusation  of  persons  guilty  of  murder  or  any  other
capital  offence,  and  carried  the  sentence  into  exe-
cution.    (Festus,  s.  V.  Parici  and  Quaestores;  Liv.
ii.  41;  Dionys.  viii.  77.)     There  are  many  points
which  might  make  us  inclined  to  believe  that  the
quaestores   parricidii   and  the   duumviri  perduel-
iionis  were  the  same  officers  ;  but  a  closer  exami-
nation shows  that  the  former  were  a  permanent
magistracy,  while  the  latter  were  appointed  only
on    special   emergencies.     [  See    Perduellionis
Duumviri.]  All  testimonies  agree  that  these  pub-
lic accusers  existed  at  Rome  during  the  period  of
the  kings,  though  it  is  impossible  to  ascertain  by
which  king  they  were  instituted  (Fest.  I.e.;  Tacit.
Annal.  xi.  22;  Dig.  1.  tit.  13),  as  some  mention
them  in  the  reign  of  Romulus  and  others  in  that
of  Numa.     When  Ulpian  takes  it  for  certain  that
they  occurred  in  the  time  of  Tullus  Hostilius,  he
appears  to  confound  them,  like  other  Avriters,  with
the  duumviri  perduellionis,  who  in  this  reign  acted
as  judges  in  the  case  of  Horatius,  who  had  slain
his  sister.     During  the  kingly  period  there  occurs
no  instance  in  which  it  could  be  said  with  any
certainty,  that  the  quaestores  parricidii  took  a  pan.
As  thus  everything  is  so  uncertain,  and  as  late
writers  are  guilty  of  such  manifest  confusions,  we
can  say  no  more  than  that  such  public  accusers
existed,  and  infer  from  the  analogy  of  later  times
that  they  were  appointed  by  the  populus  on  the
presentation  of  the  king.     In  the  early  period  of
the  republic  the  quaestores  parricidii  appear  to  have
become  a  standing  office,  which,  like  others,  was
held  only  for  one  year.    (Liv.  iii.  24,  25.)     They
were  appointed  by  the  populus  or  the  curies  on
the  presentation  of  the  consuls.     (Dig.  1.  tit.  2.
s.  2.  §  23  ;  Tacit.  I.  c.)   When  these  quaestores  dis-
covered that  a  capital  offence  had  been  committed,
they  had  to  bring  the  charge  before  the  comitia
for  trial.  (Liv.  iii,  24;  Dionys.  viii.  75.)  They  con-
voked the  comitia  through  the  person  of  a  trum-
peter, who  proclaimed  the  day  of  meeting  from  the
capitol,  at  the  gates  of  the  city,  and  at  the  house  of
the  accused.  (Varro,  rfe  Ling.  Lat.  vi.  90,  ed.  Miil-
ler.)    When  the  sentence  had  been  pronounced  by
the  people,  the  quaestores  parricidii  executed  it ;
thus  they  threw  Spurius  Cassias  from  the  Tarpeian
rock.    (Dionys.  viii.  77  ;  Liv.  ii,  41  ;  Cic.  de  Re
Puhl.  ii.  35.)     They  were  mentioned  in  the  laws
of  the  Twelve  Tables,  and  after  the  time  of  the
decemvirate  they  still  continued  to  be  appointed,
though  probably  no  longer  by  the  curies,  but  either
in  the  comitia  centuriata  or  tributa,  which  they
therefore  must  also  have  had  the  right  to  assemble
in  cases  of  emergency.  (Varro,  de  Liiig.  Lat.  vi.  9.)
This  appears  to  be   implied  in  the  statement  of
Tacitus,  that   in  the   year    447  b.  c,   they  were
created  by  the  people  without  any  presentation  of
the  consuls.     From  the  year  366  B.  c.  they  are  no
longer  mentioned  in  Roman  history,  as  their  funo-
tions  were  gradually  transferred  to  the  triumviri
capitales.  (Val.  Max.  v.  4.  §  7,  viii.  4.  §  2 ;  Sallust,


in        ■

A


QUAESTOR.

Cat.  bo  ;  Triumviri  Capitalks),  and  partly  to
the  Jiediles  and  tribunes.  (Aediles,  Tribuni  ;
Niebuhr,  Hist,  of  Rome,  vol.  iii.  p.  44  ;  Zachariae,
Sulla,  als  Ordner,  &c.  vol.  ii.  p.  147,  &c.)  The
qnaestores  parricidii  have  not  only  been  confounded
with  the  duumviri  perduellionis,  but  also  with  the
quaestores  classici  (Tacit.  I.  c.  ;  Zonar.  vii.  1 3,  &c.),
and  this  probably  owing  to  the  fact,  that  they
ceased  to  be  appointed  at  such  an  early  period,  and
that  the  two  kinds  of  quaestors  are  seldom  dis-
tinguished in  ancient  writings  by  their  character-
istic epithets.  (Becker,  Handb.  der  Rom.  Alterth.
vol.  ii,  pt.  iL  p.  228,  &c.)

The  quaestores  classici  were  officers  entrusted
with  the  care  of  the  public  money.  It  is  established
by  the  clearest  possible  evidence,  that  during  the
kingly  period  this  magistracy  did  not  exist  (Liv.  iv.
4  ;  Plut  Popl.  12),  and  it  would  seem  that  a  con-
siderable time  elapsed  after  the  expulsion  of  the
kings,  before  this  magistracy  was  instituted.  Their
distinguishing  epithet  classici  is  not  mentioned  by
any  ancient  writer,  except  Lydus  {De  Mag.  i,  27),
who  however  gives  an  absurd  interpretation  of  it.
Niebuhr  (vol.  ii.  p.  430)  refers  it  to  their  having  been
elected  by  the  centuries  ever  since  the  time  of  Va-
lerius Publicola,  who  is  said  to  have  first  instituted
the  office.  (Plut.  Fiihl.  12.)  They  Avere  at  first
only  two  in  number,  and  of  course  taken  only  from
the  patricians.  As  the  senate  had  the  supreme
administration  of  the  finances,  the  quaestors  were
in  some  measure  only  its  agents  or  paymasters,  for
they  could  not  dispose  of  any  part  of  the  public
money  without  being  directed  by  the  senate.  Their
duties  consequently  consisted  in  making  the  neces-
sary payments  from  the  aerarium,  and  receiving
the  public  revenues.  Of  both  they  had  to  keep
correct  accounts  in  their  tabulae  publicae.  (Polyb.
vi.  13.)  Demands  which  any  one  might  have  on
the  aerarium,  and  outstanding  debts  were  likewise
registered  by  them.  (Pseudo-Ascon.  in  Verrin.  p.
158,  Orelli  ;  Plut.  Cat.  Min.  27.)  Fines  to  be
paid  to  the  public  treasury  were  registered  and  ex-
acted by  them.  (Liv.  xxxviii.  60  ;  Tacit.  Annal.
xiii.  28.)  Another  branch  of  their  duties,  which
however  was  likewise  connected  with  the  treasury,
was  to  provide  the  proper  accommodations  for
foreign  ambassadors  and  such  persons  as  were  con-
nected with  the  republic  by  ties  of  public  hos-
pitality. Lastly  they  were  charged  with  the  care
of  the  burials  and  monuments  of  distinguished
men,  the  expenses  for  which  had  been  decreed  by
the  senate  to  be  defrayed  by  the  treasmy.  In  the
aerarium,  and  consequently  under  the  superintend-
ence of  the  quaestors,  were  kept  the  books  in  which
the  senatus-consulta  were  registered  (Joseph,  Ant.
Jud.  xiv.  10.  10  ;  Plut.  Cat.  Min.  17),  while  the
original  documents  were  in  the  keeping  of  the
aediles,  until  Augustus  transferred  the  care  of  them
also  to  the  quaestors.    (Dion  Cass.  liv.  36.)

In  the  year  B.  c.  421  the  number  of  quaestors
was  doubled,  and  the  tribunes  tried  to  eifect  by  an
amendment  of  the  law  that  a  part  (probably  two)
of  the  quaestores  should  be  plebeians.  (Liv.  iv.  43  ;
Niebuhr,  vol.  ii.  p.  430,  &c.)  This  attempt  was  in-
deed frustrated,  but  the  interrex  L.  Papirius  effected
a  compromise,  that  the  election  should  not  be  re-
stricted to  either  order.  After  this  law  was  car-
ried, eleven  years  passed  without  any  plebeian
being  elected  to  the  office  of  quaestor,  until  in  B.  c,
409,  three  of  the  foiu-  quaestors  were  plebeians.
(Liv.  iv.  5L)     A  person  who  had  held  the  office


QUAESTOR.  981

of  quaestor  had  undoubtedly,  as  in  later  times,  the
right  to  take  his  seat  in  the  senate,  unless  he  was
excluded  as  unworthy  by  the  next  censors.  And
this  was  probably  the  reason  why  the  patricians  so
determinately  opposed  the  admission  of  plebeians
to  this  office.  [Senatus.]  Henceforth  the  con-
suls, whenever  they  took  the  field  against  an  enemy,
were  accompanied  by  one  quaestor  each,  who  at
first  had  only  to  superintend  the  sale  of  the  booty,
the  produce  of  which  was  either  divided  among
the  legion,  or  was  transferred  to  the  aerarium,
(Liv,  iv,  53.)  Subsequently  however  we  find
that  these  quaestors  also  kept  the  funds  of  the
army,  which  they  had  received  from  the  treasury
at  Rome,  and  gave  the  soldiers  their  pay  ;  they
were  in  fact  the  pay -masters  in  the  army.  (Polyb.
vi.  39.)  The  two  other  quaestors,  who  remained
at  Rome,  continued  to  discharge  the  same  duties
as  before,  and  were  distinguished  from  those  who
accompanied  the  consuls  by  the  epithet  urbani.  In
the  year  b.  c.  265,  after  the  Romans  had  made
themselves  masters  of  Italy,  and  when,  in  conse-
quence, the  administration  of  the  treasury  and  the
raising  of  the  revenues  became  more  laborious  and
important,  the  number  of  quaestors  was  again
doubled  to  eight  (Lyd.  de  Mag.  i.  27  ;  Liv,  Epit.
lib.  15;  Niebuhr,  vol.  iii.  p.  645)  ;  and  it  is  pro-
bable that  henceforth  their  number  continued  to  be
increased  in  proportion  as  the  empire  became  ex-
tended. One  of  the  eight  quaestors  was  appointed
by  lot  to  the  quaestura  ostiensis,  a  most  laborious
and  important  post,  as  he  had  to  provide  Rome
with  corn.  (Cic.  pi-o  Muren.  8,  pro  Seoct.  17.)
Besides  the  quaestor  ostiensis,  who  resided  at  Ostia,
three  other  quaestors  were  distributed  in  Italy  to
raise  those  parts  of  the  revenue  which  were  not
farmed  by  the  publicani,  and  to  control  the  latter.
One  of  them  resided  at  Cales,  and  the  two  others
probably  in  towns  on  the  Upper  Sea.  (Cic.  in  Vat.
5.)  The  two  remaining  quaestors,  who  were  sent
to  Sicily,  are  spoken  of  below.

Sulla  in  his  dictatorship  raised  the  number  of
quaestors  to  twenty,  that  he  might  have  a  large
number  of  candidates  for  the  senate  (senatui  ex-
plendo.  Tacit.  Annal.  xi.  22),  and  Julius  Caesar  even
to  forty.  (Dion  Cass,  xliii.  47,  51.)  In  the  year
B.  c.  49  no  quaestors  were  elected,  and  Caesar
transferred  the  keeping  of  the  aerarium  to  the
aediles.  From  this  time  forward  the  treasury  was
sometimes  entrusted  to  the  praetors,  sometrmes  to
the  praetorii,  and  sometimes  again  to  quaestors.
[Aerarium.]  Quaestors  however,  both  in  the
city  and  in  the  provinces,  occur  down  to  the  latest
period  of  the  empire.  Some  of  them  bore  the  title
of  candidati  principis,  and  their  only  duty  was
to  read  in  the  senate  the  communications  which
the  princeps  had  to  make  to  this  assembly  {libri
principales,  epistolae  principis.  Dig.  1 .  tit.  13.  §  2
and  4  ;  Lyd.  de  Mag.  i.  28  ;  Lamprid.  Alex.  Sev.
43  ;  Plin.  Epist.  vii.  16).  From  the  time  of  the
emperor  Claudius  all  quaestors,  on  entering  their
office,  were  obliged  to  give  gladiatorial  games  to
the  people,  at  their  own  expense,  whereby  the
office  became  inaccessible  to  any  one  except  the
wealthiest  individuals.  (Suet.  Claud.  24  ;  Tacit.
Annal.  I.  c.  xiii.  5  ;  Suet.  Domit.  4  ;  Lamprid.
Alex.  Sev.  43.)  When  Constantinople  had  be-
come the  second  capital  of  the  empire,  it  received
like  Rome  its  quaestors,  who  had  to  give  games  to
the  people  on  entering  upon  their  office  ;  but
they  were  probably,  like  the  praetors,  elected  by
8  A  3


9S2  QUANTI  MINORIS.

the  senate  and  only  announced  to  the  emperor.
(Becker,  Handb.  der  Rom.  Alterth.  vol.  ii.  pt.  ii.  p.
332,  &c.  ;  Walter,  GescL  des  Rom.  Rechts,  p.  371.)

The  proconsul  or  praetor,  who  had  the  adminis-
tration of  a  province,  was  attended  by  a  quaestor.
This  quaestor  had  imdoubtedly  to  perform  the  same
functions  as  those  who  accompanied  the  armies  into
the  field  ;  they  were  in  fact  the  same  officers,  with
the  exception  that  the  former  were  stationary  in
their  province  during  the  time  of  their  office,  and
had  consequently  rights  and  duties  which  those
who  accompanied  the  armies  could  not  have.  In
Sicily,  the  earliest  Roman  province,  there  were
two  quaestors  answering  to  the  two  former  divi-
sions of  the  island  into  the  Carthaginian  and
Greek  territor}'.  The  one  resided  at  Lilybaeum,
the  other  at  Syracuse.  Besides  the  duties  which
they  had  in  common  with  the  pay- masters  of  the
armies,  they  had  to  levy  those  parts  of  the  public
revenue  in  the  province  which  were  not  farmed  by
the  publicani,  to  control  the  publicani,  and  to  for-
ward the  sums  raised,  together  with  the  accounts
of  them,  to  the  aerarium.  (Pseudo-Ascon.  in
Verrin.  p.  167,  Orelli.)  In  the  provinces  the
quaestors  had  the  same  jurisdiction  as  the  curule
aediles  at  Rome.  (Gains,  i.  6.)  The  relation  ex-
istmg  between  a  praetor  or  proconsul  of  a  province
and  his  quaestor  was  according  to  ancient  custom
regarded  as  resembling  that  between  a  father  and
his  son.  (Cic.  Divin.  19,  c.  Verr.  ii.  1.  15,  joro
Plane.  W^  ad  Fam.  iii.  10.)  When  a  quaestor
died  in  his  province,  the  praetors  had  the  right  to
appoint  a  proquaestor  in  his  stead  (Cic.  c.  Verr.  I.  c),
and  when  the  praetor  was  absent,  the  quaestor
supplied  his  place,  and  was  then  attended  by  lie-
tors.  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  ii.  15,  pro  Plane.  41.)  In
what  manner  the  provinces  were  assigned  to  the
quaestors  after  their  election  at  Rome,  is  not  men-
tioned, though  it  was  probably  by  lot,  as  in  the  case
of  the  quaestor  ostiensis.  But  in  the  consulship  of
Decimus  Drusus  and  Porcina  it  was  decreed  that
the  provinces  should  be  distributed  among  the
quaestors  by  lot  ex  senatus  consulto.  (Dig.  1.  tit.  13.
§  2;  Cic.  c.  Verr.  ii.  1.  13.)  During  the  time  of
the  empire  this  practice  continued,  and  if  the
number  of  quaestors  elected  was  not  sufficient  for
the  number  of  provinces,  those  quaestors  of  the
preceding  year,  who  had  had  no  province,  might  be
sent  out.  This  was,  however,  the  case  only  in  the
provinces  of  the  Roman  people,  for  in  those  of  the
emperors  there  were  no  quaestors  at  all.  In  the
time  of  Constantine  the  title  oi  quaestor  sacripalatii
was  given  to  a  minister  of  great  importance,  whose
office  probably  originated  in  that  of  the  candidati
principis.  Respecting  his  power  and  influence  see
Walter,  Gesch.  d.  R'6m.  R.  p.  365.  [L.S.]

QUAESTO'RII  LUDI.  [Ludi  Quaestoril]

QUAESTO'RIUM.  [Castra,  pp.  249,  a,
253,  b.]

QUALES-QUALES.     [Servus.]

QUALUS.     [Calathus.]

QUANTI  MINO'RIS  is  an  actio  which  a
buyer  had  against  the  seller  of  a  thing,  in  respect
of  any  non-apparent  faults  or  imperfections,  at  the
time  of  the  sale,  even  if  the  seller  was  not  aware
of  them,  or  for  any  defects  in  the  qualities  of  the
thing  which  the  seller  had  warranted :  the  object
of  the  actio  was  to  obtain  an  abatement  in  the
purchase-money.  This  action  was  to  be  brought
within  a  year  or  within  six  months,  according  as
there  was  a  Cautio  or  not.  The  actio  quanti  minoris


QUINQUATKUS.

might  be  brought  as  often  as  a  new  defect  was  dis-
covered ;  but  the  purchaser  could  not  recover  the
value  of  the  same  thing  twice.  [Emtio  et
Venditio.]  (Dig.  21.  tit,  1  ;  44.  tit.  2.  s.  25.
§  1.)  [G.  L.]

QUART  A'RIUS,  a  Roman  measure  of  capacity,
one  fourth  of  the  secctarius,  and  consequently  a
little  less  than  a  quarter  of  a  pint  imperial.  It  is
also  found  in  the  Greek  system  of  liquid  measures
under  the  name  of  reraprov.  [P.  S.]

QUASILLA'RIAE.     [Cat.athus.]

QUASILLUM.     [Calathus.]

QUATUORVIRI  JURI  DICUNDO.  [Co-
LONIA,  p.  318,  b.]

QUATUORVIRI  VIARUM  CURANDA-
RUM.     [Viae.]

QUERE'LA  INOFFICIO'SI  TESTAMEN-
TI.     [Testamentum.]

QUINA'RIUS.     [Denarius.]

QUINCUNX.     [As,  p.  140,  b.]

QUINDECIMVIRI.  [Decemviri,  p.  387,  a.]

QUINQUAGE'SIMA,  the  fiftieth  or  a  tax  of
two  per  cent,  upon  the  value  of  all  slaves  that
were  sold,  was  instituted  by  Augustus  according
to  Dion  Cassius  (Iv.  31).  Tacitus  (xiii.  31),
however,  mentions  the  twenty-fifth  or  a  tax  of
four  per  cent,  upon  the  sale  of  slaves  in  the  time  of
Nero :  if  both  passages  are  correct,  this  tax  must
have  been  increased  after  the  time  of  Augustus,
probably  by  Caligula,  who,  we  are  told  by  Suetonius
{in  vita,  c.  40),  introduced  many  new  taxes.
(Burmann,  de  Vectig.  p.  69,  &c.)

We  are  also  told  by  Tacitus  {Ann.  xiii.  51)  that
Nero  abolished  the  Quinquagesima  ;  this  must
have  been  a  different  tax  from  the  above-mentioned
one,  and  may  have  been  similar  to  the  Quinqua-
gesima mentioned  by  Cicero  {c.  Verr.  iii.  49)  in
connection  with  the  Aratores  of  Sicily.

A  duty  of  two  per  cent,  was  levied  at  Athens
upon  exports  and  imports.     [Pentecoste.]

QUINQUATRUS  or  QUINQUA'TRIA,  a
festival  sacred  to  Minerva,  which  was  celebrated
on  the  19th  of  March  («.  d.  xiv.  Kal.  Apr.),  and
was  so  called  according  to  Varro  {de  Ling.  Lot.  vi.
14,  ed.  Miiller),  because  it  was  the  fifth  day  after
the  Ides,  in  the  same  way  as  the  Tusculans  called
a  festival  on  the  sixth  day  after  the  Ides  Sexatnis,
and  one  on  the  seventh  Septimatrus.  Gellius  (ii.
21)  and  Festus  (s.  v.)  also  give  the  same  etymology,
and  the  latter  states  that  the  Faliscans  too  called  a
festival  on  the  tenth  day  after  the  Ides  Decimatrus.
(Comp.  Miiller, ^^rwsA-er,  vol.  ii.  p.  49.)  Both  Varro
and  Festus  state  that  the  Quinquatrus  was  cele-
brated for  only  one  day,  but  Ovid  {Fast.  iii.  809,
&c.)  says  that  it  was  celebrated  for  five  days,  and
was  for  this  reason  called  by  this  name :  that  on
the  first  day  no  blood  was  shed,  but  that  on  the
last  four  there  were  contests  of  gladiators.  It
would  appear  however  from  the  above-mentioned
authorities  that  the  first  day  was  only  the  festival
properly  so  called,  and  that  the  last  four  were
merely  an  addition  made  perhaps  in  the  time  of
Caesar  to  gratify  the  people,  who  became  so  pas-
sionately fond  of  gladiatorial  combats.  The  ancient
Calendars  too  assign  only  one  day  to  the  festival.

Ovid  {I.  c.)  says  that  this  festival  was  celebnited
in  commemoration  of  the  birth-day  of  Minerva ;
but  according  to  Festus  it  was  sacred  to  Minerva
because  her  temple  on  the  Aventine  was  conse-
crated on  that  day.  On  the  fifth  day  of  the  fes-
tival, according  to  Ovid  (iii.  849),  the  trumpets


QUIRINALIA.

nsed  in  sacred  rites  were  purified  ;  but  this  seems
to  have  been  originally  a  separate  festival  called  Tu-
hilitstrium  (Festus,  s.  v.  ;  Varro,  /.  c),  which  was
celebrated  as  we  know  irom  the  ancient  Calendars
on  the  23d  of  March  (a.  d.  x.  Cal.  Apr.)^  and
would  of  course,  when  the  Quinquatrus  was  ex-
tended to  five  days,  fall  on  the  last  day  of  that
festival.

As  this  festival  was  sacred  to  Minerva,  it  seems
that  women  were  accustomed  to  consult  fortune-
tellers and  diviners  upon  this  day.  (Plant.  Mil.
iii.  1.  98.)  Domitian  caused  it  to  be  celebrated
every  year  in  his  Alban  Villa,  situated  at  the  foot
of  the  hills  of  Alba,  and  instituted  a  collegium  to
superintend  the  celebration,  which  consisted  of
the  hunting  of  wild  beasts,  of  the  exhibition  of
plays,  and  of  contests  of  orators  and  poets.  (Suet.
Dom.  4.)

There  was  also  another  festival  of  this  name
called  Quinquatrus  Minusculae  or  Quinquatrus  Mi-
nores,  celebrated  on  the  Ides  of  June,  on  Avhich
the  tibicines  went  through  the  city  in  procession
to  the  temple  of  Minerva.  (Varro,  de  Ling.  Lat.
vi.  17  ;  Ovid.  Fast.  vi.  651,  &c.  ;  Festus,  p.  149,
ed.  Miiller.)

QUINQUENNA'LIA,  were  games  instituted
by  Nero  a.  d.  60,  in  imitation  of  the  Greek  festi-
vals, and  celebrated,  like  the  Greek  Trei'TaeTrjpiSey
at  the  end  of  every  four  years :  they  consisted  of
musical,  gymnastic,  and  equestrian  contests,  and
were  called  Neronia.  (Suet.  Ner.  12;  Tac.  Ann.
xiv.  20  ;  Dion  Cass.  Ixi.  21.)  Suetonius  and
Tacitus  {II.  cc.)  say  that  such  games  were  first  in-
troduced at  Rome  by  Nero.  The  Quinquennalia^
which  had  previously  been  instituted  both  in
honour  of  Julius  Caesar  (Dion  Cass.  xliv.  6)  and
of  Augustus  {Id.  li.  19  ;  Suet  Aug.  59,  98),  were
confined  to  the  towns  of  Italy  and  the  provinces.
The  Quinquennalia  of  Nero  appear  not  to  have
been  celebrated  after  his  time,  till  they  were  re-
vived again  by  Domitian  in  honour  of  the  Capi-
toline  Jupiter.  (Suet.  Dom.  4.)

QUINQUENNA'LIS.    [Colonia,  p.  318,  b.]

QUINQUERE'MIS.     [Navis,  p.  785,  b.]

QUINQUE'RTIUM.     [Pentathlon.]

QUINQUEVIRI,  or  five  commissioners,  were
frequently  appointed  under  the  republic  as  extra-
ordinary magistrates  to  carry  any  measure  into
effect.  Thus  Quinqueviri  Mensarii,  or  public
bankers,  were  occasionally  appointed  in  times  of
great  distress  [Mensarii]  ;  the  same  number  of
commissioners  was  sometimes  appointed  to  super-
intend the  formation  of  a  colony,  though  three  {tri-
umviri) was  a  more  common  number.  [Colonia,
p.  315,  b.]  We  find  too  that  Quinqueviri  were
created  to  superintend  the  repairs  of  the  walls  and
of  the  towers  of  the  city  (Liv.  xxv.  7),  as  well  as
for  various  other  purposes.

Besides  the  extraordinary  commissioners  of  this
name,  there  were  also  permanent  officers,  called
Quinqueviri,  who  were  responsible  for  the  safety
of  the  city  after  sunset,  as  it  was  inconvenient  for
the  regular  magistrates  to  attend  to  this  duty  at
that  time  :  they  were  first  appointed  soon  after  the
war  with  Pyrrhus.     ( Dig.  1 .  tit.  2.  s.  2.  §  31.)

QUINTA'NA.     [Castra.]

QUIRINA'LIA,  a  festival  sacred  to  Quirinus,
which  was  celebrated  on  the  17th  of  February
(a.  d.  XIII.  Cal.  Mart.),  on  which  day  Romulus
(Quirinus)  was  said  to  have  been  carried  up  to
lieaTen.  (Ovid.  Fast.  ii.  475  ;  Festus, s.  v.;  Varro,


QUORUM  BONORUM.  983

de  Ling.  Lat.  vi.  13,  ed.  Miiller.)  This  festival
was  also  called  Stultorum  feriae,  respecting  the
meaning  of  which  see  Fornacalia.

QUIRINA'LIS  FLAMEN.     [Flamen.]

QUIRFTES,  QUIRITIUM  JUS.  [Jus,
p.  658,  a.]

QUOD  JUSSU,  ACTIO.  [Jussu,  Quod,
Actio.]

QUORUM  BONORUM,  INTERDICTUM.
The  object  of  this  interdict  is  to  give  to  the  Prae-
torian heres  the  possession  of  anything  belonging
to  the  hereditas  which  another  possesses  pro  he-
rede  or  pro  possessore.  The  name  of  this  Interdict
is  derived  from  the  introductory  words,  and  it  runs
as  follows :  "  Ait  Praetor :  Quorum  bonorum  ex
edicto  meo  illi  possessio  data  est:  quod  de  his
bonis  pro  herede  aut  pro  possessore  possides,  pos-
sideresve  si  nihil  usucaptum  esset :  quod  quidem
dolo  malo  fecisti,  uti  desineres  possidere  :  id  illi
restituas."  The  plaintiff  is  entitled  to  this  Inter-
dict when  he  has  obtained  the  Bonorum  Possessio,
and  when  any  one  of  the  four  following  conditions
apply  to  the  defendant.

1.  Quod  de  his  bonis  pro  herede,

2.  Aut  pro  possessore  possides,

3.  Possideresve  si  nihil  usucaptum  esset,

4.  Quod  quidem  dolo  malo  fecisti,  uti  desineres

possidere.

The  two  first  conditions  are  well  understood,
and  appl}'  also  to  the  case  of  the  hereditatis  petitio.
The  fourth  condition  also  applies  to  the  case  of  the
hereditatis  petitio  and  the  rei  vindicatio  ;  but  in-
stead of  "  quod  quidem  "  the  reading  "  quodque  "
has  been  proposed,  which  seems  to  be  required,
for  No.  4  has  no  reference  to  No.  3,  but  is  itself  a
new  condition.  The  words  of  No.  3  have  caused
some  difficulty,  which  may  be  explained  as  fol-
lows.

In  establishing  the  Bonorum  Possessio,  the
Praetor  intended  to  give  to  many  persons,  such  as
emancipated  children  and  Cognati,  the  same  rights
that  the  heres  had  ;  and  his  object  was  to  accom-
plish this  effectually.  The  Roman  heres  was  the
representative  of  the  person  who  had  died  and  left
an  hereditas,  and  by  virtue  of  this  representative
or  juristical  fiction  of  the  person  of  the  dead  having
a  continued  existence  in  the  person  of  the  heres,
the  heres  succeeded  to  his  property  and  to  all  his
rights  and  obligations.  In  the  matter  of  rights
and  obligations  the  Praetor  put  the  bonorum  pos-
sessor in  the  same  situation  as  the  heres  by  allow-
ing him  to  sue  in  respect  of  the  claims  that  the
deceased  had,  and  allowing  any  person  to  sue  him
in  respect  of  claims  against  the  deceased,  in  an
actio  utilis  or  fictitia.  (Ulp.  Frag.  tit.  28.  s.  12  ;
Gains,  iv.  34.)  In  respect  to  the  propertj',  accord-
ing to  the  old  law  any  person  might  take  posses-
sion of  a  thing  belonging  to  the  hereditas,  and  ac-
quire the  ownership  of  it  in  a  certain  time  by  usuca-
pion. (Gains,  ii.  52 — 58.)  The  persons  in  whose
favour  the  Praetor's  edict  was  made  could  do  this
as  well  as  any  other  person ;  but  if  they  found  any
other  person  in  possession  of  anything  belonging
to  the  hereditas,  they  could  neither  claim  it  by  the
vindicatio,  for  they  were  not  owners,  nor  by  the
hereditatis  petitio,  for  they  were  not  heredes.  To
meet  this  difficulty  the  Interdictum  Quorum  Bono-
rum was  introduced,  the  object  of  which  was  to
aid  the  Bonorum  Possessor  in  getting  the  possession
(whence  the  title  of  the  Interdictum  adipiscendae
possessionis)  and  so  commencing  the  usucapion.
3  R  4


984  QUORUM  BONORUM.

If  he  lost  the  possession  before  the  usucapion  was
complete,  he  could  in  most  cases  recover  it  by  the
Possessorial  Interdicts,  properly  so  called,  or  by
other  legal  means.  This,  according  to  Savigny,  is
the  origin  of  the  Bonorum  Possessio.

In  course  of  time  when  Bonitarian  ownership
(in  bonis)  was  fully  established  and  co-existed  with
Qiiiritarian  ownership,  this  new  kind  of  ownership
was  attributed  to  the  Bonorum  Possessor,  after  he
had  acquired  the  Bonorum  Possessio,  and  thus  all
that  belonged  to  "the  deceased  ex  jure  Quiritium  be-
came his  in  bonis  and  finally  by  Usucapion,  ex  jure
Quiritium  ;  though  in  the  mean  time  he  had  most
of  the  practical  advantages  of  Quiritarian  ownership.
Ultimately  the  Bonorum  Possessio  came  to  be  con-
sidered as  a  species  of  hereditas,  and  the  like  forms
of  procedure  to  those  in  the  case  of  the  real  hereditas
were  applied  to  the  case  of  the  Bonorum  Possessio :
thus  arose  the  possessoria  hereditatis  petitio,  which
is  mentioned  by  Gains,  and  cannot  therefore  be  of
later  origin  than  the  time  of  Marcus  Aurelius.
Thus  the  new  form  of  procedure,  which  would
have  rendered  the  Interdict  Quorum  Bonorum  un-
necessary, if  it  had  been  introduced  sooner,  co-
existed with  the  Interdict,  and  a  person  might
avail  himself  of  either  mode  of  proceeding,  as  he
found  best.  (Gaius,  iii.  34.)  In  the  legislation
of  Justinian,  we  find  both  forms  of  procedure  men-
tioned, though  that  of  the  Interdict  had  altogether
fallen  into  disuse.    (Inst.  4.  tit.  15.)

According  to  the  old  law,  any  possessor,  without
respect  to  his  title,  could  by  usucapion  pro  herede
obtain  the  ownership  of  a  thing  belonging  to  the
hereditas  ;  and  of  course  the  Bonorum  Possessor
was  exposed  to  this  danger  as  much  as  the  Heres.
If  the  time  of  Usucapion  of  the  possessor  was  not
interrupted  by  the  first  claim,  the  heres  had  no
title  to  the  Interdict,  as  appears  from  its  terms,  for
such  a  possessor  was  not  included  in  No.  1  or  2.
Hadrian  (Gaius,  ii.  .57)  by  a  senatusconsultum
changed  the  law  so  far  as  to  protect  the  heres
against  the  complete  usucapion  of  an  Iraprobus  Pos-
sessor, and  to  restore  the  thing  to  him.  Though
the  words  of  Gaius  are  general,  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  the  Senatusconsultum  of  Hadrian  did
not  apply  to  the  Usucapion  of  the  Bonorum  Pos-
sessor nor  to  that  of  the  Bonae  fidei  possessor.
Now  if  we  assume  that  the  Senatusconsultum  of
Hadrian  applied  to  the  Bonorum  Possessor  also,
its  provisions  must  have  been  introduced  into  the
formula  of  the  Interdict,  and  thus  the  obscure  pas-
sage No.  3  receives  a  clear  meaning,  which  is  this  :
You  shall  restore  that  also  which  you  no  longer
possess  pro  possessore,  but  once  so  possessed,  and
the  possession  of  which  has  only  lost  that  quality
in  consequence  of  a  lucrative  usucapio.  According
to  this  explanation  tlie  passage  No.  3  applies  only
to  the  new  rule  of  law  established  by  the  Senatus-
consultum of  Hadrit^n,  which  allowed  the  old  usu-
capion of  the  improbus  possessor  to  have  its  legal
effect,  but  rendered  it  useless  to  him  by  compelling
restitution.  In  the  legislation  of  Justinian  conse-
quently these  words  have  no  meaning,  since  that
old  usucapion  forms  no  part  of  it ;  yet  the  words
have  been  retained  in  the  compilation  of  Justinian,
like  many  others  belonging  to  an  earlier  age,
though  in  their  new  place  they  are  entirely  devoid
of  meaning.

(Savigny,  Ueber  das  Interdict  Quorum  Bonorum^
Zeitsckrt/t,  &c  vol.  v. ;  Dig.  43.  tit.  2  ;  Gaius,  iv.
144.)  [G.L.]


RECEPTA.


R.


RAMNES,  RAMNENSES.  [Patricii.]
RAPFNA.  [Bona  Rapta  ;  FuRTUM,]
RASTER  or RAST RUM,  rfm.RASTELLUS,
RALLUS,  RALLUM  (Iwo-t^p),  a  spud  {icd-
Tpivos);  a  rake,  a  hoe.  Agreeably  to  its  deri-
vation from  rocfo,  to  scrape,  "  Raster  "  denoted  a
hoe  which  in  its  operation  and  in  its  simplest  form
resembled  the  scrapers  used  by  our  scavengers  in
cleansing  the  streets.  By  the  division  of  its  blade
into  tines  or  prongs,  it  assumed  more  of  the  foim
of  our  garden-rakes,  and  it  was  distinguished  by  the
epithets  bidens  and  quadridens  (Cato  de  Re  Rust.
10)  according  to  the  number  of  the  divisions.

The  raster  bidens  was  by  far  the  most  common
species,  and  hence  we  frequently  find  it  mentioned
under  the  simple  name  bidens.  (Juv.  iii,  228.)
This  term  corresponds  to  the  Greek  Si'/ceWa,  for
which  (Tfiivvri  was  substituted  in  the  Attic  dialect.
(Xen.  Ct/rop.  vi.  2.  §  34,  36  ;  Aristoph.  Nub.
1488,  1502,  Aves,  601 ;  Phryn.  Eclog.  p.  302,  ed.
Lobeck  ;  Plato,  Repub.  p.  426,  f  ;  Tim.  Lex.  Plat,
s.  V.)  The  bidens  was  used  to  turn  up  the  soil,
and  thus  to  perform  on  a  small  scale  the  part  of  a
plough.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xvii.  9.  s.  6.)  But  it  was
much  more  commonlj'  used  in  the  work  called
occatio,  i.  e.  the  breaking  dowTi  of  the  clods  after
ploughing.  (Virg.  Geoiy.  i.  94,  155.)  [Agricul-
TURA,  p.  52,  a.]  Hence  it  was  heavy.  (Ovid.  Afet.
xi.  101.)  The  prongs  of  the  bidens  held  by  the
rustic  in  the  woodcut  at  p.  849  are  curved,  which
agrees  with  the  description  of  the  same  implement
in  Catullus  (Ivi.  39).  Vine-dressers  continually
used  the  bidens  in  hacking  and  breaking  the
lumps  of  earth,  stirring  it,  and  collecting  it  about
the  roots  of  the  vines.  (Virg.  Georg.  ii.  355,  400  ;
Col.  de  Re  Rust.  iii.  13,  iv,  14,  Geopon.  v.  25.)  In
stony  land  it  was  adapted  for  digging  trenches,
whilst  the  spade  was  better  suited  to  the  purpose
when  the  soil  was  full  of  the  roots  of  rushes  and
other  plants.  (Plin.  //.  N.  xviii.  6.  s.  8  ;  Suet.
Nero,  19.)  [Pala.]  Wooden  rakes  were  some-
times used.  (Col.  de  Re  Rust.  ii.  I'd.y  [J.  Y.]
RATES.  [Navis,  p.783,a.]
RATIO'NIBUS  DISTRAHENDIS  ACTIO.

[TUTELA.]

RECEPTA;  DE  RECEPTO,  ACTIO.  The
Praetor  declared  that  he  would  allow  an  action
against  Nautae,  Caupones,  and  Stabularii,  in  re-
spect of  any  property  for  the  security  of  which
they  had  undertaken  (receperint,  whence  the  name
of  the  action)  if  they  did  not  restore  it.  The
meaning  of  the  term  Nauta  has  been  explained
[ExERCiTORiA  Actio]  :  the  meaning  of  Caupo
follows  from  the  description  of  the  business  of  a
Caupo.  (Dig.  4.  tit.  9.  s.  5.)  "A  Nauta,  Caupo,
and  Stabularius  are  paid  not  for  the  care  which
they  take  of  a  thing  ;  but  the  Nauta  is  paid  for
carrying  passengers  ;  the  Caupo  for  permitting
travellers  to  stay  in  his  Caupona ;  the  Stabularius
for  allowing  beasts  of  burden  to  stay  in  his  stables,
and  yet  they  are  bound  for  the  security  of  the
thing  also  (custodiae  nomine  tenentur).''''  The  two
latt' r  actions  are  similar  to  such  actions  as  arise
among  us  against  innkeepers,  and  livery  stable
keepers,  on  whose  premises  loss  or  injury  has  been
sustained  with  respect  to  the  property  of  persons
which  they  have  by  legal  implication  imdertaken
the  care  pf^     At  first  sight  there  seems  no  reason


REDHIBITORIA  ACTIO,
for  these  Praetoriae  actiones,  as  the  person  who
had  sustained  loss  would  either  have  an  actio
locati  and  conducti,  in  cases  where  payment  had
been  agreed  on,  or  an  actio  depositi,  where  no  pay-
ment had  been  agreed  on  ;  but  Pomponius  suggests
that  the  reason  was  this :  in  a  matter  of  Locatum
and  Conductum,  the  receiver  was  only  answerable
for  loss  in  case  he  was  guilty  of  Culpa  ;  and  in  a
matter  of  Depositum,  only  in  case  he  was  guilty  of
Dolus  Mains  ;  but  the  receiver  was  liable  to  these
Praetoriae  actiones,  if  the  thing  was  lost  or  injured
even  without  any  Culpa  on  his  part,  and  he  was
only  excused  in  case  of  Damnum  fatale,  such  as
shipwreck,  piracy,  and  so  forth.

These  praetorian  actions  in  factum  were  either
*'  rei  persecutoriae  "  for  the  recovery  of  the  thing,
or  "  poenales  "  for  damages.  The  former  action
might  be  maintained  against  the  heres  of  the
Nauta,  Caupo,  or  Stabularius.  The  Exercitor  of  a
ship  was  answerable  for  any  loss  or  damage  caused
to  property,  which  he  had  received  in  the  legal
sense  of  this  term,  by  any  person  in  his  employ-
ment. The  actio  against  him  was  in  duplum.  The
liability  on  the  part  of  Caupones  and  Stabularii
was  the  same :  a  caupo  for  instance  was  answer-
able for  loss  or  damage  to  the  goods  of  any  traveller,
if  caused  by  those  who  were  dwelling  or  employed
in  the  caupona,  but  not  if  caused  by  a  mere  tra-
veller. The  actio  for  damages  could  not  be  main-
tained against  the  heres.  (Dig.  4.  tit.  9  ;  Peckii
In  Titt.  Dig.  et  Cod.  Ad  rem  nauticam  perti-
nentes  Commentarii,  &c.   Amstel.  1668.)

As  to  the  passages  in  the  Digest  (4.  tit.  9.  s.  I.
§  1,  and  47.  tit.  5.  §  6)  see  Vangerovv,  Pandekten^
&c.  iii.  p.  436.

There  is  a  title  in  the  Digest  (4.  tit  8),  De  Re-
ceptis,  qui  arbitrium  receperunt  ut  sententiam
dicant.  When  parties  who  had  a  matter  to  liti-
gate, had  agreed  to  refer  it  to  an  arbitrator,  which
reference  was  called  Compromissum,  and  a  person
had  accepted  the  office  of  arbitrator  {arbitrium  re-
ceperit\  the  praetor  would  compel  him  to  pro-
nounce a  sentence,  unless  he  had  some  legal  excuse.
The  Praetor  could  compel  a  person  of  any  rank,  as
a  Consularis  for  instance,  to  pronounce  a  sentence
after  taking  upon  him  the  office  of  arbitrator  ;  but
he  could  not  compel  a  person  who  held  a  Magis-
tratus  or  Potestas,  as  a  Consul  or  Praetor,  for  he
had  no  Iraperium  over  them.  The  parties  were
bound  to  submit  to  the  award  of  the  arbitrator  ;
and  if  either  party  refused  to  abide  by  it,  the
other  had  against  him  a  poenae  petitio,  if  a  poena
was  agreed  on  in  the  compromissimi ;  and  if  there
was  no  poena  in  the  compromissum,  he  had  an
Incerti  actio.     (Dig.  4.  tit.  8.)  [G.  L.]

RECI'NIUM.     [RiciNiuM.]
RECISSO'RIA  ACTIO.     [Intbrckssio.]
RECUPERATO'RES.     [Judex.]
REDEMPTOR,  the  general  name  for  a  con-
tractor, who  undertook  the  building  and  repairing
of  public  works,  private  houses,  &c.,  and  in  fact  of
any  kind  of  work.    (Festus,  s.  v.  ;  Hor.  Carm.  iii.
1.  35,  Ep.  ii.  2  72  ;  Cic.  de  Div.  ii.  21.)      The
farmers  of  the  public  taxes  were  also  called  Re-
demptores.     (Dig.  19.  tit.  2.  s.  60.  §  8.)

REDHIBITO'RIA  ACTIO  was  an  actio
which  a  buyer  had  against  a  seller  for  rescinding
the  bargain  of  sale  on  account  of  any  non-apparent
defect  at  the  time  of  the  purchase  in  the  thing  pur-
chased, which  the  buyer  was  not  acquainted  with,
and  which  according  to  the  Edict .  of  the  Curule


HEGULA.


9P5


Aediles,  he  ought  to  have  been  acquainted  with ;
or  for  any  defect  in  the  qualities  of  the  thing  which
the  seller  had  warranted.  The  seller  was  answer-
able even  if  he  was  not  aware  of  the  defects.
"  Redhibere,"  says  Ulpian,  "  is  so  to  act  that  the
seller  shall  have  back  what  he  had,  and  because
this  is  done  by  restoration,  for  that  reason  it  is
called  '  Redhibitio,'  which  is  as  much  as  to  say
'  Redditio.' "

The  effect  of  the  redhibitio  was  to  rescind  the
bargain  and  to  put  both  parties  in  the  same  con-
dition, as  if  the  sale  had  never  taken  place.  The
time  allowed  for  prosecuting  the  actio  redhibitoria
was  "  sex  menses  utiles,"  when  a  cautio  had  been
given,  which  were  reckoned  from  the  day  of  sale
or  from  the  time  when  any  statement  or  promise
had  been  made  relating  to  the  matter  (dictum
promissumve,  the  words  of  the  Edict).  If  there
was  no  cautio,  the  time  allowed  was  two  months.
(Dig.  21.  tit.  1.)  [G.  L.]

REDIMrCULUM  (KaOer-f^p),  a  fillet  attached
to  the  Calantica,  Diaderaa,  Mitra,  or  other  head-
dress at  the  occiput,  and  passed  over  the  shoulders,
so  as  to  hang  on  each  side  over  the  breast.  (Virg.
^e».  ix.  616;  Ovid.  Met.  x.  265.)  Redimicula
were  properly  female  ornaments  (Festus,  s.  v. ;
Ovid.  Episi.  ix.  71;  Juv.  ii.  70;  Prudent.  Psi/c/io7n.
448)  ;  and  in  the  statues  of  Venus  they  were  imi-
tated in  gold.  (Ovid.i^a5^.  iv.  135— 137.)  [J.Y.]

REGIA  LEX.     [Lex  Regia.]

REGIFU'GIUM  or  FUGA'LIA,  the  king's
flight,  a  festival  which  was  celebrated  by  the  Romans
every  year  on  the  24th  of  February,  and  according
to  Verrius  (ap.  Fest.  s.  v.  Regifugium)  and  Ovid
{Fast.  ii.  685,  &c.)  in  commemoration  of  the  flight
of  king  Tarquinius  Superbus  from  Rome.  The
day  is  marked  in  the  Fasti  as  nefastus.  In  some
ancient  calendaria  the  24th  of  May  is  likewise
called  Regifugium,  and  in  others  it  is  described  as
Q.  Rex.  C.  F.,  that  is,  "  Quando  Rex  comitiavit,
fas,"  or  "  Quando  Rex  comitio  fugit."  Several
ancient  as  well  as  modem  writers  have  denied  that
either  of  these  days  had  anything  to  do  with  the
flight  of  king  Tarquinius  (Cincius,  ap.  Fest.  I.  c),
and  are  of  opinion  that  these  two  days  derived
their  name  from  the  symbolical  flight  of  the  Rex
Sacrorum  from  the  comitium  ;  for  this  king-priest
was  generally  not  allowed  to  appear  in  the  comi-
tium, which  was  destined  for  the  transaction  of
political  matters  in  which  he  could  not  take  part.
But  on  certain  days  in  the  year,  and  certainly  on
the  two  days  mentioned  above,  he  had  to  go  to  the
comitium  for  the  purpose  of  ofi^ering  certain  sacri-
fices, and  immediately  after  he  had  performed  his
functions  there,  Le  hastily  fled  from  it  ;  and  this
symbolical  flight  is  said  to  have  been  called  Regi-
fugium. (Fest. /.c./  Plut.  Quaest.Rom.  63;  Ovid.
Fast.  V.  727.)  [L.  S.]

REGULA  (/caj/cijv),  the  ruler  used  by  scribes
for  drawing  right  lines  with  pen  and  ink  (Brunck,
Anal.  iii.  69,  87) ;  also  the  rule  used  by  carpenters,
masons,  and  other  artificers,  either  for  drawing
straight  lines  or  making  plane  surfaces.  (Aristoph.
Ran.  798  ;  Vitruv.  vii.  3.  §  5.)  That  it  was
marked  with  equal  divisions,  like  our  carpenter's
rules,  is  manifest  from  the  representations  of  it
among  the  "  Instrumenta  fabrorum  tignariorum,"
in  the  woodcuts  at  pp.  287,  806.  The  substance,
with  which  the  lines  were  made,  was  raddle  or
red  ochre  {/xiKros,  Brunck,  Anal.  i.  221  ;  (polviKi
Kav6vi^  Eurip.  Here.  Fur.  925.)     [Linea.]     The


986


REPETUNDAE.


scale-beam  is  sometimes  called  Kavbsv  instead  of
^vySv.     [JuGUM.]  [J.  Y.J

REI  UXO'RIAE  or  DOTIS  ACTIO.  [Dos.]
RELA'TIO.     [Sknatus.]
RELEGA'TIO.     [Exsilium.  p.  515,  b.]
REMANCIPA'Tlb.     [Emancipatio.]
REMULCUM   (fn>iJ.ov\Kelv  rhs  pavs),  a  rope
for  towing  a  ship,  and  likewise  a  tow-barge  ("i?e-
midcum,  funis,  quo  deligata  navis  magna  trahitur
vice  rami,"   Isid,  Orig.  xix.  4.  §  8  ;  Remulco  est,
quum  scaphae  remis  navis  magna  trahitur,"  Festus,
*.  v.  ;  comp.  Caes.  B.  C.  ii.  23,  iii.  40  ;  Hirt.  B.
Alex.  11  ;  Liv.  xxv.  30,  xxxii,  16  ;  Polyb.  i.  27,
28,  iii.  46).

REMU'RIA.  [Lemuria.]
REMUS.  [Navis,  pp.  787,  b.,  788,  a.]
REPA'GULA.  [Janua,  p.  626,  b.]
REPETUNDAE,  or  PECUNIAE  REPE-
TUNDAE. Repetundae  Pecuniae  in  its  widest
sense  was  the  term  used  to  designate  such  sums  of
money  as  the  Socii  of  the  Roman  State  or  indivi-
duals claimed  to  recover  from  Magistratus,  Judices,
or  Publici  Curatores,  which  they  had  improperly
taken  or  received  in  the  Provinciae,  or  in  the  Urbs
Roma,  either  in  the  discharge  of  their  Jurisdictio,
or  in  their  capacity  of  Judices,  or  in  respect  of  any
other  public  function.  Sometimes  the  word  Repe-
tundae was  used  to  express  the  illegal  act  for  which
compensation  was  sought,  as  in  the  phrase  "  Repe-
tundarum  insiraulari,  damnari  ;"  and  Pecuniae
meant  not  only  money,  but  anything  that  had
value.  The  expression  which  the  Greek  writers
sometimes  use  for  Repetundae  is  Siktj  Swpwp.  (Plut.
Sulla.,  5.)

It  is  stated  by  Livy  (xlii.  1)  that  before  the  year
B.  c.  1 73,  no  complaints  were  made  by  the  Socii  of
being  put  to  any  cost  or  charge  by  the  Roman  magis-
tratus. When  complaints  of  exactions  were  made,
an  inquiry  was  instituted  into  this  offence  extra  or-
dinem  ex  Senatusconsulto  as  appears  from  the  case
of  P.  Furius  Philus  and  M.  Matienus,  who  were
accused  of  this  offence  by  the  Hispani.  (Liv.  xliii.
2.)  The  first  Lex  on  the  subject  was  the  Calpur-
nia,  which  was  proposed  and  carried  by  the  Tri-
bunus  Plebis,  L.  Calpumius  Piso  (b.  c.  149),  who
also  distinguished  himself  as  an  historical  writer.
By  this  Lex  a  Praetor  was  appointed  for  trying
persons  charged  with  this  crime.  (Cic.  de  Ojf.  ii.
21,  Brut.  27.)  This  Lex  only  applied  to  Pro-
vincial Magistratus,  because  in  the  year  B.C.  141
according  to  Cicero  (de  Fin.  ii.  1 6)  the  like  offence
in  a  Magistratus  Urbanus  was  the  subject  of  a
Quaestio  extra  ordinem.  It  seems  that  the  penal-
ties of  the  Lex  Calpumia  were  merely  pecuniary,
and  at  least  did  not  comprise  exsilium,  for  L.  Cor-
nelius Lentulus  who  was  Censor  B.  c.  147,  had
been  convicted  on  a  charge  of  Repetundae  in  the
previous  year.  The  pecuniary  penalty  was  ascer-
tained by  the  litis  aestimatio,  or  taking  an  account
of  all  the  sums  of  money  which  the  convicted  party
had  illegally  received.

Various  leges  de  repetundis  were  passed  after
the  Lex  Calpumia,  and  the  penalties  were  con-
tinually made  heavier.  The  Lex  Junia  was  passed
probably  about  B.  c.  126  on  the  proposal  of  M.  Ju-
nius Pennus,  Tribunus  Plebis.  It  is  probable  that
this  was  the  Lex  under  which  C.  Cato,  Proconsul
of  Macedonia,  was  living  in  exile  at  Tarraco  (Cic.
pro  Balbo,  11  ;  Veil.  Pat.  iL  8)  ;  for  at  least  exsi-
liam  was  not  a  penalty  imposed  by  the  Calpumia
Lex,  but  was  added  hj  some   later   Lex.     This


REPETUNDAE.

Lex  Junia  and  the  Lex  Calpumia  are  mentioned
in  the  Lex  Servilia.

The  Lex  Servilia  Glaucia  was  proposed  and  cai-
ried  by  C.  Servilius  Glaucia  Praetor  b.  c.  100.
This  Lex  applied  to  any  magistratus  who  had  im-
properly taken  or  received  money  from  any  private
person  ;  but  a  magistratus  could  not  be  accused
during  the  term  of  office.  The  Lex  enacted  that
the  Praetor  Peregrinus  shoxUd  annually  appoint
450  judices  for  the  trial  of  this  offence  :  thp  judices
were  not  to  be  senators.  The  penalties  of  the  Lex
were  pecuniary  and  exsilium  ;  the  law  allowed  a
comperendinatio.  (Cic.  in  Verr.  i.  9.)  Before  the
Lex  Servilia,  the  pecuniary  penalty  was  simple
restitution  of  what  had  been  wrongfully  taken  ;
this  Lex  seems  to  have  raised  the  penalty  to  double
the  amount  of  what  had  been  wrongfully  taken  ;
and  subsequently  it  was  made  quadmple.  Exsi-
lium was  only  the  punishment  in  case  a  man  did
not  abide  his  trial,  but  withdrew  from  Rome.
(Savigny,  VondemSchutz  der  Mind.,Zeitschri/t^x.)
Under  this  Lex  were  tried  M'  Aquillius,  P.  Ruti-
lius,  M.  Scaurus,  and  Q.  Metellus  Numidicus.  The
Lex  gave  the  Civitas  to  any  person  on  whose  com-
plaint a  person  was  convicted  of  Repetundae.  (Cic.
pro  Balbo,  23,  24.)

The  Lex  Acilia,  which  seems  to  be  of  uncertahi
date  (probably  b.  c.  101),  was  proposed  and  carried
by  M'  Acilius  Glabrio,  a  Tribunus  Plebis,  which
enacted  that  there  should  be  neither  ampliatio  nor
comperendinatio.  It  is  conjectured  that  this  is  the
Lex  Caecilia  mentioned  by  Valerius  Maximus  (vi.
9,  1 0),  in  which  passage  if  the  conjecture  is  correct,
we  should  read  Acilia  for  Caecilia.  (Cic.  in  Verr.
Act.  i.  17,  in  Verr.  i.  9.)  It  has  sometimes  been
doubted  whether  the  Acilia  or  Servilia  was  first
enacted,  but  it  appears  that  the  Acilia  took  away
the  comperendinatio  which  the  Servilia  allowed.

The  Lex  Cornelia  was  passed  in  the  dictatorship
of  Sulla  B.  c.  81,  and  continued  in  force  to  the  time
of  C.  Julius  Caesar.  It  extended  the  penalties  of
Repetundae  to  other  illegal  acts  committed  in  the
provinces,  and  to  judices  who  received  bribes,  to
those  to  whose  hands  the  money  came,  and  to  those
who  did  not  give  into  the  Aerarium  their  Procon-
sular accounts  (proconsulares  rationes).  The  Praetor
who  presided  over  this  quaestio  chose  the  judges  by
lot  from  the  Senators,  whence  it  appears  that  the
Servilia  Lex  was  repealed  by  this  Lex,  at  least  so
far  as  related  to  the  constitution  of  the  court.
This  Lex  also  allowed  ampliatio  and  comperendi-
natio. The  penalties  were  pecuniary  (litis  aesti-
matio) and  the  aquae  et  ignis  interdictio.  Under
this  Lex  were  tried  L.  Dolabella,  Cn.  Piso,  C.
Verres,  C.  Macer,  M.  Fonteius,  and  L.  Flaccus,
the  two  last  of  whom  were  defended  by  Cicero.  In
the  Verrine  Orations  Cicero  complains  of  the  com-
perendinatio or  double  hearing  of  the  cause,  which
the  Lex  Cornelia  allowed,  and  refers  to  the  practice
under  the  Lex  Acilia,  according  to  which  the  case
for  the  prosecution,  the  defence,  and  the  evidence
were  only  heard  once,  and  so  the  matter  was  de-
cided. {In  Verr.  i.  9.)

The  last  Lex  de  Repetundis  was  the  Lex  Julia
passed  in  the  first  consulship  of  C.  Julius  Caesar
B.  c.  59.  (Cic.  in  Vat.  1 2.)  This  Lex  consisted
of  numerous  heads  (capita)  which  have  been  col-
lected by  Sigonius.  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  viii.  8.)  This
Lex  repealed  the  penalty  of  exsilium,  but  in  ad-
dition to  the  litis  aestimatio,  it  enacted  that  per-
sons coDTicted  under  this  Lex  should  lose  their


RESTITUTIO  IN  INTEGRUM.

rank,  and  be  disqualified  from  being  witnesses,
judices,  or  senators.  This  is  the  Lex  which  was
commented  on  by  the  Jurists,  whose  expositions
are  preserved  in  the  Digest  (48.  tit  11),  and  in  the
Code  (9.  tit.  27).  This  Lex  adopted  some  pro-
visions that  existed  in  previous  Leges,  as  for  in-
stance that  by  which  the  money  that  had  been  im-
properly retained  could  be  recovered  from  those
into  whose  hands  it  could  be  traced.  (Cic.  pro  C.
Rabir.  Post.  4.)  The  Lex  had  been  passed  when
Cicero  made  his  oration  against  Piso,  b.  c.  55.  {In
Pis.2\.)  A.  Gabinius  was  convicted  under  this
Lex.  Many  of  its  provisions  may  be  collected
from  the  oration  of  Cicero  against  Piso.  Cicero
boasts  that  in  his  proconsulship  of  Cilicia  there
was  no  cost  caused  to  the  people  by  himself,  his
legati,  quaestor,  nor  any  one  else  ;  he  did  not  even
demand  from  the  people  what  the  Lex  (Julia)  al-
lowed him.  {AdAtt.  v.  16.)

Under  the  Empire  the  offence  was  punishable
with  exile.  (Tacit.  Annal.  xiv.  28,  and  the  note  of
Lipsius.)

In  Clinton's  Fasti  Hellenici^  the  Lex  Calpumia
is  incorrectly  stated  to  be  the  first  law  at  Rome
against  Bribery  at  Elections.    Bribery  is  A  mbitus.

(Sigonius  de  Judiciis^  ii.  c.  27  ;  Rein,  Das  Cri-
minalrecht  der  R'6mer^  p.  604.  &c.  ;  Rudorif,  f/eftcr
die  Oclavianische  Formel,  Zettschri/t  fur  Geschicht.
Bechlsw.  &c.  xil  p.  1 36.)  [G.  L.]

REPLICA'TIO.     [Actio,  p.  10.]

REPOSITO'RIA.     [CoENA,  p.  307,  b.]

REPO'TIA.     [Matrimonium,  p.  744,  a.]

REPU'DIUM.     [DivoRTiuM.J

RES.     [Dominium.]

RES  JUDICATA.     [Judicata  Actio.]

RES  MA'NCIPL     [Dominium.]

RESCRIPTUM.       [CONSTITUTIONKS.]

RESPONSA.  [JuRiscoNSULTi.]
RESTITUTIO  IN  INTEGRUM,  in  the
sense  in  which  the  term  will  here  be  used,  signifies
the  rescinding  of  a  contract  or  legal  transaction  so
as  to  place  the  parties  to  it  in  the  same  position
with  respect  to  one  another  which  they  occupied
before  the  contract  was  made  or  the  transaction
took  place.  The  Restitutio  here  spoken  of  is
founded  on  the  Edict.  If  the  contract  or  trans-
action is  such  as  not  to  be  valid  according  to  the
Jus  Civile,  this  Restitutio  is  not  needed  ;  and  it
only  applies  to  cases  of  contracts  and  transaction,
which  are  not  in  their  nature  or  form  invalid.  In
order  to  entitle  a  person  to  the  Restitutio,  he  must
have  sustained  some  injury  capable  of  being  esti-
mated, in  consequence  of  the  contract  or  transaction,
and  not  through  any  fault  of  his  own  ;  except  in
the  case  of  one  who  is  minor  xxv  annorum,  who  was
protected  by  the  Restitutio  against  the  consequences
of  his  ottTi  carelessness.  The  injury  also  must  be
one  for  which  the  injured  person  has  no  other
remedy.

The  Restitutio  may  either  be  effected  on  the
complaint  of  the  injured  party,  which  would  gene-
rally, be  made  after  the  completion  of  the  trans-
action, or  when  he  is  sued  by  the  other  party  in  re-
spect of  the  transaction  and  defends  himself  by  an
Exceptio.  The  complaint  as  a  general  rule  must
be  made  within  four  years  of  the  time  of  the  injury
being  discovered,  and  of  the  party  being  capable
of  bringing  his  action  ;  in  the  case  of  Minores  the
four  years  were  reckoned  from  the  time  of  their
attaining  their  majority.  In  the  case  of  an  Excep-
tio there  was  no  limitation  of  time.  (Cod.  2.  tit.  53.


RESTITUTIO  IN  INTEGRUM.     987

s.  7.)     According  to  the  old  law  the  complaint  must
be  made  within  one  year.

The  application  for  a  Restitutio  could  only  be
made  to  one  who  had  Jurisdictio,  either  original
or  delegated,  which  flowed  from  the  possession  of
the  Imperium  ;  and  it  might,  according  to  the  cir-
cumstances, be  decreed  by  the  Magistratus  extra
ordinem,  or  the  matter  might  be  referred  to  a
Judex.  When  a  Restitutio  was  decreed,  each
party  restored  to  the  other  what  he  had  received
from  him  with  all  its  accessions  and  fruits,  except
so  far  as  the  fruits  on  one  side  might  be  set  off
against  the  interest  of  money  to  be  returned  on
the  other  side.  All  proper  costs  and  expenses  in-
curred in  respect  of  the  thing  to  be  restored  were
allowed.  If  the  object  of  the  Restitutio  was  a
right,  the  injured  party  was  restored  to  his  right  ;
or  if  he  had  incurred  a  duty,  he  was  released  from
the  duty.

Tiie  action  for  Restitutio  might  be  maintained
by  the  person  injured,  by  his  heredes,  cessionarii,
and  sureties  ;  but  as  a  general  rule  it  could  only
be  maintained  against  the  person  with  whom  the
contract  had  been  made,  and  not  against  a  third
person  who  was  in  possession  of  the  thing  which
was  sought  to  be  recovered,  except  when  the  actio
for  restitutio  was  an  actio  in  rem  scripta,  or  the  in-
jured party  had  an  actio  in  rem,  or  when  the  right
which  he  had  lost  was  a  right  in  rem.

The  grounds  of  Restitutio  were  either  those  ex-
pressed in  the  Edict,  or  any  good  and  sufficient
cause :  "  item  si  qua  alia  mihi  justa  causa  esse
videbitur  in  integrum  restituam,  quod  ejus  per
Leges,  Plebiscita,  Senatusconsulta,  Edicta,  Decreta
Principum  licebit."  (Dig.  4.  tit.  6.  s.  1.)

The  following  are  the  chief  cases  in  which  a
Restitutio  might  be  decreed.

The  case  of  Vis  et  Metus.  If  a  man  did  an  act
that  was  injurious  to  himself,  through  vis  or  metus,
the  act  wasnotfor  that  reason  invalid,  nor  was  it  con-
sidered that  his  assent  was  wanting  (Dig.  4.  tit.  2.
s.  21.  §  5)  :  but  it  was  contra  bonos  mores  to  allow
such  an  act  to  have  legal  effect.  When  a  man  had
acted  under  the  influence  of  force,  or  reasonable
fear  caused  by  the  acts  of  another  party,  he  had
an  actio  quod  metus  causa  for  restitution  against
the  party  who  was  the  wrongdoer,  and  also  against
an  innocent  person  who  was  in  possession  of  any
thing  which  had  thus  been  got  from  him,  and  also
against  the  heredes  of  the  wrongdoer  if  they  were
enriched  by  being  his  heredes  {quantum  ad  eos
pervenit).  If  he  was  sued  in  respect  of  the  trans-
action, he  could  defend  himself  by  an  exceptio
quod  metus  causa.  The  actio  Quod  Metus  was
given  by  the  Praetor  L.  Octavius,  a  contemporary
of  Cicero.  (Compare  Cic.  in  Verr.  iii.  65,  and  Dig.
4.  tit.  2.  s.  1.)

The  case  of  Dolus.  When  a  man  was  fraudu-
lently induced  to  become  a  party  to  a  transaction,
which  was  legal  in  all  respects,  saving  the  fraud,
he  had  his  actio  de  dolo  malo  against  the  guilty
person  and  his  heredes,  so  far  as  they  were  made
richer  by  the  fraud,  for  the  restoration  of  the  thing
of  which  he  had  been  defrauded,  and  if  that  was
not  possible,  for  compensation.  Against  a  third
party  who  was  in  bona  fide  possession  of  the  thing,
he  had  no  action.  If  he  was  sued  in  respect  of  the
transaction-  ^e  could  defend  himself  by  the  excep-
tio doli  mafi.  (Compare  Dig.  4.  tit.  3.)

The  case  of  Minores  xxv.  annorum.  A  Minor
could  by  himself  do  no  legal  act  for  which  the


988      RESTITUTIO  IN  INTEGRUM.

assent  of  a  Tutor  or  Curator  was  required,  and
therefore  if  he  did  such  act  by  himself,  no  Resti-
tutio was  necessary.  If  the  Tutor  had  given  his
Auctorites,  or  the  Curator  his  assent,  the  trans-
action was  legally  binding,  but  yet  the  Minor
could  claim  Restitutio  if  he  had  sustained  injury
by  the  transaction.  Gaius  (iv.  57)  gives  an  ex-
ample, when  he  says  that  if  too  large  an  amount
was  inserted  in  the  Condemnatio  of  the  Formula,
the  matter  is  set  right  by  the  Praetor,  or  in  other
words  "  reus  in  integrum  restituitur,"  but  if  too
little  was  inserted  in  the  formula,  the  Praetor  would
not  make  any  alteration  ;  "  for,"  he  adds,  "  the
I'raetor  more  readily  relieves  a  defendant  than  a
plaintiff ;  but  we  except  the  case  of  Minores  xxv
annorum,  for  the  Praetor  relieves  persons  of  this
class  in  all  cases  wherein  they  have  committed
error  ( in  omnibus  rebus  lapsis)."

There  were  however  cases  in  which  Minores  could
obtain  no  Restitutio  ;  for  instance,  when  a  Minor
with  fraudulent  design  gave  himself  out  to  be
Major  ;  when  he  confirmed  the  transaction  after
coming  of  age  ;  and  in  other  cases.  The  benefit  of
this  Restitutio  belonged  to  the  heredes  of  the  Mi-
nor, and  generally  also  to  sureties.  The  demand
could  only  be  made,  as  a  general  rule,  against  the
person  with  whom  the  Minor  had  the  transaction
and  his  heredes.  The  Minor  had  four  years  after
attaining  his  majority,  in  which  he  could  sue.  The
older  law  allowed  only  one  j'^ear.  If  the  time  had
not  elapsed  when  he  died,  his  hereshad  the  benefit
of  the  remaining  time,  which  was  reckoned  from
the  time  adeundi  hereditatem  ;  and  if  the  heres
was  a  Minor,  from  the  time  of  his  attaining  his
majority.  [Chrator.]

The  case  of  Absentia :  which  comprehends  not
merely  absence  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word,
but  absence  owing  to  madness  or  imprisonment,
and  the  like  causes.  (Dig.  4.  tit.  6.  s.  28.)  If  a
man  had  sustained  injury  by  his  own  absentia,  he
was  generally  intitled  to  restitutio,  if  the  absentia
was  unavoidable :  if  it  was  not  unavoidable,  he
was  intitled  to  Restitutio,  either  if  he  could  have
no  redress  from  his  Procurator,  or  was  not  blamable
for  not  having  appointed  one.  If  a  man  found
that  he  might  sustain  damage  on  account  of  the
absence  of  his  adversary,  he  might  avoid  that  by
entering  a  protestation  in  due  form.

The  case  of  Error,  Mistake,  comprehends  such
error  as  cannot  be  imputed  as  blame  ;  and  in  such
case,  a  man  could  always  have  restitutio  when
another  was  enriched  by  his  loss.  The  erroris
causae  probatio  somewhat  resembles  this  case.
(Gaius,  i.  67 — 75.)

The  case  of  Capitis  diminutio  through  adrogatio
or  in  manum  conventio,  which  was  legally  followed
by  the  extinction  of  all  the  obligationes  of  the  per-
son adrogated  or  in  manu.  The  Praetor  restored
to  the  creditors  of  such  persons  their  former  rights.
(Gaius,  iii.  83,  iv.  38.)

The  case  of  alienatio  judicii  mutandi  causa  facta
is  hardly  a  case  of  restitutio,  though  sometimes
considered  such.  It  occurs  when  a  man  alienates
a  thing  for  the  purpose  of  injuring  a  claimant  by
substituting  for  himself  another  against  whom  the
claimant  cannot  so  easily  prosecute  his  right.  In
the  case  of  a  thing  which  the  Possessor  had  thus
alienated,  the  Praetor  gave  an  actio  in  factum
against  the  alienor  to  the  full  value  of  the  thing.
If  a  man  assigned  a  claim  or  right  with  the  view
of  injuring  his  adversary  by  giving  him  a  harder


RETIS.

claimant  to  deal  vvith,  the  adversary  could  meet  the
assignee,  when  he  sued,  with  an  exceptio  judicii
mutandi  causa.

The  case  of  alienatio  in  fraud  era  creditorura
facta,  (Dig.  42.  tit.  8.)  When  a  man  was  insol-
vent (non  solvendo),  and  alienated  his  property  for
the  purpose  of  injuring  his  creditors,  the  Praetor's
Edict  gave  the  creditors  a  remedy.  If  for  instance
a  debt  was  paid  post  bona  possessa,  it  was  abso
lutely  void,  for  the  effect  of  the  Bonorum  Possessio
in  the  case  of  insolvency  was  to  put  all  the  credi-
tors on  the  same  footing.  If  any  alienation  was
made  before  the  Bonorum  Possessio,  it  was  valid
in  some  cases.  A  debtor  might  reject  any  thing
which  was  for  his  advantage,  for  the  Praetor's
edict  related  only  to  the  diminution  of  his  property,
and  not  to  its  increase.  If  the  act  was  such  as  to
diminish  his  property  (fraudationis  causa)  the  cre-
ditors, as  a  general  rule,  were  intitled  to  have  the
act  undone.  A  creditor  who  exacted  his  just  debt,
was  intitled  to  retain  it.  The  actio  by  which  the
creditors  destroyed  the  effect  of  an  illegal  aliena-
tion was  called  Pauliana,  which  was  brought  by
the  Curator  bonorum  in  the  name  of  the  creditors,
for  the  restoration  of  the  thing  which  had  been  im-
properly aliened,  and  all  its  fruits.  The  creditors
were  also  intitled  to  an  Interdictum  fraudatorium
in  order  to  get  possession  of  the  thing  that  had
been  improperly  aliened.  (Dig.  36.  tit.  1.  s.  67.)

In  the  Imperial  times,  Restitutio  was  also  ap-
plied to  the  remission  of  a  punishment  (Tac.  Jnn.
xiv.  12  ;  Plin.  Ep.  x.  64,  65  ;  Dig.  48.  tit.  1.9.  s.27)
which  could  only  be  done  by  the  Imperial  grace.

(Dig.  4.  tit.  1—7  ;  44.  tit.  4  ;  Paulus,  S.  R.  i.
tit.  7—9  ;  Cod.  2.  tit.  20—55  ;  Cod.  Theod.  2.
tit.  15,  16  ;  MUhlenbruch,  Doct.  Pandect.  ;  Mac-
kcldey,  Lehrbuch,  &c.  r2th  ed. ;  Rein,  DasRomische
Privatrecht  ;  Rudorff,  Zeitschrift  fur  Geschicht.
Rechtsw.  xii.  131,  Ueber  die  Octavianische  Formel  ;
Puchta,  Inst.  ii.  §  209.)  [G.  L.]

RESTITUTO'RIA  ACTIO.    [Intercessio.]

RETIA'RII.     [Glabiatores,  p.  575,  b.]

RETICULUM,  a  head-dress.  [Coma,  p.
329,  a.]

RETIS  and  RETE  ;  dim,  RETI'CULUM
(SiKTwo*'),  a  net.  Nets  were  made  most  commonly
of  flax  from  Egypt,  Colchis,  the  vicinity  of  the
Cinyps  in  North  Africa,  and  some  other  places.
Occasionally  they  were  of  hemp.  (Varro,  de  Re
Rtist.  iii.  5.)  They  are  sometimes  called  litia
(Atva)  on  account  of  the  material  of  which  they
consisted.  (Horn.  11.  v.  487  ;  Brunck,  Anal.  ii.
494,  495.)  The  meshes  (maculae,  Ovid.  Epist.  v.
19  ;  Varro,  de  Re  Rust.  ni.  11  ;  Nemesiani,  C^wg^r.
302  ;  Ppoxoi,  dim.  jSpox^Ses,  Heliodor.  vi.  p.  231,
ed.  (3ommelin.)  were  great  or  small  according  to
the  purposes  intended  ;  and  these  purposes  were
very  various.  But  by  far  the  most  important  ap-
plication of  net- work  was  to  the  three  kindred  arts
of  fowling,  hunting,  and  fishing  :  and  besides  the
general  terms  used  alike  in  reference  to  all  these
employments,  there  are  special  terms  to  be  explained
under  each  of  these  heads.

I.  In  fowling  the  use  of  nets  was  comparatively

limited  (Aristoph.  Av.  528)  ;  nevertheless  thrushes

were  caught  in  them  (Hor.  Epod.  ii.  33,  34)  ;  and

doves    or   pigeons    with   their   limbs   tied   up  or

,  fastened  to  the  ground,  or  with  their  eyes  covered

'  or  put  out,  were  confined  in  a  net,  in  order  that

I  their  cries  might  allure  others  into  the  snare.
(Aristoph.  .4 u.  1083.)     The  ancient  Egyptiar.!!, as


RETIS.

we  learn  from  the  paintings  in  their  tombs,  caught
birds  in  clap-nets.  (Wilkinson,  Alan,  and  Cust.  vol.
iii.  pp.  35—38,  45.)

11.  In  hunting  it  was  usual  to  extend  nets  in  a
curved  line  of  considerable  length,  so  as  in  part  to
surround  a  space  into  which  the  beasts  of  chace,
such  as  the  hare,  the  boar,  the  deer,  the  lion,  and
the  bear,  were  driven  through  the  opening  left  on
one  side.  (Aelian,  H.A.  xii.  46  ;  Tibullus,  iv.  3.
12  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xix.  2.  §  2.)  This  range  of  nets
was  flanked  by  cords,  to  which  feathers  dyed
scarlet  and  of  other  bright  colours  were  tied,  so  as
to  flare  and  flutter  in  the  wind.  The  hunters  then
sallied  forth  with  their  dogs,  dislodged  the  animals
from  their  coverts,  and  by  shouts  and  barking
drove  them  first  within  the  formido^  as  the  appa-
ratus of  string  and  feathers  was  called,  and  then,
as  they  were  scared  with  this  appearance,  within
the  circuit  of  the  nets.  Splendid  descriptions  of
this  scene  are  given  in  some  of  the  following  pas-
sages, all  of  which  allude  to  the  spacious  enclosure
of  net- work.  ( Virg.  Georg.  iii.  411 — 413,  Aeji.  iv.
121,  151— 159,  X.  707—715  ;  Ovi6i.  Epist.  iv.  41,
42,  V.  19,20  ;  Oppian,  C^«.  iv.  120— 1 23  ;  Eurip.
Jiacchae^  821 — 832.)  The  accompanying  woodcuts
are  taken  from  two  bas-reliefs  in  the  collection  of
ancient  marbles  at  Ince-Blundell  in  Lancashire.
In  the  uppermost  figure  three  servants  with  staves
carry  on  their  shoulders  a  large  net,  which  is  in-


RETTS.


989


tended  to  be  set  up  as  already  described.  (Tibullus,
i.  4.  49,  50  ;  Sen.  Hippol.  i.  1.  44  ;  Propert.  iv.  2.
32.)  The  foremost  servant  holds  by  a  leash  a  dog,
which  is  eager  to  pursue  the  game.  In  the  middle
figure  the  net  is  set  up.  At  each  end  of  it  stands
a  watchman  holding  a  staff.     (Oppian,  Cyneg.  iv.


124.)  Being  intended  to  take  such  large  quadm-
peds  as  boars  and  deer  (which  are  seen  within  it),
the  meshes  are  very  wide  {reMa  rara,  Virg.  Aen.
iv.  131  ;  Hor.  Epod.  ii.  33).  The  net  is  supported
V)y  three  stakes  (o-raAi/fes,  Oppian,  Cyneg.  iv.  67,
&c.  ;  Pollux,  V.  31  ;  ancones,  Gratiiis,  Ci/neg.  87  ;
van,  Lucan,  iv.  439).  To  dispose  the  nets  in  this
manner  was  called  retia  ponere  (Virg.  Georg.  i.
307),  or  retia  tendere  (Ovid.  Art.  Amat.  i.  45).
Comparing  it  with  the  stature  of  the  attendants,
we  perceive  the  net  to  be  between  five  and  six  feet
high.  The  upper  border  of  the  not  consists  of  a
strong  rope,  which  was  called  aapSccu.  (Xen.  de
Vcnat.  vi.  9.)  The  figures  in  the  following  woodcut
represent  two  men  carrying  the  net  home  after
the  chace  ;  the  stakes  for  supporting  it,  two  of
which  they  hold  in  their  hands,  are  forked  at  the
top,  as  is  expressed  by  the  terms  for  them  already
quoted,  ancones  and  vari.

Besides  the  nets  used  to  inclose  woods  and  co-
verts or  other  large  tracts  of  country  two  additional
kinds  are  mentioned  by  those  authors  who  treat  on


hunting.  All  the  three  are  mentioned  together  by
Xenophon  (Slktvu,  iv65ia,  &pKves,  ii.  4),  and  by
Nemesianus  (Ci/neg.  299,  300).

The  two  additional  kinds  were  placed  at  inter-
vals in  the  same  circuit  with  the  large  hunting-net
or  haye.  The  road-net  ( plaga,  iv65tov)  Avas  much
less  than  the  others,  and  was  placed  across  roads
and  narrow  openings  between  bushes.  The  purse-
or  tunnel-net  (cassis,  &pKvs)  was  made  with  a  baa:
(KeKpv(t)a\o<:,  Xen.  de  Venat.  vi.  7),  intended  to
receive  the  animal  when  chased  towards  the  extre-
mity of  the  inclosure.  Within  this  bag,  if  we  may
so  call  it,  were  placed  branches  of  trees,  to  keep  it
expanded  and  to  decoy  the  animals  by  making  it
invisible.  The  words  &pKv$  or  cassis  are  used  me-
taphorically to  denote  some  certain  method  of  de-
struction,^ and  are  more  particularly  applied,  as
well  as  afx(()i§\7]arpov,  which  Avill  be  explained
immediately,  to  the  large  shawl  in  which  Clytem-
nestra  enveloped  her  husband  in  order  to  murder
him.  (Aeschyl  Agam.  1085,  1346,1353,  C/toeph.
AS5,Eu7nen.  112.)

III.  Fishing-nets  (aXievTiKO.  BlKTva,  Diod.  Sic.
xvii.  43,  p.  193,  Wess.)  were  of  six  different  kinds,
which  are  enumerated  by  Oppian  (Hal.  iii.  80 — 82)
as  follows  :  —

Twv TO.  fj.y  afi(pi€\T](TTpa,Ta  Se  yp7cpoi  KaXeovrai^
rdyyafia  r\  r;S'  viroxai  irepirfyees,  ^5e  (Tayrjvai^
"AWa  Se  KiKK'f](TKov(Ti  KaKv^fxaTa.

Of  these  by  far  the  most  common  were  the
afx(pi§AricTTpov,  or  casting-net  (funda,  jaculum,
retiiiaculum)  and  the  aayfjur],  i.  e.  the  drag-net,  or
sean  (tragum,  Isid.  Hisp,  Grig.  xix.  5  ;  tragula.^
verriculum).  Consequently  these  two  are  the  only
kinds  mentioned  by  Virgil  in  Georg.  i.  141,  142.
and  by  Ovid,  in  Ar.  Amat.  i.  763,  764.  Of  the
KaXvfxfxa  we  find  nowhere  any  further  mention.
We  are  also  ignorant  of  the  exact  form  and  use  of
the  yp7(pos,  although  its  comparative  utility  may
be  inferred  from  the  mention  of  it  in  conjunction
with  the  sean  and  casting-net  by  Artemidorus  (ii.
14)  and  Plutarch  (irepl  evdvfx.  vol.  v,  p;  838,  ed.
Steph.).  We  know  no  more  of  the  70770^0^',
(Hesych.  s.v. ;  Aeschyl.  Agam.  352.)  The  inrox-h
was  a  landing-net,  made  with  a  hoop  (kvkAos)
fastened  to  a  pole,  and  perhaps  provided  also  with
the  means  of  closing  the  circular  aperture  at  the
top.  (Oppian,  Hal.  iv.  251.)  The  metaphorical
use  of  the  term  aix<pl€\r)<rTpov  has  been  already
mentioned.  That  it  denoted  a  casting-net  may  be
concluded  both  from  its  etymology  and  from  the
circumstances  in  which  it  is  mentioned  by  various
authors.  (Hesiod,  Scut.  Here.  213 — 215  ;  Herod,
i.  141  ;  Ps.  cxli.  10  ;  Is.  xix.  8  ;  Hab.  i.  15—17
(LXX.  and  Vulgate  versions)  ;  St.  Matt.  iv.  18;
St.  Mark,  i.  16.)  More  especially  the  casting-net,
being  alwa3's  pear-shaped  or  conical,  was  suited  to
the  use  mentioned  under  the  article  Conopeum.


990


REX.


Its  Latin  names  are  found  in  the  passages  of  Vir-
gil's Georgics,  and  of  the  Vulgate  Bible  above  re-
ferred to,  in  Plautus,  Asinar.  i.  1.  87,  Triic.  i.  1.
14  ;  and  in  Isid.  Hisp.  Orig.  xix.  5.

The  English  term  sean  (which  is  also  in  the
south  of  Englasd  pronounced  and  spelt  seine,  as  in
French),  has  been  brought  into  our  language  by  a
corruption  of  the  Greek  aayT]vi\  through  the  Vul-
gate Bible  (sagena)  and  the  Anglo-Saxon.  (Ezek.
xxvi.  5,14,  xlvii.  10  ;  St.Matt  xiii.47,48  ;  St.  John
xxi.  6 — 11.)  This  net,  which,  as  now  used  both
by  the  Arabians  and  by  our  own  fishermen  in
Cornwall,  is  sometimes  half  a  mile  long,  was  pro-
bably of  equal  dimensions  among  the  ancients,  for
tliey  speak  of  it  as  nearly  taking  in  the  compass
of  a  whole  bay.  (Hom.  Od.xxil  384—387  ;  Alci-
phron,  i.  17,  18.)  This  circumstance  well  illus-
trates the  application  of  the  term  to  describe  the
besieging  of  a  city :  to  encircle  a  city  by  an  unin-
terrupted line  of  soldiers  was  called  aayr]Viv(iv.
(Herod,  iii.  145,  vi.  31  ;  Plato,  de  Leg.  iii.  svb
im.  ;  Heliodorus,  vii.  p.  304,  ed.  Commelini.)  The
use  of  corks  (</>eAAoi,  cortices  suberini,  Sidon.
Apollin.  Epist.  ii.  2  ;  Plin.  H.N.  xvi.  8.  s.  13)
to  support  the  top,  and  of  leads  (iJ.o\i€5iSes)  to
keep  down  the  bottom,  is  frequently  mentioned  by
ancient  writers  (Ovid.  Irist.  iii.  4.  11,  12  ;  Aelian,
//.  A.  xii.  43  ;  Pausan.  viii.  12.  §  1),  and  is  clearly
exhibited  in  some  of  the  paintings  in  Egyptian
tombs.  Leads,  and  pieces  of  wood  serving  as  floats
instead  of  corks,  still  remain  on  a  sean  which  is
preserved  in  the  fine  collection  of  Egyptian  anti-
quities at  Berlin.  (See  Yates,  Textritium  Anti-
quum, Appendix  C.)  [J.  Y.]

REUS.     [Actor  ;  Obligationes,  p.  658.]

REX  (fia(n\6vs,  &ya^),  king.  1.  Greek.  In  the
earliest  ages  of  Greece,  of  which  we  have  any  au-
thentic records,  we  find  the  kingly  form  of  govern-
ment everywhere  prevalent.  On  this  point  we  may
safely  trust  the  pictures  of  society  found  in  the
Homeric  poems  ;  for  whatever  amount  of  historical
truth  there  may  be  in  the  legends  which  form  their
subject,  there  cannot  be  the  smallest  question  that
the  poems  present  a  faithful  reflection  of  the  feel-
ings, condition  and  manners  of  the  society  in  the
age  of  which  they  were  composed.

Whether  in  early  times  absolute  monarchies  ex-
isted in  Greece,  we  have  no  historical  data  for
determining.  The  first  of  which  we  can  trace  the
features  are  hereditary  monarchies  with  limited
functions  (irpSTepou  Se  ^aav  iirl  ^t)to7s  yepaai
iraTpLKal  fiacriKelai,  Thuc.  i.  13  ;  i)  Trepl  tovs
Tjpw'iKovs  xP^^ovs  [/SotriAeio]  ?iv  €k6utuv  fihu  cVi
Tjfl-t  5'  apia-fievoiSy  Arist.  Pol.  iii.  10,  ed.  Gottl.
14,  ed.  Bekker  ;  comp.  Dionys.  Halic.  v.  74).
By  this  we  are  to  understand,  not  only  that  the
kings  were  themselves  under  the  control  of  law  or
custom,  but  that  only  a  portion  of  the  functions  of
political  sovereignty  were  in  their  hands.  This  is
the  fourth  species  of  fiacriXdia  which  Aristotle  re-
cognises ;  the  others  being,  a.  the  royalty  of  the
Spartan  kings  ;  b.  the  royalty  of  barbarian  kings
(an  hereditary  despotism  administered  according  to
law)  ;  c.  the  government  of  an  aesymnetes  (Arist.
Pol.  iii.  9  or  14).  It  is  not  to  be  supposed,  how-
ever, that  the  Grecian  kings  of  the  heroic  age  were
constitutional  kings,  or  were  responsible  to  their
subjects  in  any  recognised  sense.  Their  authority
was  founded  purely  on  the  personal  feeling  and
reverence  entertained  for  them  by  their  subjects,
and  its  limitations  were  derived  not  from  any  de-


REX.

finite  scheme,  or  written  code,  but  from  tlie  force  of
traditionary  usage,  and  the  natural  influence  of  the
circumstances  in  which  the  kings  were  placed,  sur-
rounded as  they  were  by  a  body  of  chiefs  or  nobles,
whose  power  was  but  little  inferior  to  that  of  the
kings  themselves.  Even  the  title  fiatriXries  is  ap-
plied to  them,  as  well  as  to  the  king  (Hom.  II.  ii.
86,  Od.  i.  394,  vii.  55,  viii.  391).  The  main-
tenance of  regal  authority  doubtless  depended
greatly  on  the  possession  of  personal  superiority  in
bravery,  military  prowess,  wisdom  in  council  and
eloquence  in  debate.  When  old  age  had  blunted
his  powers  and  activity,  a  king  ran  a  great  chance
of  losing  his  influence.  (Od.  xi.  496  ;  comp.  //.
xii.  310,  &c,)  There  was,  however,  an  undefined
notion  of  a  sort  of  divine  right  connected  with  the
kingly  office  (ck  Se  Aihs  fiaffiKrjes,  Hesiod.  Theog.
96  ;  comp.  Hom.  Od.  xi.  255.  Hence  the  epithet
SioTpfip'fjs,  so  commonly  applied  to  kings  in  Homer).
This,  in  most  cases,  was  probably  strengthened  by
a  belief  in  the  divine  descent  of  kingly  families.

Besides  the  more  ordinary  kingly  accomplish-
ments, there  were  various  others,  proficiency  in
which  gave  increased  dignity  and  consideration
even  to  a  king.  To  be  a  skilful  carpenter  or
ploughman  was  considered  not  unworthy  of  being
made  a  matter  of  boast  (Hom.  Od.  v.  246,  xviii.
365,  xxiii.  188).  Prowess  in  boxing  and  other
athletic  exercises  was  more  closely  connected  with
superiority  in  the  use  of  arms.  (Od.  viii.  180,  &c.
//.  xxiii.  257,  &c.)

Aristotle  (I.  c.)  mentions,  as  the  functions  of  the
kings  in  the  heroic  age,  the  leadership  in  war,  the
offering  of  such  sacrifices  as  were  not  appropriated
to  particular  priests,  and  the  duty  of  deciding
judicial  causes.  But  both  in  the  field  and  in  the
agora  the  king  always  appears  in  connection  with  the
)8ouA.7j,  or  council  of  chiefs  and  elders,  of  which  he
acts  as  president.  Even  before  Troy  Agamemnon
submits  his  plans  to  the  assembled  chieftains  and
soldiers  (II.  ii.  53,  &c.  x.  195,  &c.).  The  restrictive
influence  of  these  assemblies  was,  however,  rather
indirect  than  ostensible.  The  chieftains  or  princes
merely  offer  their  advice  (II.  ix.  95,  &c.),  and  the
multitude  assembled  outside  the  circle  in  which
they  sit  take  no  part  in  the  deliberations.  They
only  listen,  and  sometimes  applaud  (II.  ii.  100  ;
Aristot.  ap.  Schol.  ad  II.  ix.  17).  Still  less  is
the  matter  in  hand  put  in  any  formal  way  to  the
vote  of  either  the  fiov\-f],  or  the  assembly  of  freemen.
The  assemblies  described  in  the  second  book  of  the
Iliad  and  the  second  book  of  the  Odyssey  will
give  a  good  idea  of  their  nature.  In  judicial  trials
the  council  of  elders  seems  always  to  have  held  a
prominent  place.  (II.  xviii.  504  ;  Hesiod.  Theog.
85,  Op.  et  D.  37.)  Theoretically  the  govern-
ment of  the  heroic  age  was  in  the  strictest  sense
monarchical  (see  especially  the  remarkable  pas-
sage //.  ii.  204).  Here  and  there  the  poet  repre-
sents kings  as  using  language  which  would  iniply  a
power  on  the  part  of  the  king  to  deal  with  his  do-
minions and  subjects  in  a  very  summary  manner
(see  the  offer  of  Agamemnon  to  make  over  to
Achilles  seven  cities,  //.  ix.  153  ;  and  of  Menelaus,
to  depopulate  one  of  his  towns  to  make  room  for
Ulysses,  Od.  iv.  176).  No  doubt  the  power  of
different  kings  varied,  and  in  the  absence  of  definite
constitutional  restrictions  the  actual  amount  of
power  in  the  hands  of  each  depended  mainly  on
his  individual  qualifications  and  address.  The
cases,  however,  must  have  been  extremely  rare  in


REX.

Tvliich  it  approached  to  absolute  power  (irajugao-i-
\eia).  Even  the  voice  of  the  commonalty  carried
a  moral  weight  with  it  that  ensured  some  degree  of
respect  for  it  (xoAeir))  ^/xov  (prjfjiis^  Od.  xiv.  239,
vi.  273).

Besides  such  private  property  as  the  king  might
possess,  he  had  the  use  of  a  domain  attached  to
the  regal  office.  {Od.  xi.  185.)  The  refieur}  here
spoken  of  are  different  from  the  Kri^jxara^  or  pri-
vate property  of  the  family,  which  Telemachus
would  retain,  even  if  excluded  from  the  throne,
and  so  deprived  of  the  use  of  the  royal  domain.
{Od.  i.  402.)  There  were  also  stated  dttes  {^4-
ttt<rT6s),  which  formed  an  important  item  in  the
king's  emoluments  (hence  termed  \nrapai,  IL  ix.
156",  298).  But  besides  these  a  large  part  of  his
revenues  was  derived  from  presents  {durivai  or
5«po),  which  appear  to  have  been  given  on  most
occasions  on  which  his  aid  or  protection  was  in-
voked {11.  ix.  155,  xvii.  225).  The  characteristic
emblem  of  the  kingly  office  was  the  a-KrJTrrpov  {II.
ii.  101,  206).     [ScEPTRUM.]

It  was  doubtless  seldom  that  the  rule  of  here-
ditary succession  was  infringed  upon,  though  the
ciise  of  Telemachus  {Od.  i.  386,  &c.)  indicates  that
under  peculiar  circumstances  the  idea  of  departing
from  it  might  be  entertained.  But  even  here  the
presumptive  rightof  Telemachus  is  admitted.  Such
a  dparture  from  the  ordinarj^  rule,  however,
marks  a  considerable  decline  in  the  kingh'^  power,
and  advance  on  the  part  of  the  nobles.  At  a  later
period  we  find  kings  deprived  of  their  throne  for
misconduct,  as  in  the  case  of  Thymoetes  in  Attica,
At  a  later  period  than  the  Homeric  age  the  fact  of
responsibility  was  regarded  as  constituting  the  dif-
ference between  a  king  and  a  tyrant  ( Arist.  Pol.  iv.
8).  Hence  at  Argos  Pheidon  is  called  a  tyrant,
though  he  was  a  legitimate  successor  to  the  throne,
because  he  acquired  for  himself  despotic  authority.

Our  information  respecting  the  Grecian  kings  in
the  more  historical  age  is  not  ample  or  minute
enough  to  enable  us  to  draw  out  a  detailed  scheme
of  their  functions.  The  rising  influence  of  the
nobles  gradually  reduced  these  to  narrower  and
narrower  limits  till  at  last  the  establishment  of
aristocratical  or  oligarchical  governments  became
almost  universal.  Respecting  the  kings  of  Sparta
the  reader  is  referred  to  the  article  Ephori.  As
an  illustration  of  the  gradual  limitation  of  the  pre-
rogatives of  thaking  or  chief  magistrate,  the  reader
may  consult  the  article  Archon.  The  title  Ba-
sileus  was  sometimes  applied  to  an  officer  who  dis-
charged the  priestly  functions  of  the  more  ancient
kings,  as  in  Athens  [ArchonJ,  Delphi  (Plut.
Quaed.  Gr.  7.  p.  177),  Siphnos  (Isocr.  ad  Callim.
p.  685),  Megara  (Chandler,  Marm.  Oocon.  2,  82),
Chalcedon  (Caylus,  Recueil,  &c.  ii.  55),  Cyzicus
{id.  ii.  71,  72),  and  Samothrace  (Liv.  xlv.  5).
(K.  F.  Hermann,  Lehrhuch  der  griech.  Staatsalter-
tkumer,  §§  53 — 55  ;  Wachsmuth,  Hellenische  Al-
terthumskunde,  §§  38,  43  ;  Thirlwall,  Hist,  of
Greece,  cc.  vi.  x.  ;  Grote,  Hist,  of  Greece,  c.  xx.
vol.  ii.  p.  79,  &c.)  [C.  P.M.]

2.  Roman.  Rome  was  originally  governed  by
kings.  All  the  ancient  writers  agree  in  repre-
Benting  the  king  as  elected  by  the  people  for  life,
and  as  voluntarily  entrusted  by  them  with  the
supreme  power  in  the  state.  No  reference  is  made
to  the  hereditary  principle  in  the  election  of  the
first  four  kings  ;  and  it  is  not  until  the  fifth  king
Tarquinius  Priscus  obtained  the  sovereignty,  that


REX.


901


anything  is  said  about  the  children  of  the  deceased
king.  Consequently  the  ancient  writers  state  that
the  king  was  chosen  on  account  of  his  virtues  and
not  his  descent  (Cic.  de  Rep.  ii.  12  ;  Appian,  B.  C.
i.  98).  It  is  true  that  in  the  case  of  Romulus  the
genuine  legend  makes  no  mention  of  his  election  to
Ihe  royalty  ;  and  one  of  the  acutest  modem  writers
on  the  history  of  the  Roman  constitution  has
availed  himself  of  this  circumstance  to  support  his
theory,  that  the  Roman  king  was  not  elected  by  the
people,  but  derived  his  power  immediately  from
the  gods,  and  that  this  power  devolved  upon  the
senate  at  his  death,  and  was  transmitted  in  all  its
integrity  to  the  next  king  by  means  of  the  inter-
reges  (Rubino,  Untersuchungen  iiber  Romische  Ver-
fassung,  p.  107,  &c.).  Our  limits  will  not  permit
us  to  enter  into  an  examination  of  this  theory.  It
rests  to  a  great  extent  upon  the  assumption  that
the  Patres  in  the  early  Roman  constitution  were
the  senate  ;  and  it  falls  if  it  can  be  proved  that  the
Patres  in  the  earliest  times  were  the  same  as  the
whole  body  of  the  patricians.  We  think  that  W.  A.
Becker  {Handbuck  der  Romiscken  A  Iter thiimer)  has
established  beyond  all  doubt  that  the  latter  is  the
true  meaning  of  the  Patres,  and  that  the  common
view  is  correct,  which  represents  the  king  as  volun-
tarily entrusted  by  the  people  with  the  supreme
power.

Since  the  people  had  conferred  the  regal  power,
it  returned  to  them  upon  the  death  of  the  king.
As  in  modem  states  it  is  held  that  the  king  never
dies,  in  like  manner  in  Rome  the  vacant  place  was
instantly  filled  up.  But  as  a  new  king  could
not  be  immediately  appointed,  an  Interrex  forth-
with stepped  into  his  place.  The  necessity  for  an
immediate  successor  to  the  king  arose  from  the
circumstance  that  he  alone  had  had  the  power  of
taking  the  auspicia  on  behalf  of  the  state  ;  and  as
the  auspicia  devolved  upon  the  people  at  his  death,
it  was  imperative  upon  them  to  create  a  magistrate,
to  whom  they  could  delegate  the  auspicia  and
who  would  thus  possess  the  power  of  mediating
between  the  gods  and  the  state.  Originally  the
people  consisted  only  of  the  patres  or  patricii  ;
and  accordingly,  on  the  death  of  the  king,  we
read  res  ad  patres  redit  (Liv.  i.  32),  or,  what  is
nearly  the  same  thing,  auspicia  ad  patres  redeunt.
[Augur,  p.  177.]  The  interrex  was  elected  by
the  whole  body  of  the  patricians,  and  he  appointed
{prodebat)  his  successor,  as  it  was  a  rule  that  the
first  interrex  could  not  hold  the  comitia  for  the
election  ;  but  it  frequently  happened  that  the
second  interrex  appointed  a  third,  the  third  a
fourth,  and  so  on,  till  the  election  took  place.  This
was  the  custom  under  the  republic  ;  and  there
would  hp.ve  been  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the
practice  was  different  during  the  kingly  period,  if
it  had  not  been  for  the  account  of  the  appoint-
ment of  interreges  after  the  death  of  Romulus,  ac-
cording to  which  the  senate  was  divided  into  de-
curies  for  the  purpose  of  sharing  the  interregnum
between  them.     [Interrex.]

The  Interrex  presided  over  the  comitia  curiata,
which  was  assembled  for  the  election  of  the  king.
He  had  previously  agreed  with  the  senate  upon
the  person  who  was  to  be  proposed  to  the  comitia
as  king  ;  for  it  is  inconceivable  that  he  had  the
absolute  power  of  selecting  whatever  person  he
chose,  as  Dionysius  states  in  some  passages.  The
person  whom  the  senate  had  selected  was  proposed
by  the  interrex  to  the  people  in  a  regular  rogativ^-


992


REX.


which  the  people  obuld  only  accept  or  reject,  for
they  had  not  the  initiative  and  could  not  them-
eelves  propose  any  name.  If  the  people  voted  in
favour  of  the  rogation,  they  were  said  creare  regem^
and  their  acceptance  of  him  was  called  jussus
populi.  (Dionys.  iv.  40,  80  ;  Liv.  i.  22,  32  ;  Cic.
de  Rep.  ii.  17,  21.)  But  the  king  did  not  imme-
diately enter  upon  his  office.  Two  other  acts  had
still  to  take  place  before  he  was  invested  with  the
full  regal  authority  and  power.  First,  his  inaugu-
ratio  had  to  be  performed,  as  it  was  necessary  to
obtain  the  divine  will  respecting  his  appointment
by  means  of  the  auspices,  since  he  was  the  high
priest  of  the  people.  This  ceremony  was  performed
by  an  augur,  who  conducted  the  newly-elected
king  to  the  arx,  or  citadel,  and  there  placed  him  on
a  stone  seat  with  his  face  turned  to  the  south,
while  the  people  waited  below  in  anxious  suspense
until  the  augur  announced  that  the  gods  had  sent
the  favourable  tokens  confirming  the  king  in  his
priestly  character.  (Liv.  i.  18;  Plut.  Num.  7.)
The  inauguratio  did  not  confer  upon  him  the  aus-
picia  ;  for  these  he  obtained  by  his  election  to  the
royalty,  as  the  comitia  were  held  auspicato.  It
simply  had  reference  to  his  priestly  character,  as  al-
ready remarked,  and  consequently  did  not  take
place  in  the  case  of  the  republican  magistrates,
though  the  rexsacrorum  and  other  priests  were  in-
augurated. The  passage  of  Dionysius  (ii.  6),  which
is  quoted  in  the  article  Inauguratio  to  prove  that
the  republican  magistrates  were  inaugurated,  refers
only  to  their  taking  the  auspices  on  the  morning  of
the  day  on  which  they  entered  upon  their  office.
(Comp,  Becker,  Ibid.  vol.  ii.  pt.  i.  p.  314.)  The
second  act  which  had  to  be  performed  was  the
conferring  of  the  iraperium  upon  the  king.  The
curiae  had  only  determined  by  their  previous  vote
who  was  to  be  king,  and  had  not  by  that  act  be-
stowed the  necessary  power  upon  him  ;  the,y  had,
therefore,  to  grant  him  the  imperium  by  a  distinct
vote.  Accordingly  the  king  himself  proposed  to
the  curiae  a  lex  curiata  de  imperio^  and  the  curiae
by  voting  in  favour  of  it  gave  him  the  imperium.
(Cic.  deBep.  ii.  13,  17,  18,  20,  21.)  The  reason
of  this  double  vote  of  the  curiae  is  clear  enough.
The  imperium  could  only  be  conferred  upon  a
determinate  person.  It  was  necessary,  therefore,
first  to  determine  who  was  to  be  the  person  who
was  capable  of  receiving  the  imperium  ;  and
when  this  was  determined,  the  imperium  was
granted  to  him  by  a  special  vote.  Livj'^  in  his
iirst  book  makes  no  mention  of  the  lex  curiata  de
imperio^  but  he  uses  the  expressions  patres  audores
Jierent,  patres  auctores  fadi.  (Liv.  i.  17,  22,  32.)
That  these  expressions,  however,  are  equivalent  to
the  lex  curiata  de  imperio  in  the  kingly  period  is
shown  by  Becker,  an  abstract  of  whose  explana-
tion is  given  under  Auctor.

It  is  very  difficult  to  determine  the  extent  of  the
king's  powers,  as  the  ancient  writers  naturally
judged  of  the  kingly  period  by  their  own  repub-
lican constitution,  and  frequently  assigned  to  the
king,  the  senate,  and  the  comitia  of  the  curiae,  the
respective  powers  and  functions  which  were  only
true  in  reference  to  the  consuls,  the  senate,  and  the
comitia  of  their  own  time.  Most  modern  writers
have  represented  the  supreme  power  as  residing  in
the  people,  and  have  regarded  the  king,  to  a  great
extent,  as  the  executive  of  the  senate  and  the  curiae ;
but  this  view  of  the  limited  nature  of  the  king's
puvirers  is  strongly  attacked,  and  we  may  say  dis-


REX.

proved,  by  the  masterly  investigations  of  Rubino.
For  whatever  exception  may  be  taken  to  many  of
his  propositions,  no  one  can  examine  his  arguments
without  feeling  convinced  that  the  king  possessed
the  supreme  power  in  the  earliest  times,  and  that
the  senate  and  the  comitia  of  the  curiae  were  very-
slight  checks  upon  its  exercise.  In  the  first  place,
the  king  alone  possessed  the  right  of  taking  the
auspices  on  behalf  ol  the  state  ;  and  as  no  public
business  of  any  kind  could  be  performed  without
the  approbation  of  the  gods  expressed  by  the
auspices,  the  king  stood  as  mediator  between  the
gods  and  the  people,  and  in  an  early  stage  of  so-
ciety must  necessarily  have  been  regarded  with
religious  awe.  [Augur.]  He  was  thus  at  the
head  of  the  national  religion  ;  and  the  priests,  who
are  in  all  nations  most  jealous  of  their  exclusive
rights  and  privileges,  acknowledged  that  they  were
originally  instituted  by  the  king,  and  learnt  from
him  their  religious  rites.  Thus  Romulus  is  not
only  said  to  have  established  the  augurs,  but  to
have  been  himself  the  best  of  all  augurs  (Cic.  de
Div.  i.  2)  ;  and  the  institution  of  the  pontiffs  in
like  manner  was  not  only  attributed  to  Numa
Pompilius,  but  they  are  said  to  have  been  taught
by  this  king  the  whole  doctrine  of  the  public  and
private  sacra,  the  arrangement  of  the  calendar,  the
division  of  daj's  mio  fasti  and  ne/asti,  in  one  word
the  jus  pontificium.  (Liv.  i.  19,  20  ;  Cic.  de  Rep.
ii.  14  ;  Dionys.  ii.  72  ;  Plut.  Num.  12.)

Secondly,  the  people  surrendered  to  the  king  the
supreme  military  and  judicial  authority  by  con-
ferring the  imperium  upon  him.  It  is  true  that
the  imperium  was  granted  to  the  consuls  in  like
manner  ;  but  the  imperium,  though  the  same  nomi-
nally, was  in  reality  limited  in  its  exercise,  as
the  consuls  at  the  end  of  their  year  of  office  be-
came private  persons  again,  and  might  be  brought
to  trial  for  acts  which  they  had  performed  during
their  consulship.  In  addition  to  which  various
laws  were  passed  for  the  protection  of  the  citizens
against  the  arbitrary  use  of  their  power,  none  of
which  existed  in  the  kingly  period.  The  impe-
rium is  usually  defined  to  be  the  exercise  of  military
authority  {imperium^  sine  quo  res  viilitaris  ad-
ministrari,  teneri  exercitus^  helium  geri  non  potesty
Cic.  Fhil.  s.\^  \  comp.  Liv.  v.  52  ;  Cic.  de  Leg..
Agr.  ii.  12)  ;  but  this  definition  simply  arises  from
the  fact  that  the  writers  are  thinking  of  tiu  im-
perium of  the  consuls,  who  were  deprived  v.  ju-
dicial power  in  the  city  of  Rome,  and  witha.  the
first  milestone  from  it,  from  the  time  of  the  insti-
tution of  the  praetorship.  (Liv.  iv.  42  ;  Gains,  iv.
104.)  But  the  praetors  also  had  the  imperium
conferred  upon  them  by  a  lex  curiata,  and  it  was
by  possession  of  the  imperium  that  they  were
alone  qualified  to  pronounce  a  judicium  legitimum^
at  all  events  in  criminal  cases.  It  must,  there-
fore, be  recollected,  that  the  king  was  not  only  the
commander  in  war,  but  the  supreme  judge  in  peace.
Seated  on  his  throne  in  the  comitium,  he  adminr
istered  justice  to  all  comers,  and  decided  in  all
cases  which  were  brought  before  him,  civil  as  well
as  criminal.  The  opinion  of  Puchta  (Instil,  vol.  i.
p.  1 40,  &c.),  that  private  suits  were  not  decided  by
the  king,  but  came  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the
pontiffs,  rests  on  no  sufficient  authority,  and  is  re-
futed by  the  tale  of  the  pretended  dispute  which
was  brought  before  Tarquinius  Priscus  by  the  mui>
derers  of  that  king.  (Liv.  i.  40.)  If  we  are  tp
place  reliance  upon  Livy,  the  kuig  did  not  admiij-


I


REX.

ister  justice  alone,  but  was  fettered  by  a  consilium^
since  it  is  brought  forward  as  a  reproach  against
Tarquinius  Superbus,  cognitiones  capitaJium  rerum
sifie  consiliis  per  se  so/us  exercebut  (Liv.  i.  47)  ;
but  it  is  not  easy  to  believe  in  the  existence  of
such  a  consilium  in  the  times  of  the  early  kings,  or
if  it  did  exist,  it  must  have  been  a  body  simply  to
advise  the  king,  and  could  not  have  had  the  power
of  controlling  him,  as  he  administered  justice  in
virtue  of  his  possessing  the  imperium.  There  is
moreover  no  case  recorded  in  which  the  consilium
liad  any  share  in  the  administration  of  justice.
I'^rom  the  decision  of  the  king  there  seems  to
have  been  no  appeal  (provocatio).  This  is  in-
deed denied  by  Niebuhr,  who  maintains  that  in
all  cases  affecting  the  caput  of  a  Roman  citizen,
an  appeal  lay  from  the  king  to  the  people  in
the  comitia  of  the  curiae,  and  who  further  argues
that  this  was  an  ancient  right  of  the  patricians,
and  was  extended  to  the  plebs  by  the  Lex  Va-
leria, enacted  at  the  establishment  of  the  re-
public. It  is  true  that  the  ancient  writers  refer
the  institution  of  the  provocatio  to  the  kingh'-
period  (Liv.  i.  26,  viii.  33  ;  Cic.  pro  Mil.  3  ;  Val.
Max.  vi.  3.  §  6,  viii.  L  §  1  ;  Festus,  s.  v.  sororium
tiqillum  ;  Cic.  de  Rep.  ii.  31),  but  it  by  no  means
follows  that  the  provocatio  of  that  early  time  was
the  same  as  the  right  secured  by  the  Lex  Valeria,
which  was  regarded  as  the  great  bulwark  of  the
liberty  of  a  Roman  citizen.  We  have  indeed  the
record  of  only  one  case  of  provocatio  under  the
kings,  namelj^  when  the  surviving  Horatius,  who
murdered  his  sister,  appealed  from  the  duumviri  to
the  people  ;  and  in  this  case  it  must  be  borne  in
mind  that  the  appeal  was  not  from  the  sentence  of
the  king,  but  from  the  sentence  of  the  duumviri.
It  appears,  even  from  the  narrative  of  Livy,  that
the  king  voluntarily  surrendered  his  right  of  trying
the  criminal  and  passing  sentence  upon  him,  in
order  to  avoid  the  odium  of  putting  to  death  the
hero  who  had  rendered  such  signal  services  to  the
state,  and  that  he  appointed  duumviri,  from  whose
decision  an  appeal  lay  to  the  people,  in  order  that
the  people  might  have  the  responsibility  of  pro-
nouncing his  acquittal  or  condemnation.  (Liv.  i.
26  ;  comp.  Dionys.  iii.  22.)  In  addition  to  which
it  is  expressly  stated  that  the  dictatorship  was  a
restoration  of  the  kingly  power  (Zonar,  vii.  13  ;
comp.  Cic.  de  Rep.  ii.  32)  ;  and  it  is  certain  that
tlie  great  distinction  between  the  power  of  the
dictator  and  that  of  the  consuls  consisted  in  there
being  no  provocatio  from  the  decisions  of  the  former,
as  there  was  from  the  decisions  of  the  latter.  Our
limits  do  not  allow  us  to  enter  further  into  an
examination  of  this  question  ;  but  the  reader  will
find  the  arguments  against  Niebuhr's  views  stated
at  great  length  in  Rubino,     {Ibid.  p.  430,  &c.)

Again,  all  the  magistrates  in  the  kingly  period
appear  to  have  been  appointed  by  the  king  and
not  elected  by  the  curiae.  This  is  expressly  stated
of  the  two  most  importJint,  the  Tribunus  Celeram.,
who  occupied  the  second  place  in  the  state,  and
who  stood  in  the  same  relation  to  the  king  as  the
magister  equitum  did  in  later  times  to  the  dic-
tator (Lydus,  </e  Mag.  i.  14),  and  the  Gustos  or
Prapfectus  urbi,  who  was  nominated  by  the  king
to  supply  his  place  when  he  was  absent  from  the
city  (Tac.  A7in.  vi.  11).  We  may  consequently  infer
that  the  Quaestores  were  in  like  manner  nominated
hj  the  king,  although  the  ancient  authorities  differ
on  the  point,  Tacitus  ascribing  their  appointment


REX.  9.9a

to  the  king  (Tac.  J?m.  xi.  22)  and  Jimius  Grac-
chanus  to  the  people.  (Dig.  1.  tit.  13.)  Livy  ex-
pressly says  (i.  26)  that  the  Duumviri  Perdud-
lionis  were  appointed  by  the  king  ;  and  if  these
were  the  same  officers  as  the  Quaestores  during  the
kingly  period,  as  many  writers  maintain,  there  can
be  no  doubt  that  the  latter  were  nominated  by
the  king.

Further,  the  king  was  not  dependent  upon  the
people  for  his  support  ;  but  a  large  portion  of  the
ager  publicus  belonged  to  him,  which  was  culti-
vated at  the  expense  of  the  state  on  his  behalf.
(Cic.  de  Rep.  v,  2.)  He  had  also  the  absolute
disposal  of  the  booty  taken  in  war  and  of  the  con-
quered lands.  (Dionys.  ii.  28,  62  ;  Cic.  de  Rep.  ii.
9,  14,  18.)

It  must  not,  however,  be  supposed  that  the  au-
thority of  the  king  was  absolute.  The  senate  and
the  assembly  of  the  people  must  have  formed  some
check  upon  his  power  ;  though,  if  the  views  we
have  been  stating  are  correct,  they  were  far  from
possessuig  the  extensive  privileges  which  Dionysius
(ii.  14)  assigns  to  them.  The  senate  and  the
comitia  of  the  curiae  were  not  independent  bodies
possessing  the  right  of  meeting  at  certain  times  and
discussing  questions  of  state.  They  could  only  be
called  together  when  the  king  chose,  and  further
could  only  determine  upon  matters  which  the  king
submitted  to  them.  The  senate  was  simply  the
consilium  of  the  king,  the  members  of  which  were
all  appointed  by  him  (Liv.  i.  8;  Dionys.  ii.  12  ;
Festus,  p.  246,  ed.  Miiller ;  Cic.  de  Rep.  ii.  8),
and  which  only  offered  their  advice  to  him,  which
he  could  follow  or  reject  according  to  his  pleasure.
The  comitia  of  the  curiae  seem  to  have  been
rarely  assembled,  and  then  probably  more  to  hear
the  decisions  of  the  king  than  to  nitify  his  acts  ;
and  it  is  certain  that  they  had  no  power  of  dis-
cussing any  matter  that  was  brought  before  them.
The  only  public  matter  in  which  the  king  could
not  dispense  with  the  co-operation  of  the  senate
and  the  curiae  was  in  declarations  of  war  against
foreign  nations,  as  appears  clearly  from  the  decla-
ration of  war  against  the  Latins  in  the  time  of
Ancus  Marcius,  as  related  by  Livy  (i.  32),  who
preserves  the  ancient  formula.  There  is  no  trace
of  the  people  having  had  anything  to  do  with  the
conclusion  of  treaties  of  peace  ;  and  Dionysius  in
this  case  as  in  many  others  has  evidently  trans-
ferred a  later  custom  to  the  earlier  times.  The
relation  in  which  the  senate  and  the  curiae  stood
to  the  kings  is  spoken  of  more  at  length  under
Comitia,  p.  331,  and  Senatus.

The  insignia  of  the  king  were  the  fasces  with
the  axes  {secures)^  which  twelve  lictors  carried
before  him  as  often  as  he  appeared  in  public,  the
trabea,  the  sella  curulis,  and  the  toga  prueteacia  and
pida.  The  traltea  appears  to  have  been  the  most
ancient  official  dress,  and  is  assigned  especially  to
Romulus  :  it  was  of  Latin  origin,  and  is  therefore
represented  by  the  antiquarian  Virgil  as  worn
by  the  Latin  kings.  (Plin.  H.  N.  viii.  48,  ix.
39  ;  Ov.  Fast.  ii.  501  ;  Virg.  Am.  vii.  187,  xi.
334.)  The  toga  pradexta  and  picta  were  bor-
rowed, together  with  the  sella  curtdis,  from  the
Etruscans,  and  their  introduction  is  variously
ascribed  to  Tullus  Hostilius  or  Tarquinius  Priscus.
(Cic.  de  Rep.  ii.  17;  Macrob.  Sat.  i.  6  ;  Plin.  H.K
ix,  39  ;  Dionys.  iii.  62.)  Dionysius  (/.  c.)  also
mentions  a  diadem  and  a  sceptre  as  insignia  of  the
kings.


994


REX  SACRIFICULUS.


For  further  information  respecting  the  Roman
kings,  see  Niebuhr,  Hist,  of  Rome,  vol.  i.  p.  338,
&c.  ;  Walter,  GeschicMe  des  Romischen  Rechts,
§17,  2d  ed.  ;  and  especially  Rubino,  Umtersuch-
ungen  uUr  Romische  Verfassung.,  passim  ;  and
Becker,  Handbtich  der  Romischen  Alterthumer^  vol.
ii,  pt.  i.  p.  291,  &c.

REX  SACRIFFCULUS,  REX  SACRT'FI-
CUS,  or  REX  SACRO'RUM.  When  the  civil
and  military  powers  of  the  king  were  transferred
to  two  praetors  or  consuls,  upon  the  establishment
of  the  republican  government  at  Rome,  these  ma-
gistrates were  not  invested  Avith  that  part  of  the
royal  dignity  by  virtue  of  which  he  had  been  the
high  priest  of  his  nation  and  had  conducted  several
of  the  sacra  publica,  but  this  priestly  part  of  his
offi(,«  was  transferred  to  a  priest  called  Rex  Sacri-
ficulus  or  Rex  Sacrorura.  ( Liv.  ii.  2  ;  Dionys.  iv.
74,  v.  1.)  The  first  rex  sacrorum  was  designated,
at  the  command  of  the  consuls,  by  the  college  of
pontiffs,  and  inaugurated  by  the  augurs.  He  was
always  elected  and  inaugurated  in  the  comitia  ca-
lata  under  the  presidency  of  the  pontiffs  (Gell.  xv.
27),  and  as  long  as  a  rex  sacrificulus  was  ap-
pointed at  Rome,  he  was  always  a  patrician,  for  as  he
had  no  influence  upon  the  management  of  political
affairs,  the  plebeians  never  coveted  this  dignity.
(Liv.  vi.  41  ;  Cic.  pro  Dom.  14.)  But  for  the
same  reason  the  patricians  too  appear  at  last  to
have  attributed  little  importance  to  the  office  ;
whence  it  sometimes  occurs  that  for  one,  or  even
for  two  successive  years  no  rex  sacrorum  was  ap-
pointed, and  during  the  civil  wars  in  the  last  pe-
riod of  the  republic,  the  office  appears  to  have
fallen  altogether  into  disuse.  Augustus  however
seems  to  have  revived  it,  for  we  find  frequent
mention  of  it  during  the  empire,  until  it  was  pro-
bably abolished  in  the  time  of  Theodosius.  (OrellL,
T7iscr.  n.  2280,  2282,  2283.)

Considering  that  this  priest  was  the  religious
representative  of  the  kings,  he  ranked  indeed
higher  than  all  other  priests,  aad  even  higher  than
the  pontifex  maximus  (Festus.  s.v.  Ordo  sacerdo-
ium),  but  in  power  and  influence  he  was  far  inferior
to  him.  (Id  sacerdotium  ponti/ici  subjecere,  Liv.  ii.
2.)  He  held  his  office  for  life  (Dionys.  iv.  74),
was  not  allowed  to  hold  any  civil  or  military  dig-
nity, and  was  at  the  same  time  exempted  from  all
military  and  civil  duties.  (Dionys.  I.  c.  ;  Plut
Quaest.  Rom.  60  ;  Liv.  xl.  42.)  His  principal  func-
tions were :  1.  To  perform  those  oacra  publica
which  had  before  been  performed  by  the  kings :
and  his  wife,  who  bore  the  title  oi  regina  sacrorum,
had  like  the  queens  of  former  days  also  to  perform
certain  priestly  functions.  These  sacra  publica  he
or  his  wife  had  to  perform  on  all  the  Calends,  Ides,
and  the  Nundines  ;  he  to  Jupiter,  and  she  to  Juno,
in  the  regia.  (Varro,  de  Ling.  IM.  vi.  12,  13  ;
Macrob.  Sat.  i.  15.)  2.  On  the  days  called  regi-
fugium  he  had  to  offer  a  sacrifice  in  the  comitium.
[Regifugium.]  3.  When  extraordinary  portenta
seemed  to  announce  some  general  calamity,  it  was
his  duty  to  try  to  propitiate  the  anger  of  the  gods.
(Fest.  s.  V.  Regiae  feriae.)  4.  On  the  nundines
when  the  people  assembled  in  the  city,  the  rex  sa-
crorum announced  (edicehat)  to  them  the  succession
of  the  festivals  for  the  month.  This  part  of  his
functions  however  must  have  ceased  after  the  time
of  Cn.  Flavius.  (Varro,  de  Ling.  Lat.  vi.  13;
Serv.  ad  Aen.  viii.  654.)  He  lived  in  a  domus
publica  on  the  via  sacra,  near  the  regia  and  the


RHETRAE.

house  of  the  Vestal  virgins.  (Ambrosch,  Studicn  u.
Afideutungen,-pp.  41 — 76.)  [L.  S.]

RHEDA  or  REDA  was  a  travelling  carriage
with  four  wheels.  Like  the  CoviNUS  and  the
EssEDUM  it  was  of  Gallic  origin  (Quintil.  Irist.
Orat.  i.  5.  §  68  ;  Caes.  Dell.  Gall.  i.  51),  and
may  perhaps  contain  the  same  root  as  the  German
reiten  and  our  ride.  It  was  the  common  carriage
used  by  the  Romans  for  travelling,  and  was  fre-
quently made  large  enough  not  only  to  contain
many  persons,  but  also  baggage  and  utensils  of  va-
rious kinds.  (Cic.  pro  Mil.  10,  20  ;  Juven.  iii.  10  ;
Mart.  iii.  47.)  The  word  Epirhedium,  which  was
formed  by  the  Romans  from  the  Greek  preposition
eVi  and  the  Gallic  rheda  (Quint.  I.  c),  is  explained
by  the  Scholiast  on  Juvenal  (viii.  Q6)  as :  "  Oma-
mentum  rhedarum  aut  plaustrum.'"

RHETOR.     [Rhetorice  Graphe.]

RHETO'RICE  GRAPHE  (pTjTopiKi]  yparpv).
The  best  interpretation  of  this  expression  is  per-
haps that  given  by  Harpocration  and  Suidas,  s.  v.
T]  Korh.  pr]ropos  yevofievr],  ypd^pauros  ri  t)  eiirSvTos
^  -npd^avros  irapavojxov.  There  was  not  any  par-
ticular class  of  persons  called  ^i]Topcs,  invested
with  a  legal  character,  or  intrusted  with  political
duties,  at  Athens.  For  every  citizen,  who  did  not
labour  under  some  special  disability,  was  entitled
to  address  the  people  in  assembly,  make  motions,
propose  laws,  &c.  The  name  of  ^T7Topes,  however,
was  given  in  common  parlance  to  those  orators  and
statesmen,  who  more  especially  devoted  themselves
to  the  business  of  public  speaking  ;  while  those  who
kept  aloof  from,  or  took  no  part  in,  the  business  of
popular  assemblies,  were  called  tSicoroi.  Hence
pijrwp  is  explained  by  Suidas,  s.  v.  'O  Sriixcf)  ffv^i-
€ov\€vwv  Kal  6  iv  S-fj/jLCf)  ayop^vwv.  The  prjTopiK^
ypa(p^  might  be  either  the  same  as  the  TrapavSfjLwu
ypacpi^,  or  a  more  special  prosecution,  attended  with
heavier  penalties,  against  practised  demagogues,
who  exerted  their  talents  and  influence  to  deceive
the  people  and  recommend  bad  measures.  Others
have  conjectured  this  to  be  a  proceeding  similar  to
the  iiruyyeXla  SoKiiuLaaias,  directed  against  those
persons  who  ventured  to  speak  in  public,  after
having  been  guilty  of  some  misdemeanour  which
would  render  them  liable  to  arijuzo.  Of  this  nature
was  the  charge  brought  against  Timarchus  by  Aes-
chines,  whose  object  was  to  prevent  the  latter  from
appearing  as  prosecutor  against  him  on  the  subject
of  the  embassy  to  Philip.  (Schoraann,  de  Comit,
p.  108  ;  Meier,  Att.  Proc.  p.  209.)      [C.  R.  K.]

RHETRAE  {prirpai),  specially  the  name  of  the
ordinances  of  Lycurgus.  (Plut.  Lye.  6,  13.)  The
word  is  defined  by  the  grammarians  to  signify
compact  or  treaty  (^^T/»r/,  7]  iirl  prjTolsTKri  avi/6-fiKr].
ApolloH.  Lex.  Horn.  p.  138.  30,  ed.  Bekker  \
priTpai,  avvQriKai  hih  Xdytau,  Hesych.)  ;  and  mos
modem  writers  adopt  this  interpretation,  supposing
the  word  to  signify  originally  words  (rh  ^Tjrhv),  or
a  declaration,  which  bound  parties.  It  is  true
that  the  etymology  points  simply  to  that  which  is
spoken  or  declared  ;  but  Plutarch  gives  another
meaning  to  the  word  in  relation  to  the  laws  of
Lycurgus,  and  says  that  they  were  divine  ordi-
nances {^T]Tpas  uuSfiacrep,  us  iraph,  rov  ^eov  vofii-
(6fji.€va  Kol  xPVo^/^ohs  ovra,  Plut.  Lye.  13).  The
opinion  of  Mr.  Grote,  which  reconciles  these  two
accounts,  seems  the  most  probable.  "  The  word  I
Rhetra  means  a  solemn  compact,  either  originally
emanating  from,  or  subsequently  sanctioned  by  th
gods,  who  arc  always  parties  to  such  agreements  %'^


e


RICINIUM.

Bee  the  old  treaty  between  the  Eleians  and  He-
raeans — 'A  Ipdrpa^  between  the  two,  commemorated
in  the  valuable  inscription  still  preserved,  —  as  an-
cient, according  to  Bockh,as  Olym.  40 — 60  (Bijckh,
Corp.  Inscript.  No.  ii.  p.  26,  part  i.).  The  words
of  Tyrtaeus  imply  such  a  contract  between  the
contracting  parties  :  first  the  kings,  then  the  sena-
tus,  lastly  the  people, —  evddas  ^-i^rpais  afTaTra/jLu-
€ofX€vovs, — where  the  participle  last  occurring  applies
not  to  the  people  alone,  but  to  all  the  three.  The
Khetra  of  Lycurgus  emanated  from  the  Delphian
god  :  but  the  kings,  senators,  and  people  all  bound
themselves,  both  to  each  other  and  to  the  gods  to
obey  it."  (Grote,  Hist  of  Greece,  vol.  ii.  p.  462  ;
for  a  different  explanation  of  the  word,  see  Thirl-
wall.  Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  i.  p.  335,  2d  ed.)

RHYTON  (pfTJi/),  a  drinking-horn  (Kepay),  by
which  name  it  was  originally  called,  is  said  by  Athe-
naeus  (xi.  p.  497,  b)  to  have  been  first  made  under
Ptolemy  Philadelphus ;  but  it  is  even  mentioned
in  Demosthenes  (c.  Mid.  p.  565.  29),  as  Athenaeus
himself  also  remarks.  The  oldest  and  original
form  of  this  drinking-horn  was  probably  the  horn
of  the  ox,  but  one  end  of  it  was  afterwards  orna-
mented with  the  heads  of  various  animals  and
birds.  We  frequently  find  representations  of  the
pvT({j'  on  ancient  vases  depicting  symposia.  Several
specimens  of  these  drinking-horns  have  also  been
discovered  at  Pompeii  (Museo  Borbonico,  vol.  viii.
14,  v.  20) :  representations  of  two  of  these  are
given  in  the  annexed  cut.


The  Pvt6v  had  a  small  opening  at  the  bottom,
which  the  person  who  drank  put  into  his  mouth,
and  allowed  the  wine  to  run  in  :  hence  it  derived
its  name  {avofxacrdai  re  airh  Trjs  pixrews,  Athen.
xi.  p.  497,  e).  We  see  persons  using  the  ^vt6u  in
this  way  in  ancient  paintings.  (Pitt,  d'Ercol.  v.  t.
46  ;  Zahn,  Ornam.  und  Wandgem.  t.  90.)  Martial
(ii.  35)  speaks  of  it  under  the  name  of  Rhytium.
(Becker,  ChariUes,  vol.  i.  p.  505.)

RICA.     [Flamen.]

RICFNIUM,  RECPNIUM  or  RECINUS,an
article  of  dress.  The  name  was  according  to  Festus
(*.  ».)  applied  to  any  dress  consisting  of  a  square
piece  of  cloth.  It  occurs  in  a  fragment  of  the
Twelve  Tables  (Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  23),  and  the  an
cient  commentators  according  to  Festus  explained
the  word  there  as  a  toga  for  women  (if  the  reading
Ver.  togam  be  right  instead  of  virilem  togam),  with
a  purple  stripe  in  front.  That  it  was  an  article  of
female  dress,  and  more  especially  a  small  and  short
kind  of  pallium,  is  stated  by  Nonius  (xiv.  33)  on
the  authority  of  Varro.  It  was  worn  in  grief  and
mourning,  and  in  such  a  manner  that  one  half  of  it
was  thrown  back  (Varro,  de  Ling.  Lat.  v.  132  ;
Serv.  ad  Aen.  i.  286  ;  Isidor.  Orig.  xix.  25),
whence  the  ancient  grammarians  derive  the  word
from  rejicere,  although  it  is  manifestly  a  derivative
from  ricuy  which  was  a  covering  of  the  head  us(!d


ROSTRA.  S05

by  females.  (Varro,  I.  c.  ;  Fest.  s.  v.  Rica.)  The
grammarians  appear  themselves  to  have  had  no
clear  idea  of  the  ricinium  ;  but  after  careful  exami-
nation of  the  passages  above  referred  to,  it  appears
to  have  been  a  kind  of  mantle,  with  a  sort  of  cowl
attached  to  it,  in  order  to  cover  the  head.  It  was
also  worn  by  mimes  upon  the  stage  (Fest.  I.  c.  and
s.  V.  Orchestra),  and  the  mavortium,  mavorte,  or
mavors  of  later  times  was  thought  to  be  only  an-
other name  for  what  had  formerly  been  called  rici-
nii™-  [L.  S.]

ROBIGA'LIA,  a  public  festival  in  honour  of
the  god  Robigus  to  preserve  the  fields  from  mil-
dew, is  said  to  have  been  instituted  by  Numa,  and
was  celebrated  a.  d.  vii.  Kal.  Mai.  (April  25th).
(Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  29.  s.  69  ;  Varro,  Re  Rust.  i.
I.  p.  90,  ed.  Bip.,  Ling.  Lat.  vi.  16,  ed.  MUll.  ;
Festus,  s.  V.)     The  sacrifices  offered  on  this  occa-
sion consisted  of  the  entrails  of  a  dog  and  a  sheep,
accompanied  with  frankincense  and  wine  :  a  prayer
was  presented  by  a  flamen  in  the  grove  of  the  an-
cient deity,  whom  Ovid   and   Columella  make  a
goddess.     (Ovid.  Fast.  iv.  907—942  ;  Colum.  x.
342.)     A  god  Robigus  or  a  goddess  Robigo  is  a
mere  invention  from  the  name  of  this  festival,  for
the  Romans  paid  no  divine  honours  to  evil  deities.
(Hartung,  Die  Religion  der  Romer,  vol.  ii.  p.  148.)
ROBUR.     [Carcer,  p.  241,  a.]
ROGATIO.     [Lex,  p.  682.]
ROGATO'RES.     [Diribitores.]
ROGUS.     [FuNiis,  p.  559,  b.]
ROMPHEA.     [Hasta,  p.  589,  a.]
RORA'RII.     [Exercitus,  pp.  495,  502,  b.]
ROSTRA,  or  The  Beaks,  was  the  name  applied
to  the  stage  (siiggestus)  in  the  Forum,  from  which
the  orators  addressed  the  people.     This  stage  was
originally  called  tewplum  (Li v.  ii.  56),  because  it
was  consecrated  by  the  augurs,  but  it  obtained  its
name  of  7?os;ra  at  the  conclusion  of  the  great  Latin
war,  when  it  was  adorned  with  the  beaks  (rostra)
of  the  ships  of  the  Antiates.    (Liv.  viii.  14  ;  Flor.
i.  11  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiv.  5.  s.  11.)     The  Greeks
also  mutilated  galleys   in  the  same  way  for  the
purpose    of  trophies:    this    was    called    by   them

aKpa>Tt)pid^eiV.       [ACROTERIUM.]

The  Rostra  lay  between  the  Comitium  or  place
of  meeting  for  the  curies,  and  the  Forum  or  place
of  meeting  for  the  tribes,  so  that  the  speaker  might
turn  either  to  the  one  or  the  other  ;  but  down  to
the  time  of  C.  Gracchus,  even  the  tribunes  in
speaking  used  to  front  the  Comitium  ;  he  first
turned  his  back  to  it  and  spoke  with  his  face  to-
wards the  forum.  (Niebuhr,  Hist,  of  Rome,  vol.  i.
p.  426,  note  990.)  The  form  of  the  Rostra  has
been  well  described  by  Niebuhr  (vol.  iii.  p.  144,
note  268)  and  Bunsen  (quoted  by  Arnold,  Hist,  of
Rome,  vol.  ii.  p.  164):  the  latter  supposes  "that
it  was  a  circular  building,  raised  on  arches,  with
a  stand  or  platform  on  the  top  bordered  by  a  para-
pet ;  the  access  to  it  being  by  two  flights  of  steps,
one  on  each  side.  It  fronted  towards  the  comitium,
and  the  rostra  were  affixed  to  the  front  of  it,  just
under  the  arches.  Its  form  has  been  in  all  the
main  points  preserved  in  the  ambones,  or  circular
pulpits,  of  the  most  ancient  churches,  which  also
had  two  flights  of  steps  leading  up  to  them,  one  on
the  east  side,  by  which  the  preacher  ascended,
and  another  on  the  west  side,  for  his  descent.
Specimens  of  these  old  churches  are  still  to  be
seen  at  Rome  in  the  churches  of  St.  Clement  and
S.  liorenzo  fuori  le  mure."  The  speaker  was  thus
3s  2


996  RUTRUM.

enabled  to  walk  to  and  fro,  while  addressing  his
audience.

The  suggestus  or  Rostra  was  transferred  by
Julius  Caesar  to  a  corner  of  the  Foram,  but  the
spot,  where  the  ancient  Rostra  had  stood,  still  con-
tinued to  be  called  Rostra  Vetera,  while  the  other
was  called  Rostra  Nova  or  Rostra  Julia.  (Ascon.
in  Cic.  Mil.  §  1 2.  p.  43,  ed.  Orelli  ;  Dion  Cass,
xliii.  49,  Ivi.  U  ;  Suet.  Aug.  100.)  Both  the
Rostra  contained  statues  of  illustrious  men  (Cic.
Philip,  ii.  b'l)  ;  the  new  Rostra  contained  eques-
trian statues  of  Sulla,  Pompey,  Julius  Caesar,  and
Augustus.  (Veil.  Pat.  ii.  61.)  Niebuhr  (/.  c.)  dis-
covered the  new  Rostra  in  the  long  wall,  that  runs
in  an  angle  tovi'urds  the  three  columns,  which  have
for  a  very  long  time  borne  the  name  of  Jupiter
Stator,  but  which  belong  to  the  Curia  Julia.  The
substance  of  the  new  Rostra  consists  of  bricks  and
casting-work,  but  it  was  of  course  cased  with
marble:  the  old  Rostra  Niebuhr  supposes  were
constructed  entirely  of  peperino.

The  following  coin  of  M.  Lollius  Palicanus  con-
tains a  representation  of  the  Rostra.


ROSTRA'TA  COLUMNA.  [Columna,  p.
327,  b.]

ROSTRATA  CORO'NA,  [Corona,  p.  360.]
ROSTRUM.     [Navis,  p.  786,b.J
ROTA.     [CuRRus,  p.  378.]
RUDENS  (/fdAws),  any  rope  used  to  move  or
fix  the  mast  or  sail  of  a  vessel  (Juv.  vi.  102;  Ovid.
Met.  iii.  616;  Achilles  Tatius,  ii.  32.)     The  dif-
ferent ropes  of  an  ancient  ship  are  spoken  of  under
Navis,  p.  790.

RUDERA'TIO.     [Domus,  p.  431,a.]
RUDIA'RII.     [Gladiatorks,  p.  575,  a.]
RUDIS.     [Gladiatores,  p.  575,  a.]
RU'FULT,  the  name  of  the  tribunes  of  the
soldiers   chosen    by  the  consul   or  other  general.
(Liv.  vii.  5  ;  Festus,  s.  v.)      For  further  inform-
ation see  ExERCiTUS,  pp.  503,  a,  504,  b.

RUNCFNA  ((>vK<ivv\  a  plane  (TertuU.  Jpol.
12;  Brunck,  Anal.  i.  227),  is  delineated  among
joiner's  tools  (Instrumen.  Fabr.  Tignar.)  in  the
woodcut  at  p.  806.  The  square  hole  in  the  right  side
of  the  stock  seems  intended  for  the  passage  of  the
shavings  (ramenta).  The  Latin  and  Greek  names
for  this  instalment  gave  origin  to  the  corresponding
transitive  verbs  runcino  and  f>vKavda3,  meaning  to
plane.  (Min.  Felix,  23.)  They  seem  to  be  allied
etymologically  with  piyxos,  referring  to  the  opera-
tion of  those  beasts  and  birds  which  use  their  snout
or  beak  to  plough  up  the  ground.  [J.  Y.]

RUTILIA'NA  ACTIO  was  a  Praetorian  actio
introduced  by  the  Praetor  Publius  Rutilius,  by
virtue  of  which  the  bonorum  emptor  could  sue  in
the  name  of  the  person  whose  goods  he  had  bought
and  claim  the  condemnatio  to  be  made  in  his  own
favour  and  in  his  own  name.  (Gaius,  iii.  80,  81,
iv.  35.)  [G.  L.]

RUTRUM,  dim.  RUTELLUM,akind  of  hoe.
which  had  the  handle  fixed  perpendicularly  into
the  middle  of  the  blade,  thus  differing  from  the


SACERDOS.

Raster.  It  was  used  before  sowing  to  level  thfe
ground,  by  breaking  down  any  clods  which  adhered
too  long  together.  (Non.  Marc.  p.  18,  ed.  Merceri.)
This  operation  is  described  by  Virgil  in  the  follow-
ing terms,  which  also  assign  the  derivation  of  the
name :  "  Cumulosque  ruH  male  pinguis  arenae,'*
{Georg.  i.  105.)  See  Festus,  s,  v.  ;  Varro,  de  L.
Lot.  V.  p.  137,  ed.  Spengel.  The  same  implement
was  used  in  mixing  lime  or  clay  with  water  and
straw  to  make  plaster  for  walls.  (Cato,  de  Re  RusU
10,  128  ;  Pallad.  de  Re  Rust.  i.  15  ;  Plin.  H.  N.
xxxvi.  23.  s.  55.)

The  word  rutabidum  ought  to  be  considered  as
another  form  of  rutrum.  It  denoted  a  hoe  or  rake
of  the  same  construction,  which  Avas  used  by  the
baker  in  stirring  the  hot  ashes  of  his  oven.  (Festus,
s.  V.)  A  wooden  rutabulum  was  employed  to  mix
the  contents  of  the  vats  in  which  wine  was  made.
(Colum.  de  Re  Rust.  xii.  20.)  [J.  Y.]


S.


SACCUS  ((ra/f/cos),  signified  in  general  any
kind  of  sack  or  bag,  made  of  hair,  cloth,  or  other
materials.  We  have  only  to  notice  here  its  mean-
ing as  —  1.  A  head-dress.  [Coma,  p.  329.]  2.  A
sieve  for  straining  wine  [Vinum].  3.  A  purse
for  holding  money.  Hence  the  phrase  in  Plautus
ire  ad  saccum,  *'  to  go  a  begging."    (Plant.  Capt.  i.

SACELLUM  is  a  diminutive  of  sacer,  and  sig-
nifies a  small  place  consecrated  to  a  god,  containing
an  altar,  and  sometimes  also  a  statue  of  the  god  to
whom  it  was  dedicated.  (Gellius,  vi.  12.)  Festus
(s.v.)  completes  the  definition  by  stating  that  a
sacellum  never  had  a  roof.  It  was  therefore  a
sacred  enclosure  surrounded  by  a  fence  or  wall  to
separate  it  from  the  profane  ground  around  it,  and
answers  to  the  Greek  irepiSoKos.  The  form  of  a
sacellum  was  sometimes  square  and  sometimes
round.  The  ancient  sacellum  of  Janus  which  was
said  to  have  been  built  by  Romulus,  was  of  a
square  form,  contained  a  statue  of  the  god,  and  had
two  gates.  (Ovid.  Fast.  i.  275  ;  Terent.  Maur.  in
Wernsdorf 's  Poet.  Min.  ii.  p.  279.)  Many  Romans
had  private  sacella  on  their  own  estates  ;  but  the
city  of  Rome  contained  a  great  number  of  public
sacella  such  as  that  of  Caca  (Serv.  ad  A  en.  viii.
190),  of  Hercules  in  the  Forum  Boarium  (Solin.  i.;
Plin.  //.  N.  X.  29),  of  the  Lares  (Solin.  2),  of
Naenia  (Fest.  s.  v.  Naeniae  deae),  of  Pudicitia
(Liv.  X.  23),  and  others.  [L.  S.]

SACERDOS,  SACERDO'TIUM.  Cicero  {de
Leg.  ii.  8)  distinguishes  two  kinds  of  sacerdotes  ;
those  who  had  the  superintendence  of  the  forms  of
worship  {caerimoniae)  and  of  the  sacra,  and  those
who  interpreted  signs  and  what  was  uttered  by
seers  and  prophets.  Another  division  is  that  into
priests  who  were  not  devoted  to  the  service  of  any
particular  deity,  such  as  the  pontiffs,  augurs,
fetiales,  and  those  who  were  connected  with  the
worship  of  particular  divinities,  such  as  the  fla-
mines.  The  priests  of  the  ancient  world  did  not
consist  of  men  alone,  for  in  Greece  as  well  as  at
Rome  certain  deities  were  attended  only  by  priest-
esses. At  Rome  the  wives  of  particular  priests
were  regarded  as  priestesses,  and  had  to  perfoml
certain  sacred  functions,  as  the  regina  sacronim
and  the  fiaminica.  [Flamen  ;  Rex  Sacrori/m.]
In  other  cases  maidens  were  appointed  priestesses,


SACERDOS.   ^

as  the  VestJil  virgins,  or  boys,  with  regard  to  whom
it  was  always  requisite  that  their  fathers  and
mothers  should  be  alive  (pafrimi  et  matrimi).
As  all  the  different  kinds  of  priests  are  treated  of
separately  in  this  work,  it  is  only  necessary  here
to  make  some  general  remarks.

In  comparison  with  the  civil  magistrates  all
priests  at  Rome  were  regarded  as  homines  privati
(C'k.  c.  Catil.  i.  1,  de  Qf.  i.  22,  ad  Att.  iv.  2,
Philip,  v.  17),  though  all  of  them  as  priests  were
sacerdotes  publici,  in  as  far  as  their  office  (sacerdo-
tium)  was  connected  with  any  worship  recognised
by  the  state.  The  appellation  of  sacerdos  puUicus
was  however  given  principally  to  the  chief-pontiff
and  the  flamen  dialis  (Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  9  ;  Serv.
ad  Aen.  xii.  534),  who  were  at  the  same  time  the
only  priests  who  were  members  of  the  senate  by
virtue  of  their  office.  All  priestly  offices  or  sacer-
dotia  were  held  for  life  without  responsibility  to
any  civil  magistrate.  A  priest  was  generally  al-
lowed to  hold  any  other  civil  or  military  office  be-
sides his  priestly  dignity  (Liv.  xxxviii.  47,  xxxix.
45  ;  Epit.  19,  xl.  45,  Epit.  6%  &c.)  ;  some  priests
however  formed  an  exception,  for  the  duumviri,  the
rex  sacrorum  and  the  flamen  dialis  were  not  allowed
to  hold  any  state  office,  and  were  also  exempt
from  service  in  the  armies.  (Dionys.  iv.  8.)  Their
priestly  character  was,  generally  speakhig,  insepa-
rable from  their  person,  as  long  as  they  lived  (Plin.
Epist.  iv,  8)  :  hence  the  augurs  and  fratres  arvalcs
retained  their  character  even  when  sent  into  exile,
or  when  they  were  taken  prisoners.  (Plin.  H.  N.
xviii.  2  ;  Plut.  Q^aest.  Rom.  99.)  It  also  occurs
that  one  and  the  same  person  held  two  or  three
priestly  offices  at  a  time.  Thus  we  find  the  three
dignities  of  pontifex  maximus,  augur,  and  decemvir
sacrorum  united  in  one  individual.  (Liv.  xl.  42.)
But  two  persons  belonging  to  the  same  gens  were
not  allowed  to  be  members  of  the  same  college  of
priests.  This  regulation  however  was  in  later
times  often  violated  or  evaded  by  adoptions.  (Serv.
cui  Aen.  vii.  303;  Dion  Cass,  xxxix.  17.)  Bodily
defects  rendered,  at  Rome  as  among  all  ancient
nations,  a  person  unfit  for  holding  any  priestly
office.  (Dionvs.  ii.  21;  Senec.  Cow/rov.  iv.  2;  Plut.
Quaest.  Horn.  73  ;  Plin.  //.  N.  vii.  29.)

All  priests  were  originally  patricians,  but  from
the  year  b.  c.  367  the  plebeians  also  began  to  take
part  in  the  sacerdotia  [Plkbes,  p.  927],  and  those
priestly  offices  which  down  to  the  latest  times  re-
mained in  the  hands  of  the  patricians  alone,  such
as  that  of  the  rex  sacrorum,  the  flamines,  salii  and
others,  had  no  influence  upon  the  affairs  of  the
state.

As  regards  the  appointment  of  priests,  the  an-
cients unanimously  state  that  at  first  they  were
appointed  by  the  kings  (Dionys.  ii.  21,  &c.  73  ;
Liv.  i.  20),  but  after  the  sacerdotia  were  once  in-
stituted, each  college  of  priests  —  for  nearly  all
priests  constituted  certain  corporations  called  col-
legia —  had  the  right  of  filling  up  the  occurring  va-
cancies by  cooptatio.  [Pontifex,  p.  940.]  Other
priests,  on  the  contrary,  such  as  the  Vestal  virgins
and  the  flamines,  were  appointed  (capiebantur)  by
the  pontifex  maximus,  a  rule  which  appears  to
have  been  observetl  down  to  the  latest  times ;
others  again,  such  as  the  duumviri  sacrorum,  were
elected  by  the  people  (Dionys.  iv.  62),  or  by  the
curiae,  as  the  curiones.  But  in  whatever  manner
they  were  appointed,  all  priests  after  their  appoint-
ment required  to  be  inaugurated  by  the  pontiffs


SACERDOS.  997

and  the  augurs,  or  by  the  latter  alone.  (Dionys.  ii.
22.)  Those  priests  who  formed  colleges  had  ori-
ginall)',  as  we  have  already  observed,  the  right  of
cooptatio ;  but  in  the  course  of  time  they  were
deprived  of  this  right,  or  at  least  the  cooptatio  was
reduced  to  aumere  form,  by  several  leges,  called
leges  de  sacerdotiis,  such  as  the  lex  Domitia,  Cor-
nelia, and  Julia  ;  their  nature  is  described  in  the
article  Pontifex,  p.  940,  &c.,  and  what  is  there
said  in  regard  to  the  appointment  of  pontiffs  ap-
plies equally  to  all  the  other  colleges.  The  leges
annales,  which  fixed  the  age  at  which  persons  be-
came eligible  to  the  different  magistracies,  had  no
reference  to  priestly  offices  ;  and  on  the  whole  it
seems  that  the  pubertas  was  regarded  as  the  time
after  which  a  person  might  be  appointed  to  a  sa-
cerdotium.  (Liv.  xlii.  28  ;  Plut.  Tib.  Gracch.  4.)

All  prii'sts  had  some  external  distinction,  as  the
apex,  tutulus,  or  galerus,  the  toga  praetexta,  as
well  as  honorar}'^  seats  in  the  theatres,  circuses  and
amphitheatres.  They  appear  however  to  have
been  obliged  to  pay  taxes  like  all  other  citizens,
but  seem  occasional!}'  to  have  tried  to  obtain  ex-
emption.    See  the  case  related  in  Livy,  xxxiii.  42.

Two  interesting  questions  yet  remain  to  be  an-
swered :  first  whether  the  priests  at  Rome  were
paid  for  their  services,  and  secondly  whether  they
instructed  the  young,  or  the  people  in  general,  in
the  principles  of  their  religion.  As  regards  the
first  question,  we  read  that  in  the  time  of  Romulus
lands  were  assigue<i  to  each  temple  and  college  of
priests  (Dionys.  ii.  7),  and  when  Festus  (s.  v.
Oscum.)  states  that  the  Roman  augurs  had  the
enjoyment  {frui  soiehant)  of  a  district  in  the  terri-
tory of  Veii,  we  may  infer  that  all  priests  had  the
usus  of  the  sacred  lands  belonging  to  their  respec-
tive colleges  or  divinities.  This  supposition  is
strengthened  by  the  fact  that  such  was  actually
the  case  in  the  Roman  colonies,  where,  besides  the
lots  assigned  to  the  coloni,  pieces  of  land  are  men-
tioned which  belonged  to  the  colleges  of  priests,
who  made  use  of  them  by  letting  them  out  to  farm.
(Siculus  Flaceus,  de  condit.  agror.  p.  23,  ed.  Goes.  ;
Hyginus,  de  Limit.  Constit.  p.  205,  ed.  Goes.)  It
appears  however  that  we  must  distinguish  between
such  lands  as  were  sacred  to  the  gods  themselves
and  could  not  be  taken  from  them  except  by  exau-
guratio,  and  such  as  were  merely  given  to  the
priests  as  possessio  and  formed  part  of  the  ager
publicus.  Of  the  latter  the  state  remained  the
owner,  and  might  take  them  from  the  priests  in  any
case  of  necessity.  (Dion  Cass,  xliii.47  ;  Oros.  v.  18  ;
Appian,  de  Bell.  Mithr.  22.)  Besides  the  use  of
such  sacred  or  public  lands  some  priests  also  had  a
regular  annual  salary  (stipendium),  which  was  paid
to  them  from  the  public  treasury.  This  is  ex-
pressly stated  in  regard  to  the  Vestal  virgins  (Liv.  i.
20),  the  augurs  (Dionys.  ii.  6),  and  the  curiones
(Fest.  s.v.  Curionium),  and  may  therefore  be  sup-
posed to  have  been  the  case  with  other  priests  also.
The  pontifex  maximus,  the  rex  sacrorum,  and  the
Vestal  virgins  had  moreover  a  domus  publica  as
their  place  of  residence.  In  the  time  of  the  empe-
rors the  income  of  the  priests,  especially  of  the
Vestal  virgins,  was  increased.  (Suet.  Aug.  31  ;
Tacit.  Annul,  iv.  16.)

As  regards  the  second  question,  we  do  not  hear
either  in  Greece  or  at  Rome  of  any  class  of  priests
on  whom  it  was  incumbent  to  instruct  the  people
respecting  the  nature  and  principles  of  religion.
Of  preaching  there  is  not  the  slightest  trace.  Reli-
3  t-*  3


998


SACRA.


gion  with  the  ancients  was  a  thing  which  was
handed  down  by  tradition  from  father  to  son,  and
consisted  in  the  proper  performance  of  certain  rites
and  ceremonies.  It  was  respecting  these  external
forms  of  worship  alone  that  the  pontiffs  were  ob-
liged to  give  instructions  to  those  A^ho  consulted
them.     [PoNTiFEX.]  [L.S.]

SACRA.  This  word  in  its  widest  sense  ex-
presses what  we  call  divine  worship.  In  ancient
times  the  state  as  well  as  all  its  subdivisions  had
their  own  peculiar  forms  of  worship,  whence  at
Rome  we  find  sacra  of  the  whole  Roman  people,  of
the  curies,  gentes,  families,  and  even  of  private  in-
dividuals. All  these  sacra,  however,  were  divided
into  two  great  classes,  the  public  and  private  sacra
(sacra  publica  et  privata),  that  is,  they  were  per-
formed either  on  behalf  of  the  whole  nation  and  at
the  expense  of  the  state,  or  on  behalf  of  indi-
viduals, families,  or  gentes,  which  had  also  to  defray
their  expenses.  (Fest.  s.  v.  Publica  sacra  ;  Liv.  i.
20,  X.  7  ;  Plut.  Num.  9  ;  Cic.  dc  Harusp.  Resp.
7.)  This  division  is  ascribed  to  Numa.  All  sacra,
publica  as  well  as  privata,  were  superintended  and
regulated  by  the  pontiffs.  We  shall  first  speak  of
the  sacra  publica.

Sacra  Publica.  Among  the  sacra  publica  the
Romans  reckoned  not  only  those  Avhich  were  per-
formed on  behalf  of  the  whole  Roman  people,  but
also  those  perfonned  on  behalf  of  the  great  subdivi-
sions of  the  people,  viz.  the  tribes  and  the  curiae,
Avhich  Festus  {I.  c.)  expresses  :  pro  monianis,  pagis^
CUriis,  sacellis.  (See  Dionvs.  ii.  21,  23;  Appian,
Hisi.  Rom.  viii.  138,  de  Bell.  Civ.  ii.  106  ;  Plut.
Qiiaest.  Rom.  89.)  The  sacra  pro  montibus  et
pagis  are  undoubtedly  the  sacra  montanalia  and
paganalia,  which  although  not  sacra  of  the  whole
Roman  people,  were  yet  publica.  (Varro,  de  Ling.
Lat.  vi.  24,  &c.  ;  comp.  Fest.  s.  v.  Sepiimontium.)
The  sacella  in  the  expression  of  Festus,  sacra  pro
sacellis,  appear  only  to  indicate  the  places  where
some  sacra  publica  were  performed.  (Gottling,
Gesch.  d.  Rom.  Staatsv.  p.  176.)  What  was  com-
mon to  all  sacra  publica,  is  that  they  were  per-
formed at  the  expense  of  certain  public  funds,
which  had  to  provide  the  money  for  victims,  liba-
tions, incense,  and  for  the  building  and  mainte-
nance of  those  places,  where  they  were  performed.
(Fest.  I.  c.  ;  Dionys.  ii.  23  ;  Liv.  x.  23,  xlii.  3.)
The  funds  set  apart  for  the  sacra  publica  were  in
the  keeping  of  the  pontilfs,  and  the  sacramentum
formed  a  part  of  them.  They  were  kept  in  the
domus  publica  of  the  pontifex  maximus,  and  were
called  aerarium  pontificum.  (Varro,  de  Ling.  Lat.
V.  180  ;  Gruter,  Inscript.  413.  8,  496.  6,  452.  6.)
When  these  funds  did  not  suffice,  the  state  trea-
sury supplied  the  deficiency.  (Fest.  s.  v.  Sacra-
mentum.) In  the  solemnization  of  the  sacra  pub-
lica the  senate  and  the  whole  people  took  part.
(Plut.  Num.  2.)  This  circumstance  however  is
not  what  constitutes  their  character  as  sacra  pub-
lica, for  the  sacra  popularia  (Fest.  s.  v.  Popul.
»aer.)  in  which  the  whole  people  took  part,  might
nevertheless  be  sacra  privata,  if  the  expenses  were
not  defrayed  out  of  the  public  funds,  but  by  one
or  more  individuals,  or  by  magistrates.  The  pon-
tiffs in  conducting  the  sacra  publica  were  assisted
by  the  epulones.     [Epulones.]

Sacra  privata  embraced,  as  we  have  stated,
those  which  were  performed  on  behalf  of  a  gens,  a
family,  or  an  individual.  The  characteristic  by
which   they   were   distinguished  from   the  sacra


SACRIFICIUM.

publica,  is  that  they  were  made  at  the  expense  of
those  persons  or  person  on  whose  behalf  they  were
performed.  Respecting  the  sacra  of  a  gens,  called
sacra  gentilicia,  see  Gens,  p.  568,  b.  The  sacra
connected  with  certain  families  were,  like  those  of
a  gens,  performed  regularly  at  fixed  times,  and  de-
scended as  an  inheritance  from  father  to  son.  As
they  were  always  connected  with  expenses,  and
were  also  troublesome  in  other  respects,  such  an
inheritance  was  regarded  as  a  burden  rather  than
anything  else.  (Macrob.  Sat.  i.  16.)  They  may
generally  have  consisted  in  sacrifices  to  the  Pe-
nates, but  also  to  other  divinities.  They  had
usually  been  vowed  by  some  member  of  a  family
on  some  particular  occasion,  and  then  continued
for  ever  in  that  family,  the  welfare  of  which  was
thought  to  depend  upon  their  regular  and  proper
performance.  Besides  these  periodical  sacra  of  a
family  there  were  others,  the  performance  of  which
must  have  depended  upon  the  discretion  of  the
heads  of  families,  such  as  those  on  the  birthday,  or
on  the  death  of  a  member  of  a  family.  Savigny
{Zeitschrift^  vol.  ii.  p.  3)  denies  the  existence  of
sacra  familiaPim.

An  individual  might  perform  sacra  at  any  time,
and  whenever  he  thought  it  necessary ;  but  if  he
vowed  such  sacra  before  the  pontiffs  and  wished
that  they  should  be  continued  after  his  death,  his
heirs  inherited  with  his  property  the  obligation  to
perform  them,  and  the  pontiffs  had  to  watch  that
they  were  performed  duly  and  at  their  proper  time.
(Fest.  s.  V.  Sacer  mons  ;  Ck.pro  Dom.  51  ;  comp.
ad  Att.  xii.  19,  &c.)  Such  an  obligation  was  in
later  times  evaded  in  various  ways.

Among  the  sacra  privata  were  reckoned  also  the
sacra  municipalia,  that  is,  such  sacra  as  a  commu-
nity or  town  had  been  accustomed  to  perform  be-
fore it  had  received  the  Roman  franchise.  After
this  event,  the  Roman  pontiffs  took  care  that  they
were  continued  in  the  same  manner  as  before.
(Fest.  s.  V.  Municipalia  sacra  ;  comp.  Ambrosch,
Stud.  u.  Andeut.  p.  215.)

(See  Gottling,  p.  175,  &c.  ;  Walter,  Gesch.  d.
Rom.  Rechts,  p.  178  ;  Hartung,  Die  Relig.  d.  Rom.
vol.  i.  p.  226,  &c.  ;  comp.  Sacrificiijm.)     [L.  S.]

SACRAMENTUM.     [Jusjurandum  ;  Vin-

DICIAE.]

SACRA'RIUM  was,  according  to  the  definition
of  Ulpian  (Dig,  1.  tit.  8.  s.  9.  §2),  anyplace  in
which  sacred  things  were  deposited  and  kept,  whe-
ther this  place  was  a  part  of  a  temple  or  of  a  pri-
vate house.  (Comp.  Cic.  c.  Verr.  iv.  2,  pro  Milon.^
31  ;  Suet.  7Yb.  51.)  A  sacrarium  therefore  wJi
that  part  of  every  house  in  which  the  images  of  th«
penates  were  kept.  Respecting  the  sacrarium  of
the  lares  see  liARARiUM.  Public  sacraria  at  Rome
were  :  one  attached  to  the  temple  of  the  Capitoline^
Jupiter,  in  which  the  tensae  or  chariots  for  publici
processions  were  kept  (Suet.  Vesp.  5  ;  Grat.  Falisc
534) ;  the  place  of  the  Salii  in  which  the  ancilia
and  the  lituus  of  Romulus  were  kept  (Val.  Max.
i.  8.  11;  Serv.  ad  Aen.  vii.  603),  and  others.  In
the  time  of  the  emperors,  the  name  sacrarium  was
sometimes  applied  to  a  place  in  which  a  statue  of
an  emperor  was  erected.  (Tacit.  Annul,  ii.  4l  ;
Stat.  Silv.  v.  1.  240.)  Livy  (i.  21)  uses  it  as  a
name  for  a  sacred  retired  place  in  general.    [  L.  S.]

SACRIFrCIUM  (i'epetoj/).  Sacrifices  or  offer-
ings formed  the  chief  part  of  the  worship  of  the
ancients.  They  were  partly  signs  of  gratitude,
partly  a  means  of  propitiating  the  gods,  and  partly


SACRIFICIUM.

ulso  intended  to  induce  the  deity  to  bestow  some
favour  upon  the  sacrificer,  or  upon  those  on  whose
behalf  the  sacrifice  was  offered.  Sacrifices  in  a
wider  sense  would  also  embrace  the  Donaria  ;  in
a  narrower  sense  sacrificia  were  things  offered  to
the  gods,  which  merely  afforded  momentary  gra-
tification, which  were  burnt  upon  their  altars,  or
were  believed  to  be  consumed  by  the  gods.  We
shall  divide  all  sacrifices  into  two  great  divisions,
bloody  sacrifices  and  unbloody  sacrifices,  and,
where  it  is  necessary,  consider  Greek  and  Roman
sacrifices  separately.

Bloody  sacrifices.  As  regards  sacrifices  in  the
earliest  times,  the  ancients  themselves  sometimes
imagined  that  unbloody  sacrifices,  chiefly  offerings
of  fruit,  had  been  customary  long  before  bloody
sacrifices  were  introduced  among  them.  (Plat,  de
Leg.  vi.  p.  782  ;  Paus.  viii.  2.  §  1,  i.  26.  §  6  ;
Macrob.  Sat.  i,  10,  &c.}  It  cannot  indeed  be  de-
nied, that  sacrifices  of  fruit,  cakes,  libations,  and
the  like  existed  in  very  early  times  ;  but  bloody
sacrifices,  and  more  than  this,  human  sacrifices,  are
very  frequently  mentioned  in  early  story  ;  in  fact
the  mythology  of  Greece  is  full  of  instances  of  hu-
man sacrifices  being  oflFered  and  of  their  pleasing
the  gods.  Wachsmuth  {Hell.  Alt.  ii.  p.  549,  &c.
2d  edit.)  has  given  a  list  of  the  most  celebrated
instances.  It  may  be  said  that  none  of  theni  has
come  down  to  us  with  any  degree  of  historical  evi-
dence ;  but  surely  the  spirit  which  gave  origin  to
those  legends  issufficienttoprove  that  human  sacri-
fices had  nothing  repulsive  to  the  ancients,  and
must  have  existed  to  some  extent.  In  the  historical
times  of  Greece  we  find  various  customs  in  the  wor-
ship of  several  gods,  and  in  several  parts  of  Greece,
which  can  only  be  accounted  for  by  supposing  that
they  were  introduced  as  substitutes  for  human  sacri-
fices. In  other  cases  where  civilisation  had  shown
less  of  its  softening  influences,  human  sacrifices  re-
mained customary  throughout  the  historical  periods
of  Greece,  and  down  to  the  time  of  the  emperors.
Thus  in  the  worship  of  Zeus  Lycaeus  in  Arcadia,
where  human  sacrifices  were  said  to  have  been  in-
troduced by  Lycjion  (Paus.  viii.  2.  §  1),  they  ap-
pear to  have  continued  till  the  time  of  the  Roman
emperors.  (Theophrast.  ap.  Porphyr.  de  Ahstin.ii.
27;  Plut.  Quaest.  Gr.  39.)  In  Leucas  a  person
was  every  year  at  the  festival  of  Apollo  thrown
from  a  rock  into  the  sea  (Strab.  x.  p.  452);  and
Themistocles  before  the  battle  of  Salamis  is  said  to
have  sacrificed  thi-ee  Persians  to  Dionysius.  (Plut.
Them.  13,  Arist.  11,  Pelop.  21.)  Kespecting  an
annual  sacrifice  of  human  beings  at  Athens,  see
Thargeua.  With  these  few  exceptions  however
human  sacrifices  had  ceased  in  the  historical  ages
.  of  Greece.  Owing  to  the  influences  of  civilisation,
in  many  cases  animals  were  substituted  for  human
beings,  in  others  a  few  drops  of  human  blood  were
thought  sufficient  to  propitiate  the  gods.  (Paus.
viii.  23.  §  1,  ix.  8.  §  1.)  The  custom  of  sacrificing
human  life  to  the  gods  arose  undoubtedly  from  the
belief,  which  mider  different  forms  has  manifested
itself  at  all  times  and  in  all  nations,  that  the  nobler
the  sacrifice  and  the  dearer  to  its  possessor,  the
more  pleasing  it  would  be  to  the  gods.  Hence  the
frequent  instances  in  Grecian  story  of  persons  sa-
crificing their  own  children,  or  of  persons  devoting
themselves  to  the  gods  of  the  lower  world.  In
later  times,  however,  persons  sacrificed  to  the  gods
were  generally  criminals  who  had  been  condemned
to  death,  or  such  as  had  been  taken  prisoners  in  war.


SACRIFICIUM.  Qm

That  the  Romans  also  believed  human  sacri-
fices to  be  pleasing  to  the  gods,  might  be  inferred
from  the  story  of  Curtius  and  from  the  self-sacrifice
of  the  Decii.  The  symbolic  sacrifice  of  human
figures  made  of  rushes  at  the  Lemiiralia  [Lemu-
ralia]  also  shows  that  in  the  early  histor}'-  of
Italy  human  sacrifices  were  not  uncommon.  For
another  proof  of  this  practice,  see  the  article  Ver
Sacrum.  One  awful  instance  also  is  known,  which
belongs  to  the  latest  period  of  the  Roman  republic.
When  the  soldiers  of  Julius  Caesar  attempted  an
insurrection  at  Rome,  two  of  them  were  sacrificed
to  Mars  in  the  Campus  Martius  by  the  pontifices
and  the  flamen  Martialis,  and  their  heads  were
stuck  up  at  the  regia.     (Dion  Cass.  xlii.  24.)

A  second  kind  of  bloody  sacrifices  were  those  of
animals  of  various  kinds,  according  to  the  nature
and  character  of  the  divinity.  The  sacrifices  of
animals  were  the  most  common  among  the  Greeks
and  Romans.  The  victim  was  called  tepetoj/,  and
in  Latin  liostia  or  victima.  In  the  early  times  it
appears  to  have  been  the  general  custom  to  burn
the  whole  victim  (oXoKavreTv)  upon  the  altars  of
the  gods,  and  the  same  was  in  some  cases  also  ob-
served in  later  times  (Xenoph.  A7ialj.  vii,  8.  §  5),
and  more  especially  in  sacrifices  to  the  gods  of  the
lower  world,  and  such  as  were  offered  to  atone  for
some  crime  that  had  been  committed.  (Apollon.
Rhod.  iii.  1030,  1209.)  But  as  early  as  the  time
of  Homer  it  was  the  almost  general  practice  to
burn  only  the  legs  (/J-vpol,  l^-Vp'i-a,  Mpa)  enclosed  in
fat,  and  certain  parts  of  the  intestines,  while  the
remaining  parts  of  the  victim  were  consumed  by
men  at  a  festive  meal.  The  gods  delighted  chiefly
in  the  smoke  arising  from  the  burning  victims,  and
the  greater  the  number  of  victims,  the  more  plea,s-
ing  was  the  sacrifice.  Hence  it  was  not  uncommon
to  offer  a  sacrifice  of  one  hundred  bulls  (e/cart^^grj)
at  once,  though  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  a
hecatomb  always  signifies  a  sacrifice  of  a  hundred
bulls,  for  the  name  was  used  in  a  general  way  to
designate  any  great  sacrifice.  Such  great  sacrifices
were  not  less  pleasing  to  men  than  to  the  gods,  for
in  regard  to  the  former  they  were  in  reality  a  do-
nation of  meat.  Hence  at  Athens  the  partiality
for  such  sacrifices  rose  to  the  highest  degree.
(Athen.  i.  p.  3  ;  comp.  Bockh,  Publ.  Econ.  p.  211,
&c.)  Sparta,  on  the  other  hand,  was  less  extrava-
gant in  sacrifices,  and  while  in  other  Greek  suites
it  was  necessary  that  a  victim  should  be  healthy,
beautiful,  and  uninjured,  the  Spartans  were  not
very  scrupulous  in  this  respect.  (Plat.  Alcib.  ii.
p.  149.)  The  animals  which  were  sacrificed  were
mostly  of  the  domestic  kind,  as  bulls,  cows,  sheep,
rams,  lambs,  goats,  pigs  dogs,  and  horses  ;  but
fishes  are  also  mentioned  as  pleasing  to  certain
gods.  (Athen.  vii.  p.  297.)  Each  god  had  his
favourite  animals  which  he  liked  best  as  sacrifices  ;
but  it  may  be  considered  as  a  general  rule,  that
those  animals  which  were  sacred  to  a  god  were
not  sacrificed  to  him,  though  horses  were  sacrificed
to  Poseidon  notwithstanding  this  usage.  (Paus.
viii.  7.  §  2.)  The  head  of  the  victim  before  it
was  killed  was  in  most  cases  strewed  with  roasted
barley  meal  {ov\6xvra  or  oiiXoxvrai)  mixed  with
salt  {mala  salsa).  The  Athenians  used  for  this
purpose  only  barley  grown  in  the  Rharian  plain.
(Paus.  i.  38.  §  6.)  The  persons  who  offered  the
sacrifice  wore  generally  garlands  round  their  heads

1"  and  sometimes  also  carried  them   in  their  hands.
and  before  they  touched  anything  belonging  to  the
3s  4


1000  SACRIFICIUM.

sacrifice  tliey  washed  their  hands  in  water.  The
victim  itsdf  was  likewise  adorned  with  garlands,
and  its  hoiiis  were  sometimes  gilt.  Before  the
animal  was  killed,  a  bunch  of  hair  was  cut  from  its
forehead,  and  thrown  into  the  fire  as  primitiae  :
this  prepaiatory  rite  was  called  Korapx^f^Qo-i.
(Horn.  //.  xix.  254,  Od.  xiv.  422  ;  Herod,  ii.  45,
iv.  60  ;  Eurip.  Iphig.  Taur.  40.)  In  the  heroic
ages  the  princes,  as  the  high  priests  of  their  people,
killed  the  victim  ;  in  later  times  this  was  done  by
the  priests  themselves.  When  the  sacrifice  was  to
be  offered  to  the  Olympic  gods,  the  head  of  the
animal  was  drawn  heavenward  (see  the  woodcut
on  the  title  page  of  this  work  :  comp.  Eustath.  ad
Iliad,  i.  459  )  ;  when  to  the  gods  of  the  lower
world,  to  heroes,  or  to  the  dead,  it  was  drawn
downwards.  While  the  flesh  was  burning  upon
the  altar,  wine  and  incense  were  thrown  upon  it
{Iliads  i.  264,  xi.  774,  &c),  and  prayers  and  music
accompanied  the  solemnity.

The  most  common  animal  sacrifices  at  Rome
were  the  suovetaurilia,  or  solitaurilia,  consisting  of
p.  pig.  a  sheep,  and  an  ox.  They  were  performed
in  all  cases  of  a  lustration,  and  the  victims  were
carried  around  the  thing  to  be  lustrated,  whether
it  was  a  city,  a  people,  or  a  piece  of  land.  [Lus-
TRATio.]  The  Greek  TpjTTi'o,  which  likewise
consisted  of  an  ox,  a  sheep  and  a  pig,  was  the
same  sacrifice  as  the  Roman  suovetaurilia.  (Calli-
raach.  up.  Phot.  s.  v.  Tpirrvav;  Aristoph.  Fhit.  820.)
The  customs  observed  before  and  during  the  sacri-
fice of  an  animal  were  on  the  Avhole  the  same  as
those  observed  in  Greece.  (Virg.  Aen.  vi.  245  ;
Serv.  ad  A  en.  iv.  5  7  ;  Fest.  s.  v.  Immolare  ;  Cato,
de  Re  Rust.  134,  132.)  But  the  victim  was  in
most  cases  not  killed  by  the  priests  who  conducted
the  sacrifice,  but  by  a  person  called  pqpa,  who
struck  the  animal  with  a  hammer  before  the  knife
was  used.  (Serv.  ad  Aen.  xii.  120  ;  Suet.  Calig.
32.)  The  better  parts  of  the  intestines  (exta)
were  strewed  with  barley  meal,  wine,  and  incense,
and  were  burnt  upon  the  altar.  Those  parts  of
the  animal  which  were  burnt  were  called  proseda,
prosiciae,  or  ablegmina.  When  a  sacrifice  was
offered  to  gods  of  rivers  or  the  sea,  these  parts
were  not  burnt,  but  thrown  into  the  water.  (Cato,
de  Re  Rust.  134  ;  Macrob.  Sat.  ii.  2  ;  Liv.  xxix.
27  ;  Virg.  Aen.  v.  774.)  Respecting  the  use  which
the  ancients  made  of  sacrifices  to  learn  the  will  of
the  gods,  see  PIaruspex  and  Divinatio.

Unbloody  sacrifices.  Among  these  we  may  first
mention  the  libations  {libatio?ies,  \oi§al  or  <nrov5al).
We  have  seen  above  that  bloody  sacrifices  were
usually  accompanied  by  libations,  as  wine  was
poured  upon  them.  Libations  always  accompanied
a  sacrifice  which  was  offered  in  concluding  a  treaty
with  a  foreign  nation,  and  that  here  they  formed  a
prominent  part  of  the  solemnity,  is  clear  from  the
fact  that  the  treaty  itself  was  called  a-rrovSai.  But
libations  were  also  made  independent  of  any  other
sacrifice,  as  in  solemn  prayers  (Iliad,  xvi,  233),
and  on  many  other  occasions  of  public  and  private
life,  as  before  drinking  at  meals,  and  the  like.
Libations  usually  consisted  of  unmixed  wine
(evairouSos^  merum)^  but  sometimes  also  of  milk,
honey,  and  other  fluids,  either  pure  or  diluted  with
water.  (Soph.  Oe^i.  Col.  159,  4«l  ;  Plin.  //.  ^V.
xiv.  19  ;  Aeschyl.  Eum.  107.)  Incense  was  like-
wise an  offering  which  usually  accompanied  bloody
sacrifices,  but  it  was  also  burned  as  an  offering  by
ftself.     Real  incense  appears  to  have  been  used


SAECULUM.

only  in  later  times  (Plin.  H.  I^.  xiii.  1),  but  in  tBe
early  times,  and  afterwards  also,  various  kinds  of
fragrant  wood,  such  as  cedar,  fig,  vine,  and  myrtle-
wood,  were  burnt  upon  the  altars  of  the  gods.
(Suid.  s.  V.  HrjcpdXia  ^v\a.)

A  third  class  of  unbloody  sacrifices  consisted  of
fruit  and  cakes.  The  former  were  mostly  offered
to  the  gods  as  primitiae  or  tithes  of  the  harvest,
and  as  a  sign  of  gratitude.  They  were  sometimes
offered  in  their  natural  state,  sometimes  also
adorned  or  prepared  in  various  ways.  Of  this  kind
were  the  elpeaiuivT],  an  olive  branch  wound  around
with  wool  and  hung  with  various  kinds  of  fruits  ;
the  X'^'''po"  or  pots  filled  with  conked  beans  [Pya*
nepsia]  ;  the  Kepuou  or  Kepva,  or  dishes  with
fruit ;  the  oax^'''^  or  otrxa  [Oschophoria].  Other
instances  may  be  found  in  the  accounts  of  the
various  festivals.  Cakes  (TreAavoj,  Tre/ijuara,  ttJ-
TTttj/a,  libum)  were  peculiar  to  the  worship  of  cer-
tain deities,  as  to  that  of  Apollo.  They  were
either  simple  cakes  of  flour,  sometimes  also  of  wax,
or  they  were  made  in  the  shape  of  some  animal,
and  were  then  offered  as  symbolical  sacrifices  in
the  place  of  real  animals,  either  because  tliey  could
not  easily  be  procured  or  were  too  expensive  for
the  sacrifices  (Suid.  s.  v.  BoOs  e'gSo^uos  ;  Serv.  ad
Aen.  ii.  116.)  This  appearance  instead  of  reality
in  sacrifices  was  also  manifest  on  other  occasions,
for  we  find  that  sheep  were  sacrificed  instead  of
stags,  and  were  then  called  stags  ;  and  in  the
temple  of  Isis  at  Rome  the  priests  used  water  of
the  river  Tiber  instead  of  Nile  water,  and  called
the  former  water  of  the  Nile.  (Fest.  s.  v.  Cer-
varia  oris  ;  Serv.  I.  c.)

See  Wachsmuth,  Ilellen.  Alterthumsh.  vol.  ii.
pp.  548 — 559,  2d  ed.  ;  Hartung,  Die  Religion  der
Romer,  vol.  i.  p.  160,  &c.  [L.  S.]

SACRILE'GIUMis  the  crime  of  stealing  things
consecrated  to  the  gods,  or  things  deposited  in  a
consecrated  place.  (Quinctil.  vii.  3.  §  21,  &c. ;  Cic.
deLeg.  ii.  16  ;  Liv.  xlii.  3.)  A  lex  Julia  referred
to  in  the  Digest  (48.  tit.  13.  s.  4)  appears  to  have
placed  the  crime  of  sacrilegium  on  an  equality  with
peculatus.  [Peculatus.]  Several  of  the  imperial
constitutions  made  death  the  punishment  for  a
sacrilegus,  which  consisted  according  to  circuni-
stances  either  in  being  given  up  to  wild  beasts,  in
being  burned  alive,  or  hanged,  (Dig.  48.  tit.  13.  s;
6.)  Paulus  says  in  general  that  a  sacrilegus  was
punished  with  death,  but  he  distinguishes  between
such  persons  who  robbed  the  sacra  publica,  and
such  as  robbed  the  sacra  privata,  and  he  is  of
opinion  that  the  latter,  though  more  than  a  common
thief,  yet  deserves  less  punishment  than  the  former.
In  a  wider  sense,  sacrilegium  was  used  by  the  Ro»
mans  to  designate  any  violation  of  religion  (Corn.
Nep.  Alcib.  6),  or  of  anything  which  should  be
treated  with  religious  reverence.  (Ovid.  Met.  xiv.
539,  Rem.  Am.  367,  Fust.  iii.  700.)  Hence  a
law  in  the  Codex  (9.  tit.  29.  s.  1)  states  that  any
person  is  guilty  of  sacrilegium  who  neglects  or
violates  the  sanctity  of  the  divine  law.  An-
other law  (Cod.  9,  tit.  29.  s.  2)  decreed  that  even
a  doubt  as  to  whether  a  person  appointed  by
an  emperor  to  some  ofiice  was  worihy  of  this
office,  was  to  be  regarded  as  a  crime  equal  ta
sacrilegium,  [L.  S.]    ■

SACRO'RUxM  DETESTA'TIO.  [Gens,  p.
568,  b.]

SAECULA'RESLUDL[LudiSaecijlarb.<!.]

SAF/CULUM.     A  saeculum  was  of  a  twofold


SAGITTA.

nature,  that  is,  either  civil  or  natural.  Tlie  civil
saecuhnii,  accordiii,?  to  the  calculation  of  the  Etrus-
cans, which  was  adopted  by  the  Romans,  was  a
space  of  time  containing  110  lunar  years.  The
natural  saeculum,  upon  the  calculation  of  which
the  former  was  founded,  expressed  the  longest
term  of  human  life,  and  its  duration  or  length  was
ascertained  according  to  the  ritual  books  of  the
Etruscans,  in  the  following  manner :  the  life  of  a
person,  which  lasted  the  longest  of  all  those  who
were  bom  on  the  day  of  the  foundation  of  a  town,
constituted  the  first  saeculum  of  that  town  ;  and
the  longest  liver  of  all  who  were  born  at  the  time
when  the  second  saeculum  began,  again  determined
the  duration  of  the  second  saeculum,  and  so  on,
(Censorin.  de  Die  Nat.  17.)  In  the  same  manner
that  the  Etruscans  thus  called  the  longest  life  of  a
man  a  saeculum,  so  they  called  the  longest  exist-
ence of  a  state,  or  the  space  of  1100  years,  a  sac-
cular day  ;  the  longest  existence  of  one  human
race,  or  the  space  of  8800  years,  a  saccular  week,
&c.  (Plut.  Sulla,  7  ;  Niebuhr,  Hist,  of  Borne,  i.
p.  137.)  It  was  believed  that  the  return  of  a  new
saeculum  was  marked  bj--  various  wonders  and
figns,  which  were  recorded  in  the  history  of  the
Etruscans,  The  return  of  each  saeculum  at  Rome
was  announced  by  the  pontiffs,  who  also  made  the
necessary  intercalations  in  such  a  manner,  that  at
the  commencement  of  a  new  saeculum  the  begin-
ning of  the  ten  months'  year,  of  the  twelve  months'
year,  and  of  the  solar  year  coincided.  But  in
these  arrangements  the  greatest  arbitrariness  and
irregularity  appears  to  have  prevailed  at  Rome,  as
may  be  seen  from  the  unequal  intervals  at  which
the  liidi  saeculares  were  celebrated.  [Ludi  Sae-
cuLAREs.]  This  also  accounts  for  the  various
ways  in  which  a  saeculum  was  defined  by  the  an-
cients :  some  believed  that  it  contained  thirty
(Censorin.  /.  c),  and  others  that  it  contained  a
hundred  years  (Varro,  de  Ling.  Lat.  vi.  11  ;  Fest.
s.v.  Saeculares  ludi)  ;  the  latter  opinion  appears
to  have  been  the  most  common  in  later  times,  so
that  saeculum  answered  to  our  century.  (See
Niebuhr,  Hixt.  of  Rome,  i.  p.  275,  &c.)       [L.  S.]

SAGA'RII,  the  sellers  or  makers  of  the  saga
or  soldiers' cloaks.  [Sagum.]  They- formed  a  col-
legium at  Rome,  and,  like  many  of  the  other  trade-
corporations,  worshipped  the  imperial  fiimily,  as
we  see  from  inscriptions.  (Dig.  14.  tit.  4.  s.  5.  §  1.5  ;
1  7.  tit.  2.  s.  52.  §  4  ;  and  the  inscription  in  A.  W.
Zumpt,  De  Augustalibus,  Berol.  1846,  p.  17.)

SAGITTA  {oiards,  I6s  ;  Herod.  TtJ^eu^ua),  an
arrow.  The  account  of  the  arrows  of  Hercules
(Hesiod,  Scut.  130 — 135),  enumerates  and  de-
scribes three  parts,  viz.  the  head  or  point,  the
shaft,  and  the  feather.

I.  The  head  was  denominated  ttpSts  (Herod,  i.
215,  iv.  81),  whence  the  instrument,  used  to  ex-
tract arrow-heads  from  the  bodies  of  the  wounded,
was  called  ap5todripa.  [Forceps,]  Great  quan-
tities of  flint  arrow  heads  are  found  in  Celtic  bar-
rows throughout  the  north  of  Europe,  in  form  ex-
actly resembling  those  which  are  still  used  b}'  the
Indians  of  North  America.  (Hoare's  Anc.  Wilt-
shire, South,  p,  183,)  Nevertheless,  the  Scythians
and  Massagetae  had  them  of  bronze,  (Herod.  //,  cc.)
Mr,  Dodwell  found  flint  arrow-heads  on  the  plain
of  Marathon,  and  concludes  that  they  liad  be-
longed to  the  Persian  army.  ( Tour  through  Greece,
vol  iL  p.  159.)  Those  used  by  the  Greeks  were
commonly  bronze,  as  is  expressed  by  the  epithet


SAGITTA.  1001

XakKfipns,  "fitted  with  bronze,"  which  Homer
applies  to  an  arrow.  (//.  xiii.  650,  662.)  Another
Homeric  epithet,  viz.  "•  three-tongued"  {rpiyKdjxiv,
II.  V.  3.93),  is  illustrated  by  the  forms  of  the  arrow-
heads, all  of  bronze,  which  are  represented  in  the
annexed  woodcut.     That  which  lies  horizontally


was  found  at  Persepolis,  and  is  drawn  of  the  size
of  the  original.  The  two  smallest,  one  of  which
shows  a  rivet-hole  at  the  side  for  fastening  it  to
the  shaft,  are  from  the  plain  of  Marathon.  (Skelton,
Tllust.  of  Annour  at  Goodrich  Court,  i.  pi.  44.)
The  fourth  specimen  was  also  found  in  Attica.
(Dodwell,  I.  c.)  Some  of  the  northern  nations,
who  could  not  obtain  iron,  barbed  their  arrow-
heads with  bone.     (Tacit.  Germ.  46.)

The  use  of  barbed  {aduncae,  hamatae),  and  poi-
soned arrows  {renenatae  sagittae)  is  alwavs  repre-
sented by  the  Greek  and  Roman  authors  as  the
characteristic  of  barbarous  nations.  It  is  attri-
buted to  the  Sauromatae  and  Getae  (Ovid.  Trist.
iii.  10.  63,  64,  de  Fonto,  iv.  7.  11,  12)  ;  to  the
Servii  (Arnoldi,  Chron.  Slav.  4.  §  8)  and  Scythians
(Plin.  H.N.  X.  53.  s.  115),  and  to  the  Arabs
(Pollux,  i.  10)  and  Moors.  ( H or.  Carw..  i.  22.  3.)
When  Ulysses  Avishes  to  have  recourse  to  this  in-
sidious practice,  he  is  obliged  to  travel  north  of  the
country  of  the  Thesprotians  (Hom.  Od.  i.  261 —
263)  ;  and  the  classical  authors  who  mention  it
do  so  in  terms  of  condemnation.  (Hom,  Plin.
//,  cc.  :  Aelian,  //.  ^.  v.  J  6.)  The  poison  applied
to  the  tips  of  arrows  having  been  called  toxicum
{ro^iKhv),  on  account  of  its  connection  with  the
use  of  the  bow  (Plin.  H.N.  xvi.  10.  s,  20  ;  Festus,
s.  V.  ;  Dioscor.  vi.  20),  the  signification  of  this  tenn
was  afterwards  extended  to  poisons  in  general.
(Plant.  Merc.  ii.  4.  4  ;  Hor.  Epod.  xvii.  61  ;
Propert.  i.  5.  6.)

II.  The  excellence  of  the  shaft  consisted  in
being  long  and  at  the  same  time  straight,  and,  if
it  was  of  light  wood,  in  being  well  polished.  (Hes.
Scut.  133.)  But  it  often  consisted  of  a  smooth
cane  or  reed  (Arundo  doiiax  or  phragmites,  Linn.),
and  on  this  account  the  whole  arrow  was  called
either  arundo  in  the  one  case  (Virg.  Aen.  iv.  69 —
73,  V.  525  ;  Ovid.  Met.  i.  471,  viii.  382),  or
calamus  in  the  other.  (Virg.  Buc.  iii.  12, 13  ;  Ovid.
Met.  vii.  778  ;  Hor.  Carm.  i.  15.  17  ;  Juv.  xiii.
80. )  In  the  Egyptian  tombs  reed-arrows  have  been
found,  varying  from  34  to  22  inches  in  length.
They  show  the  slit  (yXvcpis^  Hom.  //.  iv.  122,
Od.xxi.  419)  cut  in  the  reed  for  fixing  it  upon
the  string.  (Wilkinson,  Man.  and  Oust.  iScc.  Tol.  i
p  309.)


1002


SAGUM.


III.  The  feathers  are  shown  on  ancient  monu-
ments of  all  kinds,  and  are  indicated  by  the  terms
aloe  (Virg.  Aen.  ix.  578,  xii.  319),  pennatae  sa-
gittae  (Prudentius,  Hamart.  498),  and  TTTeptJevTes
oiaToi  (Hom.  IL  v.  171.)  The  arrows  of  Hercu-
les are  said  to  have  been  feathered  from  the  wings
of  a  black  eagle.     (Hes.  I.  c. )

Besides  the  use  of  arrows  in  the  ordinary  way,
they  were  sometimes  employed  to  carry  fire.  Julius
Caesar  attempted  to  set  Antony's  ships  on  fire  by
sending  jScAtj  trvpcpSpafrom.  the  bows  of  his  archers.
(Dion  Cass.  1.  34.)  A  head-dress  of  small  arrows  is
said  to  have  been  worn  by  the  Indians  (Prudentius,
I.  c),  the  Nubians  and  Egyptians,  and  other  Orien-
tal nations.  (Claudian,  de  Nupt.  Honor.  222,  de
3  Cons.  Horuyr.  2\,de  Laud.  Stil.  i.  254.)

In  the  Greek  and  Roman  armies  the  sagittarii,
more  anciently  called  arquites,  i.  e.  archers,  or
bowmen  (Festus,  s.  v.),  formed  an  important  part
of  the  light-armed  infantry.  (Caesar,  Bell.  Civ.  i.
81,  iii.  44  ;  Cic.  ad  Fain.  xv.  4.)  They  belonged,
for  the  most  part,  to  the  allies,  and  were  princi-
pally Cretans.  [Arcus  ;  Corytus  ;  Pharetra  ;

TORIMENTUM.]  [J.  Y.]

SA'GMINA  were  the  same  as  the  Verbenae,
namely,  herbs  torn  up  by  their  roots  from  within
the  inclosure  of  the  Capitol,  which  were  always
carried  by  the  Fetiales  or  ambassadors,  when  they
went  to  a  foreign  people  to  demand  restitution  for
wrongs  committed  against  the  Romans,  or  to  make
a  treaty.  [ Fetiales. j  They  served  to  mark  the
sacred  character  of  the  ambassadors,  and  answered
the  same  purpose  as  the  Greek  KripvKeia.  (Plin.
H.N.  xxii.  2.  s.  3  ;  Liv.  i.  24,  xxx.  43  ;  Dig.  1.
tit.  8.  s.  8.)  Pliny  {I.e.)  also  says  that  sagmina
were  used  in  remediis  publicis,  by  which  we  must
understand  expiations  and  lustrations.  The  word
Verbena  seems  to  have  been  applied  to  any  kind  of
herb,  or  to  the  boughs  and  leaves  of  any  kind  of
tree,  gathered  from  a  pure  or  sacred  place.  (Serv.
ad  Virg.  Aen.  xii.  120.)

According  to  Festus  (s. «.),  the  verhenae  were
called  sagmina.,  that  is,  pure  herbs,  because  they
were  taken  by  the  consul  or  the  praetor  from  a
sacred  {sancio)  place,  to  give  to  legati  when  setting
out  to  make  a  treaty  or  declare  war.  He  connects
it  with  the  words  sandus  and  sancire^  and  it  is  not
at  all  impossible  that  it  may  contain  the  same  root,
which  appears  in  a  simpler  form  in  sac-er  {sag-men,
sa{n)c-tus)  :  Marcian  (Dipr.  I.  c.)  however  makes  a
ridiculous  mistake,  when  he  derives  sanctus  from
sagmina.

MUller  {ad  Fesium,  p.  320)  thinks,  that  samen-
tum  is  the  same  word  as  sagmen,  although  used  re-
specting another  thing  by  the  Anagnienses.  (M.
Aurelius,  in  Epist.  ad  Fronton,  iv.  4.)

SAGUM  was  the  cloak  worn  by  the  Roman  sol-
diers and  inferior  officers,  in  contradistinction  to  the
Paludauientum  of  the  general  and  superior  officers.
[PaludamentuiM,]  It  is  used  in  opposition  to  the
toga  or  garb  of  peace,  and  we  accordingly  find  that
when  there  was  a  war  in  Italy,  all  citizens  put  on
the  sagum  even  in  the  city,  with  the  exception  of
those  of  consular  rank  {saga  sumere,  ad  saga  ire,
in  sagis  esse,  Cic.  Phil.  viii.  11,  v.  12,  xiv.  1)  :
hence  in  the  Social  or  Marsic  war  the  sagum  was
worn  for  two  years.  (Liv.  JSpit.  72,  73  ;  Veil.
Pat.  ii.  16.)

The  sagum  was  open  in  the  front,  and  usually
fastened  across  the  shoulders  by  a  clasp,  though
not  always  (Trebell.  Poll.  Trig.  Tyrann.  10):  it


SALIENTES.

resembled  in  fonn  the  Paludamentum  (see  wood-
cuts, p.  854),  as  we  see  from  the  specimens  of  it
on  the  column  of  Trajan  and  other  ancient  monu-
ments. It  was  thick  and  made  of  wool  (Mart,
xiv.  159),  whence  the  name  is  sometimes  given  to
the  wool  itself.  (Varro,  L.  L.  v.  167,  ed.  Miiller.)
The  cloak  worn  by  the  general  and  superior  officers
is  sometimes  called  sagum  {Punicum  sagum,  Hor.
Fp  ix.  28),  but  the  diminutive  Sagulum  is  more
commonly  used  in  such  cases.  (Compare  Sil.  Ital.
iv.  519,  xvii.  528  ;  Liv.  xxx.  17,  xxvii.  19.)

The  cloak  worn  by  the  northern  nations  of
Europe  is  also  called  sagum  :  see  woodcut,  p.  213,
where  three  Sarmatians  are  represented  with  saga,
and  compare  Pallium,  p.  852.  The  German
sagum  is  mentioned  by  Tacitus  {Germ.  17):  that
worn  by  the  Gauls  seems  to  have  been  a  species  of
plaid  {versicolor  sagulum,  Tac.  Hist  ii.  20).

The  outer  garment  worn  by  slaves  and  poor
persons  is  also  sometimes  called  sagum.  (Columell.
1.  8  ;  compare  Dig.  34.  tit.  2.  s.  23.  §  2.)

SALAMI'NIA.     [Paralus.]

SAL.l'KIUM,  a  salary.  The  ancients  derive
the  word  from  sal,  i.  e.  salt  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxi.  41 )  ;
the  most  necessary  thing  to  support  human  life
being  thus  mentioned  as  a  representative  for  all
others.  Salarinm  therefore  comprised  all  the  pro-
visions with  which  the  Roman  off.cers  were  sup-
plied, as  well  as  their  pay  in  money.  In  the  time
of  the  republic  the  name  salarium  does  not  appear
to  have  been  used  ;  it  was  Augustus  who  in  order
to  place  the  governors  of  provinces  and  other  mili-
tary officers  in  a  greater  state  of  dependence,  gave
salaries  to  them  or  certain  sums  of  monej',  to  which
afterwards  various  supplies  in  kind  were  added.
(Suet.  Aug.  36  ;  Tacit.  Agric.  42  ;  Treb.  Poll.
Claud.  14  and  15  ;  Flav.  Vopisc.  Pro/j.  4.)  Before
the  time  of  Augustus,  the  provincial  magistrates
had  been  provided  in  their  provinces  with  every-
thing they  wanted,  through  the  medium  of  redemp-
tores  {Trdpoxoi),  who  undertook,  for  a  certain  sum
paid  by  the  state,  to  provide  the  governors  with  all
that  was  necessary  to  them.  During  the  empire
we  find  instances  of  the  salarium  being  paid  to  a
person  who  had  obtained  a  province,  but  was  ne-
vertheless not  allowed  to  govern  it.  In  this  case
the  salarium  was  a  compensation  for  the  honour
and  advantages  which  he  might  have  derived  from
the  actual  government  of  a  province,  whence  we
can  scarcely  infer  that  the  sum  of  1 0,000  sesterces,
which  was  offered  on  such  an  occasion  (Dion  Cass.
Ixxviii.  22),  was  the  regular  salarium  for  a  pro-
consul.

Salaria  were  also  given  under  the  empire  to
other  officers,  as  to  military  tribunes  (Plin.  H.N.
xxxiv.  6  ;  Juv.  iii.  132),  toassessores  [Assessor],
to  senators  (Suet.  Nero,  1 0),  to  the  comites  of  the
princeps  on  his  expeditions  (Suet.  Tib.  46),  and
others.  Antoninus  Pius  fixed  the  salaries  of  all
the  rhetoricians  and  philosophers  throughout  the
empire  (Capitol,  Ant.  Pius,  11),  and  when  persons
did  not  fulfil  their  duties,  he  punished  them  by
deducting  from  their  salaries.  (Capitol,  ibid.  7.)
Alexander  Severus  instituted  fixed  salaries  for
rhetoricians,  grammarians,  physicians,  haruspices,
mathematicians,  mechanicians  and  architects  (Lam-
prid.  Alex.  Se7%  44)  ;  but  to  how  much  these  sala-
ries amounted  we  are  not  informed.  Respecting
the  pay  which  certain  classes  of  priests  received,
see  Sacerdos.  [L.  S.]

SALI  ELITES.     [FoNS,  p.  544,  b.]


SALII.

SA'LII  were  priests  of  Mars  Gradivus,  and  are
eaid  to  have  been  instituted  by  Numa.  They
were  twelve  in  number,  chosen  from  the  patricians
even  in  the  latest  times,  and  formed  an  ecclesias-
tical corporation.  (Liv.  i.  20;  Dionys.  ii,  70;  Cic.
Rep.  ii.  14  ;  lecta  juventus  patricia,  Lucan,  ix.
478.)  They  had  the  care  of  the  twelve  Ancilia,
which  were  kept  in  the  temple  of  Mars  on  the
Palatine  hill,  whence  those  priests  were  sometimes
called  Salii  Palatini  to  distinguish  them  from  the
other  Salii  mentioned  below.  The  distinguishing
dress  of  the  Salii  was  an  embroidered  tunic  bound
with  a  brazen  belt,  the  trabea,  and  the  Apex,  also
worn  by  the  Flamines.  [Apex.]  Each  had  a
sword  by  his  side,  and  in  his  right  hand  a  spear
or  staff.     (Dionys.  l.  c.)

The  festival  of  Mars  was  celebrated  by  the
Salii  on  the  1st  of  March  and  for  several  successive
days  ;  on  which  occasion  they  were  accustomed  to
go  through  the  city  in  their  official  dress  carrying
the  ancilia  in  their  left  hands  or  suspended  from
their  shoulders,  and  at  the  same  time  singing  and
dancing.  In  the  dance  they  struck  the  shields
with  rods  so  as  to  keep  time  with  their  voices  and
with  the  movements  of  the  dance.  (Liv.  /.  c.  ;
Dionys.  /.  c.  ;  Hor.  Canu.  i.  36.  1,  iv.  1.  28).
From  their  dancing  Ovid,  apparently  with  cor-
rectness, derives  their  name  (Fast.  iii.  387).  The
Bongs  or  hymns,  which  they  sang  on  this  occasion
{Sallaria  carmina.,  Hor.  Ep.  ii.  1.  86  ;  Tac.  Ann.
ii.  83),  were  called  Asamenta.,  Assamenta,  or
Axamenta,  of  which  the  etymology  is  uncertain.
GQttling  {Gesch.  der  Rom.  Staatsv.  p.  1.92)  thinks
they  were  so  called  because  they  were  sung  with-
out any  musical  accompaniment,  assa  voce;  but
this  etymology  is  opposed  to  the  express  statement
of  Dionysius  (iii.  32).  Some  idea  of  the  subject
of  these  songs  may  be  obtained  from  a  passage  in
Virgil  {Aen.  viii.  286),  and  a  small  fragment  of
them  is  preserved  by  Varro  {L.  L.  vii.  26,  ed.
Muller).  In  later  times  they  were  scarcely  un-
derstood even  by  the  priests  themselves.  (Varro,
L.  L.  vii.  2  ;  Hor.  Ep.  ii.  1.  86  ;  Quintil.  i.  6.
p.  54,  Bipont.)  The  praises  of  Mamurius  Veturius
formed  the  principal  subject  of  these  songs,  though
who  Mamurius  Veturius  was,  the  ancients  them-
selves were  not  agreed  upon.  (Varro,  L.  L.  vi.  45.)
He  is  generally  said  to  be  the  armourer,  who  made
eleven  ancilia  like  the  one  that  was  sent  from
heaven  in  the  reign  of  Numa.  (Festus,s.  v.  Mam.
Vet;  Dionys.  ii.  71  ;  Ovid.  Fast.  iii.  384),  but
some  modern  writers  suppose  it  to  be  merely
another  name  of  Mars.  Besides,  however,  the
praises  of  Mamurius,  the  verses,  which  the  Salii
sang,  appear  to  have  contained  a  kind  of  theogony,
in  which  the  praises  of  all  the  celestial  deities
were  celebrated,  with  the  exception  of  Venus.
(Macrob.  Sat.  i.  12.)  The  verses  in  honour  of
each  god  were  called  by  the  respective  names  of
each,  as  Januli,  Junonii,  Minervii.  (Festus,  s.  v.
Axamenta.)  Divine  honour  was  paid  to  some  of
the  emperors  by  inserting  their  names  in  the  songs
of  the  Salii.  This  honour  was  first  bestowed
upon  Augustus  (Monum.  Ancyr.),  and  afterwards
upon  Gcrmanicus  (Tac.  Ann.  ii.  83)  ;  and  when
Verus  died,  his  name  was  inserted  in  the  song  of
the  Salii  by  command  of  M.  Antoninus.  (Capitol.
M.  Ant.  Phil.  21.)

At  the  conclusion  of  the  festival  the  Salii  were
accustomed  to  partake  of  a  splendid  entertainment
in  the  terraple  of  Mars,  which  was  proverbial  for


SALINAE.  1003

its  excellence.  (Suet.  Claud.  33  ;  Cic.  ad  Att.  v,
9  ;  Hor.  Carm.  i.  37.)  The  members  of  the  col-
legium were  elected  by  co-optation.  We  read  of
the  dignities  of  pi-aesul,  vates,  and  magister  in  the
collegium.     (Capitol.  Ibid.  4.)

The  shape  of  the  ancile  is  exhibited  in  the  an-
nexed cut,  taken  from  an  ancient  gem  in  the  Floren-
tine cabinet,  which  illustrates  the  accounts  of  the
ancient  writers  that  its  form  was  oval,  but  with
the  two  sides  receding  inwards  with  an  even  curv-
ature, and  so  as  to  make  it  broader  at  the  ends
than  in  the  middle.  The  persons  engaged  in  car-
rying these  ancilia  on  their  shoulders,  suspended
from  a  pole,  are  probably  servants  of  the  Salii  ;
and  the  representation  agrees  exactly  with  the
statement  of  Dionj-sius  (ii.  70)  iriKras  yirrypeToi
Vprrj/JLeuas  arrh  Kav6vwv  KOfii(ov(ri.  At  the  top  of
the  cut  is  represented  one  of  the  rods  with  which
the  Salii  were  accustomed  to  beat  the  shield  in
their  dance,  as  already  described.  (Gruter,  Inscr.
p.  cccclxiv.  note  3.)


Tullus  Hostilius  established  another  collegium
of  Salii  in  fulfilment  of  a  vow  which  he  made  in  a
war  with  the  Sabines.  These  Salii  were  also
twelve  in  number,  chosen  from  the  patricians,  and
appeared  to  have  been  dedicated  to  the  service  of
Quirinus.  They  were  called  the  Salii  CoUini,
Agonales  or  Agonenses.  (Liv.  i.  27  ;  Dionys.  ii.
70,  iii.  32  ;  Varro,  L.  L.  vi.  14.)  Niebuhr  (Hist.
o/"/?ome,  vol.  iii.  p.  351)  supposes,  that  the  oldest
and  most  illustrious  college,  the  Palatine  Salii,
were  chosen  originally  from  the  oldest  tribe,  the
Ramnes,  and  the  one  instituted  by  Tullus  Hostilius
or  the  Quirinalian  from  the  Titles  alone :  a  third
college  for  the  Luceres  was  never  established.
(Compare  Hartung,  Die  Religion  derRbmer,  vol.  ii.
p.  163.)

SALI'NAE  (a\at,  aXoirfiyiov).,  a  salt-work.
(Varro,  de  L.  Lot.  viii.  25,  ed.  Spengel.)  Al-
though the  ancients  were  well  acquainted  with
rock-salt  (Herod,  iv.  181 — 185  ;  aAes  bpvKroi,
i.  e.  **  fossil  salt,"  Arrian,  Erped.  Alex.  iii.  4.  pp.
161, 162,  ed.  Blan.),  and  although  they  obtained
salt  likewise  from  certain  inland  lakes  (Herod,  vii.
30)  and  irom  natural  springs  or  brine-pits  (Cic
Nat.  Deor.  ii.  53  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxi.  7.  s.  39—
42),  and  found  no  small  quantity  on  certain  shores
where  it  was  congealed  by  the  heat  of  the  sun
without  human  labour  (oXey  aurd/iaTot,  Herod,  iv.
53  ;  Plin.  I.  c),  3'et  they  obtained  by  far  the
greatest  quantity  b}'  the  management  of  works
constructed  on  the  sea -shore,  where  it  was  natu-
rally adapted  for  the  purpose  by  being  so  low  and


1004


SALINUM.


flat  as  to  be  easily  overflowed  by  the  sea  (mari-
timae  areae  salinarmn.  Col.  de  Be  Rust.  ii.  2),  or
even  to  be  a  brackish  marsh  (aAu/cls)  or  a  marine
pool  {\ifJivoOa.\arra,  Strabo,  iv.  1.  §  6,  vii.  4.  §  7;
Caesar,  Bell.  Civ.  ii.  37).  In  order  to  aid  the
natural  evaporation,  shallow  rectangular  ponds
(muUifidi  locus)  were  dug,  divided  from  one  an-
other by  earthen  walls.  The  sea-water  was  ad-
mitted through  canals,  which  were  opened  for  the
purpose,  and  closed  again  by  sluices.  [Cataract  A.]
The  water  was  more  and  more  strongly  impregnated
with  salt  as  it  flowed  from  one  pond  to  another.
(Rutilii,  Bin.  i.  475 — 490.)  When  reduced  to
brine  (coacto  humore),  it  was  called  by  the  Greeks
akfxri^  by  the  Latins  salsugo  or  salsilago^  and  by
the  Spaniards  muria.  (Plin.  I.e.)  In  this  state  it
■was  used  by  the  Egyptians  to  pickle  fish  (Herod,
ii.  77),  and  by  the  Romans  to  preserve  olives,
cheese,  and  flesh  likewise.  (Cato,  de  Re  Rust.
7,  88,  105  ;  Hor.  Sat.  ii.  8.  53.)  From  muria,
which  seems  to  be  a  corruption  of  aXfivphs,
*'  briny,"  the  victuals  cured  in  it  were  called  salsa
muriatica.  (Plant.  Poen.  i.  2.  32,  39.)  As  the
brine  which  was  left  in  the  ponds  crystallized,  a
man  entrusted  with  the  care  of  them,  and  there-
fore called  salinator  (aXoinjyhs).,  raked  out  the  salt
so  that  it  lay  in  heaps  {tumuli)  upon  the  ground  to
drain.  (Manilius,  v.  prope  fin. ;  Nicander,  Alex.
518,  519.)  In  Attica  (Steph.  Byz.),  in  Britain
(Ptol.),  and  elsewhere,  several  places,  in  conse-
quence of  the  works  established  in  them,  obtained
the  name  of  'A\al  or  Salinas.

Throughout  the  Roman  empire  the  salt-works
were  commonly  public  prop;rty,  and  were  let  by
the  government  to  the  highest  bidder.  The  first
salt-works  are  said  to  have  been  established  by
Ancus  Marcms  at  Ostia.  (Liv.  i.  33 ;  Plin.  H.  A''.
xxxi.  41.)  The  publicani  who  farmed  these  works
appear  to  have  sold  the  salt,  one  of  the  most  neces-
sary of  all  commodities,  at  a  very  high  price,
Avhence  the  censors  M.  Livius  and  C.  Claudius
(b.  c.  204)  fixed  the  price  at  which  those  who  took
the  lease  of  them  were  obliged  to  sell  the  salt  to
the  people.  At  Rome  the  modius  was  according  to
this  regulation  sold  for  a  sextans,  while  in  other
parts  of  Italy  the  price  was  higher  and  varied.
(Liv.  xxix.  37.)  The  salt-works  in  Italy  and  in
the  provinces  were  very  numerous  ;  in  conquered
countries  however  they  were  sometimes  left  in  the
possession  of  their  former  owners  (persons  or  towns)
who  had  to  pay  to  Rome  only  a  fixed  rent,  but
most  of  them  were  farmed  by  the  publicani.  (Bur-
mann,  Vectigal.  Pop.  Rom.  p.  90,  &c,)        [J.  Y.]

SALFNUM,  dim.  SALILLUM,  a  salt-cellar.
Among  the  poor  a  shell  served  for  a  salt-cellar
(Hor.  Sat.  i.  3. 14 ;  Schol.  adloc.):  but  all  who  were
raised  above  poverty  had  one  of  silver,  which  de-
scended from  father  to  son  (Hor.  Carm.  ii.  16.  13,
1 4),  and  was  accompanied  by  a  silver  plate,  which
was  used  together  with  the  salt-cellar  in  the  do-
mestic sacrifices.  (Pers.  iii.  24,  25.)  [Patera.]
These  two  articles  of  silver  were  alone  compatible
with  the  simplicity  of  Roman  manners  in  the  early
times  of  the  republic.  (Plin.  II.  N.  xxxiii.  12.  s.
54  ;  Val.  Max.  iv.  4.  §  3  ;  Catull.  xxiii.  1 9.)  The
salt-cellar  was  no  doubt  placed  in  the  middle  of  the
tiible,  to  which  it  communicated  a  sacred  character,
the  meal  partaking  of  the  nature  of  a  sacrifice.
[Focus  ;  Mensa.]  These  circumstances,  to-
gether with  the  religious  reverence  paid  to  salt
and  the  habitual  comparison  of  it  to  wit  and  vi-


SALTATIO.

vacity,  explain  the  metaphor  by  which  the  soul  ol
a  man  is  called  his  salillum.  (Plant.  7Ve«.  ii.  4..
90,  91.)  ^  ^      [J.  Y.]

SALTA'TIO  (opxf]'^!'^.,  opxvf^Tvs),  dancing
The  dancing  of  the  Greeks  as  well  as  of  the  Ro-
mans had  very  little  in  common  with  the  exercise
which  goes  by  that  name  in  modern  times.  It  may
be  divided  into  two  kinds,  gymnastic  and  mimetic  ;
that  is,  it  was  intended  either  to  represent  bodily
activity,  or  to  express  by  gestures,  movements  and
attitudes  certain  ideas  or  feelings,  and  also  single
events  or  a  series  of  events,  as  in  the  modern  ballet.
All  these  movements,  however,  were  accompanied
by  music  ;  but  the  terms  opxVfrts  and  saltatio
were  used  in  so  much  wider  a  sense  than  our
word  dancing,  that  they  were  applied  to  designate
gestures,  even  when  the  body  did  not  move  at  all.
(Ovid.  Art.  Am.  i.  595,  ii.  305;  saltare  solis oculis^
Apul.  Met.  X.  p.  251,  ed.  Bip.  ;  comp.  Grote,
Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  iv.  p.  114.)

We  find  dancing  prevalent  among  the  Greeks
from  the  earliest  times.  It  is  frequently  mentioned
in  the  Homeric  poems  :  the  suitors  of  Penelope  de-
light themselves  with  music  and  dancing  {Od.  i.
152,  421,  xviii.  304) :  and  Ulysses  is  entertained
at  the  court  of  Alcinous  with  the  exhibitions  of  very
skilful  dancers,  the  rapid  movements  of  whose  feet
excite  his  admiration.  {Od.  viii.  265.)  Skilful
dancers  were  at  all  times  highly  prized  by  the
Greeks :  we  read  of  some  who  were  presented  with
golden  crowns,  and  had  statues  erected  to  their
honoui*,  and  their  memory  celebrated  by  inscrip-
tions. (Pint,  de  Pyili.  Orac.  8  ;  Anthol.  Plan.  iv.
n.  283,  &c.)

The  lively  imagination  and  mimetic  powers  of
the  Greeks  found  abundant  subjects  for  various
kinds  of  dances,  and  accordingly  the  names  of  no
less  than  200  difi^erent  dances  have  come  down  to
us.  (Meursius,  Orchestr. ;  Athen.  xiv.  pp.  627 — 630;
Pollux,  iv.  95 — 111  ;  Liban.  virkp  ruv  opx-)  It
would  be  inconsistent  with  the  nature  of  this  work
to  give  a  description  of  all  that  are  known :  only
the  most  important  can  be  mentioned,  and  such  as
will  give  some  idea  of  the  dancing  of  the  ancients.

Dancing  was  originally  closely  connected  with
religion  :  Plato  {Leg.  vii.  pp.  7i>8,  799)  thought
that  all  dancing  should  be  based  on  religion,  as  it
was,  he  says,  among  the  Egyptians.  The  dances  of
the  Chorus  at  Sparta  and  in  other  Doric  states
were  intimately  connected  with  the  worship  of
Apollo,  as  has  been  shown  at  length  elsewhere
[Chorus  ;  Hyporchema]  ;  and  in  all  the  public
festivals,  which  were  so  numerous  among  the
Greeks,  dancing  formed  a  very  prominent  part.
All  the  religious  dances,  with  the  exception  of  the
Bacchic  and  the  Corybantian,  were  very  simple,
and  consisted  of  gentle  movements  of  the  body
with  various  turnings  and  windings  around  the
altJir  :  such  a  dance  was  the  yepauos,  which  The-
seus is  said  to  have  performed  at  Delos  on  hia
return  from  Crete.  (Plut.  Thes.  21.)  The  Diony-
siac  or  Bacchic  and  the  Corybantian  were  of  a
very  difi^erent  nature.  In  the  former  the  life  and
adventures  of  the  god  were  represented  by  mimetic
dancing  [Dionvsia]:  the  dance  called  BaKx^K-h
by  Ivucian  {de  Salt.  79),  was  a  Satyric  dance  and
chiefly  prevailed  in  Ionia  and  Pontus  ;  the  most
illustrious  men  in  the  state  danced  in  it,  repre-
senting Titans,  Corybantians,  Satyrs,  and  husband-
men ;  and  the  spectators  were  so  delighted  with
the  exhibition,   that  they   remained  sitting  the


SALTATIO.

whole  day  to  witness  it,  forgetful  of  everything
else.  The  Corj'bantian  was  of  a  very  wild  cha-
racter :  it  was  chiefly  danced  in  Phrygia  and  in
Crete  ;  the  dancers  were  armed,  struck  their
swords  against  their  shields,  and  displayed  the
most  extravagant  fury  ;  it  was  accompanied  chiefly
by  the  flute.     (Lucian,  lb.  8  ;  Strab.  x.  p.  473  ;


Plat.  Cnt.  p.  54.)  The  preceding  woodcut  from
the  Museo  Pio  Clementino  (vol.  iv.  pi.  2)  is  sup-
posed to  represent  a  Corybantian  dance.  Respect-
ing the  dances  in  the  theatre,  see  Chorus.

Dancing  was  applied  to  gymnastic  purposes  and
to  training  for  war,  especially  in  the  Doric  states,
and  was  believed  to  have  contributed  very  much
to  the  success  of  the  Dorians  in  war,  as  it  enabled
them  to  perform  their  evolutions  simultaneously
and  in  order.  Hence  the  poet  Socrates  (Athen.
xiv.  p.  629.  f.)  says,

ol  Se  xopo7s  KaWiara  ^eovs  rifiwaiUy  &picrToi

There  were  various  dances  in  early  times,  which
served  as  a  preparation  for  war :    hence  Homer
(11.  xi.  49,  xii.  77)  calls  the  Hoplites  irpvXhs,  a
war-dance  having  been  called  irpvKis  by  the  Cre-
tans. (Miiller,  Dor.  iii.  12.  §  10.)    Of  such  dances
the  most  celebrated  was  the  Pyrrhic  (^  Uvpfiixv),
of  which  the  TrpvXis  was  probably  only  another
name:  this  Plato  (Leg.  vii.  p.  815)  takes  as  the
representative  of  all  war  dances.     The  invention  of
this  dance  is  placed  in  the  mythical  age,  and  is
usually  assigned  to  one  Pyrrhicos,  but  most  of  the
accounts  agree  in  assigning  it  a  Cretan  or  Spartan
origin  ;  though  others  refer  it  to  Pyrrhus  or  Neo-
ptoieraus,  the  son  of  Achilles,  apparently  misled  by
the  name,  for  it  was  undoubtedly  of  Doric  origin.
(Athen.  xiv.  p.  6:50,  e  ;   Strab.  x.  p.  466  ;    Plat.
Leg.  p.  796  ;  Lucian,  lb.  9.)     It  was   danced  to
the  sound  of  the  flute,  and  its  time  was  very  quick
and  light,  as  is  shown  by  the  name  of  the  Pyrrhic
foot    (*'*'),  which   must   be  connected   with  this
dance:  and  from  the  same  source  came  also  the
Proceleusraatic  (*^^  or  challenging  foot.    (Miil-
ler, Hist,  of  the  Litcrat.  of  Greece,  p.  161.)     The
Pyrrhic  dance  was  performed  in  different  ways  at
various  times  and  in  various  countries,  for  it  was
by  no  means  confined  to  the  Doric  states.     Plato
(Leg.  vii.  p.  815)  describes  it  as  representing  by
rapid  movements  of  the  body  the  way  in  which
missiles  and  blows  from  weapons  were  avoided,
and   also    the   mode    in  which   the   enemy  were
;  attacked.     In  the  non-Doric  states   it  was  pro-
i  bably  not  practised   as   a  training  for  war,   but
I  only  as  a  mimetic  dance  :  thus  we  read  of  its  being
]  danced  by  women  to  entertain  a  company.     (Xen.
Anab.  vi.  1.  §  12.)      It  was  also  performed   at
Athens  at  the  greater  and  lesser  Panathenaea  by
;  Ephebi,  who  were  called  Pyrrhichists  (Tlvp^iXKTTai)
I  and  were  trained  at  the  expense  of  the  Choragus.
(Schoi.   ad  Ariitoph.   Nub.  988  ;    Lysiae»   &iro\.


SALTATIO.  1005

SupoSo/c.  p.  698,  Reiske.)  In  the  mountainous
parts  of  Thessaly  and  Macedon  dances  are  per-
formed at  the  present  day  by  men  armed  with
muskets  and  swords.  (Dodwell,  Tour  through
Greece^  vol.  ii.  pp.  21,  22.)

The  following  woodcut,  taken  from  Sir  W.
Hamilton's  vases  (ed.  Tischbein,  vol.  i.  pi.  60),
represents  three  Pyrrhicists,  two  of  whom  with
shield  and  sword  are  engaged  in  the  dance,  while
the  third  is  standing  with  a  sword.  Above  them
is  a  female  balancing  herself  on  the  head  of  one,
and  apparently  in  the  act  of  performing  a  somerset ;
she  no  doubt  is  taking  part  in  the  dance,  and  per-
forming a  very  artistic  kind  of  KvSia-Tiqaris  or
tumbling,  for  the  Greek  performances  of  this  kind
surpass  any  thing  we  can  imagine  in  modem  times.
Her  danger  is  increased  by  the  person  below,  who
holds  a  sword  pointing  towards  her.  A  female  spec-
tator sitting  looks  on  astonished  at  the  exhibition.


The  Pyrrhic  dance  was  introduced  in  the  public
games  at  Rome  by  Julius  Caesar,  when  it  was
danced  by  the  children  of  the  leading  men  in  Asia
and  Bithynia.  (Suet.  Jul.  Cues.  39.)  It  seems
to  have  been  much  liked  by  the  Romans  ;  it  was
exhibited  both  by  Caligula  and  Nero  (Dion  Cass.
Ix.  7  ;  Suet.  A'er.  12),  and  also  frequently  by
Hadrian.  (Spartian. //ac?r.  1 9.)  Athenaeus  (xiv,
p.  631,  a)  says  that  the  Pyrrhic  dance  was  still
practised  in  his  time  (the  third  century  A.  D.)  at
Sparta,  where  it  was  danced  by  boys  from  the  age
of  fifteen,  but  that  in  other  places  it  had  become  a
species  of  Dionysiac  dance,  in  which  the  history  of
Dionysus  was  represented,  and  where  the  dancers
instead  of  arms  carried  the  thyrsus  and  torches.

Another  important  gymnastic  dance  was  per-
formed at  the  festival  of  yv/xvonaidia  at  Sparta  in
commemoration  of  the  battle  at  Thyrea,  where  the
chief  object  according  to  Miiller  (Dor.  iv.  6.  §  8)
was  to  represent  gymnastic  exercises  and  dancmg
in  intimate  union :  respecting  the  dance  at  this
festival,  see  GyMNOPAEDiA.

There  were  other  dances,  besides  the  Pyrrhic,  in
which  the  performers  had  arms,  but  these  seem  to
have  been  entirely  mimetic,  and  not  practised  with
any  view  to  training  for  war.  Such  was  the
Kapiroto  peculiar  to  the  Aenianians  and  Magnetes,
which  was  performed  by  two  anned  men  in  the
following  manner :  one  lays  down  his  arms,  sows
the  ground,  and  ploughs  with  a  yoke  of  oxen,  fre-
quently looking  around  as  if  afraid  ;  then  comes  a
robber,  whom  as  soon  as  the  other  sees,  he  snatches
up  his  arms  and  fights  with  him  for  the  oxen.    AU


1006


SALTATIO.


these  movements  are  rhythmical,  accompanied  by
the  flute.  At  last  the  robber  binds  the  man  and
drives  away  the  oxen,  but  sometimes  the  husband-
man conquers.  (Xen.  A  nab.  vi.  1.  §§  7,  8;  Athen.  i.
pp.  1 5, f,  1 6, a;  Maxim.  Tyr. Diss,  xxviii.  4.)  Similar
dances  by  persons  with  arms  are  mentioned  by
Xenophon  on  the  same  occasion.  These  dances
•were  frequently  performed  at  banquets  for  the  en-
tertainment of  the  guests  (Athen.  iv.  p.  1 55,  b.).
At  banquets  likewise  the  Kv€iaTrfTrjp€s  or  tum-
blers were  frequently  introduced.  These  tumblers,
in  the  course  of  their  dance,  flung  themselves  on
their  heads  and  alighted  again  on  their  feet
(&(nr€p  ol  KvSicrruvTis  Ka\  ety  opOphv  ra  (TKeXr]
irepKpepS/JLeyoi  Kv^iarwcn  KVK\cp,  Plato,  Synip.  c.
16,  p.  190).  We  read  of  KvSi(TT-r)Tr\p€s  as  early
as  the  time  of  Homer.  {11.  xviii.  605,  Od.  iv.  18.)
They  were  also  accustomed  to  make  their  somerset
over  knives  or  swords,  which  was  called  kvSkttuv
fls  fiaxaipas.  (Plato,  Euthyd.  c.  55.  p.  294  ;  Xen.
Mem.  i.  d.  §  9,  Symp.  ii.  14  ;  Athen.  iv.  p.  129,  d  ;
Pollux,  iii.  1 34.)  The  way  in  which  this  feat  was
performed  is  described  by  Xenophon,  who  says
(Syinp.  ii.  11)  that  a  circle  was  made  quite  full  of
upright  swords,  and  that  the  dancer  eis  Tavra
4Kv§i(rTa  T€  Koi  i^eKv§'L(TTa  virhp  avruv ;  and  it  is
well  illustrated  by  the  following  cut  taken  from
the  Museo  Dorbonico,  vol.  vii.  tav.  58.  (Becker,
Charikles,  vol.  i.  p.  499,  vol.  ii.  p.  287.)  We  learn
from  Tacitus  {Germ.  24)  that  the  German  youths
also  used  to  dance  among  swords  and  spears  pointed
at  them.


Other  kinds  of  dances  were  frequently  performed
at  entertainments,  in  Rome  as  well  jis  in  Greece,
by  courtezans,  many  of  which  were  of  a  very  inde-
cent and  lascivious  nature.  (Macrob,  Sat.  ii.  10  ;
Plant.  Stick.  V.  2.  11.)  The  dancers  seem  to  have
frequently  represented  Bacchanals :  many  such
dancers  occur  in  the  painthigs  found  at  Hercula-
neum  and  Pompeii  in  a  variety  of  graceful  atti-
tudes. (See  Museo  Borbonico,  vol.  vii.  tav.  34 —
40,  vol.  ix.  tav.  17,  vol.  x.  tav.  5,  6,  54.)

Among  the  dances  performed  without  arms  one
of  the  most  important  was  the  op/xos,  which  was
danced  at  Sparta  by  youths  and  maidens  together ;
the  youth  danced  first  some  movements  suited  to
his  age,  and  of  a  military  nature  ;  the  maiden  fol-
lowed in  measured  steps  and  with  feminine  ges-
tures. Lucian  {de  Salt.  12)  says  that  it  was
similar  to  the  dance  performed  at  the  Gymnopacdia.
(Compare  Miiller,  Dor.  iv.  6.  §  5.)  Another  com-
mon dance  at  Sparta  was  the  Bibasis  {^i€a(ns),
which  was  much  practised  both  by  men  and  women.
The  dance  consisted  in  springmg  rapidly  from  the


SALUTATORES.

ground,  and  striking  the  feet  behind  ;  a  feat  of
which  a  Spartan  woman  in  Aristophanes  {Lysistr.
28)  prides  herself  {-yvixvahhoiiai  ya  Koi  ttotI  TTiryav
aWo/xai).  The  number  of  success'ul  strokes  was
counted,  and  the  most  skilful  received  prizes.  We
are  told  by  a  verse  which  has  been  preserved  by
Pollux  (iv.  102),  that  a  Laconian  girl  had  danced
the  bibasis  a  thousand  times,  which  was  more  than
had  ever  been  done  before.  (Miiller,  Dorians,  iv.
6.  §  8.)

In  many  of  the  Greek  states  the  art  of  dancing
was  carried  to  great  perfection  by  females,  who
were  frequently  engaged  to  add  to  the  pleasures
and  enjoyment  of  men  at  their  symposia.  These
dancers  always  belonged  to  the  hetaerae.  Xeno-
phon {Symp.  ix.  2 — 7)  describes  a  mimetic  dance
which  was  represented  at  a  symposium,  where
Socrates  was  present.  It  was  performed  by  a
maiden  and  a  youth,  belonging  to  a  Syracusian,
who  is  called  the  6pxv<^ToSidd(TKahos,  and  repre-
sented the  loves  of  Dionysus  and  Ariadne.

Respecting  the  dancers  on  the  tight-rope  see

FUNAMBULUS.

Dancing  was  common  among  the  Romans  in  an-
cient times  in  connection  with  religious  festivals
and  rites,  and  was  practised  according  to  Servius
{ad  Virg.  Eel.  v.  73),  because  the  ancients  thought
that  no  part  of  the  body  should  be  free  from  the
influence  of  religion.  The  dances  of  the  Salii,
which  were  performed  by  men  of  patrician  families,
are  spoken  of  elsewhere.  [Salii.]  Dionysius
(vii.  72)  mentions  a  dance  with  arms  at  the  Ludi
Magni,  which,  according  to  his  usual  plan  of  re-
ferring all  old  Roman  usages  to  a  Greek  origin,  he
calls  the  Pyrrhic.  There  was  another  old  Roman
dance  of  a  military  nature,  called  Bellicrepa  Salta-
tio,  which  is  said  to  have  been  instituted  by  Ro-
mulus, after  he  had  carried  off  the  Sabine  virgins,
in  order  that  a  like  misfortune  might  not  befall  his
state.  (Festus,  s.  v.)  Dancing,  however,  was  not
performed  by  any  Roman  citizen  except  in  con-
nection with  religion  ;  and  it  is  only  in  reference
to  such  dancing  that  we  are  to  understand  the
statements,  that  the  ancient  Romans  did  not  con-
sider dancing  disgraceful,  and  that  not  only  free-
men, but  the  sons  of  senators  and  noble  matrons
practised  it.  (Quintil.  Inst.  Orat.  i.  11.  §  18;
Macrob.  Sat.  ii.  10.)  In  the  later  times  of  the
republic  we  know  that  it  was  considered  highly
disgraceful  for  a  freeman  to  dance  :  Cicero  re-
proaches Cato  for  calling  Murena  a  dancer  {salta-
tor),  and  adds  "  nemo  fere  saltat  sobrius,  nisi  forte
insanit."    {Pro  Muren.  6;  compare  in  Pison.  1 0.)

The  mimetic  dances  of  the  Romans,  which  we
carried  to  such  perfection  under  the  empire,
described  under  Pantomimus.     (Meursuis,  Or\
chestra  ;  Biirette,  de  la  Danse  des  Anciens  ;  Krau
Gymnastik  und  Agon.  d.  Hell.  p.  807,  &c.)

SALVIA'NUM  INTERDICTUM.   [Inte:

DICTUM.]

SALUTATO'RES,  the  name  given  in  the  later
times  of  the  republic  and  under  the  empire  to  a
class  of  men  who  obtained  their  living  by  visiting
the  houses  of  the  wealthy  early  in  the  morning  to
pay  their  respects  to  them  {salutare),  and  to  accom-
pany them  when  they  went  abroad.  This  arose
from  the  visits  which  the  clients  were  accustomed
to  pay  to  their  patrons,  and  degenerated  in  latei
times  into  the  above-mentioned  practice.  Such
persons  seem  to  have  obtained  a  good  living  among
the  great  number  of  wealthy  and  vairt  persons  at


SAMBUCA.

Rome,  wlio  were  gratified  by  this  attention.  (Mer-
cenarius  SaliUator,  Colum.  Praef.  i. ;  Martial,  x.
74  ;  Becker,  Gallus,  vol.  i.  p.  146.)    [Sportula.]

SAMBUCA  {(TajxSvKr)^  or  aaSvKTj,  Arcadiu3  de
Accent,  p.  107),  a  harp.  The  preceding  Latin  and
Greek  names  are  with  good  reason  represented  bj'
Bochart,  Vossius,  and  other  critics,  to  be  the  same
with  the  Hebrew  i^^Ilp  (sabeca),  which  occurs  in
Daniel  (iii.  5,  7,  10).  The  performances  of  sam-
hucistriae  {(Tafi6vKi(TTpiai)  were  only  known  to  the
early  Romans  as  luxuries  brought  over  from  Asia.
(Plaut.  Stick,  ii.  3.  57 ;  Liv.  xxxix.  6.)  The  Athe-
nians considered  them  as  an  exotic  refinement
(Philemon,  p.  370,  ed.  Meineke)  ;  and  the  Rhodian
women  who  played  on  the  harp  at  the  marriage-
feast  of  Caranus  in  Macedonia,  clothed  in  very  thin
tunics,  were  introduced  with  a  view  to  give  "to  the
entertainment  the  highest  degree  of  splendour.
Some  Greek  authors  expressly  attributed  the  in-
vention of  this  instrument  to  the  Syrians  or  Phoe-
nicians. (Athen.  iv.  p.  1 75,  d.)  The  opinion  of  those
who  .ascribed  it  to  the  Lyric  poet,  Ibycus,  can  only
authorize  the  conclusion,  that  he  had  the  merit  of
inventing  some  modification  of  it,  the  instrument
as  improved  by  him  being  called  'ISvKivoy.  (Athen.
I.C.;  Smdas,  s.  vv, 'ISvKiuov :  '1§vk6s:  'S,aix€vKai.)
Strabo,  moreover,  represents  (TafiSuKr)  as  a  "  bar-
barous" name  (x.  3.  §  17).

The  sambuca  is  several  times  mentioned  in  con-
junction with  the  small  triangular  harp  (jpiywuov)^
which  it  resembled  in  the  principles  of  its  con-
struction, though  it  was  much  larger  and  more
complicated.  The  trigonum.,  a  representation  of
which  from  the  Museum  at  Naples  is  given  in  the
aimexed  woodcut,  was  held  like  the  lyre  in  the
hands  of  the  performer  (Spon,  Misc.  Erud.  Ant.
p.  21),  whereas  the  harp  was  sometimes  consider-
ably higher  than  the  stature  of  the  performer,  and
was  placed  upon  the  ground.  The  harp  of  the
Parthians  and  Troglodytae  had  only  four  strings.
(Athen.  xiv.  p.  633,  f.)  Those  which  are  painted  on
the  walls  of  Egyptian  tombs  (see  Denon,  Wilkin-
son, &c.)  have  from  4  to  38.  One  of  them,  taken
from  Bruce's  travels,  is  here  introduced.  From
the  allusions  to  this  instrument  in  Vitruvius  (vi.
1)  Ave  find  that  the  longest  string  was  called  the
**  proslambanomenon,"  the  next  "  hypate,"  tlie
shortest  but  one  "  paranete,"  and  the  shortest,
which  had  consequently  the  highest  tone,  was
called  "  nete."  [See  MusiCA,  p.  775.]  Under
the  Roman  Emperors  the   harp  appears  to  have


SARCOPHAGUS.


loo:


come  into  more  general  use  (Pers.  v.  95  ;  Spartian.
Hadr.  26),  and  was  played  by  men  {(TaaSvKKnai)
as  well  as  women.     (Athen.  iv.  p.  182,  e.)

Samlmca  was  also  the  name  of  a  military  engine,
used  to  scale  the  walls  and  towers  of  besieged
cities.  It  was  called  by  this  name  on  account  of
its  general  resemblance  to  the  form  of  the  harp,
Accordingl}^,  we  may  conceive  an  idea  of  its  con-
struction by  turning  to  the  woodcut  and  supposing
a  mast  or  upright  pole  to  be  elevated  in  the  place
of  the  longest  strings,  and  to  have  at  its  summit  an
apparatus  of  pulleys,  from  which  ropes  proceed  in
the  direction  of  the  top  of  the  harp.  We  must
suppose  a  strong  ladder,  4  feet  wide,  and  guarded
at  the  sides  with  palisades,  to  occupy  the  place  of
the  sounding-board,  and  to  be  capable  of  being
lowered  or  raised  at  pleasure  by  means  of  the  ropes
and  pulleys.  At  the  siege  of  Syracuse  Marcellus
had  engines  of  this  description  fixed  upon  vessels,
which  the  rowers  moved  up  to  the  walls  so  that
the  soldiers  might  enter  the  city  by  ascending  the
ladders.  (Polyb.  viii.  5  ;  Pint.  Marc.  p.  558,  ed.
Steph. ;  Athen.  xiv.  p.  634,  b;  Onosandr.  67/-ai!.  42  ;
Vitruv.  x.\Q.%9;  Festus,  s.  v.  Sambuca;  Athen.
de  Mach.  ap.  Math.  Vet.  p.  7.)  When  an  inland
city  was  beleaguered,  the  Sambuca  was  mounted
upon  wheels.  (Bito,  ap.  Math.  Vet.  pp.  1 1 0,  1 1 1  ;
Veget.  iv.  21.)  [j.  y.]

SAMNITES.  [Gladiatores,  p.  576,  a,]
SANDA'LIUM  {aauZaKiov  or  aavhaXov)^  a
kind  of  shoe  Avorn  only  by  women.  In  the  Homeric
age  however  it  was  not  confined  to  either  sex,  and
consisted  of  a  wooden  sole  fastened  to  the  foot
with  thongs.  {l{om.  Hymn,  in  Merc.  79,  83,  139.)
In  later  times  the  sandalium  must  be  distinguished
from  the  u7ro577^a,  which  was  a  simple  sole  bound
under  the  foot  (Pollux,  viii.  84,  with  Kuhn's
emendation),  whereas  the  sandalium,  also  called
^XavTia  or  fiXavrrj,  was  a  sole  with  a  piece  of
leather  covering  the  toes,  so  that  it  formed  the
transition  from  the  virSdriixa  to  real  shoes.  The
piece  of  leather  under  the  toes  was  called  (vyhs  or
Cvy6y.  (Aristoph.  Li/sistr.  390,  with  the  Schol.  ;
Hesych.  s.  v.  ZvySs  ;  Pollux,  vii.  81  ;  Phot.  Lex.
p.  54,  ed.  Dobr.)  The  (ravSdXia  &(vya  in  Strabo
(vi.  p.  259)  are  however  not  sandalia  without  the
(vyoy^  but,  as  Becker  (Chari/des,  ii.  p.  367,  &c.)
justly  remarks,  sandalia  which  did  not  belong  to
one  another,  or  did  not  form  a  pair,  and  one  of
which  was  larger  or  higher  than  the  other.  The
(vy6u  was  frequently  adorned  with  costly  em-
broidery and  gold  (Cephisodor.  ap.  Poll.  vii.  87  ;
Clem.  Alex.  Paedag.  ii.  1 1 ),  and  appears  to  liave
been  one  of  the  most  luxurious  articles  of  female
dress.  (Aelian,  V.  H.  i.  18.)  The  small  cover  of
the  toes  however  was  not  sufficient  to  fasten  the
sandalium  to  the  foot,  wherefore  thongs  likewise
beautifully  adorned  were  attached  to  it.  (Pollux,
vii.  92.)  Although  sandalia,  as  we  have  stated,
were  in  Greece  and  subsequently  at  Rome  also
worn  by  women  only,  yet  there  are  traces  that  at
least  in  the  East  they  were  also  worn  by  men.
(Herod,  ii.  91  ;  St.  Mark,  vi.  9.)

The  Roman  ladies,  to  whom  this  ornament  of
the  foot  was  introduced  from  Greece,  wore  sandalia
which  appear  to  have  been  no  less  beautiful  and
costly  than  those  worn  by  the  Greeks  and  the
Oriental  nations.  (Tarpilius,  ap.  Non.  v.  24  ;  Terent.
Eunuch.  V.  7.  4.)  [L.  S.J

SANDAPILA.     [FuNUS,  p.  559, a.]
SARCOTHAGUS.     [Funus,  p.  oo% b.]


1008


SATURA.


SA'RCULUM  (a  sarriendo,  Varro,  de  L.  Lat.
y.  31,  (TKaXls,  ffKaXia-T-fipiov),  a  hoe,  chiefly  used  in
•weeding  gardens,  cornfields,  and  vineyards.  (Hor.
Carm.  i.  1.  11;  Ovid.  Met.  xi.  36,  'Fast.  i.  69.9,
iv.  930  ;  Plant.  True.  ii.  2.  21 ;  Cato,  de  Re  Rust.
10  ;  Columellji,  x.  21  ;  Pallad.  i.  43.)  It  was  also
sometimes  used  to  cover  the  seed  when  sown  (Co-
lumella, ii.  11),  and  in  mountainous  countries  it
served  instead  of  a  plough,  (Pliii.  //.  A'",  xviii.  19.
s.  49.)  Directions  for  using  it  to  clear  the  surface
of  the  ground  (o-KciAActi/,  Herod,  ii.  1 4  ;  ffKoK^vnv^
Schol.  in  Theocrit.  x.  14)  are  given  by  Palladius
{de  Re  Rust.  ii.  9).  [J.  Y.]

SARISSA.     [ExKRCiTUS,  p.  488,  a.]

SARRA'CUM,  a  kind  of  common  cart  or  wag-
gon, which  was  used  by  the  country-people  of
Italy  for  conveying  the  produce  of  their  fields,
trees,  and  the  like  from  one  place  to  another,  (Vi-
truv.  X,  1 ;  Juv.  iii,  254.)  Its  name  as  well  as
the  fact  that  it  was  used  by  several  barbarous  na-
tions, shows  that  it  was  introduced  from  them  into
Italy.  (Sidon.  Epist.  iv,  18;  Amm,  Marc.  xxxi.
2.)  That  persons  also  sometimes  rode  in  a  sar-
racum,  is  clear  from  a  passage  of  Cicero  quoted  by
Quinctilian  (viii,  3.  §21),  who  even  regards  the
word  sarracura  as  low  and  vulgar.  CapitoHnus
(Atiton.  Philos.  13)  states,  that  during  a  plague  the
mortality  at  Rome  was  so  great,  that  it  was  found
necessary  to  carry  the  dead  bodies  out  of  the  city
upon  the  common  sarraca.  Several  of  the  bar-
barous nations  with  which  the  Romans  came  in
contact  used  these  waggons  also  in  war,  and  placed
them  around  their  camps  as  a  fortification  (Sisenna,
ap.  Non.  iii.  35),  and  the  Scythians  used  them  in
their  wanderings,  and  spent  almost  their  whole
lives  upon  them  Avith  their  wives  and  children,
whence  Ammianus  compares  such  a  caravan  of
san-aca  with  all  that  was  conveyed  upon  them  to  a
wandering  city.  TJie  Romans  appear  to  have  used
the  word  sarracum  as  synonymous  with  plaustrum,
and  Juvenal  (v.  22)  goes  even  so  far  as  to  apply
it  to  the  constellation  of  stars  which  was  gene-
rallv  called  plaustrum.  (Scheffer,  de  Re  Vildcul.
ii.  31.)  [L.S.]

S  ARTA'GO  {Ti]yavov)^  was  a  sort  of  pan  which
was  used  in  the  Roman  kitchens  for  a  variety  of
purposes,  such  as  roasting,  melting  fat  or  butter,
cooking,  &c.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xvi.  22  ;  Juv.  x.  63.)
Frequently  also  dishes  consisting  of  a  variety  of
ingredients  seem  to  have  been  prepared  in  such  a
sartago,  as  Persius  (i.  79)  speaks  of  a  sartago
loquendi,  that  is,  of  a  mixture  of  proper  and  im-
proper expressions.  Some  commentators  on  this
passage,  and  perhaps  with  more  justice,  understand
the  sartago  loquendi  as  a  mode  of  speaking  in  which
hissing  sounds  are  employed,  similar  to  the  noise
produced  when  meat  is  fried  in  a  pan.      [L.  S.]

SATISDA'TIO.     [Actio.]

SATURA,  or  in  the  softened  form  SATIRA,
is  the  name  of  a  species  of  poetry,  which  we  call
satire.  In  the  history  of  Roman  literature  we
have  to  distinguish  two  different  kinds  of  satires,
viz,  the  early  satura,  and  the  later  satira  which
received  its  perfect  development  from  the  poet  C.
Lucilius  (148 — 103  B.  c).  Both  sp-cies  of  poetry,
however,  are  altogether  peculiar  to  the  Romans.
The  literal  meaning  of  satura,  the  root  of  which  is
«r.<,  comes  nearest  to  what  the  French  call  pot-
pourri^ or  to  the  Latin  farrago^  a  mixture  of  all
sorts  of  things.  The  name  was  accordingly  applied
by  the    Romans  in  many  ways,   but  always  to


SATURA.

things  consisting  of  various  parts  or  ingredientu,
e.  g.  lanx  satura,  an  offering  consisting  of  various
fruits,  such  as  were  offered  at  harvest  festivals  and
to  Ceres  (Acron,  ad  Horat.  Sat.  i.  1  ;  Diomed.  iii,
p.  483,  ed.  Putsch.);  lex  per  saturam  lata,  a  law
which  contained  several  distinct  regulations  at
once.  {¥Q?>i.  s.  V.  Satiira.)  It  would  appear  from
the  etymology  of  the  word,  that  the  earliest  Ro-
man satura,  of  which  we  otherwise  scarcely  know
anything,  must  have  treated  in  one  work  on  a
variety  of  subjects  just  as  they  occurred  to  the
writer,  and  perhaps,  as  was  the  case  with  the
satires  of  Varro,  half  in  prose  and  half  in  verse,  or
in  verses  of  different  metre.  Another  feature  of
the  earliest  satura,  as  we  learn  from  the  celebrated
passage  in  Livy  (vii.  2.),  is  that  it  was  scenic,  that
is,  an  improvisatory  and  irregular  kind  of  dramatic
performance,  of  the  same  class  as  the  versus  Fes-
cennini.  [Fescennina.]  When  Livius  Andro-
nicus  introduced  the  regular  drama  at  Rome,  the
people,  on  account  of  their  fondness  for  such  ex-
tempore jokes  and  railleries,  still  continued  to  keep
up  their  former  amusements,  and  it  is  not  impro-
bable that  the  exodia  of  later  times  were  the  old
saturae  merely  under  another  name,     [Exodia.]

Ennius  and  Pacuvius  are  mentioned  as  the  first
writers  of  satires,  but  we  are  entirely  unable  to
judge  wheth;^r  their  works  were  drannitic  like  the
satura  of  old,  or  whether  they  resembled  the
satires  of  Lucilius  and  Horace.  At  any  rate,  how-
ever, neither  Eiuiius  nor  Pacuvius  can  have  made
any  great  improvement  in  this  species  of  poetry,
as  Quinctilian  (x.  1,  §  93)  does  not  mention  either
of  them,  and  describes  C.  Lucilius  as  the  first  great
Avriter  of  satires.  It  is  Lucilius  who  is  universally
regarded  by  the  ancients  as  the  inventor  of  the
new  kind  of  satira,  which  resembled  on  the  whole
that  species  of  poetry  which  is  in  modem  times
designated  by  the  same  name,  and  which  was  no
longer  scenic  or  dramatic.  The  character  of  this
new  satira  was  afterwards  erapliatically  called
character  Lucilianus.  (Varro,  de  Re  Rust.  iii.  2.)
These  new  satires  were  written  in  hexameters,
which  metre  was  subsequently  adopted  by  all  the
other  satirists,  as  Horace,  Persius,  and  Juvenal,
who  followed  the  path  opened  by  Lucilius.  Their
character  was  essentially  ethical  or  practical,  and
as  the  stage  at  Rome  was  not  so  free  as  at  Athens,
the  satires  of  the  former  had  a  similar  object  to
that  of  the  ancient  comedy  at  the  latter  place.  The
poets  in  their  satires  attacked  not  only  the  follies
and  vices  of  mankind  in  general,  but  also  of  such
living  and  distinguished  individuals  as  had  an)
influence  upon  their  contemporaries.  Such  a  specie
of  poetry  must  necessarily  be  su'oject  to  grea
modification?,  arising  partly  from  the  character
the  time  in  which  the  poet  lives,  and  partly  fror
the  personal  character  and  temperament  of  the
poet  himself,  and  it  is  from  these  circumstance
that  we  have  to  explain  the  differences  between
the  satires  of  Lucilius,  Horace,  Persius,  and
Juvenal,

After  Lucilius  had  already  by  his  own  example
established  the  artistic  principles  of  satire,  Teren-
tius  Varro  in  his  youth  wrote  a  kind  of  satires,
which  were  neither  like  the  old  satura  nor  like
the  satira  of  Lucilius,  They  consisted  of  a  mixture
of  verse  and  prose,  and  of  verses  of  different
metres,  but  were  not  scenic  like  the  old  saturae.
They  were  altogether  of  a  peculiar  character,  and
were  therefore  called  siitirae  Varronianac,  or  Me-


SATURNALIA.

nippeae  or  Cynicae,  the  latter  because  he  was  said
to  have  imitated  the  works  of  the  Cynic  philoso-
pher Menippus.    (Gellius,  ii.  18.)

(See  Casaubon,  de  Satyrica  Graecorum  Poesi  et
Romanorum  Satira,  libri  ii.  Halae  1774,  with
notes  by  Rambach.)  [L.  S.]

SATURNA'LIA,  the  festival  of  Saturniis,  to
whom  the  inhabitants  of  Latium  attributed  the  in-
troduction of  agriculture  and  the  arts  of  civilized
life.  Falling  towards  the  end  of  December,  at  the
season  when  the  agricultural  labours  of  the  year
were  fully  completed,  it  was  celebrated  in  ancient
times  by  the  rustic  population  as  a  sort  of  joyous
harvest-home,  and  in  every  age  was  viewed  by  all
classes  of  the  community  as  a  period  of  absolute
relaxation  and  unrestrained  merriment.  During
its  continuance  no  public  business  could  be  trans-
acted, the  law  courts  were  closed,  the  schools  kept
holiday,  to  commence  a  war  was  impious,  to  punish
a  malefactor  involved  pollution.  (Macrob.  Sat.  i.
10.  16  ;  Martial,  i.  86  ;  Suet.  Auff.  .32  ;  Plin.  Ep.
viii.  7.)  Special  indulgences  were  granted  to  the
slaves  of  each  domestic  establishment ;  they  were
relieved  from  all  ordinary  toils,  were  permitted  to
wear  the  pileus  the  badge  of  freedom,  were  granted
full  freedom  of  speech,  paxtook  of  a  banquet  attired
in  the  clothes  of  their  masters,  and  were  waited
upon  by  them  at  table.  (Macrob.  Sat.  i.  7  ;  Dion
Cass.  Ix.  19;  Hor.  Sat.  ii.  7.  5 ;  Martial,  xi.  6,
xiv,  1  ;  Athen.  xiv.  44.)

All  ranks  devoted  tliemselves  to  feasting  and
mirth,  presents  were  interchanged  among  friends,
ccrci  or  wax  tapers  being  the  common  offering  of
the  more  humble  to  th-eir  superiors,  and  crowds
thronged  the  streets,  shouting  lo  Saturnalia  (this
was  termed  damarc  Satsrmalia)^  while  sacrifices
were  offered  with  uncovered  head,  from  a  convic-
tion that  no  ill-oraened  sight  would  interrupt  the
rites  of  such  a  happy  day.  (Catull.  14  ;  Senec.
Ep.  18;  Suet.  Aug.  75;  Martial,  v.  18,  19,  vii.
53,  xiv.  1 ;  Plin.  Ep.  iv.  9  ;  Macrob.  Sat.  i.  8, 10  ;
Serv.  ad  Virg.  Aen.  iii.  407.)

Many  of  the  peculiar  customs  exhibited  a  re-
markable resemblance  to  the  sports  of  our  own
Christmas  and  of  the  Italian  Carnival.  Thus  on
the  Saturnalia  public  gambling  was  allowed  by  the
aediles  (Martial,  v,  84,  xiv.  1,  xi.  6),  jast  as  in
the  days  of  our  ancestors  the  most  rigid  were  wont
to  countenance  card-playing  on  ChTistmas-eve  ;
the  whole  population  threw  off  the  toga,  wore  a
loose  gown,  called  synthesis^  and  walked  about  with
the  pileus  on  their  heads  (Martial,  xiv.  141,  vi.
24,  xiv.  1,  xi.  6  ;  Senec.  Ep.  18),  which  reminds
us  of  the  dominoes,  the  peaked  caps,  and  othey
disguises  worn  by  masques  and  mummers  ;  the
cerei  were  probably  employed  as  the  moccoli  now
are  on  the  last  night  of  the  Carnival  ;  and  lastly,
one  of  the  amusements  in  private  society  was  the
election  of  a  mock  king  (Tacit.  Ann.  xiii.  15 ;
Arrian,  Diss.  Epictet.  i,  25  ;  Lucian.  Saturn.  4),
which  at  once  calls  to  recollection  the  characteristic
ceremony  of  Twelfth-night.

Saturnus  being  an  ancient  national  god  of  La-
I       tium,  the  institution  of  the  Saturnalia  is  lost  in  the
j       most  remote  antiquity.     In  one  legend  it  was  as-
I       cribed  to  Janus,  who,  after  the  sudden  disappear-
\       ance  of  his  guest  and  benefactor  from  the  abodes
of  men,  reared  an  altar  to  him,  as  a  deity,  in  the
forum,  and  ordained  annual  sacrifices  ;  in  another,
j       as  related  by  Varro,  it  was  attributed  to  the  wan-
dering Pelasgi,  upon  their  first  settlement  in  Italy,


SCALAE.


looy


and  Hercules,  on  his  return  from  Spain,  was  said
to  have  reformed  the  worship,  and  abolished  the
practice  of  immolating  human  victims  ;  while  a
third  tradition  represented  certain  followers  of  the
last  named  hero,  whom  he  had  left  behind  on  his
return  to  Greece,  as  the  authors  of  the  Saturnalia.
(Macrob.  Sat.  i.  7.)  Records  approaching  more
nearly  to  history  referred  the  erection  of  temples
and  altars,  and  the  first  celebration  of  the  festival,
to  epochs  comparatively  recent,  to  the  reign  of
Tatius  (Dionys.  ii.  50-),  of  Tullus  Hostilius  (Dio-
nys.  iii.  32  ;  Macrab.  Sat.  i.  8),  of  Tarquinius
Superbus  (Dionys.  vi.  1  ;  Macrob.  I.  c),  to  the
consulship  of  A,  Sempronius  and  M.  Minucius,
B.  c.  497,  or  to  that  of  T.  Larcius  in  the  precedini»
year.  (Dionys,  vi.  1 ;  Liv.  ii.  21.)  These  conflict-
ing statements  may  be  easily  reconciled,  by  sup-
posing that  the  appointed  ceremonies  were  in  these
rude  ages  neglected  from  time  to  time,  or  corrupted,
and  again  at  different  periods  revived,  purified,
extended,  and  perfonned  with  fresh  splendour  and
greater  regularity.  (Compare  Liv.  xxiii.  1.  sub
fin.)

During  the  republic,  although  th«  whole  month
of  December  was  considered  a*  dedicated  to  Sa-
turn (Macrob.  i.  7),  only  one  day,  the  xiv.  Kal.
Jan.  was  set  apart  for  the  sacred  rites  of  the  divi-
nity :  when  the  month  waa  lengthened  by  the  ad-
dition of  two  days  upon  the  adoption  of  the  Julian
Calendar,  the  Saturnalia  fell  on  the  xvi.  Kal.  Jan.,
which  gave  rise  to  confusion  and  mistakes  among
the  more  ignorant  portion  of  the  people;  To  ob-
viate this  inconvenience,  and  allay  all  religious
scruples,  Augustus  enacted  that  three  whole  days,
the  17th,  18th,  and  19th  of  December,  should  in
all  time  coming  be  hallowed,  thus  embracing  both
the  old  and  new  style.  (Macrob.  i.  10.)  A  fourth
day  was  added,  we  know  not  when  or  by  whom,
and  a  fifth,  with  the  title  Juvenalis^  by  Caligula
(Dion  Cass.  lix.  6 ;  Sueton.  Cal.  17),  an  arrange-
ment which,  after  it  had  fallen  into  disuse  for  some
years,  was  restored  and  confirmed  by  Claudius.
(Dion  Cass.  Ix.  2.)

But  although,  strictly  speaking,  one  day  only,
during  the  republic,  was  consecrated  to  religious
observances,  the  festivities  were  spread  over  a
much  longer  space.  Thus  while  Livy  speaks  of
the  first  day  of  the  Sartunialia  {Saturnalibus  primis,
Liv.  XXX.  36),  Cicero  mentions  the  second  and
third  {secundis  Saturnalibus^  ad  Att.  xv.  32  ;  Satur-
nalibus  tertiis,  ad  Ait.  v.  20) ;  and  it  would  seem
that  the  merry-making  lasted  during  seven  days,
for  Novius,  the  writer  of  Atellanae,  emplo3'ed  the
expression  septem  Saturnalia,  a  phrase  copied  in
later  times  by  Memmius  (Macrob.  i.  10),  and
even  Martial  speaks  of  Saturni  septem  dies  (xiv,
72),  although  in  many  other  passages  he  alludes-
to  the  five  days-  observed  in  accordance  with  the
edicts  of  Caligula  and  Claudius  (ii.  89,  xiv.  79,-
141 ).  In  reality,  under  the  empire,  three  different
festivals  were  celebrated  during  the  period  of  seven
days.  First  came  the  Saturnalia  proper,  com-
mencing on  XVI.  Kal.  Dec,  followed  by  the  Opalia^
anciently  coincident  with  the  Saturnalia  (Macrob.
i.  10),  "on  XIV.  Kal.  Jan.;  these  two  together
lasted  for  five  days,  and  the  sixth  and  seventh
were  occupied  with  the  Siffillaria,  so  called  from
little  earthenware  figures  {sigilla,  oscilla)  exposed
for  sale  at  this  season,  and  given  as  tovs  to  chil-
dren. [  W.  R.]

SCALAE  {KXifiai),  a  ladder.  The  general  co»-
3t


1010


SCALPTURA.


Btruction  and  use  of  ladders  was  the  same  among
the  ancients  as  in  modern  times,  and  therefore  re-
quires no  explanation,  with  the  exception  of  those
used  in  besieging  a  fortified  place  and  in  making
an  assault  upon  it.  The  ladders  were  erected
against  the  walls  (admovere,  ponere^  apponere^  or
erigere  scalas)^  and  the  besiegers  ascended  them
under  showers  of  darts  and  stones  thrown  upon
them  by  the  besieged.  (Sallust.  Jug.  6,  64  ;  Caes.
de  Bell.  Civ.  i.  28,  63 ;  Tacit.  Hist.  iv.  29,  &c.  ;
Veget.  de  Re  Milit.  iv.  21  ;  Polyb.  ix.  18.)  Some
of  these  ladders  were  formed  like  our  common
ones  ;  others  consisted  of  several  parts  (K\ifj.aK€S
irrjKTal  or  SiaKural)  which  might  be  put  together
so  as  to  form  one  large  ladder,  and  were  taken  to
pieces  when  they  were  not  used.  Sometimes  also
they  were  made  of  ropes  or  leather  with  large  iron
hooks  at  the  top,  by  which  they  were  fastened  to
the  walls  to  be  ascended.  The  ladders  made
A\  holly  of  leather  consisted  of  tubes  sowed  up  air-
tight, and  when  they  were  wanted,  these  tubes
were  filled  with  air.  (Heron,  c.  2.)  Heron  also
mentions  a  ladder  which  was  constructed  in  such  a
manner,  that  it  might  be  erected  with  a  man
standing  on  the  top,  whose  object  was  to  observe
what  was  going  on  in  the  besieged  town.  (Heron,
c.  12.)  Others  again  were  provided  at  the  top
with  a  small  bridge,  which  might  be  let  down
upon  the  wall.  (Heron,  19.)  In  ships  small  lad-
ders or  steps  were  likewise  used  for  the  pvu-pose  of
ascending  into  or  descending  from  them.  (Virg.
Aen.  X.  654;  Heron,  c.  11.)

In  the  houses  of  the  Romans  the  name  Scalae
was  applied  to  the  stairs  or  staircase,  leading  from
the  lower  to  the  upper  parts  of  a  house.  The
steps  were  either  of  wood  or  stone,  and,  as  in  mo-
dern times,  fixed  on  one  side  in  the  wall.  (Vitruv.
ix.  1.  §  7,  &c.)  It  appears  that  the  staircases  in
Roman  houses  were  as  dark  as  those  of  old  houses
in  modern  times,  for  it  is  very  often  mentioned,
that  a  person  concealed  himself  in  scalis  or  in  sca-
larum  tenebris  (Cic.  pro  Mil.  15,  Philip,  ii.  9  ;
Horat.  Epist.  ii.  2.  15),  and  passages  like  these
need  not  be  interpreted,  as  some  commentators
have  done,  by  the  supposition  that  in  scalis  is  the
same  as  sub  scalis.  The  Roman  houses  had  two
kinds  of  staircases :  the  one  were  the  common
scalae,  which  were  open  on  one  side  ;  the  others
were  called  scalae  Graecae  or  KKi/xaKis^  which  were
closed  on  both  sides.  Massurius  Sabinus  (ap.  Gell.
X.  15.  §  29)  states,  that  the  Flarainica  was  not  al-
lowed to  ascend  higher  than  three  steps  on  a  com-
mon scala,  but  that  she  might  make  use  of  a  climax
like  every  other  person,  as  here  she  was  concealed
when  going  up.  (Serv.  ad  Aen.  iv.  664.)       [L.  S.]

SCALPTU'RA  or  SCULPTU'RA.  There  are
two  different  forms  of  this  word  both  in  Greek
and  Latin,  viz.  scalpo,  scalptura.,  and  sculpo,  seulp-
tura  (in  Greek  yXdcpw  and  yKixpu),  and  there  is
much  doubt  respecting  their  precise  meaning.  The
original  meaning,  common  to  them,  is  undoubtedly
the  cutting  figures  out  of  a  solid  material.  The
general  opinion  is,  that  both  scalfto  and  sculpo,  with
their  derivatives,  'signify  the  same  thing,  only  dif-
ferent in  degree  of  perfection,  so  that  scalptura
would  signify  a  coarse  or  rude,  sculptura  an  elabo-
rate and  perfect  engraving.  This  opinion  is  chiefly
based  upon  the  following  passages :  Horat.  Sat.  ii.
3.  22  ;  Ovid,  Met.  x.  248  ;  Vitruv.  iv.  6.  (Com-
pare the  commentators  on  Suet.  Galb.  10.)  Others
again  believe  that  tcalpo  {yhd<pw)  eignifics  to  cut


SCALPTURA.

figures  into  the  material  (intaglio),  and  seulpr
(y\v(j)a})  to  produce  raised  figures,  as  in  cameoi
But  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  the  ancients  them-,
selves  made  or  observed  such  a  distinction.  From
the  passages  in  which  the  words  occur,  both  in
Greek  and  Latin  writers,  it  seems  that,  in  their
widest  sense,  they  were  used,  almost  indifferently,
for  what  we  call  sculpture,  in  its  various  forms,  in
wood,  marble,  ivory,  or  other  materials,  more  par-
ticularly for  reliefs,  for  carving,  that  is,  the  exe-
cution of  small  works  by  cutting,  and  for  engraving
precious  stones;  but,  of  these  senses,  the  last  was
the  most  specific  and  usual  ;  the  first,  in  which
modem  writers  use  the  word  sculpture,  was  the
most  unusual.  [Statuaria.]  (See  the  Greek
and  Latin  Lexicons).

It  may  be  expedient,  however,  in  accordance
with  the  above  distinction  to  divide  the  art  into  two
departments :  1.  the  art  of  cutting  figures  into  the
material  (intaglios),  which  was  chiefly  applied  to
producing  seals  and  matrices  for  the  mints  ;  and  2.
the  art  of  producing  raised  figures  (cameos),  which
served  for  the  most  part  as  ornaments.

The  former  of  these  two  branches  was  much
more  extensively  practised  among  the  ancients
than  in  modern  times,  which  arose  chiefly  from
the  general  custom  of  every  free  man  wearing  a
seal-ring.  [Annulus.J  The  first  engravings  in
metal  or  stone,  which  served  as  seals,  were  simple
and  rude  signs  without  any  meaning,  sometimes
merely  consisting  of  a  round  or  square  hole.  (Meyer,
Kunstgeschichte,  i.  10.)  In  the  second  stage  of  the
art,  certain  symbolical  or  conventional  forms,  as  in
the  worship  of  the  gods,  were  introduced,  until  at
last,  about  the  age  of  Pheidias  and  Praxiteles,  this,
like  the  other  branches  of  the  fine  arts,  had  com-
pleted its  free  and  unrestrained  career  of  develope-
ment,  and  was  carried  to  such  a  degree  of  perfec-
tion that,  in  the  beauty  of  design  as  well  as  of  exe-
cution, the  works  of  the  ancients  remain  unrivalled
down  to  the  present  day.  But  few  of  the  names
of  the  artists,  who  excelled  in  this  art,  have
come  down  to  us.  Some  intaglios,  as  well  as
cameos,  have  a  name  engraved  upon  them,  but  it
is  in  many  cases  more  probable  that  such  are  the
names  of  the  owners  than  of  the  artists.  The  first
artist  who  is  mentioned  as  an  engraver  of  stones  is
Theodorus,  the  son  of  Telecles,  the  Samian,  who
engraved  the  stone  in  the  ring  of  Polycrates.
(Herod,  iii.  41.)  The  most  celebrated  among
them  was  Pyrgoteles,  who  engraved  the  seal-rings
for  Alexander  the  Great.  (Winckelmann,  vi.  p.
107,  &c.  ;  see  the  articles  in  the  Diet,  of  Diog.)
The  art  continued  for  a  long  time  after  Pyrgoteles
in  a  very  high  state  of  perfection,  and  it  appears
to  have  been  applied  about  this  period  to  orna-
mental works.  For  several  of  the  successors  of
Alexander  and  other  wealthy  persons  adopted  the
custom,  which  was  and  is  still  very  prevalent  in
the  East,  of  adorning  their  gold  and  silver  vessels,
craters,  candelabras,  and  the  like,  with  precious
stones  on  which  raised  figures  (cameos)  were
worked.  (Ath.  xi.  p.  781  ;  Cic.  c.  Verr.  ii.  4.  27,
«&c.)  Among  the  same  class  of  ornamental  works
we  may  reckon  such  vessels  and  paterae  as  con-
sisted of  one  stone,  upon  which  there  was  in  many
cases  a  whole  series  of  raised  figures  of  the  most
exquisite  workmanship.  (Appian.  Mithrid.  115;
Cic.  /.  c. ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvii.  3.)  The  art  was  in
a  particularly  flourishing  state  at  Rome  under  Au-
gustus and  his  successors,  in  the  hands  of  Dioscu^


SCEPTRUM.

rides  and  other  artists,  many  of  \vhose  wcrks  are
still  preserved.  Respecting  the  various  precious
and  other  stones  which  the  ancient  artists  used  in
those  works,  see  MUller,  Arch'dol.  §  313,

As  regards  the  technical  part  of  the  art  of  work-
ing in  precious  stones,  we  only  know  the  following
particulars.  The  stone  was  first  polished  by  the
politor,  and  received  either  a  plane  or  convex  sur-
face ;  the  latter  was  especially  preferred,  when  the
stone  was  intended  to  serve  as  a  seal.  The  scalptor
himself  used  iron  or  steel  instruments  moistened
with  oil,  and  sometimes  also  a  diamond  framed  in
iron.  These  metal  instmnienis  were  either  sharp
and  pointed,  or  round.  The  ancients  understood
the  use  of  diamond  dust  in  this  work.  (Plin.  H.  N.
xxxvii.  76  ;  Miiller,  Arch.  §  314.  2.)  The  stones
which  were  destined  to  be  framed  in  rings,  as
well  as  those  which  were  to  be  inlaid  in  gold  or
silver  vessels,  then  passed  from  the  hands  of  the
scalptor  into  those  of  the  goldsmith  (annularius^
compositor).

Numerous  specimens  of  intaglios  and  cameos
are  still  preserved  in  the  various  museums  of  Eu-
rope, and  are  described  in  numerous  works.  For
the  literature  of  the  subject,  and  an  account  of  these
gems  and  their  engravers,  see  Winckelraann,
Gesch.  d.  Kunst^  and  other  works  ;  Miiller,  Ar-
ch'dol.  §  315,  Sec.  ;  and  Raoul- Roche tte,  Lettre  a
M.  Schorn,  2d  ed.  [L.  S.]

SCALPTURA'TUM.     [Domus,  p.  431,  a.J

SCAMNUM,c;m.SCABELLUM,  a  step  which
was  placed  before  the  beds  of  the  ancients  in  order
to  assist  persons  in  getting  into  them,  as  some
were  very  high :  others  which  were  lower  required
also  lower  steps,  which  were  called  scahella.  (  Varro,
de  Ling.  Lot.  v.  168;  Isidor.  xx.  11  ;  Ovid,  Ars
Ain.  ii.  211.)  A  scamnum  was  sometimes  also
used  as  a  foot-stool.  (Ovid,  Ar.  Am.  i.  162.)  A
scaranum  extended  in  length  becomes  a  bench,
and  in  this  sense  the  word  is  frequently  used.
The  early  Romans,  before  couches  were  introduced
among  them,  used  to  sit  upon  benches  (scanma)
before  the  hearth  when  they  took  their  meals.
(Ovid.  Fast.  vi.  305.)  The  benches  in  ships  were
also  sometimes  called  scamna.  In  the  technical
language  of  the  agrimensores  a  scamnum  was  a
field  which  was  broader  than  it  was  long,  and  one
that  was  longer  than  broad  was  called  striga.
(Varii  Auctor.  Rei  Agr.  pp.  46, 125, 198,  ed.  Goes.)
In  the  language  of  the  Roman  peasantry  a  scam-
num was  a  large  clod  of  earth  which  had  not  been
broken  by  the  plough.    (Colum.  ii.  2.)       [L.  S.J

SCAFHA.     [Navis,  p.  786,  a.]

SCAPHEPHO'RIA.     [Hydriaphoria.]

SCENA.     [Theatrum.]

SCEPTRUM  is  a  latinised  form  of  the  Greek
(r/cfjTrTpov,  which  originally  denoted  a  simple  staff
or  walking-stick.  (Horn.  II.  xviii.  416  ;  Aeschyl.
Again.  74  ;  Herod,  i,  195.)  The  corresponding
Latin  term  is  scipio,  springing  from  the  same  root
and  having  the  same  signification,  but  of  less  fre-
quent occurrence.

As  the  staff  was  used  not  merely  to  support  the
steps  of  the  aged  and  infirm,  but  as  a  weapon  of
defence  and  assault,  the  privilege  of  habitually  car-
rying it  became  emblematic  of  station  and  autho-
rity. The  straight  staves  which  are  held  by  two
of  the  four  sitting  figures  in  the  woodcut  at  p.  98,
while  a  third  holds  the  curved  stafl^  or  LiTUUS,  in-
dicate no  less  than  their  attitude  and  position,  that
they  are  exercising  judicial  functions.     In  ancient


SCHOLA.


1011


authors  the  sceptre  is  represented  as  belonging
more  especially  to  kings,  princes,  and  leaders  of
tribes  (Hom.  II.  ii.  186,  199,  265,  268,  279,  xviii.
557,  Od.  ii.  37,  80,  iii.  412) :  but  it  is  also  borne
by  judges  (Hom.  Od.  xi.  568),  by  heralds  (//.  iii.
218,  vii.  277,  xviii,  505),  and  by  priests  and
seers.  (Hom.  11.  i.  15,  Od.  xi.  91  ;  Aeschyl.  Agam.
1236.)  It  was  more  especially  characteristic  of
Asiatic  manners,  §o  that  among  the  Persians  whole
classes  of  those  who  held  high  rank  and  were  in-
vested with  authority,  including  eunuchs,  were
distinguished  as  the  sceptre-bearing  classes  (o*
aKVTTTovxoi.,  Xen.  Cyr.  vii.  3.  §  17,  viii.  1.  §  38,
3.  §  15).  The  sceptre  descended  from  father  to
son  (Hom.  11.  ii.  46,  100—109),  and  might  be
committed  to  any  one  in  order  to  express  the
transfer  of  authority.  (Herod,  vii.  52.)  Those
who  bore  the  sceptre  swore  by  it  (Hom.  11.  i.  234
—239),  solemnly  taking  it  in  the  right  hand  and
raising  it  towards  heaven.  (Horn.  //.  vii.  412,  x.
321,  328.)

The  original  wooden  staff,  in  consequence  of  its
application  to  the  uses  now  described,  received  a


variety  of  ornaments  or  emblems.  It  early  became
a  tnmcheon,  pierced  with  golden  or  silver  studs.
(//.  i.  246,  ii.  46.)  It  was  enriched  with  gems
(Ovid.  Met.  iii.  264),  and  made  of  precious  metals
or  of  ivory  (i.  178,  Fast.  vi.  38.)  The  annexed
woodcut,  taken  from  one  of  Sir  Wm.  Hamilton's
fictile  vases,  and  representing  Aeneas  followed  by
Ascanius  and  carrying  off  his  father  Anchises,  who
holds  the  sceptre  in  his  right  hand,  shows  its  form  as
worn  by  kings.  The  ivory  sceptre  {eburneus  scipio,
Val.  Max.  iv.  4.  §  5)  of  the  kings  of  Rome,  which
descended  to  the  consuls,  was  surmounted  by  an
eagle.  (Virg.  Aen.  xi.  238  ;  Serv.  ad  he.;  Juv.  x.
43  ;  Isid.  Orig.  xviii.  2.)  [Insigne.J  Jupiter
and  Juno,  as  sovereigns  of  the  gods,  were  repre-
sented, with  a  sceptre.     (Ovid,  U.  cc.)       [J.  Y.]

SCHOENUS  (o,  ^,  <Txotvos\  literally,  a  rope
of  rushes,  an  Egyptian  and  Persian  itinerary  and
land  measure  (Herod,  i.  GH).  Its  length  is  stated
by  Herodotus  (ii.  G,  Q)  at  60"  stadia,  or  2  para-
sangs  ;  by  Eratosthenes  at  40  stadia,  and  by  others
at  32  or  30.  (Plin.  H.  N.  v.  9.  s.  10,  xii.  14.  s.  30.)
Strabo  and  Pliny  both  state  that  the  schoenus
vai-ied  in  different  parts  of  Egypt  and  Persia
(Strabo,  p.  803  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  vi.  26.  s.  30  ;  comp
Athen.  iii.  p.  122,a.)  [P  S.j

SCHOLA      [Balneae,  p.  189,  b.]
8x2


1012  SCRIPTURA.

SCIADEPHO'RTA.     [Hyuuiaphoria.]
SCIOTHE'RICUM.     [Horologium.]

SCrPIO.       [SCEPTRUM.]

SCIRI'TAE.     [ExERciTus,  p.  485,  b.]

SCO'RPIO.       [TORMENTUM.]

SCRIBAE.  The  Scribae  at  Rome  were  public
notaries  or  clerks,  in  the  pay  of  the  state.  They
were  chiefly  employed  in  making  up  the  public
accounts,  copying  out  laws,  and  recording  the  pro-
ceedings of  the  different  functionaries  of  the  state.
The  phrase  scriptum  facere  (Liv.  ix.  46  ;  Gellius,
vi.  9)  was  used  to  denote  their  occupation.  Being
very  numerous,  they  were  divided  into  companies
or  classes  (decuriae),  and  were  assigned  by  lot  to
different  magistrates,  whence  they  were  named
Quaestorii,  Aedilicii,  or  Praetorii,  from  the  officers
of  state  to  whom  they  were  attached,  (Cic.  Verr.
iii.  79,  c.Cat.  iv.  7,  pro  Cluent  45  ;  Plin. /f.  A^.
xxvi.  1.  s.  3.)  We  also  read  of  a  Navalis  Scriba,
whose  occupation  was  of  a  very  inferior  order.
(Festus,  s.  V.  Navalis.)  The  appointment  to  the
office  of  a  scriba  seems  to  have  been  either  made
on  the  nominatio  of  the  magistrate,  or  purchased.
Thus  Livy  (xl.  29)  tells  us  that  a  scriba  was  ap-
pointed by  a  quaestor:  and  we  meet  with  the
phrase  deeuriam  emere  to  "  purchase  a  company,''
i.  e.  to  buy  a  clerk's  place.  Horace,  for  instance,
bought  for  himself  a  "  patent  place  as  clerk  in  the
treasury  "  (scriptum  quaestorium  comparavit,  Tate's
Horaue,  ed.  i.  p.  58).  In  Cicero's  time,  indeed,  it
seems  that  any  one  might  become  a  scriba  or
public  clerk,  by  purchase  (Cic.  Verr.  iii.  79),  and
consequently,  as  freedmen  and  their  sons  were  eli-
gible, and  constituted  a  great  portion  of  the  public
clerks  at  Rome  (Tacit.  A^in.  xiii.  27),  the  office
was  not  highly  esteemed,  though  frequently  held
by  ingenui  or  freebom  citizens.  Cicero  (/.  c.)
however  informs  us  that  the  Scribae  formed  a  re-
spectable class  of  men,  but  he  thinks  it  necessary
to  assign  a  reason  for  calling  them  such,  as  if  he
were  conscious  that  he  was  combating  a  popular
prejudice.  Verj'  few  instances  are  recorded  of  the
Scribae  being  raised  to  the  higher  dignities  of  the
state  :  Cn.  Flavius,  the  scribe  of  Ap.  Claudius,  was
raised  to  the  office  of  curule  aedile  in  gratitude
for  his  making  public  the  various  forms  of  actions,
which  had  previously  been  the  exclusive  property
of  the  patricians  [Actio],  but  the  returning  of-
ficer refused  to  acquiesce  in  his  election  till  he  had
given  up  his  books  (tahnlas  posuit)  and  left  his
profession.  (Gellius,  /.  c.)  The  private  secreta-
ries of  individuals  were  called  Librarii,  and  some-
times Scribae  ab  epistolis.  In  ancient  times,  as
Festus  (s.  V.)  informs  us,  scriba  was  used  for  a  poet.
(Ernesti,  Claris  Ciceron.  s.v. ;  Gbttling,  Gesch.  dcr
R6m.  Staatsverf.  p.  374.)  [R.  W.]

SCRI'NIUM.     [Capsa.]

SCRIPLUM.     [ScRUPULUM.l

SCRIPTA  DUO'DECIM.     [Latruxculi.]

SCRIPTU'RA  was  that  part  of  the  revenue  of
the  Roman  republic  which  was  derived  from  letting
out  those  portions  of  the  ager  publicus  which  were
not  or  could  not  be  taken  into  cultivation  as  pas-
ture land.  (Fest.  s.  v.  SaJium.)  The  name  for
such  parts  of  the  ager  publicus  was  :  pascua  pub-
lica,  saltus,  or  silvae.  They  were  let  by  the  cen-
sors to  the  publicani,  like  all  other  vectigalia  ;  and
the  persons  who  sent  their  cattle  to  graze  on  such
public  pastures  had  to  pay  a  certain  tax  or  duty  to
the  publicani,  which  of  course  varied  according  to
the  number  and  quality  of  the  cattle  which  they


SCUTUM.

kept  upon  them.  To  how  much  this  duty  amounted
is  nowhere  stated,  but  the  revenue  which  the  state
derived  from  it  appears  to  have  been  very  con-
siderable. The  publicani  had  to  keep  the  lists  of
the  persons  who  sent  their  cattle  upon  the  public
pastures,  together  with  the  number  and  quality  of
the  cattle.  From  this  registering  {scriliere)  the
duty  itself  was  called  scriptura^  the  public  pasture
land  ager  scripturarius  (Fest.  s.  v.  Scripturarius
ager),  and  the  publicani  or  their  agents  who  raised
the  tax,  scripturarii.  Cattle,  not  registered  by  the
publicani,  were  called  pecudes  inscriptae,  and  those
who  sent  such  cattle  upon  the  public  pasture  were
punished  according  to  the  lex  censoria  (Varro,  de
Re  Rust.  ii.  1),  and  the  cattle  was  taken  by  the
publicani  and  forfeited.  (Plant.  Trucul.  i.  2.  42,
&c.)  The  lex  Thoria  (Appian,  de  Bell.  Civ.  i.2/;
Cic.  Brut.  36)  did  away  with  the  scriptura  in
Italy,  where  the  public  pastures  were  very  numer-
ous and  extensive,  especially  in  Apulia  (Varro,  de
Re  Rust.  I.  c. ;  Liv.  xxxix.  29),  and  the  land*
themselves  were  now  sold  or  distributed.  In  the
provinces,  where  the  public  pastures  were  also  let
out  in  the  same  manner  (Cic.  c.  Verr.  ii.  2,  3,  pro
Leg.  Man.  6,  ad  Fam.  xiii.  65  ;  Plin.  //.  N.  xix.
i5).,  the  practice  continued  until  the  time  of  the
empire  ;  but  afterwards  the  scriptura  is  no  longer
mentioned.  (Compare  Niebuhr,  Hist,  of  Rome,
vol.  iii.  p.  1 5,  &c. ;  Burraann,  Vectig.  Pop.  Rom.
C.4.)  [L.S.J

SCRU'PULUM,  or  more  properly  Scripulum
or  ScRiPLUM  (ypd/jL/xa),  the  smallest  denomination
of  weight  among  the  Romans.  It  was  the  24th
part  of  the  Uncia,  or  the  288th  of  the  Libra,
and  therefore  about  18  grains  English,  which  is
about  the  average  weight  of  the  scrupular  aurei
still  in  existence.     [Aurum.]

As  a  square  measur?,  it  was  the  smallest  division
of  the  Jugerum,  which  contained  288  scrupula.
[JuGERUM.]  Pliny  (//.  A^.  ii.  7)  uses  the  word
to  denote  small  divisions  of  a  degree.  It  was  in
fact  to  be  applicable,  according  to  the  use  of  the
As  and  its  parts,  to  the  288th  part  of  any  unit.

Though  the  scrupulum  was  the  smallest  weight
in  common  use,  we  find  divisions  of  it  sometimes
mentioned,  as  the  obolus  =  ^  of  a  scruple,  the  scmi-
obolus  =  i  of  an  obolus,  and  the  siliqua  =  i  of  an
obolus,  =  -^  of  a  scruple,  which  is  thus  shown  to
have  been  originally  the  weight  of  a  certain  num-
ber of  seeds.  (Priscian.  de  Pond.  v.  8 — 13  :  —

"Semioboli    duplum    est  obolus,   quera   pondere
duplo
Gramma  vocant,  scriplum  nostri  dixere  priores.
Semina  sex  alii  siliquis  latitantia  curvis
Attribuunt  scriplo,  lentisve  grana  bis  octo,
Aut  totidem  speltas  numerant,  tristesve  lupinos
Bis  duo.")  [P.  S.J

SCULPTURA.     [ScALPTURA.]

SCU'TICA.     [Fi.AGRUM.]

SCUTUM  (.&upe({s),  the  Roman  shield,  worn
by  the  heavy-armed  infantry,  instead  of  being
round  like  the  Greek  Clifeus,  was  adapted  to  the
form  of  the  human  body,  by  being  made  either
oval  or  of  the  shape  of  a  door  ipvpa)  which  it  also
resembled  in  being  made  of  wood  or  wicker-work,
and  from  which  consequently  its  Greek  name  was
derived.  Two  of  its  forms  are  shown  in  the  wood-
cut at  p.  711.  That  which  is  here  exhibited  is
also  of  frequent  occurrence,  and  is  given  on  the
same  authority :  in  this  case  the  shield  is  curved


SCYTALE.

so  as  in  part  to  encircle  the  body.  The  terms
clipeus  and  scutum  are  often  confounded  ;  but  that
they  properly  denoted  different  kinds  of  shields  is
manifest  from  the  passages  of  several  ancient  writers.
(Liv.  viii.  8  ;  Plut.  Rom.  21  ;  Diod.  Eclog.  xxiii.  3.)
In  like  manner  Plutarch  distinguishes  the  Roman
dvpeds  from  the  Greek  aatrls  in  his  life  of  T.  Fla-


I


miiiius  (p.  688,  ed.  Steph.)  In  Eph.  vi.  16  St.  Paul
uses  the  term  ^vpeos  rather  than  aa-n-is  or  (tukSs,
because  he  is  describing  the  equipment  of  a  Roman
soldier.  These  Roman  shields  are  called  scuta
longa.  (Virg.  .^ew.  viii.  662  ;  Ovid.  Fast.  vi.  393  ;
i&upeoi/s  €7ri,u7)Keis-,  Joseph.  Ant.  Jud.  viii.  7.  §  2.)
Polybius  (vi.  21)  says  their  dimensions  were  4  feet
by  2-1-.  The  shield  was  held  on  the  left  arm  by
means  of  a  handle,  and  covered  the  left  shoulder.
[Comp.  ExERCiTUS,  p.  496,  b.]  [J.  Y.]

SCY'RIA  DIKE  {<TKvpia  S:/c?])  is  thus  ex-
plained by  Pollux  :  ^Kvpiav  SIktjv  ouoixd^ovcriv  oi
KUfx({}5oSi5d(TKa\oi  tt]u  rpax^^av  ot  yap  (pvyoSi-
Kovvres  iarK-fjinovTO  ets  '2,Kvpov  ^  ets  A.rip.vov  airo-
STj^eij/.  By  rpaxeta  Siktj  is  meant  one  beset  with
difficulties,  in  which  the  plaintiff  had  to  encounter
every  sort  of  trickerj'  and  evasion  on  the  part  of
the  defendant.  On  the  appointed  day  of  trial  both
parties  were  required  to  be  present  in  court,  and  if
either  of  them  did  not  appear,  judgment  was  pro-
nounced against  him,  unless  he  had  some  good
excuse  to  offer,  such  as  illness  or  inevitable  absence
abroad.  Cause  was  shov/n  by  some  friend  on  his
behalf,  supported  by  an  affidavit  called  inra>ixoaia,
in  answer  to  which  the  opponent  was  allowed  to
put  in  a  counter  affidavit  (av6vir(afJi.oaia),  and  the
court  decided  whether  the  excuse  was  valid.  It
seems  to  have  become  a  practice  with  persons  who
wished  to  put  off  or  shirk  a  trial,  to  pretend  that
they  had  gone  to  some  island  in  the  Aegean  sea,
either  on  business  or  on  the  public  service  ;  and
the  isles  of  Scyrus  (one  of  the  Cyclades),  Lemnos,
and  Imbrus  were  particularly  selected  for  that
purpose.  Shammers  of  this  kind  were  therefore
nicknamed  Lemnians  and  Imbrians.  (Pollux,  viii.
60, 81 ;  Kiihn,  ad  loc. ;  Suidas,  s.  v.  ^Kvpiau  5iKr}v  :
,  Hesych.  s.  v.''lfji6pios;  Steph.  Thesaur.  8484.  c.  s.  v.
'S.Kvpos  :  Demosth.  c.  Olympiod.  1174  ;  Meier,  Att.
Proc.  p.  696.)  [C.  R.  K.]

SCYTALE  ((TKVTa\7])  is  the  name  applied  to
a  secret  mode  of  writing  by  which  the  Spartan
ephors  communicated  with  their  kings  and  generals
when  abroad,  (Plut.  X^sawc^.  19;  Schol. ««/  Thucyd.
i.  131  ;  Suidas,  s.v.)     When  a  king  or  general


SECTIO.  1013

loft  Sparta,  the  ephors  gave  to  him  a  staff  of  a  defi-
nite length  and  thickness,  and  retained  for  them-
selves another  of  precisely  the  same  size.  When
they  had  any  communicaton  to  make  to  him,  they
cut  the  material  upon  which  they  intended  to
write  into  the  shape  of  a  narrow  riband,  wound  it
round  their  staff,  and  then  Avrote  upon  it  the  mes-
sage which  they  had  to  send  to  him.  When  the
strip  of  writing  material  was  taken  from  the  staff,
nothing  but  single  or  broken  letters  appeared,  and
in  this  state  the  strip  was  sent  to  the  general,  who
after  having  wound  it  around  his  staff,  Avas  able  to
read  the  communication.  This  rude  and  imperfect
mode  of  sending  a  secret  message  must  have  come
down  from  early  times,  although  no  instance  of  it
is  recorded  previous  to  the  time  of  Pausanias.
(Corn.  Nep.  Paus.  3.)  In  later  times,  the  Spartans
used  the  scytale  sometimes  also  as  a  medium  through
which  they  sent  their  commands  to  subject  and  al-
lied towns.  (Xenoph.  Hell.  v.  2.  §  37.)  [L.  S.]
SCYTHAE  {:ZK{)eai).  [Demosii.]
SECE'SPITA,  an  instrument  used  by  the  Ro-
man priests  in  killing  the  victims  at  sacrifices.
(Suet.  Tih.  25.)  According  to  the  definition  of
Antistius  Labeo,  preserved  by  Festus  (p.  348,  ed.
MUller)  and  Servius  {ad  Virg.  Aeti.  iv.  262),  it
was  a  long  iron  knife  (eulter)  with  an  ivory  handle,
used  by  the  Flamines,  Flaminicae  Virgines,  and
Pontifices.  Paulus,  however,  in  his  epitome  of
Festus  (p.  336)  says  that  some  think  it  to  be  an-
axe  (securisX  others  a  dolabra,  and  others  again  a-
knife  {eulter).  On  Roman  coins  representing  sacri-
ficial emblems  we  see  an  axe,  which  modern  writers
call  a  secespita,  though  we  do  not  know  on  Avhat
authority,  except  the  doubtful  statement  of  Paulus.
See  the  annexed  coin  of  the  Sulpicia  Gens,  the
obverse  of  which  is  supposed  to  represent  a  eulter,
a  simpuvium,  and  a  secespita.  '


SECRETA'RIUM.  [Auditorium.]
SE'CTIO.  "  Those  are  called  Sectores  who  buy
property  pwi/jce."  (Gains,  iv.  146;  Festus,  s.v.
Sectores.)  Property  was  said  to  be  sold  puUice
{venire  publice),  when  a  man's  property  was  sold
by  the  state  in  consequence  of  a  condemnatio  and
for  the  purpose  of  repayment  to  ihe  State  of  such
sums  of  money  as  the  condemned  person  had  im-
properly appropriated  ;  or  in  consequence  of  a  pro-
scriptio.  (Liv.  xxxviii.  60  ;  Cic.  in  Verr.  i.  20.)
Such  a  sale  of  all  a  man's  property  was  a  Sectio
(Cic.  fro  Roscio  Amer.  36,  43,  &c.)  ;  and  some-
times the  things  sold  were  called  Sectio.  (Tacit.
Hist.  i.  90.)  The  sale  was  effected  by  the  Praetor
giving  to  the  Quaestors  the  Bonorum  Possessio,  in
reference  to  which  the  phrase  "  bona  publice  pos-
sideri "  is  used.  The  property  was  sold  sub  hasta
and  the  sale  transferred  Quiritarian  ownership,  to
which  Gaius  probably  alludes  in  a  mutilated  pas-
sage (iii.  80  ;  compare  Varro,  de  Re  Rust.  ii.  10.
s.  4  ;  Tacit.  Hist.  i.  20).  The  Sector  was  intitled
to  the  Interdictum  Sectoriura  for  the  purpose  of
obtaining  possession  of  the  property  (Gaius,  iv.
146)  ;  but  he  took  the  property  with  all  its  liabi-
lities. An  hereditas  that  had  fallen  to  the  Fiscus
3t  3


lOU  SEISA€HTHEIA.

was  sold  ID  this  way,  and  the  Sector  acquired  the
hereditatis  petitio.     [Praeda.]  [G.  L.]

SECTOR.     [Sectio.1

SECTO'RIUM  INTERDICTUM,  [Inter-
dictum  ;  Sectio.]

SECU'RIS,  dim.  SECURICULA  (a^tVrj,  -n-e-
Xe'/cMs),  an  axe  or  hatchet.  The  axe  was  either
made  with  a  single  edge,  or  with  a  blade  or  head
on  each  side  of  the  haft,  the  latter  kind  being  de-
nominated bipennis  (ireAe/cus  Sjcrrd/Aos,  or  aix<pi(rr6-
fios^  Agathlas,  Hist.  ii.  5.  pp.  73,  74).  As  the  axe
was  not  only  an  instrument  of  constant  use  in  the
hands  of  the  carpenter  and  the  husbandman,  but
was  moreover  one  of  the  earliest  weapons  of  attack
(Hom.  II.  XV.  711  ;  Suet.  Galha^  18),  a  constituent
portion  of  the  Roman  fasces,  and  a  part  of  the  ap  •
paratus  when  animals  were  slain  in  sacrifice,  we
find  it  continually  recurring  under  a  great  variety
of  forms  upon  coins,  gems,  and  bas-reliefs.  In  the
woodcut  to  the  article  Sceptrum,  the  young  As-
canius  holds  a  battle-axe  in  his  hand.  Also  real
axe-heads,  both  of  stone  and  metal,  are  to  be  seen
in  many  collections  of  antiquities.  Besides  being
made  of  bronze  and  iron,  and  more  rarely  of  silver
(  Virg.  Aen.  v.  307  ;  Wilkinson,  Mail,  and  Cust.  of
Egypt,  vol.  i.  p.  324),  axe-heads  have  from  the
earliest  times  and  among  all  nations  been  made  of
stone.  They  are  often  found  in  sepulchral  tumuli,
and  are  arranged  in  our  museums  together  with
chisels,  both  of  stone  and  of  bronze,  under  the  name
of  celts  [Dolabra],

The  prevalent  use  of  the  axe  on  the  field  of
battle  was  generally  characteristic  of  the  Asiatic
nations  (Curt.  iii.  4),  whose  troops  are  therefore
called  securiyerae  catervae.  (Val.  Flacc.  Argon,  v.
138.)  As  usual,  we  find  the  Asiatic  custom  pro-
pagating itself  over  the  north  of  Europe.  The  bi-
pennis and  the  spear  were  the  chief  weapons  of  the
Franks.     (Agathias,  I.  c.)  [J.  Y.]

SECUTO'RES.  [Gladiatores,  p.  576,  a.]
SEISACHTHEIA  (o-e/o-ax^eja),  a  disburden-
ing ordinance,  was  the  first  and  preliminary  step  in
the  legislation  of  Solon.  (Plut.  Sol.  15  ;  Diog.
Laert.  i.  45.)  The  real  nature  of  this  measure
was  a  subject  of  doubt  even  among  the  ancients
themselves,  for  while  some  state  that  Solon  thereby
cancelled  all  debts,  others  describe  it  as  a  mere  re-
duction of  the  rate  of  interest.  But  from  the
various  accounts  in  Plutarch  and  the  grammarians
it  seems  to  be  clear  that  the  (rcia-dx^^i'ai-  consisted
of  four  distinct  measures.  The  first  of  these  was
the  reduction  of  the  rate  of  interest,  and  if  this
was,  as  it  appears,  retrospective,  it  would  naturally
in  many  cases  wipe  off  a  considerable  part  of  the
debt.  The  second  part  of  the  measure  consisted
in  lowering  the  standard  of  the  silver  coinage,  that
is,  Solon  made  73  old  drachmas  to  be  worth  100
new  ones  ;  so  that  the  debtor,  in  paying  off  his
debt,  gained  rather  more  than  one  fourth.  Bockh
(Publ.  Econ.  p.  16)  supposes  that  it  was  Solon's
intention  to  lower  the  standard  of  the  coinage  only
by  one  fourth,  that  is,  to  make  75  old  drachmas
equal  to  100  new  ones,  but  that  the  new  coin
proved  to  be  lighter  than  he  had  expected.  The
third  part  consisted  in  the  release  of  mortgaged
lands  from  their  incumbrances  and  the  restoration
of  them  to  their  owners  as  full  property.  How
ihis  was  effected  is  not  clear.  Lastly,  Solon
abolished  the  law  which  gave  to  the  creditor  a
right  to  the  person  of  his  insolvent  debtor,  and  he
restored  to  their  full  liberty  those  who  had  been


SELLA.

enslaved  for  debt.  For  further  information  on  this
measure,  see  Diet,  of  Biogr.  art.  Solon.

This  great  measure,  when  carried  into  effect,
gave  general  satisfaction,  for  it  conferred  the  great-
est benefits  upon  the  poor,  without  depriving  the
rich  of  too  much,  and  the  Athenians  expressed  their
thankfulness  by  a  public  sacrifice,  which  they  called
o-eto-dx^eifl,  and  by  appointing  Solon  to  legislate
for  them  with  unlimited  power,  (Pint.  Sol.  16  ;
compare  Suidas,  Hesych.  Etym.  Mag.  s.  v.  ;  Cic.
de  Re  Publ.  ii.  34  ;  Wachsmuth,  Hellen.  Alt.  vol.
i.  p.  472.)  [L.  S.]

SELIQUASTRUM.     [Sella,  No.  IV.]

SELLA.  The  general  term  for  a  seat  or  chair
of  any  description.  The  varieties  most  deserving
of  notice  are  :  —

I.  Sella  Curulis,  the  chair  of  state.  Curulis
is  derived  by  the  ancient  writers  from  currus  (Aul.
Gell.  iii.  18;  Festus,  s.  v.  Ourules ;  Servius,  ad
Virg.  Aen.  xi.  334  ;  Isidor.  xx.  J 1.  §  11)  ;  but  it
is  more  probably  connected  with  cirvus.  The  sella
curulis  is  said  to  have  been  used  at  Rome  from  a
very  remote  period  as  an  emblem  of  kingly  power
(hence  curuli  regia  sella  adornavit.,  Li  v.  i.  20),  having
been  imported,  along  with  various  other  insignia  of
royalty,  from  Etruria  (Liv.  i.  8),  according  to  one
account  by  Tullus  Hostilius  (Macrob.  Sat.  i.  6)  ;  ac-
cording to  another  by  the  elder  Tarquinius  (Flor.
i.  5)  ;  while  Silius  names  Vetulonii  as  the  city
from  which  it  was  immediately  derived  (viii.  487).
Under  the  republic  the  right  of  sitting  upon  this
chair  belonged  to  the  consuls,  praetors,  curule
aediles,  and  censors  (Liv.  ii.  5'J,  vii.  1,  ix.  46,  x,  7,
xl.  45  ;  Aul.  Gell.  vi.  9,  &c.)  ;  to  the  Flamen
Dialis  (Liv.  i.  20,  xxvii.  8)  [Flamen]  ;  to  the
dictator,  and  to  those  whom  he  deputed  to  act
under  himself,  as  the  mcujider  equitum,  since  he
might  be  said  to  comprehend  all  magistracies
within  himself.  (Dion  Cass,  xliii.  48  ;  Liv.  ii.  31  ;
Festus,  s.  V.  Sellae  curulis).  After  the  downfal  of
the  constitution  it  was  assigned  to  the  emperors
also,  or  to  their  statues  in  their  absence  (Tacit.
Ann.  XV.  29,  Hist.  ii.  59  ;  Servius,  I.e.);  to  the
Augustales  (Tacit.  Ann.  ii.  83),  and,  perhaps,  to
the  praefectus  urbi.  (Spanheim,  de  Praest.  et  Usu
Numism.  x.  3.  §  1.)  It  was  displayed  upon  all
great  public  occasions,  especially  in  the  circus  and
theatre  (Liv.  ii.  31  ;  Suet.  Octav.  43  ;  Dion  Cass.
Iviii.  4),  sometimes,  even  after  the  death  of  the
person  to  whom  it  belonged,  a  mark  of  special
honour,  bestowed  on  Marcellus,  Germanicus,  and
Pertinax  (Dion  Cass.  liii.  30,  Ixxiv.  4  :  Tacit.  Ann.
ii.  83,  and  Comm.  of  Lips.  ;  Spanheim,  x.  2  §  I ) ;
and  it  was  the  seat  of  the  praetor  when  he  ad-
ministered justice.  (Cic.  Verr.  ii.  38;  Val.  Max.  iii.
5.  §  1  ;  Tacit.  Jwra.  i.  75  ;  Martial,  xi.  98.  18.)
In  the  provinces  it  was  assumed  by  inferior  magis-
trates, when  they  exercised  proconsular  or  pro-
praetorian  authority,  as  we  infer  from  its  ap-
pearing along  with  fasces  on  a  coin  of  the  Gens
Pupia,  struck  at  Nicaea  in  Bithynia,  and  bearing
the  name  AVAOC  nOVniOC  TAMIAC.  We  find
it  occasionally  exhibited  on  the  medals  of  foreign
monarchs  likewise,  on  those  of  Ariobarzanes  II.  of
Cappadocia,  for  it  was  the  practice  of  the  Romans
to  present  a  curule  chair,  an  ivory  sceptre,  a  toga
praetexta,  and  such  like  ornaments,  as  tokens  of
respect  and  confidence  to  those  rulers  whose  friend-
ship they  desired  to  cultivate.  (Liv.  xxx.  11,  xlii.
1 4 ;  Polyb.  Exc.  Leg.  cxxi.  ;  Cic.  ad  Fain.  xv.  2  ;
Spanheim,  Ibid.  x.  4.)


SELLA.

The  sella  curulis  appears  from  the  first  to  have
been  ornamented  with  ivory,  and  this  is  commonly-
indicated  by  such  expressions  as  curule  ehur  ;  Nu-
midae  scidptile  dentis  opus;  and  4\a(j)avTivos  Sl-
(ppos  (Hot.  Ep.  i.  6.  53  ;  0\idi.  ex  Pont.  iv.  9.  27);
at  a  later  period  it  was  overlaid  with  gold,  and
consequently  we  find  hiippovs  iirixpixrovs,  ^p6vovs
Karaxp^f^ovs,  rhv  Si(j)pop  rhv  KexRvariOfievov,  re-
curring constantly  in  Dion  Cassius,  who  frequently,
however,  employs  the  simple  form  Sicppoi  apxiKoi.
In  shape  it  long  remained  extremely  plain,  closely
resembling  a  common  folding  (plicatilis)  camp  stool
with  crooked  legs.  These  last  gave  rise  to  the
name  ayKvhSTrovs  Si<ppos,  foimd  in  Plutarch  (Ma-
i-ius,  5)  ;  they  strongly  remind  us  of  elephants'
teeth,  which  they  may  have  been  intended  to  imi-
tate, and  the  emperor  Aurelian  proposed  to  con-
struct one  in  which  each  foot  was  to  consist  of  an
enormous  tusk  entire.     (Vopiscus,  Firm.  3.)

The  form  of  the  sella  curulis,  as  it  is  commonly
represented  upon  the  denarii  of  the  Roman  i'a-
milies,  is  given  in  p.  520.  In  the  following  cut  are
represented  two  pair  of  bronze  legs,  belonging  to
seilae  curules,  preserved  in  the  museum  at  Naples
(Museo  Borbonico,  vol.  vi.  tav.  28)  ;  and  a  sella
curulis,  copied  from  the  Vatican  collection.


SELLA.


lOiS


II.  Biv«5ELLiuM.  The  word  is  found  in  no  clas-
sical author  except  Varro  {L.  L.  v.  128,  ed.  MUller),
according  to  whom  it  means  a  seat  large  enough  to
contain  two  persons.  We  learn  from  various  in-
scriptions that  the  right  of  using  a  seat  of  this
kind,  upon  public  occasions,  was  granted  as  a  mark


of  honour  to  distinguished  persons  by  the  magis-
trates and  people  in  provincial  towns.  There  are
examples  of  this  in  an  inscription  found  at  Pisa,
which  called  forth  the  long,  learned,  rambling
dissertation  of  Chimentelli  (Graev.  Thes.  Antiq.
Rom.  vol.  vii.  p.  2030),  and  in  two  others  found
at  Pompeii.  (Orell.  Inscr.  n.  4048,  4044.)  In
another  inscription  we  have  Biselliatus  Honor
(Orell.  4043);  in  another  (Orell.  4055),  con-
taining the  roll  of  an  incorporation  of  carpenters,
one  of  the  office-bearers  is  styled  COLLEGI  BI-
SELLEARIUS.     (Compare  Orell. 4046,  4047.)

Two  bronze  bisellia  were  discovered  at  Pompeii,
and  thus  all  uncertainty  with  regard  to  the  form  of
the  seat  has  been  removed.  One  of  these  is  en-
graved above.     (Mus.  Borbon.  vol.  ii.  tav.  31.)

III.  Sella  Gestatoria  (Suet.A'er.2Q,  Vitell.
16  ;  Amm.  Marc.  xxix.  2)  or  Fertoria  (Cae-
lius  Aurelian.  i.  5,  ii.  1),  a  sedan  used  both  in
town  and  country  (Tacit.^nn.  xiv.  4  ;  Suet.  Claud.
25),  by  men  (Tacit.  Hist.  i.  35,  iii.  85  ;  Juven.
vii.  141  ;  Martial,  ix.  23),  as  well  as  by  women.
(Tacit. -r4«w.  xiv.  4  ;  Juv.  i.  124,  vi.  532  ;  hence
muliebris  sella.  Suet.  Otho,  6.)  It  is  expressly  dis-
tinguished from  the  Lectica  (Suet.  Claud.  25  ;
Martial,  x.  10,  xi.  98;  Senec.  brev.  vit.  12),  a
portable  bed  or  sofa,  in  which  the  person  carried
lay  in  a  recumbent  position,  while  the  sella  was  a
portable  chair  in  which  the  occupant  sat  upright,
but  they  are  sometimes  confounded,  as  by  Martial
(iv.  51).  It  differed  from  the  cathedra  also,  but  in
what  the  difference  consisted  it  is  not  easy  to  de-
termine. [Cathedra.]  The  sella  was  sometimes
entirely  open,  as  we  infer  from  the  account  given
by  Tacitus  of  the  death  of  Galba  (Hist.  i.  35,  &c.),
but  more  frequently  shut  in.  (Juven.  i.  126  ;  Suet.
Ner.  26,  Vitell.  16,  Otho,  6.)  Dion  Cassius  (Ix.
2)  pretends  that  Claudius  first  employed  the
covered  sella,  but  in  this  he  is  contradicted  by
Suetonius  (Octav.  53),  and  by  himself  (xlvii.  23,
Ivi.  43).  It  appears,  however,  not  to  have  been
introduced  until  long  after  the  lectica  was  common,
since  we  scarcely,  if  ever,  find  any  allusion  to  it
until  the  period  of  the  empire.  The  seilae  were
made  sometimes  of  plain  leather,  and  sometimes
ornamented  with  bone,  ivory,  silver  (Lamprid.
Elagab.  4),  or  gold  (Claud.  Honor.  Cons.  iv.  583),
according  to  the  rank  or  fortune  of  the  proprietor.
They  were  furnished  with  a  pillow  to  support  the
head  and  neck  {cervical,  Juv.  vi.  532,  and  Schol.),
when  made  roomy  the  epithet  laxa  was  applied
(Senec.  de  Const.  14),  when  smaller  than  usual
they  were  termed  sellulae  (Tacit  Hist.  iii.  85)  ;
the  motion  was  so  easy  that  one  might  study  with-
out inconvenience  (Plin.  Ep.  iii.  5),  while  at  the
same  time  it  afforded  healthful  exercise.  (Senec.
Brev.  vit.  12  ;  Gakn.rfe  Tuend.  Vol.  vi.  4  ;  Caelius
Aurelian.  I.e.)

IV.  Sellae  of  different  kinds  are  mentioned
incidentally  in  ancient  writers,  accompanied  by
epithets  which  serve  to  point  out  generally  the
purposes  for  which  they  were  intended.  Thus  we
read  of  sellae  balneares,  sellae  tonsoriae,  sellae  ob-
stetriciae,  sellae  familiaricae  v.  pertusae,  and  many
others.  Both  Varro  {L.  L.  v.  128)  and  Festus
(s.  V.)  have  preserved  the  word  seliquastrum.  The
former  classes  it  along  with  sedes,  sedile,  solium,
sellae,  the  latter  calls  them  ^^  sedilia  antiqui  gene-
ris,'''' and  Amobius  includes  them  among  common
articles  of  furniture.  No  hint,  however,  is  given
by  any  of  these  authorities  which  could  lead  lis  to


1016  SENATUS.

conjecture  the  sliape,  nor  is  any  additional  liglit
thrown  upon  the  question  by  Hyginus,  who  tells
us,  when  describing  the  constellations,  that  Cassio-
peia is  seated  "  in  siliquastro.''''

Of  chairs  in  ordinary  use  for  domestic  purposes,
a  great  variety,  many  displaying  great  taste,  have
been  discovered  in  excavations  or  are  seen  repre-
sented in  ancient  frescoes.  The  first  cut  annexed
represents   a  bronze    one   from  the   Museum  at


Naples  {Mas.  Borh.  vol.  vi.  tav.  28)  :  the  second,
two  chairs,  of  which  the  one  on  the  right  hand  is
ill  the  Vatican  and  the  other  is  taken  from  a  paint-
ing at  Pompeii.  {Mus.  Borb.  vol.  xii.  tav.  3.)  A
chair  of  a  very  beautiful  form  is  given  in  the  Mus.
Borh.  vol.  viii.  tav.  20.


V.  Sellae  Equestres.  [Ephippium,]  [W.R.]

SE'MATA  {(T-hf^ara).      [FuNUS,  p.  556,  a.]

SEMBELLA.     [Denarius.]

SEMENTIVAE  FERIAE.  [FERiA,p.530,a.]
~    SEMIS,  SEMISSIS.     [As,  p.  140,  b.]

SEMU'NCIA.     [Uncia.]

SEMUNCIA'RIUM  FUNUS.  [Fenus,  p.
527,  b.]

SENA'TUS.  In  all  the  republics  of  antiquity
the  government  was  divided  between  a  senate  and
a  popular  assembly  ;  and  in  cases  where  a  king
stood  at  the  head  of  aflfairs,  as  at  Sparta,  the
king  had  little  more  than  the  executive.  A  se-
nate in  the  early  times  was  always  regarded  as
an  assembly  of  elders,  which  is  in  fact  the  meaning
of  the  Roman  senatus  as  of  the  Spartan  yepovaia,
and  its  members  were  elected  from  among  the
nobles  of  the  nation.  The  number  of  senators
in  the  ancient  republics  always  bore  a  distinct  re-
lation to  the  number  of  tribes  of  which  the  nation
was  composed.  [Boule,  Gerusia.]  Hence  in
the  earliest  times,  when  Rome  consisted  of  only
one  tribe,  iis  senate  consisted  of  one  hundred  mem-
bers (senatores  or  patres  ;  compare  P atricii),  and
when  the  Sabine  tribe  or  the  Titles  became  united
with  the  Latin  tribe  or  the  Ramnes,  the  number
of  senators  was  increased  to  two  hundred.  (Dionys.
ii.  47  ;  Plut.  Rom.  20.)  This  number  was  again
augmented  by  one  hundred,  when  the  third  tribe


SENATUS.

or  tlie  Luceres  became  incorjiorated '  with  the
Roman  state.  Dionysius  (iii.  67)  and  Livy  (1.
35)  place  this  last  event  in  the  reign  of  Tar-
quinius  Priscus  ;  Cicero  {de  Re  Publ.  ii.  20),  who
agrees  with  the  two  historians  on  this  point,  states
that  Tarquinius  doubled  the  number  of  senators,
according  to  which  we  ought  to  suppose  that  be-
fore Tarquinius  the  senate  consisted  only  of  150
members.  This  difference  however  may  be  ac-
counted for  by  the  supposition,  that  at  the  time  of
Tarquinius  Priscus  a  number  of  seats  in  the  senate
had  become  vacant,  which  he  filled  up  at  the
same  time  that  he  added  100  Luceres  to  the  senate,
or  else  that  Cicero  regarded  tlie  Luceres,  in  oppo-
sition to  the  two  other  tribes,  as  a  second  or  a  new
half  of  the  nation,  and  thus  incorrectly  considered
their  senators  likewise  as  the  second  or  new  half
of  that  body.  The  new  senators  added  by  Tar-
quinius Priscus  were  distinguished  from  those  be-
longing to  the  two  older  tribes  by  the  appellation
patres  minorum  (jentium^  as  previously  those  who
represented  the  Titles  had  been  distinguished,  by
the  same  name,  from  those  who  represented  the
Ramnes.  (Dionys.  ii.  57.)  Servius  Tullius  did
not  make  any  change  in  the  composition  of  the
senate  ;  but  under  I'arquinius  Superbus  their
number  is  said  to  have  become  very  much  di-
minished, as  this  tyrant  put  many  to  death  and
sent  others  into  exile.  This  account  however  ap-
pears to  be  greatly  exaggerated,  and  it  is  a  pro-
bable supposition  of  Niebuhr  {Hist,  of  Rome,  i.
p.  526),  that  several  vacancies  in  the  senate  arose
from  many  of  the  senators  accompanying  the  tyrant
into  his  exile.  The  vacancies  which  had  thus
arisen  were  filled  up  immediately  after  the  estab-
lishment of  the  republic,  by  L.  Junius  lirutus,
as  some  writers  state  (Liv.  ii.  1),  or,  according  to
Dionj'sius  (v.  13),  by  Brutus  and  Valerius  Publi-
cola,  and  according  to  Plutarch  {Pull.  11)  and
Festus  (s.  V.  Qui  patres)  by  Valerius  Publicola
alone.  All  however  agree  that  tlie  persons  who
were  on  this  occasion  made  senators  were  noble
plebeians  of  equestrian  rank.  Dionysius  states,'
that  the  noblest  of  the  plebeians  were  first  raised
to  the  rank  of  patricians,  and  that  then  the  new
senators  Avere  taken  from  among  them.  But  this
appears  to  be  incompatible  with  the  name  by
which  they  were  designated.  Had  they  been
made  patricians,  they  would  have  been  patres  like
the  others,  whereas  now  the  new  senators  are  said
to  have  been  distinguished  from  the  old  ones  by
the  name  of  conscripti.  (Liv.  ii.  1  ;  Fest.  s.  v.  Con-
scripti  and  adlecti.)  Hence  the  customary  mode  of
addressing  the  whole  senate  henceforth  always
was :  patres  conscripti,  that  is,  patres  et  conscripti.
There  is  a  statement  that  the  number  of  these  new
senators  was  164  (Plut.  Puhl.  11  ;  Fest,  s.  v.  Qui
patres)  ;  but  this,  as  Niebuhr  has  justly  remarked,
is  a  fabrication,  perhaps  of  Valerius  of  Antiura,
which  is  contradicted  by  all  subsequent  history.

Henceforth  the  number  of  300  senators  appears
to  have  remained  unaltered  for  several  centuries.
(Liv.  Epit.  60.)  C.  Sempronius  Gracchus  was
the  first  who  attempted  to  make  a  change,  but  in
what  this  consisted  is  not  certain.  In  the  epitome
of  Livy  it  is  expressly  stated,  that  he  intended  to
add  600  equites  to  the  number  of  300  senators,
which  would  have  made  a  senate  of  900  members,
and  would  have  given  a  great  preponderance  to  the
equites.  This  appears  to  be  an  absurdity.  (Gbttling,
O'esch.  d.  Rom.  Staatsv.  p   437.)      Plutarch   (fi.


SENATUS.

Gracch.  5,  &c.)  states,  that  Gracchus  added  to  the
senate  300  equites,  whom  he  was  allowed  to  select
from  the  whole  body  of  equites,  and  that  he  trans-
ferred the  judicia  to  this  new  senate  of  600.  This
account  seems  to  be  founded  upon  a  confusion  of
the  lex  judiciaria  of  C.  Gmcchus  with  the  later
one  of  Livius  Drusus  (Walter,  Gesch.  d.  Rom.
Rec/its,  p.  2t4),  and  all  the  other  writers  who  men-
tion the  lex  judiciaria  of  C.  Gracchus  do  not  allude
to  any  change  or  increase  in  the  number  of  sena-
tors, but  merely  state  that  he  transferred  the  judi-
cia from  the  senate  to  the  equites,  who  remained  in
their  possession  till  the  tribuneship  of  Livius  Dru-
sus. The  latter  proposed,  that  as  the  senate  con-
sisted of  300,  an  equal  number  of  equites  should
be  elected  (apKTTivSrjv)  into  the  senate,  and  that  in
future  the  indices  should  be  taken  from  this  senate
of  600.  (Appian.  B.  C.  i.  35  ;  Aurel.  Vict,  de  Vir.
niudr.  (>Q  ;  Li  v.  Epit.  71.)  After  the  death  of
Livius  Drusus,  however,  this  law  was  abolished  by
the  senate  itself,  on  whose  behalf  it  had  been  pro-
posed, and  the  senate  now  again  consisted  of  300
members.  During  the  civil  war  between  Marius
and  Sulla  many  vacancies  must  have  occurred  in
the  senate.  Sulla  in  his  dictatorship  not  only  filled
up  these  vacancies,  but  increased  the  number  of
senators.  All  we  know  of  this  increase  with  cer-
tainty is,  that  he  caused  about  300  of  the  most
distinguished  equites  to  be  elected  into  the  senate
(Appian.  Z^.  C.  i.  100),  but  the  real  increase  which
he  made  to  the  number  of  senators  is  not  mentioned
anywhere.  It  appears,  however,  henceforth  to
have  consisted  of  between  five  and  six  hundred.
(Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  14.)  Julius  Caesar  augmented  the
number  to  900,  and  raised  to  this  dignity  even
common  soldiers,  freedmen,  and  peregrini.  (Dion
Cass,  xliii.  47  ;  Suet.  Goes.  80.)  This  arbitrari-
ness in  electing  unworthy  persons  into  the  senate,
and  of  extending  its  number  at  random,  was  imi-
tated after  the  death  of  Ca  sar,  for  on  one  occasion
there  were  more  than  one  thousand  senators.  (Suet.
Aug.Zb.)  Augustus  cleared  the  senate  of  the  un-
worthy members,  who  were  contemptuously  called
by  the  people  Orcini  senatores,  reduced  its  number
to  600  (Dion  Cass.  liv.  14),  and  ordained  that  a  list
of  the  senators  should  always  be  exhibited  to  public
inspection.  (Dion  Cass.  Iv.  3.)  During  the  first
centuries  of  the  empire,  this  number  appears,  on  the
whole,  to  have  remained  the  same  ;  but  as  every-
thing depended  upon  the  will  of  the  emperor,  we
can  scarcely  expect  to  find  a  regular  and  fixed
number  of  them.  (Dion  Cass.  liii.  17.)  During  the
latter  period  of  the  empire  their  number  was  again
very  much  diminished.

With  respect  to  the  eligibility  of  persons  for
the  senate,  as  well  as  to  the  manner  in  which  they
were  elected,  Ave  must  distinguish  between  the
several  periods  of  Roman  history.  It  was  formerly
a  common  opinion,  founded  upon  Livy  (i.  8)  and
Fest'us  (s.  V.  Praeteriti  senatores),  which  has  in
modem  times  found  new  supporters  in  Huschke
and  Hubino,  that  in  the  early  period  of  Roman
history  the  kings  appointed  the  members  of  the
Benate  at  their  own  discretion.  Niebuhr  and
others  after  him  have  attempted  to  show  that  the
populus  of  Rome  was  the  real  sovereign,  that  all
the  powers  which  the  kings  possessed  were  dele-
gated to  them  by  the  populus,  and  that  the  senate
was  an  assembly  formed  on  the  principle  of  re-
presentation, so  that  it  represented  the  populus,
and  that  its  members  were  elected  by  the  populus.


SENATUS.  1017

Dionysius  (if.  14)  also  states  that  the  senator*
were  elected  by  the  populus,  but  the  manner  in
which  he  describes  the  election  is  erroneous,  for
he  believes  that  the  three  tribes  were  already
united  when  the  senate  consisted  of  only  one
hundred  members,  and  that  the  senators"  were
elected  by  the  curies.  Niebuhr  (i.  p.  338)
thinks,  that  each  gens  sent  its  decurio,  who  was
its  alderman,  to  represent  it  in  the  senate  ;  Gut-
tling (p.  151,  comp.  p.  62)  on  the  other  hand
believes,  with  somewhat  more  probability,  that
each  decury  (the  5e«ds  of  Dionysius),  which  con-
tained either  a  part  of  one  or  parts  of  several
smaller  gentes,  had  to  appoint  one  old  man  by
whom  it  was  represented  in  the  senate,  and  a
younger  one  as  eques.  This  supposition  removes
the  diflficulty  respecting  the  decurio,  which  has
been  pointed  out  by  Walter  (Gesch.  d.  Rom.  Redds,
p.  23.  n.  12)  ;  for  the  decurio  was  the  commander
of  a  division  of  the  army,  and  as  such  could  not
well  have  been  of  the  age  of  a  senator.  As,  ac-
cording to  this  theory,  each  decury  or  gens  ap-
pointed one  senator,  each  cury  was  represented  by
ten,  each  tribe  by  one  hundred,  and  the  whole
populus  by  three  hundred  senators,  all  of  whom
held  their  dignity  for  life.  But  this  theory  cannot
b»;  accepted,  for  we  must  either  set  nearly  all
the  ancient  authorities  at  defiance,  or  we  must
acquiesce  in  the  old  opinion  that  the  king  ap-
pointed the  senators.  The  plebeians  as  such
were  not  represented  in  the  senate,  for  the  in-
stances in  which  plebeians  are  mentioned  as  being
made  senators,  as  in  the  reign  of  Tarquinius  Pris-
cus  and  after  the  abolition  of  the  kingly  power,
cannot  be  regarded  in  any  other  light  than  mrre
momentary  measures,  which  the  government  was
obliged  to  adopt  for  several  reasons,  and  withdut
any  intention  to  appoint  representatives  of  the
plebes.  (Niebuhr,  i.  p.  526,  &c.)  The  numbers  of
such  plebeian  senators  at  any  rate  must  have  been
much  smaller  than  they  are  stated  by  our  authori-
ties, for  there  is  no  instance  of  any  plebeian  sena-
tor on  record  until  the  year  439  B.  c,  when  Spurius
Maelius  is  mentioned  as  senator.  The  senate  it-
self appears  to  have  had  some  influence  upon  the
election  of  new  members,  inasmuch  as  it  might  raise
objections  against  a  person  elected.  (Dionys.  vii.  55.)
The  whole  senate  was  divided  into  decuries,  each
of  which  corresponded  to  a  curia.  When  the
senate  consisted  of  only  one  hundred  members,
there  were  accordingly  only  ten  decuries  of  sena-
tors ;  and  ten  senators,  one  being  taken  from  each
decury,  formed  the  decern  primi  who  represented
the  ten  curies.  When  subsequently  the  represent-
atives of  the  two  other  tribes  were  admitted  into
the  senate,  the  Ramnes  with  their  decem  primi  re-
tained for  a  time  their  superiority  over  the  two
other  tribes  (Dionys.  ii.  58,  iii.  1  ;  Pint.  Num.  3),
and  gave  their  votes  first.  (Dionys.  vi.  84.)  The
first  among  the  decem  primi  was  the  princeps
senaius,  who  was  appointed  by  the  king  (Dionys.
ii.  12  ;  Lyd.  de  Mens.  i.  19),  and  v/as  at  the  same
time  custos  urbis.  [Prakfectus  Urbi.]  Respect-
ing the  age  at  which  a  person  might  be  elected
into  the  senate  during  the  kingly  period,  we  know
no  more  than  what  is  indicated  by  the  name  sena-
tor itself,  that  is,  that  they  were  persons  of  ad-
vanced age.  (Comp.  Becker,  Rom.  AlierUi.  vol.  ii.
pt.  ii.  p.  385,  &c)

On  the  establishment  of  the  republic  tiie  elec-
tion of  senators   passed  from   the   hands  of  the


1018


SENATUS.


kings  into  those  of  the  magistrates,  the  consuls,  con-
sular tribunes,  and  subsequently  the  censors.  (Liv.
ii.  1  ;  Fest.  s.v.  Praeteriti  senatores.)  But  the  power
of  electing  senators  possessed  by  the  republican
magistrates  was  by  no  means  an  arbitrary  power,
for  the  senators  were  always  taken  from  among
those  who  were  equites,  or  whom  the  people  had
previously  invested  with  a  magistracy,  so  that  in
reality  the  people  themselves  always  nominated
the  candidates  for  the  senate.  From  the  year
487  B.  c.  the  princeps  senatus  was  no  longer
appointed  for  life,  but  became  a  magistrate  ap-
pointed by  the  curies,  and  the  patres  minorum
gentium  were  likewise  eligible  to  this  dignity.
(Niebuhr,  ii.  p.  119.)  It  moreover  appears,  that
all  the  curule  magistrates  from  the  quaestors  up-
wards had  by  virtue  of  their  office  a  seat  in  the
senate,  which  they  retained  after  the  year  of  their
office  was  over,  and  it  was  from  these  ex-magis-
trates that  the  vacancies  occurring  in  the  senate
were  generally  filled  up.

After  the  institution  of  the  censorship,  the  cen-
sors alone  had  the  right  to  elect  new  members  into
the  senate  from  among  the  ex-magistrates,  and  to
exclude  such  as  they  deemed  unworthy.  (Zonar.
vii.  19;  compare  Cic.  de  Leg.  iii.  12.)  [Cen-
sor.] The  exclusion  was  effected  by  simply
passing  over  the  names  and  not  entering  them
into  the  lists  of  senators,  whence  such  men  were
called  praeteriti  senatores.  (Fest.  s.  v.)  On  one
extraordinary  occasion  the  eldest  among  the  ex-
censors  was  invested  with  dictatorial  power  to
elect  new  members  into  the  senate.  (Liv.  xxiii.
22.)  The  censors  were  thus,  on  the  one  hand,
confined  in  their  elections  to  such  persons  as  had
already  received  the  confidence  of  the  people,  and
on  the  other,  they  were  expressly  directed  by  the
lex  Ovinia  tribunicia  to  elect  "  ex  omni  ordine  op-
timum quemque  curiatim."  (Fest.  I.  c.)  This  ob-
scure lex  Ovinia  is  referred  by  Niebuhr  (i.  p.  527)
to  the  time  anterior  to  the  admission  of  the  con-
scripti  into  the  senate,  but  it  evidently  belongs  to
a  much  later  period,  and  was  meant  to  be  a  guid-
ance to  the  censors,  as  he  himself  afterwards  ac-
knowledged (ii.  p.  408,  n.  855  ;  compare  Walter,
p.  100,  n.  68).  The  ordo  mentioned  in  this  lex  is
the  ordo  senatorius,  i.  e.  men  who  were  eligible  for
the  senate  from  the  office  they  had  held.  (Liv.
xxii.  49.)  The  expression  curiatim  is  very  difficult
to  explain  ;  some  believe  that  it  refers  to  the  fact
that  the  new  senators  were  only  appointed  with  the
sanction  of  the  senate  itself  (Dionys.  vii.  55  ;  Cic.
Philip.  V.  17),  and  in  the  presence  of  the  lictors,
who  represented  the  curies.

From  the  time  that  the  curule  magistrates  had
the  right  to  take  their  seats  in  the  senate,  we  must
distinguish  between  two  classes  of  senators,  viz.,
real  senators,  or  such  as  had  been  regularly  raised
to  their  dignity  by  the  magistrates  or  the  censors,
and  such  as  had,  by  virtue  of  the  office  which  they
held  or  had  held,  a  right  to  take  their  seats  in  the
senate  and  to  speak  ( sententiam  dicerejus  sententiae),
but  not  to  vote.  (Gellius,  iii.  1 8  ;  Fest.  s.  v.  Senatores.)
To  this  ordo  senatorius  also  belonged  the  ponti-
fex  maximus  and  the  flamen  dialis.  The  whole
of  these  senators  had,  as  we  have  stated,  no  right
to  vote,  but  when  the  others  had  voted,  they  might
step  over  or  join  the  one  or  the  other  party,  whence
they  were  called  senatores  pedarii^  an  appellation
which  had  in  former  times  been  applied  to  those
juniores  who  were  not  consulara.  (Gell.  /.  c. ;  com-


SENATUS.
pare  Niebuhr,  ii.  p.  114  ;  Walter,  p.  144,  and
more  especially  Becker,  I.e.  p.  431,  &,c.  ;  F.  Hof-
mann,  Der  Rom  Senat,  p.  1 9,  &c.)  A  singular
irregularity  in  electing  members  of  the  senate  was
committed  by  Appius  Claudius  Caecus,  who  elected
into  the  senate  sons  of  freedmen  (Liv.  ix.  29,  46  ;
Aur.  Vict,  de  Fir.  Illustr.  34)  ;  but  this  conduct
was  declared  illegal,  and  had  no  further  conse-
quences.

When  at  length  all  the  state  offices  had  become
equally  accessible  to  the  plebeians  and  the  patri-
cians, and  when  the  majority  of  offices  were  held
by  the  former,  their  number  in  the  senate  naturally
increased  in  proportion.  The  senate  had  gradually
become  an  assembly  representing  the  people,  as
formerly  it  had  represented  the  populus,  and  down
to  the  last  century  of  the  republic  the  senatorial
dignity  was  only  regarded  as  one  conferred  by  the
people.  (Cic.  jr^-o  Sext.  65,  de  Leg.  iii.  12,  c.  Verr.
iv.  1 1,  pro  Cluent.  56.)  But  notwithstanding
this  apparently  popular  character  of  the  senate,  it
was  never  a  popular  or  democratic  assembly,  for
now  its  members  belonged  to  the  nobiles,  who
were  as  aristocratic  as  the  patricians.  [No-
biles.]  The  office  of  princeps  senatus,  which
had  become  independent  of  that  of  praetor  urbanus,
was  now  given  by  the  censors,  and  at  first  always
to  the  eldest  among  the  ex-censors  (Liv.  xxvii.  11),
but  afterwards  to  any  other  senator  whom  they
thought  most  worthy,  and  unless  there  was  any
charge  to  be  made  against  him,  he  was  re-elected
at  the  next  lustrum.  This  distinction,  however,
great  as  it  was,  afforded  neither  power  nor  advan-
tages (Zonar.  vii.  19),  and  did  not  even  confer  the
privilege  of  presiding  at  the  meetings  of  the  senate,
which  only  belonged  to  those  magistrates  who  had
the  right  to  convoke  the  senate.  (Gell.  xiv.  7;  Cic.
de  Leg.  iii.  4.)

It  has  been  supposed  by  Niebuhr  (iii.  p.  406),
that  a  senatorial  census  existed  at  Rome  at  the
commencement  of  the  second  Punic  war,  but  the
words  of  Livy  (xxiv.  1 1)  on  which  this  supposition
is  founded  seem  to  be  too  vague  to  admit  of  such  an
inference.  Gottling  (p.  346)  infers  from  Cicero  {ad
Fain.  xiii.  5),  that  Caesar  was  the  first  who  insti-
tuted a  senatorial  census,  but  the  passage  of  Cicero
is  still  more  inconclusive  than  that  of  Livy,  and
we  may  safely  take  it  for  granted  that  during  the
whole  of  the  republican  period  no  such  census
existed  (Plin.  H.  N.  xiv.  1),  although  senators
naturally  always  belonged  to  the  wealthiest  classes.
The  institution  of  a  census  for  senators  belongs
altogether  to  the  time  of  the  empire.  Augustus
first  fixed  it  at  400,000  sesterces,  afterwards  in-
creased it  to  double  this  sum,  and  at  last  even  to
1,200,000  sesterces.  Those  senators  whose  pro-
perty did  not  amount  to  this  sum,  received  grants
from  the  emperor  to  make  it  up.  (Suet.  Attg.  41  ;
Dion  Cass.  liv.  17,  26,  30,  Iv.  13.)  Subsequently
it  seems  to  have  become  customary  to  remove  from
the  senate  those  who  had  lost  their  property
through  their  own  prodigality  and  vices,  if  they
did  not  quit  it  of  their  own  accord.  (Tacit.  Anna/.
ii.  48,  xii.  52  ;  Suet.  Tib.  47.)  Augustus  also,
after  having  cleared  the  senate  of  unworthy  mem-
bers, introduced  a  new  and  reanimating  element
into  it  by  admitting  men  from  the  municipia,  the
colonies,  and  even  from  the  provinces.  (Tacit
Annal.  iii.  55,  xi.  25  ;  Suet.  Vesp.  9.)  When
an  inhabitant  of  a  province  was  honoured  in  this
manner,  the  province  was  said  to  receive  the^


SENATUS.

senatus.  Provincials  who  were  made  senators  of
course  went  to  reside  at  Rome,  and  with  the  ex-
ception of  such  as  belonged  to  Sicily  or  to  Gallia
Narbonensis,  they  were  not  allowed  to  visit  their
native  countries  without  a  special  permission  of
the  emperor.  (Tacit.  Annal.  xii.  23  ;  Dion  Cass,
lii.  46,  Ix.  25.)  In  order  to  make  Rome  or  Italy
their  new  home,  the  provincial  candidates  for  the
senate  were  subsequently  always  expected  to  ac-
quire landed  property  in  Italy.  (Plin.  Epist.  vi.
1.9.)  On  the  whole,  however,  the  equites  remained
during  the  first  centuries  of  the  empire  the  semi-
narium  senatus,  which  they  had  also  been  in  the
latter  period  of  the  republic.

As  regards  the  age  at  which  a  person  might  be-
come a  senator,  we  have  no  express  statement  for
the  time  of  the  republic,  although  it  appears  to
have  been  fixed  by  some  custom  or  law,  as  the
aetas  senatoria  is  frequently  mentioned,  especially
during  the  latter  period  of  the  republic.  But  we
may  by  induction  discover  the  probable  age.  We
know  that  according  to  the  lex  annalis  of  the  tribune
Villius,  the  age  fixed  for  the  quaestorship  was  31.
(Orelli,  Onom.  Tull.  vol.  iii.  p.  133.)  Now  as  it
might  happen  that  a  quaestor  was  made  a  senator
immediately  after  the  expiration  of  his  office,  we
may  presume  that  the  earliest  age  at  which  a  man
could  become  a  senator  was  32.  Augustus  at  last
fixed  the  senatorial  age  at  25  (Dion  Cass.  lii.  20),
which  appears  to  have  remained  unaltered  through-
out the  time  of  the  empire.

No  senator  was  allowed  to  carry  on  any  mer-
cantile business.  About  the  commencement  of  the
second  Punic  war,  some  senators  appear  to  have
violated  this  law  or  custom,  and  in  order  to  pre-
vent its  recurrence  a  law  was  passed  with  the  ve-
hement opposition  of  the  senate,  that  none  of  its
members  should  be  permitted  to  possess  a  ship  of
more  than  300  amphorae  in  tonnage,  as  this  was
thought  sufficiently  large  to  convey  to  Rome  the
produce  of  their  estates  abroad.  (Liv.  xxi.  63.)  It
is  clear  however  from  Cicero  (e.  Verr.  v.  18),
that  this  law  was  frequently  violated.

Regular  meetings  of  the  senate  {senatus  legiti-
mus)  took  place  during  the  republic,  and  probably
during  the  kingly  period  also,  on  the  calends,  nones,
and  ides  of  every  month  (Cic.  ad  Q.  Frat.  ii.  1 3)  ;
extraordinary  meetings  (senatus  indictus)  might  be
convoked  on  any  other  day,  with  the  exception  of
those  which  were  atri,  and  those  on  which  comitia
were  held.  (Cic.  ad  Q.  Frat.  ii.  2.)  The  right  of
convoking  the  senate  during  the  kingly  period  be-
longed to  the  king,  or  to  his  vicegerent,  the  custos
.urbis.  (Dionys.  ii.  8  ;  Praefectus  Urbi.)  This
right  was  during  the  republic  transferred  to  the
curule  magistrates,  and  at  last  to  the  tribunes  also.
Under  the  empire  the  consuls,  praetors,  and  tri-
bunes continued  to  enjoy  the  same  privilege  (Dion
Cass.  Ivi.  47,  Hx.  24  ;  Tacit.  Hist.  iv.  39),  al-
though the  emperors  also  had  it.  (Dion  Cass.  liii.
1,  liv.  3.)  If  a  senator  did  not  appear  on  a  day  of
meeting,  he  was  liable  to  a  fine  for  which  a  pledge
was  taken  (pignoris  captio)  until  it  was  paid.
(Gellius,  xiv.  7  ;  Liv.  iii.  28  ;  Cic.  de  Leg.  iii.  4,
Philip,  i.  5  ;  Plut.  Cic.  43.)  Under  the  empire
the  penalty  for  not  appearing  without  sufficient
reason  was  increased.  (Dion  Cass.  liv.  18,  Iv.  3,
Ix.  11.)  Towards  the  end  of  the  republic  it  was
decreed,  that  during  the  whole  month  of  February
the  senate  should  give  audience  to  foreign  ambas-
wdors  on  all  days  on  which  the  senate  could  law-


SENATtfS.  101.9

fully  meet,  and  that  no  other  matters  should  be
discussed  until  these  affairs  were  settled.  (Cic.  ad
Q.  Frat.  ii.  13,  ad  Fam.  i.  4.)

The  places  where  the  meetings  of  the  senate
were  held  (curiae,  senacula)  were  always  inaugu-
rated by  the  augurs.  [Templum.]  The  most  an-
cient place  was  the  Curia  Hostilia,  in  which  alone
originally  a  senatusconsultum  could  be  made.  Af-
terwards however  several  temples  were  used  for
this  purpose,  such  as  the  temple  of  Concordia,  a
place  near  the  temple  of  Bellona  [Legatus],  and
one  near  the  porta  Capena.  (Fest.  s.  v.  Senacula  ;
Varro,  de  Ling.  Lat.  v.  155,  156.)  Under  the  em-
perors the  senate  also  met  in  other  places :  under
Caesar  th6  curia  Julia,  a  building  of  immense
splendour,  was  commenced  ;  but  subsequently  meet-
ings of  the  senate  were  not  unfrequently  held  in
the  house  of  a  consul.

When  in  the  earliest  times  the  king  or  the  cus-
tos urbis,  after  consulting  the  pleasure  of  the  gods
by  auspices,  had  convoked  the  senate  (senatum
edicere,  convocare),  he  opened  the  session  with  the
words  :  "  Quod  bouum,  faustum,  felix  fortunatum-
que  sit  populo  Romano  Quiritibus,"  and  then  laid
before  the  assembly  (referre,  relatio)  what  he  had
to  propose.  The  president  then  called  upon  the
members  to  discuss  the  matter,  and  when  the  dis-
cussion was  over,  every  member  gave  his  Vote.
The  majority  of  votes  always  decided  a  question
The  majority  was  ascertained  either  by  numeratio
or  by  discessio,  that  is,  the  president  either  counted
the  votes  (Fest.  s.  v.  Numera),  or  the  members
who  voted  on  the  same  side  joined  together,  and
thus  separated  from  those  who  voted  otherwise.
This  latter  method  of  voting  appears  in  later  times
to  have  been  the  usual  one,  and,  according  to
Capito  (ap.  Gell.  xiv.  7),  the  only  legitimate  method.
[Senatusconsultum.]

The  subjects  laid  before  the  senate  partly  be-
longed to  the  internal  affairs  of  the  state,  partly
to  legislation,  and  partly  to  finance  ;  and  no  mea-
sure could  be  brought  before  the  populus  without
having  previously  been  discussed  and  prepared  by
the  senate.  The  senate  was  thus  the  medium
through  which  all  affairs  of  the  whole  government
had  to  pass  :  it  considered  and  discussed  whatever
measures  the  king  thought  proper  to  introduce,
and  had,  on  the  other  hand,  a  perfect  control  over
the  assembly  of  the  populus,  which  could  onh'  ac-
cept or  reject  what  the  senate  brought  before  it.
When  a  king  died,  the  royal  dignit}^,  until  a  suc-
cessor was  elected,  was  transferred  to  the  decern
primi  (Liv.  i.  17),  each  of  whom  in  rotation  held
this  dignity  for  five  days.  The  candidate  for  the
royal  power  was  first  decided  upon  by  the  inter-
reges,  who  then  proposed  him  to  the  whole  senate,
and  if  the  senate  agreed  with  the  election,  the
interrex  of  the  day,  at  the  command  of  the  senate,
proposed  the  candidate  to  the  comitia  and  took
their  votes  respecting  him.  (Dionys.  ii.  58,  iii.  36,
iv.  40,  80  ;  comp.  Walter,  p.  25,  n.  28.)  The  will
of  the  gods  was  then  consulted  by  the  augurs,  and
when  the  gods  too  sanctioned  the  election  (Liv.  i.
18),  a  second  meeting  of  the  populus  was  held,  in
which  the  augurs  announced  the  sanction  of  the
gods.  Hereupon  the  king  was  invested  with  the
powers  belonging  to  his  office.

Under  the  republic  the  right  of  convoking  the
senate  was  at  first  only  possessed  by  the  dictators,
praetors  or  consuls,  inten-eges,  and  the  praefectus
urbi,  who  also,  like  the  kings  of  former  times,  laid


]020


SENATUS.


be''ore  the  senate  the  subjects  for  deliberation.
The  power  of  the  senate  was  at  first  the  same  as
'under  the  kings,  if  not  greater  :  it  had  the  general
care  of  the  public  welfare,  the  superintendence  of
all  matters  of  religion,  the  management  of  all  af-
fairs with  foreign  nations  ;  it  commanded  the  levies
of  troops,  regulated  the  taxes  and  duties,  and  had
in  short  the  supreme  control  of  all  the  revenue  and
expenditure.  The  order  in  which  the  senators
spoke  and  voted  was  determined  by  their  rank  as
belonging  to  the  majores  or  minores.  (Cic.  de  Re
Puhl.  ii.  20  ;  Dionys.  vi.  QQ,  vii.  47.)  This  dis-
tinction of  rank  however  appears  to  have  ceased
after  the  decemvirate,  and  even  under  the  decera-
virate  we  have  instances  of  the  senators  speaking
without  any  regular  order.,  (Dionys.  vi.  4,  16,  19,
21  ;  Liv,  iii.  39,  41.)  It  is  also  probable  that  after
the  decemvirate  vacancies  in  the  senate  were  gene-
rally filled  with  ex-magistrates,  which  had  now
become  more  practicable  as  the  number  of  magis-
trates had  been  increased.  The  tribunes  of  the
people  likewise  obtained  access  to  the  deliberations
of  the  senate  (Liv.  iii.  QQ^  vi.  1)  ;  but  they  had  no
seats  in  it  yet,  but  sat  before  the  opened  doors  of
the  curia.  (Val.  Max.  ii.  2.  §  7.)  The  senate  had
at  first  had  the  right  to  propose  to  the  comitia  the
candidates  for  magistracies,  but  this  right  was  now
lost :  the  comitia  centuriata  had  become  quite  free
iu  regard  to  elections  and  were  no  longer  dependent
upon  the  proposal  of  the  senate.  The  curies  only
still  possessed  the  right  to  sanction  the  election  ;
but  in  the  year  B.  c.  299  they  were  compelled  to
sanction  any  election  of  magistrates  which  the  co-
mitia might  make,  before  it  took  place  (Cic.  Brut.
14  ;  Aurel.  Vict,  de  Vir.  Illustr.  33),  and  this
soon  after  became  law  by  the  lex  Maenia.  (Orelli,
Onom.  lull.  vol.  iii.  p.  215.)  When  at  last  the
curies  no  longer  assembled  for  this  empty  show  of
power,  the  senate  stept  into  their  place,  and  hence-
forth in  elections,  and  soon  after  also  in  matters  of
legislation  the  senate  had  previously  to  sanction
whatever  the  comitia  might  decide.  (Liv.  i.  17.)
After  the  lex  Hortensia  a  decree  of  the  comitia
tributa  became  law  even  without  the  sanction  o6
the  senate.  The  original  state  of  things  had  thus
gradually  become  reversed,  and  the  senate  had  lost
very  important  branches  of  its  power,  which  had
all  been  gained  by  the  comitia  tributa.  [Tribunus
Plebis.]  In  its  relation  to  the  comitia  centu-
riata, however,  the  ancient  rules  were  still  in  force,
as  laws,  declarations  of  war,  conclusions  of  peace,
treaties,  &c.  were  brought  before  them  and  decided
by  them  on  the  proposal  of  the  senate.  (Walter,
p.  132.)

The  powers  of  the  senate  after  both  orders  were
placed  upon  a  perfect  equality  may  be  thus  briefly
summed  up.  The  senate  continued  to  have  the
supreme  superintendence  in  all  matters  of  religion
(Gellins,  xiv.  7)  ;  it  determined  upon  the  manner
in  which  a  war  was  to  be  conducted,  what  legions
were  to  be  placed  at  the  disposal  of  a  commander,
and  whether  new  ones  were  to  be  levied  ;  it  decreed
into  what  provinces  the  consuls  and  praetors  were
to  be  sent  [Provincia],  and  whose  imperium  was
to  be  prolonged.  The  commissioners  who  were
generally  sent  out  to  settle  the  administration  of  a
newly  conquered  country,  were  always  appointed
by  the  senate.  (Liv.  xlv.  17  ;  Appian.  de  Reb.  Hisp.
99,  rfe  Reb.  Pun.  135;  Sallust.  Jvg.  16.)  All
embassies  for  the  conclusion  of  peace  or  treaties
with  foreign  states  were  sent  out  by  the  senate,


SENATUS.

and  such  ambassadors  were  generally  senatorH
themselves  and  ten  in  number.  (Polyb.  vi.  13  ;
Liv.  passim.)  The  senate  alone  carried  on  the  ne.
gotiations  with  foreign  ambassadors  (Polyb.  /.  c.  ;
(lie.  c.  Vatin.  15),  and  received  the  complaints  of
subject  or  allied  nations,  who  always  regarded  the
senate  as  their  common  protector.  (Liv.  xxix.  1 6,
xxxix.  3,  xlii.  14,  xliii.  2  ;  Polyb.  I.  c.)  By
virtue  of  this  office  of  protector  it  also  settled  all
disputes  which  might  arise  among  the  municipia
and  colonies  of  Italy  (Dionys.  ii.  1  ;  Liv.  ix.  20  ;
Varro,  de  Re  Rust.  iii.  2  ;  Cic.  ad  Att.  iv.  15,  c?e
Ojf.  i.  10),  and  punished  all  heavy  crimes  com-
mitted in  Italy,  which  might  endanger  the  public
peace  and  security.  (Polyb.  I.  c.)  Even  in  Rome
itself  the  judices  to  whom  the  praetor  referred  im-r
portant  cases,  both  public  and  private,  were  taken
from  among  the  senators  (Polyb.  vi.  17),  and  in
extraordinary  cases  the  senate  appointed  especial
commissions  to  investigate  them  (Liv.  xxxviii.  54,
xxxix.  14,  xl.  37,  44,  &c.)  ;  but  such  a  commis-
sion, if  the  case  in  question  was  a  capital  oifence
committed  by  a  citizen,  required  the  sanction  of
the  people.  (Polyb.  vi.  16  ;  Liv.  xxvi.  33,  &c.)
When  the  republic  was  in  danger  the  senate  might
confer  unlimited  power  upon  the  magistrates  by
the  formula,  "  videant  consules,  ne  quid  respub-
lica  detrimenti  capiat "  (Sallust.  Cat.  29  ;  Caes.
B.  C.  i.  5,  7),  which  was  equivalent  to  a  de-
claration of  martial  law  within  the  city.  This
general  cxre  for  the  internal  and  external  welfare
of  the  republic  included,  as  before,  the  right  to  dis-
pose over  the  finances  requisite  for  these  purposes.
Hence  all  the  revenue  and  expenditure  of  the  re-
public were  under  the  direct  administration  of  the
senate,  and  the  censors  and  quaestors  were  only
its  ministers  or  agents.  [Censor  ;  Quaestor.]
All  the  expenses  necessary  for  the  maintenance  of
the  armies  required  the  sanction  of  the  senate,  be-
fore anything  could  be  done,  and  it  might  even
prevent  the  triumph  of  a  returning  general,  by  re-
fusing to  assign  the  money  necessary  for  it.  (Polyb.
vi.  15.)  There  are,  however,  instances  of  agenei-ai
triumphing  without  the  consent  of  the  senate.  (Liv.
iii.  63,  vii.  17,  ix.37.)

How  many  members  were  required  to  be  present
in  order  to  constitute  a  legal  meeting  is  uncertain,
though  it  appears  that  there  existed  some  regula-
tions on  this  point  (Liv.  xxxviii.  44,  xxxix.  4  ;
Cic.  ad  Fam.  viii.  5  ;  Fest  s.  v.  Numera),  and
there  is  one  instance  on  record,  in  which  at  least
one  hundred  senators  were  required  to  be  present.
(Liv.  xxxix.  18.)  The  presiding  magistrate
opened  the  business,  and  as  the  senators  sat  in  the .
following  order, — princeps  senatus,  consulares,  cen-
sorii,  praetorii,  aedilicii,  tribunicii,  quaestorii,  —  it
is  natural  to  suppose,  that  they  were  asked  their
opinion  and  voted  in  the  same  order.  {Suo  loco
sententium  dicere,  Cic.  Philip,  v.  17,  xiii.  13,  &c.,
ad  Att.  xii.  21.)  Towards  the  end  of  the  republic
the  order  in  which  the  question  was  put  to  the
senators,  appears  to  have  depended  upon  the  dis-
cretion of  the  presiding  consul  (Varro,  ap.  Gell.  xiv.
7 ),  who  called  upon  each  member  by  pronouncing
his  name  {nominatim.,  Cic.  c.  Verr.  iv.  64),  but  he
usually  began  with  the  princeps  senatus  (Cic.  pnt
Sext.  32),  or  if  consules  designati  were  present,
with  them.  (Sallust,  Cat.  50  ;  Appian,  B.  C.
ii.  5.)  The  consul  generally  observed  all  the  year
round  the  same  order  in  which  he  had  commenced
on  the  first  of  January.     (Suet.  Caes.   21.)     A


SENATUS.

"senator  when  called  upon  to  speak  might  do  so  at
lull  length,  and  even  introduce  subjects  not  directly
connected  with  the  point  at  issue.  (Cic.  de  Leg.
iii.  18  ;  Gcllius,  iv.  10  ;  Tacit.  Annal.  ii.  38,  xiii.
39  ;  compare  Cic.  Philiv.  vii.)  It  depended
upon  the  president  which  of  the  opinions  expressed
he  would  put  to  the  vote,  and  which  he  would
pass  over.  (Polyb.  xxxiii.  I  ;  Cic.  ad  Fam.  i.  2,
X.  1 2  ;  Caes.  B.  C.  i.  2.)  Those  men  who  were
not  yet  real  senators,  but  had  only  a  seat  in  the
senate  on  account  of  the  office  they  held,  or  had
held,  had  no  right  to  vote  (Gellius,  xiii.  8.)  When
a  Senatusconsultum  was  passed,  the  consuls  ordered
it  to  be  written  down  by  a  clerk  in  the  presence  of
some  senators,  especially  of  those  who  had  been
most  interested  in  it  or  most  active  in  bringing  it
about.  (Polyb.  vi.  12;  Cic.  de  Orat.  iii.  2,  ad
Fam.  viii.  8.)  [Senatusconsultum.]  A  meet-
ing of  the  senate  was  not  allowed  to  be  held  be-
fore sunrise  or  to  be  prolonged  after  sunset  (Varro,
ap.  Gdl.  I.  c.)  :  on  extraordinary  emergencies,  how-
ever, this  regulation  was  set  aside.  (Dionys.  iii.
17;  Macrob.  Sat.  i.  4.)

During  the  latter  part  of  the  republic  the  senate
was  degraded  in  various  ways  by  Sulla,  Caesar,
and  others,  and  on  many  occasions  it  was  only  an
instrument  in  the  hands  of  the  men  in  power.  In
this  way  it  became  prepared  for  the  despotic  go-
vernment of  the  emperors,  when  it  was  altogether
the  creature  and  obedient  instrument  of  the  prin-
ceps.  The  emperor  himself  was  generally  also
princeps  senatus  (Dion  Cass.  liii.  1,  Ivii.  8,  Ixxiii.
,5),  and  had  the  power  of  convoking  both  ordinary
and  extraordinar}^  meetings  (Dion  Cass.  liv.  3  ;
Lex  de  imperio  Vespas.),  although  the  consuls,
praetors,  and  tribunes,  continued  to  have  the  same
right.  (Tacit.  Hist.  iv.  39;  Dion  Cass.  Ivi.  47,  lix.
24,  Ix.  16,  &c.)  The  ordinary  meetings  according
to  a  regulation  of  Augustus  were  held  twice  in
every  month.  (Suet.  Atig.  35  ;  Dion  Cass.  Iv.  3.)
A  full  assembly  required  the  presence  of  at  least
400  members,  but  Augustus  himself  afterwards
modified  this  rule  according  to  the  difference  and
importance  of  the  subjects  which  might  be  brought
under  discussion.  (Dion  Cass.  liv.  35,  Iv.  3.)  At
a  later  period  we  find  that  seventy  or  even  fewer
senators  constituted  an  assembly.  (Lamprid.  Al.
Sever.  16.)  The  regular  president  in  the  assembly
was  a  consul,  or  the  emperor  himself,  if  he  was
invested  with  the  consulship.  (Plin.  Epist.  ii.  11,
Panegi/r.7  6.)  At  extraordinary  meetings,  the  person
who  convoked  the  senate  was  at  the  same  time  its
president.  The  emperor,  however,  even  when  he  did
not  preside,  had  by  virtue  of  his  office  of  tribune,
ihe  right  to  introduce  any  subject  for  discussion,
and  to  make  the  senate  decide  upon  it.  (Dion  Cass,
liii.  32 ;  Lex  de  imperio  Vespas.)  At  a  later
period  this  right  was  expressly  and  in  proper  form
conferred  upon  the  emperor  under  the  name  of  J?is
relatiouis,  and  accordingly  as  he  obtained  the  right
to  introduce  three  or  more  subjects,  the  jus  was
called  jus  teriiae^  quartae^  quintae^  <tc.  relationis.
(Vopisc.  Prob.  12  ;  J.  Capitol.  Pertin.  5,  M.  An-
tonin.  6;  Lamprid.  Al.  Sev.  1.)  The  emperor  in-
troduced his  proposals  to  the  senate  in  writing
{oratio,  Ubellus,  epistola  piincipis),  which  was  read
in  the  senate  by  one  of  his  quaestors.  (Dion  Cass,
liv.  25,  Ix.  2;  ^uet.  Aug.  65,  Tit.  6;  Tacit.  Annal.
xvi.  27  ;  Dig.  1.  tit.  1 3.  s.  1.  §§  2  and  4.)  [Ora-
TiONES  Prixcipum.]  The  praetors,  that  they
might  not  bo  inferior  to   the  tribunes,   likewise


SENATUS.


1021


j  received  the  jus  relationis.  (Dion  Cass.  Iv.  3.)  The
mode  of  conducting  the  business,  and  the  order  in
which  the  senators  were  called  upon  to  vote,  re-
mained on  the  whole  the  same  as  under  the  re-
public (Fl'm.  Epist.  viii.  14,  ix.  13);  but  when
magistrates  were  to  be  elected,  the  senate,  as  in
former  times  the  comitia,  gave  their  votes  in  secret
with  little  tablets.  (Plin.  Epist.  iii.  20,  xi.  5.)
The  transactions  of  the  senate  were  from  the  time
of  Caesar  registered  by  clerks  appointed  for  the
purpose,  under  the  superintendence  of  a  senator.
(Suet.  Caes.  20,  Aug.  36  ;  Tacit.  Annal.  v.  4,  &c. ;
Spart.  Hadrian,  3  ;  Dion  Cass.  Ixxviii.  22.)  In
cases  which  required  secrecy  (senatusco7isidtum
taciturn),  the  senators  themselves  officiated  as
clerks.  (Capitol.  Gord.  20.)

As  the  Roman  emperor  concentrated  in  his  own
person  all  the  powers  which  had  formerly  been
possessed  by  the  several  magistrates,  and  without
limitation  or  responsibility,  it  is  clear  that  the
senate  in  its  administrative  powers  was  dependent
upon  the  emperor,  who  might  avail  himself  of  its
counsels  or  not,  just  as  he  pleased.  In  the  reign
of  Tiberius  the  election  of  magistrates  vvas  trans-
ferred from  the  people  to  the  senate  (Veil.  Put.  ii.
124  ;  Tacit.  Annal.  i.  15  ;  Plin.  Epist.  iii.  20,  vi.
19),  which,  however,  was  enjoined  to  take  especial
notice  of  those  candidates  who  were  recommended
to  it  by  the  emperor.  This  regulation  remained,
with  a  short  interruption  in  the  reign  of  Caligula,
down  to  the  third  century,  when  we  find  that  the
princeps  alone  exercised  the  right  of  appointing
magistrates.  (Dig.  48.  tit.  14.  s.  1.)  At  the  de-
mise of  an  emperor  the  senate  had  the  right  to
appoint  his  successor,  in  case  no  one  had  been
nominated  by  the  emperor  himself ;  but  the  senate
had  in  very  rare  cases  an  opportunity  to  exercise
this  right,  as  it  was  usurped  by  the  soldiers.  The
aerarium  at  first  still  continued  nominally  to  be
under  the  control  of  the  senate  (Dion  Cass.  liii.  16,
22),  but  the  emperors  gradually  took  it  under  their
own  exclusive  management  (Dion  Cass.  Ixxi.  33 ;
Vopisc.  Aurel.  9,  12,  20),  and  the  senate  retained
nothing  but  the  administration  of  the  funds  of  the
city  {area  puhlica),  which  were  distinct  both  from
the  aerarium  and  from  the  fiscus  (Vopisc.  Aurel.
20,  45),  and  the  right  of  giving  its  opinion  upon
cases  connected  with  the  fiscal  law.  (Dig.  49.  tit.
14.  s.  15  and  42.)  Its  right  of  coining  money
was  limited  by  Augustus  to  copper  coins,  and
ceased  altogether  in  the  reign  of  Gallienus.  (Eck-
hel,  D.  N.  Proleg.  c.  13.)  Augustus  ordained  that
no  accusations  should  any  longer  be  brought  before
the  comitia  (Dion  Cass.  hi.  40),  and  instead  of
them  he  raised  the  senate  to  a  high  court  of  justice,
upon  which  he  conferred  the  right  of  taking  cog-
nizance of  capital  offences  committed  by  senators
(Dion  Cass.  Iii.  31,  &c.  ;  Suet.  Calig.  2  ;  Tacit.
Annal.  xiii.  44  ;  Capitol.  M.  Antonin.  10),  ot
crimes  against  the  state  and  the  person  of  the  em-
perors (Dion  Cass.  Hi.  15,  17,  22,  Ix.  16,  Ixxvi.
8  ;  Suet.  Atig.  QQ  ;  Tacit,  Annal.  iii.  49,  &c.),  and
of  crimes  committed  by  the  provincial  magistrates
in  the  administration  of  their  provinces..  The
senate  might  also  receive  appeals  from  other  courts
(Suet.  A''<?ro,  17;  Tacit.  ^««a^.  xiv.  28;  Capitol.
M.  Antonin.  10  ;  Vopisc.  Prob.  13),  whereas,  at
least  from  the  time  of  Hadrian,  there  was  no  ap-
peal from  a  sentence  of  the  senate.  (Dion  Cass,
lix.  18  ;  Dig.  49.  tit.  2.  s.  1.  §  2.)  The  princeps
sometimes  referred  cases  which  were  not  contained


102*.


SEN  AT  US.


in  the  above  categories,  or  which  he  might  have
decided  himself,  to  the  senate,  or  requested  its  co-
operation. (Suet.  Claud.  14,  15,  A^ero,  15,  Domit.
8,  &c.)     Respectins  the  provinces  of  the  senate  see

PROVINCIA.

When  Constantinople  was  made  the  second
capital  of  the  empire,  Constantine  instituted  also  a
second  senate  jn  this  city  (Sozomen,  ii.  2  ;  Excerpt,
de  gest.  Const.  30),  upon  which  Julian  conferred  all
the  privileges  of  the  senate  of  Rome.  (Zosim.  iii.
11  ;  Liban.  Orat.  ad  Theodos.  ii.  p.  383,  ed.
Morell.)  Both  these  senates  were  still  sometimes
consulted  by  the  emperors  in  an  oratio  upon  mat-
ters of  legislation  (Cod.  Theod.  6.  tit.  2.  s.  14  ;
Symmach.  Epist.  x.  2.  28  ;  Cod.  1.  tit.  14.  s.  3)  :
the  senate  of  Constantinople  retained  its  share  in
legislation  down  to  the  ninth  century.  (Nov.  Leon.
78.)  Each  senate  also  continued  to  be  a  high
court  of  justice  to  which  the  emperor  referred  im-
portant criminal  cases.  (Amm.  Marc,  xxviii.  1.
23;  Symmach.  Epist.  iv.  5;  Zosim.  v.  11,  38.)
Capital  offences  committed  by  senators,  however,
no  longer  came  under  their  jurisdiction,  but  either
under  that  of  the  governors  of  provinces,  or  of
the  prefects  of  the  two  cities.  (Walter,  p.  367,
&c.)  Civil  cases  of  senators  likewise  belonged  to
the  forum  of  the  praefectus  urbi.  (Cod.  3.  tit.  24.
s.  3  ;  Symmach.  Epist.  x.  6Q.)  The  senatorial
dignity  was  now  obtained  by  descent  (Cod.  Theod.
6.  tit.  2.  s.  2  ;  12,  tit.  1.  s.  58  ;  Cassiodor.  Variar.
iii.  6),  and  by  having  held  certain  offices  at  the
court,  or  it  was  granted  as  an  especial  favour  by
the  emperor  on  the  proposal  of  the  senate.  (Cod.
Theod.  I.e.;  Symmach.  Epist.  x.  25.118.)  To
be  made  a  senator  was  indeed  one  of  the  greatest
honours  that  could  be  conferred,  and  was  more
valued  than  in  the  times  of  the  republic  ;  but  its
burdens  were  very  heavy,  for  not  only  had  the  sena-
tors to  give  public  games  (Symmach.  Epist.  x.  25.
28),  to  make  magnificent  presents  to  the  emperors
(Cod.  Theod.  6.  tit.  2.  s.  5),  and  in  times  of  need
extraordinary  donations  to  the  people  (Zosim.  v.
41  ;  SjTumach.  Ep.  vi.  14,26,  vii.  68),  but  in  ad-
dition they  had  to  pay  a  peculiar  tax  upon  their
landed  property,  which  was  called  /oUis  or  gleba.
(Zosim.  ii.  32 ;  Cod.  Theod.  6.  tit.  2  ;  Symmach.
Epist.  iv.  61.)  A  senator  who  had  no  landed  pro-
perty was  taxed  at  two  folles.  (Cod.  Theod.  6.
tit.  2.  s.  2,  6.  tit.  4.  s.  21.)  It  was  therefore  only
the  wealthiest  persons  of  the  empire,  no  matter  to
what  part  of  it  they  belonged,  that  could  aspire
to  the  dignity  of  senator.  A  list  of  them,  together
with  an  account  of  their  property,  was  laid  before
the  emperor  every  three  months  by  the  prefect  of
the  city.  (Symmach.  x.  66,  &c.)  Down  to  the
time  of  Justinian  the  consuls  were  the  presidents
of  the  senate,  but  from  this  time  the  praefectus
urbi  always  presided.  (Cod.  Theod.  6.  tit.  6.  s.  1 ;
Nov.  Instit.  62.)

It  now  remains  to  mention  some  of  the  distinc-
tions and  privileges  enjoyed  by  Roman  senators :
1.  The  tunica  with  a  broad  purple  stripe  (latus
davits)  in  front,  which  was  woven  in  it,  and  not  as
is  commonly  believed  sewed  upon  it.  (Acron.  ad
Horat.  Sat.  L  5.  35  ;  compare  i.  6.  28  ;  Quinetil.
xi.  3.)  2.  A  kind  of  short  boot  with  the  letter  C
on  the  front  of  the  foot.  (Juv.  vii.  192  ;  Cic.  Phil.
xiii.  13.)  This  C  is  generally  supposed  to  mean
centum^  and  to  refer  to  the  original  number  of  1 00
(centum)  senators.  3.  The  right  of  sitting  in  the
orchestra  in  the  theatres  and  amphitheatres.     This


SENATUSCONSULTUM.

distinction  was  first  procured  for  the  senators  by
Scipio  Africanus  Major,  194  B.C.  (Liv.  xxxiv.  54  ;
Cic.  pro  Cluent.  47.)  The  same  honour  was  granted
to  the  senators  in  the  reign  of  Claudius  at  the  games
in  the  circus.  (Suet.  Claud.  21  ;  Dion  Cass.  Ix.  7.)
4.  On  a  certain  day  in  the  year  a  sacrifice  v/as  of-
fered to  Jupiter  in  the  capitol,  and  on  this  occasion
the  senators  alone  had  a  feast  in  the  capitol  ;  the
right  was  called  the  jus  publice  epulandi.  (Gellius,
xii.  8  ;  Suet.  Aug.  35.)  5.  The  jus  liberae  lega^
tionis.     [Ij'EG AT v»,  sub finem.^  [L.S.J

SENATUSCONSULTUM.  In  his  enumera-
tion of  the  formal  parts  of  the  Jus  Civile,  Cicero  in-
cludes Senatusconsulta.  (7bp.  5.)  Numerous  Leges
properly  so  called  were  enacted  in  the  reign  of
Augustus,  and  Leges,  properly  so  called,  were
made  even  after  his  time.  [Lex.]  It  wa^
under  Augustus  however  that  the  Senatuscon-
sulta began  to  take  the  place  of  Leges  properly
so  called,  a  change  which  is  also  indicated  by  the
fact  that  until  his  time  the  Senatusconsulta  were
not  designated  either  by  the  names  of  the  Con-
suls or  by  any  other  personal  name,  so  far  as  wc
have  evidence.  But  from  that  time  we  find  the
Senatusconsulta  designated  either  by  the  name  of
the  Consuls,  as  Apronianum,  Silanianum,  or  from
the  name  of  the  Caesar,  as  Claudianum,  Neronia-
num  ;  or  they  are  designated  as  made  "  auctore  "
or  "  ex  auctoritate  Hadriani,"  &c.,  or  "  ad  ora-
tionem  Hadriani,"  &c.  The  name  of  the  Senatus-
con^ultum  Macedonianum  is  an  exception,  as  will
afterwards  appear.

Many    Senatusconsulta    were    enacted    in    the
Republican  period,  and  some  of  them  were  laws  in
the  proper  sense  of  the  term,  though  some  modern
writers  have  denied  this  position.     But  the  opi-
nion of  those   who  deny  the   legislative  power  of
the  Senate  during   the   Republican  period  is  op-
posed by  facts.     An  attempt  has  sometimes  been
made  to  support  it  by  a  passage  of  Tacitus  ("  turn
primum  e  campo  Comitia  ad  patres  translata  sunt,"
Ann.  i.  15),  a  passage   which  only  refers  to  the
elections.     It  is  difficult  however  to  determine  how
far  the  legislative  power  of  the  Senate  extended,
A    recent    writer  (Walter,  Geschichte   des    Rom,
Rechts.,  437,  1st  ed.)  observes  "  that  the  Senatus-
consulta were  an  important  source  of  law  for  mat-
ters  which    concerned   administration,  the   main-
tenance of  Religion,  the  suspension  or  repeal  of
laws  in   the  case  of  urgent  public  necessity,  the
rights  of  the  Aerarium   and   the   Publicani,  the
treatment   of  the    Italians   and  the  Provincials,"
(Liv.  xxvi.  34,  xxxix.  3,  xli.  9.)     The  following,
are  instances  of  Senatusconsulta  under  the  Re-f
public :    a   Senatusconsultum   "  ne   quis  in   urb^J
sepeliretur  ;  "  the  Senatusconsultum  de  Bacchana-f
libus   hereafter   more  particularly   mentioned  ;   a
Senatusconsultum  de  Libertinorum  tribu  (Liv.  xlv.
15)  ;  a  Senatusconsultum  de  Macedonia  (Liv.  xlv,
18);  a  Senatusconsultum  de  Sumtibus  at  the  Mega-
lenses  ludi    (Gell.   ii.  24)  ;    a  Senatusconsultum
"  ne  homo  immolaretur"  (Plin.  H.  N.xxx.  1)  ;  a
Senatusconsultum    de    provinciis    Quacstoriis ;    a
Senatusconsultum  made   M.   Tullio   Cicerone  re-
ferente  to  the  effect,  "  ut  legationum   liberarum  f
tempus  annuura  esset ; "  various  Senatusconsulta  de
coUegiis  dissolvendis  ;   an  old   Senatusconsultum,
"  Senatusconsultum  vetus  ne  liceret  Africanas  (bes-
tias)  in  Italiam  advehere,"  which  was  so  far  re-
pealed by  a  Plebiscitum  proposed  by  Cn,  Aufidins,
Tribunus  Plebis,  that  the  importation  for  the  pur-


SENATUSCONSULTUM.

pose  of  the  Circenses  was  made  legal  (Plin.  H.  N.
viii.  17)  ;  an  old  Senatusconsultura  by  which
"  quaestio  {servorum)  in  caput  domini  prohibeba-
tiir"  (Tacit.  Ann.  ii.  30),  a  rule  of  law  which
Cicero  (pro  Milon.  22)  refers  to  Mores  as  its
foundation.  From  these  instances  of  Senatuscon-
sulta  made  in  the  Republican  period  we  may  col-
lect in  a  general  way  the  kind  of  matters  to  which
this  form  of  legislation  applied.  The  constitution
of  the  Senate  was  such  as  to  gradually  bring
within  the  sphere  of  its  legislation  all  matters  that
pertained  to  religion,  police,  administration,  pro-
vincial matters,  and  all  foreign  relations.  And  it
seems  that  the  power  of  the  Senate  had  so  far  in-
creased at  the  time  of  the  accession  of  Augustus
that  it  was  no  great  change  to  make  it  the  only
legislating  body.  Pomponius  (Dig.  1.  tit.  2.  s.  2),
though  his  historical  evidence  must  be  received
with  caution,  states  the  matter  in  a  way  which
is  generally  consistent  with  what  we  otherwise
know  of  the  progress  of  Senatorial  legislation :
"  As  the  plebs  Ibund  it  difficult  to  assemble,  &c.,
it  was  a  matter  of  necessity  that  the  administra-
tion of  the  State  came  to  the  Senate:  thus  the
Senate  began  to  act,  and  whatever  the  Senate  had
determined  {co7idituisset)  was  observed  (observa-
batur),  and  a  law  so  made  is  called  Senatuscon-
sultum."

A  Senatusconsultmn  was  so  named  because  the
Cansul  (qui  retulit)  was  said  "  Senatum  consulere  :  "
*'  Marcivs  L.  F.  S.  Postvmivs  L.  F.  Cos  Senatvm
Consolvervnt."  (Senatusconsultum  de  Bacchana-
libus.)  In  the  Senatusconsultum  De  Philosophis  et
De  Rhetoribus  (Gell.  xv.  11),  the  Praetor  "  con-
suluit."  In  the  enacting  part  of  a  Lex  the  Populus
was  said  "jubere,"  and  in  a  Plebiscitum  "scire  :  "
in  a  Senatusconsultum  the  Senate  was  said  "  cen-
sere  : "  "  De  Bacchanalibvs,  &e.,  ita  exdeicendvm
censvere."  (S.  C.  de  Bacch.)  In  the  Senatuscon-
sulta  of  the  time  of  Augustus  cited  by  Frontinus
(de  Aquaeductihus  Romae,  ii.),  the  phrase  which
follows  "  censuere  "  is  sometimes  "  placere  huic
ordini."  In  Tacitus  the  verb  "  censere  "  is  also
applied  to  the  person  who  made  the  motion  for  a
Senatusconsultum.  (A7m.  iv.  20.)  Sometimes
the  term  "  arbitrari "  is  used  (Dig.  IG.  tit.  I.  s.  2);
and  Gains  (i.  4),  writing  under  the  Antonines  ap-
plies to  the  Senatus  the  terras  which  originally
denoted  the  legislative  power  of  the  Populus :
"  Senatus  jubet  atque  constituit ;  idque  legis  vicem
optinet,  quamvis  luit  quaesitum."  "  Habere  sena-
tum "  is  to  hold  a  meeting  of  the  senate.  When
Cn.  Pompeius  was  elected  consul  for  the  first  time,
his  friend  M.  Varro  wrote  for  his  use  a  treatise
"  de  Senatu  habendo  consulendoque."  A  Senatus-
consultum made  before  the  rising  or  after  the  set-
ting of  the  sun  was  not  valid.     (Gellius,  xiv.  7.)

The  mode  in  which  the  legislation  of  the  Senate
was  conducted  in  the  Imperial  period  is  explained
iu  the  article  Orationes  Principum.

Certain  forms  were  observed  in  drawing  up  a
Senatusconsultum,  of  which  there  is  an  example  in
Cicero  (ad  Fain.  viii.  8):  "  S.  C.  Auctoritates
(for  this  is  the  right  reading)  Pridie.  Kal.  Octob.
in  Aede  ApoUinis,  scribendo  adfuerunt  L.  Domi-
tius  Cn.  Filius  Ahenobarbus,  &c.  Quod  M.  Marcel-
lus  Consul  V.  F.  {verba  fecit)  de  pro  v.  Cons.  D.  E.
R.  I.  C.  {de  ea  re  ita  censuerunt  Uti,,  <&c.)."  The  pre-
amble of  the  Senatusconsultum  de  Bacchanalibus
IS  similar,  but  the  names  of  the  consuls  come  at  the
beginning  and  the  word  is  "  consolvervnt :  "  the


SENATUSCONSULTUM.  1023
date  and  place  are  also  given  ;  and  the  names  of
those  qui  scribendo  adfuerunt  (SC.  ARF.  in  the
Inscription).  The  names  of  the  persons  who  were
Avitnesses  to  the  drawing  up  of  the  Senatuscon-
sultum were  called  the  "  auctoritates,"  and  these
auctoritates  were  cited  as  evidence  of  the  fact  of
the  persons  named  in  them  having  been  present  at
the  drawing  up  of  the  S.  C.  ("  id  quod  in  aucto-
ritatibus  praescriptis  extat,"  Cic,  de  Or.  iii.  2)  ;
from  which  passage,  and  from  another  (Cic.  ad
Fam.  V.  2  ;  "  illud  S.  C.  ea  praescriptione  est ")
in  which  Cicero  refers  to  his  name  being  found
among  the  auctoritates  of  a  S.  C.  as  a  proof  of
his  friendship  to  the  person  Avhom  the  S.  C.  con-
cerned, it  is  certain  that  "  praescribo "  in  its
various  forms  is  the  proper  reading  in  these  Sena-
tusconsulta.  (Compare  the  similar  use  of  Prae-
scriptio  in  Roman  Pleadings  [Praescriptio].)
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  certain  persons  were
required  to  be  present  "  scribendo,"  but  others
might  assist  if  they  chose,  and  a  person  in  this  way
might  testify  his  regard  for  another  on  behalf  of
whom  or  with  reference  to  whom  the  S.  C.  was
made.  ("  Cato  autera  et  scribendo  adfuit,"  &c.
Cic.  ad  Att.  vii.  1.)  Besides  the  phrase  "  scri-
bendo adesse,"  there  are  "  esse  ad  scribendum  "
(Cic.  ad  Alt.  i.  19),  and  "  poni  ad  scribendum  "
(as  to  which  see  the  curious  passage  in  Cicero,  ad
Fam.  ix.  15).  When  a  S.  C.  was  made  on  the
motion  of  a  person,  it  was  said  to  be  made  "  in
sententiam  ejus."  If  the  S.  C  was  carried,  it  was
written  on  tablets  and  placed  in  the  Aerarium  :  the
S.  C.  de  Bacchanalibus  provides  that  it  shall  be
cut  on  a  bronze  tablet,  but  this  was  for  the  pur-
pose of  its  being  put  up  in  a  public  place  where  it
could  be  read  {vbei  facilivmed  gnoscier  potisit).

The  Senatusconsulta  were  originally  intrusted
to  the  care  of  the  tribunes  and  the  aediles,  but  in
the  time  of  Augustus  the  quaestors  had  the  care  of
them.  (Dion  Cass.  Iv.  3G,  and  the  note  of  Rei-
marus.)  Under  the  later  emperors  the  Senatus-
consulta "  quae  ad  principes  pertinebant,"  were
preserved  in  "  libri  elephantini."  (Vopiscus,
Tacitus,  c.  8.)

A  measure  which  was  proposed  as  a  Senatuscon-
sultum might  be  stopped  by  the  Intercessio  of  the
Tribunes,  and  provision  Avas  sometimes  made  for
further  proceeding  in  such  case  :  "  si  quis  huic
senatusconsulto  intercesserit  senatui  placere  aucto-
ritatem  perscribi  (praescribi)  et  de  ea  re  ad  sena-
tum populumque  referri."  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  viii.  8.)
This  explains  one  meaning  of  Senatus  auctoritas,
which  is  a  Senatusconsultum  which  has  been  pro-
posed and  not  carried,  and  of  which  a  record  was
kept  with  the  '•  auctoritates  eorum  qui  scribendo
adfuerunt."  In  one  passage  Cicero  calls  a  S.  C.
which  had  failed  owing  to  an  Intercessio,  an  Auc-
toritas {ad  Fam.  i.  7).  One  meaning  of  Auctoritas
in  fact  is  a  S.  C.  proposed,  but  not  yet  carried  ;
and  this  agrees  with  Livy  (iv.  57)  :  ''  Si  quis  in-
tercedat  Sto,  auctoritate  se  fore  contentum."  If
Senatus  auctoritas  occasionally  appears  to  be  used
as  equivalent  to  Senatusconsultum,  it  is  an  im-
proper use  of  the  word,  but  one  which  presents  no
difficulty  if  we  consider  that  the  names  which  de-
note a  thing  in  its  two  stages  are  apt  to  be  con-
founded in  popular  language,  as  with  us  the  words
Bill  and  Act.  In  its  general  and  original  sense
Senatus  Auctoritas  is  any  measure  to  which  a
majority  of  the  Senate  has  assented.  (See  the
note  of  P.  Manutius  on  Cic.  ad  Fam.  v.  2.)


1024


SENATUSCONSULTUM.


The  proper  enacting  word  in  the  Senatusconsulta
is  "  censeo,"  but  the  word  "  decemo  "  was  also
used  in  ordinary  language  to  express  the  enacting
of  a  Senatusconsultum.  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  viii,  8  ;  Sena-
his  dccrevit  ut  <L'c.  ad  Att.  i.  19.)  But  a  Senatus-
consultum, which  was  a  law  in  the  proper  sense  of
the  term,  is  not  called  a  Decretum,  which  was  a
rule  made  by  the  Senate  as  to  some  matter  which
was  strictly  within  its  competence.  The  words
Decretum  and  Senatusconsultum  are  often  used
indiscriminately  and  with  little  precision.  (Gell.  ii.
24.)  (See  Aelius  Gallus,  apud  Festum,  s.  v.  Senatus
Decretum,  and  Decretum.)

The  forms  of  the  Senatusconsulta  are  the  best
evidence  of  their  character.  The  following  are
some  of  the  principal  Senatusconsulta  which  are
preserved :  the  Senatusconsultum  de  Tiburtibus,
printed  by  Gruter  and  others,  which  is  "  un-
doubtedly the  oldest  of  all  Roman  documents  "
(Niebuhr,  Rom.  Hist.  vol.  iii.  p.  264,  note  6Q)  ;
the  Senatusconsultum  de  Bacchanalibus  ;  the
Senatusconsultum  in  the  Letter  of  Cicero  already
referred  to  ;  Cic.  Philipp.  v.  1 3  ;  Gellius,  xv.  1 1  ;
the  six  Senatusconsulta  about  the  Roman  Aque-
ducts in  the  second  book  of  Frontinus  de  Aquae -
ductibus  ;  the  Senatusconsultum  about  the  Aphro-
disienses  (Tacit.  Ann.  iii.  62  ;  Tacit.  Oberlin.  ii.
t!35)  ;  the  oration  of  Claudius  (Tacit.  Ann.  xi.  24;
Tacit.  Oberlin.  ii.  806)  ;  the  various  Senatuscon-
sulta preserved  in  the  Digest,  which  are  mentioned
in  a  subsequent  part  of  this  article.  See  also  the
Senatusconsultum  printed  in  Sigonius,  "  De  Antique
Jure  Provinciarum,"  i.  288  ;  and  the  Sctum  by
which  the  name  Augustus  was  given  to  the  month
Sextilis.  (Macrob.  Saturnal.  i.  12.)

The  following  list  of  Senatusconsulta  contains
perhaps  all  of  them  which  are  distinguished  by
the  name  of  a  consul  or  other  distinctive  name.
Numerous  Senatusconsulta  under  the  Empire  are
referred  to  in  the  Latin  writers,  for  which  we  find
no  distinctive  name,  though  it  is  probable  that  all
of  them  had  a  title  like  the  Leges,  but  many  of
them  being  of  little  importance  were  not  much  re-
ferred to  or  cited,  and  thus  their  names  were  for-
gotten. Tacitus,  for  instance,  often  speaks  of  S.  C.
without  giving  their  names,  and  in  some  cases  we
are  able  to  affix  the  titles  from  other  authorities.
Many  of  the  Imperial  Senatusconsulta  were  merely
amendments  of  Leges  ;  but  they  were  laws  in  the
proper  sense  of  the  word.

Some  of  the  Senatusconsulta  of  the  Republican
period  were  laws,  as  already  observed,  but  others
were  only  determinations  of  the  Senate,  which
became  Leges  by  being  carried  in  the  comitia.
Such  S.  C.  were  really  only  auctoritates.  One
instance  of  this  kind  occurred  on  the  occasion  of
the  trial  of  Clodius  for  violating  the  mysteries  of
the  Bona  Dea.  A  rogatio  on  the  subject  of  the
trial  was  proposed  to  the  Comitia  ex  Senatuscon-
Bulto  (Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  14)  ;  which  is  also  spoken  of
as  the  Auctoritas  of  the  Senate,  and  as  "  quod  ab
Senatu  Constitutum  "  (the  words  of  Gaius,  i.  4).

Aprom^num,  probably  enacted  in  the  time  of
Hadrian,  empowered  all  Civitates  which  were
within  the  Roman  Imperium  to  take  a  fideicom-
missa  hereditas.  This  Senatusconsultum  is  cited
by  Ulpian  {Frag.  tit.  22)  without  the  name,  but
it  appears  from  comparing  Ulpian  with  the  Digest
<36.  tit.  1.  s.  26)  to  be  the  Senatusconsultum
Apronianum.  A  Senatusconsultum  also  allowed
Civitates  or  Municipia,  which  were  legally  con-


SENATUSCONSULTUM.

sidered  as  Universitates,  to  be  appointed  heredeS
by  their  liberti  or  libertae.  Ulpian  speaks  of  this
Senatusconsultum  in  the  passage  referred  to,  im-
mediately before  he  speaks  of  that  Senatuscon-
sultum which  we  know  to  be  the  Apronianum,
and  it  appears  probable  that  the  two  Senatus-
consulta were  the  same,  for  their  objects  were
similar  and  they  are  mentioned  together  without
any  indication  of  their  being  different.  This  last
mentioned  provision  is  also  mentioned  in  the
Digest  (38.  tit.  3)  as  being  contained  in  a  Sena-
tusconsultum which  was  posterior  to  the  Trebelli-
anum,  but  the  name  is  not  given  in  the  Digest.
Under  this  provision  a  Municipium  could  obtain
the  Bonorum  Possessio.  Bachius  {Historia  Juris'
prudentiae  Romanae)  assigns  this  Senatusconsultum
to  the  reign  of  Trajan.  But  it  appears  to  belong
to  the  time  of  Hadrian,  and  to  be  the  same  S.  C.
which  allowed  Civitates  to  take  a  legacy.  (Ulp.
Frag.  tit.  24.)

Articuleianum  gave  the  Praeses  of  a  Province
jurisdiction  in  the  case  of  fideicommissa  libertas,
even  when  the  heres  did  not  belong  to  the  Pro-
vince. The  heres  could  be  compelled  to  give  the
libertas  which  was  the  subject  of  the  fideicommis-
sum.  (Manumissio  ;  Dig.  40.  tit.  5.  s.  44,  51.)
This  Senatusconsultum  was  enacted  A.  D.  101,  in
which  year  Sex.  Articuleius  Paetus  was  consul.

De  Bacchanalibus.  This  Senatusconsultum.
which  is  sometimes  called  Marcianum,  was  passed
in  the  year  B.  c.  186.  The  terms  of  it  are  stated
generally  by  Livy  (xxxix.  18),  and  may  be  com-
pared with  the  original  Senatusconsultum  which  is
printed  in  the  edition  of  Livy  by  Drakenborch,  and
in  that  by  J.  Clericus,  Amsterdam,  1710.  There
is  a  dissertation  on  this  Senatusconsultum  by
Bynkershoek  {De  Cultu  Religionis  Peregrinae  apud
Veteres  Romarios,  Op.  i.  412),  who  has  printed  the
Senatusconsultum  and  commented  upon  it  at  some
length.  The  provisions  of  this  Senatusconsultum
are  stated  generally  under  Dionysia,  p.  414,  b.
There  is  no  ancient  authority,  as  it  appears,  for  the
name  Marcianum,  which  has  been  given  to  it  from
the  name  of  one  of  the  Consuls  who  proposed  it,
and  in  accordance  with  the  usual  titles  of  S.  C.  in
the  Imperial  period.  This  Sctum  was  found  in
A.  D.  1640,  in  a  village  in  Calabria,  and  is  said  to
be  now  at  Vienna,  f  Senatusconsidti  De  Bac-
chanalibus, &c.  Explicatio,  auctore  Matthaeo  Ae-
gyptio,  Neapol.  1729.)

Calvitianum.  (Ulpian, Fm(7.  tit.  xvi.  ;  Julia
ET  Papia  Poppaea  Lex,  p.  692,  b.)

Claudianum  passed  in  the  time  of  the  Emperor
Claudius,  reduced  a  free  woman  to  the  condition  of
a  slave  {ancilla)  if  she  cohabited  with  the  slave  of
another  person,  fifter  the  master  had  given  her  no-
tice that  he  would  not  permit  it.  But  if  a  woman,
who  was  a  Roman  citizen,  cohabited  with  a  slave
with  the  consent  of  the  slave's  master,  she  might
by  agreement  with  the  master  remain  free  and  yet
any  child  bom  from  this  cohabitation  would  be  a
slave  ;  for  the  Senatusconsultum  made  valid  any
agreement  between  the  free  woman  and  the  slave's
master,  and  by  such  agreement  the  woman  was  re-
lieved from  the  penalty  of  the  Senatusconsultum.
But  Hadrian,  being  moved  thereto  by  a  considera-
tion of  the  hardship  of  the  case  and  the  incongruity
of  this  rule  of  law  {i7ielegaiitia  juris),  restored  the
old  rule  of  the  Jus  Gentium,  according  to  which
the  woman  continuing  free  was  the  mother  of  a
free  child.


SENATUSCONSULTUM.

A  difficulty  arose  on  the  interpretation  of  this
Senatusconsultum  for  which  the  words  of  the  law-
had  not  provided.  If  a  woman,  who  was  a  Roman
citizen,  was  with  child,  and  became  an  ancilla
purs\iant  to  the  Senatusconsultum  in  consequence
of  cohabiting  with  a  slave  contrary  to  the  master's
wish,  the  condition  of  the  child  was  a  disputed
matter :  some  contended  that  if  the  woman  had
become  pregnant  in  a  legal  marriage,  the  child  was
a  Roman  citizen,  but  if  she  had  become  pregnant
by  illicit  cohabitation,  the  child  was  the  property
of  the  person  who  had  become  the  master  of  the
mother.     [Servus  (Roman).]

There  is  an  apparent  ambiguity  in  a  passage  of
Gaius  (i.  86)  in  which  he  says,  "  but  that  rule
of  the  same  Lex  is  still  in  force,  by  which  the  issue
of  a  free  woinan  and  another  man's  slave  is  a  slave,
if  the  mother  knew  that  the  man  with  whom  she
cohabited,  was  a  slave."  The  Lex  of  which  he
speaks,  is  the  Lex  Aelia  Sentia.  The  exception
in  the  Senatusconsultum  of  Claudius  applied  to  the
case  of  a  compact  between  a  free  woman  and  the
master  of  the  slave,  which  compact  implies  that
the  woman  must  know  the  condition  of  the  slave,
and  therefore  according  to  the  terms  of  the  Lex
the  issue  would  be  slaves.  But  Gaius  says  (i.  84)
that  under  this  Senatusconsultum  the  woman  might
by  agreement  continue  free  and  yet  give  birth  to  a
slave  ;  for  the  Senatusconsultum  gave  validity  to
the  compact  between  the  woman  and  the  master  of
the  slave.  At  first  sight  it  appears  as  if  the
Senatusconsultum  produced  exactly  the  same  eifect
as  the  Lex  with  respect  to  the  condition  of  the
child.  But  this  is  explained  by  referring  to  the
chief  provision  of  the  Senatusconsultum,  which
was  that  cohabitation  with  a  slave  "  invito  et  de-
nuntiante  domino  "  reduced  the  woman  to  a  servile
condition,  and  it  was  a  legal  consequence  of  this
change  of  condition  that  the  issue  of  her  cohabita-
tion must  be  a  slave.  The  Lex  Aelia  Sentia  had
already  declared  the  condition  of  children  born  of
the  union  of  a  free  woman  and  a  slave  to  be  ser-
vile. The  Seuiitusconsultum  added  to  the  penalty
of  the  Lex  by  making  the  mother  a  slave  also,  un-
less she  cohabited  with  the  consent  of  the  master,
and  thus  resulted  that  "  inelegantia  juris "  by
which  a  free  mother  could  escape  the  penalty  of
the  Senatusconsultum  by  her  agreement  and  yet
her  child  must  be  a  slave  pursuant  to  the  Lex.
Hadrian  removed  this  inelegantia  by  declaring  that
if  the  mother  notwithstanding  the  cohabitation  es-
caped from  the  penalties  of- the  Senatusconsultum
by  virtue  of  her  compact,  the  child  also  should
have  the  benefit  of  the  agreement.  The  Senatus-
consultum only  reduced  the  cohabiting  woman  to
a  servile  state  when  she  cohabited  with  a  man's
slave  "  invito  et  denuntiante  domino :  "  if  she  co-
habited with  him,  knowing  him  to  be  a  slave,
without  the  knowledge  of  the  master,  there  could
be  no  denuntiatio,  and  this  case,  it  appears,  was
not  affected  by  the  Senatusconsultum,  for  Gaius
observes,  as  above  stated  (i.  86),  that  the  Lex  had
still  effect  and  the  offspring  of  such  cohabittition
was  a  slave.  The  fact  of  this  clause  of  the  Lex
remaining  in  force  after  the  enacting  of  the  Sena-
tusconsultum, appears  to  be  an  instance  of  the
strict  interpretation  which  the  Roman  Jurists  ap-
plied to  positive  enactments  ;  for  the  Senatuscon-
sultum of  Hadrian  as  stated  by  Gaius  only  applied
j  to  the  case  of  a  contract  between  the  master's
slave  and  the  woman,  and  therefore  its  terms  did


SENATUSCONSULTUM.


1025


not  comprehend  a  case  of  cohabitation  when  there
was  no  compact.  Besides  this  if  a  free  woman
cohabited  Avith  a  man's  slave  either  without  the
knowledge  of  the  master  or  with  his  knowledge,
but  without  the  "  denuntiatio,"  it  seems  that  this
was  considered  as  if  the  woman  simply  indulged  iri
promiscuous  intercourse  {vulgo  concfpit\  and  the
mother  being  free,  the  child  also  was  free  by  the
Jus  Gentium  till  the  Lex  attempted  to  restrain
such  intercourse  by  working  on  the  parental  affec-
tions of  the  mother,  and  the  Senatusconsultum  by
a  direct  penalty  on  herself.  There  was  a  "juris
inelegantia "  in  a  free  woman  giving  birth  to  a
slave,  but  this  was  not  regarded  by  Hadrian,  who
was  struck  by  the  inelegantia  of  a  woman  by  com-
pact being  able  to  evade  the  penalty  of  the  Sena-
tusconsultum while  her  child  was  still  subject  to
the  penalty  of  the  Lex.

This  Senatusconsultum  was  passed  a.  d.  52,  and
is  mentioned  by  Tacitus,  but  the  terms  in  which
he  expresses  himself  do  not  contain  the  trae  mean-
ing ot  the  Senatusconsultum,  and  in  one  respect,
"  sin  consensisset  dominus,  pro  libertis  haberentur,"
they  differ  materially  from  the  text  of  Gaius,  unless
the  reading  "libertis"  should  be  " liberis."  (See
the  notes  onTacitus,^«w.xii.53,ed.  Oberlin.)  Itap-
pears  however  fi-om  a  passage  in  Paulus  (S.  R.  iv.
tit.  10),  that  a  woman,  in  some  cases  which  are  not
mentioned  by  him,  was  reduced  to  the  condition  of
a  liberta  by  the  Senatusconsultum  ;  a  circumstance
which  confirms  the  accuracy  of  the  text  of  Tacitus,
but  also  shows  how  very  imperfectly  he  has  stated
the  Senatusconsultum.  Suetonius  (Vesp.  11)  at-
tributes the  Senatusconsultum  to  the  reign  of  Ves-
pasian, and  expresses  its  effect  in  terms  still  more
general  and  incorrect  than  those  of  Tacitus.  Such
instances  show  how  little  we  can  rely  on  the
Roman  historians  for  exact  information  as  to
legislation.

It  appears  from  Paulus  that  the  provisions  of
this  Senatusconsultum  are  stated  very  imperfectly
even  by  Gaius,  and  that  they  applied  to  a  great
number  of  cases  of  cohabitation  between  free  wo-
men, whether  Ingenuae  or  Libertinae,  and  slaves.

This  Senatusconsultum  was  entirely  repealed  by
a  Constitution  of  Justinian.  Some  writers  refer
the  words  "ea  lege"  (Gaius,  i.  85)  to  the  Senatus-
consultum Claudianum,  and  they  must  consequently
refer  the  words  "  ejusdem  legis"  (Gaius,  i.  86)  also
to  this  Senatusconsultum  ;  but  the  word  "  lex  "  in
neither  case  appears  to  refer  to  the  Senatusconsul-
tum, but  to  the  Lex  Aelia  Sentia.

( Gaius,  i.  84,  86,  91,  160  ;  Ulp.  Frag.  tit.  xi.  ;
Cod.  7.  tit.  24  ;  Paulus,  S.  R.  ii.  tit.  21.)

There  were  several  other  Senatusconsulta  Clau-
diana,  of  which  there  is  a  short  notice  in  Jo.  Au-
gusti  Bachii  Historia  .Turisprudentiae  Romanae.

Dasumianum,  passed  in  the  reign  of  Trajan,
related  to  Fideicommissa  libertas.  (Dig.  40.  tit  5.
s.  51.)  See  Rudorff,  Zeitschrift^&LC.  vol.  xii.  p.  307,
Das  Testament  des  Dasumius.

Hadriani  Senatusconsulta.  Numerous  se-
natusconsulta were  passed  in  the  reign  of  Hadrian,
but  there  does  not  appear  to  be  any  which  is  called
Hadrianum.  Many  Senatusconsulta  of  this  reign
are  referred  to  by  Gains  as  "  Senatusconsulta  auc-
tore  Hadriano  facta,"  i.  47,  &c.,  of  which  there  is
a  list  in  the  Index  to  Gaius.  The  Senatusconsulta
made  in  the  reign  of  Hadrian  are  enumerated  by
Bachius,  and  some  of  them  are  noticed  here  under
their  proper  designations.
3  V


1026


SENATUSCONSULTUM.


JuNCiANUM,  passed  in  the  reign  of  Commodus,
related  to  Fideicommissa  Libertas.  (Dig.  40.  tit.  5.
8.  28,  51.)  This  Senatusconsultum  is  preserved  in
one  of  the  passages  of  the  Digest  referred  to.

JuNiANUM,  passed  in  the  time  of  Domitian,  in
ihe  tenth  consulship  of  Domitian,  and  in  the  con-
sulship of  Ap.  Junius  Sabinus,  A.  d.  84,  had  for  its
object  to  prevent  collusion  between  a  master  and
his  slave,  by  which  the  slave  should  be  made  to
appear  to  be  as  a  free  man.  The  person  who  dis-
covered the  collusion  obtained  the  slave  as  his  pro-
perty.   (Dig.  40.  tit.  16.)

JuvENTiANUM  is  the  name  given  by  modern
jurists  to  the  Senatusconsultum,  which  is  preserved
in  the  Digest  (5.  tit.  3.  s.  20.  §  6).  The  Senatus-
consultum is  placed  under  the  title  "  De  Hereditatis
Petitione."

Largianum,  passed  in  the  first  year  of  the  Em-
peror Claudius,  a.  d.  42,  gave  to  the  children  of  a
Manumissor,  if  they  were  not  exheredated  by  name,
a  right  to  the  bona  of  Latini  in  preference  to  Ex-
tranei  heredes.  (Patronus  ;  Gains,  iii.  63 — 71  ;
Inst.  3.  tit.  7.  s.  4  ;  Cod.  7.  tit.  6.)

LiBONiANUM,  passed  in  the  reign  of  Tiberius,  in
the  consulship  of  T.  Statilius  Taurus  and  L.  Scribo-
nius  Libo,  a.  d.  1 6,  contained  various  provisions,
one  of  which  was  to  the  effect  that  if  a  man  wrote
a  will  for  another,  every  thing  which  he  wrote  in
his  own  favour  was  void  :  accordingly  he  could  not
make  himself  a  tutor  (Dig.  26.  tit,  2.  s.  29),  nor
heres  or  legatarius  (Dig.  34.  tit.  8).  This  Senatus-
consultum contained  other  provisions,  and  it  ap-
pears to  have  been  an  extension  of  the  Lex  Cornelia
de  Falsis.  [Falsum.]  See  also  Coll.  Leg.  M.  &
R.  viii.  7.

Macedonianum,  enacted  a.  d.  46,  provided
that  any  loan  of  money  to  a  filiusfamilias  could  not
be  recovered  even  after  the  death  of  the  father.
The  Senatusconsultum  took  its  name  from  Macedo,
a  notorious  usurer,  as  appears  from  the  terms  of
the  Senatusconsultum  which  is  preserved  (Dig.
14.  tit.  6).  Theophilus  {Paraphr.  Inst.)  states  in-
correctly that  the  Senatusconsultum  took  its  name
Irom-a  filiusfamilias.  The  provision  of  the  Senatus-
consultum is  cited  by  Tacitus  {Ann.  xi.  13),  but
in  such  terms  as  might  lead  to  ambiguity  in  the
interpretation  of  the  law.  Suetonius  {Vesp.  11)
attributes  this  Senatusconsultum  to  the  time  of
Vespasian  ;  but  he  states  its  provisions  in  less
ambiguous  terms  than  Tacitus,

Memmian  um.  This  name  is  sometimes  given  to
the  Senatusconsultum,  passed  in  the  time  of  Nero,
the  terms  of  which  are  preserved  by  Tacitus  {Ann.
XV.  19) :  "  ne  simulata  adoptio  in  ulla  parte  mune-
ris  publici  juvaret,  ac  ne  usurpandis  quidem  here-
ditatibus  prodesset."  The  object  of  this  Senatus-
consultum was  to  prevent  the  evasion  of  the  Lex
Julia  et  Papia  Poppaea.  It  is  sometimes  referred
to  the  consulship  of  C.  Memmius  Regulus  and  Vir-
ginius  Rufus  A.  D.  63,  but  it  appears  to  belong  to
the  preceding  year.  See  Dig.  31.  s.  51,  and  53.
tit.  1.  8.  76.

Neronianum  de  Legatis,  the  provisions  of
which  are  stated  in  the  article  Lbgatum,  (Gaius,
ii.  157,  198,  212,  218,220  ;  \]\^.Frag.  xxiv.)

Neronianum,  also  called  Pisonianum,  from
being  enacted  in  the  consulship  of  Nero  and  L.
Calpumius  Piso,  A.  d.  57.  It  contained  various
provisions :  "  Ut  si  quis  a  suis  servis  interfectus
escet,  ii  quoque,  qui  testamento  manumissi  sub
eodem  tecto  mansissent,  inter  servos  supplicia  pen-


SENATUSCONSULTUM.

derent  "  (Tacit.  Ann.  xiii.  32 )  :  "  Ut  occisa  uxcro
etiam  de  familia  viri  quaestio  habeatur,  idemque  ut
juxta  uxoris  familiam  observetur,  si  vir  dicatur
occisus  "  (Paulus,  S.  R.  iii.  tit.  5,  who  gives  in
substance  also  the  provision  mentioned  by  Tacitus,
but  adds :  "  Sed  et  hi  torquentur,  qui  cum  occiso
in  itinere  fuerunt ") :  "  Ut,  si  poonae  obnoxius
servus  venisset,  quandoque  in  eura  animadversum
esset,  venditor  pretiumpraestaret."  (Dig.  29.  tit.  5.
s.  8.)

Orphitianum  enacted  in  the  time  of  M.  Aure-
lius  (Capitol,  in  vita.,  11)  that  the  legitima  hereditas
of  a  mother  who  had  not  been  in  manu,  might
come  to  her  sons  to  the  exclusion  of  the  consan-
guinei  and  other  agnati.  The  name  Orphitianum
is  supplied  by  Paulus  {S.R.  iv.  tit.  10),  and  the
Digest  (38.  tit.  17)  ;  the  enactment  was  made  in
the  consulship  of  V.  Rufus  and  C.  Orphitus.  (Inst.
3.  tit.  4.)

Paulus  (iv.  tit.  14)  speaks  of  rules  relating  to
manumission  being  included  in  a  Senatusconsultum
Orphitianum.  [Heres.]  This  Senatusconsultum
was  made  in  the  joint  reign  of  M.  Aurelius  and
Commodus.  (Impp.  Anton,  et  Commodi  oratione
in  senatu  recitata,  Ulp.  Frag.  tit.  xxvi.)    See  Ora-

TIONES  PrINCIPUM.

Pegasianum  was  enacted  in  the  reign  of  Vespa-
sian, Pegasus  and  Pusio  being  Consules  (  Suffecti  P)
in  the  year  of  the  enactment.  (Inst.  ii.  tit.  23  ;
Gaius,  ii.  254,  &c  )  The  provisions  of  this  Sena-
tusconsultum are  stated  under  Fideicommissa
and  Legatum.  This  Senatusconsultum,  or  another
of  the  same  name,  modified  a  provision  of  the  Lex
Aelia  Sentia  as  to  a  Latinus  becoming  a  Romanus.
(Gaius,  i.  31.)

Persicianum,  which  may  be  the  correct  form
instead  of  Pernicianum,  was  enacted  in  the  time  of
Tiberius  A.  d.  34,  and  was  an  amendment  of  the
Lex  Julia  et  Papia  Poppaea.  (Compare  Lex
Julia  et  Pap.  Pop.;  LHp.  Frag.  tit.  xvi. ;
Sueton.  Claud.  23.)

Pisonianum.     [Neronianum.]

Plancianum,  of  uncertain  date,  is  by  some
writers  assigned  to  the  time  of  Vespasian.  The
Lex  Julia  Papia  et  Poppaea  apparently  contained
a  provision  by  which  a  fideicommissum  was  forfeited
to  the  Fiscus,  if  a  heres  or  legatarius  engaged
himself  by  a  written  instrument  or  any  other  secret
mode  to  pay  or  give  the  fideicommissum  to  a  person
who  was  legally  incapable  of  taking  it.  (Dig.  30.
s.  103  ;  34,  tit.  9.  s.  10,  18  ;  49.  tit.  14.  s.  3.)
Such  a  Fideicommissum  was  called  Tacitum,  and
when  made  in  the  way  described  was  said  to  be
"  in  fraudem  legis,"  designed  to  evade  the  law.  If
it  was  made  openly  (palam),  this  was  no  fraus,
and  though  the  fideicommissum  might  be  invalid
on  account  of  the  incapacity  of  the  fideicomrais-
sarius  to  take,  the  penalty  of  the  lex  did  not  apply.
It  does  not  appear  certain  whether  this  provision
as  to  the  confiscation  was  contained  in  the  original
Lex  or  added  by  some  subsequent  Senatusconsul-
tum. However  this  may  be,  the  fiduciarius  still
retained  his  Quarta.  But  a  Senatusconsultum  men-
tioned by  Ulpian  (Frag.  tit.xxv.  s.  17)  enacted  that
if  a  man  undertook  to  perform  a  tacitum  fideicom-
missum, he  lost  the  Quadrans  or  Quarta  [Fidei-
commissum],  nor  could  he  claim  what  was
Caducum  under  the  Testamenta,  which  as  a  general
rule  he  could  claim  if  he  had  children.  [Legatum  ;
Bona  Caduca.]  This  Senatusconsultum,  it  ap-
pears from  an  extract  in  the   Digest  (35.  tit.  2*


SENATUSCONSULTUM.

6.  59),  wfis  the  Plancianum,  or  Plautianum,  for
the  reading  is  doubtful  ;  and  in  this  passage  it  is
stated  that  the  Fourth,  which  the  Fiduciarius  was
not  allowed  to  retain,  was  claimed  for  the  Fiscus
l)y  a  Rescript  of  Antoninus  Pius.  The  penalty  for
the  fraud  only  applied  to  that  part  of  the  property
to  which  the  fraud  extended,  and  if  the  heres  was
hcres  in  a  larger  share  of  the  hereditas  than  the
share  to  which  the  fraus  extended,  he  had  the
benefit  of  the  Falcidia  for  that  part  to  which  the
fraus  did  not  extend,  which  is  thus  expressed  by
Papinian  (Dig.  34.  tit.  9.  s.  11),  "  sed  si  major
modus  institutionis  quam  fraudis  fuerit  quod  ad
Falcidiam  attinet,  de  superfluo  quarta  retinebitur."
The  history  of  legislation  on  the  subject  of  Tacita
fideicommissa  is  not  altogether  free  from  some
doubt.

Plautianum.  [Plancianum.]
RuBRiANUM,  enacted  in  the  time  of  Trajan,  in
the  consulship  of  Rubrius  Gallus  and  Q.  Coelius
Hispo  (probably  consules  suflfecti)  A.  D.  101,  related
to  fideicommissa  libertas.  Its  terms  are  given  in
the  Digest  (40.  tit.  5.  s.  26)  :  "  Si  hi  a  quibus  li-
bertatem  praestari  oportet  evocati  a  Praetore  adesse
iioluissent,  Si  causa  cognita  Praetor  pronuntiasset
libertatem  his  deberi,  eodem  jure  statum  servari
ac  si  directo  manumissi  essent."  Compare  Plin.
Ep.  iv.  9,  ad  Ursum  with  the  passage  in  the
Digest.

Sabinianum,  of  uncertain  date,  but  apparently
after  the  time  of  Antoninus  Pius.  It  related  to
the  rights  of  one  of  three  brothers  who  had  been
adopted,  to  a  portion  of  the  hereditas  contra  tabulas
testamenti.  (Cod.  8.  tit.  48.  s.  10  ;  Inst.  3.  tit.  1.)

SiLANiANUM,  probably  passed  in  the  time  of
Augustus  in  the  consulship  of  P.  Cornelius  Dola-
bella  and  C.  Junius  Silanus  A.  n.  10,  contained
various  enactments.  It  gave  freedom  to  a  slave
who  discovered  the  murderer  of  his  master.  If
a  master  was  murdered,  all  the  slaves  who  were
under  the  roof  at  the  time,  if  the  murder  was  com-
mitted under  a  roof,  or  who  were  with  him  in  any
place  at  the  time  of  the  murder,  were  put  to  the
torture,  and,  if  they  had  not  done  their  best  to
defend  him,  were  put  to  death.  Tacitus  {Ann.
xiv.  42)  refers  to  this  provision  of  the  Senatuscon-
Bultum,  and  he  uses  the  phrase  "  vetere  ex  more."
Lipsius  (note  on  this  passage)  refers  to  Cicero
(ad  Fam.  iv.  12).  Servi  Impuberes  were  ex-
cepted from  this  provision  of  the  Senatusconsultum.
(Dig.  29.  tit.  5.  s.  14.)  The  heres  who  took  pos-
session of  the  hereditas  of  a  murdered  person  be-
fore the  proper  inquiry  was  made,  forfeited  the
hereditas,  which  fell  to  the  Fiscus :  the  rule  was
the  same  whether  being  heres  ex  testamento  he
opened  the  will  {tabulae  testamenti)  before  the  in-
quiry was  made,  or  whether  being  heres  ab  intes-
tato,  he  took  possession  of  the  hereditas  {adiit  he-
<  reditatem)  or  obtained  the  Bonorum  Posse ssio  ;  he
was  also  subjected  to  a  heavy  pecuniary  penalty.
A  Senatusconsultum  passed  in  the  consulship  of
Taurus  and  Lepidus  A.  D.  11,  enacted  that  the
I  penalty  for  opening  the  will  of  a  murdered  person
\  could  not  be  inflicted  after  five  years,  except  it  was
I  a  case  of  parricide  to  which  this  temporis  praescrip-
I  tio  did  not  apply.  (Paulus,  S.  R.  iii.  tit.  5  ;  Dig.
29.  tit.  5  ;  Cod.  0.  tit.  35.)

Tertullianum  is  stated  in  the  Institutes  of

Justinian  (3.  tit.  3)  to  have  been  enacted  in  the

'  time  of  Hadrian,  in  the  consulship  of  Tertullus  and

Sacerdos  ;  but  some  critics,  notwithstanding  this,


SENATUSCONSULTUM.


1027


would  refer  it  to  the  time  of  Antoninus  Puis.
This  Senatusconsultum  empowered  a  mother,  whe-
ther Ingenua  or  Libertina,  to  take  the  Legitima
hereditas  of  an  intestate  son  ;  the  Ingenua,  if  she
was  or  had  been  the  mother  of  three  children  ;  the
Libertina,  if  she  was  or  had  been  the  mother  of
four  children.  They  could  also  take,  though  they
neither  were  nor  had  been  mothers,  if  they  had
obtained  the  Jus  Liberorum  by  Imperial  favour.
Several  persons  however  took  precedence  of  the
mother  ;  the  sni  heredes  of  the  son,  those  who
were  called  to  the  Bonorum  Possessio  as  sui
heredes,  the  father,  and  the  frater  consanguineus.
If  there  was  a  soror  consanguinea,  she  shared  with
her  mother.  The  Senatusconsultum  Orphitianum
gave  the  children  a  claim  to  the  hereditas  of  the
mother.

(Ulp.  Frag.  tit.  xxvi.  ;  Paulus,  S.  R.  iv.  tit.  9  ;
Dig.  38.  tit.  1 7.)

Trebel  LI  AN  um,  enacted  in  the  time  of  Nero
in  the  consulship  of  L.  Annaeus  Seneca  and  Tre-
bellius  Maximus  A.  D.  62,  related  to  Fideicommis-
sae  hereditates.

(Fideicommissum  ;  Gaius,  ii.  251,  253  ;  Dig.
36.  tit.  1  ;  Paulus,  S.  R.  iv.  tit.  2.)

TuRPiLiANUM,  enacted  in  the  time  of  Nero  in
the  consulship  of  Caesonius  Paetus  and  Petronius
Turpillus  A.  D.  61,  was  against  praevaricatio  or  the
collusive  desisting  from  prosecuting  a  criminal
charge.  The  occasion  of  this  Senatusconsultum
and  the  terms  of  it  are  stated  by  Tacitus  {Ann.
xiv.  14):  "qui  talem  operam  emptitasset,  vendi-
dissetve,  perinde  poena  teneretur  ac  publico  judicio
calumniae  condemnaretur."  The  definition  of  a
praevaricator  is  given  in  the  Digest  (48.  tit.  16.  s.
\.  Ad  Senatusconsultum  Turpilianum).

Velleianum  rendered  void  all  intercessiones  by
women,  whether  they  were  on  behalf  of  males  or
females.  This  Senatusconsultum  was  enacted  in
the  consulship  of  Maaieus  Silanus  and  Velleius
Tutor,  as  appears  from  the  preamble  of  the  Sena-
tusconsultum (Dig.  1 6..  tit.  1 ),  and  it  appears  most
probably  to  have  been  passed  in  the  reign  of  Claudius
from  the  words  of  Ulpian  in  his  comment  upon
it.  The  name  of  Velleius  Tutor  does  not  occur  in
the  Fasti  Consulares,  and  he  may  be  a  consul  suf-
fectus.  The  name  of  M.  Silanus  occurs  as  consul
in  the  reign  of  Claudius,  and  the  colleague  of
Valerius  Asiaticus,  a.  d.  46.  (Dion  Cass.  Ix.  27.)
[Intercessio.]  In  the  year  a,  d.  19,  according
to  the  Fasti  a  M.  Silanus  was  also  consul  ;  his
colleague  according  to  the  Fasti  waSs  L-  Norbanus
Balbus,  and  this  agrees  with  Tacitus  (^Ann.  ii.  59).

ViTRASiANUM  is  assigned  to  the  reign  of  Ves-
pasian, but  the  time  is  very  uncertain.  It  re-
lated to  Fideicommissa  Libertas.  (Dig.  40.  tit.  5.
8.  30.)

VoLusiANUM,  enacted  in  the  reign  of  Nero  in
the  consulship  of  Q.  Volusius  Satuminus  and  P.
Cornelius  Scipio,  A.  d.  56.  It  contained  a  provi-
sion against  pulling  down  a  domus  or  villa  for  the
sake  of  profit ;  but  the  object  of  this  law  seems
rather  obscure :  it  is  referred  to,  without  the  name
being  given,  in  the  Digest  (18.  tit.  1.  s.  52.  Senatus
censuit,  &c.).  Tacitus  {Ann.  xiii.  28)  mentions  a
Senatusconsultum  in  this  consulship  which  limited
the  power  of  the  Aediles :  "  quantum  cuniles,
quantum  plebeii  pignoris  caperent,  vel  poenae  irro-
garent."  A  Senatusconsultum  Volusianum  (if  the
name  is  right)  enacted  that  persons  should  be  liable
to  the  penalties  of  the  Lex  Julia  de  vi  privata,
3  u  2


1028


SERICUM.


who  joined  in  the  suit  of  another  person  with  the
bargain  that  they  should  share  whatever  was
acquired  by  the  condeninatio.  (Dig.  48.  tit.  7.
s.  6.)  [G.  L.]

SENIO'RES.  [CoMiTiA,  p.  333.]
SEPTA.  [CoMiTiA,  p.  336,  b.l
SEPTEMVIRI  EPULO'NES.  [Epulones.]
SEPTIMATRUS.  [Quinquatrus.]
SEPTIMO'NTIUM,  a  Roman  festival  which
was  held  in  the  month  of  December.  It  lasted
only  for  one  day  (dies  Septimoniium,  dies  Septimon-
tialis).  According  to  Festus  (s.  v.  Septimmtium),
the  festival  was  the  same  as  the  Agonalia  ;  but
Scaliger  in  his  note  on  this  passage  has  shown
from  Varro  {de  Ling.  Lot.  vi.  24)  and  from  Ter-
tullian  {de  Idolol.  10),  that  the  Scptimontium
must  have  been  held  on  one  of  the  last  days  of
December,  whereas  the  Agonalia  took  place  on  the
tenth  of  this  month.  The  day  of  the  Septimontium
was  a  dies  feriatus  for  the  montani,  or  the  inhabit-
ants of  the  seven  ancient  hills  or  rather  districts  of
Rome,  who  offered  on  this  day  sacrifices  to  the
gods  in  their  respective  districts.  These  sacra
{sacra  pro  montilms,  Fest.  s.  v.  Puhlica  sacra)  were,
like  the  paganalia,  not  sacra  publica,  but  privata.
(Varro,  I.  c. ;  compare  Sacra.)  They  were  believed
to  have  been  instituted  to  commemorate  the  en-
closure of  the  seven  hills  of  Rome  within  the  walls
of  the  city,  but  must  certainly  be  referred  to  a
time  when  the  Capitoline,  Quirinal,  and  Viminal
were  not  yet  incorporated  with  Rome.  (Compare
Columella,  ii.  10  ;  Suet.  Domit.  4  ;  Plut.  Quuest.
Rom.  68  ;  Niebuhr,  Hid.  of  Rome,  vol.  i.  p.  389,
&c.)  [L.  S.]

SEPTUNX.  [As,  p.  140,  b.]
SEPULCRUM.  [FuNus,  p.  560,  b.]
SEQUESTRES.  [Ambitus.]
SERA.  [Janua,  p.  626,  b.]
SE'RICUM  (arjpiKSv),  silk,  also  called  bom-
hycinum.  The  first  ancient  author  who  affords
any  evidence  respecting  the  use  of  silk,  is  Aristotle
{H.A.  V.  19).  After  a  description,  partially  cor-
rect, of  the  metamorphoses  of  the  silkworm  {bombyx.
Martial,  viii.  33),  he  intimates  that  the  produce  of
the  cocoons  was  wound  upon  bobbins  by  women
for  the  purpose  of  being  woven,  and  that  Pamphile,
daughter  of  Plates,  was  said  to  have  first  woven
silk  in  Cos.  This  statement  authorizes  the  conclu-
sion, that  raw  silk  was  brought  from  the  ulterior
of  Asia  and  manufactured  in  Cos  as  early  as  the
fourth  century  B.C.  From  this  island  it  appears  that
the  Roman  la/lies  obtained  their  most  splendid
garments  [CoA  Vestis],  so  that  the  later  poets
of  the  Augustan  age,  Tibullus  (ii.  4),  Propertius
(i.  2,  ii.  1,  iv.  2,  iv.  5),  Horace  (Carm.  iv.  13.  13,
Sat.  i.  2.  101),  and  Ovid  {Ari.  Amat.  ii.  298),
adorn  their  verses  with  allusions  to  these  elegant
textures,  which  were  remarkably  thin,  sometimes
of  a  fine  purple  dye  (Hor.  U.  cc.\  and  variegated
with  transverse  stripes  of  gold.  (TibuU.  ii.  6.)
About  this  time  the  Parthian  conquests  opened  a
way  for  the  transport  into  Italy  of  all  the  most
valuable  productions  of  central  Asia,  which  was
the  supposed  territory  of  the  Seres.  The  appear-
ance of  the  silken  flags  attached  to  the  gilt  stand-
ards of  the  Parthians  in  the  battle  fought  in  .54
B.  c.  (Florus,  iii.  11),  must  have  been  a  very  strik-
ing sight  for  the  army  of  Crassns.

The  inquiries  of  the  Romans  respecting  the
nature  of  this  beautiful  manufacture  led  to  a  very
general  opinion  that  silk  in  its  natural  state  was  a


SERICUM.

thin  fleece  found  on  trees.  (Virg.  Georg.  ii.  121  j
Petron.  119  ;  Seneca,  Hippol.  386  ;  p\>stus  A  vie-
nus,  935  ;  Sil.  Ital.  Pun.  vi.  4,  xiv.  664,  xvii.
HdQ.)  An  author,  nearly  contemporary  with
those  of  the  Augustan  age  already  quoted  (Dio-
nysius  Periegetes,  755),  celebrates  not  only  the
extreme  fineness  and  the  high  value,  but  also  the
flowered  texture  of  these  productions.  The  cir-
cumstances now  stated  sufficiently  account  for  the
fact,  that  after  the  Augustan  age  we  find  no
further  mention  of  Coan,  but  only  of  Seric  webs.
The  rage  for  the  latter  increased  more  and  more.
Even  men  aspired  to  be  adorned  with  silk,  and
hence  the  senate  early  in  the  reign  of  Tiberius
enacted  "  Ne  vestis  Serica  viros  foedaret."  (Tac.
Ann.  ii.  33  ;  Dion  Cass.  Ivii.  15  ;  Suidas,  s.  v,
TiSepios.)

In  the  succeeding  reigns,  we  find  the  most
vigorous  measures  adopted  by  those  emperors
who  were  characterized  by  severity  of  manners,
to  restrict  the  use  of  silk,  whilst  Caligula  and
others,  notorious  for  luxury  and  excess,  not  only
encouraged  it  in  the  female  sex,  but  delighted  to
display  it  in  public  on  their  own  persons.  (Suet.
Califf.  52 ;  Dion  Cass.  lix.  12 ;  see  also  Joseph.
B.  J.  vii.  5.  §  4.)  Shawls  and  scarves,  interwoven
with  gold  and  brought  from  the  remotest  East,
were  accumulated  in  the  wardrobe  of  the  Empress
during  successive  reigns  (Martial,  xi.  9),  until  in
the  year  176  Antoninus,  the  philosopher,  in  conse-
quence of  the  exhausted  state  of  his  treasury,  sold
them  by  public  auction  in  the  Forum  of  Trajan
with  the  rest  of  the  imperial  ornaments.  (Capitol.
in  vita,  17.)  At  this  period  we  find  that  the
silken  texture,  besides  being  mixed  v/ith  gold
{XpycSrraarros,  xp^'^o^4'Vs)t  was  adorned  with  em-
broidery, this  part  of  the  work  being  executed
either  in  Egypt  or  Asia  Minor.  {Niloiis,  Maeonia,
acus,  Lucan,  x.  141  ;  Seneca,  Here.  Oet.  664.)  The
Christian  authors  from  Clemens  Alexandrinus
{Paedag.  ii.  10)  and  Tertullian  {de  Pallio,  4)
downwards  discourage  or  condemn  the  use  of  silk.
Plutarch  also  dissuades  the  virtuous  and  prudent
wife  from  wearing  it  {Conj.  Pruec.  p,  550,  vol.  vi.
ed.  Reiske),  although  it  is  probable  that  ribands
for  dressing  the  hair  (Martial,  xiv.  24)  were  not
uncommon,  since  these  goods  {Serica)  were  pro-
curable in  the  vicus  Tuscus  at  Rome  (xi.  27).
Silk  thread  was  also  imported  and  used  for  various
purposes.  (Galen,  Ilepl  Aidyy.  vol.  vi.  p.  533,  e4.
Chartier.)

Although  Commodus  in  some  degree  replenished
the  palace  with  valuable  and  curious  effects,  in-
cluding those  of  silk  (Capitol.  Pertin.  8),  this  arti-
cle soon  afterwards  again  became  very  rare,  so  that
{e\v  writers  of  the  third  century  make  mention  of
it.  When  finely  manufactured,  it  sold  for  its
weight  in  gold,  on  which  account  Aurelian  would
not  allow  his  empress  to  have  even  a  single  shawl
of  purple  silk  {pallio  Uatteo  serico,  Vopisc.  AureL
45).  The  use  of  silk  with  a  warp  of  linen  or  wool,
called  tramoserica  and  subserica,  as  distinguished
from  holoserica,  was  permitted  imder  many  restric-
tions. About  the  end,  however,  of  the  third  cen-
tur}-,  silk,  especially  when  woven  with  a  warp  of
inferior  value,  began  to  be  much  more  generally
worn  both  by  men  and  women  ;  and  the  conse-
quence was  that,  in  order  to  confine  the  enjoyment
of  this  luxury  more  entirely  to  the  im{)erial  family
and  court,  private  persons  were  forbidden  to  en-
gage in  the  manufacture,  and  gold  and  silken  bor-


SERRA.

dcrs  {paragaudae)  were  allowed  to  be  made  only
m  the  imperial  gynaecea.     [Paragauda.]

The  production  of  raw  silk  (fj-era^a)  in  Europe
was  first  attempted  under  Justinian,  a.  d.  530.
The  eggs  of  the  silkworm  were  conveyed  to  Byzan-
tium in  the  hollow  stem  of  a  plant  from  "  Serinda,"
which  was  probably  Khotan  in  Little  Bucharia,  by
some  monks,  who  had  learnt  the  method  of  hatch-
ing and  rearing  them.  The  wonns  were  fed  with
the  leaf  of  the  Black  or  Common  Mulberry  ((Tu/co-
fiivos.  Procop.  B.  Goth.  iv.  17  ;  Glycas,  Ann.  iv.  p.
209 ;  Zonar.  Ann.  xiv.  p.  Q9.,  ed.  Du  Cange  ;  Phot.
Bihl  p.  80,  ed.  Roth.).  The  cidtivation  both  of
this  species  and  of  the  White  Mulberry,  the  breeding
of  silk-worms,  and  the  manufacture  of  their  pro-
duce, having  been  long  confined  to  Greece,  were  at
length  in  the  twelfth  century  transported  into
Sicily,  and  thence  extended  over  the  south  of  Eu-
rope. (Otto  Frisingen,  Hist.  Imp.  Freder.  i.  33  ;
Man.  Comnenus,  ii.  8.)  The  progress  of  this  im-
portant branch  of  industry  was  however  greatly
impeded  even  in  Greece  both  by  sumptuary  laws
restricting  the  use  of  silk  except  in  the  church  ser-
vice or  in  the  dress  and  ornaments  of  the  court,
and  also  by  fines  and  prohibitions  against  private
silk-mills,  and  by  other  attempts  to  regulate  the
price  both  of  the  raw  and  manufactured  article.
It  was  at  one  time  determined  that  the  business
should  be  carried  on  solely  by  the  imperial  trea-
surer. Peter  Barsames,  probably  a  Phoenician,
held  the  office,  and  conducted  himself  in  the  most
oppressive  manner,  so  that  the  silk  trade  was  ruined
both  in  Byzantium  and  at  Tyre  and  Berytus,  whilst
Justinian,  the  empress  Theodora,  and  their  trea-
surer amassed  great  wealth  by  the  monopoly.
(Procop.  Hist.  Arcan.  25.)  The  silks  woven  in
Europe  previously  to  the  thirteenth  century  were
in  general  plain  in  their  pattern.  Many  of  those
produced  by  the  industry  and  taste  of  the  Seres,
i.  e.  the  silk  manufacturers  of  the  interior  of  Asia,
were  highly  elaborate,  and  appear  to  have  been
very  similar  in  their  patterns  and  style  of  ornament
to  the  Persian  shawls  of  modern  times.      [J.  Y.]

SERRA,  dim.  SERRULA  {Trpiwv\  a  saw.  It
was  made  of  iron  {ferrea,  Non.  Marc.  p.  223,
ed.  ]\Ierceri ;  de  ferro  lamina^  Isid.  Orig.  xix.  19  ;
Virg.  Georg.  i.  143).  The  form  of  the  larger  saw
used  for  cutting  timber  is  seen  in  the  annexed
woodcut,  which  is  taken  from  a  miniature  in  the
celebrated  Dioscorides  written  at  the  beginning  of
the  sixth  century.  (Montfaucon,  Pal.  Greece,  p.
203.)  It  is  of  the  kind  which  we  call  the  frame-
saw, because  it  is  fixed  in  a  rectangular  frame.  It
was  held  by  a  workman  (serrarius.,  Sen.  Epist.
57)  at  each  end.  The  line  was  used  to  mark  the
timber  in  order  to  guide  the  saw  (Sen.  Epist.
90) ;  and  its  movement  was  facilitated  by  driving
wedges  with  a  hammer  between  the  planks  {tenues
tabulae)  or  rafters  (trabes).  (Corippus,  de  Laud.
Just.  iv.  45 — 48.)  A  similar  representation  of  the
use  of  the  frame-saw  is  given  in  a  painting  found
at  Herculaneura,  the  operators  being  winged  genii,
as  in  this  woodcut  (Ant.  d''Ercol.  i.  tav.  34)  ;  but
in  a  bas-relief  published  by  Micali  {Ital.  av.  il
Dom.  dei  Rom.  tav.  49)  the  two  sawyers  wear  tunics
girt  round  the  waist  like  that  of  the  ship-builder  in
the  woodcut  at  p.  141.  The  woodcut  here  intro-
duced also  shows  the  blade  of  the  saw  detached
from  its  frame,  with  a  ring  at  each  end  for  fixing
it  in  the  frame,  and  exhibited  on  a  funereal  monu-
ment published  by  Grutcr.     On  eaeh  side  of  the


SERTA.


1029


last-mentioned  figure  is  represented  a  hand-saw
adapted  to  be  used  by  a  single  person.  That  on
the  left  is  from  the  same  funereal  monument  as  the
blade  of  the  frame-saw :  that  on  the  right  is  the
figure  of  an  ancient  Egyptian  saw  preserved  in  the
British  Museum.  These  saws  (serrulae  manu-
hriatae)  were  used  to  divide  the  smaller  objects.
Some  of  them,  called  lupi,  had  a  particular  shape,
by  which  they  were  adapted  for  amputating  the
branches  of  trees.     (Pallad.  de  Re  Rust.  i.  43.)

St.  Jerome  (in  Is.  xxviii.  27)  seems  clearly  to
allude  to  the  circular  saw,  which  was  probably  used,
as  at  present,  in  cutting  veneers  {laminae praetenties^
Plin.  //.  A'",  xvi.  43.  s.  84).  We  have  also  inti-
mations of  the  use  of  the  centre-bit,  and  we  find
that  even  in  the  time  of  Cicero  (  pro  Ciuent.  64)  it
was  employed  by  thieves.

Pliny  {H.  N.  xxxvi.  22.  s.  44)  mentions  the  use
of  the  saw  in  the  ancient  Belgium  for  cutting
white  building-stone :  some  of  the  oolitic  and  cre-
taceous rocks  are  still  treated  in  the  same  manner
both  m  that  part  of  the  continent  and  in  the  south
of  England.  In  this  case  Pliny  must  be  understood
to  speak  of  a  proper  or  toothed  saw.  The  saw
without  teeth  was  then  used,  just  as  it  is  now,  by
the  workers  in  marble,  and  the  place  of  teeth  was
supplied,  according  to  the  hardness  of  the  stone,
either  by  emeiy  or  by  various  kinds  of  sand  of  in-
ferior hardness.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvi.  6.  s.  9.)  In
this  manner  the  ancient  artificers  were  able  to  cut
slabs  of  the  hardest  rocks,  which  consequently
were  adapted  to  receive  the  highest  polish,  such
as  granite,  porphyry,  lapis-lazuli,  and  amethyst.
[MoLA  ;  Paries.]

The  saw  is  an  instrument  of  high  antiquity,  its
invention  being  attributed  either  to  Daedalus
(Plin.  //.  N.  vii.  56  ;  Sen.  Epist.  90),  or  to  his
nephew  Pcrdix  (Hygin.  Fab.  274  ;  Ovid.  Met.  viii.
246)  [CiRCiNus],  also  called  Tales,  who,  having
found  the  jaw  of  a  serpent  and  divided  a  piece  of
\v  ood  with  it,  was  led  to  imitate  the  teeth  in  iron.
(Diod.  Sic.  iv.  76  ;  ApoUodor.  iii.  15.)  In  a  bas-
relief  published  by  Winckelmann  (Mon.  Ined.  ii.
fig.  94),  Daedalus  is  represented  holding  a  saw
approaching  very  closely  in  form  to  the  Egyptian
saw  above  delineated.  [J.  Y.]

SERRA'TI  NUMMI.  [Denarius,  p.  394,  a.]
SERTA,  used  only  in  the  plural  (o-Te^ytto,
arecpdywixa)^  a  festoon  or  garland.  The  art  of
weaving  wreaths  [Corona],  garlands,  and  fes-
toons, employed  a  distinct  class  of  persons  {coro-
narii  and  coroimriae  ;  (TT€(pavi]ir\6Koi,  Theophrast.
H.  P.  vi.  8.  §  1  ;  Plin.  //.  N.  xxi.  2.  s.  3,  or
(TT€(pavoTr\6KOL),  who  endeavoured  to  combine  all
the  most  beautiful  varieties  of  leaves,  of  flowftrs,
3  u  3


1030  SERTA.

and  of  fruits,  so  as  to  blend  their  forms


and  scents  (Virg.  Copa^  14,


colours,
35)  in  the  most  agree-


able maimer.  The  annexed  woodcut  taken  from  a
sarcophagus  at  Rome  (Millin,  Gal.  Myth.  ii.  100),
shows  a  festoon  adapted  to  be  suspended  by  means
of  the  fillets  at  both  ends.  Its  extremities  are
skilfully  encased  in  acanthus-leaves  :  its  body  con-
sists apparently  of  laurel  or  bay,  together  with  a
profusion  of  fruits,  such  as  apples,  pears,  pome-
granates, bunches  of  grapes,  and  fir-cones.  At
Athens  there  was  a  market,  called  arefpavoTrASKiov


for  the  manufacture  and  sale  of  this  class  of  pro-
ductions, the  work  being  principally  performed  by
women  and  girls.     (Aristoph.  Thesm  455.)

When  a  priest  was  preparing  a  sacrifice,  he  often
appeared  with  a  festoon  intended  to  be  placed  on
the  door  of  the  temple  {/estafronde,  Virg.  Aen.  ii.
249  ;  variis  sertis,  iv.  202  ;  Juv.  xii.  84  ;  Lucan,  ii.
354),  on  the  front  of  the  altar  (Virg.  Aen.  i.  41  7)
or  upon  the  head  of  the  victim.  Thus  m  the  Iliad
(i.  14,  28),  Chryses  besides  the  gilded  sceptre
which  denoted  his  office  and  authority  carries  a
garland  in  honour  of  Apollo,  which  was  probably
wound  about  the  sceptre.  (See  also  Aristoph.  Av.
894,  Pojp,  948  ;  Callim.  Hpnn.  in  Cer.  45.)  The
act  here  described  is  seen  in  the  annexed  woodcut,
which  is  taken  from  a  bas-relief  in  the  collection
of  antiques  at  Ince-Blundell,  and  represents  a
priestess  carrying  in  her  two  hands  a  festoon  to
suspend  upon  the  cirrnlar  temple  which  is  seen  in
the  distance.     As  the  festoons  remained  on  the


temples  long  after  their  freshness  had  departed,
they  became  very  combustible.  The  temple  of
Juno  at  Argos  was  destroyed  in  consequence  of


SERVITUTES.

their  being  set  on  fire.  (Thuc.  iv.  133.  §2;
Paus.  ii.  17.  §  7.)  The  garlands  on  funereal  monu-
ments hung  there  for  a  year,  and  were  then  re-
newed. (Tibull.  ii.  4.  48",  7.  32  ;  Propert.  iii.  1 6.
23.)  The  funeral  pile  was  also  decorated  in  a
similar  manner,  but  with  an  appropriate  choice  of
plants  and  flowers.    (Virg.  Aen.  iv.  506.)

Festoons  were  placed  upon  the  door-posts  of
private  houses  in  token  of  joy  and  atfection  (Tibull.
i.  2.  14)  more  especially  on  occasion  of  a  wedding.
(Lucan,  ii.  354.)  They  were  hung  about  a  palace
in  compliment  to  the  wealthy  possessor  (insertabo
coronis  atria.  Prudent,  in  Symm.  ii.  726)  :  and  on
occasions  of  general  rejoicing  the  streets  of  a  city
were  sometimes  enlivened  with  these  splendid  and
tasteful  decorations.     (Martial,  vi.  79.  8.)

The  smaller  garlands  or  crowns,  v/hich  were
worn  by  persons  on  the  head  or  round  the  neck,
are  sometimes  called  serta.  (Tibull.  i.  7.  52.)  The
fashion  of  wearing  such  garlands  suspended  from
the  neck,  was  adopted  by  the  early  Christians.
(Min.  Felix,  38.)  [J.  Y.]

SERVIA'NA  ACTIO.  [Pignus.]
SE'RVITUS.  [S.^RVus.]
SERVITUDES.  The  owner  of  a  thing  can
use  it  in  all  ways  consistent  with  his  ownership,
and  he  can  prevent  others  from  using  it  in  any  way
that  is  inconsistent  with  his  full  enjoyment  of  it  as
owner.  If  the  owner's  power  over  the  thing  is
limited  either  way,  that  is,  if  his  enjoyment  of  it
is  subject  to  the  condition  of  not  doing  certain  acts
in  order  that  some  other  person  may  have  the
benefit  of  such  forbearance,  or  to  the  condition  of
allowing  others  to  do  certain  acts,  which  limit  his
complete  enjoyment  of  a  thing,  the  thing  is  said
"  servire  "  to  be  subject  to  a  "  servitus."  Hence
when  a  thing  was  sold  as  "  optima  maxima,"  this
was  legally  understood  to  mean  that  it  was  war-
ranted free  from  Servitutes.  (Dig.  50.  tit.  16.
s.  90.  1 69  ;  compare  Cic.  de  Leg.  Agr.  iii.  2.)  The
existence  of  a  Servitus  must  be  proved :  the  pre-
sumption is  that  the  ground  is  free  (liber)  till  it
is  shown  to  be  servient.  Servitutes  are  also  in-
cluded in  the  terms  "  Jura,"  and  "  Jura  in  Re,"
and  these  terms  are  opposed  to  Dominium  or  com-
plete ownership.  He  who  exercises  a  Servitus
therefore  has  not  the  animus  domini,  not  even  in
the  case  of  ususfructus,  for  the  Ususfructuarius  is
never  recognized  as  owner  in  the  Roman  Law.  The
technical  word  for  ownership,  when  the  ususfructus
is  deducted  from  it,  is  Proprietas.

A  man  can  only  have  a  right  to  a  servitus
another  person's  property  ;  and  a  servitus  can  on!
be  in  a  corporeal  thing.  Viewed  with  respect
the  owner  of  the  thing,  a  Servitus  either  consis:
in  his  being  restrained  from  doing  certain  acts
his  property,  which  otherwise  he  might  do  (
vitus  quae  in  non  fadendo  consistit ;  Servitus  negu
tiva)  ;  or  it  consists  in  his  being  bound  to  allow
some  other  person  to  do  something  to  the  propert}',
which  such  person  might  otherwise  be  prevented
from  doing  {servitus  quae  in  patiendo  consistit;
Servitus  ajfirmativa).  A  Servitus  never  consists  in
the  owner  of  the  servient  property  being  obliged  to
do  any  act  to  his  property,  though  he  may  be  under
an  obligatio  to  do  acts  which  are  necessary  towards
the  enjoyment  of  the  Servitus.  (Dig.  8.  tit.  1.  s.
15  ;  Puchta,  Inst.  i.  §  252,  note  e.)

There  were  two  classes  of  Servitutes.  Either
they  had  for  their  subject  a  definite  person,  who
could  exercise  the  right,  in  which  case  they  were


ctus

'I
jisH

I


SERVITUTES.

called  Personal,  Personarum  ;  and  they  ceased
with  the  death  of  the  person :  the  expression
**  personalis  servitus  "  was  used.  (Dig.  34.  tit.  3.
s.  8.  §  3.)  Or  they  had  for  their  subject  another
piece  of  property,  as  a  house  or  land,  and  the  per-
son who  exercised  the  Servitus  exercised  it  in  re-
spect of  his  right  to  the  house  or  land,  which  was
its  subject.  Servitutes  of  the  latter  kind  were
called  Praedial,  Servitutes  Praediorum  or  Rerum,
or  Jura  Praediorum  (Gains,  ii.  17.  29  ;  Dig.  8.  tit.
1,  s.  1)  ;  and  with  reference  to  their  special  kinds,
Jura  aquarum,  &c.     (Cic  pro  Caecin.  26.)

The  exercise  of  Personal  Servitutes,  of  which
Usus  and  Ususfructus  were  the  principal,  was  al-
ways connected  with  the  natural  possession  of  the
thing  ;  and  consequently  the  Quasi  Possessio  of
such  Servitutes  had  a  close  resemblance  to  Posses-
sio. [Possessio.]  Servitutes  of  this  class  consisted
solely  "  in  patiendo."

Praedial  servitutes  consisted  both  "  in  patiendo,"
and  "  in  non  faciendo."  Those  which  consisted
"  in  patiendo  "  comprised  either  such  acts  as  a  per-
son might  do,  by  virtue  of  the  Servitus,  which  acts
had  only  mediately  a  reference  to  another  piece  of
land,  as  in  the  case  of  a  Jus  Itineris  ;  or  such  acts
as  a  man  might  do,  with  immediate  reference  to
another  piece  of  land,  as  Jus  tigni  immittendi,
and  the  like.  Those  which  consisted  "  in  non
faciendo "  on  the  part  of  the  owner  were  acts
which  another  possessor  of  a  piece  of  land  could
require  the  owner  of  the  servient  property  not  to
do,  but  which  except  for  the  servitus,  the  owner
might  do.

Personal  servitutes  were  Usus,  Ususfructus,
Habitatio,  and  Operae  servorum  et  Animalium.

Habitatio  or  the  right  of  living  in  another  per-
8on''s  house  resembled  the  ususfructus  or  usus
aedium.  But  it  was  not  lost  as  ususfructus  and
usus  were,  by  capitis  diminutio  or  neglect  to  exer-
cise the  right.  Also,  it  consisted  in  the  right  to
inhabit  some  definite  part  of  a  house  only,  and  not
the  whole  ;  the  habitatio  could  be  sold  or  let.  If
it  was  a  donatio  inter  vivos,  it  could  be  set  aside
by  the  heredes  of  the  giver.  (Dig.  7.  tit.  8.  De
Usit  et  HabiUitione;  Dig.  39.  tit.  5.  s.  27,  32;
Inst.  2.  tit.  5.)

Operae  servorum  et  animalium  consisted  in  a
man  having  a  right  to  the  use  and  services  of
another  person's  slave  or  beast,  so  long  as  the  slave
or  beast  lived.  The  servitus  continued  after  the
death  of  the  person  entitled  to  it,  and  was  not  lost
by  a  capitis  diminutio  nor  by  neglect  to  exercise  it.
This  is  called  by  Gains  (ii.  32)  "  the  Ususfructus
hominum  et  ceterorum  animalium."

Praedial  Servitutes  imply  the  existence  of  two
contiguous  pieces  of  land  (praedia),  one  of  which
owes  a  servitus  to  the  other  (servitutem  debet^
praedium,  fundus  serviens)  ;  and  the  servitus  is
said  to  be  due  {deheri)  from  the  one  to  the  other.
The  name  of  praedium  dominans  which  is  now
often  used  to  designate  the  praedium  to  which  the
servitus  is  due,  is  a  modern  invention.  It  is  of
the  nature  of  a  Servitus  to  be  an  advantage  to  the
land  to  which  it  belongs:  it  must  be  something
that  in  some  way  increases  its  value.  It  must  also
be  a  thing  that  is  permanently  to  the  advantage  of
the  dominant  praedium  ;  for  it  is  said  "  omnes  ser-
vitutes praediorum  perpetuas  causas  habere  debent"
(Paulus,  Dig.  8.  tit.  2.  s.  8),  which  means  there  is
a  continuous  adaptation  of  the  servient  to  the  use
of  the  dominant  tenement     The  Servitus  is  con-


SERVITUTES.


3031


sidered  as  belonging  to  the  dominant  praedium  in
such  a  sense  that  it  cannot  be  alienated  without
the  praedium  nor  pledged  nor  let.

Praedial  Servitutes  were  either  Praediorum  Ur-
banorum  or  Rusticorum.  But  the  word  Servitus
has  a  double  meaning,  according  as  we  view  it  as  a
right  or  a  duty.  The  Servitus  of  a  Praedium  Rus-
ticum  or  Urbanum  is,  in  the  former  sense,  the
servitus  which  belongs  to  a  particular  Praedium,  as
a  right :  in  the  latter  sense  it  is  the  servitus  which
some  particular  Praedium  owes,  as  a  duty.  When
the  two  Praedia  are  contemplated  together  in  their
mutual  relations  of  right  and  duty,  the  word  Ser-
vitus expresses  the  whole  relation.  Servitutes  Ur-
banae  are  those  which  are  for  the  advantage  of  an
edifice  as  such,  whether  the  advantage  is  derived
from  another  building  or  simply  a  piece  of  land  ;
Rusticae  are  those  which  are  for  the  advantage  of
a  piece  of  ground,  as  such,  and  mainly  for"  the
benefit  of  agriculture.  "  Urbanum  praedium  non
locus  facit,  sed  materia."  (Ulp.  Dig.  30.  tit.  16.
s.  198.)

The  following  are  the  principal  Servitutes  Ur-
banae:  —  1.  Oneris  ferendi,  or  the  right  which  a
man  has  to  use  the  edifice  or  wall  of  his  neighbour
to  support  his  own  edifice.  The  owner  of  the
servient  property  was  consequently  bound  to  keep
it  in  repair  so  that  it  should  be  adequate  to  dis-
charge its  duty.  (Dig.  8.  tit.  5.  s.  6.)  2.  Tigni
immittendi,  or  the  right  of  planting  a  beam  in  or
upon  a  neighbour's  wall.  3.  Projiciendi,  or  the
right  of  adding  something  to  a  man's  edifice,  though
it  shall  project  into  the  open  space  which  is  above
his  neighbour's  grounds.  4.  Stillicidii,  or  fluminis
recipiendi  or  immittendi.  This  servitus  was  either
a  right  which  a  man  had  for  the  rain  water  to  run
from  his  house  upon  and  through  his  neighbour's
premises,  or  a  right  to  draw  such  water  from  his
neighbour's  premises  to  his  own.  The  technical
meaning  of  Stillicidium  is  rain  in  drops  ;  when
collected  in  a  flowing  body  it  is  Flumen.  (Varro,
de  Ling.  Lot.  v.  27,  ed.  Miiller  ;  Cic.  de  Or.  i.
38.)  5.  Altius  non  toUendi,  or  the  duty  which  a
man  owed  not  to  build  his  house  higher  than  its
present  elevation,  or  the  duty  of  the  owner  of  a
piece  of  land  not  to  raise  his  edifice  above  a  cer-
tain height,  in  order  that  the  owner  of  some
other  house  might  have  the  advantage  of  such
forbearance.  If  a  man  was  released  from  this
duty  by  his  neighbour,  he  obtained  a  new  right,
which  was  the  Jus  altius  tollendi.  In  like  man-
ner, a  man  whose  ground  was  released  from  the
Servitus  Stillicidii,  was  said  to  have  the  servitus
stillicidii  non  recipiendi.  This  was  not  strictly
accurate  language,  for  if  a  servitus  is  defined  to  be
some  limitation  of  the  usual  rights  of  ownership,  a
recovery  of  these  rights  or  a  release  from  the  duties
which  is  implied  by  the  possession  of  these  rights
by  another,  merely  gives  the  complete  exercise  of
ownership  and  so  destroys  all  notion  of  a  Servitus.
Still  such  was  the  language  of  the  Roman  Jurists,
and  accordingly  we  find  enumerated  among  the
Urbanae  Servitutes  (Dig.  8.  tit.  2.  s.  2),  "  Stilli-
cidium avertendi  in  tectum  vel  aream  vicini  aut
non  avertendi."  6.  Servitus  ne  Luminibus,  and  ne
Prospectui  officiatur,  or  the  duty  which  a  man  owes
to  his  neighbour's  land  not  to  obstruct  his  light  or
his  prospect  (see  Gains,  ii.  31  ;  Cic.  de  Or.  i.  39)  ;
and  Servitus  Luminum  or  Prospectus,  or  the  duty
of  a  man  to  allow  his  neighbour  to  make  openings
into  his  premises,  as  in  a  common  wall  for  instance
3  u  4


I03t


SERVITUTES.


to  get  light  or  a  prospect.  It  was  a  Servitus  tlie
object  of  which  was  to  procure  light,  whereas  the
ne  officiatur  was  to  prevent  the  destroying  of  light.
(Dig.  8.  tit.  2.  s.  4.  40.)  But  there  'are  different
opinions  as  to  the  meaning  of  Servitus  Luminum.
7.  Servitus  Stercolinii,  or  the  right  of  placing  dung
against  a  neighbour's  wall,  &c.  0.  Servitus  funii
immittendi,  or  the  right  of  sending  one's  smoke
through  a  neighbour's  chimney.  9.  Servitus  cloacae,
or  the  right  to  a  drain  or  sewer  from  a  man's  land
or  house  through  a  neighbour's  land  or  house.

The  following  are  the  principal  Servitutes  Rus-
ticae: — 1.  Servitus  Itineris,  or  the  right  to  a  foot-
path through  another  man's  ground  or  to  ride
through  on  horseback  or  in  a  sella  or  lectica,  for  a
man  in  such  cases  was  said  ire  and  not  a^ere.
Viewed  with  reference  to  the  person  who  exercised
the  right,  this  Servitus  was  properly  called  Jus
eundi.  (Gains,  iv.  3.)  2.  Actus  or  Agendi,  or  the
right  of  driving  a  beast  or  carriage  through  another
man's  land.  3.  Viae  or  the  right  eundi  et  agendi
et  ambulandi.  Via  of  course  included  the  other
two  Servitutes  ;  and  it  was  distinguished  from  them
by  its  width,  which  was  defined  by  the  Twelve
Tables.  (Dig.  8.  tit.  3.  s.  8.)  The  width  of  an
Iter  or  Actus  might  be  a  matter  of  evidence,  and
if  it  was  not  determined,  it  was  settled  by  an
arbiter.  If  the  width  of  a  Via  was  not  determined,
its  width  was  taken  to  be  the  legal  width  {lalitudo
hgitima).  In  the  work  De  Coloniis,  attributed  to
Frontinus,  the  phrase  "  iter  populo  debetur  or  non
debetur"  frequently  occurs.  When  "  iter  debetur"
occurs,  the  width  of  the  iter  is  given  in  feet.  It
seems  that  in  the  assignment  of  the  lands  in  these
instances,  the  lands  were  made  "  servire  populo,"
for  the  purposes  of  a  road.  4.  Servitus  pascendi
or  the  right  of  a  man  in  respect  of  the  ground  to
which  his  cattle  are  attached,  to  pasture  them
on  another's  ground.  5.  Servitus  aquaeductus  or
ducendi  aquam  per  fundum  alienum.  There  were
also  other  Servitutes  as  Aquae  haustus,  Pecoris
ad  aquam  appulsus,  Calcis  coquendae,  and  Arenae
fodiendae.  If  a  Publicus  locus  or  a  Via  publica
intervened,  no  servitus  aquaeductus  could  be  im-
posed, but  it  was  necessary  to  apply  to  the  Prin-
ceps  for  permission  to  form  an  aquaeductus  across
a  public  road.  The  intervention  of  a  Sacer  et
religiosus  locus  was  an  obstacle  to  imposing  an
Itineris  servitus,  for  no  Servitus  could  be  due  to
any  person  on  ground  which  was  sacer  or  reli-
giosus.

A  Servitus  Negativa  could  be  acquired  by  mere
contract  ;  and  it  seems  the  better  opinion  that  a
Servitus  Affirmativa  could  be  so  acquired,  and  that
quasi  possessio,  at  least  in  the  later  periods,  was
not  necessary  in  order  to  establish  the  Jus  Servi-
tutis,  but  only  to  give  a  right  to  the  Publiciana  in
rem  actio.  (Gains,  ii.  30,  31  ;  Savigny,  Das  Recht
des  Besitzes.)  The  phrases  "  aquae  jus  consti-
tuere,"  "  servitutem  fundo  imponere,"  occur  (Cic.
ad  Quint,  iii.  1.  c.  2).  According  to  Gains,  Servi-
tutes Urbanae  could  only  be  transferred  by  the
In  jure  cessio :  Servitutes  Rusticae  could  be  trans-
ferred by  Mancipatio  also.     (Gaius,  ii.  29.)

A  Servitus  might  be  established  by  Testament
(Servitus  Legata,  Dig.  33.  tit.  3),  and  the  right  to
it  was  acquired  when  the  "  dies  legati  cossit "
[Legatum]  ;  but  tradition  was  necessary  in  order
to  give  a  right  to  the  Publiciana  in  rem  actio.  A
Servitus  could  be  established  by  the  decision  of  a
judex  in  the  Judiciam  Familiae  erciscundae,  Com-


SERVITUTES.
muni  dividundo,  and  in  a  case  where  the  Judex
adjudicated  the  Proprietas  to  one  and  the  Usus-
fructus  to  another  (Dig.  7.  tit.  1.  s.  6).  Servitutes
could  also  be  acquired  by  the  Praescriptio  longi
temporis.  (Cod.  7.  tit.  33.  s.  ]  2.)  An  obscure  and
corrupt  passage  of  Cicero  (ad  Att.  xv.  26)  seems
to  allude  to  the  possibility  of  acquiring  a  right  to  a
Servitus  by  use  ;  as  to  which  a  Lex  Scribonia  made
a  change.  [Lex  Scribonia.]  Quasi  servitudes  were
sometimes  simply  founded  on  positive  enactments,
which  limited  the  owner  of  a  property  in  its  enjoy-
ment (Nov.  22.  c.  46.  s.  2)  ;  and  others  were  con-
sidered as  "  velut  jure  impositae"  (Dig.  39.  tit.  3.
s.  1.  §  23  ;  and  Dig.  43.  tit.  27,  De  Arboribus
Caedendis.)

A  Servitus  might  be  released  (remitti)  to  the
owner  of  the  Fundus  serviens  (Dig.  8.  tit.  1.  s.  14)  ;
or  it  might  be  surrendered  by  allowing  the  owner
of  the  Fundus  Serviens  to  do  certain  acts  upon  it,
which  were  inconsistent  with  the  continuance  of
the  Servitus.  (Dig.  8.  tit.  6.  s.  8.)  If  both  the
dominant  and  the  servient  land  came  to  belong  to
one  owner,  the  Servitutes  were  extinguished  ;
there  was  a  Confusio.  (Dig.  8.  tit.  6.  s.  1.)  If  the
separate  owners  of  two  separate  estates,  jointly
acquired  an  estate  which  was  servient  to  the  two
separate  estates,  the  Servitutes  were  not  extin-
guished ;  but  they  were  extinguished  if  the  joint
owners  of  a  dominant  estate,  jointly  acquired  the
servient  estate.  (Dig.  8.  tit.  3.  s.  27.)  A  usu-
fructus  was  extinguished  when  the  Usufructua-
rius  acquired  the  Proprietas  of  the  thing.  A
Servitus  was  extinguished  by  the  extinction  of  the
object,  but  if  the  servient  object  was  restored,  the
servitus  was  also  restored.  (Dig.  8.  tit.  2.  s.  20  ;
tit.  6.  s.  14.)  A  servitus  was  extinguished  by  the
extinction  of  the  subject,  as  in  the  case  of  a  Per-
sonal Servitude  with  the  death  of  the  person  who
was  intitled  to  it  ;  and  in  the  case  of  Praedial  Ser-
vitutes with  the  destruction  of  the  dominant  sub-
ject, but  they  were  revived  with  its  revival :  for
instance,  if  a  building  to  which  a  servitude  be-
longed, was  pulled  down  in  order  to  be  rebuilt,
and  if  it  was  rebuilt  in  the  same  form,  the  servi-
tude revived  (Paulus,  Dig.  8.  tit.  2.  s.  20.  §  2  ;
Moore  V.  Rawson,  3  B.  «Sc  Cr.  332).  A  Servitus
might  be  extinguished  by  not  using  it.  There  is
a  case  in  the  Digest  (8.  tit.  3.  s.  35)  of  the  servitus
of  a  spring,  the  use  of  which  had  been  interrupted
by  the  temporary  failure  of  the  spring,  and  a  re-
script of  Augustus  on  the  matter.  According  to
the  old  law,  Ususfructus  and  Usus  were  lost,;
through  not  exercising  the  right,  in  two  years  in
the  case  of  things  immoveable,  and  in  one  year  in|
the  case  of  things  moveable.  In  Justinian's  legis-
lation Ususfructus  and  Usus  were  only  lost  by  not]
exercising  the  right,  when  there  had  been  a  Usu-
capio  libertatis  on  the  part  of  the  owner  of  the
thing  or  the  ownership  had  been  acquired  by  Usu-
capion. (Cod.  .3.  tit  33.  8.  16.  §  1,  and  tit.  34.
s.  13.)

Servitutes  might  be  the  subjects  of  Actiones  in
rem.  (Dig.  7.  tit.  6  ;  8.  tit.  5.)  An  Actio  Con-
fessoria  or  Vindicatio  Servitutis  had  for  its  object
the  establishing  the  right  to  a  Servitus,  and  it
could  only  be  brought  b)-^  the  owner  of  the  domi-
nant land,  when  it  was  due  to  land.  The  object
of  the  action  was  the  establishment  of  the  right,
damages,  and  security  against  future  disturbance
in  the  exercise  of  the  right ;  and  the  action  might
be  not  only  against  the  owner  of  the   servient


SERVITUTES.

thing,  but  against  any  person  who  impeded  the
exercise  of  the  right.  The  phiintiff  had  of  course
to  prove  his  title  to  the  Servitus.  The  Actio  Ne-
gatoria  or  Vindicatio  libertatis,  might  be  brought
by  the  owner  of  the  property  against  any  person
who  claimed  a  Servitus  in  it.  The  object  was  to
establish  the  freedom  of  the  property  from  the
servitus,  for  damages,  and  for  security  to  the  owner
against  future  disturbance  in  the  exercise  of  his
ownership.  The  plaintiff  had  of  course  to  prove
his  ownership  and  the  defendant  to  prove  his  title
to  the  Servitus.     (Gains,  iv.  'd  ;  Dig.  8.  tit.  5.)

In  the  case  of  Personal  Servitudes,  the  Inter-
dicts were  just  the  same  as  in  the  <;ase  of  proper
Possession  ;  the  Interdict  which  was  applied  in
the  case  of  proper  Possession,  was  here  applied  as
a  Utile  Interdictum.  (Frag.  Vat.  90,  as  emended
by  Savigny.)

In  the  case  of  Praedial  Servitudes,  we  must
first  consider  the  Positive.  In  the  first  class,  the
acquisition  of  the  Juris  Quasi  Possessio  is  etlected
by  an  act  which  is  done  simply  as  an  exercise  of
the  Right,  independent  of  any  other  right.  The
interference  with  the  exercise  of  the  right  was  pre-
vented by  Interdicts  applicable  to  the  several  cases.
A  person  who  was  disturbed  in  exercising  a  Jus
Itineris,  Actus,  Viae  by  any  person  whatever,
whether  the  owner  of  the  servient  land  or  any
other  person,  had  a  right  to  the  Interdict :  the
object  of  this  Interdict  was  protection  against  the
disturbance,  and  compensation  :  its  elfect  was  ex-
actly like  that  of  the  Interdict  Uti  possidetis.
Another  Interdict  applied  to  the  same  objects  as
the  preceding  Interdict,  but  its  object  was  to
protect  the  person  intitled  to  the  servitude  from
being  disturbed  by  the  owner  while  he  was  putting
the  way  or  road  in  a  condition  fit  for  use.

There  were  various  other  Interdicts  as  in  the
case  of  the  Jus  aquae  quotidianae  vel  aestivae
ducendae  (Dig.  43.  tit.  20)  ;  in  the  case  of  the  re-
pair of  water  passages  (43.  tit.  21,  de  rivis)  ;  in
the  case  of  the  Jus  aquae  hauriendae  (43.  tit.  22).
The  second  class  of  Positive  Servitudes  consists
in  the  exercise  of  the  servitude  in  connection  with
•the  possession  of  another  piece  of  property.  The
jlnterdicts  applicable  to  this  case  are  explained
under  the  third  cla^s,  that  of  Negative  Servitudes.
I  In  the  case  of  Negative  Servitudes  there  are  only
jtwo  modes  in  whicli  the  Juris  quasi  Possessio  can
Ibe  acquired:  1,  when  the  owner  of  the  servient
iproperty  attempts  to  do  some  act,  which  the  owner
of  the  dominant  property  considers  inconsistent
iwith  his  Servitus,  and  is  prevented  ;  2,  by  any
legal  act  which  is  capable  of  transferring  the  Jus
jServitutis.  The  possession  is  lost  when  the  owner
■of  the  servient  property  does  an  act  which  is  con-
'trary  to  the  Right.  The  Possession  of  the  Servi-
jtudes  of  the  second  and  third  class  was  protected
by  the  Interdict  Uti  possidetis.  There  was  a
special  interdict  about  sewers  {De  Cloacis,  Dig.
i;i  tit.  23).

It  has  been  stated  that  Quasi-servitudes  were
liometimes  founded  on  positive  enactments.  These
lA^ere  not  Servitutes  properly  so  called,  for  they
kere  limitations  of  the  exercise  of  ownership  made
for  the  public  benefit.  The  only  cases  of  the  limi-
ation  of  the  exercise  of  ownership  by  positive
i:nactment,  which  are  mentioned  in  the  Pandect,
|.re  reducible  to  three  principal  classes.  The  first
|lass  comprehends  the  limitation  of  ownership  on
'eligious  grounds.     To  this  class  belongs  Finis,  or


SERVITUTES.  1033

a  space  of  five  feet  in  width  between  adjoining  es-
tates, which  it  was  not  permitted  to  cultivate.
This  intermediate  space  was  sacred  and  it  was
used  by  the  owners  of  the  adjoining  lands  for  sa-
crifice. To  this  class  also  belongs  the  rule,  that  if
a  man  had  buried  a  dead  body  on  the  land  of  an-
other without  his  consent,  he  could  not  as  a  general
rule  be  compelled  to  remove  the  body,  but  he  was
bound  to  make  recompence.  (Dig.  II.  tit.  7.  s.  2.
7,  8.)  The  second  class  comprehends  rules  relat-
ing to  police.  According  to  the  Twelve  Tables
every  owner  of  land  in  the  city  was  required  to
leave  a  space  of  two  feet  and  a  half  vacant  all
round  any  edifice  that  he  erected :  this  was  called
legitimum  spatium,  legitimus  modus.  Conse-
quently between  two  adjoining  houses  there  must
be  a  vacant  space  of  five  feet.  This  law  was  no
doubt  often  neglected,  for  after  the  fire  in  Nero's
reign  (Tacit.  A7m.  xv.  43),  it  was  forbidden  to
build  houses  with  a  common  wall  (com?nunio  parie^
turn)  ;  and  the  old  legitimum  spatium  was  again
required  to  be  observed  ;  and  it  is  referred  to  in  a
rescript  of  Antoninus  and  Verus.  (Dig.  8.  tit.  2.
s.  14.)  This  class  also  compi'ehends  rules  as  to  the
height  and  form  of  buildings.  Augustus  (Sueton.
Ociav.  89)  fixed  the  height  at  seventy  feet  ;  Nero
also  after  the  great  fire  made  some  regulations
with  the  view  of  limiting  the  height  of  houses.
Trajan  fixed  the  greatest  height  at  sixty  feet.
These  regulations  were  general,  and  had  no  refer-
ence to  the  convenience  of  persons  who  possessed
adjoining  houses  :  they  had  therefore  no  relation  at
all  to  the  Servitutes  altius  toUendi  and  non  toUendi
as  some  writers  suppose.  The  rule  of  the  Twelve
Tables  which  forbade  the  removing  a  "  tignum
furtivum  aedibus  vel  vineis  junctum,"  had  for  its
object  the  preventing  of  accidents.  (Dig.  47.  tit.  3.)
Another  rule  declared  that  the  owners  of  lands
which  were  adjoining  to  public  aquaeducts  should
permit  materials  to  be  taken  from  their  lands  for
these  public  purposes,  but  should  receive  a  proper
compensation.  The  Twelve  Tables  forbade  the
burning  or  interring  of  a  dead  body  in  the  city  ;
and  this  rule  was  enforced  by  a  Lex  Duilia.  In
the  time  of  Antoninus  Pius  this  rule  prevailed
both  in  Rome  and  other  cities.

The  third  class  of  limitations  had  for  its  object
the  promotion  of  Agricultui-e.  It  comprised  the
rules  relating  to  Aqua  Pluvia,  and  to  the  Tignum
Junctum  ill  the  case  of  a  vineyard  ;  and  it  gave  a
man  permission  to  go  on  his  neighbour's  premises
to  gather  the  fruits  which  had  fallen  thereon  from
his  trees  ;  with  this  limitation  that  he  could  only
go  every  third  day.  (Dig.  43.  tit.  28,  De  Glande
legenda.)  The  Twelve  Tables  enacted  that  if  a
neighbour's  tree  hung  over  into  another  person's
land,  that  person  might  trim  it  to  the  height  of
fifteen  feet  from  the  ground  {quindecim  pedes  altius
earn  suhlucator).  The  rule  was  a  limitation  of
ownership,  but  not  a  limitation  of  the  ownership
of  the  tree-owner  :  it  was  a  limitation  of  the  owner-
ship of  the  land-owner  ;  for  it  allowed  his  neigh-
bour's tree  to  overhang  his  ground,  provided  there
were  no  branches  less  than  fifteen  feet  from  the
ground.

With  these  exceptions,  some  of  which  were  of
great  antiquity,  ownership  in  Roman  Law  must  be
considered  as  unlimited.  These  limitations  also
had  no  reference  to  the  convenience  of  individuals
who  had  adjoining  houses  or  lands.  With  respect
to  neighbours  the  law  allowed  them  to  regulate  theix


•1034


SERVUS.


mutual  interests  as  they  pleased,  and  accordingly  a
man  could  agree  to  allow  a  neighbour  to  derive
a  certain  benefit  from  his  land  which  their  proxi-
mity rendered  desirable  to  him,  or  he  could  agree
to  abstain  from  certain  acts  on  his  land  for  the
benefit  of  his  neighbour's  land.  The  law  gave
force  to  these  agreements  under  the  name  of  Servi-
tutes,  and  assimilated  the  benefits  of  them  to  the
right  of  ownership  by  attaching  to  them  a  right  of
action  like  that  which  an  owner  enjoyed.

This  view  of  the  limitation  of  ownership
among  the  Romans  by  positive  enactment  is  from
a  valuable  essay  by  Dirksen,  Ueber  die  gesetzlichen
beschr'dnkungen  desEiqenthums,  <L'C.  Zeitschrift^  vol.  ii.

(Gains,  ii.  28—33  ;  Inst.  2.  tit.  3—5  ;  Dig.  7
and  8  ;  Cod.  3.  tit.  33,  34.)

This  sketch  may  be  completed  by  reference  to
the  following  works  and  the  authorities  quoted  in
them  :  Mackeldey,  Lehrbuch^  <fbc.  12th  ed.  ;  Muh-
lenbruch,  Doctritia  Pandectarum^  p.  268,  &c.  ;
Savigny,  Das  Recht  des  Besitzes,  Juris  Quasi  Pos-
session p.  525,  5th  ed.  ;  Von  der  Bestellung  der
Servitutcn  durch  simple  Vertrag  und  Stipulation,
von  Hasse,  Rhein.  Mus.  flir  Jurisprudenz,  Erster
Jahrgang ;  Von  dem  Verh'dltniss  des  Eigenthums
zn  den  Servituten,  von  Puchta,  Rhein.  Mus.  Erst.
Jahrg.  ;  Scheurl,  Bemerkungen  zur  lehre  von  den
Servitutcn,  Zeitschri/l,  <fcc.,  xii.  p.  237  ;  Puchta,
[nst.  ii.  §  252.  [G.  L.]

SERVUS  (Greek).  The  Greek  SoOAos,  like
the  Latin  servus,  corresponds  to  the  usual  meaning
of  our  word  slave.  Slavery  existed  almost  through-
out the  whole  of  Greece  ;  and  Aristotle  (Polil.  i.  3)
says  that  a  complete  household  is  that  which  con-
sists of  slaves  and  freemen  (o'lKla  Se  reAetos  e«
tovXwv  KoX  4\€v64p<ov),  and  he  defines  a  slave  to
be  a  living  working-tool  and  possession.  ('O  5ov\os
$/x\pvxov  opyavov.  Ethic.  Nieom.  y'm.  13  ;  6  SoDAoy
KTTiixa.  Ti  ifiipvxov,  Polit.  i.  4.)  None  of  the  Greek
philosophers  ever  seem  to  have  objected  to  slavery
as  a  thing  morally  wrong  ;  Plato  in  his  perfect
state  only  desires  that  no  (jreeks  should  be  made
slaves  by  Greeks  (de  Rep.  v.  p.  469),  and  Aristotle
defends  the  justice  of  the  institution  on  the  ground
of  a  diversity  of  race,  and  divides  mankind  into
the  free  (e'Aeu^epot)  and  those  who  are  slaves  by
nature  (ot  (pvffn  dov\oi)  :  under  the  latter  de-
scription he  appears  to  have  regarded  all  barba-
rians in  the  Greek  sense  of  the  word,  and  there-
fore considers  their  slavery  justifiable.

In  the  most  ancient  times  there  are  said  to  have
been  no  slaves  in  Greece  (Herod,  vi.  1 37  ;  Phere-
crat.  ap.  At/ten.  vi.  p.  263,  b),  but  we  find  them  in
the  Homeric  poems,  though  by  no  means  so  gene-
rally as  in  later  times.  They  are  usually  prisoners
taken  in  war  (SopidKwTOi),  who  serve  their  con-
querors :  but  we  also  read  as  well  of  the  purchase
and  sale  of  slaves  (Od.  xv.  483).  They  were  how-
ever at  that  time  mostly  confined  to  the  houses  of
the  wealthy.

There  were  two  kinds  of  slavery  among  the
Greeks.  One  species  arose  when  the  inhabitants
of  a  country  were  subdued  by  an  invading  tribe  and
reduced  to  the  condition  of  serfs  or  bondsmen  :  they
lived  upon  and  cultivated  the  land  which  their
masters  had  appropriated  to  themselves,  and  paid
them  a  certain  rent.  They  also  attended  their
masters  in  war.  They  could  not  be  sold  out  of  the
country  or  separated  from  their  families,  and  could
acquire  property.  Such  were  the  Helots  of  Sparta
[Hklotbs],  the  Penestae  of  Thessaly  [Penes-


SERVUS.

tab],  the  Bithynians  at  Byzantium,  tlie  Callicyrii"
at  Syracuse,  the  Mariandyni  at  Heraclea  in  Pon-
tus.  the  Aphamiotae  in  Crete.  [Cosmi.]  The
other  species  of  slavery  consisted  of  domestic  slaves
acquired  bj"^  purchase  (apyvpdoi'TtToi  or  xp^'^^^'^V'oi,
see  Isocr.  Platae.  p.  300,  ed.  Steph.),  who  were
entirely  the  property  of  their  masters,  and  could
be  disposed  of  like  any  other  goods  and  chattels :
these  were  the  SoCAot  properly  so  called,  and  were
the  kind  of  slaves  that  existed  at  Athens  and
Corinth.  In  commercial  cities  slaves  were  very
numerous,  as  they  performed  the  work  of  the  arti-
zans  and  manufacturers  of  modern  towns.  In
poorer  republics,  which  had  little  or  no  capital,  and
which  subsisted  wholly  by  agriculture,  they  would
be  few :  thus  in  Phocis  and  Locris  there  are  said
to  have  been  originally  no  domestic  slaves.  (Athen.
vi.  p.  264,  c  ;  Clinton,  F.  H.  vol.  ii.  pp.  41 1,  412.)
The  majority  of  slaves  was  purchased  ;  few  com-
paratively were  born  in  the  family  of  the  master,
partly  because  the  number  of  female  slaves  was
ver}'  small  in  comparison  Avith  the  male,  and  partly
because  the  cohabitation  of  slaves  was  discouraged,
as  it  was  considered  cheaper  to  purchase  than  to
rear  slaves.  A  slave  born  in  the  house  of  a  master
was  called  olK6rpiy\i,  in  contradistinction  to  one
purchased,  who  was  called  oIk4tt}s.  (Ammon.  and
Suid.  *.  V.)  If  both  the  father  and  mother  were
slaves,  the  offspring  was  called  aficpiSouXos  (Eus-
tath.  ad  Od.  ii.  290)  :  if  the  parents  were  oi-
k6tpi€€s,  the  offspring  was  called  olKOTpiSaios.
(Pollux,  iii.  76.)

It  was  a  recognized  rule  of  Greek  national  law
that  the  persons  of  those  who  were  taken  prisoners
in  war  became  the  property  of  the  conqueror  (Xen
Cyr.  vii.  5.  §  73),  but  it  was  the  practice  for
Greeks  to  give  liberty  to  those  of  their  own  nation
on  payment  of  a  ransom.  Consequently  almost  all
slaves  in  Greece,  with  the  exception  of  the  serfs
abovementioned,  were  barbarians.  It  appears  to
follow  from  a  passage  in  Timaeus  (ap.  A  then.  vi.
p.  265,  b)  that  the  Chians  were  the  first  who  car-
ried on  the  slave  trade,  where  the  slaves  were  more
numerous  than  in  any  other  place,  except  Sparta,
that  is  in  comparison  with  the  free  inhabitants.
(Thuc.  viii.  40.)  In  the  early  ages  of  Greece.,  a
great  number  of  slaves  was  obtained  by  pirates,
who  kidnapped  persons  on  the  coasts,  but  the  chief
supply  seems  to  have  come  from  the  Greek  colonies
in  Asia  Minor,  who  had  abundant  opportunities  of
obtaining  them  from  their  own  neighbourhood  and
the  interior  of  Asia.  A  considerable  number  of.
slaves  also  came  from  Thrace,  where  the  pareiita
frequently  sold  their  children.    (Herod,  v.  6.)

At  Athens,  as  well  as  in  other  states,  there  was.
a  regular  slave  market,  called  the  kukKos  (Harpo-i
crat.  s.  v.),   because  the  slaves  stood  round  in  a
circle.     They  were  also  sometimes  sold  by  auctiou,
and  appear  then  to  have  been  placed  on  a  stone
called  the  npar^p  M6os  (Pollux,  iii.  78),  as  is  also
done  when  slaves  are  sold  in  the  United  States  of  |
North  America :  the  same  was  also  the  practice  in
Rome,  whence  the  phrase  /iomo  de  lapide  emtus.
[AucTio.]     The  slave  market  at  Athens  seems  to
have  been  held  on  certain  fixed  days,  usually  the
last  day  of  the  month  (the  eurj  koi  via  or  vovp-tivia^  (
Aristoph.  Equit.  43,  with  Schol.).     The  price  of  j
slaves  naturally  differed  according  to   their  age,
strength,  and  acquirements.     "  Some  slaves,"  says  ;(
Xenophon  {Mem.  ii.  5.  §  2)  "  are  well  worth  two
minas,  others  hardl}-  half  a  mina  ;  some  sell  for


SERVUS.
five  minns  and  others  even  for  ten  ;  and  Nicias  the
son  of  Niceratus  is  said  to  have  given  no  less  than
a  talent  for  an  overseer  in  the  mines."  Bockh
(Publ.  Econ.  of  Athens^  p.  67,  &c.,  2d  ed.)  has
collected  many  particulars  respecting  the  price  of
slaves  ;  he  calculates  the  value  of  a  common  mining
slave  at  from  125  to  150  drachmas.  The  know-
ledge of  any  art  had  a  great  influence  upon  the
value  of  a  slave.  Of  the  thirty-two  or  thirt}^-
three  sword-cutlers  who  belonged  to  the  father  of
Demosthenes,  some  were  worth  five,  some  six,  and
the  lowest  more  than  three  minas  ;  and  his  twenty
couch-makers  together  were  worth  40  minas  {in
Apliob.  i.  p.  816).  Considerable  sums  were  paid
for  courtezans  and  female  players  on  the  cithara  ;
twenty  and  thirty  minas  were  common  prices  for
such  \lc:v.  Adelph.  iii.  1.  37,  iii.  2.  15,  iv.  7.  24  ;
Phorm.  iii.  3.  24)  :  Neaera  was  sold  for  thirty
minas.     (Demosth.  e.  Neaer.  p.  1354.  16.)

The  number  of  slaves  was  very  great  in  Athens.
According  to  the   census  made   when  Demetrius
Phalereus  was  archon  (b.  c.  309),  there  are  said
to  have  been  21,000  free  citizens,  10,000  Metics,
and  400,000  slaves  in  Attica  (Ctesicles,  ap.  Athen.
vi.  p.  272,  c) :  according  to  which  the  slave  popu-
lation is  so  immensely  large  in  proportion  to  the
free,  that  some  writers  have  rejected  the  account
altogether  (Niebuhr,  Hist,  of  Rome,  vol,  ii.  note
143),  and  others  have  supposed  a  corruption  in  the
numbers  and  that  for  400,000  we  ought  to  read
40,000.     (Hume,  ^5sa^s,  vol.i.  p.  443.)     Bockh
.and  Clinton   (F.  H.  ii.  p.  391),  however,  remark
with  some  justice,  that  in  computing  the  citizens
and  metics  the  object  was  to  ascertain  their  po-
litical and  military  strength,  and  hence  the  census
of  only  males  of  full  age  was  taken  ;  while  in
enumerating  slaves,  which  were  property,  it  would
be  necessary  to  compute  all  the  individuals  who
composed  that  property.     Bockh  takes   the  pro-
portion of  free  inhabitants  to  slaves  as  nearly  one
to   four   in   Attica,  Clinton  as  rather  more   than
three  to  one  ;   but  whatever  may  be  thought   of
these  calculations,  the  main  fact,   that  the  slave
population    in  Attica  was   much  larger  than  the
free,  is  incontrovertible :  during  the  occupation  of
Decelea  by  the  Lacedaemonians,  more  than  20,000
I  Athenian  slaves  escaped  to  this  place.    (Thuc.  vii.
I  27.)     In  Corinth  and  Aegina  their  number  was
I  equally    large :    according   to    Timaeus,    Corinth
I  had  460,000,  and  according  to  Aristotle  Aegina
\  470,000  slaves  (Athen.  I.e.),  but  these  large  num-
;  bers,  especially  in  relation  to  Aegina,  must  be  un-
j  derstood  only  of  the  early  times,  before  Athens
I  had  obtained  possession  of  the  commerce  of  Greece.
I      At  Athens  even  the  poorest  citizen  had  a  slave
for  the  care  of  his  household  (Aristoph.  Plut.  init.),
;  and  in  every  moderate  establishment  many  were
j  employed  for  all  possible  occupations,  as  bakers,
I  cooks,  tailors,  &c.     The  number  possessed  by  one
;  person   was   never   so  great  as   at  Rome    during
the  later  times  of  the  republic  and  under  the  em-
pire, but  it  was  still  very  considerable.     Plato  {de
I  Hep.  ix.  p.  57b)  expressly  remarks,  that  some  per-
sons  had  fifty  slaves  and  even  more.     This  was
I  about  the  number  which  the  father  of  Demosthenes
I  possessed  {in  Aphob.  i.  p.  823)  ;  Lysias  and  Pole-
marchus    had    120    (Lys.   in  Eratosth.   p.   395),
Philemonides  had  300,  Hipponicus  600,  and  Nicias
1000  slaves  in  the  mines  alone.    (Xen.  de  Vect.  iv.
,  14, 15.)     It  must  be  bonie  in  mind,  when  we  read
iof  one  person   possessing   so   large  a  number   of


SERVUS.  1035

slaves,  that  thej^  were  employed  in  various  work-
shops, mines,  or  manufactories  •  the  number  which
a  person  kept  to  attend  to  his  own  private  wants  or
those  of  his  household,  was  probably  never  very
large.  And  this  constitutes  one  great  distinction
between  Greek  and  Roman  slaves,  that  the  labour
of  the  former  was  regarded  as  the  means  by  which
an  owner  might  obtain  profit  for  the  outlay  of  his
capital  in  the  purchase  of  the  slaves,  while  the
latter  were  chiefl}^  employed  in  ministering  to  the
wants  of  their  master  and  his  family,  and  in  grati-
fying his  luxury  and  vanity.  Thus  Athenaeus
(vi.  p.  272,  e)  remarks,  that  many  of  the  Romans
possess  10,000  or  20,000  slaves  and  even  more,
but  not,  he  adds,  for  the  sake  of  bringing  in  a
revenue,  as  the  wealthy  Nicias.

Slaves  either  worked  on  their  masters'  account
or  their  own  (in  the  latter  case  they  paid  their
masters  a  certain  sum  a  day)  ;  or  they  were  let
out  by  their  master  on  hire  either  for  the  mines  or
any  other  kind  of  labour,  or  as  hired  servants  for
wages  (aTTocpopd).  The  rowers  on  board  the  ships
were  usually  slaves  (Isocrat.  de  Pace,  p.  169,  ed.
Steph.)  ;  it  is  remarked  as  an  unusual  circumstance,
that  the  seamen  of  the  Paralos  were  freemen.
(Thuc.  viii.  73.)  These  slaves  either  belonged
to  the  state  or  to  private  persons,  who  let  them  out
to  the  state  on  payment  of  a  certain  sum.  It  ap-
pears that  a  considerable  number  of  persons  kept
large  gangs  of  slaves  merely  for  the  purpose  of
letting  out,  and  found  this  a  profitable  mode  of  in-
vesting their  capital.  Great  numbers  were  required
for  the  mines,  and  in  most  cases  the  mine-lessees
would  be  obliged  to  hire  some,  as  they  would  not
have  sufficient  capital  to  purchase  as  many  as  they
wanted.  We  learn  from  a  fragment  of  Hyperides
preserved  by  Suidas  (s.v.'A7re»|/7)<|)tVaTo),  that  there
were  at  one  time  as  many  as  150,000  slaves,  who
worked  in  the  mines  and  were  employed  in  country
labour.  Generally  none  but  inferior  slaves  were
confined  in  these  mines :  they  worked  in  chains,
and  numbers  died  from  the  effects  of  the  unwhole-
some atmosphere.  (Bockh,  On  the  Silver  Mines  of
Laurion.)  We  cannot  calculate  with  accuracy
what  was  the  usual  rate  of  profit  which  a  slave-
proprietor  obtained.  The  thirty-two  or  thirty-
three  sword-cutlers  belonging  to  the  father  of  De-
mosthenes produced  annually  a  net  profit  of  30
minas,  their  purchase  value  being  190  minas,  and
the  twenty  couch-makers  a  profit  of  12  minas,
their  purchase  value  being  40  tninas.  (Demosth.  in
Aphob.  i.  p.  816.)  The  leather- workers  of  Timar
chus  produced  to  their  masters  two,  the  overseers
three,  oboli  a  day  (Aeschin.  in  Tim.  p.  118):
Nicias  paid  an  obolus  a  day  for  each  mining  slave
which  he  hired.  (Xen.  Vect.  iv.  14.)  The  rate
of  profit  upon  the  purchase-money  of  the  slaves
was  naturally  high,  as  their  value  was  destroyed
by  age,  and  those  who  died  had  to  be  replaced  by
fresh  purchases.  The  proprietor  was  also  exposed
to  the  great  danger  of  their  running  away,  when  it
became  necessary  to  pursue  them  and  offer  rewards
for  their  recapture  {awcrrpa,  Xen.  Mem.  ii.  10.
§  1,  2  ;  Plat.  Protag.  p.  310).  Antigenes  of
Rhodes  was  the  first  that  established  an  insurance
of  slaves.  For  a  yearly  contribution  of  eight
drachmas  for  each  slave  that  was  in  the  army,  he
undertook  to  make  good  the  value  of  the  slave  at
the  time  of  his  running  away.  (Pseudo-Arist.
Oecon.  c.  35.)  Slaves  that  worked  in  the  fields
were  under  an  overseer  {iirirpoiros),  to  -whom  the


103G


SERVUS.


whole  management  of  the  estate  was  frequently
entrusted,  while  the  master  resided  in  the  city  ;
the  household  slaves  were  under  a  steward  (rafjiiasX
the  female  slaves  under  a  stewardess  {Tajxla).
(Xcn.  Oecon.  xii.  2,  ix.  11.)

The  Athenian  slaves  did  not,  like  the  Helots  of
Sparta  and  the  Peuestae  of  Thessaly,  serve  in  the
armies  ;  the  battles  of  Marathon  and  Arginusae,
when  the  Athenians  anned  their  slaves  (Pausan.
i.  32.  §  3  ;  Schol.  ad  Aristoph.  Ran.  33),  were
exceptions  to  the  general  rule.

The  rights  of  possession  with  regard  to  slaves
differed  in  no  respect  from  any  other  property  ;
they  could  be  given  or  taken  as  pledges.  (Dem.  in
Pa7itaenet.  p.  9()7,  in  Aphob.  p.  821,  in  Onetor.  i.
p.  871.)  The  condition,  however,  of  Greek  slaves
was  upon  the  whole  better  than  that  of  Roman
ones,  with  the  exception  perhaps  of  Sparta,  where,
according  to  Plutarch  {Lye.  28),  it  was  the  best
place  in  the  world  to  be  a  freeman,  and  the  worst
to  be  a  slave  (eV  AaKeSai'/xow  Kal  rhu  eAevOepov
fxd\i(na  iKevOepov  eluai,  Koi  rhv  SovKov  fxaXiara
SovAov).  At  Athens  especially  the  slaves  seem  to
have  been  allowed  a  degree  of  liberty  and  indul-
gence, which  was  never  granted  to  them  at  Rome.
(Compare  Plut.  de  Garrul.  18  ;  Xenoph.  de  Rep.
Ath.  i.  12)  On  the  reception  of  a  new  slave  into
a  house  at  Athens,  it  was  the  custom  to  scatter
sweetmeats  (/caraxi^o'/iaTa),  as  was  done  in  the
case  of  a  newly  married  pair.  (Aristoph.  Plut.  760,
with  Schol.  ;  Demosth.  in  Steph.  p.  1123.  29  ;
Pollux,  iii.  77  ;  Hesych.  and  Suidas,  s.  v.  Kara-
XixTfiara.)

The  life  and  person  of  a  slave  were  also  pro-
tected by  the  law  :  a  person  who  struck  or  mal-
treated a  slave  was  liable  to  an  action  {v€p€ws
ypacpT].,  Dem.  in  Mid.  p.  ,529  ;  Aeschin.  in  Tim.  p.
41  ;  Xen.  de  Rep.  Ath.  i.  10  ;  Athen.  vi.  p.  267,
f  ;  Meier,  Att.  Froc.  p.  322,  &c.)  ;  a  slave  too  could
not  be  put  to  death  without  legal  sentence.  (Eurip.
Hecuh.  287,  288  ;  Antiph.  de  caed.  Herod,  p.  728.)
He  could  even  take  shelter  from  the  cruelty  of
his  master  in  the  temple  of  Theseus,  and  there
claim  the  privilege  of  being  sold  by  him  {ivpaaiv
alreTaeai,  Plut.  T/w.s.  36  ;  Pollux,  vii.  13  ;  Meier,
Att.Proc.  p.  403,  &c.).  The  person  of  a  slave,
however,  was  not  considered  so  sacred  as  that  of  a
freeman  :  his  offences  were  punished  with  corporal
chastisement,  which  was  the  last  mode  of  punish-
ment inflicted  on  a  freeman  (Dem.  m  Timocr.  \i.
752)  ;  he  was  not  believed  upon  his  oath,  and  his
evidence  in  courts  of  justice  was  always  taken  with
torture.

Notwithstanding  the  generally  mild  treatment
of  slaves  in  Greece,  their  insurrection  was  not  un-
frequent  (Plat.  Leg.  vi.  p.  777)  :  but  these  insur-
rections in  Attica  were  usually  confined  to  the
mining  slaves,  who  were  treated  with  more  severity
than  the  others.  On  one  occasion  they  murdered
their  guards,  took  possession  of  the  fortifications  of
Sunium,  and  from  this  point  ravaged  the  country
for  a  considerable  time.     (Athen.  vi.  p.  272,  f.)

Slaves  were  sometimes  manumitted  at  Athens,
though  not  so  frequently  as  at  Rome  ;  but  it  seems
doubtful  whether  a  master  was  ever  obliged  to
liberate  a  slave  against  his  will  for  a  certain  sum  of
money,  as  some  writers  have  concluded  from  a  pas-
sage of  Plautus.  (Casin.  ii.  5.  7.)  Those  who  were
manumitted  (aTreAew^epot)  did  not  become  citizens,
as  they  did  at  Rome,  but  passed  into  the  condi-
tion of  Metics.    They  were  obliged  to  honour  their


SERVUS.
former  master  as  their  patron  (irpoo-TKTTjs),  and  to
fulfil  certain  duties  towards  him,  the  neglect  of
which  rendered  them  liable  to  the  S'ikt]  airoara-
aiov,  by  which  they  might  again  be  sold  into
slavery.  [Libertus,  p.  705,  a  ;  Apostasiou
Dike.']

Respecting  the  public  slaves  at  Athens,  see
Demosii.

It  appears  that  there  was  a  tax  upon  slaves  at
Athens  (Xen.  de  Vecf.  iv.  25),  which  Bockh  (Pubf.
Econ.  pp.331,  332,  2d  ed.)  supposes  was  three
oboli  a  year  for  each  slave.

Besides  the  authorities  quoted  in  tlie  course  of
this  article,  the  reader  may  refer  to  Petitus,  Leg.
Att.  ii.  6.  p.  254,  &c.  ;  Reitermeier,  Gesch.  der
Sclaverei  in  Griechenland.,  Berl.  1789  ;  Limburg-
Brouwer,  Histoire  de  la  Civilisation  des  Grecs.,  vol.
iii.  p.  267,  &c.  ;  Gottling,  de  Notione  ServHutis
apud  Aristotelem,  Jen.  1821  ;  Hermann,  Lehrhuch
der  griech.  Staatsalt.  §  114  ;  and  especially  Becker,
Charikles,  vol.  ii.  p.  20,  &c.

SERVUS  (Roman).  SE'RVITUS.  "Servitus
est  constitutio  juris  gjntium  qua  quis  domiiiio
alieno  contra  naturam  subjicitur."  (Florent.  Di?.
1.  tit.  5.  s.  4.)  Gains  also  considers  the  potestas  of
a  master  over  a  slave  as  "juris  gentium  "  (i.  52).
The  Romans  viewed  Liberty  as  a  Natural  State,
and  Slavery  as  a  condition  which  was  contrary  to
the  Natural  State.  The  mutual  relation  of  Slave
and  Master  among  the  Romans  was  expressed  by
the  tenns  Servus  and  Dominus  ;  and  the  power
and  interest  which  the  dominus  had  over  and  in
the  slave  was  expressed  by  Dominium.  The  term
Dominium  or  ownership,  with  reference  to  a  slave,
pointed  to  the  slave  merely  as  a  thing  or  object  of
ownership,  and  a  slave  as  one  of  the  Res  Mancipi
was  classed  with  other  objects  of  ownership.  The
word  Potestas  was  also  applied  to  the  mastei-'s
power  over  his  slave,  and  the  same  word  was  used
to  express  the  father's  power  over  his  children.
The  boundaries  between  the  Patria  and  Dominica
Potestas  were  originally  very  narrow,  but  the  child
had  certain  legal  capacities  Avhich  were  altogether
wanting  to  the  condition  of  the  slave.  The  master
had  no  Potestas  over  the  slave,  if  he  had  merely  a
"  nudum  jus  Quiritium  in  servo :  "  it  was  neces-
sary that  the  slave  should  be  his  In  bonis  at  kast.
(Gains,  i.  54.)

According  to  the  strict  principles  of  the  Roman
Law,  it  was  a  consequence  of  the  relation  of  Master
and  Slave  that  the  Master  could  treat  the  Slave  as
he  pleased  :  he  could  sell  him,  punish  him,  and
put  him  to  death.  Positive  morality  however  and
the  social  intercourse  that  must  always  subsist  be-
tween a  master  and  the  slaves,  who  are  immedi-
ately about  him,  ameliorated  the  condition  of
slavery.  Still  we  read  of  acts  of  great  cruelty
committed  by  masters  in  the  later  Republican  and
earlier  Imperial  periods,  and  tlie  Lex  Petronia
was  enacted  in  order  to  protect  the  slave.  The
original  power  of  life  and  death  over  a  slave,
which  Gains  considers  to  be  a  part  of  the  Jus
Gentium,  was  limited  by  a  constitution  of  Anto-
ninus, which  enacted  that  if  a  man  put  his  slave
to  death  without  sufficient  reason  {siiie  causa),  he
was  liable  to  the  same  penalty  as  if  he  had  killed  )
another  man's  slave.  The  Constitution  applied  to
Roman  citizens  and  to  all  who  were  under  the
Imperium  Romanura.  (Gaius,  i.  52,  &c.)  The
same  Constitution  also  prohibited  the  cruel  treat-
ment of  slaves  by  their  masters,  by  enacting  that


SERVUS.

if  the  cruelty  of  the  master  was  intolerable,  he
niitrht  be  compelled  to  sell  the  slave  ;  and  the
slave  was  empowered  to  make  his  complaint  to
the  proper  authority.  (Senec.  de  Denef.  iii.  22.)
A  Constitution  of  Claudius  enacted  that  if  a  man
exposed  his  slaves,  who  were  infinn,  they  should
become  free  ;  and  the  Constitution  also  declared
that  if  they  were  put  to  death,  the  act  should  be
murder.  (Sueton.  Cland.  25.)  It  was  also  enacted
(Cod.  3.  tit.  38.  s.  11)  that  in  sales  or  division
of  property,  slaves,  such  as  husband  .ind  wife,
parents  and  children,  brothers  and  sisters,  should
not  be  separated.

A  slave  could  not  contract  a  marriage.  His
cohabitation  with  a  woman  was  Contubemium  ;
and  no  legal  relation  between  him  and  his  children
was  recognized.  Still  nearness  of  blood  was  con-
sidered an  impediment  to  marriage  after  manumis-
sion :  thus  a  manumitted  slave  could  not  marry  his
manumitted  sister.     (Dig.  23.  tit.  2.  s.  14.)

A  slave  could   have  no  property.     He  was  not
incapable  of  acquiring  property,  but  his  acquisi-
tions belonged  to  his  master  ;  which  Gains  consi-
ders to  be  a  rule  of  the  Jus  Gentium  (i.  52).     A
slave  could  acquire  for  his  master  by  Mancipatio,
Traditio,  Stipulatio,  or  in  any  other  way.     In  this
capacity  of  the  slave  to  take,  though  he  could  not
keep,  his  condition  was  assimilated  to  that  of  a
filiusfamilias,  and  he  was  regarded  as  a  person.     If
one  person  had  a  Nudum  Jus  Quiritium  in  a  slave,
and  he  was  another's  In  bonis,  his  acquisitions  be-
longed to  the  person  whose  he  was  In  bonis.     If  a
man  bona  fide  possessed  another  man's  slave  or  a
free  person,  he  only  acquired  through  the  slave  in
two  cases :  he  was  entitled  to  all  that  the  slave
acquired  out  of  or  by  means  of  the  property  of  the
I  possessor  {ex  re  ejus)  ;  and  he  was  entitled  to  all
(  that  the  slave  acquired   by  his  own   labour    {ex
j  operis  suis)  ;  the  law  was  the  same  with  respect
i  to  a  slave  of  whom  a  man  had  the  Ususfructus
I  only.     All  other  acquisitions  of  such  slaves  or  free
!  persons  belonged  to  their  owner  or  to  themselves,
j  according  as  they  were  slaves  or  free  men.    (Ulp.
iFraff.  tit.  19.)     If  a  slave  Avas  appointed  heres,
he  could  only  accept  the  hereditas  with  the  consent
i  of  his  master,  and  he  acquired  the  hereditas  for
his  master :  in  the  same  way,  the  slave  acquired  a
legacy  for  his  master.     (Gains,  ii.  87,  &c.)

A  master  could  also  acquire  Possessio  through
his  slave,  and  thus  have  a  commencement  of  Usu-
capion (Gaius,  ii.  89)  ;  but  the  owner  must  have
the  possession  of  the  slave  in  order  that  he  might
lacquire  possession  through  him,  and  consequently
la  man  could  not  acquire  possession  by  means  of  a
jpignorated  slave.  [Pignus.]  A  bonae  fidei  pos-
sessor, that  is,  one  who  believed  the  slave  to  be
ihis  own,  could  acquire  possession  through  him  in
isuch  cases  as  he  could  acquire  property  ;  conse-
iquently  a  pledgee  could  not  acquire  possession
through  a  pignorated  slave,  though  he  had  the
jpossession  of  him  bona  fide,  for  this  bona  fides
was  not  that  which  is  meant  in  the  phrase  bonae
pdei  possessor.  The  Usufructuarius  acquired  pos-
session through  the  slave  in  the  same  cases  in
^vhich  the  bonae  fidei  possessor  acquired  it.  (Sa-
vigny,  Das  Recht  des  Desitzes,  p.  314,  ed.  5.)
'  Slaves  were  not  only  employed  in  the  usual  do-
mestic offices  and  in  the  labours  of  the  field,  but
jilso  as  factors  or  agents  for  their  masters  in  the
lOanagement  of  business  [Institoria  Actio,
F-cc],  and  as  mechanics,   artisans,   and  in  every


SERVUS.


1037


branch  of  industry.  It  may  easily  be  conceived
that  under  these  circumstances,  especially  as  they
were  often  intrusted  with  property  to  a  large
amount,  there  must  have  arisen  a  practice  of  al-
lowing the  slave  to  consider  part  of  his  gains  as
his  own :  this  was  his  Peculium,  a  term  also  ap-
plicable to  such  acquisitions  of  a  filiusfamilias  as
his  father  allowed  him  to  consider  as  his  own.
[P  ATRIA  Potest  AS.]  According  to  strict  law,
the  Peculium  was  the  property  of  the  master,  but
according  to  usage  it  was  considered  to  be  the
property  of  the  slave.  Sometimes  it  was  agreed
between  master  and  slave,  that  the  slave  should
purchase  his  freedom  with  his  Peculium  when  it
amounted  to  a  certain  sum.  (Tacit.  Ann.  xiv.  42,
and  the  note  of  Lipsius.)  If  a  slave  was  manu-
mitted by  the  owner  in  his  lifetime,  the  Peculium
was  considered  to  be  given  together  with  Libertas,
unless  it  was  expressly  retained.  (Dig.  15.  tit.  1.
s.  53,  de  Peculio.)  Transactions  of  borrowing  and
lending  could  take  place  between  the  master  and
slave  with  respect  to  the  Peculium,  though  no
right  of  action  arose  on  either  side  out  of  such
dealings,  conformably  to  a  general  principle  of
Roman  Law.  (Gaius,  iv.  78.)  If  after  the  slave's
manumission,  the  master  paid  him  a  debt  which
had  arisen  in  the  manner  above  mentioned,  he
could  not  recover  it.  (Dig.  12.  tit.  6.  s.  64.)  In
case  of  the  claim  of  creditors  on  the  slave's  Pecu-
lium, the  debt  of  the  slave  to  the  master  was  first
taken  into  the  account,  and  deducted  from  the  Pe-
culium. So  far  was  the  law  modified,  that  in  the
case  of  natumles  obligationes,  as  the  Romans
called  them,  between  master  and  slave,  a  fidejussor
could  be  bound  for  a  slave  ;  and  he  could  also  be
bound,  if  the  creditor  was  an  extraneus.

A  naturalis  obligatio  might  result  from  the  deal-
ings of  a  slave  with  other  persons  than  his  mas-
ter ;  but  the  master  was  not  at  all  affected  by
such  dealings.  The  master  was  only  bound  by  the
acts  and  dealings  of  the  slave,  when  the  slave  was
employed  as  his  agent  or  instrument,  in  which
case  the  master  might  be  liable  to  an  Actio  Exer-
ciTORiA  or  Institoria.  (Gaius,  iv.  71.)  There
was  of  course  an  actio  against  the  master,  when  the
slave  acted  by  his  orders.  [Jussu,  Quod,  &c.]
If  a  slave  or  filiusfamilias  traded  with  his  peculium
with  the  knowledge  of  the  dominus  or  father,  the
peculium  and  all  that  was  produced  by  it  were  di-
visible among  the  creditors  and  master  or  father  in
due  proportions  {pro  rata  portione),  and  if  anf  of
the  creditors  complained  of  getting  less  than  his
share,  he  had  a  tributoria  actio  against  the  master
or  father,  to  whom  the  laAV  gave  the  power  of  dis-
tribution among  the  creditors.  (Gaius,  iv.  72,  &c.)
The  master  was  not  liable  for  anything  beyond
the  amount  of  the  peculium,  and  his  own  demand
was  payable  first.  (Dig.  14.  tit.  4.  de  Tributoria
Actione.)  Sometimes  a  slave  would  have  anothei
slave  under  him,  who  had  a  peculium  with  respect
to  the  first  slave,  just  as  the  first  slave  had  a  pecu-
lium with  respect  to  his  master.  On  this  practice
was  founded  the  distinction  between  Servi  Ordi-
narii  and  Vicarii.  (Dig.  15.  tit.  1.  s.  17.)  These
subordinate  peculia  were  however  legally  considered
as  included  in  the  principal  peculium.  In  the  case
of  a  slave  dying,  being  sold  or  manumitted,  the
Edict  required  that  any  action  in  respect  of  the
Peculium  must  be  brought  within  a  year.  (Dig.  1 5.
tit.  2.  s.  1 ,  which  contains  the  words  of  the  Edict.)
If  a  slave  or  filiusfamilias  had  carried  on  dealings


1038


SERVUS.


witliout  the  knowledge  and  consent  of  his  master
or  father,  there  might  be  an  action  against  the
master  or  father  in  respect  of  such  dealings,  so  far
as  it  could  be  proved  that  he  had  derived  advan-
tage from  them.  This  was  called  the  Actio  de  in
rem  Verso  (Dig.  15.  tit.  3),  and  it  was  in  fact  the
same  actio  as  that  De  Peculio.  That  was  said
"  in  rem  patris  dominive  versum,"  which  turned
out  for  his  advantage.  For  instance  if  a  slave  bor-
rowed ten  sestertia  and  paid  them  to  the  master''s
creditors,  the  master  was  bound  to  pay  the  loan,
and  the  lender  had  an  actio  against  him  De  in  rem
verso.  If  the  slave  paid  any  part  of  the  borrowed
sum  to  his  master's  creditors,  the  master  was  liable
to  the  lender  for  the  amount  so  applied,  and  if  the
slave  had  wasted  the  other  part,  the  master  was
bound  to  make  that  good  to  the  amount  of  the
slave's  peculium  ;  but  still  with  this  provision,
that  the  amount  of  the  slave's  peculium  could  only
be  ascertained  by  first  deducting  from  it  what  he
ovved  to  the  master.  The  case  was  the  same  with
the  peculium  of  a  son  and  a  slave.  Thus,  as
Gains  observes  (iv.  73),  the  Actio  De  peculio  and
De  in  rem  verso  was  one  actio,  but  contained  two
condemnationes.

It  is  a  consequence  of  the  relation  of  Slave  and
Master,  that  the  Master  acquired  no  rights  against
the  slave  in  consequence  of  his  Delicts.  Other
persons  might  obtain  rights  against  a  slave  in  con-
seqvence  of  his  delicts,  but  their  right  could  not  be
prosecuted  by  action  until  the  slave  was  manu-
mitted. (Gains,  iv.  77.)  They  had  however  a
right  of  action  against  the  slave's  master  for
damages,  and  if  the  master  would  not  pay  the
damages,  he  must  give  up  the  slave.  [NoxA.]
The  slave  was  protected  against  injury  from  other
persons.  If  the  slave  was  killed,  the  master  might
either  prosecute  the  killer  for  a  capital  offence,  or
sue  for  damages  under  the  Lex  Aquillia.  (Gains,
iii.  213.)  [Aquillia  Lex  ;  Injuria.]  The
master  had  also  a  praetoria  actio  in  duplum  against
those  who  corrupted  his  slave  (servus,  servo)  and
led  him  into  bad  practices  (Dig.  11.  tit.  3.  s.  I.
■where  the  words  of  the  Edict  are  given) :  the  in
duplum  was  to  twice  the  amount  of  the  estimated
damage.  He  had  also  an  action  against  a  person
who  committed  stuprum  with  his  female  slave.
(Dig.  47.  tit.  10.  s.  25.)

A  runaway  slave  (fugitivus)  could  not  lawfully
be  received  or  harboured  ;  to  conceal  him  was
Furtum.  The  master  was  entitled  to  pursue  him
wherever  he  pleased  ;  and  it  was  the  duty  of  all
authorities  to  give  him  aid  in  recovering  the  slave.
It  was  the  object  of  various  laws  to  check  the
running  away  of  slaves  in  every  way,  and  ac-
cordingly a  runaway  slave  could  not  legally  be  an
object  of  sale.  A  class  of  persons  called  Fugitivarii
made  it  their  business  to  recover  runaway  slaves.
The  rights  of  the  master  over  the  slave  were  in
no  way  affected  by  his  running  away.  (Dig.  11.
tit.  4.  De  fugitivis :  there  was  a  Lex  Fabia  on
this  subject,  and  apparently  two  Senatusconsulta
at  least  ;  see  also  Varro,  de  Re  Rust.  iii.  14  ;  Floras,
iii.  19,  and  the  note  in  Duker's  edition.)

A  person  was  a  slave  either  Jure  Gentium  or
Jure  Civili.  A  person  was  bom  a  slave  Jure  Gen-
tium whose  mother  was  a  slave  when  she  gave
him  birth  (Gaius,  i.  82)  ;  for  it  was  a  legal  prin-
ciple that  the  condition  of  those  who  were  not  be-
gotten in  Justae  Nuptiae  was  to  be  reckoned  from
the  moment  of  the  birth.     A  slave  born  in  the


SERVUS.

master's  house  was  Vema.  But  it  was  also  a
principle  of  Roman  Law  that  the  status  of  a  person
who  was  begotten  in  Justae  Nuptiae  was  reckoned
from  the  time  of  conception.  At  a  later  period  the
rule  of  law  was  established,  that  though  a  woman
at  the  time  of  the  birth  might  be  a  slave,  still  her
child  was  free,  if  the  mother  had  been  free  at  any
time  reckoning  backwards  from  the  time  of  the
birth  to  the  time  of  the  conception.  (Paulus,  S.  R.
ii.  tit.  24;  Dig.  1.  tit.  5.  s.  5.)  There  were  various
cases  of  children  the  offspring  of  a  free  parent  and
a  slave  as  to  which  positive  law  provided  whether
the  children  should  be  free  or  slaves.  (Gaius,  i.
83,  &c.)     [Senatusconsultum  Claudianum.J

A  person  became  a  slave  by  capture  in  war,  also
Jure  Gentium.  [Praeda.]  Captives  in  war  were
sold  as  belonging  to  the  Aerarium  or  distributed
among  the  soldiers  by  lot.  (Walter,  Geschickte
&c.  p.  50.  note  35,  1st  ed.)  In  reference  to  the
practice  of  selling  prisoners  with  a  crown  on  their
heads,  we  find  the  expression  "  sub  corona  venire,
vendere."  (Gell.  vii.  4  ;  Liv.  v.  22  ;  Caesar,
D.G.m.  16.)

A  free  person  might  become  a  slave  in  various
ways  in  consequence  of  positive  law,  .Jure  Civili.
This  was  the  case  with  Incensi  [Caput],  and
those  who  evaded  military  service.  (Cic.  pro
Cdecina^  34.)  In  certain  cases,  a  man  became  a
slave,  if  he  allowed  himself  to  be  sold  as  a  slave  in
order  to  defraud  the  purchaser  ;  and  a  free  woman
who  cohabited  with  a  slave  might  be  reduced  to
the  same  condition.  [Senatusconsultum  Clau-
DiANUM.]  Under  the  empire  the  rale  was  es-
tablished that  persons  condemned  to  death,  to  the
mines,  and  to  fight  with  wild  beasts,  lost  their
freedom,  and  their  property  was  confiscated,  whence,
concludes  Gaius,  it  appears  that  they  lose  the
Testamenti  factio.  (Dig.  28.  tit.  1.  s.  8.)  But  this
was  not  the  earlier  law.  A  person  so  condemned,
though  he  lost  his  freedom,  had  no  master,  and
consequently  the  hereditates  and  legacies  which
were  left  to  him,  were  simply  void  ;  for  such  a
person  was  "  poenae  servus,  non  Caesaris."  (Dig.
34.  tit.  8.  s.  3.)  A  man  never  lost  his  freedom
by  usucapion.  (Gaius,  ii.  48.)  According  to  the
old  law  a  manifestus  fur  was  liable  to  a  capitalis
poena  and  was  addicted  (addicebatur)  to  the  person
whose  property  he  had  stolen  ;  but  it  was  doubted
whether  the  effect  of  the  addictio  was  to  make  hira
a  servus  or  to  put  him  in  the  condition  of  an  adju-
dicatus.     (Gaius,  iii.  189.)

By  a  Constitutio  or  Senatusconsultum  of  Clau-
dius (Sueton.  Claud.  25)  a  freedman  who  miscon-
ducted himself  towards  his  patron,  was  reduced  to
his  former  state  of  slavery.  But  this  was  not  the
rule  of  law  in  the  time  of  Nero.  (Tacit.  Ann.  xiii.
27  ;  see  the  notes  of  Ernesti  and  Lipsius  on  this
passage:  and  Patronus,  Libertus.)

The  State  of  Slavery  was  terminated  by  Manu-
Missio.  It  was  also  terminated  by  various  positive
enactments,  either  by  way  of  reward  to  the  slave
or  punishment  to  the  master.  The  Senatuscon-
sultum Silanianum  is  an  example  of  the  former ;
and  various  subsequent  Constitutions  gave  freedom
to  slaves  who  discovered  the  perpetrators  of  certain
crimes.  (Cod.  Theod.  tit.  21.  s.  2.)  Liberty  might
also  be  acquired  by  the  Praescriptio  Temporis.
After  the  establishment  of  Christianit}%  it  might
be  acquired  subject  to  certain  limitations  by  be-
coming a  monk  or  a  spiritual  person  (Nov.  5,  c.  2-
and  123.  c.  17.  35)  ;  but  if  the  person  left  his


SERVUS.

monastery  for  a  secular  life,  or  rambled  about  in
the  towns  or  the  country,  he  might  be  reduced  to
his  former  servile  condition.

There  were  slaves  that  belonged  to  the  state  and
were  called  Servi  Public!  (Plant.  Capt  ii.  2.  85)  :
they  had  the  testament!  factio  to  the  amount  of  one
half  of  their  property  (Ulp.  Frag.  tit.  20),  from
which  circumstance  it  appears  that  they  were
viewed  in  a  light  somewhat  different  from  the
slaves  of  private  persons.

In  times  of  revolution  under  the  Republic,  it
was  not  unusual  to  proclaim  the  libertj'  of  slaves
to  induce  them  to  join  in  revolt  (Pint.  Mar.  c.  41,
42) ;  but  these  were  irregular  proceedings,  and
neither  justifiable  nor  examples  for  imitation.  Lord
Dunmore,  the  last  British  Governor  of  Virginia,
at  the  commencement  of  the  American  Revolution,
followed  this  bad  example.  [G.  L.]

The  preceding  account  treats  of  the  legal  con-
dition of  slaves  in  relation  to  their  masters.  It
remains  to  give  an  account  of  the  history  of
slavery  among  the  Romans,  of  the  sale  and  value
of  slaves,  of  the  different  classes  into  which  they
were  divided,  and  of  their  general  treatment.

Slaves  existed  at  Rome  in  the  earliest  times  of
which  we  have  any  record  ;  but  they  do  not  ap-
pear to  have  been  numerous  under  the  kings  and
in  the  earliest  ages  of  the  republic.     The  different
trades  and  the  mechanical  arts  were  chiefly  carried
on  by  the  clientes  of  the  patricians,  and  the  small
farms  in  the  country  were  cultivated  for  the  most
part  by  the  labours  of  the  proprietor  and  of  his
own  family.     But  as  the  territories  of  the  Roman
state  were  extended,  the  patricians  obtained  pos-
session of  large  estates  out  of  the  ager  publicus,
since  it  was  the  practice  of  the  Romans  to  deprive
j  a  conquered  people  of  part  of  their  land.    These
I  estat{^s  probably  required  a  larger  number  of  hands
for  their  cultivation  than  could  readily  be  obtained
among  the  free  population,  and  since  the  freemen
were  constantly  liable  to  be  called  away  from  their
work  to  serve  in  the  armies,  the  lands  began  to  be
}  cultivated  almost  entirely  by  slave  labour.     (Com-
Ipare  Liv.  vi.  12.)     Through   war  and  commerce
(slaves  could  easily  be  obtained,  and  at  a  cheap
jratc,  and  their  number  soon  became  so  great,  that
the  poorer  class  of  freemen   was  thrown   almost
j  entirely  out  of  employment.     This  state  of  things
jwas  one  of  the  chief  arguments  used  by  Licinius
(and  the  Gracchi  for  limiting  the  quantity  of  public
[land  which  a  person  might  possess  (Appian,  B.  C.
;i.  7,  9,  10)  ;  and  we  know  that  there  was  a  pro-
;vision  in  the  Licinian  Rogations  that   a   certain
Inumber  of  freemen  should  be  employed  on  every
testate.     (Appian,   B.  C.  i.  8.)      This  regulation,
'however,   was  probably  of  little  avail :  the  lands
|still  continued  to  be  almost  entirely  cultivated  by
islaves,  although   in  the  latest   times    of  the  re-
Ipublic  we  find  that  Julius  Caesar  attempted  to
'remedy   this  state   of  things  to  some    extent  by
enacting,  that  of  those  persons  who  attended  to
rattle  a  third  should  always  be  freemen.     (Suet.
\JtU.  42.)     In  Sicily,  which  supplied  Rome  with
(so  great  a  quantity  of  corn,  the  number  of  agri-
fcultural  slaves  was  immense :  the  oppressions  to
iwhich   they   were  exposed  drove  them  twice  to
ipen  rebellion,  and  their  numbers  enabled  them
^0  defy  for  a  time  the  Roman  power.     The  first  of
ithese  Servile  wars  began  in  b.  c.  134  and  ended  in
3.C.  132,  and  the  second  commenced  in  b.  c.  102
uid  lasted  almost  four  years.


SERVUS.  1039

Long  however  after  it  had  become  the  custom  to
employ  large  gangs  of  slaves  in  the  cultivation  of
the  land,  the  number  of  those  who  served  as  per-
sonal attendants  still  continued  to  be  small.  Per-
sons in  good  circumstances  seem  usually  to  have
had  only  one  to  wait  upon  them  (Plin.  H.  iV.
xxxiii.  1.  s.  6),  who  was  generalh^  called  by  the
name  of  his  master  with  the  word  por  (that  is,
puer)  affixed  to  it,  as  Caipor,  Lueipor,  Afarcipor,
Publipor,  Quintipor,  &c.  ;  and  hence  Quintilian
(i.  4.  §  26)  says,  long  before  whose  time  luxury-
had  augmented  the  number  of  personal  attendants,
that  such  names  no  longer  existed.  Cato,  when  he
went  to  Spain  as  consul,  took  only  three  slaves
with  him.  (Apul.  Apol.  p.  430,  ed.  Ouden.)  But
during  the  latter  times  of  the  republic  and  under
the  empire  the  number  of  domestic  slaves  greatly
increased,  and  in  every  family  of  importance  there
were  separate  slaves  to  attend  to  all  the  necessities
of  domestic  life.  It  was  considered  a  reproach  to
a  man  not  to  keep  a  considerable  number  of  slaves.
Thus  Cicero,  in  describing  the  meanness  of  Piso's
housekeeping,  says  "  Idem  coquus,  idem  atriensis :
pistor  domi  nuUus  "  {in  Pis.  27).  The  first  ques-
tion asked  respecting  a  person's  fortune  was  "  Quot
pascit  servos?  "  (Juv.  iii.  141).  Horace  {Sat.  i.  3.
12)  seems  to  speak  of  ten  slaves  as  the  lowest
number  which  a  person  in  tolerable  circumstances
ought  to  keep,  and  he  ridicules  the  praetor  Tullius
for  being  attended  by  no  more  than  five  slaves  in
going  from  his  Tiburtine  villa  to  Rome.  {Sat.  i.  6.
i07.)  The  immense  number  of  prisoners  taken  in
the  constant  wars  of  the  republic,  and  the  increase
of  wealth  and  luxury  augmented  the  number  of
slaves  to  a  prodigious  extent.  The  statement  of
Athenaeus  (vi.  p.  272,  e),  that  very  many  Romans
possessed  10,000  and  20,000  slaves  and  even
more,  is  probably  an  exaggeration,  but  a  freedman
under  Augustus,  who  had  lost  much  property  in
the  civil  wars,  left  at  his  death  as  many  as  4,116.
(Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii.  10.  s.  47.)  Two  hundred  was
no  uncommon  number  for  one  person  to  keep  (Hor.
Sat.  i.  3.  11),  and  Augustus  permitted  even  a
person  that  was  exiled  to  take  twenty  slaves  or
freedmen  with  him.  (Dion  Cass.  Ivi,  27.)  The
mechanical  arts,  which  were  formerly  in  the  hands
of  the  Clientes,  were  now  entirely  exercised  by
slaves  (Cic.  de  Off.  i-  42)  :  a  natural  growth  of
things,  for  where  slaves  perform  certain  duties  or
practise  certain  arts,  such  duties  or  arts  will  be
thought  degrading  to  a  freedman.  It  must  not  be
forgotten  that  the  games  of  the  amphitheatre  re-
quired an  immense  number  of  slaves  trained  for
the  purpose.  [Gladiatores,]  Like  the  slaves
in  Sicily,  the  gladiatores  in  Italy  rose  in  B.  c.  73
against  their  oppressors,  and  under  the  able  gene-
ralship of  Spartacus,  defeated  a  Roman  consular
army,  and  were  not  subdued  till  b.  c.  71,  when
60,000  of  them  are  said  to  have  fallen  in  battle.
(Liv.  Epit.  97.)

Under  the  empire  various  enactments,  mentioned
above  (p.  1036,  a),  were  made  to  restrain  the  cruelty
of  masters  towards  their  slaves  ;  but  the  spread  of
Christianity  tended  most  to  ameliorate  their  con-
dition, though  the  possession  of  them  was  for  a
long  time  by  no  means  condemned  as  contrary  to
Christian  justice.  The  Christian  writers,  however,
inculcate  the  duty  of  acting  towards  them  as  we
would  be  acted  by  (Clem.  Alex.  Paedago</.  iii.  Iii),
but  down  to  the  age  of  Theodosius  wealthy  per-
sons still  continued  to  keep  as  many  as  two  as


1040


SERVUS.


three  thousand.  (Chrysost.  vol,  vii.  p.  633.)
Justinian  did  much  to  promote  the  ultimate  ex-
tinction of  slavery  ;  but  the  number  of  slaves  was
again  increased  by  the  invasion  of  the  barbarians
from  the  north,  who  not  only  brought  with  them
their  own  slaves  who  were  chiefly  Sclavi  or  Sclavo-
nians  (Avhence  our  word  Slave),  but  also  reduced
many  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  conquered  provinces
to  the  condition  of  slaves.  But  all  the  various
classes  of  slaves  became  merged  in  course  of  time
into  the  Adscripti  Glebae  or  serfs  of  the  middle
ages.

The  chief  sources  from  which  the  Romans  ob-
tained slaves  have  been  pointed  out  above.  Under
the  republic  one  of  the  chief  supplies  was  prisoners
taken  in  war,  who  were  sold  by  the  quaestores
(Plant.  Capt  Prol.  34,  audi.  2.  1,  2)  with  a  crown
on  their  heads  (see  above,  p.  1038,  b),  and  usually
on  the  spot  where  they  were  taken,  as  the  care  of  a
large  number  of  captives  was  inconvenient.  Con-
sequentl}''  slave -dealers  generally  accompanied  an
anny,  and  frequently  after  a  great  battle  had  been
gained  many  thousands  were  sold  at  once,  when  the
slave-dealers  obtained  them  for  a  mere  nothing.  In
the  camp  of  Lucnllus  on  one  occasion  slaves  were
sold  for  four  drachmae  each.  The  slave  trade  was
also  carried  on  to  a  great  extent,  and  after  the  fall
of  Corinth  and  Carthage  Delos  was  the  chief  mart
for  this  traffic.  When  the  Cilician  pirates  had
possession  of  the  Mediterranean  as  many  as  10,000
slaves  are  said  to  have  been  imported  and  sold
there  in  one  day.  (Strab.  xiv.  p.  668.)  A  large
number  came  from  Thrace  and  the  countries  in  the
north  of  Kurope,  but  the  chief  supply  was  from
Africa,  and  more  especially  Asia,  whence  we  fre-
quently read  of  Phrygians,  Lycians,  Cappadocians,
&c.  as  slaves.

The  trade  of  slave-dealers  {mangones)  was  con-
sidered disreputable,  and  expresslj'-  distinguished
from  that  of  merchants  {mangones  non  mercatm-es
sed  renaliciarii  appellajilur,  Dig.  50.  tit.  16.  s.  207;
Plant.  Trin.  ii.  2.  51)  ;  but  it  was  very  lucrative,
and  great  fortunes  were  frequently  realized  from  it.
The  slave-dealer  Thoranius,  who  lived  in  the  time
of  Augustus,  was  a  well-known  character.  (Suet.
Jug.  69  ;  Macrob.  Sat.  ii.  4  ;  Plin.  //.  IV.  vii.  12.
s.  10.)  Martial  (viii.  13)  mentions  another  cele-
brated slave-dealer  in  his  time  of  the  name  of  Gar-
gilianus.

Slaves  were  usually  sold  by  auction  at  Rome.
They  were  placed  either  on  a  raised  stone  (hence
de  lapide  emtus,  Cic.  in  Pis.  15  ;  Plant.  Bacch.  iv.

7.  17),  or  a  raised  platform  (catasta,  TibuU.  ii.  3.
60  ;  I'ersius,  vi.  77,  Casaubon,  ad  /oc),  so  that
every  one  might  see  and  handle  them,  even  if  they
did  not  wish  to  purchase  them.  Purchasers  usu-
ally took  cJire  to  have  them  stript  naked  (Senec.
Ep.  80  ;  Suet.  Aug.  69),  for  slave-dealers  had  re-
course to  as  many  tricks  to  conceal  personal  defects
as  the  horse-jockeys  of  modern  times :  sometimes
purchasers  called  in  the  advice  of  medical  men.
(Claudian,  in  Eutrop.  i.  35,  36.)  Slaves  of  great
beauty  and  rarity  were  not  exhibited  to  public
gaze  in  the  common  slave-market,  but  were  shown
to  purchasers  in  private  (arcafia  tahulata  catastae.
Mart.  ix.  60).  Newly  imported  slaves  had  their
feet  whitened  with  chalk  (Plin.  H.N.  xxxv.  17.

8.  58  ;  Ovid.  Am.  i.  8.  64),  and  those  that  came
from  the  East  had  their  ears  bored  (Juv.  i.  104),
which  we  know  was  a  sign  of  slavery  among  m<iny
Eastern  nations.     The  slave-market,  like  all  other


SERVUS.

markets,  was  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  aedileg,
who  made  many  regulations  by  edicts  respecting  the
sale  of  slaves.  The  character  of  the  slave  was  set
forth  in  a  scroll  (iitulus)  hanging  round  his  neck,
which  was  a  warranty  to  the  purchaser  (Gell.  iv.
2  ;  Propert.  iv.  5.  51)  :  the  vendor  was  bound  to
announce  fairly  all  his  defects  (Dig.  21.  tit.  I.  s.  1 ;
Hor.  Sat.  ii.  3.  284),  and  if  he  gave  a  false  accoimt
had  to  take  him  back  within  six  months  from  the
time  of  his  sale  (Dig.  21.  tit.  1.  s.  19.  §  6),  or  make
up  to  the  purchaser  what  the  latter  had  lost  through
obtaining  an  inferior  kind  of  slave  to  what  had
been  warranted.  (Dig.  \9.  tit.  1.  s.  13.  §  4;  Cic.
de  Off.  iii.  16,  17,  23.)  The  vendor  might  how-
ever use  general  terms  of  commendation  without
being  bound  to  make  them  good.  (Dig.  18.  tit.  1.
s.  43  ;  21.  tit.  1.  s.  19.)  The  chief  points  which
the  vendor  had  to  warrant,  was  the  health  of  the
slave,  especially  freedom  from  epilepsy,  and  that
he  had  not  a  tendency  to  thievery,  running  away,
or  committing  suicide.  (Cic.  de  Off.  iii.  17.)  The
nation  of  a  slave  was  considered  important,  and
had  to  be  set  forth  by  the  vendor.  (Dig.  21.  tit.  1.
s.  31.  §  21.)  Slaves  sold  without  any  warranty
wore  at  the  time  of  sale  a  cap  {pileus)  upon  their
head.  (Gell.  vii.  4.)  Slaves  newly  imported  were
generally  preferred  for  common  work  ;  those  who
had  served  long  were  considered  artful  {veieratores^
Ter.  Heaut.  v.  I.  16)  ;  and  the  pertness  and  im-
pudence of  those  born  in  their  master's  house
{vernae,  see  above,  p.  1 038)  were  proverbial.  (  Vernae
procaces,  Hor.  Sat.  ii.  6.  66  ;  Mart.  i.  42,  x.  3.)

The  value  of  slaves   depended  of  course  upon
their  qualifications  ;  but  under  the  empire  the  in-
crease of  luxury  and  the  corruption  of  morals  led
purchasers    to   pay   immense    sums    for   beautiful
slaves,  or  such  as  ministered  to  the  caprice  or  whim
of  the  purchaser.     Eunuchs  always  fetched  a  verv
high  price  (Plin.  //.  N.  vii.  39.  s.  40),  and  IMartial
(iii.  62,  xi.  70)  speaks  of  beautiful  laoys  who  sold
for  as  much  as  100,000  or  200,000  sesterces  each
(885/.  8s.  id.  and  1770^.  1 66-.  Od.).     A  inorio  or
fool  sometimes  sold  for  20,000  sesterces.    (Mart,
viii.  13.)     Slaves  who  possessed  a  knowledge  of
any  art  which  might  bring  in  profit  to  their  owners,
also  sold  for  a  large  sum.     Thus  literary  men  and
doctors  frequently  fetched  a  high  price  (Suet,  de
III.  Gram. ;  Plin.  //.  N.  vii.  39.  s.  40),  and  also
slaves  fitted  for  the  stage,  as  we  see  from  Cicero's
speech  on  behalf  of  Q.  Roscius.     Female  slaves
who  might  bring  in  gain  to  their  masters  by  pros- ,
titution  were  also  dear  :  sometimes  60  niinae  wer
paid  for  a  girl  of  this  kind.     (Plant.  Pers.  iv.  4*^
113.)     Five   hundred  drachmae  (perhaps  at  that
time  about  18/.)  seem  to  have  been  a  fair  price  for
a  good  ordinary  slave  in  the  time  of  Horace.  (Svii.
ii.  7.  43.)     In  the  fourth  century  a  slave  capable'
of  bearing  arms  was  valued  at  25  solidi  or  aurei.^'-
[AuRUM,  p.  182,a.]    (Cod.  Theod.  7.  tit.  13.6.
13.)     In  the  time  of  Justinian  the  legal  valuation
of  slaves  was  as  follows :    common    slaves,   both
male   and   female,   were  valued   at   20    solidi  a
piece,  and  under  ten  years  of  age  at   half  that
sum  ;  if  they  were  artificers,  they  were  worth  30
solidi,  if  notarii  50,   if  medical  men  or  midwives
60  ;  eunuchs  under  ten  years  of  age  were  worth
30   solidi,  above  that  age  50,  and   if  they  were
artificers  also,  as  much  as  70.     (Cod.  6.  tit.  44.
s.  3.)     Female  slaves,  unless  possessed  of  personal
attractions,    were   generally  cheaper   than  male.  ;
Six  hundred  sesterces  (about  5/.)  were  thought  too


SERVUS.

inuch  for  a  slave  girl  of  indifferent  cTiaracter  in  the
tune  of  Martial  (vi.  66)  ;  and  two  aurei  or  solidi
were  not  considered  so  low  a  price  for  a  slave  girl
(ancilla)  in  the  time  of  Hadrian  as  to  occasion
doubt  of  her  having  come  honestly  into  the  hands
of  the  vendor.  (Dig.  47.  tit.  2.  s.  76.)  We  have
seen  that  in  the  time  of  Justinian  the  legal  value
of  female  slaves  was  equal  to  that  of  males  ;  this
may  probably  have  arisen  from  the  circumstance
that  the  supply  of  slaves  was  not  so  abundant  then
as  at  earlier  times,  and  that  therefore  recourse  was
had  to  propagation  for  keeping  up  the  number  of
slaves.  But  under  the  republic  and  in  the  early
times  of  the  empire  this  was  done  to  a  very  limited
extent,  as  it  was  found  cheaper  to  purchase  than
to  breed  slaves.

Slaves  were  divided  into  many  various  classes  :
the  first  division  was  into  public  or  private.  The
former  belonged  to  the  state  and  public  bodies,
and  their  condition  was  preferable  to  that  of  the
common  slaves.  They  were  less  liable  to  be  sold,
jind  under  less  control  than  ordinary  slaves  :  they
also  possessed  the  privilege  of  the  testamenti  factio
to  the  amount  of  one  half  of  their  property  (see
above,  p.  1039,  a),  which  shows  that  they  were  re-
garded in  a  ditlerent  light  from  other  slaves.  Sci-
pio,  therefore,  on  the  taking  of  Nova  Carthago,
promised  2000  artizans,  who  had  been  taken  pri-
soners and  were  consequently  liable  to  be  sold  as
common  slaves,  that  they  should  become  public
slaves  of  the  Roman  people,  with  a  hope  of  speedy
manumission,  if  they  assisted  him  in  the  war.  (Liv.
xxvi.  47.)  Public  slaves  were  employed  to  take
care  of  the  public  buildings  (compare  Tacit.  Hist.
i.  43),  and  to  attend  upon  magistrates  and  priests.
Thus  the  Aediles  and  Quaestors  had  great  numbers
of  public  slaves  at  their  command  (Gell.  xiii.  13),
as  had  also  the  Triumviri  Nocturni,  who  employed
them  to  extinguish  fires  by  night.  (Dig.  1.  tit.  15.
6.  1.)  They  were  also  employed  as  lictors,  jailors,
executioners,  watermen,  &c.  (Comp.  Gessner,  De
Servis  Romanorum  publicis,  Berlin,  1844.)

A  body  of  slaves  belonging  to  one  person  was
called  /amilia,  but  two  were  not  considered  suffi-
'  ciont  to  constitute  o,  familia.     (Dig.  50.  tit.  16.

1'  8.  40.)     Private  slaves  were  divided  into  urban
{familia  urhana)  and  rustic  {familia  rustica)  ;  but
the  name  of  urban  was  given  to  those  slaves  who
served  in  the  villa  or  country  residence  as  well  as
,  in  the  town  house  ;  so  that  the  words  urban  and
'  rustic  rather  characterized  the  nature  of  their  oc-
cupations than  the  place  where  they  served.     (  Ur-
I  hana  familia  et  rustica  non  loco,  sed  genere  distin-
\guitur,   Dig.  50.    tit.  16.    s.  166.)     The    familia
jurbana  could  therefore  accompany  their  master  to
jhis  villa  without  being  called  rustica  on  account  of
:their  remaining  in  the  country.     When  there  was
;a  large  number  of  slaves  in  one  house,  they  were
■frequently  divided  into  decuriae  (Petron.  47)  :  but
independent  of  this  division  they  were  arranged  in
certain  classes,  which  held  a  higher  or  a  lower  rank
jaccording  to  the  nature  of  their  occupation.    These
{classes  are :  Ordi7iarii,  Vulgares,  Mediastini,  and
[Quales-Quales  (Dig.  47.  tit.  10.  s.  15),  but  it  is
idoubtful  whether  the  Literati  or  literary  slaves
'were   included   in   any  of  these  classes.     Those
called  Vicarii  are  spoken  of  above  (p.  1037,  b).
'     Ordinarii  seem  to  have  been  those  slaves  who
jhad  the  superintendence  of  certain  parts  of  the
housekeeping.     They  were   always   chosen   from
those  who  had  the  confidence  of  their  master,  and


SERVUS.


1041


they  generally  had  certain  slaves  under  them.  To
this  class  the  actores,  procuraiores  and  dispensatores
belong,  who  occur  in  the  familia  rustica  as  well  as
the  familia  urbana,  but  in  the  former  are  almost
the  same  as  the  villici.  They  were  stewards  or
bailiffs.  (Colum.  i.  7,  8  ;  Plin.  Ep.  iii.  19  ;  Cic.  ad
Ait.  xi.  1  ;  Suet.  GaW.  12,  Vesp.  22.)  To  the  same
class  also  belong  the  slaves  who  had  the  charge  of
the  different  stores,  and  who  correspond  to  our
housekeepers  and  butlers  :  they  are  called  cellarii,
promi,  condi,  procuraiores  peni,  &c.      [Cella.]

Vulgares  included  the  great  body  of  slaves  in  a
house  who  had  to  attend  to  any  particular  duty  in
the  house,  and  to  minister  to  the  domestic  wants
of  their  master.  As  there  were  distinct  slaves  or
a  distinct  slave  for  almost  every  department  of
household  economj'-,  as  bakers  (jpistores),  cooks
{coqui),  confectioners  (dulciarii),  picklers  (salmen-
tarii),  &c.  it  is  unnecessary  to  mention  these  more
particularly.  This  class  also  included  the  porters
(Osiiarii),  the  bed-chamber  slaves  [Cubicularii],
the  litter-bearers  {lecticarii)  [Lectica],  and  all
personal  attendants  of  any  kind.

Mediastini.     [Mediastini.]

Quales-Quales  are  only  mentioned  in  the  Digest
{I.  c),  and  appear  to  have  been  the  lowest  class  of
slaves,  but  in  what  respects  they  differed  from  the
Mediastini  is  doubtful :  Becker  (Gallus,  vol.  i.  p.
125)  imagines  they  may  have  been  a  kind  of  slaves,
qualiquali  conditione  vivenies,  which  however  does
not  give  us  any  idea  of  their  duties  or  occupations.

Literati,  literary  slaves,  were  used  for  various
purposes  by  their  masters,  either  as  readers  [  Ana-
gnostae],  copjusts  or  amanuenses  [Librarii  ;
Amanuensis],  &c.  Complete  lists  of  all  the
duties  performed  by  slaves  are  given  in  the  works
of  Pignorius,  Popma,  and  Blair,  referred  to  at  the
close  of  this  article.

The  treatment  of  slaves  of  course  varied  greatly
according  to  the  disposition  of  their  masters,  but
they  appear  upon  the  whole  to  have  been  treated
with  greater  severity  and  cruelty  than  among  the
Athenians.  Originall}^  the  master  could  use  the
slave  as  he  pleased :  under  the  republic  the  law
does  not  seem  to  have  protected  the  person  or  life
of  the  slave  at  all,  but  the  cruelty  of  masters  was
to  some  extent  restrained  under  the  empire,  as  has
been  stated  above  (p.  1036,  b).  The  general  treat-
ment of  slaves,  however,  was  probably  little  affected
by  legislative  enactments.  In  early  times,  when
the  number  of  slaves  was  small,  they  were  treated
with  more  indulgence,  and  more  like  members  of
the  family :  they  joined  their  masters  in  offering
up  prayers  and  thanksgivings  to  the  gods  (Hor.  Ep.
ii.  1.  142),  and  partook  of  their  meals  in  common
with  their  masters  (Plut.  Coriol.  24),  though  not
at  the  same  table  with  them,  but  upon  benches
(subsellia)  placed  at  the  foot  of  the  lectus.  But
with  the  increase  of  numbers  and  of  luxury  among
masters,  the  ancient  simplicity  of  manners  was
changed  :  a  certain  quantity  of  food  was  allowed
them  {dimensum  or  dcmensum),  which  was  granted
to  them  either  monthly  {menstruum,  Plaut  Stick.
i.  2.  3),  or  daily  (diarium^  Hor.  Ep.  i.  14.  41  ;
Mart.  xi.  108).  Their  chief  food  was  the  com,
called  far,  of  which  either  four  or  five  modii  were
granted  them  a  month  (Donat.  in  Ter.  Phorm.  i.  1.
9;  Sen.  Ep.  80),  or  one  Roman  pound  {libra)  a  day.
(Hor, Sat.  i.  5. 69.)  They  also  obtained  an  allowance
of  salt  and  oil :  Cato  {R.  R.  58)  allowed  his  slaves
a  sextarius  of  oil  a  month  and  a  modius  of  salt  a
3x


1042


SERVUS.


5'-ear.  They  also  got  a  small  quantity  of  wine  with
an  additional  allowance  on  the  Saturnalia  and
Compitalia  (Cato,  R.  R.  57),  and  sometimes  fruit,
but  seldom  vegetables.  Butcher's  meat  seems  to
have  been  hardly  ever  given  them.

Under  the  republic  they  were  not  allowed  to
serve  in  the  army,  though  after  the  battle  of  Can-
nae, when  the  state  was  in  such  imminent  danger,
8000  slaves  were  purchased  by  the  state  for  the
army,  and  subsequently  manumitted  on  account  of
their  bravery.     (Liv.  xxii.  57^  xxiv.  14 — 16.)

The  oifences  of  slaves  were  punished  with
severity  and  frequently  the  utmost  barbarity.  One
of  the  mildest  punishments  was  the  cemoval  from
the  familia  urbana  to  the  rustica,  where  they  were
obliged  to  work  in  chains  or  fetters.  (Plant.  Mobi.
i.  1  18  ;  Ter.  Pkorm.  ii.  1.  20.)  They  were  fre-
quently beaten  with  sticks  or  scourged  with  the
whip  (of  which  an  account  is  given  under  Fla-
grUim),  but  these  were  such  every-day  punishments,
that  many  slaves  ceased  almost  to  care  for  them  :
thus  Chrysalus  saj^s  (Plant.  Bacchid.  ii.  3.  131),

**  Si  illi  sunt  virgae  ruri,  at  mihi  tergum  est  dorai.""

Runaway  slaves  {fugitivi)  and  thieves  {fares)
were  branded  on  the  forehead  with  a  mark  {stigma),
whence  they  are  said  to  be  notati  or  inscripti.
(Mart.  viii.  75.  9.)  Slaves  were  also  punished  by
being  hung  up  by  their  hands  with  weights  sus-
pended to  their  feet  (Plant.  Asin.  ii.  2.  37,  38),  or
by  being  sent  to  work  in  the  Ergastulum  or  Pistri-
num.  [Ergastulum  ;  MolaJ.  The  carrying  of
the  fiirca  was  a  ver}^  common  mode  of  punishment.
[FuRCA.]  The  toilet  of  the  Roman  ladies  was  a
dreadful  ordeal  to  the  female  slaves,  who  were  often
barbarously  punished  by  their  mistresses  for  the
slightest  mistake  in  the  arrangement  of  the  hair  or
a  part  of  the  dress.  (Ovid.  Am.  i.  14.  15,  Ar.Am.
iii.  235 ;  Mart.  ii.  Q6  ;  Juv.  vi.  498,  &c.)

Masters  might  work  their  slaves  as  many  hours
in  the  day  as  they  pleased,  but  they  usually  allowed
them  holidays  on  the  public  festivals.  At  the  fes-
tival of  Satumus  in  particular,  special  indulgences
were  granted  to  all  slaves,  of  which  an  account  is
given  under  Saturnalia.

There  was  no  distinctive  dress  for  slaves.  It
was  once  proposed  in  the  senate  to  give  slaves  a
distinctive  costume,  but  it  was  rejected  since  it
was  considered  dangerous  to  show  them  their
number.  (Sen.  de  Clem.  i.  24.)  Male  slaves  were
not  allowed  to  wear  the  toga  or  bulla,  nor  females
the  stola,  but  otherwise  they  were  dressed  nearly
in  the  same  way  as  poor  people,  in  clothes  of  a  dark
colour  {puUati)  and  slippers  {crepidae).  {Vestis
servilis,  Cic.  in  Pis.  38.)

The  rights  of  burial,  however,  were  not  denied
to  slaves,  for  as  the  Romans  regarded  slavery  as  an
institution  of  society,  death  was  considered  to  put
an  end  to  the  distinction  between  slaves  and  free-
men. Slaves  were  sometimes  even  buried  with
their  masters,  and  we  find  funeral  inscriptions  ad-
dressed to  the  Dii  Manes  of  slaves  {Dis  Manibus).
It  seems  to  have  been  considered  a  duty  for  a  master
to  bury  his  slave,  since  we  find  that  a  person,  Avho
buried  the  slave  of  another,  had  a  right  of  action
against  the  nmster  for  the  expenses  of  the  funeral.
(Dig.  11.  tit.  7.  s.  3L)  In  1726  the  burial  vaults
of  the  slaves  belonging  to  Augustus  and  Livia  were
discovered  near  the  Via  Appia,  where  numerous
inscriptions  were  found,  which  have  been  illustrated
by  Bianchini  and  Gori  and  give  us  considerable


SESTERTIUS.

information  respecting  the  different  classes  of  slaves
and  their  various  occupations.  Other  sepulchres
of  the  same  time  have  been  also  discovered  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Rome.

(Pignorius,  de  Sei-vis  et  eorum  apud  Vjeleres
Ministeriis ;  Popma,  de  Operis  Servorum ;  Blair,
An  Enquiry  into  the  State  of  Slavery  amongst  the
Romans,  Edinburgh,  1833;  Becker,  Gallus,  vol.  L
p.  103,  &c.)

SESCUNX.     [As,  p.  140,  b.]

SESQUIPLA'RES  and  SESQUIPLA'RII.
[ExKRciTus,  p.  509,  a.]

SESTE'RTIUM,  a  place  outside  Rome,  dis-
tant two  Roman  miles  and  a  half  (whence  the
name)  from  the  Esquiline  gate,  where  slaves  and
malefactors  of  the  lowest  class  were  put  to  death
(Schol.  ad  Hor.  Epod.  5  ;  Pint.  Galh.  28  ;  in  locum
{i.e.  Sestertium)  servilibus  poenis  sepositum,  Tac.
Ann.  XV.  60).

SESTE'RTIUS,  a  Roman  coin,  which  properly
belonged  to  the  silver  coinage,  in  which  it  was  one-
fourth  of  the  denarius,  and  therefore  equal  to  2^
asses.  Hence  the  name,  which  is  an  abbreviation
of  semis  tertius  (sc.  nummus),  the  Roman  mode  of
expressing  2^.  (Varro,  L.L.  v.  173,  ed.  Muller  ;
Festus,  S.V.;  Wm.  H.N.  xxxiii.  3.  s.  13.)  The
word  Nummus  is  often  expressed  with  sestertius,
and  often  it  stands  alone,  meaning  sestertius.

Hence  the  symbol  H  S  or  I  I  S,  which  is  used
to  designate  the  sestertius.  It  stands  either  for
L  L  S  {Libra  Libra  et  Sejuis),  or  for  II  S,  the  two
Ps  merely  forming  the  numeral  two  (sc.  asses  or
librae),  and  the  whole  being  in  either  case  equi-
valent to  dupondius  et  semis.  (Priscian,  de  Ponder.
p.  1347  ;  Festus,  p.  347,  Muller.)

When  the  as  was  reduced  to  half  an  ounce,  and
the  number  of  asses  in  the  denarius  was  made
sixteen  instead  of  ten  [As,  Denarius],  the  ses-
tertius was  still  ^  of  the  denarius,  and  therefore
contained  no  longer  2^,  but  4  asses.  The  old  reck-
oning of  1 0  asses  to  the  denarius  was  kept,  how-
ever, in  paying  the  troops.  (Plin,  xxxiii.  3.  s.  13.)
After  this  change  the  sestertius  was  coined  in  brass
as  well  as  in  silver  ;  the  metal  used  for  it  was  that
called  Orichalcum,  which  was  much  finer  than
the  common  aes,  of  which  the  asses  were  made
(Plin.  T/.A^.xxxiv.  2.)

The  sum  of  1000  sesteiiii  was  called  sestertium.
This  was  also  denoted  by  the  symbol  H  S,  the
obvious  explanation  of  which  is  "  I  I  S  (2^)  mil-
lia  ; "  but  Gronovius  understands  it  as  2^  pounds
of  silver  {sestertium  pondus  argenti),  which  he  co
siders  to  have  been  worth  originally  1000  sestertii,
and  therefore  to  have  represented  this  value  ev
after.  {Pec.  Vet.  i.  4,  11.)     The  sestertium  was  al
ways  a  sum  of  money,  never  a  coin  ;  the  coin  nsei
in  the  payment  of  large  sums  was  the  denarius

According  to  the  value  we  have  assigned  to  th*
Denarius,  up  to  the  time  of  Augustus,  we  have


\


£  s.

d.fartii.

the  sestertius    =00

2     -5

the  sestertium  =-8  17

1

after  the  reign  of  Augustus

the  sestertius    =0     0

I  3-5

the  sestertium  =*  7  16

3

Taking  the  earlier  value  of  the  sestertius,  and
neglecting  the  half  farthing,  we  have  1  sestertius
tm  two-pence,  6  sestertii  «  1  shilling,  and  120  ses'
tertii  =  11.  sterling.  Hence  we  get  the  following
very  convenient   Rulb  :  to  convert  sestertii  ii^  i


SESTERTIUS.

terling  divide  hy  120  ;  <ind  correct  tie  re-
sult by  adding  to  it  the  quotient  obtained  by  dividing
tlie  original  number  by  1920  :  for  '5  of  a  farthing  is

The  sestertius  was  the  denomination  of  money
almost  always  used  in  reckoning  considerable
amounts.  There  are  a  very  few  examples  of  the
use  of  the  denarius  for  this  purpose.  The  mode  of
reckoning  was  as  follows  :  —

Sestertius  =  sestertius  nummus  =  nummus.
Sums  below  1000  sestertii  were  expressed  by  the
numeral  adjectives  joined  with  either  of  these  forms.
The  sura  of  1000  sestertii  =  mille  sestertii  =
M  sestertium  (for  sestertiorum)  =  M  nummi  =  M
nummum  (for  nummoruiri)  =  M  sestertii  nummi  =
M  sestertium  nummum  =  sestertium.  These  forms
are  used  with  the  numeral  adjectives  below  1000,
for  sums  between  1000  and  1,000,000  sestertii :
sometimes  millia  is  used  instead  of  sestertia  :  some-
times both  words  are  omitted  :  sometimes  nummtim
or  sestertium  is  added.  For  example,  600,000
sestertii  :=  sescenta  sestertia  =  sescetita  millia  =
sescenta  =  sescenta  sestertia  nummum.

For  sums  of  a  thousand  sestertia  (i.  e.  a  million
sestertii)  and  upwards,  the  numeral  adverbs  in  ies
(decies,  undecies,  vicies,  d-c.)  are  used,  with  which
the  Avords  centena  millia  (a  hundred  thousand)
must  be  understood  With  these  adverbs  the
neuter  singular  sestertium  is  joined  in  the  case  re-
quired by  the  construction.  (Nepos,  Att.  xiv.  2,
gives  sestertia  vicies  and  sestertia  centies.)  Thus,
decies  sestertiumz=decies  centena  millia  sestertium=.
ten  times  a  hundred  thousand  sestertii  z=z  1,000,000
sestertii  =  1000  sesteHia:  millies  H  S  =  millies  cen-
tena millia  sestertium  =  a  thousand  times  one  hun-
dred thousand  sestertii  =  100,000,000  sestertii  =
1 00,000  sestertia.  When  an  amount  is  described
by  more  than  one  of  these  adverbs  in  ies^  they  must
be  added  together  if  the  larger  numeral  stands  first,
but  multiplied  when  the  smaller  is  first  ;  care  how-
ever being  taken  not  to  reckon  the  centena  millia
which  is  understood,  more  than  once  in  the  whole
imount.  Thus,  Suetonius  {Octav.  101)  has  millies
it  (juingenties  for  150,000  sestertia,  i.  e.  100,000,000
+  50,000,000  =  150,000,000  sestertii,  and  imme-
diately after  quaterdecies  millies  for  1,400,000  ses-
tertia, t.e.  14  X  1000+  100,000  (=1,400,000,000)
sestertii.  A  variety  was  allowed  in  these  forms  :
thus  Cicero  uses  decies  et  octingenta  millia  for  1800
sestertia,  i.  e.  1,000,000  +  800,000  sestertii,  and
[uaterdecies  for  1400  sestertia,  i.  e.  14  x  100,000
sestertii.    {In  Ver.  i.  39.)

When  the  numbers  are  written  in  cypher,  it  is
)ften  difficult  to  know  whether  sestertii  or  sestertia
ire  meant.  A  distinction  is  sometimes  made  by  a
line  placed  over  the  numeral  when  sestertia  are  in-
tended, or  in  other  words,  when  the  numeral  is  an
idverb  in  ies.  Thus  :  —
HS.  M.  C.  =  1100  sestertii,  but
HS.  M.  C.  =  HS  millies  centies

=  110,000  sestertia  =  110,000,000
jestertii.

Wurm  (p.  24)  gives  the  following  rule  :  When
;he  numbers  are  divided  into  three  classes  by
points,  the  right-hand  division  indicates  units,  the
second  thousands,  the  third  hundreds  of  thousands,
rhus,  III.  XII. DC  =300,000  +  12,000  -<-  600  =
312,600  sestertii.  But  these  distinctions  are  by
10  means  strictly  observed  in  the  manuscripts.

Like  other  parts  and  multiples  of  the  as,  the


SIBYLLINI  LIBRI


1043


sestertius  is  applied  to  other  kinds  of  magnitude,
e.  g.  pes  sestertius  for  2^  feet.

It  has  been  assumed  throughout  this  article  that
the  forms  of  sestertium,  as  a  neuter  singular,  are
genuine,  a  fact  which  may  admit  of  doubt.

Sesterce  is  sometimes  used  as  an  English  word.
If  so.  It  ought  to  be  used  only  as  the  translation  of
sestertius,  never  of  sestertium.  [P.  S.]

SEVIR.  [Equites,  p.  475,  a ;  Augustalbs.
p.  180,  b.]

SEX  SUFFRA'GIA.  [Equites.J
SEXATRUS.  [QuiNQUATRus.l
SEXTANS.  [As,p.l40,b.J
SEXTA'RIUS,  a  Roman  dry  and  liquid  mea-
sure, which  may  be  considered  one  of  the  principal
measures  in  the  Roman  system,  and  the  connecting
point  between  it  and  that  of  the  Greeks,  for  it  was
equal  to  the  leVrryy  of  the  latter ;  and  there  can
be  little  doubt  that  the  ^^<tt-i]s  was  not  an  original
Greek  measure,  but  that  the  word  was  introduced
into  the  Greek  system  from  the  Roman,  for  the
purpose  of  establishing  a  unit  of  agreement.  [Quad-
RANTAL.]  It  was  one-sixth  of  the  congius,  and
hence  its  name  :  in  the  Greek  system  it  was  one-
sixth  of  the  chous.  It  was  divided,  in  the  same
manner  as  the  As,  into  parts  named  uncia,  sex-
tans, quadrans,  triens,  quincunx,  semissis,  d'c.  The
uncia,  or  twelfth  part  of  the  sextarius,  was  the
Cyathus  ;  its  sextans  was  therefore  two  cyathi,
its  quadrans  three,  its  triens  four,  its  quincunx
five,  &c.  (Wurm,  de  Pond.  &c.  p.  ]  18,  comp.  the
Tables.)  [p.s,]

SE'XTULA,  the  sixth  part  of  the  uncia,  was
the  smallest  denomination  of  money  in  use  among
the  Romans.  (Varro,  L.L.  v.  171,  ed.  Muller.)
It  was  also  applied,  like  the  uncia,  to  other  kinds
of  magnitude.     [Uncia.]  [P.S.J

SIBYLLFNI  LIBRI.     These  books  are  said
to  have  been  obtained  in  the  reign  of  Tarquinius
Pnscus,  or  according  to  other  accounts  in  that  of
Tarquinius  Superbus,  when  a  Sibyl  (2i§v\\a),  or
prophetic  woman,  presented  herself  before  the  king,
and  ofi'ered  nine  books  for  sale.     Upon  the  king
refusing  to   purchase   them    she    went  and  burnt
three,  and  then  returned  and  demanded  the  same
price  for  the  remaining  six  as  she  had  done  for  the
nine.     The  king  again  refused  to  purchase  them,
whereupon  she  burnt  three  more  and  demanded  the
same  sum  for  the  remaining  three,  as  she  had  done  at
first  for  the  nine  :  the  king's  curiosity  now  became
excited,  so  that  he  purchased  the  books,  and  then
the  Sibyl  vanished.     (Dionys.  iv.  62  ;  Varro,  ap.
Lactant.  i.  6  ;  Gell.  i.  19  ;  Plin.  H.N.  xiii.  27:
respecting  the  different  Sibyls  mentioned  by  an-
cient writers  see  Di vinatio,  p.  4 1 6,  b.)  These  books
were  probably  written  in  Greek,  as  the  later  ones
undoubtedly  were,  and  if  so  consequently  came
from  a  Greek  source,  though  it  is  doubtful  from
what  quarter  :  Niebuhr  {Hist,  of  Rome,  vol.  i.  p,
506)  supposes  them  to  have  come  from  Ionia,  but
they  were  more  probably  derived  from  Cumae  in
Campania.  (Gottling,  Gesch.  der  Bom.  Staaisv.  p.
212.)     They  were  kept  in  a  stone  chest  under
ground  in  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Capitolinus,  under
the  custody  of  certain  officers,  at  first  only  two  in
number,  but  afterwards  increased  successively  to
ten  and  fifteen,  of  whom  an  account  is  given  under
Decemviri,  p.  387,  a.     The  public  were  not  al-
lowed to  inspect  the  books,  and  they  were  onlv  con-
sulted by  the  officers,  who  had  the  charge  ofthem
at  the  special  command  of  the  senate  {ad  libros  ire
3x2


1044


SIBYLLINI  LIBRI.


Cic.  de  Div.  i.  43  ;  Liv.  xxii.  57).  They  were
consulted  in  the  case  of  prodigies  and  calamities,
but  it  is  difficult  to  ascertain  whether  they  contained
predictions,  or  merely  directions  as  to  what  was  to
be  done  for  conciliating  or  appeasing  the  gods,  in
consequence  of  the  mystery  which  enveloped  them
from  the  time  that  one  of  their  keepers  was  put  to
death  for  divulging  their  secrets.  (Dionys.  /.  c. ;
Valer.  Max.  i.  1.  §  13.)  Niebuhr  remarks  from
the  instances  in  Livy,  that  the  original  books  were
not  consulted,  as  the  Greek  oracles  were,  for  the
purpose  of  getting  light  concerning  future  events  ;
but  to  learn  what  worship  was  required  by  the
gods,  when  they  had  manifested  their  wrath  by
national  calamities  or  prodigies.  Accordingly  we
find  that  the  instruction  they  give  is  in  the  same
spirit ;  prescribing  what  honour  was  to  be  paid  to
the  deities  already  recognized,  or  what  new  ones
were  to  be  imported  from  abroad.  They  were  pro-
bably written  on  palm-leaves  (Serv.  ad  Virg.  Aen.
iii.  444,  vi.  74),  and  it  is  not  unlikely  that  the
leaves  of  the  Cumaean  Sibyl  described  by  Virgil
were  designed  as  an  allusion  to  the  form  of  the
Sibylline  books.  Their  nature  being  such,  Niebuhr
supposes  that  they  were  referred  to  in  the  same
way  as  Eastern  nations  refer  to  the  Koran  and  to
Hafiz  :  they  did  not  search  for  a  passage  and  apply
it,  but  probably  only  shuffled  the  palm  leaves  and
then  drew  one.

When  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Capitolinus  was
burnt  in  b.  c.  82,  the  Sibylline  books  perished  in
the  fire  ;  and  in  order  to  restore  them,  ambassadors
were  sent  to  various  towns  in  Italy,  Greece,  and
Asia  Minor,  to  make  fresh  collections,  which  on
the  rebuilding  of  the  temple  were  deposited  in  the
same  place  that  the  former  had  occupied.  (Dionys.
I.  c.)  But  as  a  great  many  prophetic  books,  many
of  them  pretending  to  be  Sibylline  oracles,  had  got
into  general  circulation  at  Rome,  Augustus  com-
manded that  all  such  books  should  be  delivered  up
to  the  praetor  urbanus  by  a  certain  day  and  burnt,
and  that  in  future  none  should  be  kept  by  any
private  person.  More  than  2000  prophetic  books
were  thus  delivered  up  and  burnt,  and  those  which
were  considered  genuine  and  were  in  the  custody
of  the  state  were  deposited  in  two  gilt  cases  at
the  base  of  the  statue  of  Apollo,  in  the  temple  of
that  god  on  the  Palatine,  and  were  entrusted  as
before  to  the  Quindecemvi.  (Suet.  Aug.  31  ;  Tacit.
Ann.  vi.  12,)  The  writing  of  those  belonging  to
the  state  had  faded  by  time,  and  Augustus  com-
manded the  priests  to  write  them  over  again.
(Dion  Cass.  liv.  17.)  A  fresh  examination  of  the
Sibylline  books  was  again  made  by  Tiberius,  and
many  rejected,  which  were  considered  spurious.
(Dion  Cass.  Ivii.  18.)  A  few  years  afterwards,
also  in  the  reign  of  Tiberius,  it  was  proposed  to
add  a  new  volume  of  Sibylline  oracles  to  the  re-
ceived collection.    (Tacit.  Z.c.)

The  Christian  writers  frequently  appeal  to  the
Sibylline  verses  as  containing  prophecies  of  the
Messiah  ;  but  these  in  most  cases  are  clearly
forgeries.  A  complete  collection  of  Sibylline  ora-
cles was  published  by  Gallaeus,  Amst.  1689  :  frag-
ments of' them  have  also  been  published  by  Mai,
Milan  1817,  and  Struve,  Regiomont.  1818.  (Com-
pare Heidbreede,  de  SihyUis  Dissertai.^  Berol
1835.)

The  Sibylline  books  were  also  called  Fata  Sihyl-
lina  (Cic.  Cat  iii.  4),  and  Libri  Fatales.  (Liv.  v.
15,  xxii.  57.)     Those  that  were  collected  after


SIGNA  MILITARIA.

the  burning  of  the  temple  on  the  Capitol,  were
undoubtedly  written  in  Greek  verses,  and  were
acrostics  (awpoo-Tix'?,  Cic.  de  Div.  ii.  54  ;  Dionys.
I.  c).  Along  with  the  Sibylline  books  were  pre-
served under  the  guard  of  the  same  officers  the
books  of  the  two  prophetic  brothers,  the  Marcii
(Serv.  ad  Virg.  Aen.  vi.  72  ;  Cic.  de  Div.  i.  40,
ii.  55),  the  Etniscan  prophecies  of  the  nymph
Bygoe,  and  those  of  Albuna  or  Albunea  of  Tibur.
(Lactant.  i.  6.)  Those  of  the  Marcii,  which  had
not  been  placed  there  at  the  time  of  the  battle  of
Cannae,  were  written  in  Latin  :  a  few  remains  of
them  have  come  down  to  us  in  Livy  (xxv.  12)  and
Macrobius  (Sat.  i.  17).  See  Niebuhr,  vol.  i.  p.
507  ;  Gottling,  Gesch.  d.  Rom.  Staatsv.  p.  213  ;
Hartung,  Die  Religion  d.  Romer,  vol.  i.  p.  129,  &c.

SlCA,dim.  SICILA,  whence  the  English  sickle^
and  SICILICULA  (Plant.  Rud.  iv.  4.  125),  a
curved  dagger,  adapted  by  its  form  to  be  concealed
under  the  clothes,  and  therefore  carried  by  robbers
and  murderers.  [Acinaces.]  (Cic.  Cat.  iii.  3.)
Sica  may  be  translated  a  scimitar  to  distinguish
it  from  PuGio,  which  denoted  a  dagger  of  the
common  kind.  Sicarius^  though  properly  meaning
one  who  murdered  with  the  sica,  was  applied  to
murderers  in  general.  (Quintil.  x.  i.  §  12.)  Hence
the  forms  de  sicariis  and  inter  sicarios  were  used  in
the  criminal  courts  in  reference  to  murder.  Thus
judicium  inter  sicarios^  "  a  trial  for  miu-der  "  (Cic.
pro  Rose.  5)  ;  defendere  inter  sicarios,  "  to  defend
against  a  charge  of  murder  "  (Phil.  ii.  4).    [J.  Y,]

SICA'RIUS,  [Sica  ;  Lex  Cornelia,  p.  687.J

SICILICUS.     [ScRUPULUM  ;  Uncia.]

SIGILLA'RIA.     [Saturnalia.]

SIGMA.     [Mensa.]

SIGNA  MILITA'RIA  (<n]txua,  arv/xalai),
military  ensigns  or  standards.  The  most  ancient
standard  employed  by  the  Romans  is  said  to  have
been  a  handful  of  straw  fixed  to  the  top  of  a  spear
or  pole.  Hence  the  company  of  soldiers,  belonging
to  it,  was  called  Manipulus.  [Exercitus,  p.
500,  b.]  The  bundle  of  hay  or  fern  was  soon  suc-
ceeded by  the  figures  of  animals,  of  which  Pliny
( H.  N.  X.  4.  s.  5)  enumerates  five,  viz.  the  eagle,
the  wolf,  the  minotaur  (Festus,  s.v.  Minotaur.),
the  horse,  and  the  boar.  In  the  second  consulship
of  Marius,  b,  c.  104,  the  four  quadrupeds  were  en-
tirely laid  aside  as  standards,  the  eagle  being  alone
retained.  It  was  made  of  silver,  or  bronze,  and
witli  expanded  wings,  but  was  probably  of  a  small
size,  since  a  standard-bearer  (signifer)  under  Juliuij
Caesar  is  said  in  circumstances  of  danger  to  havjp
wrenched  the  eagle  from  its  staflF  and  concealed
in  the  folds  of  his  girdle.    (Flor.  iv.  12.)

Under  the  later  emperors  the  eagle  was  carrie
as  it  had  been  for  many  centuries,  with  the  legioB
a  legion  being  on  that  account  sometimes  called
aquila  (Hirt.  Bell.  Hisp.  39),  aud  at  the  same  tiine^
each  cohort  had  for  its  own  ensign  the  serpent  or
dragon  (draco,  SpaKuv),  which  was  woven  on  a
square  piece  of  cloth  (textilis  anguis,  Sidon.  ApolL^
Carm.  v.  409),  elevated  on  a  gilt  staff,  to  which  a
cross-bar  was  adapted  for  the  purpose  (Themist.
Orat.  i.  p.  1,  xviii.  p.  267,  ed.  Dindorf;  Clau-
dian,  iv.  Cons.  Honor.  546  ;  vi.  Cons.  Honor.  566),
and  carried  by  the  draconarius.  (Veget.  de  B»
Mil.  ii.  13  ;  compare  Tac.  Ann.  i.  18.)

Another  figure  used  in  the  standards  was  a  ball
(pila),  supposed  to  have  been  emblematic  of  the
dominion  of  Rome  over  the  world  (Isid.  Orig.
xviii.  3)  ;  and  for  the  same  reason  a  bronze  figure


SIGNA  MILITARIA.

of  Victory  was  sometimes  fixed  at  the  top  of  the
staff,  as  we  see  it  sculptured,  tojjether  with  small
st'itues  of  Mars,  on  the  Column  of  Trajan  and  the
Arch  of  Constantino.  (See  the  next  woodcut,  and
Causeus  de  Sig.  in  Graevii  Tlies.  vol.  x.  p.  2529.)
Under  the  eagle  or  other  emblem  was  often  placed
a  head  of  the  reigning  emperor,  which  was  to  the
army  the  object  of  idolatrous  adoration.  (Josephus,
B.J.  ii.  9.  §  2  ;  Suet.  Tiber.  A^.Calig.  14  ;  Tac.
Ann.  i.  39,  41,  iv.  62.)  The  name  of  the  em-
peror, or  of  him  who  was  acknowledged  as  emperor,
was  sometimes  inscribed  in  the  same  situation.
(Sueton.  Vespas.  6.)  The  pole,  used  to  carry  the
eagle,  had  at  its  lower  extremity  an  iron  pohit
(cuspis)  to  fix  it  in  the  ground,  and  to  enable  the
aquilifer  in  case  of  lieed  to  repel  an  attack.  (Suet.
Jul.  62.)

Tlie  minor  divisions  of  a  cohort,  called  centuries,
had  also  each  an  ensign,  inscribed  with  the  num-
ber both  of  the  cohort  and  of  the  century.  By
this  provision,  together  with  the  diversities  of  the
crests  worn  by  the  centurions  [Galea],  every
soldier  was  enabled  with  the  greatest  ease  to  take
his  place.  (Veget.  I.  c.)

In  the  Arch  of  Constantino  at  Rome  there  are
foiu-  sculptured  panels  near  the  top,  which  exhibit
a  great  number  of  standards,  and  illustrate  some  of
the  forms  here  described.     The  annexed  woodcut


SIGNA  MILITARIA.


1046


X


LAJ-iMlil.  ILJ-I-  lii


n  V  riLJi^TT


Hjffi-HJ^iHH^HWmHM


!s  copied  from  two  out  of  the  four.  The  first  panel
fepresents  Trajan  giving  a  king  to  the  Parthians  :
';even  standards  are  held  by  the  soldiers.  The
lecond,  containing  five  standards,  represents  the
erformance  of  the  sacrifice  called  suovetaurilia.
Bartoli,  Jj-c.  Triumph.)

When  Constantino  had  embraced  Christianity,
.  figure  or  emblem  of  Christ,  woven  in  gold  upon
lurple  cloth,  was  substituted  for  the  head  of  the
jmperor.  This  richly  ornamented  standard  was
[ailed  labarum.  (Prudentius  cont.  Symm.  i.  466,
88;  Niceph.^.^.  vii.  37.)

Since  the  movements  of  a  body  of  troops  and  of
l^ery  portion  of  it  were  regulated  by  the  standards,
11  the  evolutions,  acts,  and  incidents  of  the  Ro-
Jian  army  were  expressed  by  phrases  derived
;ora  this  circumstance.     Thus  signa  inferre  meant


to  advance  (Caesar,  B.  G.  i.  25,  ii.  25),  referre  to
retreat,  and  convertere  to  face  about  ;  eff'erre.,  or
castris  veUere.,  to  march  out  of  the  camp  (Virg.
Georg.  i.  108)  ;  ad  signa  convenire,  to  re-assemble.
(Caesar,  B.  G.  vi.  1.  37.)  Notwithstanding  some
obscurity  in  the  use  of  terms,  it  appears  that,
whilst  the  standard  of  the  legion  was  properly
called  aquila.,  those  of  the  cohorts  were  in  a  special
sense  of  the  term  called  signa,  their  bearers  being
signi/eri,  and  that  those  of  the  manipuli  or  smaller
divisions  of  the  cohort  were  denominated  vexilla,
their  bearers  being  vesnllarii.  Also  those  who
fought  in  the  first  ranks  of  the  legion  before  the
standards  of  the  legion  and  cohorts  were  called
antedgnani.  (Caesar,  B.  C.  i.  43,  44,  6Q.)  A  pecu-
liar application  of  the  term  vexillarii  is  explained
on  p.  507,  b.

In  military  stratagems  it  was  sometimes  neces-
sary to  conceal  the  standards.  (Caesar,  B.  G.  vii.
45.)  Although  the  Romans  commonly  considered
it  a  point  of  honour  to  preserve  their  standards,  yet
in  some  cases  of  extreme  danger  the  leader  himself
threw  them  among  the  ranks  of  the  enemy  in
order  to  divert  their  attention  or  to  animate  his
own  soldiers.  (Florus,  i.  11.)  A  wounded  or  dying
standard-bearer  delivered  it,  if  possible,  into  the
hands  of  his  general  (Florus,  iv.  4),  from  whom  he
had  received  it  (signis  acceptis,  Tac.  Ann.  i.  42).
In  time  of  peace  the  standards  were  kept  in  the
Aerarium  under  the  care  of  the  Quaestor.

We  have  little  information  respecting  the  stand-
ards of  any  other  nation  besides  the  Romans.
The  banners  of  the  Parthians  appear  to  have  had  a
similar  form  to  that  of  the  Romans,  but  were  more
richly  decorated  with  gold  and  silk.  [Sericum.]
A  golden  eagle  with  expanded  wings  was  the  royal
standard  of  Persia.  (Xen.  Cyrap.  vii.  1.  §  4,  Anah.
i.  10.  §  12.)  The  military  ensigns  of  the  Egyptians
were  very  various.  Their  sacred  animals  were  re-
presented in  them  (Diod.  i.  86),  and  in  the  paint-
ings at  Thebes  we  observe  such  objects  as  a  king's
name,  a  sacred  boat,  or  some  other  emblem,  ap-
plied to  the  same  purpose.  (Wilkinson,  Man.  and
Oust.  vol.  i.  p.  294.)  The  Jewish  army  was  probably
marshalled  bv  the  aid  of  banners  {Ps.  xx.  5  j
3x3


1046


SISTRUM.


Cant  vi.  4  ;  Is.  xiii,  2)  ;  but  not  so  the  Greek,
although  the  latter  had  a  standard,  the  elevation
of  which  served  as  a  signal  for  joining  battle,
either  by  land  (Polyaen.  iii,  9.  §  27  ;  Corn.  Nepos,
xi.  2.  §  2)  or  by  sea.  (Thucyd.  i.  49.)  A  scarlet
flag  ((poiviKls)  was  sometimes  used  for  this  pur-
pose. (Polyaen.  i.  48.  §  2.)  [J.  Y.]
SIGNINUM  OPUS.  [DoMU8,p.431,a.]
SIGNUM,  a  division  of  the  Roman  legion.
[ExERciTus,  p.  501,  a.]

SILENTIA'RII.     [Praepositus.]
SILICE'RNIUM.     [FuNus,  p.  562,  a.]
SILIQUA.     [Uncia.]

SFMPULUM  or  SIMPU'VIUM,  was  the
name  of  a  small  cup  used  in  sacrifices,  by  which
libations  of  wine  were  off  red  to  the  gods.  Festus
says  that  it  was  not  unlike  the  cvathus.  (Festus,
s.  V.  ;  Varr.  L.  L.  v.  124,  ed.  Muller  ;  Plin.  H.  N.
XXXV.  12.  s.  46  ;  Juv.  vi.  343  ;  Cic.  de  Rep.  vi.  2.)
It  often  appears  on  Roman  coins,  as  on  the  an-
nexed coin  of  the  Sestia  gens,  which  represents  on
the  obverse  a  tripod  with  a  secespita  on  one  side
and  a  simpuvium  on  the  other.  A  simpuvium  also
appears  on  the  coin  figured  under  Secespita.


There  was  a  proverbial  expression  exdtare  fluctus
in  simpulo,  "  to  make  much  ado  about  nothing  "
(Cic.  de  Leq.  iii.  16).

SINDON.  [Pallium,  p.  851,  b.]
SINGULA'RES.  [Exercitus,  p.  508,  b.]
SIPA'RIUM,  a  piece  of  tapestry  stretched  on  a
frame,  which  rose  before  the  stage  of  the  theatre
(Festus,  S.V.;  Cic.  Prov.  Cons.  6  ;  Juv.  viii.  186),
and  consequently  answered  the  purpose  of  the
drop-scene  with  us,  although,  contrary  to  our  prac-
tice, it  was  depressed  when  the  play  began,  so  as
to  go  below  the  level  of  the  stage  (aulaea  premun-
tur,  Hor.  Epist.  ii.  1.  189),  and  was  raised  again
when  the  performance  was  concluded  {tolluntur,
Ovid,  Met.  iii.  Ill — 114).  From  the  last-cited
passage  we  learn  that  human  figures  were  repre-
sented upon  it,  whose  feet  appeared  to  rest  upon
the  stage  when  this  screen  was  drawn  up.  From
a  passage  of  Virgil  {Georg.  iii.  25)  we  further
learn,  that  the  figures  were  sometimes  those  of
Britons  woven  in  the  canvass  and  raising  their
arms  in  the  attitude  of  lifting  up  a  purple  curtain,
so  as  to  be  introduced  in  the  same  manner  as
Atlantes,  Persae,  and  Caryatides.

In  a  more  general  sense  siparium  denoted  any
piece  of  cloth  or  canvass  stretched  upon  a  frame.
(Quintil.  vi.  1.  §  32.)  [J.Y.]

SISTRUM  (<T€7(TTpov),  a  mystical  instrument
of  music,  used  by  the  ancient  Egyptians  in  their
ceremonies,  and  especially  in  the  worship  of  Isis.
(Ovid.  Met.  ix.  7 Si,  Amor.  ii.  13.  11,  iii.  9.  34,
de  Ponio,  i.  1.  38.)  It  was  held  in  the  right  hand
(see  woodcut),  and  shaken,  from  which  circum-
stance it  derived  its  name  {aera  repulsa  munu,
Tibull.  i.  3.  24).  Its  most  common  form  is  seen  in
the  right-hand  figure  of  the  annexed  woodcut,
which  represents  an  ancient  sistrum  formerly  be-
longing to  the  library  of  St.  Genovefa  at  Paris.


SITOPHYLACES.

Plutarch  {de  Is.  et  Osir.  pp.  670,  671,  ed.  Steph.)
says,  that  the  shaking  of  the  four  bars  within  the
circular  apsis  represented  the  agitation  of  the  four
elements  within  the  compass  of  the  world,  by  which
all  things  are  continually  destroyed  and  repro
duced,  and  that  the  cat  sculptured  upon  the  apsig
was  an  emblem  of  the  moon.     Apuleius  {Met.  xi.


pp.  119,  I21,.ed.  Aldi)  describes  the  sistrum  as  a
bronze  rattle  {aureum  crepitacuhim\  consisting  of  a
narrow  plate  curved  like  a  sword-belt  {balte/is),
through  which  passed  a  few  rods,  that  rendered  a
loud  shrill  sound.  He  says  that  these  instruments
were  sometimes  made  of  silver  or  even  of  gold.
He  also  seems  to  intimate,  that  the  shakes  were
three  together  {tergeminos  ictus),  which  would
make  a  sort  of  rude  music.

The  introduction  of  the  worship  of  Isis  into
Italy  shortly  before  the  commencement  of  the
Christian  aera  made  the  Romans  familiar  with  this
instrument.  The  "  linigeri  calvi.  sistrataque  turba  "
(Mart.  xii.  29)  are  most  exactly  depicted  in  two
paintings  found  at  Portici  {Ant.  d''Ercolano,  vol.  ii.
pp.  309 — 320),  and  containing  the  two  figures  of  a
priest  of  Isis  and  a  woman  kneeling  at  her  altar,
which  are  introduced  into  the  preceding  woodcut.
The  use  of  the  sistrum  in  Egypt  as  a  military  in-
strument to  collect  the  troops  is  probably  a  fiction.
(Virg.  Aen.  viii.  QQQ  ;  Propert.  iii.  11.  43.)  The
sistrum  is  used  in  Nubia  and  Abyssinia  to  the  pre-
sent day.

Sistrum,  which    is  in  fact,  like  Sceptrum,  a.,
Greek  word  with  a  Latin  termination,  the  prop
Latin  term  for  it  being  crepitaculum,  is  sometime
used  for  a  child's  rattle.   (Martial,  xiv.  54  ;  Pollc
ix.  127.)  [J.  Y.]

SITELLA.     [SiTULA.]

SITO'NAE  (o-iTwj/ai).     [SiTos.]

SITOPHY'LACES  {airoK^vKaKcs),  a  board
officers,  chosen  by  lot,  at  Athens.  They  were  at
first  three,  afterwards  increased  to  fifteen,  of  whom
ten  were  for  the  city,  five  for  the  Peiraeeus.  Their
business  was  partly  to  watch  the  arrival  of  the
corn  ships,  take  account  of  the  quantity  imported,
and  see  that  the  import  laws  were  duly  observed  ;
partly  to  watch  the  sales  of  corn  in  the  market,
and  take  care  that  the  prices  were  fair  and  reason-
able, and  none  but  legal  weights  and  measures
used  by  the  factors  ;  in  which  respect  their  duties
were  much  the  same  as  those  of  the  Agoranonu
and  Metronomi  with  regard  to  other  saleable  articles.
[SiTos.]     Demosthenes  refers  to  the  entry  in  thelj


SITOS.

books  of  the  Sitophylaces  {t^v  irapa  raiis  <Tiro(pv~
KoL^iv  a.TToypa(\>T]v)  to  prove  the  quantity  of  corn
imported  from  Pontus,  which  (he  says)  was  equal
to  all  that  came  from  elsewhere,  owing  to  the
liberality  of  Leucon,  king  of  the  Bosporus,  who
allowed  corn  to  be  exported  from  Theudosia  to
Athens  free  of  duty.  (Demosth.  c.  Leptin.  466,
467.)  These  books  were  probably  kept  by  the
five  who  acted  for  the  Peiraeeus,  whose  especial
business  it  would  be  to  inspect  the  cargoes  that
wereunladen.  (Harpocr.  s.u.  2iTo<|)uAo/ces  :  Bockh,
Publ.  Econ.  of  Athens,  p.  83,  2d  ed.)       [C.  R.  K.]

SITOS  ((TtTos),  corn.  The  soil  of  Attica,  though
favourable  to  the  production  of  figs,  olives,  and
grapes,  was  not  so  favourable  for  corn  ;  and  the
population  being  very  considerable  in  the  flourishing
period  of  the  Athenian  republic,  it  was  necessary
to  import  corn  for  their  subsistence.  According  to
the  calculation  of  Bockh,  which  does  not  mate-
rially differ  from  that  of  other  writers,  there  were
135,000  freemen  and  365,000  slaves  residing  in
Attica.  The  country,  which  contained  an  area  of
64,000  stadia,  produced  annually  about  two  millions
of  medimni  of  corn,  chiefly  barley.  The  medimnus
was  about  1  bushel,  3  gallons,  and  5'75  pints,  or
48  Attic  xo''''Kes.  A  x^**^"*!  was  considered  a  fair
daily  allowance  of  meal  (rj/xeprjaia  rpocpi})  for  a
slave.  The  consumption  of  the  whole  population
was  three  million  medinmi,  and  one-third  therefore
was  imported.  It  came  from  the  countries  border-
ing on  the  Euxine  Sea  (Pontus,  as  it  was  called  by
the  Greeks),  and  more  especially  from  the  Cimme-
rian Bosporus  and  the  Thracian  Chersonese  ;  also
from  Syria,  Egypt,  Libya,  Cyprus,  Rhodes,  Sicily,
and  Euboea.  The  necessities  of  the  Athenians
made  them  exceedingly  anxious  to  secure  a  plenti-
ful supply,  and  every  precaution  was  taken  for  that
purpose  by  the  government  as  well  as  by  the  legis-
lator. Sunium  was  fortified,  in  order  that  the  com
vessels  (<riTayayal  dXKaSis)  might  come  safely
round  the  promontory.  Ships  of  war  were  often
employed  to  convoy  the  cargo  (irapairefiiTeiv  rhv
(tItov)  bevond  the  reach  of  an  enemy.  ( Dem.  de
Coron.  250,  251,  c.  Polyd.  1211.)  When  Pollis,
the  Lacedaemonian  admiral,  was  stationed  with
his  fleet  off  Aegina,  the  Athenians  embarked  in
haste,  under  the  command  of  Chabrias,  and  offered
him  battle,  in  order  that  the  corn-ships,  which  had
arrived  as  far  as  Geraestus  in  Euboea,  might  get
into  the  Peiraeeus.  (Xenoph.  HeUen.  v.  4.  §  61.)
One  of  the  principal  objects  of  Philip  in  his  attack
on  Byzantium  was  that,  by  taking  that  city  he
might  command  the  entrance  to  the  Euxine,  and
80  have  it  in  his  power  to  distress  the  Athenians
in  the  corn  trade.  Hence  the  great  exertions  made
by  Demosthenes  to  relieve  the  Byzantines,  of  the
success  of  which  he  justly  boasts  (de  Coron.  254,
307,  326).

The  measures  taken  by  the  legislature  to  obtain
supplies  of  corn  may  appear  harsh,  and  their  policy
is  at  least  doubtful,  but  they  strongly  evince  the
anxiety  of  the  people  on  the  subject.  Exportation
was  entirely  prohibited,  nor  was  any  Athenian  or
resident  alien  allowed  to  carry  corn  to  any  other
place  than  Athens  {(TiT-Dyelv  aKX6(Ti  ^  'A6i]m(e).
Whoever  did  so,  was  punishable  with  death.  (Dem.
c.P/iorm.913  ;  Lycurg.  c.  Leocr.  151,  ed.  Steph.)
Of  the  corn  brought  into  the  Athenian  port  two-
thirds  was  to  be  brought  into  the  city  and  sold
there.  (Harpocr.  s.  v.  'ETre/iieATjT^s  efiiropiov.)  No
one  might  lend  money  on  a  ship  that  did  not  sail


SITOS.  1047

with  an  express  condition  to  bring  a  return  cargo,
part  of  it  com,  to  Athens.  If  any  merchant,  capi-
talist, or  other  person  advanced  money  or  entered
into  any  agreement  in  contravention  of  these  laws,
not  only  was  he  liable  to  the  penalty,  but  the  agree,
ment  itself  was  null  and  void,  nor  could  he  recover
any  sum  of  money,  or  bring  any  action  in  respect
thereof.  (Dem.  c.Zacn^  941.)  Information  against
the  offenders  was  to  be  laid  before  the  eVe^eATjToi
Tov  ifXTTopiov.  (Meier,  A  tt.  Proc.  ■p.  87.)  Strict
regulations  were  made  with  respect  to  the  sale  of
com  in  the  market.  Conspiracies  among  the  corn-
dealers  ((TiTOTrwKai)  to  buy  up  the  corn  ((ruvavua:
Oai),  or  raise  the  price  (arvpicrTavai  to?  rt^uis),
were  punished  with  death.  They  were  not  allowed
to  make  a  profit  of  more  than  one  ohol  in  the  me-
dimnus ;  and  it  was  unlawful  to  bu}'  more  than
fifty  (pop/xoi  at  a  time.  It  is  not  certain  what  the
size  of  a  (pop/xSs  was :  Bockh  supposes  it  to  be
about  as  much  as  a  medimnus.  These  laws  remind
us  of  our  own  statutes  against  engrossing  and  re-
grating  ;  but  they  appear  to  have  been  easily  evaded
by  the  corn-dealers.  (See  the  speech  of  Lysias
KaTo,  Twv  (TiToirwXwu:  Dem.  c.  Dionysod.  1285.)
The  sale  of  corn  was  placed  under  the  supervision
of  a  special  board  of  officers  called  Sitophylaces
(<TLTO(pv\aKes),  while  that  of  all  other  marketable
commodities  was  superintended  by  the  agoranomi.
(Lys.  id.  165,  ed.  Steph.)  It  was  their  business
to  see  that  meal  and  bread  were  of  the  proper
quality,  and  sold  at  the  legal  weight  and  price.
They  were  bound  to  detect  the  frauds  of  the  factor
and  the  baker,  and  (if  we  may  believe  Lysias)
they  sometimes  suffered  death  for  their  want  of
vigilance.  The  mode  of  proceeding  against  them
was  by  daayyeXia  before  the  senate.  (Plainer,
Proc.  und  Klag.  vol.  ii.  p.  149.)

Notwithstanding  these  careful  provisions,  scarci-
ties ((TJToSerai)  frequently  occurred  at  Athens,
either  from  bad  harvests,  the  misfortunes  of  war,
or  other  accidental  causes.  The  state  then  made
great  efforts  to  supply  the  wants  of  the  people  by
importing  large  quantities  of  corn,  and  selling  it  at
a  low  price.  Public  granaries  were  kept  in  the
Odeum,  Pompeum,  Long  Porch,  and  naval  store-
house near  the  sea.  (Pollux,  ix.  45  ;  Dem,  c.
Phorm.  918.)  Sitonae  (ffiTuivai)  were  appointed
to  get  in  the  supply  and  manage  the  sale.  De-
mosthenes was  appointed  on  one  occasion  to  that
office  (de  Coron.  310.)  Persons  called  apodectae
(onoZeKTai)  received  the  com,  measured  it  out,
and  distributed  it  in  certain  quantities.  (Pollux,
viii.  114.)  Public-spirited  individuals  would  some-
times import  grain  at  their  own  expense,  and  sell
it  at  a  moderate  price,  or  distribute  it  gratuitously.
(Dem.  c.  Phorm.  918.)  We  read  of  the  Athenian
state  receiving  presents  of  com  from  kings  and
princes.  Thus  Leucon,  king  of  the  Bosporus,  sent
a  large  present,  for  which  he  had  the  honour  of
dreA-eta  (exemption  from  customs-duties)  conferred
on  him  by  a  decree  of  the  people.  (Dem.  c.  Leptin.
467  ;  see  Isocr.  Tpaire^iT.  370,  ed.  Steph.)  Psam-
metichus,  an  Egyptian  prince,  sent  a  present  in
Olymp.  83.  4,  Demetrius  in  Olymp.  118.  2,  Spar-
tacus,  king  of  the  Bosporas,  a  few  years  after.  In
later  times,  that  made  by  the  Roman  Atticus  is
well  known.  On  the  whole  of  this  subject  the
reader  is  referred  to  Bockh  (PuU.  Econ.  of  Athens^
p.  77,  &c.,  2nd.  ed.),  where  also  he  will  find  the
various  prices  of  meal  and  bread  at  Athens,  and
other  details,  copiously  explained.  As  to  the  duty
3x4


1048  SITOU  DIKE.

payable  on  the  importation  of  com,  see  Pentk-

COSTE.

^7to^  is  strictly  wheat-Jlour,  hhtpira  harhrj-flour^
irvpoi  wheats  Kpidal  barley,  &pTos  wheat  bread,  fxa^a
barley-bread.  S'lVos,  however,  is  often  applied  to
all  kinds  of  corn,  and  even  in  a  larger  sense  to  pro-
visions in  general.  [C.  K.  K.]

SITOU  DIKE  {a'nov  S/ktj).  The  marriage
portion  (7rpo?|)  being  intended  as  a  provision  for
the  wife,  although  it  was  paid  to  the  husband  by
her  father,  brother,  or  other  natural  guardian  {kv-
pios),  if  anything  happened  to  sever  the  marriage
contract,  the  husband  or  his  representative  was
bound  to  repay  it ;  or,  if  he  failed  to  do  so,  he  was
liaV)le  to  pay  interest  upon  it  at  the  rate  of  eighteen
per  cent,  per  annum  (eTr'  ivv4a  oSoKots  roKocpopelv).
This  was  the  law  in  case  of  a  divorce  (Demosth.  c.
Neaer.  1362)  ;  and  also  when,  after  a  contract  of
marriage,  and  after  payment  of  the  marriage  por-
tion, the  intended  husband  refused  to  perform  his
engagement.  (Demosth.  c.  Jp7«o6,  818.)  Upon  the
death  of  the  husband  without  children,  the  wife
and  her  money  went  back  to  the  natural  guardian
(Isaeus,  de  Pyrr.  lier.  41,  ed.  Steph.)  ;  but  if  he
died  leaving  children,  she  had  the  option  of  staying
with  them  or  going  back  to  her  Kvpios.  If  she  did
the  latter,  the  children  (or  their  guardian,  if  they
were  under  age)  were  bound  to  pay  back  the  por-
tion to  the  Kvptos,  or  eighteen  per  cent,  interest  in
the  meantime.  (Isaeus,  de  Pyrr.  her.  38,  46,  ed.
Steph.)  And  if  she  married  again,  her  Kvpios  was
bound  in  honour  to  give  the  same  sum  to  her  new
husband.  (Demosth.  c.  Boeot.  de  dote,  \0\0.)  Upon
the  transfer  of  a  woman  from  one  husband  to  another,
which  was  not  uncommon,  the  irpoi^  was  trans-
ferred with  her.  (Demosth.  c.  Onet.  866.)  A  wo-
man's fortune  was  usually  secured  by  a  mortgage
of  the  husband's  property ;  but  whether  this  was
so  or  not,  her  guardian,  in  any  of  the  cases  above
mentioned,  might  bring  an  action  against  the  party
who  unjustly  withheld  it  ;  Siktj  irpoiKhs,  to  recover
the  principal,  Si/ct;  airov,  for  the  interest.  The
interest  was  called  &Itos  (alimony  or  maintenance),
because  it  was  the  income  out  of  which  the  woman
had  to  be  maintained,  ai  6(l>^i\6fi€vai  rpo(()a\,  r]
SiSo/xeuT]  TTpSaoSos  els  rpo^i]]/  rals  yvuai^iu.  (Har-
pocr.  s.  V.  SiTos :  Pollux,  viii.  33  ;  Demosth.  c.
Aphob.  839,  854.)  The  word  alros  is  often  used
generally  for  provisions,  just  as  we  use  the  word
bread.  So  in  the  law,  which  required  the  son  of
an  iiriKXrjpos  to  maintain  his  mother  when  he
came  of  age  and  took  possession  of  her  inheritance,
the  expression  is  rhv  (htov  ficTpelu  tt}  fj.r)rpi.
(Demosth.  c.  Steph.  1135.)  The  allowance  for
rations  given  to  soldiers  was  called  (riT7]p4(nou.
(Bockh,  Publ.  Econ.  of  Athens,  p.  272,  2d  ed.)
The  Si'/cTj  criTov  was  tried  before  the  archon  in
the  Odeum,  the  same  building  in  which  the  corn
granaries  were  kept,  which  makes  it  not  improbable
that  in  earlier  times  the  defendant  was  called  upon
to  pay  the  damages  in  kind,  that  is,  in  com  or  some
other  sort  of  provisions  ;  though  it  was  soon  found
to  be  more  convenient  to  commute  this  for  a  money
payment  This  cause,  like  the  S/kt;  irpoiKhs,  seems
to  have  belonged  to  the  efx/xrivot  8i/caz,  as  it  was  pre-
sumed that  the  woman  could  not  wait  long  for  the
means  of  her  daily  subsistence.  It  was  arl/jjiros,
for  the  damages  were  clearly  liquidated,  being  a
mere  matter  of  calculation,  when  the  payment  of
the  marriage  portion  was  proved.  (Suidas,  s.  v.
'ClSetoy;    Pollux,  iii.  47,   vi.  153,  viil  31,  33;


SOCCUS.

Meier,  Att.  Proc.  pp.  43,  423—427  ;   Platnet^
Proc.  und  Klag.  vol.  ii.  p.  266.)  [C.  R.  K.J

SITTYBAE.     [Liber.]

SI'TULA,  dim.  SITELLA  {v^p'ia),  was  pro-
bably a  bucket  or  pail  for  drawing  and  carrj-ing
water  (Plant.  Amph.  ii.  2.  30),  but  was  more  usu-
ally applied  to  the  vessel  from  which  lots  were
drawn :  Sitella,  however,  was  more  commonly  used
in  this  signification.  (Plant.  Cas.  ii.  5.  34,  43,  ii.  6.
7,  11,  Liv.  XXV.  3,  xli.  18.)  It  appears  that  the
vessel  was  filled  with  water  (as  among  the  Greeks,
whence  the  word  vSpia),  and  that  the  lots  (sortes)
were  made  of  wood  ;  and  as,  though  increasing  in
size  below,  it  had  a  narrow  neck,  only  one  lot
could  come  to  the  top  of  the  water  at  the  same
time,  when  it  was  shaken.  (Situlam  hue  tecum
afferto  cum  aqua  et  sortes,  Plaut.  Cas.  ii.  4.  1 7  ;  Cic.
in  Verr.  ii.  51  ;  Vopisc.  Pro6.  8.)  The  vessel  used
for  drawing  lots  was  also  called  urna  or  orca  as
well  as  Situla  or  Sitella.  (Cic  in  Vatin.  1 4  ;  Val.
Max.  vi.  3.  §  4  ;  Virg.  Aen.  vi.  431,  &c.  ;  Lucian,
V.  394,  with  Schol.  ;  compare  Pers.  iii.  48.)

It  is  important  to  understand  the  true  meaning
of  Sitella,  since  almost  all  modern  writers  have
supposed  that  the  name  of  Sitella  or  Cista  was
given  indifferently  to  the  ballot-box,  into  which
those  who  voted  in  the  comitia  and  courts  of
justice  cast  their  tabellae :  but  Wunder  {Codex
Erfutensis,  p.  clviii.  &c.)  has  proved,  that  the
opinion  of  Manutius  {de  Comitiis  Romanis,  c.  1 5.
p.  527,  ed.  Graev.)  is  correct,  who  maintained  that
the  Sitella  was  the  urn,  from  which  the  names  of
the  tribes  or  centuries  were  drawn  out  by  lot,  so
that  each  might  have  its  proper  place  in  voting,
and  that  the  Cista  was  the  box  into
which  the  tabellae  were  cast.  [Cista.]
The  form  of  the  Sitella  is  preserved  on
a  coin  of  the  Cassia  gens,  which  is  repre-
sented in  the  annexed  cut.

SOCCUS,  dim.  SO'CCULUS,  was  nearly  if  not
altogether  equivalent  in  meaning  to  Crepida,  and
denoted  a  slipper  or  low  shoe,  which  did  not  fit
closely,  and  was  not  fiistened  by  any  tie.  (Isid.
Orig.  xix.  33.)  Shoes  of  this  description  were
worn,  more  especially  among  the  Greeks  together
with  the  Pallium,  both  by  men  and  by  women.
But  those  appropriated  to  the  female  sex  were
finer  and  more  ornamented  {VWw.  H.N.  ix.  35.  s.56  ;
Soccus  muliebris.  Suet.  Calig.  52,  Vitell.  2),  although
those  worn  by  men  were  likevvise  in  some  instances
richly  adorned  according  to  the  taste  and  means  ol
the  wearer.     (Plant.  Bacch.  ii.  3.  98.)


SOCIETAS.

For  the  reasons  mentioned  under  the  articles
Baxa  and  Chepida  the  Soccus  was  worn  by
comic  actors  (Hor.  Ars  Pott.  80,  90),  and  was  in
this  respect  opposed  to  the  Cothurnus.  (Mart,
viii.  3. 13  ;  F\in.  Epist.  ix.  7.)  The  preceding  wood-
cut is  taken  from  an  ancient  painting  of  a  buffoon
[MiMUs],  who  is  dancing  in  loose  yellow  slippers
(luteum  soccuni,  Catull.  Epithal.  Jul.  10).  This
was  one  of  their  most  common  colours.  (De  L'Aul-
naye.  Salt.  Theat.  pi.  iv.)   [Solea.]  [J.  Y.]

SOCI'ETAS.  Societas  is  classed  by  Gains  (iii.
]  35)  and  in  the  Institutions  of  Justinian  among
those  obligationes  which  arise  Consensu.  When
several  persons  unite  for  a  common  purpose,  which
is  legal,  and  contribute  the  necessary  means,  such
a  union  is  Societas,  and  the  persons  are  Socii.  (Dig.
17.  tit.  2.  s.  57.)  The  contract  of  Societas  might
either  be  made  in  words  or  by  the  acts  of  the  par-
ties, or  by  the  consent  of  the  parties  signified
through  third  persons :  it  required  no  particular
form  of  agreement.  A  Societas  might  be  formed
either  for  the  sake  of  gain  to  arise  from  the  dealings
and  labour  of  the  Socii  (quaestus),  or  not.  Societas
for  the  purpose  of  quaestus  corresponds  to  the  Eng-
lish Partnership.  A  Societas  might  be  formed
which  should  comprise  all  the  property  of  the  Socii
(societas  omnium  bonorum)  ;  in  which  case  as  soon
as  the  Societas  was  formed,  all  the  property  of  all
the  Socii  immediately  became  common  (res  quae
cop.nntium  sunt  cotiiinuo  commmiicantur).  But  the
Societas  might  be  limited  to  a  part  of  the  property
of  the  Socii  or  to  a  single  thing,  as  the  buying  and
Belling  of  slaves,  or  to  carrying  on  trade  in  a  par-
ticular thing  in  a  particular  place.  (Cic.  pro  P.
Quintio,  c.  3.)  The  communion  of  property  in  a
Societas  might  also  be  limited  to  the  use  of  the
things.  A  Societas  might  be  formed  either  in
perpctuum^  that  is,  so  long  as  the  parties  lived,  or
ad  tempus  or  in  tempore  or  svh  conditione.  (Dig.  17.
tit.  2.  8.1.)

Each  Socius  was  bound  to  contribute  towards
the  objects  of  the  Societas  according  to  the  terms
of  the  contract.  But  it  was  not  necessary  that  all
the  Socii  should  contribute  money  :  one  might  sup-
ply money  and  another  might  supply  labour  {opera),
and  the  profit  might  be  divisible  between  them,
for  the  labour  of  one  might  be  as  valuable  as  the
money  of  the  other.  In  the  case  of  Roscius  the
actor,  Fannius  had  a  slave  Panurgus,  who  by
agreement  between  Roscius  and  Faimius  was  made
their  joint  property  {communis).  Roscius  p'aid
nothing  for  his  one  half  of  the  man,  but  he  under-
took to  instruct  him  in  his  art.  Apparently  they
became  partners  in  the  man  in  equal  shares,  for
Cicero  complains  of  the  terms  of  the  Societas  on
the  part  of  Roscius  whose  instruction  was  worth
much  more  than  the  price  of  the  slave  before  he  was
taught  his  art.  (Cic.  pro  Q.  Roscio  Com.  10.)  The
[  agreement  between  the  Socii  might  also  be,  that
one  Socius  should  sustain  no  loss  and  should  have
a  share  of  the  gain,  provided  his  labour  was  so
valuable  as  to  render  it  equitable  for  him  to  become
a  partner  on  such  terms.  If  the  shares  of  the  Socii
were  not  fixed  by  agreement  they  were  considered
to  be  equal.  (Dig.  1 7.  tit.  2.  s.  29.)  One  partner
might  have  two  or  more  shares,  and  another  might
have  only  one,  if  their  contributions  to  the  Societas
in  money  or  in  labour  were  in  these  proportions.
If  the  agreement  was  merely  as  to  the  division  of
profit,  it  followed  that  the  Socii  must  bear  the
losses  in  the  same  proportion.     Each  Socius  wao


SOCIETAS.


104!)


answerable  to  the  others  for  his  conduct  in  the
management  of  the  business  :  he  was  bound  to  use
Diligentia  and  was  answerable  for  any  loss  through
Culpa.  The  action  which  one  socius  had  against
another  in  respect  of  the  contract  of  partnership,
was  an  actio  dire  eta  and  called  Pro  Socio  {cur  non
arbitrum  pro  socio  adegeris  Qu.  Roscium,  &c,  ;  Cic.
pro  Q.  Roscio  Com.  9).  The  action  might  be
brought  for  any  breach  of  the  agreement  of  part-
nership, for  an  account  and  for  a  dissolution.  A
partner  might  transfer  his  interest  to  another  per-
son, but  this  transfer  did  not  make  that  other  per-
son a  partner,  for  consent  of  all  parties  was  essential
to  a  Societas  :  in  fact  such  a  transfer  was  a  disso-
lution of  the  partnership,  and  the  person  to  whom
the  transfer  was  made  might  have  his  action  De
Communi  dividundo.  But  there  might  be  the  pro
socio  actio  against  the  heres  of  a  socius,  for  though
the  heies  is  not  a  socius,  yet  he  succeeds  to  the  in-
terest of  his  testator  or  intestate  in  the  partnership
{emolumento  successor  est;  Dig.  17.  tit.  2.  s.  63.
§  £).

Each  socius  had  a  right  of  action  in  proportion
to  his  interest  against  any  person  with  whom  any
of  the  socii  had  contracted,  if  the  socii  had  com-
missioned him  to  make  the  contract  or  had  ap-
proved of  the  contract  ;  or  if  it  was  an  action
arising  from  a  delict.  Thus  in  the  case  of  Roscius
and  Fannius,  they  had  severally  sued  a  third  person
in  respect  of  their  several  claims  as  partners,  and
yet  Fannius  still  claimed  the  half  of  what  Roscius
had  recovered  in*respect  of  his  share  in  the  part-
nership. {Pro  Q.  Rose.  Com.  11,  17,  18.)  In  all
other  cases  the  person  who  made  the  contract  could
alone  sue.  All  the  socii  could  be  sued  if  they  had
all  joined  in  the  contract  with  a  third  person,  and
each  in  proportion  to  his  share.  If  one  socius  con-
tracted on  behalf  of  all,  being  commissioned  to  do
so,  all  were  liable  to  the  full  amount  {in  solidum).
If  a  socius  borrowed  money,  the  other  socii  were
in  no  case  bound  by  his  contract,  unless  the  money
had  been  brought  into  the  common  stock.  In  fact
the  dealings  of  one  partner  did  not  bind  the  other
partners,  except  in  such  cases  as  they  would  be
bound  independent  of  the  existence  of  the  Societas.
Condemnatio  in  an  Actio  Pro  Socio  was  sometimes
attended  with  Infamia.

A  Societas,  unless  it  was  for  a  limited  period,
could  be  ended  at  the  pleasure  of  any  one  of  the
socii :  any  member  of  the  body  could  give  notice
of  dissolution  when  he  pleased  {renuntiare  societati)^
and  therefore  the  Societas  was  dissolved  {solvitur).
But  in  the  case  of  a  societas  omnium  bonorum,  if
one  socius  had  been  appointed  heres,  he  could  not
by  giving  notice  of  dissolution  defraud  his  co-
partners of  their  share  of  the  hereditas.  The  death
of  a  partner  dissolved  the  Societas  ;  and  a  Capitis
diminutio  was  said  to  have  the  same  effect.  If  the
property  of  any  one  of  the  socii  was  sold  either
publice  {bonorumpvblicatio)  or  privatim,the  Societas
was  dissolved.  It  was  also  dissolved  when  the
purpose  for  which  it  was  formed  was  accomplished ;
or  the  things  in  which  there  was  a  Societas,  had
ceased  to  exist ;  or  by  the  lapse  of  the  time  for
which  it  was  formed.

If  on  the  dissolution  of  a  partnership  there  was
no  profit,  but  a  loss  to  sustain,  the  loss  was  borne,
as  already  stated,  by  the  socii  in  proportion  to  their
shares.  If  one  man  contributed  money  and  another
labour,  and  there  was  a  loss,  how  was  the  loss
borne  ?    If  the  money  and  the  labour  were  con*


1050


SOCII.


fiidered  equivalent,  it  would  seem  to  follow  that
until  the  partnership  property  were  exhausted  by
the  pa\'ment  of  the  debts,  there  should  be  no  pe-
cuniary contribution  by  the  person  who  supplied
the  labour.  This  principle  is  a  consequence  of
what  Gains  states  that  the  capital  of  one  and  the
labour  of  another  might  be  considered  equal,  and
the  gain  might  be  divided,  and  if  there  was  a  loss
the  loss  must  be  divided  in  the  same  proportion.

Societates  were  formed  for  the  purposes  of  farm-
ing the  public  revenues.     [Publicani.]

(Gaius,  iii.  148—154  ;  Dig.  17.  tit.  2  ;  Inst  3.
tit.  26  ;  Cod.  4.  tit.  37  •  Muhlenbruch,  Doctrina
Pandedarum  ;  Mackeldey,  Lehrhuch,  <&c.  ;  Hasse,
Die  Culpa  des  Rom.  Rechts.  s.  46,  49.)     [G.  L.]

SO 'CI  I  (a-vfifiaxoi).  In  the  early  times,  when
Rome  formed  equal  alliances  with  any  of  the  sur-
rounding nations,  these  nations  were  called  Socii.
(Liv.  ii.  53.)  After  the  dissolution  of  the  Latin
league,  when  the  name  Latini,  or  Nomen  Latinum^
was  artificially  applied  to  a  great  number  of  Ita-
lians, few  only  of  whom  were  real  inhabitants  of
the  old  Latin  towns,  and  the  majority  of  whom
had  been  made  Latins  by  the  will  and  the  law  of
Rome,  there  necessarily  arose  a  difference  between
these  Latins  and  the  Socii,  and  the  expression
Socii  Nomen  Latinum  is  one  of  the  old  asyndeta,
instead  of  Socii  et  Nomen  Latinum.  The  Italian
allies  again  must  be  distinguished  from  foreign  al-
lies. Of  the  latter  we  shall  speak  hereafter.  The
Italian  allies  consisted,  for  the  most  part,  of  such
nations  as  had  either  been  conquered  by  the  Ro-
mans, or  had  come  under  their  dominion  by  other
circumstances.  When  such  nations  formed  an
alliance  with  Rome,  they  generally  retained  their
own  laws  ;  or  if  at  first  they  were  not  allowed  this
privilege,  they  afterwards  received  them  back  again.
The  condition  of  the  Italian  allies  varied,  and
mainly  depended  upon  the  manner  in  which  they
had  come  under  the  Roman  dominion  (Liv.  viii.  25,
ix.  20)  ;  but  in  reality  they  were  always  depend-
ent upon  Rome.  Niebuhr  (Hist,  of  Rome,  vol.  iii.
p.  616)  considers  that  there  were  two  main  con-
ditions of  the  Socii,  analogous  or  equal  to  those  of
th3  provincials,  that  is,  that  they  were  either
Joederati  or  liheri  (immwies,  Cic.  c.  Verr.  iii.  6).
The  former  were  such  as  had  formed  an  alliance
with  Rome,  which  was  sworn  to  by  both  parties  ;
the  latter  were  those  people  to  whom  the  senate
had  restored  their  autonomy  after  they  were  con-
quered, such  as  the  Hernican  toAvns.  (I^iv.  ix.  43.)
But  the  condition  of  each  of  these  classes  must
again  have  been  modified  according  to  circum-
stances. The  cases  in  which  Rome  had  an  equal
alliance  with  nations  or  towns  of  Italy  became
gradually  fewer  in  number  :  alliances  of  this  kind
existed  indeed  for  a  long  time  with  Tibur,  Prae-
neste,  Naples,  and  others  (Polyb,  vi.  14  ;  Liv.
xliii.  2  ;  Cic.  pro  Balb.  8)  ;  but  these  places  were,
nevertheless,  in  reality  as  dependent  as  the  other
Socii.  It  was  only  a  few  people,  such  as  the
Camertes  and  Heracleans,  that  maintained  the
rights  of  their  equal  alliance  with  Rome  do\vn  to
a  very  late  time.  (Liv.  xxviii.  45  ;  Plut.  Mar.
28  ;  Cic.  pro  Balb.  20,  pro  Arch.  4.)  With  these
few  exceptions,  most  of  the  Italians  were  either
Socii  (in  the  later  sense)  or  Latini.  During  the
latter  period  of  the  republic  they  had  the  connu-
bium  with  Rome  (Diodor.  Excerpt.  Mai^  xxxvii.  6),
but  not  the  suffrage  of  the  Latins.  It  sometimes
happened,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Macedonian  Onesi-


SOCIL

mus,  that  a  foreign  individual  was  honoured  by  the
senate  by  being  registered  among  the  Italian  Socii
{in  sociorum  formidani  referre\  and  in  this  casa
the  senate  provided  him  with  a  house  and  lands  in
some  part  of  Italy.     (Liv.  xliv.  16.)

Although  the  allies  had  their  own  laws,  the
senate,  in  cases  where  it  appeared  conducive  to  the
general  welfare,  might  command  them  to  submit  to
any  ordinance  it  might  issue,  as  in  the  case  of  the
Senatusconsultum  de  Bacchanalibus.  (Liv.  xxxix.
1 4.)  Many  regulations  also,  which  were  part  of
the  Roman  law,  especially  such  as  related  tousurj',
sureties,  wills,  and  innumerable  other  things  (Liv.
XXXV.  7  ;  Gaius,  iii.  121,  &c.  ;  Cic.  pro  Balh.  8),
were  introduced  among  the  Socii,  and  nominally
received  by  them  voluntarily.  (Cic.  I.  c.  ;  Gell.  xvi.
13,  xix.  8.)  The  Romans  thus  gradually  united
the  Italians  with  themselves,  by  introducing  their
own  laws  among  them  ;  but  as  they  did  not  grant
to  them  the  same  civic  rights  the  Socii  ultimately
demanded  them  arms  in  their  hands.

Among  the  duties  which  the  Italian  Socii  had  to
perform  towards  Rome  the  following  are  the  prin-
cipal ones  :  they  had  to  send  subsidies  in  troops,
money,  corn,  ships,  and  other  things,  whenever
Rome  demanded  them.  (Liv.  xxvi.  39,  xxviii.  45,
XXXV.  16,  &c.)  The  number  of  troops  requisite
for  completing  or  increasing  the  Roman  armies  was
decreed  every  year  by  the  senate  (Liv.  passim)^
and  the  consuls  fixed  the  amount  which  each  allied
nation  had  to  send,  in  proportion  to  its  population
capable  of  bearing  arms,  of  which  each  nation  was
obliged  to  draw  up  accurate  lists,  called  formulae.
(Liv.  xxxiv.  5Q  ;  Polyb.  ii.  23,  &c.;  Liv.  xxii.  57,
xxvii.  10.)  The  consul  also  appointed  the  place
and  time  at  which  the  troops  of  the  Socii,  each  part
imder  its  own  leader,  had  to  meet  him  and  his
legions.  (Polyb.  vi.  21,  26  ;  Liv.  xxxiv.  56,
xxxvi.  3,  xli.  5.)  The  infantrj'  of  the  allies  in  a
consular  army  was  usually  more  numerous  than
that  of  the  Romans ;  the  cavalry  was  generally
three  times  the  number  of  the  Romans  (Polyb.  iii.
108,  vi.  26,  30)  :  but  these  numerical  proportions
were  not  always  observed.  (Polyb.  ii.  24,  iii.  72.)
The  consuls  appointed  twelve  praefects  as  com-
manders of  the  Socii,  and  their  power  answered  to
that  of  the  twelve  military  tribunes  in  the  consular
legions.  (Polyb.  vi.  26,  37.)  These  praefects,  who
were  probably  taken  from  the  allies  themselves,  and
not  from  the  Romans,  selected  a  third  of  the  cavalry,
and  a  fifth  of  the  infantry  of  the  Socii,  who  formed
a  select  detachment  for  extraordinary  cases,  and
who  were  called  the  extraordinarii.  The  re-
maining body  of  the  Socii  was  then  divided  into
two  parts,  called  the  right  and  the  left  wing.
(Polyb.  I.e.;  Liv.  xxxi.  21,  xxxv.  5.)  The  in-
fantry of  the  wings  was,  as  usual,  divided  into
cohorts,  and  the  cavalry  into  turmae.  In  some
cases  also  legions  were  formed  of  the  Socii.  (Liv.
xxxvii.  39.)  Pay  and  clothing  were  given  to  the
allied  troops  by  the  states  or  towns  to  which  they
belonged,  and  which  appointed  quaestors  or  pay-
masters for  this  purpose  (Polyb.  vi.  21  ;  Cic.  c.  Verr.
V.  24)  ;  but  Rome  furnished  them  with  provisions
at  the  expense  of  the  republic  :  the  infantry  re-
ceived the  same  as  the  Roman  infantry,  but  the
cavalry  only  received  two-thirds  of  what  was  given
to  the  Roman  cavalry.  (Polyb.  vi.  39  ;  Cic.  pro
Balh.  20.)  In  the  distribution  of  the  spoil  and  of
conquered  lands  they  frequently  received  the  same
share  as  the  Romans.     (Liv.  xl.  43,  xli.  7,  IS,


SOCII.

xlv.  43,  xlii.  4.)  The  Socii  were  also  sometimes
sent  out  as  colonists  with  the  Romans.  (Appian,
de  Bell.  Civ.  i.  24.)  They  were  never  allowed  to
take  up  arms  of  their  own  accord,  and  disputes
among  them  were  settled  by  the  senate.  Notwith-
standing all  this,  the  socii  fell  gradually  under  the
arbitrary  rule  of  the  senate  and  the  magistrates  of
Rome  ;  and  after  the  year  B.  c.  173,  it  even  be-
came customary  for  magistrates,  when  they  travelled
through  Italy,  to  require  the  authorities  of  allied
towns  to  pay  homage  to  them,  to  provide  them
with  a  residence,  and  to  furnish  them  with  beasts
of  burden  when  they  continued  their  journey.
(Liv.  xlii.  1.)  Gellius  (x.  3)  mentions  a  number
of  other  vexations,  which  the  Roman  magistrates
inflicted  upon  the  Socii,  who  could  not  venture  to
seek  any  redress  against  them.  The  only  way
for  the  allies  to  obtain  protection  against  such
arbitrary  proceedings,  was  to  enter  into  a  kind  of
clientela  with  some  influential  and  powerful  Ro-
man, as  the  Samnites  were  in  the  clientela  of
Fabricius  Luscinus  (Val,  Max.  iv.  3.  §  6),  and
the  senate,  which  was  at  all  times  regarded  as  the
chief  protector  of  the  Socii,  not  only  recognised
such  a  relation  of  clientela  between  Socii  and  a
Roman  citizen,  but  even  referred  to  such  patrons
cases  for  decision  which  otherwise  it  might  have
decided  itself.  (Dionys.  ii.  11  ;  Liv.  ix.  20  ;  Cic.
pro  Still.  21.)  Socii  who  revolted  against  Rome  were
frequently  punished  with  the  loss  of  their  freedom,
or  of  the  honour  of  serving  in  the  Roman  armies.
(Gell.  I.  c.  ;  Appian,  de  Bell.  Hannib.  61 ;  Strab.  v.
p.  385,  vi.  p.  389  ;  Fest.  s.  v.  Brutiani.)  Such
punishments  however  varied  according  to  circum-
stances. After  repeated  and  fruitless  attempts  to
obtain  the  full  Roman  franchise  by  legal  means,
the  Italian  allies  broke  out  in  open  war  against
Rome,  the  result  of  which  was  that  she  was  com-
pelled to  grant  what  she  had  before  obstinately  re-
fiised.

After  the  civitas  had  been  obtained  by  all  the
Italians  by  the  Lex  Julia  de  Civitate,  the  relation
of  the  Italian  Socii  to  Rome  ceased.  But  Rome
had  long  before  this  event  applied  the  name  Socii
to  foreign  nations  also  which  were  allied  with
Rome,  though  the  meaning  of  the  word  in  this
case  differed  from  that  of  the  Socii  Italici.  Livy
(xxxiv.  57  ;  comp.  xxxv.  46)  distinguishes  two
principal  kinds  of  alliances  with  foreign  nations :
1.  focdm  aequum^  such  as  might  be  concluded
either  after  a  war  in  which  neither  party  had
gained  a  decisive  victory,  or  with  a  nation  with
which  Rome  had  never  been  at  war  ;  2.  a  foedus
iniqmnn,  when  a  foreign  nation  conquered  by  the
Romans  was  obliged  to  enter  the  alliance  on  any
terms  proposed  by  the  conquerors.  In  the  latter
case  the  foreign  nation  was  subject  to  Rome,  and
obliged  to  comply  with  anything  that  Rome  might
demand.  But  all  foreign  Socii,  whether  they
had  an  equal  or  unequal  alliance,  were  obliged
to  send  subsidies  in  troops  when  Rome  demanded
them  ;  these  troops,  however,  did  not,  like  those
of  the  Italian  Socii,  serve  in  the  line,  but  were
employed  as  light-armed  soldiers,  and  were  called
milites  aticciliares^  atiociliarii,  auxilia^  or  sometimes
auxilia  externa.  (Polyb.  ii.  32  ;  Liv.  xxi.  46,  &c.,
xxii.  22,  xxvii.  37,  xxxv.  11,  xlii.  29,  35.)  To-
wards the  end  of  the  republic  all  the  Roman  allies,
whether  they  were  nations  or  kings,  sank  down  to
the  condition  of  mere  subjects  or  vassals  of  Rome,
whose  freedom   and    independence    consisted    in


SORTES.  1051

nothing  but  a  name.     (Walter,  Gesch.  d.  Bom.
Reekts,  p.  192,  &c. ;  compare  Foederatae  Civi-

TATES.)  [L.  S.]

SO'CIO,  PRO,  ACTIO.     [SociETAS.]

SO'CIUS.       [SociETAS.]

SODA'LES.     [Collegium.]

SODA'LESAUGUSTA'LES.[AuGusTALEs.]

SODA'LES  TI'TII.     [Tixn.]

SODALI'TIUM.     [Ambitl's.]

SOLA'RIUM.  [HoROLOGiUM,  p.  616,  b  ;
DoMus,  p.  429,  b.]

SO'LEA  was  the  simplest  kind  of  sandal  [San-
dalium],  consisting  of  a  sole  with  little  more  to
fasten  it  to  the  foot  than  a  strap  across  the  instep.
(Gellius,  iii.  14,  xiii.  21.)  It  was  sometimes
made  of  wood  (Isid.  Orig.x'ix.  33),  and  worn  by
rustics  (/caAoTre'StAa,  Theocrit.  xxv.  102,  103),  re-
sembling probably  the  wooden  sandals  which  now
form  part  of  the  dress  of  the  Capuchins.  The
solea,  as  worn  by  the  upper  classes,  was  adapted
chiefly  for  wearing  in  the  house,  so  that  when  a
man  went  out  to  dinner,  he  walked  in  shoes
[CalceusJ,  taking  with  him  slippers  [Soccus]  or
soleae,  which  he  put  on  when  he  entered  the
house.  Before  reclining  at  table,  these  were  taken
away  by  a  servant  (see  woodcut,  p.  308  ;  Plaut.
True.  ii.  4.  16  ;  Ovid.  Jr.  Am.  ii.  212  ;  Mart.  viii.
59.  14)  ;  consequently  when  dinner  was  over  it
was  necessary  to  call  for  them.  (Plaut.  Trtic.  ii.
4.  12,  Most.  ii.  1.  37  ;  Hor.  Sat.  ii.  8.  77.)  But,
according  to  the  state  of  the  roads  or  of  the  wea-
ther, the  shoes  or  boots  were  again  put  on  in  order
to  return  home,  the  soleae  being  carried,  as  before,
under  the  arm.  (Hor.  Epist.  i.  13.  15.)  When
circumstances  were  favourable,  this  change  of  the
shoes  for  slippers  or  soleae  was  not  considered
necessary,  the  latter  being  worn  in  the  streets.
(Mart.  xii.  88.)

Soleae  ligrieae,  soles  or  shoes  of  wood,  were  put
on,  under  the  authority  of  the  Roman  law,  either
for  the  purpose  of  torture,  or  perhaps  merely  to  in-
dicate the  condition  of  a  criminal,  or  to  prevent
his  escape.  (Cic.  Invent,  ii.  50,  adHerenn.  i.  13.)
In  domestic  life  the  sandal  commonly  worn  by
females  was  often  used  to  chastise  a  husband  and
to  bring  him  into  subjection.  (Menander,  p.  68.
186,  ed.  Meineke :  solea  objurgahere  rubra,  Pers.  v.
169;  sandalio,TeT.  Eurnich.  v.  8.  4;  Juv.  vi,  516.)

Iron  shoes  (soleae  ferreae)  were  put  on  the  feet  of
mules  (Catull.  xvii.  26)  ;  but  instead  of  this,  Nero
had  his  mules  shod  with  silver  (Sueton.  A^ero,  30),
and  his  empress  Poppaea  her's  with  gold.  (Plin.
//.A^.  xxxiii.  11.  s.  49.)  [J.Y.]

SO'LIDUS.     [A  URUM,  p.  1 82,  b.]

SOLITAURI'LIA.  [Sacbificium,?.  1000,a ;
LusTRATio,  p.  719,  b  ;  and  woodcut  on  p.  1045.]

SO'LIUM.     [Balneae,  p.  191  ;   Thronus.]

SOPHRONISTAE.  [Gymnasium,  p.581,b.]

SORTES,  lots.  It  was  a  frequent  practice
among  the  Italian  nations  to  endeavour  to  ascertain
a  knowledge  of  future  events  by  drawing  lots
(sortes) :  in  many  of  the  ancient  Italian  temples
the  will  of  the  gods  was  consulted  in  this  way,  as
at  Praeneste,  Caere,  &c.  [Oraculum,  p.  843,  a.]
Respecting  the  meaning  of  Sors  see  Cic.  de  Div.
ii.  41.

These  sortes  or  lots  were  usually  little  tablets  or
counters,  made  of  wood  or  other  materials,  and
were  commonly  thrown  into  a  siteUa  or  urn,  filled
with  water,  as  is  explained  imder  SiTUlA.  The
lots  were  sometimes  thrown  like  dice.     (Suet.  Tib,


1052


SPECULUM.


14.)  The  name  of  Sortes  was  in  fact  given  to  any-
thing used  to  determine  chances  (compare  Cic.  de
Div.  i.  34),  and  was  also  applied  to  any  verbal  re-
sponse of  an  oracle.  (Cic.  de  Div.  ii.  5Q;  Virg.  Aen.
iv.  346,  377.)  Various  things  were  written  upon
the  lots  according  to  circumstances,  as  for  instance
the  names  of  the  persons  using  them,  &c. :  it  seems
to  have  been  a  favourite  practice  in  later  times  to
write  the  verses  of  illustrious  poets  upon  little  tab-
lets, and  to  draw  them  out  of  the  urn  like  other  lots,
the  verses  which  a  person  thus  obtained  being  sup-
posed to  be  applicable  to  him :  hence  we  read  of
Sortes  Virffilianae^  &c.  (Lamprid.  Alex.  Sever.  14  ;
Spartian.  Hadr.  2.)  It  was  also  the  practice  to
consult  the  poets  in  the  same  way  as  the  Moham-
medans do  the  Koran  and  Hafiz,  and  many  Chris-
tians the  Bible,  namely,  by  opening  the  book  at
random  and  applying  the  first  passage  that  struck
the  eye  to  a  person "'s  own  immediate  circumstances.
(August.  Confess,  iv.  3.)  This  practice  was  very
common  among  the  early  Christians,  who  substi-
tuted the  Bible  and  the  Psalter  for  Homer  and
Virgil :  many  councils  repeatedly  condemned  these
Sortes  Sanctorum,  as  they  were  called.  (Gibbon,
Decline  and  Fall^  c.  xxxyiii.  note  51.)  The  Sibylline
books  were  probably  also  consulted  in  this  way.
[SiBYLLiNi  LiBRi.]  Those  who  foretold  future
events  by  lots  were  called  Sortilegi.  (Lucan,  ix,
581.)

The  Sortes  Conviviales  were  tablets  sealed  up,
which  were  sold  at  entertainments,  and  upon  being
opened  or  unsealed  entitled  the  purchaser  to  things
of  very  iinequal  value  ;  they  were  therefore  a  kind
of  lottery.  (Suet.  Octav.  75  ;  Lamprid.  Heliogab.
22.)

SPADO'NES.     [Impubes,  p.  631,  b.]
SPARUS.     [Hasta,  p.  588,  b.]
SPE'CIES  NOVA.     [CoNFusio.]
SPEC'TIO.     [Augur,  pp.  177,b,  178,  a.]
SPECULA'RIA.     [DoMUs,  p.  432,  b.]
SPECULA'RIS  LAPIS.   [Domus,  p.  432,  a.]
SPECULATO'RES.    [Exercitus,  p.  508,  b  ;
comp.  Hemerodromi.]

SPE'CULUM  {Ka.TOTTrpov^%(Toirrpov^  ivoirrpov\
a  mirror,  a  looking-glass.  The  use  of  mirrors  is  of
very  high  antiquity  {Job,  xxxvii.  18  ;  Exodus,
xxxviii.  8),  but  they  are  not  mentioned  by  Homer,
e?en  when  he  describes  in  so  circumstantial  a
manner  the  toilet  of  Hera.  In  the  historical  times
of  Greece  they  are  frequently  spoken  of  (Xen.  Cyr.
vii.  1.  §  2  ;  Eurip.  Medexi,  1161,  Orest.  \U'2,  &c.),
and  they  were  probably  known  in  Greece  long  be-
fore, .  since  every  substance  capable  of  receiving  a
fine  polish  would  answer  the  purpose  of  a  mirror.
Thus  basins  were  employed  instead  of  mirrors
(Artemiod.  Ondr.  iii.  30.  p.  279,  ed.  Reiff),  and
also  cups,  the  inside  of  which  was  sometimes  so
disposed,  that  the  image  of  the  person  who  drank
from  them  was  seen  multiplied.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii.
D.  s.  45  ;  compare  Vopisc.  Prob.  4.)

The  looking-glasses  of  the  ancients  were  usually
made  of  metal,  at  first  of  a  composition  of  tin  and
copper,  but  afterwards  more  frequently  of  silver.
(Plin. /.  c.)  Pliny  says  that  silver  mirrors  were
first  made  by  Praxiteles  in  the  time  of  Pompey
the  Great,  but  they  are  mentioned  as  early  as  that
of  Plautus.  {Most.  i.  3.  111.)  Under  the  empire
the  use  of  silver  mirrors  was  so  common,  that  they
began  to  be  used  even  by  maid  servants  (Plin.
//.  A^.  xxxiv.  17.  s.  48)  :  they  are  constantly  men-
tioned in  the  Digest,  when  silver  plate  is  spoken  of


SPECULUM.

(33.  tit.  6.  s.  3  ;  34.  tit.  2.  s.  19.  §  8).  At  hrst
they  were  made  of  the  purest  silver,  but  metal  of
an  inferior  quality  was  afterwards  employed.  (Plin.
H.  N.  xxxiii.  9.  §  45.)  Frequently  too  the
polished  silver  plate  was  no  doubt  very  slight,  but
the  excellence  of  the  mirror  very  much  depended
on  the  thickness  of  the  plate,  since  the  reflection
was  stronger  in  proportion  as  the  plate  was  thicker.
(Vitruv.  vii.  3.  p.  204,  ed.  Bip.)  We  find  gold
mirrors  mentioned  once  or  twice  by  ancient  writers
(Eurip.  Hecuh.  925  ;  Senec.  Quaest.  Nat.  i.  17  ;
Aelian,  V.  H.  xii.  58)  ;  but  it  is  not  impossible,
as  Beckmann  has  remarked,  that  the  tenn  golden
rather  refers  to  the  frame  or  ornaments  than  to  the
mirror  itself,  as  we  speak  of  a  gold  watch,  though
the  cases  only  may  be  of  that  metal.

Besides  metals,  the  ancients  also  formed  stones
into  mirrors,  but  these  are  mentioned  so  seldom
that  we  may  conclude  they  were  intended  for  orna-
ment rather  than  for  use.  Pliny  {H.  N.  xxxvi.  26.
s.  67)  mentions  the  obsidian  stone,  or,  as  it  is  now-
called,  the  Icelandic  agate,  as  particularly  suitable
for  this  purpose.  Domitian  is  said  to  have  had  a
gallery  lined  with  phenffites,  which  by  its  reflection
showed  every  thing  that  was  done  behind  his  back
(Suet.  Dom.  14),  by  which  Beckmann  understands
a  calcareous  or  gypseous  spar,  or  selenite,  which  is
indeed  capable  of  reflecting  an  image  ;  but  we  can-
not therefore  conclude  that  the  ancients  formed
mirrors  of  it.  Mirrors  were  also  made  of  rubies
according  to  Pliny  (//.  A^.  xxxvii.  7-  s.  25),  who
refers  to  Theophrastus  for  his  authority,  but  he
seems  to  have  misunderstood  the  passage  of  Theo-
phrastus {de  Lapid.  61),  and  this  stone  is  never
found  now  sufficiently  large  to  enable  it  to  be  made
into  a  mirror.  The  emerald,  it  appears,  also  served
Nero  for  a  mirror.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvii.  5.  s.  16;
Isidor.  xvi.  7.)

The  ancients  seem  to  have  had  glass  mirrors
also  like  ours,  which  consist  of  a  glass  plate  covered
at  the  back  with  a  thin  leaf  of  metal.  They  were
manufactured  as  early  as  the  time  of  Pliny  at  the
celebrated  glass-houses  of  Sidon  (Plin.  H.N.  xxxA'i.
26.  s.  QQi),  but  they  must  have  been  inferior  to
those  of  metal,  since  they  never  came  into  general
use  and  are  never  mentioned  by  ancient  writers
among  costly  pieces  of  furniture,  whereas  metal  mir-
rors frequently  are.  Pliny  seems  to  allude  to  them  in
another  passage  {H.  N.  xxxiii.  9.  s.  45),  where  he
speaks  of  gold  being  applied  behind  a  mirror,  which
we  can  understand,  if  we  admit  that  Pliny  was
acquainted  with  glass  mirrors.

Of  mirrors  made  of  a  mixture  of  copper  and  tin,
the  best  were  manufactured  at  Brundisium.  (Plin.
H.  N,  xxxiii.  9.  s.  45,  xxxiv.  17.  s.  48.)  This  mix-
ture produces  a  white  metal,  which,  unless  pre-
served with  great  care,  soon  becomes  so  dim  that
it  cannot  be  used  until  it  has  been  previously
cleaned  and  polished.  For  this  reason  a  sponge
with  pounded  pumice-stone  was  generally  fastened
to  the  ancient  mirrors.  (Plat.  Timaeus,  p.  72,  c. ;
Vossius,  ad  CatuU.  p.  97.)

Looking-glasses  were  generally  small  and  such
as  could  be  carried  in  the  hand.  Most  of  those
which  are  preserved  in  our  Museums  are  of  this
kind  ;  they  usually  have  a  handle,  and  are  of  a
round  or  oval  shape.  Their  general  form  is  shown
in  the  woodcut  annexed.  (Caylus,  Recueil  d''An-
tiquitis,  vol.  v.  pi.  62.)

Instead  of  their  being  fixed  so  as  to  be  hung  against
the  wall  or  to  stand  upon  the  table  or  floor,  they


SPIRA.

were  generally  held  by  female  slaves  before  their
mistresses  when  dressing  (Propert.  iv.  7.  75,  76),
which  office  was  also  performed  sometimes  by  the
lover,  when  admitted  to  the  toilet  of  his  mistress.
(Ovid.  Ar.  Am.  ii.  216.)  On  ancient  vases  we
sometimes  find  female  slaves  represented  holding
up  mirrors  to  their  mistresses.  (Tischbein,  Engrav.
from  ancient  Vases,  vol.  i.  pi.  10.)


SPOLIA.


1053


Looking-glasses,  however,  were  also  made  of  the
length  of  a  person's  body  (specula  totis  paria  cor-
poribus,  Senec.  Quaest.  Nat.  i.  17)  :  of  which  kind
the  mirror  of  Demosthenes  must  have  been.
(Quintil.  Inst.  Or.  xi.  3.  §  68.)  They  were
fastened  to  the  walls  sometimes  (speculum  parieti
affiorum.  Dig.  34.  tit.  2.  s.  19.  §  8  ;  Vitruv.  ix.
6.  (9.)  p.  280.  Bip.),  though  not  generally.  Sue-
tonius in  his  life  of  Horace  speaks  of  an  apartment
belonging  to  that  poet,  which  was  lined  with
mirrors  (speculatum  culnculum),  which  expression,
however,  Lessing  considers  as  contrary  to  the  Latin
idiom,  and  therefore  regards  the  whole  passage  as
a  forgery.  That  there  were,  however,  rooms  orna-
mented in  this  way,  is  probable  from  Claudian's
description  of  the  chamber  of  Venus,  which  was
covered  over  with  mirrors,  so  that  whichever  way
her  eyes  turned  she  could  see  her  own  image.
(Hymn,  in  Nupt.  Honor,  et  Mar.  106,  &c.)  We
frequently  find  the  mirror  mentioned  in  connection
with  Venus  (Athen.  xv.  p.  687,  c),  but  Minerva
was  supposed  to  make  no  use  of  it.  (Callim.  Hymn,
in  Lavacr.  Pallad.  1 7.)

(Spanheim,  Ohserv.  in  CallimacJd  Hymnum  in
lavacrum  Palladis,  p.  547,  Ultraj.  1697  ;  Menard,
Recherches  sur  les  Miroirs  des  Anciens  in  VHistoire
de  VAcademie  des  Inscr.  vol.  xxiii.  p.  140  ;  Caylus,
Recueil  d'Antiquites,  iii.  p.  331,  v.  p.  173  ;  Beck-
mann.  History  of  Inventions,  vol.  iii.  p.  164,  transl. ;
Bottiger,  Sahina,  vol.  i.  pp.  133,  152,  vol.  ii.  pp.
145,  169,  GnecAiic7ie»  Vasengem'dhlden,  vol.  iii.  p.
46 ;  Becker,  Gallus,  vol.  i.  p.  97,  vol.  ii.  p.  111.)
SPECUS.  [Aquaeductus,  p.  113.]
SPHAERISTE'RIUM.  [Gymnasium,  p.
582,  a ;  PiLA.]

SPFCULUM.     [Hasta,  p.  589,  a.]
SPINTER  or  SPINTHER.     [Armilla.]
SPIRA  ((Tirelpa),  dim.  SPIRULA  (Servius  in
Virg.  Aen.  ii,  217),  the  base  of  a  column.

This  member  did  not  exist  in  the  Doric  order  of
Greek  architecture  [Columna],  but  was  always
present  iu  the  Ionic  and  Corinthian,  and,  besides
tiie  bases  properly  belonging  to  those  orders,  there


was  one  called  the  Attic,  which  may  be  regarded
as  a  variety  of  the  Ionic  [Atticurges].  The
terra  occurs  frequently  in  Vitruvius  (iii.  3.  §  2  •
4.  §  1,  5  ;  5.  §  1—4,  iv.  1.  §  7,  V.  9.  §  4,  ed!
Schneider)  and  in  Pliny  (H.  N.  xxxvi.  5.  s.  4  ;
23.  s.  bQ).  They  adopted  it  from  the  writings  of
Greek  architects,  whose  works  have  perished.  It
is  in  fact  the  Greek  term  o-ireTpa,  which  Avas  ap-
plied to  this  member  of  a  column  (Pollux,  vii.  121)
probably  on  account  of  its  resemblance  to  a  coil  of
rope.  In  ancient  Greek  inscriptions  aireTpa  de-
notes the  base  of  Ionic  and  Corinthian  pillars,
being  applied  to  those  of  the  temples  of  Minerva
Polias  at  Athens  (C.  0.  MUller,  Min.  Pol.  Sacra,
pp.  35,  50  ;  Bockh,  Corp.  Inscr.  Gr.  i,  pp.  261 —
286),  and  of  Jupiter  at  Labranda.  (C.  Fellows,
JExc.  in  Asia  Minor,  pp.  262,  331.)

In  the  Tuscan  and  the  Roman  Doric  the  base
consisted  of  a  single  torus  (Festus,  s.  v.  Spira),
sometimes  surmounted  by  an  astragal.  In  the
Ionic  and  Attic  it  commonly  consisted  of  two  tori
(torus  superior  and  torus  inferior')  divided  by  a
scotia  (rpSxi^os),  and  in  the  Corinthian  of  two
tori  divided  by  two  scotiae.  The  upper  torus  was
often  fluted  (pa^Scards),  and  surmounted  by  an
astragal  [Astragalus],  as  in  the  left-hand  figure
of  the  annexed  woodcut,  which  shows  the  form  of
the  base  in  the  Ionic  temple  of  Panops  on  the
Ilissus.  The  right-hand  figure  in  the  same  wood-
cut shows  the  corresponding  part  in  the  temple  of
Minerva  Polias  at  Athens.  In  this  the  upper
torus  is  wrought  with  a  plaited  ornament,  perhaps
designed  to  represent  a  rope  or  cable.  In  these
two  temples  the  spira  rests   not   upon  a  plinth


(plinthus,  Tr\iv9os\  but  on  a  podium.  In  Ionic
buildings  of  a  later  date  it  rests  on  a  square  plinth
corresponding  in  its  dimensions  with  the  Abacus.
For  other  examples,  see  Mauch,  Architektonisclie
Ordn  ungen.  [  J .  Y .  ]

SPI'THAME  (ffirieafji-f)),  a  span,  a  Greek  mea-
sure equal  to  3-4  ths  of  the  foot.  There  was  no
proper  Roman  measure  corresponding  to  it,  but
the  later  writers  used  palmus  in  this  sense  ;  the
early  writers  express  the  Greek  span  properly  by
dodrans.  [Mensura,  p.  751,b  ;  Palmus.]   [P.S.]

SPO'LI  A.  Four  words  are  commonly  employed
to  denote  booty  taken  in  war,  Praeda,  ManuLiae,
Exuviae,  Spolia.  Of  these,  praeda  bears  the  most
comprehensive  meaning,  being  used  for  plunder  of
every  description.  [Praeda.]  Manvbiae  was  the
money  which  the  quaestor  realised  from  the  sale  of
those  objects  which  constituted  praeda  (Gell.  xiii,
24  ;  Cic.  de  Leg.  Agr.  ii.  22.)  The  tenn  Exuviae
indicates  any  thing  stripped  from  the  person  of  a
foe,  while  Spolia,  properly  speaking,  ought  to  be
confined  to  armour  and  weapons,  although  both
words  are  applied  loosely  to  trophies  such  as  cha-


1054


SPOLIA.


riots,  standards,  beaks  of  ships  and  the  like,  which
uiight  be  presei-ved  and  displayed.  (See  Doeder-
lein,  Lat.  Syn.  vol,  iv.  p.  337;  Rarashorn,  Lat.  Syn.
p.  869  ;  Habicht,  Syn.  Handworterbuch,  n.  758.)

In  the  heroic  ages  no  victory  was  considered
complete  unless  the  conquerors  could  succeed  in
stripping  the  bodies  of  the  slain,  the  spoils  thus
obtained  being  viewed  (like  scalps  among  the
North  American  Indians)  as  the  only  unquestion-
able evidence  of  successful  valour  ;  and  we  find  in
Homer  that  when  two  champions  came  forward  to
contend  in  single  combat,  the  manner  in  which  the
body  and  arras  of  the  vanquished  were  to  be  dis-
posed of  formed  the  subject  of  a  regular  compact
between  the  parties.  (Hom.  11.  vii.  75,  &c.,  xxii.
254,  &c.)  Among  the  Romans,  spoils  taken  in
battle  were  considered  the  most  honourable  of  all
distinctions  ;  to  have  twice  stripped  an  enemy,  in
ancient  times,  entitled  the  soldier  to  promotion
(Val.  Max.  ii.  7.  §14),  and  during  the  second
Punic  war,  Fabius  when  filling  up  the  numerous
vacancies  in  the  senate  caused  by  the  slaughter  at
Cannae  and  by  other  disastrous  defeats,  after  hav-
ing selected  such  as  had  borne  some  of  the  great
offices  of  state,  named  those  next  "  qui  spolia  ex
hoste  fixa  domi  haberent,  aut  civicam  coronam
accepissent."  (Liv.  xxiii.  23.)  Spoils  collected  on
the  battle  field  after  an  engagement,  or  found  in  a
captured  town  were  employed  to  decorate  the  tem-
ples of  the  gods,  triumphal  arches,  porticoes,  and
other  places  of  public  resort,  and  sometimes  in  the
hour  of  extreme  need  served  to  arm  the  people
(Liv.  xxii.  57,  xxiv.  21,  x.  47  ;  Val.  Max.  viii.
6.  §  1  ;  Sil.  Ital.  X.  599),  but  those  which  were
gained  by  individual  prowess  were  considered  the
undoubted  property  of  the  successful  combatant,
and  were  exhibited  in  the  most  conspicuous  part
of  his  dwelling  (Polyb.  vi.  39),  being  hung  up  in
the  atrium,  suspended  from  the  door-posts,  or  ar-
ranged in  the  vestibuium,  with  appropriate  inscrip-
tions. (Liv.  x.  7,  xxxviii.  43  ;  Cic.  Fhilipp.  ii.  2^  ;
Suet.  Nero,  88  ;  Virg.  Aen.  ii.  504,  iii.  286,
Tibull.  i.  1. 54  ;  Propert.  iii.  9.  26  ;  Ovid.  Ar.  Avi.
ii.  743;  Sil.  Ital.  vi.  446.)  They  were  regarded  as
peculiarly  sacred,  so  that  even  if  the  house  was
sold  the  new  possessor  was  not  permitted  to  re-
move them.  (Plin.  j^.  A^.  xxxv.  2.)  A  remarkable
instance  of  this  occurred  in  the  "  rostrata  domus  "
of  Porapey,  which  was  decorated  with  the  beaks
of  ships  captured  in  his  war  against  the  pirates  ;
this  house  passed  into  the  hands  of  Antonius  the
triumvir  (Cic  Philipp.  I.  c),  and  was  eventually
inherited  by  the  emperor  Gordian,  in  whose  time
it  appears  to  have  still  retained  its  ancient  orna-
ments. (Capitolin.  G'or^/i'aw.  3.)  But  while  on  the
one  hand  it  was  unlawful  to  remove  spoils,  so  it
was  forbidden  to  replace  or  repair  them  when  they
had  fallen  down  or  become  decayed  through  age
(Plutarch,  Quaest.  Rom.  37),  the  object  of  this
regulation  being  doubtless  to  guard  against  the
frauds  of  false  pretenders.

Of  all  spoils  the  most  important  were  the  Spolia
Opima,  a  terra  applied  to  those  only  which  the
coraraander-in-chief  of  a  Roman  army  stripped  in  a
field  of  battle  from  the  leader  of  the  foe.  (Liv.  iv.
20.)  Festus  (s.  v.  Opima)  gives  the  same  defini-
tion as  Livy.  but  adds  "  M.  Varro  ait  opima  spolia
esse  [etiam]  si  manipularis  miles  detraxerit  dum-
modo  duci  hostium,"  a  statement,  if  correctly
quoted,  directly  at  variance  with  the  opinion
generally  received  and  acted  upon.     Thus  when


SPORTULA.

M.  Crassus,  in  the  fifth  consulship  of  Octavianus
(b.  c.  29),  slew  Deldo,  king  of  the  Bastarnae,  he
was  not  considered  to  have  gained  spolia  opima
because  acting  under  the  auspices  of  another  (Lion
Cass.  Ii.  24  ;  compare  Val.  Max.  iii.  2.  §  6),  and
Plutarch  (Marcell.  8)  expressly  asserts  that  Roman
history  up  to  his  own  time  afforded  but  three  ex-
amples. The  first  were  said  to  have  been  won  by
Roraulus  frora  Aero,  king  of  the  Caeninenses.  the'
second  by  Aulus  Cornelius  Cossus  from  Lar  Tolum-
nius  king  of  the  Veientes,  the  third  by  M.  Claudius
Marcellus  from  Viridomarus  (or  BpirS/jLapro^  as  he
is  called  by  Plutarch),  king  of  the  Gaesatae.  In
all  these  cases,  in  accordance  with  the  original
institution,  the  spoils  were  dedicated  to  Jupiter
Feretrius.  The  honours  of  spolia  opima  were  voted
to  Julius  Caesar  during  his  fifth  consulship  (b.  c.
44,  the  year  of  his  death),  but  it  was  not  even
pretended  that  he  had  any  legitimate  claim  to  this
distinction.  (Dion  Cass.  xliv.  4.)  (The  question
with  regard  to  the  true  definition  of  spolia  opima
is  discussed  with  great  learning  by  Perizonius,
Animad.  Hist.  c.  7.)  [Vi.  R.]

SPONDA.     [Lectus,  p.  674,  b.]
SPO'NDEO.     [Obligationes,  p.  817,  b.]
SPO'NGIA.     [PicTURA,  p.  905,  a.]
SPONSA,      SPONSUS.       [Matrimonium,
p.  74i,b.]

SPONSA'LIA.  [Matrimonium,  p.  741,  b.]
SPONSOR.  [Intercessio.  p.  640,  b.]
SPO'RTULA.  In  the  days  of  Roman  freedom
clients  were  in  the  habit  of  testifying  respect  for
their  patron  by  thronging  his  atrium  at  an  early
hour,  and  escorting  him  to  places  of  public  resort
when  he  went  abroad.  As  an  acknowledgment  of
these  courtesies  sorae  of  the  number  were  usually
invited  to  partake  of  the  evening  meal.  After  the
extinction  of  liberty  the  presence  of  such  guests,
who  had  now  lost  all  political  importance,  was
soon  regarded  as  an  irksome  restraint,  while  at  the
same  time  many  of  the  noble  and  wealthy  were
unwilling  to  sacrifice  the  pompous  display  of  a  nu-
merous body  of  retainers.  Hence  llie  practice  was
introduced  under  the  empire  of  bestowing  on  each
client,  when  he  presented  himself  for  his  morning
visit,  a  certain  portion  of  food  as  a  substitute  and
compensation  for  the  occasional  invitation  to  a
regular  supper  (coena  recta),  and  this  dole,  being
carried  oflp  in  a  little  basket  provided  for  the  pur-
pose, received  the  name  of  sportula.  Hence  also  it
is  termed  by  Greek  writers  on  Roman  affairs
Z^Ittuov  airh  airvpiSos,  which  however  must  not  bo
confounded  with  the  Seiin/ou  anh  <nrvpiSos  of
earlier  authors,  which  was  a  sort  of  pic-nic.  [Coena,
p.  304,  b.]  For  the  sake  of  convenience  it  soon
became  common  to  give  an  equivalent  in  money,
the  sura  established  by  general  usage  being  a  hun-
dred quadrantes.  ( Juv.  i.  1 20  ;  Martial,  x.  70,  75.)
Martial  indeed  often  speaks  of  this  as  a  shabby
pittance  (centum  miselii  quadrantes,  iii.  7,  compare
i.  60,  iii.  14,  x.  74),  which,  however,  he  did  not
scorn  himself  to  accept  (x.  75),  but  at  the  same
time  does  not  fail  to  sneer  at  an  upstart  who  en-
deavoured to  distinguish  himself  by  a  largess  to  a
greater  amount  on  his  birthday  (x.  28).  The  do-
nation in  money,  however,  did  not  entirely  super-
sede the  sportula  given  in  kind,  for  we  find  in
Juvenal  a  lively  description  of  a  great  man's  vesti-
bule crowded  with  dependents,  each  attended  by  a
slave  bearing  a  portable  kitchen  to  receive  the
viands  and  keep  them  hot  while  they  were  carried


STADIUM.

home  (iii.  249).  If  the  sketches  of  the  satirist
are  not  too  highly  coloured,  we  must  conclude  that
in  his  time  great  numbers  of  the  lower  orders  de-
rived their  whole  sustenance  and  the  funds  for  or-
dinary expenditure  exclusively  from  this  source,
while  even  the  highborn  did  not  scruple  to  increase
their  incomes  by  tiiking  advantage  of  the  ostenta-
tious profusion  of  the  rich  and  vain.  (Juv.  i.  95.)
A  regular  roll  was  kept  at  each  mansion  of  the
persons,  male  and  female,  entitled  to  receive
the  allowance  ;  the  names  were  called  over  in
order,  the  individuals  were  required  to  appear  in
person,  and  the  almoner  was  ever  on  his  guard  to
frustrate  the  roguery  of  false  pretenders  (Juv.  /.  c),
whence  the  proverb  quoted  by  TertuUian  (c.  Mai--
cion.  iii.  16),  sportulam  furunculus  capiat.  The
morning,  as  we  have  seen  above  (Juv.  i.  128),  was
the  usual  period  for  these  distributions,  but  they
were  sometimes  made  in  the  afternoon.  (Martial.
X.  70.)

Nero,  imitating  the  custom  of  private  persons,
ordained  that  a  sportula  should  be  substituted  for
the  public  banquets  (  puUicae  coenae)  given  to  the
people  on  certain  high  solemnities  ;  but  this  unpo-
piUar  regulation  was  repealed  by  Domitian.  (Suet.
Ner.  16,  Dom.  7  ;  Martial,  viii.  50.)

When  the  Emperor  Claudius  on  one  occasion
resolved  unexpectedly  to  entertain  the  populace
with  some  games  which  were  to  last  for  a  short
time  only,  he  styled  the  exhibition  a  sportula,  and
in  the  age  of  the  younger  Pliny  the  word  was
commonly  employed  to  signify  a  gratuity,  gift,  or
emolument  of  any  description.  (Plin.  Ep.  ii.  14,
X.  118.)

(Compare  a  dissertation  on  the  Sportula  by
Buttmann  in  the  Kritische  Bibliothek  for  1821  ;  see
also  Becker,  Gallus,  vol.  i.  p.  147.)         [W.  R.]

STABULA'RIUS.     [Recepta  Actio.]

STA'DIUM  {6  (rrdSios  and  to  crrdbiov)  1.  The
foot-race  course  at  Olympia  and  the  other  places  in
Greece  where  games  were  celebrated.  It  was
originally  intended  for  the  foot-race,  but  the  other
contests  which  were  added  to  the  games  from  time
to  time  [Olympia]  were  also  exhibited  in  the  Sta-
dium, except  the  horse  races,  for  which  a  place
was  set  apart,  of  a  similar  form  with  the  stadium,
but  larger :  this  was  called  the  Hippodromus
(tTTTToSpo/xos).

The  stadium  was  an  oblong  area  terminated  at
one  end  by  a  straight  line,  at  the  other  by  a  semi-
circle having  the  breadth  of  the  stadium  for  its
base.  Round  this  area  were  ranges  of  seats  rising
above  one  another  in  steps.

It  was  constructed  in  three  different  ways,  ac-
cording to  the  nature  of  the  ground.  The  simplest
form  was  that  in  which  a  place  could  be  found
which  had  by  nature  the  required  shape,  as  at
Laodicea.  Most  commonly,  however,  a  position
was  chosen  on  the  side  of  a  hill,  and  the  stadium
was  formed  on  one  side  by  the  natural  slope,  on
the  other  by  a  mound  of  earth  {yris  x^^ua),  as  at
Olympia,  Thebes,  and  Epidaurus.  (Pausan.  ii.  27.
§  6,  vi.  20.  §  5,  6,  ix.  23.  §  1.)  Sometimes,  how-
ever, the  stadium  was  on  level  ground,  and  mounds
of  earth  were  cast  up  round  it  to  form  seats,  and
covered  with  stone  or  marble.  We  have  two  cele-
brated examples  of  this  construction  in  the  Pythian
Stadium  at  Delphi  and  the  Panathenaic  at  Athens.
The  former  was  originally  constructed  of  Parnas-
sian stone,  and  afterwards  covered  with  Pentelic
mrable  by  Herodes  Atticus  (Paus.  x.  32.  §  1),  who


STADIUM.


1055


adorned  in  tlie  same  manner  the  stadium  at  Athens,
which  had  been  originallj^  constructed  on  the  banks
of  the  llissus  by  the  orator  Lycurgus.  The  mar-
ble covering,  Avhich  took  four  years  to  complete,
has  now  disappeared,  but  the  area  is  still  left,  with
some  ruins  of  the  masonry.  (Paus.  i.  \0.  §  7  ;
Leake's  Topography  of  Athens.)

The  stadium  sometimes  formed  a  part  of  the
buildings  of  the  gymnasium  [Gymnasium],  at
other  times  it  was  placed  in  its  neighbourhood,  and
often,  as  at  Athens,  stood  entirely  by  itself.  That
at  Olympia  was  in  the  sacred  grove  called  Altis.

The  size  of  the  Grecian  stadia  varied  both  in
length  and  breadth  ;  but  this  variety  is  in  all  pro-
bability  to  be  understood  of  the  size  of  the  whole
enclosure,  not  of  the  length  of  the  part  marked  out
for  the  race  ;  the  latter  appears  to  have  been
fixed,  while  the  former  was  naturally  different,
according  to  the  accommodation  to  be  provided  for
spectators,  or  the  magnificence  which  the  builder
might  wish  to  confer  upon  the  structure.  The
fixed  length  of  the  course,  between  the  pillars
which  marked  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  the
race,  was  600  Greek  feet.  There  was  a  tradi-
tion that  Hercules  measured  it  out  originally  by
his  own  foot.  It  is  not  improbable  that  Pheidon,
who  claimed  to  be  a  descendant  of  Hercules,  and
who  presided  as  agonothete  at  the  Olympic  games,
may  have  fixed  the  length  of  the  stadium  accord-
ing to  the  standard  of  measure  which  he  esta-
blished.

The  accounts  left  by  ancient  writers  of  the  ar-
rangement of  the  parts  of  the  stadium  are  scanty,
but  from  a  comparison  of  them  with  existing  re-
mains of  stadia  we  may  collect  the  following  par-
ticulars.

At  one  end  a  straight  wall  shut  in  the  area,  and
here  were  the  entrances,  the  starting-place  for  the
runners,  and  (at  Olympia)  an  altar  of  Endymion.
At  the  other  end,  at  or  near  the  centre  of  the
semicircle,  and  at  the  fixed  distance  from  the
starting- place,  was  the  goal,  which  was  the  termi-
nation of  the  simple  foot-race,  the  runners  in  which
were  called  (rra^io^pSixoi :  the  race  itself  is  called
(rrdSiov  and  SpSfios :  in  the  diau\os  dpS/j-os  the
racers  turned  round  this  and  came  back  to  the
starting-place.  The  stirting-place  and  goal  had
various  names :  the  former  was  called  &(pe(ris^
ypa/u./jLT],  vairXr]^,  and  fia\€ls :  the  latter  rep/jLa,
fiariip,  TeAos,  KafxiTTTjp  and  vvacra.  The  term
ypajj./j.Ti  is  explained  as  the  lifie  along  which  the
racers  were  placed  before  starting  ;  D'(nrA7j|,  which
means  the  lash  of  a  whip,  is  supposed  to  have  been
a  cord  which  was  stretched  in  front  of  the  racers
to  restrain  their  impatience,  and  which  was  let  fall
when  the  signal  was  given  to  start  ;  the  name
KafxTTT-qp  was  applied  to  the  goal  because  the  run-
ners in  the  UavXos  and  SoAtxos  turned  round  it  to
complete  their  course.  These  terms  are  often  ap-
plied indifferently  to  the  starting-place  and  the
goal  ;  probably  because  the  starting- place  was  also
the  end  of  all  races,  except  the  simple  o-raSioj/.
The  starting-place  and  goal  were  each  marked  by
a  square  pillar  (trrfjAat,  Kioves  KvSoeiSels),  and
half  way  between  these  was  a  third.  On  the  first
was  inscribed  the  word  ap'Kmve,  on  the  second
(TTreuSe,  on  the  third  KdiJ.\\/ov.  The  5()\ixo5p6iJ.oi
turned  round  both  the  extreme  pillars  till  they  hud
completed  the  number  of  stadia  of  which  their
course  consisted,  which  appears  to  have  been  dif-
ferent on  different  occasions,  for  the  length  of  the


1056


STADIUM.


56\ixos  dpSfJLos  is  variously  stated  at  6,  7,  fi,  12,
20,  and  24  stadia.     (Schol.  ad  Soph.  Electr.  691.)

The  semicircular  end  of  the  area,  which  was
called  (T(p€v5ovf}^  and  was  not  used  in  the  races,
was  probably  devoted  to  the  other  athletic  sports.
This  <r<p€v5ovf}  is  still  clearly  seen  in  the  Ephesian
and  Messenian  stadia,  in  the  latter  of  which  it  is
surrounded  by  16  rows  of  seats.  The  area  of  the
stadium  was  surrounded  by  the  seats  for  spectators,
which  were  separated  from  it  by  a  low  wall  or  po-
dium.

Opposite  to  the  goal,  on  one  side  of  the  stadium,
were  the  seats  of  the  Hellanodicae,  for  whom  there
was  a  secret  entrance  into  the  stadium  (/cpuTrr^
6(roSos),  and  on  the  other  side  was  an  altar  of
white  marble,  on  which  the  priestesses  of  Demeter
Chamyne  sat  to  view  the  games.  The  area  was
generally  adorned  with  altars  and  statues.

Such  was  the  general  form  and  arrangement  of
the  Greek  stadium.  After  the  Roman  conquest  of
Greece  the  form  of  the  stadium  was  often  modified
go  as  to  resemble  the  amphitheatre  by  making  both
its  ends  semicircular,  and  by  surrounding  it  with
seats  supported  by  vaulted  masonry,  as  in  the
Roman  amphitheatre.  The  Ephesian  stadium  still
has  such  seats  round  a  portion  of  it.  A  restoration
of  this  stadium  is  given  in  the  following  woodcut,
copied  from  Krause.


STATER.

A  is  the  boundary  wall  at  the  Aphesis,  77  feet
deep,  B  C  the  sides,  and  D  the  semicircular  end,
of  the  same  depth  as  A  ;  F  F  the  area,  including
the  (Tipev^ovi]  ;  b  b  pieces  of  masonry  jutting  out
into  the  area  ;  e  e  the  entrances  ;  from  o  to  jo  is
the  length  of  an  Olympic  stadium  ;  from  q  to  z  the
range  of  amphitheatrical  seats  mentioned  above.

(Krause,  Die  Gymnastik  und  Agnosiik  der  Hel-
lenen,  p.  131,  §  14  ;  MUller,  Arch'dol.  der  Ku7ist,
§  290  ;  Olympia.)

2.  The  word  also  signifies  the  chief  Greek  mea-
sure for  itinerary  distances,  which  was  adopted  by
the  Romans  also,  chiefly  for  nautical  and  astro-
nomical measurements.  It  was  equal  to  600  Greek
or  625  Roman  feet,  or  to  125  Roman  paces  ;  and
the  Roman  mile  contained  8  stadia.  (Herod,  ii.
149  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  ii.  23.  s.  21  ;  Coluraell.  R.  R.  v.
1  ;  Strabo,  vii.  p.  497.)  Hence  the  stadium  con-
tained 606  feet  9  inches  English.  (See  the  Tables.)
This  standard  prevailed  throughout  Greece,  under
the  name  of  the  Olympic  stadium,  so  called  because,
as  above  stated,  it  was  the  exact  length  of  the
stadium  or  foot-race  course  at  Olympia,  measured
between  the  pillars  at  the  two  extremities  of  the
course.  There  were  multiples  of  the  measure,
corresponding  to  the  longer  races  ;  thus  the  hiavXos
was  2  o-raSm,  and  the  ^6\ixos  6  or  more.  (See
above.)  The  ItrinKSv  of  4  stadia  we  may  presume
to  have  been  the  length  of  one  double  course  in
the  chariot  race,  which  would  give  2  stadia  for  the
distance  between  the  pillars  in  the  hippodrome
[HiPPODROMUS,  p.  611,  a].  In  mathematical  geo-
graphy, the  ordinary  computation  Avas  600  stadia
to  a  degree  of  a  great  circle  of  the  earth's  surface.
The  important  question,  whether  the  stadium  was
a  uniform  measure  throughout  Greece,  is  fully  dis-
cussed under  Mknsura,  p.  755.  [P-S.]

STALA'GMIA.     [Inauris.]

STATER  (o-TttT^p),  which  means  simply  a
standard  (in  this  case  both  of  weight  and  more
particularly  of  money),  was  at  first  the  name  of  the
chief  coin  in  the  early  Greek  systems,  namely,  the
didrachn.  [Nummus,  pp.  811,  b,  812,  a.]  When
gold  began  to  be  coined,  the  name  was  applied  to
the  principal  gold  coin  of  Greece,  which  was  also
called  Chrysus  {xp^cov^)^  and  which  in  the  ma-
jority of  cases  was  conformed  to  the  Attic  stand-
ard, and  therefore  a  stater  commonly  signifies  a
gold  coin  equal  in  weight  to  two  Attic  drachmae  and
in  valtie  to  twenty;  but  there  are  also  staters  of  the
Euboic  scale.  The  general  subject  of  Greek  gold
money  has  been  discussed  under  Aurum,  where
it  is  stated  that  the  Greeks  obtained  their  principal
supply  of  gold  from  Asia.  To  the  same  quarter
we  must  look  for  the  origin  of  their  gold  money.
The  Daricus,  which  came  to  them  from  Persia,  has
been  already  treated  of.  [Daricus.]  The  stater
is  said  to  have  been  first  coined  in  Lydia  by
Croesus.  To  this  country,  indeed,  one  tradition
ascribes  the  origin  both  of  gold  and  silver  money
(Herod,  i.  94)  ;  but  be  this  as  it  may,  the  stater  of
Croesus  was  the  first  gold  coinage  with  which  the
Greeks  were  acquainted.  (Herod,  i.  84  ;  Pollux,
iii.  87,  ix.  84.)  Bockh  (Metrolog.  Untersuch.  p.
129)  asserts  that  these  staters  were  undoubtedly
formed  of  the  pale  gold  or  electrum  which  was
washed  down  from  Tmolus  by  the  Pactolus,  and
which  Sophocles  speaks  of  as  Sardian  electrum.
{Antig.  1037.)  [Electrum.]  There  is,  in  the
Hunterian  collection  (Plate  ^Q.  fig.  1),  a  very  an-
cient coin  of  this  pale  gold,  of  an  oval  ball-like


STATER.

shape,  impressed  with  the  figure  of  a  nian  kneel-
ing, holding  a  fish  in  his  left  hand,  and  in  his
right  a  knife  hanging  down,  which  Pinkerton
takes  for  a  coin  of  Croesus,  but  respecting  which
nothing  more  can  he  said  with  safety  than  that
it  is  a  very  ancient  specimen  of  Asiatic  money.
Its  weight  is  248^  English  grains,  or  allowing
for  the  loss  of  weight  by  wear,  about  that  of  the
Attic  tetradrachm,  which  was  twice  the  weight  of
the  stater.  This,  therefore  would  be  a  double
stater.  (Bcickh,  l.c.)  At  all  events,  in  the  ab-
sence of  certain  specimens  of  the  Lydian  stater
and  of  an  express  statement  of  its  value,  we  may
suppose  from  the  very  silence  of  the  Greek  wri-
ters, that  it  did  not  differ  materially  from  the
stater  which  was  afterwards  current  in  Greece  ;
and  which  was  equal  in  u-eight  to  two  drachmae,
and  in  value  to  twenty.  (Hesych.  s.  v.  Xpvaovs :
Pollux,  iv.  173  ;  Harpocration,  s.v.  Aapet/cos.)


Macedonian  Stater.     British  Museitm.

The  following  were  the  principal  Greek  staters :
1.  The  Attic  stater,  which  has  been  spoken  of  un-
der AuRUM.  The  weights  of  the  coins  there  men-
tioned are  132'3,  1327,  132-6,  and  13275  grains,
the  average  of  which  is  132'5875  grains,  which
only  falls  short  of  the  weight  of  the  Attic  didrachni
by  a  little  more  than  half  a  grain.  [Drachma.]
The  gold  of  the  Attic  coins  is  remarkably  pure.

2.  The  stater  of  Cyzicus  was  common  in  Greece,
especially  at  Athens.  We  learn  from  Demosthenes
(tw  P//or/«.  p.  .914)  that  at  a  particular  period  (a
little  after  B.  c.  335)  this  stater  passed  on  the  Bos-
porus for  28  Attic  drachmae,  which,  by  a  compari-
son with  the  then  value  of  the  daricus  [Daricus],
would  give  for  its  weight  about  180  grains.  Se-
veral Cyzicene  staters  exist,  but  none  of  them
conic  up  to  this  weight.  Hence  we  may  conclude
that  the  price  of  gold  on  the  Bosporus  was  at  that
time  unusually  high.  Some  of  the  existing  coins
give  160  grains,  and  others  not  more  than  120,  for
the  weight  of  the  Cyzicene  stater  ;  but,  allowing
for  debasement  in  the  minting,  and  for  subse-
quent wear,  we  may  perhaps  take  180  grains  for
about  its  true  value,  and  if  so,  it  belongs  to  the
Euboic  standard.  Its  value,  calculated  from  the
number  of  drachmae  it  passed  for,  would  be  11.
2s.  M.

3.  The  Stater  of  Lampsacus  is  mentioned  in  an
Attic  inscription  of  B.  c.  434.  Several  gold  coins
of  Lampsacus  are  extant ;  they  may  be  known  by
the  impression  of  a  sea-horse  upon  them.  There
are  two  in  the  British  Museum  of  the  weight  of
about  129  grains,  which  is  just  that  of  the  daricus.
The  Aveights  of  the  Lampsacene  staters  are  very
unequal ;  and  both  Lampsacus  and  Cyzicus  appear
to  have  had  gold  coins  which  were  multiples  of
different  standards.  It  is  not  improbable,  that
the  Euboic  and  Attic  standards  existed  together
at  these  places.

4.  The  stater  of  Phocaea  is  mentioned  by  Thu-
cydides  (iv.  52)  and  Demosthenes  {in  Boeot.  p.
101.0)   as   in  circulation  in  their  times.      Sestini


STATER.  10r,7

gives  several  of  these,  the  largest  of  which,  stamped
with  a  *,  weighs  255*42  English  grains.  This  is  a
double  stater,  giving  a  single  one  of  12771  grains,
or  5  grain*  less  than  the  Attic,  and  it  seems  to
follow  the  standard  of  the  daricus.  Most  of  the
others  are  thirds  of  the  stater,  and  of  a  lighter
comparative  weight.  There  was  also  at  Athens  a
Phocaean  coin  called  e'/cTTj,  and  its  half  rjixieKTov.,
and  Hesychius  (s.  v.  ewTTj)  mentions  the  eKrr],
rpiTTj,  and  TerapTTj,  as  coins  of  gold  or  silver  or
copper.     Respecting  these  coins,  see  Hecte.

5.  The  stater  of  Macedonia  was  coined  by
Philip  11.  and  Alexander  the  Great  after  the
standard  of  the  Attic  didrachm,  and  of  very  fine
gold.  Under  those  princes  it  came  into  general
circulation  in  Greece  and  throughout  the  Macedo-
nian empire.  The  extant  specimens  of  this  coinage
are  very  immerous.

Mr.  Hussey  gives  the  following  report  of  an  assay
which  was  made  for  him  of  a  stater  of  Alexander.

Gold       11  oz.     9  dwts.     6  grs.
Silver         „  „         18   ,^


Alloy


0


The  silver  is  an  accidental  admixture,  or,  if  known
to  be  present,  Avas  not  allowed  for,  so  that  this
coin  may  be  reckoned  at  133  grains  of  fine  gold.
Our  sovereign,  after  deducting  the  alloy,  contains
]  13'12  grains  of  fine  gold.  Therefore  the  Macedo-
nian stater  =  . , ..  ,  .-^  of  the  English  sovereign,  or

II.  3s.  6t?.  G'672  farthing.  The  average  is  however
a  little  below  this  stater,  but  not  more  so  than  is
due  to  wear.  The  stater  of  Philip  was  very  re-
cently current  in  Greece  at  the  value  of  about  25
shillings.  This  standard  was  preserved,  or  very
nearly  so,  under  the  later  Macedonian  kings,  and
was  adopted  by  other  states,  as  Epirus,  Aetolia,
Acarnania,  and  Syracuse.

Besides  the  staters  noticed  above,  most  of  the
cities  of  Ionia  had  gold  coins,  but  their  value  is
very  doubtful.  There  are  specimens  in  existence
from  Chios,  Teos,  Colophon,  Smyrrei,  Ephesus,  and
many  other  places.  Samos,  Siphnus,  Thasos,  the
Greek  cities  of  Sicily,  and  Cyrene  had  gold  money
at  an  early  period.

Pollux  mentions  a  Corinthian  stater  as  used  in
Sicily  which  he  calls  ScKaKirpos  (TTar-fip,  and  makes
equal  to  10  Aeginetan  obols.  (Pollux,  iv.  174,  ix.
80.)  The  explanation  of  this  statement  is  very
difficult,  and  depends  in  a  great  measure  on  the
disputed  question  whether  the  Corinthian  money
followed  the  Attic  or  the  Aeginetan  standard.
[See  NuMMUs,  p.  812,  a.]

In  calculating  the  value  of  the  stater  in  our
money,  the  ratio  of  gold  to  silver  must  not  be  over-
looked. Thus  the  stater  of  Alexander,  which  we
have  valued,  according  to  the  present  worth  of
gold,  at  1/.  3*.  6rf.,  passed  for  twenty  drachmae,
which,  according  to  the  present  value  of  silver,  were
worth  only  16s.  dd.  But  the  former  gives  the
better  idea  of  the  worth  of  the  stater,  the  differ-
ence arising  from  the  greater  value  of  silver  in  an-
cient times  than  now.     [Argentum.]

Besides  the  stater  itself,  there  were,  as  appears
from  tl>e  above  remarks,  double  staters,  and  the
halves  (7]iJ.txp^<^ovs^  rf/xca-TaTTipes)^  quarters,  thirds,
sixths,  and  twelfths  of  the  stater.  The  coins  of
the  last  four  denominations  are,  however,  much  less
common  than  the  single,  double,  and  half  staters.

The  term  araT-ffp,  in  later  times,  vi^as  applied  to
3  Y


1058


STATU  ARIA  ARS.


the  silver  tetradrachra,  but  whether  it  was  so  used
in  tlie  flourishing  times  of  Athens  is  doubtful.
[Drachma.]

It  was  also  used  in  reference  to  weight,  appa-
rently like  the  llehvew  shekel  and  the  Latin  pondo,
in  a  general  sense.  The  Mina  (Pollux,  ix.  6)  and
the  Sicilian  Litra  (Pollux,  iv.  24),  are  both  called
stater.

(Sestini,  degli Stateri  Antichi ;  Hussey  ;  Wurm  ;
Bockh.)  [P.  S.]

STATERA,    a  steel-yard.      [Libra  ;    Tru-

TINA.]

STATI  dies.  [Dies,  p.  409,  b.]
STATIO'NES.  [Castra,  p.  250,  b.]
STATIO'NES  FISCI.  The  Fisci/s  was  di-
vided into  various  departments,  called  Stationes^
according  to  the  diflferent  revenues  belonging  to  it.
(Cod.  4.  tit.  31.  s.  1  ;  10.  tit.  5.  s.  1.)  Thus  we
read  of  a  Stutio  XX.  hereditatium  (Orelli,  Inser.
n.  3332),  a  Statio  Hereditatium  (Orelli,  n.  3207  ;
Gruter,  p.  451,  n.  3)  ;  a  Statio  Annotiae.  (Orelli,
n.  4107,  4420.)  See  Walter,  Gesch.  des  Rom.
Rechts,  §  314.  2d  ed.

STATIO'NES  MUNICIPIO'RUM.  [Grae-

COSTASIS.]

STATOR,  a  public  servant,  who  attended  on
the  Roman  magistrates  in  the  provinces.  The
Statores  seem  to  have  derived  their  name  from
standing  by  the  side  of  the  magistrate,  and  thus
being  at  liand  to  execute  all  his  commands  ;  they
appear  to  have  been  chiefly  employed  in  carrying
letters  and  messages.  (Cic.  aoJ  i^am.  ii.  1 7,  19,
X.  21  ;  Dig.  4.  tit.  6.  s.  10.)  Alexander  Severus
forbade  the  use  of  statores  in  the  provinces,  and
commanded  that  their  duties  should  be  discharged
by  soldiers.  (Dig.  4.  tit.  6.  s.  10  ;  Lamprid.  Alex.
Sev.  52.)

STATU  LIBER.  [Manumissio.]
STATUA'RIA  ARS  is  in  its  proper  sense  the
art  of  making  statues  or  busts,  whether  they  con-
sist of  stone  or  metal  or  other  materials,  and
includes  the  art  of  making  the  various  kinds  of
reliefs  (alto,  basso,  and  mezzo  relievo).  The  an-
cients, accustomed  to  trace,  all  their  arts  and
sciences  to  a  single  person,  who  was  generally  be-
lieved to  have  been  led  to  his  discovery  by  some
accidental  circumstance,  relate  several  stories  to
account  for  the  origin  and  discovery  of  the  arts  of
painting  and  statuary.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.  5  and
43  ;  compare  Quintil.  x.  2.  §  7.)  But  arts  such  as
these  cannot,  like  those  which  are  the  necessary
result  of  particular  local  circumstances,  or  are  in
their  origin  of  a  complicated  nature,  be  assigned  to
any  particular  nation  or  to  any  particular  indi-
vidual :  they  spring  up  naturally  in  all  countries,
and  take  their  origin  alike  everywhere  in  the
imitative  faculty  of  man.  It  is,  therefore,  idle  talk
when  modem  writers  gravely  repeat  the  stories
about  the  invention  of  sculpture  or  painting,  or
assign  the  invention  of  either  of  them  to  the
Egyptians  or  any  other  nation.  These  arts  in  their
infant  state  existed  among  the  Greeks  from  time
immemorial,  and  if  there  are  any  resemblances
between  the  earliest  works  of  Grecian  art  and  those
of  Egypt,  we  have  still  no  right  to  infer  that  the
Greeks  learnt  them  from  the  Egyptians,  and  we
might  as  well  assert  that  the  Greeks  learnt  their  arts
from  the  Gauls  or  from  the  Siamese,  for  the  works
of  these  nations  too  resemble  those  of  early  Greece.
An  art  in  its  primitive  state  manifests  itself  nearly
in  the  same  manner  in  ail  parts  of  the  world.    But


STATUARIA  ARS.

what  is  of  real  interest  is  to  know  the  cause
through  which  statuary,  or,  to  use  a  more  commoi
but  less  appropriate  term,  sculpture,  became  s
pre-eminently  the  art  of  the  Greeks,  that  down  t
this  day  no  other  nation  has  produced  artists  tha
can  compete  with  them,  and  that  all  look  upon  th
Greeks  as  the  great  masters  and  models  for  al
apes.  Winckelmann  has  pointed  out  three  grea
causes,  viz.  their  innate  genius,  their  religion,  an(
their  social  and  political  institutions  ;  and  thes
three  points,  if  accurately  examined,  will  certain!;
be  found  to  have  singularly  co-operated  in  makinj
the  Greek  artists  what  they  were.  There  is  anothe
point  connected  with  the  origin  of  Grecian  sculptur
which  appears  to  have  led  some  modern  writers  t^
form  erroneous  opinions.  The  peculiar  form  of  th^
Hermae  [Hermae]  has  given  rise  to  the  belie
tliat  in  the  earliest  statues  the  head  only  (bust
was  represented,  and  that  the  remaining  part  o
the  body  was  expressed  by  a  simple  pillar  or  block
This  view  is  contrary  to  nature  as  well  as  to  his
torj',  for  neither  a  nation  nor  a  child  (which  in  thi
case  may  be  fairly  taken  as  a  representative  of  i
nation  in  its  infancy),  when  they  begin  to  exercisi
their  imitative  faculty,  will  rest  satisfied  wit)
forming  the  mere  head  of  a  human  being,  but  en
deavour  to  produce  the  whole  as  well  as  they  can
We  may  add,  that  no  other  nation  presents  sucl
a  phenomenon  in  the  earliest  history  of  its  arts
The  Hermae,  therefore,  cannot  have  arisen  from  ai
incapability  of  forming  a  whole  human  figure.  The;
appear  rather  to  point  to  the  time  when  the  Greek
began  to  represent  their  gods  in  a  human  form,  Ti
give  to  a  god  the  entire  form  of  a  man  would  hav
been  irreverent,  whereas  the  head  was  necessary
and  at  the  same  time  sufficient,  to  represent  hir
as  a  distinct  individual  being  and  endowed  wit]
spiritual  and  thinking  powers.  The  process  o
humanizing  the  gods  must  have  been  precede(
by  the  custom  of  representing  them  in  unnatura
forms,  or  such  as  were  partly  human  and  parti;
animal.  The  earliest  images  of  the  gods  were  pur
images  (not  the  gods  themselves),  and  intended  t
express  some  thought  or  idea :  now  as  the  natura
figure  of  man  is  only  expressive  of  itself,  th
significant  parts  of  two  or  more  beings  were  pu
together  to  express  the  idea  which  men  had  fonne(
of  their  gods.  Such  monstrous  figures  were  re
tained  as  representations  of  some  gods  down  to  th
latest  times.  As  instances  of  this  we  may  men
tion  Glaucus  with  the  tail  of  a  fish  (Philostr. /cots
ii.  15),  the  Arcadian  Pan  with  goat's  feet  (Hisi
MytM.  Bilderb.  ii.  p.  161,  &c.),  and  the  Demete
of  Phigaleia  with  the  head  and  mane  of  a  horse
(Pans,  viii,  42.  §  3.)  Homer's  silence  on  sucl
compound  representations  of  the  gods  is  no  proo
that  they  did  not  exist  in  early  times.

Before  proceeding  to  consider  statuary  in  it
several  stages  of  developement,  it  is  necessary  t
make  a  few  preliminary  remarks  respecting  th
materials  used  by  the  Greeks  in  this  art.  On  th
whole  it  may  be  said  that  there  is  no  materia
applicable  to  statuary  which  was  not  used  b;
the  Greeks.  As  soft  clay  is  capable  of  beini
shaped  without  difficulty  into  any  form,  and  i
easily  dried  either  by  being  exposed  to  the  sun  o
by  being  baked,  we  may  consider  this  substance  t
have  been  the  earliest  material  of  which  figure
were  made.  We  have  a  trace  of  this  in  the  story
that  Zeus,  in  his  anger  at  Prometheus  having  stole:
the  fire,  ordered  Hephaestus  to  form  Pandora  o


STATUARIA  ARS.
earth  moistened  with  tears.  (Hesiod.  Theogon.
571,  &c.;  Stob. -Sferm.  1.)  The  name  plastic  art
(t}  TrAoo-TjKTf),  by  which  the  ancients  sometimes
designate  the  art  of  statuarj-,  properly  signifies  to
form  or  shape  a  thing  of  clay.  But  notwithstand-
ing the  great  facility  of  making  figures  of  clay,
they  are  not  often  mentioned  in  the  early  ages  of
Greece,  while  in  Italy  the  Dii  fictiles  (irriXivoi
i&eoi)  were  very  common  from  the  earliest  times.
Clay  figures,  however,  never  fell  into  disuse  en-
tirely, and  in  later  times  we  find  not  only  statues
of  clay,  but  the  pediments  in  small  or  rural  temples
frequently  contained  the  most  beautiful  reliefs  in
clay,  which  were  copies  of  the  marble  reliefs  of
larger  temples.  When  Pliny  (H.N.  xxxv.  43)
speaks  of  Rhoecus  and  Theodorus  of  Samos  as  the
inventors  of  the  plastice,  he  seems  to  labour  under
a  mistake  and  to  confound  the  art  of  working  in
clay  with  that  of  casting  in  metal,  as  in  later
times  the  latter  of  these  two  arts  was  commonly
called  plastice.  Some  ancient  figures  of  clay  are
still  preserved.

The  second  material  was  wood,  and  figures  made
of  wood  were  called  ^oava,  from  ^ew,  "  polish"  or
*'  carve."  Various  kinds  of  wood  were  used  in
statuary  ;  we  find  mention  of  oak,  cedar,  cypress,
sycamore,  pine,  fig,  box,  and  ebony.  It  was  chiefly
used  for  making  images  of  the  gods,  and  probably
more  on  account  of  the  facility  of  working  in  it,
than  for  any  other  reason.  It  should,  however,  be
remarked,  that  particular  kinds  of  wood  were  used
to  make  the  images  of  particular  deities :  thus  the
statues  of  Dionysus,  the  god  of  figs,  were  made  of
fig-wood.  The  use  of  wood  for  statues  of  the
gods  continued  to  the  latest  times  ;  but  statues  of
men,  as,  for  example,  some  of  the  victors  in  the
public  games,  were  likewise  made  of  wood  at  a
time  when  the  Greeks  were  sufficientl}'  acquainted
with  the  art  of  working  in  stone  and  metal.

Stone  was  little  used  in  statuary  during  the
early  ages  of  Greece,  though  it  was  not  altogether
unknown,  as  we  may  infer  from  the  relief  on  the
Lion-gate  of  Mycenae.  In  Italy,  where  the  soft
peperino  afforded  an  easy  material  for  working,
stone  appears  to  have  been  used  at  an  earlier
period  and  more  commonly  than  in  Greece.  But  in
the  historical  times  the  Greeks  used  all  the  principal
varieties  of  marble  for  their  statues  ;  the  most  ce-
lebrated kinds  of  which  were  the  marbles  of  Paros
and  of  Mount  Pentelicus,  both  of  which  were  of  a
white  colour.  Different  kinds  of  marble  and  of
different  colours  were  sometimes  used  in  one  and
the  same  statue,  in  which  case  the  work  is  called
Polylitliic  statuary.

fjronze  (xaA/fos,  aes),  silver,  and  gold  were  used
profusely  in  the  state  of  society  described  in  the
Homeric  poems,  which  is  a  sufficient  proof  that
works  of  art  in  these  metals  were  not  altogether
unknown  in  those  times.  At  that  period,  however,
and  long  after,  the  works  executed  in  metal  were
made  by  means  of  the  hammer,  and  the  different
pieces  were  joined  together  by  pins,  rivets,  cramps,
or  other  mechanical  fastenings,  and,  as  the  art
advanced,  by  a  kind  of  glue,  cement,  or  solder.
Iron  came  into  use  much  later,  and  the  art  of
casting  both  bronze  and  iron  is  ascribed  to  Rhoecus
and  to  Theodorus  of  Samos.  (Pans.  x.  38.  §  3.)
[Aes  ;  Metallum.]

Ivort/  came  into  use  at  a  later  period  than  any
of  the  before-mentioned  materials,  and  then  was
highly  valued  both  for  its  beauty  and  rarity.     In


STATUARIA  ARS.


1059


its  application  to  statuary,  ivory  was  generally
combined  with  gold,  and  was  used  for  the  parts  re-
presenting the  flesh.  Winckelmann  has  calculated
that  about  one  hundred  statues  of  this  kind  are
mentioned  by  the  ancients.

The  history  of  ancient  art,  and  of  statuary  in
particular,  may  be  divided  into  five  periods.

I.  First  Period,  from  Hie  earliest  times  till  about
01.  50,  or  580  b.  c.

The  real  history  of  the  arts  is  preceded  by  a
period  of  a  purely  mythical  character,  which  tra-
dition has  peopled  with  divine  artists  and  most
extraordinary  productions.  Three  kinds  of  artists,
however,  may  be  distinguished  in  this  mythical
period  :  the  first  consists  of  gods  and  daemons,  such
as  Athena,  Hephaestus,  the  Phrygian  or  Dardanian
Dactyli,  and  the  Cabiri.  The  second  contains
whole  tribes  of  men  distinguished  from  others  by
the  mysterious  possession  of  superior  skill  in  the
practice  of  the  arts,  such  as  the  Telchines  and  the
Lycian  Cyclopes.  The  third  consists  of  individuals
who  are  indeed  described  as  human  beings,  but  yet
are  nothing  more  than  personifications  of  particular
branches  of  art,  or  the  representatives  of  families
of  artists.  Of  the  latter  the  most  celebrated  is
Daedalus,  whose  name  indicates  nothing  but  a
smith,  or  an  artist  in  general,  and  who  is  himself
the  mythical  ancestor  of  a  numerous  family  of
artists  (Daedalids),  which  can  be  traced  from  the
time  of  Homer  to  that  of  Plato,  for  even  Socrates
is  said  to  have  been  a  descendant  of  this  family.
It  is,  however,  very  probable  that,  in  Homer,
Daedalus  is  merely  an  epithet  of  the  god  Hephaes-
tus. (See  Did.  of  Biog,  s.  v.)  He  was  believed
to  be  an  Athenian,  but  Crete  also  claimed  the
honour  of  being  his  native  country.  The  stories
respecting  him  are  more  like  allegorical  accounts  of
the  progress  of  the  arts  than  anything  else.  He
was  principally  renowned  in  antiquity  for  his  |ooya,
and  several  parts  of  Greece,  as  Boeotia,  Attica,
Crete,  and  even  Libya  in  later  times,  were  believed
to  possess  specimens  of  his  workmanship.  (Pans,
vii.  5,  ix.  40.  §  2,  i.  18.  §  5  ;  Scylax,  p.  53,  ed.
Huds.)  Numerous  inventions  also,  especially  of
instruments  used  in  carving  wood,  are  ascribed  to
him.  He  is  said  to  have  made  his  statues  walking,
which  appears  to  mean  that  before  his  time  human
figures  were  represented  with  their  legs  close  to-
gether, and  that  in  his  statues  the  legs  were  sepa-
rated, which  was  at  once  a  great  step  forward,  as
it  imparted  greater  life  and  activity  to  a  figure.
Smilis  (from  o-^uiAtj,  a  carving-knife)  exercised  his
art  in  Samos,  Aegina,  and  other  places,  and  some
remarkable  works  were  attributed  to  him.  (Miiller,
Aeginet.  p.  97.)  Endoeus  of  Athens  is  called  a
disciple  of  Daedalus.  Various  works  were  attri-
buted to  him  by  the  ancients.  One  among  them
was  a  colossal  ^6avov  of  Athena  Polias  in  a  temple
at  Erythrae  in  Ionia.  She  was  represented  sitting
upon  a  bpovos,  holding  a  spindle  in  her  hand,  and
with  a  it6Kos  on  her  head.  Pausanias  (vii.  5.  §  4)
saw  this  loavov  himself.  (See  Di£t.  of  Biog.  s.  w.
Daedalus,  Endoeus,  Sinilis.)

According  to  the  popular  traditions  of  Greece,
there  was  no  period  in  which  the  gods  were  not
represented  in  some  form  or  other,  and  there  is  no
doubt  that  for  a  long  time  there  existed  no  other
statues  in  Greece,  than  those  of  the  gods  ;  a  statue
of  a  man  appears  for  a  long  time  to  have  been  a
thing  unheard  of  in  Gre«ce.  The  earliest  repre-
3y  2


1060  STATU  ARIA  ARS.

sentations  of  the  gods,  however,  were  by  no  means
regarded  as  the  gods  themselves  or  even  as  images
of  them,  but  only  as  symbols  of  their  presence  ;
and  as  the  imagination  of  a  pious  primitive  age
does  not  require  much  to  be  reminded  of  the  pre-
sence of  the  deity,  the  simplest  symbols  were
sometimes  sufficient  to  produce  this  effect.  Hence
we  find  that  in  many  places  the  presence  of  a  god
was  indicated  by  th-e  simplest  and  most  shape-
less symbols,  such  as  unhewn  blocks  of  stone  {hi-
6oi  a^jyoi.  Pans.  ix.  27.  §  1,  35.  §  1,  \\l  22.
§  3),  and  by  simple  pillars  or  pieces  of  wood.
(Paus.  vii.  22.  §  3. ;  Clem.  Alex.  Strom,  i.  p.418,
and  p.  348,  ed.  Sylburg ;  Docana  and  Daedala.)
Many  such  symbolic  representations  of  gods  were
held  in  the  greatest  esteem,  even  in  the  historical
ages,  as  sacred  inlieritances  of  former  times,  and
remained  the  conventional  representations  of  the
gods  notwithstanding  the  progress  which  the  arts
had  made.  The  general  name  for  a  representation
of  a  god  not  consisting  of  such  a  rude  symbol  was
ayaXfia.     (Rnhnken,  ad  Tim.  p.  2.)

In  the  Homeric  poems,  although  the  shield  of
Achilles,  the  gold  and  silver  dogs  which  kept
watch  at  the  palace  of  Alcinous,  and  other  similar
things  may  be  pure  fictions,  there  are  sufficient
traces  of  the  existence  of  statues  of  the  gods  ;  but
it  would  seem  that,  as  the  ideas  of  the  gods  were
yet  gigantic  and  undefined,  the  representations  of
several  superhuman  beings  were  more  calculated  to
inspire  awe  than  to  display  any  artistic  beauty.
{11.  xi.  36,  &c. ;  Ilesiod,  Scut.  Here.  144,  156,
248,  &c.)  This  was  however  not  always  the  case.
Temples  are  mentioned  in  several  places  {11.  i.  39,
vii.  83,  &c.),  and  temples  presuppose  the  existence
of  representations  of  the  gods.  A  statue  of  Athena
is  mentioned  at  Ilion,  upon  whose  knees  the  queen
places  a  magnificent  peplus.  (//.  vi.  92  ;  comp.
273.)  The  statue  thus  appears  to  have  been  in  a
sitting  position  like  the  statues  of  Athena  among
the  lonians  in  general.  (Strab.  xiii.  p.  601.)  The
existence  of  a  statue  of  Apollo  must  be  inferred
from  Iliad  i.  28,  for  the  a-Tefiiua  Sfcolo  can  only
mean  the  wreath  or  diadem  with  which  his  statue
itself  used  to  be  adorned.  This  statue  must  more-
over have  been  represented  carrying  a  bow,  for  at-
tributes like  dpyvpoTo^os  could  have  no  meaning
unless  they  referred  to  something  existing  and
well-known.  Other  proofs  of  representations  of
the  gods  in  human  form  may  be  found  in  Iliad  ii.
478,  &c.  iii.  396,  &c.  These  statues  were  un-
doubtedly all  ^oava.,  and,  as  we  must  infer  from  the
expressions  of  Homer,  were  far  more  perfect  than
they  are  said  to  have  been  previously  to  the  time
of  Daedalus.  A  work  still  extant,  which  is  cer-
tainly as  old  as  the  time  of  Homer,  if  not  much
older,  is  the  relief  above  the  ancient  gate  of  Myce-
nae, representing  two  lions  standing  on  their  liind
legs,  with  a  sort  of  pillar  between  them.  (Pans-  ii.
16.  §  4;  SirW.  Gell,  Ar^ol.  pi.  8—10;  Gottling
in  the  Rhcinisch.  Miis.  1841.  part  2:  wood-cut
under  MuRUS.)  These  facts  justify  us  in  sup-
posing that,  at  the  time  of  Homer,  the  Greeks,  but
more  especially  the  lonians  of  Asia  Mmor,  had
ni.ade  great  progress  in  sculpture.  The  lonians
appear  to  have  been  far  in  advance  of  the  Greeks
of  the  mother-counti;y.  The  cause  of  this  must
probably  be  sought  in  the  influence  which  some  of
the  nations  of  western  Asia,  such  as  the  Lydians,
Lycians,  and  Phoenicians,  had  upon  the  Ionian
colonists,  for  that  these  nations  excelled  the  Greeks


STATU  ARIA  ARS.

in  various  branches  of  the  arts  is  abundantly  a(
tested  by  numerous  passages  in  tlie  Homed
poems.  We  must  not  however  attribute  too  muc
to  this  foreign  influence,  for  there  were  many  othe
causes  at  work  besides,  by  which  the  Greek  cok
nies,  not  only  of  Asia,  but  of  Sicily  and  Italy  als(
were  carried  forward  in  advance  of  the  mothei
country.  The  ancient  coins  of  the  Italian  Greek
too  are  mucli  more  beautiful  and  show  more  ind
viduality  than  those  of  Greece  proper;  we  als
find  that  Learchus  of  Rhegiura  came  to  Sparta  »
a  very  early  period,  and  formed  there  the  eai
liest  bronze  statue  of  Zeus,  which  consisted  (
several  pieces  nailed  together.  (Paus.  iii.  17.  §  6.
About  the  same  time,  as  some  think,  Gitiadas  c
Sparta  made  a  bronze  statue  of  Athena.  (Paui
iii.  17.  §  13.)  There  is,  however,  very  great  ur
certainty  respecting  the  true  dates  of  these  artist!
(See  Did.  of  Biog,  s.  vv.  Gitiadas.,  Learchus.
Another  great  work  in  bronze  belonging  to  tin
period  is  the  colossal  statue  of  Zeus  which  wa
dedicated  at  Olympia  by  Cypselus  or  Periander  t
Corinth,  and  for  which  the  wealthy  Corinthian
were  obliged  to  sacrifice  a  considerable  part  of  thei
property.  (Strab.  viii.  pp.  353,  378  ;  Phot,  and  Suic
s.  V.  Ku<|/eAtS«i'.)  About  650  B.  c.  Myron  of  Sicyo
dedicated  two  baKafj-oi  of  bronze  at  Olympia,  whic
were  still  there  in  the  days  of  Pausanias  (vi.  Ii
§  2).

The  time  which  elapsed  between  the  compositio
of  the  Homeric  poems  and  the  beginning  of  th
fifth  century  before  our  aera  may  be  termed  th
age  of  discovery;  for  nearly  all  the  inventioni
upon  the  application  of  which  the  developement  (
the  arts  is  dependent,  are  assigned  to  this  perioc
which  may  at  the  same  time  be  regarded  as  the  fir;
historical  period  in  the  history  of  art.  Glaucus  <
Chios  or  Samos  is  said  to  have  invented  the  art  (
soldering  metal  ((tjS^/jou  koWtictis,  Herod,  i.  25
The  two  artists  most  celebrated  for  their  discoverit
were  the  two  brothers  Telecles  and  Theodorus  c
Samos,  about  the  time  of  Polycrates.  The  mos
important  of  their  inventions  was  the  art  of  castin
figures  of  metal.  It  is  a  singular  circumstance
that  the  very  two  artists  to  whom  this  inventio
is  ascribed,  are  said  to  have  made  their  studies  i
Egypt ;  and  the  curious  story  of  the  two  brothei
executing  a  ^oauov  of  the  Pythian  Apollo  in  sue
manner,  that  while  Telecles  made  the  one  half  (
the  statue  at  Delos,  the  other  half  was  made  b
Theodorus  at  Ephesus,  and  that  when  the  tw
halves  were  put  together,  they  tallied  as  accuratel
as  if  the  whole  had  been  the  work  of  one  artif
(Diodor.  i.  98),  has  been  thought  to  support  th
Egyptian  tradition  that  these  artists  were  greatl
assisted  in  the  exercise  of  their  art  by  what  the
had  learnt  in  Egypt.  But,  in  the  first  place,  th
whole  story  has  a  very  fabulous  appearance,  an
even  admitting  that  the  artists,  as  the  Egyptian
asserted,  had  actually  been  in  their  country,  nc
body  will  on  this  ground  maintain  that  they  learn
their  art  there:  the  utmost  they  could  have  learr
might  have  been  some  mechanical  processes:  th
art  itself  must  be  vindicated  for  the  Greeks.  I
the  second  place,  Telecles  and  Theodorus  are  calle
by  Diodorus  sons  of  Rhoecus,  and  Pausanias  hin-
self,  who  was  unable  to  discover  a  bronze  work  c
Theodorus,  saw  at  Ephesus  a  bronze  statue  whic
was  the  work  of  Rhoecus  (x.  38.  §  3.)  Hence  w
have  reason  to  suppose  that  Telecles  and  Theodoru
learnt  at  any  rate  the  art  of  casting  metal  fror


STATUARIA  ARS.

ttleii"  father,  and  not  in  a  foreign  countr)'.  Re-
specting the  various  accounts  of  these  two  artists
find  the  time  at  which  they  lived,  see  the  Did.  of
Bioij.  s.  vv.  Pliny  (//.  A^.  xxxv.  55)  says,  that
Pasiteles  call-ed  the  art  of  modelling  clay  the  mother
of  the  art  of  casting  figures  in  metal  (statuaria),
and  this  passage  has  been  explained  as  if  Pasiteles
meant  to  say  that  in  Samos  the  former  of  these
arts  had  given  rise  to  the  latter.  But  this  is  ma-
nifestly wrong,  for  from  the  words  wliich  follow
in  the'text  of  Pliny  it  is  clear  that  the  meaning
is,  that  he  never  executed  any  work  in  metal,
marble,  &c.  without  previously  taking  a  model
in  clay.

Statues  of  gods  in  baked  clay,  though  in  general
more  used  for  domestic  and  private  than  for  public
worship,  continued  to  be  made  as  before.  Many
specimens  of  small  dimensions  and  of  very  rude
workmanship  have  been  discovered  in  Attic  graves.
(See  Schol.  ad  Aristoph.  Av.  436.)  Ornaments  and
reliefs  on  houses,  porticoes,  and  temples  were  like-
wise very  commonly  made  of  clay,  especially  at
Corinth  and  in  the  Cerameicus.  (Fans.  i.  2.  §  4,
i.  3.  §  1.)

Representations  of  the  gods  in  marble  are  not
mentioned  in  Homer,  although  they  may  have  ex-
isted in  his  time,  as  well  as  statues  of  wood,  which
are  likewise  not  expressly  mentioned.  Marble  is
found  in  the  ancient  Thesaurus  of  Orchomenos.
Pliny  (H.  N.  xxxvi.  4.  s.  2)  calculates  that  works
in  marble  were  executed  by  Mains  in  Chios  at  the
beginning  of  the  Olympiads ;  and  about  01.  50
(580  3.  c).  Dipoenus  and  Scyliis  were  renowned
for  their  works  in  marble.  The  most  ancient  spe-
cimen of  a  marble  statue  was  seen  by  Pausanias
(i.  43.  §  7)  in  the  market-place  of  Megara.  The
work  consisted  of  two  figures,  Coroehus  killing
Poene.  There  are  still  extant  some  works  in  mar-
ble which  may  with  certainty  be  ascribed  to  the
period  previous  to  01.  50.

Before  we  conclude  our  account  of  tlie  works
produced  during  this  period,  we  have  to  mention
the  celebrated  chest  of  CypseUis  at  Olympia,  which
Pausanias  saw  and  described  (iv.  17.  §  2,  &c.).  It
belonged  perhaps  to  the  year  733  B.  c.  The  chest
was  made  of  cedar-wood,  which  was  thought  most
durable.  It  was  adorned  on  its  four  sides  and  on
the  cover  with  figures,  partly  in  ivory,  partly
in  gold,  and  partly  in  the  cedar-wood  itself,  which
represented  various  scenes  taken  from  the  stories
of  the  heroic  ages.  Pausanias  does  not  express  his
opinion  as  to  their  artistic  merits,  but  the  minute-
ness with  which  he  describes  them  is  a  sufficient
proof  tliat  he  did  not  consider  them  as  bad  either
in  design  or  execution.  Qnatremere  de  Quincy
has  attempted  (in  his  Jupiter  Olympien)  to  restore
this  chest  and  its  ornaments  from  the  description
of  Pausanias ;  but  the  restoration  is  so  egregiously
bad,  that  an  eye  accustomed  to  the  contemplation
of  genuine  works  of  art  shrinks  from  it  with  dis-
gust.

During  the  whole  of  this  period  we  scarcely
hear  of  any  statues  except  those  of  the  gods,  and
although  marble  and  bronze  began  to  be  exten-
sively applied,  yet  wood  was  much  more  generally
used  for  representations  of  tlie  gods.  These  statues
were  painted  [Pictuua,  p.  905],  and  in  most  cases
dressed  in  the  most  gorgeous  attire.  The  general
character  of  the  statues  produced  in  the  earlier
times  of  this  period  is  on  the  whole  the  same  as
among  other  nations  at  such  an  early  period.    The


STATUARIA  ARS.


1061


style  in  which  they  are  executed  is  called  the
archaic  or  the  hieratic  style.  The  figures  are  stifl
and  clumsy,  the  countenances  have  little  or  no  in-
dividuality, the  eyes  long  and  small,  and  the  outer
angles  turned  a  little  upwards,  the  mouth,  which  is
likewise  drawn  upwards  at  the  two  corners,  has  a
smiling  appearance.  The  hair  is  carefully  worked,
but  has  a  stiff  wiry  appearance,  and  hangs  gene-
rally down  in  straight  lines  which  are  curled  at  the
ends.  The  arms  hang  down  the  sides  of  the  body,
unless  the  figure  carries  something  in  its  hands.
The  drapery  is  likewise  stiff,  and  the  folds  are  very
symmetrical  and  worked  with  little  regard  to  na-
ture. As  the  arts  during  this  period  were  chiefly
employed  in  the  service  of  religion,  they  could,
notwithstanding  the  many  mechanical  discoveries
of  the  time,  make  but  slow  progress  towards  the
production  of  arts  of  sublimity  or  beauty,  for  in
the  representation  of  the  gods  for  public  worship
ancient  forms  hallowed  by  time  and  custom  were
retained  and  repeated  without  the  artist  being  al-
lowed, even  if  he  was  able  to  do  it,  to  depart  from
these  forms  or  to  introduce  any  material  change.
Art  therefore  could  not  make  any  great  progress,
until  it  was  applied  to  purposes  in  which  the  ar-
tist's genius  was  not  restrained  by  religious  custom,
and  not  bound  to  conventional  forms.  Religion,
although  the  fostering  mother  of  the  arts  in  their
infancy,  became  a  tedious  restraint  when  they
grew  up  to  manhood.  But  as  soon  as  other  spheres
of  action  were  opened,  religion,  in  her  turn,  could
not  escape  from  tlie  influence  of  the  advancement
of  the  arts,  and  the  old  conventional  forms  in  many
places  gave  way  to  works  of  real  merit  and  genius.
This  great  and  important  change  took  place  about
and  after  01.  50.

II.  Seco7id  Period,  from  01,  50  to  Ol.  75.
(580—480  B.C.)

This  period,  although  comprising  no  more  than
one  century,  developed  all  the  elements  which  com-
bined to  make  Grecian  art  what  it  became  during
the  third  and  most  flourishing  period  of  its  history.
Greece  now  came  into  close  contact  with  the  na-
tions of  the  East  and  with  Egypt  ;  commerce  flou-
rished at  Corinth,Aegina,  Samos,  Miletus,  Phocaea,
and  other  places  ;  gold  became  more  abundant  in
Greece  than  it  had  been  before,  and  the  tyrants,
who  sprang  up  in  several  parts  of  Greece,  surround-
ed themselves  with  splendour  and  magnificence,
and  .acted  as  the  patrons  of  art  to  palliate  their  own
usurpation.  But  all  these  were  only  external  in-
fluences, and  could  not  have  produced  a  nation  of
artists  like  the  Greeks.  Epic  poetry  had  gradually
created  in  the  minds  of  the  people  more  defined
ideas  of  their  gods  and  heroes,  while  philosophy
began  to  make  men  look  beyond  what  was  conven-
tional and  traditionary.  The  athletic  and  orchestic
arts  attained  about  01.  50  a  high  degree  of  perfec-
tion, and  the  circumstance  that  about  the  same
time  the  gymnastic  and  athletic  contests  at  the  great
public  festivals  began  to  be  performed  naked,  di-
rected the  attention  of  the  artists  as  well  as  of  the
public  to  nature,  and  rendered  them  familiar  with
the  beautiful  forms  of  the  human  body.  But  the
imitation  of  nature  was  at  first  of  a  very  hard  and
severe  character,  and  the  influence  of  conventional
forms  still  acted  in  many  cases  as  an  obstacle.

The   number  of  artists  who  flourished    during
this  period  is  truly  astonishing.     It  has  been  said
that  the  close  connection  of  father  and  son  among
3  Y  3


1062  STATUARIA  ARS.

the  artists  ceased  at  this  time,  and  that  individual
artists  worked  free  and  according  to  the  dictates  of
their  own  genius.  But  this  is  going  too  far,  for  it
still  continued  to  be  the  common  practice  for  a  son
to  be  instructed  by  his  father,  and  although  this
relation  is  usually  expressed  by  the  term  ixadriTrjs,
yet  on  statues  we  only  meet  with  the  term  vlos.
But,  along  with  these  families  of  artists,  schools  now
became  more  general,  in  which  the  arts  were  taught
and  cultivated  according  to  certain  principles  which
were  or  became  traditionary  in  each  sciiool  ;  the
schools  thus  acquired  something  of  the  spirit  of
castes  or  corporations.

The  lonians  of  Asia  Minor  and  the  islanders  of
the  Aegean,  who  had  previously  been  in  advance
of  the  other  Greeks  in  the  exercise  of  the  fine  arts,
had  their  last  flourishing  period  from  01.  55  to  01.
63(560 — 528  b.c.).  But  this  short  period  must
have  been  one  of  the  greatest  as  well  as  one  of  the
most  active  and  productive  of  numerous  costly
works  of  art.  The  presents  which  Croesus  sent  to
Delphi,  and  some  of  which  were  said  to  have  been
made  by  the  Samian  Theodorus,  must  have  been
executed  at  the  beginning  of  these  forty  years.
Our  w.ant  of  infonnation  respecting  the  lonians
must  be  ascribed  to  the  circumstance  that  we  have
no  Pausanias  to  take  us  through  their  cities,  and
to  describe  and  explain  the  works  of  art  with  which
they  were  adorned.  It  is  owing  to  the  same  cir-
cumstance that  we  know  so  little  of  Rhodes,  Lem-
nos,  Naxos,  and  Cyprus,  although  we  may  take  for
granted  that  these  flourishing  islands  did  not  by
any  means  neglect  the  arts.  Respecting  Chios  and
Samos  we  possess  more  infonnation.  Works  in
metal  were  produced  in  high  perfection  in  the  lat-
ter island,  in  Aegina  and  Argos,  while  Chios  gain-
ed the  greatest  reputation  from  its  possessing  the
earliest  great  school  of  sculptors  in  marble,  in
which  Bupalus  and  Anthermus  were  the  most  dis-
tinguished about  01.  60.  Their  works  were  scat-
tered over  various  parts  of  Greece,  and  their  value
may  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  Augustus  adorn-
ed with  them  the  pediment  of  the  temple  of  Apollo
on  the  Palatine.  (Plin.  II.  N.  xxxvi.  4.)  These
works  must  be  supposed  originally  to  have  belonged
to  a  Greek  temple  of  the  same  god,  and  must  cer-
tainly have  been  of  superior  beauty  to  the  works
discovered  in  the  island  of  Aegina,  otherwise  Au-
gustus would  not  have  chosen  them  as  ornaments
for  the  Palatine  temple.  Sicyon  also  possessed  a
celebrated  school  of  sculptors  in  marble,  and  about
01.  50  Dipoenus  and  Scyllis,  who  had  come  from
Crete,  were  at  the  head  of  it,  and  executed  several
marble  statues  of  gods.  (Plin.  /.  c.)  In  Aetolia,
whither  they  withdrew  for  a  time,  and  at  Argos,
there  likewise  existed  works  in  marble  by  these
artists.  Disciples  of  them,  such  as  Dorycleidas,
Medon,  and  Theocles,  were  engaged  at  Sparta  and
in  other  places.  (Pans.  v.  17.  §  1,  vi.  19.)  Re-
specting Magna  Graecia  and  Sicily  we  know  few
particulars,  though  it  appears  that  the  arts  here
went  on  improving  and  continued  to  be  in  advance
of  the  mother-country.  The  most  celebrated  artists
in  southern  Italy  were  Daraeas  of  Croton  and
Pythagoras  of  Rh(-gium.  (See  the  lives  of  these
artists  in  the  Diclinnary  of  Biography.)

In  Greece  itself  Sicyon  continued  from  early
times  to  be  the  seat  of  a  distinguished  school  of  ar-
tists. Here  Canachus  and  Arislocles  flourished
about  01.  70  as  statuaries  in  metal,  though  the
former  was  also  celebrated  in  the  art  of  carving  in


STATUARIA  ARS.
wood  and  in  toreutic.  Pliny  {H.  N.  xxxvi.  4)
calls  Sicyon  ;  diu  ojfficinarum  omnium  metallorum
patria.  Canachus,  whose  works  Cicero  {Brut.  18)
calls  more  rigid  and  hard  than  was  consistent  with
the  truth  of  nature,  was  the  most  distinguished
among  the  Sicyonian  artists,  and  his  skill  found
employment  in  other  parts  of  Greece  also.  His
most  celebrated  work  was  a  colossal  bronze  statue
of  Apollo  Philesius  in  the  Didymaeon,  the  descrip-
tion of  which  may  give  us  an  idea  of  the  character
of  temple- statues  at  this  period.  The  whole  figure
was  stitF,  very  muscular,  and  without  any  elegance.
In  his  right  hand,  which  was  stretched  out,  the
god  held  a  fawn,  and  in  the  left,  which  was  some-
what lower,  a  bow.  The  features  of  the  counte-
nance were  hard  and  worked  in  the  old  hieratic
style  ;  the  hair  was  divided  and  hung  down  like  wire
with  little  curls  at  the  end.  {MuWev,  Arch'dol.  p.  64.)
In  Aegina  the  arts  appear  likewise  to  have  con-
tinued to  flourish  as  before,  and  the  most  celebrated
among  its  artists  was  Gallon,  about  01.  QQ.  (Paus.
iii.  18.  §  5,  iv.  14.  §2.)  Athens,  which  at  this
time  rivalled  Aegina  in  the  fine  arts,  appears  in  a
short  space  to  have  made  great  progress,  for  great
artists  as  well  as  great  works  begin  now  to  ap-
pear in  the  pages  of  Athenian  history.  This  was
in  part  owing  to  the  influence  of  the  Peisistratids.
After  the  death  of  Peisistratus  himself,  the  first
quadriga  of  bronze  was  erected  in  front  of  the  tem-
ple of  Pallas.  The  most  celebrated  among  the
Athenian  sculptors  were  Critias  and  Hegias  or
Hegesias,  both  distinguished  for  their  works  in
bronze.  The  former  of  them  made  in  01.  75  the
statues  of  Harmodius  and  Aristogiton.  (See  tlie
articles  in  the  Did.  of  Biog.)

Argos  also  distinguished  itself,  and  it  is  a  curious
circumstance,  that  the  greatest  Attic  artists  with
whom  the  third  period  opens,  and  who  brought  the
Attic  art  to  its  culminating  point,  are  disciples  of
the  Argive  Ageladas  (about  01.  QS),  which  at  once
raises  this  city  and  her  other  artists,  such  as  Aris-
tomedon,  Glaucus,  Dionysius,  and  others  to  a
greater  importance  than  we  might  otherwise  be  in-
clined to  attribute  to  them.

Among  the  numerous  works  produced  during
this  period  we  shall  first  mention  the  representa-
tions of  the  gods  {aydhixaTa).  In  all  the  statues
which  were  made  for  temples  as  objects  of  worship,
the  hieratic  style  was  more  or  less  conscientiously
retained,  and  it  is  therefore  not  in  these  statues
that  we  have  to  seek  for  proofs  of  the  progress  of
art.  They  were  for  the  most  part,  as  of  old,  made
of  wood,  and  when  an  old  statue  was  to  be  replaced
by  a  new  one,  the  latter  was  generally  a  faithful
copy  of  the  former.  Thus  the  wooden  statue  of
Demeter  at  Phigaleia  with  a  horse's  head,  from
which  dragons  and  other  monsters  sprang  forth,
and  which  bore  a  dolphin  and  a  dove  in  its  hands,
was  imitated  by  Onatas  in  bronze  after  the  wooden
figure  had  been  burnt.  (Paus.  viii.  42.)  The
same  adherence  to  ancient  forms  of  the  gods  was
also  visible  in  other  cases  ;  for  when  colonies  were
sent  out  the  images  of  the  gods  of  the  mother-city
were  for  the  most  part  faithfully  copied  for  the  co-
lony, and  such  copies  were  called  d(j)i5f)viuaTa.
(Dionys.  Hal.  ii.  22,  viii.  56  ;  Strab.  iv.  p.  179.)
The  instances  of  the  Apollo  Philesius  and  of  the
Demeter  of  Onatas  show  that  even  in  temple-sta-
tues wood  began  to  give  way  to  other  and  better
materials.  Besides  bronze,  marble  also,  and  ivory
and  gold  were  now  applied  to  statues  of  the  gods,


STATU  ARIA  ARS.

and  it  was  not  very  uncommon  to  form  the  body  of
a  statue  of  wood,  and  to  make  its  head,  arms,  and
feet  of  stone  (aKpoKiOoi)^  or  to  cover  the  whole  of
such  a  wooden  figure  with  ivory  and  gold.  (Paus.
ii.  4.  §  1,  vi.  25.  §  4,  &c.,  ii.  22.  §  6  ;  Eurip.
Troad.  1081.)  The  latter  method,  which  about
this  time  became  a  distinct  and  much  admired
branch  of  statuary,  was  practised  by  Dorycleidas,
Theocles,  Medon,  Canachus,  Menaechmus,  and
others,  and  appears  to  have  been  introduced  by
Dipoenus  and  Scyllis.  Quatremere  de  Quincy  con-
sidered this  kind  of  sculpture,  which  the  moderns
call  chryselephantine  sculpture,  as  a  part  of  the  art
which  the  ancients  called  toreutic  (TopeuTi/of).
There  are  few  errors  more  surprising  than  this,  and
yet  the  opinion  of  the  French  critic  has  been  re-
peated as  if  there  could  be  no  doubt  about  it.
[Elephas.]

From  the  statues  of  the  gods  erected  for  worship
we  must  distinguish  those  statues  which  were  de-
dicated in  temples  as  avaQ-qixara,  and  wiiich  now
became  customary  instead  of  craters,  tripods,  &c.
But  here  too  the  change  was  not  sudden,  for  the
statues  at  first  were  frequently  connected  with  tri-
pods and  similar  ornaments.  At  Amyclae  there
were  tripods  made  by  Gallon  and  Gitiadas  with
small  statues  of  goddesses  under  them.  (Paus.  iii.
1 8.)  In  the  execution  of  statues  to  be  dedicated  as
dvaQrifJiaTa,  even  though  they  were  representations
of  gods,  the  artists  were  not  only  not  bound  to  any
traditional  or  conventional  forms,  but  were,  like
the  poets,  allowed  to  make  free  use  of  mythological
subjects,  to  add,  and  to  omit,  or  to  modify  the
stories,  so  as  to  render  them  more  adapted  for  their
artistic  purposes.

A  third  class  of  statues,  which  were  erected  dur-
ing this  period  in  great  numbers,  were  those  of  the
victors  in  the  great  national  games  and  of  other
distinguished  persons  {avZpidvTe^).  The  custom  of
erecting  statues  of  the  victors  in  public  appears  to
have  coumienced  about  01.  58  (Paus.  vi.  18.  §  5)  ;
but  these  statues  soon  became  extremely  numerous,
and  many  of  them  were  executed  by  the  first  artists
of  the  time.  In  some  the  influence  of  the  hieratic
style  was  visible,  or  they  were  even  made  in  that
style,  as  the  statue  of  Mylon  by  Dameas.  (Phi-
lostr.  Apoil.  Tyan.  iv.  28  ;  comp.  Paus.  iv.  28,
vi.  14.  §2.)  Although  these  statues  were  gene-
rally not  portraits,  for  Pliny  {H.N.  xxxiv.  9)  states
that  only  those  who  had  gained  the  victory  thrice
were  allowed  to  have  an  iconic  statue  erected,  yet
they  were  destined  to  preserve  the  memory  of  the
particular  physical  powers  and  the  bodily  develope-
ment  of  the  athletes,  or  even  to  show  the  peculiar
skill  or  the  peculiar  stratagems  by  which  an  athlete
had  excelled  and  overcome  his  adversary,  and  thus
afforded  to  the  artists  numerous  opportunities  of
representing  figures  in  a  variety  of  attitudes  and
actions.  (Paus.  vi.  10.  §  1,  viii.  40  ;  Schol.  ad
Find.  01.  vii.  init.  ;  Xenoph.  Mem.  iii.  10.  §  6.)
Statues  erected  in  public  or  dedicated  in  temples  in
honour  of  other  distiguished  persons  are  mentioned
very  rarely  during  this  period,  but  they  appear
generally  to  have  been  portraits  (et/cJi^ej,  statuae
iconicae).  The  earliest  statues  of  this  kind  we
know  of  are  those  of  Cleobis  and  Biton  of  Argos,
which  were  dedicated  in  the  temple  of  Delphi  about
01.  50.  (Herod,  i.  31.)  The  first  iconic  statues  of
Harmodius  and  Aristogition  were  made  by  Antenor
in  509  B.  c,  and  in  477  b.  c.  new  statues  of  the
earae  persona  were  made  by  Critias.     It  is  allowed


STATUARIA  ARS.


1063


on  all  hands  that  nothing  contributed  more  to  the
advancement  of  statuary  than  the  contests  at  the
public  games,  as  they  not  only  rendered  the  artists
familiar  with  the  greatest  variety  of  attitudes,  and
with  the  most  beautifully  developed  forms  of  the
bodies  of  the  athletes,  but  also  afforded  to  them
numerous  opportunities  to  represent  in  their  works
those  same  persons  and  attitudes  which  they  had
seen  and  admired.  The  widest  field  for  study  and
exercise  was  thus  opened  to  the  artists.

We  have  seen  that  at  a  very  early  period  of
Grecian  art  attempts  were  made  to  adorn  the  out-
side of  temples  and  other  public  buildings,  but  it
was  not  till  the  period  we  are  now  describing  that
it  became  customary  to  adorn  the  pediments,  friezes,
and  other  parts  of  temples  with  reliefs  or  groups  of
statues  of  marble.  We  still  possess  two  great
works  of  this  kind  which  are  sufficient  to  show
their  general  character  during  this  period.  1.  The
Selinuntine  Marbles,  or  the  metopes  of  two  temples
on  the  acropolis  of  Selinus,  in  Sicily,  which  were
discovered  in  1823  by  W.  Harris  and  Sam.  Angell,
and  are  at  present  in  the  Museum  of  Palermo.
Those  belonging  to  the  western  temple  appear  to
have  been  made  at  the  beginning  of  this  period,  as
they  show  a  very  great  resemblance  to  the  works
in  the  hieratic  style.  The  figures  of  the  other  or
middle  temple  show  indeed  a  considerable  advance-
ment of  the  art,  but  the  execution  is  still  hard  and
stiff ;  they  may  have  possibly  been  executed  a  short
time  before  01.  75.  (See  S.  Angell  and  Th.  Evans,
Sculptured  Metopes  discovered  among  the  ruins  of
Selinus,  Lond.  1826  ;  comp.  Metop.a.)  2.  T/te
Aeginetan  Marbles  were  discovered  in  1812  in  the
island  of  Aegina,  and  are  now  at  Munich  in  the
collection  of  the  king  of  Bavaria.  They  consist  of
eleven  statues,  which  adorned  two  pediments  of  a
temple  of  Athena,  and  represent  the  goddess  lead-
ing the  Aeacids  against  Tro}%  and  contain  manifest
allusions  to  the  war  of  the  Greeks  with  the
Persians.  Many  small  holes  in  the  marble  render
it  probable  that  originally  several  parts  of  these
statues,  perhaps  the  armour,  were  of  bronze,  and
fixed  to  them  with  nails.  The  general  character
of  these  Aeginetan  statues  is  a  mixture  of  the
archaic  style  and  an  anxious  imitation  of  nature.
The  hair  is  wiry,  and  traces  of  paint  are  visible  on
all  parts  of  the  statues,  with  tlie  exception  of  those
representing  the  flesh.  (See  Edw.  Lyon,  Outlines
oftlie  Egina  Marbles,  1829.)

Besides  these  a  great  number  of  works  in  bronze
and  marble  of  this  period  are  still  extant ;  they  are
partly  round  figures  or  statues  and  partly  reliefs.
(Miiller,  Arch'dol.  p.  73,  &c.)  Some  of  the  best
specimens  in  marble  relief,  which  seem  to  form  the
transition  from  this  to  the  third  period,  are  pre-
served in  the  British  Museum.  (See  Combe,  Mar-
bles of  the  Brit.  Mus.  ii.  pi.  6  and  7  ;  Specimens  of
Anc.  Sculpture,  pi.  11.)  It  is  not  always  easy  to
say  whether  a  work  made  in  the  archaic  style  is
really  as  old  as  the  style  indicates,  as  this  style
was  never  entirely  abandoned,  and  was  retained
in  temple- statues  even  under  the  Roman  emperors.

III.   Third  Period  from  01.  75  to  01.  111.
(480—336  B.C.)

During  this  period  Athens  was  the  centre  of  the
fine  arts  in  Greece.  The  Persian  wars  awakened
in  the  hearts  of  the  people  the  feeling  and  the  con-
viction of  their  own  power,  and  the  Greeks,  who
had  at  first  only  warded  off  the  attacks  of  the  bar-
ay  4


lOCi


STATUARIA  ARS.


barians,  now  felt  strong  enough  to  act  on  the  offen-
sive. The  fall  of  the  Spartan  Pausanias  raised
Athens  in  47*2  B.  c.  to  the  supremacy  in  the  wars
against  Persia.  Athens  had  now  acquired  a  pow-
erful navy,  and  the  tributes  of  the  allies,  wliich
amounted  at  different  times  from  460  to  1200
talents,  and  which  from  4C2  b.  c.  were  deposited
in  the  treasury  at  Athens,  raised  the  city  to  a
height  of  power  such  as  few  cities  have  ever  pos-
sessed. Only  a  small  portion  of  these  treasures
was  spent  upon  war  ;  the  rest  was  applied  at  first
to  the  fortification  of  the  city,  and  afterwards  to
the  building  of  temples,  porticoes,  theatres,  gym-
nasia, &c.  Among  them  we  need  only  mention
the  Theseum,  the  Parthenon,  the  Propylaea,  the
stone  theatre,  the  Poecile,  and  the  Odeum.  After
the  wars  with  Persia  Athens  appears  by  no  means
exhausted  or  broken  down,  but  refreshed  and
strengthened  like  nature  after  a  heavy  storm.

Statuary  during  this  period  went  hand  in  hand
with  the  other  arts  and  with  literature  :  it  became
emancipated  from  its  ancient  fetters,  from  the  stiff-
ness and  conventional  forms  of  former  times.  The
free  and  noble  spirit  of  the  Athenian  democracy
showed  its  influence  in  all  departments  of  litera-
ture and  art,  and  among  the  latter  statuary  reached
its  culminating  point  in  the  sublime  and  mighty
works  of  Pheidias.  (See  Diet,  of  Biog.  s.  v.  Phel-
dias.)  The  democratical  spirit  did  not  however
lead  to  any  kind  of  extravagance  in  the  arts :  no
vehement  passions  or  actions  were  represented,  and
although  the  character  of  those  works  which  belong
to  the  latter  half  of  this  period  differs  very  much
from  those  of  the  former  half,  yet  on  the  whole
all  show  a  calm  dignity  and  an  almost  passionless
tranquillity  of  mind,  a  feature  so  peculiar  to  all
the  great  masterpieces  of  Grecian  art.  The  Pelo-
ponnesian  war  and  the  calamities  which  accom-
panied it  produced  a  change  in  tlie  state  of  things  ;
a  new  generation  now  stepped  into  the  place  of
the  heroic  race  which  had  partaken  in  or  witnessed
the  memorable  events  of  the  Persian  war.  Sen-
suality and  an  indulgence  of  the  passions  became
the  prominent  features  in  the  character  of  tlie
Athenian  people  ;  and  the  prevailing  desire  after
pleasures  and  strong  excitements  could  not  fail  to
produce  an  injurious  influence  upon  the  arts  also.
In  the  works  of  art  which  were  produced  after  the
year  380  b.  c.  there  was  no  longer  that  calm  and
sublime  majesty  which  characterised  the  works  of
Pheidias  and  his  more  immediate  followers,  but  the
figures  were  more  pathetic,  and  calculated  to  have
a  greater  effect  upon  the  senses  of  the  beholders.
The  different  stages  of  the  arts  during  this  period
bear  the  most  striking  analogy  with  the  three
phases  of  tragedy  as  they  lie  before  us  in  the  works
of  the  three  great  dramatists,  Aeschylus,  Sophocles,
and  Euripides.

Argos  was,  next  to  Athens,  the  most  distin-
guished seat  of  the  arts  during  this  period,  and  the
works  of  the  Athenian  and  Ai-give  artists  spread
over  all  Greece,  and  became  the  models  for  other
Greek  artists.

The  developeraent  of  statuary  at  Athens  and
Argos  had  been  prepared  by  Calamis  of  Athens
and  Pythagoras  of  Rhegium,  the  former  of  whom,
although  not  quite  free  from  the  hardness  of  the
earlier  style,  yet  produced  a  great  variety  of  works,
among  which  are  mentioned  representations  of  gods
in  a  sublime  style,  graceful  statues  of  women,  and
Bpirited  horses,  in  which  he  was  unrivalled.  (Plin.


STATUARIA  ARS.
H.N.  xxxiv.  19.  §  11  ;  Quinctil.  xii.  10.  §  7;  Cic.
Brut.  18  ;  Lucian,  Imag,  6.)  Pythagoras  was  dis-
tinguished for  the  perfection  with  which  he  ex-
pressed the  muscles,  veins,  and  hair  in  his  athletic
statues,  for  the  beautiful  proportions  and  the  power-
ful expression  of  these  statues  which,  as  Pliny  says,
made  the  beholders  feel  the  pains  which  the  indi-
viduals represented  were  suffering.  (Plin. //.  A'",
xxxiv,  19.  §  4  ;  Pans.  vi.  6.  §  1  ;  13.  §  4.)  Several
of  his  works  are  specified  by  Pausanias  and  Pliny.
(  See  Diet,  of  Biog.  s.  v.)  The  career  of  Pheidias  the
Athenian  begins  about  01.  82.  The  genius  of  this
artist  was  so  great  and  so  generally  recognised,  that
all  the  great  works  which  were  executed  in  the  age
of  Pericles  were  placed  under  his  direction,  and
thus  the  whole  host  of  artists  who  were  at  that  time
assembled  at  Athens  were  engaged  in  working  out
his  designs  and  ideas.  (Plut  Peric.  12.)  He  him-
self was  chiefly  engaged  in  executing  the  colossal
works  in  ivory  and  gold,  the  expenses  of  which
were  supplied  by  the  Greek  states  with  the  greatest
liberality,  and  other  works  in  bronze  and  marble.
(For  an  account  of  the  chryselephantine  statues  of
Athena  at  Athens,  and  of  Zeus  at  Olympia,  and
the  other  works  of  Pheidias,  see  the  Diet,  of  Biog.
s.  V.)  Pheidias  was  greatest  in  the  representation
of  the  gods,  and  especially  in  portraying  the  cha-
racter of  Athena,  which  he  represented  with  various
modifications,  sometimes  as  a  warlike  goddess,  and
sometimes  as  the  mild  and  graceful  protectressi,  of
the  arts.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiv.  8.  s.  19.  §  1  ;  Paus.  i.
28.  §  2  ;  Lucian,  Imag.  6.)

We  do  not  read  of  many  disciples  of  Pheidiasy
but  the  most  distinguished  among  them  were
Agoracritus  of  Samos  and  Alcamenes  of  Athens.
Both,  though  the  latter  with  greater  independence,
applied  their  skill  like  their  master  to  statues  of
the  gods ;  both  were  especially  renowned  for  the
great  beauty,  softness,  and  calm  majesty  with
which  they  represented  goddesses,  in  the  composi-
tion of  which  they  rivalled  each  other.  Some  of
the  statues  of  Alcamenes  were  very  highly  valued
in  antiquity,  especially  his  Hecate,  Athena,  Aphro-
dite in  the  gardens,  Hephaestus,  and  also  the
groups  in  the  pediment  of  the  temple  at  Olympia.
The  most  celebrated  statue  of  Agoracritus  was  the
Nemesis  of  Rhamnus,  which  had  originally  been
intended  as  an  Aphrodite  to  compete  with  that  of
Alcamenes,  but  was  afterwards  by  the  addition  of
the  proper  attributes  consecrated  as  a  Nemesis  at
Rhamnus.

We  still  possess  a  series  of  sculptured  works  in
marble  which  were  made  by  the  school  of  Pheidias,
and  some  of  them  undoubtedly  by  the  great  master
himself.     These  works  are  :

1.  Some  parts  of  the  eighteen  sculptured  metopes,
together  with  tlie  frieze  of  the  small  sides  of  the
cella  of  the  temple  of  Theseus.  Ten  of  the  metopes
represent  the  exploits  of  Heracles,  and  the  eight
others  those  of  Theseus.  The  figures  in  the  frieze
are  manifestly  gods,  but  their  meaning  is  uncertain.
All  the  figures  are  full  of  life  and  activity,  and
worked  in  the  sublime  style  of  the  school  of  Phei-
dias. Some  antiquarians  value  them  even  higher
than  the  sculptures  of  the  Parthenon.  Casts  of
these  figures  are  in  the  British  Museum.  (Compare
Stuart,  Ant.  iii.  chap.  1.)

2.  A  considerable  number  of  the  metopes  of  the
Parthenon,  which  are  all  adorned  with  reliefs  in
marble,  a  great  part  of  the  frieze  of  the  cella,  some
colossal  figures,  and  a  number  of  fragments  of  the


STATUARIA  ARS.

two  pediments  of  this  temple.  The  greater  part  of
these  works  is  now  in  the  British  Museum,  where
they  are  collected  under  the  name  of  the  Elgin
Marbles.  They  have  been  described  and  com-
mented upon  so  often,  that  they  require  no  further
mention  here.     (See  Diet  of  Biog.  s.v.  Plteidias.)

3.  The  marble  reliefs  of  the  temple  of  Nike
Apteros  belong  indeed  to  a  later  age  than  that  of
Pheidias,  but  they  are  manifestly  made  in  the  spirit
of  his  school.  They  represent  with  great  liveliness
and  energy  co'ntests  of  Greeks  with  Persians,  and
of  Greeks  among  themselves.  These  also  are  in
the  British  Museum.

All  these  sculptures  breathe  on  the  whole  the
same  sublime  spirit,  though  it  would  seem  that
some,  especially  some  figures  of  the  metopes  of  the
Parthenon,  were  executed  by  artists  w^ho  had  not
emancipated,  themselves  entirely  from  the  influence
of  an  earlier  age.  With  this  exception  and  some
other  slight  defects,  which  are  probably  the  conse-
quences of  the  place  which  the  sculptures  occupied
in  the  temples  they  adorned,  we  find  everywhere  a
truth  in  the  imitation  of  nature,  which,  without
suppressing  or  omitting  anj'thing  that  is  essential,
and  without  any  forced  attempt  to  go  beyond  na-
ture, produces  the  purest  and  sublimest  beauty:
these  works  show  lively  movements  combined  with
calmness  and  ease,  a  natural  dignity  and  grace
united  with  unatfected  simplicity  ;  no  striving  after
effect,  or  excitement  of  the  passions.  These  sculp-
tures alone  afford  us  ample  means  to  justify  the
ancient  critics,  who  state  that  the  ixeya\e7ov  and
aefivou,  or  the  grand  and  sublime,  were  the  charac-
teristic features  of  Pheidias  and  his  school.  (De-
metr.  de  Elocut.  1 4  ;  Dionys.  Hal.  de  Isocrat.  p.
542.)  Piieidias  was  the  Aeschylus  of  statuary,
and  it  may  be  safely  asserted  that,  although  the  art
subsequently  made  certain  progress  in  the  execution
of  details,  yet  Pheidias  and  his  school  were  never
excelled  by  subsequent  generations.

Besides  the  sculptures  of  the  three  temples  men-
tioned above,  there  are  also  similar  ornaments  of
other  temples  extant,  which  show  the  influence
which  the  school  of  Pheidas  must  have  exercised
in  various  parts  of  Greece,  though  they  were  exe-
cuted in  a  different  style.  Of  these  we  need  only
mention  two  as  the  most  important.

1.  The  Phigaleian  marbles,  which  belonged  to
the  temple  of  Apollo  Epicurius,  built  about  01.  86
by  Ictinus.  They  were  discovered  in  1812,  and
consist  of  twenty-three  plates  of  marble  belonging
to  the  inner  frieze  of  the  cella.  They  are  now  in
the  British  Museum.  The  subjects  represented  in
them  are  fights  with  centaurs  and  amazons,  and
one  plate  shows  Apollo  and  Artemis  drawn  in  a
chariot  by  stags.  Many  of  the  attitudes  of  the
figures  appear  to  be  repetitions  of  those  seen  on
the  Attic  temples,  but  there  are  at  the  same  time
great  diff"erei)ces,  for  the  Phigaleian  marbles  some-
times show  a  boldness  of  design  which  almost  bor-
ders on  extravagance,  while  some  figures  are  incor-
rectly drawn  and  in  forced  attitudes.  The  best
descriptions  of  them  are  those  in  Basd  relievi  delta
Grecia^  disegn.  da  G.  M.  Wagner  (1814),  and  in
Stackelberg's  ApoUotempel  zu  Bassae  in  Arcadien
u.  die  daselbst  ausgegrab.  Biidwerke^  1828.

2.  Marbles  of  the  temple  of  the  Olympian  Zeus,
Avhich  were  made  by  Paeonius  of  Mende  and  Alca-
raenes  of  Athens,      (Pans.  v.  16.)     Several  frag-
ments of  these  sculptures  were  discovered  in  1829,  i
aud  are  now  at  Paris  {Exptdit.  Scientif.   de  la  j


STATUARIA  ARS.


1065


Morte,  pi.  74 — 78.)  The  figures  of  these  marbles
are  indeed  free  from  the  fetters  of  the  ancient  style,
and  show  a  true  imitation  of  nature,  but  do  not
nearly  come  up  to  the  ideal  simplicity  of  the  works
of  Pheidias.

About  the  same  time  that  the  Attic  school  rose
to  its  highest  perfection  under  Pheidias,  the  school
of  Argos  was  likewise  raised  to  its  summit  by
Polycleitus,  who  was  inferior  to  the  former  in  his
statues  of  gods  (Quinctil.  xii.  10.  §  7,  &c.  ;  Cic.
Brut.  18),  though  he  advanced  the  toreutic  art  in
his  colossal  statue  of  Hera  at  Argos  further  than
Pheidias.  (Plin.  H.N.  xxxiv.  8.  s.  19.  §  2.)  But
the  art  of  making  bronze  statues  of  athletes  was
carried  by  him  to  the  greatest  perfection:  ideal
youthful  and  manly  beauty  was  the  sphere  in  which
he  excelled.  Among  his  statues  of  gods  we  only
know  two,  that  of  Hera  and  another  of  Hermes.
Pliny  mentions  several  of  his  representations  of
human  beings,  in  which  without  neglecting  to  give
them  individuality,  he  made  youthful  figures  in
their  purest  beauty,  and  with  the  most  accurate
proportions  of  the  several  parts  of  the  human  body.
(Plin.  I.  c. ;  comp.  Strab.  viii.  p.  372.)  One  of
these  statues,  a  youthful  Doryphorus,  was  made
with  such  accurate  observation  of  the  proportions
of  the  parts  of  the  body,  that  it  was  looked  upon
by  the  ancient  artists  as  a  canon  of  rules  on  this
point.  (Cic.  ^;m^.  86,  Orat.  2  ;  Quintil.  v.  12.
§  21  ;  Lucian,  de  Saltat.  75.)  Polycleitus  is  said
to  have  written  a  work  on  the  same  subject,  and  it
may  be  that  his  Doryphorus  was  intended  to  give  a
practical  specimen  of  the  rules  he  had  laid  down
in  his  treatise.  He  gained  a  victory  over  Pheidias
in  the  representation  of  an  Amazon,  which  must
consequently  have  been  a  figure  in  the  greatest
luxuriance  of  female  beauty  combined  with  a  manly
character.  {WnWev.,  Arch'dol.  §  121.)  Polyclei-
tus was  also  distinguished  in  portrait-statues,  among
which  that  of  Artemon  Periphoretus,  a  mechani-
cian of  the  time  of  Pericles,  is  mentioned  with  es-
pecial praise.     (Comp.  Did.  of  Biog.  s.  v.)

Myron  of  Eleutherae,  about  01.  87,  was,  like
Polycleitus,  a  disciple  of  Ageladas,  but  adhered  to  a
closer  imitation  of  nature  than  Polycleitus,  and  as
far  as  the  impression  upon  the  senses  was  concerned,
his  works  were  most  pleasing,  but  animi  sensu.<i
nou  cxp7-essit,  says  Pliny  {H.  N.  xxxiv.  8.  s.  19.  §
3).  The  cow  of  Myron  in  bronze  was  celebrated
in  all  antiquity.  (Tzetzes.  Chil.  viii.  1 94,  &c. ;  Pro-
pert,  ii.  31.  7.)  Pliny  mentions  a  considerable
number  of  his  works,  among  which  a  dog,  a  disco-
bolus, pentathli  and  pancratiasts  were  most  cele-
brated ;  the  last  of  them  were  especially  dis-
tinguished for  their  eurythmia  and  the  animation
displayed  in  their  movements,  as  well  as  for  the
most  beautiful  athletic  attitudes.  Among  his  sta-
tues of  gods  we  find  only  mention  of  a  colossal
group  representing  Heracles,  Zeus,  and  Athena,
which  he  made  for  the  Samians.  (Plin.  /.  c. ;  Cic.
c.  Verr.  iv.  3  ;  Strab.  xiv.  p.  637.)  In  his  execu-
tion of  the  hair  he  adhered,  according  to  Pliny,  to
the  ancient  style.     (See  Did.  of  Biog.  s.  v.)

The  deviation  from  the  sublime  ideality  of  the
Attic  school  of  Pheidias  was  still  more  manifest  in
the  works  of  Callimachus  and  Demetrius.  The
former  executed  his  statues  Avith  the  utmost  possi-
ble accuracy  and  attention  to  the  minutest  details,
but  was  careless  in  the  conception  as  well  as  in  th«
execution  of  the  whole,  which  destroyed  the  value
of  his  works,  whence  he  was  designated  by  the


1066


STATUARIA  ARS.


nickname  of  KaTaTT^llrexfos.  Quinctilian  (xii.  10.
§  9)  says  of  him  nimius  in  veritate.  (Comp.  Lucian,
Philops.  18  ;  Plin.  Epist.  iii.  6.)  On  the  whole  it
should  be  observed,  that  near  the  end  of  the  Pelo-
ponnesian  war  and  afterwards  the  greater  part  of
the  artists  continued  to  work  in  the  spirit  and
style  of  Polycleitus,  and  that  the  principal  produc-
tions in  Peloponnesus  were  bronze  statues  of  ath-
letes and  statues  erected  in  honour  of  other  distin-
guished persons.  (Pans.  x.  9.  §  4,  vi.  2.  §  4  ;
Pint.  Lymnd.  1,18,  de  Orac.  Pyih.  2.)

The  change  which  took  place  after  the  Pelopon-
nesian  war  in  the  public  mind  at  Athens  could  not
fail  to  show  its  influence  upon  the  arts  also  ;  and
the  school  of  statuary,  whicii  had  gradually  become
developed,  was  as  different  from  that  of  Pheidias  as
the  then  existing  state  of  feeling  at  Athens  was  from
that  which  had  grown  out  of  the  wars  with  Persia.
It  was  especialh^  Scopas  of  Paros  and  Praxiteles
of  Athens,  about  one  generation  after  Myron  and
Polycleitus,  who  gave  the  reflex  of  their  time  in
their  productions.  Their  works  expressed  the
softer  feelings  and  an  excited  state  of  mind,  such
as  would  make  a  strong  impression  upon  and  cap-
tivate the  senses  of  the  beholders.  But  the  chief
masters  of  this  new  school  still  had  the  wisdom  to
combine  these  things,  which  were  commanded  by
the  spirit  of  the  age,  witli  a  noble  and  sublime  con-
ception of  the  ideas  which  they  embodied  in  their
works.  Scopas  and  Praxiteles  were  both  distin-
guished as  sculptors  in  marble,  and  both  worked  in
the  same  style  ;  the  legendary  circles  to  which  most
of  their  ideal  productions  belong  are  those  of  Dio-
nysus and  Aphrodite,  a  fact  which  also  shows  the
character  of  the  age.  There  was  a  time  when  this
school  of  statuary  was  considered  superior  even  to
that  of  Pheidias,  and  it  is  indeed  true  that  its  pro-
ductions are  distinguished  by  exquisite  beauty  and
gracefulness,  whence  their  female  statues  in  parti-
cular are,  in  one  sense,  unrivalled  ;  but  the  effect
they  produced  upon  the  minds  of  the  beholders
was  by  no  means  of  the  same  pure  and  elevating
nature  as  that  of  the  works  of  their  predecessors.
(  For  an  account  of  their  works,  see  the  articles  Proir-
ileles  and  Scopas  in  the  Dictionary  of  Biography.)

Cephissodorus  and  Timarchus  were  sons  of
Praxiteles.  There  were  several  works  of  the  for-
mer at  Rome  in  the  time  of  Pliny;  he  made  his
art  subservient  to  passions  and  sensual  desires.
Pliny  (//.  A^.  xxxvi.  5,  s.  4.  §  6)  mentions  among
his  works  a  celebrated  Symplegma  at  Pergamus,
which  is  the  first  instance  of  this  kind  that  we  hear
of  in  Grecian  art.  A  similar  spirit  pervaded  the
works  of  Leochares  (as  his  Ganymedes  carried  by
.in  eagle  up  to  Zeus),  of  Polycles,  who  was  the  first
that  made  the  voluptuous  statues  of  Hermaphro-
dites, and  of  Silanion,  who  made  a  dving  Jocaste.
(Plin.  //.  A^.  xxxiv.  8.  s.  1.9.  §  17  and  20  ;  Plut.
de  Aud.  Poet.  3,  Sympos.  v.  1  ;  see  Diet,  of  Biog.
s.  vv.)  Leochares  also  made  a  number  of  portrait-
statues  in  ivory  and  gold  of  members  of  the  royal
family  of  Macedonia,  and  of  other  persons.  (Paus.
V.  20.)  Such  portrait-statues  about  this  time  began
to  give  much  occupation  to  the  artists.  About  the
year  350  B.  c.  several  of  the  greatest  artists  of  the
age,  such  as  Scopas,  Leochares,  Timotheus,  and
Bryaxis,  were  engaged  in  Caria  in  making  the
magnificent  mausoleum  of  Mausolus,  a  general
description  of  which  is  given  under  Mausolkum.

Most  of  the  above-mentioned  artists,  however
widely  their  works  differed  from  those  of  the  school


STATUARIA  ARS.

of  Pheidias,  may  yet  be  regarded  as  having  only
continued  and  developed  its  principles  of  art  in  a
certain  direction  ;  but  towards  the  end  of  this  pe-
riod Euphranor  and  Lysippus  of  Sicyon  carried  out
the  principles  of  the  Argive  school  of  Polycleitus.
(Cic.  Brut.  86.)  Their  principal  object  was  to  re-
present the  highest  possible  degree  of  physical
beauty  and  of  athletic  and  heroic  power.  (See
their  lives  in  the  Diet,  of  Biog).  The  chief  charac-
teristic of  Lysippus,  and  his  school  is  a  close
imitation  of  nature,  which  even  contrived  to
represent  bodily  defects  in  some  interesting  man-
ner, as  in  his  portraits  of  Alexander  ;  its  tendency
is  entirely  realistic.  The  ideal  statues  of  former
times  disappear  more  and  more,  and  make  way
for  mere  portraits.  Lysippus,  it  is  true,  made  sta-
tues of  gods  ;  but  they  did  not  properly  belong  to
his  sphere  ;  he  merely  executed  them  because  he
had  received  orders  which  he  could  not  well  refuse.
His  greatest  care  was  bestowed  upon  the  execution
of  the  details  {argutiae  operum),  upon  the  correct
proportions  of  the  parts  of  the  human  body,  and
upon  making  his  statues  slender  and  tall  above  the
common  standard.  In  short,  all  the  features  which
characterise  the  next  period  appear  in  the  school  of
Lysippus.

IV.  Fourth  Period,  from  01.  Ill  to  01.  158.
(336—146  B.C.)

"Within  a  few  generations  Grecian  art  had  passed
through  the  various  stages  of  developenient,  and
each  of  them  had  produced  such  an  abundance  of
masterpieces  that  it  was  difficult  for  a  new  genera-
tion of  artists  to  produce  new  and  original  works.
Hence  the  artists  of  the  periods  which  followed
could  not  do  much  more  than  imitate,  and  their
productions  are  better  or  worse  in  proportion  as
they  were  founded  upon  the  study  of  earlier  works
or  not.  But  even  this  period  of  eclecticism  has
nevertheless  produced  statues  and  groups  worthy
of  the  highest  admiration,  and  which  can  be  placed
by  the  side  of  the  best  works  of  antiquit)'.  The
very  slow  decay  of  the  arts,  in  comparison  with  the
rapid  decline  of  literature,  is  indeed  a  strange  phe-
nomenon.

During  the  first  fifty  years  of  this  period  the
schools  of  Praxiteles  and  Lysippus  continued  to
flourish,  especially  in  works  of  bronze  ;  but  after
this  time  bronze  statues  were  seldom  made,  until
the  art  was  carried  on  with  new  vigour  at  Athens
about  the  end  of  the  period.  The  school  of  Ly-
sippus gave  rise  to  that  of  Rhodes,  where  his  dis-
ciple Chares  formed  the  most  celebrated  among  tiie
hundred  colossal  statues  of  the  sun.  It  was  seventy
cubits  high  and  partly  of  metal.  It  stood  near  the
harbour,  and  was  thrown  down  by  an  earthquake
about  225  b.  c.  (Plin.  H.N.  xxxiv.  18  ;  Meursius,
Bhodus,  i.  16;  Diet,  of  Biog.  s.  v.)  Antiquarians
assign  to  this  part  of  the  fourth  period  several  very
beautiful  works  still  extant,  as  the  magnificent
group  of  Laocoon  and  his  sons,  which  was  dis-
covered in  1506  near  the  baths  of  Titus,  and  is  at
present  at  Rome.  This  is,  next  to  the  Niobe,  the
most  beautiful  group  among  the  extant  works  of
ancient  art ;  it  was  according  to  Pliny  the  work  of
three  Rhodian  artists:  Agesander,  Polydorus,  and
Athenodorus.  (Plin.  H.N.  xxxvi.  5.  s.  4.  §  1 1  ,
Lessing's  Laocoon.)  The  celebrated  Farnesian  bull
is  likewise  the  work  of  two  Rhodian  artists,  Apol-
lonius  and  Tauriscus.  (Plin.  H,  N.  xxxvi.  5.  s.  4.
§10.)


STATUARIA  ARS

In  the  various  kingdoms  which  arose  oiit  of  the
conquests  of  Alexander  the  arts  were  more  or  less
cultivated,  and  not  only  were  the  great  master-
works  of  former  times  copied  to  adorn  the  new  ca-
pitals, but  new  schools  of  artists  sprang  up  in  several
of  them.  Alexandria,  Pergamus,  and  Seleuceia
rivalled  each  other  in  art  no  less  than  in  literature.
At  Pergamus  the  celebrated  groups  were  composed
which  represented  the  victories  of  Attains  and
Eumenes  over  the  Gauls.  (Plin.  H.N.  xxxiv,  8.
8.  19.  §  24  ;  Pans.  i.  25.  §  2  ;  Pint.  Anton.  60.)
It  is  believed  by  some  (Miiller,  Arch.  §  158)  that
the  so-called  dying  gladiator  at  Rome  is  a  statue  of
a  Gaul,  which  originally  belonged  to  one  of  these
groups.  Ephesus  also  had  a  flourishing  school  of
art,  which  appears  to  have  followed  in  the  main
the  style  of  Lysippus,  and  excelled,  like  that  of
Pergamus,  in  the  representation  of  battle  scenes.
The  Borghese  fighter  in  the  Louvre  is  supposed  to
be  the  work  of  an  Ephesian  Agasias,  and  to  have
originally  formed  a  part  of  such  a  battle-scene.  In
Syria  too,  art  flourished  at  Antioch  until  the  time
of  Antiochus  IV.,  before  whose  reign  a  number  of
statues  had  already  been  carried  away  by  Scipio.

In  these  new  monarchies  statues  of  the  gods
were  seldom  made,  and  when  they  were  executed
they  were  in  most  cases  copies  from  earlier  works,
as  the  character  in  which  the  gods  were  repre-
sented had  gradually  become  fixed,  and  few  artists
ventured  to  alter  the  forms,  Avhich  had  become
typical.  Portrait-statues  of  kings  increased,  on
the  other  hand,  to  a  great  extent.  The  vanity  of
the  kings  and  the  flattery  of  the  artists  created  a
new  kind  of  statues :  the  princes  were  frequently
identified  with  certain  deities,  and  were  conse-
quently represented  as  such  with  all  the  requisite
attributes.  In  many  cases  the  mere  bust  of  a  king
was  put  upon  the  body  of  a  statue  of  a  god.  This
was  a  most  dangerous  rock  for  artists  ;  for  the
simple  representation  of  a  king  in  the  shape  of  a
god,  which  commenced  as  early  as  the  time  of
Alexander,  was  soon  thought  an  insuflicient  mark
of  veneration,  and  art  degenerated  into  a  mere  in-
strument of  the  most  vulgar  flattery :  pomp  and
show  and  tasteless  ornaments  were  mistaken  for  art.
Flattery  towards  the  great  was  also  shown  in  the
monstrous  number  of  statues  that  were  erected  to
one  and  the  same  individual.  Demetrius  Phalereus
had  360,  or  according  to  others  1500  statues  erected
to  him.  (Athen.  xii.  p.  537  ;  Pans.  v.  24.  §  3  ;
Clem.  Alex.  Proirept.  iv.  p.  16,  ed.  Sylb. ;  Dion
Chrysost.  Orat.  37.  p.  122.)  When  the  honour  of
a  statue  ceased  to  be  considered  as  a  high  distinc-
tion, and  when  it  became  necessary  to  produce
such  numbers  of  statues,  the  workmanship  na-
turally became  worse  in  proportion  as  the  honour
sank  in  public  estimation.  During  this  time  it
became  customary  to  combine  with  the  statues  of
kings  and  generals  symbolical  representations  of
towns,  which  are  called  Tuxaj  ttoK^cov.  In  Magna
Graecia  art  gradually  fell  into  decay  after  the  wars
with  the  Romans  ;  and  the  example  of  Capua,
from  which  all  the  statues  were  carried  to  Rome,
affbrds  us  an  instance  of  the  robberies  and  plunder
which  were  committed  by  the  Romans  in  other
towns  of  Italj\  But  even  after  the  Roman  con-
quests the  cultivation  of  the  plastic  arts  cannot  have
ceased  altogether,  as  we  must  infer  from  the  nu-
merous works  found  at  Pompeii,  some  of  which
possess  a  higher  degree  of  perfection  and  beauty
thaii  might  have  been  expected  in  works  of  so  late


STATUARIA  ARS.


1067


a  date.  In  Sicily  the  activity  of  the  artists  appears
to  have  ceased  after  the  Roman  conquest,  for  the
numerous  works  with  which  Syracuse  was  adorned
and  with  which  we  are  made  acquainted  by  Cicero
(c.  Verr.  iv.),  mostly  belong  to  an  earlier  period.

Shortly  before  the  taking  of  Corinth  by  Mum-
mius,  statues  in  bronze  and  marble  were  revived
at  Athens  ;  and  although  the  artists  were  far  in-
ferior to  those  of  former  times,  yet  they  still  pro-
duced works  of  great  excellence,  as  they  showed
their  good  sense  and  taste  by  making  the  master-
works  of  their  predecessors  the  subjects  of  study  ,
and  imitation.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiv.  8.  s.  19.)  Among
those  who  contributed  most  to  this  revival  of  sta-
tuary were  Cleomenes  (who  made  the  Medicean
Venus,  an  imitation  of  that  of  Cnidus,  but  inferior
in  point  of  taste  and  delicacy),  his  son  Cleomenes
(by  whom  there  is  a  statue  in  the  Louvre,  which
shows  exquisite  workmanship  but  little  life),  Gly-
con,  Apollonius,  and  others.  (See  their  lives  in
the  Diet,  of  Biog.)

About  the  close  of  this  period,  and  for  more  than
a  century  afterwards,  the  Romans,  in  the  conquest
of  the  countries  where  the  arts  had  flourished,
made  it  a  regular  practice  to  carry  away  the  works
of  art ;  and,  as  they  were  unable  to  appreciate  their
value  and  merit,  they  acted  in  many  cases  no
better  than  rude  barbarians,  regarding  the  most
precious  relics  of  art  in  no  other  light  than  that  of
chairs  and  tables,  which  might  be  made  again  at
pleasure  and  at  any  time.  At  first  these  robberies
were  carried  on  with  some  moderation,  as  by  Mar-
cellus  at  Syracuse  and  by  Fabius  Maximus  at
Tarentum,  and  only  with  a  view  to  adorn  their
triumphs  and  the  public  buildings  of  Rome.  The
triumphs  over  Philip,  Antiochus,  the  Aetolians,
the  Gauls  in  Asia,  Perseus,  Pseudo-Philip,  and
above  all  the  taking  of  Corinth,  and  subsequently
the  victories  over  Mithridates  and  Cleopatra,  filled
the  Roman  temples  and  porticoes  with  the  greatest
variety  of  works  of  art.  After  the  taking  of  Co-
rinth, the  Roman  generals  and  governors  of  pro-
vinces began  to  show  a  kind  of  amateurship  in
works  of  art,  which  was  probably  more  owing  to
the  fashion  prevailing  among  the  Roman  grandees
than  to  any  real  taste  or  love  for  the  fine  arts:
they  now  carried  oflF  whatever  they  could,  to  adorn
their  own  residences.  Sometimes  either  their  ava-
rice or  necessity  induced  them  to  melt  down  the
most  precious  works  without  any  regard  to  artistic
worth.  The  sacrilegious  plunder  of  temples  and
the  carrying  away  of  the  sacred  statues  from  the
public  sanctuaries,  which  had  at  first  been  pre-
vented to  some  extent  by  the  pontiffs,  became
afterwards  a  common  practice.  The  manner  in
which  Verres  acted  in  Sicily  is  but  one  of  many
instances  of  the  extent  to  which  these  robberies
were  carried  on.  The  emperors,  especially  Au-
gustus^ Caligula,  and  Nero,  followed  these  exam-
ples, and  the  immense  number  of  statues  which
notwithstanding  all  this  remained  at  Rhodes,  Del-
phi, Athens,  and  Olympia,  is  truly  astonishing.
(See  Volkel,  Ueber  die  Wegfuhrung  der  alten
Kunstioerke  aus  den  eroberten  L'dndern  nach  Horn  {
Muller,  ^rcAao/.  §  164,  &c.)  |

Before  we  proceed  to  describe  the  state  of  sta-
tuary during  the  last  stage,  in  which  Rome  was  the
centre  of  the  ancient  world,  it  will  be  necessjiry  to
give  an  outline  of  the  history  of  statuary  among
the  Etruscans  and  Romans  down  to  the  year  146
B.  c


T068  STATUARIA  ARS.

The  Etruscans  were  on  the  whole  an  industrious
and  enterprising  people.  Diiferent  hypotheses  have
been  proposed  to  account  for  the  cultivation  of  the
arts,  in  which  this  nation  excelled  all  others  in
central  and  northern  Italy,  as  well  as  for  the  peculiar
style  of  some  of  their  productions.  Some  writers
think  that  it  was  owing  to  colonies  from  Lydia,
which  were  established  at  Caere  and  Tarquinii,
others  that  the  Etruscans  themselves  were  a  Pe-
lasgian  tribe.  With  the  works  of  Grecian  art  they
must  have  become  acquainted  at  an  early  time
through  their  intercourse  with  the  Greeks  of
southern  Italy,  whose  influence  upon  the  art  of  the
Etruscans  is  evident  in  numerous  cases.  The  East
also  appears  to  have  exercised  some  influence  upon
the  Etruscans,  as  many  works  of  art  found  in
Etruria  contain  precisely  the  same  representations
as  those  which  we  find  in  Asia,  especially  among
the  Babylonians.  However  this  may  have  been
effected,  we  know  for  certain  that  the  whole  range
of  the  fine  arts  was  cultivated  by  the  Etruscans  at
an  early  period.  Statuary  in  clay  (which  here
supplied  the  place  of  wood,  ^oaua,  used  in  Greece)
and  in  bronze  appears  to  have  acquired  a  high
degree  of  perfection.  In  267  B.C.  no  less  than
2000  bronze  statues  are  said  to  have  existed  at
Volsinii  (Plin.  H.N.  xxxiv.  16,  18;  compare
Vitruv.  iii.  2),  and  numerous  works  of  Etruscan
art  are  still  extant,  which  show  great  vigour  and
life,  though  they  do  not  possess  a  very  high  degree
of  beauty.  Among  them  we  may  mention  the
Chimaeraof  Arretium  (at  Florence)  ;  the  Capitoline
She-wolf  (Dionys.  i.  79  ;  Liv.  x.  23),  which  was
dedicated  in  B,  c.  296  ;  the  Minerva  of  Arezzo
(now  at  Florence)  ;  and  others.  Some  of  their
statues  are  worked  in  a  Greek  style  ;  others  are  of
a  character  peculiar  to  themselves,  and  entirely
different  from  works  of  Grecian  art,  being  stiff  and
ugly  ;  otiiers  again  are  exaggerated  and  forced  in
their  movements  and  attitudes,  and  resemble  the
figures  which  we  meet  with  in,  the  representations
of  Asiatic  nations.  Etruscan  utensils  of  bronze,
such  as  candelabra,  paterae,  cups,  thrones,  &c.,
embellished  with  various  ornaments  and  figures,
were  very  highly  valued  in  antiquity,  and  even  at
Athens  at  a  time  when  the  arts  were  still  flourish-
ing there.  (Ath.  i.  p.  28,  xv.  p.  700.)  Their
works  in  stone,  especially  the  alto  and  basso-
relievos,  which  are  found  in  considerable  numbers
on  chests  containing  the  ashes  of  the  dead,  are
with  few  exceptions,  of  very  inferior  merit.

The  Romans  previously  to  the  time  of  the  first
Tarquin  are  said  to  have  had  no  images  of  the
gods  ;  and  for  a  long  time  afterwards  their  statues
of  gods  in  clay  or  wood  were  made  by  Etruscan
artists,  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.  45,  xxxiv.  1 6.)  During
the  early  part  of  the  republic  the  works  executed
at  Rome  were  altogether  of  a  useful  and  practical
and  not  of  an  ornamental  character  ;  and  statuary
was  in  consequence  little  cultivated.  But  in  the
course  of  time  the  senate  and  the  people,  as  well  as
foreign  states  which  desired  to  show  their  gratitude
to  some  Roman,  began  to  erect  bronze  statues  to
distinguished  persons  in  the  Forum  and  other
places.  (Plin.  IL  N.  xxxiv.  14.)  The  earliest
Avorks  of  this  kind,  which  we  can  consider  as  really
historical,  are  the  statues  of  Attus  Navius  (Plin.
//.  A'^  xxxiv.  1 1  ;  Cic.  de  Divin.  i.  11),  of  Minucius
outside  the  Porta  Trigemina,  and  of  Pythagoras
and  Alcibiades,  which  stood  in  the  corners  of  the
tamitiura  from  the  vear  B.  c.  314  down  to  the  dic-


STATUARIA  ARS.

tatorship  of  Sulla.  (Plin.  H.N.  xxxiv.  12,)  Tha
last  two  statues  were  undoubtedly  of  Greek  work-
manship. The  earliest  metal  statue  of  a  deity
was,  according  to  Pliny,  a  Ceres  which  was  made
of  the  confiscated  property  of  Spurius  Cassius,  about
485  B.  c.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiv.  9  )  Two  other  metal
statues  of  gods  were  the  Capitoline  Hercules,  306
B.  c.  (Liv.  ix.  44),  and  the  colossal  statue  of  the
Capitoline  Jupiter,  which,  according  to  Livy,  was
made  about  490  b.  c.  (Liv.  ix.  40,  x.  38  ;  Plin.
//.  A'',  xxxiv.  18.)  The  number  of  statues  of  men
in  the  Forum  appears  soon  to  have  become  very
great,  and  many  persons  seem  to  have  had  them
erected  there  without  any  right:  hence  in  161
B.  c.  the  censors  P.  Cornelius  Scipio  and  M.  Po-
pilius  removed  from  the  Forum  all  the  statues  of
magistrates  which  had  not  been  erected  with  the
sanction  of  the  senate  or  the  people,  (Plin.//.  A",
xxxiv.  14.)  A  statue  of  Cornelia,  the  mother  of
the  Gracchi,  stood  in  the  porticus  of  Metellua.
The  artists  by  whom  these  and  other  statues  were
executed  were  undoubtedly  Greeks  and  Etruscans.

V.  Flflh  Period,  from  01.  158  (b.  c.  146)  to  the
fall  of  tlie  Western  Empire.

During  this  period  Rome  was  the  capital  of
nearly  the  whole  of  the  ancient  world,  not  through
its  intellectual  superiority,  but  by  its  military  and
political  power.  But  it  nevertheless  became  the
centre  of  art  and  literature,  as  the  artists  resorted
thither  from  all  parts  of  the  empire  for  the  purpose
of  seeking  employment  in  the  Rouses  of  the  great.
The  mass  of  the  people,  however,  had  as  little  taste
for  and  were  as  little  concerned  about  the  arts  as
ever.  {yi.ovs.i.  Art.  Pott.  323;  Petron.  88.)  lu
addition  to  this  there  was  still  a  strong  party  of
the  Romans,  who,  either  from  an  affected  or  an
honest  contempt  for  the  Greeks,  entertained  the
vain  hope  of  being  able  to  restore  the  olden  times.
These  circumstances  account  for  the  fact  that  a  man
like  Cicero  thought  it  necessary  to  conceal  and  dis-
guise his  love  and  knowledge  of  the  fine  arts.  It
was,  therefore,  only  the  most  distinguished  and  in-
tellectual Romans  that  really  loved  and  cherislied
the  arts,  Tliis  was  both  a  fortunate  and  an  unfor-
tunate circumstance :  had  it  not  been  so,  art  would
have  perished  at  once  ;  now  it  continued  in  some
degree  to  be  cultivated,  but  it  experienced  the  same
fate  which  it  has  met  with  at  all  limes,  when  it
has  continued  its  existence  without  the  sympathies
of  the  people,  and  merely  under  the  patronage  of
the  great.  Notwithstanding  these  unfavourable
circumstances,  there  were  a  number  of  distinguished
artists  at  Rome  during  the  latter  period  of  the  re-
public, who  had  really  imbibed  the  spirit  of  the  an-
cient Greeks  and  who  produced  worksof  great  beauty
and  merit.  We  need  only  mention  such  names
as  Pasiteles  of  southern  Italy,  who  was  a  Roman
citizen,  and  who  made  an  ivory  statue  of  Jupiter  for
the  temple  of  Metellus  (Plin.  //.  A^.  xxxvi.  5,  s.  4,
§  12);  Arcesilaus,  of  whom  Pliny  mentions  several
iiighly  valued  works,  and  whose  models  were  prized
more  than  the  statues  of  others  ;  Decius,  who  even
ventured  to  rival  Chares  in  the  art  of  founding
metal  statues  ;  Diogenes,  and  others.  During  the
empire  the  arts  declined,  and,  with  some  noble  ex-
ceptions, merely  administered  to  the  vanity,  luxu-
ries, and  caprices  of  the  emperors.  (Senec,  Episl.
88.)  The  inertness  of  the  times,  says  Pliny  (//.  N.)
xxxv.  2),  lias  destroyed  the  arts ;  and  as  there
were  no  more  minds  to  be  represented,  the  repro-


STATUARIA  ARS.

sentations  of  the  bodies  were  likewise  neglected.
Occasionally,  however,  excellent  and  gifted  sculp-
tors still  arose,  and  adorned  the  palaces  of  the  em-
])erors  with  beautiful  groups.  Pliny  (//.  N.  xxxvi.
4.  §11)  mentions  as  such  Craterus,,  Pythodorus,
Polydectes,  Herraolaus,  a  second  Pythodorus,  Ar-
temon,  and  Aphrodisius  of  Tralles.  (See  the  arti-
cles in  the  Diet  of  Biog.)  In  the  time  of  Nero,
who  did  much  for  the  arts,  we  meet  with  Zeno-
dorus,  a  founder  of  metal  statues,  who  was  com-
missioned by  trie  emperor  to  execute  a  colossal
statue  of  110  feet  high,  representing  Nero  as  the
Sun.  The  work  was  not  completely  executed,  as
the  art  of  using  the  metal  had  fallen  into  oblivion.
In  A.  D.  75  the  statue  was  consecrated  as  a  Sol,
and  was  afterwards  changed  into  a  statue  of  Com-
modus  by  altering  the  head.  (Piin,  H.N.  xxxiv.
18;  Herodian,  i.  15.)  The  principal  sculptured
works  that  were  produced  during  the  empire,  were,
1.  Reliefs  on  public  monuments,  such  as  those
adorning  the  triumphal  arch  of  Titus,  which  repre-
sented the  apotheosis  of  the  emperor,  and  his  tri-
umph over  Judaea.  The  invention  and  grouping
of  the  figures  are  good  and  tasteful,  but  the  exe-
cution is  careless.  The  same  may  be  said  of  the
reliefs  of  the  temple  of  Minerva  in  the  Forum  of
Domitian,  in  which  the  drapery  in  particular  is
very  bad.  2.  Statues  and  busts  of  the  emperors.
These  may  again  be  divided  into  classes,  and  are
easiest  distinguished  by  the  costumes  in  which  they
are  represented.  They  are  (a)  faithful  portraits  in
the  costume  of  ordinary  life  {toga\  or  in  the  attire
of  warriors  {atatuae  thoracatae)  generally  in  an  at-
titude as  if  they  were  addressing  a  body  of  men,  as,
c.  g.  the  colossal  statue  of  Augustus  in  the  palace
(irimani.  To  this  class  also  belong  the  equestrian
statues,  and  the  statues  upon  triumphal  cars  with
from  two  to  six  horses,  and  sometimes  even  with
elephants,  which  were  frequently  made  for  emperors
out  of  mere  vanity,  and  without  there  having  been
any  real  triumph  to  occasion  such  a  work.  (Dion
Cass.  liii.  22  ;  Stat.  Silv.  i.  1  ;  Mart.  ix.  69  ;  Tacit.
(k  Orat  8.  11  ;  Juv.  vii.  126  ;  Plin.  //.  A',  xxxiv.
10.)  b.  Such  statues  as  were  intended  to  show
the  individual  in  an  exalted,  heroic  or  deified
character.  Among  those  were  reckoned  the  so-
called  Achillean  statues,  which  were  first  made  in
the  time  of  Augustus ;  they  were  naked,  and  bore
H  hasta  in  one  hand  (Plin.  //.  N.  xxxiv.  lOj :  and
secondly,  statues  in  a  sitting  position,  with  the
upper  part  of  the  body  naked,  and  a  pallium  co-
vering the  loins.  These  statues  were  intended  to
represent  an  emperor  as  Jupiter,  but  sometimes
also  as  an  Apollo.  (Muller,  Arch.  §  199.)  This
method  of  representing  an  emperor  as  a  god  was
at  first  practised  with  much  good  taste.  The
statues  of  the  ladies  of  the  imperial  families  are
likewise  either  simple  and  faithful  portraits,  or  they
are  idealized  as  goddesses:  specimens  of  each  kind
are  still  extant.  The  custom  adopted  in  the  Mace-
donian time,  of  combining  allegorical  representa-
tions of  towns  and  provinces  with  the  monuments
erected  in  honour  of  the  sovereigns,  was  sometimes
followed  by  the  Romans  also,  and  some  of  them
were  made  by  very  distinguished  artists.  (Strab.
iv.  p.  192;  Miiller,  I.e.)  In  the  reign  of  Trajan
were  executed  the  column  of  Trajan,  with  sculp-
tures representing  the  victories  of  this  emperor
over  the  Dacians,  and  other  similar  works.  We
also  possess  a  beautiful  colossal  statue  of  Nerva
in  the  Vatican,  and  in  the  Louvre  there  is  a  beau-


STATUARIA  ARS.


1069


tiful  statua  thoracata  of  Trajan,  and  several  fine
busts  of  the  same  emperor.

Down  to  the  reign  of  Hadrian  statuary  had  be-
come more  and  more  confined  to  the  representation
of  subjects  of  a  common  nature,  so  that  at  length
we  scarcely  find  anything  else  but  the  records  of
victories  in  the  reliefs  on  the  public  monuments,
and  the  various  kinds  of  statues  of  the  emperors
and  the  members  of  their  families.  But  in  the
reign  of  Hadrian  the  arts  seemed  to  begin  a  new
aera.  He  himself  was  undoubtedly  a  real  lover
and  connoisseur  of  art,  and  he  encouraged  it  not
only  at  Rome,  but  in  Greece  and  Asia  Minor.
The  great  Villa  of  Hadrian  below  Tivoli,  the  ruins
of  which  cover  an  extent  of  ten  Roman  miles  in
circumference,  was  richer  in  works  of  art  than  any
other  place  in  Italy.  Here  more  works  of  art  have
been  dug  out  of  the  ground  than  anywhere  else
within  the  same  compass.  ,  Hadrian  was  fond  of
the  ancient  forms  in  art  as  well  as  in  language,  and
many  works  in  the  archaic  style  still  extant  may
have  been  executed  at  this  time.  Some  statues
made  at  this  time  combine  Egyptian  stiffness  with
Grecian  elegance ;  and,  especially,  the  representa-
tions of  Egyptian  deities,  such  as  that  of  Isis,  are
half  Greek  and  half  Egyptian.  But,  by  the  side  of
this  strange  school,  there  existed  another,  in  which
the  pure  Greek  style  was  cultivated,  and  which  has
produced  works  worthy  of  the  highest  admiration.
Foremost  among  these  stand  the  statues  and  busts
of  Antinous,  for  whom  the  emperor  entertained  a
passionate  partiality,  and  who  was  represented  in
innumerable  works  of  art.  The  colossal  bust  of
Antinous  in  the  Louvre  is  reckoned  one  of  the
finest  works  of  ancient  art,  and  is  placed  by  some
critics  on  an  equality  with  the  best  works  that
Greece  has  produced.  The  two  centaurs  of  black
marble  on  the  Capitol  probably  belong  to  the  reign
of  Hadrian:  one  of  them  is  executed  in  an  old
and  noble  style,  and  is  managed  by  a  little  Eros
riding  on  his  back  ;  the  other  looks  more  like  an
intoxicated  Satyr.  There  are  also  some  very
good  works  in  red  marble  which  are  referred  to
this  period,  as  that  material  is  not  known  to  have
been  used  before  the  age  of  Hadrian.

As  the  arts  had  received  such  encouragement
and  brought  forth  such  fruits  in  the  reign  of  Ha-
drian, the  effects  remained  visible  for  some  time
during  the  reigns  of  the  Antonines.  Antoninus
Pius  built  the  great  villa  at  Lanuvium,  of  which
ruins  are  still  extant,  and  where  many  excellent
works  of  art  have  been  discovered.  But  sophistry
and  pedantic  learning  now  began  to  regard  the  arts
with  the  same  contempt  as  the  ignorance  of  the
Romans  had  formerly  done.  The  frieze  of  a  tem-
ple, which  the  senate  caused  to  be  erected  to
Antoninus  Piws  and  Faustina,  is  adorned  with
griffins  and  vessels  of  very  exquisite  workmanship  ;
but  the  busts  and  statues  of  the  emperors  show  in
many  parts  an  affected  elegance,  while  the  features
of  the  countenance  are  tasteless  and  trivial  copies
of  nature.  The  best  among  the  extant  works  of
this  time  are  the  equestrian  statue  of  M.  Aurelius
of  gilt  bronze,  which  stands  on  the  Capitol,  and
the  column  of  M.  Aurelius  with  reliefs  represent-
ing scenes  of  his  war  against  the  Marcomanni.
The  busts  which  we  possess  of  M.  Aurelius,  Faus-
tina, and  Lucius  Verus,  are  executed  with  very
great  care,  especially  as  regards  the  hair.  The
number  of  extant  busts  of  the  Antonines  amounts
■  to  above  one  hundred ;  and  the  rate  at  which  busts


1070


STATUARIA  ARS.


of  emperors  were  sometimes  multiplied  may  be
inferred  from  the  fact,  tliat  the  senate  sometimes
ordained  tliat  the  bust  of  an  emperor  should  be  in
the  house  of  every  citizen.

After  the  time  of  the  Antonines  the  symptoms
of  decline  in  the  arts  became  more  and  more  visible.
The  most  numerous  works  continued  to  be  busts
and  statues  of  the  emperors,  but  the  best  among
them  are  not  free  from  affectation  and  mannerism.
The  hair,  especially  in  the  representations  of  female
figures,  becomes  gradually  utterly  tasteless,  and
instead  of  the  natural  hair  the  artists  made  it  a
point  to  show  that  it  was  a  large  peruque,  which
in  some  cases  might  be  put  on  and  taken  off  at
pleasure.  [Galerus.]  In  the  time  of  Caracalla
many  statues  were  made,  especially  of  Alexander
the  Great.  Alexander  Severus  was  a  great  ad-
mirer of  statues,  not  from  a  genuine  love  of  art,
but  because  he  deliglited  in  the  representations  of
great  and  good  men.  (Lamprid.  AL  Sev.  25.)  The
reliefs  on  the  triumphal  arch  of  Septimius  Seve-
rus, representing  his  victories  over  the  Parthians,
Arabs,  and  Adiabenians,  have  scarcely  any  artistic
merits.  During  this  time  of  decay  the  custom
arose  of  adorning  sarcophagi  with  figures  in  high
relief,  representing  scenes  from  the  legends  of  De-
meter  and  Dionysus,  and  from  the  heroic  ages  of
Greece,  sometimes  also  the  fable  of  Eros  and
Psyche  :  all  these  contained  allusions  to  the  im-
mortality of  the  soul.  Art,  however,  now  declined
with  great  rapidity:  busts  and  statues  were  more
seldom  made  than  before,  and  are  awkward  and
poor ;  the  iiair  is  frequently  indicated  by  nothing
else  hut  holes  bored  in  the  stone.  The  reliefs  on
the  sarcophagi  gradually  become  monotonous,  life-
less, and  evidently  executed  without  spirit.  The
reliefs  on  the  arch  of  Constantine,  which  are  not
taken  from  that  of  Trajan,  are  perfectly  rude  and
worthless,  and  those  on  the  column  of  Theodosius
Avere  not  better.  Art  in  the  proper  sense  of  the
word  ceased  to  exist;  statues  of  victors  in  the
public  games  continued  to  be  erected  down  to  the
fourth,  and  statues  of  the  emperors  (at  Constanti-
nople) down  to  the  eighth  century  ;  but  at  Rome,
as  at  Constantinople,  those  who  were  honoured  in
this  way  were  more  concerned  about  their  rank
and  dress  being  properly  represented  in  their  sta-
tues, than  about  the  real  artistic  merit  of  the  work.
Statuary  became  mere  manual  labour,  and  required
nothing  but  mechanical  skill.  At  Constantinople,
however,  where  statues  had  been  collected  from
Rome,  Greece,  and  Asia  Minor,  the  events  of
history  allowed  the  plastic  arts  to  die  away  more
gradually  than  in  Italy.

Before  concluding,  it  remains  to  say  a  few  words
on  the  destruction  of  ancient  works  of  art.  During
the  latter  part  of  the  reign  of  Constantine  many
statues  of  the  gods  were  destroyed  and  melted
down,  and  not  long  after  his  time  a  systematic  de-
struction began,  which  under  Theodosius  spread
to  all  parts  of  the  empire.  The  spirit  of  destruc-
tion, however,  was  not  directed  against  works  of
art  in  general  and  as  such,  but  only  against  the
pagan  idols.  The  opinion,  therefore,  which  is  en-
tertained by  some,  that  the  losses  we  have  sustain-
ed in  works  of  ancient  art,  are  mainly  attributable
to  the  introduction  of  Christianity,  is  too  sweeping
and  general.  Of  the  same  character  is  another
opinion,  according  to  which  the  final  decay  of  an-
cient art  was  a  consequence  of  the  spiritual  nature
of  the  new  religion.   The  coincidence  of  the  general


STATUARIA  ARS.

introduction  of  Christianity  with  the  decay  of  the
arts  is  merely  accidental.  That  the  early  Christiana
did  not  despise  the  arts  as  such,  is  clear  from  se-
veral facts.  We  know  that  they  erected  statues  to
their  martyrs,  of  which  we  have  a  specimen  in  that
of  St.  Hippolitus  in  the  Vatican  library  ;  and  it  is
expressly  stated  that  Christians  devoted  themselves
to  the  exercise  of  the  arts.  ( Baronius,  Jw/za/.  ad  A .
303.)  The  numerous  works,  lastly,  which  have
been  found  in  the  Christian  catacombs  at  Rome,
might  alone  be  a  sufficient  proof  that  the  early
Christians  were  not  hostile  towards  the  representa-
tion of  the  heroes  of  their  religion  in  works  of  art.
The  hostility,  such  as  it  appears  in  the  writings  of
Tatian  and  Augustine,  cannot  therefore  have  been
general ;  and,  in  fact,  Christianity  during  the  mid-
dle ages  became  as  much  the  mother  of  the  arts  of
modern  times,  as  the  religion  of  Greece  was  the
mother  of  ancient  art.  Another  very  general  and
yet  incorrect  notion  is,  that  the  northern  barbarians
after  the  conquest  of  Rome  intentionally  destroyed
works  of  art.  This  opinion  is  not  supported  by
any  of  the  contemporary  historians,  nor  is  it  at  all
probable.  The  barbarians  were  only  anxious  to
carry  with  them  the  most  precious  treasures  in
order  to  enrich  themselves ;  a  statue  must  have
been  an  object  of  indifference  to  them.  What
perished,  perished  naturally  by  the  circumstances
and  calamities  of  the  times :  in  times  of  need
bronze  statues  were  melted  down  and  the  material
used  for  other  purposes ;  marble  statues  were  fre-
quently broken  to  pieces  and  used  for  building
materials.  If  we  consider  the  history  of  Rome
during  the  first  centuries  after  the  conquest  of  Italy
by  the  Germans,  we  have  every  reason  to  wonder
that  so  many  specimens  of  ancient  art  have  come
down  to  our  times.

The  greatest  destruction,  at  one  time,  of  ancient
works  of  art  is  supposed  to  have  occurred  at  the
taking  of  Constantinople,  in  the  beginning  of  the
thirteenth  century.  The  collection  of  statues  had
been  made  with  great  care,  and  their  number  had
accumulated  to  an  amount  which  seems  quite  sur-
prising when  it  is  considered  how  long  a  time  had
elapsed  since  art  had  been  encouraged  or  protected.
At  the  period  alluded  to  we  are  told  that  some  of
the  finest  works  of  the  ancient  masters  were  pur-
posely destroyed  ;  either  in  mere  wantonness,  or
with  the  view  of  turning  the  material  into  money,
or  for  sale  to  the  metal  founders  for  the  value
of  the  bronze.  Among  the  few  works  saved  from
this  devastation  are  the  celebrated  bronze  horses
which  now  decorate  the  exterior  of  St.  Mark's
church  at  Venice.  They  have  been  ascribed,  but
without  sufficient  authority,  to  Lysippus.

The  finest  collection  of  ancient  bronzes  is  in  the
Museo  Borbonico  at  Naples.  They  have  been
found  chiefly  in  the  ruins  of  Herculaneum  and
Pompeii,  and  among  them  are  some  examples  of
great  skill  and  beauty.  A  few  of  the  heads  offer
peculiarities  in  the  treatment  of  the  hair,  the  small
corkscrew  curls,  and  the  ends  of  the  beards  being
formed  of  separate  pieces  of  metal  fastened  on.
Several  of  the  statues  have  the  eyes  of  paste,  and
of  stones,  or  sometimes  of  a  different  metal  from
the  material  of  the  rest  of  the  work.  Silver  was
often  united  with  bronze.  Cicero  (  Verr.  iv.  43)
mentions  a  statue  of  Apollo  aeneus,  aijus  infemore
litterulis  minutis  arf/enteis  nome7i  Myronis  erat  iti'
scriptum.  In  a  bronze  statue,  of  a  youth,  in  the
collection  at  Paris,  ar^  the  remains  of  a  Greek


STILUS.

inscription  in  silver  letters.  They  are  inserted
into  the  left  foot.  The  Museo  Boibonico  possesses
some  examples  of  inlaid  silver  work.  There  are
also  instances  of  it  in  the  collection  of  bronzes  in
the  British  Museum.  Many  of  the  examples  of
bronze  works  that  have  reached  us  exhibit  signs
of  having  been  gilt,  and  the  writers  of  antiquity
refer  occasionally  to  the  practice.  It  does  not
seem  to  have  been  employed  till  taste  had  much
deteriorated  ;  probably  when  the  value  and  rich-
ness of  the  material  were  more  highly  estimated
than  the  excellence  of  the  workmanship.  Nero
conmninded  a  statue  of  Alexander,  the  work  of
Lysippus,  to  be  gilt ;  but  Pliny  (//.  A',  xxxiv.  19.
§  6)  tells  us  it  was  found  to  injure  the  be.iuty
and  effect  of  the  work,  and  the  gold  was  removed.
(Winckelmann,  Gesch.  der  Kmist;  Meyer,  Gesck.
der  bildenden  Kunste  bei  den  GriecJien ;  F.  Thiersch,
[feljer  die  Epochen  der  bildenden  Kunst  iinter  den
Grieclien;  K.  0.  Miiller,  Handbuch  der  Archaeo-
logie  der  Kunst,  2nd  ed.  1835,  3d  ed.  with  notes
by  Welcker,  1848.)  [L.  S.]

STELAE  (o-TTJAai).     [FuNus,  p.  556,  b.]
STELLATU'RAE.     [Exercitus,  p.  505,  a.]
STHE'NIA  (crdevia)^  a  festival  with  contests
celebrated  by  the  Argives  in  honour  of  Zeus  sur-
named  Sthenius,  who  had  an  altar  consisting  of  a
large   rock   in  the   neighbourhood   of   Hermione.
(Hesych.  s.  v.  ^deyia :  compare  Pans.  ii.  32.  §  7,
34.  §6.)      Plutarch  (de  Mus.  p.  1140,  c.)   states
that  the  ttciAtj  or  wrestling,  which  formed  a  part  of
the  contests  at  this  festival,  was  accompanied  by
the  flute  ;  and  he  also  mentions  a  tradition  ac-
cording to  which  the  festival  had  originally  been
held  in  honour  of  Danaus,  and  that  it  was  after-
wards consecrated  to  Zeus  Sthenius.         [L.  S.]
STIBA'DTUM.     [Mensa.]
STILLICPDIUM.  [Servitutes,  p.  1031,  b.l
STILUS  or  STYLUS  is  in  all  probability  the
same  word  with  the  Greek  (TtvXos,  and  conveys
the  general    idea   of  an  object  tapering  like  an
architectural  column.     It  signifies,

1.  An  iron  instrument  (Ovid.  Met.  ix.  521  ;
Martial,  xiv.  21),  resembling  a  pencil  in  size  and
shape,  used  for  writing  upon  waxed  tablets.  (Plaut.
Bacch.  iv.  4.  63;  Plin.^.  N.  xxxiv.  14.)  At  one
end  it  was  sharpened  to  a  point  for  scratching  the
characters  upon  the  wax  (Quintil.  i.  1.  §  27),  while
the  other  end  being  flat  and  circular  served  to
render  the  surface  of  the  tablets  smooth  again,  and
so  to  obliterate  what  had  been  written.  Thus,
vertere  stilum  means  to  erase,  and  hence  to  correct,
as  in  the  well-known  precept  saepe  stilum  vertas.
{Yiov.Sat.  i.  10.  72;  Cic.  Verr.  ii.  41.)  The
stylus  was  also  termed  graphium  (Ovid.  Amor.  i.
11.  23  ;  Suet.  Jul.  82 ),  and  the  case  in  which  it
was  kept  graphiarium  (Martial,  xiv.  21)  or  graphi-
siria  theca.  (Suet.  Claud.  35.)    The  annexed  cut  is


STIPENDIUM.


1071


from   a  picture   found   in   Herculaneum.     (Mus.
Borbon.  vol.  vi.  tav.  35.)

2.  A  sharp  stake  or  spike  placed  in  pitfalls  be-
fore an  entrenchment  to  embarrass  the  progress  of
an  attacking  enemy.  {Bell.  African.  31  ;  Sil.  Ital.
x.  415.)  It  was  intended  to  answer  the  same
purpose  as  the  contrivances  called  cippi,  lilia,  and
stimuli  by  Caesar  {B.  G.  vii.  73).

3.  A  bronze  needle  or  rod  for  picking  worms  off
fruit-trees  (Pallad.  iv,  10.  §  20),  also  a  wooden
probe  employed  in  gardening  operations.  (Colu-
mell.  xi.  3.  §  53.)

It  bears  also  the  meaning  of  the  stem  of  a  tree
or  vegetable  (Columell.  v.  10.  §  21,  xi.  3.  §  46),
which    is    perhaps    the   primary   signification  of

(TTVXOS.  [W.  R.]

STIPENDIA'RII.  The  Stipendiariae  urbes  of
the  Roman  provinces  were  so  denominated,  as  being
subject  to  the  payment  of  a  fixed  money  tribute,
"  stipendium,"  in  contradistinction  to  the  vecti-
gales,  who  paid  a  certain  portion,  as  a  tenth  or
twentieth  of  the  produce  of  their  lands,  their
cattle,  or  customs.  The  word  "  stipendium  "  was
used  to  signify  the  tribute  paid,  as  it  was  origin-
ally imposed  for  and  afterwards  appropriated  to  the
purpose  of  furnishing  the  Roman  soldiers  with  pay
{stipendium,  Liv.  iv.  60;  Tacit.  Hist.  iv.  74).  The
condition  of  the  urbes  stipendiariae  is  generallj'-
thought  to  have  been  more  honourable  than  that  of
the  vectigales,  but  the  distinction  between  the  two
terms  was  not  always  observed.  (Liv.  xxxvii.  35.)
The  word  stipendiarius  is  also  applied  to  a  person
who  receives  a  fixed  salary  or  pay,  as  a  "  stipen-
diarius miles  "  (Hirtius,  de  Bell.  Afric.  43),  a  phrase
which  is  sometimes  used  to  denote  a  veteran  who
has  received  pay  for  many  years,  or  served  in  many
campaigns.  (Veget.  de  Re  Milit.  i.  18.)  Some
MSS.  have  stipendiosus  in  the  passage  last  quoted,
which  is  perhaps  a  better  reading.  (Gbttling,  Gesch.
der  R'6m.  Sfaatsverf.  p.  418.)  [R.  W.]

STIPE'NDIUM,  a  pension  or  pay,  from  stipem
and  pendo,  because  before  silver  was  coined  at
Rome  the  copper  money  in  use  was  paid  by  weight
and  not  by  tale.  (Varro,  L.  L.  v.  182,  ed.  Miiller  ;
Plin.  H.  N.  XXX.  3.)  According  to  Livy  the  prac-
tice of  giving  pay  to  the  Roman  soldiers  {ut  stipen-
dium miles  de  publico  acciperet)  was  not  introduced
till  B.  c.  405,  on  the  occasion  of  the  taking  of
Tarracina  or  Anxur.  He  represents  the  change  as
the  spontaneous  and  unsolicited  act  of  the  senate,
but  from  another  passage  (iv.  36)  we  learn  that  in
the  year  421  B.  c.  the  tribunes  had  proposed  that
the  occupiers  of  the  public  land  should  pay  their
vedigal  regularly,  and  that  it  should  be  devoted  to
the  payment  of  the  troops.  The  concession  was
probably  accelerated  by  the  prospect  of  the  last
war  with  Veil,  and  made  with  a  view  of  conciliating
the  plebs,  who  without  seme  such  favour  would  in
their  then  humour  have  refused  to  vote  for  the  war.
Livy  also  represents  the  funds  for  the  payment  to
have  been  raised  by  a  tributum  or  general  tax,  but
as  Arnold  observes  {Hist,  of  Rome,  vol.  i.  p.  369  ;
compare  Niebuhr,  vol.  ii.  p.  440),  "  The  vectigal,  or
tithe,  due  from  the  occupiers  of  the  public  land,
was  to  provide  pay  for  the  soldiers  ;  and  if  this
were  not  sufficient,  it  was  to  be  made  good  by  a
tax  or  tribute  levied  upon  the  whole  people.  This
tithe,  however,  was  probably  paid  verj'  irregularlj-,
and  hence  the  pay  of  the  soldiers  would  in  point
of  fact  be  provided  chiefly  out  of  the  tributum."
A  few  years  after  this  concession  (b.  c.  403),  aiul


1072


STIPENDIUM.


during  the  hostilities  against  Veii,  a  certain  amount
of  pay  was  assigned  {certus  nuinerus  aeiis  est  as-
signatics^  Liv.  v.  7)  to  the  knight  also.  [Equitks,
p.  472,  a.]  Livy,  however,  seems  to  be  here  speak-
ing of  the  citizens  who  possessed  an  equestrian  for-
tune, but  had  no  horse  {eqnus  publicus)  assigned  to
them  by  the  state.  For  it  had  always  been  cus-
tomary for  the  knights  of  the  18  centuries  to  re-
ceive pay  out  of  the  common  treasury,  in  the  shape
of  an  allowance  for  the  purcliase  of  a  horse,  and  a
yearly  pension  of  2000  asses  for  its  keep.  [Aes
Equkstre;  AesHordearium.]  HenceNiebuhr
(vol.  i.  p.  474,  and  vol.  ii,  p.  441)  doubts  the  accu-
racy of  the  account  which  is  given  by  Livy  (iv.
.59),  and  observes  that  '*  the  Veientine  war  cannot
liave  been  the  occasion  on  which  the  practice  of
giving  pay  to  the  troops  was  first  established :  the
aerarii  must  undoubtedly  have  always  continued
to  pay  pensions  {capita)  to  the  infantry,  in  the
same  way  as  single  women  and  minors  did  to  the
knights :  and  the  change  consisted  in  this,  that
every  legionary  now  became  entitled  to  pay,
whereas  the  number  of  pensioners  had  previously
been  limited  by  that  of  the  persons  liable  to  be
charged  with  them  ;  and  hence  the  deficiency  was
supplied  out  of  the  aerarium,  from  the  produce  of
the  vectigal,  and  when  this  failed,  by  a  tribute
levied  even  from  those  plebeians  who  were  them-
selves bound  to  serve."  Consequently  the  tribunes
murmured  that  the  tribute  was  only  imposed  for
the  sake  of  ruining  the  plebs.  (Liv.  iv.  GO.)
In  support  of  his  opinion  Niebuhr  {I.e.)  advances
arguments  which  at  least  make  it  very  probable
that  the  "  paternal  legislation  "  of  Servius  TuUius
provided  for  the  pay  of  the  infantry  in  the  manner
mentioned ;  but  even  admitting  this,  the  practice
might  have  been  discontinued  so  as  to  justify  the
statement  made  on  this  subject  by  Livy.  We
have  not  space  to  repeat  or  discuss  those  argu-
ments here,  and  therefore  simply  refer  to  vol.  i.
p.  374,  and  vol.  ii.  p.  441,  of  his  History.  Accord-
ing to  Polybius  (vi.  37)  the  daily  pay  of  a  legionary
amounted,  in  his  time,  to  two  oboli,  which,  as  he
makes  a  drachma  equivalent  to  a  denarius,  and  a
denarius  in  paying  the  soldiers  was  then  estimated
at  ten  asses  (Plin.  /.  c),  and  not  at  sixteen,  as  was
usual  in  other  money  transactions,  gives  3^  asses  a
day,  or  i  00  a  month.  Now  the  yearly  pension  of
the  knights  (1000  asses),  observes  Niebuhr,  gives,
if  we  take  the  old  year  of  10  months,  200  asses  a
month :  just  double  the  pay  of  the  foot  soldiers.
In  later  times  the  knights  received  triple  pay  {tri-
plex stipendium  merebani).  This  allowance  was
first  established  by  the  military  tribune  Cn.  Corne-
lius Cossus  (400  B.  c),  and  according  to  Niebuhr
was  then  designed  as  a  compensation  to  those
who  served  with  their  own  horses  ;  it  did  not
become  the  general  custom  till  some  time  after-
wards.  Polybius  (vi.  37)  thus  speaks  of  the  sti-
pendium of  his  day,  which  he  calls  oy^dsviov.,  as
St.  Luke  (iii.  14)  also  does.  *'  The  foot  soldier
receives  as  pay  two  oboli  a  day  :  the  centurion
twice  as  much  :  the  horseman  a  drachma  or  dena-
rius. The  foot  soldiers  also  receive  in  corn  every
month  an  allowance  {demensum)  of  g-  of  an  Attic
medimnus  or  about  2  bushels  of  wheat :  the  horse-
men 7  medimni  of  barley  and  2  of  wheat.  The
infantry  of  the  allies  receive  the  same  allowance
{(Tiroixirpovvrai)  as  the  Roman  :  the  horsemen  1  ^
medimni  of  wheat  and  5  of  barley.  But  there  is
this  difference,  that  the  allied  forces  receive  their


STIPENDIUM.

allowances  as  a  gratuity ;  the  Roman  soldiers,  on
the  contrary,  have  deducted  from  their  pay  the
money  value  of  whatever  they  receive,  in  corn,
armour  or  clothes."  There  was  indeed  a  law  passed
by  C.  Gracchus  (Pint.  C.  Graccli.  5)  which  provided
that  besides  their  pay  the  soldiers  should  receive
from  the  treasury  an  allowance  for  clothes ;  but
from  Tacitus  {Ann.  i.  17)  this  law  seems  either  to
have  been  repealed  or  to  have  fallen  into  disuse
The  two  oboli  of  Polybius,  which  we  make  equal
to  3^-  asses,  are  reckoned  by  Plautus  in  round  num-
bers at  3  asses.  Thus  he  says  {Most.  ii.  1.  10),
"  Isti  qui  trium  nummorum  causa  subeunt  sub
falas."  This  amount  was  doubled  for  the  legion-
aries by  Julius  Caesar  (Sueton.  Jul.  Caes.  26)  be-
fore the  civil  war.  He  also  gave  them  corn  wlien-
ever  he  had  the  means,  without  any  restrictions
{sine  modo  mensuraque).  Under  Augustus  (Suet.
Atu/.  49  ;  Tacit.  I.  c.)  it  appears  to  have  been
raised  to  10  asses  a  day  (three  times  the  original
sum),  or  300  a  month,  or  1200  in  four  months.
Now  as  the  original  amount  of  their  pay  had  been
tripled,  the  soldiers  could  not  complain  if  the  de-
narius were  reckoned  at  16  asses  in  payments
made  to  themselves,  as  well  as  other  persons  ;  and
taking  this  value,  the  1200  asses  amount  to  ex-
actly 3  aurei,  or  3  x  400  asses.  This  sum  then
was  considered  as  an  unit,  and  called  stipendium.,
being  paid  three  times  a  year.  Hence  Suetonius
sa^-s  of  Domitian  {Do7n.  7)  :  "  Addidit  et  quartum
stipendium,  ternos  aureos : "  a  fact  which  Zonaras
{Ann.  ii.  p.  196)  otherwise  expresses  by  stating,
that  instead  of  75  drachmae  {i.  e.  denarii)  Domi-
tian gave  the  soldiers  100,  i.  e.  he  made  an  addi-
tion of  25  denarii  or  1  aureus  to  their  pay.  The
expression  of  Suetonius  supposes  that  3  aurei  were
paid  every  quarter  instead  of  every  four  months,
a^er  the  addition  made  by  Domitian  ;  that  of
Zonaras  implies,  that  4  aurei  instead  of  3  were
paid,  as  before,  every  three  months,  the  annual
amount  being  the  same  either  way,  and  the  quar-
terly or  four  months'  instalment  of  3  or  4  aurei
being  called  a  stipendium.  Niebuhr's  (vol.  ii.  p.
443)  statement  on  this  subject  is  only  partially
correct  or  else  obscure  :  at  any  rate,  if  the  soldiers
received  10  asses  a  day  they  must  have  received
more  than  1 200  a  year.

The  Praetorian  cohorts  received  twice  as  much
as  the  legionaries.  (Tacit.  I.  c.)  The  pay  of  the
tribunes  is  not  known ;  but  it  was  considered  very
great  ( Juven.  iii.  1 32),  and  probably  was  not  less
than  48  aurei  per  annum,  after  the  time  of  Domi-
tian. We  must  not  omit  to  mention  that  if  his
pay  were  withheld  the  Roman  soldier  was  allowed
by  an  old  unwritten  custom  to  distrain  the  goods
( per  pifpioris  capionem)  of  the  officer  whose  duty
it  was  to  supply  it.  The  eques  was  allowed  the
same  privilege  against  the  persons  who  were  bound
to  furnish  him  with  the  aes  equestre,  for  the  pur-
chase of  his  horse,  and  the  aes  hordearium  for  its
keep.     (Gains,  lib.  iv.  §  26 — 28.)

From  an  expression  which  Livy  (v,  4)  puts
into  the  mouth  of  a  patrician  orator,  it  might  be
supposed  that  the  soldiers  always  received  a  full
year's  pjiy,  independent  of  the  length  of  their  ser-
vice. This,  however,  seems  so  unreasonable,  that
we  cannot  but  agree  with  Niebuhr  in  supposing
that  the  historian  was  misled  by  the  custom  of  his
own  time,  when  a  full  year  had  long  been  the  sti-
pulated term  of  a  soldier's  pay  as  well  as  of  his
service.  [R.  W.j


STRATEGUS.

STIPULATIO,  STIPULA'TOR.  [Obliga-
TioNEs,  pp.  817,  b,  818,  a.]

STIVA.     [Aratrum.]

STOA.     [PoRTicus.]

STOICHEION.     [HoROLOGiuM.]

STOLA,  vas  a  female  dress  wom  over  the
tunic  ;  it  came  as  low  as  the  ankles  or  feet  {ad  talos
stola  demissa,  Hon  Sat.  i.  2.  .99),  and  was  fastened
round  the  body  by  a  girdle,  leaving  above  the
breast  broad  folds  (rugosiorem  stola /ro7ztem,  Mart,
iii.  93.  4).  The  tunic  did  not  reach  much  below
the  knee,  but  the  essential  distinction  between  the
tunic  and  stola  seems  to  have  been,  that  the  latter
always  had  an  Instita  or  flounce  sewed  to  the
bottom  and  reaching  to  the  instep.  (Hor.  Sat.  i.  2.
29  ;  Ovid.  Ar.  Amat.  i.  32.)  Over  the  Stola  the
Palla  or  Pallium  was  worn  [Pallium],  as  we^see
in  the  cut  annexed.     (Mus.  Dorbon.  iii.  tav.  37.)


STRATEGUS.


1073


The  stola  seems  to  have  been  usually  fastened
over  the  shoulder  by  a  Fibula  or  clasp,  and  gene-
rally had  sleeves,  but  not  always.

The  Stola  was  the  characteristic  dress  of  the
Roman  matrons  as  the  toga  was  of  the  Roman
men.  (Cic.  Phil.  ii.  18.)  Hence  the  meretrices
were  not  allowed  to  wear  it,  but  only  a  dark-
coloured  toga  (Tibull.  iv.  10.  3 ;  Mart.  i.  36.  8)  ;
and  accordingly  Horace  {Sat.  i.  2.  63)  speaks  of
the  matrona  in  contradistinction  to  the  togata..  For
the  same  reason  women,  who  had  been  divorced
from  their  husbands  on  account  of  adultery,  were
not  allowed  to  wear  the  Stola,  but  only  the  toga
(Schol.  ad  Hor.  I.  c.)  :  to  which  Martial  alludes
(ii.  39,  vi.  64.  4).  See  Becker,  Gallus,  vol.  i.  p.
321,  &c.

STRA'GULUM.  [Tapes.]
STRATE'GUS  {a-rpar-nyds).  The  office  and
title  of  Strategus,  or  General,  seem  to  have  been
more  especially  peculiar  to  the  democratic  states  of
ancient  Greece :  we  read  of  them,  for  instance,  at
Athens,  Tarentum,  Syracuse,  Argos,  and  Thurii  ;
and  when  the  tyrants  of  the  Ionian  cities  in  Asia
Minor  were  deposed  by  Aristagoras,  he  established
Strategi  in  their  room,  to  act  as  chief  magistrates.
(Herod,  v.  38.)

The  Strategi  at  Athens  were  instituted  after  the
remodelling  of  the  constitution  by  Cleisthenes,  to
discharge  the  duties  which  had  in  former  times
been  performed  either  by  the  king  or  the  Archon
Polemarchus.  They  were  ten  in  number,  one  for
each  of  the  ten  tribes,  and  chosen  by  the  suffrages
(X^'porovla)  of  the  people.  (Pollux,  viii.  87.)
Before  entering  on  their  duties,  they  were  required


to  submit  to  a  SoKifmaia,  or  examination  of  their
character  (Lysias,  c.  Alcib.  144);  and  no  one  v.as
eligible  to  the  office  unless  he  had  legitimate  ch'l-
dren,  and  was  possessed  of  landed  property  in  At-
tica. (Dinarch.  c.  Demosth.  99.)  They  were,  as
their  name  denotes,  entrusted  with  the  command
on  military  expeditions,  with  the  superintendence
of  all  warlike  preparations,  and  with  the  regulation
of  all  matters  in  any  way  connected  with  the  war
department  of  the  state.  They  levied  and  enlisted
the  soldiers  (KaTeAelav),  either  personally  or  with
the  assistance  of  the  Taxiarchs.  (Lysias,  c.  Alcib.
140,  j)ro  Milit.  114.)  They  were  entrusted  with
the  collection  and  management  of  the  slacpopai,  or
property  taxes  raised  for  the  purposes  of  war  ;  and
also  presided  over,  or  officiated  as  ElaayooyeTs  in
the  courts  of  justice  in  which  any  disputes  con-
nected with  this  subject  or  the  trierarchy  were  de-
cided. (Wolf,  ad  Lept.  p.  94  ;  Dem.  c.  Lacr.  940.
16.)  They  also  nominated  from  year  to  year  per-
sons to  serve  as  trierarchs  (Dem.  c.Doeot.  i.  997;
Xenoph.  de  Rep.  Athen.  3),  and  took  cognizance
of  the  cases  of  Antidosis  arising  out  of  the  trie-
rarchy and  property  taxes  {iTroiovv  ras  ai/riSoaeis,
c.Phaenip.  1040.)  They  also  presided  at  courts -
irartial  and  at  the  trials  in  cases  of  accusation  fur
non-performance  of  military  and  naval  duties.
[AsTRATEiAS  and  Anaumachiou  Graphae.]
They  likewise  had  the  power  of  convening  extra-
ordinary assemblies  of  the  people  in  cases  of  emer-
gency [EccLESiA,  pp.  440,  b,  441,  a],  and  from
the  instance  of  Pericles  it  would  always  seem  that
in  critical  times  they  had  the  power  of  preventing
an  assembly  being  holden.  (Thucyd.  ii.  22.)  But
their  most  important  trust  was  the  command  in
war,  and  it  depended  upon  circumstances  to  how
many  of  the  number  it  was  given.  At  Marathon
all  the  ten  were  present,  and  the  chief  command
came  to  each  of  them  in  turn.  The  Archon  Pole-
marchus also  was  there  associated  with  them,  and
according  to  the  ancient  custom,  his  vote  in  a
council  of  war  was  equal  to  that  of  any  of  the
generals.  (Herod,  vi.  109.)  In  the  expedition
against  Samos,  also,  all  the  ten  generals  were  en-
gaged (Thucyd.  i.  116),  the  poet  Sophocles  being
one  of  the  number  (Miiller,  Literature  of  Ancient
Greece,  p.  338)  ;  but  it  was  obvious  that  in  most
cases  it  would  be  neither  convenient  nor  useful  to
send  out  the  whole  number  on  the  same  under-
taking, and  during  the  coiu-se  of  a  protracted  war
it  would  be  necessary  for  some  of  them  to  be  left
at  home,  in  charge  of  the  war  department  there.
Accordingly,  in  the  best  times  of  Athens,  three
only  were  for  the  most  part  sent  out  ;  one  of  these
{rpiros  avT6s)  was  considered  as  the  commander-
in-chief,  but  his  colleagues  had  an  equal  voice  in
a  council  of  war.  Sometimes  a  strategus,  as
Pericles,  was  vested  with  extraordinary  powers
(Thucyd.  ii.  65)  :  in  like  manner,  the  three  ge-
nerals engaged  in  the  Sicilian  expedition,  Nicias,
Alcibiades,  and  Lamarchus,  were  made  avroKpd-
Topes,  or  supreme  and  independent  in  all  matters
connected  with  it.  (Thucyd.  vi.  8,  26.)  So  also
was  Aristides  in  his  command  at  Plataeae.  But
even  in  ordinary  cases  the  Athenian  generals  were
not  fettered  in  the  conduct  of  a  campaign  by  any
council  of  war,  or  other  controlling  authority,  as
the  Spartan  kings  sometimes  were  ;  still  they  were
responsible  for  it,  and  in  the  time  of  Demosthenes
{Philip,  i.  53)  exposed  on  the  termination  of  their
command  to  capital  indictment  at  the  caprice  oi
3«


1074


STRATEGUS.


the  people,  or  from  the  malevolence  of  personal
enmity,  (c.  Mid.  535,  c.  Arisfocr.  676.)  Even
Pericles  himself  (Thucyd.  ii.  65)  was  fined  by  the
people  for  imputed  mismanagement,  but  really  be-
cause the  Athenians  were  disappointed  in  their
expectations.

In  the  times  of  Chabrias  and  Phocion,  however,
the  greater  part  of  the  generals  regularly  remained
at  home  to  conduct  the  processions,  &c.,  as  the
citizens  did  to  enjoy  them,  leaving  their  wars  to
be  conducted  by  mercenaries  and  their  leaders.
(Demosth,  PML  i.  47.  12.)  Some  of  them  too  were
not  commanders  of  all  the  troops,  but  only  of  the
horse  and  foot  of  separate  armies  {(TTpaTrj'yhs  6  iirl
Tuu  ottKwv  or  birXnwv^  and  6  eVl  ru>v  iinrfuv)  :
and  one  of  them,  the  general  of  the  administration
(o  eVt  TTJs  Stot/crjoreojs),  performed  part  of  the  judi-
cial labours  of  the  strategi,  and  other  civil  services,
such  as  that  of  giving  out  the  pay  of  the  troops.
(Bockh,  Fubl.  Econ.  of  Athens,  p.  181,  2d  ed.  ;
Dem.  pro  Coron.  265.  11.)  We  must  also  re-
member that  the  Athenian  navy  as  well  as  the
army  was  commanded  by  the  Strategi,  whence  the
"  praetoria  navis  "  or  flag-ship  is  called  o-Tparrjyis
vavs.  (Hermann,  Lehrbitch  der  griech.  Staatsalt.
§152.)

The  strategi  at  Athens  were  perhaps  the  most
important  officers  of  the  republic,  especially  during
war ;  and  amongst  them  are  numbered  some  of  her
most  distinguished  citizens,  Miltiades,  Themistocles,
Pericles,  Phocion,  «Scc.  But  the  generals  of  the
early  times  differed  in  many  respects  from  the  con-
temporaries of  Demosthenes.  Formerly  the  general
and  the  statesman  were  united  in  one  person  ;  the
leader  in  the  field  was  the  leader  in  the  assembly,
and  thus  acquired  a  double  influence,  accompanied
with  a  double  responsibility.  But  in  later  times,
the  general  and  the  professed  orator  or  statesman
were  generally  perfectly  distinct  (Isocr.  de  Pace,
173),  and  the  latter,  as  ought  always  to  be  the  case
in  free  states,  had  by  far  the  greater  influence.
The  last  of  the  Athenian  generals  who  was  con-
sidered to  unite  the  two  characters,  was  Phocion,
who  was  general  no  less  than  forty-five  times.
(Plut.  Fhoc.  5.)  Accordingly  the  various  parties
into  which  the  state  was  then  divided  had  each
their  orator  and  general,  the  former  acting  as  a
recognized  leader  (Demosth.  Ol^n.  ii.  26)  ;  and  a
general,  when  absent  on  foreign  expeditions,  was
liable  to  be  maligned  or  misrepresented  to  the
people  by  an  unfriendly  and  influential  demagogue.
(Demosth.  de  Cherson.  97.  12.)  Hence  we  cannot
wonder  that  the  generals  of  the  age  of  Demosthenes
were  neither  so  patriotic  nor  so  distinguished  as
those  of  former  times,  more  especially  when  we
call  to  mind,  that  they  were  often  the  commanders
of  mercenary  troops,  and  not  of  citizens,  whose
presence  might  have  checked  or  animated  them.
Moreover,  they  suffered  in  moral  character  by  the
contamination  of  the  mercenary  leaders  with  whom
they  were  associated.  The  necessity  they  were
under  of  providing  their  hired  soldiers  with  pay,
habituated  them  to  the  practice  of  levying  exac-
tions from  the  allies ;  the  sums  thus  levied  were
not  strictly  accounted  for,  and  what  should  have
been  applied  to  the  service  of  the  state  was  fre-
quently spent  by  men  like  Chares  upon  their  own
pleasures,  or  in  the  purchase  of  a  powerful  orator.
(Thirl wall.  Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  v.  p.  214.)  An-
other effect  of  the  separation  of  the  two  characters,
was  that  the  responsibility  of  the  general  and  of


STRATORES.

the  orator  or  minister  was  lessened,  and  it  was  in
most  cases  easy  for  a  general  to  purchase  an  appa-
rently disinterested  advocacy  of  his  conduct.  There
was  this  further  abuse  connected  with  the  system,
that  according  to  Isocrates  {de  Pace,  168),  military
command  was  so  much  coveted,  that  the  election
of  generals  was  often  determined  by  the  most  pro-
fligate bribery.

The  most  eminent  generals  of  the  time  of  De-
mosthenes were  Timotheus,  Chabrias,  Iphicrates,
and  Diopithes  :  Chares  and  Lysicles  were  inferior
to  them  both  in  loyalty  and  skill,  but  the  former
and  the  mercenary  Charidcmus  were  frequently
employed.  Towards  the  decline  of  the  Roman
empire  the  chief  magistrate  at  Athens  was  called
'S,TpaT(]'y6s,  or  the  Duke :  Constantino  bestowed
on  him  the  title  of  Me7as  '2,raTi]y6s  or  the  Grand
Duke.  (Julian.  Orat.  i.)  The  military  chiefs  of
the  Aetolian  and  Achaean  leagues  were  also  called
Strategi.  The  Achaean  Strategi  had  the  power
of  convening  a  general  assembly  of  the  league  on
extraordinary  occasions.  [Achaicum  Foedus,
p.5,b.]  [R.  W.]

STRATO'RES.  1.  Imperial  Equerries  subject
to  the  Tribunus  Stabuli.  Their  proper  duty,  as
the  name  imports,  was  to  saddle  the  horses  ;  they
also  led  them  from  the  stable  and  assisted  the
emperor  to  mount.  Hence  they  were  termed  in
Greek  ava€o\e7s.  From  the  addition  of  miles  to
their  title  it  appears  that  they  were  considered  as
part  of  the  military  establishment.  (Spartian,
Caracall.  7;  Amm.  Marc.  xxx.  5  ;  see  Ducange,
s.  u.)  Consuls  and  praetors  had  their  stratores
as  we  learn  from  inscriptions  (Orell.  Inscr.  n.  798,
3250,  3523),  and  perhaps  aediles  also.  (Orell.
n.  1584.)

2.  Officers  sent  into  the  provinces  to  select
horses  for  the  stud  of  the  prince  or  for  the  general
service  of  the  state.  (Amm.  Marc.  xxix.  3  ;  Cod.
Thcod.  8.  tit.  8.  s.  4  ;  Cod.  12.  tit.  25  ;  Salmas.
ad  Capitolin.  M.  Atitonin.  8,  ad  Trehell.  Poll.  Fa-
lerian.  3.)  These  in  all  probability  belonged  to
the  same  body  with  those  mentioned  above  ;  the
title  stratores  a  publicis  rationibus,  by  which  they
are  usually  distinguished  in  works  upon  Roman
antiquities,  rests  upon  no  authority  except  the
letters  STR.  A.P.R.  in  an  inscription  (Gruter,  p.
DLxix.  n.  8),  the  interpretation  of  which  is  very
doubtful.

3.  Jailors  under  the  orders  of  the  Commenta-
riensis  or  Chief  Inspector  of  Prisons.  (Cod.  Theod,
9.  tit.  3.  s.  1.)  To  these  Ulpian  refers  (Dig.  1.
tit.  16.  s.  4),  "  nemo  proconsulum  stratores  suos
habere  potest,  sed  vice  eorum  milites  ministcrio
in  provinciis  funguntur,"  although  the  passage  is
quoted  in  most  dictionaries  as  bearing  upon  the
stratores  of  the  stable.  (Compare  the  Notitia  Dig-
nitaium  Imperii  Orientis,  c.  13  and  c.  101  in  Grae-
vii  Thes.  Rom.  Antiq.  vol.  vii.  p.  1375  and  p.  1606.)

4.  In  the  later  Latin  writers  and  especially  in
the  monkish  historians  of  the  middle  ages,  stratores
denote  a  chosen  body  of  soldiers  sent  in  advance  of
an  army  to  explore  the  country,  to  determine  the
proper  line  of  march,  to  select  the  spots  best  fitted
for  encamping,  and  to  make  all  the  arrangements
necessary  for  the  safety  and  comfort  of  the  troops
when  they  halted,  their  duties  being  in  some  re-
spects analogous  to  those  of  the  classical  metatorcs,
and  in  others  to  those  of  a  modem  corps-de-guidcs.
(Symmach.  Epist.  ad  TJieod.  et  Valent.  1  ;  Diu
cange,  s.  v.)


SUBLIGACULUM.

5,  We  find  in  an  inscription  the  words  Dio-
MEDKS  Ap.  Stratoh,  which  is  generally  under-
stood to  commemorate  the  labours  of  some  individual
in  paving  the  Appian  Way,  and  mention  is  made
of  stratores  of  this  description  in  another  inscrip-
tion found  at  Mayence.  (Orell.  n.  1450  ;  compare
Fuchs,  Geschichte  von  Mainz.)  [W.  R.]

STRENA,  a  present  given  on  a  festive  day  and
for  the  sake  of  good  omen  (Festus,  s.  v.),  whence  a
good  omen  is  called  by  Plautus  bona  strena.  {Stick.
V.  2.  24.)  It  was  however  chiefly  applied  to  a  new
year's  gift,  to  a  present  made  on  the  Calends  of
January.  In  accordance  with  a  Senatusconsultum
new  year's  gifts  had  to  be  presented  to  Augustus
in  the  Capitol,  even  when  he  was  absent.  ( Suet.
Aug.  57  ;  comp.  Dion  Cass.  liv.  35.)  The  person
who  received  such  presents  was  accustomed  to
make  others  in  return  {strenarum  commercium)  ;
but  Tiberius,  who  did  not  like  the  custom  on  ac-
count of  the  trouble  it  gave  him  and  also  of  the  ex-
pense in  making  presents  in  return,  frequently  left
Rome  at  the  beginning  of  January,  that  he  might
be  out  of  the  way  (Dion  Cass.  Ivii.  8),  and  also
strictly  forbade  any  such  presents  to  be  offered
him  after  the  first  of  January,  as  he  used  to  be
annoyed  by  them  during  the  whole  of  the  month.
(Suet.  Tib.  34  ;  Dion  Cass.  Ivii.  1 7.)  The  custom,
so  far  as  the  emperor  was  concerned,  thus  seems  to
have  fallen  almost  entirely  into  disuse  during  the
reign  of  Tiberius,  It  was  revived  again  by  Caligula
(Suet.  Cal.  42  ;  Dion  Cass.  lix.  24),  but  abolished
by  Claudius  (Dion  Cass.  Ix.  6)  ;  it  must,  however,
have  been  restored  afterwards,  as  we  find  it  men-
tioned as  late  as  the  reigns  of  Theodosius  and
Arcadius.  (Auson.  Ep.  xviii.  4  ;  Symmach.  Ep.
X.  28.)

STRIAE.       [COLUMNA.]

STRIGA.     [Castra,  p.  254.]
STRIGIL.     [Balneae,  pp.  185,  a,  192,  a.]
STRO'PHIUM  (ratj/io,  raiv'ihiov^  aTrdSea/xo^)
was  a  girdle  or  belt  worn  by  women  round  the
breast  and  over  the  inner  tunic  or  chemise.    (Non.
xiv.   8  ;   tereti   strcrphio    luctantes   vincta  papillas,
CatuU.  Ixiv.  65.)     It  appears  from  an  epigram  of
Martial  (xiv.  66)  to  have  been  usually  made  of
leather.     (Becker,  Gallup  vol.  i.  p.  321.)
STRUCTOR.     [CoENA,  p.  307,  b.]
STULTO'RUM  FE'RIAE.    [Fornacalia.]
STUPRUM.     [Adulterium  ;   Concubina  ;
Incestum.]

STYLUS.  [Stilus.]
SUBCENTU'RIO.  [Exercitus,  p.  506,  a  ]
SUBITA'RII.  [TuMULTus.]
SUBLIGA'CULUM  orSUCCINCTO'RIUM
(did^o^ixa,  irepiCwfia),  drawers.  (J oseTph.  Ant.  iii.  7.
§  1.)  This  article  of  dress,  or  a  bandage  wound
about  the  loins  so  as  to  answer  the  same  purpose,
was  worn  by  athletes  at  the  public  games  of  Greece
in  the  earliest  ages  [Athletae]  :  but  the  use  of
it  was  soon  discontinued,  and  they  went  entirely
naked.  (Schoi.  in  Horn.  II.  xxiii.  683  ;  Isid.  Orig.
xviii.  17.)  The  Romans,  on  the  contrary,  and  all
other  nations  except  the  Greeks,  always  adhered
to  the  use  of  it  in  their  gymnastic  exercises.
(Thucyd.  i.  6  ;  Schol.  in  he.  ;  Clem.  Alex.  Paedag.
iii.  i)  ;  Isid.  Grig.  xix.  22.)  It  was  also  worn  by
actors  on  the  stage  (Cic.  de  Off.  i.  35),  by  those
who  were  employed  in  treading  grapes  [ToRCU-
i.ar]  {Geopon.  vi.  11),  and  by  the  Roman  popa
at  the  sacrifices,  and  it  then  received  the  de-
nomination limus  (Virg.  Aen.  xii.  120  ;  Servius,


SUCCESSIO.  1076

in  Jqc.\  which  name  was  also  applied  to  it  as  worn
by  Roman  slaves.  (Gell.  xii.  3.)  The  circumstance
of  the  slaves  in  India  wearing  this  as  their  only
covering  (Strabo,  xv.  1.  §  73.  p.  156,  ed.  Sieb.)  is
agreeable  to  the  practice  of  modem  slavery  in  the
West  Indies  and  other  tropical  countries.  [J.  Y.]
SUBSCRI'PTIO  CENSO'RIA.  [Censor,
p.  263,  b.]

SUBSECI'VA.  [Agrariae  Leges,  p.  42,  a.]
SUBSELLIUM.  [Thronus.]
SUBSIGNA'NI.  [Exercitus,  p.  502,  a.]
SUBSTITU'TIO.  [Heres,  p.  599,  a.]
SUBTE'MEN.  [Tela.]
SUBU'CULA.  [Tunica.]
SUCCE'SSIO.  This  word  is  used  to  denote  a
fight  which  remains  unchanged  as  such,  but  is
changed  with  reference  to  its  subject.  The  change
is  of  such  a  nature  that  the  right  when  viewed  as
attached  to  a  new  person  is  founded  on  a  preceding
right,  is  derived  from  it  and  depends  upon  it.  The
right  must  accordingly  begin  to  be  attached  to  the
new  person  at  the  moment  when  it  ceases  to  be  at-
tached to  the  person  who  previously  had  it ;  and
it  cannot  be  a  better  right  than  it  was  to  the  per-
son from  whom  it  was  derived  (Dig.  50.  tit.  1 7.
s.  175.  §  1).  Thus  in  the  case  of  the  transfer  of
ownership  by  tradition,  the  new  ownership  begins
when  the  old  ownership  ceases,  and  it  only  arises
in  case  the  former  possessor  of  the  thing  had  the
ownership,  that  is,  prior  ownership  is  a  necessary
condition  of  subsequent  ownership.  This  kind  of
change  in  ownership  is  called  Successio.  It  fol-
lows from  the  definition  of  it  that  Usucapion  is
not  included  in  it  ;  for  Usucapion  is  an  original
acquisition.  The  successio  of  a  heres  is  included,
for  though  there  might  be  a  considerable  interval
between  the  death  and  the  aditio  hereditatis,
yet  when  the  hereditas  was  once  taken  posses^
sion  of,  the  act  of  aditio  had  by  a  legal  fiction  re-
lation to  the  time  of  the  death.  Thus  whereas  we
generally  view  persons  who  possess  rights  as  the
permanent  substance  and  the  rights  as  accidents,
in  the  case  of  Succession  the  right  is  the  permanent
substance,  which  persists  in  a  series  of  persons.

The  notion  of  Succession  applies  mainly  though
not  exclusively  to  property.  With  respect  to  the
law  that  relates  to  Familia,  it  applies  so  far  as  the
parts  of  the  Familia  partake  of  the  nature  of  pro-
perty, such  as  the  power  of  a  master  over  his  slave,
and  the  case  of  Patronatus  and  Mancipii  causa.
Thus  the  patria  potestas  and  the  condition  of  a
wife  in  manu  may  be  objects  of  succession.  It
applies  also  to  the  case  of  adoption.

Successio  is  divided  into  Singular  Succession
and  Universal  Succession.  These  terms  conveni-'
ently  express  the  notion,  but  they  are  not  Roman
terms.  The  Roman  terms  were  as  follows :  in
universura  jus,  in  earn  duntaxat  rem  succedere
(Dig.  21.  tit.  3.  8.  3)  ;  per  universitatem,  in  rem
succedere  (Gaius,  ii.  97  ;  Dig.  43.  tit.  3.  s.  1)  ;  ill
omne  jus  mortui,  in  singularum  rerum  dominium
succedere  (Dig.  29.  tit.  2.  s.  37)  ;  in  universa  bona,
in  rei  tantum  dominium  succedere.  (Dig.  39.  tit.  2.
8.24.)

It  is  Singular  succession  when  a  single  thing  as
an  object  of  ownership  is  transferred,  or  several
things  together,  when  they  are  transfen-ed  as  in-
dividual things,  and  not  as  having  any  relation  to
one  another  in  consequence  of  this  accidental  com-
mon mode  of  transfer.  The  person  into  whose
place  another  comes  by  Singular  succession,  is
3z  2


1076  SUCCESSIO.

called  Auctor  with  respect  to  his  successor.  In
order  to  be  Singular  succession,  the  whole  right  of
the  auctor  must  be  transferred.  He  to  whom  an
estate  in  fee  simple  is  transferred,  takes  by  Singular
succession  :  he  to  whom  a  life  estate  is  granted  out
of  an  estate  in  fee  simple,  does  not  take  by  Singu-
lar succession.

The  object  of  Universal  succession  is  property  as
an  ideal  whole  (universitas)  without  any  reference
to  its  component  parts.  Yet  the  notion  of  succes-
sion applies  as  well  to  a  fraction  of  this  ideal  whole
as  to  the  unit  which  this  ideal  whole  is  conceived
to  be  ;  for  the  whole  property  being  viewed  as  a
anit,  it  may  be  conceived  to  be  divided  into  frac-
tional parts  without  any  reference  to  the  several
things  which  are  included  in  the  ideal  whole.  It
was  also  consistent  with  this  species  of  succession
that  many  particular  things  should  be  incapable  of
being  transferred :  thus  in  the  case  of  an  hereditas
the  ususfructus  of  the  deceased  did  not  pass  to  the
heres,  and  in  the  case  of  adrogation  neither  the
ususfructus  nor  the  debts  of  the  adrogated  person,
according  to  the  idd  law.

In  the  case  of  Obligationes  there  is  no  Singular
succession  :  there  is  either  the  change  of  the  Obli-
gatio  into  another  by  Novatio,  or  the  suing  for  the
debt  by  another  (cessio  actionis).

The  object  of  Universal  succession  is  a  Univer-
sitas as  such,  and  it  is  by  means  of  the  words
Universitas  and  Universum,  that  the  Romans  de-
note this  kind  of  succession  ;  but  it  would  be  er-
roneous to  infer  from  this  use  of  the  term  that
succession  applies  to  all  Universitates.  Its  proper
application  is  to  property,  and  the  true  character  of
Universal  succession  is  the  immediate  passing  over
from  one  person  to  another  of  all  the  credits  and
debts  that  belong  or  are  attached  to  the  property.
This  happens  in  the  case  of  an  hereditas  :  heres  in
omne  jus  mortui,  non  tantum  singularum  rerum
dominium  succedit,  quum  et  ea  quae  in  nominibus
sunt  ad  heredem  transeant  (Dig.  29.  tit.  2.  s.  37)  ;
and  in  the  case  of  adrogation  as  to  most  matters.
The  debts  would  be  transferred  by  adrogation  if
this  were  not  accompanied  with  a  capitis  derainutio.
Credits  and  debts  could  not  be  transferred  by
Singular  succession.  The  cases  of  Universal  succes-
sion were  limited  and  the  notion  could  not  be  ap-
plied and  made  effectual  at  the  pleasure  of  indivi-
duals. The  most  important  cases  of  Universal
succession  were  the  property  of  a  deceased  person  ;
as  hereditas,  bonorum  possessio,  fideicommissaria
hereditas,  and  others  of  the  like  kind.  The  pro-
perty of  a  living  person  might  be  transferred  in
this  way,  in  the  case  of  adrogatio,  conventio  in
manum,  and  the  boncrum  emtio.  (Gains,  ii.  98.)
In  many  other  cases  though  the  object  is  to  trans-
fer a  whole  property,  it  is  in  fact  effected  by  the
transfer  of  the  several  things :  the  following  are
instances  of  this  kind  of  transfer,  the  gift  of  a
whole  property,  or  its  being  made  a  Dos,  or  being
brought  into  a  Societas,  or  the  sale  of  an  hereditas
by  a  heres.

The  notion  of  a  Universal  succession  among  the
Romans  appears  to  have  been  derived  from  the
notion  of  the  hereditas,  to  which  it  was  necessarj--
to  attach  the  credits  and  debts  of  the  deceased  and
the  sacra.  Other  instances  of  Universal  succession
such  as  the  Bonorum  Possessio  grew  out  of  the
notion  of  the  hereditas  ;  and  it  was  found  con-
venient to  extend  it  to  other  cases,  such  as  Adro-
gation.    But,  as  already  observed,  the  extension


SUFFRAGIUM.

of  the  notion  was  not  left  to  the  pleasure  of  indi-
viduals, and  accordingh'  this  doctrine  was,  to  use
a  Roman  phrase,  Juris  Publici.

The  words  Successio,  Successor,  Succedere  by
themselves  have  a  general  meaning  and  comprise
both  kinds  of  Succession.  Sometimes  these  words
by  themselves  signify  universal  succession,  as  ap-
pears from  the  context  (Gaius,  iii.  82),  and  by
such  expressions  as  heredes  ceterique  successores.
In  other  cases  the  kind  of  succession  is  denoted  by
appropriate  words  as  per  universitatem  succedere,
acquirere,  transire,  in  universum  jus  succedere,  &c.
in  the  case  of  Universal  Succession  ;  and  in  rem,
in  rei  dominium,  in  singularum  rerum  dominium
succedere,  &c.  in  the  case  of  Singular  Succession.

In  the  phrase  "  joer  universitatem  succedere  "  the
notion  of  universal  succession  is  not  directly  ex-
pressed ;  for  the  phrase  has  immediate  reference  to
the  acquisition  of  a  single  thing,  and  it  is  only  by
means  of  the  word  Universitas  that  we  express
the  notion,  that  the  acquisition  of  the  individual
thing  is  effected  by  means  of  the  acquisition  of  the
whole.

(Savigny,  System^  <kc.  iii.  p.  8  ;  Gaius,  ii.  97,
&c.  ;  Puchta,  Inst  ii.  §  198.)  [G.  L.]

SUCCESSOR.     [Successio.]
SUCCINCTO'RIUM.     [Subligaculum.]
SUDATIO,  SUDATO'RIUM.     [Balneae,
p.  190,b.]

SUFFPBULUM.  [Vestales.]
SUFFRA'GI A  SEX.  [Equites,  p.  472,  b.]
SUFFRA'GIUM,  a  vote.  At  Athens  the  voting
in  the  popular  assemblies  and  the  courts  of  justice
was  either  by  show  of  hands  or  by  ballot,  as  is
explained  under  Cheirotonia  and  Psephus.  It
is  commonly  supposed  that  at  Rome  the  people
were  always  polled  in  the  comitia  by  word  of
mouth,  till  the  passing  of  the  Leges  Tabellariae
about  the  middle  of  the  second  century  before
Christ  [Tabellariae  Leges],  when  the  ballot
by  means  of  tabellae  was  introduced.  [Tabella.]
Wunder  (Codex  Erfutensis,  p.  clxvii.  &c.)  however
has  shown,  that  the  popular  assemblies  voted  by
ballot,  as  well  as  by  word  of  mouth,  long  before
the  passing  of  the  Leges  Tabellariae,  but  that  in-
stead of  using  tabellae  they  employed  stones  or
pebbles  (the  Greek  if/Tj^ot),  and  that  each  voter
received  two  stones,  one  white  and  the  other
black,  the  former  to  be  used  in  the  approval  and
the  latter  in  the  condemnation  of  a  measure.  The
voting  by  word  of  mouth  seems  to  have  been
adopted  in  elections  and  trials,  and  the  use  of
pebbles  to  have  been  confined  to  the  enactment
and  repeal  of  laws.  That  the  latter  mode  of  voting
was  adopted  in  early  times  is  proved  by  many
passages  of  Dionysius,  and  especially  by  x.  41  :  wy
6  Sri/jLos  airrJTei  raj  \pr]<povs,  ol  vewTaroi  twu  ira-
rpiKiwv  —  T^  ayye'ia  rwv  rpijcpwu  robs  exoi'Tos
acprjpovvTO  ;  and  by  xi.  52 :  iK4\€V(rav  KaSicrKov
TiQi]vai  vTTfp  rrjs  irSXfws  'Peofiaiuv^  Kaff"  eKacTTT/i/
(pv\)]v^  ds  t)U  aTTod-fja-ovrai  ras  ^Iz-ficpovs.  It  is  also
confirmed  by  the  common  expressions  used  with
respect  to  voting,  as  svffragium  ferre^  miitere  in
suffragia^  inire,  or  ire  in  sufpragia^  which  lead  us
to  suppose  that  the  suffragium  probably  signified
something  which  was  put  by  the  hand  from  one
place  into  another.  For  if  the  Romans  had  from
the  first  been  polled  only  by  word  of  mouth,  it  is
scarcely  possible  that  such  an  expression  as  suffra-
gium ferre  would  have  been  used,  when  they  had
nothing  to  carry ;  but  on  the  contrarj',  some  such


SUMTUARIAE  LEGES,
word  as  dicere  would  have  been  employed,  more
especially  as  it  is  certain  that  in  the  most  ancient
times  those  who  voted  by  word  of  mouth  did  not
go  up  one  by  one  to  the  officer  who  received  the
votes,  but  remained  in  their  places,  and  were  asked
for  their  votes  by  the  Rogatores,  who  thence  de-
rived their  name.  Besides  which  the  word  sriffni-
gium  can  scarcely  signify  the  same  as  sententia  or
vox.  The  etymology  is  uncertain,  for  the  opinions
of  those  who  connect  it  with  (ppd(ecr6ai  or  f*-agor
do  not  deserve  notice.  Wunder  thinks  that  it
may  possibly  be  allied  with  suffrago^  and  signified
originally  an  ankle-bone  or  knuckle-bone.  On  the
passing  of  the  Leges  Tabellariae  the  voting  with
stones  or  pebbles  went  out  of  use.  For  further
particulars  with  respect  to  the  voting  in  the  comitia,
see  Comitia,  p.  336  ;  Diribitores  ;  Situla  ;
Tabella  ;  Tabellariae  Leges.

Those  who  had  the  Jus  Siiffragii  or  the  right  of
voting  in  the  comitia,  as  well  as  the  capacity  of
enjoying  magistracies,  were  citizens  optimo  jure.
[CiviTAS,  p.291,b.]

SUGGESTUS  means  in  general  any  elevated
place  made  of  materials  heaped  up  {sub  and  gero),
and  is  specially  applied  :  1 .  To  the  stage  or  pulpit
from  which  the  orators  addressed  the  people  in  the
comitia.  [Rostra.]  2.  To  the  elevation  from
which  a  general  addressed  the  soldiers.  (Tacit.
Hid.  i.  35.)  3.  To  the  elevated  seat  from  which
the  emperor  beheld  the  public  games  (Suet.  Jul.
76  ;  Plin.  Paneg.  51),  also  called  cubiculum.    [Cu-

BICULUM.]

SUGGRUNDA'RIUM.  [Funus,  p.  ho%  b.]
SUI  HERE'DES.  [Heres,  p.  598,  b.]
SUMTUA'RLIE  LEGES,  the  name  of  various
laws  passed  to  prevent  inordinate  expense  {sumtus)
in  banquets,  dress,  &c.  (Gellius,  ii.  24,  xx.  1.)
In  the  states  of  antiquity  it  was  considered  the
duty  of  government  to  put  a  check  upon  extra-
vagance in  the  private  expenses  of  persons,  and
among  the  Romans  in  particular  we  find  traces
of  this  in  the  laws  attributed  to  the  kings  and
in  the  Twelve  Tables.  The  censors,  to  whom  was
entrusted  the  disdpHna  or  cura  morum,  punished
by  the  nota  censoria  all  persons  guilty  of  what  was
then  regarded  as  a  luxurious  mode  of  living :  a
great  many  instances  of  this  kind  are  recorded.
[Censor,  p.  264,  a.]  But  as  the  love  of  luxury
greatly  increased  with  the  foreign  conquests  of  the
republic  and  the  growing  wealth  of  the  nations,
various  Leges  Sumtuariae  were  passed  at  different
times  with  the  object  of  restraining  it.  These
however,  as  may  be  supposed,  rarely  accomplished
their  object,  and  in  the  latter  times  of  the  republic
they  were  virtually  repealed.  The  following  is  a
list  of  the  most  important  of  them  arranged  in
chronological  order.

Oppia,  proposed  by  the  tribune  C.  Oppius  in  the
consulship  of  Q.  Fabius  and  Ti.  Sempronius  in  the
middle  of  the  second  Punic  war  B.  c.  213,  enacted
that  no  woman  should  have  above  half  an  ounce  of
gold,  nor  wear  a  dress  of  different  colours,  nor  ride
in  a  carriage  in  the  city  or  in  any  to\vn,  or  within
a  mile  of  it,  unless  on  account  of  public  sacrifices.
This  law  was  repealed  twenty  years  afterwards
(Liv.  xxxiv.  1,  8;  Val.  Max.  ix.  1.  §3),  whence
we  frequently  find  the  Lex  Orchia  mentioned  as
the  first  Lex  Sumtuaria.  Tacitus  (Ann.  iii.  33,  34)
speaks  of  Oppiae  Leges.

Orchia,  proposed  by  the  tribune  C.  Orchius  in
the  third  year  after  the  censorship  of  Cato  b.  c.  181,


SUMTUARIAE  LEGES.


1077


limited  the  number  of  guests  to  be  present  at  en-
tertainments. When  attempts  were  afterwards
made  to  repeal  this  law,  Cato  offered  the  strongest
opposition,  and  delivered  a  speech  in  defence  of  the
law,  which  is  referred  to  by  the  grammarians.
(Macrob.  Sat.  ii.  13  ;  Festus,  s.  vv.  Obsonitavere^
Percunctatum ;  Schol.  Bob.  in  Cic.  pro  Sest.
p.  310,  ed.  Orelli  ;  Meyer,  Orat.  Roman.  Fragm.
p.91,«&c.,  2ded.).

Fannia,  proposed  by  the  consul  C.  Fannius  B.  c.
161,  limited  the  sums  which  were  to  be  spent  on
entertainments,  and  enacted  that  not  more  than
100  asses  should  be  spent  on  certain  festivals
named  in  the  lex,  whence  it  is  called  Centussis  by
Lucilius,  that  on  ten  other  days  in  each  month  not
more  than  30  asses,  and  that  on  all  other  days  not
more  than  10  asses  should  be  expended  :  also  that
no  other  fowl  but  one  hen  should  be  served  up,  and
that  not  fattened  for  the  purpose.  (Gell.  ii.  24  ;
Macrob.  Sat.  ii.  13  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  x.  50.  s.  71.)

DiDiA,  passed  b.  c.  143,  extended  the  Lex  Fan-
nia to  the  whole  of  Italy,  and  enacted  that  not  only
those  who  gave  entertainments  which  exceeded  in
expense  what  the  law  had  prescribed,  but  also  all
who  were  present  at  such  entertainments,  should
be  liable  to  the  penalties  of  the  law.  We  are  not
however  told  in  what  these  consisted.  (Macrob.
-Sa^.ii.  13.)

LiciNiA  agreed  in  its  chief  provisions  with  the
Lex  Fannia,  and  was  brought  forward,  we  are  told,
that  there  might  be  the  authority  of  a  new  law
upon  the  subject,  inasmuch  as  the  Lex  Fannia  was
beginning  to  be  neglected.  It  allowed  200  asses
to  be  spent  on  entertainments  upon  marriage  days
and  on  other  days  the  same  as  the  Lex  Fannia :
also,  that  on  ordinary  days  there  should  not  be
served  up  more  than  three  pounds  of  fresh  and  one
pound  of  salt  meat.  (Gell.  Macrob.  U.  cc.)  Gellius
(/.  c.)  states,  that  this  lavv  was  brought  forward  by
P.  Licinius  Crassus,  but  we  do  not  know  at  what
time,  probably  however  in  his  praetorship  b.c.  10.3.
Gellius  relates  elsewhere  (xv.  8)  that  a  Latin
orator  of  the  name  of  Favorinus  spoke  in  support
of  this  law.     (See  Diet,  of  Biog.  art.  Favorinus.)

Cornelia,  a  law  of  the  dictator  Sulla  b.  c.  81,
was  enacted  on  account  of  the  neglect  of  the  Fan-
nian  and  Licinian  Laws.  Like  these  it  regulated
the  expenses  of  entertainments.  (Gell.  ii.  24  ;
Macrob.  /.  c.)  Extravagance  in  funerals,  which
had  been  forbidden  even  in  the  Twelve  Tables
(Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  23 — 25),  was  also  restrained  by  a
law  of  Sulla.  (Plut.  Sull.  35.)  It  was  probably
the  same  law  which  determined  how  much  might  be
spent  upon  monuments.    (Cic.  ad  Att.  xii.  35,  36.)

Aemilia,  proposed  by  the  consul  Aemilius  Le-
pidus  B.  C.78,  did  not  limit  the  expenses  of  enter-
tainments, but  the  kind  and  quantity  of  food  that
was  to  be  used.  (Gell.  Macrob.  //.  cc.)  Pliny  (//.
N.  viii.  57.  s.  82)  and  Aurelius  Victor  {de  Vir.  III.
72)  ascribe  this  law  to  the  consulship  of  M.  Aemi-
lius Scaurus  B.  c.  115.  It  is  not  impossible  that
there  may  have  been  two  Aemilian  Leges  on  the
subject.

Antia,  of  uncertain  date,  proposed  by  Antius
Restio,  besides  limiting  the  expenses  of  entertain-
ments, enacted  that  no  actual  magistrate,  or  magis-
trate elect,  should  dine  abroad  anywhere  except  at
the  houses  of  certain  persons.  This  law  however
was  little  observed  ;  and  we  eire  told  that  Antius
never  dined  out  afterwards,  that  he  might  not  see
his  own  law  violated.  (Gell.  Macrob.  U.  cc.)
3z  3


1078


SUPERFICIES.


Julia,  proposed  by  the  dictator  C.  Julius  Caesar,
enforced  the  former  sumptuary  laws  respecting  en-
tertainments, which  had  fallen  into  disuse.  (Dion
Cass,  xliii.  25.)  Julius  Caesar  adopted  strong  mea-
sures to  carry  this  law  into  execution,  but  it  was
violated  when  he  was  absent  from  Rome.  (Cic  ad
Att.  xiii.  7.)  He  stationed  officers  in  the  provision
market  to  seize  upon  all  eatables  forbidden  by  the
law,  and  sometimes  sent  lictors  and  soldiers  to  ban-
quets to  take  away  every  thing  which  was  not
allowed  by  the  law.  (Suet.  Jul.  43.)  Cicero  seems
to  refer  to  this  law  in  two  of  his  epistles  {ad  Fam.
vii.26,  ix.  15).

Julia,  a  lex  of  Augustus,  allowed  200  sesterces
to  be  expended  upon  festivals  on  dies  profesti,
300  upon  those  on  the  Calends,  Ides,  Nones,  and
some  other  festive  days,  and  1000  upon  marriage
feasts.  There  was  also  an  edict  of  Augustus  or
Tiberius  by  which  as  much  as  from  300  to  2000
sesterces  were  allowed  to  be  expended  upon  enter-
tainments, the  increase  being  made  with  the  hope
of  securing  thereby  the  observance  of  the  law.
(Gell.  I.  c.  ;  Sueton.  Octav.  34.)

Tiberius  attempted  to  check  extravagance  in
banquets  (Suet.  Tih.  34)  ;  and  a  senatusconsultum
was  passed  in  his  reign  for  the  purpose  of  restrain-
ing luxury,  which  forbade  gold  vases  to  be  em-
ployed, except  for  sacred  purposes,  and  which  also
prohibited  the  use  of  silk  garments  to  men.  (Tacit.
Ann.  ii.  33  ;  Dion  Cass.  Ivii.  15.)  This  sumptuary
law,  however,  was  but  little  observed.  (Tacit.  Ann.
iii,  52,  53.)  Some  regulations  on  the  subject  were
also  made  by  Nero  (Suet.  Ner.  16),  and  by  suc-
ceeding emperors,  but  they  appear  to  have  been  of
little  or  no  avail  in  checking  the  increasing  love  of
luxury  in  dress  and  food.  (Platner,  Exercit.  II.
de  Legihus  Sumtuariis  Rom.  Lips.  1752  ;  Box-
mann.  Dissert,  antiquario-juridica  de  Leg.  Rom.
Sumtuariis,  Lugd.  Batav.  1816.)

Sumptuary  laws  were  not  peculiar  to  antiquity.
*'  Our  own  legislation,  which  in  its  absurd  as  well
as  its  best  parts  has  generally  some  parallel  in  that
of  the  Romans,  contains  many  instances  of  Sump-
tuary Laws,  which  prescribed  what  kind  of  dress,
and  of  what  quality,  should  be  worn  by  particular
classes,  and  so  forth.  The  English  Sumptuary  Sta-
tutes relating  to  apparel  commenced  with  the  37th
of  Edward  III.  This  statute,  after  declaring  that
the  outrageous  and  excessive  apparel  of  divers  people
against  their  estate  and  degree  is  the  destruction
and  impoverishment  of  the  land,  prescribes  the  ap-
parel of  the  various  classes  into  which  it  distributes
the  people  ;  but  it  goes  no  higher  than  knights.
The  clothing  of  the  women  and  children  is  also  re-
gulated. The  next  statute,  3rd  of  Edward  IV.,  is
very  minute.  This  kind  of  statute-making  went  on
at  intervals  to  the  1st  of  Philip  and  Mary,  when
an  act  was  passed  for  the  Reformation  of  Excessive
AppareL  These  Apparel  statutes  were  repealed  by
the  1st  of  James  I."  (Long's  Translation  of
Plutarch's  Life  of  Sulla,  c.  2.)

SUOVETAURI'LIA.    [Sacripicium  ;  Lus-

TRATIO.]

SUPERFI'CIES,  SUPERFICIA'RIUS.  —

Superficies  is  anything  which  is  placed  upon  the
ground,  so  as  to  become  attached  to  it.  The  most
common  case  of  superficies  is  that  of  buildings
erected  on  another  man's  land.  "  Those  are
aedes  superficiariae  which  are  built  on  hired
groimd,  and  the  property  of  which  both  by  the
Jus  Civile  and  Naturale  belongs  to  him  to  whom


SUPERFICIES.

the  ground  (solum)  also  belongs."  (Gains,  Dig.
43.  tit.  18.  S.2.)  Cicero  (ad  Att.  iv.  2)  uses  the
expression  '"'' superficies  aedium.^''  Every  building
then  was  considered  a  part  of  the  ground  on  which
it  stood  ;  and  the  ownership  and  possession  of  the
building  were  inseparable  from  the  owmfrship  and
possession  of  the  ground.  The  Superficies  resem-
bles a  Servitus  and  is  classed  among  the  Jura  in
re.  According  to  the  definition,  the  Superficiarius
had  not  the  thing  even  In  bonis  ;  and  as  the  animus
Domini  could  not  exist  in  the  case  of  Superficies,
he  consequently  could  not  be  Possessor.  He  had
however  a  Juris  Quasi  Possessio.  The  Superficiarius
had  the  right  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  Superficies  :
he  could  alienate  the  Superficies  and  pledge  it  for
the  term  of  his  enjoyment ;  he  could  dispose  of  it
by  testament ;  and  it  could  be  the  object  of  suc-
cession ab  intestato  ;  he  could  also  make  it  subject
to  a  Servitus  ;  and  he  could  prosecute  his  right  by
a  utilis  in  rem  actio.  As  he  had  a  Juris  Quasi
Possessio,  he  was  protected  against  threatened  dis-
turbance by  a  special  Interdict,  which  is  given  in
the  Digest  (43.  tit.  18),  and  in  its  eff'ect  resembles
the  Interdictum  Uti  possidetis.  The  explanation
of  the  passage  relating  to  this  Interdict  (Dig.  43.
tit.  18.  s.  3)  is  given  by  Savigny  (Das  Rechi  dcs
Besitzes,  p.  289,  5th  ed.).  If  he  was  ejected,  he
could  have  the  Interdictum  de  vi,  as  in  the  case
of  proper  Possession  ;  and  if  he  had  granted  the
use  of  the  Superficies  to  another  Precario,  who  re-
fused to  restore  it,  he  had  the  Interdictum  de  pre-
cario.

A  man  could  obtain  the  use  of  a  Superficies  by
agreement  with  the  owner  of  the  land  for  permis-
sion to  erect  a  building  on  it :  he  thus  obtained  a
Jus  Superficiarium  ;  and  he  might  also  by  agree-
ment have  the  use  of  an  existing  Superficies.  He
was  bound  to  discharge  all  the  duties  which  he
owed  in  respect  of  the  Superficies,  and  to  make
the  proper  payment  in  respect  of  it  (solatium),  if
any  payment  had  been  agreed  on.  The  solarium
was  a  ground-rent.     (Dig.  43.  tit.  8.  s.  2.  §  17.)

The  rule  of  law  tliat  the  Superficies  belonged  to
the  owner  of  the  soil  was  expressed  thus  :  Super-
ficies solo  cedit.  (Gains,  ii.  73.)  If  then  a  man
built  on  another  man's  land,  the  house  became  the
property  of  the  owner  of  the  land.  But  if  the
owner  of  the  land  claimed  the  house,  and  would
not  pay  the  expense  incurred  by  building  it,  the
builder  of  the  house  could  meet  the  claimant  with
a  plea  of  dolus  mains  (eocceptio  doli  mali),  that  is
to  say,  if  he  was  a  Bonae  fidei  possessor.  In  any
other  case,  he  had  of  course  no  answer  to  the
owner's  claim.

According  to  Coke  (Co.  Litt.  48,  b), "  a  man  may
have  an  inheritance  in  an  upper  chamber,  though
the  lower  buildings  and  the  soil  be  in  another,  and
seeing  it  is  an  inheritance  corporeal,  it  shall  pass
by  livery."  But  this  doctrine  is  open  to  serious
objections,  and  contradicts  a  fundamental  principle
of  law.

At  Rome  if  a  man  received  permission  to  build
on  a  locus  publicus,  he  thereby  obtained  a  Jus
Superficiarium.  The  Lex  Icilia  de  Aventino,  b.  c.
456,  probably  gave  the  ground  in  ownership  to  the
Plebs.  Dionysius,  who  speaks  particularly  of  this
lex,  says  that  several  persons  united  to  build  a
house  on  the  same  plot  of  ground,  and  distributed
the  stories  among  them  ;  this,  however,  would  not
be  a  case  of  superficies,  but  a  communio  pro  in-
diviso.     In  later  times,  it  was  common  at  Rome


SUSPENSURA.

for  the  ground  on  which  Insulae  were  built  to  re-
main the  property  of  the  owner  of  the  soil,  while
other  persons  had  a  Jus  Superficiarium  in  the
diiferent  stories,  in  respect  of  which  a  rent  (so-
larium) was  payable  to  the  dominus  of  the  soil.
Iludorff  {Beitrag  zur  GescJdcMe  der  Superficies,
Zeitschrifi  fur  GescIiicU.  Recldsw.  &c.,  No.xi.)  says
that  these  terms  were  as  common  in  Rome  "  as
they  now  are  in  London  where  great  landholders,
in  consideration  of  a  rent  for  nine  and  ninety  years,
and  the  reservation  of  the  ownership  of  the  soil,
allow  others  to  occupy  building  ground  and  slightly
built  houses."  He  who  builds  on  another's  land
on  a  building  lease  has  a  Jus  Superficiarium  and
nothing  more.

(Gains,  ii.  73—75  ;  Dig.  43.  tit.  18  ;  Lex  Icilia,
Dionys.  Antiq.  Rom.  x.  32  ;  Puchta,  Inst.  ii.
§  244  ;  Zeitschrift.  <kc.  xi.  219  ;  Stair,  Institutes,
book  ii.  tit.  7  ;  M'Dowell,  T7ist.  i.  676  ;  Code
Civil  art.  664.)  [G.  L.]

SUPERNUMERA'RIL  [Accensi.]
SU'PPARUM.  [Navis,  p.  790,  a;  Tunica.]
SUPPLICA'TIO  was  a  solemn  thanksgiving  or
supplication  to  the  gods  decreed  by  the  senate,
when  all  the  temples  were  opened,  and  the  statues
of  the  gods  frequently  placed  in  public  upon
couches  (pulvinaria),  to  which  the  people  offered
up  their  thanksgivings  and  prayers  (ad  omnia  pul-
vinaria  supplicatio  decreta  es^,Cic.  in  Catil.  iii.  10).
[Lectisternium.]  a  Supplicatio  was  decreed
for  two  different  reasons.

I.  As  a  thanksgiving,  when  a  great  victory  had
been  gained :  it  was  usually  decreed  as  soon  as
official  intelligence  of  the  victory  had  been  re-
ceived by  a  letter  from  the  general  in  command.
The  number  of  days  dm-ing  which  it  was  to  last
was  proportioned  to  the  importance  of  the  victory.
Sometimes  it  was  decreed  for  only  one  day  (Liv.
iii.  63),  but  more  commonly  for  three  or  five  days.
A  supplication  of  ten  days  was  first  decreed  in
honour  of  Pompey  at  the  conclusion  of  the  war
with  Mithridates  (Cic.  de  Frov.  Cons.  11),  and
one  of  fifteen  days  after  the  victory  over  the  Belgae
by  Caesar,  an  honour  which  Caesar  himself  says
(B.  G.  ii.  35)  had  never  been  granted  to  any  one
before.  (Compare  Cic.  L  c.)  Subsequently  a  sup-
plicatio of  twenty  days  was  decreed  after  his  con-
quest of  Vercingetorix.  (Caes.  B.  G.  vii.  90.)
From  this  time  the  senate  seems  to  have  frequently
increased  the  number  of  days  out  of  mere  compli-
ment to  the  general.  We  thus  find  mention  of
thanksgivings  for  forty  days  (Dion  Cass,  xliii.  14),
fifty  days  (Id.  xliii.  42,  and  Cic.  Phil.  xiv.  14),  and
even  sixty.  (Dion  Cass.  xl.  50.)  A  supplicatio  was
usually  regarded  as  a  prelude  to  a  triumph,  but  it
was  not  always  followed  by  one,  as  Cato  reminds
Cicero,  to  whose  honour  a  supplicatio  had  been
decreed.  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  xv.  5.)  This  honour  was
conferred  upon  Cicero  on  account  of  his  suppression
of  the  conspiracy  of  Catiline,  which  had  never  been
decreed  to  any  one  before  in  a  civil  capacity  (to-
gatus),  as  he  frequently  takes  occasion  to  mention,
(/ra  Catil.  m.  6,  10,  in  Fis.  3,  PM.  ii.  6.)

II.  A  Supplicatio,  a  solemn  supplication  and
humiliation,  was  also  decreed  in  times  of  public
danger  and  distress,  and  on  account  of  prodigies  to
avert  the  anger  of  the  gods.  (Liv.  iii.  7,  x.  23,
xxxi.  9,  xxxvii.  3.)

SURDUS.     [Obligationes,  p.  818,a  ;   Tes-

TAMENTUM.]

SUSPENSU'RA.    [Balneae,  p.  191,b.]


SYCOPHANTES.  1079

SYCOPHANTES  (<rvKO<pdvT-ns).  At  an  early
period  in  Attic  history  a  law  was  made  prohibiting
the  exportation  of  figs.  Whether  it  was  made  in
a  time  of  dearth,  or  through  the  foolish  policy  of
preserving  to  the  natives  the  most  valuable  of
their  productions,  we  cannot  saj'-.  It  appears,
however,  that  the  law  continued  in  force  long
after  the  cause  of  its  enactment,  or  the  general
belief  of  its  utility,  had  ceased  to  exist ;  and
Attic  fig-growers  exported  their  fruit  in  spite  of
prohibitions  and  penalties.  To  inform  against  a
man  for  so  doing  was  considered  harsh  and  vexa-
tious ;  as  all  people  are  apt  to  think  that  obsolete
statutes  may  be  infringed  with  impunity.  Plence
the  term  avKO(pavTilv,  which  originally  signified
to  lay  an  information  against  another  for  exporting
iigs,  came  to  be  applied  to  all  ill-natured,  malicious,
groundless,  and  vexatious  accusations.  It  is  de-
fined by  Suidas,  y\iivZocs  rivos  KaTr]jope7i'.  (Ste-
phan.  Tliesaur.  8873,  b.)

Sycophantes  in  the  time  of  Aristophanes  and
Demosthenes  designated  a  person  of  a  peculiar
class,  not  capable  of  being  described  by  any  single
word  in  our  language,  but  well  understood  and  ap-
preciated by  an  Athenian.  He  had  not  much  in
common  with  our  sycophant,  but  was  a  happy  cora-
poimd  of  the  common  barretor,  informer,  pettifogger,
busybody,  rogue,  liar,  and  slanderer.  The  Athenian
law  permitted  any  citizen  (rhif  fiov\6iJi.evou)  to  give
information  against  public  offenders,  and  prosecute
them  in  courts  of  justice.  It  was  the  policy  of  the
legislator  to  encourage  the  detection  of  crime,  and
a  reward  (such  as  half  the  penalty)  was  frequently
given  to  the  successful  accuser.  Such  a  power,
with  such  a  temptation,  was  likely  to  be  abused,
unless  checked  by  the  force  of  public  opinion,  or
the  vigilance  of  the  judicial  tribunals.  Unfortu-
nately, the  character  of  the  Athenian  democracy
and  the  temper  of  the  judges  furnished  additional
incentives  to  the  informer.  Eminent  statesmen,
orators,  generals,  magistrates,  and  all  persons  of
wealth  and  influence  were  regarded  with  jealousy
by  the  people.  The  more  causes  came  into  court,
the  more  fees  accrued  to  the  judges,  and  fines  and
confiscations  enriched  the  public  treasury.  The
prosecutor  therefore  in  public  causes,  as  well  as  the
plaintiff  in  civil,  was  looked  on  with  a  more  favour-
able eye  than  the  defendant,  and  the  chances  of
success  made  the  employment  a  lucrative  one.  It
was  not  always  necessary  to  go  to  trial  or  even  to
commence  legal  proceedings.  The  timid  defendant
was  glad  to  compromise  the  cause,  and  the  con-
scious delinquent  to  avert  the  threat  of  a  prosecu-
tion by  paying  a  sum  of  money  to  his  opponent
Thriving  informers  found  it  not  very  difficult  to
procure  witnesses,  and  the  profits  were  divided  be-
tween them.  According  to  Theophrastus  (ap.Athen.
vi.  254,  b),  Athens  was  full  of  Aiovva-OKoKdKwv
Kol  XoiiTohvrwp  KoL  rpevSofxapTvpwv  Kol  cvKocpavTwy
Kal  \pevSoK\r]Tiip(ii}v.  The  character  of  the  (tvko-
^avrai  will  be  best  imderstood  by  the  examples
and  descriptions  found  in  the  Attic  writers.  Aris-
tophanes directs  the  keenest  edge  of  his  satire
against  them.  (See  particularly  Acharn.  818,
Aves,  1410,  Flut.  850.)  Demosthenes  says:
TTovTiphv  6  (rvK0(pdvT7]S  KoL  fid(TKavov  Ka\  (piXaiTiov
(de  Coron.  307  ;  compare  c.  Eubul.  1309).  2uK<^
^avrelv  rpidKOvra  fiuas  in  Lysias  (c.  Evand.  177,
ed.  Steph.)  signifies  "to  extort  thirty  minas  by
Sycophant-like  practices."  (See  further  Lys.  Atj^
KaraA.  AttoA.  171  •  Aesch.  de  Fals.  Leg.  36,  ed.


1080


SYLAE.


Steph.  ;  Dem.  de  Cor.  291  ;  Xenoph.  Mem,  ii.  9,
§  4,  de  Rep.  Ath.  i.  4.)  That  the  increase  of  liti-
gation and  perjury  was  in  some  measure  owing  to
the  establishment  of  clubs  and  political  associations
and  the  violence  of  party  spirit,  may  be  gathered
from  various  passages  of  the  Attic  writers.  (Thu-
cyd,  viii.  54  ;  Demostlu  c.  Boeot.  de  dote,  1010,  c.
Pantaen.  978,  c.  Zenoth.  885.)

The  Athenian  law  did  indeed  provide  a  remedy
against  this  mischievous  class  of  men.  There  was
a  ypa(p7]  (rvKO(f>ain-ias  tried  before  the  Thesmothe-
tae.  Any  person  who  brought  a  false  charge
against  another,  or  extorted  money  by  threat  of
legal  proceedings,  or  suborned  false  witnesses,  or
engaged  in  a  conspiracy  to  ruin  the  character  of  an
innocent  man,  was  liable  to  this  ypacp'f].  He  might
also  be  proceeded  against  by  (pda-is,  et-Setlts,
airaywyT],  irpoSoK^  or  elcayyeKia.  (See  articles
Phasis,  &c.  ;  Aesch.  de  Fals.Leg.  47,  ed.  Steph.  ;
Dem.  c.  Theocr.  1325.)  The  trial  was  an  0170)1/
riiJ.7]T6s.  The  lieaviest  punishment  might  be  in-
flicted, together  with  ari/jLia  and  confiscation  of
property.  Besides  this,  if  any  man  brought  a  cri-
minal charge  against  another,  and  neglected  to
prosecute  it  (i-n-e^eXOelt/),  he  was  liable  to  a  pe-
nalty of  1000  drachmas,  and  lost  the  privilege  of
instituting  a  similar  proceeding  in  future,  which
was  considered  to  be  a  species  of  aTi/xia.  (Dem.
c.  Mid.  548,  c.  Theocr.  1323.)  The  same  conse-
quence followed,  if  he  failed  to  obtain  a  fifth  part
of  the  votes  at  the  trial.  The  eTrwgeAfo  in  civil
actions  was  a  penalty  of  the  same  kind  and  having
the  same  object :  viz.,  to  prevent  the  abuse  of
legal  process,  and  check  frivolous  and  unjust  ac-
tions. Such  were  the  remedies  provided  by  law,
but  they  were  found  inefficacious  in  practice  ;  and
the  words  of  Aristophanes  (Plutus,  885)  were  not
more  severe  than  true  :  "  there  is  no  charm  against
the  bite  of  a  Sycophantes.'"  (See  Platner,  Proc.
und  Kkig.  vol.  ii.  p.  164  ;  Meier,  Att.  Proc.  p.  335  ;
Schomann,  Ant.  Jur.  pub.  Gr.  pp.  101,  185  ;  Pol-
lux, viii.  31,  46,  47,  88.)  [C.R.K.]

SYLAE  {cvXai).  When  a  Greek  state,  or
any  of  its  members,  had  received  an  injury  or
insult  from  some  other  state  or  some  of  its  mem-
bers, and  the  former  was  unwilling,  or  not  in  a
condition,  to  declare  open  war,  it  was  not  unusual
to  give  a  commission,  or  grant  public  authority  to
individuals  to  make  reprisals.  This  was  called
ci\as,  or  o-tJAo,  '6iZ6vai.  (Demosth.  c.Laerit.  931  ;
Lysias,  c.  A'tcom.  185,  ed.  Steph.)  Polybius  (iv.
26,  36,  53)  calls  it  Xdcpvpov  or  pvaia  KarayyeK-
\€iv.  Thus,  when  the  Lacedaemonians  thought
the  Athenians  had  broken  the  treaty  with  them
by  making  incursions  from  Pylus,  they  issued  a
proclamation  that  any  of  their  subjects  might
commit  depredations  on  the  Athenians  (ATyt'^ecr^at
rovs  'Afliji^ajouy,  Thucyd.  v.  115).  Demosthenes
(de  Coron.  Trierarch.  1232)  declares  that  the
deputy  captains  of  triremes  so  misbehaved  them-
selves in  foreign  countries,  plundering  everybody
they  came  near,  that  no  Athenian  could  travel  safely
Sicb  Tcbs  virh  rovTcau  avSpoXr]\pias  Kal  avKas  Kana-
K€vaa-fMeyas,  where  av5po\7}\pias  refers  to  the  arrest
of  the  person,  crvXas  to  the  seizure  of  goods.
Suidas  explains  <Tv\ai  by  the  synonym  (ryAA^i/zets.
As  to  apSpoKr]\piai  for  another  purpose,  see  Phonos.
In  the  vavTiK^  avyypacp^  in  the  speech  of  Demos-
thenes (c.  Lacr.  927 \  one  of  the  conditions  is  that
goods  may  be  landed  only  '6irov  tiv  firi  avKai  Statu
Adiivaiois^  "  where  no  hostilities  are  exercised


SiMBOLAEON.

against  Athenians."  The  people  of  Athens  passed
a  special  decree  to  authorise  privateering  ;  and
when  any  booty  was  taken  by  Athenian  subjects,
they  reserved  to  themselves  the  right  of  determin-
ing whether  it  was  lawfully  taken,  whether  it
ought  to  be  kept  or  restored,  and  what  should  be
done  with  it.  (Demosth.  c.  Tiniocr.  703  ;  Argum.
694,  695.)  The  ancient  practice  may  be  compared
with  the  modern  one  of  granting  letters  of  marque
and  reprisal.  (Harpocr.  s.  v.  ZSwAas  :  Schomann,  de
Comit.  p.  284,  Ant.  Jur.  Pub.  Gr.  p.  367.)  [C.R.K.]

SYLLOGEIS  (o-yAAo76:s),  usually  called  SwA-
Ao7ets  Tov  5i}fj.ov,  or  the  Collectors  of  the  People,
were  special  commissioners  at  Athens,  who  made  out
a  list  of  the  property  of  the  oligarchs  previously  to
its  confiscation.  (Lex  Rlict.  p.  304,  Bekker.)  They
foi-med  an  apx^]  (Harpocr.  s.  v.  ^vWoyri)^  and
seem  to  have  been  introduced  after  the  dominion  of
the  Thirty  Tyrants.  It  appears  from  an  inscrip-
tion that  the  Syllogeis  had  to  attend  to  the  sacred
rites  connected  with  the  worship  of  Athena  and  the
Olympian  Zeus,  whence  Bockh  conjectures  that
they  collected  or  summoned  the  citizens  to  certain
sacred  rites,  in  which  the  people  were  feasted,  and
that  from  this  circumstance  they  derived  their
name  :  the  property  of  the  oligarchs,  of  which  they
are  said  to  have  made  out  a  list  for  the  purpose  of
confiscation,  may  have  been  applied  to  these  public
banquets,  since  confiscated  property  was  not  unfre-
quently  divided  among  the  citizens.  (Corpus  Inscr.
Grae^.  No.  Q9.  pp.  137,  138,  No.  157.  p.  250.)

SY'MBOLA.  [CoENA,  p.  304,  b  ;  Dicastes.]

SYMBOLAEON,  SYNALLAGMA,  SYN-
THE'CE  (arvix§6\aiop,  ovvdKKayjxa.,  (TvvOrjKTf),  are
all  words  used  to  signify  a  contract,  but  are  dis-
tinguishable from  one  another,  ^v/x§6\aioi/  ia
used  of  contracts  and  bargains  between  private
persons,  and  peculiarly  of  loans  of  money.  Thus,
(rvfM§ake7v  els  avSpdiroSov  is,  to  lend  upon  the
security  of  a  slave.  (Demosth.  c.  Aphob.  822,  c.
Zenoth.  884,  c.  Phorm.  907,  c.  Timoth.  1185,  c.
Dionys.  1284.)  ^vvaXXayfia  signifies  any  matter
negotiated  or  transacted  between  two  or  more  per-
sons, whether  a  contract  or  anything  else.  (De-
mosth. c.  07iet.  867,  869,  c.  Timocr.  760.)  Sw-
BijKr]  is  used  of  more  solemn  and  important  con-
tracts, not  only  of  those  made  between  private
individuals,  but  also  of  treaties  and  conventions
between  kings  and  states.  (Thucyd.  i.  40,  v.  18,
viii.  37  ;  Xenoph.  Hell.  vii.  1.  §  2  ;  Demosth.  de
Rhod.  199.  de  Coron.  251,  c.  Aristog.  774  ;  Di-
narch.  c.  Demosth.  101,  ed.  Steph.)

As  to  the  necessity  or  advantage  of  having
written  agreements  between  individuals,  see  Syn-
graphe.  National  compacts,  on  account  of  their
great  importance,  and  the  impossibility  of  other-
wise preserving  evidence  of  them,  were  almost
always  committed  to  writing,  and  commonly  in-
scribed on  pillars  or  tablets  of  some  durable  mate-
rial. (Thucyd.  v.  23,  47  ;  see  Aristoph.  Ac/uim.
727.)  Upon  a  breach,  or  on  the  expiration,  of
the  treaty,  the  pillars  were  taken  down.  (Demosth.
pro  Megalopol.  209.)

For  breaches  of  contract  actions  were  maintain-
able at  Athens,  called  <Tvfji§o\aiwv  (or  avvOTjKwv)
irapa€d(Te(i}5  diKui.  (Pollux,  vi.  153,  viii.  31.)
Such  actions,  it  is  apprehended,  applied  only  to  ex-
press contracts,  not  to  obligations  ex  delicto,  or  the
UKovaia  (TvvaWdyiJLaTa  of  Aristotle.  (Ethic.  Nicom.
V.  4.)  Thus,  if  I  had  promised  to  pay  a  sum  of
money  by  a  certain  day,  and  failed  to  perform  that


SYMBOLON.

promise,  an  action  for  breach  of  contract  would
have  lain  at  Athens.  But  if  my  cow  had  broken
my  neighbour's  fence,  my  obligation  to  repair  the
damage  would  have  given  rise  not  to  an  action  for
breach  of  contract,  but  to  a  Sikt/  fiXdSris.  (Meier,
Att.  ProG.  pp.  476,  477.)  On  the  other  hand,  a
8t'/c7j  fi\d6rts  would  lie  against  a  person  who  had
committed  a  breach  of  contract  ;  for  he  was  re-
garded as  a  wrongdoer,  and  liable  to  pay  compen-
sation to  the  party  injured.  Therefore  Dionyso-
dorus,  who  had  failed  to  perform  the  conditions  of
a  vavTiK^  (TVYYP^fpVi  had  a  Sjktj  ^\d§r]s  brought
agahist  him  by  the  persons  who  lent  him  money
on  his  ship.  (Demosth.  1282  ;  see  also  pro  Phorm.
950,  c.  Callipp.  1240.)  The  Athenian  law  fre-
quently gave  an  option  between  various  forms  of
action.  It  is  not,  however,  improbable  that  the
5f/c7j  (rw9r]KCt)u  Trapa€d(rews  was  only  one  species
of  the  5i/c7j  /3Au§77s,  and  the  name  one  of  a  less
technical  kind.  Wherever  a  debt  had  become
due  to  a  man  by  reason  of  some  previous  contract,
we  may  suppose  that  he  had  the  option  between
an  action  of  debt  (xpeovs)  and  one  for  breach  of
contract.  The  same  observation  will  apply  to  the
SiKai  7rapaKaTat?r]K77s,  apyvpiov,  and  others  of  a
eimilar  kind.  The  main  point  of  difference  might
be  this  :  that  in  a  general  action  for  breach  of  con-
tract, the  plaintiff  went  for  unliquidated  damages,
which  the  court  had  to  assess  ;  whereas,  upon  a
claim  to  recover  a  debt  or  sum  certain,  or  a  specific
chattel,  the  court  had  nothing  more  to  do  than  to
determine  whether  the  plaintiff  was  entitled  to  it
or  not  ;  the  aydiv  was  ariixrjTos.  All  such  actions
v/ere  tried  before  the  Qea^o^irai.  (Meier,  Att.
Proc.  pp.  67,  184,  4.93—497,  510.)

'O/jLokoyla  appears  to  be  a  word  of  less  technical
nature  than  avvOriKri,  though  (as  we  might  expect
in  words  of  this  sort)  they  are  often  used  indiffer-
ently. Grammarians  make  them  synonymous.
(Harpocr.  s.  v.  'KawQerwrarov  :  Suidas,  s.  v.  Sw-
d'fiKT}.)  'XvvQi]Kas  TToielaOai  or  riOeadai  fierd  tlvos
is,  to  make  an  agreement  with  any  one  ;  f/jLfjLeveiv
rats  (TvvdiiKais,  to  abide  by  it  ;  inrepSaiudU  or
irapa§alveLV^  to  break  or  transgress.  Here  we  may
observe,  that  (ruv^Tj/cat  is  constantly  used  in  the
plural,  instead  of  crvvdi}Kr],  the  only  difference
being,  that '  strictly  the  former  signifies  the  terms
or  articles  of  agreement,  in  the  same  manner  as
SiadriKai^  the  testamentary/  dispositions,  is  put  for
SiadrjKTj,  the  will.  SuyugoAoj/  also  signifies  a  com-
pact or  agreement,  but  had  become  (in  Attic  par-
lance) obsolete  in  this  sense,  except  in  the  expres-
sion SiKai  airh  <TviJ.€6\(av.  (See  below.)    [C.R.K.]

SYMBOLON,  DIKAE  APO  (SiVai  airh  avfi-
€6\ci}v).  The  ancient  Greek  states  had  no  well
defined  international  law  for  the  protection  of  their
respective  members.  In  the  earlier  times  troops
of  robbers  used  to  roam  about  from  one  country  to
another,  and  commit  aggressions  upon  individuals,
who  in  their  turn  made  reprisals,  and  took  the  law
into  their  own  hands.  Even  when  the  state  took
upon  itself  to  resent  the  injury  done  to  its  members,
n  violent  remedy  was  resorted  to,  such  as  the
giving  authority  to  take  av\a,  or  ^vaia,  a  sort  of
national  distress.  As  the  Greeks  advanced  in
civilization,  and  a  closer  intercourse  sprang  up
among  them,  disputes  between  the  natives  of  dif-
ferent countries  were  settled  (whenever  it  was
possible)  by  friendly  negotiation.  It  soon  began
to  be  evideiit,  that  it  would  be  much  better,  if,  in-
i>tead  of  any  interference  on  the  part  of  the  state,


SYMBOLON.


1081


such  disputes  could  be  decided  by  legal  process,
either  in  the  one  country  or  the  other.  Among
every  people,  however,  the  laws  were  so  framed,
as  to  render  the  administration  of  justice  more
favourable  to  a  citizen  than  to  a  foreigner  ;  and
therefore  it  would  be  disadvantageous,  and  often
dangerous,  to  sue  a  man,  or  be  sued  by  him,  in  his
own  country.  The  most  friendly  relation  might
subsist  between  two  states,  such  as  tru^i/Aax'a  or
iTTiyafxia,  and  yet  the  natives  of  each  be  exposed
to  this  disadvantage  in  their  mutual  intercourse.
To  obviate  such  an  evil,  it  was  necessary  to  have  a
special  agreement,  declaring  the  conditions  upon
which  justice  was  to  be  reciprocally  administered.
International  contracts  of  this  kind  were  called
avij.§o\a,  defined  by  Suidas  thus,  avvdriKai  hs  hu
aWr)\ais  al  Tr6\eis  ^e/xevai  rdrroKTi  tois  ttoAitois,
&(TTe  diSdfai  Koi  XafiSdveiv  to  S'lKaia:  and  the
causes  tried  in  pursuance  of  such  contracts  were
called  S'lKai  UTrh  avfx€6\<t}V.  The  more  constant
and  more  important  the  intercourse  between  any
two  nations,  the  more  necessary  would  it  be  for
them  to  establish  a  good  system  of  international
jurisprudence.  Commercial  people  would  stand  in
need  of  it  the  most.  Aristotle  mentions  the  Tus-
cans and  Carthaginians  as  having  <Tviji.§oAa  irepl
Tov  fii]  adiKf7v.  {Polit.  iii.  1,  3,  and  5,  10.)  No
such  agreement  has  been  preserved  to  us,  and  we
know  but  little  about  the  terms  that  were  usually
prescribed.  The  basis  of  them  seems  to  have  been
the  principle  that  actor  sequitur  forum  rei ;  but
this,  as  well  as  other  conditions,  must  have  varied
according  to  circumstances.  Liberty  of  person,  and
protection  of  property,  would,  no  doubt,  be  secured
to  the  foreigner,  as  far  as  possible  ;  and  it  would
be  the  duty  of  the  itp6\^vos  to  see  that  these  rights
were  respected.  A  common  provision  was,  that
the  party  who  lost  his  cause  might  appeal  to  the
tribunal  of  the  other  country,  or  to  that  of  some
third  state  mutually  agreed  upon.  (Etym.  Magn.
s.  V.  "EKKXrjTos  irdAjs.)  This  was  perhaps  sug-
gested by  the  practice  which  had  grown  up,  of  re«
ferring  national  quarrels  to  the  arbitration  of  some
individual  or  third  state.  (Thucyd.  i.  34,  78,  140,
V.  41,  vii.  18  ;  Schcimann,  Ant.  Jur.  pub.  Gr.  p.
367.)

When  the  Athenians  made  any  such  treaty,
they  required  it  to  be  approved  of  and  finally  rati-
fied by  a  jury  of  the  Heliaea,  under  the  direction  of
the  Thesmothetae.  Hence  Pollux  (viii.  88)  says
of  those  magistrates,  to.  (rv/xSoAa  to,  irphs  ras
ir6\€is  Kvpovciif.  The  other  contracting  state  was
therefore  compelled  to  send  an  envoy  to  Athens,
with  power  to  conclude  the  treaty  (if  he  thought
fit)  as  it  was  drawn  up  and  settled  by  the  Thesmo-
thetae and  jurors.  Most  of  the  people  with  whom
the  Athenians  had  to  deal,  were  either  subject  or
inferior  to  them,  and  Avere  content  to  acquiesce  in
the  above  regulation.  Philip,  however,  would  not
submit  to  it,  and  demanded  that  the  terms  should
receive  final  ratification  in  Macedonia.  This  de-
mand is  made  the  subject  of  complaint  by  Demos-
thenes (de  Ha/on.  78).

The  name  of  dUai  airh  <rvfi§6\a)v  was  given  also
to  the  causes  which  the  allies  of  the  Athenians
sent  to  be  tried  at  Athens.  (Pollux,  viii.  63.)  This
fact  has  been  called  in  question  by  Bockh,  but
there  is  not  much  reason  for  doubting  it.  It  is
true  that  the  expression  is  not  strictly  applicable
to  causes,  not  between  an  Athenian  and  a  foreigner,
I  but  between  two  foreigners  ;  and  it  may  be  allowed


1082


SYMPOSIUM.


that  the  object  of  the  Athenians  in  bringing  such
causes  to  Athens  was,  not  to  give  the  allies  a
better  or  speedier  means  of  obtaining  justice,  but
to  secure  certain  advantages  to  the  imperial  city.
(Xenoph.  de  Republ.  Ath.  i.  16.)  It  is,  however,
not  improbable  that  the  arrangement  was  called
(Tu/igoAo,  for  the  very  purpose  of  softening  the
harshness  of  the  measure,  by  giving  an  honourable
name  to  that  which  in  reality  was  a  mark  of  servi-
tude. For  the  same  reason  the  confederate  states
were  called  (TVfxfxaxoi^  allies,  while  in  point  of  fact
they  were  rather  v-n^Kooi  or  subjects.

These  causes  were  tried  in  the  summer  months,
when  the  voyage  to  Athens  was  more  convenient,
and  (like  all  other  SUai  airh  crvix§6\a}v)  belonged
to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Thesmothetae.  We  have
but  one  example  of  such  a  cause  preserved  to  us,
viz.  the  speech  of  Antiphon  on  the  death  of
Herodes,  where  both  the  prosecutor  and  the  de-
fendant are  natives  of  Mytilene.  (Harpoc.  s.  v.
2u|UgoAo :  Thucyd.  i.  77.  c  not,  Goeller  ;  Platner,
Proc.  und  Klag.  vol.  i.  pp.  105 — 114  ;  Meier,  Ait.
Proc.  pp.  67,  773  ;  Schomann,  Ant.  jur.  publ.
Or.  p.  376.)  [C.  R.  K.]

SYMBU'LI  {(TvfiSovXoC).     [Paredri.]

SYMMO'RIA  ((rvfxfj.opla).  [Eisphora  ;
Trierarchia.]

SY'MPHOREIS  {(rvn({>op€7s).  [Exercitus,
p.  485,  b.]

SYMPO'SIUM  (arvfiTrSa-iov,  comissatio,  convi-
vium),  a  drinking-party.  The  arvixTrScriov,  or  the
irdTos.,  must  be  distinguished  from  the  ^elirvov,  for
though  drinking  almost  always  followed  a  dinner-
party, yet  the  former  was  regarded  as  entirely  dis-
tinct from  the  latter,  was  regulated  by  different
customs,  and  frequently  received  the  addition  of
many  guests,  who  were  not  present  at  the  dinner.
For  the  Greeks  did  not  usually  drink  at  their
diimer,  and  it  was  not  till  the  conclusion  of  the
meal,  that  wine  was  introduced,  as  is  explained
under  Coena  [p.  306,  a].  Thus  we  read  in  the
Symposium  of  Plato  (p.  176,  a.)  that  after  the
dinner  had  been  finished,  the  libations  made,  and
the  paean  sung,  they  turned  to  drinking  (rpe-
ireadai  irphs  rhv  ttStov).

Symposia  seem  to  have  been  very  frequent  at
Athens.  Their  enjoyment  was  heightened  by
agreeable  conversation,  by  the  introduction  of  nmsic
and  dancing,  and  by  games  and  amusements  of
various  kinds :  sometimes,  too,  philosophical  sub-
jects were  discussed  at  them.  The  Symposia
of  Plato  and  Xenophon  give  us  a  lively  idea  of
such  entertainments  at  Athens.  The  name  itself
shows,  that  the  enjoyment  of  drinking  was  the
main  object  of  the  Symposia  :  wine  from  the  juice
of  the  grape  (ohos  ojUTreAtvos)  was  the  only  drink
partaken  of  by  the  Greeks,  with  the  exception  of
water.  For  palm-wine  and  beer  [Cerevisia],
though  known  to  many  of  the  Greeks  from  inter-
course with  foreign  nations,  were  never  introduced
among  them  ;  and  the  extraordinary  cheapness  of
wine  at  Athens  [Vinum]  enabled  persons  even  in
moderate  circumstances  to  give  drinking-parties  to
their  friends.  Even  in  the  most  ancient  times
the  enjoyment  of  wine  was  considered  one  of  the
greatest  sources  of  pleasure,  and  hence  Musaeus
and  his  son  supposed  that  the  just  passed  their
time  in  Hades  in  a  state  of  perpetual  intoxication,
as  a  reward  of  their  virtue  (riyTi(rd/A€Voi  kAWkttov
aperrjs  fiiaQhv  jMedrju  alwviou.  Plat.  Leg.  ii.  p.  363,
c  d.).     It  would  appear  from  the  Symposium  of


SYMPOSIUM.

Plato,  that  even  the  Athenians  frequently  con-
cluded their  drinking-parties  in  rather  a  riotous
manner,  and  it  was  to  guard  against  this  that  such
parties  were  forbidden  at  Sparta  and  in  Crete.
(Plat.  Mm.  p.  320,  a.)

The  wine  was  almost  invariably  mixed  with
water,  and  to  drink  it  unmixed  (&icpaTov)  was  con-
sidered a  characteristic  of  barbarians.  (Plat.  Leff.
i.  p.  637,  e.)  Zaleucus  is  said  to  have  enacted  a
law  among  the  Locrians,  by  which  any  one  who
was  ill  and  drank  of  unmixed  wine  without  the
command  of  his  physician,  was  to  be  put  to  death
( Aelian,  V.  H.  ii.  37) ;  and  the  Greeks  in  general
considered  unmixed  wine  as  exceedingly  prejudicial
to  physical  and  mental  health.  (Athen.  ii.  p.  36,
b.)  The  Spartans  attributed  the  insanity  of  Cleo-
menes  to  his  indulging  in  this  practice,  which  he
learnt  from  the  Scythians.  (Herod,  vi.  84.)  So
universal  was  it  not  to  drink  wine  unless  mixed
with  water,  that  the  word  olvos  is  always  applied
to  such  a  mixture,  and  whenever  wine  is  spoken
of  in  connection  with  drinking,  we  are  always  to
understand  wine  mixed  with  water,  unless  the
word  &KpaTos  is  expressly  added  (rh  Kpafxa^
Kairoi  vSaros  fMerdxcv  irKeiovos,  dlvov  KaKovp.iv,
Plut.  Conjug.  Praec.  20).

The  proportion,  in  which  the  wine  and  water
were  mixed,  naturally  differed  on  different  occa-
sions. To  make  a  mixture  of  even  half  wine  and
half  water  (I'crov  tcrcf))  was  considered  injurious
(Athen.  I.  c),  and  generally  there  was  a  much
greater  quantity  of  water  than  of  wine.  It  appears
from  Plutarch  \Symp.  iii.  9),  Athenaeus  (x.p.426),
and  Eustathius  {ad  Od.  ix.  209.  p.  J  624),  that  the
most  common  proportions  were  3  :  1,  or  2  :  1,  or
3  :  2.  Hesiod  {Op.  6^Q)  recommends  the  first  of
these.

The  wine  was  mixed  either  with  warm  or  cold
water:  the  former,  which  corresponded  to  the  Calida
or  Calda  of  the  Romans  [Calida],  was  by  far  the
less  common.  On  the  contrary,  it  was  endeavoured
to  obtain  the  water  as  cool  as  possible,  and  for  this
purpose  both  snow  and  ice  were  frequently  em-
ployed. [PsYCTER.]  Honey  was  sometimes  put
in  the  wine  (Athen.  i.  p.  32,  a.),  and  also  spices
(Id.  p.  31,  e.)  :  in  the  latter  case  it  received  the
name  of  TpifM/xa,  and  is  frequently  mentioned  by
the  writers  of  the  New  Comedy.  (Pollux,  vi.  18.)
Other  ingredients  were  also  occasionally  added.

The  mixture  was  made  in  a  large  vessel  called
the  Kpar-fjp  [Crater],  from  which  it  was  con-
veyed into  the  drinking-cups  by  means  of  olvox^o-i
or  KvaQoi.  [Cyathus.]  The  cups  usually  em-
ployed were  the  kv\i^,  (pidXr],  Kapx'h'^^^ov^  and
Koivdapos,  of  which  an  account  is  given  in  separate
articles.  The  ^vt6v,  or  drinking-horn,  was  also
very  commonly  used.  We  find  several  craters  on
vases  representing  drinking  scenes.  (See  for  ex-
ample Mas.  Borbon.  vol.  v.  t.  51.)

The  guests  at  a  Symposium  reclined  on  couches
and  were  crowned  with  garlands  of  flowers,  as  is
explained  under  Coena.  A  master  of  the  revels
{&pX(^v  T7is  trdacws^ffVfjLTrocriapxos  ov  ^a(n\fvs)v{iis
usually  chosen  to  conduct  the  Symposium  {iraiZayoo-
ydv  0-vfjLir6<noy,  Plat.  Leg.  i.  p.  641,  a.  b.),  whose
commands  the  whole  company  had  to  obey,  and
who  regulated  the  whole  order  of  the  entertain-
ment, proposed  the  amusements,  &c.  The  same
practice  prevailed  among  the  Romans,  and  their
Symposiarch  was  called  the  Magister  or  Rex  Con-
viviif   or   the  Arbiter  Bibendi.     The  choice  was


SYMPOSIUM.

penerally  determined  by  the  throwing  of  Astragali
or  Tali  ;  but  we  find  in  Plato  (Sr/mp.  p.  213,  e.)
Alcibiades  constituting  himself  Symposiarch.  The
proportion  in  which  the  wine  and  water  were
mixed  was  fixed  by  him,  and  also  how  much  each
of  the  company  was  to  drink.  The  servants
(olvox^oi  and  olvrfpol  ^epdirovres),  usually  young
slaves,  who  had  to  mix  the  wine  and  present  it  to
the  company,  were  also  under  his  orders  ;  but  if
there  was  no  Symposiarch,  the  company  called  for
the  wine  just  as  they  pleased.  (Xen.  S^mp.  ii.  27.)

Before  the  drinking  commenced,  it  was  agreed
upon  in  what  way  they  should  drink  (Plat.  Symp.
p.  176,  a.  b.),  for  it  was  not  usually  left  to  the
option  of  each  of  the  company  to  drink  as  much  or
as  little  as  he  pleased,  but  he  was  compelled  to
take  whatever  the  Symposiarch  might  order.  At
Athens  they  usually  began  drinking  out  of  small
cups  (fieTpia  irorijpLa,  Athen.  x.  p.  431,  e.),  but  as
the  entertainment  went  on,  larger  ones  were  intro-
duced. (Diog.  Laert.  i.  104.)  In  the  Symposium
of  Plato  (pp.  213,  214)  Alcibiades  and  Socrates
each  empty  an  immense  cup,  containing  eight  co-
tylae,  or  nearly  four  English  pints  ;  and  frequently
such  cups  were  emptied  at  one  draught  (awj/evcTTl
or  a/xva-rl  -rrlveiv,  afivcrri^eiv^  Athen.  x.  p.  431,  b. ;
Lucian,  Leodph.  8  ;  Suidas,  s.  v.  'Afiva-rl).

The  cups  were  always  carried  round  from  right
to  left  (eVt  5€|i<£),  and  the  same  order  was  ob-
served in  the  conversation  and  in  everything  that
took  place  in  the  entertainment  (eVi  Be^ia  diairiveiv^
Plat.  Hep.  iv.  p.  420,  e.,  eVl  Se^ta  Kdyov  elirelu^
Symp.  p.  214,  b.  ;  Athen.  xi.  p.  463,  e.).  The  com-
pany frequently  drank  to  the  health  of  one  another
{irpoiriveiv  (piXoTTjffLas,  Lucian,  Gall.  12  ;  Athen.
xi.  p.  498,  d.),  and  each  did  it  especially  to  the  one
to  whom  he  handed  the  same  cup.  This  seems  to
have  been  the  custom,  which  Cicero  alludes  to,
when  he  speaks  of  "drinking  after  the  Greek
fashion."  {Graeco  more  bibere,  Verr.  i.  26  ;  com-
pare Tusc.  i.  40,  Graeci  in  conviviis  solent  nomi-
nare,  cut  poculum  tradituri  sunt.)

Music  and  dancing  were  usually  introduced,  as
already  stated,  at  Symposia,  and  we  find  few  re-
presentations of  such  scenes  in  ancient  vases  with-
out the  presence  of  female  players  on  the  flute  and
the  cithara,  Plato,  indeed,  decidedly  objects  to
their  presence,  and  maintains  that  it  is  only  men
incapable  of  amusing  themselves  by  rational  con-
versation, that  have  recourse  to  such  means  of  en-
joyment {Protag.  p.  347,  c  d.,  Symp.  p.  176,  e.)  ;


SYMPOSIUM.


1083


but  this  says  nothing  against  the  general  practice,
and  Xenophon  in  his  Symposium  represents  So-
crates mightily  pleased  with  the  mimetic  dancing
and  other  feats  performed  on  that  occasion.  The
female  dancers  and  the  players  on  the  flute  and
the  cithara  were  frequently  introduced  at  the
Symposia  of  young  men  for  another  purpose,  and
were  oftentimes  actually  haipai  [Hetaerae],
as  we  see  clearly  represented  on  many  ancient  vases.
(See  for  example  Alus.  Borbon.  vol.  v.  t.  51.)  Re-
specting the  different  kinds  of  dances  performed  at
Symposia,  see  Saltatio.

Representations  of  Symposia  are  very  common
on  ancient  vases.  Two  guests  usually  reclined  on
each  couch  (kAivtj),  as  is  explained  on  p.  305,  and
illustrated  by  the  following  cut  from  one  of  Sir  W.
Hamilton's  vases,  where  the  couch  on  the  right
hand  contains  two  persons,  and  that  on  the  left  is
represented  with  only  one,  which  does  not  appear
to  have  been  the  usual  practice.  The  guests  wear
garlands  of  flowers,  and  the  two  who  are  reclining
on  the  same  couch  hold  a  (piaKt]  each  in  the  right
hand.


Sometimes  there  were  four  or  five  persons  on
one  couch,  as  in  the  following  woodcut,  taken
from  Millin  {Peintures  de  Vases  Antiques,  vol.  ii.
pi.  58).  Three  young  and  two  older  men  are  re-
clining on  a  couch  (K\ivr}),  with  their  left  arms
resting  on  striped  pillows  (irpoaKecpdXata  or  U7ra7-
Kdavia).  Before  the  couch  are  two  tables.  Three
of  the  men  are  holding  a  calijs  or  kvXi^  suspended
by  one  of  the  handles  to  the  fore-finger,  the  fourth
holds  a  (pidXr),  and  the  fifth  a  <f>td\7}  in  one  hand
and  a  ^vt6v  in  the  other.  [Calix  ;  Phiala  ;
Rhyton.]  In  the  middle  Comos  is  beating  the
tympanum.


1084  SYNDICUS.

Respecting  the  games  and  amusements  by  which
the  Symposia  were  enlivened,  it  is  unnecessary  to
Bay  much  here,  as  most  of  them  are  described  in
separate  articles  in  this  work.  Enigmas  or  riddles
(ali/iyfiaTa  or  yp7(poi)  were  among  the  most  usual
and  favourite  modes  of  diversion.  [Aenigma.]
The  Cottabos  was  also  another  favourite  game  at
Sj'-mposia,  and  was  played  at  in  various  ways.
[Cottabos.]  The  other  games  at  S^Tuposia,  which
require  mention,  are,  the  aa-TpayaKiarfiSs  and  KvSeia^
explained  under  Tali  and  Tesserae,  the  irerrda^
spoken  of  under  Latrunculi,  and  the  xoA/c/a^itds.
The  latter  consisted  in  turning  round  a  piece  of
money  placed  upright  on  its  edges,  and  causing
it  suddenly  to  stop  while  moving  by  placing  a
finger  on  its  top.  (Pollux,  ix.  118  ;  Eustath.  ad
ILxiv.  291,  p.  986.)

A  drinking-party  among  the  Romans  was  some-
times called  Convivium^  but  the  word  Comissatio
more  nearly  corresponds  to  the  Greek  (Tv^TT6(nov.
[Comissatio.]  The  Romans,  however,  usually
drank  during  their  dinner  (coena),  which  they  fre-
quently prolonged  during  many  hours  in  the  later
times  of  the  republic  and  under  the  empire.  Their
customs  connected  with  drinking  differed  little
from  those  of  the  Greeks,  and  have  been  incident-
ally noticed  above.

The  preceding  account  has  been  mainly  com-
posed from  Becker's  Charikles  (vol.  i.  p.  451,  &c.)
and  Gallus  (vol.  ii.  p.  235,  &c.),  where  the  sub-
ject is  treated  at  length.

SYNALLAGMA     {crvvaXKayiia).     [Symbo-

LAEON.]

SY'NDICUS  ((riVStKos),  an  advocate.,  is  fre-
quently used  as  synonymous  with  the  word  avvi]-
yopos,  to  denote  any  one  who  pleads  the  cause  of
another,  whether  in  a  court  of  justice  or  elsewhere.
SuvSi/ceTj/  also  is  used  indifferently  with  avvriyopeTi/
or  (Tvvaywvi^eadai.  (Andoc.  de  Myst.  19,  ed.
Steph.  ;  Demosth,  c.  Aristocr.  689,  c.  Zenoth.  885,
c.  Sieph.  1127.)  Thus,  the  five  public  advocates,
who  were  appointed  to  defend  the  ancient  laws
before  the  Court  of  Heliasts,  when  an  amendment
or  a  new  law  in  abrogation  thereof  was  proposed,
are  called  both  avif^iKoi  and  avvijyopoi.  As  to
them,  see  Nomothetes  and  also  Schomann,  de
Comit.  p.  255,  Ant.  Jur.  Publ.  Gr.  p.  228.  The
name  of  avvSiKoi  seems  to  have  been  peculiarly
applied  to  those  orators  who  were  sent  by  the  state
to  plead  the  cause  of  their  countrj^men  before  a
foreign  tribunal.  Aeschines,  for  example,  was  ap-
pointed to  plead  before  the  Amphictyonic  council
on  the  subject  of  the  Delian  temple  ;  but  a  certain
discovery  having  been  made  not  very  creditable  to
his  patriotism,  the  court  of  Areiopagus  took  upon
themselves  to  remove  him,  and  appoint  Hyperides
in  his  stead.  (Demosth.  de  Coron.  271,  272.)
These  extraordinary  advocates  are  not  to  be  con-
founded with  the  Pylagorae,  or  ordinary  Am-
phictyonic deputies.  (Schomann,  de  Comit.  p.  321,
Ant.  Jur.  Publ.  Gr.  p.  257.)  There  were  other
crvvSiKoi^  who  acted  rather  as  magistrates  or  judges
than  as  advocates,  though  they  probably  derived
their  name  from  the  circumstance  of  their  being
appointed  to  protect  the  interests  of  the  state.
These  were  extraordinary  functionaries,  created
from  time  to  time,  to  exercise  a  jurisdiction  in  dis-
putes concerning  confiscated  property  ;  as  when,
for  instance,  an  information  was  laid  against  a  man
for  having  in  his  possession  the  goods  of  a  con-
demned criminal,  or  which  were  liable  to  be  seized


SYNEGORUS.

in  execution  on  behalf  of  the  state  ;  or  when  the
goods  of  a  convict  having  been  confiscated,  a  claim
was  made  by  a  mortgagee,  or  other  creditor  having
a  lien  thereupon,  to  have  his  debt  satisfied  out  of
the  proceeds.  Such  a  claim  was  called  ivenia-K-nix/xa,
and  to  prosecute  it  eveTri(TK7]\paadai.  (Harpoc.  and
Suidas,  s.v.)  On  this  subject  the  reader  is  referred
to  the  speeches  of  Lysias  de  Publ.  Pecun.,  de  Nic.
Fratr.  Pecun.,  de  Aristoph.  Pecun..,  and  more  espe-
cially pp.  149,  151,  154,  ed.  Steph.  The  first  ap-
pointment of  these  judicial  crvvdiKoi  took  place  after
the  expulsion  of  the  thirty  tyrants  ;  and  one  of  their
duties  appears  to  have  been  to  receive  informations
from  the  (pvXapxoi  against  those  persons  who  had
served  in  the  cavalry  during  the  interregnum,  and
who  by  a  special  decree  of  the  people  were  ordered
to  restore  to  the  treasury  all  the  pay  which  they
had  received  for  that  service.  (Lysias,  pro  Alan-
tith.  146,  ed.  Steph.)  See  Synegorus  ;  Harpoc.
5.  V.  2w5iKot :  Meier,  Att.  Proc.  p.  110  ;  Scho-
mann, de  Comit.  p.  316.  [C.  R.  K.]

SYNEDRI  (crweSpoj),  a  name  given  to  the
members  of  any  council,  or  any  body  of  men  who
sat  together  to  consult  or  deliberate.  The  congress
of  Greeks  at  Salamis  is  called  crvvi'Spiov.  (Herod,
viii.  75,  79.)  Frequent  reference  is  made  to  the
general  assembly  of  the  Greeks,  tJ>  Koivhv  ruv
'EK\7}vcou  cvveSpiov,  at  Corinth,  Thermopylae,  or
elsewhere.  (Aesch.  c.  Ctesiph.  62,  ed.  Steph.  ;
Demosth.  Hepl  rwv  irphs  'AKe^avBpov^  215.)  When
the  new  alliance  of  the  Athenians  was  formed  after
B.  c.  377,  upon  fairer  and  more  equitable  principles
than  the  former,  the  several  states  who  were  in-
cluded therein  were  expressly  declared  to  be  inde-
pendent, and  a  congress  was  held  at  Athens,  to
which  each  of  the  allied  states  sent  representatives.
The  congress  was  called  aweSpiov^  and  the  depu-
ties arvvedpoi,  and  the  sums  furnished  by  the  allies
(TWTd^eis,  in  order  to  avoid  the  old  and  hateiiil
name  of  <^(5pos  or  tribute.  (Harpocrats.  r.;  Plut.^'o/.
1 5.)  Many  allusions  to  this  new  league  are  made
by  the  orators,  especially  Isocrates,  who  strongly
urges  his  countrymen  to  adhere  to  the  principle  on
which  the  league  was  formed,  and  renounce  all
attempt  to  re-establish  their  old  supremacy.  (De
Pace,  165,  ed.  Steph.)  Perhaps  the  avveSpoi  men-
tioned in  the  oath  of  the  AiKacrral  are  the  Athenian
members  of  this  congress.  (Schomann,  Att.  Proc.
130.)  For  further  information  on  the  subject  of
this  confederacy,  see  Schomann,  Ant.  Jur.  PM.  Gr.
p.  434  ;  Bockh,  Publ.  Econ.  of  Athens,  p.  418,  2d
ed.  ;   Thirlwall,  Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  v.  pp.  42,  203.

The  name  of  awedpiou  was  given  at  Athens  to
any  magisterial  or  ofiicial  body,  as  to  the  court  of
Areiopagus  (Aesch.  c.  Timarch.  13  ;  Dinarch.  c.
Demosth.  91,  ed.  Steph.);  or  to  the  place  where
they  transacted  business,  their  board  or  council-
room.  (Isocrat.  riepi  'Kvri56aius,  318,  ed.  Steph. ;
Demosth.  c.  Theocr.  1324.)  [C.  R.  K.]

SYNEGO'RICON  {cwnyopiKSv).  [Syne-
gorus.]

SYNE'GORUS  (arvyfiyopos),  may  be  trans-
lated an  advocate  or  counsel,  though  such  transla-
tion will  convey  to  the  English  reader  a  more
compretiensive  meaning  than  the  Greek  word
strictly  bears.

According  to  the  ancient  practice  of  the  Athenian
law,  parties  to  an  action  were  obliged  to  conduct
their  own  causes  without  assistance :  but  on  the
increase  of  litigation  the  sciences  of  law  and  rheto-
ric began  to  unfold  themselves  ;  and  men,  who  had


SYNEGORUS.

paid  no  attention  to  these,  were  unable  to  compete
Avith  more  experienced  opponents.  To  consult  a
friend  before  bringing  an  action,  or  about  the  best
means  of  preparing  a  defence,  were  obvious  expe-
dients. It  was  but  another  step  to  have  a  speech
prepared  by  such  friend  out  of  court,  to  be  delivered
by  the  party  himself  when  the  cause  was  brought
to  trial.  A  class  of  persons  thus  sprang  up,  some-
what in  the  nature  of  chamber  counsel,  who  re-
ceived money  for  writing  speeches  and  giving  legal
advice  to  those  who  consulted  them.  Of  this  class
Antiphon  was  the  first  who  acquired  any  celebrity.
Lysias,  Isaeus,  and  Isocrates  obtained  considerable
incomes  by  speech-writing.  Demosthenes  followed
the  same  profession  for  some  time,  until  his  engage-
ments in  public  business  forced  him  to  relinquish
it.  (Dem.  c.  Zenoth.  890.)  These  persons  were
called  not  (Tvpiiyopoi,  but  Xoyoypdipoi^  a  name  ap-
plied to  Demosthenes  reproachfully  by  his  rival,
who  accuses  him  also  of  betraying  his  clients  by
showing  the  speeches  which  he  had  written  to  the
adversary.  (Aesch.  c.  Ctesiph.  78,  c.  Timarch.  1 3,
ed.  Steph.)  [Logographi.]  Still,  whatever  as-
sistance the  party  might  have  received  out  of
court,  the  law  which  compelled  him  to  appear  in
person  at  the  trial,  remained  in  force  ;  although
the  prohibition  to  speak  by  counsel  was  so  far  re-
laxed, that  if  the  party  was  labouring  under  illness,
or  through  any  physical  or  mental  debility  was  un-
able to  conduct  his  own  cause  without  manifest
disadvantage,  he  might  (by  permission  of  the  court)
procure  a  relation  or  friend  to  speak  for  him.
Thus,  when  Miltiades  was  impeached  for  treason,
and  by  reason  of  a  gangrene  in  his  hip  was  unable
to  plead  his  own  cause,  he  was  brought  on  a  litter
into  court,  and  his  brother  Tisagoras  addressed  the
people  on  his  behalf.  So,  when  Isocrates  was  ill,
his  son  Aphareus  spoke  for  him  in  the  cause  about
the  avrihoais.  And  in  the  speech  of  Demosthenes
against  Leochares  we  see  (p.  1081)  that  the  son
conducts  his  father's  cause.  As  a  general  rule,  the
party  was  expected  to  address  the  court  himself ;
for  the  judges  liked  to  foi-m  an  opinion  of  him
from  his  voice,  look,  and  demeanour  ;  and  therefore
if  a  man  distrusted  his  own  ability,  he  would  open
the  case  himself  by  a  short  speech,  and  then  ask
permission  for  his  friend  to  come  forward.  (De-
mosth.  c.  Phorm.  922.  c.  Neaer.  1349  )  This  was
seldom  refused  ;  and  in  the  time  of  the  orators  the
practice  was  so  well  established,  that  the  principal
speeches  in  the  cause  were  not  unfrequently  made
by  the  advocate.  The  defences  by  Demosthenes
of  Ctesiphon  against  Aeschines,  and  of  Phanus
against  Aphobus,  may  be  cited  as  examples.  In
both  of  these  it  will  be  seen  that  Demosthenes
was  as  much  interested  as  the  defendants  them-
selves ;  and  it  is  further  to  be  observed,  that  the
advocate  was  looked  upon  with  more  favour  on  this
very  account  ;  for  as  no  fees  were  allowed  to  be
taken,  a  speaker  was  regarded  with  suspicion  who
had  no  apparent  motive  for  undertaking  the  cause
of  another  person.  Hence  we  find  in  most  of  the
avvTjjopiKol  \6yoi,  that  the  speaker  avows  what
his  motives  are  ;  as  for  instance,  that  he  is  con-
nected by  blood  or  friendship  with  the  one  party,
or  at  enmity  with  the  other,  or  that  he  has  a  stake
in  the  matter  at  issue  between  them.  (See  the
opening  of  the  speeches  of  Isaeus,  de  Nicost.  her.
and  de  Philoct.  her.  ;  Isocrates  c.  Euthyn.  and  De-
mosthenes c.  Androt.)  In  the  cause  against  Leo-
chares  above  cited  it  is  evident  that  the  son  had


SYNEGORUS.


1085


an  equal  interest  with  his  father  in  preserving  the
inheritance,  and  therefore  he  would  be  considered
in  the  light  of  a  party.  The  law  which  pro-
hibited the  advocate  from  taking  fees,  under  peril
of  a  ypacp^  before  the  Thesmothetae  (Demosth.
c.  Steph.  1137),  made  no  provision  (and  perhaps  it
was  impossible  to  make  an  effective  provision)
against  an  influence  of  a  more  pernicious  kind,  viz.
that  of  political  association,  which  induced  men  to
support  the  members  of  their  club  or  party  without
the  least  regard  for  the  right  or  justice  of  the  case.
Hence  the  frequent  allusions  bj'  the  orators  to  the
epyaar^pia  cvKocpauruv^  fjLoxSripwv  avdpwirwu  (tvv-
etTTTjKOTwv,  irapacTKevas  X6ywv^  fxapTvpcou^  arvvw-
fioTwu,  all  which  expressions  have  reference  to  that
system  of  confederation  at  Athens,  by  whicli  indi-
viduals endeavoured  to  influence  and  control  the
courts  of  justice.  (See  Erani  ;  Sycophantes  ;
Reiske,  Index  in  Orat.Att.  s.  v.  'Epyaariipiov  and
irapacrKev^.)  That  friends  were  often  requested  to
plead,  not  on  account  of  any  incapacity  in  the
party,  but  in  order  that  by  their  presence  they
might  exert  an  influence  on  the  bench,  is  evident
from  an  attentive  perusal  of  the  orators.  In  some
cases  this  might  be  a  perfectly  legitimate  course,  as
where  a  defendant  charged  with  some  serious  crime
called  a  man  of  high  reputation  to  speak  in  his  be-
half, and  pledge  himself  thereby  that  he  believed
the  charge  was  groundless.  With  such  view  Aes-
chines, on  his  trial  for  misconduct  in  the  embassy,
prayed  the  aid  of  Eubulus  and  Phocion,  the  latter
of  whom  he  had  previously  called  as  a  witness.
(Aesch.  de  Fals.  Leg.  51,  52,  ed.  Steph.)

On  criminal  trials  the  practice  with  respect  to
advocates  was  much  the  same  as  in  civil  actions;
only  that  it  seems  to  have  been  more  common  to
have  several  speakers  on  the  part  of  the  prosecu-
tion ;  and  in  causes  of  importance,  wherein  the
state  was  materially  interested,  more  especially  in
those  which  were  brought  before  the  court  upon  an
6tVa77eAja,  it  was  usual  to  appoint  public  advo-
cates (called  (Tvvi]yopoi^  avvSiKoi,  or  Karriyopoi)  to
manage  the  prosecution.  Thus,  Pericles  was  ap-
pointed, not  at  his  own  desire,  to  assist  in  the  im-
peachment of  Cimon.  (Plut.  Pericl.  1 0.)  Public
prosecutors  were  chosen  by  the  people  to  bring  to
trial  Demosthenes,  Aristogiton,  and  others  charged
with  having  received  bribes  from  Harpalus.  (Di-
narch.  c.  Demosth.  90,  QQ^  ed.  Steph.)  In  ordinary
cases  however  the  accuser  or  prosecutor  (Kari^yopos)
was  a  distinct  person  from  the  avvriyopos^  who  act-
ed only  as  auxiliary  to  him.  It  might  be,  indeed,
that  the  avviiyopos  performed  the  most  important
part  at  the  trial,  as  Anytus  and  Lycon  are  said  to
have  done  on  the  trial  of  Socrates,  wherein  Melitus
was  prosecutor  ;  or  it  might  be  that  he  performed
a  subordinate  part,  making  only  a  short  speech  in
support  of  the  prosecution,  like  those  of  Lysias
against  Epicrates,  Ergocles,  and  Philocrates,  which
are  called  i-jriXoyoi.  But  however  this  might  be,
he  was  in  point  of  law  an  auxiliary  only,  and  was
neither  entitled  to  a  share  of  the  reward  (if  any)
given  by  the  law  to  a  successful  accuser,  nor  liable,
on  the  other  hand,  to  a  penalty  of  a  thousand
drachms,  or  the  arifxia  consequent  upon  a  failure
to  get  a  fifth  part  of  the  votes.  Here  we  must  dis-
tinguish between  an  advocate  and  a  joint  prosecu-
tor. The  latter  stood  precisely  in  the  same  situa-
tion as  his  colleague,  just  as  a  co-plaintiff  in  a  civil
action.  The  names  of  both  would  appear  in  the
bill  (€7KA.77/ia),  both  would  attend  the  avaKpiats


108G


SYNEGORUS.


and  would  in  short  have  the  same  rights  and  liabi-
lities ;  the  elder  of  the  two  only  having  priority  in
certain  matters  of  form,  such  as  the  irptaToKoyia.
(Argum.  Or.  Dem.  c.  Androt.  592.)  In  the  pro-
ceeding against  the  law  of  Leptines  there  were  two
prosecutors,  Aphepsion  and  Ctesippus  the  son  of
Chabrias  ;  each  addressed  the  court,  Aphepsion
first,  as  being  the  elder  ;  each  had  his  advocate,
the  one  Phormio,  the  other  Demosthenes,  who  tells
us  in  the  exordium  that  he  had  undertaken  to
speak,  partly  from  a  conviction  of  the  impolicy  of
the  law,  and  partly  to  oblige  the  son  of  Chabrias,
who  would  have  been  deprived  of  certain  privileges
inherited  from  his  father,  if  the  law  had  taken  ef-
fect.    (See  Argum.  453.)

There  seems  to  have  been  no  law  which  limited
the  number  of  persons  who  might  appear  as  advo-
cates, either  in  public  or  private  causes.  There
was  however  this  practical  limitation,  that  as  the
time  allowed  for  speaking  to  either  party  was  mea-
sured by  the  clepsydra,  if  either  chose  to  em-
ploy a  friend  to  speak  for  him,  he  subtracted  so
much  from  the  length  of  his  own  speech  as  he
meant  to  leave  for  that  of  his  friend,  and  the  whole
time  allowed  was  precisely  the  same,  whatever  the
number  of  persons  who  spoke  on  one  side.  Both
parties  were  usually  allowed  to  make  two  speeches,
the  plaintiff  beginning,  the  defendant  following,
then  the  plaintiff  replying,  and  lastly  the  defendant
again.  These  are  often  called  \6yoi  irpdrepoi  and
So-repoi  respectively,  but  are  not  to  be  confounded
with  the  (TvuTTyopiai  or  ScvrepoXoylai,  which  might,
and  usually  did,  immediately  follow  the  speech  of
the  party  in  whose  favour  they  were  made,  though
as  a  matter  of  arrangement  it  might  be  convenient
sometimes  to  reserve  the  speech  of  the  advocate  for
the  reply,  in  which  case  the  (rvv7)yopiKhs  \6yos  and
the  var^pos  \6yos  would  be  the  same.  (Schomann,
Alt.  Proc.  pp.  707—712,  715  ;  Platner,  Proc.  und
King.  vol.  i.  p.  91.)

With  respect  to  the  custom  of  producing  friends
to  speak  in  mitigation  of  damages  or  punishment,
see  TiMEMA.  As  to  the  public  advocates  ap-
pointed to  defend  the  old  laws  before  the  Court  of
lieliasts,  see  Syndicus,  Nomothetes.

The  fee  of  a  drachm  (t6  ffwriyopiKov)  mentioned
by  Aristophanes  (Vespae,  691)  was  probably  the
sum  paid  to  the  public  advocate  whenever  he  was
employed  on  behalf  of  the  state.  It  has  been
shown  clearly  by  Schomann,  that  Petit  was  wrong
in  supposing  that  the  orators  or  statesmen  who
spoke  in  the  assembly  are  called  avv-iiyopoi.  They
are  always  distinguished  by  the  title  of  p^ropes  or
Sr^fx-fiyopoi,  or  if  they  possessed  much  influence  with
the  people,  Srjuaytayoi :  and  it  is  not  to  be  sup-
posed that  they  constituted  a  distinct  class  of
persons,  inasmuch  as  any  Athenian  citizen  was  at
liberty  to  address  the  assembly  when  he  pleased  ;
though,  as  it  was  found  iti  practice  that  the  posses-
sion of  the  firifia  was  confined  to  a  few  persons  who
were  best  fitted  for  it  by  their  talent  and  experi-
ence, such  persons  acquired  the  title  of  (>-fiTopes,  &c.
(DeCoinit.  pp.  107— 109,  210.)  There  appears
however  to  have  been  (at  least  at  one  period)  a
regular  appointment  of  <rvvi]yopoi,  ten  in  number,
with  whom  the  Scholiast  on  Aristophanes  {I.  c.)
confounded  the  pi]ropis  or  orators.  For  what  pur-
pose such  ten  avi'-ffyopoi  were  appointed,  is  a  matter
about  which  we  have  no  certain  information.  Some
think  they  were  officers  connected  with  the  board
of  Scrutators  who  audited  magistrates'  accounts.


SYNGRAPHE.

Aristotle  (Polit.  vi.  8)  says  the  authorities  to  whom
magistrates  rendered  their  accounts  were  called  in
some  of  the  Greek  states  ei/flui/oj,  in  others  Xoyiaral^
in  others  avvnyopoi  or  f^eraa-Tal,  and  the  author
of  the  Lexicon  Rhetoricum,  published  by  Bekker
(Anccd.  i.  301),  says  that  the  Synegori  were
6.pxovT€s  KXrjpwToi  oi  eSoiiQovv  ro7s  koyiarali
irphs  Toj  evOvvas.  But  what  sort  of  assistance  did
they  render  ?  Is  it  not  probable  that  they  per-
formed the  duty  which  their  name  imports,  viz.
that  of  prosecuting  such  magistrates  as,  in  the  opi-
nion of  the  Logistae,  had  rendered  an  unsatisfactory
accoxmt.''  Any  individual,  indeed,  might  prefer
charges  against  a  magistrate  when  the  time  for
rendering  his  account  had  arrived  ;  but  the  prose-
cution by  a  (Tvvriyopos  would  be  an  ex  officio
proceeding,  such  as  the  Logistae  were  bound  to
institute,  if  they  had  any  reason  to  suspect  the
accounting  party  of  malversation  or  misconduct.
If  this  conjecture  be  well-founded,  it  is  not  unrea-
sonable to  suppose  that  these  ten  cvvi]yopot  were
no  other  than  the  public  advocates  who  were  em-
ployed to  conduct  state  prosecutions  of  a  different
kind.  They  might  be  appointed  annually,  either
by  lot  or  by  election  (according  to  Harpocration,
s.  V.  ^w-fiyopos).  Their  duties  would  be  only
occasional,  and  they  would  receive  a  drachm  as
their  fee  whenever  they  were  employed.  Bockh's
conjecture,  that  they  received  a  drachm  a  day  for
every  day  of  business,  is  without  much  founda-
tion. [C.  R.  K.]

SYNGENEIA  ((Tvyy4veia).  [Herbs,  p.  595,
b.]

SYNGRAPHE  ((Tvyypa<pi])^  signifies  a  written
contract ;  whereas  (Tvv6i\Kii)  and  (rvfxS6\aiov  do  not
necessarily  import  that  the  contract  is  in  writing  ;
and  dfjLoXoyia  is,  strictly  speaking,  a  verbal  agree-
ment. Pollux  explains  the  word,  (rvv9r]KT)  ey-
ypacpos,  bfjLoXoyia  eyy pacpos  (viii.  140).

At  Athens  important  contracts  were  usually  re-
duced to  writing  ;  such  as  leases  (fiicrduKreis),  loana
of  money,  and  all  executory  agreements,  where  cer-
tain conditions  were  to  be  performed.  The  rent,
the  rate  of  interest,  with  other  conditions,  and  also
the  penalties  for  breach  of  contract  ( iiriTifiia  t^  e/c
rrjs  avyypa(()rjs)  were  particularly  mentioned.  The
names  of  the  witnesses  and  the  sureties  (if  any)
were  specified.  The  whole  was  contained  in  a
little  tablet  of  wax  or  wood  (^iSXlovor  ypanixareiov,
sometimes  double,  hiiTTvxov)^  which  was  sealed,
and  deposited  with  some  third  person,  mutually
agreed  on  between  the  parties.  (Isocrat.  Trapez.
362,  ed.  Steph.  ;  Demos,  c.  Apat.  903,  904,  c.
Dionysod.  1283.)  An  example  of  a  contract  on  a
bottomry  loan  {yavriK)]  (rvyypacpij)  will  be  found
in  Demosth.  c.  Lacrit.  926,  where  the  terms  are
carefully  drawn  up,  and  there  is  a  declaration  at
the  end,  Kvpiwrepov  Se  Trepi  tovtwv  aWh  /tiTjSej/
(Ivai  T7js  (Tvyypa(pris,  "  which  agreement  shall  be
valid,  anything  to  the  contrary  notwithstimdingi'

Anything  might  form  the  subject  of  a  written
contract  —  a  release  (S(|>eff-is),  a  settlement  of  dis-
putes {Zi(x\v<ns\  the  giving  up  of  a  slave  to  be  ex-
amined by  torture,  or  any  other  accepted  challenge
{irp6K\y]<jis)  ;  in  short,  any  matter  wherein  the
contracting  parties  thought  it  safer  to  have  docu-
mentary evidence  of  the  terms.  'EK5i56vai  av-
ZpiavTo,  Kara  avyy pa<p)}v  is,  to  give  an  order  for
the  making  of  a  statue  of  certain  dimensions,  of  a
certain  fashion,  at  a  certain  price,  &c.,  as  specified
in  the  agreement.    (Demosth.  de  Cor.  268.)     No


SYNOTKIA.

particular  form  of  words  was  necessary  to  make  the
instrument  valid  in  point  of  law,  the  sole  object
being  to  furnish  good  evidence  of  the  parties'  in-
tention. The  agreement  itself  was  valid  without
any  writing  ;  and  would  form  the  ground  of  an  ac-
tion against  the  party  who  broke  it,  if  it  could  be
sufficiently  proved.  Hence  it  was  the  practice  to
have  witnesses  to  a  p<irol  agreement.  The  law  de-
clared Kvpias  elj/at  tos  irphs  aWT]\ovs  SfioXoylas^
&s  hu  iuavrlui  fxaprvpwv  iroiiiawvTai.  (Demosth.  c.
Phaenipp.  1042,  c.  Etierg.  et  Mnes.  1162,  c.  Dionys.
1283,  c.  Onetor.  869.)  It  seems  that  for  the  main-
tenance of  an  ifiiropiK^  Siktj  it  was  necessary  to  have
a  written  contract.    (Demosth.  c.  Zenoth.  882.)

Bankers  were  persons  of  extensive  credit,  and
had  peculiar  confidence  reposed  in  them.  They
were  often  chosen  as  the  depositaries  of  agree-
ments and  other  documents.  Money  was  put  into
their  hands  without  any  acknowledgment,  and
often  without  witnesses.  They  entered  these  and
also  the  loans  made  by  themselves  to  others  in
their  books,  making  memoranda  (viroixuTjfxaTo)  of
any  important  particulars.  Such  entries  were  re-
garded as  strong  evidence  in  courts  of  justice.
Sureties  were  usually  required  by  them  on  making
loans.  (Isocr.  Trapez.  369,  ed.  Steph.  ;  Demosth.
c.  Apat  894,  pro  Phorm.  950,  958,  c.  Timoth.
1185,  c.  Pliorm.  908;  Bockh,  PmW.  Ecm.  of
Alliens,  p.  128,  2d  ed.)

IZvyypafp^  denotes  an  instrument  signed  by  both
or  all  the  contracting  parties.  Xeipdypacpov  is  a
mere  acknowledgment  by  one  party.  2,vyypd\l/a(T6ai.
(Tuyypacp^v  or  avvQ-i]KT]v  is  to  draw  up  the  contract,
crr}fxr]vacrdai  to  seal  it,  avaipeiv  to  cancel,  av€\4<r6ai
to  take  it  up  from  the  person  with  whom  it  was
deposited,  for  the  purpose  of  cancelling,  when  it
was  no  longer  of  any  use.  'ICiravoiyeiu,  to  break
the  seal  clandestinely  for  some  fraudulent  purpose,
as  to  alter  the  terms  of  the  instrument,  or  erase  or
destroy  some  material  part,  or  even  the  whole,
tliereof  (fieraypdcpeiv  or  diacpddpeiv),  [Symbo-
LAEON.]  [C.  R.  K.]

SYNOI'KIA  ((TvuoLKia  or  avvoiKea-ia),  a  fes-
tival celebrated  every  year  at  Athens  on  the  1 6th
of  Ilecatombaeon  in  honour  of  Athena.  Jt  was
believed  to  have  been  instituted  by  Theseus  to
commemorate  the  concentration  of  the  government
of  the  various  towns  of  Attica  and  Athens.
(Thucyd.  iii.  15  ;  Steph.  Byz.  s.  v.  'ABriuai.)
According  to  the  Scholiast  on  Aristophanes  (Pax,
962)  an  unbloody  sacrifice  was  on  this  day  offered
to  the  goddess  of  peace  (elprjuT)).  This  festival,
which  Plutarch  (Thes.  24)  calls  /xerolKia,  is  men-
tioned both  by  him  and  by  Thucydides  as  still  held
in  their  days.  (Compare  Meyer,  de  Bon.  damnat.
p.  120.)  [L.  S.]

SYNOI'KIA  ((TvvoiKia.)  differs  from  oUia  in
this  :  that  the  latter  is  a  dwelling-house  for  a
single  family  :  the  former  adapted  to  hold  several
families,  a  lodging-house,  insula,  as  the  Romans
would  say.  The  distinction  is  thus  expressed  by
Aeschines  (c.  Timarch.  17,  ed.  Steph.):  Hirov  fxhv
yap  TToAAoi  p-iaQoiadpLevoi  jxiav  oXktio-iv  5ie\6ixevoi
exovai,  avvoiKiav  Kahov/xeu,  'dtrov  S'  els  ivoiKu,
oIklov.

There  was  a  great  deal  of  speculation  in  the
building  and  letting  of  houses  at  Athens.  (Xe-
noph.  Occon.  iii.  1.)  The  lodging-houses  were  let
mostly  to  foreigners  who  came  to  Athens  on  busi-
ness, and  especially  to  the  fiiroiKoi,  whom  the  law
did  not  allow  to  acquire  real   property,  and  who


SYNTHESIS.


1087


therefore  could  not  purchase  houses  of  their  own.
(Demosth.  pro  Phorm.  946.)  As  they,  v.ith  their
families,  formed  a  population  of  about  45,000,  the
number  of  (rvvoiKiai  must  have  been  considerable.
Pasion,  the  banker,  had  a  lodging-house  valued  at
100  minas.  Xenophon  recommended  that  the
Ij.4toikoi  should  be  encouraged  to  invest  their
money  in  houses,  and  that  leave  should  be  granted
to  the  most  respectable  to  build  and  become  house-
proprietors  (olKo^of^riaaixeuois  iyKCKTiiaOai,  de
Vectig.  ii.  6.)  The  tVoTeAets  laboured  under  no
such  disability ;  for  Lysias  and  his  brother  Pole-
marchus,  who  belonged  to  that  class,  were  the
owners  of  three  houses.  The  value  of  houses  must
have  varied  according  to  the  size,  the  build,  the
situation,  and  other  circumstances.  Those  in  the
city  were  more  valuable  than  those  in  the  Peiraeeus
or  the  country,  caeteris  paribus.  Two  counting-
houses  are  mentioned  by  Isaeus  {de  Hayn.  her.
88,  ed.  Steph.)  as  yielding  a  retiu-n  of  rather  more
than  8^  per  cent,  interest  on  the  purchase-n;oney.
But  this  probably  was  much  below  the  average.
The  summer  season  was  the  most  profitable  for
the  letting  of  houses,  when  merchants  and  other
visitors  flocked  to  Athens.  The  rent  was  com-
monly paid  by  the  month.  Lodging-houses  were
frequently  taken  on  speculation  by  persons  called
vavK\r]poi  or  aTaQ{j.ovxoi,  who  made  a  profit  by
underletting  them,  and  sometimes  for  not  very
reputable  purposes.  (Isaeus,  de  Philoct.  her.  58,
ed.  Steph.)  Hesychius  explains  th^  word  va\)K\-r\-
pos,  6  (TvvoiKias  Trpoeardljs :  see  also  Harpocration,
s.  V.  Some  derive  the  word  from  vaiw  :  but  it  is
more  probable  that  it  was  given  as  a  sort  of  nick-
name to  the  class,  when  they  first  sprang  up.  (See
Stephan.  Thesaur.  6608  ;  Reiske,  Index  in  Or.
Att.  s.  V.  SuvotKio  :  Bcickh,  Publ.  Econ.  of  Athens^
pp.  6B,  141,  2d  ed.)  [C.  R.  K.]

SYNTAGMA  (jrvvrayfia).  [Exercitus,  p.
488,  a.]

SYNTAXEIS  ((TvvT&^^is).  [Synedri.]
SYNTELEIA  {awTiKiia).  [Trierarchia.)
SYNTHE'CE  ((ruv0:fjK77).  [Symbolaeon.]
SY'NTHESIS,  a  garment  frequently  worn  at
dinner,  and  sometimes  also  on  other  occasions.  As
it  was  inconvenient  to  wear  the  toga  at  table  on
account  of  its-many  folds,  it  was  customary  to  have
dresses  especially  appropriated  to  this  purpose,
called  vestes  coenatoriae,  or  coenatoria  (Mart.  x.  87.
12,  xiv.  135  ;  Petr.  21),  accubitoria  (Petr.  30),  or
Synflieses.  The  Synthesis  is  commonly  explained
to  be  a  loose  kind  of  robe,  like  the  Pallium ;  but
Becker  (Ga/lus,  vol.  i.  p.  37)  supposes  from  a  com-
parison of  a  passage  of  Dion  Cassius  (Ixiii.  13)
with  one  of  Suetonius  (Ner.  5 1 )  describing  the  dress
of  Nero,  that  it  must  have  been  a  kind  of  tunic,  an
indumentum  rather  than  an  amictus.  [AlwicTUS.]
That  it  was,  however,  an  easy  and  comfortable  kind
of  dress,  as  we  should  say,  seems  to  be  evident
from  its  use  at  table  above  mentioned,  and  also
from  its  being  worn  by  all  classes  at  the  Satur-
nalia, a  season  of  universal  relaxation  and  enjoy-
ment. (Mart.  xiv.  1,  141,  vi.  24.)  More  than
this  respecting  its  form  we  cannot  say  :  it  was
usually  dyed  with  some  colour  (Mart.  ii.  46,  x.
29),  and  was  not  white  like  the  toga.

The  word  Synthesis  is  also  applied  to  a  set  of
wearing  apparel  or  a  complete  wardrobe.  (Dig.  34.
tit.  3,  s.  38.)  This  use  of  the  word  agrees  better
with  its  etymology  {avvQeais,  avvriQtiiJn)  thiui  tha
one  mentioned  above.  (Becker,  I.  c.)


1088


SYRINX.


SYRINX  ((TvpiyO,  the  Pan's  Pipe,  or  Pandean
Pipe,  was  the  appropriate  musical  instrument  of
the  Arcadian  and  other  Grecian  shepherds,  and  was
regarded  by  them  as  the  invention  of  Pan,  their
tutelary  god  (Virg.  Buc.  ii.  32,  viii.  24),  who  was
sometimes  heard  playing  upon  it  (avpi^ovTos :  see
Theocrit.  j.  3.  14,  16  ;  Schol.  in  loc. ;  Longus,  iv.
27),  as  they  imagined,  on  mount  Maenalus.  (Pans,
viii.  36.  §  5.)  It  was  of  course  attributed  to  Fau-
nus,  who  was  the  same  with  Pan.  (Hor.  Carm.  i.
1 7.  1 0.)  "When  the  Roman  poets  had  occasion  to
mention  it,  they  called  it  fistula  (Virg.  Btic.  ii.  36,
iii.  22,  25  ;  Hor.  Carm.  iv.  12.  10  ;  Ovid.  Met.
viii.  192,  xiii.  784  ;  Mart.  xiv.  63  ;  Tibull.  i.  5.
20.)  It  was  also  variously  denominated  according
to  the  materials  of  which  it  was  constructed,
whether  of  cane  {tenui  arundine,  Virg.  Bttc.  vi.  8  ;
Hom.  IIi/mn.inPana^l5;  iroifxcvicp  Soyci/fi, Brunck,
Anal.  i.  489),  reed  (calamo,  Virg.  Btic.  i.  10,  ii.
34,  V.  2  ;  Kd\afio5,  Theocrit.  viii.  24  ;  Longus,
i.  4),  or  hemlock  {dcuta,  Virg.  Btic.  v.  85).  In
general  seven  hollow  stems  of  these  plants  were
fitted  together  by  means  of  wax,  having  been  pre-
viously cut  to  the  proper  lengths,  and  adjusted  so
as  to  form  an  octave  (Virg.  Btic.  ii.  32,  36) ;  but
sometimes  nine  were  admitted,  giving  an  equal
number  of  notes.  (Theocrit.  viii.  18 — 22.)  Another
refinement  in  the  construction  of  this  instrument,
which,  however,  was  rarely  practised,  was  to  ar-
range the  pipes  in  a  curve  so  as  to  fit  the  form  of
the  lip,  instead  of  arranging  them  in  a  plane.
(Theocrit.  i.  129.)  A  syrinx  of  eight  reeds  is
shown  in  the  gem  figured  on  page  846.  The  an-
nexed woodcut  is  taken  from  a  bas-relief  in  the
collection  at  Appledurcombe  in  the  Isle  of  Wight.
(Mus.  Worslet/anum,  pi.  9.)  It  represents  Pan
reclining  at  the  entrance  of  the  cave,  which  was
dedicated  to  him  in  the  Acropolis  at  Athens.  He
holds  in  his  right  hand  a  drinking-horn  [Rhyton]
and  in  his  left  a  syrinx,  which  is  strengthened  by
two  transverse  bands.


The  ancients  always  considered  the  Pan's  Pipe
as  a  rustic  instrument,  chiefly  used  by  those  who
tended  flocks  and  herds  (Hom.  Jl.  xviii.  526  ;
Apoll.  Rhod.  i.  577  ;  Dionys.  Perieg.  996  ;  Longus,
i.  2,  i.  14—16,  ii.  24—26)  ;  but  also  admitted  to
regulate  the  dance.  (Hes.  Scut.  278.)  The  Ly-
dians,  whose  troops  marched  to  military  music,
employed  this  together  with  other  instruments  for
the  purpose.  (Herod,  i.  17.)  This  instrument  was
the  origin  of  the  organ  [Hydraula],

The  term  (ripiy^  was  also  applied  to  levels,  or
narrow    subterranean    passages,   made   either  in


SYSSITIA.

searching  for  metals,  in  mining  at  the  sifge  of  a
city  (Polyaen.  v.  17),  or  in  forming  catacombs  for
the  dead.  (Aelian,  H.  A.  vi.  43,  xvi.  15.)  [J.  Y.]
SYRMA  {a-vp/xa}^  which  properly  means  that
which  is  drawn  or  dragged  (from  crvpo})^  is  applied
to  a  dress  with  a  train.  The  long  Peplos  worn  by
the  Trojan  matrons  was  consequently  a  dress  some-
what of  this  kind.  (//.  vi.  442.)  The  Syrma,  how-
ever, was  more  especially  the  name  of  the  dress
worn  by  the  tragic  actors,  which  had  a  train  to  it
trailing  upon  the  ground  ;  whence  the  word  is  ex-
plained by  Pollux  (vii.  67),  as  a  rpayiKhu  (p6p7)/xa
iTTi<Tvp6fiivov,  and  is  alluded  to  by  Horace  {Ar.
Poet.  215),  in  the  words,

traxitque  vagus  per  pulpita  vestem.

(Compare  Juv.  viii.  229.)  Hence  we  find  Syrma
used  metaphorically  for  tragedy  itself.  (Juv.  xv.
30  ;  Mart.  iv.  49.)

SYSSPTIA  ((Tvcra-iTia).  The  custom  of  taking
the  principal  meal  of  the  day  in  public  prevailed
extensively  amongst  the  Greeks  from  very  early
ages.  It  existed  not  only  with  the  Spartans  and
Cretans,  amongst  both  of  whom  it  was  kept  up  till
comparatively  recent  times,  but  also  at  Meg.ira  in
the  age  of  fheognis  (v.  305),  and  at  Corinth  in
the  time  of  Periander,  who  it  seems  abolished  the
practice  as  being  favourable  to  aristocracy.  (Arist.
Pol.  v.  9.  §  2.)  Nor  was  it  confined  to  the  Hellenic
nation :  for  according  to  Aristotle  (Pol.  vii.  9),  it
prevailed  still  earlier  amongst  the  Oenotrians  in
the  south  of  Italy,  and  also  at  Carthage,  the  po-
litical and  social  institutions  of  which  state  resem-
bled those  of  Sparta  and  Crete.  (Pol.  ii.  8.)  The
origin  of  the  usage  cannot  be  historically  estab-
lished ;  but  it  seems  reasonable  to  refer  it  to  infant
or  patriarchal  communities,  the  members  of  which
being  intimately  connected  by  the  ties  of  a  close
political  union  and  kindred,  may  naturally  be  sup-
posed to  have  lived  together  almost  as  members  of
the  same  family.  But  however  and  wherever  it
originated,  the  natural  tendency  of  such  a  practice
was  to  bind  the  citizens  of  a  state  in  the  closest
union  ;  and  accordingly  we  find  that  at  Sparta,
Lycurgus  availed  himself  of  it  for  this  purpose,
though  we  cannot  determine  with  any  certainty
whether  he  introduced  it  there,  or  merely  perpe-
tuated and  regulated  an  institution,  which  the
Spartans  brought  with  them  from  their  mother-
country  and  retained  at  Sparta  as  being  suitable  to
their  position  and  agreeable  to  their  national  habits.
The  latter  supposition  is  perhaps  the  more  probable.
The  Cretan  usage  Aristotle  (Pol.  vii.  9)  attributes
to  Minos ;  this,  however,  may  be  considered  rather
"  the  philosopher's  opinion  than  as  an  historical
tradition :  "  but  the  institution  was  confessedly  of
so  high  antiquity,  that  the  Peloponnesian  colonists
may  well  be  supposed  to  have  found  it  already
existing  in  Crete,  even  if  there  had  been  no  Dorian
settlers  in  the  island  before  them.  (Thirlwall,
Hist,  of  Greece.,  vol.  i.  p.  287.)

The  Cretan  name  for  the  Syssitia  was  *AvSpe7a
(Arist.  Pol.  ii.  7),  the  singular  of  which  is  used  to
denote  the  building  or  public  hall  where  they  were
given.  This  title  affords  of  itself  a  sufficient  indi-
cation that  they  were  confined  to  men  and  youths
only :  a  conclusion  justified  and  supported  by  all
the  authorities  on  the  subject.  (Plat  L^g.  vi.  p.
780,  d.)  It  is  not  however  improbable,  as  Hoeck
(Creta^  vol.  iii.  p.  123)  suggests,  that  in  some  of
the  Dorian  states  there  were  syssitia  of  the  young


SYSSITIA.

nnman-ied  women  as  well  as  of  the  men.  (Comp.
Pindar,  Pyth.  ix.  18.)  All  the  adult  citizens
partook  of  the  public  meals  amongst  the  Cretans,
and  were  divided  into  companies  or  "  messes,"
called  'Eraipiai,  or  sometimes  avBpeTa.  (Athen.  iv.
p.  143.)  These  divisions  were  perhaps  originally
confined  to  persons  of  the  same  house  and  kindred,
hut  afterwards  any  vacancies  in  them  were  filled
up  at  the  discretion  of  the  members.  (Hoeck,  vol.
iii.  p.  1 26.)  The  divinity  worshipped  under  the
name  of  Zebs  'Eraipetos  (Hesych.  s.  v.)  was  consi-
dered to  preside  over  them.

According  to  Dosiadas,  who  wrote  a  history  of
Crete  (Athen.  I.  c),  there  were  in  every  town  of
the  island  (iravraxov)  two  public  buildings,  one  for
the  lodging  of  strangers  {KoifXT]T{)ptov\  the  other
a  common  hall  (avSpeiou)  for  the  citizens.  In  the
latter  of  these  the  syssitia  were  given,  and  in  the
upper  part  of  it  were  placed  two  tables  for  the  en-
tertainment of  foreign  guests  {^cuikoX  rpciye^ai),
a  circumstance  deserving  of  notice,  as  indicating
the  extent  to  which  the  Dorians  of  Crete  encou-
raged mutual  intercourse  and  hospitality.  Then
came  the  tables  of  the  citizens.  But  besides  these
there  was  also  a  third  table  on  the  right  of  the  en-
trance dedicated  to  Zevs  |ej/tos,  and  perhaps  used
for  the  purpose  of  making  offerings  and  libations  to
the  god.

The  Syssitia  of  the  Cretans  were  distinguished
by  simplicity  and  temperance.  They  always  sat  at
their  tables,  even  in  later  times,  when  the  custom
of  reclining  had  been  introduced  at  Sparta.  (Cic.
pro  Mur.  35.)  The  entertainment  began  with
prayer  to  the  gods  and  libations.  (Athen.  iv.  p.
143,  e.)  Each  of  the  adult  citizens  received  an
equal  portion  of  fare,  with  the  exception  of  the
"  Archon,"  or  "  Master  of  the  Tables,"  who  was
perhaps  in  ancient  times  one  of  the  Kdafioi,  and
more  recently  a  member  of  the  yepavla  or  council.
This  magistrate  received  a  fourfold  portion  ;  "  one
as  a  common  citizen,  a  second  as  President,  a  third
for  the  house  or  building,  a  fourth  for  the  furni-
ture "  (tuv  aKevwu^  Heraclid.  Pont,  iii.)  :  an  ex-
pression from  which  it  would  seem  that  the  care
of  the  building  and  the  provision  of  the  necessary
utensils  and  furniture  devolved  upon  him.  The
management  of  all  the  tables  was  under  the  super-
intendence of  a  female  of  free  birth  (^  TrpoecrrrjKvTa
TTJs  cv<T(Tirias  yvirf})^  who  openly  took  the  best
fare  and  presented  it  to  the  citizen  who  was  most
eminent  in  council  or  the  field.  She  had  three  or
four  male  assistants  under  her,  each  of  whom  again
Avas  provided  vvith  two  menial  servants  {KaKri(p6-
poi^  or  wood-carriers).  Strangers  were  served
before  the  citizens,  and  even  before  the  Archon  or
President.  (Heracl.  Pont.  l.  c.)  On  each  of  the
tables  was  placed  a  cup  of  mixed  wine,  from  which
the  messmates  of  the  same  company  drank.  At
the  close  of  the  repast  this  was  replenished,  but  all
intemperance  was  strictly  forbidden  by  a  special
law.     (Plat.  Minos,  p.  265.)

Till  they  had  reached  their  eighteenth  year,  when
they  were  classed  in  the  dyeAat,  the  youths  accom-
panied their  fathers  to  the  syssitia  along  with  the
orphans  of  the  deceased.  (Hoeck,  vol.  iii.  p.  185.)
In  some  places  the  youngest  of  the  orphans  waited
on  the  men  ;  in  others  this  was  done  by  all  the
boys.  (Ephor.  ap.  Strab.  x.  p.  483.)  When  not
thus  engaged,  they  were  seated  near  to  the  men
on  a  lower  bench,  and  received  only  a  half  portion
of  meat :  the  eldest  of  the  orphans  appear  to  have


SYSSITIA.


1089


received  the  same  quantity  as  the  men,  but  of  a
plainer  description  of  fare.  (Athen.  iv.  p.  143.)
The  boys  like  the  men  had  also  a  cup  of  mixed
wine  in  common,  which  however  was  not  reple-
nished when  emptied.  During  the  repast  a  general
cheerfulness  and  gaiety  prevailed,  which  were  en-
livened and  kept  up  by  music  and  singing.  (Ale-
man,  ap.  Strab.  I.  c.)  It  was  followed  by  conversa-
tion, which  was  first  directed  to  the  public  affairs
of  the  state,  and  afterwards  turned  on  valiant  deeds
in  war  and  the  exploits  of  illustrious  men,  whose
praises  might  animate  the  younger  hearers  to  an
honourable  emulation.  While  listening  to  this  con-
versation, the  j'ouths  seem  to  have  been  arranged
in  classes  {av^p^la).,  each  of  which  was  placed
under  the  superintendence  of  an  officer  {iraiBovofios)
especially  appointed  for  this  purpose  ;  so  that  the
syssitia  were  thus  made  to  serve  important  political
and  educational  ends.

In  most  of  the  Cretan  cities,  the  expenses  of  the
syssitia  were  defrayed  out  of  the  revenues  of  the
public  lands  and  the  tribute  paid  by  the  Perioeci,
the  money  arising  from  which  was  applied  partly
to  the  service  of  the  gods,  and  partly  to  the  main-
tenance of  all  the  citizens  both  male  and  female.
(Arist.  Pol.  ii,  7.  4)  ;  so  that  in  this  respect  there
might  be  no  difference  between  the  rich  and  the
poor.  From  the  statement  of  Aristotle  compared
with  Dosiadas  (Athen.  I.  c),  it  appears  probable
that  each  individual  received  his  separate  share  of
the  public  revenues,  out  of  which  he  paid  his  quota
to  the  public  table,  and  provided  with  the  rest  for
the  support  of  the  females  of  his  family.  This
practice  however  does  not  appear  to  have  prevailed
exclusively  at  all  times  and  in  all  the  cities  of
Crete.  In  Lyctus,  for  instance,  a  colony  from
Sparta,  the  custom  was  different :  the  citizens  of
that  town  contributed  to  their  respective  tables  a
tenth  of  the  produce  of  their  estates  ;  a  practice
which  may  be  supposed  to  have  obtained  in  other
cities,  where  the  public  domains  were  not  sufficient
to  defray  the  charges  of  the  syssitia.  But  both  at
Lyctus  and  elsewhere,  the  poorer  citizens  were  in
all  probability  supported  at  the  public  cost.

In  coimection  with  the  accounts  given  by  the
ancient  authors  respecting  the  Cretan  sj^ssitia  there
arises  a  question  of  some  difficulty,  viz.  how  could
one  building  accommodate  the  adult  citizens  and
youths  of  such  towns  as  Lyetus  and  Gortyna?
The  question  admits  of  only  two  solutions  :  we  are
either  misinformed  with  respect  to  there  being  only
one  building  in  each  town  used  as  a  common  hall,
or  the  number  of  Dorian  citizens  in  each  town
nmst  have  been  comparatively  very  small.

The  Spartan  Syssitia  were  in  the  m.ain  so  similar
to  those  of  Crete  that  one  was  said  to  be  borrowed
from  the  other.  (Arist.  Pol.  ii.  7.)  In  later  times
they  were  called  ^ejSirm,  or  the  "  spare  meals,''  a
terra  which  is  probably  a  corruption  of  (piMria,  the
love-feasts,  a  word  corresponding  to  the  Cretan
eTaipeto.  (Gnttling,  ad  Arist.  Oecon.  p.  190;  Mul-
ler.  Dor.  iv.  3.  §  3.)  Anciently  they  were  called
avSpeTa,  as  in  Crete,  (Pint.  Lycur.  12.)  They
differed  from  the  Cretan  in  the  following  respects.
Instead  of  the  expenses  of  the  tables  being  defrayed
out  of  the  public  revenues,  every  head  of  a  family
was  obliged  to  contribute  a  certain  portion  at  his
own  cost  and  charge  ;  those  who  were  not  able  to
do  so  were  excluded  from  the  public  tables.  (Arist.
Pol.  ii.  7.  4.)  The  guests  were  divided  into  com-
panies generally  of  fifteen  persons  each,  and  all
4  A


1090


SYSSITIA.


vacancies  were  filled  up  by  ballot,  in  which  unani-
mous consent  was  indispensable  for  election.  No
persons,  not  even  the  kings,  were  allowed  what  was
called  an  a.(pl5iTos  7)iJL4pa  (Hesych.  s.  v.)  or  excused
from  attendance  at  the  public  tables,  except  for  some
satisfactory  reason,  as  when  engaged  in  a  sacrifice,
or  a  chase,  in  which  latter  case  the  individual  was
required  to  send  a  present  to  his  table.  (Plut.  I.  c.
Affis,  c.  1 0.)  Each  person  was  supplied  with  a
cup  of  mixed  wine,  which  was  filled  again  when
required  ;  but  drinking  to  excess  was  prohibited  at
Sparta  as  well  as  in  Crete.  The  repast  was  of  a
plain  and  simple  character,  and  the  contribution  of
each  member  of  a  mess  or  ^etSiTTjy  was  settled  by
law.  (Wachsmuth,  vol.  ii.  pt.  ii.  p.  24,  1st  ed.  ;
Plut.  I.  c.)  The  principal  dish  was  the  /xe'Aoy
^a}/j.6s  or  black  broth,  with  pork.  (Athen.  iv.  p.
141.)  The  eird.'iK\ov  or  aftermeal  (from  the  Doric
&ikAov,  a  meal)  was  however  more  varied,  and
richly  supplied  by  presents  of  game,  poultry,  fruit,
&c.,  and  other  delicacies  which  no  one  was  allowed
to  pun  base.  Moreover,  the  entertainment  Avas
enlivened  by  cheerful  conversation,  though  on
public  matters.  (Xen.  Rep.  Lacon.  v.  6.)  Sing-
ing also  was  frequently  introduced,  as  we  learn
from  Alcman  {Frag.  31),  that  "at  the  banquets
and  drinking  entertainments  of  the  men  it  was  fit
for  the  guests  to  sing  the  paean."  The  arrange-
ments were  under  the  superintendence  of  the
Polemarchs.

The  use  and  purposes  of  the  institutions  de-
scribed above  are  very  manifest  They  united
the  citizens  by  the  closest  ties  of  intimacy  and
union,  making  them  consider  themselves  as  mem-
bers of  one  family,  and  children  of  one  and  the
same  mother,  the  state.  They  maintained  a  strict
and  perfect  separation  between  the  higher  and  the
subject  classes  both  at  Sparta  and  in  Crete,  and
kept  up  in  the  former  a  consciousness  of  their  su-
perior worth  and  station,  together  with  a  strong
feeling  of  nationality.  At  Sparta  also  they  were
eminenth'  useful  in  a  military  point  of  view,  for
the  members  of  the  syssitia  were  formed  into  cor-
responding military  divisions,  and  fought  together
in  the  field,  as  they  had  lived  together  at  home,
with  more  bravery  and  a  keener  sense  of  shame
^oiScis),  than  could  have  been  the  case  with  merely
chance  comrades.  (Herod,  i.  ^5.)  Moreover  "  they
gave  an  efficacy  to  the  power  of  public  opinion
which  must  have  nearly  superseded  the  necessity
of  penal  laws."  (Thirfwall,  voh  i.  p.  289.)  With
respect  to  the  political  tendencies,  they  were  de-
cidedly arranged  upon  aristocratical  principles,
though  no  individual  of  a  company  or  mess  was
looked  upon  as  superior  to  his  fellows.  Plutarch
{Quaes.  Sympos.y'n.  p.  332)  accordingly  calls  them
cvu^Spia  apKTTOKpaTiKOL^  or  aristocratical  meetings,
and  compares  them  with  the  Prytaneium  and  Thes-
mothesium  at  Athens.

The  simplicity  and  sobriety,  which  were  in  early
times  the  characteristic  both  of  the  Spartan  and
Cretan  Syssitia,  were  afterwards  in  Sparta  at  least
supplanted  by  luxury  and  effeminate  indulgence.
The  change  was  probably  gradual,  but  the  kings
Areus  and  Acrotatus  (b.  c.  300)  are  recorded  as
having  been  mainly  instrumental  in  accelerating  it.
The  reformer  Agis  endeavoured  but  in  vain  to  re-
store the  old  order  of  things,  and  perished  in  the
attempt.  In  his  days  Sparta  contained  4500
families,  out  of  which  he  proposed  to  make  fifteen
syssitia,  whence  MUUer  infers  that  formerly,  when


TABELLA.

the  number  of  families  was  9000,  the  number  of
syssitia  was  thirty  ;  and  consequently  that  Hero-
dotus, when  he  spoke  of  Lycurgus  having  instituted
the  "  syssitia  "  for  war,  alluded  to  the  larger  divi-
sions and  not  the  single  banqueting  companies  ;  a
conclusion  justified  by  the  context.  Miiller  more-
over supposes,  that  in  this  sense  the  Syssitia  at
Sparta  corresponded  to  the  divisions  of  the  state
called  obae,  and  sometimes  (pparpiai^  which  were
also  thirty  in  ntmaber.  {Dorians^  iii.  5.  §  6,  and
12.  §4.)

(Hoeck,  Creia,  vol.  iii.  pp.  120 — 139;  HUllman's
Anfdnge,  §  138  ;  Thirl  wall.  Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  i.
pp.  288,  331  ;  Hermann,  Lehrbuch  der  Griech.
Staats.  §§  22,  28.)  [R.  W.]

SYSTY'LOS.     [Templum.]


T.


TABELLA,  dim.  of  TABULA,  a  billet  or
tablet,  with  which  each  citizen  and  judex  voted  ia
the  comitia  and  courts  of  justice.  In  the  comitia,
if  the  business  was  the  passing  of  a  law,  each  citi-
zen was  provided  with  two  Tabellae,  one  inscribed
V.  R.  i.  e.  Uii  Rogas,  "  I  vote  for  the  law,"  the
other  inscribed  A.  i.  e.  Antiquo.,  "  I  am  for  the  old
law."  (Compare  Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  14.)  If  the  busi-
ness was  the  election  of  a  magistrate,  each  citizen
was  supplied  with  only  one  tablet,  on  which  the
names  of  the  candidates  were  written,  or  the  ini-
tials of  their  names,  as  some  suppose  from  the  ora-
tion pro  Domo,  c.  43  ;  the  voter  then  placed  a  mark
{punctum)  against  the  one  for  whom  he  voted,
whence  punda  are  spoken  of  in  the  sense  of  votes.
(Cic.  pro  Plane.  22.)  For  further  particulars  re-
specting the  voting  in  comitia,  see  Diribitores,

CiSTA,  SiTELLA,  and  SUFFRAGIUM.

The  judices  were  provided  with  three  Tabellae :
one  of  which  was  marked  with  A.  i.e.  Absolve,
"  I  acquit  ;"  the  second  with  C.  i.  e.  Ck)ndemnOy
"  I  condemn  ;"  and  the  third  with  N.  L.  i.  e.  Non
LiqueU  "  It  is  not  clear  to  me,"  The  first  of  these
was  called  Tahella  absoluioria  and  the  second  7a-
bella  damnatoria  (Suet.  Octav.  33),  and  hence
Cicero  {pro  Mil.  6)  calls  the  former  litera  salularis,
and  the  latter  litera  tristis.  It  would  seem  that  in
some  trials  the  Tabellae  were  marked  with  the  let-
ters L.  and  D.  respectively,  i.e.  Libero  and  Damno,
since  we  find  on  a  denarius  of  the  Caelian  gens  a
Tabella  marked  with  the  letters  L.  D.  ;  and  as  we
know  that  the  vote  by  ballot  in  cases  of  Perduellio
was  first  introduced  by  C.  Caelius  Caldus  [Tabel-
LARIAE  Leges],  the  Tabella  on  the  coin  undoubt-
edly refers  to  that  event.  There  is  also  a  passage
in  Caesar  {B.  C.  iii.  83),  which  seems  to  intimate
that  these  initial  letters  were  sometimes  marked
on  the  tabellae  :  *'  Unam  fore  tabellam,  qui  liber-
andos  omni  periculo  censerent ;  alteram,  qui  capitis
damnarent,''''  &c.  (Compare  Spanheira,  Nunusnu
vol.  ii.  p.  199.)


BRITISH    MUSEUM.


J


TABERNA.

•  The  preceding  cut  contains  a  copy  of  a  coin  of  tte
Cassian  gens,  in  which  a  man  wearing  a  toga  is  re-
presented in  the  act  of  placing  a  tabella,  marked
with  the  letter  A.  (i.  e.  absolvo)^  in  the  cista.  The
letter  on  the  tabella  is  evidently  intended  for  A.

For  the  other  meanings  of  Tabella  see  Tabula.

TABELLA'RI  AE  LEGES,  the  laws  by  which
the  ballot  was  introduced  in  voting  in  the  comitia.
As  to  the  ancient  mode  of  voting  at  Rome,  see
SuFFRAGiuM.  There  were  four  enactments  known
by  the  name  of  Tabellariae  Leges,  which  are  enu-
merated by  Cicero  (de  Leg.  iii.  16).  They  are
mentioned  below  according  to  the  order  of  time  in
which  they  were  passed.

1.  Gabinia  Lex,  proposed  by  the  tribune  Ga-
binius  b.  c,  139,  introduced  the  ballot  in  the  elec-
tion of  magistrates  (Cic.  I.e.);  whence  Cicero  {Ayt:
ii.  2)  calls  the  tabella  "  vindex  tacitae  libertatis."

2.  Cassia  Lex,  proposed  by  the  tribune  L.  Cas-
sius  Longinus  b.  c.  137,  introduced  the  ballot  in
the  "  Judicium  Populi,"  with  the  exception  of  cases
of  Perduellio.  The  "Judicium  Populi"  undoubt-
edly applies  tO  cases  tried  in  the  comitia  by  the
whole  body  of  the  people  [Judex,  p.  649],  al-
though Ernesti  {Index  Leg.)  wishes  to  give  a  dif-
ferent interpretation  to  the  words.  This  law  was
supported  by  Scipio  Africanus  the  younger,  for
which  he  was  censured  by  the  aristocratical  party.
(Cic.  de  I^g.  iii.  16,  Brut.  25,  27,  pro  Sextio,  48  ;
Ascon.  in  Cornel,  p.  78,  ed.  Orelli.)

3.  Papiria  Lex,  proposed  by  the  tribune  C.
Papirius  Carbo  b.c.  131,  introduced  the  ballot  in  the
enactment  and  repeal  of  laws.    (Cic.  de  Leg.  iii.  1 6.)

4.  Caelia  Lex,  proposed  by  C.  Caelius  Caldus
B.  c.  107,  introduced  the  ballot  in  cases  of  Perduel-
jio,  which  had  been  excepted  in  the  Cassian  law.
(Cic.  /.  c.)

There  was  also  a  law  brought  forward  by  Marius
B.  c.  119,  which  was  intended  to  secure  freedom
and  order  in  voting.  (Cic.  de  Leg.  iii,  17  ;  Plut.
Mar.  4.)

TABELLA'RIUS,  a  letter-carrier.  As  the
Romans  had  no  public  post,  they  were  obliged  to
employ  special  messengers,  who  were  called  Tahel-
larii,  to  convey  their  letters  (tabellae,  literae),  when
they  had  not  an  opportunity  of  sending  them  other-
v/ise.  (Cic.  Fhil.  ii.  31  ;  Cic.  ad  Fam.  xii.  12,
xiv.  22.)

TABE'LLIO,  a  notary.  (Suidas.  *.  v.)  Under
the  empire  the  Tabelliones  succeeded  to  the  busi-
ness of  the  Scribae  in  the  times  of  the  republic.
[ScRiBAE.]  They  were  chiefly  employed  in  draw-
ing up  legal  documents,  and  for  this  purpose  usu-
ally took  their  stations  in  the  market-places  of
towns.  (Cod.  4.  tit.  21.  s.  17  ;  Novell.  73.  c.  5,
&c.)  They  formed  a  special  order  in  the  state.
(Gothofr.  ad  Cod.  TIteod.  12.  tit.  1.  s.  3.)

TABERNA  is  defined  by  Ulpian  as  any  kind
of  building  fit  to  dwell  in  "  nempe  ex  eo,  quod
tabtdis  clauditur"  (Dig.  50.  tit.  10.  §  183),  or  accord-
ing to  the  more  probable  etymology  of  Festus,  be-
cause it  was  made  of  planks.  (Festus,  s.  v.  Contu-
bernaks,  Tabemacula.)  Festus  (s.  v.  Adtibernalis)
asserts  that  this  was  the  most  ancient  kind  of
abode  used  among  the  Romans,  and  that  it  was
from  the  early  use  of  such  dwellings  that  the  words
tabema  and  tabernactdum  were  applied  to  military
tents,  though  the  latter  were  constructed  of  skins.
We  know  very  little  of  the  form  and  materials  of
the  ancient  tents  ;  but  we  may  infer  from  the  no-
tices we  have  of  them  that  they  were  generally


TABULAE.


109j


composed  of  a  covering  of  skins  partly  supported
by  wooden  props,  and  partly  stretched  on  ropes.
Sometimes,  in  a  permanent  camp,  they  may  have
been  constructed  entirely  of  planks  ;  and  some-
times, in  cases  of  emergency,  garments  and  rushes
were  spread  over  any  support  that  could  be  ob-
tained. (Lipsius,  de  Milit.  Roman,  in  Oper.  vol.
iii.  pp.  154 — 155.)  From  taberna,  when  used  in
this  sense,  are  derived  tabernaculum,  the  more  com-
mon name  of  a  tent,  and  Contubernales.

The  usual  meaning  of  taberna  is  a  sliop.  Ori-
ginally the  shops  were  stalls  or  booths  in  or  round
the  market  place  [Agora  ;  Forum]  ;  afterwards
they  were  permanently  established  both  on  the
sides  of  the  market-place,  and  in  other  parts  of  the
city.  Neither  the  ancient  authors  nor  the  remains
of  Pompeii  lead  us  to  suppose  that  tradesmen  often
had  their  shops  forming  part  of  their  houses,  as
with  us.  A  few  houses  are  indeed  found  in  Pom-
peii entirely  devoted  to  the  purposes  of  trade,  con-
sisting, that  is,  of  the  shop  and  the  rooms  occupied
by  the  tradesman  and  his  familjr.  Most  commonly,
however,  the  shops  formed  a  part  of  a  large  house,
to  the  owner  of  which  they  belonged,  and  were  by
him  let  out  to  tradesmen.  [DoMUS,  p.  430.]
Some  of  the  shops  round  a  house  were  retained  by
the  owner  for  the  sale  of  the  produce  of  his  estates.
This  arrangement  of  the  shops  was  probably  an  im-
provement on  an  older  plan  of  placing  them  against
the  walls  of  houses.  Even  under  the  emperors  we
find  that  shops  were  built  out  so  far  into  the  street
as  to  obstruct  the  thoroughfare.  Martial  (vii.  61)
mentions  an  edict  of  Domitian  by  which  this  prac-
tice was  put  down,  and  the  shops  were  confined
within  the  areas  of  the  houses.

The  following  are  the  most  remarkable  classes
of  shops  of  which  we  have  notices  or  remains.

1.  Shops  for  the  sale  of  wine,  hot  drinks,  and
ready-dressed  meat.     [Caupona.]

2.  Bakers'  shops.  Of  these  several  have  been
found  at  Pompeii,  containing  the  mill  as  well  as
the  other  implements  for  making  bread.     [Mola  ;

PiSTOR.]

3.  Booksellers'  shops.     [Liber.]

4.  Barbers'  and  Hairdressers'  shops.    [Barba.]

[P.S.]
TABERNA'CULUM.  [Taberna  ;Templum.]
TABLI  NUM.  [DoMUS,  p.  428,  a.]
TA'BULAE.  This  word  properly  means  planks
or  boards,  whence  it  is  applied  to  several  objects,
as  gaming-tables  (Juv.  i.  90), pictures  (Cic.  de  Fin.
v.  1  ;  Propert.  i.  2.  22),  but  more  especially  to
tablets  used  for  writing,  of  which  alone  we  have  to
speak  here.  The  word  Tabulae  was  applied  to
any  flat  substance  used  for  writing  upon,  whether
stone  or  metal,  or  wood  covered  with  wax.  Livy
(i.  24)  indeed  distinguishes  between  Tabtdae  and
Cera.,  by  the  former  of  which  he  seems  to  mean
tablets  of  stone  or  metal  ;  but  Tabulae  and  Tabellae
more  frequently  signify  waxen  tablets  {tabulae
ceratae),  which  were  thin  pieces  of  wood  usually
of  an  oblong  shape,  covered  over  with  wax  {ccra).
The  wax  was  written  on  by  means  of  the  stilus.
[Stilus.]  These  tabulae  were  sometimes  made
of  ivory  and  citron- wood  (Mart,  xiv,  3.  5),  but
generally  of  a  wood  of  a  more  common  tree,  as
the  beech,  fir,  &c.  The  outer  sides  of  the  tablets
consisted  merely  of  the  wood  ;  it  was  only  the
inner  sides  that  were  covered  over  with  wax.
They  were  fastened  together  at  the  back  by  means
of  \vires,  which  answered  the  purpose  of  hinges,  so
4  A  2


1092


TABULAE.


that  they  opened  and  shut  like  our  books  ;  and
to  prevent  the  wax  of  one  tablet  rubbing  against
the  wax  of  the  other,  there  was  a  raised  margin
around  each,  as  is  clearly  seen  in  the  woodcut  under
Stilus.  There  were  sometimes  two,  three,  four
live,  or  even  more,  tablets  fastened  together  in  the
above-mentioned  manner.  Two  such  tablets  were
called  Diptycha  (Sitttuxo),  which  merely  means
" twice- folded "  (from  Trriicr^raj  "to  fold"),  whence
we  have  ittvktIov,  or  with  the  t  omitted,  irvKriov.
The  Latin  word  puf^illares,  which  is  the  name  fre-
quently given  to  tablets  covered  with  wax  (Mart,
xiv.  3  ;  Gell.  xvii.  9  ;  Plin.  Ep.  i.  6),  may  perhaps
be  connected  with  the  same  root,  though  it  is
usually  derived  from,  pugillus,  because  they  were
small  enough  to  be  held  in  the  hand.  Such  tablets
are  mentioned  as  early  as  the  time  of  Homer,  who
speaks  of  a  iriva^  irrvKTos.  (11.  vi.  169.)  Three
tablets  fastened  together  were  called  Triptycha
(TpLTTTvxa),  which  Martial  (xiv.  6)  translates  by
triplices  (cerae)  ;  in  the  same  way  we  also  read  of
Pejitaptycha  (TrevxaTTTuxa)  called  by  Martial  ( xiv.  4 )
Quintuplices  {cerae).,  and  of  PolyptycJia  (iro\vTrTvx<^)
or  Multiplices  {cerae).  The  pages  of  these  tablets
were  frequently  called  by  the  name  of  cerae  alone  ;
thus  we  read  of  prima  cera,  altera  cera,  "first  page,"
"  second  page."  (Compare  Suet.  Ner.  17.)  In  ta-
blets containing  important  legal  documents,  espe-
cially wills,  the  outer  edges  were  pierced  through
with  holes  (foramina),  through  which  a  triple
thread  (li?mm)  was  passed,  and  upon  which  a  seal
was  then  placed.  This  was  intended  to  guard
against  forgery,  and  if  it  was  not  done  such  docu-
ments were  null  and  void.  (Suet.  A'ier.  17  ;  Paulus,
Sent.  JRec.  v.  25.  §  6  ;  Testamentum.)

Waxen  tablets  were  used  among  the  Romans
for  almost  every  species  of  writing,  where  great
length  was  not  required.  Thus  letters  Avere  fre-
quently written  upon  them,  which  were  secured
by  being  fastened  together  with  packthread  and
sealed  with  wax.  Accordingly  we  read  in  Plautus
(Bacchid.  iv.  4.  64)  when  a  letter  is  to  be  written,

"  EfFer  cito  stilum,  ceram,  et  tabellas,  et  linum."

The  sealing  is  mentioned  afterwards  (1.  96).  (Com-
pare Cic.  in  CatiLiiu  5.)  Tabulae  and  tabellae  are
therefore  used  in  the  sense  of  letters.  (Ovid.  Met.
ix.  522.)  Love-letters  were  written  on  very  small
tablets  called  Vitelliani  (Mart.  xiv.  8,  9),  of  which
word  however  we  do  not  know  the  origin.  Ta-
blets of  this  kind  are  presented  by  Amor  to  Poly-
phemus on  an  ancient  painting.  (Mus.  Borbon.
vol.  i.  tav.  2.)

Legal  documents,  and  especially  wills,  were  al-
most always  written  on  waxen  tablets,  as  men-
tioned above.  Such  tablets  were  also  used  for
accounts,  in  which  a  person  entered  what  he  re-
ceived and  expended  (Tabulae  or  Codex  accepti  et
expensi,  Cic.  pro  Rose.  Com.  2),  whence  Novae
Tabulae  mean  an  abolition  of  debts  either  wholly
or  in  part.  (Suet.  Jul.  42  ;  Cic.  de  Off.  ii.  23.)
The  above  are  merely  instances  of  the  extensive
use  of  waxen  tablets  ;  it  is  unnecessary  to  pursue
the  subject  further.

Two  ancient  waxen  tablets  have  been  discovered
in  a  perfect  state  of  preservation,  one  in  a  gold
mine  four  or  five  miles  from  the  village  of  Abrud-
banya  in  Transylvania,  and  the  other  in  a  gold
mine  in  the  village  itself.  Of  this  interesting  dis-
covery an  account  has  been  published  by  Massmann
in  a  work  intitled  "  Libellus  Aurarius,  sive  Tabulae


TABULARIUM.

Ceratae,  et  antiquissimae  et  unice  Romanae  in
Fodina  Auraria  apud  Abrudbanyam,  oppidulum'
Transsylvanum,  nuper  repertae,"  Lipsiae  (1841).
An  account  of  these  tablets,  taken  from  Massmann's
description,  will  serve  as  a  commentary  on  \vhat
has  been  said  above.  Both  the  tabulae  are  tri-
ptycha, that  is,  consisting  of  three  tablets  each.
One  is  made  of  fir- wood,  the  other  of  beech-wood,
and  each  is  about  the  size  of  what  we  call  a  small
octavo.  The  outer  part  of  the  two  outside  tablets
of  each  exhibits  the  plain  surface  of  the  wood,  the
inner  part  is  covered  with  wax,  which  is  now  al-
most of  a  black  colour,  and  is  surrounded  with  a
raised  margin.  The  middle  tablet  has  wax  on
both  sides  with  a  margin  around  each  ;  so  that
each  of  the  two  tabulae  contains  four  sides  or  four
pages  covered  with  Avax.  The  edges  are  pierced
through,  that  they  might  be  fastened  together  by
means  of  a  thread  passed  through  them.  The  wax
is  not  thick  in  either  ;  it  is  thinner  on  the  beechen
tabulae,  in  which  the  stilus  of  the  writer  has  some-
times cut  through  the  wax  into  the  wood.  There
are  letters  on  both  of  them,  but  on  the  beechen  ta-
bulae they  are  few  and  indistinct  ;  the  beginning
of  the  first  tablet  contains  some  Greek  letters,  but
they  are  succeeded  by  a  long  set  of  letters  in  un-
known characters.  The  writing  on  the  tabulae
made  of  fir- wood  is  both  greater  in  quantity  and  in
a  much  better  state  of  preservation.  It  is  written
in  Latin,  and  is  a  copy  of  a  document  relating  to
some  business  connected  with  a  collegium.  The
name  of  the  consuls  is  given,  which  determines  its
date  to  be  A.  D.  169.  One  of  the  most  exti'aordi-
nary  things  connected  with  it  is,  that  it  is  written
from  right  to  left.  The  writing  begins  on  what  we
should  call  the  last  or  fourth  page,  and  ends  at  the
bottom  of  the  third  ;  and  by  some  strange  good
fortune  it  has  happened  that  the  same  document
is  written  over  again,  beginning  on  the  second
page  and  ending  at  the  bottom  of  the  first  ;  so  that
where  the  writing  is  effaced  or  doubtful  in  the  one
it  is  usually  supplied  or  explained  by  the  other.

Waxen  tablets  continued  to  be  used  in  Europe
for  the  purposes  of  writing  in  the  middle  ages ;  but
the  oldest  of  these  with  which  we  are  acquainted
belongs  to  the  year  1301  A.  ij.,and  is  preserved  in
the  Florentine  Museum.

The  tablets  used  in  voting  in  the  comitia  and
the  courts  of  justice  were  also  called  tabulae  as
well  as  tabellae.  [Tabellae.]

TA'BULAE  PU'BLICAE.     [Tabularium.]

TABULA'RII  were  notaries  or  accountants,
who  are  first  mentioned  under  this  name  in  the
time  of  the  empire.  (Sen.  Ep.  88  ;  Dig.  11.  tit.  6.
s.  7  ;  50.  tit.  13.  s.  1.  §  6.)  Public  notaries,  who
had  the  charge  of  public  documents,  were  also
called  tabularii  (Dig.  43.  tit.  5.  s.  3),  and  these
seem  to  have  differed  from  the  tabelliones  in  the
circumstance  that  the  latter  had  nothing  to  do
with  the  custody  of  the  public  registers.  Public
tabularii  were  first  established  by  M.  Antoninus
in  the  provinces,  who  ordained  that  the  births  of
all  children  were  to  be  announced  to  the  tabularii
within  thirty  days  from  the  birth.  (Capitol.  M.
Anton.  9.)  Respecting  the  other  duties  of  the
public  tabularii,  see  Cod.  Thcod.  8.  tit.  2,  and
Gothofr.  ad  loc.

TABULA'RIUM,  a  place  where  the  public
records  (tabulae  pubiicae)  were  kept.  (Cic.  pro  C,
Rabir.  3,  pro  Arch.  4.)  These  records  were  of
various  kinds,  as  for  instance  Senatusconsulta,  Tar


TAGUS.

biilae  Censoriae,  registers  of  births,  deaths,  of  the
names  of  those  who  assumed  the  toga  virilis,  &c.
(See  Abram.  ad  Cic.  Mil.  27.)  There  were  various
tabularia  at  Rome,  all  of  which  were  in  temples  ;
we  find  mention  made  of  tabularia  in  the  temples
of  the  Nymphs  (Cic.  pro  Mil.  27),  of  Lucina,  of
Jiiventus,  of  Libitina,  of  Ceres,  and  more  especially
in  that  of  Saturn,  which  was  also  the  public  trea-
sury. (Servius,  ad  Virg.  Georg.  ii.  502  ;  Capitol.
M.  Anton.  Phil.  9.)  [Akrarium.]

A  tabulariura  was  also  called  by  other  names,  as
GrammatophT/lacium,  Arehium,  or  Archivum.  (Dig.
48.  tit.  19.  s.  9.)  In  a  private  house  the  name  of
Tablinum  was  given  to  the  place  where  the  family
records  and  archives  were  kept.  [DoMUS,  p.
428,  a.]

TAEDA  or  TEDA  (Sats,  Alt.  Say,  dim.  SaBlov),
a  light  of  fir-wood,  called  on  this  account  pinea
kieda.  (Catull.  lix.  15  ;  Ovid.  Fast.  ii.  bb[\.)  Be-
fore the  adoption  of  the  more  artificial  modes  of
obtaining  light,  described  under  Candela,  Fax,
FuNAi.E,  and  Lucerna,  the  inhabitants  of  Greece
and  Asia  Minor  practised  the  following  method,
which  still  prevails  in  those  countries,  and  to  a
certain  extent  in  Scotland  and  Ireland,  as  well  as
in  other  parts  of  Europe,  which  abound  in  forests
of  pines.  (Fellows,  Em.  in  Asia  Minor,  pp.  140,
3.33 — 335.)  A  tree  having  been  selected  of  the
species  Pinus  Maritima,  Linn.,  which  was  called
TrevKT]  by  the  ancient  Greeks  from  the  time  of
Homer  (ll.  xi.494,  xxiii.  328),  and  which  retains
this  name,  with  a  slight  change  in  its  termination,
to  the  present  day,  a  large  incision  was  made  near
its  root,  causing  the  turpentine  to  flow  so  as  to  ac-
cumulate in  its  vicinity.  This  highly  resinous
Avood  was  called  Sas,  i.  e.  torch-wood  ;  a  tree  so
treated  was  called  evSaSos,  the  process  itself  ivSa-
Sovv  or  Sa5ovpye7v,  and  the  workmen  employed  in
the  manufacture,  SaSovpyoi.  After  the  lapse  of
twelve  months  the  portion  thus  impregnated  was
cut  out  and  divided  into  suitable  lengths.  This
was  repeated  for  three  successive  years,  and  then,
as  the  tree  began  to  decay,  the  heart  of  the  trunk
was  extracted,  and  the  roots  were  dug  up  for  the
same  purpose.  (Theophrast.  //.  /-•.  i.  G.  §  1 ,  iii.
9.  §  3,  5,  iv.  16.  §  1,  X.  2.  §  2,  3  ;  Athen.  xv.
700,  f.)  These  strips  of  resinous  pinewood  are
now  called  ScfSia  by  the  Greeks  of  Mount  Ida.
(Hunt  and  Sibthorp,  in  Walpole's  Mem.  pp.  120,
235.)

When  persons  went  out  at  night,  they  took  these
lights  in  their  hands  (Aristoph.  Eccles.  688,  970),
more  particularly  in  a  nuptial  procession.  (Hom.  //.
xviii.  492  ;  Hes.  Scut.  275  ;  Aristoph.  Pax,  1317  ;
Ovid.  Met.  iv.  326  ;  Fast.  vi.  223.)  Hence  taedae
f slices  signified  "a  happy  marriage"  (Catull.  61.
25  ;  compare  Prudent,  c.  8ymm.  ii.  1 65)  ;  and
these  lights,  no  less  than  proper  torches,  are  at-
tributed to  Love  and  Hymen.  (Ovid.  Met.  iv.
758.)  [J.  Y.]

TAE'NIA.     [ViTTA  ;  Strophium.]

TAGUS  {ray^s),  a  leader  or  general,  was  more
especially  the  name  of  the  military  leader  of  the
Thessalians.  Under  this  head  it  is  proposed  to
give  a  short  account  of  the  Thessalian  constitu-
tion.

The  Thessalians  were  a  Thesprotian  tribe  (Herod,
vii.  176;  Veil.  Pat.  i.  3),  and  originally  came
from  the  Thesprotian  Ephyra.  Under  the  guid-
ance of  leaders,  who  are  said  to  have  been  descend-
ants of  Hercules,  they  invaded  the  western  part


TAGUS.


1093


of  the  country  afterwards  called  Thessaly,  and
drove  out  or  reduced  to  the  condition  of  Penestae
or  bondsmen  the  ancient  Aeolian  inhabitants  {r^v
t6t^  ixkv  AioXiSa  vvv  Se  QerToKiav  KdKovfiivT]v,
Diod.  iv.  57).  The  Thessalians  afterwards  spread
over  the  other  parts  of  the  country,  and  took  pos-
session of  the  most  fertile  districts,  and  compelled
the  Peraebi,  Magnetes,  Achaean  Phthiotae,  and
other  neighbouring  people  to  submit  to  their  autho-
rity and  to  pay  them  tribute.  (Thucyd.  ii.  101,
iv.  78,  viii.  3  ;  Aristot.  Pol.  ii.  6.)  The  popula-
tion of  Thessaly  therefore  consisted,  like  that  of
Laconica,  of  three  distinct  classes.  J.  The  Penes-
tae, whose  condition  was  nearly  the  same  as  that
of  the  Helots.  [Penestae.]  2.  The  subject
people,  who  inhabited  the  districts  which  were  not
occupied  by  the  Thessalian  invaders.  They  paid
tribute,  as  stated  above,  but  were  personally  free,
though  they  had  no  share  in  the  government.
They  corresponded  to  the  Perioeci  of  Laconica,  by
which  name  they  are  called  by  Xenophon.  {Hell.
vi.  1.  §  19.)  [Perioeci.]  3.  The  Thessalian
conquerors,  who  alone  had  any  share  in  the  public
administration,  and  whose  lands  were  cultivated
by  the  Penestae.

For  some  time  after  the  conquest  Thessaly  seems
to  have  been  governed  by  kings  of  the  race  of  Her-
cules, who  may  however  have  been  only  the  heads
of  the  great  aristocratical  families,  invested  with
the  supreme  power  for  a  certain  time.  Under  one
of  these  princes,  named  Aleuas,  the  country  was
divided  into  four  districts,  Phthiotis,  Histiaeotis,
Thessaliotis,  and  Pelasgiotis.  (Aristot.  ap.  Harpo-
crat.  s.v.  Terpapxia:  Strab.  ix.  p.  430.)  This
division  continued  till  the  latest  times  of  Thessalian
history,  and  we  may  therefore  conclude  that  it  was
not  merely  a  nominal  one.  Each  district  may  per-
haps have  regulated  its  affairs  by  some  kind  of  pro-
vincial council,  but  respecting  the  internal  govern-
ment of  each  we  are  almost  entirely  in  the  dark.
(Thirl wall.  Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  i.  p.  437.)

When  occasion  required,  a  chief  magistrate  was
elected  under  the  name  of  Tagus  (Tuyos),  whose
commands  were  obeyed  by  all  the  four  districts.
He  is  sometimes  called  king  (iSao-tAeus,  Herod,  v.
63),  and  sometimes  apx^s.  (Dionys.  v.  74.)  His
command  was  of  a  military  rather  than  of  a  civil
nature,  and  he  seems  only  to  have  been  appointed
when  there  was  a  war  or  one  was  apprehended.
Pollux  (i.  128)  accordingly  in  his  list  of  military
designations  classes  together  the  Boeotarchs  of  the
Tliebans,  the  King  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  the
Polemarch  of  the  Athenians  (in  reference  to  his
original  duties),  and  the  Tagus  of  the  Thessalians.
We  do  not  know  the  extent  of  the  power  which
the  Tagus  possessed  constitutionally,  nor  the  time
for  which  he  held  the  office  ;  probably  neither  was
precisely  fixed,  and  depended  on  the  circumstances
of  the  times  and  the  character  of  the  individual.
(Thirl wall,  vol.  i.  p.  438.)  He  levied  soldiers  from
the  states  in  each  district,  and  seems  to  have  fixed
the  amount  of  tribute  to  be  paid  by  the  allies.
(Xenoph.  Hell.  vi.  1.  §  19.)  When  Jason  was
tagus  he  had  an  army  of  more  than  8000  cavalry
and  not  less  than  20,000  hoplites  (Xenoph.  I.  c),
and  Jason  himself  says  that  when  Thessaly  is
under  a  tagus,  there  is  an  army  of  6000  cavalry  and
10,000  hoplites.  (Id.  vi.  1.  §  8.)  The  tribute
which  Jason  levied  from  the  subject  towns  was
the  same  as  had  been  previously  paid  by  one  of
the  Scopadae,  whom  Buttraann  supposes  to  be  the
4  A  3


1094  TAGUS.

same  Scopas  as  the  one  mentioned  by  Aelian  (  V.  H.
xii.  1)  as  a  contemporary  of  Cyrus  the  younger.
When  Thessaly  was  not  united  under  the  govern-
ment of  a  tagus  the  subject  towns  possessed  more
independence.  (Xenoph.  Hell.  vi.  1.  §  9.)  In  later
times  some  states  called  their  ordinary  magistrates
Tayoi  (Bockh,  Corp.  I,iscr.  n.  1770),  which  may
have  been  done  however,  as  Hermann  suggests,
only  out  of  affectation.

Thessaly  however  was  hardly  ever  united  under
one  government.  The  different  cities  administered
their  own  affairs  independent  of  one  another,
though  the  smaller  towns  seem  to  have  frequently
been  under  the  influence  of  the  more  important
ones  (tuu  ^|  v/moiu  (tw//  ^apcraXiwv)  "qpTTj/j.euwv
'TToAeo)!',  Xenoph.  flell.  vi.  1.  §  8).  In  almost  all
the  cities  the  form  of  government  was  aristocratical
(SuuaaTeia  iJ.a,\\ov  rj  Icrovofxia  expa^uro  to  €'YX<i!>p^oy
01  QeaaaAoi,  Thucyd.  iv.  78),  and  it  was  chiefly
in  the  hands  of  a  few  great  families,  who  were
descended  from  the  ancient  kings.  Thus  Larissa
was  subject  to  the  Aleuadae,  whence  Herodotus
(vii.  6)  calls  them  kings  of  Thessaly ;  Cranon  or
Crannon  to  the  Scopadae,  and  Pharsalus  to  the
Creondae.  (Compare  Theocr.  xvi.  34,  &c.)  These
nobles  had  vast  estates  cultivated  bj'  the  Penestae ;
they  were  celebrated  for  their  hospitality  and  lived
in  a  princely  manner  [(piKo^epos  re  kcu  ixcyaXo-
TpeTTTjs  rou  &eTTa\iK6p  Tpoirov,  Xenoph.  Hell.  vi.  1.
§  3),  and  they  attracted  to  their  courts  many  of
the  poets  and  artists  of  southern  Greece.  The
Thessalian  commonalty  did  not  however  submit
quietly  to  the  exclusive  rule  of  the  nobles.  Con-
tests between  the  two  classes  seem  to  have  arisen
early,  and  the  conjecture  of  Thirl  wall  (vol.  i.  p.
438),  that  the  election  of  a  tagus,  like  that  of  a  dic-
tator at  Rome,  was  sometimes  used  as  an  expedient
for  keeping  the  commonalty  under,  appears  very
probable.  At  Larissa  the  Aleuadae  made  some  con-
cessions to  the  popular  party.  Aristotle  (Pol.  v.  5)
speaks,  though  we  do  not  know  at  what  time  he
refers  to,  of  certain  magistrates  at  Larissa,  who
bore  the  name  of  Tro\iTo(pv\aK€s,  who  exercised  a
superintendence  over  the  admission  of  freemen,
and  were  elected  themselves  out  of  the  body  of  the
people,  whence  they  were  led  to  court  the  people
in  a  way  unfavourable  to  the  interests  of  the  aris-
tocracy. There  were  also  other  magistrates  at
Larissa  of  a  democratical  Tcind,  called  AapKraoiroiol.
(Aristot.  Pol.  iii.  1.)  Besides  the  contests  betv/een
the  oligarchical  and  democratical  parties,  there
were  feuds  among  the  oligarchs  themselves  ;  and
such  was  the  state  of  parties  at  Larissa  under  the
government  of  the  Aleuadae  two  generations  be-
fore the  Persian  war,  that  a  magistrate  was  chosen
by  mutual  consent,  perhaps  from  the  commonalty,
to  mediate  between  the  parties  (apx'«"'  fieaiStos^
Aristot.  Pol.  V.  5).  At  Pharsalus  too  at  the  close
of  the  Peloponnesian  war  the  state  was  torn  asun-
der by  intestine  commotions,  and  for  the  sake  of
quiet  and  security  the  citizens  entrusted  the  acro-
polis and  the  whole  direction  of  the  government  to
Polydamas,  who  discharged  his  trust  with  the
strictest  integrity.  (Xenoph.  Hell.  vi.  L  §  2,  3.)

The  power  of  the  aristocratical  families  however
seems  to  have  continued  with  little  diminution  till
towards  the  close  of  the  Peloponnesian  war,  when
decided  democratical  movements  first  begin  to  ap-
pear. At  this  time  the  Aleuadae  and  the  Scopadae
had  lost  much  of  their  ancient  influence.  Pherae
and  Pharsalus  then  became  the  two  leading  states


TALARIA.

in  Thessaly.  At  Pherae  a  tyranny,  probably  arising
from  a  democracy,  was  established  by  Lycophron,
who  opposed  the  great  aristocratical  families,  and
aimed  at  the  dominion  of  all  Thessaly.  (Xenoph.
Hell.  ii.  3.  §  4  ;  Diod.  xiv.  82.)  The  latter  ob-
ject was  accomplished  by  Jason,  the  successor  and
probably  the  son  of  Lycophron,  who  effected  an
alliance  with  Polydamas  of  Pharsalus,  and  caused
himself  to  be  elected  tagus  about  B.  c.  374.  While
he  lived  the  whole  of  Thessaly  was  united  as  one
political  power,  but  after  his  murder  in  B.  c.  370
his  family  was  torn  asunder  by  intestine  discords
and  did  not  long  maintain  its  dominion.  The
office  of  tagus  became  a  tyranny  under  his  succes-
sors, Polydorus,  Polyphron,  Alexander,  Tisiphonus,
and  Lycophron ;  till  at  length  the  old  aristocratical
families  called  in  the  assistance  of  Philip  of  Mace-
donia, who  deprived  Lycophron  of  his  power  in
B.  c.  35.3,  and  restored  the  ancient  government  in
the  different  towns.  At  Pherae  he  is  said  to  have
restored  popular  or  at  least  republican  government.
(Diod.  xvi.  38.)  The  country  however  only  changed
masters  ;  for  a  few  years  later  (b.  c.  344)  he  made
it  completely  subject  to  Macedonia  by  placing  at
the  head  of  the  four  divisions  of  the  country,  te-
trarchies  or  tetradarchies,  which  he  re-established,
governors  devoted  to  his  interests  and  probably
members  of  the  ancient  noble  families,  who  had
now  become  little  better  than  his  vassals.  (Dem.
Philip,  ii.  p.  71,  iii.  p.  117;  Harpocrat.  s.  v.)
Thessaly  from  this  time  remained  in  a  state  of  de-
pendence on  the  Macedonian  kings  (Polyb.  iv.  76),
till  the  victory  of  T.  Flarainius  at  Cynoscephalae  in
B.  c.  1.97  again  gave  them  a  show  of  independence
under  the  protection  of  the  Romans.  (Li v.  xxxiii.
34,  xxxiv.  51,  Polyb.  xviii.  30.)

(Buttmann,  Mythologus,  No.  xxii.  Von  dem
Geschlecht  der  Aleuaden ;  Voemel,  de  Tliessaliae
Incolis  antiqu.  Frankf.  1829  ;  Horn,  de  T/iessalia
Macedonum  imperio  suhjecta^  Gryphiae,  1829  ;
Tittmann,  Darstellung  d.  Griech.  SlaaUverf.  p.  713,
&c.  ;  Schbmann,  Aniiq.  Juris  publ.  Graec.  p.  401,
&c. ;  Hermann,  Lehrbuch  d.  griech.  Slaaisalt.  §  178.)

TALA'RIA,  small  wings,  fixed  to  the  ancles
of  Mercury  and  reckoned  among  his  attributes.
(Tre'SiAa,  Athen.  xii.  p.  537,  f. ;  irTTjfoire'StA.o?,  Orph.
Hymn,  xxvii.  4  ;  Ovid.  Met.  ii.  736  ;  Fulgent.
Mytliol.  1.)  In  many  works  of  ancient  art  they
are  represented  growing  from  his  ancles,  as  if  they
were  a  part  of  his  bodily  frame  ;  but  more  fre-
quently they  are  attached  to  him  as  a  part  of  his
dress,  .igreeably  to  the  description  of  the  poets
(Hom.  //.  xxiv.  340,  Od.  v.  44  ;  Virg.  Aen.  iv.
239)  ;  and  this  is  commonly  done  by  representing
him  with  sandals,  which  have  wings  fastened  to
them  on  each  side  over  the  ancles.  But  there  is  a
most  beautiful  bronze  statue  of  this  divinity  in  the


TALUa

museum  at  Naples,  in  which  the  artist,  instead  of
the  sole  of  a  sandal,  has  made  the  straps  unite  in  a
rosette  under  the  middle  of  the  foot  (see  the  wood-
cut), evidently  intending  by  this  elegant  device  to
represent  the  messenger  of  the  gods  as  borne
through  space  withc^t  touching  the  ground.

Besides  Mercury  the  artists  of  antiquity  also
represented  Perseus  as  wearing  winged  sandals
(Mon.  Maith.  iii.  28  ;  Inghirami,  Vasi  Fiitili^  i.
tav.  70,  iv.  tav.  166)  ;  because  he  put  on  those
of  Mercury,  when  he  went  on  his  aerial  voyage
to  the  rescue  of  Andromeda.  (Ovid.  Met.  iv.
665—677  ;  Hes.  Scut.  •216—220  ;  Eratosth.  Catast.
22  ;  Hygin.  Poet.  Astron.  ii.  12.)  The  same  ap-
pendage was  ascribed  to  Minerva,  according  to
one  view  of  her  origin,  viz.  as  the  daughter  of
Pallas.  (Cic.  de  Nat.  Deor.  iii.  23  ;  Tzetzes,  Schol.
in  Lycoph.  355.)  [J.  Y.]

TALARUS  {rdXapos).  [Calathus.]
TALA'SSIO.     [Matrimonium,  p.  743,  b.]
TALENTUM.    [Libra,  2d  art.  ;  Pondera  ;

NUMMUS.]

TA'LIO,  from  Talis,  signifies  an  equivalent,  but
it  is  used  only  in  the  sense  of  a  punishment  or
penalty  the  same  in  kind  and  degree  as  the  mis-
chief which  the  guilty  person  has  done  to  the  body
of  another.  A  provision  as  to  Talio  occurred  in
the  Twelve  Tables :  Si  membrum  rupit  ni  cum  eo
pacit  talio  esto.  (Festus,  s.v.  Talionis.)  This  pas-
sage does  not  state  what  Talio  is.  Cato  as  quoted
by  Priscian  (vi.  p.  710,  Putsch)  says:  Si  quis
membrum  rupit  aut  os  fregit,  talioiie  proximus
cognatus  ulciscatur.  The  law  of  Talio  was  probably
enforced  by  the  individual  or  his  friends  :  it  is  not
probable  that  the  penalty  was  inflicted  under  a
decision  of  a  court  of  justice.  It  seems  likely  that
it  bore  some  analogy  to  the  permission  to  kill  an
adulterer  and  adultress  in  certain  cases,  which  the
Julia  Lex  confirmed  ;  and  if  so,  the  law  would
define  the  circumstances  under  which  an  injured
person  or  his  cognati  might  take  this  talio.  The
punishment  of  death  for  death  was  talio  ;  but  it  is
not  said  that  the  cognati  could  inflict  death  for
death.  Talio,  as  a  punishment,  was  a  part  of  the
Mosaic  law :  "  breach  for  breach,  eye  for  eye,
tooth  for  tooth :  as  he  hath  caused  a  blemish  in  a
man,  so  shall  it  be  done  to  him  again."  {Levit.
xxiv.  20  ;  Rein,  Das  Criminalrecht  der  R'6ine7\  pp.
37,358.816,915.)  [G.  L].

TALUS  {darparyaXos),  a  huckle-bone.  The
huckle-bones  of  sheep  and  goats  have  often  been
found  in  Greek  and  Roman  tombs,  both  real,  and
imitated  in  ivory,  bronze,  glass,  and  agate.  Those
of  the  antelope  (Sop/caScioi)  were  sought  as  objects
of  elegance  and  curiosity.  (Theoph.  Cliar.  5. ;
Athen.  v.  p.  193,  f.)  They  were  used  to  play  with
from  the  earliest  times,  principally  by  women  and
children  (Plut.  Alcib.  p.  350),  occasionally  by  old
men.  (Cic.  de  Senect.  16.)  A  painting  by  Alex-
ander of  Athens,  found  at  Resina,  represents  two
women  occupied  with  this  game.  One  of  them,
having  thrown  the  bones  upvvards  into  the  air,  has
cauglit  three  of  them  on  the  back  of  her  hand.  {Ant.
d'^Erc.  i.  tav.  1.)  See  the  following  woodcut,  and
compare  the  account  of  the  game  in  Pollux  (ix.  c.  7).
Polygnotus  executed  a  similar  work  at  Delphi,  re-
presenting the  two  daughters  of  Pandarus  thus  em-
ployed (TToiCoi/tras  darporfdXois^  Pans.  x.  30.  §  1).
But  a  much  more  celebrated  production  w^as  the
group  of  two  naked  boys,  executed  in  bronze  by
Polycletus,  and  called  the  Astragalizontes.     (Pliu.


TALUS.


1096


H.  N.  xxxiv.  8.  s.  19.)  A  fractured  marble  group
of  the  same  kind,  preserved  in  the  British  Museum,
exhibits  one  of  the  two  boys  in  the  act  of  biting
the  arm  of  his  play-fellow  so  as  to  present  a  lively
illustration  of  the  account  in  Homer  of  the  fatal
quarrel  of  Patroclus.  (//.  xxiii.  87,  88.)  To  play
at  this  gam.e  was  sometimes  called  •jrej'TaAi0(J"eji/,
because  five  bones  or  other  objects  of  a  similar  kind
were  employed  (Pollux,  I.e.)  ;  and  this  number  is
retained  among  ourselves.

Whilst  the  tali  were  without  artificial  marks,  the
game  was  entirely  one  of  skill  ;  and  in  ancient  no
less  than  in  modern  times,  it  consisted  not  merely
in  catching  the  five  bones  on  the  back  of  the  hand
as  shown  in  the  wood-cut,  but  in  a  great  variety  of
exercises  requiring  quickness,  agility,  and  accuracy
of  sight.  When  the  sides  of  the  bone  were
marked  with  different  values,  the  game  became
one  of  chance.  [Alea  ;  Tessera.]  The  two  ends
were  left  blank,  because  the  bone  could  not  rest
upon  either  of  them  on  account  of  its  curvature.
The  four  remaining  sides  were  marked  with  the
nimibers  1,  3,  4,  6  ;  1  and  6  being  on  two  oppo-
site sides,  and  3  and  4  on  the  other  two  opposite
sides.  The  Greek  and  Latin  names  of  the  num-
bers were  as  follows  (Pollux,  I.  c. ;  Eustath.
in  Horn.  II.  xxiii.  88  ;  Sueton.  August.  71  ;  Mart,
xiii.  1.  6)  :  —  1.  Moms,  ely,  kvwv,  X7os  (Brunck,
Anal.  i.  35,  242)  ;  Ion.  Oo/tj:  Unio^  VuUurius,
cams  (Propert.  iv.  9.  17  ;  Ovid.  Art.  Amat.  ii.
205,  Fast.  ii.  473)  :  3.  Tpids  :  remio  ;  4.  T^ipds:
Quaiernio  ;  6.  'E^dy,    e^iTTjs,  Kwor :  Senio.

As  the  bone  is  broader  in  one  direction  than  in
the  other,  it  was  said  to  fall  upright  or  prone
{opQos  57  TT^TjvTjs,  rcctus  aut  pronus),  according  as  it
rested  on  the  narrow  or  the  broad  side.  (Plut.
Spnpos.  Prob.  p.  1209,  ed.  Steph.  ;  Cic.  de  Fin.
iii.  16.)

Two  persons  played  together  at  this  game,  using
four  bones,  which  they  threw  up  into  the  air,  or
emptied  out  of  a  dice-box  [Fritillus],  and  ob-
serving the  numbers  on  the  uppermost  sides.  The
numbers  on  the  four  sides  of  the  four  bones  admitted
of  thirty-five  different  combinations.  The  lowest
throw  of  all  was  four  aces  (  jacit  voUorios  quatuor^
Plaut.  Cure.  ii.  3.  78).  But  the  value  of  a  throw
(jSoAos,  jacttis,)  was  not  in  all  cases  the  sum  of
the  four  numbers  turned  up.  The  highest  in  value
was  that  called  Venus.,  or  jacius  Venereus  (Plaut.
Asin.  V.  2.  55  ;  Cic.  de  Div.  ii.  59  ;  Sueton.  I.  c),
in  which  the  numbers  cast  up  were  all  diiferent
(Mart.  xiv.  14),  the  sum  of  them  being  only  four-
teen. It  was  by  obtaining  this  throw  that  the  king
4  A  4


1096


TAMIAS.


of  the  feast  was  appointed  among  the  Romans
(Hor.  Carm.  i.  4.  18,  ii.  7.  25)  [Symposium],  and
hence  it  was  also  called  Basilicus.  (Plant.  Cure.  ii.
3.  80.)  Certain  other  throws  were  called  by  par-
ticular names,  taken  from  gods,  illustrious  men  and
women,  and  heroes.  Thus  the  throw,  consisting
of  two  aces  and  two  trays,  making  eight,  was  de-
nominated Stesichorus.  When  the  object  was
simply  to  throw  the  highest  numbers,  the  game
was  called  TrAeio-TogoAij/Sa.  (Pollux,  vii.  206,  ix.
.9.5,  110,  117.)  Before  a  person  threw  the  tali,  he
often  invoked  either  a  god  or  his  mistress.  (Plant.
Capt  i.  1.  5,  Cure.  ii.  3.  77—79.)  These  bones,
marked  and  thrown  as  above  described,  were  also
used  in  divination.  (Sueton.  Tiier.  14.)    [J.  Y.]

TA'MIAS  {Taixias),  was  a  name  given  to  any
person  who  had  the  care,  managing,  or  dispensing
of  money,  stock,  or  property  of  any  description,
confided  to  him  ;  as  a  steward,  butler,  housekeeper,
storehousekeeper,  or  treasurer.  And  the  word  is
applied  metaphorically  in  a  variety  of  ways.  But
the  Taixiai,  who  will  fall  under  our  notice  in  this
article,  are  certain  officers  entrusted  with  import-
ant duties  by  the  Athenian  government ;  and  more
especially  the  treasurers  of  the  temples  and  the
revenue.

In  ancient  times  every  temple  of  any  importance
had  property  belonging  to  it,  besides  its  furniture
and  ornaments  ;  and  a  treasury  where  such  pro-
perty was  kept.  Lands  were  attached  to  the
temple,  from  which  rents  accrued  ;  fines  were  made
paj^able  to  the  god  ;  trophies  and  other  valuables
were  dedicated  to  him  by  the  public  ;  and  various
sacred  offerings  were  made  by  individuals.  There
was  a  ra/xias  UpQv  ^p-qjxdTwv^  who,  together  with
eTno-Tctrat  and  Upioirotoi,  had  the  custody  and
management  of  these  funds.  The  wealthiest  of  all
the  temples  at  Athens  was  that  of  Athena  in  the
Acropolis,  in  which  were  kept  the  spoils  taken
from  the  Persians  (ra  apio-reta  ttjs  TroAeoiTs),  be-
sides magnificent  statues,  painting,  and  other
works  of  art.  (Demosth.  c.  Timocr.  741.)  To  the
Goddess  large  fines  were  specially  appropriated  by
the  law  or  given  by  decree  of  the  courts  or  the
assembly  ;  and  besides  this  she  received  a  tenth  of
all  the  fines  that  went  to  the  state,  a  tenth  of  all
confiscations  and  prizes  taken  in  war.  Her  trea-
surers were  called  ra.uiat  rris  Snov.  or  roou  ttjs
S^foO,  or  Tayuiat  Upwu  xfMy.uarwj'  ttjs  ^€ov,  and
sometimes  simply  rainiai.  (Demosth.  c.  Androt.
615.)  They  appear  to  have  existed  from  an  early
period.  Herodotus  (viii.  51,  53)  relates  that  the
rajxiai  rod  hpoO  with  a  few  other  men  awaited  the
attack  of  Xerxes  upon  the  Acropolis,  and  perished
in  its  defence.  They  were  ten  in  number,  clioseu
annually  by  lot  from  the  class  of  Pentaoosiome-
dimni,  and  afterwards  when  the  distinction  of
classes  had  ceased  to  exist,  from  among  the  wealth-
iest of  Athenian  citizens.  (  Harpocr.  and  Suid.  s.  v.
Ta/xiai.)  The  treasurers  of  the  other  gods  were
chosen  in  like  manner  ;  but  they,  about  the  90th
Olympiad,  where  all  united  into  one  board,  while
those  of  Pallas  remained  distinct.  (Demosth.  c.
Timocr.  743.)  Their  treasury,  however,  was  trans-
ferred to  the  same  place  as  that  of  Athena,  viz.  to
the  Opisthodomus  of  the  Parthenon,  where  were
kept  not  only  all  the  treasures  belonging  to  the
temples,  but  also  the  state  treasure  (oVio  xp^^Moto,
as  contra-distinguished  from  te/Ja),  under  the  care
of  the  treasurers  of  Pallas.  (Aristoph.  Flut.  1194.)
All  the  funds  of  the  state  were  con^dered  as  being


TAMIAS.

in  a  manner  consecrated  to  Pallas  ;  while  on  the
other  hand  the  people  reserved  to  themselves  the
right  of  making  use  of  the  sacred  monies,  as  well
as  the  other  property  of  the  temples,  if  the  safety
of  the  state  should  require  it.  (Thucyd.  ii.  13.)
Payments  made  to  the  temples  were  received  by
the  treasurers  in  the  presence  of  some  members  of
the  senate,  just  as  public  monies  were  by  the
Apodectae  ;  and  then  the  treasurers  became  re-
sponsible for  their  safe  custody.  As  to  fines  see
Epibole,  Practores,  and  on  the  whole  of  this
subject,  Bockh,  Pzibl.  Econ.  of  Alliens^  pp.  160
—164.

The  treasurer  of  the  revenue,  raiJ.las  or  eiri-
fifXrjTrjs  TTJS  Koiuijs  7rpo(ro5ou,  was  a  more  import-
ant personage  than  those  last  mentioned.  He  was
not  a  mere  keeper  of  monies,  like  them,  nor  a  mere
receiver,  like  the  Apodectae  ;  but  a  general  pay-
master, who  received  through  the  Apodectae  all
money  which  was  to  be  disbursed  for  the  purposes
of  the  administration  (except  the  property-taxes
which  were  paid  into  the  war-office,  and  the  tri-
bute from  the  allies,  which  was  at  first  paid  to  the
Hellenotamiae,  and  afterwards  to  other  persons
hereafter  mentioned),  and  then  distributed  it  in
such  manner  as  he  was  required  to  do  by  the  law  ;
the  surplus  (if  any)  he  paid  into  the  war-office  or
the  Theoricfund.  As  this  person  knew  all  the  chan-
nels in  which  the  public  money  had  to  flow,  and
exercised  a  general  superintendence  over  the  ex-
penditure, he  was  competent  to  give  advice  to  the
people  upon  financial  measures,  with  a  view  to  im-
prove the  revenue,  introduce  economy,  and  prevent
abuses  ;  he  is  sometimes  called  ra/uiias  rrjs  SiOi/crj-
(Tecas,  or  o  eTri  T17S  SiotfCTjo-ews,  and  may  be  re-
garded as  a  sort  of  minister  of  finance.  To  him
Aristophanes  refers  in  Equit.  947.  He  was
elected  by  xe:poToi/fa,  and  held  his  office  for  four
years,  but  was  capable  of  being  re-elected.  A  law,
however,  was  passed  during  the  administration  of
Lvcurgus,  prohibiting  re-election  ;  so  that  Lycur-
gus,  Avho  is  reported  to  have  continued  in  office
for  twelve  years,  must  have  held  it  for  the  last
eight  years  under  fictitious  names.  The  power  of
this  officer  was  by  no  means  free  from  control  ;
inasmuch  as  any  individual  was  at  liberty  to  pro-
pose financial  measures,  or  institute  criminal  pro-
ceedings for  malversation  or  waste  of  the  public
funds;  and  there  was  an  afTtYpat^eus  t^s  Stoi/frj-
o-ecos  appointed  to  check  the  accounts  of  his  supe-
rior. Anciently  there  were  persons  called  Hopiarai
who  appear  to  have  assisted  the  rafxiai  in  some  part
of  their  duties.  (Bockh,  id.  166)  [Poristae.]

The  money  disbursed  by  the  treasurer  of  the
revenue  was  sometimes  paid  directly  to  the  various
persons  in  the  employ  of  the  government,  some-
times through  subordinate  pay  offices.  Many  pub-
lic functionaries  had  their  own  paymasters,  who
were  dependent  on  the  To^tas  t^s  irpo<ro5oy,  re-
ceiving their  funds  from  him,  and  then  distributing
them  in  their  respective  departments.  Such  were
the  TpiripoTToioi,  Teixonotoi,  oSoirowi,  Tatppoiroioi^
ene/xeXriTal  yewpluy^  who  received  through  their
own  TOjUiai  such  sums  as  they  required  from  time
to  time  for  the  prosecution  of  their  works.  Jhe  pay-
ment of  the  judicial  fees  was  made  by  the  Colacretae
{KcoKaKperai),  which,  and  the  providing  for  the
rneals  in  the  Prytaneum,  were  the  only  duties  that
remained  to  them  after  the  establishment  of  the
Apodectae  by  Cleisthenes.  (Aristoph.  Vesp.  695,
724.)     The    rafiiai  of    the   sacred   vessels,  t^^


TAPES.

Tlapd\ov  and  ttjj  '2,a\anivias,  acted  not  only  as
treasurers,  but  as  trierarchs  ;  the  expenses  (amount-
ing for  the  two  ships  together  to  about  sixteen
talents)  being  provided  by  the  state.  Tliey  were
elected  by  x^^P°'^°^^°-  (Demosth.  c.  Mid.  570  ;
Pollux,  viii,  116.)  Other  trierarchs  had  their  own
private  Tafiiai,  for  the  keeping  of  accounts  and
better  dispatch  of  business.  (Bockh,  Id.  p.  171,
&c. ;  Schomann,  Ant  Jur.  publ.  Gr.  pp.  250,  312.)

The  duties  of  the  'E \Ai7 j'ora.uioi  are  spoken  of
in  a  separate  article.  [Hellenotamiab.J

The  war  fund  at  Athens  (independently  of  the
tribute)  was  provided  from  two  sources,  1st,  the
property-tax  [Eisphora],  and  2dly,  the  surplus
of  the  yearly  revenue,  which  remained  after  de-
fraying the  expenses  of  the  civil  administration,
Tairep/oi/Ta  xP'7V«'''a ''"'Js  8ioiK7jo-ews.  Of  the  ten
2TpaTr77o2,  who  were  annually  elected  to  preside
over  the  war  department,  one  was  called  aTpaTrjyos
6  eVi  ttJs  Siot/cTjo-ews,  to  whom  the  management
of  the  war  fund  was  entrusted.  He  had  under
him  a  treasurer,  called  ra/xias  twv  (rrpaTiwriKMu,
^vho  gave  out  the  pay  of  the  troops,  and  defrayed
all  other  expenses  incident  to  the  service.  De-
mosthenes, perhaps  on  account  of  some  abuses
which  had  sprung  up,  recommended  that  the
generals  should  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  mili-
tary fund,  but  that  this  should  be  placed  under  the
care  of  special  officers,  Ta/iiai  Kot  SrjiJLoaiot^  who
should  be  accountable  for  its  proper  application  :
Tou  (XiV  Twu  xpTj^aTftjj/  hSyov  irapd  rovrcov
ha^Savnv^  tou  Se  rwu  epywu  irapci,  tov  aTpaTTjyou.
(De  C/ierso7i.  101.)  The  passage  just  cited  con-
firms the  opinion  of  those  who  think  that  in  De-
mosth. de  Coron.  238,  265,  the  words  6  kirX  rrjs
Stoi/crjcrews  refer  to  a  a-Tparrjyos  so  designated,
and  not  to  the  rafxias  rijs  irpoaoSov.  (Schomann,
Ant.  Jur.  publ.  Gr.  p.  252,  n,  7  ;  Bcickh,  Id.  p.
168  ;  Meier,  Ait.  Froc.  p.  105.)

So  much  of  the  surplus  revenue,  as  was  not  re-
quired for  the  purposes  of  war,  was  to  be  paid  by
the  treasurer  of  the  revenue  into  the  Theoric  fund  ;
of  which,  after  the  Archonship  of  Euclides,  special
managers  were  created.     [Thkorica.]

Lastly,  we  have  to  notice  the  treasurers  of  the
demi,  hi^pLwv  ra/xlai^  and  those  of  the  tribes,  <pvKwu
ra/xiai,  who  had  the  care  of  the  funds  belonging  to
their  respective  communities,  and  performed  duties
analogous  to  those  of  the  state  treasurers.  The
demi,  as  well  as  the  tribes,  had  their  common
lands,  which  were  usually  let  to  farm.  The  rents
of  these  formed  the  principjil  part  of  their  revenue.
^vAapxoi,  Srjjuapxoi,  and  other  local  functionaries
were  appointed  for  various  purposes ;  but  with  re-
spect to  their  internal  economy  we  have  but  scanty
information.  (Schomann,  de  Comit.  pp.  371 — 378,
Ant.  Jur.  puhl.  Gr.  pp.  203,  204.)      [C.  R.  K.]

TAPES  or  TAPETE  (Non.  Marcell.  p.  229,
ed.  Merceri),  Ta7r»/s,  TaTTjs,  or  SctTrty,  dim,  SairlSiov,
a  piece  of  tapestry,  a  carpet.

The  use  of  tapestry  was  in  very  ancient  times
characteristic  of  Oriental  rather  than  of  European
habits  (Athen.  ii.  p.  48,  n.)  ;  we  find  that  the
Asiatics,  including  the  Egyptians  and  also  the
Carthaginians,  who  were  of  Asiatic  origin,  excelled
in  the  manufacture  of  carpets,  displayed  them  on
festivals  and  o^her  public  occasions,  and  gave  them
as  presents  to  their  friends.  (Xen.  Anab.  vii.  3.
§  18,  27-)  They  were  nevertheless  used  by  the
Greeks  as  early  as  the  age  of  Homer  (//.  xvi.  224,
xxiv.  230,   645,   Od.  iv.  298,  vii.  337),  and  by


TAPES.


1097


some  of  the  later  Roman  Emperors  they  were  given
as  presents  to  the  combatants  at  the  Circensian
Games.  (Sidon.  Apoll.  Carm.  xxiii.  427.)  The
places  most  renowned  for  the  manufacture  were
Babylon  (Arrian,  Exped.  Alex.  vi.  p.  436,  ed.
Blanc.  ;  Sidon.  Apoll.  Epist.  ix.  13),  Tyre  and
Sidon  (Heliodor.  v.  p.  252,  ed.  Commelin.),
Sardes  (Athen.  ii.  p.  48,  b.,  vi.  p.  255,  e.,  xii.
p.  514,  c. ;  Non.  Marcell.  p.  542),  Miletus  (Aris-
toph.  Ran.  542),  Alexandria  (Plant.  Pseud,  i.  2.
13),  Carthage  (Athen.  i.  p.  28,  a),  and  Corinth.
(Athen.  i.  p.  27,  d.)  In  reference  to  the  texture,
these  articles  were  distinguished  into  those  which
were  light  and  thin  with  but  little  nap,  chiefly
made  at  Sardes  and  called  ;|/£AoTa7nSes  (Athen.  vi.
p.  255,  e.,  xii.  p.  514,  c. ;  Diog.  Laert.  v.  72),  and
those  in  which  the  nap  (/xaAAos)  was  more  abund-
ant, and  which  were  soft  and  woolly  (ooAoi,  Horn.
//.  xvi.  224  ;  ixaXaKoO  cpioio,  Od.  iv.  124).  The
thicker  and  more  expensive  kinds  {fxaWwroi)  re-
sembled our  baize  or  drugget,  or  even  our  soft  and
warm  blankets,  and  were  of  two  sorts,  viz.  those
which  had  the  nap  on  one  side  only  (eVcpojuoAAot),
and  those  which  had  it  on  both  sides,  called
dfx(plTaTroi  (Athen.  v.  p.  1 97,  b.,  vi.  p.  255,  e. ;  Diog.
Laert.  v.  72,  73),  amphitapae  (Non.  Marcell.  p.
540  ;  Lucil.  Sat.  i.p.  188,  ed.  Bip.),  or  dfx<pirdiri}Tiv
(Eustath.  in  Horn.  II.  ix.  200),  and  also  aiJ.(pi/j.a\\ot
or  amphimalla.  (Plin. //^.  A^.  viii.  48.  s.  73.)  In-
stead of  being  always  used,  like  blankets,  in  single
pieces  as  they  came  fi'ora  the  loom  [Pallium],
carpets  were  often  sewed  together.  (Plant.  Stic?i.
ii.  2.  54.)  They  were  frequently  of  splendid
colours,  being  dyed  either  with  the  kermes  ( Hor.
Sat.  ii.  6.  102 — 106)  or  with  the  murex  (d\oupyfis,
a?\.nrup(pvpoi),  and  having  figures,  especially  hunt-
ing-pieces, woven  into  them.  (Sidon.  Apoll. /.  c.  ;
Phiut.  Pseud,  i.  2.  14.)  These  fine  specimens  of
tapestry  were  spread  upon  thrones  or  chairs,  and
upon  benches,  couches,  or  sofas,  at  entertainments
(Horn.  //.  ix.  200,  Od.  xx.  150  ;  Virg.  Aen.  i.  639,
697—700  ;  Orid.  Met.  xiii.  638  ;  Cic.  Tusc.  v.  21 ),
more  especially  at  the  nuptials  of  persons  of  dis-
tinction. Catullus  {Argon.  47 — 220)  represents
one  to  have  been  so  employed,  which  exhibited  the
whole  story  of  Theseus  and  Ariadne.  They  were
even  used  to  sleep  upon  (Horn.  //.  x.  156  ;  Anac.
viii.  1,2  ;  Theocrit.  xv.  125  ;  Aristoph.  P/m<.  540  ;
Virg.  Aen.  ix.  325,  358),  and  for  the  clothing  of
horses.  (Aen.  vii.  277.)  The  tapestry  used  to
decorate  the  bier  and  catafalque  at  the  Apotheosis
of  a  Roman  Emperor  was  interwoven  with  gold.
(Herodian,  iv.  2,  p.  82,  ed.  Bekker.)  The  orientals
upon  occasions  of  state  and  ceremony  spread
carpets  both  over  their  floors  and  upon  the  ground.
(Aeschyl.  Again.  879—936  ;  Athen.  iv.  p.  131,  b.,
xii.  p.  514,  c.)

Besides  the  terms  which  have  now  been  explained,
the  same  articles  of  domestic  furniture  had  deno-
minations arising  from  the  mode  of  using  them,
either  in  the  Triclinium  {tricliniaria  Babylonica^
Plin.  H.  N.  viii.  48.  s.  74)  or  in  the  Cubiculum
(cubicularia  polymila,  Mart.  xiv.  150),  and  espe-
cially from  the  constant  practice  of  spreading  them
out  {textile  stragulum,  Cic.  Ttisc.  v.  21  ;  stratum^
C.  Nepos,  Ages.  viii.  2  ;  vestis  stragula,  Liv.  xxxiv,
7  ;  Hor.  Sat.  ii.  3.  118  ;  arpu/xval^  Piut.  Lycurg.
p.  86,  ed.  Steph. ;  Athen.  iv.  p.  ]  42,  a.,  arpdifxara^
ii.  p.  48,  d.).  The  Greek  term  pcristroina,  which
was  transferred  into  the  Latin  (Diog.  Laert.  I.e.;
Plant.  Stick,  ii.  2.  54  ;  Cic.  Phil.  ii.  27),  had  a


1098


TEGULA.


special  signification,  meaning  probably  a  coverlet
made  so  large  as  to  hang  round  the  sides  of  the
bed  or  couch.  [J.  Y.]

TAPHUS  (rdcpos).     [FiJNUS,  p.  556,  a.]
.    TARENXrNI  LUDI.  [Lum  Saeculares.]

TARRHUS  (ra^^o's).     [Navis,  p.  788,  a.]

TAURII  LUDI.     [LuDi  Saeculares.]

TAX  I  ARCH  I  {Ta^lapxoi),weTe  military  officers
at  Athens,  who  were  next  in  rank  to  the  Strategi.
[Strategus.]  They  were  ten  in  number  like  the
strategi,  one  for  each  tribe,  and  were  elected  in  the
same  way,  namely  by  x^'F"'''o»"'a.  (Dem.  PhilipA.
p.  47  ;  Pollux,  viii.  87)  In  war  each  commanded
the  infantry  of  his  own  tribe  (Dem.  in  Boeot.  p.
d99  ;  Aesch.  de  Fals.  Leg.  p.  333),  and  they  were
frequently  called  to  assist  the  Strategi  with  their
advice  at  the  war-council.  (Thucyd.  vii.  60.)  In
peace  they  assisted  the  Strategi  in  levying  and
enlisting  soldiers,  as  is  stated  under  Strategus,
and  they  seem  to  have  also  assisted  the  latter  in
the  discharge  of  many  of  their  other  duties.

The  Taxiarchs  were  so  called  from  their  com-
manding Ta|ejs,  which  were  the  principal  divisions
of  the  hoplites  in  the  Athenian  army.  Each  tribe
(<pii\T))  formed  a  reikis,  whence  we  find  (puK-^  used
as  synonymous  with  rd^is.  (Lys.  in  Agorat.  pp.
498,  501.)  As  there  were  ten  tribes,  there  were
consequently  in  a  complete  Athenian  army  ten
Ta|eir,  but  the  number  of  men  contained  in  each
■would  of  course  vary  according  to  the  importance
of  the  war.  Among  the  other  Greeks  the  ra^is
was  the  name  of  a  much  smaller  division  of  troops.
The  Ao'xos  among  the  Athenians  was  a  subdivision
of  the  Ta'^ts,  and  the  Xoxayoi  were  probably  ap-
pointed by  the  taxiarchs.  (Schdmann,  Ant.  Jur.
publ.  Grace,  p.  253,  &c.)

TAXIS  (tc{|/s).     [Taxiarchi.]

TECTOR,  TECTO'RIUM  OPUS.  [Paries,
p.  870,  a.]

TE'GULA  (Kepaixos,  dim.  Kipajxis.,  Xen.  Hellen.
vi.  5.  §  9),  a  roofing-tile.  Roofing-tiles  were  origi-
nally made,  like  bricks,  of  baked  clay  {yrjs  6irrr}s).
Byzes  of  Naxos  first  introduced  tiles  of  marble
about  the  year  620  B.  c.  (Paus.  v.  10.  §  2.)  Be-
sides the  superior  beauty  and  durability  of  the
material,  these  tiles  could  be  made  of  a  much
larger  size  than  those  of  clay.  Consequently,  when
they  were  employed  in  the  constmction  of  the
greatest  temples,  such  as  that  of  Jupiter  at  Olympia
(Paus.  Z.  c),  the  Parthenon  at  Athens,  and  the
Serapeium  at  Puteoli,  their  dimensions  were  in
exact  proportion  to  the  other  parts  of  the  building  ;
and  the  effect  of  the  parallel  rows  of  joint-tiles
descending  from  the  ridge  to  the  eaves,  and  termi-
nated by  ornamental  frontons,  with  which  the  lions'-
heads  {capita  leonina,  Vitruv.  iii.  5.  §  15  ;  xo^fp^N
HorapoU. ///er.  i.  21)  over  the  cornice  alternated,
was  exceedingly  grand  and  beautiful.  How  highly
this  invention  was  prized  by  the  ancients  is  proved
by  the  attempt  of  the  Roman  censor  Q.  Fulvius
Flaccus  to  despoil  the  temple  of  the  Lacinian  Juno
of  some  of  its  marble  tiles  (tegulae  mannoreae),  in
order  to  adorn  another  temple  which  he  had  vowed
to  erect  in  Rome.  (Liv.  xlii.  4  ;  Va!.  Max.  i.  1.
§  20.)  A  still  more  expensive  and  magnificent
method  of  roofing  consisted  in  the  use  of  tiles
made  of  bronze  and  gilt.  (Plin.  //.  N.  xxxiii.  3.
B.  18.)

At  Rome  the  houses  were  originally  roofed  with
shingles,  and  continued  to  be  so  down  to  the  time
of  the  war  with  Pyrrhus,  when  tiles  began  to  super-


TEGULA.

sede  the  old  roofing  material.  (Plin.  H.N.xv].  10.
s.  36  ;  Niebuhr,  Hist,  of  Ro7ne,  vol.  iii.  p.  559.)

Tiles  were  originally  made  perfectly  flat,  or  with
nothing  more  than  the  hook  or  nozle  underneath
tlie  upper  border,  which  fulfilled  the  purpose  of
fixing  them  upon  the  rafters.  They  were  after-
wards formed  with  a  raised  border  on  each  side,  as
is  shown  in  the  annexed  woodcut  representing  the
section  of  four  of  the  tiles  remaining  at  Pompeii.


In  order  that  the  lower  edge  of  any  tile  might
overlap  the  upper  edge  of  that  which  came  next
below  it,  its  two  sides  were  made  to  converge
downwards.  See  the  next  woodcut  representing
a  tiled  roof,  from  a  part  of  which  the  joint-tiles  are
removed  in  order  to  show  the  overlapping  and  the
convergence  of  the  sides.  It  was  evidently  neces-
sary to  cover  the  lines  of  junction  between  the
rows  of  flat  tiles,  and  this  was  done  by  the  use  of
semicylindrical  tiles  called  imbrices.  Tlie  above
woodcut  shows  the  section  of  three  imbrices  found
at  Pompeii,  and  indicates  their  position  relatively
to  the  flat  tiles.  This  is  also  shown  in  the  next
woodcut.     The  roof,  by  the  exact  adaptation  of


the  broad  tegulae  and  the  narrow  imbrices  through-
out its  whole  extent,  became  like  one  solid  and
compact  frame-work.  (Xen.  Mem.  iii.  1.  §  7  ;  con-
fringit  iegulm  imbricesque.  Plant.  Most.  i.  2.  28  ;
Plin.  //.  N.  xxxvi.  22.  s.  44.)  The  rows  of  joint-
tiles  divided  the  roof  into  an  equal  number  of
channels,  down  which  the  water  descended  into
the  gutter  {canalis)  to  be  discharged  through  open-
ings made  in  the  lions'-heads,  the  position  and  ap-
pearance of  which  are  shown  in  the  woodcuts.
The  rows  of  flat  tiles  terminated  in  a  variously
ornamented  front,  which  rose  ininijediately  above
the  cornice,  and  of  which  four  specimens  are  shown
in  the  first  woodcut.  The  first  and  fourth  patterns
are  drawn  from  tiles  found  at  Pompeii,  and  the
two  internal  from  tiles  preserved  in  the  British


TELA.

Museum  and  brought  thither  from  Athens.  The
lions'  heads  upon  the  third  and  fourth  are  per-
forated. [Antefixa.]  The  frontons,  which
were  ranged  along  the  cornice  at  the  termination
of  the  rows  of  joint-tiles,  were  either  painted  or
sculptured  so  as  to  represent  leaves,  aplustria
[Aplustre],  or  masks.  The  first  woodcut  shows
three  examples  of  such  frontons,  which  belong
to  the  Elgin  collection  in  the  British  Museum,
They  are  drawn  on  a  much  larger  scale  than  the
other  objects  in  the  same  woodcut.  The  invention
of  these  graceful  ornaments  is  ascribed  to  Dibutades
of  Corinth.     (Plin.  i/.iV.  xxxv.  12.  s.  43.)

Other  highly  curious  details  upon  the  tiled  roofs
of  Greek  temples  may  be  seen  in  the  Unedited
Antiquities  of  Attica,  Lon.  1817.

The  same  arrangement  of  tiles  which  was  placed
round  a  temple  was  also  to  be  found  within  a  house
which  was  formed  with  an  opening  in  the  centre.
Hence  any  person  who  descended  from  the  roof
into  the  open  court  or  impluvium  of  a  house,  was
said  to  pass  "  through  the  tiles  "  {per  tegulas,  Ter.
Eun.  iii.  5.  40  ;  compare  Gellius,  x.  15  ;  5id  ruv
KepdfjLuv,  St.  Luke,  v.  19).

Pliny  mentions  a  kind  of  tiling  under  the  name
pavonaeeum  {H.  N.  xxxvi,  22.  s.  44),  so  called  pro-
bably because  the  tiles  were  semicircular  at  their
lower  edge,  and  overlapped  one  another  like  the
feathers  in  the  train  of  a  peacock.  Ancient  se-
pulchres and  urns,  made  in  the  form  of  small  temples
[Fun us],  often  represent  very  exactly  the  ap-
pearance of  a  roof  with  the  above-mentioned  va-
rieties in  the  form  of  the  tiles.  [J.  Y.]

TEICIIOPOEUS  (TezxoTTOzo's).  Among  the
various  persons  to  whom  was  entrusted  the  ma-
nagement of  public  works  at  Athens  (eVio-Tarat
Zr}iJ.o(riwv  epywi^),  were  those  whose  business  it  was
to  build  and  keep  in  repair  the  public  walls.  It  is
needless  to  observe  how  important  to  the  citj'  of
Athens  were  her  walls  and  fortifications,  more
especially  the  long  walls,  which  connected  the
upper  city  with  the  Peiraeeus,  and  which  gave  it  the
advantages  of  an  island.  These  were  maintained
at  considerable  expense.  The  reixoTroioi  appear
to  have  been  elected  by  x^^porovla,  one  from  each
tribe,  and  probably  for  a  year.  They  were  con-
sidered to  hold  a  magisterial  office  (d/?x^),  and
in  that  capacity  had  an  -nye/xovia  SiKaaTTjpiov.
Aeschines  calls  them  iiria-TaTai  tov  fieyiarou  ruv
cpyav.  Funds  were  put  at  their  disposal,  for  which
they  had  their  treasurer  (ra^ufas),  dependent  on
the  treasurer  of  the  revenue.  They  were  liable  to
render  an  account  (cvOvvrf)  of  their  management  of
these  funds,  and  also  of  their  general  conduct,  like
other  magistrates.  The  office  of  Teixonoios  has  been
invested  with  peculiar  interest  in  modern  times,  on
account  of  its  having  been  held  by  Demosthenes,
and  its  having  given  occasion  to  the  famous  prose-
cution of  Ctesiphon,  who  proposed  that  Demosthenes
should  receive  the  honour  of  a  crown  before  he  had
rendered  his  account  according  to  law.  As  to  the
nature  of  the  office,  and  the  laws  thereto  relating,
we  may  probably  rely  upon  the  account  given  by
Aeschines.  (Aesch.  c.  Ctesiph.  55 — 57,  ed.  Steph. ;
Bockh,  FubLEcon.  of  Athens,  pp.  170,  203,  2d
ed.)  '  [C.  R.  K.]

TELA  (iVto's),  a  loom.  Although  weaving  was
amongst  the  Greeks  and  Romans  a  distinct  trade
carried  on  by  a  separate  class  of  persons  {ixpavrai,
tesctores  and  ieatrices,  linteones),  who  more  particu-
larly supplied  the  inhabitants  of  the  towns  with


TELA.  109.9

the  productions  of  their  skill  (Cato,  de  Re  liust.
135),  yet  every  considerable  domestic  establish-
ment, especially  in  the  country,  contained  a  loom
(Cato,  de  Re  Rust.  10, 14)  together  with  the  whole
apparatus  necessary  for  the  working  of  wool  (lani-
ficium,  TaXao-m,  Tahacriovpyia).  (Hesiod,  Op.  et
Dies,  779  ;  Virg.  Gewg.  i.  285, 294.)  [Calathus.J
These  occupations  were  all  supposed  to  be  carried
on  under  the  protection  of  Minerva,  specially  deno-
minated 'EpydvTj,  who  was  always  regarded  in  this
character  as  the  friend  and  patroness  of  industry,
sobriety,  and  female  decorum.  (Serv.  in  Virg.  Ed.
vi.  3.)

When  the  farm  or  the  palace  was  sufficiently
large  to  admit  of  it,  a  portion  of  it  called  the  laTuif
{histones,  Varro,  de  Re  Rust.  i.  2)  or  textrinum,  was
devoted  to  this  purpose.  (Cic.  Verr.  iv.  26.)  The
work  was  there  principally  carried  on  by  female
slaves  (qtiasillanae,  a'l  epiQoi,  Theocrit.  xv.  80  ;
Horn.  Od.  i.  356—360,  vii.  235,  xxi.  350)  under
the  superintendence  of  the  mistress  of  the  house,
who  herself  also  together  with  her  daughters  took
part  in  the  labour,  both  by  instructing  beginners
and  b}^  finishing  the  more  tasteful  and  ornamental
parts.  ( Vitruv.  vi.  7.  p.  1 64,  ed.  Schneider  ;  Syra-
machus,  Epist.  vi.  40.)  But  although  weaving  was
employed  in  providing  the  ordinary  articles  of
clothing  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans  from  the
earliest  times,  yet  as  an  inventive  and  decorative
art,  subservient  to  luxury  and  refinement,  it  was
almost  entirely  Oriental.  Persia,  Babylonia,  Egypt,
Phoenicia,  Phrygia,  and  Lydia,  are  all  celebrated
for  the  wonderful  skill  and  magnificence  displayed
in  the  manufacture  of  scarfs,  shawls,  carpets  and
tapestry.  [Chlamys,  Pallium,  Peplum,  Tapes.]

Among  the  peculiarities  of  Egyptian  manners
Herodotus  (ii.  35  ;  compare  Athen.  ii.  p.  48,  b)  men-
tions that  weaving  was  in  that  country  the  employ-
ment of  the  male  sex.  This  custom  still  continues
among  some  Arab  and  negro  tribes.  (Welsted,
Travels,  vol.  i.  p.  123  ;  Prichard,  Researches,  vol.
ii.  p.  60,  3d  edit.)  Throughout  Europe,  on  the
other  hand,  weaving  was  in  the  earliest  ages  the
task  of  women  only.  The  matron,  assisted  by  her
daughters,  wove  clothing  for  the  husband  and  the
sons.  (Colum.  de  Re  Rust.  xii.  Praef.  ;  Plin.  H.  N.
viii.  48.  s.  74  ;  Herod,  ix.  109.)  This  domestic
custom  gives  occasion  in  the  works  of  the  epic  and
tragic  poets  to  some  very  interesting  denoumens  and
expressions  of  aifection  between  near  relations.  In-
deed the  recognition,  or  'hvayv^piais,  as  Aristotle
calls  it  {de  Art.  Poet.  6.  §  18,  14.  §  21),  often
depends  on  this  circumstance.  Thus  Creusa  proves
herself  to  be  the  mother  of  Ion  (Eurip.  Ion,  1416,
1417)  by  describing  the  pattern  of  a  shawl  which
she  had  made  in  her  youth,  and  in  which  she  had
wrapped  her  infant  son.  Iphigenia  recognises  her
brother  Orestes  on  one  occasion  (Eurip.  Jph.  in
Taur.  S14 — 817),  and  Electra  recognises  him  on
another  (Aeschyl.  Choeph.  225)  by  the  figured
clothing  which  he  wore,  and  which  they  had  long
before  woven  for  him.

Besides  the  shawls  which  were  frequently  given
to  the  temples  by  private  persons,  or  obtained  by
commerce  with  foreign  nations,  companies  or  col-
leges of  females  were  attached  to  the  more  opulent
temples  for  the  purpose  of  furnishing  a  regular  sup-
ply. Thus  the  sixteen  women,  who  lived  together
in  a  building  destined  to  their  use  at  Olympia,
wove  a  new  shawl  every  five  years  to  be  displayed
at  the  games  which  were  then  celebrated  in  honour


1100


TELA.


of  Hera,  and  to  be  preserved  in  her  temple.  (Pans.
V.  16.  §  2—4,  vi.24.  §  8.)  [Heraea.]  A  similar
college  at  Sparta  was  devoted  to  the  purpose  of
weaving  a  tunic  every  year  for  the  sitting  statue
of  the  Amyclean  Apollo,  which  was  thirty  cubits
high.  (Paus.  iii.  16.  §  2,  19.  §  2.)  At  Athens
the  company  of  virgins  called  epyaarluai  or  epyduai,
and  dppTjcpopai,  who  were  partly  of  Asiatic  extrac-
tion, wove  the  shawl  which  was  carried  in  the  P.a-
nathenaic  procession  and  which  represented  the
battle  between  the  gods  and  the  giants.  (Eurip.
flee.  461—469  ;  Virg.  Ciris,  21—35.)  [Arrhe-
PHORiA  ;  Panathenaea.]  a  similar  occupation
was  assigned  to  young  females  of  the  higliest  rank
at  Argos.  (Eurip.  Iph.  in  Taiir.  213 — 215.)  In
the  fourth  century  the  task  of  weaving  began  to
be  transferred  in  Europe  from  women  to  the  other
sex,  a  change  which  St.  Chrysostom  deplores  as  a
sign  of  prevailing  sloth  and  effeminacy.  {Oral.  34.
vol.  iii.  p.  470,  ed.  Saville.)  Vegetius  {de  Re  Mil.
i.  7),  who  wrote  about  the  same  time,  mentions
linieones,  or  the  manufacturers  of  linen  cloth,  in  the
number  of  those  who  were  ineligible  as  soldiers.

Every  thing  woven  consists  of  two  essential  parts,
the  warp  and  the  woof,  called  in  Latin  Stameti  and
SuLtegmen,  Subtemen^  or  Trama  (Vitruv.  x.  1  ;
Ovid.  Met.  iv.  397  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xi.  24.  s.  28  ;
Pers.  Sat.  vi.  73),  in  Greek  (Tti/\ixu}v  and  icpoKr;.
(Plato,  PoHt.  pp.  297,  301,  302,  ed.  Bekker  ;
Aelian,  //.  ^.  ix.  17  ;  Plut.  de  Is.  et  Osir.  p.
672.)  Instead  of  KpoKi]  Plato  {I^y.  v.  p.  386,
ed.  Bekker)  sometimes  uses  e(pi,(p-^,  and  in  the
passages  referred  to  he  mentions  one  of  the  most
important  differences  between  the  warp  and  the
woof :  viz.  tliat  the  threads  of  the  former  are  strong
and  firni  in  consequence  of  being  more  twisted  in
spinning,  whilst  those  of  the  latter  are  compara-
tively soft  and  yielding.  This  is  in  fact  the  diffe-
rence which  in  the  modern  silk  manufacture  dis-
tinguishes organzine  from  tram.,  and  in  the  cotton
maiuifacture  twist  from  iveft.  Another  name  for
the  woof  or  tram  was  poMvr).  (Hom.  Batr.  181  ;
Eustath.  in  Horn.  II.  xxiii.  762,  Od.  v.  121.)

The  warp  was  called  stamen  in  Latin  (from
stare)  on  account  of  its  erect  posture  in  the  loom.
(Varro,  L.  L.  v.  1 13,  ed.  Miiller.)  The  correspond-
ing Greek  term  ar-qtxwv  and  likewise  itnos  have
evidently  the  same  derivation.  For  the  same  re<i-
son  the  very  first  operation  in  weaving  was  to  set
up  the  loom,  iarov  crTriaaaOai  (Hom.  Od.  ii.  94  ;
Hesiod,  Op.  et  Dies.,  779)  ;  and  the  web  or  cloth,
before  it  was  cut  down  or  "  descended"  from  the
loom  (KareSa  cup'  iVroJ,  Theocrit.  xv.  35),  was
called  "vestis  pendens,"  or  "pendula  tela"  (Ovid,
Met.  iv.  395,  Epist.  i.  10),  because  it  hung  from
the  transverse  beam  or  Jugum.  These  particulars
are  all  clearly  exhibited  in  the  picture  of  Circe's
loom,  which  is  contained  in  the  very  ancient  illu-
minated MS.  of  Virgil's  Aeneid  preserved  at  Rome
in  the  Vatican  Library.     (See  the  annexed  wood-


TELA.

cut,  and  compare  A  en.  vii.  1 4  :  ap'Mi  majores  stanf&i
texehant^  Servius  in  loc. ;  Hom.  Od.  x.  222.)  Al-
though the  upright  loom  here  exhibited  was  in
common  use,  and  employed  for  all  ordinary  pur-
poses, the  practice,  now  generally  adopted,  of
placing  the  warp  in  an  horizontal  position  was  oc-
casionally resorted  to  in  ancient  times  ;  for  the
upright  loom  {stans  tela.,  larros  opOios),  the  manage-
ment of  which  required  the  female  to  stand  and
move  about,  is  opposed  to  another  kind  at  which
she  sat.     (Artemidor.  iii.  36  ;  Servius,  I.e.)

We  observe  in  the  preceding  woodcut  about  the
middle  of  the  apparatus  a  transverse  rod  passing
through  the  warp.  A  straight  cane  was  well
adapted  to  be  so  used,  and  its  application  is  clearly
expressed  by  Ovid  in  the  words  "  stamen  secernit
arundo."  (Met.  vi.  55.)  In  plain  weaving  it  was
inserted  between  the  threads  of  the  warp  so  as  to
divide  them  into  two  portions,  the  threads  on  one
side  of  the  rod  alternating  with  those  on  the  other
side  throughout  the  whole  breadth  of  the  warp.
The  two  upright  beams  supporting  the  jugum,  or
transverse  beam,  from  which  the  warp  depends,
were  called  /ceAeoi/rcs  (Theocrit.  xviii,  34),  and
tVTOTToSes,  literally,  "  the  legs  of  thp  loom."  (Eus-
tath. in  Horn.  Od\  xiii.  107.)

Whilst  the  improvements  in  machinery  have  to
a  great  extent  superseded  the  use  of  the  upright
loom  in  all  other  parts  of  Europe,  it  remains  almost
in  its  primitive  state  in  Iceland.  The  following
woodcut  is  reduced  from  an  engraving  of  the  Ice-
landic loom  in  Olaf  Olafsen's  Economic  Tour  in
that  island,  published  in  Danish  at  Copenhagen,
A.  D.  1780.  We  observe  underneath  the  jugum  a
roller  {avTiov,  Pollux,  vii.  x.  §  36  ;  Eustath.  in
Hom.  Od.  xiii.  107)  which  is  turned  by  a  handle,
and  on  which  the  web  is  wound  as  the  work  ad-
vances. The  threads  of  the  warp,  besides  being
separated  by  a  transverse  rod  or  plank,  are  divided
into  thirty  or  forty  parcels,  to  each  of  which  a
stone  is  suspended  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  the
warp  in  a  perpendicular  position  and  allowing  the
necessary  play  to  the  strokes  of  the  spatha,  whiclv
is  drawn  at  the  side  of  the  loom.  The  mystical
ode  written  about  the  eleventh  century  of  our  era,


TELA.
with  which  Gray  has  made  us  familiar  in  his  trans-
lation, and  which  describes  the  loom  of  "  the  Fatal
Sisters,"  represents  warriors'  skulls  as  supplying
the  place  of  these  round  stones  (pondera.  Sen.
jEpist.  91  ;  Plin.  H.N.  i.e.).  The  knotted  bundles
of  threads,  to  which  the  stones  were  attached,  often
remained  after  the  web  was  finished  in  the  form  of
a  fringe.     [Fimbriae.]

Whilst  the  comparatively  coarse,  strong,  and
much-twisted  thread  designed  for  the  warp  was
thus  arranged  in  parallel  lines,  the  woof  remained
upon  the  spindle  [Fusus],  forming  a  spool,  bobbin,
or  jyen  {'TW'n,  dim.  iri^viov.,  Horn.  II.  xxiii.  762  ;
Eurip.  Hec.  466).  This  was  either  conveyed
through  the  warp  without  any  additional  con-
trivance, as  is  still  the  case  in  Iceland,  or  it  was
made  to  revolve  in  a  shuttle  {iravovKKos,  Hesych,
S.V.  Uriviov:  radius.,  Lucret.  v.  1352).  This  was
made  of  box  brought  from  the  shores  of  the  Euxine,
and  was  pointed  at  its  extremities,  that  it  might
easily  force  its  way  through  the  warp.  (Virg.  Aen.
ix.  476  ;  Ovid.  Met.  iv.  275,  vi.  5Q,  132,  Fast.
jii.  879.)  The  annexed  woodcut  shows  the  form
in  which  it  is  still  used  in  some  retired  parts  of  our
island  for  common  domestic  purposes,  and  which
may  be  regarded  as  a  form  of  great  antiquity.
An  oblong  cavity  is  seen  in  its  upper  surface,
which  holds  the  bobbin.  A  small  stick,  like  a
wire,  extends  through  the  length  of  this  cavity,
and  enters  its  two  extremities  so  as  to  turn  freely.
The  small  stick  passes  through  a  hollow  cane,
which  our  manufacturers  call  a  quill^  and  which


is  surrounded  by  the  woof.  This  is  drawn  through
a  round  hole  in  the  front  of  the  shuttle,  and,
whenever  the  shuttle  is  thrown,  the  bobbin  re-
volves and  delivers  the  woof  through  this  hole.
The  process  of  winding  the  yarn  so  as  to  make
It  into  a  bobbin  or  pen,  was  called  ■m]vi^i<jQai
(Theocrit.  xviii.  32)  or  avaTrtivi^^aQai.  (Aristot.
H.  A.  v.  19.)  The  reverse  process  by  which  it
was  delivered  through  the  hole  in  front  of  the
shuttle  (see  the  last  woodcut)  was  called  cKir-qyt-
^earQai,  Hence  the  phrase  iKin^uieiTai  ravra  means
"  he  shall  disgorge  these  things."  (Aristoph.  Ban.
586  ;  Schol  in  loc.)

All  that  is  effected  by  the  shuttle  is  the  con-
ve3'-ance  of  the  woof  across  the  warp.  To  keep
every  thread  of  the  woof  in  its  proper  place  it  is
necessary  that  the  threads  of  the  warp  should  be
decussated.  This  was  done  by  the  leashes,  called
in  Latin  licia,  in  Greek  /uirot  (fiiTos,  Hom.  II.
xxiii.  762).  By  a  leash  we  are  to  understand  a
thread  having  at  one  end  a  loop,  through  which  a
thread  of  the  warp  was  passed,  the  other  end  being
fastened  to  a  straight  rod  called  Liciatorium,  and  in
Greek  Kavwv.  (Aristoph,  Thesm.  829.)  The  warp,
having  been  divided  by  the  arundo,  as  already
mentioned,  into  two  sets  of  threads,  all  those  of  the
same  set  were  passed  through  the  loops  of  the  cor-
responding set  of  leashes,  and  all  these  Jeashes
were  fastened  at  their  other  end  to  the  same  wooden
rod.  At  least  one  set  of  leashes  was  necessar\'  to
decussate  the  warp,  even  in  the  plainest  and  sim-
plest weaving.     The  number  of  sets  was  increased


TELA.  1101

according  to  the  complexity  of  the  pattern,  which
was  called  biiia  or  trilix  (Mart.  xiv.  143),  Ufxiros^
TpifitTos  (Crat.  Jun.  Fra(^.  p.  103,  ed.  Runkel),  or
TToAuVtTos  (Per.  Mar.  Eryth.  pp.  164,  170,  173,
ed.  Blancardi),  according  as  the  number  was  two,
three,  or  more.

The  process  of  annexing  the  leashes  to  the  warp
was  called  ordiri  telam  (Plin.  H.  N.  xi.  24.  s.  28),
also  licia  telae  addere.,  or  adnectere.  (Virg.  Georg.  i.
285  ;  Tibull.  i.  6.  78.)  It  occupied  two  women  at
the  same  time,  one  of  whom  took  in  regular  succes-
sion each  separate  thread  of  the  warp  and  handed
it  over  to  the  other  ;  this  part  of  the  process  was
called  Trapa(pepfiv,  irapaSlSovai,  or  TTpo(f)op€7a6au
(Schol.  in  Aristoph.  Av.i  ;  Suidas,  Hesychius,  s.  v.)
The  other  woman,  as  she  received  each  thread,
passed  it  through  the  loop  in  proper  order,  and  this
act,  which  we  call  "entering,"  was  called  in  Greek
Sid^ecrdai.     (Schol.  in  Hom.  Od.  vii.  107.)

Supposing  the  warp  to  have  been  thus  adjusted,
and  the  pen  or  the  shuttle  to  have  been  carried
through  it,  it  was  then  decussated  by  drawing  for-
wards the  proper  rod,  so  as  to  carry  one  set  of  the
threads  of  the  warp  across  the  rest,  after  which  the
woof  was  shot  back  again,  and  by  the  continual  re-
petition of  this  process  the  warp  and  woof  were
interlaced.  (Plutarch,  vii.  sap.  conv.  p.  592,  ed.
Reiske  ;  Hom.  //.  xxiii.  760 — 763.)  In  the  pre-
ceding figure  of  the  Icelandic  loom  we  observe  two
staves,  which  are  occasionally  used  to  fix  the  rods
in  such  a  position  as  is  most  convenient  to  assist
the  weaver  in  drawing  her  woof  across  her  warp.
After  the  woof  had  been  conveyed  by  the  shuttle
through  the  warp,  it  was  driven  sometimes  down-
wards, as  is  represented  in  the  first  woodcut,  but
more  commonly  upwards  as  in  the  second.  (Isid.
Orig.  xix.  22;  Herod,  ii.  35.)  Two  different  in-
struments were  used  in  this  part  of  the  process.
The  simplest  and  probably  the  most  ancient  was  in
the  form  of  a  large  wooden  sword  {spatka,  (nrdOrj^
dim.  (nraQiov,  Brunck,  Anal.  i.  222 ;  Plato,  Lysis.,
p.  118  ;  Aesch.  Climph.  226).  From  the  verb
(TiraQaui,  to  beat  with  the  spatha,  cloth  rendered
close  and  compact  by  this  process  was  called  aita-
QriTos.  (Athen.  xii.  p.  525,  d.)  This  instrument
is  still  used  in  Iceland  exactly  as  it  was  in  ancient
times,  and  a  figure  of  it  copied  from  Olafsen,  is
given  in  tlje  second  woodcut.

The  spatha  was,  however,  in  a  great  degree
superseded  by  the  comb  (pecten,  KtpKis).  the  teeth
of  which  were  inserted  between  the  threads  of  the
warp,  and  thus  made  by  a  forcible  impulse  to  drive
the  threads  of  the  woof  close  together.  (Ovid.  Fast,
iii.  880,  Met.  vi.  58  ;  Juv.  ix.  26  ;  Virg.  Aen.
vii.  14  ;  Hom.  //.  xxii.  448 ;  Aristoph.  Aves^  832  ;
Eurip.  Ion,  509,  760,  1418,  1492.)  It  is  probable
that  the  teeth  were  sometimes  made  of  metal  (Horn.
Od.  v.  62) ;  and  they  were  accommodated  to  the
purpose  intended  by  being  curved  {peciinis  unci,
Claudian,  in  Eutrop.  ii.  382),  as  is  still  the  case  in
the  combs  which  are  used  in  the  same  manner  by
the  Hindoos.  Among  us  the  office  of  the  comb  is
executed  with  greater  ease  and  effect  by  the  reedy
lay,  or  batten.

The  lyre  [Lyra],  the  favourite  musical  instru-
ment of  the  Greeks,  was  only  known  to  the  Ro-
mans as  a  foreign  invention.  Hence  they  appear
to  have  described  its  parts  by  a  comparison  with
the  loom,  with  which  they  were  familiar.  The
terms  jugum  and  stamina  were  transferred  by  an
obvious  resemblance  from  the  latter  to  the  former


1102


TELA.


object ;  and,  although  they  adopted  into  their  own
language  the  Greek  word  plectrum  (Ovid.  Afet.  xi.
167 — 170),  they  used  the  Latin  Pecten  to  denote
the  same  thing,  not  because  the  instrument  used
in  striking  the  lyre  was  at  all  like  a  comb  in  shape
and  appearance,  but  because  it  was  held  in  the
Tight  hand  and  inserted  between  the  stamina  of  the
lyre  as  the  comb  was  between  the  stamina  of  the
loom.  ( Virg.  Aen.  vi.  647  ;  Juv.  vi.  290—293 ;
Pers.  vi.  2.)

After  enumerating  those  parts  of  the  loom  which
were  necessary  to  produce  even  the  plainest  piece
of  cloth,  it  remains  to  describe  the  methods  of  pro-
ducing its  varieties,  and  more  especially  of  adding
to  its  value  by  making  it  either  warmer  and  softer,
or  more  rich  and  ornamental.  If  the  object  was  to
produce  a  checked  pattern  (scuiulis  dividere,  Plin.
JI.  N.  viii.  48,  s.  74  ;  Juv.  ii.  97),  or  to  weave
what  we  should  call  a  Scotch  plaid,  the  threads  of
the  warp  were  arranged  alternately  black  and
white,  or  of  different  colours  in  a  certain  series
according  to  the  pattern  which  was  to  be  exhibit-
ed. On  the  other  hand,  a  striped  pattern  (pa€5u>-
ros,  Diod.  Sic.  v.  30  ;  virgata  sagula,  Virg.  Aen.
viii.  660)  was  produced  by  using  a  warp  of  one
colour  only,  but  changing  at  regular  intervals  the
colour  of  the  woof.  Of  this  kind  of  cloth  the  Ro-
man trahea  (Virg.  Aen.  vii.  188)  was  an  example.
Checked  and  striped  goods  were,  no  doubt,  in  the
first  instance,  produced  by  combining  the  natural
varieties  of  wool,  white,  black,  brown,  &c.  [Pal-
JJUM.]  The  woof  also  was  the  medium,  through
which  almost  every  other  diversity  of  appearance
and  quality  was  effected.  The  warp  as  mentioned
above  was  generally  more  twisted,  and  consequently
stronger  and  firmer  than  the  woof:  and  with  a
view  to  the  same  object  different  kinds  of  wool
were  spun  for  the  warp  and  for  the  woof.  The
consequence  was,  that  after  the  piece  was  woven,
the  fuller  drew  out  its  nap  by  carding,  so  as  to
make  it  like  a  soft  blanket  (Plato,  PoliL  p.  302)
[FuLLo]  ;  and,  when  the  intention  was  to  guard
against  the  cold,  the  warp  was  diminished  and  the
woof  or  nap  (fpf^l,  KpoKvs)  made  more  abundant
in  proportion.  (Hesiod.  Op.  et  Dies,  537  ;  Proclus
ad  loc.)  In  this  manner  they  made  the  soft
X\aiva  or  Laena  [Pallium].  On  the  other
hand  a  woof  of  finely  twisted  thread  [iJTpiov)  pro-
duced a  thin  kind  of  cloth,  which  resembled  our
buntine  (lacemae  nimia  svhteminum  tenuilate  per-
fiabiles.,  Amm.  Marcell.  xiv.  6).  Where  any  kind
of  cloth  was  enriched  by  the  admixture  of  different
materials,  the  richer  and  more  beautiful  substance
always  formed  part  of  the  woof.  Thus  the  vestis
suhserica^  or  iramoserica,  had  the  tram  of  silk.
[Sericum.]  In  other  cases  it  was  of  gold  (Virg.
Aen.'ni.  483  ;  Servius  in  loc);  of  wool  dyed  with
Tyrian  purple  (Ovid.  Met.  vi.  578;  Tp'io  svhteg-
niine^  TibuU.  iv.  1.  122  ;  picto  subiegmine,  Val.  Flacc.
vi.  228) ;  or  of  beavers'- wool  (vestis  filn-ina,  Isid.
Orig.  xix.  22).  Hence  the  epithets  (poiviKOKpoKos^
**  having  a  purple  woof"  (Pind.  01.  vi.  39,  ed.
Bockh  ;  Schol.  in  loc.\  d.vQoKp6Kos^  '*  producing  a
flowery  woof"  (F-urip. //ec.  466),  xpi"''f07r77K)7Tos,
**  made  from  bobbins  or  pens  of  gold  thread "
(Eurip.  Orest.  829),  ewTTTjcos,  *'  made  with  good
bobbins"  (Eurip.  Iph.  in  Taur.  814,  1465),  KepiciSi
woi/c<A.AoC(ra,  "  variegating  with  the  comb"  (Eurip.
Iph.  in  Taur.  215),  &c.

But  besides  the  variety  of  materials  constituting
the  woof,  an  endless  diversity  was  effected  by  the


TELONES.
manner  of  inserting  them  into  the  warp.  The
terms  bilix  and  SiVtros,  the  origin  of  which  has
been  explained,  probably  denoted  what  we  call
dimity  or  tweeled  cloth,  and  the  Germans  zwillich.
The  poets  apply  trilix,  which  in  German  has  be-
come drillich^  to  a  kind  of  armour,  perhaps  chain-
mail,  no  doubt  resembling  the  pattenii  of  cloth,
which  was  denoted  by  the  same  term.  (Virg^
Aen.  iii.  467,  v.  259,  vii.  639,  xii,  375;  Val.
Flaccus,  iii.  199.)  In  the  preceding  figure  of  the
Icelandic  loom  the  three  rods  with  their  leashes
indicate  the  arrangement  necessary  for  this  texture.
All  kinds  of  damask  were  produced  by  a  very
complicated  apparatus  of  the  same  kind  (plurimis
liciis),  and  were  therefore  called  Polymita.  (Plin.
//.  A^.  viii.  48.  s.  74 ;  Mart.  xiv.  150.)

The  sprigs  or  other  ornaments  produced  in  the
texture  at  regular  intervals  were  called  flowers
(ai'07j,  Pliilostr.  Imag.  ii.  28  ;  bpoua.,  Horn.  //.  xxii.
440)  or  feathers  (plumae).  Another  term,  adopted
with  reference  to  the  same  machinery,  was  6^*'^'-
Tov  or  ela/tiTOf,  denoting  velvet.  In  the  middle
ages  it  became  fa/itroy,  and  thus  produced  the
German  sammet.

The  Fates  are  sometimes  mentioned  by  classical
writers  in  a  manner  very  similar  to  the  description
of  "  the  Fatal  Sisters  "  above  referred  to.  ( Dira
sororum  licia,  Stat.  Achill.  i.  520  ;  fatorum  inex-
tricalititer  contoi-ta  iicia,  Apul.  Met.  xi.)

As  far  as  we  can  form  a  judgment  from  the  lan-
guage and  descriptions  of  ancient  authors,  the  pro-
ductions of  the  loom  appear  to  have  fallen  in  an-
cient times  very  little,  if  at  all,  below  the  beauty
and  variety  of  the  damasks,  shawls,  and  tapestry
of  the  present  age,  and  to  have  vied  with  the
works  of  the  most  celebrated  painters,  representing
first  mythological,  and  afterwards  scriptural  sub-
jects. In  addition  to  the  notices  of  particular
works  of  this  class,  contained  in  the  passages  and
articles  which  have  been  already  referred  to,  the
following  authors  may  be  consulted  for  accounts  of
some  of  the  finest  specimens  of  weaving:  Euripid.
/ow,  190— 202, 1 141— 1 165  ;  Aristot.  Mir.  Auscult.
99  ;  Athen.  xii.  p.  541  ;  Asterii,  Homilia  de  Div.
et  Laz.;  Theod.  Prodrora.  Rhod.  et  Dos.  Amor,  ad
fin. ;  Virg.  Aen.  v.  250—257,  Cir.  21—35  ;  Ovid.
Met.  vi.  61—128;  Stat.  Theh.  vi.  64,  540—547  ;
Auson.  Epig.  26  ;  Lamprid.  Heliog.  28  ;  Claudian,
de  VI.  Cons.  Honor.  56\—577,inStilick  ii.  330—
365.  [J.  Y.J

TELAMO'NES.  [Atlantes.]
TE'LETAE  (reKeral).  [Mvsteria.]
TELO'NES  (t6A«»/7js).  Most  of  the  taxes  at
Athens  were  farmed  by  private  persons,  who  took
upon  themselves  the  task  of  collecting,  and  made
periodical  payments  in  respect  thereof  to  the  state.
They  were  called  by  the  general  name  of  rcAwuaiy
while  the  farmers  of  any  particular  tax  were  called
€lKoaTS)vai,'>rcvTT]KoaToK6yoi,  &c.,as  the  case  might
be.  The  duties  were  let  by  auction  to  the  highest
bidder.  Companies  often  took  them  in  the  name
of  one  person,  who  was  called  dpxcovrjs  or  reAwv-
dpxn^i  and  was  their  representative  to  the  state.
Sureties  were  required  of  the  farmer  for  the  pay-
ment of  his  dues.  The  office  was  frequently  under-
taken by  resident  aliens,  citizens  not  liking  it,  on
account  of  the  vexatious  proceedings  to  which  it
often  led.  The  farmer  was  armed  with  consi-
derable powers;  he  carried  with  him  his  books,
searched  for  contraband  or  uncustomed  goods,
watched  the  harbour,  markets  and  other  places,  to


TELOS.

.prevent  smuggling,  or  unlawful  and  clandestine
sales ;  brought  a  (pdais  or  other  legal  process
against  those  whom  he  suspected  of  defrauding  the
revenue ;  or  even  seized  their  persons  on  some  oc-
casions, and  took  them  before  the  magistrate.  'Jo
enable  liim  to  perform  these  duties,  he  was  ex-
empted from  military  service.  Collectors  (eK\oye7s)
were  sometimes  employed  by  the  farmers  ;  but
frequently  the  farmer  and  the  collector  were  the
same  person.  (Bockh,  Fubl.  Econ.  of  Athens,  p.
335,  &c.,  2d  ed.)

The  taxes  were  let  by  the  Commissioners,  acting
tinder  the  authority  of  the  Senate.  [Poletae.]
The  payments  (^KaraSoKoX  t4\ovs)  were  made  by
the  farmer  on  stated  Prytaneias  in  the  Senate-
house.  There  was  usually  one  payment  made  in
advance,  irpoKaTaSoXri,  and  one  or  more  afterwards,
called  irpocTKaTdSKijfxa.  Upon  any  default  of  pay-
ment, the  farmer  became  an/xos,  if  a  citizen,  and
he  was  liable  to  be  imprisoned  at  the  discretion  of
the  court,  upon  an  information  laid  against  him.
If  the  debt  was  not  paid  by  the  expiration  of  the
uinth  Prytaneia,  it  was  doubled  ;  and  if  not  then
paid,  his  property  became  forfeited  to  the  state,
and  proceedings  to  confiscation  might  be  taken
forthwith.  Upon  this  subject  the  reader  should
consult  the  speech  of  Demosthenes  against  Timo-
crates.  (Schomann,  Ant.  Jur.  puhl.  Gr.  p.
317.)  [C.R.K.]

TELOS  (tcAos),  a  tax.  The  taxes  imposed  by
the  Athenians  and  collected  at  home  were  either  or-
dinary or  extraordinary.  The  former  constituted  a
reguhir  or  permanent  source  of  income  ;  the  latter
were  only  raised  in  time  of  war  or  other  emer-
gency. The  ordinary  taxes  were  laid  mostly  upon
property,  and  upon  citizens  indirectly  in  the  shape
of  toll  or  customs  ;  though  the  resident  aliens  paid
a  poll-tax,  called  {xtToUiov,  for  the  liberty  of  re-
siding at  Athens  under  protection  of  the  state.
[Metoeci.]  As  to  the  customs  and  harbour  dues,
see  Pentecostb.  An  excise  was  paid  on  all  sales
in  the  market,  called  iirwyia,  though  we  know  not
what  the  amount  was.  (Harpoc.  s.  v.  'Eircovia.)
And  a  duty  was  imposed  on  aliens  for  permission
to  sell  their  goods  there.  Slave-owners  paid  a
duty  of  three  obols  for  every  slave  they  kept  ;  and
slaves  who  had  been  emancipated  paid  the  same.
This  was  a  very  productive  tax  before  the  fortifi-
cation of  Deceleia  by  the  Lacedaemonians.  (Xe-
noph.  de  Vectig.  iv.  25.)  There  was  also  a  TtopviKov
t4\os,  and  some  others  of  minor  importance,  as  to
which  the  reader  is  referred  to  Bockh  {Pvhl.  Econ.
of  Athens,  p.  333,  2d  ed.).  The  justice  fees
(ripuToi'ero,  HapiaracTis,  &c,)  were  a  lucrative  tax
in  time  of  peace.  (Thucyd.  vi.  91  ;  Bockh,  Id.  p.
345,  &c.)

The  extraordinary  taxes  were  the  property  tax
(etV^opct),  and  the  compulsory  services  called  Aet-
Tovpyiai.  Some  of  these  last  were  regular,  and
recurred  annually  ;  the  most  important,  the  rpir]-
papxla,  was  a  war- service,  and  performed  as  occasion
required.  As  these  services  were  all  performed,
wholly  or  partly,  at  the  expense  of  the  individual,
they  may  be  regarded  as  a  species  of  tax.  [Eis-
PHORA  ;  Leitourgia  ;  Trierarchia.]

The  tribute  {(popoi)  paid  by  the  allied  states  to
the  Athenians  formed,  in  the  flourishing  period  of
the  republic,  a  regular  and  most  important  source
of  revenue.  In  b.  c.  415  the  Athenians  sub-
stituted for  the  tribute  a  duty  of  five  per  cent.
(ciKyjTTj)  on  all  commodities  exported  or  imported


TEMENOS.  1103

by  the  subject  states,  thinking  to  raise  by  this
means  a  larger  income  than  by  direct  taxation.

[ElCOSTE.]

A  duty  of  ten  per  cent.  (SeKciTTj)  on  merchan-
dise passing  into  and  from  the  Euxine  Sea  was
established  for  a  time  by  Alcibiades  and  other
Athenian  generals.  [Decumae.]  This  may  be
regarded  as  an  isolated  case.  In  general,  where
SfKurai  are  mentioned  among  the  Greeks,  they
denote  the  tithes  of  land  ;  such  as  the  Persian
Satraps  collected  from  conquered  countries,  or  such
as  tyrants  exacted  of  their  subjects  for  the  use  of
land  held  under  them  as  lords  of  the  whole  country.
For  instance,  Peisistratus  took  a  tithe  of  this  kind,
which  was  reduced  by  his  sons  to  a  twentieth.
The  state  of  Athens  held  the  tithe  of  some  lands  ;
other  tithes  were  assigned  to  the  temples  or  service
of  the  Gods,  having  been  dedicated  by  pious  indi-
viduals, or  by  reason  of  some  conquest  or  vow,
such  as  that  recorded  by  Herodotus  (vii.  132).

Other  sources  of  revenue  were  derived  by  the
Athenians  from  their  mines  and  public  lands,
fines,  and  confiscations.  The  public  demesne  lands,
whether  pasture  or  arable,  houses  or  other  buildings,
were  usually  let  by  auction  to  private  persons.
The  conditions  of  the  lease  were  engraven  on  stone.
The  rent  was  payable  by  Prytaneias.  If  not  paid
at  the  stipulated  time,  the  lessee,  if  a  citizen,  be-
came ari/xos,  and  subject  to  the  same  consequences
as  any  other  state  debtor.  As  to  fines  and  confis-
cations, see  TiMKMA.

These  various  sources  of  revenue  produced,  ac-
cording to  Aristophanes,  an  annual  income  of  two
thousand  talents  in  the  most  flourishing  period  of  the
Athenian  empire.  (  Vesp.  660.)  See  the  calcula-
tions of  Bockh,  Id.  p.  433,  &c.

T€\uv  signifies  "  to  settle,  complete,  or  perfect,"
and  hence  '•  to  settle  an  account,"  and  generally
"  to  pay."  Thus  TeKos  comes  to  mean  any  pay-
ment in  the  nature  of  a  tax  or  duty.  The  words
are  connected  with  zahlen  in  German,  and  the  old
sense  of  tale  in  English,  and  the  modern  word  toil.
(Arnold,  ad  Thuc.  i.  58.)  Though  reAos  may
signify  any  payment  in  the  nature  of  a  tax  or
duty,  it  is  more  commonly  used  of  the  ordinary
taxes,  as  customs,  &c.  TcAos,  nKuv  is  used  with
reference  to  the  property-tax,  in  the  sense  of  being
rated  in  a  certain  proportion,  or,  which  is  the  same
thing,  belonging  to  a  particular  class  of  rate-payers.
Thus  iTTTraSa  or  iivTriKov  rehuv,  or  c/s  'nnrdSa
TeAeti',  means,  to  belong  to  the  class  of  knights.
And  the  same  expression  is  used  metaphorically,
without  any  immediate  reference  to  the  payment
of  a  tax.  Thus  ets  dvSpas  reXelv,  is  to  be  classed
among  adults.  So  e$  Bojwtovs  reAteti',  Herod,  vi.
108.  'l(TOTe\eia  signifies  the  right  of  being  taxed
on  the  same  footing,  and  having  other  privileges,
the  same  as  the  citizens ;  a  right  sometimes  granted
to  resident  aliens.  [Metoeci.]  'AreAeta  signifies,
an  exemption  from  taxes,  or  other  duties  and
services ;  an  honour  very  rarely  granted  by  the
Athenians.  [Ateleia.]  As  to  the  farming  of
the  taxes,  see  Telones.  For  an  epitome  of  the
whole  subject,  see  Schomann,  A7it.  Jur.  publ.  Gr,
p.  314,  &c.  ^  [C.  R.  K.]

TE'MENOS  (t4/jlcj/os),  a  piece  of  land  cut  or
marked  off  from  other  land.  The  name  was  parti-
cularly applied  to  a  piece  of  land  cut  off  from  the
public  land  and  appropriated  to  the  support  of  a
king  in  the  heroic  age  (Hom.  //.  vi.  193,  vii.  313,
XX.  184,  Od.  vi.  293,  xi.  183),  and  likewise  to  a


1104  TEMPLUM.

piece  of  land,  cut  off  from  comnion  uses,  and  dedi-
cated to  a  god.  In  Attica,  there  appears  to  have
been  a  considerable  quantity  of  such  sacred  lands
(rejuei/rj),  which  were  let  out  by  the  state  to  farm  ;
and  the  income  arising  from  them  was  appropriated
to  the  support  of  the  temples,  and  the  maintenance
of  public  worship.  (Xen.  Vectiy.  iv.  19  ;  Harpocrat.
*•. V.  diro  MiaQwixdruv ;  Bockh,  Publ.  Econ.  ofAtltens,
p.  303,  2d  ed.)

TEMO.     [Aratrum  ;  Currus  ]

TEMPLUM  is  the  same  word  as  the  Greek
Tffievos,  from  refjivo)  to  cut  off,  for  iemplum,  ac-
cording to  Servius  (ad  Aen.  i.  446),  was  any  place
which  was  circumscribed  and  separated  by  the  au-
gurs from  the  rest  of  the  land  by  a  certain  solemn
formula.  The  technical  terms  for  this  act  of  the
augurs  are  liberare  and  effuH,  and  hence  a  templum
itself  is  a  locus  Hberatiis  et  effutus.  A  place  thus
Bet  apart  and  hallowed  by  the  augurs  was  always
intended  to  serve  religious  purposes,  but  chiefly  for
taking  the  auguria.  ('*  Templum  locus  augurii  aut
auspicii  causa  quibusdam  concepiis  verbis  fiyiitus,''^
Varro,  de  Ling.  Lat.  vi.  p.  81,  Bip.)  When  Varro
(de  Ling.  ImI.  v.  p.  65,  Bip.)  says  that  a  locus  ef-
Juius  was  always  outside  the  city,  we  must  remember
that  this  only  means  outside  the  pomoerium,  for
the  whole  space  included  within  the  pomoerium
was  itself  a  templum^  i.  e.  a  place  in  which  auspices
could  be  tjiken  [Pomoerium]  ;  but  when  they
were  to  be  taken  in  any  place  outside  the  pomoe-
rium^ it  was  always  necessary  for  such  a  place
to  be  first  circumscribed  and  sanctified  by  the
augur  {liberare  et  effari).  The  place  in  the  heavens
within  which  the  observations  were  to  be  made
was  likewise  called  templum^  as  it  was  marked  out
and  separated  from  the  rest  by  the  staff  of  the
augur.  When  the  augur  had  defined  the  templum
within  which  he  intended  to  make  his  observa-
tions, he  fixed  his  tent  in  it  {tabernaeulum  capere)^
and  this  tent  was  likewise  called  templum.,  or  more
accurately,  templum  minus.  To  this  minus  tem-
plum we  must  refer  what  Servius  (ac/^ew.  iv,  "200)
and  Festus  (s.  v.  minora  templa)  state,  that  a  iem-
plum was  enclosed  with  planks,  curtains,  &c.,  at-
tached to  posts  fixed  in  the  ground,  and  that  it
had  only  one  door  {exitus).  The  place  chosen  for
a  iemplum  was  generally  an  eminence,  and  in  the
city  it  was  the  arx,  where  the  fixing  of  a  tent  does
not  appear  to  have  been  necessary,  because  here  a
place  called  auguraculum  was  once  for  all  conse-
crated for  this  purpose.  (Paul  D'mc.s.  v.  Augura-
culum ;  comp.  Liv.  i.  18,  iv.  18  ;  Cic.  de  Off.  iii.
16.)

Besides  this  meaning  of  the  word  iemplum  in
the  language  of  the  augurs,  it  also  had  that  of  a
temple  in  the  common  acceptation.  In  this  case
too,  however,  the  sacred  precinct  within  which  a
temple  was  built,  was  always  a  locus  liberatus
et  effalus  by  the  augurs,  that  is,  a  templum  or  a
fanum  (Liv.  x.  37  ;  Varro,  de  Ling.  Lat.  v.  p.  65,
Bip.)  ;  the  consecration  was  completed  by  the
pontiffs,  and  not  until  inauguration  and  consecra-
tion had  taken  place,  could  sacra  be  performed  or
meetings  of  the  senate  be  held  in  it.  (Serv.  ad  Aen.
i.  446.)  It  was  necessary  then  for  a  temple  to  be
sanctioned  by  the  gods,  whose  will  was  ascertained
by  the  augurs,  and  to  be  consecrated  or  dedicated  by
the  will  of  man  (the  pontiffs).  Where  the  sanction
of  the  gods  had  not  been  obtained,  and  where  the
mere  act  of  man  had  consecrated  a  place  to  the
gods,  such  a  place  was  only  a  sacrum^  sacrarium^


TEMPLUM.

or  sacellum.  [Sacrarium  ;  Sacellum.]  Varro
(ap.  Gell.  xiv.  7-  §  7)  justly  considers  the  ceremony
performed  by  the  augurs  as  essential  to  a  temple,
as  the  consecration  by  the  pontiffs  took  place  also
in  other  sanctuaries  which  were  not  temp/a,  but
mere  sacra  or  aedes  sacral.  Thus  the  sanctuary
of  Vesta  was  not  a  templum  but  an  aedes  sacra^
and  the  various  curiae  (Hostilia,  Pompeia,  Julia)
required  to  be  made  templa  by  the  augurs  before
senatusconsulta  could  be  made  in  them.  In  what
manner  a  iemplum  differed  from  a  delubrum  is  moro
difficult  to  decide,  and  neither  the  ancient  nor  mo-
dern writers  agree  in  their  definitions.  Some  an-
cients believed  that  delubrum  was  originally  the
name  given  to  a  place  before  or  at  the  entrance  of
a  temple,  which  contained  a  font  or  a  vessel  with
water,  by  which  persons,  before  entering  the  temple,
performed  a  symbolic  purification  (Serv.  ad  Aen.
iv.  56,  ii.  225  ;  Corn.  Fronto,  quoted  by  Dacier  on
Fest.  s.  V.  Delubrum )  ;  others  state  that  delubrum
was  originally  the  name  for  a  wooden  representa-
tion of  a  god  Q,6avov).,  which  derived  its  name
from  librum  (the  bark  of  a  tree),  which  was  taken
off  (delibrare)  before  the  tree  was  worked  into
an  image  of  the  god,  and  that  hence  delubrum  was
applied  to  the  place  where  this  image  was  erected.
(Fest.  s.  V.  Delubrum  ;  Massur.  Sab.  ap.  Serv.
ad  Aen.  ii.  225.)  Hartung  {Die  h'el.  d.  Rom.  i.
p.  143,  &c.)  derives  the  word  delubrum  from  liber
(anciently  luber),  and  thinks  that  it  originally
meant  a  locu^  liberatus,  or  a  place  separated  by  the
augur  from  the  profane  land,  in  which  an  image  of
a  god  might  be  erected,  and  sacred  rites  be  per-
formed. A  delubrum  would  therefore  be  a  sanctuary,
whose  chief  characteristic  was  its  being  separated
from  the  profane  land.  But  nothing  certain  can  be
said  on  the  subject.  (Comp.  Macrob.  Sat.  iii.  4.)

After  these  preliminary  remarks,  we  shall  pro-
ceed to  give  a  brief  account  of  the  ancient  temples,
their  propertv,  and  their  ministers,  both  in  Greece
and  Rome.  We  must,  however,  refer  our  readers
for  a  more  detailed  description  of  the  architectural
structure  of  ancient  temples  to  other  works,  such  as
Stieglitz,  Arch'dologie  der  Baukunst,  and  others,
especially  as  the  structure  of  the  temples  varied
according  to  the  divinities  to  whom  they  were
dedicated,  and  other  circumstances.

Temples  in  Greece.  —  Temples  appear  to  have
existed  in  Greece  from  the  earliest  times.  They
were  separated  from  the  profane  land  around  them
{Tdiros  fii§T]Xus,  or  to  fie€r}\a),  because  every  one
was  allowed  to  walk  in  the  latter.  (Schol.  ad  Soph.
Oed.  Col.  10.)  This  separation  was  in  early  times
indicated  by  very  simple  means,  such  as  a  string  or
a  rope.  (Pans.  viii.  10.  §  2.)  Subsequently,  how-
ever, they  were  surrounded  by  more  efficient  fences,
or  even  by  a  wall  {epKos,  irepiioXos,  Herod,  vi.
134;  Pollux,  i.  10;  Peiua.  passim),  the  entrance
to  winch  was  decorated,  as  architecture  advanced,
with  magnificent  Propylaea  [Propylaea].  The
whole  space  enclosed  in  such  a  TrepiSoKos  was  called
T€/xevus,  or  sometimes  Upov  (Herod,  ix.  36,  vi.  19,
with  Valckenaer's  note  ;  Thucyd.  v.  18)  ;  and  con-
tained, besides  the  temple  itself,  other  sacred
buildings,  and  sacred  ground  planted  with  groves,
&c.  Within  the  precincts  of  the  sacred  enclosure
no  dead  were  generally  allowed  to  be  buried,
though  there  were  some  exceptions  to  this  nile,
and  we  have  instances  of  persons  being  buried  in
or  at  least  near  certain  temples.  The  religious
laws  of  the  island  of  Delos  did  not  allow  any


TEMPLUM.

corpses  to  be  buried  within  the  whole  extent  of
the  island  (Thucj-d.  iii.  104  :  com  p.  Herod,  i.  64),
and  when  this  law  had  been  violated,  a  part  of  the
island  was  first  purified  by  Peisistratus,  and  subse-
quently the  whole  island  by  the  Athenian  people.

The  temple  itself  was  called  I'ews,  and  at  its  en-
trance fonts  (TTcpippavTT^pia)  were  generally  placed,
that  those  who  entered  the  sanctuary  to  pniy  or  to
offer  sacrifices  might  first  purify  themselves.  (Pol-
lux, i.  10  ;  Herod,  i.  51.)  In  the  earliest  times
the  Greek  temples  were  either  partly  or  wholly
made  of  wood  (Paus.  v.  20.  §  3  ;  16.  §  1,  viii.  10.
§  2),  and  the  simplest  of  all  appear  to  have  been
the  ar]Koi,  which  were  probably  nothing  but  hollow
trees  in  which  the  image  of  a  god  or  a  hero  was
placed  as  in  a  niche  (Hesiod.  Fragm.  54,  ed.  Gott-
ling  ;  Schol.  ad  Soph.  Track.  1169  );  for  a  temple
was  originally  not  intended  as  a  receptacle  for  wor-
shippers, but  simply  as  an  habitation  for  the  deity.
The  act  of  consecration,  by  which  a  temple  was
dedicated  to  a  god,  was  called  'i^pvffis.  The  cha-
racter of  the  early  Greek  temples  was  dark  and
mysterious,  for  they  had  no  windows,  and  they
received  light  through  the  door,  which  was  very
large,  or  from  lamps  burning  in  them.  Vitruvius
(iv.  5)  states  that  the  entrance  of  Greek  temples
was  alwaj^s  towards  the  west,  but  most  of  the
temples  still  extant  in  Attica,  Ionia,  and  Sicily
have  their  entrance  towards  the  east.  Architecture,
however,  in  the  construction  of  magnificent  temples,
made  great  progress  even  at  an  earlier  time  than
either  painting  or  statuary,  and  long  before  the
Persian  wars  we  hear  of  temples  of  extraordinary
grandeur  and  beauty.  All  temples  were  built
either  in  an  oblong  or  round  form,  and  were  mostly
adorned  with  columns.  Those  of  an  oblong  form
had  columns  either  in  the  front  alone,  in  the  fore
and  back  fronts,  or  on  all  the  four  sides.  Re-
specting tlie  original  use  of  these  porticoes  see
Porticos.  The  classification  of  temples,  according
to  the  number  and  arrangement  of  their  columns,
will  be  described  presently.  The  friezes  and  me-
topes were  adorned  with  various  sculptures,  and  no
expense  was  spared  in  embellishing  the  abodes  of
the  gods.  The  light  which  was  formerly  let  in  at
the  door,  was  now  frequently  let  in  from  above
through  an  opening  in  the  middle,  which  was
called  iinaidpop,  and  a  temple  thus  constructed  was
called  vnaidpos.  (Vitruv.  I.e.)  Many  of  the  great
temples  consisted  of  three  parts:  1,  the  irpovaos  or
TT^oSo/xos,  the  vestibule  ;  2.  the  cella  {vaos,  (ttj/cos)  ;
and  3.  the  diriadoSofjios.  The  cella  was  the  most
important  part,  as  it  was,  properly  speaking,  the
temple,  or  the  habitation  of  the  deity  whose  statue
it  contained.  In  one  and  the  same  cella  there
were  sometimes  the  statues  of  two  or  more  divini-
ties, as  in  the  I'lrechtheum  at  Athens  the  statues  of
Poseidon,  Hephaestus,  and  Butas.  The  statues
always  faced  the  entrance,  which  was  in  the  centre
of  the  prodylus,  or  front  portico.  The  place  where  the
statue  stood  was  called  eSoj,  and  was  surrounded  by
a  balustrade  or  railings  (i'vpia,  ipvfxara,  Paus.  v.  11 .
§  2).  Some  temples  also  had  more  than  one  cella,  in
which  case  the  one  was  generally  behind  the  other,  as
in  the  temple  of  Athena  Polias  at  Athens.  In  tem-
ples where  oracles  were  given,  or  where  the  worship
was  connected  with  mysteries,  the  cella  was  called
&SvTov,  fxiyapov^  or  dvoLKropov^  and  to  it  only  the
priests  and  the  initiated  had  access.  (Pollux,  i.  9  ;
Paus.  ix.  8.  §  1,  viii.  62  ;  37.  §  5  ;  Herod,  viii.
S3,  ix.  65  ;  Plut.  Num.  13;  Caes.  de  Bell.  Civ.


TEMPLUM.


llOo


iii.  1 05.)  In  some  cases  the  cella  was  not  acces-
sible to  any  human  being,  and  various  stories  were
related  of  the  calamities  that  had  befallen  persons
who  had  ventured  to  cross  the  threshold.  (Paus.
viii.  52.  §  3  ;  10.  §  2  ;  38.  §  2  ;  Soph.  Oed.  Col.
37.)  The  oTnedoSo/jLos  was  a  cliamber  which  had
its  entrance  in  the  back  front  of  a  temple,  and  served
as  a  place  in  which  the  treasures  of  the  temple
were  kept,  and  thus  supplied  the  place  of  the
brjaavpoi  which  were  attached  to  some  temples.
( Compare  Miiller,  Arch'dol.  d.  Kunst,  §  288  ;
Stieglitz,  Arch'dol.  der  Battkunst,  vol.  ii.  $  1  ;
Hirt,  Leh7-e  der  Geh'dvde,  §  1  ;  Bockh,  ad  Corp.
Inscript.  pp.  264,  &c.)

We  now  proceed  to  describe  the  classification
of  temples,  both  Greek  and  Roman,  the  latter  being
chiefly  imitated  from  the  former.  They  were  either
quadrangular  or  circular.

Quadrangular  Temples  were  described  by  the
following  terms,  according  to  the  number  and  ar-
rangement of  the  columns  on  the  fronts  and  sides.

1.  "AffTuAos,  aslyle,  without  any  columns.  (Leo-
nidas  Tarent.  in  Brunck,  Anal.  vol.  i.  p.  237  ;  Plin.
H.N.xxxiv.  8.)

2.  'Ef  TTapacrrdcri,  in  antis,  with  two  columns  in
front  between  the  antae.     (Pind.  01.  vi.  1.)

3.  JlpoarvAos,  prostyle,  with  four  columns  in
front.

4.  ^Afx(pnrp6aTu\os^  amphiprostyle,  with  four
columns  at  each  end.

5.  ne/DtTTTepos  or  dfvpiKiwv  (Soph.  Ant.  285),
peripteral,  with  columns  at  each  end  and  along
each  side.

6.  A'nrrep09,  dipteral,  with  two  ranges  of  columns
(iTTepd)  all  round,  the  one  within  the  other.

7.  'V€vdoSlTrTepos,pseudodipte7'al,  with  one  range
only,  but  at  the  same  distance  from  the  walls  of
the  cella  as  the  outer  range  of  a  5'nrTepos.

To  these  must  be  added  a  sort  of  sham  invented
by  the  Roman  architects,  namely :

8.  '^evSoTTepi-rrTepos,  pseudoperipteral  (Vitruv.  i v.
7),  where  the  sides  had  only  half-columns  (at  the
angles  three-quarter  columns),  attached  to  the  walls
of  the  cella,  the  object  being  to  have  the  cella  large
without  enlarging  the  whole  building,  and  yet  to
keep  up  something  of  the  splendour  of  a  peripteral
temple.

Names  were  also  applied  to  the  temples,  as  well
as  to  the  porticoes  themselves,  according  to  the
number  of  columns  in  the  portico  at  either  end
of  the  temple  ;  namely,  r^rpdarvKos,  tetrastyle^
when  there  were /our  columns  in  front,  e^do-ruAos,
hexastyle,  when  there  were  six,  oKraaruKos,  octa-
style,  when  there  were  eight,  SeKaarvXas,  dccastyle,
when  there  were  ten.  There  were  never  more
than  ten  columns  in  the  end  portico  of  a  temple  ;
and  when  there  were  only  two,  they  were  always
arranged  in  that  peculiar  form  called  in  antis  {iv
vapaardai).  The  number  of  columns  in  the  end
porticoes  was  never  uneven,  but  the  number  along
the  sides  of  a  temple  was  generally  uneven.  The
number  of  the  side  columns  varied :  where  the
end  portico  was  tetrastyle,  there  were  never  any
columns  at  the  sides,  except  false  ones,  attached  to
the  walls,  as  in  the  temple  of  Fortuna  Virilis  at
Rome,  which  has  a  tetrastyle  portico,  with  a  columr-
behind  each  comer  column,  and  then  five  false
columns  along  each  side  of  the  cella :  where  it  was
hexastyle  or  octastyle,  there  were  generally  13  or  17
columns  at  the  sides,  counting  in  the  corner  columns ;
sometimes  a  hexastyle  temple  had  only  eleven  CO*
4b


1106


TEMPLUM.


lumns  on  the  sides.  The  last  arrangement  resulted
from  the  rule  adopted  by  the  Roman  architects,
who  counted  by  intercolumniations  (the  spaces
between  the  columns),  and  whose  rule  was  to  have
twice  as  many  ititercolumniaiioTis  along  the  sides  of
the  huildiiig  as  in  front ;  another  example  of  the
rule  is  furnished  by  the  above-mentioned  temple
of  Fortuna  Virilis,  which  has  four  columns  in  front
and,  altogether,  seven  on  each  side.  The  Greek
architects,  on  the  contrary,  counted  by  columns,
and  their  rule  was  to  have  twice  as  many  columns
along  the  sides  as  in  fronts  and  one  morc*^  counting
the  corner  columns  in  each  case  :  sometimes,  how-
ever, they  followed  the  other  rule,  as  in  the  temple
at  Mylasa,  where  there  are  six  columns  in  front
and  eleven  at  each  side.  Another  set  of  terms,
applied  to  temples  and  other  buildings  having  por-
ticoes, as  well  as  to  the  porticoes  themselves,  was
derived  from  the  distances  between  the  columns  as
compared  with  the  lower  diameters  of  the  columns.
They  were  the  following  : —

1.  XlvKvocTTvKos^  pycnostyle^  the  distance  be-
tween the  columns  a  diameter  of  a  column  and
half  a  diameter.

2.  Suo-TuAos,  systyle^  the  distance  between  the
columns  two  diameters  of  a  column.

3.  EutTTuAos,  eustyle^  the  distance  between  the
columns  two  diameters  and  a  quarter,  except  in  the
centre  of  the  front  and  back  of  the  building,  where
each  intercolumniation  {intercolumnium)  was  three
diameters ;  called  eustyle,  because  it  was  best
adapted  both  for  beauty  and  convenience.

4.  AidaTvXos,  diastyle,  the  intercolumniation,  or
distance  between  the  columns,  three  diameters.

5.  'ApaioarvXas,  araeostyle,  the  distances  exces-
sive, so  that  it  was  necessary  to  make  the  epistyle
( eTTJo-TuAtov),  or  architrave,  not  of  stone,  but  of
timber.  [Epistyli UM.]

These  five  kinds  of  intercolumniation  are  illus-
trated by  the  following  diagram  :  —


H


2i  m


i  or  more  J  ^

The  following  elevations  and  plans  of  temples
will  aid  the  reader  in  understanding  the  different
terms  descriptive  of  the  number  and  arrangement
of  the  columns.  They  are  taken  from  the  plates
to  Hirt''s  Gesckichte  der  Batikunst ;  and  although,
for  the  sake  of  greater  clearness  and  convenience,
they  are  not  all  taken  from  actual  buildings,  but
are  general  representations  of  each  form,  yet  they
are  not  merely  imaginary,  for  they  are  founded  on
a  careful  comparison  of  existing  remains  with  the
descriptions  of  Vitruvius.

I.  In  Antis.

An  engraving  of  a  temple  of  this  form  has  been
given  under  Antak.


*  The  Roman  rule  might  also  be  stated  accord-
ing to  the  number  of  columns  thus : — twice  as
many  columns  along  tlic  sides  as  in  front^  and  one
less.


TEMPLUM.
II.  Prostyle,  Tetrastyle,  of  the  Ionic  ordet.


The  above  engraving  exhibits  clearly  the  prodo-
mus  or  pronaos^  or  space  enclosed  b}"^  the  portico
and  the  side  walls  projecting  beyond  the  front  wall;
and  the  ce/Zo,  with  the  statue  of  the  god  opposite  to
the  entmnce.


TEMPLUMi
III.  Amfhiprostvle,    Tetrastyle.


TEMPLUM.


107


a  H  H  p
1            1

r             1

■   H    M  1

Vitruvius  (iii.  1)  says  that  "the  Amphiprostylos
has  every  part  which  the  Prostylos  has,  and  more-
over it  has  columns  and  a  pediment  in  the  posticum
after  the  same  manner."  This  posticum  (the  Greek
opisthodomus)  appears  to  have  been  of  two  kinds  ;
either  a  mere  portico  attached  to  the  back  wall  of  the
cella^  or  a  larger  space,  as  shown  in  the  figure.


IV.  Peripteral,  Hexastyle,   of  the  Doric
order.


•      €

»       •         d       c

•      •

»    •     •    «

L__ ,,||

1 ^1

The  above  plan  is  that  of  a  Roman  Periptcros:
to  represent  the  Grecian  Periptcros  two  column*
should  be  added  to  each  side,  and  the  length  thus
gained  thrown  into  the  opisthodomus.  In  this  form
there  were  two  columns  between  the  antae  termi-
nating the  projecting  walls  ;  and  tlie  three  inter-
columniations  thus  formed  were  fenced  with  marble
railings  (plutei,  Vitruv.  iv.  4),  with  gates  in  them
giving  access  to  the  prodovius,  as  shown  by  the
lines  in  the  figure.

This  species  of  temple  was  not  only  more  splen-
did than  the  former,  but  also  more  fully  adapted  for
the  performance  of  grand  religious  ceremonies,  as
the  continuous  portico  all  round  it  would  give  shelr
ter  and  passage  to  a  large  number  of  people.  Ac-
cordingly we  find  that  several  of  the  most  celebrated
Greek  temples  are  of  this  form  ;  such  as  that  of
Zeus  Nemeus  between  Argos  and  CoriHth;  Of  Conr
cord  at  Agrigentum,  of  Theseus  at  Athens,  which
has  no  pillars  between  the  antae  of  the  posticum,
4b  2


1108


TEMPLUM.

and     PSEUDODIPTERAL,    0(  TA-

5pace,  til


V.  Dipteral
STYLE,  of  the  Ionic  order.     To  save  space,  tlie  one
side  of  the  cut  represents  half  of  the  dipteral  tem-
ple, the  other  side  half  of  the  pseudodipteral.


1

=n

^    p    ^    ^

m  m  M  M

1  s  1  ^

1

1  m  1

f  m

m  1

1

1  m

m

m

m

m  M

m

m  m

1
m

L

J

m  M

m

m  m

m

m  m
m  m

-^

m
m

^  Wi

m

m

m

m  m  i

I  m

m

1       m

m  m  g

1  m

m

m  m  @

1  m

m  g

I  m  m

-^ — 1

-7-

=1_J

The  Dipteros  may  be  considered  as  a  Peripteros^
increased  in  size  and  magnificence  by  the  addition
of  another  row  of  pillars  along  each  side  ;  the
Psetidoflipteros  as  a  Peripteros  with  the  side  co-
lumns moved  outwards  over  the  space  of  one  column
and  intercolumniation,8o  as  to  allowof  eightcolumns
in  front,  Vitruvius,  who  describes  the  latter  first,
assigns  its  invention  to  the  architect  Hermogenes.
From  the  expense  of  such  edifices,  Jhere  were  na-
turally very  few  examples  of  them.  The  far-famed
temple  of  Artemis  at  Ephesus,  and  that  of  Quiriims
at  Rome,  were  dipteral.  That  of  Artemis  at  Mag-
nesia, built  by  Hermogenes,  was  pseudodipteral


TEMPLUM.

VI.  Hypaethral,  Decastyle,  of  the  Corir
thian  order.


i!    ^   ^   ^    ^

m  m  m  m  m

m  m  m  m  m

M  m  m  m  m\

m  m

m  m

m  m  j

I  m  m

m  m
m  m
m  m
Hi  m
m  m
m  m
m  m

^

m

m  m
^  m
m  m
@  m
m  m
m  m
m  m

m            @
m            m

m  m
m  M

m

m

m
m

m

m  m
m  m

m  m

umma^

1

m  m

m  ^

m

m

m  m

m  m

m

m

m  m

m  m

m

m

m  ^

m  s  J

\  m  M

m  m  1

fs  m

m  ^  ^

0  m  m

n  ^  ^  ^  ^1

m  m  %

g  ®  m

S  ®   P  ^   ®j|

a,  the  statue  of  the  god  ;  b  6,  entrances  to  the
cella  from  the  opisthodomus  ;  c,  apartments  for  the
keeper  of  the  temple.

Every  decastyle  temple  was  also  hypaethral,  but
there  were  also  octastyle  and  even  hexastyle  hy-
paethral temples.

A  question  has  lately  been  raised  whether  there
ever  were  any  hypaethral  temples.  The  two  sides
of  the  question  will  be  found  discussed  in  the  fol-
lowing works :  Ross,  Keine  Hyp'dthraltempel  mehr^
in  his  Hellenika,  pt.  i.  pp.  1—39,  Halle,  1846,  4to.,
and  Botticher,  Der  Hyp'dthraltempel^  auf  Grund
des  VitruviscJicn  Zeugnisses,  gegen  Prof.  D.  L.  Ross,
crwiesen,  Potsdam,  1847,  4to.


TEMPLUM.

VII.    PSKUDOPERIPTERAL,  HeXASTYLE,  of   the

Ionic  Order.


TEMPLUM.


1109


These  were  the  chief  normal  forms  of  quadran-
gular temples.  The  variations  made  upon  them,
especially  by  the  union  of  two  or  more  temples  in
one  building,  were  very  numerous,  (See  Hirt,
Stieglitz,  and  the  other  authorities.)  One  form
deserves  particular  notice,  inasmuch  as  it  was
certainly  very  ancient,  and  some  writers  have
supposed  that  it  contained  the  germs  of  all  the
other  forms  ;  this  was  what  Vitruvius  called  the
Tuscan  Temple.   (Vitruv.  iv.  7.)     The  passage  of


Vitruvius  is  very  difficult,  and  has  been  differently
explained.  (Comp.  Stieglitz  and  Hirt.)  The  fol-
lowing engraving  is  so  constructed  as  to  contain  a
representation  of  the  three  chief  forms,  real  or  sup-
posed, of  the  Tuscan  temple.


TT


FT


Of


#


m


m


m


m
m      m


m     m


The  above  plan  is  divided  by  the  lines  a,  h,  into
three  portions,  by  completing  each  of  which, we  have
three  different  plans.  Thus,  if  the  middle  portion
be  retained  as  it  is,  and  the  part  to  the  right  of  b
be  made  like  that  to  the  left  of  a,  we  have  one  of
the  supposed  forms.  Again,  if  the  middle  portion
be  retained,  and  the  two  sides  completed  on  the  same
plan,  namely,  like  the  portion  to  the  left  of  a,  but
without  the  projecting  side  wall,  and  with  a  round
column  in  place  of  the  square  pillar  which  termi-
nates it,  we  have  what  others  suppose  to  have  been
the  true  original  form  of  the  Tuscan  temple.  In
either  case,  the  characteristic  feature  is  the  union
of  three  ccllae  in  one  temple,  dedicated  to  three
associated  deities,  the  middle  cella^  which  (as
shown  in  the  figure)  was  larger  than  the  other  two,
being  assigned  to  the  chief  of  the  three  divinities  ;
as  in  the  great  temple  on  the  Capitol,  the  middle
cella  of  which  was  dedicated  to  Jupiter,  the  cella  on
the  right  side  of  the  middle  one  to  Minerva,  audi
the  remaining  cella  to  Juno,  Lastly,  a  later  varia-
tion of  the  Tuscan  temple,  in  which  its  chief  pecu-
liarity was  lost,  was  made  by  retaining  only  the-
middle  eclla^  and  carrying  a  peristyle  of  columna


alio


TEMPLUM.


along  each  side  of  it,  as  represented  in  the  right-
hand  division  of  the  plan  and  elevation.

Circular  Temples,  properly  so  called,  were  pro-
bably not  used  by  the  Greeks  in  early  times.  The
round  buildings  of  which  we  have  notices  were
either  iholi  or  mere  monumental  edifices.  Several
round  buildings  of  this  kind  are  mentioned  by
Pausanias  ;  such  as  the  iholus  at  Athens,  in  which
there  were  several  small  silver  statues  ;  where  the
Prytaneis  sacrificed  (Paus.  i.  5),  and  where,  ac-
cording to  Pollux  (viii.  155)  they  also  banquetted.
There  was  another  tholus  at  Epidaurus,  in  the  sa-
cred grove  of  Asclepios,  which  he  describes  as  well
worth  seeing :  it  was  built  of  white  marble,  after
the  design  of  Polycleitus,  and  adorned  on  the  inside
with  paintings  by  Pausias.  (Paus.  ii.  27.)  (See
Stieglitz,  vol.  ii.  pp.  38,  fol.)  Vitruvius  (iv.  7)
however  recognizes  two  regular  forms  of  circular
temples,  to  which  a  third  must  be  added.

I.  The  MoNOPTEROS  consisted  of  a  single  circle
of  columns,  standing  on  a  platform  (tribunal),  the
outer  wall  of  which  formed  a  sfylohate  or  conti-
nuous pedestal  for  the  columns,  and  surmounted  by
a  dome  ;  but  without  any  cella.  For  the  propor-
tions see  Vitruvius.  The  remains  of  such  a  temple
have  been  found  at  the  ruins  of  Puteoli.


TEMPLUM.

II.  The  Peripteros  had  a  circular  eella  Rnr-
rounded  by  a  single  peristyle  of  columns,  standing*
on  three  steps,  and  the  whole  surmounted  by  a
dome.  Specimens  are  preserved  in  the  so-called
temples  of  Vesta  at  Rome  (see  wood-cut  on  p.  299)
and  at  Tivoli.


The  proportions  of  the  temples  of  this  form  were
very  carefully  regulated.  The  existing  specimens
agree  in  most  particulars  with  the  rules  laid  down
by  Vitruvius,  according  to  whom  the  distance  of
the  wall  of  the  cella  from  the  edge  of  the  substruc-
tion was  one-fifth  of  the  whole  diameter  of  the  sub-
struction ;  and  consequently  the  diameter  of  the  cella
(including  its  walls)  was  three-fifths  of  the  whole  :
the  internal  diameter  of  the  cella  was  equal  to  the
height  of  the  columns  :  the  height  of  the  dome  was
equal  to  a  semi-diameter  of  the  whole  building :
and  the  centre  of  the  dome  was  surmounted  by  a
pyramid  (or  cone),  to  support  an  ornament  equal  in
height  to  the  capitals  of  the  columns.  (For  a  full
discussion  of  the  passage,  see  Hirt,  Lehre  d.  Ge-
haude,  pp.  29,  30.)

Both  species  of  round  temples  are  mentioned  by
Servius  (adAen.  ix.  408),  who  says  that  they  were
peculiar  to  Vesta,  Diana,  Hercules,  and  Mercury  ;
and  he  distinguishes  the  Monopteros  by  the  follow-
ing description  :  —  tectum  sine  parietiius  cohmnia
subnixum.


TEMPLUM.

ITI.  Another  form,  of  which  we  have  the  chief
example  in  the  Pantheon,  besides  some  smaller
specimens  (see  Hirt,  §  19),  consists  of  a  circular
ceila  surmounted  by  a  dome,  without  a  peristyle,
but  with  an  advanced  portico.  The  following  en-
graving represents  such  a  temple,  with  a  prostyle
tetrastyle  portico,  of  two  slightly  different  khids
(compare  the  left  and  right  sides  of  the  portico  in
the  plan)  ;  the  niches  are  for  the  statues  of  three
associated  deities,  such  as  Apollo,  Diana,  and
Latona  ;  and  thus  this  form  of  temple  may  be  re-
garded, in  its  religious  design,  as  a  variation  of  the
old  Tuscan  temple.


TEMPLUM.


1111


The  portico  of  such  a  temple  might  be  hexa-
Btyle,  or  even  octastyle,  as  in  the  Pantheon.


Respecting  the  more  minute  details  of  the  con-
struction of  temples  of  both  sorts,  which  our  space
does  not  permit  us  to  enter  into,  the  reader  is  re-
ferred to  the  works  of  Hirt  and  Stieglitz,  as  quoted
above  ;  and  lists  and  brief  descriptions  of  the  chief
Greek  and  Roman  temples,  with  references  to  the
works  in  which  they  are  more  fully  described,  will
be  found  in  Muller's  Handbuch  der  Arch'dologie  der
Kunst^  under  the  heads  of  the  respective  periods  in
the  history  of  the  art.

Besides  the  terms  which  have  now  been  ex-
plained, temples  were  designated  by  the  names  of
the  deities  to  whom  they  were  dedicated,  as  the
'OAujUTreroy  or  temple  of  Zetis  Olympius  ;  the  Tlap-
Q^vaiv,  or  temple  of  Athena  Farthenos,  &c.  ;  and
sometimes  a  name  was  given  according  to  some
peculiar  feature  of  the  structure,  as  in  the  case  of
the  Parthenon  at  Athens,  which  was  called  Heca-
tompedon,  because  its  front  was  exactly  100  feet
wide.

Independently  of  the  immense  treasures  con-
tained in  many  of  the  Greek  temples,  which  were
either  utensils  or  ornaments,  and  of  the  tithes  of
spoils,  &c.  (Herod,  vii.  132  ;  Diodor.  xi.  3 ;  Polyb.
iv.  33),  the  property  of  temples,  from  which  they  de-
rived a  regular  income,  consisted  of  lands  (re/xefT;),
either  fields,  pastures,  or  forests.  In  Attica  we
sometimes  find  that  a  demos  is  in  possession  of  the
estates  of  a  particular  temple :  thus  the  Peiraeeus
possessed  the  lands  belonging  to  the  Theseum :
in  what  their  right  consisted  is  not  known  ;  but  of
whatever  kind  it  may  have  been,  the  revenues
accruing  from  such  property  were  given  to  the
temples,  and  served  to  defray  the  expenses  for
sacrifices,  the  maintenance  of  the  buildings,  &c.
For  this  purpose  all  temple-property  was  generally
let  out  to  farm,  unless  it  was,  by  some  curse  which
lay  on  it,  prevented  from  being  taken  into  culti-
vation. (Harpocrat.  s.  r. 'AttO  fxiaQwixdraiv :  comp.
Isocrat.  Areop.  11.)  The  rent  for  such  sacred
domains  was,  according  to  Demosthenes  {in  Eu-
hulid.  p.  1318),  received  by  the  demarch,  probably
the  demarch  of  the  demos  by  which  the  sacred
domain  was  occupied  ;  for  in  other  cases  we  find
that  the  rents  were  paid  to  the  authorities  en-
trusted with  the  administration  of  the  temples.
(Bockh,  Staatsh.  i.  p.  327,  &c.,  ii.  p.  33.9.)  The
supreme  control  over  all  property  of  temples  be-
longed to  the  popular  assembly.  (Demosth.  in
Neaer.  p.  1380.)

Respecting  the  persons  entrusted  with  the
superintendence,  keeping,  cleaning,  etc,  of  temples,
we  scarcely  possess  any  information.  [Aeditui.]
We  have  mention  of  persons  called  K\€idovxoi,
K\ridov)(oi,  veo<pv\aKes^  who  must  have  been  em-
ployed as  guards  <ind  porters  (Aeschyl.  Suppl.
294),  although  it  is  not  certain  whether  these
functions  were  not  performed  by  priests  who  were
occasionally  called  by  names  derived  from  some
particular  function.  At  Olympia  (paiSpiii/Tat  were
appointed  who  belonged  to  the  family  of  Pheidias,
and  had  to  keep  clean  the  statue  of  the  Olympian
Zeus.     (Pans.  v.  14.  §  5.)

Temples  at  Home.  —  In  the  earliest  times  there
appear  to  have  been  very  few  temples  at  Rome,
and  in  many  spots  the  worship  of  a  certain  divinity
had  been  estalslished  from  time  immemorial,  while
we  hear  of  the  building  of  a  temple  for  the  same
divinity  at  a  comparatively  late  period.  Thus  the
foundation  of  a  temple  to  the  ol  Italian  divinity
Satumus,  on  the  capitoline  did  not  take  place  till '
4  B  4


1112


TERMINALIA.


498  B.  c.  (Liv.  ii.  21 ;  Dionys.  vi.  1  ;  Plut.  Puhl
12.)  In  the  same  manner  Quirinus  and  Mars  had
temples  built  to  them  at  a  late  period.  Jupiter
also  had  no  temple  till  the  time  of  Ancus  Martins,
and  the  one  then  built  was  certainly  very  insig-
nificant, (Dionys.  ii.  34  ;  Liv.  i.  33.)  We  may
therefore  suppose  that  the  places  of  worship  among
the  earliest  Romans  were  in  most  cases  simple
altars  or  sacella.  The  Roman  temples  of  later
times  were  constructed  in  the  Greek  style.  The
cella  was  here,  as  in  Greece,  the  inner  spacious  part
of  the  temple  which  contained  the  statue  or  statues
of  the  gods,  and  an  altar  before  each  statue.
(Vitruv.  iv.  5.)  The  roof  which  covered  the  cella
is  called  tesiudo,  but  it  was  in  most  cases  not
wholly  covered,  in  order  to  let  the  light  in  from
above.  (Varro,  ap.  Serv.  ad  Aen.  i.  505.)  The
entrance  of  a  Roman  temple  was,  according  to
Vitruvius,  if  possible,  always  towards  the  west,
which  side  was  at  the  same  time  faced  by  the
image  of  the  divinity,  so  that  persons  offering
prayers  or  sacrifices  at  the  altar  looked  towards
the  east,  (Comp.  Isidor.  xv,  4,  7  ;  Hygin,  de
Limit,  p,  153,  ed.  Goes.)  If  it  was  not  prac-
ticable to  build  a  temple  in  such  a  position,  it  was
placed  in  such  a  manner  that  the  greater  part  of
the  city  could  be  seen  from  it ;  and  when  a  temple
was  erected  by  the  side  of  a  street  or  road,  it
was  always  so  situated  that  those  who  passed  by
could  look  into  it,  and  offer  their  salutations  to
the  deity.

As  regards  the  property  of  temples,  it  is  stated
that  in  early  times  lands  were  assigned  to  each
temple,  but  these  lands  were  probably  intended  for
the  maintenance  of  the  priests  alone.  [Sacerdos.]
The  sacra  publica  were  performed  at  the  expense
of  the  treasury,  and  in  like  manner  we  must  sup-
pose, that  whenever  the  regular  income  of  a
temple,  arising  from  fees  and  fines,  was  not  suffi-
cient to  keep  a  temple  in  repair,  the  state  supplied
the  deficiency',  unless  an  individual  volunteered  to
do  so.

The  supreme  superintendence  of  the  temples  of
Rome,  and  of  .ill  things  connected  with  them,
belonged  to  the  college  of  pontiffs.  Those  persons
who  liad  the  immediate  care  of  the  temples  were
the  Aeditui.  [L.  S.]  and  [P.  S.]

TEMPORALIS  ACTIO.     [Actio.]

TE'MPORIS  PRAESCRI'PTIO.  [Praescrip-

TIO.]

TENSAE.     [Thensae.]

TEPIDA'RIUM.     [Balneae,  p.  190,  a.]

TERMINA'LIA,  a  festival  in  honour  of  the
god  Terminus,  who  presided  over  boundaries.  His
statue  was  merely  a  stone  or  post  stuck  in  the
ground  to  distinguish  between  properties.  On  the
festival  the  two  owners  of  adjacent  property  crowned
the  statue  with  garlands  and  raised  a  rude  altar,  on
Avhich  they  offered  up  some  corn,  honeycombs,  and
wine,  and  sacrificed  a  lamb  (Hor.  Epod.  ii.  59)  or
a  sucking  pig.  They  concluded  with  singing  the
praises  of  the  god.  (Ovid.  Fast.  ii.  639,  &c.)
The  public  festival  in  honour  of  this  god  was  cele-
brated at  the  sixth  milestone  on  the  road  towards
Laurentum  {Id.  682),  doubtless  because  this  was
originally  the  extent  of  the  Roman  territory  in  that
direction.

The  festival  of  the  Terminalia  was  celebrated
«.  d.  VII.  Kal.  Mart.^  or  the  23d  of  February  on
the  day  before  the  Regifugium.  The  Terminalia
was  celebrated  on  the  last  day  of  the  old  Roman


TESSERA.

year,  whence  some  derive  its  name.  We  know  that
February  was  the  last  month  of  the  Roman  year,
and  that  when  the  intercalary  month  Mercedonius
was  added,  the  last  five  days  of  February  were
added  to  the  intercalary  month,  making  the  23rd
of  February  the  last  day  of  the  year.  (Varro,  L.  L.
vi.  13,  ed.  Miiller;  Macrob.  Sat.  i.  13.)  Wh3n
Cicero  in  a  letter  to  Atticus  (vi.  1)  says.  Accept
tuas  litteras  a.  d.  V.  Termi7ialia  {i.e.  Feb.  19),  !ie
uses  this  strange  mode  of  defining  a  date,  because
being  then  in  Cilicia  he  did  not  know  whether  any
intercalation  had  been  inserted  that  year.  [Calen-
DARiuM,  pp.  229,  b.  230,  a.]

TERU'NCIUS.     [As,  p.  141,  a.]

TE'SSERA,  dim.  TESSE'RUL  A  and  TESSEL-
LA  (/fugoj),  a  square  or  cube  ;  a  die  ;  a  token.

The  use  of  small  cubes  of  marble,  earthen-
ware, glass,  precious  stones,  and  mother-of-pearl
for  making  tessellated  pavements  {pavimenta  iessel-
lata,  Sueton,  Jid.  46)  is  noticed  under  DoMUS,
p.  431  and  Pictura,  p.  915.

The  dice  used  in  games  of  chance  [Alea]  had
the  same  form,  and  were  commonly  made  of  ivory,
bone,  or  some  close-grained  wood,  especially  privet
{ligustra  tesseris  utilissima,  Plin.  H.  N.  xvi.  18.
s.  31).  They  were  numbered  on  all  the  six  sides
like  the  dice  still  in  use  (Ovid.  Trist.  ii.  473)  ;  and
in  this  respect  as  well  as  in  their  form  they  differed
from  the  tali,  which  are  often  distinguished  from
tesserae  by  classical  writers.  (Gellius,  xviii.  13;
Cic.  de  Sen.  16.)  [Talus.]  Whilst  four  tali  were
used  in  playing,  only  three  tesserae  were  anciently
employed.  Hence  arose  the  proverb,  ^  rph  e|,  ■)?
Tpeis  KvSoi,  i.  e.  "  either  three  sizes  or  three  aces,""
meaning,  all  or  none  (Plat,  Leg.  xii,  ad  Jin. ;  Schol.
in  loc.  ;  Pherecrates,  p.  49,  ed.  Runkel)  ;  for  kvSos
was  used  to  denote  the  ace,  as  in  the  throw  Bvo
KvSoi  KoiX  TtTTopot,  i.  e,  1, 1,4,  =  6.  (Eupolis,  p.  174,
ed.  Runkel  ;  Aristoph.  Ran.  1447  ;  Schol.  in  loc.)
Three  sizes  is  mentioned  as  the  highest  throw  in
the  Agamemnon  of  Aeschylus  (32).  As  early  as
the  time  of  Eustathius  {in  Od.  i,  107)  we  find  that
the  modern  practice  of  using  two  dice  instead  of
three  had  been  established.

The  ancients  sometimes  played  with  dice  irKctcr-
ro§o\iy5a  [Talus],  wh^n  the  object  was  simply
to  throw  the  highest  numbers.  At  other  times
they  played  also  with  two  sets  of  Latrunculi  or
draughtsmen,  having  fifteen  meij  on  each  side.
The  board  {alveus  lusorius,  Plin.  //.  A^.  xxxvii.  2.
s.  6  ;  alveolus^  Gellius,  i.  20,  xiv.  1)  was  divided
by  twelve  lines,  so  that  the  game  must  have  been
nearly  or  altogether  the  same  with  tric-trac  or
backgammon.  (Brunck,  Anal.  iii.  60  ;  Jacobs,  lui
loc.)  Perhaps  the  duodecim  scripta  of  the  Romans
was  the  same  game.  [Abacus,]

Objects  of  the  same  materials  with  dice,  and
either  formed  like  them  or  of  an  oblong  shape,
were  used  as  tokens  for  different  purposes.  The
tessera  liospitalis  was  the  token  of  mutual  hospi-
tality, and  is  spoken  of  under  Hospitium,  p.  619,  a.
This  token  was  probably  in  many  cases  of  earthen-
ware, having  the  head  of  Jupiter  Hospitalis  stamped
upon  it,  (Plant.  Poen.  v.  1.  25  ;  2.  87—99.)
Tesserae  frumentariae  and  nummaru.ie  were  tokens
given  at  certain  times  by  the  Roman  magistrates
to  the  poor,  in  exchange  for  which  they  received  a
fixed  amount  of  corn  or  mone)'.  (Sueton.  Aug.  40,
42,  A'e^o,  11.)  [Frumentariae  Leges.]  Similar
tokens  were  used  on  various  occasions,  as  they
arose  in  the  course  of  events.     For  example,  when


TESTAMENTUM.
tlie  Romans  sent  to  give  the  Carthaginians  their
choice  of  peace  or  war,  they  sent  two  tesserae,  one
marked  with  a  spear,  the  other  with  a  Caduceus,
requesting  tliem  to  take  either  the  one  or  the
other.     (Gellius,  x.  27.)

From  the  application  of  this  term  to  tokens  of
various  kinds,  it  was  transferred  to  tlie  ivord  used
as  a  token  among  soldiers.  This  was  the  tessera
milUaris,  the  avvQr]iJ.a  of  the  Greeks.  Before  join-
ing battle  it  was  given  out  and  passed  through  the
ranks  as  a  method  by  which  the  soldiers  might  be
able  to  distinguish  friends  from  foes.  Thus  at  the
battle  of  Cunaxa  the  word  was  "  Zeus  the  Saviour
and  Victory,"  and  on  a  subsequent  engagement  by
the  same  troops  "  Zeus  the  Saviour,  Heracles  the
Leader."  (Xen.  Anah.  i.  8.  §  16,  vi.^3.  §  25.)  The
soldiers  of  Xenophon  used  a  verbal  sign  for  the
same  purpose  when  they  were  encamped  by  night
(vii.  3.  §  34).  Aeneas  Tacticus  (c.  24)  gives  variouo
directions  necessary  to  be  observed  respecting  the
word.  Respecting  the  tessera  or  watchword  in  the
Roman  ciimp,  see  Castra,  p.  251,  a.         [J.  Y.]

TESTA.     [Fictile.]

TESTAMENTUM  is  "  mentis  nostrae  justa
contestatio  in  id  solemniter  facta  ut  post  mortem
nostram  valeat."  (Ulp.  Fra^.  tit.  20  ;  comp.  Ulp.
Dig.  28.  tit.  1.  s.  1,  where  he  has  "  justa  senten-
tia.")  In  this  passage  the  word  Justa  means
"  jure  facta,"  "  as  required  by  law."  The  word
Contestatio  is  apparently  used  with  reference  to  the
origin  of  the  tenn  Testamentum,  which  is  to  be  re-
ferred to  "  Testari,"  which  signifies  "  to  make  a
solemn  declaration  of  one's  will,"  Gellius  (vi,  12)
properly  finds  fault  with  Servius  Sulpicius  for
saying  that  the  Avord  is  compounded  "  a  mentis
contestatione."  The  person  who  made  a  Testa-
mentum was  Testator.  (Sueton.  Ner.  1 7  ;  Dig,
28,  tit,  3.  s,  17.)

In  order  to  be  able  to  make  a  valid  Roman  will,
the  Testator  must  have  the  Testamentifactio  (Cic.
ad  Fam.y'n.  21),  which  term  expresses  the  legal
capacity  to  make  a  valid  will :  the  word  has  also
another  signification.  [Heres,  p.  598,  b,]  The
testamentifactio  was  the  privilege  only  of  Roman
citizens  who  were  patresfamilias.  The  following
persons  consequently  had  not  the  testamentifactio  :
those  who  were  in  the  Potestas  or  Manns  of  an-
other, or  in  Mancipii  causa,  as  sons  and  daughters,
wives  In  manu  and  slaves  ;  but  with  respect  to  his
Castrense  Peculium  [Patria  Potestas]  a  filius-
familias  had  the  privilege  of  testamentary  dispo-
sition :  Latini  Jmiiani,  Dediticii :  Peregrini  could
not  dispose  of  their  property  according  to  the
form  of  a  Roman  will :  a  person  who  was  doubtful
as  to  his  status,  as  for  instance  if  his  father  had
died  abroad  and  the  fact  was  not  ascertained,
could  not  make  a  testament:  an  Impubes  could
not  dispose  of  his  property  by  will  even  with  the
consent  of  his  Tutor  ;  when  a  male  was  fourteen
years  of  age,  he  obtained  the  testamentifactio,  and
a  female  obtained  the  power,  subject  to  certain
restraints,  on  the  completion  of  her  twelfth  year :
muti,  surdi,  furiosi,  and  prodigi  "  quibus  lege
bonis  interdictum  est "  had  not  the  testamenti-
factio ;  the  reasons  why  these  several  classes  of
persons  had  not  the  testamentifactio  illustrate  the
Roman  mode  of  deducing  legal  conclusions  from
general  principles :  —  the  Mutus  had  not  the
Testamentifactio,  because  he  could  not  utter  the
words  of  Nuncupatio  ;  the  Surdus,  because  he
could  not  hear  the  words  of  the  Emtor  familiae  ;


TESTAMENTUM.


113


the  Furiosus,  because  he  had  not  intellectual  capa-
city to  declare  his  will  {testari)  about  his  property;
and  the  Prodigus,  because  he  was  under  a  legal
restraint,  so  that  he  had  no  commercium,  and  con-
sequently could  not  exercise  the  formal  act  of  the
familiae  mancipatio.  (Ulp,  Frag.  tit.  20.  s,  13  ;
Curator  ;  Impubes,)  As  to  the  testament  which
a  man  has  made  before  he  becomes  Furiosus,  see
Dig,  28,  tit,  l.s.  20.  §4.

Women  had  originally  no  testamentifactio,  and
when  they  did  acquire  the  power,  they  could  only-
exercise  it  with  the  auctoritas  of  a  Tutor.  Of  course
a  daughter  in  the  power  of  her  father,  whether  she
was  unmarried  or  married,  and  a  wife  in  manu
could  never  make  a  will.  The  rules  therefore  as
to  a  woman's  capacity  to  make  a  will,  could  apply
only  to  unmarried  women  after  the  death  of  their
father  and  to  widows  who  were  not  in  the  power
of  a  father.     This  subject  requires  explanation.

Cicero  {Top.  4)  observes  "  if  a  woman  has  made
a  will,  and  has  never  undergone  a  capitis  diminutio,
it  does  not  appear  that  the  Bonorum  Possessio  can
be  granted  in  pursuance  of  such  will  according  to
the  Praetor's  Edict ;  for  if  it  could,  the  Edict  must
give  the  Possessio  in  respect  of  the  Avills  of  Servi,
Exules,  and  Pueri."  Cicero  means  to  say  that  if
a  woman  made  a  will  without  having  sustained  a
capitis  diminutio,  the  will  could  have  no  eifect  at
all :  and  he  derives  his  argument  "  ab  adjunctis,'*
for  if  such  a  will  could  have  any  effect,  then  the
wills  of  other  persons,  who  had  not  the  testamenti-
factio, might  be  effectual  so  far  as  to  give  the
Bonorum  Possessio.  It  is  not  a  logical  inference
from  the  language  of  Cicero  that  a  woman  who
had  sustained  a  capitis  diminutio  could  make  a
will ;  but  this  is  the  ordinary  meaning  of  such
language  and  it  appears  to  be  his.  Consistently
with  this,  Ulpian  says  {Frag.  tit.  20.  s.  1 5),  "  wo-
men after  their  twelfth  year  can  make  a  will  with
the  auctoritas  of  a  Tutor,  so  long  as  they  are  in
tutela  ;  "  and  the  comment  of  Boethius  on  the  pas-
sage of  the  Topica  clearly  shows  that  he  understood
it  in  this  way.  A  woman  then  could  make  a  will
with  the  auctoritas  of  her  Tutor  and  not  without.
Now  if  a  woman  was  in  Tutela  Legitima,  it  might
be  correctly  said  that  she  could  not  make  a  will  ;
for,  if  she  was  Ingenua,  the  tutela  belonged  of
right  to  the  Agnati  and  Gentiles,  and  if  she  was  a
Liberta,  it  belonged  to  the  patron.  In  these  cases
a  woman  could  indeed  make  a  valid  will  with  the
consent  of  her  Tutores,  but  as  her  Tutores  were
her  heirs  in  case  of  intestacy,  such  consent  would
seldom  be  given,  and  though  a  woman  under  such
circumstances  might  be  allowed  to  make  a  will,  it
may  be  assumed  that  it  was  a  circumstance  alto-
gether unusual,  and  thus  the  rule  as  to  a  woman
in  Tutela  Legitima,  as  above  stated,  might  be
laid  down  as  generally  true.  The  passage  of
Cicero  therefore  does  not  apply  to  the  Tutela
Legitima,  but  to  something  else.  Since  the  dis-
covery of  the  Institutes  of  Gains  the  difficulty  has
been  cleared  up,  though  it  had  been  solved  in  a
satisfactory  manner  by  Savigny  before  the  pub-
lication of  Gains.  {Beytrag  zur  Gesdiichte  der
GeschlechtsttUel,  Zeitschrift,  vol.  iii.  p.  328.)

A  woman  could  make  a  "  coemptio  fiduciae
causa,"  in  order  to  qualify  herself  to  make  a  will  ;
for  "  at  that  time  women  had  not  the  power  of
making  a  will,  except  certain  persons,  unless  they
made  a  co-emptio  and  were  reraancipated  and
manumitted  :  but  on  the  recommendation  of  Ha-


1114


TESTAMENT  UM.


drian  the  senate  made  the  ceremony  of  coemptio
unnecessary  for  this  pui-pose."  (Gains,  115,  a.)
The  coemptio  was  accompanied  with  a  capitis
diminutio,  and  this  is  what  Cicero  alhides  to  in  the
passage  of  the  Topica.  [Matrimonium  (Roman).]
A  woman  who  came  in  manum  viri  had  sustained  a
capitis  diminutio,  but  it  must  not  be  inferred  from
this  that  if  she  became  a  widow  she  could  make  a
will.  The  Capitis  diminutio  of  Cicero  means  that
the  will  must  be  made  with  the  auctoritas  of  a
tutor.  Now  if  the  husband  died,  when  the  wife
had  been  in  manu,  and  he  appointed  no  tutor  for
her,  she  was  in  the  legitima  tutela  of  her  nearest
agnati,  who  would  be  her  own  children  and  step-
children, if  she  had  any.  But  the  tutela  legitima  in
such  a  case  would  seem  something  unnatural,  and
accordingly  the  magistratus  would  give  a  tutor  to
the  woman  ;  and  such  a  tutor,  as  he  had  no  in-
terest in  the  woman's  property,  could  not  prevent
her  from  making  a  will.  The  husband  might  by
his  will  give  the  wife  a  power  to  choose  a  Tutor
(tutoris  optio),  and  such  a  Tutor  could  not  refuse
his  consent  to  the  woman  making  a  will  ;  for  in-
stead of  the  woman  being  in  the  potestas  of  the
tutor,  he  Avas  in  the  potestas  of  the  woman,  so  far
as  to  be  bound  to  assent  to  her  testamentary  dis-
positions. (Compare  Liv.  xxxix.  19;  Cic.  joro
Muren.  c.  17  ;  Gaius,  i.  150.)

The  case  of  Silius  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  vii.  21)  may
be  a  case  of  a  woman's  making  a  will,  without  the
auctoritas  of  a  tutor,  for  it  appears  that  a  woman
(Turpilia)  had  disposed  of  property  by  will,  and
Servius  Sulpicius  was  of  opinion  that  this  was  not
a  valid  will,  because  the  will-maker  had  not  the
testamentifactio.  There  may  however  have  been
other  reasons  why  the  will-maker  had  not  the
testamentifactio,  than  the  want  of  a  capitis  di-
minutio (in  the  sense  of  Cic.  Top.  4),  and  con-
sequently the  opinion  of  those  critics  who  refer
the  case  mentioned  in  this  letter  to  the  principle
of  the  Capitis  diminutio  is  not  a  certain  truth.

The  following  references  may  be  consulted  as  to
this  matter :  Cic.  pro  Caecin.  6.  25,  pro  Flacc.  35,
pro  Muren.  12,  ad  Att.  vii.  8  ;  Liv.  xxxix.  19  ;
Gaius,  i.  150,  «&c.

Libertae  could  not  make  a  testament  without  the
auctoritas  of  their  patronus,  except  so  far  as  this
rule  was  altered  by  enactments  ;  for  they  were  in
the  legitima  tutela  of  their  patronus.  Libertae,
who  had  a  certain  number  of  children,  could  make
a  will  without  the  auctoritas  of  their  patronus.
[Patronus.]

The  Vestal  Virgins  had  no  tutor,  and  yet  they
could  make  a  Testament.  The  Twelve  Tables  re-
leased them  from  all  tutela  "  in  honorem  sacer-
dotii."     (Cic.  de  Rep.  iii.  10  ;  Gaius,  i.  145.)

In  order  to  constitute  a  valid  will,  it  was  neces-
sary that  a  heres  should  be  instituted,  which  might
be  done  in  such  terms  as  follow  :  —  Titius  heres
esto,  Titimn  heredem  esse  jubeo.  [Herks  (Ro-
man.)]

All  persons  who  had  the  commercium  could  be
heredes  ;  slaves  also  and  others  who  were  not  sui
juris  could  be  made  heredes,  but  they  could  not
tjdce  for  themselves.  [Heres  ;  Servus,  p.  1037.]
But  there  were  many  classes  of  persons  who  could
not  be  heredes :  Peregrini,  who  had  not  received
the  commercium:  persons  who  were  imperfectly
described :  Juristical  persons  or  universitates,  ex-
cept by  their  liberti,  a  privilege  granted  by  a
Seiuitusconsultura :  Gods,  or  the  temples  of  Gods,


TESTAMENTUM.

except  such  as  were  excepted  by  a  Senatuscon^
sultum  and  Imperial  Constitutions,  such  as  Jupiter
Tarpeius,  Apollo  Didymaeus,  Mars  in  Gallia,
Minerva  Iliensis,  Hercules  Gaditanus,  and  others
enumerated  by  Ulpian  {Frag.  tit.  22.  s.  6)  :  a
Postumus  alienus  could  not  be  made  a  heres,  for
he  was  an  incerta  persona :  it  is  a  disputed  ques-
tion whether,  according  to  the  old  law,  women
could  be  made  heredes  ;  but  the  question  concerns
only  those  who  were  sui  juris,  as  to  wliom  there
seems  no  sufficient  reason  why  they  could  not  be
made  heredes  ;  the  capacity  of  women  to  take
under  a  will  was  limited  by  the  Lex  Voconia  :
unmarried  persons  and  persons  who  had  no  children
were  limited  as  to  their  capacity  to  take  under  a
will  by  the  Papia  Poppaea  Lex.  [Lex  Julia  et
Papia  Poppaea.]

The  first  question  as  to  the  validity  of  a  will  was
the  capacity  of  the  testator  :  the  next  question  was
as  to  the  proper  observance  of  the  forms  required
by  law,  "  except  in  the  case  of  soldiers,  who,  in
consideration  of  their  little  acquaintance  with  such
matters,  were  allowed  to  make  their  wills  as  they
pleased  or  as  they  could."  (Gaius,  ii*  114.)  This
remark  of  Gaius  seems  to  refer  to  the  Imperial
period.

As  to  the  Form  of  wills,  Gaius  (ii.  101)  and
Ulpian  (i^ra^.  tit.  xx.)  are  now  the  best  authorities.

Originally  there  were  two  modes  of  making
wills  ;  for  people  made  their  wills  either  at  Calata
Comitia,  which  were  appointed  twice  a  year  for
the  making  of  wills  ;  or  they  made  wills  in  pro-
cinciu,  that  is,  Avhen  they  were  going  to  battle  ;  for
an  army  in  movement  and  under  arms  is  Procinctus.
A  third  mode  of  making  wills  was  introduced,
which  was  efi'ected  per  aes  et  libram,  whence  the
name  of  Testamentura  per  aes  et  libram.  If  a  man
had  neither  made  his  will  at  Calata  Comitia  nor  In
procinctu,  and  was  in  imminent  danger  of  death,
he  would  mancipate  (niancipio  dabat)  his  Faniilia,
that  is,  his  Patrimonium  to  a  friend  and  would  tell
him  what  he  wished  to  be  given  to  each  after  his
death.  The  old  form  of  making  a  will  per  aes  et
libram  was  this.  The  Familiae  emtor,  that  is  the
person  'who  received  the  Familia  by  mancipation,
filled  the  place  of  heres,  and  accordingly  the  testator
instmcted  him  what  he  wished  to  be  given  to  each
after  his  death.  In  the  time  of  Gaius  the  practice
was  different.  One  person  was  instituted  heres
{heres  testamento  instituitur),  who  was  charged  with
the  payment  of  the  legacies,  or,  as  it  is  expressed
in  the  phraseology  of  the  Roman  Law,  "  a  quo
etiam  legata  relinquebantur  ;  "  and  another  person
was  present  as  familiae  emtor  from  a  regard  to  the
old  legal  form.  The  mode  of  proceeding  was  this.
The  testator,  after  having  written  his  will  {tabulae
testamenti\  called  together  five  witnesses,  who  were
Roman  citizens  and  puberes,  and  a  libripens,  as
in  the  case  of  other  mancipationes,  and  mancipated
his  familia  to  some  person  in  compliance  with  legal
forms  {dicis  causa).  The  words  of  the  Familiae
emtor  (Gaius,  ii.  104)  show  clearly  the  original
natiu"e  of  the  transaction  :  "  Familiam  pecuniamque
tuam  endo  mandatam  tutelam  custodelamque  meam
recipio  eaque  quo  tu  jure  testamentum  facere  possis
secundum  legem  publicam  hoc  aere  (aeneaque  libra)
esto  mihi  emta."  (As  to  the  reading  of  this  pas-
sage, see  Puchta,  Inst.  iii.  §  306,  note  g.)  The
Emtor  then  struck  the  scales  with  a  piece  of  money
which  he  gave  to  the  testator  as  the  price  of  the
Familia.     Then  the  testator  taking  the  will  in  Li»


.  TESTAMENTUM.

hand  said  :  '*  Haec  ita  Tit  in  his  tabulis  cerisque
(or  cerisve)  scripta  sunt  ita  do  ita  lego  ita  tester
itaque  vos  Quirites  testimonium  mihi  perhibetote."
This  was  called  the  Nuncupatio  or  publishing  of
the  will  ;  in  other  words  the  testator's  general  con-
firmation of  all  that  he  had  written  in  his  will.

As  the  Familiae  emtio  was  supposed  to  be  a  real
transaction  between  the  Emtor  and  Testator,  the
testimony  of  their  several  families  was  excluded,
and  consequently  a  person  who  was  in  the  power
of  the  Familiae  Emtor,  or  in  the  power  of  the
Testator  could  not  be  a  witness.     If  a  man  who
was  in  the   power  of  another  was   the    familiae
emtor,  it  followed  that  his  father  could  not  be  a
witness,  nor  his  brother,  if  the  brother  was  in  the
power  of  the  father.     A  filiusfamilias  who  after  his
Missio  disposed  of  his  Castrense  peculium  by  testa-
ment, could  not  have  his  father  as  witness  nor  any
one  who  was  in  the  power  of  his  father.  The  same
rules  applied  to  the  libripens,  for  he  was  a  witness.
A  person  who  was  in  the  power  of  the  heres  or  of
a  legatee  or  in  whose  power  the  heres  or  legatee
was,  or  who  was  in  the  power  of  the  same  person
as  the  heres  or  a  legatee,  and  also  the  heres  or  a
legatee  could  all  be  witnesses  ;  for  as  Ulpian  ob-
serves, there  is  no  objection  to  any  number  of  wit-
nesses from  the  same  family.     But  Gaius  observes
that  this  ought  not  to  be  considered  as  law  with
respect  to  the  heres,  and  him  who  is  in  the  power
of  the  heres  and  him  in  whose  power  the  heres  is.
According  to  Gaius,  wills  were  originally  made
only  at  Calata  Comitia,  and   In   Procinctu.     The
Comitia  were  held  twice  a  year  for  the  purpose  of
making  wills,  and  a  will  not  made  there  was  in-
valid.   It  is  sometimes  assumed  that  these  Comitia
were  held  in  order  that  the  Gentes  might  consent
to  the  testamentary  disposition,  in  which  it  is  im-
plied that  they  might  refuse  their  consent.     But
there  is  no  direct  evidence  for  this  opinion,  and  it
derives  no   support   from  a   consideration  of  the
mode  of  disposing  of  property  per  aes  et  libram.
The  form  per  aes  et  libram  was  a  form  introduced
in  cases  when  the  will  had  not  been  made  at  the
Calata  Comitia  nor  In  Procinctu.     It  had  effect
because  it  was  an  alienation  of  property  inter  vivos
without  the  consent  of  any  parties  except  the  buyer
and  seller,  which  alienation  must  be  assumed  to
have  been  a  legal  transaction  at  the  time  when  this
new  form  of  will  was  introduced.     This  new  form
was   a  sale  and  the  familiae  emtor  undertook  a
trust ;  he  resembled  the  heres  fiduciarius  of  later
times.      It  is  probable    enough  that  there   were
originally  no  means  of  compelling  him  to  execute
the  trust,  but  opinion  would  be  a  sufficient  gua-
rantee that  the  testator's  will  would  be  observed,
and  thus  would   arise  one  of  those  parts  of  Law
which  had  its  source  in  Mos.     Now  when  the
Romans  introduced  new  legal  forms,  they  always
assimilated  them  to  old  forms,  whence  Ave  have  a
probable  conclusion  that  the  form  of  mancipatio  was
also  observed  at  the  Calata  Comitia  ;  and  if  so,  the
consent  of  the  Gentes  was  not  necessary,  unless  it
was  necessary  to  every  alienation  of  property,  which
in  the  absence  of  evidence  must  not  be  assumed,
though  such  may  have  been  the  fact.     The  dif-
ference then  between  the  will  made  at  the  Calata
Comitia  and  the  will  per  aes  et  libram,  consisted
in   the   greater   solemnity   and   notoriety   of  the
former,  and  the  consequent  greater  security  that  the
testator's  intentions  would  be  observed.     Written
wills  are  not  spoken  of  with  reference  to  this  time,


TESTAMENTUM.


1115


nor  is  it  probable  that  wills  were  written  :  it  does
not  appear  that  a  written  will  was  ever  required
by  law.  The  testator's  disposition  of  his  property
would  be  short  and  simple  in  those  early  times,
and  easily  remembered  ;  but  there  would  be  greater
security  for  an  unwritten  will  made  at  the  Comitia
than  for  an  unwritten  will  made  per  aes  et  libram;
whence  in  course  of  time  Tabulae  became  a  usual
part  of  the  ceremony  of  a  will.

As  we  are  ignorant  of  the  true  nature  of  private
property  among  the  Romans,  viewed  with  respect
to  its  historical  origin,  we  cannot  determine  with
certainty  such  questions  as  these  respecting  testa-
mentary disposition,  but  it  is  of  some  importance
to  exclude  conjectures  Avhich  are  devoid  of  all  evi-
dence. Rein  (Das  Rom.  Privatrecht,  p.  373,  note)
has  referred  to  the  modem  Avriters  who  have  dis-
cussed this  subject :  he  has  adopted  the  opinion  of
Niebuhr,  according  to  which  '*  as  the  property  of
an  extinct  house  escheated  to  the  cnrj,  that  of  an
extinct  cury  to  the  publicum  of  the  citizens  at  large,
the  consent  of  the  whole  populus  was  requisite  ;  and
this  is  the  origin  of  the  rule  that  testaments  were
to  be  made  in  the  presence  of  the  pontiff  and  the
curies."  (//es^.  q/'i?o?«e,  vol.  ii.  p.  338.)  But  there
is  no  evidence  of  the  assertion  contained  in  the  first
part  of  this  passage  ;  and  if  this  rule  as  to  escheat
is  admitted  to  be  a  fact,  the  rule  that  testaments
must  be  confirmed  by  the  pontiff  and  curies  is  no
necessary  conclusion.  Niebuhr  further  observes
that  "  the  plebeian  houses  were  not  so  connected  ;
but  the  whole  order  had  a  public  coffer  in  the
temple  of  Ceres  ;  and  when  the  army,  being  as-
sembled in  centuries,  either  on  the  field  of  Mars,
or  before  a  battle,  passed  the  last  will  of  a  soldier
into  a  law,  it  thereby  resigned  the  claims  of  the
whole  body  to  the  property."  This  assertion  also
is  not  supported  by  evidence,  and  is  therefore  a
mere  conjecture  against  the  probability  of  which
there  are  sufficient  reasons.

The  Testamentum  in  procinctu  is,  for  anything
we  know  to  the  contrary,  as  old  as  the  testament
at  the  Calata  Comitia.  In  this  case  the  forms  of
the  Calata  Comitia  were  of  necessity  dispensed
with,  or  the  soldier  would  often  have  died  intes-
tate. This  power  of  disposition  in  the  case  of  a
Testamentum  in  procinctu  could  not  depend  on  the
consent  of  the  whole  populus,  in  each  particular
instance  ;  for  the  nature  of  the  circumstances  ex-
cluded such  consent.  He  had  therefore  full  power
of  disposition  In  Procinctu,  a  circumstance  which
leads  to  the  probable  conclusion  that  the  will  made
at  the  Calata  Comitia  differed  only  from  the  other
will  in  its  forms  and  not  in  its  substance.  Some
writers  assert  that  the  Testamentum  in  Procinctu
could  only  be  made  after  the  auspices  were  taken,
which  gave  the  testament  the  religious  sanction,
and  that  when  the  auspices  ceased  to  be  taken  in
the  field,  this  kind  of  testament  ceased  to  be  made;
and  that  the  military  testaments  mentioned  about
the  latter  part  of  the  republic  (as  by  Caesar,  BelL
Gall.  i.  39  ;  Veil.  Pat.  ii.  5,  &c.)  were  not  the  same
kind  of  testaments,  but  purely  military  testaments
made  without  any  form,  which  in  the  Imperial
period  became  in  common  use  and  of  which  Julius
Caesar  probably  introduced  the  practice.  (Dig.  29.
tit.  1.  De  Testamento  Militis.)  Cicero  however
speaks  of  the  will  In  procinctu  (de  Or.  i.  53)  as
then  in  use,  and  he  describes  it  as  made  "  sine
libra  et  tabulis,"  that  is,  without  the  forms  which
were  used  after  the  introduction  of  the  testamentum


me


TESTAMENTUM.


per  aes  et  libram.  Thus  the  Testamentum  in  Pro-
cinctu  ahvaj's  retained  its  characteristic  of  being
exempted  from  legal  forms,  but  as  to  the  capacity
of  the  Testator  it  was  always  subject  to  the  same
rules  of  law  as  other  wills,  so  far  as  we  know.

The  form  of  Mancipatio  owed  its  origin  to  posi-
tive enactments  :  it  was  a  form  of  alienation  ac-
companied with  certain  public  ceremonies,  the  pre-
sumed object  of  which  was  to  secure  evidence  of  the
transfer.  The  form  of  Mancipatio  as  applied  to  a
will  was  exactly  the  same  form  as  Mancipatio  ap-
plied to  any  other  purpose  :  it  was  an  alienation
of  the  property,  and  according  to  strict  principles
it  must  have  been  irrevocable.  It  may  be  con-
cluded then  that  Roman  wills  were  originally  irre-
vocable. It  is  sometimes  assumed  that  the  five
witnesses  to  the  Testament  {cives  Romani  pvheres)
were  representatives  of  the  five  Classes  of  Servius
Tullius.  If  this  is  true  (which  is  a  mere  assump-
tion) the  classes  were  represented  as  witnesses
only,  not  as  persons  who  gave  their  consent  to
the  act.  Engelbach  states :  "  Mancipation  was
originally  a  formal  sale  in  which  the  publicness  of
the  transaction  constituted  the  essential  character-
istic. When  the  seller  had  transferred  to  the
buyer  the  ownership  of  a  thing  before  the  five
representatives  of  the  five  classes  of  the  Roman
People,  this  was  as  valid  as  any  other  Lex  which
was  brought  before  the  assembly  of  the  People  and
passed  into  a  Lex."  (Ueber  die  Usucapion  zur  Zeit
der  Zwolf  Tafeln,  p,  80.)  The  whole  meaning  of
this  is  not  clear,  but  so  far  as  this  it  is  clear  and
true  :  the  Testamentum  per  aes  et  libram  differed
in  no  respects  as  to  the  capacity  of  the  alienor,  from
any  other  Mancipation.  Now  we  must  either  sup-
pose that  the  assumed  consent  of  the  populus  to  the
Testamentary  disposition  at  the  Calata  Comitia,
was  expressed  by  a  special  enactment  which  should
transfer  the  property  according  to  the  Testator's
wish,  or  that  the  consent  only  must  have  been
given  to  the  transfer,  and  the  transfer  must  have
been  made  in  the  usual  way :  the  latter  is  the  only
conceivable  case  of  the  two.  In  assuming  this
original  necessity  of  consent  on  the  part  ot  the
populus  to  the  testamentary  disposition,  we  as-
sume that  Roman  property  was  originally  inalien-
able at  the  will  of  the  owner.  This  may  be  true,
but  it  is  not  yet  shown  to  be  so.

The  Twelve  Tables  recognize  a  man's  power  to
dispose  of  his  property  by  will  as  he  pleased :  "  Uti
legassit  super  pecunia  tutelave  suae  rei  ita  jus  esto."
(IJlp.  Frag.  tit.  xi.  1 4.)  It  is  generally  admitted,
and  the  extant  passages  are  consistent  with  the
opinion,  that  the  new  testamentary  form  per  aes
et  libram  existed  while  the  two  original  forms  were
still  in  use.  Now  in  the  testamentum  per  aes  et
libram  there  is  no  pretence  for  saying  that  any
consent  was  required  except  that  of  the  buyer  and
seller  ;  and  the  Twelve  Tables  recognize  the  testa-
tor's power  of  disposition.  If  then  the  form  of
testament  at  Comitia  Calata  subsisted  after  the
Twelve  Tables,  we  have,  according  to  the  views  of
some  writers,  a  form  of  testamentum  to  which  the
consent  of  the  testator  was  sufficient  and  another
form  in  which  it  was  not.  There  still  remains  to
those  who  support  this  opinion,  the  power  of  saying
that  the  consent  of  the  sovereign  people  had  become
a  form,  and  therefore  it  was  indifferent,  so  far  as
concerns  this  consent,  whether  the  will  was  made
at  the  Comitia  where  it  would  be  fully  witnessed,
or  per  aes  et  libram  where  it  would  be  witnessed


TESTAMENTUM.

by  the  five  representatives.  But  it  is  easy  to  sug-
gest possibilities  ;  less  easy  to  weigh  evidence  ac-
curately and  to  deduce  its  legitimate  consequences.
As  already  observed,  there  seems  to  have  been
no  rule  of  law  that  a  testament  must  be  written.
The  mancipatio  required  no  writing,  nor  did  the  in-
stitution of  a  heres,  and  the  number  of  witnesses
was  probably  required  in  order  to  secure  evidence
of  the  testator's  intentions.  Thus  it  is  said  (Dig.  28.
tit.  1.  B.  21)  that  the  heres  might  either  be  made
by  oral  declaration  (nuneupatio)  or  by  writing.
Written  wills  however  were  the  common  form
among  the  Romans  at  least  in  the  later  republican
and  in  the  imperial  periods.  They  were  written
on  tablets  of  wood  or  wax,  whence  the  word
"  Cera"  is  often  used  as  equivalent  to  "tabella;'
and  the  expressions  prima,  secunda  cera  are  equi-
valent to  prima,  secunda  pagina.  The  will  might  be
written  either  by  the  testator  or  any  other  person
with  his  consent,  and  sometimes  it  was  made  with
the  advice  of  a  lawyer.  It  was  written  in  the  Latin
language,  until  a.  d.  439  when  it  Avas  enacted  that
wills  might  be  in  Greek.  (Cod.  6.  tit.  23.  s.  21.)
By  the  old  law  a  legacy  could  not  be  given  in  the
Greek  language,  though  a  fideicommissum  could  be
so  given.  It  does  not  appear  that  there  was  origi-
nally any  signature  by  the  witnesses.  The  will  was
sealed,  but  this  might  be  done  by  the  testator  in
secret,  for  it  was  not  necessary  that  the  witnesses
should  know  the  contents  of  the  will ;  they  were
witnesses  to  the  formal  act  of  mancipatio,  and  to
the  testator's  declaration  that  the  tabulae  which  he
held  in  his  hand  contained  his  last  will.  It  must
however  have  been  in  some  way  so  marked  as  to
be  recognized,  and  the  practice  of  the  witnesses
(testes)  sealing  and  signing  the  will  became  common.
(As  to  the  will  of  Claudius,  see  Suetonius,  Claudius,
44.)  It  was  necessary  for  the  witnesses  both  to
seal  (signare),  that  is,  to  make  a  mark  with  a  ring
(annulus)  or  something  else  on  the  wax  and  to  add
their  names  {adscribere).  The  five  witnesses  signed
their  names  with  their  oAvn  hand,  and  their  ad-
scription  also  declared  whose  will  it  was  that  they
sealed.  (Dig.  28.  tit.  I.  s.  30.)  The  seals  and
adscriptions  were  both  on  the  outside.  A  Senatus-
consultum,  which  applied  to  wills  among  other  in-
struments, enacted  that  they  should  be  witnessed
and  signed  as  follows  :  they  were  to  be  tied  with  a
triple  thread  (linum)  on  the  upper  part  of  the
margin  which  was  to  be  perforated  at  the  middle
part,  and  the  wax  was  to  be  put  over  the  thread
and  sealed.  Tabulae  which  were  produced  in  any
other  way  had  no  validity.  (Compare  Paulus,
S.  R.  V.  tit.  25.  8.  6,  where  impositae  seems  to  be
the  true  reading,  with  Sueton.  Ner.  1 7.)  A  man
might  make  several  copies  of  his  will,  which  was
often  done  (ut  vulgo  fieri  solet.  Dig.  31.  tit.  1.
s.  47 ;  a  case  put  to  Proculus)  for  the  sake  of
caution.  Both  Augustus  and  Tiberius  made  two
copiesof  their  wills.  (Sueton.  Aug.  101,  Tiber.  76.)
When  sealed,  it  was  deposited  with  some  friend,  or
in  a  temple,  or  with  the  Vestal  Virgins;  and  after  the
testator's  death  it  was  opened  (resignare)  in  due
form.  The  witnesses  or  the  major  part  were  present,
and  after  they  had  acknowledged  their  seals,  the
thread  (linum)  was  broken  and  the  will  was  opened
and  read,  and  a  copy  was  made  ;  the  original  was
then  sealed  with  the  public  seal  and  placed  in  the
archium,  whence  a  fresh  copy  might  be  got,  if  the
first  copy  should  ever  be  lost.  (Paulus,  iv.  6.)  This
practice  described  by  Paulus  may  have  been  of


TESTAMENTUM.

considerable  antiquity.  The  will  of  Augustus
which  had  been  deposited  with  the  Vestal  Virgins
was  brought  into  the  Senate  after  his  death
(Tacit.  Ann.  i.  8)  :  none  of  the  witnesses  were
admitted  except  those  of  Senatorian  rank  ;  the
rest  of  the  witnesses  acknowledged  their  signa-
tures outside  of  the  Curia.     (Sueton.  Tib,  23.)

A  passage  in  a  Novel  of  Theodosius  II.  (a.  d.
439,  £>«  Testamentis)  states  the  old  practice  as  to
the  signature  of  the  witnesses.  "  In  ancient  times
a  testator  showed  {qfferebat)  his  written  testament
to  the  witnesses,  and  asked  them  to  bear  testimony
that  the  will  had  so  been  shown  to  them  {ohlalarum
iahularum  perhibere  testimonium)  "  which  are  almost
the  words  of  Gaius.  The  Novel  goes  on  to  state
that  the  ignorant  presumption  of  posterity  had
changed  the  cautious  rule  of  the  ancient  law,  and
the  witnesses  were  required  to  know  the  contents
of  the  will  ;  the  consequence  of  which  was  that
many  persons  preferred  dying  intestate  to  letthig
the  contents  of  their  wills  be  known.  The  Novel
enacted  what  we  may  presume  to  have  been  the
old  usage,  that  the  testator  might  produce  his  will
sealed,  or  tied  up,  or  only  closed,  and  offer  it  to
seven  witnesses,  Roman  citizens  and  puberes,  for
their  sealing  and  adscription,  provided  at  the  same
time  he  declared  the  instrument  to  be  his  will  and
signed  it  in  their  presence,  and  then  the  witnesses
affixed  their  seals  and  signatures  at  the  same  time
also.  Valentinianlll.  enacted  that  if  aTestamentum
was  holographum,  witnesses  were  not  necessary.

A  fragment  of  a  Roman  will,  belonging  to  the
time  of  Trajan,  was  published  by  Pugge'  in  the
JiheijiiseJies  Museum^  vol.  i.  p.  249,  &c.  ;  and  it  is
explained  b}''  RudorfF  (Das  Testament  des  Da-
sumius,  Zeitschrift,  &c.  vol.  xii.  p.  301).

The  penalties  against  fraud  in  the  case  of  wills
and  other  instruments  were  fixed  by  the  Lex
Cornelia.     [Falsum.]

The  Edict  established  a  less  formal  kind  of  will,
since  it  acknowledged  the  validity  of  a  written  will
when  there  had  been  no  mancipatio,  provided  there
were  seven  witnesses  and  seven  seals,  and  the  tes-
tator had  the  testamentifactio  at  the  time  of  making
the  will  and  at  the  time  of  his  death.  (Gaius,  ii.
1 47.)  The  terms  of  the  Edict  are  given  by  Cicero
{in  Verr.  i.  1,  45.)  The  Edict  only  gave  the  Bo-
norum  Possessio  which  is  the  sense  of  hereditas  in
the  passage  of  Cicero  referred  to,  as  well  as  in  Gaius
(ii.  1 1  9).  This  so-called  Praetorian  Testament  ex-
isted in  the  Republican  period,  and  for  a  long  time
after.  Thus  a  man  had  his  choice  between  two
forms  of  making  his  will  ;  the  Civil  form  by  Man-
cipatio, and  the  Praetorian  with  seven  seals  and
seven  witnesses,  and  without  Mancipatio.  (Savigny,
Beytrag  zur  Geschichte  dcr  Rom.  Tcstam.,  Zeitschrift^
voi.  i.  p.  78.)

The  Praetorian  Testament  prepared  the  way  for
the  abolition  of  Mancipatio,  the  essential  character
of  a  will  made  according  to  the  Jus  Civile,  and  in
the  Legislation  of  Justinian  the  form  of  m.aking  a
testament  was  simplified.  It  required  seven  male
witnesses  of  competent  age  and  legal  capacity,  and
the  act  must  be  done  in  the  presence  of  all,  at  the
same  place,  and  at  the  same  time,  that  is,  it  must
be  continuous.  The  testator  might  declare  his  last
will  orally  {sine  scriptis)  before  seven  witnesses,
and  this  was  a  good  will.  If  it  was  a  written  will,
the  testator  acknowledged  it  before  the  witnesses
as  his  last  will,  and  put  his  name  to  it,  and  the
witnesses  then  subscribed  their  names  and  affixed


TESTAMENTUM.  1117

their  seals.  The  testator  might  write  his  will  or
have  it  written  by  another  person,  but  such  other
person  could  derive  no  advantage  under  the  will,

[SENATUSCONSUi^TUM  lilBONIANlTM.]

The  cases  in  which  a  will  was  not  valid,  because
the  heredes  sui  were  not  expressly  exheredated,  are
stated  in  PIerks  (Roman).

A  testament  which  was  invalid  from  the  first  was
Injustum  and  never  could  become  valid:  it  was
Non  jure  factum,  when  the  proper  forms  had  not
been  observed  ;  it  was  Nullius  Momenti,  as  in  the
case  of  a  filiusfamilias  who  is  "  praeteritus."  A
Testamentum  Justum  might  become  either  Ruptum
or  Irritum  in  consequence  of  subsequent  events.
(Dig.  28.  tit.  3.  s.  1.)

A  testament  became  Ruptum,  if  the  testator  made
a  subsequent  testament  in  due  form  as  required
by  law :  and  it  made  no  matter,  whether  or  not
there  turned  out  to  be  a  heres  under  the  second
will  ;  the  only  question  was  whether  there  could
have  been  one.  If  then  the  heres  named  in  the
second  will  refused  the  hereditas,  or  died  either
in  the  lifetime  of  the  testator,  or  after  his  death,
and  before  the  cretio,  or  failed  to  comply  with  the
conditions  of  the  will,  or  lost  the  hereditas  under
the  Lex  Julia  et  Papia  Poppaea — in  all  these  cases
the  paterfamilias  died  intestate.

The  testator  must  have  a  capacity  to  make  a
will  and  continue  to  have  the  capacity  until  his
death  ;  but  this  principle  does  not  apply  to  mental
sanity,  for  the  will  was  valid  if  the  testator  became
insane.  But  the  will  became  Irritum  if  the  tes-
tator sustained  a  capitis  diminutio  after  the  date  of
the  will  ;  or  if  it  failed  of  effect  because  there  was
no  heres.  Thus  a  prior  will  which  was  invalidated
by  a  subsequent  will  was  Ruptum,  and  if  there  was
no  heres  under  the  subsequent  will,  such  will  was
Irritum.

If  a  man  who  had  made  a  will  was  taken  pri-
soner by  the  enemy,  his  will  was  good  jure  post-
liminii  if  he  returned  homo;  if  he  died  in  captivity,
it  was  made  as  valid  by  the  Lex  Cornelia  as  if  he
had  not  been  a  captive.

Though  a  will  might  be  Ruptum  or  Irritum  by
the  Jus  Civile,  it  was  not  always  without  eifect  ;
for  the  Bonorum  Possessio  secundum  tabulas  might
be  had  by  the  scriptus  heres,  if  the  will  was  wit-
nessed by  seven  witnesses,  and  if  the  testator  had
the  testamentifactio.  The  distinction  between  the
case  of  a  Avill  which  was  invalid  Jure  Civili  for
want  of  due  forms,  and  one  which  was  invalid  for
want  of  legal  capacity  to  dispose  of  property  by
will  was  well  recognized  in  the  time  of  Cicero.
{Top.  11 .)  A  will  also  became  Ruptum  by  adgnatio,
that  is,  if  a  suus  heres  was  born  after  the  making
of  the  will  who  was  not  either  instituted  heres  or
exheredated,  as  the  law  required.  A  quasi  adgnatio
also  arose  by  adoption,  or  by  the  in  manum  con-
ventio,  or  by  succession  to  the  place  of  a  suus  heres,
as  in  the  instance  of  a  grandson  becoming  a  suus
heres  in  consequence  of  the  death  or  the  emancipa'
tion  of  a  son  :  a  will  also  became  ruptum  by  the
manumission  of  a  son,  that  is,  where  the  son  after
a  first  and  second  mancipation  returned  into  the
power  of  his  father.     [Emancipatio.]

A  testament  was  called  Inofficiosum  which  was
made  in  legal  form,  "  sed  non  ex  officio  pietatis."
For  instance,  if  a  man  had  exheredated  his  own
children,  or  passed  over  his  parents,  or  brothers  or
sisters,  the  will  was  in  form  a  good  will,  but  if
there  was  no  sufficient  reason  for  this  exheredatioa


1118


TESTAMENTUM.


or  praeterition,  the  persons  aggrieved  miglit  have
an  Inofficiosi  querela.  The  ground  of  the  com-
plaint was  the  allegation  that  the  testator  was
"non  sanae  mentis,"  so  as  to  have  capacity  to
make  a  will.  It  was  not  alleged  that  he  was
Furiosus  or  Demens,  for  these  were  technical  words
•which  implied  complete  legal  incapacity.  The  dis-
tinction was  a  fine  one,  and  worthy  of  the  subtlety
of  the  Jurists,  to  whom  it  may  be  presumed  to
owe  its  origin.  By  the  legislation  of  Justinian
no  person  could  maintain  a  Querela  inofficiosi  bej^ond
the  degree  of  brothers  and  sisters  ;  and  brothers
and  sisters  could  only  maintain  their  claim  against
*'  scripti  heredes  "  who  were  "  turpes  personae."
The  complaint  also  could  only  be  maintained  in
cases  where  the  complaining  parties  had  no  other
right  or  means  of  redress.  If  any  portion,  how-
ever small,  was  left  by  the  will  to  the  complaining
part}',  he  could  not  maintain  a  Querela  inofficiosi,
and  he  was  only  intitled  to  so  much  as  would  make
up  his  proper  share.  If  the  judex  declared  the
testamentum  to  be  Inofficiosum,  it  was  rescinded  ;
but  if  there  were  several  heredes,  the  testament
would  only  be  rescinded  as  to  him  or  them  against
whose  institution  the  Judex  had  pronounced.
The  portion  of  an  hereditas  which  might  be  claimed
by  the  Querela  inofficiosi  was  one-fourth,  which
was  divided  among  the  claimants  pro  rata.  (Plin.
Ep.  V.  1  ;  Inst.  2.  tit.  18  ;  Dig.  5.  tit.  2,  De
Inofficioso  Testamento.)

The  Querela  Inofficiosi  is  explained  by  Savigny
with  his  usual  perspicuity  {System,  <kc.  vol.  ii.  p.
127).  When  a  testator  passed  over  in  his  will
any  of  his  nearest  kinsfolks,  who  in  the  case  of
intestacy  would  be  liis  heredes,  this  gave  rise  to
the  opinion  that  the  person  thus  passed  over  had
merited  this  mark  of  the  testator's  disapprobation.
If  this  opinion  was  unfounded,  the  testator  had  done
an  unmerited  injury  to  the  person,  and  his  remedy
was  by  getting  the  will  set  aside,  as  made  under
the  influence  of  passion.  If  the  will  was  set  aside,
the  testator  was  thereby  declared  to  have  died  in-
testate, and  the  complainant  obtained  the  hereditas
which  was  the  immediate  object  of  the  Querela,  or
his  share  of  it.  But  the  ultimate  object  of  the
Querela  was  the  public  re-establishment  of  the  in-
jured honour  of  the  complainant,  who  in  this  action
appeared  in  a  hostile  position  with  respect  to  the
Testator  who  had  brought  his  character  in  question.
Consequently  this  action  had  for  its  ultimate  object
Vindicta,  and  the  peculiarity  of  the  action  consisted
in  the  diiFerence  between  this  ultimate  object  of
the  action  and  the  immediate  object  of  it  (pro-
perty), which  was  merely  a  means  to  the  ultimate
object.     [Vindicta.]

There  is  no  evidence  to  show  when  the  Querela
Inofficiosi  was  introduced  as  a  mode  of  setting  aside
a  will.  The  phrase  Testamentum  Inofficiosum
occurs  in  Cicero,  and   in   Quintilian    {Inst.    Or.

^•2).  ...

Codicilli  were  an  informal  will:  they  may  be
defined  to  be  a  testamentary  disposition  of  such  a
kind  which  does  not  allow  any  direct  universal
succession,  and,  consequently,  neither  the  direct
appointment  nor  exheredation  of  a  heres,  even
though  the  codicilli  are  confirmed  by  a  testa-
ment ;  but  he  who  was  appointed  heres  by  a
testament,  might  be  requested  by  codicilli  to  give
the  hereditas  to  another  altogether  or  in  part,  even
though  the  codicilli  were  not  confirmed  by  a  Testa-
ment.    A  legacy  could  not  be  given  by  codicilli,


TESTUDO.

unless  the  codicilli  were  confirmed  by  a  will  ;  an^
this  must  be  the  case  to  which  Pliny  refers  {Ep.
ii.  16).  Acilianus  had  made  Pliny  "heres  ex
parte,"  but  he  had  also  made  codicilli  in  his  own
handwriting,  which  as  Pliny  alleges  were  void
{pro  non  scriptis  habendi),  because  they  were  not
confirmed  by  the  will.  Now,  as  already  observed,
it  appears  from  Gains  (ii.  273),  that  a  person  who
was  appointed  heres  by  a  will,  might  be  required
by  codicilli  to  give  the  whole  hereditas  or  a  part  to
another,  even  though  the  codicilli  were  not  con-
firmed by  a  will.  But  Pliny  is  speaking  of  codicilli
which  were  void  for  want  of  a  testamentary  con-
firmation ;  and  this,  as  we  learn  from  Gains,  is  the
case  of  a  legacy  given  by  codicilli  which  have  not
been  confirmed  by  a  will.  This  confirmation  might
be  either  prospective  or  retrospective  {si  in  testa'
mento  caverit  testator,  tit  quidquid  in  codicUlis  scrip-
scrit,  id  ratum  sit.  Gains,  ii.  270  ;  quos  novissimos
fecero.  Dig.  29.  tit.  7.  s.  8).  This  passage  of  Pliny
as  to  the  confirmation  of  codicilli  by  a  testament,
has  sometimes  been  misunderstood.  It  is  stated,
(Dig.  29.  tit.  7.  s.  8),  "Conficiuntur  codicilli  qua-
tuor  modis :  aut  enira  in  futurum  confirmantur  aut
in  praeteritum,  aut  per  fideicommissum  testamento
facto  aut  sine  testamento."  These  four  modes  are
referred  to  in  Gains :  the  first  two  are  contained  in
the  words  above  quoted.  Si  in  testamento,  &c. :  the
third  is  the  case  of  the  heres  institutus  being  re-
quired to  give  the  hereditas  to  another  person  by
codicilli  non  confirmati  ;  and  the  fourth  is  the  case
of  a  fideicommissum  given  by  codicilli  of  a  person
who  made  no  other  testamentary  disposition.  It
was  a  rule  of  law  that  codicilli,  when  duly  made,
were  to  be  considered  (except  in  a  few  cases)  as
incorporated  in  the  will  at  the  time  when  the  will
was  made,  a  principle  which  led  to  various  legal
conclusions,  which  the  Roman  jurists  deduced  with
their  usual  precision.     (Dig.  27.  tit.  7.  s.  2.)

Originally  there  was  probably  no  particular  form
required  for  codicilli ;  but  there  must  have  been
evidence  of  their  containing  the  testator's  intention.
Subsequently  witnesses  were  required  and  five  wit-
nesses were  sufficient  for  codicilli  made  in  writing,
if  the  witnesses  subscribed  their  names  to  the  codi-
cilli. (Cod.  6.  tit.  36.)  But  a  man  could  with-
out writing  and  in  the  presence  of  five  witnesses
impose  a  fideicommissum  on  his  heres.  A  testa-
ment which  was  defective  as  such,  might  be  ef-
fectual as  codicilli.  The  power  to  make  codicilli
\vas  the  same  as  the  power  to  make  a  testament.
(Dig.  29.  tit.  7.  De  Jure  Codicillorum  ;  Inst.  2.  tit.
25.)

The  subject  of  Roman  Testaments  can  only  be
satisfactorily  expounded  in  a  large  treatise,  and  it
would  require  to  be  treated  historically.  The  pre-
ceding sketch  may  be  useful,  and  generally  true,
and  it  affects  to  be  nothing  more.  (Gaius,  ii.  101
—108  ;  Ulp.  Frag.  xx.  ;  Inst.  2.  tit.  10,  «&c.  ;  Dig.
28.  tit.  1  ;  Cod.  G.  tit.  23  ;  Vangerow,  Pandekten,
&c.  ii.  §  427,  &c.)  [G.  L.]

TESTIS,  a  witness.  I.  Greek.  [Mar-
TYRiA.]    2.  Roman.    [Jusjurandum.]

TESTU'DO  (xeAwi/Tj),  a  tortoise,  was  the  name
given  to  several  other  objects.

1.  To  the  Lyra,  because  it  was  sometimes  made
of  a  tortoise-shelL     [Lyra.]

2.  To  an  arched  or  vaulted  roof.  (Virg.  Aen.  i
505;  C\c.  Brut.  22.)  [Templum,  p.  1112,  a.]
Thus  in  a  Roman  house,  when  the  Cavum  Aedium
was  roofed  all  over  and  had  no  opening  or  com-


TESTUDO.

pliivium  in  the  centre,  the  Cavum  Aedium  was
called  Testudo.  (Vam^.Z.  v.  161,  ed.  MUller.)
[DoMUS,  p.427,1).]

3.  To  a  military  machine  moving  upon  wheels
and  roofed  over,  used  in  besieging  cities,  under
which  the  soldiers  worked  in  undermining  the
walls  or  other>/ise  destroying  them.  (Caes.  B.  G.
V.  42,  43,  B.  C.  ii.  2.)  It  was  usually  covered
with  raw  hides  or  other  materials  which  could
not  easily  be  set  on  fire.  The  battering-ram
[Aries]  was  frequently  placed  under  a  testudo  of
this  kind,  which  was  then  called  Testudo  Arietaria.
(Vitruv.  X.  19.  p.  322,  Bip.)  Vitmvius  also  men-
tions and  explains  the  construction  of  several  other
military  machines  to  which  the  name  of  Testudines
v/as  given  (x.  20,  21  ;  compare  Polyb.  ix.  41).

4.  The  name  of  Testudo  was  also  applied  to  the
covering  made  by  a  close  body  of  soldiers  who
placed  their  shields  over  their  heads  to  secure
themselves  against  the  darts  of  the  enemy.  The
shields  fitted  so  closely  together  as  to  present  one
imbroken  surface  without  any  interstices  between
them,  and  were  also  so  firm  that  men  could  walk
upon  them,  and  even  horses  and  chariots  be  driven
over  them.  (Dion  Cass.  xlix.  30.)  A  testudo  was
formed  (testudinem  faccre)  either  in  battle  to  ward
off  the  arrows  and  other  missiles  of  the  enemy,  or,
which  was  more  frequently  the  case,  to  form  a  pro-
tection to  the  soldiers  when  they  advanced  to  the
walls  or  gates  of  a  town  for  the  purpose  of  attack-
ing them.  (Dion  Cass.  L  c. ;  Liv.  x.  43  ;  Caes.  B.
G,  ii.  6  ;  Sail.  Jrig.  94  ;  sea  cut  annexed,  taken


THALAMITAE.


1119


from  the  Antonine  column.)  Sometimes  the  shields
were  disposed  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  the  testudo
slope.  The  soldiers  in  the  first  line  stood  up-
right, those  in  the  second  stooped  a  little,  and  each
line  successively  was  a  little  lower  than  the  pre-
ceding down  to  the  last,  where  the  soldiers  rested
on  one  knee.  Such  a  disposition  of  the  shields
was  called  Fastigata  Testudo^  on  account  of  their
sloping  like  the  roof  of  a  building.  The  advan-
tages of  this  plan  were  obvious :  the  stones  and
missiles  thrown  upon  the  shields  rolled  off  them
like  water  from  a  roof ;  besides  Avhich,  other  sol-
diers frequently  advanced  upon  them  to  attack  the
enemy  upon  the  walls.     The  Romans  were  accus-


I  tomed  to  form  this  kind  of  testudo,  as  an  exercise,
m  tne  games  of  the  Circus.  (Liv,  xliv.  9  ;  Polyb-
xxviii.  12.)

TETRADRACHMON.     [Drachma.]

TETRARCHA  or  TETRARCHES  (rerpdf,
XVs).  This  word  was  originally  used,  according  to
its  etymological  meaning,  to  signify  the  governor  of
the  fourth  part  of  a  country  (rcrpapxia  or  rerpa-
Sapxla).  We  have  an  example  in  the  ancient  di-
vision of  Thessaly  into  four  tetrarchies,  which  was
revived  by  Philip.  (Harpocrat.  s.  v.  Terpapxia :
Strabo,  ix.  p.  430  ;  Demosth.  Philipp.  ii.  p,  117  ;
Eurip.  Alcest.  1154  ;  Thirl  wall's  Greece^  vi.  pp.  13,
14.)  [Tagus.]  Each  of  the  three  Gallic  tribes
which  settled  in  Galatia  was  divided  into  four  te-
ti-archies,  each  ruled  by  a  tetrarch.  (Strabo,  xii.
pp.  566,  5Q1 ;  Plin.  H.  N.  v.  42.)  This  arrange-
ment subsisted  till  the  latter  times  of  the  Roman
republic  (Appian.  Mithrid.  46,  Syr.  50,  Bell.  Civ.
iv.  88),  but  at  last  the  twelve  tetrarchs  of  Gallo-
graecia  were  reduced  to  one,  namely  Deiotarus.
(Liv.  Epit.  xciv.  ;  Cic.  pro  Deiot  15  ;  Hirtius,
de  Bell.  Alex.  67.)  Some  of  the  tribes  of  Syria
were  ruled  by  tetrarchs,  and  several  of  the  princes
of  the  house  of  Herod  ruled  in  Palestine  with  this
title.  (Plin.  H.  JV.  v.  16,  19  ;  Joseph.  Antiq.  xiv.
13.  §  1,  xvii.  8.  §  1,  xi.  4.  §  18,  xvii.  11.  §  1,
xi.  2.  §  1,  Vit.  11.)  Niebuhr  (Hist,  of  Rome,  il
p.  135)  remarks  that  the  tetrarchs  in  Syria  were
zemindars,  who  occupied  the  rank  of  sovereigns,  in
the  same  way  as  the  zemindars  of  Bengal  succeeded
under  Lord  Cornwallis  in  getting  themselves  re-
cognised as  dependent  princes  and  absolute  pro-
prietors of  the  soil.

In  the  later  period  of  the  republic  and  under  the
empire,  the  Romans  seem  to  have  used  the  title
(as  also  those  of  eihnarch  and  phi/larch)  to  de-
signate those  tributary  princes  who  were  not  of
sufficient  importance  to  be  called  kings.  (Com-
pare Lucan.  vii.  227  ;  Sallust,  Catil.  20  ;  Cic.  pro
Mil.  28,  in  Vatin.  12  ;  Horat.  Sat.  i.  3..  12  ;  Veil
Paterc,  ii,  51  ;  Tacit,  Annal.  xv.  25.)       [P.  S.]

TETRASTY'LOS.     [Tkmplum.]

TETRO'BOLUS.     [Drachma.]

TETTARACONTA,  hoi  {ol  TSTTapaKoura),
the  Forty,  were  certain  officers  chosen  by  lot,  who
made  regular  circuits  through  the  demi  of  Attica,
whence  they  are  called  hiKaa-raX  Kara  Sirj^uouv,  to
decide  all  cases  of  aiKia  and  ra  ir^pX  rS>u  fiiaiuVy
and  also  all  other  private  causes,  where  the  matter
in  dispute  was  not  above  the  value  of  ten  drachmae.
Their  number  was  originally  thirty,  but  was  in-
creased to  forty  after  the  expulsion  of  the  thirty
tyrants,  and  the  restoration  of  the  democracy  by
Thrasybulus,  in  consequence,  it  is  said,  of  the
hatred  of  the  Athenians  to  the  number  of  thirty.
They  diff"ered  from  other  Si/cao-rai,  inasmuch  as
they  acted  as  ilaayoryeis^  as  well  as  decided  causes  ;
that  is,  they  received  the  accusation,  drew  up  the
indictment,  and  attended  to  all  that  was  under-
stood in  Athenian  law  by  the  riycfiovla  tov  SiKaff.
rrjpiou.  They  consequently  may  be  classed  among
the  regular  magistrates  of  the  state.  (Pollux,  viii.
40  ;  Hai-pocrat.  s.  v.  Kara  Sijfj.ovs  SiKaa-r^s  :
Rhetor.  Lex.  310.  21  ;  Demosth.  c.  Timocr.  p.  735.
11,  c.  Pantaen.  p.  976.  10  ;  Schubert,  De  Aedil.
pp.  96—98  ;  Meier,  ^«.  Proc.  pp.  77—82  ;  Scho-
mann.  Ant.  Jur.  Pvhl.  Grace,  p.  267.  10.)

TEXTOR,TEXTRINUM.  [Tela,  p.  1099.]

THALAMI'TAE,  THALA'MII  {poXaplriii^
haKap.i»C),     [Navis,  p.  788,  a.]


1120


THARGELIA.


THALLO'PHORI  (^a\\o(t>6poi).  [Pana-
THENAEA,  p.  857,  a.]

THALY'SIA  (^a\v(na\  a  festival  celebrated
Jn  honour  of  Dionysus  and  Demeter  (Menand.
lihet.  quoted  by  Meursius),  or  according  to  others
of  Demeter  alone,  as  it  is  described  by  Theocritus
in  his  seventh  idyll,  and  by  the  grammarians  who
wrote  the  argumenta  to  the  same.  It  was  held  in
autumn,  after  the  harvest,  to  thank  the  gods  for
the  benefits  they  had  conferred  upon  men.  (Span-
heim  ad  Callimach.  hymn,  in  Cer.  20  and  137  ;
Wustemann  ad  Theocrit.  Idyll,  vii.  3.)  [L.  S.]

THARGE'LIA  {^apyi{xia\  a  festival  cele-
brated at  Athens  on  the  6th  and  7th  of  Thargelion
in  honour  of  Apollo  and  Artemis  (Etymol.  M.  ;
Suidas,  s.  V.  Qapy^Xta),  or  according  to  the  Scho
liast  on  Aristophanes  {Equit.  1405)  in  honour  of
Helios  and  the  Horae  ;  the  latter  statement  how-
ever is  in  substance  the  same  as  the  former.  The
Apollo  who  was  honoured  by  this  festival  was  the
Delian  Apollo.     (Athen.  x.  p.  424.)

The  real  festival,  or  the  Thargelia  in  a  narrower
sense  of  the  word,  appears  to  have  taken  place
on  the  7th,  and  on  the  preceding  day  the  city
of  Athens  or  rather  its  inhabitants  were  purified.
(Plut.  Symp.  viii.  1  ;  Diog.  Laert.  ii.  44  ;  Harpo-
crat.  s.  V.  iapfiuKSs.)  The  manner  in  which  this
purification  was  effected  is  very  extraordinary  and
certainly  a  remnant  of  very  ancient  rites,  for  two
persons  were  put  to  death  on  that  day,  and  the
one  died  on  behalf  of  the  men  and  the  other  on  be-
half of  the  women  of  Athens.  The  name  by  which
these  victims  were  designated  was  <papiiaKoi :  ac-
cording to  some  accounts  both  of  them  were  men,
but  according  to  others  the  one  dying  on  behalf  of
the  women  was  a  woman  and  the  other  a  man.
(Hesych.  s.  v.  ^ap/xaKol.)  On  the  day  when  the
sacrifice  was  to  be  performed  the  victims  were  led
out  of  the  city  to  a  place  near  the  sea,  with  the
accompaniment  of  a  peculiar  melody,  called  Kpadi7)s
p6{j.os,  played  on  the  flute.  (Plesych.  s.  v.)  The
neck  of  the  one  who  died  for  the  men  was  sur-
rounded with  a  garland  of  black  figs,  that  of  the
other  with  a  garland  of  white  ones  ;  and  while
they  were  proceeding  to  the  place  of  their  destin}^
they  Avere  beaten  with  rods  of  fig-wood,  and  figs
and  other  things  were  thrown  at  them.  Cheese,
figs,  and  cake  were  put  into  their  hands  that  they
might  eat  them.  They  were  at  last  burnt  on  a
funeral  pile  made  of  wild  fig-wood,  and  their  ashes
were  thrown  into  the  sea  and  scattered  to  the
winds.  (Tzetzes,  Chil.  v.  25.)  Some  writers  main-
tain from  a  passage  of  Ammonius  {de  Different.
Vocal),  p.  142,  ed.  Valck.)  that  they  were  thrown
into  the  sea  alive,  but  this  passage  leaves  the
matter  uncertain.  We  are  not  informed  whether
this  expiatory  and  purifying  sacrifice  was  offered
regularly  every  year,  but  from  the  name  of  the
victims  ((pap/xaKoi)  as  well  as  from  the  whole  ac-
count of  Tzetzes,  which  is  founded  on  good  au-
thorities, it  appears  highly  probable  that  this  sa-
crifice only  took  place  in  case  of  a  heavy  calamity
having  befallen  the  city  (uoffovarjs  ttjs  irdAcws),
such  as  the  plague,  a  famine,  &c.  What  persons
were  chosen  as  victims  on  such  occasions  is  not
mentioned,  and  we  only  learn  from  Suidas  {s.  v.
^ap/xuKul)  that  they  were  kept  at  the  public  ex-
pense (Sriixoaia  rpe(p6iievoi).  But  they  were  in
all  probability  criminals  sentenced  to  death,  and
who  were  kept  by  the  state  from  the  time  of  their
condemnation  to  be  sacrificed  at  the  Thargelia.    In


THEATRUM.

the  earlier  times  however  they  were  not  criminals,
but  either  cripples  (Tzetzes,  I.e.;  Schol.  ad  Aris-
toph.  Ran.  733),  or  persons  who  offered  to  die
voluntarily  for  the  good  of  their  country.  (Athen.
ix.  p.  370  ;  Suidas,  s.  v.  UapOcvoi.)

The  second  day  of  the  Thargelia  was  solemnized
with  a  procession  and  an  agon  which  consisted  of
a  cyclic  chorus  performed  by  men  at  the  expense
of  a  choragus.  (Lysias,  de  Muncr.  accept,  p.  255  :
Antiphon,  de  Choreut.  c.  1 1  ;  Demosth.  in  Mid.  p.
517.)  The  prize  of  the  victor  in  this  agon  was  a
tripod  which  he  had  to  dedicate  in  the  temple  of
Apollo  which  had  been  built  by  Peisistratus.  (Sui-
das, s.  V.  Yivdiov.)  On  this  day  it  was  customary
for  persons  who  were  adopted  into  a  family  to  be
solemnly  registered  and  received  into  the  genos
and  the  phratria  of  the  adoptive  parents.  This
solemnity  was  the  same  as  that  of  registering  one's
own  children  at  the  apaturia.  (Isaens,  de  Apollod,
hercd.  c.  15.  de  Arisiarch.  hered.  c.  8.)  [Adop-
Tio  (Greek),]

Respecting  the  origin  of  the  Thargelia  there  are
two  accounts.  According  to  Istrus  (a/>.  Phot.  Lex.
p.  467  ;  Etymol.  M., and  Harpocrat.  s.v.  ^apfiuKSs)
the  (papfjLaKOL  derived  their  name  from  one  Phar-
macus,  who  having  stolen  the  sacred  phials  of
Apollo  and  being  caught  in  the  act  by  the  men  of
Achilles,  was  stoned  to  death,  and  this  event  was
commemorated  by  the  awful  sacrifice  at  the  Thar-
gelia. Helladius  (p.  534.  3),  on  the  other  hand,
states  that  at  first  these  expiatory  sacrifices  were
oflFered  for  the  purpose  of  purifying  the  city  of  con-
tagious diseases,  as  the  Athenians  after  the  death
of  the  Cretan  Androgens  were  visited  by  the
plague.  A  similar  festival,  probably  an  imitation
of  the  Thargelia,  was  celebrated  at  Massilia.
(Petron.  141.)  (See  Meursius,  Graecia  Feriata^
s.  V,  &apy7]\ia  :  Bode,  Gesch.  der  lyrisch,  Dichtkunst
der  Hellen.  i.  p.  173,  &c.,  where  an  account  is  also
given  of  the  Kpadlris  v6jxos ;  K.  F.  Hermann,
Handh.  der  Gottesd.  Alterth.  §  60.  n.  4.  &c.)  [L.S.]

THEA'TRUM  {biarpov).  The  Athenians  be-
fore the  time  of  Aeschylus  had  only  a  wooden
scaffolding  on  which  their  dramas  were  performed.
Such  a  wooden  theatre  was  only  erected  for  the
time  of  the  Dionysiac  festivals,  and  was  afterwards
pulled  down.  The  first  drama  that  Aeschylus
brought  upon  the  stage  wfis  performed  upon  such  a
wooden  scaffold,  and  it  is  recorded  as  a  singular
and  ominous  coincidence  that  on  that  occasion
(500  B.  c.)  the  scaffolding  broke  down.  To  pre-
vent the  recurrence  of  such  an  accident  the  build-
ing of  a  stone  theatre  was  forthwith  commenced  on
the  south-eastern  descent  of  the  acropolis,  in  the
Lcnaea  ;  for  it  should  be  observed  that  throughout
Greece  theatres  were  always  built  upon  eminences,
or  on  the  sloping  side  of  a  hill.  The  new  Athenian
theatre  was  built  on  a  very  large  scale,  and  appears
to  have  been  constructed  with  great  skill  in  regard
to  its  acoustic  and  perspective  arrangements,  but
the  name  of  the  architect  is  not  known.  It  is
highly  probable  that  dramas  were  performed  in
this  new  theatre  as  soon  as  it  was  practicable,  and
before  it  was  completely  finished,  which  did  not
take  place  till  about  b.  c.  340,  unless  we  adopt  the
untenable  supposition  that  the  completion  of  the
Attic  theatre  at  this  time  refers  to  a  second  theatre.
(Pans.  i.  29.  §  16  ;  Plut.  Vit.  X.  Orat.  pp.  841,  c,
852,  c.)  During  this  long  interval  of  fortj'  Olym-
piads theatres  were  erected  in  all  parts  of  Greece
and  Asia  Minor,  although  Athens  was  the  centre


THEATRUM.

of  the  Greek  drama  and  the  only  place  which  pro-
duced great  masterworks  in  this  department  of
literature.  It  should  also  be  borne  in  mind  that
theatres  are  mentioned  in  several  parts  of  Greece
where  the  worship  of  Dionysus  and  the  drama
connected  with  it  did  not  exist,  so  that  these  build-
ings were  devoted  to  other  public  exhibitions.
Thus  at  Athens  itself  there  were  in  later  times,
besides  the  theatre  in  the  Lenaea,  two  others,  viz.
the  'Aypiirireiov  and  the  iirl  'F7]yiWr}  SiiaTpov^
which  were  not  destined  for  dramatic  performances,
but  were  only  places  in  which  the  sophists  de-
livered their  declamations.  At  Sparta  there  was
a  theatre  of  white  marble  (Paus.  iii.  14.  §  1 )  in
which  assemblies  of  the  people  were  held,  choral
dances  performed,  and  the  like  (Athen.  iv.  p.  139,
xiv.  p.  631),  for  the  festive  joy  of  Dionysus  and
the  regular  drama  were  foreign  to  the  Spartans.
All  the  theatres  however  which  were  constructed
in  Greece  were  probably  built  after  the  model  of
that  of  Athens,  and  with  slight  deviations  and
modifications  they  all  resembled  one  another  in  the
main  points,  as  is  seen  in  the  numerous  ruins  of
theatres  in  various  parts  of  Greece,  Asia  Minor,
and  Sicily.  Some  of  them  were  of  prodigious  di-
mensions. The  theatre  at  Epidaurus  in  the  grove
of  Asclepius,  of  which  considerable  ruins  are  still
extant,  excelled  in  beauty  the  Roman  theatres
(Paus.  ii.  27.  §  5),  and  in  size  even  that  of  Mega-


THEATRUM.


1121


lopolis,  which  was  reckoned  the  largest  theatre  in
Greece.  (Paus.  viii.  32.  §  1.)  The  great  num-
ber of  ruins  of  theatres  may  enable  us  to  form
an  idea  of  the  partiality  of  the  Greeks  for  such
magnificent  buildings,  and  of  their  gigantic  dimen-
sions. The  ruins  of  the  theatre  at  Argos  enclose
a  space  of  450  feet  in  diameter  ;  the  theatre  of
Ephesus  is  even  660  feet  in  diameter.  Upon
these  ruins  see  the  works  of  Clarke,  DodwelL
Leake,  Hughes,  Arundell,  and  the  Supplement  to
Stuart's  Antiquities  of  Athens.

The  construction  of  the  Greek  theatres  has  been
the  subject  of  much  discussion  and  dispute  in  mo-
dem times,  and  although  all  the  best  writers  agree
on  the  great  divisions  of  which  a  theatre  consisted,
the  details  are  in  many  cases  mere  matters  of  con-
jecture. The  Attic  theatre  was,  like  all  the  Greek
theatres,  placed  in  such  a  manner  that  the  place
for  the  spectators  formed  the  upper  or  north-
western, and  the  stage  with  all  that  belonged  to  it
the  south-eastern  part,  and  between  these  two
parts  lay  the  orchestra.  We  shall  consider  each  of
these  three  divisions  separately,  together  with  its
parts  and  subdivisions,  referring  the  reader  to  the
annexed  plan  which  has  been  made  from  the  re-
mains of  Greek  theatres  still  extant,  and  from  a
careful  examination  of  the  passages  in  ancient
writers  which  describe  the  whole  or  parts  of  a
theatre,  especially  in  Vitruvius  and  Pollux.


#     •      •


%      %      %      %      %


1.  The  place  for  the  spectators  was  in  a  nar-
rower sense  of  the  word  called  ^earpov.  The  seats
for  the  spectators,  which  were  in  most  cases  cut
into  the  rock,  consisted  of  rows  of  benches  rising
one  above  another  ;  the  rows  themselves  (a)  formed
parts  (nearly  three-fourths)  of  concentric  circles,
and  were  at  intervals  divided  into  compartments
by  one  or  more  broad  passages  (b)  running  between
them  and  parallel  with  the  benches.  These  pas-
sages were  called  Sia^afiara,  or  KaraTOfial,  Lat.
pniecindiones  (Vitruv.  v.  3  and  7  ;  Bekker,  Anec-


dot.  p.  270  ;  Pollux,  iv.  123  ;  Harpocrat.  and  Suid.
s. «.  KaTaTOfi-f})^  and  when  the  concourse  of  people
was  very  great  in  a  theatre,  many  persons  might
stand  in  them.  One  side  of  such  a  passage  formed
towards  the  upper  rows  of  benches  a  wall,  in  which
in  some  theatres,  though  perhaps  not  at  Athens,
niches  were  excavated  which  contained  metal  ves-
sels (^x^'**)  to  increase  the  sounds  coming  from  the
stage  and  orchestra.  (Vitruv.  i.  1.  §  9,  v.  4  ;
Stieglitz,  Arch'dol.  der  Baukunst.,  &c.  ii.  1.  p.  150.)
Across  the  rows  of  benches  ran  stairs,  by  which
4c


1122


THEATRUM.


persons  might  ascend  from  the  lowest  to  the  high-
est. But  these  stairs  ran  in  straight  lines  only
from  one  praecinctio  to  another  ;  and  the  stairs  in
the  next  series  of  rows  were  just  between  the  two
stairs  of  the  lower  series  of  benches.  By  this
course  oF  the  stairs  the  seats  were  divided  into  a
immber  of  compartments  resembling  cones  from
■which  the  tops  are  cut  off ;  hence  they  were  termed
KepKiSes,  and  in  Latin  cunei.  The  whole  of  the
place  for  the  spectators  {^earpov)  was  sometimes
designated  by  the  name  koTAoj',  Latin  eavea,  it
being  in  most  cases  a  real  excavation  of  the  rock.
Above  the  highest  row  of  benches  there  rose  a  co-
vered portico  (c),  which  of  course  far  exceeded  in
height  the  opposite  buildings  by  which  the  stage
was  surrounded,  and  appears  to  have  also  contri-
buted to  increase  the  acoustic  effect.  (Apul.  Met.
iii.  p.  49,  Bip.)  The  entrances  to  the  seats  of  the
spectators  were  partly  undergroimd,  and  led  to  the
lowest  rows  of  benches,  while  the  upper  rows  must
have  been  accessible  from  above.  (Pollux,  iv.  123  ;
Athen.  xiv.  p.  622.)

2.  The  orchestra  (opxi^o-rpa)  was  a  circular  level
space  extending  in  front  of  the  spectators,  and
somewhat  below  the  lowest  row  of  benches.  But
it  was  not  a  complete  circle,  one  segment  of  it
being  appropriated  to  the  stage.  The  orchestra  was
the  place  for  the  chorus,  where  it  performed  its
evolutions  and  dances,  for  which  purpose  it  was
covered  with  boards.  As  the  chorus  was  the  ele-
ment out  of  which  the  drama  arose,  so  the  or-
chestra was  originally  the  most  important  part  of  a
theatre  :  it  formed  the  centre  around  which  all  the
other  parts  of  the  building  were  grouped.  In  the
centre  of  the  circle  of  the  orchestra  was  the  ^u/xe\r],
that  is,  the  altar  of  Dionysus  (d),  which  was  of
course  nearer  to  the  stage  than  to  the  seats  of  the
spectators,  the  distance  from  which  was- precisely
the  length  of  a  radius  of  the  circle.  In  a  wider
sense  the  orchestra  also  comprised  the  broad  pas-
sages (TrapoSot,  e)  on  each  side  between  the  pro-
jecting wings  of  the  stage  and  the  seats  of  the
spectators,  through  which  the  chorus  entered  the
orchestra.  The  chorus  generally  arranged  itself  in
the  space  between  the  thymele  and  the  stage.  The
thymele  itself  was  of  a  square  form,  and  was  used
lor  various  purposes,  according  to  the  nature  of  the
different  plays,  such  as  a  funeral  monument,  an
altar,  &c.  It  was  made  of  boards  and  surrounded
on  all  sides  with  steps.  It  thus  stood  upon  a
raised  platform,  which  was  sometimes  occupied  by
the  leader  of  the  chorus,  the  flute-player,  and  the
rhabdophori.  (Miiller,  Dissert,  on  the  Eumen.  of
AeschyL  p.  249,  &c.  transl.)  The  flute-player  as
well  as  the  prompter  (inroSoXeis,  monitor)  were
generally  placed  behind  the  thymele,  so  as  to  face
the  stage  and  not  to  be  seen  by  the  spectators.
(Plut.  Ret  publ.  gerend.  praec.  p.  813,  e.  ;  Ath,  xiv.
p.  631.)  The  orchestra  as  well  as  the  dcarpov  lay
under  the  open  sky  ;  a  roof  is  nowhere  mentioned.

3.  The  stage.  Steps  led  from  each  side  of  the
orchestra  to  the  stage,  and  by  them  the  chorus
probably  ascended  the  stage  whenever  it  took  a
real  part  in  the  action  itself.  The  back  side  of  the
stage  was  closed  by  a  wall  called  the  <r/crjj'^  or
sccna^  from  which  on  each  side  a  wing  projected
which  was  called  the  irapaaK-fiviov.  The  whole
depth  of  the  stage  was  not  very  great,  as  it  only
comprised  a  segment  of  the  circle  of  the  orchestra.
The  whole  space  from  the  scena  to  the  orchestra
was  termed  the  proscenium  (TrpocrKi}viov)^  and  was


THEATRUM.

what  we  shouid  call  the  real  stage.  That  part  of
it  which  was  nearest  to  the  orchestra,  and  where
the  actors  stood  when  they  spoke  was  the  Xoyeloy^
also  called  oKpiSas  or  oKpiiavrcs,  in  Latin  pulpitum,
which  was  of  course  raised  above  the  orchestra
and  probably  on  a  level  with  the  thymele.  What
the  \nvocrKi]viov  was  is  not  clear  ;  some  think  that
it  was  a  place  to  which  the  actors  withdrew  when
they  had  acted  their  parts,  others  think  that  it  was
the  same  as  the  Kovlcrrpa  (Suidas,  s.  v.  ^K-qvif) ;  but
as  it  is  stated  that  the  v-no(TKi\viov  was  adorned
with  statues,  it  seems  more  probable  that  it  was
the  wall  under  the  Xoy^'iov  which  faced  the  orches-
tra and  the  spectators.  The  aKr]vi]  or  scena  was,
as  we  have  already  stated,  the  wall  which  closed
the  stage  (^proscenium  and  logeum)  from  behind.
It  represented  a  suitable  background  or  the  locality
in  which  the  action  was  going  on.  Before  the  play
began,  it  was  covered  with  a  curtain  (TrapaTreVao-juo,
TTpocTKiiviou^  avAaiai,  Latin  aulcvea  or  siparium ;
Etymol.  M.  s.v.  AvX6s  :  Athen.  xiii.  p.  587  ;  Pol-
lux, iv.  122.)  When  the  play  began  this  curtain
was  let  doAvn  and  was  rolled  upon  a  roller  under-
neath the  stage.  The  proscenium  and  logeum  thus
were  never  concealed  from  the  spectators.  As  re-
gards the  scenery  represented  on  the  ctktjv^,  it  was
different  for  tragedy,  comedy,  and  the  satyric
drama,  and  for  each  of  these  kinds  of  poetrj'  the
scenery  must  have  been  capable  of  various  modifi-
cations according  to  the  character  of  each  indivi-
dual play  ;  at  least  that  this  was  the  case  with  the
various  tragedies,  is  evident  from  the  scenes  de-
scribed in  the  tragedies  still  extant.  In  the  latter
however  the  back-ground  {(XK-qvi))  in  most  cases
represented  the  front  of  a  palace  with  a  door  in  the
centre  (i)  which  was  called  the  royal  door.  This
palace  generally  consisted  of  two  stories  (diffTeyia,
Pollux,  iv.  129),  and  upon  its  flat  roof  there  ap-
pears to  have  sometimes  been  some  elevated  place
from  which  persons  might  observe  what  Avas  going
on  at  a  distance.  (Eurip.  PAoewiss.  88,  &c.)  The
palace  presented  on  each  side  a  projecting  wing,
each  of  which  had  its  separate  entrance.  These
wings  generally  represented  the  habitations  of
guests  and  visitors.  All  the  three  doors  must  have
been  visible  to  the  spectators.  (Vitruv.  v.  7.)
The  protagonistes  always  entered  the  stage  through
the  middle  or  royal  door,  the  deuteragonistes  and
tritagonistes  through  those  on  the  right  and  left
wings.  In  tragedies  like  the  Prometheus,  the
Persians,  Philoctetes,  Oedipus  in  Colonus,  and
others  the  back-ground  did  not  represent  a  palace.
There  are  other  pieces  again  in  which  the  scena
must  have  been  changed  in  the  course  of  the  per-
formance, as  in  the  Eumenides  of  Aeschylus  and
the  Ajax  of  Sophocles.  The  dramas  of  Euripides
required  a  great  variety  of  scenery  ;  and  if  in  ad-
dition to  this  we  recollect  that  several  pieces  were
played  in  one  day,  it  is  manifest  that  the  mechani-
cal parts  of  stage  perfonnance,  at  least  in  the  days
of  Euripides,  must  have  been  brought  to  great  per-
fection. The  scena  in  the  Satyric  drama  appears
to  have  always  represented  a  woody  district  with
hills  and  grottoes  ;  in  comedy  the  scena  represented,
at  least  in  later  times,  the  fronts  of  private  dwell-
ings or  the  habitations  of  slaves.  (Vitruv.  v.  8.  §  1  ;
Pollux,  iv.  125.)  The  art  of  scene-painting  must
have  been  applied  long  before  the  time  of  Sopho-
cles, although  Aristotle  {Poet.  iv.  16)  ascribes  its
introduction  to  him.  [Pictura,  p.  908,  b.]
The  machines  in  the  Greek  theatres  were  ex-


THEATRUM.

tremely  numerous,  but  we  are  in  many  cases  unable
to  I'orni  an  exact  idea  of  their  nature  and  their
effects.  We  shall  only  mention  the  most  important
among  them.  1.  The  ireplaKTOi  (m)  stood  near
the  two  side  entrances  of  the  scena  ;  their  form
was  that  of  a  prisma,  and  by  a  single  turn  they
produced  a  change  in  the  scenery.  (Vitruv,  v.  7  ;
Pollux,  iv.  126.)  2.  The  xop'^"'*'!  KKifiaKes^  or
the  Charonian  steps,  by  which  the  shades  ascended
from  the  lower  world  upon  the  stage.  (Pollux,  iv.
1 32.)  3.  The  fj.rjxaf'h,  KpdSr]  or  ecopTj/^a,  a  machine
by  which  gods  or  heroes  were  represented  passing
through  or  floating  in  the  air :  hence  the  proverb,
dens  ex  machina.  (Pollux,  iv.  126,  128,  131  ;
Suidas,  s.  V.  'Edipriixa :  Hesych.  s.  v.  KpaSrj.)  4.  The
i^wcTTpa  or  iKKVKKrjfia.  [Exostra.]  5.  The
^eoKojflov,  an  especial  elevated  place  above  the
scena  for  the  Olympian  gods  when  they  had  to  ap-
pear in  their  full  majesty.  (Pollux,  iv.  130  ;  Phot.
Lccc.  p.  597.)  6.  The  fipovTiiov^  a  machine  for  imi-
tating thunder.  It  appears  to  liave  been  placed
underneath  the  stage,  and  to  have  consisted  of
large  brazen  vessels  in  which  stones  Avere  rolled.
(Pollux,  iv.  130  ;  Suidas,  s.  v.  BpouT'f) :  Vitruv.  v.
7.)  Respecting  several  other  machines  of  less  im-
portance, see  Pollux,  iv.  irepl  fiepcou  ^idrpov.

It  is  impossible  to  enter  here  upon  the  differences,
which  are  presented  by  many  ruins  of  theatres  still
extant,  from  the  description  we  have  given  above.
It  is  only  necessary  to  mention,  that  in  the  theatres
of  the  great  cities  of  the  Macedonian  time  the  space
between  the  thymele  and  the  logeum  was  converted
into  a  lower  stage,  upon  which  mimes,  musicians,
and  dancers  played,  while  the  ancient  stjige  (pros-
cenium and  logeum)  remained  destined,  as  before,
for  the  actors  in  the  regular  drama.  This  lower
stage  was  sometimes  called  thymele  or  orchestra.
(Miiller,  Hist,  of  Greek  Lit.  i.  p.  299  ;  Donaldson,
I'he  Theatre  of  the  Greeks.)

^  The  Romans  must  have  become  acquainted  with
the  theatres  of  the  Italian  Greeks  at  an  early
period,  whence  they  erected  their  own  theatres  in
similar  positions  upon  the  sides  of  hills.  This  is
still  clear  from  the  ruins  of  very  ancient  theatres  at
Tusculum  and  Faesulae.  (Niebuhr,  Hist.  o/Rome,
iii.  p.  364,  &c.)  The  Romans  themselves  however
did  not  possess  a  regular  stone  theatre  until  a  very
late  period,  and  although  dramatic  representations
were  very  popular  in  earlier  times,  it  appears  that
u  wooden  stage  was  erected  when  necessary,  and
was  afterwards  pulled  down  again,  and  the  plays
of  Plautus  and  Terence  were  performed  on  such
temporary'  scaffoldings.  In  the  meanwhile  many  of
the  neighbouring  towns  about  Rome  had  their  stone
theatres,  as  the  introduction  of  Greek  customs  and
manners  was  less  strongly  opposed  in  them  than
in  the  city  of  Rome  itself.  Wooden  theatres,
adorned  with  the  most  profuse  magnificence,  were
erected  at  Rome  even  during  the  last  period  of  the
republic.  The  first  attempt  to  build  a  stone  theatre
was  made  a  short  time  before  the  consulship  of
P.  Cornelius  Scipio  Nasica.  It  was  sanctioned  by
the  censors,  and  was  advancing  towards  its  com-
pletion, when  Scipio,  in  1 55  B.  c,  persuaded  the
senate  to  command  the  building  to  be  pulled  down
as  injurious  to  public  morality.  (Liv.  Epit.  48.)
Respecting  the  magnificent  wooden  theatre  which
M.  Aemilius  Scaurus  built  in  his  aedileship,  58  B.C.,
see  Pliny,  //.  A'",  xxxvi.  24.  §  7.  Its  scena  consisted
of  three  stories,  and  the  lowest  of  them  was  made
of  white  marble,  the  middle  one  of  glass,  and  the


THEATRUM.


112.'


upper  one  of  gilt  wood.  The  cavea  contamed
80,000  spectators.  (Comp^Plin.  i/.A^.  xxxiv.  17.)
In  55  B.  c.  Cn.  Pompey  built  the  first  stone  theatre
at  Rome  near  the  Campus  Martius.  It  was  of
great  beauty,  and  is  said  to  have  been  built  after
the  model  of  that  of  Mytilene  ;  it  contained
40,000  spectators.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvi.  24.  §  7;
compare  Drumann,  Gesch.  Roms.  iv,  p.  520,  «Scc.)
C.  Curio  built  in  50  B.  c.  two  magnificent  wooden
theatres  close  by  one  another,  which  might  be
changed  into  one  amphitheatre.  (Plin.  H.  N.
xxxvi.  24.  §  8.)  After  the  time  of  Pompey,  how-
ever, other  stone  theatres  were  erected,  as  the
theatre  of  Marcellus,  which  was  built  by  Augustus
and  called  after  his  nephew  Marcellus  (Dion  Cass,
xliii.  49;  Plin.  H.N.  xxxvi.  12)  ;  and  that  of
Balbus  (Plin.  I.  c),  whence  Suetonius  {Aug.  44)
uses  the  expression  per  trina  theaira.

The  construction  of  a  Roman  theatre  resembled,
on  the  whole,  that  of  a  Greek  one.  The  principal
differences  are,  that  the  seats  of  the  spectators,
which  rose  in  the  form  of  an  amphitheatre  around
the  orchestra,  did  not  form  more  than  a  semi-
circle ;  and  that  the  whole  of  the  orchestra  like-
wise formed  only  a  semicircle,  the  diameter  of
which  formed  the  front  line  of  the  stage.  The
Roman  orchestra  contained  no  thymele,  and  waa
not  destined  i'or  a  chorus,  but  contained  the  seats
for  senators  and  other  distinguished  persons,  such
as  foreign  ambassadors,  which  are  called  "  primus
subselliorum  ordo."  In  the  year  68  B.  c.  the  tri-
bune L.  Roscius  Otho  carried  a  law  which  regu-
lated the  places  in  the  theatre  to  be  occupied  by  the
different  classes  of  Roman  citizens  :  it  enacted  that
fourteen  ordines  of  benches  were  to  be  assigned  as
seats  to  the  equites.  ( Liv.  E-pit.  ^^  ;  Ascon.  ad
Cornel,  p.  78,  ed.  Orelli.)  Hence  these  quatuor-
decim  ordines  are  sometimes  mentioned  without
any  further  addition  as  the  honorary  seats  of  the
etpiites.  They  were  undoubtedly  close  behind  the
seats -of  the  senators  and  magistrates,  and  thug
consisted  of  the  rows  of  benches  immediately  be-
hind the  orchestra.  Velleius  (ii.  32)  and  Cicero
{pro  Muren.  19)  speak  of  this  law  in  a  manner  to
lead  us  to  infer  that  it  only  restored  to  the  equites
a  right  which  they  had  possessed  before.  Another
part  of  this  law  was  that  spendthrifts  and  persons
reduced  in  their  circumstances  {decoctores),  whether
through  their  own  fault  or  not,  and  whether  they
belonged  to  the  senatorian  or  equestrian  order,
should  no  longer  occupy  the  seats  assigned  to  their
order,  but  occupy  a  separate  place  set  apart  for
them.  (Cic.  Philip,  ii.  18.)  In  the  reign  of  Au-
gustus the  senate  made  a  decree,  that  foreign  am-
bassadors should  no  longer  enjoy  the  privilege
mentioned  above,  as  it  had  sometimes  happened
that  freedmen  were  sent  to  Rome  as  ambassadors.
The  soldiers  also  were  separated  from  the  people
by  the  same  decree  ;  the  same  was  the  case  with
women,  praetextati  and  paedagogi.  (Suet.  ^t^.  44.)
This  separation  consisted  probably  in  one  or  more
cunei  being  assigned  to  a  particular  class  of  per-
sons. The  woodcut  on  the  following  page  contains
a  probable  representation  of  the  plan  of  a  Roman
theatre.

For  a  fuller  account  of  the  construction  of
Greek  and  Roman  theatres  see  the  commentators
on  Vitruvius  (I.  c.),  J.  Chr.  Genelli,  das  Theater  zu
Athcn,  hinsichtlich  auf  Architectur.,  Scenerie  und
Darstelhwffs  Kunst  uberhaupt,  Berlin,  1818,  8vo.  ;
G  C.  W.  S'^hn^'ider,  Das  Attische  Theatcrwtsen,
4c  2


1J24


THEATRUM.


THEATRUM.


zum  bessern  Verstehen  der  Griecli.  Dramatiker ;
Stieglitz,  Arch'dologie  der  Baukunst  der  Griech.
und  Romer  ;  Ferrara,  Storia  e  descrip.  de"  princip.
teatri  ant.  e  modemi^  Milano,  1830  ;  the  Sup-
plement to  Stuart's  Antiq.  of  Alliens.  A  general
outline  is  also  given,  by  Miiller,  Hist,  of  Gr.  Lit.
i.  p.  299,  &c.  ;  and  by  Bode,  Gesch.  der  dramat.
Dichtkunst  d.  Hellen.  i.  p.  156,  &c.

It  remains  to  speak  of  a  few  points  respecting
the  attendance  in  the  Greek  theatres.  Theatrical
representations  at  Athens  began  early  in  the  morn-
ing, or  after  breakfast  ( Aeschin.  c.  Ctesiph.  p.  4  66 ;
Athen.  xi.  p,  464)  ;  and  when  the  concourse  of
people  was  expected  to  be  great,  persons  would  even
go  to  occupy  their  seats  in  the  night.  The  sun
could  not  be  ver}"-  troublesome  to  the  actors,  as
they  were  in  a  great  measure  protected  by  the
buildings  surrounding  the  stage,  and  the  spectators
protected  themselves  against  it  by  hats  with  broad
brims.  (Suidas,  s.  w.  ne'racros  and  ApdKwy.)
When  the  weather  was  fine,  especially  at  the
Dionysiac  festivals  in  spring,  the  people  appeared
with  garlands  on  their  heads  ;  when  it  was  cold,
as  at  the  Lenaea  in  January,  they  used  to  wrap
themselves  up  in  their  cloaks.  (Suidas,  I.  c.)
When  a  storm  or  a  shower  of  rain  came  on  sud-
denly, the  spectators  took  refuge  in  the  porticoes
behind  the  stage,  or  in  those  above  the  uppermost
row  of  benches.  Those  who  wished  to  sit  com-
fortably brought  cushions  with  them.  (Aeschin.
c.  Ctesiph.  I.e.  ;  Theophr.  C/iur.  2.)  As  it  was  not
unusual  for  the  theatrical  performances  to  last  from
ten  to  twelve  hours,  the  spectators  required  re-
freshments, and  we  find  that  in  the  intervals  be-
tween the  several  plays,  they  used  to  take  wine
and  cakes.  (Athen.  xi.  p.  464  ;  Aristot.  Eth.
Nicol.  X.  5.)

The  whole  of  the  cavea  in  the  Attic  theatre
must  have  contained  afcout  50,000  spectators.  The
places  for  generals,  the  archons,  priests,  foreign  am-
bassadors, and  other  distinguished  persons,  were
in  the  lowest  rows  of  benches,  and  nearest  to  the
orchestra   (Pollux,  iv.    121    viii.  133;  Schol.  ad


Aristoph.  Equit.  572),  and  they  appear  to  have
been  sometimes  covered  with  a  sort  of  canopy.
(Aeschin.  I.  c.)  The  rows  of  benches  above  those
were  occupied  by  the  senate  of  500,  those  next  in
succession  by  the  ephebi,  and  the  rest  by  the
people  of  Athens.  But  it  would  seem  that  they
did  not  sit  indiscriminately,  but  that  the  better
places  were  let  at  a  higher  price  than  the  others,
and  that  no  one  had  a  right  to  take  a  place  for
which  he  had  not  paid.  (Plat.  Apolog.  p.  26  ;
Aelian.  V.  H.  ii.  13;  Demosth.  in  Mid.  p.  572.)
The  question,  whether  in  Greece,  and  more  especi-
ally at  Athens,  women  were  present  at  the  per-
formance of  tragedies,  is  one  of  those  which  have
given  rise  to  much  discussion  among  modern  scho-
lars, as  we  have  scarcely  any  passage  in  ancient
writers  in  which  the  presence  of  women  is  stated  \
as  a  positive  fact.  But  Jacobs  (  Vermischt.  Schri/ten,  ^
iv.  p.  272),  and  Passow  (in  Zimmermann's  Zeitschr.
fur  die  Alterth.  1837.  n.  29),  have  placed  it  almost
beyond  a  doubt,  from  the  various  allusions  made  by
ancient  writers,  that  women  were  allowed  to  be
present  during  the  performance  of  tragedies.  This
opinion  is  now  perfectly  confirmed  by  a  passage  in
Athenaeus  (xii.  p.  534),  which  has  been  quoted
by  Becker  (Charikles,  ii.  p.  560),  in  corroboration
of  the  conclusion  to  which  the  above  mentioned
writers  had  come.  In  this  passage  we  find  that  at
Athens,  and  at  the  time  of  the  Peloponnesian  war,
the  spectators  in  the  theatre  consisted  of  men  and
women.  We  have,  however,  on  the  other  hand,
every  reason  to  believe  that  women  were  not
present  at  comedies,  while  boys  might  be  present
both  at  tragedy  and  comedy.  (Theoph.  Charact.
9  ;  Isaeus,  de  C'iron.  Iiered.  p.  206  ;  Aristoph.
Nub.  537,  &c.  ;  Lucian,  de  Gymnast.  22.)  The
seats  which  women  occupied  in  the  Greek  theatres
appear  to  have  been  separated  from  those  of  the
men.  (Gottling,  in  the  Rheinisch.  Mus.  1834,
p.  103,  &c.)

For  the  purpose  of  maintaining  order  and  pre-
venting excesses,  the  ancients  had  a  sort  of  theatre-
police;  the  persons  who  held  this  office  were  called


THENSAE.

in  Greece  ^aSSocpSpoi  or  pa€dovxoi,  and  at  Rome
Praecones.     (Schol.  ad  Aristoph.  Pax^  718.)

Respecting  the  attendance  at  the  Greek  theatres,
and  the  conduct  of  the  people,  see  a  very  good  dis-
sertation of  Becker,  in  his  CJmriUes^  ii.  pp.  249 —
278.  [L.  S.]

THENSAE  or  TENSAE  (for  the  orthography
and  etymology  of  the  word  are  alike  doubtful,  al-
though the  oldest  MSS.  generally  omit  the  aspirate)
were  highly  ornamented  sacred  vehicles,  which,  in
the  solemn  pomp  of  the  Circensian  games,  conveyed
the  statues  of  certain  deities  with  all  their  decora-
tions to  the  pulvinaria,  and  after  the  sports  were
over  bore  them  back  to  their  shrines.  (Cic.  in  Verr.
ii.  1,  69^  and  note  of  Pseudo-Ascon.  iii.  27,  v.  72  ;
Serv.  ad  Virg.  Aen.  i.  21  ;  Festus,  s.v.;  Diomedes,
i.  p.  372,  ed.  Putsch.  ;  Dion  Cass,  xlvii.  40  ;
Tertull.  de  Sped.  7.)  We  are  ignorant  of  their
precise  form  ;  for  although  we  find  several  re-
presentations upon  ancient  medals  and  other  works
of  art,  of  gods  seated  in  cars,  and  especially  of  the
sun-chariot  of  Elagabalus  (Herodian.  v.  6  ;  see
Vaillant,  Numismata  Imp.  vol.  ii.  p.  269  ;  Ginzrot,
Die  W'dffen  U7id  Fahrwcrhe.,  &c.  tab.  xlii.  fig.  6)  ;
yet  we  have  no  means  of  deciding  which,  if  any,
of  these  are  tensae.  We  know  that  they  were
drawn  by  horses  (Plut.  Coriolan.  25,  who  calls
them  i^Tjcro-as),  and  escorted  (deducere)  by  the
chief  senators  in  robes  of  state,  who,  along  with
pueri  patrimi  [Patrimi],  laid  hold  of  the  bridles
and  traces,  or  perhaps  assisted  to  drag  the  carriage
(for  ducere  is  used  as  Avell  as  deducere,  Liv.  v.  41),
by  means  of  thongs  attached  for  the  purpose  (and
hence  the  proposed  derivation  from  tendo).  So
sacred  was  this  duty  considered,  that  Augustus,
when  labouring  under  sickness,  deemed  it  neces-
sary to  accompany  the  tensae  in  a  litter.  If  one
of  the  horses  knocked  up  or  the  driver  took  the
reins  in  his  left  hand,  it  was  necessary  to  recom-
mence the  procession,  and  for  one  of  the  attendant
boys  to  let  go  the  thong  or  to  stumble  was  profa-
nation. (Liv.  v.  41  ;  Plut.  I.  c. ;  Ascon.  /.  c. ;
Arnob.  adv.  gent.  iv.  31  ;  compared  with  the  ora-
tion de  Harusp.  resp.  1 1  ;  Tertull.  de  cor.  mil.  1 3,
and  de  Spectac.  7  ;  Suet.  Octav.  43.)

The  only  gods  distinctly  named  as  carried  in
tensae  are  Jupiter  and  Minerva  (Suet.  Vespas.  5  ;
Dion  Cass,  xlvii.  40,  1.  8,  Ixvi.  1),  to  which
number  Mars  is  usually  added  on  the  autho-
rity of  Dion  Cassius  (Ixxviii.  8),  but,  in  the  pas-
sage referred  to,  he  merely  states,  that  at  the  Cir-
censian games  celebrated  A.  D.  216,  the  statue  of
Mars,  which  was  in  the  procession  (Tro/iTrerov),  fell
down,  and  it  is  very  remarkable  that  Dionysius
(vii.  72),  in  his  minute  description  of  the  Pompa
Circensis,  takes  no  notice  whatever  of  the  Tensae,
but  represents  the  statues  of  the  gods  as  carried  on
men's  shoulders,  i,  e.  on  fercula.  That  a  consider-
able number  of  deities  however  received  this
honour  seems  probable  from  the  expression  of
Cicero,  in  his  solemn  appeal  at  the  close  of  the
last  Verrine  oration,  "  omnesque  dii,  qui  vehiculis
tensarum  solemnes  coetus  ludorum  initis  ; "  though
we  cannot  determine  who  these  gods  were.  We
frequently  hear  indeed  of  the  chariot  of  Juno
{Y'w^.Georg.  iii.  531),  of  Cybele  {Aen.  vi.  784),
and  many  others,  but  as  these  are  not  mentioned
in  connexion  with  the  Pompa  Circensis,  there  is
no  evidence  that  they  were  tensae.  Among  the
impious  flatteries  heaped  on  Caesar,  it  was  decreed
that  his  ivorj'  statue  should  accompany  the  images


THEORI.


1125


of  the  gods  to  the  circus  in  a  complete  chariot
{appLa  SAoj/,  that  is,  a  te?isa,  in  opposition  to  a  mere
fermlum),  and  that  this  chariot  should  stand  in  the
Capitol  immediately  opposite  to  that  of  Jupiter.
(Dion  Cass,  xliii.  15,  21,  45,  xliv.  6.)

Similar  homage  was  paid  upon  high  festivals  to
the  images  of  their  gods  by  other  ancient  nations.
Thus,  in  the  curious  ceremonies  performed  at
Papremis  connected  with  the  worship  of  the
Egyptian  deity,  whom  Herodotus  (ii.  63)  imagined
to  he  identical  with  Ares,  the  statue,  enshrined  in
a  chapel  made  of  gilded  wood,  was  dragged  in  a
four-wheeled  car  by  a  body  of  priests.  So  also,
in  the  account  given  by  Athenaeus  (v.  c.  27,  &c.),
after  Callixenes  of  Rhodes,  of  the  gorgeous  pageant
at  Alexandria,  during  the  reign  of  Ptolemy  Phila-
delphus,  we  read  of  a  car  of  Bacchus  of  prodigious
size,  most  costly  materials,  and  most  elaborate
workmanship,  which  was  dragged  by  180  men,
and  to  such  customs  we  may  find  a  parallel  in
modem  times  in  the  usages  which  prevail  at  the
festival  of  S.  Agatha  at  Catania,  and  S.  Rosolia  at
Palermo.

(SchefFer  de  Be  vehiculari,  c.  24  ;  Ginzrot,  Die
W'dgen  und  Fahrwerke  der  Griechen  und  R'omer^
c.  55  ;  but  the  latter  author,  both  here  and  else-
where, allows  his  imagination  to  carry  him  farther
than  his  authorities  warrant.)  [W.  R.]

THEODOSIA'NUS  CODEX.  [Codbx  Theo-

DOSIANUS.]

THEOPHA'NIA  (d€o<pdvia\  a  festival  cele-
brated at  Delphi,  on  the  occasion  of  which  the
Delphians  filled  the  huge  silver  crater  which  had
been  presented  to  the  Delphic  god  by  Croesus.
(Herod,  i.  5\.)  Valckenaer  on  Herodotus  (I.e.)
thought  that  the  reading  was  corrupt,  and  that
&eo^hia  should  be  read,  as  this  festival  is  well
known  to  have  been  celebrated  by  the  Delphians.
(Plut.  de  his  qui  sero  a  num.  pmi.  p.  557,  f ;  Pole-
mon,  ap.  Athen.  ix.  p.  372.)  Bui  both  festivals
are  mentioned  together  by  Pollux  (i.  34),  and
Philostratus  {Vit  Apollon.  iv.  31).  The  Theo-
phania  were  intended  as  a  celebration  of  the  re-
turn of  Apollo  to  Delphi  from  which  he  was  be-
lieved to  be  absent  during  the  winter  months.  An
agon  called  theoxenia  was  also  celebrated  at  Pellene
in  Achaia  in  honour  of  Hermes  and  Apollo.  (Schol.
ad  Pind.  Ol.  vii.  156,  ix.  146.)  But  no  particulars
of  any  of  these  festivals  are  known.  [L.  S.]

THEO'RI  ((S^ewpot),  were  persons  sent  on  spe-
cial missions  {beu>piai)  to  perform  some  religious
duty,  as  to  consult  an  oracle,  or  to  offer  a  sacrifice,
on  behalf  of  the  state.  It  is  thus  explained  by  the
grammarians :  ^eoTrpoiroi,  ^  ot  Stewfx^voi,  ^  ol  <ppov-
Ti^oi/Tcs  irepl  TO  i^ela'  ol  els  ^vaiai^  ire/xTrd/xevoi  koI
eopras  /cot  Travnyvpeis  Kol  xPW^'hp'^o-  (Harpocr.
Suidas  and  Hesych.  s.  v.  &e(opoi :  compare  Pollux,
ii.  55  ;  Sophocl.  Oedip.  Tyr,  114.)  There  were  in
some  of  the  Dorian  states,  as  the  Aeginetans,  Troe-
zenians,  Messenians,  and  Mantineans,  official  priests
called  i&ewpot,  whose  duty  it  was  to  consult  oracles,
interpret  the  responses,  &c.,  as  among  the  Spartans
there  were  men  called  Pythii,  chosen  by  the  kings
to  consult  the  oracle  at  Delphi.  (Schbmann,  Ant.
Jur.  pvhl.  Gr.  pp.  1 30,  395.)  At  Athens  there  were
no  official  persons  called  ^ewpol^  but  the  name  was
given  to  those  citizens  who  were  appointed  from
time  to  time  to  conduct  religious  embassies  to
various  places  ;  of  which  the  most  important
were  those  that  were  sent  to  the  Olympian,
Pythian,  Nemean,  and  Isthmian  games,  those
4c  3


1126


THEORICA.


that  went  to  consult  the  God  at  Delphi,  and  those
that  led  the  solemn  procession  to  Delos,  where  the
Athenians  established  a  quadriennial  festival,  in
revival  of  the  ancient  Ionian  one,  of  which  Homer
speaks,  (Thucyd.  iii.  104).  The  expense  of  these
embassies  Avas  defrayed  partly  by  the  state  and
partly  by  wealthy  citizens,  to  whom  the  manage-
ment of  them  was  entrusted,  called  apx^8^<»poi,
chiefs  of  the  embassy.  This  was  a  sort  of
AeiToupyia,  and  frequently  a  very  costly  one  ;  as
the  chief  conductor  represented  the  state,  and  was
expected  to  appear  with  a  suitable  degree  of
splendour  ;  for  instance,  to  wear  a  golden  crown,
to  drive  into  the  city  with  a  handsome  chariot,
retinue,  &c.  Nicias,  who  was  very  rich,  is  re-
ported to  have  incurred  great  expenses  on  his
embassy  to  Delos,  beyond  what  was  required  of
him  ;  and  Alcibiades  astonished  all  the  spectators
at  Olympia  by  the  magnificence  of  his  horses,
chariots,  &c.,  and  the  profuseness  of  his  expendi-
ture. {Bockh,  Publ.  Eco?i.  of  Athens,  p.  214,  &c.
2d  ed. ;  Thirl  wall,  Hist,  of  Greece,  vol.  iii.  pp.  217,
330.)     [Delia.]

The  Salaminian,  or  Delian,  ship  was  also  called
^eufjls  vavs,  and  was  principally  used  for  convey-
ing embassies  to  Delos,  though,  like  the  Paralus,
it  was  employed  on  other  expeditions  besides.
(Suidas,  I.  c. ;  Backh,  Id.  p.  240.)  [C.  R.  K.]

THEO'RIA  i^ewpia).     [Theori.]

THEO'RICA  (SfeupiKa).  Under  this  name  at
Athens  were  comprised  the  monies  expended  on
festivals,  sacrifices,  and  public  entertainments  of
various  kinds  ;  and  also  monies  distributed  among
the  people  in  the  shape  of  largesses  from  the  state.

There  were,  according  to  Xenophon,  more  festi-
vals at  Athens  than  in  all  the  rest  of  Greece.  (De
Rep.  Ath.  iii.  8.)  Besides  those  which  were  open
to  the  whole  body  of  the  people,  there  were  many
confined  to  the  members  of  each  tribe,  deme,  and
house.  These  last  were  provided  for  out  of  the
private  funds  of  the  community  who  celebrated
them.  At  the  most  important  of  the  public  festi-
vals, such  as  the  Dionysia,  Panathenaea,  Eleusinia,
Thargelia,  and  some  others,  there  were  not  only
sacrifices,  but  processions,  theatrical  exhibitions,
gymnastic  contests,  and  games,  celebrated  with
great  splendour  and  at  a  great  expense.  A  portion
of  the  expense  was  defrayed  by  the  individuals,
upon  whom  the  burden  of  Xeirovpyia  devolved  ;
but  a  considerable,  and  perhaps  the  larger,  part
was  defrayed  by  the  public  treasury.  Demos-
thenes complains,  that  more  money  was  spent  on  a
single  Panathenaic  or  Dionysiac  festival  than  on
any  military  expedition.  (Philip,  i.  50.)  The  reli-
gious embassies  to  Delos  and  other  places,  and
especially  those  to  the  Olympian,  Nemean,  Isth-
mian, and  Pythian  games,  drew  largely  upon  the
public  exchequer,  though  a  part  of  the  cost  fell
upon  the  wealthier  citizens  who  conducted  them.
(Schomann,  Attt.  Jur.  puhl.  Gr.  p.  305.)

The  largesses  distributed  among  the  people  had
their  origin  at  an  early  period,  and  in  a  measure
apparently  harmless,  though  from  a  small  begin-
ning they  afterwards  rose  to  a  height  most  in-
jurious to  the  commonwealth.  The  Attic  drama
used  to  be  performed  in  a  wooden  theatre,  and  the
entrance  was  free  to  all  citizens  who  chose  to  go.
It  was  found,  however,  that  the  crushing  to  get  in
led  to  much  confusion  and  even  danger.  On  one
occasion,  about  B.  c,  500,  the  scaifolding  which
supported  the  roof  fell  in,  and  caused  great  alarm.


THEORICA.

It  was  then  determined  that  the  entrance  should
no  longer  be  gratuitous.  The  fee  for  a  place  was
fixed  at  two  obols,  which  was  paid  to  the  lessee  of
the  theatre,  (called  b^arpwvris,  St^aTpoiruX-qs,  or
apxireKTwv,)  who  undertook  to  keep  it  in  repair,
and  constantly  ready  for  use,  on  condition  of  being
allowed  to  receive  the  profits.  This  payment  con-
tinued to  be  exacted  after  the  stone  theatre  was
built.  Pericles,  to  relieve  the  poorer  classes,
passed  a  law  which  enabled  them  to  receive  the
price  of  admission  from  the  state  ;  after  which  all
those  citizens  who  were  too  poor  to  pay  for  their
places  applied  for  the  money  in  the  public  assembly,
which  was  then  frequently  held  in  the  theatre.
(Schomann, /(/.  p.  219.)  In  process  of  time  this
donation  was  extended  to  other  entertainments  be-
sides theatrical  ones  ;  the  sum  of  two  oboli  being
given  to  each  citizen  who  attended  ;  if  the  festival
lasted  two  days,  four  oboli ;  and  if  three,  six  oboli  ;
but  not  beyond.  Hence  all  theoric  largesses  re-
ceived the  name  of  SiwSeXia.  The  sums  thus
given  varied  at  different  times,  and  of  course  de-
pended on  the  state  of  the  public  exchequer.
These  distributions  of  money,  like  those  of  grain
and  flour,  were  called  hiavoixai,  or  ZiaZocr^is.
They  were  often  made  at  the  Dionysia,  when  the
allies  were  present,  and  saw  the  surplus  of  their
tribute  distributed  from  the  orchestra.  The  appe-
tite of  the  people  for  largesses  grew  by  encourage-
ment, stimulated  from  time  to  time  by  designing
demagogues ;  and  in  the  time  of  Demosthenes
they  seem  not  to  have  been  confined  to  the  poorer
classes.  {Philip,  iv,  141.)  Bockh  calculates  that
from  25  to  30  talents  were  spent  upon  them  annu-
ally.    {Publ.  Econ.  of  Athens,  p,  224,  2d  ed.)

So  large  an  expenditure  of  the  public  funds
upon  shows  and  amusements  absorbed  the  re-
sources, which  were  demanded  for  services  of  a
more  important  nature.  By  the  ancient  law  the  j
whole  surplus  of  the  annual  revenue  which  re-
mained after  the  expense  of  the  civil  administra-
tion (ra  Trepioura  xprj^aara  ttjs  SioiKTjcrecos)  was  to
be  carried  to  the  military  fund,  and  applied  to  the
defence  of  the  commonwealth.  Since  the  time  of
Pericles  various  demagogues  had  sprung  up,  who
induced  the  people  to  divert  all  that  could  be
spared  from  the  other  branches  of  civil  expendi-
ture into  the  Theoric  fund,  which  at  length  swal-
lowed up  the  whole  surplus,  and  the  supplies
needed  for  the  purpose  of  war  or  defence  were
left  to  depend  upon  the  extraordinary  contribu-
tions, or  property-tax  (elcrcjiopai).  An  attempt  was
made  by  the  demagogue  Eubulus,  of  whom  Theo-
pompus  says,  that  ras  TrpoaSSovs  Karap-iaQocpopSiv
StereAet  (Athen.  iv.  p.  166),  to  perpetuate  this
system.  He  passed  a  law,  which  made  it  a  capital
offence  to  propose  that  the  Theoric  fund  should  be
applied  to  military  service.  In  B.  c  353  Apollo-
dnrus  carried  a  decree  empowering  the  people  to
determine  whether  the  surplus  revenue  might  be
applied  to  the  purpose  of  war  ;  for  which  he  was  in-
dicted by  a  ypacpi)  irapai/SfKau,  convicted  and  fined  ;
and  the  decree  was  annulled,  as  a  matter  of  course.
(Demosth.  c,  Neaer.  1346—1348.)  The  law  of
Eubulus  was  a  source  of  great  embarrassment  to
Demosthenes,  in  the  prosecutions  of  his  schemes
for  the  national  defence  ;  and  he  seems  at  last,  but
not  before  b.  c.  339,  to  have  succeeded  in  repeal-
ing it.  (Harpocr.  and  Suidas,  s.  v.  QewpiKo.  and  :
Ev€ov\o5:  Bockh.  Jd.  i.  pp.  219—223;  Scho-
mann, Id.  p.  307.)


THESAURUS.

In  the  earlier  times  there  was  no  person,  or
board  of  persons,  expressly  appointed  to  manage
the  Theoric  fund.  The  money  thus  appropriated
was  disbursed  by  the  Hellenotamiae.  After  the
anarchy,  the  largess  system  having  been  restored
by  Agyrrhius,  a  board  of  managers  was  appointed,
who  are  called  apxh  cTri  r^  ^€wpiK(f,  ol  iirl  rb
^ecopiKhi/  rerayfihoi  or  Kex^iporovr]iJ.€voi^  ^ewpiKi]
apxT),  &c.  They  were  elected  by  show  of  hands
at  the  period  of  the  great  Dionysia,  one  from  each
tribe.  In  the  time  of  Eubulus  many  other  branches
of  the  administration  were  placed  under  the  control
of  this  board  ;  as  the  management  of  the  civil  ex-
penditure, the  office  of  the  Apodectae,  the  building
of  docks,  arsenals,  streets,  &c.  This  was  dictated
by  an  anxiety  on  the  part  of  the  people  that  no
part  of  the  revenue  should  be  improperly  diverted
from  the  Theoric  fund,  which  they  thought  would
be  prevented  by  increasing  the  powers  of  its  mana-
gers. But  these  extraordinary  powers  appear  not
to  have  been  of  long  continuance.  (Aeschin.  c.
Ctesiph.  57,  ed.  Steph.  ;  Bockh,  p.  170,  &c.  ;  Scho-
mann.  Id.  320  ;  Wachsmuth,  Helkn.  Alt.  vol.  ii.
pt.  i.  pp.  124—127,  1st  ed.)  [C.  R.  K.]

THEOXE'NIA.     [Theophania.]
THERAPON  (^epdTTwi/).     [Helotes.]
THERMAE.     [Balneae,  p.  193,  b.]
THERMOPO'LIUM.    [Calida;  Caupona.]
THESAURUS  {br}(Tavp6s\  a  treasure-house.
That  buildings  of  this  description  were  required,
especially  by  kings  and  states,  in  the  earliest  period
of  civilization,  is  self-evident  ;  and  tradition  points
to  subterranean  buildings  in  Greece,  of  unknown
antiquity  and  of  peculiar  formation,  as  having  been
erected  during  the  heroic  period,  for  the  purpose  of
preserving  precious  metals,  arms,  and  other  pro-


THESMOPHORIA.


1127


PLAN.

A,  entrance :  B,  principal  chamber :  C,  small  side
chamber.


perty  (Kfifx-fjXia).  Such  are  the  treasury  of  Mi-
nyas,  at  Orchomenus,  described  by  Pausanias  (ix.
38),  and  of  which  some  remains  still  exist  (Dod-
well,  vol.  i.  p.  227),  and  those  of  Atreus  and  his
sons  at  Mycenae  (Pans.  ii.  16),  the  chief  one  of
which,  the  so-called  Treasury  of  Atreus,  still  exists
almost  in  a  perfect  state.  The  preceding  woodcut
shows  a  ground-plan  of  the  building,  and  a  section
of  the  principal  chamber,  which  is  about  48  feet  in
diameter,  and  50  high,  and  is  vaulted  over  in  the
manner  described  under  Arcus,  p.  128,  a.  The
remains  of  similar  structures  have  been  found  at
various  places  in  Greece  and  Italy.

It  is,  however,  very  questionable  whether  these
edifices  were  treasuries  at  all :  some  of  the  best
archaeologists  maintain  that  they  were  tombs.
The  question  cannot  be  entered  into  here :  a  full
discussion  of  it,  with  a  description  of  the  buildings
themselves,  will  be  found  in  the  works  now  quoted.
(MuWeT,  ArchUoL  d.  Kunst,  §§  48,  291,  Welcker's
edition  ;  Wei cker's  review  of  MUller's^ rc/iao%2e,
in  the  Rhein.  Mus.  for  1834,  vol.  ii.  pp.  469,  foil.  ;
Col.  Mure,  Ueber  die  Koniglichen  Grabm'dler  des
heroischen  Zeitalters,  in  the  Rhein.  Mus.  for  1838,
vol.  vi.  pp.  240,  foil.  ;  we  are  not  aware  whether
this  Essay  has  been  published  in  English  ;  Abeken,
Mittelitaiien,  pp.  234,  foil.)

In  the  historical  times,  the  public  treasury  was
either  in  a  building  attached  to  the  agora^  or  in
the  opisthodomus  of  some  temple.  (Hirt,  Lehre  d.
Geb'dude,  pp.  189,  190.)

Respecting  the  public  treasury  at  Rome,  see
Aerarium.  [P.  S.]

THESEIA  (i^rjo-em),  a  festival  celebrated  by  the
Athenians  in  honour  of  their  national  hero  Theseus
(Aristoph.  Flut.  G22,  &c.  with  the  Schol.  Thes-
moph.  841  ;  Suidas,  s.  v.  &r}aeiois),  whom  they
believed  to  have  been  the  author  of  their  demo-
cratical  form  of  government.  In  consequence  of
this  belief  donations  of  bread  and  meat  were  given
to  the  poor  people  at  the  Theseia,  which  thus  was
for  them  a  feast  at  which  they  felt  no  want  and
might  fancy  themselves  equal  to  the  wealthiest
citizens.  We  learn  from  Gellius  (xv.  20.  §  3)
that  a  contest  also  was  held  on  this  occasion,  but
we  are  not  inforaied  in  what  it  consisted.  The
day  on  which  this  festival  was  held  was  the  eighth
of  every  month  (oySdai),  but  more  especially  the
eighth  of  Pyanepsion,  because  it  was  believed  that
Theseus  returned  from  Crete  on  that  day.  (Schol.
ad  Aristoph.  I.  c;  Plut.  Thes.  36.)  Hence  the  fes-
tival was  sometimes  called  6y565iov.  (Hesych.  s.v.)
From  the  passages  above  referred  to,  compared
with  Diodorus  (v.  52),  it  appears  highly  probable
that  the  festival  of  the  Theseia  was  not  instituted
till  B.  c.  469,  when  Cimon  brought  the  remains  of
Theseus  from  Scyros  to  Athens.

(Meursius,  Graec.  Fer.  s.  v.  ©Tjcrero,  Tlieseus,  p.
133;  Corsini,  Fast.  Att.  ii.  p.  330  ;  Ideler,  Histor.
UntersuchunQen  iiber  die  Astronom.  Beobachtuny.  der
Alten,  p.  383,  &c.)  [L.  S.]

THESMOPHO'RI  A  (&eiTiJiO(p6pia),  a  great  fes-
tival and  mysteries  celebrated  in  honour  of  Demeter
in  various  parts  of  Greece,  and  only  by  married
women,  though  some  ceremonies  also  were  per-
formed by  maidens.  The  Attic  Thesmophoria
were  held  in  the  month  of  Pyanepsion  and  began
on  the  eleventh.  Its  introduction  is  ascribed  by
Demosthenes,  Diodorus  Siculus,  and  Plutarch  (ap,
Theodorct.  Therap.  1 )  to  Orpheus,  while  Herodotus
(li.  171)  states  that  it  was  introduced  into  Greece
4c  4


1128


THESMOPHORIA.


from  Egypt  by  the  daughters  of  Danaus,  who  made
the  Pelasgian  women  of  Peloponnesus  acquainted
Avith  the  mysteries,  that  after  the  Dorian  conquest
they  fell  into  disuse,  and  were  only  preserved  by
the  Arcadians,  who  remained  undisturbed  in  their
ancient  seats.  Thus  much  appears  certain  from
the  name  of  the  festival  itself,  that  it  was  intended
to  commemorate  the  introduction  of  the  laws  and
regulations  of  civilized  life,  which  was  universally
ascribed  to  Demeter.  (Diodor.  v.  5.)  Respecting
the  duration  of  the  Attic  Thesmophoria,  various
opinions  are  entertained  both  by  ancient  and  mo-
dern writers.  According  to  Hesychius  (s.  v.  TpiTT]
®€(rfj.o(popiceu)  it  lasted  four  days  :  it  has  been  in-
ferred from  Aristophanes  {Thesmoph.  80)  that  it
lasted  for  five  days.  Such  discrepancies  have  un-
doubtedly arisen  from  the  circumstance  that  the
women  spent  several  days  before  the  commence-
ment of  the  real  festival  in  preparations  and  puri-
fications, during  which  they  were  especially  bound
to  abstain  from  sexual  intercourse,  and  for  this  pur-
pose they  slept  and  sat  upon  particular  kinds  of
herbs  which  were  believed  to  have  a  purifying  ef-
fect. (Hesych.  s.  v.  Kvecapov :  Etymol.  M.  s.  v.
2/c(5po5ov :  Aelian.  Nat.  An.  ix.  26  ;  Schol.  ad
Theocrit.  iv.  25  ;  Dioscorid.  i.  135  ;  Plin.  H.N.
xxiv.  19;  Stephan.  Byz.  s.  r.  MtATjToy.)  During
this  time  the  women  of  each  demos  appointed  two
married  women  from  among  themselves  to  con-
duct the  preliminary  solemnities  (6,px^iv  ds  to,
Qea-fiocpSpia,  Isaeus,  de  Ciron.  hered.  p.  208,  ed.
Reisk.),  and  their  husbands  who  had  received  a
dowry  amounting  to  three  talents,  had  to  pay  the
expenses  for  the  solemnity  in  the  form  of  a  liturgy.
(Isaeus,  de  Pyrrh.  hered.  p.  QQ.)  The  festival
itself,  which  according  to  the  most  probable  sup-
position, also  adopted  by  Wellauer  {de  Thesmo-
pfioriis,  p.  6),  lasted  only  for  three  days,  began  on
the  11th  of  Pyanepsion,  which  day  was  called
6.V0S0S  or  KadoBos  (Hesych.  s.  v.  "ApoSos)  from  the
circumstance  that  the  solemnities  were  opened  by
the  women  with  a  procession  from  Athens  to  Eleusis.
In  this  procession  they  carried  on  their  heads  sacred
laws  (v6(xifxoi  fii§\oi  or  ^etr^ol),  the  introduction  of
which  was  ascribed  to  Demeter  &€(TfjLO(f)6pos,  and
other  symbols  of  civilised  life.  (Schol.  ad  Theocrit.
xiv.  23.)  The  women  spent  the  night  at  Eleusis  in
celebrating  the  mysteries  of  the  goddess.  (Aen.
Tact.  Poliorc.  4.)

The  second  day,  called  vr)(rTeia  (Athen.  vii.
p.  307),  was  a  day  of  mourning,  during  which  the
women  sat  on  the  ground  around  the  statue  of
Demeter,  and  took  no  other  food  than  cakes  made
of  sesame  and  honey  (arTja-a/xovs,  Aristoph.  Thes-
moph. 535,  Pax,  820).  On  this  day  no  meetings
either  of  the  senate  or  the  people  were  held.
(Aristoph.  Thesm.  79.)  It  was  probably  in  the
afternoon  of  this  day  that  the  women  held  a  pro-
cession at  Athens,  in  which  they  walked  barefooted
behind  a  waggon,  npon  which  baskets  with  mys-
tical symbols  were  conveyed  to  the  Thesmophorion.
(Aristoph.  Thesm.  276,  &c.)  The  third  day,  called
KoWiyeveia  from  the  circumstance  that  Demeter
was  invoked  under  this  name  (Aristoph.  Thesm.
296),  was  a  day  of  merriment  and  raillery  among
the  women  themselves,  in  commemoration  of  lambe
who  was  said  to  have  made  the  goddess  smile
during  her  grief.  (Aristoph.  Thesm.  792,  Ran.  390  ;
Hesych.  s.  v.  'S,Ti]via :  Phot.  Lex.  p.  397;  Apollod.
i.  5.  §  1.)  Hesychius  mentions  a  sacrifice  called
Cfll^ici,  which  was  offered  to  the  goddess  aa  an


THOLUS.

atonement  for  any  excess  or  error  which  might
have  been  committed  during  the  sacred  days,  and
this  sacrifice  Avas  probably  offered  at  the  close  of
the  third  day.

There  are  several  other  particulars  mentioned
by  ancient  writers  as  forming  part  of  the  Thesmo-
phoria, but  we  are  not  able  to  ascertain  in  what
manner  they  were  connected  with  the  festival,  or
on  what  day  they  took  place.

Thesmophoria  were  also  celebrated  in  many  other
parts  of  Greece,  as  stated  above.  The  principal
places  where  they  are  mentioned  by  ancient  authors
are  the  following: — Sparta,  where  the  festival  lasted
for  three  days  (Hesych.  s.  v.  Tpii]jj.^pos) ;  Dryraaea
in  Phocis  (Pans.  x.  33.  §  6  ;  Steph.  Byz.  s.v.
Apvfila)  ;  Thebes  in  Boeotia  (Plut.  Pelop.  p.  280  ;
Xenoph.  Hellen.  v.  2.  §  29)  ;  Miletus  (Steph.  Byz.
s.v.  Mi\r]Tos:  Diog.  Laert.  ix.  §  43),  Syracuse
(Athen.  xiv.  p.  647),  Eretria  in  Euboea  (Plut.
Quaest.  Gr.  p.  298,  b.  &c.),  Delos  (Athen.  iii.
p.  109),  Ephesus  (Strab.  xiv.  p.  633  ;  Herod,  vi.
16),  Agrigentum  (Polyaen.  v.  1.  1),  and  other
places.  But  of  their  celebration  in  these  towns  we
know  no  more  than  a  few  isolated  particulars  which
are  mentioned  in  the  passages  referred  to.

(Meursius,  Graecia  Feriata,  s.  v.  @ecr^o(p6pia :
Wellauer,  de  Tliesmophoriis,  Wratislaviae  1820,
Bvo.  ;  Creuzer,  Symbol,  iv.  p.  440,  &c.  ;  Preller  m
Zimmermann's  Zeitschrift,  1835,  n.  98  ;  and  in
general  Wachsmuth,  HeUe?i.Alt.  ii.  p.  574,  2d  ed.
8lc.;  K.  F.  Hermann,  i7a«(/6.  der  Gottesd.  Alterth.
§  56.  n.  15,  &c.)  [L.  S.]

THESMOPHY'LACES  (^etr^uoc^i^Aa/ces).
[Hendeca.]

THESMOS  (pe(rfjL6s).     [Nomos.]

THESMO'THETAE     (^etr^oeeVai).        [Ar-

CHON.]

THESSA  (prt<T<Ta).  [Herbs,  p.  od7^  b]
THETES  (.a-TJTes).  In  earlier  times  this  name
denoted  any  freemen  who  worked  for  hire  (ot
eVe/co  Tpocprjs  Soi/AevoiTes,  Photius,  s,  v. ;  eXevdepwv
ivofxa  tia  TT^viav  iir'  apyvpiq}  5ov\ev6uTuv,  Pollux,
iii.  32).  Homer  {Od.  iv.  644,  xviii.  356)  speaks
of  ^7j7  es  re  S/xwes  re,  the  latter  properly  signify-
ing those  who  became  slaves  by  captivity.  They
are  to  be  distinguished  not  only  from  all  common
slaves,  but  also  from  those  persons  who  were  in  the
condition  of  the  Penestae  or  Helots.  (Wachsmuth,
Hell.  Alt.  vol.  i.  pt.i.  pp.235,  255,  322,  1st  ed.;
Schomann,  ^«^  Jwr.  puA.  Gr.  p.  70.)  The  persons
best  known  by  the  name  of  ^rJTis  are  the  members
of  the  fourth  or  lowest  class  at  Athens,  according
to  the  political  division  of  Solon.  They  are  spoken
of  under  Census.  [C.  R.  K.J

THIASOS  (^iWos).  [DiONVSXA,  p.4il,  a;
Erani,  p.  475,b.]
THOLIA  (SroXia).  [Umbraculum.]
THOLUS  (^6\os,  6  and  ^,  also  called  aitids)
is  a  name  which  was  given  to  any  round  building
which  terminated  at  the  top  in  a  point,  whatever
might  be  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  used.
(Hesych.  and  Suidas.  s.  v.  &6\os  :  Od.  xxii.  442,
459,  466.)  At  Athens  the  name  was  in  particular
applied  to  the  new  round  prytaneum  near  the
senate-house,  which  should  not  be  confounded  with
the  old  prytaneum  at  the  foot  of  the  acropolis.
(Pans.  i.  5.  §  1,  18.  §  13.)  It  was  therefore  the
place  in  which  the  prytanes  took  their  conmion
meals  and  offered  their  sacrifices.  It  was  adorned
with  some  small  silver  statues  (Pollux,  viii.  155  ;
Demosth.  de  Fals.  Leg,  p.  419),  and  near  it  stood


THRONUS.

the  ten  statues  of  the  Attic  iiruuvfjLoi.   [Eponymi,
Prytaneium.]

Other  Greek  cities  had  likewise  their  pxiblic
d6\oi :  thus  we  find  that  Polycletus  built  one  of
white  marble  at  Epidaurus,  the  inside  of  which
was  adorned  with  paintings  by  Pausias.  It  was
originally  surrounded  by  columns,  of  which  in  the
days  of  Pausanias  six  only  were  standing,  and
upon  these  were  inscribed  the  names  of  such  per-
sons as  had  been  cured  of  some  disease  by  Ascle-
pius,  together  with  the  name  of  the  disease  itself
and  the  manner  in  which  they  had  obtained  their
recovery.     (Pans.  ii.  17.  §  3.)  [L.  S.]

THORAX.  [LoRicA.]
THRACES.  [Gladiatores,  p.  576,  a.]
THRANFTAE  (SfpavTrai).  [NAVis,p.788,a.'I
THRONUS,  the  Greek  ^p6vos,  for  which  the
proper  Latin  terra  is  solium  ;  a  throne.  This  did
not  differ  from  a  chair  (nadeSpa)  [Cathedra  ;
Sella]  except  in  being  higher,  larger,  and  in  all
respects  more  magnificent.  (Athen.  v.  p.  192,  e.)
On  account  of  its  elevation  it  was  always  neces-
sarily accompanied  by  a  foot-stool  (subsdliwii,
viroTr6diou^  Att.  bpaviov,  Icm.  ^pr^vvs,  Horn.  //.  xiv.
240,  Od.  i.  131,  X.  31.5).  Besides  a  variety  of
ornaments,  especially  nails  or  studs  of  silver,  be-
stowed upon  the  throne  itself,  it  was  often  covered
with  beautiful  and  splendid  drapery.  (Hom.  Od.
XX.  150.)  [Tapes.]  The  accompanying  woodcut
sliows  two  gilded  thrones  with  cushions  and  dra-
pery represented  on  paintings  found  at  Resina.
{Ant.  d'Erc.  vol.  i.  tav.  29.)  These  were  intended
to  be  the  thrones  of  Mars  and  Venus,  which  is
expressed  by  the  helmet  on  the  one  and  the  dove
on  the  other.


THYRSUS.


1129


All  the  greater  gods  were  sometimes  represented
as  enthroned.  This  was  in  imitation  of  the  prac-
tice adopted  by  mortals,  and  more  particularly  in
Asia,  as  in  the  case  of  Xerxes  (Philostr.  Imag.  ii.
31),  and  of  the  Parthians.  (Claud,  in  IV.  Cons.
Ho7ior.  2]  4.)  When  the  sitting  statue  of  the  god
was  colossal,  the  throne  was  of  course  great  in  pro-
portion, and  consequently  presented  a  very  eligible
field  for  the  display  of  sculpture  and  painting.  As
early  as  the  sixth  century  before  Christ  Bathycles
of  Magnesia  thus  decorated  the  throne  of  the
Amyclaean  Apollo.  {Diet,  of  Biog.  art.  Bathycles.)
The  throne  of  the  Olympian  Zeus,  the  work  of
Pheidias,  was  constructed  and  ornamented  in  a
similar  manner.      {Diet,  of  Biog.   art.  Pheidias.


/ol.


ni.  p.


.)     As  a  chair  for  common  use  was


sometimes  made  to  hold  two  persons  (Hom.  II.  iii.
424,  Od.  xvii.  330)  and  a  throne  shared  by  two
potentates  (5f<^poi/,  Doris,  ap.  Athen.  i.  p.  17,  f.),  so
two  divinities  were  sometimes  supposed  to  occupy
the  same  throne.  (Paus.  viii.  37.  §  2.)  Besides  those
belonging  to  the  statues  of  the  gods,  the  thrones  of


monarchs  were  sometimes  deposited  in  the  temples
as  DoNARiA.    (Paus.  ii.  19.  §  4,  v.  12.  §  3.)

The  following  woodcut,  taken  from  a  fictile  vase
in  the  Museo  Borbonico  at  Naples,  represents  Juno
seated  on  a  splendid  throne,  which  is  elevated,  like
those  already  described,  on  a  basement.  She  holds
in  her  left  hand  a  sceptre,  and  in  her  right  the
apple,  which  Mercury  is  about  to  convey  to  Paris
with  a  view  to  the  celebrated  contest  for  beauty
on  Mount  Ida.  Mercury  is  distinguished  by  his
Talaria,  his  Caduceus,  and  his  petasus  thrown
behind  his  back  and  hanging  by  its  string.  On
the  right  side  of  the  throne  is  the  representation  of
a  tigress  or  panther.


The  elevated  seat  used  by  a  schoolmaster  was
called  his  throne.  (Brunck,  Anal.  ii.  417.)  [J.  Y.]
THY'MELE  {bvjx^XTi).  [Theatrum,p.  1122.]
THYRSUS  {^vpffos),  a  pole  carried  by  Diony-
sus, and  by  Satyrs,  Maenades,  and  others  who
engaged  in  Bacchic  festivities  and  rites.  (Athen.
xiv.  p.  631,  a. ;  Veil.  Pat.  ii.  82.)  [Dionysia,
p.  411,  a.]  It  was  sometimes  terminated  by  the
apple  of  the  pine,  or  fir-cone  {KcavocpSpos,  Brunck,
Anal.  i.  421),  that  tree  {irevKr])  being  dedicated
to  Dionysus  in  consequence  of  the  use  of  the  tur-
pentine which  flowed  from  it,  and  also  of  its  cones,
in  making  wine.  (Walpole,  Mem.  on  Eur.  atid  As.
Turkey,  p.  235.)  The  monuments  of  ancient  art,
however,  most  commonly  exhibit  instead  of  the
pine-apple  a  bunch  of  vine  or  ivy -leaves  (Ovid.
Met.  xi.  27,  28;  Propert.  iii.  3.  35)  with  grapes  or
berries,  arranged  into  the  form  of  a  cone.  The
following  woodcut,  taken  from  a  marble  oniament
{Mon.  Matth.  ii.  tab.  86),  shows  the  head  of  a
thyrsus  composed  of  the  leaves  and  berries  of  the
ivy,  and  surrounded  by  acanthus  leaves.  Yevy
frequently  also  a  white  fillet  was  tied  to  the  pole
just  below  the  head,  in  the  manner  represented  in
the  woodcut  on  p.  1 36,  b.,  where  each  of  the  figures
holds  a  thyrsus  in  her  hand.  See  also  the  wood-
cut to  FuNAMBULUS  and  Vannus.  (Statins,  Theb.
vii.  654.)  [Instita.]  The  fabulous  history  of
Bacchus  relates  that  he  converted  the  thyrsi  car-
ried by  himself  and  his  followers  into  dangerous
weapons,  by  concealing  an  iron  point  in  the  head
of  leaves.  (Diod.  iii.  64,  iv.  4  ;  Macrob.  Sat.  i.
19.)  Hence  his  thyrsus  is  called  "a  spear  en-
veloped in  vine-leaves"  (Ovid.  Met.  iii  667),  and


1130


TIAIlA.


its  point  was  thought  to  incite  to  madness.  (Hor.
Carm.  ii.  19.  8  ;  Ovid.  Amor.  iii.  1.  23,  iii.  15.  17,
Trist.iw  J.  43  ;  Bnmck,  Anal.  iii.  201  ;  Orph.
Hymn.  xlv.  5,  1.  8.)  [J-  Y.]

TIA'RA  or  TIA'RAS  (ridpa  or  ridpas  :  Att.
Kvp€a<rla,  Moeris,  s.  v.  ;  Herod,  v.  49,  vii.  64  ;
Aristoph.  Aves,  487),  a  hat  with  a  large  high
crown.  Thia  was  the  head-dress  which  character-
ized the  north- \-vestern  Asiatics,  and  more  especially
the  Armenians  (Xen.  Q/r.  1.  §  13;  Sueton.  Nero,
13),  the  Parthiano,  and  the  Persians  (Herod,  iii.
12  ;  Philost.  Sen.  Imag.  ii.  31  ;  Plant.  Fers.  iv.
2.  2),  as  distinguished  from  the  Greeks  and  Ro-
mans, whose  hats  fitted  the  head  or  had  only  a
low  crown.  The  Mysian  hat,  or  "  Phrygian  bon-
net," as  it  is  now  called  [Pileus,  p.  919,  b.],  was
a  kind  of  tiara  (Virg.  Aen.  vii,  247 ;  Servius,  in  foe;
Son.  T/iyesi.  iv.  ].  40,  41  ;  Philostr.  Jun.  Imag.
8),  formed  with  lappets  to  be  tied  under  the  chin
(Juv.  vi.  516  ;  Val.  Flacc.  vi.  700),  and  dyed
purple.     (Ovid.  Met.  xi.  181.)

The  king  of  Persia  wore  an  erect  tiara,  whilst
those  of  his  subjects  were  soft  and  flexible,  falling
on  one  side.  (Herod,  vii.  61  ;  Xen.  Anab.  ii.  5.
§  23,  Ci/rop.  viii.  3.  §  13  ;  Schol.  in  Aristoph.  I.  c.)
He  was  also  distinguished  by  the  splendid  colours
of  his  tiara  (Themist.  Orat.  2.  p.  36,  c,  24.  p.
306,  c),  and  by  a  Diadema,  which  encircled  it,


\


TIBIA.

and  which  was  variegated  with  white  spots  upon
a  blue  ground.  The  Persian  name  for  this  regal
head-dress  was  cidaris.  (Curt.  iii.  8  ;  KiBapis  or
Kir  apis,  Strabo,  xi.  12.  §  9  ;  Pollux,  vii.  §  58.)
The  preceding  woodcut  shows  the  cidaris  as  repre-
sented on  a  gem  in  the  Royal  Cabinet  at  Paris,
and  supposed  by  Caylus  to  be  worn  by  a  sovereign
of  Armenia.  {Recmil  d'Ant.  ii.  p.  124.)  From
a  very  remote  period  (Aeschyl.  Pers.  668)  down
to  the  present  day  the  tiara  of  the  king  of  Persia
has  been  commonly  adorned  with  gold  and  jewel-
lery. [J.  Y.]

TFBIA  {avK6s),  a  pipe,  the  commonest  musical
instrument  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  It  was
very  frequently  a  hollow  cane  perforated  with
holes  in  the  proper  places.  (Plin.  //.  N.  xvi.  36.
8.  QQ  ;  Athen.  iv.  p.  182.)  In  other  instances  it
was  made  of  some  kind  of  wood,  especially  box,
and  was  bored  with  a  gimblet  {tcrehrato  huxo,
Ovid.  Fast.  vi.  697).  The  Phoenicians  used  a  pipe,
called  gingrus,  or  avXhs  yiyypdbos,  which  did  not
exceed  a  span  in  length,  and  was  made  of  a  small
reed  or  straw.  (Athen.  iv.  p.  174,  f ;  Festus,  s.v.
Gingriator.)  The  use  of  the  same  variety  in  Egypt
is  proved  by  specimens  in  the  British  Museum,
which  were  discovered  in  an  Egyptian  tomb.

When  a  single  pipe  was  used  by  itself,  the  per-
former upon  it,  as  well  as  the  instrument,  was
called  monaulos.  (Mart.  xiv.  64  ;  ii6vav\os,
Brunck,  Anal.  i.  484.)  Thus  used,  it  was  much
in  fashion  at  Alexandria.  (Athen.  iv.  p.  174,  b.)
When  its  size  became  considerable,  and  it  was
both  strengthened  and  adorned  by  the  addition  of
metallic  or  ivory  rings  (Hor.  ^r^.  Poet.  202 — 205;
Propert.  iv.  6.  8),  it  must  have  been  comparable
to  the  flageolet,  or  even  to  the  clarionet  of  modern
times.  Among  the  varieties  of  the  single  pipe  the
most  remarkable  were  the  bag-pipe,  the  performer
on  which  was  called  utricularius  (Sueton.  Nero,
54)  or  acxKavXtis  (Onomast.)  ;  and  the  avXbs
■jr\dyios  or  irXayiavXos  (Theocrit.  xx.  29  ;  Longus,
i.  2  ;  Heliodor.  Aethiop.  v.  ;  Aelian,  H.A.vi.  19  ;
Eustath.  in  Horn.  II.  xviii.  495),  which,  as  its
name  implies,  had  a  mouth-piece  inserted  into  it
at  right  angles.  Its  form  is  shown  in  a  restored
terminal  statue  of  Pan  in  the  Townley  collection
of  the  British  Museum.  Pan  was  the  reputed
inventor  of  this  kind  of  tibia  (Bion,  iii.  7)  as  well
as  of  the  fistida  or  Syrinx.

But  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans  it  was  much
more  usual  to  play  on  two  pipes  at  the  same  time.
Hence  a  perfonnance  on  this  instrument  {tibicinium,
Gellius,  iv.  13),  even  when  executed  by  a  single
person,  was  called  mwere  or  cantare  tibiis.  (Gellius,
N.  A.  XV.  17  ;  Com.  Nepos,  xv.  2.  §  1.)  This
act  is  exhibited  in  very  numerous  works  of  ancient
art,  and  often  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  it  manifest
that  the  two  pipes  were  perfectly  distinct,  and  not
connected,  as  some  have  supposed,  by  a  common
mouth-piece.  We  see  this  more  especially  in  two
beautiful  paintings,  which  were  found  at  Resina
and  Civita  Vecchia,  and  which  represent  Marsyas
teaching  the  young  Olympus  to  play  on  the  double
pipe.  {Ant.  rf'  Ercolano,  i.  tav.  9,  iii.  tav.  19  ;
compare  Pans.  x.  30.  §  5.)  The  tibiae  pares  in
the  British  Museum,  which  were  found  with  a  lyre
in  a  tomb  at  Athens,  appear  to  be  of  cedar.  Their
length  is  about  15  inches.  Each  of  them  had  a
separate  mouth-piece  (yXwaais),  and  besides  the
hole  at  the  end  it  has  five  holes  along  the  top  and
one  underneath.     The  circimastance  of  these  three


TIBIA.

instruments  being  found  together,  is  in  accordance
with  the  fact,  that  they  are  very  commonly  men-
tioned together  by  ancient  authors  (Pind.  01.  iii.
9,  xi.  97,  98,  Isth.  iv.  30,  ed.  Bockh  ;  1  Cor.  xiv.
7)  ;  and  the  reason  of  this  was,  that  performances
on  the  double  pipe  were  very  frequently  accom-
panied by  the  music  of  the  lyre.  (Hor.  Epod.  ix.
5.)  The  mouth-pieces  of  the  two  pipes  often  passed
through  a  Capistrum.     (See  woodcut,  p.  553.)

Three  different  kinds  of  pipes  were  originally
used  to  produce  music  in  the  Dorian,  Phrygian,
and  Lydian  modes.  [MusiCA,  p.  777.]  About
the  third  century  B.  c,  Pronomus,  the  Theban,  in-
vented adjustments  (ap/xouiai)  by  which  the  same
set  of  pipes  might  be  fitted  to  all  the  modes.  (Pans.
ix.  12.  §4;  Athen.  xiv.  p.  631,  e.)  In  what
these  adjustments  consisted  we  are  not  clearly  in-
formed. Probably  stopples  or  plugs  (8A/xoi)  were
used  for  this  purpose.  It  appears  also,  that  to
produce  the  Phrygian  mode  the  pipe  had  only  two
holes  above  {bi/oris,  Virg.  Aen.  ix.  617 — 620),
and  that  it  terminated  in  a  horn  bending  upwards.
(Tibull.  ii.  1.  86  ;  Ovid.  Met.  iii.  533.)  It  thus
approached  to  the  nature  of  a  trumpet,  and  pro-
duced slow,  grave,  and  solemn  tunes.  The  Lydian
mode  was  much  quicker,  and  more  varied  and
animating.  Horace  mentions  "  Lydian  pipes  "  as
a  proper  accompaniment,  when  he  is  celebrating
the  praise  of  ancient  heroes  (Carm.  iv.  13.  30).
The  Lydians  themselves  used  this  instrument  in
leading  their  troops  to  battle  ;  and  the  pipes,  em-
ploj'ed  for  the  purpose,  are  distinguished  by  Hero-
dotus (i.  17)  as  "male  and  female,"  i.e.  probably
bass  and  treble,  corresponding  to  the  ordinary
sexual  difference  in  the  human  voice.  The  corre-
sponding Latin  terms  are  tibia  dcxtra  and  sinistra
(laeva,  Plin.  I.e.):  the  respective  instruments  are
supposed  to  have  been  so  called,  })ecause  the  for-
mer was  more  properly  held  in  the  right  hand  and
the  latter  in  the  left.  The  "  tibia  dextra  "  was
used  to  lead  or  commence  a  piece  of  music,  and
the  "  sinistra  "  followed  it  as  an  accompaniment.
Hence  the  former  was  called  incentiva,  the  latter
succentiva.  {YaxvQ.,deI{eRust.\.  2.')  The  comedies
of  Terence  having  been  accompanied  by  the  pipe,
the  following  notices  are  prefixed  to  explain  the
kind  of  music  appropriate  to  each :  tibiis  paribus,
i.  e.  with  pipes  in  the  same  mode  ;  tib.  imparibus,
pipes  in  different  modes  ;  tib.  duabus  dewtris,  two
pipes  of  low  pitch  ;  tib.  par.  dextris  et  sinistris,
pipes  in  the  same  mode  and  of  both  low  and  high
pitch.

The  use  of  the  pipe  among  the  Greeks  and  Ro-
mans was  threefold,  viz.  at  sacrifices  (tibiae  sacri-
jicae),  entertainments  {ludicrue^  Plin.  /.  c. ;  woodcut,
p.  308),  and  funerals.  (Ovid.Fas^  vi.  657.)  1.  A
sacrifice  was  commonly  attended  by  a  piper  (tibicen,
Varro,  de  Re  Rust.  iii.  17;  woodcut,  p.  1045,  b),
who  partook  of  the  food  offered,  so  that  *'  to  live
like  a  piper  "  became  a  proverb  applied  to  those
who  maintained  themselves  at  the  expense  of  other
people.  (Suidas,  s.  v.  Av\7)t^s  :  Aristoph.  Pax,
952.)  The  worshippers  of  Bacchus  (Virg.  Aen.  xi.
737),  and  still  more  of  Cybele,  "  the  Berecynthia
mater"  (Hor.  Carm.  iv.  1.  23),  used  the  Phrygian
pipe,  the  music  of  which  was  on  this  account  de-
nominated T^  MrjTpwov  aiikriiuLa.  (Paus.  x.  30.  §  5.)
2.  At  public  entertainments  the  tibicines  wore
tunics  reaching  down  to  their  feet  (Ovid.  Fast.  vi.
686),  as  is  exemplified  in  one  of  the  woodcuts  under
Tunica.     In  conformity  with  the  use  of  this  kind


TIMEMA.  I13I

of  music  at  public  festivals,  a  band  of  tibicines
preceded  a  Roman  general  when  he  triumphed.
(Florus,  ii.  2.)  3.  The  gravity  and  solemnity  of
the  Phrygian  pipes,  which  adapted  them  to  the
worship  of  Cybele,  also  caused  them  to  be  used  at
funerals.  (Statins,  T/ieb.  vi.  120  ;  compare  Joseph.
B.  J.  iii.  8.  5  ;  Matt.  ix.  23.)  The  pipe  was  the
instrument  principally  used  to  regulate  the  dance
[Saltatio],  whether  at  sacrifices,  festivals,  or
private  occasions  in  domestic  life  (Herod,  vi.  129);
by  means  of  it  also  the  rowers  kept  time  in  a
trireme.     (Max.  Tyr.  23.)

Notwithstanding  the  established  use  of  the  pipe
for  these  important  purposes,  it  was  regarded,  more
especially  by  the  Athenians,  as  an  inelegant  in-
strument, greatly  inferior  to  the  lyre.  (Plut.  Aleib.
p.  351  ;  Gellius,  A^.  J.  xv.  17  ;  Aristot.  Po/zV.  viii.
6.)  Horace,  however,  represents  Clio  as  perform-
ing according  to  circumstances  either  on  the  lyre
or  the  pipe  {Carm.  i.  12.  2  ;  compare  Philost.  Sen.
Imag.  ii.  5) ;  and  it  is  certain  that  the  pipe  was  by
no  means  confined  anciently,  as  it  is  with  us,  to
the  male  sex,  but  that  avATjTpi'Ses,  or  female  tibi-
cines, were  very  common.  (Xen.  Symp.  ii.  1 ;  Hor.
Epist.  i.  14.  25.)  The  Thebans  always  esteemed
this  instrument,  and  excelled  greatly  in  the  use  of
it.     (J;2^M.ed.  Jacobs,  ii.  633.)  [J.  Y.]

TIBI'CEN.     [Tibia.]

TIGNI  IMMITTENDI  SERVITUS.  [Ser-
VITUTES,  p.  1031,  b.]

TIME'MA  (jiixfiixa).  The  penalty  imposed  in
a  court  of  criminal  justice  at  Athens,  and  also  the
damages  awarded  in  a  civil  action,  received  the
name  of  Ti/iTj^a,  because  they  were  estimated  or
assessed  according  to. the  injury  which  the  public
or  the  individual  might  respectively  have  sustained.
The  penalty  was  either  fixed  by  the  judge,  or
merely  declared  by  him  according  to  some  estimate
made  before  the  cause  came  into  court.  In  the
first  case  the  trial  was  called  aycbu  Tipi-qrhs,  in  the
second  case  a7c«jj/  artjUTjTos,  a  distinction  which
applies  to  civil  as  well  as  to  criminal  trials.

It  is  obvious  that  on  a  criminal  charge  two
inquiries  have  to  be  made  ;  first,  whether  the  de-
fendant is  guilty,  secondly,  if  he  be  found  guilty,
what  punishment  ought  to  be  inflicted  upon  him.
It  may  be  advisable  to  leave  the  punishment  to  the
discretion  of  the  judge,  or  it  may  not.  In  some
cases  the  Athenian  law-giver  thought  that  the
judge  ought  to  have  no  discretion.  Thus,  in  cases
of  murder  and  high  treason  sentence  of  death  was
imposed  by  the  law  and  only  pronounced  by  the
judge  [Phonos  ;  Prodosia],  and  in  many  other
cases  the  punishment  was  likewise  fixed  by  the
law.  But  where  the  exact  nature  of  the  offence
could  not  be  foreseen  by  the  lawgiver,  or  it  might
so  far  vary  in  its  character  and  circumstances  as  to
admit  of  many  degrees  of  culpability,  it  'might  be
desirable  or  even  necessary  to  leave  the  punish-
ment to  the  discretion  of  the  judge.  The  law  then
directed  that  the  same  court  which  passed  sentence
on  the  culprit  should  forthwith  impose  the  penalty
which  his  crime  deserved.  Thus  in  the  vSjxos
v§pews  (Demosth.  c.  Mid.  529)  it  is  enacted  :
Stou  av  Korayv^  ri  rjAiaia,  riixaro)  -K^pl  avrov
•irapaxpviJ-a,  '6rov  h-v  S6^t]  &^ios  elvai  itaQiiv  ^
anorlaai,  where  airoTla-ai  refers  to  pecuniary  pe-
nalties, Tra6e7u  to  any  other  sort  of  penalty,  as
death,  imprisonment,  &c.  Sometimes  a  special
provision  was  made  as  to  the  means  of  enforcing
the  punishment ;  as  in  the  law  last  cited,  and  also


1132


TIMEMA.


in  the  laws  in  Demosth.  c.  Timocr.  733,  it  is  de-
clared, that  if  a  fine  be  imposed,  the  party  shall
be  imprisoned  until  it  is  paid.

In  civil  causes  the  sentence  by  which  the  Court
awarded  redress  to  the  injured  party  would  vary
according  to  the  nature  of  his  complaint.  Where
he  sought  to  recover  an  estate  in  land,  or  a  house,
or  any  specific  thing,  as  a  ring,  a  horse,  a  slave,
nothing  further  was  required,  than  to  determine  to
whom  the  estate,  the  house,  or  the  thing  demanded,
of  right  belonged.  [Heres  (Greek)  ;  Oikias
Dike.]  The  same  would  be  the  case  in  an  action
of  debt,  xpiovs  Sikt],  where  a  sum  certain  was  de-
manded ;  as  for  instance,  where  the  plaintiff  had
lent  a  sum  of  money  to  the  defendant,  and  at  the
trial  no  question  was  made  as  to  the  amount,  but
the  dispute  was,  whether  it  was  a  loan  or  a  gift,
or  whether  it  had  been  paid  or  not  So,  in  an
action  for  breach  of  contract,  if  by  the  terms  of  the
contract  a  certain  penalty  had  been  attached  to  its
violation,  it  would  be  unnecessary  to  have  an  in-
quiry of  damages,  they  being  already  liquidated  by
the  act  of  the  parties  themselves.  (Demosth.  c.
Dionys.  1291,  1296,  et  argum.)  In  these  and
many  other  similar  cases  the  trial  was  arlfirfTos.
On  the  other  hand,  wherever  the  damages  were  in
their  nature  unliquidated^  and  no  provision  had
been  made  concerning  them  either  by  the  law  or
by  the  agreement  of  the  parties,  they  were  to  be
assessed  by  the  dicasts.

The  following  was  the  course  of  proceeding  in
the  Ti/xTjrol  ay&ues.

Let  us  suppose  that  on  a  criminal  prosecution
the  defendant  had  been  found  guilty.  The  super-
intending magistrate  then  called  upon  the  pro-
secutor to  say,  what  punishment  he  proposed  to  be
inflicted  on  him,  and  what  he  had  to  say  there-
upon. The  bill  of  indictment  {eyKXTj/xa)  wiis
.always  superscribed  with  some  penalty  by  the
person  who  preferred  it.  He  was  said  iiriypd-
<p€(T0ai  Ti/j.r]iu.a,  and  the  penalty  proposed  is  called
i^iriypafi^ia.  (Demosth.  c.  Naus'un.  985.)  We
find  also  the  expressions  iiraryciv  Tifirjua,  Tifiaadai
rep  (peuyouTi,  TL/xrjtriu  iroielaOai.  When  a  charge
was  brought  not  by  a  private  individual,  but  by  a
magistrate  ex  officio,  the  law  required  him  in  like
manner  to  write  down  the  penalty  which  he
thought  the  case  merited.  (Demosth.  c.  Macari.
1076.)  The  prosecutor  was  now  called  upon  to
support  the  allegation  in  the  indictment,  and  for
that  purpose  to  mount  the  platform  and  address
the  dicasts  (ava§aiveiu  ds  riix-nixa).

Here  he  said  whatever  occurred  to  him  as  likely
to  aggravate  the  charge,  or  increase  the  dicasts
against  his  opponents.  He  was  not  bound,  how-
ever, to  abide  by  the  proposal  made  in  the  bill,  but
might,  if  he  pleased  (with  the  consent  of  the  court)
ask  for  a  lower  penalty  than  he  had  demanded
before.  This  was  often  done  at  the  request  of  the
defendant  himself,  or  of  his  friends  ;  sometimes
from  motives  of  humanity  ;  and  sometimes  from
prudential  considerations.  If  the  accused  sub-
mitted to  the  punishment  proposed  on  the  other
side,  there  was  no  further  dispute  ;  if  he  thought
it  too  severe,  he  made  a  counter  proposition,  nam-
ing the  penalty  (commonly  some  pecuniary  fine)
which  he  considered  would  satisfy  the  demands  of
justice.  He  was  then  said  auTiTifj-aaOai^  or  eat/ry
rifxwaOai.  (Demosth.  c.  Timocr.  743,  c.  Nicostr.
1252  ;  Aesch.  de  Fals.  Leg.  29,  ed.  Steph.)  He
was  allowed  to  address  the  court  in  mitigation  of


TIMEMA.

punishment ;  to  say  what  he  could  in  extenuation
of  his  offence,  or  to  appeal  to  the  mercy  of  his
judges.  This  was  frequently  done  for  him  by  his
relations  and  friends  ;  and  it  was  not  unusual  for
a  man,  Avho  thought  himself  in  peril  of  life  or  free-
dom, to  produce  his  wife  and  children  in  court,
to  excite  compassion.  (Demosth.  c.  Mid.  573,  575,
c.  Aristocr.  793,  de  Fals.  Leg.  431,  434,  c.  Onetor.
878,  c.  Aphob.  834  ;  Aristoph.  Vesp.  560.)  After
both  parties  had  been  heard,  the  dicasts  were  called
upon  to  give  their  verdict.

Here  occurs  a  question,  about  which  there  has
been  much  difference  of  opinion,  and  which  it  is
impossible  to  determine  with  any  certainty  ;  viz.
whether  the  dicasts,  in  giving  this  verdict,  were
confined  to  a  choice  between  the  estimates  of  the
opposing  parties,  or  whether  they  had  a  discretion
to  award  what  punishment  they  pleased.  With-
out entering  upon  any  controversial  discussion,  the
following  appears  to  the  writer  the  most  probable
view  of  the  matter.

The  dicasts  had  no  power  of  discussing  among
themselves,  or  agreeing  upon  the  fine  or  penalty  to
be  awarded.  Such  power  was  incompatible  with
their  mode  of  voting  by  ballot.  [Psephus.]  At
the  same  time  it  would  be  absurd  to  suppose  that
the  Athenian  court  had  no  means  of  controlling  the
parties  in  the  exercise  of  that  privilege  which  the
law  gave  them,  or  that  it  was  the  common  practice
for  the  parties  to  submit  widely  different  estimates
to  the  dicasts,  and  leave  them  no  alternative  but
the  extreme  of  severity  on  the  one  side,  and  the
extreme  of  mercy  on  the  other.  Many  passages
in  the  orators  are  opposed  to  such  a  view,  and
especially  the  words  of  Demosthenes,  c.  Timocr.
737.

The  course  of  proceeding  seems  to  have  been  as
follows.  The  prosecutor- usually  superscribed  his
indictment  with  the  highest  penalty  which  the  law
or  the  nature  of  the  case  would  admit  of.  In  the
course  of  the  trial  there  might  be  various  indica-
tions on  the  part  of  the  dicasts  of  a  disposition  to
favour  one  side  or  the  other.  They  often  exhibited
their  feelings  by  vehement  gestures,  clamour,  in-
terruption, and  questioning  of  the  parties.  It
was  not  unusual  for  the  speakers  to  make  allusions
to  the  punishment  before  the  first  verdict  had  been
given.  (Aesch.  c.  Timarch.  12,  de  Fals.  Leg.  48.
ed.  Steph.  ;  Demosth.  c.  Mid.  523,  c.  Boeot.  de
dot.  1022,  1024,  c.Spud.Wd^,  c.  Macart.  1060,
c.  Steph.  1128  ;  Platner,  Proc.  und  Klag.  vol.  i.
p.  384.)  All  this  enabled  both  parties  to  feel  the
pulse  of  the  court  before  the  time  had  arrived  for
the  second  verdict.  If  the  prosecutor  saw  that  the
dicasts  were  greatly  incensed  against  his  opponent,
and  he  himself  was  not  mercifully  inclined,  he
would  persist  in  asking  for  the  highest  penalt}'.
If  he  was  himself  disposed  to  be  merciful,  or
thought  that  the  dicasts  were,  he  would  relax  in
his  demand.  Similar  views  would  prevent  the  de-
fendant from  asking  for  too  small  a  penalty,  or
would  induce  him  to  effect  a  compromise  (if  pos-
sible) with  his  opponent.  We  may  reasonably
suppose,  that  it  was  competent  for  the  prosecutor
to  mitigate  his  demand  at  any  time  before  the
magistrate  called  on  the  dicasts  to  divide  ;  but  not
after,  without  the  consent  of  the  court.  (Demosth.
c.  Nicostrat.  1252,  1254,  c.  TheocHn.  1343,  c.
Neaer.  1347.)  If  the  parties  were  endeavouring
to  come  to  an  arrangement,  the  court  would  give
them  a  reasonable  time  for  that  pm'pose  ;  and  there


TIMEMA.
is  reason  to  believe,  that  the  petitions  addressed
by  the  defendant  or  his  friends  to  the  prosecutor
were  made  aloud  in  the  hearing  of  the  dicasts.
As  to  the  suggested  explanation  of  nixdv  rijv
fioLKpav^  see  Psephus.

We  cannot  doubt  that  in  case  of  heinous  of-
fences, or  those  which  immediately  concerned  the
state,  the  court  would  not  permit  of  a  compromise
between  the  opposing  parties  ;  but  in  ordinary
cases,  a  public  prosecutor  was  looked  on  by  the
Athenians  much  in  the  light  of  a  plaintiff,  es-
pecially where  his  object  was  to  obtain  some
penalty  given  by  the  law  to  an  informer.  When
the  parties  could  not  come  to  terms,  the  dicasts,
after  hearing  what  each  of  them  had  to  say,  di-
vided on  their  respective  propositions,  and  the  ma-
jority of  votes  determined  the  penalty.  (Platner,
Proc.undKlag.  vol.  i.  pp.  198—202  ;  Meier,  Att.
Proc.  pp.  178—182.)

The  course  thus  pursued  at  Athens  must  have
led  to  injustice  occasionally,  but  was,  perhaps,  the
only  course  that  could  be  adopted  with  so  large  a
number  of  judges.  Aristotle  tells  us,  that  Hippo-
damus  of  Miletus  (who,  no  doubt,  perceived  the
evils  of  this  system)  proposed  that  the  verdict
should  not  be  "given  by  ballot  (Sto  y^-ncfyocpopias),
but  that  each  judge  should  bring  in  a  tablet  with
a  special  statement  of  his  opinion  ;  upon  which
proposal  Aristotle  remarks,  that  its  effect  would  be
to  make  each  judge  a  SiaiT7}T-fis  :  that  it  was  an
object  with  most  of  the  ancient  lawgivers,  that  the
judges  should  not  confer  with  each  other  {koivo-
Koywvrai)^  and  then  he  comments  on  the  confusion
that  would  arise,  if  the  judge  were  allowed  to
propose  a  penalty  different  from  that  submitted
to  him  by  the  parties.  (Arist.  Polit.  ii.  5.  §§  3,
8,  9.)

As  a  general  rule,  only  one  penalty  could  be  im-
posed by  the  court,  though  the  law  sometimes  gave
more  than  one.  (Demosth.  c.  Lept.  504,  c.  Neaer.
1363.)  Sometimes  the  law  expressly  empowered
the  jury  to  impose  an  additional  penalty  (Trpoari-
^Tj/xa)  besides  the  ordinary  one.  Here  the  pro-
position emanated  from  the  jury  themselves,  any
one  of  whom  might  move  that  the  punishment  al-
lowed by  the  law  should  be  awarded.  He  was
said  irpoffTifi^adai,  and  the  whole  dicasts,  if  (upon
a  division)  they  adopted  his  proposal,  were  said
irpo(TTifiS,u.  (Demosth.  c.  Timocr.  733  ;  Meier,
Att.  Proc.  pp.  183,  725.)  We  may  observe,  that
the  preposition  irphs  in  the  verb  Trpoamij.av  does
not  always  imply  that  a  second  jtenalty  is  imposed,
but  is  sometimes  used  Avith  reference  to  other  mat-
ters, as  in  Demosth.  c.  Aristoa.  790.

In  private  actions  the  course  of  proceeding  with
respect  to  the  assessment  of  damages  was  much  the
same  as  described  above.  In  some  cases,  where
the  plaintiff's  demand  was  made  up  of  several
charges,  or  arose  out  of  various  matters,  he  would
give  in  his  bill  of  plaint  a  detailed  account,  specify-
ing the  items,  &c.,  instead  of  including  them  in
one  gross  estimate.  This  seems  to  have  been  con-
sidered the  fairer  method,  and  may  be  compared
to  our  bid  of  particulars,  which  the  plaintiff  de-
livers to  the  defendant,  (Demosth.  c.  Aphob.  853.)
The  liability  of  the  plaintiff  to  the  ^irajgeA-ia,  which
was  calculated  upon  the  sum  demanded,  operated
as  a  check  upon  exorbitant  demands,  in  addition
to  that  which  we  have  already  noticed.

The  Trpo(TTi/xT](Tis  rarely  occurred  in  private  ac-
tions, except  in  those  where  the  wrongful  act  com-


TINTINNABULUM.


133


plained  of  had  the  character  of  a  public  offence,  as
in  the  SIkt]  \pev5ofj.apTvpiu>v.     [Martyria.]

As  to  the  amount  of  revenue  derived  by  the
Athenians  from  public  fines,  see  Bockh,  Publ.
Econ.  o/Atliens,  p.  375,  &c.  2ded.

As  to  Ti^irjfxa  in  the  sense  of  the  rateable  value
of  property  with  reference  to  the  Athenian  pro-
perty tax,  see  Eisphora.  [C.  R.  K.]

TIMOCRATIA.     [OLiGARrjHiA.J

TINTINNA'BULUM  (/cciJSwz/),  a  bell.  Bells
were  used  for  a  great  variety  of  purposes  among  the
Greeks  and  Romans,  which  it  is  unnecessary  to
particularize  here.  One  use,  however,  of  them,
for  the  purpose  of  keeping  watch  and  ward  in  the
fortified  cities  of  Greece,  deserves  mention.  (Thu-
cyd.  iv.  135  ;  Aristoph.  Aves,  843,  1159  ;  Schol.
in  loc.)  A  guard  {(pv\a^)  being  stationed  in  every
tower,  a  Trep'nroKos  (see  p.  463,  a)  walked  to  and
fro  on  the  portion  of  the  wall  between  two  towers.
It  was  his  duty  to  carry  the  bell,  which  he  received
from  the  guard  at  one  tower,  to  deliver  it  to  the
guard  at  the  next  tower,  and  then  to  return,  so  that
the  bell  by  passing  from  hand  to  hand  made  the
circuit  of  tlie  city.  By  this  arrangement  it  was
discovered  if  any  guard  was  absent  irom  his  post,
or  did  not  answer  to  the  bell  in  consequence  of
being  asleep.  Hence  to  prove  or  try  a  person  was
called  /cwSajvi^eti/ (Aelian,  H.  A.  xvi.  25)  ;  to  per-
form the  office  of  patrole  was  Kcadojuo^ope^v.

The  forms  of  bells  were  various  in  proportion  to
the  multiplicity  of  their  applications.  In  the  Mu-
seum at  Naples  are  some  of  the  form  which  we
call  bell-shaped  ;  others  are  more  like  a  Chinese


gong.  The  bell,  fig.  1  in  the  annexed  woodcut,  is
a  simple  disk  of  bell-metal  ;  it  is  represented  in  a
painting  as  hanging  from  the  branch  of  a  tree.
(Bartoli,  Sep.  Atit.  13.)  Figure  2  represents  a  bell
of  the  same  form,  but  with  a  circular  hole  in  the
centre,  and  a  clapper  attached  to  it  by  a  chain.
This  is  in  the  Museum  at  Naples,  as  well  as  the
bell,  fig.  3,  which  in  form  is  exactly  like  those  still
commonly  used  in  Italy  to  be  attached  to  the  necks
of  sheep,  goats,  and  oxen.     Fig.  4  is  represented


1134


TITHENIDIA.


on  one  of  Sir  W.  Hamilton's  vases  (i.  43)  as  car-
ried by  a  man  in  the  garb  of  Pan,  and  probably
for  the  purpose  of  lustration.  (Theocrit.  ii.  36  ;
*^chol.  in  loc.)  Fig.  5  is  a  bell,  or  rather  a  collec-
tion of  twelve  bells  suspended  in  a  frame,  which  is
preserved  in  the  Antiquarium  at  Munich.  This
jingling  instrument,  as  well  as  that  represented  by
iig,  6 .  (from  Bartoli,  Luc.  Sep.  ii.  23),  may  have
been  used  at  sacrifices,  in  Bacchanalian  processions,
or  for  lustration.  Fig.  7  is  a  fragment  of  ancient
sculpture,  representing  the  manner  in  which  bells
were  attached  to  the  collars  of  chariot-horses.
(Ginzrot,  uher  W'dgen,  ii.  pi.  57.)  [J.  Y.]

TIRO  was  the  name  given  by  the  Romans  to  a
newly  enlisted  soldier,  as  opposed  to  veteranus.,  one
who  had  had  experience  in  war.  (Caesar,  Bell.  Civ.
A\.  28.)  The  mode  of  levying  troops  is  described
under  Exercitus,  pp.  49(),  49.9.  The  age  at
which  the  liability  to  military  service  commenced
was  17.

From  their  first  enrolment  the  Roman  soldiers,
when  not  actually  serving  against  an  enemy,  were
perpetually  occupied  in  military  exercises.  They
were  exercised  every  day  (Veget.  i.  1 ),  the  tirones
twice,  in  the  morning  and  afternoon,  and  the  vete-
rani  once.  The  exercises  included  not  only  the
use  of  their  weapons  and  tactics  properly  so  called,
but  also  whatever  could  tend  to  increase  their
strength  and  activity,  and  especially  carrjnng  bur-
thens and  enduring  toil.  Vegetius  (i.  9 — 27)  enu-
merares  among  the  exercises  of  the  tirones  march-
ing, running,  leaping,  swiraminj},  carrying  the
shield,  fighting  at  a  post  [PalusJ,  thrusting  with
the  sword  in  preference  to  striking,  using  their
armour,  hurling  spears  and  javelins,  shooting  ar-
rows, throwing  stones  and  leaden  bullets,  leaping
on  and  off  their  horses,  carrying  weights,  fortifying
the  camp,  and  forming  the  line  of  battle.

Vegetius  also  gives  rules  for  choosing  tirones  ac-
cording to  their  country,  their  being  rustics  or
townsmen,  their  age,  stature,  personal  appearance,
and  previous  occupation  (i.  2 — 8).  But  these  rules
refer  almost  exclusively  to  the  state  of  things  under
the  emperors,  when  the  army  was  no  longer  re-
cruited fron*  the  citizens  of  Rome,  but  from  the
inhabitants  of  the  provinces.

At  this  period,  the  tiro,  when  approved  as  fit  for
the  army,  was  branded  or  tatooed  in  the  hand  v/ith
a  mark  [stigmata  ;  puncta  signorum),  which  Lipsius
conjectures  to  have  been  the  name  of  the  emperor.

The  state  of  a  tiro  was  called  tirocinium ;  and  a
soldier  who  had  attamed  skill  in  his  profession  was
then  said  tirocinium  ponere^  or  deponere.  (Justin,
xii.  4,  ix.  1.)

(Lipsius,  de  Milit.  Roman,  in  Oper.  vol.  iii.
pp.32,  33,  184,  193—197.)

In  civil  life  the  terms  tiro  and  tirocinium  were
applied  to  the  assumption  of  the  toga  virilis,  which
was  called  tirocinium  fori  [TogaJ,  and  to  the  first
appearance  of  an  orator  at  the  rostrum,  tirocinium
eloquentiae  (Senec.  Pro'cm.l.  2.);  and  we  even  have
such  a  phrase  as  tirocinium  navis  for  the  first  voyage
of  a  ship.     (Plin.  H.  N.  xxiv.  7.  s.  26.)      [P.  S.J

TIROCI'NIUM.     [Tiro.]

TITHENI'DIA  (TiflTj^Sio),  a  festival  cele-
brated at  Sparta  by  the  nurses  who  had  the  care
of  the  male  children  of  the  citizens.  On  this  oc-
casion the  nurses  {riTdai)  carried  the  little  boys
out  of  the  city  to  the  temple  of  Artemis  surnamed
Corythallia,  which  was  situated  on  the  bank  of
the  "stream  Tiassus  in  the  district  of  Cleta.     Here


TOGA.

the  nurses  sacrificed  sucking  pigs  on  behalf  of  the
children,  and  then  had  a  feast,  probably  of  the  meat
of  the  victims,  with  which  they  ate  bread  baked
in  an  oven  (tVi/iTay  &pT0V5,  Athen.  iv.  p.  139  ;
comp.  Plut.  St/mpos.  iii.  9,  Quaest.  Gr.  vii.  p.  211,
Wvttenb.  ;  Hesych. s. v.  KopvdaWiaTpiai.)    [L. S.]

TITIES  or  fiTIENSES.     [Patricii.]

TI'TII  SODA'LES,  a  sodalitas  or  college  of
priests  at  Rome,  who  represented  the  second  tribe
of  the  Romans,  or  the  Titles,  that  is,  the  Sabines,
who  after  their  union  with  the  Ramnes  or  Latins
continued  to  perform  their  own  ancient  Sabine
sacra.  To  superintend  and  preserve  these,  T.  Tatius
is  said  to  have  instituted  the  Titii  sodales.  (Tacit.
Anna!,  i.  54.)  In  another  passage  (Hist.  ii.  95)
Tacitus  describes  this  sacerdotium  in  a  somewhat
different  manner,  inasmuch  as  he  says  that  it  was
instituted  by  Romulus  in  honour  of  king  Tatius,
who  after  his  death  was  worshipped  as  a  god.  But
this  account  seems  only  to  mean  that  Romulus  after
the  death  of  Tatius  sanctioned  the  institution  of
his  late  colleague  and  made  the  worship  of  Tatius
a  part  of  the  Sabine  sacra.  From  Varro  (de  Ling.
TmL  v.  85,  ed.  Miiller),  who  derives  the  name
Sodales  Titii  from  Titiae  aves,  which  were  observed
by  these  priests  in  certain  auguries,  it  appears  that
these  priests  also  preserved  the  ancient  Sabine  au-
guries distinct  from  those  of  the  other  tribes.  Dur-
ing the  time  of  the  republic  the  Titii  sodales  are
no  longer  mentioned,  as  the  worships  of  the  three
tribes  became  gradually  united  into  one  common
religion.  (Am\>VQ?>c\ Studien  u.  Andeut.  p.  1 92,  &c.)
Under  the  empire  we  again  meet  with  a  college  of
priests  bearing  the  name  of  Sodales  Titii  or  Titienses,
or  Sacerdotes  Titiales  Flaviales  ;  but  they  had  no-
thing to  do  with  the  sacra  of  the  ancient  tribe  of
the  Titles,  but  were  priests  instituted  to  conduct
the  worship  of  an  emperor,  like  the  Augustales.
(Gruter,  Lnscript.  xix.  4,  ccciv.  9,  cccxcvi.  1  ;  In-
script.  ap.  Murat.  299.  5:  comp.  Lucan.  Phars.  i.
602.)     [Augustales.]  [L.  S.]

TOCOS  (rdKos).     [Fenus.]

TOCULLIONES.     [Fenus.]

TOGA  (rr]§epuos),  a  gown,  the  name  of  the
principal  outer  garment  worn  by  the  Romans,  is
derived  by  Varro  from  tegere,  because  it  covered
the  whole  body  (v.  144,  ed.  Miiller).  Gellius
(vii.  12)  states  that  at  first  it  was  worn  alone,
without  the  tunic.  [Tunzca.]  Whatever  may
have  been  the  first  origin  of  this  dress,  which  some
refer  to  the  Lydians,  it  seems  to  have  been  re-
ceived by  the  Romans  from  the  Etruscans,  for  it  is
seen  on  Etruscan  works  of  art  as  the  only  covering
of  the  body,  and  the  toga  praetexta  is  expressly
said  to  have  been  derived  from  the  Etruscans.
(Liv.  i.  8  ;  Plin.  //.  A^.  viii.  48.  s.  74  ;  MuUer,
Eti-usker,  vol.  i.  p.  262.)

The  toga  was  the  peculiar  distinction  of  the  Ro-
mans, who  were  thence  called  togati  or  gens  togata.
(Virg.  Aen.  i.  282  ;  Martial,  xiv.  124.)  It  was
originally  worn  only  in  Rome  itself,  and  the  use  of
it  was  forbidden  alike  to  exiles  and  to  foreigners.
{Flm.Epist.  iv.  11  ;  Suet.  CYawrf,  15.)  Gradually,
however,  it  went  out  of  common  use,  and  was  sup-
planted by  the  Pallium  and  lacerna,  or  else  it  was
worn  in  public  under  the  lacerna.  (Suet.  Aug.  40.)
[Lacerna.]  But  it  was  still  used  by  the  upper
classes,  whe  regarded  it  as  an  honourable  distinc-
tion (Cic.  I*kilip.  ii.  30),  in  the  courts  of  justice,
by  clients  when  they  received  the  Sportula
(Martial,  xiv.  125),  and  in  the  theatre  or  at  the


TOGA.

games,  at  least  when  the  emperor  was  present.
(Suet.  Claud.  6  ;  Lamprid.  Commod.  16.)  Under
Alexander  Severus  guests  at  the  emperor's  table
were  expected  to  appear  in  the  toga.  (Lamprid.
Sever.  1.)

The  form  of  the  toga,  and  the  manner  of  wear-
ing it,  are  matters  which  are  much  disputed,  and
about  which  indeed  it  seems  almost  impossible,
with  our  present  information,  to  arrive  at  certainty.

The  form  was,  undoubtedly,  in  some  sense  round
(Quintil.  xi.  3.  §  137  ;  Isid.  Orig.  xix.  24),  semi-
circular according  to  Dionysius  (iii,  61),  who  calls
it  irepi§6\aiou  tijxikvkXiov.  It  seems,  however,
impossible,  from  the  way  in  which  it  was  worn,
that  it  could  have  been  always  a  semicircle.  Such
may  perhaps  have  been  its  form  as  worn  in  the
most  ancient  times,  when  it  had  no  great  fulness  ;
but  to  account  for  the  numerous  folds  in  which  it
was  afterwards  worn,  Ave  must  suppose  it  to  have
had  a  greater  breadth  in  proportion  to  its  length,
that  is,  to  have  been  a  smaller  segment  than  a
semicircle.  Probably  the  size  of  the  segment  which
the  toga  formed  (on  Avhich  its  fulness  depended)
was  determined  by  the  fashion  of  the  time  or  the
taste  of  the  wearer.  This  appears  to  be  the  trae
explanation  of  Quintilian's  words  (xi.  3.  §  139),
"  Ipsam  togam  rotundam,  et  apte  caesam  velim,"
which  could  have  no  meaning  if  nothing  more  were
required  than  to  give  the  garment  the  very  simple
form  of  a  simicircle.  The  only  other  point  to  be
noticed  respecting  the  form  of  the  toga,  is  the
question  whether,  Avhen  it  came  to  be  worn  in
mony  complicated  folds,  the  art  of  the  tailor  may
not  have  been  employed  to  keep  these  folds  in
their  position.  This  question,  however,  belongs
more  properly  to  the  mode  of  wearing  the  toga.

On  this  subject  our  principal  information  is  de-
rived from  Quintilian  (xi.  3.  §§  137,  &c.)  and  Ter-
tullian  (de  Pallio)^  whose  statements,  however,  refer
to  the  later  and  more  complicated  mode  of  wearing
tlie  garment,  and  from  statues  in  Roman  costume.

Frequent  reference  is  made  to  the  Sinus  of  the
toga.  This  was  a  portion  of  the  garment,  which
hung  down  in  front  of  the  body,  like  a  sling  ;  it
will  be  more  fullj--  explained  presentl3\

We  must  make  a  clear  distinction  between  the
more  ancient  and  simpler  mode  of  wearing  the
toga,  and  the  full  form,  with  many  complicated
folds,  in  which  it  was  worn  at  a  later  period.

Quintilian  (xi.  3.  §  137)  says  that  the  ancients
had  no  sinus^  and  that  afterwards  the  siimses  were
very  short.  The  passage  in  Livy  (xxi.  18,  sinu  ex
toga  facto^  iterum  sum  effitso)  seems  to  refer
not  to  the  sinus,  technically  so  called,  but  a  sinus
which  Fabius  made  at  the  moment  by  gathering
up  some  part  of  his  toga.

The  ancient  mode  of  wearing  the  toga  is  shown
in  the  following  cut,  which  is  taken  from  the
Augusteum,  pi.  117  (Becker,  Gallus,  vol.  ii.  p.  83),
and  represents  a  statue  at  Dresden.

Let  the  toga,  which  in  this  case  was  probably
not  far  from  an  exact  semicircle,  be  held  behind
the  figure,  with  the  curved  edge  downwards.  First,
one  corner  is  thrown  over  the  left  shoulder  ;  then
the  other  part  of  the  garment  is  placed  on  the  right
shoulder,  thus  entu-ely  covering  the  back  and  the
right  side  up  to  the  neck.  It  is  then  passed  over
the  front  of  the  body,  leaving  very  little  of  the  chest
uncovered,  and  reaching  downwards  nearly  to  the
feet  (in  the  figure,  quite  to  one  of  them).  The
remaining  end,  or  corner,  is  then  thrown  back  over


TOQA.


11S5


the  left  shoulder,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  cover  the
greater  part  of  the  arm.  By  this  arrangement  the
right  arm  is  covered  by  the  garment,  a  circumstance
noticed  by  Quintilian  (§  138)  ;  but  it  was  occa-
sionally released  by  throwing  the  toga  off  the  riglit
shoulder,  and  leaving  it  to  be  supported  on  the  left
alone.  This  arrangement  is  seen  in  many  ancient
statues  ;  an  example  is  shown  in  the  following  cut,
which  represents  the  celebrated  statue  of  Aulus  Me-
tellus  (commonly  called  the  Etruscan  orator)  in  the
Florence  Gallery.  (Miiller,  Denkm'dler,  vol.  i.  pi.
Iviii.  No.  289.)     The  portion  of  the  toga  which,  in


the  first  figure,  hangs  down  from  the  chest,  if  it  be  a
sinus,  is  certainly  of  the  kind  described  by  Quin-
tilian as  perquant  hrevis.

The  next  cut  represents  the  later  mode  of  wear-
ing the  toga,  and  is  taken  from  an  engraving  in
the  Museo  Borhonico  (vol.  vi.  tav.  41)  of  a  statue
found  at  Herculaneura.

By  comparing  this  and  other  statues  with  the
description  of  Quintilian,  we  may  conclude  that  the
mode  of  wearing  the  toga  was  something  like  the
following :  —

First,  as  above  remarked,  the  fonn  in  this  case
was  a  segment  less  than  a  semicircle.  As  before,
the  curved  side  was  the  lower,  and  one  end  of  the


nsb'


TOGA.


garment  was  thrown  over  the  left  shoulder,  and
hung  down  in  front,  but  much  lower  than  in  the
former  case.  This  seems  to  be  the  part  which
Quintilian  (§  139)  says  should  reach  down  half-
way between  the  knee  and  the  ankle.  In  our
figure  it  reaches  to  the  feet,  and  in  some  statues  it
is  even  seen  lying  on  the  ground.  The  garment
was  then  placed  over  the  back,  as  in  the  older
mode  of  wearing  it,  but,  instead  of  covering  the
right  shoulder,  it  was  brought  round  under  the
right  arm  to  the  front  of  the  body.  This  is  the
most  difficult  part  of  the  dress  to  explain.  Quin-
tilian says  (§  140): — "Sinus  decentissimus,  si
aliquanto  supra  imam  togam  fuerit,  nunquam  certe
sit  inferior.  Ille,  qui  sub  humero  dextro  ad  sinis-
trum  oblique  ducitur  velut  balteus,  nee  strangulet
nee  fluat."  Becker's  explanation  of  this  matter
seems  perfectly  satisfactory.  He  supposes  that  the
toga,  when  carried  under  the  right  arm,  was  then
folded  into  two  parts  ;  one  edge  (namely,  the
'ower  or  round  edge)  was  then  brought  almost  close
under  the  arm,  and  drawn,  but  not  tightly,  across
the  chest  to  the  left  shoulder,  fonning  the  velut
balteus  of  Quintilian,  while  the  other  part  was  al-
lowed to  fall  gracefully  over  the  lower  part  of  the
l)ody,  forming  the  sinus^  and  then  the  remaining  end
of  the  garment  was  thrown  over  the  left  shoulder,
and  hung  down  nearly  as  low  as  the  other  end,
which  was  first  put  on.  It  is  to  this  part  that
Quintilian  seems  to  refer  when  he  says  (§  140)  :  —
*'  Pars  togae,  quae  postea  iraponitur,  sit  inferior :
nam  ita  et  sedet  melius,  et  continetur  ; "  but  the
true  application  of  these  words  is  very  doubtful.
By  the  bottom  of  the  toga  {imam  togam)  in  the
above  quotation,  he  seems  to  mean  the  end  of  the
toga  first  put  on.  The  part  last  thrown  over  the
left  shoulder,  as  well  as  the  end  first  put  on,  co-
vered the  arm,  as  in  the  older  mode  of  wearing  the
garment.  The  outer  edge  {eodrema  ora)  of  this
part  ought  not,  says  Quintilian  (§  140),  to  be
thrown  back.  He  adds  (§141),  *'  Super  quod  (i.  e.
sinistrum  brachium)  ora  ex  toga  duplex  aequaliter
sedeat,"  by  which  he  probably  means  that  the  edge
of  this  portion  should  coincide  with  the  edge  of  the
end  which  was  first  thrown  over  the  left  shoulder,
and  which  is  of  course  covered  by  this  portion  of
the  garment.  He  says  (§  141)  that  the  shoulder
and  the  whole  of  the  throat  ought  not  to  be  co-
vered, otherwise  the  dress  will  become  narrow  and


TOGA.

'  that  dignity  which  consists  in  width  of  chest  will  be
lost.  This  direction  appears  to  mean  that  the  part
brought  across  the  chest  (velut  balteus)  should  not
be  drawn  too  tight.

Tassels  or  balls  are  seen  attached  to  the  ends  of
the  toga,  which  may  have  served  to  keep  it  in  its
place  by  their  weight,  or  may  have  been  merely
ornaments.

There  is  one  point  which  still  remains  to  be  ex-
plained. In  the  figure  a  mass  of  folds  is  seen  in
the  middle  of  the  part  of  the  toga  drawn  across  the
chest  {velut  balteus).  This  is  the  umbo  mentioned
by  Tertullian  {de  Pallio,  5),  and  used  by  Persius
for  the  toga  itself  {Sat.  v.  33).  It  was  either  a
portion  of  the  balteus  itself,  formed  by  allowing  this
part  of  the  garment  to  hang  loose  (which  perhaps
it  must  have  done,  as  it  is  the  curved,  and  there-
fore longer  edge  that  is  thus  dra^vn  across  the  chest),
and  then  gathering  it  up  in  folds  and  tucking  these
folds  in,  as  in  the  figure,  or  else  the  folds  which
composed  it  were  drawn  out  from  the  sinus,  and
either  by  themselves,  or  with  the  loose  folds  of  the
balteus,  formed  the  umbo.  It  seems  to  have  been
secured  by  passing  the  end  of  it  under  the  girdle
of  the  tunic  ;  and  perhaps  this  is  what  Quintilian
means  by  the  words  (§  140),  "  Subducenda  etiam
pars  aliqua  tunicae,  ne  ad  lacertum  in  actu  redeat."

The  back  of  the  figure,  which  is  not  seen  in  our
engravings,  was  simply  covered  with  the  part  of
the  garment  which  was  drawn  across  it,  and  which,
in  the  ancient  mode  of  wearing  it,  reached  down  to
the  heels.  (Quintil.  §  143).  Quintilian  states  how
low  it  was  worn  in  his  time,  but  the  meaning  of
his  words  is  very  obscure  (§  139:  "pars  ejus
prior  mediis  cruribus  optime  terminatur,  posterior
eadera  portione  altius  qua  cinctura."  See  above).

A  garment  of  the  supposed  shape  of  the  toga,
put  on  according  to  the  above  description,  has
been  found  by  the  writer  of  this  article  to  present
an  appearance  exactly  like  that  of  the  toga  as  seen
on  statues,  and  Becker  states  that  he  has  made  simi-
lar experiments  with  equally  satisfactory  results.

Tertullian  {de  Pallio,  5)  contrasts  the  simplicity
of  the  Pallium  with  the  complication  of  the  toga,
and  his  remarks  apply  very  well  to  the  above  de-
scription. It  appears  by  his  account  that  the  folds
of  the  umbo  were  arranged  before  the  dress  was
put  on,  and  fixed  in  their  places  by  pins  or  hooks ;
Ijut  generally  speaking  it  does  not  seem  that  the
toga  was  held  on  by  any  fastening:  indeed  the
contrary  may  be  inferred  from  Quintilian's  direc-
tions to  an  orator  for  the  management  of  his  toga
while  speaking  (§§  144 — 149).

Another  mode  of  wearing   the   toga   was  the
ductus  Gabinus.     It  consisted  in  forming  a  part  of
the  toga  itself  into  a  girdle,  by  drawing  its  outer
edge  round  the  body  and  tying  it  in  a  knot  in
front,  and  at  the  same  time  covering  the  head  with
another  portion  of  the  garment.     It  was  worn  by
persons  oifering  sacrifices  (Li v.  v.  46  ;  Lucan.  i,
5dQ),  by  the  consul  when  he  declared  war  ( Virg.
Aen.  vii.  612),  and  by  devoted  persons,  as  in  the
case    of   Decius.     (Liv.  v.  46.)       Its   origin    v
Etruscan,  as  its  name  implies  (Servius  in  Virg.  I.  c.j
Mliller,  Etrusker,  vol.  i.  p.  265;  Thiersch  in  AnnalA
Acad.  Bavar.  vol.  i.  p.  29,  quoted  by  Miiller,  AnnotA
ad  Fcstum,  p.  225).  Festus  (/.  c.)  speaks  of  an  armj
about  to  fight  being  girt  with  the  cinctus  Gabinus
Persons  wearing  this  dress  were  said  to  be  proci%
(or  incincti)  dnctu  (or  ritu)  Galnno.

The  colour  of  the  toga   worn   by  men   (t


TOGA.

tirilis)  was  generally  white,  tbat  is,  the  natural
colour  of  white  wool.  Hence  it  was  called  pura  or
vestimentum  purum,  in  opposition  to  the  praetexta
mentioned  below.  A  brighter  white  wns  given
to  the  toga  of  candidates  for  offices  {candidati  from
their  toga  Candida)  by  rubbing  it  with  chalk.
There  is  an  allusion  to  this  custom  in  the  phrase
cretata  ambitio.  (Pers.  v.  177.)  White  togas  are
often  mentioned  as  worn  at  festivals,  which  does
not  imply  that  they  were  not  worn  commonly,  but
that  new  or  fresh  cleaned  togas  were  first  put  on
at  festivals.  (See  Lipsius,  Elect,  i.  13,  in  Oper.  vol.
i.  pp.  256,  257.)  The  toga  was  kept  white  and
clean  by  the  fuller  [Fullo].  When  this  was
neglected,  the  toga  was  called  sordida^  and  those
who  wore  such  garments  sordidati.  This  dress
(with  disarranged  hair  and  other  marks  of  dis-
order about  the  person),  was  worn  by  accused  per-
sons, as  in  the  case  of  Cicero.  (Pint.  Cic.  30,  31  ;
Dion  Cass,  xxxviii.  16  ;  Liv.  vi.  20.)  The  toga
puUa,  which  was  of  the  natural  colour  of  black
wool,  was  worn  in  private  mourning,  and  some-
times also  by  artificers  and  others  of  the  lower
orders.  (See  the  passages  in  Forcellini,  s.  vv.  Pullus,
PuUatus.)  The  toga  picta^  which  was  ornamented
with  Phrygian  embroidery,  was  worn  by  generals
in  triumphs  [Triumphus],  and  under  the  em-
perors by  the  consuls,  and  by  the  praetors  when
they  celebrated  the  games.  It  was  also  called
Capitolina.  (Lamprid.  Alex.  Sever,  c.  40.)  The
toga  palmata  was  a  kind  of  toga  picta.  The
toga  praeteocta  had  a  broad  purple  border.  It  was
worn  with  the  Bulla,  by  children  of  both  sexes.
It  was  also  worn  by  magistrates,  both  those  of
Rome,  and  those  of  the  colonies  and  municipia,  by
the  sacerdotes,  and  by  persons  engaged  in  sacred
rites  or  paying  vows.  (Liv.  xxxiv.  7  ;  Festus,  s.  v.
Praetexta  pulla.)  Among  those  who  possessed  the
JUS  togae  praetextae  habendae,  the  following  may
be  more  particularly  mentioned :  the  dictator,  the
consuls,  the  praetors  (who  laid  aside  the  praetexta
when  about  to  condemn  a  Roman  citizen  to  death),
the  augurs  (who,  however,  are  supposed  by  some
to  have  worn  the  trabea),  the  decemviri  sacris
faciundis  [Decemviri],  the  aediles,  the  triumviri
epulones,  the  senators  on  festival  days  (Cic.  Phil.
ii.  43),  the  magistri  coUegii,  and  the  magistri
vicorum  when  celebrating  games.  [Magister.]
In  the  case  of  the  tribuni  plebis,  c  nsors,  and
quaestors  there  is  some  doubt  upon  the  subject.
The  praetexta  pulla  might  only  be  worn  at  the
celebration  of  a  funeral.  (Festus.  /.  c.)

The  toga  praetexta,  as  has  been  above  remarked,
is  said  to  have  been  derived  from  the  Etruscans.
It  is  said  to  have  been  first  adopted,  with  the  latus
clavus  [Clavus  Latus],  by  Tullus  Hostilius  as
the  royal  robe,  whence  its  use  by  the  magistrates
in  the  republic.  (Plin.  H  N.  ix.  39.  s.  63.)  Ac-
cording to  Macrobius  {Sat.  i.  6)  the  toga  intro-
duced by  Hostilius  was  not  only  praetexta^  but  also
picta.  Pliny  states  {H.  N.  viii.  48.  s.  74)  that  the
toga  regia  undulata  (that  is,  apparently,  embroi-
dered with  waving  lines  or  bands)  which  had  been
worn  by  Servius  Tullius  was  preserved  in  the  tem-
ple of  Fortune.  The  toga  praetexta  and  the  bulla
aurea  were  first  given  to  boys  in  the  case  of  the
son  of  Tarquinius  Priscus,  who  at  the  age  of  four-
teen, in  the  Sabine  war,  slew  an  enemy  with  his
own  hand.  (Macrob.  I.  o.,  where  other  particulars
respecting  the  use  of  the  toga  praetexta  may  be
found.)     Respecting  the  leaving  oflf  of  the  toga


TORCULUM.


1137


praetexta  and  the  assumption  of  the  toga  virilis,  see
Impubes,  Bulla,  Clavus  Latus.  The  occasion
was  celebrated  with  great  rejoicings  by  the  friends
of  the  youth,  who  attended  him  in  a  solemn  pro^
cession  to  the  Forum  and  Capitol.  (Valer.  Max.  v.
4.  §  4.)  This  assumption  of  the  toga  virilis  was
called  tirocinium  fori,  as  being  the  young  man's
introduction  to  public  life,  and  the  solemnities  at-
tending it  are  called  by  Pliny  (Epist.  i.  9)  offidum,
togae  virilis,  and  by  TertuUian  {de  Tdolol.  c.  16)
solemnitates  togae.  The  public  ceremonies,  con-
nected with  the  assumption  of  the  toga  virilis  by
the  sons  of  the  emperors,  are  referred  to  by  Sue-
tonius {Oct.  26,  Tib.  54,  Calig.  16,  Ner.  7).  The
toga  virilis  is  called  libeixihj  Ovid  {Fasti,  in.  771).
Girls  wore  the  praetexta  till  their  marriage.

The  trabea  was  a  toga  ornamented  with  purple
horizontal  stripes.  Servius  {ad  Aen.  vii.  612)  men-
tions three  kinds  of  trabea  ;  one  wholly  of  purple,
which  was  sacred  to  the  gods,  another  of  purple
and  white,  and  another  of  purple  and  saffron,  which
belonged  to  augurs.  The  purple  and  white  trabea
was  a  royal  robe,  and  is  assigned  to  the  Latin  and
early  Roman  kings,  especially  to  Romulus.  CPlin.
H.  N.  viii.  49,  ix.  39  ;  Virg.  Aen.  vii.  187,  xi.  334;
Ovid.  Fast.  ii.  504.)  It  was  worn  by  the  consuls
in  public  solemnities,  such  as  opening  the  temple
of  Janus.  (Virg.  Aen.  vii.  612;  Claudian.  in  Rufin.
I.  249.)  The  equites  wore  it  at  the  transvectio  and
in  other  public  solemnities.  (Valer.  Max.  ii.  2  ;
Tacit.  Ann.  iii.  2.)  Hence  the  trabea  is  mentioned
as  the  badge  of  the  equestrian  order.  Lastly,  the
toga  worn  by  the  Roman  emperors  was  wholly  of
purple.  It  appears  to  have  been  first  assumed  by
Julius  Caesar.    (Cic.  Philip,  ii.  34.)

The  material  of  which  the  toga  was  commonly
made  was  wool.  It  was  sometimes  thick  and
sometimes  thin.  The  former  was  the  toga  densa,
pinguis,  or  hirta.  (Suet.  Aug.  82  ;  Quintil.  xii.  1 0.)
A  new  toga,  with  the  nap  neither  worn  off  nor  cut
close,  was  balled  pexa,  to  which  is  opposed  the  trita
or  rasa,  which  was  used  as  a  summer  dress.  (Mar-
tial, ii.  85.)  On  the  use  of  silk  for  togas  see
Sericum.

It  only  remains  to  speak  of  the  general  use  of
the  toga.  It  was  originally  worn  by  both  sexes  ;
but  when  the  stola  came  to  be  worn  by  matrons,
the  toga  was  only  worn  by  the  meretrlces  and  bj'-
women  who  had  been  divorced  on  account  of  adul-
tery. [Stola.]  Before  the  use  of  the  toga  be-
came almost  restricted  to  the  upper  classes,  their
toga  was  only  distinguished  from  that  of  the  lower
classes  by  being  fuller  and  more  expensive.  In
war  it  was  laid  aside  and  replaced  by  the  Palu-
D amentum  and  Sagum.  Hence  togatus  is  op-
posed to  miles.  The  toga  was,  however,  sometimes
used  by  soldiers,  but  not  in  battle,  nor  as  their
ordinary  dress  ;  but  rather  as  a  cloak  or  blanket.
It  was  chiefly  worn  in  Rome,  and  hence  togatus  is
opposed  to  rusticus.  The  toga  was  often  used  as  a
covering  in  sleeping  ;  and  lastly,  as  a  shroud  for
the  corpse.

(Becker,  G'aZ/MS,  vol.  ii.  pp.  78 — 88;  Ferrarius,  de
Re  Vestiaria;  Rubenius,  de  Re  Vest.)     [P.  S.j

TONSOR.     [Barba.]

TOPIA'RIUS.     [HoRTUs.]

TORA'LIA.     [Torus.]

TO'RCULUM   or  TO'RCULAR  (Ar;»/Js),  a

press  for  making  wine  and  oil.     When  the  grapc^s

were  ripe  {<TTa(pvXi]),  the  bunches  were  gathered,

anv  which  remained  unripe  {6fi<pa^)  or  had  become

4  D


1138


TORCULUM.


dry  or  rotten  were  carefully  removed  (Geopon.  vi.
11)  [FoRFEx],  and  the  rest  carried  from  the  vine-
yard in  deep  baskets  (quali,  Virg.  Georg.  ii.  241  :
ToAdpoi,  Hes.  Scut.  296  ;  ap^lxoi,  Longus,  ii.  I  ;
Ko<pivoi,  Geopon.  I.  c.)  to  be  poured  into  a  shallow
vat.  In  this  they  were  immediately  trodden  by
men,  who  had  the  lower  part  of  their  bodies  naked
(Virg.  Georg.  ii.  7),  except  that  they  wore  drawers
[Subligaculum].  At  least  two  persons  usually
trod  the  grapes  together.  To  "  tread  the  wine-
press alone "  indicated  desolation  and  distress.
(Is.  Ixiii.  3.)  The  Egyptian  paintings  (Wilkinson,
Man.  and  Oust.  vol.  ii.  pp.  152 — 157)  exhibit  as  many
as  seven  treading  in  the  same  vat,  and  supporting
themselves  by  taking  hold  of  ropes  or  poles  placed
above  their  heads.  From  the  size  of  the  Greek
and  Roman  vats  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the
company  of  treaders  was  often  still  more  numerous.
To  prevent  confusion  and  to  animate  them  in  their
labour  they  moved  in  time  or  danced,  as  is  seen  in
the  ancient  mosaics  of  the  church  of  St.  Constantia
at  Rome,  sometimes  also  leaning  upon  one  another.
The  preceding  circumstances  are  illustrated  in  the
following  woodcut,  taken  from  a  bas-relief.  (Mon.
Matth.  iii.  tab.  45.)  An  antefixa  in  the  British
Museum  (Combe,  ^«c.  Terra- cottas.  No.  59)  shows
a  person  by  the  side  of  the  vat  performing  during
this  act  on  the  scabellum  and  tibiae  pares,  for  the
purpose  of  aiding  and  regulating  the  movements  of


those  in  it.  Besides  this  instrumental  music  they
were  cheered  with  a  son^,  called  /icAos  iiriK-hviov
(Athen.  v.  p.  199,  a.)  or  vixvos  iiriXiivios,  specimens
of  which  may  be  seen  in  Anacreon  (Od.  xvii.  1  and
Iii. ;  and  Brunck,  Anal.  ii.  239.  See  Jacobs,  ad  loc;
compare  Theocrit.  vii.  25).  After  the  grapes  had
been  trodden  sufficiently,  they  were  subjected  to
the  more  powerful  pressure  of  a  thick  and  heavy
beam  [Prelum]  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  all
the  juice  yet  remaining  in  them.  (Vitniv.  x.  1  •
Virg.  Georg.  ii.  242  ;  Servius  in  he.  ;  Hor.  Carm.
i.  20.  9.)  Instead  of  a  beam  acted  on  by  wedges,
a  press  with  a  screw  [Cochlea]  was  sometimes
used  for  the  same  purpose.  ( Vitruv.  vi.  6 ;  PHn.
H.  N.  xviii.  31.  8.  74.)  A  strainer  or  colander
[Colum]  was  employed  to  clear  the  must  from
solid  particles,  as  it  flowed  from  the  vat.

The  preceding  woodcut  shows  the  apertures  at
the  bottom  of  the  vat,  by  which  the  must  {mmtum.,
yXevKos)  was  discharged,  and  the  method  of  re-
ceiving it,  when  the  vat  was  small,  in  wide-mouthed
jars,  which  when  full  were  carried  away  to  be  emp-
tied into  casks  (dolia,  iridol,  Longus,  ii.  1,  2).
[DoLiuM.]     When  the  vineyard   was  extensive


TORMENTUM.

and  the  vat  large  in  proportion,  the  must  flowed
into  another  vat  of  corresponding  size,  which  wag
sunk  below  the  level  of  the  ground,  and  therefore
called  vTToAT^j/toi' (Mark,  xii.  1 ;  Geopon.  \'ul.  11)^
in  Latin  lacus.  (Ovid.  Fast.  v.  888;  Plin.  Epist.  ix.
20;  Colum.  de  Re  Rust.  xii.  18.)

From  \riv6s  Bacchus  was  called  Lenaeus  (Arj-
valos).  The  festival  of  the  Lenaea  was  celebrated
on  the  spot  where  the  first  Attic  wine-press  was
said  to  have  been  constructed.     [Dionysia.]

Olives  as  well  as  grapes  were  subjected  to  the
prelum  for  the  sake  of  their  oil.     [Olea,  p.  826.]

The  building  erected  to  contain  all  the  vessels
and  other  implements  (torcula  vasa,  Varro,  de  Re
Rust.  iii.  2)  for  obtaining  both  wine  and  oil  was
called  torcularium  (Cato,  de  Re  Rust.  12,  13,  18;
Col.  de  Re  Rust.  xii.  18)  and  XT)viS>v  {Geopon.  vi.
1).  It  was  situated  near  the  kitchen  and  the
wine-cellar.     (Vitruv.  vi.  6.)  [J.  Y.]

TOREU'TICE.     [Caelatura.]

TORMENTUM  {a.<p€T-f)piov  opyavov),  a  mili-
tary engine.  All  the  missiles  used  in  war,  except
those  thrown  from  the  sling  [Funda],  are  pro-
jected either  by  the  hand  alone  or  with  the  aid  of
elastic  substances.  Of  elastic  instruments  the  bow
[Arc us]  is  still  used  by  many  nations.  But  the
tormentum,  so  called  from  the  twisting  (torquendo)
of  hairs,  thongs  and  vegetable  fibres  (Polyb.  iv.  56),
has  fallen  into  disuse  through  the  discovery  of  gun-
powder. The  word  tormentum  is  often  used  by
itself  to  denote  engines  of  various  kinds.  (Cic.  ad
Fam.  XV.  4  ;  Caes.  B.  C.  iii.  44,  45,  B.  Alex.  10;
Liv.  XX.  11  ;  Veil.  Pat.  ii.  82  ;  Curt.  iv.  9.  16.)
Often  also  these  engines  are  specified  separately
under  the  names  of  BaUstae  and  Catapultae,  which
names  however  most  commonly  occur  together  in
the  accounts  of  sieges  and  other  military  operations,
because  the  two  kinds  of  engines  denoted  by  them
were  almost  always  used  in  conjunction.  [Hele-
POLis.]  The  balista  (■7reTpo§6\os')  was  used  to
shoot  stones  (Ovid.  Trist.  i.  2.  48  ;  Lucan,  vi.  198;
Non.  Marc.  p.  555,  ed.  Merceri),  the  catapulta
(KaraTreATTjs,  KaTaireXriKi})  to  project  darts,  espe-
cially the  Falarica  [Ha.sta],  and  a  kind  of  mis-
sile, 4^  feet  long,  called  trifax.  (Festus,  s.  r.)
Whilst  in  besieging  a  city  the  ram  [Aries]  was
employed  in  destroying  the  lower  part  of  the  wall,
the  balista  was  used  to  overthrow  the  battlements
{propugnacula,  Plaut.  Bacch.  iv.  4.  58 — 61 ;  eTroA-
leZs),  and  the  catapult  to  shoot  any  of  the  besieged
who  appeared  between  them.  (Diod.  xvii.  42,  45,
XX.  48,  88.)  The  forms  of  these  machines  being
adapted  to  the  objects  which  they  were  intended
to  throw,  the  catapult  was  long,  the  balista  nearly
square,  which  explains  the  following  humourous
enumeration  by  Plautus  (Capt.  iv.  2.  16)  of  the
three  fifixaval,  the  application  of  which  has  just
been  explained.

"  Meus  est  balista  pugnus,  cubitus  catapulta  est
mihi.
Humerus  aries."

In  the  same  armament  the  number  of  catapults  was
commonly  much  greater  than  the  number  of  balistae.
(Non.  Marc.  p.  552,  ed.  Merceri  ;  Liv.  xxvi.  47.)
Also  these  two  classes  of  machines  were  both  of
them  distinguished  into  the  greater  and  the  less,
the  number  of  "the  less"  being  much  more  con-
siderable than  the  number  of  '*  the  greater."  When
Carthago  Nova,  which  had  served  the  Carthaginians
for  an  arsenal,  was  taken  by  the  Romans,  the  fol-


TORMENTUM.

lowing  were  found  in  it :  120  large  and  281  small
catapults  ;  23  large  and  52  small  balistae.  (Liv.
/.  c.)  Three  sizes  of  the  balista  are  mentioned  by
historians,  viz.  that  which  threw  stones  weighing
half  a  hundred-weight  {TpiaKovTatxvaiovs  \idovs^
Polyb.  ix.  34),  a  whole  hundred-weight  (balista
centenaria,  Non.  Marc.  /.  c. ;  \LdoS6\os  ToKavTiaios^
Polyb.  Ic;  Diod.  xx.  86),  and  three  hundred-
weight (ir^rpoSSKos  rpiTaKavTos,  Diod.  xx.  48).
Besides  these,  Vitruvius  (x.  11)  mentions  many
other  sizes,  even  down  to  the  balista  which  threw
a  stone  of  only  two  pounds  weight.  In  like  manner
cattipults  were  denominated  according  to  the  length
of  the  arrows  emitted  from  them.  (Vitruv.  x.  10  ;
Schneider,  ad  loc.)  According  to  Josephus,  who
gives  some  remarkable  instances  of  the  destructive
force  of  the  balista,  it  threw  stones  to  the  distance
of  a  quarter  of  a  mile.  (B.J.  iii.  7.  §  19,  23  ;
comp.  Procop.  Bell.  Goth.  i.  21,  23.)  Neither  from
the  descriptions  of  authors  nor  from  the  figures  on
the  column  of  Trajan  (Bartoli,  CoL  Traj.  tab.  45 —
47)  are  we  able  to  form  any  exact  idea  of  the
construction  of  these  engines.  Still  less  are  we
informed  on  the  subject  of  the  Scorpio  or  Onager,
which  was  also  a  tormentum.  (Vitruv.  x.  10;  Liv.
xxvi.  6,  47;  Amm.  Mareell.  xx.  7,  xxiii.  4.)  Even
the  terms  balista  and  catapulta  are  confounded  by
writers  subsequent  to  Julius  Caesar,  and  Diodorus
Siculus  often  uses  KaraireKr-qs  to  include  both  ba-
listae and  catapults,  distinguishing  them  by  the
epithets  TrerpogJAot  and  o|ug€A€?s  (xiii.  51,  xx.  48,
83,  86,  xxi.  4).

The  various  kinds  of  tormenta  appear  to  have
been  invented  shortly  before  the  time  of  Alexander
the  Great.  When  horse-hair  and  other  materials
failed,  the  women  in  several  instances  cut  off  their
own  hair  and  twisted  it  into  ropes  for  the  engines.
(Caes.  B.  C.  iii.  9  ;  Veget.  de  Re  Mil.  iv.  9.)
These  machines,  with  those  who  had  the  manage-
ment of  them,  and  who  were  called  balistarii  and
acperai  (Polyb.  iv.  56),  were  drawn  up  in  the  rear
of  an  advancing  army,  so  as  to  throw  over  the  heads
of  the  front  ranks.  In  order  to  attack  a  maritime
city,  they  were  carried  on  the  decks  of  vessels
constructed  for  the  purpose.  (Diod.  xx.  83 — 86  ;
Tacit.  Ann.  ii.  6.)

The  meaning  of  tormentum  as  applied  to  the
cordage  of  ships  is  explained  on  p.  790,  a.     [J.Y.]

TORMENTUM  (jSotroyos),  torture.  1.  Grkek.
By  a  decree  of  Scamandrius  it  was  ordained  that
no  free  Athenian  could  be  put  to  the  torture  (An-
doc.  deMyst.  22  ;  compare  Lys.  irepi  rpavfi.  177,
c.  Agorat.  462) ;  and  this  appears  to  have  been  the
general  practice,  notwithstanding  the  assertion  of
Cicero  {Part.  Orat.  c.  34)  to  the  contrary  (de  In-
stitutis  Atlieniensium,  Rhodioi~um  —  apudquos  liberi
civesque  torquentur).  The  only  two  apparent  ex-
ceptions to  this  practice  are  mentioned  by  Antiphon
(de  Herod,  coed.  729)  and  Lysias  (c.  Simon.  153).
But,  in  the  case  mentioned  by  Antiphon,  Bockh
has  shown  that  the  torture  was  not  applied  at
Athens,  but  in  a  foreign  country;  and  in  Lysias,
as  it  is  a  Plataean  boy  that  is  spoken  of,  we  have
no  occasion  to  conclude  that  he  was  an  Athenian
citizen,  since  we  learn  from  Demosthenes  (c.
A'^eaer.  1381)  that  all  Plataeans  were  not  neces-
sarily Athenian  citizens.  It  must,  however,  be
observed  that  the  decree  of  Scamandrius  does  not
appear  to  have  interdicted  the  use  of  torture  as  a
means  of  execution,  since  we  find  Demosthenes  (de
Cor.  271)  reminding  the  judges  that  they  had  put


TORMENTUM.  1139

Antiphon  to  death  by  the  rack  (ffrpeeKda-avTcs),
Compare  Plut.  Pkoc.  c.  35.

The  evidence  of  slaves  was,  however,  always
taken  with  torture,  and  their  testimony  was  not
otherwise  received.  (Antiph.  Tetral.  i.  p.  633.)
From  this  circumstance  their  testimony  appears  to
have  been  considered  of  more  value  than  that  of
freemen.  Thus  Isaeus  (De  Ciron.  Hered.  202)
says,  "  When  slaves  and  freemen  are  at  hand,
you  do  not  make  use  of  the  testimony  of  freemen;
but,  putting  slaves  to  the  torture,  you  thus  en-
deavour to  find  out  the  truth  of  what  has  been
done."  Numerous  passages  of  a  similar  nature
might  easily  be  produced  from  the  orators.  (Comp.
Demosth.  c.  Onetor.  i.  p.  874  ;  Antiphon,  De
Choreut.  778  ;  Lycurg.  c.  Leocr.  159—162.)  Any
person  might  offer  his  own  slave  to  be  examined
by  torture,  or  demand  that  of  his  adversary,  and
the  offer  or  demand  was  equally  called  Trpo/cArjcrts
els  fida-avov.  If  the  opponent  refused  to  give  up
his  slave  to  be  thus  examined,  such  a  refusal  was
looked  upon  as  a  strong  presumption  against  him.
The  irp6K\r](ns  appears  to  have  been  generally
made  in  writing  (Demosth.  c.  Pantaen.  978),  and
to  have  been  delivered  to  the  opponent  in  the
presence  of  witnesses  in  the  most  frequented  part  of
the  Agora  (Demosth.  c.  Aphob.  iii.  848)  ;  and  as
there  were  several  modes  of  torture,  the  particular
one  to  be  employed  was  usually  specified  (De-
mosth. c.  Steph.  i.  1120).  Sometimes,  when  a
person  offered  his  slave  for  torture,  he  gave  his
opponent  the  liberty  of  adopting  any  mode  of  tor-
ture which  the  latter  pleased.  (Antiph.  De  Cho-
reut. 777.)  The  parties  interested  either  super-
intended the  torture  themselves,  or  chose  certain
persons  for  this  purpose,  hence  called  /Sarrai/to-Tol,
who  took  the  evidence  of  the  slaves  (eAcJ/xeyot
fiaaavKTTas,  ain]VT'r}(Tafj.ep  els  rh  'H(pa(TTe7ov,  Isocr.
Trap.  c.  9  ;  compare  Demosth.  c.  Pantaen.  978,
979  ;  Antiph.  Karrjyopla  Papuan.  609).  In
some  cases,  however,  we  find  a  public  slave  at-
tached to  the  court,  who  administered  the  torture
(irapiaraL  5e  ^Stj  6  Srifilos,  koI  fiaaauiel  ivavrloy
vfx&v,  Aesch.  De  Leg.  284,  ed.  Tayl.)  ;  but  this
appears  only  to  have  taken  place  when  the  torture
was  administered  in  the  court,  in  presence  of  the
judges.  (Aesch.  l.c.  ;  Demosth.  c.  Euerg.  1144.)
This  particular  mode  of  administering  the  torture
was,  however,  certainly  contrary  to  the  usual  practice
(^aa-aviCeiv  ovk  ecrTiv  evavriov  vfiofv,  Demosth.  c.
Steph.  i.  1106).  The  general  practice  was  to  read
at  the  trial  the  depositions  of  the  slaves,  which
were  called  fiacrauol  (Harpocr.  Suid.  s.v.;  Demosth.
c.  Nicostrat.  1254),  and  to  confirm  them  by  the
testimony  of  those  who  were  present  at  the  ad-
ministration of  the  torture.  (Meier,  Att.  Process,
p.  680,  i&c.)

2.  Roman.  During  the  time  of  the  republic,
freemen  were  never  put  to  the  torture,  and  slaves
only  were  exposed  to  this  punishment.  Slaves,
moreover,  could  not  be  tortured  to  prove  the  guilt
of  their  own  master,  except  in  the  case  of  incestus,
which  was  a  crime  against  the  gods,  or  unless  the
senate  made  an  exception  in  some  special  instance,  as
was  done  in  the  Catilinarian  conspiracy.  (Cic.  pro
Mil.  12, pro  Deiot.  1,  Part.  Orat.  34  ;  Dion  Cass.
Iv.  5  ;  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  30,  iii.  67;  Dig.  48.  tit.  18.
s.  1.  §  16.)  At  a  later  time  slaves  might  be  tor-
tured to  bear  witness  against  their  masters  in  cases
I  of  majestas  (Cod.  9.  tit.  8.  ss.  6,  7)  and  adultery.
I  (Dig.  48.  tit.  18.  8, 17  ;  Cod.  9.  tit.  9.  ss.  3,  6,
4  D  2


1140  TORQUES.

32.)  Under  the  emperoi-s  even  free  persons  were
put  to  the  torture  to  extract  evidence  from  them  in
cases  of  majestas  ;  and  although  this  indignity  was
confined  for  the  most  part  to  persons  in  humble
circumstances,  we  read  of  cases  in  which  even
Roman  senators  and  equites  were  exposed  to  it.
(Dion  Cass.  Ix.  15;  Suet.  Tib.  58;  Dig.  48.  tit.  18.
s.  10.  §  1.)  For  further  information  see  Dig.  48.
tit.  18,  De  Quaestionibus ;  Walter,  Geschichte  des
Romischen  Reehts,  pp.  875,  876,  Isted.;  Rein,  Das
Criminalredit  der  Romer^  p.  542.

TORQUES  or  TORQUIS  (o-TpeTrr^Js),  an  or-
nament of  gold,  twisted  spirally  and  bent  into  a
circular  form,  which  was  worn  round  the  neck  by
men  of  distinction  among  the  Persians  (Curt.  iii.  3  ;
Themist.  Orat.  24,  p.  306,  c),  the  Gauls  (Florus,
i.  13,  ii.  4),  and  other  Asiatic  and  northern  na-
tions, (Isid.  Orig.  xix.  30.)  Tore  was  the  name  of
it  among  the  Britons  and  ancient  Irish.  Virgil
(Aen.  V.  558,  559)  thus  describes  it  as  part  of  the
attire  of  the  Trojan  youths  :

"  It  pectore  summo
Flexilis  obtorti  per  coUum  circulus  auri."
Ornaments  of  this  kind  have  been  frequently
found  both  in  France  and  in  many  parts  of  Great
Britain  and  Ireland  (Petrie,  Trans,  of  R.  Irish
Acad.  vol.  xviii.;  Antiq.^'^.  181 — 184),  varying  in
size  and  weight,  but  almost  always  of  the  form  ex-
hibited in  the  annexed  woodcut,  which  represents
a  torquis  found  in  Brecknockshire,  and  now  pre-
served in  the  British  Museum.  The  same  wood-
cut contains  a  section  of  this  torquis  of  the  size  of
the  original.  It  shows,  as  Mr.  Petrie  observes  con-
cerning some  found  in  the  county  of  Meath,  "  four
equidistant  radiations  from  a  common  centre."  The
torquis  in  the  British  Musenra  is  four  feet  and  a
half  in  length.  Its  hooks  correspond  well  to  the
following  description  of  the  fall  of  a  Celtic  warrior:
"  Torquis  ab  incisa  decidit  unca  gula."  (Propert.
iv.  10.  44  )  A  torquis,  which  instead  of  being
bent  into  a  circular  form  was  turned  into  a  spiral,
became  a  bracelet,  as  is  shown  in  the  lowest  figure
of  the  woodcut  to  Armilla.  A  torquis  contrived
to  answer  this  purpose,  is  called  torquis  brachialis.
(Vopisc.  Aurel.  7.)  Such  bracelets  and  torques
are  often  found  together,  having  been  worn  by  the
same  people.


The  head  in  the  preceding  woodcut  is  that  of  a
Persian  warrior  in  the  mosaic  of  the  battle  of  Issus,
mentioned  in  p.  431.  It  illustrates  the  mode  of
wearing  the  torquis,  which  in  this  instance  ter-


TRAGOEDIA.

minates  in  two"serpents'  heads  instead  of  hooks.  It
was  by  taking  this  collar  from  a  Gallic  warrior  that
T.  Manlius  obtained  the  cognomen  of  Torquatus.
(Cic.  de  Fin.  ii.  22,  de  Of.  iii.  31  ;  Gellius,  ix.  13;
Non.  Marc.  pp.  227,  228,  ed.  Merceri.)

Torques,  whether  in  the  form  of  collars  or  brace-
lets, no  doubt  formed  a  considerable  part  of  the
wealth  of  those  who  wore  them.  Hence  they
were  an  important  portion  of  the  spoil,  when  any
Celtic  or  Oriental  army  was  conquered,  and  they
were  among  the  rewards  of  valour  bestowed  after
an  engagement  upon  those  who  had  most  distin-
guished themselves.  (Juv,  xvi.  60  ;  Plin.  H.  N.
xxxiii.  2.  s.  10  ;  Sidon.  Apollin.  Cann.  xxiii.  424.)
The  monuments  erected  to  commemorate  Roman
soldiers  and  to  enumerate  the  honours  which  they
had  obtained,  often  mention  the  number  of  torques
conferred  upon  them.  (MafFei,  il/as.  Veron.  p.  218.)
[Phalera.]  [J.  Y.]

TORUS,  a  bed  ;  originally  made  of  straw
(Plin.  H.  N.  viii.  48.  s.  73),  hay,  leaves,  woolly
plants  (Mart.  xiv.  160,  162),  sea- weed  (de  mol-
libus  ulvis,  Ovid.  Met.  viii.  656),  also  stuffed  with
wool,  and  afterwards  with  feathers  (xi.  611),  or
swans-down  (Mart.  xiv.  161),  so  as  to  be  as  much
raised  and  as  soft  as  possible.  (Virg.  Aen.  vi.  603;
Ovid.  Amor.  ii.  4.  14.)  It  was  sometimes  covered
with  the  hide  of  a  quadruped  (Virg.  Aen.  viii.  177),
but  more  commonly  with  sheets  or  blankets,  called
Toralia.  (Hor.  Sat  ii.  4.  84,  Epist.  i.  5.  22.)  The
torus  may  be  observed  on  the  sopha  in  the  first
woodcut,  p.  308  ;  and  its  appearance  there  may
suffice  to  explain  the  transference  of  its  name  to
the  larger  semi-circular  mouldings  in  the  base  of
columns.     [Atticurges  ;  Spira.]         [J.  Y.]

TO'XOTAE  (To^6Tai).     [Demosil]

TRA'BEA.     [Toga.]

TRADFTIO.     [Dominium.]

TRAG0E'DIA(Tpa7(j>5^,  tragedy.  I.Greek.
The  tragedy  of  the  ancient  Greeks  as  well  as  their
comedy  confessedly  originated  in  the  worship  of
the  god  Dionysus.  It  is  proposed  in  this  article  (1)
to  explain  from  what  element  of  that  worship
Tragedy  took  its  rise,  and  (2)  to  trace  the  course
of  its  developement,  till  it  reached  its  perfect  form
and  character  in  the  drama  of  the  Attic  tragedians,
Aeschylus,  Sophocles,  and  Euripides.

The  peculiarity  which  most  strikingly  distin-
guishes the  Greek  tragedy  from  that  of  modem
times,  is  the  lyrical  or  choral  part.  This  was  the
offspring  of  the  dithyrambic  and  choral  odes  from
which,  as  applied  to  the  worship  of  Dionj'sus,
Greek  tragt-dy  took  its  rise.  This  worship,  we
may  observe,  was  of  a  twofold  character,  corre-
sponding to  the  different  conceptions  which  were
anciently  entertained  of  Dionysus  as  the  change-
able God  of  flourishing,  decaying,  or  renovated
nature,  and  the  various  fortunes  to  which  in  that
character  he  was  considered  to  be  subject  at  the
different  seasons  of  the  year.  Hence  MUUer  ob-
serves (Lit.  of  Greece.,  p.  288),  "  the  festivals  of
Dionysus  at  Athens  and  elsewhere  were  all  solem-
nized in  the  months  nearest  to  the  shortest  day,
coincidently  with  the  changes  going  on  in  the
course  of  nature,  and  by  which  his  worshippers
conceived  the  god  himself  to  be  affected."  His
mournful  or  joyous  fortunes  (tto^tj),  his  mystical
death,  symbolizing  the  death  of  all  vegetation  in
winter,  and  his  birth  (Plat,  de  Leg.  iii.  p.  700  ;
Proclus  in  Gaisford''s  Ilephaest.  p.  383),  indi-
cating the  renovation  of  all  nature  in  the  spring,


TRAGOEDIA.

and  his  struggles  in  passing  from  one  state  to
another,  were  not  only  represented  and  sym-
pathised in  by  the  Dithyrambic  singers  and  dan-
cers, but  they  also  carried  their  enthusiasm  so  far,
as  to  fancy  themselves  under  the  influence  of  the
same  events  as  the  god  himself,  and  in  their  at-
tempts to  identify  themselves  with  him  and  his
fortunes,  assumed  the  character  of  the  subordinate
divinities,  the  Satyrs,  Nymphs,  and  Panes  {Nym-
pharumqiie  leves  cum  Satyris  chori),  who  formed  the
mythological  train  of  the  god.  Hence,  as  is  ex-
plained under  Dionysia  (p.  410,  b),  arose  the
custom  of  the  disguise  of  Satyrs  being  taken  by  the
worshippers  at  the  festivals  of  Dionysus,  from  the
choral  songs  and  dances  of  whom  the  Grecian  tra-
gedy originated,  "  being  from  its  commencement
connected  with  the  public  rejoicings  and  ceremo-
nies of  Dionysus  in  cities,  while  comedy  was  more
a  sport  and  merriment  of  the  country  festivals."  In
fact  the  very  name  of  Tragedy  {Tpay(f}5ia),  far  from
signifying  anything  mournful  or  pathetic,  is  most
probably  derived  from  the  goatlike  appearance  of
the  S<atyrs  who  sang  or  acted  with  mimetic  gesticula-
tions (opx''70''s)  the  old  Bacchic  songs,  with  Silenus,
the  constant  companion  of  Dionysus,  for  their  leader.
(Bode,  Gesch.  d.  Hellen.  Dichtkunst,  vol.  iii.  p.  31.)
From  their  resemblance  in  dress  and  action  to  goats,
they  were  sometimes  called  rpdyoi,  and  their  song
Tpayw^ia.  Thus  Aeschylus  in  a  fragment  of  the
Prometheus  nvp(p6pos  calls  a  Satyr  Tpayos,  and
the  Satyric  chorus  in  the  Cyclops  of  Euripides
(1.  80)  appears  in  the  skin  of  a  goat  {x^'''-^'^''''
Tpdyov).  The  word  ^drvpos  also  is  apparently
the  same  as  rirvpos,  a  kind  of  goat.  (Phot.  Lex.
s.v.)  According  to  another  opinion,  the  "word
Tragedy  was  first  corned  from  the  goat  that  was
the  prize  of  it,  which  prize  was  first  constituted  in
Thespis'  time."  (Bentley,  Pluilar.  p.  249.)  This
derivation,  however,  as  well  as  another, connecting
it  with  the  goat  offered  on  the  altar  of  Bacchus
(Miiller,  Literal,  of  Greece,  p.  291),  around  which
the  chorus  sang,  is  not  equally  supported  either  by
the  etymological  principles  of  the  language,  or  the
analogous  instance  of  liw/iicfUa,  the  "  revel-song."
{Etymol.  Magn.  p.  764  ;  Eurip.  Bacch.VM  ;  Aelian,
V.  H.  iii.  40.)

But  the  Dionysian  dithyrambs  were  not  always
of  a  gay  and  joyous  character :  they  were  capable
of  expressing  the  extremes  of  sadness  aud  wild
lamentation  as  well  as  the  enthusiasm  of  joy  ;  and
it  was  from  the  Dithyrambic  songs  of  a  mournful
cast,  probably  sung  originally  in  the  winter  months,
that  the  stately  and  solemn  tragedy  of  the  Greeks
arose.  That  there  were  Dithyrambs  of  such  a
character,  expressive  of  the  sufferings  of  Dionysus
(to  tov  Aioyvffov  irddr)),  appears  from  the  state-
ment in  Herodotus  (v.  67),  that  at  Sicyon  in  the
time  of  Clisthenes  (b.  c.  600)  it  was  customary  to
celebrate  (yepaipeiv)  the  sufferings  of  that  god  with
"  tragic  choruses."  But  it  must  be  remarked  that
in  the  most  ancient  times  the  Dithyrambic  song
was  not  executed  by  a  regular  chorus.  Thus
Archilochus  says  in  Trochaic  verse,  "  I  know  how
when  mj'  mind  is  inflamed  with  wine  to  lead  off
the  Dithyramb,  the  beautiful  song  of  Dionysus,"
whence  we  may  infer  that  in  his  time  (b.  c.  700)
the  Dithyramb  was  sung  by  a  band  of  revellers  led
by  a  flute-player.  Lyrical  choruses,  indeed,  had
been  even  then  established,  especially  in  the  Dorian
states  of  Greece,  in  connection  with  the  worship  of
ApoUo,  the  cithara  or  <p6pfiiy^  being  the  instrument


TRAGOEDIA.


1141


to  which  the  choreutae  sang  and  danced.  (Muller,
Literat.  of  Greece,  p.  204  ;  Dorians,  iv.  7.  §  8.)
In  fact  the  connection  of  the  Dorian  choral  poetry
with  the  worship  of  Apollo,  the  direct  opposite  to
that  of  Dionysus,  and  its  consequent  subjection  to
established  rules  and  forms,  admitting  too,  from
the  Dorian  character  but  little  innovation,  affords
the  most  obvious  explanation  of  the  striking  cir-
cumstance that  nothing  decidedly  dramatic  sprang
from  it,  as  from  the  dithyrambic  performances.
(Bode,  p.  16.)  Still  there  were  some  points  in
which  the  Dorian  worship  of  Apollo  resembled
that  of  Dionysus,  e.g.  the  dances  with  which  the
former  god  was  honoured,  and  the  kind  of  mimicry
which  characterised  them.  Other  circumstances
also,  on  which  we  cannot  here  dwell,  would  pro-
bably facilitate  the  introduction  of  the  Dionysian
Dithyramb  amongst  the  Dorian  states,  especially
after  the  improvements  made  in  it  by  Arion  (b.  c.
600),  which  were  so  great,  that  even  the  invention
of  that  species  of  poetry  is  ascribed  to  him,  though
it  had  been  known  in  Greece  for  a  century  before
his  time.  The  worship  of  Dionysus  was  celebrated
at  his  native  place,  Methymnae  in  Lesbos,  with
music  and  orgiastic  rites  ;  and  as  Arion  travelled
extensively  in  the  Dorian  states  of  Hellas,  he  had
ample  opportunities  of  observing  the  varieties  of
choral  worship,  and  of  introducing  any  improve-
ments Avhich  he  might  wish  to  make  in  it.  (Bode,
p.  22.)  He  is  «aid  to  have  been  the  inventor  of
the  "  tragic  turn  "  (rpayiKov  rp6irov),  a  phrase  of
doubtful  signification,  but  which  seems  to  mean,  that
he  was  the  inventor  of  a  grave  and  solemn  style  of
music,  to  which  his  Dithyrambs  were  danced  and
sung,  (Hermann,  OjOMSc.  vol.  vii.  p.  216.)  Suidas
(s.u.)  adds  of  him,  Ae76Tot  koX  TtpaTos  xop^i^  (rrTja-ai,
Kal  didvpa/j.€ov  aaai  /ecu  ovofxaircu  rh  dSo/xevou  vnh
TOV  X°P°^->  '^"^  "Xarvpovs  ei(TevsyKe7v  efifierpa  \4-
yovras.  From  the  first  clause,  in  connection  with
other  authorities  (Schol.  in  Aristoph.  Aves,  1403),
we  learn  that  he  introduced  the  cyclic  chorus  (a
fact  mythologically  expressed  by  making  him  the
son  of  Cycleus)  ;  i.  e.  the  Dithyramb,  instead  of
being  sung  as  before  his  time  in  a  wild  irregular
manner,  was  danced  by  a  chorus  of  fifty  men
around  a  blazing  altar  ;  whence  in  the  time  of
Aristophanes,  a  dithyrambic  poet  and  a  teacher  of
cyclian  choruses  were  nearly  synonymous.  (Miiller,
p.  204.)  As  the  alteration  was  made  at  Corinth,
we  may  suppose  that  the  representation  of  the
Dithyrambic  was  assimilated  in  some  respects  to
that  of  the  Dorian  choral  odes.  The  clause  to  the
effect  that  Arion  introduced  Satyrs,  i.  e.  rpdyoi,
speaking  in  verse  {trochaic),  is  by  some  thought
another  expression  for  the  invention  of  the  "  tra-
gic style."  A  simpler  interpretation  is,  that  he
introduced  the  Satyrs  as  an  addition  and  contrast
to  the  dance  and  song  of  the  cyclic  chorus  of  the
Dithyramb,  thus  preserving  to  it  its  old  character
as  a  part  of  the  worship  of  Bacchus.  The  phrase
ovajjidcrai  (compare  Herod,  i.  23)  alludes  to  the
different  titles  given  by  him  to  his  different  Dithy-
rambs according  to  their  subjects,  for  we  need  not
suppose  that  they  all  related  directly  to  Bacchus.
(Welcker,  Nachtrag.  p.  233.)  As  he  was  the  first
cithara  player  of  his  age  (Herod,  i.  23),  it  is  pro-
bable that  he  made  the  lyre  the  principal  instru-
ment in  the  musical  accompaniment.

From  the  more  solemn  Dithyrambs  then,  as  im-
proved by  Arion,  with  the  company  of  Satyrs,  who
probably  kept  up  a  joking  dialogue,  ultimately
4  D  3


1142


TRAGOEDIA.


spranfi;  the  dramatic  tragedy  of  Athens,  somewhat
in  the  following  manner.  The  choruses  which
represented  them  were  imder  the  direction  of  a
leader  or  exarchus,  who,  it  may  be  supposed,  came
forward  separately,  and  whose  part  was  sometimes
taken  by  the  poet  himself.  (Plato,  Rep.  iii.  p.  394,
c.)  We  may  also  conjecture  that  the  exarchus  in
each  case  led  off  by  singing  or  reciting  his  part  in
a  solo,  and  that  the  chorus  dancing  round  the  altar
then  expressed  their  feelings  of  joy  or  sorrow  at
his  story,  representing  the  perils  and  sufferings
of  Dionysus,  or  some  hero,  as  it  might  be.  Ac-
cordingly some  scholars  have  recognized  in  such
choral  songs,  or  in  a  proximate  deviation  from
them,  what  has  been  called  a  "  lyrical  tragedy,"
performed  without  actors  distinct  from  the  chorus,
and  conceived  to  be  a  transition  step  between  the
Dithyramb  and  the  dramatic  Tragedy.  The  title,
however,  does  not  occur  in  ancient  writers,  and
therefore,  if  it  means  anything,  can  only  refer  to  re-
presentations of  the  character  we  have  just  ascribed
to  the  Dithyrambs  of  Arion,  modified  from  time  to
time,  according  to  circumstances  or  the  fancy  of
the  writer.  That  the  names  rpayepSia  and  rpdycp-
Sos  are  applied,  indeed,  to  works  and  writers  before
the  time  of  Thespis,  and  that  the  "  tragedy  "  of
that  age  was  entirely  choral,  without  any  regular
formal  dialogue,  is  evident  from  many  autho-
rities. Thus  Athenaeus  (xiv.  p.  630,  c),  ob-
serves that  the  whole  satyrical  poetry  formerly
consisted  of  choruses,  as  did  the  "  tragedy  "  of  old
times  (rj  Tore  rpaycpdia).  Again,  Diogenes  Laer-
tius  (iii.  56)  states  that  formerly  the  chorus  alone
acted  (SieSpafiarl^eu)  or  performed  a  drama,  on
which  Hermann  (Ojozwc.  vii.  218)  observes,  "after
the  Dithyramb  was  sung,  some  of  the  chorus  in
the  guise  of  Satyrs  came  forward  and  impro-
vised some  ludicrous  stories  ;  but  in  exhibitions
of  this  sort,"  he  adds,  *'  we  see  rather  dramaticae
tragoediae  initia,  quam  ullum  lyrici  cujusdam
generis  vestigium."  Lyric  poets  also  seem  to  have
been  spoken  of  as  Tragedians  ;  thus  according  to
Suidas  (s.v.)  Pindar  wrote  17  Spd/xaTa  TpayiKo.
("  but  not  lyrical  tragedies,"  Hermann,  l.  c),  and
Simonides  of  Ceos  wrote  tragedies,  or  a  tragedy,
as  some  manuscripts  have  it.  But  whatever  may
be  inferred  from  this,  it  only  proves  that  Dithy-
rambic  poets  were  also  called  Tragedians,  just  as
in  the  Scholia  on  Aristophanes  {Plut.  290)  a  writer
is  described  as  ^iBvpa^Soiroibs  f}  Tpay^5itd(TKa\os.
For  the  arguments  on  both  sides  see  Hermann,
I.  c. ;  and  Bockh  on  the  Orchomenian  Inscriptions.
(Greek  Theatre,  p.  28.)

The  choral  Dithyrambic  songs,  accompanied  with
mimetic  action  (the  lyrical  tragedy  ?),  prevailed  to
Borae  extent,  as  all  choral  poetry  did,  amongst  the
Dorians  of  the  Peloponnesus  (Muller,  Dorians,  ii.
10.  §  6)  ;  whence  their  derivative,  the  choral  ele-
ment of  the  Attic  tragedy,  was  always  written  in
the  Dorian  dialect,  thus  showing  its  origin.  The
lyrical  poetry  was,  however,  especially  popular  at
Sicyon  and  in  Corinth.  In  the  latter  city  Arion
made  his  improvements  ;  in  the  former  "  tragic
choruses,"  i.  e.  dithyrambs  of  a  sad  and  plaintive
character,  were  very  ancient  (Herod,  v,  67  ;
Welcker,  Nachtrag,  p.  235),  and  the  Sicyonians
are  also  said  to  have  been  the  inventors  of  the
Tpay(pB'<f.  {rpaytf^ias  evpeTui  ynev  SiJcvwj'toi,  re-
Ma-iovpyol  Se  'krriKol  iroir^Tal,  Themist.  xxvii.
p.  406,  Dindorf )  ;  but  of  course  this  can  only
mean,  that  the  dramatic  tragedy  was  a  derivative,


TRAGOEDIA.

through  many  changes,  of  the  old  satyrical  rpay^
5io,  i.  e.  of  the  songs  sung  with  mimetic  dancing  by
the  goatlike  Satyrs,  or  as  others  would  say,  round
the  altar,  on  which  lay  the  burnt  sacrifice  of  a
goat.  It  appears  then  that  there  is  a  good  and  in-
telligible foundation  for  the  claims  which,  accord-
ing to  Aristotle  (Poet  iii.  3),  were  made  by  the
Peloponnesians,  and  especially  by  the  Sicyonians,
to  the  invention  of  "  tragedy,"  understanding  by  it
a  choral  performance,  such  as  has  been  described
above.  Now  the  subjects  of  this  Dithyrambic
tragedy  were  not  always,  even  in  ancient  times,
confined  to  Dionysus.  Even  Arion  wrote  Dithy-
rambs, lelating  to  different  heroes  (Herod,  i.  23),
a  practice  in  which  he  was  followed  by  succeeding
poets,  who  wrote  Dithyramb- like  odes  (whence
they  were  classed  amongst  the  rpayiKol  Troirjrof),
which  they  called  Centaurs,  Ajaces,  or  Memnons,
as  it  might  be.  (Zenob.  v.  40.)  Thus,  Epigenes
the  Sicyonian  is  said  to  have  written  a  tragedy,
i.  e.  a  piece  of  dithyrambic  poetry  on  a  subject  un-
connected with  Dionysus,  which  was  consequently
received  with  the  cry  of  ovdlv  irphs  rhp  Aiovvaov,
or  "this  has  nothing  to  do  with  Bacchus."
(Apostolius,  XV.  13.)  If  this  anecdote  be  true,
and  Epigenes  preceded  Arion,  the  introduction  of
the  Satyrs  into  the  Dithyrambic  chorus  by  the
latter,  may  possibly  have  been  meant  to  satisfy  the
wishes  of  the  people  ;  but  whether  it  was  so  or
not,  there  is  scarcely  any  doubt  that  from  the  time
of  Arion,  the  tragic  dithyramb  gradually  became
less  satyrical  and  sportive  in  its  character,  till  the
creation  of  the  independent  Satyric  drama  and  the
Attic  dramatic  tragedy.  (Bode,  p.  23.)

As  to  the  steps  by  which  this  was  effected,
Aristotle  (Poet.iv.  14)  says,  "Tragedy  was  at  the
first  an  extemporaneous  effusion  (an  apxf)s  avro-
(rxeSiaa-TiK-fi),  and  was  derived  airh  ruv  ^^apx^v-
T(t>v  rhv  AidvpafxSoj/,  i.  e.  from  the  leaders  or  the
chief  singers  of  the  Dithyramb,  who  probably  sang
or  recited  their  parts  in  the  trochaic  metre,  while
the  main  body  of  the  ode  was  written  in  irregular
verse.  It  is  easy  to  conceive  how  the  introduction
of  an  actor  or  speaker  independent  of  the  chorus
might  have  been  suggested  by  the  exarchs  or  cory-
phaei coming  forward  separately  and  making  short
off-hand  speeches  (Welcker,  NacUrag,  p.  228),
whether  learnt  by  heart  beforehand,  or  mdde  on
the  spur  of  the  moment.  [Chorus.]  But  it
is  also  possible,  if  not  probable,  that  it  was  sug-
gested by  the  rhapsodical  recitations  of  the  epic
and  gnomic  poets  formerly  prevalent  in  Greece :
the  gnomic  poetry  being  generally  written  in
Iambic  verse,  the  metre  of  the  Attic  dialogue,  and
which  Aristotle  {Poet.  4)  says  was  used  by  Homer
in  his  Margites,  though  its  invention  is  commonly
ascribed  to  Archilochus.  In  fact  the  rhapsodists
themselves  are  sometimes  spoken  of  as  actors
(vTTOKpiTal)  of  the  pieces  they  recited,  which  they
are  also  said  to  act  (v-KOKpivdaQai,  Athen.  xiv.  p.
629,  d  ;  Muller,  Literature,  &c.,  p.  34).  But  if
two  or  more  rhapsodes  were  called  upon  to  go
through  an  episode  of  a  poem,  a  regulation  which
obtained  at  the  Panathenaca,  and  attributed  to
Solon  or  Hipparchus  (Wolf,  Proleg.  p.  97  ;  Plato,
Hippar.  p.  228),  it  is  clear  that  they  would  pre-
sent much  of  a  dramatic  dialogue.  In  fact  (Bode,
p.  6)  the  principal  scenes  of  the  whole  Iliad
might  in  this  way  have  been  represented  as
parts  of  a  drama.  These  recitations  then  being  so
common,  it  was  natural  to  combine  with  the  re-


TRAGOEDIA.

presentation  of  the  Dithyramb,  itself  a  mixture  of
recitative  and  choral  song,  the  additional  element
of  the  dialogue,  written  in  Iambic  verse,  a  measure
suggested  perhaps  by  the  gnomic  poetry,  and  used
by  Solon  about  the  time  of  the  origin  of  the  dia-
logue (Solon,  Frag.  28,  Gaisford),  more  especially
as  it  is  the  most  colloquial  of  all  Greek  metres
(XiKTLKbv)  and  that  into  which  common  conversa-
tion most  readily  falls.  It  is  indeed  only  a  con-
jecture that  the  dialogue  or  the  Ionian  element  of
Attic  tragedy  was  connected  with  the  rhapsodical
recitations,  but  it  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that
Homeric  rhapsodes  were  common  at  Sicyon  (Herod.
V.  67),  the  cradle  of  the  Dorian  tragedy,  and  also
at  Brauron  in  Attica,  v/here  the  worship  of  Diony-
sus existed  from  ancient  times.  (Hesych.  s.  v.
Bpavpuviois.)  This  however  is  certain,  that  the
union  of  the  Iambic  dialogue  with  the  lyrical
chorus  took  place  at  Athens  under  Peisistratus,  and
that  it  was  attributed  to  Thespis,  a  native  of
Icarus,  one  of  the  country  demes  or  parishes  of
Attica  where  the  worship  of  Dionysus  had  long
prevailed.  The  introduction  of  this  worship  into
Attica,  with  its  appropriate  choruses,  seems  to  have
been  partly  owing  to  the  commands  of  the  Dorian
oracle  (Dem.  c.  Mid.  p.  531),  in  very  early  times.
Thus  it  is  stated  (Plato,  Alinos,  p.  321  ;  Plut.  Sol.
29),  that  tragedy  (i.  e.  the  old  Dithyrambic  and
Satyrical  tragedy)  was  very  ancient  in  Attica,  and
did  not  originate  with  Thespis  or  his  cotempora-
ries.  This  alteration  made  by  him,  and  which
gave  to  the  old  tragedy  {apxc/xeviov  twv  ivepl
©eo-TTtj/  ^§77  Ti]v  TpaycpSiav  Kivitv)  a  new  and  dra-
matic character  (making  it  an  ignotum  tragicae
genuss  Hor.  Art.  Poet.  275),  was  very  simple  but
very  important.  He  introduced  an  actor,  as  it  is
recorded,  for  the  sake  of  giving  rest  to  the  chorus
(Diog.  Laert.  iii.  50)  and  independent  of  it,  in
which  capacity  he  probably  appeared  himself  (Plut.
Sol.  29),  taking  various  parts  in  the  same  piece,
under  various  disguises,  which  he  was  enabled  to
assume  by  means  of  the  linen  masks,  the  invention
of  which  is  attributed  to  him.  Now  as  a  chorus,
by  means  of  its  leader,  could  maintain  a  dialogue
with  the  actor,  it  is  easy  to  see  how  with  one
actor  only  "  a  dramatic  action  might  be  introduced,
continued,  and  concluded,  by  the  speeches  between
the  choral  songs  expressive  of  the  joy  or  sorrow  of
the  chorus  at  the  various  events  of  the  drama."
Thus  MUUer  observes  that  in  the  play  of  Pentheus,
supposed  to  have  been  composed  by  Thespis,  "  a
single  actor  might  appear  successively  as  Dionysus,
Pentheus,  a  messenger.  Agave  the  mother  of  Pen-
theus, and  in  these  characters  express  designs  and
intentions,  or  relate  events  which  could  not  be  re-
presented, as  the  murder  of  Pentheus  by  his
mother :  by  which  means  he  would  represent  the
substance  of  the  fable  as  it  appears  in  the  Bacchae
of  Euripides."  (Muller,  p.  29  ;  Bode,  p.  57.)
With  respect  to  the  character  of  the  drama  of
Thespis  there  has  been  much  doubt :  some  writers,
and  especially  Bentley  (Phalar.  p.  218),  have
maintained  that  his  plays  were  all  satyrical  and
ludicrous,  i.  e.  the  plot  of  them  was  some  story  of
Bacchus,  the  chorus  consisted  principally  of  satyrs,
and  the  argument  was  merry  —  an  opinion  indeed
which  is  supported  by  the  fact  that  in  the  early
part  of  his  time,  the  satyric  drama  had  not  ac-
quired a  distinctive  character.  It  may  also  appear
to  be  confirmed  by  the  statement  (Aristot  Poet.  4)
that  at  first  the  Tragedians  made  use  of  the  tro-


TRAGOEDIA.  1143

chaic  tetrameter,  as  being  better  suited  to  the
satyrical  and  saltatorial  nature  of  their  pieces.
But  perhaps  the  truth  is  that  in  the  early  part  of
his  career  Thespis  retained  the  satyrical  character
of  the  older  tragedy,  but  afterwards  inclined  to
more  serious  compositions,  which  would  almost
oblige  him  to  discard  the  Satyrs  from  his  choruses.
That  he  did  write  serious  dramas  is  intimated  by
the  titles  of  the  plays  ascribed  to  him,  as  well  as
by  the  character  of  the  fragments  of  Iambic  verse
quoted  by  Plutarch  as  his  (Bentley,  Phalar.  p.
214),  and  which  even  if  they  are  forgeries  of
Heraclides  Ponticus,  at  least  prove  what  was  the
opinion  of  a  scholar  of  Aristotle  on  the  subject.
Besides  the  assertion  that  Sophocles  (Suidas,  in
vit.)  wrote  against  the  chorus  of  Thespis  seems  to
show  that  there  was  some  similarity  of  character
between  the  productions  of  the  two  poets.  (Bode,
p.  47.)  A  summary  of  the  arguments  in  favour
of  the  serious  character  of  the  tragedy  of  Thespis
is  given  by  Welcker  {NacUrag,  pp.  257 — 276).
The  invention  of  the  prologus  and  rhesis  of  tragedy
(an  expression  clearly  in  some  measure  identical
with  the  introduction  of  an  actor)  is  also  ascribed
to  Thespis  by  Aristotle.  (Themist.  p.  382,  ed.
Dind.)  By  the  former  word  is  meant  the  first
speech  of  the  actor  (Aristot.  Poet.  12),  or  the
prooemium  with  which  he  opened  the  piece  ;  the
chorus  then  sang  the  first  ode  or  TrapoSos,  after
which  came  the  ^^crts  or  dialogue  between  the
actor  and  the  principal  choreutae.  The  invention
of  this  dialogue  is  also  alluded  to  in  the  phrase
Ae'letwy  Se  yeyojuevris.  (Id.  4.)  It  is  evident  that
the  introduction  of  the  dialogue  must  also  have
caused  an  alteration  in  the  arrangement  of  the
chorus,  which  could  not  remain  cyclic  or  circular,
but  must  have  been  drawn  up  in  a  rectangular
form  about  the  thymele  or  altar  of  Bacchus  in
front  of  the  actor,  who  was  elevated  on  a  platform
or  table  (iKeSs),  the  forenmner  of  the  stage.  The
statement  in  Pollux  (iv.  123),  that  this  was  the
case  before  Thespis  seems  incorrect.  (Welcker,
Nacktrag,  p.  268.)  If  we  are  right  in  our  notion
of  the  general  character  of  the  Thespian  drama,
the  phrase  ovSev  irphs  Aiovvaov,  which  was  cer-
tainly used  in  his  time,  was  first  applied  to  his
plays  at  Athens,  as  being  unconnected  with  the
fortunes  of  Dionysus,  and  as  deviations  from  the
fiiKpoL  fivdoi  Kal  Ae|ts  yeXoia  of  his  predecessors.
Plutarch  however  {Symp.  i.  5)  supposes  that  its
first  application  was  later :  he  says  "  when  Phryni-
chus  and  Aeschylus  continued  to  elevate  tragedy
to  legends  and  tales  of  sufferings  (ets  fivQovs  koL
Trddr]  irpoaySvrai/),  the  people  missing  and  regret-
ting the  old  Satyric  chorus,  said,  "  What  is  this  to
Bacchus  ?  "  Hence  the  expression  was  used  to  sig-
nify what  was  mal-a-propos,  or  beside  the  ques-
tion.

The  reader  may  have  observed  that  we  have  not
noticed  the  lines  of  Horace  (Ar.  Poet.  276)  :

"  Dicitur  et  plaustris  vexisse  poemata  Thespis,
Quae  canerent  agerentque  peruncti  faecibus  ora.'*

The  fact  is  that  they  are  founded  on  a  misconcep-
tion of  the  origin  of  the  Attic  tragedy,  and  that  the
tale  about  the  wagons  of  Thespis  probably  arose  out
of  a  confusion  of  the  wagon  of  the  comedian  Susarion
with  the  platform  of  the  Thespian  actor.  The  first
representation  of  Thespis  was  in  b.  c.  535.  His
immediate  successors  were  the  Athenian  Choerilua
and  Phrynichus,  the  former  of  whom  represented
4d  4


1144


TRAGOEDIA.


plays  as  early  as  b.  c.  524.  He  is  said  l)y  Suidas
to  have  written  150  pieces  :  from  the  title  of  one
of  them,  the  "  Alope,"  its  subject  seems  to  have
been  a  legend  of  Attic  origin.  (Pans.  i.  14.  §  3  ;
Bode,  p.  60.)  That  he  excelled  in  the  Satyrical
drama  invented  by  Pratinas,  is  indicated  by  the
line  of  an  unknown  author,

'UvIku  fJLiv  fia(n\€vs  -^v  XoipiXos  iv  Sarvpois,

and  if  he  wrote  anything  like  the  number  of  dra-
mas ascribed  to  him,  it  is  also  evident  that  the
custom  of  contending  with  Tetralogies  must  have
been  of  early  origin,  for  there  were  only  two  dra-
matic festivals  during  the  year.

Phrynichus  was  a  pupil  of  Thespis,  and  gained
his  first  victory  in  the  dramatic  contests  B.C.  511.
In  his  works,  the  lyric  or  choral  element  still  pre-
dominated over  the  dramatic,  and  he  was  distin-
guished for  the  sweetness  of  his  melodies,  which
in  the  time  of  the  Peloponnesian  war  were  very
popular  with  the  admirers  of  the  old  style  of  music.
The  esteem  in  which  his  "  ambrosial  songs  "  were
then  held  is  shown  in  several  passages  of  Aristo-
phanes (Aves,  748,  Thesm.  164),  and  in  the  line
(Vesp.  219)  where  the  dicasts  are  made  to  chaunt
the  old  Sidonian  sweet  songs  of  Phrynichus,

Ka\  fiivvpl^ovres  fxeXr]
^ApxaiOfieXiffLdavocppwixvpi^TO"

"  Sidonian  "  being  an  allusion  to  the  play  which  he
wrote  called  the  Phoenissae.  The  first  use  of
female  masks  is  also  attributed  to  him  (Suidas,  in
vit),  and  he  so  far  deviated  from  the  general  prac-
tice of  the  Attic  tragedians  as  to  write  a  drama
on  a  subject  of  cotemporary  history,  the  capture
of  Miletus  by  the  Persians,  B.  c.  494.  (Herod,  vi.

We  now  come  to  the  first  writer  of  Satyrical
dramas,  Pratinas  of  Phlius,  a  town  not  far  from
Sicyon,  and  which  laid  claim  to  tha  invention  of
tragedy  as  well  as  comedy.  (Bode,  p.  35.)  For
some  time  previously  to  this  poet,  and  probably  as
early  as  Thespis,  tragedy  had  been  gradually  de-
parting more  and  more  from  its  old  ohamcteristics,
and  inclining  to  heroic  fables,  to  which  the  chorus
of  Satyrs  was  not  a  fit  accompaniment.  But  the
fun  and  merriment  caused  by  them  were  too  good
to  be  lost,  or  displaced  by  the  severe  dignity  of
the  Aeschylean  drama.  Accordingly  the  Satyrical
drama,  distinct  from  the  recent  and  dramatic  tra-
gedy, but  suggested  by  the  sportive  element  of  the
old  Dithyramb,  was  founded  by  Pratinas,  who
however  appears  to  have  been  surpassed  in  his  own
invention  by  Choerilus.  It  was  always  written  by
tragedians,  and  generally  three  tragedies  and  one
Satyrical  piece  were  represented  together,  which  in
some  instances  at  least  formed  a  connected  whole,
called  a  tetralogy  {T^TpaXoyia).  The  Satyrical
piece  was  acted  last,  so  that  the  minds  of  the
spectators  were  agreeably  relieved  by  a  merry
after-piece  at  the  close  of  an  earnest  and  engrossing
tragedy.  The  distinguishing  feature  of  this  drama
was  the  chorus  of  Satyrs,  in  appropriate  dresses
and  masks,  and  its  subjects  seem  to  have  been
taken  from  the  same  class  of  the  adventures  of
Bacchus  and  of  the  heroes  as  those  of  tragedy  ;
but  of  course  they  were  so  treated  and  selected,
that  the  presence  of  rustic  satyrs  would  seem  ap-
propriate. In  their  jokes  and  drollery  and  naivete
consisted  the  merriment  of  the  piece  ;  for  the  kings
and  heroes  who  were  introduced  into  their  com-


TRAGOEDIA.

pany  were  not  of  necessity  thereby  divested  of
their  epic  and  legendary  character  (Horace,  Ar.
Poet.  222,  speaks  of  the  "  incolumi  gravitate  "),
though  they  were  obliged  to  conform  to  their  situ-
ation and  suffer  some  diminution  of  dignity,  from
their  position.  Hence  Welcker  {Naditrag^  p.  331)
observes,  the  Satyrical  drama,  which,  so  to  speak,
was  "  the  Epos  turned  into  prose,  and  interspersed
with  jokes  made  by  the  chorus,"  is  well  spoken  of
as  a  "  playful  tragedy "  (jcai^ovaa  TpaycfSia)^
being  both  in  form  and  materials  the  same  as  tra-
gedy.    Thus  also  Horace  {Ar.  Poet.  231)  says  :

EtTutire  leves  indigna  Tragoedia  versus
Intererit  Satyris  paulum  pudibunda  protervis,

alluding  in  the  first  line  to  the  mythic  or  epic  ele-
ment of  the  Satyric  drama,  which  he  calls  Tragoe-
dia, and  in  the  second  representing  it  as  being
rather  ashamed  of  its  company.  The  scene  was  of
course  laid  in  the  supposed  haunts  of  the  Satyrs,
as  we  learn  from  Vitruvius  (v.  8)  :  "  Satyiicae
scenae  ornantur  arboribus,  montibus  reliquisque
agrestibus  rebus,"  all  in  keeping  with  the  incidents
of  the  pieces,  and  reminding  the  spectators  of  the
old  Dithyramb  and  the  god  Dionysus,  in  whose
honour  the  dramatic  contests  were  originally  held.
We  must  however  observe  that  there  were  some
characters  and  legends,  which  as  not  presenting
any  serious  or  pathetic  aspects,  were  not  adapted,
for  tragedy,  and  therefore  were  naturally  appro-
priated to  the  Satyric  drama.  Such  were  Sisy-
phus, Autolycus,  Circe,  Callisto,  Midas,  Omphale,
and  the  robber  Skiron.  Hercules  also,  as  he  ap-
pears in  Aristophanes  (Ranae)  and  the  Alcestis
of  Euripides,  was  a  favourite  subject  of  this  drama,
as  being  no  unfit  companion  for  a  drunken  Silenus
and  his  crew.  (Muller,  295.)  The  Odyssee  also,
says  Lessing  (Leben  des  Sophocles,  §  115),  was  in
general  a  rich  storehouse  of  the  Satyrical  plays  ;
but  though  the  Cyclops  of  Euripides,  the  only
satyrical  play  extant,  was  taken  from  it,  the  list
of  Satyric  pieces  given  by  Welcker  (Nachirag,  p.
284 — 322)  hardly  confirms  this  assertion.

We  now  come  to  the  improvements  made  in
tragedy  by  Aeschylus,  of  which  Aristotle  (Poet.
iv,  §  16)  thus  speaks  :  — "  He  first  added  a  second
actor  and  diminished  the  parts  of  the  chorus,  and
made  the  dialogue  the  principal  part  of  the  action"
(Thv  x6yov  irpajTaywvKTTrju  irapecrKevacre),  He
also  availed  himself  of  the  aid  of  Agatharchus,  the
scene-painter,  and  improved  the  costume  of  his
actors  by  giving  them  thick-soled  boots  (i/xSaTai),
as  well  as  the  masks,  which  he  made  more  expres-
sive and  characteristic.  Horace  (Ar.  Poet.  278)
thus  alludes  to  his  improvements  :  —

"  personae  pallaeque  reporter  honestae
Aeschylus,  et  modicis  instravit  pulpita  tignis
Et  docuit  magnumque  loqui,  nitique  cothumo  "

The  custom  of  contending  with  trilogies  (rpi\oylai\
or  with  three  plays  at  a  time,  is  said  to  have  been
also  introduced  by  him.  In  fact  he  did  so  much  for
tragedy,  and  so  completely  built  it  up  to  its  "  tower-
ing height,"  that  he  was  considered  the  father  of  it.
The  subjects  of  this  drama,  as  we  have  before  inti-
mated from  Plutarch,  were  not  connected  with  the
worship  of  Dionysus  ;  but  rather  with  the  great
cycle  of  Hellenic  legends  and  some  of  the  myths
of  the  Homeric  Epos.  Accordingly  he  said  of  him-
self (Athen.  viii.  p.  347,  e)  that  his  dramas  were
but  scraps  and  fragments  from  the  great  feasts  of


TRAGOEDIA.

Homer.  Another  instance  of  his  departure  from
the  spirit  and  form  of  the  old  tragedy,  as  connected
with  Dionysus,  is  shown  in  his  treatment  of  the
Dithyrambic  chorus  of  fifty  men,  which  in  his  tri-
logy of  the  Oresteia  he  did  not  bring  on  the  stage
all  at  once,  but  divided  it  into  separate  parts  mak-
ing a  different  set  of  choreutae  for  each  of  the  three
pieces.  (Miiller,  Eumenid.)  In  the  latter  part  of
his  life  Aeschylus  made  use  of  one  of  the  improve-
ments of  Sophocles,  namely  the  rpiTaywvKTT'fjs^  or
third  actor.  This  was  the  finishing  stroke  to  the
dramatic  element  of  Attic  tragedy,  which  Sopho-
cles is  said  to  have  matured  by  further  improve-
ments in  costume  and  scene-painting.  Under  him
tragedy  appears  with  less  of  sublimity  and  stern-
ness than  in  the  hands  of  Aeschylus,  but  with
more  of  calm  grandeur  and  quiet  dignity  and  touch-
ing incident.  His  latter  plays  are  the  perfection
of  the  Grecian  tragic  drama,  as  a  work  of  art  and
poetic  composition  in  a  thoroughly  chastened  and
classic  style,  written  when  as  he  says  of  himself  he
had  put  away  the  boyish  pomp  of  Aeschylus  {rhv
AtVxvAou  SiaTreiraixws  uyKou),  and  the  harsh  ob-
scurity of  his  own  too  great  refinements,  and  at-
tained to  that  style  which  he  thought  the  best,
and  most  suited  for  portraying  the  characters  of
men,  (Pint,  de  Pro.  V.  S.  p.  79,  b.)  The  intro-
duction of  the  third  actor  enabled  him  to  do  this
the  more  effectually,  by  showing  the  principal  cha-
racter on  different  sides  and  under  different  cir-
cumstances, both  as  excited  by  the  opposition  of
one  and  draAvn  out  by  the  sympathies  of  another.
[HiSTRio,  p.  611.]  Hence  though  the  plays  of
Sophocles  are  longer  than  those  of  Aeschylus,  still
there  is  not  a  corresponding  increase  of  action,  but
a  more  perfect  delineation  of  character.  Creon  for
instance  in  the  Antigone,  and  Ajax  are  more  per-
fect and  minutely  drawn  characters  than  any  in
Aeschylus.  The  part  of  the  chorus  is,  on  the  other
hand,  considerably  diminished  in  his  plays.  Ano-
ther distinguishing  feature  in  them  is  their  moral
significance  and  ethical  teaching.  Though  the  cha-
racters in  them  are  taken  from  the  old  subjects  of
national  interest,  still  they  do  not  always  appear
as  heroes,  or  above  the  level  of  common  liumanity,
but  in  such  situations  and  under  the  influence  of
such  motives,  passions,  and  feelings  as  fall  to  the
lot  of  men  in  general :  so  that  "  every  one  may  re-
cognise in  them  some  likeness  of  himself."

In  the  hands  of  Euripides  tragedy  deteriorated
not  only  in  dignity,  but  also  in  its  moral  and  reli-
gious significance.  He  introduces  his  heroes  in
rags  and  tatters,  and  busies  them  with  petty  affairs,
and  makes  them  speak  the  language  of  every-day
life.  As  Sophocles  said  of  him  (Arist.  Poet.  25),
he  represented  men  not  as  they  ought  to  be,  but  as
they  are,  without  any  ideal  greatness  or  poetic
character  —  thoroughly  prosaic  personages.  His
dialogues  too  were  little  else  than  the  rhetorical
and  forensic  language  of  his  day  cleverly  put  into
verse  :  fidl  of  sophistry  and  quibbling  distinctions.
One  of  the  peculiarities  of  his  tragedies  was  the
TTpSXayos,  an  introductory  monologue,  with  which
some  hero  or  god  opens  the  play,  telling  who  he
is,  what  is  the  state  of  affairs,  and  what  has  hap-
pened up  to  the  time  of  his  address,  so  as  to  put
the  audience  in  possession  of  every  fact  which  it
might  be  necessary  for  them  to  know :  a  very
business-like  proceeding  no  doubt,  but  a  poor  make-
shift for  artistical  skill.  The  "Deus  ex  machina,"
also,  though  not  always,  in  a  "  nodus,  tali  vindice


TRAGOEDIA.


1145


dignus,"  was  frequently  employed  by  Euripides  to
effect  the  denoument  of  his  pieces.  The  chorus  too
no  longer  discharged  its  proper  and  high  functions
either  as  a  representative  of  the  feelings  of  unpre-
judiced observers,  or,  "  as  one  of  the  actors,  and  a
part  of  the  whole,"  joining  in  the  development  of
the  piece.  Many  of  his  choral  odes  in  fact  are
but  remotely  connected  in  subject  with  the  action
of  the  play.  Another  novelty  of  Euripides  was  the
use  of  the  "  monodies  "  or  lyrical  songs,  in  which
not  the  chorus,  but  the  principal  persons  of  the
drama,  declare  their  emotions  and  sufferings.  They
were  amongst  the  most  brilliant  parts  of  his  pieces,
and  being  sung  by  persons  on  the  stage,  are  some-
times described  as  (pSal  anh  crK'^vris.  (Phot.  Lex.
s.  V.)  Aristophanes  often  parodied  them,  and
makes  Euripides  say  of  himself  {Ranae,  944),  that
he  "  nurtured  tragedy  with  monodies,  introducing
Cephisophon  "  his  chief  actor,  to  sing  them.

E?t'  av4Tpe(pov  fiovcfSiais^  KrjcpicroepwvTa  fiiyvvs.

Euripides  was  also  the  inventor  of  tragi-comedy,
which  not  improbably  suggested,  as  it  certainly
resembled,  the  'IXapoTpaycfSia  of  the  Alexandrian
age,  the  latter  being  a  half-tragic,  half-comic  di-ama,
or  rather  a  parody  or  travesty  of  tragical  subjects.
A  specimen  of  the  Euripidean  tragi-comedy  is  still
extant  in  the  Alcestis,  acted  B.  c.  438,  as  the  last
of  four  pieces,  and  therefore  as  a  substitute  for  a
Satyrical  drama.  Though  tragic  in  its  form  and
some  of  its  scenes,  it  has  a  mixture  of  comic  and
satyric  characters  (c.  g.  Hercules)  and  concludes
happily.

It  remains  to  make  some  remarks  on  the  nature
and  object  of  Greek  tragedy  in  general,  and  on
the  parts  into  which  it  was  divided.  According
to  Plato  (Leg.  vii.  p.  817)  the  truest  tragedy  is  an
imitation  of  the  noblest  and  best  life :  [xi[xrf<Ti5
Tov  KaWiffTov  Koi  api(TTOv  fiiov.  Aristotle's  de-
finition is  more  comprehensive  and  perhaps  perfect.
"  Tragedy  is  an  imitation  of  an  action  that  is  im-
portant ((TTTOuSaias),  and  entire,  and  of  a  proper
magnitude,  in  pleasurable  language,  by  means  of
action,  not  of  narration,  and  effecting  through  ter-
ror and  pity  the  refinement  and  correction  of  such
passions  "  {r^v  toiovtwv  iraOrjfjLdTwv  Kadapciv).  He
then  adds,  Tragedy  contains  six  parts  :  the  story,
i.  e.  the  combination  of  incidents  or  plot,  manners,
expression,  sentiment,  decoration,  and  music  (fivdos
/cat  ^07j,  Koi  Ae|is,  Ka\  Siduoia,  Kol  6\pis,  /col  fxeXo-
TToua).  Of  these  the  story  is  the  principal  part,
developing  the  character  of  agents,  and  being  in
fact  the  very  soul  of  tragedy.  The  manners  come
next,  and  manifest  the  disposition  of  the  speakers.
The  sentiments  take  the  third  place,  and  compre-
hend whatever  is  said,  whether  proving  anything,
or  expressing  some  general  reflection.  Aftervv.ards
he  adds.  Fables  are  of  two  sorts,  simple  and  com-
plicated (o^  ftev  cnr\o7.  ot  5e  7r67r\e7^cVot),  the
catastrophe  of  the  former  produced  without  a  revo-
lution or  discovery,  of  the  latter  with  one  or  both.
Now  a  revolution  (irepnT^Teia)  is  a  change  to  the
reverse  of  what  is  expected  from  the  circumstances
of  the  action :  a  discovery  (avayviopicris)  is  a  change
from  known  or  unknown,  happening  between  cha-
racters whose  happiness  or  unhappiness  forms  the
catastrophe  of  the  drama.  The  best  sort  of  dis-
covery is  accompanied  by  a  revolution,  as  in  the
Oedipus.  Aristotle  next  enumerates  the  parts  of
quantity  (Karh  rh  troahv)  or  division  in  tragedy :
these  are,  the  prologue,  episode,  exode,  and  choraj


1146


TRAGOEDIA.


songs  ;  tlie  last  divided  into  the  parode  and  stasi-
mon.  The  irpShoyos  is  all  that  part  of  a  tragedy
which  precedes  the  parodos  of  the  chorus,  i.  e.  the
first  act.  The  eirnadSiov  is  all  the  part  between
whole  choral  odes.  The  e|o5os  that  part  which
has  no  choral  ode  after  it.  Of  the  choral  part  the
trdpoSos  is  the  first  speech  of  the  whole  chorus  ( not
broken  up  into  parts) :  the  stasimon  is  without
anapaests  and  trochees.  These  two  divisions  were
sung  by  all  the  choreutae  (koivo.  airdpTwv),  but
the  "  songs  on  the  stage  "  and  the  kS/jl/xoi  by  a
part  only  (^Sta  Sk  rh  cnrh  t^s  (T/ctjj/tjs  koI  k6ix[xoi).
The  commus,  which  properly  means  a  wailing  for
the  dead,  was  generally  used  to  express  strong  ex-
citement, or  lively  sympathy  with  grief  and  suffer-
ing, especially  by  Aeschylus.  It  was  common  to
the  actors  and  a  portion  only  of  the  chorus  (ko/a/x^s
5e  dprjvos,  Koivhs  X^P^^i  '^"^  """^  (Tktjj'tjs),  whence
its  derivative  Ko/xfiaTiKoi  is  used  to  designate
broken  and  interrupted  songs  sung  either  by  indi-
vidual choreutae  or  divisions  of  the  chorus.  (M  til-
ler, Eumen.  p.  84.)  Again  the  irapoSos  was  so
named  as  being  the  passage-song  of  the  chorus
sung  while  it  was  advancing  to  its  proper  place  in
the  orchestra,  and  therefore  in  anapaestic  or  march-
ing verse :  the  crrda-ifiov^  as  being  chaunted  by  the
chorus  when  standing  still  in  its  proper  position.
(Suid.  and  Etym.  Magn.)

With  respect  to  the  ends  or  purposes  of  Tragedy,
Aristotle  observes  that  they  are  best  effected  by
the  representation  of  a  change  of  fortune  from
prosperity  to  adversity,  happening  to  a  person
neither  eminently  virtuous  nor  just,  nor  yet  in-
volved in  misfortune  by  deliberate  vice  or  villany,
but  by  some  error  of  human  frailty,  and  that  he
should  also  be  a  person  of  high  fame  and  eminent
prosperity,  like  Oedipus  or  Thyestes.  Hence,  he
adds,  Euripides  is  not  censurable,  as  is  generally
supposed  ;  for  tragedies  with  an  unhappy  termina-
tion like  his,  have  always  the  most  tragic  effect  ;
and  Euripides  is  the  most  tragic  of  all  poets,  i.  e.
succeeds  best  in  producing  pity :  an  expression
especially  true  of  some  scenes  in  the  Medea.  In
Aeschylus,  the  feelings  of  pity  and  melancholy
interest  are  generally  excited  by  the  relation  in
which  his  heroes  stand  to  destiny.  He  mostly
represents  them  as  vainly  struggling  against  a
blind  but  irresistible  fate,  to  whose  power  (ac-
cording to  the  old  Homeric  notion)  even  the  father
of  gods  and  men  is  forced  to  yield,  and  it  is  only
occasionally,  as  in  the  splendid  chorus  of  the  Eume-
nides  (522),  that  we  trace  in  him  any  intimations
of  a  moral  and  retributive  government  of  the  world.
Hence  there  is  a  want  of  moral  lessons  in  his
works.  In  Sophocles,  on  the  contrary,  we  see
indications  of  a  different  tone  of  thought,  and  the
jBuperintendence  of  a  directing  and  controlling
power  is  distinctly  recognized :  "  the  great  Zeus
in  heaven,  who  superintends  and  directs  all  things."
(^Ekctr.  174;  Thiriwall,  Phil.  Mus.  vol.  ii.  p.  492.)

The  materials  of  Greek  tragedy  were  the  national
mythology,

"  Presenting  Thebes,  or  Pelops'  line,
Or  the  tale  of  Troy  divine."

The  exceptions  to  this  were  the  two  historical
tragedies,  the  "  Capture  of  Miletus,"  by  Phryni-
chus,  and  the  "  Persians  "  of  Aeschylus  ;  but  they
belong  to  an  early  period  of  the  art.  Hence  the
plot  and  story  of  the  Grecian  tragedy  were  of
uecessity  known  to  the  spectators,  a  circumstance


TRAGOEDIA.

which  strongly  distinguishes  the  ancient  tragedy
from  the  modern,  and  to  which  is  owing  in  some
measure  the  practical  and  quiet  irony  in  the  hand-
ling of  a  subject,  described  by  Thiriwall  {Phil.
Mus.  ii.  p.  483,  &c.)  as  a  characteristic  of  the
tragedy  of  Sophocles.

The  functions  of  the  Chonis  in  Greek  Tragedy
were  very  important,  as  described  by  Horace  \Ar.
Poet.  193),

"  Actoris  partes  chorus  officiumque  virile
Defendat :  neu  quid  medios  intercinat  actus.
Quod  non  proposito  conducat,et  haereatapte,"&c.

We  must  conceive  of  it,  says  A.  W.  Schlegel,  as
the  personification  of  the  thought  inspired  by  the
represented  action  ;  in  other  words,  it  often  ex-
presses the  reflections  of  a  dispassionate  and  right-
minded  spectator,  and  inculcates  the  lessons  of  mo-
rality and  resignation  to  the  will  of  heaven,  taught
by  the  occurrence  of  the  piece  in  which  it  is  en-
gaged. Besides  this,  the  chorus  enabled  a  poet  to
produce  an  image  of  the  "  council  of  elders,"  which
existed  under  the  heroic  governments,  and  under
whose  advice  and  in  whose  presence  the  ancient
princes  of  the  Greek  tragedy  generally  acted.
This  image  was  the  more  striking  and  vivid,  inas-
much as  the  chorus  was  taken  from  the  people  at
large,  and  did  not  at  all  differ  from  the  appearance
and  stature  of  ordinary  men  ;  so  that  the  contrast
or  relation  between  them  and  the  actors  was  the
same  as  that  of  the  Homeric  Xaol  and  fii'OKTes.
Lastly,  the  choral  songs  produced  an  agreeable
pause  in  the  action,  breaking  the  piece  into  parts,
while  they  presented  to  the  spectator  a  lyrical
and  musical  expression  of  his  own  emotions,  or
suggested  to  him  lofty  thoughts  and  great  argu-
ments, iis  Schlegel  says,  the  chorus  was  the
spectator  idealised.  With  respect  to  the  number
of  the  chorus,  Miiller  {Lit.  of  Greece.,  300)  thinks
that  out  of  the  dithyrambic  chorus  of  50  a  quad-
rangular chorus  of  48  persons  was  first  formed,
and  that  this  was  divided  into  sets  of  12,  one  for
each  play  of  a  tetraloge  ;  but  in  the  time  of  So-
phocles, the  tragic  chorus  amounted  to  15,  a
number  which  the  ancient  grammarians  always
presuppose  in  speaking  of  it«  arrangements,  though
it  might  be  that  the  form  of  the  Aeschylean  tra-
gedy afterwards  became  obsolete.

The  preceding  account  should  be  read  in  connec-
tion with  the  articles  Chorus,  Dionysia,  Histrio,
and  Theatrum.

The  explanation  of  the  following  phrases  may
be  useful.

napaxop^yr}i.ia :  this  word  was  used  in  case  of
a  fourth  actor  appearing  on  the  stage  ;  probably
because  the  choragus  was  required  to  be  at  an
eortra  expense  in  supplying  him  with  costume,  &c.;
sometimes  actors  so  called  spoke,  as  the  character
of  Pylades  does  (Aesch.  Choeph.  900—902);
sometimes  they  were  mutes.

Tlapa(rK-f]vtov :  this  phrase  was  used  when  one
of  the  choreutae  spoke  in  song,  instead  of  a  fourth
actor,  probably  near  or  behind  the  side-scenes.
UapTiyop^fxaTa  were  voices  off  the  stage,  and  not
seen,  as  the  frogs  in  the  Ranae.  (Pollux,  iv.  109  ;
Schol.  in  Aristoph.  Pac.  113.)

napax(^P^I^a'''<'^',  persons  who  came  forward  but
once,  something  like  the  Trpdawira  TrpoTOTJ/ca,  or
introductory  persons  who  open  a  drama  and  never
appear  again  ;  as  the  watchman  in  the  Agamem-
non, and  Polydorus  in  the  Hecuba.     Terence  also


TRAGOEDIA.

frequently  uses  the   persona   protatica.     (Donat.
Ter.  Prolog,  ad  Andr.)

The  Sixopia  was  a  double  chorus,  formed  of  the
choruses  of  two  separate  plays :  thus  at  the  end
of  the  Eumenides  of  Aeschylus  the  Furies  of  one
play  and  the  festal  train  of  another  come  on  the
stage  together.   (Muller,  Literat.  <&c.  p.  300.)

The  principal  modern  writers  on  the  Greek
Tragedy  are  mentioned  in  the  course  of  the  article.
The  reader  may  also  consult  Wachsmuth,  vol.  ii.
pt.  ii.  pp.  467,  421 ;  Gruppe,  Ariadne^  Die  Tragische
Kunst  der  Griechen  in  ihrer  Entwickelung  und  in
ikrem  Zusammenhange  mit  der  Volkspoesie,  Berl.
1834  ;  Museum  Criticum,  vol.  ii.  p.  69,  &c.  ;  Cop-
\eston,  Praelectiones  Acadcmicae  ;  Schneider,  Ueber
das  Attisclie  Theaierwescji,  an  exceedingly  valuable
book.

2.  Roman.     The  tragedy  of  the  Romans  was,
for  the  most  part,  an  imitation  of,  or  rather  a  bor-
rowing from,  the  Greek,  the  more  imperfect  and
luinatural,   as    the    construction    of    the   Roman
theatre    afforded    no    appropriate    place   for   the
chorus,  Avhich  was  therefore  obliged  to  appear  on
the  stage,  instead  of  in  the  orchestra.     The  first
tragic  poet  and  actor  at  Rome  (Gellius,  xxi.  17)  was
Livius  Andronicus,  a  Greek  by  birth,  who  began
to   exhibit  in  B.  c   240.     From  the  account  in
Livy  (vii.  2),  it  would  seem  that  in  his  monodies
(or  the  lyrical  parts  sung,  not  by  a  chorus,  but  by
one  person),  it  was  customary  to  separate  the  sing-
ing from  the  mimetic  dancing,  leaving  the  latter
only  to  the  actor,  while  the  singing  was  performed
by  a  boy  placed  near  the  flute-player  (ante  tibi-
ci7iein)  ;  so  that  the  dialogue  only  {diverbia)  was
left  to  be  spoken  by  the  actors.     One  of  the  plays
written  by  him  was  an  "Andromeda  ;"  and  he
also  made  a  Latin  prose  translation  of  the  Odyssee.
The  next  tragic  poet  at  Rome  was  Naevius,  who
however  appears  to  have  written  comedies  as  well
as  tragedies  (Hieron.  in  Euseb.  Olymp.  144.  3),
and  a  history  of  the  first  Punic  war :  so  that  the
writing  of  tragedies  was  not  a  distinct  profession
at  Rome,  as  at  Athens.     An  "  Alcestis  "  seems  to
have  been  written  by  him.     To  the  same  epoch  as
Livius  Andronicus,  and  Naevius,  belongs  Ennius,
who  resembled  the  latter  in  being  an  epic  poet  as
well  as  a  tragedian.     Amongst  the  plays  written
by  him  are  mentioned,   a   Medea,   an    Ajax,   a
Phoenissae,  an  Iphigenia,  an  Andromache,  and  a
Hecuba.     The  metre  used  by  him  and  Naevius
was  iambic  or  trochaic  in  the  dialogue,  and  ana-
paestic for  the  lyrical  parts.    (Gellius,  xi.  4.)     The
next    distinguished   tragedian   was    Pacuvius,    a
nephew  of  Ennius,  and  a  painter  also.     His  style
was  more  remarkable  for  spirit  and  vigour  of  ex-
pression than  polish   or   refinement,  a  deficiency
attributable  to  his  age  and  provincial  origin,  as  he
was  bom  at  Brundisium.     Among  his  plays  occur
an  Antiope,  a  Chryses,  and  a  Dulorestes  (Quintil.
X.  1  ;  Cicero,   Orat.   iii.    39),   and    his  tragedies
found  admirers  even  in  the  time  of  Persius    (i.
77).     Cicero  {l.  c.)   quotes  from   him   a   spirited
translation  of  the  concluding  lines  of  the  Prome-
theus Vinctus  of  Aeschylus.     Attius   or   Accius
the  younger  was  junior  to  Pacuvius  by  about  fifty
years.     His  earlier  plays  were,  as  he  himself  ad-
mitted, harsh  and  obscure  (Gellius,  xiii.  2) ;  but
his  style  probably  altered  with  increasing  years.
Many  fragments  of  his  plays  occur  in  Cicero  and
the  Latin   grammarians,  Diomedes,  Nonius,  and
Varro.     He  was  also  a  writer  of  annals  in  hexa-


TRAGOEDIA.


1147


meter  verses.  (Macrob.  Sat.  i.  7.)  The  five  poets
mentioned  above  belong  to  the  earlier  epoch  of
Roman  tragedy,  in  which  little  was  written  but
translations  and  imitations  of  the  Greek,  with  oc-
casional insertions  of  original  matter.  How  they
imitated  the  structure  of  the  choral  odes  is  doubt-
ful, perhaps  they  never  attempted  it.  Ennius,
Pacuvius,  and  Accius  are  contrasted  by  Cicero
(rfe  Orat.  iii.  7),  with  Aeschylus,  Sophocles,  and
Euripides  ;  and  of  the  two  last  Quintilian  (x.  1.
§  97)  says,  "  Virium  Accio  plus  tribuitur  ;  Pacu-
viura  videri  doctiorem,  qui  esse  docti  affectant,
volunt,"

In  the  age  of  Augustus  the  writing  of  tragedies,
whether  original  or  imitations,  seems  to  have  been
quite  a  fashionable  occupation.  The  emperor  him^
self  attempted  an  Ajax,  but  did  not  succeed  ;  and
when  his  friends  asked  him,  '*  Quidnam  Ajax
ageret  ?  "  his  reply  was  "  Ajacem  suum  in  spongiam
incubuisse,"  (Suet.  Aug.  85.)  One  of  the  prin-
cipal tragedians  of  this  epoch  was  Asinius  PoUio,
to  whom  the  line  (Virg.  Eclog.  viii.  10)

*'  Sola  Sophocleo  tua  carmina  digna  cothumo,"

is  supposed  to  apply :  he  also  excelled  in  other
literary  accomplishments.  (Hor.  Carm.  ii.  1.)  Ovid
(Trist.  ii.  556)  also  wrote  a  tragedy,  of  which
Quintilian  (x.  1.  §  98)  says,  "  Ovidii  Medea  vi-
detur  mihi  ostendere,  quantum  ille  vir  praestare
potuerit  si  ingenio  suo  temperare  quam  indulgere
maluisset."  His  "  armorum  judicium  "  (Metamor.
xiii.)  between  Ajax  and  Ulysses,  on  which  Pacu-
vius and  Accius  also  wrote  dramas,  proves  that
he  might  have  rivalled  Euripides  in  rhetorical
skill.  Quintilian  also  says  of  Varius,  who  was
distinguished  in  epic  as  well  as  tragic  poetry  (Hor.
Carm.  i.  6,  Ar.  Poet.  55  ;  Tacit.  Dial.  xii.  1),  that
his  Thyestes  might  be  compared  with  any  of  the
Greek  tragedies.  Some  fragments  of  this  Thyestes
are  extant,  but  we  have  no  other  remains  of  the
tragedy  of  the  Augustan  age.  The  loss  perhaps  is
not  great  ;  for  the  want  of  a  national  and  indi-
genous mythology  must  have  disabled  the  Roman
poets  from  producing  any  original  counterparts  of
the  Greek  tragedy  ;  besides  which,  in  the  later
days  of  the  republic,  and  under  the  empire,  the
Roman  people  were  too  fond  of  gladiatorial  shows,
and  beast-fights,  and  gorgeous  spectacles,  to  en-
courage the  drama.  Moreover,  it  is  also  manifest
that  a  tragedy  like  that  of  the  Greeks  could  not
have  flourished  under  a  despotism.

The  only  complete  Roman  tragedies  that  have
come  down  to  us  are  the  ten  attributed  to  the
philosopher  Seneca.  But  whether  he  wrote  any
of  them  or  not  is  a  disputed  point.  It  is  agreed
that  they  are  not  all  from  the  same  hand,  and  it
is  doubtful  whether  they  are  all  of  the  same  age
even.  In  one  of  them,  the  Medea,  the  author
made  his  heroine  kill  her  children  on  the  stage,
•'  coram  populo,"  in  spite  of  the  precept  of  Horace.
Schlegel  (Lect.  viii.)  thus  speaks  of  them :  **  To
whatever  age  they  belong,  they  are  beyond  de-
scription bombastic  and  frigid,  utterly  unnatural  in
character  and  action,  and  full  of  the  most  revolting
violations  of  propriety,  and  barren  of  all  theatrical
eifect.  With  the  old  Grecian  tragedies  they  have
nothing  in  common  but  the  name,  the  exterior
form,  and  the  matter.  Their  persons  are  neither
ideal  nor  real  men,  but  misshapen  giants  of  pup-
pets, and  the  wire  that  moves  them  is  at  one  time
an  unnatural  heroism,  at  another  a  passion  alike


1148


TRIBULA.


unnatural,  which  no  atrocity  of  guilt  can  appal."
Still  they  have  had  admirers :  Heinsius  calls  the
Hippolytus  "  divine,"  and  prefers  the  Troades  to
the  Hecuba  of  Euripides :  even  Racine  has  bor-
rowed from  the  Hippolytus  in  his  Phedre.

Roman  tragedians  sometimes  wrote  tragedies
on  subjects  taken  from  their  national  history.
Pacuvius,  e.  g.  wrote  a  Paulus,  L.  Accius  a  Brutus
and  a  Decius.  (Cic.  de  Div.  i.  22.)  Curiatius  Ma-
temus,  also  a  distinguished  orator  in  the  reign  of
Domitian,  wrote  a  Domitius  and  a  Cato,  the  latter
of  which  gave  offence  to  the  rulers  of  the  state
(potentium  animos  qffendit.  Tacit.  Dial.  2  ;  Lang.
Vind.  Trag.  Roman,  p.  14).  The  fragments  of  the
Thyestes  of  Varius  are  given  by  Bothius.  Poet.
Seen.  Lat.  Frag.  p.  279.  [R.  W.]

TRA'GULA.     [Hasta,  p.  589,  a.]
TRANSA'CTIO  IN  VIA.    [Actio,  p.  1 1,  a.]
TRA'NSFUGA.     [Desertor.]
TRANSTRA.     [N avis,  p.  788,  a.]
TRANSVE'CTIO  E'QUITUM.    [Equites.]
TRAUMATOS  EK  PRONOIAS  GRAPHE
(rpavfiaros  t/c  irpovoias  ypacpri).     Our  principal
information  respecting  this  action  is  derived  from
two  speeches  of  Lysias,  namely,  Tcphs  '^.ifxuua  and
•jrept  rpav^aros  e/c  Trpofoias,  though   they  do  not
supply  us    with   many   particulars.      It   appears,
however,  that  this  action  could  not  be  brought  by
any  person  who  had  been   wounded  or  assaulted
by  another,  but  that  it  was  necessary  to  prove  that
there  had  been  an  intention  to  murder  the  person
who  had  been  wounded  ;  consequently  the  irpSvoia
consisted  in  such  an  intention.     Cases  of  this  kind
were  brought  before  the  Areiopagus  :  if  the  ac-
cused was  found  guilty,  he  was   exiled  from  the
state  and  his  property  confiscated.  (Compare  Dem.
c.  Aristocr.   627.  22,  c.  Boeot  1018.  9,  Aesch.  de
Fals.  Leg.  270,  c.  Oes.  440,  608  ;  Lys.  c.  Andoc.
p.  212  ;    Lucian,    Timon,  46  ;    Pollux,  viii.    40  ;
Meier,  Att.  Proc.  p.  314.)
TRESSIS.     [As,  p.  141,  a.]
TRESVIRI.     [Triumviri.]
TRIA'RII.    [Exercitus,  pp.  495  —497,  501,
b.]

TRl'BULA  or  TRI'BULUM  {Tpi§6\os\  a
corn-drag,  consisting  of  a  thick  and  ponderous
wooden  board,  which  was  armed  underneath  with
pieces  of  iron  or  sharp  flints  and  drawn  over  the
com  by  a  yoke  of  oxen,  either  the  driver  or  a  heavy
weight  being  placed  upon  it,  for  the  purpose  of  se-
parating the  grain  and  cutting  the  straw.  (Varro,
de  Re  Rust.  i.  52;  Ovid.  Met.  xiii.  803  ;  Plin.  H.
N.  xviii.  30  ;  Longus,  iii.  22  ;  Brunck,  Anal.  ii.
215  ;  Amos,  i.  3.)  Together  with  the  trihula  an-
other kind  of  drag,  called  traha,  was  also  some-
times used,  which  it  is  probable  was  either  entirely
of  stone  or  made  of  the  trunk  of  a  tree.  (Virg.
Georg.  i.  1 64  ;  Servius,  ad  loc.  ;  Col.  de  Re  Rust.
ii.  21.)  These  instruments  are  still  used  in  Greece,
Asia  Minor,  Georgia,  and  Syria,  and  are  described
by  various  travellers  in  those  countries,  but  more
especially  by  Paul  Lucas  (Voyage,  vol.  i.  p.  182).
Sir  R.  K.  Porter  {Travels^  vol.  i.  p.  158),  Jackson
{.Journey  from  India,  p.  249),  and  C.  Fellows,
(Journal,  pp.  70,  333).  The  com  is  threshed  upon
a  circular  floor  (area,  aKuv),  either  paved,  made
of  hardened  clay,  or  of  the  natural  rock.  It  is  first
heaped  in  the  centre,  and  a  person  is  constantly
occupied  in  throwing  the  sheaves  under  the  drag
as  the  oxen  draw  it  round.  Lucas  and  Fellows
have  given  prints  representing  the  tribula  as  now


TRIBUNUS.

used  in  the  East.  The  verb  trihulare  (Cato,  deRo
Rust.  23) ,  and  the  verbal  noun  trihulatio  were  ap-
plied in  a  secondary  sense  to  denote  affliction  in
general.  [J.  Y  ]

TRFBULUS  (rpi§oXos),  a  caltrop,  also  called
murex.  (Val.  Max.  iii.  7.  §  2  ;  Curt.  iv.  13.  §  36.)
When  a  place  was  beset  with  troops,  the  one  party
endeavoured  to  impede  the  cavalry  of  the  other
party  either  by  throwing  before  them  caltrops,
which  necessarily  lay  with  one  of  their  four  sharp
points  turned  upwards,  or  by  burying  the  cal-
trops with  one  point  at  the  surface  of  the  ground.
(Veget.  de  Re  Mil.  iii.  24;  Jul.  Afric.  69.  ap.  Vet.


Math.  Graec.-p.  311.)  The  annexed  woodcut  is
taken  from  a  bronze  caltrop  figured  by  Caylus
(Recueil,  iv.  pi.  98).  [J.  Y.]

TRIBU'NAL  (fiwa),  a  raised  platform,  or,  to
use  the  term  adopted  from  the  French,  tribune,  on
which  the  praetor  and  judices  sat  in  the  Basilica.
It  is  described  under  Basilica  (p.  199).

There  was  a  tribunal  in  the  camp,  which  was
generally  formed  of  turf,  but  sometimes,  in  a  sta-
tionary camp,  of  stone,  from  which  the  general
addressed  the  soldiers,  and  where  the  consul  and
tribunes  of  the  soldiers  administered  justice.
When  the  general  addressed  the  anny  from  the
tribunal,  the  standards  were  planted  in  front  of  it,
and  the  army  placed  round  it  in  order.  The  ad-
dress itself  was  called  Allocutio.  (Plut.  Pomp.  41;
Lipsius,  de  Milit.  Rom.  iv.  9  ;  Castra.)

A  tribunal  was  sometimes  erected  in  honour  of  a
deceased  imperator,  as,  for  example,  the  one  raised
to  the  memory  of  Germanicus.  (Tacit.^««a^.  ii.  83.)

Pliny  (//.  A^.  xvi.  1)  applies  the  term  to  em-
bankments against  the  sea.  [P.  S.]

TRIBU'NUS.  This  word  seems  originally  to
have  indicated  an  officer  connected  with  a  tribe
(trihus),  or  who  represented  a  tribe  for  certain  pur-
poses ;  and  this  is  indeed  the  character  of  the
officers  who  were  designated  by  it  in  the  earliest
times  of  Rome,  and  may  be  traced  also  in  the  later
officers  of  this  name.  We  subjoin  an  account  of
all  the  Roman  officers  known  under  this  name.

1.  Tribunes  op  the  three  ancient  tribes.
At  the  time  when  all  the  Roman  citizens  were
contained  in  the  three  tribes  of  the  Ramnes,  Titles,
and  Lucercs,  each  of  them  was  headed  by  a  tribune
(<pv\apxo^,  Dionys.  ii.  7;  Dig.  1.  tit.  2.  s.  2.  §  20;
Serv.  ad  Aen.  v.  560),  and  these  three  tribunes
represented  their  respective  tribes  in  all  civil,  reli-
gious, and  military  affairs  ;  that  is  to  eay,  thej


TRIBUNUS.

were  in  the  city  the  magistrates  of  their  tribes,  and
performed  the  sacra  on  their  behalf,  and  in  times
of  war  they  were  their  military  commanders.  (Liv.
i.  59;  Dionys.  ii.  64  ;  Varro,  de  Ling.Lat.  v.  81.)
Niebuhr  {Hist  of  Jiome^  i.  p.  331)  supposes  that
the  tribunus  cehrum  was  the  tribune  of  the  Ramnes,
the  oldest  and  noblest  among  the  three  tribes,  and
in  this  opinion  he  is  followed  by  Gottling  (Gesch.
d.  Rom.  Staatsverf  p.  166),  though  it  is  in  direct
contradiction  to  Dionysius  (ii.  13)  and  Pomponius
{de  Orig.  Jur.  Dig.  1.  tit.  2,  s.  2.  §  15),  according
to  whom  the  tribunus  celerum  was  the  commander
of  the  celeres^  the  king's  body-guard,  a  statement
which  is  rejected  by  Niebuhr  without  his  being
supported  by  any  ancient  authority,  except  that
Dionysius  in  one  passage  (ii.  64)  vaguely  speaks
of  tribuni  celerum  in  the  plural.  That  however
the  tribunus  celerum  was  really  distinct  from  the
three  tribunes  of  the  tribes,  is  acknowledged  by
Niebuhr  himself  in  a  subsequent  part  of  his  work
(iii.  p.  4 1 ).  In  what  manner  the  tribunus  celerum
was  appointed  is  uncertain,  but  notwithstanding
the  statement  of  Dionysius,  that  Tarquinius  Su-
perbus  gave  this  office  to  L.  Junius  Brutus,  it  is
much  more  probable  that  he  was  elected  by  the
tribes  or  curiae  ;  for  we  find  that  when  the  im-
perium  was  to  be  conferred  upon  the  king,  the
coraitia  were  held  under  the  presidency  of  the  tri-
bunus celerum,  and  in  the  absence  of  the  king,  to
whom  this  officer  was  next  in  rank,  he  convoked
the  comitia :  it  was  in  an  assembly  of  this  kind
that  Brutus  proposed  to  deprive  Tarquinius  of  the
imperium.  (Liv.  i.  59.)  A  law  passed  under  the
presidency  of  the  tribunus  celerum  was  called  a
lex  tribunicia,  to  distinguish  it  from  one  passed
under  the  presidency  of  the  king.  [Lex  Regia.]
The  tribunes  of  the  three  ancient  tribes  ceased  to
be  appointed  when  these  tribes  themselves  ceased
to  exist  as  political  bodies,  and  when  the  patricians
became  incorporated  in  the  local  tribes  of  Servius
TuUius.     [Tribus  (Roman).]

2.  Tribunes  of  the  Servian  tribes.  When
Servius  Tullius  divided  the  commonalty  into  thirty
local  tribes,  we  again  find  that  at  the  head  of  each
of  these  tribes  there  was  a  tribune,  whom  Dionysius
calls  (/)uAapxos,  like  those  of  the  patrician  tribes.
(Dionys.  iv.  1 4.)  He  mentions  them  only  in  connec-
tion with  the  city  tribes,  but  there  can  be  no  doubt
that  each  of  the  rustic  tribes  was  likewise  headed
by  a  tribune.  The  duties  of  these  tribunes,  who
were  without  doubt  the  most  distinguished  per-
sons in  their  respective  districts,  appear  to  have
consisted  at  first  in  keeping  a  register  of  the  in-
habitants in  each  district  and  of  their  property,
for  purposes  of  taxation  and  for  levying  the  troops
for  the  armies.  When  subsequently  the  Roman
people  became  exempted  from  taxes,  the  main  part
of  their  business  was  taken  from  them,  but  they
still  continued  to  exist.  Niebuhr  (i.  p.  421)  sup-
poses that  the  tribuni  aerarii,  who  occur  down  to
the  end  of  the  republic,  were  only  the  successors  of
the  tribunes  of  the  tribes.  Varro  (de  Ling.  Lot.
vi.  86)  speaks  oicuratores  omnium  tribuum^a,  name
by  which  he  probably  means  the  tribunes  of  the
tribes.  When  in  the  year  406  B.  c.  the  custom
of  giving  pay  {stipendium)  to  the  soldiers  was  in-
troduced, each  of  the  tribuni  aerarii  had  to  collect
the  tributum  in  his  own  tribe,  and  with  it  to  pay
the  soldiers  (Varro,  de  Ling.  Lot.  v.  181),  and  in
case  they  did  not  fulfil  this  duty,  the  soldiers  had
the  right  of  pignoris  capio  against  them.     (Cato,


TRIBUNUS.  1149

ap.  Gell.  vii.  10.)  In  later  times  their  duties  ap-
pear to  have  been  confined  to  collecting  the  tribu-
tum, which  they  made  over  to  the  military  quaes-
tors who  paid  the  soldiers.  [Quaestor.]  The
lex  Aurelia  (70  b.  c.)  raJJed  the  tribuni  aerarii  to
the  exercise  of  judicial  functions,  along  with  the
senators  and  equites,  as  these  tribunes  represented
the  body  of  the  most  respectable  citizens.  (Orelli,
Onom.  TulL  iii.  p.  142  ;  Appian,  de  Bell.  Civ.  iii.
23.)  But  of  this  distinction  they  were  subse-
quently deprived  by  Julius  Caesar.  (Suet.  Cues.
41.)

3.  Tribuni  plebis.  The  ancient  tribunes  of
the  plebeian  tribes  had  undoubtedly  the  right  of
convoking  the  meetings  of  their  tribes,  and  of  main-
taining the  privileges  granted  to  them  by  king
Servius  and  subsequently  by  the  Valerian  laws.
But  this  protection  was  very  inadequate  against
the  insatiable  ambition  and  usurpations  of  the
patricians.  When  the  plebeians,  impoverished  by
long  wars  and  cruelly  oppressed  by  the  patricians,
at  last  seceded  in  the  year  494  b.  c.  to  the  Mens
Sacer,  the  patricians  were  obliged  to  grant  to  the
plebeians  the  right  of  appointing  tribunes  (tribuni
plebis)  with  more  efficient  powers  to  protect  their
own  order  than  those  which  were  possessed  by  the
heads  of  the  tribes.  The  purpose  for  which  they
were  appointed  was  only  to  afford  protection  against
any  abuse  on  the  part  of  the  patrician  magistrates  ;
and  that  they  might  be  able  to  afford  such  protec-
tion, their  persons  were  declared  sacred  and  invio-
lable, and  it  was  agreed  that  whoever  acted  against
this  inviolability  should  be  an  outlaw,  and  that  his
property  should  be  forfeited  to  the  temple  of  Ceres.
(Liv.  ii.  33  ;  Dionys.  vi.  89.)  This  decree  seems
to  contain  evidence  that  the  heads  of  the  tribes  in
their  attempts  to  protect  members  of  their  own
order  had  been  subject  themselves  to  insult  and
maltreatment;  and  that  similar  things  occurred  even
after  the  sanctity  of  the  tribunes  was  established  by
treaty,  maybe  inferred  from  the  fact,  that,  some  time
after  the  tribuneship  was  instituted,  heavy  punish-
ments were  again  enacted  against  those,  who  should
venture  to  annoy  a  tribune  when  he  was  making  a
proposition  to  the  assembly  of  the  tribes.  The  law
by  which  these  punishments  were  enacted  ordained
that  no  one  should  oppose  or  interrupt  a  tribune
while  addressing  the  people,  and  that  whoever
should  act  contrary  to  this  ordinance  should  give
bail  to  the  tribunes  for  the  payment  of  whatever
fine  they  should  affix  to  his  offence  in  arraigning
him  before  the  commonalty :  if  he  refused  to  give
bail,  his  life  and  property  were  forfeited.  (Dionys.
vii.  1 7.)  It  should  however  be  observed  that  this
law  belongs  to  a  later  date  than  that  assigned  to  it
by  Dionysius,  as  has  been  shown  by  Niebuhr  (ii.
p.  98)  ;  it  was  in  all  probability  made  only  a  short
time  before  its  first  application  in  461  B.  c.  in  the
case  of  Caeso  Quinctius.  (Liv.  iii.  13.)  The  tri-
bunes were  thus  enabled  to  afford  protection  to  any
one  who  appealed  to  the  assembly  of  the  common-
alty, or  required  any  other  assistance.  They  were
essentially  the  representatives  and  the  organs  of
the  plebeian  order,  and  their  sphere  of  action  was
the  comitia  tributa.  With  the  patricians  and  their
comitia  they  had  nothing  to  do.  The  tribunes
themselves  however  were  not  judges  and  could  in-
flict no  punishments  (Gellius,  xiii.  12),  but  could
only  propose  the  imposition  of  a  fine  to  the  com-
monalty {imdtam  irrogare).  The  tribunes  were
thus  in  their  origin  only  a  protecting  magistracy  of


1150


TRIBUNUS.


the  plebs,  but  in  the  course  of  time  their  power
increased  to  such  a  degree  that  it  surpassed  that
of  all  other  magistrates,  and  the  tribunes  then,
as  Niebuhr  (i.  p.  614)  remarks,  became  a  ma-
gistracy for  the  whole  Roman  people  in  opposition
to  the  senate  and  the  oligarchical  elements  in
general,  althoiigh  they  had  nothing  to  do  with
the  administration  or  the  government.  During
the  latter  period  of  the  republic  they  became  true
tyrants,  and  Niebuhr  justly  compares  their  college,
such  as  it  was  in  later  times,  to  the  national  con-
vention of  France  during  the  first  revolution.  But
notwithstanding  the  great  and  numerous  abuses
which  were  made  of  the  tribunitian  power  by  in-
dividuals, the  greatest  historians  and  statesmen
confess  that  the  greatness  of  Rome  and  its  long
duration  is  in  a  great  measure  attributable  to  the
institution  of  this  office.

As  regards  the  number  of  the  tribunes  of  the
people,  all  the  ancient  writers  agree  (see  the  pas-
sages in  Niebuhr,  i.  n.  1356),  that  at  first  they
Avere  only  two,  though  the  accounts  differ  as  to  the
names  of  the  first  tribunes.  Soon  afterwards,  how-
ever, the  number  of  tribunes  was  increased  to  five,
one  being  taken  from  each  of  the  five  classes.  (As-
con,  in  Cic.  Corn.  p.  5Q,  ed.  Orelli ;  Zonar.  vii.  15.)
When  this  increase  took  place  is  quite  uncertain.
According  to  Dionysius  (vi.  89)  three  new  tribunes
were  added  immediately  after  the  appointment  of
the  first  two.  Cicero  {Fragm.  Cornel,  p.  451,
Orelli)  states,  that  the  year  after  the  institution  of
the  tribunes  their  number  was  increased  to  ten ;
according  to  Livy  (ii.  33)  the  first  two  tribunes
immediately  after  their  appointment  elected  them-
selves three  new  colleagues  ;  according  to  Piso  {ap.
Liv.  ii.  58)  there  were  only  two  tribunes  down  to
the  time  of  the  Publilian  laws.  It  would  be  hope-
less to  attempt  to  ascertain  what  was  really  the
case  ;  thus  much  only  is  certain,  that  the  number
was  not  increased  to  ten  till  the  year  457  b.  c,
and  that  then  two  were  taken  from  each  of  the
five  classes.  (Liv.  iii.  30  ;  Dionys.  x.  30.)  This
number  appears  to  have  remained  unaltered  down
to  the  end  of  the  empire.

The  time  when  the  tribunes  were  elected  was,
according  to  Dionysius  (vi.  89),  always  on  the  10th
of  December,  although  it  is  evident  from  Cicero
(ad  AU.  i.  1)  that  in  his  time  at  least  the  election
took  place  a.  d.  xvi.  Kal.  Sextil.  (17th  of  July.)
It  is  almost  superfluous  to  state  that  none  but  ple-
beians were  eligible  to  the  office  of  tribune  ;  hence
when  towards  the  end  of  the  republic  patricians
wished  to  obtain  the  office,  they  were  obliged  first
to  renounce  their  own  order  and  to  become  ple-
beians [Patricii,  p.  876]  ;  hence  also  under  the
empire  it  was  thought  that  the  princeps  should  not
be  tribune  because  he  was  a  patrician.  (Dion
Cass.  liii.  17,  32.)  But  the  influence  which  be-
longed to  this  office  was  too  great  for  the  emperors
not  to  covet  it.  Hence  Augustus  received  the  tri-
bunitia  potestas  for  life.  (Suet.  Aiig.  27  ;  Tacit.
Annal.  i.  2 ;  compare  Suet.  Tiber.  9, 23,  Vesp.  1 2,  Tit.
6.)  During  the  republic,  however,  the  old  regula-
tion remained  in  force  even  after  the  tribunes  had
ceased  to  be  the  protectors  of  the  plebs  alone.  The
only  instance  in  which  patricians  were  elected  to
the  tribuneship  is  mentioned  by  Livy  (iii.  65),
and  this  was  probably  the  consequence  of  an
attempt  to  divide  the  tribuneship  between  the
two  orders.  Although  nothing  appears  to  be  more
natural  than  that   the  tribunes  should  originally


TRIBUNUS.

have  been  elected  by  that  body  of  the  Roman  citi-
zens which  they  represented,  yet  the  subject  is  in-
volved in  considerable  obscurity.  Cicero  {Fragm.
Comd.  I.e.)  states  that  they  were  elected  by  the
comitia  of  the  curies  ;  the  same  is  implied  in  the
accounts  of  Dionysius  (I.  c.)  and  Livy  (ii.  56),  ac-
cording to  whom  the  comitia  of  the  tribes  did  not
obtain  this  right  till  the  Lex  Publilia  (472  B.C.;
Liv.  ii.  56  ;  Dionys.  x.  41).  Niebuhr  thinks  (i.
p.  618)  that  down  to  the  Publilian  law  they  were
elected  by  the  centuries,  the  classes  of  which  they
represented  in  their  number,  and  that  the  curies,  as
Dionysius  himself  mentions  in  another  place  (vi.
90),  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  election  except  to
sanction  it.  The  election  in  the  comitia  of  the
centuries  however  does  not  remove  the  difficulties,
whence  Gcittling  (p.  289)  is  inclined  to  think  that
the  tribunes  before  the  expiration  of  their  office
appointed  their  successors,  after  a  previous  con-
sultation with  the  plebeians.  The  necessity  of  the
sanction  by  the  curies  cannot  be  doubted,  but  it
appears  to  have  ceased  even  some  time  before  the
Publilian  law.  (Niebuhr,  ii.  p.  190.)  After  this
time  it  is  never  heard  of  again,  and  the  election  of
the  tribunes  was  left  entirely  to  the  comitia  tributa,
which  were  convoked  and  held  for  this  purpose  by
the  old  tribunes  previously  to  the  expiration  of  their
office.  (Liv.  ii.  56,  &c.;  Dionys.  ix.  43,  49.)  One
of  the  old  tribunes  was  appointed  by  lot  to  preside
at  the  election.  (Liv.  iii.  64;  Appian,  de  Bell.  Civ.
i.  14.)  As  the  meeting  could  not  be  prolonged  after
sunset,  and  the  business  was  to  be  completed  in
one  day,  it  sometimes  happened  that  it  was  obliged
to  break  up  before  the  election  was  completed,  and
that  those  who  were  elected  filled  up  the  legitimate
number  of  the  college  by  cooptatio.  (Liv.  I.  c.)  But
in  order  to  prevent  this  irregularity  the  tribune
L.  Trebonius  in  448  b.  c.  got  an  ordinance  passed,
according  to  which  the  college  of  the  tribunes
should  never  be  completed  by  cooptatio,  but  the
elections  shoidd  be  continued  on  the  second  day,
if  they  were  not  completed  on  the  first,  till  the
number  ten  was  made  up.  (Liv.  iii.  64,  65,  v.  10;
comp.  Niebuhr,  ii.  p.  383.)  The  place  where  the
election  of  the  tribunes  was  held  was  originally
and  lawfully  the  Forum,  afterwards  also  the
Campus  Martins,  and  sometimes  the  area  of  the
Capitol.

We  now  proceed  to  trace  the  gradual  growth  of
the  tribunitian  power.  Although  its  original  cha-
racter was  merely  auxilium  or  j^of]6eia  against  pa-
trician magistrates,  the  plebeians  appear  early  to
have  regarded  their  tribunes  also  as  mediators  or
arbitrators  in  matters  among  themselves.  This
statement  of  Lydus  (de  Magist.  i.  38,  44;  Dionys.
vii.  58)  has  been  pointed  out  by  Walter  (G^escA.  d.
Rom.  liechts,  p.  85).  The  whole  power  possessed
by  the  college  of  tribunes  was  designated  by  the
name  tribunicia  potestas,  and  extended  at  no  time
further  than  one  mile  beyond  the  gates  of  the  city;
at  a  greater  distance  than  this  they  came  under
the  imperiura  of  the  magistrates,  like  every  other
citizen.  (Liv.  iii.  20;  Dionys.  viii.  87.)  As  they
were  the  public  guardians,  it  was  necessary  that
every  one  should  have  access  to  them  and  at  any
time  ;  hence  the  doors  of  their  houses  were  open
day  and  night  for  all  who  were  in  need  of  help  and
protection,  which  they  were  empowered  to  afford
against  any  one,  even  against  the  highest  magis-
trates. For  the  same  reason  a  tribune  was  not
allowed  to  be  absent  from  the  city  for  a  whole  day,


TRIBUNUS.

except  during  the  Feriae  Latinae,  when  the  whole
people  was  assembled  on  the  Alban  Mount.  (Ma-
crob.  Sat.  i.  3.)

In  the  year  456  b.  c  the  tribunes,  in  opposition
to  the  consuls,  assumed  the  right  to  convoke  the
genate,  in  order  to  lay  before  it  a  rogation  and  dis-
cuss the  same  (Dionys.  x.  31,  3*2)  ;  for  until  that
time  the  consuls  alone  had  had  the  right  of  laying
plebiscita  before  the  senate  for  approbation.  Some
years  after,  452  b.  c,  the  tribune  demanded  of  the
consuls  to  request  the  senate  to  make  a  senatus-
consultum  for  the  appointment  of  persons  to  frame
a  new  legislation  ;  and  during  the  discussions  on
this  subject  the  tribunes  themselves  were  present
in  the  senate.  (Dionys.  x.  50,  52.)  The  written
legislation  which  the  tribunes  then  wished  can
only  have  related  to  their  own  order  ;  but  as  such
a  legislation  would  only  have  widened  the  breach
between  the  two  orders,  they  afterwards  gave  way
to  the  remonstrances  of  the  patricians,  and  the  new
legislation  was  to  embrace  both  orders.  (Liv.  iii.
tSl  ;  Zonar.  vii.  18.)  From  the  second  decemvi-
rate  the  tribuneship  was  suspended,  but  was  re-
stored after  the  legislation  was  completed,  and  now
assumed  a  different  character  from  the  change  that
had  taken  place  in  the  tribes.  [Tribus  (Roman.)]
The  tribunes  now  had  the  right  to  be  present  at
the  deliberations  of  the  senate  (Liv.  iii.  69,  iv.  1) ;
but  they  did  not  sit  among  the  senators  themselves,
but  upon  benches  before  the  opened  doors  of  the
senate-house.  (Val.  Max.  ii.  2.  §  7  ;  F.  Hofmann,
Der  R'6m.  Senate  p.  109,  &c.)  The  iiiviolability
of  the  tribunes,  which  had  before  only  rested  upon
a  contract  between  the  two  estates,  was  now  sanc-
tioned and  confirmed  by  a  law  of  M.  Horatius.
(Liv.  iii.  65.)  As  the  tribes  now  also  included
the  patricians  and  their  clients,  the  tribunes  might
naturally  be  asked  to  interpose  on  behalf  of  any
citizen,  whether  patrician  or  plebeian.  Hence  the
patrician  ex-decemvir,  Appius  Claudius,  implored
the  protection  of  the  tribunes.  (Liv.  iii.  6^  ;
comp.  also  viii.  33,  34  ;  Niebuhr,  ii.  p.  374.)
About  this  time  the  tribunes  also  acquired  the
right  to  take  the  auspices  in  the  assemblies  of  the
tribes.  (Zonaras,  vii.  19.)  They  also  assumed
again  the  right  which  they  had  exercised  before
the  time  of  the  decemvirate,  to  bring  patricians
who  had  violated  the  rights  of  the  plebeians  before
the  comitia  of  the  tribes,  as  is  clear  from  several
instances.  (Liv.  iii.  5Q^  &c.,  iv.  44,  v.  11,  &c.)
Respecting  the  authority  which  a  plebiscitum  pro-
posed to  the  tribes  by  a  tribune  received  through
the  lex  Valeria,  see  Plebiscitum.  AVhile  the
college  thus  gamed  outwardly  new  strength  every
day,  a  change  took  place  in  its  internal  orgajiisa-
tion,  which  to  some  extent  paralyzed  its  powers.
Before  the  year  394  b.  c.  every  thing  had  been
decided  in  the  college  by  a  majority  (Liv.  ii.  43,
44  ;  Dionys.  ix.  1,  2,  41,  x.  31)  ;  but  about  this
time,  we  do  not  know  how,  a  change  was  intro-
duced, which  made  the  opposition  {intercessio)  of
one  tribune  sufficient  to  render  a  resolution  of  his
colleagues  void.  (Zonar.  vii.  15.)  This  new  re-
gulation does  not  appear  in  operation  till  394
and  393  b.  c.  (Liv.  v.  25,  29)  ;  the  old  one  was
Btill  applied  in  B.  c.  421  and  415.  (Liv.  iv.  42,
48  ;  comp.  Niebuhr,  ii.  p.  438.)  From  their  right
of  appearing  in  the  senate,  and  of  taking  part  in
its  discussions,  and  from  their  being  the  repre-
sentatives of  the  whole  people,  they  gradually
obtained  the  right    of    intercession   against  any


TRIBUNUS.


1151


action  which  a  magistrate  might  undertake  during
the  time  of  his  office,  and  this  even  without  giving
any  reason  for  it.  (Appian,  de  Bell.  Civ.  i.  23.)
Thus  we  find  a  tribune  preventing  a  consul  con-
voking the  senate  (Polyb.  vi.  1 6),  preventing  the
proposal  of  new  laws  or  elections  in  the  comitia
(Liv.  vi.  35,  vii,  17,  x.  9,  xxvii.  6)  ;  and  they
interceded  against  the  official  functions  of  the
censors  (Dion  Cass,  xxxvii.  9  ;  Liv.  xliii.  16)  ;
and  even  against  a  command  issued  by  the  praetor.
(Liv.  xxxviii.  00  ;  Gell.  vii.  19.)  In  the  same
manner  a  tribune  might  place  his  veto  upon  an
ordinance  of  the  senate  (Polyb.  vi.  16  ;  Dion  Cass,
xli.  2)  ;  and  thus  either  compel  the  senate  to  sub-
mit the  subject  in  question  to  a  fresh  consideration,
or  to  raise  the  session.  (Caes.  de  Bell.  Civ.  i.  2  ;
Appian,  de  Bell.  Civ.  i.  29.)  In  order  to  propose
a  measure  to  the  senate  they  might  themselves  con-
voke a  meeting  (Gellius,  xiv.  7),  or  when  it  had
been  convoked  by  a  consul  they  might  make  their
proposal  even  in  opposition  to  the  consul,  a  right
which  no  other  magistrates  had  in  the  presence  of
the  consuls.  The  senate,  on  the  other  hand,  had
itself,  in  certain  cases,  recourse  to  the  tribunes.
Thus,  in  431  B.  c.  it  requested  the  tribunes  to
compel  the  consuls  to  appoint  a  dictator,  in  com-
pliance with  a  decree  of  the  senate,  and  the  tri-
bunes compelled  the  consuls,  by  threatening  them
with  imprisonment,  to  appoint  A.  Postumius
Tubertus  dictator.  (Liv.  iv.  26.)  From  this  time
forward  we  meet  with  several  instances  in  which
the  tribunes  compelled  the  consuls  to  comply  with
the  decrees  of  the  senate,  si  non  essent  in  audoritaU
scnatus^  and  to  execute  its  commands.  (Liv.  v.  9,
xxviii.  45.)  In  their  lelation  to  the  senate  a
change  was  introduced  by  the  Plebiscitum  Atinium,
which  ordained  that  a  tribune,  by  virtue  of  his
office,  should  be  a  senator,  (Gellius,  xiv.  8  ;  Zonar.
vii.  15.)  When  this  plebiscitum  was  made  is  un-
certain ;  but  we  know  that  in  170  B.  c.  it  was  not
yet  in  operation.  (Liv.  xiv.  15.)  It  probably
originated  with  C.  Atinius,  who  was  tribune  in
B.  c.  132.  (Liv.  Epit.  59  ;  Plin.  H.N.  vii.  45.)
But  as  the  quaestorship,  at  least  in  later  times,
was  the  office  which  persons  held  previously  to
the  tribuneship,  and  as  the  quaestorship  itself  con-
ferred upon  a  person  the  right  of  being  present  and
expressing  his  opinion  in  the  senate,  the  law  of
Atinius  was  in  most  cases  superfluous.

In  their  relation  to  other  magistrates  we  may
observe,  that  the  right  of  intercessio  was  not  con-
fined to  stopping  a  magistrate  in  his  proceedings,
but  they  might  even  command  their  viatores
[Viator]  to  seize  a  consul  or  a  censor,  to  im-
prison him,  or  to  throw  him  from  the  Tarpeian
rock.  (Liv.  ii.  5Q,  iv.  26,  v.  9,  ix.  34,  Epit.  48,
65^  Bd  ;  Cic.  de  Leg.  iii.  9,  in  Vatin.  9  ;  Dion
Cass,  xxxvii.  50.)  It  is  mentioned  by  Labeo  and
Varro  {ap.  Gell.  xiii.  12)  that  the  tribunes,  when
they  brought  an  accusation  against  any  one  before
the  people,  had  the  right  of  preJiensio,  but  not
the  right  of  vocatio,  that  is,  they  might  command  a
person  to  be  dragged  by  their  viatores  before  the
comitia,  but  could  not  summon  him.  An  attempt  to
accoimt  for  this  singularity  is  made  by  Gellius
{I.  c.).  They  might,  as  in  earlier  times,  propose  a
fine  to  be  inflicted  upon  the  person  accused  before
the  comitia,  but  in  some  cases  they  dropped  this
proposal  and  treated  the  case  as  a  capital  one.
(Liv.  viii.  33,  xxv.  4,  xxvi.  3.)  The  college  of
tribunes  had  also  the  power  of  making  edicts,  as


1152


TRIBUNUS.


that  mentioned  by  Cicero  (in  Veir.  ii.  41  ;  comp.
Gell.  iv.  14  ;  Liv.  xxxviii.  52).  In  cases  in  which
one  member  of  the  college  opposed  a  resolution  of
his  colleagues  nothing  could  be  done,  and  the
measure  was  dropped  ;  but  this  useful  check  was
removed  by  the  example  of  C.  Tiberius  Gracchus,
in  which  a  precedent  was  given  for  proposing  to
the  people  that  a  tribune  obstinately  persisting  in
his  veto  should  be  deprived  of  his  office.  ( Appian,
de  Bell.  Civ.  i.  12  ;  Pint.  Tib.  Graech.  11,  12,  15  ;
Cic.  de  Leg.  iii.  10  ;  Dion  Cass,  xxxvi.  13.)

From  the  time  of  the  Hortensian  law  the  power
of  the  tribunes  had  been  gradually  rising  to  such  a
height  that  there  was  no  other  in  the  state  to  equal
it,  whence  Velleius  (ii.  2)  even  speaks  of  the  im-
perium  of  tribunes.  They  had  acquired  the  right
of  proposing  to  the  comitia  tributa  or  the  senate
measures  on  nearly  all  the  important  affairs  of  the
state,  and  it  Avould  be  endless  to  enumerate  the
cases  in  which  their  power  was  manifested.  Their
proposals  were  indeed  usually  made  ex  auctoritate
senatus,  or  had  been  communicated  to  and  ap-
proved by  it  (Liv,  xlii.  21)  ;  but  cases  in  which  the
people  itself  had  a  direct  interest,  such  as  a  gene-
ral legal  regulation  (Liv.  xxi.  63,  xxxiv.  1),  the
granting  of  the  franchise  (Liv.  xxxviii.  36),  the
alteration  of  the  attributes  of  a  magistrate  (Liv.
xxii.  25,  &c.),  and  others,  might  be  brought  before
the  people,  without  their  having  previously  been
communicated  to  the  senate,  though  there  are  also
instances  of  the  contrary.  (Liv.  xxxv.  7,  xxvii.
5.)  Subjects  belonging  to  the  administration
could  not  be  brought  before  the  tribes  without  the
tribunes  having  previously  received  through  the
consuls  the  auctoritas  oft  the  senate.  This  how-
ever was  done  very  frequently,  and  hence  we  have
mention  of  a  number  of  plebiscita  on  matters  of
administration.  (See  a  list  of  them  in  Walter,
p.  1 32,  n.  1 1.)  It  sometimes  even  occurs  that  the
tribunes  brought  the  question  concerning  the  con-
clusion of  a  peace  before  the  tribes,  and  then  com-
pelled the  senate  to  ratify  the  resolution  as  ex-
pressing the  wish  of  the  whole  people.  (Liv.  xxx.
43,  xxxiii.  25.)  Sulla,  in  his  reform  of  the  con-
stitution on  the  early  aristocratic  principles,  left  to
the  tribunes  only  the  jus  auxiliandi,  but  de-
prived them  of  the  right  of  making  legislative  or
other  proposals,  either  to  the  senate  or  the  comi-
tia, without  having  previously  obtained  the  sanc-
tion of  the  senate.  [Tribus  (Roman).]  But
this  arrangement  did  not  last,  for  Pompey  restored
to  them  their  former  rights.  (Zachariae,  L.  Corn.
SuUa^  als  Ordner  des  Kom.  Freistaates,  ii.  p.  12,
&c.  and  p.  99,  &c.)

During  the  latter  period  of  the  republic,  when
the  office  of  quaestor  was  in  most  cases  held  im-
mediately before  that  of  tribune,  the  tribunes  were
generally  elected  from  among  the  senators,  and
this  continued  to  be  the  same  under  the  empire.
(Appian.  de  Bell.  Civ.  i.  100.)  Sometimes,  how-
ever, equites  also  obtained  the  office,  and  thereby
became  members  of  the  senate  (Suet.  Aug.  10,  40),
where  they  were  considered  of  equal  rank  with
the  quaestors.  (Veil.  Pat.  ii.  111.)  Tribunes  of
the  people  continued  to  exist  down  to  the  fifth
century  of  our  aera,  though  their  powers  became
naturally  much  limited,  especially  in  the  reign  of
Nero.  (Tacit.  Annal.  iii.  28.)  They  continued
however  to  have  the  right  of  intercession  against
decrees  of  the  senate,  and  on  behalf  of  injured  in-
dividuals.    (Tacit.  Anncd.  xvi.   26,  Hist.    ii.  91,


TRIBnS.
iv.  9  ;  PHn.  Epist.  i.  23,  ix.   13;  comp.  Becker,
Handb.  der  Rom.  Alterth.  vol.  ii.  pt.  ii.  p.  247,  &c.)

4.  TrIBUNI  MILITUM  cum  CONSULARl  POTE-
ST ATE.  When  in  445  b.  c.  the  tribune  C.  Canu-
leius  brought  forward  the  rogation  that  the  consul-
ship should  not  be  confined  to  either  order  (Liv.  iv.
1  ;  Dionys.  xi.  52),  the  patricians  evaded  the  at-
tempt by  a  change  in  the  constitution  :  the  powers
which  had  hitherto  been  imited  in  the  consulship
were  now  divided  between  two  new  magistrates,
viz.  the  Tribuni  militum  cum  consulari  potestate  and
the  censors.  Consequently,  in  444  b.  c.  three  mi-
litary tribunes,  with  consular  power,  were  appointed,
and  to  this  office  the  plebeians  were  to  be  equally
eligible  with  the  patricians.  (Liv.  iv.  7  ;  Dionys.
xi.  60,  &c.)  For  the  years  following  however,
the  people  were  to  be  at  liberty,  on  the  proposal  of
the  senate,  to  decide  whether  consuls  were  to  be
elected  according  to  the  old  custom,  or  consular
tribunes.  Henceforth,  for  many  years,  sometimes
consuls  and  sometimes  consular  tribunes  were  ap-
pointed, and  the  number  of  the  latter  varied  from
three  to  four,  until  in  405  b.  c.  it  was  increased  to
six,  and  as  the  censors  were  regarded  as  their  col-
leagues, we  have  sometimes  mention  of  eight  tri-
bunes. (Liv.  iv.  61,  V.  1  ;  Diodor.  xv.  50  ;  Liv.
vi.  27  ;  Diodor.  xv.  51  ;  Liv.  vi.  30.)  At  last,
however,  in  367  b.  c.  the  office  of  these  tribunes
was  abolished  by  the  Licinian  law,  and  the  consul-
ship was  restored.  The  consular  tribunes  Avere
elected  in  the  comitia  of  the  centuries,  and  un-
doubtedly with  less  solemn  auspices  than  the  con-
suls. Concerning  the  irregularity  of  their  number,
see  Niebuhr,  ii.  p.  325,  &c.,  p.  389,  &c.  ;  comp.
Gottling,  p.  326,  &c.  ;  Becker,  Handb.  der  Rom.
Alterth.  vol.  ii.  pt.  ii.  p.  136,  &c.

5.  Tribuni  Militares.  [Exercitus,  pp.
503,  504.]

6.  Tribunus  Voluptatum,  was  an  officer  who
does  not  occur  till  after  the  time  of  Diocletian,
and  who  had  the  superintendence  of  all  public
amusements,  especially  of  theatrical  performances.
(Cassiodor.  Variar.  vii.  10.)  [L.  S.]

TmBV^  {(pvXov,  (pvX-i)).  1.  Greek.  In  the
earliest  times  of  Greek  history  mention  is  made  of
people  being  divided  into  tribes  and  clans.  Homer
speaks  of  such  divisions  in  terms  which  seem  to  im-
ply that  they  were  elements  that  entered  into  the
composition  of  every  community.  Nestor  advises
Agamemnon  to  arrange  his  army  Kara  <pv\a,  Kara
(ppiJTpas,  so  that  each  may  be  encouraged  by  the
presence  of  its  neighbours.  (H.  ii.  362.)  A  per-
son not  included  in  any  clan  {a<pfrf)Ta}p),  was  re-
garded as  a  vagrant  or  outlaw.  (II.  ix.  63.)  These
divisions  were  rather  natural  than  political,  de-
pending on  family  connection,  and  arising  out  of
those  times,  when  each  head  of  a  family  exercised
a  patriarchal  sway  over  its  members.  The  bond
was  cemented  by  religious  communion,  sacrifices
and  festivals,  which  all  the  fiimily  or  clansmen
attended,  and  at  which  the  chief  usually  presided.
The  aggregate  of  such  communities  formed  a  po-
litical society.  (Arislot.  Pol.i.  1.  §  7.)  In  the  ages
succeeding  the  heroic  tribes  and  clans  continued  to
exist,  though  in  the  progress  of  civilisation  they
became  more  extended,  and  assumed  a  territorial
or  political,  rather  than  a  fraternal  character.  The
tribes  were  not  in  general  distinctions  between
nobles  and  commons,  unless  the  people  were  of
different  races,  or  unless  there  had  been  an  acces-
sion of  foreigners,  who  were  not  blended  with  the


TRIBUS

original  inhabitants.  It  is  true,  that  in  the  com-
mon course  of  things,  nobles,  or  privileged  classes,
sprang  up  in  various  countries,  by  reason  either  of
wealth,  or  of  personal  merit,  or  of  descent  from  the
ancient  kings  ;  and  that  in  some  cases  all  the  land
■was  possessed  by  them,  as  by  the  Gamori  of  Syra-
cuse (Herod,  vii.  155)  ;  sometimes  their  property
was  inalienable,  as  under  our  feudal  law  (Arist.
Pol.  ii.  4.  §  4)  ;  and  the  Bacchiadae  are  an  in-
stance of  a  noble  family,  who  intermarried  only
among  themselves.  (Herod,  v.  92.)  Still,  how-
ever, as  a  general  rule,  there  was  no  decided  sepa-
ration of  tribe,  much  less  of  caste,  between  nobles
and  commons  of  the  same  race.  Nor  was  there
any  such  distinction  of  a  sacerdotal  order.  The
priestly  function  was  in  early  times  united  to  that
of  the  king  (Arist.  Pol.  iii.  9.  §  7)  ;  afterwards
the  priesthood  of  particular  deities  became  here-
ditary in  certain  families,  owing  either  to  a  sup-
posed transmission  of  prophetic  power,  as  in  the
case  of  the  Eumolpidae,  Branchidae,  lamidae  ;  or
to  accidental  circumstances,  as  in  the  case  of  Telines
of  Gela  (Herod,  vii.  153)  ;  but  the  priests  were
not  separated,  as  an  order,  from  the  rest  of  the
people.  (Wachsmuth,  Hell.  Alt.  vol.  i.  pt.  i.  pp.
76, 149,  1st.  ed.  ;  Schomann,  Ant.jur.  pith.  Gr.  p.
79.)  The  most  important  distinctions  of  a  class-
like nature,  between  people  living  under  the  same
government,  arose  in  those  countries  that  were  con-
quered by  the  migratory  hordes  of  Thessalians,
Boeotians,  and  Dorians,  in  the  century  subsequent
to  the  heroic  age.  The  revolutions  which  they
effected,  though  varying  in  different  places  accord-
ing to  circumstances,  had  in  many  respects  a  uni-
form character.  The  conquering  body  took  pos-
session of  the  country,  and  became  its  lords  ;  the
original  inhabitants,  reduced  to  subjection,  and
sometimes  to  complete  vassalage  or  servitude,  re-
mained a  distinct  people  or  tribe  from  the  conquerors.
The  fonner  built  cities,  usually  at  the  foot  of  some
citadel  that  had  belonged  to  the  ancient  princes,
where  they  resided,  retaining  their  military  dis-
cipline and  martial  habits  ;  while  a  rural  population,
consisting  principally  of  the  former  natives,  but
partly  also  of  the  less  warlike  of  the  invaders,  and
partly  of  fresh  emigrants  invited  or  permitted  by
them  to  settle,  dwelt  in  the  surrounding  villages,
and  received  the  name  of  UepioiKoi.  The  condition
of  the  Lacedaemonian  TrepioiKoi  is  spoken  of  under
Pbrioeci.  a  similar  class  arose  in  most  of  the
countries  so  colonized,  as  in  Argos,  Corinth,  Elis,
Crete,  &c.  (Herod,  viii.  73  ;  Thucyd.  ii.  25  ;
Xenoph.  Hell.  iii.  2.  §  23,  30  ;  Pausan.  iii.  8.  §  3,
viii.  27.  §  1  ;  Arist.  Pol.  ii.  6.  §  1,  v.  2.  §  8.)  But
their  condition  varied  according  to  the  manner  in
which  the  invaders  effected  their  settlement,  and
other  circumstances  and  events  prior  or  subsequent
to  that  time.  In  many  places  the  new  comer  was
received  under  a  treaty,  or  upon  more  equitable
terms,  so  that  a  union  of  citizenship  would  take
place  between  them  and  the  original  inhabitants.
This  was  the  case  in  Elis,  Messenia,  Phlius,  Tree-
zen.  (Pausan.  ii.  13.  §  1,  v.  4.  §  1  ;  Thirl  wall.
Hist  of  Greece,  vol.  i.  p.  342.)  So  the  Cretans,
who  invaded  Miletus,  mingled  with  the  ancient
Carians,  and  the  lonians  with  the  Cretans  and
Carians  of  Colophon.  (Pausan.  vii.  2.  §  5,  vii.  3.
§  1.)  In  Megara,  the  ruling  class,  after  a  lapse  of
some  time,  amalgamated  with  the  lower.  (Thirl-
wall,  vol.  i.  p.  430.)  In  other  places  the  irepioiKoi
were  more  degraded.     Thus,  in  Sicyon  they  were


TRIBUS.


1163


compelled  to  wear  sheep-skins,  and  called  kuto)-
vaKu<p6pos  (Athenaeus  vi.  271)  ;  in  Epidaurug
they  were  styled  KoviiroSis,  dusty-footed,  a  name
which  denoted  their  agricultural  occupation,  but
was  meant  as  a  mark  of  contempt  (Muller,  Dor.
iii.  4.  §  2.)  But  in  general  they  formed  a  sort
of  middle  order  between  the  ruling  people  and  the
serf  or  slave.  Thus,  in  Argos,  there  was  a  class  of
persons  called  Gymnesii  or  Gymnetes,  corresponding
to  the  Helots.  [Gymnesii.]  So  in  Thessaly,
in  the  districts  not  immediately  occupied  by  the
Thessalian  invaders,  there  dwelt  a  population  of
ancient  Aeolians,  who  were  not  serfs,  like  the  Pe-
nestae  [Penestae],  but  only  tributary  subjects,
who  retained  their  personal  liberty,  though  not  ad-
mitted to  the  rank  of  citizens.  (Thirlwall,  vol.  i.
p.  438  ;  Schomann,  Id.  p.  401.)  So  also  in  Crete,
there  were  the  Dorian  freemen,  the  irepioiKoi^ox  old
inhabitants,  similar  to  the  Lacedaemonians,  and  the
slaves.  [CosMi.]  We  may  observe  that  the  term
irepioiKoi  is  sometimes  used  in  rather  a  different
sense  ;  as  when  Xenophon  gives  that  name  to  the
Thespians,  who  were  not  subjects  of  the  Thebans,
as  the  Achaeans  were  of  the  Spartans.  (Hell.  v.
4.  §  46.)  In  some  of  the  maritime  states  the  con-
dition of  the  subject  classes  was  somewhat  different ;
they  were  suffered  to  reside  more  in  the  town  ;  as
in  Corinth,  where  they  were  artizans,  at  Tarentum,
where  they  were  fishermen.  (Wachsmuth,  vol.  i.
pt.  i.  p.  162  ;  Schomann,  Id.  pp.  80,  107.)

The  ruling  people,  thus  remaining  distinct  from
the  rest,  were  themselves  divided  into  tribes  and
other  sections.  Of  the  Dorian  race  there  were
originally  three  tribes,  traces  of  which  are  found  in
all  the  countries  which  they  colonized.  Hence  they
are  called  by  Homer  Awpi4(s  TpixoC^Kcs.  (Od.
xix.  1 77,)  These  tribes  were  the  'TAAets,  IIo/a-
(pvKoi,  and  Avfiavdrai  or  Avfxaves.  The  first  de-
rived their  name  from  Hyllus,  son  of  Hercules,  the
two  last  from  Paraphylus  and  Dymas,  who  are  said
to  have  fallen  in  the  last  expedition  when  the
Dorians  took  possession  of  the  Peloponnesus.  The
Hyllean  tribe  was  perhaps  the  one  of  highest  dig-
nity ;  but  at  Sparta  there  does  not  appear  to  have
been  much  distinction,  for  all  the  freemen  there
were  by  the  constitution  of  Lycurgus  on  a  footing
of  equality.  To  these  three  tribes  others  were
added  in  different  places,  either  when  the  Dorians
were  joined  by  other  foreign  allies,  or  when  some
of  the  old  inhabitants  were  admitted  to  the  rank  of
citizenship  or  equal  privileges.  Thus  the  Cadmean
Aegeids  are  said  by  Herodotus  to  have  been  a
great  tribe  at  Sparta,  descended  (as  he  says)  from
Aegeus,  grandson  of  Theras  (Herod,  iv.  149),
though  others  have  thought  they  were  incorporated
with  the  three  Doric  tribes.  (Thirlwall,  vol.  i.  pp.
257,  268,  314.)  At  Argos,  Aegina,  and  Epidaurus
there  was  an  Hymethian  tribe  besides  the  three
Doric.  (Muller,  Aegin.  p.  140.)  In  Sicyon  Cleis-
thenes  havin|  changed  the  names  of  the  Doric
tribes,  to  degrade  and  insult  their  members,  and
given  to  a  fourth  tribe,  to  which  he  himself  be-
longed, the  name  of  Archelai,  sixty  years  after  his
death  the  Doric  names  were  restored,  and  a  fourth
tribe  added,  called  AlyiaXees,  from  Aegialeus,  son
of  the  Argive  hero  Adrastus.  (Herod,  v.  68.)
Eight  tribes  are  mentioned  in  Corinth  (Suidas,  s.  v,
UduTo.  o/cTw),  four  in  Tegea,  (Pausan.  viii.  53.
§  6.)  In  Elis  there  were  twelve  tribes,  that  were
afterwards  reduced  to  eight  by  a  war  with  the  Ar-
cadians (Paus.  V.  9.  §  6),  from  which  they  appear"
4  B


1164


TRIBUS.


to  have  been  geographical  divisions.  (Wachsmuth,
vol.  ii.  pt.  i.  p.  17.)  Sometimes  we  find  mention
of  only  one  of  the  Doric  tribes,  as  of  the  Hylleans
in  Cydonia  (Hesych.  s.  v.  'TAAels),  the  Dymanes
in  Halicamassus  ;  which  probably  arose  from  co-
lonies having  been  founded  by  the  members  of  one
tribe  only.     (Wachsmuth,  vol.  ii.  pt.  i.  p.  15.)

Of  all  the  Dorian  people  the  Spartans  kept
themselves  the  longest  unmixed  with  foreign  blood.
So  jealous  were  they  to  maintain  their  exclusive
privileges,  that  they  had  only  admitted  two  men
into  their  body  before  the  time  of  Herodotus.
(Herod,  ix.  33,  35.)  Afterwards  their  numbers
were  occasionally  recruited  by  the  admission  of
Laconians,  Helots,  and  foreigners  ;  but  this  was
done  very  sparingly,  until  the  time  of  Agis  and
Cleomenes,  who  created  large  numbers  of  citizens.
But  we  cannot  further  pursue  this  subject.  (Scho-
mann.  Id.  p.  114.)

The  subdivision  of  tribes  into  cpparpiai  or  irdrpai^
7eV77,  TpiTTues,  &c.  appears  to  have  prevailed  in
various  places.  (Wachsmuth,  vol.  ii.  pt.  i.  p.  18.)
A  Sparta  each  tribe  contained  ten  wlat,  a  word,
like  Kdo/xat,  denoting  a  local  division  or  district  ;
each  obe  contained  ten  rpiaKaBes,  communities  con-
taining thirty  families.  But  very  little  appears  to
be  known  of  these  divisions,  how  far  they  were
local,  or  how  far  genealogical.  After  the  time  of
Cleomenes  the  old  system  of  tribes  was  changed  ;
new  ones  were  created  corresponding  to  the  different
quarters  of  the  town,  and  seem  to  have  been  five
in  number.  (Schomann,  Ant  Jur.  Pub.  p.  115  ;
Miiller,  Dor.  iii.  5.)

The  four  Ionian  tribes,  Teleontes  or  Geleontes,
Hopletes,  Argadenses,  Aegicorenses,  who  are
spoken  of  below  in  reference  to  Attica,  were  found
also  in  Cyzicum.  In  Samos  a  <^vKh]  hxTxP'-^vit]  is
mentioned  by  Herodotus  (iii.  26),  which  was  pro-
bably a  Carian  race  that  mingled  with  the  lonians.
In  Ephesus  five  tribes  are  mentioned,  of  different
races.  With  respect  to  these  the  reader  is  referred
to  Wachsmuth,  vol.  ii.  pt.  i.  p.  16.

The  first  Attic  tribes  that  we  read  of  are  said
to  have  existed  in  the  reign,  or  soon  after  the  reign,
of  Cecrops,  and  were  called  Cecropis  (K^Kponis)^
AutocJit/um  (Avt6x&c}v\  Actaea  ('AKTota),  and
Paralia  (UapaXia).  In  the  reign  of  a  subsequent
king,  Cranaus,  these  names  were  changed  to
Crunais  (Kpavdts),  Atthis  ('At0is),  Mesogaea  (Me-
(r6yma\  and  Diacris  {^laKpis).  Afterwards  we
find  a  new  set  of  names  ;  Bias  {Aids),  Athenais
{'Adrfvais),  Poddonias  (Jloa^ibwvids),  and  Hephaes-
tias  {'Hcpaia-Tids)  ;  evidently  derived  from  the
deities  who  were  worshipped  in  the  country.
(Compare  Pollux,  viii.  109.)  Some  of  those
secondly  mentioned,  if  not  all  of  them,  seem  to
have  been  geographical  divisions  ;  and  it  is  not
improbable  that,  if  not  independent  communities,
they  were  at  least  connected  by  a  veyy  weak  bond
of  union.  But  all  these  tribes  were  superseded  by
four  others,  which  were  probably  founded  soon
after  the  Ionic  settlement  in  Attica,  and  seem  (as
before  observed)  to  have  been  adopted  by  other
Ionic  colonies  out  of  Greece.  The  names  Geleontes
(FeXfovTes),  Hopletes  ("OTrATjres),  Argades  {'Ap-
7(£5ets),  Aegicores  (AlyiKopels),  are  said  by  Hero-
dotus (v.  66)  to  have  been  derived  from  the  sons
of  Ion,  son  of  Xuthus.  (Compare  Eurip.  Ton,  15.96,
&c.  ;  Pollux,  I.  c.)  Upon  this,  however,  many
doubts  have  been  thrown  by  modem  writers,  who
have  suggested  various  theories  of  their  own,  more


TRIBUS.

or  less  ingenious,  to  which  reference  will  be  found
in  the  books  cited  below.  It  is  impossible  within
our  limits  to  discuss  the  question  at  any  length.
The  etymology  of  the  three  last  names  would  seem
to  suggest,  that  the  tribes  were  so  called  from  the
occupations  which  their  respective  members  fol-
lowed ;  the  Hopletes  being  the  armed  men,  or
warriors  ;  the  Argades,  labourers  or  husbandmen  ;
the  Aegicores,  goatherds  or  shepherds.  It  is  diffi-
cult, however,  to  discover  in  the  first  name  any  such
meaning,  unless  TeAeoz/res,  and  not  reAeoires,  be
the  true  reading,  in  which  case  it  has  been  sap-
posed  that  this  tribe  might  be  a  sacerdotal  order,
from  TeAeti/,  used  in  its  religious  sense  ;  or  a
peasantry  who  paid  rent  to  the  lords  of  the  soil,
from  TeAeTv,  in  the  sense  of  to  pay.  Against  the
former  of  these  interpretations  it  may  be  objected,
that  no  trace  of  a  priestly  order  is  to  be  found  in
later  times  of  Attic  history  ;  and  against  the  latter,
that  the  Argades  and  the  Teleontes  would  denote
a  similar  class  of  people,  unless  we  resort  to  another
interpretation  of  the  v;ord  Argades,  viz.  ai-tisans,
who  would  hardly  constitute  a  distinct  tribe  in  so
early  a  period  of  society.  It  may  be  observed,
however,  that  Argades  and  Aegicores  may  be  taken
to  signify  a  local  distribution  of  inhabitants,  the
former  being  the  tillers  of  the  ground,  dwelling  in
the  plain,  the  latter  mountaineers  ;  and  this  agrees
very  well,  not  only  with  the  known  character  of
the  country  of  Attica,  but  also  with  the  division
above  mentioned  as  having  existed  in  the  reign  of
Cranaus,  viz.  Mesogaea  and  Diacris.  There  is  no
more  difficulty  in  the  one  case  than  in  the  other,
in  supposing  that  some  of  the  tribes  were  denomi-
nated from  their  localities  or  occupations,  while
others  owed  their  names  to  other  circumstances.
Argades  and  Aegicores  might  be  the  old  inhabit-
ants, according  to  their  previous  division  ;  while  the
other  two  tribes  might  be  the  Ionic  settlers,
Hopletes  the  most  warlike  portion  of  them,  Gele-
ontes the  great  body,  so  called  from  a  son  of  Ion.
Or  the  last  might,  as  Schomann  thinks,  be  the  an-
cient nobility,  as  distinguished  from  the  Ionic
settlers.  Whatever  be  the  truth  with  respect  to
the  origin  of  these  tribes,  one  thing  is  more  certain,
that,  before  the  time  of  Theseus,  whom  historians
agree  in  representing  as  the  great  founder  of  the
Attic  commonwealth,  the  various  people  who  in-
habited the  country  continued  to  be  disunited  and
split  into  factions.

Theseus  in  some  measure  changed  the  relations
of  the  tribes  to  each  other,  by  introducing  a
gradation  of  ranks  in  each  ;  dividing  the  people
into  EvTTOTpiSaJ,  rew/tJpoj,  and  Arifxiovpyoi,  of  whom
the  first  were  nobles,  the  second  agriculturists  or
yeomen,  the  third  labourers  and  mechanics.  At
the  same  time,  in  order  to  consolidate  the  national
unity,  he  enlarged  the  city  of  Athens,  with  which
he  incorporated  several  smaller  towns,  made  it  the
seat  of  government,  encouraged  the  nobles  to  reside
there,  and  surrendered  a  part  of  the  royal  prero  •
gative  in  their  favour.  The  Tribes  or  Phylae
were  divided,  either  in  the  age  of  Theseus  or  soon
after,  each  into  three  (pparpiai  (a  term  equivalent
to  fraternities,  and  analogous  in  its  political  relation
to  the  Roman  Curiae),  and  eacli  ^parpla  into
thirty  yeur}  (equivalent  to  the  Roman  Gentes),  tlie
members  of  a  yivos  being  called  y^uvrirai  or
6fxoya\dKT€s.  Each  yevos  was  distinguished  by  a
particular  name  of  a  patronymic  form,  which  was
derived  from  some  hero  or  mythic  ancestor.     We


TRIBUS.

learn  from  Pollux  (viii.  111)  that  these  divisions,
though  the  names  seem  to  import  family  connection,
were  in  fact  artificial  ;  which  shows  that  some  ad-
vance had  now  been  made  towards  the  establish-
ment of  a  closer  political  union.  The  members  of
the  (pparpiai  and  yivT]  had  their  respective  religious
rites  and  festivals,  which  were  preserved  long  after
these  communities  had  lost  their  political  import-
ance, and  perhaps  prevented  them  from  being  alto-
gether dissolved.  (Compare  Niebuhr,  Hist.  ofRome^
vol.  i.  p.  311,  &c.)

The  relation  between  the  four  Ionic  tribes  and
the  three  classes,  into  which  Theseus  divided  the
nation,  is  a  difficult  and  perplexing  question.  It
would  appear  from  the  statements  of  ancient  writers
on  the  subject  that  each  of  the  four  tribes  was
divided  into  Eupatridae,  Geomori,  and  Demiurgi ;
which  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  the  four
<pv\oSaiTi\eis,  who  were  the  assessors  of  the  so-
vereign, were  all  taken  from  the  Eupatridae,  but
at  the  same  time  one  from  each  tribe.  [Phylo-
BASiLEis.]  This,  as  Thirlwall  (Hist,  of  Greece^
vol.  ii.  p.  10)  has  remarked,  can  only  be  conceived
possible  on  the  supposition,  that  the  distinctions
which  originally  separated  the  tribes  had  become
merely  nominal  ;  but  Maiden  (Hist,  of  Rome,  p.
140),  who  rejects  the  notion  that  the  four  Ionic
tribes  were  castes  deriving  their  name  from  their
employment,  supposes  that  the  Tribes  or  Phylae
consisted  of  the  Eupatridae  alone,  and  that  the  latter
were  divided  into  four  Phylae  like  the  patricians
at  Rome  into  three.  The  Geomori  and  Demiurgi
had  therefore,  according  to  his  supposition,  nothing
to  do  with  the  tribes.  This  view  of  the  subject
would  remove  many  difficulties  and  is  most  in  ac-
cordance with  the  subsequent  history  and  political
analogies  in  other  states,  but  seems  hardly  sup-
ported by  sufficient  evidence  to  warrant  us  in  re-
ceiving it.

After  the  age  of  Theseus,  the  monarchy  having
been  first  limited  and  afterwards  abolished,  the
whole  power  of  the  state  fell  into  the  hands  of  the
Eupatridae  cr  nobles,  who  held  all  civil  offices,  and
had  besides  the  management  of  religious  affairs,  and
the  interpretation  of  the  laws.  Attica  became
agitated  by  feuds,  and  we  find  the  people,  shortly
before  the  legislation  of  Solon,  divided  into  three
parties,  neSmlot  or  lowlanders,  AiaKpioi  or  high-
landers,  and  Udpa\oi  or  people  of  the  sea  coast.
The  two  first  remind  us  of  the  ancient  division  of
tribes,  Mesogaea  and  Diacris  ;  and  the  three  par-
ties appear  in  some  measure  to  represent  the  classes
established  by  Theseus  :  the  first  being  the  nobles,
whose  property  lay  in  the  champaign  and  most
fertile  part  of  the  country;  the  second,  the  smaller
landowners  and  shepherds  ;  the  third,  the  trading
and  mining  class,  who  had  by  this  time  risen  in
wealth  and  importance.  To  appease  their  discords,
Solon  was  applied  to  ;  and  thereupon  framed  his
celebrated  constitution  and  code  of  laws.  Here
we  have  only  to  notice,  that  he  retained  the  four
tribes  as  he  found  them,  but  abolished  the  existing
distinctions  of  rank,  or  at  all  events  greatly  di-
minished their  importance,  by  introducing  his  pro-
perty qualification,  or  division  of  the  people  into
riej'TaKoo'/o/ueStjLij'ot,  'lirireis,  2,iir/lTai,  and  O^res.
The  enactments  of  Solon  continued  to  be  the  law
at  Athens,  though  in  great  measure  suspended  by
the  tyranny,  until  the  democratic  reform  effected  by
Cleisthenes.  He  abolished  the  old  tribes,  and  cre-
ated ten  new  ones,  according  to  a  geographical  divi-


TRIBUS.


1155


sion  of  Attica,  and  named  them  after  ten  of  the  an-
cient heroes  :  Erechtheis,  Aegeis,  Pandionis,  Leontis,
Acamantis,  Oeneis,  Cecropis,  Hippothoontis,  Aean-
tis,  Antiochis.  These  tribes  were  divided  each  into
ten  Svfioi,  the  number  of  which  was  afterwards  in-
creased by  subdivision  ;  but  the  arrangement  was
so  made,  that  several  Stj/hoi  not  contiguous  or  near
to  one  another  were  joined  to  make  up  a  tribe.
[Demus.]  The  object  of  this  arrangement  was,
that  by  the  breaking  of  old  associations  a  perfect
and  lasting  revolution  might  be  effected,  in  the
habits  and  feelings,  as  well  as  the  political  orga-
nization of  the  people.  He  allowed  the  ancient
(pparplai  to  exist,  but  they  were  deprived  of  all
political  importance.  All  foreigners  admitted  to
the  citizenship  were  registered  in  a  Phyle  and
Deraus,  but  not  in  a  Phratria  or  Genos ;  whence
Aristophanes  (Ranae,  419,  Aves,  765)  says,  as  a
taunting  mode  of  designating  new  citizens,  that
they  have  no  phrators,  or  only  barbarous  ones
(quoted  by  Niebuhr,  vol.  i.  p.  312).  The  functions
which  had  been  discharged  by  the  old  tribes  were
now  mostly  transferred  to  the  triiu.ot.  Among  others,
we  may  notice  that  of  the  forty-eight  vavKpapiai
into  which  the  old  tribes  had  been  divided  for  the
purpose  of  taxation,  but  which  now  became  useless,
the  taxes  being  collected  on  a  different  system.  The
reforms  of  Cleisthenes  were  destined  to  be  perma-
nent. They  continued  to  be  in  force  (with  some  few
interruptions)  until  the  downfal  of  Athenian  inde-
pendence. The  ten  tribes  were  blended  with  the
whole  machinery  of  the  constitution.  Of  the  Senate
of  five  hundred,  fifty  were  chosen  from  each  tribe.
The  allotment  of  SiKacTTai  was  according  to  tribes;
and  the  same  system  of  election  may  be  observed
in  most  of  the  principal  offices  of  state,  judicial  and
magisterial,  civil  and  military  ;  as  that  of  the  diai-
rrjTai,  XoyKXTai,  TrcoATjrai,  ra/xiai,  reixoiroioi,  (pv~
\apxoi,  orTpar-nyoi,  &c.  In  B.  c.  307  Demetrius
Poliorcetes  increased  the  number  of  tribes  to  twelve
by  creating  two  new  ones,  namely  Antigonias  and
Demetrias,  which  afterwairds  received  the  names
of  Ptolemais  and  Attalis ;  and  a  thirteenth  was
subsequently  added  by  Hadrian,  bearing  his  own
name.  (Plut.  Demetr.  10;  Paus.  i.  5.  §  5;  Pollux,
viii.  110.)

The  preceding  aecoimt  is  only  intended  as  a
brief  sketch  of  the  subject,  since  it  is  treated  of
under  several  other  articles,  which  should  be  read
in  connection  with  this.  [Civitas  (Greek)  ;
Demus  ;  Phylarchi  ;  Phylobasileis,  &c.]

(See  Wachsmuth,  vol.  i.  pt.  i.  pp.  224—240,-
Hermann,  Lehrbuch  d.  Griech.  Stouts.  §§  24,  93,  94,
111,  175,  176  ;  Schomann,  Ant.jur.pub.  pp.  165,
178,  200,  395  ;  Thirlwall,  vol.  ii.  pp.  1—14,  32,
73.)  [C.  R.  K.]

2.  Roman.  The  three  ancient  Rom ulian  tribes,
the  Ramnes,  Titles,  and  Luceres,  or  the  Ram-
nenses,  Titienses,  and  Luccrenses,  to  which  the
patricians  alone  belonged,  must  be  distinguished
from  the  thirty  plebeian  tribes  of  Servius  TuUius,
which  were  entirely  local,  four  for  the  city,  and
twenty-six  for  the  country  around  Rome.  The
history  and  organization  of  the  three  ancient  tribes
is  spoken  of  under  Patricii.  They  continued  of
political  importance  almost  down  to  the  time  of  the
decemviral  legislation  ;  but  after  this  time  they  no
longer  occur  in  the  history  of  Rome,  except  as  an
obsolete  institution.

The  institution  and  organization  of  the  thirty
plebeian  tribes,  and  their  subsequent  reduction  to
4b  2


1156


TRIBUS.


twenty  by  the  conquests  of  Porsenna,  are  spoken
of  under  Plebes.  The  four  city  tribes  were
called  by  the  same  name  as  the  regions  which
they  occupied,  viz.  Subunma,  Esquilina^  CoUina,
and  Palatina.  (Varro,  Dc  Ling.  Lot.  v.  56.  ;  Festus,
s.  V.  Urbanas  tribus.)  The  names  of  the  sixteen
country  tribes  which  continued  to  belong  to  Rome
after  the  conquest  of  Porsenna,  are  in  their  alpha-
betical order  as  follow :  Aemilta,  Camilla,  Cor-
nelia,  Fabia,  Galeria,  Horatia,  Lemonia,  Mencnia,
Papiria,  Pollia  (which  Niebuhr,  i.  n.  977,  thinks
to  be  the  same  as  the  Poblilia,  which  was  insti-
tuted at  a  later  time),  Papiria,  Pupinia,  Romilia,
Sergia,  Vefwia,  and  Voltinia.  (Compare  Gottling,
Gesch.  d.  Kom.  Staatsv.  p.  238.)  As  Rome  gra-
dually acquired  possession  of  more  of  the  sur-
rounding territory,  the  number  of  tribes  also  was
gradually  increased.  When  Appius  Claudius,
with  his  numerous  train  of  clients,  emigrated  to
Rome,  lands  were  assigned  to  them  in  the  district
where  the  Anio  flows  into  the  Tiber,  and  a  new
tribe,  the  tribus  Claudia,  was  formed.  This  tribe,
which  Livy  (ii.  16,  if  the  reading  is  correct)  calls
vetus  Claudia  tribus,  was  subsequently  enlarged,
and  was  then  designated  by  the  name  Crustumina
ov  Clustumina.  (Niebuhr,  i.  n.  1236.)  This  name
is  the  first  instance  of  a  country  tribe  being  named
after  a  place,  for  the  sixteen  older  ones  all  derived
their  names  from  persons  or  heroes  who  were  in  the
same  relation  to  them,  as  the  Attic  heroes  called
i-rrwvvfjLoi  were  to  the  Attic  phylae.  In  B.  c.  387,
the  number  of  tribes  was  increased  to  twenty-five
by  the  addition  of  four  new  ones,  viz.  the  Stella-
tina,  Tromentina,  Sabatina,  and  Amiensis.  (Liv.
vi.  5  ;  Niebuhr,  ii.  p.  675.)  In  358  b.  c.  two
more,  the  Pomptina  and  Publilia,  were  formed
of  Volscians.  (Liv.  vii.  15.)  In  B.  c.  332,  the
Censors  Q.  Publilius  Philo  and  Sp.  Postumius
increased  the  number  of  tribes  tp  twenty-nine,  by
the  addition  of  the  Maecia  and  Scaptia.  (Liv.  viii.
17.)  In  B.  c.  318  the  Ufentina  and  Falerina  were
added.  (Liv.  ix.  20.)  In  b.  c.  299  two  others,  the
Jniensis  and  Tercntina  were  added  by  the  censors
(Liv.  X.  9),  and  at  last,  in  b.  c.  241 ,  the  number  of
tribes  was  augmented  to  thirty-five,  by  the  addition
of  the  Quirina  and  Velina.  This  number  was  never
afterwards  increased,  as  none  of  the  conquered
nations  were  after  this  incorporated  with  the  so-
vereign Roman  state.  (Liv.  Epit.  19,  i.  43.)  When
the  tribes,  in  their  assemblies,  transacted  any  busi-
ness, a  certain  order  {ordo  tribuum)  was  observed,
in  which  they  were  called  upon  to  give  their  votes.
The  first  in  the  order  of  succession  was  the  Subu-
rana,  and  the  last  the  Amiensis.  (Cic.  de  Leg.  Agr.
ii.  29.)  Any  person  belonging  to  a  tribe  had  in
important  documents  to  add  to  his  own  name  that  of
his  tribe,  in  the  ablative  case.  (Nomen,  p.  802,  b.
Compare.  Becker,  Handb,  der  Kom.  AUertL  vol.  ii.
pt.  i.  p.  i64,  &c.)

Whether  the  local  tribes,  as  they  were  established
by  the  constitution  of  Servius  Tullius,  contained
only  the  plebeians,  or  included  the  patricians  also,
is  a  point  on  which  the  opinions  of  modem  scholars
are  divided.  Niebuhr,  Walter,  and  others,  think
that  the  patricians  were  excluded,  as  they  had  al-
ready a  regular  organization  of  their  own;  Wachs-
muth,  Gerlach,  Rein,  Becker,  and  others,  on  the
contrary,  maintain  that  the  patricians  also  were  in-
corporated in  the  Servian  tribes  ;  but  they  allow,  at
the  same  time,  that  by  far  the  majority  of  the  people
in  the  assemblies  of  the  tribes  were  plebeians,  and


TRIBUTUM.

that  hence  the  character  of  these  assemblies  was  es-
sentially plebeian  ;  especially  as  the  patricians,  being
so  few  in  numbers,  and  each  of  them  having  no  more
influence  in  them  than  a  plebeian,  seldom  attended
the  meetings  of  the  tribes.  The  passages,  however,
which  are  quoted  in  support  of  this  opinion,  are
partly  insufficient  to  prove  the  point  (as  Liv.  ii.  56,
60  ;  Dionys.  ix.  41),  and  partly  belong  to  a  later
period,  when  it  certainly  cannot  be  doubted  that
the  patricians  belonged  to  the  tribes.  We  must
therefore  suppose,  with  Niebuhr,  that  down  to  the
decemviral  legislation  the  tribes  and  their  assem-
blies were  entirely  plebeian.

The  assemblies  of  the  tribes  (comitia  tributa),  as
long  as  they  were  confined  to  the  plebeians,  can
scarcely  have  had  any  influence  upon  the  affairs  of
the  state  :  all  they  had  to  do  was  to  raise  the  tri-
butum,  to  hold  the  levies  for  the  armies,  and  to
manage  their  own  local  and  religious  affairs.  [Tri-
BUNUS;  Plebes.]  (Fest.  s.  vu.  Jugarius,  PtiUica
sacra,  Sobrium  ;  Varro,  de  Ling.  Lat.  vi.  24  ;  Cic.
pro  Dom.  28;  Macrob.  Sat.  i.  4.  16.)  Their
meetings  were  held  in  the  forum,  and  their  sphere
of  action  was  not  extended  by  the  establishment  of
the  republic.  The  first  great  point  they  gained
was  through  the  lex  Valeria,  passed  by  Valerius
Publicola.  [Leges  Valeriae.]  But  the  time
from  which  the  increase  of  the  power  of  the  co-
mitia of  the  tribes  must  be  dated,  is  that  in  which
the  tribuni  plebis  were  instituted  (494  B.  c).
During  the  time  of  the  decemviral  legislation  the
comitia  were  for  a  short  time  deprived  of  their
influence,  but  we  have  every  reason  to  believe  that
immediately  after,  probably  by  this  legislation  it-
self, the  comitia  tributa,  instead  of  a  merely  ple-
beian, became  a  national  assembly,  inasmuch  as
henceforth  patricians  and  freebom  clients  were  in-
corporated in  the  tribes,  and  thus  obtained  the
right  of  taking  part  in  their  assemblies.  (Liv.  iv.
24,  V.  30,  vi.  18,  xxix.  37.)  This  new  con-
stitution of  the  tribes  also  explains  the  otherwise
unaccountable  phenomena  mentioned  in  the  article
Tribunus,  that  patricians  sought  the  protection  of
the  tribunes,  and  that  on  one  occasion  even  two  of
the  tribunes  were  patricians.  From  the  latter  fact
it  has  been  inferred,  with  great  probability,  that
about  that  time  attempts  were  made  by  the  patri-
cians to  share  the  tribuneship  with  the  plebeians.
But  notwithstanding  the  incorporation  of  the  patri-
cians in  the  tribes,  the  comitia  tributa  remained
essentially  plebeian,  as  the  same  causes,  which
would  have  acted,  had  the  patricians  been  included
in  the  tribes  by  Servius  Tullius,  were  still  in  ope-
ration ;  for  the  patricians  were  now  even  fewer  in
number  than  two  centuries  before.  Hence  the  old
name  of  plebiscitum,  which  means  originally  a  re-
solution of  the  plebes  only,  although  in  a  strict
sense  of  the  word  no  longer  applicable,  was  still
retained,  as  a  resolution  of  the  comitia  tributa  was
practically  a  resolution  of  the  plebes,  which  the
patricians,  even  if  they  had  voted  against  it  unani-
mously, could  not  have  prevented.  Moreover,
owing  to  this,  the  patricians  probably  attended  the
comitia  tributa  very  seldom.  For  a  more  detailed
accoimt  of  the  comitia  tributa,  see  Comitia  tri-
buta. [L.  S.]
TRIBU'TA  COMFTIA  [Comitia.]
TRlBUTCyRIA  A'CTIO.  [Servus,  p.  1037.]
TRIBU'TUM  is  a  tax  which,  as  Niebuhr  (Hist.
of  Rome,  i.  p.  468)  supposes,  was  at  first  paid  only
by  the  plebeians,  since  the  name  itself  is  used  by


TRIBUTUM.

the  ancients  in  connection  with  the  Servian  tribes  ;
for  Varro  (rfe  Ling.  Lat.  v.  181)  says  "tributum
dictum  a  tribubus,"  and  Livy  (i.  43)  "  tribus  ap-
pellatae  a  tributo."  But  this  seems  to  be  only  par-
tially correct,  as  Livy  (iv.  60)  expressly  states  that
the  patres  also  paid  the  same  tax.  It  is  indeed
true,  that  the  patricians  had  little  real  landed  pro-
perty, and  that  their  chief  possessions  belonged  to
the  ager  publicus,  which  was  not  accounted  in  the
census  as  real  property,  and  of  which  only  the
tithes  had  to  be  paid,  until  at  a  late  period  an  al-
teration was  attempted  by  the  Lex  Thoria.  ( Appian,
de  Bell.  Civ.  i.  27.)  But  there  is  no  reason  for
supposing  that  the  patricians  did  not  pay  the  tri-
butum upon  their  real  property,  although  the
greater  part  of  it  naturally  fell  upon  the  plebeians.
(Liv.  iv.  60,  v.  10.)  The  impost  itself  varied  ac-
cording to  the  exigencies  of  the  state,  and  was
partly  applied  to  cover  the  expenses  of  war,  and
partly  those  of  the  fortifications  of  the  city.  (Liv.
vi.  32.)  The  usual  amount  of  the  tax  was  one  for
every  thousand  of  a  man's  fortune  (Liv,  xxiv.  15,
xxxix.  7,  44),  though  in  the  time  of  Cato  it  was
raised  to  three  in  a  thousand.  The  tributum  was
not  a  property  tax  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word,
for  the  accounts  respecting  the  plebeian  debtors
clearly  imply,  that  the  debts  were  not  deducted  in
the  valuation  of  a  person's  property,  so  that  he  had
to  pay  the  tributum  upon  property  which  was  not
his  own,  but  which  he  owed,  and  for  which  he  had
consequently  to  pay  the  interest  as  well.  It  was
a  direct  tax  upon  objects  without  any  regard  to
their  produce,  like  a  land  or  house  tax,  which  in-
deed formed  the  main  part  of  it.  (Niebuhr,  i.  p.
581.)  That  which  seems  to  have  made  it  most
oppressive,  was  its  constant  fluctuation.  It  was
raised  according  to  the  regions  or  tribes  instituted
by  Servius  TuUius,  and  by  the  tribunes  of  these
tribes  subsequently  called  tribuni  aerarii  (Dionys.
iv.  14,  15.)  Dionysius,  in  another  passage  (iv.  19)
states  that  it  was  imposed  upon  the  centuries  ac-
cording to  their  census,  but  this  seems  to  be  a  mis-
take, as  the  centuries  contained  a  number  of  ju-
niores  who  were  yet  in  their  fathers'  power,  and
consequently  could  not  pay  the  tributum.  It  was
not  like  the  other  branches  of  the  public  revenue  let
out  to  farm,  but  being  fixed  in  money  it  was
raised  b)'  the  tribunes,  unless  (as  was  the  case
after  the  custom  of  giving  pay  to  the  soldiers  was
introduced)  the  soldiers,  like  the  equites,  de-
manded it  from  the  persons  themselves  who  were
bound  to  pay  it.  [Aes  equestre  and  horde-
ARIUM.]  When  this  tax  was  to  be  paid,  what
sum  was  to  be  raised,  and  what  portion  of  every
thousand  asses  of  the  census,  were  matters  upon
which  the  senate  alone  had  to  decide.  But  when
it  was  decreed,  the  people  might  refuse  to  pay  it
when  they  thought  it  too  heavy,  or  unfairly  dis-
tributed, or  hoped  to  gain  some  other  advantage  by
the  refusal.  (Liv.  v.  12.)  In  later  times  the
senate  sometimes  left  its  regulation  to  the  censors,
who  often  fixed  it  very  arbitrarily.  No  citizen
was  exempt  from  it,  but  we  find  that  the  priests,
augurs,  and  pontiffs  made  attempts  to  get  rid  of  it,
but  this  was  only  an  abuse  which  did  not  last.
(Liv.  xxxiii.  42.)  In  cases  of  great  distress,  when
the  tributum  was  not  raised  according  to  the
census,  but  to  supply  the  momentary  wants  of
the  republic,  it  was  designated  by  the  name  of
Tributum  Temerarium.  (Fest.  s.  v.  Tributorum  col-
lationem.)     After  the  war  with  Macedonia  (a.  c.


TRICLINIUM.


1157


147),  when  the  Roman  treasury  was  filled  with  the
revenues  accruing  from  conquests  and  from  the
provinces,  the  Roman  citizens  became  exempted
from  paying  the  tributum  (Cic.  de  Of.  ii.  22  ;  Plin.
B.  JV.  xxxiii.  17),  and  this  state  of  things  lasted
down  to  the  consulship  of  Hirtius  and  Pansa  (43
B.  c.  ;  Plut.  Aem.  Paul.  38),  when  the  tributum
was  again  levied  on  account  of  the  exhausted  state
of  the  aerarium.  (Comp.  Cic.  ad  Fam.  xii.  30,
Philip,  ii.  37.)  After  this  time  it  was  imposed
according  to  the  discretion  of  the  emperors.

Respecting  the  tributum  paid  by  conquered
countries  and  cities,  see  Vectigalia.  Comp.
Hegewisch,  Versuch  uber  die  Rom.  Finanzen,  Al-
tona  1804  ;  Bosse,  Grundziige  des  Finanzwesena
im  Rom.  Staat,  Braunschweig  1803.         [L,  S.j

TRICLFNIUM,  the  dining-room  of  a  Roman
house,  the  position  of  which,  relativelj'- to  the  other
parts  of  the  house,  is  explained  in  p.  4.28.  It  was
of  an  oblong  shape,  and  according  to  Vitruvius  (vi.
3.  §  8)  ought  to  be  twice  as  long  as  it  was  broad.
The  same  author  (§  10)  describes  triclinia,  evi-
dently intended  to  be  used  in  summer,  which  were
open  towards  the  north,  and  had  on  each  side  a
window  looking  into  a  garden.  The  "  house  of  the
Tragic  Poet"  at  Pompeii,  and  also  that  of  Actaeon,
appear  to  have  had  summer  dining-rooms  opening
to  the  viridarium.  The  woodcut  at  p.  562  shows
the  arrangement  of  the  three  couches  (Jecti^  KKivai),
from  which  the  triclinium  derived  its  name.  They
also  remain  in  the  "  House  of  Actaeon,"  being  built
of  stone.

The  articles  Lectus,  Torus  and  Pulvinar,  con-
tain accounts  of  the  furniture  used  to  adapt  these
couches  for  the  accubatio,  i.  e.  for  the  act  of  reclining
during  the  meal.  When  so  prepared  for  an  en-
tertainment they  were  called  triclinia  strata  (Caes.
B.  C.  iii.  92  ;  comp.  Athen.  ii.  pp.  47,  48),  and
they  were  made  to  correspond  with  one  another  in
substance,  in  dimensions,  and  in  shape.  (Varro,
L.  L.  ix.  47,  ed.  Muller.)  As  each  guest  leaned
during  a  great  part  of  the  entertainment  upon  his
left  elbow,  so  as  to  leave  the  right  arm  at  liberty,
and  as  two  or  more  lay  on  the  same  couch,  the
head  of  one  man  was  near  the  breast  of  the  man
who  lay  behind  him,  and  he  was  therefore  said  to
lie  in  the  bosom  of  the  other.  (Plin.  Epist.  iv.  22.)
Among  the  Romans,  the  usual  number  of  persons
occupying  each  couch  was  three,  so  that  the  three
couches  of  a  triclinium  afforded  accommodation  for
a  party  of  nine.  It  was  the  rule  of  Varro  (Gellius
xiii.  11),  that  the  number  of  guests  ought  not  to
be  less  than  that  of  the  Graces,  nor  to  exceed  that
of  the  Muses.  Sometimes  however,  as  many  as
four  lay  on  each  of  the  couches.  (Hor.  Sat.  i.  4.
86.)  Among  the  Greeks  it  was  usual  for  only-
two  persons  to  recline  on  each  couch.  [Cobna,
p.  305,  a.]

In  such  works  of  ancient  art  as  represent  a  sym-
posium, or  drinking-party,  we  always  observe  that
the  couches  are  elevated  above  the  level  of  the
table.  This  circumstance  throws  some  light  upon
Plutarch's  mode  of  solving  the  problem  respecting
the  increase  of  room  for  the  guests  as  they  pro-
ceeded with  their  meal.  (Si/mpos.  v.  6.)  Each  man
in  order  to  feed  himself  lay  flat  upon  his  breast  or
nearly  so,  and  stretched  out  his  hand  towards  tbe
table  ;  but  afterwards,  when  his  hunger  was  satis-
fied, he  turned  upon  his  left  side,  leaning  on  his
elbow.  To  this  Horace  alludes  in  describing  a
person  sated  with  a  particular  dish,  and  turning
4  tt  .^


1158


TRICLINIUM.


to

3

3

s

T,

.

a

g

s

summus

6

5

4

imus

7

'd
2

s?

medius

8

medius

imus

9

1

summus

in  order  to   repose  upon  his  elbow.     (Sat.  ii.  4.
39.)

We  find  the  relative  positions  of  two  "persons
who  lay  next  to  one  another,  commonly  expressed
by  the  prepositions  super  or  supra  and  infra.  A
passage  of  Livy  (xxxix.  43),  in  which  he  relates
the  cruel  conduct  of  the  consul  L.  Quintius  Flami-
ninus,  shows  that  i?i/'ra  aliquem  cubare  was  the
same  as  insinu  alicujus  cubare^  and  consequently
that  each  person  was  considered  as  below  him  to
whose  breast  his  own  head  approached.  On  this
principle  we  are  enabled  to  explain  the  denomina-
tions both  of  the  three  couches,  and  of  the  three
places  on  each  couch.

lectus  medius


Supposing  the  annexed  arrangement  to  represent
the  plan  of  a  Triclinium,  it  is  evident  that,  as  each
guest  reclined  on  his  left  side,  the  countenances  of
all  when  in  this  position  were  directed,  first,  from
No  ]  towards  No  3,  then  from  No.  4  towards  No.
6,  and  lastly,  from  No  7  towards  No.  9  ;  that  the
guest  No.  1  lay,  in  the  sense  explained,  above  No.
2,  No.  8  below  No.  2,  and  so  of  the  rest ;  and  that,
going  in  the  same  direction,  the  couch  to  the  right
hand  was  above  the  others,  and  the  couch  to  the
left  hand  below  the  others.  Accordingly  the  fol-
lowing fragment  of  Sallust  (op.  Serv.  in  Virg,
Aen.  i.  698)  contains  the  denominations  of  the
couches  as  shown  on  the  plan  :  "  Igitur  discu-
buere:  Sertorius  {i.e.  No.Q)  inferior  in  medio;
super  eum  L.  Fabius  Hispaniensis  senator  ex  pro-
scriptis  (  No,  5) :  in  summo  Antonius  {No.  1)  ;  et
infra  scriba  Sertorii  Versius  (A^o.  2)  :  et  alter  scri-
ba  Maecenas  (A^o.  8)  in  imo,  medius  inter  Tarqui-
nium  (Ab,  7)  et  dominum  Perpernam  (Ab.  9)."
On  the  same  principle,  No.  1  was  the  highest  place
{Locus  summus)  on  the  highest  couch  ;  No.  3  was
Locus  imus  in  lecto  summo  ;  No.  2  Locus  medius
in  lecto  summo  ;  and  so  on.  It  will  be  found  that
in  the  following  passage  (Hor.  Sat.  ii.  8.  20 — 23)
the  guests  are  enumerated  in  the  order  of  their  ac-
cubation — an  order  exhibited  in  the  annexed  dia-
gram.


Nomentanus

Nasidienus

Porcius


o    -r;


Fundanius,  one  of  the  guests,  who  was  at  the  top
relatively  to  all  the  others,  says,

*'  Summus  ego,  et  prope  me  Viscus  Thurinus,  et
infra.

Si  memini,  Varius :  cum  Servilio  Balatrone

Vibidius,  quos  Maecenas  adduxerat  umbras.

Nomentanus  erat  super  ipsum,  Porcius  infi-a."


TRIERARCIIIA.

It  is  possible  that  Maecenas  ought  to  be  in  the
place  No.  4  instead  of  No  5,  since  the  entertain-
ment was  given  more  especially  in  honour  of  him,
and  No.  4  was  an  honourable  place.  The  host
himself,  Nasidienus,  occupies  the  place  No.  8,
which  was  usually  taken  by  the  master  of  the  feast,
and  was  a  convenient  situation  forgiving  directions
and  superintending  the  entertainment.  Unless
there  be  an  exception  in  the  instance  of  No.  4,  it  is
to  be  observed  that  at  each  table  the  most  honour-
able was  the  middle  place.  (Virg,  Aen.  i.  698.)

The  general  superintendence  of  the  dining-room
in  a  great  house  was  intrusted  to  a  slave  called  tri-
cliniarcka,  who,  through  the  instrumentality  of  other
slaves  of  inferior  rank,  took  care  that  every  thing
was  kept  and  proceeded  in  proper  order.  [J.  Y.]

TRIDENS.     [FusciNA.]

TRIENS.     [As.]

TRIERA'RCHIA  {rpi-npapxia).  This  was
one  of  the  extraordinary  war  services  or  liturgies
[Leiturgia]  at  Athens,  the  object  of  which  was
to  provide  for  the  equipment  and  maintenance  of
the  ships  of  war  belonging  to  the  state.  The  per-
sons who  were  charged  with  it  were  called  Tpi-qpap-
Xoi,  or  Trierarchs,  as  being  the  captains  of  Tri-
remes, tliough  the  name  was  also  applied  to  persons
who  bore  the  same  charge  in  other  vessels.  It  ex-
isted from  very  early  times  in  connection  with  the
forty-eight  naucraries  of  Solon,  and  the  fifty  of
Cleisthenes :  each  of  which  corporations  appears
to  have  been  obliged  to  equip  and  man  a  vessel.
(Comp.  Naucraria:  Lex  RJiet.  p.  283.)  Under
the  constitution  of  Cleisthenes  the  ten  tribes  were
at  first  severally  charged  with  five  vessels.  This
charge  was  of  course  superseded  by  the  later
forms  of  the  Trierarchy,  explained  in  the  course  of
this  article.

I.  The  services  to  which  the  Trierarchs  were  liable.
What  these  were  previously  to  358  B.  c.  there  can
be  no  doubt ;  the  vessel  was  furnished  by  the  state,
though  sometimes  a  wealthy  and  patriotic  indivi-
dual served  in  his  own  ship,  Cleinias,  for  instance,
did  so  at  Artemisium  (Herod,  viii.  17),  but  as  it  is
particularly  recorded  that  this  ship  was  his  own,
we  may  infer,  that  he  supplied  at  his  own  cost
what  the  state  was  bound  to  provide.  The  same
custom  prevailed  during  the  Peloponnesian  war
also.  The  1 00  ships  prepared  and  reserved  at  the
beginning  of  the  war,  for  any  critical  emergency,
were  supplied  by  the  state.  (Thucyd.  ii.  24.)  In
the  expedition  against  Sicily  {Id.  vi.  31)  the  state
furnished  the  hull  of  the  vessel  {vavu  Kevdv),  and
the  pay  of  the  crews,  a  drachma  per  day  for  eacli
man :  but  the  equipment  of  the  ships  was  at  the
cost  of  the  Trierarchs,  who  also  gave  itncpopai
(Pollux,  iii.  94),  or  additional  pay  to  secure  the
best  men.  The  same  conclusions  are  also  deduci-
ble  from  the  credit  which  a  Trierarch  takes  to  him-
self for  saving  his  vessel,  when  the  city  lost  her
ships  at  Aegospotami  (Isocr.  c.  Callim.  382) :
and  from  the  further  statement  that  he  paid
the  sailors  out  of  his  own  pocket.  From  the
threat  of  Cleon  (Aristoph.  Equit.  916)  that  he
would  (as  2TpaTi77os)  make  an  adversary  a  Trier-
arch,  and  give  him  an  old  ship  with  a  rotten
mast  {icTTiov  aairpoi')^  it  appears  that  the  state
furnished  the  hull  and  mast  also,  but  that  the  Trier-
arch  was  bound  to  keep  and  return  them  in  good
repair :  an  obligation  expressed  in  the  inscriptions
quoted  by  Bdckh  (  Urkunden  iiber  das  Seewesen  dea
Attisclien  StaaieSf  p.  197),  by  the  phrase,  Sel  tJ/j»


TRIERARCHIA.

pavv  SSKifJiov  Kol  ipTeXij  TrapaSovvai.  Conse-
quently the  statement  in  the  oration  against  Mi-
dias  (p.  564.  22)  that  when  Demosthenes  was  quite
young  (b.  c.  364)  the  Trierarchs  paid  all  the  ex-
penses themselves  (rci  dvaXco/xaTa  4k  rwv  Ihicav)
only  implies  that  they  defrayed  the  expenses  which
were  customary  at  that  time,  and  which  were  after-
Avards  diminished  by  the  regulation  of  the  sym-
nioriae  ;  but  not  that  they  supplied  the  ship,  or
pay  and  provisions  for  the  crew.  The  whole  ex-
penditure, says  Bockh,  means  nothing  more  than
the  equipment  of  the  vessel,  the  keeping  it  in  repair,
and  the  procuring  the  crew  which  was  attended
with  much  trouble  and  expense,  as  the  Trierarchs
were  sometimes  obliged  te  give  bounties  in  order  to
induce  persons  to  serve,  foreign  sailors  not  being
ad:nissible.  From  the  oration  of  Demosthenes
against  Polycles  (b.  c.  361),  we  learn  the  following
particulars  about  the  Trierarchy  of  that  time.
The  Trierarchs  were  obliged  to  launch  their  ship  ;
the  sailors  were  supplied  from  particular  parishes
(Sijfxoi),  through  the  agency  of  the  demarchi  ;  but
those  supplied  to  Apollodorus  the  client  of  Demos-
thenes were  but  few  and  inefficient,  consequently
he  mortgaged  his  estate  {vvoOeTvai  ttju  ovcriav),
and  hired  the  best  men  he  could  get,  giving  great
bounties  and  premiums  (irpoSoaeis).  He  also
equipped  the  vessel  with  his  own  tackle  and  furni-
ture, taking  nothing  from  the  public  stores  (e/c  tcSz/
Sriimoffiwu  ovSei^  e\a€ov.  Compare  the  Speech  on
the  Crown  of  the  Trierarchj',  p.  1229).  Moreover
in  consequence  of  his  sailors  deserting  when  he
was  out  at  sea,  he  was  put  to  additional  and  heavy
expenses  in  hiring  men  at  different  ports.  The
provision  money  for  the  sailors  (aiTr^pea-iov)  was
provided  by  the  state,  and  paid  by  the  strategi,
and  so  generally  speaking  was  the  pay  for  the
marines  (eTrtgarat)  :  but  Demosthenes'  client  only
received  it  for  two  months,  and  as  he  served  foi
five  months  more  than  his  time,  (from  the  delay  of
his  successor  elect,)  he  was  obliged  to  advance  it
himself  for  fifteen  months,  with  but  an  uncertain
prospect  of  repayment.  Other  circumstances  are
mentioned  which  made  his  Trierarchy  very  expen-
sive, and  the  whole  speech  is  worth  reading,  as
showing  the  unfairness  and  hardship  to  which  a  rich
man  was  sometimes  subjected  as  a  Trierarch.  The
observation  that  he  took  no  furniture  from  the  public
stores,  proves  that  at  that  time  (b.  c.  361),  the
triremes  were  fitted  out  and  equipped  from  the
public  stores,  and  consequently  by  the  state  ;  but
as  we  learn  from  other  passages  in  Demosthenes,
and  the  inscriptions  in  Bockh  (Urkunden,  No.  iii.),
the  Trierarchs  were  obliged  to  return  in  good  con-
dition any  articles  which  they  took ;  in  default  of
doing  so  they  were  considered  debtors  to  the  state.
That  the  ship's  furniture  was  either  wholly  or  in
part  supplied  by  the  state,  also  appears  from  an-
other speech  (c.  Euery.  et  Mnesib.  1146):  but
Trierarchs  did  not  always  avail  themselves  of  their
privilege  in  this  respect,  that  they  might  have  no
trouble  in  settling  with  the  state.  It  is  evident
then,  that  at  the  time  referred  to  (about  B.c.  360),
the  only  expenses  binding  upon  the  Trierarchs  were
those  of  keeping  in  repair  the  ship  and  the  ship's
furniture  ;  but  even  these  might  be  very  consider-
able, especially  if  the  ship  were  old,  or  exposed  to
hard  service  and  rough  weather.  Moreover,  some
Trierarchs,  whether  from  ambitious  or  patriotic
motives,  put  themselves  to  unnecessary  expense  in
fitting  out  and  rigging  their  ships,  from  which  the


TRIERARCHIA.


1159


state  derived  an  advantage.  Sometimes,  on  the
other  hand,  the  state  suffered,  by  the  Trierarchs
performing  their  duties  at  the  least  possible  ex-
pense, or  letting  out  their  Trierarchy  {ixiaQSiaai
rriv  \eiTovpyiav)  to  the  contractor  who  offered  the
lowest  tender.  (Dem.  de  Coron.  Trierar.  1230.)
One  consequence  of  this  was,  that  the  duties  were
inadequately  performed ;  but  there  was  a  greater
evil  connected  with  it,  namely,  that  the  contractors
repaid  themselves  by  privateering  on  their  own
account,  which  led  to  reprisals  and  letters  of  marque
being  granted  against  the  state.  (Sylae  :  Dem.
Id.  1231.)  It  seems  strange  that  the  Athenians
tolerated  this,  especially  as  they  were  sometimes
inconsistent  enough  to  punish  the  Trierarchs  who
had  let  out  their  Trierarchy,  considering  it  as  a
desertion  of  post  (AenroTaljoj/,  Id.  1230).

We  may  here  observe,  that  the  expression  in
Isaeus  {de  Apoll.  Hered.  67),  that  a  Trierarch
"  had  his  ship  made  himself"  (jiiu  vavv  TroiTjffcJ/ie-
vov),  does  not  mean  that  he  was  at  the  cost  of
building  it  {vavn-nyrjad^evos).,  but  only  of  fitting
it  up  and  getting  it  ready  for  sea.  That  the  ships
always  belonged  to  the  state,  is  further  evident
from  the  fact  that  the  senate  was  intrusted  with
the  inspection  of  the  ship-building  (Dem.  c.  Androt.
599.  1 3)  ;  and  is  placed  beyond  all  doubt  by  the
"  Athenian  Navy  List"  of  the  inscriptions  in
Bockh.  (  Urkunden.,  &c.)  Some  of  the  ships  there
mentioned  are  called  dv^triKXifipanoi,  whence  it  ap-
pears that  the  public  vessels  were  assigned  by  lot
to  the  respective  Trierarchs.  A  rpt^pTjs  67rt5o(rf-
tios  was  a  ship  presented  to  the  state  as  a  free  gift,
''  just  as  rpiT^pri  iniSovvai  means  to  present  the  state
with  a  trireme  (Dem.  c.  Mid.  566,  568).  The
duration  of  a  Trierarchy  was  a  year,  and  if  any
Trierarch  served  longer  than  his  legal  time,  he
could  charge  the  extra  expenses  (to  eTrtrptrjpop-
XVl^a)  to  his  successor.  To  recover  these  expenses
an  action  {eirirpi-npapx^txaTos  BIkti)  might  be
brought  against  the  successor,  of  which  we  have
an  example  in  the  speech  of  Apollodorus  against
Polycles,  composed  by  Demosthenes  for  the  former.

II.  On  the  eorpenses  of  the  Trierarchy.  These
would  of  course  depend  upon  circumstances ;  but
except  in  extraordinary  cases,  they  were  not  more
than  60,  nor  less  than  40  minae :  the  average  was
about  50.  Thus  about  the  year  b.  c.  360,  a  whole
Trierarchy  was  let  out  for  40  minae  ;  in  later
times  the  general  amount  of  a  contract  was  60.
(Dem.  c.  Mid.  539,  564.  20,  de  Corm.  260,  262.)

III.  On  the  different  forms  of  the  Trierarchy.
In  ancient  times  one  person  bore  the  whole  charge,
afterwards  it  was  customary  for  two  persons  to
share  it,  who  were  then  called  Syntrierarchs  {aw-
rpLTJpapxoi).  When  this  practice  was  first  intro-
duced is  not  known,  but  Bockh  conjectures  that  it
was  about  the  year  412  B.  c,  after  the  defeat  of
the  Athenians  in  Sicily,  when  the  union  of  two
persons  for  the  Choregia  was  first  permitted.  The
most  ancient  account  of  a  sj  ntrierarchy  is  later
than  410  (Lys.  c.  Diogit.  907,  909),  and  we  meet
with  one  so  late  as  B.  c.  358,  the  year  of  the  Athe-
nian expedition  into  Euboea.  (Dem.  c.  Mid.  566.
24.)  The  syntrierarchy  to  which  we  allude  was>
indeed  a  voluntary  service  (ewfSoo-iy),  but  there
can  be  little  doubt  that  it  v/as  suggested  by  the
ordinary  practice  of  that  time  ;  and  even  under  the
next  form  of  the  service,  two  Trierarchs  were
sometimes  employed  for  the  immediate  direction  of
the  Trierarchy.     The  syntrierarchy,  however,  did

4k  4


3160


TRIERARCHIA.


not  entirely  supersede  the  older  and  single  form,
being  only  meant  as  a  relief  in  case  of  emergency,
when  there  was  not  a  sufficient  number  of  wealthy
citizens  to  bear  the  expense  singly.  Numerous
instances  in  fact  occur  of  single  Trierarchies,  be-
tv/een  410  and  358  B.  c,  and  in  two  passages  of
Isaeus  {de  Dicaeog.  Her.  54,  de  Apoll.  67),  refer-
ring to  this  period,  the  single  and  double  Trierar-
chy  are  mentioned  as  cotemporaneous.  Apollo-
dorus  also  was  sole  Trierarch  (Dera.  c.  Polyd.)  so
late  as  B.  c.  361.  In  the  case  of  a  syntrierarchy
the  two  Trierarchs  commanded  their  vessel  in  turn,
six  months  each  (Id.  1219),  according  as  they
agreed  between  themselves.

The  third  form  of  the  Trierarchy  was  connected
with,  or  suggested  by,  the  syntrierarchy.  In  B.  c,
358,  the  Athenians  were  unable  to  procure  a  suffi-
cient number  of  legally  appointed  Trierarchs,  and
accordingly  they  summoned  the  volunteers.  This,
however,  was  but  a  temporary  expedient  ;  and  as
the  actual  system  was  not  adequate  to  the  public
wants,  they  determined  to  manage  the  Trierarchy
somewhat  in  the  same  way  as  the  property  taxes
[Eisphora],  namely,  by  classes  or  symmoriae,
according  to  the  law  of  Periander  passed,  as  Bockh
shows,  jn  the  year  358,  and  which  was  the  pri-
mary and  original  enactment  on  the  subject.  With
this  view  1200  crvvT^Xeis,  or  partners  (Dem.  c.
Mid.  564)  were  appointed,  who  were  probably  the
wealthiest  individuals  of  the  state,  according  to  the
census  or  valuation.  These  were  divided  into  20
avfi/bLopiai,  or  classes  ;  out  of  which  a  number  of
persons  (trtv/uaTa)  joined  for  the  equipment  or  ra-
ther the  maintenance  and  management  of  a  ship,
imder  the  title  of  a  avvreXfia  (Harpocr.  s.  v.)  or
union  Sometimes,  perhaps,  by  special  enactment,
when  a  great  number  of  ships  was  required,  a
synteleia  of  this  kind  consisted  of  four  or  five
wealthy  individuals,  who  bore  jointly  the  ex-
penses of  one  trireme  (Harpocr.  s.  v.  ^vfi/xopia) ;
but  generally  to  every  ship  there  was  assigned  a
synteleia  of  fifteen  persons  of  different  degrees  of
wealth,  as  we  may  suppose,  so  that  four  only  were
provided  for  by  each  symmoria  of  sixty  persons.

These  synteleiae  of  fifteen  persons  each  seem  to
hare  been  also  called  symmoriae  by  Hyperides.
(Harpocr.  s.  «.;  compare  Dem.  de  Syimnor.  183.)
It  appears,  however,  that  before  Demosthenes
carried  a  new  law  on  this  subject  (b.  c.  340),  it
had  been  customary  for  sixteen  persons  to  unite  in
a  synteleia  or  company  for  a  ship  (Dem.  pro
Cor.  261),  who  bore  the  burden  in  equal  shares.
This  being  the  case  it  follows,  either  that  the
members  of  the  symmoriae  had  been  by  that  time
raised  from  1200  to  1280,  or  that  some  alterations
had  taken  place  in  their  internal  arrangements,  of
which  no  account  has  come  down  to  us.  (Bockh,
Urkunden,  &c.  p.  181.)  From  the  phrase  6k  r&v  iv
Tots  \6xois  trvvTsKfiuv,  used  in  the  KardKoyos  (de
Cor.  261),  it  would  also  seem  that  the  word  \6xoi
was  used  of  civil  as  well  as  military  divisions,  and,
in  this  instance,  of  the  symmoriae.  The  superin-
tendence of  the  whole  system  was  in  the  hands  of
the  300  wealthiest  members,  who  were  therefore
called  the  "  leaders  of  the  symmoriae  "  {liyfixoves
rwu  (TvufiopLwu).,  on  whom  the  burdens  of  the  trier-
archy chiefly  fell,  or  rather  ought  to  have  fallen.
(Dem.  pro  Cor.  329,  c.  Eiterg.  et  Mnesib.  1145.)
The  services  performed  by  individuals  under  this
system  appear  to  have  been  the  same  as  before:
the  state  still  provided  the  ship's  tackle  (»'.  e.  the


TRIERARCHIA.
dOSvia  Koi  a-TVTnria  Kal  crxoivia,  and  other  things\
and  some  stringent  enactments  were  made  to  com-
pel the  Trierarchs  to  deliver  it  up  according  to  the
inventory  taken  of  it  (to  Sidypaufxa  ruv  cKevwv)^
either  at  Athens  or  to  their  successors  sent  out  by
the  symmoriae.  This  conclusion,  that  the  vessel
was  equipped  by  the  state,  is  confirmed  by  De-
mosthenes {de  Symmor.  18.S.  17),  and  in  the  ora-
tion against  Midias  {I.  c)  he  says,  referring  to  the
system  of  the  symmoriae,  that  the  state  provided
the  crews,  and  the  furniture.  The  only  duty  then
of  the  Trierarchs  under  this  system  was  to  keep
their  vessels  in  the  same  repair  and  order  as  they
received  them.  But  even  from  this  they  managed
to  escape :  for  the  wealthiest  members,  who  had  to
serve  for  their  synteleia,  let  out  their  Trierarchies
for  a  talent,  and  received  that  amount  from  their
partners  (o-WTeAcTs),  so  that  in  reality  they  paid
next  to  nothing,  or,  at  any  rate,  not  what  thpy
ought  to  have  done,  considering  that  the  Trierarchy
was  a  ground  of  exemption  from  other  liturgies.  It
does  not  appear  from  the  orators  how  the  different
synteleiae  appointed  the  Trierarchs  who  were  to
take  charge  of  their  vessels ;  but  it  was  probably
left  to  themselves  without  being  regulated  by  any
legal  enactment.  The  evils  and  irregularities  of
the  symmoriae  are  thus  (rhetorically  perhaps)
described  by  Demosthenes:  "  I  saw  your  navy
going  to  ruin,  and  the  rich  escaping  with  little
cost,  and  persons  of  moderate  income  losing  their
property,  and  the  city  losing  the  opportunities  of
action,  and  the  triremes  not  being  equipped  in
sufficient  time  to  meet  an  emergencj^  and  therefore
I  proposed  a  law,  &c."  Tlie  changes  he  meant  to
effect  by  it  are  related  in  his  oration  concerning
the  symmoriae  (b.  c.  354),  and  are  as  follow  :  he
proposed  to  add  800  to  the  1200  (Twi'TeAerj,  making
the  whole  2000,  so  that,  subtracting  all  those  who
could  claim  exemption  as  minors,  orphans,  &c.,
there  might  always  remain  1200  persons  {<Ta!/j.aTa)
to  serve.  These  were  to  be  divided  into  20  sym-
moriae of  60  each,  as  under  the  old  system  :  each
of  these  was  to  be  subdivided  into  five  divisions  of
12  persons  each,  one-half  rich  and  the  other  poor
{dvTava'ir\r]pwu),  so  as  to  form  altogether  100
smaller  symmoriae.  The  number  of  triremes,  ac-
cording to  this  scheme,  was  to  be  300,  classed  in
20  divisions  of  15  ships:  each  of  these  divisions
was  to  be  assigned  to  one  of  the  20  larger  sym-
moriae, so  that  each  of  the  smaller  would  receive
3  ;  and  in  case  of  300  ships  being  required,  four
Trierarchs  would  be  appointed  to  each.  More-
over, each  of  the  greater  symmoriae  was  to  receive
the  same  amount  of  the  public  stores  for  equip-
ment, in  order  that  they  might  apportion  it  to  the
smaller  classes.  With  a  view  to  levying  the  crews,
and  for  other  purposes,  the  generals  were  to  divide
the  dockyards  into  ten  parts  for  30  ships'  stations
{vfwcroiKoi)  adjacent  to  each  other  ;  and  to  assign
each  of  these  parts  to  a  tribe,  or  two  large  sym-
moriae of  30  ships.  These  ten  parts  were  to  be
subdivided  into  thirds,  each  of  which  was  to  be
assigned  to  a  third  part  (rpiTrvs)  of  the  tribe  to
whom  the  whole  was  allotted,  so  that  each  third
would  receive  ten  ships.  Whether  this  scheme
was  put  into  practice  does  not  appear,  but  it  seems
that  it  was  not,  for  the  mismanagement  of  the  Trier-
archy appears  to  have  continued  till  Demosthenes
carried  his  law  about  the  "  Trierarchy  according  to
the  Valuation."  One  of  the  chief  evils  connected
with  it  was,  that  the  triremes  were  never  equipped


TRIERARCHIA.

in  time  ;  nnd  as  Demosthenes  {Phil.  50)  complains
of  this,  in  B.  c.  352,  we  may  conclude  that  his
proposal  fell  to  the  ground.  But  these  evils  were
too  serious  to  remaiu  without  a  remedy  ;  and
therefore  when  the  orator  was  the  eTrjcrTaTTjs  tov
vavriKou  or  the  superintendent  of  the  Athenian
navy,  he  brought  forward  and  carried  a  law  for
altering  and  improving  the  system  of  the  symmo-
riae  and  companies,  the  members  of  which  no
longer  called  themselves  Trierarchs,  but  partners
(avvTe\€7s)  (Id.  de  Cor.  260),  thereby  introducing
the  '•^Fourth form  of  the  Trierarchy."  The  provisions
of  the  law  were  as  follow.  The  naval  services  re-
quired from  every  citizen  were  to  depend  upon
and  be  proportional  to  his  property,  or  rather  to
his  taxable  capital  (Tifx-nixa,  see  Eisphora),  as
registered  for  the  symmoriae  of  the  property  taxes,
the  rate  being  one  trireme  for  every  ten  talents  of
taxable  capital,  up  to  three  triremes  and  one  auxi-
liary vessel  (vTvnpeaiov)  for  the  largest  properties  ;
i.  e.  no  person,  however  rich,  could  be  required
to  furnish  more.  Those  who  had  not  ten  talents
in  taxable  capital  were  to  club  together  in  synte-
leiae  till  they  had  made  up  that  amount ;  and  if
the  valuation  of  the  year  of  Nausinicus  (b.  c.  379)
was  still  in  force,  the  taxable  capital  (for  the  high-
est class)  was  one-fifth  of  the  whole.  By^  this  law
great  changes  were  effected.  All  persons  paying
taxes  were  rated  in  proportion  to  their  property,
80  that  the  poor  were  benefitted  hy  it,  aShd  the
state  likewise:  for,  as  Demosthenes  {de  Cor.  261)
says,  those  who  had  formerly  contributed  one-
sixteenth  to  the  Trierarchy  of  one  ship  were  now
Trierarchs  of  two,  in  which  case  they  must  either
have  served  by  proxy,  or  done  duty  in  successive
years.  He  adds  that  the  consequences  were  highly
beneficial.  During  the  whole  war,  carried  on  after
the  law  was  in  force,  no  Trierarch  implored  the  aid
of  the  people  (txeTTjpfaj'  c^Tj/ce),  or  took  refuge  in
a  temple,  or  was  put  into  prison  by  the  persons
whose  duty  it  was  to  dispatch  the  fleet  (ot  oTroo-To-
A«rs),  nor  was  any  trireme  lost  at  sea,  or  lying
idle  in  the  docks  for  want  of  stores  and  tackle,  as
tmder  the  old  system,  when  the  service  (to  Aet-
•Tov(r)'fiv)  fell  on  the  poor.  The  duties  and  services
to  which  the  Trierarchs  were  subject  under  the
new  law  were  probably  the  same  as  under  the
third  form  of  the  Trierarchy,  the  symmoriae.

On  the  relation  which,  in  this  system,  the  cost
of  a  Trierarchy  bore  to  the  property  of  a  Trierarch
Bockh  makes  the  following  remarks,  which  may
be  verified  by  a  reference  to  Eisphora.  "If  we
reckon  that,  as  formerly,  it  cost  about  a  talent,  the
total  expense  of  the  Trierarchs.  for  100,  200,  or  300
triremes  amounted  to  an  equal  number  of  talents,
or  a  sixtieth,  a  thirtieth,  and  a  twentieth  of  the
valuation  of  Attica :  i.  e.  for  the  first  class  one-third,
two-thirds,  and  one  per  cent,  of  their  property :
for  the  poorer  a  proportionally  less  amount :  and  of
the  annual  incomes,  taken  as  a  tenth  part  of  the
property,  3^,.  6§,  and  10  per  cent,  for  the  most
wealthy.  But  we  may  reckon  that  Athens  at  that
time  had  not  more  than  100  or  200  triremes  at
sea,  very  seldom  300  ;  so  that  this  war-tax  did  not
for  the  richest  class  amount  on  an  average  to  more
than  one-third,  and  two-thirds  per  cent,  of  their
property."

This  arrangement  of  Demosthenes  was  calculated
for  300  triremes,  for  which  number  300  persons
serving  in  person  would  be  necessary  ;  so  that  the
chief  burden  must  have  fallen  upon  the  leaders  of


TRIERARCHIA.


1161


'the  former  symmoriae.  The  year  of  passing  this
law  Bcickh  fixes  at  B.  c.  340  or  339.  How  long  it
remained  in  force  is  uncertain.  In  the  speech  for
the  crown  (b.  c.  330),  where  much  is  said  on  the
subject  of  the  Trierarchy,  it  is  neither  mentioned
that  the  law  was  in  existence,  nor  that  it  was
repealed  ;  but  Demosthenes  (p.  329)  says  that
Aeschines  had  been  bribed  by  the  leaders  of  the
symmoriae  to  nullify  it.

It  appears  then  that  the  Trierarchy,  though  the
most  expensive  of  the  liturgies,  was  not  of  neces-
sity oppressive,  if  fairly  and  economically  managed,
though  this,  as  has  been  before  observed,  was  not
always  the  case.     (Demosth.  c.  Polyc.)

With  respect  to  the  amount  of  property  which
rendered  a  man  liable  to  serve  a  Trierarchy  or  syn-
trierarchy,  Bockh  observes,  "  I  am  aware  of  no
instance  of  liability  arising  from  a  property  of  less
value  than  500  minae,  and  as  an  estate  of  one  or
two  talents  never  obliged  the  possessor  to  the  per-
formance of  any  liturgy  (Dem.  c.  Aphob.  p.  833),
the  assertion  of  Isaeus  (de  Dicaeog.  Hered.  p.  54)
that  many  had  served  the  office  of  Trierarch  whose
property  was  not  more  than  80  minae,  obliges  us
(if  true)  to  suppose  that  public-spirited  individuals
were  sometimes  found  to  contribute  to  a  Trierarchy
(rather  perhaps  to  a  syntrierarchy)  out  of  a  very
small  property."

The  disadvantages  which  in  later  times  resulted
from  the  Trierarchs  not  being  ready  for  sea  by  the
time  for  sailing,  were  in  early  times  prevented  by
their  appointments  being  made  beforehand  ;  as  was
the  case  with  the  Trierarchs  appointed  to  the  100
ships  which  were  reserved  at  the  beginning  of  the
Peloponnesian  war  against  an  attack  upon  Athens
by  sea.

The  appointment  to  serve  under  the  first  and
second  forms  of  the  Trierarchy  was  made  by  the
strategi  (Demosth.  c.  Lacr.  940.  16),  and  in  case
any  person  was  appointed  to  serve  a  Trierarchy,
and  thought  that  any  one  else  (not  called  upon)
was  better  able  to  bear  it  than  himself,  he  offered
the  latter  an  exchange  of  his  property  [AntidosisJ
subject  to  the  burden  of  the  Trierarchy.

In  cases  of  extreme  hardship,  persons  became
suppliants  to  the  people,  or  fled  to  the  altar  of
Artemis  at  Munychia.  If  not  ready  in  time,  they
were  sometimes  liable  to  imprisonment  {evoxot  Seo--
ixf^^  Dem.  de  Cor.  262.  15).  Thus  on  one  occasion
(Dem.  de  Cor.  Trier.  1229.  6),  the  Trierarchs  were
by  a  special  decree  subjected  to  imprisonment,  if
they  were  not  off  the  pier  (x«/xa)  by  the  end  of
the  month  ;  on  the  contrary,  whoever  got  his  ship
ready  first,  was  to  be  rewarded  with  the  '*  crown
of  the  Trierarchy  ;"  so  that  in  this  way  consi-
derable emulation  and  competition  were  produced.
Moreover,  the  Trierarchs  were  vk^vQwoi,  or  liable
to  be  called  to  account  for  their  expenditure  ;
though  they  applied  their  own  property  to  the
service  of  the  state.  (Dem.  c.  Polyc.  1222.  11  ;
Aeschin.  c.  Ctesiph.  bG.)  But  they  also  received
money  out  of  the  treasury  for  various  disburse-
ments, as  the  pay  of  the  soldiers  and  sailors,  and
the  extra  hands  (uTTTjpeffta)  :  thus,  on  one  occasion,
each  Trierarch  is  stated  to  have  received  30  minae,
(Is  iirinKuvv.  (Dem.  de  Cor.  Trier.  1231.  14.)  The
Trierarchs  may  also  have  been  considered  vinvQv-
roi,  from  being  required  to  show  that  they  had
performed  their  duties  properly.  The  Sacred  Tri-
remes, the  Paralus  and  the  Salamis,  had  special
treasurers  [Tamias]  appointed  to  them  (Pollux,


1162


TRIERARCHIA.


viii.  116);  and,  on  the  authority  of  Ulpian  (ad
Dem.  c.  Mid.  686),  it  has  been  believed  that  the
state  acted  as  Trierarch  for  each  of  them  ;  but  in
the  inscriptions  quoted  by  Bockh  (  Urkunden,  &c.,
p.  169),  no  difference  is  made  between  the  Trier-
archs  of  the  Paralus  and  other  vessels,  and  there-
fore it  would  seem  that  the  state  appointed  Trier-
archs  for  them  as  well  as  for  other  vessels,  and
provided  out  of  the  public  funds  for  those  expenses
only  which  were  peculiar  to  them.

IV.  On  the  exemptions  from  the  Trierarchy. —
By  an  ancient  law,  in  force  B.  c.  335  (Dem.  c.
LepL),  no  person  (but  minors  or  females)  could
claim  exemption  from  the  Trierarchy,  who  were  of
sufficient  wealth  to  perform  it,  not  even  the  de-
scendants of  Harmodius  and  Aristogiton.  But
from  Isaeus  {De  Apoll.  Hered.  67)  it  appears
that  in  the  time  of  the  single  Trierarchy  no  person
could  be  compelled  to  serve  a  second  time  within
two  years  after  a  former  service  (5uo  errj  ZiaXi-Kutv).
The  nine  archons  alsf»  were  exempt,  and  the  Trier-
archy was  a  ground  of  exemption  from  the  other
liturgies,  any  of  which,  indeed,  gave  an  exemption
from  all  the  rest  during  the  year  next  following
that  of  its  service.    (Dem.  c.  Lept.  459,  464.)

But  all  property  was  not  subject  to  the  service,
as  we  learn  from  Demosthenes  (Z)e  Symm.  182.
14),  who  tells  us  that  a  person  was  exempt,  if
oSuj/OTos,  or  unable  to  serve  from  poverty  ;  so
also  were  "  wards,  heiresses,  orphans,  cleruchi,  and
corporate  bodies."  Of  course  an  heiress  could  only
claim  exemption  while  unmarried.  Wards  also
were  free  from  all  liturgies,  during  their  minority,
and  for  a  year  after  their  hoKifxacria.  (Lysias,  c.
Diogit.  908.)  By  KXrjpoOxoi,  are  meant  colonists,
who,  while  absent  by  the  command  of  the  state,
could  not  perform  a  Trierarchy.  The  ret  koivuvmo.
admits  of  a  doubt,  but  it  probably  means  the  pro-
perty of  joint  tenants,  as  brothers  or  coheirs,  which
had  not  yet  been  apportioned  to  them  (Pollux,
viii.  184),  or  it  may  refer  to  monies  invested  in
partnership.  Moreover,  though  the  proper  duration
of  a  Trierarchy  was  a  year,  it  was  legally  dissolved
if  the  general  furnished  no  pay  to  the  soldiers,
or  if  the  ship  put  into  the  Peiraeeus,  it  being  then
impossible  to  keep  the  sailors  together.  (Dem.  c.
Folyc.  1209.)

V.  On  the  legal  proceedings  connected  with  the
Trierarchy. — These  were  either  between  individual
Trierarchs,  or  between  Trierarchs  and  the  state,
and  therefore  in  the  form  of  a  Diadicasia.  They
generally  a^ose  in  consequence  of  a  Trierarch  not
delivering  up  his  ship  and  her  rigging  in  proper
order,  either  to  his  successor  or  to  the  state.  If  he
alleged  that  the  loss  or  damage  of  either  happened
from  a  storm,  he  was  said  (TK-qy^daQai  Kara,  x^^f^^va
diro\(t)\hal,  and  if  his  plea  were  substantiated,
iSo^ev  Iv  T(f  hiKa(TTr)pi(f  K.  t.  A.  Vessels  or  furni-
ture on  which  a  trial  of  this  kind  had  been  held,
were  said  to  be  StaSeStKoo-zxei/a.

The  presidency  of  the  courts  which  tried  matters
of  this  sort  was  vested  in  the  strategi,  and  some-
times in  the  superintendents  of  the  dockyard,
in  conjunction  with  the  aTroo-ToActj.  The  senate
also  appears  to  have  had  a  judicial  power  in  these
matters:  e.g.  we  meet  in  various  inscriptions  with
the  phrase  oV5e  twv  Tpnipdpx<»v,  SiV  eSinhuacv  tj
/SouAt)  rriy  Tpirjpr].  13ockh  conjectures  that  the
Trierarchs  of  whom  this  is  said  had  returned  their
ships  in  such  a  condition,  that  the  state  might  have
called  upon  them  to  put  them  f  n  thorough  repair,  or


TRIPOS.

to  rebuild  them,  at  a  cost  for  an  ordinary  trireme  of
5000  drachmae.  Supposing  that  they  were  not  re-i.
leased  from  this  liability  by  any  decree  of  a  court
of  justice,  and  that  the  rebuilding  was  not  com-
pleted, he  conceives  that  it  must  have  been  com-
petent (in  a  clear  and  flagrant  case)  for  the  senate
to  have  inflicted  upon  them  the  penalty  of  twice
5000  drachmae,  the  technical  phrase  for  which  was
"doubling  the  trireme."  (Urkunden,  &c.  p.  228.)

The  phrase  wfji.oXo'yr}<T€U  rpiripT}  Kaivf>v  dirudwaeiy,
which  occurs  in  inscriptions,  does  not  apply  to  an
undertaking  for  giving  a  new  trireme,  but  merely
for  putting  one  in  a  complete  state  of  repair.

The  phrase  (paiveiv  irXolov  (Dem.  c.  Lacr.  94 1 ),
to  lay  an  information  against  a  vessel,  is  used  not
of  a  public  ship,  but  of  a  private  vessel,  engaged
perhaps  in  smuggling  or  privateering.  (Bockh,  Publ,
Econ.  of  Athens,  pp.  541—576,  2d  ed.)  [R.  W.]
TRIEROPOII  {TpivpoTToioi).  [Navis,  p.
785,  a. J

TRIGON.     [PiLA.]
TRILIX.     [Tela,  p.  1102,  b.]
TRINU'NDINUM.     [Nundinae.]
TRIO'BOLON.     [DicASTEs,  p.  402,  b.]
TRIO'BOLUS.     [Drachma.]
TRIPLICA'TIO.     [Actio,  p.  12,  a.]
TRIPOS  (rpiTrouy),  a  tripod,  i.  e.  any  utensil
or  article  of  furniture  supported  upon  three  feet.
More  especially

I.  A  three-legged  table.  [Mensa.]  The  first
woodcut,  at  p.  308,  shows  such  a  table  in  use.
Its  three  supports  are  richly  and  tastefully  orna-
mented. Various  single  legs  {irapezophora,  Cic.
ad  Fam.  vii.  23),  wrought  in  the  same  style  out
of  white  marble,  red  porphyry,  or  other  valuable
materials,  and  consisting  of  a  lion's-head  or  some
similar  object  at  the  top,  and  a  foot  of  the  same
animal  at  the  bottom,  united  by  intervening  foliage,
are  preserved  in  the  British  Museum  (Combe,
Ancient  Marbles,  i.  3,  i.  13,  iii.  38)  and  in  other
collections  of  antiquities.  The  tripod  used  at  en-
tertainments to  hold  the  Crater  had  short  feet,
so  that  it  was  not  much  elevated.  These  tables
were  probably  sometimes  made  to  move  upon
castors.     (Horn.  //.  xviii.  375).

II.  A  pot  or  caldron,  used  for  boiling  meat,
and  either  raised  upon  a  three-legged  stand  of
bronze,  as  is  represented  in  the  woodcut,  p.  827»
or  made  with  its  three  feet  in  the  same  piece.
Such  a  utensil  was  of  great  value,  and  was  some-f
times  offered  as  a  prize  in  the  public  games  (xxiii.
264,  702,  703).

III.  A  bronze  altar,  not  differing  probably  in
its  original  form  from  the  tall  tripod  caldron  already
described.  In  this  form,  but  with  additional  or-
nament, we  see  it  in  the  annexed  woodcut,  which
represents  a  tripod  found  at  Frejus.  (Spon,  Misc.
Erud.  Ant.  p.  118.)  That  this  was  intended  to  be
used  in  sacrifice  may  be  inferred  from  the  bull's-
head  with  a  fillet  tied  round  the  horns,  which  we
see  at  the  top  of  each  leg.

All  the  most  ancient  representations  of  the
sacrificial  tripod  exhibit  it  of  the  same  general
shape,  together  with  three  rings  at  the  top  to  serve
as  handles  {oiaTa,  Horn.  //.  xviii.  378).  Since  it
has  this  form  on  all  the  coins  and  other  ancient
remains,  which  have  any  reference  to  the  Delphic
oracle,  it  has  been  with  sufficient  reason  concluded
that  the  tripod,  from  which  the  Pythian  priestess
gave  responses,  was  of  this  kind.  The  right-
hand  figure    in  the  woodcut  is  copied   from  on^


TRIPOS.

pnWished  by  K.  0.  Miiller  (Bottigers  Amalthca,
i.  p.   119),   founded  upon  numerous  ancient   au-


thorities, and  designed  to  show  the  appearance
of  the  oracular  tripod  at  Delphi.  Besides  the
parts  already  mentioned,  viz.  the  three  legs,  the
three  handles,  and  the  vessel  or  caldron,  it  shows
a  flat,  round  plate,  called  oKfxos,  on  which  the
Pythia  seated  herself  in  order  to  give  responses,
and  on  which  lay  a  laurel  wreath  at  other  times.
This  figure  also  shows  the  position  of  the  Cortina,
which,  as  well  as  the  caldron,  was  made  of  very
thin  bronze,  and  was  supposed  to  increase  the
prophetic  sounds  which  came  from  underneath  the
earth.     (Yirg.  Aen.  iii.  92.)

The  celebrity  of  this  tripod  produced  innu-
merable imitations  of  it  (Diod.  xvi.  26),  called
"Delphic  tripods."  (Athen.  v.  p.  199.)  They
were  made  to  be  used  in  sacrifice,  and  still  more
frequently  to  be  presented  to  the  treasury  both
in  that  and  in  many  other  Greek  temples.  (Athen.
vi.  pp.  231,  f.— 232,  d.  ;  Paus.  iv.  32.  §  1.)
[DoNARiA.]  Tripods  were  chiefly  dedicated  to
Apollo  (Paus.  iii.  18.  §  5)  and  to  Bacchus.  Partly
in  allubion  to  the  fable  of  the  rape  of  a  tripod  from
Apollo  by  Hercules,  and  the  recovery  of  it  by  the
former  (Paus.  iii.  21.  §  7,  x.  13.  §  4),  the  tripod
was  one  of  his  usual  attributes,  and  therefore
occurs  continually  on  coins  and  ancient  marbles
which  have  a  relation  to  him.  Of  this  we  have  an
example  in  the  bas-relief  engraved  on  p.  117,  which
also  exhibits  two  more  of  his  attributes,  the  lyre
and  the  serpent.  In  conformity  with  the  same
ideas  it  was  given  as  a  prize  to  the  conquerors  at
the  Pythian  and  other  games,  which  were  cele-
brated in  honour  of  Apollo.  (Herod,  i.  144.)  On
the  other  hand,  the  theatre  at  Athens  being  con-
sidered sacred  to  Bacchus,  the  successful  Cho-
ragus  received  a  bronze  tripod  as  the  appropriate
prize.  The  choragic  monuments  of  Thrasyllus  and
Lysicrates,  the  ornamental  fragments  of  which  are
now  in  the  British  Museum,  were  erected  by  them
to  preserve  and  display  the  tripods  awarded  to
them  on  such  occasions.  We  find  also  that  a
tripod  was  sometimes  consecrated  to  the  Muses
(Hes.  Op.  et  Dies.,  658)  and  to  Hercules.  (Paus.
X.  7.  §  3.)

A  tripod,  scarcely  less  remarkable  than  that
from  which  the  Pythia  delivered  oracles,  and  con-
secrated to  Apollo  in  the  same  temple  at  Delphi,
was  that  made  from  the  spoils  of  the  Persian  army


TRIUMPHUS.  1163

after  the  battle  of  Plataeae.  It  consisted  of  a
golden  bowl,  supported  by  a  three-headed  bronze
serpent.  (Herod,  ix.  81  ;  Thucyd.  i.  132  ;  Schol.
in  loc. ;  Paus.  x.  1 3.  §  5  ;  Gyllius,  Top.  Const,  ii.  1 3  ;
Banduri,  Imp.  Orient,  t.  ii.  p.  614.)  The  golden
bowl  having  been  removed,  the  bronze  serpent  was
taken  to  Constantinople,  and  is  probably  the  same
which  was  seen  there  by  Spon  and  Wheler  in
1675.  The  first  figure  in  the  annexed  wood-cut
is  copied  from  Wheler's  engraving  of  it.»  {Journey
into  Greece.,  p.  185.)  He  says  it  was  about  four-
teen or  fifteen  feet  high.


The  use  of  bronze  tripods  as  altars  evidently
arose  in  a  great  degree  from  their  suitableness  to
be  removed  from  place  to  place.  We  have  an  ex-
ample of  this  mode  of  employing  them  in  the  scene
which  is  represented  in  the  woodcut  on  p.  1045.
To  accommodate  them  as  much  as  possible  to  this
purpose,  they  are  sometimes  made  to  fold  together
into  a  small  compass  by  a  contrivance,  which  may
be  understood  from  an  inspection  of  the  preceding
woodcut.  The  right-hand  figure  represents  a  tripod
in  the  British  Museum.  A  patera,  or  a  plain  me-
tallic disk,  was  laid  on  the  top,  when  there  was
occasion  to  oflfer  incense.  Many  of  these  movable
folding  tripods  may  be  seen  in  Museums,  proving
how  common  they  were  among  the  Romans.

Another  species  of  tripods  deserving  of  notice
are  those  made   of  marble  or  hard  stone.      One
was  discovered  in  the  villa  of  Hadrian,  five  feet
high,  and  therefore  unsuitable  to  be  used  in  sacri-
fice.    It  is  very  much  ornamented,  and  was  pro-
bably intended  merely  to  be  displayed  as  a  work
of  art.     (Caylus,  Recueil,  ii.  pi.  53.)        [J.  Y.]
TRIPU'DIUM.  [Augur,  pp.  175,  b.,  176, a]
TRIRE'MIS.     [Navis.]
TRITAGONISTES.     [Histrio.]
TRITTYA  (rptTTua).  [Sacrificium,  p.lOOO.]
TRITTYS  {rpiT-ris).     [Tribus,  p.  1154.]
TRIUMPHUS,  a  solemn  procession  in  which
a  victorious  general  entered  the  city  in  a  chariot
drawn  by  four  horses.     He  was  preceded  by  the
captives  and  spoils  taken  in  war,  was  followed  by
his  troops,  and  after  passing  in  state  along  the  Via
Sacra,  ascended  the  Capitol  to  offer  sacrifice  in  the
temple  of  Jupiter.


1164  TRIUMPHUS.

Such  displaj's  have  been  so  universal  among  all
warlike  tribes  from  the  earliest  times,  and  are  so
immediately  connected  with  some  of  the  strongest
passions  of  the  human  heart,  that  it  would  be  as
useless  as  it  is  impossible  to  trace  their  origin  his-
torically. It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  advert  to  the
fancies  of  those  ancient  writers,  who  refer  their  first
institution  to  the  mythic  conquests  of  Bacchus  in
the  East  (Diodor.  iv.  5  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  vii.  57),  nor
need  we  attach  much  importance  to  the  connection
between  triumphus  and  ^piafxSos^  according  to  the
etymology  doubtingly  proposed  by  Varro  (L.  L,  vi.
68,  ed.  Miiller).  Rejoicings  after  a  victory,  ac-
companied by  processions  of  the  soldiery  with  their
plunder,  must  have  been  coeval  with  the  existence
of  the  Romans  as  a  nation,  and  accordingly  the
return  of  Romulus  with  spolia  opima  after  he  had
defeated  the  Caeninenses  and  slain  Aero  their  king.
is  described  by  Dionysius  (ii.  34  ;  compare  Prop.
iv.  1.  32)  with  all  the  attributes  of  a  regular
triumph.  Plutarch  {Rom.  16)  admits  that  this
event  was  the  origin  of  and  first  step  towards  the
triumph  of  after  times,  but  censures  Dionysius  for
the  statement  that  Romulus  made  his  entrance  in
a  quadriga,  which  he  considers  disproved  by  the
fact  that  all  the  triumphal  (rpoiraio(p6pQvs)  statues
of  that  king,  as  seen  in  his  day,  represented  him  on
foot.  He  adds  that  Tarquinius  Priscus,  according
to  some,  or  Poplicola,  according  to  others,  first
triumphed  in  a  chariot  ;  and  in  corroboration  of  this
we  find  that  the  first  triumph  recorded  by  Livy
(i.  38  ;  compare  Flor.  i.  5  ;  Eutrop.  i.  6)  is  that  over
the  Sabines  by  Tarquinius,  who  according  to  Ver-
rius  (Plin.  ^.  A'',  xxxiii.  19)  wore  upon  this  oc-
casion a  robe  of  cloth  or  gold.  Whatever  conclusion
we  may  form  upon  these  points,  it  is  certain  that
from  the  first  dawn  of  authentic  history  down  to
the  extinction  of  liberty  a  regular  triumph  (Justus
triumphus)  was  recognized  as  the  summit  of  military
glory,  and  was  the  cherished  object  of  ambition  to
every  Roman  general.  A  triumph  might  be  granted
for  successful  achievements  either  by  land  or  sea,
but  the  latter  were  comparatively  so  rare  that  we
shall  for  the  present  defer  the  consideration  of  the
naval  triumph.

After  any  decisive  battle  had  been  won,  or  a
province  subdued  by  a  series  of  successful  opera-
tions, the  Imperator  forwarded  to  the  senate  a
laurel- wreathed  despatch  (literae  laureatae,  Zonar.
vii.  21  ;  Liv.  xlvi.  1  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xv.  40)  con-
taining an  account  of  his  exploits.  If  the  intelli-
gence proved  satisfactory  the  senate  decreed  a  public
thanksgiving.  [Supplicatio.]  This  supplication
was  so  frequently  the  forerunner  of  a  triumph,  that
Cato  thinks  it  necessary  to  remind  Cicero  that  it
was  not  invariably  so.  (Cic.  ad  Fain.  xv.  5. )  After
the  war  was  concluded  the  general  with  his  army
repaired  to  Rome,  or  ordered  his  army  to  meet  him
there  on  a  given  day,  but  did  not  enter  the  city.
A  meeting  of  the  senate  was  held  without  the
walls,  usually  in  the  temple  of  Bellona  (e.g.  Liv.
xxvi.  21,  xxxvi.  39)  or  Apollo  (Liv.  xxxix.  4),
that  he  might  have  an  opportunity  of  urging  his
pretensions  in  person,  and  these  were  then  scru-
tinized and  discussed  with  the  most  jealous  care.
The  following  rules  and  restrictions  were  for  the
most  part  rigidly  enforced,  although  the  senate
assumed  the  discretionary  power  of  relaxing  them
in  special  cases.

1.  That  no  one  could  be  permitted  to  triumph
unless  he  had  held  the  office  of  dictator,  of  consul.


TRIUMPHUS.
or  of  praetor.  (Liv.  xxviii.  38,  xxxi.  20.)  Ilenro
a  triumph  was  not  allowed  to  P.  Scipio  after  he
had  expelled  the  Carthaginians  from  Spain,  because
he  had  commanded  in  that  province  "  sine  ullo
magistratu."  (Val.  Max.  ii.  8.  §  5  ;  Liv.  /.  c.)
The  honours  granted  to  Pompey,  who  triumphed
in  his  24th  year  (b.  c.  81),  before  he  had  held
any  of  the  great  offices  of  state,  and  again  ten
years  afterwards,  while  still  a  simple  eques,  were
altogether  unprecedented.  (Liv.  Epit.  89  ;  Cic.
pro  Leg.  Man.  21  ;  Veil.  Pat.  ii.  30  ;  Val.  Max.
viii.  15.  §  8  ;  Plut.  Pomp.  12,  22  ;  Dion  Cass,
xxxvi.  8.)

2.  That  the  magistrate  should  have  been  actually
in  office  both  when  the  victory  Avas  gained  and
when  the  triumph  was  to  be  celebrated.  This  re-
gulation was  insisted  upon  onh"^  during  the  earlier
ages  of  the  commonwealth.  Its  violation  com-
menced with  Q.  Publilius  Philo,  the  first  person  to
whom  the  senate  ever  granted  a  "  prorogatio  im-
perii" after  the  termination  of  a  magistracy  (Liv,
viii.  26),  and  thenceforward  proconsuls  and  pro-
praetors were  permitted  to  triumph  without  question
(Liv.  xxxix.  45,  xl.  25,  34),  although  for  a  consi-
derable time  the  event  was  of  rare  occurrence.  It
was  long  held,  however,  that  it  was  necessary  for
the  "  prorogatio  imperii "  to  follow  immediately
upon  the  termination  of  the  magistracy,  for  a
triumph  was  refused  to  L.  Lentulus,  who  succeeded
P.  Scipio  in  Spain,  on  the  ground  that,  although
he  had  been  formerly  praetor,  his  imperium  had
not  been  continued  uninterruptedly  from  the  period
when  the  command  expired,  but  had  been  renewed
"  extra  ordinem "  after  a  lapse  of  some  years.
(Liv.  xxxi.  20.)  But  towards  the  close  of  the
republic  this  principle  was  entirely  abandoned.
Consuls  and  praetors  seldom  quitted  the  city  until
their  term  of  office  had  ceased,  and  when  at  any
subsequent  period  they  entered  upon  the  govern-
ment of  a  province,  either  in  regular  rotation  or
"  extra  ordinem,"  they  enjoyed  the  full  status  and
all  the  privileges  of  proconsuls  and  propraetors.
The  position  of  Pompey  when  sent  against  the
pirates  and  afterwards  against  Mithridates,  and  of
Cicero  when  he  went  to  Cilicia,  will  be  sufficient
to  illustrate  this  without  multiplying  examples.

3.  That  the  war  should  have  been  prosecuted
or  the  battle  fought  under  the  auspices  and  in  the
province  and  with  the  troops  of  the  general  seek-
ing the  triumph  (Liv.  xxxi.  48,  xxxiv.  10  ;  Val.
Max.  ii.  8,  §  2),  and  hence  the  triumph  of  the
praetor  Furius  (Liv.  xxxi.  49)  was  considered  ir-
regular and  imperfect.  Thus  if  a  victory  was
gained  by  the  legatus  of  a  general  who  Avas  absent
from  the  army,  the  honour  of  it  did  not  belong  to
the  former,  but  to  the  latter,  inasmuch  as  he  had
the  auspices.

4.  That  at  least  5000  of  the  enemy  should  have
been  slain  in  a  single  battle  ( Val.  Max.  ii.  8.  §  1 ),
that  the  advantage  should  have  been  positive  and
not  merely  a  compensation  for  some  previous  dis-
aster (Oros.  v.  4),  and  that  the  loss  on  the  part  of
the  Romans  should  have  been  small  compared  with
that  of  their  adversaries.  (Liv.  xxxiii.  22.)  By  a
law  of  the  tribunes  L.  Marius  and  M.  Cato  penal-
ties were  imposed  upon  all  Imperatores  who  should
be  found  guilty  of  having  made  false  returns  to  the
senate,  and  it  was  ordained  that  so  soon  as  they
returned  to  the  city  they  should  be  required  to
attest  the  correctness  of  such  documents  upon  oatti
before  the  city  quaestor.     (Val.  Max.  I.  c.)     It  is


TRIUMPHUS.

clear  that  these  provisions  could  never  have  existed
during  the  petty  contests  with  which  Rome  was
fully  occupied  for  some  centuries  ;  and  even  wlien
wars  were  waged  upon  the  most  extensive  scale  we
find  many  instances  of  triumphs  granted  for  gene-
ral results,  without  reference  to  the  numbers  slain
in  .iny  one  engagement  (e.  g.  Liv.  viii.  26,  xl.  38).

5.  That  the  war  should  have  been  a  legitimate
contest  against  public  foes  (Jusiis  hostilibusque  bellis,
Cic.  pro  Deiot.  5),  and  not  a  civil  contest.  Hence
Catulus  celebrated  no  triumph  over  Lepidus,  nor
Antonius  over  Catiline,  nor  Cinna  and  Marius  over
their  antagonists  of  the  Sullan  party,  nor  Caesar
after  Pharsalia,  and  when  he  did  subsequently
triumph  after  his  victory  over  the  sons  of  Pompey
it  caused  universal  disgust.  Hence  the  line  in
Lucan  (i.  12)  :

"  Bella  geri  placuit  nuUos  habitura  triumphos."

(See  Val.  Max.  ii.  8.  §  7  ;  Dion  Cass,  xliii.  42  ;
Plut.  Cues.  5b\)  [OvATio.]

6.  That  the  dominion  of  the  state  should  have
been  extended  and  not  merely  something  previously
lost  regained.  Hence  Fulvius,  who  Avon  back
Capua  after  its  revolt  to  Hannibal,  did  not  receive
a  triumph.  (Val.  Max.  I.  c. ;  compare  Liv.  xxxi.  5,
xxxvi.  1.)  The  absolute  acquisition  of  territory
does  not  appear  to  have  been  essential.  (Duker,
ad  Liv.  xxxi.  5.)

7.  That  the  war  should  have  been  brought  to  a
conclusion  and  the  province  reduced  to  a  state  of
peace  so  as  to  permit  of  the  army  being  withdrawn,
the  presence  of  the  victorious  soldiers  being  consi-
dered indispensable  in  a  triumph.  In  consequence
of  this  condition  not  being  fulfilled  an  ovation  only
was  granted  to  Marcellus  after  the  capture  of  Syra-
cuse (Liv.  xxvi.  21,  compare  xxviii.  29,  xxx.  48)
and  to  L.  Manlius  upon  his  return  from  Spain.
(Liv.  xxxix.  29.)  We  find  an  exception  in  Liv.
xxxi.  48,  49,  but  this  and  similar  cases  must  be
regarded  as  examples  of  peculiar  favour.  (See  also
Tacit.  Ann.  i.  55,  compared  with  ii.  41.)

The  senate  claimed  the  exclusive  right  of  delibe-
rating upon  all  these  points  and  giving  or  with-
holding the  honour  sought  (Liv.  iii.  63  ;  Polyb.
vi.  13),  and  they  for  the  most  part  exercised  the
privilege  without  qiiestion,  except  in  times  of  great
political  excitement.  The  sovereignty  of  the  peo-
ple, however,  in  this  matter  was  asserted  at  a  very
early  date,  and  a  triumph  is  said  to  have  been
voted  by  the  tribes  to  Valerius  and  Horatius,  the
consuls  of  B.  c.  446,  in  direct  opposition  to  the  re-
solution of  the  fathers  (Liv.  iii.  63  ;  Dionys.  xi.
50),  and  in  a  similar  manner  to  C.  Marcius  Rutilus
the  first  plebeian  dictator  (Liv.  vii.  17),  while  L.
Postumius  Megellus,  consul  B.  c.  294,  celebrated  a
triumph,  although  resisted  by  the  senate  and  seven
out  of  the  ten  tribunes.  (Liv.  x,  37.)  Nay  more,
we  read  of  a  certain  Appius  Claudius,  consul  B.  c.
143,  who  having  persisted  in  celebrating  a  triumph
in  defiance  of  both  the  senate  and  people,  was  ac-
companied by  his  daughter  (or  sister)  Claudia,  a
vestal  virgin,  and  by  her  interposition  saved  from
being  dragged  from  his  chariot  by  a  tribune.  (Oros.
V.  4  ;  Ck.  pro.  CoeL  14  ;  Val.  Max.  v.  4.  §  6 ;  Suet.
7V6.  2.)  A  disappointed  general,  however,  seldom
ventured  to  resort  to  such  violent  measures,  but
satisfied  himself  with  going  through  the  forms  on
the  Alban  Mount,  a  practice  first  introduced  by
C.  Papirius  Maso,  and  thus  noticed  in  the  Capito-
line  Fasti:  C.  P^pikius  Maso  cos.  de  Corskis


TRIUMPHUS.


1165


PRIMUS   TN    MONTE  AlBANO  IIx.  NoNAS    MaRT.

AN.  DXXIL  (Plin. //.iV.  xv.  38.)  His  example
was  followed  by  Marcellus  (Liv.  xxvi.  21  ;  Phit.
Marc.  22),  by  Q.  Minucius  (Liv.  xxxiii.  23),  and
by  many  others,  so  that  Livy  (xlii.  21)  after  men-
tioning that  the  senate  had  refused  a  triumph  to
Cicereius  (praetor  B.  c.  173)  adds,  "in  monte  Al-
bano,  quod  jam  in  morem  venerat^  triumphavit."
(See  also  Liv.  xlv.  38.)

If  the  senate  gave  their  consent  they  at  the
same  time  voted  a  sum  of  money  towards  defraying
the  necessary  expenses  (Polyb.  vi.  13),  and  one
of  the  tribunes  "ex  auctoritate  senatus"  applied
for  a  plebiscitum  to  permit  the  Imperator  to  retain
his  imperium  on  the  day  when  he  entered  the  city.
(Liv.  xlv.  35,  xxvi.  21.)  This  last  form  could
not  be  dispensed  with  either  in  an  ovation  or  a
triumph,  because  the  imperium  conferred  by  the
comitia  curiata  did  not  include  the  city  itself,  and
when  a  general  had  once  gone  forth  "  paludatus  "
his  military  power  ceased  as  soon  as  he  re-entered
the  gates,  unless  the  general  law  had  been  pre-
viously suspended  by  a  special  enactment  ;  and  in
this  manner  the  resolution  of  the  senate  was,  as  it
were,  ratified  by  the  plebs.  [Imperium  ;  Palu-
DAMENTUM.)  For  this  reason  no  one  desiring  a
triumph  ever  entered  the  city  until  the  question
was  decided,  since  by  so  doing  he  would  ipso  facto
have  forfeited  all  claim.  We  have  a  remarkable
example  of  this  in  the  case  of  Cicero,  who  after  his
return  from  Cilicia  lingered  in  the  vicinity  of  Rome
day  after  day,  and  dragged  about  his  lictors  from
one  place  to  another,  without  entering  the  city,  in
the  vain  hope  of  a  triumph.

Such  were  the  preliminaries,  and  it  only  now
remains  to  describe  the  order  of  the  procession.
This  in  ancient  days  was  sufficiently  simple.  The
leaders  of  the  enemy  and  the  other  prisoners  were
led  along  in  advance  of  the  general's  chariot,  the
military  standards  were  carried  before  the  troops
who  followed  laden  with  plunder,  banquets  were
spread  in  front  of  every  door,  and  the  populace
brought  up  the  rear  in  a  joyous  band,  filled  with
good  cheer,  chanting  songs  of  victory,  jeering  and
bantering  as  they  went  along  with  the  pleasantries
customary  on  such  occasions.  (Liv.  iii.  29.)  But
in  later  times  these  pageants  were  marshalled  with
extraordinary  pomp  and  splendour,  and  presented
a  most  gorgeous  spectacle.  Minute  details  would
necessarily  be  different  according  to  circumstances,
but  the  general  arrangements  were  as  follow.  When
the  day  appointed  had  arrived  the  whole  population
poured  forth  from  their  abodes  in  holiday  attire,
some  stationed  themselves  on  the  steps  of  the  pub-
lic buildings  in  the  forum  and  along  the  Via  Sacra,
while  others  mounted  scaflfoldings  erected  for  the
purpose  of  commanding  a  view  of  the  show.  The
temples  were  all  thrown  open,  garlands  of  flowers
decorated  every  shrine  and.  image,  and  incense
smoked  on  every  altar.  (Plut.  Aemil.  Paul.  32;
Dion  Cass.  Ixxiv.  1.)  Meanwhile  the  Imperator
called  an  assembly  of  his  soldiers,  delivered  an
oration  commending  their  valour,  and  concluded  by
distributing  rewards  to  the  most  distinguished  and
a  sum  of  money  to  each  individual,  the  amount  de-
pending on  the  value  of  the  spoils.  He  then  as-
cended his  triumphal  car  and  advanced  to  the
Porta  Triumphalis  (where  this  gate  was  is  a  ques-
tion which  we  cannot  here  discuss  ;  see  Cic.  in  Pis.
23;  Suet.  Odav.  101  ;  Josephus,  B.J.  vii.  24),
where  he  was  met  by  the  whole  body  of  the  senate


lie«


TRIUMPHUS.


headed  by  the  magistrates.     The  procession  then
defiled  in  the  following  order.

1.  The  Senate  headed  by  the  magistrates.  (Dion
Cass.  li.  21  ;  Serv.  ad  Virg.  Aen.  543.)  2.  A  body
of  trumpeters.  3.  A  train  of  carriages  and  frames
(Josephus,  B.  J.  vii.  24)  laden  with  spoils,  those
articles  which  were  especially  remarkable  either  on
account  of  their  beauty  or  rarity  being  disposed  in
such  a  manner  as  to  be  seen  distinctly  by  the
crowd.  (Suet.  Jul.  37.)  Boards  were  borne  aloft
on  fercula,  on  which  were  painted  in  large  letters
the  names  of  vanquished  nations  and  countries.
Here,  too,  models  were  exhibited  in  ivory  or  wood
(Quinctil.  vi.  3)  of  the  cities  and  forts  captured
(Plin.  V.  5),  and  pictures  of  the  mountains,  rivers,
and  other  great  natural  features  of  the  subjugated
region,  with  appropriate  inscriptions.  Gold  and
silver  in  coin  or  bullion,  arms,  weapons,  and  horse
furniture  of  every  description,  statues,  pictures,
vases,  and  other  works  of  art,  precious  stones,
elaborately  wrought  and  richly  embroidered  stuffs,
and  every  object  which  could  be  regarded  as  valu-
able or  curious.  4.  A  body  of  flute-players.  5.  The
white  bulls  or  oxen  destined  for  sacrifice,  with
gilded  horns,  decorated  with  infulae  and  serta,  at-
tended by  the  slaughtering  priests  with  their  im-
plements, and  followed  by  the  Camilli  bearing  in
their  hands  paterae  and  other  holy  vessels  and  in-
struments. 6.  Elephants  or  any  other  strange
animals,  natives  of  the  conquered  districts,  7.  The
arms  and  insignia  of  the  leaders  of  the  foe.  8.
The  leaders  themselves,  and  such  of  their  kindred
as  had  been  taken  prisoners,  followed  by  the  whole
band  of  inferior  captives  in  fetters.  9.  The  coronae
and  other  tributes  of  respect  and  gratitude  be-
stowed on  the  Imperator  by  allied  kings  and  states.

1 0.  The  lictors  of  the  Imperator  in  single  file,  their
fasces  wreathed  with  laurel.     (Plin.  H.  N.  v.  40.)

1 1.  The  Imperator  himself  in  a  circular  chariot  of


1

^c

>•'

ym~^

■^^

■>4~^

J

mjr

sM

h

ftt

»i

tw

li-      1

R  peculiar  form  (Zonar.  vii.  21)  drawn  by  four
horses,  which  were  sometimes,  though  rarely,  white.
(Plut.  Camill.  7  ;  Serv.  /.  c. ;  Dion  Cass,  xliii.  14.)
The  circular  form  of  the  chariot  is  seen  in  the  pre-
ceding cut,  copied  from  a  marble  formerly  in  the
possession  of  the  Duke  d'Alcala  at  Seville  (Mont-
faucon.  Ant.  Exp.  vol.  iv.  pi.  cv.),  and  also  in  the
following  cut,  which  represents  the  reverse  of  one
of  the  coins  of  the  Antonines.  He  was  attired  in
a  gold  embroidered  robe  {toga  pitta)  and  flowered
tunic  {tunica  palmata),  he  bore  in  his  right  hand  a
kurel  bough  (Plut.  Paull.  32),  and  in  his  left  a
sceptre  (Dionys.  v.  47  ;  Val.  Max.  iv.  4.  §  5),  his


TRIUMPHUS.

brows  were  encircled  with  a  wreath  of  Delphic  laurel
(Plin.  H.  N.  XV.  38,  39),  in  addition  to  which,  in
ancient  times,  his  body  was  painted  bright  red.
(Plin.  H.  N.  xxiii.  36.)  He  was  accompanied
in   his  chariot   by  his   children   of  tender  years


(Liv.  xlv.  40  ;  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  41),  and  sometimes
by  very  dear  or  highly  honoured  friends  (Dion
Cass.  li.  16",  Ixiii.  20),  while  behind  him  stood  a
public  slave  holding  over  his  head  a  golden  Etrus-
can crown  ornamented  with  jewels.  (Plin.  H.  N.
xxxiii.  4,  xxviii.  7  ;  Zonar.  vii.  21.)  The  pre-
sence of  a  slave  in  such  a  place  at  such  a  time
seems  to  have  been  intended  to  avert  "  in vidia'*
and  the  influence  of  the  evil  eye,  and  for  the  same
purpose  a  fascinum,  a  little  bell,  and  a  scourge
were  attached  to  the  vehicle.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxviii.
7  ;  Zonar.  vii.  21.)  TertuUian  {Apol.  33)  tells  us,
that  the  slave  ever  and  anon  whispered  in  the  ear
of  the  Imperator  the  warning  words  "  Respice  post
te,  hominem  memento  te,"  and  this  statement  is
copied  by  Zonaras  {I.  c),  but  is  not  confirmed  by
any  earlier  writer.  Isidorus  (xviii.  2),  misunder-
standing Pliny  (xxviii.  7),  imagines  that  the  slave
in  question  was  a  common  executioner.  12.  Be-
hind the  chariot  or  on  the  horses  which  drew  it
(Zonar.  I.  c.)  rode  the  grown-up  sons  of  the  Im-
perator, together  with  the  legati,  the  tribuni  (Cic.
in  Pis.  25),  and  the  equites,  all  on  horseback.
13.  The  rear  was  brought  up  by  the  whole  body
of  the  infantry  in  marching  order,  their  spears
adorned  with  laurel  (Plin.  xv.  40),  some  shouting
lo  Triumphe  ( Varro,  L.  L.  v.  7,  ed.  Mliller  ;  Hor.
Carm.  iv.  2.  49  ;  TibuU.  ii.  6.  121),  and  singing
hymns  to  the  gods,  while  others  proclaimed  the
praises  of  their  leader  or  indulged  in  keen  sarcasms
and  coarse  ribaldry  at  his  expense,  for  the  most
perfect  freedom  of  speech  was  granted  and  exer-
cised. (Liv.  iv.  53,  V.  49,  xlv.  38,  Dionys.  vii.  72;
Suet.  Jul.  49,  51  ;  Mart.  i.  5.  3.)

The  arrangement  of  the  procession  as  given
above  is  taken,  with  some  changes,  from  the  treatise
of  Onuphfius  Panvinius  De  Triumpho  in  the  9th
volume  of  the  Thesaurus  of  Graevius.  The  dif-
ferent particulars  are  all  collected  from  the  accounts
transmitted  to  us  of  the  most  celebrated  triumphs,
such  as  that  of  Pompey  in  Appian  {Bell.  Mith.
116,  117),of  Aemilius  Paullus  in  Plutarch  {FauU.
32)  and  in  Livy  (xlv.  40),  of  Vespasian  and  Titus
in  Josephus  {B.  J.  vii.  5.  §  4,  5,  6),  and  of  Camil-
lus  in  Zonaras  (vii.  21),  together  with  the  remarks
of  Dionysius  (ii,  34,  v.  47),  Servius  {ad  Virg.  Aen.
iv.  543),  and  Juvenal  {Sat.  x.  38—45).

Just  as  the  pomp  was  ascending  the  Capitoline
hill  some  of  the  hostile  chiefs  were  led  aside  into
the  adjoining  prison  and  put  to  death,  a  custom  so
barbarous  that  we  could  scarcely  believe  that  it
existed  in  a  civilized  age  were  it  not  attested  by


I


TRIUMPHUS.
.the  most  unquestionable  evidence.  (Cic.  in  Verr.
V.  30  ;  Liv.  xxvi.  13;  Joseph,  vii.  24.)  Pom-
pe5%  indeed,  refrained  from  perpetrating  this  atro-
city in  his  third  triumph  (Appian,  Bell.  Mith.
1 17),  and  Aurelian  on  like  occasion  spared  Zenobia,
but  these  are  quoted  as  exceptions  to  the  general
rule.  When  it  was  announced  that  these  murders
had  been  completed  (Joseph  Lc.)  the  victims  were
then  sacrificed,  an  offering  from  the  spoils  was
presented  to  Jupiter,  the  laurel  wreath  was  de-
posited in  the  lap  of  the  god  (Senec.  Comol.  ad
Helv.  1 0  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xv.  40  ;  Plin.  Paneg.  8  ;
Stat.^y/v.iv.  1.  41),  the  Imperatorwas  entertained
nt  a  public  feast  along  with  his  friends  in  the  tem-
ple, and  returned  home  in  the  evening  preceded
by  torches  and  pipes,  and  escorted  by  a  crowd  of
citizens.  (Flor.  ii.  1.)  Plutarch  {Q.  R.  77)  and
Valerius  Maximus  (ii.  8.  §  6)  say  that  it  was  the
practice  to  invite  the  consuls  to  this  banquet,  and
then  to  send  a  message  requesting  them  not  to
come,  in  order,  doubtless,  that  the  Iniperator  might
be  the  most  distinguished  person  in  the  company.

The  whole  of  the  proceedings,  generally  speak-
ing, were  brought  to  a  close  in  one  day,  but  when
the  quantity  of  plunder  was  very  great,  and  the
troops  very  numerous,  a  longer  period  was  re-
quired for  the  exhibition,  and  thus  the  triumph  of
Fiaminius  continued  for  three  days  in  succession.
(Liv.  xxxix.  52;  V\\\i.  Aemil.  Fault.  32.)

But  the  glories  of  the  Imperator  did  not  end
with  the  show  nor  even  with  his  life.  It  was
customary  (we  know  not  if  the  practice  was  in-
variable) to  provide  him  at  the  public  expense
with  a  site  for  a  house,  such  mansions  being  styled
triumpliales  domus.  (Plin.  xxxvi.  24.  §  6.)  After
death  his  kindred  Avere  permitted  to  deposit  his
ashes  within  the  walls  (such,  at  least,  is  the  ex-
planation given  to  the  words  of  Plutarch,  Q.  Ii.
78),  and  laurel -wreathed  statues  standing  erect
in  triumphal  cars,  displayed  in  the  vestibulum  of
the  family  mansion,  transmitted  his  fame  to  pos-
terity.

A  Triumphus  Navalis  appears  to  have  dif-
fered in  no  respect  from  an  ordinary  triumph
except  that  it  must  have  been  upon  a  smaller  scale,
and  would  be  characterized  by  the  exhibition  of
beaks  of  ships  and  other  nautical  trophies.  The
earliest  upon  record  was  granted  to  C.  Duilius,
who  laid  the  foundation  of  the  supremacy  of  Rome
by  sea  in  the  first  Punic  war  (Liv.  Epit.  xvii.  ;
Fast.  Capit.) ;  and  so  elated  was  he  by  his  success,
that  during  the  rest  of  his  life,  whenever  he  re-
turned home  at  night  from  supper,  he  caused  flutes
to  sound  and  torches  to  be  borne  before  him.  (Flor.
ii.  1  ;  Cic.  Cat.  Maj.  13.)  A  second  naval  tri-
umph was  celebrated  by  Lutatius  Catulus  for  his
victory  off  the  Insulae  Aegates,  B.  c.  241  (Val.
Max.  ii.  8.  §  2  ;  Fast.  Capit.)  ;  a  third  by  Q.
Fabius  Labeo,  B.C.  189,  over  the  Cretans  (Liv.
xxxvii.  60),  and  a  fourth  by  C.  Octavius  over
King  Perseus  (Liv.  xlv.  42)  without  captives  and
without  spoils.

Triumphus  Castrensis  was  a  procession  of
the  soldiers  through  the  camp  in  honour  of  a  tri-
bunus  or  some  officer,  inferior  to  the  general,  who
had  performed  a  brilliant  exploit.  (Liv.  vii.  36.)

After  the  extinction  of  freedom   the   Emperor

being  considered  as  the  commander-in-chief  of  all

the  armies  of  the  state,  every  military  achievement

\      was  understood  to  be  performed  under  his  auspices,

t      and  hence,  according  to   the  forms  of  even  the


TRIUMVIRL


1167


ancient  constitution,  he  alone  had  a  legitimata
claim  to  a  triumph.  This  principle  was  soon  fully
recognised  and  acted  upon,  for  although  Antonius
had  granted  triumphs  to  his  legati  (Dion  Cass.  xlix.
42),  and  his  example  had  been  freely  followed  by
Augustus  (Suet.  Octav.  38  ;  Dion  Cass.  liv.  11,  12)
in  the  early  part  of  his  career,  yet  after  the  year
B.C.  14  (Dion  Cass.  liv.  24),  he  entirely  discon-
tinued the  practice,  and  from  that  time  forward
triumphs  were  rarely,  if  ever,  conceded  to  any
except  members  of  the  imperial  family.  But  to
compensate  in  some  degree  for  what  was  then
taken  away,  the  custom  was  introduced  of  bestow-
ing what  were  termed  Triumplialia  Omamenta.,
that  is,  permission  to  receive  the  titles  bestowed
upon  and  to  appear  in  public  with  the  robes  Avorii
by  the  Imperatores  of  the  commonwealth  when
they  triumphed,  and  to  bequeath  to  their  descend-
ants triumphal  statues.  These  triumphalia  orna'-
menta  are  said  to  have  been  first  bestowed  upon
Agrippa  (Dion  Cass.  I.e.)  or  upon  Tiberius  (Suet.
Octav.  9),  and  ever  after  were  a  common  mark  of
the  favour  of  the  prince.  (Tacit.  Ann.  i.  72,  ii.  52,
iii.  72,  &c..  Hist.  i.  79,  ii.  78,  &c.)

The  last  triumph  ever  celebrated  was  that  of
Belisarius,  who  entered  Constantinople  in  a  quad-
riga, according  to  the  fashion  of  the  olden  time,
after  the  recovery  of  Africa  from  the  Vandals.
The  total  number  of  triumphs  upon  record  down
to  this  period  has  been  calculated  as  amounting  to
350.  Orosius  (vii.  9)  reckons  320  from  Romulus
to  Vespasian,  and  Pitiscus  (Leccic.  Antiq.  s.  v.
Triumphus)  estimates  the  number  from  Vespasian
to  Belisarius  at  30.  [W.  R.]

TRIU'MVIRI  or  TRE'SVIRI,  Were  either  or-
dinary magistrates  or  officers,  or  else  extraordinary
commissioners,  who  were  frequently  appointed  at
Rome  to  execute  any  public  office.  The  following
is  a  list  of  the  most  important  of  both  classes,  ar-
ranged in  alphabetical  order.

1.  Triumviri  Agro  Dividundo.  [Triumviri

COLONTAE  DeDUCENDAE.]

2.  Triumviri  Capitales  were  regular  magis-
trates first  appointed  about  B.C.  292.  (Liv.  Epit.
11  ;  Dig.  1.  tit.  2.  8.2.  §  30.)  The  institution  of
their  office  is  said  to  have  been  proposed  by  L.
Papirius,  whom  Festus  (s.  v.  Sacramenium)  calls
tribunfe  of  the  plebs,  but  whom  Niebuhr  (Hist,  of
Rome.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  407,  408)  supposes  to  be  L.
Papirius  Cursor,  who  was  praetor  in  B.  c.  292.
They  were  elected  by  the  people,  the  comitia  being
held  by  the  praetor.  (Festus,  I.e.)  They  succeeded
to  many  of  the  functions  of  the  Quaestores  Parri-
cidii.  (Varro,  L.  L.  v.  81,  ed.  Muller  ;  Quaestor.)
It  was  their  duty  to  inquire  into  all  capital  crimes,
and  to  receive  informations  respecting  such  (  Varro,
/.  c. ;  Plaut.  Asin.  i.  2.  5,  AuluL  iii.  2.  2  ;  Cic.  pro
Cluent.  13),  and  consequently  they  apprehended
and  committed  to  prison  all  criminals  whom  they
detected.  (Liv.  xxxix.  17  ;  Val.  Max.  vi.  1.  §  10  ;
Cic.  I.  c.)  In  conjunction  with  the  Aediles,  they
had  to  preserve  the  public  peace,  to  prevent  all  un-
lawful assemblies,  &c.  (Liv.  xxv.  1,  xxxix.  14.)
They  enforced  the  payment  of  fines  due  to  the  state
(Fest.  /.  c.)  They  had  the  care  of  public  prisons,
and  carried  into  effect  the  sentence  of  the  law
upon  criminals.  (Liv.  xxxii.  26  ;  Val.  Max.  v.
4.  §  7,  viii.  4.  §  2  ;  Sail.  Cat.  55  ;  Tacit.  Aim.  v
9.)  In  these  points  they  resembled  the  magistrary
of  the  Eleven  at  Athens.  [Hendkca.]  They  had
the  power  of  inflicting  summary  punishment  upojj


1168


TRIUMVIRI.


slaves  and  persons  of  lower  rank :  their  court
appears  to  have  been  near  the  Maenian  column.
(Festus,  I.  c. ;  Gell.  iii.  3  ;  Plaut.  Atnphitr.  i.  I
.3  ;  Cic.  pro  Clue.nt.  13.)  Niebuhr  (I.  c),  who  is
followed  by  Arnold  {Hist,  of  Rome^  vol.  ii.  p.
389),  supposes  that  they  might  inflict  summary
punishment  on  all  offenders  against  the  public
peace  who  might  be  taken  in  the  fact ;  but  the
passiige  of  Festus,  which  Niebuhr  quotes,  does  not
prove  this,  and  it  is  improbable  that  they  should
have  had  power  given  them  of  inflicting  summary
punishment  upon  a  Roman  citizen,  especially  since
we  have  no  instance  recorded  of  their  exercising
such  a  power.  (Walter,  Gesch.  d.  Rom.  Recliis.,
pp.  165,  858,  Isted.  ;  Gdttling,  Gesch.  d.  Rom.
Staatsv.  p.  378.)

3.  Tkiumviri  Coloniae  Deducendae  were
persons  appointed  to  superintend  the  formation  of
a  colony.  They  are  spoken  of  under  Colonia,
p.  315,  b.  Since  they  had  besides  to  superintend
the  distribution  of  the  land  to  the  colonists,  we  find
them  also  called  Triumviri  Coloniae  Deducendae
Agroque  Dividundo  (Li v.  viii.  16),  and  sometimes
simply  Triumviri  Agra  Dando  (Li v.  iii.  1).

4.  Triumviri  Epulones.    [Epulones,]

5.  Triumviri  Equitum  Turmas  Recognos-
CENDi,  or  Legendis  Equitum  Decuriis,  were
magistrates  first  appointed  by  Augustus  to  revise
the  lists  of  the  Equites,  and  to  admit  persons  into
the  order.  This  was  formerly  part  of  the  duties
of  the  censors.  (Suet.  Av^.  37  ;  Tacit.  Ann.
iii.  30.)

6.  Triumviri  Mensarii.    [Mensarii.]

7.  Triumviri  Monetales.    [Moneta.]

8.  Triumviri  Nocturni,  were  magistrates
elected  annually,  whose  chief  duty  it  was  to  pre-
vent fires  by  night ;  and  for  this  purpose  they  had
to  go  round  the  city  during  the  night  (vigilias
circumire).  If  they  neglected  their  duty  they  were
sometimes  accused  before  the  people  by  the  tri-
bunes of  the  plebs.  (Val.  Max.  viii.  L  §  5,  6.)
The  time  at  which  this  office  was  instituted  is  un-
known, but  it  must  have  been  previously  to  the
year  B.C.  304.  (Liv.  ix.  46.)  Augustus  transferred
their  duties  to  the  Praefectus  Vigilum.  (Dig.  L  tit.
15.  s.  L)     [Praefectus  Vigilum.]

9.  Triumviri  Reficiendis  Aedibus,  extraor-
dinary officers  elected  in  the  Comitia  Tributa  in  the
time  of  the  second  Punic  war,  were  appointed  for
the  purpose  of  repairing  and  rebuilding  certain
temples.     (Liv.  xxv.  7.)

10.  Triumviri  Reipublicae  Constituendae.
Niebuhr  {Hist,  of  Rome.,  vol.  iii.  p.  43)  supposes
that  magistrates  under  this  title  were  appointed  as
early  as  the  time  of  the  Licinian  Rogations,  in
order  to  restore  peace  to  the  state  after  the  com-
motions consequent  upon  those  Rogations.  (Lydus,
€le  Mag.  i.  35. )  Niebuhr  also  thinks  that  these
were  the  magistrates  intended  by  Varro,  who  men-
tions among  the  extraordinary  magistrates,  that
had  the  right  of  summoning  the  senate,  Triumvirs
for  the  regulation  of  the  republic,  along  with  the
Decemvirs  and  Consular  Tribunes.  (Gell.  xiv.
7.)  We  have  not,  however,  any  certain  mention
of  ofl^cers  or  magistrates  under  this  name,  till  to-
wards the  close  of  the  republic,  when  the  supreme
power  was  shared  between  Caesar  (Octavianus),
Antonius,  and  Lepidus,  who  administered  the  affairs
of  the  state  under  the  title  oi  Triumviri  Reipublicae
Constituendae.  This  office  was  conferred  upon
them  in  B.C.  43  for  five  years  (Liv.  Epit.  120  ;


TROPAEUM.

Appian,  B.  C.  iv.  2—12  ;  Dion  Cass.  xlvi.  54—56  ;
Veil.  Pat.  ii.  65  ;  Plut.  Cic.  46  )  ;  and  on  the  ex-
piration of  the  term,  in  b.  c.  38,  was  conferred
upon  them  again,  in  b.  c.  37,  for  five  years  more.
(Appian,  B.  C.  v.  95  ;  Dion  Cass,  xlviii.  54.)  The
coalition  between  Julius  Caesar,  Pompeius,  and
Crassus,  in  b.  c.  60  (Veil.  Pat.  ii.  44  ;  Liv.  Epit.
103)  is  usually  called  the  first  triumvirate,  and
that  between  Octavianus,  Anton}',  and  Lepidus,
the  second  ;  but  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the
former  never  bore  the  title  of  triumviri,  nor  were
invested  with  any  office  under  that  name,  whereas
the  latter  were  recognized  as  regular  magistrates
under  the  above-mentioned  title.

11.  Triumviri  Sacbis  Conquirendis  Donis-
QUK  Persignandis,  extraordinary  officers  elected
in  the  Comitia  Tributa  in  the  time  of  the  second
Punic  war,  seem  to  have  had  to  take  care  that  all
property  given  or  consecrated  to  the  gods  was  ap-
plied to  that  purpose.     (Liv.  xxv.  7.)

12.  Triumviri  Senatus  Legendi  were  magis-
trates appointed  by  Augustus  to  admit  persons  into
the  senate.  This  was  previously  the  duty  of  the
censors.     (Suet.  Aug.  37.)

TRO'CHILUS.     [Spira.]

TROCHUS  (rpoxos),  a  hoop.  The  Greek
boys  used  to  exercise  themselves  like  ours  with
trundling  a  hoop.  It  was  a  bronze  ring,  and  had
sometimes  bells  attached  to  it.  (Mart.  xi.  22.  2,
xiv.  168,  169.)  It  was  impelled  by  means  of  a
hook  with  a  wooden  handle,  called  clavis  ( Propert
iii.  12),  and  ihar-fip.  From  the  Greeks  this
custom  passed  to  the  Romans,  who  consequently
adopted  the  Greek  term.  (Hor.  Carm,  iii.  24.  57.)
The  hoop  was  used  at  the  Gymnasium  (Propert.
I.  c.  ;  Ovid.  Trist.  ii.  485)  ;  and,  therefore,  on  one
of  the  gems  in  the  Stosch  collection  at  Berlin,
which  is  engraved  in  the  annexed  woodcut,  it  is
accompanied  by  the  jar  of  oil  and  the  laurel  branch,
the  signs  of  effort  and  of  victory.  On  each  side  of
this  we  have  represented  another  gem  from  the
same  collection.  Both  of  these  exhibit  naked
youths  trundling  the  hoop  by  means  of  the  hook
or  key.  These  show  the  size  of  the  hoop,  which
in  the  middle  figure  has  also  three  small  rings  or
bells  on  its  circumference.  (Winckelmann,  Desc.
des  Pierres  Gravies^  pp.  452 — 455.)


In  a  totally  different  manner  hoops  were  used
in  the  performances  of  tumblers  and  dancers.
Xenophon  describes  a  female  dancer  who  receives
twelve  hoops  in  succession,  throwing  them  into  the
air  and  catching  them  again,  her  motions  being
regulated  by  another  female  playing  on  the  pipe.
{Sympos.  ii.  7,  8.)

On  the  use  of  rpoxos,  to  denote  the  potter's
wheel,  see  Fictile.  [J.  Y.]

TROJAE  LUDUS.     [Circus,  p.  288,  b.]

TROPAEUM  (rpoTratoj/,  Att.  rpoiraiov^  Schol.
ad  Aristoph.  Plut.  453),  a  trophy,  a  sign  and  me-
morial of  victory,  which  was  erected  on  the  field


i


TROPAEUM.

of  battle  where  the  enemy  had  turned  (Tpeira,
TpoTTT])  to  flight,  and  in  case  of  a  victory  gained
at  sea,  on  the  nearest  land.  The  expression,  for
raising  or  erecting  a  trophy,  is  rpoiraiov  arTrjaai
or  ffTrjcraadai,  to  which  may  be  added  dnh  or  Kara
Tuv  Tro\efxluv.    (Wolf,  ad  Dem.  in  Lept.  p.  296.)

When  the  battle  was  not  decisive,  or  each  party
considered  it  had  some  claims  to  the  victory,  both
erected  trophies,  (Thiicyd.  i.  54,  105,  ii.  92.)
Trophies  usually  consisted  of  the  arms,  shields,
helmets,  &c.,  of  the  enemy  that  were  defeated  ;
and  from  the  descriptions  of  Virgil  and  other
Roman  poets,  which  have  reference  to  the  Greek
rather  than  to  the  Roman  custom,  it  appears  that
the  spoils  and  arms  of  the  vanquished  were  placed
on  the  trunk  of  a  tree,  which  was  fixed  on  an
elevation.  (Virg.  Aen.  xi.  5  ;  Serv.  ad  loc. ;  Stat,
TJuib.m.  707  ;  Juv.  x.  133.)  It  was  consecrated
to  some  divinity  with  an  inscription  (iiriypaixiJLa),
recording  the  names  of  the  victors  and  of  the  de-
feated party  (Eurip.  Phoen.  583  ;  Schol.  ad  loc.  ;
Paus.  v.  27.  §  7  ;  Virg.  Je?i.  iii.  288  ;  Ovid.  Ar.
Am.  ii.  744  ;  Tacit.  Ann.  ii.  22)  ;  whence  trophies
were  regarded  as  inviolable,  which  even  the  enemy
were  not  permitted  to  remove.  (Dion  Cass.  xlii.
58.)  Sometimes,  however,  a  people  destroyed  a
trophy,  if  they  considered  that  the  enemy  had
erected  it  without  sufficient  cause,  as  the  Milesians
did  with  a  trophy  of  the  Athenians.  (Thucyd.  viii.
24.)  That  rankling  and  hostile  feelings  might  not
be  perpetuated  by  the  continuance  of  a  trophy,  it
seems  to  have  been  originally  part  of  Greek  inter-
national law  that  trophies  should  be  made  only  of
wood  and  not  of  stone  or  metal,  and  that  they
should  not  be  repaired  when  decayed.  (Pint.  Quaest.
Rom.  c.  37,  p.  273.  c.  ;  Diod.  xiii.  24.)  Hence  we
are  told  that  the  Lacedaemonians  accused  the  The-
bans  before  the  Amphictyonic- council,  because  the
latter  had  erected  a  metal  trophy.  (Cic.  de  Invent.
ii.  23.)  It  was  not  however  uncommon  to  erect
such  trophies.  Plutarch  {Alcib.  29.  p.  207,  d.)
mentions  one  raised  in  the  time  of  Alcibiades,  and
Pausanias  (ii.  21.  §  9,  iii.  14.  §  7,  v.  27.  §  7)
speaks  of  several  which  he  saw  in  Greece.  ( Wachs-
muth.  Hell.  Alt.  vol.  ii.  pt.  i.  p.  424,  Ist  ed.  ;
Schomann,  Ant.  Jur.  PvU.  Grace,  p.  370.)

The  trophies  erected  to  commemorate  naval  vic-
tories were  usually  ornamented  with  the  beaks  or
ncroteria  of  ships  [Acroterium  ;  Rostra]  ;  and
were  generally  consecrated  to  Poseidon  or  Neptune.
Sometimes  a  whole  ship  was  placed  as  a  trophy.
(Thucyd.  ii.  84,  92.)

The  following  woodcut  taken  from  a  painting
found  at  Pompeii  {Mm.  Borbon.  vol.  vii.  t.  7)  con-
tains a  very  good  representation  of  a  tropaeum,
which  Victory  is  engaged  in  erecting.  The  con-
queror stands  on  the  other  side  of  the  trophy  with
his  brows  encircled  with  laurel.

The  Macedonian  kings  never  erected  trophies,  for
the  reason  given  by  Pausanias  (ix.  40.  §  4),  and
hence  the  same  writer  observes  that  Alexander
raised  no  trophies  after  his  victories  over  Dareius  and
in  India.  The  Romans  too,  in  early  times,  never
erected  any  trophies  on  the  field  of  battle  (Florus,
iii.  2),  but  carried  home  the  spoils  taken  in  battle,
with  which  they  decorated  the  public  buildings,  and
also  the  private  houses  of  individuals.  [Spolia.]
Subsequently,  however,  the  Romans  adopted  the
Greek  practice  of  raising  trophies  on  the  field  of
battle  :  the  first  trophies  of  this  kind  were  erected
by  Domitius  Ahenobarbus  and  Fabius  Maximus  in


TRUA.  1169

B.  c.  121,  after  their  conquest  of  the  Allobroges,
when  they  built  at  the  junction  of  the  Rhone  and


the  Isara  towers  of  white  stone,  upon  which  tro-
phies were  placed  adorned  with  the  spoils  of  the
enemy,  (Florus,  I.  e. ;  Strabo,  iv.  p.  185.)
Pompey  also  raised  trophies  on  the  Pyrenees  after
his  victories  in  Spain  (Strabo,  iii.  p.  156  ;  Plin.
H.  N.  iii.  3  ;  Dion  Cass.  xli.  24. ;  Sail.  ap.  Serv.  in
Virg.  Aen.  xi.  6)  ;  Julius  Caesar  did  the  same
near  Ziela,  after  his  victory  over  Pharnaces  (Dion
Cass.  xlii.  48),  and  Drusus,  near  the  Elbe,  to  com-
memorate his  victory  over  the  Germans.  (Dion
Cass.  Ii.  1  ;  Florus,  iv.  12.)  Still,  however,  it  was
more  common  to  erect  some  memorial  of  the  victory
at  Rome  than  on  the  field  of  battle.  The  trophies
raised  by  Marius  to  commemorate  his  victories
over  Jugurtha  and  the  Cimbri  and  Teutoni,  which
were  cast  down  by  Sulla  and  restored  by  Julius
Caesar,  must  have  been  in  the  city.  (Suet.  Jul.  11.)
In  the  later  times  of  the  republic,  and  under  the
empire,  the  erection  of  triumphal  arches  was  the
most  common  way  of  commemorating  a  victory,
many  of  which  remain  to  the  present  day.
[Arcus.]  We  find  trophies  on  the  Roman  coins
of  several  fixmilies.  The  annexed  coin  of  M.
Furius  Philus  is  an  example  ;  on  the  reverse,  Vic-
tory or  Rome  is  represented  crowniiag  a  trophy.


TROSSULI.  [Equites,  p.  472,  a.]
TRUA,  dim.  TRULLA  (Topt^yrj),  derived
from  rpvu,  Topw,  &c.,  to  perforate ;  a  large  and
flat  spoon  or  ladle  pierced  with  holes  j  a  trowel.
The  annexed  woodcut  represents  such  a  ladle,
adapted  to  stir  vegetables  or  other  matters  in  the
pot  (Schol.  in  Aristoph.  Av.  78),  to  act  as  a  strainer
4  F


1170  TRUTmA.

when  they  were  taken  out  of  the  water,  or  to  dis-
pel the  froth  from  its  surface.  (Non.  Marcell.  p.
19,  ed.  Merceri.)  The  ladle  here  drawn  was
found  in  the  kitchen  of  "  the  house  of  Pansa,"  at
Pompeii.


^


The  trulla  vinaria  (Varro,  X.  L.  v.  118,  ed,
Muller)  seems  to  have  been  a  species  of  colander
[Colum],  used  as  a  wine-strainer.  (Cic.  Verr.
iv.  27  ;  Hor.  Sat  ii.  3.  144.)  Though  generally
applied  to  these  domestic  and  culinary  purposes
(Eupolis,  p.  174,  ed.  Runkel)  the  trulla  was
found  to  be  convenient  for  putting  bees  into  a  hive.
(Col.  de  Re  Rust.  ix.  12.)  It  was  also  commonly
used  to  plaster  walls  (Pallad.  de  Re  Rust  i.  13,
15),  and  thus  gave  rise  to  the  verb  trullissare.
[Paries.]

Fellows  {Exc.  in  Asia  Minor.,  p.  153)  explains
the  Eastern  method  of  using  a  kind  of  colander  in
washing  the  hands.  It  is  placed  as  a  cover  upon
the  jar  [Olla],  which  receives  the  dirty  water.
This  may  therefore  be  the  trulleum^  which  the
ancients  used,  together  with  the  basin  and  ewer,  to
wash  their  hands.  (Non.  Marcell.  p.  547,  ed.
Merceri. )  [J«  Y.]

TRUBLION.     [CoTYLA.]

TRU'TINA  (rpuToi'Tj),  a  general  term  including
both  Libra,  a  balance,  and  siatera,  a  steelyard.
(Non.  Marc.  p.  180.)  Payments  were  originally
made  by  weighing,  not  by  counting.  Hence  a
balance  (trutina)  was  preserved  in  the  temple  of
Saturn  at  Rome.  (Varro,  L,  L.  v.  183,  ed.  Muller.)
The  balance  was  much  more  ancient  than  the  steel-
yard, which  according  to  Isidore  of  Seville  (Orig.
xvi.  24)  was  invented  in  Campania,  and  therefore
called  by  way  of  distinction  Trutina  Campana.
Consistently  with  this  remark,  steelyards  have
been  found  in  great  numbers  among  the  ruins  of
Herculaneum  and  Pompeii.  The  construction  of
some  of  them  is  more  elaborate  ami  complicated
than  that  of  modern  steelyards,  and  they  are  in
some  cases  much  ornamented.  The  annexed  wood-
cut represents  a  remarkably  beautiful  statera  which
is  preserved  in  the  Museum  of  the  Capitol  at  Rome.
Its  support  is  the  trunk  of  a  tree,  round  which  a
serpent  is  entwined.     The  equipoise  is  a  head  of


TUBA.

Minerva.  Three  other  weights  lie  on  the  base  of
the  stand,  designed  to  be  hung  upon  the  hook  when
occasion  required.  {Mus.  Capit  vol.  ii.  p.  213.)

Vitruvius  (x.  3.  s.  8.  §  4)  explains  the  principle
of  the  steelyard,  and  mentions  the  following  con-
stituent parts  of  it:  the  scale  (Jancula)  depending
from  the  head  {caput).,  near  which  is  the  point  of
revolution  {centrum)  and  the  handle  {ansa).  On
the  other  side  of  the  centre  from  the  scale  is  the
beam  {scapus)  with  the  weight  or  equipoise  {aequi-
po7idium),  which  is  made  to  move  along  the  points
(;oer/>?mcta)  expressing  the  weights  of  the  different
objects  that  are  put  into  the  scale.  [J,  Y.]

TUBA     (<raA7rt7|),  a  bronze  trumpet,  distin-
guished from  the  cornu  by  being  straight  while  the
latter  was  curved :  thus  Ovid  {Met  i.  98)
"  Non  tuba  direct!  non  aeris  comua  flexi."

(Compare  Vegetius,  iii.  5.)  Facciolati  in  his  Lexi-
con (s.  V.  Tvba)  is  mistaken  in  supposing  that
Aulus  Gellius  (v.  8)  and  Macrobius  {Sat  vi.  8),
who  copies  him,  intend  to  affirm  that  the  tuba  was
crooked.  The  words  of  the  former  do  not  mean
that  both  the  lituus  and  the  tuba  were  crooked,
but  that  both  that  kind  of  trumpet  which  was
called  a  lituus  and  also  the  staff  of  the  augur  were
crooked,  and  that  it  was  doubtful  which  of  the
two  had  lent  its  name  to  the  other.     [Lituus]

The  tuba  was  employed  in  war  for  signals  of
every  description  (Tacit.  Hist  ii.  29  ;  Caesar,  B.  C.
iii.  46  ;  Hirt.  B.  G.  viii.  20  ;  Li  v.  xxxix.  27),  at
the  games  and  public  festivals  (Juv.  vi.  249,  x.
214  ;  Virg.  Aen.  v.  113  ;  Ovid,  Fast.  i.  716),  also
at  the  last  rites  to  the  dead  {hinc  tuba.,  candelae^
Pers.  iii.  103;  Virg.  Ae?i.  xi.  191  ;  Ovid.  Heroid.
xii.  140,  Amor.  ii.  6.  6),  and  Aulus  Gellius  (xx.
2)  tells  us  from  Atteius  Capito  that  those  who
sounded  the  trumpet  at  funerals  were  termed
siticines,  and  used  an  instrument  of  a  peculiar  form.
The  tones  of  the  tuba  are  represented  as  of  a  harsh
and  fear-inspiring  character  {fractos  sonitus  tuhor
rum,  Virg.  Georg.  iv.  72  ;  tcrribilem  sonitum  acre
canoro,  Aen.  ix.  503),  which  Ennius  (Serv.  ad
Virg.  Aen.  ix.  503,;  Priscian  viii.  18.  103,  ed.
Krehl)  endeavoured  to  imitate  in  the  line

*'  At  tuba  terribili  sonitu  iaratantara  dixit."

The  invention  of  the  tuba  is  usually  ascribed  by
ancient  writers  to  the  Etruscans  (Athenaeus,  iv.  c.
82  ;  Pollux,  iv.  85,  87  ;  Diodor.  v.  40  ;  Serv.  ad
Virg.  Aen.  viii.  516  ;  Clem.  Alex.  Strom,  i.  p.
306),  and  the  epithet  K-nffTocraKirvyKTai  {i.e.  robber-
trumpeters,  Photius  and  Hesych.  s.  v.  and  Pollux,
I.  c.)  would  seem  to  indicate  that  they  had  made  it
famous  by  their  piracies.  It  has  been  remarked
that  Homer  never  introduces  the  aaKTriy^  in  his
narrative  but  in  comparisons  only  (//.  xviii.  2 1 9,
xxi.  388  ;  Eustath.  and  Schol.),  which  leads  us  to
infer  that  although  known  in  his  time  it  had
been  but  recently  introduced  into  Greece,  and  it  is
certain  that  notwithstanding  its  eminently  martial
ciiaracter,  it  was  not  until  a  late  period  used  in  the
armies  of  the  leading  states.  By  the  tragedians  its
Tuscan  origin  was  fully  recognized  :  Athena  in  Aes-
chylus orders  the  deep-toned  piercing  Tyrrhenian
trumpet  to  sound  {Eumen.  567),  Ulysses  in  Sopho-
cles {Aj.  17)  declares  that  the  accents  of  his  beloved
goddess  fell  upon  his  ears  like  the  tones  of  the
brazen-mouthed  Tyrrhenian  bell  {kw^uvos.,  i.  e.  the
bell-shaped  aperture  of  the  trumpet),  and  simihir
epithets  are  applied  by  Euripides  {Plioeniss.  1376


i


TUBA.

Heradid.  830),  and  other  Greek  (Auctor.  Wies.
988  ;  Brunck,  A7ial,  torn.  ii.  p.  142)  and  Roman
writers  (Tyrrlienus  clangor^  Virg.  Aen.  viii.  526  ;
Stat.  77<e6.  iii.  650  ;  Tyi-rlienae  clangore  tnbae^
Silius,  ii.  19).  According  to  one  account  it  was
first  fabricated  for  the  Tyrrhenians  by  Athena,
who  in  consequence  was  worshipped  by  the  Ar-
gives  under  the  title  of  'ZdhTTiy^  (Schol.  ad  Horn.
II.  xviii.  219,  e.  cod.  Vict.  ;  Pausan.  ii.  21.  §  3) ;
while  at  Rome  the  tubilustrium^  or  purification  of
sacred  trumpets,  was  performed  on  the  last  day  of
the  Quinquatrus.  [Quinquatrus.]  In  another
legend  the  discovery  is  attributed  to  a  mythical
king  of  the  Tyrrhenians,  Maleus,  son  of  Hercules
and  Omphale  (Lutat.  ad  Stat.  Tkeb.  iv.  224,  vi.
404  ;  Hygin.  Fab.  274  ;  Schol,  ad  Horn.  I.  c),  in
a  third  to  Pisaeus  the  Tyrrhenian  (Plin.  H.  N.
vii.  67  ;  Photius,  s.  v.),  and  Silius  has  preserved  a
tradition  (viii,  490),  according  to  which  the  origin
of  this  instrument  is  traced  to  Vetulonii.  (Miiller,
Die  Etrusker,  iv.  1,  3,  4,  5.)

There  appears  to  have  been  no  essential  differ-
ence in  form  between  the  Greek  and  Roman  or
Tyrrhenian  trumpets.  Both  Avere  long,  straight,
bronze  tubes  gradually  increasing  in  diameter,  and
terminating  in  a  bell-shaped  aperture.     They  pre-


TUNICA.


1171


sent  precisely  the  same  appearance  on  monuments
of  very  different  dates,  as  may  be  seen  from  the
cuts  annexed,  the  former  of  which  is  from  Trajan's
column,  and  the  latter  from  an  ancient  fictile  vase.
(Hope,  Costumes  of  Hie  Ancierits,  pi.  156.)


The  scholiast  on  the  Iliad  (I.  c.)  reckons  six  va-
rieties of  trumpets  ;  the  first  he  calls  the  Grecian
2o\Tri7|  which  Athena  discovered  for  the  Tyrrhe-
nians, and  the  sixth,  termed  by  him  /car'  il6x'n*'i
the  Tvpa-nviKTJ  (rdXiziy^^  he  describes  as  bent  at  the
extremity  (/ctwSwj'a  KeKKarrixhov  ex'^vaa)  ;  but  by
this  we  must  unquestionably  understand  the  sacred
trumpet  (tepariKi)  o-ctATrt-y^,  Lydus,  de  Mens.  iv.  6),
the  Utms  already  noticed  at  the  beginning  of  this
article.    (Compare  Lucan,  i.  431.)        [W.  R.]


TUBILU'STRIUM.  [Quinquatrus.]
TUBUS,  TUBULUS.  [Fistula.]
TULLIANUM.  [Carcer.]
TUMULTUA'RII.  [Tumultus.]
TUMULTUS  was  the  name  given  to  a  sudden
or  dangerous  war  in  Italy  or  Cisalpine  Gaul,  and
the  word  was  supposed  by  the  ancients  to  be  a
contraction  of  timor  multus.  (Cic.  Phil.  viii.  I  ;
tumultus  dictus,  quasi  timor  multus^  Serv.  ad  Virg.
Aen.  ii.  486,  viii.  1  ;  Festus,  s.  v.  Tumultuarii.)
It  was  however  sometimes  applied  to  a  sudden  or
dangerous  war  elsewhere  (Li v.  xxxv.  1,  xli.  6  ;
Cic.  Phil.  V,  12)  ;  but  this  does  not  appear  to  have
been  a  correct  use  of  the  word.  Cicero  [Phil.  viii.
1 )  says  that  there  might  be  a  war  without  a  tu-
multus, but  not  a  tumultus  without  a  war  ;  but  it
must  be  recollected  that  the  word  was  also  applied
to  any  sudden  alarm  respecting  a  war  ;  whence  we
find  a  tumultus  often  spoken  of  as  of  less  importance
than  a  war  (tJ.  g.  Liv.  ii.  26),  because  the  results
were  of  less  consequence,  though  the  fear  might
have  been  much  greater  than  in  a  regular  war.

In  the  case  of  a  tumultus  there  was  a  cessation
from  all  business  (justilium),  and  all  citizens  were
obliged  to  enlist  without  regard  being  had  to  the
exemptions  (vacationes)  from  military  service,  which
were  enjoyed  at  other  times.  (Cic. //.  cc.,*  Liv.
vii.  9,  11,  28,  viii.  20,  xxxiv.  56.)  As  there
was  not  time  to  enlist  the  soldiers  in  the  regular
manner,  the  magistrate  appointed  to  command  the
army  displayed  two  banners  (yexilla)  from  the
capitol,  one  red,  to  summon  the  infantry,  and  the
other  green,  to  summon  the  cavalry,  and  said,
"  Qui  rempublicam  salvam  vult,  me  sequatur."
Those  that  assembled  took  the  military  oath  to-
gether, instead  of  one  by  one,  as  was  the  usual
practice,  whence  they  were  called  conjurati,  and
their  service  conjuraiio.  (Serv.  ad  Virg.  Aen.  viii.
1.)  Soldiers  enlisted  in  this  way  were  called
Tumultuarii  or  Subitarii.  (Festus,  s.  v. ;  Liv.  iii.
30,  X.  21,  xl.  26.)

TU'NICA  (x'TWj/,  dim.  X'twj/iVkos,  X'TCtf^iOJ^),
the  under-gai-ment  of  the-  Greeks  and  Romans.

1 .  Greek.  The  Chiton'  was  the  only  kind  of
€Pdv/xa,  or  under-garment  worn  by  tlie  Greeks.  Of
this  there  were  two  kinds,  the  Dorian  and  Ionian.
The  Dorian  Chiton,  as  worn  by  males,  was  a  short
woollen  shirt,  without  sleeves.;  the  Ionian  was  a
long  linen  garment,  with  sleeves.  The  under-
garment, afterwards  distinguished,  as  the  Dorian,
seems  to  have  been  originally  wor»'  in  the  whole  of
Greece.  Thucydides  (i.  6)  speaks  as  if  the  long
linen  garment  worn  at  Athens  a  little  before  his
time  was  the  most  ancient  kind,  since  he  attributes
the  adoption  of  a  simpler  mode  of  dress  to  the
Lacedaemonians,  but  we  know  with  tolerable  cer-
tainty that  this  dress  was  brought  over  to  Athens
by  the  lonians  of  Asia.  (Miiller,  de  Minerva  Po-
Hade,  p.  41,  Dor.  iv.  2.  §  4.)  It  was  commonly
worn  at  Athens  during  the  Persian  wars,  but  ap-
pears to  have  entirely  gone  out  of  fashion  about
the  time  of  Pericles,  from  which  time  the  Dorian
Chiton  was  the  under  garment  universally  adopted
by  men  through  the  whole  of  Greece.  (Athen.
xii.  p.  512,  c  ;  Eustath.  p.  954. 47  ;  Thucyd.  /.  c;
Aristoph.  Equit.  1330.)

The  distinction  between  the  Doric  and  Ionic
Chiton  still  continued  in  the  dress  of  women.  The
Spartan  virgins  only  wore  this  one  garment,  and
had  no  upper  kind  of  clothing,  whence  it  is  some-
times called  Himation  [Pallium]  as  well  as  Chi'
4  F  2


1172


TUNICA.


ton.  (Compare  Herod,  v.  87  ;  Sc"hol.  ad  Eurip.
Hecuh.  933.)  Euripides  (Hecuh.  I.e..,  Androm.
598)  incorrectly  calls  this  Doric  dress  Peplos,  and
speaks  of  a  Doric  virgin  as  ixovottcttKo^.  From  the
circumstance  of  their  only  wearing  one  garment,
the  Spartan  virgins  were  called  yvixvai  (Plut.  Lt/c.
14)  [NuDUS],  and  also  fiovox^Tuues.  (Schol.  ad
Eurip.  I.e. ;  Athen.  xiii.  p.  589,  f.)  They  appeared
in  the  company  of  men  without  any  further  cover-
ing ;  but  the  married  women  never  did  so  without
wearing  an  upper  garment.  This  Doric  Chiton
was  made,  as  stated  above,  of  woollen  stuff;  it
was  without  sleeves,  and  was  fastened  over  both
shoulders  by  clasps  or  buckles  {iropirai,  Trepovai),
which  were  often  of  considerable  size.  (Herod.
Schol.  ad  Eurip.  II.  ce.)  It  was  frequently  so
short  as  not  to  reach  the  knee  (Clem.  Alex.  Paed.
ii.  10,  p.  258),  as  is  shown  in  the  figure  of  Diana,
on  p.  276,  who  is  represented  as  equipped  for  the
chase.  It  was  only  joined  together  on  one  side,
and  on  the  other  was  left  partly  open  or  slit  up
(o'xto'Tos  x^'^'^^1  Pollux,  vii.  55),  to  allow  a  free
motion  of  the  limbs:  the  two  skirts  (Trrepiryes)
thus  frequently  flew  open,  whence  the  Spartan
virgins  were  sometimes  called  t^ati/oyur/pfSes. (Pollux,
I.  c. ),  and  Euripides  {Androm.  I.  c.)  speaks  of  them
as  with

yvfj,vo7(ri  fx-qpoTs  Koi  neirXois  aveifiivois.

Examples  of  this  o-X£0-tos  x^''"'*'"  ^''^  frequently
seen  in  works  of  art:  the  following  cut  is  taken
from  a  bas-relief  in  the  British  Museum,  which  re-
presents an  Amazon  with  a  Chiton  of  this  kind :
some  parts  of  the  figure  appear  incomplete,  as  the
original  is  mutilated.  (See  also  Mus.  Borbon.  vol.
iv.  t.21.)


The  Ionic  Chiton,  on  the  contrary,  was  a  long
and  loose  garment,  reaching  to  the  feet  (■n-oSr/prjs),
with  wide  sleeves  (fopot),  and  was  generally  made
of  linen.  The  sleeves,  however,  appear  usually  to
have  covered  only  the  upper  part  of  the  arm ;  for
in  ancient  works  of  art  we  seldom  find  the  sleeves
extending  further  than  the  elbow,  and  sometimes
not  so  far.  The  sleeves  were  sometimes  slit  up,
and  fastened  together  with  an  elegant  row  of
brooches  (Aelian,  V.  H.  i.  18),  and  it  is  to  this
kind  of  garment  that  Bdttiger  {Kleine  Schrift.  vol.  iji.
p.  56)  incorrectly  gives  the  name  of  o-xto-ros  x^''"*"'.
The  Ionic  Chiton,  according  to  Herodotus  (v.  87,
88),  was  originally  a  Carian  dress,  and  passed  over
to  Athens  from  Ionia.  The  women  at  Athens  ori-
ginally wore  the  Doiic  Chiton,  but  were  compelled
to  change  it  for  the  Ionic  after  they  had  killed.


TUNICA.

with  the  buckles  or  clasps  of  their  dresses,  the  single
Athenian  who  had  returned  alive  from  the  expedi-
tion against  Aegina,  because  there  were  no  buckles
or  clasps  required  in  the  Ionic  dress.  The  Muses
are  generally  represented  with  this  Chiton.  The
woodcut  annexed,  taken  from  a  statue  in  the
British  Museum,  represents  the  Muse  Thalia  wear-
ing an  Ionic  Chiton.  The  Peplum  has  fallen  off  her
shoulders,  and  is  held  up  by  the  left  hand.  The
right  arm  holding  a  Pedum  is  a  modern  restoration.


Both  kinds  of  dress  were  fastened  round  the
middle  with  a  girdle  [Zona],  and  as  the  Ionic
Chiton  was  usually  longer  than  the  body,  part  of
it  was  drawn  up  so  that  the  dress  might  not  reach
further  than  the  feet,  and  the  part  which  was  so
drawn  up  overhung  or  overlapped  the  girdle,  and
was  called  koKtvos.

There  was  a  peculiar  kind  of  dress,  which  seems
to  have  been  a  species  of  double  Chiton,  called  5t-
TrAots,  5i7rAot5iov,  and  'i]ixiZnrKot5iov.  Some  writers
suppose  that  it  was  a  kind  of  little  cloak  thrown
over  the  Chiton,  in  which  case  it  would  be  an
Amictus,  and  could  not  be  regarded  as  a  Chiton  ;
but  Becker  and  others  maintain  that  it  was  not  a
separate  article  of  dress,  but  was  merely  the  upper
part  of  the  cloth  forming  the  Chiton,  which  was
larger  than  was  required  for  the  ordinary  Chiton,
and  was  therefore  thrown  over  the  front  and  back.
The  following  cuts  {Mus.  Borbon.  vol.  ii.  t.  4,  6)  will
give  a  clearer  idea  of  the  form  of  this  garment  thaa
any  description.


TUNICA.

It  seems  impossible  to  determine  with  certainty
•whether  the  Diploidion  formed  part  of  the  Chiton,
or  was  a  separate  piece  of  dress.  Those  writers
who  maintain  the  former  view,  think  that  it  is
quite  proved  by  the  left-hand  figure  in  the  pre-
ceding cut  ;  but  this  is  not  conclusive  evidence,
since  the  Chiton  may  have  terminated  at  the  waist.
In  the  right-hand  figure  we  see  that  the  Chiton  is
girded  round  the  middle  of  the  body,  as  described
above,  and  that  the  fold  which  overhangs  (koAttos)
forms,  with  the  end  of  the  Diploidion,  a  parallel
line,  which  was  always  the  case.  This  is  also
plainly  seen  in  the  woodcut  to  the  article  Umbra-
CULUM.  Since  the  Diploidion  was  fastened  over
the  shoulders  by  means  of  buckles  or  clasps,  it  was
called  eirwfjils^  which  Miiller  (Arch'dol.  d.  Kunst,
§  339.  4)  supposes  from  Eurip.  Hecub,  553,  and
Athen.  xiii.  p.  608,  b,  to  have  been  only  the  end  of
the  garment  fastened  on  the  shoulder  ;  but  these
passages  do  not  necessarily  prove  this,  and  Pollux
(vii.  49)  evidently  understands  the  word  as  mean-
ing a  garment  itself.

Besides  the  word  x'^'^^^i  we  also  meet  with  the
diminutives  x^'^^^'-^'^'^^  ^"^^  XtTwvioj',  the  former  of
which  is  generally  applied  to  a  garment  worn  by
men,  and  the  latter  to  one  worn  by  women,  though
this  distinction  is  not  always  preserved.  A  ques-
tion arises  whether  these  two  words  relate  to  a  dif-
ferent garment  from  the  Chiton,  or  mean  merely  a
smaller  one.  Many  modern  writers  think  that  the
Chiton  was  not  worn  immediately  next  the  skin,
but  that  there  was  worn  under  it  a  shirt  (xt^wi'to--
Kos)  or  chemise  (xitwj'joi').  In  the  dress  of  men,
however,  this  does  not  appear  to  have  been  the
case  ;  since  we  find  x'tw^o'kos  frequently  used  as
identical  with  x^'^^^^  and  spoken  of  as  the  only
under  garment  worn  by  individuals.  (To  Ifxariov  iced
t6v  x^'^'^vlcTKQV,  Plat.  Hipp.  Min.  p.  368  ;  Dem.  in
Mid.  p.  583.  21  ;  Aesch.  in  Tim.  p.  143  ;  Athen.
xii.  p.  545,  a.)  It  appears,  on  the  contrary,  that
females  were  accustomed  to  wear  a  chemise  (X''''*'-
viov)  under  their  Chiton,  and  a  representation  of
such  an  one  is  given  in  p.  185.  (Compare  Athen.
xiii.  p.  590,  f.  ;  Aristoph,  Lysistr.  48,  1 50.)

It  was  the  usual  practice  among  the  Greeks  to
wear  an  Himation,'  or  outer  garment,  over  the
Chiton,  but  frequently  the  Chiton  was  worn  alone.
A  person  who  wore  only  a  Chiton  was  called  ^xovo-
Xirwv  {olox^Twy  in  Homer,  Od.  xiv.  489),  an
epithet  given  to  the  Spartan  virgins,  as  explained
above.  In  the  same  way,  a  person  who  wore  only
an  Himation,  or  outer  garment,  was  called  axircou.
(Xen.  Mem.  i.  6.  §  2  ;  Aelian,  V.  H.  vii.  13  ;
Diod.  Sic.  xi.  26.)  The  Athenian  youths,  in  the
earlier  times,  wore  only  the  Chiton,  and  when  it
became  the  fashion,  in  the  Peloponnesian  war,  to
wear  an  outer  garment  over  it,  it  was  regarded  as
a  mark  of  effeminacy.  (Aristoph.  Nvb.  964,  com-
pared with  987.)

Before  passing  on  to  the  Roman  under  garment,
it  remains  to  explain  a  few  terms  which  are  ap-
plied to  the  different  kinds  of  Chiton.  In  later
times,  the  Chiton  worn  by  men  was  of  two  kinds,
the  aiJ.(pL/xd(Txci?<os  and  the  ^Tepojxdcrxa-^os,  the
former  the  dress  of  freemen,  the  latter  that  of  slaves.
(Pollux,  vii.  47.)  The  dpL(pi^j.d(Txa.Kos  appears  to
have  signified  not  only  a  garment  which  had  two
sleeves,  but  also  one  which  had  openings  for  both
arms  ;  while  the  erepojuao-xaAos,  on  the  contrary,
liad  only  a  sleeve,  or  rather  an  opening  for  the
left  arm,  leaving  the  right,  with  the  shoulder  and  a


TUNICA.  1173

part  of  the  breast  uncovered,  whence  it  is  called
c^w/xis,  a  representation  of  which  is  given  on  p.  512.
When  the  sleeves  of  the  Chiton  reached  down  to
the  hands,  it  seems  to  have  been  properly  called
XeipiSwTos  (Gell.  vii.  12,  see  woodcut,  p.  329),
though  this  word  seems  to  have  been  frequently
used  as  equivalent  to  dfx(()iiJi.daxO'^os.  (Hesych.  s.  v.
'A/uLcpif-idcrxa^os.)

A  x'TW"  opdoa-rdSios  was  one  which  was  not
fastened  round  the  body  with  a  girdle  (Pollux,  vii.
48  ;  Phot.  Lex.  p.  346,  Pors.) :  a  x'Taf  (ttoKiSo-
ros  seems  to  have  had  a  kind  of  flounce  at  the
bottom.  (Pollux  vii.  54  ;  Xenoph.  Cyrop.  vi.  4.
§2.)

On  the  subject  of  the  Greek  Chiton  in  general,
see  Miiller,  Dorians,  iv.  2.  §  3,  4,  Arch'dologie  der
Kunst,  §  337,  339  ;  Becker,  Cliarikles,  vol.  ii.
p.  309,  &c.

2.  Roman.  The  Tunica  of  the  Romans,  like
the  Greek  Chiton,  was  a  woollen  under  garment,
over  which  the  Toga  was  worn.  It  was  the  Indu-
tnenium  or  Indutus,  as  opposed  to  the  Amicius,  the
general  term  for  the  toga,  pallium,  or  any  other
outer  garment.  [Amictus.]  The  Romans  are
said  to  have  had  no  other  clothing  originally  but
the  toga  ;  and  when  the  Tunic  was  first  introduced,
it  was  merely  a  short  garment  without  sleeves,  and
was  called  Colobium.  (Gell.  vii.  12  ;  Serv.  ad  Virg.
Aen.  ix.  616.)  It  was  considered  a  mark  of  effe-
minacy for  men  to  wear  Tunics  with  long  sleeves
(manicatae)  and  reaching  to  the  feet  {talares).
(Cic.  Cat.  ii.  10.)  Julius  Caesar  was  accustomed
to  wear  one  which  had  sleeves,  with  fringes  at  the
wrist  {ad  manus  fimbriata.  Suet.  Jul.  45),  and  in
the  later  times  of  the  empire,  tunics  with  sleeves,
and  reaching  to  the  feet,  became  common.

The  Tunic  was  girded  (cincia)  with  a  belt  or
girdle  around  the  waist,  but  was  usually  worn
loose,  without  being  girded,  when  a  person  was  at
home,  or  wished  to  be  at  his  ease.  (Hor.  Sat.  ii.
1.  73  ;  Ovid,  Am.  i.  9.  41.)  Hence  we  find  the
terms  cindus,  praecindus,  and  succinctus,  applied,
like  the  Greek  eij^wvos,  to  an  active  and  diligent
person,  and  discindus  to  one  who  was  idle  or  disso-
lute. (Hor.  Sat.  i.  5.  6,  ii.  6.  107,  Epod.  i.  34.)

The  form  of  the  Tunic,  as  worn  by  men,  is  re-
presented in  many  woodcuts  in  this  work.  In
works  of  art  it  usually  terminates  a  little  above  the
knee  ;  it  has  short  sleeves,  covering  only  the  upper
part  of  the  arm,  and  is  girded  at  the  waist  (see
cuts,  pp.  90,  808) :  the  sleeves  sometimes,  though
less  frequently,  extend  to  the  hands  (cut,  p.  141).

Both  sexes  usually  wore  two  tunics,  an  outer
and  an  under,  the  latter  of  which  was  worn  next
the  skin,  and  corresponds  to  our  shirt  and  che-
mise. Varro  {ap.  Non.  xiv.  36)  says,  that  when
the  Romans  began  to  wear  two  tunics,  they  called
them  Subucula  and  Indusium,  the  former  of  which
Bottiger  (Sabina,  vol.  ii.  p.  113)  supposes  to  be  the
name  of  the  under  tunic  of  the  men,  and  the  latter
of  that  of  the  women.  But  it  would  appear  from
another  passage  of  Varro  (X.  L.y.  131,  ed.  Miiller)
referred  to  by  Becker  (Gallus,  vol.  ii.  p.  89),  as  if
Varro  had  meant  to  give  the  name  of  Subucula  to
the  under  tunic,  and  that  of  Indusium  or  Intusium
to  the  outer,  though  the  passage  is  not  without  dif-
ficulties. It  appears,  however,  that  Subucula  was
chiefly  used  to  designate  the  under  tunic  of  men.
(Suet.  Aug.  82  ;  Hor.  Epist.  i.  1.  95.)  The  word
interula  was  of  later  origin,  and  seems  to  have  ap-
plied equally  to  the  under  tunic  of  both  sexesi
4  F  3


1174


TUNICA.


(Apul.  Florid,  ii.  p.  32  ;  Metam.  viii.  p.  533,  ed.
Oud.  ;  Vopisc.  Prob.  4.)  The  Supparus  or  Sup-
parum  is  said  by  Festus  (s.v.)  to  have  been  a  linen
vest,  and  to  have  been  the  same  as  the  Subucula ;
but  Varro  (v.  131),  on  the  contrary,  speaks  of  it
as  a  kind  of  outer  garment,  and  contrasts  it  with
Stibuctila,  which  he  derives  from  subtm,  while  sup-
parus he  derives  from  supra.  The  passage  of  Lucan
(ii.  364)  in  which  it  is  mentioned  does  not  enable
us  to  decide  whether  it  was  an  outer  or  under  gar-
ment, but  would  rather  lead  us  to  suppose  that  it
was  the  former.  Persons  sometimes  wore  several
tunics,  as  a  protection  against  cold  :  Augustus  wore
four  in  the  winter,  besides  a  Subucula.  (Suet.
Avg.  82.)

As  the  dress  of  a  man  usually  consisted  of  an
under  tunic,  an  outer  tunic,  and  the  toga,  so  that
of  a  woman,  in  like  manner,  consisted  of  an  under
tunic  {Tunica  iniitna,  Gell.  x.  15),  an  outer  tunic,
and  the  palla.  The  outer  tunic  of  the  Roman
matron  was  properly  called  Stola  [Stola],  and  is
represented  in  the  woodcut  on  p,  1073  ;  but  the
annexed  woodcut,  which  represents  a  Roman  em-
press in  the  character  of  Concordia,  or  Abundantia,
gives  a  better  idea  of  its  form.  (Visconti,  Mo-
numenti  Gabini,  n.  34  ;  Bottiger,  SaLina,  tav.  x.)
Over  the  Tunic  or  Stola  the  Palla  is  thrown  in
many  folds,  but  the  shape  of  the  former  is  still
distinctly  shown.


The  tunics  of  women  were  larger  and  longer
than  those  of  men,  and  always  had  sleeves  ;  but  in
ancient  paintings  and  statues  we  seldom  find  the
sleeves  covering  more  than  the  upper  part  of  the
arm.  An  example  of  the  contrary  is  seen  in  the
Museo  Borbonico,  vol.  vii.  tav.  3.  Sometimes  the
tunics  were  adorned  with  golden  ornaments  called
Leria.  (Festus,  s.  v. ;  Gr.  Xrjpol,  Hesych.  Suid.  s.  v.)

Poor  people,  who  could  not  afford  to  purchase  a
toga,  wore  the  tunic  alone,  whence  we  find  the
common  people  called  Tunicati.  (Cic.  in  RuU.  ii.
34  ;  Hor.  Epist.  i.  7.  65.)  Persons  at  work  laid
aside  the  toga  ;  thus,  in  the  woodcut  on  p.  808,  a
man  is  represented  ploughing  in  his  tunic  only.  A
person  who  wore  only  his  tunic  was  frequently
called  NuDUS.

Respecting  the  Clavus  Latus  and  the  Clavus
Augustus,  worn  on  the  tunics  of  the  Senators  and.
Equites  respectively,  see  Clavus.


TURRIS.

When  a  triumph  was  celebrated,  the  conqueror
wore,  together  with  an  embroidered  toga  {Toga
pida\  a  flowered  tunic  {Tunica  pahnata),  also
called  Tunica  Jovis,  because  it  was  taken  from  the
temple  of  Jupiter  Capitolinus.  (Liv.  x.  7  ;  Mart,
vii.  l;Juv.  X.38.)  [TRiUMPHUS,p.  1166,a.]  Tunics
of  this  kind  were  sent  as  presents  to  foreign  kings
by  the  senate.     (Liv.  xxx.  15,  xxxi.  11.)

TURI'BULUM  {^vfitaTTfpiov),  a  censei.  The
Greeks  and  Romans,  when  they  sacrificed,  com-
monly took  a  little  frankincense  out  of  the  Ackrra
and  let  it  fall  upon  the  flaming  altar.  [Ara.]  More
rarely  they  used  a  censer,  by  means  of  which  they
burnt  the  incense  in  greater  profusion,  and  which
was  in  fact  a  small  moveable  grate  or  Foculus.
(Aelian,  V.  H,  xii.  51.)  The  annexed  woodcut,
taken  from  an  ancient  painting,  shows  the  per-
formance of  both  of  these  acts  at  the  same  time.
Winckelmann  {Mon.  Ined.  177)  supposes  it  to  re-
present Livia,  the  wife,  and  Octavia,  the  sister  of
Augustus,  sacrificing  to  Mars  in  gratitude  for  his
safe  return  from  Spain.  (Hor,  Carm.  iii.  14.  5.)
The  censer  here  represented  has  two  handles  for
the  purpose  of  carrying  it  from  place  to  place,  and
it  stands  upon  feet  so  that  the  air  might  be  ad-
mitted underneath,  and  pass  upwards  through  the
fuel.


As  the  censer  was  destined  for  the  worship  of
the  gods,  it  was  often  made  of  gold  or  silver  {Ep.
ad  Heb.  ix.  4  ;  Thucyd.  vi.  46)  and  enriched  Avith
stones  and  gems.  (Herod,  iv-  1 62  ;  Cic.  Verr.  iv.
21 — 24.)  We  find  a  silver  censer  in  the  official
enumerations  of  the  treasures  presented  to  the  Par-
thenon at  Athens  :  its  bars  (StepeiV/xaro)  were  of
bronze.  (Bockh,  Corp. /wscnp.  vol.  i.  pp.  198,  235,
238.)  [J.  Y.]

TURMA.     [ExERciTUS,  p.  497,  b.]

TURRIS  (•jryp7os),  a  tower.  The  word  Tupo-zy,
fi-om  which  comes  the  Latin  turris,  signified  ac-
cording to  Dionysius  (i.  26)  any  strong  building
surrounded  by  walls  ;  and  it  was  from  the  fact  of
the  Pelasgians  in  Italy  dwelling  in  such  places
that  the  same  writer  supposes  them  to  have  been
called  Tyrsenians  or  Tyrrhenians,  that  is,  the  in-
habitants of  towns  or  castles.  Turris  in  the  old
Latin  language  seems  to  have  been  equivalent  to
urbs.  (Polyb.  xxvi.  4  ;  Gottling,  Gesch.  d.  Bom.
Staats-o.  p.  17.)  The  use  of  towers  by  the  Greeks
and  Romans  was  vai-ious.

I.  Stationary  Towers.  1.  Buildings  of  this  form
are  frequently  mentioned  by  ancient  authors,  as
forming  by  themselves  places  of  residence  and
defence.  This  use  of  towers  was  very  common  in
Africa.  (Diod.  Sic.  iii.  49,  Itin.  Ant.  pp.  34,  35,
with  Wesseling's  notes.)  We  have  examples  in
the  tower  of  Hannibal  on  his  estate  between
Acholla  and  Thapsus  (Liv.  xxxiii,  48),  the  turris


TUllUIS.

re_(jia  of  Jugurtha  (Sallust.  Jm^t.  103),  the  tov/er  of
a  private  citizen  without  the  walls  of  Carthage,  by
the  help  of  which  Scipio  took  the  city  (Appian.
Pun.  117)  ;  and,  in  Spain,  the  tower  in  wliich
Cn.  Scipio  was  burnt.  (Appian.  Hisp.  1 6.)  Such
towers  were  common  in  the  frontier  provinces  of
the  Roman  empire.    (Amniian.  Marcell.  xxviii.  2.)

2.  They  were  erected  within  cities,  partly  to
form  a  last  retreat  in  case  the  city  should  be  taken,
and  partly  to  overawe  the  inhabitants.  In  almost
all  Greek  cities,  which  were  usually  built  upon  a
hill,  rock,  or  some  natural  elevation,  there  was  a
kind  of  tower,  a  castle,  or  a  citadel,  built  upon  the
highest  part  of  the  rock  or  hill,  to  which  the  name
of  Acropolis  was  given,  as  at  Athens,  Corinth,
Argos,  Messene,  and  many  other  places.  The
Capitolium  at  Rome  answered  the  same  purpose
as  the  Acropolis  in  the  Greek  cities  ;  and  of  the
same  kind  were  the  tower  of  Agathocles  at  Utica
(Appian.  Pun.  14),  and  that  of  Antonia  at  Jeru-
salem. (Joseph.  Bell.  Jud.  v.  5.  §  8,  Act.  Apostol.
xxi.  31.)

3.  The  fortifications  both  of  cities  and  camps
were  strengthened  by  towers,  which  were  placed
at  intervals  on  the  murus  of  the  former  [Murus]
and  the  vallum  of  the  latter  ;  and  a  similar  use
was  made  of  them  in  the  lines  (circumvallafio)
drawn  round  a  besieged  town.  [Vallum. J  They
were  generally  used  at  the  gates  of  towns  and  of
stative  camps.  [Porta.]  The  use  of  temporary
towers  on  walls  to  repel  an  attack  will  be  noticed
below.

II.  Moveable  Towers.  These  were  among  the
most  important  engines  used  in  storming  a  fortified
place.  They  were  of  two  kinds.  Some  were
made  so  that  they  could  be  taken  to  pieces  and
carried  to  the  scene  of  operations :  these  were
called  folding  towers  (-Trvpyoi  tttvktoi  or  iinvyfiivoi^
turres  plicatiles,  or  portable  towers,  (poprjrol  Trvpyoi).
The  other  sort  were  constructed  on  wheels,  so  as
to  be  driven  up  to  the  walls ;  and  hence  they  were
called  turres  ambulatoriae  or  suhrotatae.  But  the
turres  plicatiles  were  generally  made  with  wheels,
so  that  they  were  also  ambulatoriae.

The  first  invention  or  improvement  of  such
towers  is  ascribed  by  Athenaeus  the  mechanician
(quoted  by  Lipsius,  Oper.  vol.  iii.  p.  297)  to  the
Greeks  of  Sicily  in  the  time  of  Dionysius  I.  (b.  c.
405.)  Diodorus  (xiv.  51)  mentions  towers  on  wheels
as  xised  by  Dionysius  at  the  siege  of  Motya.  He
had  before  (xiii.  54)  mentioned  towers  as  used  at
the  siege  of  Selinus  (b.  c.  409),  but  he  does  not
say  that  they  were  on  v/heels.  According  to  others,
they  were  invented  by  the  engineers  in  the  service
of  Philip  and  Alexander,  the  most  famous  of  whom
were  Polyidus,  a  Thessalian,  who  assisted  Philip  at
the  siege  of  Byzantium,  and  his  pupils  Chaereas
and  Diades.  (Vitruv.  x.  19.  s.  13.)  Heron  (c.  13)
ascribes  their  invention  to  Diades  and  Chaereas,
Vitruvius  {I.  c.)  to  Diades  alone,  and  Athenaeus
(Ji.  c.^  says  that  they  were  improved  in  the  time  of
Philip  at  the  siege  of  Byzantium.  Vitruvius  states
that  the  towers  of  Diades  were  carried  about  by
the  army  in  separate  pieces.  Respecting  the
towers  used  by  Demetrius  Poliorcetes  at  the  siege
of  Rhodes,  see  Helepolis.

Appian  mentions  the  turres  plicatiles  {Bell.  Civ.

V.  36,  37),  and  states  that  at  the  siege  of  Rhodes

Cassius  took  such  towers  with  him  in  his  ships,

and  had  them  set  up  on  the  spot.     {Id.  iv.  72.)

Besides  the  frequent  allusions  in  ancient  writers


TURRIS.


I17S


to  the  moveable  towers  {turres  mobiles,  Liv.  xxi.
11),  we  have  particular  descriptions  of  them  by
Vitruvius  (x.  19.  s.  13),  and  Vegetius  (iv.  17).

They  were  generally  made  of  beams  and  planks,
and  covered,  at  least  on  the  three  sides  which  were
exposed  to  the  besieged,  with  iron,  not  only  for
protection,  but  also,  according  to  Josephus,  to  in-
crease their  weight  and  thus  make  them  steadier.
They  were  also  covered  with  raw  hides  and  quilts,
moistened,  and  sometimes  with  alum,  to  protect
them  from  fire.  The  use  of  alum  for  this  purpose
appears  to  have  origmated  with  Sulla  at  the  siege
of  Athens.  (Anim.  Marc.  xx.  and  Claud.  Quadrig.
ap.  Lips.  p.  300.)  Their  height  was  such  as  to
overtop  the  walls,  towers,  and  all  other  fortifica-
tions of  the  besieged  place.  (Liv.  xxi.  11.)  Vitru-
vius {I.e.),  following  Diades,  mentions  two  sizes
of  towers.  The  smallest  ought  not,  he  says,  to  be
less  than  60  cubits  high,  17  wide,  and  one-fifth
smaller  at  the  top  ;  and  the  greater  120  cubits  high
and  23^  wide.  Heron  (c.  13),  who  also  follows
Diades,  agrees  with  Vitruvius  so  far,  but  adds  an
intermediate  size,  half-way  between  the  two,  90
cubits  high.  Vegetius  mentions  towers  of  30,  40,
and  50  feet  square.  They  were  divided  into  sto-
ries {tabulata  or  tecta),  and  hence  they  are  called
turres  contabulatae.  (Liv.  xxi.  34.)  Towers  of
the  three  sizes  just  mentioned  consisted  respec-
tively of  10,  15,  and  20  stories.  The  stories  de-
creased in  height  from  the  bottom  to  the  top.
Diades  and  Chaereas,  according  to  Heron,  made
the  lowest  story  7  cubits  and  12  digits,  those  about
the  middle  5  cubits,  and  the  upper  4  cubits  and
one-third  of  a  cubit.

The  sides  of  the  towers  were  pierced  with  win-
dows, of  which  there  were  several  to  each  story.

These  rules  were  not  strictly  adhered  to  in  prac-
tice. Towers  were  made  of  6  stories,  and  even
fewer.  (Diod.  xiv.  51.)  Those  of  10  stories  were
very  common  (Hirt.  Bell.  Gall.  viii.  41  ;  Sil.  Ital.
xiv.  300),  but  towers  of  20  stories  are  hardly,  if
ever,  mentioned.  Plutarch  {Lucull.  1 0)  speaks  of
one  of  100  cubits  high  used  by  Mithridates  at  the
siege  of  Cyzicus.

The  use  of  the  stories  was  to  receive  the  engines
of  war  [Tormenta],  and  slingers  and  archers
were  stationed  in  them  and  on  the  tops  of  the
towers.  (Liv.  xxi.  11.)  In  the  lowest  story
was  a  battering-ram  [Aries]  ;  and  in  the  middle
one  or  more  bridges  (pontes)  made  of  beams  and
planks,  and  protected  at  the  sides  by  hurdles.
Scaling-ladders  {scalae)  were  also  carried  in  the
towers,  and  when  the  missiles  had  cleared  the
walls,  these  bridges  and  ladders  enabled  the  be-
siegers to  rush  upon  them.

The  towers  were  placed  upon  wheels  (generally
6  or  8),  that  they  might  be  brought  up  to  the
Avails.  These  wheels  were  placed  for  security  in-
side of  the  tower.

The  tower  was  built  so  far  from  the  besieged
place  as  to  be  out  of  the  enemy's  reach,  and  then
pushed  up  to  the  walls  by  men  stationed  inside  of
and  behind  it.  (Caesar,  B.  G.  ii.  30,  31  ;  Q.  Curt,
viii.  10.)  The  attempt  to  draw  them  forward  by
beasts  of  burthen  was  sometimes  made,  but  was
easily  defeated  by  shooting  the  beasts.  (Procop.
Bell.  Goth.  i.  ap.  Lips.  p.  298.)  They  were  gene-
rally brought  up  upon  the  Agger  (Hirtius,  I.  c),
and  it  not  unfrequently  happened  that  a  tower  stuck
fast  or  fell  over  on  account  of  the  softness  of  the
agger,  (Liv.  xxxii.  17;  Q.  Curt.  iv.  6.  §  9.)  They
4  P  4


1176


TUTOR.


were  placed  on  the  agger  before  it  was  completed,
to  protect  the  soldiers  in  working  at  it.  (Sail.
Jtujurth.  76  ;  Caesar,  B.  G.  vii.  22.)  When  the
tower  was  brought  up  to  the  walls  without  an
ugger^  the  ground  was  levelled  before  it  by  means
of  the  MuscuLUS.

These  towers  were  accounted  most  formidable
engines  of  attack.  They  were  opposed  in  the  fol-
lowing ways.

1.  They  were  set  on  fire,  either  by  sallies  of  the
besieged,  or  by  missiles  carrying  burning  matter,
or  by  letting  men  down  from  the  walls  by  ropes,
close  to  the  towers,  while  the  besiegers  slept.
(Veget.  iv.  18  ;  Sil.  Ttal.  xiv.  305.)

2.  By  undermining  the  ground  over  which  the
tower  had  to  pass,  so  as  to  overset  it.  (Veget.  iv.
20.)

3.  By  pushing  it  off  by  main  force  by  iron-shod
beams,  asseres  or  trabes.     (Veget.  I.  c.)

4.  By  breaking  or  overturning  it  with  stones
thrown  from  catapults,  when  it  was  at  a  distance,
or,  when  it  came  close  to  the  wall,  by  striking  it
with  an  iron-shod  beam  hung  from  a  mast  on  the
wall,  and  thus  resembling  an  Aries.

5.  By  increasing  the  height  of  the  wall  ;  first
with  masonry,  and  afterwards  with  beams  and
planks,  and  also  by  the  erection  of  temporary
wooden  towers  on  the  walls.  (Caesar,  B.  G.  vii.
22  ;  Veget.  iv.  19.)  This  mode  of  defence  was
answered  by  the  besiegers  in  two  ways.  Either
the  agger  on  which  the  tower  stood  was  raised,  as
by  Caesar  at  the  siege  of  Avaricum  {B.  G.  I.  c),  or
a  smaller  tower  was  constructed  within  the  upper
part  of  the  tower,  and  when  completed  was  raised
by  screws  and  ropes.  (Veget.  I.  c.)  On  these
towers  in  general  see  Lipsius,  Poliorcet.  in  Oper.
vol.  iii.  pp.  296 — 356,

III.  Caesar  {B.  C.  li.  8 — 9)  describes  a  peculiar
sort  of  tower,  Avhich  was  invented  at  the  siege  of
Massilia,  and  called  turris  latericia,  or  laterculum.
It  partook  somewhat  of  the  character  both  of  a
fixed  and  of  a  besieging  tower.  It  was  built  of
masonry  near  the  walls  of  the  town  to  afford  the
besiegers  a  retreat  from  the  sudden  sallies  of  the
enemy  ;  the  builders  were  protected  by  a  moveable
cover  ;  and  the  tower  was  pierced  with  windows
for  shooting  out  missiles.

IV.  Towers  in  every  respect  similar  to  the  turres
ambdatoriae  (excepting  of  course  the  wheels)  were
constructed  on  ships,  for  the  attack  of  fortified
places  by  sea.  (Caes.  Bell.  Civ.  iii.  40,  where,
respecting  the  term  ad  libram^  see  the  commenta-
tors ;  Liv.  xxiv,  34;  Appian.  Mith.  73,  Bell.  Civ.
V.  106;  Amm.  Marc.  xxi.  12.)

V.  Small  towers  carrying  a  few  armed  men
were  placed  on  the  backs  of  elephants  used  in  battle.
(Liv.  xxxvii.  40.)

VI.  The  v/ords  -rr^fyyos  and  turris  are  applied  to
an  army  drawn  up  in  a  deep  oblong  column.  (Cell.
X.  9  ;  Cato,  de  Be  Milit.  ap.  Fest.  s.  v.  Serra  proe-
liari^  p.  344,  ed.  Muller  ;  Eustath.  ad  Horn.  II.
xii.  43.)  [P.S.]

TUTE'LA.     [Tutor.]

TUTE'LAE  ACTIO.     [Tutor.!

TUTOR.  The  difference  between  a  Tutor  and
Tutela,  and  Curator  and  Curatio  or  Cura,  is  ex-
plained in  the  article  Curator.  In  the  Roman
system  there  might  be  persons  who  were  under  no
potestas,  and  had  property  of  their  own,  but  by
reason  of  their  age  or  sex  required  protection  for
their  own  interest,  and  for  the  interest  of  those  who


TUTOR.

might  be  their  heredes.     This  protection  was  given
by  the  tutela  to  Impuberes  and  women.

A  Tutor  derived  his  name  a  "  tuendo  "  from  pro-
tecting another  {quasi  Tuitor\,  His  power  and  of-
fice were  "  Tutela,"  which  is  thus  defined  by  Servius
Sulpicius  (Dig.  26.  tit.  1.  s.  1) :  "  Tutela  est  vis
ac  potestas  in  capite  libero  ad  tuendum  eura  qui
propter  aetatem  suam  {sua)  sponte  se  defendere
nequit  jure  civili  data  ac  permissa."  After  the
word  "  suam  "  it  has  been  suggested  by  Rudorff
that  something  like  what  follows  has  been  omitted
by  the  copyists :  "  eamve  quae  propter  sexum,"  a
conjecture  which  seems  very  probable.  Tutela  ex-
presses both  the  status  of  the  Tutor  and  that  of  the
person  who  was  In  Tutela.  The  tutela  of  Im-
puberes was  a  kind  of  Potestas,  according  to  the
old  law :  that  of  Mulieres  was  merely  a  Jus.

As  to  the  classification  of  the  different  kinds
(genera)  of  Tutela,  the  jurists  differed.  Some
made  five  genera,  as  Quintus  Mucius ;  others  three,
as  Servius  Sulpicius  ;  and  others  two,  as  Labeo.
The  most  convenient  division  is  into  two  genera,
the  tutela  of  Impuberes  {pupilli,  pupillae),  and
the  tutela  of  Women.  The  pupillus  or  the  pupilla
is  the  male  or  the  female  who  is  under  Tutela.

Every  paterfamilias  had  power  to  appoint  by
testament  a  Tutor  for  his  children  who  were  in  his
power :  if  they  were  males,  only  in  case  they  were
Impuberes  ;  if  they  were  females,  also  in  case  they
were  marriageable  (nubiles),  that  is  above  twelve
years  of  age.  Therefore  if  a  tutor  was  appointed
for  a  male,  he  was  released  from  the  Tutela  on  at-
taining puberty  (fourteen  years  of  age),  but  the
female  still  continued  in  tutela,  unless  she  was  re*
leased  from  it  by  the  Jus  Liberorum  under  the
Lex  Julia  et  Papia  Poppaea.  A  man  could  only
appoint  a  Tutor  for  his  grandchildren,  in  case  they
would  not  upon  his  death  come  into  the  power  of
their  father.  A  father  could  appoint  a  tutor  for
Postumi,  provided  they  would  have  been  in  his
power,  if  they  had  been  born  in  his  life-time.  A
man  could  appoint  a  tutor  for  his  wife  in  manu,
and  for  his  daughter-in-law  (nurus)  who  was  in
the  manus  of  his  son.  The  usual  form  of  appoint-
ing a  Tutor  was  this :  "  Lucium  Titium  Liberis
meis  tutorem  do."  A  man  could  also  give  his  wife
in  manu  the  power  of  choosing  a  tutor  (tutoris
optio)  ;  and  the  optio  might  be  either  plena  or
angusta.  She  who  had  the  plena  optio  might
choose  (and  consequently  change)  her  tutor  any
number  of  times :  she  who  had  the  angusta  optio
was  limited  in  her  choice  to  the  number  of  times
which  the  testator  had  fixed.     [Testamentum.]

The  power  to  appoint  a  tutor  by  will  was  either
given  or  confirmed  by  the  Twelve  Tables.  The
earliest  instance  recorded  of  a  testamentary  Tutor
is  that  of  Tarquinius  Priscus  being  appointed  by
the  will  of  Ancus  (Liv.  i.  34),  which  maybe  taken
to  prove  this  much  at  least,  that  the  power  of  ap-
pointing a  tutor  by  will  was  considered  by  the
Romans  as  one  of  their  oldest  legal  institutions.
The  nearest  kinsmen  were  usually  appointed  Tu-
tores,  and  if  a  testator  passed  over  such,  it  was  a
reflection  on  their  character  {Cic.pro  P.  Sextio,  52),
that  is,  we  must  suppose,  if  the  testator  himself
was  a  man  in  good  repute.  Persons  named  and
appointed  Tutores  by  a  will  were  Tutores  Dativi :
those  who  were  chosen  under  the  power  given  by
a  will  were  Tutores  Optivi,     (Gains,  i.  154.)

If  the  testator  appointed  no  tutor  by  his  will,
the  tutela  was  given  by  the  Twelve  Tables  to  the


TUTOR.

nearest  Agnati,  and  such  Tutores  were  called  Legi-
timi.  The  nearest  Agnati  were  also  the  heredes  in
case  of  the  immediate  heredes  of  the  Testator  dying
intestate  and  without  issue,  and  the  tutela  was
therefore  a  right  which  they  claimed  as  well  as  a
duty  imposed  on  them.  Persius  (ii.  12)  alludes  to
the  claim  of  the  Tutor  as  heres  to  his  pupillus.  A
son  who  was  pubes,  was  the  legitinms  tutor  of  a
son  who  was  impubes  ;  and  if  there  was  no  son  who
was  pubes,  the  son  who  was  impubes  had  his  father's
brother  (patruus)  for  his  tutor.  The  same  rule  ap-
plied to  females  also,  till  it  was  altered  by  a  Lex
Claudia.  If  there  Avere  several  agnati  in  the  same
degree,  they  were  all  tutores.  If  there  were  no
Agnati,  the  tutela  belonged  to  the  Gentiles,  so  long
as  the  Jus  Gentilicium  was  in  force.  (Gains,  iii.
17,  and  i.  164.)  The  tutela  in  which  a  freedman
was  with  respect  to  his  Patronus  was  also  Legitima;
not  that  it  was  expressly  given  by  the  words  (le.v)
of  the  Twelve  Tables,  but  it  flowed  from  the  lex
as  a  consequence  (per  consequefitiam,  Ulp.  Fi-ag.
tit.  11);  for  as  the  hereditates  of  intestate  liberti
and  libertae  belonged  to  the  patronus,  it  was  as-
sumed that  the  tutela  belonged  to  him  also,  since
the  Twelve  Tables  allowed  the  same  persons  to  be
tutors  in  the  case  of  an  ingenuus,  to  whom  they
gave  the  hereditas  in  case  there  was  no  suus  heres,
(Gaius,  i.  165.)

If  a  free  person  had  been  mancipated  to  another
either  by  the  parent  or  coemptionator,  and  such
other  person  manumitted  the  free  person,  he  be-
came his  tutor  fiduciarius  by  analogy  to  the  case  of
freedman  and  patron.  (Compare  Gaius,  i.  166  with
Ulp.Fra5r.tit.il.  s.  5.)  [Emancipatio;Fiducia.]

If  an  impubes  had  neither  a  tutor  Dativus  nor
Legitimus,  he  had  one  given  to  him,  in  Rome,  un-
der the  provisions  of  the  Lex  Atilia  by  the  Praetor
Urbanus  and  the  major  part  of  the  Tribuni  Plebis;
in  the  provinces  in  such  cases  a  tutor  was  appointed
by  the  Praesides  imder  the  provisions  of  the  Lex
Julia  et  Titia.  [Lex  Julia  et  Titia.]  If  a
tutor  was  appointed  by  testament  either  sub  condi-
cione  or  ex  die  certo,  a  tutor  might  be  given  under
these  Leges  so  long  as  the  condition  had  not  taken
ctfect  or  the  day  had  not  arrived :  and  even  when
a  tutor  had  been  appointed  absolutely  (pure),  a
tutor  might  be  given  under  these  Leges  so  long  as
there  was  no  heres  ;  but  the  power  of  such  tutor
ceased  as  soon  as  there  was  a  tutor  under  the  tes-
tament, that  is,  as  soon  as  there  was  a  heres  to
take  the  hereditas.  If  a  tutor  was  captured  by
the  enemy,  a  tutor  was  also  given  under  these
Leges,  but  such  tutor  ceased  to  be  tutor,  as  soon  as
the  original  tutor  returned  from  captivity,  for  he
recovered  his  tutela  Jure  Postliminii.

Before  the  passing  of  the  Lex  Atilia  tutors  were
given  by  the  praetor  in  other  cases,  as  for  instance,
when  the  legis  actiones  were  in  use,  the  Praetor
appointed  a  tutor  if  there  was  any  action  between
a  tutor  and  a  woman  or  ward,  for  the  tutor  could
not  give  the  necessary  authority  (auctoritas)  to
the  acts  of  those  whose  tutor  he  was,  in  a  matter
in  which  his  own  interest  was  concerned.  Other
cases  in  which  a  tutor  was  given  are  mentioned  by
Ulpian,  Fra^r.  tit.  11.

Ulpian's  division  of  Tutores  is  into  Legitirai,
Senatusconsultis  constituti,  Moribus  introducti.
His  legitimi  tutores  comprehend  all  those  who  be-
come tutores  by  virtue  of  any  Lex,  and  specially
by  the  Twelve  Tables :  accordingly  it  comprises
tutores  in  the  case  of  intestacy,  tutores  appointed


TUTOR.


ii7r


by  testament,  for  they  were  confirmed  by  the
Twelve  Tables,  and  tutores  appointed  under  any
other  Lex  as  the  Atilia.  Various  Senatusconsulta
declared  in  what  cases  a  tutor  might  be  appointed  ;
thus  the  Lex  Julia  de  maritandis  ordinibus  (Papia
et  Poppaea)  enacted  that  the  Praetor  should  ap-
point a  tutor  for  a  woman  or  a  virgin,  who  was  re-
quired to  marry  by  this  law,  "  ad  dotem  dandam,
dicendam,  promittendamve,"  if  her  Legitimus  tutor
was  himself  a  Pupillus :  a  Senatusconsultum  ex-
tended the  provision  to  the  provinces,  and  enacted
that  in  such  case  the  praesides  should  appoint  a
tutor  ;  and  also  that  if  a  tutor  was  mutus  or  furiosus,
another  should  be  appointed  for  the  purposes  of  the
Lex.  The  case  above  mentioned  of  a  tutor  being
given  in  the  case  of  an  action  between  a  tutor  and
his  Avard,  is  a  case  of  a  tutor  Moribus  datus.  In
the  Imperial  period  from  the  time  of  Claudius  tu-
tores extra  ordinem  were  appointed  by  the  consuls
also.

Only  those  could  be  Tutores  who  were  sui  juris,
A  person  could  not  be  named  Tutor  in  a  Testa-
ment, unless  he  had  the  Testaraentifactio  with  the
Testator,  a  rule  which  excluded  such  persons  as
Peregrini.  The  Latini  Juniani  were  excluded  by
the  Lex  Junia.  (Gaius,  i.  23.)  Women  could
not  be  Tutores.  Many  persons  who  were  com-
petent to  be  Tutores,  might  excuse  themselves
from  taking  the  office :  these  grounds  of  excuse
(exeusationes)  were,  among  others,  age,  absence,
the  being  already  Tutor  in  other  cases,  the  holding
of  particular  offices  and  other  grounds  which  are
enumerated  in  the  Fragmenta  Vaticana  (123 — •
247).  In  the  system  of  Justinian  the  tutela  is
viewed  as  a  Publicum  munus.

The  power  of  the  Tutor  was  with  respect  to  the
property  and  pecuniary  interests,  not  the  person  of
the  Pupillus,  and  the  passage  of  the  Twelve  Tables
which  gives  or  confirms  to  a  testator  the  power  of  dis-
posing of  his  property,  uses  the  phrase,  Uti  legassit
super  pecunia  tutelave  suae  rei,  that  is  the  Tutela
of  the  property.  It  was  not  absolutely  essential
to  the  notion  of  Tutela  that  the  Tutor  should  have
the  administration  of  property ;  and  he  had  it  not
in  the  case  of  Mulieres.  It  might  happen  that  the
Tutores  from  their  nearness  of  blood  and  other
causes  might  have  the  guardianship  of  the  Im-
pubes ;  but  then  the  protection  of  the  property  of
the  Impubes  was  the  special  office  of  the  Tutor,
and  the  care  of  the  infant  belonged  to  the  mother,
if  she  survived  (custodia  matrum,  Hor.  Ep.  i.  1.
22).  In  a  case  mentioned  by  Livy  (iv.  9),  where
the  mother  and  the  Tutores  could  not  agree  about
the  marriage  of  the  mother's  daughter,  the  ma-
gistratus  decided  in  favour  of  the  mother's  power
(secutidum  parentis  arhitrium).  As  to  the  later
law,  see  Dig.  27.  tit.  2.  s.  1.  §  6.

A  pupillus  could  do  no  act  by  which  he  dimi-
nished his  property,  but  any  act  to  which  he  was
a  party  was  valid,  so  far  as  concerned  the  pupillus,
if  it  was  for  his  advantage.  Consequently  a
pupillus  could  contract  obligationes,  which  were  for
his  advantage,  without  his  Tutor.  (Gaius,  iii.  107.)
The  Tutor's  office  was  "  negotia  gerere  et  auctori-
tatem  interponere."  Thus  the  natural  act  of  the
pupillus  became  by  auctoritatis  interpositio  "of  the
Tutor,  a  legal  act ;  and  thus  the  pupillus  and  his
Tutor  formed  one  complete  person,  as  to  legal  ca-
pacity to  act.  No  particular  form  was  required
for  the  expression  of  the  tutor's  auctoritas,  and  his
presence,  when  the  act  was  done  by  the  pupillus.


1178


TUTOR.


was  enough,  if  he  made  no  opposition  to  it.  (Ulp.
Fr<ig.  tit.  11.  s.  25.)  The  Negotiorum  Gestio  in
•which  the  Tutor  acted  alone  took  place  when  the
Pupillus  was  an  Infans,  or  absent,  or  Furiosus :
it  was  his  duty  to  preserve  and  improve  the
property  and  to  do  all  necessary  acts  for  that  pur-
pose. When  the  Pupillus  was  no  longer  Infans,
he  could  do  various  acts  with  the  Auctoritas  of  his
Tutor :  the  auctoritas  was  the  consent  of  the  Tutor
to  the  act  of  the  Pupillus,  which  was  necessary  in
order  to  render  it  a  legal  act.  Thus  it  was  a  rule
of  law  that  neither  a  woman  nor  a  pupillus  could
alienate  a  Res  mancipi  without  the  auctoritas  of  a
Tutor  :  a  woman  could  alienate  a  Res  nee  mancipi
without  such  consent,  but  a  pupillus  could  not.
(Gains,  ii.  80.)  The  incapacity  of  the  pupillus  is
best  shown  by  the  following  instance  :  if  his  debtor
paid  a  debt  to  the  pupillus,  the  money  became  the
property  of  the  pupillus,  but  the  debtor  was  not
released,  because  a  pupillus  could  not  release  any
duty  that  was  due  to  himself  without  the  auctoritas
of  his  Tutor,  for  he  could  alienate  nothing  without
Buch  auctoritas,  and  to  release  his  debtor  was  equi-
valent to  parting  with  a  right.  Still  if  the  money
really  became  a  part  of  the  property  of  the  pupillus,
or,  as  it  was  expressed  according  to  the  phraseology
of  the  Roman  Law,  si  ex  ea  pecunia  locupletior  foetus
sit,  and  he  afterwards  sued  for  it,  the  debtor  might
answer  his  demand  by  an  Exceptio  doli  mali.
(Gains,  ii.  84;  Cic.  Top.  11.)  The  subject  of  the
incapacity  of  Impuberes  and  the  consequent  ne-
cessity of  the  auctoritas  of  a  Tutor  is  further  ex-
plained in  the  articles  Impubes  and  Infans.

The  tutela  was  terminated  by  the  death  or
capitis  deminutio  maxima  and  media  of  the  Tutor.
The  case  of  a  Tutor  being  taken  prisoner  by  the
enemy  has  been  stated.  (Gains,  i.  187.)  A  legi-
timus  Tutor  became  disqualified  to  be  Tutor  legiti-
mus  if  he  sustained  a  capitis  deminutio  minima,
which  was  the  case  if  he  allowed  himself  to  be
adopted  (Gains,  i.  195  ;  Ulp.  Froff.  tit.  11.  s.  13);
but  this  was  not  the  case  with  a  testamentary
Tutor.  The  tutela  ceased  by  the  death  of  the
pupillus  or  pupilla,  or  by  a  capitis  deminutio,  as  for
instance  the  pupilla  coming  in  manum  viri.  It
also  ceased  when  the  pupillus  or  pupilla  attained
the  age  of  Puberty,  which  in  the  male  sex  was
fourteen  and  in  the  female  was  twelve.  [Impubes.]
The  tutela  ceased  by  the  abdicatio  of  the  testa-
mentary Tutor,  that  is,  when  he  declared  "  nolle
Be  tutorem  esse."  The  Tutor  legitimus  could  only
get  rid  of  the  Tutela,  in  such  cases  as  he  could  get
rid  of  it,  by  In  jure  cessio,  a  privilege  which  the
Testamentary  tutor  had  not.  The  person  to  whom
the  tutela  was  thus  transferred  was  called  Cessicius
Tutor.  If  the  Cessicius  Tutor  died,  or  sustained  a
Capitis  deminutio,  or  transferred  the  tutela  to
another  by  the  In  jure  cessio,  the  tutela  reverted
to  the  legitimus  tutor.  If  the  legitimus  tutor  died,
or  sustained  a  capitis  deminutio,  the  cessicia  be-
came extinguished.  Ulpian  adds  (Frag.  tit.  xi.
8.  8)  :  **  as  to  what  concerns  adgnati,  there  is  now
no  cessicia  tutela,  for  it  was  only  permitted  to
transfer  by  the  In  jure  cessio  the  tutela  of  females,
and  the  legitima  tutela  of  females  was  done  away
with  by  a  Lex  Claudia,  except  the  tutela  patro-
Jiorum."  The  power  of  the  legitimus  tutor  to
transfer  the  tutela,  is  explained  when  we  consider
what  was  his  relation   to  the  female.     [Testa-

MENTUM.]

The  tutela  of  a  tutor  was  terminated,  when  he


TUTOR.

was  removed  from  the  tutela  as  suspectus,  or  when
his  excusatio  was  allowed  to  be  justa  ;  but  in  both
of  these  cases,  a  new  tutor  would  be  necessarj'.
(Gaius,  i.  182.)

The  tutor,  as  already  observed,  might  be  re-
moved from  his  office,  if  he  Avas  misconducting
himself:  this  was  effected  by  the  Accusatio  sus-
pecti,  which  is  mentioned  in  the  Twelve  Tables.
(Gaius,  i.  182  ;  Dirksen,  Uebersicht,  dhc.der  Zwolf
Tafein,  599—604.)

The  Twelve  Tables  also  gave  the  pupillus  an
action  against  the  Tutor  in  respect  of  any  mis-
management of  his  property,  and  if  he  made
out  his  case,  he  was  entitled  to  double  the  amount
of  the  injury  done  to  his  property.  This  appears
to  be  the  action  which  in  the  Digest  is  called
Rationibus  distrahendis,  for  the  settlement  of  all
accounts  between  the  Tutor  and  his  Pupillus.
There  was  also  the  Judicium  tutelae,  which  com-
prehended the  Actio  tutelae  directa  and  Contraria,
and  like  the  Actio  distrahendis  rationibus  could
only  be  brought  when  the  Tutela  was  ended.  The
Actio  tutelae  directa  was  for  a  general  account  of
the  property  managed  by  the  Tutor,  and  for  its
delivery  to  the  pupillus  now  become  Pubes,  The
tutor  was  answerable  not  only  for  loss  through
dolus  mains,  but  for  loss  occasioned  by  Avant  of
proper  care.  This  was  an  action  Bonae  fidei  and
consequently  In  incertum  (Gaius,  iv.  62).  If  the
tutor  was  condemned  in  such  a  judicium,  the  con-
sequence was  Infamia.  [Inpamia.]  The  tutor
was  intitled  to  all  proper  allowances  in  respect  of
what  he  had  expended  or  done  during  his  manage-
ment of  the  property  of  the  pupillus.  The  Tutor
had  the  Actio  tutelae  contraria  against  the  pupillus
for  all  his  proper  costs  and  expenses  ;  and  he
might  have  also  a  Calumniae  judicium,  in  case  he
could  show  that  the  pupillus  had  brought  an  action
against  him  from  malicious  motives.

In  order  to  secure  the  proper  management  of  the
property  of  a  pupillus  or  of  a  person  who  was  In
curatione,  the  Praetor  required  the  Tutor  or  Cura-
tor to  give  security  ;  but  no  security  was  required
from  Testamentary  Tutores,  because  they  had  been
selected  by  the  testator  ;  nor,  generally,  from  Cu-
ratores  appointed  by  a  Consul,  Praetor  or  Praeses,
for  they  were  appointed  as  being  fit  persons.
(Gaius,  i.  199.)

The  Tutela  of  women  who  are  puberes,  requires
a  separate  consideration.  If  they  were  not  in
Potestas  or  In  Mauu,  yet  they  were  under  a
Tutela.

It  was  an  old  rule  of  Roman  Law  that  a  woman
could  do  nothing  "  sine  auctore,"  that  is  without  a
tutor  to  give  to  her  acts  a  complete  legal  character.
(Liv.  xxxiv.  2,  the  speech  of  Cato  for  the  Lex
Oppia.)  The  reasons  for  this  nile  are  given  by
Cicero  {pro  Murena,  c.  12),  by  Ulpian  {Frag.  tit.
11.  s.  1)  and  by  Gaius  (i.  190)  ;  but  Gaius  con-
siders the  usual  reasons  as  to  the  rule  being  founded
on  the  inferiority  of  the  sex,  as  unsatisfactory;  for
women  who  are  puberes  {per/ectae  aetatis)  manage
their  own  affairs,  and  in  some  cases  a  tutor  must
interpose  his  auctorifcis  {dicis  causa),  and  frequently
he  is  compelled  to  give  his  auctoritas  by  the  Praetor.
(Gaius,  i.  190.)  Ulpian  also  observes  {Frag.  tit.
11,  s.  25)  :  "  in  the  case  of  pupilli  and  pupillae,
tutores  both  manage  their  aifairs  and  give  their
auctoritas  {et  negotia  gerunt  et  auetoritatem  inter-
ponunt);  but  the  tutores  of  women  (mulieres,  that
is  women  who  are  puberes)  only  give  their  aucto-


TUTOR.

ritas/'  There  were  other  cases  also  in  which  the
capacity  of  a  Mulier  was  greater  than  that  of  a
Pupillus  or  Pupilla.  The  object  of  this  rule  seems
to  have  been  the  same  as  the  restriction  on  the
Testamentary  power  of  women,  for  her  Agnati
who  were  a  woman's  Legitimi  Tutores  were  in-
terested in  preventing  the  alienation  of  her  pro-
perty.

A  Mulier  might  have  a  Tutor  appointed  by  her
father's  Testament  ;  or  by  the  Testament  of  her
husband  in  whose  hand  she  was  (tutor  dativus).
She  might  also  receive  from  her  husband's  will  the
Tutoris  Optio  (tutor  optivus).  Women  who  had
no  testamentary  Tutor,  were  in  the  tutela  of  their
Agnati,  until  this  rule  of  law  was  repealed  by  a
Lex  Claudia,  which  Gains  (i.  157)  illustrates  as
follows :  '*  a  masculus  impubes  has  his  frater
pubes  or  his  patruus  for  his  tutor  ;  but  women
{faeminae)  cannot  have  such  a  tutor."  This  old
tutela  of  the  Twelve  Tables  {legitima  tutela)  and
that  of  manumissores  {patronorum  tutela)  could  be
transferred  by  the  In  jure  cessio,  while  that  of
pupilli  could  not,  "  being,"  as  Gains  observes,
"  not  onerous,  for  it  terminated  with  the  period  of
puberty."  But,  as  already  suggested,  there  were
other  reasons  why  the  Agnati  could  part  with  the
tutela,  which  in  the  case  of  Patroni  are  obvious.
The  tutela  of  Patroni  was  not  included  within  the
Lex  Claudia.  The  Tutela  fiduciaria  was  ap-
parently a  device  of  the  lawyers  for  releasing  a
woman  from  the  tutela  legitima  f  Cic.  pro  Murena,
c.  12)  ;  though  it  seems  to  have  been  retained,
after  the  passing  of  the  Lex  Claudia,  which  took
away  the  tutela  of  Agnati  over  women,  as  a  general
mode  by  which  a  woman  changed  her  Tutor.
(Gaius,  i.  1 1 5.)  To  effect  this,  the  woman  made
a  "  coemptio  fiduciae  causa  ;  "  she  was  then  re-
mancipated  by  the  coemptionator  to  some  person
of  her  own  choice :  this  person  manumitted  her  by
Vindicta,  and  thus  became  her  Tutor  fiduciarius.
Thus  the  woman  passed  from  her  own  familia  to
another,  and  her  Agnati  lost  all  claims  upon  her
property,  and  her  Tutor  fiduciarius  might  be  com-
pelled by  the  Praetor  to  give  his  auctoritas  to  her
acts.     (Gaius,  i.  190,  ii.  122.)

A  tutor  dativus  was  given  to  women  under  the
Lex  Atilia,  when  there  was  no  tutor  ;  and  in  other
cases  which  have  been  already  mentioned.  (Gaius,
i.  1 73,  &c.;  Ulp.  Froff.  tit.  11.)  The  Vestal  Virgins
were  exempt  from  tutela  ;  and  both  Ingenuae  and
Libertinae  were  exempted  from  tutela  by  the  Jus
Liberorum.  (Gaius,  i.  145,  194.)  Octavia,  the
sister  of  Caesar  Octavianus,  and  his  wife  Livia,
were  released  from  Tutela  by  a  special  enactment.
(Dion  Cass.  xlix.  38.)  The  tutela  of  feminae
was  determined  by  the  death  of  the  Tutor,  or  that
of  the  woman  ;  and  by  her  acquiring  the  Jus
Liberorum,  either  by  bearing  children,  or  from  the
Imperial  favour.  The  abdicatio  of  the  Tutor,  and
the  In  jure  cessio  (so  long  as  the  In  jure  cessio
was  in  use)  merely  eflfected  a  change  of  Tutor.

Mulieres  differed  from  pupilli  and  pupillae  in
having  a  capacity  to  manage  their  affairs,  and  only
requiring  in  certain  cases  the  Auctoritas  of  a  Tutor.
If  the  woman  was  in  the  legitima  tutela  of  patroni
or  parentes,  the  Tutores  could  not  be  compelled,
except  in  certain  very  special  cases,  to  give  their
auctoritas  to  acts  which  tended  to  deprive  them  of
the  woman's  property,  or  to  diminish  it  before  it
might  come  to  their  hands.  (Gaius,  192.)  Other
Tutores  could  be  compelled  to  give  their  auctoritas.


TUTOR.


1179


The  special  cases  in  which  the  auctoritas  of  a  Tutor
was  required  were,  if  the  woman  had  to  sue  "  lege,**
or  in  a  legitimum  judicium,  if  she  was  going  to  bind
herself  by  a  contract,  if  she  was  doing  any  Civil
act,  or  permitting  her  freedwoman  to  be  in  contu-
bemium  with  the  slave  of  another  person,  or  alien-
ating a  Res  Mancipi.  Among  Civil  Acts  {civilia
negoiia)  was  the  making  of  a  Testament,  the  rules
as  to  which  are  stated  in  the  article  Testa-
MENTUM.  Libertae  could  not  make  a  will  with-
out the  consent  of  their  Patroni,  for  the  will  was
an  act  which  deprived  the  Patron  of  his  rights
(Gaius,  iii.  43)  as  being  a  Legitimus  tutor.  Gaius
mentions  a  Rescript  of  Antoninus,  by  which  those
who  claimed  the  bonorum  possessio  secundum  ta-
bulas  non  jure  factas,  could  maintain  their  right
against  those  who  claimed  it  ab  intestato.  He  adds,
this  Rescript  certainly  applies  to  the  wills  of  males,
and  also  of  feminae  who  had  not  performed  the
ceremony  of  Mancipatio  or  Nuncupatio  ;  but  he
does  not  decide  whether  it  applies  to  the  testa-
ments of  women  made  without  the  auctoritas  of  a
tutor  ;  and  by  tutor  he  means  not  those  who  ex-
ercised the  legitima  tutela  of  parents  or  Patroni ;
but  Tutors  of  the  other  kind  {alteritis  generis^  com-
pare ii.  122  and  i.  194,  195)  who  could  be  com-
pelled to  give  their  auctoritas.  It  would  be  a  fair
conclusion,  however,  that  a  woman's  will  made
without  the  auctoritas  of  such  tutores,  ought  to  be
valid  under  the  Rescript.

A  payment  made  to  a  mulier  was  a  release  to
the  debtor,  for  a  woman  could  part  with  Res  nee
Mancipi  without  the  auctoritas  of  a  Tutor :  if,
however,  she  did  not  receive  the  money,  but  af-
fected to  release  the  debtor  by  acceptilatio,  this  was
not  a  valid  release  to  him.  (Cic.  Top.  11  ;  Gaius,
ii.  83,  85,  iii.  171.)  She  could  not  manumit
without  the  auctoritas  of  a  tutor.  (Ulp.  Frag,  tit  i.
s.  17;  compare  Cic.  pro  M.  Coel.  c.  29.)  Gaius  (ii.
47)  states  that  no  alienation  of  a  Res  Mancipi
by  a  mulier  in  agnatorum  tutela  was  valid  unless
it  was  delivered  with  the  auctoritas  of  a  Tutor,
which  he  expresses  by  saying  that  her  Res  Man-
cipi could  not  otherwise  be  the  object  of  Usucapion,
and  that  this  was  a  provision  of  the  Twelve  Tables
(ii.  47).  In  other  cases,  if  a  Res  Mancipi  was
transferred  by  tradition,  the  purchaser  acquired  the
Quiritarian  ownership  by  Usucapion  [Usucapio];
but  in  the  case  of  a  woman's  Res  Mancipi,  the
auctoritas  of  the  Tutor  was  required  in  order  that
Usucapion  might  be  effected.  In  another  passage
(ii.  80)  Gaius  observes  that  a  woman  cannot
alienate  her  Res  Mancipi  without  the  auctoritas  of
her  tutor,  which  means  that  the  formal  act  of
mancipatio  is  null  without  his  auctoritas  ;  and  such
act  could  not  operate  as  a  traditio  for  want  of  his
auctoritas  as  appears  from  the  other  passage  (ii.  47).
The  passage  of  Cicero  (pro  Flacco,  c.  34)  is  in  ac-
cordance with  Gaius;  but  another  (ad  Att.  i.  5)  is
expressed  so  vaguely,  that  though  the  explanation
is  generally  supposed  to  be  clear,  it  seems  ex-
ceedingly doubtful,  if  it  can  be  rightly  understood.
The  possibility  of  Uusucapion,  when  there  was  the
auctoritas  of  the  Tutor,  appears  from  Gaius  ;  but
it  does  not  appear  why  Cicero  should  deny,  gene-
rally, the  possibility  of  Usucapion  of  a  woman's
property,  when  she  was  in  Legitima  Tutela.  The
passage,  however,  is  perfectly  intelligible  on  the
supposition  of  there  having  been  a  transfer  without
the  auctoritas  of  a  Tutor,  and  on  the  further  sup-
position of  Cicero  thinking  it  unnecessary  to  state


1180


TYMPANUM.


the  particular  facts  of  a  case  which  must  have  been
known  to  Atticus.  (See  Casaubon's  note  on  Cic.
ad  Att.  i.  5.)

The  auctoritas  of  a  Tutor  was  not  required  in
the  case  of  any  Obligatio  by  which  the  woman's
condition  was  improved  ;  but  it  was  necessary  in
cases  where  the  woman  became  bound.  (Gains,  i.
]92,  iii.  108  ;  Ulp.  Frag.  tit.  11.  s.  27;  Cic.  joro
Caecin.  23.)  If  the  woman  wished  to  promise  a
Dos,  the  auctoritas  of  a  Tutor  was  necessary.
(Cic.  pro  Flacc.  35.)  By  the  Lex  Julia,  if  a
woman  was  in  the  legitima  tutela  of  a  pupillus,
she  might  apply  to  the  Praetor  Urbanus  for  a
Tutor  who  should  give  the  necessary  auctoritas  in
the  case  of  a  Dos  constituenda.  (Gaius,  i.  178  ;
Ulp.  Frag.  11.  tit.  20.)  As  a  woman  could  alienate
Res  nee  mancipi  without  the  consent  of  a  Tutor,
she  could  contract  an  obligation  by  lending  money,
for  by  delivery  the  money  became  the  property  of
the  receiver.  A  senatusconsultum  allowed  a  wo-
man to  apply  for  a  Tutor  in  the  absence  of  her
Tutor,  unless  the  Tutor  was  a  Patronus  ;  if  he  was
a  Patronus,  the  woman  could  only  apply  for  a
Tutor  in  order  to  have  his  auctoritas  for  taking
possession  of  an  hereditas  (ad  hereditatem  adeun-
dam)  or  contracting  a  marriage.

The  Tutela  of  a  woman  was  terminated  by  the
death  of  the  Tutor  or  that  of  the  woman  ;  by  a
marriage  by  which  she  came  in  manum  viri  ;  by
the  privilege  of  children  {jus  liberorum)  ;  by  abdi-
catio,  and  also  by  the  in  jure  cessio,  so  long  as  the
Agnatorum  tutela  was  in  use  :  but  in  these  two  last
cases  there  was  only  a  change  of  Tutor.

A  woman  had  no  right  of  action  against  her
Tutor  in  respect  of  his  Tutela,  for  he  had  not  the
Negotiorura  gestio,  or  administration  of  her  pro-
perty, but  only  interposed  his  Auctoritas.  (Gaius,
L191.)

The  tutela  mulierum  existed  at  least  as  late  as
Diocletian,  a.  d.  293  {Vat.  Frag.  §  325).  There
is  no  trace  of  it  in  the  Code  of  Theodosius,  or  in
the  legislation  of  Justinian.

(The  most  recent  and  the  most  complete  work  on
the  Roman  Tutela  is  said  to  be  by  RudorfF  {Das
Redd  der  Vormundsclvaft.,  1832 — 1834),  the  sub-
stance of  which  appears  to  be  given  by  Rein,  Das
Rom.  Privatrecht,  p.  239,  &c.;  Gaius,  i.  142—200;
Ulp.  Fraq.  xi.  xii. ;  Inst.  1.  tit.  13—26  ;  Dig.  26
and  27;  Cod.  5.  tit.  28—75.)  [G.  L.]

TU'TULUS  was  the  name  given  to  a  pile  of
hair  on  a  woman's  head.  Great  pains  were  taken
by  the  Roman  ladies  to  have  this  part  of  the  hair
dressed  in  the  prevailing  fashion,  whence  we  read
in  an  inscription  of  an  ornatriai  a  tiitulo.  (Gruter,
579.  3.)  Sometimes  the  hair  was  piled  up  to  an
enormous  height.  (Lucan,  ii.  358  ;  Juv.  vi.  503  ;
Stat.  Silv.  i.  2.  114.)  The  Tutulus  seems  to  have
resembled  very  much  the  Greek  K6pviJ.6os,  of  which
a  representation  is  given  in  the  first  woodcut  on
p.  329,  a.

The  Flaminica  always  wore  a  Tutulus,  which
was  formed  by  having  the  hair  plaited  up  with  a
purple  band  in  a  conical  form.     (Festus,  *.  v.)

TY'MPANUM  {rviXTravov\  a  small  drum  car-
ried in  the  hand.  Of  these,  some  resembled  in  all
respects  a  modern  tambourine  with  bells.  Others
presented  a  flat  circular  disk  on  the  upper  surface
and  swelled  out  beneath  like  a  kettledrum,  a  sha})e
which  appears  to  be  indicated  by  Pliny  when  he
describes  a  particular  class  of  pearls  in  the  follow-
ing terms ;  "  Quibus  una  tantum  est  facies,  et  ab


TYMPANUM.

ea  rotunditas,  aversis  planities,  ob  id  tympania
vocantur."  {H.  N.  ix.  54.)  Both  forms  are  repre-
sented in  the  cuts  below.  That  upon  the  left  is
from  a  painting  found  at  Pompeii  {Mus.  Borbon.
tom.  vii.  tav.  37),  that  on  the  right  from  a  fictile
vase  (Millin,  Peintures  de  Vases  Antiqties,  pi,  56),
and  hero  the  convexity  on  the  under  side  is  dis-
tinctly seen.      Tympana  were   covered  with  the


hides  of  oxen  (Ovid.  Fast.  iv.  342  ;  Stat.  T/ieh.  ii.
78)  or  of  asses  (Phaedr.  iii.  20.  4),  were  beaten
(Suet.  Aug.  68)  with  a  stick  (Phaedr.  I.  c.)  or
with  the  hand  (Ovid.  Met.  iv.  30  ;  see  cuts),  and
were  much  employed  in  all  wild  enthusiastic  reli-
gious rites  (Aristoph.  Lysistr.  i.  387),  especially
the  orgies  of  Bacchus  and  of  Cybele  (Catull.
Ixiv.  262;  Claud.  deCons.  Stilich.  iii.  365;  Lucret.
ii.  618  ;  Catull.  Ixiii.  8;  Virg.  Aen.  ix.  619;  Claud.
Eutrop.  i.  278  ;  compare  Lobeck,  Aglaophamus,
pp.  630,  652),  and  hence  Plautus  (True.  ii.  7.  49)
characterises  an  eflfeminate  coxcomb  as  "  Moechura
malacum,  cincinnatum,  umbraticolam,  tympanotri-
bam."  According  to  Justin  (xli.  2)  they  were
used  by  the  Parthians  in  war  to  give  the  signal  for
the  onset.

2.  A  solid  wheel  without  spokes  for  heavy
waggons  (Virg.  Georg.  iv.  444),  such  as  is  shown
in  the  cut  on  page  923.  These  are  to  this  day
common  in  the  rude  carts  of  southern  Italy  and
Greece,  and  Sir  C.  Fellows  {Excursions  in  Asia
Minor.,  p.  72),  from  whose  work  the  figure  below
is  copied,  found  them  attached  to  the  farm  vehicles
of  Mysia.  "The  wheels  are  of  solid  blocks  of
wood,  or  thick  planks,  generally  three,  held  to-
gether by  an  iron  hoop  or  tire  ;  a  loud  creaking
noise  is  made  by  the  friction  of  the  galled  axle,"
a  satisfactory  commentary  on  the  "stridentia
plaustra"  of  Virgil  {Georg.  iii.  536).


3.  Hence,  wheels  of  various  kinds,  a  sort  of
crane  worked  by  a  wheel  for  raising  weights
(Lucret.  iv.  903  ;  Vitruv.  x.  4  ;  Antlia),  a  wheel
for  drawing  water  (Vitruv.  x.  14),  a  solid  toothed
wheel  forming  part  of  the  machinery  of  a  mill
(Vitruv.  X.  9,  10),  and  the  like.

4.  An  ancient  name  for  round  plates  or  chargers,
such  as  were  afterwards  called  la7iees  and  staterae.
(Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii.  52.)

5.  An  architectural  term  signifying  the  flat  sur-
face or  space  within  a  pediment,  and  also  the
sq^uaro  panel  of  a  door.  (Vitruv.  iii.  3,  iv.  6.)


TYRANNUS.

6.  A  wooden  cudgel  for  beating  malefactors,  and
also  a  beating  post  to  which  they  were  tied  when
flogged  ;  hence  the  Greek  verbs  TvfjLTravi(eLV  and
airoTvixvavi^eiv  are  formed.  (Schol.  ad  Aristoph.
Plut.  476  ;  St.  Paul,^/).  to  Hebrews^  xi.  35  ;  Pol-
lux, viii.  70.)  [  W.  R.]

TYPUS  (tuttos),  which  properly  means  a  blow^
and  hence  tlie  effect  of  a  blow,  and  specifically  a
7nark  or  impress  made  by  a  blow,  is  applied  in  the
arts  to  any  die  or  mould,  and  to  any  figure  formed
by  striking  from  a  die,  or  by  casting  in  a  mould,
or  even  by  cutting,  as  a  cameo  or  intaglio,  and,
more  generally,  to  any  figure  whatever,  as  being
the  type  or  facsimile  of  the  thing  represented  by  it.
(See  the  Lexicons.)  By  the  typi  which  Cicero
(ad  Att.  i.  10)  commissions  Atticus  to  obtain  for
him  to  work  into  the  plastering  of  his  ainum,  he
probably  means  reliefs  of  any  sort.  The  difterent
specific  meanings  included  in  the  word  are  more
exactly  expressed  by  certain  compounds,  such  as
dj/T^TUTToy,  the  copy  or  impress  of  a  tvttos,  a  die  or
mould  ;  evrviros  and  eVrvTrw/ia,  a  szcnken  pattern  or
intaglio;  Iktuttos,  a  relief  oi  any  kind,  especially  a
cameo,  and,  more  specifically,  a  high-relief  as  op-
posed to  iTp6(TrvKos,  a  low-relief)  Comp.  Fictile,
p.  532,  a  ;  Forma.  [P.  S.]

TYRANNUS  {Tvpavvosi).  In  the  heroic  age
all  the  governments  in  Greece  were  monarchical,
the  king  uniting  in  himself  the  functions  of  the
priest,  the  judge,  and  military  chief.  These  weie
the  iraTpiKol  fiacriKeiai  of  Thucydides.  (i.  1 3.)  In
the  first  two  or  three  centuries  following  the  Trojan
war  various  causes  were  at  work,  which  led  to  the
abolition,  or  at  least  to  the  limitation,  of  the  kingly
power.  Emigrations,  extinctions  of  families,  disas-
ters in  war,  civil  dissensions,  may  be  reckoned
among  these  causes.  Hereditary  monarchies  be-
came elective  ;  the  different  functions  of  the  king
Avere  distributed  ;  he  was  called  &pxoi}v,  Kdcrfios,
or  TTpvTavis,  instead  of  ^aaiXevs,  and  his  character
was  changed  no  less  than  his  name.  Noble  and
wealthy  families  began  to  be  considered  on  a  foot-
ing of  equality  with  royalty  ;  and  thus  in  process
of  time  sprang  up  oligarchies  or  aristocracies,  which
most  of  the  governments  that  succeeded  the  ancient
monarchies  were  in  point  of  fact,  though  not  as
yet  called  by  such  names.  These  oligarchies  did
not  possess  the  elements  of  social  happiness  or  sta-
bility. The  principal  families  contended  with  each
other  for  the  greatest  share  of  power,  and  were
only  unanimous  in  disregarding  the  rights  of  those
whose  station  was  beneath  their  own.  The  people,
oppressed  by  the  privileged  classes,  began  to  regret
the  loss  of  their  old  paternal  form  of  government ;
and  were  ready  to  assist  any  one  who  would  at-
tempt to  restore  it.  Thus  were  opportunities  af-
forded to  ambitious  and  designing  men  to  raise
themselves,  by  starting  up  as  the  champions  of
popular  right.  Discontented  nobles  Avere  soon
found  to  prosecute  schemes  of  this  sort,  and  they
had  a  greater  chance  of  success,  if  descended  from
the  ancient  royal  family.  Peisistratus  is  an  ex-
ample ;  he  was  the  more  acceptable  to  the  people
of  Athens,  as  being  a  descendant  of  the  family  of
Codrus.  (Herod,  v.  65.)  Thus  in  many  cities
arose  that  species  of  monarchy  which  the  Greeks
called  Tvpavpis,  which  meant  only  a  despotism,  or
irresponsible  dominion  of  one  man  ;  and  which
frequently  was  nothing  more  than  a  revival  of  the
ancient  government,  and,  though  unaccompanied
with  any  recognized  hereditary  title,  or  the  reve  •


TYRANNUS.  1181

rence  attached  to  old  name  and  long  prescription,
was  hailed  by  the  lower  orders  of  people  as  a  good
exchange,  after  suffering  under  the  domination  of
the  oligarchy.  All  tyrannies,  however,  were  not
so  acceptable  to  the  majority  ;  and  sometimes  we
find  the  nobles  concurring  in  the  elevation  of  a
despot,  to  further  their  own  interests.  Thus  the
Syracusan  Gamori,  who  had  been  expelled  by  the
populace,  on  receiving  the  protection  of  Gelon,
sovereign  of  Gela  and  Camarina,  enabled  him  to
take  possession  of  Syracuse,  and  esfciblish  his  king-
dom there.  (Herod,  vii.  154,  155.)  Sometimes
the  conflicting  parties  in  the  state,  by  mutual  con-
sent, chose  some  eminent  man,  in  whom  they  had
confidence,  to  reconcile  their  dissensions  ;  investing
him  with  a  sort  of  dictatorial  power  for  that  pur-
pose, either  for  a  limited  period  or  otherwise.
Such  a  person  they  called  alarvfivfirris.     [Aesvm-

NETES.]

A  similar  authority  was  conferred  upon  Solon,
when  Athens  was  torn  by  the  contending  factions
of  the  AiuKpioi,  neStaloi,  and  UapaXoi,  and  he
was  requested  to  act  as  mediator  between  them.
Solon  was  descended  from  Codrus,  and  some  of
his  friends  wished  him  to  assume  the  sovereignty ;
this  he  refused  to  do,  but,  taking  the  constitu-
tional title  of  Archon,  framed  his  celebrated  form
of  polity  and  code  of  laws.  (Herod,  i.  29  ;  Plut.
Solon,  c.  13,  &c. ;  Schomann,  Antiq.  Jur.  pM.  Gr.
p.  173.)  The  legislative  powers  conferred  upon
Draco,  Zaleucus,  and  Charondas,  were  of  a  similar
kind,  investing  them  with  a  temporary  dictator-
ship.

The  ripavvos  must  be  distinguished,  on  the  one
hand,  from  the  atVu/xj'TjTTjs,  inasmuch  as  he  was
not  elected  by  general  consent,  but  commonly  owed
his  elevation  to  some  coup  d''itat,  some  violent
movement  or  stratagem,  such  as  the  creation  of  a
body-guard  for  him  by  the  people,  or  the  seizure
of  the  citadel  (Herod,  i.  59  ;  Thucyd.  i.  126)  ;
and  on  the  other  hand,  from  the  ancient  king,
whose  right  depended,  not  on  usurpation,  but  on
inheritance  and  traditionary  acknowledgment.  The
power  of  a  king  might  be  more  absolute  than  that
of  a  tyrant;  as  Pheidon  of  Argos  is  said  to  have
made  the  royal  prerogative  greater  than  it  was
under  his  predecessors  ;  yet  he  was  still  regarded
as  a  king  ;  for  the  difference  between  the  two
names  depended  on  title  and  origin,  and  not  on
the  manner  in  which  the  power  was  exercised.
(Aristot.  Polit.  v.  8.)  The  name  of  tyrant  was
originally  so  far  from  denoting  a  person  who  abused
his  power,  or  treated  his  subjects  with  cnielty,
that  Peisistratus  is  praised  by  Thucydides  (vi.  54)
for  the  moderation  of  his  government ;  and  He-
rodotus says,  he  governed  oUtc  rifxas  tos  iovTas
avurapd^as,  oijTe  ^ea-fiia  /xiTaWd^as,  4irl  re  roiai
KaTearewcri  eve/xe  t)]V  v6Kiv  Kocr/xewv  KaXas  T€
Kal  eS.  (i.  59.)  Therefore  we  find  the  words
^aaiKevs  and  rvpavvos  used  promiscuously  by  the
Attic  tragedians  passim  (see  the  Argument  of  the
Oedipus  Tyrannus)  ;  and  even  by  prose  authors.
Thus  Herodotus  calls  the  Lydian  Candaules  rv-
pavvos  (i.  7),  the  kingdom  of  Macedonia  rvpavuls
(viii.  137),  and  Periander  of  Corinth  fiaaiXevs.
(iii.  52  ;  compare  v.  27,  92.)  Afterwards,  when
tyrants  themselves  had  become  odious,  the  name
also  grew  to  be  a  word  of  reproach,  just  as  rex
did  among  the  Romans.  ( Wachsmuth,  Hellen.  Alt.
vol.  i.  pt.  i.  pp.  279— 288, 1st  ed.  ;  Thirlwall,  Hist,
of  Greece,  vol.  i.  pp.  401,  404.)


1182


TYRANNUS.


Among  the  early  tyrants  of  Greece  those  most
■worthy  of  mention  are :  —  Cleisthenes  of  Sicyon,
grandfather  of  the  Athenian  Cleisthenes,  in  whose
family  the  government  continued  for  a  century
since  its  establishment  by  Orthagoras,  about  B.  c.
672  (Herod,  v.  67,  ^Q)  ;  Cypselus  of  Corinth,  who
expelled  the  Bacchiadae,  b.  c.  GbQ^  and  his  son
Periander,  both  remarkable  for  their  cruelty  ;  their
dynasty  lasted  between  seventy  and  eighty  years
(Herod,  v.  92)  ;  Procles  of  Epidaurus  (Herod,  iii.
50,  52)  ;  Pantaleon  of  Pisa,  who  celebrated  the
thirty- fourth  Olympiad,  depriving  the  Eleans  of
the  presidency  (Pausan.  vi.  21,  22)  ;  Theagenes
of  Megara,  father-in-law  to  Cylon  the  Athenian
(Thucyd.  i.  126)  ;  Peisistratus,  whose  sons  were
the  last  of  the  early  tyrants  on  the  Grecian  conti-
nent.

In  Sicily,  where  tyranny  most  flourished,  the
principal  were  Phalaris  of  Agrigentum,  who  es-
tablished his  power  in  B.  c.  568,  concerning  whose
supposed  epistles  Bentley  wrote  his  famous  treatise  ;
Theron  of  Agrigentum  ;  Gelon,  already  mentioned,
who,  in  conjunction  with  Theron,  defeated  Hamil-
car  the  Carthaginian,  on  the  same  day  on  which
the  battle  of  Salamis  was  fought  ;  and  Hiero,  his
brother :  the  last  three  celebrated  by  Pindar.  (See
Herod,  vii.  156,  165,  166.)  In  Grecian  Italy  we
may  mention  Anaxilaus  of  Rhegium,  who  reigned
B.C.  496  (Herod,  vi.  23,  vii.  165);  Cleinias  of
Croton,  who  rose  after  the  dissolution  of  the  Py-
thagorean league  ;  (as  to  which  see  Polyb.  ii.  39  ;
Athen.  xii.  p.  522,  xiv.  p.  623  ;  Thirlwall,  Id.
vol.  ii.  p.  154.)  The  following  also  are  worthy
of  notice  :  Polycrates  of  Samos  (Herod,  iii.  39,
5Q,  120,  125;  Thucyd.  i.  13);  Lygdamis  of
Naxos  (Herod,  i.  61,  64)  ;  Histiaeus  and  Aris-
tagoras  of  Miletus.  (Herod,  iv.  137,  v.  23,  30,  37,
vi.  29.)  Perhaps  the  last  mentioned  can  hardly
be  classed  among  the  Greek  tyrants,  as  they  were
connected  with  the  Persian  monarchy.  (Wachs-
muth.  Id.  vol.  i.  pt.  i.  p.  274.)

The  general  characteristics  of  a  tyranny  were,
that  it  was  bound  by  no  laws,  and  had  no  recog-
nized limitation  to  its  authority,  however  it  might
be  restrained  in  practice  by  the  good  disposition  of
the  tyrant  himself,  or  by  fear,  or  by  the  spirit  of  the
age.  It  was  commonly  most  odious  to  the  wealthy
and  noble,  whom  the  tyrant  looked  upon  with
jealousy  as  a  check  upon  his  power,  and  whom  he
often  sought  to  get  rid  of  by  sending  them  into
exile  or  putting  them  to  death.  The  advice  given
by  Thrasybulus  of  Miletus  to  Periander  affords  an
apt  illustration  of  this.  (Herod,  v.  92.)  The  tyrant
usually  kept  a  body-guard  of  foreign  mercenaries,
by  aid  of  whom  he  controlled  the  people  at  home  ;
but  he  seldom  ventured  to  make  war,  for  fear  of
giving  an  opportunity  to  his  subjects  to  revolt.
The  Sicilian  sovereigns  form  an  exception  to  this
observation.  (Thucyd.  i.  17.)  He  was  averse  to  a
large  congregation  of  men  in  the  town,  and  en-
deavoured to  find  rustic  employments  for  the  popu-
lace ;  but  was  not  unwilling  to  indulge  them  with
shows  and  amusements.  A  few  of  the  better  sort
cultivated  literature  and  the  arts,  adorned  their
city  with  handsome  buildings,  and  even  passed  good
laws.  Thus,  Peisistratus  commenced  building  the
splendid  temple  of  Jupiter  Olympus,  laid  out  the
garden  of  the  Lyceum,  collected  the  Homeric
poems,  and  is  said  to  have  written  poetry  himself.
Tribute  was  imposed  on  the  people,  to  raise  a
revenue  for  the  fyratit,  to  pay  his  mercenaries,  and


TYRANNIDOS  GRAPHE.

maintain  his  state.  Peisistratus  had  the  tithe  of
land,  which  his  sons  reduced  to  the  twentieth.
[Telos.]

The  causes  which  led  to  the  decline  of  tyranny
among  the  Greeks  were  partly  the  degeneracy  of
the  tyrants  themselves,  corrupted  by  power,  indo-
lence, flattery,  and  bad  education  ;  for  even  where
the  father  set  a  good  example,  it  was  seldom  fol-
lowed by  the  son  ;  partly  the  cruelties  and  excesses
of  particular  men,  which  brought  them  all  into
disrepute  ;  and  partly  the  growing  spirit  of  inquiry
among  the  Greek  people,  who  began  to  speculate
upon  political  theories,  and  soon  became  discon-
tented with  a  form  of  government,  which  had  no-
thing in  theory,  and  little  in  practice,  to  recommend
it.  Few  dynasties  lasted  beyond  the  third  gene-
ration. Most  of  the  tyrannies,  which  flourished
before  the  Persian  war,  are  said  to  have  been  over-
thrown by  the  exertions  of  Sparta,  jealous  probably
of  any  innovation  upon  the  old  Doric  constitution,
especially  of  any  tendency  to  ameliorate  the  con-
dition of  the  Perioeci,  and  anxious  to  extend  her
own  influence  over  the  states  of  Greece  by  means
of  the  benefits  which  she  conferred.  (Thucyd.  i.
18.)  Upon  the  fall  of  tyranny,  the  various  repub-
lican forms  of  government  were  established,  the
Dorian  states  generally  favouring  oligarchy,  the
Ionian  democrary.  (Wachsmuth,  vol.  i.  pt.  i.  p.
289  ;  Schomann,  Id.  pp.  84,  88—91.)

As  we  cannot  in  this  article  pursue  any  historical
narrative,  we  will  shortly  refer  to  the  revival  of
tyranny  in  some  of  the  Grecian  states  after  the  end
of  the  Peloponnesian  war.  In  Thessaly  Jason  of
Pherae  raised  himself,  under  the  title  of  TaySs,  B.  c
374,  to  the  virtual  sovereignty  of  his  native  city,
and  exercised  a  most  extensive  sway  over  most  of
the  Thessalian  states,  but  this  power  ceased  with
Lycophron,  B.  c.  353.  [Tagus.]  In  Sicily,  the
comiption  of  the  Syracusans,  their  intestine  dis-
cords, and  the  fear  of  the  Carthaginian  invaders,
led  to  the  appointment  of  Dionysius  to  the  chief
military  command,  with  unlimited  powers  ;  by
means  of  which  he  raised  himself  to  the  throne,
B.  c.  406,  and  reigned  for  38  years,  leaving  his  son
to  succeed  him.  The  younger  Dionysius,  far  in-
ferior in  every  respect  to  his  father,  was  expelled
by  Dion,  afterwards  regained  the  throne,  and  was
again  expelled  by  Tiraoleon,  who  restored  liberty
to  the  various  states  of  Sicily.  (For  their  history
the  reader  is  referred  to  Xenoph.  Hell.  ii.  2.  §  24  ;
Diod.  xiv.  7,  46,  66,  72,  109,  xv.  73,  74,  xvi.  5,
16,  36,  68,  69,  &c.  ;  Plut.  Dion,  and  Timol.  ;
Wachsmuth,  vol.  i.  pt.  ii.  pp.  316—326.)  ^  With
respect  to  the  dynasty  of  the  Archaenactidae  in
the  Cimmerian  Bosporus,  and  some  of  the  towns
on  the  coast  of  the  Euxine,  see  Wachsmuth,  vol.  i.
pt.  ii.  p.  329.  Lastly,  we  may  notice  Evagoras
of  Cyprus,  who  is  panegyrized  by  Isocrates  ;  Plu-
tarch of  Eretria,  Callias  and  Taurosthenes  of
Chalcis,  who  were  partisans  of  Philip  against  the
Athenians.  (Plut.  Pkoc.  12  ;  Isocr.  Evag.;  Wachs-
muth, vol.  i.  pt.  ii.  p.  330.)  The  persons  com-
monly called  the  tidriy  tyrants  at  Athens,  who  ob-
tained the  supreme  power  at  the  close  of  the  Pelo-
ponnesian war,  do  not  fall  within  the  scope  of  the
present  subject.  With  respect  to  the  Athenian
laws  against  tyranny,  and  the  general  feelings  of
the  people,  see  Prodosia.  [C.  R.  K.J

TYRANNIDOS  GRAPHE  {rvpavvihos  ypa-
<pi]).     [Prodosia.]


VALLUM.


U.  V.


VAS.


1183


VACA'NTIA  BONA.     [Bona  Vacantia.]

VACATIO.     [ExERCiTus,  p.  499.]

VADIMO'NIUM.     [Actio,  p.  11  ;  Praes.]

VAGFNA.     [Gladius.]

VALLUM,  a  term  applied  either  to  the  whole
or  a  portion  of  the  fortifications  of  a  Roman  camp.
It  is  derived  from  vallas  (a  stake),  and  properly
means  the  palisade  which  ran  along  the  outer  edge
of  the  top  of  the  agger,  but  it  very  frequently  in-
cludes the  agger  also.  The  vallum^  in  the  latter
sense,  together  with  the  fossa  or  ditch  which  sur-
rounded the  camp  outside  of  the  vallum^  formed  a
complete  fortification.     [Agger.]

The  valli  (xapa/ces),  of  which  the  vallum,  in  the
former  and  more  limited  sense,  was  composed,  are
described  by  Polybius  (xviii.  i.  1,  Excerpt.  Antiq.
xvii.  14)  and  Livy  (xxxiii.  5),  who  make  a  com-
parison between  the  vallum  of  the  Greeks  and  that
of  the  Romans,  very  much  to  the  advantage  of  the
latter.  Both  used  for  valli  young  trees  or  arms  of
larger  trees,  with  the  side  branches  on  them  ;  but
the  valli  of  the  Greeks  were  much  larger  and  had
more  branches  than  those  of  the  Romans,  which
had  either  two  or  three,  or  at  the  most  four
branches,  and  these  generally  on  the  same  side.
The  Greeks  placed  their  valli  in  the  agger  at  con-
siderable intervals,  the  spaces  between  them  being
filled  up  by  the  branches  ;  the  Romans  fixed  theirs
close  together,  and  made  the  branches  interlace,
and  sharpened  their  points  carefully.  Hence  the
Greek  vallus  could  easily  be  taken  hold  of  by  its
large  branches  and  pulled  from  its  place,  and  when
it  was  removed  a  large  opening  was  left  in  the
vallum.  The  Roman  vallus,  on  the  contrary,  pre-
sented no  convenient  handle,  required  very  great
force  to  pull  it  down,  and  even  if  removed  left  a
very  small  opening.  The  Greek  valli  were  cut  on
the  spot  ;  the  Romans  prepared  theirs  beforehand,
and  each  soldier  carried  three  or  four  of  them  when
on  a  march.  (Polyb.  I.e.;  Virg.  Georg.  iii.  346,
347  ;  Cic.  Tusc.  ii.  16.)  They  were  made  of  any
strong  wood,  but  oak  was  preferred.

The  word  vallus  is  sometimes  used  as  equivalent
to  vallum.  (Caesar,  Bell.  Civ.  iii.  63.)

A  fortification  like  the  Roman  vallum  was  used
by  the  Greeks  at  a  very  early  period.  (Hom.  //.
ix.  349,  350.)

Varro's  etymology  of  the  word  is  not  worth
much  {L.L.  V.  117,  ed.  Miiller).

In  the  operations  of  a  siege,  when  the  place
could  not  be  taken  by  storm,  and  it  became  neces-
sary to  establish  a  blockade,  this  was  done  by
drawing  defences  similar  to  those  of  a  camp  round
the  town,  which  was  then  said  to  be  circumvalla-
tiim.  Such  a  circumvallation,  besides  cutting  off
all  communication  between  the  town  and  the  sur-
rounding country,  formed  a  defence  against  the
sallies  of  the  besieged.  There  was  often  a  double
line  of  fortifications,  the  inner  against  the  town,
and  the  outer  against  a  force  that  might  attempt  to
raise  the  siege.  In  this  case  the  army  was  en-
camped between  the  two  lines  of  works.

This  kind  of  circumvallation,  which  the  Greeks
called  OTTOTetxi'^AKJs  and  irepireixio'lJ-^s,  Avas  em-
ployed by  the  Peloponnesians  in  the  siege  of  Pla-
taeae.  (Tnucyd.  ii.  78,  iii.  20—23.)  Their  lines
consisted  of  two  walls  (apparently  of  turf)  at  the
distance  of  16  feet,  which  surrounded  the  city  in


the  form  of  a  circle.  Between  the  walls  were  the
huts  of  the  besiegers.  The  walls  had  battlements
(eVaAleis),  and  at  every  tenth  battlement  was  a
tower,  filling  up  by  its  depth  the  whole  space  be-
tween the  walls.  There  was  a  passage  for  the  be-
siegers through  the  middle  of  each  tower.  On  the
outside  of  each  wall  was  a  ditch  (Td(ppos).  This
description  would  almost  exactly  answer  for  the
Roman  mode  of  circumvallation,  of  which  some  of
the  best  examples  are  that  of  Carthage  by  Scipio
(Appian,  Punic.  119,  &c.),  that  of  Numantia  by
Scipio  (Appian,  Hispan.  90),  and  that  of  Alesia
by  Caesar  {Bell.  Gall.  vii.  72,  73).  The  towers  in
such  lines  were  similar  to  those  used  in  attacking
fortified  places,  but  not  so  high,  and  of  course  not
moveable.     [Turris.]

(Lipsius,  de  Milit.  Rom.  v.  5,  in  Oper.  iii.  pp.
156,  157  ;  Poliorc.  ii.  1,  in  Oper.  iii.  283.)  [P.S.]

VALLUS.     [Vallum.]

VALVAE.     [Janua,  p.  625,  b.]

VANNUS  (XiKfiSs,  K'ikvov),  a  winnowing-fan,
i.  e.  a  broad  basket,  into  which  the  com  mixed
with  chaff  {acus,  &.xvpa)  was  received  after  thrash-
ing, and  was  then  thrown  in  the  direction  of  the
wind.  (Col.  de  Re  Rust.  ii.  21  ;  Virg.  Georg.  iii.
134.)  It  thus  performed  Avith  greater  effect  and
convenience  the  office  of  the  pala  lignea,  or  win-
nowing-shovel.  [Pala.]  Virgil  {Georg.  i.  166)
dignifies  this  simple  implement  by  calling  it  mystica
vannus  lacclii.  The  rites  of  Bacchus,  as  well  as
those  of  Ceres,  having  a  continual  reference  to  the
occupations  of  rural  life,  the  vannus  was  borne  in
the  processions  celebrated  in  honour  of  both  these
divinities.  Hence  AiKulrris  (Hesych.  s.  v.)  Avas
one  of  the  epithets  of  Bacchus.  In  an  Ante  fix  a
in  the  British  Museum  (see  the  annexed  woodcut)
the  infant  Bacchus  is  carried  in  a  vannus  by  two
dancing  bacchantes  clothed  in  skins,  the  one  male
and  carrying  a  Thyrsus,  the  other  female  and
carrying  a  torch   [Fax].     Other  divinities  Avere


sometimes  conceived  to  have  been  cradled  in  the
same  manner.  (Callim.  Jov.  48  ;  Schol.  in  loc.;
Hom.  H.  in  Merc.  254.)  The  A'annus  was  also
used  in  the  processions  to  carry  the  instruments  of
sacrifice  and  the  first  fruits  or  other  offerings,
those  Avho  bore  them  being  called  the  KiKvo<p6poi.
(Callim.  Cer.  127.)  [J.  Y.]

VAPPA.     [Vinum.]

VAS.     [Actio,  p.  11  ;  Praes.]

VAS  (pi.  vasa).,  a  general  term  for  any  kind  of
vessel.  Thus  Ave  read  of  vas  vinarium  (Cic.  Verr.
iv.  27),  vas  argenteum  (Cic.  I.e.;  Hor.  Sat.  ii.  7.
72),  vasa  Corinthia  ct  Ddiaca  (Cic.  pro  Rose.  Anu


1184  VECTIGALIA.

46),  vasa  Samta,  that  is,  made  of  Samian  earthen-
ware (Cic.  pro  Mur.  36),  vasa  Murrhina  (Plin.
H.  N.  xxxvii.  2.  s.  7).  [Murrhina  Vasa.]  The
word  vas  was  used  in  a  still  wider  signification,
and  was  applied  to  any  kind  of  utensil  used  in  the
kitchen,  agricult'ire,  &c.  Thus  Plautus  says  (Aulul.
i.  3.  17):  —

*'  Cultrum,  securiin,  pistillura,  mortariura.
Quae  utenda  vasa  semper  vicini  rogant,
Fures  venisse,  atque  abstulisse  dicito."

<Comp.  Dig.  33,  tit.  7.  s.  8  ;  34.  tit.  2.  s.  20).  The
utensils  of  the  soldiers  were  called  vasa,  and  hence
vasa  colligere  and  vasa  conclamare  signify  to  pack
up  the  baggage,  to  give  the  signal  for  departure
(Cic.  Verr.  iv.  19  ;  Liv.  xxi.  47,  xxvii.  47;  Caes.
B.  a  i.  6G,  iii.  37).

UDO,  a  sock  of  goats-hair  or  felt.  (Mart.  xiv.
140.)  Hesiod  (Op.  et  Dies,  542)  advises  country-
men to  wear  brogues  {perones,  KapSariuai)  made
of  ox-hide,  with  socks  of  the  above  description
within  them.  Socks  of  a  finer  felt  were  sometimes
worn  by  the  Athenians.  (Cratinus,  p.  29,  ed.
Runkel.)  [J.  Y.]

VECTIGA'LIA,  the  general  term  for  all  the
regular  revenues  of  the  Roman  state.  (Cic.  pro
Leg.  Manil.  6.)  The  word  is  derived  from  velio,
and  is  generally  believed  to  have  originally  signi-
fied the  duties  paid  upon  things  imported  and  ex-
ported {qtiae  vehehantur).  If  this  were  true,  it
would  necessarily  imply  that  these  duties  were
either  the  most  ancient  or  the  most  important
branch  of  the  Roman  revenues,  and  that  for  either
of  these  reasons  the  name  was  subsequently  used
to  designate  all  the  regular  revenues  in  general.
But  neither  point  is  borne  out  by  the  history  of
Rome,  and  it  seems  more  probable  that  vectigal
means  anything  which  is  brought  (vehitur)  into
the  public  treasury,  like  the  Greek  ^opos.  The
earliest  regular  income  of  the  state  was  in  all  pro-
bability the  rent  paid  for  the  use  of  the  public
and  and  pastures.  This  revenue  was  called  pascua,
a  name  which  was  used  as  late  as  the  time  of
Pliny  (H.  N.  xviii.  3),  in  the  tables  or  registers  of
the  censors  for  all  the  revenues  of  the  state  in
general.

The  senate  was  the  supreme  authority  in  all
matters  of  finance,  but  as  the  state  itself  did  not
occupy  itself  with  collecting  the  taxes,  duties,  and
tributes,  the  censors  were  entrusted  with  the  actual
business.  These  officers,  who  in  this  respect  may
not  unjustly  be  compared  to  modern  ministers  of
finance,  used  to  let  the  various  branches  of  the  re-
venue to  the  publicani  for  a  fixed  sum,  and  for  a
certain  number  of  years.   [Censor;  Publicani.]

As  most  of  the  branches  of  the  public  revenues
of  Rome  are  treated  of  in  separate  articles,  it  is
only  necessary  to  give  a  list  of  them  here,  and  to
explain  those  which  have  not  been  treated  of  sepa-
rately.

1.  The  tithes  paid  to  the  state  by  those  who  oc-
cupied the  ager  publicus.  [Decumae  ;  Agrariae
Leges.]

2.  The  sums  paid  by  those  who  kept  their  cat-
tle on  the  public  pastures.     [Scriptura.]

3.  The  harbour  duties  raised  upon  imported  and
exported  commodities.     [Portorium.]

4.  The  revenue  derived  from  the  salt-works.
[Salinae.]

5.  The  revenues  derived  from  the  mines  (metalla).
This  branch  of  the  public  revenue  cannot  have


VECTIGALIA.

been  very  productive  until  the  Romans  had  be-
come masters  of  foreign  countries.  Until  that
time  the  mines  of  Italy  appear  to  have  been
worked,  but  this  was  forbidden  by  the  senate  after  ,
the  conquest  of  foreign  lands.  (Plin.  H.N.  xxxiii.  I
4,  xxxvii.  1 3.)  The  mines  of  conquered  countries
were  treated  like  the  salinae,  that  is,  they  were
partly  left  to  individuals,  companies,  or  towns  on
condition  of  a  certain  rent  being  paid  (Plin.  H.  N.
xxxiv.  1  ;  Cic.  Philip,  ii.  19),  or  they  were  worked
for  the  direct  account  of  the  state,  or  were  farmed
by  the  publicani.  In  the  last  case,  however,  it
appears  always  to  have  been  fixed  by  the  lex  cen-
soria  how  many  labourers  or  slaves  the  publicani
should  be  allowed  to  employ  in  a  particular  mine,
as  otherwise  they  would  have  been  able  to  derive
the  most  enormous  profits.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii.  4.)
Among  the  most  productive  mines  belonging  to
the  republic  we  may  mention  the  rich  gold-mines
near  Aquileia  (Polyb.  xxxiv.  10),  the  gold-mines
of  Ictimuli  near  Vercelli,  in  which  25,000  men
were  constantly  employed  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii.  4  ;
Strab.  v.  p.  151),  and  lastly  the  silver-mines  in
Spain  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Carthago  Nova,
which  yielded  every  day  25,000  drachmas  to  the
Roman  aerarium.  (Polyb.  xxxiv.  9  ;  comp.  Liv.
xxxiv.  21.)  Macedonia,  Thrace,  Illyricum,  Africa,
Sardinia,  and  other  places  also  contained  very
productive  mines,  from  which  Rome  derived  con-
siderable income.

6.  The  hundredth  part  of  the  value  of  all  things
which  were  sold  (centesima  rerum  venalium).  This
tax  was  not  instituted  at  Rome  until  the  time  of
the  civil  wars  ;  the  persons  who  collected  it  were
called  coactores.  (Cic.  Ep.  ad  Brut.  i.  1 8,  pro  Rob.
Post.  11.)  Tiberius  reduced  this  tax  to  a  two-
hundredth  (ducentesima),  and  Caligula  abolished  it
for  Italy  altogether,  whence  upon  several  coins  of
this  emperor  we  read  r.  c.  c,  that  is,  Remissa
Ducentesima.  (Tacit.  Annal.  i.  78,  ii.  42  ;  Suet.  \
Calig.  16.)  According  to  Dion  Cassius  (Iviii.  16,
lix.  9)  Tiberius  restored  the  centesima,  which  was
afterwards  abolished  by  Caligula.  (Comp.  Dig,  50.
tit.  16.  s.  17.  §  1.)  Respecting  the  tax  raised
upon  the  sale  of  slaves  see  Quinquagesima.

7.  The  vicesima  hereditatiura  et  manuraissionum.
[Vicesima.]

8.  The  tribute  imposed  upon  foreign  countries
was  by  far  the  most  important  branch  of  the  public
revenue  during  the  time  of  Rome's  greatness.  It
was  sometimes  raised  at  once,  sometimes  paid  by
instalments,  and  sometimes  changed  into  a  poll-tax,
which  was  in  many  cases  regulated  according  to
the  census.  (Cic,  c.  Verr.  ii,  53,  55,  &c,  ;  Paus,  vii.
16.)  In  regard  to  Cilicia  and  Syria  we  know  that
this  tax  amounted  to  one  per  cent,  of  a  person's
census,  to  which  a  tax  upon  houses  and  slaves  was
added.  (Cicorf  Fain,  iii,  8,  ad  Att.  v.  16  ;  Appian,
de  Reb.  Si/r.  50,)  In  some  cases  the  tribute  was
not  paid  according  to  the  census,  but  consisted  in
a  land-tax.  (Appian,  de  Bell.  Civil,  v.  4  ;  comp
Walter,  Gesch.  des  Rom.  Reckts,  p.  224,  &c,)

9.  A  tax  upon  bachelors.     [Aes  Uxorium.]

10.  A  door  tax.     [Ostiarium,]

11.  The  oclavae.  In  the  time  of  Caesar  all
liberti  living  in  Italy  and  possessing  property  of
200  sestertia,  and  above  it,  had  to  pay  a  tax  con-
sisting of  the  eighth  part  of  their  property.  (Dion
Cass.  1.  10.)

It  would  be  interesting  to  ascertain  the  amount
of  income  which  Rome  at  various  periods  derived


VEHES.

from  these  and  other  sources  ;  but  our  want  of  in-
formation renders  it  impossible.  We  have  only
the  general  statement  that  previously  to  the  time
of  Pompey  the  annual  revenue  amounted  to  fifty
millions  of  drachmas,  and  that  it  was  increased  by
him  to  eighty-five  millions.  (Plut.  Pomp.  45.)
Respecting  the  sums  contained  at  different  times
in  the  aerarium  at  Rome,  see  Pliny,  H.  N.  xxxiii.

(Burmann,  de  Vedig.  Pop.  Romani ;  Hegewisch,
Versuch  uber  die  Rom.  Finanzen  ;  Boase,Grundzuge
des  Finanzwesens  im  Rom.  Stoat.;  Dureau  de  la
Malle,  Economie  Politique  des  Romains,  Paris,  2
vols.  8vo.)  [L.  S.]

VEHES  (2xwa)»  a  load  of  hay,  manure,  or
anything  which  was  usually  conveyed  in  a  cart.
[Plaustrum.]  Pliny  speaks  of  "a  large  load  of
hay"  (vehem  foeni  large  onustam,  Plin.  H.  N.
xxxvi.  15.  s.  24),  which  shows  that  this  term  did
not  always  denote  a  fixed  quantitj'.  With  the
Romans,  however,  as  with  us,  the  load  was  like-
wise used  as  a  measure,  a  load  of  manure  being
equal  to  eighty  raodii,  which  was  about  twenty
bushels.  (Col.  de  Re  Rust.  ii.  15,  16,  xi.  2.)  The
trunk  of  a  tree,  when  squared,  was  also  reckoned
a  load,  the  length  varying  according  to  the  kind  of
timber,  viz.  20  feet  of  oak,  25  of  fir.  Sec.  (Col.  Lc.)
A  load  was  also  called  Carpentum.      [J.  Y.]

VELA'RIUM.     [Velum.]

VELA'TI  was  a  name  given  to  the  Accensi  in
the  Roman  army,  who  were  only  supernumerarj-
soldiers  ready  to  supply  any  vacancies  in  the
legion.  [Accensi.]  They  were  called  Velati,
because  they  were  only  clothed  (velati)  with  the
saga,  and  were  not  regularly  armed.  (Festus,  s.  v.
Velati,  Adscripticii.)

VE'LITES.    [ExERCiTus,  pp.  503,  a,  506,  b.]

VELUM  (oy\oto,  Theophrast.  Char.  5  ;  Athen.
V.  p.  196,  c;  Pollux,  iv.  122;  TrapaTreToa/io,
Plato,  Polit.  p.  294,  ed.  Bekker  ;  Synes.  Epist.  4  ;
Kara-niraana,  Matt,  xxvii.  51),  a  curtain  ;  {iariov),
■A  sail.  In  private  houses  curtains  were  either
hung  as  coverings  over  doors  (Sueton.  CLavd.  10),
or  they  served  in  the  interior  of  the  house  as  sub-
stitutes for  doors.  (Sen.  Epist.  81.)  [Janua.]
In  the  palace  of  the  Roman  emperor  a  slave,  called
velarius,  was  stationed  at  each  of  the  principal
doors  to  raise  the  curtain  when  any  one  passed
through.  (Inscript.  ap.  Pignor.  de  Servis,  p.  470.)
Window-  curtains  were  used  in  addition  to  window-
shutters.  (Juv.  ix,  80.)  Curtains  sometimes  formed
partitions  in  the  rooms  (Plin.  Epist.  iv.  19),  and,
when  drawn  aside,  they  were  kept  in  place  by  the
use  of  large  brooches  {fibulae).  Iron  curtain-rods
have  been  found  extending  from  pillar  to  pillar  in
a  building  at  Herculaneum.  (Gell,  Pompeiana,
Tol.i.  p.160,  Lon.  1832.)

In  temples  curtains  served  more  especially  to
veil  the  statue  of  the  divinity.  They  were  drawn
aside  occasionally  so  as  to  discover  the  object  of
worship  to  the  devout.  (Apuleius,  Met.  xi.  p.  127,
ed.  Aldi.)  [Pastophorus.]  Antiochus  presented
to  the  temple  of  Jupiter  at  Olympia  a  Avoollen  cur-
tain of  Assyrian  manufacture,  dyed  with  the  Tyrian
•  purple  and  interwoven  with  figures.  When  the
statue  was  displayed,  this  curtain  lay  upon  the
ground,  and  it  was  afterwards  drawn  up  by  means
of  cords  ;  whereas  in  the  temple  of  Diana  at
Ephesus  the  corresponding  curtain  or  veil  was  at-
tached to  the  ceiling,  and  was  let  down  in  order  to
conceal  the  statue.    (Pans.  v.  12.  §  2.)     The  an-


VELUM.


1185


nexed  woodcut  is  from  a  bas-relief  representing
two  females  engaged  in  supplication  and  sacrifice
before  the  statue  of  a  goddess.  The  altar  is  adnrned
for  the  occasion  [Sertum],  and  the  curtain  is
drawn  aside  and  supported  by  a  terminus.  (Guat-
tani,  Man.,  hied,  per  1786,  Nov.  T.  iii.)


In  the  theatres  there  were  hanging  curtains  to
decorate  the  scene.  (Virg.  Georg.  iii.  25  ;  Propert.
iv.  1.  15.)  The  Siparium  was  extended  in  a
wooden  frame.  The  velarium  was  an  awning
stretched  over  the  whole  of  the  cavea  to  protect
the  spectators  from  the  sun  and  rain.  (Juv.  iv.  121  ;
Sueton.  Calig.  26.)  These  awnings  were  in  general
either  woollen  or  linen  ;  cotton  was  used  for  this
purpose  a  little  before  the  time  of  Julius  Caesar,
(Plin.  H.  N.  xix.  1.  s.  6  ;  Dion  Cass,  xliii.  24  ;
Lucret.  vi.  108.)  This  vast  extent  of  canvass  was
supported  hj  masts  [mali,  Lucret.  /.  c.)  fixed  into
the  outer  wall.  The  annexed  woodcut  shows  the
form  and  position  of  the  great  rings,  cut  out  of
lava,  which  remain  on  the  inside  of  the  wall  of
the  Great  Theatre  at  Pompeii  near  the  top,  and
which  are  placed  at  regular  distances,  and  one  of
them  above  another,  so  that  each  mast  was  fixed
into  two  rings.     Each  ring  is  of  one  piece  with


the  stone  behind  it.  At  Rome  we  observe  a
similar  contrivance  in  the  Coliseum  ;  but  the  masts
were  in  that  instance  ranged  on  the  outside  of
the  wall,  and  rested  on  240  consoles,  from  which
4g


1186


VENABULUM.


they  rose  so  as  to  pass  tlirough  holes  cut  in  the
cornice.  The  holes  for  the  masts  are  also  seen  in
the  Roman  theatres  at  Orange  and  other  places.

Velum^  and  much  more  commonly  its  derivative
velamen^  denoted  the  veil  worn  by  women.  (Pru-
dent, c.  St/mm.  ii.  147.)  That  worn  by  a  bride
was  specifically  c?i\\e^  Jlammeum  [Matrimonium,
p.  743,  a]  :  another  special  term  was  Rica.  Greek
women,  when  they  went  abroad,  often  covered
their  heads  with  the  shawl  [Peplum],  thus  mak-
ing it  serve  the  purpose  of  a  veil.  But  they  also
used  a  proper  head-dress,  called  KaXvirrpa  (Apol-
lod.  ii.  6.  §  6  ;  Aelian,  V.  H.  vii.  9),  which  besides
serving  to  veil  their  countenances,  whenever  they
desired  it,  was  graceful  and  ornamental,  and  was
therefore  attributed  to  Venus  (Pans.  iii.  15.  §  8  ;
Brunck,  Anal.  ii.  459)  and  Pandora  (Hes.  Theog.
573).  The  veil  of  Ilione,  the  eldest  daughter  of
Priam,  was  one  of  the  seven  objects  preserved  at
Rome  as  pledges  of  the  permanency  of  its  power.
(Serv.  m  Virg.Aen.  vii.  188.)

Velum  also  meant  a  sail  {Icrriov^  Navis,  p.
790,  a  ;  Aar</)os,  Callim.  Epig.  v,  4  ;  Eurip.  Hec.
109).  Sail-cloth  was  commonly  lin«n,  and  was
obtained  in  great  quantities  from  Egypt  ;  but  it
was  also  woven  at  other  places,  such  as  Tarquinii
in  Etruria.  (Liv.  xxviii.  45.)  But  cotton  sail-
cloth (ca7'basa)  was  also  used,  as  it  is  still  in  the
Mediterranean.  The  separate  pieces  (lintea)  were
taken  as  they  came  from  the  loom,  and  were  sewed
together.  This  is  shown  in  ancient  paintings  of
ships,  in  which  the  seams  are  represented  as  dis-
tinct and  regular.  [J.  Y.]

VENA'BULUM,  a  hunting-spear.  This  may
have  been  distinguished  from  the  spears  used  in
warfare  by  being  barbed  ;  at  least  it  is  often  so
formed  in  ancient  works  of  art  representing  the
story  of  Meleager  (Bartoli,  Admir.  84)  and  other
hunting  scenes.  It  was  seldom,  if  ever,  thrown,
but  held  so  as  to  slant  downwards  and  to  receive
the  attacks  of  the  wild  boars  and  other  beasts  of
chace.  (Virg.  Aen.  iv.  131,  ix.  553  ;  Varr.  L.  L.
viii.  53,  ed.  Muller;  Apul.il/ei.  viii.  pp.78,  83,
ed.  Aldi';  Plin.  Ep,  i.  6.)  [J.  Y.]

VE.NALICIA'RII.     [Servus,  p.  1040,  a.]

VENA'TIO,  hunting,  was  the  name  given
among  the  Romans  to  an  exhibition  of  wild  beasts,
which  fought  with  one  another  and  with  men.
These  exhibitions  originally  formed  part  of  the
games  of  the  Circus.  Julius  Caesar  first  built  a
wooden  amphitheatre  for  the  exhibition  of  wild
beasts,  whicli  is  called  by  Dion  Cassius  (xliii.  22)
deaTpov  KvvriyiTiK6v,  and  the  same  name  is  given
to  the  amphitheatre  built  by  Statilius  Taurus  (Id.
Ii.  23),  and  also  to  the  celebrated  one  of  Titus  (Id.
Ixvi,  24)  ;  but  even  after  the  erection  of  the  latter
we  frequently  read  of  Venationes  in  the  Circus.
(Spart.  Hadr.  19  ;  Vopisc.  Prob.  19.)  The  per-
sons who  fought  with  the  beasts  were  either  con-
demned criminals  or  captives,  'or  individuals  who
did  so  for  the  sake  of  pay  and  were  trained  for  the
purpose.     [Bestiarii.]

The  Romans  were  as  passionately  fond  of  this
entertainment  as  of  the  exhibitions  of  gladiators,
and  during  the  latter  days  of  the  republic  and
under  the  empire  an  immense  variety  of  animals
was  collected  from  all  parts  of  the  Roman  world  for
the  gratification  oi  the  people,  and  many  thousands
were  frequently  slain  at  one  time.  We  do  not
know  on  what  occasion  a  venatio  was  first  exhibited
at  Rome ;  but  the  first  mention  we  find  of  any


VENATIO.

thing  of  the  kind  is  in  the  year  B.C.  251,  when
L.  Metelkis  exhibited  in  the  Circus  142  ele-
phants, which  he  had  brought  from  Sicily  after
his  victory  over  the  Carthaginians,  and  which  were
killed  in  tlie  Circus  according  to  Verrius,  though
other  writers  do  not  speak  of  their  slaughter.
(Plin.  If.N.  viii.  6.)  But  this  can  scarcely  be
regarded  as  an  instance  of  a  venatio,  as  it  was  un-
derstood in  later  times,  since  the  elephants  are
said  to  have  been  only  killed  because  the  Romans
did  not  know  what  to  do  with  them,  and  not  for
the  amusement  of  the  people.  There  was,  how-
ever, a  venatio  in  the  later  sense  of  the  word  in
B.  c.  186,  hi  the  games  celebrated  by  M.  Fulvius
in  fulfilment  of  the  vow  which  he  had  made  in  the
Aetolian  war  ;  in  these  games  lions  and  panthers
were  exhibited.  (Liv.  xxxix.  22.)  It  is  mentioned
as  a  proof  of  the  growing  magnificence  of  the  age
that  in  the  Ludi  Circenses,  exhibited  by  the  curule
aediles  P.  Cornelius  Scipio  Nasica  and  P.  Lentulus
B.C.  168,  there  were  63  African  panthers  and  40
bears  and  elephants.  (Liv.  xliv.  18.)  From  about
this  time  combats  with  wild  beasts  probably  formed
a  regular  part  of  the  Ludi  Circenses,  and  many  of
the  curule  aediles  made  great  efforts  to  obtain  rare
and  curious  animals,  and  put  in  requisition  the  ser-
vices of  their  friends.  (Compare  Caelius's  letter  to
Cicero,  ad  Fam.  viii.  9.)  Elephants  are  said  to
have  first  fought  in  the  Circus  in  the  curule  aedile-
ship  of  Claudius  Pulcher,  b.  c.  99,  and  twenty
years  afterwards,  in  the  curule  aedileship  of  the
two  Luculli,  they  fought  against  bulls.  ( Plin.  H.  N.
viii.  7.)  A  hundred  lions  were  exhibited  by  Sulla
in  his  praetorship,  which  were  destroyed  by  javelin-
men  sent  by  king  Bocchus  fm*  the  purpose.  This
was  the  first  time  that  lions  were  allowed  to  be
loose  in  the  Circus  ;  they  were  previously  always
tied  up.  (Senec.  de  Brev.  Vit.  13.)  The  games,
however,  in  the  curule  aedileship  of  Scaurus  B.  c.
58  surpassed  anything  the  Romans  had  ever  seen  ;
among  other  novelties  he  first  exhibited  an  hippo-
potamos  and  five  crocodiles  in  a  temporary  canal
or  trench  {euripus^  Plin.  //.  N.  viii.  40).  At  the
venatio  given  by  Pompey  in  his  second  consulship
b.  €.  55.,  upon  the  dedication  of  the  temple  of
Venus  Victrix,  and  at  which  Cicero  was  present
(Cic.  ad  Fam.  vii.  1),  there  was  an  immense  num-
ber of  animals  slaughtered,  among  which  we  find
mention  of  600  lions,  and  1 8  or  20  elephants  :  the
latter  fought  with  Gaetulians,  who  hurled  darts
against  them,  and  they  attempted  to  break  through
the  railings  (clathri)  by  which  they  were  separated
from  the  spectators.  (Senec.  I.e.;  Plin.  viii.  7.20.)
To  guard  against  this  danger  Julius  Caesar  sur-
rounded the  arena  of  the  amphitheatre  with
trenches  (euripi).

In  the  games  exhibited  by  J.  Caesar  in  his  third
consulship,  b.  c.  45,  the  venatio  lasted  for  five
days  and  was  conducted  with  extraordinary  splen-
dour. Camelopards  or  giraflfes  were  then  for  the
first  time  seen  in  Italy.  (Dion  Cass,  xliii.  23  ;
Suet.  Jul.  39  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  viii.  7  ;  Appian,  B.  C.
ii.  102  ;  Veil.  Pat.  ii.  56.)  Julius  Caesar  also  in-
troduced bull-fights,  in  which  Thessalian  horsemen
pursued  the  bidls  round  the  circus,  and  when  the
latter  were  tired  out,  seized  them  by  the  horns  and
killed  them.  This  seems  to  have  been  a  favoiirite
spectacle  ;  it  was  repeated  by  Claudius  and  Nero.
(Plin.  H.  N.  viii.  70  ;  Suet.  Claud.  21  ;  Dion  Cass.
Ixi.  9.)  In  the  games  celebrated  by  Augustus,
B.  c.  29,  the  hippopotamos  and  the  rhinoceros  were


VENATIO.

first  exhibited,  according  to  Dion  Cassius  (li.  22),
but  the  hippopotamos  is  spoken  of  by  Pliny,  as
mentioned  above,  in  the  games  given  by  Scaurus.
Augustus  also  exhibited  a  snake  50  cubits  in
length  (Suet.  Aug.  43),  and  thirty-six  crocodiles,
which  are  seldom  mentioned  in  the  spectacles  of
later  times.     (Dion  Cass.  Iv.  10.)

The  occasions  on  which  Venationes  were  ex-
hibited have  been  incidentally  mentioned  above.
They  seem  to  have  been  first  confined  to  the  Ludi
Circenses,  but  during  the  later  times  of  the  re-
public, and  under  the  empire,  they  were  frequently
exhibited  on  the  celebration  of  triumphs,  and  on
many  other  occasions,  with  the  view  of  pleasing
the  people.  The  passion  for  these  shows  continued
to  increase  under  the  empire,  and  the  number  of
beasts  sometimes  slaughtered  seems  almost  incre-
dible. At  the  consecration  of  the  great  amphitheatre
of  Titus,  5000  wild  beasts  and  4000  tame  animals
were  killed  (Suet.  Tit.  7  ;  Dion  Cass.  Ivi.  25),
and  in  the  games  celebrated  by  Trajan,  after  his
victories  over  the  Dacians,  there  are  said  to  have
been  as  many  as  11,000  animals  slaughtered.
(Dion  Cass.  Ixviii.  15.)  Under  the  emperors  we
read  of  a  particular  kind  of  Venatio,  in  which  the
beasts  were  not  killed  by  bestiarii,  but  were  given
up  to  the  people,  who  were  allowed  to  rush  into
the  area  of  the  circus  and  carry  away  what  they
pleased.  On  such  occasions  a  number  of  large
trees,  which  had  been  torn  up  by  the  roots,  was
planted  in  the  circus,  which  thus  resembled  a
forest,  and  none  of  the  more  savage  animals  were
admitted  into  it.  A  Venatio  of  this  kind  was
exhibited  by  the  elder  Gordian  in  his  aedileship,
and  a  painting  of  the  forest  with  the  animals  in  it
is  described  by  Julius  Capitolinus.  (Gordian,  3.)
One  of  the  most  extraordinary  venationes  of  this
kind  was  that  given  by  Probus,  in  which  there
were  1000  ostriches,  1000  stags,  1000  boars,
1000  deer,  and  numbers  of  wild  goats,  wild  sheep,
and  other  animals  of  the  same  kind.  (Vopisc.
Frob.  19.)  The  more  savage  animals  were  slain
by  the  bestiarii  in  the  amphitheatre,  and  not  in
the  circus.  Thus,  in  the  day  succeeding  the  ve-
natio of  Probus  just  mentioned,  there  Avere  slain
in  the  amphitheatre  100  lions,  and  the  same
number  of  lionesses,  100  Libyan  and  100  Syrian
leopards,  and  300  bears.  (Vopisc.  l.  c.)  It  is  un-
necessary to  multiply  examples,  as  the  above  are


VENATIO.


1187


sufficient  to  give  an  idea  of  the  numbers  and
A^ariety  of  animals  at  these  spectacles  ;  but  the
list  of  beasts  which  were  collected  by  the  younger
Gordian  for  his  triumph,  and  were  exhibited  by
his  successor  Philip  at  the  Secular  Games,  de-
serve mention  on  account  of  their  variety  and  the
rarity  of  some  of  them.  Among  these  we  find
mention  of  32  elephants,  10  elks,  10  tigers  (which
seem  to  have  been  very  seldom  exhibited),  60
tame  lions,  30  tame  leopards,  1 0  hyaenas,  an  hip-
popotamos and  rhinoceros,  10  archoleontes  (it  is
unknown  what  they  were),  10  caraelopards,  20
onagri  (wild  asses,  or  perhaps  zebras),  40  wild
horses,  and  an  immense  number  of  similar  animals.
(Vopisc.  Gordian.,  33.)

How  long  these  spectacles  continued  is  uncer-
tain, but  they  were  exhibited  after  the  abolition
of  the  shows  of  gladiators.  There  is  a  law  of
Honorius  and  Theodosius,  providing  for  the  safe
convoy  of  beasts  intended  for  the  spectacles,  and
inflicting  a  penalty  of  five  pounds  of  gold  upon  any
one  Avho  injured  them.  (Cod.  11.  tit.  44.)  They
were  exhibited  at  this  period  at  the  praetorian
games,  as  we  learn  from  Symmachus.  {Epist.  ix.
70,  71,  126,  &c.)  Wild  beasts  continued  to  be
exhibited  in  the  games  at  Constantinople  as  late
as  the  time  of  Justinian.   (Procop.  Hist.  Arc.  c.  9.)

Combats  of  wild  beasts  are  sometimes  repre-
sented on  the  coins  of  Roman  families,  as  on  the
annexed  coin  of  M.  Livineius  Regulus,  which  pro-
bably refers  to  the  venatio  of  Julius  Caesar  men-
tioned above.


In  the  bas-reliefs  on  the  tomb  of  Scaurus  at
Pompeii,  there  are  representations  of  combats  with
wild  beasts,  which  are  copied  in  the  following
Avoodcuts  from  Mazois  {Pomp.  i.  pi.  32,  33).  On
the  same  tomb  gladiatorial  combats  are  repre-
sented, which  are  figured  on  p.  576  of  the  present
work.


The  first  represents  a  man  naked  and  unarmed  I  defenceless  state  had  of  course  only  their  agility  to
betAveen  a  lion  and   a  panther.     Persons  in  this  |  trust  to  in  order  to  escape  from  the  beasts.     In  the


second  cut  we  see  a  similar  person  against  whom  a
wild  boar  is  rushing,  and  who  appears  to  be  pre-
paring for  a  spring  to  escape  from  the  animal.     In


the  same  relief  there  is  a  wolf  running  at  full  speed,
and  also  a  stag  Avith  a  rope  tied  to  his  horns  who
has  been  pulled  down  by  two  wolves  or  dogs.   The
4  G  2


118S


VENEFICIUM.


VENEFICItJM.


third  relief  is  supposed  by  Mazois  to  represent  the
training  of  a  bestiarius.  The  latter  has  a  spear  in
each  hand  ;  his  left  leg  is  protected  by  greaves,
and  he  is  in  the  act  of  attacking  a  panther,  whose
movements  are  hampered  by  a  rope,  which  fastens
him  to  the  bull  behind  him,  and  which  accordingl}'^
places  the  bestiarius  in  a  less  dangerous  position,
though  more  caution  and  activity  are  required  than
if  the  beast  were  fixed  to  a  single  point.  Behind
the  bull  another  man  stands  with  a  spear,  who
aeerns  to  be  urging  on  the  animal.  The  fourth
woodcut  represents  a  man  equipped  in  the  same
way  as  the  matador  in  the  Spanish  bull-fights  in
tlie  present  day,  namely,  with  a  sword  in  one  hand
and  a  veil  in  the  other.     The  veil  was  first  em-


ployed in  the  arena  in  the  time  of  the  emperor
Claudius.     (Plin.  H.  N.  viii.  21.)

VENEFI'CIUM,  the  crime  of  poisoning,  is
frequently  mentioned  in  Roman  history.  Women
were  most  addicted  to  it  ;  but  it  seems  not  im-
probable that  this  charge  was  frequently  brought
against  females  without  sufficient  evidence  of  their
guilt,  like  that  of  witchcraft  in  Europe,  in  the
middle  ages.  We  find  females  condemned  to
death  for  this  crime  in  seasons  of  pestilence,  when
the  popular  mind  is  always  in  an  excited  state
and  ready  to  attribute  the  calamities  under  which
they  suffer  to  the  arts  of  evil-disposed  persons.
Thus  the  Athenians,  when  the  pestilence  raged  in
their  city  during  the  Peloponnesian  war,  supposed
the  wells  to  have  been  poisoned  by  the  Pelopon-
nesians  (Thucyd.  ii.  48),  and  similar  instances
occur  in  the  history  of  almost  all  states.  Still
however  the  crime  of  poisoning  seems  to  have
been  much  more  frequent  in  ancient  than  in
modem  times  ;  and  this  circumstance  would  lead
persons  to  suspect  it  in  cases  when  there  was  no
real  ground  for  the  suspicion.  Respecting  the  crime
of  poisoning  at  Athens,  see  Pharmacon  Graphe.

The  first  instance  of  its  occurrence  at  Rome  in
any  public  way  was  in  the  consulship  of  M.
Claudius  Marcellus  and  C.  Valerius,  B.  c  331,
when  the  city  was  visited  by  a  pestilence.  After
many  of  the  leading  men  of  the  state  had  died  by
the  same  kind  of  disease,  a  slave-girl  gave  informa-
tion to  the  curule  aediles  that  it  was  owing  to
p(  isons  prepared  by  the  Roman  matrons.  Follow-
ing her  information  they  surprized  about  twenty
matrons,  among  whom  were  Cornelia  and  Sergia,
both  belonging  to  Patrician  families,  in  the  act  of
preparing  certain  drugs  over  a  fire  ;  and  being
compelled  by  the  magistrates  to  drink  these  in  the
forum,  since  they  asserted  that  they  were  not
poisonous,  they  perished  by  their  own  wickedness.
Upon  this  further  informations  were  laid,  and  as


many  as  a  hundred  and  seventy  matrons  were  con-
demned. (Liv.  viii.  1 8  ;  compare  Val.  Max.  ii.  5.
§  3  ;  August.  De  Civ.  Dei^  iii.  1 7.)  We  next  read  of
poisoning  being  carried  on  upon  an  extensive  scale
as  one  of  the  consequences  of  the  introduction  of  the
worship  of  Bacchus.  (Liv.  xxxix.  8.)  [Dionysia,  p.
413.]  In  B.  c.  1 84,  the  praetor,  Q.  Naevius  Matho,
was  commanded  by  the  senate  to  investigate  such
cases  {de  veneficiis  quaerere)  :  he  spent  four  months
in  the  investigation,  which  was  principally  carried
on  in  the  municipia  and  conciliabula,  and,  according
to  Valerius  of  Antium,  he  condemned  2000
persons.  (Liv.  xxxix.  38.  41.)  We  again  find
mention  of  a  public  investigation  into  cases  of
poisoning  by  order  of  the  senate,  in  B.  c.  180,
when  a  pestilence  raged  at  Rome,  and  many
of  the  magistrates  and  other  persons  of  high  rank
had  perished.  The  investigation  was  conducted
in  the  city  and  within  ten  miles  of  it  by  the
praetor  C.  Claudius,  and  beyond  the  ten  miles
by  the  praetor  C.  Maenius.  Hostilia,  the  widow
of  the  consul  C.  Calpurnius,  who  had  died  in  that
year,  was  accused  of  having  poisoned  her  husband,
and  condemned  on  what  appears  to  have  been  mere
suspicion.  (Liv.  xl.  37.)  Cases  of  what  may  be
called  private  poisoning,  in  opposition  to  those
mentioned  abovo,  frequently  occurred.  The  speech
of  Cicero  in  behalf  of  Cluentius  supplies  us  with
several  particulars  on  this  subject.  Under  the
Roman  emperors  it  was  carried  on  to  a  great  ex-
tent, and  some  females,  who  excelled  in  the  art,
were  in  great  request.  One  of  the  most  celebrated
of  these  was  Locusta,  who  poisoned  Claudius  at
the  command  of  Agrippina,  and  Britannicus  at  that
of  Nero,  the  latter  of  whom  even  placed  persons
under  her  to  be  instructed  in  the  art.  (Tacit.
Annal.  xii.  66,  xiii.  15  ;   Suet.  Ner.  33  ;   Juv.  i.

The  first  legislative  enactment  especially  directed
against  poisoning  was  a  law  of  the  dictator  Sulla —
Lex  Cornelia  de  Sicariis  et  Veneficis  —  passed  in
B,  c.  82,  which  continued  in  force,  with  some
alterations,  to  the  latest  times.  It  contained  pro-
visions against  all  who  made,  bought,  sold,  pos-
sessed, or  gave  poison  for  the  purpose  of  poisoning.
(Cic.  pro  Cluent.  54  ;  Marcian,  Dig.  48.  tit.  8.  s.  3  ;
Inst.  4.  tit.  18.  s.  5.)  The  punishment  fixed  by
this  law  was,  according  to  Marcian,  the  deportatio
in  insulam  and  the  confiscation  of  property  ;  but  it
was  more  probably  the  interdictio  aquae  et  ignis,
since  the  deportatio  under  the  emperors  took  the
place  of  the  interdictio,  and  the  expression  in  the
Digest  was  suited  to  the  time  of  the  writers  or
compilers.  [Lex  Cornelia,  p.  687.]  By  a  se-
natusconsultum  passed  subsequently,  a  female,  who
gave  drugs  or  poison  for  the  purpose  of  producing
conception  even  without  any  evil  intent,  was  ban-
ished (relegatus),  if  the  person  to  whom  she  ad-
ministered them  died  in  consequence.  By  another
senatusconsultum  all  druggists  {pigmentarii)^  who
administered  poisons  carelessly  "  purgationis  causa,"
were  liable  to  the  penalties  of  this  law.  In  the
time  of  Marcian  (that  of  Alexander-Severus)  thit


VESTALES

crime  was  punished  capitally  in  the  case  of  persons
of  lower  rank  (hurniliores),  who  were  exposed  to
wild  beasts,  but  persons  of  higher  rank  {altiores)
were  condemned  to  the  deportatio  in  insulam.
(Dig./.c.)

The  Avord  Veneficium  was  also  applied  to  potions,
incantations,  &c.  (Cic.  BrtU.  60  ;  Petron.  118)  ;
whence  we  find  Veneficus  and  Venefica  used  in  the
sense  of  a  sorcerer  and  sorceress  in  general.

VER  SACRUM  (eror  Up6v)t  It  was  a  custom
among  the  early  Italian  nations,  especially  among
the  Sabines,  in  times  of  great  danger  and  distress,
to  vow  to  the  deity  the  sacrifice  of  every  thing  born
in  the  next  spring,  that  is  between  the  first  of
March  and  the  last  day  of  April,  if  the  calamity
under  which  they  were  labouring  should  be  re-
moved. (Fest.  s.  t;.  Ver  sacrum;  Li  v.  xxii.  9,  10,
xxxiv.  44  ;  Strab.  v.  p.  172  ;  Sisennaojo.  Non.  xii.
18  ;  Serv.  ad  A  en.  vii.  796.)  This  sacrifice  in  the
early  times  comprehended  both  men  and  domestic
animals,  and  there  is  little  doubt  that  in  many
cases  the  vow  was  reall)''  carried  into  effect.  But
in  later  times  it  was  thought  cruel  to  sacrifice  so
many  innocent  infants,  and  accordingly  the  follow-
ing expedient  was  adopted.  The  children  were
allowed  to  grow  up,  and  in  the  spring  of  their
twentieth  or  twenty-first  year  they  were  with
covered  faces  driven  across  the  frontier  of  their
native  country,  whereupon  they  went  whitherso-
ever fortune  or  the  deity  might  lead  them.  Many
a  colony  had  been  founded  by  persons  driven  out
in  this  manner  ;  and  the  Mamertines  in  Sicily
were  the  descendants  of  such  devoted  persons.
(Fest.  I.  c.  and  s.  v.  Mamerti7ii:  compare  Dionys.
i.  16  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  iii.  18  ;  Justin,  xxiv.  4  ;  Liv.
xxxiii.  44.)

In  the  two  historical  instances  in  which  the
Romans  vowed  a  ver  sacrum,  that  is,  after  the
battle  of  lake  Trasimenus  and  at  the  close  of  the
second  Punic  war,  the  vow  was  confined  to  do-
mestic animals,  as  was  expressly  stated  in  the  vow.
(Liv.  I.  c.  ;   Plut.  Fab.  Max.  4.)  [L.  S.]

VERBE'NA.     [Sagmina.]
VERBENA'RIUS.     [Fetialis.]
VERNA.     [Servus,  pp.  1038,  1040.]
VERSO  IN  REM  ACTIO.  [Servus,  p.  1038.]
VERSU'RA.     [Fenus,  p.  527,  a.]
VERU,  VERU'TUM.     [Hasta.  p.  588,  b.]
VESPAE,     VESPILLO'NES.      [Funus,  p.
559,  a.]

VESTA'LES,  the  virgin  priestesses  of  Vesta
who  ministered  in  her  temple  and  watched  the
eternal  fire.  Their  existence  at  Alba  Longa  is
connected  with  the  earliest  Roman  traditions,  for
Silvia  the  mother  of  Romulus  was  a  member  of  the
sisterhood  (Liv.  i.  20  ;  Dionys.  i.  76)  ;  their  esta-
blishment in  the  city,  in  common  with  almost,  all
other  matters  connected  with  state  religion,  is  ge-
nerally ascribed  to  Numa  (Dionys.  ii.  G5  ;  Plut.
Num.  10),  who  selected  four  (their  names  are
given  in  Plutarch),  two  from  the  Titienses  and
two  from  the  Ramnes  (Dionys.  ii.  67  ;  Festus,  s.  v.
Sex  Vestae),  and  two  more  were  subsequently
added  from  the  Luceres,  by  Tarquinius  Priscus  ac-
cording to  one  authority  (Plut.  Num.  I.  c),  by
Servius  Tullius  according  to  another.  (Dionys,  iii.
67.)  This  number  of  six  remained  unchanged  at
the  time  when  Plutarch  wrote,  and  the  idea  that
it  was  afterwards  increased  to  seven  rests  upon
very  unsatisfactory  evidence.  (See  Memoires  de
V Academic  des  Inseript.  vol.  iv.   p.  167  ;  Ambros.


VESTALES.


1189


Ejnst.  v.  31,  c.  Symmach.  and  the  remarks  of  Lip-
sius.)

They  were  originally  chosen  (capere  is  the  tech-
nical word)  by  the  king  (Liv.  i.  3.  20  ;  Dionys.
//.  cc.)  and  during  the  republic  and  empire  by  the
Pontifex  Maximus.  It  was  necessary  that  the
maiden  should  not  be  under  six  nor  above  ten
years  of  age,  perfect  in  all  her  limbs,  in  the  full
enjoyment  of  all  her  senses,  patrima  et  matrima
[Patrimi],  the  daughter  of  free  and  freeborn  pa-
rents who  had  never  been  in  slavery,  who  followed
no  dishonourable  occupation,  and  whose  home  was
in  Italy.  (Gell.  i.  12.)  The  lex  Papia  ordained
that  when  a  vacancy  occurred  the  Pontifex  Maxi-
mus should  name  at  his  discretion  twenty  qualified
damsels,  one  of  whom  was  publiclj'-  (in  co7icione)
fixed  upon  by  lot,  an  exemption  being  granted  in
favour  of  such  as  had  a  sister  already  a  vestal  and
of  the  daughters  of  certain  priests  of  a  high  class.
(Gell.  l.  c.)  The  above  law  appears  to  have  been
enacted  in  consequence  of  the  unwillingness  of
fathers  to  resign  all  control  over  a  child,  and  this
reluctance  was  manifested  so  strongly  in  later  times
that  in  the  age  of  Augustus  libertinae  were  declared
eligible.  (Dion  Cass.  Iv.  22  ;  Suet.  Octav.  31.)
The  casting  of  lots  moreover  does  not  seem  to  have
been  practised  if  any  respectable  person  came  for-
ward voluntarily  and  off'ered  a  daughter  who  ful-
filled the  necessary  conditions.  As  soon  as  the
election  was  concluded  the  Pontifex  Maximus  took
the  girl  by  the  hand  and  addressed  her  in  a  solemn
form  preserved  by  Aulus  Gellius  from  Fabius  Pictor.
Sacerdotem.  Vestalem.Quae.  Sacra.  Faciat.
Quae.  Ious.  Siet.  Sacerdotem.  Vestalem.
Facere.  Pro.  Populo.  Romano.  Quiritium.
Utei.  Quae.  Optima.  Lege.  Fovit,  Ita.  Te.
Am  ATA.  Capio.  where  the  title  Amata  seems
simply  to  signify  "  beloved  one,"  and  not  to  refer
as  Gellius  supposes  to  the  name  of  one  of  the  ori-
ginal Vestals,  at  least  no  such  name  is  to  be  found
in  the  list  of  Plutarch  alluded  to  above.  After
these  words  were  pronounced  she  was  led  away  to
the  atrium  of  Vesta,  and  lived  thenceforward  with-
in the  sacred  precincts  under  the  special  superin-
tendence and  control  of  the  pontifical  college.
(Dionys.  ii.  67  ;  Liv.  iv.  44,  viii.  15  ;  Plin.  Ep.
iv.  11  ;  Suet.  Octav.  31  ;  Gell.  i.  12.)

The  period  of  service  lasted  for  thirty  years.
During  the  first  ten  the  priestess  was  engaged  in
learning  her  mysterious  duties,  being  termed  disci-
pula  (Val.  Max.  i.  1.  §  7),  during  the  next  ten  in
performing  them,  during  the  last  ten  in  giving  in-
structions to  the  novices  (Dionys.  /.  c.  •  Plut.  /.  c.  ;
Senec.  de  vit.  beat.  29),  and  so  long  as  she  was
thus  employed  she  was  bound  by  a  solemn  vow  of
chastity.  But  after  the  time  specified  was  com-
pleted she  might,  if  she  thought  fit,  throw  off  the
emblems  of  her  office  (Dionys.  /.  c),  unconsecrate
herself  (exauc/urare,  Gell.  vi.  7),  return  to  the
world  and  even  enter  into  the  marriage  state.
(Plut.  I.  c.)  Few  however  availed  themselves  of
these  privileges  ;  those  who  did  were  said  to  have
lived  in  sorrow  and  remorse  (as  might  indeed  have
been  expected  from  the  habits  they  had  formed)  :
hence  such  a  proceeding  was  considered  ominous,
and  the  priestesses  for  the  most  part  died  as  they
had  lived  in  the  service  of  the  goddess.  (Tacit.
Ann.  ii.  86  ;  Inscrip.  quoted  by  Gronov.  ad  Tacit,
Ann.  iii.  64.)

The  senior  sister  was  entitled  Vestalis  Maxima,
or  Virffo  Maxima  (Ovid.  Fast.  iv.  639  ;  Suet.  Jul.
4  G  3


1190


VESTALES.


83,  Domit  8  ;  Orell.  Inscript.  n.  2233,  &c.  ;  t]
irpiaSevovcra^  Dion  Cass.  liv.  24  ;  t)  apxi^p^la,
Ixxix.  9),  and  we  find  also  the  expressions  Vesia-
liiim  vetustissimavi  (Tacit.  Ann.  xi.  32)  and  tres
maximae.     (Serv.  ad  Vii-g.  Eel.  viii.  82.)

Their  chief  office  was  to  watch  by  turns,  night
and  day,  the  everlasting  fire  which  blazed  upon
the  altar  of  Vesta  (Virginesque  Vestales  in

URBE    CUSTODIUNTO  IGNEM   FOCI  PUBLICI  SEMPI-

TERNUM,  Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  8.  12  ;  Liv.  xxviii.  11  ;
Val.  Max.  i.  1.  §  6  ;  Senec.  ofe  Prou.' 5),  its  extinc-
tion being  considered  as  the  most  fearful  of  all  pro-
digies, and  emblematic  of  the  extinction  of  the
state.  (Dionys.  ii.  Q7  ;  Liv.  xxvi,  1.)  If  such
misfortune  befell  and  was  caused  by  the  careless-
ness of  the  priestess  on  duty,  she  was  stripped  and
scourged  by  the  Pontifex  Maximus,  in  the  dark
and  with  a  screen  interposed,  and  he  rekindled  the
flame  by  the  friction  of  two  pieces  of  wood  from  a
feliw  arbor.  (Dionys.,  Plut.,  Val.  Max.  II.  cc.  ;  Fes-
tus,  s.  V.  Ignis.)  Their  other  ordinary  duties  con-
sisted in  presenting  offerings  to  the  goddess  at
stated  times,  and  in  sprinkling  and  purifying  the
shrine  each  morning  with  water,  which  according
to  the  institution  of  Nuraa  was  to  be  drawn  from
the  Egerian  fount,  although  in  later  times  it  was
considered  lawful  to  employ  any  water  from  a  living
spring  or  running  stream,  but  not  such  as  had
passed  through  pipes.  When  used  for  sacrificial
purposes  it  was  mixed  with  muries,  that  is,  salt
which  had  been  pounded  in  a  mortar,  thrown  into
an  earthen  jar  and  baked  in  an  oven.  (Ovid.  Fast.
iii.  11  ;  Propert.  iv.  4.  15  ;  Plut.  Num.  13  ;  Fest.
s.  V.  Muries.)  They  assisted  moreover  at  all  great
public  holy  rites,  such  as  the  festivals  of  the  Bona
Dea  (Dion  Cass,  xxxvii.  45)  and  the  consecration
of  temples  (Tacit.  Hist.  iv.  53),  they  were  invited
to  priestly  banquets  (Macrob.  ii.  9  ;  Dion  Cass.
xlvii.  19),  and  we  are  told  that  they  were  present
at  the  solemn  appeal  to  the  gods  made  by  Cicero
during  the  conspiracy  of  Catiline.  (Dion  Cass,
xxxvii.  35.)  They  also  guarded  the  sacred  relics
which  formed  the  fatale  pignus  imperii,  the  pledge
granted  by  fate  for  the  permanency  of  the  Roman
sway,  deposited  in  the  inmost  adytum  (^penus  Ves-
tae,  see  Festus,  s.  r.)  which  no  one  was  permitted
to  enter  save  the  virgins  and  the  chief  pontifex.
What  this  object  was  no  one  knew,  some  supposed
that  it  was  the  Palladium,  others  the  Samothracian
gods  carried  by  Dardanua  to  Troy  and  transported
from  thence  to  Italy  by  Aeneas,  but  all  agreed  in
believing  that  something  of  awful  sanctity  was
here  preserved,  contained,  it  was  said,  in  a  small
earthen  jar  closely  sealed,  while  another  exactly
similar  in  form,  but  empty,  stood  by  its  side.
(Dionys.  i.  69,  ii.  QQ  ;  Plut.  Camill.  20  ;  Liv.
xxvi.  27  ;  Lamprid.  Elagah.  6  ;  Ovid.  Fast.  vi.
365  ;  Lucan,  ix.  994.)

We  have  seen  above  that  supreme  importance
was  attached  to  the  purity  of  the  Vestals,  and  a
terrible  punishment  awaited  her  who  violated  the
vow  of  chastity.  According  to  the  law  of  Numa
she  was  simply  to  be  stoned  to  death  (Cedrenus,
Hist.  Comp.  p.  148,  or  p.  259,  ed.  Bekker),  but  a
more  cruel  torture  was  devised  by  Tarquinius
Priscus  (Dionys.  iii.  67  ;  Zonaras,  viL  8)  and  in-
flicted from  that  time  forward.  When  condemned
by  the  college  of  pontifices,  she  was  stripped  of  her
vittae  and  other  badges  of  office,  was  scourged
(Dionys.  ix.  40),  was  attired  like  a  corpse,  placed
in  a  close  litter  and  borne  through  the  forum  at-


VESTALES.

tended  by  her  weeping  kindred,  with  all  the  cere-
monies of  a  real  funeral,  to  a  rising  ground  called
the  Campus  Sceleratus^  just  within  the  city  walls,
close  to  the  CoUine  gate.  There  a  small  vault
underground  had  been  previously  prepared,  con-
taining a  couch,  a  lamp,  and  a  table  with  a  little
food.  The  Pontifex  Maximus,  having  lifted  up  his
hands  to  heaven  and  uttered  a  secret  prayer,  opened
the  litter,  led  forth  the  culprit,  and  placing  her  on
the  steps  of  the  ladder  which  gave  access  to  the
subterranean  cell,  delivered  her  over  to  ihe  common
executioner  and  his  assistants,  who  conducted  her
down,  drew  up  the  ladder,  and  having  filled  the
pit  with  earth  until  the  surface  was  level  with  the
surrounding  ground,  left  her  to  perish  deprived  of
all  the  tributes  of  respect  usually  paid  to  the  spirits
of  the  departed.  In  every  case  the  paramour  was
publicly  scourged  to  death  in  the  forum.  (Plut.
Num.  10,  Fab.  Max.  18,  Quaest.  Rom.  vol.  vii.
p.  154,  ed.  Reiske  ;  Dionys.  ii.  ^1^  iii.  Q7^  viii.  89,
ix.  40  ;  Liv.  iv.  44,  viii.  15,  xxii.  57  ;  Plin.  Ep.
iv.  11  ;  Suet.  Dom.  8  ;  Dion  Cass.  Ixvii.  3,  Ixxvii.
16,  and  Iragg.  xci.  xcii.  ;  Festus  s.  v.  Probrum  et
Sceleratus  Campus.)

But  if  the  labours  of  the  Vestals  were  unre-
mitting and  the  rules  of  the  order  rigidly  and
pitilessly  enforced,  so  the  honours  they  enjoyed
were  such  as  in  a  great  measure  to  compensate  for
their  privation.  They  were  maintained  at  the
public  cost  and  from  sums  of  money  and  land  be-
qxieathed  from  time  to  time  to  the  corporation.
(Suet.  Octav.  31,  Tib.  76  ;  Sicul.  Flacc.  23,  ed.
Goes.)  From  the  moment  of  their  consecration
they  became  as  it  were  the  property  of  the  goddess
alone,  and  were  completely  released  from  all
parental  sway  without  going  through  the  form  of
ema?icipatio  or  suffering  any  capitis  deminutio.  (Gell.
i.  11.)  They  had  a  right  to  make  a  will,  and  to
give  evidence  in  a  court  of  justice  without  taking
an  oath  (Gell.  x.  15),  distinctions  first  conceded  by
an  Horatian  law  to  a  certain  Caia  Tarratia  or
Fufetia,  and  afterwards  communicated  to  all.  (Gell.
i.  12  ;  Gains,  i.  145  ;  compare  Plin.  H.N.  xxxiv.
11.)  From  the  time  of  the  triumviri  each  was
preceded  by  a  lictor  when  she  went  abroad  (Dion
Cass,  xlvii.  19),  consuls  and  praetors  made  way  for
them,  and  lowered  their  fasces  (Senec.  Controvers.
vi.  8  ;  compare  Plut.  Tib.  Gracch.  15),  even  the
tribunes  of  the  plebs  respected  their  holy  character
(Oros.  V.  4  ;  Suet.  Tib.  2  ;  compare  Cic.  pro  Coel.
14  ;  Val.  Max.  v.  4.  §  6),  and  if  any  one  passed
under  their  litter  he  was  put  to  death.  (Plut.  Num.
10.)  Augustus  granted  to  them  all  the  rights  of
matrons  who  had  borne  three  children  (Dion  Cass.
Ivi.  10  ;  Plut.  /.  c),  and  assigned  them  a  conspicu-
ous place  in  the  theatre  (Suet.  Octav.  44  ;  Tacit.
Ann.  iv.  16),  a  privilege  which  they  had  enjoyed
before  at  the  gladiatorial  shows.  (Cic.  pro  Muren.
35.)  Great  weight  was  attached  to  their  interces-
sion on  behalf  of  those  in  danger  and  difficulty,  of
which  we  have  a  remarkable  example  in  the  en-
treaties which  they  addressed  to  Sulla  on  behalf  of
Julius  Caesar  (Suet.  Jul.  1  ;  compare  Cic.  pro  Font.
17  ;  Suet.  Vitell.  16,  Dion  Cass.  Ixv.  18  ;  Tacit.
Ann.  iii.  6d,  xi.  32,  Hist.  iii.  81),  and  if  they
chanced  to  meet  a  criminal  as  he  was  led  to  pun-
ishment they  had  a  right  to  demand  his  release,
provided  it  could  be  proved  that  the  encounter  was
accidental.  Wills,  even  those  of  the  emperors
were  committed  to  their  charge  (Suet.  Jul.  83,
Octav.  101  ;  Tacit.  Ann.  \.  8),  for  when  in  such


VESTALES.

keeping  they  were  considered  inviolable  (Plut.
Anton.  58)  ;  and  in  like  manner  very  solemn
treaties,  such  as  that  of  the  triumvirs  with  Sextns
Ponipeius,  were  placed  in  their  hands.  (Appian,
B.  C.  v.  73  ;  Dion  Cass,  xlviii.  37  and  46  ;  com-
pare xlviii.  12.)  That  they  might  be  honoured  in
death  as  in  life,  their  ashes  were  interred  within
the  pomoerium.     (Serv.  ad  Virg.  Aen.  xi.  206.)

They  were  attired  in  a  stola  over  which  was  an
Tipper  vestment  made  of  linen  (Val.  Max.  i.  1.  §  7  ;
Dionys.  ii.  68  ;  Plin.  Ep.  iv.  11),  and  in  addition
to  the  Infula  and  white  woollen  Vitta  they  wore
when  sacrificing  a  peculiar  head-dress  called  suffi-
hulum^  consisting  of  a  piece  of  white  cloth  bordered
with  purple,  oblong  in  shape,  and  secured  by  a
clasp.  (Festus,  s.  v.  Suffihulum.)  In  dress  and
general  deportment  they  were  required  to  observe
the  utmost  simplicity  and  decorum,  any  fanciful
ornaments  in  the  one  or  levity  in  the  other  being
always  regarded  with  disgust  and  suspicion.  (Liv.
iv.  44,  Hii.  15  ;  Plin.  Ep.  iv.  11  ;  Ovid.  Fast.  iv.
285.)  We  infer  from  a  passage  in  Pliny  {H.  N.
xvi.  85)  that  their  hair  was  cut  off,  probably  at  the
period  of  their  consecration  ;  whether  this  was  re-
peated from  time  to  time  does  not  appear,  but  they
are  never  represented  with  flowing  locks.  The
first  of  the  following  cuts,  copied  from  a  gem
(Montfaucon,  Ant.  Eocp.  i.  pi.  xxviii.,  Supplem.  i.
pi.  xxiii.),  represents  the  Vestal  Tuccia  who  when
wrongfully  accused  appealed  to  the  goddess  to  vin-
dicate her  honour,  and  had  power  given  her  to
carry  a  sieve  full  of  water  from  the  Tiber  to  the
temple.  (Val.  Max.  viii.  1.  §  5  ;  Plin.  H.  N.
xxviii.  2.)      The  form  of  the  upper  garment  is


VIAE.


1191


here  well  seen.  The  second  is  from  a  denarius  of
the  Gens  Clodia,  representing  upon  the  reverse  a
female  priestess  with  a  simpuvium  in  her  hand,
and  bearing  the  legend  vestalis  ;  on  the  ob-
verse is  a  head  of  Flora  with  the  words  c.
CLODivs  c.  P.  Two  Vestals  belonging  to  this
gens  were  celebrated  in  the  Roman  Annals.  (See
Ovid.  Fast.  iv.  279  ;  Suet.  Tib.  2  ;  Augustin.  de
Civ.  Dei.,  X.  16  ;  Herodian.  i.  11.)  [Triumphus,
p.  1165,  a.]  The  coin  seems  to  have  been  struck  to
commemorate  the  splendour  of  the  Floralia  as  ex-
hibited during  the  famous  aedileship  of  C.  Clodius
PulcherB.  c.  99.  (Cic.  de  Of.  ii.  16,  c.  Verr.vf.
2  ;  PliiL  H.  N.  XXXV.  4.)

(Lipsius,  de   Vesta  et  Vestalihis  Syntagma,  and
Noehden,  "  On  the  worship  of  Vesta,  &c.  Clas-


sical Journal,  vol.  xv.  123,  vol.  xvi.  321,"  have
collected  most  of  the  authorities  on  this  subject  ;
Gottling,  Gescldchte  der  Romisch.  Staaisverfassung^
p.  189.)  [W.  R.]

VESTI'BULUM.  [Domus,  p.  427,  a ;  Janua,
p.  627,  b.]

VESTICEPS.     [Impubes,  631,a.]
VETERA'NUS.     [Exercitus,  p.  499,  b.]
VEXILLA'RII.  [Exercitus,  p.  507,  b.]
VEXILLUM.    [Exercitus,  p.  507,  b  ;  Signa

MiLITARIA.]

VIAE.  Three  words  are  employed  by  the  Ro-
man jurists  to  denote  a  road,  or  a  right  of  road,
Iter^  Actus,  Via.  The  different  meanings  of  these
three  words  are  given  under  Servitutes,  p.  1082.

We  next  find  Viae  divided  into  privatae  or
agrariae  and publicae,  the  former  being  those  the
use  of  which  was  free  while  the  soil  itself  remained
private  property,  the  latter  those  of  which  the  use,
the  management,  and  the  soil  were  alike  vested  in
the  state.  Viae  Vicinales  {quae  in  vicis  sunt  vel
quae  in  vicos  ducunt),  being  country  cross-roads
merging  in  the  great  lines,  or  at  ail  events  not
leading  to  any  important  terminus,  might  be  either
publicae  or  privatae  according  as  they  were  formed
and  maintained  at  the  cost  of  the  state  or  by  the
contributions  of  private  individuals.  (Dig.  43.  tit.
8.  s.  2.  §  21, 22  ;  tit  7.  s.  3  ;  Sicul.  Flacc.  de  Cond.
Agr.  p.  9,  ed.  Goes.)  The  Viae  publicae  of  the
highest  class  were  distinguished  by  the  epithets
militares,  consulares,  praetoriae,  answering  to  the
terras  ohoi  ^acrtKiKoiX  among  the  Greeks  and  king''s
highway  among  ourselves.

That  public  roads  of  some  kind  must  have
existed  from  the  very  foundation  of  the  city  is
manifest,  but  as  very  little  friendly  intercourse  ex-
isted with  the  neighbouring  states  for  any  length
of  time  without  interruption,  they  would  in  all
probability  not  extend  beyond  the  narrow  limits  of
the  Roman  territory,  and  would  be  mere  muddy
tracks  used  by  the  peasants  in  their  journeys  to
and  from  market.  It  was  not  until  the  period  of
the  long  protracted  Samnite  wars  that  the  neces-
sity was  strongly  felt  of  securing  an  easy,  regular,
and  safe  communication  between  the  city  and  the
legions,  and  then  for  the  first  time  we  hear  of  those
famous  paved  roads,  which,  in  after  ages,  keeping
pace  with  the  progress  of  the  Roman  arms,  con-
nected Rome  with  her  most  distant  provinces,  con-
stituting not  only  the  most  useful,  but  the  most
lasting  of  all  her  works.  (Strabo,  v.  p.  235.)  The
excellence  of  the  principles  upon  which  they  were
constructed  is  sufficiently  attested  by  their  extra-
ordinary durability,  many  specimens  being  found
in  the  country  around  Rome  which  have  been  used
without  being  repaired  for  more  than  a  thousand
years,  and  are  still  in  a  high  state  of  preservation.

The  Romans  are  said  to  have  adopted  their  first
ideas  upon  this  subject  from  the  Carthaginians
(Isidor.  XV.  16.  §  6),  and  it  is  extremely  probable
that  the  latter  people  may,  from  their  commercial
activity,  and  the  sandy  nature  of  their  soil,  ha\Fe
4g  4


1192


VIAE.


been  compeLIed  to  turn  their  attention  to  the  hest
means  of  facilitating  the  conveyance  of  merchan-
dize to  different  parts  of  their  territory.  It  must
not  be  imagined,  however,  that  the  Romans  em-
ployed from  the  first  the  elaborate  process  which
we  are  about  to  describe.  The  first  step  would  be
from  the  Via  Terrena  (Dig.  43.  tit.  II .  s.  2),  the
mere  track  worn  by  the  feet  of  men  and  beasts
and  the  wheels  of  waggons  across  the  fields,  to  the
Via  Glareata^  where  the  surface  was  hardened  by
gravel  ;  and  even  after  pavement  was  introduced
the  blocks  seem  originally  to  have  rested  merely
on  a  bed  of  small  stones.  (Liv.  xli.  27;  compare
Liv.  X.  23.  47.)

Livy  has  recorded  (ix.  29)  that  the  censorship
of  Appius  Caecus  (b.C.  312)  was  rendered  cele-
brated in  after  ages  from  his  having  brought  water
into  the  city  and  paved  a  road  {quod  viam  munivit
et  aquam  in  urbem  p&rduxii),  the  renowned  Via
Apjjia,  which  extended  in  the  first  instance  from
Rome  to  Capua,  although  we  can  scarcely  suppose
that  it  was  carried  so  great  a  distance  in  a  single
lustrum.  (Niebuhr,  Rwn.  Gesch.  iii.  p.  356.)  We
undoubtedly  hear  long  before  this  period  of  the
Via  Lati7ia  (Liv.  ii.  39),  the  Via  Gabina  (Liv.  ii.
11,  iii.  6,  v.  49),  and  the  Via  Solaria  (Liv,  vii.  9),
&c. ;  but  even  if  we  allow  that  Livy  does  not  em-
ploy these  names  by  a  sort  of  prolepsis,  in  order  to
indicate  conveniently  a  particular  direction  (and
that  he  does  speak  by  anticipation  when  he  refers
to  milestones  in  some  of  the  above  passages  is  cer-
tain), yet  we  have  no  proof  whatever  that  they
were  laid  down  according  to  the  method  after-
wards adopted  with  so  much  success.  (Compare
Liv.  vii.  39.)

Vitruvius  enters  into  no  details  with  regard  to
road-making,  but  he  gives  most  minute  directions
for  pavements,  and  the  fragments  of  ancient  pave-
ments still  existing  and  answering  to  his  description
correspond  so  exactly  with  the  remains  of  the  mili-
tary roads,  that  we  cannot  doubt  that  the  processes
followed  in  each  case  were  identical,  and  thus
Vitruvius  (vii.  I),  combined  with  the  poem  of
Statius  {Silv.  iv.  3),  on  the  Via  Domitiana^  will
supply  all  the  technical  terms.

In  the  first  place,  two  shallow  trenches  (sulci)
were  dug  parallel  to  each  other,  marking  the  breadth
of  the  proposed  road  ;  this  in  the  great  lines,  such
as  the  Via  Appia,  the  Via  Flarainia,  the  Via
Valeria,  &c.,  is  found  to  have  been  from  13  to  15
feet,  the  Via  Tusculana  is  11,  while  those  of  less
importance,  from  not  being  great  thoroughfares,
such  as  the  Via  which  leads  up  to  the  temple  of
Jupiter  Latialis,  on  the  summit  of  the  Alban
Mount,  and  which  is  to  this  day  singularly  per-
fect, seem  to  have  been  exactly  8  feet  wide.  The
loose  earth  between  the  Sulci  was  then  removed,
and  the  excavation  continued  until  a  solid  founda-
tion (gremium)  was  reached,  upon  which  the  ma-
terials of  the  road  might  firmly  rest ;  if  this  could
not  be  attained,  in  consequence  of  the  swampy
nature  of  the  ground  or  from  any  peculiarity  in  the
soil,  a  basis  was  formed  artificially  by  driving  pi^es
(fistiicationibus).  Above  the  gremium  were  four  dis-
tinct strata.  The  lowest  course  was  the  statumen,
consisting  of  stones  not  smaller  than  the  hand  could
just  grasp ;  above  the  statumen  was  the  rudus,  a  mass
of  broken  stones  cemented  with  lime,  (what  masons
call  ncljble-work,)  rammed  down  hard  and  nine
inches  thick  ;  above  the  rudus  came  the  nucleus,
composed  of  fragments  of  bricks  and  pottery,  the


VIAE.

pieces  being  smaller  than  in  the  rudus,  cemented
with  lime  and  six  inches  thick.  Uppermost  was
the  pavimenium,  large  polygonal  blocks  of  the
hardest  stone  {silex),  usually,  at  least  in  the  vicinity
of  Rome,  basaltic  lava,  irregular  in  form  but  fitted
and  jointed  with  the  greatest  nicety  {apta  jungitur
arte  silex,  Tibull.  i.  7.  60)  so  as  to  present  a  per-
fectly even  surface,  as  free  from  gaps  or  irregu-
larities as  if  the  whole  had  been  one  solid  mass,
and  presenting  much  the  same  external  appearance
as  the  most  carefully  built  polygonal  walls  of  the
old  Pelasgian  towns.  The  general  aspect  will  be
understood  from  the  cut  given  below  of  a  portion
of  the  street  at  the  entrance  of  Pompeii.  (Mazois,
Les  Ruines  de  Pompei^  vol.  i.  pi.  xxxvii.)


The  centre  of  the  way  was  a  little  elevated  so
as  to  permit  the  water  to  run  off  easily,  and  hence
the  terms  agger  viae  (Isidor.  xv.  16.  §  7  ;  Ammian.
Marcellin.  xix.  16  ;  compare  Virg.  Aen.  v.  273)  ;
and  summum  dorsum  (Stat.  I.  c),  although  both
may  be  applied  to  the  whole  surface  of  the  pavi-
mentum.  Occasionally,  at  least  in  cities,  rectan-
gular slabs  of  softer  stone  were  employed  instead
of  the  irregular  polygons  of  silex,  as  we  perceive
to  have  been  the  case  in  the  forum  of  Trajan,
which  was  paved  with  travertino,  and  in  part  of
the  great  forum  under  the  column  of  Phocas,  and
hence  the  distinction  between  the  phrases  silicc
sternere  and  saoco  quadrato  stemere.  (Liv.  x.  23,
xli.  27.)  It  must  be  observed,  that  while  on  the
one  hand  recourse  was  had  to  piling,  when  a  solid
foundation  could  not  otherwise  be  obtained,  so,  on
the  other  hand,  when  the  road  was  carried  over
rock,  the  statumen  and  the  rudus  were  dispensed
with  altogether,  and  the  nucleus  was  spread  im-
mediately on  the  stony  surface  previously  smoothed
to  receive  it.  This  is  seen  to  have  been  the  case,
we  are  informed  by  local  antiquaries,  on  the  Via
Appia,  below  Albano,  where  it  was  cut  through  a
mass  of  volcanic  peperino.

Nor  was  this  all.  Regular  foot-paths  {Margines^
Liv.  xli.  27,  crepidines,  Petron.  9  ;  Orelli,  Inscrip.
n.  3844  ;  uml)ones,  Stat.  Silv.  iv.  3.  47)  Avere
raised  upon  each  side  and  strewed  with  gravel,  the
different  parts  v/sre  strengthened  and  bound  to-
gether with  gomphi  or  stone  wedges  (Stat.  I.  c),
and  stone  blocks  were  set  up  at  moderate  intervals


VIAE.

on  the  side  of  the  foot-paths,  in  order  that  travel-
lers on  horseback  might  be  able  to  mount  without
the  aid  of  an  ava€6\€vs  to  hoist  them  up.  (Plut.
C.  Cwracch.  7.)      [Stratokes.]

Finally,  C.  Gracchus  (Plut.  I.  c)  erected  mile-
stones along  the  whole  extent  of  the  great  high-
ways, marking  the  distances  from  Rome,  which
appear  to  have  been  counted  from  the  gate  at
which  each  road  issued  forth.  The  passage  of
Plutarch,  however,  may  only  mean  that  Gracchus
erected  milestones  on  the  roads  which  he  made
or  repaired  ;  for  it  is  probable  that  milestones
existed  much  earlier.  [Milliare.]  Augustus,
Avhen  appointed  inspector  of  the  viae  around  the
city,  erected  in  the  forum  a  gilded  column  (xpv(rovu
fii\iov — ;tpu(roi)s  k'iuv,  milliarium  aureum^  Dion
Cass.  liv.  8  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  iii.  5  ;  Suet.  0th.  6  ;
Tacit.  Hist.  i.  27),  on  which  were  inscribed  the
distances  of  the  principal  points  to  which  the
viae  conducted.  Some  have  imagined,  from  a
passage  in  Plutarch  (Galb.  24),  that  the  distances
were  calculated  from  the  milliarium  aureum,  but
this  seems  to  be  disproved  both  by  the  fact  that
the  roads  were  all  divided  into  miles  by  C.  Gracchus
nearly  two  centuries  before,  and  also  by  the  posi-
tion of  various  ancient  milestones  discovered  in
modern  times.  (See  Holsten.  de  Milliario  Aureo
in  Graev.  Tkes.  Antiq.  Rom.  vol.  iv.  and  Fabretti
de  Aquis  et  Aquaeductis,  Diss.  iii.  n.  25.)

It  is  certain  that  during  the  earlier  ages  of  the
republic  the  construction  and  general  superin-
tendence of  the  roads  without,  and  the  streets
within,  the  city,  were  committed  like  all  other
important  works  to  the  censors.  This  is  proved
by  the  law  quoted  in  Cicero  (de  Leg.  iii.  3),  and  by
various  passages  in  which  these  magistrates  are
represented  as  having  first  formed  and  given  their
names  to  great  lines,  such  as  the  Via  Appia  and
the  Via  Flaminia,  or  as  having  executed  important
improvements  and  repairs.  (Liv.  ix.  29, 43,  Epit.
20,  xxii.  11,  xli.  27  ;  Aurel.  Vict,  de  Viris  illust.
c.  72  ;  Lips.  Exeurs.  ad  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  31.)  These
duties,  when  no  censors  were  in  office,  devolved


VIAE.


1193


upon  th(


Is,    and   in  their  absence  on  the


Praetor  Urbanus,  the  Aediles,  or  such  persons  as
the  senate  thought  fit  to  appoint.  (Liv.  xxxix.
2  ;  Cic.  c.  Vein:  i  48,  50,  59.)  But  during  the
last  century  of  the  commonwealth  the  administra-
tion of  the  roads,  as  well  as  of  every  other  depart-
ment of  public  business,  afforded  the  tribunes  a
pretext  for  popular  agitation.  C  Gracchus,  in
what  capacity  we  know  not,  is  said  to  have  ex-
erted himself  in  making  great  improvements,  both
from  a  conviction  of  their  utility  and  with  a  view
to  the  acquirement  of  popularity  (Plut.  C.  Gracch.  7),
and  Curio,  when  tribune,  introduced  a  Lex  Viaria
for  the  construction  and  restoration  of  many  roads
and  the  appointment  of  himself  to  the  office  of  in-
spector (eVto-TaTTjs)  for  five  years.  (Appian.  B.  C.
ii.  26"  ;  Cic.  ad  Fam.  viii.  6.)  We  learn  from
Cicero  {ad  Att.  i.  1),  that  Thermus,  in  the  year
B.  c.  Qo,  was  Curator  of  the  Flaminian  Way,  and
from  Plutarch  (Caes.  5),  that  Julius  Caesar  held
the  same  office  (eVt/ieATjTr/.?)  with  regard  to  the
Appian  Way,  and  laid  out  great  sums  of  his  own
money  upon  it,  but  by  whom  these  appointments
were  conferred  we  cannot  tell.  During  the  first
years  of  Augustus,  Agrippa,  being  aedile,  repaired
all  roads  at  his  own  pi'oper  expense  ;  subsequently
the  emperor,  finding  that  the  roads  had  fallen  into
disrepair  through  neglect,  took  upon  himself  the


restoration  of  the  Via  Flaminia  as  far  as  Ariminum,
and  distributed  the  rest  among  the  most  distin-
guished men  in  the  state  {triumphalibus  viris).,  to
be  paved  out  of  the  money  obtained  from  spoils
(ex  manubiali  pecunia  sternendas.  Suet.  Octav.  30  ;
Dion  Cass.  liii.  22).  In  the  reign  of  Claudius  we
find  that  this  charge  had  fallen  upon  the  quaestors,
and  that  they  were  relieved  of  it  by  him,  although
some  give  a  different  interpretation  to  the  words.
(Suet.  Claud.  24.)  Generally  speaking,  however,
under  the  empire,  the  post  of  inspector-in-chief
(curator), — and  each  great  line  appears  to  have
had  a  separate  officer  with  this  appellation,  —  was
considered  a  high  dignity  (Plin.  Ep.  v.  15),  inso-
much that  the  title  was  frequently  assumed  by  the
emperors  themselves,  and  a  great  number  of  in-
scriptions are  extant,  bearing  the  names  of  upwards
of  twenty  princes  from  Augustus  to  Constantine,
commemorating  their  exertions  in  making  and
maintaining  public  ways.     (Gruter,  Corp.  Inscrip.

cxlix clix.)

These  curatores  were  at  first,  it  would  appear,
appointed  upon  special  occasions,  and  at  all  times
must  have  been  regarded  as  honorar}"-  functionaries
rather  than  practical  men  of  business.  But  from
the  beginning  of  the  sixth  century  of  the  city  there
existed  regular  commissioners,  whose  sole  duty
appears  to  have  been  the  care  of  the  ways,  four
(quatuorviri  viarum)  superintending  the  streets
within  the  walls,  and  two  the  roads  without.  (Dig.
1 .  tit.  2.  s.  2.  §  30.  compared  with  Dion  Cass.  liv.
26.)  When  Augustus  remodelled  the  inferior  ma-
gistracies he  included  the  former  in  the  vigintivirate,
and  abolished  the  latter  ;  but  when  he  undertook
the  care  of  the  viae  around  the  city,  he  appointed
under  himself  two  road-makers  (oSoTroiovs,  Dion
Cass.  liv.  8),  persons  of  praetorian  rank,  to  whom
he  assigned  two  lictors.  These  were  probably  in-
cluded in  the  number  of  the  new  superintendents
of  public  works  instituted  by  him  (Suet.  Octav.  37),
and  would  continue  from  that  time  forward  to  dis-
charge their  duties,  subject  to  the  supervision  and
control  of  the  curatores  or  inspectors  general.

Even  the  contractors  employed  (mancipes.  Tacit.
Ann.  ii.  31)  were  proud  to  associate  their  names
with  these  vast  undertakings,  and  an  inscription  has
been  preserved  (Orell.  Inscrip.  n.  3221)  in  Avhich
a  wife,  in  paying  the  last  tribute  to  her  husband,
inscribes  upon  his  tomb  Mancipi  Viae  Appiab.
The  funds  required  were  of  course  derived,  under
ordinary  circumstances,  from  the  public  treasury
(Dion  Cass.  liii.  22  ;  Sicul.  Flacc.  de  cond.  agr.  p.
9,  ed.  Goes.),  but  individuals  also  were  not  unfre-
quently  found  willing  to  devote  their  own  private
means  to  these  great  national  enterprises.  This,  as
we  have  already  seen,  was  the  case  with  Caesar  and
Agrippa,  and  we  learn  from  inscriptions  that  the
example  was  imitated  by  many  others  of  less  note.
(e.g.  Gruter,  clxi.  n.  1  and  2.)  The  Viae  Vicinales
were  in  the  hands  of  the  rural  authorities  (magistri
pagoruvt).,  and  seem  to  have  been  maintained  by
voluntary  contribution  or  assessment,  like  our
parish  roads  (Sicul.  Flacc.  p.  9),  while  the  streets
within  the  city  were  kept  in  repair  by  the  inhabit-
ants, each  person  being  answerable  for  the  portion
opposite  to  his  own  house.   (Dig.  43.  tit.  10.  s.  3.)

Our  limits  preclude  us  from  entering  upon  so
large  a  subject  as  the  history  of  the  numerous  mili-
tary roads  which  intersected  the  Roman  dominions.
We  shall  content  ourselves  with  simply  mentioning
those  which  issued  from  Rome,  together  with  thei»


1194


VIAE.


most  important  branches  within  the  bounds  of
Italy,  naming  at  the  same  time  the  principal  towns
through  which  they  passed,  so  as  to  convey  a  gene-
ral idea  of  their  course.  For  all  the  details  and
controversies  connected  with  their  origin,  gradual
extensions,  and  changes,  the  various  stations  upon
each,  the  distances,  and  similar  topics,  we  must
refer  to  the  treatises  enumerated  at  the  close  of
this  article,  and  to  the  researches  of  the  local  anti-
quaries, the  most  important  of  whom,  in  so  far  as
the  southern  districts  are  concerned,  is  Romanelli.
Beginning  our  circuit  of  the  walls  at  the  Porta
Capena,  the  first  in  order,  as  in  dignity,  is,

I.  The  Via  Appia,  the  Great  South  Road.  It
was  commenced,  as  we  have  already  stated,  by
Appius  Claudius  Caecus,  when  censor,  and  has
always  been  the  most  celebrated  of  the  Roman
Waj'S.  It  was  the  first  ever  laid  down  upon  a
grand  scale  and  upon  scientific  principles,  the  na-
tural obstacles  which  it  was  necessary  to  overcome
were  of  the  most  formidable  nature,  and  when  com-
pleted it  well  deserved  the  title  of  Queen  of  Roads
(regina  viartim,  Stat.  Silv.  ii.  2,  12).  We  know
that  it  was  in  perfect  repair  when  Procopius  wrote
(Bell.  Goth.  i.  14),  long  after  the  devastating  in-
roads of  the  northern  barbarians  ;  and  e\  en  to  this
day  the  cuttings  through  hills  and  masses  of  solid
rock,  the  filling  up  of  hollows,  the  bridging  of  ra-
vines, the  substructions  to  lessen  the  rapidity  of
steep  descents,  and  the  embankments  over  swamps,
demonstrate  the  vast  sums  and  the  prodigious  la-
bour that  must  have  been  lavished  on  its  construc-
tion. It  issued  from  the  Porta  Capena,  and  pass-
ing through  Aricia,  Tres  Tabernae,  Appii  Forum,
Tarracina,  Fundi,  Formiae,  Miniurnae,  Sinuessa,
and  Casilinum,  terminated  at  Capua,  but  Avas  even-
tually extended  through  Calatia  and  Caudium  to
Beneventum,  and  finally  from  thence  through  Venu-
sia,  Tarentum,  and  Uria,  to  Brundusium.

The  ramifications  of  the  Via  Appia  most  worthy
of  notice,  are.

(1.)  The  Via  Setina,  which  connected  it  with
Setia.  Originally  it  would  appear  that  the  Via
Appia  passed  through  Velitrae  and  Setia,  avoiding
the  marshes  altogether,  and  travellers,  to  escape
this  circuit,  embarked  upon  the  canal,  which  in  the
days  of  Horace  traversed  a  portion  of  the  swamps.
(2.)  The  Via  Domitiana  struck  off  at  (SiwMessa,
and  keeping  close  to  the  shore  passed  through
Liternum,  Cumae,  Puteoli,  Neapolis,  Herculaneum,
Oplonti,  Pompeii,  and  Stabiae  to  Surrentnm,  mak-
ing the  complete  circuit  of  the  bay  of  Naples.

(3.)  The  Via  Campana  or  Consularis  from
Capua  to  Cumae  sending  off  a  branch  to  Puteoli
and  another  through  Atella  to  Neapolis.

(4.)  The  Via  Aquillia  began  at  Capua  and  ran
south  through  Nola  and  Nuceria  to  Salemum,  from
thence,  after  sending  off  a  branch  to  Paestum,  it
took  a  wide  sweep  inland  through  Eburi  and  the
region  of  the  Mo7is  Albumus  up  the  valley  of  the
Tanager ;  it  then  struck  south  through  the  very
heart  of  Lucania  and  Bruttium,  and  passing  Neru-
lum,  Interamnia  and  Coscntia,  returned  to  the  sea
at  Vibo,  and  thence  through  Medina  to  Rhegium.
This  road  sent  off  a  branch  near  the  sources  of  the
Tanager,  which  ran  down  to  the  sea  at  Blanda  on
the  Laus  Sinus  and  then  continued  along  the  whole
line  of  the  Bruttian  coast  through  Laus  and  Terina
to  Vibo,  where  it  joined  the  main  stem.

(5.)  The  Via  Egnatia  began  at  Benevetitum,
Struck  north  through  the  country  of  the  Hirpini  to


1

assmff  -^


VIAE.

Equotuticum,  entered  Apulia  vdAecae,  and  passing
through  Herdonia,  Canusium,  and  Rubi,  reached
the  Adriatic  at  Barium  and  followed  the  coast
through  Egnatia  to  Brundusium.  This  was  the
route  followed  by  Horace.  It  is  doubtful  whether
it  bore  the  name  given  above  in  the  early  part  of
its  course.

(6.)  The  Via  Trajana  began  at  Venusia  and
ran  in  nearly  a  straight  line  across  Lucania  to
Heraclea  on  the  Sinus  Tarentinus,  thence  following
southwards  the  line  of  the  east  coast  it  passed
through  Tliurii,  Croto,  and  Sa/llacium,  and  com-
pleted the  circuit  of  Bruttium  by  meeting  the  Via
Aquillia  at  Rhegium.

(7.)  A  Via  Minucia  is  mentioned  by  Cicero
(ad  Att.  ix.  6),  and  a  Via  Numicia  by  Horace
(Epist.  i.  18.  20),  both  of  which  seem  to  liave
passed  through  Samnium  from  north  to  south,  con-
necting the  Valerian  and  Aquillian  and  cutting  the
Appian  and  Latin  ways.  Their  course  is  unknown.
Some  believe  them  to  be  one  and  the  same.

Returning  to  Rome,  we  find  issuing  from  the
porta  Capena,  or  a  gate  in  its  immediate  vicinity

II.  The  Via  Latina,  another  great  line  leading
to  Beneventum,  but  keeping  a  course  farther  inland
than  tiie  Via  Appia.  Soon  after  leaving  the  city
it  sent  off  a  short  branch  (Via  Tusculana)  to
Tusculum,  and  passing  X\iio\xg\i  Compitum  Anagni-
num,  Ferentinum,  Frusino,  Fregellae,  Fabi-ateria,
Aquinum,  Casinum,  Venafrum,  Teanum,  Alli/ae,
and  Telesia,  joined  the  Via  Appia  at  Beneventum.

A  cross-road  called  the  Via  Hadriana,  running
from  Mintmyiae  through  Suessa  Aurunca  to  Tta-
num,  connected  the  Via  Appia  with  the  Via
Latina.

III.  From  the  Porta  Esquilina  issued  the  Via
Labicana,  which  passing  Labicum  fell  into  the
Via  Latina  at  the  station  ad  Bivium  30  miles  from
Rome.

IV.  The  Via  Praenestina,  originally  the  Via
Gabina,  issued  from  the  same  gate  with  the  for-
mer. Passing  through  Gabii  and  Praeneste,  it
joined  the  Fia  Latina  just  below  Anagnia.

V.  Passing  over  the  Via  Collatina  as  of  little
importance,  we  find  the  Via  Tiburtina,  which
issued  from  the  Porta  Tiburtina,  and  proceeding
N.  E.  to  Tibur,  a  distance  of  about  20  miles,  was
continued  i'rom  thence,  in  the  same  direction,  under
the  name  of  the  Via  Valeria,  and  traversing  the
country  of  the  Sabines  passed  through  Carseoli  and
Corfinium  to  Atemum  on  the  Adriatic,  thence  to
Adria,  and  so  along  the  coast  to  Castrum  Titten-
tinum,  where  it  fell  into  the  Via  Solaria.

A  branch  of  the  Via  Valeria  led  to  Sublaqueum,
and  was  called  Via  Sublacensis.  Another  branch
extended  from  Adria  along  the  coast  southwards
through  the  country  of  Frentani  to  Larinum,  being
called,  as  some  purpose.  Via  Frentana  Appula.

VI.  The  Via  Nomentana,  anciently  FicuL-
NENSis,  ran  from  the  porta  Collina,  crossed  the
Anio  to  Nomentum,  and  a  little  beyond  fell  into
the  Via  Salaiia  at  Eretum.

VII.  The  Via  Salaria,  also  from  the  porta
Collina  (passing  Fideiiae  and  Crustumerium)  ran
north  and  east  through  Sabinum  and  Picenum  to
Reate  and  A  scutum  Picenum.  At  Castrum  Truen-
iinum  it  reached  the  coast,  which  it  followed  until
it  joined  the  Via  Flaminia  at  Ancona.

VIII.  Next  comes  the  Via  Flaminia,  the
Great  North  Road  commenced  in  the  censorship  of
C.  Flaminius  and  carried  ultimately  to  Ariminunt.


VIAE.

It  issued  from  the  Porta  Flaminia  and  proceeded
nearly  north  to  Ocriculum  and  Narnia  in  Umbria.
Here  a  branch  struck  off,  making  a  sweep  to  the
east  tlirough  Interamna  and  Spoleiium,  and  fell
again  into  the  main  trunk  (which  passed  through
Mevania)  at  Ftdginia.  It  continued  through  Fa-
num  Fiaminii  and  Nuceria^  where  it  again  divided,
one  line  running  nearly  straight  to  Fanum  Fortunae
on  the  Adriatic,  while  the  other  diverging  to  An-
cona  continued  from  thence  along  the  coast  to  Fa-
num Fortunae^  where  the  two  branches  uniting
passed  on  to  Ariminum  through  Pisaurum.  From
thence  the  Via  Flaminia  was  extended  under  the
name  of  the  Via  Aemilia  and  traversed  the  heart
of  Cisalpine  Gaul  through  Bononia^Mutina^  Parma,
Placentia  (where  it  crossed  the  Po)  to  Mediolanum.
From  this  point  branches  were  sent  off  through
Bergomum,  Briaria,  Verona,  Vicentia,  Patavium  and
Aquileia  to  Tergeste  on  the  east,  and  through  No-
varia,  Vercelli,  Eporedia  and  Augusta  Praetoria
to  the  Alpis  Graia  on  the  west,  besides  another
branch  in  the  same  direction  through  Ticinum  and
Jndustria  to  Augusta  Taurinorum.  Nor  must  we
omit  the  Via  Postumia,  which  struck  from  Verona
right  down  across  the  Appenines  to  Genoa,  passing
through  Mantua  and  Cremona,  crossing  the  Po  at
Placentia  and  so  through  Iria,  Dertona  and  Li-
barna,  sending  oif  a  branch  from  Dertona  to  Asia.

Of  the  roads  striking  out  of  the  Via  Flaminia  in
the  immediate  vicinity  of  Rome  the  most  important
is  the  Via  Cassia,  which  diverging  near  the  Pons
Mulvius  and  passing  not  far  from  Veii  traversed
Etruria  through  Baccanae,  Sutrium,  Vulsinii,  Clu-
sium,  Arretium,  Florentia,  Pistoria,  and  Luca,
joining  the  Via  Aurelia  at  Luna.

(a)  The  Via  Amerina  broke  off  from  the  Via
Cassia  near  Baccanae,  and  held  north  through
Falerii,  Tuder,  and  Perusia,  re-uniting  itself  with
the  Via  Cassia  at  Clusium.

(i8)  Not  far  from  the  Pons  Mulvius  the  Via
Clodia  separated  from  the  Via  dassia,  and  pro-
ceeding to  Sabate  on  the  Lacus  Sabatinus  there
divided  into  two,  the  principal  branch  passing
through  central  Etruria  to  Rusellae  and  thence  due
north  to  Florentia,  the  other  passing  through  Tar-
quinii  and  then  falling  into  the  Via  Aurelia.

(7)  Beyond  Baccanae  the  Via  Cimina  branched
off,  crossing  the  Mons  Ciminus  and  rejoining  the
Via  Cassia  near  Fanum  Voltumnae.

IX.  The  Via  Aurklia,  the  Great  Coast  Road,
issued  originally  from  the  Porta  Janiculensis  and
subsequently  from  the  Porta  Aurelia.  It  reached
the  coast  at  Alsium  and  followed  the  shore  of  the
lower  sea  along  Etruria  and  Liguria  by  Genoa  as
far  as  Forum  Julii  in  Gaul.  In  the  first  instance
it  extended  no  farther  than  Pisa.

X.  The  Via  Portitensis  kept  the  right  bank
of  the  Tiber  to  Partus  Augusti.

XL  The  Via  Ostiensis  originally  passed
through  the  Porta  Trigemina,  afterwards  through
the  Porta  Ostiensis,  and  kept  the  left  bank  of  the
Tiber  to  Ostia.  From  thence  it  was  continued
under  the  name  of  Via  Severiana  along  the  coast
southward  tlirough  Laurentum,  Antium,  and  Cir-
caei,  till  it  joined  the  Via  Appia  at  Tarracina.
The  Via  Laurentina,  leading  direct  to  Lauren-
tum, seems  to  have  branched  off  from  the  Via
Ostiensis  at  a  short  distance  from  Rome.

XII.  Lastly,  the  Via  Ardeatina  from  Rome
to  Ardea.  According  to  some  this  branched  off
from  the  Via  Appia,


VIATOR.

11

Alplahetical  Table  oftl

e  Viae  described  above.

1.

Via  Aemilia  VIII.

20.

Via  Labicana  III.

2.

„    Appia  1.

21.

„    Latiiia  II.

3.

„    Aquillia  I.  (4.)

22.

„    Laurentina  XI.

4.

„    Amerina  VIII.  (a.)

23.

„    Minucia  I.  (7.)

5.

„    Ardeatina  XII.

24.

„    Nomentana  VI.

6.

„    Aurelia  IX.

25.

„     Numicia  I.  (7.)

7.

„     Campana  I.  (3.)

26.

„     Ostiensis  XI.

8.

„    Cassia  VIII.

27.

„    Portuensis  X.

9.

„    Cimina  VIII.  (y.)

28.

„    Postumia  VIII.

10.

„     Clodia  VIII.  (3.)

29.

„    Praenestina  IV.

11.

„     Collatina  V.

30.

„     Salaria  VII.

12.

„     Consulares  I.  (3.)

31.

„     Setinal.  (1.)

13.

„    Domitiana  I.  (2.)

32.

„     Severiana  XI.

14.

„    Egnatia  I.  (5.)

33.

„     Sublacensis  V.

15.

„    Ficulnensis  VI.

34.

„     Tiburtina  V.

16.

„    Flaminia  VIII.

35.

„     Trajana  I.  (6.)
„     Tusculana  II.

17.

„     Frentana  Appula  V.

36.

18.

„    GabinalV.

37.

„    Valeria  V.

19.

„    Hadrianall.

The  most  elaborate  treatise  upon  Roman  Roads
is  Bergier,  Histoire  des  Grands  Chemins  de  VEm-
pire  Romain,  published  in  1622.  It  is  translated
into  Latin  in  the  tenth  volume  of  the  Thesaurus  of
Graevius,  and  with  the  notes  of  Henninius  occupies
more  than  800  folio  pages.  In  the  first  part  of
the  above  article  the  essay  of  Nibby,  Delle  Vie
degli  Antichi  disseriazione,  appended  to  the  fourth
volume  of  the  fourth  Roman  edition  of  Nardini,
has  been  closely  followed.  Considerable  caution,
however,  is  necessary  in  using  the  works  of  this
author,  who  although  a  profound  local  antiquary,
is  by  no  means  an  accurate  scholar.  To  gain  a
knowledge  of  that  portion  of  the  subject  so  lightly
touched  upon  at  the  close  of  the  article,  it  is  neces-
sary to  consult  the  various  commentaries  upon  the
Tabula  Peutingeriana  and  the  different  ancient
Itineraries,  together  with  the  geographical  works
of  CoUarius,  Cluverius,  and  D'Anville.       [W.  R.]

VIA'TICUM  {icpoSiov)  is,  properly  speaking,
every  thing  necessary  for  a  person  setting  out  on  a
journey,  and  thus  comprehends  money,  provisions,
dresses,  vessels,  &c.  (Plaut.  Epid.  v.  1.9;  Plin.
Epist.  vii.  12  ;  Cic.  de  Sefiect.  18.)  When  a  Roman
magistrate,  praetor,  proconsul,  or  quaestor  went  to
his  province,  the  state  provided  him  with  all  that
was  necessaiy  for  his  journey.  But  as  the  state  in
this  as  in  most  other  cases  of  expenditure  preferred
paying  a  sum  at  once  to  having  any  part  in  the
actual  business,  the  state  engaged  contractors
(redempiores),  who  for  a  stipulated  sum  had  to  pro-
vide the  magistrates  with  the  viaticum,  the  principal
parts  of  which  appear  to  have  been  beasts  of  burden
and  tents  (nMliet  tabernacula).  Julius  Caesar  in-
troduced some  modification  of  this  system,  by  his
Lex  De  Repetundis  [Repetijndae]  ;  and  Augustus
once  for  all  fixed  a  certain  sura  to  be  given  to  the
proconsuls  (probably  to  other  provincial  magistrates
also)  on  setting  out  to  their  provinces,  so  that  the
redemptores  had  no  more  to  do  with  it.  (Cic.  ad
Fam.  xii.  3  ;  Suet.  Aug.  36  ;  Gellius,  xvii.  2,  13  ;
comp.  Sigonius,  de  Antiq.  Jure  Provinc.  iii.  11  ;
Casaubon  ad  Tlieophrast.  11.)  [L.  S.]

VIA'TOR  was  a  servant  who  attended  upon
and  executed  the  commands  of  certain  Roman  ma-
gistrates, to  whom  he  bore  the  same  relation  as  the
lictor  did  to  other  magistrates.  The  name  viatores
was  derived  from  the  circumstance  of  their  being
chiefly  employed  on  messages  either  to  call  upon
senators  to  attend  the  meeting  of  the  senate,  or
to  summon  the  people  to  the  comitia,  &c.  (Cic.  de
Senect.  16.)  In  the  earlier  times  of  the  republic
we  find  viatores  as  ministers  of  such  magistrates
also  as  had  their  lictors  :  viatores  of  a  dictator  and
of  the  consuls  are  mentioned  by  Livy  (vi.  15,  xxii.


1196


VICUS.


11 ;  comp.  Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  4  ;  Liv.  viii.  18).  In
later  times  however  viatores  are  only  mentioned
with  such  magistrates  as  had  only  potestas  and  not
imperium,  such  as  the  tribunes  of  the  people,  the
censors,  and  the  aediles.  They  were,  in  short,  the
attendants  of  all  magistrates  who  had  x]\e  jus  pren-
dendi.  (Gell.  xiii.  12  ;  Liv.  ii.  bQ,  xxx.  39,  xxxix.
34  ;  Lydus,  de  Magist.  i.  44.)  How  many  via-
tores attended  each  of  these  magistrates  is  not
known  ;  one  of  them  is  said  to  have  had  the  right
at  the  command  of  his  magistrate  to  bind  persons
(ligare),  whence  he  was  called  lictor.  (Gell.  xii.  3.)
It  is  not  improbable  that  the  ancient  writers  some-
times confound  viatores  and  lictores.  (Sigonius,  de
Aid.  Jur.  Civ.  Romanorum.,  ii.  15  ;  Becker,  Handb.
der  Rom.  Alterth.  vol.  ii.  pt.  ii.  p.  379.)  [L.  S.]
VICA'RII  SERVI.  [Servus.  p.  1 037,  b.]
VICA'RIUS.  [ExKRCiTus,  p.  504,  a.]
VICE'SIMA,  a  tax  of  five  per  cent.  Every
Roman,  when  he  manumitted  a  slave,  had  to  pay
to  the  state  a  tax  of  one-twentieth  of  his  value,
whence  the  tax  was  called  vicesima  manumissionis.
This  tax  appears  to  have  been  levied  from  the
earliest  times,  and  was  not  abolished  when  all
other  imposts  were  done  away  with  in  Rome  and
Italy.  (Liv.  vii.  16,  xxvii.  10  ;  Cic.  Ad  Att.W.  16.)
Caracalla  raised. this  tax  to  a  deciina,  that  is,  ten
per  cent.,  but  Macrinus  again  reduced  it  to  the  old
standard.  (Dion.  Cass.  Ixxvii.  9,  Ixxviii.  12.)  The
persons  employed  in  collecting  it  were  called  Vice-
simarii,  (Petron.  Fragm.  Tragur.  65  ;  Orelli,  In-
script.  n.  3333,  See.)

A  tax  called  vicesima  hereditatium  et  legatorum  was
introduced  by  Augustus  {Lex  Julia  Vicesimaria) :  it
consisted  of  five  per  cent,  which  every  Roman  citizen
had  to  pay  to  the  aerarium  militare,  upon  any  in-
heritance or  legacy  left  to  him,  with  the  exception
of  such  as  were  left  to  a  citizen  by  his  nearest  re-
latives, and  such  as  did  not  amount  to  above  a  cer-
tain sum.  (Dion  Cass.  Iv.  25,  Ivi.  28  ;  Plin.  Paneg.
37,  &c.  ;  Capitol.  M.  Antonin.  11.)  Peregrini  and
Latini  who  had  become  Roman  citizens  had,  in  a
legal  sense,  no  relative,  and  were  therefore  obliged
in  all  cases  to  pay  the  vicesima  hereditatium.  (Plin.
Paneg.  I.e.)  As  only  citizens  had  to  pay  this  tax,
Caracall<i,  in  order  to  make  it  more  productive,
granted  the  franchise  to  all  the  subjects  of  the  em-
pire, and  at  the  same  time  raised  it  to  ten  per  cent.
{decima),  but  Macrinus  again  reduced  it  to  five
(Dion.  Cass.  Ixxvii.  9,  Ixxviii.  12),  and  at  last  it
was  abolished  entirely.  It  was  levied  in  Italy  and
the  provinces  by  procuratores  appointed  for  the
purpose,  and  who  are  mentioned  in  many  inscrip-
tions  as   PROCURATORES    XX    HEREDITATIUM,   or

AD  VECTiGAL  XX  HEREDiT.  But  these  officers
generally  sold  it  for  a  round  sum  to  the  publican!,
which  the  latter  had  to  pay  in  to  the  praefects  of
the  aerarium  militare.  (Plin.  EpisU  vii.  14,  Paneg.
37.)  [L.  S.]

VICOMAGISTRL     [Vicus.]

VrCTIMA.     [Sacrificium.]

VICTORIATUS.     [Denarius.]

VICUS  is  the  name  of  the  subdivisions  into
which  the  four  regions  occupied  by  the  four  city
tribes  of  Servius  TuUius  were  divided,  while  the
country  regions,  according  to  an  institution  ascribed
to  Numa,  were  subdivided  into  Pagi.  (Dionys.  ii.
76.)  This  division,  together  with  that  of  the  four
regions  of  the  four  city  tribes,  remained  down  to
the  time  of  Augustus,  who  made  the  vici  subdivi-
sions of  the  fourteen  regions  into  which  he  divided


VILLA.

the  city.  (Suet.  Aug.  30.)  In  this  division  each
vicus  consisted  of  one  main  street,  including  several
smaller  by-streets  ;  their  number  was  424,  and
each  was  superintended  by  four  officers,  called  vico-
magisiri,  who  had  a  sort  of  local  police,  and  who,
according  to  the  regulation  of  Ausrustus,  were
every  year  chosen  by  lot  from  among  the  people
who  lived  in  the  vicus.  (Suet.  /.  c.  ;  Dion  Cass.  Iv.
8.)  On  certain  days,  probably  at  the  celebration
of  the  compitalia,  they  wore  the  praetexta,  and
each  of  them  was  accompanied  by  two  lictors,
(Dion  Cass.  L  c. ;  Ascon.  ad  Cic.  in  Pison.  p.  7.  ed.
Orelli.)  These  officers,  however,  were  not  a  new
institution  of  Augustus,  for  they  had  existed  during
the  time  of  the  republic,  and  had  had  the  same
functions  as  a  police  for  the  vici  of  the  Servian
division  of  the  city.  (Liv.  xxxiv.  7  ;  Festus,  s.  v.
Magistrare ;  comp.  Sextus  Rufus,  Breviarium  de
Regionibus  Urbis  Romae  ;  and  P.  Victor,  de  Regio-
nibus  Urbis  Romae.)  [L.  S.]

VICUS.  [Universitas,  p.  1216,  a.]
VI'GILES.  [Exercitus,  p.  510,  a.]
VIGI'LIAE.  [Castra,  p.  250,  b.]
VIGINTISEXVIRI  were  twenty-six  magis-
tratus  minores,  among  whom  were  included  the
triumviri  capitales,  the  triumviri  monetales,  the
quatuorviri  viarum  curandarum  for  the  city,  the  two
curatores  viarum  for  the  roads  outside  the  city,  the
decemviri  litibus  {stlitibus)  judicandis,  and  the  four
praefects  who  were  sent  into  Campania  for  the
purpose  of  administering  justice  there.  Augustus
reduced  the  number  of  officers  of  this  college  to
twenty  (vigintiviri).,  as  the  two  curatores  viarum
for  the  roads  outside  the  city  and  the  four  Campa-
nian  praefects  were  abolished.  (Dion  Cass.  liv.  26.)
Down  to  the  time  of  Augustus  the  sons  of  senators
had  generally  sought  and  obtained  a  place  in  the
college  of  the  vigintisexviri,  it  being  tlie  first  step
towards  the  higher  offices  of  the  republic  ;  but  in
A.  D.  13  a  senatusconsultum  was  passed  ordaining
that  only  equites  should  be  eligible  to  the  college
of  the  vigintiviri.  The  consequence  of  this  was
that  the  vigintiviri  had  no  seats  in  the  senate,
unless  they  had  held  some  other  magistracy  which
conferred  this  right  upon  them.  (Dion  Cass.  I.e.)
The  age  at  which  a  person  might  become  a  vigin-
tivir  appears  to  have  been  twent\\  (Compare  Dion
Cass.  Ix.  5  ;  Tacit.  Annul,  iii.  29,  with  Lipsius'
note  ;  Spart.  Did.  Julian.  1.)  An  account  of  the
magistrates  forming  this  college  has  been  given  in
separate  articles.  [L.  S.l

VIGINTIVIRL  [Vigintisexviri.]
VILLA,  a  farm  or  country-house.  The  Roman
writers  mention  two  kinds  of  villa,  the  villa  rusiu-a
or  farm-house,  and  the  villa  urbana  or  pspudo-
tirbana^  a  residence  in  the  country  or  in  the  suburbs
of  a  town.  When  both  of  these  were  attached  to
an  estate,  they  were  generally  united  in  the  same
range  of  buildings,  but  sometimes  they  were  placed
at  different  parts  of  the  estate.  The  part  of  the
villa  rustica,  in  which  the  produce  of  tlie  farm  was
kept,  is  distinguished  by  Columella  by  a  separate
name,  villa  J^rucluaria.

1.  The  villa  rustica  is  described  by  Varro  (/?.  R.
i.  11,  13),  Vitruvius  (vi.  9),  and  Columella  (i.  4.
§5).

The  villa,  which  must  be  of  size  corresponding
to  that  of  the  farm,  is  best  placed  at  the  foot  of  a
wooded  mountain,  in  a  spot  supplied  with  running
water,  and  not  exposed  to  severe  winds  nor  to  the
effluvia  of  marshes,  nor  (by  being  close  to  a  public


VILLA.

road)  to  a  too  frequent  influx  of  visitors.  The  villa
attached  to  a  large  farm  had  two  courts  {coliortes^
chortes,  cortes,  Varro,  i.  13).  At  the  entrance  to
the  outer  court  was  the  abode  of  the  villkus,  that
he  might  observe  who  went  in  and  out,  and  over
the  door  was  the  room  of  the  procurator.  ( Varro,
Lc.  ;  Colum.  i.  6.)  Near  this,  in  as  warm  a  spot
as  possible,  was  the  kitchen,  which,  besides  being
used  for  the  preparation  of  food,  was  the  place
where  the  slaves  {familiae)  assembled  after  the
labours  of  the  day,  and  where  they  performed
certain  in-door  work.  Vitruvius  places  near  the
kitchen  the  baths  and  the  press  (torcular)  for  wine
and  oil,  but  the  latter,  according  to  Columella,
though  it  requires  the  warmth  of  the  sun,  should
not  be  exposed  to  artificial  heat.  In  the  outer
court  were  also  the  cellars  for  wine  and  oil  {cel/ae
viftariae  et  oleariae\  which  were  placed  on  the
level  ground,  and  the  granaries,  which  were  in  the
upper  stories  of  the  farm-buildings,  and  carefully
protected  from  damp,  heat,  and  insects.  These
store-rooms  form  the  separate  villa  fruduaria  of
Columella  ;  Varro  places  them  in  the  inlla  rtistica,
but  Vitruvius  recommends  that  all  produce  which
could  be  injured  by  fire  should  be  stored  without
the  villa.

In  both  courts  were  the  chambers  (celiac)  of  the
slaves,  fronting  the  south  ;  but  the  ergastulum  for
those  who  were  kept  in  chains  {vi7icti)  was  under-
ground, being  lighted  by  several  high  and  narrow
windows.

The  inner  court  was  occupied  chiefly  by  the
horses,  cattle,  and  other  live  stock,  and  here  were
the  stables  and  stalls  (bubilia,  equilia^  ovilia).

A  reservoir  of  water  was  made  in  the  middle  of
each  court,  that  in  the  outer  court  for  soaking  pulse
and  other  vegetable  produce,  and  that  in  the  inner,
which  was  supplied  with  fresh  water  by  a  spring,
for  the  use  of  the  cattle  and  poultry.

2.  The  Villa  urbana  ov pseudo-urbana  was  so  called
because  its  interior  arrangements  corresponded  for
the  most  part  to  those  of  a  town-house.  [House.]
Vitruvius  (vi.  8)  merely  states  that  the  description
of  the  latter  will  apply  to  the  former  also,  except
that  in  the  town  the  atrium  is  placed  close  to  the
door,  but  in  the  country  the  peristyle  comes  first,
and  afterwards  the  atrium,  surrounded  by  paved
porticoes,  looking  upon  the  palestra  and  ambulatio.

Our  chief  sources  of  information  on  this  subject
are  two  letters  of  Pliny,  in  one  of  which  (ii.  17)
he  describes  his  Laurentine  villa,  in  the  other  (v.  6)
his  Tuscan,  with  a  few  allusions  in  one  of  Cicero's
letters  {ad  Quint,  iii.  1),  and,  as  a  most  important
illustration  of  these  descriptions,  the  remains  of  a
suburban  villa  at  Pompeii.  {Pompeii^  ii.  c.  1 1,  Lond.
183-2.)

The  clearest  account  is  that  given  by  Pliny  in
the  first  of  the  tv/o  letters  mentioned  above,  from
which,  therefore,  the  following  description  is  lor
the  most  part  taken.

The  villa  was  approached  by  an  avenue  of  plane
trees  leading  to  a  portico,  in  front  of  which  was  a
mystiis  divided  into  flower-beds  by  borders  of  box.
This  xystus  formed  a  terrace,  from  which  a  grassy
slope,  ornamented  with  box-trees  cut  into  the  figores
of  animals,  and  forming  two  lines  opposite  to  one
another,  descended  till  it  was  lost  in  the  plidn,
which  was  covered  with  acanthus.  (Plin.  v.  6.)
Next  to  the  portico  was  an  atrium,  smaller  and
plainer  than  the  corresponding  apartment  in  a
town-house.     In  this  respect  Pliny's  description  is


VILLICUS.  1197

at  variance  with  the  rule  of  Vitruvius  ;  and  the
villa  at  Pompeii  also  has  no  atrium.  It  would
appears  from  Cicero  (/.  c.)  that  both  arrangements
were  common.  Next  to  the  atrium  in  Pliny's
Laurentine  villa  was  a  small  elliptic  peristyle
(porticus  in  O  literae  similitudinem  circu7nactaey
where,  however,  the  readings  D  and  A  are  also
given  instead  of  0).  The  intervals  between  tiie
columns  of  this  peristyle  were  closed  with  VdXc
windows  (specularibus,  see  DoMus,  p.  432),  and
the  roof  projected  considerably,  so  that  it  formed
an  excellent  retreat  in  unfavourable  weather.  The
open  space  in  the  centre  of  this  peristyle  seems
often  to  have  been  covered  with  moss  and  orna-
mented with  a  fountain.  Opposite  to  the  middle
of  this  peristyle  was  a  pleasant  cavaedium,  and
beyond  it  an  elegant  triclinium,  standing  out  from
the  other  buildings,  with  windows  or  glazed  doors
in  the  front  and  sides,  which  thus  commanded
a  view  of  the  grounds  and  of  the  surrounding
country,  while  behind  there  was  an  uninterrupted
view  through  the  cavaedium,  peristyle,  atrium,
and  portico  into  the  xystus  and  the  open  country
beyond.

Such  was  the  principal  suite  of  apartments  in
Pliny's  Laurentine  villa.  In  the  villa  at  Pompeii
the  arrangement  is  somewhat  difl'erent.  The  en-
trance is  in  the  street  of  the  tombs.  The  portico
leads  through  a  small  vestibule  into  a  large  square
peristyle  paved  with  opus  signi7mm,  and  having  an
impluvium  in  the  centre  of  its  uncovered  area.
Beyond  this  is  an  open  hall,  resembling  in  form
and  position  the  tablinum  in  a  town-house.  Next
is  a  long  gallery  extending  almost  across  the  whole
width  of  the  house,  and  beyond  it  is  a  large  cyzi-
cene  oecus,  corresponding  to  the  large  triclinium  in
Pliny's  villa.  This  room  looks  out  upon  a  spacious
court,  which  Avas  no  doubt  a  xystus  or  garden,  and
which  is  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  a  colonnade
composed  of  square  pillars,  the  top  of  which  forms
a  terrace.  In  the  farthest  side  of  this  court  is  a
gate  leading  out  to  the  open  country.  As  the
ground  slopes  downward  considerably  from  the
front  to  the  back  of  the  villa,  the  tprrace  just
spoken  of  is  on  a  level  with  the  cyzicene  oecus,  the
windows  of  which  opened  upon  it ;  and  beneath
the  oecus  itself  is  a  range  of  apartments  on  the
level  of  the  large  court,  which  were  probably  used
in  summer,  on  account  of  their  coolness.

The  other  rooms  were  so  arranged  as  to  take
advantage  of  the  difi^erent  seasons  and  of  tlie  sur-
rounding scenery.  Of  these,  however,  there  is  only
one  which  requires  particular  notice,  namely,  a
state  bed-chamber,  projecting  from  the  other  build-
ings in  an  elliptic  or  semicircular  form,  so  as  to
admit  the  sun  during  its  whole  course.  This
apartment  is  mentioned  by  Pliny,  and  is  also  found
in  the  Pompeian  villa.  In  Pliny's  Laurentine
villa  its  wall  Avas  fitted  up  as  a  library.

The  villa  contained  a  set  of  baths,  the  general
arrangement  of  which  was  similar  to  that  of  the
public  baths.     [Balneak.]

Attached  to  it  were  a  garden,  ambulatio.,  gestatio,
hippodromus,  sphaeristerium.,  and  in  short  all  neces-
sary arrangements  for  enjoying  different  kinds  of
exercise.     [Hortus  ;  Gymnasium.]

(Becker,  Gallus.,  vol.  i.  p.  258  ;  Schneider's  notes
on  Columella  and  Varro,  and  Gierig's  on  Pliny,
contain  many  useful  remarks.)  [P.  S.]

VrLLICUS  (^nLTpoTos  in  Greek  writers,  Plut,
Crass.  4),  a  slave  who   had  the  superintendence


11.98


VINDICATIO.


of  the  villa  rtistica,  and  of  all  the  business  of
the  farm,  except  the  cattle,  which  were  under  the
care  of  the  magister  pecoris.  ( Varro,  R.  R.  i.  2.)
The  duties  of  the  villicus  were  to  obey  his  master
implicit]}',  and  to  govern  the  other  slaves  with
moderation,  never  to  leave  the  villa  except  to  go  to
market,  to  have  no  intercourse  with  soothsayers,
to  take  care  of  the  cattle  and  the  implements  of
husbandry,  and  to  manage  all  the  operations  of  the
farm.  (Cato,  R.  R.  5.  142.)  His  duties  are  de-
scribed at  great  length  by  Columella  (xi.  1,  and
i.  8),  and  those  of  his  wife  (villica)  by  the  same
writer  (xii.  1),  and  by  Cato  (c.  143).

The  word  was  also  used  to  describe  a  person  to
whom  the  management  of  any  business  was  en-
trusted. (See  the  passage  quoted  in  Forcellini's
Lexicon.)  [P.  S.]

VINA'LIA.  There  were  two  festivals  of  this
name  celebrated  by  the  Romans:  the  Vinalia
urhana  or  prioria,  and  the  Vinalia  rustica  or  altera.
The  vinalia  urbana  were  celebrated  on  the  23rd  of
Aprjl  (ix.  Calend.  Mai).  This  festival  answered
to  the  Geeek  inQovyia^  as  on  this  occasion  the  wine
casks  which  had  been  filled  the  preceding  autumn
were  opened  for  the  first  time,  and  the  wine  tasted.
(Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  69.  §  3.)  But  before  men  ac-
tually tasted  the  new  wine,  a  libation  was  offered
to  Jupiter  (Fest.  s.  v.  Vinalia)^  which  was  called
calpar.     (Fest.  s.  v.  Calpar.)

The  rustic  vinalia,  which  fell  on  the  19th  of
August  (xiv.  Calend.  Sept.)  and  was  celebrated
by  the  inhabitants  of  all  Latium,  was  the  day  on
which  the  vintage  was  opened.  On  this  occasion
the  flamen  dialis  offered  lambs  to  Jupiter,  and
while  the  flesh  of  the  victims  lay  on  the  altar,  he
broke  with  his  own  hands  a  bunch  of  grapes  from
a  vine,  and  by  this  act  he,  as  it  were,  opened  the
vintage  {vindemiam  auspicari  ;  Varro,  de  Ling.  Lat.
vi.  20),  and  no  must  was  allowed  to  be  conveyed
into  the  city  until  this  solemnity  was  performed.
(Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  69.  §  4.)*  This  day  Avas
sacred  to  Jupiter,  and  Venus  too  appears  to  have
had  a  share  in  it.  (Varro,  /.  c.  ;  de  Re  Rust.  i.  1  ;
Macrob.  Sat.  i.  4;  Ovid,  Fast.  iv.  897,  &c.)  An
account  of  the  story  which  was  believed  to  have
given  rise  to  the  celebration  of  this  festival  is  given
by  Festus  («.  v.  Rustica  vinalia)  and  Ovid  {Fast.
iv.  863,  &c.  ;  compare  Aurel.  Vict,  de  Orig.  Gent.
Rom.  15).  [L.  S.]

VINDEMIA'LIS  FE'RIA.  [Feriae,  p.
530,  a.]

VINDEX.  [Actio,  p.   ]1,  a;    Manus    In-

JECTIO.]

VINDICA'TIO.  Actiones  In  Rem  were  called
Vindicationes  :  Actiones  in  Personam,  "  quibus
dari  fieri  oportere  intendimus,"  were  called  Con-
dictiones.  (Gaius,  iv.  5.)  Vindicationes  therefore
were  actions  about  the  title  to  res  Corporales,
and  to  Jura  in  re.  (Gaius,  iv.  3.)  The  distinction
between  Vindicationes  and  Condictiones  was  an
essential  distinction  which  was  not  affected  by
the  change  in  the  form  of  procedure  from  the
Legis  Actiones  to  that  of  the  Formulae.  The
Legis  Actiones  fell  into  disuse  (Gaius,  iv.  31)
except  in  the  case  of  Damnum  Infectum  and  a
Judicum  Centumvirale,  and  from  this  time  both
Vindicationes  and  Condictiones  were  prosecuted
by  the  Formulae.  [Actio.]  The  peculiar  process
of  the  Vindicatio  belonged  to  the  period  when  the
Legis  Actiones  were  in  force.

The  five  modes  of  proceeding  Lege  (Gaius,  iv.


VINDICATIO.

12),  were  Sacramento  ;  Per  judicis  postulationem  ?•
Per  condictionem  ;  Per  manus  injectionem  ;  Per
pignoris  capionem.  [Per  Judicis  Postula-
TioNEM  ;  Per  Condictionem  ;  Manus  Injec-
tio  ;  Per  Pignoris  Capionem.]

A  man  might  proceed  Sacramento  either  in  the
case  of  an  Actio  in  personam  or  an  Actio  in  rem.
The  part  of  the  process  which  contained  the  sacra-
metito  contendere,  or  the  challenge  to  the  deposit
of  a  sum  of  money  originally,  and  afterwards  to
the  engagement  to  pay  a  penalty,  was  applicable
both  to  an  action  in  personam  and  an  action  in
rem.  The  condition  of  the  penalty  was  in  fact
the  existence  or  non-existence  of  the  right  claimed
by  the  plaintiff,  whatever  the  right  might  be  ;  and
the  process  thus  assumed  the  form  of  a  suit  for  the
penalty.  It  was  the  Sacraraentum  which  gave  to
this  form  of  action  its  peculiar  character.  When  the
parties  were  in  judicio,  they  briefly  stated  their  cases
severally,  which  was  called  causae  conjectio.  If  it
was  an  Actio  in  rem,  that  is  a  Vindicatio,  moveable
things  and  moving  things  (mobilia  et  moventia)
which  could  be  brought  before  the  Praetor  (injtis),
were  claimed  before  the  Praetor  (in  jure  vindica-
bantur)  thus  :  he  who  claimed  a  thing  as  his  pro-
perty {qui  vtndicabat),  held  a  rod  in  his  hand,
and  laying  hold  of  the  thing,  it  might  be  a  slave
or  other  thing,  he  said  ;  "  Hunc  ego  hominem  ex
jure  Quiritium  Meum  esse  aio  secundum  causara
sicut  dixi.  Ecce  tibi  Vindictam  imposui  ; "  and
saying  this  he  placed  the  rod  on  the  thing.  The
other  claimant  (adversarius)  did  and  said  tlxe  same.
This  claiming  of  a  thing  as  property  by  laying  the
hand  upon  it,  was  "  in  jure  manum  conserere,"  a
phrase  as  old  as  the  XII  Tables.  (Gell.  xx.  10.)
The  Praetor  then  said  :  "  Mittite  ambo  hominem,"
and  the  claimants  obeyed.  Then  he  who  had  made
the  first  vindicatio  thus  addressed  his  opponent:
"Postulo  anne  dicas  qua  ex  causa  vindicaveris."
The  opponent  replied  :  "  Jus  peregi  sicut  Vindictam
imposui."  Then  he  who  had  made  the  first  vindi-
catio proceeded  to  that  part  of  the  process  called  the
Sacramentum,  which  was  in  the  form  of  a  wager
as  to  the  Right ;  he  said  :  **  Quando  tu  injuria  vin-
dicavisti  D  Aeris  sacramento  te  provoco."  The
opponent  replied  by  giving  the  Similiter  ;  "  Simi-
liter ego  te."

The  process  of  the  Sacramentum,  as  already
observed,  was  applicable  to  an  actio  in  personam  ;
but  as  that  was  founded  on  an  obligatio,  there  was
of  course  no  specific  object  to  claim.  In  the  case  of
a  Vindicatio  the  Praetor  declared  the  Vindiciae
in  favour  of  one  of  the  parties,  that  is,  in  the  mean-
time he  established  one  of  the  parties  as  Possessor,
and  compelled  him  to  give  security  to  his  opponent
for  the  thing  in  dispute  and  the  mesne  profits,  or
as  it  was  technically  expressed,  "  jubebat  praedes
adversario  dare  litis  et  vindiciarum.'"

The  Praetor  took  security  from  both  for  the
amount  of  the  Sacramentum ;  for  the  party  who
failed  paid  the  amount  of  the  Sacramentum  as  a
penalty  (jooewae  nomine)  which  penalty  belonged
to  the  state  {in  publicum  cedebat).  The  sums  of
money  were  originally  deposited  in  sacro :  the
successful  party  took  his  money  back,  and  the  de-
posit of  the  unsuccessful  party  was  paid  into  the
aerarium.  (Varro,  de  L.  L.  180,  Miiller  ;  Festus,
s.  v.  Sacramentum.)

The  Poena  of  the  Sacramentum  was  quingenaria,
that  is,  quingenti  asses,  in  cases  when  the  property
in  dispute  was  of  the  value  of  a  thousand  asses  and


VINDICATIO.

upwards  ;  and  in  cases  of  smaller  value  it  was  fifty
asses.  This  was  a  provision  of  the  XII.  Tables  ;
but  if  a  man's  freedom  {Ubertas)  was  in  issue,  the
poena  was  only  fifty  asses.

If  the  property  claimed  was  a  piece  of  land,  the
claimants  appeared  In  jure  and  challenged  each
other  to  go  on  the  land  in  the  presence  of  witnesses
{superstites^  Festus,  s.  v. ;  Cic.  pro  Murena,  12),
where  each  made  his  claim.  In  the  time  of  the
Twelve  Tables  says  Gellius  (xx.  10)  the  Magis-
tratus  who  presided  in  the  court  accompanied  the
parties  to  the  land  in  order  to  perfect  the  process
in  jure  ;  but  this  mode  of  procedure,  which  might
do  in  very  early  times  and  within  a  small  territory,
must  have  become  inconvenient.  Accordingly  it
became  the  practice  for  one  of  the  claimants  to  go
through  the  form  of  ejecting  the  other  from  the
land,  which  was  called  the  Vis  Civilis.  (Com-
pare Gellius,  XX.  10  ;  Cic.  pro  Caecina,  1,  7,  32,
pro  lullio^  20.)  In  course  of  time  it  became
the  practice  to  bring  into  court  a  clod  of  earth,  or
a  bit  of  a  column,  as  a  sign  of  the  thing  ;  and
even  in  the  case  of  moveable  objects,  a  part  was
often  brought  into  court  to  represent  the  whole  ;
and  the  Vindicatio  was  made  as  if  the  whole  thing
was  there.  It  seems  that  the  process  might  also
be  begun  by  the  parties  performing  the  ceremony
of  the  Deductio  on  the  ground  before  they  came  In
jus,  where  however  they  performed  the  fiction  of
going  to  the  premises  and  returning.  The  change
in  the  form  of  procedure,  which  change  was  accom-
plished "contra  Duodecim  Tabulas,  tacito  consensu,"
led  to  the  phrase  "ea?  jure  manum  conserere''  (Gell.
XX.  10),  which  is  explained  thus:  one  party
called  the  other  out  of  court  (ex  jure)  "ad  con-
serendam  manum  in  rem  de  qua  agebatur :"  the
parties,  he  says,  then  went  together  to  the  land  in
dispute,  and  brought  a  clod  of  earth  from  it,  "  in
jus  in  urbem  ad  Praetorem  ;"  and  the  clod  of  earth
was  viewed  as  the  whole  "  ager."

When  the  Legis  Actiones  fell  into  disuse,  the
process  of  the  Vindicatio  was  altered  and  became
that  of  the  Sponsio.  The  term  Sponsio  is  best  ex-
plained by  giving  the  substance  of  a  passjige  in
Gaius  (iv.  91,  &c.).  In  the  case  of  an  actio  in  rem,
a  man  might  proceed  either  Per  forraulam  petito-
riam,  in  which  the  Intentio  of  the  plaintiff  was,
that  a  certain  thing  was  his  property  ;  or  he  might
proceed  Per  sponsionera  which  did  not  contain
such  an  Intentio.  The  defendant  was  challenged
to  a  Sponsio  in  such  terms  as  these :  "  Si  homo
quo  de  agitur  ex  jure  Quiritium  mens  est  sestertios
XXV.  Nummos  dare  spondes?"  The  Intentio  in
the  formula  was  that  if  the  slave  belonged  to  the
plaintiff^,  the  sum  of  money  contained  in  the  Spon-
feio  ought  to  be  paid  to  the  plaintiff  {spottsionis
sunimam  actori  dari  dehere).  The  Sponsio  evi-
dently took  its  name  from  the  verb  Spondeo.  If
the  plaintiff  proved  the  slave  to  be  his  property,  he
was  intitled  to  a  judgment.  Yet  the  sum  of  mo-
ney was  not  paid,  though  it  was  the  object  of  the
Intentio,  for,  says  Gaius,  "  it  is  not  poenalis,  but
praejudicialis,  and  the  sponsio  is  introduced  merely
as  a  means  of  trying  the  right  to  the  property,  and
this  explains  why  the  defendant  has  no  restipula-
tio."  The  sponsio  was  said  to  be  "pro  praede
litis  et  vindiciarum,"  because  it  took  the  place  of
the  praedium,  which  when  the  Legis  actiones  were
ill  use,  was  given  "pro  lite  et  vindiciis,"  that  is,
"  pro  re  et  fructibus"  by  the  possessor  to  the  plain-
tiff.    [Pkaejudicium  ;  Praes.]


VINDICATIO.  1199

This  Sponsio  Praejudicialis  was  merely  a  tech^
nical  mode  of  converting  an  actio  in  rem  into  an
actio  in  personam,  and  we  must  suppose  that  there
was  some  good  reason  for  the  practice.  It  might
be  conjectured  that  it  was  introduced  in  order  to
obviate  the  trouble  and  difficulties  attendant  on  the
old  process  of  the  Vindicatio.

From  the  expression  of  Gaius,  it  appears  that
tliere  was  also  a  Sponsio  Poenalis,  that  is  both  the
defendant  made  a  sponsio  and  the  plaintiff  made  a
restipulatio.  Thus  in  the  case  of  "  certa  pecunia
credita,"  the  defendant's  sponsio  was  made  at  the
risk  of  losing  the  sum,  if  he  could  not  sustain  his
denial  of  the  plaintiff's  claim  ;  and  the  plaintiff's
restipulatio  was  made  at  the  like  risk  if  he  could
not  support  his  claim.  The  poena  of  the  Sponsio
and  restipulatio  belonged  to  the  successful  party.
(Gaius,  iv.  13.)  There  was  also  a  Poenalis  sponsio
in  the  case  of  Interdicts  (Gaius,  iv.  141,  165,&c.),
and  Pecunia  Constituta.  In  the  case  of  Certa
Pecunia  the  sponsio  was  to  the  amount  of  one-third
of  the  sura  demanded,  which  was  called  legitima
pars.  (Cic.  pro  Rose.  Com.  4,  5.)  In  the  case  of
Constituta  Pecunia  the  sponsio  was  to  the  amount
of  one-half.  (Gaius,  iv.  171.)  These  stipulationes
were  fixed  by  law  ;  in  other  cases  they  were  fixed
by  the  Edict.

These  sponsiones  were  introduced  probably  partly
with  a  view  to  check  litigation,  and  partly  with  a
view  to  give  compensation  to  the  party  who  ulti-
mately obtained  a  verdict ;  for  otherwise  there  do
not  appear  in  the  Roman  law  to  be  any  direct  pro-
visions as  to  the  costs  of  suits.  Thus  Gaius  (iv.
174)  enumerates  four  modes  in  which  the  Actoris
calumnia  is  checked  ;  the  Calumniae  judicium,
Contrarium  judicium,  Jusjurandum,  and  the  Resti-
pulatio. The  Restipulatio,  he  says,  "  is  allowed
in  certain  cases  ;  and  as  in  the  Contrarium  judicium
the  plaintiff  has  in  all  cases  judgment  against  him,
if  he  cannot  sustain  his  case,  and  it  matters  not
whether  or  not  he  knows  that  his  claim  was  not
good,  so  in  all  cases  the  plaintiff  (that  is  if  he  can-
not sustain  his  case)  is  condemned  in  the  penalty
of  the  restipulatio."

As  to  the  form  of  the  Sponsio  the  passage  of
Gaius  already  referred  to  is  an  example  ;  and  there
is  another  in  the  oration  of  Cicero,  pro  P.  Quin-
tio  (8.  27).  The  use  of  the  word  Si  or  Ni  in  the
Sponsio  would  depend  on  the  fact  whicli  was  af-
firmed or  rather  on  the  mode  of  affirmation  and
the  party  affirming.  Cicero  {pro  Caecin.  23)  al-
ludes to  the  use  of  these  words  (sive^  nive).  Bris-
sonius  {de  Formulis,  &c.  v.  7.  p.  348)  has  collected
instances  of  them.

The  other  mode  of  procedure  in  the  case  of  Vin-
dicatio, that  was  in  use  after  the  Legis  Actiones
fell  into  disuse  was,  Per  Fornuilam  Petitoriam,  in
which  the  plaintiff  {acior)  claimed  the  thing  as  his
property  (intendit  rem  suani  esse).  In  this  form  of
proceeding  there  was  the  Stipulatio  called  Judica-
tum  solvi,  by  wliich  the  defendant  engaged  to  obey
the  decree  of  the  Judex.  (Gaius,  iv.  91.)  This
formula  was  adapted  also  to  the  cases  of  Praetorian
ownership  and  the  Actio  Publiciana.  (Gaius,  iv.
34,  36.)  In  cases  which  were  brought  before  the
Centumviri,  it  was  the  practice,  at  least  in  the
Imperial  period,  to  come  first  before  the  Praetor
Urbanus  or  Peregrinus  in  order  that  the  matter
might  be  put  in  the  old  form  of  the  Sacramentum.
(Gaius,  iv.  31,  95  ;  Gell.  xx.  10.)

An  hereditas  was  sued  for  like  any  other  thing


1200


VINDICTA.


either  by  the  Sacramentum,  so  long  as  it  was  in
use,  or  the  Sponsio,  or  the  Petitoria  Formula.
(Gains,  iv.  11,  31  ;  Walter,  Gesehichte  des  Rom.
Becks  ;  Puchta,  Inst.  ii.  §  161.)  [G.  L.]

VINDFCIAE.     [ViNDiCATio.]

VINDICTA.     [Manumissio;    Vindicatio.]

VINDICTA.  A  class  of  actions  in  the  Roman
Law  have  reference  to  Vindicta  as  their  object,
which  is  thus  expressed :  ad  ultionem  pertinet,  in
sola  vindicta  constitutum  est,  Vindictam  continet.
(Dig.  47.  tit.  12.  s.  6.  10  ;  29.  tit.  2.  s.  20.  §  5.)
Some  of  these  actions  had  for  their  object  simply
compensation,  as  the  Actio  doli.  Others  had  for
their  object  to  give  the  complainant  something  more
(poena)  than  the  amount  of  his  injury,  as  in  the
Furti  actio,  and  sometimes  in  addition  to  this  com-
pensation also  as  in  the  Vi  Bonorum  raptorum  actio.
A  third  class  of  actions  had  for  its  immediate  object
money  or  property,  but  this  was  not  the  ultimate
object  as  in  the  cases  already  mentioned,  but
merely  a  means  ;  the  real  object  was  Vindicta.
This  Vindicta  consists  in  the  re-establishment  of  a
right  which  has  been  violated  in  the  person  of  the
complainant,  in  which  case  the  individual  discharges
the  office  which  the  State  discharges  generally  in
matters  of  Crime.  Those  actions  of  which  Vindicta
is  the  object,  are  distinguished  from  other  actions
by  fonning  exceptions  to  the  general  rules  as  to  the
legal  capacity  of  those  who  may  institute  them,
such  as  a  filiusfamilias  and  one  who  has  sustained
a  capitis  deminutio.

The  following  are  actions  of  this  kind : —
1.  Actio  Injuriarum.  When  a  filiusfamilias  was
injured,  a  wrong  was  done  both  to  him  and  to  his
father.  The  injury  done  to  the  son  is  the  only
one  that  belongs  to  the  head  of  Vindicta.  The
father  generally  brought  the  action,  for  he  could
acquire  through  his  son  all  rights  of  action.  But
the  son  could  bring  an  action  in  his  own  name  with
the  permission  of  the  Praetor,  if  the  father  was  ab-
sent, or  was  in  any  way  prevented  from  bringing  the
action  ;  and  in  some  cases,  if  the  father  refused  to
bring  the  action.  The  pecuniary  damages  which
were  the  immediate  object  of  the  action  belonged
to  the  father,  so  that  the  son  appeared  in  the
double  capacity  of  suing  in  his  own  name  in  re-
spect of  the  Vindicta,  and  as  the  representative  of
his  father  in  respect  of  the  damages.  If  the  son
was  emancipated,  the  right  of  action  passed  to  him
and  was  not  destroyed  by  the  capitis  deminutio.

2.  Actio  sepulcri  violati,  which  could  be  brought
by  the  children  of  the  deceased,  even  if  they
refused  the  hereditas,  or  by  the  heredes.  The
object  was  Vindicta,  which  was  effected  by  giving
the  plaintiff  damages  to  the  amount  of  the  wrong
(qttanti  oh  earn  rem  aequum  videhitur,  ^c.  Dig.  47.
tit.  12.  8.  3).  The  action  was  consequently  in
bonum  et  aequum  concepta,  and  the  right  was  not
affected  by  a  capitis  deminutio.  If  those  who  had
a  right  to  bring  the  action  neglected  to  do  so,  any
person  might  bring  the  action  ;  but  in  that  case
the  damages  were  limited  to  100  aurei  by  the  Edict.

3.  Actio  de  effusis.  When  a  free  person  was
injured  by  anything  being  poured  or  thrown  from
a  house,  he  had  an  actio  in  bonum  et  aequum  con-
cepta, the  ultimate  object  of  which  was  Vindicta.

4.  An  action  for  mischief  done  to  a  man  by  any
dangerous  animal  belonging  to  another,  when  it
happened  through  the  want  of  proper  caution  on
the  part  of  the  owner.  (Dig.  21.  tit.  1.  8.  40—43.)

o<  Interdictum   quod  vi   aut  clam.      This  is  a


VINEA.

plaint  which  could  be  instituted  by  a  filiusfamiliai
in  his  own  name,  because  the  object  was  Vindicta.
The  ground  of  this  capacity  of  a  filiusfamilias  was
an  injury  done  to  him  personally  by  a  person  who
acted  in  opposition  to  his  remonstrance.  If  for  in-
stance the  son  inhabited  a  house  belonging  to  his
father  or  one  hired  from  a  stranger,  and  was  dis-
turbed in  his  enjoyment  by  some  act  of  his  neigh-
bour, the  filiusfamilias  might  have  an  action  for
the  amount  of  the  damage,  but  the  pecuniary
satisfaction  would  belong  to  the  father  as  in  the
case  of  the  Actio  Injuriarum.  But  the  action  was
not  in  bonum  et  aequum  concepta,  since  it  had  a
definite  object,  which  was  either  the  restoration  of
things  to  their  former  condition,  which  might  be
immediately  for  the  benefit  of  the  filiusfamilias,  or
to  ascertain  the  value  of  the  wrong  done  (qmd
interest).

6.  The  action  against  a  Libertus  in  respect  of  an
In  Jus  vocatio.  [Patronus.]  If  the  Libertus
had  proceeded  against  the  son  of  his  patron,  and
the  father  was  absent,  the  son  could  institute  the
suit  himself,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Actio  Injuriarum.

7.  Querela  Inofficiosi.     [Testamentum.]

8.  Actiones  Populares,  which  are  actions  in
which  the  plaintiff  claims  a  sum  of  money,  but  not
as  a  private  individual :  he  comes  forward  as  a
kind  of  representative  of  the  State.  If  the  act
complained  of  be  such  as  affects  the  interests  of  in-
dividuals as  such,  they  can  bring  an  action  in
preference  to  any  other  person  and  the  action  is
not  purely  popular :  to  this  class  belong  such  ac-
tions as  the  Actio  sepulcri  violati.  But  if  there
are  no  persons  who  are  individually  interested  in
the  matter  complained  of,  or  none  such  bring  an
action,  any  person  (  unus  ex  populo)  may  bring  the
action  as  the  Procurator  of  the  State,  and  he  is
not  bound  to  give  the  security  which  an  ordinary
procurator  must  give.  A  filiusfamilias  can  bring
such  action.  By  virtue  of  the  Litis  contestatio  the
action  becomes  the  same  as  if  it  were  founded
on  an  obligatio,  and  this  right  of  action  as  well  as
the  money  which  may  arise  from  it  is  acquired  by
the  filiusfamilias  for  his  father.  These  actiones
being  for  fixed  sums  of  money  are  not  in  bonum  et
aequum  conceptae.

With  the  populares  actiones  may  be  classed  as
belonging  to  the  same  kind,  the  Interdicta  Publica
or  Popularia,  and  that  Novi  operis  nuntiatio  which
is  for  the  protection  of  Publicum  Jus  ;  with  this
distinction,  that  the  proceedings  have  not  for  their
object  the  recovery  of  a  sum  of  money.  But  in
the  general  capacity  of  all  persons  to  bring  such
actions,  independent  of  the  usual  rules  as  to  legal
capacity,  all  these  modes  of  proceeding  agree.

(Savigny,  System  des  Jieut.  Rom.  Rechts,  ii.
121.)  [G.L.]

VI'NEA,  in  its  literal  signification,  is  a  bower
formed  of  the  branches  of  vines,  and  from  the  pro-
tection which  such  a  leafy  roof  affords,  the  name
was  applied  by  the  Romans  to  a  roof  under  which
the  besiegers  of  a  town  protected  themselves  against
darts,  stones,  fire,  and  the  like»  which  were  thrown
by  the  besieged  upon  the  assailants.  The  descrip-
tion which  Vegetius  (de  Re  Mil.  iv.  15)  gives  of
such  a  machine  perfectly  agrees  with  what  we  know
of  it  from  the  incidental  mention  of  other  writers.
The  whole  machine  formed  a  roof,  resting  upon
posts  eight  feet  in  height.  The  roof  itself  was  ge-
nerally sixteen  feet  long  and  seven  broad.  The
wooden  frame  was  in  most  cases  light,  so  that  it


VINUM.

coTild  be  carried  by  the  soldiers  ;  sometimes,  how-
ever, when  the  purpose  which  it  was  to  serve  re-
quired great  strength,  it  was  heavy  and  then  the
whole  fabric  probably  was  moved  by  wheels  at-
tached to  the  posts.  The  roof  was  formed  of  planks
and  wicker-work,  and  the  uppermost  layer  or  layers
consisted  of  raw  hides  or  wet  cloth  as  a  protection
against  fire,  by  which  the  besieged  frequently  de-
stro3'ed  the  vineae.  (Liv.  ii.  17,  v.  7,  xxi.  61.)
The  sides  of  a  vinea  were  likewise  protected  by
wicker-work.  Such  machines  were  constructed  in
a  safe  place  at  some  distance  from  the  besieged
town,  and  tlien  carried  or  wheeled  (agere)  close  to
its  walls.  Here  several  of  them  were  frequently
joined  together,  so  that  a  great  number  of  soldiers
might  be  employed  under  them.  When  vineae
had  taken  their  place  close  to  the  walls  the  sol-
diers began  their  operations,  either  by  undermining
the  wails,  and  thus  opening  a  breach,  or  by  em-
ploying the  battering-ram  (aries,  Liv.  xxi.  7,  8).
In  the  time  of  Vegetius  the  soldiers  used  to  call
these  machines  causiae.  (J.  Lipsius,  Poliorcet.  i.
dial.  7.)  [L.  S.]

VINUM  {oJvos).  The  general  term  for  the
fermented  juice  of  the  grape.

The  native  country  of  the  vine  was  long  a  vex-
ata  quaestio  among  botanists,  but,  although  many
points  still  remain  open  for  debate,  it  seems  now  to
be  generally  acknowledged  that  it  is  indigenous
throughout  the  whole  of  that  vast  tract  which
stretches  southward  from  the  woody  mountains  of
Mazanderan  on  the  Caspian  to  the  shores  of  the
Persian  Gulf  and  the  Indian  sea,  and  eastward
through  Khorasan  and  Cabul  to  the  base  of  the
Himalaya,  —  the  region  to  which  history  and  phi-
lology alike  point  as  the  cradle  of  the  human  race.
Hence,  when  we  consider  the  extreme  facility  of
the  process  in  its  most  simple  form,  we  need  little
wonder  that  the  art  of  making  wine  should  have
been  discovered  at  a  very  remote  epoch.

In  the  earliest  of  profane  writers  the  cultivation
of  the  grape  is  represented  as  familiar  to  the  Heroic
Greeks,  some  of  his  most  beautiful  and  vivid  pic-
tures of  rural  life  being  closely  connected  with  the
toils  of  the  vineyard.  It  is  worth  remarking  that
the  only  wine  upon  whose  excellence  Homer  dilates
in  a  tone  approaching  to  hyperbole  is  represented
as  having  been  produced  on  the  coast  of  Thrace,  the
region  from  which  poetry  and  civilization  spread
into  Hellas,  and  the  scene  of  several  of  the  more
remarkable  exploits  of  Bacchus.  Hence  we  might
infer  that  the  Pelasgians  introduced  the  culture  of
the  vine  when  they  wandered  westward  across  the
Hellespont,  and  that  in  like  manner  it  was  con-
veyed to  the  valley  of  the  Po,  when  at  a  subse-
quent period  they  made  their  way  round  the  head
of  the  Adriatic.  It  seems  certain  from  the  various
legends  that  wine  was  both  rare  and  costly  in  the
earlier  ages  of  Italian  and  Roman  history.  Thus,
a  tradition  preserved  by  Varro  {ap.  PLin.  H.  N.
xiv.  14)  told  that  when  Mezentius  agreed  to  aid
the  Rutilians  he  stipulated  that  the  produce  of  the
Latian  vineyards  should  be  his  recompense.  Ro-
mulus is  said  to  have  used  milk  only  in  his  offer-
ings to  the  gods  (Plin.  I.  c.)  :  Numa,  to  check  ex-
travagance, prohibited  the  sprinkling  of  wine  upon
the  funeral  pyre,  and,  to  stimulate  the  energies
of  the  rustic  population,  he  ordained  that  it
should  be  held  impious  to  offer  a  libation  to  the
gods  of  wine  which  had  flowed  from  an  unpruned
Btock.     So  scarce  was  it  at  a  much   later  period


VINUM.  1201

tliat  Papirius  the  dictator,  when  about  tc  join  in
battle  with  the  Samnites,  vowed  to  Jupiter  a  small
cupful  {vini  podllum)  if  he  should  gain  the  victory.
That  wine  was  racked  off  into  amphorae  and
stored  up  in  regular  cellars  as  early  as  the  era
of  the  Gracchi  Pliny  considers  proved  by  the
existence  in  his  own  day  of  the  Vinum  Opimianum,
described  hereafter.  But  even  then  no  specific  ap-
pellation was  given  to  the  produce  of  different  lo-
calities, and  the  jar  was  marked  with  the  name  of
the  consul  alone.  For  many  years  after  this  foreign
wines  were  considered  far  superior  to  native  growths,
and  so  precious  were  the  Greek  vintages  esteemed
in  the  times  of  Marius  and  Sulla  that  a  single
draught  only  was  offered  to  the  guests  at  a  ban-
quet. The  rapidity  with  which  luxury  spread  in
this  matter  is  well  illustrated  by  the  saying  of
M.  Varro,  that  LucuUus  when  a  boy  never  saw  an
entertainment  in  his  father's  house,  however  splen-
did, at  which  Greek  wine  was  handed  round  more
than  once,  but  when  in  manliood  he  returned  from
his  Asiatic  conquests  he  bestowed  on  the  people  a
largess  of  more  than  a  hundred  thousand  cadi.
Four  different  kinds  of  wine  are  said  to  have  been
presented  for  the  first  time  at  the  feast  given  by
Julius  Caesar  in  his  third  consulship  (b.  c.  46),
these  being  Falernian,  Chian,  Lesbian,  and  Mamer-
tine,  and  not  until  after  this  date  were  the  merits
of  the  numerous  varieties,  foreign  and  domestic,
accurately  known  and  fully  appreciated.  But
during  the  reign  of  Augustus  and  his  immediate
successors  the  study  of  wines  became  a  passion,  and
the  most  scrupulous  care  was  bestowed  upon  every
process  connected  with  their  production  and  pre-
servation. (Plin.  H.  N.  xiv.  28.)  Pliny  calculates
that  the  number  of  wines  in  the  whole  world  de-
serving to  be  accounted  of  high  quality  (nobi/ia)
amounted  to  eighty,  of  which  his  own  country
could  claim  two-thirds  (xiv.  1 3)  ;  and  in  another
passage  (xiv.  29)  he  asserts  that  195  distinct  kinds
might  be  reckoned  up,  and  that  if  all  the  varieties
of  these  were  to  be  included  in  the  computation,
the  sum  would  be  almost  doubled.  (Plin.  H.  N'.
xiv.  6.  29.)

The  process  followed  in  wine-making  was  es-
sentially the  same  among  both  the  Greeks  and
the  Romans.  After  the  grapes  had  been  gathered,
they  were  first  trodden  with  the  feet  and  after-
wards submitted  to  the  action  of  the  press.  This
part  of  the  process  of  wine -making  is  described  in
the  article  Torculum.

The  sweet  unfermented  juice  of  the  grape  was
termed  yKeuKos  by  the  Greeks  and  mustum  by  the
Romans,  the  latter  word  being  properly  an  ad-
jective signifying  new  ov  fresh.  Of  this  there  were
seA'eral  kinds  distinguished  acccording  to  the  man-
ner in  which  each  was  originally  obtiiined  and  sub-
sequeiitly  treated.  That  which  flowed  from  the
clusters,  in  consequence  merely  of  their  pressure
upon  each  other  before  any  force  was  applied,  was
known  as  TrpoxfjWa  (Geopon.  vi.  16)  or protropuvt
{Plin.H.N.  xiv.  11),  and  was  reserved  for  manu-
facturing a  particular  species  of  rich  wine  described
by  Pliny  (/.  c.)  to  which  the  inhabitants  of  Mytilene
gave  the  name  of  irpoSpofio':  or  irpoTpoiros.  (A then.
i.  p.  30,  b.,  ii.  p.  45.  e.)  That  which  was  obtained
next,  before  the  grapes  had  been  fully  trodden,  was
the  mustum  lixivium^  and  was  considered  best  for
keeping.  (Geopon.  vi.  16  ;  Colum.  xii.  41.)  After
the  grapes  had  been  fully  trodden  and  pressed,  the
mass  was  taken  out,  the  edges  of  the  husks  cut,
4  H


1202


VINUM.


and  the  whole  again  subjected  to  the  press  ;  tlie
result  was  the  mustitm  tortivum  or  circumcisitum
(Cato,  R.  Ti.  23  ;  Varr.  i.  54  ;  Cohim.  xii.  36),
which  was  set  apart  and  used  for  inferior  purposes.

A  portion  of  the  must  was  used  at  once,  being
drunk  fresh  after  it  had  been  chirified  with  vinegar.
(Geopon.  vi.  15.)  When  it  was  desired  to  preserve
a  quantity  in  the  sweet  state,  an  amphora  was
taken  and  coated  with  pitch  within  and  without  ;
it  was  tilled  with  mustum  lixivium^  and  corked  so
as  to  be  perfectly  air-tight.  It  was  then  immersed
in  a  tank  of  cold  fresh  water  or  buried  in  wet  sand,
and  allowed  to  remain  for  six  weeks  or  two  months.
The  contents  after  this  process  were  found  to  re-
niairfi  unchanged  for  a  year,  and  hence  the  name
ail  yAevKos,  i.e.  semper  mustum.  (Geopon.  vi.  16  ;
Plut.  Q.  N.  26  ;  Cato,  R.  R.  120  ;  Colum.  xii.  29  ;
Plin.  H.N.  xiv.  11.)  A  considerable  quantity  of
must  from  the  best  and  oldest  vines  was  inspissated
by  boiling,  being  then  distinguished  by  the  Greeks
under  the  general  names  of  eif/rjiua  or  'yXv^is  ( Athen.
i.  31,  e.),  while  the  Latin  writers  have  various
terms  according  to  the  extent  to  which  the  evapo-
ration was  carried.  Thus,  when  the  must  was  re-
duced to  two-thirds  of  its  original  volume  it  became
carenum  (Pallad.  Octobr.  tit.  xviii.),  when  one-half
had  evaporated,  c/e/z-M^^^rt  (Plin.  H.  N.  xiv.  9),  when
two- thirds,  sapa  (known  also  by  the  Greek  names
siraeum  and  hepsema,  Plin.  /.  c),  but  these  words
are  frequently  interchanged.  (See  Varr.  ap.  Non.  c.
17,  n.  14  ;  Colura.  xii.  19.)  Similar  preparations
are  at  the  present  time  called  in  Italy  musio  colto
and  sapa^  and  in  France  sale.  The  process  was
carried  on  in  large  caldrons  of  lead  {yasa  defrutaria)^
iron  or  bronze  being  supposed  to  communicate  a
disagreeable  flavour,  over  a  slow  fire  of  chips,  on  a
night  when  there  was  no  moon  (Plin.  xviii.  74),
the  scum  being  carefully  removed  with  leaves
(Plin.  /.  c. ;  Virg.  Georg.  i.  269,  iv.  296),  and  the
liquid  constantly  stirred  to  prevent  it  from  burning.
(Plin.  xxiii.  2  ;  Cato,  R.  R.  105  ;  Colum.  xii.  19,
20,  21  ;  Pallad.  xi.  18  ;  Dioscorid.  v.  9.)  These
grape-jellies,  for  they  were  nothing  else,  were  used
extensively  for  giving  body  to  poor  wines  and  mak-
ing them  keep,  and  entered  as  ingredients  into
many  drinks,  such  as  the  hurranica  poiio,  so  called
from  its  red  colour,  which  was  formed  by  mixing
sajoa  with  milk  {Festus,  s.  v.  Burranica  ;  compare
Ovid.  Fast.  iv.  782;,  and  others  described  here-
after.

The  whole  of  the  mustum  not  employed  for  some
of  the  above  purposes  was  conveyed  from  the  locus
to  the  cella  vinaria  {oluo6i^K-n,  iridewv,  Geopon.  vi.
2,  12),  an  apartment  on  the  ground-floor  or  a  little
below  the  surface,  placed  in  such  a  situation  as
to  secure  a  moderate  and  equable  temperature,
and  at  a  distance  from  dunghills  or  other  objects
emitting  a  strong  odour.  (Varro,  R.  R.  \.  13  ;
Geopon.  I.  c.)  Here  were  the  dolia  {iriBoi),  other-
wise called  seriae  or  cupae,  long  bell-mouthed
vessels  of  earthenware  (hooped  tubs  of  wood  being
employed  in  cold  climates  only,  Plin.  xiv.  21)  very
carefully  formed  of  the  best  clay  and  lined  with  a
coating  of  pitch  {iri(Taui0evTa,  picata),  the  operation
(TTiVcrwcns,  picatio)  being  usually  performed  while
they  were  hot  from  the  furnace.  They  were
usually  sunk  {depressa,  de/ossa,  demersa)  one-half
or  two-thirds  in  the  ground  ;  to  the  former  depth  if
the  wine  to  be  contained  was  likely  to  prove  strong,
to  the  latter  if  weak,  and  attention  was  paid  that
they  should  repose  upon  a  dry  bed.     They  were


VINUM.

moreover  sprinkled  with  sea- water,  fumigated  with
aromatic  plants  and  rubbed  with  their  ashes,  all
rank  smelling  substances,  such  as  rotten  leather,
garlic,  cheese,  and  the  like,  being  removed,  lest  they
should  impart  a  taint  to  the  wine.  (Geopon.  vi.  2,
3,  4  ;  Cato,  R.  R.  23  ;  Varro,  i.  13  ;  Colum.  xii.
18,25  ;  Dig.  33.  tit.  6.  s.  3.)  In  these  dolia  the
process  of  fermentation  took  place.  They  were  not
filled  quite  full,  in  order  that  the  scum  only  might
boil  over,  and  this  was  also  cleared  off  at  regular
intervals  by  skimming,  and  carried  to  a  distance.
The  fermentation  usually  lasted  for  about  nine  days,
and  as  soon  as  it  had  subsided  and  the  mustum
had  become  vinum^  the  dolia  were  closely  covered,
the  upper  portion  of  their  interior  surface  as  well
as  the  lids  {opercula  doliorum)  having  been  pre-
viously well  rubbed  over  with  a  compound  of  de-
frutum,  saffron,  old  pitch,  mastic,  and  fir-cones.
(Geopon.  vi.  12  ;  Cato,  R.  R.  107  ;  Varro,  i.  65  ;■
Colum.  xii.  25,  80.)  The  opercula  were  taken  oi^
about  once  every  thirty-six  days,  and  oftener  in  hot
weather,  in  order  to  cool  and  give  air  to  the  contents,
to  add  any  preparation  required  to  preserve  them,
sound,  and  to  remove  any  impurities  that  might  be
thrown  up.  Particular  attention  was  paid  to  the.
peculiar  light  scum,  the  avQos  dlvov  {fios  vini),
which  frequently  appeared  on  the  surface  after  a
certain  time,  since  it  was  supposed  to  afford  indi-
cations by  its  colour  and  consistence  of  the  quality
of  the  wine.  If  red  (■!rop<pvpi^ov),  broad,  and  soft,-
it  was  a  sign  that  the  wine  was  sound  ;  if  glutinous,
it  was  a  bad  symptom  ;  if  black  or  yellow,  it  de-
noted want  of  body  ;  if  white,  it  was  a  proof  that
the  Avine  would  keep  well  (juJ^t/uoi').  Each  time
that  the  opercula  were  replaced  they  were  well
rubbed  with  fir-cones.  (Geopon.  vii.  15  ;  Colum.
xii.  38.)     [Thyrsus.]

The  commoner  sorts  of  wine  were  drunk  direct
from  the  dolium,  and  hence  draught  wine  was
called  vinum  doliare  or  vinum  de  cupa  (Dig.  18.  tit.
6.  8.  1 .  §  4  ;  Varr.  ap.  Non.  c.  2.  n.  1 1 3),  but  the  finer
kinds,  such  as  were  yielded  by  choice  localities
and  possessed  sufficient  body  to  bear  keeping,  were-
drawn  off  {diffundere,  ixerayyl^eiv)  into  amphorau
or  lagenae,  many  fanciful  precautions  being  ob-
served in  transferring  them  from  the  larger  to  the
smaller  vessel.  (Geopon.  vii.  5,  6  ;  compare  Plin.
xiv.  27.)  These  amphorae  were  made  of  earthen-
ware, and  in  later  times  occasionally  of  glass  ;  they
were  stoppered  tight  by  a  plug  of  wood  or  cork
(cortex,  suber),  which  was  rendered  impervious  to  air
by  being  smeared  over  with  pitch,  clay,  or  gypsum.
On  the  outside  the  title  of  the  wine  was  painted,
the  date  of  the  vintage  being  marked  by  the  names
of  the  consuls  then  in  office,  or  when  the  jars  were
of  glass,  little  tickets  (pittacia,  tesserae)  were  sus-
pended from  them  indicating  these  particulars.
(Petron.  34.)  The  amphorae  were  then  stored  up
in  repositories  {apothecae,  Colum.  i.  6  ;  Plin.  Ep.  ii.
17  ;  horrea,  Senec.  Ep.  115  ;  tabulata,  Colum.  xii.
41)  completely  distinct  from  the  cella  vinaria,  and
usually  placed  in  the  upper  story  of  the  house
(whence  descende,  testa,  Hor.  Carm.  iii.  21.  7  ;
deriperc  horreo,  iii.  28.  7)  for  a  reason  explained
afterwards.

It  is  manifest  that  wines  prepared  and  bottled,
if  we  may  use  the  phrase,  in  the  manner  described
above  must  liave  contained  a  great  quantity  of
dregs  and  sediment,  and  it  became  absolutely  ne-
cessary to  separate  these  before  it  was  drunk.
This  was  sometimes  effected  by  fining  with  yelk*


VINUAI.

of  eggs,  those  of  pigeons  being  considered  most  ap-
propriate by  the  fastidious  (Hor.  Sat  ii.  4.  51),  or
with  the  whites  whipped  up  with  salt  (Geopon.
til.  22),  but  more  commonly  by  simply  straining
through  small  cup-like  utensils  of  silver  or  bronze
perforated  with  numerous  small  holes,  and  distin-
guished by  the  various  names  vKkttvp,  rpvyoiiros^
i)6lj.6s,colum  vinarium.  ( Geopon.  vii. 37.)  [Colum.]
Occasionally  a  piece  of  linen  cloth  (ora/CKos,  saccus)
was  placed  over  the  rpvyonros  or  colum  (Pollux,  vi.
19,  X.  75)  and  the  wine  (aaKKias^saccatus)  filtered
through.  (Martial,  viii.  45.)  The  use  of  the  saccus
was  considered  objectionable  for  all  delicate  wines,
since  it  was  believed  to  injure  (Hor.  Sat.  ii.  4.  51)
if  not  entirely  to  destroy  their  flavour,  and  in
every  instance  to  diminish  the  strength  of  the
liquor.  For  this  reason  it  was  employed  by  the
dissipated  in  order  that  they  might  be  able  to
swallow  a  greater  quantity  without  becoming  in-
toxicated. (Plin.  xiv.  22,  compare  xxiii.  1,  24,
xix.  4.  19  ;  Cic.  ad  Fain,  ii.  8.)  The  double  pur-
pose of  cooling  and  weakening  was  eifectually  ac-
complished by  placing  ice  or  snow  in  the  filter,
which  under  such  circumstances  became  a  colum
nivarium  (Martial,  xiv.  103)  or  saccus  nivarius
(xiv.  104).

The  wine  procured  from  the  musium  tortivum^
which  was  always  kept  by  itself,  must  have  been
thin  and  poor  enough,  but  a  still  inferior  beverage
was  made  by  pouring  water  upon  the  husks  and
stalks  after  they  had  been  fully  pressed,  allowing
them  to  soak,  pressing  again,  and  fermenting  the
liquor  thus  obtained.  This,  which  was  given  to
labourers  in  winter  instead  of  wine,  was  the  bafxva
or  5€WT6ptos  of  the  Greeks,  the  lora  or  vinum  ope-
rarium  of  the  Romans,  and  according  to  Varro  (ap.
Non.  xvii.  13)  was,  along  with  sapa,  defrutum,
and  passum,  the  drink  of  elderly  women.  (See
Athen.  x.  p.  440.)  The  Greeks  added  the
water  in  the  proportion  of  \  of  the  must  pre-
viously drawn  off,  and  then  boiled  down  the
mixture  until  \  had  evaporated  ;  the  Italians
added  the  water  in  the  proportion  of  -^q  of  the
must,  and  threw  in  the  skimmings  of  the  defru-
tum and  the  dregs  of  the  lacus.  Another  drink  of
the  same  character  was  the  faecatuin  from  wine-
lees,  and  we  hear  also  of  mnum  praeliganeum  given
to  the  vintagers,  which  appears  to  have  been  manu-
factured from  inferior  and  half-ripe  fruit  gathered
before  the  regular  period.  (Geopon.  vi.  3  ;  Cato,
R.  R.  23,  57,  153  ;  Varro,  i.  54  ;  Colum.  xii.  40  ;
Plin.  xiv.  12.)  We  find  an  analogy  to  the  above
processes  in  the  manufacture  of  cider,  the  best
being  obtained  from  the  first  squeezing  of  the  apples
and  the  worst  from  the  pulp  and  skins  macerated
in  water.

In  all  the  best. wines  hitherto  described  the
grapes  are  supposed  to  have  been  gathered  as  soon
as  they  were  fully  ripe  and  fermentation  to  have
run  its  full  course.  But  a  great  variety  of  sweet
wines  were  manufactured  by  checking  the  fermen-
tation, or  by  partially  drying  the  grapes,  or  by
converting  them  completely  into  raisins.  The
'y\vKos  ohos  of  the  Geoponic  writers  (vii.  19)  be-
longs to  the  first  class.  Must  obtained  in  the  or-
dinary manner  was  thrown  into  the  dolia,  which
remained  open  for  three  days  only  and  were  then
partially  covered  for  two  more  ;  a  small  aperture
was  left  until  the  seventh  day,  when  they  were
luted  up.  If  the  wine  was  wished  to  be  still
sweeter,  the  dolia  were  left  open  for  five  days  and


VINUM.


1203


then  at  once  closed.  The  free  admission  of  air
being  necessary  for  brisk  fennentation,  and  this
usually  continuing  for  nine  days,  it  is  evident  that
it  would  proceed  weakly  and  imperfectly  under  the
above  circumstances.  For  the  Vinum  JJulce  of
Columella  (xii.  27)  the  grapes  were  to  be  dried  in
the  sun  for  three  days  after  they  were  gathered,
and  trodden  on  the  fourth  during  the  full  fervour
of  the  mid-day  heat.  The  mustum  lixivium  alone
was  to  be  used,  and  after  the  fermentation  was
finished  an  ounce  of  well-kneaded  iris-root  was
added  to  each  50  sextarii  ;  the  wine  was  racked  off
from  the  lees,  and  was  found  to  be  sweet,  sound,
and  wholesome.  (Colum.  /.  c.)  For  the  Vinum
Diachylum.,  more  luscious  still,  the  grapes  were  ex-
posed to  the  sun  for  seven  days  upon  hurdles.
(Plin. //.  iV:  xiv.  11.)

Lastly,  Passum  or  raisin-wine  was  made  from
grapes  dried  in  the  sun  until  they  had  lost  half  their
weight,  or  they  were  plunged  into  boiling  oil,  which
produced  a  similar  effect,  or  the  bunches  after  they
were  ripe  were  allowed  to  hang  for  some  weeks
upon  the  vine,  the  stalks  being  twisted  or  an  inci-
sion made  into  the  pith  of  the  bearing  shoot  so  as
to  put  a  stop  to  vegetation.  The  stalks  and  stones
were  removed,  the  raisins  were  steeped  in  must  or
good  wine,  and  then  trodden  or  subjected  to  the
gentle  action  of  the  press.  The  quantity  of  juice
which  flowed  forth  was  measured,  and  an  equal
quantity  of  water  added  to  the  pulpy  residuum,
which  was  again  pressed  and  the  product  employed
for  an  inferior  passum  called  secundarium,  an  ex-
pression exactly  analogous  to  the  Sevrepios  mention-
ed above.  The  passum  of  Crete  was  most  prized
(Mart.  xiii.  106  ;  Juv.  xiv.  270),  and  next  in  rank
were  those  of  Cilicia,  Africa,  Italy,  and  the  neigh-
bouring provinces.  The  kinds  known  as  Psythium
and  Melampsythium  possessed  the  peculiar  flavour
of  the  grape  and  not  that  of  wine,  the  Scybillites
from  Gaiatid  and  the  Haluntium  from  Sicily  in  like
manner  tasted  like  must.  The  grapes  most  suitable
for  passum  were  those  which  ripened  early,  espe-
cially the  varieties  Apiana  (called  by  the  Greeks
Siicha),  Scirpula  and  Fsithia.  (Geopon.  vii.  18;
Colum.  xii.  39 ;  Plin.  H.  N.-  xiv.  1 1 ;  Virg.  Georg.
ii.  93.)

The  Greeks  recognized  three  colours  in  wines:
red  (/ie'Aos),  white,  i.  e.  pale,  straw-colour  (AefKc^y),
and  brown  or  amber-coloured  (Ki^pos).  (Athen.  i.
p.  32,  c.)  Pliny  distinguishes  four:  albus  answer-
ing to  X€vk6s,/uIvus  to  Ktpp6s,  while  fi4\as  is  sub-
divided into  sanguineus  and  niger,  the  former
being  doubtless  applied  to  bright  glowing  wines
like  Tent  and  Burgundy,  while  the  niger  or  aier
(Plant.  Menaech.  v.  6.  17)  would  resemble  Port.
In  the  ordinary  Greek  authors  the  epithet  epvdp6s
is  as  common  as  /we'Aas,  and  will  represent  the
sanguineus.

We  have  seen  that  wine  intended  for  keeping
was  racked  off  from  the  dolia  into  amphorae.
When  it  was  necessary  in  the  first  instance  to
transport  it  from  one  place  to  another,  or  when
carried  by  travellers  on  a  journey,  it  was  contained
in  bags  made  of  goat-skin  (daKoi,  utres)  well
pitched  over  so  as  to  make  the  seams  perfectly
tight.  The  cut  below,  from  a  bronze  found  at
Herculaneum  (Mus.  Borbon.  vol.  iii.  tav.  28),
exhibits  a  Silenus  astride  upon  one  of  them.
When  the  quantity  was  large  a  number  of  hides
were  sewed  together,  and  the  leathern  tun  thus
constructed  carried  from  place  to  place  in  a  cart,  us
4h  2


J204


VINUM.


ehown  in  the  illustration  on  page  90.     (Compare
Lucian,  Zea;.  6.)


Among  the  ancients  recourse  was  had  to  va-
rious devices  for  preventing  or  correcting  acidity,
heightening  the  flavour,  and  increasing  the  dura-
bility of  the  inferior  kinds  of  wine.  This  subject
was  reduced  to  a  regular  system  by  the  Greeks :
Pliny  mentions  four  authors  who  had  written  for-
mal treatises,  and  the  authors  of  the  Geoponic  col-
lection, together  with  Cato,  Varro,  and  Columella,
supply  a  multitude  of  precepts  upon  the  same
topic.  The  object  in  view  was  accomplished  some-
times by  merely  mixing  different  kinds  of  wine
together,  but  more  frequently  by  throwing  into
the  dolia  or  amphorae  various  condiments,  or  sea-
sonings (dpTv(f(is,iiiedkai)ima,condtturae).  When
two  wines  were  mixed  together  those  were  selected
which  possessed  opposite  good  qualities  and  defects.
(Athen.  i.  p.  32.  6.)

The  principal  substances  employed  as  conditurae
were,  1.  sea-water ;  2.  turpentine,  either  pure,  or
in  the  fonn  of  pitch  (/>2>),  tar  (pix  liquida),  or
resin  {resina).  3.  Lime,  in  the  form  of  gypsum,
burnt  marble,  or  calcined  shells.  4.  Inspissated
must.  5.  Aromatic  herbs,  spices,  and  gums ;  and
these  were  used  either  singly,  or  cooked  up  into  a
great  variety  of  complicated  confections.

We  have  already  seen  that  it  was  customary  to
line  the  interior  of  both  the  dolia  .ind  the  amphorae
with  a  coating  of  pitch  ;  but  besides  this  it  was
common  to  add  this  substance,  or  resin,  in  powder,
to  the  must  during  the  fermentation,  from  a  con-
viction that  it  not  only  rendered  the  wine  more
full-bodied,  but  also  communicated  an  agreeable
bouquet,  together  with  a  certain  degree  of  raciness
or  piquancy.  (Plin.  N.  H.  xiv.  25  ;  Plutarch,
Symp.  V.  3.)  Wine  of  this  sort,  however,  when
new  {novitium  resinatum)  was  accounted  unwhole-
some and  apt  to  induce  headach  and  giddiness.
From  this  circumstance  it  was  denominated  crupula,
and  was  itself  found  to  be  serviceable  in  checking
the  fermentation  of  the  must  when  too  violent.

It  must  be  remembered,  that  when  the  vinous
fermentation  is  not  well  regulated,  it  is  apt  to  be


VINUM.

renewed,  in  which  case  a  fresh  chemical  change
takes  place,  and  the  wine  is  converted  into  vinegar
{o^os,  acetum),  and  this  acid,  again,  if  exposed  ta
the  air,  loses  its  properties  and  becomes  perfectly
insipid,  in  which  form  it  was  called  vajypa  by  the
Romans,  who  used  the  word  figuratively  for  a
worthless  blockhead.

Now  the  great  majority  of  inferior  wines,  being
thin  and  watery,  and  containing  little  alcohol,
are  constantly  liable  to  undergo  these  changes,
and  hence  the  disposition  to  acescence  was  closely
watched  and  combated  as  far  as  possible.  With
this  view  those  substances  were  thrown  into  the
dolia,  which  it  was  known  would  neutralize  any
acid  which  might  be  formed,  such  as  vegetable
I  ashes,  which  contain  an  alkali,  gypsum,  and  pure
j  lime,  besides  which  we  find  a  long  list  of  articles,
which  must  be  regarded  as  preventives  rather
than  correctives,  such  as  the  various  preparations
of  turpentine  already  noticed,  almonds,  raisins
steeped  in  must,  parched  salt,  goats'  milk,  cedar-
I  cones,  gall-nuts,  blazing  pine-torches,  or  red-hot
irons  quenched  in  the  liquid,  and  a  multitude  of
others.  (Geopon.  vii.  12,  15,  16,  &c.)  But  in  ad-
dition to  these,  which  are  all  harmless,  we  find
some  traces  of  the  use  of  the  highly  poisonous
salts  of  lead  for  the  same  purpose  (Geopon.  vii.  19),
a  practice  which  produced  the  most  fatal  conse-
quences in  the  middle  ages,  and  was  prohibited  by
a  series  of  the  most  stringent  enactments.  (See
Beckmann's  History  of  Inventions^  vol?  i.  p.  39  b",
Trans.)

Defmtum  also  was  employed  to  a  great  extent  ;
but  being  itself  liable  to  turn  sour,  it  was  not  used
until  its  soundness  had  been  tested  by  keeping  it
for  a  year.  It  was  then  introduced,  either  in  its
simple  state,  in  the  proportion  of  a  sextarius  to  the
amphora,  that  is,  of  1  to  48,  or  it  was  combined
with  a  great  variety  of  aromatics,  according  to  a
prescription  furnished  by  Columella  (xii.  20 j.  In
this  receipt,  and  others  of  the  same  kind,  the
various  herbs  were  intended  to  give  additional
efficacy  to  the  nourishing  powers  of  the  defrutum,
and  great  pains  were  taken  to  prevent  them  from
affecting  the  taste  of  the  wine.  But  from  a  very
early  period  it  was  customary  to  flavour  wines
highly  by  a  large  admixture  of  perfumes,  plants,
and  spices.  We  find  a  spiced  drink  (e^  a/jw/uaVwj'
KaraaKiva^ofJiivos)  noticed  under  the  name  of
TpijuLfia  by  Athenaeus  and  the  writers  of  the  new
comedy  (Athen.  i.  p.  31,  e.  ;  Pollux,  vi.  18),  and
for  the  whole  class  Pliny  has  the  general  term
aromafites  (xiv.  19.  §  5).

There  was  another  and  very  numerous  family
of  wines,  entitled  oiuoi  vyieivoi,  into  which  drugs
were  introduced  to  produce  medicinal  effects.  Such
were  vinum  marrubii  (horehound)  for  coughs,  the
sciUites  (squill-wine),  to  assist  digestion,  promote
expectoration,  and  act  as  a  general  tonic,  ahsinthiies
(wine  of  wonnwood),  corresponding  to  the  modern
vermuth^  and  above  all  the  myrtites  (myrtle-berry-
wine),  which  possessed  innumerable  virtues.  (Co-
lumell.  32,  39;  Geopon.  viii.  1,  &c.)

Pliny,  under  the  head  of  vina  Jictitia,  includes
not  onfy  the  oluoi  vytftvol^  but  a  vast  number  of
others  bearing  a  strong  analogy  to  our  British
home  made  wines,  such  as  cowslip,  ginger,  elder-
berry, and  the  like  ;  and  as  we  manufacture
Champagne  out  of  gooseberries,  so  the  Italians
had  their  imitations  of  the  costly  vintages  of  the
most  favoured  Asiatic  isles.     These  vina   ficHtia


VINUM.

weic,  as  may  be  imagined,  almost  countless,  every
variety  of  fruit,  flower,  vegetable,  shrub,  and  per-
fume being  put  in  requisition:  figs,  cornels, medlars,
roses,  asparagus,  parsley,  radishes,  laurels,  junipers,
cassia,  cinnamon,  saffron,  nard,  malobathrum,  afford
but  a  small  sample.  It  must  be  remarked,  that
there  was  one  material  difference  between  the
method  followed  by  the  Greeks  and  that  adopted
by  the  Romans  in  cooking  these  potions.  The
former  included  the  drug,  or  whatever  it  might  be,
in  a  bag,  which  was  suspended  in  a  jar  of  Avine,
and  allowed  to  remain  as  long  as  was  thought
necessary  ;  the  latter  mixed  the  flavouring  in-
gredient with  the  sweet  must,  and  fermented  them
together,  thus  obtaining  a  much  more  powerful
extract ;  and  this  is  the  plan  pursued  for  British
wines,  except  that  we  are  obliged  to  substitute
BUgar  and  water  for  grape-juice.  (Geopon.  viii.
32,  33,  34 ;  Plin.  //.  A^  xiv.  19  ;  Colum.  //.  cc. ;
C&to,Ii.B.  114,  115.)

But  not  only  were  spices,  fragrant  roots,  leaves,
and  gums,  steeped  in  wine  or  incorporated  during
fermentation,  but  even  the  precious  perfumed
essential  oils  {unguenta)  were  mixed  with  it  before
it  was  drunk.  The  Greeks  were  exceedingly  par-
tial to  this  kind  of  drink.  (Aelian,  V.  H.  xii.  31.)
We  also  learn  from  Aelian  (/.  c.)  that  it  was  named
/jLv^ptviTrjs,  which  seems  to  be  the  same  with  the
(UupptVrj?  of  Foseidippus  (Athen.  i.  p.  32,  b.),  the
Ixvp^ivT]  of«Hesychius,  the  ixvpivqs  of  Pollux  (vi.  2),
and  the  murrhina  of  Plautus  {Pseitdol.  ii.  4.  50 ;
compare  nardini  amphoram^  Miles  GL  iii.  2.  11  ;
Festus,  s.  V.  Mttrrata  potio  and  Murrina ).  The
Romans  were  not  slow  to  follow  the  example  set
them,  valuing  bitterness  so  highly,  says  Pliny  {H.
N.  xiii.  5),  that  tiiey  were  resolved  to  enjoy  costly
perfumes  with  two  senses,  and  hence  the  expres-
sions '■'•foliata  sitis'''  in  Martial  (xiv.  110)  .and
^'' jierfusa  viero  spujrM?it  utu/tiej/ta  Falemo''''  in
Juvenal  (vi.  303).

In  a  more  primitive  age  we  detect  the  same
fondness  for  the  admixture  of  something  extraneous.
Hecamede,  when  preparing  a  draught  for  Nestor,
fills  his  cup  with  Pramnian  wine,  over  which  she
grates  goat-milk  cheese  and  sprinkles  the  whole
with  flour  (//.  xi.  638),  the  latter  being  a  common
addition  at  a  much  later  epoch.  (Athen.  x.  p.  432.)
So  also  the  draught  administered  by  Circe  con-
sisted of  wine,  cheese,  and  honey  ;  and  according
to  Theophrastus  (Athen.  i.  p.  32,  a.)  the  wine
drunk  in  the  prytaneum  of  the  Thasians  was  ren-
dered delicious  by  their  throwing  into  the  jar
which  contained  it  a  cake  of  wheaten  flour  kneaded
up  with  honey.    (Compare  Plat.  Sump.  i.  1.  4.)

This  leads  us  on  to  notice  the  most  generally
popular  of  all  these  compound  beverages,  the  olvofieM
of  the  Greeks,  the  vmlsum  of  the  Romans.  This
was  of  two  kinds ;  in  the  one  honey  was  mixed
with  wine,  in  the  other  with  must.  The  former
v/as  said  to  have  been  invented  by  the  legendary
hero  Aristaeus,  the  first  cultivator  of  bees  (Plin.
xiv.  4),  and  was  considered  most  perfect  and
palatable  when  made  of  some  old  rough  {cmslemm)
wine,  such  as  Massic  or  Falernian  (although
Horace  objects  to  the  latter  for  tliis  purpose,  Sat.
ii.  4.  24),  and  new  Attic  honey.  (Mart.  iv.  13,
xiii.  108;  Dioscor.  v.  16;  Macrob.  Sat.  vii.  12.)
The  proportions  as  stated  in  the  Geoponic  collec-
tion were  four,  by  measure,  of  wine  to  one  of
honey,  and  various  spices  and  perfumes,  such  as
myrrh,   cassia,  costum,  malobathrum,   nard,   and


VINUM.


1205


pepper,  might  be  added.  The  second  kind,  the
oe7iomelum  of  Isidorus  {Orig.  xx.  3.  §  11),  accord-
ing to  the  Greek  authorities  (Geopon.  viii.  26),  was
made  of  must  evaporated  to  one  half  of  its  original
bulk,  Attic  honey  being  added  in  the  proportion  of
one  to  ten.  This,  therefore,  was  merely  a  very
rich  fruit  syrup  in  no  way  allied  to  wine.  The
virtues  of  mulsum  are  detailed  by  Pliny  [H.  N
xxii.  4  ;  compare  Geopon.  /.  c.)  ;  it  was  considered
the  most  appropriate  draught  upon  an  empty
stomach, and  was  therefore  swallowed  immediatelv
before  the  regular  business  of  a  repast  began  (Hor.
Sat.  ii.  4.  25;  Senec.  Ep.  122),  and  hence  the
whet  ( gustatio)  coming  before  the  cup  of  mulsum
was  called  the  jyromulsis.  (Cic.  ad.  Fain.  ix.  1 6
and  20.)  We  infer  from  Plautus  (Bacch.  iv.  9.
149;  compare  Liv.  xxxviii.  55)  that  midsum  was
given  at  a  triumph  by  the  Imperator  to  his  soldiers.

Midsum  (sc.  viniim)  or  oivo/xeXi  is  perfectly  dis-
tinct from  mulsa  (sc.  aqua).  The  latter,  or  meady
being  made  of  honey  and  water  mixed  and  fer-
mented, is  the  ixiXiKparov  or  i58po';UfAt  of  the
Greeks  (Geopon.  viii.  28 ;  Dioscorid,  v.  9 ;  Isidor.
Or!g.  XX.  3.  §  10  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xiv.  20),  although
Pollux  confounds  (vi.  2)  ixeKiKpaTov  with  oIvo/jlcKi,
Again,  vSpofirjXou  (Geopon.  viii.  27)  or  hydromelum
(Isidor.  Orig.  xx.  3.  §  11)  was  cider;  d|u^eAt
(Plin.  //.  N.  xiv.  20)  was  a  compound  of  vinegar,
honey,  salt,  and  pure  water,  boiled  together  and
kept  for  a  long  time ;  poZofxeKi  was  a  mere  confec-
tion of  expressed  juice  of  rose-leaves  and  honey.
(Geopon.  viii.  29.)

The  ancients  considered  old  wine  not  only  more
grateful  to  the  palate  but  also  more  wholesome
and  invigorating  (Athen.  i.  p.  26,  a. ;  ii.  p.  36,
e.),  and  curiously  enough,  Pliny  supposes  that  it
grew  more  strong  and  fiery  by  age  in  consequence
of  the  dissipation  of  the  watery  particles  {H.  N.
vii.  3).  Generally  speaking  the  Greek  wines  do
not  seem  to  have  required  a  long  time  to  ripen,
Nestor  in  the  Odyssee,  indeed,  drinks  wine  ten
years  old  (iii.  391),  and  wine  lA)t  for  sixteen
years  is  incidentally  mentioned  by  Afthenaeus  (xiii.
p.  584,  b)  ;  but  the  connoisseurs  under  the  Empire
pronounced  that  all  transmarine  wines  arrived  at  a
moderate  degree  of  maturity  {ad  vetustatem  mediam)
in  six  or  seven.  (Plin.  xiv.  10.)  Many  of  the
Italian  varieties,  however,  as  we  shall  see  below,
required  to  be  kept  for  twenty  or  twenty-five  years
before  they  were  drinkable  (which  is  now  consi-
dered ample  for  our  strongest  ports),  and  even  the
humble  growths  of  Sabinum  were  stored  up  for
from  four  to  fifteen.  (Hor.  Carm.  i.  9.  7  ;  Athen.
i.  p.  276.)  Hence  it  became  a  matter  of  import-
ance to  hasten,  if  possible,  the  natural  process.
This  was  attempted  in  various  ways,  sometimes  by
elaborate  condiments  (Geopon.  vii.  24),  sometimes
by  sinking  vessels  containing  the  must  in  the  sea,
by  which  an  artificial  mellowness  was  induced
(praecox  vetustas),  and  the  wine  in  consequence
termed  thalassites  (Plin.  //.  A^,xiv.  10)  ;  but  more
usually  by  the  application  of  heat.  (Plut.  Symp.  v.
3.)  Thus  it  was  customary  to  expose  the  .im-
phorae  for  some  years  to  the  full  fervour  of  the
sun's  rays,  or  to  construct  the  apothecae  in  such  a
manner  as  to  be  exposed  to  the  hot  air  and  smoke
of  the  bath-furnaces  (Colum.  i.  6),  and  hence  the
name /umaria  applied  to  such  apartments,  and  the
phrases  fumosos,  fumum  bibere,  fuligine  testae  in
reference  to  the  wines.  (TibuU.  ii.  1.  26  ;  Hor.
Carm.  iii.  8.  9  ;  Juv.  v.  35.)     If  the  operation  was

A    IT     ^


1206  VI  NUM.

not  conducted  with  care,  and  the  ampliorae  not
stoppered  down  perfectly  tight,  a  disagreeable
etYect  would  be  produced  on  the  contents,  and  it  is
in  consequence  of  such  carelessness  that  Martial
pours  forth  his  maledictions  on  the  furaaria  of
Marseilles  (x.  36,  iii.  82,  xil.  123).

The  3'ear  B.  c.  121  is  said  to  have  been  a  season
singularly  favourable  to  all  the  productions  of  the
earth  ;  from  the  great  heat  of  the  autumn  the  wine
was  of  an  unprecedented  quality,  and  remained
'ong  celebrated  as  the  Vinum  Opimianum,  from
L.  Opimius  the  consul  of  that  year,  who  slew
C,  Gracchus.  A  great  quantity  had  been
treasured  up  and  sedulously  preserved,  so  that
samples  were  still  in  existence  in  the  days  of  the
elder  Pliny,  nearly  two  hundred  years  afterwards.
It  was  reduced,  he  says,  to  the  consistence  of
rough  honey,  and,  like  other  very  old  wines,  so
strong  and  harsh  and  bitter  as  to  be  undrinkable
until  largely  diluted  with  water.  Such  wines,
however,  he  adds,  were  useful  for  flavouring  others
when  mixed  in  small  quantities.

Our  most  direct  information  with  regard  to  the
price  of  common  wine  in  Italy  is  derived  from
Columella  (iii.  3.  §  12),  who  reckons  that  the
lowest  market  price  of  the  most  ordinary  quality
was  300  sesterces  for  40  urnae,  that  is  15  sesterces
for  the  amphora,  or  6d.  a  gallon  nearly.  At  a
much  earlier  date,  the  triumph  of  L.  Metellus
during  the  first  Punic  war  (b.  c.  250),  wine  was
sold  at  the  rate  of  8  asses  the  amphora  (Varro,  ap.
PUn.  H.  N.  xviii.  4),  and  in  the  year  B.  c.  89  the
censors  P.  Licinius  Crassus  and  L.  Julius  Caesar
issued  a  proclamation  that  no  one  should  sell
Greek  and  Aminean  wine  at  so  high  a  rate  as  8
asses  the  amphora  ;  but  this  was  probably  intended
as  a  prohibition  to  their  being  sold  at  all,  in  order
to  check  the  taste  then  beginning  to  display  itself
for  foreign  luxuries,  for  w^e  find  that  at  the  same
time  they  positively  forbade  the  use  of  exotic
unguents.  (Plin.//.  N.  xiv.  16,  xiii.  3.)

The  price  of  native  wine  at  Athens  was  four
drachmas  for  the  metretes,  th.at  is  about  Ahd.  the
gallon,  when  necessaries  were  dear,  and  Bockh  con-
siders that  we  may  assume  one  half  of  this  sum  as
the  average  of  cheaper  times.  In  fact,  we  find  in
an  agreement  in  Demosthenes  {In  Lacrit.  p.  928)
300  casks  (KepojUta)  of  Mendaean  wine,  which  we
know  was  used  at  the  most  sumptuous  Macedonian
entertainments  (Athen.  iv.  p.  129,  d.),  valued  at
600  drachmas,  which  gives  two  drachmas  for  the
metretes,  or  little  more  than  Id.  a  gallon  ;  but  still
more  astonishing  is  the  marvellous  cheapness  of
Lusitanian  wine,  of  which  more  than  ten  gallons
were  sold  for  3d.  On  the  other  hand  high  prices
were  given  freely  for  the  varieties  held  in  esteem,
since,  as  early  as  the  time  of  Socrates,  a  metretes
of  Chian  sold  for  a  mina,  (Plut.  de  Anim.  Tran-
quill.  10  ;  Bockh,  Ftibl.  JEcon.  o/At/iens,  vol.  i.  p.
133,  Isted.)

With  respect  to  the  way  in  which  wine  was
drunk,  and  the  customs  observed  by  the  Greeks
and  Romans  at  their  drinking  entertainments,  the
reader  is  referred  to  the  article  Symposium.

It  now  remains  for  us  to  name  the  most  esteemed
wines,  and  to  point  out  their  localities  ;  but  our
limits  will  allow  us  to  enumerate  none  but  the
most  celebrated.  As  far  as  those  of  Greece  are
concenied,  our  information  is  scanty  ;  since  in  the
older  writers  we  find  but  a  small  number  defined
by  specific   appellations,  the   general   term   olvos


VINUM.

usually  standing  alone  without  any  distinguishing
epithet.  The  wine  of  most  early  celebrity  was
that  which  the  minister  of  Apollo,  Maron,  who
dwelt  upon  the  skirts  of  Thracian  Ismarus,  gave  to
Ulysses.  It  was  red  (ipvdpdv)^  and  honey-sweet
(iUeAi7j5ea),  so  precious,  that  it  was  unknown  to  all
in  the  mansion,  save  the  wife  of  the  priest  and  one
trusty  housekeeper  ;  so  strong,  that  a  single  cup
was  mingled  with  twenty  of  water ;  so  fragrant,
that  even  when  thus  diluted  it  diifused  a  divine
and  most  tempting  perfume.  (Od.  ix.  203.)  Pliny
(//.A',  xiv.  6)  asserts  that  wine  endowed  with
similar  noble  properties  was  produced  in  the  same
region  in  his  own  day.  Homer  mentions  also  more
than  once  (11.  xi.  638,  Od.  x.  234)  Pramnian  wine
{oivos  Upajjiveios)^  an  epithet  which  is  variousljr
interpreted  by  certain  different  writers.  (Athen.  i.
p.  28,  f.)  In  after  times  a  wine  bearing  the  same
name  was  produced  in  the  island  of  Icaria,  around
the  hill  village  of  Latorea,  in  the  vicinity  of  Ephe-
sus,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Smyrna  near  the
shrine  of  Cj^bele,  and  in  Lesbos.  (Athen.  i.  p.  30,  c.
&c. ;  Plin.  xiv.  6.)  The  Pramnian  of  Icaria  ia
characterized  by  Eparchides  as  dry  {aKArjpus),
harsh  (auo-rrypos), astringent  and  remarkably  stiong,
qualities  which,  according  to  Aristophanes,  ren-
dered it  particularly  unpalatable  to  the  Athenians.
(Athen.  i.  p.  30,  c.)

But  the  wines  of  greatest  renown  during  the
brilliant  period  of  Grecian  history  and  after  the
Roman  conquest  were  grown  in  the  islands  of
Thasos,  Lesbos,  Chios  and  Cos,  and  in  a  few  fa-
voured spots  on  the  opposite  coast  of  Asia  (Strabo,
xiv.  p.  637),  such  as  the  slopes  of  Mount  Tmolus,
the  ridge  which  separates  the  valley  of  the  Herraua
from  that  of  the  Cayster  (Plin.  v.  29  ;  Virg.  Georg.
ii.  97  ;  Ovid.  Met.  vi.  15),  Mount  Messogis,  which
divides  the  tributaries  of  the  Cayster  from  those  of
the  Maeander  (Strabo,  xiv.  p.  650),  the  volcanic
region  of  the  Catacecaumene  (Vitruv.  iii.  3)  which
still  retains  its  fame  (Keppell's  Travels,  ii.  p.  355),
the  environs  of  Ephesus  (Dioscorid.  v.  12),  of  Cni-
dus  (Athen.  i.  p.  29,  a.),  of  Miletus  (Athen.  /.  c),
and  of  Clazomenae.  (Plin.  xiv.  9.)  Among  these
the  first  place  seems  to  have  been  by  general  con-
sent conceded  to  the  Chian,  of  which  the  most  de-
licious varieties  were  brought  from  the  heights  of
Ariusium,  in  the  central  parts  (Virg.  Ed.  v.  71  ;
Plin.  H.  N.  xiv.  7  ;  Silius,  vii.  210),  and  from  the
promontory  of  Phanae  at  the  southern  extremity  of
the  island.  (Virg.  Georg.  ii.  97.)  The  77i«sirtw  and
Lesbian  occupied  the  second  place,  and  the  Coan  dis-
puted the  palm  with  them.  (  Athen.  i.  pp.  28, 29,  &c.)
In  Lesbos  the  most  highly  prized  vineyards  were
around  Mytilene  (Athen.  i.  p.  30,  b,,  iii.  p.  86,  e. ;
p.  92,  d.),  and  Methymna.  (Athen.  viii.  p.  363,  b.  ;
Pausan.  x.  19  ;  Virg.  Georg.  ii.  89  ;  Ovid.  Ar.  Am.
i.  57.)  Pliny  (xiv.  9),  who  gives  the  preference
over  all  others  to  the  CUizomenian,  says  that  the
Lesbian  had  naturally  a  taste  of  salt  water,  while
the  epithet  "  innocens,"  applied  by  Horace,  seems
to  point  out  that  it  was  light  and  wholesome.

It  may  here  be  observed  that  there  is  no  foun-
dation whatever  for  the  remark  that  the  finest
Greek  wines,  especially  the  products  of  the  islands
in  the  Aegean  and  Ionian  seas,  belonged  for  the
most  part  to  the  luscious  sweet  class.  The  very
reverse  is  proved  by  the  epithets  avarripos,  (t/cAtj-
pos,  AeTrrds,  and  the  like,  applied  to  a  great  num-
ber, while  yXvKvs  and  yXvKa^wv  are  designations
comparatively  rare,  except  in  the  vague  language


VINUM

of  poetry.  *'  Vinum  omne  duke  minus  odoratum,"*^
says  Pliny  (H.  N.  xiv.  11),  and  the  ancients  ap-
pear to  have  been  fully  sensible  that  sweet  wines
could  not  be  swallowed  either  with  pleasure  or
safety,  except  in  small  quantities.  The  mistake
has  arisen  from  not  perceiving  that  the  expressions
olvos  yXvKvs  and  oluos  tJSus  are  by  no  means  ne-
cessarily synonymous.  The  former  signifies  wine
positively  sweet,  the  latter  wine  agreeable  to  the
taste  from  the  absence  of  acidity,  in  most  cases  in-
dicating nothing  more  than  sound  wine.

It  is  well  known  that  all  the  most  noble  Italian
wines,  with  a  verv  few  exceptions,  were  derived
from  Latium  and  Campania,  and  for  the  most  part
grew  within  a  short  distance  of  the  sea.  "  The
whole  of  these  places,"  says  Strabo  (v.  p.  234),
when  describing  this  coast,  "  yield  excellent  wine  ;
among  the  most  celebrated  are  the  Caecuban,  the
Fundanian,  the  Setinian,  and  so  also  are  the  Fa-
lernian,  the  Alban,  and  the  Statinian."  But  the
classification  adopted  by  Pliny  (xiv.  6)  will  prove
our  best  guide,  and  this  we  shall  follow  to  a  certain
extent.

In  the  first  rank,  then,  we  must  place  the  Se-
tinum  which  fairly  deserves  the  title  of  Imperial,
since  it  was  the  chosen  beverage  of  Augustus  and
most  of  his  courtiers.  It  grew  upon  the  hills  of
Setia,  above  Forum  Appii,  looking  down  upon  the
Pomptine  marshes.  {Fendula  Pomptinos  quae  spec-
tat  Setia  campos.  Mart.  xiii.  112  ;  see  also  vi.  86,
ix.  3,  X.  74,  xiii.  112;  Juv.  v.  34  ;  Silius,  viii.
378  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  I  c.)  Before  the  age  of  Augustus
the  Caecuhum  was  the  most  prized  of  all.  It  grew
in  the  poplar  swamps  bordering  on  the  gulf  of
Amyclae,  close  to  Fundi.  (Mart.  xiii.  1 1 5.)  In  the
time  of  Pliny  its  reputation  was  entirely  gone,
partly  in  consequence  of  the  carelessness  of  the
cultivators,  and  partly  from  its  proper  soil,  origin-
ally a  very  limited  space,  having  been  cut  up  by
the  canal  of  Nero  extending  from  Baiae  to  Ostia.
Galen  (Athen.  i.  p.  27,  a.)  represents  it  as  gene-
rous, full  bodied  and  heady,  not  arriving  at  maturity
until  it  had  been  kept  for  many  years,  (Plin.  I.  c. ;
Strabo,  v.  p.  231  ;  Mart.  xiii.  115  ;  Hor.  Carm.  i.
20.  9,  iii.  23.  2,  &c.)

The  second  rank  was  occupied  by  the  Falernum,
of  which  the  Faustianum  was  the  most  choice  va-
riety, having  gained  its  character  from  the  care
and  skill  exercised  in  the  cultivation  of  the  vines ;
but  when  Pliny  wrote,  it  was  beginning  to  fall  in
public  estimation,  in  consequence  of  the  growers
being  more  solicitous  about  quantity  than  quality,
just  as  was  the  case  with  Madeira  a  few  years
ago.  The  Falernus  ager,  concerning  the  precise
limits  of  which  there  have  been  many  controver-
sies, commenced  at  the  Pons  Campanus,  on  the
left  hand  of  those  journeying  towards  the  Urbana
Colonia  of  Sulla,  the  Faustianus  ager  at  a  village
about  six  miles  from  Sinuessa,  so  that  the  whole
district  in  question  may  be  regarded  as  stretching
from  the  Massic  hills  to  the  river  Viilturnus.  Fa-
lernian  became  fit  for  drinking  in  ten  years,  and
might  be  used  when  twenty  years  old,  but  when
kept  longer  gave  headachs,  and  proved  injurious
to  the  nervous  system.  Pliny  distinguishes  three
kind,  the  rough  {austerum),  the  sweet  {duke),  and
the  thin  (tenue).  Galen  (ap.  Athen.  i.  p.  26,  c.)
two  only,  the  rough  (avarTTipos)  and  the  sweetish
(7\uKafwf).  When  the  south  wind  prevailed
during  the  season  of  the  vintage  the  wine  was
sweetish  and  darker  in  colour  {/xeKdi'Tepos)^  but  if


VINUM.


1207


the  grapes  were  gathered  during  weather  of  a  dif-
ferent description,  it  was  rough  and  tawny  or
amber-coloured  {Kippos).  The  ordinary  appear-
ance of  Falernian,  which  has  been  made  a  theme
of  considerable  discussion,  seems  to  be  determined
by  a  passage  in  Pliny  [H.  N.  xxxvii.  12),  in  which
we  are  informed  that  the  finest  amber  was  named
Falerna.  Others  arranged  the  varieties  differ-
ently ;  that  which  grew  upon  the  hill  tops  they
called  Caucinum,  that  on  the  middle  slopes  Faus
tianum,  that  on  the  plain  Falernum.  (Plin.  /.  c
and  xxiii.  21  ;  Athen.  i.  p.  26,  c. ;  Hor.  Carjn.
i.  20.  10  ;  Prop.  iv.  6  ;  Martial,  ix.  do  ;  Silius,  vii.
159.)

In  the  third  rank  was  the  Albanum,  from  the
Mons  Albanus  (Mons  Juleits,  Mart.  xiii.  109),  of
various  kinds,  very  sweet  (praedtdce),  sweetish
(yXvicd^wv),  rough  (Plin.  xxiii.  21),  and  sharp
(6iJL(()aKias)  ;  it  was  invigorating  (nervis  utile),  and
in  perfection  after  being  kept  for  fifteen  years.
(Plin.  //.  cc. ;  Mart.  xiii.  109  ;  Hor.  Sat.  ii.  8.  14  ;
Juv.  v.  33  ;  Athen.  i.  p.  26,  d.)  Here  too  we  place
the  Surrentinum,  from  the  promontory  forming  the
southern  horn  of  the  bay  of  Naples,  which  was
not  drinkable  until  it  had  been  kept  for  five-and-
twenty  years,  for  being  destitute  of  richness  (d\i-
■JTTjs)  and  very  dry  (ipacpapos),  it  required  a  long
time  to  ripen,  but  was  strongly  recommended  to
convalescents,  on  account  of  its  thinness  and  whole-
someness.  Galen,  however,  was  of  opinion  that
it  agreed  with  those  only  who  were  accustomed  to
use  it  constantly ;  Tiberius  was  wont  to  say  that
the  physicians  had  conspired  to  dignify  what  was
only  generous  vinegar  ;  while  his  successor,  Caligula,
styled  it  nobilis  vappa.  (Plin.  II.  cc.;  Athen.  /.  c.)
Of  equal  reputation  were  the  Massicum,  from  the
hills  which  formed  the  boundary  between  Latium
and  Campania,  although  somewhat  harsh,  as  would
seem,  from  the  precautions  recommended  by  the
epicure  in  Horace  {Sat.  ii.  4.  51  :  compare  Carm.  i.
1.  19,  i.  7.  21,  iii.  21  ;  Mart.  xiii.  Ill  ;  Silius,
vii.  207),  and  the  Ganranum,  from  the  ridge  above
Baiae  and  Puteoli,  produced  in  small  quantity,  but
of  very  high  quality,  full  bodied  {^vrovoi)  and
thick  {Trdxvs).  (Athen.  /.  c.  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  iii.  5  ;
Flor.  iii.  5.)  In  the  same  class  are  to  be  included
the  Calenum  from  Cales,  and  the  Fundanum  from
Fundi.  Both  had  formerly  held  a  higher  place,
"but  vineyards,"  moralizes  Pliny,  ''as  well  as
states,  have  their  periods  of  rise,  of  glory,  and  of
fall."  The  Calenum  was  light  {mixpos),  and  bet-
ter for  the  stomach  than  Falernian  ;  the  Funda-
num was  full  bodied  {^vTovoi)  and  nourishing,  but
apt  to  attack  both  stomach  and  head  ;  therefore
little  sought  after  at  banquets.  (Strabo,  v.  p.  234  ;
Athen.  i,  p.  27,  a. ;  Hor.  Carm.  i.  31.  9  ;  Juv.  i.
69  ;  Mart.  x.  35,  xiii.  113.)  This  list  is  closed
by  the  Veliteminum,  Privernatinum,  and  Signinum,
from  Velitrae,  Privernum,  and  Signia,  towns  on
the  Volscian  hills  ;  the  first  was  a  sound  wine,
but  had  this  peculiarity,  that  it  always  tasted  as  if
mixed  with  some  foreign  substance  ;  the  second
was  thin  and  pleasant  ;  the  last  was  looked  upon
only  in  the  light  of  a  medicine,  valuable  for  its
astringent  qualities.  (Athen.  i.  p.  27,  b. ;  Plin.  I.e.;
Mart.  xiii.  116.)  We  may  safely  bring  in  one
more,  the  Formianum,  from  the  gulf  of  Caieta
{Laestrygonia  Bacchus  in  amphora,  Hor.  Carm.  iii.
16.  34),  associated  by  Horace  with  the  Caecuban,
Falernian,  and  Calenian  (Hor.  Carm.  i.  20,  iii.
16),  and  compared  by  Galen  {ap.  Athen.  i.  p.  26
4  H  4


1208


VI  NUM.


e.)  to  the  Privernatinum  and  Rheginura,  but  richer
(AnrapwreposX  and  ripening  quickly.

The  fourth  rank  contained  the  Mameriinuvi^
from  the  neighbourhood  of  Messana,  first  brought
into  fashion  by  Julius  Caesar.  The  finest,  called
Potalanum  ('IwTaAti'os,  Athen.  i.  p,  27,  d.),  from
the  fields  nearest  to  the  main  land,  was  sound
(7781)5),  light,  and  at  the  same  time  not  without
body.  Tiie  Tauvomenitanum  was  frequently  sub-
stituted fraudulently  for  the  Mamertinum,  which  it
resembled.    (Athen.  i.  p.  27,  d. ;  Plin.  /.  c.)

Of  the  wines  in  Southern  Gaul,  that  of  Baeter-
■rae  alone  bore  a  high  character.  The  rest  were
looked  upon  with  suspicion,  in  consequence  of  the
notorious  frauds  of  the  dealers  in  the  Province,  who
carried  on  the  business  of  adulteration  to  a  great
extent,  and  did  not  scruple  to  have  recourse  to
noxious  drugs.  Among  other  things,  it  was  known
that  they  purchased  aloes,  to  heighten  the  flavour
and  improve  the  colour  of  their  merchandise,  and
conducted  the  process  of  artificial  ripening  so  un-
skilfully, as  to  impart  a  taste  of  smoke,  which
called  forth,  as  we  have  seen  above,  the  maledic-
tion of  Martial  on  the  fumaria  of  Marseilles.  (Plin.
//.  N.  xiv.  8.  ^-  5.)

The  produce  of  the  Balearic  isles  was  compared
to  the  first  growths  of  Italy,  and  the  same  praise
was  shared  by  the  vineyards  of  Tarraco  and  Lau-
ron,  Avhile  those  of  the  Laletani  were  not  so  much
famed  for  the  quality  as  for  the  abundance  of  their
supply.  (Plin.  //.  N.  xiv.  8.  §  6  ;  Mart.  xiii.  1 18  ;
Silius,  iii.  370.)

Returning  to  the  East,  several  districts  of  Pon-
tns,  Paphlagonia,  and  Bithynia,  Lampsacus  on  the
Hellespont,  Telmessus  in  Caria,  Cyprus,  Tripolis,
Berytus,  and  Tyre,  all  claimed  distinction,  and
above  all  the  Chalybonium,  originally  from  Beroea,
but  afterwards  grown  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Da-
mascus also,  was  the  chosen  and  only  drink  of  the
Great  King  (Plin.  //,  A',  xiv.  9  ;  Geopon.  v.  2  ;
Athen.  i.  p.  28,  d.),  to  which  we  may  join  the
Babylonium^  called  nectar  by  Chaereus  (Athen.  i.
p.  29,  f.),  and  the  BvSMvos  from  Phoenicia,  which
found  many  admirers.  (Athen.  i.  p.  29,  b.)  The
last  is  spoken  of  elsewhere  as  Thracian,  or  Grecian,
or  Sicilian,  which  may  have  arisen  from  the  same
grape  having  been  disseminated  through  these
countries.  (Compare  Herod,  ii.  35  ;  Athen.  i.  p.
31,  a.)

Passing  on,  in  the  last  place,  to  Egypt,  where,
according  to  Hellanicus,  the  vine  was  first  dis-
covered, the  Mareoticum^  from  near  Alexandria,  de-
mands our  attention.  It  is  highly  extolled  by
Athenaeus,  being  white,  sweet,  fragrant,  light
(AeTTTos),  circulating  quickly  through  the  frame,
and  not  flying  to  the  head  ;  but  superior  even  to
this  was  the  Taenioiicmn^  so  named  from  a  long
narrow  sandy  ridge  (jaivia)  near  the  western  ex-
tremity of  the  Delta ;  it  was  aromatic,  slightly
astringent,  and  of  an  oily  consistency,  which  dis-
appeared when  it  was  mixed  with  water :  besides
these  we  hear  of  the  Sebennyticum,  and  the  wine  of
Antylla,  a  town  not  far  from  Alexandria.  Ad-
vancing up  the  valley,  the  wine  of  the  Thebais,
and  especially  of  Coptos,  was  so  thin  and  easily
thrown  off  that  it  could  be  given  without  injury  to
fever  patients  ;  and  ascending  through  Nubia,  to
the  confluence  of  the  Nile  with  the  Astapus,  we
reach  MeroU,  whose  wine  has  been  immortalized
by  Lucan.  (Athen.  i.  p.  33,  f.  ;  Strab.  xvii.  p.  799  ;
Hor.  Carm.  L  37.  10  ;  Virg.  Geor^.  ii.  91  ;  Lucan,


VINUM.

X.  161  ;  Plin.  If.  N.  xiv.  9.)  Martial  appears  to
have  held  them  all  very  cheap,  since  he  pronounces
the  vinegar  of  Egypt  better  than  its  wine.  (xiii.
112.)

We  read  of  several  wines  which  received  their
designation,  not  from  the  region  to  which  they  be-
longed, but  from  the  particular  kind  of  grape  from
which  they  were  made,  or  from  some  circumstance
connected  with  their  history  or  qualities.  Names
belonging  to  the  former  class  were  in  all  likelihood
bestowed  before  the  most  favoured  districts  were
generally  known,  and  before  the  eficcts  produced
upon  the  vine,  by  change  of  soil  and  climate,  had
been  accurately  observed  and  studied.  After  these
matters  were  better  understood,  habit  and  mercan  -
tile  usage  would  tend  to  perpetuate  the  ancient
appellation.  Thus,  down  to  a  late  period,  we  hear
of  the  Amineum  {'Afiivaios  oTvos,  Hesych.),  from
the  Aminea  Vitis^  which  held  the  first  place  among
vines,  and  embraced  many  varieties,  carefully  dis-
criminated and  cultivated  according  to  different
methods.  ( Plin.  H.  N.  xiv.  4.  §  1  ;  Cato,  R.  R.
6  and  7  ;  Colum.  iii.  2.  §  7  ;  9.  §  3.)  It  was  of
Grecian  origin,  having  been  conveyed  by  a  Thes-
salian  tribe  to  Italy  (a  story  which  would  seem
to  refer  to  some  Pelasgian  migration),  and  reared
chiefly  in  Campania  around  Naples,  and  in  the
Falenius  ager.  Its  characteristic  excellence  was
the  great  body  and  consequent  durability  of  its
wine.  {Firmissima  vina,  Virg.  Georg.  ii.  97  ;  Galen,
Melh.  med.  xii.  4  ;  Geopon.  viii.  22  ;  Cels.  iv.  2  ;
Macrob.  ii.  16;  Auson.  Ep.  xviii.  32;  Seren.
Samm.  xxix.  544.)  So,  in  like  manner,  the  ^iQios
uhos  (Athen.  L  p.  28,  f.),  from  the  rpiOia  a/xTreAos
(Colum.  iii.  2.  §  24),  which  Virgil  tells  us  {Georg.
ii.  93)  was  particularly  suitable  for  passum^  and
the  Kairyiai  (smoke-wine)  of  Plato  the  comic  poet
(Athen.  i,  p.  31,  e.),  prepared  in  greatest  perfec-
tion near  Beneventum,  from  the  Kawyeos  OjUttcAoj,
so  named  in  consequence  of  the  clusters  being
neither  white  nor  black,  but  of  an  intermediate
dusky  or  smoky  hue.  (Theophr.  H.  P.  ii.  4,  C.  P.
v.  3  ;  Aristot.  de  Gener.  iv.  4  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xiv.  4.
§  7  ;  compare  xxxvi.  36,  on  the  gem  Capnias.)

On  the  other  hand,  the  2a7rpios,  on  whose  di-
vine fragrance  Hermippus  descants  in  such  glow-
ing language  (Athen.  i.  p.  29,  e.),  is  simply  some
rich  wine  of  great  age,  "toothless,  and  sere,  and
wondrous  old."  {ohovras  ovic  ix'^^i  '^^V  o'a^'pds  .  .  .
y4pwv  7€  Sai/iiouius,  Athen.  x.  p.  441,  d.  ;  see
Eustath.  ad  Horn.  Od,  ii.  340  ;  Casaub.  ad  Allien.
i.  p.  29.)  The  origin  of  the  title  duOoa/xias  is  some-
what more  doubtful :  some  will  have  it  to  denote
wine  from  a  sweet-smelling  spot  (Suid.  s.  v. )  ;  others
more  reasonably  refer  it  to  the  "  bouquet  "  of  the
wine  itself  (Hesych.  s.  v.) ;  according  to  Phanias  of
Eresus,  in  one  passage,  it  was  a  compound,  formed
by  adding  one  part  of  sea-water  to  fifty  of  must,
although,  in  another  place,  he  seems  to  say,  that  it
was  wine  obtained  from  grapes  gathered  before  they
were  ripe,  in  which  case  it  might  resemble  Cham-
pagne.    (Athen.  i.  p.  32,  a.  ;  compare  p.  462,  e.)

Those  who  desire  more  minute  details  upon  this
very  extensive  subject  may  consult  the  Geoponic
Collection,  books  iii.  to  viii.  inclusive  ;  the  whole
of  the  1 4th  book  of  Pliny's  Natural  History,  to-
gether with  the  first  thirty  chapters  of  the  23d  ;
the  12th  book  of  Columella,  with  the  commentarj'
of  Schneider  and  others  ;  the  2d  book  of  Virgil's
Georgics,  with  the  remarks  of  Heyne,  Voss,  and
the  old   grammarians ;   Galen,  i.  9,   and  xii.  4  j


VIS.

Pollux,  vi.  foil.  ;  Athenaeus,  lib.  i.  and  lib.  x.  ;
besides  which  there  are  a  multitude  of  passages
in  other  parts  of  the  above  authors,  in  Cato,  Varro,
and  in  the  classics  generally,  which  bear  more  or
less  upon  these  topics.

Of  modern  writers  we  may  notice  particularly.
Prosper  Rendella,  Tractatus  de  Vinea,  Vindemia  et
Vino,  Venet.  1 629  ;  Galeatius  Landrinus,  Quaestio
de  Mixtione  Vini  et  Aquae,  Ferrar.  1593;  An-
dreas Baccius,  de  Naturali  Vinorum  Historia,  &c.^
Rom.  1596,  de  Conviviis  Antiquorum,  tfrc,  Gronov.
Thes.  Graec.  Antiq.  ;  Sir  Edward  Barry,  Obsei-va-
(lojis  on  the  Wi7ies  of  the  Ancie?its,  Lond.  1775  ;
Henderson,  History  of  Ancient  and  modern  Wines,
Lond.  1824.  Some  of  the  most  important  facts
are  presented  in  a  condensed  form  in  Becker's
Gallas,  vol.  ii.  pp.  163—176,  and  pp.  238—241,
and  Ckarikles,  vol.  i.  p.  456,  foil.  [  W.  R.]

VIOCURI.       [QUATUORVIRI  VlALES.]

VIRGA,  dim.  VIRGULA  (pdSSos),  a  rod  or
wand.  This  was  in  manj'  cases  the  emblem  of  a
certain  rank  or  office  ;  being  carried,  for  example,
by  the  Salii,  by  a  judge  or  civil  officer  (see  wood-
cut, p.  98),  a  herald  [Caduceus]  (Non.  Marc.  p.
528  ;  Ovid.  Met.  i.  716),  and  by  the  Tricliniarcha
[Triclinium],  or  any  other  person  who  had  to
exercise  authority  over  slaves.  (Senec.  Epist.  47.)
The  use  of  the  rod  {paShiC^iv,  Acts,  xvi.  22)  in
the  punishment  of  Roman  citizens  was  abolished
by  the  Lex  Porcia  (p.  Q9Q,  a).  In  the  Fasces  a
number  of  rods  were  bound  together.

The  wand  was  also  the  common  instrument  of
magical  display,  as  in  the  hand  of  Circe  (Hom.  Od.
X.  238,  293,  318,  389),  and  of  Minerva  (xvi.  172).
To  do  any  thing  virgula  divina  was  to  do  it  by
magic.  (Cic.  Ait.  i.  44.)  The  stripes  of  cloth  were
called  virgae,  (Ovid.  Ar.  Am.  iii.  269.)  [Pal-
lium ;  Tela.]  [J.  Y.]

VPRGINES  VESTA'LES.  [Vestales  Vir-

GINES.]

VIRIDA'RIUM.     [Hortus.]

VIS.  Leges  were  passed  at  Rome  for  the  pur-
pose of  preventing  acts  of  violence.  The  Lex
Plotia  or  Plautia  was  enacted  against  those  who
occupied  public  places  and  carried  arms  (Cic,  ad
Att.  ii.  24,  de  Harusp.  Respons.  8  ;  the  Disserta-
tion of  Waechter,  Neues  Arehiv.  des  Criminalrechts,
vol.  xiii.  reprinted  in  Orellii  Onomasticon>.  The  Lex
proposed  by  the  consul  Q.  Catulus  on  this  subject,
with  the  assistance  of  Plautius  the  tribunus,  ap-
pears to  be  the  Lex  Plotia.  (Cic.  pro  Coel.  29  ;
Sallust.  iJi  Cic.  Declam.)  There  was  a  Lex
Julia  of  the  dictator  Caesar  on  this  subject,  which
imposed  the  penalty  of  aquae  et  ignis  interdictio.
(Cic.  Philip,  i.  9.)  Two  Juliae  Leges  were  passed
as  to  this  matter  in  the  time  of  Augustus,  which
were  respectively  entitled  De  Vi  Publica,  and  da
Vi  Privata.  (Dig.  48.  tit.  6,  7.)  The  Lex  de  Vi
Publica  did  not  appl}',  as  the  title  might  seem  to
import,  exclusi  f  ely  to  acts  againts  the  public  peace,
and  it  is  not  pussible  to  describe  it  very  accurately
except  by  enumerating  its  chief  provisions.  The
collecting  of  arms  (arma,  tela)  in  a  house  (domus),
or  in  a  villa  (agrove  in  villa),  except  for  the  pur-
pose of  hunting,  or  going  a  journey  or  a  voyage,
was  in  itself  a  violation  of  the  Lex,  The  signifi-
cation of  the  word  tela  in  this  Lex  was  very  ex-
tensive. The  punishment  for  the  violation  of  this
Lex  was  aquae  et  ignis  interdictio,  except  in  the
case  of  attacking  and  plundering  houses  or  villas
i\'ith  an  armed  band,  in  which  case  the  punishment


VITRUM.


1209


was  death  ;  and  the  penalty  was  the  same  for  carry-
ing off  a  woman,  married  or  unmarried.  The  cases
enumerated  in  the  Digest,  as  falling  within  the
penalties  of  the  Lex  Julia  de  Vi  Privata,  are  cases
where  the  act  was  of  less  atrocity  ;  for  instance,  if
a  man  got  a  number  of  men  together  for  a  riot,
which  ended  in  the  beating  of  a  person,  but  net
in  his  death,  he  came  within  the  penalties  of  the
Lex  de  Vi  Privata.  It  was  also  a  case  of  Vis
Privata,  when  persons  combined  to  prevent  another
being  brought  before  the  praetor.  The  Senatus-
consultum  Volusianum  extended  the  penalties  of
the  Lex  to  those  who  maintained  another  in  his
suit,  with  the  view  of  sharing  any  advantage  that
might  result  from  it.  The  penalties  of  this  Lex
were  the  loss  of  a  third  part  of  the  offender's  pro-
perty ;  and  he  was  also  declared  to  be  incapable  of
being  a  Senator  or  Decurio,  or  a  Judex :  by  a  Se-
natusconsultum,  the  name  of  which  is  not  given,
he  was  incapacitated  from  enjoying  any  honour,
quasi  infamis.  (This  matter  is  discussed  at
length  by  Rein,  Das  Criminalrecht  der  Romei\
p.  732.)  [G.  L.]

VIS  et  VIS  ARMATA.  There  was  an  inter-
dict De  Vi  et  Vi  Armata,  which  applied  to  the
case  of  a  man  who  was  forcibly  ejected  from  the
possession  of  a  piece  of  ground  or  edifice  {qui  vi  de-
jectus  est).  The  object  of  the  interdict  was  to  restore
the  party  ejected  to  possession.  (Dig.  43.  tit.  16  .
Interdictum.)  [G.  L.]

VISCERATIO.  [FuNus,  p.  562,  a.]
VITELLIA'NI.  [Tabulae,  p.  1092,  a.]
VITIS.  [ExERciTUs,  p.  504,  b.]
VITRUM  {vaiKos),  glass.  A  singular  amount
of  ignorance  and  scepticism  long  prevailed  with
regard  to  the  knowledge  possessed  by  the  ancienta
in  the  art  of  glass-making.  Some  asserted  that  it
was  to  be  regarded  as  exclusively  a  modern  inven-
tion, while  others,  unable  altogether  to  resist  the
mass  of  evidence  to  the  contrary,  contented  them-
selves with  believing  that  the  substance  was  known
only  in  its  coarsest  and  rudest  form.  It  is  now
clearly  demonstrated  to  have  been  in  common  use
at  a  very  remote  epoch.  Various  specimens  still  in
existence  prove  that  the  manufacture  had  in  some
branches  reached  a  point  of  perfection  to  which
recent  skill  has  not  yet  been  able  to  attain  ;  and
although  we  may  not  feel  disposed  to  go  so  far  aa
Winckelmann  (i.  c.  2.  §  20),  who  contends  that  it
was  used  more  generally  and  for  a  greater  variety
of  purposes  in  the  old  world  than  among  ourselves,
yet  when  we  examine  the  numerous  collections
arranged  in  all  great  public  museums,  we  must  feel
convinced  that  it  was  employed  as  an  ordinary
material  for  all  manner  of  domestic  utensils  by  the
Egyptians,  Greeks,  and  Romans.

We  find  the  process  of  glass-blowing  distinctly
represented  in  the  paintings  of  Beni  Hassan,  which
if  any  faith  can  be  reposed  in  the  interpretation  of
hieroglyphics  according  to  the  phonetic  system,  were
executed  during  the  reigns  of  Osirtasen  the  First,
the  contemporary  of  Joseph,  and  his  immediate
successors,  while  a  glass  bead  has  been  found  at
Thebes  bearing  the  name  of  a  monarch  who  lived
3300  years  ago,  about  the  time  of  the  Jewish
Exodus.  Vases  also,  wine-bottles,  drinking- cups,
bugles,  and  a  multitude  of  other  objects  have  been
discovered  in  sepulchres  and  attached  to  mummies
both  in  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt,  and  although  in
most  cases  no  precise  date  can  be  aflixed  to  these
relics,  many  of  them  are  referred  by  the  most  com-


1210


VITRUM.


petent  judges  to  a  very  early  period.  (Wilkinson,
Ancient  Egyptians^  vol.  iii.  p.  88,  &c.)

A  story  has  been  preserved  by  Pliny  {H.  N.
xxxvi.  Qo),  that  glass  was  first  discovered  acci-
dentally by  some  merchants  who  having  landed  on
the  Syrian  coast  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  Beliis,
and  being  unable  to  find  stones  to  support  their
cooking-pots,  fetched  for  this  purpose  from  their
ship  some  of  the  lumps  of  nitre  which  composed
the  cargo.  This  being  fused  by  the  heat  of  the
fire,  united  with  the  sand  upon  which  it  rested
and  formed  a  stream  of  vitrified  matter.  No  con-
clusion can  be  drawn  from  this  tale,  even  if  true,
in  consequence  of  its  vagueness  ;  but  it  probably
originated  in  the  fact  recorded  by  Strabo  (xvi.
p.  758)  and  Josephus  {B.J.  ii.  9),  that  the  sand
of  the  district  in  question  was  esteemed  peculiarly
suitable  for  glass-making,  and  exported  in  great
quantities  to  the  workshops  of  Sidon  and  Alexan-
dria, long  the  most  famous  in  the  ancient  world.
(See  Hamberger  and  Michaelis  on  the  Glass  of
the  Hebrews  and  Phoenicians,  Commentar.  Soc.
Gott.  vol.  iv.  ;  Heeren,  Ideen^  i.  2.  p.  94.)  Alex-
andria sustained  its  reputation  for  many  centuries  ;
Rome  derived  a  great  portion  of  its  supplies  from
this  source,  and  as  late  as  the  reign  of  Aurelian
we  find  the  manufacture  still  flourishing.  (Cic.  ■pro
Rahir.  Post.  14;  Strabo,  I.  c. ;  Martial,  xi.  11,
xii.  74,  xiv.  115  ;  Vopisc.  Aurel.  45  ;  Boudet,  5?<r
I'' Arte  de  la  Verrerie  ne  en  Egypte  ;  Description  de
VEgypte,  vol.  ix.  p.  213.)

There  is  some  difficulty  in  deciding  by  what
Greek  author  glass  is  first  mentioned,  because  the
term  vaKos^  like  the  Hebrew  word  used  in  the
book  of  Job  (xxviii.  17)  and  translated  in  the
LXX.  by  SaAos,  unquestionably  denotes  not  only
artificial  glass  but  rock-crystal,  or  indeed  any
transparent  stone  or  stone-like  substance.  (Schol.
ad  AristopJi.  Nub.  7B7.)  Thus  the  CeXos  of
Herodotus  (iii.  24),  in  which  the  Ethiopians
encased  the  bodies  of  their  dead,  cannot  be
glass,  although  understood  in  this  sense  by  Ctesias
and  Diodorus  (ii.  15),  for  we  are  expressly  told
that  it  was  dug  in  abundance  out  of  the  earth  ;
and  hence  commentators  have  conjectured  that
rock-crystal  or  rock-salt,  or  amber,  or  oriental
alabaster,  or  some  bituminous  or  gummy  product
might  be  indicated.  But  when  the  same  his-
torian in  his  account  of  sacred  crocodiles  (ii.  69)
states  that  they  were  decorated  with  ear-rings
made  of  melted  stone  (apT-fffxard  re  KiQiva  x^to
KoL  xpvo'ea  is  ra  &Ta  eVdeVres),  we  may  safely
conclude  that  he  intends  to  describe  some  vitreous
ornament  for  which  he  knew  no  appropriate  name.
The  a<ppwy\s  liaXlvrj  and  <T<ppayiSe  voAtVo  of  an
Athenian  inscription  referred  to  b.  c  398  (Bockh,
Corp.  Inscrip.  n.  150.  §  60),  together  with  the
passage  in  Aristophanes  {Acham.  74)  where  the
envoy  boasts  that  he  had  been  drinking  with  the
great  king  "  ^|  vaKivwv  iKirufj.dTuv''''  decide  no-
thing, especially  since  in  another  comedy  (jVub.
737)  Strepsiades  describes  a  iloAos,  or  burning-
glass,  as  a  transparent  stone  sold  in  the  shops  of
apothecaries,  and  we  know  that  any  solid  dia-
phanous substance  ground  into  the  form  of  a  lens
would  produce  the  effect.  Setting  aside  the  two
problems  with  regard  to  glass,  attributed  to  Ari-
stotle, as  confessedly  spurious,  we  at  length  find  a
satisfactory  testimony  in  the  works  of  his  pupil  and
successor,  Theophrastus,  who  notices  the  circura-
Btance  alluded  to  above,  of  the  fitness  of  the  sand


VITRUM.

at  the  mouth  of  the  river  Belus  for  the  fabrication
of  glass.

Among  the  Latin  writers  Lucretius  appears  to
be  the  first  in  whom  the  word  vitrum  occurs  (iv.
604,  vi.  991)  ;  but  it  must  have  been  well  known
to  his  countrymen  long  before,  for  Cicero  names  it,
along  with  paper  and  linen,  as  a  common  article  of
merchandise  brought  from  Egypt  {pro  Rah.  Post.
14).  Scaurus,  in  his  aedileship  (b.  c.  58),  made
a  display  of  it  such  as  was  never  witnessed  even
in  after-times ;  for  the  scena  of  his  gorgeous  theatre
was  divided  into  three  tiers,  of  which  the  under
portion  Avas  of  marble,  the  upper  of  gilded  wood,
and  the  middle  compartment  of  glass.  (Plin,  H.  N.
xxxvi.  34.  §  7.)  In  the  poets  of  the  Augustan  age
it  is  constantly  introduced,  both  directly  and  in
similes,  and  in  such  terms  as  to  prove  that  it  was
an  object  with  which  every  one  must  be  familiar
(e.g.  Virg.  Georg.  iv.  350,  Aen.  vii.  759  ;  Ovid.
Amor.  i.  6.  55  ;  Prop.  iv.  8.  37  ;  Hor.  Carm.  iii.
13.  1).  Strabo  declares  that  in  his  day  a  small
drinking-cup  of  glass  might  be  purchased  at  Rome
for  half  an  as  (xvi.  p.  758  ;  compare  Martial,  ix.
60),  and  so  common  was  it  in  the  time  of  Juvenal
and  Martial,  that  old  men  and  women  made  a
livelihood  by  tracking  sulphur  matches  for  broken
fragments.  (Juv.  v.  48  ;  Martial,  i,  42,  x,  3 ;
Stat.  Sylv.  i.  6.  73  ;  compare  Dion  Cass.  Ivi.  17.)
When  Pliny  wrote  manufactories  had  been  est.i-
blished  not  only  in  Italy,  but  in  Spain  and  Gaul
also,  and  glass  drinking- cups  had  entirely  super-
seded those  of  gold  and  silver  (//,  N.  xxxvi.  66.,
67),  and  in  the  reign  of  Alexander  Severus  we  find
vitrearii  ranked  along  with  curriers,  coachmakers,
goldsmiths,  silversmiths,  and  other  ordinary  arti-
ficers whom  the  emperor  taxed  to  raise  money  for
his  thermae.     (Lamprid.  Aleic.  Sev.  24.)

The  numerous  specimens  transmitted  to  us  prove
that  the  ancients  were  well  acquainted  with  the
art  of  imparting  a  great  variety  of  colours  to  their
glass  ;  they  were  probably  less  successful  in  their
attempts  to  render  it  perfectly  pure  and  free  from
all  colour,  since  we  are  told  by  Pliny  that  it  was
considered  most  valuable  in  this  state.  It  was
wrought  according  to  the  different  methods  now
practised,  being  fashioned  into  the  required  shape
by  the  blowpipe,  cut^  as  we  term  it,  although
ground  (teritur)  is  a  more  accurate  phrase,  upon  a
wheel,  and  engraved  with  a  sharp  tool,  like  silver
("  aliud  flatu  figuratur,  aliud  torno  teritur,  aliud
argenti  modo  coelatur,"  Plin.  //.  A^.  xxxvi.  6(5).
Doubts  have  been  expressed  touching  the  accuracy
of  the  last  part  of  this  statement ;  but  since  we
have  the  most  positive  evidence  that  the  diamond
(adarnas)  was  employed  by  engravers  of  gems
(Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvii.  15  ;  Solin,  52  ;  Isidor.  xvi.
13,  3),  and  might  therefore  have  been  applied  with
still  greater  facility  to  scratching  the  surface  of
glass,  there  is  no  necessity  for  supposing  that  Pliny
was  not  himself  aware  of  what  he  meant  to  sa}',
nor  for  twisting  his  words  into  meanings  which
they  cannot  legitimately  assume,  especially  since
hieroglyphics  and  various  others  devices  are  now  to
be  seen  on  Egyptian  vases  and  trinkets  which  have
been  engraved  by  some  such  process.  (Wilkinson,
vol.  iii.  p.  105.)  The  diatreta  of  Martial  (xii.  70)
were  glass  cups  cut  or  engraved  according  to  one
or  other  of  the  above  methods.  The  process  was
difficult,  and  accidents  occurred  so  frequently
(Mart.  xiv.  115)  that  the  jurists  found  it  necessary
to  define  accurately  the  circumstances  under  which


VITRUM.

the  workman  became  liable  for  the  value  of  the
■vessel  destroyed.  (Dig.  9.  tit.  2.  s.  27.  §  29  ;  see
Salmasius  ad  Vopisc.  Saturn,  c.  8.)  The  art  of
etching  upon  glass,  now  so  common,  was  entirely
unknown,  since  it  depends  upon  the  properties
of  fluoric  acid,  a  chemical  discovery  of  the  last
century.

We  may  now  briefly  enumerate  the  chief  uses
to  which  glass  was  applied.

1.  Bottles,  vases,  cups,  and  cinerary  urns.  A
great  number  of  these  may  be  seen  in  the  British
Museum  and  all  the  principal  continental  cabinets,
but  especially  in  the  Museo  Borbonico  at  Naples,
which  contains  the  spoils  of  Herculaneum  and
Pompeii,  and  includes  upwards  of  2400  specimens
of  ancient  glass.  These  sufficiently  prove  the  taste,
ingenuity,  and  consummate  skill  lavished  upon  such
labours  ;  many  which  have  been  shaped  by  the
blowpipe  only,  are  remarkable  for  their  graceful
form  and  brilliant  colours,  while  others  are  of  the
most  delicate  and  complicated  workmanship.  A
very  remarkable  object  belonging  to  the  last  class,
the  property  of  the  Trivulsi  family,  is  described  in
the  notes  to  Winckelmann  (i,  c.  2.  §  21)  and  figured


ill  I  \7 1  !/if


VITRUM.


121


here.  It  is  a  glass  cup  contained  within  a  sort
of  network,  also  of  glass,  to  which  it  is  attached
by  a  series  of  short  and  very  fine  glass  props  placed
at  equal  distances  from  each  other.  Round  the
rim  are  several  letters  connected  with  the  cup  in
the  same  manner  as  the  network,  and  forming  the
words  BiBE  VIVAS  MULTos  ANNOS.  The  cha-
racters of  the  inscription  are  green,  the  network  is
blue,  the  cup  itself  resembles  opal,  shades  of  red,
white,  yellow  and  blue  predominating  in  turn  ac-
cording to  the  angle  at  which  the  light  falls  upon
it.  It  was  at  first  believed  that  this  effect  was
the  result  of  long  interment  beneath  the  ground  ;
but  it  is  much  more  likely  to  have  been  produced
by  the  artist,  for  it  corresponds  precisely  to  the
account  given  of  two  precious  cups  presented  by  an
Egj'ptian  priest  to  the  emperor  Adrian,  and  cha-
racterised as  calices  allassotites  versicolores.  (Vopisc.
Saturn,  c.  8.)  Neither  the  letters  nor  the  network
have  been  soldered  to  the  cup,  but  the  whole  has
been  cut  of  a  solid  mass,  after  the  manner  of  a
cameo,  the  marks  of  the  wheel  being  still  visible
on  the  little  props,  which  are  more  or  less  angular
according  as  the  instrument  was  able  to  reach  them
completely  or  not.  But  the  great  triumph  of  an-
cient genius  in  this  department  is  the  celebrated


Portland  Vase,  formerly  known  as  the  Barberini
Vase,  which  is  now  in  the  British  Museum.  It  was
found  about  three  hundred  years  ago,  at  a  short
distance  from  Rome,  in  a  marble  coffin  within  a
sepulchral  vault,  pronounced  upon  very  imperfect
evidence  to  have  been  the  tomb  of  Alexander  Se-
verus.  The  extreme  beauty  of  this  urn  led  Mont-
faucon  and  other  antiquaries  to  mistake  it  for  a
real  sardonyx.  Upon  more  accurate  examination  it
was  ascertained  to  be  composed  of  dark  blue  glass,
of  a  very  rich  tint,  on  the  surface  of  which  are  de-
lineated in  relief  several  minute  and  elaborately
wrought  figures  of  opaque  white  enamel.  It  has
been  determined  by  persons  of  the  greatest  practi-
cal experience,  that  these  figures  must  have  been
moulded  separately,  and  afterwards  fixed  to  the
blue  surface  by  a  partial  fusion  ;  but  the  union  has
been  effected  with  such  extraordinary  care  and
dexterity,  that  no  trace  of  the  junction  can  be  ob-
served, noK  have  the  most  delicate  lines  received
the  slightest  injury.  With  such  samples  before  us,
we  need  not  wonder  that  in  the  time  of  Nero  a
pair  of  moderate-sized  glass  cups  with  handles
Ipteroti)  sometimes  cost  fifty  pounds  (HS.  sex
mUlibus,  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvi.  66).  For  a  full  de-
scription of  the  Portland  Vase,  see  the  eighth
volume  of  the  Archaeologia.

2.  Glass  Pastes  presenting  fac-similes,  either  in
relief  or  intaglio,  of  engraved  precious  stones.  In
this  way  have  been  preserved  exact  copies  of  many
beautiful  gems,  of  which  the  originals  no  longer
exist,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  catalogues  of  Stosch,
of  Tassie,  of  the  Orleans  collection,  and  from  similar
publications.  These  were  in  demand  for  the  rings  of
such  persons  as  were  not  wealthy  enough  to  purchase
real  stones,  as  we  perceive  from  the  phrase  "  vitreis
gemmis  ex  vuJgi  annulis.''''  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.  30.)
Large  medallions  also  of  this  kind  are  still  pre-
served, and  bas-reliefs  of  considerable  magnitude.
(See  Winckelmann,  i.  c.  2.  §  27.)

3.  Closely  allied  to  the  preceding  were  imitations
of  coloured  precious  stones,  such  as  the  carbuncle,
the  sapphire,  the  amethyst,  and  above  all,  the  eme-
rald. These  counterfeits  were  executed  with  such
fidelity,  that  detection  was  extremely  difficult,  and
great  profits  were  realised  by  dishonest  dealers
who  entrapped  the  unwary.  (Plin.  //.  A'",  xxxvii.
75.)  That  such  frauds  were  practised  even  upon
the  most  exalted  in  station  is  seen  from  the  anec-
dote given  by  Trebellius  Pollio  of  the  whimsical
vengeance  taken  by  Gallienus  {Gall.  c.  12)  on  a
rogue  who  had  cheated  him  in  this  waj',  and  col-
lections are  to  be  seen  at  Rome  of  pieces  of  coloured
glass  which  were  evidently  once  worn  as  jewels,
from  which  they  cannot  be  distinguished  by  the
eye.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvii.  26.  33.  75  ;  Senec.  Ep.
90  ;  Isidor.  Orig.  xvi.  15.  §  27  ;  Beckmann,  History
of  Inventions^  vol.  i.  p.  199.  Eng.  Trans.  3d  edit.)

4.  One  very  elegant  application  of  glass  deserves
to  be  particularly  noticed.  A  number  of  fine  stalks
of  glass  of  difterent  colours  were  placed  vertically,
and  arranged  in  such  a  manner  as  to  depict  upon
the  upper  surface  some  figure  or  pattern,  upon  the
principle  of  a  minute  mosaic.  The  filaments  thus
combined  were  then  subjected  to  such  a  degree  of
heat  as  would  suffice  to  soften  without  melting
them,  and  were  thus  cemented  together  into  a
solid  mass.  It  is  evident  that  the  picture  brought
out  upon  the  upper  surface  would  extend  down
through  the  whole  of  the  little  column  thus  formed,
and  hence  if  it  was  cut  into  thin  slices  at  right


1212


VITTA.


angles  to  the  direction  of  the  fibres,  each  of  these
sections  would  upon  both  sides  represent  the  de-
sign which  would  be  multiplied  to  an  extent  in
proportion  to  the  total  length  of  the  glass  threads.
Two  beautiful  fragments  evidently  constructed  in
this  way  are  accurately  commented  upon  by
Winckelmann  (i.  c.  2.  §  22,  23,  24),  and  another
I'ecently  brought  from  Egypt  is  shown  on  the  fron-
tispiece to  the  third  volume  of  Wilkinson's  work.
Many  mosaic  pavements  and  pictures  (opus  mu-
sivum)  belong  to  this  head,  since  the  cubes  were
irequently  composed  of  opaque  glass  as  well  as
marble,  but  these  have  been  already  discussed  in
p.  915  of  this  work.

5.  Thick  sheets  of  glass  of  various  colours  appear
to  have  been  laid  down  for  paving  floors,  and  to
have  been  attached  as  a  lining  to  the  walls  and
ceilings  of  apartments  in  dwelling  houses,  just  as
scagliuola  is  frequently  employed  in  Italy,  and  oc-
casionall}'  in  our  own  country  also.  Rooms  fitted
up  in  this  waj'  were  called  vitreae  camerae,  and  the
panels  vitreae  quadraturae.  Such  was  the  kind
of  decoration  introduced  by  Scaurus  for  the  scene
of  his  theatre,  not  columns  nor  pillars  of  glass  as
gome,  nor  bas-reliefs  as  others  have  imagined.
(Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvi.  64  ;  Stat.  Syl.  i.  5.  42  ;  Senec.
Ep.  76 ;  Vopisc.  Firm.  c.  3 ;  Winckelmann,  i.
c.  2.  §  21 ;  Passeri,  Lucer7iae  Fidiks,  p.  67.  tab.
Ixxi.)

6.  The  question  whether  glass  windows  were
known  to  the  ancients  has,  after  much  discussion,
been  set  at  rest  by  the  excavations  at  Pompeii,  for
not  only  have  many  fragments  of  flat  glass  been
disinterred  from  time  to  time,  but  in  the  tepidarium
of  the  public  baths  a  bronze  lattice  came  to  light
with  some  of  the  panes  still  inserted  in  the  frame,
so  as  to  determine  at  once  not  only  their  existence,
but  the  mode  in  which  they  were  secured  and  ar-
ranged. (Mazois,  Palais  de  Scajirus,  c.  viii.  p.  97  ;
Jiuines  de  Pompii,  vol.  iii.  p.  77  ;  Becker,  Gallus,
vol.  ii.  p.  20.)     [DoMus,  p.  432.]

7.  From  the  time  that  pure  glass  became  known,
it  must  have  been  remarked  that  when  darkened
upon  one  side,  it  possessed  the  property  of  reflect-
ing images.  We  are  certain  that  an  attempt  was
made  by  the  Sidonians  to  make  looking-glasses
(Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvi.  66),  and  equally  certain  that
it  must  have  failed,  for  the  use  of  metallic  rain-ors,
which  are  more  costly  in  the  first  instance,  which
require  constant  care,  and  attain  but  imperfectly
the  end  desired,  was  universal  imder  the  Empire.
Respecting  ancient  miiTors,  see  Speculum.

8.  A  strange  story  with  regard  to  an  alleged  in-
vention of  malleable  glass  is  found  in  Petronius
(c.  51),  is  told  still  more  circumstantially  by  Dion
Cassius  (Ivii.  21),  and  is  alluded  to  by  Pliny  (//.  A'.
xxxvi.  66),  with  an  expression  of  doubt,  however,
as  to  its  truth.  An  artist  appeared  before  Tiberius
with  a  cup  of  glass.  This  he  dashed  violently
upon  the  ground.  When  taken  up  it  was  neither
broken  nor  cracked,  but  dinted  like  a  piece  of
metal.  The  man  then  produced  a  mallet,  and  ham-
mered it  back  into  its  original  shape.  The  emperor
inquired  whether  any  one  was  acquainted  with  the
secret,  and  was  answered  in  the  negative,  upon
which  the  order  was  given  that  he  should  be  in-
stantly beheaded,  lest  the  precious  metals  might
lose  their  value,  should  such  a  composition  become
generally  known.  [W.  R.]

VITTA,  or  plaral  VITTAE,  a  ribbon  or  fillet,
is  to  be  considered,  I.  As  an  ordinary  portion  of


VITTA.

female  dress.  II.  As  a  decoration  of  sacred  per-
sons and  sacred  things.

1.  When  considered  as  an  ordinary  portion  of
female  dress,  it  was  simply  a  bjind  encircling  the
head,  and  serving  to  confine  the  tresses  {crinales
vittae)  the  ends,  when  long  {longae  taenia  inttae)^
hanging  down  behind.  (Virg.  Aen.  vii.  351,  403  ;
Ovid.  Met.  ii.  413,  iv.  6;  Isidor.  xix.  31.  §  6.)
It  was  Avom  (1.)  by  maidens  (Virg.  Aen.  ii.  168  ;
Prop.  iv.  11.  34;'Val.  Flacc.  viii.  6;  Serv.  ad
Virg.  Aen.  ii.  133);  (2.)  by  married  women  also,
the  vitta  assumed  on  the  nuptial  day  being  of  a
diflferent  form  from  that  used  by  virgins.  (Prop.  iv.
3.  15,  iv.  J 1.  34  ;  Plant.  Mil.  Gl.  iii.  1.  194  ;  Val.
Max.  V.  2.  §  1.)

The  Vitta  was  not  worn  by  libertinae  even  of
fair  character  (Tibull,  i.  6.  67),  much  less  by  rae-
retrices ;  hence  it  was  looked  upon  as  an  insigne
ptidorisy  and,  together  with  the  stola  and  instita^
served  to  point  out  at  first  sight  the  freebom  ma-
tron. (Ovid.  A.  A.  i.  31,  R.  A.  386,  Trist.  ii.
247,   Ep.  e.v  Pont.  iii.  3.  51.)

The  colour  was  probably  a  matter  of  choice,
white  and  purple  are  both  mentioned.  (Ovid.  Met.
ii.  413,  Ciris,  511;  Stat.  AcMll.  i.  611.)  One
of  those  represented  in  the  cuts  below  is  orna-
mented with  embroider}',  and  they  were  in  some
cases  set  with  pearls  {villas  margaritarum^  Dig.  34.
tit.  2.  s.  25.  §  2).

The  following  woodcuts  represent  back  and  front
views  of  the  heads  of  statues  from  Herculaneum,
on  which  we  perceive  the  vitta.  {Bronzi  d^Ercv-
lano,  vol.  ii.  tav.  72,  75.)


ir.  When  employed  for  sacred  purposes,  it  was
usually  twisted  round  the  infula  [Infula],  and
held  together  the  loose  flocks  of  wool.  (Virg.  Georg.
iii.  487,  Aen.  x.  537  ;  Isidor,  xix.  30.  §  4  ;  Serv.
ad  Virg.  Ae7i.  x.  538 ;  the  expression  of  Lucan  v.
142,  &c.  is  obscure.)  Under  this  form  it  was  cm-
ployed  as  an  ornament  for  (1.)  Priests,  and  those
who  ofi"ered  sacrifice.  (Yirg.  Aen.  ii.  221,  vi.  637,
x.  537  ;  Tacit.  Ann.  i.  57. )  (2.)  Priestesses,  espe-
cially those  of  VestJi,  and  hence  vittata  sacerdos
for  a  Vestal,  /car'  i^Sxnv.  (Virg.  Aen.  vii.  418;
Ovid.  Fast.  iii.  30,  vi.  457  ;  Juv.  iv.  9,  vi.  50.)
(3.)  Prophets  and  poets,  who  may  be  regarded  a»
priests,  and  in  this  case  the  Vittae  were  frequently
intertwined  with  chaplets  of  olive  or  laurel.  (Virg.
Aen.  iii.  81,  vi.  665  ;  Stat.  Silv.  ii.  1.  26,  Achill.
i.  11,  rheb.  iii.  466).  (4.)  Statues  of  deities.
(y'wg.  Aen.  ii.  168,  296;  Juv.  vi.  50;  compare
Stat.  Silv.  iii.  3.  3.)  (5.)  Victims  decked  for  sa-
crifice. (Virg.  Georg.  iii.  487,  Aen.  ii.  133,  156,
v.  366  ;  Ovid.  Ep.  ex  Pont.  iii.  2.  74,  Stat.  Achill.
ii.  301.)  (6.)  Altars.  (Virg.  Eel.  viii.  64,  Aen.
iii.  64.)  (7.)  Temples.  (Prop.  iv.  9.  27  ;  compare
Tacit.  Hist.  iv.  53.)  (8.)  The  'iKeriipia  of  suppli-
ants.   (Virg.  Aen.  vii.  237,  viii.  128.)


UMBRACULUM.

The  sacred  vittae,  as  well  as  the  infulae,  were
made  of  wool,  and  hence  the  epithets  lanea  (Ovid.
Fast  iii.  30)  and  mollis.  (Virg.  Ed.  viii.  f)4.)
They  were  white  (nieeae,  Virg.  Georg.  iii.  487  ;
Ovid.  Met.  xiii.  643 ;  Stat.  Thcb.  iii.  466),  or  pur-
ple (puniceue,  Prop.  iv.  9.  27),  or  azure  (caeruleae)
when  wreathed  round  an  altar  to  the  manes.  (Virg.
Jen.  iii.  64.)

Vitta  is  also  used  in  the  general  sense  of  a  string
for  tying  up  garlands  (Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  2  ;  Isidor.
xix.'^Sl.  6),  and  vittae  loreae  for  the  leathern  straps
or  braces  by  which  a  machine  was  worked.  (Plin.
H.  N.  xviii.  31.)  [W.  R.]

ULNA  (wAcVtj),  properly  the  fore-arm  from
the  shoulder  to  the  wrist,  is  also  used  for  the
whole  arm,  and  even  for  the  whole  span  of  both
arms  ;  and  hence,  as  a  measure  of  length,  it  ap-
pears to  be  used  with  different  significations.  In
the  chief  passages  in  which  it  occurs  (Virg.  Buc.
iii.  105,  Georg.  iii.  355  ;  Ovid,  Mefam.  viii.  750  ;
Hor.  Epod.  iv.  8)  there  is  nothing  to  determine  its
length,  except,  perhaps,  in  the  last  quoted  passage,
where,  however,  we  may  easily  suppose  the  exag-
geration of  caricature.  Servius,  however,  in  his
note  on  the  first  of  these  passages,  says  that  it  was
the  space  between  the  outstretched  hands,  that  is,
the  same  as  the  Greek  opyvia  of  six  feet ;  and  this
is  evidently  its  meaning  in  Pliny  (//.  A^.  xvi.  40.
8.  76,  32.  s.  57),  where  it  is  important  to  observe
that  crassitudo  refers  to  the  circumference  of  the
trunk,  not  to  its  diameter.  Later  writers  use  it
as  equivalent  to  the  cvhit  or  a  modification  of  it,
and  hence  the  modem  ell.  (Pollux,  ii.  140  ;  Solin.
54.)  [P.  S.]

ULTROTRIBU'TA.     [Censor,  p.  265,  a.]

UMBELLA.     [Umbraculum.]

UMBPLICUS.     [Liber.]

UMBO.     [Clipeus  ;  Toga,  p.  1136,  b.]

UMBRA'CULUM,  UMBELLA  (aKidhiiov,
(TKidZiov^  cTKiaBia-KTi)  a  parasol,  was  used  by  Greek
and  Roman  ladies  as  a  protection  against  the  sun.


UN  CIA.


1213


They  seem  not  to  have  been  carried  generally  by
the  ladi«s  themselves,  but  by  female  slaves  who
held  them  over  their  mistresses.     The  daughters


of  the  aliens  (ix4toikoi)  at  Athens  had  to  carry
parasols  after  the  Athenian  maidens  at  the  Pana-
thenaea,  as  is  mentioned  under  Hydriaphoria.
The  parasols  of  the  ancients  seem  to  have  been
exactly  like  our  own  parasols  or  umbrellas  in
form,  and  could  be  shut  up  and  opened  like  ours.
(Aristoph.  Equit.  1248  ;  Schol.  ad  loc;  Ovid.  Ar.
Am.  ii.  209.)  They  are  often  represented  in  paint-
ings on  ancient  vases:  the  annexed  woodcut  is
taken  from  Millin's  Peintures  de  Vases  Antiques,
vol.  i.  pi.  70.  The  female  is  clothed  in  a  long
Chiton  or  Diploidion  [Tunica,  p.  1172,  b.],  and
has  a  small  Hiraation,  which  seems  to  have  fallen
off  her  shoulders.

It  was  considered  a  mark  of  effeminacy  for  men
to  make  use  of  parasols.  ( Anacreon,  ap.  Athen.  xii.
p.  534,  a.)  The  Roman  ladies  used  them  in  the
amphitheatre  to  defend  themselves  from  the  sun
or  some  passing  shower  (Mart.  xiv.  28),  when  the
wind  or  other  circumstances  did  not  allow  the  ve-
larium to  be  extended.  To  hold  a  parasol  over  a
lady  was  one  of  the  common  attentions  of  lovers
(Mart.  xi.  73 ;  Ovid.  /.  c),  and  it  seems  to  have
been  very  common  to  give  parasols  as  presents.
(Juv.  ix.  50.)

Instead  of  parasols  the  Greek  women  in  later
times  wore  a  kind  of  straw  hat  or  bonnet,
called  boAia.  (Pollux,  vii.  174;  compare  x.  127  ;
Theocr.  xv.  39.)  The  Romans  also  wore  a  hut  with
a  broad  brim  {petasus)  as  a  protection  against  the
sun.  (Suet.  Aug.  82  ;  Dion  Cass.  lix.  7.)  See  Paci-
audi,  rfe  Umbellae  gestatione,  Rom.  1752;  Becker,
ChariMes,  vol.  ii.  p.  73.

UNCI  A  (67/cta,  ovyKia,  ovyyia)^  the  twelfth
part  of  the  As  or  Libra,  is  derived  by  Varro  from
M«MS,  as  being  the  unit  of  the  divisions  of  the  as
(Z. //.  V.  171,  Miiller).  It  was  subdivided  into
2  semunciac^  3  duellae,  4  sicilici,  6  sextulae,  24  scru-
pula,  and  1 44  siliquae.  The  values  of  the  Uncia
and  its  subdivisions,  in  terms  of  our  own  weights,
will  be  found  in  the  Tables.

In  connecting  the  Roman  system  of  weights  and
money  with  the  Greek,  another  division  of  the  uncia
WHS  used.  When  the  drachma  was  introduced
into  the  Roman  system  as  equivalent  to  the  deria-
rius  of  96  to  the  pound  [Denarius  ;  Drachma]
the  uncia  contained  8  drachmae.,  the  drachma  3
scrupula,  the  scrupulum  2  oboli  (since  6  oboli  made
up  the  drachma),  and  the  oholos  3  siliquae  (Kcparia).
Therefore  the  uncia  was  divided  into  8  drachmae,
24  scrupula,  48  oboli,  144  siliquae.  In  this  division
we  have  the  origin  of  the  modern  Italian  system,
in  which  the  pound  is  divided  into  12  ounces,  the
ounce  into  8  drams,  the  dram  into  3  scruples,  and
the  scruple  into  6  carats.  In  each  of  these  systems
1 728  Keparia,  siliquae,  or  carats  make  up  the  pound.

The  uncial  system  was  adopted  by  the  Greeks
of  Sicily,  who  called  their  obol  \irpa  (the  Roman
libra),  and  divided  it  into  twelve  parts,  each  of
which  they  called  oyKia  or  oiryKla  (the  Roman
uncia).  In  this  system  the  oyKia  was  reckoned
equal  to  the  x^^'^oOs.  [Litra  ;  Nummus,  pp.
813,  814.]

Miiller  considers  that  the  Greeks  of  Sicily,  and
also  the  Romans  themselves,  obtained  the  uncial
system  from  the  Etruscans.  (Etrusker,  i.  p.  309.)

The  Romans  applied  the  uncial  division  to  all
kinds  of  magnitude.  [As.]  In  length  the  uncia
was  the  twelfth  of  a  foot,  whence  the  Avord  inch,
in  area  the  twelfth  of  a  jugerum,  in  content  the
twelfth  of  a  sextarius,  in  time  the  twelfth  of  an


J  214


UNGUENTA.


hour.     [As,  sub  fin.]      Respecting  the  uncia  as  a
coin  see  As,  p.  141,  a.

(Boekh,  Metrolog.  Untersuch.  pp.  155, 160, 165,
293  ;  Wurra,  de  Fond,  &c,  pp.  8,  9,  63,  67,  118,
138.)  [P.S.]

UNCIA'RIUM  FENUS.  [FENus,p.  527,b.]
UNCTO'RES.  [ Balnea E,  p.  190,  b.]
UNCTUA'RIUM.  [Balneae,  p.  190,  b.]
UNGUENTA,  ointments,  oils,  or  salves.  The
application  of  Unguenta  in  connection  with  bath-
ing and  the  athletic  contests  of  the  ancients  is
stated  under  Balneae,  Athletae,  &c.  But
although  their  original  object  was  simply  to  pre-
serve the  health  and  elasticity  of  the  human  frame,
they  were  in  later  times  used  as  articles  of  luxury.
They  were  then  not  only  employed  to  impart  to
the  body  or  hair  a  particular  colour,  but  also  to
give  to  them  the  most  beautiful  fragrance  possible  ;
they  were,  moreover,  not  merely  applied  after  a
bath,  but  at  any  time,  to  render  one's  appearance  or
presence  more  pleasant  than  usual.  In  short  they
were  used  then  as  oils  and  pomatums  are  at  present.
The  numerous  kinds  of  oils,  soaps,  pomatums,
and  other  perfumes  with  which  the  ancients  were
acquainted,  are  quite  astonishing.  We  know  several
kinds  of  soap  which  they  used,  though,  as  it  ap-
pears, more  for  the  purpose  of  painting  the  hair
than  for  cleaning  it.  (Plin.  H.N.  xviii.  12,  51  ;
Mart.  viii.  23.  20,  xiv.  26,  27.)  For  the  same
purpose  they  also  used  certain  herbs.  (Ovid.  Ar.
Amat.  iii.  163,  Amor.  i.  14.)

Among  the  various  and  costly  oils  which  were
partly  used  for  the  skin  and  partly  for  the  hair,  the
following  may  be  mentioned  as  examples :  mende-
sium,  megalesium,  metopium,  amaracinum,  Cypri-
num,  susinum,  nardinum,  spicatum,  iasminum,
rosaceum,  and  crocus-oil,  which  was  considered  the
most  costly.  (Becker,  Gallus,  ii.  p.  27.)  In  ad-
dition to  these  oils  the  ancients  also  used  various
kinds  of  powder  as  perfumes,  which  by  a  general
name  are  called  Diapasmata.  To  what  extent
the  luxury  of  using  fragrant  oils  and  the  like  was
carried  on,  may  be  inferred  from  Seneca  {Epist.  86),
who  says  that  people  anointed  themselves  twice  or
even  three  times  a  day,  in  order  that  the  delicious
fragrance  might  never  diminish.  At  Rome,  how-
ever, these  luxuries  did  not  become  very  general
till  towards  the  end  of  the  republic  (Gell.  vii.  12),
while  the  Greeks  appear  to  have  been  familiar  with
them  from  early  times.  The  wealthy  Greeks  and
Romans  carried  their  ointments  and  perfumes  with
them,  especially  when  they  bathed,  in  small  boxes
of  costly  materials  and  beautiful  workmanship,
which  were  called  Narthecia.  (Bottiger,  Sahina,  i.
p.  52.)  The  traffic  which  was  carried  on  in  these
ointments  and  perfumes  in  several  towns  of  Greece
and  southern  Italy  was  very  considerable.  The
persons  engaged  in  manufacturing  them  were  called
by  the  Romans  Unguentarii  (Cic.  de  Off.  i.  12  ;
Horat.  Sat.  ii.  3.  228),  or  as  they  frequently  were
women,  Unguentariae  (Plin.  H.  N.  viii.  5),  and
the  art  of  manufacturing  them  Unguentaria.  In
the  wealthy  and  effeminate  city  of  Capua  there
was  one  great  street  called  the  Seplasia,  which
consisted  entirely  of  shops  in  which  ointments  and
perfumes  were  sold.

A  few  words  are  necessary  on  the  custom  of  the
ancients  in  painting  their  faces.  In  Greece  this
practice  appears  to  have  been  very  common  among
the  ladies,  though  men  also  had  sometimes  re-
course to  it,  as  for  example,  Demetrius  Phalereus.


UNIVERSITAS.

(Athen.  xii.  p.  642.)  But  as  regards  the  women,
it  appears  that  their  retired  mode  of  living,  and
their  sitting  mostly  in  their  own  apartments,  de-
prived them  of  a  great  part  of  their  natural  fresh-
ness and  beauty,  for  which,  of  course,  they  were
anxious  to  make  up  by  artificial  means.  (Xenoph.
Oecon.  10.  §  10  ;  Stobaeus,  iii.  p.  87,  ed.  Gaisford  ;
compare  Becker,  Charides,  ii.  p.  232.)  This  mode
of  embellishing  themselves  was  probably  applied
only  on  certain  occasions,  such  as  when  they  went
out,  or  wished  to  appear  more  charming.  (Lysias,
de  caed.  Eratosth.  p.  15  ;  Aristoph.  Lysistr.  149^
Eccles.  878,  Plut.  1064  ;  Plut.  Alcib.  39.)  The
colours  used  for  this  purpose  were  white  {^iiivQiov
(cerusa)  and  red  (eyxovaa  or  &yxov(T(i,  iraiSfpajs,
avKafxivov,  or  (pvKos,  Xenoph.  Oecon.  10.  §  2  ;
Aristoph.  Lysistr.  48,  Eccles.  929  ;  Alexis,  ap.
Athen.  xiii.  p.  568,  compare  557  ;  Etymol.  Mag.
s.  V.  'Eri/ifjLfivdieacrOai).  The  eyebrows  were  fre-
quently painted  black  (iJ.f\au,  6.(t€o\os,  or  trTt'/u/ujy,
Alexis,  ap.  Athen.  xiii.  p.  568  ;  Pollux,  v.  101).
The  manner  in  which  this  operation  of  painting
was  performed,  is  still  seen  in  some  ancient  works
of  art  representing  ladies  in  the  act  of  painting
themselves.  Sometimes  they  are  seen  painting
themselves  with  a  bnish  and  sometimes  with  their
fingers.  (Bottiger,  Sabina,  ii.  tab.  ix.  and  i.  tab.  vi.)

The  Romans,  towards  the  end  of  the  republic
and  under  the  empire,  were  no  less  fond  of  painting
themselves  than  the  Greeks.  (Horat.  Epod.  xii.
1 0  ;  Ovid.  Ar.  Am.  iii.  199  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxviii.  8.)
The  red  colour  was  at  Rome,  as  in  many  parts  of
Greece,  prepared  from  a  kind  of  moss  which  th&
Romans  called  fucus  (the  rocella  of  Linnaeus),  and
from  which  afterwards  all  kinds  of  paint  were
called  fucus.  Another  general  term  for  paint  is
creta.  For  embellishing  and  cleaning  the  com-
plexion the  Greeks  as  well  as  the  Romans  used  a
substance  called  oesipum  (see  the  comment,  on
Suidas,  s.  v.  OferTTTj),  which  was  prepared  of  the
wool  taken  from  those  parts  of  the  body  of  a  sheep
in  which  it  perspired  most.  Another  remedy  often
applied  for  similar  purposes  consisted  of  powdered
excrementa  of  the  Egyptian  crocodiles.  (Horat.
and  Plin.  I.  c.)

Respecting  the  subjects  here  mentioned  and
everything  connected  with  the  toilet  of  the  an-
cients, see  Bottiger,  Sabina  oder  Morgenscenen  tin
Futzzimmer  einer  reiclien  Romerin.  Leipz.  1806.
2  vols.  [L.  S.]

UNGUENTA'RII.     [Unguenta.]

UNIVE'RSITAS.  The  philosophical  division
of  things  (Res)  in  the  widest  sense  of  the  term,  is
into  things  Corporeal  (Res  Corporales),  objects  of
sense,  and  things  Incorporeal  (Res  Incorporales),
objects  of  intellect  only  (Cic.  Top  5.)  ;  and  this
division  was  applied  by  the  Roman  Jurists  to  things
as  the  objects  of  Rights.  When  a  man  said  of  a
thing  "  meum  est,"  it  might  be  either  a  Corporeal
thing,  as  a  piece  of  land  or  an  animal  ;  or  it  might
be  an  Incorpoieal  thing,  as  a  Jus  utendi  fruendi.
Obligationes  were  also  classed  among  Incorporeal
things.  But  this  is  not  a  division  of  things,  in  the
limited  sense,  for  things  in  that  sense  are  always
corporeal  ;  it  is  a  division  of  things  in  the  wider
sense.

In  a  thing  corporeal  we  may  consider  that  there
are  parts,  in  reference  to  which  the  whole  is  a  Uni-
versitas  or  a  unit.  If  then  the  division  into  parts
is  made  with  reference  to  the  subjection  of  a  part
to  a  person's  will,  the  part  is  viewed  as  a  whole,


UNIVERSITAS.
as  a  thing  in  itself,  that  is,  the  whole  is  viewed
pro  diviso  ;  for  division  in  this  case  is  the  same  as
making  many  wholes  out  of  one  whole.  It  is
nere  assumed  that  the  thing  is  in  its  nature  di-
visible ;  as  a  piece  of  land  which  is  capable  of
being  divided  into  parts.

But  there  are  parts  of  things  corporeal  which
are  essential  to  the  constitution  of  the  whole,  so  that
the  whole  cannot  be  divided  into  parts  without
the  destruction  of  its  nature  ;  as  a  living  animal
for  instance.

Besides  the  corporeal  parts  into  which  a  (cor-
poreal) thing  is  divisible,  we  may  suppose  incorpo-
real, ideal  parts  of  a  corporeal  thing  (Dig.  45.  tit.
3.  8.  5).  These  parts  are  assumed  fractions  of  a
whole,  not  corporeal  parts.  If  such  a  part  is  the
object  of  thought,  the  whole  corporeal  thing  is
viewed  pro  indiviso :  the  corporeal  object  of  the  will
is  the  thing,  and  the  limitation  of  the  will  to  a
part,  is  merely  intellectual.  Thus  several  persons
may  be  joint  owners  of  a  piece  of  undivided  land,
but  no  one  can  say  that  any  particular  part  belongs
to  him.  The  case  just  put  is  that  of  a  corporeal
whole  and  ideal  parts.  But  the  whole  may
be  ideal  and  the  parts  corporeal :  as  when  there
is  a  number  of  independent  corporeal  things,  not
materially  connected,  but  they  are  intellectually
connected  so  as  to  form  in  idea  a  whole :  thus  a
flock  of  sheep  is  an  ideal  whole,  and  the  several
sheep  are  the  independent  corporeal  things.  The
ideal  whole  is  not  composed  of  the  several  corporeal
things,  for  an  ideal  whole  cannot  be  composed  of
corporeal  parts  ;  but  the  ideal  whole  is  a  notion
which  is  formed  with  reference  to  some  particular
purpose.  It  is  necessary  that  the  purpose  of  the
several  things  shall  not  be  diiferent  from  and  inde-
pendent of  the  general  purpose  for  which  the  notion
is  formed,  but  subservient  to  it.  Thus  as  separate
corporeal  things  may  be  often  materially  united  to
fonn  a  new  corpus ;  so  the  several  independent
things  which  are  not  capable  of  such  material
union,  may  be  viewed  as  an  ideal  union  or  as  a
a  universitas  for  some  purpose  ;  the  flock  of  sheep
may  be  viewed  as  a  whole,  as  a  universitas,  for
the  purpose  of  ownership.  Such  a  universitas,  as
already  observed,  is  independent  of  the  several  cor-
poreal things:  it  still  exists  if  they  are  all  changed.
'  Thus  in  a  flock  of  sheep  we  have  a  fictitious,  a
juristical  whole  or  thing,  and  in  the  notion  of
a  universitas  of  persons  we  have  a  fictitious  or  ju-
ristical person,  which  is  still  the  same  person
though  all  the  individuals  are  changed.  As  a
number  of  sheep  must  have  a  name, a  flock,  in  order
to  be  comprehended  in  one  notion,  so  a  juristical
person  must  have  a  name,  as  the  universitas  of
Fabri,  or  the  city  of  Rome.

The  term  universitas  then  may  have  various
senses,  1.  Both  the  universitas  and  the  parts  may
be  corporeal  (Dig.  50.  tit.  16.  s.  23.9.  §  8)  :  terri-
torium  est  universitas  agrorum  intra  fines  cujus-
que  civitatis.  2.  The  universitas  may  be  corpo-
real, and  the  parts  incorporeal,  as  when  we  imagine
fractional  parts  of  a  thing.  3.  The  universitas  may
be  incorporeal,  and  the  parts  corporeal,  as  a  flock
of  sheep.  4.  The  universitas  and  the  parts  may
both  be  incorporeal.

The  fourth  is  the  case  when  the  notion  of  a
whole  and  its  parts  is  not  applied  to  things,  but  to
rights :  thus  a  man's  whole  property  may  be
viewed  as  a  unit,  or  as  a  universitas,  which  compre-
hends the  several  rights  that  he  has  to  the  several


UNIVERSITAS.


1215


material  things  which  form  the  ideal  unit  of  his

property.

In  this  way  we  arrive  at  the  correct  notion  of  a
universitas  of  persons,  which  is  the  notion  of  a
fictitious  person  imagined  for  certain  purposes,  as
the  notion  of  a  universitas  of  independent  material
things  is  the  notion  of  a  fictitious  thing,  imagined
for  certain  purposes.

A  single  person  only  can  properly  be  viewed  as
the  subject  of  rights  and  duties  ;  but  the  notion  of
legal  capacity  may  by  a  fiction  be  extended  to  an
imaginary  person,  to  a  universitas  personarum,  but
the  fictitious  person  is  not  a  unit  composed  of  the
real  persons :  it  is  a  name  in  which  the  several
persons  or  a  majority  may  act  for  certain  permanent
purposes.  The  purpose  itself  is  sometimes  the
fictitious  person,  as  when  property  is  given  for
the  service  of  religion,  whether  it  is  administered
by  one  person  or  several  persons.  Such  juristical
persons  have  certain  legal  capacities  as  individuals
have  ;  but  their  legal  capacities  are  limited  to
property  as  their  object.  It  is  true  that  the  Ro-
mans often  considered  persons  as  a  collective  unity,
simply  because  they  all  exercised  the  same
functions:  thus  they  speak  of  the  Collegium
of  the  consuls  [Collegium],  and  of  the  TrilDuni
Plebis.  In  like  manner  they  say  that  the  Duum-
viri of  a  municipum  are  to  be  viewed  as  one  person.
(Dig.  50.  tit.  1.  8.  25).  But  these  fictitious
unities  have  only  reference  to  Jus  Publicum,  and
they  have  no  necessary  connection  with  juristical
persons,  the  essential  character  of  which  is  the
capacity  to  have  and  acquire  property  by  some
name.

Juristical  persons  could  be  subjects  of  owner-
ship. Jura  in  re,  obligationes,  and  hereditas :
they  could  own  slaves  and  have  the  Patronatus  ;
but  all  the  relations  of  Familia,  as  the  Patria  Po-
testas  and  others  of  a  like  kind,  were  foreign  to  the
notion.  But  though  the  capacity  to  have  property
is  the  distinguishing  characteristic  of  Juristical
persons  viewed  with  relation  to  Jus  Privatum,  the
objects  for  which  the  property  is  had  and  applied
may  be  any ;  and  the  capacity  to  have  property
implies  a  purpose  for  which  it  is  had,  which  is
often  much  more  important  than  this  mere  capacity.
But  the  purposes  for  which  Juristical  persons  have
property  are  quite  distinct  from  their  capacity  to
have  it.  This  will  appear  from  all  or  any  of  the
examples  hereinafter  given.

The  following  are  Juristical  persons:  (1)  Civi-
tas :  (2)  Municipes:  this  term  is  more  common
than  Municipium,  and  comprehends  both  citizens
of  a  Municipium  and  a  Colony  ;  it  is  also  used
when  the  object  is  to  express  the  Municipium  as
a  whole  opposed  to  the  individual  members  of  it.
(3)  Respublica.  In  the  republican  period,  when
used  without  an  adjunct,  Respublica  expressed
Rome,  but  in  the  old  jurists  it  signifies  a  Civitas
dependent  on  Rome.  (4)  Respublica  Civitatis  or
Municipii :  (5)  Commune,  Communitas.  Besides
the  Civitates,  component  parts  of  the  Civitates  are
also  Juristical  persons  :  (1)  Curiae  or  Decuriones  ;
the  word  Decuriones  often  denotes  the  individuals
composing  the  body  of  Decuriones  as  opposed  to
the  Civitas  (Municipes),  which  appears  from  a
passage  in  the  Digest  (4.  tit.  3.  s.  15),  where  it  is
stated  that  an  action  for  Dolus  will  not  lie  against
the  Municipes,  for  a  fictitious  person  cannot  be  .
guilty  of  Dolus,  but  such  action  will  lie  against  the
individual   Decuriones  who  administer  the  aifaiis


121R


UNIVERSITAS.


of  the  Municipes.  Sometimes  the  word  Curia  is
used  as  equivalent  to  Civitas  :  and  sometimes  the
Decuriones  are  spoken  of  as  a  Juristical  person,
which  has  property  as  such.  (2)  Vici ;  which
have  no  political  self-existence,  but  are  attached
to  some  Respublica  ;  yet  they  are  juristical  per-
sons, can  hold  property,  and  maintain  suits.  (3)
Fora,  Conciliabula,  Castella.  These  were  places
between  Civitates  and  Vici  as  to  extent  and  im-
portance ;  they  belonged  to  a  Respublica,  but  had
the  rights  of  juristical  persons  :  they  are  not  men-
tioned in  the  legislation  of  Justinian,  but  the  names
occur  in  the  Tablet  of  Heraclea,  in  the  Lex  Galliae
Cisalpinae,  and  in  Paulus  (S.  R.  iv.  tit.  6.  s.  2.)
In  the  later  period  of  the  Empire,  Provinces  were
viewed  as  juristical  persons.

In  the  writings  of  the  Agrimensores,  commu-
nities, and,  particularly,  colonies  (coloni),  are  desig-
nated by  the  appropriate  name  of  Publicae  Per-
sonae,  and  property  is  spoken  of  as  belonging  to
the  Coloni,  that  is,  the  Colonia,  Coloni  being  used
here  in  the  same  sense  in  which  Municipes  was
used  as  above  explained.

Other  juristical  persons  were  (1)  Religious
bodies,  as  Collegia  of  Priests,  and  of  the  Vestal
Virgins,  which  could  hold  property  and  take  by
testament.  (2)  Associations  of  official  persons,
such  as  those  who  were  employed  in  administra-
tion :  the  body  of  Scribae  became  one  of  the  most
numerous  and  important,  as  they  were  employed  in
all  branches  of  administration  ;  the  general  name
was  Scribae,  a  terra  which  includes  the  particular
names  of  librarii,  fiscales  and  others  ;  they  were
divided  into  subdivisions  called  Decuriae,  a  term
which  even  under  the  Republic  and  also  under
the  Empire  denoted  the  corporations  of  Scribae  ;
the  individual  members  were  called  decuriati,  and
subsequently  decuriales  ;  the  decuriati  had  great
privileges  in  Rome  and  subsequently  in  Constanti-
nople. (Cic.  in  Verr.  iii.  79,  ad  Qumt.  Frat.  ii.  3 ;
Tacit.  Ann.  xiii.  27  ;  Sueton.Anff.  57^  Claud.  I.)
(3)  Associations  for  trade  and  commerce,  as  Fabri,
Pistores,  Navicularii,  the  individuals  of  which  had
a  common  profession,  on  which  the  notion  of  their
union  was  founded  ;  but  each  man  worked  on  his
o^vn  account.  Associations  properly  included  under
Societates  [Societas]  :  such  associations  could  be
dissolved  by  the  notice  of  any  member,  and  were
actually  dissolved  by  the  death  of  a  single  member.
Some  of  these  associations,  such  as  those  for  work-
ing Mines,  Salinae,  and  farming  the  Portoria  were
corporate  bodies,  though  they  had  the  name  of  Socie-
tates. (4)  Associations,  called  Sodalitates,  Sodalitia,
Collegia  Sodalitia,  which  resembled  modem  clubs.
In  their  origin  they  were  friendly  associations  for
feasting  together  ;  in  course  of  time  many  of  them
became  political  associations,  but  from  this  we  must
not  conclude  that  their  true  nature  really  varied  ;
they  were  associations  not  included  in  any  other
class  that  has  been  enumerated,  but  they  differed
in  their  character  according  to  the  times.  In
periods  of  commotion  they  became  the  central
points  of  political  factions,  and  new  associations,  it
may  be  reasonably  supposed,  would  be  formed  ex-
pressly for  political  purposes.  Sometimes  the
public  places  were  crowded  by  the  Sodalitia  and
Decuriati  (Cic.  ad  Quint.  Frat.  ii.  3),  and  the
Senate  was  at  last  compelled  to  propose  a  lex  which
should  subject  to  the  penalties  of  Vis  those  who
would  not  disperse.  This  was  followed  by  a  gene-
ral  diesoiution  of  collegia  according   to  Asconius


UNIVERSITAS.

(in  Co7-?ielia}iam),  but  the  dissolution  only  ex-
tended to  mischievous  associations,  as  may  be
safely  inferred  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  and
even  the  words  of  Asconius,  if  carefully  examined,
are  not  inconsistent  with  this  conclusion.  In
the  Digest  (47.  tit.  22.  s.  I,  2,  3)  we  find  the  rule
that  no  collegium  could  be  formed  without  the
permission  of  a  Senatusconsultum  or  the  Caesar ;
and  persons  who  associated  unlawfully  were  guilty
of  an  extraordinarium  crimen.  The  rule  of  law
means  that  no  union  of  persons  could  form  a
juristical  person  without  the  consent  of  the  proper
authority ;  and  this  is  quite  distinct  from  the
other  provision  contained  in  the  same  rule,  which
punished  associations  of  persons  who  acted  as  cor-
porations, for  this  part  of  the  rule  relates  only  to
such  associations  as  were  dangerous,  or  of  an  unde-
fined character.

There  were  also  in  the  Imperial  period  the
Collegia  tenuiorum,  or  associations  of  poor  people,
but  they  were  allowed  to  meet  only  once  a  month
and  they  paid  monthly  contributions.  (Dig.  47.
tit.  22.  s.  1,  3.)  A  man  could  only  belong  to  one
of  them.  Slaves  could  belong  to  such  a  collegium,
with  the  permission  of  their  masters.

Communities  of  cities  and  towns  have  a  kind  of
natural  or  necessary  existence  ;  and  other  bodies,
called  corporations,  have  been  fashioned  by  a  kind
of  analogy  to  them,  and  like  them  can  have  pro-
perty, and  be  represented  like  them  by  an  agent,
wherein  consists  the  essence  of  a  juristical  person.
Some  of  these  corporations,  like  communities  of
cities  and  towns,  were  of  a  permanent  character,
as  Colleges  of  Priests,  Decuriae,  and  Companies
of  artisans  ;  others  had  a  temporary  character,
as  Societates  and  Sodalitates.  All  these  corpo-
rations are  designated  by  the  name  either  of  Col-
legium or  Corpus,  between  which  there  is  no  legal
distinction  ;  for  it  appears  that  one  corporation
was  called  a  Collegium  and  another  a  Corpus,  as  it
might  happen.  But  both  of  these  terms  denote  a
Corporation,  as  above  explained,  as  opposed  to  a
Civitas  or  Respublica.  The  members  of  such  cor-
porations were  Collegae  and  Sodales,  which  is  a
more  general  and  an  older  term  than  Sodalitas.
Altogether  they  were  called  Collegiati  and  Corpo-
rati :  the  members  of  particular  kinds  of  corpora-
tions were  Decuriati,  Decuriales,  Socii.  The  com-
mon name  which  includes  all  Corporations  and
Civitates  is  Universitas,  as  opposed  to  which  any
individual  is  singularis  persona.

The  notion  of  individual  property  as  a  unity  is
founded  on  the  notion  of  the  unity  of  the  owner.
But  this  notion  of  unity,  when  once  established,
may  for  certain  purposes  be  arbitrarily  assumed,
and  accordingly  it  is  applied  to  the  case  of  Peculi-
um,  Dos,  and  Hereditas,  and  modem  writers  have
designated  these  as  cases  of  a  Universitas  Juris.
The  name  Universitas  Juris  does  not  occur  in  the
Roman  law.  On  this  subject  see  Puchta,  Inst.
ii.  §  222.  The  nature  of  Succession  is  explained
under  SuccESSio.

The  temi  Universitas  was  adopted  in  the  middle
ages  to  denote  certain  great  schools,  but  not  as
Schools :  the  term  denoted  these  places  as  corpora-
tions, that  is,  as  associations  of  individuals.  The
adjunct  which  would  express  the  kind  of  persons
associated  would  depend  on  circumstances :  thus
in  Bologna,  the  expression  Universitas  Scholarium
was  in  common  use  ;  in  Paris,  Universitas  Magis-
trorum.     The  School  as  such  was   called  Schola,


UllNA.

Rnd  from  the  thirteenth  century,  most  commonly
Studium  ;  and  if  it  was  a  distinguished  school,  it
wus  called  Studium  Generale.  The  first  occasion
on  which  the  term  Universitas  was  applied  to  a
great  school  is  said  to  be  in  a  Decretal  of  Innocent
III.,  of  the  beginning  of  the  thirteenth  century,
addressed  Scholaribus  Parisiensibus.

(Savigny,  System  des  Heutigen  Rom.  Rechts,  i.
378,  ii.  235,  iii.  8  ;  Savigny,  Gesckichte  des  Rom.
Rechts  im  Mittelalter,  vol.  iii.  318,  380  ;  Puchta,
Inst.  ii.  §  222.)  [G.  L.]

VOCA'TIO  IN  JUS.  [Actio,  p.  10.  b.]
VOLO'NES  is  synonymous  with  Voluntarii
(from  volo)^  and  might  hence  be  applied  to  all
those  who  volunteered  to  serve  in  the  Roman
armies  without  there  being  any  obligation  to  do  so.
But  it  was  applied  more  especially  to  slaves,  when
in  times  of  need  they  offered  or  were  allowed  to
fight  in  the  Roman  armies.  Thus  when  during
the  second  Punic  war  after  the  battle  of  Cannae
there  was  not  a  sufficient  number  of  freemen  to
complete  the  army,  about  8000  young  and  able-
bodied  slaves  offered  to  serve.  Their  proposal  was
accepted  :  they  received  armour  at  the  public  ex-
pense, and  as  they  distinguished  themselves  they
were  honoured  with  the  franchise.  (Liv.  xxii.  57,
xxiii.  35  ;  Macrob.  Sat.  i.  1 1  ;  Fest.  s.  v.  Volones.)
In  after  times  the  name  volones  was  retained  when-
ever slaves  chose  or  were  allowed  to  take  up  arms
in  defence  of  their  masters,  which  they  were  the
more  willing  to  do,  as  they  were  generally  re-
warded with  the  franchise.  (Liv.  xxiv.  11,  14,
&c.,  xxvii.  38,  xxviii.  46  ;  J.  Capitolin.  M.  Ante-
nin.  Philos.  21.)  [L.  S.J

VOLU'MEN.     [LiBER.l
VOLUNTA'RII.     [Volones.]
VOMITO'RIA.     [Amphitheatrum,  p.  84.]
URAGUS.     [ExERCiTus,  p.  506,  a.]
URBA'NAE  COPIORTES.     [Exercitus,  p.
510,  a.]

U'RCEUS,  a  pitcher,  or  water-pot,  generally
made  of  earthenware.  (Dig.  33.  tit.  7.  s.  1 8  ;  Hor,
Jr.  Pott.  22.)  It  was  used  by  the  priests  at
Rome  in  the  sacrifices,  and  thus  appears  with  other
sacrificial  emblems  on  the  coins  of  some  of  the
Roman  gentes.  The  annexed  coin  of  the  Pompeia
gens  has  on  the  obverse  a  lituus  before  the  head
of  Porapeius,  the  triumvir,  and  an  urceus  be-
hind it.


URN  A,  an  urn,  a  Roman  measure  of  capacity
for  fluids,  equal  to  half  an  Amphora.  (Hor.  Sat.
i.  1.  54.)  This  use  of  the  term  was  probably
founded  upon  its  more  general  application  to  de-
note a  vessel  for  holding  water,  or  any  other  sub-
stance, either  fluid  or  solid.  (Plant.  Pseud,  i.  2.
24  ;  Hor.  Sai.  i.  5.  91,  ii.  6.  10  ;  Ovid.  Met.  iii.
172.)

An  urn  was  used  to  receive  the  names  of  the
judges  (Judices)  in  order  that  the  praetor  might
draw  out  of  it  a  sufficient  number  to  determine
causes  (Hor.  Carm.  iii.  1.  16  j  Virg.  Aen.  vL  432;


USUCAPIO.  1217

Plin.  Epist.  X.  3  ;  Juv.  xiii.  4)  :  also  to  receive  ih«>
ashes  of  the  dead.  [FuNUS,  p.  560,  a.]  For  this
purpose  urns  were  made  of  marble,  porphyry,
baked  clay,  bronze,  or  glass,  of  all  forms  and  sizes,
some  quite  simple,  and  others  sculptured  in  bas-
relief,  or  ornamented  in  an  endless  variety  of
ways.  [J.  Y.]

URPEX.     [Irpex.]

USTRFNA,  USTRI'NUM.  [Funus,  p.
559,  b.]

USUCA'PIO.  The  history  of  Usucapio  is  an
important  fact  in  the  history  of  Roman  Juris-
prudence. Usucapio  is  the  acquisition  of  Quiri-
tarian  ownership  by  continuous  possession  ;  conse-
quently, it  is  not  possible  in  the  case  of  a  Pere-
grinus  nor  is  it  applicable  to  provincial  land.

Gains  (ii.  40 — 42)  states  that  there  was  origi-
nally in  Rome  only  one  kind  of  ownership  ;  a  per-
son was  either  owner  of  a  thing  Ex  jure  Quiritium,
or  he  was  not  owner  at  all.  But  afterwards  owner-
ship was  divided,  so  that  one  man  might  be  owner
Ex  jure  Quiritium,  and  another  might  have  the
same  thing  In  bonis,  that  is,  have  the  right  to  the
exclusive  enjoyment  of  it.  He  then  goes  on  to
give  an  instance  of  the  mode  in  which  the  divided
ownership  might  arise  by  reference  to  the  transfer
of  a  Res  Mancipi :  if  such  a  thing  was  transferred
by  bare  tradition,  and  there  was  neither  Mancipatio
nor  In  jure  cessio,  the  new  owner  only  acquired  the
natural  ownership,  as  some  would  call  it,  or  only
had  it  In  bonis,  and  the  original  owner  retained  the
Quiritarian  ownership  until  the  purchaser  acquired
the  Quiritarian  ownership  by  Usucapio  {possidendo
usucapiat)  ;  for  when  the  Usucapio  was  completed,
the  effect  was  the  same  as  if  the  thing  had  been
originally  mancipated  or  transferred  by  the  In
jure  cessio.  Gains  adds,  "  in  the  case  of  moveable
things  the  Usucapio  is  completed  in  a  year,  but  in
the  case  of  a  fundus  or  aedes  two  years  are  re-
quired ;  and  so  it  is  provided  by  the  Twelve
Tables."

In  this  passage  he  is  evidently  speaking  of  Res
Mancipi  only,  and  of  them  only  when  transferred
to  the  purchaser  by  the  owner  without  the  foinis
of  Mancipatio  or  in  Jure  Cessio.  From  this  then
it  might  be  safely  concluded  that  the  Twelve
Tables  provided  a  remedy  for  defective  modes  of
conveyance  of  Res  Mancipi  from  the  owner  ;  and
this  is  all  that  could  be  concluded  from  this  pas-
sage. But  a  passage  which  immediately  follows
shows  that  this  was  all  that  the  Twelve  Tables
did  ;  for  Gains  (ii.  43)  proceeds  to  say,  "  But
(Ceterum)  there  may  be  Usucapio  even  in  the  case
of  those  things  which  have  come  to  us  by  tradition
from  a  person  who  was  not  the  owner,  whether
they  are  Res  Mancipi  or  not,  provided  we  have
received  them  bona  fide,  believing  that  he  who  de-
livered {qui  tradiderit)  them  to  us  was  the  owner.
And  this  rule  of  law  seems  to  have  been  established,
in  order  that  the  ownership  of  things  might  not
be  long  in  uncertainty,  seeing  that  one  or  two
years  would  be  quite  sufficient  for  the  owner  to
look  after  his  property,  that  being  the  time  al-
lowed to  the  Possessor  for  Usucapio."

The  reason  for  limiting  the  owner  to  one  or  two
years  has  little  force  in  it  and  possibly  no  his-
torical truth  ;  but  it  is  clear  from  this  passage  that
this  application  of  the  rule  of  Usucapio  was  formed
from  analogy  to  the  rule  of  the  Twelve  Tables,
and  that  it  was  not  contained  in  them.  The
limitation  of  the  time  of  Usucapio  is  clearly  due  to
4  I


1518


USUCAPIO.


the  Twelve  Tables,  and  the  time  applied  only  to
purchases  of  Res  Mancipi  from  the  owner,  when
the  legal  forms  of  conveyance  had  been  neglected.
But  the  origin  of  Usucapio  v/as  probably  still
more  remote.

When  Gaius  states  that  there  was  originally
only  one  kind  of  ownership  at  Rome,  and  that
afterwards  ownership  was  divided,  he  immediately
shows  how  this  arose  by  taking  the  case  of  a  Res
Mancipi,  This  division  of  ownership  rested  on  the
division  of  things  into  Res  Mancipi  and  Res  Nee
Mancipi,  a  distinction  that  had  reference  to  nothing
else  than  the  mode  of  transferring  the  property  of
them.  Things  were  merely  called  Res  Mancipi,
because  the  ownership  of  them  could  not  be  trans-
ferred without  Mancipatio,  Things  were  Res  nee
Mancipi,  the  alienation  of  which  could  be  effected
without  Mancipatio.  There  could  be  no  division
of  things  into  Mancipi  and  Nee  mancipi,  except
by  determining  what  things  should  be  Res  Mancipi.
Res  nee  Mancipi  are  determined  negatively  :  they
are  all  things  that  are  not  Res  Mancipi.  But  the
negative  determination  pre-supposes  the  positive.
Therefore  Res  Mancipi  were  determined  before
Res  nee  Mancipi  could  be  determined  ;  and  before
the  Res  Mancipi  were  determined,  there  was  no
distinction  of  things  into  Bes  Mancipi  and  Res
nee  Mancipi.  But  this  distinction,  as  such,  only
affected  the  condition  of  those  things  to  which  it
had  a  direct  application :  consequently  all  other
things  remained  as  they  were  before.  The  conclu-
sion then  is  certain,  that  the  Res  Mancipi  as  a
class  of  things  were  posterior  in  order  of  time  to
the  class  of  Res  nee  Mancipi,  which  comprehended
all  things  except  Res  Mancipi.  Until  then  the
class  of  Res  Mancipi  was  established,  all  property
at  Rome  could  be  alienated  by  tradition,  as  Res
nee  Mancipi  could  be  alienated  by  tradition  after
the  class  of  Res  Mancipi  was  constituted.

The  time  when  the  class  of  Res  Mancipi  was
formed  is  not  known  ;  but  it  is  most  consistent
with  all  that  we  know  to  suppose  that  it  existed
before  the  Twelve  Tables.  If  we  consider  the
forms  of  Mancipatio  [Mancipatio],  we  cannot
believe  that  they  arose  in  any  other  way  than  by
positive  enactment.  As  soon  as  the  forms  of
Mancipatio  and  of  the  In  jure  cessio  (which  from
its  character  must  be  posterior  to  Mancipatio)
were  established,  it  followed  that  mere  tradition  of
a  thing  to  a  purchaser  and  payment  of  the  purchase-
money,  could  not  transfer  the  ownership  of  a  Res
Mancipi,  The  transfer  gave  the  purchaser  merely
a  Possessio,  and  the  original  owner  retained  the
property.  In  course  of  time  the  purchaser  ob-
tained the  Publiciana  actio,  and  from  this  time  it
might  be  said  that  a  double  ownership  existed  in
the  same  thing.

The  introduction  of  Mancipatio,  which  gave  rise
to  the  double  ownership,  was  also  followed  by
the  introduction  of  Usucapio.  The  bona  fide
Possessor  of  a  Res  Mancipi  which  had  not  been
transferred  by  Mancipatio,  had  no  legal  defence
against  the  owner  who  claimed  the  thing.  But  he
had  the  exceptio  doli,  and  subsequently  the  Ex-
cepiio  rei  venditae  et  traditae  by  which  he  could
protect  himself  against  the  owner  ;  and  as  Possessor
simply  he  had  the  protection  of  the  Interdict
against  third  persons.  He  had  the  full  enjoyment
of  the  thing,  and  he  could  transfer  the  possessio,
but  he  could  do  no  act  with  respect  to  it  for  which
Quiritarian  ownership  was  necessary ;  consequently


USUCAPIO.

I  he  could  not  alienate  it  by  Mancipatio  or  In  jure
Cessio,  and  it  was  a  necessary  consequence  that  he
could  not  dispose  of  it  by  Testament  in  the  same
way  in  which  Quiritarian  ownership  was  disposed
of  by  Testament  The  necessity  for  such  a  rule  as
that  of  Usucapio  was  evident,  but  it  could  arise
in  no  other  way  than  by  positive  enactment,  for  its
effect  was  to  be  the  same  as  that  of  Mancipatio.
Ttie  Twelve  Tables  fixed  the  term  of  Usucapio,
but  we  do  not  know  whether  they  fixed  or  merely
confirmed  the  rule  of  law  as  to  Usucapio.

It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  tradition  or  de-
livery was  a  part  of  Mancipatio  as  such.  Manci-
patio was  merely  a  form  of  transferring  ownership
which  was  fixed  by  law,  and  the  characteristic  of
which  was  publicity :  a  delivery  of  the  thing  would
of  course  generally  follow,  but  it  was  no  part  of
the  transfer  of  ownership.  Land  (praedia)  for
instance  could  be  mancipated  without  delivery
(in  absentia  mandvari  solent,  Ulp.  Frag,  tit,  18  ;
Gaius,  i.  121,)  In  the  case  of  moveable  things,
it  was  necessary  that  they  should  be  present,  not
for  the  purpose  of  delivery,  but  that  the  thing
mancipated  might  be  identified  by  apprehension.
The  essential  to  the  transfer  of  ownership  in  all
countries,  is  the  consent  of  two  persons,  who  have
legal  capacity  to  consent,  the  seller  and  the  buyer.
All  the  rest  is  form  that  may  be  varied  infinitely:
this  consent  is  the  substance.  Yet  tradition  as  a
form  of  transfer  was  undoubtedly  the  old  Roman
form,  and  consent  alone  was  not  sufficient ;  and  it
may  be  admitted  that  consent  alone  was  never  suffi-
cient for  the  transfer  of  ownership  without  affecting
the  principle  laid  down  that  consent  alone  is  es-
sential in  the  transfer  of  ownership.  This  appa-
rent incongruity  is  ingeniously  and  sufficiently  ex-
plained in  the  following  manner:  "  Tradition  owes
its  origin  to  a  time  when  men  could  not  sufficiently
separate  in  their  minds  Physical  ownership,  or  the
dominium  over  a  thing,  from  Legal  ownership.  As
a  man  can  only  call  a  bird  in  the  air  or  a  wild
animal  in  the  forest  his  own  when  he  has  caught
it  ;  so  men  thought  that  tradition  must  be  added  to
contract  in  order  to  enable  a  man  to  claim  the
thing  as  his  own."  (Engelbach,  Ueber  die  Usuca-
pion^ &c.  p.  60.)

Besides  the  case  of  property  there  might  be
Usucapio  in  the  case  of  Servitutes,  Marriage,  and
Hereditas.  But  as  Servitutes  praediorum  rusticorum
could  only  be  the  objects  of  Mancipatio  and  could
only  be  established  by  the  same  form  by  which
ownership  of  Res  Mancipi  was  transferred,  so  ac-
cording to  the  old  law,  these  Servitutes  alone  could
be  the  object  of  Usucapio  ;  and,  as  it  is  contended
by  Engelbach,  only  in  the  case  of  Aquaeductus,
Haustus,  Iter  and  Actus.  But  as  the  ownership
of  Res  Mancipi  could  be  acquired  by  bare  tradition
followed  by  usucapio,  so  these  servitutes  could  be
established  by  contract  and  could  be  fully  acquired
by  Usucapio,  In  the  later  Roman  law,  when  the
form  of  Mancipatio  was  replaced  by  mere  tradition,
servitutes  could  be  established  per  pacta  et  stipu-
lationes  only.  In  the  case  of  a  Marriage  Coemp-
tione,  the  form  of  Mancipatio  was  used,  and  the
effect  was  that  the  woman  came  into  the  hand  of
her  husband,  and  became  part  of  his  Familia.  The
marriage  Usu  could  not  of  itself  effect  this,  but  if
the  woman  lived  with  her  husband  a  year,  she
passed  into  his  Familia  by  Usucapio  (velut  annua
possessione  usucapiebatur)  :  and  accordingly  it  was
provided  by  the  laws  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  that  if


USUCAPIO.

she  did  not  wish  thus  to  come  into  her  husband's
hand,  she  must  in  every  year  absent  herself  from
him  for  three  nights  in  order  to  interrupt  the  usus.
(Gaius,  i.  1 1 0.)  Thus  Usucapio  added  to  Usus
produced  the  effect  of  Coemptio.  In  the  case  of
the  Hereditas,  when  the  testator  had  the  testamenti
factio,  and  had  disposed  of  his  property  without
observing  the  forma  of  Mancipatio  and  Nuncupatio,
the  person  whom  he  had  named  his  heres,  could  ob-
tJiin  the  legal  ownership  of  the  hereditas  by  Usu-
capio. (Gaius,  ii.  54.)  In  all  these  cases  then  the
old  law  as  to  Usucapio  was  this :  when  the  positive
law  had  required  the  forms  of  Mancipatio  in  order
that  a  certain  end  should  be  effected,  Usucapio  sup-
plied the  defect  of  form,  by  converting  a  possessio
(subsequently  called  In  bonis)  into  Dominium  ex
jure  Quiritium.  Usucapio  then  was  not  originally  a
mode  of  acquisition,  but  it  was  a  mode  by  which
a  defect  in  the  mode  of  acquisition  was  supplied,
and  this  defect  was  supplied  by  the  use  of  the
thing,  or  the  exercise  of  the  right.  The  end  of
Usucapio  was  to  combine  the  beneficial  with  the
Quiritarian  ownership  of  a  thing.  Accordingly  the
original  name  for  Usucapio  was  Usus  Auctoritas,
the  auctoritas  of  usus  or  that  which  gives  to  Usus
its  efficacy  and  completeness,  a  sense  of  Auctoritas
which  is  common  in  the  Roman  Law.  Some  say
that  usus  auctoritas  is  usus  et  auctoritas.  (Cic.  Pro
Caecin.  19.)  [Auctoritas  ;  Tutela.]  But  Usus
alone  never  signifies  Usucapio  ;  and  consistently
with  this,  in  those  cases  where  there  could  be  no
Usucapio,  the  Roman  writers  speak  of  Usus  only.
Possessio  is  the  Usus  of  a  piece  of  ground  as  op-
posed to  the  ownership  of  it ;  and  the  term  Usus
was  applied  to  the  enjoyment  of  land  of  which  a
man  either  had  not  the  ownership  or  of  which  he
could  not  have  the  ownership,  as  the  Ager  publicus.
In  the  later  law,  as  it  is  known  to  us  in  the  Pan-
dect, Usucapio  was  a  mode  of  acquiring  ownership,
the  term  Usus  Auctoritas  was  replaced  by  the
phrase  Usu  Capere,  and  in  the  place  of  Usucapio
sometimes  the  phrase  "possessione  or  longa  pos-
sessione  capere  "  occurs  ;  but  Possessio  alone  never
is  used  for  Usucapio.  In  order  to  establish  the
title  by  Usucapio,  the  Possession  must  be  continuous
or  uninterrupted  during  the  whole  Usucapion.  If
there  was  an  interruption  of  the  Possession  (usur-
patio),  and  the  Possession  was  acquired  again,  this
was  the  commencement  of  a  new  Usucapio.  The
possession  must  also  have  a  legal  origin,  without
which  the  possession  would  have  no  effect  The
possessor  must  be  able  to  show  an  origin  of  his
possession  which  would  give  him  at  least  bonitarian
ownership :  this  was  called  justa  causa  possessionis,
tituks  usucapionis.  The  causa  might  be  a  bargain
and  sale,  a  gift  (donatio),  a  legacy  and  others.

It  appears  from  a  passage  of  Gaius  already
quoted,  that  in  his  time  Usucapio  was  a  regular
mode  of  acquisition,  which  was  applicable  to  things
which  had  come  to  a  man  by  tradition  from  one
who  was  not  the  owner,  and  was  applicable  both
to  Res  Mancipi  and  Nee  Mancipi,  if  the  possessor
acquired  the  possession  of  them  bona  fide,  that  is,
for  instance,  if  he  believed  that  he  brought  them
from  the  owner.  There  were  however  some  ex-
ceptions to  this  rule :  a  man  could  never  acquire
the  ownership  of  a  stolen  thing  by  Usucapio,  for
the  Twelve  Tables  prevented  it,  and  the  Lex  Julia
ct  Plautia  prevented  Usucapio  in  the  case  of  a
thing  Vi  possessa.  The  meaning  of  the  law  was
not  that  the  thief  or  the  robber  could  not  acquire


USUCAPIO.


1215


the  ownership  by  Usucapio,  for  the  mala  fides  in
which  their  possession  originated  was  an  obstacle
to  the  Usucapio,  but  no  person  who  bona  fide
bought  the  thing  that  was  stolen  or  vi  possessa,
could  acquire  the  ownership  by  Usucapio.  (Gaius,
ii.  45.)  According  to  other  authorities  the  rule  as
to  a  stolen  thing  was  established  by  the  Lex
Atinia.  Provincial  lands  also  were  not  objects  of
Usucapio.

If  a  woman  was  in  the  tutela  of  her  agnati,  her
Res  Mancipi  could  not  be  objects  of  Usucapio,
unless  they  had  been  received  from  her  by  traditio
with  the  auctoritas  of  her  tutor  ;  and  this  was  a
provision  of  the  Twelve  Tables.  The  legal  incapa-
city of  the  woman  to  transfer  ownership  by  Man-
cipatio must  be  the  origin  of  this  rule.  The
property  of  a  woman  who  was  in  Tutela  legitima
could  not  be  an  object  of  Usucapio,  as  Cicero  ex-
plains to  Atticus  (rfe  tutela  legitima  nihil  usucapi
posse,  ad  Att.  i.  5).  The  foundation  of  this  rule,
according  to  some,  was  the  legal  incapacity  of  a
woman  who  was  in  the  tutela  of  her  Agnati,  to
make  a  will.  [Testamentum  ;  but  see  Tutela.]

In  order  to  acquire  by  usucapio,  a  person  must
have  the  capacity  of  Roman  ownership  ;  conse-
quently all  persons  were  excluded  from  acquiring
by  Usucapio  who  had  not  the  Commercium.  The
passage  quoted  by  Cicero  (de  Offie.  i.  12)  from  the
Twelve  Tables,  "  adversum  hostem  (i.  e.  pere-
grinum)  aeterna  auctoritas,"  is  alleged  in  support
of  this  rule  of  law ;  that  is,  a  Peregrinus  may  have
the  use  of  a  Res  Mancipi  which  has  been  trans-
ferred by  traditio,  but  he  can  never  acquire  any-
thing more  by  Usucapio.

Things  could  not  be  objects  of  Usucapio,  which
were  not  objects  of  Commercium.  Accordingly  all
Res  divini  juris,  such  as  temples  and  lands  dedi-
cated to  the  gods,  and  Res  communes  could  not  be
objects  of  Usucapio.  The  Limits  or  bounds  by
which  the  Romanus  Ager  was  marked  out  were
consequently  not  objects  of  Usucapio,  as  to  which
there  was  a  provision  in  the  Twelve  Tables.  (Cic.
de  Leg.  i.  21.  "Quoniam  usucapionem  intra  quinque
pedes  esse  noluerunt.")  The  Quinque  pedes  are  the
limites  linearii,  the  breadth  of  which  was  fixed  at
five  feet  by  a  Lex  Mamilia.  The  approach  to  a
sepulchre  was  also  not  an  object  of  U^sucapio.
Free  men  could  not  be  objects  of  Usucapio.  (Gaius,
ii.  48.)

In  the  time  of  Gaius  (ii.  51)  a  man  might  take
possession  of  another  person's  land,  provided  he
used  no  force  {vis),  the  possession  of  which  was
vacant  either  from  the  carelessness  of  the  owner,  or
because  the  owner  had  died  without  a  Successor
[SuccESSio],  or  had  been  long  absent ;  and  if  he
transferred  the  field  to  a  bona  fide  purchaser,  the
purchaser  could  acquire  the  ownership  by  Usuca-
pio, even  though  the  seller  knew  that  the  field  was
not  his  own.  This  rule  was  established  against
the  opinion  of  those  who  contended  that  a  Fundus
could  be  Furtivus  or  an  object  of  theft.  But  a
man  might  in  some  cases  acquire  by  Usucapio  the
ownership  of  a  thing  which  he  knew  to  be  not  his
own :  as  if  a  man  had  possession  of  a  thing  be-
longing to  the  hereditas,  of  which  the  heres  had
never  acquired  the  possession,  provided  it  was  a
thing  that  could  be  an  object  of  Usucapio.  This
species  of  possessio  and  usucapio  was  called  Pro
herede:  and  even  things  immovable  {qtuie  solo
continentur)  could  be  thus  acquired  by  one  year's
usucapio.  The  reason  was  this :  the  Twelve  Tables
4i  2


1220


USUCAPIO.


declared  that  the  ownership  of  res  soli  could  be
acquired  by  usucapio  in  two  years,  and  all  other
things  in  one  year :  now  as  the  hereditas  was  not
a  res  soli  it  must  be  included  in  the  "  other  things,"
and  it  was  further  determined  that  the  several
things  which  made  up  the  hereditas  must  follow
the  rule  as  to  the  hereditas  ;  and  though  the  rule
as  to  the  hereditas  was  changed,  it  continued  as  to
all  the  things  comprised  in  it.  (Seneca,  De  Bene/.
vi.  5.)  The  reason  of  this  "  improba  possessio  et  usu-
capio," says  Gaius,  was  that  the  heres  might  be  in-
duced the  sooner  to  take  possession  of  the  hereditas,
and  that  there  might  be  somebody  to  discharge  the
sacra,  which  in  ancient  times  {illis  temporibus)  were
very  strictly  observed  ;  and  also  that  there  might
be  somebody  against  whom  the  creditors  might
make  their  demands.  This  kind  of  Possessio  and
Usucapio  was  called  Lucrativa.  In  the  time  of
Gaius  it  had  ceased  to  exist,  for  a  Senatusconsultum
of  Hadrian's  time  enabled  the  heres  to  recover  that
which  had  been  acquired  by  Usucapio,  just  as  if
there  had  been  no  Usucapio  ;  but  in  the  case  of  a
heres  necessarius,  the  old  rule  still  remained.
(Gaius,  ii.  52—58  ;  Cic.  Top.  6  ;  Plin.  Ep.  v.  1.)

Gaius  mentions  a  mode  of  acquisition  under  the
name  of  Usureceptio.  If  a  man  mancipated  a
thing  to  a  friend  or  transferred  it  by  the  In  Jure
Cessio,  simply  in  order  that  the  thing  might  be  in
his  friend's  safe  keeping  (Jiduciae  causa;  quod
tutius  nostrae  res  apud  eum  essent),,  he  had  always
a  capacity  for  recovering  it.  In  order  to  recover
immediately  the  Quiritarian  ownership  of  the  thing,
Remancipatio  was  necessary  ;  but  if  the  thing  was
transferred  to  him  by  traditio,  the  Remancipatio
was  completed  by  Usucapio,  or  as  it  is  here  called
by  Usureceptio  :  for  LJsiireceptio  differs  in  no  re-
spect from  Usucapio,  except  that  the  person  who
acquires  the  Quiritarian  ownership  by  Usus,  in  the
one  case  acquires  (capit)^  in  the  other  re-acquires
(reeipit)  the  thing.  In  the  case  of  a  pignorated
thing,  the  debtor's  capacity  to  recover  by  Usure-
ceptio was  the  same  as  in  the  case  of  Fiducia  as
soon  as  he  had  paid  his  debt  to  the  creditor  :  and
even  if  he  had  not  paid  the  money  and  had  ob-
tained possession  of  the  thing  neither  by  hiring  it
from  the  creditor,  nor  precario,  he  had  a  lucrativa
usucapio,  which  was  a  usureceptio  and  was  pro-
bably formed  from  analogy  to  the  lucrativa  usu-
capio pro  herede.

Servitutes  praediorum  rusticorum  were  estab-
lished, at  le^st  according  to  the  old  law,  by  Man-
cipatio :  the  right  to  the  Servitutes  could  only  be
properly  extinguished  by  a  Remancipatio.  If  the
Servitus  was  extinguished  by  mere  agreement,
there  must  be  a  usureceptio  on  the  part  of  the
owner  of  the  servient  tenement  in  order  to  com-
plete its  legal  release  from  the  Servitus.  In  order
that  the  possession  of  the  libertas  of  the  servient
land  might  be  enjoyed  uninterruptedly  for  two
years,  there  must  be  for  the  same  time  a  total  ab-
stinence from  all  exercise  of  the  right  on  the  part
of  him  who  had  the  servitus.  Subsequently,  it
was  considered  sufficient  if  the  person  entitled  to
the  Servitus  did  not  exercise  his  right  for  two
years.

When  usucapio  was  established  as  a  means  of
giving  the  Quiritarian  ownership  to  him  who  had
acquired  a  thing  In  bonis,  the  form  of  raancipatio
must  have  gradually  lost  its  importance,  and  Usu-
capio came  to  be  viewed  as  a  mode  of  acquisition.
Accordingly,  it  has  been  already  observed,  it  be-


USUCAPIO.

came  applicable  to  all  cases  of  bona  fide  possession,
wliether  the  thing  was  a  Res  Mancipi  or  not.
Formerly  if  a  will  had  been  made  in  due  form  ex-
cept as  to  Mancipation  and  Nuncupation,  the  heres
acquired  the  hereditas  by  Usucapio  ;  but  with  the
introduction  of  the  Praetorian  Testament  [Testa-
mentum]  and  the  Bonorura  Possessio,  the  Bonorura
Possessor  obtained  the  right  to  actiones  fictitiae  or
utiles  in  all  cases  where  the  deceased  had  a  right
of  action,  and  he  acquired  by  Usucapio  the  Quiri-
tarian ownership  of  the  several  things  which  were
included  in  the  hereditas.  In  course  of  time  it  came
to  be  considered  by  the  jurists  as  a  rule  of  law  that
there  could  be  no  Usucapio  of  an  hereditas.  (Gaius,
ii.  54.)  In  like  manner  in  the  case  of  Servitutes
established  by  contract,  the  introduction  of  the
Actio  Publiciana  rendered  the  doctrine  of  Usucapio
unnecessary,  and  a  Scribonia  Lex  is  mentioned
which  repealed  all  Usucapio  of  Servitutes.  (Dig.
41.  tit.  3.  s.  4.  §  29.)  But  this  Lex  only  applied
to  the  establishment  of  servitutes  ;  it  did  not  affect
that  Usucapio  by  which  the  freedom  of  a  servient
piece  of  land  was  effected.  It  became  a  maxim  of
law  :  servitutes  praediorum  rusticorum  non  utendo
araittuntur,  which,  viewed  with  respect  to  the  ser-
vient land,  was  a  Usureceptio.  In  this  sense
"  usurpata  recipitur  "  seems  to  be  used  in  a  passage
of  Paulus  (S.  R.  i.  tit.  17.  s.  2).  "  Usurpari "  is
commonly  used  in  the  sense  of  "  uti,"  and  in  this
passage  of  Paulus  "  usurpata  recipitur "  seems
equivalent  to  "  usu  recipitur  ;  "  though  this  is  not
the  meaning  that  has  usually  been  given  to  this
passage.

In  the  case  of  marriage  also  Usucapio  fell  into
disuse  (Gaius,  i.  111).

But  in  other  respects  usucapio  subsisted.  He
who  had  acquired  a  Res  Mancipi  by  tradition,  had
now  a  Praetorian  ownership,  and  he  had  a  right  of
action  in  respect  of  this  ownership,  which  was
analogous  to  the  Rei  Vindicatio.  But  Usucapio
was  still  necessary  to  give  him  Quiritarian  owner-
ship and  its  consequent  advantages.  The  distinc-
tion between  Res  Mancipi  and  Nee  Mancipi  ex-
isted, and  as  a  consequence  the  Testamentuni  per
aes  et  libram  subsisted  at  the  same  time  with  the
Praetorian  Testament.

When  finally  all  distinction  was  abolished  be-
tween Res  Mancipi  and  Nee  Mancipi,  and  the
ownership  of  all  things  could  be  acquired  by  Tra-
ditio and  Occupatio,  that  kind  of  Usucapio  ceased
by  which  a  thing  In  bonis  became  a  man's  Ex
Jure  Quiritiura.  All  Usucapio  was  now  the  same,
and  its  general  definition  became  "adjectio  do-
minii  per  continuationem  possessionis  temporis  lege
definiti."  (Dig.  41.  tit,  3.  s.  2,  De  Usurpationibus
et  Usucapionibus.)  By  a  constitution  of  Justinian
(Inst.  2.  tit.  6,  De  Usucapionibus  et  longi  temporis
possessionibus)  it  was  enacted  that  there  might  be
usucapion  of  Res  Mobiles  in  three  years,  and  of
Res  Immobiles  "  per  longi  temporis  possessionem,"
which  is  explained  to  be  ten  years  "  inter  prae-
sentes,"  and  twenty  years  "  inter  absentes  ;  "  and
this  applied  to  the  whole  Roman  Empire,  so  that
ownership  of  all  things  could  be  acquired  on  these
terms  within  the  whole  Roman  empire  ;  but  the
conditions  of  "  Justus  titulus,"  "  bona  fides,"  and
the  capability  of  the  thing  to  be  an  object  of  usu-
capion were  still  required.  The  absence  of  a  Justus
titulus  or  the  fact  of  the  thing  being  not  capable
of  usucapbn,  did  not  deprive  the  possessor  of  the
title  by  usucapion,  but  a  possession  of  thirty,   oi


USUSFRUCTUS.

in  some  cases,  forty  years  was  required.  From
this  time  the  terms  Usucapio  and  Longi  temporis
praescriptio,  were  used  indifferently,  as  some  writers
suppose,  though  on  this  point  there  is  not  uniformity
of  opinion.

(Engelbach,  Ueher  die  Usucapion  zur  zeit  der
Zwolf  Tafeln,  Marburg  1»28  ;  Muhlenbruch,
Dodrin.  Pandect.  §  261,  &c.  ;  Ueber  die  Usucapio,
pro  herede  von  Arndts,  Rhein.  Mus.  fur  Jurispru-
denz,  vol.  ii.  p.  125  ;  Puchta,  Inst.  ii.  §  239.)  [G.  L.]

USURAE.     [Fenus,  p.  526,  b.]

USURPA'TIO.  One  sense  of  this  word  is
"Usucapionis  interruptio,"  (Dig.  41.  tit.  3.  s.  2.)
Appius  Claudius,  not  the  Decemvir,  but  he  who
made  the  Appia  Via  and  brought  the  Aqua  Claudia
to  Rome,  wrote  a  book  De  Usurpationibus,  which
was  not  extant  in  the  time  of  Pomponius.  (Dig.  1.
tit.  2.  s.  36.)  In  some  cases  "  usurpatio  "  means
the  preservation  of  a  right  by  the  exercise  of  it,  as
"jus  usurpatura,''  in  the  case  of  a  Servitus  aquae
ducendae  ;  and  this  nearly  agrees  with  that  sense
of  Usurpare  which  is  equivalent  to  Uti.  [Usu-
capio.] As  to  the  passage  in  Gellius,  iii.  2,  see
Savigny,  St/stem,  &c.  iv.  365.  [G.  L.]

USUS.     [Matrimonium,  p.  741.]

USUS.       [USUSFRIICTUS.]

USUSFRUCTUS  and  USUS  were  Personal
Servitutes.  [Servittjtes.]  (Dig.  8.  tit.  1.  s.  1.)
Ususfructus  is  defined  to  be  "jus  alienis  rebus
utendi  fruendi  salva  rerum  substantia."  (Dig.  7.
tit.  1.  s.  1.)  Accordingly  Ususfructus  comprehended
the  "jus  utendi"  and  the  "jus  fruendi."  Usus
comprehended  only  the  "jus  utendi."  The  com-
plete distinction  between  Ususfructus  and  Usus
will  only  appear  from  a  statement  of  what  each  is.

A  ususfructus  was  the  right  to  the  enjoyment  of
the  fruits  of  a  thing  by  one  person,  while  the
ownership  (proprietas)  belonged  to  another.  It
could  be  established  by  Testament,  which  was  the
common  case,  as  when  the  Heres  was  required  to
give  to  another  the  ususfructus  of  a  thing  ;  and  it
could  also  be  established  by  contract  between  the
owner  of  a  thing  and  him  who  contracted  for  the
Ususfructus.  He  who  had  the  Ususfructus  was
Ususfructuarius  or  Fructuarius,  and  the  object  of
the  Ususfructus  was  Res  Fructuaria.  The  utmost
limit  of  Ususfructus  and  Usus  was  the  life  of  the
person  who  had  the  right.  Thus  the  Ususfructus
and  Usus  were  generally  life  estates  ;  but  not  more.
(Dig.  45.  tit.  1.  s.  38.  §  12.)

There  might  be  Ususfructus  both  in  Praedia
Rustica  and  Urbana,  in  slaves,  beasts  of  burden
and  other  things  ;  and  a  Ususfructus  of  a  whole
property  (omnium  bonorum)  might  be  given  ;  or
of  some  aliquot  part.   (Dig.  32.  tit.  2.  s.  37,  43.)

If  the  Ususfructus  of  a  thing  was  bequeathed  to
a  person,  all  the  "  fructus  "  of  the  thing  belonged
to  the  Fructuarius  during  the  time  of  his  enjoy-
ment. Consequently  if  the  Ususfructus  of  a  piece
of  land  was  given  to  him,  he  was  intitled  to  collect
and  have  for  his  own  all  the  fructus  that  were  al-
ready on  the  land,  and  all  that  were  produced  on
it  during  the  time  of  his  enjoyment.  But  as  he
only  acquired  the  ownership  of  the  fructus  by  col-
lecting them  (perceptio),  he  was  not  intitled  to
fructus,  which  existed  on  the  land  at  the  time
when  his  right  ended,  and  which  he  had  not  col-
lected :  quidquid  in  fundo  nascitur,  vel  quidquid
inde  percipitur,  ad  fructuarium  pertinet.  (Dig.  7.
tit.  1.  S.59.  §  1  ;  tit.  4.  S.13.)

He  was  bound  not  to  injure  the  land,  and  he


USUSFRUCTUS.


1221


was  bound  to  cultivate  it  properly.  As  to  quarries
and  mines,  he  could  work  them  for  his  benefit,  if  he
worked  them  properly  (quasi  bonus  paterfamilias).
If  after  the  bequest  of  the  ususfructus,  minerals
were  found  on  the  land,  he  could  work  them.  He
could  be  compelled  to  plant  new  trees  in  the  place
of  those  which  died,  and  generally  to  keep  the  land
in  good  condition.  If  the  ususfructus  was  of  aedes,
the  fructuarius  was  intitled  to  all  the  rents  and
profits  which  he  received  during  the  time  of  his
enjoyment.  He  could  be  compelled  to  keep  a
house  in  repair,  but  it  seems  to  be  doubtful  how
far  he  was  bound  to  rebuild  the  house  if  it  fell
down  from  decay :  at  any  rate  he  was  liable  for  all
moderate  and  reasonable  expenses  which  were  ne-
cessary for  the  maintenance  of  the  property.

The  Fructuarius  could  not  alienate  the  right  to
the  ususfructus,  though  he  might  give  to  another
the  usus  of  his  right  ;  and  he  might  surrender  the
right  to  the  Ususfructus  to  the  owner  of  the  thing.
He  could  not  subject  the  thing  to  servitutes  ;  nor
could  the  owner  do  this  even  with  the  consent  of
the  fructuarius.  The  Fructuarius  could  make  such
changes  or  alterations  in  the  thing  as  would  im-
prove it,  but  not  such  as  would  in  any  way  dete-
riorate the  thing,  or  even  render  the  maintenance
of  it  a  greater  burden.  Consequently  he  had
greater  power  over  cultivated  land  than  over  houses
or  pleasure-grounds,  for  a  part  of  the  value  of
houses  or  pleasure-grounds  and  things  of  the  like
kind  consists  in  opinion,  and  must  be  measured  by
the  rank,  wealth,  and  peculiar  disposition  of  the
owner.

The  fructuarius  could  maintain  or  defend  his
rights  by  action  and  by  interdicts.  On  the  com-
pletion of  the  time  of  the  Ususfructus,  the  thing
was  to  be  restored  to  the  owner,  who  could  gene-
rally require  securities  from  the  fructuarius  both
for  the  proper  use  of  the  thing  and  for  its  restora-
tion in  due  time.  This  security  was  in  some  cases
dispensed  with  by  positive  enactments,  and  in
other  cases  by  agreement  ;  but  it  could  not  be  dis-
pensed with  by  testament.

Originally  there  could  be  no  Ususfructus  in
things  unless  they  were  things  corporeal  and  such
as  could  be  restored  entire,  when  the  time  of
Ususfructus  had  expired.  But  by  a  Senatuscon-
sultum  of  uncertain  date,  there  might  be  quasi
ususfructus  of  things  which  were  consumed  in  the
use,  and  in  this  case  the  fructuarius  in  fact  became
the  owner  of  the  things,  but  was  bound  to  give
security  that  he  would  either  restore  as  much  in
quantity  and  value  as  he  had  received,  or  the  value
of  the  things  in  money.  (Dig.  7.  tit.  5.  s.  7  ;  and
compare  Randall  v.  Russell,  3  Mer.  190.)  It  is
generally  supposed  that  this  Senatusconsultum  was
passed  in  the  time  of  Augustus,  and  a  passage  of
Cicero  {Top.  3)  is  alleged  to  show  that  it  did  not
exist  in  the  time  of  Cicero  :  "  Non  debet  ea  mulier,
cui  vir  bonorum  suorum  usumfructum  legavit,  cellis
vinariis  et  oleariis  plenis  relictis,  putare  id  ad  se
pertinere.  Usus  enim  non  abusus  legatur."  The
only  difficulty  is  in  the  words  "  id  ad  se  pertinere,"
which  are  usually  translated  "these  things,  (the
cellae  vinariae,  &c. )  are  not  objects  of  Ususfructus,"
from  which  it  is  inferred  that  there  was  at  that
time  no  Ususfructus  in  things  which  were  con-
sumed in  the  Use.  But  if  this  is  the  sense,  the
words  which  follow,  "  for  the  usus,  not  the  abusus
(power  to  consume)  is  the  object  of  the  legacy,"
have  no  clear  meaning.  These  words  simply  sig"-
4  I  3


1222


USUSFRUCTUS.


nify  that  a  Usus  is  given,  not  an  Abusus  ;  but
this  does  not  prove  that  an  abusus  could  not  be
given.  Puchta  shows  that  the  phrase  "  res  pertinet
ad  usufructuarium,"  which  exactly  corresponds  to
the  phrase  in  Cicero,  does  not  mean  "that  the
thing  is  an  object  of  ususfructus,"  but  that  "  it  be-
longs to  the  fructuarius."  In  the  Digest  (7.  tit.  1.
s.  68 )  the  question  is,  whether  the  young  child  of
a  female  slave  belongs  to  the  fructuarius  (an  partus
ad  fructuarium  pertineat),  and  it  is  answered  in
the  negative,  with  the  following  explanation :  "nee
usumfructum  in  eo  fructuarius  habebit."  The  pas-
sage of  Cicero  therefore  will  mean,  that  wine  and
oil  in  the  testator's  possession  are  not  given  to  her
by  a  bequest  of  the  ususfructus  of  his  property,
for  it  is  usus,  that  is,  the  enjoyment  of  the  future
fruits,  which  is  given,  and  not  "  abusus  "  or  the
power  to  consume  fruits  which  already  exist.  In
other  words  the  testator  gives  the  woman  a  Usus-
fructus in  all  his  property,  that  is  a  right  to  gather
the  fruits,  but  h6  does  not  give  the  wine  and  oil,
which  are  fruits  already  gathered,  to  the  woman
to  be  her  property  as  if  she  had  gathered  them
during  her  Ususfructus.  Puchta  contends  that
*'  abusus  "  does  not  necessarily  signify  that  there
could  be  "  abusus "  only  in  the  case  of  things
*'  quae  usu  consumuntur :  "  he  says  that  in  the
place  of  wine  and  oil  Cicero  might  have  given  the
young  of  animals,  as  an  example  without  altering
his  expression.  If  this  interpretation  is  correct,
Puchta  contends  that  the  Senatusconsultura  as
to  Quasi  ususfructus  is  older  than  the  time  of
Cicero.

Usus  is  defined  (Dig.  7.  tit.  8.  s.  2)  by  the
negation  of  "  frui :  "  "  cui  usus  relictus  est,  uti
potest,  frui  vero  non  potest."  The  title  of  the
Digest  above  referred  to  is  "De  Usu  et  habitatione,"
and  the  instances  given  under  that  title  mainly
refer  to  the  use  of  a  house  or  part  of  a  house.  Ac-
cordingly the  usus  of  a  house  might  be  bequeathed
without  the  fructus  (Dig.  7.  tit.  8.  s.  18) :  it  has
been  already  explained  what  is  the  extent  of  the
meaning  of  Ususfructus  of  a  house.  The  usus  of
a  thing  implies  the  power  of  using  it  either  for  ne-
cessary purposes  or  purposes  of  pleasure.  The  man
who  was  intitled  to  the  usus  could  not  give  the  thing
to  another  to  use,  though  a  man  who  had  the  usus
of  a  house  could  allow  another  to  lodge  with  him.
A  man  who  had  the  usus  of  an  estate  could  take
wood  for  daily  use,  and  could  enjoy  the  orchard,
the  fruit,  flowers  and  water,  provided  he  used  them
in  moderation,  or  as  it  is  expressed  "  non  usque  ad
compendium,  sed  ad  usum  scilicet  non  abusum."
If  the  usus  of  cattle  (pecus)  was  left,  the  usuarius
was  intitled  to  a  moderate  allowance  of  milk.  If
the  usus  of  a  herd  of  oxen  was  bequeathed  to  a
man,  he  could  use  the  oxen  for  ploughing  and  for
all  purposes  for  which  oxen  are  adapted.  If  the
usus  was  of  things  which  were  consumed  in  the
use,  then  the  usus  was  the  same  as  Ususfructus.
(Dig.  7.  tit.  5.  8. 5.  §  2  ;  s.  10.  §  1.)  Usus  was  in
its  nature  indivisible,  and  accordingly  part  of  a
Usus  could  not  be  given  as  a  legacy,  though  per-
sons might  have  the  fructus  of  a  thing  in  common.
(Dig.  7.  tit.  8.  s.  ]  9.)  As  to  his  duties  the  usu-
arius was  in  most  respects  like  the  fructuarius.  In
some  cases  Usus  is  equivalent  to  Ususfructus,  as
where  there  can  be  no  usus  of  a  thing  without  a
taking  of  the  Fructus.  As  to  Usus  in  the  English
system,  see  Slanning  v.  Style,  3  P.  Wms.  p.  335,
and  Hyde  v.  Parratt,  1  P.  Wms.  p.  1.


XENELASIA.

(Inst.  2.  tit.  4  ;  Dig.  7.  tit.  1,  &c.  ;  Frag.  Vat.
de  Usu/ructu;  Muhlenbruch,  Doct.  Pandect.  §  284,
&c.  ;  Ueber  das  alter  des  Quasiususfruclus^  Von
Puchta,  Rhein.  Museum  fur  Jurisprudenx.  vol.  iii.
p.  82.)  [G.  L.]

UTERINI.     [CoGNATi.]

UTI  POSSIDE'TIS.     [Interdictum.]

UTILIS  ACTIO.     [Actio,  p.  10,  a.]

UTRES.     [ViNUM,  p.  1203,  b.]

UTRICULA'RIUS.     [Tibia.]

UTRUBI.     [Interdictum.]

VULCANA'LIA,  a  festival  celebrated  at  Rome
in  honour  of  Vulcan,  on  the  23d  of  August  (x.
Calend.  Sept.)  with  games  in  the  circus  Flaminius,
where  the  god  had  a  temple.  (Inscript.  ap.  Gruter.
Ixi.  3,  cxxxiv.  ;  Publ.  Vict,  de  regionib.  urb.  Ro-
mae,  .9.)  The  sacrifice  on  this  occasion  consisted
of  fishes  which  the  people  threw  into  the  fire.
(Varro,  de  Ling.  Lot.  vi.  20.)  It  was  also  cus-
tomary on  this  day  to  commence  working  by  candle-
light, which  was  probably  considered  as  an  auspi-
cious beginning  of  the  use  of  fire,  as  the  day  was
sacred  to  the  god  of  this  element.  (Plin.  E-pist.
iii.  5.)  It  was  on  the  day  of  this  festival  that  the
consul  Q.  Fulvius  Nobilior  received  a  severe  de-
feat from  the  Celtiberians,  B.  c.  153.  It  became
an  ater  dies  in  consequence.  (Appian,  Hisp.
45.)  [L.S.]

VULGA'RES.     [Servus,  p.  1 041,  b.]

UXOR.     [Matrimonium,  p.  740,  b.]

UXO'RIUM.     [Aes  Uxorium.]


X.


XENA'GI  {l^vayot).  The  Spartans,  as  being
the  head  of  that  Peloponnesian  and  Dorian  league,
which  was  formed  to  secure  the  independence  of  the
Greek  states,  had  the  sole  command  of  the  con-
federate troops  in  tjme  of  war,  ordered  the  quotas
which  each  state  was  to  furnish,  and  appointed
oflicers  of  their  own  to  command  them.  Such
officers  were  called  ^ivayol.  The  generals  whom
the  allies  sent  with  their  troops  were  subordinate
to  these  Spartan  ^ivayol^  though  they  attended  the
council  of  war,  as  representatives  of  their  respec-
tive countries.  (Thucyd.  ii.  7,  10,  75,  v.  54;
Xenoph.  Hell.  iii.  5.  §  7,  Agesil.  ii.  10.)  After
the  peace  of  Antalcidas,  the  league  was  still  more
firmly  established,  though  Argos  refused  to  join
it  ;  and  the  Spartans  were  rigorous  in  exacting  the
required  military  service,  demanding  levies  by  the
(TkutoAt?,  and  sending  out  ^ivayoi  to  collect  them.
(Xenoph.  Hell.  v.  2.  §§  7,  37,  vi.  3.  §7;  Wachs-
rauth,  Hell.  Altertk  vol.  i.  pt.  ii.  pp.  114,  241,  1st
ed.;  Schiimarm,  Antjur. Pub. Gr.T^.  4-26.)  [C.R.K.]

XENELA'SIA  (^evrj^aaia).  The  Lacedae-  •
monians  appear  in  very  early  times,  before  the
legislation  of  Lycurgus,  to  have  been  averse  to  in-
tercourse with  foreigners  {^evoiai  a-rrpSa-fiiKToi,
Herod,  i.  65).  This  disposition  was  encouraged
by  the  lawgiver,  who  made  an  ordinance  forbidding
strangers  to  reside  at  Sparta,  without  special  per-
mission, and  empowering  the  magistrate  to  expel
from  the  city  any  stranger  who  misconducted  him-
self, or  set  an  example  injurious  to  public  morals.
Such  jurisdiction  was  exercised  by  the  Ephori.
Thucydides  (ii.  3.9)  makes  Pericles  reproach  the
Lacedaemonians  with  this  practice,  as  if  its  object
were  to  prevent  foreigners  from  becoming  acquainted
with  such  institutions  and  means  of  defence  as  would


XENIAS  GRAPHE.

be  dangerous  for  an  enemy  to  know.  The  intention
of  Lycurgus,  more  probably,  was  to  preserve  the
national  character  of  his  countrymen,  and  prevent
their  being  corrupted  by  foreign  manners  and  vices
(as  Xenophon  says),  ottws  fii]  paSiuvpyias  ol  iroJUTai
airh  tS>v  \4vu)v  eniriirXaivTO.  (De  Rep.  Laced,  xiv.
4  ;  compare  Plut.  Lycurg.  27.)  With  the  same
view  the  Spartans  were  themselves  forbidden  to
go  abroad  without  leave  of  the  magistrate.  Both
these  rules,  as  well  as  the  feelings  of  the  people
on  the  subject,  were  much  relaxed  in  later  times
when  foreign  rule  and  supremacy  became  the  ob-
ject of  Spartan  ambition.  Even  at  an  earlier
period  we  find  that  the  Spartans  knew  how  to  ob-
serve the  laws  of  hospitality  upon  fit  and  proper
occasions,  such  as  public  festivals,  the  reception
of  ambassadors,  «Scc.  (Xenoph.  Mem.  i.  2.  §  61.)
They  worshipped  a  Zeus  leVjos  and  'ASava  ^ej/io.
(Pausan.  iii.  1.  §  111.)  The  connection,  called
by  the  Greeks  irpo^ivia,  was  cultivated  at  Sparta
both  by  the  state  and  by  individuals  ;  of  which
their  connection  with  the  Peisistratidae  is  an  ex-
ample ;  and  also  that  of  a  Spartan  family  with
the  family  of  Alcibiades.  (Thucyd.  v.  43,  vi.  89,
viii.  6  ;  Herod,  v.  91  ;  compare  vi.  57.)  [Hospi-
TiUM,]  Many  illustrious  men  are  reported  to
have  resided  at  Sparta  with  honour,  as  Terpander,
Theognis,  and  others.  (Schomann,  Ant.jur.  Puhl.
Gr.  p.  142.)  Xenophon  was  highly  esteemed  by
the  nation,  and  made  Spartan  irpS^evos.  (See
fiirther  on  the  subject  of  the  leyTjXatria,  Thucyd.  i.
144,  with  Goeller's  notes  ;  Aristoph.  Aves^  1013  ;
Harpocr.  s.v.  Ka\  yap  rh  fM-nSeva.)  [C.  R.  K.]

XE'NIAS  GRAPHE  (len'as  7pa</)i(?).  This
was  a  prosecution  at  Athens  for  unlawfully  usurping
the  rights  of  citizenship.  As  no  man  could  be  an
Athenian  citizen,  except  by  birth  or  creation
(yeVet  or  iroL-qaei)^  if  one,  having  neither  of  those
titles,  assumed  to  act  as  a  citizen,  either  by  taking
part  in  the  popular  assembly,  or  by  serving  any
office,  judicial  or  magisterial,  or  by  attending  cer-
tain festivals,  or  doing  any  other  act  wliich  none
but  a  citizen  was  privileged  to  do,  he  was  liable  to
a  ypa<p^  |€j/ia$,  which  any  citizen  might  institute
against  him.  (Demosth.  c.  Timoth.  1204.)  Or
he  might  be  proceeded  against  by  ^laayy^Xia.
(Schomann,  de  Comit.  p.  187.)  If  condemned,
his  property  and  person  were  forfeited  to  the  state,
and  he  was  forthwith  to  be  sold  for  a  slave.  (De-
mosth. Epist.  i.  1481.)  The  judgment  however
was  arrested,  if  he  brought  a  StK»j  xpevdofxapTvpiuv
against  the  witnesses  who  had  procured  his  convic-
tion, and  convicted  them  of  giving  false  testimony.
During  such  proceeding  he  was  kept  in  safe  custody
to  abide  the  event.  [Martyria.]  When  a  person
tried  on  tliis  charge  was  acquitted  by  means  of
fraudulent  collusion  with  the  prosecutor  or  wit-
nesses, or  by  any  species  of  bribery,  he  was  liable
to  be  indicted  afresh  by  a  ypacpi]  Swpo^eulas,  the
proceedings  in  which,  and  the  penalty,  were  the
same  as  in  the  ypaipij  ^evias.  The  jurisdiction  in
these  matters  belonged,  in  the  time  of  Demosthenes,
to  the  Thesmothetae,  but  anciently,  at  least  in  the
time  of  Lysias,  to  the  Nautodicae.  (Harpocr.  s.  v.
Awpo^evia,  riopoo-Totrts,  tiavroSiKai ;  Hesych.  and
Suidas,  8.  V.  acvias  S/ktj,  NouroSiKat  ;'  Pollux,  viii.
40.  126;  Meier,  J«.  Proc.  pp.  83,  347,761.)

In  order  to  prevent  fraudulent  enrolment  in  the
register  of  the  Srjfioi^  or  XTj^iapxtxhu  ypanfiareTov,
which  was  important  evidence  of  citizenship,  the
6VjM«^Ta<  themselves  were  at  liberty  to  revise  their


XESTES.


1223


register,  and  expunge  the  names  of  those  who  had
been  improperly  admitted.  From  their  decision
there  was  an  appeal  to  a  court  of  justice,  upon
which  the  question  to  be  tried  was  much  the  same
as  in  the  ypacp-f)  ^evias,  and  the  appellant,  if  he
obtained  a  verdict,  was  restored  to  the  register  ;
but  if  judgment  was  given  against  him,  was  sold
for  a  slave.  [Demus.]  (Harpocr.  s,  v.  Aimpiicptais  :
Schomann,  rfe  Comit.  p.  381.)  For  an  example  of
this  see  the  speech  of  Demosthenes  against  Eu-
bulides.         ^  [C.R.K.]

XENI  (leVoi),  mercenaries.     [Mercenarii.]
XENUS,    XENIA     (leVos,    ^euia).     [HoSPl-

TIUM.]

XESTES  (ItVrTjs),  a  Greekmeasure  of  capacity,
both  fluid  and  solid,  which  contained  12  cyathi  or
2  cotylae,  and  was  equal  to  l-6th  of  the  x^vs^
l-48th  of  the  Roman  amphora  quadrantal,  and
l-72nd  of  the  Attic  amphora  metretes  ;  or,  viewing
it  as  a  dry  measure,  it  was  half  the  choenix  and
l-96th  of  the  medimnus.  It  contained  very  nearly
a  pint  English.

It  is  thought  desirable  to  add  here  a  few  words
to  the  remarks  made  under  Mensura,  Ponuera,
and  QiTADRANTAL,  respecting  the  connection  be-
tween the  Greek  and  Roman  measures  of  weight
and  capacity,  according  to  the  views  of  Bockh.

At  this  point  the  Roman  and  Attic  systems  of
measures  coincide  ;  for,  though  the  ^4cnr\s  may
perhaps  have  varied  in  different  states  of  Greece,
there  is  no  doubt  that  the  Attic  ^eVrrjs  was  iden-
tical, both  in  name  and  in  value,  with  the  Roman
seatarius:  in  fact  the  word  ^4crrr]s  seems  to  be
only  an  Hellenic  form  of  seoctarius.  Also  the  Attic
Xovs  was  equal  to  the  Roman  congius,  for  the
le'cTTjs  was  the  sixth  of  the  former,  and  the  sex-
tarius  the  sixth  of  the  latter.  Further,  the  Attic
metretes  or  amphora  contained  12  x^^'s,  and  the  Ro-
man amphora  contained  8  congii ;  giving  for  the
ratio  of  the  former  to  the  latter  3  :  2  or  1^-  :  1.
Again,  the  Attic  medimnus  was  the  double  of  the
Roman  amphora,  and  was  to  the  metretes  in  the
ratio  of  4  :  3  :  and  the  Roman  modius  was  the
sixth  of  the  Attic  medimnus,  and  the  third  of  the
Roman  amphora.  Hence  the  two  systems  are
connected  by  the  numbers  2  and  3  and  their
multiples.

How  and  when  did  this  relation  arise  ?  It  can-
not be  accidental,  nor  can  we  suppose  that  the
Greek  system  was  modelled  upon  the  Roman,
since  the  former  existed  long  before  the  Roman
conquest  of  Greece.  We  must  therefore  suppose
that  the  Roman  system  was  in  some  way  adapted
to  the  Greek.  It  is  a  remarkable  circumstance
that  the  uncial  system  of  division,  which  character-
ised the  Roman  weights  and  measures  [As  ;  Un-
cia],  is  not  found  in  the  genuine  Roman  measures
of  capacity  (for  the  use  of  the  cyathus  as  the  micia
of  the  seoctarius  appears  to  have  originated  with
the  Greek  physicians  in  later  times) :  and  this  is
the  more  remarkable,  as  it  is  adopted  in  the  Greek
system  ;  the  Greek  amphora  being  divided  into  1 2
Xoes,  and  the  Roman  into  8  congii.,  instead  of  12.
In  the  Roman  foot  again,  besides  the  uncial  divi-
sion, we  have  the  division  into  4  palmi  and  16
digiti.,  which  seems  clearly  to  have  been  borrowed
from  the  Greek  division  into  4  irdKaiaraX  and  16
SaKTvXoi.  It  seems  therefore  highly  probable  that
the  Greek  system  of  measures  had  a  considerable
influence  on  that  of  the  Romans.

To  find  the  origin  of  this  connection,  we  nuist
4i  4


224;


ZETETAE.


look  from  the  measures  to  the  weights,  for  both
systems  were  undoubtedly  founded  on  weight.
The  Roman  amphora  or  quadrantal  contained  80
pounds  (whether  of  wine  or  water  does  not  matter
here),  and  the  congius  10  pounds.  Also  the  Attic
talent  was  reckoned  equal  to  80  Roman  pounds,
and  contained  60  minae.  Therefore  the  Attic
mina  had  to  the  Roman  pound  the  ratio  of  80  :  60
or  4  :  3.

Now  if  we  look  at  the  subject  historically,  we
find  all  the  principal  features  of  the  Roman  system
in  existence  as  early  as  the  time  of  Servius  TuUius.
We  must  therefore  seek  for  the  introduction  of
the  Greek  element  before  that  time.  At  that  early
period  Athens  does  not  appear  to  have  had  any
considerable  commercial  intercourse  with  Italy,
but  other  Grecian  states  had,  through  the  colonies
of  Magna  Graecia.  The  Phocaeans  at  a  very  early
period  had  a  traffic  with  the  Tyrrhenians,  the
Aeginetans  had  a  colony  in  Umbria,  and  Corinth
and  her  colonies  were  in  intercourse  with  the
people  of  Central  Italy,  besides  the  traces  of  Corin-
thian influence  upon  Rome,  which  are  preserved  in
the  legend  of  the  Tarquinii.  It  is  therefore  to  the
Aeginetico-Corinthian  system  of  weights  and  mea-
sures that  we  must  look  for  the  origin  of  Grecian
influence  on  the  Roman  sj'stem.  Now  the  half  of
the  Aeginetan  mina  had  to  the  Roman  pound  the
ratio  of  10  :  9  ;  and  since  the  Aeginetan  mina  was
to  the  Attic  as  5  ;  3,  we  get  from  the  comparison
of  these  ratios  the  Attic  mina  to  the  Roman  pound
as  4  :  3,  as  above.

{Bockh,  Metrologisehe  Untersuchungen,  xi.  §
10.)  [P.  S.]

X  YSTARCHUS.     [Gymnasium,  p.  581,  b.]

XYSTUS.     [Gymnasium,  p.  580,  b. ;  Hor-

TUS.]


ZACORI    {(dKopoi).    [Akditui.]

ZETE'TAE  (CnT-nral)  Inquisitors,  were  extra-
ordinary officers,  appointed  by  the  Athenians  to
discover  the  authors  of  some  crime  against  the
state,  and  bring  them  to  justice.  Public  advocates,
ffvvfjyopoi  or  Kar-fiyopoi,  were  sometimes  directed
to  assist  them  in  this  duty.  Frequently  the  court
of  Areopagus  performed  the  office  of  inquisitors  for
the  state,  and  indeed  it  was  the  duty  of  every  ma-
gistrate to  assist  in  procuring  information  against
offenders.  ( Andoc.  de  Myst.  3,  5,  6  ;  Dinarch.  c.
Demosth.  pp.  90,  97,  ed.  Steph.)  ZTjrrjToi  were  more
frequently  appointed  to  search  for  confiscated  pro-
perty, the  goods  of  condemned  criminals  and  state
debtors  ;  to  receive  and  give  information  against
any  persons  who  concealed,  or  assisted  in  conceal-
ing them,  and  to  deliver  an  inventory  of  all  such
goods  (aitoypdcpeiv)  to  the  proper  authorities.  The
delinquent  was  then  prosecuted,  either  before  the
(TvvhiKoi,  or  it  might  be  before  the  CrjTr^Tai  them-
selves, if  their  commission  extended  to  the  holding
of  an  riyipLOvla  ZiKaffTtipiov.  Any  person,  how-
ever, who  thought  himself  entitled  to  the  goods,
which  were  the  subject  of  such  information,  or  to
any.  part  of  them,  might  prefer  a  complaint  against
the  inquisitor  or  informer,  and  petition  to  have  the
goods  or  the  part  to  which  he  was  entitled,  or  their
proceeds,  restored  to  him.  This  proceeding  was
called  ivetriffK-nniia.  [Syndici  ;  Paracata-
BOLE.]     Inquisitors  were   also  called  Moo-Trjpes.


•ZONA.

On  one  particular  occasion  a  set  of  conmiissionera
called  crvKKoyiis,  were  appointed,  to  discover  the
property  of  the  oligarchs,  who  were  concerned  in
overturning  the  democracy.  (Harpocr.  «.  v.  Ztjttj-
T^s :  Bockh,  Publ.  Econ.  of  Athens^  p.  158,  2d
ed.  ;  Meier,  Att.  Proc.  pp.  110,  112,  566.)  See
also  the  speeches  of  Lysias  de  Publ.  Bon.  and  de
Aristoph.  Bon.  [C.  R.  K.]

ZEUGI'TAE  iCivytraC).     [Census.]

ZONA,  dim.  ZO'NULA,  also  called  CI'NGU^
LUM  {C<^vT],  C'i'yu.a,  C^(Trrip,  Herod,  i.  215,  iv.
9  ;  ixirpa),  a  girdle  or  zone,  worn  about  the  loins
by  both  sexes.  As  in  the  case  of  some  other  arti-
cles of  dress,  the  distinction  between  the  male  and
female  girdle  was  denoted  by  the  use  of  a  diminu-
tive, C'^vq  or  ^oioTT^p  being  more  properly  a  man's,
C^uiov  a  woman's  girdle.  (Moeris  Att.  s.  v.)  The
finer  kinds  of  girdles  were  made  by  netting,
whence  the  manufacturer  of  them  was  called  (uvio-
irKdKos.  (Th.  Magister,  p.  413,  ed.  Oudendorp  ;
Zonarius.)

The  chief  use  of  this  article  of  dress  was  to
hold  up  the  tunic  ((dovuvaOai,  Callim.  Dian.  12),
which  was  more  especially  requisite  to  be  done
when  persons  were  at  work,  on  a  journey,  or  en-
gaged in  hunting.  Hence  we  see  the  loins  girded
in  the  woodcuts  of  the  boatman  at  p.  512,  of  the
shipbuilders  at  pp.  98,  141,  of  the  goat-herd  at
p.  886,  of  the  hunters  at  p.  989,  and  of  Diana  at  p.
276.  The  C^^yrj  or  ^ajorr^p  is  also  represented  in
many  ancient  statues  and  pictures  of  men  in  armour
as  worn  round  the  cuirass.  Among  the  Romans
the  Magister  Equitum  wore  a  girdle  of  red  leather,
embroidered  with  needlework,  and  having  its  two
extremities  joined  bj'  a  very  splendid  and  elaborate
gold  buckle.  [Fibula.]  (Lydus,  de  Mag.  ii.  13.)
The  girdle,  mentioned  by  Homer  {II.  iv.  135,  v,
539,  X.  77,  xi.  236),  seems  to  have  been  a  con-
stituent part  of  the  cuirass,  serving  to  fasten  it  by
means  of  a  buckle,  and  also  affording  an  additional
protection  to  the  body,  and  having  a  short  kind  of
petticoat  attached  to  it,  as  is  shown  in  the  figure
of  the  Greek  warrior  in  p.  712.  In  consequence
of  the  use  of  the  girdle  in  fastening  on  the  armour,
^uvvvcrQai  or  ^waaffQai  meant  to  arm  one^s-self
(Horn.  //.  xi.  15),  and  from  this  circumstance
Athene  was  worshipped  under  the  character  Z«-
aTrjpia.  (Paus.  ix.  17.  §  2.)  The  woodcuts  at
pp.  712,  854  show  that  the  ancient  cuirass  did  not
descend  low  enough  to  secure  that  part  of  the
body,  which  was  covered  by  the  ornamental  kilt
or  petticoat.  To  supply  this  defect  was  the  de-
sign of  the  mitra  (fxirpa),  a  brazen  belt  lined  pro-
bably on  the  inside  with  leather  and  stuffed  with
wool,  which  was  worn  next  to  the  body  (Horn.
II.  iv.  137,  187,  V.  707,  857  ;  Schol.  in  II.  iv.
187),  so  as  to  cover  the  lower  part  of  the  abdo-
men. The  annexed  woodcut  shows  the  outside
and  inside  of  the  bronze  plate  of  a  mitra,  one
foot  long,  which  was  obtained  by  Brondsted
(Bronzes  o/Siris,  p.  42)  in  the  island  of  Euboea,
and  is  now  preserved  in  the  Royal  Library  at
Paris.  We  observe  at  one  end  two  holes  for  fast-
ening the  strap  which  went  behind  the  bodj',
and  at  the  other  end  a  hook  fitted  probably  to  a
ring,  which  was  attached  to  the  strap.  A  portion-
of  a  similar  bronze  plate  is  engraved  by  Cay  Ins
(Rec.  d'Ant.  v.  pl.  9Q.  fig.  1).

Men  used  their  girdles  to  hold  money  instead
of  a  purse.  (Plaut.  Merc.  v.  2.  84  ;  Gellius,  xv
12;  Sueton.  Vim.  16.)     The  wallet  [Pera]  was


ZONA.


ZOPHORUS.


1223


fastened  to  the  girdle  ;  and  still  more  frequently
the  fold  of  the  tunic,  fonned  by  tucking  it  up,
and  called  sinus^  was  used  as  a  pocket  to  carry
•whatever  -was  necessary.

As  the  girdle  was  worn  to  hold  up  the  gar-
ments for  the  sake  of  business  or  of  work  requiring
despatch,  so  it  was  loosened  and  the  tunic  was
allowed  to  fall  down  to  the  feet  to  indicate  the
opposite  condition,  and  more  especially  in  preparing
to  perform  a  sacrifice  (veste  recincta^  Virg.  A  en.  iv.
518;  Ovid,  Met.  vii.  182),  or  funeral  rites  (discincti,
Sueton.  Am/.  100;  incindae,  Tibull.  iii.  2.  18).

A  girdle  was  worn  by  young  women,  even  when
their  tunic  was  not  girt  up,  and  removed  on  the
day  of  marriage,  and  therefore  called  C'"'''^  irapde-
viK^.  (Jacobs,  Anthol.  ii.  p.  873  ;  trapOivov  fiirpTqu,
Brunck,  4naL  iii.  299;  Sen.  Oed.  ii,  3.  17;  Horn.
Od.  V.  231  ;  Longus,  i.  2  ;  Ovid.  Epist.  Her.  ii.
116,  ix.  QQ.,  Festus,  s.  v.  Cingulum  ;  Catull.  ii.  1 3,
Ixiv.  28.)     The  Flora  in  the  museum  at  Naples


(see  the  annexed  woodcut)  shows  the  appearance
of  the  girdle  as  worn  by  young  women.


A  horse's  girth,  used  to  fasten  on  the  saddle
[Ephippium],  was  called  by  the  same  names,  and
was  sometimes  made  of  rich  materials,  and  em-
broidered in  the  most  elaborate  manner.  (Ovid.
Rem.  Am.  23G  ;  Claud.  Epig.  34,  36.)  These
terms,  zona  and  cingulum^  were  also  used  to  sig-
nify the  five  zones  as  understood  by  geographers
and  astronomers.  (Virg.  Georg.  i.  233;  Plin.  H.N.
ii.  68  ;  Macrob.  Som.  Scip.  ii.)  [J.  Y.]

ZOTHORUS  {C<^(\>6pos  or  ^i6.Cu}fia\  the  frieze
of  an  entablature.  (See  Columna,  p.  324,  a,  and
the  woodcuts.)  [P.  S.]


TABLES  OF  GREEK  AND  ROMAN  MEASURES,  WEIGHTS,  AND  MONEY.


Table

I.  Greek  Measures  of  Length.
(1 )  Smaller  Measures.
II.  Roman  Measures  of  Length.

(1)  Smaller  Measures.
III.  Greek  Measures  of  Length.

(2)  Land  and  Itinerary.
IV.  Roman  Measures  of  Length.

(2)   Land  and  Itinerary.
v.  Greek  Measures  of  Surface.
VI.  Roman  Measures  of  Surface.
VII.  Greek  Measures  of  Capacity.

(1)  Liquid  Measures.
VIII.  Roman  Measures  of  Capacity.

(1)  Liquid  Measures.
IX.  Greek  Measures  of  Capacity.

(2)  Dry  Measures.

X.  Roman  Measures  of  Capacity.
(2)  Dry  Measures.
XI.  Greek  Weights.
XII.  Greek  Money.

XIII.  Roman  Weights.

(1)  The  As  and  its  Uncial  Divisions.

XIV.  Roman  Weights.

(2)  Subdivisions  of  the  Uncia.
XV.  Roman  Money.     (1)  Before  Augustus.

XVI.  Roman  Money.     (2)  After  Augustus.


In  the  construction  of  these  Tables,  the  same
authorities  have  been  used  as  those  referred  to  in
the  articles  in  the  body  of  the  work.  Particu-
lar acknowledgment  is  due  of  the  assistance  which
has  been  derived  from  the  Tables  of  Hussey  and
Wurm.  The  last  two  Tables  (of  Greek  and  Roman
money)  have  been  taken  without  alteration  from
Mr.  Hussey 's,  because  they  were  thought  incapable
of  improvement,  except  one  addition  in  the  Table
of  Attic  money.  All  the  calculations,  however,
have  been  made  de  novo^  even  where  the  results
are  the  same  as  in  Mr.  Hussey's  Tables.

The  Tables  are  so  arranged  as  to  exhibit  the
corresponding  Greek  and  Roman  measures  in  direct
comparison  with  each  other.  In  some  of  the  Tables
the  values  are  given,  ndt  only  in  our  several  mea-
sures, but  also  in  decimals  of  a  primary  unit,  for
the  purpose  of  facilitating  calculations.  In  others,
approximate  values  are  given,  that  is,  values  which
differ  from  the  true  ones  by  some  small  fraction,
and  which,  from  their  simplicity,  will  perhaps  be
found  far  more  useful  for  ordinary  purposes  than
the  precise  quantities,  while  the  error,  in  each  case,
can  easily  be  corrected.  Fuller  information  will
be  found  under  Mensura,  Nummus,  Pondera,
and  the  specific  names,  [P.  S.j


TABLES  OF  WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES.


CO
00

1^


»o


«3

CO
CO

ip        o

A  CO


05


W3

00

CO


O  r-l


»o

O  —I

CD  00

<b  6


CO


»o

CO

CO

O

<M

"^

OQ

CO

a

§

to

(M

lO

00

Jr-

^

CO

t^

Q

CO

OS

^

^H

CO

CO

*o

S

»o

S5

^

1^

9

<N

»o

.»o

1— 1

f-^

rH

M<

<o

1


«


•    4

.1

•  t

^  I

*o     I


<N


1

o
O


3-


O


-3


-h


(M


(M


00


»o


-t  ht


ei|eo


<M


-!o


<>1


»o


<N


CO


(M


00


CO


*ho


-tN


O)


Clio

G<1


CO


CO


C^


CO


<

a.

p


CO       "^


CO         00


»o


CO


CO  00


00        -^


TABLES  OF  WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURED


122:


00

Tt<

0^

^

""^

»>'

00

0

<N

t-

Oi

C^

-•f

s

(N

1-

co

Tf

0

l:^

•g

i;-

?^

5

r-

^

U3

^

M

<M

ob

*"•

<N

»b

^

1

R

i^

:;

r

r

^

1—^

**•

§

fe

>o

«>

I^

'S

0

0

&

00

§

CO

C<J

^

30

^

<M

t^

to

"rt

0

0

<>i

1-

Ci

5

■^

B

A

r-l

*3

0

H

Q

M

H

i5

H^

D
Q

<

•
1

I

•

^
•

t
I

•

•

1
1

H

0
H

CO

H
0

1

I

•

I

•

1

1

1

^

c»'

H

tii

S

tf

^

t)

-N

W3

1

•

•

•

1

1

1

•<

J^

H

S

/^

C3

g

H

*-»3

CQ

»-]

f

1

03

•

1

P

1^

•^

H

<

eS

00

n

CO

1

•

1

i

D
0

fH|^

•5»

Ph

1^

••—

1

m

i^

dr

^!«

s

^

•— •

a

■3

'

fS
s

m

E

s

^h

wleo

C^

g

CO

^

to

«)

5

"■

»

CO

05

(N

»o

CO

01

tJ

1— t

--

l-H

•^

To

-h

-f

<M

CO

0

rf

0

-

c.

(M

«


•r;  t>
*^  X
be  ^

.5  >»

i"!


rt  o


iio

«    ^^

cc  ^  "8

§  „  ._
« -^  "^  ^

c  aT  a
0^3  ^
«"  .2  ,«  'o

'^  ■=  ^   M

to  »r  o  o

.s  .t;  ^00
>  *  ■£  s

^  s  5  I2-

*®  «-  '^    2    3

■5     W!      E      «-.   -2


S


li-
lt

'3  e


.8


3
o


o  —


■?  o


•&,-=


B


rj4?


*;  s  of
.2       o


1228


TABLES  OF  WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES.


i

»o

«5

^

CO

^^

CO

i-H

iO

^

^

^

J

1— I

(N

CO

00

CO

i-H

»o

•\

»»

"

o

CO

CD

O

^

00

--^

C?i

CO

CO

^

^

<M

CO

O

o

^

CO

CO

J>.

'?f«

<M

iO

o

£

CO

o

Q

— i.

<M

»o

CO

CO

1—1

CO

<N

'^

00

CO

t^

l_H

Ui

•-H

<M

-^

CM

Tfl

»o

1

•«

n

^

^

•>

^

^

:j

^

•»

»i

CO

CO

s

s

es

lO

00

O     .

i-H

1^

00

Oi

•o

^ —

«>^

Oi

00

1—

""^

0^

<N

Tf

1-H

Oi

rt<

W5

a>

00

CO

CO

Tt<

00

00

gS

Q

^^

Oi

Tj^

05

CT)

o^

1:^

rf<

00

"

^

•

8

8

9

9

r-H

5

00
CO

05
00
CO

»

1

1

1

1

1

»

1

1

1

1

o

I:

1

Q

»

X

o

h4

^

v\

I

•

..•

t

1

■ .

O

1

1

:§

§

8

1

(N

o5

<:

^

•

1

I

■

,

«

•

1

^

1

^

CO

F?

1:-

Pi
<

S

o

0^

rH

g

Pi

CA

2

<i

'"'

C^l

Tt<

1— »

g

8

H
Q

1

•

«

I

1

<

1

*

<

<M

-*

00

g

8

8

<
Q

^

c5-

1

1

1

•

o

«

CO

(N

CM

00

o

00

8

CO

CO

J2;

s

a.

ch

o

O

O

o

8

CO

§

g

1

03

1

1

•

•

-<

■l

<

<M

-^

00

8

CO

o

8

§

1

g

1— 1

i

co-^

CO

<

Vj

Ul

CO

'

P4

•

•

1

M4

«(»

o

rH

8

r-l

8

1

8

00

1

o"

P

CO

■
•

•

r

Q

PQ

^

?

O

g

05

i

r-

tt"
^

I-H

«|co

'^

CO

?

Win

8

1

1

i-H

CO

<>r

-^

%

H

1— (

<M

cS

-^M

CO

o

t— t

8

8

1

8

<M

8

00

00

CO'

CO

8

CO

TABLES  OF  WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES.


1229^


CD

^

Oi

Tt<

Tf<

00

CO

(M

TfH

Jb-

(M

Tt^

Oi

^

CO

t*

r—^

<N

rft

a

»o

V3

O

00

»o

Oi


CO    Tt^    CO

rH      »0      O

1-H    00    O


J's


?


CO
O


05


Oi

CO


e3
bO

1-^


^
O


<D

CO


e^h


(M


C3

o

a


<M


CO


CO


CO

CO

CO

CO


O

g

^

»

h^

d

I-)

^h

>o

N_^

1^

1— 1

Ir^

«

<IJ

^

CO

CO

CM

o

s

8

U3

^

ir-

fe

Is

o>

«^

E'S

o  c

.„  "^

•g  CO

o,^

**  ■♦*

sJ

^  *^

s-^.

3    S>

C    b

0»O

•5^

■S'^S

•  3  a

^-a  S

w  -=.3

^?1

_£,•

t-I

^

**  j=^

l_^

1

•2CS!

U

3

uded
cle  0
00  G
ile.

^

1

V5

'^  •?.  ^  S

V

Eh

to  the  Greeks  are  in
a  degree  of  a  great
=  75  Roman  miles  =
about  7-lOOthsof  a

>*

W
H

2

To

■5

O

«    3    S^

P

«i3

H

H

vi

c/J

i|Q.^

cc

.^

w

•1    .    .     01

P^

TS

o

ures  most
iles  conta
namely,
difFerenc

H
O

Pi

;zi

;3

-Si

■ff

\— '

meas
te  m
ate;
dthe

V— '

t4

&!.§§

08

fS

(U    CO     o   «5

F,

0)

he  for
glish
appr
9-019

<

1

sTP^'s   II

0^

w

•

SuSS

^

"^  ^.2

£  S-g  «

J  mo

e  nu
whi
mile

2  ♦*       .  2

relat
t  the
some
Engl

"

•5  =  «r-2

der  to  show
is,  of  course,
in  the  Tabl
of  a  degree

o.2'a  3

♦  -^'-s  §

0)  *5

1280


TABLES  OF  WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES.


^

CO

CO

1

CO

»o

CO

<M

-f

Ol

Oi

1^

00

♦

<M

pH

CO

eo

1^

.-4

<N

2J

9

a>

oq

rf<

Op

CO

9

OS

Wm^

CO

(M

«b

O

1

CO

3

CO

o

CO

Ir-

»o

^

i-H

a

2i

■§

s

2

s

CO

;o

o>

*-

i:

CO

V

p^

4J!

CD

CO
V3

g

CO

«

Tf<

OJ

00

t^

CO

*o

&;

(jq

CO

00

1^

CO

CO

Q

00

CvJ

1— I

CO

*o

(?>!

3

'-'

^

i

s

s

s

s

00

1:^

»o

c^

•-<

w

o^

1

1

•

1

1

1

1

1

1

I

•

•

t

■

1

•

1

■

•

1

1

CO*

Pi^

ffj

x

D

•

t

»

•

■

•

o

w

cu

<J

o

»

«

^

<:

•

1

t

•

t

0

e

-fli

«

^

1^

^'S

§_

"l^

>^

s

«

<

•

1

1

•

S

2

"s

-(N

CO

S

w

o

s

J/2

3-

<M

CO

(M

I

1

t-H

8

1

iff-

i

00

3?

s

8

2

3

►-)»

'fe

<

i

a*

«

(M

CO

CO

t^

(n

CK»

"^

<M

■i

CO

o

CO

I'

8

§

CO

1—1

£

J

s

5^

1  I


5        -o


t


TAB

LES  (

DF  >\

^EIG

HTS

AND

MEi^

lSUR

ES.

1231

^J

^

1

^

to

!>.

«5

•M-

t^gy*

=

g

^

Th

(M

00

CO

r-

o

CO

»o

»o

5

s

05

*

(N

1-^

op

op

9

00

^

c^

h-

«M

'  H

^

6

03

»o

Oi

r^

»o

O)

'S

'£.

05

00

00

<M

CO

00

o

CO

CO

^

f^

f— <

(M

t— (

<N

2,

1

««

^

00

(N

Oi

Oi

Oi

o>

t^

1

H

•*

y—<

rH

CO

CO

^

^

'O

1^    s

o
o

•V

£

R

R

^

'^

<M

o

c^

T-H

i    y

k^

^    8

.•

s

rH

''f

00

s    «•'

Ul

5

2

^

:i

Vs

s

*v

<M

o^

E»              "tS

<3

'^

r}^

5         «o

g     i

>o

r  -i

^

s

<M

lO

t^

00

CO

09

J          «t

^

^

Tf"

Jt-

05

CO

l-H

CO

J>.

01           .^

8

^

<N

CO

qp

00

CO

CO

*?•

<N

Op

"5

fa

rt<

(f^l

I— (

<N

^

(fl

»b

1—

00

'i;       '^

Oi

12

CO

Oi

Jh-

r^

00

C^

o

o

u

T^

C<|

CO

»o

i-H

G>q

»o

I-H

»j

«

c^

CO

co"

1^

rfn"

00-^

^^

o

d

»— (

(N

lO

to

1—4

is
*>

is

_

*o

%

•

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

.2

1

m

1

3

^     1

•

t

1

1

,

•

•

g

a
!3

;3

^

M"

i"    \

1  i

03

P

1

g

8

8

t

•

«

i

*
1

1

1
•

t
t

«

W

1

1

1-^  •-•

<M

^

1

i

Q

3

1

^-4

"^

00

CO
f— »

i

1

11. "•

ill

55

<

1

1

<

O

1— 1

CO

all

;o

(M

1

i

IS-  «

o

I

^

1

»o

;*■

§

8

1

<>f

00*^

i

a'

S3
1

<1

I— 1

rf

5§

1— t

%

»o

»o

8

cT

?5

P

Q

o

S  *'    0,    1

<

8

^

1

CO

rfT

1

U3

1

i

1:232


TABLES   OF  WEIGHTS   AND   MEASURES.


c

^

-^

-R

-S

-S

^lao

H*

rH|M

i-<

CO

a        ri

c«

u

C

S

^

2

R

:j

::

S

«>

R

s

R

5

CO       c;

<

i

00

CO

O

1— t

<M

^

00

(M

"^

00

^O

CO

00         <M

o

o

O

o

O

1— t

(M

rl*

O)

J:^

O              r^

Q^

>o

CO          lO

^

a

1

R

:i

:j

::

R

R

:5

Ji

:i

:5

»0          00

1

•

1
1

1
1

1

1

1
1

1

1
i

1

1

t
1

1           i

,  ^  <:  S

GO

?§

•

■

I

I

1

1

a

0

1    '

^  m

»

n

1-

0)

<
P

1— 1

05

•

1

1

1

1

1

o

•i

X

00

<M

Q

%D

I^

I

•

1

1

1

1

1

14

CO

00

1-

<M

<M

i

5:

i-rt

Cf

•

1

1

1

i-

<M

00

-

a

-^

CM

2

S

H

<M

^

00

00

00

CO

•<

■

1

1

W

o

CO

iO

h4

o
<5

1

1

B-

i

1-^

CO

CO

I— •

1:^

CO

00

X

5

(M

00

<N

CO

CO

cq

s;-

:^

^

•— (

1— 1

I

•<»

(M

Tf

CO

(M

00

00
00

o

CO

;^

a.

^

<M

CO

^1*

.Mie,

V3

-h

»o

^

o

1

O
00

g

v^

(M

Ir-

CO

CO

00

CO

5

X

Ol

Tt<

f

<N

»o

O

1— 1

g

8

§

a

8

i

TABLES    OF   WEIGHTS   AND   MEASURES.


1233


«

tn

(U

C

-e

"E

^i»

.Hirt*

«,«

r-H

CO

£

5

-

g

Pu,

X

g

o

<

i

•*

•\

»\

•^

•»

5

:^

CO

c:)

GO

l-H

«

(M

00

<N

Tt^

oo

CO

CO

'^

00

a

9

9

r-^

(M

Tt^

Oi

1--

9

O

^

^

v:)

t^

CO

i-H

w

g

iO

1— j

:;

^

S

li

!i

!^

j;

cq

W3

r-H

el

l-H

o

1

1

1

1

.

1

1

1

1

1

•

1

•

1

1
<5

■

1

t

■

•

1

1

I

'

1

1

1

•

1

(5

'.

1

-3
o

O

CO
t3

1

•

1

1

,£5

1

1

<1

a

CO

«*

c8

<1

CO

CO

o

pq

^

t5

^

Q
&

1^

1

•

■5

,£3

1

f

1

TtH

00

8

1— t

»-?

1

1

•

o

C

(/J

CO

CO

00

8

OS

•<.:

a

Q

(M

00

CO

CO

p

w

(M

^

Oi

l-H

f

1

03

i

1

a
s

(M

^

CO

g

CO

O

00
CO

1

1

(N

^

00

00

1— 1

Jt-

s

a

^

Hn

CO

CO

CO

CO

CO

IS

'4

I— •  .

u

1-H

Tt<

CD

cq

GO

00
00
CO

CO

I— I
1— (

CO

o

CO

4

K

HH*.>


1^34


TABLES    OF   WEIGHTS   AND   MEASURES.


*

<f.

|o

-J—

1

I

"P

•"•irt

'^

«l<5<

1—f

(N

:5

R

*

1

t

++

^

■:      •»

:i

:;

:i

^

:j

1^

<M

tN

O

JS

nS

1

i

s

(N

'5P

S

!

CO

1

3

s

^

«— 1

,_^

o

•<^

•k

O

1

1

•

•

1

I

1

1

)>H

l-<

>

r2

|h'

-^

g

•

■

I

1

1

1

1

o

■

H

o

•

1

■

1

4

«

i

1

W

H

n

o

m

w-

•

•

1

•

I

1

1

s

O

Pi?

rJl

(^

u*

S

55

<

<

CO

1

»

■

^^

•

:^

e

H

CO

1

Q
u

t-H
H
H

<1

I

t

1

i

s

s

II— 1

1

(M

1— t

1

'^

00

^

1

1-4

H

^*

t-i

•

t

^

W

>— 1

t

iK

<

i

(M

00

CO

g

>

2

<M

rj^

CO

1— t

§3

1—1

H
o
o

;!

v\

%

^

00

2

s

00

o

^

%

^

2

i

CD

<M

^

§

1— 1

03

i-H     ,

•

^^

O

1

o

•—1

8

§

1

i

l-H

TABLES   OF   WEIGHTS   AND   MEASURES.


1235


*

bo

-e

^\»

rH|^

^l'^

l-H

r

:;

es

g

*M

Q

CO

<

J
3

•»

S

s

s

2

^

»-*

++

CM

c

C<J

00

<M

"^

00

CO

00

CO

9

9

rH

(N

^

<?

CO

CO

£

1^-

1^

«•

(3

j2

s

•«

5

n

R

s

j;

r-t

'  'es

o

t

•

1

■

1

1

1

•

1

1

t

1

I

t

•

1

'

1

•

•

•

1

1

1
1

m

■

■

•

•5

,

<:g

1

0

oj

^

^

O

<

1

1

1

1

s

•-3
1

a

S

CO

,j3

s

■<

S

>4

^

H

Q
1-5

1

t

1

o

e?

a

'a

00

CO
I—I

•f

(M

CO
f— 1

^

•

1

B

s

3

S

CO

T^

CO

s

O?

Xi

e3

■

•fe-

1

<M

^

00

s

00
CO

r— (

^

^|N

CO

CD

1— t

CO
05

CO

1— 1

c3

1

O

-^

;o

cq

s

00

00
CO

1

lA

■"■■■

4k2

o


2       eg


}2?,r>


TABLES   OF   WEIGHTS   AND    MEASURES.


TilBZ.£      XI.

GRECIAN   WEIGHTS.


1

Ratios  of  tlie  three

cbief  Systems.

Aeginetan  :  Euboic  or
Aeginetan  :  Solonian  oi
Euboic  :  Solonian

old  Attic
'later  Attic*

-

or
or

:  :       6
::       5
:  :  1383-
::  100
:  :     25*

5
3

100

72
18

The  Aeginetan  Talent
Euboic            „
Solonian  *       „

=   6000  Aeginetan  Drachmae
=  5000
=  3600

=   7200  Euboic
=   6000       „
=  4320       „

^^

10,000  Solonian
8333^    „
6000       „

*  Also  called  the  Attic  Silver  Taleiit.     When  Attic  weights  are  spoken  of  without  any  farther  dis-
tinction, these  are  generally  intended.


1

Eorad*

Approccimate.    \

lb.

oz.

grs.

lb.

nz.

grs.

Obol  CO€oK6s)               -             -             -             -             _

1

95

9

18-4721
110-831
145-831^  t

'5

100

99
i
99

20

99
99

6

Drachma

(Apaxf^v)       -      .         -        ,       -

600

100

Mina  (Mm)               -             .             .

30,000

6000

60        1   Talent  (TaXavrou)

*  In  this  and  the  other  tables  the  English  weights  used  are  those  of  the  avoirdupois  scale  as  fixed
by  statute  ;  namely,  the  grain  =  the  Troy  grain,  the  ounce  =  4371  grains,  the  pound  =  16  ounces  ==
7000  grains.  f  Or  -^  of  an  oz.


Exact.

Approximale.   \

3.    Euduiu   or  ja.\j.\v  vrouxiuez-uiai    w  eig^sixs.''

lb.

oz.

grs.

lb.

oz.

99

99

grs.
93i

99

Obol       -

.              -

99
1

79

„

5
2

15-393^
92-361 IJ-
48-611^
291-631-

99
»>

H

80

()•

Drachma

600

100

Mina            -             .             -             -

36,000

6000

(;0       1  Talent      -

*  See  pp.  933,  b.,  934,  a.     It  is  here  assumed  that  the  Attic  commercial  mina  was  exactly  138-§
silver  drachmae,  not  138,  as  stated  in  the  decree.    The  difference  is  not  quite  half  a  grajn  in  the  drachma.


4.  Attic  Commercial  "Weigrlits  increased^*

Exact.

Approximate.

lb.   1  oz.

grs.

lb.

H

90

oz.

99

grs.

99
99

1  Mina  =  150  Drachmae  (silver)                ...
5  Minae  =  6  Minae  (commercial)
1  Talent  =  65  Minae  Ccommercial)

1

f7

88t

6

14

350
291-6^
145-8^

*  See  p.  934,  a.

+  Here,  as  in  the  preceding  table,  the  commercial  mina  is  taken  as  equal  to  138|-  drachmae,  not  138.


S.  Attic  Silver  -Weiglits.

1              Exact.

Approximate.  1

lb.

oz.

grs.

lb.

9»

60

oz.

99

grs.
12
70

99

Obol       -

99
99

57

99

99

15

11-0833^
66-5*
87-5t

6

Drachma

600

100

Mina               ...              -

36,000

6000

60       1  Talent

*  This  value  is,  if  any  thing,  too  small.     Bockli  makes  it  67'4.     Respecting  other  scales  of  weight,
lee  Pondera.  '  f  Or  ^  of  an  oz.


TABLES   OF    WEIGHTS    AND    MEASURES.


1237


a

CO

^

••-^

O^l

lO

^

^

^

r

f— 1

CO

CO

(M

>o

»o

•^

*"

•^

£

r— 1

00

<M

'—t

OO

(N

CO

(>^

-d

:^

I\

-

-

--

CO

Tt<

CO

C^

l:-

CO

CO

r

-M-

«;

•^

•^

•^

•^

•^

•^

-^

•^

•^

»— (

CO

""^

IQ

CO

%^

R

•^

r.

•\

■^

»v

•"

'^

'^

"

•^

^

—

^ ^^

;i.

■

1

1

1

1

i

1

o

-8

1

1

i

I

1

1

I

1

'

1

2^
O

J-

2

<

1

1

•

',

1

1

1

o

&
k

<

s

1

S

8

^

g

V

£-

^_

2

H

<M

i2

^

H

<

o

o

1

,

o

^-^

Q

U2

o

•

)<

cn

y  .

CO-

*s

/■^

>

^

"O

£

o

«

p

oq

^

8

5

8

's.'

•fj

O

o

CO

1

•

I

1

1

<iS

1

^

^h

CO

CO

g

<

^-N

I— t

(M

Tj^

00

1

cnT

w

X

o

Ol

S

l-H

o

1

1

<

1

r.!e<

(N

CO

CO

03

r— (

8

CO

§

u

o

i?

O

W

00

o

S

3^

>— <

o

<

1
1

1

3
O

'o
O

(M

CO

^

CO

,S

8

CO

cq

'^

CO

00

C<|

00

i-H

);2

o

^

X

o

oq

Tfi

CX)

(M

CO

00

g

8

3

(M

^

CO

CO

(>5

CO

00

CO
C5

I

1

oo''

00

'^

c;

(M

<

Q

1:^

Tf

00

CO

<M

2

i

CO

CO

CO

1— I

co"

CO

co"

O

h-l

(>f

o

•^

i^

"A

o

^

ai

X

a.

'«

O

flj

ij

'-S

•^

rt

e2

C3
3

o

1

_s

r

c

biD

5
>

-^

rt

tD

3

^

O

C

lU

a  J3

p

a;

«

^

12;

_

S

^

<U

tf

S

lU

2

^

-o

^:

12;

?4

?1

^

S

S

«!

i?

s

^

o

~  *

ca

t2

6

3

f  (

o

CI

,°',

03

3

O

1^

So'

CO

CO

o

C/5

^

O

"n*

S

0)

o
o

s-11

CO   a>   ^
bO  fl

?>

c

.2

3

01

a,

a>
>
a
o

-1

01

(U

Pi

r

^

M

o

-a

c

1

rr

"

cS

Ti

E

W

m

u

%

cB

o

u

c

u

a

«

'T

ej

fe

I

O

TS

c
o

r^i

c

?r

1

3

O

c
.2

O

01

0)

+  ■5

3

3

1

H

:?;

"o

(c

1

tn

>»

.

S

■|

t>3

c
"bb

c

>

1

>•

i^

0)

1

C

>

"W

,^

(1)

s

1-rt

br

■3

_G

1

2

^5S

3

a;
<

Is
<

)— <

r}<

i-i "

*

+-

►— (

m

H-l  -d

<

•«

g

4  k3


1238


TABLES   OF   WEIGHTS    AND   MEASURES.


wh

g

rnh

§>

-*l»

cb

^h

-lj«

CO

»o

'vD

iO

CO

CO

CO

CO

CO

S2

00

1^

1— (

r;-

00

iO

CO

»o

00

00

*P

O

6

CO

'^

<»

6

Tt<

1^

Q

rf<

1^

6

6

A

CO

o

O

CO

Jr^

iO

CO

c^

O

t^

t^

CO

CO

-*

^

Tt<

I— 1

(M

CO

CO

CO

1-^

oq

<M

cq

C^

J3

.HP
"S

Oh

6

«

f-H

r-i

(M

CO

"^

lO

CO

l>

00

Oi

o

1—4

3

T3

J-

*o

^

c
s
o

f2

0^

00

00

lr>-

CO

»o

Tj<

CO

<M

^

o

Ci

00

c«

r-H

^-

CO

>o

J^

05

CO

»o

1--

05

Q

oq

Cm

1— I

1— 1

<N

CO

Tfl

>o

i-—

00

o

1—"

CO

'^

O

s

Q

O

o

o

^

^

Q

1— 1

I— <

en

05

<M

00

Tfl

Q

CD

o>i

00

^

1

CO

(M

1

o

o

V

l-H

<N

CO

CO

Th

'^

»p

^

1,-

'E3

(U

Q

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

■

1

•

1

t

1
00

1

•

>

1

1

«

•

1

•

■

•

1

5

p

P

o

Z

cc

D

H

<

O

w

H

1

1

1

1

•

1

1

c3

:?

^ho

O

1

1

1

1

■

1

1

&

^
T?

1

s

0

rH|0>

r-l

r-H

1— (

J2;
o

OJ

X

s

•^

rHhC

n|»

r-h

So

1

1

.

OQ

1

•

o

0

1-

pq

■"^

1—1

•"^

-Hit.

Nk^

«^.

rfh

JO^

s

X

2

M

rt

•^

I—I

i-H

(3

g

»4

p

1

ph|co

r^h

^

«h

«|oe

(M

<

§J

OJ

»-<

f-H

i-H

— ^

o

1

1

1

h

.§

^25

s

s

-h

«|0

eo^J

^|o

(M

-HhO

«h

s

O

CO

C

.2^

C

1— t

1—1

f-(

1—1

<M

(M

-H}.

r-h

«h«

<N

-Hhj<

-h

cch.

CO

ffi

S

u

H

1— 1

rH

1— I

<N

<N

<N

H

1

C/J

-s

M

1

1

^

-h

«h

<M

«?

CO

«^

sr

-^

eg

'hIn

<M

?r

CO

CO

-^

»o

--In

CO

^

1

<M

-c^

^

t

W3

CO

^^^5
CO

00

Q

h5

1— 1

<M

CO

-^

vo

CO

t^

00

05

o

rH

I— t

TABLES   OF  WEIGHTS   AND   MEASURES.


1239


^

H

M

W

^4

^

H

^

ri

!zi

n

<l

<

^

H

P^

CO

c^

sf

rH

CO

t^

Tt<

CO

S

1

<M

J>-

Tf

O)

00

00

l^

CO

CO

Oq

<x>

CO

^

CO

0

r-

CO

<?5

Jb-

»p

r->

^

<N

^

<p

Q

61

ob

1^

»o

6

»o

0

6

Q

\r>

CO

i>

0

f— t

1— •

"

»o

i

1

4

•

1

1

1

1

1

•

«

i

•

•

t

1

•

■

1

1

1

•

•

I

t

t

1

•

1

1

•

•

i

•

1

i

<

0

1

1

•

I

1

I

1

i^

^

1

1

r— 1

b

P

O

•

•

•

1

1

1

w

03

tfy

^25

o

e8

HH

::3

CO

U

ph|(N

CO

CO

1— (

3

1—1

CO

1

•

•

'

0

Q

03

'3

rH|«

(M

^

00

<

w

1-5

1

.

t

•i

i

^

(M

CO

CO

1

05

■

(A

Q

(M

CO

Tl<

CO

p-i

(N

-^

CO

00

<M

<M

1

1

1

09

^

1

W

Tt<

00

<N

CO

i-H

00

1

C8        -

1

5

CO

CO

1—1

CO
CO

00

0^
1:-

00

I— 1

zn

1   T?    ^

I

1240


TABLES  OF  WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES.


a.

CD

^

^O

^"""

c

<—i

c^

CO

(M

»o

^

1— (

c»

CO

(N

«3

pC]

VO

CO

O

9

cq

»p

1—1

(N

ca  oq

^

"C

CO

»o

1^

<N

"

Pm

00  .-1

J^  r-t

ns

•5

!\

»>

S

-

<M

"^

00

1-H

•v

^

^

^

«>

^

^

n

J

S3

CQ

•>

•^

"^

•*

•V

•*

J\

S

1— <

00

%1

:i

:;

S

-

-

-

-

R

-

O

1

1

1

1

1

1     1

1

1

1

1

o

CO

03

■*«

&

o

§

^

<

eS

u

F^

O

1

1

1

1

,     1

1

.2

«

•      1

1

(3

c3

3

cj

o

QQ

0

'3

<M

CS

g

O?

I

I

1

•

1

1      1

'

i

oi

Tt<

s

s

m

_  ■

.2

1

1

1

•

'3

1

^

00

2

1     1

t

>

>h'

1

5i

c4

1

h3

a

O

oa

1

a

a>

c^

1

00

CO

1—4

S

1

n

S

.2
*3

OQ

1      •

n

|2i
<

1

1

<M

Tf

1

CO

?3

IT

>

'a
s

<

§

P^

CO

H

CO

H

CO

^

^

to

1

1

1

1

1

g

'

'

p

1

<1

f4

p^  -s

s_,

C4
H

2  £

o

P^

DO

<M

'^

flS

g

o

s

CQ

O    CP

fi

5z;

1

1

I

•

O

11

o  too

1

CO

N

"^

00

W

s

rs  fl

H
O

1;

1

1

1

1

1
1

03

(M

"^

00

CO
f— I

Si

*

*

e

«
"S

(M

^

00

CO
1— 1

n

M

1—4

P

^

»

1

1

U

OQ

W

■Si

,_•

0

t>

M

1

s

o

s

^

CO

CO

s

^

<1

1

Mh

<M

Tt<

00

CO

T— 1

8

s

O*

eS

§J

r5

1— (

(M

CO

CO

?

g

c§

!|

cc

CO

^

TABLES   OF   WEIGHTS   AND   MEASURES.


1241


>

^

^

o

kH

H

r^

n
<

h

rt

to

»o

1

.1°

»o

r^

lO

(M

00

»o

1:^

V3

5

CO

(M

CO

Jr^

»o

^

Im

CO

■^

cp

q>

00

t-

lO

oq

•»

£

"*

CO

w

CO

(M

(M

oo

ns

:i

::

^

•\

:i

-

CO

1>

t^

VO

CO

•»

•N

•V

•k

»\

^

»»

W3

00

CO

•e

•»

•»

•\

•V

•»

«\

«\

<\

1

*"*

^"^

^

rr:;rsssrr

•\

:i

1>

t

1

1

1

1

a

1

•

1

i

1

1

CO

^d

O

»o

c^

1

1

■

t

•

•

1

1

1

1

9

f

W5

u

o

oT

u

s

3

o

t

1

I

1

I

1

1

1

1

1

I

1

fl

cU

c<->

O

^

CO

'^

1

•

1

•

1

■

1

•

1

1

1

1

CS

^

w

3

*^

CO

1

(1)

3

1

t

•

1

1

1

1

.1

■

1

fl

1

CO

03

I— 1

6

'

'

1

1

1

1

1

o

3

-«1

1

B
o

1

09

QQ

P

i

H
C/2

■g

«

c3

a

P

O

o

'

■

1

f

•

BO

.2

*3

a

a
1

cq

c^

^

^

J3

0

fl

^

1

•

1

1

1

Q

<M

Tf^

00

o

o

p^

2

<M

tH

00

CO

^

M

^

s

P5

1

1

p

p

v»

CC

0.

.  ''f

00

CO

^

tiq

C3

•S

-loi

CO

CO

<M

Tt<

00

H

H

•— t

I— t

<M

-:h

fe
<

^

Pi

rHfrO

0:j

'^

00

CD

^

CO

t-^

s

1

--IN

rH

(M

CO

to

<M

^

s

I  Jf  D  E  X,


The  numerals  indicate  the  pages,  and  the  letters  a  and  b  the  first  and  second  columns  respectively.


A.

*A§a!ciaKos,  2,  a.
Aga|,  1,  a  ;  904,  a.
"AyaX/xa,  1060,  a;    1062,  b.
^hyajxiov  ypa<p-fi,  735,  b.
*AyaBoepyoL,  28,  b.
*Ayyapua,  94,  b.
^Ayyapos,  94,  b.
\\yyo9i]K7},  633,  b.
^AydKacTToi,  28,  b.
'AyeAcLTTjs,  28.  b.
*Ay4Xr],  28,  b.
"Ayrjixa,  29,  a.
*A-y7jTT,s,  242,  a.
'AyrjTopeioj^,  242,  a.
'Ay7]T6pLa,  242,  a.
'AyfjTup,  103,  a.
"AyKOLva,  790,  b.
'A7/CUA77,  366,  a  ;  5;: 8,  b.
Ay Kvpa,  791,  a.
'A7i'£T7js,  513,  b.
'A7opa,  32,  a.

,,      yv^aiKela,  35,  a.

„       TTArjOovaa,  35,  b  ;  304,  a  j
408,  b.
' Ay opau6fx.os,  18,  a;  36,  b.
'Ayopas  TrXrjdupr],  35,  b.
'AyopacTTTjs,  36,  a.
^Aypa(piov  ypacpi],  36,  b.
"Aypacpoi  vo/xoi,  804,  b.
'Aypd4>ov  fjL€TdWov  ypoupij,  37,  a.
'Ayptduios,  224,  a.
'Aypiuvia,  72,  a.
' Ay po7K OS,  892,  a.
'Aypopo/xoi,  72,  b  ;  623,  b.
^Ayporepas  ^vaia,  72,  b.
"Ayuios,  226,  a.
'A7yp(U(Js,  453,  b.
'Ayvprai,  73,  a.
'A7xto'T6fa,  594,  a  ;  595,  b.
'Aywvdpxai,  32,  a.
'Ayuves,  32  a  ;  402,  b.

„     aTifiTiToi,  1131,  b.

„     TtVTjTot,  399,  b;  1131,  b.
*A7coi'jorTat,  167,  a.
'AycovodlKai,  32,  a.
'A7a>i'o0eTai,  32,  a.
"ASdi^,  "Addicts,  14,  a.
"ASeict,  14,  a;  79,  a.
'Aoe'AcpiSovs,  595,  b.
"ASe\(p65,  595,  b.
'ASeo-TTOTot,  592,  a. ;  705,  a.
'A^vuaroi,  17,  b.
'ASto^ia,  14,  b.


ASvTou,  1105,  a.
Aeii/aDTai,  22,  a.
AftcrtToi,  970,  a.
Aficpvyla,  129,  a.
AeT({s,  149,  b  ;  523,  b.
Aeru/xa,  523,  b.
Ae\7]Tai,  166,  b.
Ae\r]Trjp€s,  166,  b.
A6\oe4Tat,  32,  a  ;  856,  a.
Atcuceta,  18,  a,
Alyia\ees,  1153,  b.
AlytKope7s,  1154,  a.
Alyivriruv  iopri],  20,  a.
AtVoX^Sf  20,  b.
At^ts,  20,  b.

AlyoKepws,  59,  a;   151.  b.
AtOovaa,  73,  b.
AIkiu,  100,  a.
Ai/ctos  St/cTj,  73,  a.
Atviy/jLu,  22,  a  ;  1034,  a.
Atw/f(Js,  225,  a.
Ar^.  149,  a.

AlavfivijTrjs,  27,  a,  32,  a.
At'x/t^,  587,  a.
Alx/Ji-o(p6poi,  587,  b.
'A/cati'o,  'A/ca/i/77,  2,  b.
'AKavdivi]  fiaa-Tixv,  903,  b.
'AKdreios,  789,  a.
'AKciTioj',  786,  a.
*'A«oTo^,  786,  a,
'AKfiSdiTov,  759,  b.
"Aicfiuv,  634,  b.
'Ako^u  fj.apTvpe7Vf  93,  b.
*A«ovm,  832,  a.
'Ak6vtiou,  589,  a.
'AKOvriafids,  589,  b.
^A«pa,  139,  a.
'AKpaTio-fut,  304,  a.
*AKpo9iviov,  433,  a.
'AKpoKipaia,  789,  b.
*AKp6\eiou,  433,  a.
'AKp6\ieoi,  451,  b  J  1063,  a.
'AKpoTr6\ei  iyyeypafXfievos,  iv,

37,  a.
'AKpc^TToAts,  6,  b  ;  1175,  a.
^AKpoardXiov,  786,  a.
'AKpoa-rSfjuou,  543,  b.
^AKpotpvaiov,  543,  b.
'AKpox^ipia,  583,  a.
'AKpwrripia^eiv,  7,  a  ;  995,  b.

'AKpUTTIplOV,  6,  b.

"A/cTia.  8,  b.
"AKvpos,  971,  a.
'Akwkt],  587,  a.
"A/cwv,  589,  a.


A\a€dpx'ns,  74,  a.
*A\d§aarpoy,  74,  a.
'AAo^ocTTpos,  74,  a.
"AAaSf  ixvcrrai,  453,  b.
'AAaf,  1003,  b.
'AAato,  74,  a.
'AKaKKOfj.4vi.os,  224,  a.
'AKeaia,  75.  b.
'AAeiTTTat,  75,  b.
'AKdirrifpiov,  76,  a  ;  190,  a.
'AA^Tis,  22,  b.
'AAta,  32,  b.

'AAiVSTjo-ty,  583,  a  ;  714,  a.
'AAKa0o?a,  74,  b.
'AAAa7«i,  729,  b.
"AAAt;!,  or  "AAAj^,  75,  b.
"AAmo,  883,  b.
"AKfxv,  1004,  a.
'AKoyias  ypa<pii,  76,  b.
'AKoyiov  ypoupr],  76,  b.
'AKoir-fiyiou,  1003,  b.
'AAr^pes,  585,  a.
^AKva-iSioi/,  257,  a.
'AKvaiou,  257,  a.
"AAvo-is,  257,  a.
'AAuTat,  831,  a.
AKvTdpxvs,  831,  a.
'AKcpeaiSoiai,  436,  a.
'AAwo,  76,  b.
AAaJo,  76,  b.
'AKooT],  or  'AAwTj,  53,  a.
"AAojs,  53.  a.

"Afia^a,  147,  b;  585,  b ;  923,
'Afial6TroSes,  587,  b ;  923,  a.
'AjjLapvvdia,  76,  b.
'Ap.apv(Tia,  76,  b.
' AjxSKosQTipioiov ,  2,  b.
'AjU^Acotrecos  ypa(pi],  2,  b.
'AAie<^AAo,  2,  a.
'Afi^poa-ia,  78,  b.
"AfxfjLa,  79,  a.
'A/xvr](TTla,  79,  a.
'AfxSpyn,  825,  b.
'A/jLirex^PT),  79,  a.
'AnTTLTrapes,  591,  b.
'AjuLnvKTijp,  91,  a.
"A/ixTryl,  91,  a.
^AfKpiapdXa,  79,  a.
'AiJL<pi€Kr](TTpov,  989,  b.
'AfjLcpiSoKos,  791,  a.
'AfitpiSfai,  136,  a.
'Afi(f)iSouKos,  1034,  b.
'AfX(pidp6iJLia,  82,  b.
*A/x<piddKafji.os,  425,  K
* A}j.(piKmv .  1 105,  b.


AncpiKTiores,  79,  a,
AfjL(t>lopKia,  82,  b.
AfKpiirpda-TvXos,  1105,  b.
'AiJ.(pia€r)Te7v,  596,  b.
'AficpiaToixos,  791,  a.
AiJ.(pi(popevs,  90,  a.
"AfjLcpKpoivTis,  769,  h  ;  975,  a.
'Aficpopevs,  90,  a  ;  971,  a.

„         ix^TprjT^s,  762,  a.
'Ai.i(pwfio(Tla,  82,  b.
"A/xcpcDTiSes,  975,  a.
'Ava§aeiJLoi,  424,  b.
'Ai/agoAeTs,  1074,  b.
'Afoy/coroi',  240,  b.
' AvayicoTpo^iay  168,  a.
'AvajKocpayia,  168,  a.
" AudyXvTTTa,  92,  a.
'AudyXvcpa,  92,  a.
'Aj'a7J'ci5;>i(riS,  1145,  b.
'A^'a7a)777S  St/CTj,  92,  a.
'Auayuyia,  92,  a.
'Ai^aSiKta,  106,  a.
'AuaeijiJ.aTa,  432,  b  ;  1063,  a.
' AvaKaKvKT7]pia,  738,  a.
'Am/ceio,  92,  a.
AvaKcipLiva,  432,  b.
AvaKeiov,  92,  a.
AvaKivr]jxaTa,  583,  a.
AvaKkriTripia,  92,  b.
AvaKKivQirdhT),  857,  b.
AvaKkivTpou,  673,  b.
AvdKpiais,  92,  b  ;   122,  b.
AuuKTopov,  1 105,  a.
Avd\T]i.L^a,  94,  a.
Aval,  990,  a.
Ai/a|a7({peja,  94,  a.
Ara|ypi'5ey,  213,  a.
ATOTraio-Toy,  344,  b.
AvaTTTvaaeiv,  484,  b.
Audppvais,  101,  b.
AvdaifXQs,  890,  b.
AvaToXi],  155,  b.
Auavp.axiou  ypacp-fj,  94,  a.
Avd<popov,  143,  a.
Ai'Spera,  1088,  b.
AvSpids,  1063,  a.
Av5po76wz/ia,  94,  b.
Av5poA7ji|/ia,  94,  b.
Avhpo\iii\iiov,  94,  b
AvSpo/meSr],  149,  b.
Ai'SpcSi'es,  425,  a.
Av5pcoj/ms,  423,  b.
Ai'euflwos,  478,  b.
Avei|/jo8oi)s,  595,  b.
Ai/e4/«{s,  595,  b.
Aveeia,  98,  b.
AvQ^arripia,  411,  b.
AveeaT7]pia>u,  223,  a  ;  224.  a.
Ave€iT(p6pia,  98,  b.
AvduTrwfj.o(ria,  399,  a  ;  403,  b.
Avodos,  1128,  a.
"AvottKoi,  135,  a.
"AvTeoy,  225,  a.
*AvTiy6ueia,  99,  a.
* Avr lyparpels,  578,  a.
'AvTiypacpT],  93,  a';  99,  b.
'AvrfSoo-ts,  98,  b.
'AvTiATjIis,  399,  a.
'AvT luSeia,  100,  a.
'AyriffTpeiTTa,  590,  b.
*AvTiTiix7\(Tis,  266,  b.


INDEX.

'ArTiTUTrey,  1181,  a.
'AvTKpcovia,  773,  b.
'AfTAta,  100,  a.
"AvTvl,  101,  a;  297,  b.
'AvToafioaia,  92,  b  ;  99,  b.
'Afi/TToSiiTos,  221,  a.
'A^iin],  1014,  a.
"Alovey,  183,  a.
"A^uu,  378,  a.
"Aop,  577,  a.
'A7rd7eAot,  28,  b.
'Airaytayf],  460,  a.
'Airarovpia,  101,  a,
' AiraTovpios ,  225,  a,
'AiraTovpiwv,  224  a ;  225,  a.
'ATrauAta,  738,  a.
'ATravMariipia,  738,  a.
'ATrekevdepia,  705,  a.
'ATreAeiJflepos,  704,  a.
"ATreAAa,  573,  a.
"ATreAAatos,  223,  a ;  224,  a.
^Air€viaxjTi(T/x6s,  514,  a.
"ATro€depa,  939,  b.
'AirogoTTjs,  394,  b.
A7ro70J'iKJs,  225,  a.
'Airoypaip-f],  103,  a.
'Airoypdcpcov,  103,  b.
'AirodeKTai,  1047,  b.
'Air65e(TiJ.os,  764,  b ;  1075,  a.
'Airodepaireia,  76,  a.
'Airodi]K7],  618,  a.
'ATTotKio,  313,  b.
*AiroiKoi,  313,  b.
*AiroKi]pv^is,  103,  b.
'AttSkXtjtoi,  27,  b.
*A7roAef4'6wy  Sjkt;,  418,  a.
*ATTo\\dovia,  104,  a.
''ArroiJ.aydaXiai,  305,  b.
'ATTOTTe/jApews  S'lKT],  418,  a.
'A7r<^^^a|is,  918,  b.
'Airdp'prira,  104,  b.
'Airocrraa-iov  S'ikt],  104,  b.
'ATTooTToAers,  104,  b.
'ATToreiX'O'M'^y,  1183,  a.
"ArroTeXeafxariKSs,  144,  b.
'AiroTiuav,  436,  b.
'AiroTifjL-nfia,    436,    b;    470,    a;

614,  b.
*ATroTiix7]ral,  764,  a.
'AttJ^ovo-zs,  104,  a.
*Air6(pa(ns,  99,  a  ;  100,  a  ;  1 28,  a.
'ATTocpopd,  104,  a.
'A'!roc()pddcs  rjfMepat,  104,  b.
'ATToxfipoToz/eri/,  122,  b;  271,  a.
*AiroxeipoTovia,  271.  a,
'Airpoa-Taaiov   ypa<p-t],     108,    a  ;

123,  b.
'ATTWfjLOcria,  513,  a.
'Apai6(rTvKos,  1 106,  a.
'Apdreta,  117,  a.
•A/)guA77,  889,  b.
'ApBvKis,  889,  b.
'Ap7d56is,  1154,  b.
^Apyias  ypacprj,  133,  a.

,,       vo/jLos,  133,  a.
'Apyvpiov,  808,  b.
'Apyvpiov  S'lKT],  133,  b.
'ApyvpTris  yrj,  132,  b.
*ApyvpoKOTTf7ou,  133,  b.
*'Ap7i;pos,  132.
'Apyvpd'vrjToi,  1034   b.


1243

'Ap7£6,  153.  a.
'ApSdAioj/,  555,  a.
'ApSdviov,  555,  a.
*ApSiodT}pa,  1001,  a.
"ApSts,  1001,  a.
"Apeios,  225,  a.

„      wdyos,  126,  b.
"ApecTKos,  345,  b.
•A/«d5;/em,  133,  b.
'ApiaTepoaTdrai,  280,  a.
'Api(TTiv5r]v,  127,  a.
'ApuTTOKparia,  134,  a.
'ApKTela,  214,  a.
*ApKT€veiv,  214,  a.
'ApKT€veadai,  214,  a.
"ApKToi,  214,  a.
"ApKTos  fieydkr],  147,  a.

,,      )UtK/)d,  147,  a.
ApKTovpos,  148,  a.
'ApKTo0vAa|,  148,  a.
"ApKws,  989,  b.

"ApAta,  378,  a ;  585,  b ;  753,  b.
'Apfidfia^a,  585,  b.
'ApfJLoyr],  910,  a.
'Apfxovia,  IIQ,  b.
'ApfioviKT},  773,  a.  I

'ApvuKis,  882,  a.
"ApoTpov,  1 1 7,  b.
"Apovpa,  138,  a;  753,  b.
'ApTrayri,  586,  b.
'ApTraTrjs  ypacpv,  586,  a.
'ApTTaa-rSv,  586,  b.
"ApTTT],  518,  a.
'A^^T]<l>6pia,  137,  b.
'A^^-qtpSpoi,    137,   b;    871,  b,

1100,  a.
'AprdSv,  137,  b.
^Apraixirios,  224,  a.
'ApTc/xlaia,  138,  a.
'Apreyufo-ioy,    223,   a;    224,   a j

225,  a.
*ApTep.i(Ti(iv,  224,  a ;  225,  a.
"Aprta  ^  Trepirra  Trai^eiy,  863,  a
'ApTid^civ,  863,  a.
'ApTiacrfj.6s,  863,  a.
'ApTOTTotJs,  921,  a.
^AproTTuXai,  305,  b  ;  921,  b.
'AproTTciAtSes,  305,  b.
'Aprvir^is,  1204,  a.
'ApvTUiva,  185,  b.
'Apxaipecrlat,  271,  aj  443,  b.
'Apx«*o»',  119,  a.
'Apxrj,  124,  a.
'Apx7j7€V97y,  470,  b.
'Apxiarpos,  1 1 9,  a.
'Apx'epfuy,  167,  a  ;  225,  a.
'Apx<0e«pos,  389,  a;  1126,  a.
'Apx^rcKTovla,  123,  a.
'ApxtreKTOviKTi,  120,  a.
'Apx'Te'/cTwv,  1 126,  a.
'Apx'TeAcJjvrjs,  973,  a.
"Afxwr,  121,  b;  124,  a.

„       iirdivvfios,  123,  a.
'ApxcS"*??,  884,  b;  1102.  b.
•Ao-d/ttfeos,  183,  b.
'Ao-egetas  ypa<fyfi,  142,  a.
'Ao-i'AAo,  142,  b.
^A(TKdvr7]s,  674,  a.
'Ao-kouAtjs,  1130,  b,
'Ac/cATyTTieia,  141,  b.
'Ao-Kot,  1203,  b.


1244

'AaKUiXiaa-fids,  141,  b.
'AcTTTiSeW,  787,  a.
'AGnriSiarKri,  787,  a.
'Aa-TTis,  297,  a.
'Aa-iriOiTai,  135,  a.
^Acradpiov,  141,  a.
'Atrrepes  ayaOoTToioi,  144,  b.

„       iiTiKoivoi,  144,  b.

,,       KaicoTToiol,  144,  b.
'A(TTpd§7],  464,  a.
'A(rTpd7aAos,  143,  b;  1095,
'Ao-rpareias  ypacpi),  144,  a.
"AdTpou,  TO,  152,  b.
"AtTTvXos,  1105,  b.
^Aarvvoixoi,  165,  a.
'AavXia,  165,  a.
"AavXov,  165,  a.
'Are'Aeia,  166,  a  ;  1103,  b.
*ATifx.ia,  168,  a.
"ATj/xoy,  168,  b.
'ArAayei/ers,  150,  b.
"ArAoj/Tes,  170,  a.
"ArpuKTos,  565,  a.
AuSu^'atos,  225,  a.
AuOexp-ns,  183,  a.
AuAara,  1185,  a.
AuKeios  ^vpa,  425,  a.
AvX-f],  425,  a.
AvXTjrpides,  1131,  b.
AuA(5s,  779,  a;  1130,  b.
AvAcpSia,  977,  a.
A5pa  TTc-piKovpos,  892,  b.
AvTOKparopLKSs,  225,  a.
AvTOfioXias  ypa(pv,  183,  a.
AvrSvojxoi,  183,  a.
AuToreA^/s  SticTj,  404,  b.
AvTo-^ia,  454,  a.
'Acpa/jLiwrai,  366,  a.
"Acpeffis,  610,  a.  1055,  b.
'A<|)eTai, 592,  a;  705,  a;  113^
*A<perr]piov  opyavov,  1138,  b.
'A<piSiTos  Tj/jLepa,  1090,  a.
'A(pi8pvfxa,  1062,  b.
'AcpXaarov,  787,  a.
"Ac/JoSoy,  180,  a.
A^op/xrjs  St'/frj,  102,  b.
A<ppaKTos  vavs,  784,  b,
'A<ppo8i(ria,  102,  b.
*A<ppo5i(nos,  225,  a.
'Axd-VT],  6,  a.
'AxiTcci/,  1173,  a.
A\l/r](poi,  95,  a.
'A^j/ts,  108,  a.

B.

Ba5(!MJ;it<os,  224.
BaKTVpia,  183,  b;  402,  b.
BaKxiKT),  1004,  b.
BaAa;/a7pa,  943,  b.
BaAai'eroi',  183,  b.
BoAaj/eus,  184,  b.
BaAaJ/oSf^KTj,  943,  b.
BciAaj'os,  943,  b.
BaAdyrtoj/,  732,  b.
BaAgi's,  435,  a;  1055,  b.
BaWia-fioi,  863,  a.
BdpaOpov,  196,  b.
BdpSirov,  -OS,  721,  a.
Ba(Taui<TTai,  1139,  b
Bdaavos,  1139,  a.


INDEX.
Bao-iAeta,  198,  a.
BaariXevs,  123,  a;  990,  a.
BaaiXLVva,  123,  a.
Bao-iAios,  226,  a.
BaaiXitraa,  123,  a  ;  412,  a.
BaaKavia,  521,  b.
Bdo-/caj/os  6(p6aXfj.6s,  521,  b.
BaTi7p,  1055,  b.
Bc^aiuxrews  Siitr],  201,  a.
B6A(^i/77,  13,  b.
BeAoz/is,  13,  b.
BeySidaios,  225,  a.
B6i/5t562a,  201,  a.
BepovLKTjs  fi6(TTpvxos,  154,  a.

„       -irKoKa/xos,  154,  a.
Bt?A({s,  624,  b.
Brifia,  440,  b;  577,  a;  751,  b;

1148.  b.
Biaicav  Si/ct?.  202,  a.
Bigaais,  1006,  a.
BiSKioQiiKT),  202,  a.
BigAioj/,  703,  b.
BiZaioi,  2C3,  b.
B?«:os,  203,  a.
Bi6s,  126,  a.
Bippos,  203,  b.

BAd/87js  Si'/fTj,  203,  b  ;  513,  a.
BKaiT-n,  1007,  b.
BXavria,  1007,  b.
BoaBoos,  224,  a.
BoTjSpdyuta,  204,  a.
Bo7]5pofxiciu,  223,  a;  224,  a.
Bo-ndoi,  868,  a.
Boiwrdpx'n^i  -OS,  204,  a.
BoAfs,  256,  b.
BopeaafxoL,  239,  b.
Bopeaa/JLOS,  209,  b.
BoTaj'iO"(U(Js,  52,  a,
Boravo/jLai'Teia,  417,  b.
a.    Bovai,  29,  a.

Bou/cdrios,  224,  a.

BovKepas,  -ws,  59,  a.

BouAeucreoJS  7pa(^'^,213,  a;  972,a.

Bov\evT-f)piou,  212,  b;  377,  b.

BouAt^,  209,  b.

Bovs,  812,  b.

BovT^TToi,  410,  a.

Bov(povia,  410,  a.

Boy^Jws,  410,  a.

Bowvcxi,  209,  a.

BowTTjs,  148,  a.

Bpa€e7s,  32,  a.

Bpagei/rai,  32,  a.

Bpaa'ideia,  213,  b.

Bpavpuvia,  214,  a.

Bpoj/Tetoi/,  1183,  a.

BugAos,  703,  a.

BvKavrj,  215,  a.

Bvacos,  224,  a.

Bv(Tor(Js,  216,  a.

Bcofi6s,  116,  a.


Tdyyafiov,  989,  b.
rdA«y,  28,  b.
ra/JLriAla,  567,  a.
rafirjKictiU,  223,  a.
rdfiopoi,  570,  b.
rd/xoy,  735,  b.
rai;A(Js,  218,  a.


FeAeovTes,  1 154,  b.
reXaTOTTOiol,  867,  b.
r€V60AiaAo7i'a,  144,  b.
Tepeiou,  196,  b.
Tefeaia,  558,  a.
FeVeo-is,  ^44,  b.
FevyrjraL,  290,  a;  1154,  b.
Viuos,  290,  a;  1154,  b.
Tepaipai,  412,  a.
Tipavos,  624,  a.
TepavovXKos,  624,  a.
Fepapai,  412,  a.
Fepdo-Ttos,  223,  a.
Fepowo-^a,  377,  b  ;  570,  a.
Fep^a,  574,  a.
Tepuy'ia,  572,  a.
r4(pvpa,  936,  b.
Fe4)upt^eii/,  454,  a.
T^<pvpL(Tix6s,  454,  a.
TewfiSpoi,  570,  b;   1154  b.
TiyyXvfjLos,  240,  a.
FAai^l,  812,  b.
FAewos,  1201,  b.
FAu^s,  1202,  a.
rxu> ffffis,  1130,  b.
TvdcpaXov,  673,  b.
Tuacpevs,  551,  b.
FvVtos,  14,  b.

Fj'c;5A^a)j',615,a;  806,  a;  930,  a.
Vopyvpa,  240,  a.
Toptnaios,  225,  a.
Tp^dioi/  iXevdepov,  891,  a.
iVxi'i^'',  892,  a.
,,       XvKaivLov,  892,  a.
,,       oIk6tik6u,  891,  a.
,,       olKovpov,  892,  a.
Tpafi/JiaTeiov  Xrj^iapxtKdv,  392,  b.

„  <pparpLK6v,  15,  a.

Tpafj-ixarevs,  5,  b  ;  2 1 1,  bj  577,  b.
TpafxfJL-i],  1055,  b.
rpafif^ris  Sia,  iraiC^iv,  582,  a.
Fpa(^T7,  578,  a  ;  899,  b.
rpa(f>r]  aya/jLiov,  735,  b.

,,        aypacpiov,  36,  b.

,,        aypd(pov  yuerdAAou,  37,  a.

„       aXoyiov,  76,  b.

„        d/x§Awo-ea?s,  2,  b.

„       Ai/au/xaxiow,  94,  a.

,,       UTTpoaTaaiov,     108,    a ;
123,  b.

„       apylas,  133,  a.

„       apTrayris,  586,  a.

„       do-egetay,  142.

„       atTTpardas,  144,  a.

,,       avTOixoXias,  183,  a.

„  fiovXevaews,      213,  a;
972,  a.

„       SeiXias,  388,  b.

„       SeKaa/xov,  385,  b.

„       5r}fxo(TLa,  402,  b.

„       ScopoSoKlas,  385,  b.

„       Swpo^evias,  1223,  a.

„       Swpcau,  385,  b.

„       (Lpyfjiov,  590,  a.

„       cTTiTpoTT^y,  470,  a.

„       eraip-f)a€ous,  606,  a
tSra,  402,  b.

„       hpoavXias,  607,  b.

„       KaKoya/XLov,  735,  b.

„       KaTaXvaews    tov    Sr)(JLOVj
256.  a.


Tpa(pi}  KaraaKOTTTis,  257,  a.

kAotttjs,  300,  a.

XfLTrovavTLOu,  679,  a.

XenroaTpaTiov,  679,  a.

Xenrora^iov,  144,  a.

fjLiaddocTicos  oXicov,  764,  a.

fjioixeias,  16,  b.

vofxiff/xaros     StacpOopas,
803,  b.

|ei/ios,  1223,  a,

o^^/iya/xiov,  735,  b.

rrapaj/oias,  865,  a.

Trapavo/xuv,  865,  b.

■jrapairpeaSeias,  866,  b.

TTccpeto-ypa*?)?,  868,  a.

irapaywyeias,  958,  b.

TrpoSoaias,  962,  a.

prjTopiicrj,  462,  a  ;  994,  b.

(rvKocpavTias,  1080,  a.

TpaifxaTos    eK    irpovolas,
1148,  a.

Twpat'j'tSos,  962,  a.

vgpews,  622,  a.

viroSoXTjs,  623,  b.

(papixaKsias,  895,  a.

(papixoMoiv,  895,  a.

<p6opas     Twp    4\€vdepo}U,
898,  a.

q!>oVoy,  897,  a.

i|/eu5677pa(jf>77y,  971,  b.

rpevdoK\7]Teias,  972,  a.
Tpa(piKT],  899,  b.
rpa(/)ts,  903,  a.

rpr^os,  22,  a  ;  989,  h;  1034,  a.
Tpoacpofxaxoi,  588,  b.
rpdtrcjjos,  588,  b.
T{>r)s,  117,  b.
rujUTOO-japx^y,  581,  a.
Tvfiuarriapxos,  581,  a.
Tv/xvd(Tiov,  579,  a.
rv/ii/ao-Toi,  581,  b;  582,  b.
Tv/JLvrjcrioi,  584,  a.
Tu/ii'TjTaj,  135,  a.
ri/^z/r}T6s,  135,  a.;  584,  a.
Ty^yot,  135,  a.
Fu^uvoTratSia,  584,  a.
Tvixvos,  808,  b.
TvvaucoK6a/xoi,  584,  b.
TwaiKovop-ot,  584,  b.
Tui/aiKwi'rTts',  423,  b.
Tvv^  XeKTiKi],  892,  b.

„     o(;A77,  892,  b.
Twpvrds,  126,  b.


A(fSa((>6pios,  224,  a.
Aa5ot;p7erj',  1093,  a.
AaSovpy6s,  1093,  a.
AaSoGxos,  453,  b.
AklSaXa,  382,  a.
AaiSdXeia,  382,  a.
Aa?s,  1093,  a.
Aaiffios,  225,  a.
Aairpoi,  410,  a.
AaKTvXtos,  95,  a.
AaKTv\oS6x/J'Vj  751,  b.
Aa«Tv\os,  322,  b  ;  382,  b.
Arf\tos,  224,  a.
Aafxapdreiou  xP^piov,  382,  b.
AayArpios^  224,  a.


INDEX.

Aajxiovpyoi,  390,  b.

Aa/iocr/a,  384,a;  485,  b;  929,  a.

AavoLKt},  384,  a.

Adyeiaixa  ajj-cpOTipoirXovv,  525,  b.

,,  eTept^TrAouv,  525,  b.

AdiTis,  674,  a;   1097,  a.
AapeiKSs.  384,  b.
Aas,  1093,  a.
Aa<pP7](p6pos,  384,  b.
Aer7/xa,  388,  a.
AeiK€\i(TTal,  388,  a.
AeiAT?,  408,  b.
AeiAias  ypacp^,  388,  b.
Aer7r;/o?/,  303,  a  ;  304,  b.
AeiTTVocpSpoi,  845,  b.
Ae/caSapx'".  385,  b.
A€Ka5ovxoi,  385,  b.
Ae/capx'a,  385,  b.
AcKatXfxSs,  71,  a  ;  385,  b.
AeKacTTvAos,  1105,  b.
Aefcareueti/,  214,  a.
AeKareWTai,  388,  a.
AeKarevTijpLoy,  388,  a.
Ae/caTTj,  388,a;  800,  b;  1103,b.
AiKaT7]\6yoi,  387,  b.
Ae/caTwvat,  387,  b.
AeATWTOi/,  149,  b.
AeA*iV,  149,  b.
AeA^iuia,  389,  b.
AeX(f)ivios,  223,  a.
AeA(^t's,  149,  b;  389,  b.
A4fj.uiov,  673,  b.
Aelioo-Tarai,  280,  a.
Aepfjia,  882,  a.
Ae/5j5is,  282,  b.
Ae(TiiX.o(pv\aKes,  593,  a.
Aea/nwriipiov,  240,  b,
AecTTToorioyaOTaj,  592,  a ;  705,  a.
AevT fpayuviariis,  611,  b.
A€ur4pios,  1203,  a.
AeurepoTTOTjUOi,  557,  a.
A^7;ua,  548,  a.
Ai)Xia,  389,  a  ;  865,  a.
Arffiayccyoi,  1086,  a.
A7]fj.apxi^ouaLos,  225,  a.
A-r]ixapxoi,  389,  1).
A-nju-nyopoi,  1086,  a.
A-mx-nrpia,  390,  a.
A7]p.^Tpios,  225,  a.
Ariixi6iTpaTa,  390,  a.
A-f}ixiovpyoi,  5,  b ;  314,  a ;  390,  b  ;

570,  a;  115^,  b.
AV'os,  593,  a;  1139,  b.
A7]/x6koivos,  593,  a,
A-qfioKparia,  390,  b.
Ar]iJ.OTroir}Tos,  391,  b.
A^/ios,  391,  b.
Ari/x6cTia  ypd/nfiaTa,  8,  a.
At] fjL6(noi,  391,  b.
AriiJ.6aiov,  23,  a  ;  119,  a.
A7]ix6(Tios,  593,  a.
A77;WOTa£,  392,  b.
Aia§aT'f}pia,  395,  a.
Aia€i)Tr]s,  283,  a.
Ata7pa(^ers,  449,  b.
Aidh-qiia,  395,  a.
AtaSi/catrta,     395,   b  ;    596,   b ;
897,  b.

,,        KKi]pov,  15,  a.

„        Tr}s  c-iriK\'f]pov,  467,  b.
Aiadoans,  400,  a;   1126,  b.


1246

AictC<w,ua,  1075,  a  ;  1225,  b.
Aia(6/xaTa,  1121,  a.
AiaLTa,  395,  b.
Aiairrirai,  396,  b.
Aian-qriKTi,  395,  b.
AidKpioi,  1155,  a.
AiafxapTvpia,  92,  b.
Aiafxaariywcris,  399,  b.
AidfxiTpos  eraipa,  892,  b.
Aiavofj-ai,  400,  a ;  1126,  b.
Aidcria,  400,  b.
Atao-TuAos,  1106,  a.
AiavXos,  1055,  b.
Aiax^Lporovia,  271,  a.
Amxpycos  kraipa,  892,  b.
Aia\p7](pioi5,  400,  a.
AidacTKahtKri,  628,  a.
AiSpaxjJ-ov,  438,  b.
Ai5y/zot,  150,  b.
AieA/cucTTiVSa  TraifeiJ/,  582,  a.
AjTjpes,  425,  b.
At/fot  ipLixrivoi,  458,  a.
AttTTf^Aeia,  410,  a.
AuTTcJAta,  410,  a.
AiKaariipiov ,  401,  a.
AiKa(TTT]s,  401,  b;  805.  a.
AiKacrTucSv,  402,  b.
Ai/ceAAa,  707,  b.
AiK77,  402,  b.

„     alicias,  100,  a.

„     avaywyiis,  92,  a.

„     avdSiKos,  106,  b.

„     d7raA€i\|/6ws,  418,  a.

„     aTruTr4ix\peoos,  418,  a.

„     a-rroa-Taaiov,  104,  b ;  1 23,  b,

„     aTrb  (TvixSoXuiv,  1081,  a.

„     airp6(rK\T]Tos,  403,  a.

„     airpoaraaiov,  123.  b.

„     apyvpiou,  133,  b.

„     avTOT€\-f]s,  404,  b.

„     cKpopixrjs,  102,  b.

„     /Segaiwcrews,  201,  a.

„     /3tatW,  202,  a  ;  479,  b.

„     /SAcigrjs,    93,   b;    203,  b;
513,  a.

„     iyyvr]s,  461,  a.

„     ivoLiciov,  461,  a.

„     i^aywyrjs,  479,  a.

„     i^a(.p4aeci}s,  479,  a.

„     e|ouA7js,  456,  a.

„      fcirtTpt77papx77jUaTos,  1159,b

,,      ipaviK-f],  475,  h.

,,     Ka6v(p4a€(a^,  578,  b.

„     KaK-qyoplas,  217,  a.

„     Ko/C7j7op(oy,  217,  a.

„     KaKoKoyias,  217,  a.

„     KaKOTfKViCijv,  217,  a.

„     /capTTou,  243,  a;  461,  a.

,,     /cAo7r^9,  300,  a.

„     XeiTTOfxapTvpiov,    93,    b ;
513,  a.

„     AojSoptas,  217,  a.

„     utaeov,  764,  a.

„     fii(T6c&(rews  oXkov,  764,  a.

„     olKias  823,  b.

„     ovaias,  461,  a.

„     irapaKarae-nK-ns,  102,  b.

„     irpoficTcpopas,  962,  b.

„     ttpolkSs,  437,  a  ;  1048,  a.

,,     (TtTou  1048,  a.

„     2/cypia,  1013,  a.


1246

At'/crj    crvjxSoXaiwv,    or  <rvv0€Kwv
TrapaSdaecos,  1080,  a.

„     rpax^M,  1013,  b.

,,     XP^ovs,  280,  b.

,,     \pivdo/j.apTvpiuu,  734,  a<
A'lKpora,  784,  a.
AiKTvvj/ia,  408,  a.
AiKTvou,  988,  b.
A£,uaxai,  410,  a  ;  488,  b.
AifxiTos,  1101,  b;  1102,  b.
Atoi/cTjrreojs,  o  67rt,  1096,  b.
AlSKciu,  410,  b.
Aiouvaia,  410,  b.

„         ev  6,(TTci,  or  fieydha,

412,  b.
„         /car'  apyovs,  or  fiiKpdy
411,  a.
Aiouvcrios,  225,  a.
AFos,  224,  a  ;  225,  a.
A£Oir77/xera,  417,  b.
Aiocr0yos,  223,  a.
AiodKovpia,  414,  b.
AioaKovpios,  226,  a.
Ai7rAa|,  151,  a.
ALirXotdiov,  1172,  b.
AtTTAoiy,  853,  a;  1172,  b.
ALTr6\€ia,  410,  a.
Aiirrfpos,  1105,  b.
AtTTTyxa,  1092,  a.
AicTKos,  415,  a.
AicTKovpa,  415,  a.
AtToi'o;',  773,  b.
Aicpeipa,  414,  b  ;  704,  a.
AicpBepias,  890,  b.
Ai(p9ep7Tis,  891,  a.
At>pos,  379,  b.
Aixofiwis,  223,  a.
Aixopia,  1147,  a.
AiwgeA^o,  1126,  b.
AoKi/xouria,  419,  b  ;  462,  a.
AoXix^SpSfioi,  1055,  b.
AoAtxoy,  1055,  b.
A<iAa>j',  420,  b.
Aopd,  882,  a.
Aopdriov,  587,  a.
Aopa.ToQr,KT),  587,  b.
AopiaKwToi,  1034,  a.
AopTreia,  101,  b.
AopTTio,  101,  b.
AdpiTov,  303,  b.
A({pu,  587,  a.
Aopv(p6pot,  587,  b.
Ar^ffts,  124,  a.
Aov\os,  1034,  a.
Aox/WTJ,  751.  b,
ApaKuv,  148,  a.
Apaxft^,  438,  a ;  931,  b.
Apeiravrj,  Ap4iravov,  518,
Apolrai,  555,  b.
ApS/j-os,  1055,  b.
Av/Jiavdrai,  1153,  b.
Av^az/es,  1153,  b."
AvuaaTfia,  365,  b.
Avcrrposj  225,  a.
Awfidria,  425,  a.
Awpa,  432,  b.
AwpoSo/cfas  7po</)rj,  385,  b.
Aupou,  751,  b.
A»po|6i'ros  ypaip-ff,  1223,  a.
Aa>pwu  ypa<pr]y  385,  b.
AwTtVrj,  436,  a.


INDEX.
E.

"Eap,  163,  b.
'£77^77,  460,  b.
'Eyy vr]di]Kv,  633,  b.
'E77U77S  Si'/cr;,  461,  a.
'E77V77(7ty,  737,  a.
*Ey KeKTrj/aeuos,  459,  b.
'EyKevrpis,  220,  b.
*'E7«A7jjua,  403,  a.
"EyKTrnj-a,  459,  b.
''E7KT77a-ty,  459,  b.
'EyKTr]TiK6v,  392,  b ;  459,  b.
'Eyx^ipiStov,  975,  a.
"'E7X0S,  587,  a,
*Eyxv(TrpiCeiv,  828,  a.
'Eyxv(TTpi(TTpiai,  828,  a.
"ESm,  436,  a.
"E5o?,  1105,  a.
'E5d!)\ia,  788,  a.
"EeSm,  436,  a.
'E0eAo7rpJ^evos,  620,  a.
Er/fos,  223,  b.
EIk6u6s,  1063,  a.
EIkovikos,  892,  a.
EIkocttt],  446,  b;  1103,  a.
Et/co(rToA(^7os,  446,  b.
EiAcwres,  591,  a.
Eif/io;/,  226,  a.
Elpy/xov  ypacpii,  590,  a.
Elpi(Tuavn,  976,  b ;  1000,  a.
EXpw,  446,  b.
EtVc£7eji/,  447,  a.
EtVoTyeAi'a,  447,  a  ;  458,  b
EtVo7a>7er5,  446,  b.
Eia-iT-fipia,  448,  b.
Eia-TToielcrdat,  14,  b.
EtViroiTjo-ts,  14,  b.
Eia-n-oi7jT6s,  14,  b.
El<T<p4piiv,  449,  a.
Elcrtpopd,  448,  b.
'EKarSfiSaia,  593,  b.
'E/faT({;Ugatoy,  225,  a.
'EKaTo/jL€aLdot/,  223,  a.
'E/faroAtgeuy,  223,  a.
'EKarofxe-fj,  593,  b ;  999,  b.
'EKaroari],  884,  b.
*'EK7o»'ot,  595.  b.
"EkSiKos,  444,  a.
"E/cSoo-ts,  525,  b.
'E/cexf'P^o,  607,  a.
'EKK\w'^a,  439,  b ;  572,  b.

„         Kvpia,  440,  a.

„         uSfMifios,  440,  a.

„         (TvyK\rjTos,  439,  b.
'EKKXrjToi,  443,  b.
*EKKOfiiZi},  555,  a.
^EKKVK\r]fia,  1123,  a.
'EKAo76rs,  449.  b.
'E/c/«i76roj',  305,  b.
'EKfiapTvpla,  93,  b.  444,  a.
*E/C7rc»eH/,  14,  b.
'EKitoieiarOai,  14,  b.
'EKTfis,  "E/cTTj,  589,  b.
'EKTT]fi6pioi,  590,  a.
"E/cTVTros,  481,  a.
*EK<popd,  555,  a.
'EK(pvWo(popla,  516,  a.
*EAa(a,  "EXaiov,  823,  b.
*E\aio<p6pov,  192,  b.
'EAoj'wy,  823,  b.


'EXar-np,  1168,  b.
'EAa^rjgc^Ata,  450,  a.
'EAacjiTjgoAicor,  223,  a.
"EKacpos,  450,  a.
'EA6u06>ia,  454,  b.
'EAewcrma,  452,  b.
'EAeuo-iVios,  223,  a.
'EA60ay,  451,  a.
'EAiKT],  147,  a.
"EAi|,  590,  b.
'EXKvcTTivda  iral^eiv,  582,  a.
'EAAai/o5t/cai,  590,  b  j  830,  b.
'EKK-qvoTajxiai,  590.  b.
"EAAt^giov,  632,  a.
'EWiOTia,  or  'EAAc^Tio,  455,  a.
"EAu.ua,  117,  b.
*E/x§os,  456,  a.
"E/x^aa-Ls,  184.  a.
'E|agaT6ia,  456,  a.
'Efi§dT7is,  764,  b.
'Efx§AT]fxa,  456,  b.
'EfjL€o\ii,  133,  b.
'E/^goAi^os,  223,  a.
"Eai^oAoi',  786,  b.
"E/aSoXos,  786,  b.
'Eyit/ieAeto,  280,  a.
'E/x/ieAijs,  773,  a.
"Efi/xTjvoi  SiKai,  458,  a.
"Eixiraia-iJ.a,  456,  b.
'Eixirepdprjfia.  532,  a.
'Efiirdpiov,  459,  a.
"EjXTTopos,  459,  a.
"Eficppovpoi,  458,  a.
'E/i<|)uT6uo-iy,  458,  a.
'Evayia-fjLaTa,  577,  b.
"Emro,  577,  b.
"Et/SaSos,  1093,  a.
'E^/S^SoSj/,  1093,  a.
^Ev5et|t5,  459,  b;  463,  a.
"Ej'Se/co  ot,  593,  a.
'EvSovvai,  625,  a.
'EuSpofiis,  460,  a.
"EvSvyua,  79,  a.

'EueirlaKTififxa,  863,  a  ;   1084,  b,
'Ei/eTTj,  531,  b.
'Ei/e'xupa,  460,  a  ;  525,  b.
"EvvaTa,  557,  b.
'EfveaKpovvos,  108,  b.
'EvueaTTjpis,  222,  b.
'Ei/t^Stoj/,  989,  b.

„       a-i'ixSoKov,  417,  a.
*EvoikIou  SIkt],  461,  a.
"Euoirrpov,  1052,  a.
"EvTfa,  135,  a.
"EvTvnos,  1181,  a.
'EvTviru/jLa,  1181,  a.
'EvdoTLov,  632,  a.
'E|a7&j777,  456,  a.
*E|a7w7^s  S'lKTj,  479,  a.
'ElajpeVews  Si/crj,  479,  a.
'EidiJLiTov,  1 102,  b.
'Elao-TuAos,  1105,  b.
'E|677uaff0at,  460,  b.
'E^f\iyfids,  484,  b.
'E|€Ta(rror,  478,  b ;  511,  b.
'E^-nyvrai,  480,  a.
'El^petj,  785,  b.
'E^ifiirov,  1102,  b.
'E\iTi]pLa,  512,  a.
'EfdSm,  612,  a.
"eIoSos,  1146,  a.


*E^ov\7js  SiKTi,  456,  a.
'E|co;u£'s,  512,  b  ;  1173,  b.
*E^a}fio(xia,  512,  b.
*E^a>(TTpa,  513,  a.
'Eira77eAm,  462,  a.
'ETToi/cAoj/,  1090,  a.
'ETToA^eis,  1183,  b.
'EirdpiToi,  462,  a.
'E-iravKia,  738,  a.
'Eir€ia6Siov,  512,  a  ;  1146,  a.
'Eire^SSia,  512,  a.
'ETre'retoi',  211,  a.
'EircvvaKTai,  462,  a.
'ETn€ddpa,  939,  b.
'ETTjgaTat,  466,  b.
"EmSSa,  102,  a.
*ETri§\vfJiiJ.*.,  79,  a ;  674,  a.
'Eiri€Qkaiou,  79,  a  j  674,  a.
'Ein§o\ri,  467,  a.
*E7ri7oMia,  289.  a ;  520,  b.
EnlypaiJ./xa,  1132,  a.
*ETriypa(pus,  449,  b.
'ETTiSavpia,  454,  a.
'ETTtSe'/caTOJ',  387,  b.
'EmdiKaala,  123,  a.
'EmUcrets,  468,  a.
'E7ri07/Aia,  556,  b.
*EiriK\r]pos,  467,  b.

'ETTtKAtl'TpOJ',  673,  b.

'EttIkoivos,  918,  b.
^ETTiKovpoi,  758,  a.
*Eirt\070t,  1085,  b.
'EirtfxeXTjrai,  468,  a  ;  978,  a.

„         rod  i/jLTTopiov,  36,  b  ;

468,  a.
„         T7JS  KoivTJs  TcpoaSZov,
468,  a;  1096,  b.
„  rwv  ixopiSav  'E\aiwv,

468,  a.

„         tS>v  Mvarripioiv,  468,

b.
„         Tuv  veuptuy,  468,  b.
„        Twu  (pvKwv,  468,  b.
'EirifivMov,  765,  a.
'ETriirdpaSos,  280,  a.
'EirnropiriSf  531,  b.
*ETriTrpoiKoi,  594,  b.
'ETrtVetcrTOS  Seurepos,  892,  a.
„  rry^p-oou  892,  a.

,,  tTTpaTtc^TTjy,  892,  a,

'Eiriarjfia,  638,  a.
'Eiri(rr)fiou,  638,  a.
'Eiri(TKi}imiv  els  "Apeiov   itdyov,

129,  a.
"ETTtcr/coiroj,  468,  b.
'EmV/cupos,  918,  b.
^EnKTirdtraaQai,  625,  a.
'Eiri(Tira(TT-f}p,  627,  a.
'E7rt(rTaTTjs,    210,  b  ;     468,   b  ,
484,  b.
„         ruv  5riiJ.o(rlwv  ^pywv,

469,  a.

,,         Twv  vSartov,  469,  a.
'Eni(xro\€6s,  469,  a.
*ETri(TTv\iov^  469,  a.
'Eiria-wrpov,  387,  b.
'EiriTay/xa,  488,  a.
*Err/TijUOS,  513,  b.
'EttitoAtJ,  155,  b.
'ETTiTOj/ot,  673,  b  ;  790,  b.
'KTriTPirjpapxVM-O'Tos  5tKT;,1195,b.


INDEX.

'ETTtTpoTTTjs  ypa<pi],  470,  a.
'Eirirpoiros,  469,  b;   1197,  b.
^Eirix^ipoTovia,  122,  b  ;  271,  a;

443,  a.
'ETrt'xvo-zs,  380,  b.
'ETTotKio,  313,  b.
"ETTotKos,  313,  b.
'EiTO(x(pd\iov,  298,  a.
'ETrdTTTat,  453,  b.
'ETTOTTTeia,  453,  b.
'ETrojgeAia,  470,  a.
'ETrajytiis,  1173,  a.
"EiravCa,  1103,  a.
^Eircivvfios,  470,  b.

„         Tciu  r]XiKiwv,  470,  b.

„         Tcoi'  (pv\wv,  470,  b.
'EirwTiSej,  787,  a.
'Epavctpx'js,  457,  b.
^Epavl^civ,  475,  b.
'EpavtffTai,  475,  b.
"Epavov    \direiv,    or    iKAdireiv,
475,  b.

„      vKinpovv,  475,  b.

„       <rvW4yeiv,  475,  b.
"^Epai/os,  304,  b ;  475,  a.
'Epdvov  irATjpwT^s,  475,  b.
'Ep7a»/ot,  1100,  a.
'Epyaa-rlvai,  856,  b;  1100,  a.
"'Ep7aTiy,  628,  a.
"Epicpos,  149,  a.
'Ep;ua?,  602,  a.
"Ep/xuia,  604,  a.
'Epfialos,  224,  a ;  226,  a.
'Ep/jiwvfios,  891,  b.

„  Seurepos,  891,  b.

'E^^7j(f)6pia,  137,  b.
'E^f>'n(p6poi,  137,  b.
*Ep(rr](p6pia,  137,  b.
*Ep(rri(()6poi,  137,  b.
*Epv/cT7)/)6s,  592,  a.
"Eo-^tos,  225,  a.
"Eo-oTTTpoj/,  1052,  a.
'Eo-Tto,  542,  a.
'Eo-Ttcio-is,  604,  b.
'Ea-ridrcop,  604,  b.
'Eaxdpa,  116,  a;  542,  a.
|E(Txopis,  542,  a.
'Eraipai,  604,  b.
'Erotpirjo-ews  ypa<p-fi,  606,  a.
'Eratpta,  310,  b;  475,  b.
'EraiplSiou,  892,  b.
"Eraipoi,  488,  a.
'ErepJiropTros,  532,  a.
'ETfpoa-TOfios,  791,  a.
EiJa,  846,  a,
EvayyeKios,  225,  a.
Euao-T^y,  846,  a.
Eu€p7oo-ta,  289,  b.
EUCovos,  1173,  b.
EvduSiKia,  92,  b ;  404,  a ;  864,  b.
EvdvuT},  478,  a.
EijdvuQi,  478,  a.
Eu^oATTiSot,  477,  a.
Evuij,  673,  a;  791,  a.
Evnarpidai,  477,  b  ;   1154,  b.
Eu(Trv\os,  1106,  a.
Eu(p7j^e?T€,  417,  a.
Ev((>r)iJ.ia,  417,  a.
'E^eKKvaaadai,  625,  a.
'E(|>e'trta,  463,  a.
'Ecpiais,  106,  a.


1247


"E^eorpiy,  79,  a.
'E(peTai,  463,  e.
'E(3!)eTii/5a,  918,  b.
'E(p7igeia,  462,  b.
'EcpvSiK-fi,  918.  b.
"Ecp-nSo^,  462,  b.
'E<f>'f]y7}(ns,  460,  a.
'E^Tj^ueptSes,  144,  b.
'Ecpimreioy,  464,  a.
^EcpiiriTiou,  464,  a.
'Ec^JSioj/,  1195,  b.
"Eipopoi^  464,  b.
''Eq&upoi,  453,  b.
'EcpvipT],  1100,  a.
'ExfTArj,  117,  b.
*Exrj/oy,  93,  b  ;  325,
"Ei/zTj^iio,  1202,  a.
'Ecip-n/jLa,  1123,  a.


Z.


ZaKopoi,  20,  a.

Ze'a,  or  Zet'a.  54,  b ;  56,  b.

ZevyTrai,  266,  a;  486,  a ;  1156,

a.
ZsvyXai,  789,  a.
Z€UKTT}plai,  789,  a.
ZTjAtt'o,  1128,  a.
ZvTvrai,  1 224,  a.
Zu7a,  788,  a.
Zi>yioi,  788,  a.
ZvyTrai,  788,  a.
Zi}70J/,  280,  a;  652,  a  ;  721,  b  ;

1007,  b.
Ziyos,  652,  a ;  1007,  b.
Zvdos,  268,  b,
Zooypa<p€7v,  900,  b.
Zaypacpla,  899,  b.
ZcS|Ua,  1225,  b.
Zw/J^s  Ate'Aas,  1090,  a.
Zciur],  135,  a  ;  1224,  b.
Zdoviov,  1244,  b.
Zwnoir\dK05,  1224,  b.
Zwo-TT^p,  1224,  b.
Zu(p6pos,  1225,  b.


'H7e/ii<Ji'fs  (rvfifiopiwu,  449,  b.
'H76^oj'to  SiKaarriplov,  477,  R

593,  a.
'H76/iWj',  891,  b.

„       ^epdruv,  892,  a.
'nytropia,  928,  b.
'H0^Js,  322,  b  ;   1203,  a.
'HAafc^TTj,  565,  a.
"HKcKTpov  -OS,  450,  a.
'HKiorpSTTiov,  615,  a.  ^

"'Hfiap  5ele\ov,  408,  b.

„     jxeaou,  408,  b.
'H/t6pa  Kupfa  rod  v6fxov,  94,  a,

„      /ite'ffTj,  408,  b.
'H/x4pai  anotppdSes,  104,  b.
'H/itepoSaj'etcrTat,  525,  a.
'HfiepoSpSfioi,  592,  b.
'H/it5t7r\otStoi/,  1172,  b.
'HfueKTsSu,  589,  b.
'H/JUSKrov,  589,  b.
'HIjlikvkKiov,  592,  b.


V2iH

'Ufiiiiiva,or'H/iva,367,  a;  592, b.

'Huia,  585,  a.

'Hvioxos,  149,  a  ;  379,  b.

Hpa?a,  224,  a  ;  225,  a.

UpdK\€ios,  224,  a ;  225,  a.
'Hpdaios,  223,  a.
'Hpqiou,  557,  a.
'Hws,  408,  b.


e.

Qaipos,  241,  a.
&a\dfnoi,  788,  a.
0aAa,u?Tat,  788,  a.
GaAa^uos,  425,  b  ;  788,  a.
&aA\o(i)6poi,  857,  a.
©aXvaia,  76,  b  ;   1120,  a.
0d^»/a,  1203,  a.
Qd-rrreiv,  555,  b.
&apyrj\Lwi^,  223,  a.
Qfarpou,  1120,  a.
©earpoTTwATjs,  1126,  a.
@eaTpwv7]s,  1126,  a.
0etAov0io?,  224,  a.
©fyua,  144,  b.
©eoSocTios,  226,  a.
0foAo7froj',  1 123,  a.
&eoBevia,  1125,  b.
0eo|eVios,  224,  a.
eeocpavia,  1125,  b.
Gepaneia,  738,  b.
QepanevTiKoi,  867,  b-
©epoTTwj/,  591,  b.

„       p.4(Tos,  892,  a.

„       Te'TTtl,  892,  a.
06'pos,  163,  b.
©eo-ts,  14,  b.

QecTfioOeTai,  123,  a;  804,  b.
060-Mos,  804,  b.
&e(rixo(p6ptos,  224,  a.
Qea/xocpopioiu,  226,  a.
Qe(Tfj.o(pv\aKes,  593,  a.
©eo-o-aAot/ceTat,  883,  a.
©erot,  14,  b.
QevSdcrios,  224,  a.
©ecopio,  389,  a;  1125,  b.
eeupiKd,  1 126,  a.
©ewpi'y,  389,  a ;  865,  a.
©ecopot,  389,  a  ;  1 125,  b.
QiiKai,  556,  a.
eiiKv,  197,  b.
0r]piofjLdxot,  202,  a.
Qrjpiov,  153,  b.
©Tjffaupos,  1 127,  a.
0770-era,  1127,  b.
©^o-o-a,  597,  b.

©f/Tes, 266, a ;  1155,  a;  1128, b.
©iacoy,  411,  a;  475,  b.
&oivi]  ya/xLKT],  737,  b.
©oAfa,  1213,  b.
©oAos,  1128,  b.
&6wKos,  32,  b.
Qpdvioy,  1 129,  a.
&pav7rat,  788,  a.
&pduo5,  788,  a.
Gprjvcpdoi,  555,  b.
Gpopos,  1129,  a.
OuyaTTjp   595,a.
QiryarpiSovs,  59rs  K
©VAte'ATj,  1122,  a.


INDEX.
&vixia.Ti]piov,  1174,  b.
@vpa,  624,  b.

„     auAgjos,  425,  a.

„     K-qiraia,  425,  b.

„     fieaavAos,  425,  a.

„     fieravXos,  425,  a.
©ypeds,  1012,  b.
®vpeTpou,  625,  b.
©ypfSes,  426,  a.
0y/)o-oj,  1129,  b.
®vpuu,  425,  a.
@vpci)p€iou,  425,  a.
©upwpJs,  425,  a ;  627,  b.
Svaavoi,  537,  a.
®vTT]pLoy,  116,  a;  153,  b.
0«>a|,  711,  a.


"laKxos,  453,  b.
*laTpaX^nrri]s,  76,  a;  628,  a.
'larpiK^,  745,  b.
'larpos,  747,  a.
*laTpo<TO'pi(TTiis,  628,  a.
^lyST?,  "1781^,  768,  b.
'iSiWTTjs,  994,  b.
-"iSpivfTiy,  1105,  a.
'lepdKiov,  98,  b.
'leperoi',  998,  b.
'lepeTs  TWJ'  crcoTrfpeav,  606,  b.
'Upoypaix/j.aTe7s,  80,  b.
'lepoSouAot,  606,  a.
'lepQ/xauTeia,  417,  a.
'Upo/x-nna,  607,  a.
'UpofMvfjfjLoves,  80,  b  J  138,  b
'lepJi/,  1104,  b.
'lepovTKai,  167,  a.
'lepoiroioi^  607,  b.
'UpocregacrTos,  225,  a.
'UpoaKOTrla,  417,  a.
'UpoavXlas  ypa(pi),  607,  b.
'lepo(|)ai'T72s,  453,  a  ;   477,  a.
'levcpa^Aoi,  411,  a.
'iKST-npia,  142,  a.
^iKpia,  784,  b.
'l/cTTves,  154,  a.
'lAaios,  224,  a.
'lAcipja,  608,  a.
'I\apoTpaycf)5ia,  1145,  b.
Vdin-65,  269,  a ;  790,  b.
'lixdures  ttvktikoC,  269,  a.
'Ifiari^iov,  850,  b.
'Ifidriov,  850,  b.
'Iwo,  699,  a.
'Ijy,  1001,  a.
*IouAto5,  225,  a.
'lirvSs,  669,  a.
'iTnrop/uoo-TTjs,  483,  b.
"iTnropxos,  5,  b  ;  487,  a.
'linrels,  266,  a;  1155, a.
'linriKov,  608,  a  ;  1056,  b.
'iTnrogoTot,  608,  a.
*linroSp6iJ.ios,  224,  a.
'l7r7r%o/*os,  283,  b ;  608,  b.
"Ittttos,  149,  b.
"lirvovTrpoTOfxij,  149,  b.
"Ipvv,  446,  b.
"IcrOfiia,  645,  b.
"ifl-on-oAtreta,  289,  b.
'lo-oreAeja,  289,  b.


'lo-OTeA^rs,  289,  b.
'lo-TiW,  790,  a  ;  1186,  a.
'IfTToSocvs,  117,  b.
'larSiroSes,  1100,  b.
'la-rSs,  789,  a ;  1099,  a.
'lardv,  425,  b  ;  1099,  b.
"Itvs,  297,  b ;  378,  b.
'IxOves,  151,  b.
'IxQvs  v6tios  or  (M^yas,  153,  b.


K.

Ka§eipia,  216,  b.
KaStV/cot,  971,  a.
KaSos,  Ka55os,  218,  a;  971,  a.
KaOapia,  781,  b.
KaOapuoi,  781,  b.
KdOaptTis,  719,  a.
KadsT-fjp,  985,  b.
Kddohos,  1128,  a.
Kadvcpfaews  Sikt],  578,  b.
KaK7j7opias  Siktj,  217,  a.
KaKTiyopiov  St/CT?,  217,  a.
KaKoXoylas  Siktj,  217,  a.
Ka/coTe/<Tia)i'  SiicT],  217,  b.
Ka/c«cr<s,  217,  a.
KdKadoS:  220,  a  ;  326,  b.
„       Kddodos,  453,  b.
KaXa/xaicov,  224,  a ;  225,  a.
KoAaMos,  220,  a;  753,  b.
KaAAt7eV6ia,  1128,  a.
KoAAtepe?//,  417,  a.
KoAAttrTeia,  234.  a.
KaXoedTTjs,  553,  b.
Kc£Aoi,  783,  b  ;  790,  a.
Ka\6Trovs,  545,  b.
KaXiSas,  902,  b.
KaAvTTTpa,  1186,  a.
KaAfjtfSfa,  790,  a.
KoAws,  996,  a.     ■
Kdfxa^,  587,  b.
Kaixdpa,  124,  b.
Kd/jLivos,  546,  a.
KafiTTT-fip,  1055,  b.
Kawagos,  or  Kfr'j'o§os-,  235,  b.
Kdvadpov,  235,  b.
KduSvs,  237,  a.
Kai/eoj/,  237,  b.
Kavn(p6poi,    237,    b;    411,    a

857,  a.
Kavcav,  298,  a;  985,  b;  1101,  a
KttTrrjAeroy,  258,  a.
KdTTTjAos,  258,  b  ;  459,  a.
Ka7rj/oSd/c77,  426,  a.
KanpofxavTcia,  417,  a.
KapSarlpT],  889,  b.
KapKivos,  150,  b.
Kapvedrai,  242,  a.
Kapyela,  241,  b.
Kapv€7os,  223,  a ;  224,  a.
Kapiraia,  1005,  b.
Kapnov  Sikt],  243,  a.
Kapuo,  243,  b.
KapvariCfiv,  243,  b.
KapvuTis,  243,  b.
Kao-(rte7reto,  149,  a.
KardS\riiJ.a,  790,  b.
KaraSX-nnara,  448,  b.
KaTogA?jTi/t^,  719,  b.
KaT07a>7T7,  720,  a.


Karaytiyia,  92,  a.
Karaydoyiov,  258,  aj  619,  b.
KoTaiTi/l,  566,  a.
KaTaK\r]ala,  439,  b.
KaraKOfios,  891,  a.
KardKoyos,  256,  a.
KaraXtxreces   rod  Siffwv    ypa<p^,

256,  a.
KaraiKvais,    258,     a;     619,    b:

729,  a.
KaratrfipaT'fipia,  256,  b.
KaraTre'ATTjy,  1138,  b.
KoToircATt/CTj,  1138,  b.
KaTOTreTacMa,  1185,  a.
KaTa^pdKTT)s,  256,  b.
KaToo-KOTTTjs  ypa<pii,  257 f  a.
KaTcurrpwuara,  784,  b.
KoTOTo/to/,  1121,  a.
Karax^ipoTOfia,  271,  a.
KoTox'5ff'jwoTo,  1036,  a,
KoT€77uai/,  403,  b ;  460,  b.
KaTTjyopia,  578,  a.
KariiyopoSy  1085,  b.
KoTOTTTpoi/,  1052,  a.
KaTopvTTeiv,  555,  b.
Karoxevy,  626,  b.
Kdrpii/os,  118,  a;  984,  b.
Kdrw  rpixias,  892,  a.

„     reTpLx<^tJ^^vos,  892,  a.
KaTuvaKt],  882,  b.
KoToya/coe/xipot,  1153,  b.
KoOo-iy,  904,  a.
KauT^to:/,  274,  b  ;  904,  a.
K€({5as,  260,  a.
K€t/j(a,  673,  b.
KeKpv<pa\os,  329,  a.
K^AcoWes,  1100,  b.
KeAevtTT^y,  782,  a  ;  944.  b.
Ke'Arjs,  287,  b  ;  610,  a.
Ke'i/Toupos,  153,  b.
Kei/TptdSot,  410,  a.
Kepata,  789,  b.
KepolTts,  59,  a.
Kepojueus,  532,  b.
Kepdynov,  532,  b.
Ke'pa^os,  210,  a  ;  532,  b ;  1098,  a.
Ke'pas,  126,  a  ;  789,  b.
KcpoTtoi/,  1213,  b.
KepKtSes,  1122,  a.
K4pvov,  1000,  b.
Kfpovxoi,  790,  b.
Ket^aAif,  133,  b.
Ki)Traia  ^vpa,  425,  b.
Ktjttos,  618,  a.
Kr]poypa(pia,  903,  b.
KrfpvKciov,  218,  a.
KrjpvKiov.  218,  a.
K^Tos,  152,  a.
Kr70€i^s,  148,  a.
Ki0opty,  720.  b.
KtdapcpSia,  977,  a.
KiWagos,  235,  b.
KtWes,  556,  b.
Kfo-TTj,  288,  a.
Ki(TTO(p6pos ,  288,  b.
Kiwu,  323,  a.
KAapwTaj,  366,  a.
KAetSoSxot,  1111,  b.
KAeiepov,  626,  b.
KXfts,  627,  a
KA€i//v5pa,  61»'i,  R.


INDEX.

KArjSoGxoi,  1111,  b.
KKvpopdfios,  595,  b.
KXrjpos,  595,  b.
KATjpoux^o,  313,  b  ;  314,  a.
K\vpovxoi,    313,    bj   314,    b;

1162,  a.
K\r}T€veiv,  93,  b.
K\vrvpes,  294,  b.
KA^Topey,  294,  b.
KAtSafos,  546,  a.
KA/yUo,  296,  b.
KKijuuKides,  789,  a.
KA(/io^,  975,  a ;  1009,  b.
KArj/r/,  671,  b;  673,  a.
K\iviSiov,  671,  b.
KAto-tas,  625,  b.
K\oirrjs  StKTj,  300,  a.
Kmc^et^j,  551,  b.
Ku4<paXov,  673,  b.
Kj/^Mot,  378,  b.
Kvr]^lis,  822,  a.
K({7|,  454,  a.
Ko7X»7.  348,  a.
K6eopvos,  366,  a.
KoTAoi/,  1122,  a.
KoiTuvis,  425,  a.
KJAowres,  867,  b.
K(JAa|,  892,  a.
Ko\€6s,  577,  a.
KoAAugto-TTjs,  270,  b.
KdAAugos,  270,  b.
KoAoo-o-ds,  322,  a.
K6\iros,  322,  b ;  1203,  a.
KoKuvai,  556,  a.
K6ti-n,  328,  b.
KofifxdTiov,  344,  b.
KofifiUTiKd,  1146,  a.
Ko/iM<is,  1 146,  a.
KJj/SuAos,  752,  a.
KovidT-qs,  870,  a ;  979,  a.
KoviiroSes,  1153,  I).
KovtSs,  357.  b  ;  789,  a.
Kovduov,  768,  b.
Kovis,  622,  a.
KoTTTeti/,  627,  b.
Kopa|,  627,  a.
K(ipSa^  280,  a  ;  344,  b.
K<$p77,  891,a;  892,  b.
Kopivdia  Kdpr),  606,  a.
Kopivdid^eaOai,  606,  a.
KopvSavres,  364,  a.
KopvSavTiKd,  364,  a.
Kopv§avTi(riii6s,  364,  a.
K(Jpu/igos,  328,  b.
KopivT),  881,  b.
K(Jpus,  565,  b.
Kopv(paia,  548,  a.
KopcifTj,  126.  a  ;  627.  a.
Kopocvls,  325,  a  ;  363,  a.
Ko(rfx.r}T'ns,    365,   a;     581,   b;

624,  a.
Koa-fjLoi,  365,  a.
Ko(Tno(rdv5a\oi,  282,  a,
K6tii^os,  831,  b.
KoTTa§uov,  366,  a.
KoTT(£gto>/,  366,  a.
K6TTa§os,  366,  b.
K<frTuT6y,  367,  a.
KorvXr),  367,  a  ;  381,  b.
KoTUTTio,  367,  a.
Kw/xi,  328,  b.


1249

Kowpeus,  197,  a.
Koupe&jTtr,  101,  b.
Kovptfios  irapOdvos,  891,  a.
Koupt'y,  197,  b.
K6<pivos,  358,  a.
KoxAtaptoj',  301,  a.
Kox\las,  300,  b.
Kpc£g§aTos,  674,  a.
Kpa577,  1123,  a.
KpaSlrjs  v6fios,  1 120,  a,
Kpa»'oy,  565,  b.
Kpa<rveS^rai,  280,  a.
Kpda-ir^Sou,  665,  b.
KporVjp,  153,  b;  367,  b
Kpcdypa,  586,  b.
Kp4iiSa\a,  381,  b.
KpeoirtwAetoj',  722,  a.
KpeooTr(i\7]s,  722,  a.
KpVji/r;,  543,  b.
Kp777r/s,  368,  b.
KpiOo/jiavTeia,  41 7,  a.
Kpi'/fos,  627,  a.
Kpi6s,  133,  b;   149,  b.
KptTof,  369,  b.
KpofcTj,  1000,  a.
KpoK(i}T6v  -6s,  370,  a.
Kp({»/ia,  370,  a.
Kpoa-croi,  537,  a.
KpSraXo}/,  370,  a.
Kpoi^ej?',  627,  b.
Kpovfia,  381,  b.
KpovireCia,  381,  b.
KpvTTTeta,  371,  a.
Kpvirrii,  371,  a.
KpuTTTJo,  371,  a.
KpvTTToi,  372,  a.
KpwguAoy,  328,  b.
KT€t's,  881,a.
KT-fjfxaTa  459,  b.
Kvafloy,  380,  b.
Kua/tos,  57,  a.
Kvav&l/iciv,  224,  a.
Kv€i(TTTJp(s,  1005,  b;   1006,  a.
KiJgos,  372,  b;   1112,  b.
KvOvpoSlKTis,  888,  a.
Kt^KAa.  378,  a.
Ki//cAdy,  381,  a.
Ku/fAtoStSacr/coAot,  279,  a.
KukAos,  35,  a;  298,  a;  1034, b.
KiXiffis,  714,  a.
Kvfia,  381,  a.
Kvfi€aKov,  381,  a.
Kifi€v,  381,  a.
KWtj,  565,  b.

Kvvt)yeriK6v  ^iarpov,  1186,  a.
Ki/>'({(Toupo,  147,  b.
Ky»'(J(roi;poy,  147,  b.
KypSoo-ra,  920,  a;  1130,  a.
KvpSiis,  183,  a.
Kwpto,  T],  399,  a.
Kvpioi,  101,  b.
Kvpjoy,  213,  a;  377, b.
Kvwv,  152,  b.
KwStof,  673,  b.

KoiSor,  1133,  b.  .

Kcoea,  673,  b.  /

KwAa/cperat,  310,  b.
Kwnos,  277,  b ;  279,  a.
KcafJLt^Zia,  341,  b.
Kc^vetof,  593,  a.
Kwonrtiov^  351,  a.
4  L


1250

Kwttt;,  239,  a;  788.  a.
KwTTw,  384,  b.
KwpvKO/uLaxict,  583,  a.
KwpvKos,  195,  b.
Ka>s,  260,  a.


AaSi],  239,  a.

AayuB6\os,  881,  b.

Ao7»Jy,  Aay(i)5,  152,  b.

Aa2<pos,  1186,  a.

Aau7raSapx^«.  666,  a.

AafuraBrfSpofxia,  666,  a.

Aa/t7ro57}4>opfo,  666,  a.

AafXTraZr](p6pot,  666,  b.

AafxiraZiov,  892,  a.

Aa/^TraSoGxoJ  o7«''.  666,  a.

Ao/tTray,  666,  a.

Aajoh'iKios,  225,  a.

Aapi(T(TOTroioi,  1094,  a.

Adpi/aK€s,  555,  b.

AaT07€?oi',  366,  b.

Adrol,  366,  b.

Adrpeis,  883,  a.

AavpocTTciTot,  280,  a.

Adcppia,  667,  b.

Ae'gTjs,  827,  a.

Acnroixaprvplov  Siicrj,  513,  a.

Aenrovavriou  ypa^i),  679,  a.

AfiiroaTpoTlov  ypatpij^  679,  a.

AetTroToitou  ypajpi\,  144,  a.

AeiTovpyia,  679,  a.

Ae/ct£j^,  366,  b ;  872,  b.

AfKdi/iov,  872,  b.

AiKTpov,  673,  b.

AeoviSeio,  681,  a.

Ai-naZva,  397,  b.

A67rToup7of,  681,  a.

Ae<rxn,  681,  a.

Acvfcbs  uvi}p,  890,  b.

AevKw/M,  903,  a.

A^x^pva,  593,  b.

Ae'xos,  673,  a ;  673,  b.

A€«i/,  150,  b.

AriSdpiov,  853,  a.

ApSos,  853,  a.

A^iTov,  970,  b.

AiiKvdos,  192,  b ;  555,  a ;  558,  a ;

675,  a.
A^fcua,  411,  b.
Aiivaios,  225,  a.
Aijvaiuu,  224,  a ;  225,  a.
A-nvoi,  555,  b.
Ariuds,  1137,  b.

A-niiapxinhu  ypaixnareiov,  390,  a.
Arj^idpxoi,  441,  a.
A7?$ts,  403,  a.
Artpol,  708,  a.
Atgtwojuaj'Tero,  417,  a.
AiSavwrpis,  3,  b.
Atgupi/fs,  786,  a.
Ai6vpv6v,  786,  a.
Atdorofi(a(,  671,  a.
AiKfiSs,  1183,  b.
AUyov,  411,  a;  1183,  b.
Aj/cvoilMipoy,  411,  a  ;  1183,  b.
Airpa,  709,  a  j  814,  a  j  1213,  b.
ALxds,  752,  a.
AfTfuoy,  1122,.b.


INDEX.

Aoyurrai,  36,  b.
Aoyi(TTi]piov,  479,  a.
Aoyiariis,  222,  a  ;  478,  b.
Aoyoypdipot,  710.  b  ;   1085,  a.
AoyoTTOLoi,  710,  b  ;  1085  a.
A6yxv,  587,  b  ;  588,  a.
Aoyxo^Spoi,  587,  b.
AoerpSu,  183,  b.
Aoi§ai,  1000,  a.
Aoidopias  S'lKT},  217,  a.
AouT^p,  185,  a.
Aovri)piov,  185,  a.
Aoinp6v,  183,  b  ;  189,  b.

„         VVfKplKdv,  185,  b.

AovTpo^Spos,  185,  b.

A6<pos,  566,  a.

Aoxoyo^,  483,  a;  1098,  a.

Adxos,  483,  a  ;  486,  b ;  1098,  a.

„      iipdios,  185,  a.
AvKaia,  720,  a.
AvKOfxiideios,  892,  a.
AiJ/fos,  586,  b.
Aupo,  148,  b ;  720,  a.
Avx^os,  713,  a.
Avxvovxos,  236,  a ;  669,  a.
Amos,  225,  a.

ACCTTTJ,  710,  b.

Adoiriop,  710,  b.
Aanros,  710,  b.
AwiroSvrrjs,  710,  b.


MdyaSis,  779,  a.

Mayeipela,  35,  a.

Mdyeipoi,  305,  b.

Mc£Co,  305,  b  ;  745,  b ;  870,  b.

MaiixoKTr^pidov,  223,  a.

Maiffuv,  892,  b.

MdKcWa,  707,  b ;  848,  b.

Ma/fpoV,  344,  b.

Mct/CTpo,  1,  a.

MoAA.({y,  1097,  b.

MduSaKos,  626,  b.

MavSuos,  665,  a.

MoySuTj,  665,  a.

Mcii/T/s,  366,  b.

Mavreiou,  836,  b.

Mdmfis,  416,  a.

MovTiK^,  415,  b.

MdpTjs,  732,  a.

M({pjj,  732,  a.

Mdptarov,  732,  a.

MapavTTtov,  732,  b.

MapTvpla,  732,  b.

MacTTjpe^,  1224,  a.

McuTTiyov6fioi,  735,  a.

MaaTiyo({>6poi,  735,  a.

Me£<rTif,  549,  b.

„       KepaynKi],  515,  a.
Moo-T/xr?,  903,  b.
Maxatpo,  197,  b ;  373,  b  j  975,  a.
Moxaiptoj',  975,  a.
-^axaipis,  197,  b.
M4yapov,  1105,  a.
M€5«/ii/os,  748,  b.
MieiffTcureai,  513,  b.
M6i07ayy<Jj,  101,  b.
MetAio,  436,  a.
Met\/xat,  269,  a.


Metoj/,  101,  b.
Me'Aai/,  170,  b.
Me\at/56xov,  171,  a.
MeAio,  587,  b.
Me\lKpaTov,  1205,  b.
McAtTToOro,  555,  a.
MfWeipriv,  446,  b.
MeAoTTotta,  778,  a.
MeveAaeio,  749,  a.
Mfpoj/,  750,  b.
MeaavXios  ^vpa,  425,  a.
MeVouAos  i^upa,  425,  a.
Meo-Tj/xgpia,  408,  b.
Me(r6Kovpo5  irpdacpaTos,  891,  a.

„  «xf>«^,  891,  a.

Me(ro\a6civ,  858,  a.
Metro fjL^dXioy,  298,  a.
MerroTOJXos,  869,  b.
MeTog«£T7?s,  394,  b.
McTayeiTVMy  759,  a.
MeTayeirvidv,  223,  a.
MeTaAAoi/,  759,  a.
Merai'tTrTpts,  306,  a.
MerdviirTpov,  306,  a.
Mercipxtos,  226,  a.
Merdaraa-is,  280,  a.
MeravAos  (&i>po,  425,  a.
MeTecopoAo7^o,  144,  b.
MeTo'iKiov,  166,  a;  761,  b.
MeroiKoi,  761,  a.
MeTOTrr?,  323,  a.
MeTSvupov,  164,  a.
MerpopSfjLoi,  762,  b.
MeTCtfTror,  786,  a.
MtjKv,  274,  b.
M^y,  228,  a.

„     oTTiwi/,  223,  b.

„     iiJ.66\ifxos,  223,  a.

„     iwl  54Ka,  223,  b.

„     lardfJLevos,  223,  a,

„     KOiAo^,  222,  b.

„    \-fiya)v,  223,  b.

„     fieatov,  223,  b.

„     vavdfjLeyos,  223,  b.

„     irA^pTjs,  222,  b.

„     (peiywv,  223,  a.
M^i'i/cis,  443,  a.
MrjTpayvprai,  73,  a.
Mr]Tp6iTo\ts,  313,  b.
MT/Tpijtfoj',  119,  a.
M-nrp^os,  225,  a.
MTjxoi'a^  722,  a.
MTjxai/T?,  1123,  a.
Mr/xos,  763,  a.
Mi<Tdo<p6poi,  758,  a.
Mio-001/  St/cTj,  764,  a.
Miadciaews  oXkov  SIktj,  764,  a.
MiadaiToi,  758,  a.
MiToi,  1101,  a.
Mirpa,  764,  b.
M^Tpi7,  135,  a.
Mva,  931,  b.
Mvif/iaTO,  556,  a.
M»oj/ii€ro,  556,  a.
Mvola,  366,  a.
Mvua,  366,  a.
Md0oK€s,  290,  b;592,  b.
mSeupes,  290,  b ;  592,  b.
Moix^las  ypoipi],  16,  b.
MoKveSldes,  554,  a.
MoAueSftoj'Tefo,  417,  u.


VLoySypafMfJLov,  900,  b.
Movofidixoi,  574,  a.
Movoxpci>fiaTov,  900,  b.
M6pa,  483,  a;  768,  a.
Mopiai,  142,  a.
Moui/iJx'o,  769,  a.
Movvvxi<iv,  223,  a.
Mova-eia,  772,  b.
Mov<re7ov,  772,  b.
MovaiK-fi,  772,  b.
Mox^<^s,  626,  b.
MvKTrip€s,  713,  a.
MiiAor,  765,  a.
Mi^ai,  712,  a.
Mwpiot,  780,  b.
Mvpnr)K€s,  269,  a.
Mvpoe'f]Kiov,  192,  b.
Mv^^ivai,  35,  a.
Mv^^ivirrfs,  1205,  a.
Mwo-ta,  780,  b.

Mu(rT07a>7<Js,  453,  a  j  477,  a.
Muo-Tot,  453,  a.
Myo-Tttl,  780.  a.
MvffTftpia,  781,  a.
Muo-tiAtj,  305,  a.
Mvffrpov,  305,  a  ;  782,  a.
MucTTpos,  305,  a.
MvwiTTlCeiv,  220,  b.
Mvwii/,  220,  b.

N.

NatStoi/,  556,  b.
Na6s,  97,  a  ;  1105,  a.
Nauopx^a.  782,  b.
Navapxos,  782,  b.
NoiJ/cATjpot,  1087,  b.
UavKpapia,  782,  b;   1155,  b.
l^avKpapos,  782,  b.
Now,  783.  a.

NauTtKol  (Tvyypa^ai,  525,  b.
NouTtKot  t6koi,  525,  b.
Noi/T t/coV,  525,  b.
NouToStKot,  793,  a.
NeavlaKos  aTTa\6s,  892,  a.

„        fx4\as,  892,  a.

„        ^avOSs,  890.  b.

o5a.os,  890.  b ;  892,  a.

„         7ra7xp7jo-Toy,  890,  b.

„         iropouAos,  890,  b.

„         irdpwxpos,  890,  b.

„         irivapds,  890,  b.

„         virepoyKOi,  890,  b.

,,        o^xpos,  890,  b.
NeKpdSeiTri'o;',  557,  a.
NeKooflaTTTot,  558,  a.
NcKuo^aj/TeloJ',  842,  b.
"NeKiaia,  558.  a.
"NfKvaios,  226,  a.
N6juo?a,  794,  b.
Ne>ea,  794,  b.
Ne/tera,  794,  b.
NeoSo/«tf5ejs,  592,  a;  705,  a.
Nco^Tjj/ia,  223,  a.
Neo^uAo/ces,  1111,  b.
N€«K({poj,  20,  a ;  795,  b.
JJedpia,  782,  a.
NecSs,  1105,  a.
liedHTOiKot,  782,  a.
N?;«rT«fa,  1128,  a.


INDEX.
N(5/At«r/xa,  767,  a  ;  808,  b.
Noixiarixaros     Sia(pdopas    ypa<j)-fi,

803,  b.
UofioddTiis,  123,  b  ;  805,  a.
No/xos,  803,  b.

„      Kpadiris,  1120,  a.

„      -irvdiKos,  977,  a.
Nofio<pv\aKes,  803,  b  ;  831,  a.
fiovfx-nvia,  223,  a.
NoD/i/uoy,  814,  a.
NufjL(t>ayoi)y6s,  737,  b.
Nv/i^euT^s,  737,  b.
NiJo-o-a,  610,  b.


H.

Hai/0tK(Jy,  225,  a.
Eov06j  avfjp,  890,  b.
Ho»'0(iT6/3os  ctvrjp,  890,  b.
aeyayia,  488,  a.
"aevayol,  1222,  b.
HewjAao-fo,  1222,  b.
aevia,  619,  a ;  620,  a.
Hei//oy  7po</)rf,  1223,  a.
Hew/ci,  761,  b.
"SeviKhv  TeAos,  36,  b.
HeVos,  619,  b  ;  758,  a.
Hej/wi/ey,  425,  b  ;  620,  a.
He'o-Tijs,     979,   b;     1043,    b;

1223,  b.
alcpos,  577,  a.
aSavov,  1059,  a.
"EvXaKovia,  564,  b.
Ei/p/oy  OLVifip,  890,  b.
Eupcij',  197,  b.
p.vcrrApxos,  581,  b,
"EvaTi/ip,  984,  b.
avarSs,  580,  b.
Hwo-rpa,  185,  a.


O.

'OS€\6s,  816,  b.
'OgoAo's,  821,  b  ;  931,  b.
'OySJStoi',  1127,  b.
^OyKla,  or  Ouy/cta,  1213,  b.
"OyKos,  890,  b.
*OSo;/Tc{7pa,  275,  a.
'OSovrSTpifMfia,  394,  a.
'OSoTToior,  613,  a;   1193,  b.
*O0(Jw7,  851,  b.
'oeSvioy,  851,  b.
OJ/C6T77S,  1034,  b.
OIk€tikop  pLfaoKovpov ,  891,
OtK^/xaro.  425,  a.
OMa,  423,  b.
OMas  S'lK-n,  823,  b.
OtKJffTTjs,  313,  b.
OIkoi,  425,  a.
OTkos,  423,  b.
OIkoctitos,  441,  a.
OiKOTplSaios,  1034,  b.
OiKorpiip,  1034,  b.
OiVT^pol  ^epdirovT^s,  1083,  a
OiVto-TTfpta,  328,  b.
OtVoVeAt,  1205,  a.
Ohos,  1201,  a.
Olv6(popov,  823,  b.
Oiwx<^ot,  1082,  b.


Olvaxooi,  1083,  a.
'Oio-To's,  149,  b ;  1001,  a.
OlauKTTal,  174,  b.
OlwvKrTiKij,  471,  a.
OlwvoTToKos,  174,  b.
OIuvoo-kSttoi,  174,  b.
'OKpiSavres,  1122,  b.
'OKpi€as,  902,  b;   1122,  b.
'OtfTcJcTTuAoS,  1105,  b.

•OAi7opxt«,  134,  b  ;  826,  b.

'OXKdSes,  785,  a.

'0\Koi,  785,  a.

"OA/ioy,  768,  b.

"OA/ioy,  1163,  a.

'OAoKavreiv,  999,  b.

'OXooipvpriKaTa  ipya,  726,  a.

'OAuAiTTio,  828,  a.

'OAv/xmds,  883,  a.

"OAupo,  56,  b.

'Ofioyd\aKT€5,  290,  a  ;  1154,  b.

"Ofioioi,  291,  a;  613,  a.

'Oixo\oyia,  1081,  a.

'0/xo(pwvia,  773,  b.

'O/jLcpdKos,  298.  a  ;  488,  a.

^Ov€ipoTro\ia,  417,  b.

"Ovofjia,  800,  a.

"Ows,  765,  a.

'0|iy,  4,  a.

"O^os,  1204,  b.

'O|u§a^ioj/,  4,  a.

'o|j5ea<|)oi',  4,  a;  381,  b.

'0|u7pt£(^ot,  806,  b.

'O^vfieXi,  1205,  b.

'OTri  761,  b.

'OTTifrejSo/uos,  1105,  b.

"OTTAa,  135,  a.

"OTTArjTey,  1154,  a.

'OTTXirai,  135,  a.

'Oirupa,  163,  b.

"Opyavov,  722,  a.

"0^710,  781,  a.

*Op7i;t<£,  751,  b;  845,  a.

'OpetxoAKos,  845,  b.

'Ope68(apov,  751,  b.

"Op/ctoi/,  661,  b.

"OpKoy,  659,  b.

"Op^oy,  767,  b ;  1006,  a.

"Opvis,  149,  a.

„      ahXos,  149,  a.
Opoi,  99,  a ;  614,  b.
'Opvyfxa,  196,  b.
'Op(p6s,  152,  a.
''Opx'70'ty,  1004,  b.
'Opxv<rrpa,  1122,  a.
'Opx»7<^Ti)y,  1004,  b.
"Offm,  837,  b.
'Oo-twrrfp,  837.  b.
'OffTpdKiov,  532,  b  ;  555,  a.
'OffTpaKKTfiSs,  514,  a,
"Oa-TpoKov,  532,  b.
*0(rxo(popM,  845,  b.  '

'O(rxo<p6poi,  845,  b.
Ogoy,  533,  a.
0077/0,  1213,  b.
Oy7K/o,  1213,  b.
OSSoy,  624,  b.
OvhMfxoi,  483,  b.
OSAoy  dfpdiroDV,  892,  a.
OuA^^XWTo,  999,  b.
OuAox«>roi,  999,  b.
OvpaySs,  484,  a ;  488,  a ;  497,  a
4l  2


1252

Ovpaula,  918,  b.
Oupjaxos,  587,b.
Ovaias  Sikti,  461,  a.
"OcpHS,  136,  b.
'OcpdaAfihs  fidcTKOvos,  521,  b.
*0(piovxos,  149,  a.
"Ocpis,  148,  a  ;  149,  b.
'Oxdfv,  298,  b.
'Oxavov,  298,  b.
"OxrjMo,  1185,8.
'Ox^oKparla,  391,  b;  821,  b.
"O^Vfxa,  835,  b.
'0\1/oS6kt),  873,  a.
*'Oi/^oi/,  835,  b.
*0^ov6fjLoi,  836,  b.
'0\^oTrc>>K€7ou,  722,  a.
'Oi//07r£iA7?s,  722,  a.
*0\f/oirw\ia,  722,  a.
'Oij/o^a^ta,  836,  a.
'O\l/o(pdyos,  836,  a.
'OrpuvTjs,  836,  a.


UayKpariacrTal,  857^  b.
na7KpoTto;/,  857,  a.
na7Xprj(rTos,  892,  a.
naicii/,  846.  b.
HaiSaycuySs,  847,  a.
IlotSopicij'es,  36,  a.
naiSi(TKe7ov,  605,  a.
ITaiSoi^o/ios,  848,  a.
UaiSorpiSai,  581,  b.
UaiSorpocpia,  738,  b.
UaiSuvis,  36,  a.
JlaiT^wv,  846,  b.
nowv,  846,  b.
nctAaiffjua,  713,  b.
noAaj(7/to(ru»'7j,  713,  b.
na\aiarTi,  372,  b;  751,  b.
UaXaiarpa,  849,  a.
na\ai(rTpo<p6\aK€S,  582,  b.
naAT?,  713,  b.
naAtyKctTTTjAos,  258,  b.
UaWaK-n,  349,  a  ;  892,  b.
UaWaKis,  349,  a.
nahrSv,  587,  a.
na^§ot£«;Tta,  854,  b.
ndfifiaxoi,  857,  b.
ndiMpvXoi,  572,  a.
ncfi'ttiuos,  223, a;  224,  a ;  225,
nai/Sio,  861,  a.
Uav5oK€7ov,  258,  a  ;  619,  b.
nayeAArjVta,  861,  b.
no»^7upi5,  861,  b.
Tlavidovia,  861,  b.
navoirXif},  135,  a.
riavoDA/coj,  1101,  a.
ndinros,  892,  a.

„       cVepos,  891,  b.

„       irpwros,  891,  b.
napc{go<7is,  344,  a.
napaSoKiov,  106,  b  ;  863,  a.
napd§o\ou,  106,  b  ;  863,  a.
HapayvadiSes,  566,  a.
TlapaypadiSiov,  548,  a.
nopo7pa4)ij^  93,  a  j  470,  a ;  86

a.
Uapayaiyi^,  484,  b.
TLapayciS-ns,  864,  a.


INDEX.

Ilapddii(ros,  863,  b.

napa^po/xiSes,  580,  b.

Uapadvpa,  625,  b.

nopatgoTTjs.  379,  b.

Ilapa/fOTogaAAetj/,  596,  b.

na/JOKaTagoATf,    93,  a  ;   103,  b  ;
403,  b  ;  863,  a.

UapuKaTadriKT),  102,  b  ;  863,  b.

TlapaKaTaQriKT]s  S'lKr],  102,  b.

UapaXeyfadai,  197,  b.

JJapaXlrai,  865,  a.

Udpa\oi,  865,  a;  1155,  a.

UdpaAos,  865,  a.

Uapd/xeaos  Sa/cruAos,  95,  b.

Uapavoias  ypacpi^,  865,  a.

Xlapavdixwv  ypa<pT^,  856,  b.

Iiapdvvfx<pot,  737,  a.

napaireTacrna,  1122,  b.

YlapaTT^yfiaTa,  154,  b.

YlapairpeaS^ia,  866.  a.

Tlapaa-peaSeias  ypa(f>T^,  866,  b.

IlapaTryAis,  843,  a.

Tlapa^f>v flora,  790,  b.

napa(ro7777s,  866,  b.

Tlapdcrrifiov,  699,  a.

IlapocrtTos,  892,  a.

UapaaKi^viov,  1122,  a  ;  1146,  b.

napo(7Tci5es,  97,  a.

Uapaa-Tds,  97,  b  ;  425,  b.

Uapdaraai,  iv,  1105,  b.

Uapdaraais,  403,  b  ;  867,  b.

liapaa-rdTai,  593,  a ;  789,  a.

Uapatpwvla,  113,  h.

UapaxopvyiiiJ.a,  1146,  b.

Uapdxpufios,  891,  a.

UapaxvTTjs,  185,  b.

Tlaooxc>>p'f}yVM'°;  1146,  b.

nopa»|/7j^tcrToi/,  892,  b.

TlapeSpia,  868,  a.

ntipeSpot,  867,  b.

napei(Typa(pi^,  868,  a.

nopejcr7pa^7js  ypacp'rj,  868,  a.

UapriyopTjfx.aTa,  1146,  b..

nopififoj',  548,  a.

Uap-^opos,  378,  b.

nap0ej/etai,  871,  a.

Uapdevia,  871,  a.

napdet/oi,  871,  a.

no/j0€Vos,  150,  b.

ndpodoi,  1122,  a.

Udpodos,  280,  a.
I.    ndpoxos,  737,  a.

UapvcpTi,  707,  b.

natTTJs,  871,  a.

'n.a(Tro<p6pLov,  871,  b.

no(rTO(|)dpos,  871,  a.

ndraiKoi,  639,  a.

rioxc'^a  ypavs.  892,  b.

HeSiaioi,  1155,  a.

n4Si\ov,  220,  b.

Ile^oKOi'TtcrTar,  503,  a.

ne^eVai/JOt,  488,  b.

neActat,  840,  b.

neAaVai,  882,  a.

ncAoTTjs,  295,  a.

ntAeiaSes,  840,  b.

rieAe/cus,  1614,  a.
),    neAToo-Tot,  135,  b;  487,  bj  882,
b.

nc'ATTj,  882,  b.

neye'oToi,  882,  b.


YlevTaerripis,  222,  b.
UevTadKoi,  883,  a.
neVTO0Aor,  883,  a.
UevTaKoa-iapxla,  488,  a.
Ilevr aKoaiofifdifivoi.    266,    a ;

1155,  a.
TlevTaKielCeip,  1095,  b.
nej/Tt^At^oj,  582,  a.
YleuTdirTvxa,  1092,  a.
nevT»;«(}j/Topos,  785,  a.
UePTTiKoa-T-f},  884,  a.
TlevTH^Kocnrip,  483,  a.
ne»'TrjKO(rToAo7ot,  884,  a.
IliVTriKo<TTvs ,  483,  a.

Il€VT7)p€lS,  785,  b.

neVAos,  884,  b.

TlepiaKTOi.  1123,  a.

UepiaKTos,  887,  a.

UepiafifjLa,  91,  b.

TlepiaTnou,  91,  b.

UepieKrifia,  79,  a.

rieptgt^AoioJ',  79,  a.

rifpi&oAoy,  996,  b.

neptSejTTi'oi/,  577,  b.

Uepie-TTios,  225,  a.

n^plCaixa,  1075,  a.

nepj/fjJxA.iOj',  300,  b.

Uepifirjpia,  524.  b.

neptj/6(^,  788,  b.

UepioiKOi,  290,  b;  887,  a.

neptTreVeta,  1145,  b.

IlepnrSSiov,  639,  a.

nepiVoAot,  463,  a ;  486,  b.

Ueplirrepos,  1105,  b.

Tlepiirrvacreiv,  484,  b.

Tlfpippavri]pia,  1 1 ,05,  a.

nepto-KeAAts,  889.  a.

nepfcTia,  441,  b

Hepiarriapxos,  441,  b.

nepio-TvAtoi/,  425,  a  ;  889,  b

UepiTeixicrfJi.6s,  1183,  a.

IlepiTtos,  225,  a.

nep6u-n,  531,  b.

UepovnTpis,  531,  a.

Uepovis,  531,  b.

Ileptrevy,  149,  a.

Ueaa-oi,  670.  b.

neraAtcr/ios,  515,  a.

Ilerdaiov,  920,  a.

neVoo-os,  920,  a.

neVaupoj',  748,  a.

Il4r€vpov,  748,  a.

nerpogt^Aoy,  1138,  b.

UT)Sd\iov,  788,  b.

HtjAtjI,  565,  b.

nrjAoTTciTts,  889,  b..

n-liyrj,  1101,  a.

n-nviKT},  330,  a.

n-hviov,  565,  b;  1101,  a.

U-fipa,  886,  a.

n^X^s,  126,  a  J  721,  b  ;  751,  b,

880,  b.
TliSos,  1202,  a.
Uieoiyia,  412,  a.
UlK-rifia,  920,  a.
ni'Aiov,  920,  a.
TUKos,  920,  a.
niKo)T6v,  919,  b.
liivaKiK-i],  144,  b.
nfval,  1092,  a.

„     iKK\rj(na<TTtK6s,  392,  b.


niaa-uais,  1202,

YlAaiaioi/,  485,  a.

n\avriTai,  922,  a.

n\av(i}fifuoL  aa-Tfpes,  922,  a.

UKaariK-i),  1059,  a.

nAaTa7iij,  381,  b.

HXaraydviov,  381,  b.

Ux4dpQv,  753,  b ;  928,  a.

TlMi<TToSoXivZa,  1112,  b.

UK-qBinraTos,  225,  a.

TL\rtKTpov,  721,  b.

UXrifivT),  378,  b.

IlATj/Aoxi^ot,  454,  a.

n\r)fjLox6ri,  454,  a.

UXiveiov,  485,  a ;  668,  a.

TlKiveis,  668,  a.

nA.rj/aoy,  668,  a;  923,  a.

UXolou,  785,  a.

nXovfiaplos,  851,  a.

nXvvT7}pia,  928,  b,

nr?7os,  344,  b.

nj/j^l,  440,  b.

mSes,  783,  b  ;  790,  b.

UodoKaKio],  240,  b.

noieri/,  14,  b.

UoifTadai,  14,  b.

Tloirjcns,  14,  b.

notrjT<{s,  14,  b.
TIoiKiXT-ffs,  851,  a.
not;/r?,  929,  a.

UoiTpSTTios,  224,  a.

noAe/xapxoy,    123,   a;   483,   aj

929,  a.
TloXiot.  KardKO/JLOS,  890,  b.
noXiTeia,  288,  b.
noXlTTjs,  289,  a.
TloXtTocpvXaKes,  1094,  a.
ndAoy,  615,  a ;  929,  b.
UoXifiiTos,  1101,  b;  1102,  b.
HoXvirrvxa,  1092,  a.
UofiTT-n,  931,  a.
U6vTos,  226,  a.
Uopia-rai,  942,  b.
Hopvehv,  605,  a.
U6pvv,  604,  b.
Ilopi't/cbj'  TfXos,  605,  b.
HopvoiocTKoi,  605,  a.
TLopvoSo(TK6s,  891,  b.
Uopvoypcupia,  912,  a.
XlopvoTeAwj/ot,  605,  b.
ncipTTol,  298,  b.
nJ/wnj,  531,  b.
n6pTn)p.a,  532,  a.
nocretSecii/,    223,    a  ;    224,    a ;

225,  a.
TIoaeid(i)Via,  945,  b.
Uoa-iSacav,  225,  a.
noTafi6s,  152,  b.
n<5Tos,  1082,  a.
novs,  751,  b  ;  893,  a.
TIpoLKTopes,  951,  a.
n/Jo|tep7tSo<,  928,  b.
Upariip  XiOos,  1034,  b  ;  1205,  b.
UpecrSuTTjs,  891,  b.
Up-qarripes,  543,  b.
IIp^o'Tts,  151,  a.
npiwv,  1029,  a.
Tlpodyu(v(Tis,  453,  a.
npoa7c«j7e<as  ypacpi},  958,  b.
npogoA^,  426,  a  ;  958,  b.
npo€ovXevfia,  210,  b  ;  806,  a.


INDEX.

Upo^ovXev/xa  iirireiov,  211,  a.
UpoSovXoi,  960,  a.
Upoydfieia,  737,  a.
UpoSiKacria,  897,  b.
IlpdSo^os,  1105,  a-
UpoSoa-'ia,  961,  a.
npoSoalas  ypa(pri,  962,  a.
UpSSpofios,  425,  b.
II/JocS/jei^oi/iTa  <^uAi^,  212,  b.
npoedpia,  646,  a.
npJeSpot,  210,  b;212,  a.
Upoeiacpopd,  449,  a.
Upoeiacpopas  St'/cTj,  962,  b.
npoe/j.§oXis,  787,  a.
UpoTtpoffla,  or  Ilporjpoaiai,  962,  b.
ITpe^flecTiy,  555,  a.
Upodefftiia,  460,  a ;  964,  a.
UpoOea-fiias  vdixos,  964,  a.
np(^0i/pa,  424.  b.
npJevpoj/,  627,  a.
UpoiKbs  S'lKt],  1048,  a.
npo<|,  436,  a.
TlpoKaQapais,  453,  a.
TlpoKaXitadai,  398,  a.
UpoKaTa€oXi],  1103,  a.
np(J/cA77o-iy,    398,    a  J    403,    a;

404,  a ;  732,  a.
UpoKoiTiov,  428,  b.
UpoKiwu,  152,  b.
Up6Xoyos,  1146,  a.
Ilpo/xavTcia,  837,  a.
UpSfiavTis,  839,  a.
npo/j.-fjOeia,  962,  b.
Tlpoixvi]<Trpiai,  736,  b.
UpofxvT](TTpiSes,  736,  b>
Il/jtJvaos,  1105,  a.
npo|ey/a,  619,  a;  620,  a.
npt^lej/os,  620,  a.
Updnovs,  790,  b.
npoTTwAoio,  963,  a.
UpS^prjais,  897,  a.
npoaKardSXriixa,  1103,  a.
UpocTKeipdXiiov,  555,  a ;  673,  b.
Upoa-KTJuioy,  1122,  a.
np6a-KXr](Tis,  403,  a  ;  733,  a.
npoaKvvr}(Tts,  16,  a.
np<5o'o5oj'  ypd\paadai,  211,  a.
npotrrrfs,  425,  b.
Tlpoara.ri]pios,  224,  a.
UpoardTris,  295,  a.

„        ToG  d-fifxov,  964,  a.
npoaTifj.au,  1133,  a.
npo(TTip.aa6ai,  1133,  a.
npoa-ri/nifia,  1133,  a.
n/)0(rT(Jo»',  425,  a.

Up6(TTvX05,  1105,  b.
IlpSa-TVTra,  457,  a.
n/JtJo-Tvn-os,  1181,  a.
npocwTreroy,  889,  b.
UpSawTTov,  889,  b,
ITpoTeAeio  ydfutiv,  737,  a.
UpoTopL-i],  133,  b.
np^TOj/ot,  783,  a ;  790,  b.
UpoTpvyia,  964,  b.
UpovvcKoi,  36,  a.
Ylpo<pi\Ti]s,  453,  a.
npo<|)^Tts,  837,  a.
npoxeipoTOfio,  211.
Up6xvfJia,  1201,  b.
Upou)fjLO(Tia,  92,  b.
npuAccs,  278.  b;  1005,  a.


1253
UpvXis,  278,  b  ;  1005,  a.
Upv/xvT],  787,  a.
UpvTavela,  210,  b.
npvTauela,  103,  b  ;  970,  b.
IlpvTaveTov,  970,  a.
UpvTave7s,  210,  b;  970,  b.
Upcoi,  408,  b.
Upcipa,  786,  a.
npcoTayavta-riis,  611,  b.
np«T(JAeiov,  433,  a.
lipwroardTi^s,  484,  a.
nTv/cTtoj/,  1092,  a.
TLtvou,  848,  b.
Tlvavi^ia,  976,  a.
nuaveij/tcSj/,  223,  a.
Uvyfiaxia,  974,  b.
nt;7/i^,  752,  a  ;  974,  b.
nxryiMoavvt],  974,  b.
Uvywp,  752,  a.
Uv4Xoi,  185,  a ;  555,  b.
TlvdaiaTai,  978,  a.
nu^ia,  976,  b.

UvOlKOS  v6lJL0S,  911,^.

Uieioi,  978,  b.

UvdSxpwroi,  480,  b.

UvKv6(rTvXos,  1106,  a.

nv/cToj,  874,  b.

UvKriov,  1002,  a.

nuAo7(Jpat,  80,  b.

UvXaia,  80,  b.

niXrj,  943,  a.

nuA/s,  943,  a.

TlvXuv,  425,  a ;  943,  b.

n{>$,  974,  b.

nvl'iSiov,  978,  b.

nuiroj/,  171,  a;  216,  a.

ni^is,  978,  b.

nu|os,  216,  a.

Ilvpdypa,  545,  a.

riypo/,  555,  b.

n.^P7os,  481,  b ;  976,  b ;  1774,  b.

Uvpia,  185,  a.

IlvpiaT-fjpiov,  185,  a.

UvpofxauTela,  417,  a.

Uv^pixv-  1005,  a.

ITu/J^txto-To/,  1005,  a.

Uuyav,  196,  b.

n«ATjToi,  884,  a ;  929,  b.

nuX-rj-rfipiov,  929,  b.


'Fa§Siov,  903,  a.
'Pa§5op6fioi,  32,  a.
'Pd§Soi,  402,  b ;  1209,  a.
'PaeSovxoi,  32,  a ;  1125,  a.
'Pa§5o(t>6poi,  1125,  a.
'PaSivdios,  226,  a.
'Paurrnp,  726,  a.
'Pacers,  13,  b.
'P^7ea,  673,  a.
'P-nrivT}  ffxtvltrq,  903,  b.
'Pr\TopiK^  ypacpii,  462,  a ;  994,  b,
'Pi^Tpa,  804,  a ;  994,  b.
•p^Twp,  994,  b;  1086,  a.
'PivoTTvXti,  943,  a.
'PtTTt's,  539,  a.
'PiiricrT'fip,  539,  a.
'PoddvT],  1100,  a.
'PoS6ueXi,  1205,  b.
4  L  3


1254

'Pdrrrpov,  627,  a.
'PuKovY],  996,  a.
yifi/xa,  185,  b.
'Pvfi6s,  117,  b;  378,  b.
'Pvirapoypoupla,  912,  a.
'Pvaria,  1081,  a.
'PurSv,  995,  a.
'Pufjuiios,  225,  a.


2.

iSdgavov,  851,  b
'Sa€vKri,  1007,  a.
"Sayrtveveiv,  990,  a.
SoT^ioj,  989,  b.
"Sdyiou,  710,  a.
^oicKios,  1203,  a.
2t£«/coy,  329,  b;996,  b.
2<iKos,  135,  a.
ZiaXafxlyia,  865,  a.
2aXa/i(v(oi,  865,  a.
2(£Airt7|,  1170,  b.
2o/tgu/n7,  1007,  a.
Jia/xivKurTai,  1007,  b.
2oi'5(£\to>',  1007,  b.
2&v^a\ov,  1007,  b.
Sav^s,  625,  b.
'XdpaKoVf  59,  a.
:S.ap5d)V,  989,  a.
'S.&pura,    or   'S.dpuraa,   488,

589,  a.
2<£Tvpos,  1141,  a.
'2avpayri]p,  587,  b,
26go(rT<{s,  225,  a.
2ejporoy,  379,  b.
"XfipcupSpos,  379,  b.
26fpios,  152,  b.
2€t(rox0eio,  1014,  a.
'Seivrpov,  1046,  a.
2;jKof,  142,  a.
2W^,  260,  b;1105,  a.
277/iafai,  1044,  b.
2^juaTa,  556,  a.
'S.-nfieioypaxpoi,  806,  b.
'S.TllxCiov^  638,  a ;  1044,  b.
20eVia,  1071,  a.
2t57jpDjwo»^€io,  417,  a.
2t»f€AiK<$s,  892,  a.
2fKti'j/ts,  280,  a.
•Xivh<!>v,  851,  b.
2i(ri^pa,  882,  a.
:S,i<rvpva,  882,  a.
2tT€UT7js,  520,  a.
•S.irt]pi(Tiov,  487,  a;  1048,  a.
2iT07r«Aoi,  1047,  b.
Xnos,  1047,  a.
2fToi;  5iK77,  1048,  a.
2(TO(^u\aK€(oc,  618,  a.
:Eiro<p6\aKes,  1046.  b.
2jT«»'ot,  1047,  b.
2KaA(ia,  52,  a.
2KaAis,  1008,  a.
l^KoXfioi,  787,  b.
2Ka7r(£v7?,  848,  b.
2KaireSpo,  582,  a.
2k<£4)7?,  366,  b ;  786,  a.
JiKa(t>lov,  848,  b.
iKiirapvov,  141,  b.
^Kt{rti  Kpffiaard,  789,  b.
„    4^Aii/a,  788,  a.


INDEX.

l^Kevn  irX^Krd,  788,  a.
^K€v6<popos,  623,  b.
2K:r?i'^',  1 122,  a.
2K7jTrToOxot,  1011,  b.
2Kfi'7rTpo*',  1011,  a.
2K^a,  900,  b.
"XKiaypuiPri,  900,  a.
"SiKiaypacpia,  900,  b.
2KtaS6toi',  1213,  a.
'2Kia5T]<popla,  623,  a.
2«tct5to;',  1213,  a.
:SKia5i(TKrj,  1213,  a.
'2,KidQi]pov,  615,  a.
2«:ic{s,  944,  a  ;  1128,  b.

^KifJLTTOVS,  674,  a.

'2,Kipo<popi(iVf  223,  a.
2«:oA(£i,  553,  a.
2koAo4',  370,  b.
"SKopirios,  151,  a.
2«:veoi,  391,  b.
^Kvpia  StK77,  1013,  a.
2kutoAi7,  1013,  a.
:Sfiriyixa,  57,  b.
2/*tAr7,  274,  b ;  420,  a.
2ju»"i»7,  984,  b.
2<JAoy,  415,  b.
2opoi,  555,  b.

2rr£{077,  118,  b;  577,  a;  1101,  b.
2fl-o077Tds,  llOi,  b.
:i^dpyavov,  634,  a.
a  J    '^irapToir6Xios  X^ktikti,  892,  b.
27re?po,  1053,  a.
27r€Tpat  fioelai,  269,  a.
27retpfoJ',  853,  a.
27r€rpo»',  853,  a.

27rt0a/*7^,  372,  b ;  751 ,  b;  1053,  b.
:S,'iroyyia,  905,  a.
2^0^50^,  306,  a  ;  100,  a.
'Sirov5o<l)6poi,  607,  a.
^irSvduKoi,  971,  a.
2TaS(oS/}d/to(,  1055,  b.
^rdSiov,  1055,  a.
2Ta5tos,  1055,  a.
2To0Aiof,  931,  a.

2To0)tt<Jy,  624,  b ;  706,  a ;  729,  a.
2To0/xoCxot,  1087,  b.
I.TdcripiOV,  1146,  a.
2tot^P,  1056,  b.
2Toup(}y,  370,  b.
'2.T(upv\6bp6fjioi,  242,  a.
2T€>/to,  1029,  b.
2Te4)o>'777rAdKOi,  1029,  b.
'2,Ti<pavoir\6Kiov,  1030,  a.
2T€<i)aJ'07rA<J/coi,  1029,  b.
2T€>ai'os,  148,  b;  359,  a.
"XTftpdvupLa,  1029,  b.
2t^Ao»,  550,  b.
2T^/iwi/,  1100,  a.
2t(xos.  280,  a.
2TA€77fs,  185,  a;  329,  a.
2to({,  944,  a.
2x07x05,  280,  a.
•S.t6\os,  786,  a.
2t<J/*ioi',  548,  a.
2tox«o»',  615,  a.
'S.rpdnios,  225,  a.
2TpoT7r>'^y  vavi,  1074,  a.
2x^0X177^5,  5,  b  ;  27,  b ;  1073,  a.

1097,  a.
"STpardviKos,  225,  a.


2xpox<Js,  481,  a.
2xpe7rT({s,  1140,  a.
IrpoyyvXai,  784,  a ;  785,  K.
"Xrpocpevs,  241,  a.
2Tp(5(^t7|,  241,  a.
:S,Tp6(piov,  411,  a.
2xi;Aos,  323,  a;   1071,  a.
'S.rvpdKiov,  587,  b.
2xj5pa|,  587,  b.
SuyyeVeitt,  595,  b.
2u77e''«s,  595,  b.
:S,vyypa<p€i5,  960,  a.
'2vyypa(p'f),  1086,  b.
2u7/cA77X05  iKK\7}(Tia,  439,  b.
^vyKOfjLKTTijpia,  76,  b.
2uKo<^oi'X77s,  1079,  b.
^vKQcpatnias  ypapt],  1080,  a.
SOAot,  1080,  a.
2uAAo76is,  1080.  b ;  1224,  b.
:S,vfiS6\aiov,  1080,  b.
:S,vfjL§o\aia)V  irapa^daeas  SUrf,

1080,  b.
2u/4goA^,  304,  b.
:Sifji§o\ov,  402,  b;  1081,  a.
:S,v/ig6\(cv  airh  Si'/cat,  1080,  a.
:ivfi€ov\oi,  868,  a.
'Xvixixaxoi,  1050,  a.
'S.vixfiopia,  449,  a;  1160,  a.
1,vfnr6aiov,  1082,  a.
2uM<^opers,  485,  b ;  929,  a.
^vii<puvia,  778,  b.
'S.vvaywyit,  357,  b.
IZvvdKKayfia,  1080,  b
2wSt/cos',  1084,  a.
'S.vvZpop.i],  144,  b.
2ui'65pjoi',  1084,  b.
2uj'e5poi,  1084,  b.
1,vvriyopLK6v,  1086,  a.
2v»'V]7opoy,  124,  a  ;  478,  b  ;

1084,  a.
•S.vvd-nK'n,  1080,  b.
'SvudrjKwv    irapaSda-eus  SIkt],

1080,  b.
:^vvdr]na,  1113,  a.
2^0505,  357,  b.
2wotKecr(o,  1087,  a.
:ZuvoiKla,  1087,  a.
'Xwovdia,  357,  b.
'Sivvraypja,  488,  a.
S.vvrdJ^iis,  1084,  b.
2«5i'To|js,  446,  b.
2i'»'X6Aeio,  1160,  a.
2uJ'X€A6ry,  1160,  a.
'Svvrpii/jpapxoi,  1159,  b.
-Xvvwpls,  378,  b.
2vpj7|,  1088,  a.
2vp/xo,  1088,  b.
'2,v<TKt\voi,  357,  a.
2ucr(7fxjo,  1088,  b.
2uo-xo<r»j,  488.  a.
2urrTi;Aos,  1106,  a.
2(/)o7/s,  373,  b.
2(|>a?pa,  918,  a.
:S,<paipai,  269,  a
^(paipels,  918,  b.
2qt>aipt(nf,  582,  a.
2^aipiari^piov,  582,  a;    918,

b.
:$(paipi(rriKijj  918,  b.
2</)otpt(rxiK($y,  582,  a  ;  918,  b.
^aipiarpa,  918,  b.


1<paiponaxia,  582,  a.

:S.<i)fvh6vi),  96,  b ;  329,  a ;  553,  b ;

1056.  a.
2<^€»'8o»'rfTat,  553,  b.
:SfP'nvoirdl)ywv,  890,  b ;  892,  a.
2<j!»7/cT7Jp,  136,  a.
■ZcpiSes,  721,  b.
^payis,  95,  a.
5(^upa,  726,  a.
:S(pvpiov,  726,  a.
SxeSt'cu,  783,  a ;  936,  b.
2x^Mtt  TeTpdywvoy,  602,  a.
2xoipia,  790.
SxoiwgtfxTjs,  553,  a.
Sxorvos,  1011,  b.
SwAtjV,  538,  b.
^ua-rpa,  1035,  b.
^uxppovurTi/iptov,  240,  b.


T.

To7«Jy,  1093,  a.
Tati/to,  521,  a;  1075,  a.
Toji'fSioj',  1075,  a.
Td\avTa,  706,  a.
TtiAaj/Tor,  810,  a;  931,  b.
TdXapos,  220,  b.
TaAoo-t'o,  1099,  b.
TaXacTiovpyia,  1099,  b.
Tafxias,  1096,  a.
Ta^uteta,  738,  b.
Ta^iapxoi,  1098,  a.
Tt£its,  486,  b ;  488,  a.
TttTrrjs,  1097,  a.
Tdiris,  1097,  a.
TappSs,  788,  a.
Tdpaos,  368,  b.
Tavpfdv,  224,  a.
ToGpos,  1 50,  a.
T({0ot,  556,  a.
Ta<ppoiToioi,  469,  a.
Td<ppos,  1183,  b.
Toxv7pa<^o(,  806,  b.

Te'eptTTTTOS,  379,  b.

Tetxtoi',  868,  a.
T€ixoTroi6s,  1099,  a.
Tetxos,  769,  b.
TfAo/xciv,  196,  a.
Te\6to»'  kraipiKSv,  892,  b.
TeXcTOi,  781,  a.
Te'Aos,  488,  a;  1103,  a.
TeXavdpx-n^,  884,  b  ;  1102,  b.
TeXctfj/Tjs,  884,  b;  1102,  b.
Tffxevos,  1103,  b;  1104,  a.
TerpdSpaxH-ov,  438.  b.
TerpaKoyia,  1144,  a.
Terpaopla,  379,  b.
TerpdpxvSf  1119.  b.
Terpapxta,  488,a;   1119,  b.
Terpd(TTv\os,  1 105,  b.
TfTp-hpeis,  785,  b.
TerpueoXov,  438,  b.
TcTTopc^Koin-a,  ot,  1 1 1 9,  b.
T€j5x«o.  135,  a.
TvSevuos,  1134,  b.
Tiryavov,  1008,  a.
T^\is,  59,  a.
Tidpa,  1130,  a.
Tidpas,  1130,  a.
Ti€4pios,  225,  a.


INDEX.
Tt^Tji/^Sio,  1 134,  a.
Tifiv/xa,  266,  a ;  467,  a ;  469,  b ;

1131,  b.
Tiinvreia,  260,  b.
Tifi-nrris,  260,  b.
TifiOKparia,  827,  a.
Ti<|)77,  56,  b.
ToTxos,  868,  a.
Tojxwpvxoy.  593,  a.
ToKoyKixpoi,  525,  a.
TJ/fot  6776ioi,  524,  b.
„     eyyvoi,  524,  b.
,,     vavTiKoi,  525,  b.
TJkos,  524,  b.
ToAuTTTj,  565,  a.
T6txovpoi,  840,  b.
T(5»'ot,  673,  b.
Tc^j/os,  773.
TS^apxoi,  391,  b.
T(J|€Uyuo,  1001 ,  a.
TolevTTJp,  To|€UT7fs,  151,  a.
Tolod-nKV,  126,  b.
T<J|o«/,  126,  a;  149,  b;  151,  a.
Toldrai,  391,  b.
Toireia,  790,  a.
TopevTiKV,  218,  b.
Topiurj,  1169,  b.
Tpoyot,  1141,  a.
TpaycpSia,  1140,  b.
TpdmCa,  749,  b.
TpdiTfCai,  473,  a ;  474,  b ;  556,  b.
„       devrepai,  305,  b ;  750,  a.
„       irpwrai,  305,  b ;  750,  a.
TpaneClrai,  130,  a.

Tpaire^oKSfios,  305,  b.

TpaTreloTTOids,  305,  b.

TpavfiUTOS   CK    irpouoias    ypa^pff],
1148,  a.

Tp(£<^77|,  787,  b.

Tpax"o  StKT7,  1013,  a.

TpiaypL6s,  883,  b.

Tpiaiva,  564,  b.

Tpta/fdSes,  557,  b;  1154,  a.

TptoKas,  223,  a.

TpiaKOffio/xediixvoi,  266.  a.

Tpig({Aos,  1148.

TpiSuv,  853,  a.

TpiSdcviov,  853,  a.

Tpiewvo(p6poi,  853,  a.

Tpt^wj/oj/,  149,  b;  1007,  a.

TpuTTipis,  222,  b.

Tp<77papx^a.  1158,  b.

Tpiiipapxoi,  1158,  b.

Tpiijpeis,  784,  a.

TpiripoTToioi,  785,  a.

Tpifiiiros,  1101,  b;  1102,  a.

Tp/yii^a,  1082,  b;   1204,  b.

Tphovs,  1162,  b.

TpfTTTuxa,  1092,  a.

Tplra,  557,  b.

Tpirayavtar^s,  611,  b.

TptTTua,  1000,  a.

TptTTtJs,  1154,  a.

TpiXo\a§is,  275,  a.

Tpi\pis,  T]  vapacrrevTiKii,  76,  a.

Tpiu>€o\ov,  402,  b.

TpoTToToj/,  1168,  b.

Too<P'n§iaios,  168.  a.

Tp(JxtAos,  1053,  b.

Tpox6s,  378,  a ;  532,  b  ;  1 168,  b.

TpvSXiov,  367,  a.


1256

Tpvyoiiros,  1203,  a.

Tpu7vSro,  411,  b.

TpvyepSoi,  411,  b.

Tpvrdvv,  1170,  a.

Tpv<pd\€ia,  566,  a.

TuAeroi/,  673,  b.

TiXv,  673,  b.

Tujttgos,  556,  a.

TvfjLtTavop,  1180,  a.

T6iros,  532,  b  ;  545,  b  ;  1 181 ,  a.

TvpavulSos  ypa<p-{j,  962,  a.

Tvpavuls,  1181,  a.

Tuporyos,  1181,  a.

Tipffis,  1174,  b.


•Y<£5€s  150,  a.

'raKlvOia,  621,  b.

'ToKrj/0ios,  224,  a.

"TaXos,  1209,  b.

"repeus  ypa^i),  73,  a ;   124,  a ;

622,  a.
"TSoToy  x*^<''*^.  151,  b.
'YSpayayia,  108,  a.
'TSpayerrjs,  765,  b.
'TSpoi/(Js,  453,  a.
'Y5poi5A77y,  622,  b.
'TSpavXiKhv  opydifov,  622,  b.
"TSpauAts,  622,  b.
''TSpT?,  148,  a;  153,  b.
'TSp/o,  1048,  b.
*TSpio</)opio,  623,  a.
'rBp6fie\i,  1205,  b.
'rSpofii}\ov,  1205,  b.
"TSpos,  153,  b.
'TSpox<{os,  151,  b.
"TScop,  151,  b.
'rx-nupoi,  623,  a.
'TAto-TTjp,  1203,  a.
'TAAe??,  572;  1153,  b.
'rxwpoi,  623,  a.
"Yms,  118,  a.
"tiraiQpov,  1105,  a.
"TiraiOpos,  1105,  a.
'TTToo-irto-Taf,  485,  b  ;  488,  a.
"rCiraros,  352,  a.
'r-irepai,  783,  b :  790,  D.
'T-7rfp6(peTa7o5,  225,  a.
'TTrepgeperos,  226,  a.
'T-rreprnxepos,  456,  b  ;  460,  a.
"rirepov,  768,  b.
"ttrcp^ov,  423,  b ;  425,  b.
'TTreudwos,  122,  a;  478,  b.
'TtttJi'tj.  196,  b ;  780,  b.
'Tmjpeo-fo,  623,  b.
'TirTiperris,  623,  b.
'rir6S\r]fia,  790,  b.
'TirogoAews,  1122,  a.
'TTTogoA^y  7pa0^,  623.  b.
'TirSyaiov,  556,  b.
'1Cir6yeiov,  556,  b.
'Tiroypafifiareis,  677,  b.
"tvoypa<pis,  903,  a.
'TTrdSTjMO,  220,  b  ;  1007,  b.
'T7roC«^/toTo,  789,  b.
'rirodiiKT],  525,  b.
"tiroK6\viov,  280,  a.
'TiroKOfffiriTai,  624,  a.
'TiroKpiriis,  611,  a.
4l  4


1256

•TiroA^wov,  1138,  b.
*rirofi€lov(s,  291,  a;  613,  a.
"CirSvonos,  374,  a  ;  457,  a.
'riioir65Lov,  1129,  a.
TirSpxVH-a,  624,  a.
'ViroffK-nuioy,  1122,  b.
'riroxa\wSia,  548,  a.
'rir6xv.  989,  b.
'TTTTioo-jUcJy,  858,  a.
•Tir«^o<n'o,92,  b ;  399,  a ;  403,  b.
•To-ttAijI,  285,  a;  1055,  b.
'ratrds,  588,  b.
*T<nep67roTiJioi,  557,  a.
TifovTot,  1099,  a.


*,

^aiSpvvrai,  1111,  b.
^aivivSa,  918,  b.
*(£Ao776s,  894,  a.
*oAa77opx»«,  488,  a.
*cUo7|,  481,  b;  488,  a.
^dAapov,  894,  a.
*(£Aos,  666,  a.
*av6s,  524,  a ;  669,  a.
♦ofjeVpa,  894,  b.
^ap/jLUKelas  ypa<p-f},  895,  a.
*apfj.aK€VTpiai,  895,  a.
^apfioKlSes,  895,  a.
^apfioKol,  1120,  a.
^apfjidKcov  ypatpi),  895.  a.
*opos,  850,  b.
*4jos,  895.  a.
♦{{or-yavo   677,  a.
*d(r7]\os,  '895,  b.
♦(£<rts,  895,  b.
♦ciSfrrjs,  1090,  a.
♦etSiTta,  1089,  b.
^evdKTj,  330,  a.
♦cpv^,  436,  a.
^6iv6rcu)pov,  164,  a.
♦fiopct,  17,  a.

„      tS>p  4X€ve4pwv,  898,  b.
^idX-n,  871,  b.
«i)U(Ss,  548,  b.
*\id(rios,  223,  a.
«o€e^a,  238,  a.
*oivlKrt,  147,  b.
♦(Jj/os,  896,  b.
♦di/ow  5^/crj,  897,  a.
4fopa^6potf  672,  a.
^op€(oi',  671,  b.
*6pniyi,  720,  b.
*Pfju}6s,  1047,  b.
♦po(Js,  104,  b ;  898,  b.
♦oprrryoi,  785,  a.
*opriKd,  785,  a.
*parpia,  290,  a ;  572,  a ;  1 154,  b.
^parpiKhv  ypaiifuiTeiou,  15,  a.
*vyii,  513,  a.
tpvKos,  551,  a.
4^u\cuc6rov,  250,  a.
«vAa/c€$,  868,  a.
♦uAeucTT^ptor,  91,  b.
*v?Mpxoi,  487,  a  J  899,  a.


INDEX.

*uA7f,  486,  b;  1152,  b.
^v\o§oun\us,  478,  a  ;  899.  a.
*uAov,  1152,  b.
*u(rat,  543,  b.
^(&<ruy,  851,  b,
^uraycoyla,  454,  a.


X.

Xa\iv6s,  548,  a ;  790,  b.
XoA/cera,  270,  a.
Xd\Keioy,  366,  b.
XaKKioLKia,  270,  b.
Xcu\j{i(rix6s,  1084,  a.
Xo.\K(Js,  25,  a.
XaA/foCs,  270,  b.
Xa/xeiyT],  675,  a.
Xafievviov,  675,  a.
Xdpanes,  1183,  a.
Xapdjvioi  KXipMKcs,  1123,  a.
Xe?/ttt,  XeijjLUV,  163,  b.
X€ipeKfiaye7oi',  729,  b.
X€ipt5a>Tbs  x*''"'*'''.  1173,  b.
X€ip6ypa<pov,  271,  b  ;  1087,  a.
X€ip6ixaKTpov,  305,  b ;  729,  b.
XeipoviiTTpov,  729,  b.
XeipoToyciv,  271,  a.
XeipoTovTjToi,  271,  a.
Xeiporoyla,  271,  a.
Xerpw*/,  153,  b.
XeAtSJi/jo,  271,  a.
XeAtSai/io-Taf,  271,  b.
Xe'Aus,  148,  b ;  720,  b.
XeAcii/T;,  720,  b;  1118,  b.
X4pSoira,  57,  a.
XepviSov,  729,  b.
Xeppi^,  303,  b ;  729,  b.
XTjAat,  151,  a.
Xr;/*^,  271,b.
XrjviaKos,  786,  b.
X-npcaaraiy  596,  a.
xedviay  282,  a.
XjAopx/o,  488,  a.
XtTci*',  1171,  b.

„      a/jupiixd(rx<'^05,  1173,  a.

„      €Tepo;H(£(rxoAoy,  1173,  a.

„      opeoardSios,  1173,  b.

„      (TToXiSayrSs,  1 173,  b.

„      (rxt<rT(Js,  1172,  a.

„     x"P'5toT(Js,  1173,  b.
XiTf&via,  275.  a.
XtTt^j'ioj',  1171,  b;  1173,  a.
XiTU)vi(TKoi,  1171,  b;  1173,  a.
XAoTm,  665,  b ;  673,  a  ;  674,  a.
XAatVioi/,  851,  a.
XAa/tus,  275,  a.
XKafivSiov,  275,  a.
XKavlSiov,  851,  a.
XXauls,  851,  a.
XAof/o'/cioi',  851,  a.
XKiSdv,  136,  a.
XA($6io,  276,  b.
XXoid,  557,  b.
Xoof,  567,  b.
Xoayoi,  759,  b.


Xoes,  412,  a.
Xo€uj,  280,  b.
XoiviKis,  378,  b.
Xori/il,  276,  b.
Xoipivou,  971,  a.
XopfUTat,  276,  b.
XopTjyeiov,  277,  a.
Xoprtyia,  276,  b.
Xop777ds,  276,  b.
XopuSiSdarKoKos,  276,  b.
XopcJs,  277,  a  ;  584,  a.
„     KVKXiKoSf  279,  a.
Xovs,  280,  b.
Xpeovs  StKTj,  280,  b.
Xp^fMTa,  808,  b.
XpTjcrfwi,  416,  a.
Xp7](rfi6\oyoi,  416,  b.
Xprjcrriipiov,  836,  b.
Xpoj/oAoyfa,  280,  b.
Xpu(r<Js,  180,  b.
X/)u<roCs,  1056,  b.
Xpv<Twv7)Toi,  366,  a  ;  1034,  b.
XpwCeiy,  900,  b.
Xirpa,  827,  a ;  1000,  b.
Xvrpai,  35,  a.
Xwrpts,  827,  a.
Xvrpoi,  412,  a.
Xirpos,  827,  a.
Xufia,  31,  a   556,  a.
Xwpls  oiKovmes,  705,  a.


^rdXiov,  136,  a  J  548,  a.
^oAfs,  545,  a.
^€Ato»',  or  Ve'AAioj/,  136,  a.
^evSeyypaiprjs  ypacp-f},  971,  b.
"VevSoSlvTepos,  1105,  b.
"VfvSoKhrjTelas  ypoupi),  294,    b

972,  a.
^ei/5oAC(J/)77,  892,  b.
"VfvSo/Moprvpiwv  S'lKT},  724,  a.
"VevSoirepliTTepos,  1105,  b.
"V-hipKTiJLa,  2 II,  a ;  442, b ;  805, b,
^ri<pos,  95,  a  j  670,  b ;  971,  a.
ViAol,  135,  a.
^iAoTOTTiSes,  1097,  b.
"VvKT-hp,  972,  b.
l^vxoTroinriioVy  842,  b.


'Xioptojj',  152,  a,
'nga/,  572,  a;  1154,  a.
'QZilov,  822,  b.
'XlAc'i/Tj,  1213,  a
*0.lxo<payla,  413,  a.
'^puoVj  618,  a.
*Cipla3v,  152,  a.
'ripohiyiov,  615,  a.
'npotTKinoSj  144,  b.
'nr,  533,  a.
'A(rXo^($pta,  845,  b.


LATIN    INDEX.


Abactus  venter,  2,  a.
Abaculus,  2,  a.
Abacus,  1,  a  ;  904,  a.
Abalienatio,  728,  a.
Abamita,  SIO,  a.
Abavia,  310,  a.
Abavunculus,  310,  a.
Abavus,  310,  a.
Ablegmina,  1000,  a.
Abmatertera,  310,  a.
Abnepos,  310,  a.
Abneptis,  310,  a.
Abnormis,  806,  a.
AboUa,  2,  a.
Abortio,  2,  a.
Abortivus,  2,  a.
Abortus,  2,  a.
Abpatruus,  310,  a.
Abrogare  legem,  682,  b.
Absentia,  988,  a.
Absolutio,  647,  b.
Abstinendi  beneficium,  598,  b.
Abusus,    677,    a;     1221,    b;

1222,  a.
Accensi,  2,  b  ;  495,  b ;  502,  b.
Accensus,  535,  b.
Acceptilatio,  2,  b.
Acceptum,  or  Accepto,  facere,

or  ferre,  3,  a.
Acceptum  habere,  3,  a.
Accessio,  3,  a.
Acclamatio,  3,  b.
Accubita,  3,  b.
Accubitalia,  3,  b.
Accubitoria  vestis,  1087,  b.
Accusatio,  368,  b.
Accusator,  13,  a;  648,  b.
Acerra,  3,  b.
Acetabulum,  979,  a.
Acetum,  1204,  b.
Achaicum  fcedus,  4,  a.
Acies,  587,  b,
Acilia  lex,  986,  b.
Acilia    Calpurnia  lex,  77,  b.
Acinaces,  6,  a.
Aciscularius,  141,  b.
Acisculus,  141,  b.
Aclis,  589,  a.

Acna,  Acnua,  6,  b ;  46,  b.
Acqiiisitiones  civiles,  422,  a.

„  naturales,  422,  b.

Acroama,  6,  b.
Acropolis,  6,  b  ;   1175,  a.
Acroterium,  6,  b.
Acta,  7,  a.

„     diurna,  7,  a.

„     forensia,  7,  a.

„     jurare  in,  7,  b.

„     militaria,  7,  b.

„     patrum,  7,  b.

^     senatus,  7,  b.


Actarius,  7,  b  ;  8,  b.
Actio,  9,  a ;  642,  a.
„     albi  corrupti,  74,  b.
„     aquae    pluviae  arcendae,

1 15,  b.
„     arbitraria,  10,  a.
„     arborum  furtim  caesarum,

564,  b.
„     auctoritatis,  173,  b.
„     ex  bona  fide,  10,  a.
„     bonae  fidei,  10,  a.
„     bonorum     vi    raptorum,

564,  a.
„     certi  incerti,  268,  b.
„     civilis,  10,  a.
„     commodati,  341,  a.
„     comrauni  dividundo,  341 ,

a.
„     confessoria,  350,  a;  1032,

b.
„     damni  injuria  dati,  383,

b.
„     dejecti  effusive,  388,  a.
„     depensi,  640,  a.
„     depositi,  394,  b.
„     directa,  10,  a.
„     de  dolo  malo,  373,  a.
„     de  effusis,  1 200,  a.
„     emti  et  venditi,  459,  a.
„     exercitoria,  480,  b.
„     ad  exhibendum,  51 1,  b.
„     extraordinaria,  10,  a.
„     in  factum,  10,  b.
„     familiae  erciscundae,  520,

a.
„     fictitia,  10,  a.
„     fiduciaria,  536,  b.
„     finium  regundorum,  537,

b.
„     furti,  563,  b.
„     furti   adversus  nautas  et

caupones,  564,  b.
„     honoraria,  10,  a;  258,  a.
„     hypothecaria,  917,  b.
„     inanis,  10,  a
„     injuriarum,  699,  a;  1200,

a.
„     institoria,  639,  a.
„     institutoria,  641,  b.
„     inutilis,  10,  a.
„     judicati,  651,  b.
„     in  judicio,  10,  a.
„     in  jure,  10,  a.
„     in  jus,  10,  b.
„     quod  jussu,  663,  b.
„     legis,  or  legitiraa,  9,  a.
„     legis  Aquiliae,  383,  b.
„     locati  et  conduct!,  710,  a.
„     mandati,  728,  b.
„     mixta,  9,  b  ;  1 0,  a.
„     mutui,  780,  b.
„     negativa,  350,  a.
„     negatoria,  350,  a ;  1 033,  a.


Actio  negotiorum  gestorutxi,
794,  a.

>,     noxalis,  10,  b.

„     ordinaria,  10,  a.

„     de  pauperie,  880,  b.

„     de  peculio,  1037,  b.

„     perpetua,  10,  b

„     persecutoria,  10,  a.

„     in  personam,  9,  a.

„     pignoraticia,  917,  b.

„     poenalis,  To,  a.

„     popularis,  1200,  b.

„     praejudicialis,  954,  a.

„     praetoria,  10,  a.

„     privata,  10,  b.

„     prosecutoria,  10,  a.

„     Publiciana  in  rem,  974,  a,

„     quanti  minoris,  982,  a.

„     rationibus     distrahendis,
1178,  b.

„     de  recepto,  984,  b.

„     redhibitoria,  985,  a.

„     rei    uxoriae,    or    dotis,
438,  a.

„     in  rem,  9,  a.

„     de  in  rem  verso,  1038,  a.

„     rescissoria,  641 ,  b.

„     restitutoria,  641,  b.

„     Rutiliana,  996,  a.

„     sepulchri  violati,  562,  a;
1 200,  a.

„     Serviana,  918,  a.

„     pro  socio,  1049,  b.

„     stricti  juris,  10,  a.

„     temporalis,  10,  b.

„     de  tigno  juncto,  564,  b.

„     tributoria,  1037,  b.

„     tutelae,  1 1 78,  b.

„     utilis,  10,  a.
Actionem  dare,  11,  a.

.,  edere,  11,  a.

Actor,  13,  a;  48,  a.

„     publicus,  13,  a.
Actuariae  naves,  785,  a.
Actuarii,  7,   b  ;    8,  b ;   1 3,  b ;
807,  a
„       centuriales,  30,  b.
Actus,  13,  b;  753,  a

„      minimus,  13,  b.

„      quadratus,  IS,  b;  46,  b;
753,  b.

„      servitus,  1032,  a.

„      simplex,  13,  b.
Acus,  13,  b  ;  57,  a.
Adamas,  759,  to.
Adcrescendi  jure,  600,  b.
Addico,  172,  a  ;  655,  h.
Addicti,  796,  a;  797,  b.
Addictio,  655,  b.
Ademptio,  677,  a.

„         equi,  264,  b.
Adfines,  28,  a.
Adiinitas,  28,  a.


1258

Adgnati,  309,  a.

Adgnatio,  309,  a.

Aditio  hereditatis,  601,  b.

Adjudicatio,  12,  b.

Adlecti,  14,  a.

Adlector,  1 4,  b.

Admissionales,  14,  b.

Adiuissionis  primae,  secundae,

&c.,  amici,  14,  b.
Admissionum  proximus,  14,  b.
Adnepos,  310,  a.
Adneptis,  310,  a.
Adobruere,  52,  a.
Adolescentes,  636,  a.
Adoratio,  16,  a.
Adrogatio,  15,  b.
Adscript!  glebae,  1040,  a.
Adscriptores,  538,  b.
Adscriptitii,  2,  b;  311,  b.
Adscriptivi,  2,  b.
Adsertor,  143,  a.
Adsessor,  143,  a.
Adstipulatio,  818,  a.
Adstipulator,  640,  b;  818,  a.
Adversaria,  17,  b.
Adversarius,  13,  a.
Adulterium  (Greek),  16,  b.
Adulterium  (Roman),  17,  a.
Adulti,  636,  a.
Advocatus,  17,  b.

„  fisci,  18,  a.

Adytum,  1105,  a.
Aebutia   lex,  9,  a ;    267,  a ;

684,  a.
Aedes,  554,  a;   1104,  b.

„      sacra,  1104,  b.
Aediculae,  18,  a.
Aediles,  18,  a.

„        cereales,  19,  a.
Aeditimi,  20,  a.
Aeditui,  20,  a.
Aeditumi,  20,  a.
Aegis,  20,  b.
Aelia  lex,  684,  a.

„     Sentia   lex,    684,  a  ;
878,  a.
Aemilia  lex,  684,  b.

„        Baebia  lex,  688,  b.
„        Lepidi  lex,  1077,  b.
„       Scauri  lex,  1077,  b.
Aenatores,  22,  a.
Aenei  nummi,  26,  a.
Aenum,  22,  a.
Aera,  281,  b.
Aerarii,  22,  b.

„  Praefecti,  24,  a.
„  Praetores,  24,  b.
„       Quaestores,  24,  b.

Tribuni,26,b;1149,a,
Aerarlum,  23,  a.

„         militare,  24,  a.
„         Praetores  ad,  24,  b.
„         sanctius,  23,  b.
,,         sanctum,  23,  b.
Aerii  nummi,  26,  a.
Aes,  25,  a.
Aes  (money),  26,  a.
„    Aegineticum,  25,  b.
„    alienum,  26,  a.
„    circumforaneum,  26,  a.


INDEX.
Aes   Corinthiacura,  25,  b.

„     Deliacum,  25,  b.

„    equestre,  26,  a.

„    grave,  140,  a.

„    hordeariuni,     or    hordla-
rium,  26,  a;  471,  b.

„    manuarium,  26,  b.

„    militare,  26,  a.

„    rude,  140,  a.

„    thermarum,  186,  b.

„    uxorium,  26,  b.
Aestivae  feriae,  530,  a.
Aetolicum  concilium,  27,  b.

„  foedus,  27,  a.

AflRnes,  28,  a.
Affinitas,  28,  a.
Agaso,  28,  b.
Agema,  485,  b.
Agendi  servitutes,  1032,  a.
Ager,  29,  a  ;  38,  b ;  554,  a.

„     arcifinalis,  29,  a  ;  38,  b.

„     arcifinius,  29,  a  ;  30,  a.

„     assignatus,  29,  b;  39,  b.

„     concessus,  39,  b.

„     decumanus,  43,  a.

„     divisus     et     assignatus,
29,  b.

„     efFatus,  930,  b.

„     emphyteusis,  43,  a.

„     emphyteuticarius,  43,  a  ;
458,  a.

„     limitatus,  29,  b ;  30,  a  ;
39,  b.

„     mensura     comprehensus,
29,  b.

„     occupatorius,29,a;  39,  b.

„     privatus,  29,  a.

„     publicus,  29,  a  ;  949,  a.

„     quaestorius,  29,  b ;  39,  b.

„     redditus,  29,  a.

„     religiosus,  37,  b.

„     restibilis,  51,  a;  57,  a;
60,  b;  61,  a.

„     sacer,  37,  b.

„     sanctus,  31,  a.

„     scriptuarius,  1012,  b.

„     vectigalis,  43,  a;  458,  a.
Agger,  31,  a;  937,  a.
Agitator,  287,  a,
Agmen,  498,  a.

„       pilatum,  498,  b.
„       quadratum,  498,  b.
Agnati,  309,  b.
Agnatic,  309,  b.
Agnomen,  802,  b.
Agonales,  1003,  b.
Agonalia,  31,  b.
Agonensis,  1003,  b.
Agonia,  31,  b.
Agonium  Martiale,  31,  b.
Agoranomi,  36,  b.
Agrariae  leges,  37,  a.
Agraulia,  44,  a.
Agricultura,  44,  a.
Agrimensores,  71,  b.
Agronomi,  72,  b.
Ahenatores,  22,  a.
Ahenum,  22,  a.
Ala,  73,  b.
Alae,  428,  a ;  507,  a  ;   509,  a.


Alabaster,  74,  a.
Alabastrites,  74,  a.
Alabastrum,  74,  a.
A  lares,  73,  b.
Alarii,  73,  b.
Alauda,  74,  a.

„       legio,  74,  a.
Albarium  opus,  870,  a.
Albogalerus,  102,  b.
Album,  74,  b;  171,  a.
„       decurionum,  74,  b.
„      judicum,  74,  b  ;  649,  b

„      senatorum,  74,  b.
Alea,  74,  b.
Aleator,  74,  b.
Ales,  149,  a;   175,  b.
Alica,  55,  h.
Alicula,  75,  b.
Alimentarii  pueri    et   puellae,

75,  b.
Alipilus,  75,  b.
Aliptae,  75,  b.
Alluvio,  76,  a.
Altare,  116,  b.
Altius   non   tollendi   servitus,

1031,  b.
Aluta,  222,  a.
Amanuensis,  76,  b.
Ambarvalia,  78,  b;   138,  b.
Ambitio,  77,  a.
Ambitus,  76,  b.
Ambrosia,  78,  b.
Ambubaiae,  78,  b.
Ambulationes,  618,  b.
Amburbiale,  78,  b.
Amburbium,  78,  b.
Amentum,  588,  a.
Amicire,  78,  b.
Amictorium,  78,  b.
Amictus,  78,  b.
Amiculum,  78,  b,
Amita,  310,  a.
Amphictyones,  79,  a.
Amphimalla,  1097,  b.
Amphitapae,  1097.  b.
Ampliitheairum,  82,  l».
Amphora,     90,    a ;     979,    a ;

1203,  b.
Ampliatio,  647,  a.
Ampulla,  91,  a;   192,  b.
Ampullarius,  91,  a.
Amuletum,  91,  b.
Amurca,  825,  b.
Amussis,  or  Amussium,  91,  b.
Anagnostae,  92,  a.
Anatocismus,  527,  a.
Ancilla,  637,  a.
Ancones,  989,  a.
Andabatae,  575,  a.
Andromeda,    or     Andromede,

149,  b.
Angaria,  94,  b.
Angariorum  exhibitio,  or  prae-

statio,  94,  b.
Angiportus,    or    Angiportum,

95,  a.
Anguifer,  149,  a.
Anguis,  ]  48,  a ;  149,  b;  153,  li.
Anguitenens,  149,  a.
Augustus  clavus.  294,  b.


Animadversio  censoria,  263,  b.
Anio  novus,  111,  a.

„     vetus,  110,  a.
Annales maximi,  523, a;  941, a.
Annalis  lex,  19,  b.
Annona,  95,  a.

„       civica,  500,  b.
Annotatio,  351,  b.
Annul!  aurei  jus,  95,  b.
Annulorum  jus,  95,  b.
Annulus,  95,  a  ;  325,  a.
Annus  inagnus,  222,  b  ;  227,  a.

„        vertens,  226,  a.
Anquina,  790,  b.
Anquisitio,  649,  a.
Ansa,  533,  a.
Antae,  97,  a.
Anteambulones,  97,  b.
Antecanis,  or  Antecanem,  152,

b.
Antecessores,  97,  b.
Antecoena,  307,  a.
Antecursores,  97,  b.
Antefixa,  97,  b.
Antemeridianum  tempus,  408,

a.
Antenna,  789,  b.
Antepagmenta,  98,  b  ;  624,  b.
Antepilani,  495,  a.
Antesignani,  502,  a  ;   1045,  b.
Antestari,  1 1 ,  a.
Antia  lex,  1077,  b.
Antichresis,  916,  b.
Anticum,  624,  b.
Antinous,  149,  b.
Antiquarii,  706,  b.
Antlia,  100,  a.
An  teniae  leges,  685,  a.
Apaturia,  101,  a.
Aperta  navis,  784,  b.
Apex,  102,  a.
Apicula,  102,  a.
Aplustre,  787,  a.
Apodectae,  103,  a;   1047,  b.
Apodyterium,  1 89,  a.
Apollinares  ludi,  715,  a.
Apophoreta,  104,  b.
Apotheca,  105,  a.
Apotheosis,  1 05,  a.
Apparitio,  106,  a.
Apparitor  es,  106,  a.
Appellatio  (Greek),  106,  a.

„  (Roman),  106,  a.

Applicationis  jus,  295,  a.
Aprilis,  232.

Apuleia  lex,  641,  a  ;  685,  a.
„        agraria  lex,  685,  a.
„       frumentaria  lex,  548,  a.
„        majestatis  lex,  725,  a.
Aqua,  151,  b.

„     Alexandrina,  111,  b.

„     Algentia,  111,  b.

„      Alsietina,    or     Augusta,
111,  a.

„     Appia,  109,  b.

y,     caduca,  115,  a.

0     Claudia,  1 1 1,  a.

„     Crabra,  lll,b.

„     Julia,  110,  b.

M     Marcia,  1 1 0,  a.


INDEX.

Aquapluvia,  115,  b.

„     Septimiana,  111,  b.

„     Tepula,  1 10,  b.

„     Trajana,  111,  b.

„     Virgo,  110,  b.
Aquae  ductus,  108,  a.

„      ductus  servitus,  1032,  a.

„      effusio,  151,  b.

„      haustus  servitus,  1032,  a.

.,       et  ignis  interdictio,  516,
b.

„       pluviae  arcendae  actio,
115,  b.
Aquarii,  116,  a.
Aquarioli,  116,  a.
Aquarius,  151,  b.
Aquila,  149,  b  ;   1044,  b.
Aquilia  lex,  383,  b.
Aquilifer,  505,  a.
Ara,  116,  a;   153,  b.
Aratio,  49,  a.
Aratrum,  117,  b.
Aratrum  auritum,  49,  b.
Arbiter,  10,  b.
Arbiter  bibendi,  1082,  b.
Arbitraria  actio,  10,  a.
Arbitria,  558,  b.
Arbitrium,  10,  b;  647,  b.
Arbusculae,  585,  b ;   923,  a.
Area,  119,  a;  559,  b.
Area,  ex,  119,  a;   131,  a.
Area  publica,  24,  b ;   119,  a.
Arcera,  119,  a.
Archiater,  119,  a.
Archiinagirus,  307,  b.
Archimimus,  559,  a  ;  763,  b.
Architectura,  120,  a.
Archium,  1093,  a
Archivum,  1093,  a.
Archon,  121,  b.
Arcifinius  ager,  29,  a.
Arcitenens,  151,  a.
Arctophylax,  148,  a.
Arctos  Lycaonis,  147,  b.

„       Parrhasis,  147,  b.
Arcturus,  148,  a  ;   159,  a.
Arctus  major,  147,  a.
„       minor,  147,  b.
Arcus,  124,  b  ;   126,  a;  151,  a.

„      triumphalis,  1 25,  b.

„       Constantini,  1 26,  a.

„      Drusi,  1 25,  b.

„       Gallieni,  126,  a.

„       Septimii  Severi,  126,  a.

„       Titi,  125,  b.
Area,  53,  a;  171,  b  ;  55\,  a.
Areiopagus,  126,  b.
Arena,  86,  a  ;  88,  b  ;  286,  a,
Aretalogi,  129,  b.
Argei,  129,  b.
Argentarii,  1 30,  a.
Argentum,  132,  a.
Argo,  153,  a.
Argyraspides,  133,  b.
Aries,  133,  b;   149,  b.
Arinca,  5Q,  b.
Arma,  Armatura,  135,  a.
Armarium,  136,  a;  203,  a.
Armatura  levis,  506,  b.
Armilla,  136,  a.


1259
Armilustrium,  137,  a.
Aromatites,  1204,  b.
Arquites,  1002,  a.
Arra,  Arrabo,  or  Arrlia,  Ar»

rhabo,  137,  a.
Arrogatio,  15,  b.
Artaba,  1  37,  b.
Artopta,  921,  a,
Artopticii,  921,  a.
Arvales  Fratres,  138,  a.
Arundo,  1001,  b.
Arura,  138,  a.
Aruspices,  586,  b.
Arvum,  61,  a.
Arx,  139,  a.
As,  139,  a;   706,  a.
As  libralis,  139,  b.
Asamenta,  1003,' a.
Ascia,  141,  b.
Asiarchae,  142,  b.
Assa,  191,  b.
Assamenta,  1003,  a.
Assarius,  141,  a.
Assentatores,  867,  b.
Asseres  falcati,  519,  a.

„       lecticarii,  672,  a
Assertor,  143,  a.
Assertus,  143,  a.
Assessor,  143,  a.
Assidui,  710,  a.
Assiduitas,  77,  a.
Astragalus,  143,  b.
Astrologi,  144,  b.
Astrologia,  144,  a.
Astronomi,  144,  b.
Astronomia,  145,  a.
Asyli  jus,  165,  a.
Asylum,  165,  a.
Atavia,  310,  a.
Atavus,  310,  a.
Atellanae  Fabulae,  347,  a.
Aternia  Tarpeia  lex,  685,  a.
Athenaeum,  166,  b.
Athletae,  166,  b.
Atia  lex,  685,  a.
Atilia  lex,  685,  a.
Atinia  lex,  685,  a.
Atlantes,  170,  a.
Atlantides,  1 50,  b.
Atnepos,  310,  a.
Atneptis,  310,  a.
Atramentum,  170,  b.
Atrium,  171,  b;  188,  b;  427,  b.
Atticurges,  171,  b.
Auctio,  172,  a.
Auctor,  172,  b.
Auctores  fieri,  172,  b.
Auctoramentum,202,a;  574, b.
Auctorati,  574,  b.
Auctoritas,  173,  b  ;   1023,  b.
„  senatus,  1023,  b.

Auctoritatem  imponere,  173,  b.
Auditorium,  174,  a;  969,  b.
Auddia  lex,  78,  a.
Augur,  1 74,  a.

Auguraculum,  176,  a  ;  1 104,  a.
Augurale,  176,  a;  233,  a.
Auguratorium,  253,  a.
Augurium,  174,  a  ;  417,  a.
Augustales,  179,  b;  180,  a.


1260

Augustalia,  179,  b.

Augustus,  180,  b.

A  via,  310,  a.

Aviaria,  66,  a ;  68,  b.

Avis,  149,  a.

Aulaeum,  1046,  a.

Aurelia  lex,  650,  a.

Aures,  118,  a.

Aureus  nummus,  1 8 2,  a;  935,  a.

Auriclialcum,  25,  a;  845,  b.

Auriga,  149,  a;  287,  a.

Aurigae  manus,  1 49,  a.

Aurigator,  149,  a.

Aurum,  180,  b.

„       coronarium,  182,  b
„       lustrale,  182,  b.

Auspex,  174,  a.

Auspicium,  174,  a.

Authenticum,  807,  b.

Authepsa,  183,  a.

Autonomi,  183,  a.

Avulsio,  350,  b.

Avunculus,  310,  a.

Avus,  310,  a.

Auxilia,  1051,  a.

Auxiliares,  1051,  a.

Auxiliarii,  1051,  a.

Axamenta,  1003,  a.

Axicia,  197,  b.

Axis,  378,  a.


B.


Babylonii,  144,  b.

„  numeri,  144,  b.

Bacchanalia,  413,  a.
Baebia  lex,  685,  a.

„      Aemilia  lex,  688,  a.
Balatro,  183,  b.
Balineae,  183,  b.
Balineum,  183,  b;  191,  a.
Balista,  Ballista,  1138,  b.
Balistarii,  1 1 39,  a.
Balneae,  183,  b.
Balnearium,  183,  b.
Balneator,     186,   b;    189,    a;

195,  a.
Balneum,  183,  b;  190,  b.
Baltearius,  196,  b.
Balteus,    or    Baltea,    196,   a;

1136,  b.
Balteus,  196,  b.
Baptisterium,  189,  b.
Barathrum,  196,  b.
Barba,  196,  b.
Barbati  bene,  1 97,  a.
Barbatuli,  1 97,  a.
Bardocucullus,  372,  b.
Bascauda,  198,  a.
Basilica  (building),  198,  a.

„       (legal  work),  200,  a.
Basterna,  200,  b.
Baxa,  or  Baxea,  200,  b.
Bell  aria,  307,  b.
Bellicrepa  saltatio,  1006,  b.
Beneficiarius,  201,  b.
BeneBcium,  201,  b.

„  abstinendi,  598,  b.

Benignitas,  77,  a.


INDEX.
Berenices  coma,  or  crinis,  1 54,  a.
Bes,  140,  b.
Bessis,  140,  b.
Bestia,  153,  b.
Bestiarii,  202,  a.
Bibasis,  1006,  a.
Bibliopola,  704,  b
Bibliotheca,  202,  a.
Bidens,  98,  a,  b;  791,  a.
Bidental,  203,  a.
Bidiaei,  203,  b.
Biga,  or  Bigae,  379,  a.
Billix,  1101,  b;  1102,  b.
Bipalium,  849,  a.
Bipennis,  1014,  a.
Biremis,  784,  a.
Birrus,  203,  b.
Bisellium,  1015,  a.
Bissextilis  annus,  232,  a.
Bissextum,  232,  a.
Bissextus,  232,  a.
Bombycinum,  1028,  a.
Bombyx,  1028,  a.
Bona,  205,  a.

„     caduca,  206,  b.

„     fides,  207,  a.

„     rapta,  564,  a.

„     vacantia,  207,  b.
Bonorum  cessio,  207,  b.
„        coUatio,  208,  a.
„        emtio,  et  emtor,  208,


„         possessio,  208,  b.

„         vi    raptorum,    actio,
564,  a.
Bootes,  148,  a-
Boves  Icarii,  148,  b.
Bracae,  or  Braccae,  213,  a.
Branchidae,  839,  b.
Bravium,  287,  b.
Breviarium,  214,  b.

„      Alaricianum,  214,  b.
Bruttiani,  215,  a.
Buccina,  215,  a.
Buccinator,  22,  a;  215,  a.
Bucco,  347,  a.
Bucculae,  566,  a.
Bulla,  215,  b.
Bura,  or  Buris,  117,  b.
Bustuarii,  560,  a.
Bustum,  559,  b.
Buxum,  216,  a.
Byssus,  216,  a.


C.

Cacabus,  22,  a.

Caduceator,  21 8,  a.

Caduceus,  218,  a.

Caducura,  206,  b.

Cadus,  218,  a.

Caecilia    lex     de    censoribus,

685,  b.
,       lex    de   vectigalibus,

685,  b.
„       Didia  lex,  685,  b.
Caelatura,  218,  b.
Caelebs,  692,  a.
Caelialex,  1091,  a.


Caelibatus,  692,  a.
Caerimonia,  996,  b.
Caeritum  tabulae,  22,  b
Caesar,  220,  a.
Caetra,  269,  b.
Calami  stratus,  220,  a.
Calamistrum,  220,  a.
Calamus,  220,  a.
Calantica,  329,  b.
Calathiscus,  220,  a.
Calathus,  220,  a.
Calatores,  331,  a.
Calcar,  220,  b.
Calceamen,  220,  b.
Calceamentum,  220,  b.
Calceus,  220,  b.
Calculator,  222,  a.
Calculi,  222,  a.
Calda,  232,  a.

„      lavatio,  190,  b.
Caldarium,  1 90,  b.
Calendae,  231,  b.

„         Fabariae,  57,  a.
Calendarium,  222,  a;  522,  b.
Calida,  232,  a.
Caliendrum,  233,  b.
Caliga,  233,  b.
Calix,  115,  b;  234,  b.
Callis,  234,  a.
Calones,  234,  b.
Calpurnia  lex  de  ambitu,  77,  b.
Calpurnia  lex   de   repetundis,

648,  b;  649,  b;  986,  a.
Calvatica,  329,  b.
Calumnxa,  234,  b.
Calumniae  judicium,  235,  a.

„  jusjurandum,  235,a.

Calx,  286,  a.
Camara,  235,  a.
Camera,  235,  a.
Camillae,Camilli,235,b;  743, b.
Caminus,  432,  b.
Campagus,  235,  b.
Campestre,  235,  b.
Campidoctores,  235,  b.
Canaliculus,  235,  b.
Canalis,  235,  b.
Cancelli,  236,  a ;  336,  b.
Cancer,  150,  b.
Candela,  236,  a.
Candelabrum,  236,  a.
Candidarii,  921,  a.
Candidati  principis,  981,  b.
Candidatus,  77,  a;  1137,  a.
Canephorus,  237,  b ;  857,  a.
Canis,  or  Canis  Sirius,  152,  b.
Canis,   or    Canicula,    152,    b;

160,  a.
Canistrum,  237,  b.
Cantabrum,  237,  b.
Canterii,  237,  b.
Cantharus,  237,  b.
Canthus,  378,  b.
Canticum,  238,  a;  346,  a.
Canuieia  lex,  685,  b.
Capella,  149,  a.
Caper,  151,  b.
Capis,  179,  a,
Capisterium,  53,  b.
Capistrum,  288,  a.


Capite  censi,  239,  a.
Capitis  deminutio,  239,  b.

„      diminutio,  media,  433,

b.
„      minutio,  239,  b.
Capitolini,  715,  a.

„         ludi,  715,  a.
Capitiura,  238,  b.
Capra,  149,  a.
Capricornus,  151,  b.
Capsa,  189,  a;  238,  b.
Capsarii,  189,  a;  239,  a.
Capsula,  238,  b.
Captio,  940,  a.
Capulum,  671,  b.
Capulus,  118,  b;  239, a;  559,  a.
Caput,  239,  a.

„      extorum,  240,  a.
Caracalla,  240,  a.
Career,  210,  a.
Carceres,  285,  a;  336,  b.
Carcbesium,  241,  a;  789,  a.
Cardo,  241,  a.
Cardo,  29,  b.
Carenum,  1202,  a.
Carmen  seculare,  717,  b.
Carmentalia,  241,  b.
Carnifex,  242,  a.
Carpentum,  242,  b.
Carptor,  307,  b.
Carrago,  243,  a.
Carruca,  243,  a.
Carrus,  or  Carrum,  243,  a.
Caryatis,  243,  b.
Cassia  lex,  685,  b.

„        „     agraria,  685,  b.

„        „     tabellaria,  685,  b.

„        „     Terentia  frumenta-
ria,  685,  b.
Cassiopeia,  or  Cassiepeia,  149,

a.
Cassis,  565,  h;  989,  b.
Castellarii,  1 15,  b.
CastelJum  aquae,  114,  a.
Castra,  244,  a;  729,  b.
„       stativa,  242,  a.
Castrense  peculium,  874,  b.
Castrensis  corona,  360,  b.
Catagrapha,  902,  b.
Cataphracti,  256,  a.
Catapulta,  1138,  b.
Cataracta,  256,  b.
Catasta,  1040,  a.
Cateia,  257,  a;  589,  a.
Catella,  257,  a.
Catena,  257,  a.
Catervarii,  575,  a.
Cathedra,  257,  b.
Catillum,  or  Catillus,  257,  b.
Catillus,  765,  a.
Catlnum,  or  Catinus,  257,  b.
Cavaedium,  427,  b.
Cavea,  87,  b;  283,  b;  1122,  a.
Cavere,  259,  a.
Cavi  menses,  226,  a;  227,  b.
Caupo,  257,  b.
Caupona,  258,  a.
Causae  prol)atio,  874,  b.
Causia,  259,  a.
Causiae,  1201,  a.


INDEX.

Cautio,  259,  a.

„       Muciana,  259,  b.
Cavum  aedium,  427,  a.
Celeres,  260,  a.
Celerum  tribunus,  471,  a.
Cella,  97,  a;  260,  a;  1105,  a.

„     caldaria,  190,  b.
Cellarius,  260,  b.
Celtes,  420,  a.
Cenotaphium,  260,  b.
Censere,  262,  b.
Censiti,  311,  b.
Censitores,  265,  b.
Censor,  260,  b.

Censoria  nota,  263,  b ;  635,  b.
Censuales,  7,  b;  265,  b.
Censura,  260,  b.
Census,  260,  b;  262,  a;  265,  b.
Census  (Greek),  266,  a.
Centaurus,  153,  b.
Centesima,  267,  a.

„         rerum    venalium,
24,  a.
Centesimae  usurae,  526,  b.
Centesimatio,  387,  b.
Cento,  48,  b.
Centumviri,  267,  a.
Centuria,  30,  a;  46,  b;  501,  a;

652,  a  ;  753,  a.
Centuriata  comitia,  333,  a.
Centurio,    494,    b  ;     497,    a ;
504,  b.
„        primus,  505,  a.
„        primipili,  505,  a.
Centussis,  141,  a.
Cepheis,  149,  b.
Cepheus,  148,  a.
Cera,  268,  a;  518,  a;  1092,  a;

1116,  a.
Cerae,  1092,  a.
Ceratae  tabulae,  1091,  b.
Cerealia,  268,  a.
Cerevisia,  268,  b.
Cernere  hereditatem,  599,  a.
Ceroma,  268,  b.
Certamen,  167,  a.
Certi,  incerti  actio,  268,  b.
Ceruchi,  790,  b.
Cervoli,  253,  a.
Cessio  bonorum,  207,  b.
Cessio  in  jure,  653,  a.
Cestius  pons,  937,  b.
Cestrum,  903,  a ;  905,  a.
Cestus,  269,  a.
Cetra,  269,  b.
Chalcidium,  270,  a.
Chaldaei,  144,  b.
Charistia,  270,  b.
Charta,  703,  b.
Cheironomia,  271,  a;  583,  a.
Chelae,  151,  a.
Cheniscus,  786,  b.
Chiramaxium,  271,  b.
Chiridota,  1173,  b.
Chirographum,  271,  b.
Chiron,  153,  b.
Chirurgia,  272,  a.
Chlamys,  275,  a.
Choregia,  276,  b.
Choregus,  276,  b.


Chorobates,  277,  a.

Chorus,  200,  a;  277,  a.

Chronologia,  280,  b.

Chrysendeta,  282,  a.

Cibaria  servorura,  48,  b.

Cibarium  secundarium,  55,  b.

Cidaris,  1 1 30,  b.

Cilicia,  63,  b.

Cilicium,  282,  b.

Cilliba,  749,  b.

Cincia,  or  Muneralis,  lex,  685,

b.
Cinctus,  1 1 73,  b.

„       Gabinus,  665,  b  ;  1 136.
b.
Cinerarius,  220,  a.
Cingulum,  1224,  b.
Ciniflo,  220,  a.
Cippus,  282,  b.
Circenses  ludi,  286,  b.
Circinus,  283,  a.
Circuitores,  115,  b.
Circulio,  48,  b.
Circumlitio,  906,  a.
Circumluvio,  76,  b.
Circus,  283,  b.

„      agonensis,  32,  a.
Cisicura,  288,  a.
Cista,  288,  a.
Cistophorus,  288,  b.
Cithara,  720,  b.
Civica  corona,  359,  b.
Civile  jus,  10,  a;  656,  a.
Civilis  actio,  1 0,  a.
Civis,  291,  b.
Civitas  (Greek),  288,  b.

„       (Roman),  291,  a.
Clandestina  possessio,  643,  b.
Clarigatio,  530,  a.
Clarissimi,  628,  a.
Classica  corona,  360,  a.
Classic!,  509,  b.
Classicum,  358,  b.
Clathri,  432,  a.
Claudia  lex,  686,  a.
Clavicula,  253,  a.
Clavis,  1168,  b.
Clavola,  824.  b.
Claustra,  626,  b.
Clavus  angustus,  293,  b.

„      annalis,  293,  b.

„      latus,  293,  b.
Clepsydra,  615,  a.
Clibanarii,  256,  b.
Cliei^s,  294,  b.
Clientela,  295,  a.
Clima,  753,  b.
Clipeus,  297,  a.
Clitellae,  299,  a.
Cloaca,  299,  a.
Cloacae  servitus,  1032,  a.
Cloacarium,  300,  a.
Cloacarum  curatores,  300,  a.
Clodiae  leges,  549,  b ;  686,  a
Coa  vestis,  300,  b.
Coactor,  300,  b;  1184,  b.
Cochlea,  300,  b.
Cochlear,  301,  a.
Cochlis,  301,  a.
Codex,  131,  a;  301,  a.


1262

Codex    Gregorianus   et  Her-
mogianus,  301,  b.
„       Justinianus,  301,  b.
„      Theodosianus,  302,  b.
Codicilli,  301,  b;  1118,  a.
Coelia,  or  Caelia,  lex,  1091,  a.
Coemptio,  741,  a.
Coena,  303,  a.
Coenaculum,  429,  a.
Coena tio,  308,  a.
Coenatoria,  307,  b;  1087,  b.
Cognati,  309,  a.
Cognatio,  309,  a.
Cognitor,  12,  a.
Cognitoria  exceptio,  II ,  b.
Cognomen,  702,  a.
Coheres,  598,  a;  601,  b.
Cohors,  499,  b ;  507,  a.
„       in  piano,  66,  a.
Cohortes  equitatae,  509,  b.

„        peditatae,  509,  b.

„        vigilum,  510,  a.

„        urbanae,  510,  a.
Coitio,  77,  b.

Collatio  bonorum,  208,  a.
Collegae,  310,  b.
Collegatarii,  675,  a.
Collegiati,  1216,  b.
Collegium,  310,  b.
Colobium,  1173,  b.
Colonatus,  311,  b.
Coloni,  311,  b;  710,  a.

„      indigenae,  49,  a.
Colonia,  313,  b.
Colonus,  48,  b.

„        urbanus,  49,  a.
Colores,  320,  a.
Colossicotera,  322,  a.
Colossus,  322,  a.
Colum,  322,  b  ;  1203,  a.
Columbarium,  68,  a;  323,  a;

561,  a.
Columen,  328,  a.
Columna,  323,  a.

„       cochlis,  328,  a.

„        rostrata,  327,  b.
Columnarium,  328,  a.
Colus,  565,  a.
Coma,  328,  b.

Comes,  143,  b;  3 SO,  a;  969,  a.
Commentarii  senatus,  7,  b.
Commissatio,  330,  b;   1082,  a.
Comitia,  330,  b.

„       calata,331,a;  I114,b;
1115,  a.  •

„       centuriata,  333,  a.

„       curiata,  311,  b.

„       tributa,  1156,  b.
Commeatus,  340,  b.
Commendationes    mortuorum,

536,  a.
Commentariensis,  340,  b.
Commentarii  sacrorum,  941,  a.
Commentarium,  340,  b.
Commentarius,  340,  b.
Commercium,  291,  b.
Commissoria  lex,  340,  b.
Commissum,  341,  a.
Commixtio,  350,  a.
Commodans,  341,  a.


INDEX.
Commodatarlus,  341,  a.
Commodati  actio,  341 ,  a.
Commodatum,  341,  a.
Communi   dividundo    actio,

341,  a.
Comoedia,  341.
Compensatio,  347,  b.
Comperendinatio,  647,  a.
Comperendini  dies,  409,  b.
Competitor,  77,  a.
Compitalia,  347,  b.
Compitalicii  ludi,  347,  b.
Compluvium,  427,  b.
Compromissum,  648,  a;  985,  a.
Concamerata  sudatio,  1 90,  b.
Conceptivae  feriae,  528.  b.
Concha,  348,  a.
Conciliabulum,  318,  a.
Conciliarii,  143,  b.
Concilium,  348,  a.
Concio,  347,  b.
Concubina  (Greek),  349,  a.

„  (Roman),  349.  b.

Concubinatus,  349,  b.
Condemnatio,  1 2,  b ;  647,  b.
Condictio,  9,  a ;  10,  a;  564,  b.
Conditivum,  561,  a.
Conditorium,  561,  a.
Conditurae,  1 204,  a.
Conductio,  710,  a.
Conductor;  265,  a;  710,  a.
Condus,  260,  b.
Confarreatio,  741,  a.
Confessoria  actio,  350,  a.
Confusio,  350,  a.
Congiarium,  350,  b.
Congius,  351,  a.
Conjurati,  1171,  b.
Conjuratio,  1171,  b.
Connubium,  740,  a.
Conopeum,  351,  a.
Co'nquisitores,  351,  a.
Consanguine!,  309,  b.
Conscripti,  1016,  b.
Consecratio,  105,  a;  631,  b.
Consensus,  820,  a.
Consiliarii,  358,  a.
Consilium,  358,  a,
Consistorium,  969,  b.
Consobrina,  310,  a.
Consobrinus,  310,  a.
Consponsor,  640,  b.
Constellatio,  144,  b.
Constitutiones,  351,  a.
Consualia,  351,  b.
Consul,  352,  a.
Consulares,  969,  a.
Consular  is,  367,  a.
Consulti,  653,  b.
Consultores,  653,  b.
Contestari,  708,  b.
Contractus,  817,  b.
Controversia,  648,  a.
Contubernales,  357,  a.
Contubernium,  357,   a;   501  ;

1037,  a.
Contus,  357,  b;  789,  a.
Conventio  in  manum,  740,  b ;

742,  a.
Conventiones,  820.  b.


Conventus,  357,  b ;  965,  b.
Conviciura,  637,  b.
Convivii  magister,  1082,  b.

„        rex,  1082,  b.
Cooptari,  305,  b.
Cophinus,  358,  a.
Corbicula,  358,  a.
Corbis,  358,  a.
Corbitae,  358,  b.
Corbula,  358,  a.
Cornelia  lex  agraria,  666,  b.
„         „     de  alea,  75,  a.
„         „     de  falsis,  517,  b.
„         „     frumentaria,   549,

a.
„         „     de  injuriis,  638,  a.
„         „     judiciaria,  650,  a.
„         „     majestatis,  725,  a.
„         „     de  novis   tabellis,

688,  a.
„         „     nummaria,  517,b.
„         „     de  parricidio,  687,

a.
„         „     de     proscriptione
et     proscriptis,
963,  b.
„         „     de        repetundis,

986,  a.
„         „     desacerdotiis,997,

b.
„         „     de  sicariis  et  vene-
licis,670,b;687,
a;   1188,  b.
„         „     de      sponsoribus,

641,  a.
„         „     sumptuaria,  1077,

b.
„         „     testamentaria,

517,  b.
„         „     tribunicia,  697,  b.
„         „     de      vi     publica,

1209,  a.
„         „     Unciaria,  687,  b.
Cornelia    Baebia    lex,    77,   b ;
688,  a.
„        Caecilia  lex,  549,  b.
„       et  Caecilia  lex,  688,  a.
Cornicines,  22,  a.
Cornu,  126,  a  ;  358,  b.
Cornua,  721,  b  ;  704,  a.
Corona,  148,  b  ;  325,  a ;  359,  a.
„       Ariadnes,  148,  b.
„       castrensis,  360,  b.
„       civica,  359,  b.
„       classica,  360,  a.
„       convivialis,  362,  b.
„       Etrusca,  362,  b.
„       funebris,  362,  a.
„       graminea,  359,  a.
„       lemniscata,  363,  a.
,,       longa,  362,  b.
„       Minoa,  148,  b.
„       mural  is,  360,  b.
„       natalitia,  362,  b.
„       navalis,  360,  a.
„       nuptialis,  362,  b.
„       obsidionalis,  359,  a,
„       oleagina,  361,  b.
„       oval  is,  361,  a.
„       pactilis,  363,  a.


Corona  pampinea,  363,  a.

„       plectiiis,  363,  a,

„       radiata,  363,  a.

„       rostrata,  360,  a.

„       sacerdotalis,  362,  a.

„       sepulchralis,  362,  a.

„       spicea,  362,  a.

„       sutilis,  363,  a.

„       tonsa,  363,  a.

„       tonsilis,  363,  a.

„       torta,  363,  a.

„       triumphalis,  361,  a.

„       vallaris,  360,  b.
Coronarii,  -ae,  1029,  b.
Coronis,  325,  a  ;  363,  a.
Coronix,  363,  a.
Corporati,  310,  b  ;   1216,  b.
Corporatio,  310,  b.
Corpus,  310,  b.

„      juris  civilis,  363,  a.
Correctores,  969,  a.
Correus,  820,  a.
Cortex,  57,  a.
Cortina,  364,  a.
Corvus,  153,  b  ;  364,  b,
Corycaeum,  1 95,  b ;  580,  a.
Coryphaeus,  280,  a.
Corytos,  126,  b.
Cosmetae,  364,  b.
Cosmetes,    365,    a;    581,    b;

624,  a.
Cosmetriae,  264,  b.
Cosmi,  365,  a.
Cothurnus,  366,  a.
Cotyla,  367,  a.
Covinarii,  367,  b.
Covinus,  367,  b.
Crapula,  1204,  a.
Crater,  Cratera,  153,  b;  367,  b.
Crates,  368,  b.
Creditor,  819,  b.
Creditum,  131,  a.
Crepi,  718,  b.
Crepida,  368,  b.
Crepidata  tragoedia,  346,  b.
Crepidines,  1192,  b.
Creppi,  718,  b.
Creta,286,  a;   1214,  b.
Cretio  hereditatis,  599,  a.
Crimen,  368,  b.
Crimina  extraordinaria,  369,  b.
Crista,  566,  a.
Crocota,  369,  b.
Crotalistria,  370,  a.
Crotalum,  370,  a.
Crusta,  282,  a  ;   456,  b.
Crux,  370,  b,
Crypta,  371,  a.
Cryptoporticus,  371,  a.
Ctesibica  machina,  100,  b.
Cubicularii,  372,  a.
Cubiculum,    88,    a;     372,    a;

428,  a.
Cubitoria,  307,  b.
Cubitus,  372,  a;  751,  b.
Cubus,  372,  b.
Cucullus,  372,  b.
Cudo,  or  Cudon,  372,  b.
C!ulcita,  674,  b.
Culeus,  373,  a.


INDEX.

Culina,  428,  b.
CuUeus,  373,  a.
Culpa,  373,  a.
„     lata,  373,  a.
„     lenissima,  373,  b.
„     levis,  373,  b.
Culter,  118,  b;  373,  b.
Cultrarius,  373,  b.
Cumatium,  381,  a.
Cunabula,  634,  a.
Cuneus,  88,  b;   1122,  a.
Cuniculus,  374,  a.
Cupa,  374,  a;   1202,  a.
Cura  bonorum,  376,  a.

„     bonorum  absentis,  376,  a.
„     bonorum  etventris,  376,  a.
„     hereditatis,  376,  a.
„     hereditatis  jacentis,   376,
a.
Curatela,  375,  a.
Curator,  318,  b;  374,  b.
Curatores,  376,  b.

„         alvei     et     riparum,

376,  b.
„         annonae,  376,  b.
„         aquarum,     115,    b;

376,  b.
„         kalendarii,  376,  b.
„         ludorum,  376,  b.
„         operum  publicorum,

376,  b.
„         republicae,  376,  b.
„         religionum,  376,  b.
„         viarum,  377,  a.
Curia,  318,  a;  377,  b.
Curiae,  318,  a;  377,  b.
Curiales,  318,  a.
Curiata  comitia,  331,  b.
Curio,  377,  b.

„     maxim  us,  377,  b.
Curriculum,  378,  a.
Currus,  147,  b  ;  378,  a.
Cursores,  380,  b.
Cursus,  287,  a.
Curules  magistratus,  724,  a.
Curulis  sella,  1014,  b.
Cuspis,  587,  a.
Custodes  custodiae,  250,  b.
Custos  urbis,  953,  a  ;  993,  a.
Cyathus,  380,  b  ;  979,  a.
Cyclas,  381,  a.
Cycnus,  149,  a.
Cyma,  381,  a.
Cymatium,  381,  a.
Cymba,  381,  a.
Cymbalum,  381,  a.
Cynosura,  147,  b.


D.

Dactyliotheca,  382,  a.
Damni  injuria  actio,  383,  ,b.
Damnum,  383,  a.

„        infectum,  383,  a.

„         injuria  datum,  383, 1
Dare  actionem,  1 1 ,  a.
Daricus,  384,  b.
Debitor,  819,  b.
December,  226,  a;  231,  232.


1263
Decempeda,  386,  a ;  893,  a.
Decemviri,  386,  a.

„         legibus     scribendis,

386,  a.

„  litibus,  or  stlitibus,
judicandis,  386,  b.

„  sacrorum,  or  sacris
faciendis,  387,  a.

„         agris        dividundis,

387,  a.
Decennalia,  or  Decennia,  387,  a,
Decimanus,  29,  b.
Decimatio,  387,  a.
Decimatrus,  982,  b.
Declinatio,  296,  b.
Decretum,  387,  b  ;   1024,  a.
Decumae,  387,  b.
Decumani,  29,  b.
Decuriae,  1012,  a  ;  1216,  a.

„        judicum,  650,  b.
Decuriales,  1216,  b.
Decuriati,  1211.
Decuriatio,  77,  b.
Decuriones,    318,  a;    47J,  a;

497,  b;    1017,  b.
Decurrere,  559,  b.
Decursoria,  937,  a.
Decussis,  141,  a.
Dedicare,  433,  a.
Dedicatio,  631,  a.
Dediticii,  388,  a.
Deditio,  388,  a.
Deductores,  77,  a.
Defensores,  968,  b.
Defrutum,  1202,  a.
Deject!  effusive  actio,  388,  a.
Delator,  388,  b.
Delectus,  499,  a.
Delia,  389,  a.
Delictum,  369,  a.
Delphin,  or  Delphinus,  149,  b.
Delphinae,  284,  b.
Delphinia,  389,  b.
Delubrum,  1 1 04,  b.
Demarchi,  389,  b.
Demens,  376,  a.
Demensum,  1041,  b.
Dementia,  376,  a.
Demetria,  390,  a.
Deminutio  capitis,  239,  b.
Demiurgi,  390,  b.
Demonstratio,  12,  b.
Demus,  290,  a.
Denarius,  393,  a.

„       aureus,  182,  a;  394, a.
Denicales  feriae,  528,  b.
Dens,  or  Dentale,  117,  b.
Dentifricium,  394,  a.
Depensi  actio,  640,  a.
Deponens,  394,  a,
Deportatio,  516,  a.

„  in  insulam,  516,  a.

Deportatus,  516,  a.
Depositarius,  394,  a.
Depositi  actio,  394,  b.
Depositor,  394,  a.
Depositum,  131,  a;  394,  a.
Derogare  legem,  682,  b,
Desertor,  394,  b.
Designator,  558,  b.


1264

Desultor,  394,  b.
Detestatio  sacrorum,  568,  h.
Devergentia,  296,  b.
De\ersonum,  258,  b.
Deunx,  140,  b.
Dextans,  140,  b.
Diadema,  395,  a.
Diaeta,  308,  a  ;  429,  a.
Diaetetica,  395,  b.
Dialis  flamen,  540,  b.
Diarium,  1041,  b.
Diatreta,  1210,  b.
Dicere,  405,  b.
Dictator,  404.  b.
Didia  lex,  1077,  b.
Diem  dicere,  649,  a.
Dies,  408,  a.

„     comitiales,  409,  b.

„     comperendini,  409,  b.

„     fasti,  409,  a.

„     ferial i,  528,  a.

„     festi,  409,  b.

„     intercisi,  409,  b.

„     nefasti,  409,  b.

„     proeliales,  410,  a.

„     profesti,  402,  b.

„     sementina,  530,  a.

„     stati,  409,  b.
Diffarreatio,  4 1 9,  a.
Digesta,  858,  a.
Digitalia,  729,  a.
Digitus,  382,  a.
Dilatoria  exceptio,  II ,  b.
Diligentia,  373,  a,
Dimachae,  410,  a.
Dimacheri,  575,  a.
Dimensum,  1041,  b.
Diminutio  capitb,  239,  bw
Dionysia,  410,  b.
Diploma,  414,  b.
Diptycba,  1 092,  a.
Directa  actio,  10,  a,
Diribitores,  336,  b  ;  414,  b.
Discessio,  1019,  b.
Discinctus.  1173,  b.
Discipula,  1189,  b.
Discus,  415,  a.
Dispensator,  222,  a.
Diversorium,  258,  b.
Dividiculum,  114,  a.
Divinatio,  415,  b  ;  417,  b.

„  (law  term),  417,  b.

Divisores,  77,  a.
Divortium,  418,  a.
Dodrans,  140,  b;  751,  b.
Dogmatic!,  746,  b.
Dolabella,  420,  a.
Dolabra,  420,  a.
Dolium,  1202,  a.
Dolo,  420,  b.

De  dolo  raalo  actio,  373,  a.
Dolus  malus,  373,  a.
Domicilium,  420,  b.
Dominium,  421,  a.
Dominus,  423,  a ;   574,  a.
„         funeris,  558,  b,
Domitia  lex,  940,  b.
Domo,  de,  131,  a.
Pomus,  144,  b;  423,  b.
Pona,  432.  b.


INDEX.

Donaria,  432,  b.
Donatio,  434,  a.
Donatio  mortis  causa,  434,  a.

„       propter  nuptias,435,a.
Donationes    inter    virum    et

uxorem,  435,  b.
Donativum,  351,  b.
Dormitoria,  428,  a.
Dos  (Greek),  436,  a.
„    (Roman),  437,  a.
„    adventitia,  437,  a.
„    profectitia,  437,  a.
„    receptitia,  437,  a.
Dotis  actio,  438,  a.
Drachma,  438,  a  ;   1213,  b.
Draco,  148,  a;   1044,  b.
Draconarius,  1044,  b.
Ducenarii,  439,  a.
Ducentesima,  1184,  b.
Duella,  1213,  b.
Duillia  lex,  688,  a.

„       Maenia  lex,  688,  a.
Dulciarii,  921,  a.
Duocimanus,  29,  b.
Duodecim  scripta,  670,  a.
Duplarji,  439,  b.
Duplicarii,  429,  b  ;  509,  a.
Duplicatio,  12,  a.
Dupondium,  893,  b.
Dupondius,  141,  a.
Dussis,  141,  a.
Duumviri,  439,  b.

„       juri  dicundo,  318,  a.
„       navales,  439,  b.
„       perduellionis,  886,  b.
„       quinquennales,  439,  b.
„       sacri,  439,  b.
„       sacrorum,  439,  b.
„       viis  extra  urbem  pur-
/        gandis,  439,  b.
Dux,  969,  a.


Eclectici,  746,  b.
Eculeus,  475,  a.
Edere  actionem,  11,  a.
Edictum,  444,  a.

„         aedilicium,  445,  a.

„         novum,  444,  b.

„         perpetuum,  444,  b.
445,  b.

„         provinciale,  445,  a.

„         repentinum,  444,  b.

„         Theodorici,  446  a.

„         tralatitium,  444,  b.

„         vetus,  444,  b.

„         urbanum,  445,  a.
Editor,  574,  a.

Elaeothesium,  190,  b;  580,  b.
Electrum,  450,  a.
Eleusinia,  452,  b.
EUychnium  713,  a.
Emancipatio,  455,  a.
Emansor,  394,  b.
Emblema,  456,  b.
Embolia,  6,  b.
Emeriti,  499,  b.
Emissarium,  457,  a.


Emphyteusis,  458,  a.
Empbyteuta,  458,  a.
Emphyteuticarius  ager,  458,  a.
Empirici,  746,  b.
Emporium,  459,  a.
Emti  et  venditi  actio,  459,  a.
Emtio  bonorum,  208.  a.

„      et  venditio,  459,  a.
Encaustica,  903,  b.
Endromis,  460,  a.
Engonasi,  or  Engonasin,  148,h.
Ensis,  577,  a.
Entasis,  461,  b.
Ephebeum,  580,  a.
Ephebia,  1 95,  b.
Ephippium,  464,  a.
Ephori,  464,  b.
Epibatae,  466.  b.
Epidemiurgi,  390,  b.
Epipedonici,  30,  b.
Epirhedium,  994,  b.
Epistola,  351,  a;  843,  b.
Epistomium,  457,  b.
Epistylium,  469,  a.
Epitaphium,  560,  a.
Epithalamium,  573,  b  ;  744,  a
Epulones,  470,  b.
Epulum  Jovis,  470,  b ;  673.  a.
Equestris  ordo,  845,  a.
Equiria,  471,  a.
Equites,  47 1 ,  a  ;  575,  b.

„        singulares  imperato-
ris,  508,  b.
Equitum  transvectio,  473,  a.

„       centurias  recogno-
scere,  473,  a.
Equuleus,  475,  a.
Equus,  149,  b.

„       October,  850,  a.
Ergastulum,  476,  a.
Ericius,  476,  a.
Eridanus,  1 52,  b.
Erigone,  150,  b.
Erogatio,  114,  a.
Ervilia,  59,  a.
Ervum,  59,  a.
Esseda,  476,  a.
Essedarii,  476,  b ;  575,  b.
Essedum,  476,  a.
Everriator,  562,  a.
Evictio,  476,  b.
Evocati,  508,  a.
Euripus,  88,  b  ;  286,  a.
Ex-archiatri,  1 1 9,  b.
Ex-archiatris,  1 1 9,  b.
Exauguratio,  479,  b.
Excellentissimi,  628,  a.
Exceptio,  11,  b;  956,  a.

„         cognitoria,  11,  b.

„         dilatoria,  11,  b.

„         litis  dividuae,  11,  b.

„         peremptoria,  11,  b.

„         rei  residuae,  1 1 ,  b.
Exceptores,  807,  a.
Excubiae,  250.
Excubitores,  480,  a.
Exedra,  1 95,  a ;  428,  a  ;  480,  a.
Exercitor  navis,  480,  b.
Exercitoria  actio,  480,  b.
Exercitus,  481,  a.


Exhibendum  actio,  ad,  511 ,  b.
Exodia,  512,  a.
Exostra,  513,  a.
Exploratores,  509,  a.
Exsequiue,  558,  b.
Exsilium,  5 1 3,  a.

„         liberum,  515,  b.
Exsul,  515,  b.
Exterere,  53,  a.
Extispices,  587,  a.
Extispiciiim,  587,  a.
Extranei  heredes,  589,  b.
Extraordinarii,  497,  b;  1500,  b.
Exverrae,  562,  a.
Exverriator,  562,  a.
Exuviae,  1053,  b.


F.

Faba,  57,  a.

„      trimestris,  57,  a.
Fabacia,  57,  b.
Fabia  lex,  921,  b.
Fabri,  517,  a.
Fabula  palliata,  346,  b.

„      praetextata,  346,  b.

„       togata,  346,  b.

„       tabernaria,  346,  b.

„       trabeata,  346,  b.
Fabulae  Atellanae.  34"^,  a.
Factiones  aurigarum,  287   a.
Factus,  826,  b.
Faecatum,  1203,  a.
Falae,  284,  b.
Falarica,  589,  a.
Falcidia  lex,  676,  b.
Falcula,  518,  a.
Falsarii,  518,  a.
Falsum,  517,  b.
Falx,  518,  a.

Familia,5l9,a;574,b;  1041, a.
Famillae  emptor,  1144,  b.

„        erciscundae      actio,
520,  a.
Familiaris,  519,  b.
Famosi  libelli,  702,  b ;  725,  b.
Famulus,  519,  a.
Fannia  lex,  1077,  b.
Fanum,  1 104,  a.
Far  Clusinum,  54,  a.

„  venuculum  rutilum,  54,  a.

„  venuculum  candidum,  54,
a.
Farrago,  59,  a.
Farreum,  741,  a.
Fartor,  520,  a.
Fas,  521,  b.
Fasces,  520,  b.
Fascia,  521,  a.
Fascinum,  521,  b.
Fasciola,  521,  a.
Fasti,  521,  b.

„      annales,  523,  a.

„      calendares,  522,  a.

„      Capitolini,  523,  b.

„      consulares,  523,  b,

„      dies,  522,  a.

„      historici,  523,  a.

„      sacri,  522,  a.


INDEX.

Fastigium,  II 3,  b  ;  523,  b.
Fauces,  428,  a.
Favete  linguis,  417,  a.
Fax,  524,  a.
Februare,  718,  a.
Februarius,  232  ;   718,  a.
Februum,  718,  a.
Februus.  718,  a.
Feciales,  530,  b.
Feminal,  1179,  a.
Feminalia,  524,  b.
Fenestra,  432,  a.
Fenus,  525,  b.

„      nauticum,  528,  a.

ferae  magna  minorque,  147,  b.
eralia,  562,  b.
Ferculum,  528,  a.
Ferentarii,  502,  b.
Feretrum,  559,  a;  671,  b.
Feriae,  528,  a.

„       aestivae,  530,  a.

„      conceptivae,  or  concep-
tae,  528,  b.

„       denicales,  528,  b.

„       imperativae,  528,  b.

„       Latinae,  529,  b.

„       praecidaneae,  530,  a.

„      privatae,  528,  a.

„      publicae,  528,  b.

„       sementivae,  530.  a.

„       stativae,  528,  b.

„       stultorum,  545,  b,

„       vindemiales,  530,  a.
Ferre  legem,  682,  b.
Fercennina,  530,  a.
Festi  dies,  409,  b.
Festuca,  730,  a.
Fetiales,  530,  b.
Fibula,  531,  b.
Fictile,  532,  b.
Fictio,  534,  b.
Fideicommissarii     praetores,

536,  a.
Fideicommissarius,  535,  a.
Fideicommissum,  535,  a.
Fidejussor,  640,  b.
Fidepromissor,  640,  b.
Fides,  148,  b;  720,  a.
Fidicula,  148,  b  ;  536,  b.
Fidis,  148,  b.
Fiducia,  536,  b.
Fiduciaria  actio,  536,  b.
Fiduciarius,  535,  a.
Figlinae,  533,  b.
Figulina  ars,  532,  b.
Figulus,  532,  b.
Filamen,  540,  b.
Filia,  310,  a.
Filiafamilias,  873,  b.
Filius,  310,  a.
Filiusfamilias,  10,  b;   873.  b;

874,  a.
Filum,  540,  b.
Fimbriae,  537,  a.
Fines  effati,  930,  b.
Finis,  29,  b  ;   1032,  a.
Finitores,  71,  b.
Finium    regundorum    actio,

557,  b.
Fiscales,  575,  b.


Fiscalis  praetor,  538,  a.
Fiscus,  537,  b.
Fistuca,  538,  a.
Fistucatio,  1 1 92,  a.
Fistula,  538,  b  ;   1088,  a.
Flabelliferae,  539,  b.
Flabellum,  539,  a.
Flagellum,  539,  b.
Flagrio,  540,  a.
Flagrum,  539,  b.
Flamen,  540,  a.

„        Augustalis,  180,  a.

„         Curialis,  377,  a.

„         Dialis,  540,  b.

„        Martialis,  540,  a.

„         Quirinalis,  540,  a.
Flaminla  lex,  690,  a.
Flaminica,  541,  a.
Flammeum,  743,  a.
Flavia  agraria  lex,  690,  a.
Flexumines,  472,  a.
Floralia,  541,  b.
Flos  (siliginis),  55,  b.
Flumen,  1031,  b.
Fluminis  recipiendi,  or  immit-

tendi  servitus,  lOSl,  b.
Focale,  542,  a.
Foculus,  542,  a.
Focus,  542,  a.

Foederatae  civitates,  542,  b.
Foederati,  542,  b.
Foedus,  542,  b  ;   1051,  a.
Foeniseca,  59,  b.
Foenisicia,  60,  a.
Foenum  Graecum,  59..  a.

„        cordum,  60,  a.
Foenus,  525,  b.

„        nauticum,  528,  a.
Folliculus,  57,  a;  543,  a.
FoUis,  543,  a;   1022,  a.
Fons,  543,  b.
Forceps,  545,  a.
Fores,  427,  b.
Forfex,  197,  b;  545,  a.
Forficula,  545,  a.
Fori,  283,  b ;  788,  a.
Foris,  625,  b.
Forma,  532,  b  ;   545,  b.
Formacii,  47,  a.
Formella,  545,  b.
Formido,  989,  a.
Formula,  II,  a;  545,  b.
Formulae  praejudiciales,  12  b.
Fornacalia,  545,  b.
Fornacatores,  192,  b.
Fornacula,  546,  a.
Fornax,  546,  a.
Fornix,  546,  b.
Foro  cedere,  or  abire,  132,  a.

„     mergi,  132,  a.
Foruli,  203,  a  ;  283,  b.
Forum,  357,  b  ;  546,  b.
Fossa,  31,  b;   253,  a.

„      caeca,  46,  b.
Framea,  589,  a.
Frater,  310,  a.
Fratres  arvales,  1 38,  a.
Fraus,  929,  a.
Frenum,  548,  a.
Frigidarium,  189,  a;  192,  b,
4M


1266

T'ritillus,  548,  b.
Frontale,  91,  a.
Fructuaria  res,  1221,  a.
Fructuarius,  1221,  a.
Fructus,  421,  b.
Frumenta,  54,  a.
Frumentariae  leges,  548,  b.
Frumentarii,  551,  a.
Frumento  servando,  de,  53,  b.
Fucus,  551,  a;    1214,  b.
Fuga  lata,  515,  b.

„      libera,  515,  b.
Fugalia,  985,  b.
Fugitivarii,  1038,  a.
Fugitivus,  1038,  a.
Fulcra,  674,  b.
Fulcrum,  118,  b.
Fullo,  55 l,b.
Fullonica,  552,  b.
Fullonicum,  552,  b.
Fill  Ionium,  553,  a.
Fumarium,  1205,  b.
Fumi    immittendi    servitus,

1032,  a.
Funale,  553,  a.
Funalis  equus,  379,  b.
Funambulus,  553,  a.
Funarius,  379,  b.
Funda,  553,  b ;  989,  b.
Fundani,  543,  a.
Funditores,  553,  b.
Fundus,  554,  a.
Funes,  790,  a.
Funus,  554,  b.

„      indictivum,  55S,  h.

„      plebeium,  558,  b.

„      publicum,  558,  b.

„      tacitum,  558,  b.

„      translatitium,  558,  b.
Furca,  562,  b.
Furcifer,  563,  a.
Furfures,  55,  b.
Furia,  or    Fusia   Caninia  lex,

690,  a;  731,  a.
Furiosus,  376,  a;  1113,  b.
Furiius,  192,  b;  546,  a.
Furor,  376,  a.
Furti  actio,  563,  b.
Furtum,  562,  a.

„  conceptum,  563,  b.
„  manifestum,  563,  b.
„        nee  manifestum,  563,

b.
„        oblatum,  563,  b.
Fuscina,  564,  b.
Fustium  animadversio,  565,  a.
Fustuarium,  564,  b.
Fusus,  565,  a.


Gabinia  lex,  1091,  a.

Gabinus  cinctus,  665,  b;  1136,

b.
Gaesum,  588,  b.
Gains,  639,  b.
Galea,  565,  b.

Galerus,  -um,  330,  a;  566,  b.
Galiarc,  566,  b.


INDEX.

Gain,  566,  b;  575,  b.

Ganea,  259,  a.

Gausapa,  567,  a.

Gausape,  567,  a,

Gausapum,  567,  a.

Gemini,  150,  b.

Gener,  28,  b.

Genethliaci,  144,  b.

Geniculatus,  148,  b.

Genitura,  1 44,  b.

Gens,  567,  b.

Gentiles,  567,  b.

Gentilitas,  568,  a.

Gentilitia  sacra,  568,  b.

Gentilitium  jus,  568,  a.

Gerraani,  309,  b.

Gerrae,  574,  a.

Gesta,  7,  a.

Gestatio,  619,  a.

Gingrus,  1130,  b.

Gladiatores,  574,  a.

Gladiatorium,  574,  b

Gladius,  574,  a.

Glandes,  554,  a.

Gleba,  1022,  a.

Glomus,  565,  a.

Glos,  28,  b.

Gluma,  57,  a.

Gomphi,  1192,  b.

Gradus,  88,  a;  577,  a;  751,  b.

„        cognationis,  310,  a.
Graecostasis,  579,  b.
Grammatophylacium,   1093,  a.
Granea,  55,  b.
Graphiarium,  1071,  a.
Grassatores,  670,  b.
Gregorianus  Codex,  301,  b.
Gremium,  200,  a ;  1 1 92,  a.
Groma,  251,  b.
Gubernaculum,  788,  b.
Gustatio,  307,  a.
Guttus,  192,  b;  579,  a.
Gymnasium,  579,  a.


H.

Habenae,  585,  a.
Habitatio,  1031,  a.
Haeres,  594,  a ;  598,  a.
Halicastrum,  54,  a.
Halteres,  585,  a,
Harmamaxa,  5S5,  b.
Harmostae,  586,  a.
Harpaginetuli,  586,  a.
Harpago,  586,  b.
Harpastum,  586,  b.
Haruga,  587,  a.
Haruspices,  586,  b.
Haruspicina  ars,  417,  a;  587,
Hanispicium,  417,  a.
Hasta,  267,  b;  587,  a.

„       celibaris,  589,  a.

„       pura,  589,  a.

„       vendere  sub,  172,  b.
Hastarium,  589,  a.
Hastati,  494,  b;  496,  b.
Helepolis,  590,  a.
Heliaea,  401,  a.
Heliocaminus,  432,  b.


Helix,  590,  b.

Hellanodicae,  590,  b ;  830,  b.

Hellenotamiae,  590,  b.

Helotes,  591,  a.

Hemina,  351,  a;  367,  a;  592,  b.
979,  a.

Heminarium,  351 ,  a.

Hemistrigium,  254,  a.

Hepatizon,  25,  b.

Heraea,  573,  b.

Herculanei,  167,  a.

Hercules,  148,  b.

Hereditas,  598,  a.

Heredium,  652,  a ;  753,  a.

Heres  (Greek),  594,  a.
„     (Roman),  598,  a.

Hermae,  602,  a.

Hermaea,  604,  a.

Hermanubis,  603,  b.

Hermares,  603,  b.

Hermathena,  603,  b.

Hermeracles,  603,  b.

Hermogenianus  codex,  301,  b.

Hermuli,  602,  a.

Herones,  604,  b.

Hexaphori,  894,  a.

Hexaphoron,  672,  b.

Hexeres,  785,  b.

Hieronica  lex,  690,  b  ;  965,  a.

Hieronicae,  1 67,  a.

Hilaria,  608,  a,

Hippocratici,  746,  b.

Hippodromus,  608,  b;  619,  a.

Hippoperae,  611,  a.

Hirpex,  645,  b.

Hister,  612,  a.

Histrio,  611,  a.

Hoedi,  149,  a.

Holoserica,  1028,  b.

Honoraria  actio,  10,  a;  258,  a.

Honorarii  ludi,  716,  a.

Honorarium,  18,  a;  686,  a.

„  jus,  10,  a;  444,  b.

Honores,  613,  b.

Hoplomachi,  575,  b.

Hura,  614,  a.

„      genitalis,  144,  b.

Hordearium  aes,  26,  a ;  471,  b  .

Hordeum,  55,  h.

„         cantherinum,  56,  a,
„  Galaticum,    or    dis-

tich um,  56,  a.
„         hexastichum,  56,  a.

Horologium,  615,  a.

Horrearii,  618,  a.

Horreum,  61  8,  a.

Hortensia  lex,  682,  a,  690,  b.
696,  b ;  928,  a.

Hortus,  618,  a.

Hospes,  621,  a.

Hospital ia,  620,  a,

Hospitium,  619,  a  ;  620,  a.

Hostia,  999,  b.

Hostis,  619,  b;  950,  a.

Hostus,  826,  b.

Huniare,  560,  b.

Hyacinthia,  621,  b.

Hyades,  150,  a  ;  162,  K

Hydra,  Hydros,  153,  b.

Hydraula,  622,  b.


Hydromelum,  1205,  b.
Hypaetbrae,  195,  a.
Hypocaustum,  192,  b.
Hypogeum,  556,  b.
Hypotheca,  916,  a.
Hypothecaria  actio,  91,  b.
Hypotrachelium,  325,  a.


L     J.

Jaculatores,  503,  a ;  589,  a.
Jaculum,  589,  a  ;  989,  b
Janitor,  427,  b;  627,  b.
Janua,  427,  b ;  624,  b.
Januarius,  231,  232.
latralipta,  628,  a.
latraliptice,  628,  a.
latrosophista,  6i8,  a.
Jconicae  statuae,  1063,  a.
Idus,  231,  b.
Jejunum  solum,  45,  b.
Jentaculum,  306,  a.
]  licet,  560,  b.
lllustres,  6S8,  a.
Ilotae,  591,  a.
Imagines,  628,  b.
Imbrices,  1098,  b.
Immunitas,  628,  b.
Impendium,  525,  b.
Imperativae  feriae,  528,  b.
Imperator,  630,  a.
Imperium,  628,  b;  992,  b.
Impluvium,  427,  b.
Impubes,  630,  a  ;  636,  a.
In  bonis,  205,  b.
Inauguratio,  631,  b.

„  regis,  992,  a.

Inauris,  632,  a.
Incendium,  632,  b.
Incensus,  239,  b;  263,  a.
Inceramenta  navium,  903,  b.
Incestum,  -us,  633,  a.
Incitega,  633,  b.
Inclinatio,  296,  b.
Incorporales  res,  421,  b.
Incubatio,  433,  b.
Incunabula,  634,  a.
Incus,  634,  a.
Index,  704,  b.
Indigitamenta,  941,  a.
Induere,  78,  b.
Indumentum,  1173,  b.
Indusium,  1173,  b.
Indutus,  78,  b;  1173,  b.
Infamia,  634,  b.
Infans,  636,  a.
Infantia,  636,  a.
Inferiae,  562,  b.
Infula,  637,  a.
Ingeniculatus,  148,  b.
Ingeniculus,  148,  b.
Ingenui,  637,  a.
Ingenuitas,  637,  a.
Ingratus,  878,  a.
Injuria  637,  b.
Injuriarum  actio,  639  a;  1200,

a.
Inlicium,  335,  b.
Innixus,  148,  b.


INDEX.

Inofficiosi  querela,  1118,  a.
Inofficiosum    testamentum,

1117,  b.
Inquilini,  31 1,  b.
Inquilinus,  516,  b;  710,  a.
Insania,  376,  a.
Insanus,  376,  a.
Inscripta,  945,  a.
Insigne,  638,  a.
Instita,  639,  a.
Institor,  639,  a.
Institoria  actio,  639,  a.
Institutiones,  639,  b.
Institutoria  actio,  641,  b.
Insula,  430,  a.
Integrum,   restitutio   in,    987,

a.
Intentio,  12,  b.
Intercapedo,  191,  a.
Intercessio,  640,  b;  641,  b.
Intercisi  dies,  409,  b.
Interdictio  aquae  et  ignis,  516,

b.
Interdictum,  642,  a.

„  adipiscendae  pos-

sessionis,  643,  a.

„  duplicium,  644,  a.

„  possessorium,643,

a.

„  de  precario,643,b.

„  prohibitorium,

642,  a.

„  quorum  bonorum,

983,  b.

„  recuperandae  pos-

sessionis,64S,b.

„  restitutorium,642,

a.

„  retinendae  posses-

sion is,  643,  a.

„  .Salvianum,643,a.

„  sectorium,  643,  a  ;

1013,  b.

„  simplicium,644,a.

„  uti  possidetis,  64  3 ,

a.

„  utrubi,  643,  a.

Intergerinus,  869,  b.
Intergerivus,  869,  b.
Internundinum,  816,  b.
Interpres,  77,  a;  131,  b;  644,  b.
Interregnum,  644,  b.
Interrex,  644,  b.
Intervallum,  248,  a.
Interula,  1173,  b.
Intestabilis,  645,  b.
Intestate,  hereditatis  ab,  598,  a.
Intestatus,  598,  a.
Intestinum  opus,  645,  b.
Intimum  solidum,  57,  a.
Indusium,  1173,  b.
Inventarium,  601,  b.
Investis,  631,  a.
Irpex,  645,  b.
Iselastici  ludi,  167,  b.
Italia,  318,  a;  964,  b.
Iter,  937,  a.
Iterare,  49,  b.
Itineris  servitus,  1 032,  a.
Jubere,  1023,  a.


1267
Judex,  10,  b  ;  646,  b;  968,  a.
„       ordinarius,      968,       a,

969,  a.
„       pedaneus,  651,  a.
„       quaestionis,  648,  b.
Judicati  actio,  65 1 ,  b.
Judices  editi,  648,  b.

„       edititii,  77,  b  ;  648,  b.
Judicia  duplicia,  520,  a.

„       extraordinaria,  709,  a.
„       legitima,  629,  a.
„       quae  imperio,  628,  b.
Judicium,  646,  b.

„         album,  649,  b.
„  ex  lege,  629,  a.

„         populi,  6-18,  a.
,.  privatum,  648,  a.

„         publicum,  648,  a.
tutelae,  1178,  b.
Jugarii,  48,  a.
Jugerum,  65\,  b.
Jiigum,  651  y  b;  652,  a;  753,  a.
Jugumentum,  624,  b.
Jugus,  651,  b.
Juline  leges,  690,  b.
Julia  lex  de  adulteriis,  1 7,  a.
„         agraria,  690,  b.
„         de  ambitu,  77,  b.
„         de  annona,  690,  b.
„         de  bonis  cedendis,

690,  b.

„         caducaria,  691,  a.
„         de  caede  et  veneficio,

691,  a.

„  de  civitate,  691,  a.
„  de  foenore,  691,  a.
„         de  fundo  dotali,  691

a.
„        judiciaria,  691,  a.
„         de    liberis    legation!-

bus,  679,  a.
„         majestatis,  691,  a.
„         municipalis,  691,  a.
„         et     Papia     Poppaea

691,  b.
„         peculatus,  881,  b.
„         et  Plautia,  692,  b.
„         de  provinciis,  692,  b.
„         repetundarum,   986,

b.
„         de  residuis,  881,  b.
„         de  sacerdotiis,  693,  a.
„         de  sacrilegis,  881,  b;

1001,  b.
„         sumptuaria,   693,   a;

1078,  a.
„         theatralis,  693,  a.
„         et  Titia,  693,  a.
„         de  vi  publica  et  pri-

vata,  1 209,  a.
„         vicesimaria,   1 1 96,  a.
Julius,  232.

Junea,  or  Junia,  Norbana  lex,
670,  a;  693,a;  705,b;  731, a.
Junia  lex  repetundarum,  986,  a.
Juniores,  333,  b.
Junius,  229,  b ;  232.
Jure,  actio  in,  10,  a;  655,  b.
„     adcrescendi,  600,  b.
„    agere,  11,  a.
4  M  2


1268

Jure  cesslo,  in,  653,  a.

Jureconsultl,  653,  b.

Jurgium,  653,  a.

Juridici,  653,  b.

Juris  auctores,  173,  b  ;  653,  b  ;

654,  b.
Jurisconsult!,  653,  b.
Jurisdictio,  357,  b.
Jurisperiti,  653,  b.
Jurisprudentes,  653,  b.
Juris  studiosi,  143,  b.
Jus,  655,  h.

„    aquae  impetratae,  115,  a.

„     Aelianum,  659,  a.

„    annuli  aurei,  95,  b.

,,    annulorum,  95,  b.

„    applicationis,  295,  a.

„    augurium,    or    augurum,
179,  a.

„    civile,  10,  a;  656,  a.

„         „       Flavianum,  659,  b.
„       Papirianum,  or  Pa-
pisianum,  659,  b.

,    civitatis,  291,  b.

,    commercii,  291,  b;  317,  b.

,    conuubii,  291,  b.

,,    edicendi,  444,  a.

„    eundi,  1032,  a.

„    fetiale,  656,  b.

„    gentilitium,  or  gentilitatis,
568,  a.

„    gentium,  656,  a.

„    honorarium,  10,  a  ;  444  b;
657,  a.

„    honorum,  291,  b.

„     Italicum,  317,  a.

„     Latii,  291,  b;  669,  b.

„    liberorum,  692,  b.

„     naturale,  656,  a.

„     non  scriptum,  657,  b.

„     Pontificium,  656,  b;   941,
b.

„    possessionis,  946,  a ;  948,  a.

„    postliminii,  949,  b.

„    praediatorium,  955,  a.

„    praetorium,  444,  b ;  657,  a.

„     privatum,  291,  b;  657,  b.

„     publice  epulandi,  1022,  b.

„    publicum,  291,  b;  657,  b.

„     Quiritium,  291 ,  b  ;  658  a.

„    relationis,  1021,  a.

„     respondendi,  654,  a.

„    sacrum,  656,  b.

„    scriptum,  657,  b.

„    senatus,  1018,  b.

„    sufFragiorum,  291,  b.

„    superficiarium,  1078,  b.

„    vocatio,  in,  10,  b.
Jusjurandum,  659,  b.

„  calumniae,235,a.

Justa  funera,  558,  b,
Justinianeus  codex,  301,  b.
Justitium,  663,  b.
Jussu  quod  actio,  663,  b.
Justum,  659,  a.

Juvenalia,   or  juvenales    ludi,
663,  b.


INDEX.


L.


Labarum,  1045,  a.
Labrum,  191,  a;    192,  a.
Labyrinthus,  664,  a.
Lacerna,  665,  a.
Laciniae,  665,  a.
Laconicum,   184,  b;     190,  b;

191,  b.
Lacunar,  432,  a.
Lacus,  114,  b.
Laena,  665,  b.
Laesa  majestas,  724,  b.
Lagenae,  1203,  b.
Lancea,  588,  a.
Lancula,  667,  a  ;  1170,  b.
Lanarius,  919,  b.
Lanificium,  1099,  b.
Laniger,  1 49,  b.
Lanista,  574,  b.
Lanterna,  669,  a.
Lanx,  667,  a.
Lapicidinae,  671,  a.
Lapis  specularis,  432,  a.
Laquear,  452,  a.
Laqueatores,  575,  b.
Laqueus,  667,  b.
Lararium,  667,  b.
Larentalia,  668,  a.
Larentinalia,  668,  a.
Largitio,  77,  a.
Larva,  889,  b.
Lata  fuga,  515,  b.
Later,  668,  a.
Laterculus,  668,  a.
Laterna,  669,  a.
Laticlavius,  294,  a.
Latii  jus,  669,  b.
Latinae  feriae,  529,  b.
Latini  Juniani,  705,  b.
Latinitas,  669,  b.
Latinus,  291,  b.
Latium,  669,  b.
Latomiae,  671,  a.
Latrina,  188,  b.
Latrocinium,  670,  a.
Latrones,  670,  a.
Latrunculi,  670,  b.
Latumiae,  671,  a.
Latus  clavus,  293,  b.
Lavatio  calda,  190,  b;  191,  a.
Laudatio  funebris,  559,  a.
Laurentalia,  668,  a.
Lautia,  677,  b.
Lautomiae,  671,  a.
Lautumiae,  671,  a.
Lectica,  671,  b.
Lecticarii,  671,  b;  672,  a.
Lecticula,  671,  b;  672,  b.
Lectisternium,  673,  a.
Lectores,  92,  a.
Lectus,  673,  a.

„       funebris,  671,  b.
Legatarius,  675,  a.
Legatio  libera,  678,  b.
Legatum,  675,  a.
Legatus,  677,  b;  967,  b.
Leges,  682,  a.

„      censoriae,  265,  a.


Leges   centuriatae,  682,  a.
„       curiatae,  332,  h ;  682,  a.
„      Juliae,  690,  b.
Legio,  490,  a  ;  597,  b,
Legis  actiones,  9,  a.

„     Aquiliae  actio,  383,  b.
Legitima    hereditas,   598,    a

600,  a.
Legitimae  actiones,  9,  a.
Legitimum  spatium,  1033,  b.
Legitimus  modus,  1033,  b.
Legumina,  57,  a.
Lembus,  680,  a.
Lemniscus,  680,  a.
Lemuralia,  680,  b.
Lemuria,  680,  b.
Lenaea,  411,  b.
Leno,  680,  b.
Lenocinium,  680,  b.
Leo,  150,  b.
Leporaria,  69,  b.
Lepta,  270,  b.
Lepus,  152,  b.
Leria,  708,  a.
Lernaea,  681,  a.
Lessus,  559,  a.
Leuca,  893,  b.
Leuga,  893,  b.
Levir,  28,  b.
Lex,  657,  a;  658,  b;  681,  b.

„     Acilia,  986,  b.

„     Acilia  Calpurnia,  77,  b.

„     Aebutia,  9,   a ;   267,  a ;
684,  a.

„     Aelia,  684,  a.

„     Aelia    Sentia,     684,    a ;
878,  a.

„     Aemilia,  684,  b.

„  „         de  censoribus,

684,  b.

„     Aemilia  Baebia,  688,  a,

„     Aemilia  Lepidi,  1077,  b.

„     Aemilia  Scauri,  731,  b;
1077,  b.

„     agraria,  37,  a;  685,  a.

„     ambitus,  77.

„     Ampia,  684,  b.

„     annalis,  or  Villia,  19,  b;
684,  b.

„     annua,  444,  b.

„      Antia,  1077,  b.

„     Antonia,  685,  a.

„     Apuleia,  641,  a;  685,  a.

„  „      agraria,  685,  a.

„  „       frumentaria,

548,  a;  685,  a.

„  „     majestatis,  725,  a.

„     Aquilia,  383,  b.

„     Aternia  Tarpeia,  685,  a.

„     Atiadesacerdotiis,685.a,

„     Atilia,  685,  a;    693,  a;
1177,  a.

„     Atinia,  685,  a.

„     Aufidia,  78,  a.

„     Aurelia,  650,  a.

„     Baebia,  685,  a.

„  „        Aemilia,  688,  a.

„     Caecilia  de  Censoribus.  ot

„  „         Censori  a,  685

b.


Lex    Caecilia  de  vectlgalibus,

685,  b.

„  „         Didia,  685,  b.

„  „        tabellaria,  1091,

a.
„     Calpurnia  de  ambitu,  77,

b.
„  „         de  repetundis,

648,  b;  649,
b ;  986,  a.
„     Canuleia,  685,  b.
„     Cassia,  685,  b.
„         „     agraria,  685,  b.
„         „     tabellaria,   6S5,  h  ;

1091,  a.
„         „     Terentia  frum'enta-

ria,  685,  b.
„     Cincia,  685,  b.
„     Claudia,  686,  a.
„     Clodiae,  549,  b  ;  686,  a.
„     Coelia  or  Caelia,  1091,  a.
„     Cornelia  agraria,  666,  h.
,.  „        de  civitate,  686,

b.
„  „       de  falsis,  517,  b.

„  „       frumentaria,  549,

a.
„  „       de  injuriis,  638,

a.
„  „       judiciaria,650,  a.

„  „       de  magistratibus,

686,  b.

„  „       majestatis,725,a.

„  „       de  novis  tabellis,

688,  a.
„  „       nummaria,517,b.

„  „       de  parricidio,  ■

687,  a.

n  „       de  proscriptione

et   proscriptis,

96 S,  b.
„  „       de    repetundis,

986,  a.
„  „       de    sacerdotiis,

997,  b.
„  „       de  sicariis  et  ve-

neficis,  670,  b;

687,  a;    1188,

b.
„  „       de   sponsoribus,

641,  a.
„  „       sumtuaria,  1077,

b.
„  „       testamentaria,

517,  b.
„  „       de   vi  publica,

1209,  a.
„  „       tribunicia,687,b.

„  „       unciaria,  687,  b.

„  ,,        Baebia,  77,  b.

„  „        Caecilia,  549,  b.

„  „       et  Caecilia,  688,

a.
„     Curiata  de  imperio,  172,

b ;  333,  a.
„     Didia,  1077,  b.
„     Domitia    de    sacerdotiis,

940,  b.
„     Duilia,  688,  a,
„  „       maenia,  688,  a.


INDEX

Lex  Duodecim     Tabularum,
688,  a.

„  Fabia  de  plagio,  921,  b.

„  Falcidia,  676,  b.

„  Fannia,  1077,  b.
„  Flaminia,  690,  a.
„      Flavia  agraria,  690,  a.

„  frumentariae,  549,  b.
„     Fufia  de  religione,  690,  a.
„         „     judiciaria,  650,  a.

„  Furia  or  Fusia   Caninia,

690,  a;  731,  a.
„         „     de  sponsu,  641,  a;

732,  a.

„         „     or  Fusia  testamen-
taria, 676,  b.

„  Gabinia  tabellaria,  1091,
a.

„      Gabiniae,  78,  a;  690,  a.

„      Gellia  Cornelia,  690,  b.

„     Genucia,  690,  b.

„     Hieronica,  690,  b ;  965,  a.

„      Horatia,  690,  b.

„  Hortensia  de  plebiscitis,
682,  a;  690,  b  ;  696,  b;
928,  a.

„     Hostilia  de  fastis,  690,  b.

„     Icilia,  690,  b.

„     judicaria     C.    Gracchi,
1017,  b.

„     Julia  de  adulteriis,  17,  a  ;
419,  a;  680,  b.

„         „     de  ambitu,  77,  b.

„         „     de  civitate,  319,  b;
320,  a.

„         „     municipalis,  635,  b ;

691,  a.

„         „     peculatus,  881,  b.

„         „     de  vi,  633,  a.

„     Juliae,  690,  b;  691,  692,

693,  a.
„     Juniadeperegrinis,693,a.
„         „     Licinia,  693,  b.
„         5,     Norbana,    670,    a ;
693,  a  ;    705,  b  ;
731,  a.
„         „     repetundarum,  986,

a.
„         „     Vellela,  693,  a.
„     Laetoria,  693,  b.
„     Licinia  de  sodalitiis,  77, b.
„  „      Junia,  693,  b.

„  „       Mucia  de  civibus

regundis,693,b.
„  „      sumtuaria,   1077,

b.
„     Liciniae  rogationes,  693,

b.
„     Liviae,  549,  a ;  694,  a.
„     Lutatia  de  vi,  1209,  a.
„     Maenia,  694,  b.
„     majestatis,  691,a;  724,  b.
„     Mamilia  de  coloniis,  694,

b.
„  „         finium  regunda-

rum,  694,  b.
„     mancipii,  728,  a.
„      Manilia,  694,  b.
„     Manlia  de  vicesira;a»  23,
b;  731,  b.


12G9
Lex  Marcia,  695,  a.
„     Maria,  695,  a.
„     Memmia,    or    Remmia,

234,  b.
„     Mensia,  695,  a.
„     Minucia,  695,  a.
„     Octavia,  549,  a.
„     Ogulnia,  695,  a.
„     Oppia,  1077,  a.
„      Orchia,  1077,  a.
„     Ovinia,  695,  a;   1018,  a.
„     Papia  de  peregrinis,  695,

a.
„         „       Poppaea,    206,  b ;
418,  b;   691,  b;
878,  b;   879,  b.
„     Papiria,  or  Julia  Papiria
de  mulctarum  aestima-
tione,  695,  a.
„     Papiria,  695,  a.
„  „         Plautia,  695,  b.

„  „         Poetelia,  696,  a.

„  „         tabellaria,  1091,

a.
„      Pedia,  695,  b.
„     Peducaea,  695,  b.
„      Pesulania,  695,  b.
„     Petreia,  695,  b.
„      Petronia,  695,  b.
„     Pinaria,  695,  b.
„     Plaetoria,  374,  b  ;  409,  a.
,,     Plautia,  or  Plotia  de  vi,

1209,  a.
„  „  or   Plotia  judi-

ciaria, 650,  a ;
695,  b.
M  „  Papiria,  293,  a ;

695,  b.
„     Poetelia,  77,  b;  696,  a.
„  „  Papiria,  696,  a ;

797,  a.
„  Pompeia,  696,  a.
„  „  dc  ambitu,  77,

b;    650,   a;
696,  a.
„  „  judiciaria,  650,

•  a.

„  „  de  jure  magis-

tratuum,  696,
a.
„  „  de    parricidiis,

687,  a.
„  „  tribunitia,  696,

a.
„  „  de  vi,   633,  a;

650,  a ;  696,
a;   1209,  a.
„     Pompeiae,  696,  a.
„     Popilia,  695,  a.
„     Porciae  de  capite  civium.

696,  a.
„     Porcia  de  provinciis,  696

a.
„     Publicia,  696,  a.
„     Publilia,  696,  a.
„  „         de  alea,  75,  a.

„  „         de  sponsoribus,

641, a;  732, a.
„  Publiliae,  696,  b ;  928,  a.
,j     Pupia,  697,  a.


1270
Lex


Quintla,  697,  a.
regia,  697,  a;   1149,  a.
regiae,  332,  a.
Remmia,  234,  b.
repetundarum,  956,  a.
de  residiis,  881,  b.
Rhodia,  697,  a.
Roscia  theatralis,  697,  b  ;

1123,  b.
Rubria,  697,  b.
Rupiliae,  698,  a;  964,  b.
sacratae,  698,  a,
Satura,  683,  a  ;    1008,  b.
Scantinia,  698,  b.
Scribonia,  698,  b.
Sempronia    de    foenore,

699,  a.
Semproniae,  698,  b.
Servilia  agraria,  699,  a.
„        Caepionis,649,b.
„         Glaucia  de  civi-

tate,  986,  b.
„         Glaucia  de  repe-
tundi.s,649,b;
986,  b.
„        judiciaria,    649,
b ;  699,  a.
Silia,  699,  a.

Silvani  et  Carbonis,695,b.
Sulpicia  Sempronia,  699,

b.
Sulpiciae,  699,  b.
Sumptuariae,  1077,  a.
Tabellariae,  1091,  a.
Tarpeia  Aternia,  685,  a.
Terentia  Cassia,  549,  a.
Terentilia,  699,  a.
Testamentariae,  699,  b.
Thoria,  699,  b.
Titia,  700,  b.

„      de  alea,  75,  a.
„      de  tutoribus,  700,
b.
Trebonia,  700,  b.
Tribunicia,  1149,  a.
Tullia  de  ambitu,  77,  b.
„      de     legatione.  li-
bera, 679,  a.
Valeria,  de  proscriptione,

963,  b.
Valeriae,  700,  b.

„         et    Horatiae,

700,  b;   928,


„     Varia,  725,  a.

„     Vatinia    de     provinciis,
701,  a.

„  „      decolonis,  701,a.

„     devi,  1209,  a.

„     viaria,  701,  a;   1193,  a.

„     vicesimaria,  1196,  a.

„     "Villia  annalis,  701,  b.

„     Visellia,  96,  a;  701,  b.

„     Voconia,  696,  b;  701,  b.
Libatio,  1000,  a.
Libella,  702,  b  ;  706,  a.
Libellus,  792,  b  ;  843,  b.
Liber,  637,  a ;  703,  b ;  704,  b.

„      statu,  730,  b.
Libera  fuga,  515,  b.


INDEX.

Liberal es  ludi,  414,  b.
Liberalia,  414,  a.
Liberalis  causa,  143,  a.

„         manus,  143,  a.
Liberalitas,  77,  a.
Liberi,  637,  a ;  705,  a.
Libertas,  704,  b.
Libertus  (Greek),  705,  a.

„         (Roman),  705,  a.
Libertlnus,  637,  a.
Libitinarii,  558,  a.
Libra,  706,  a.

„       or  as,  706,  a;   810,  a.
Librae,  151,  a.
Libramentum,  113,  b.
Libraria  taberna,  704,  b.
Librarii,  570,  b  ;  704,  b  ;  706,  b.
Librarius  legionis,  7,  b.
Librator,  707,  a.
Libripens,  727,  b.
Liburna,  786,  a.
Libuniica,  786,  a.
Liceri,  172,  a.
Licia,  1101,  a.
Liciatorum,  1101,  a.
Licinia  lex  de  sodaliiiis,  77,  b.

„       Junia  lex,  693,  b.

„       Mucia  lex,  693,  b.

„      lex  sumturia,  1076,  b.
Liciniae  rogationes,  693,  b.
Licitari,  172,  a.
Lictor,  707,  a.
Ligo,  707,  b.
Ligula,  707,  b  ;  979,  a.
Lima,  707,  b.
Limbus,  707,  b.
Limen,  624,  b  ;   949,  b.
Limes,  '29,  b.
Limitatio,  29,  b.
Limus,  1075,  a.
Linearii,  29,  b.
Linteamen,  851,  b.
Linteones,  1099,  a.
Linteum,  674,  b.
Linum,  1092,  a.
Lirare,  49,  b.
Literae,  843,  b.
Literarum  obligatio,  818,  a.
Literati,  1041,  b.
Lithostrotum,  431,  a.
Litis  contestatio,  708,  a ;  8 1  9,  a.
Litus  dividuae  exceptio,  11.  b.
Lituus,  709,  b.
Lixae,  234,  b.

Locare  agrum,  43,  a ;  48,  b.
Locarii,  88,  b.

Locati  et  conducti  actio,  710,  a.
Locatio,  710,  a.

„         fructus,  43,  a.
Locator,  710,  a.
Loculamentum,  203,  a.
Loculus,  5 J  9,  b.
Locuples,  710,  a.
Locus  liberatus  et  effatus,  1104,

a.
Lodicula,  710,  a.
Lodix,  710,  a.
Logistae,  376,  b.
Lomentum,  57,  b.
Lora,  1203,  a.


Lorarii,  540,  a.

Lorica,  711,  a.

Lucar,  613,  a.

Lucerences,  875,  b  ;   1 155,  b.

Luceres,  875,  b  ;   1155,  b.

Lucerna,  713,  a.

Lucta,  713,  b.

Luctatio,  713,  b.

Ludi,  714,  b.

„      Apollinares,  715,  a.

„      Augustales,  179,  b.

„      Capitolini,  715,  a.

„      Circenses,286,  b;714,b
715,  b.

„      compitalitii,  1347,  b.

„      Consuales,  286,  b.

„      Florales,  542,  a.

„      funebres,  715,  b.

„      honorarii,  716,  a.

„      liberal  es,  414,  b.

„      magni,  715,  b.

„      Martiales,  716,  a.

„      Megalenses,  749,  a.

„      natalitii,  716,  a.

„      Palatini,  716,  a.

„      piscatorii,  716,  a.

„      plebeii,  716,  a.

„      pontificales,  716.  b.

„     quaestorii,  716,  b.

„     quinquennales,  9,  a.

„      Romani,  716,  b.

„     saeculares,  716,  b.

„     scenici,  714,  b;   749,  a.

„     Tarentini,  716,  b.

„     Taurii,  716,  b.
Ludus,  574,  b.

„        duodecim     scriptorum,
671,  a.

„        latrunculorum,  670,  b.
Trojae,  288,  a.
Lumen,  115,  a;   538,  b.
Luminum  servitus,  1031,  b.
Lupanar,  258,  b.
Lupatum,  548,  a.
Lupercalia,  718,  a.
Luperci,  718,  a.
Lupus  ferreus,  719,  a.
Lustratio,  719,  a.
Lustrum,  259,  a;   719,  b.
Lychnuchus,
Lyra,  148,  b;  720,  a.

M.

Macchus,  347,  a.
Macedonianum   senatusconsul-

tum,  1026,  a.
Macellarius,  722,  a.
Macellum,  722,  a.
Maceria,  769,  b.
Machinae,  722,  a.
Macrum  solum,  45,  b.
Mactra,  1,  a.
Maenia  lex,  694,  b.
JVIaenianum,  86,  b  ;  88,  a  ;  723,

a.
Magadis,  721,  a;  779,  a,
Magister,  723,  a.

,,         admissionum,  14,  b.


Magister    armorum,  723,  a.

„  auctiones,  208,  b.

„         convivii,  1082,  b.

„         epistolarum,  723,  a.

„  equitum,  407,  b.

„         libellorum,  723,  a.

„         memoriae,  723,  a.

„         militum,  723.  a.

„         navis,  480,  b.

„         officiorum,  723,  a.

„         populi,  405,  a.

„  scriniorum,  723,  b.

„         societatis,  723,  b.

„         vicorum,  723,  b.
Magistratus,  723,  b.
Magnifici,  628,  a.
Maius,  232,  a.
Majestas,  724,  b.
Majores,  636,  b.
Malleolus,  726,  a.
Malleus,  726,  a.
Malluvium,  729,  b.
Malus,  789,  a.
Malus  oculus,  521,  b.
Mamilia  lex,  694,  b.
Mammaeani,  75,  b.
Manceps,  265,  a  ;   726,  b.
Mancipatio,  727,  b  ;   11 16,  a.
Manclpi  res,  421,  b;    1218,  a.
Mancipii,  728,  a.

„         causa,  726,  b.
Mancipium,  727,  a.
Mandata  principum,  728,  b.
Mandatarius,  728,  b.
Mandati  actio,  728,  b.
Mandator,  728,  b.
Mandatum,  728,  b.
Mandrae,  671,  a.
Mane,  409,  a.
Mangones,  1040,  a.
Manica,  729,  a.
Manicula,  1 1 8,  a.
Manilia  lex,  694,  b.
Manipulares,  500,  b.
Manipularii,  500,  b.
Manipulus,    494,    a ;    497,    a ;

500,  b.
Manlia  lex,  731,  b.
Mansio,  729,  a.
Mansionarius,  729,  b.
Mansiones,  729,  b;  880,  b.
Mantele,  729,  b.
Manuarium  aes,  26,  b.
Manubiae,  951,  b;   1053,  b.
Manum,  conveutio  in,  740,  b  ;

742,  a.
Manumissio,  730,  a.
Manumissor,  730,  b.
Manus,  26,  b.

„      ferrea,  586,  b.
„      injectio,  731,  b.
Mappa,  729,  b.
Marcia  lex,  695,  a.
Margines,  1 1 92,  b.
Maria  lex,  695,  a.
Marsupium,  732,  b.
Martialis  flamen,  504,  a.
Martiales  ludi,  716,  a.
Martius,  232.
Mastigia,  540,  a.


INDEX.

Mastiche,  903,  b.
Matara,  589,  a.
Mater,  310,  a.

Materfamilias,  51 9,  b  ;   740,  b.
Mathesis,  144,  b.
Matralia,  735,  a.
Matrimonjum,  735,  b.
Matrona,  741,  a.
Matronales  feriae,  744,  a.
Matronalia,  744,  a.
Mausoleum,  561,  a;   744,  a.
Mazonomus,  745,  b.
Mediastini,  48,  a  ;  745,  b.
Medicamina,  1204,  a.
Medicina,  745,  b.
Medicus,  747,  a.
Medimnus,  748,  b.
Meditrinalia,  748,  b.
Medix  tuticus,  748,  b.
Medulla  nudata,  55,  h.
Megalenses  ludi,  749,  a.
Megalensia,  1 49,  a.
Megalesia,  749,  a,
Melligo,  70,  b.
Membrana,  703,  b.
Memmia  lex,  234,  b.

Mensa,  749,  b.
„       de,  131,  a.

Mensae  Delphicae,  2,  a.

„       scripturam,  per,  1 3 1 ,  a

Mensam  per,  131,  a.

Mensarii,  750,  a.

Mensularii,  750,  a.

Mensia  lex,  695,  a.

Mensis,  238,  a.

Mensores,  71,  b;  750,  b.

Menstruum,  1041,  b.

Mensura,  750,  a.

Mercenarii,  758,  a.

Mercenarius,  48,  a.

Merenda,  306,  b.

Meridiani,  575,  b.

Meridies,  409,  a.

Messio,  52,  b.

Metae,  284,  a.

Metallum,  759,  a.

Methodici,  746,  b.

Metretes,  762,  a  ;   1223,  b.

Metronomi,  762,  b.

Milium,  56,  a.

Mille  passuum,  762,  b.

Milliare,  762,  b.

Milliarium,  762,  b.

„  aureum,  763,  a.

Milvus,  154,  a.

Mimus,  763,  a.

Mina,  931,  b.

Minores,  374,.  b;  636,  b.

Minucia  lex,  695,  a.

Minutio  capitis,  239,  b,

Mirmillones,  575,  b.

Missio,  499,  b  ;   575,  a.
„     causaria,  499,  b.
„     honesta,  499,  b.
„     ignominiosa,  499,  b.

Missus,  287,  b.

„      aerarius,  287,  b.

Mitra,  329,  b;    1224,  b.

Mixta  actio,  10,  a.

Modiolus,  378,  b  ;  764,  b.


1271

Modius,  7,64y  b.
Modulus,  764,  b.

„       acceptorius,  115,  a.
„       erogatorius,  115,  a.
Modus  legitinuis,  1033,  b.
Moenia,  769,  b.
Mola,  765,  a.

„     salsa,  743,  a ;  999,  b.
Monarch ia,  766,  a.
Monaulos,  1130,  b.
Moneta,  766,  a  ;  808,  b.
Monetales  triumviri,  766,  a
Monetarii,  767,  a.
Monile,  767,  b.
Monitor,  1122,  a.
Monopodium,  758,  a.
Monoxylon,  783,  a;  875,  b.
Monstrum,  961,  a.
Monumentum,  561,  a.
Morator,  287,  a.
Morbus  comitialis,  336,  b.
Mortarium,  768,  b.
Morum  regimen,  263,  a.

„        cura,  or    praefectura,

263,  b.
Mos,  657,  a.
Motio  e  senatu,  264,  a.

„       e  tribu,  264,  b.
Muciana  cautio,  259,  b.
Mulier,  1179,  a.
Mullens,  222,  a.
Mulsa,  1205,  I).
Mulsum,  1205,  a.
Multa,  929,  a.
Munerator,  574,  a.
Municeps,  318,  b,
Municipes,  318,  b.
Municipium,  318,  b.
Munifex,  202,  a.
Munus,  574,  a ;  613,  b.
Munycliia,  769,  a.
Muralis  corona,  360,  b.
Muries,  1190,  a,
Murrea  vasa,  769,  b.
Murrhina  vasa,  769,  b.
Murus,  769,  b.
Muscarium,  539,  b.
Musculus,  772,  a.
Museum,  772,  b.
Musica  muta,  862,  a.
Musivarii,  915,  b.
Musivum  opus,  43.1,  a ,  915,  a,
Mustaceum,  743,  a.
Mustum,  1201,  b.
Mutationes,  729,  b.
Mutui  actio,  780,  b.

„      datio,  780,  b.
Mutuli,  325,  a.
Mutus,  818,  a;   IILS,  a.
Mutuum,  780,  b.
Mysteria,  781,  a.
Mystrum,  782,  a.

N.

Nacca,551,  b.
Naenia,  559,  a.
Narthecia,  1214,  a.
Natalitii  ludi,  716,  a.
Natalibus  restitutio,  637,  b.
4m  4


1272

Natatio,  189,  b;    195,  a.
Natatorium,  189,  b.
Naturales,  879,  b.
Navalia,  782,  a.
Naval  is  corona,  360,  a.

„       scriba,  1012,  a.
Navarchus,  782,  b.
Navis,  783,  a.

„       aperta,  784,  b.
Naumachia,  792,  b.
Naumachiarii,  792,  b.
Nauta,  480,  b.
Nebris,  793,  b.
Necessarii  heredes,  598,  b.
Nefasti  dies,  409,  b.
Negativa  actio,  350,  a.
Negatoria  actio,  3  50,  a ;  1 033,  a.
Negiigentia,  373,  a.
Negotiatores,  794,  b.
Negotiorum    gestorum    actio,

794,  a.
Nenia,  559,  a.
Nepos,  310,  a.
Neptis,  310,  a.
Neptunalia,  795,  b.
Neroniana,  983,  a.
Nexum,  795,  b.
Nexus,  796,  a.
Nidus,  203,  a.
Nisus,  or  Nixus,  148,  b.
Nobiles,  798,  b.
Nobilitas,  798,  b.
Nodus,  800,  a.
Nomen,  527,  a  ;  800,  a.

„       expedire,or  expungere,
131,  a.

„       Latinum,  1050,  a.

„       (Greek),  800,  a.

„       (Roman),  800,  b.
Nomenclator,  77,  a.
Nonae,  231,  b.
Norma,  806,  a.
Nota,  806,  a.

„    censoria,  263,  b  ;  635,  b.
Notarii,  8,  b  ;  222,  a  ;  806,  a  ;

807,  a.
Notatio  censoria,  263,  b.
Novacula,  197,  b.
No  vale,  60,  b.
Novalis,  60,  b.
Novatio,  819,  a.
Novellae,  807,  a.

•    „        constitutionis,  807,  a.
November,  232.
Novendiale,  562,  a  ;   807,  b.
Noverca,  28,  b.
Novi  homines,  799,  a.

„    operis  nuntiatio,  835,  a.
Noxa,  808,  a;   929,  a.
Noxalis  actio,  807,  b.
Noxia,  808,  a.
Nubilarium,  53,  a.
Nucleus,  1192,  a.
Nudipedalia,  221,  a.
Nudus,  808,  b.
Numeratio,  1019,  b.
Numisma,  808,  b.
Nummularii,  750,  a.
Nuraularii,  750,  a.
Nuramus,  or  Numus,  808,  b.


INDEX.

Nuramus  aureus,  182,  a.
Nuncupatio,  1 1 1 6,  b.
Nundinae,  815,  b.
Nundinum,  816,  b.
Nuntiatio,  1 76,  b  ;   835,  b.
Nuptiae,  735,  b.
Nurus,  28,  b.


O.

Oarion,    or    Orion,    152,    a ;

161,  b.
Obarator,  52,  a.
Obeliscus,  816,  b.
Obices,  626,  b.
Obligatio,  817,  a.
Obligationes,  817,  a.
Obnuntiatio,  176,  b.
Obolus,  821,b;931,b;  1213,b.
Obrogare  legem,  682,  b.
Obsidlonalis  corona,  359,  a.
Obsonium,  835,  b.
Occasus,  155.
Occatio,  52,  a ;   984,  b.
Occupatio,  821,  b.
Ocimum,  or  Ocymum,  59,  b.
Ocrea,  822,  a.
Octavae,  1184,  b.
Octavia  lex,  549,  a.
October,  232.

„         equus,  880,  a.
Octophoron,  672,  b.
Oecus,  428,  b.
Oenomelum,  1205,  b.
Oenophorum,  823,  b.
Oenophorus,  823,  b.
Oesipum,  1214,  b.
Offendix,  102,  a.
Officiales,  508,  b.
Officium  admissionis,  14,  b.
OffVingere,  49,  b.
Ogulnia  lex,  695,  a.
Olea,  823,  b.
Oleagina  corona,  361,  b.
Olenie,  H9,  a.
Olenium  astrum,   or   pecus,

149,  a.
Oletum,  823,  b.
Oleum,  823,  b.
Oliva,  823,  b,
Olivetum,  823,  b.
OUa,  561,  b;  827,  a.
Olor,  149,  a.
Olympia,  9.  a;   828,  a.
Onager,  1 1 39,  a.
Onerariae  naves,  358,  b.
Oneris  ferendi  servitus,  1031,b.
Onyx,  alabaster,  74,  a.
Opalia,  835,  a ;   1009,  b.
Operae,  878,  b.

„       servorum   et   anima-

lium,  1031,  a.
Operarii,  8,  b  ;  47,  b.
Operis  novi  nuntiatio,  835,  a.
Opifera,  790,  b.
Opima  spolia,  1054,  a.
Opimianum  vinum,  1201,  b.
Opinatores,  835,  b,
Opistographi,  704,  a.


Oppia  lex,  1077,  a.
Oppidum,  285,  a.
Opsonator,  836,  a.
Opsonium,  835,  b.
Optio,  497,  506,  a.
Optimates,  799,  b.
Opus,  or  acceptum  referre,
265,  b.

„     novum,  835,  a.
Oraculum,  836,  b.
Orarium,  843,  a.
Oratio,  16,  b.

Orationes  principum,  843,  a.
Orator,  843,  b.
Orbis,  532,  b.
Orbus,  692,  b.
Orca,  1048,  b.
Orchestra,  1122,  a.
Orchia  lex,  1077,  a.
Orcinus  libertus,  730,  b.
„         senator,  730,  b  ;
1017,  a.
Ordinarii  gladiatores.  575,  b.

„         servi,  1041,  a.
Ordinarius  judex,968,a;  969,  a.
Ordinum    ductores,    497,    a ;

504,  b.
Ordo,  318,  a;  501,  b;  676,  b  ;
845,  a.

„      decurionum,      318,    a;
845,  a.

„     equestris,  473,  b  ;   845,  a,

,,     senatorius,  845,  a;   1018^
a.
Oreae,  548,  a.
Organum,  722,  a.
Orichalcum,  25,  a ;  845,  b.
Originarii,  311,  b.
Ornamentatriumphalia,l  1 67,U.
Ornatrix,
Orneatae,  888,  b.
Ornithones,  68,  b.
Ortus,  155,  b.
Oscines,  1 75,  b.
Oscillum,  846,  a.
Ostentum,  961,  a.
Ostiarium,  846,  a.
Ostiarius,  427,  b.
Ostium,  427,  a ;  624,  a.
Ova,  284,  a.
Ovalis  corona,  361,  a.
Ovatio,  846,  a.
Ovile,  336,  b.
Ovinia  lex,  1018,  a.


Pabula,  58,  b.
Pactio,  820,  b.
Pactum,  821,  a.
Paean,  846,  b.
Paedagogia,  847,  b.
Paedagogium,  847,  b.
Paedagogus,  847,  a.
Paenula,  848,  a.
Paganalia,  848,  b.
Pagan i,  848,  b.
Paganica,  919,  a.
Pagi,  848,  b.


Pala,  96,  b  ;   848,  b.

Palaestra,  849,  a.

Palangae,  894,  a.

Palaria,  854,  b.

Palatini  ludi,  716,  a.

Palea,  57,  a.

Palilia,  849,  b.

Piililicium,  or  Parilicium  sidus,

150,  a.
Palimpsestus,  704,  a.
Palla,  850,  b.
Palliata  fabula,  346,  b.
Palliatus,  853,  b.
Palliolum,  850,  b.
I'allium,  850,  b.
Palrnipes,  853,  b.
Palmus,  75,  b ;  372,  b  ;  853,  b.
Paludamentum,  853,  b.
Paludatiis,  853,  b.
Pal  us,  854,  b.
Panathenaea,  855,  a.
Pancratiastae,  857,  b.
Pancratium,  857,  a.
Pandectae,  858,  a.
Panej];yris,  861,  b.
Panicum,  56,  a.
Panis  gradilis,  550,  b.
Pantomimus,  862,  a.
Papia  lex  de  peregrinis,  695,  a.
„      Poppaea     lex,     206,     b ;
418,   b;     691,   b;     878,    b;
879,  b.
Papiria  lex,  695,  a.

„       Plautia  lex,  695,  b.

„       Poetelia  lex,  696,  a.

„       tabellaria  lex,  1091,  a.
Papyrus,  703,  b.
Par  impar  ludere,  863,  a.
Faradisus,  863,  b.
Paragauda,  864,  a.
Parapherna,  437,  a.
Parasiti,  867,  a.
Parental  ia,  562,  b.
Paries,  868,  a.
Parilia,  849,  b.
Parma,  496,  b  ;   870,  a.
Parmula,  870,  a.
Parochi,  870,  b.
Paropsis,  870,  b.
Parricida,  687,  b.
Parricidium,  687,  a.
Partiarius,  48,  b.
Pascendi  servitus,  1032,  a.
Pascua,  1 1 84,  a.

„      publica,  1012,  a.
Passum,  1 203,  b.
Passus,  751,  b;  871,  a.
Pastio,  61,  a.

„       agrestis,  61,  a.

„       villatica,  66,  a.
Pastoplioros,  871,  a.
Patella,  871,  b.
Pater,  3  JO,  a.

„     familias,  519,  b  ;    874,  a.
„     patratus,  531,  a.
Patera  871,  b.
Pathologia,
Patibulum,  563,  a.
Patina,  872,  b.
Patres,  875,  a;  1016,  a.


INDEX.

Patres  conscripti,  1016,  b.
Patria  potestas,  873,  a.
Patricii,  875,  a.
Patrimi  et  matrimi,  or  Patri-

mes  et  matrimes,  877,  b.
Patrimus,  877,  b.
Patrona,  878,  a.
Patronomi,  877,  b.
Patronus,  878,  a.
Patruus,  310,  a.
Pavimentum,  431,  a;   1192,  b.
Pavonaceum,  1099,  a.
Pauper ie,  actio  de,  880,  b.
Pauperies,  880,  b.
Pausarii,  880,  b.
Pecten,  881,  a;   1101,  b.
Pecuarii,  881,  a.
Peculator,  881,  a.
Peculatus,  881,  a.
Peculio,  actio  de,  1037,  b.
Peculium,  869,  b  ;  1037,  b.
„  castrense,  874,  b.

Pecunia,  808,  b.

„       certa,  818,  a.
„       vacua,  131,  a.
Pecuniae  repetundae,  986,  a.
Pecus,  881,  a.

„       hirtum,  61,  b.

„     Tarentinum,or  Graecum,
61,  b.
Pedaneus  judex,  651,  a.
Pedarii    senatores,    851,    a;

1018,  a.
Pedisequi,  88],  b.
Peducaea,  lex,  695,  b.
Pedum,  881,  b.
Pegasus,  149,  b.
Pegma,  882,  a.
Pegmares,  882,  a.
Pellex,  349,  b.
Pellis,  882,  a.
Pelta,  882,  b.
Penicillus  -um,  903,  a.
Pentacosiomedimni,    266,    a ;

1155,  a.
Pentathli,  883,  a.
Pentathlon,  883,  a.
Peplum,  884,  b.
Per  condictionem,  885,  b.
Per   judicis  postulationein,

885,  b.
Per  manus  injectionem,  731,  b.
Per  pignoris  capionem,  or  cap-

tionem,  885,  b.
Pera,  886,  a.
Perduellio,  725,  a.
Perduellionis  duumviri,  886,  b.
Peregrinus,  291,  b,
Peremptoria  exceptio,  II,  b.
Perferre  legem,  682,  b.
Pergula,  886,  b.
Periscelis,  889,  a.
Peristiarchus,  441,  b.
Peristroma,  674,  b  ;   1079,  b.
Peristylium,  425,  a;  428,  a;

889,  b.
Peritiores,  653,  h.
Permutatio,  130,  b.
Pero,  889,  b.
Perpetua  actio,  8,  a;   10,  b.


1273

Perscribere,  131,  a.
Perscriptio,  131,  a.
Persae,  149,  b.
Perseus,  149,  a.
Perula,  886,  a.
Prosecutoria  actio,  10,  a.
Persona,  889,  b.
Pertica,  893,  a.
Pes,  751,  b;  893,  a.
„     Drusianus,  893,  b.

„    sestertius,  893,  b.
Pessulus,  626,  b.
Pesulani  lex,  695,  b.
Petasus,  920,  a;   1213,  b.
Petauristae,  894,  a.
Petaurum,  893,  b.
Petitor,  13,  a;  77,  a.
Petorritum,  894,  a.
Petreia  lex,  695,  b.
Petronia  lex,  695,  b.
Phalae,  284,  b.
Phalangae,  894,  a.
Phalangarii,  894,  a.
Phalanx,  481,  b;  482,  b;

488,  a.
Phalarica,  589,  a.
Phalera,  894,  a.
Phallus,  411,  a;  521,  b.
Pharetra,  894,  b.
Pharos,  or  Pharus,  895,  a.
Phaselus,  895,  b.
Phengites,  1 052,  b.
Philyra,  703,  b.
Phrygio,  851,  a.
Picatio,  1 202,  a.
Pictura,  899,  b.
Pignoraticia  actio,  917,  b.
Pignoris  capio,  916,  b.
Pignus,  915,  b.
Pila,  768,  b;   918,  a.

„    trigonalis,  919,  a.
Pilani,  501,  b.
Pilentum,  919,  a.
Pileolum,  919,  b.
Pileolus,  919,  b.
Pileum,  91 9,  b.
Pileus,  919,  b.
Pilicrepus,  918,  b.
Pilum,497,  a;   588,  a;  768, U
Pinacotheca,  921,  a.
Pinaria  lex,  695,  b.
Pinsere,  54,  b.
Piscatorii  ludi,  716,  a.
Pisces,  151,  b.
Piscis,  153,  b.
Piscina,  70,  a  ;  1 14,  a  ;   1 89,  b;

191,  b;   195,  a;  921,  a.
Pistillum,  768,  b.
Pistor,  921,  a.
Pistrinum,  765,  b  ;  768,  b.
Pistris,  or  Pistrix,  152,  a.
Pittacium,  533,  b.
Plaetoria  lex,  374,  b  ;  409,  a.
Plaga,  989,  b.
Plagiarius,  921,  b.
Plagium,  921,  b.
Planetae,  922,  a.
Planetarii,  144,  b.
Plaustrum,  or  Plostrum,  147,

b  ;  923,  a.


1274

Plautla,  or  Plotia    lex  de  vi,
1 209,  a.
„       judiciaria,  650,  a;  695,
b.
Plebeii,  923,  b.

„       ludi,  716,  a.
Plebes,  923,  b.
Plebiscitum,  682,  a  ;   927,  b.
Plebs,  923,  b.
Plectrum,  721,  b.
Pleni  menses,  226,  a  ;   227,  b.
Pleiades,  150,  a;    157,  b.
Pleurici,  30,  b.
Plostellum  poenicum,  53,  a.
Plumarii,  923,  a.
Pluteus,  674,  b  ;   928,  b.
Pneumatici,  746,  b.
Pnyx,  440,  b.
Poeulum,  923,  b.
Podium,  86,  b  ;  88,  a  ;  323,  b  ;

929,  a.
Poecile,  944,  a.
Poena,  929,  a.
Poetelia  Papiria  lex,   696,    a  ;

797,  a.
Politor,  48,  b.
Pollen,  55,  b.

Pollex,  372,  b;  751,  b;  893,  b.
Pollicaris,  893,  b.
Pollicitatio,  821,  a.
Pollinctores,  558,  a.
Polus,  615,  a;  929,  b
Polychromy,  905,  b  ;    1092,  a.
Polyraita,  1102,  b.
Pomeridianum  tempus,  409,  a.
Pomoerium,  930,  a.
Pompa,  931,  a,

„      Circensis,  287,  a.
Pompeiae  leges,  696,  a.
Pondera,  931,  a.
Pondo,  706,  a.
Pons,  336,  b  ;  936,  b.
„     Aelius,  938,  b.
„     Aemilius,  937,  b.
„     Cestius,  937,  b.
„      Fabric!  us,  937,  b.
„     Janiculensis,  938,  a.
„     Milvius,  938,  a.
„      Palatinus,  937,  b.
„     Sublicius,  937,  a.
„     sutFragiorum,  939,  b.
„     Vaticanus,  936,  a.
Pontifex,  938,  b.
Pontificales  libri,  941,  a.
„  ludi,  716,  b.

Pontifices  minores,  942,  a.
Pontificii  libri,  941,  a.
Pontificium  jus,  656,  b  ;  941.
Popa,  ?58,  b  ;  373,  b  ;  1000,  a.
Popilia  lex,  695,  a.
Popina,  258,  b.
Poplifugia,  942,  b.
Populates,  799,  b.

„         actiones,  1200,  b.
Popularia,  88,  b.
Populi  scitum,  682,  b.
Populifiigia,    or    Poplifugia,

942,  b.
Populus,  88,  b.
Por,  1039,  b.


INDEX.

Porciae  leges,  696,  a.
Porta,  943,  a.

„     decumana,  249,  a ;  251 ,  b.
„     Libitinensis,  285,  b.
„     pompae,  285,  b.
„     praetoria,    or    extraordi-
naria,  249,  a  ;  251,  b.
„     principalis,  249,  a.
„     (juaestoria,  249,  a.
„     triumphalis,  285,  b.
Portentum,  961,  a.
Portions,  944,  a.
Portisculus,  944,  b.
Portitores,  945,  a  ;   973,  b.
Portorium,  944,  b.
Portumnalia,  945,  b.
Portunalia,  945,  b.
Posca,  945,  b.

Possessio,  38,  a;  945,  b;  949,  a.
„         bonae  fidei,  422,  b.
„         bonorum,  208,  b.
„         clandestina,  643,  b.
Possessor,  946,  b  ;  949,  a.
Postes,  624,  b.
Posticum,  624,  b.
Postliminium,  949,  b.
Postmeridian  um  tempus,  409,  a.
Postsignani,  502,  b.
Postulaticii,  575,  b.
Postumus,  601,  a.
Potestas,  873,  a.
Praecidianeae  ferlae,  530,  a.
Praecinctio,    87,    a ;     88,    b ;

1121,  a.
Praecinctus,  1173,  a.
Praecones,  951,  b;    1125,  a.
Praeconium,  951,  b.
Praeda,  950,  b;  951,  b;  1053,  b.
Praedia,  954,  b  ;  955,  a.
Praediator,  954,  b.
Praediatorium  jus,  955,  a.
Praediorum  servitutes,    1031  ;

1033,  a.
Praedium,  952,  a.
Praefecti  sociorum,  497,  b.
Praefectus,  967,  b.

„         aerarii,  24,  a.

„         alimentorum,  75,  b.

„         annonae,     540,     b ;

952,  a.
„         aquarum,  115,  b.
„         castrorum,  952,  b.
„         classis,  952,  b.
„         fabrum,  517,  b.
„         juri  dicundo,  318,  b.
„         praetorio,  952,  b.
„  vigilum,  510,  a.

„         urbi,  953,  a  ;  993,  a.
Praefectura,  318,  b  ;  319,  a.
Praeficae,  558,  b.
Praefurnium,  192,  b;  546,  a.
Praejudicium,  954,  a.
Praelusio,  575,  a.
Praenomen,  801,  b.
Praepetes,  175,  b.
Praepositus,  954,  b.
Praerogativa  centuria,

„  tribus,     338,     b;

339,  b.
Praerogativae,  339,  b.


Praes,  954,  b.

Praescriptio,  12,  a  ;  955,  a.
Praeses,  967,  b  ;   969,  a.
Praesidia,  250,  b,
Praestatio,  955,  b.
Praetentura,  251,  b  ;   253,  b.
Praeteritii   senatores,   264,   b  ;

1018,  a.
Praetexta,  1137,  a.
Praetextata  fabula,  346,  b.
Praetextatus,  631,  a.
Praetor,  956,  a.

„       peregrinus,  956,  b.
„       urbanus,  956,  b.
Praetoria  actio,  10,  a.

„         cohors,  957,  a.
Praetoriani,  957,  a.
Praetorii  latera,  251,  b;   253,

a.
Praetorium,   246,   b;   251,   b:

253,  a;   958,  a.
Praevaricatio,  1027,  b.
Pragmatici,  844,  a.
Prandium,  306,  a.
Precarium,  39,  b  ;  643,  b.
Prehensio,  1151,  b.
Prelum,  or  Praelum,  958,  a.
Prensatio,  77,  a.
Primicerius,  958,  a.
Primipilaris,  508,  b.
Primipilus,  505,  a.
Princeps  juventutis,  475,  a.

„         senatus,  1017,  b,
Principales  constitutiones,  351;

a.
Principes,  494,  b  ;  496,  b.
Principia,  502,  a.

„         via,  248,  a.
Principium,  332,  a.
Privatae  feriae,  528,  a.
Privatum  jus,  291,  b  ;  657,  b.
Privilegium,   514,  b;  516,  a;

683,  b ;  805,  b.
Privigna,  28,  b.
Privignus,  28,  b.
Proamita,  310,  a.
Proavia,  310,  a.
Proavunculus,  310,  a.
Proavus,  310,  a.
Probatio  nummorum,  131,  b.
Proconsul,  960,  b  ;   967,  b.
Procubitores,  503,  a.
Procuratio  prodigiorum,  961 ,  a.
Procurator,    12,  a;  47,  a;  48,
a;  222,  a;  96 1,  a;
967,  b.
„         alimentorum,  75,  b.
„         peni,  260,  b.
Procyon,  152,  b.
Prodigium,  961,  a.
Prodigus,  1113,  b.
Proeliales  dies,  410,  a.
Profesti  dies,  409,  b.
Progenor,  28,  b.
Projiciendi  Servitus,  1031,  b
Proletarii,  239,  a.
Promatertera,  310,  a.
Promissa,  741,  b.
Promissor,  817,  b.
Proraulsis,  307,  a  ;   1205,  b.


Promus,  260,  b.
Promuscondus,  260,  b.
Pronepos,  SIO,  a.
Proneptis,  310,  a.
Pronubae,  744,  a.
Proniibi,  743,  b.
Pronurus,  28,  b,
Propatruus,  310,  a.
Propes,  790,  b.
Propnigeuin,  192,  b.
Proportionales,  30,  b.
Propraetor,  967,  a.
Proprietas,  422,  a.
Prora,  786,  a.
Proscenium,  1122,  a.
Proscindere,  49,  b.
Proscribere,  963,  b.
Proscripti,  963,  b.
I'roscriptio,  963,  b.
Prosecta,  1000,  a.
Prosiciae,  1000,  a.
Prosocrus,  28,  b.
Prospectus  servitus,  1031,  b.
Protropum,  1201,  b.
Provincia,  964,  b.
Provocatio,  107,  a.
Provocatores,  575,  b.
Proximus  admissionum,  14,  b.
„         infantiae,  637,  a.
„         pubertati,  636,  b.
Prudentiores,  653,  b.
Pubertas,  374,  b  ;  636,  b.
Pubes,  631,  a;  837,  a.
Publicae  feriae,  528,  b.
Publicani,  972,  b.
Public!  servi,    1039,  a;    1041,

a.
Publlcia  lex,  696,  a.
Publiciana  in  rem   actio,  974,

a.
Publicum,  23,  b;  40,  a;  972,  b.
„         jus,  291,  b;   657,  b.
Publicus  ager,  29,  a ;   949,  a.
Publilia  lex,  696,  a.
Publiliae  leges,  696,  b.
Puer,  1039,  b.

Pugilatus,  974,  b.

Pugiles,  974,  b.

Pugillares,  1092,  a.

Pugio,  975,  a.

PuUarius,  176,  a.

Pullati,  88,  b.

Pulmentarium    servorum,   48,
b.

Pulpitum,  1  122,  b.

Puis  fabata,  57,  b.

Pulvinar,  286,  b;  975,  b.

Pulvinus,  975,  b.

Punctae,  1 15,  a.

Pupia  lex,  697,  a.

Pupillus,  3,  a ;  630,  a  ;  636,  b  ;
1177,  b.

Pupillaris  substitutio,  599,  b.

Puppis,  787,  a.

Puteal,  976,  a.

Puteus,  113,  a;  189,  b.

Puticulae,  560,  b.

Puticuli,  560,  b.

Pyra,  559,  b.

Pyrgus,  548,  b.


INDEX.

Pythia,  837,  a.
Pytho,  836,  a.
Pyxidula,  978,  b.
Pyxis,  978,  b.


Q.

Quadragesima,  978,  b.
Quadrans,  140,  b.
Quadrantal,  979,  a.
Quadratarii,  915,  b.
Quadriga,  379,  b.
Quadriremes,  785,  b.
Quadrupes,  880,  b.
Quadruplatores,  980,  a.
Quadruplicatio,  12,  a.
Quadrussis,  141,  a.
Quaesitor,  648,  b.
Quaestiones,  648,  b.

„  perpetuae,  648,  b.

Quaestor,  980,  a.
Quaestores    alimentorum,    75,
b.
„  classici,    981,    a;

980,  b.
„  parricidii,  648,  b.

„  pecuniae  alimenta-

riae,  75,  b.
„  rerum    capitalium,

648,  b.
„  sacri  palatii,  982,  a.

„  urbani,  981,  b.

Quaestorii  ludi,  716,  b.
Quaestorium,  249,  a;  253,  b.
Quaestura  Ostiensis,  981,  b.
Quales-quales,  1041,  b.
Qualus,  220,  b.
Quanti  minoris  actio,  982,  a.
Quartarius,  979,  a;  982,  b.
Quasillariae,  220,  b;   1099,  b.
Quasillus,  220,  b.
Quatuorviri  juri  dicundo,  318,
b.
„  viarum     curanda-

rum,  1193,  b.
Querela   inofficiosi  testament!,

1118,  a.
Quinarius,  393,  b.
Quiiictllis,  232,  a.
Quincunx,  140,  b.
Quindecemviri,  387,  a.
Quinquagesima,  982,  b.
Quinquatria,  982,  b.
Quinquatrus,  982,  b.

„  minores   or   mi-

nusculae,  983,  a.
Quinquennalia,  983,  a.
Quinquennalis,  318,  b.
Quinqueremes,  785,  b.
Quinquertium,  883,  a.
Quinqueviri,  983,  a.

„  mensarii,  750,  a  ;

983,  a.
Quintana,  248,  a.
Quintia  lex,  697,  a.
Quintilis,  232,  a.
Quirinalia,  983,  a.
Quirinalis  flamen,  540,  a.
Quiritium  jus,  291,  b;  658,  a.


1275
Qucd  jussu,  actio,  663,  b.
Quorum    bonorum,   interdic-
tum,  983,  b.


Radius,  378,  b.
Ramnenses,  875,  b;  1155,  b.
Ramnes,  875,  b;  1155,  b.
Rapina,  58,  b.

„       or  rapta  bona,  564,  a,
Rallum,  984,  b.
Rallus,  984,  b.
Rastellus,  984,  b.    ,
Rasitare,  197,  b.
Raster,  984,  b.
Rastrum,  984,  b.
Rates,  783,  a.
Rationes,  131 ,  a.
Rationibus    distrahendis  actio,

1178,  b.
Recepta;    de    recepto,    actio,

984,  b.
Recinium,  995,  a.
Recinus,  995,  a.
Rector,  969,  a.
Recuperatores,  11,  b;  646,  b.
Reda,  994,  b.

Redemptor,    265,    b;    710,  a;

985,  a.
Redhibitoria  actio,  985,  a.
Redimiculum,  985,  b.
Refriva,  57,  b.

Regia,  198,  a.

„      lex,  1149,  a.
Regifugium,  985,  b.
Regina  sacrorum,  994,  a.
Regula,  985,  b.
Rei  residuae  exceptio,  11,  b.
,,    uxoriae,    or    dotis    actio,

438,  a.
Relatio,  1019,  b;  1021,  a.
Relegatio,  515,  b.
Relegatus,  515,  b.
Religiosus,  562,  a.
Remancipatio,  419,  a;   455,  b.
Remmia  lex,  234,  b.
Remulcum,  986,  a.
Remuria,  680,  b.
Remus,  788,  a.
Renuntiatio,  336,  b;  388,  b.
Repagula,  626,  b.
Reparator,  49,  b.
Repetundae,  986,  a.
Replicatio,  12,  a.
Repolire,  53,  b.
Repositorium,  307,  b.
Repotia,  744,  a.
Repudium,  419,  a.
Repurgare,  53,  b.
Res,  421,  b.

„     communes,  421,  b.

„     corporales,  421,  b.

„     divini    juris,    421,    b;
657,  a.

„     frumentaria,  1221,  a.

,,     hereditariae,  421,  b.

„    human  1    juris,    421.   b
657,  a.


1276

Res    immobiles,  421,  b.

„     incorporales,  421,  b.

„     mancipi,  421,  b;  1218,  a.

„     mobiles,  421,  b.

„     nee  mancipi,  422,  1218,
a.

„     nullius,  421,  b.

„     privatae,  421,  b.

„     publicae,  421,  b.

„     religiosae,  421,  b.

„     sacrae,  421,  b.

„     sanctae,  421,  b.

„     singulae,  421,  b.

},     universitatis,  421,  b.

„     uxoria,  437,  a.
Rescissoria  actio,  64 1 ,  b.
Rescriptum,  351,  b.
Resina  lentiscina,  903,  b.
Respondere,  107,  b,
Responsa,  653,  h.
Respublica,  1215,  b.
Restitutio  in  integrum,  987,  a.
Restitutoria  actio,  641,  b.
Rete,  988,  b.
Retentio  dotis,  418,  b.
Retentura,  251,  b;  253,  b.
Retiarii,  575,  b.
Reticulum,  329,  a;  988,  b.
Retinaculum,  989,  b.
Retis,  988,  b.
Reus,  12,  819,  a.
Rex,  990,  a.

„     convivii,  10S2,  b.

„     sacrificulus,  994,  a.

„     sacrificus,  994,  a.

„     sacrorum,  994,  a.
Rheda,  994,  b.
Rhodia  lex,  697,  b.
Rica,  541,  a,
Ricinium,  995,  a.
Robigalia,  995,  b.
Robur,  241,  a.
Robus,  54,  a.
Rogare  legem,  628,  b.
Rogatio,  682,  a ;  683,  b.
Rogationem  accipere,  682,  b.

„         promulgare,  682,  b.
Rogationes  Liciniae,  693,  b.
Rogator,338,  b;  1077,  a.
Rogus,  559,  b.
Romana,  850,  b.
Romphea,  589,  a.
Rorarii,  495,  b  ;  502,  b.
Roscia  theatralis  lex,  697,  b ;

1123,  b.
Rostra,  995,  b.
Rostrata  columna,  327,  b.

„        corona,  360,  a.
Rostrum,  786,  b.
Rota,  378,  a;  532,  b.
Rubria  lex,  697,  b.
Rubrica,  171,  a.
Rudens,  996,  a.
Ruderatio,  431,  a.
Rudiarii,  575,  a.
Kudis,  574,  b.
Rudus,  1  I  92,  a.
Ruffuli,  996,  a.
Rumpia,  589,  a.
Runcatio,  52,  a.


INDEX

Runcina,  996,  a.
Rupiliae  leges.
Rustici,  311,  b.
Rutabulum,  996,  b.
Rutellum,  996,  a.
Rutiliana  actio,  996,
Rutrum,  996,  a.


Sabanum,  851,  b.
Saccatus,  1203,  a.
Saccus,  996,  b;  1203,  a.
Sacellum,  996,  b.
Sacena,  420,  b.
Sacer,  562,  a.
Sacerdos,  996,  b.
Sacerdotium,  996,  b.
Sacra,  998,  a.

„      gentilitia,  568,  b.

„       municipalia,  998,  b.

„      privata,  998,  a.

„      publica,  998,  a.
Sacramento,  1198,  b.
Sacramentum,  662,  a;  998,  i
Sacrarium,  998,  I).
Sacratae  leges,  698,  a.
Sacrificium",  998,  b.
Sacrilegium,  1000,  b.
Sacrilegus,  1000,  b.
Sacrorum  alienatio,  568,  b.

„  detestatio,  568,  b.

Sacrum  novemdiale,  528,  b.
Saeculares  ludi,  716,  b.
Saeculum,  1000,  b.
Sagarii,  1001,  a,
Sagitta,  149,  b;  1001,  a.
Sagittarii,  1001,  a.
Sagittarius,  151,  a.
Sagittifer,  151,  a.
Sagittipotens,  151,  a.
Sagmina,  1002,  a.
Sagulum,  1002,  b.
Sagum,  1002,  a.
Salaminia,  865,  a.
Salarium,  1002,  b.
Salii,  1003,  a.
Salillum,  1004,  a.
Salinae,  1003,  b.
Salinator,  1004,  a.
Salinum,  1004,  a.
Salsilago,  1004,  a.
Salsugo,  1C04,  a.
Saltatio,  862,  a;  1004,  b.
Saltus,  46,  b;  652,  a;  753,

1012,  a.
Salvianum  interdictum,  643,
Salutatores,  1006,  b.
Sambuca,  1007,  a.
Sandalium,  1007,  b.
Sandapila,  559,  a.
Sapa,  1202,  a.
Sarcophagus,  559,  b.
Sarculatio,  52,  a.
Sarculum,  52,  a;  1008,  a.
Sardiana,  715,  b.
Sarissa,  488,  a;  589,  a.
Sarracum,  1008,  a.
Sarritio,  52,  a.


Sartago,  1008,  a.
Satio,  51,  a.

„     autumnal  is,  54,  b.

„     septimontalis.  57,  a.

„     trimestris,  51,  a  ;  55,  a.
Satira,  1008,  a.
Satisdatio,  12,  a.
Satura,  1008,  a.

„       lex,  683,  a;  1008,  b.
Saturnalia,  1009,  a.
Scabellum,  286,  b.
Scabillum,  381,  b.
Scalae,  789,  a;  1009,  b.

„       Gemoniae,  240,  b.
Seal  mi,  787,  b.
Scalpellum,  274,  b.
Scalptura,  1010,  a.
Scalpturatum,  431,  a.
Seamnum,  253,  286,  b;  1011,  a,
Scantinia  lex,  698,  b.
Scapha,  786,  a,
Scapus,  57,  a;  1170,  b.
Scena.  1 122,  a.
Scenici  ludi,  714,  b  ;  749,  a.
.Sceptrum,  101 1,  a.
I.       Scheda,  703,  b.
Schoenus,  101  i,  b.
Schola,  1 89,  b.

,.        labrorum,  191,  a.
Scholae,  253,  b.

„       auctores,  173,  b.
Sciothericum,  616,  b.
Scipio,  1011,  a.
Scire,  1023,  a.
Scissor,  307,  b.
Scitum  populi,  682,  a.
Scorpio,  1 5 1 ,  a ;  540,  a ;  1 1 39,  a.
Scorpius,  151,  a,
Scortea,  848,  b.
Scribae,  7,  b;  1C12,  a.
Scribere,  131,  a.
Scribonia  lex,  698,  b.
Scrinium,  238,  b.
Scriplum,  1012,  b.
Scripta,  945,  a.

„       duodecim,  670,  a.
Scriptura,     234,    a;    972,    b;

1012,  a.
Scripturarii,  1012,  b.
Scripulum,  46,  b;  1012,  b.
Scrobes,  1 1 6,  b
Scrupulum,    182,    a;    652.    a;

753,  b;  1012,  b;  1213,  b.

Sculptura,  1010,  a.

Sculponeae,  48,  b.
a ;    Scutica,  539,  b.

Scutum,  496,  b;  1012,  b.
a.     Scytale,  1013,  a.

Secale,  56,  a.

Secespita,  1013,  b.

Secretarium,  174,  a.

Sectatores,  77,  a.

Sectio,  951,  b  ;  1013,  b."

Sector,  951,  b;  1013,  b.

Sectorium  interdictum,  643,  a;

1013,  b.
Securicula,  1014,  a.
Securis,  1014,  a.
Secutores,  576,  a.
Seges,  61,  a.


Scgestre,  674,  b.
Seliquastrum,  1015,  b.
Sella,  257,  b;  1014,  b.
Sembella,  702,  b.
Semen  adoreum,  54,  a.

„       trimestre,  54,  a.
Sementina  dies,  530,  a.
Sementivae  feriae,  530,  a.
Semimares,  566,  b.
Semis,  Semissis,  140,  b;  182,  b.
Semproniae  leges,  698,  b.
Sempronia  lex  de  foenere,  699,

a.
Semuncia,  1213,  b.
Semvmciarium  fenus,  527,  b.
Senator,  1016,  a.
Senatort's  Oruni,  1017,  a.
„         pedarii,  1018,  a.
Senatu  motio,   or  ejectio  e,

264,  a.
Senatus,  1016,  a.
Senatus  auctoritas,  1023,  b.
Senatusconsultum,  1022,  b.

„      Apronianum,  1024,  a.

„     Articuleianum,  1024,  b.

„     de  Bacchanalibus,  414,a;
1024,  b.

„     Calvitianum,     692,    b  ;
1024,  b.

„     Claudianum,  1024,  b.

„     Dasumianum,  1025,  b.

„     Hadrian!,  1025,  b.

„     Juncianum,  1026,  a.

„     Junianum,  1026,  a.

„     Juventiainim,  1026,  a.

„     Largianum,  1026,  a.

„     Libonianum,  1026,  a.

„     Macedonianum,  1026,  a.

,,     Marcianum,  1024,  b.

„     Memmianum,  1026,  a

„     Neronianum,  1026,  a.

„     Orphitianum,  1026,  b.

„     Pegasinum,    535,    b ;
536,  b;   1026,  b.

„     Persicjanum,  1026,  b.

„     Pisonianum,  1026,  a.

„     Plancianum,  1026,  b.

„     Plautionum,  1027,  a.

„     Rubrianum,  1027,  a.

„     Sabinlanum,  1027,  a.

„     Siianianum,  1027,  a.

„     taciturn,  7,  b.

„     Tertullianuni,  1027,  a.

„     Trebellianum,  535,  a  ;
1027,  b.

„     Turpilianum,  1027,  b.

„     Velleianum,  1027,  b.

„     Vitrasianum,  1027,  b.

„     Volusianum,  1027,  b.
Senatus  jus,  1018,  b.
Seniores,  333,  b.
Sepelire,  560,  b.
Sepimentum,  47,  a.
September,- 232.
Septem  Triones,  147,  b.
Septemviri  Epulones,  470,  b.
Septimatrus,  982,  b.
Septitnontium,  1028,  a.
Septum,  336,  b.
Septunx,  140,  b.


INDEX.

Sepulchri  violati  actio,  562,  a.
Sepulchrum,  560,  b.
Sequestres,  77,  a.
Sera,  626,  b.
Seriae,  1202,  a.
Sericum,  1028,  a.
Serpens,  148,  a;   149,  b,
Serpentarius,  149,  a.
Serra,  1029,  a.
Serrati,  sc.  numrai,  394,  a.
Serrula,  1029,  b.
Serta,  1029,  b.
Servare  de  coelo,  176,  b.
Serviana  actio,  918,  a.
Servilia  agraria  lex,  699,  a.
„        Glaucia  lex,  986,  b.
„       judiciaria  lex,  699,  a.
Servitus,  1030,  b;   1036,  b.
Servitutes,  9,  b;   lOSO,  b.
Servus  (Greek),  1034,  a.

„      (  Roman  ),  4  8,  a ;  1 036,  b.

„       ad  manum,  76,  b,

„        publicus,  7,  b  ;  1039,  a ;
1041,  a.
Sescuncia,  140,  b.
Sescunx,  140,  b.
Sesquiplares,    or    Sesquiplarii,

509,  a.
Sestertium,  242,  b;   1042,  b.
Sestertius,  t042,  b.
Sevir  turmae  equitum,  475,  a.
Seviri,  180,  b.
Sex  suflfragia,  472,  b.
Sexatrus,  982,  b.
Sextans,  140,  b.
Sextarius,  979,  a ;   1043,  b.
Sextilis,  232.

Sextula,  1213,  b;   1043,  b.
Sibina,  589,  a.
Sibyllini  libri,  1043,  b.
Sica,  1044,  b.
Sicarius,  687,  a.
Sicila,  1044,  b.
Sicilicus,  113,  b;    1213,  b.
Sicilire  pratum,  60,  a.
Sidus  natalitium,  144,  b.
Sigillaria,  1009,  b.
Sigma,  750,  a.
Signa,  253,  b.

„      militaria,  1044,  b.
Signifer,  1045,  b.
Signinum  opus,  431,  a.
Signum,  501 ,  a.
Silentiarii,  954,  b.
Silentiura,  176,  b.
Silia  lex,  699,  a.
Silicarii,  115,  b.
Silicernium,  562,  a.
Siligo,  54,  a  ;  55,  h.
Simila,  or  Similago,  55,  b.
Siliqua,  1213,  b
Silvae,  1012,  a.
Silvani   et  Carbonis  lex,  695,

b.
Simpulum,     or     Simpuvium,

1046,  a.
Sindon,  851,  b.
Singulares,  508,  b.
Sinus,  1135,  a.
Siparium,  1046,  a.


1277
Sirius,  152,  b;  160,  a.
Sistrum,  1046,  a.
Sitella,  1048,  b.
Siticines,  558,  b.
Sittybae,  704,  b.
Situla,  1048,  b.
Sol)rina,  310,  a.
Sobriniis,  310,  a.
Socculus,  1048,  b.
Soccus,  1048,  b.
Socer,  28,  b.

„      magnus,  28,  b.
Societas,  1049,  a.
Socii,  542,  b  ;  1049,  a  ;  1050,  a.
Socio  pro,  actio,  1049,  b.
Socius,  1049,  a.
Socrus,  28,  b.

„       magna,  28,  b.
Sodales,  310,  b.

„        Augustales,  180,  a.
Titii,  1 1 34,  b.
Sodalitium,  77,  b.
Solarium,    429,    b;    616,  L;

1078,  b.
Solea,  1051,  b.
Solidorum  venditio,  131,  b.
Solidus,  182,  b.
Solitaurilia,  719,  b  :   1000,  a.
Solium,  187, b;  191,  a;  1129,

a.
Solvere  in  area,  119,  a.
Solum,  430,  b.
Solutio,  819,  b.
Sonipes  ales,  149,  b.
Sophronistae,  581,  b.
Sordidati,  1137,  a.
Soror,  310,  a.
Sortes,  843,  a;  1051,  b.
Sortilegi,  1052,  a.
Spadones,  631,  b.
Sparus,  588,  b.
Spatium,  286,  a.

„         legitimum,  1033,  b
Specillum,  274,  b.
Spectabiles,  628,  a.
Spectio,  176,  b;   177,  b.
Specularia,  432,  b.
Specularis  lapis,  432,  a.
Speculatores,  508,  b.
Speculum,  1052,  a.
Specus,  113,  a.

Spbaeristerium,  1 95,  b  ;  582,  a.
Spica  mutica,  57,  a.
Spiculum,  587,  a;  589,  a.
Spina,  284,  b.

Spinter,  or  Spintber,  13G,  a.
Spira,  1053,  a.
Spirula,  1053,  a.
Spolia,  1053,  b.
Spoliatorium,  189,  a.
Sponda,  674,  b.
Spondeo,  817,  b.
Spongia,  905,  a.
Sponsa,  741,  b.
Sponsalia,  741,  b.
Sponsio,  640,  b ;   1 1 99,  a.
Sponsor,  640,  b.
Sponsus,  741,  b.
Sportula,  1054,  b.
Stabularius,  984,  b.


127S

iStadium,  1055,  a.
"Stalagamla,  632,  a.
■Stamen,  1100,  a.
Stater,  1 0.56,  b.
Statera,  1170,  a.
Stati  dies,  409,  b.
Stationes,  250,  b.

„        fisci,  1058,  a.
„        municipiorum,  577,  b.
Stativae  feriae,  528,  b.
Stator,  1058,  a.
Statores,  508,  b.
Statu  liber,  730,  b,
Statuae  Persicae,  889,  b.
Statuaria  ars,  1058,  a.
Statumen,  1 1 92,  a.
Stellae  Parrhasides,  147,  b.

„        errantes,  922,  a.
Stellaturae,  505,  a.
Stercolinii  servitus,  1032,  a.
Stereoratio,  50,  a.
Stercutius,  50,  a.
Sterqu  ill  Ilium,  50,  a.
Stesicharus,  1096,  a.
Stibadium,  750,  a.
Stillicidii  servitus,  1031,  b.
Stillicidium,  1031,  b.
Stilus,  1071,  a.
Stipendiaria,  37,  b.
Stipendiavii,  1071,  b.
Stipendium,  1071,  b.
Stipes,  854,  b.
Stipulatio,  817,  b.
Stipulator,  817,  b.
Stiva,  117,  b;   118,  a.
Stola,  1073,  a.
Stragulum,  674,  b.
Stratores,  1074,  b.
Strena,  1075,  a.
Striae,  324,  a.
Striga,  253,  b  ;   254,  a.
Strigil,  1 85,  a  ;   ]  92,  a.
Strophium,  1075,  a.
Structor,  307,  b.
Studiosi  juris,  143,  b.
Stultorum  feriae,  545,  b.
Stuprum,  17,  a;  349, a;  633,  b.
Stylus,  1071,  a.
Suasor,  173,  a.
Subcenturio,  506,  a.
Subitarii,  1171,  b.
Subligaculum,  576,  a  ;  1075,  a.
Sublimissimi,  628,  a.
Subrogare  legem,  682,  b.
Subruncivi,  30,  a.
Subscriptio,  357,  b.

„  censoria,  263,  b ;

635,  b.
Subseciva,  30,  a  ;  42,  a.
Subsellium,  1 129,  a.
Subserica,  1028,  b.
Subsignanus,  502,  b.
Substitutio,  599,  a.

„  pupillaris,  599,  b,

Subtegmen,  1100,  a.
Subtemen,  1 100,  a.
Subucula,  1173,  b.
Successio,  1075,  b.
Successor,  1076,  b.
Succinctorium,  1075,  a


INDEX.

Succinctus,  1173,  b.
Succolare,  672,  b.
Sudatio  concamerata,  190,  b.
Sudatorium,  190,  b.
Suffibulum.  1191,  a.
Suffitio,  562,  a.
Suffragia  sex,  472,  b.
SufFragium,  1076,  b.
Suggestus,    88,    a;    995,    b;

1077,  a.
Suggrundarium,  559,  b.
Sui  heredes,  598,  b.
Sulci,  1 1  92,  a.
Sulcus,  58,  a  ;  59,  a.
Sulpiciae  leges,  699,  b.
Sulpicia  Sempronia  lex,  699,  b.
Sumtuariae  leges,  1077,  a.
Suovetaurilia,  719,  b  ;   1000,  a.
Superficiarius,  1078,  a.
Superficies,  1078,  a.
Supernumerarii,  2,  b.
Supparum,  790,  a  ;   1174,  a.
Supparus,  1 174,  a.
Supplicatio,  1079,  a.
Supposititii,  576,  a.
Suprema,  sc.  tempestas,  409,  a.
Surdus,  818,  a;   1113,  a.
Susceptores,  265,  a.
Suspensura,  192,  a.
Symposium,  1082,  a.
Syndicus,  1084,  a.
Syngrapha,  271,  b.
Synthesis,  1009,  a;   1087,  b.
Syrinx,  1088,  a.
Syssitia,  1088,  b.


T.

Tabella,  1090,  b.
Tabellariae  leges,  1091,  a.
Tabellarius,  1091,  a.
Tabellio,  1091,  a.
Tftberna,  285,  b  ;   1091,  a.

„        diversoria,  258,  b.

„       libraria,  704,  b.
Tabernaculum,  1104,  a.
Tabernaria  fabula,  346,  b.
Tablinum,  428,  a.
Tabulae,  131,  a;    1091,  b.

„        censoriae,  263,  a.

„       novae,  1092,  a.

„       publicae,  7,  a  ;   8,  -

„       votivae,  433,  b.
Tabulam,  adesse  ad,  172,  a.
Tabularii,  1092,  b.
Tabularium,  1092,  b.
Tabularius,  7,  b.
Tabulinum,  253,  b.
Taeda,  1093,  a.
Taenia,  1212,  b.
Talaria,  1094,  b.
Talasius,  743,  b.
Talassio,  743,  b.
Talea,  824,  b.
Talentum,  931,  b.
Talio,  1095,  a.
Talus,  1095,  a.
Tapes,  1097,  a.
Tapete,  1097,  a.


Tarentini  ludi,  716,  b.
Tarpeia  Aternia  lex,  685,  a.
Taurii  ludi,  716,  b.
Taurus,  150,  a.
Tector,  870,  a.
Tectores,  1  1 5,  b.
Tectorium  opus,  870,  a.
Teda,  1093,  a.
Tegula,  1098,  a.
Tela,  1099,  a.
Telamones,  170,  a.
Temo,  117,  b  ;  378,  b.
Templum,176,a;995,b;  1104,

a.
Temporalis  actio,  10,  b.
Temporis  praescriptio,  955,  a.
Tensae,  1 125,  a.
Tentipellium,  545,  b.
Tepidarium,  1 90,  a  ;   1 92.  b
Terentilia  lex,  699,  a.
Terentini  ludi,  716,  b,
Terminalia,  1112,  a.
Termini,  30,  b  ;  603,  b.
Terra,  29,  a  ;   1 32,  b.

„     cariosa,  49,  b.  ,

„     restibilis,  60,  b.
Tertiare,  49,  b.
Teruncius,  141,  a;   702,  b.
Tescum,  176,  a.
Tessella,  915,  b.
Tessellarii,  915,  b.
Tessera,  1 1 1 2,  b.

„       nummaria,  or  frumen-

taria,  550,  a.
Tesserula,  1 1 1 2,  b.
Testa,  534,  b.

Testamentariae  leges,  699,  b.
Testamentifactio,  1114,  b.
Testamentum,  1113,  a.
Testator,  1113,  a.
Testis,  1118,  b.
Testudo,    720,   b;     1112,  a;

1118,  b.
Tetraphori,  894,  a.
Tetrarcha,  1 1 1 9,  b.
Tetrarches,  1119,  b.
Textores,  1099,  a.
Textrices,  1099,  a.
Textrinum,  1099,  b.
Thargelia,  1120,  a.
Theatrun;,  1120,  b.
Thensae,  1125,  a.
Theodosianus  codex,  302,  b.
Thermae,  183,  b;    193,  b.
Thermopolium,  233,  b  ;  258,  b.
Thesmophoria,  1127,  b.
Thorax,  711,  a.
Thoria  lex,  699,  b.
Thraces,  576,  a.
Threces,  576,  a.
Thronus,  1129,  a.
Thyrsus,  1129,  b.
Tiara,  1 1 30,  a.
Tiaras,  1130,  a.
Tibia,  1130,  b.
Tibicen,  1131,  a.
Tibicinium,  1130,  b.
Tigni     immitttendi    servitus,

1031,  b.
Tigno  juncto,  actio  de,  564,  b'


Tfntinnabulnm,  1133,  b.
Tirocinium,  1134,  a.
Tiro,  1134,  a.
Titia  lex,  700,  a.
Titienses,  875,  b;   1155,  b.
Titles,  875,  I);   1155,  b.
Titii  Sodales,  1134,  b.
Titulus,  253,  a;  560,  a;  704,  b.
Toculliones,  525,  a.
Toga,  1134,  b.

„     Candida,  1137,  a.

„     palmata,  1137,  a.

„     picta,  1137,  a.

„     praetexta,  1137,  a.

„     puUa,  1137,  a.

„     pura,  1137,  a.

„     sordida,  1137,  a.

„     virilis,  631,  a;   1137,  b.
Togata  fabula,  346,  b.
Togatns,  853,  b;  1137,  b,
Tonsor,  197,  a.
Topiaria  ars,  618,  b.
Topiarius,  619,  a.
Toralia,  674,  b.
Torcular,  958,  a;   1137,  b.
Torculum,  1 1 37,  b.
Tormentum,  790,  a  ;   1138,  b  ;

1139,  a.
Torques,  1140,  a.
Torquis,  1140,  a.
Torus,  674,  b;    1140,  b.
Toxicum,  1001,  b.
Trabea,  993,  b  ;    1137,  b.
Trabeata  fabula,  346,  b.
Traditio,  821,  a.
Tragoedia,  1140,  b.

„  crepidata,  346,  b.

Traguia,  589,  a  ;  989,  b.
Tragum,  989,  b.
Traha,  53,  a;   1148,  a.
Trahea,  53,  a.
Trama,  1100,  a.
Tramoserica,  1028,  b.
Transactio  in  via,  1 1 ,  a.
Transfuga,  394,  b.
Transtilium,  721,  b
Transtra,  788,  a.
Transvectio   equitum,  437,  a;

474,  b.
Trebonia  lex,  700,  b.
Tremissis,  182,  b,
Tressis,  141,  a.
Tresvivi,  1167,  b.
Triarii,  495,  a;  496,  a;  501,  b.
Trlbula,  53,  a;    1148,  a.
Tribulum,  53,  a;   1148,  a.
Tribulus,  1148,  b.
Tribunal,  253,  a;   1148,  b.
Tribuni  cohortium,  504,  a.

„       militum,  4  95,  b ;  503,  a.
Tribunicia  lex,  1149,  a.

„         potestas,  1150,  b.
Tribunus,  1148,  b.

„  celerum,     993,     a ;

1149,  a.
Tribus  (Greek),  1152,  b.
„       (Roman),  1155,  b
Tributa  comitia,  1156,  b.
Tributaria,  37,  b.
Tributarii,  311,  b.


INDEX.

Trlbutoria  actio,  1037,  b.
Tributum,  1156,  b.
Tricliniarchia,  1158,  b.
Triclinium,  1157,  b.
Tridens,  564,  b
Triens,  140,  b.
Trifax,  1138,  b.
Triga,  379,  b.
Trigon,  919,  a.
Trigonum,  1007,  a.
Trilix,  1101,  b;    1102,  b.
Trimestris  faba,  57,  a.
Trinepos,  310,  a.
Trineptis,  310,  a.
Trinum  nundinum,  816,  b.
Trimmdinum,  816,  b.
Triplicatio,  12,  a.
Tripos,  1162,  b.
Tripudium,  175,  b.
Triremes,  785,  a.
Tritavia,  310,  a.
Tritavus,  310,  a.
Triticum,  54,  a.

„         spelta,  54,  b.

„         trimestre,  54,  a.
Tritura,  53,  a.
Triumphalia  ornamenta,  1167,

b.
Triumphalis  corona,  361.
Triumphus,  1163,  b.

„  castrensis,  1 1 67,  a.

„  navalis,  1167,  a.

Triumviri,  1167,  b.

„         agro     dividundo,
1167,b.

„  capitalis,  1167,  b.

„  coloniaededucendae,
1168,  a.

„         epulones,  470,  b.

„  equitum  turmas  re-
cognoscendi,  or
legendis  equitum
decuriis,  1168,  a.

„         monetales,  766,  a.

„         nocturni,  1168,  a.

„  reficiendis  aedibus,
1168,  a.

„  reipublicaeconstitu-
endae,  1168,  a.

„  sacris  conquirendis
donisque  persig-
nandis,  J 168,  b.

„         senatus      l^endi,
1 1 6S,  b.
Trocbus,  1168,  b.
Trojae  ludus,  288,  a.
Tropaeum,  1168,  b.
Trossuli,  472,  a.
Trua,  1169,  b.
Trulla,  1169,  b.
Trulleum,  1170,  a.
Trullissatio,  870,  a,
Truncus,  824,  b.
Trutina,  1 1 70.  a.
Tuba,  1 1 70,  b.
Tubicen,  22,  a.
Tubilustrium,  983,  a.
Tullia  lex  de  ambitu,  77,  b.

„         de  legatione    libera,
679,  a.


1279
TuUianum,  240,  b ;  546,  b.
Tumultuarii,  1171,  b.
Tumultus,  1171,  b.
Tunica,  57,  a;   1171,  b.
Tunicati,  1174  a.
Turibulum,  1174,  b.
Turma,  47 1 ,  a ;  497,  b.
Turricula,  548,  b.
Turris,  1174,  b.
Tutela,  1176,  b.
Tutelae  actio,  1 178,  b.

„       judicium,  1178,  b.
Tutor,  1176,  a.
Tutulus,  1180,  a.
Tympanum,  100,  b;   523,  b
923,  a;   1180.  a.


U.   V.

Vacantia  bona,  2G7,  b.
Vadari  reum,  11,  b.
Vades  dare,  1 1 ,  b.
Vadimonium,Vas,l  1,  b;  954,b.
Vagina,  577,  a.
Valeriae  leges,  700  b.
Valeriae    et    Horatiae     leges,

700,  b  ;  928,  a.
Valeria  lex,  963,  b.
Vallaris  corona,  360,  b.
Vallum,  31,  b;  253,  a;  11 83,  a.
Vallus,  1183,  a.
Valva,  625,  b.
Vannus,  1183,  b.
Vappa,  1204,  b.
Vari,  989,  a.
Varia  lex,  725,  a.
Vas,  954,  b;    1183,  b.

„    leve,  <)r  purum,  133,  a.
Vatinia  lex,  701,  a,
Udo,  1184,  a.
Vectigal  rerum  venalium,  267,

a.
Vectigalia,  1184,  a.
Vectigalis  ager,  43,  a  ;  458,  a.
Vehes,  1185,  a.
Velamen,  1186,  a.
Velarium,  86,  a  :    1185,  b.
Velarius,  1185,  a.
Velati,  1185,  a.
Velites,  496,  b ;   503,  a.
Velleianum  senatusconsultum,

1027,  b.
Velum,  790,  a;  1185,  a.
Venabulum,  1  ISo,  a.
Venaliciarii,  1040,  a.
Venatio,  1186,  a
Venditio,  459,  a.
Venefica,  1189,  b.
Veneficium,  1188,  a.
Veneficus,  1189,  b.
Venereus  jactus,  1095,  b.
Venter,  1 1 3,  b.
VentiJabrum,  849,  a.
Ventilatio,  53,  a.
Venus,  1095,  b.
Ver  sacrum,  1189,  a
Verbena,  1002,  a.
Verbenarius,  531,  a.
Vergiliae,  150,  a.


1230

Vergilianum  sidus,  1 50,  a.
Verna,  1038,  b  ;   1040,  b.
Verriculum,  989,  b.
Verso  in  rem  actio,  1038,  a.
Versura,  50,  a  ;  527,  a.
Versus,  50,  a  ;  753,  a.

„       quadratus,  47,  a.
Veru,  588,  b.
Vervactor,  49,  b,
Vervactum,  49,  b.
Verutum,  588,  h.
Vespae,  559,  a
Vespillones,  559,  a.
Vestal  is,  1189,  a.

„        maxima,  1189,  b.
Vestibulum,  427,  a.
Vesticeps,  631,  a.
Veteranus,  499,  b.
Veteratores,  1040,  b.
Veteretum,  57,  a.
Vexillarii,  494,  b  ;   507,  b.
Vexillum,  507,  b  ;    1045,  b.
Via  sagularis,  253,  a.
Viae,  1191,  b.

„     servitus,  1032,  a.

„     vicinariae,  or  vicinales,
253,  a.
Viaria  lex,  701,  a;    1193,  a.
Viaticum,  1 1  95,  b.
Viator,  1195,  b.
Vicarii  servi,  1037,  b.
Victima,  499,  b.
Vicesima,  1 1 96,  a.

„        hereditatum    et    le-
gatorum,     24,     a  ;
1196,  a.
„        manumissionis,  1 1 96,
a.
Vicesimaria  lex,  119S,  a.
Vicesimarii,  1196,  a.
Vicesimatio,  387,  b.
Vico  magistri,  1 1 96,  a.
Vicus,  1196,  a.
Victoriatus,  393,  b.
Vigiies,  510,  a.
Vigiliae,  250,  a.
Vigintisexviri,  1196,  b.
Vigintiviri,  1 1 96,  b.
Villa,  554,  a;   1196,  b.

„      publica,  262,  a.

„      rustica,  47,  a.
'>n[llia  annalis  lex,  701 ,  b.
Villica,  48,  a.


INDEX.

Villicus,  48,  a ;  115,  b;  1196,b.

„       amphitheatri,  88,  b.
Vinalia,  1 1  98,  a.
Vindemialis  feria,  530,  a.
Vindex,  1 1 ,  a ;  732,  a.
Vindicatio,     9,     a ;      564,     b ;
1198,  a.

„  libertalis,  1033,  a.

„  servitutis,  1032,  b.

Vindiciae,  1198,  b.
Vindicta,  730,  a ;   1200,  a.
Vinea,  1200,  b.
Vinum,  1201,  a.
Virga,  1209,  a.
Virgines  Vestal es,  1189,  a.
Virgo,  150,  b.

„     maxima,  1189,  b.
Virgula,  1 209,  a.
Viridarium,  619,  a.
Virilis  pars,  880,  a.

„      toga,  631,  a;   1137,  a.
Vis,  1209,  a.

„    et  vis  armata,  1 209,  b.
Visceratio,  562,  a.
Viscellia  lex,  96,  a;   701,  b.
Vitelliani,  1092,  a.
Vitis,  504,  b.
Vitium,  176,  b.
Vitrearii,  1210,  b.
Vitricus,  28,  b.
Vitrum,  1 209,  b.
Vitta,  Vittae,  1212,  a.
Vittata  sacerdos,  1212,  b.
Vivaria,  69,  b.
Uliginosus  campus,  49,  b.
Ulna,  1213,  a.

Ulpianipueripuellaeque,  75, b.
Ultrotributa,  265,  a.
Umbella,  1213,  a.
Umbilicus,  704,  a.
Umbo,  298,  a ;  1 1 36,  b  ;  1 1 92,

a.
Umbraculum,  1213,  a.
Uncia,  140,  b  ;   1213,  b.
Unciarum  fenus,  5 1 6,  b.
Unctores,  76,  a.
Unctuarium,  76,  a ;   190,  b.
Unguenta,  1214,  a.
Unguentaria,  1214,  a.
Unguentariae,  1214,  a.
UnguentArii,  1214,  a.
Universitas,  1214,  b.
Universum,  1076,  a.


Vocatio  in  jus,  10,  Ij.  -^

Voconia  lex,  676,  b:   701,  b.
Volones,  499,  a;   1217,  a.
Volsellae,  197,  b;  275,  a.
Volucris,  149,  a.
Volumen,  704,  a.
Voluntarii,  1217,  a.
Volutae,  590,  b.
Vomitoria,  87,  b.
Urceus,  1217,  a.
Urna,   560,   a;   979,  a;   1048,

b;  1217,  a.
Urpex,  645,  b.
Ursa  major,  147,  a.

„    minor,  147,  b.

„    Moenalis,  147,  b.
Ustrina,  559,  b.
Ustrinum,  559,  b.
Usucapio,  1217,  b.
Usurae,  525,  b.
Usureceptio,  1220,  a.
Usurpatio,  1221,  a.
Usus,  1219,  a;   1221,  a;   1222;
a.

„     auctoritas,  1219,  a.

„     fructuarius,  1221,' a.
Ususfructus,  1221,  a.
Uterini,  309,  b.
Uti  possedetis,  643,  a.
Utilis  actio,  10,  a.
Utres,  1203,  b.
Utricvilarius,  1130,  b.
Utrubi,  643,  a.
Vulcanalia,  1222,  b.
Vulgares,  1041,  b.
Uxor,  740,  b.
Uxorium,  26,  b.


X.

Xystarchus,  581,  b.
Xystici,  167,  a.
Xystus,  580,  b;  618,  b.


Zona,  1224,  b.
Zonula,  1 224,  b.
Zophorus,  325,  a;  1225,  b.


ENGLISH  INDEX.


Actors  (Greek)   611,  a.
(Roman),  61.2,  a.
Adoption  (Greek),  14,  b.

„        (Roman),  15,  b.
Advocate,  1084,  a.
Adze,  141,  b.
Altar,  116,  a:  153,  b.
Ambassadors,  677,  b.
Anchor,  791,  a.
Anvil,  634,  a.
Aqueduct,  108,  a.
Arbitrator,  396,  b.
Arch,  124,  b;  546,  b.
Archer,  the,  151,  a.
Archers,  1002,  a.
Armour,   135,  a.
Arms,  135,  a.
Army  (Greek),  481,  a.
„     (Roman),  489,  a.
Arrow,  the,  149,  b.
Arrows,  1001,  a.
Astronomy,  145,  a.
Auction  (sale),  172,  a.
Axe,  1014,  a.
Axle,  378,  a.


B.

Bail  (Greek),  460,  b.
,,    (Roman),  11,  b.
Bakers,  921,  a.
Balance,  the,  151,  a.
Baldric,  196,  a.
Ball,  game  at,  543,  a  ;  918,  a.
Bankers,  1 30,  a.
Banishment  (Greek),  513,  a.
„  (Roman),  515,  b.

Barber,  1 97,  a.
Basket,  198,  a.
Baths  ((xreek),  184,  a.

„     (Roman),  185,  b.
Bear,  the  great,  147,  a.

„     the  lesser  or  little,  1  47,
b.
Bear-warden,  the,  148,  a.
Beard,  196,  b.
Beds,  673,  a;  1140,  b.
Beer,  268,  b.
Bell,  1133,  b.
Bellows,  543,  a-
Belt,  196,  a.

Berenice,  the  hair  of,  154,  a.
Bit  (of  horses),  548,  a.
Boeotian  constitution,  204,  a.
Books,  703,  b.
Hookseller,  704,  b.
Boots,  366,  a.
Bottomrv.  525.  b.


Bow,  126,  a.
Boxing,  974,  b.
Brass,  25,  a.
Brazier,  542,  a.
Breakfast,  804,  a.
Bribery  (Greek),  385,  b.

„       (Roman),  77,  a.
Bricks,  668,  a.
Bridge,  936,  b.
Bridle,  548,  a.
Bronze,  25,  a.
Brooch,  531,  b.
Bull,  the,  150,  a.
Burial  (Greek),  555,  b.

„      (Roman),  560,  b.


C.

Calendar  (Greek),  222,  a.

„  (Roman),  226,  a.
Cameos,  1010,  b;  1181,  a.
Camp,  244,  a.

„       breaking  up  of,  251,  a;
256,  a.

„       choice    of  ground    for,
246,  a.

„       construction  of,  246,  a.

„       of  Hyginus,  251,  a

„       of  Polybius,  245,  b.
Camp-oath,  the,  249,  b.
Candle,  236,  a.
Candlestick,  236,  a.
Canvassing,  76,  b.
Capital  (of  columns),  324,  a.
Carpets,  1097,  a.
Cart,  923,  a.
Casque,  565,  b.
Ceilings,  432,  a.
Celt,  420,  a.
Censer,  1174,  b.
Centaur,  the,  153,  b.
Chain,  ^57,  a.
Chariot,  378,  a;  476,  a.
Charioteer,  the,  149,  a.
Chimneys,  426,  a;  432,  b.
Chisel,  420,  a.
Cider,  1205,  b.
Circumvallation,  1183,  a.
Citizenship  (Greek),  288,  b.
„  (Roman),  291,  a.

Claws,  the,  151,  a.
Clerks    (Athenian),    211,    b;
577,  b.
„       (Roman),  13,  b.
Clocks,  615,  a.
Coffins,  555,  b;  559,  b.
Colony  (Greek),  313,  b

„      (Roman),  315,  .1.
Column,  323,  a.
Combs.  881.  a.


Comedy  (Greek),  .341,  b.

„       (Roman),  345,  b
Compass,  283,  a.
Constellations,  14.5,  b.
Cooks,  305,  b.
Cordage,  790.
Corn  crops,  54,  a.

„     preservation  of,  53,  b.
Conches,  671,  b.
Cowl,  372,  b.
Crab,  the,  150,  b.
Cretan  constitution,  365,  a.
Criers.  951,  b.
Crook,  881,  b.
Crops,  53.
Cross,  370,  b.
Crow,  the,  1 53,  b.
Crown,  359,  a.

„       the  northern,  148,  b
1 63,  a.

„       the  southern,  1 53,  b.
Crucifixion,  370.  b.
Cubit,  751,  b.
Cup,  the,  153,  b.
Cymbal,  370,  a;  381,  a.


D.

Daggers,  975,  a;  1044,  b.
Dance,  the  Pyrrhic,  278,  b.
Dancing,  1004,  b.
Day,  408,  a.
Dice,  1 1 1 2,  b.
Dice-box,  548,  b.
Dinner,  .306,  b.
Dish,  257,  b.
Distaff,  565,  a.
Dithyramb,  1 141,  a.
Divorce  (Greek),  418,  a.

„       (  Roman),  4  1 8,  a.
Dog,  the  great,  152,  b.
„     the  little,  152,  b.
Dolphin,  the,  149,  b.
Door,  624,  b.
Dowry  (Greek),  436,  a.

„       (Roman),  437,  a.
Dragon,  the,  148,  a.
Drains,  ^6,  b.
Draughts,  game  of,  670,  b.
Drawers,  1075,  a.
Drum,  1180,  a.
Dynasty,  122,  a.


Eagle,  the,  149,  b.
Ear-ring,  632,  a.
Earthenware,  .'i?2,  a.
Eleven,  the.  593.  a.


1282

Ensigns,  military,  1044,  b.

Era,  281,  b.

Evil  eye,  521,  b.

Executioner,  242,  a.


Fan,  539,  a.

Felting,  919,  b.

Fences,  47,  a.

Fire-place,  542,  a.

Fish,  the  southern,  153,  b.

Fishes,  the,  151,  b.

Floors  of  houses,  430,  b.

Foot    (measure    of    length),

751,  b.
Fresco,  904,  a.
Fringe,  537,  a.
Fuller,  551,  b.
Funerals  (Greek),  554,  b.

„        (Roman),  558,  a.
Furnace,  192,  b ;  546,  a.


Gambler,  Gaming,  74,  b.
Garden,  618,  a.
Gates  of  cities,  943,  a.
Girdle,  1224,  b.
Gladiators,  574,  a.
Glass,  1209,  b.
Goat,  the,  151,  b.
Gold,  180,  b.
Granary,  618,  a.
Greaves,  822,  a.
Guards,  250,  a.


H.

Hair  (Greek),  328,  b.

„    (Roman),  329,  b.
Hammers,  726,  a.
Hare,  the,  152,  b.
Harp,  1007,  a.
Harrowing,  52,  a.
Hatchet,  1014,  a.
Hearth,  542,  a.
Heir  (Greek),  594,  a.

„     (Roman),  598,  a.
Heliacal  rising,  155,  a.

„         setting,  1 55,  b.
Helmet,  565,  h.
Hemlock,  593,  a.
Heraclean  tablet,  691,  a.
Hinge,  241,  a.
Hoe,  984,  b;    1008,  a.
Hoeing,  52,  a.
Holidays,  528.  a.
Homicide,  896,  b.
Hoop,  1168,  b.
Horse,  the  little,  1 49,  b.
Hospitality,  619,  a.
Hour,  614,  a.
House  (Greek),  423,  b.

„      (Roman),  426,  b.
Hunting,  1186,  a.
Hunting-spear,  1186,  a.
Hurdle,  368,  b.


INDEX.


I.  J,


Imprisonment,  210,  a.
Informer,  388,  b.
Inheritance  (Greek),  594,  a.

„  (Roman),  598,  a.

Ink,  1 70,  b.
Inn  (Greek),  258,  a.
„    (  Roman),  258,  b.
Intaglios,  1010,  b;   1181,  b.
Intercalary    month,     227,    b ;

228,  b ;  229.
Interest    of    money    (Greek),
524,  b.
„         (Roman),  526,  b.
Isthmian  games,  645,  b.
Italy,  318,  a.

Judges  (Greek),  369,  b  ;  401,
b ;  483,  a.
„       (Roman),  646,  b.


K.

Kids,  the,  149,  a;   163,  a.
Kiln,  546,  a.
King  (  Greek),  990,  a.
„     (Roman),  991,  a.
Kitchen,  428,  b.
Kite,  the,  154,  a.
Knife,  373,  b.
Knights  (Athenian),  266,
„         (Roman),  471,  a
Knockers,  627,  a.


Ladders,  788,  a;  1009,  b.
Lamps,  713,  a.
Lanterns,  669,  a.
Law,  681,  b;  803,  b.
Legacy,  675,  a.
Legion,  490,  a.
Leguminous  crops,  57,  a.
Letter-carrier,  1091,  a.
Levy,  499,  a.
Library,  202,  a.
Light-house,  895,  a.
Link,  553,  a.
Lion,  150,  b.
Litters,  671,  b.
Liturgies,  679,  a.
Looking-glass,  1052,  a.
Loom,  1099,  a.
Lots,  1051,  b.
Luncheon,  306,  a.
Lyre,  the,  148,  b;   156,  b.


M.

Mamertine,  240,  b.
Manuring,  50,  a.
Marriage  (Greek),  735,  b.
„        (Roman),  740,  a
Masks,  889,  b.
Masts,  1789,  a.
Meals  (Greek),  30:5,  a.


Meals  (Roman),  306,  a.
Measure,  750,  b.
Measures  of  land,  46,  b.
Medicine,  745,  b.
Mercenary   soldiers,    758,   a }

1223,  b.
Mile,  762,  b.

Mile-stones,  762,  b;   1193,  a.
Mills,  765,  a.
Mines,  1184,  a.
Mint,  766,  a.
Mirror,  1052,  a.
Money,  coined,  808,  b.

„      (Greek),  gold,  181,  a.
„       (Roman),    „     182,  a.
Month  (Greek),  223.

„       (Roman),  226,  227.
Mortars,  768,  b.
Mosaics,  431,  a;  915,  a.
Mourning  for  the   dead,  557,

b  ;  562,  b.
Moustaches,  780,  a.
Music  (Greek),  772,  b.

„      (Roman),  779,  b.


Names  (Greek),  800,  a.

„       (Roman),  800,  b.
Necklaces,  767,  b.
Nemean  games,  794,  b.
Nets,  988,  b.
Notary,  1091,  a;   1092,  U.


O.

Oars,  788,  a.

Oath  (Greek),  659,  b.

„     (Roman),  661,  b.
Obelisks,  816,  b.
October-horse,  880,  a.
Officers,  duty  of,  249,  b.

„       parade  of,  250,  a.
Olympiad,  883,  a.
Olympic  games,  828,  a.
Oracles,  836,  b.
Orders    of  architecture,   325 :

326,  b  ;   327,  b.
Organ,  622,  b.
Organist,  622,  b.
Ostracism,  514,  a.
Oven,  546,  a.
Ounce,  1213,  b.


Painting,  899,  b.
Paper,  703,  b.
Parasol,  1213,  a.
Parchment,  703,  b.
Partnership,  1094,  a.
Pay  of  soldiers,  1071,  b-
Pediment,  7,  a.
Pen,  220,  a.
Perfumes,  1214,  a.
Physicians,  747.
Pipe,  1130,  b.


Pledges,  915,  b.
Plough,  117,  b;   147,  a.
Ploughing,  49,  a.
Poisoning,  895,  a;   1188,  a.
Poles,  789,  a.
Portcullis,  256,  b.
Pottery,  532,  b.
Priests,  996,  b.
Prison,  240,  a.
Prodigies,  961,  a.
Property-tax  (Greek),  448,  b.
„  (Roman),  1157,  a

Prostitutes,  604,  b.
Prow,  786,  a.
Purification,  719,  a.
Purses,  732,  b.
Pyrrhic  dance,  1005,  a.
Pythian  games,  976,  b.


Quiver,  894,  b.


R.

Races,  287,  a.
Rake,  984,  b.
Ram,  the,  149,  b.
Raven,  the,  153,  b.
Razor,  197,  b.
Reaping,  52,  b.
Rings,  95,  a.
Road,  1191,  b.
Rope-dancers,  553,
Ropes,  996,  a.
Rounds,  250,  b.
Rudder,  788,  b.


Sacrifices,  998,  b.

Saddles,  464,  a.

Sails,  790,  a.

Salary,  1002,  b.

Salt,  1003,  b.

Salt-cellar,  1004,  b.

Salt-works,  1003,  b.

Sandal,  200,  b;   1051,  b.

Saw,  1029,  a.

Scales,  706,  a.

Scorpion,  the,  151,  a.

Screw,  300,  b.

Scythe,  518,  a.

Senate  (Greek),  209,  b ;  572,

„      (Roman),  1016,  a.
Sentinels,  250,  a.
Serpent-holder,  flux  14i^,  .-u
Shawl,  884,  b.
Shears,  545,  a.


INDEX.

Shields,  297,  a ;   870,  a ;   882.

b;   1012,  b.
Ships,  783,  a.
Shoe,  220,  b  ;  456,  a.
Shops,  1091,  b.
Sibyi,  1043,  b.
Sickln,  518,  a;   1044,  b.
Signs,  northern,  147,  a.

„     of  the  Zodiac,  14'9,  b.
Silk,  1028,  a.
Silver,  1 32,  a.
Slaves  (Greek),  1034,  a.

„       (Roman),  1036,  b.
Sleeve,  729,  a.
Sling,  553,  b.
Slingers,  553,  b.
Snake,  the,  149,  a.
Sowing,  51,  a.
Spade,  848,  b.
Span,  751,  b;  1053,  b.
Spartan  constitution,  570,  a.
Spear,  587,  a.
Speusinians,  391,  b.
Spindle,  565,  a.
Sponge,  905.  a.
Standards,  military,  1044,  b.
Stars,  fixed,  154,  b.
Statuary,  1058,  a.
Step,  577,  a.
Stern,  787,  a.
Stoves,  432,  b.
Sun-dial,  615,  a.
Surgery,  272,  a.
Swan,  the,  149,  a.
Sword,  577,  a.


T.

Tables,  749,  b.

Talent,  931,   b;    932;    933;

935,  a.
Tapestry,  1097,  a.
Tassel,  537,  a.
Taxes  (Greek),  448,  b;  1103,  a.

„     (Roman),  1156,  b;  1184,

a.
Temple,  1104,  a.
Testament,  1 1 1 3,  a.
Theatre.  1120,  b.
Theft,  300,  a ;  562,  a.
Thessal  ian  constitu  tion,  1 093 ,  a.
Thrashing,  53,  a.
Threshold,  624,  b.
Throne,  1129,  a.
Thrum,  537,  a.
Tiles,  roofing,  1098,  a.
Tombs,  556,  a;  557,  b  ;  561.
Tooth-powder,  394,  a.
Torch,  524,  a.
Torture,  1139.
Tower,  1174,  b.


1283
Tragedy  (Greek),  1140,  b.
„        (Roman),  1147,  a.
Treaty,  542,  b.
Triangle,  the,  149,  b.
Tribes  (Greek),  1152,  b.

„      (Roman),  1155,  b.
Tribunes,  1148,  b.
Trident,  564,  b.
Tripod,  1162,  b.
Trophy,  1168,  b.
Trousers,  213,  a.
Trumpet,  215, a;  709, b;  1170,

b.
Tumblers,  1005.
Twelve  Tables,  688,  a.
Twins,  the,  150,  b.


U.   V.

Vase-painting,  906,  b.

Veil,  1186,  a.

Vinegar,  1205,  b.

Virgin,  the,  150,  b.

Umpire,  391,  b.

Voting  (Greek),  21 7,  a;  971. a.

„      (  Roman),  3.36,  a ;  1076,

b.
Usurers,  525,  a.


W.

Waggon,  923,  a.

„        the,  147,  b.
Waggoner,  the,  148,  a.
Wain,  Charles's,  147,  a.
Wall,  431,  b;  968,  a.
Waterman,  the,  151,  b.
Watersnake,  the,  153,  b.
Waterstream,  the,  151,  b.
Weaving,  1099,  a.
Weeding,  52,  a.
Whale,  the,  152,  a.
Wheel, 378,  a;  532, b;  1180,  b
Whip,  539,  b.
Wills,  1113,  a.
Window,  426,  a  ;  432,  a.
Wine,  1201,  a.
Winnowing,  53,  a.
Witnesses  (Greek),  732,  b.

„  (Roman),  659,  b.

Wolf,  the,  153,  b.
Wrestling,  713,  b.


Yards  of  a  sail,  789,  b.
Year  (Greek),  222,  a.

„     (Roman),  226,  a.

„  division  of,  163,  b.
Yoke,  652,  a.


CLASSIFIED  INDEX.


Under  each  head  the  names  of  the  articles  are  given  in  which  the  subject  is  explained.


Agriculture,

Architecture  —  continued.

Armour,  &c

—  continted.

Agricultura.

Astragalus.

Gladius

Hortus.

Atlantes.

Habenae,  2,  3.

Olea,  oliva.

Atticurges.

Hasta.

Oscillum.

Balteus.

»>

Lancea.

Scamnum.

Camara,  1.

»

Pilum.

Sitos.

Canalis.

»

Verutum.

Villa  rustica.

Canterii.

»

Gaesum.

Vinum.

Chalcidicum.

Sparus.

Agricultural  Implements.

Cochlis.

j»

Jaculum.

Aratrum.

Columbaria,  3,

Spiculum.

Crates.

Columen.

»»

Sarissae.

Irpex.

Columna.

»»

Framea.

Jugum,  3.  7.

Coronis.

Falarica.

Pala.

Cortina,  4.

„

Matara.

Pecten.

Crypta,  I.

»>

Tragula.

Pedum.

Cyma.

Lorica.

Plaustrum.

Entasis.

Ocrea.

.

Prelum.

Epistylium.

Palma.

Rastrum.

Fascia.

Pelta.

Rutrum.

Fastigium.

Pharetra.

Sarculura.

Harpaglnetuli.

Pugio.

Sarracum.

Helix,  1.

Sagitta.

Stilus,  3.

Janua.

Scutum

Tintinnabulum.

Jugum,  1.

Securis.

Torculum.

Later.

Sica.

Tribula.

Maenianum.

Venabulum.

Tympanum.

Metopa.

Assemblies  and  Councils.

Vannus.

Modulus.

Agora.

Vehes.

Peristylium.

Amphictyones.

Amusements  and  Playthings.

Plinth  us.

Areiopagas.

Abacus,  5.

Podium.

Boule.

Aenigma.

Porticus.

Comitia

calata.

Alea.

Spira.

»>

curiata.

Ascollasmus.

Testudo,  3.

»

centuriata.

Buxum.

Thol.is.

»

tributa.

Calculi.

Tympanum.

Concilium.

Cottabos,

Zophorus.

Concio.

FoUis.

Arithmetic.

Conventus

Fritillus.

Abacus,  4,

Curia.

Latrunculi.

Calculi.

Ecclesia

.

Par  impar  ludere.

Armour  and  Weapons.

Eccleti.

Talus.

Acinaces.

Gerousia.

Tessera.

Aegis.

Myrii.

Trochus.

Arcus.

Panegy

rls.

AaCHITHCTURE.

Arma.

Panionia.

Abacus,  1,  2.  7,  8.

Armatura.

Senatus

Acroterium.

Capulus.

Synedri

Analemma.

Cateia.

Astronomy.

Antae.

Cetra.

Astrologia.

Antefixa,

Clipeus.

Astronomia.

Antepagmer.ta.

Dolo.

Northern    constella-

Apsis.

Funda.

tions.

Architecturo.

Galea.

Zodiacal  signs.

Arcus.

Gerrha.

Southern  constellation."

INDEX.

Astronomy  —  continued.

Classes  of  Citizens,  &c. — cont.

Dress,  &c.  —  continued.

Planetae.

Patrimi  et  Matrimi.

Baxa.

Pol  us.

Pecuarii.

Birrus.

Camps  and  Forts.

Perioeci.

Braccae.

Acropolis.

Plebes.

Bulla.

Agger.

Quadruplatores.

Calamistrum.

Arx.

Salutatores.

Calceus.

Carrago.

Colonies  and  Mother  Coun-

Caliendrum.

Castra.

try.

Campagus.

„      stativa.

Apoikia.

Campestre.

Pagi.

Cleruchiae.

Candys.

Praetorium.

Colonia.

Capitium.

Turris,  1.

Metropolis.

Caracalla.

Vallum.

Crimes.

Catena.

Charities  and  Donations.

Abortio.

Causia.

Adunati.

Adulterium.

Cestus,  2.

Alimentarii.

Ambitus.

Chlamys.

Congiaria.

Calumnia.

Clavus  latus.

Dianomae.

Falsum.

„      angustu-s.

Donaria.

Furtum.

Coma.

Frumentariae  Leges.

Incendium.

Cothurnus.

Strena.

Injuria.

Crepida.

Civil  Punishments.

Latrocinium.

Crocota.

Area,  4.

Leges  Corneliae  et  Juliae.

CucuUus.

Barathron,  or  Orugma.

Leno,  Lenocinium.

Cudo.

Career.

Majestas.

Cyclas.

Ceadas.

Parricidium.

Dactyliothecsl.

Crux.

Perjurium.

Dentrificiura.

Equuleus.

Phonos.

Diadema.

Ergastulura.

Plagium.

Diphthera.

Fidicula.

Rapina.

Embas.

Flagrum.

Sacrilegium.

Emblema.

Furca,  patibulum.

Sodalitium.

Endromis.

Habenae,  5.

Stuprum.

Exomis.

Laqueus.

Talio.

Fascia.         ♦

Latum  iae.

Veneficium.

Feminalia.

Sestertium.

Vis.

Fibula.

CiASSEs  OF  Citizens  and

Division  of  Land.

Fimbriae.

OTHERS.

Ager  privatus.

Flabellum.

Adlecti,  1.

„     publicus.

Focale.

Aerarii.

„     sanctus.

Fucus.

Agela.

Cippus,  2.

Galerus.

Alimentarii.

Pyrgos.

Habenae,  4.

Aretalogi.

Temenos.

Inauris.

Camilli.

Drama,  Dramatic  Enter-

Incunabula.

Canephoros.

tainments.

Infula.

Deditieii.              ^

Comoedia.

Instita.

Delator.

Exodia.

Lacerna.

Demopoietos.

Exostra.

Laciniae.

Demos.

Hyporcheme.

Laena.

Eiren.

Mimus.

Lemniscus.

Emphruri.

Pantomimus.

Limbus.

Epeunactae.

Periactos.

Lope.

Ephebus.

Persona,  1.  Tragic.

Manica.

Equites.

„         2.  Comic.

Mantele.

Eupatridae.

Sipariura.

Marsupium.

Geomori.

Theatrum.

Mitra.

Hectemorii.

Tragoedia.

Monile.

Hetaerae.

Velum.

Mustax.

Hippobotae.

Dress,    Ornaments,  the

Nebris.

Homoei.                   '

Toilet.

Nodus.

Libertus.

Abolla.

Nudus.

Locupletes.

Alicula.

Orarium.

Metoeci.

Amictorium.

Paenula.

Naucraria.

Amictus.

Pallium.

Nobiles.

Ampyx.

Paragauddu

Orao.

Annulus.

Pecten.

Parasiti.

Apex.

Pellis.

Partheniae.

Armilla.

Peplum.

Patricii.

Barba.

Pera.

4v  S

12S5


1286

Dress,  &c.  —  co7itinued.

Periscelis.

Pero.

Phalera.

Pileus.

Redimiculum.

Reticulum.

Ricinium.

Saccus.

Sandalium.

Serta.

Soccus.

Solea.

Stola.

Strophium.

Subligaculum,    succincto-
rium.

Synthesis.

Tiara.

Toga.

Torques.

Tunica.

Tutulus.

Udo.

Velum.

Vitta,  1.

Umbraculum.

Unguenta.

Zona.

ENGINEERING.

Aquaeductus»

Chorobates.

Cloaca.

Crypta,  2.

Smissarium.

Fistula.

Fons.

Herones.

Librator  aquae.

Murus,  moenia.

Navalia.

Pharos.

Piscina.

Pons.

Porta.

Syrinx.
Enghating  and  Chasimo.

Caelatura.
Entertainments,   Fooik

Apophoreta.

Calida.

Cerevisia.

Coena.

Commissatio.

Erani.

Opsonium.

Paropsis.

Posca.

Sportula.

Symposium.

Syssitia,

Vinum.
Epochs    and    Divisions    of
Time.

Calendarium,  1.  Greek.

„  2.  Roman.

Chronologia.
Clavus  annalis.
Dies.

-n     fasti  et  nefusti.


INDEX.
Epochs,  &c.  —  continued.

Fasti.

„     sacri,  or  kalendares.
„     annales,  or  historici.

Feriae.

Hora.

Horologium.

Lustrum.

Nundinae.

Olympias.

Saeculum.
Exercises.

Campidoctores.

Ceroma.

Cestus.

Cheironomia.

Desultor.

Discus.

Gymnasium.

Hal  teres.

Harpastum.

Hippodromus.

Lucta,  luctatio.

Palaestra.
•       Palus.

Pancratium.

Pentathlon.

Petaurum.

Pila.

Pugilatus.

Saltatio.
Festivals,  Games,  and  Shows.

Actia.

Adonia.

Aeaceia.

Aeginetarum  feriae.

Aeora.

Agonalia.

Agones.

Agraulia.

Agrionia,

Agroteras  thusia.

Alaea.

Alcathoea.

Aloa  or  haloa.

Amarynthia.

Ambrosia.

Amphiaraia.

Amphidromia.

Anagogia.

Anakeia.

Anaxagoreia.

Androgeonia.

AnthesphorJa.

Antinoeia.

Apaturia.

Aphrodisia.

Apollonia.

Ariadneia.

Armilustrlum.

Arrhephoria.

Artemisia.

Asclepieia,

Augustalts.

Bendideia.

Boedromia.

Boreasmus.

Brasideia.

Brauronia.

Cabeiria.


Festivals,  &c. —  continued,
Callisteia.
Carmentalia.
Carnela.
Carya.
Cerealia.
Chalceia.
Chalcioikia.
Charistia.
Chelidonia.    .
Chitonia.
Choeia.
Chthonia.
Compitalia.
Consualia.
Cotyttia.
Daedala.
Daphnephoria.
Docennalia.
Delia.
Delphinia.
Demetria.
Diasia.
Dictynnia.
Diipoleia.
Diocleia.
Dionysia.
Dioscuria.
Elaphebolia.
Eleusinia.
Eleutheria.
EUotia.
Ephesia.
Equiria.
Erotia.
Floralia.
Fornacalia.
Gymnopaedia.
Heraea.
Hermaea.
Hestiasis.
Hilaria.
Hyacinthia,
Inoa.
Isthmia.
Juvenalia.
Lampadephoria.
Laphria.
Larentalia.
Lectisternium.
Lemutalia.
Leonideia.
Lernaea.
Ludi.

[/n  the  text  an  alphahetL

cal  list  of  the  principal

ludi  is  ffiven.^
Lupercalia.
Lycaea.
Matralia.
Matronal  ia.
MeditrinaliH.
Megalensia.
Menelaeia.
Metageitnia,
Munychia.
Museia.
Mysia.
Mysteria.
Nemea.


Festivals,  &c. —  continued.

Neptunalia.

Novendiale.

Olympia.

Opalia.

Oschophoria.

Pal  ilia,

Pamboeotia.

Panathenaea.

Pandia.

Panellenia.

Plynteria.

Poplifugia.

Portumnalia.

Poseidonia.

Prometheia.

Protrygaea.

Pyanepsia.

Pythia.

Quinquatrus.

Quinquennalia.

Quirinalia.

Regifugium.

Robigalia.

Saturnalia,

Septimontium.

Sthenia.

Synoikia.

Terminalia.

Thalysia.

Thargelia.

'ITieophania.

Theseia.

Thesmopboria.

Tithenidia.

Vinalia.

Vulcanalia.
Forms  op  Government.

Aristocratia.

Democratia.

Monarchia.

Ochlocratia.

Oligarchia.
Funerals.

Area,  3.

Cenotapbium.

Cippus,  1.

Columbarium,  1.

Crypta,  3.

Funus,  1.  Greek.
„      2.  Roman.

Mausoleum.

Urna.
Furniture.

Abacus,  6.

Accubita.

Area,  1.

Armarium.

Balnea.

Catbedra.

Conopeum.

Cortina,  3.

Incitega.

Lectus.

Mensa.

Pluteus,  3,  4.

Pulvinar.

Scamnum.

Sella,  1,  2,  /iv

Speculum.


INDEX.

Furniture  —  continued.

Thronus.

Torus.

Trielinium.

Tripos,  1.
Greek  Law.

Adeia.

Adoptio,  1.

Adulterium,  1.

Agrapbiou  grapbe.

Agrapbou    metallou
grapbe.

Aikias  dike.

Alogiou  grapbe.

Ampbiorkia,    or    ampbo-
mosia.

Anagoges  dike.

Anakrisis.

Anaumacbiou  grapbe

Androlepsia.

Antidosls.

Antigraphe.

Apbormes  dike.

Apograpbe.

Apokeruxis.

Apopbasis.

Aporrbeta.

Apostasiou  dike.

Appellatio.

Aprostasiou  dike,

Argias  grapbe.

Arguriou  dike.

Asebeias  grapbe.

Astrateias  grapbe.

Ateleia.

Atimia.

Automolias  grapbe.

Axones.

Bebaioseos  dike.

Biaiou  dike.

Blabes  dike.

Bouleuseos  dike.

Cakegorias  dike.

Cakosis.

Cakotecbnicou  dike.

Carpou  dike.

Cataluseos    tou    demou
grapbe.

Cataseopes  graphe.

Chreous  dike.

Civitas,  politeia.

Cleteres.

Clopes  dike.

Concubina.

Curius.

Decasmus.

Diadicasia.

Diaetetae.

Diapsepbisis.

Dieasterion.

Dicastes.

Dike.

Divortium.

Dokimasia.

Dos,  1.

Ecmartyria.

Eisangelia.
0       Embateia.

Emmcni  dikae.

Enctesis.


1287
Greek  Law  —  continued.

Endeixis,  ephegesis.

Enecbyra.

Engye.

Enoikiou  dike

Epangelia.

Epibole.

Epiclerus.

Epitropus.

Epobelia.

Eutbyne.

Exagoges  dike.

Exaireseos  dike.

Exomosia.

Exsilium,  1.

Fenus,  1.

Gamelia.

Graphe.

Harpages  grapbe.

Heirgmou  graphe.

Heres,  1.

Hetaireseos  graphe.

Hieromenia.

Hierosylias  graphe.

Hori.

Hybreos  graphe.

Hypoboles  grapbe.

Jusjurandum,  1.

I-eiponautiou  graphe.

Prodosia.

Proeispboras  dike.

Prostates  tou  demou.

Prothesmia.

Psepbus.

Pseudengraphes  graphic

Pseudocieteias  graphe.

Rhetorice  grapbe.

Rbetrae.

Scyria  dike.

Seisaehtheia.

Sitou  dike.

Syeopbantes.

Sylae.

Symbolaeon,

Symbolon,  dikae  apo.

Syndicus.

Synegorus.

Syngraphe,

Timema.

Tormentum,  1.

Traumatos  ek    pronoias
grapbe.

Xenias  grapbe.
Horse  Furniture.

Calcar.

Epbippium.

Frenum.

Habenae,  1.

Hippoperae-
Ikcome,  Public  and  PaivATa

Aes  uxorium.

Apopbora.

Area,  2.

Aurum  lustrale.

Census.

Centesima.

Columnariura.

Decumae.

Demioprat*.

Eicoste.

4  N   4


12«8

Income,  &c.  —  continued.

Eisphora.

Epidoseis.

F'iscus.

Ostiarium.

Pentecoste.

Phoros.

Portorium.

Quadragesima.

Quinquagesima.

Salarium.

Salinae.

Scriptura.

Stationes  fisci.

Stipendiarii.
,         Telones.

Telos.

Theorica.

Tril)utuTn.

Vectigalia.

Vicesima.
Insignia  and  Attributes

Caduceus.

Cantabrum.

Fasces.

Insignia.

Sceptrum.

Talaria.

ITiyrsus.

Virga.

LEAGlIf:s.

Achaicum  Foedus.
Aetolicum  Foedus.
Socii.
Literature.

Commentarius.
Fescennina.
Logographi.
Paean.
Satura.
Machines  and  Contrivances.
Antlia.
Cardo.
Catena.
Clitellae.
Cochlea.

Columbarium,  2,
Ephippium.
Exostra.
Ferculum.
Fistula.
Follis.
Forma.
Fornax.
Helix,  2.
Jugum,  2.
Lil)ra,  Libella.
Machinae.
Moia,  1.  liand  mill.

„     2.  cattle  mill.

„     S.  water  mill.

„     4.  floating  mill,

„     5.  saw  mill.

„     6.  pepper  mill.
Mortarium,  pila.
Pegma.
Phalangae.
Retis,  Rete.
Scalae.
fela.


INDEX.

Machines,  &c.  —  contintied.
Tintinnabulum.
Torculura.
TriJtina.
Magistrates  and  Rulers.
Acta,  1.  5.
Adlecti.
Aeinautae.
Aesj'mnetes.
Alabarches.
Amphictyones.
Archon.
Areiopagus.
Bidiaei.
Boetarches.
Boule.
Censor.
Centumviri.
Colacretae.
Consul.
Consularis.
Cosmi.
Decaduchi.
Decarchia.
•    Decemviri  iegibus  scriben-
dis.

„         litibus  judican-
dis.

„         sacris  faciundis.

„         agris    dividun-
dis.
Demarchi.
Demiurgi.
Dictator.
Duumviri.
Eisagogeis.
Ephetae.
Ephori.
Epimeletae.
Eponymus.
Gerousia.
Gynaeconomi.
Harmostae.
Hendeka,  hoi.
H  ieromnemones.
lUustres.
Interrex.
Magistratus.
Medix  tuticus.
Nomophy  laces.
Paedonomus.
Patronomi.

Ptrduellionis  duumviri.
Phylarchi.
Phylobasileis.
Polemarchus.
Poletae.
Poristae.
Praetor.
Probouli.
Proconsul.
Rex,  1.  Greek.
„     2.  Roman.
tSenatus.
Tetrarches.
Tribuni  plcbis.
Tribunus.

Triumviri.  %

Tyrannus.
Vijrintisex  viri.


Man


UFACrURES     AND


Mati


ALS.

Byssus.
Cilicium.
Coa  vestis.
Elephas.
Fictile.
Gausapa.
Lodix,  lodicula.
Salinae.
Sericum.
Serta.

Tapes,  tapete.
Vitrum.
Manners  and  Customs.
Acclamatio.
Acta.
Amnestia.
AnakJeteria.
Angaria.
Cheirotonia.
Chelidonia.
Chirographum.
Corona  convivialis.

„       nuptialis.

„       natalitia.

„       longa.

„       Etrusca.

„       pact  His.

„       tonsilis.

.,       pampinea.
Crypteia.
Diploma.
Hospitium.
Hydriaphoria.
Immunitas.

Jusjurandum,    I.  Greek.
„  2.  Romari.

Leiturgia.

Matrimonium,  1.  Greek.
„  2.   Roman

Nomen.
Nudus.
Proscriptio.
Prytaneium.
Suffragium.
Synoikia.
Syssitia.
I'abelia.
Tribus,  1.  Greek.

„        2.  Roman.
Trierarchia.
Venatio.
Viaticum.
Xenelasia.
Maritime  Affairs.
Camara,  2.
Carchesium,  2.
Cataphracti,  2,
Corbitae.
Cymba.
Delphis.
Dolo,  2.
Epibatae.
Epistoleus.
Harpago.
Hyperetes.
Insignia,  5
Jugum,  <J,
Lembus.


INDEX

\-i^9

Maritime  AfFairs — continued.

Measures,  &c. —  continued.

Military  Pay,  &c.  — continued.

Navarchus.

Sextarius.

Stipendium,

Navis.

Spithame.

Military   Punishments.

Naumachla.

Stadium,  2.

Decimatio.

Paralus.

Ulna.

Deilias  graphe.

Phaselus.

Uncia.

Desertor.

Portisculus.

Urna.

Fustuarium.

Praefectus  classis.

Xestes.

Military   Rewards.

Remulcuin.

Medicine,

A  urum  coronarium.

Rudens.

Archiater.

Corona  obsidionalis.

Markets.

Chirurgia.

„       civica.

Agora.

Diaetetica.

„       naval  is.

Deigma

latralipta.

„       muralis.

Emporium.

latrosopliista.

„      castrensis,  vallaris.

Forum.

Medicina.

„       ovalis.

Macellum.

Medicus.

„       oleagina.

Mathematical  Geography.

Metals.

Hasta  pura.

Clima.

Aes.

Ovatio.

Measures  and  Weights.

Argentum.

Praeda.

Acaena.

Aurum.

Spolia.

Acetabulum.

Electrum.

Triumph  us.

Achane.

Metallum.

Tropaeum.

Acna,  or  Acnua.

Orichalcum.

Money.

Actus.

Military  Costume.

Aes.

Addix.

Abolla.

„    circumforaneuni.

Amma.

Alicula.

„    manuarium.

Amphora.

Balteus.

Argentum

Artaba.

Bulla.

As.

Arura.

Caliga.

Assarius  nummus

As.

Paludamentum.

Aurum.

Cheme.

Sagum.

Chalcus.

Choenix.

Military  Engines,

Cistophorus.

Chous.

Aries.

Daraaretion.

Concha.

Catapulta.

Danace.

Congius.

Cataracta.

Daricus.

Cotyla.

Corvus.

Denarius.

Cubitus.

Covinus.

Drachma.

Cubus.

Crates.

Hecte,  2.

Culeus.

Cuniculus.

Libella.

Cyathus.

Ericius.

Litra.

Dactylus.

Helepolis.

Nummus.

Decempeda,

Lupus  ferreus.

Obolus.

Gradus.

Pluteus,  2.

Sestertius.

Hecte,  1.

Scalae.

Sextula.

Hemina.

Stylus,  2.

Stater.

Hippicon.

Testudo,  3.

Uncia.

Jugerura.

Tormentum.

Music   AiMD  Musical   Instru-

LiLra, as.

Tribulus.

ments.

Ligula.

Turris,  2.

Acroama.

Litra.

Vinea.

Aeneatores.

Maris.

Military  Ensigns.

Buccina.

Medimnus.

Signa  Militaria.

Canticum.

Mensura.

Military  Levies.

Capistrum.

Metretes.

Catalogus.

Chorus.

Milliare.

Conquisitores.

Cornu.

Modius.

Emphruri.

Crotalum.

Mystrum.

Epariti.

Cymbalum.

Obolus.

Tumultus.

Hydraula,

Orgyia.

Military  Manceuvres.

Jugum,  4.

Palmipes.

Cuneus.

Lituus,  2.

Palmus.

Forfex.

Lyra.

Parasanga.

Testudo.

Musica,  1.  Greek.

Passus.

Military    Pay   and    Allow-

„      2.  Roman.

Pertica.

ances.

Pecten.

Pes.

Acta.

Sambuca.

Plethron.

Aes  equestre.

Sistrum.

Pondera.

„     hordearium.

Syrinx.

Quadrar»*aJ.

„     militare.

Testudo.  1.

Schoenus.

Praeda.

Tibia.

Scrupulum.

Spolium.

Tuba.

1290

INDEX.

Music,  &c.  —  continued.

Painting  —  continued.

Private  Buildings  —  conUmted

Tympanum.

Purple:  purpurissura.

Domus  coenacula.

Offickks  and   Soldiers.

„        ostrum.

„       diaeta.

Accensi,  2.

hysginum.

„       solaria.

Aeneatores.

„        rubiae  radix.

Exedrae.

Agathoergi.

Red :       cinnabaris.

Focus.

Ala.

„                „       Indica.

Fornax.

Alauda.

„        minium.

Fornix.

Antecessores.

„        rubrica.

Hemicyclium.

Argyraspides.

„        cicerculum.

Janua.

Campidoctores.

„        cerussa  usta.

Insignia,  4.

Catalogus.

„        sandaracha.

Lararium.

Cataphracti.

White  :   melinum.

Later.

Celeres.

„        paraetonium.

Paries  cratitius.

Conquisitores.

„        creta  anularia.

„       formaceus.

Contubernales.

„        cerussa.

„       lateritius.

Damosia.

Yellow  :  sil.

„      reticulata  strue-

Dimachae.

„        auripigmentum.

tura.

Ducenarii.

Pictura.

„      structura  antiqua.

Duplarii.

Priests  and  Priestly  Offices.

,,      emplecton.

Epariti.

Aeditui.

„      e  lapide  quadrato.

Evocati.

Agyrtae.

Pergula.

Excubitores.

Ar vales  fratres.

Pinacotheca.

Exercitus,  1.  Greek.

Asiarchae.

Pluteus,  1.

„          2.  Roman.

Augur,  auspex.

Puteal.

Libratores.

Augustales.

Scalae.

Mensores,  2,  3,  5.

Corybantes.

Synoikia.

Mercenarii.

Curio.

Taberna.

Phylarchi.

Epulones.

Tegula.

Praefectus  castrorum.

Eumolpidao.

Triclinium.

„          praetorio.

Exegetae.

Villa.

Praetor.

Fetiales.

Public   Buildings.

Praetoriani.

Flamen.

Aerarium.

Rufuli.

Galli.

Amphitheatrum.

Strategus.

Haruspices.

Archeion.

Tagus.

Hiereis  ton  soteron.

Arcus  triumphalis.

Taxiarchi.

Luperci.

Argyrocopeioii.

Tiro.

Neocori.

Athenaeum.

VelatL

Pastophori.

Auditorium.

Volones.

Pausarii.

Balneae.

Xenagi.

Pontifex.

Basilica,  chalcidicum.

OilACLES    AND    DiVINATION.

Rex  sacrificulus,

Bibliotheca.

Augurium,  auspicium.

Sacerdos.

Career,  2.

Caput  extorum.

Salii.

Chalcidicum.

Oraculum,  1.  of  Apollo.

Theori.

Circus.

„         2.  of  Zeus.

Titii  sodales.

Cochlea,  3.

„         3.  of  other

Vestal  es.

Curia.

gods.

Private  Buildings.

Forum.

„         4.  of  heroes.

AithoTisa.

Graecostasis,

5.  of  the  dead.

Apotheca,

Hippodromus.

„         6.  Italian.

Armarium.

Horreum.

Sibyllini  Libri.

Atrium.

Labyrinthus.

Sortes.

Bibliotheca.

Lautumiae.

Painting.

Caupona.

Lesche.

Colores.

Cella.

Moneta.

Black  :    atramentum.

Cubiculum.

Museum.

„         elephantinum.

Domus,  1.  Greek.

Obeliscus.

„        tryginum.

,,      2.  Roman.

Odeum.

Blue :     caeruleum.

„           vestibulum.

Paradisus.

„        lomentum

„            ostium.

Porticus.

„        tritum.

„           atrium.

Prytaneion.

„        Armenium.

„           alae.

Rostra.

„        Indicum.

„           tablinum.

Stadium.

Brown:  ochra  usta.

„           fauces.

Suggestus.

Green:  chrysocolla.

„            perystylum.

Tabularium.

,,        aerugo.

„            cubicula.

Thesaurus.

„        scolecia.

„            triclinia.

Tribunal.

„        Theodotion.

„           oeci.

Public  Officers-

„        Appianum.

„           exedrae.

Accensi,  1.

„        creta  viridis.

„           culina.

Actuarii-

Public  Officers  —  continued.
Adlecti,  2.
Adlector.
Admissionales.
Aediles.
Agathoergi.
Agonothetae.  .
Agoranorai.      v
Agrimensores.
Agronomi.
Apodectae.
Apostoleis.
Apparitores.
Asiarchae.
Astynomi.
Boonae.
Cancellarius.
Carnlfex.
Choregus.
Coactor.
Comes.

Coramentariensis.
Critae.
Curatores.

\^An  alphabetical  list  of
curatores  is  given.'\
Diaetetae.
Diribitores.
Ducenarii,  1,  2,
Ecdicus.
Episcopi.
Epistates.
Euthyni.
Exetastae.
Frumentarii.
Grammateus.
Hieropoii.
Hodopoei.
Hylori.
Hyperetes.
Legatus.
Leiturgia.
Lictor.
Magister.

\_An  alphabetical  list  of
magistri  is  given.  ]
Manceps.
Mastigophori.
Mensarii.
Metronomi.
Notarii.
Opinatores.
Paredri.
Parochi.
Practores.
Praecones.
Praefectus  Annonao.

Urbi.
Praepositus.
Primicerus.
Probouli.
Procurator.
Publicani.
Pythii.
Quaestores  classiei.

„         parricidii.
Quinqueviri.
Scribae.
Sitophylaces.
Stator.


INDEX.

Public  Officers  —  continued.
Stratores.
Svllogeis.
Tabellio.
Tabularii.
Tamias.
Teicliopoeus.
Tettaraconta,  hoi.
Theori.
Trierarchia.
Triumviri.
Viatores.
Zetetae.
Roads  and  Streets.
Angiportus.
Callis.
Mansio.
Viae.
Vicus.
Roman  Law.
Acceptilatio.
Accessio.
Acta,  2.
Actio.
Actor.
Adoptio,  2
Adulterium,  2.
Advocatus.
Aediles.
Affinitas.
Agrariae  leges.
Album.
Alluvio.
Ambitus.
Appellatio.
Aquae    pluviae    arct'ndae

actio.
Arra,  Arrha.
Arrabo,  Arrhabo.
Assertor.
Assessor.
Auctio.

Auctor,  Auctoritas.
Basilica.
Beneficiura.
Bona.

„     caduca.

„     fides.

„     rapta.  '

„     vacantia.
Bonorum  cessio.
„        coUatio.
„        emptio.
„        possessio.
Breviarium  Alaricianum.
Calumnia.
Caput.
Caupo.

Cautio,  cavere.
Centumviri.
Certi,  incerti  actio.
Chirographum.
Civitas.
Cliens.

Codex  Gregorianus.
„       Herraogenianus.
„      Justin  ianeus.
„       Theodosianus.
Cognati.
Collegium.


1291

Roman  Law  . —  continued.
Colonia,  2.
Commissoria  lex
Commissum.
Commodatum.
Comrauni  dividundo  actio.
Compensatio.
Concubina.
Confessoria  actio.
Confusio.
Constitutiones.
Corpus  juris  civilis.
Crimen,  delictum.
Culpa,  dolus  malus.
Curator.
Damnum.

„         infectum.

.,        injuria  datum.
Decretum.
Dediticii.

Dejecti  effusive  actio.
Depositum.
Divortium,  2.
Domicilium.
Dominium.
Dominus.
Donatio  mortis  causa.

„        propter  nuptias.

„        inter    virum     et
uxorem.
Dos,  2.
Edictum.

„         Theodorici.
Emancipatio.
Emphyteusis.

Emptio  et  venditio.  *

Evictio.

Exercitoria  actio.
Exhibendum,  actio  ad.
Exsilium,  2.
Falsum.
Famiha.

Familiaeerciscundae  actio.
Fen  us,  2.
Fictio.

Fidei  commissum.
Fiducia.

Finium  regundorum  actio,
Fiscus.

Foederatae  civitates.
Frumentariae  leges.
Fundus.
Furtum.
Gens.
Heres,  2.
Honores.
Imperium.
Impubes.
Incendium.
Incestum.
Infamia.
Infans.
Ingenui.
Injuria.

Institoria  actio.
Institutiones.
Intercessio.
Interdictiim.
Intestabilis.
Judex.


I '292

Roman  Law  —  continued.
Judex  Pedaneus.
Judicati  actio.
Jure,  cessio  in.
Jurgium.
Juridici.
Jurisconsult!.
Jurisdictio.
Jus.

„     Aelianum.

„     Civile  Flavianum.

„     Civile  Papirianum.
Jusjurandum,  2.
Jussu  quod,  actio.
Latinitas.
Legatuin.
Lex.

[  Under  this  head  an  al-
phabetical  list  of  the
principallaws  isgiven.^
Libelli  accusatorum.

„     famosi.
TAber,  Libertas.
Libertus,  2.
Litis  contestatio.
Locatio,  conductio.
Magistratus.
INIajestas.
Mancipii  causa.
Mancipium.
Mandatum.
Manumissio.
Manus  injectio.
Mora.
Mutuum.
Negotiatores,
Negotiorum     gestorum

actio.
Nexura.

Novellas  constitutiones.
Noxalis  actio.
Obligationes.
Occupatio.

Operis  novi  nuntiatio.
Orationes  principum.
Orator.

Pandectae  or  Digesta.
Patria  potestas.
Patron  us.
Pauperies.
Peculatus.
Per  condictionem.
Per  judicispostulationein.
Per  pignoris  c.npionem.
Pignus.
Plagium.
Plebiscitum.
Poena.
Possessio.
Postliminium.
Praedium.
Praejudicium.
Praes.

Prae  scrip  tio.
Praetor.
Procurator.
Proscriptio.
Provincia.

Publiciana  in  rem  actio.
Quanti  minoris  actio.


INDEX.

Roman  Law  —  continued.

Quorum    bonorum   inter-
dictum,

ReceptM,  de  recepto  actio.

Redhibitoria  actio.

Repetundae  pecuniae.

Restitutio  in  integrum.

Rutiliana  actio.

Sectio.

Senatus  consultum.
\_An     alphabetical  list   of
senatus  consulta  isffiven.^

Servitutes.

Societas.

Successio.

Sumtuariae  leges.

Superficies.

Tabellariae  leges.

Talio.

Testamentum.

Tormentum,  2.

Tutor.

Vindicatio.

Vindicta.

Vis.

Universitas.

Usucapio.

Usurpatio.

Usufructus.
Sacrifices  and  Reliqious
Rites.

Acerra.

.Amburbium.

Anakleteria.

Antigoneia.

Apotheosis.

Ara.

Arateia.

Canephoros.

Corona  sacerdotalis.
„      sutilis.
„      radiata.

Cortina,  3.

Diabateria.

Diamastigosis.

Eisiteria.

Eleusinia.

Exauguratio.

Exiteria,  or  Epexodia.

Inauguratio

Lituus,  1.

Lustratio.

Lustrum.

Proerosia.

Sacra.

Sacrificiura.

Sagmina.

Secespita.

Simpulura.

Supplicatio.

Thensae.

Tripos,  3.

Turibulum.

Ver  sacrum.
Slaves  and  Bondsmen.

Agaso.

Alipilus.

Aliptae.

Amanuensis.

Anagnostae.


Slaves,    &c, —  coniimted.

Anteambulones.

Aquarii.

Bruttiani.

Calones.

Capsarii.

Coloni.

Cosmetae.

CubiculariL

Cursores.

Demosii

Fartor.

Gymnesii.

Helotes.

leroduli.

Librarii.

MediastinL

Notarii.

Paedagogus.

Pedisequi.

Penestae.

Servus,  1.  Greek.
„       2.  Roman.

Tabellarius.

Thetes.

Villicus.
Statuary.

Acrolithi.

Canabus.

Caryatides.

Colossus.

Daedala.

Hermae.

Imago.

Persae.

Sculptura.

Statuaria  ars.

Typus.
Superstitions.

Amuletum.

Apophrades  hemerai.

Astrologia.

Fascinum.

Oscillum.

Prodigium.

Sortes.
Temples  and  Holt  Plac

Aediculae.

Argei.

Asylum.

Bidental.

Docana.

Propylaea.

Sacellum.

Sacrarium.

Templum,

Velum.
Titles.

Augustus,

Caesar.
Tools  and  Implements.

Acus.

Amussis,

Apsis.

Asci^

A  sill  a.

Circinus.

Colus.

Contus.

Culter.


INDEX.

1293

Tools,  &c. —  continued.

Vehicles  and  their  parts.

Utensils  —  continued.

Dolabra,  Dolabella.

Antyx.

Cortina,  1,  2.

Falx.

Arcera.

Crater.

Fistuca.

Basterna.

Cupa.

Follis.

Canathron.

Cyathus.

Forceps.

Capistrum.

Fax.

Forfex.

Carpentum.

Ferculum.

Fuscina.

Carruca

Funale.

Fusus.

Chiramaxium.

Guttus.

Harpago.

Cisium.

Lanx,  Lancula.

incus.

Covinus,

Laterna.

Jugum.  5.

Currus,  bigae.

Lecythus.

Ligo.

„       trigae.

Lucerna.

Lima.

„       quadrigae.

Mazonomus.

Malleus,  Malleolus.

Esseda.

Modiolus.

Norma.

Hamaxopodes,  arbusculae.

Murrhina  vasa.

Regula.

Harmamaxa.

Oenophorum.

Runcina.     •

Jugum,  7.

Olla,  aula.

Securis.

Lectica.

Patera,  Patella.

Serra.

Petorritum

Patina.

Trades  and  Occupations.

Pilentum.

Poculum.                 ,

Ambubaiae,

Rheda.

Psycter.

Argentarii.

Sella,  3.

Pyxis.

Athletae.

Utensils.

Rhyton.

Balatro.

Acetabulum.

Salinum.

Barber,  tonsor.

Aenum.

Sartago.

Bestiarii.

Alabastrum.

Situla,  Sitella.

Bibliopola.

Amphora.

Taeda.

Calculator.

Ampulla

Tripos,  2.

Caupo.

Anaglypha.

Trua,  TruUa.

Fabri.

Authepsa.

Vas.

FuHo.

Bascauda.

Urceus.                          ,

Funambulus.

Bico*;.

Writing  and  Writing  Mate-

Gladiatores.

Carius.

rials.

Hemerodromi.

Calathiis.

Adversaria.

Histrio,  1.  Greek.

Caiix.

Album.

„       2.  Roman

Candela.

Atramentum.

Interpres.

Candelabrum

Buxum.

Leno.

Cantharus.

Calamus.

Lepturgi.

Capsa.

Codex.

Logographi,  2.

Carchesium,  1.

Libellus.

Mensores.

Catinus.

„         meinorialis.

Notarii.

Chrysendita.

Liber.

Pelatae.

Cista.

Nota.

Pistor.

Cochlear.

Regula.

Plumarii.

Colum.

Scytale.

Redemtor.

Cophinus.

Stylus,  1.

SagariL

Corbis,  Corbula,  Corbicula,

Tabulaa

LONDON:     PUINTED    ur

SPOTTISWOODE    AND     CO.,    NKW-S'i  KKT^T    SQt'AKE

AND    PAliLIAMliNT    UTRKKT


a^


DE.  WILLIAM  SMITH'S  CLASSICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA.

I

Dictionary  of  G-reek  and  Eoman  Antiquities,     By  various

Writers.     Edited  by  Dr.  William   Smith.     Second  Edition,     500   Engravings   on
Wood.     1  thick  vol.  8vo.  42s.

II

Dictionary  of  G-reek  and  Eoman  Biography  and  Mythology.

By  various  Writers,     Edited  by  Dr.  William  SinxH.     564  Engra^angs  on  Wood.
Complete  in  3  vols.  8vo.  price  £5  15s.  6d.

Ill

Dictionary   of  Greek  and  Eoman  Geography.     By  various

Writers.     Edited  by  Dr.  William   Smith.      534    Engravings   on   Wood.     2   vols.
8vo.  M.

'  I  have  been  for  some  time  in  the  habit  of  vising  the  Dictionaries  of  Antiquity  and  Ancient  Bio-
graphy, as  well  as  the  Dictionary  of  Ancient  Geography,  and  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying,  from  my
knowledge  of  them,  that  they  are  far  superior  to  any  other  publications  of  the  same  sort  in  our  language.
They  are  works  which  every  student  of  ancient  literature  ought  to  consult  habitually,  and  which  are
indispensable  to  every  person  engaged  in  original  researches  into  any  department  of  antiquity.'

Sir  G.  CORNEVVALL  Lkwis,  Bart.

'  The  Dictionary  of  Greek  and  Roman  Geography,  edited  by  Dr.  William  Smith,  is  a  work  of  so
much  utility  to  the  study  of  ancient  history,  and  of  such  general  importance  to  classical  education  and
the  progress  of  knowledge,  that  its  extensive  circulation,  wherever  the  English  language  is  spoken  or
read,  may  confidently  be  anticipated.'  Wiliiam  Martin  Leake,  Esq.,  P.R.S.

'  I  have  much  pleasure  in  expressing  my  sense  of  the  invaluable  services  rendered  to  the  cause  of
Greek  and  Latin  literature,  and  of  classical  education  generally,  by  the  great  and  laborious  works  of  Dr.
William  Smith,  which  are  extensively  used,  and  with  great  profit,  at  Harrow,  as  in  all  the  public  schools
of  England.'  Rev.  Dr.  Yaughan.

Ancient  Eome.    By  Thomas  H.  Dyer,    Eeprinted  from  Dr.

William  Smith's   '  Dictionary  of  Greek  and  Eoman  Geography.'     With  a  Map  ot
Ancient  Eome  and  52  Illustrations.     Eoyal  8vo.  7s.  6d.  cloth  lettered.

DR.  WILLIAM   SMITH'S  LARGER  HISTORY  OP  GREECE.

History  of  G-reece,  from  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Eoman

Conquest.     With  Supplementary  Chapters  on  the  History  of  Literature  and  Art.
By  Dr.  William  Smith.   New  Edit.    100  Engravings  on  Wood.  Small  Svo.  cloth,  7s.  6d.

Dr.  William  Smith's  Smaller  School  Books.     New  Editions.

Fcp.  Svo.  cloth,  red  edges.
SMALLER  HISTORY  of  ENGLAND.     68  Illustrations.     3s.  6d.
SMALLER  HISTORY  of  ROME.     79  Illustrations.     3s.  6d.
SMALLER  HISTORY  of  GREECE.     74  Illustrations.     3s.  6d.
SMALLER   CLASSICAL    MYTHOLOGY.    By  a  Lady.     Illustrated

by    Extracts    from     the     Poets    in    English.       Edited    by    Dr.

William  Smith.     Many  Woodcuts.     3s.  6d.

GREEK  AND   LATIN  AUTHORS,  EDITED  BY  DR.   AVILLIAM   SMITH.

Plato.      The  Apology  of  Socrates,  the  Crito,  and  part  of

th.e   Pheedo ;  with  Notes  in  English  from  Stallbaum.     Schleiermacher's    Intro-
ductions.    Fifth  Edition.     12mo.  5s.

Tacitus.    Grermania,  Agricola,  and  Eirst  Book  of  the  Annals.

With  English  Notes.     Sixth  Edition.     12mo.  5s.


London:    JAMES  WALTON,  137  Gower  Street.


SMALLER  CLASSICAL  DICTIONARIES  FOR  SCHOOL  USE.


A  lew  Classical  lictionaTy  of  Biography,  Mythology,  and

Geograpliy.  Partly  based  on  the  '  Dictionary  of  Greek  and  E  man  Biography
and  Mythology.'  By  Dr.  William  Smith.  Ninth  Edition,  with  750  Illustrations.
8vo.  cloth,  18s.


The  old  Classical  Dictionaries  having  become  ob-
solete, from  the  vastly  increased  information  which
the  researche.o  of  modern  scholars  have  attained
on  historical  subjects,  this  Dictionary  is  presented
to  the  student  as  embodying  the  accurate  parti-
culars which  recent  discoveries  have  arrived  at,
respecting  the  manners,  customs,  history,  and
literature  of  antiquity.

The  work  contains  articles  on  the  most  important
names— Biographical,  Mythological,  and  Geogra-
phical— occurring  in  the  Greek  and  Roman  classics.

The  Biographical  portion  comprehends  the  de-
partments of  Historj',  of  Literature,  and  of  Art.
All  names  of  note  are  included,  up  to  A.D.  476,  and
a  few  remarkable  ones  beyond  that  epoch.  The
Literary  articles  occupy  considerable  space,  and
embrace  all  Greek  and  Roman  writers  whose  works
either  are  extant,  or,  though  lost,  have  exercised
an  important  influence  on  learning.  The  best
modern  editions  of  the  works  of  the  several  authors
are  indicated  at  the  end  of  the  articles  relating  to
them.  The  history  of  Ancient  Art  has  also  a  large
space  devoted  to  it.


In  the  Mythological  articles,  care  has  been  taken
to  exclude  all  indelicate  allusions  ;  and  the  Greek
and  Roman  Mythology  are  kept  distinct,  by  treat-
ing separately  of  the  Greek  divinities  under  their
Greek  names,  and  the  Roman  under  their  Roman
names— a  method  adopted  by  modern  authorities,
both  here  and  on  the  Continent,  and  calculated
to  remove  and  prevent  many  errors  and  miscon-
ceptions.

In  the  Geographical  portion  have  been  embodied
all  the  latest  discoveries  of  travellers  relating  to
the  identification  of  modern  localities  with  ancient
sites.

The  work  will  also  be  found  of  great  use  to  Biblical
Stxidents  in  elucidating  points  connected  with  the
Geography  of  the  Scriptures,  and  explaining  the
numerous  allusions  to  classical  subjects  contained
in  tlie  Sacred  Writers.

The  Illustrations  have  reference  to  the  Mytho-
logical, Biographical,  and  Geographical  articles,
and  will,  it  is  believed,  add  considerably  to  the
value  and  usefulness  of  the  work.


A  Smaller  Classical  Dictionary  of  Biography,  Mythology,  and

Geography.     Abridged  from  the  Larger  Dictionary.     Illustrated  by  200  Engravings
on  Wood.     By  Dr.  "William  Smith.     New  Edition.     Crown  Svo.  cloth,  7s.  6d.


This  work  is  designed  for  junior  students,  and
contains  so  much  of  the  subjects  of  the  larger
Classical  Dictionary  as  is  necessary  for  under-
standing the  Greek  and  Roman  Classics  generally
read  in  schools.  It  is  more  adapted,  in  size  as  well
as  in  price,  to  younger  pupils  ;  and,  for  their  bene-
fit, not  only  has  the  quantity  of  the  syllables  of
each  name  been  carefully  marked,  but  the  genitive
cases  have  been  inserted.


A  new  and  pleasing  feature  is  introduced  into  this
volume,  viz.  the  illustration  of  the  Mythological
articles  by  drawings  from  ancient  works  of  art.
These  will  give  the  young  beginner  a  more  vivid
and  adequate  conception  of  the  symbols  and  fipures
typical  of  the  deities  and  heroes  than  he  could
possibly  obtain  in  any  other  manner ;  and  will  thus
enlist  his  interest  in  the  objects  of  ancient  Greek
and  Roman  worship.


A  Smaller  Dictionary   of  Grreek   and  Roman   Antiquities.

Abridged  from  the  Larger  Dictionary.     By  Dr.  William  Smith.     Illustrated  by  200
Engravings  on  Wood.     New  Edition.     Crown  Svo.  cloth,  7s.  6d.


This  work,  intended  to  illustrate  the  classical
authors  usually  read  in  schools,  exhibits  the  results
of  the  labours  of  modern  scholars  in  the  various
subjects  included  under  the  general  term  of  Greek
and  Roman  antiquities.  Such  information,  con-
tained in  the  larger  Dictionary  of  Antiquities,  as  is
not  suited  to  junior  students,  is  here  omitted  ;
and  whatever  articles  are  susceptible  of  it  have
been  illustrated  by  woodcuts  from  ancient  works
of  art.

The  book,  however,  is  designed  not  only  for
school  use,  but  for  the  general  English  reader  who,
although  unacquainted  with  the  ancient  classics  in
the  original,  frequently  needs  information  on  points
connected  with  Greek  and  Roman  antiquities.

The  woodcuts  are  calculated  to  give  a  correct


idea  of  the  numerous  objects  described,  of  which
but  a  vague  notion  could  be  conceived  from  the
most  minute  verbal  di  scription  ;  and  these  cuts
have  the  advantage  of  authenticity,  being  taken
( xclusively  from  ancient  inscriptions,  paintings  on
vases,  gems,  coins,  and  pictures  found  at  Pompeii,
as  well  as  from  actual  relics  of  antiquity  still  ex-
isting. The  pupil  thus  acquires  a  knowledge  of
the  forms  of  the  various  kinds  of  ancient  armour
and  weapons,  instruments  of  music,  apparatus  for
cooking  and  banqueting,  articles  of  dress,  plans  of
houses,  &c.

The  Appendix  consists  of  extensive  tables  of
Greek  and  Roman  coins,  weights,  and  measures  ;
the  years  corresponding  to  the  Olympiads,  the
calendar,  &c.


London:  JAMES  WALTON,  and  JOHN  MURRAY.


BINDING  «?rrT.   SEPlT


•

-H

1        i

c

!•

•

1      t

University  of  Toronto

€9

Library

tH

P

o

P*
•i-«

t

pi
c

DO  NOT            /^  \

Ol

r*

00

«>

REMOVE         /

CQ

(^

«H

i

r-i

•id

THE               //

^

ft

,

t>

CARD            I

Vi^

"             0

f

FROM             ^

i
1

••H

V"

rH

0

•ri

THIS                \

^

4
,S3

e

POCKET              X

•P

««^

•^

4^

B

O

CO

0

,:2

■4-t

y

Acme  Library  Card  Pocket

<5J

LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  LIMTTED
