# Ihya Ulum al-Din Vol 4

*Imam al-Ghazali (1937)*

REVIVAL  OF  RELIGIOUS  LEARNINGS

IMAM  GHAZZALI'S

IHYA  ULUM-ID-DIN

Translated  by

FAZL-UL-KARIM

VOL.  Ill

Published  by

DARUL-ISHAAT

Urdu  Bazar,  Karachi

Pakistan  -  Phone  :  213768

|  Rights  of  composing  reserved  ~)

Publisher

DARUL-ISHAAT

URDU  BAZAR  KARACHI-PAKISTAN. 
Tel:  213768  -  2631861

First  Edition:  1993

Composing  at:  KODWAVI  COMPOSING  CENTRE 
Pakistan  Chowk,  Karachi.

DISTRIBUTORS :

Bait-ul-Quran  Urdu  Bazar  Karachi-1 
Idara  Tul  Ma'arif,  Darul  Uloorn  Korangi  Karachi- 14 
Maktaba  Darul  Ukxm  Darul  Uloorn  Korangi  Karachi-14 
Idara  Tul  Quran  437/D,  G  JE.  Las  be  11a  Karachi-3 
Idara-e-Islamiat  190  Anar  Kali  Lahore.

also  available  at:- _

Siddiqui  Trust  Al-Manzar  Apartments 
Lasbella  Karachi-5

Printed  At :

AHMAD  PRINTING  CORPORATION  KARACHI.

PREFACE

The  Book  of  Destructive  Evils  is  the  third  book  of  Imam 
Gazzali's  world  renowned  master  piece  Ihya  Ulum-id-Din  or  the 
Revival  of  Religious  learning.  This  work  is  an  attempt  to 
translate  the  third  part  of  the  Ihya  not  too  literally  but  in 
substance.  This  book  deals  with  soul  and  its  attributes,  conduct, 
greed  and  passion,  benefits  and  harms  of  tongue,  anger  and 
envy,  attachment  for  the  world,  love  for  wealth  and  harms  of 
miserliness,  power,  show,  pride  and  erroneous  beliefs.

A  literal  translation  is  avoided  in  order  to  omit  some 
unnecessary  things  which  were  prevalent  in  the  then  society, 
such  as  arguments  of  sects  and  sub-sects  and  also  to  omit  the 
sayings  of  personages  and  sages  of  less  importance  but  it  should 
be  noted  that  no  verse  of  the  Quran  and  saying  of  the  Prophet  has 
been  omitted  in  this  work.Translations  of  the  other  three  books  of  the  Ihya  have  by  the 
grace  of  God  already  come  out  of  press,  namely  the  Book  of 
worship,  the  Book  of  worldly  usages  and  the  Book  of 
constructive  virtues.

I  pary  to  the  Almighly  Allah  that  He  may  guide  the  people  of 
the  world  in  accordance  with  the  teachings  of  the  Holy  Quran 
and  Sunnah  and  the  spirit  in  which  the  Ihya  was  written  by 
Hujjatul  Islam  (proof  of  Islam),  a  title  received  by  Imam  Gazzali 
and  about  which  it  has  been  said  "If  all  the  books  of  Islam  were 
destroyed,  it  would  be  but  a  slight  loss  if  only  the  Ihya  of  Gazzali 
were  preserved . "

DACCA

FAZLUL  KARIM

CONTENTS  OF 
BOOK  III

THE  BOOK  OF  DESTRUCTIVE  BVILS 
CONTENTS

CHAPTER  I

Soul  and  its  attributes  7

CHAPTER  II

Riazat  or  efforts  for  good  conduct  in  the  ways  of  God  47

CHAPTER  III

Harms  of  greed  and  sexual  passion  69

CHPATER IV

Harms  of  Tongue  91

CHAPTER  V

Harms  of  anger,  hatred  and  Envy  127

CHAPTER  VI

Evils  of  the  world  153

CHAPTER  VII

Evils  of  wealth  and  miserliness  175

CHAPTER  VIII

Evils  of  power  and  show  209

CHAPTER  IX

Evils  of  pride  and  self-praise  249

CHAPTER  X

Evils  of  erroneous  belief  280

THE  REVIVAL  OF  RELIGIOUS  LEARNINGS 
The  Book  of  Destructive  Evils 
PARTI 
CHAPTER  1

SOUL  AND  ITS  ATTRIBUTESCHAPTER  X

Evils  of  erroneous  belief  280

THE  REVIVAL  OF  RELIGIOUS  LEARNINGS 
The  Book  of  Destructive  Evils 
PARTI 
CHAPTER  1

SOUL  AND  ITS  ATTRIBUTES

It  is  by  means  of  soul  that  man  is  the  Lord  of  creation  as  it  is 
by  means  of  soul  that  man  acquires  the  knowledge  of  God  and 
His  attributes  and  by  no  other  organs  of  the  body.  It  is  by  means 
of  soul  that  man  can  go  to  the  nearness  of  God  and  make  efforts  to 
realise  Him.  So  soul  is  the  king  of  the  body  and  its  different 
organs  are  its  servants  to  carry  out  its  orders  and  commands.  It  is 
accepted  by  God  when  it  remains  free  from  things  other  than 
God.  When  it  is  attached  to  things  other  than  God,  it  drifts  away 
from  God.  It  is  the  soul  which  will  be  asked  and  rebuked.  It 
becomes  fortunate  if  it  is  purified  and  cleaned,  and  it  becomes 
fortunate  if  it  is  kept  impure.  It  is  the  knowledge  of  soul  which  is 
the  root  of  the  knowledge  of  God.  When  man  does  not  know 
himself  he  does  not  know  God.  Majority  of  men  are  ignorant  of 
soul  and  its  attributes  as  screen  is  cast  between  soul  and  baser 
self.  God  says:  "God  moves  between  a  man  and  his  soul  and 
controls  it  and  its  attributes.  It  is  between  the  two  fingers  of  the 
Merciful.  It  sometimes  reaches  the  last  limit  of  the  devil  and 
sometimes  rises  so  high  as  to  the  throne  of  the  Almighty.  He  who 
does  not  enquire  about  his  soul  is  included  among  those  persons 
of  whom  God  says  in  the  following  verse:  They  forgot  God  and  so 
He  made  their  souls  forgetful  19:67.  They  are  the  transgressors.  It 
is  therefore  essential  to  know  soul  and  its  attributes  which  is  the 
root  of  religion.What  has  been  said  in  the  earlier  pages  of  this  book  relates  to 
the  outward  organs  and  bodily  limbs.  Now  we  shall  narrate  the 
attributes  and  evils  of  soul  which  are  the  subject  matter  of  secret 
knowledge.

WORDS-NAFS,  RUH,  QALB,  AQL  EXPLAINED

(1)  QALB  has  got  two  meanings.  It  means  first  a  piece  of  flesh 
in  the  left  breast  called  heart  which  is  hollow  in  the  interior.

8

Soul  and  its  Attributes

Vol-III

which  is  filled  up  with  black  blood  and  which  is  again  a  source  of 
Ruh  or  life.  Heart  is  the  centre  or  mine  for  circulation  of  blood. 
The  detailed  description  of  heart  is  to  be  found  in  Anatomy.  It 
exists  in  breasts  and  lower  animals  and  appertains  to  the  material 
world.  We  shall  not  refer  to  it  in  our  book.  The  second  meaning  of 
Qalb  is  soul  with  which  we  are  concerned  here.  It  is  an 
immaterial  thing  or  formless  Latifa  or  basic  subtle  element  which 
has  got  connection  with  the  material  heart.  It  is  just  like  unseen 
electricity.  It  is  the  principal  thing  in  a  man.  It  catches  knowledge 
of  God  and  spiritual  world.. It  is  punished  and  rewarded.  The 
connection  of  soul  with  heart  is  the  connection  of  attributes  with 
the  bodily  jlimbs,  or  a  machine  with  the  machine  man,  or  a  house 
with  its  inmates.  This  connection  is  of  two  kinds.  One  kind  of 
connection  is  with  Ulume  Mokashafa  or  spiritual  knowledge.  But 
in  this  look,  our  object  is  to  narrate  Ulume  Muamalah  or 
knowledge  of  worldly  usages.  Its  second  connection  requires  the 
knowledge  of  the  secrets  of  soul.  The  Prophet  did  not  throw  light 
on  this  object  and  so  we  should  refrain  from  it.  We  shall  translate 
the  word  Qalb  in  this  book  as  soul  or  an  immaterial  thing  Latifa 
with  its  attributes.(2)  RUH:  It  has  got  also  two  meanings.  It  means  first  a 
material  thing  within  the  heart  which  vibrates  the  whole  body  like 
the  current  of  electricity  and  which  rims  through  the  veins  of  the 
body.  It  is  called  'life'.  It  has  got  the  power  of  touch ,  hearing,  sight, 
smell  and  the  power  of  the  other  limbs  of  the  body.  It  is  just  like 
radiation  of  light  of  a  lighted  lamp  pitched  in  a  corner  of  the  house. 
It  is  a  subtle  gas  or  steam  which  creates  the  heat  of  the  heart.  Our 
object  is  not  that.  The  second  meaning  of  Ruh  is  an  immaterial 
subtle  thing  which  is  called  soul  and  not  life.  God  says:  They  ask  you 
about  Ruh.  Say:  It  is  a  command  from  my  Lord.  17: 85.

(3)  NAFS:  It  has  got  also  two  meanings  for  our  purpose.  The 
first  meanings  is  passion  or  baser  and  lower  self.  Passion  is  a 
comprehensive  word  consisting  of  greed,  anger  and  other  evil 
attributes.  The  Prophet  said:  Your  greatest  enemy  is  your  passion 
lying  by  your  two  sides.  The  second  meaning  of  Nafs  is  soul  as 
described  above.  When  Nafs  assumes  calmness  and  has  removed 
passion,  it  is  then  termed  Nafs  Mutmainna  or  satisfied  soul  as 
God  says:  O  satisfied  soul,  return  to  your  Lord  satisfied  and 
satisfying  him-89: 27.  In  the  first  meaning,  Nafs  is  with  the  party 
of  devil.  When  the  calm  nature  of  Nafs  does  not  become  perfect,  it

Vol-III

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

9

is  called  Nafs  Lawwamah  or  self-accusing  soul,  as  such  a  soul 
rebukes  one  for  neglecting  divine  duties.  If  soul  gives  up  protests 
and  surrenders  itself  to  the  devil,  it  is  called  Nafs  Ammarah  or 
passion  addicted  to  evils.  The  Quran  refers  to  this  in  verse  12:53?(4)  AQL:  It  has  got  many  meanings  two  of  which  we  shall 
narrate  here.  The  first  meaning  of  Aql  is  intellect  with  which  true 
nature  of  things  of  this  material  world  is  known  and  its  seat  is  in 
soul.  The  second  meaning  of  Aql  is  power  to  understand  the 
secrets  of  different  learnings.  It  is  a  subtle  essence  called 
knowledge  which  is  an  attribute.  Attribute  and  the  thing  which 
contains  it  are  two  different  things.  Intellect  is  the  name  of  both. 
This  is  supported  by  the  following  Hadis.  The  first  thing  which 
God  created  is  intellect.  The  attribute  of  intellect  is  an  immaterial 
thing  but  the  attribute  cannot  stand  without  a  material  thing.  So 
the  place  of  intellect  should  be  created  first  or  along  with  it. 
Knowledge  is  the  content  of  intellect  and  so  it  was  created  first.ARMY  OF  SOUL:  God  says  in  years  71  :  31-  None  except  He 
knows  the  army  of  your  Lord'.  There  are  armed  soldiers  in  soul. 
Their  real  nature  is  not  known  and  nobody  knows  their  number 
except  He.  Soul  has  got  two  armies.  One  army  can  be  seen  by  the 
external  eye  and  another  army  cannot  be  seen  except  by  the 
internal  eye.  These  two  armies  are  necessary  for  upkeep  of  the 
dominion  of  this  king.  Courtiers,  servants,  helpers,  etc.  are  the 
armies  of  the  king  which  can  bee  seen  by  the  external  eyes. 
Similarly,  hands,  feet,  eyes,  ears,  tongue  and  other  outward  and 
inward  organs  are  the  armies  of  soul.  They  are  all  servants  of  soul 
which  rules  over  them.  They  have  been  created  to  obey  them. 
They  cannot  go  against  soul.  When  the  soul  orders  the  eyes  to 
open,  they  open.  When  it  orders  the  feet  to  walk,  they  walk.  Their 
submission  is  like  that  of  angels  of  God.  The  angels  have  been 
created  to  obey  God  and  they  cannot  go  against  Him.  These 
armies  are  necessary  for  soul  for  its  journey  to  God,  as 
conveyance  and  food  are  necessary  for  body.  It  has  to  cross  many 
stations  to  meet  Him  for  which  it  has  been  created.  God  says:  I 
have  not  created  Jinn  and  man  but  that  they  should  worship 
Me-51 :56.  Body  is  the  conveyance  or  carrier  of  soul  and  its  food  is 
knowledge.  In  order  that  it  can  acquire  its  food,  the  ingredients 
which  are  necessary  are  goods  deeds.  To  reach  God  is  impossible 
till  the  body  does  not  remain  sound.

This  world  is  the  seed  ground  for  the  next  and  a  station  of 
guidance.  It  is  called  Duniya  or  near  planet  as  it  is  the  closest

Vol-III

1 0  Soul  and  its  Attributes

station  out  of  many  stations.  So  to  acquire  food  in  the  world  is 
necessary.Vol-III

1 0  Soul  and  its  Attributes

station  out  of  many  stations.  So  to  acquire  food  in  the  world  is 
necessary.

TWO  ARMIES  OF  HEALTH:  To  take  food  which  keeps  the 
health  of  body  is  necessary  and  to  avoid  that  which  is  harmful  to 
it  is  to  be  avoided.  So  it  is  necessary  to  approach  two  armies,  the 
hidden  army  of  greed  for  food  and  drink  and  the  open  army  of 
bodily  organs.  So  greed  for  food  and  drink  have  been  created  in 
soul  as  they  are  necessary  for  the  upkeep  of  the  body,  and  the 
other  organs  are  the  arms  of  greed.  Two  armies  are  also  necessary 
to  remove  the  outer  enemies  who  are  destructive  evils,  such  as 
anger  etc.  with  which  these  evils  are  removed.

ARMIES  OF  SOUL  ARE  THREE:  (1)  One  army  does  benefit 
to  soul,  the  army  of  greed.  It  can  be  termed  Will  also.  (2)  The 
second  army  is  anger  which  moves  the  bodily  organs  to  give  the 
object  of  greed  power  and  strength.  (3)  The  third  army  works  like 
secret  emissaries-po  wers  of  sight,  hearing,  smell,  taste  and  touch. 
These  defined  powers  are  entrusted  to  different  organs.  For  those 
armies,  there  are  open  arms-fingers  to  catch,  eyes  to  see  etc.  The 
third  army  is  divided  into  two.  One  army  lives  openly,  such  as 
attributes  of  five  organs-hearing,  sight,  smell,  taste  and  touch. 
Another  army  lives  secretly  in  the  horizon  of  brain.  They  are 
fi  ve-(l)  power  of  idea  (2)  power  of  thought  (3)  power  of  memory, 
(4)  power  of  retention  (5)  and  power  of  consolidating  them 
together.  These  five  powers  are  in  brain  and  they  secretly  stay 
therein.These  are  the  armies  of  soul.  A  man  of  weak  intellect  will  feel 
difficult  to  understand  them  but  the  wise  get  benefit  from  these 
discussions.  We  shall  try  to  make  those  who  are  weak,  in 
understanding  these  things  by  illustrations.

ILLUSTRATIONS  OF  SECRET  ARMIES  OF  SOUL

(1)  Soul  is  a  king  over  body  as  a  king  over  an  empire.  In  the 
empire  of  soul,  hands,  feet  and  other  organs  are  like  different 
business  men  and  industrialists  in  town.  Greed  is  a  collector  of 
revenue  in  that  town,  anger  is  its  police,  intellect  is  it  minister 
and  soul  is  its  king.  The  collector  greed  is  like  one  who  collects 
food  and  anger  is  like  a  police  who  keeps  guard  over  it.  The 
collector  greed  is  a  downright  liar  and  a  deceiver.  It  ostensibly 
wishes  good  but  there  is  destructive  poison  in  it.  The  reign  of  soul 
over  the  region  of  body  is  similar.  It  goes  on  well  if  all  organs  and

Vol-IH

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

11Vol-IH

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

11

attributes  are  under  the  rule  of  soul.  When  soul  takes  the  help  of 
its  minister  intellect,  it  rules  over  greed  keeping  anger  in  control. 
In  order  to  bring  anger  under  control,  sometimes  it  seeks  the 
help  of  greed  and  then  its  character  and  conduct  become  good. 
He  who  goes  away  from  this  pa  th,  becomes  like  one  about  whom 
God  speaks  in  the  following  verse:  Have  you  looked  towards  one 
who  takes  his  passion  as  deity-25:43?  God  says:  He  who  follows 
his  greed  is  like  a  dog.  If  you  attack  it,  it  will  prolong  its  tongue.  If 
you  give  it  up,  it  will  also  prolong  its  tongue-7:176.  God  speaks  in 
another  verse  about  the  person  who  controlled  his  passion:  As 
for  such  men  as  en  tertained  the  fear  of  s  tanding  before  their  Lord 
and  controlled  their  souls  from  low  desires,  their  abode  will  be 
Paradise-79:41.(2)  Second  illustration  of  secret  army  of  soul.  Know,  O  dear 
readers,  that  the  body  is  a  town  and  intellect  or  conscience  rules 
over  that  town  like  a  king.  Its  armies  are  its  external  and  internal 
senses  and  its  subject  are  its  organs.  Sexual  passion  and  anger  are 
the  enemies  of  the  region  of  body  and  soul  is  its  guard.  If  it  fights 
against  its  enemies  and  defeats  them  and  compels  them  to  do 
what  soul  likes,  its  actions  become  commendable  and  it  returns 
to  the  Almighty.  God  says  that  He  gives  superiority  to  those  who 
fight  with  their  lives  and  properties  over  those  who  worship 
sitting-9:20Q.  If  the  soul  acts  as  guard  like  the  frontier  guards  and 
neglects  the  organs  of  the  body,  it  is  punished.  On  the 
Resurrection  Day,  it  will  be  asked:  O  dishonest  guard,  you  have 
eaten  food  and  drunk  milk,  but  you  have  not  inquired  into  lost 
animal  and  have  not  arranged  for  treatment  of  diseased  animals. 
To-day  I  will  take  retaliation  on  you  for  this.  In  the  Hadis  below, 
such  a  Mujahid  or  fighter  has  been  praised:  You  have  returned 
from  the  little  fight  to  the  greatest  fight.

(3)  Third  illustration  of  secret  army  of  soul.  Intellect  is  like  a 
rider,  greed  is  like  a  horse  and  anger  is  like  his  hunting  dog. 
When  the  rider  is  expert  and  his  horse  and  dog  are  trained, 
success  can  be  obtained  in  hunting.  When  the  rider  is 
inexperienced,  horse  disobedient  and  dog  biting,  then  the  horse 
does  not  obey  the  rider  and  the  dog  does  not  run  obeying  him. 
Similarly,  when  intellect  is  mature  and  greed  and  anger  are 
submissive  to  intellect,  success  in  sure,  but  if  intellect  is 
immature  and  greed  and  anger  are  not  under  control,  there  is 
surely  ruin.

12

Soul  and  its  Attributes

Vol-III12

Soul  and  its  Attributes

Vol-III

KNOWLEDGE  AND  WILL:  The  attributes  for  which  man's 
soul  becomes  fit  to  approach  God  and  honoured  are  knowledge 
and  will.  Knowledge  means  knowledge  of  the  material  and 
spiritual  world  and  reality  of  intellect.  Then  matters  lie  behind 
the  knowledge  gained  by  the  senses.  Lower  animals  have  got  no 
share  in  it.  Regarding  will,  when  a  man  can  understand  by  his 
intellect  the  result  of  any  action  and  know  what  will  bring  good, 
then  there  grows  in  his  mind  will  to  obtain  that  good  and  to  do 
that  action.  It  is  not  the  will  of  greed  or  the  instinct  of  the  lower 
animals.  It  is  opposed  to  greed.  Intellect  wills  what  will  be  its 
good  in  future  and  spends  for  it.  There  is  greed  of  taking 
delicious  food  in  illness  but  intellect  prohibits  its  eating.  A  wise 
man  refrains  from  eating  it.  So  soul  of  man  is  endowed  with 
knowledge  and  will  and  not  the  lower  animals.  Even  little 
children  are  void  of  these  attributes.  There  are  two  stages  of 
acquiring  knowledge  on  the  part  of  a  boy.  The  first  stage  is  his 
learning  of  all  preliminary  necessary  things  and  to  know  lawful 
and  unlawful  things.  He  cannot  gain  expert  knowledge  at  this 
stage  but  becomes  close  to  it.  The  second  stage  is  his  acquisition 
of  knowledge  by  learning  and  thinking.  He  becomes  then  like  an 
expert  writer.THREE  MODES  OF  GAINING  SOUL-POWER:  (1)  Mode 
of  Ilham  or  inspiration.  God's  inspiration  comes  on  some 
souls  unknowingly  and  for  that  they  gain  spiritual 
knowledge.  (2)  Some  souls  acquire  spiritual  power  by  learning 
and  efforts.  (3)  Some  souls  acquire  spiritual  power  quickly  and 
some  late.  There  are  degrees  of  these  acquisitions  in  the  case  of 
Prophets,  friends  of  God,  wise  and  learned  men.  This  advance  is 
unlimited.  There  is  no  limit  of  knowledge  about  God.  The  rank  of 
a  Prophet  in  this  regard  is  highest.  All  secrets  are  disclosed  to  him 
without  his  efforts.  A  child  in  its  mother's  womb  does  not  know 
the  condition  of  a  boy.  A  boy  does  not  know  the  condition  of  a 
grown-up-man.  A  grown-up  man  does  not  know  the  condition  of 
an  intelligent  man  and  his  acquired  learning.  Similarly,  an 
intelligent  man  does  not  know  the  blessings,  mercy  and  gifts 
showered  by  God  on  the  Prophets.  These  blessings  are  also  cast 
upon  those  souls  which  remain  prepared  and  become  fit  to 
receive  them.  The  Prophet  said:  "There  is  your  Lord's  blowing  in 
the  days  of  your  life.  Beware  and  be  prepared  for  it".  The 
meaning  of  this  preparation  is  to  remove  the  impurities  that  have 
fallen  on  soul  as  a  result  of  commission  of  sins  and  to  purify  it.  It

Vol-IH

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

13

can  be  understood  from  the  following  Hadis:  God  comes  down 
every  night  to  the  nearest  heaven  and  says:  Is  there  any  invoking 
man  whose  invocation  I  shall  accept?  In  another  Hadis:  The 
religious  man  remains  eager  to  meet  Me,  but  I  am  more  eager  to 
meet  him.  In  a  Hadis  Qudsi,  God  says:  I  advance  one  cubit  for  one 
who  advances  to  Me  half  a  cubit.;  From  this,  it  is  understood  that  God  does  not  withhold  His 
mercy  to  shed  the  luster  of  knowledge  on  soul ,  but  the  people 
themselves  are  to  be  blamed  for  they  do  not  cleanse  their  souls  or 
minds  from  the  impurities  they  heaped  on  them.  As  air  does  not 
enter  a  pot  full  of  water,  so  knowledge  of  God  does  not  enter  a 
soul  or  mind  if  it  remains  filled  up  with  things  other  than  God. 
For  this  reason,  the  Holy  Prophet  said:  Had  the  party  of  the  devil 
not  moved  round  the  minds  of  the  children  of  Adam,  they  would 
have  seen  the  spiritual  world.  From  this,  it  is  understood  that 
knowledge  is  the  special  attribute  of  human  soul.  The  knowledge 
about  God's  being,  attributes  and  actions  is  the  most  honorable 
and  on  that  strength  a  man  becomes  perfect  and  within  this 
perfection  there  lies  his  fortune  of  approaching  God.PECULIARITIES  OF  HUMAN  SOUL:  Body  has  been 
framed  for  accommodation  of  soul  which  is  again  the  house  of 
knowledge.  Divine  knowledge  is  the  human  goal  and  its 
speciality.  An  ass  and  a  horse  are  the  same  for  carrying  loads  but 
a  horse  is  superior  to  an  ass,  as  horse  has  got  additional  qualities 
of  beauty  and  running  fast  which  an  ass  and  other  animals  lack 
in.  similarly  there  is  difference  between  a  man  and  an  angel.  The 
man  who  engages  all  his  limbs,  thoughts  and  actions  to  please 
God  is  like  an  angel  and  fit  to  be  called  an  angel.  God  says  about 
Joseph:  Surely  he  is  an  honourable  angel*12:21.  He  who  makes 
efforts  only  for  his  physical  comforts  comes  down  to  the  class  of 
an  animal.  He  becomes  then  envious  like  an  ox,  greedy  like  a  pig, 
biting  like  a  dog,  eats  like  a  camel,  takes  revenge  like  a  leopard, 
cunnings  like  a  jackal  and  clever  like  a  devil-the  embodiment  of 
the  above  evils.  There  is  no  such  limb  or  senses  which  do  not  help 
a  man  to  reach  God.  He  is  successful  who  walks  in  that  path  and 
he  is  unsuccessful  who  is  misguided .

Man's  fortune  lies  in  Taing  God's  vision  as  the  ultimate  goal, 
the  next  world  as  his  permanent  abode,  this  world  as  his 
temporary  abode,  body  as  his  carrier  and  the  limbs  as  his 
servants.

14

Soul  and  its  Attributes

Vol-III14

Soul  and  its  Attributes

Vol-III

Human  soul  is  the  centre  to  realise  them  and  a  king  over  the 
region  of  body.  His  power  of  idea  works  like  a  post  office  in  front 
of  his  head.  All  news  gathered  by  senses  are  accumulated  there. 
The  power  of  thinking  keeping  behind  the  brain  works  like  a 
treasurer,  the  tongue  as  its  interpreter,  the  five  senses  like  secret 
police.  Eyes  have  been  given  power  to  receive  various  colour, 
ears  to  receive  different  voices,  nose  to  smell  and  other  limbs  to 
receive  other  news  and  they  send  them  to  the  power  of  ideas 
which  send  them  to  the  power  of  thinking  which  send  them  to  the 
king  soul.Hazrat  Ka'ab  Ahbar  said:  I  went  once  to  Hazrat  Ayesha  and 
said:  Man's  eyes  are  his  guide,  his  two  ears  are  his  guards,  his 
tongue  his  interpreter,  his  two  hands  are  his  wings,  his  two  feet 
are  his  news  carriers  and  his  soul  is  his  king.  When  the  king  soul 
is  pleased,  his  armies  are  also  pleased.  Hazrat  Ayesha  said:  1 
heard  the  Prophet  say  thus.  Hazrat  Ali  said  by  way  of  illustration 
of  human  soul:  God  has  got  many  pots  in  this  world.  The  dearest 
to  God  among  them  is  that  which  is  most  soft,  pure  and  strong. 
Then  he  explained  and  said:  The  soul  which  is  most  firm  in 
religion,  most  pure  in  faith,  most  kind  in  treatment  with  brethren 
is  dearest  to  God.  This  can  be  seen  from  the  following  verse:  They 
are  hard  upon  the  unbelievers  and  kind  to  one  another  among 
them-  48:29.  In  another  verse;  God  says:  His  light  is  like  a  niche 
wherein  there  is  lamp-24:35.  To  explain  this  verse,  Hazrat  Ka'ab 
said:  The  meaning  of  light  is  the  light  of  soul  of  a  believer.  God 
says:  Or  it  is  like  darkness  in  a  fathomless  sea.  Hence  the  soul  of 
hyporite  has  been  spoken  of  as  an  illustration.

NATURES  OF  MEN:  There  are  four  natures  of  man  (1) 
beastly  nature,  (2)  animal  nature,  (3)  devilish  nature  and  (4) 
angelic  nature.  Anger  is  a  sign  of  beastly  nature  along  with 
enemity,  hatred,  rebuke,  attack  on  people  etc.  His  animal  nature 
is  seen  when  his  sexual  passion  becomes  strong.  He  has  got 
devilish  natures  like  deceit,  fraud  conspiracy  etc.  He  has  got 
angelic  nature  such  as  divine  service,  worship  of  God,  doing 
good  to  all.  As  he  has  got  the  divine  thing  soul,  he  has  got  the 
nature  of  lordship  and  he  likes  to  be  free  from  servitude  and 
meanness.The  roots  of  these  four  natures  are  in  a  man  and  centred  in 
human  soul.  If  he  has  got  only  the  nature  of  a  lower  animal,  he 
becomes  like  a  pig  or  a  dog.  If  he  has  got  only  the  nature  of  the

Vol-III

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

15

devil,  he  becomes  a  devil.  If  he  has  got  divine  qualities,  he 
becomes  a  truly  wise  man.  If  he  follows  sexual  passion  and  greed, 
he  acquires  the  evils  of  impurity,  shamelessness,  meanness, 
miserliness,  hatred  and  other  bad  habits.  If  he  obeys  the  dictates 
of  anger,  he  acquires  heinous  conducts  such  as  haughtiness, 
pride,  love  of  power,  self-praise,  jokes,  contempt  for  others, 
oppression.  If  he  obeys  the  devil,  he  acquires  evil  conducts  such 
as  deceit,  deception,  treachery,  fraud  etc.  When  he  controls  the 
above  evils,  he  is  endowed  with  divine  qualities  such  as  wisdom, 
knowledge,  certain  faith,  knowledge  of  the  natures  of  all  things. 
When  he  becomes  free  from  sexual  passion  and  anger,  he 
acquires  the  following  virtues-pardon,  contentment,  self 
satisfaction,  asceticism,  piety,  God  fear,  contentment  and  shame. 
If  he  keeps  anger  under  control,  he  gains  heroism,  kindness, 
patience,  silence  etc.SOUL  IS  A  MIRROR:  Soul  is  like  a  mirror  in  which  the  above 
evils  and  virtues  are  reflected.  The  virtues  make  the  soul  shining, 
resplendent  and  bright  and  the  evils,  sins  and  guilts  make  it  dark. 
The  Prophet  said:  When  God  wants  good  of  a  servant.  He 
appoints  an  admonished  in  his  soul.  He  said:  He  who  has  got  an 
admonished  in  his  soul  has  got  a  guard  from  God.  Zikr  or  God's 
remembrance  becomes  lasting  in  his  soul.  God  says:  Beware, 
souls  get  consolation  by  the  remembrance  of  God  13 : 25.  The  sins 
are  like  smokes  full  of  darkness  which  covers  the  soul.  One  sin 
after  another  comes  over  the  soul  like  a  layer  of  smokes  till  his 
soul  gets  completely  enveloped  wit  darkness.  As  a  result,  soul 
becomes  removed  from  God.  It  is  the  seal  on  soul  of  which  God 
speaks  in  verse  83 : 14-Never,  it  is  seal  on  souls  for  what  they  have 
earned.  God  says:  Had  I  wished,  I  would  have  surely  punished 
them  and  sealed  their  souls."

When  sins  accumulate  in  soul,  it  becomes  blind  to  good 
things  of  religion.  The  sage  Maimun-b-Mehran  said:  When  a  man 
commits  a  sin,  a  black  spot  falls  in  his  soul.  When  he  makes 
repentance,  it  blots  out.  Again  when  he  commits  sin,  the  spot 
increases.  Thus  if  sins  are  committed  one  after  another,  the  soul 
becomes  dark  and  that  is  the  seal  on  soul.  The  Prophet  said:  The 
soul  of  a  believer  is  bright  and  there  is  a  bright  lamp  in  it.  The  soul 
of  an  unbeliever  is  black  and  blind.'  The  polish  of  soul  is 
obedience  to  God  with  opposition  to  passion.  Sins  are  impurities 
on  soul.  He  who  proceeds  towards  sins  makes  his  soul  dark.

16

Soul  and  its  Attributes

Vol-III16

Soul  and  its  Attributes

Vol-III

FOUR  KINDS  OF  SOUL:  The  Prophet  said:  Soul  is  of  four 
kinds.  The  first  kind  of  soul  is  bright  in  which  there  is  a  lighted 
lamp.  It  is  the  soul  of  a  believer.  (2)  The  second  kind  of  soul  is 
black  and  it  is  the  soul  of  an  unbeliever.  (3)  The  third  kind  of  soul 
is  confined  within  cover  and  it  is  the  soul  of  a  hypocrite.  (4)  The 
fourth  kind  of  soul  is  mixed  with  faith  and  hypocrisy.  Faith  in 
such  a  soul  is  like  a  plant  which  the  water  grows  and  if  there  is 
other  liquids  like  blood  and  pus,  its  growth  is  retarded.  God  says: 
When  a  party  of  the  devil  attack  those  who  are  God  fearing,  they 
remember  God  and  they  keep  on  looking  7:201 .  The  brightness  of 
soul  is  gained  by  Zikr  which  finds  consolation  in  a  person  who 
has  got  God-fear.  So  God-fear  is  the  gate  of  Zikr  which  is  again 
the  gate  of  Kashf  or  inner  revelation  which  is  again  the  gate  of 
salvation  and  the  gate  of  having  the  fortune  of  Divine  vision.ILLUSTRATION  OF  SOUL:  Soul  is  a  container  of 
knowledge.  As  a  mirror  has  got  connection  with  figure  and  form, 
so  also  a  soul  has  got  connection  with  objects  of  knowledge.  In 
other  words,  picture,  or  figure  can  be  seen  if  placed  in  front  of  a 
mirror.  So  also  different  objects  of  knowledge  are  reflected  in 
soul.  A  mirror  assumes  the  colour  of  a  figure  placed  before  it. 
Similarly  soul  assumes  the  colour  or  nature  of  an  unknown  object 
of  knowledge.  Every  object  of  knowledge  has  got  a  nature  and 
every  nature  has  got  a  figure.  That  figure  is  reflected  in  the  mirror 
of  soul  and  is  clearly  visible.  Mirror  is  a  thing  figure  is  a  different 
thing  and  its  shadow  in  the  mirror  is  a  different  thing.  Similarly  a 
man  has  got  three  different  things-(l)  soul,  (2)  real  nature  of  a 
thing,  (3)  and  the  knowledge  of  its  real  nature.  Soul  is  the  name  of 
a  thing  with  which  knowledge  is  gained.  Shadows  of  everything 
are  reflected  in  it.  So  the  container  of  knowledge,  object  of 
knowledge  and  knowledge  itself  are  inter  connected.  For 
instance,  to  catch  a  shield  is  an  action.  Here  there  are  three  things 
(1)  hand,  (2)  shield  and  (3)  catching.  These  three  things  connected 
together  produce  an  action.  Similarly  knowledge  is  a  thing  which 
is  connected  with  soul  with  the  shadow  of  the  thing  therein  and 
the  falling  of  that  shadow  therein.  Knowledge  does  not  arise 
unless  the  object  of  knowledge  falls  in  soul.  Fire  cannot  be  said 
to  fall  in  soul  to  produce  knowledge  of  fire.  Shadow  of  fire  in 
soul  is  sufficient  to  produce  it.  The  real  man  does  not  remain  in 
mirror.  The  shadow  of  his  real  self  remains  in  mirror.  Similarly 
real  shadows  of  all  things  fall  in  soul  and  that  is  called 
knowledge.

Vol-lHVol-lH

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

17

FIVE  OBSTACLES  OF  GAINING  DIVINE  KNOWLEDGE: 
There  are  five  obstacles  or  hurdles  which  prevent  real  pictures  in 
a  mirror.  A  picture  cannot  be  seen  in  a  mirror  if  the  thing  with 
which  the  mirror  is  made  is  spoiled  or  if  impurities  fallin  the 
mirror,  or  if  the  mirror  is  not  directed  towards  the  picture,  there 
is  something  between  the  mirror  and  the  picture,  or  if  the  picture 
is  not  in  front  of  the  mirror.  Similar  is  the  case  with  human  soul.  It 
has  got  five  obstacles.  Human  soul  has  got  the  fitness  to  receive 
true  pictures  of  everything,  but  if  it  cannot  do  its  function,  it  will 
be  understood  that  knowledge  cannot  come  owing  to  the  five 
obstacles.

(1)  The  first  obstacle  is  a  natural  defect  of  soul  as  the  souls 
of  boys.

(2)  The  second  obstacle  is  the  impurities  of  sins  owing  to 
greed,  passion  and  low  desires.  If  the  impurities  of  sins  are  not 
removed  just  like  the  impurities  in  a  mirror,  truth  is  not  reflected 
in  it.  The  Prophet  therefore  said:  The  intellect  of  a  man  who  is 
accustomed  to  commit  sins  goes  away.  It  never  comes  back  to 
him.  In  other  words,  rust  falls  in  his  soul  unless  it  is  removed  by  a 
good  deed  and  repentance.  If  dust  falls  on  a  mirror,  it  can  be 
removed  by  a  duster.  Soul  becomes  bright  if  it  does  not  follow 
low  desires  and  urge  of  passion.  God  says:  I  shall  show  My  paths 
to  those  who  strive  hard  about  Me-29:69  The  Prophet  said:  God 
grants  such  wisdom  to  one  who  acts  up  to  his  learning  which  he 
did  not  know  before.(3)  Third  obstacle  of  soul.  As  nothing  can  be  seen  if  a  mirror 
is  not  directed  towards  a  figure  or  picture,  so  real  picture  of  a 
thing  does  not  fall  in  soul  if  it  is  misguided  from  the  real  object  of 
research  and  enquiry.  Brightness  of  truth  is  not  reflected  in  soul 
owing  to  the  object  of  enquiry  not  being  directed  towards  soul 
although  it  is  clean  and  pure.  The  picture  of  an  object  about 
which  a  man  thinks  falls  in  his  soul.  He  who  confines  his 
thoughts  and  efforts  to  the  different  modes  of  health  gains, 
health.  So  he  who  engage  his  whole  attention  and  energy  to  the 
attainment  of  Divine  love  can  acquire  it.  But  he  whose  attention 
is  diverted  only  to  worldly  pursuits  gets  them  no  doubt  but  is  not 
blessed  with  divine  love  and  grace.  It  is  an  obstacle  and  a  hurdle 
to  acquisition  of  Kashf  or  secret  divine  knowledge.

(4)  Fourth  obstacle  of  soul.  If  there  is  something  between  a 
mirror  and  a  picture  or  figure,  the  figure  cannot  be  seen  in  mirror.

18

Soul  and  its  Attributes

Vol-III

So  also  if  there  is  screen  between  a  human  soul  and  a  thing 
desired,  its  true  picture  cannot  be  reflected  in  soul.  Truth  cannot 
come  out  from  a  screened  soul.  Whose  follows  his  passions  and 
low  desires,  screen  falls  in  his  soul.  The  beliefs  which  take  root  in 
early  years  of  life  horn  the  surrounding  environments  paint  the 
future  of  a  man  and  create  obstacles  in  finding  out  the  truth  of  a 
thing.  This  is  also  true  in  case  of  open  Taqlid  or  blind  faith  in  a 
sect.  Such  a  man  does  not  accept  what  is  opposed  to  his  belief 
although  it  is  true  and  correct(5)  Fifth  obstacle  of  soul  is  ignorance.  This  ignorance  occurs 
in  connection  with  a  special  object.  As  a  result,  defect  is  cast  upon 
the  object  of  enquiry.  For  instance  if  a  student  enquires  about  an 
unknown  subject  it  will  be  impossible  to  know  it  until  he  ponders 
over  the  thing  connected  with  the  object  of  enquiry  and  that 
pondering  is  not  along  the  prescribed  mode  of  the  learned,  as  the 
object  of  enquiry  is  to  be  known  on  the  basis  of  other  learnings. 
Mixture  of  two  learnings  produces  knowledge  of  a  third  kind,  as 
a  young  one  of  a  camel  is  obtained  owing  to  the  cohabitation  of  a 
camel  and  a  she  camel.  He  who  wants  to  get  a  young  one  of  a 
horse,  he  can't  get  it  if  he  unites  and  ass  and  a  camel,  but  he  will 
get  it  when  a  horse  and  a  she  horse  cohabit.  Similar  is  the  case 
-  with  every  knowledge.  It  has  got  two  roots  and  there  is 
prescribed  mode  of  the  union  of  the  roots.  Knowledge  cannot 
arise  unless  the  mode  of  union  is  not  known.  If  one  does  not  stand 
in  front  of  a  mirror,  he  cannot  see  his  face  therein.  If  the  mirror  is 
kept  in  front  of  face,  he  can't  see  his  back.  So  there  is  certain 
methods  of  acquiring  knowledge.So  there  are  five  hurdles  in  the  reflection  of  truth  in  souls  for 
which  we  hardly  see  truths.  Soul  is  a  celestial  thing  and  it  has  got 
natural  attribute  of  knowing  truth.  God  says  about  this  soul.  I 
have  placed  this  trust  upon  the  heavens  and  the  earth  and  the 
mountains,  but  they  all  refused  to  carry  it  and  feared  it,  but  only 
man  has  borne  it.  Surely  he  is  oppressive,  ignorant-33:72  Q.  It 
appears  from  this  that  soul  has  got  such  a  special  attribute  which 
the  heavens  and  the  earth  and  the  mountains  do  not  possess.  For 
that  they  have  been  made  subservient  to  man.  This  trust  is 
Ma'arfat  or  Divine  knowledge  and  Tauhid.

However,  soul  is  naturally  fit  to  bear  this  trust,  but  it  cannot 
reach  its  real  nature  owing  to  the  obstacles  narrated  above.  For 
this  reason,  the  Prophet  said:  Every  child  is  born  upon  nature.

Vol-III

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

19Vol-III

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

19

but  his  parents  make  him  a  Jew,  or  a  Christian  or  a  Maginan.  The 
Prophet  said:  If  the  party  of  the  devil  did  not  move  in  the  soul  of 
the  son  of  Adam:  he  could  have  seen  the  divine  realm.  It  appears 
from  this  Hadis  also  that  the  above  five  obstacles  prevent  a  man 
from  seeing  the  divine  realm.  The  PropheV>,was  once  asked: 
Where  is  God-in  earth  or  in  heaven?  He  said:God  is  in  the  soul  of 
a  believer.  In  another  Hadis,  there  is  this:  The  Prophet  Was  asked : 
Who  is  the  best  man?  The  Prophet  replied:  The  believer  whose 
soul  is  Makhmus  is  best.  He  was  asked:  What  is  Makhmus?  He 
said:  That  soul  is  Makhmus  which  is  God-fearing,  in  which  there 
is  no  deceit,  deception,  treachery,  contrivance  and  hatred!  For 
this  reason,  the  Prophet  said:  When  God-fear  lifted  from  my  soul 
the  screen  (of  sins),  my  Lord  saw  my  soul?  Whoever  lifts  up  the 
screen  of  sins  from  his  soiil,  the  pictures  of  unseen  things  are  , 
disclosed  in  his  soul.^Then  he  can  see  paradise  which  extends  in 
heaven  and  earth.  Unseen  world  is  outside  of  external  eyes. 
When  this  world  of  sight  and  the  unseen  world  are  united  at  a 
time,  it  is  termed  Hazrat  Rabubiyat  or  the  presence  of  .God's 
J  being  which  can  encompass  everything.  There  is  no  existence  of 
anything  except  that  of  God,  His  actions  and  His  sovereignty.  His 
servants  are  included  within  His  actions.  The  object  of  all  actions 
is  to  make  soul  pure  and  bright.  The  Quran  says:  He  who  purifies 
it  will  get  salvation-91 :8Q.  The  object  of  purity  of  soul  is  to  gain 
light  of  faith  therein  or  to  enkindle  the  light  of  divine  knowledge. 
Regarding  this,  God  says:  God  expends  the  breast  of  one  for 
Islam  whom  He  wishes  to  guide.  God  says:  Whose  breast  God 
has  expanded  for  Islam,  he  is  on  light  from  his  Lord-39 : 22.THREE  STAGES  OF  LIGHT  OF  FAITH:  This  light  of  faith  in 
soul  has  got  three  stages.  In  the  first  stage,  the  light  is  that  of  faith 
of  ordinary  man.  It  is  the  light  of  blind  faith.  In  the  second  stage, 
it  is  the  light  of  faith  of  the  followers  of  Fiqh  or  jurisprudence.  It  is 
mixed  with  some  sort  of  proof.  In  the  third  stage,  it  is  the  light  of 
faith  of  the  friends  of  God.  It  is  the  dazzling  ray  of  certain  faith. 
Take  for  instance  the  stay  of  Zaid  within  his  house.  It  can  be 
proved  in  three  ways.  The  first  kind  of  proof  is  belief  on  hearing. 
If  you  have  belief  in  a  certain  man  and  you  know  that  he  does  not 
speak  lie,  you  will  believe  his  word  that  Zaid  is  in  his  house.  This 
is  the  belief  of  ordinary  man  based  on  hearing  only.  When  the 
little  boys  attain  maturity,  they  hear  from  their  parents  and 
relatives  that  there  is  God,  that  He  is  almighty.  Creator  of 
everything,  that  He  sent  apostles  with  books.  They  believe  them

20

Soul  and  its  Attributes

Vol-III

on  hearing.  This  belief  will  be  the  cause  of  salvation  in  the  next 
world.  But  they  will  be  in  the  first  stage  of  the  fortunate  but  not 
included  within  the  near  ones,  as  there  is  no  opening  of  their 
inner  eye  (Kashf)  with  the  help  of  certain  faith  and  no  expansion 
of  breast,  and  there  may  be  defects  in-heresay.The  second  kind  of  proof  is  as  follows.  That  Zaid  is  within  his 
house  can  be  guessed  from  a  hearing  of  his  voice  and  talks 
coming  from  his  house.  So  this  belief  is  stronger  than  that  of 
heresay.  There  may  be  also  mistake  of  voices  and  words.  The 
third  kind  of  proof  is  to  enter  into  the  room  and  see  Zaid  with 
open  eyes.  This  is  real  knowledge  gained  by  direct  sight.  This 
knowledge  is  like  that  of  the  friends  of  God  and  near  ones.  There 
is  no  mistake  in  this  belief.

There  are  however  degrees  of  this  knowledge  or  Kashf 
among  them.  If  Zaid  is  seen  in  front  in  light  or  sunlight,  it  is 
perfect  sight.  If  he  is  seen  in  the  house  from  a  great  distance  or 
like  his  figure  at  night,  it  is  less  perfect.  Similarly  there  are 
different  degrees  of  spiritual  vision  and  knowledge.

TWO  KINDS  OF  KNOWLEDGE:  Knowledge  which  thus 
falls  in  soul  is  of  two  kinds  knowledge  concering  intellect  and 
concerning  religion.  The  former  is  also  of  two  kinds-natural 
knowledge  and  acquired  knowledge.  Acquired  knowledge  is 
also  of  two  kinds  worldly  knowledge  and  next  worldly  or 
spiritual  knowledge.  We  understand  by  knowledge  concerning 
intellect  basic  natural  and  necessary  knowledge.  It  is  not 
acquired  by  blind  faith  or  heresay.  It  is  that  which  is  gained  but 
not  known  how  and  from  where,  for  instance  the  knowledge  that 
the  same  person  cannot  stay  in  two  different  places  at  the  same 
time  and  that  the  same  thing  cannot  be  at  the  same  time  old  and 
new.  This  preliminary  knowledge  is  imprinted  in  a  boy's  mind  in 
his  earliest  years.  He  does  not  know  wherefrom  this  knowledge 
comes.  The  acquired  knowledge  concerning  intellect  is  gained  by 
learning.  These  two  kinds  of  knowledge  is  called  intellect  or 
wisdom.The  Prophet  said  with  regard  to  the  natural  intellect  from 
birth:  God  created  nothing  more  honourable  to  Him  than 
intellect  With  regard  to  the  second  kind  of  intellect  on  heresay, 
the  Prophet  said  to  Hazrat  Ali:  'When  the  people  come  close  to 
God  by  good  deeds,  you  will  be  able  to  come  close  to  Him  by  the

Vol-III

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

21

help  of  your  intellect.  It  is  not  possible  to  come  close  to  God  by 
natural  intellect.  It  has  to  be  acquired.  So  human  soul  has  got 
power  of  sight  like  that  of  external  eyes.  As  there  is  power  of  sight 
in  eyes,  so  also  there  is  power  of  as  on  in  human  soul.  One  of  its 
names  is  intellect  or  wisdom.  The  power  of  vision  is  a  basic 
Ingredient  which  in  not  found  in  a  spiritually  blind  man.  It  is 
•found  only  in  a  person  having  inner  sight  though  he  closes  his 
two  eyes  or  remains  in  darkness.  All  things  are  seen  by  the  eye  of 
knowledge.  There  is  delay  in  the  rise  of  knowledge  till  one  attains 
maturity  as  the  tablet  of  soul  does  not  become  prepared  then  for 
light  of  knowledge.  Pen  is  an  instrument  to  depict  pictures  of 
knowledge  as  God  says:  He  taught  with  pen.  He  taught  men 
what  he  knew  not-8  :  2Q  God's  pen  is  not  like  the  pen  of  man  as 
His  attributes  are  not  like  the  attributes  of  man.  His  pen  is  not 
made  of  material  or  other  things.  So  there  is  distinction  between 
inner  vision  and  outer  sight.SOULS  VISION  AND  BLINDNESS:  The  vision  of  soul  is 
subtle  essence  or  Latifa  with  which  spiritual  things  are  seen.  This 
essence  is  like  a  rider  and  its  eye  is  like  a  conveyance.  For  it,  the 
blindness  of  the  rider  is  more  harmful  than  the  blindness  of  the 
conveying  horse,  that  is  the  blindness  of  soul  is  more  harmful 
than  the  blindness  of  eye.  These  two  things  have  got  no 
connection  with  each  other.  Still  there  is  some  similarity  between 
external  sight  and  internal  sight.  God  explained  the  sight  of  soul 
in  this  verse:  Soul  has  not  disbelieved  what  it  saw-53:ll.  Here  it 
has  been  said  that  the  soul  has  got  powerfof  sight  God  says  in 
another  verse:  1  showed  thus  the  sovereignty  of  heavens  and 
earth  to  Abraham  -6:75.  Here  external  sight  has  not  been  spoken 
of  as  others  also  have  been  given  this  power,  but  there  is  mention 
here  of  internal  sight.  Opposite  to  it  is  the  internal  blindness  God 
says:  Who  so  is  blind  in  this  world  will  be  blind  in 
hereafter-17:71.  This  is  the  blindness  of  soul.  This  is  the  narration 
of  knowledge  concerning  intellect.

KNOWLEDGE  CONCERNING  RELIGION:  This  knowledge 
is  acquired  by  blind  faith  in  the  words  of  the  prophets.  It  can  be 
earned  after  studying  the  Quran  and  Sunna  of  the  Prophet  or 
hearing  them  For  salvation  of  soal,  even  though  knowledge 
concerning  intellect  is  necessary,  it  is  not  singly  sufficient.  As  for 
health  of  body,  some  measures  are  necessary,  but  they  are  not 
alone  sufficient  without  their  actual  application.  Special

22

Soul  and  its  Attributes

Vol-III22

Soul  and  its  Attributes

Vol-III

methods  of  medicines  for  cure  should  be  learnt  from  the 
physicians.  Only  intellect  is  not  sufficient.  He  who  calls  towards 
blind  faith  only  without  application  of  intelect  is  a  fool.  On  the 
other  hand,  he  who  relies  on  intellect  only  after  giving  up  the 
Quran  and  Sunna  is  a  proud  man.  The  two  must  be  kept  together. 
Education  concerning  intellect  is  like  food  and  religious 
education  is  like  medicine.  A  diseased  man  meets  with  harm  if  he 
takes  only  food  after  giving  up  medicine.  Similar  is  the  case  with 
diseased  soul.  Its  cure  is  not  possible  without  profitable  medicine 
of  Shariat.  The  medicine  of  Shariat  is  the  duties  prescribed  by  the 
Prophets  for  purity  of  soul.  He  who  does  not  treat  his  diseased 
soul  by  the  medicine  of  divine  service  as  ordained  by  Shariat  and 
thinks  the  leanings  of  intellect  as  sufficient  faces  ruin.

SCIENCE  IS  NOT  OPPOSED  TO  RELIGION:  Some  think 
that  science  is  opposed  to  religion.  This  is  not  at  all  correct.  Such  a 
man  sets  up  one  learning  of  Shariat  against  another.  The  reason  is 
his  failure  to  co-ordinate  the  two.  As  a  result,  such  people  go  out 
of  religion.  Such  man  is  just  like  a  blind  man  who  stumbles  down 
against  furnitures  of  a  house  and  says:  Why  have  these  furnitures 
been  kept  in  the  path  way?  The  house  owner  says:  They  are  in 
their  proper  places.  It  is  your  blindness  which  is  responsible  for 
your  stumbling.  This  is  also  the  case  with  one  who  thinks  that 
science  is  opposed  to  religion.TWO  KINDS  OF  SCIENCE:  There  are  two  kinds  of  science, 
material  and  spiritual.  Medical  Science,  Mathematics,  and  other 
technical  sciences  belong  to  the  leanings  of  this  world.  The 
religious  sciences  are  the  education  concerning  soul,  God,  His 
attributes  and  actions.  He  who  makes  efforts  with  regard  to  the 
worldly  sciences  and  becomes  expert  has  shortcomings  in  most 
cases  in  being  expert  in  religious  sciences.  For  this  reason,  Hazrat 
Ali  cited  three  illustrations  to  explain  this.  He  said:  This  world 
and  the  next  world  are  like  two  scales  or  like  the  east  and  the  west 
or  like  two  co-wives.  You  will  fipd  that  he  who  is  intelligent  in 
worldly  matters  and  expert  in  Medical  science.  Mathematics, 
Philosophy,  Geometry  etc.  is  fool  in  the  religious  sciences.  He 
who  is  experienced  in  the  religious  sciences  is  inexperienced  in 
the  worldly  learnings.  For  this  reason,  the  Prophet  said:  Most  of 
the  inmates  of  Paradise  are  indifferent.'  In  other  words,  they  are 
inattentive  in  worldly  matters.  Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said:  We 
have  seen  such  a  people  whom  you  would  think  if  you  had  seen

Vol-III

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

23

them  as  insane  and  mad.  If  they  had  seen  you,  they  would  call 
you  devils.  So  the  worldly  educated  men  deny  any  wonderful 
event  of  religion.  God  says:  Those  who  do  not  hope  to  meet  Me 
and  remain  satisfied  with  this  world's  life  get  consolation 
therein.  God  says"  Whoso  is  heedless  of  remembering  Me  and 
does  not  wish  except  this  world's  life,  it  is  the  limit  of  his 
knowledge.  It  is  only  the  Prophets  who  combined  in  themselves 
the  knowledge  of  this  world  and  the  next.  They  were  helped  by 
the  Holy  Spirit  and  given  divine  powers.MEANS  OF  ACQUIRING  SPIRITUAL  POWERS:  Know,  o 
dear  readers,  that  there  are  different  conditions  of  knowledge 
which  are  not  all  necessary.  Some  of  them  fall  suddenly  in  mind 
called  Ilham  and  some  of  them  are  acquired  by  efforts. 
Knowledge  not  acquired  by  efforts  is  of  two  kinds.  One  kind  of 
such  knowledge  is  not  known  from  where  it  comes  or  how  it 
comes.  Another  kind  of  such  knowledge  comes  through  an  angel 
who  throwsiit  into  one's  soul.  That  is  called  Wahi  or  revelation.  It 
is  revealed  (inly  to  the  prophets.  Ilham  of  the  first  kind  is  thrown 
on  the  souls  of  Prophets  as  well  as  other  religious  personalities. 
In  short,  human  soul  is  the  place  of  disclosing  truths  of  all  things, 
but  the  obstacles  mentioned  earlier  stand  as  screens.  Those  are 
screens  between  Lauhe  Mahfuz  fGuarded  tablet)  and  the  mirror 
of  soul.  Picture  of  everything  that  will  occur  up  to  the 
Resurrection  Day  have  been  preserved  in  this  Guarded  Tablet. 
Real  condition  of  every  affair  is  reflected  in  the  mirror  of  soul. 
That  is  like  the  picture  in  front  of  a  mirror.  If  there  is  no  screen 
between  the  two,  it  is  see  in  the  mirror  of  soul  from  the  Guarded 
Tablet.  The  wind  of  Latifa  or  essence  sometimes  removes  the 
screen  from  the  mirror  of  soul,  so  as  to  disclose  what  is  in  the 
Guarded  Tablet.  Sometimes  the  future  events  can  be  seen  in 
dream.  By  death,  all  the  screens  are  removed.  In  wakeful  state 
also,  sometimes  the  screen  is  removed  provided  secret  mercy  is 
showered  on  soul.  Then  gosts  of  knowledge  spring  forth  in  soul 
from  unseen  things.  It  lasts  for  a  short  time.  Ilham  and  Wahi 
(inspiration  and  revelation)  cannot  be  obtained  by  human  will. 
God  says:  It  is  not  for  a  man  to  talk  with  God  except  by  means  of 
Wahi  or  from  behind  the  screen  or  by  means  of  a  means  of  a 
messenger  who  reveals  with  His  permission  what  He  wishes.MERITS  OF  KNOWLEDGE  BY  ILHAM:  The  Sufis  love 
knowledge  through  Ilham  or  inspiration.  For  this  reason,  they

24

Soul  and  its  Attributes

Vol-IIIMERITS  OF  KNOWLEDGE  BY  ILHAM:  The  Sufis  love 
knowledge  through  Ilham  or  inspiration.  For  this  reason,  they

24

Soul  and  its  Attributes

Vol-III

donot  like  to  have  education  or  read  books  or  hold  arguments. 
They  say  that  the  primary  source  of  acquisition  of  knowfedge  is 
the  saving  of  oneself  from  the  condemnable  evils,  severing  all 
connections  and  directing  all  efforts  towards  Cod.  When  it  is 
earned,  God  Himself  becomes  the  caretaker  of  human  soul.  He 
saves  it  by  enkindling  the  light  of  knowledge  in  soul.  When  God 
takes  care  of  his  soul,  mercy  falls  in  it,  light  sparkles,  breast 
expands  and  the  secrets  of  spiritual  world  are  disclosed  to  him. 
By  God's  help,  screens  of  darkness  are  removed  from  the  upper 
portion  of  his  soul  and  real  nature  of  divine  affairs  comes  to  him. 
So  it  is  the  duty  of  God's  servant  to  purify  his  soul  and  to  make 
efforts  with  true  and  sincere  intention.  These  matters  are  opened 
to  the  prophets  and  friends  of  God.  Lights  flow  over  their  breasts. 
It  is  not  due  to  their  acquired  knowledge  by  efforts,  but  it  is  due 
to  their  asceticism,  to  their  full  freedom  from  worldly 
connections  and  to  full  direction  of  their  energies  towards  God. 
God  becomes  for  one  who  becomes  for  God.  To  them  the  first  step 
is  to  cut  off  all  worldly  connections,  to  make  the  soul  vacant  for 
God,  to  give  up  all  efforts  for  family,  property,  children,  houses, 
name  and  fame  and  then  to  confine  themselves  in  performing 
compulsory  and  optional  duties  and  sit  in  meditation  with  a 
mind  absolutely  free  from  everything.  Their  thoughts  are  centred 
only  in  one  Being.  Even  they  become  free  from  interpretation  of 
the  Quran,  Hadis  and  other  books  and  matters.  They  sit  in  lonely 
places  and  invoke  only  Allah,  Allah  with  humility  of  mind  till 
they  reach  such  a  stage,  when  they  give  up  even  the 
movements  of  their  tongue.  Then  the  influence  of  their  tongue 
enters  their  soul  which  recites  Allah,  Allah.  The  pictures  of 
words  are  then  effaced  from  their  souls  are  only  their 
meanings  remain  therein.It  is  your  option  to  regain  this  stage.  Yqu.  have  got  no  power  . 
to  claim  mercy  of  God,  rather  you  may  be  fit  to  receive  its 
blowing.  At  this  time,  sparkling  ray  of  truth  may  sparkle  in  your 
soul  first  like  attracting  electricity  but  it  may  not  last  or  it  may 
last.  You  will  then  continue  to  purify  your  soul  and  hope  to 
receive  God's  blessings.  This  mode  is  very  troublesome  and  its 
fruit  is  time-consuming.  If  you  can  gain  one  stage,  it  is  difficult 
for  you  to  stay  in  it  as  the  devil  will  constantly  mislead  you.  the 
Prophet  said:  The  heart  of  a  believer  is  more  changing  than  a  pot 
(of  hot  water).  During  this  time  of  efforts  and  trials,  health  may 
deteriorate.

Vol-Ill

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

25

Ilham  and  acquired  knowledge.  Know,  o  dear  readers,  that 
the  wonderful  action  of  soul  is  outside  the  knowledge  gained  by 
the  senses  as  soul  is  outside  the  knowledge  of  the  senses.  So  to 
understand  the  actions  of  soul,  some  illustrations  of  the  material 
world  are  necessary.  Only  two  of  them  are  cited  here.FIRST  ILLUSTRATION:  Take  for  instance  that  a  well  has 
been  dug  underneath  the  ground.  There  are  two  ways  of  pouring 
waters  in  it,  one  way  through  pipe  or  canal  and  another  way  is  to 
dig  the  well  very  deep,  so  that  water  may  gush  forth  from  its 
bottom.  The  second  mode  is  better  as  water  obtained  in  this  way 
is  more  pure  and  lasting.  Similarly  soul  is  like  a  well,  knowledge 
is  like  water  and  the  five  senses  are  like  pipes  or  canals. 
Knowledge  like  water  comes  to  the  soul  through  the  help  of  five 
organs  like  pipes  or  canals.  If  you  wish  to  get  pure  knowledge, 
you  shall  have  to  shut  up  the  five  senses  as  you  shut  up  the  pipes 
or  canals  to  get  pure  water  into  the  well  and  dig  it  very  deep  so 
that  pure  water  may  gush  forth  from  the  bottom.  The  filth  in  the 
bottom  of  well  must  be  cleared  to  allow  pure  water  to  gush  forth 
from  the  bottom.  So  also  in  order  to  get  pure  and  unadulterated 
knowledge,  you  shall  have  to  shut  up  knowledge  gained  by  the 
five  senses  because  such  knowledge  is  full  of  harasses, 
superstitions  and  errors.

Question.  How  can  knowledge  come  out  of  soul  when  it 
remains  without  knowledge?Question.  How  can  knowledge  come  out  of  soul  when  it 
remains  without  knowledge?

Answer.  These  matters  are  the  wonderful  actions  of  soul.  It  is 
difficult  to  get  them  from  the  worldly  learnings.  It  may  however 
be  mentioned  that  real  condition  of  everything  was  recorded  in 
Lauhe  Mahfuz  or  Guarded  Tablet.  That  was  recorded  also  in  the 
souls  of  angels  who  are  near  God.  As  an  architect  prepares  a  plan 
before  building  a  house  and  then  builds  it  according  to  his  plan, 
so  also  the  Creator  recorded  His  plan  in  the  Guarded  Tablet  of 
everything  of  His  reaction  in  the  heavens  and  earth  from  first  to 
last.  Thereafter  He  takes  out  everything  according  to  that 
prepared  plan.

There  are  four  stages  of  this  material  world-(l)  its  existence 
in  the  Guarded  Tablet  before  creation  of  the  world;  (2)  this 
material  world  comes  into  being  according  to  this  plan,  (3)  the 
world  of  ideas  follows  this  material  world,  and  (4)  the  world  of 
intellect  follows  this  world  of  ideas,  that  is  its  pictures  fall  in

26

Soul  and  its  Attributes

Vol-III

human  soul.  Some  worlds  are  material  and  some  immaterial.  In 
the  immaterial  worlds  also,  one  is  more  spiritual  than  another. 
These  are  strategy  of  God.  Look  at  the  eye-ball.  Though  it  is 
small,  the  pictures  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth  fall  in  it.  Then  it 
comes  within  ideas  and  then  it  falls  in  soul.  Man  does  not  take 
cognisance  of  it  till  it  reaches  the  soul.  Praise  be  to  God  who 
created  wonderful  power  in  soul  and  eyes  and  He  also  made  soul 
and  eyes  of  some  blind.So  pictures  of  the  world  fall  in  soul  sometimes  by  the  help  of 
five  senses  and  sometimes  by  the  help  of  the  Guarded  Tablet  as 
picture  of  the  sun  falls  in  eyes.  Again  picture  of  the  sun  falls  in 
water  as  it  falls  in  eyfes.  When  obstacles  are  removed  from 
between  soul  and  Guarded  Tablet,  soul  can  see  many  things  and 
thus  knowledge  arises  therefrom.  Then  no  help  of  senses 
rfecessary  for  such  knowledge.  It  is  just  like  the  gushing  forth  of 
water  from  the  deep  bottom  of  a  well.

TWO  DOORS  OF  SOUL:  One  door  of  soul  is  open  towards 
the  spiritual  world  which  is  the  world  of  angels  and  the  Guarded 
Tablet.  Another  door  of  soul  is  open  towards  the  five  senses  and 
it  is  connected  with  the  material  world.  The  former  door  open  to 
the  spiritual  world  can  be  better  understood  from  dreams  in 
which  one  can  see  some  matters  of  future  and  past  events.  One 
can  tell  them  without  the  necessity  of  knowledge  gained  form  his 
five  senses.  That  door  is  open  to  one  who  remains  engaged  in 
solitude  in  remembrance  of  God.  The  Prophet  said:  the  dwellers 
of  solitude  have  preceded.  He  was  asked:  O  Prophet  of  God,  who 
are  the  dwellers  of  solitude?  He  said:  Those  who  have  been  made 
pure  by  the  remembrance  of  God,  those  whose  burdens  have 
been  taken  down  by  the  remembrance  of  God  and  those  who  will 
come  on  the  Resurrection  Day  free  of  burdens.  Then  he  described 
their  virtues  and  read  these  words  of  God:  I  kept  My  face  in  their 
front.  Do  you  know  in  whose  front  I  have  kept  My  face?  Does 
anybody  know  what  I  will  give  them?  Then  God  says:  First  I 
throw  light  in  their  souls.  As  a  result,  they  broadcast  the  news 
they  get  from  Me.There  is  difference  in  the  knowledge  of  the  prophets  and 
friends  of  God  and  the  knowledge  of  the  learned  and  the 
scientists.  Knowledge  of  the  prophets  and  the  friends  of  God 
come  out  of  that  gate  of  souls  which  remains  open  towards  the 
spiritual  world,  and  the  knowledge  of  the  learned  and  the

Vol-IH

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

27

come  out  of  that  gate  of  souls  which  remains  open  towards  the 
spiritual  world,  and  the  knowledge  of  the  learned  and  the 
scientists  comes  which  remains  open  towards  the  spiritual 
world,  and  the  knowledge  of  the  learned  and  the  scientists  comes 
out  of  that  gate  of  souls  which  remains  open  to  the  material 
world  through  the  help  of  five  senses.  So  it  is  impossible  for  the 
latter  to  acquire  spiritual  knowledge.  This  illustration  will  make 
one  to  understand  the  difference  between  the  two  work.

SECOND  ILLUSTRATION:  The  destination  between  the 
actions  of  the  learned  and  of  the  friends  of  God  will  make  one  to 
understand  the  second  illustration,  as  the  learned  learn  the  basic 
principles  of  learnings  and  the  bright  and  pure.  The  spiritual 
knowledge  of  a  believer  is  everlasting  as  the  soul  of  a  believer  has 
got  no  death.  At  the  time  of  his  death,  his  knowledge  does  not  go. 
Hazrat  Hasan  basari  said:  Earth  cannot  eat  the  place  of  faith,  but 
it  is  a  means  to  gain  nearness  of  God.  The  rank  of  the  fortunate  is 
different  according  to  the  degree  of  Ma'arfat  and  faith  as  there  is 
the  difference  of  the  rich  men  is  respect  of  the  difference  of  their 
riches.  So  Ma'arfat  or  knowledge  of  God  is  a  light  without  which 
the  believer  will  not  be  able  to  secure  divine  vision.  God  says: 
Their  lights  will  run  in  their  front  and  their  back  -57:12.There  is  difference  in  the  degrees  of  light.  The  Prophet  said:  If 
the  faith  of  Abu  Bakr  is  measured  with  that  of  the  people  of  the 
world  except  the  faith  of  the  prophets  and  apostles,  the  balance  of 
his  faith  will  be  heavier.  This  like  the  saying  of  the  man  who  says: 
If  the  lights  of  all  lamps  are  weighed  with  the  rays  of  the  sun,  the 
rays  of  the  son  will  be  heavier.  The  light  of  the  faith  of  the 
prophets  and  apostles  is  like  the  rays  ofthe  sun,  the  light  of  the 
Siddiqs  is  like  that  of  the  moon,  the  light  of  the  friends  of  God  is 
like  that  of  the  stars  and  the  light  of  the  general  believers  is  like 
that  of  a  lamp.  The  rays  of  the  sun  illumine  the  whole  world  and 
the  light  of  the  lamp  gives  light  to  a  room.  Similarly  there  is 
difference  in  the  case  of  expansion  of  breasts  of  the  prophets  and 
ordinary  believers.  For  this  reason,  there  is  in  Hadis  that  on  the 
Resurrection  Day  it  will  be  said  that  whoever  has  got  faith  in  his 
heart  to  the  weight  of  an  atom  will  be  taken  out  of  Hell.  God  said: 
You  will  be  victorious  if  you  are  believers  -3 : 38.

In  this  verge,  superiority  of  the  believers  over  the  Muslims 
has  been  spoken  of.  Here  the  believer  means  the  believer  with 
great  spiritual  knowledge  and  not  Muslims  with  outward  faith. 
God  says:  God  will  raise  those  in  rank  who  are  believers  among 
you  and  who  have  been  given  knowledge-58:12.  Here  those  who

28

Soul  and  its  Attributes

Vol-IJI28

Soul  and  its  Attributes

Vol-IJI

have  got  blind  faith  have  been  spoken  of  and  then  those  believers 
who  are  learned  have  been  mentioned.  God  says:  Those  who 
have  been  given  learning  have  got  ranks.  Hazrat  Ibn  Abbas 
explained  this  verse  by  saying:  God  will  keep  the  learned 
believers  over  the  ordinary  believers  by  seven  hundred  degrees 
above,  the  distance  between  every  two  degrees  is  as  the  distance 
between  heaven  and  earth.  The  Prophet  said:  Majority  of  the 
inmates  of  Paradise  are  simple,  but  the  wise  will  live  in  the 
highest  Paradise.  The  Prophet  said:  The  superiority  of  a  learned 
man  over  a  worshiper  is  like  mine  over  an  ordinary  man  among 
my  followers,  in  another  narration  as  the  superiority  of  the  full 
moon  over  the  stars.  It  can  be  understood  from  the  above  that  the 
difference  of  the  ranks  of  the  inmates  of  Paradise  will  be 
according  to  the  difference  of  thei  r  souls  in  divine  knowledge.

Proof  of  Shariat  about  correctness  of  the  ways  of  the  Sufis  in 
gaining  spiritual  knowledge.Proof  of  Shariat  about  correctness  of  the  ways  of  the  Sufis  in 
gaining  spiritual  knowledge.

ILHAM  AND  KASHF:  If  anything  is  disclosed  to  anybody 
by  Ilham  or  inspiration  from  unknown  source,  he  is  termed  Sufi 
or  an  ascetic  with  knowledge  of  God  by  the  help  of  correct  means. 
Owing  to  constant  engagement  in  divine  service,  spiritual 
knowledge,  is  disclosed  in  soul  by  way  of  Ilham  or  inspiration  or 
Kashf.  The  Prophet  said  :  God  gives  one  who  acts  up  to  his 
learning  such  knowledge  which  was  unknown  to  him  before.  He 
gives  him  Taufiq  or  grace  in  his  actions,  till  Paradise  becomes 
sure  for  him.  He  who  does  not  act  up  to  his  learning  roams  round 
his  learning.  God  does  not  give  him  grace  in  what  he  acts  till  Hell 
becomes  sure  for  him.  God  says:  God  makes  out  a  way  for  a  man 
who  fears  Him  and  gives  him  provision  from  a  source  he  cannot 
conceive.  This  means  that  God  takes  him  out  from  doubts  and 
various  difficulties  and  gives  him  knowledge  without  education 
and  natural  understanding  without  experience.  God  says  :  O 
those  who  believe,  if  you  fear  God,  He  will  give  you  Furqan — . 
Furqan  means  light  with  which  truth  and  falsehood  are 
distinguished  and  with  the  help  of  which  one  can  come  out  of 
doubt.  The  Prophet  used  to  pray :  O  God,  give  me  light,  increase 
my  light,  give  me  light  in  my  soul,  give  me  light  in  my  grave,  give 
me  light  in  my  hearing,  give  me  light  in  my  sight.  Even  he  used  to 
pray  :  Give  me  light  in  my  hairs,  my  flesh,  my  blood  and  my 
bones.  When  asked  about  the  meaning  of  the  following  verse — 
He  is  upon  the  light  of  God  whose  heart  God  has  opened  for

Vol-III

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

29Vol-III

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

29

Islam — 29  :  22),  the  Prophet  said  :  It  is  diffusion  of  light,  when 
light  falls  in  soul,  heart  expands  and  spreads.  The  Prophet 
prayed  for  Ibn  Abbas  :  O  God,  give  him  knowledge  of  religion 
and  of  interpretation.  Hazrat  Ali  said :  There  is  nothing  which  the 
Prophet  concealed  from  us.'  God  gives  the  knowledge  of  the 
Quran  to  some  of  His  servants.  It  is  not  acquired  knowledge.God  says:  He  gives  wisdom  to  whom  He  likes — 12 : 229.  This 
knowledge  is  said  to  be  that  of  God's  Book.  God  says:  I  gave 
Soloman  its  knowledge — 21  :  79.  He  specialised  Soloman  with 
knowledge.  Hazrat  Abu  Darda'a  said:  A  believer  is  he  who  by  the 
help  of  God's  light  sees  everything  from  behind  the  screen.  By 
God.  it  is  true  that  God  casts  truth  in  soul  and  for  that  it  is 
disclosed  in  his  tongue.  An  ancient  sage  said  :  Fear  the  sight  of  a 
believer  as  he  looks  only  by  the  help  of  divine  light.  The  clue  is 
found  in  the  following  verse :  In  it  there  are  signs  for  those  who 
enquire.  God  says :  I  make  clear  the  signs  to  a  people  with  certain 
faith — 12 : 118.  The  Prophet  said:  'Learning  is  of  two  kinds — one 
kind  of  learning  lies  concealed  in  soul  and  it  is  the  benefiting 
learning.'  One  learned  man  was  asked  about  this  and  he  said  : 
That  is  a  secret  matter  out  of  the  secret  matters  of  God.  God  casts 
it  in  the  souls  of  His  dear  servants*  Angels  or  ordinary  men  do  not 
get  clue  to  it.  The  learned  man  is  he  who  learns  from  his  God.  This 
is  knowledge  from  the  Almighty  called  Ilhame  Laduni  (secret 
knowledge).  God  says:  I  have  taught  him  learning  from 
Myself — 18  :  65.  Some  knowledge  comes  from  God  and  some 
knowledge  is  acquired  through  the  medium  of  men.  It  cannot  be 
called  secret  knowledge  which  is  such  a  knowledge  which  arises 
from  the  deep  bottom  of  soul  without  any  reason.  The  Quran  and 
Hadis  support  it."  The  following  are  some  examples  of  lime 
Laduni  or  secret  knowledge.

(1)  Hazrat  Abu  Bakr  at  the  time  of  his  death  said  to  Hazrat 
Ayesha  :They  are  both  your  brother  and  sister.(1)  Hazrat  Abu  Bakr  at  the  time  of  his  death  said  to  Hazrat 
Ayesha  :They  are  both  your  brother  and  sister.

At  that  time,  his  wife  was  pregnant  and  she  gave  birth 
thereafter  to  a  daughter.  He  came  to  know  beforehand  that  he 
would  have  a  daughter  born  to  him.

(2)  One  day  Hazrat  Omar  said  at  the  time  of  his  sermon  :  O 
army,  towards  the  hillock,  towards  the  hillock.  When  he  came  to 
know  by  Kashf  or  secret  knowledge  that  the  enemies  were  about 
to  kill  the  Muslim  soldiers,  he  cautioned  them  and  called  them  to

30

Soul  and  its  Attributes

Vol-III

assemble  in  the  hillock.  It  is  wonderful  that  the  call  soon  reached 
the  Muslim  soldiers.

(3)  Hazrat  Anas  said :  I  started  to  meet  Hazrat  Osman.  On  the 
way  I  met  a  woman  and  began  to  think  of  here  uncommon 
beauty.  When  I  came  to  Hazrat  Osman,  he  said  :  Someone  of  you 
has  come  to  me  with  open  sign  of  fornication  in  his  eyes.  Don't 
you  know  that  look  at  a  strange  woman  is  fornication?  Repent  or 
otherwise  I  shall  give  you  punishment.  I  said  :  Does  revelation 
come  even  after  the  Prophet  of  God.  Hazrat  Osman  said: 
Revelation  does  not  come,  but  by  deep  insight  everything  can  be 
seen.

There  are  many  instance  that  the  sages  and  saints  could  tell 
the  inner  thoughts  of  men.  Two  wonderful  events  are  admitted 
and  cannot  be  denied  by  anybody.  They  are — (1)  true  dream 
and(2)  Hadis  of  the  Prophet  regarding  future  events.(1)  True  dream.  It  reveals  the  unseen  events.  When  it  is 
possible  in  dream,  it  does  not  become  impossible  in  wakeful  state 
for  the  following  reasons.  In  sleep,  actions  of  the  outward  senses 
remain  closed  and  suspended  and  soul  remains  free  from  the 
engagements  of  the  material  world  and  then  the  door  of  the 
knowledge  of  soul  remains  a  little  open  towards  the  spiritual 
world.  This  occurs  sometimes  in  wakeful  state.  There  are  many 
men  who  don't  hear  and  see  even  in  wakeful  state  as  they  are 
then  remain  immerged  in  their  thoughts.

(2)  Prophecies  of  Prophet.  With  regard  to  the  prophecies  of 
the  Holy  Prophet  concerning  future  events,  there  are  proofs  in 
the  Quran.  A  prophet  is  he  who  remains  busy  for  the  Quran.  A 
prophet  and  to  whom  the  real  nature  of  everything  is  disclosed. 
A  friend  of  God  is  he  who  does  not  remain  busy  in  the  affairs  of 
the  people  but  it  is  possible  for  him  to  know  the  real  nature  of 
things.  There  are  two  gates  of  soul.  He  who  believes  in  the 
prophets  and  in  true  dreams  must  believe  that  there  are  two  gates 
of  soul,  one  gate  is  opened  to  the  external  senses  and  another  to 
the  spiritual  world  from  the  deepest  recess  of  soul  and  that  is 
Ilham  or  blowing  of  Ruh  or  inspiration  or  revelation.  Between 
these  two  gates,  the  roaming  of  soul  discloses  its  real  nature.  As 
spiritual  meters  are  disclosed  in  dream,  they  are  disclosed 
similarly  to  the  prophets  and  friends  of  God  in  different  forms.  It 
cannotbe  understood  without  spiritual  knowledge.

Vol-III

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

31Vol-III

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

31

Many  angels  are  ignorant  of  human  mind.  A  man  of  Kashf 
said  :  An  angel  came  to  me  and  asked  me  :  Disclose  to  me  your 
insight  of  Tauhid  and  secret  Zikr  or  remembrance  of  God,  as  I 
don't  write  anything  of  these  matters.  I  asked  him  :  Don't  you 
write  compulsory  duties?  He  said :  Yes,  we  write  them.  It  appears 
from  this  that  Keraman  Ketebinor  the  honoured  scribes  do  not 
know  of  secret  things  and  they  look  only  to  the  outward  actions. 
An  Aref  or  agnostic  said  :  I  asked  a  certain  Badl  (saint)  about 
direct  sight  of  certain  faith.  He  asked  the  angels  on  the  right  side, 
left  side  and  breast.  They  all  said :  We  don't  know.  Then  he  gave  a 
wonderful  reply  which  pleased  me.  He  said  :  I  asked  my  soul 
(conscience)  and  it  gave  me  the  reply.  The  soul  is  more  intelligent 
than  the  angels.  The  Prophet  also  said  :  There  are  true 
news-givers  among  my  followers  and  Omar  is  one  of  them.  There 
is  in  Hadis  Qudsi;  God  says.  He  whose  news  of  soul  I  take,  holds 
My  remembrance  firm  in  his  soul,  I  take  his  charge  and  become 
his  friend,  admonishner  and  companion.  Hazrat  Abu  Solaiman 
Darani  said  :  Soul  is  like  a  closed  tent  of  which  all  the  gates  have 
been  shut  up.  One  look  at  the  door  which  is  opened  up  towards 
him.  One  door  out  of  the  doors  of  soul  is  opened  towards  the 
spiritual  world  and  the  Almighty  God.  That  is  opened  by  God 
fear,  abstinence  from  worldly  lusts,  greed  and  efforts.  For  this 
reason,  Hazrat  Omar  gave  orders  to  his  commanders  to 
remember  what  the  religious  persons  say,  as  true  matters  are 
disclosed  to  them.  A  certain  wise  man  said :  God's  hand  is  placed 
on  the  wise.  They  don't  say  except  what  God  discloses  to  them. 
Another  sage  said.  If  you  are  wise,  I  shall  tell  you  that  God 
discloses  some  of  His  secrets  to  the  God  fearing  men.DEVIL'S  WHISPERINGS  IN  SOUL:  As  already  stated,  soul 
is  a  closed  tent  which  has  got  several  doors  and  from  every  door, 
its  condition  is  infused  to  it.  Or  soul  is  like  a  building  to  which 
arrows  are  thrown  from  every  direction.  Or  soul  is  like  a 
preserved  mirror  in  which  different  pictures  are  thrown  and 
pictures  after  pictures  are  falling  in  it.  Or  soul  is  like  a  well  which 
as  got  connection  with  pipes  through  which  water  falls  in  it.  The 
five  senses  are  its  open  pipes,  and  its  secret  pipes  are  a  man's 
character  and  conduct  made  up  of  greed,  anger  etc.  Whatever  is 
gained  by  its  five  senses  falls  in  soul.  When  sexual  passion  rises 
high  on  account  of  over-eating  and  over-drinking,  its  effect  falls 
in  soul.  The  soul  changes  from  one  condition  to  another.  This 
effect  in  soul  is  called  kha water  and  out  of  it  there  grows  will  and

32

Soul  and  its  Attributes

Vol-III

then  intention.  Thoughts  are  good  or  bad.  Good  thoughts  are 
called  Ilham  or  inspiration  and  bad  thoughts  are  called  Waswasa 
or  whisperings  of  the  devil.Vol-III

then  intention.  Thoughts  are  good  or  bad.  Good  thoughts  are 
called  Ilham  or  inspiration  and  bad  thoughts  are  called  Waswasa 
or  whisperings  of  the  devil.

DEVIL  AND  ANGEL:  They  have  got  generators.  The  cause 
or  urge  which  calls  towards  good  is  called  angel  and  the  cause 
which  calls  towards  bad  is  called  devil.  Latifa  or  essence  gives 
help  to  soul  in  receiving  Ilham  and  this  help  is  called  Taufiq  or 
grace.  The  thing  which  is  accepted  from  Waswasa  or  contrivance 
of  the  devil  is  called  misguiance.  The  action  of  an  angel  is  to  give 
impetus  to  good  actions,  to  disclose  truth  and  to  order  is  to  order 
for  evils  and  indecencies.  Thus  God  created  two  opposite 
agencies.  He  says:  I  have  created  two  kinds  of  everything — 13:3. 
Except  God,  all  things  are  opposed  to  one  another.  God  is  One 
and  unique  who  created  different  things.  So  soul  lives  in  dispute 
between  angel  and  devil.  The  Prophet  said  :  There  are  two 
impulses  in  soul,  one  impulse  of  angel  which  calls  towards  good 
and  confirms  truth.  He  who  feels  this  impulse  should  know  that 
it  is  from  God.  Another  impulse  comes  from  the  enemy  which 
leads  to  doubt  and  holds  out  the  truth  as  falsehood  and  prohibits 
good  works.  He  who  feels  this  should  seek  refuge  to  God  from 
the  accursed  devil.  Then  he  recited  the  verse  :  The  devil  shows 
you  fears  of  poverty  and  enjoins  you  to  do  evils — 2 : 268.Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said :  Two  thoughts  roam  over  soul-one 
thought  from  God  and  another  from  the  devil.  God  shows  mercy 
on  a  servant  who  stops  at  the  time  of  the  latter  thought.  If  soul 
follows  low  desires  and  passions,  the  devil  gets  upperhand.  If  it 
follows  the  habits  of  angels,  it  becomes  the  resting  place  of 
angels.  For  this  reason,  the  Prophet  said :  There  is  nobody  among 
you  in  whom  there  is  no  devil.  The  companions  asked  :  O 
Messenger  of  God,  does  it  reside  in  you  too?  He  said  :  There  is 
also  devil  in  me,  but  God  helped  me  to  overcome  it  and  it  has 
become  submissive  to  me.  It  does  not  order  me  but  good.

The  devil  works  havoc  through  the  medium  of  sexual 
passion.  Who  so  follows  it  finds  the  devil  as  his  guide.  When  he 
returns  to  Zikr,  the  devil  goes  behind  and  the  angel  gives 
incentive  to  good  works.  In  the  battle-field  of  soul,  there  is 
constant  clash  between  the  soldiers  of  the  devil  and  angels  till  it 
gets  upperhand.  After  victory,  soul  remains  in  peace  and  the 
devil  becomes  submissive.  The  sage  Ata-b-Ziyad  said  :  The  devil 
enters  a  soul  as  a  thief  enters  a  house.  If  there  is  anything  in  the

Vol-III

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

33Vol-III

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

33

house,  the  thief  takes  it  a  way.  If  there  is  nothing  in  the  house,  the 
thief  leaves  it.  In  other  words,  the  devil  does  not  enter  a  soul 
which  is  free  from  sexual  passion  and  evil  desires.  God  says  to 
the  devil :  You  have  got  no  control  over  My  servants'  16  :  32.  He 
who  follows  the  dictates  of  passion  is  a  slave  of  passion  and  not 
of  God.  For  this  reason.  He  gave  control  of  the  devil  over  him. 
God  says:  Have  you  seen  one  who  has  taken  up  his  passion  as  hid 
deity-25  : 44  ?  One  day  Hazrat  Amr-b-A's  asked  the  Prophet :  O 
Messenger  of  God,  the  devil  enters  in  o  my  Quran-  reading  in 
prayer.  He  said  :  He  is  a  devil  called  Khanzab.  When  you  feel  it, 
seek  refuge  to  God  and  spit  thrice  to  your  left  side.  He  said  that 
God  relieved  him  from  it  after  he  did  it.  There  is  in  another  Hadis 
that  there  is  a  devil  in  ablution  called  Walhan.  He  said  :  Seek 
refuge  from  him  to  God.  God  says  :  Seek  refuge  from  the 
machinations  of  the  devil — 16:98.  Hazrat  Mujahid  said  by 
explanation  of  this  verse  that  it  is  a  broad  sign  in  soul.  When  one 
remembers  God,  the  devil  flees  away  disappointed.  When  he  is 
heedless,  the  devil  takes  seat  in  his  soul.  God's  Zikr  and  devil's 
contrivance  are  like  light  and  darkness  which  can  not  live 
together.  The  Prophet  said  :  The  devil  places  his  trunk  in  the  soul 
of  man.  When  he  remembers  God,  he  goes  away,  and  when  he  is 
heedless,  he  catches  hold  of  his  soul.The  Prophet  said :  When  a  man  does  not  turn  after  he  reaches 
his  fortieth  year,  the  devil  rubs  his  face  with  his  hands  and  says.  I 
have  wiped  the  face  of  one  who  has  got  no  salvation.  The  Prophet 
said  :  The  devil  moves  in  man  like  the  circulation  of  blood.  Make 
his  circulation  narrow  by  hunger.  The  reason  is  that  hunger  cures 
sexual  passion  which  is  the  weapon  of  the  devil.  So  sexual 
passion  surrounds  soul.  God  mentioned  the  case  of  the  devil 
saying:  The  devil  said :  I  will  keep  sitting  in  Thy  straight  path  for 
them.  Then  I  shall  run  to  them  by  their  front,  by  their  back,  by 
their  right  side  and  by  their  left  side — 7 : 17.

The  Prophet  said :  The  devil  keeps  sitting  in  different  paths  for 
man.  He  sits  in  the  path  of  Islam  and  says:  Will  you  accept  Islam 
after  giving  up  your  religion  and  the  religion  of  your  ancestors  ? 
When  hedisobeys  him  and  accepts  Islam,  he  sits  for  him-in  the  path 
of  emigration  and  says  :  Will  you  leave  your  country  after  leaving 
your  native  land  and  your  properties .  When  he  disobeys  him  and 
makes  arguments,  he  sits  in  the  path  of  Jihad  and  says  :  Will  you 
fight  ruining  yourself  and  your  properties  ?  He  disobeys  him  and

34

Soul  and  its  Attributes

Vol-III

fights.  The  Prophet  said :  If  a  man  dies  after  performing  the  above 
actions,  it  becomes  the  duty  of  God  to  admit  him  in  Paradise.34

Soul  and  its  Attributes

Vol-III

fights.  The  Prophet  said :  If  a  man  dies  after  performing  the  above 
actions,  it  becomes  the  duty  of  God  to  admit  him  in  Paradise.

Some  may  ask:  What  is  devil  ?  Has  he  got  body?  If  he  has  got 
body,  how  can  be  enter  into  the  soul  of  a  man?  These  are  useless 
talks.  He  who  raises  such  arguments  is  like  the  man  who,  instead 
of  removing  a  snake  from  his  cloth,  argues  as  to  the  shape,  form, 
length  and  breadth  of  the  snake.  This  is  sheer  foolishness.  When 
you  know  thatevil  thoughts  arise  in  yourmind  and  that  they  lead 
you  to  ruin,  it  is  then  clear  that  they  are  your  enemies  of  whom 
you  should  take  care.  God  says:  The  devil  is  your  open  enemy. 
35:6.  God  says:  Have  I  not  told  you :  Don't  follow  the  devil  as  he  is 
your  great  enemy — 36 : 61  ?  So  everybody  should  take  care  of  him 
and  not  ask  about  his  birth  death  and  other  particulars.THREE  KINDS  OF  THOUGHT:  (1)  Bad  thoughts  lead  to 
evils,  (2)  good  thoughts  lead  to  good  and  it  is  called  Ilham  and  (3) 
thoughts  mixed  with  good  and  bad  lead  to  doubt  and  it  is  not 
known  whether  they  come  from  angels  or  devils.  The  devil 
cannot  call  majority  of  the  pious  men  towards  evil  deeds.  He 
presents  doubt  to  them  in  the  form  of  good  and  that  is  a  great 
deception  which  destroys  many  people.  For  instance,  he  advises 
a  learned  man  to  make  sermons,  and  to  adorn  his  lectures  with 
ornamental  words.  His  objects  is  to  throw  him  to  a  show  of  deeds 
and  to  generate  in  his  mind  greed  for  name  and  fame.  He  is  then 
included  among  those  men  about  whom  the  Prophet  said  :  God 
will  help  this  religion  with  such  men  who  will  have  no  share  in 
religion.  There  is  in  another  Hadis  that  God  will  help  the  religion 
by  a  transgressor.

DECEPTION  OF  DEVIL:  It  has  been  narrated  that  the  devil 
once  came  to  Jesus  and  told  him :  Say :  there  is  no  deity  but  God. 
He  said  :  This  is  a  true  word,  but  I  will  not  utter  it  in  obedience  to 
your  dictation.  Every  man  should  know  the  source  of  thought, 
whether  it  comes  from  the  angel  or  from  the  devil.  He  should 
examine  it  by  deep  insight  and  not  by  dictates  of  passion  and  low 
desires.  It  will  not  be  disclosed  to  him  except  by  the  light  of 
God-fear  arid  deep  knowledge.  God  says  :  When  a  party  of  devil 
attack  the  God-fearing,  they  remember  God — 7  :  201.  In  other 
words,  they  return  to  the  light  of  knowledge.

The  means  of  saving  oneself  from  the  machinations  of  the 
devil  is  to  shut  up  the  doors  of  thoughts  which  are  the  five  senses.

Vol-HI

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

35The  means  of  saving  oneself  from  the  machinations  of  the 
devil  is  to  shut  up  the  doors  of  thoughts  which  are  the  five  senses.

Vol-HI

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

35

secret  sexual  passion  and  worldly  connections.  The  doors  of  five 
senses  are  shut  up  if  he  stays  alone  in  a  dark  room.  The  secret 
door  of  the  devil  is  shut  up  if  he  lives  separate  from  his  family 
members  and  his  properties.  In  this  way,  the  door  of  ideas 
remains  open  in  soul.  It  will  not  be  closed  if  the  soul  is  not  kept 
engaged  in  the  remembrance  of  God .  Even  the  devil  tries  to  make 
him  forgetful  of  it.  This  fight  continues  till  his  death.  So  long  as  he 
lives,  he  does  not  get  released  from  the  devil.  The  door  of 
passion,  hatred  and  greed  remains  open  towards  the  soul.

One  day  a  man  asked  Hasan  Basari :  O  Abu  Sayeed,  does  the 
devil  sleep  ?  He  smiled  and  said :  If  he  slept,  we  would  have  taken 
rest.  No  believer  is  safe  from  him.  It  is  true  that  there  are  means  to 
get  out  of  him  and  to  curb  his  power.  The  Prophet  said  :  A 
believer  drives  out  his  devil  as  one  of  you  drives  his  camel  in 
journey.  Hazrat  Ibn  Masud  said  :  The  devil  of  a  believer  is  lean 
and  thin.  It  is  true  that  there  are  many  doors  open  for  the  devil 
towards  soul,  but  the  door  of  angels  is  only  one  which  is  mixed 
up  with  the  other  doors.  To  know  the  path  is  very  difficult 
without  the  rays  of  soul  or  deep  insight  which  is  covered  with 
God-fear.Hazrat  Abdullah-b-Masud  said:  The  Prophet  drew  up  a  line 
in  our  front  and  said  :  This  is  God's  path.  He  drew  up  several 
lines  from  the  right  and  left  sides  of  that  line  and  said  :  These  are 
different  paths  and  in  each  path  the  devil  calls  towards  it.  Then 
he  recited  :  This  is  My  straight  path.  Follow  it  and  don't  follow 
different  paths.  The  Prophet  said :  There  was  a  hermit  among  the 
children  of  Isrial.  Once  the  devil  snared  a  woman  and  he 
generated  in  the  minds  of  her  family  members  that  her  cure  is  in 
the  hands  of  the  hermit.  They  took  the  woman  to  the  hermit  and 
wanted  him  to  keep  her,  but  he  declined  to  keep  her.  Being 
greatly  requested,  he  kept  the  woman  with  him  for  treatment. 
Then  the  devil  came  to  the  hermit  and  gave  him  evil  advice.  The 
hermit  then  cohabited  with  the  woman  who  become  pregnant  as 
a  result.  Now  the  devil  came  to  the  hermit  again  and  said  to  him : 
Kill  her,  otherwise  her  family  members  would  come  and  kill  you. 
If  they  ask  you,  you  will  say  that  she  has  died.  Then  the  hermit 
killed  the  woman  and  buried  her.  The  devil  then  came  to  the 
family  members  of  the  woman  and  told  them  that  the  hermit 
killed  her  as  the  woman  became  pregnant  owing  to  his 
cohabitation  with  her.  When  they  came  to  the  hermit  for  the

36

Soul  and  its  Attributes

Vol-lII

woman,  he  said  that  she  had  died.  Then  the  devil  came  to  the  hermit 
and  said  to  him  :  I  will  save  you  from  them  if  you  obey  my 
command.  Prostrate  before  me  twice.  When  the  hermit  made 
prostration  before  the  devil,  the  devil  said :  lam  now  free  from  you.DEVIL'S  ENTRY  INTO  SOUL:  Know,  dear  readers,  that 
soul  is  like  a  fortress  and  the  devil  wishes  to  enter  it  and  commit 
havoc.  In  order  to  save  it  from  the  devil,  one  must  guard  the 
doors  of  this  fort.  It  is  impossible  for  him  to  guard  them  unless  he 
knows  the  doors  which  mean  his  character  and  conduct.(1)  Anger  and  sexual  passion.  A  great  door  for  devil's  entry 
is  anger  and  sexual  passion.  When  intelligence  is  weak,  the  forces 
of  the  devil  attack  it.  Whenever  any  man  gets  angry,  the  devil 
plays  with  him.  It  has  been  narrated  that  once  the  devil  came  to 
Moses  and  said :  O  Moses,  God  selected  you  for  prophethood  and 
He  talked  much  with  you.  I  have  committed  sin  and  I  wish  to 
make  repentance.  Intercede  to  my  Lord  that  He  may  forgive  my 
sins  Moses  said  :  Well,  I  am  doing  it.  He  ascended  the  hill,  talked 
with  God  and  wished  to  getdown  from  it.  Then  he  said  :  Fulfill 
the  promise.  Moses  said :  O  Lord,  your  servant  Iblis  wishes  that  his 
repentance  be  accepted.  God  then  revealed  to  Moses  :  O  Moses, 
your  need  has  been  fulfilled.  Tell  the  devil  to  prostrate  before  the 
grave  of  Adam  and  make  repentance.  Then  Moses  told  it  to  the 
devil.  He  got  angry  at  it  and  said  :  I  did  not  prostrate  before  him 
while  he  was  alive.  Shall  I  now  do  it  after  his  death  ?  I  have  got  some 
duty  to  you  as  you  have  interceded  to  God  for  me.  One  should 
remember  me  at  the  time  of  three  things  and  I  shall  not  do  him  any 
harm — (1)  When  he  gets  angry,  he  should  remember  that  my  life  is 
with  his  soul,  my  eyes  are  with  his  eyes  and  I  move  within  him  like 
the  circulation  of  blood.  (2)  When  one  joins  a  fight,  he  should 
remember  that  I  come  down  at  that  time  and  I  remind  him  of  his 
wives,  children  and  properties,  as  a  result  he  flees  away.  (3)  One 
shall  not  sit  by  such  a  woman  who  can  be  married.  I  stay  with  her  as 
his  messenger.  I  don't  stop  till  I  make  him  fall  in  danger.  From  this 
story,  it  appears  how  dangerous  are  anger  and  sexual  passion.A  certain  friend  of  God  asked  the  devil :  Tell  me  how  son  hold 
control  over  a  man.  He  said :  I  hold  control  over  him  at  the  time  of 
his  anger.  Once  the  devil  went  to  a  hermit  who  asked  him  which 
conduct  of  a  man  is  more  helpful  to  him.  The  devil  said :  Haughty 
temper,  because  when  a  man  has  haughty  temper,  I  overturn  him 
as  a  boy  overturns  his  toy.

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

37

Vol|-lN

(2)  Hatred  and  greed.  Another  great  door  of  the  devil  to  enter 
soul  is  hatred  and  greed.  When  a  man  has  got  greed  for  anything, 
it  makes  him  deaf  and  blind,  as  the  Prophet  said  :  Your  love  for 
anything  makes  you  deaf  and  blind.  It  has  been  narrated  that  at 
the  time  when  the  Prophet  Noah  embarked  on  the  boat,  he  took  a 
pair  of  everything  in  it  by  God's  command  He  found  an  old  man 
in  the  boat  and  asked  him:  Why  have  you  come?  He  said  :  I  have 
come  to  throw  the  hearts  of  your  companions  into  fear,  so  that 
their  hearts  may  remain  with  me  and  their  bodies  with  you.  Noah 
said :  O  enemy  of  God,  go  out  as  you  are  cursed.  Then  the  old  man 
(devil)  said  to  him  :  I  will  destroy  people  with  five  things  and  I 
will  not  disclose  to  you  two  things.  God  revealed  to  Noah  :  You 
have  got  no  necessity  of  these  things  Te}l  him  to  disclose  to  you 
the  two  things.  Noah  informed  the  devil  accordingly.  The  devil 
said :  The  two  things  are  greed  and  hatred.  I  have  been  cursed  for 
hatred.  I  generated  greed  in  Adam  and  misguided  him.(3)  Eating  with  satisfaction.  Another  door  of  the  devil  is 
eating  to  one's  heart  content  though  the  food  is  lawful  and  pure, 
as  it  makes  sexual  passion  strong.  Once  the  devil  came  to  the 
Prophet  Ihya  who  saw  his  body  stout  and  strong  and  asked  him: 
0  Iblis'  what  is  the  reason  that  you  have  got  a  strong  body?  He 
replied  :  The  reason  is  sexual  passion.  He  asked  :  Have  I  got 
anything  of  it?  The  devil  said  :  Sometimes  you  eat  with 
satisfaction  and  as  a  result  you  feel  heaviness  to  pray  and  make 
Zikr.  Then  he  said  :  Have  I  got  anything  besides  this  ?  The  devil 
said  :  You  have  got  nothing  else.  Prophet  Ihya  said  :  1  shall  never 
eat  to  my  heart's  content.  Iblis  said :  By  God,  I  shall  no  more  give 
any  advice  to  any  Muslim.

HARMS  OF  EATING  WITH  SATISFACTION.  Eating  with 
satisfaction  creates  six  harms.-(l)  God-fear  goes  out  of  the  heart 
of  such  a  man,  (2)  kindness  for  the  people  goes  out  of  his  heart,  (3) 
he  feels  difficulty  in  doing  divine  service,  (4)  he  does  not  feel 
humility  when  he  hears  words  of  wisdom,  (5)  when  he  gives 
sermon,  it  does  not  enter  into  the  hearts  of  the  audience  and  (6) 
many  diseases  grow  in  him.

(4)  Love  for  fine  things  Another  door  of  the  devil  is  love  for 
fine  dresses,  houses  and  furnitures.  When  a  man  loves  fine 
dresses,  he  loves  to  embellish  his  house  and  decorate  it  with  fine 
and  beautiful  furnitures  and  things.  He  loves  also  to  paint  his 
building  with  variegated  colours  and  its  roofs  and  walls.

38

Soul  and  its  Attributes

Vol-III

(5)  Dependence  on  people.  Another  door  of  the  devil  is 
dependence  on  the  people  and  to  cherish  hope  to  get  their 
favours.  For  that ,  he  assumes  show  and  artificial  methods.  Thus 
greed  becomes  his  deity.(6)  Hastiness  and  absence  of  steadiness.  Hastiness  in  action 
'  and  to  give  up  firmness  in  actions  are  another  door  of  the  devil.  The 
Prophet  said :  Hastiness  comes  from  the  devil  and  delay  comes  from 
God,  God  says :  Man  has  been  created  with  Hastiness-21 : 37Q.  man 
loves  hastiness.  God  said  to  His  Prophet :  Don't  be  hasty  in  the  matter 
of  the  Quran  till  its  revelation  does  not  become  complete  on  you.  It 
has  been  narrated  that  when  Jesus  Christ  was  bom,  the  followers  of 
Iblis  came  to  him  and  said :  The  heads  of  all  idols  have  fallen  down. 
The  devil  said :  It  seems  that  some  event  has  taken  place.  Iblis  said 
that  Jesus  Christ  was  born  and  the  angels  kept  him  surrounded.  He 
said  to  his  followers  :  A  Prophet  is  bom  in  the  world,  without  my 
knowledge,  no  woman  conceived  and  gave  birth  to  a  child.  This  is 
an  exception.  He  praised  man  for  hastiness  and  fickle-mindedness.

(7)  To  possess  wealth  beyond  necessity.  Another  great  do’or 
of  the  devil  is  to  have  wealth  and  properties  beyond  one's 
necessity.  He  who  has  got  the  bare  necessary  things  lives  in  peace 
but  if  one  possesses  surplus  wealth,  he  can  not  enjoy  peace  as  he 
wants  more  and  more.  When  the  Prophet  was  born,  the  followers 
of  the  devil  became  displeased  but  the  devil  said  :  Give  them 
some  time  Perhaps  God  will  give  them  wealth  and  for  that  we 
shall  gain  upperhand  over  them.  It  has  been  narrated  that  Jesus 
Christ  once  used  a  piece  of  stone  as  pillow.  The  devil  then  came  to 
him  and  said  :  You  have  got  greed  for  wealth  as  you  are  taking 
rest  on  a  stone.  Then  Jesus  Christ  threw  the  stone  at  the  devil 
saying  :  This  is  your  reward  Now  think  of  the  man  who  has  got 
pillows  for  enjoyment.(8)  Miserliness  and  fear  of  poverty.  Another  great  door  of 
the  devil  is  miserliness  and  fear  of  poverty,  as  they  prevent 
charity  and  expense,  encourage  hoarding  and  create  greed  for 
wealth.  Khaisamah-b-Abdur  Rahman  said  :  The  devil  says  :  Man 
will  hold  control  over  me,  but  he  will  not  be  able  to  prevail  over 
me  in  three  matters-(l)  misappropriation  of  money  unjustly,  (2) 
spending  it  unjustly  (3)  and  not  to  pay  the  dues  of  others.  Hazrat 
Sufyan  Saori  said  :  There  is  no  weapon  stronger  to  the  devil  than 
fear  of  poverty.

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

39

Vol-III

(9) Staying  in  hats  and  bazars.  The  devil  lives  in  hats  and 
bazars.  The  Prophet  said  :  When  the  devil  came  down  to  the 
earth,  he  said:  O  Lord,  give  me  —place  for  habitation.  God  said :  I 
give  you  bath  room  for  habitation.  The  devil  said  :  Give  me  place 
for  assembly.  God  said  :  For  that  I  give  you  hats  and  bazars  and 
centres  of  pathways.  The  devil  said  :  Give  me  food.  God  said  : 
You  are  given  food  over  which  God's  name  is  not  taken.  The 
devil  said  :  Give  me  drink.  God  said  :  I  give  you  drink  which 
produces  intoxication.  The  devil  said  :  Give  me  an  inviter.  God 
said  :  I  give  you  instruments  of  song.  The  devil  said  :  Give  me  a 
Quran.  God  said  :  I  give  you  poetry.  The  devil  said  :  Give  me  a 
book,  God  said  :  I  give  you  pictures  of  animals.  The  devil  said  : 
give  me  Hadis.  God  said  :  I  gives  you  false  talk.  The  devil  said  : 
Give  me  a  game.  God  said :  I  give  you  women.(10)  Love  for  sect  and  hatred  for  opponents.  Another  door  of 
the  devil  is  love  for  mezhab  or  sect  or  party  and  hatred  for  those 
who  oppose  and  hold  him  in  contempt.  These  are  such  faults  for 
which  the  religious  men  are  ruined,  because  to  disclose  the  faults 
of  others  is  the  lastly  conduct  of  man.  Those  who  follow  their 
own  sect  or  party  think  that  it  is  the  best  and  they  cherish  hatred 
for  other  sects  or  parties.  Some  of  them  support  Hazrat  abu  Bakr 
though  they  do  not  follow  him,  speak  falsehood  and  create 
disturbance  Had  Hazrat  Abu  Bakr  seen  them  he  would  have  been 
their  first  enemy.  Some  of  them  support  Hazrat  Ali  but  do  not 
follow  his  character  and  conduct.  At  the  time  of  his  Caliphate,  he 
purchased  a  shirt  for  only  three  dirhams  and  cut  off  his  trouser 
up  to  ankles.  Now  his  supporters  wear  silk  dresses  and  eat 
unlawful  earnings.  On  the  Resurrection  Day,  he  will  be  their  first 
enemy.  Those  who  love  Imams  Abu  Hanifah,  Shafeyi,  Malek  and 
Ahmad  should  remember  the  above  principle.

(11)  Ordinary  men  leaders  of  religion.  One  of  the  great 
doors  of  the  devil  is  that  those  who  have  got  no  learning  an 
education  and  who  do  not  ponder  over  the  mysteries  of  creation 
and  actions  of  God  claim  to  be  the  leaders  of  religion.  They 
entertain  doubt  in  the  basic  principles  of  religion.  The  Prophet 
said  :  The  devil  comes  to  one  of  you  and  says :  Who  created  God? 
When  anyone  feels  that,  he  should  say  :  I  believe  in  God  and  His 
Prophet.  This  utterance  will  remove  that  feeling  from  him.  The 
Prophet  did  not  recommend  argument  on  the  above  line  as  the 
learned  do  not  face  it  except  the  ordinary  men.

40

Soul  and  its  Attributes

Vol-Ill40

Soul  and  its  Attributes

Vol-Ill

(12)  Bad  opinion  about  Muslims.  One  of  the  great  doors  of 
the  devil  is  bad  ideas  and  opinions  about  Muslims,  God  said  :  O 
those  who  believe,  give  up  many  conjectures  as  some  conjecture 
is  sin.  49  :12.  The  devil  gives  encouragement  to  backbite  one 
about  whom  a  bad  ideal  is  entertained.  The  Prophet  said  :  Save 
yourself  from  the  place  of  calumny.  Even  the  Prophet  saved 
himself  from  it.  Once  the  Prophet  was  in  a  state  of  I,tiqaf  or 
seclusion  in  a  mosque.  At  that  time,  his  wife  Sufiyah  came  to  him 
and  went  away  in  the  evening.  At  that  time  two  Ansars  came 
there  and  after  saluting  him  were  about  to  depart.  The  Prophet 
said  to  them  that  his  wife  Sufiyah  had  come  and  gone  away.  He 
said :  The  devil  runs  through  the  body  of  a  man  like  circulation  of 
blood.  I  fear  he  may  enter  in  you.  So  to  save  oneself  from  the 
calumny  of  others  is  the  bounden  duty  on  all.

These  are  the  twelve  great  doors  of  the  devil  through  which  he 
enters  into  the  hearts  of  men  and  commit  tremendous  havoc  and  ruin.These  are  the  twelve  great  doors  of  the  devil  through  which  he 
enters  into  the  hearts  of  men  and  commit  tremendous  havoc  and  ruin.

MEANS  TO  DRIVE  OUT  THE  DEVIL:  The  means  to  shut  up 
the  doors  to  prevent  the  entry  of  the  devil  into  human  soul  or 
heart  is  by  purification  of  soul  from  the  evil  attributes.  The  devil 
is  like  a  hungry  dog  which  shall  come  to  you.  Drive  it  out 
repeatedly.  If  you,  cannot  drive  a  dog  take  a  place  of  meat  and 
throw  it  to  it  and  it  will  go  away.  Similarly  the  soul  which  is  free 
from  the  food  of  the  devil  can  be  filled  up  with  constant  Zikr  or 
remembrance  of  God,  but  when  passion  and  greed  are  strong  in 
soul,  the  spirit  of  Zikr  roams  round  the  soul.  When  the  soul  is 
heedless  of  Zikr,  machinations  of  the  devil  come  in.  Hazrat  Abu 
Hurairah  reported:  Once  the  devil  of  a  believer  and  the  devil  of  a 
polytheist  met  with  each  other.  The  devil  of  the  polytheist  was 
stout  and  strong  and  dressed  with  fine  dresses  and  the  devil  of 
the  believer  was  lean  and  thin,  disheveled  in  hairs  and  laden  with 
dust.  The  former  said  to  the  latter:  Why  are  you  Jean  and  thin?  He 
said:  I  remain  with  such  a  man  that  when  he  eats,  he  remembers 
God  and  I  become  hungry,  when  he  drinks  and  remembers  God,  I 
become  thirsty.  When  he  puts  on  dress  and  remembers  God,  I  go 
without  cloth.  When  he  uses  oil  and  remembers  God,  I  become 
disheveled  in  hairs.  The  devil  of  the  unbeliever  said:  I  remain 
with  such  a  person  who  does  not  remember  God  in  any  caseand  I 
become  his  partner  in  eating,  drinking  and  dresses.

Hazrat  Abdur  Rahman-b-Abi  Laila  reported:  The  devil  with 
a  torch  light  of  fire  in  hand  came  to  the  Prophet  who  was  then

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

41

Vol-MHazrat  Abdur  Rahman-b-Abi  Laila  reported:  The  devil  with 
a  torch  light  of  fire  in  hand  came  to  the  Prophet  who  was  then

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

41

Vol-M

engaged  in  prayer.  Gabriel  at  once  came  to  him  and  said:  Recite 
the  following:

i  seek  refuge  to  Thee  with  the  perfect  words  which  no 
rehgious  or  irreligious  man  misses,  from  the  evil  which  enters  the 
world  and  which  comes  out  of  it,  which  comes  down  from 
heaven  and  which  ascends  to  it,  from  the  trials  of  day  and  night, 
from  what  roams  about  during  the  day  and  night  except  what 
travels  with  good,  O  Merciful.'  When  the  Prophet  recited  it,  the 
torch  of  fire  fell  on  the  body  of  the  devil.Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said:  I  have  come  to  know  that  Gabriel 
once  came  to  the  Prophet  and  said:  One  party  of  Jinn  is  making 
conspiracy  against  you.  So  when  you  enter  the  evening,  read 
Ayatul  Qursi  (2  :  255).  The  Prophet  said:  Once  the  devil  came  to 
me  and  quarrelled  with  me,  I  caught  hold  of  his  neck.  By  One 
who  sent  me  as  a  true  messenger,  I  did  not  let  him  go  till  his  saliva 
of  tongue  touched  my  hand.  Had  not  my  brother  Soloman  called 
me,  he  would  have  remained  lying  down  in  the  mosque.  The 
Prophet  said:  'The  devil  does  not  walk  in  a  route  which  is  used  by 
Omar.'  The  cause  is  that  his  soul  was  free  from  greed.  So  remove 
it  by  sincere  Zikr.  Be  like  one  who  takes  medicine  after  purgation 
of  his  bowels  which  was  full  of  indigested  food  stuffs.  If  you 
want  to  get  the  benefit  of  medicine,  first  purge  your  bowels  and 
clear  it  from  congested  stools.  Similarly  clear  your  soul  first  from 
passion  and  greed  and  when  take  the  medicine  of  Zikr.  When 
Zikr  enters  such  a  heart  which  is  free  from  thoughts  other  than  of 
God,  the  devil  flees  away  from  it,  as  disease  goes  away  if 
medicine  falls  in  stomach  free  of  food .It  has  been  recorded  in  case  of  the  devil  that  he  will  misguide 
one  on  whom  he  has  got  control  and  lead  him  to  the  endless  pit  of 
fire.  God-fear  and  God's  remembrance  remove  the  devil.  Prayer 
makes  the  soul  pure.  By  its  help,  virtues  and  faults  of  soul  are 
disclosed.  The  prayer  of  a  man  whose  soul  is  filled  up  with 
passion  and  greed  is  not  accepted.  So  it  is  beyond  doubt  that  the 
devil  will  not  go  from  you  in  that  case  and  his  machinations  in 
you  will  increase,  as  to  use  medicine  before  purgation  causes 
more  harm.  If  you  want  to  be  free  from  the  devil,  proceed  to  fill 
up  your  soul  by  God-fear.  Then  apply  the  medicine  of  Zikr.  Then 
the  devil  will  flee  away  from  you  as  he  fled  from  Hazrat  Omar. 
Hazrat  Wahab-b-Monabbah  said:  Fear  God.  A  certain  sage  said: 
Wonder  is  for  one  who  does  not  follow  the  good  deeds  after

42

Soul  and  its  Attributes

Vol-III

knowing  them  and  follows  the  devil  knowing  his  transgression. 
God  says:  Invoke  Me  and  I  will  respond  to  you.  You  call  Him  but 
He  does  not  respond  to  you.  You  are  making  Zikr  but  the  devil 
does  not  flee  away  from  you.  The  reason  is  that  you  have  lost  the 
condition  of  Zikr  and  invocation.CAUSE  OF  INVOCATION  NOT  BEING  ACCEPTED:  Hazrat 
Ibrahim-b-Adham  was  asked:  What  is  the  matter  with  us  that  we 
invoke  but  our  invocation  is  not  accepted,  although  God  says: 
Invoke  me  and  I  will  accept  your  invocation  -2:1 86?  He  said:  The 
cause  is  that  your  hearts  have  died.  He  was  asked:  What  thing  has 
caused  their  death?  He  said:  Eight  conducts  bring  the  death  of 
heart.  (1)  You  know  the  duties  towards  God  but  you  do  not  do 
them.  (2)  You  recite  the  Quran  but  you  do  not  look  to  its  promise 
of  punishment.  (3)  You  say  that  you  love  the  Prophet  but  you  do 
not  follow  his  actions.  (4)  You  say  that  you  fear  death  but  you  do 
not  become  prepared  for  it.  (5)  God  says:  The  devil  is  your  enemy 
but  you  take  his  help  in  sinful  acts.  (6)  You  say  that  you  fear 
Hell-fire  but  you  keep  your  body  immerged  in  it.  (7)  You  say  that 
you  love  Paradise  but  you  do  not  act  for  it.  <8)  When  you  get  up 
from  bed,  you  throw  your  sins  by  your  back  and  disclose  the  sins 
of  the  people,  thereby  you  cause  the  displeasure  of  your  Lord. 
How  can  He  respond  to  your  invocation?Is  devil  one  or  many?  This  knowledge  is  not  necessary  for  actions. 
One  devil  is  fixed  for  a  sin  and  he  is  called  towards  it.  The  Prophet 
said:  Khanjab  is  the  name  of  the  devil  in  ablution.  So  the  number  of 
devils  are  piany.  So  also  is  the  number  of  angels.  Every  angel  is 
entrusted  with  an  action.  The  Prophet  said:  For  each  believer,  160 
angels  have  been  fixed.  They  remove  from  him  what  he  can  not 
himself  remove.  Seven  angels  have  been  engaged  for  eyes  only.  They 
remove  the  injurious  things  from  eyes  just  as  flies  are  driven  out  from 
a  pot  of  honey.  If  any  man  is  entrusted  to  himself  for  the  trinkling  of  an 
eye,  the  party  of  devil  would  have  lifted  him  away.

It  has  been  reported  that  when  Hazrat  Adam  was  sent  down 
to  the  earth,  he  said:  O  Lord,  They  have  created  enmity  between 
me  and  the  devil.  If  you  do  not  keep  me  against  him.  I  will  have 
no  strength  to  fight  against  him.  He  said:  No  child  will  be  born  to 
one  which  will  not  have  an  angel  with  him.  Hazrat  Adam  said:  O 
Lord,  give  me  further  sermon.  God  said:  I  shall  give  one 
punishment  for  one  sin,  but  I  shall  give  ten  rewards  for  one  virtue 
and  more.  Iblis  said:  O  Lord,  I  shall  have  no  strength  to  fight

voi-ni

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

43

againsta  man  whom  Thou  hast  honoured.  God  said:  A  child  will 
jje  born  to  you  along  with  the  birth  of  a  child.  The  devil  said:  Give 
me  more  power.  God  said:  Your  riding  armies  and  infantry  will 
gather  together  against  him  and  you  will  be  cosharers  in  their 
children  and  in  their  wealth.THREE  KINDS  OF  JINN:  The  Prophet  said:  God  created 
three  kinds  of  Jinn.  One  kind  of  Jinn  are  serpents,  scorpions  and 
worms  of  earth.  Another  kind  of  Jinn  roam  in  sky  like  air.  For 
another  kind  of  Jinn,  there  are  rewards  and  punishments.

THREE  KINDS  OF  MEN:  God  created  three  kinds  of  men. 
One  kind  of  man  are  like  a  beasts.  God  says  about  this  kind  of 
men:  They  have  got  hearts  with  which  they  do  not  understand. 
They  have  got  eyes  with  which  they  do  not  see.  They  have  got 
ears  with  which  they  do  not  hear.  They  are  like  beasts,  nay  they 
are  more  misguided  -  17  :  179.  Another  kind  of  men  have  got 
bodies  of  men  but  their  hearts  are  like  the  hearts  of  the  devil. 
Another  kind  of  men  will  remain  within  the  shade  of  God  on  the 
day  on  which  there  will  be  no  shade  except  tha  t  of  God.

FIGURES  OF  DEVILS  AND  ANGELS:  The  devils  and 
angels  have  got  figures  which  cannot  be  seen  by  men  except  with 
the  light  of  prophethood.  The  Prophet  saw  Gabriel  twice  in  his 
form.  It  took  place  when  the  Prophet  wanted  to  see  his  actual 
figure.  Once  he  saw  him  in  the  cave  of  Hira  covering  the  space 
between  east  and  west  and  at  another  time  near  Sitratul  Muntaha 
or  farthest  lot  tree  in  the  night  of  his  ascension  to  heaven.  At  other 
times,  he  saw  him  in  the  form  of  a  man.EVIL  THOUGHTS  OF  MIND:  Machinations  of  the  devil  are 
very  subtle.  The  Prophet  said:  God  will  forgive  the  thoughts  of 
man  which  arise  in  mind  till  he  does  not  disclose  them  in  words 
or  translate  them  into  action.  He  also  said:  God  says  to  the  angels 
Keraman  Katebin:  Don't  write  when  on.e  of  My  servants  intends 
to  commit  a  sin  except  when  he  does  it.  When  he  wishes  to  do  a 
good  deed  and  translates  it  into  action,  write  for  him  ten  merits 
therefor.  It  appears  from  above  that  intention  to  commit  a  sin  is 
forgiven.  On  the  contrary,  if  one  intends  to  do  good  without 
translating  it  into  action,  merits  upto  seven  hundred  times  are 
written  for  him.  There  is  in  another  Hadis:  God  says:  I  forgive  one 
who  intends  to  commit  a  sin  without  translating  it  into  action. 
God  says:  God  will  take  into  account  what  crosses  your  mind

44

Soul  and  its  Attributes

Vol-III

whether  you  disclose  it  or  keep  secret.  Then  He  will  forgive 
whom  He  wishes  and  punish  whom  He  wishes  -  2 : 284.

God  say:  Don't  be  busy  in  what  you  have  no  knowledge  - 17: 
36.  Similarly,  eyes,  ears  and  heart  of  everyone  will  be  asked.  It 
appears  from  this  that  actions  of  mind  will  be  taken  into  account 
and  ordinarily  they  will  not  be  forgiven.  God  says:  God  will  not 
punish  you  for  useless  talks  in  your  oath,  but  He  will  punish  you 
for  what  your  hearts  have  earned.  So  there  are  conflicting  views 
whether  a  man  will  be  punished  for  thoughts  of  mind  or  not.  The 
solution  to  us  is  as  folio  ws.Four  Stages  Of  Thoughts:  There  are  four  stages  for  the 
formation  of  a  thought  in  order.  First,  rise  of  a  thought  in  mind, 
then  inclination  of  passion,  then  order  of  mind  and  then  will  and 
determination.  These  four  stages  of  a  thought  come  in  order.  For 
instance,  a  woman  walks  behind  a  man.  It  occurs  in  the  mind  of 
the  man  after  seeing  the  woman  that  she  is  walking  behind  him. 
This  is  the  sudden  rise  of  thought  in  his  mind.  Next  he  thinks  that 
he  should  see  her  again  by  turning  his  look  at  the  back.  This  is  the 
second  stage  called  inclination  of  mind  arising  out  of  first 
thought.  In  the  third  stage,  mind  gives  order  to  translate  this 
inclination  into  action  and  as  a  result  he  trims  his  look  towards 
the  woman.  Between  the  second  and  third  stages,  there  are 
hurdles  like  shame  or  fear.  Out  of  fear  or  shame,  he  may  not  look 
back.  In  the  fourth  stage,  there  is  will  and  determination  to  see 
the  woman.  It  is  will  with  action.'PUNISHMENT:  There  is  no  punishment  in  the  first  stage  as 
man  has  got  no  control  in  sudden  rise  of  thought  in  mind.  In  the 
second  stage  also,  there  is  no  punishment  for  the  above  reason. 
The  Prophet  said  regarding  the  above  two  stages:  The  thought 
that  naturally  arises  in  the  minds  of  my  followers  is  pardonable. 
Once  Hazrat  Osman-b-Mazun  asked  the  Prophet:  O  Messenger 
of  God,  my  nature  dictates  to  me  to  divorce  Khaola.  He  said: 
Make  delay,  marriage  is  my  way.  He  again  said:  My  nature  wants 
me  to  be  important.  The  Prophet  said:  Fasting  among  my 
followers  works  like  importancy.  He  said  again:  My  nature 
wants  me  to  be  a  hermit.  The  Prophet  said:  Stop,  Jihad  and  Haj 
and  asceticism  of  my  followers.  He  said:  My  nature  wants  me  to 
give  up  meat.  The  Prophet  said:  Stop,  I  love  it.  There  was  no  will 
and  determination  to  do  these  things.  For  this  reason,  the 
Prophet  advised  mutual  consultation  before  determining  a  thing.

voi-in

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

45voi-in

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

45

In  the  third  stage,  mind  considers  whether  the  previous 
thought  should  be  translated  into  action.  This  condition  of  mind 
is  situated  within  willingness  or  unwillingess.  What  is  subject  to 
one's  willingness  shall  meet  with  punishment  and  what  is  not 
subject  to  it  shall  receive  no  punishment.  In  the  fourth  stage, 
there  is  determination  to  translate  the  evil  thought  into  action  for 
which  there  is  punishment.  But  if  it  is  not  acted  upon,  then  there 
is  room  for  doubt  whether  it  will  be  punished  or  not.  If  he  fears 
God  and  does  not  do  it  after  repentance,  he  will  get  a  virtue  even 
though  his  evil  intention  is  a  sin,  but  to  refrain  from  it  out  of  fear 
of  God  is  a  virtue.  He  who  wills  at  night  that  in  the  morning  he 
will  kill  a  Muslim  or  commit  fornication  with  a  woman  and  if  be 
dies  in  that  night  he  will  die  upon  that  will  and  he  will  be  raised 
up  upon  that  condition.  The  Prophet  said:  When  two  men  face 
each  other  with  their  arms,  the  killer  and  the  killed  will  both  go  to 
Hell.  He  was  asked:  O  Messenger  of  God,  we  understand  it  in  the 
case  of  a  killer.  But  why  will  the  killed  go  to  Hell?  The  Prophet 
said:  The  reason  is  that  he  intended  to  kill  his  companion.So  God  will  punish  for  will  and  intention.  Pride,  self-praise, 
show,  hypocrisy,  hatred  and  other  evil  thoughts  of  mind  will 
surely  meet  with  punishment.  Soul  is  the  root  and  so  it  is  fit  for 
punishment.  The  Prophet  said:  God-fear  is  here,  pointing  out  to 
the  heart  or  soul.  God  says:  God  does  not  accept  blood  and  meat 
of  a  sacrificed  animal  but  He  accepts  from  you  God-fear.  The 
Prophet  said:  The  thing  which  irritates  is  sin.  He  said:  What 
gives  consolation  in  mind  is  virtue  though  it  gives  you  decision. 
If  a  man  finds  a  woman  in  his  bed  in  darkness  and  thinks  that 
she  is  his  wife  and  as  such  cohabits  with  her,  he  commits  no  sin, 
but  if  he  cohabits  with  his  wife  thinking  that  she  is  a  strange 
woman,  he  commits  sin.  So  every  action  is  not  an  action  of  the 
organs,  but  an  action  of  the  mind.

CONSTANT  CHANGE  OF  MIND:  Effect  on  mind  comes 
from  different  sources.  Mind  is  a  target  to  which  arrows  are  shot. 
When  anything  falling  in  mind  creates  some  effect,  the  opposite 
thing  changes  that  effect.  If  the  devil  calls  towards  passion,  the 
angel  removes  it  from  mind,  God  says:  I  change  their  heart  and 
sights.  God  created  human  mind  as  an  wonderful  thing.  When 
the  Prophet  took  oath,  he  sometimes  said:  No,  by  oath  of  the 
Changer  of  mind.  He  often  used  to  say,  O  Changer  of  mind,  keep 
my  mind  firm  on  Thy  religion.  The  companions  asked:  Do  you

46

Soul  and  its  Attributes

Vol-III

fear,  O  Prophet  of  God?  He  replied:  Who  will  give  me  assurance 
when  the  mind  is  within  the  two  fingers  of  the  Merciful?  He 
changes  it  as  He  likes.Vol-III

fear,  O  Prophet  of  God?  He  replied:  Who  will  give  me  assurance 
when  the  mind  is  within  the  two  fingers  of  the  Merciful?  He 
changes  it  as  He  likes.

THREE  EXAMPLES  OF  MIND:  The  Prophet  cited  three 
examples  of  mind.  He  said:  Mind  is  like  a  sparrow  which  He 
changes  every  moment.  He  said:  Mind  is  like  water  in  a  pot  when 
i  t  is  made  hot  in  the  matter  of  change,  he  said :  Mind  is  like  a  wing 
in  an  open  field  to  be  turned  over  and  again  by  wind.  Mind  is  of 
three  kinds  from  the  point  of  view  of  virtues,  vices  and  doubtful 
things.  The  first  kind  of  mind  is  made  up  of  God  fear  nurtured  by 
divine  services  and  free  from  bad  conducts.  Therein  fall  good 
thoughts  from  the  unseen  treasure  house  of  spiritual  kingdom. 
Wisdom  leads  the  good  thoughts  falling  on  it  to  know  the  subtle 
affairs  and  gives  clue  to  the  secret  matters  of  fortune.  One  knows 
it  by  the  light  of  insight  and  commands  that  there  is  no 
alternative  but  to  translate  it  into  action.  The  sight  of  angels  falls 
in  such  mind.  He  sees  it  naturally  pure,  cleansed  by  God-fear, 
nurtured  by  the  rays  of  intellect  or  polished  by  the  sparkling  ligh  t 
of  Ma'arfat  or  divine  knowledge.  The  angels  help  such  a  mind. 
God  says:  If  a  man  gives  charity,  fears  God  and  does  good  deeds, 
I  shall  make  his  path  easy  -5:92.  Such  a  mind  is  blessed  with  five 
virtues  gratefulness,  patience.  God-fear,  poverty,  asceticism, 
love,  containment,  reliance  on  God,  good  thoughts  and  other 
good  qualities  and  becomes  free  from  vices  and  evils.  God  speaks 
of  such  a  mind:  Behold,  hearts  find  consolation  by  the 
remembrance  of  God.  In  another  verse:  O  satisfied  soul,  return  to 
Thy  Lord  well-pleased  and  pleasing  Him  -  89 : 27.The  second  kind  of  mind  is  full  of  passions,  low  desires  and 
other  evils.  The  doors  of  the  devil  remain  open  towards  it  and  the 
doors  of  angels  remain  shut  up  against  it.  Regarding  such  mind, 
God  says:  Have  you  seen  one  who  takes  his  passion  as  his  deity? 
They  are  like  beasts  -  25  :  44.  It  is  all  the  same  if  you  call  him 
towards  guidance.  He  will  not  hear  you.

The  third  kind  of  mind  is  a  mixture  of  good  and  evil. 
Sometimes  good  leads  one  towards  guidance  and  sometimes  evil 
deeds  towards  misguidance  and  error.  Intellect  helps  him  in  his 
guidance  and  misguidance.  The  forces  of  the  devil  and  the  forces 
of  angels  fight  in  his  mind  till  either  of  them  becomes  victorious.

CHAPTER  II

GOOD  CONDUCT

RIAZAT  OR  EFFORTS  IN  THE  WAYS  OF  GOD

Know,  O  dear  readers,  that  the  Prophet  of  God  was  the 
possessor  of  good  character  and  conduct,  Good  conduct  is  half  of 
religion,  fruit  of  the  efforts  of  God-fearing  men  and  an  important 
quality  of  the  worshippers  of  God.  Bad  conduct  is  a  ruinous 
poison,  a  dangerous  wound  in  brain  and  much  condemned  evil. 
There  are  many  doors  of  bad  conduct  which  remain  open  to  the 
fire  of  Hell  as  the  doors  of  good  conduct  are  open  towards  the 
bliss  of  Paradise.  Bad  conduct  is  a  disease  of  soul  which  ruins  the 
ever-lasting  life.  If  efforts  are  necessary  to  save  the  temporary 
body  from  disease,  how  much  efforts  are  necessary  to  save  the 
soul  from  its  diseases  which  will  be  everlasting?  In  the  following 
verse,  God  says  of  the  treatment  of  sou 1:  He  who  purifies  it  is 
successful  and  he  who  ruins  it  is  ruined  -91:2.  We  shall  describe 
in  this  chapter  the  diseases  of  soul  and  its  cures.MERITS  OF  GOOD  CONDUCT.  Know,  O  dear  readers,  that 
God  praised  His  Prophet  and  said:  You  are  upon  sublime 
character,  hazrat  Ayesha  said:  The  Quran  is  the  conduct  of  the 
Messenger  of  God.  When  a  man  asked  the  Prophet  about  good 
conduct,  he  recited  the  following  verse:  Take  to  pardon,  enjoin 
good  and  keep  a  way  from  the  illiterate  -7:199.  Then  the  Prophet 
explained  good  conduct  and  said:  Good  conduct  is  this  join  the 
tie  of  relationship  with  one  who  cuts  it  off.  Pardon  one  who 
oppresses  you.  The  Prophet  said:  'I  have  been  sent  to  complete 
the  best  of  conducts.'  Good  conduct  will  be  heaviest  of  all 
attributes  in  the  Balance  on  the  resurrection  day.  Once  a  man 
came  to  the  Prophet  and  said:  O  Messenger  of  God,  what  is 
religion?  He  replied:  God  conduct  Then  he  came  to  his  front  and 
asked:  O  Messenger  of  God,  what  is  religion?  He  replied:  Good 
conduct.  Then  he  came  by  his  left  side  and  asked:  What  is 
religion?  He  replied:  Good  conduct.  Then  he  came  by  his  back 
side  and  asked  the  same  question  and  he  replied  the  same.  Then 
he  said  looking  at  him:  Not  to  be  angry  is  good  conduct.  The 
Prophet  was  asked:  What  is  misfortune?  He  said:  Bad  conduct.

Once  a  man  asked  the  Prophet:  Give  me  some  advice.  He 
said:  Fear  God  wherever  you  are.  He  said:  Give  me  more  advice.

48

Good  Conduct

Vol-IIIOnce  a  man  asked  the  Prophet:  Give  me  some  advice.  He 
said:  Fear  God  wherever  you  are.  He  said:  Give  me  more  advice.

48

Good  Conduct

Vol-III

The  Prophet  said:  If  you  commit  an  evil  do  a  good  action  soon 
after  it.  As  a  result,  the  evil  will  vanish  He  said:  Give  me  more 
advice.  The  Prophet  said:  Treat  well  with  the  people.  He  was 
asked:  Which  action  is  best?  He  said:  Good  conduct.  The  Prophet 
said:  God  will  not  throw  one  into  Hell  whom  He  gave  good 
temperament  and  good  appearance.  The  prophet  was  once 
asked.  A  certain  woman  fasts  all  days  and  prays  all  nights,  but 
she  has  got  a  bad  temper  an  gives  trouble  to  her  neighbours  by 
harsh  words.  The  Prophet  said:  There  is  no  good  in  her  and  her' 
place  is  in  Hell.  Hazrat  Abu  Darda'a  said:  I  heard  the  Prophet 
say:  The  first  of  what  will  be  placed  in  the  Balance  is  good 
conduct  and  benevolence.When  God  created  faith,  it  said:  Give  me  strength.  God  gave  it 
strength  through  good  conduct  and  benevolence.  When  God 
created  infidelity,  it  said:  O  Lord,  give  me  strength.  He  gave  it 
miserliness  and  bad  conduct.  The  Prophet  said:  God  preferred  this 
religion  for  Him.  There  will  be  no  good  in  your  religion  except  good 
conduct  and  benevolence.  Beware,  adorn  your  religion  with  these 
two  virtues.  The  Prophet  said:  God  created  good  conduct  as  the  best 
thing  He  was  asked:  O  Prophet  of  God,  who  is  best  in  i  ith  among 
the  believers:  He  replied:  He  who  is  best  among  them  in  good 
conduct.  The  Prophet  said:  Don't  entertain  the  people  with  your 
wealth,  but  entertain  them  with  smiling  face  and  goo  conduct.  The 
Prophet  said:  Bad  conduct  destroys  divine  service  as  condiment 
destroys  honey.  The  Prophet  said:  So  make  your  conduct  good, 
Hazrat  Bara'a-b-Ajeb  said:  The  face  of  the  prophet  was  most 
beautiful  and  his  conduct  was  best.  The  prophet  used  to  say  in 
invocation:  O  God,  you  have  made  my  constitution  good.  So  make 
also  my  conduct  good.  He  used  to  pray  most;  O  God,  I  pray  to  Thee 
for  health,  peace  of  mind  and  good  conduct.The  Prophet  said:  Honour  a  believer  for  his  religion.  Think 
him  superior  for  good  conduct  and  wisdom.  Some  desert  Arabs 
once  came  to  the  Prophet  and  asked  him:  What  best  thing  has 
been  given  to  men?  He  replied:  Good  conduct.  The  Prophet  said: 
He  who  will  become  dearest  and  nearest  to  me  on  the 
resurrection  day  will  be  a  man  of  good  conduct.  He  also  said: 
Don't  believe  any  action  good  out  of  the  divine  services  of  one  in 
whom  one  of  these  matters  is  not  found  -  (1)  God-fear  which 
restrains  him  from  infidelity  of  God,  (2)  patience  which  restrains 
a  fool,  (3)  or  good  conduct  with  which  he  lives  in  society.

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

49

r

yol-IH

The  Prophet  used  to  say  at  the  beginning  of  his  prayer:  O 
God,  guide  me  to  good  conduct.  Nobody  except  Thou  can  guide 
me  towards  it.  Hazrat  Anas  said:  We  were  once  with  the  Prophet 
who  said:  Good  conduct  removes  all  faults  as  the  rays  of  the  sun 
melt  snow.  The  Prophet  said:  Good  conduct  appertains  to  the 
fortune  of  a  man.  The  Prophet  said  to  Abu  Zarr:  O  Abu  Zarr, 
there  is  no  wisdom  like  efforts  and  there  is  no  virtue  like  good 
conduct.  He  said:  A  true  Muslim  can  get  for  his  good  conduct  and 
high  rank  the  rank  of  Saemur  Dahar  and  Qaemul  Lail  (one  who 
fasts  all  days  and  prays  all  nights).  The  Prophet  said  to  his 
companions:  1  saw  last  night  a  wonderful  dream.  I  saw  one  of  my 
followers  sitting  upon  his  knees  and  there  was  between  him  and 
God  only  one  screen  which  was  removed  by  his  good  conduct 
and  so  he  became  close  to  God.The  Prophet  said:  A  man  will  get  high  rank  and  an 
honourable  place  in  the  next  world  by  dint  of  his  good  conduct 
even  though  he  had  little  divine  services.  The  Prophet  said  once 
to  Hazrat  Omar:  O  Omar,  by  One  in  whose  hand  there  is  my  life, 
the  devil  does  not  tread  a  path  which  you  tread.  He  said:  Bad 
conduct  is  such  a  sin  which  has  got  no  pardon.  Bad.idea  is  such  a 
fault  which  spreads.  The  Prophet  said:  A  man  reaches  the  lowest 
stage  of  hell  for  his  bad  conduct.

Wise  Sayings.  The  son  of  Loqman  asked  his  father:  O  father, 
which  fine  qualities  in  his  conduct  are  good?  Loqman  said: 
Religion,  treatment,  shame,  good  conduct  and  generosity.  When 
these  five  qualities  are  united  in  a  person,  he  becomes  pure. 
God-fearing  and  friend  of  God  and  is  freed  from  the  devil.  Hazrat 
Junaid  said:  Four  virtues  raise  up  a  man  to  highest  rank  though 
his  divine  service  and  learning  are  little  -  (1)  patience,  (2) 
modesty,  (3)  generosity  and.  (4)  good  conduct.  Good  conduct 
completes  faith.  Hazrat  Ihya-b-Ma'az  said:  Bad  conduct  is  worst 
evil  and  if  one  has  got  many  virtues  along  with  it  they  do  not  do 
him  any  benefit.  Good  conduct  is  a  good  attribute.  If  he  has  got 
many  sins  with  it,  it  does  not  do  him  harm.  Hazrat  Ibn  Abbas  was 
asked:  What  is  honour?  He  said:  God  explained  it  in  the  Quran: 
The  most  honourable  of  you  is  he  who  is  the  most  God-fearing 
among  you  -  49  : 13.  He  said:  He  who  has  got  best  good  conduct 
among  you  is  the  possessor  of  best  quality  among  you.  He  said: 
Every  building  has  got  foundation.  The  foundation  of  Islam  is 
good  conduct.

50

Good  Conduct

Vol-IIi50

Good  Conduct

Vol-IIi

WHAT  IS  GOOD  CONDUCT:  Know,  O  dear  readers,  that 
God  said  that  He  created  man  out  of  clay  and  infused  His  spirit 
unto  him  and  then  the  angels  made  prostration  before  him.  It 
appears  from  this  that  there  is  connection  of  body  with  earth  and 
of  soul  with  the  Creator.  So  human  nature  is  rooted  in  soul  and 
actions  flow  out  of  it.  If  good  actions  come  out  of  soul,  it  assumes 
good  conduct,  and  if  evil  actions  come  out  of  it,  it  assumes  bad 
conduct.  Hence  there  are  four  things  -  (1)  to  do  good  or  bad 
action,  (2)  to  possess  power  to  do  there  actions,  (3)  to  have 
knowledge  of  both,  (4)  and  to  become  either  of  the  two  actions, 
good  and  bad,  easy.  Owing  to  his  attachment  to  either  of  them, 
conduct  arises.  As  a  man  cannot  be  called  beautiful  if  he  has  got 
only  two  beautiful  eyes  but  not  beautiful  face  and  nose,  so  he 
cannot  be  called  to  possess  good  conduct  if  he  has  got  only  one  of 
the  above  attributes!  A  beautiful  man  is  he  who  has  got  his  bodily 
limbs  proportionate  and  beautiful,  so  also  a  man  is  said  to  have 
good  conduct  if  he  has  got  in  him  all  the  qualities 
proportionately.The  nature  of  soul  is  divided  into  four  kinds:  (1)  power  of 
discerning  knowledge,  (2)  power  of  administration  or  anger,  (3) 
power  of  greed  and  (4)  power  of  adjustment  of  the  above  three 
natures.  If  knowledge  finds  full  display  and  becomes  mature, 
truth  can  be  ascertained  from  falsehood,  good  from  bad.  So 
knowledge  is  the  root  of  good  conduct.  God  says:  Whoever  is 
given  wisdom  has  been  given  abundant  good  -  2  :  269.  When 
anger  conducts  itself  under  knowledge  and  Shariat,  it  can  be 
termed  beautiful.  When  greed  becomes  subject  to  wisdom  and 
shame,  it  can  be  termed  beautiful.  Power  of  adjustment  of  the 
natures  or  judgment  is  beautiful  when  anger  and  greed  are 
guided  by  wisdom  and  Shariat.  The  beauty  of  anger  is  called 
bravery  and  the  beauty  of  greed  is  called  patience.  If  anger 
exceeds  the  limit  of  moderation,  it  is  called  cowardice.  If  greed 
exceeds  moderation,  it  is  called  hope  against  hope;  and  if  it  goes 
down,  it  is.  called  sluggishness.  Moderation  of  greed  is  good  and 
the  two  extremes  of  greed  are  bad.  If  wisdom  is  used 
immoderately,  it  is  called  deception.  If  it  reaches  to  the  extreme, 
it  is  called  genius.  The  middle  course  is  called  wisdom.

So  there  are  four  basic  qualities  of  good  conduct  knowledge, 
bravery,  patience  and  power  of  adjustment  or  judgment.  Other 
qualities  are  their  branches.  Nobody  was  blessed  with  all  these

VoI-IU  The  Book  of  Destructive  evils  51

>VoI-IU  The  Book  of  Destructive  evils  51

>

qualities  except  the  Prophets.  There  are  differences  in  those 
qualities  in  the  persons  other  than  the  Prophets,  he  who  is  devoid 
of  these  qualities  is  near  the  accursed  evil.  The  Prophet  was  sent 
to  complete  good  conduct  and  good  manners.  The  Quran  praised 
the  believers  for  possessing  these  qualities:  The  believers  are 
those  who  have  got  faith  in  God,  His  Prophet  and  then  do  not 
entertain  any  doubt  and  fight  with  their  lives  and  properties  in 
the  way  of  God.  These  are  they  who  are  truthful.  God  described 
the  companions  of  the  Prophet  in  this  verse:  They  are  hard  upon 
the  unbelievers  but  sympathetic  to  one  another  -  48 : 28.

CHANGE  OF  NATURE:  It  has  been  argued  that  nature 
cannot  be  changed  and  this  mistaken  belief  arises  out  of  two 
reasons.

•fCHANGE  OF  NATURE:  It  has  been  argued  that  nature 
cannot  be  changed  and  this  mistaken  belief  arises  out  of  two 
reasons.

•f

(1 )  The  first  reason  is  that  just  as  figure  of  a  man  or  his  colour 
can  not  be  changed,  or  a  man  can  not  be  made  short  or  long,  or  a 
black  man  cannot  be  changed  to  a  white  man,  so  also  nature 
cannot  be  changed.  Another  reason  cited  is  that  inspite  of  our 
efforts,  sexual  passion,  anger  etc.  cannot  be  uprooted  and  to 
make  efforts  to  control  them  is  useless.  The  answer  to  these 
objections  is  as  follows.  If  nature  is  unchangeable,  then  sermons, 
education  and  learning  would  have  been  useless.  The  Prophet 
said:  Make  your  conduct  good.  This  advice  would  have  been 
meaningless.  When  the  nature  of  lower  animals  can  be  changed 
by  training,  human  nature  can  all  the  more  be  changed  by 
training,  education  and  habits.  All  things  of  the  world  are  made 
of  two  elements.  Man  has  got  no  power  over  one  element,  but  he 
has  got  control  over  another  element.  The  sun,  moon,  stars  and 
the  external  and  internal  forms  of  animals  cannot  be  changed. 
God  created  another  element  which  may  develop  into  perfection 
according  to  certain  rules  and  regulations.  For  instance  a  paddy 
seed,  if  kept  under  certain  conditions,  can  develop  into  paddy 
plants,  but  it  cannot  produce  a  mango  tree  or  a  date  tree.  Similar 
is  the  case  with  passion,  anger,  pride  etc.  If  they  are  kept  under 
rules  and  regulations  and  control,  they  cannot  take  to  the  highest 
degree  of  progress,  but  they  cannot  be  uprooted  at  will.  To  keep 
them  under  control  is  the  cause  of  salvation.MEN  ARE  OF  FOUR  CLASSES  ACCORDING  TO  NATURE: 
(1)  One  class  of  men  are  in  attentive.  They  don't  distinguish 
between  truth  and  falsehood  and  they  remain  with  nature 
with  which  they  are  born.  By  training,  their  conduct  can  be  good.

52

Good  Conduct

Vol-IIl

(2)  The  second  class  of  men  can  know  the  evil  actions  of  others 
but  are  not  habituated  to  good  actions  and  are  prone  to  evils. 
They  are  to  give  up  the  habits  of  evil  actions  and  seeds  of  good 
actions  are  to  be  sown  in  their  souls.  (3)  The  third  kind  of  men 
believe  bad  conducts  to  be  good.  (4)  The  fourth  kind  of  men  are 
bred  upon  evils.  The  first  kind  of  men  are  illiterate  to  the  extreme, 
the  second  kind  are  illiterate  and  misguided,  the  third  kind  are 
illiterate,  misguided  and  sinners  and  the  fourth  kind  are 
illiterate,  misguided,  sinners  and  dishonest.(2)  The  second  reason  of  the  above  argument  is  that  greed, 
passion,  anger,  pride  etc.  can  be  uprooted.  This  is  a  mistaken 
Belief.  The  object  of  these  is  to  bring  them  under  control  and 
not  to  uproot  these  natural  propensities.  These  are  necessary 
for  a  man.  Had  he  not  had  greed  for  food,  he  would  have  been 
ruined.  The  object  is  to  use  it  with  moderation  without  going 
to  the  extremes.  The  Prophet  said:  I  am  only  a  human  being.  I 
get  angry  as  others  get  angry.  When  anything  was  said  to  him 
which  was  doubtful,  he  used  to  get  angry,  even  his  two  cheeks 
assumed  then  reddish  colour.  God  says  regarding  control  of 
anger  -  Those  who  control  anger  and  forgive  men.  He  did  not 
say  to  uproot  it.  To  take  middle  course  in  conduct  is  better  and 
not  the  two  extremes.  Benevolence  is  a  good  quality  and  it  is 
the  middle  course  between  two  extremes  -  extravagance  and 
miserliness.  God  praised  it  in  the  following  verse:  When  they 
spend,  they  do  not  squander,  nor  become  miser,  but  the  stand 
between  these  two  conditions.  In  another  verse:  Don't  make 
your  hand  tied  up  with  your  necks,  nor  spread  it  to  utmost 
spreading  -  17  :  29.  To  take  middle  course  in  green  for  food  is 
best.  God  says  :  Eat  and  drink,  but  do  not  measure.  God  does 
not  love  those  who  squanders.  The  Prophet  said  :  The  middle 
course  is  the  best.  Heat  is  a  name  between  scorching  rays  and 
snow,  free  from  two  extremes.  Benevolence  is  the  middle 
course  between  extravagance  and  miserliness  and  bravery  is 
an  attribute  between  haughtiness  and  cowardice.MEANS  OF  ACQUIRING  GOOD  CONDUCT.  Know,  O 
dear  readers,  that  good  conduct  is  the  name  of  bringing  greed 
and  anger  under  the  control  of  intellect  and  Shariat.  This  middle 
course  can  be  acquired  in  two  ways.  The  first  way  to  gain  this 
middle  course  is  to  make  perfect  God-given  powers  and  in  born 
qualities.  Some  men  have  been  created  with  full  intellect  and

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

53

voi-in

(>od  conduct  and  their  greed  and  anger  have  been  placed  under 
control  of  intellect  and  Shariat.  So  these  people  become  wise 
without  education  and  receive  good  conduct  without  training, 
prophet  Jesus  and  Prophet  Ihya  and  other  prophets  are  such  type 
of  people.  Many  boys  are  born  opposite  to  them.  They  can 
acquire  these  virtues  by  education  and  training  through  spiritual 
guides.  The  second  means  is  efforts  by  which  these  qualities  can 
be  acquired.  For  instance,  if  anybody  wishes  to  acquire  the  virtue 
of  benevolence,  he  must  be  habituated  to  make  charity  inspite  of 
his  unwillingness  to  spend  money.  Then  it  will  be  easy  for  him  to 
spend.  To  acquire  the  virtue  of  modesty,  one  is  to  follow  the 
actions  of  the  humble  for  a  long  time.  Then  it  will  become  easy 
after  a  place  of  time.  He  who  finds  pleasure  in  charity  is  called  a 
pilanthorpist.  the  Prophet  said  :  Prayer  has  been  made  a  doll  to 
my  eyes.  God  says  :  It  (Prayer)  is  difficult  except  to  the  God 
fearing.  The  Prophet  said :  Do  divine  service  with  contentment,  if 
you  can  not  do  it,  it  is  better  to  do  it  with  patience  inspite  of 
unwillingness.Acquisition  of  fortune  by  habits,  to  acquire  fortune,  it  is 
necessary  to  stick  to  a  thing  always  and  it  is  not  sufficient  to 
hate  sins.  He  must  find  pleasure  in  doing  good  deeds.  The 
longer  the  life,  the  more  firm  and  perfect  will  be  its  good. 
When  the  Prophet  was  asked  about  good  fortune,  he  replied  : 
'To  stick  to  worships  throughout  life  is  good  fortune/  For  this 
reason,  the  Prophets  and  the  friends  of  God  disliked  death  as 
this  world  is  the  seed  ground  for  the  hereafter,  the  longer  the 
life,  the  more  the  divine  service,  and  the  more  the  rewards,  the 
more  will  be  the  soul  pure  and  the  character  and  conduct  will 
be  more  strong  and  firm.  The  object  of  divine  service  is  its 
effect  on  soul.  The  object  of  good  character  and  conduct  is  to 
cut  off  the  attachment  of  the  world  from  soul  and  to  confine 
them  to  the  love  of  God.  The  greatest  thing  for  the  soul  is  its 
meeting  with  god.  Good  habits  create  light  in  soul  which 
shows  many  wonderful  things.  He  who  finds  pleasure  in 
playing  with  pigeons  stands  throughout  the  day  in  sun's  rays 
and  does  not  feel  tried.  He  who  is  accustomed  to  theft  taken 
pride  for  acts  of  theft  even  though  his  hands  are  cut  off  and  he 
is  whipped.  Those  males  who  like  to  be  females  allow  their 
hairs  to  grow  long,  paint  the  faces  and  mix  with  females  with 
female  dresses.  They  taken  pride  in  that.  These  are  acts  of  habit 
for  which  they  take  pride  and  find  pleasure.

54

Good  Conduct

Vol-III54

Good  Conduct

Vol-III

HABITS  OF  GOOD  DEEDS:  Similarly,  one  should  grow 
habits  of  doing  good  deeds.  If  they  are  done  for  long  and  are 
not  given  up,  pleasure  will  come  as  a  matter  of  course  like  that 
of  the  above  persons.  If  a  man  forms  the  habit  of  eating  earth, 
he  will  find  pleasure  in  eating  it.  So  soul  will  find  pleasure  in 
doing  good  deeds  if  one  sticks  to  them  for  a  pretty  long  time. 
He  who  wishes  to  be  a  good  scribe,  he  must  stick  to  writing  for 
long.  Similarly  if  one  if  wishes  to  acquire  the  qualities  of 
patience,  generosity,  modesty  etc.  he  must  stick  to  these  habits 
in  actions  and  behaviours.  There  is  no  other  means  to  acquire 
them  except  this  method.  Acquisition  of  learning  is  not  the 
result  of  one  day,  but  of  endless  daysand  nights  in  studies.  The 
natural  food  of  soul  is  knowledge,  divine  knowledge  and  love. 
Its  taste  might  be  changed  for  some  illness  of  soul,  as  owing  to 
disease  of  stomach,  there  is  no  taste  in  food.  So  diseases  of  soul 
must  be  removed  by  efforts  to  acquire  divine  love  and 
knowledge.CAUSES  OF  MISFORTUNE:  Only  one  sin  does  not  bring 
misfortune.  It  is  the  cause  of  committing  sins  after  sins  and 
disobeying  the  commands  and  prohibitions  of  God.  This  is  also 
the  condition  of  minor  sins.  Repetition  of  a  minor  sin  amounts  to 
a  great  sin.  One  black  spot  falls  in  soul  if  a  sin  is  committed  and 
repetition  of  sins  causes  repetition  of  spots  in  soul.  Thereafter  the 
soul  becomes  completely  dark  and  black.  When  death  suddenly 
comes  to  such  a  man,  he  dies  upon  that  condition.  God  says:  I 
have  placed  screen  in  their  front  and  screen  in  their  back.  Hazrat 
Ali  said:  Faith  puts  a  white  spot  in  soul.  The  more  faith  increases, 
the  more  the  white  spot  increases.  When  the  faith  of  a  man 
become  perfect,  his  soul  is  filled  up  with  that  light.  A  black  spot 
falls  in  the  soul  of  a  hypocrite.  The  more  hypocrisy  increase,  the 
more  the  black  spot  increases.  When  hypocrisy  is  disclosed  in 
full,  his  soul  becomes  completely  dark.

Now  you  have  understood  that  sometimes  good  conduct 
comes  with  birth,  sometimes  it  is  acquired  by  good  deeds  and 
sometimes  by  following  the  actions  of  good  and  religious  people., 
God  does  not  oppress  any  man  but  man  himself  oppresses  his 
soul  and  becomes  unfortunate.  God  says:  He  who  does  an  atom 
of  good  will  see  it,  and  he  who  does  an  atom  of  evil  will  see  it.  99 : 
8.  God  does  not  oppress  them,  but  they  themselves  oppress  their 
souls.

Vol-HI

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

55Vol-HI

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

55

METHODS  OF  EFFORTS  TO  IMPROVE  CONDUCT;  You 
have  come  to  know  now  that  the  middle  course  in  the  matter  of 
conduct  is  good  and  this  keeps  the  soul  pure,  and  if  there  is  any 
drifting  away  from  this  middle  course,  it  causes  disease  of  soul, 
just  as  the  middle  course  is  best  for  preservation  of  health.  The 
treatment  for  the  diseases  of  soul  is  to  remove  from  soul  the  evil 
natures  and  habits  and  to  bring  in  good  natures  and  habits.  Every 
child  remains  upon  nature  or  natural  inborn  qualities,  but  his 
parents  make  him  a  Jew,  or  a  Christian  or  a  Magian.  It  is  the 
saying  of  the  Prophet.  The  child  acquires  bad  habit  through  his 
surroundings.If  there  is  change  in  the  temperament  of  moderation,  it 
must  be  understood  that  the  body  has  got  disease.  Its  medicine 
is  to  act  to  its  opposite.  For  instance,  heat  can  be  removed  by 
cold  and  cold  by  heat,  and  fire  by  water.  If  one  catches  cold  it 
can  be  removed  by  using  hot  things.  Illiteracy  can  be  removed 
by  learning,  miserliness  by  charity,  pride  by  humility  and 
greed  by  patience.  Similarly  the  diseases  of  soul  can  be 
removed  by  the  bitter  pills  of  patience  and  good  actions.  The 
diseases  of  body  end  with  the  death  of  body,  but  the  diseases 
of  soul  will  last  after  death  as  soul  is  ever-lasting.  Appropriate 
medicine  of  soul  can  be  prescribed  by  a  spiritual  physician  or 
guide.  He  must  first  be  acquainted  with  the  diseases  of  his 
disciple  and  then  cautiously  treat  them.  If  he  is  ignorant  of 
Shariat,  he  must  first  teach  it  to  him  and  the  fundamental 
principles  of  Islam.  If  he  earns  unlawfully,  he  must  be  told  to 
give  it  up.  Then  when  the  open  sins  are  removed,  the  guide 
should  look  to  the  removal  of  his  inner  faults  and  character  and 
conduct.  If  he  has  got  wealth  beyond  the  limit  of  his  necessity, 
he  should  tell  him  to  spend  it  in  charities.  If  he  has  got  pride  and 
haughtiness,  he  must  be  taught  to  be  humble  by  frequenting 
bazars  and  markets  with  bags  for  sale  and  buy.  If  he  finds  him 
too  clean,  be  should  tell  him  to  cleanse  his  own  house  and 
kitchen.  To  worship  body  is  to  worship  idols.  So  the  ordinary 
means  to  remove  the  diseases  of  soul  is  to  act  against  its  low 
desires.  God  says:  He  who  fears  the  places,  of  his  Lord  and 
restrains  hims  if  from  evil  passion,  his  place  of  abode  is  Paradise 
-74:41.SIGNS  OF  DISEASES  OF  SOUL:  Know,  O  dear  readers,  that 
every  limb  of  the  body  has  been  created  for  a  particular  purpose.

56

Good  Conduct

Vol-III

If  that  limb  or  organ  does  not  do  that  particular  function,  it  has 
got  disease.  If  it  does  that  function  easily,  it  is  sound.  Eye  has 
been  created  to  see.  If  it  does  not  see,  it  has  got  disease.  So  also  the 
case  with  ear  and  nose.  Soul  has  been  created  for  acquiring  divine 
knowledge,  love  of  God  and  finding  pleasure  in  divine  services. 
God  says:  I  have  created  man  and  jinn  that  they  should  worship 
Me  -  51 : 56.  Man  can  be  distinguished  from  beast  by  soul.  A  man 
is  not  free  from  food,  cohabitation,  drink  and  other  matters.  So  is 
the  case  with  lower  animals.  The  latter  has  got  no  soul,  but  men 
have  got.  It  has  got  the  quality  of  recognising  the  nature  of 
everything,  he  who  knows  God  loves  God.  The  sign  of  love  of 
God  is  that  he  places  love  of  God  above  everything  in  this  world. 
God  says  in  verse  -  9  :  24.  If  your  parents,  your  children  etc  are 
dearer  to  you  than  God  and  His  Apostle  and  serving  in  His  way, 
then  wait  till  God  brings  about  His  command.

He  who  loves  anything  more  than  God  has  got  his  soul 
diseased.  He  is  just  like  a  person  who  loves  to  eat  earth  more  than 
bread.  This  is  the  sign  of  the  disease  of  soul.  Every  soul  is 
diseased  except  that  which  loves  God.  There  is  hardly  any 
physician  of  soul  at  present.  The  physicians  themselves  are 
diseased.  A  diseased  physician  can  hardly  look  to  his  own 
treatment,  not  to  speak  of  the  treatment  of  others.  The  people  are 
now  addicted  to  the  love  of  the  world.TREATMENT  OF  DISEASED  SOUL:  The  medicine  of  the 
disease  of  soul  is  to  accustom  itself  to  the  opposite  attribute.  If 
there  is  disease  of  miserliness,  the  medicine  to  remove  it  is  to  give 
constant  charities  and  spending  money.  There  is  limit  to  charity 
and  expenditure.  He  who  exceeds  the  limit  falls  into  another 
disease  the  fault  of  extravagance.  He  becomes  then  just  like  the 
man  suffering  cold  who  uses  such  hot  thing  which  takes  him  to 
another  trouble.  Our  object  is  to  gain  the  limit  of  moderation 
avoiding  the  two  extremes.  The  middle  path  is  the  straight  path 
which  is  more  narrow  than  a  hair  and  more  sharp-edged  than  a 
sword.  He  who  can  remain  in  the  straight  path  in  the  world  can 
cross  the  bridge  easily  in  the  hereafter.  Majority  of  people  will  be 
inclined  to  one  side  or  the  other.  While  crossing  it,  somebody  will 
fall  down  suddenly.  Some  will  cross  it  like  lightning,  God  says: 
There  is  nobody  among  you  who  will  cross  it.  This  is  your  Lord's 
decree.  I  shall  save  those  who  are  God  fearing  -  19  :  71.  The 
God-fearing  are  those  who  tread  the  straight  path  or  the  path

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

57

Vol-III

very  near  it.  For  this  reason  it  is  our  bounden  duty  to  pray  to  God 
for  seventy  times  a  day  for  being  established  in  the  straight  path. 
God  directed  us  to  pray:  Show  us  the  straight  path.One  day  a  man  dreamt  the  Prophet  and  said  to  him:  O 
Messenger  of  God,  you  have  said  that  the  chapter  Hud  has  made 
you  grey-haired.  Why  have  you  said  that?  The  Prophet  recited 
the  verse  and  said:  Be  firm  on  what  you  have  been  ordered.”  So  to 
keep  firm  on  the  path  is  very  difficult.  Still  one  should  try  his 
utmost  to  remain  on  it  or  very  near  it.  There  is  no  salvation  except 
for  good  deeds  which  cannot  be  achieved  without  good  conduct.

WAYS  OF  LEARNING  EVILS:  Know,  O  dear  readers,  that 
God  shows  evils  to  one  for  whom  He  wishes  good.  He  has  got  no 
fear  who  has  got  deep  insight.  When  a  man  can  know  his  faults,  he 
can  try  to  remove  them  but  majority  of  men  remain  ignorant  of  their 
faults.  The  man  who  wishes  to  see  his  faults  has  got  four  ways.

(1)  The  first  way  is  to  inform  his  faults  and  evils  to  his 
spiritual  guide  who  can  treat  his  diseases,  but  this  is  very  rare 
nowadays.(1)  The  first  way  is  to  inform  his  faults  and  evils  to  his 
spiritual  guide  who  can  treat  his  diseases,  but  this  is  very  rare 
nowadays.

(2)  The  second  way  is  to  appoint  a  true  and  pious  friend  to 
detect  his  faults  and  defects.  A  religious  man  takes  to  this  method 
of  finding  out  his  own  defects  and  shortcomings.  Hazrat  Omar 
prayed:  May  God  show  mercy  on  the  man  who  points  out  my 
defects  to  me.  He  asked  Hazrat  Salman  Farsi  about  his  evils. 
Hazrat  Salman  told  him:  I  heard  that  you  enjoy  two  curries  at  the 
time  of  your  meal  and  that  you  have  got  two  pieces  of  cloth  to  put 
on  -  one  piece  for  day  time  and  another  piece  for  night  time. 
Hazrat  Omar  said:  Have  you  heard  other  than  this?  He  said:  I 
heard  nothing  except  this?  Hazrat  Salman  once  asked  Hazrat 
Huzaifa  whether  he  had  got  any  hypocrisy  in  him?  Thus  the 
companions  of  the  Prophet  inquired  their  own  faults?  Hazrat 
Daud  Tai  remained  aloof  from  society.  The  people  once  asked 
him:  Why  don't  you  mix  with  the  people?  He  replied:  What 
benefit  shall  I  derive  from  them  when  they  conceal  my  faults  and 
do  not  inform  me?  Now  the  table  has  turned.  He  who  informs  us 
our  faults  is  our  great  enemy.

(3)  The  third  way  of  knowing  faults  is  to  gather  them  from 
enemies.  The  attention  of  the  enemies  is  upon  the  faults  of  their 
adversaries.  So  there  is  some  basis  of  their  information  about 
one's  faults.

58

Good  Conduct

Vol-III58

Good  Conduct

Vol-III

(4)  The  fourth  way  is  to  mix  with  the  people  and  know  their 
faults.  If  you  see  their  faults,  you  may  think  that  you  have  those 
faults  in  you  as  a  believer  is  a  mirror  to  another  believer.  He  sees 
his  defects  from  the  defects  of  others.  Once  Prophet  Jesus  was 
asked:  From  whom  have  you  learnt  good  manners?  He  replied: 
Nobody  has  told  me  this.  When  I  have  seen  the  faults  of  the 
illiterate,  I  at  once  gave  them  up.PROOF  OF  SHARIAT  ABOUT  SOUL  AND  MEDICINE:  If 
you  ponder  over  what  has  been  described  above,  your  insight 
will  be  open  and  the  diseases  of  soul  and  their  treatments  will  be 
disclosed  to  you  in  the  light  of  certain  faith.  If  you  are  unable  to 
achieve  it,  you  should  not  secede  from  faith  and  blind  belief.  This 
is  the  rank  of  faith  as  there  is  a  rank  of  education.  Education 
comes  after  faith.  God  says:  God  raises  the  rank  of  those  of  you 
who  have  faith  and  those  having  been  given  learning.  To  go 
against  passion  is  the  greatest  jihad.  H  who  believes  that  the  way 
to  reach  God  is  to  act  against  low  desires  is  included  within  the 
group  of  believers  and  he  who  searches  the  causes  of  these  helps 
is  included  within  the  educated.  God  says:  For  one  who  opposes 
his  low  desires,  there  is  the  abode  of  paradise  -  79  : 41.  God  says: 
They  are  those  people  whom  God  tried  by  God  fear.  It  has  been 
said  by  way  of  explanation  of  this  verse  that  the  love  of  greed  in 
their  hearts  has  been  crushed.  The  Prophet  said:  A  believer  lives 
in  five  troubles  -  (1)  he  is  envied  by  another  believer,  (2)  a 
hypocrite  harbours  hatred  against  him,  (3)  an  unbeliever  fights 
against  him,  (4)  the  devil  misguides  him,  (5)  and  evil  desires 
dispute  with  him.  When  evil  desires  become  enemy,  it  is 
compulsory  to  fight  with  them.God  once  sent  revelation  to  David:  Warn  your  followers  from  . 
eating  the  objects  of  greed,  as  greed  stands  as  screen  to  such  souls 
in  which  there  is  worldly  attachment.  Jesus  Christ  said:  Blessed  is 
he  who  has  given  up  his  present  greed  in  hope  of  getting  future 
promised  reward.  When  some  people  returned  from  jehad,  our 
Prophet  said:  Thanks  to  you!  You  have  returned  from  little  jehad 
to  a  greater  jehad,  he  was  asked:  O  Prophet  of  God,  what  is 
greater  jehad?  He  said:  Fight  with  passion  is  a  greater  jehad.  The 
Prophet  said:  He  who  makes  efforts  in  divine  service  is  a 
Mujahed  (fighter).  He  also  asked:  Keep  your  soul  awa,y  from  the 
harmful  things  and  don't  run  after  your  evil  desires  in  violation 
of  God's  commands.  If  you  do  it,  it  will  dispute  with  you  on  the

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

59

Vol'HI

resurrection  day.  Then  your  one  organ  will  curse  upon  another 
organ  if  God  does  not  forgive  and  conceal.  Sufyan  Saori  said:  I 
have  not  treated  a  more  serious  disease  than  the  disease  of  my 
soul.  It  is  sometimes  for  me  and  sometimes  against  me.Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said:  As  an  unruly  horse  is  to  be  kept  by 
strong  rein,  the  disobedient  soul  of  man  should  be  kept  by  a  more 
firm  rein.  Hazrat  Ihya-e-b-Ma'az  said:  Fight  against  your  passion 
by  the  weapon  of  Riazat  or  effects.  It  is  of  four  kinds  -  (1)  to  eat 
little,  (2)  to  sleep  little,  (3)  to  speak  when  necessary  and  (4)  to 
keep  patience  at  the  troubles  of  the  people.  There  is  death  of 
passion  because  of  little  food.  Sincere  intention  arises  out  of  little 
sleep.  There  is  safety  from  dangers  and  difficulties  on  account  of 
few  talks.  If  there  is  patience  at  the  troubles  given  by  others,  one 
can  reach  his  destined  goal.  There  is  no  greater  difficulty  than  to 
keep  patience  at  the  time  of  harsh  treatment  of  the  people  and  the 
troubles  given  by  them.  He  also  said:  The  enemies  of  a  man  are 
three  -  world,  devil  and  passion.  So  save  yourself  from  the  world 
by  renouncing  it,  from  the  devil  by  opposite  behaviours  and  from 
passion  by  giving  up  greed.  Hazrat  Zafar-b-Hamed  said:  The 
learned  and  the  wise  said  unanimously  that  happiness  can  not  be 
achieved  without  giving  up  happiness.It  has  been  narrated  that  when  Jospeh  was  appointed 
treasures  of  Egypt,  he  was  one  day  travelling  in  the  country  with 
12000  respectable  men  riding  on  horses.  At  that  time,  Zulaikha 
wife  of  the  king  of  Egypt  was  seated  by  the  side  of  the  pathway  of 
Jospeh.  She  said  on  seeing  him:  Glory  to  God  who  made  the  kings 
slaves  of  sins  and  the  slaves  of  God  worst  beings.  Joseph  said 
what  God  dictated  to  him:  God  does  not  destroy  the  rewards  of 
the  doers  of  God,  who  fear  God  and  remain  patient.  The  sage 
Yezid  Rakkashi  said:  O  my  friends,  don't  give  me  cold  drink  in 
the  world,  as  I  may  be  deprived  of  it  in  the  hereafter.

Once  a  man  asked  Caliph  Omar-b-Abdul  Aziz:  When  shall  I 
talk?  He  said:  When  you  wish  to  remain  silent.  He  asked:  When 
shall  I  remain  silent?  He  said:  When  you  wish  to  talk.  Hazrat  Ali 
said:  He  who  is  eager  to  go  to  Paradise  should  remain  free  from 
worldly  greed,  when  there  is  no  other  alternative  for  fortune  of 
the  next  world  but  to  oppose  passion  and  temptation,  we  should 
believe  in  the  words  of  the  learned  and  sages:  'Keep  your  soul 
and  mind  engaged  in  the  knowledge  of  God,  love  of  God  and 
thoughts  about  God.'  Cut  of  all  connections  to  achieve  these

60

Good  Conduct

Vol-III

things.  Man  has  got  no  power  to  achieve  these  things  without  the 
company  of  God.60

Good  Conduct

Vol-III

things.  Man  has  got  no  power  to  achieve  these  things  without  the 
company  of  God.

In  the  above  matters,  mankind  is  of  four  classes.  (1)  The 
minds  of  one  kind  of  people  remain  busy  with  the  remembrance 
of  God  and  do  not  look  to  the  world  except  for  the  bare 
necessaries  of  life.  They  are  included  within  the  class  of  the 
truthful.  This  rank  cannot  be  attained  without  efforts  for  a  long 
time  and  without  patience  for  long  at  worldly  pleasures  and 
temptations.  (2)  The  second  kind  of  people  remain  busy  with  the 
worldly  affairs  and  they  remember  God  with  tongue  and  not 
with  heart.  They  are  included  within  those  who  are  ruined.  (3) 
The  third  kind  of  men  remain  busy  with  religion  and  world  but 
religion  remains  strong  in  their  minds.  They  will  enter  Hell  but 
they  will  soon  be  rescued  therefrom,  because  religion  was  strong 
in  their  minds.  (4)  The  fourth  kind  of  people  remain  busy  with 
religion  and  world  but  the  world  is  strong  in  their  minds.  They 
shall  have  to  reside  long  in  Hell,  but  they  will  be  rescued 
ultimately  therefrom.LAWFUL  THINGS:  Some  say  that  to  enjoy  lawful  things  is 
lawful,  but  why  should  it  be  a  cause  of  drifting  away  from  God?  The 
answer  is  that  love  of  the  world  is  the  root  of  all  evils.  Those  things 
which  are  outside  necessary  things  are  included  in  the  world  and 
they  become  causes  of  being  away  from  God.  Hazrat  Ibrahim 
Khawaj  said:  Once  I  stayed  in  the  hillock  of  Lakam.  I  saw  there  some 
pome-granates  hanging  in  a  pomegranate  tree  and  was  inclined  to 
eat  some  of  them  I  took  some  and  found  them  sour  on  testing.  Then  I 
threw  them  and  went  away.  I  found  a  man  lying  on  the  way  side 
and  many  wasps  were  biting  him.  I  saluted  him  but  he  replied  and 
said:  O  Ibrahim.  I  wondered  how  he  had  come  to  know  of  my  name 
and  asked  him.  How  do  you  know  me?  He  said:  Nothing  is 
concealed  from  one  who  knows  God.  I  said:  I  understand  then  that 
you  are  a  chosen  one  of  God.  Why  then  do  you  not  pray  to  God  to 
save  yourself  from  the  biting  of  wasps?  He  said:  You  are  also  a 
chosen  one  of  God.  Why  they  do  you  not  pray  to  save  yourself  from 
the  greed  of  eating  pome-granates?  The  wounds  of  the  sting  of 
wasps  will  be  disclosed  in  the  next  world  in  the  form  of  greed  for 
pomegranates  and  give  you  pain,  but  the  sting  of  wasps  will  end  in 
this  world.  Then  I  went  away  leaving  him.  The  sage  Sarri  Sakti  said: 
My  mind  has  been  wishing  to  eat  walnut  dipped  in  honey  for  the 
last  forty  years,  but  I  did  not  eat  it  upto  this  date.

Vol-III

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

61Vol-III

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

61

If  the  mind  is  not  kept  under  control,  it  is  not  possible  to  tread 
the  path  of  the  next  world  by  correcting  and  purifying  it,  because 
it  will  then  desire  unlawful  things.  He  who  wishes  to  control  his 
tongue  from  backbiting  and  useless  talks,  it  is  his  duty  to  keep 
silent.  He  should  engage  in  the  remembrance  of  God  and  other 
duties  of  religion  till  the  greed  for  holding  useless  talks  goes 
away  from  him.  He  should  not  utter  except  truth.  This  is  the 
condition  of  every  passion  or  low  desire.  Nature  is  the  same  by 
which  lawful  and  unlawful  things  are  sought  and  mind  should 
be  restrained  from  unlawful  things.  If  it  is  not  kept  under  control 
within  the  limit  of  necessary  things,  it  becomes  strong.  This  is  a 
danger  of  lawful  things.God  says:  They  remain  satisfied  with  the  life  of  the  world 
and  feel  pleasure  at  it.  God  says:  This  world's  life  as  compared 
with  the  next  world  is  only  short-lived  commodity  -  13  :  26.  God 
says:  Know  that  this  world's  life  is  but  play  and  amusement, 
pomp  and  natural  boasting  and  multiplying  among  yourselves 
in  riches  and  children  -  53  :  27.  Those  Sufis  who  possessed 
uncommon  fortitude  said  out  of  experience  that  possession  of 
wealth  makes  the  mindibard  and  heinous  and  keeps  it  away  from 
the  remembrance  of  God.  They  found  by  experience  that  at  the 
time  of  sorrows,  mind  becomes  soft,  pure  and  fit  for  acceptance 
of  grace  owing  to  the  remembrance  of  God.  They  came  to  know 
that  there  is  salvation  in  long  standing  sorrows  and  ruination  in 
case  of  long  standing  enjoyment,  they  gave  up  the  paths  of  greed 
with  care  and  knew  that  accounts  will  be  taken  even  of  lawful 
things,  punishment  for  unlawful  things  and  rebuke  for  doubtful 
things,  he  who  is  to  render  accounts  on  the  resurrection  day  shall 
meet  with  punishment.  So  to  avoid  such  things,  restrain  your 
eyes  from  the  pleasures  of  the  world,  and  don't  enquire  what  will 
occur  after  death.  The  Prophet  said:  Love  what  you  wish  to  love, 
but  you  shall  have  to  leave  it.

SIGNS  OF  GOOD  CONDUCT:  The  followings  are  the  signs 
of  good  conduct  and  they  are  also  the  qualities  of  the  believers. 
God  says  in  verse  23  : 1  -  The  believers  will  get  salvation  those 
who  are  humble  in  their  prayers,  who  avoid  vain  talk,  who  pay 
the  poor-rate,  who.  guard  their  private  parts  except  from  their

wives  or  whom  their  rights  hand  possess, .  those  whowives  or  whom  their  rights  hand  possess, .  those  who

faithfully  observe  their  trusts  and  their  covenants,  who  guard 
their  prayer  s-  23 : 1-8.  God  says:  They  are  those  who  turn  to  God,

62

Good  Conduct

Vol-III

who  serve  Him,  who  praise  Him,  who  fast,  who  bow,  who 
prostrate,  who  enjoin  what  is  good  and  forbid  what  is  evil  and 
who  keep  enjoin  what  is  good  and  forbid  what  is  evil  and  who 
keep  the  limits  of  God  -9:112.  God  says:  Those  only  are  believers 
whose  hearts  become  full  of  ear  when  God  is  mentioned  and  His 
verses  are  recited  to  them,  they  increase  them  in  faith  and  on  their 
Lord  do  they  rely,  those  who  keep  up  prayer  and  spend  out  of 
what  We  have  given  them  -8:2.  Similar  conducts  have  been 
expressed  in  25  : 63.  These  are  the  signs  of  a  believer  and  should 
be  read  very  carefully  in  order  to  implement  them  in  one's  life  to 
acquire  the  virtues  of  good  conduct.Hadis:  The  Prophet  said:  A  believer  loves  for  others  what 
he  loves  for  himself.  He  said:  He  who  loves  God  and  the 
hereafter,  let  him  honour  his  guests.  He  said:  He  who  bAieves 
in  God  and  the  hereafter  shall  honour  his  neighbour.  He  said: 
He  who  believes  in  God  and  the  hereafter  should  utter  good 
words  or  remain  silent.  He  said:  He  who  is  a  perfect  believer  is 
best  in  conduct.  He  said:  When  you  see  a  believer  silent  and 
grave,  come  close  to  him  as  he  is  full  of  wisdom.  He  said:  He 
who  is  pleased  with  virtues  and  displeased  with  sins  is  a 
believer.  He  said:  No  believer  shall  look  to  his  brother  Muslim 
in  such  a  way  that  gives  trouble  to  his  mind.  He  said:  It  is 
unlawful  for  a  Muslim  to  threaten  another  Muslim  with  fear, 
he  said:  If  two  companions  consult  with  each  other  with  trust 
of  God,  it  is  not  lawful  for  one  of  them  to  disclose  the  secrets  of 
another.

Good  conduct  comprises  the  following  qualities  -  shame,  to 
consider  calamity  as  little,  to  wish  good  of  all,  truthfulness,  little 
talk,  much  divine  service,  little  shortcomings,  gravity,  patience, 
contentment,  kindness,  abstaining  from  begging,  curse,  rebuke, 
back-biting,  hatred,  miserliness,  haughtiness  and  pride,  to  love 
for  God  and  hate  for  God.

These  qualities  are  called  good  conduct.  The  sage  Eusof 
b-Ashat  said:  There  are  ten  qualities  of  good  conduct  not  to  break 
promise,  to  do  justice,  not  to  take  revenge,  to  recognise  evil  as  sin, 
not  to  raise  excuse,  to  bear  the  harms  of  others,  to  restrain 
passion,  to  know  one's  own  faults  from  seeing  the  faults  of 
others,  to  come  to  every  one  with  smiling  face  and  to  talk  with 
humility  with  others.

Vol-III

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

63

SOME  EXAMPLES  OF  GOOD  CONDUCTVol-III

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

63

SOME  EXAMPLES  OF  GOOD  CONDUCT

(1)  The  Holy  Prophet  was  once  walking  with  Hazrat  Anas 
and  met  with  a  desert  Arab  with  a  thick  cloth  on  his  body.  The 
desert  Arab  threw  the  cloth  round  the  neck  of  the  Prophet  and 
began  to  drag  him  with  force.  Hazrat  Anas  said:  As  an  effect  of 
this  forced  dragging,  spots  of  the  cloth  fell  upon  his  neck.  The 
desert  Arab  said:  O  Muhammad,  give  me  something  of  the 
wealth  you  have  got  from  God.  The  Prophet  smilingly  looked  at 
him  and  ordered  something  to  be  given  to  him.

(2)  At  another  time  when  the  Quraish  was  giving  the  Prophet 
trouble  in  the  Battle  of  Uhud  and  oppressing  him,  he  said:  O  God, 
forgive  my  people,  because  they  are  ignorant.  Then  God  revealed 
this  verse:  You  are  upon  sublime  character  -68:4.(3)  Once  the  sage  Ibrahim-b-Adham  was  travelling  through  a 
desert.  On  the  way  he  met  a  soldier  who  asked  him:  Are  you  a 
slave?  He  said:  Yes,  I  am  a  slave  The  soldier  said:  Can  you  tell  me 
where  is  locality  here?  He  pointed  out  to  the  grave.  The  soldier 
said:  I  am  seeking  locality.  He  said:  Graveyard  is  the  place  of 
habitation.  The  soldier  was  engaged  at  this,  bound  him  with  a 
chain  and  whipped  him  on  his  back  and  took  him  to  a  town.  The 
disciples  of  Ibrahim  came  to  him  and  the  soldier  told  them  about 
him.  They  said:  His  name  is  Ibrahim-b-Adham  and  he  is  the 
friend  of  God.  Then  the  soldier  fell  at  his  feet  and  begg'ed  pardon 
from  him.  On  being  asked  by  the  people,  he  said:  When  the 
soldier  was  beating  him  with  stick,  I  prayed  for  him  paradise. 
They  asked:  Why  did  you  pray  paradise  for  him  though  he 
oppressed  you?  He  said:  I  know  that  I  will  get  rewards  in  lieu  of 
his  oppression.  I  don't  like  that  one  should  remain  a  sinner  for  me 
for  whom  I  got  rewards.

(4)  Once  a  man  invited  the  sage  Abu  Osman  Hariri  and  his 
object  was  to  examine  him.  When  the  sage  went  to  his  door,  he  said: 
Now  there  is  nothing  for  food.  On  hearing  this,  Abu  Osman  went 
away.  When  he  went  to  some  distance,  the  host  called  him  again. 
When  he  came  again,  he  said:  Return.  Then  he  returned.  He  called 
Abu  Osman  for  the  third  time  and  the  latter  also  came  to  him.  He 
said:  You  have  not  come  in  time  for  food.  Then  he  returned.  When 
he  called  Abu  Osman  for  the  fourth  time,  the  sage  came  to  him  and 
this  time  also  he  did  not  give  him  food.  When  he  was  going,  the  man 
feel  upon  his  feet  and  said  with  folded  hands:  I  have  done  it  only  to

64

Good  Conduct

Vol-III64

Good  Conduct

Vol-III

examine  you.  How  good  is  your  conduct!  The  sage  said:  You 
have  found  in  me  the  conduct  of  a  dog.  If  a  dog  is  called  for  food, 
it  comes  on  call  and  flees  away  when  driven  away.

(5)  Once  the  sage  was  passing  by  a  bylane  when  somebody 
threw  some  refuges  on  his  head.  He  removed  the  refuges  from  his 
body  and  prostrated  on  the  ground  by  way  of  gratefulness  but 
didnottake  retaliation.  He  said:  If  one  is  fit  for  Hell,  will  it  not  be 
a  cause  of  gratefulness  if  refuges  only  are  thrown  on  him?

(6)  Once  the  sage  Sahal  Tastari  was  asked  about  good  conduct, 
he  said:  The  lowest  good  conduct  is  to  bear  with  patience  the 
troubles  given  by  others,  not  to  take  revenge,  to  show  kindness  on 
the  oppressor,  to  ask  forgi  veness  for  him  and  to  be  kind  to  him.

(7)  The  sage  Ahnaf-b-Qais  was  once  asked:  From  whom  have 
you  learnt  patience?  He  said:  From  Qais-b-Asem.  He  was  again 
asked:  How  did  he  learn  patience?  He  said:  He  was  once  seated  in 
his  house  when  a  black  female  slave  was  coining  to  him  with  a 
cup  of  hot  roasted  meat.  Suddenly  the  cup  fell  from  her  hand  and 
fell  on  the  head  of  his  child  who  died  as  a  result.  The  female  slave 
was  greatly  fearful  of  her  master  who  said  to  her:  You  have  got  no 
fear.  Go,  you  are  free  for  the  sake  of  God.  It  was  narrated  that 
when  the  little  boys  saw  the  saint  Wais  Qarni,  they  used  to  throw 
pebbles  at  him  as  they  thought  that  he  was  a  mad  man.  He  used  to 
say  to  them:  O  dear  children,  if  you  are  to  throw  pebbles  at  all, 
throw  small  pebbles  at  me,  so  that  no  blood  can  come  out.  If 
blood  comes  out,  my  ablution  may  break.FORMATION  OF  CHILD  CHARACTER:  Know,  O  dear 
readers,  that  the  training  of  a  child's  character  and  conduct  is  of 
supreme  importance.  God  entrusted  the  children  in  the  hands  of 
their  parents.  The  heart  of  a  child  is  bright  like  a  jewel  and  soft 
like  a  candle  and  free  from  all  impressions.  It  is  soft  like  the  soft 
clay  in  which  any  seed  can  grow.  If  he  is  given  good  training  of 
character  and  conduct,  he  grows  in  that  condition  and  acquires 
fortune  both  in  this  world  and  the  next.  If  he  goes  to  commit  sins 
and  lives  a  life  of  a  beast  he  is  doomed  to  failure  and  destruction. 
God  says:  'O  those  who  believe,  save  yourselves  and  your  family 
members  from  Hell  fire.'  As  the  parents  save  their  children  from 
the  fire  of  the  world,  so  they  should  save  them  also  from  the  fire 
of  Hell  of  the  next  world.  This  means  that  they  should  be  given 
training  of  good  conduct  and  character,  save  them  from  bad

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils ...

65

Vol-IH

company  and  luxurious  habits,  delicious  dishes  and  beautiful 
dresses.  When  a  boy  reaches  the  age  of  discretion,  care  should  be 
taken  of  his  character.  He  gives  up  then  something  out  of  shame 
and  takes  up  something.He  should  be  given  the  training  of  eating  and  drinking.  The 
following  are  some  of  the  rules  of  eating  anti  drinking  (1)  Food  is 
to  be  eaten  with  the  right  hand.  (2 Ht  should  be  begun  with  the 
recitation  of  God's  name.  (3)  It  should  be  taken  from  the  side  of 
the  dish  which  is  nearest.  (4)  It  should  not  be  taken  before  others 
begin  to  eat.  (5)  None  should  took  to  the  eaflng  of  others.  (6)  Food 
is  to  be  chewed  well  and  not  hastily.  (7)  None  should  wipe  his 
hand  with  his  wearing  garment.  (8)  Rice  or  bread  without  curry 
should  sometimes  be  eaten.  (9)  The  harms  of  over  eating  should 
be  known.  (10)  Rewards  of  little  food  should  be  known.  (11) 
White  cloth  and  not  garments  of  variegated  colours  should  be 
put  on  and  not  silk  cloths.  912)  A  boy  should  be  directed  not  to 
join  bad  company.  (13)  He  should  not  be  allotted  to  mix  with' 
boys  who  dress  luxuriantly,  eat  delicious  foods  and  are  haughty.EDUCATION  OF  CHILDREN:  The  children  should  be 
given  at  the  beginning  to  learn  the  reading  of  the  Holy  Quran  and 
thereafter  Hadis  or  the  sayings  of  the  Prophet  and  the  histories 
and  lives  of  the  Prophets,  saints  and  sages.  If  they  don't  love 
them  at  the  beginning  of  their  lives,  it  would  be  disastrous  for 
them  afterwards,  as  soft  minds  get  impressions  of  good  or  bad  in 
early  age.  They  should  not  be  given  literature  and  poems  of  love 
anecdotes.  They  should  not  be  allowed  to  sleep  at  day  time  as  it 
creates  idleness,  or  to  sleep  on  soft  beds  till  their  limbs  become 
strong.  They  should  be  given  to  put  on  coarse  cloth,  coarse  food 
and  coarse  beddings.  They  should  not  be  allowed  to  make  plays 
and  sports  requiring  harti  labour  and  should  be  encouraged  to 
walk  on  foot.  They  should  be  taught  in  this  way:  Don't  spit  before 
the  people,  don't  cleanse  nostrils  before  them,  don't  yawn  before 
them,  sit  with  them  in  a  good  manner  and  don't  keep  them  behind, 
don't  sit  placing  one  leg  upon  another,  don't  talk  too  much,  don't 
tell  falsehood,  show  respect  to  the  elders  and  seniors  in  age,  don't 
hold  indecent  talks  and  tion't  rebuke  and  backbite  others.

When  a  boy  reaches  the  age  of  discretion,  he  should  be  told  to 
pray,  fast  Ramzan  and  observe  the  religious  duties.  When  he 
reaches  youth,  he  should  be  given  education  on  everything  and 
the  reasons  for  observing  religious  duties.  He  should  be  given

66

Good  Conduct

Vol-IIl

instruction  that  this  world  is  short  lives  and  the  next  world  is 
everlasting,  that  death  is  imminents  that  a  wise  man  takes 
provisions  for  the  next  world  from  this  world  and  he  should  be 
given  such  other  profitable  teachings.The  sage  Sahal  Tastari's  training.  He  said:  When  I  was  three 
years  old,  I  looked  at  the  prayers  of  my  maternal  uncle  at  night, 
one  day  he  said  to  me:  Why  don't  you  remember  God  who 
created  you?  I  said:  How  can  I  remember  Him?  He  said:  When 
you  go  to  bed  at  night,  say  three  times  without  moving  your 
tongue:  God  is  with  me,  God  is  near  me,  God  is  looking  at  me.  I 
learnt  them  in  this  way.  Then  he  said:  Recite  them  seven  times 
every  night.  After  seven  days,  he  said:  Recite  this  eleven  times 
every  night.  After  one  year,  he  said  to  me:  Recite  this  till  you  go  to 
the  grave  and  this  will  be  your  friend  in  this  world  and  the  next.  I 
learnt  the  Quran  by  heart  at  the  age  of  seven  years.  At  twelve,  I 
began  to  fast  all  the  year  round.  I  began  to  follow  the  following 
ways  in  my  life.  I  used  to  purchase  wheat  with  one  dirham  per 
day,  prepare  food  with  it,  fast  the  day  and  break  it  with  that 
without  curry  or  salt.  After  one  year,  I  began  to  fast  three  days  at 
a  time  with  a  break  of  the  next  day.  Then  I  used  to  fast  three  days 
at  a  time  and  then  seven  days.  Thus  I  increased  my  fast  gradually 
to  25  days  at  a  time  without  any  break.  In  this  way,  I  spent  twenty 
years  of  my  life.

MODES  OF  RELIGIOUS  EXERCISE:  He  who  wishes  to 
acquire  the  fortune  of  the  next  world  should  observe  some  rules 
holding  firmly  by  the  Quran.  The  obstacles  in  the  path  of  religion 
should  be  removed  as  they  may  prevent  him  towards  spiritual 
progress.  God  says:  I  have  placed  a  screen  in  their  front  and  a 
screen  in  their  back  and  then  I  covered  them  and  they  don't  see  - 
36:9.There  are  four  walls  before  a  religious  disciple  -  (1)  wall  of  I 
wealth,  (2)  wall  of  honour,  (3)  wall  of  Mazhabs  and  (4)  wall  of 
sins.  The  wall  of  wealth  can  be  removed  if  it  goes  out  of  hand 
except  necessary  means  to  meet  bare  necessaries  of  life.  The 
second  wall  of  honour  and  rank  can  be  removed  by  shifting  from 
the  place  of  honour  and  name  and  fame.  The  third  wall  is  the 
differences  of  opinion  in  religious  matters.  Blind  faith  in  one's 
sect  must  be  removed  from  mind  and  one  should  firmly  believe 
that  there  is  no  deity  but  God  and  that  Muhammad  is  His 
Messenger  and  best  guide.  The  fourth  wall  is  the  obstacle  of  sins.

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

67

Vol-IH

Repentance  for  past  sins,  restraint  from  acts  of  oppression  and 
compensation  to  the  oppressed  parsons  should  be  taken  recourse 
to  remove  this  obstacle  of  sins.

When  the  above  four  obstacles  are  removed,  he  becomes  like 
a  person  who  prepares  himself  by  wash  and  ablution  and 
tjecomes  fit  to  observe  prayer.  Then  he  requires  a  spiritual  guide 
to  show  him  the  straight  path  as  this  path  is  one  only  and  the 
paths  of  the  devil  are  many.  Such  a  man  should  be  kept  as  it  were 
within  the  boundaries  of  a  fort,  so  that  the  devil  may  not  enter  it. 
This  fort  of  religion  has  got  four  walls  (1)  solitude,  (2)  silence,  (3) 
hunger  and  (4)  sleeplessness.  These  four  things  obstruct  the  devil 
to  enter  the  fort.The  object  of  a  disciple  is  to  purify  the  mind  to  that  he  may 
have  glimpse  of  his  Lord  therein  and  attain.  His  nearness. 
Hunger  reduces  the  blood  of  heart  and  makes  it  pure  and  bright. 
This  brightness  is  the  light  of  mind  or  soul.  Hunger  melts  the  fat 
of  heart  and  as  a  result,  softness  and  humility  come  in.  This 
softness  is  the  key  of  spiritual  insight.  Heart  becomes  hard  for 
obstruction.  Whenever  the  blood  of  heart  is  reduced,  the 
circulation  path  of  the  devil  becomes  narrow.

Jesus  Christ  said:  O  my  disciples,  keep  your  belly  hungry 
that  you  may  see  your  Lord.  Sahal  Tastari  said:  Abdals  cannot  be 
raised  to  their  rank  without  four  qualities  keeping  the  belly 
empty,  sleeplessness,  silence  and  solitude  from  the  turmoils  of 
society.  It  is  an  open  truth  that  heart  becomes  bright  owing  to 
hunger.  This  is  the  fruit  of  experience.  Sleeplessness  makes  the 
heart  bright,  pure  and  radiant.  It  increases  the  brightness  gained 
by  hunger  and  makes  it  bright  like  a  bright  star  or  a  clear  mirror 
and  then  truth  sparkles  therein.  Sleeplessness  is  the  fruit  of 
hunger  and  it  is  impossible  tp "expect  sleeplessness  with  a  full 
belly.  Too  much  sleep  makes  the  heart  dead  and  hard.  Sleep  to 
the  extent  of  necessity  becomesfe  means  of  seeing  unseen  things. 
The  Abdals  eat  when  pressed  by  extreme  hunger  and  sleep  in 
case  of  extreme  slumber  and  talk  at  the  time  of  extreme  necessi  ty. 
Hazrat  Ibrahim  Khawas  said:  It  is  the  unanimous  opinion  of 
seventy  truthful  men  that  there  is  too  much  sleep  in  case  of  too 
much  drink.

Silence  makes  lonely  habitation  easy,  but  a  man  of  silence  is 
not  free  from  those  who  are  ready  to  serve  him.  As  a  result,  he

4%  Good  Conduct  Vol-II|Silence  makes  lonely  habitation  easy,  but  a  man  of  silence  is 
not  free  from  those  who  are  ready  to  serve  him.  As  a  result,  he

4%  Good  Conduct  Vol-II|

f'SpeAcs  withoutjnecessity  and  feels  joy  in  greed.  Silence  increases 
qfxAver  of  intellect  and  encourages  God  fear.  Loneliness  saves  a 
%»an  from  work,  brings  ear  and  eye  under  control  and  opens  the 
gates  of  heart.  Knowledge  gained  through  the  five  senses  shall 
have  to  be  closed  first  and  then  the  knowledge  from  the  bottom  of 
heart  will  arise.  This  knowledge  is  clear  and  pure  as  is  the  was 
with  the  water  which  comes  out  of  the  bottom  of  a  well  as  a  result 
of  excavation.  It  is  not  necessary  to  gain  knowledge  through  the 
five  senses  except  when  required.

CONTROL  OF  EVIL  PROPENSITLES:  A  sojourner  in  the 
path  of  religion  will  then  advance  towards  the  straight  path  after 
the  obstructions  are  removed,  propensities  of  heart  are  the  causes 
of  worldly  attachment  and  obstructions  of  which  one  is  greater 
than  the  other.  In  other  to  cut  them  off,  the  following  rules  shall 
have  to  be  observed.  At  first,  the  most  easy  obstruction  shall  have 
to  be  removed.  In  other  words,  love  for  wealth,  name  and  fame, 
attachment  for  the  world,  inclination  towards  commission  of  sins 
etc.  shall  have  to  be  given  up  from  the  heart  which  requires 
sustained,  long  and  continued  efforts.Another  way  is  silent  Zikr  or  remembrance  of  God.  he  will 
prevent  his  mind  to  make  too  much  Doa  and  Darud.  His  Doa  will 
be  one  which  is  the  kernel  of  all  Doas  -  to  remember  God  Mind 
will  not  be  engaged  in  remembering  God  if  it  is  engaged  in  much 
Doa  and  Darud.  He  will  utter  'Allah'  Allah'  till  his  utterance  by 
tongue  is  closed  and  by  heart  opened.  Mind  will  then  question 
these  things  -  what  is  the  meaning  of  Allah?  These  are  the 
whisperings  of  the  devil.  It  is  of  two  kinds.  One  kind  is  that  the 
devil  casts  doubt  in  mind  which  he  shall  drive  away  and  remain 
busy  with  Zikr  of  God.  God  says:  When  whispering  of  the  devil 
come  to  you,  seek  refuge  to  God  -  7:200.  God  says:  When  the  party 
of  the  devil  touch  those  who  fear  God,  they  remember  God  and 
they  then  look  on.

CHAPTER  III

GREED  FOR  FOOD  SEXUAL  PASSION

Greed  for  food  is  a  destructive  evil.  Owing  to  this  greed, 
Adam  and  Eve  were  expelled  from  paradise.  They  were 
prohibited  to  eat  the  fruits  of  a  certain  tree  but  they  ate  them 
prompted  by  a  strong  greed  and  as  such  evil  deeds  were 
disclosed  to  the.  In  fact,  belly  is  the  container  of  greed  and  the 
breeding  ground  of  diseases  and  disasters.  In  case  of  satisfaction 
of  belly,  sexual  passion  rises  high'  and  it  encourages 
companionship  with  women.  Desire  for  name  and  fame  grows 
from  greed.  Then  come  the  evil  attributes  of  hatred,  clash  of 
interests,  pride,  self-conceit  etc.  These  can  be  removed  by 
hunger.MERITS  OF  HUNGER:  The  Prophet  said:  Fight  your 
passion  with  hunger  and  thirst.  Its  merits  are  equal  to  those 
gained  by  Jihad  in  the  way  of  God.  Nothing  is  dearer  to  God  then 
hunger  and  thirst.  The  Prophet  said:  No  angel  from  heaven 
comes  to  one  who  eats  belly-full.  The  Prophet  was  once  asked: 
Who  is  best?  He  replied:  One  who  eats  little,  laughs  little  and 
remains  satisfied  with  cloth  necessary  to  cover  his  private  parts. 
He  said:  Put  on  old  cloth,  fill  up  half  of  your  belly  with  food  and 
drink  as  it  is  a  portion  of  prophethood.  The  Prophet  said:  Fikr 
(meditation  about  God's  creation)  is  half  of  divine  service  but 
little  food  is  full  divine  service.  He  said:  Hunger  is  chief  of  all 
actions  and  Sufi  dress  curbs  passion.  He  said:  He  who  among  you 
bears  hunger  for  a  long  time  and  ponders  about  God  will  be  best 
in  rank  among  you  on  the  resurrection  day.  He  who  sleeps  long, 
eats  much  and  drinks  much  will  be  the  greatest  object  of  the 
wrath  of  God.

The  Prophet  used  to  remain  hungry  without  want.  In  other 
words,  be  kept  himself  hungry  willingly.  The  Prophet  said:  God 
glorifies  before  His  angels  about  one  who  eats  little  and  drinks 
little  in  the  world  and  says:  O  angels,  look  to  My  servant,  I  am 
trying  him  in  the  world  by  food  and  drink.  He  gave  them  up  with 
patience.  O  angels,  bear  witness,  1  will  raise  him  up  to  paradise  in 
proportion  to  the  less  number  of  morsels  he  eats.  The  Prophet 
said:  Don't  make  your  heart  dead  by  taking  excessive  food  and 
drink  as  the  heart  is  like  a  field  of  crops.  When  there  is  excessive 
water  in  a  field,  crops  are  damaged.  He  said:  The  son  of  Adam

70

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III70

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

does  not  fill  up  anything  more  obnoxious  than  excessive  food  to 
keep  his  backbone  erect  is  sufficient  for  him.  If  he  is  not  able  to  do 
it,  then  one-third  of  his  belly  is  for  food,  one  third  for  drink  and 
one-third  for  breathing.

SIGNS  OF  ABDAL:  The  Prophet  said:  Those  who  keep 
patience  in  hunger,  thirst  and  calamities  for  long  will  stay  on  the 
Resurrection  Day  near  the  Almighty  God.  They  are  God-fearing 
hones  men  without  shoes.  They  car  not  be  recognised  on  sight.  If 
they  remain  absent,  they  are  not  searched.  The  undeveloped 
paces  know  them  and  the  angels  of  heaven  keep  them  encircled. 
They  are  the  best  of  the  people  in  the  earth  and  best  in  divine 
service.  The  people  spread  out  their  soft  beds,  but  they  use  their 
heads  and  knees  as  beds.  The  people  destroy  the  character  and 
conduct  of  the  Prophet  but  they  preserve  them.  The  world  in 
which  they  roam  weeps  for  them  if  they  are  lost.  If  none  of  them 
lives  in  a  country,  God  is  displeased  with  it.  They  are  not  greedy 
for  the  world  just  as  a  dog  is  greedy  over  corpse.  The  live  by 
eating  leaves  and  vegetables,  put  on  tom  rags  and  are  disheveled 
in  hairs  and  laden  with  dust.  The  people  think  that  they  are 
diseased,  but  in  fact  they  are  not  so.  Some  think  that  they  have 
lost  intellect,  but  it  is  not  so.  Their  attention  is  towards  the  actions 
of  God  who  removed  the  attachment  of  the  world  from  them. 
They  wander  among  the  worldly  men  as  men  without  interest, 
but  there  is  endless  honour  for  them  in  the  next  world.O  Osamah,  when  you  see  them  anywhere,  know  that  for  the 
inhabitants  of  the  place,  they  are  safeguards  and  God  will  not 
punish  the  people  among  whom  they  live.  The  world  is  happy  for 
them  and  the  Almighty  is  pleased  with  them.  Take  them  as 
brethren  for  yourselves,  perchance  you  may  get  salvation  on  that 
account.  If  you  can  die  when  your  belly  remains  hungry  and  your 
spleen  thirsty,  it  will  be  better  because  you  will  have  an 
honourable  place  on  that  account  and  the  angels  will  be  happy  at 
the  advent  of  your  soul.  God  also  will  shower  His  blessings  on 
you.

The  Prophet  said:  Put  on  Sufi  dress  and  fill  up  half  of  your 
belly,  you  will  then  enter  paradise,  Jesus  Christ  said:  O  my 
disciples.  Keep  your  belly  hungry,  keep  your  body  without  cloth, 
God  will  then  appear  in  your  heart.  There  is  written  in  the  Torah: 
God  is  displeased  with  a  stout  and  strong  learned  man  as  it  is  a 
sign  of  carelessness  and  overeating.  The  Prophet  said:  The  devil

71

y0]_HI  Greed  and  suxua!  passion

runs  through  a  man  like  the  circulation  of  blood.  Make  it  narrow 
by  hunger  and  thirst.  He  also  said:  If  anybody  eats  to  his  heart's 
content,  he  is  attacked  with  leprosy.  He  also  said:  A  believer  eats 
filling  up  one  gut,  but  a  hypocrite  eats  filling  up  seven  gut's.  In 
other  words,  a  hypocrite  eats  seven  times  more  than  a  believer  or 
the  passion  and  greed  of  a  hypocrite  are  seven  times  greater  than 
those  of  a  believer.  Here  gut  means  greed.  He  also  said:  Knock  at 
the  door  of  paradise,  it  will  be  opened  for  you.  When  questioned 
a  out  knocking,  he  said:  By  hunger  and  thirst.Once  Abu  Juhafa  was  belching  in  an  assembly  of  the  Prophet 
who  said  to  him:  Lessen  your  belching.  He  who  eats  to  his  heart's 
content  in  this  world  will  suffer  much  owing  to  hungfer  on  the 
day  of  resurrection.  Hazrat  Ayesh  reported:  The  Prophet  never 
ate  to  his  heart's  content.  Sometimes  I  wept  seeing  the  pangs  off 
his  hunger.  Then  I  passed  my  hand  over  his  belly  and  said:  My 
life  be  sacrificed  to  thee.  What  is  the  fault  in  eating  so  much  as  can 
keep  your  strength  and  appease  your  hunger?  He  said:  O 
Ayesha,  my  predecessor  Prophets  suffered  more  than  this  and 
kept  patience.  They  adopted  this  condition  and  went  to  their 
Lord.  Their  honour  is  unlimited  and  their  rewards  are  profuse. 
So  I  fear  if  I  greed  for  pleasure  of  living,  my  condition  may  be  less 
than  theirs  tomorrow.  So  it  is  better  to  me  to  bear  patience  to-  day 
in  troubles  than  that  my  fortune  may-be  less  to-morrow.  Nothing 
is  dearer  to  me  than  to  live  together  with  my  brethren  and 
companions  with  dignity.  Hazrat  Ayesha  said:  After  this  talk,  the 
Prophet  did  not  live  longer  than  seven  days.

Hazrat  Anas  reported:  Once  Hazrat  Fatema  came  with 
apiece  of  bread  to  the  Prophet  who  said  to  her:  What  is  of  this 
bread.  The  Prophet  said:  To-day  this  food  will  enter  the  belly  of 
your  father  after  three  days.  Hazrat  Anas  reported  that  the  family 
members  of  the  Prophet  did  not  eat  the  bread  of  wheat 
consequitively  for  three  days  till  the  Prophet  expired.  The 
Prophet  said:  Those  who  remain  hungy  in  this  world  will  eat 
their  h\ heart's  content  in  the  next  world.  He  who  eats  to  his  full 
belly  is  an  object  of  greedy  for  it  will  have  rank  in  Paradise.Wise  sayings.  Hazrat  Omar  said:  Have  a  sharp  look  to  your 
belly  as  it  becomes  heavy  in  life  and  destroyed  after  death.  These 
age  Shaqiq  Balakhi  said:  Divine  service  is  a  profession,  its  shop  is 
solitude  and  its  weapon  is  hunger.  The  wise  Luqman  advised  his 
son:  O  dear  son,  when  you  eat  your  belly  full,  good  then  falls

72

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

asleep,  wisdom  becomes  inactive,  and  the  organs  take  leisure. 
Hazrat  Fazil-b-Iayaz  addressed  himself  thus:  What  thing  do  you 
fear?  Why  do  you  fear  hunger?  The  Prophet  and  his  companions 
used  to  remain  hunger.  Why  do  you  neglect  it?  The  sage 
Khamash  used  to  say:  O  my  Lord,  you  keep  me  without  food  and 
cloth  and  allow  me  to  sit  lose  to  Thee  in  darkness  without  light. 
Tell,  my  Lord,  on  account  of  which  virrue  I  have  achieved  this 
luck.  The  sage  Majak-b-Dinar  said:  O  my  Lod,  I  asked 
Muhammad-b-Waseq:  O  Abu  Abdullah,  he  who  has  got  food 
proportionate  to  his  wants  and  does  not  live  depending  on  others 
is  happy.  He  said  to  me:  O  Abu  Ihya'  he  is  happy  who  is  pleased 
with  God  remaining  hungry  in  the  morning  and  evening.  The 
sage  Ihya-b-Ma'az  said:  Hunger  of  the  hopeful  is  a  cause  of 
wakefulness,  hunger  of  the  patient  is  the  control  of  passion  and 
the  hunger  of  the  ascetics  is  wisdom.There  is  in  the  Torah:  Fear  God  when  you  eat  to  your  belly 
full  and  remember  hunger.  The  sage  Abu  Solainman  Darani  said: 
I  like  to  eat  one  morsel  less  than  to  be  attentive  in  prayer  during 
the  whole  night  up  to  morning.  He  also  said:  Hunger  is  one  of  the 
treasure  s  of  God.  He  gives  it  to  one  whom  He  loves.  The  sage 
Sahal  Tastari  used  not  to  take  meal  consequitively  for  25  days  at  a 
time.  One  dirham  was  sufficient  for  his  meal  throughout  the 
year.  He  used  to  consider  the  rank  of  hunger  with  honour  and 
made  exaggeration.  Even  he  said:  The  reward  which  is  gained  by 
giving  up  surplus  food  in  following  the  practice  of  the  Prophet 
will  not  be  gained  by  other  actins  on  the  resurrection  day.  He 
also  said:  There  is  nothing  more  profitable  than  hunger.  He  also 
said:  I  don't  know  of  a  more  harmful  thing  for  a  man  seeking  the 
next  world  than  eating  with  heart's  content.  He  also  said: 
Knowledge  lies  in  hunger  and  sin  and  ignorance  lie  in  over 
eating.  He  said:  No  man  does  better  divine  service  than  to  act  in 
opposition  to  his  passion  after  giving  up  lawful  things.

The  Prophet  said:  One  third  of  the  belly  is  for  food.  He  who 
eats  more  than  that  spools  his  good  deeds.  Being  asked  about 
additional  merits  he  said:  He  will  not  get  additional  merits  till 
hunger  becomes  dearer  to  him  than  over  eating  and  till  he  prays 
at  night  remaining  hungry.  When  he  does  this,  he  will  be  entitled 
to  get  additional  rewards.  He  also  said:  An  Abdal  (ascetic)  is  not 
included  in  the  class  of  Abdals  till  he  does  not  love  to  remain 
hungry  without  sleep  and  to  remain  silent.  He  said:  Of  all  the

73

V01-III  Greed  and  suxual  passion73

V01-III  Greed  and  suxual  passion

virtuous  deeds  which  descended  from  heaven  to  earth,  the 
greatest  is  hunger.  Of  all  the  evils  which  have  descended  from 
heaven  to  eath,  the  worst  is  eating  with  heart's  content.  He  said: 
The  machinations  of  the  devil  go  away  from  one  who  remains 
hungry.  He  said:  God  advances  to  a  man  who  is  in  hunger, 
diseases,  dangers  and  calamities.  God  releases  some  men  from 
these  things  at  His  sweet  will.  He  said:  Know  that  a  man  of  the 
present  age  will  not  get  salvation  till  he  destroys  his  passion  and 
sleeps  by  hunger,  and  does  hard  labour.  He  said:  There  is  no  such 
man  in  the  world  who  can  save  himself  from  sin  by  drinking  to 
his  heart's  content  even  though  he  expresses  grtefulness  to  God. 
If  it  is  so  in  case  of  water  drinking,  how  will  it  be  in  case  of  eating 
with  full  satisfaction?

Some  wise  man  was  asked:  How  can  I  change  my  passion? 
He  said:  Change  your  passion  with  hunger,  thirst,  taking  up 
humility,  by  giving  up  name  and  fame,  making  them  lower  by 
placing  them  under  the  feet  off  those  who  seek  the  next  world 
and  opposing  constantly  your  passions.  The  sage  Abdul  Wahed 
said:  The  merciful  loves  a  hungry  man.  A  man  can  walk  upon 
water  by  virtue  of  hunger  and  God  gives  him  power  for  this.  The 
sage  Abu  Bakr  Mujni  said:  God  loves  three  men-(l)  one  who 
sleeps  little,  (2)  one  who  eats  little,  and  (3)  one  who  takes  little 
rest.Jesus  christ  once  kept  fastconsequitively  for  two  months  and 
began  to  converse  secretly  with  his  Lord.  When  he  remembered 
to  take  his  meal,  the  secret  conversation  stopped  and  he  found 
his  meal  placed  before  him.  He  began  to  weep  when  his  secret 
conversation  was  suddenly  closed.  It  is  said  that  Moses  gained 
the  power  of  secretly  talking  with  God  when  he  was  in  fast  of 
consequitive  forty  days.

BENEFITS  OF  HUNGER  AND  HARMS 
OF  OVER-EATING

The  Holy  Prophet  said:  'Fight  your  passion  with  hunger  and 
thirst.'  You  may  ask  wherefrom  this  good  of  hunger  comes  and 
what  is  its  cause  though  it  gives  trouble  to  belly.  This  statement 
is  like  the  word  of  a  man  who  thinks,  after  getting  the  benefit  of  a 
bitter  and  distasteful  medicine  that  a  bitter  medicine  gives 
benefit.  Benefit  arises  not  from  bitterness  of  the  medicine.  A 
physician  knows  the  effect  of  such  a  medicine.  Similarly  the

74

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

sages  and  saints  among  the  learned  understand  the  benefit  s  of 
hunger.  He  who  believes  the  truth  of  remaining  hungry  gets  the 
benefit.  God  says:  God  will  raise  those  in  ranks  who  believe 
among  you  and  those  who  have  been  given  knowledge.  The 
following  ten  benefits  are  obtained  from  hunger.(1)  Hunger  makes  the  heart  pure,  conduct  fresh  and  sight 
sharp.  On  the  other  hand,  over-eating  makes  one  lazy,  heart 
blind  and  incurs  heat  in  brain  like  intoxication,  even  it  attacks  the 
men  of  thoughts.  As  a  result,  the  power  of  thoughts  goes  away. 
When  a  boy  eats  much,  his  power  of  memory  becomes  dull  and 
he  becomes  a  fool.  The  sage  Abu  Solaiman  Darabi  said:  Remain 
hungry  as  it  curtails  passion,  makes  the  heart  soft  and  it  gives 
divine  knowledge  therein.  The  Prophet  said:  Make  the  heart  alive 
by  little  laugh,  little  food  and  make  it  pure  by  hunger.  It  will 
become  then  pure  and  clean.  He  said:  Hunger  is  like  lightning, 
over-eating  is  like  cloud  and  wisdom  is  like  the  shower  of  rain. 
The  Prophet  said:  Whose  eats  to  his  heart's  content  and  sleeps 
much,  his  heart  becomes  hard.  Then  he  said:lThere  is  Zakat  of 
everything  and  the  Zakat  of  body  is  hunger.  The  Prophet  said: 
The  thinking  power  of  a  man  increases  who  keeps  his  belly 
hungry  and  his  heart  becomes  sharp  and  strong.  The  sage  Shibli 
said:  I  saw  on  the  very  day  I  remained  hungry  for  pleasure  of  God 
that  the  door  of  my  heart  has  been  opened  towards  wisdom  and 
knowledge  in  such  a  way  which  I  did  not  see  before.  It  is  not  a 
secret  thing  that  the  ultimate  object  of  divine  worship  is  to 
acquire  such  thinking  power  which  takes  to  divine  knowledge 
and  true  knowledge  of  everything.  Hating  with  satisfaction  is  an 
obstacle  to  that  object  and  hunger  opens  its  door.Divine  knowledge  is  a  door  to  paradise.  So  it  should  be 
unlocked  by  hunger.  For  this  reason,  Luqman  advised  his  son:  O 
darling,  when  you  fill  up  the  belly  with  food,  thinking  power 
falls  asleep,  wisdom  becomes  idle  and  the  bodily  organs  abstain 
from  divine  service.  Hazrat  Abu  Yezid  Bostami  said:  Hunger  is 
like  a  cloud.  When  a  men  feels  hungry,  heart  then  showers  rain 
of  wisdom.  He  said:  Hunger  is  the  light  of  wisdom  and  eating 
with  satisfaction  keeps  God  at  a  distance.  Love  for  the  poor  and 
nearing  them  bring  God  near.  Don' t  eat  to  your  heart's  content,  it 
will  extinguish  the  light  of  wisdom  from  your  heart  Hurs 
wander  about  a  man  who  passes  night  with  little  food  up  to 
morning.

75

Vol'IH  Greed  and  suxual  passion

(2)  Hunger  makes  the  heart  soft  and  pure  and  therewith  the 
sweet  taste  of  Zikr  and  Monazat  is  felt.  How  many  a  men  of  Zikr 
makes  Zikr  by  tongue  without  the  attention  of  mind,  so  that  the 
heart  does  not  find  taste  therein  as  its  effect  does  not  fall  in  soul. 
It's  taste  is  found  in  hunger.  The  sage  Abu  Solaiman  Darani 
said:  When  my  back  becomes  attached  to  my  belly,  I  get  taste  in 
divine  service.  The  saint  Junaid  said:  The  hope  of  one  who  wants 
taste  in  Monazat  by  placing  the  dish  of  food  between  him  and 
his  breast  will  not  meet  with  success.  He  also  said:  When  the 
belly  becomes  hungry  and  thirsty,  the  heart  becomes  soft  and 
clean.  When  it  becomes  satisfied  with  food,  it  becomes  blind  and 
hard.  When  the  heart  finds  taste  in  Monazat  or  invocation,  it 
becomes  easy  to  think  about  God  and  divine  knowledge 
increases.(3)  Another  benefit  of  hunger  is  the  breaking  of  heart  which 
produces  modesty.  Pride  and  enjoyments  are  removed  by 
hunger.  A  man  does  not  understand  the  power  and  glory  of  God 
till  he  does  not  feel  absolutely  helpless  and  sees  darkness  all 
around  being  unable  to  gather  food  and  drink  and  till  he  realises 
power  and  might  of  God  and  becomes  modest  and  submissive  to 
Him.  When  all  the  treasures  of  the  world  were  presented  to  the 
Prophet,  he  rejected  them  all  and  said:  Rather  I  prefer  to  remain 
hungry  one  day  and  take  food  the  next  day.  On  the  day  I  remain 
hungry,  I  shall  be  humble  with  patience  and  on  the  day  I  take 
food,  I  shall  be  grateful.  In  short,  belly  and  sexual  passion  are  the 
doors  of  Hell  and  their  root  is  eating  with  satisfaction.  Humility 
and  break  of  heart  are  the  doors  of  Paradise  and  their  root  is 
hunger.  He  who  closes  up  the  door  of  Hell  opens  then  the  door  of 
Paradise  as  these  doors  are  facing  the  east  and  the  west.  If  one 
comes  near  a  door,  he  goes  distant  from  another.

(4)  Another  benefit  of  hunger  is  not  to  be  forgetful  of  God's 
punishment.  In  case  of  satisfied  eating,  one  forgets  the  pangs  of 
the  hunger.  Once  Joseph  was  asked:  Why  do  you  suffer  from 
hunger  though  there  are  the  treasures  of  the  kingdom  in  your 
hand?  He  replied:  In  case  of  eating  with  satisfaction,  I  fear  I  may 
forget  the  sufferings  of  the  hungry  and  the  poor.

(5)  Another  benefit  of  hunger  is  that  the  propensity  of 
committing  sin  is  brought  under  control.  Hunger  arrests  the 
greed  for  committing  sins  and  controls  the  propensities  of  evils. 
The  root  of  all  sins  is  greed  and  physical  strength  and  the  root  of

76

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III76

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

these  two  is  satisfied  eating.  So  little  quantity  of  food  weakens 
these  things.  To  acquire  power  to  control  passion  is  the  root  of  all 
fortunes  and  to  submit  to  passion  is  the  root  of  all  misfortunes. 
The  turbulent  animals  can  be  brought  under  control  by  keeping 
them  hungry.  Similarly  the  unruly  passions  can  be  brought 
under  control  by  hunger.  A  certain  sage  was  asked:  you  have 
grown  old.  Why  don't  you  take  care  of  your  body?  Your  body  is 
getting  black.  He  said:  The  body  runs  for  enjoyments  and  wishes 
evils.  I  fear  it  may  throw  me  in  to  a  deep  ditch.  I  like  more  to  give 
it  trouble  than  that  it  should  throw  me  into  sins.The  saint  Jun  Nun  Misri  said:  Whenever  I  ate  to  my  heart's 
content,  thought  of  sin  arose  in  my  mind.  Hazrat  Ayesha  said: 
After  the  demise  of  the  Prophet,  the  first  innovation  that  has 
come  into  being  is  eating  with  satisfaction.  Hunger  is  not  only 
useful  to  suppress  passion,  but  it  can  be  called  the  touch  stone  of 
all  useful  things.  For  this  reason,  a  certain  great  man  said:  Of  all 
the  treasures  of  God,  hunger  is  a  valuable  jewel.  The  lowest 
danger  that  can  be  averted  by  hunger  is  sexual  passion,  evil 
passion  and  passion  of  talk.  A  hungry  man  does  not  wish  to  talk 
much,  he  is  rescued  from  backbiting,  indecent  talks  and 
falsehoods.  In  case  of  satisfied  eating,  a  man  cannot  control 
sexual  organ.  If  he  can  control  it  for  fear  of  God,  he  cannot 
control  his  eyes  and  mind  and  he  does  not  get  pleasure  in 
invocation.  A  certain  wise  man  said:  If  a  sojourner  towards  the 
next  world  keeps  patience  by  observing  the  rules  of  religion  and 
eats  for  one  year  half  belly  full  with  bread  only  without  any 
curry.  God  removes  from  him  the  evil  thoughts  of  enjoying 
women.

(6)  Another  benefit  of  hunger  is  sleeplessness.  He  who  eats  to 
his  heart's  content  drinks  much,  and  he  who  drinks  much  sleeps 
much.  As  many  as  seventy  truthful  and  pious  men  said 
unanimously:  'Excessive  drining  creates  excessive  sleep. 
Excessive  sleep  spoils  life.  Life  is  the  most  valuable  thing  of  a 
man  and  so  it  is  ruined  by  excessive  sleep.(7)  Another  benefit  of  hunger  is  that  divine  worship  becomes 
easy.  In  case  off  excessive  eating,  one  becomes  lazy  and  idle  and 
so  divine  service  becomes  difficult.  The  sage  Sari  Sakti  said:  I  saw 
the  saint  Abu  Zarzani  taking  drink  of  wheat  dipped  in  water  and 
asked  him:  Why  do  you  take  this  trouble?  I  can  recite  Tasbih 
seventy  times  during  the  time  taken  by  chewing  bread  of  wheat

Vol-III

Greed  and  suxuai  passion

77

and  for  that  I  did  not  take  bread  for  the  last  forty  years.  He 
thought  that  change  of  food  is  loss  of  time.  So  every  breath  of  life 
is  a  valuable  asset  which  should  be  utilized  by  collecting  wealth 
of  the  next  world.  It  is  easy  for  one  who  has  got  the  habit  of  for 
bearing  hunger.  The  saint  Abu  Solaiman  D~'ani  mentioned  six 
harms  of  eating  with  satisfaction.  (1)  Such  a  man  does  not  get 
pleasure  in  invocation.  (2)  He  can't  remember  the  matters  of 
knowledge  and  wisdom.  (3)  He  loses  the  attribute  of  showing 
kindness  to  the  people.  (4)  He  feels  difficulty  in  doing  divine 
services.  (5)  Sexual  passion  and  greed  become  strong  in  his  mind. 
(6)  When  the  worshipers  are  engaged  in  mosques,  he  is  confined 
in  privies.

(8)  Another  benefit  of  hunger  is  preservation  of  health  and 
removal  of  diseases.  A  little  quantity  of  food  improves  health  and 
removes  diseases.  Excessive  eating  accumulate  diseases  in 
stomach  and  veins.  The  diseased  man  cannot  do  divine  services, 
Zikrand  pondering.  Hunger  removes  all  these  difficulties.Caliph  Harun  Rashid  is  reported  to  have  called  eminent 
physicians  of  his  time  of  India,  Byzantium,  Iraq  and  Abyssinis 
and  said  to  them:  Give  me  such  a  medicine  as  can  prevent  all 
diseases.  The  Indian  physician  said:  If  you  use  black  Ahliz,  you 
will  not  be  attacked  with  any  disease.  The  Iraqi  physician  said:  It 
is  the  medicine  of  white  seeds  of  Helencha.  The  physician  of 
Byzantium  said:  It  is  the  medicine  of  Ahliz  makes  was  most 
experienced  said:  The  medicine  of  Ahliz  makes  the  stomach 
narrow  and  creates  a  disease.  The  seeds  of  white  Hellencha  make 
the  stomach  soft  and  create  a  disease.  They  asked:  What  medicine 
have  you  got  then?  He  said:  What  will  not  create  any  disease  in 
my  sight  is  this.  Don't  eat  unless  you  feel  hungry  and  lift  up  your 
hand  when  there  remains  a  little  hunger.  They  all  said:  You 
haven  prescribed  the  right  medicine.

A  philosopher  was  asked  imprisons  of  some  physicians  of 
the  People  of  the  Book  about  the  following  saying  of  the  Prophet: 
One  third  of  the  belly  is  for  food,  one  third  for  drink  and  one  third 
for  taking  breath.  He  wondered  at  it  and  said:  I  have  never  heard 
of  a  more  wise  saying  in  the  matter  of  little  food  than  this  and  this 
must  be  the  saying  of  a  wise  man.  The  Prophet  said:  Gluttony  is 
the  root  of  disease  and  restraint  from  food  and  drink  is  the  root  of 
cure.  Teach  the  habit  to  which  each  organ  is  entitled.  The 
physician  was  astonished  to  hear  this  saying  of  the  Prophet.  The

78

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-llI78

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-llI

sage  Ibn  Salim  said:  No  disease  can  attack  a  man  except  death 
who  eats  according  to  rules  bread  of  pure  wheat.  He  was  asked: 
What  are  its  rules?  He  said:  To  eat  it  after  being  hungry  and  to 
rise  up  before  satisfaction.  A  certain  experienced  physician  said 
with  condemnation  of  excessive  eating:  The  most  beneficial  of  all 
foods  which  are  allowed  to  enter  the  stomach  is  pomegranate 
and  the  worst  is  salt,  yet  salt  in  small  quantity  is  better  than 
pomegranate  and  the  worst  is  salt,  yet  salt  in  small  quantity  is 
better  than  pomegranate  in  large  quantity.  The  Prophet  said:  Fast 
and  you  will  be  healthy  and  the  body  will  be  cured  of  the  diseases 
on  account  of  sting,  hunger  and  little  eating  and  the  heart  will  be 
free  from  the  diseases  of  infidelity,  self  conceit  and  other 
diseases.(9)  Another  benefit  of  hunger  is  little  expense.  If  you  practice 
little  eating,  a  little  expense  will  be  sufficient.  The  belly  of  a  man 
becomes  heavy  who  eats  to  his  heart's  content.  He  thinks  every  day 
for  earning  foods  and  says:  Today  what  shall  I  eat?  He  roams 
throughout  the  day  in  earning  foods  and  then  falls  in  to  unlawful 
earnings  and  commits  sins  or  he  earns  lawful  things  but  faces 
dishonor.  Little  expense  comes  to  my  mind.  The  sage 
Ibrahim-b-Adham  being  asked  about  high  prices  of  food  stuffs, 
said:  Give-up  these  food  stuffs  and  make  them  cheap.  The  saint 
Sahal  Tastari  said:  A  glutton  is  condemned  lazy  in  divine  service, 
(2)  if  he  is  a  trader,  he  is  not  safe  from  dangers,  (3)  if  anything  comes 
to  him  he  does  not  do  justice  to  himself.  In  a  word,  attachment  to  the 
world  is  a  cause  of  destruction  of  a  man  and  the  cause  of  this 
attachment  is  belly  and  sexual  passion,  and  the  cause  of  sexual 
passion  is  full  satisfaction  of  belly.  Little  eating  removes  all  these 
evils.  The  Prophet  said:  'Knock  at  the  door  of  Paradise  by  hunger.' 
He  who  is  satisfied  daily  with  one  piece  of  bread  becomes  free  from 
want.  He  does  not  depend  on  the  people,  gets  free  from  sorrows  and 
sufferings  and  can  engage  himself  fully  in  divine  service  and  trade 
of  the  next  world.  He  then  becomes  one  of  those  of  whom  God  said: 
There  are  men  whom  business  and  buy  and  sale  can  not  divert  from 
the  remembrance  of  God.(10)  Another  benefit  of  hunger  is  to  be  ended  with  the 
attribute  of  charity  and  of  giving  up  self-praise.  One  who  keeps 
himself  hungry  and  thirsty  removes  the  hunger  and  thirst  of 
another  with  his  own  meal  and  gives  in  charity  his  excess  food  to 
the  orphans  and  the  poor.  On  the  Resurrection  Day,  he  will  take

VoI-III

79

Creed  and  suxual  passion

shelter  under  the  shadow  of  his  charity.  What  he  eats  is  saved  in 
privy  and  what  he  gives  in  charity  is  hoarded  in  his  treasury. 
This  is  the  gift  of  God.  A  man  has  got  no  wealth  except  what  he 
stores  up  in  his  treasury  by  charity,  what  finishes  after  he  eats 
and  what  gets  old  after  he  puts  it  on.  So  eat  little.  To  spend  in 
charity  excess  food  is  better  than  to  eat  with  satisfaction.Hazrat  Hasn  Basri  recited  this  verse  (33:72)  I  offered  the  Trust 
to  the  heavens  and  the  earth  and  the  mountains  but  they  refused 
to  undertake  jt,  being  afraid  thereof  but  man  undertook  it.  Then 
he  said:  God  asked  the  angels  to  carry  this  burden.  He  asked 
them;  Will  you  bear  the  responsibility  of  this  trust?  God  said:  If 
you  make  it  beautiful,  you  will  get  rewards.  If  you  make  it  ugly, 
you  will  be  punished.  They  said:  We  shall  not  accept  it.  He  then 
presented  it  to  men  who  accepted  it  as  they  are  prone  to  make 
oppression  on  soul  and  ignorant  of  Lord's  order.  By  God,  they 
are  now  selling  that  trust  in  exchange  of  money.  Thereafter  there 
are  making  beautiful  houses  but  make  their  graves  narrow.  They 
are  making  their  bodies  therewith  stout  and  strong  but  they  are 
making  their  religion  lean  and  thin.  Once  the  Prophet  saw  a  man 
with  building  belly.  He  hinted  at  it  and  said:  If  you  had  spent  it 
on  other  affairs,  it  would  have  been  better  for  you.

These  are.  the  ten  benefits  of  hunger.  Innumerable  benefits 
come  out  of  each  benefit.  So  there  is  no  end  of  the  benefits  of 
hunger.  It  is  the  most  valuable  asset  for  the  next  world.  For  this 
reason,  a  certain  sage  said:  Hunger  is  a  key  to  the  next  world  and 
the  door  to  asceticism,  eating  with  satisfaction  is  the  key  to  this 
world  and  the  door  to  greed.SOJOURNER  IN  THE  PATH  OF  RELIGION:  Those  who 
wish  the  walk  in  the  path  of  religion  should  observe  the 
following  rules  to  control  the  greed  for  food  and  drink.  His  first 
duty  is  that  he  shall  not  eat  except  lawful  foods.  If  a  man 
worships  after  eating  unlawful  food  lives  in  a  house  built  in  the 
waves  of  sea.  Besides  this,  there  remain  three  duties  to  be 
observed  in  connection  with  food  (1)  quantity  of  meal,  (2)  time  of 
meal,  (3)  and  the  kinds  of  meal.

QUANTITY  OF  MEAL:  Litte  food  is  good.  A  man  should 
lessen  his  meal  gradually  and  not  at  a  time.  There  are  four  stages 
of  meal  according  to  the  degree  of  piety.  The  first  and  the  highest 
is  the  stage  of  a  Siddiq  or  truthful  man.  He  eats  what  is  absolutely

80

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

VoI-III

necessary  to  upkeep  his  today.  The  saint  Sahal  Tastari  said:  A 
rnan  can  worship  by  three  things  life,  intellect  and  strength. 
When  a  man  fears  loss  of  life  and  intellect,  he  should  eat  and  if  he 
then  fasts,  he  should  break  it.  It  is  the  unanimous  opinion  of  the 
learned  men  that  it  is  better  to  pray  sitting  owing  to  weakness  of 
hunger  than  to  pray  standing  after  eating  with  satisfaction.  When 
he  was  asked  about  his  quantity  of  food,  he  replied:  My  meal  for  a 
whole  year  cost  me  nearly  three  dirhams.  One  day  I  purchase 
wheat  with  one  dirham,  fine  rice  with  one  dirham  and  clarified 
butter  with  one  dirham.  After  mixing  them  all,  I  make  360  small 
pieces.  Every  evening,  I  break  fast  with  one  piece  only.The  second  stage  of  meal  consists  of  half  'mud'  which  is  the 
general  practice.  Half  'mud'  is  equivalent  to  25  tolas  of  food  or 
ten  morsels.  This  fills  up  nearly  one-third  of  belly.  The  Prophet 
said:  A  few  morsels  are  sufficient  for  a  man.  He  recommended 
this  quantity  of  food  to  be  eaten.  Hazrat  Omar  used  to  eat  not 
more  then  seven  to  nine  morsels.  The  third  stage  of  meal  consists 
of  one  'Mud'  or  fifty  tolas  a  day.  It  may  fill  up  two  thirds  of  belly. 
The  fourth  stage  consists  of  meal  of  a  little  more  than  one  'Mud' 
per  day.  If  a  man  eats  in  excess  of  this  quantity,  he  commits  the 
sin  of  extravagance  of  which  God  says:  Eat  and  drink  but  do  not 
squander  7:31.  The  fifth  stage  of  meal  is  the  general  rule  and 
majority  partake  of  this  quantity  of  food.  They  take  much  more 
than  half  a  seer.  They  are  often  cheated  by  false  hunger.

SIGNS  OF  TRUE  HUNGER

(1)  The  first  sign  of  hunger  is  the  will  to  eat  only  rice  or  bread 
even  though  there  is  no  curry.  If  there  is  no  will  to  take  rice  or 
bread  without  curry,  there  is  no  real  hunger.  (2)  The  second  sign 
of  real  hunger  is  that  such  a  man  licks  the  plate  or  dish  of  meal.  It 
means  that  he  does  not  allow  any  greasy  or  oily  things  in  the  dish 
to  remain.QUANTITY  OF  FOOD  COMPANIONS  AND  SAINTS:  It  is 
true  that  the  meal  of  a  companion  out  of  a  party  per  week  did  not 
exceed  one  sa'a  equivalent  to  2  V2  seers.  When  he  ate  dates  or 
grapes,  it  rose  up  to  one  sa'a.  According  to  this  calculation,  the 
quantity  of  their  daily  meal  was  half  a  mud  or  five  sixteenth  seers 
which  filled  up  one  third  of  the  belly  of  each  one  of  them.  The 
companion  Abu  Zarr  said:  During  the  time  of  the  Prophet,  my 
food  every  weak  was  barley  of  one  sa'a.  Now  you  are  eating  fine

Greed  and  suxual  passion

81

Vol-III

bread.  You  are  now  enjoying  two  curries  in  place  of  one  at  the 
time  of  the  prophet.  You  have  now  got  one  at  the  time  of  the 
Prophet.  You  have  now  gotten  dress  for  the  day  time  and  another 
dress  for  the  night  time.  The  daily  meal  of  the  inhabitants  of  Suffa 
v^asone  Mud  or  five  eighth  seers  for  two.

TIME  OF  MEAL:  There  are  four  stages  regarding  the  time  of 
ineal.  The  people  of  the  highest  stage  take  meal  once  in  every 
three  days  or  more.  Some  of  them  took  no  food  even  for  forty 
days  at  a  stretch.  A  party  of  saints  reached  that  limit  and  they  are 
the  following:  Muhammad-b-Omar,  Abdur  Rahmman-b- 
Ibrahim,  ibrahim  Taisi,  Hajaz-b-Faresah.  Hafsal  Aref, 
Mushab-b-Sayeed,  Solaiman  Khawas,  Sohal-b-Abdullah 
Tastrari,  Ibrahim-b- Ahmed  khawas.  Hazrat  Abu  Bakr  used  to 
take  meal  once  is  six  days,  Abdullah-b-Jaber  once  in  seven  days 
and  Abdul  Zaoja  once  in  seven  days,  Sufyan-b-  Saori  and 
Ibrahim-b- Adham  once  in  three  days.Some  learned  men  said:  Some  secrets  of  the  unseen  world 
are  disclosed  to  a  man  who  can  remain  without  food  for 
consequitive  forty  days.  One  of  these  sages,  while  passing  by  a 
Christian  monk,  invited  him  to  accept  Islam  and  to  give  up  self 
conceit.  There  were  much  arguments  between  tljem  over  this 
matter.  The  monk  said  to  him  at  last:  Jesus  Christ  fasted  forty 
consequitive  days.  This  is  a  m  iitcle  indeed.  Had  he  not  been  a 
Prophet,  he  could  not  have  done  so.  The  sage  said  to  him:  If  I  can 
fast  for  consequitive  fifty  days,  will  you  accept  Islam?  The  monk 
said:  I  shall  accept  Islam  in  that  case.  Thereafter  the  sage  fasted 
for  consequitive  fifty  days  at  a  stretch.  The  sage  said:  I  can  fast 
ten  days  more.  He  then  continued  his  fast  for  ten  days  more.  The 
Christian  monk  was  astonished  at  this  and  said:  I  did  not  think 
that  any  man  can  surpass  Jesus  Christ  in  this  matter.  Then  he 
accepted  Islam.

(2)  Second  Stage.  In  this  stage,  some  pious  men  fast  from  two 
to  three  days  consequitively.  This  can  be  done  by  habit.  (3)  Third 
Stage.  The  people  of  this  stage  take  meal  once  a  day.  This  is  the 
lowest  stage  for  a  sojourner  in  the  path  of  the  next  world.  If 
anybody  takes  meal  more  than  once  in  a  day  of  24  hours,  it  will  be 
considered  extravagance  and  eating  with  satisfaction.  Such  a 
person  has  got  no  hunger.  It  is  far  from  following  the  ways  of  the 
Prophet.  The  companion  Abu  Sayeed  said:  If  the  Prophet  took 
meal  in  the  morning,  he  did  not  take  it  at  night.  If  he  took  meal  at

82

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III82

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

night,  he  did  not  take  it  in  the  morning.  The  Prophet  once  said  to 
Hazrat  Ayesha:  O  Ayesha,  beware,  don't  squander.  In  case  of  two 
meals  a  day,  there  is  squander.  One  meal  in  every  two  days  is  the 
lowest  rank  of  the  Sufis  and  one  meal  per  day  is  the  middle  of  the 
two  stages.  If  anybody  wishes  to  take  one  meal  a  day,  he  should 
take  it  after  Tahajjud  prayer  and  before  morning  prayer.  In  that 
case,  the  rewards  of  fasting  by  day  and  hunger  by  night  are 
obtained.

Hazrat  Abu  Hurairah  said:  The  Prophet  never  prayed 
Tahajjud  like  you.  He  stood  so  long  in  Tahajjud  that  his  feet  got 
swollen.  He  used  not  to  take  meal  after  Iftar  as  you  do.  He  used  to 
take  meal  of  fasting  at  the  time  of  Sehri  only.  Hazrat  Ayesha  said 
that  the  Prophet  used  to  remain  hungry  up  to  the  time  of  Sehri. 
Meal  should  be  divided  in  to  two.  If  it  is  said  that  two  pieces  of 
bread  are  sufficient,  then  one  bread  at  the  time  of  Iftar  and 
another  at  the  time  of  Sehri,  should  be  taken.  If  meal  is  taken  at 
the  time  of  Sehri,  hunger  during  the  day  does  not  become  acute 
and  Tahajjud  prayed  with  peaceful  mind.(3)  Kind  of  food:  The  seeds  of  wheat  are  the  best  of  foods. 
Meat  and  sweet  things  are  best  and  salt  and  condiment  are  worst. 
The  middle  kind  of  food  is  curries  cooked  with  oil.  The  sage 
Ihya-b-  Maaz  said:  O  religious  men  appertaining  to  the  class  of 
the  truthful,  keep  your  passion  now  hungry  for  feast  of  the 
Paradise  of  Ferdous.  For  this  reason,  there  are  abundant  rewards 
in  giving  up  greed  for  even  lawful  things  and  the  possibility  of 
harms  if  they  are  enjoyed  in  full.  The  Prophet  said:  Those  who  eat 
fine  flour  are  worst.  It  is  not  unlawful  but  the  meaning  of  this 
Hadis  is  that  if  one  is  habituated  to  eating  fine  flour,  he  may  fall 
to  the  attachment  of  the  world  which  leads  to  sin.  The  Prophet 
said:  Among  my  followers,  those  are  worst  whose  goal  is  food  of 
various  kinds  and  fine  dresses  and  who  spend  most  of  their  times 
in  useless  talks.  God  revealed  to  Moses:  O  Moses,  consider 
yourself  as  an  inmate  of  grave.  My  remembrance  will  restrain 
you  from  greed  and  evil  desires.  The  earlier  sages  feared  for  those 
who  enjoyed  delicious  food  and  remained  busy  in  satisfaction  of 
their  natural  propensities.

Hazrat  Omar  restrained  himself  from  drinking  cold  water 
mixed  with  honey.  He  said:  Save  me  from  the  responsibility  of  its 
account.  It  has  been  narrated  that  once  Ibn  Omar  fell  ill  and  he 
wanted  to  enjoy  fresh  fish.  After  search,  a  fish  worth  one  and  a  half

83

y0|.III  Greed  and  suxual  passion83

y0|.III  Greed  and  suxual  passion

dirham  was  brought  to  him.  The  fish  was  fried  and  was  presented  to 
j,jjn  with  bread.  At  that  time  a  beggar  came  there.  He  ordered  his 
gervant  to  give  him  the  fish  with  the  bread.  The  servant  gave  him  one 
and  half  dirham  and  did  not  give  him  the  fish  and  bread.  He 
ordered  his  servant  to  give  the  beggar  the  fish  and  the  bread  in 
addition  to  the  dirhams  and  said:  1  heard  the  Prophet  say:  God 
forgives  the  sins  of  one  who  denies  himself  a  thing  for  which  he 
has  got  greed  to  enjoy.  The  Prophet  said:  If  you  donot  appease 
the  hunger  for  a  dog  by  giving  it  a  piece  of  bread  and  a  pot  of  pure 
water,  calamity  will  come  to  the  world  and  its  inmates.

Once  news  reached  Hazrat  Omar  that  Yezid,  son  of.  Abu 
Sufiyan,  remained  busy  in  enjoyment  of  various  delicious  food, 
fie  said  to  his  servant:  When  the  meal  of  night  is  served  before 
Yezid,  inform  me  at  once.  The  servant  informed  him  accordingly 
and  Hazrat  Omar  went  to  him  and  sat  by  his  side.  Hazrat  Omar 
began  to  eat  with  him.  At  first  soup  of  meat  was  presented  and 
then  came  baked  meat.  When  Yezid  was  going  to  take  it,  Omar 
said  to  him:  O  Yezid,  one  food  softer  another?  By  One  in  whose 
and  there  is  my  life,  if  you  give  up  the  practices  of  the  sages  of  the 
previous  refugees,  you  will  drift  a  way  from  their  path.Yasar-Ibn  Omar  said:  I  never  prepared  for  Hazrat  Omar  thin 
bread  made  of  fine  flour.  It  has  been  said  that  the  saint  Otbatui 
Golam  used  to  eat  flour  pasted  with  water  after  it  is  baked  in  the 
sun  and  say:  One  piece  of  bread  and  salt  are  sufficient  and  in  that 
case,  fried  meat  and  delicious  food  can  be  eaten  in  the  next  world. 
His  maid  servant  once  said  to  him:  If  you  give  me  flour,  I  can 
prepare  for  you  bread  after  it  is  baked  in  fire  and  I  can  give  you 
cold  water  to  drink.  He  said  to  her:  O  mother  of  so  and  so,  I  have 
driven  out  from  me  the  dog  of  hunger.

Shaqiq-b-Ibrahim  said:  I  met  a  Mecca  Ibrahim-b-Adham 
who  was  then  weeping.  On  being  asked  the  reason,  he  said:  For 
the  last  30  years,  I  have  been  desirous  of  eating  Harirah  (sweet 
thing)  but  I  have  restrained  myself  with  great  difficulty.  Last 
night  when  I  was  in  sleep,  I  found  a  young  man  with  a  green  pot 
in  which  there  was  Harirah.  He  said  to  me:  O  Ibrahim,  eat  it.  I 
said:  1  shall  not  eat  it.  I  have  given  it  up  for  God.  He  said:  God  has 
given  you  to  eat  it.  Then  I  began  to  weep  and  eat  it.

The  sage  Malek-b-Dinar  lived  at  Basra  for  50  years.  He  did 
not  enjoy  during  this  long  period  fresh  and  dried  grapes.  Hazrat

84

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-lu

Musa  Ashjeyi  said:  I  had  a  desire  for  the  last  20  years  to  eat  bread 
of  fine  wheat  but  I  did  not  enjoy  it.  The  saint  Abu  Solaiman  said: 
Salt  is  a  thing  of  luxury.  Hazrat  Ali  said  If  a  man  eats  meat 
continuously  for  40  days,  his  temper  becomes  harsh.  A  wise  man 
said:  Eating  of  meat  continuously  become  like  drinking  of  wine.DUTIES  AFTER  MEAL:  (1)  When  a  man  wishes  to  cohabit 
with  his  wife  he  should  do  it  before  he  takes  his  meal.  (2)  It  js 
better  not  to  sleep  after  eating  and  drinking  with  satisfaction. 
Two  harms  arise  in  case  of  sleep  after  meal  the  habit  of  idleness 
and  the  heart  becoming  hard.  (3)  It  is  better  after  meal  to  hold 
conversation,  to  pray,  to  make  Zikr  as  these  are  near  expressing 
gratefulness.  The  Prophet  said:  Digest  your  food  by  prayer  and 
Zikr  and  don't  sleep  soon  after  meal.  If  you  do  it,  your  heart  will 
become  hard.  (4)  The  lowest  duty  after  meal  is  to  pray  four 
rak'ats  or  to  recite  one  hundred  Tasbih  or  a  portion  of  the  Quran. 
When  Sufiyan  Saori  ate  with  satisfaction  at  night,  he  used  to  pray 
throughout  the  night.  When  he  ate  with  satisfaction  at  day  time 
he  used  to  pray  and  make  Zikr.  He  said:  Give  full  food  to  the 
belly  of  a  Negro  slave  and  exact  from  him  hard  work.  He  used 
often  to  say:  Exact  from  him  hard  work  after  giving  full  food. 
Whenever  you  desire  to  eat  some  food  or  good  fruits,  you  should 
take  it  in  lieu  of  meal,  so  that  you  may  gain  strength.  A  wise  man 
said:  Don't  eat  being  greedy  for  it.  If  you  eat  it,  don't  search  for  it. 
If  you  search  for  it,  don't  love  it.  To  search  for  various  kinds  of 
food  is  greed.  Don't  allow  your  greed  to  follow  all  lawful  things. 
Whatever  food  a  man  takes  out  of  greed,  he  will  be  said  therefor: 
You  have  enjoyed  your  good  things  in  this  word's  life.  You  can 
fulfill  your  desire  in  the  next  world  in  proportion  to  your  gibing 
up  of  greed  and  desire  in  this  world.  A  wise  man  of  Basra  said: 
My  desire  disputed  with  me  about  eating  bread  and  fish  but  I 
restrained  myself  from  eating  them.  This  continued  for  the  last  20 
years.  When  he  died,  man  of  Basra  said:  I  saw  him  in  dream  and 
asked:  What  rewards  has  God  given  you?  He  said:  I  can't 
describe  fully  what  rewards  my  God  has  given  me.  He 
entertained  me  first  with  bread  and  fish  and  I  have  been  allowed 
to  enjoy  it  every  day  withoutaccount.  God  said:  Eat  and  drink  in 
exchange  of  what  you  have  lost  in  bygone  days.  The  sage  Abu 
Solaiman  said:  To  give  up  a  desire  is  more  benefiting  than  fasting 
and  praying  for  one  year.85

y0|.III  Creed  and  suxual  passion

MEANS  OF  GAINING  MODERATION  IN  EATING:  Know, 
0  dear  readers,  that  the  object  of  good  conduct  is  to  gain  the 
middle  path  which  is  good  in  all  actions  and  both  the  extremes 
are  bad.  What  has  been  described  above  about  the  merits  of 
hunger  shows  that  no  extreme  is  good.  The  secret  of  Shariat  is 
that  whatever  is  taken  as  a  result  of  greed  and  low  desire  is  the 
extreme  in  which  there  is  harm.  Shariat  prohibited  it  firmly. 
Nature  encourages  eating  with  heart's  content  and  Shariat 
prohibits  it.  When  these  two  things  stand  face  to  face,  the 
middle  course  should  be  adopted.  When  the  Prophet  came  to 
learn  that  some  of  the  companions  prayed  throughout  the 
night  and  fasted  throughout  the  day,  he  prohibited  it.  So  it  is 
good  to  eat  with  moderation  as  it  does  not  cause  heaviness  of 
belly  and  prevents  hunger.  The  object  of  food  is  to  save  life  and 
to  gain  strength  for  divine  services.  A  heavy  belly  obstructs 
divine  services  and  acute  hunger  also  prevents  it.  So  it  is 
better  to  eat  food  in  such  proportion  as  prevents  hunger  and 
also  heaviness  of  belly .Man  should  acquire  the  qualities  of  an  angle  and  when  these 
are  a  quarried  he  becomes  like  an  angle.  An  angel  is  free  from 
heaviness  of  belly  and  pangs  of  hunger.  The  object  of  man  should 
be  to  acquire  that  position.  The  middle  path  is  the  best  between 
hunger  and  over-eating.  The  Prophet  said:  The  middle  path  of 
every  action  is  best.  God  also  says:  Eat  and  drink  and  donot 
squander.  When  nature  runs  towards  greed  and  low  desires,  it 
should  be  punished  by  hunger  till  it  gives  up  passion  and  greed. 
The  object  of  hunger  is  to  curb  all  passions  till  they  come  to 
moderation  and  under  control.  A  sojourner  of  the  next  world 
should  therefore  have  no  necessity  of  remaining  hungry  all  along 
as  the  lash  of  hunger  is  not  necessary  for  a  siddiq  or  greatly 
truthful  man.

PROPHET'S  WAYS  OF  EATING:  The  Prophet  had  no  fixed 
measure  of  food  and  fixed  time.  Hazrat  Ayes  ha  said:  The  Prophet 
used  to  fast  in  such  a  way  that  the  people  thought  that  he  won't 
eat  and  drink  and  he  used  to  fast  in  such  a  way  that  the  people 
thought  that  he  won't  break  it.  He  often  used  to  go  to  his  wives 
and  say:  Have  you  got  any  food?  If  they  said  'yes'  he  took  meal. 
Whenever  any  food  was  served  before  him  he  used  to  say:  '  'I 
have  fasted'  and  then  he  broke  his  fast  and  ate  it.  One  day  the 
Prophet  came  out  and  said:  I  have  kept  fast.  Hazrat  Ayesha  said

86

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

to  him  once:  Hais  has  been  presented  to  us.  The  Prophet  said:  I 
wished  to  fast,  but  now  take  it  to  me.86

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

to  him  once:  Hais  has  been  presented  to  us.  The  Prophet  said:  I 
wished  to  fast,  but  now  take  it  to  me.

Sahal  Tastari  was  once  asked:  What  have  done  in  the 
beginning  of  your  religious  life?  He  informed  him  about  his 
divine  services.  He  used  to  take  little  food.  Sometimes  he  used  to 
take  olive  fruits.  He  ate  food  for  three  years  worth  three  dirhams. 
Being  asked  about  the  time  of  meal,  he  said:  I  eat  without  fixing 
any  time  or  quantity  of  food.  The  sage  Ma'ruf  Karkhi  used  to  eat 
whatever  food,  ordinary  or  delicious,  was  presented  to  him.  He 
was  asked:  Your  brother  Bashar  Hafi  does  not  eat  such  delicious 
food.  He  replied:  My  brother  is  in  chain  of  God.fear  and  1  opened 
the  door  of  Ma'arfat.  I  am  a  guests  of  my  Lord.  I  eat  whatever  He 
gives  me.  I  have  got  no  power  to  take  or  to  reject.  Hazrat  Omar 
saw  his  son  Abdullah  enjoying  clarified  butter,  meat  and  bread 
together.  He  whipped  him  and  said;  Gat  meat  and  bread  one  day 
and  clarified  butter  another  day,  and  bread  and  curry  another 
day,  and  salt  another  day  and  bare  bread  another  day.  This  is  the 
middle  path  for  you.  Constant  use  of  meal  and  greasy  things 
cause  extravagance.  To  give  up  meat  for  all  times  grows  the  evil 
of  miserliness.  The  middle  course  lies  between  the  two  extremes.

SECTION  6SECTION  6

SEXUAL  PASSION:  There  are  two  benefits  of  sexual  passion, 
(i)  satisfaction  of  intercourse  and  (2)  preservation  of  mankind.  The 
pleasure  that  is  felt  in  sexual  intercourse  between  a  man  and  his 
wife  is  a  little  sign  of  his  next  worldly  pleasure.  If  it  were  lasting, 
pleasure  would  have  been  strong  as  physical  pain  inflicted  by  force 
is  great.  The  fear  of  Hell  fire  and  the  greed  for  pleasure  and  happens 
of  paradise  lead  a  man  towards  guidance.  If  a  man  would  not  have 
the  taste  of  pleasure  or  pain,  it  would  not  have  been  possible.  (2) 
The  second  benefit  is  preservation  of  mankind.  But  there  is  this 
danger  in  it  that  if  it  is  not  kept  under  control  and  exceeds  limit  his 
next  world  and  this  world  are  both  destroyed.  God  taught  us  to  say 
in  this  verse:  O  our  Lord,  don't  inflict  on  us  such  duty  as  is  outside 
our  power.  This  power  has  been  said  to  be  sexual  desire.  God 
taught  us  to  invoke:  I  seek  refuge  from  the  evils  of  night  when  it 
spreads  darkness.  This  evil  is  explained  by  Ibn  Abbas  as  the 
erection  of  male  organ.  The  wise  said:  When  the  sexual  organ  of  any 
man  stands  erect,  two-third  of  his  intellect  goes  away.  This  Prophet 
used  to  pray:  I  seek  refute  to  Thee  from  the  evils  of  my  ears,  eyes, 
heart,  enjoymentand  semen.

87

y0I-HI  Greed  and  suxual  passion87

y0I-HI  Greed  and  suxual  passion

The  Prophet  said:  A  woman  is  the  string  of  the  devil.  Once 
the  devil  appeared  before  Moses  and  warned  him  of  three 
things-(l)  Don't  remain  along  with  a  woman  in  any  place 
because  I  become  the  companion  of  a  man  and  a  woman  who 
remain  in  a  lonely  place  till  I  throw  into  the  male  the  snate  of 
the  female  and  the  female  into  the  share  of  the  male.  (2)  Fulfil 
your  promise  with  God.  (3)  Spend  the  wealth  you  bring  out  for 
Zakat  and  other  charities,  as  I  become  owner  of  that  wealth 
which  a  man  keeps  separate  for  charities  to  the  people  but  does 
not  spend.

There  are  three  stages  of  sexual  passion-excessive,  little  and 
middle.  In  case  of  excessive  sexual  passion,  a  man  loses  his  sense 
of  right  and  wrong  and  enjoys  any  woman  and  thus  destroys  his 
religion  and  world.  Such  a  man  often  takes  recourse  to  medicine 
to  increase  his  sexual  passing.  The  is  all  the  more  dangerous. 
Such  a  man  takes  recourse  to  love-making  of  which  the  object  is 
the  satisfaction  of  sexual  passion.  The  medicine  for  this  is  to 
control  eyes  and  thoughts.  The  Prophet  prescribed  marriage  for 
them  and  said:  O  young  men,  take  recourse  to  marriage.  He  who 
is  unable  to  do  it,  let  him  fast,  as  fast  for  him  is  castration.FORNICATION  OF  EYE:  The  sin  of  the  fornication  of  eye  is 
greatest  among  the  minor  sins.  He  who  cannot  control  his  eyes 
cannot  save  his  organ  Jesus  Christ  said:  Take  carp  of  your  eye  as  it 
sows  she  seed  of  sexual  passion  in  heat  and  that  is  sufficient 
for  creation  of  danger.  Prophet  Ihya  was  asked:  What  is  the 
source  of  fornication?  He  said:  Eye  sight  and  greed.  The 
Prophet  said:  Eye  sight  is  a  poisonous  arrow  out  of  the  arrows 
of  the  devil.  God  gives  to  a  man  who  gives  it  up  for  fear  of  God 
such  faith  which  gives  satisfaction  to  his  heart.  He  also  said: 
•There  will  remain  no  greater  danger  for  the  people  after  my 
death  than  women.  He  also  said:  Fear  the  world  and  women. 
The  cause  of  first  danger  which  came  upon  the  children  off 
Israil  was  women.  God  says:  Tell  the  believers  to  control  their 
eye  sight.  The  Prophet  said:  Everyone  has  got  a  share  in 
fornication.  His  two  eyes  commit  fornication  by  sight.  His  two 
hands  commit  fornication  by  touch.  His  two  feet  commit 
fornication  by  walk.  His  mouth  commits  fornication  by  Kiss. 
His  heart  commits  fornication  by  thought.  His  sexual  organ 
commits  fornication  by  translating  it  into  action.  Hazrat 
Omme  Salemah  said:  When  Ibn  Makhtum,  a  blind  man,  sought

88

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

\?ol-III88

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

\?ol-III

permission  of  the  Prophet  to  see  him,  I  and  Maimunah  were 
present  there.  The  Prophet  said:  Screen  yourselves.  We  said  He  is 
blind.  He  will  not  see  us.  He  said:  I  f  he  does  not  see  you,  you  will 
see  him  Some  love  the  hurdles  boys  out  of  sexual  passion  which 
is  more  dangerous.  A  pious  man  said:  There  are  three  kinds  of 
people-(l )  one  kind  of  people  cohabit  with  boys,  (2)  one  kind  cast 
look  out  of  passion,  (3)  and  one  kind  do  indecent  deeds.  So  these 
are  the  dangers  of  eye  sight.DANGERS  OF  RICH  WIFE:  There  are  five  dangers  of  a  rich 
wife-(l)  her  dower  is  increased,  (2)  she  makes  delay  in  mixing 
with  her  husband,  (3)  her  service  is  rarely  found,  (4)  her  expanse 
becomes  more,  (5)  she  cannot  be  devout  for  fear  of  losing  her 
property.  This  is  not  the  case  in  case  a  poor  lady  is  married.  A 
wise  man  said:  A  husband  should  have  four  things  more  than 
those  of  his  wife,  in  default,  his  wife  will  look  down  upon 
him-age,  stature  being  long,  riches  and  pedigree.  A  female 
should  have  four  things  more  than  those  of  her  husband-beauty 
character  and  conduct,  piety  and  behaviour.  Anything  which 
creates  forgetfulness  of  God  is  harmful.  If  a  man  can  remember 
God  more  in  an  unmarried  state,  it  is  good  for  him.  Once  very 
rich  man  wanted  to  marry  the  saint  Rabia  Basri.  She  declined  his 
offer  saying:  'If  God  gives  me  wealth  like  yours  or  more  than  that, 
it  is  not  better  for  me  to  be  forgetful  of  God  even  for  a  moment.' 
There  are  medicines  for  controlling  sexual  passion.  These  are 
hunger,  restraint  of  sight  and  engagement  in  some  work  or  other. 
If  no  benefit  accrues  from  these  three  methods,  it  is  better  to 
marry.  For  this  reason,  the  earlier  sages  hastened  to  marry  and 
got  their  daughters  married  withoutdelay.

SECTION  8SECTION  8

Rewards  of  opposing  passions.  Know,  O  dear  readers,  that 
sexual  passion  is  stronger  in  human  mind  than  other  passions 
and  curbs  intellect  at  the  time  of  excitement.  At  that  time,  one 
runs  after  some  affairs  which  are  shameful.  Few  people  can 
control  it.  Most  people  refrain  from  it  owing  to  inability,  fear 
shame  and  illness.  There  is  no  merit  in  it.  If  one  has  got  ability  to 
commit  fornication  an  if  there  is  no  obstruction,  he  will  acquire 
merit  provided  he  commits  no  sin.  This  is  the  rank  of  the 
truthful.  The  Prophet  said:  He  who  refrains  from  committing  sin 
even  though  he  is  enamored  of  love  of  anybody  and  dies  in  that 
condition  keeping  it  secret,  is  a  martyr.  He  also  said:  God  will

89

y0l_jU  Greed  and  suxual  passion

•ye  shade  to  seven  persons  under  His  Throne  on1  the  Judgment 
pay  on  which  there  will  be  no  shade  except  the  shade  of  His 
Throne.  One  of  them  is  he  who  refrains  from  satisfying  the  sexual 
desire  of  a  beautiful  woman  coming  from  a  respectable  family 
when  she  calls  him  and  says:  I  fear  the  Lord  of  the  universe.  In 
this  connection,  the  story  of  Josep  and  Julaikha  is  a  brilliant 
example-  He  refrained  from  satisfying  the  carnal  desire  of 
julaikha,  the  wife  of  the  king  of  Egypt.Solaiman-b-Yasar  was  a  beautiful  man.  Once  a  beautiful 
woman  proposed  to  him  to  have  sexual  connection  but  he 
refrained  and  fled  from  his  house  leaving  her  therein.  Solaiman 
said:  in  that  night,  I  saw  Joseph  in  dream  and  asked  him:  Are  you 
Joseph?  He  said:  Yet,  I  am  Joseph  who  had  sexual  desire  but  you 
had  no  such  desire.  There  is  a  more  wonderful  story.  Once 
Solaiman  started  on  pilgrimage  from  Medina  with  a  companion. 
He  alighted  at  a  place  called  Abwa.  His  companion  went  to  a 
market  for  purchasing  food  leaving  Solaiman  in  the  tent.  One 
Arab  woman  came  then  to  the  tent  and  she  was  exquisitely 
beautiful  and  young:  The  woman  said  to  him:  I  have  not  come  to 
beg,  I  want  only  sexual  enjoyment  with  a  male.  He  said:  The  devil 
has  brought  you  to  me.  Then  he  placed  his  head  between  his 
knees  and  began  to  weep  bitterly.  Seeing  this  pitiable  condition, 
she  put  on  her  burqa  and  left  the  place.  He  then  went  to  Mecca 
and  made  pilgrimage.  One  night  he  saw  in  dream  Joseph  and 
said:  Your  glory  regarding  the  wife  of  the  king  of  Egypt  is 
wonderful.  Joseph  said:  Your  glory  regarding  the  young  woman 
of  Abwa  is  more  wonderful.The  Prophet  said  that  three  persons  went  on  a  journey.  Taey 
took  shelter  at  night  to  a  cave  of  a  hillock.  Suddenly  a  huge  stone 
fell  over  the  youth  of  the  cave  and  shut  it  up  completely.  They 
found  darkness  all  around  and  there  was  no  hope  of  getting  out 
of  it.  So  they  recalled  their  good  deeds  to  seek  mercy  of  God.  One 
of  them  said:  O  Merciful  God,  you  know  that  I  had  a  cousin  sister 
who  loved  me  dearly  and  I  also  loved  her  dearly.  During  the  time 
of  famine,  I  gave  her  120  dinars  on  condition  that  she  would 
agree  to  what  I  say.  One  day  I  found  her  alone  and  sought  to 
enjoy  her  but  she  refused  saying:  Fear  God,  don't  break  my  seal 
without  God's  order.  Then  I  refrained  from  it.  O  God,  if  Thou 
knowest  best  that  I  refrained  for  Thy  fear,  shift  the  stone  a  little. 
The  stone  shifted  a  little.

90

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

So  eye  sight  is  the  precursor  of  fornication.  The  control  it  is 
absolutely  necessary.  The  root  of  all  dangers  is  sight.  The  Prophet 
said:  Thee  first  sight  is  for  you  but  the  second  sight  is  against 
you.  Alla-b-Jiyad  said:  Don't  turn  your  look  repeatedly  over  the 
sheet  of  a  female  as  sight  sows  seed  of  sexual  passion  in  mind.Once  a  meat  seller  fell  in  love  with  a  female  slave  of  his 
neighbor.  Her  master  one  day  sent  her  to  another  village  for 
some  work.  Getting  this  information,  the  meat  seller  followed 
her  and  caught  her  on  the  way.  She  said  to  him:  Don't  do  this.  I 
love  you  more  than  you  love  me.  Fear  God.  Then  he  became 
repentant  and  went  on  his  way.  When  he  was  thirsty  he  found  no 
warer.  Finding  a  man,  he  said:  Let  us  both  pray  to  God  for  rain. 
The  m,eat  seller  said:  I  will  pray  and  you  will  call  Ameen  (be  it 
so).  So  they  began  to  pray  to  God  for  water  and  soon  a  cloud 
appeared  over  their  heads.  When  they  became  separate,  the 
cloud  followed  the  meat  seller.  On  seeing  this  favour  of  God  on 
him,  his  companion  came  there  and  asked  him  the  reason.  The 
meat  seller  narrated  to  him  the  story  of  his  love  for  the  female 
slave  and  how  he  controlled  his  passion.

CHAPTER  IV

HARMS  OF  TONGUECHAPTER  IV

HARMS  OF  TONGUE

Know,  O  dear  readers,  that  tongue  is  a  great  asset  of  a  man 
and  a  wonder  out  of  the  wonderful  creations  of  God.  Though  it  is 
insignificant  its  power  is  unlimited,  its  virtues  are  great  and 
infidelity  and  faith  do  not  find  expression  except  through 
tongue.  It  is  the  last  limit  of  sins  and  virtues.  Tongue  can  express 
what  has  been  related  and  what  has  not  been  created;  the  Creator 
and  the  created,  the  known  and  the  unknown.  Tongue  explains 
what  intellect  brings  in  mind,  whether  truth  or  untruth.  Tongue 
may  be  said  to  be  the  agent  of  intellect.  No  other  organ  has  got 
such  power  to  express  the  mind.  The  sight  of  eye  extends  only  to 
figures  and  colours  and  not  to  any  other  thing.  Ear  has  got  power 
over  only  sounds  and  not  to  any  other  thing.  The  power  to  tongue 
is,  however,  unlimited.  It  has  got  power  over  good  and  bad.  The 
dangers  of  tongue  are  useless  talks,  quarrels,  disputes,  rebukes, 
scolding,  harsh  words,  curse,  false  speaking,  backbiting,  self 
praise  etc.  We  shall  proceed  to  discuss  them  one  by  one.MERITS  OF  SILENCE:  The  dangers  and  harms  of  tongue  are 
many  and  there  is  no  rescue,  from  them  except  silent.  For  this 
reason.  Shariat  recommends  it.  The  Prophet  said  :  He  who  keeps 
silent  gets  salvation.  He  also  said  :  Silence  is  a  rule  and  few 
people  can  observe  it.  The  father  of  Sufiyan  asked  the  Prophet :  O 
Prophet  of  God,  give  me  such  news  about  Islam  which  I  shall  ask 
nobody  after  you.  The  Prophet  said  :  Say,  I  have  believed'  and 
stand  on  it  firmly.  I  asked  him :  What  matter  shall  I  fear  most.  He 
hinted  with  his  hand  at  the  tongue.  Oqbah-b-Amer  said :  I  asked : 
0  Messenger  of  God,  ho w  can  I  get  sal  va  tion  ?  He  said  :  Hold 
your  tongue,  make  your  house  spacious  and  repent  for  your  sins. 
The  Prophet  said  :  If  a  man  can  give  me  guarantee  of  the  things 
placed  between  his  two  cheeks  and  his  two  thighs,  I  can  give  him 
guarantee  of  paradise.  He  said  :  He  who  is  safe  from  the  harms  of 
his  belly,  sexual  organ  and  tongue  is  safe  from  all  troubles.  For 
these  three  organs,  majority  of  the  people  are  destroyed.  The 
Prophet  was  asked  about  a  great  viture  which  admits  one  to 
paradise.  He  said  :  Control  of  two  hollow  things-  mouth  and 
sexual  organ.  He  meant  tongue  by  mouth.

Hazrat  Muaz-b-jabal  said :  I  asked  :  O  Prophet  of  God,  shall 
we  be  punished  for  what  we  utter  ?  He  said  :  O  Ibn  Jabal,  your

92

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-IIIHazrat  Muaz-b-jabal  said :  I  asked  :  O  Prophet  of  God,  shall 
we  be  punished  for  what  we  utter  ?  He  said  :  O  Ibn  Jabal,  your

92

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

mother  be  heavy  with  you,  will  a  man  be  overturned  in  hell  over 
his  nose  except  for  harms  of  his  tongue  ?  Abdullah  Saqafi  said  :  I 
asked  :  O  Prophet  of  God,  what  matter  do  you  fear  for  me?  He 
caught  his  tongue  and  said :  This.  Hazrat  Muaz  asked :  O  Prophet 
of  God,  what  action  is  best  ?  The  Prophet  drew  out  his  tongue  and 
placed  his  finger  on  it  and  said  :  The  faith  of  a  man  does  not 
become  alright  till  his  mind  does  not  become  so,  and  his  mind 
does  not  become  alright  till  his  tongue  does  not  become  so.  He 
from  whose  harm  his  neighbour  is  not  safe  will  not  enter 
paradise.  The  Prophet  said  :  He  who  is  pleased  with  Islam  shall 
take  to  silence.  He  said :  When  a  man  rises  from  bed,  his  limbs  get 
up  and  rebuke  his  tongue.  In  other  words  they  say  to  his  tongue, 
fear  God  regarding  us,  because  when  you  are  alright,  we  are 
alright  and  when  you  are  wrong,  we  are  wrong.

Once  Hazrat  Omar  saw  Harzat  Abu  Bakr  drawing  out  his 
tongue  and  asked  him :  O  Caliph  of  the  people.  What  are  you  doing 
?  He  said :  I  drags  me  to  the  place  of  destruction.  The  Prophet  said  : 
There  is  no  such  limb  of  body  which  will  not  con  plain  to  God  about 
the  harsh  treatment  of  tongue.  Harzat  Ibn  Masud  said  that  the 
Prophet  had  said :  Major  sins  of  a  man  accrue  from  his  tongue.  The 
Prophet  said  :  God  keeps  the  hidden  things  of  a  man  secret  who 
controls  his  tongue.  God  saves  one  who  keeps  his  anger  under 
control.  God  accepts  the  excesses  of  one  who  shows  excuse  to  God.Once  Hazrat  Muaz  asked  the  Prophet :  O  Prophet  of  God, 
advise  me.' He  said :  Worship  in  such  a  way  as  if  you  see  God  and 
consider  you  as  one  of  the  dead.  I  shall  let  you  know  a  more 
important  thing  than  this  if  you  like.  He  then  hinted  with  his 
hand  at  the  tongue.  Hazrat  Safwan-b-Solaman  was  once  asked  by 
the  Prophet  :  Shall  I  not  inform  you  about  the  easiest  divine 
service  and  the  most  comfortable  thing  to  body  ? — Silence  and 
good  conduct.  The  Prophet  said  :  Let  one  who  believes  in  God 
and  the  next  world  speak  good  or  remain  silent.  The  Prophet  said 
:  May  God  show  mercy  on  one  who  acquires  rewards  by  talk  or 
remain  safe  by  keeping  silent.  Jesus  Christ  was  once  asked  : 
Teach  us  such  thing  by  virtue  of  which  we  can  enter  paradise.  He 
said :  Don't  talk.  They  said :  We  shall  not  be  able  to  do  it.  He  said : 
Then  don't  talk  except  good.  Hazrat  Bara'a-t-Azeb  said  :  O 
Prophet  of  God,  teach  me  such  a  thing  by  viture  of  which  I  can 
enter  paradise.  He  said:  Give  food  to  the  hungry,  drink  to  the 
thirsty,  enjoin  good  and  prohibit  evil.  If  you  can  not  do  it,  don't

93

V0i-Ill  Greed  and  sexual  passion93

V0i-Ill  Greed  and  sexual  passion

hold  talk  except  good.  The  Prophet  said :  Save  your  tongue  from 
talks  except  good.  The  Prophet  said :  Save  your  tongue  from  talks 
other  than  good,  you  can  then  defeat  the  devil.  He  said  :  God  is 
near  every  utterance  of  a  man.  So  let  him  tak'  care  of  what  he 
utters.  He  said  :  When  you  see  a  believer  keeping  silent  and 
grave,  come  to  him,  as  there  is  wisdom  in  him.  The  Prophet  said : 
Men  are  divided  into  three  classes-looters  of  war  booties,  talkers 
of  useless  things  and  those  who  are  safe.  A  looter  of  war  booties  is 
one  who  makes  Zikr  of  God.  A  safe  man  is  he  who  remains  silent. 
A  useless  talker  is  one  who  holds  unnecessary  talk.  The  Prophet 
said  :  The  tongue  of  a  believer  keeps  behind  his  tongue.  The 
tongue  of  a  hypocrite  keeps  in  front  of  his  mind.  When  he  wishes 
to  talk,  he  sends  it  through  his  tongue  without  any  thinking. 
Jesus  Christ  said  :  There  is  ten  portions  of  divine  service,  nine  of 
which  are  in  silence,  and  the  remaining  one  is  in  loneliness.  The 
Prophet  said  :  He  who  talks  much  commits  blunders.  He  who 
blunders  much  commits  many  sins.  For  one  whose  sins  are  great. 
Hell  fire  is  good.Caliph  Omar-b-Abdul  Aziz  said :  He  who  remembers  death 
much,  remains  satisfied  with  little.  He  who  counts  his  words  in 
his  actions  talks  little.  A  wise  man  said  :  Silence  gives  two 
benefits  to  a  man — safety  of  religion  and  knowing  of  friends. 
Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said :  Once  many  people  were  talking  in  the 
assembly  of  Caliph  Muwaytah.  The  saint*  Ahna-b-Qais  only 
remained  silent.  He  said  to  him :  O  Abu  Bakr,  what  is  the  matter 
with  you?  Why  are  you  not  talking  ?  He  said  to  him :  If  I  talk  lie,  I 
fear  God.  If  I  tell  truth,  I  fear  you.  The  sage  Mansur-b-Malaz  used 
not  to  talk  after  Isha  prayer  for  forty  years.

FOUR  KINDS  OF  TALK:  (1)  One  kind  of  talk  is  always 
beneficial,  (2)  one  kind  of  talk  is  always  harmful,  (3)  one  kind  of 
talk  is  mixed  with  harm  and  benefit.  (4)  and  one  kind  of  talk  has 
got  no  harm  or  benefit.  As  to  the  talk  which  is  always  harmful,  it 
is  essentially  necessary  to  remain  silent  therefrom.  As  to  the  talk 
which  is  mixed  with  harm  and  benefit,  it  is  necessary  to  remain 
silent  therefrom.  The  talk  which  has  got  no  benefit  or  harm  is 
useless.  Three  fourths  of  the  talk  of  fourth  kind  are  useless  except 
only  the  remaining  one-fourth.  There  is  fault  in  this  one-  fourth 
also  as  it  can  not  be  distinguished  whether  there  is  therein  any 
secret  show,  back-biting,  excessive  talk  etc.  The  Prophet  said  :  He 
who  remains  silent  gets  salvation.

94

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils 
TWENTY  HARMS  OF  TONGUE

Vol-IIi94

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils 
TWENTY  HARMS  OF  TONGUE

Vol-IIi

(1 )  Unnecessary  talk:  The  best  condition  is  to  save  the  tongue 
from  back-biting,  falsehood,  show,  quarrels,  disputes  etc.  There 
are  such  words,  therein  which  are  not  beneficial  and  which  do 
harm  to  others.  If  you  hold  useless  talk,  you  lose  time  and  you 
shall  have  to  render  accounts  for  useless  talks.  If  you  are  engaged 
in  thoughts  about  God  by  giving  up  useless  talks,  God's 
inspiration  may  suddenly  come  in  your  soul.  If  you  read  Tasbih, 
Tahlil  and  other  invocations  in  lieu  of  useless  talks,  it  is  better  for 
you.  If  a  man  remains  busy  in  lawful  things  after  giving  up  Zikr 
of  God,  it  does  not  do  him  any  benefit,  because  even  though  he 
does  not  commit  any  sin,  he  is  in  loss  as  he  loses  the  merits  of 
God's  remembrance.  The  silence  of  a  believer  is  good  thought, 
the  sight  of  a  believer  is  a  sermon  and  the  talks  of  a  believer  are 
nothing  but  remembrance  of  God.  This  is  the  basis  of  a  man's 
wealth.  When  he  spends  his  words  without  necessity  and  does 
not  acquire  virtues  for  the  next  world,  be  spoils  the  basis  of 
wealth.  The  adorment  of  Islam  of  a  man  is  to  give  up  what  does 
not  do  any  benefit  to  him.  Another  Hadis  of  a  more  harsh  nature 
has  come  in  this  connection.  Hazrat  Anas  reported  :  A  young 
man  was  martyred  at  the  battle  of  Uhud.  We  found  then  on  his 
belly  stones  tied  up.  It  seemed  that  he  had  tied  up  the  stone  for 
preventing  hunger.  His  mother  was  saying  :  O  darling,  you  have 
entered  paradise  with  a  cheerful  mind.  Then  the  Prophet  said  : 
Who  will  inform  you  whether  he  held  useless  talk  or  was  miserly 
regarding  a  matter  which  did  not  do  him  any  harm."  It  means 
that  accounts  of  such  small  matters  will  also  be  taken  in  the  next 
world.There  is  another  Hadis  that  the  Prophet  went  once  to  see 
Ka'ab  who  was  in  sick-bed.  His  mother  said  when  he  expired  :  O 
Ka'ab,  there  is  paradise  for  you.  The  Prophet  said  :  Who  will 
inform  you  whether  Ka'ab  uttered  such  words  of  which  he  had 
no  necessity  or  was  miserly  with  such  a  thing  which  was  not 
necessary  for  him.  The  Prophet  once  said  :  The  man  who  will 
come  now  by  the  door  is  an  inmate  qf  paradise.  Then  it  was  seen 
that  he  was  Abdullah-b-  Salam.  The  companions  gave  him  the 
good  news  and  asked  him  :  What  good  works  have  you  got  for 
which  you  have  gained  this  rank  ?  He  said  :  I  am  very  weak.  I 
pray  to  God  for  sound  soul  and  for  giving  up  of  what  is  not 
necessary  for  me.  Hazrat  Abu  Zarr  said :  The  Prophet  once  said  to

95

VoI-HI  Greed  and  sexual  passion

me :  Shall  I  not  give  clue  to  you  to  such  an  action  which  is  light  for 
jmdy  but  heavy  in  the  Balance  ?  I  said :  Yes,  O  Prophet  of  God.  He 
Silence,  good  conduct  and  giving  up  unnecessary  things.Hazrat  Ibn  Abbas  said  :  To  me,  five  things  are  dearer  than 
saving  money.  (1)  I  give  up  such  talk  as  is  of  no  use  to  me  as  it  is 
unnecessary  and  I  am  not  safe  from  the  fear  of  its  sin.  (2)  I  don't 
utter  such  word  as  is  not  useful  to  me  until  I  find  suitable  place 
for  it  as  there  is  harm  in  many  useful  talks  if  they  fall  in  improper 
places.  (3)  I  don't  argue  with  the  man  who  is  patient  and  with  the 
fool,  because  if  I  argue  with  the  patient  man,  it  incites  him  to 
anger,  and  if  I  argue  with  a  fool,  he  gives  me  trouble,  (4)  As  I  like 
that  my  friend  will  speak  of  me  in  my  absence,  so  I  like  that  I  shall 
speak  of  him  when  he  remains  absent  from  me.  As  I  like  that  my 
friend  should  forgive  me,  so  I  like  that  1  should  treat  well  with 
him.  (5)  I  should  do  an  action  like  the  action  of  the  man  who 
knows  that  he  will  get  rewards  for  good  deeds  and  punishment 
for  sins.  Loqman  was  once  asked :  What  is  you  wisdom.  He  said : 
I  don't  ask  what  I  know  and  I  don't  utter  what  does  not  do  me  any 
benefit.

Hazrat  Omar  said :  Don't  dispute  about  what  is  unnecessary. 
Keep  your  enemy  distant  from  you  and  be  careful  of  all  persons 
except  faithful  friends.  Without  God  fear,  nobody  can  become  a 
faithful  friend.  Don't  keep  company  with  the  sinners  as  there  is 
fear  that  you  may  commit  sins.  Let  them  not  enquire  about  your 
secrets.  Consult  with  the  God  fearing  people  in  all  your  affairs.Useless  talks  are  such  talks  which,  if  uttered,  donot  cause 
any  benefit  and  do  not  do  harm  in  this  world  and  in  the  next. 
There  are  three  reasons  for  not  holding  useless  talks — (1)  to  be 
eager  to  know  of  which  there  is  no  necessity,  (2)  to  enjoy  talk  with 
one  with  the  object  of  loving  him  and  (3)  to  pars  time  with  useless 
talks.  The  remedies  of  these  three  things  are  the  following.  The 
remedies  are  based  on  knowledge  and  action.  It  must  be 
understood  that  death  is  standing  in  front  and  that  every  word 
uttered  will  be  accounted  for.  Every  breath  is  a  valuable  asset. 
This  is  the  medicine  based  on  knowledge.  The  remedy  based  on 
action  is  to  adopt  silence.

(2)  Second  Harm  of  Tongue:  The  second  harm  is  excessive 
talk.  This  means  to  utter  such  words  as  are  of  no  use  and  to  hold 
such  talks  as  are  of  no  use.  Necessary  talks  can  he  held  in  short.  If

96

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III96

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

one  sentence  is  sufficient,  second  sentence  is  unnecessary, 
thought  it  has  got  no  sin.  The  sage  Ata  said  :  Your  predecessors 
used  to  hate  too  much  talks.  They  used  to  consider  talks  as 
superfluous  except  talks  on  the  Quran,  Sunnah  of  the  Prophet, 
enjoying  good  and  forbidding  evils  and  necessary  talks  for 
earning  livelihood.  The  Quran  says  :  There  is  careful  guard  of 
what  he  utters — 50 ;  18.  There  is  no  limit  of  superfluous  talks,  but 
there  is  no  good  in  most  of  their  secret  talks  except  in  the  talk  of 
one  who  enjoins  charity  or  good  deeds  to  make  compromise 
between  men.  The  Prophet  said :  His  is  blessed  who  restrains  his 
tongue  from  superfluous  talks  and  spends  out  of  his  excess 
wealth.  Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said  :  He  who  talks  much  talks 
much  falsehood.  The  sins  of  one  who  has  got  enormous  wealth 
are  great.  He  whose  conduct  is  bad  punishes  his  soul.  Once  a  man 
came  to  the  Prophet  and  praised  him  much.  The  Prophet  said  : 
There  is  nothing  between  them  which  can  prevent  your  words. 
He  said :  Nothing  worst  has  been  given  to  man  tan  long  talk.  The 
sage  Ibrahim  said  :  Two  conducts  destroy  a  man — enormous 
wealth  and  too  much  talks.(3)  Third  harm  of  tongue:  This  is  useless  talk  in  untrue 
matters  and  to  spend  talks  in  actions  of  sins  :  for  instance  to  state 
the  beauties  of  a  woman,  to  tell  about  assembly  of  drinking  wine, 
to  praise  the  sinners,  to  discuss  the  some  forts  of  the  rich,  to 
narrate  the  oppressions  of  the  kings  and  rulers.  These  are  all 
unlawful  talks.  To  hold  unnecessary  talks  and  to  talk  much  about 
necessary  things  should  be  given  up  though  they  are  not 
unlawful.  So  don't  hold  talk  except  on  good  of  this  world  and  the 
next.  The  Prophet  said  :  A  man  may  hold  such  God  pleasing  talk 
the  result  of  which  may  not  be  known  to  him  but  God  writes  His 
pleasure  therefor  up  to  the  resurrection  day.  A  man  can  hold 
such  talk  to  displease  God  of  which  the  result  may  not  be  known 
to  him  but  His  displeasure  therefor  may  be  written  for  him  up  to 
the  resurrection  day.  The  Prophet  said :  A  man  utters  such  a  word 
which  excites  laughter  of  the  people  of  an  assembly  and  he 
throws  himself  thereby  to  such  distance  as  that  of  the  polestar. 
He  also  said  :  The  man  who  holds  useless  talks  about  sins  for 
most  part  of  time  will  be  a  great  sinner  not  he  resurrection  day. 
This  is  supported  by  the  following  verse :  We  used  to  hold  useless 
talks  with  the  talkers  God  then  revealed :  Don't  mix  with  them  till 
they  hold  other  talks  or  else  you  will  be  like  them.  (2)  Another 
harm  of  tongue  is  quarrels  and  siputes  which  are  unlawful.  The

97

Vol-IH  Greed  and  sexual  passion97

Vol-IH  Greed  and  sexual  passion

prophet  said  :  Don't  quarrel  with  your  brother,  don't  but  jokes 
with  him  and  don't  break  promise  with  him.  He  said  :  Give  up 
protest  as  you  will  to  understand  its  contrivance  and  you  will  not 
[je  safe  from  its  dangers.  He  who  keeps  away  from  disputing  a 
false  thing  will  have  a  place  built  for  him  in  the  middle  of 
paradise.  The  Prophet  said  :  The  first  thing  which  my  Lord 
promised  me  and  the  first  thing  which  He  prohibited  me  is  idol 
Worship  and  to  dispute  with  the  people  after  drinking  wine.  He 
also  said :  God  does  not  misguide  a  people  after  they  are  guided 
except  for  quarrels  and  disputes.  He  said  :  The  faith  of  one  not 
known  does  not  give  up  dispute  knowing  his  opinion  as  true.  He 
said  :  The  faith  of  a  man  is  known  who  has  got  in  him  six 
qualities — (1)  to  fast  in  summer,  (2)  to  strike  with  sword  the 
enemies  of  God,  (3)  to  pray  in  haste  in  days  of  tempeat,  (4)  to  bear 
patience  in  dangers  and  difficulties,  (5)  to  complete  ablution 
even  against  will,  (6)  and  to  give  up  quarrel  knowing  it  to  be  true. 
Hazrat  Jubair  said  once  to  his  son :  Don't  dispute  with  the  people 
about  the  Quran,  as  you  will  not  be  able  tQ  make  them  under  and. 
Hold  fast  to  the  ways  of  the  Prophet.  Caliph  Omar-b- Abdul  Aziz 
said  :  He  who  presents  his  religion  with  the  object  of  making 
quarrels,  changes  his  opinion  most.  A  certain  wise  man  said  : 
God  does  not  misguide  a  people  after  guidance  except  for 
quarrels  and  disputes,  imam  Malek  said  :  To  dispute  about 
religious  mattes  does  not  appertain  to  religion.  He  said  :  Dispute 
makes  the  heart  hard  and  generates  hatred.  Luqman  said  to  his 
son  :  Don't  dispute  with  the  learned.  If  there  is  dispute  with 
anybody,  it  is  compensated  by  two  rak'ats  of  prayer.  Hazrat 
Qmar  said  :  Don't  acquire  knowledge  for  three  objects — (1)  to 
dispute  by  learning,  (2)  to  take  pride  by  learning,  (3)  and  to  show 
learning  to  the  people.  Don't  give  up  learning  for  three 
reasons — (1)  to  feel  shame  to  acquire  learning,  (2)  to  get  leisure 
for  renunciation  of  the  world,  (3)  and  to  remain  satisfied  with 
ignorance.Jesus  Christ  said :  The  beauty  of  one  goes  away  who  speaks 
too  much  falsehood.  The  gentle  manners  of  one  goes  away  who 
disj>utes  with  the  people.  He  whose  thoughts  are  many  is 
attacked  with  illness.  He  whose  conduct  is  bad  punishes  his  soul.

(5j Disputes  about  wealth  and  properties:  Another  harm  of 
tongue  is  disputes  about  properties.  The  Prophet  said  :  The 
greatest  object  of  hatred  to  God  is  he  who  holds  greatest  disputes

98

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-Uj

about  properties.  He  said  :  Who  disputes  about  properties  with 
another  out  of  ignorance,  remains  always  in  the  displeasure  of 
God  till  he  becomes  silent.  A  certain  wise  man  said  :  Don't 
dispute  about  properties  as  it  destroy  religion.

It  is  true  that  it  is  lawful  to  give  proof  of  one's  right  to 
properties  and  to  give  up  their  exaggeration.  It  is  also  pardonable 
to  hold  the  tongue  in  the  middle  path  in  disputes  about 
properties.  Dispute  straightens  the  breast  and  arouses  anger.  It  is 
better  to  use  sweet  words  in  dispute  and  not  to  use  harsh  words. 
The  Prophet  said  :  Sweet  words  and  feeding  will  give  you  peace 
in  paradise.  God  says :  Speak  sweet  words  with  the  people.  God 
says  :  If  you  are  entertained  with  Salam,  return  it  with  better 
salutation  than  it  or  like  it.  The  Prophet  said :  There  are  rooms  in 
paradise  whose  inner  sides  are  seen  from  their  outer  sides  and 
outer  sides  are  seen  from  their  inner  sides.  God  prepared  them 
for  those  persons  who  give  food  and  are  humble  in  talks.  The 
Prophet  said :  Sweet  word  is  a  charity  even  a  seed :  Keep  the  Hell 
at  a  distance  by  giving  in  charity  even  a  seed  of  grape.  If  you  are 
unable,  then  keep  it  distant  by  sweet  words.(6)  To  make  ornamentation  in  talks:  Another  harm  of 
tongue  is  to  make  ornamentation  in  talks,  to  disclose  oratory  and 
to  gi  e  lectures  with  ornamental  words.  The  Prophet  said :  I  and 
my  God-  fearing  men  among  my  followers  are  free  from 
artificiality.  He  said.:  Of  all  the  persons  among  you,  the  object  of 
the  greatest  wrath  to  me  and  the  most  distant  from  my  assembly 
is  he  who  holds  useless  talks,  makes  ornamentation  in  talks  and 
adopts  artificiality.  The  Prophet  said  ;  Those  who  grow  eating 
various  delicious  foods,  put  on  various  dresses,  eat  various 
delicious  dishes  and  talk  with  ornamental  words,  are  worst 
among  my  followers.  He  said  :  Beware,  those  who  make 
exaggeration  in  talks  are  ruined.  He  recited  it  thrice.  Hazrat 
Omar  said  :  Eloquent  in  talks  is  attended  with  the  eloquence  of 
the  devil.

(7)  Obsecene  and  bad  tooks:  These  talks  are  prohibited. 
Some  of  these  talks  are  impurities.  The  Prophet  said  :  Give  up 
obsecene  talks,  as  God  does  not  love  obscene  and  excessive  talks. 
The  Prophet  prohibited  to  rebuke  the  unbelievers  who  were 
killed  in  the  battle  of  Badr.  He  said  :  Don't  rebuke  those  dead 
unbelievers,  as  these  do  not  reach  them,  but  give  trouble  to  those 
who  are  alive.  Beware,  bad  talks  are  objects  of  barred.  He  said :

yol-III

Greed  and  sexual  passion

99yol-III

Greed  and  sexual  passion

99

Those  who  are  prone  to  backbiting,  excessive  cursing,  obscene 
n(j  excessive  talks  are  not  true  believers.  He  said :  Four  persons 
will  give  double  to  the  inmates  of  Hell.  They  will  be  running 
between  hot  water  and  fire  and  proclaim  their  sorrows.  One  of 
them  will  be  such  from  whose  mouth  pus  and  blood  will  come 
out.  he  will  be  asked :  Why  is  this  condition  of  yours  ?  He  will  say 
.  i  used  to  hold  obscene  and  evil  talks  and  take  pleasure  therein 
like  that  of  cohabitation,  and  for  that  I  am  getting  this 
punishment.  The  Prophet  said  to  Ayesha  :  O  Ayesha,  if  obscene 
talk  could  have  taken  the  figure  of  a  man,  its  figure  would  have 
been  ugly-  He  said  :  To  hold  obscene  talk  and  to  make  narration 
are  two  branches  of  hypocrisy.  Narration  means  to  disclose 
secret  talks  which  is  unlawful.  It  means  also  to  make  excesses  in 
narration  and  to  make  ornamentation  adding  false  thing.  The 
Prophet  said  :  Obscene  talk  or  unnecessary  talk  does  not 
appertain  to-Islam.  He  who  is  best  of  all  in  character  and  conduct 
is  best  of  all  in  Islam.  The  sage  Ibn  Mysarah  said  :  The  figure  of  a 
man  who  talks-obscene  things  openly  will  be  that  of  a  dog  on  the 
Resurrection  Day.  Ahnaf-b-Qais  said  :  Shall  I  not  inform  you  of  a 
dangerous  disease — bad  conduct  and  obscene  tongue.LIMIT  OF  OBSCENE  TALKS:  Hazrat  Ibn  Abbas  said:  God  is 
shameful.  He  mentioned  about  sexual  intercourse  by  the  word 
'touch.  There  are  many  obscene  words  which  should  not  be  said, 
clearly.  Ayaz-b-  Hemar  said:  I  asked:  O  Messenger  of  God,  a  man 
of  my  people  rebukes  me  but  he  is  lower  than  myself.  Is  there  any 
obstacle  of  my  taking  revenge  on  him?  The  Prophet  said:  Two 
rebukers  are  devils.  They  tell  each  other  liars  and  ascribe  guilt  to 
each  other.  The  Prophet  said:  There  is  sin  in  rebuking  a  believer 
and  there  is  infidelity  in  his  murder.  He  said:  Two  rebukers 
remain  upon  their  rebuke.  Out  of  the  two,  sin  falls  on  one  who 
rebukes  first.  Even  it  falls  on  the  rebukers  if  the  rebuked  person 
exceeds  the  limit.  The  Prophet  said:  He  who  rebukes  his  parents 
is  cursed.  In  another  narration,  to  rebuke  parents  is  one  of  the 
greatest  sins.  The  companions  asked:  O  Messenger  of  God,  is 
there  any  such  man  who  rebukes  his  parents?  He  said:  He 
rebukes  the  parents  of  another  and  the  latter  also  rebukes  his 
parents  and  this  amounts  to  rebuking  his  own  parents.

(8)  Curse:  Another  evil  of  tongue  is  to  curse  anything,  be  it  an 
animal  or  a  man  or  a  lifeless  thing.  It  is  condemned.  The  Prophet 
said:  A  believer  does  not  curse  another.  He  said:  Don't  curse

100

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-m100

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-m

another  with  the  curse  of  God,  with  His  anger  or  Hell.  Huzaifaf 
said:  The  curse  of  one  on  another  among  a  people  falls  on  the 
people.  Once  one  of  the  Ansar  women  was  passing  riding  on  a 
camel  by  the  side  of  the  Prophet  and  cursed  the  camel.  The 
Prophet  then  said:  Take  down  the  load  from  the  camel  and  drive 
it  out  of  the  party  as  it  is  cursed.  He  said:  I  am  as  if  looking 
towards  the  camel  which  was  walking  to  end  from  among  the 
people.  Nobody  approached  it.  Abu  Darda'a  said:  If  anybody 
curses  a  land,  it  says:  Curse  of  God  be  upon  the  person  who  is  the 
greatest  sinner  among  us.  Hazrat  Abu  Bakr  was  cursing  one  of 
his  maid  servants.  The  Prophet  heard  it  and  said:  O  Abu  Bakr,  a 
man  of  truth  and  a  curser  are  together?  It  can  never  occur,  by  the 
Lord  of  Ka'ba.  He  repeated  it  twice  or  thrice.  Then  AbuBakr  set 
free  the  slave.  Then  he  came  to  the  Prophet  and  said:  I  will  do  it 
no  more.  The  Prophet  said:  The  cursers  will  not  be  intercessors  or 
witnesses  on  the  Resurrection  Day.CURSE  WHEN  LAWFUL:  Curse  means  to  drive  away  a 
thing  from  God.  This  applies  to  the  things  which  are  already 
distant  from  God,  such  as  infidelity,  oppression,  etc.  It  is  lawful 
to  curse  the  unbelievers  and  oppressors  with  such  words  as  are 
permitted  by  Shariat.  Three  things  are  necessary  for  a  curse  -  (1) 
infidelity,  (2)  innovation,  and  (3)  great  sin.  Each  of  these  three 
things  has  got  three  stages.  The  first  stage  is  that  curse  is  allowed 
in  the  general  way,  for  instance,  curse  upon  the  innovators,  curse 
upon  the  transgressors.  The  second  stage  is  curse  specially  upon 
a  people,  as  curse  upon  the  Jews,  upon  the  Christians,  upon  the 
•bribe-takers,  upon  the  fornicators,  upon  the  oppressors.  The 
third  stage  is  curse  upon  a  particular  person  which  is  unlawful, 
but  it  is  lawful  to  curse  a  person  whom  the  Quran  or  Hadis 
cursed,  ford  instance  curse  upon  Pharaoh,  curse  upon  Abu  Jahl 
as  they  die  upon  infidelity  but  it  is  not  allowed  to  curse  an 
individual  unbeliever  at  present  as  he  may  turn  out  to  be  a 
Muslim  before  his  death.  The  Prophet  once  said  to  Hazrat  Abu 
Bakr:  O  Abu  Bakr,  when  you  discuss  about  unbelievers,  discuss  it 
is  a  general  way,  because  when  you  discuss  about  an  individual 
unbeliever,  his  children  will  surely  be  enraged  for  their  parents. 
So  prevent  the  people  from  that.  One  Numan,  a  Muslim,  drank 
wine  for  which  he  was  whipped  several  times  in  presence  of  the 
Prophet.  One  of  the  companions  then  said.Curse  of  God  on  him. 
The  Prophet  said:  Don't  be  a  helper  of  the  devil  in  the  action  of 
your  brother.  In  another  narration,  the  Prophet  said:  Don't  utter

101

yol„jjl  Greed  and  sexual  passion101

yol„jjl  Greed  and  sexual  passion

it  because  he  loves  God  and  His  Apostle.  It  appears  then  that  to 
curse  a  man  individually  is  unlawful.  The  prophet  said:  No  man 
Should  tell  another  'an  unbeliever  or  a  great  tmasgressor'  if  he  is 
not  so-  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  bears  witness  that  another  is  an 
unbeliever'it  reverts  to  one  of  them.  If  he  is  really  an  unbeliever, 
he  becomes  so.  If  he  is  really  notan  unbeliever,  the  man  who  calls 
him  an  unbeliever  becomes  himself  an  unbeliever.  The  Prophet 
said:  1  prohibit  you  to  rebuke  a  Muslim  or  to  be  disobedient  to  a 
just  ruler;  and  to  rebuke  a  dead  man  is  heinous.  The  Prophet  said: 
p0n't  abuse  the  dead,  as  what  they  sentin  advance  reached  them. 
The  Prophet  said:  Don't  abuse  the  dead.  Those  who  are  alive  are 
troubled  for  that.  He  said:  O  people,  save  men  in  respect  of  my 
companions,  my  brethren  and  my  parents.  Don't  abuse  them.  O 
people,  when  a  man  dies,  narrate  his  good  deeds.(9)  Songs  and  poetries:  Another  harm  of  tongue  is  songs  and 
poetries.  The  good  poetry  is  good  and  the  bad  of  poetry  is  bad. 
The  Prophet  said:  It  is  better  to  fill  up  the  belly  of  a  man  with  pus 
then  to  fill  it  up  with  poetry.  In  short,  poetry  is  not  unlawful  if  it 
does  not  contain  evil  or  indecent  words,  as  the  Prophet  said: 
There  is  wisdom  in  some  poetry.  The  Prophet  appointed  the  poet 
Hasan-b-Sabet  to  attack  the  polytheists  and  to  praise  Islam. 
Hazrat  Ayesha  narrated:  One  day  the  Prophet  was  sewing  his 
shoes  and  I  was  seated  by  his  side  and  eating  bread,  i  noticed  that 
sweat  was  coming  out  of  his  forehead  and  it  was  sparkling  like 
jewels.  He  got  tired  and  said  to  me:  You  have  become  tired.  I  said: 
0  Prophet  of  God,  I  noticed  at  you  and  saw  that  from  your 
forehead  sweat  was  coming  out  and  it  was  sparkling  like  jewels. 
Had  the  poet  Abu  Kabir  Hazli  seen  you  in  this  condition,  he 
would  have  taken  you  as  fit  for  his  poetry.  The  Prophet  said:  O 
Ayesha,  what  does  he  say?  I  said:  He  composed  these  two  verses:

Praised  one  is  free  from  menses, 
suckling  and  other  diseases.

It  seems  that  her  face  sheds 
luster  of  lightning.

The  Prophet  kept  what  he  had  in  his  hand  and  kissed  the 
forehead  of  Ayesha  and  said:  God  bless  you  You  have  not  been 
pleased  with  me  in  proportion  to  what  I  have  been  pleased  with 
you.  When  the  Prophet  divided  the  booties  of  Hunain  after  the 
battle,  he  gave  4  camels  to  poet  Abbas  Merda$.  He  went  away 
with  a  protest  and  demanded  more  through  poetry:

102

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

Merdas's  mind  was  not  troubled  at  Badr  and  Siege, 
he  was  satisfied  with  whathegotatboth.

But  he  returns  to-day  with  a  painful  heart.The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

Merdas's  mind  was  not  troubled  at  Badr  and  Siege, 
he  was  satisfied  with  whathegotatboth.

But  he  returns  to-day  with  a  painful  heart.

The  Prophet  ordered  for  him  100  camels  and  asked  him:  Do 
you  talk  by  poetry?  He  said:  I  roam  in  poetries  like  ants  and  they 
sting  me  like  the  sting  of  ants.  I  can't  keep  but  recite  poetry.  The 
Prophet  smiled  at  his  words  and  said:  This  desert  Arab  will  not 
give  up  poetry  till  he  gives  up  the  camels  of  Hunain.(10)  Laugh  and  jokes:  There  is  another  harm  of  tongue,  laugh 
and  jokes.  Basically  these  are  not  commendable  but  these  are  not 
*  harmful  within  limits.  The  Prophet  said:  'Don't  dispute  with 
your  brother  ;and  cut  jokes  with  him.  Excessive  jokes  and 
continued  jokes  are  unlawful.  If  they  are  done  continuously,  they 
are  included  within  sports  and  plays.  Though  sports  and  plays 
are  lawful,  yet  to  get  habituated  to  them  is  condemned.  Excessive 
jokes  give  rise  to  excessive  laughters,  excessive  laughter  makes 
the  heart  dead  and  sometimes  creates  hatred  and  destroys 
gravity  and  fear.  When  they  are  necessary,  they  are  not 
condemned.  The  Prophet  said:  I  cut  jokes,  but  I  don't  say  but 
truth.  He  said:  A  man  utters  talks  to  raise  laughter  of  friends,  but 
he  takes  himself  down  to  Hell  from  heaven.  Hazrat  Omar  said: 
The  fear  of  one  who  laughs  much  is  reduced.  He  who  cuts  jokes 
becomes  light  to  the  people.  He  who  cuts  jokes  much,  becomes 
well-known.  He  who  talk  much  commits  much  faults.  He  who 
has  got  little  shame  has  got  much  faults  and  less  piety.  He  whose 
piety  is  less,  has  got  his  heart  dead.  Jokes  keep  away  a  man  from 
the  next  world.  The  Prophet  said:  Had  you  known  what  I  know, 
you  would  have  wept  much  and  laughed  little.  Eusof-b-Asbat 
said  that  Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  did  not  laugh  for  thirty  years.  It 
has  been  said  that  the  sage  Abu  Salma  did  not  laugh  for  40  years. 
Abdullah-b-AliYala  said:  You  are  laughing  while  your  coffin  is 
coming  out  of  the  building.  Hazrat  Ibn  Abbas  said:  He  who 
commits  sin  laughing  will  enter  Hell  weeping.It  is  therefore  condemned  to  be  engaged  in  jokes  and  laughs. 
Smiling  only  is  laudable.  The  Prophet  used  to  smiles  only. 
Sayyed-b-A's  told  his  son:  O  dear  son,  don't  cut  jokes  with  any 
honourable  man,  lest  he  may  hate  you.  Don't  cut  jokes  with  a 
man  of  dishonour,  lest  he  becomes  daring  against  you.  Hazrat 
Omar-b-  Abdul  Aziz  said:  Fear  Cod.  Don't  cut  jokes  as  it  creates

Greed  and  sexual  passion

103

Vol'W

...  ruling  and  leads  Quran.  If  it  becomes  difficult  for  you,  discuss 
Relives  of  religious  men.

The  Prophet  and  his  companions  had  under  their  control 
their  joke®.  They  did  not  cut  jokes  except  with  truth.  They  did  not 
,;ve  trouble  thereby  to  anybody.  They  did  not  go  to  excess 
therein.  Minor  sins  turn  into  major  sins  if  one  is  accustomed  to 
them.  If  one  is  accustomed  to  lawful  things,  it  turns  also  into 
minor  sin.  Hazrat  Anas  said:  The  Prophet  used  to  cut  jokes  with 
his  wives.  Once  an  old  woman  came  to  the  Prophet  who  said  to 
her:  No  old  woman  will  enter  Paradise.  The  old  woman  was 
weeping  at  this.  Then  he  said  to  her:  On  that  day,  you  will  not 
remain  old  as  God  says:  I  shall  create  them  a  new  and  make  them 
young.  Hazrat  Zaid-b-Aslam  said:  Once  Omme  Ayman  came  to 
the  Prophet  and  said:  My  husband  calls  you.  The  Prophet  said: 
Who  is  your  husband?  Is  he  not  your  husband  who  has  got 
whiteness  in  his  eyes?  The  woman  said:  By  God,  the  eye  of  my 
husband  is  not  white.  The  Prophet  said:  Is  there  any  man  who  has 
not  got  whiteness  in  his  eyes?(11)  Ridicule:  Ridicule  is  unlawful  as  it  gives  pain  to  the  heart 
of  another  and  thus  he  becomes  sorry.  God  says:  O  believers,  no 
people  shall  ridicule  another  people.  Perchance  the  latter  may  be 
better  than  the  former.  No  woman  shall  ridicule  another  woman. 
Perchance  the  latter  may  be  better  than  the  former.  Ridicule 
means  to  neglect  or  hold  in  contempt  another  and  to  show  his 
defects.  It  may  be  expressed  in  words  and  actions  and  also  by 
wings  and  gestures.  If  it  is  done  in  one's  absence,  it  amounts  to 
back-biting.

Hazrat  Ayesha  said:  I  ridiculed  one  man.  The  Prophet  said  to 
me:  By  God,  I  don't  want  to  ridicule  another  and  commit  such 
sins,  God  says:  Alas,,  what  is  this  book  which  omits  not  little  or 
great  without  counting  it.  118  :  40Q?  Hazrat  Ibn  Abbas  said  by 
way  of  explanation  of  little  things,  as  something  said  by  way  of 
ridicule.  It  shows  that  loud  laughter  is  a  great  sin.

The  Prophet  said:  The  door  of  Paradise  will  be  opened  before 
one  of  those  who  ridicule  men  and  he  will  be  said:  Come,  come. 
Then  he  will  come  to  be  relieved  of  his  troubles,  but  when  he  will 
come,  it  will  be  shut  up  against  him.  He  also  said:  Don't  ridicule 
one  from  whose  belly  wind  with  sound  comes  out.  Why  should 
you  ridicule  one  who  is  led  to  do  so  as  a  call  of  nature?  The

104

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-IIl

Prophet  said:  'If  a  man  accuses  his  brother  for  a  sin  from  which  he 
repented,  he  will  not  die  till  he  commits  that  sin'.  So  if  any  man 
ridicules  one  with  regard  to  his  figure,  conduct,  writing,  action 
etc,  it  will  be  unlawful.(12)  To  disclose  secret  talks  is  unlawful  as  it  gives  pain  to  the 
mind  of  another.  The  Prophet  said:  When  any  man  tells  you 
something  and  asks  you  to  keep  it  secret,  it  is  a  trust  He  said:  It  is 
a  trust  between  you.  Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said:  It  is  a  breach  of 
trust  if  you  disclose  the  secret  talks  of  your  brother.  It  is  said  that 
Hazrat  Muwaiyah  held  a  secret  talk  with  Walid-b-  Otba.  He  said 
to  his  father:  O  father,  the  commander  of  the  faithful  told  me  a 
secret  thing.  I  think  there  is  no  fault  in  disclosing  it  to  you.  His 
father  said:  Don't  tell  it  to  me,  as  he  who  keeps  the  secret  talk 
secret,  keeps  it  under  his  control.  When  he  discloses  it,  it  goes 
under  the  control  of  another.  I  said:  O  father  said:  I  don't  want 
that  you  should  humiliate  your  tongue  by  disclosing  it.  Then  I 
informed  it  to  the  Caliph  who  said:  O  Walid,  your  father  freed 
you  from  the  slavery  of  mistake.(13)  False  Promise:  It  is  another  harm  of  tongue  as  it  wants  to 
make  promise  in  haste  but  it  does  not  become  possible  to  fulfil  it 
always.  As  a  result,  it  is  broken.  God  says:  O  believers,  fulfil 
promise.  The  Prophet  said:  Promise  is  like  a  parent.  He  said: 
Promise  is  a  kind  of  debt  or  greater  than  that.  God  praised  Hazrat 
Ismail  about  the  fulfillment  of  his  promise.  He  was  true  to  his 
promise  - 19 : 54Q.  Hazrat  Ismail  one  day  promised  to  meet  a  man  in 
a  certain  fixed  place  but  the  man  did  not  come  there  according  to  his 
promise  as  he  forgot  it.  Hazrat  Ismail  waited  there  for  him  for  22 
days.  When  Abdullah,  son  of  Hazrat  Omar  was  about  to  die,  he 
said:  A  Quraish  wanted  to  marry  my  daughter.  I  gave  him  promise. 
By  God,  I  shall  not  meet  with  God  with  three  hypocrisies.  I  bear 
witness  to  you  that  I  shall  get  my  daughter  married  to  him. 
Abdullah-b-Ali  Khansah  reported;  I  made  a  contract  with  the 
Prophet  to  feel  a  thing  to  him  before  his  prophethood.  I  promised 
that  I  would  take  that  thing  to  him  in  a  certain  fixed  place  but 
afterwards  forgot  it.  On  the  third  day  I  remembered  it  and  after 
going  there  found  the  Prophet  waiting  there,  he  said:  O  young  man, 
you  have  given  me  much  trouble.  1  am  here  for  the  past  three  days 
for  you.  The  Prophet  used  to  say  at  the  time  of  promise  -  'perchance, 
possibly.  Hazrat  Ibn  Masud  did  not  make  any  promise  without 
uttering  Insha-AUah  (if  God  pleases).

u/a

yol-III  Greed  and  sexual  passionu/a

yol-III  Greed  and  sexual  passion

The  Prophet  said:  He  in  whom  there  are  three  matters  is  a 
hypocrite  even  though  he  prays,  fasts  and  thinks  that  he  is  a 
Muslim  -  (1)  when  he  speaks,  he  speaks  falsehood,  (2)  when  he 
promises,  he  breaks  it,  (3)  and  when  he  is  entrusted,  he  breaks  it. 
The  Prophet  said:  He  in  whom  there  is  one  of  the  four  things  is  a 
hypocrite,  till  he  gives  it  up  -  (1)  when  he  speaks,  he  speaks 
falsehood,  (2)  when  he  promises,  he  breaks  it,  (3)  when  he  is 
entrusted,  he  breaks  it,  (4)  when  he  disputes  over  properties,  he 
rebukes.  Once  the  Prophet  promised  Abul  Hysam  that  he  would 
give  him  three  slaves.  He  got  three  war  prisoners  and  gave  two  of 
them  to  him  and  kept  one  to  himself.  Then  his  daughter  Hazrat 
Fatema  came  to  him  and  said:  Don't  you  find  in  my  hands  the 
signs  of  crushing  of  mill?  The  Prophet  said:  What  will  happen  of 
my  promise  to  Abul  Hysam?  Then  he  gave  him  to  Abu  Hysam 
without  giving  him  to  Fatema.One  day,  the  Prophet  was  distributing  the  war  booty  gained 
in  the  battle  of  Hunain.  Then  a  man  came  and  said:  O  Prophet  of 
God,  a  thing  is  due  to  me  according  to  your  promise.  He  said: 
That  is  true,  want  what  you  wish.  He  wanted  eighty  goats  and 
one  goat  man.  The  Prophet  gave  them  to  him  and  said:  You  have 
wanted  little.  Look,  Hazrat  Musa  said  to  the  woman  for  whose 
enquiry  the  backbone  of  Hazrat  Jospeh  was  found:  You  will  get 
what  you  want.  The  woman  said:  'I  want  that  my  youth  be 
restored  to  me  and  that  I  can  live  in  paradise  in  the  next  world 
with  you'.  She  was  made  an  example  in  Arabia.  The  Prophet  said: 
If  one  has  got  the  intention  of  fulfilling  promise,  it  will  not  be 
broken  if  one  proves  another.  In  another  narration:  When  a  man 
promises  with  his  brother  and  has  got  the  intention  to  fulfil  it  but 
afterwards  it  is  broken,  he  will  not  commit  sin  thereby.

(14)  Falsehood.  Another  danger  of  tongue  is  false-speaking 
and  false  oath.  These  are  great  sins  and  heinous  faults.  In  the  first 
year  of  emigration,  the  Prophet  said:  Be  careful  of  falsehood  as  it 
is  the  companion  of  the  sinners  and  both  will  be  in  Hell.  He  also 
said:  Falsehood  is  a  door  of  hypocrisy.  Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said: 
The  people  say  that  there  is  difference  in  open  and  secret  words 
and  actions  and  entry  into  and  going  out  of  hypocrisy,  but  the  sin 
on  which  hypocrisy  is  built  is  falsehood.  The  Prophet  said:  If  you 
narrate  to  your  brother  such  narration  which  he  believes  for  you 
but  which  you  do  not  believe  for  him,  it  will  be  an  act  of  breach  of 
trust.  The  Prophet  said:  A  man  is  enrolled  near  God  as  liar  if  he  is

106

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

VoI-III106

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

VoI-III

accustomed  to  false  speaking  and  false  discussions.  The  Prophet 
once  was  passing  by  two  men.  They  were  talking  on  sale  of  two 
goats  and  both  were  swearing.  One  of  them  said:  By  God,  I  will 
not  sell  it  less  than  this  price.  Another  said:  By  God,  1  will  not  give 
more  than  this  price.  One  of  them  purchased  the  goat.  Then  the 
Prophet  said:  The  sin  of  one  of  you  has  become  compulsory.  The 
Prophet  said:  Falsehood  reduces  provision.  He  said:  The 
merchants  are  sinners,  he  was  asked:  O  Prophet  of  God,  has  not 
God  made  trade  lawful?  He  said:  Yes,  but  the  tradesmen  commit 
sin  by  false  oaths  and  speak  falsehood.

The  Prophet  said:  On  the  Resurrection  Day.  God  will  not 
speak  with  three  persons,  nor  look  at  them  -  (1)  one  who  seeks 
benefit  in  lieu  of  charity,  (2)  one  who  sells  things  by  lies,.  (3)  and 
one  who  lets  loose  his  trouser  with  pride,  he  said:  If  any  man 
takes  oath  in  the  name  of  God  and  admits  therein  falsehood  like 
the  wing  of  a  fly,  a  spot  will  remain  in  his  soul  up  to  the 
Resurrection  Day.  He  said:  God  loves  three  persons  _  (1)  one  who 
fights  standing  in  the  row  of  Jihad  till  he  or  his  companions 
become  victorious,  (2)  one  who  keeps  patience  at  the  harms  of  his 
neighbour  till  death  or  journey  does  not  separate  them  both,  (3) 
One  who  prays  in  a  corner  when  he  stays  with  a  party  of  soldiers 
who  travel  and  findings  a  good  place  takes  rest  or  sleeps.  God 
hates  three  persons  -  (1)  a  tradesman  who  takes  false  oath,  (2)  a 
proud  poor  man,  and  (3)  a  man  who  gives  trouble.Then  the  Prophet  said:  Alas  for  one,  alas  for  one  who  speaks 
to  arouse  laughter  of  men  and  speaks  falsehood  therein.  He  also 
said:  I  dream  that  a  man  came  to  me  and  said:  Rise  up.  1  woke  up 
with  him,  and  then  I  saw  myself  between  two  men,  one  standing 
and  another,  seated.  There  was  in  the  hand  of  the  man  standing 
one  spear.  Crooked  iron  of  the  spare  was  pierced  through  the 
cheek  of  one  sitting  and  the  man  standing  was  pulling  it  with 
force.  When  his  face  came  down  upon  his  shoulder,  it  was 
pierced  to  his  another  cheek  and  he  was  pulling  it  till  it  also  came 
down  his  shoulder.  The  continued.  I  asked  him  What  is  its 
reason.  He  said:  This  man  is  a  great  liar.  Punishment  in  the  grave 
will  continue  in  such  a  way  up  to  the  Resurrection  Day.

Abdullah-b-Asbat^aid:  I  asked  the  Prophet:  O  Messenger  of 
God,  can  a  believer  commit  fornication?  He  said:  Yes,  he  can.  I 
asked:  O  Prophet  of  God,  can  a  believer  be  a  liar?  He  said:  No. 
Then  he  recited  the  following  verse:  Those  who  do  not  believe  in

Vol-IH  Greed  and  sexual  passion  107

God's  verses  can  fabricate  falsehood.  The  Prophet  used  to 
invoke:  O  God,  purify  my  heart  from  hypocrisy,  my  private  parts 
from  fornication  and  my  tongue  from  falsehood,  he  said:  God 
wjH  not  speak  with  three  persons,  nor  will  he  purify  them  and 
there  is  grievous  punishment  for  them:  A  bornicator  who  is  old,  a 
king  who  is  a  liar,  and  a  beggar  who  is  proud.  He  said:  If  God 
vvould  have  given  me  abundant  wealth  like  these  heaps  of  stones,I  would  have  distributed  them  all  amongst  you.  You  would  not 
have  found  me  miser,  liar  and  coward.  He  was  speaking  leaning 
against  a  pillar:  Shall  I  not  inform  you  of  a  great  sin?  Beware,  it  is 
to  speak  falsehood.  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  speaks  falsehood, 
his  companion  angel  goes  one  mile  away  from  him.  The  Prophet 
said:  I  will  stand  guarantee  to  you  for  Paradise  if  you  take  to  six 
things.  The  companions  asked:  What  are  they?  He  said:  (1)  Let 
nobody  amongst  you  tell  a  lie  when  he  speaks,  (2)  Let  him  not 
break  a  promise,  (3)  Let  him  not  break  a  trust  when  he  is 
entrusted,  (4)  Let  him  control  his  eye  sight,  (5)  Let  him  save  his 
private  part  and  (6)  Let  him  prevent  his  hand.  The  Prophet  said: 
There  are  for  the  devil  antimony,  scent  and  taste.  Scent  means 
falsehood,  taste  means  anger  and  antimony  means  sleep.

Hazrat  Omar  said  in  a  sermon:  The  Prophet  said:  standing 
amongst  us  in  this  place  like  my  standing:  Treat  well  with  my 
companions  and  then  with  those  who  will  come  after  them. 
Thereafter  falsehood  will  spread,  so  much  so  that  man  will  take 
oath  and  then  say  'he  has  not  taken  oath',  and  he  will  bear 
witness  and  then  say  'he  has  not  witnessed.  The  Prophet  said:  He 
who  attributes  to  me  a  Hadis  knowing  it  to  be  false  is  one  of  the 
liars.  The  prophet  said:  He  who  appropriates  the  property  of 
another  Muslim.unjustly  by  taking  false  oath  will  meet  with  the 
Almighty  God  while  He  will  be  displeased  with  him.  The 
Prophet  rejected  the  evidence  of  a  liar.  The  Prophet  said:  A 
Muslim  may  commit  other  faults  but  there  cannot  be  in  him 
cheating  and  falsehood.Hazrat  Moses  asked:  O  Lord,  who  is  the  best  to  Thee  in 
divine  service?  He  said:  One  whose  tongue  does  not  speak 
falsehood,  whose  heart  does  not  commit  sin  and  whose  private 
part  does  not  commit  fornication.  The  wise  Luqman  said  to  his 
son:  O  dear  son,  be  careful  of  falsehood,  as  falsehood  is  tasteful 
like  the  meat  of  sparrow  but  the  evil  of  the  liar  will  soon  be 
disclosed.  The  Prophet  praised  truth  and  said:  If  you  have  got

108

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

four  things,  nothing  will  harm  you  even  if  you  do  not  get  worldly 
matters  -  (1)  speaking  truth,  (2)  keeping  of  trust,  (3)  good  conduct 
and  (4)  lawful  food.  The  prophet  said:  Stick  to  truth,  as  is  it 
connected  with  religion  and  both  are  in  Paradise.  The  Prophet 
said:  I  advise  you  to  fear  God,  to  speak  the  truth,  to  fulfil  trust,  to 
fulfil  promise,  to  make  salam  and  to  be  humble.FALSE  SPEAKING  PERMISSIBLE  IN  SOME  CASES:  Know, 
O  dear  readers,  that  falsehood  is  not  unlawful  for  its  own  sake 
but  it  is  unlawful  for  the  harm  caused  to  the  person  with  whom 
falsehood  is  spoken  or  harm  to  other  persons.  Sometimes  false 
speaking  becomes  compulsory.  The  sage  Maimun-b-Mehran 
said:  In  some  places,  false-  speaking  is  better  than  speaking  the 
truth.  If  a  man  runs  with  a  sword  to  kill  another  person  who 
enters  a  house,  you  should  say  on  being  asked  about  his 
whereabouts  - 1  have  not  seen  him.  This  is  compulsory  on  you  to 
tell  this  lie.  To  save  a  person  from  unjust  oppression  is 
compulsory.  So  to  save  him,  false-speaking  becomes 
compulsory.  If  then  the  truth  is  spoken,  a  life  will  perish  in  the 
hand  of  an  oppressor.  To  say  falsehood  in  a  battle,  to  compromise 
between  two  parties  and  to  preserve  good  will  between  two 
co-wives,  false  speaking  is  lawful.  But  one  should  be  careful  of 
falsehood  even  in  these  cases.Hazrat  Onune  Qulsum  said:  The  Prophet  did  not  allows 
false  speaking  except  in  three  cases  -  (1)  to  bring  a  compromise 
between  two  parties,  (2)  at  the  time  of  war,  (3)  and  a  husband 
speaking  a  lie  to  his  wife  and  the  wife  speaking  a  lie  to  her 
husband.  The  Prophet  said:  He  who  settles  disputes  between  two 
parties  is  not  a  liar.  He  speaks  good  or  tries  for  good.  The  Prophet 
said:  Every  lie  of  a  man  is  written,  but  the  lie  to  bring  compromise 
between  two  Muslims  is  not  written.  One  man  asked  the  Prophet: 
Shall  I  speak  a  lie  with  my  wife!  He  said:  There  is  no  good  in  a  lie. 
He  said:  Repeat  it,  shall  I  tell  lie  to  her?  The  Prophet  said:  You 
have  got  no  fault  in  it.  Hazrat  Omar  said:  If  any  women  dislikes 
her  husband,  she  should  not  express  it  to  others,  as  habitation  in 
a  house  is  based  on  love.  Man  should  ljve  in  love  and  amity  in 
Islam.  The  Prophet  said:  Every  lie  of  a  man  is  recorded.  The  lie 
which  he  speaks  in  war  is  not  recorded  as  war  is  a  strategy.  The 
lie  which  is  spoken  to  settle  the  matters  between  two  contending 
parties  is  not  written.  The  lie  which  is  spoken  to  settle  the  matters 
between  two  contending  parties  is  not  written.  The  lie  which  is

109

y0l„HI  Greed  and  sexual  passion109

y0l„HI  Greed  and  sexual  passion

spoken  to  please  wife  is  not  recorded  .Saoban  said:  There  is  sin  in 
^  every  falsehood,  but  there  is  no  sin  in  that  falsehood  which 
benefits  a  Muslim  or  removes  a  harm  from  him.  The  Prophet  said: 
bfe  who  commits  fornication  shall  keep  it  secret  with  the  secrecy 
of  God,  as  to  disclose  an  obscene  act  is  also  an  obscene  act.  So 
every  man  should  sometimes  save  his  life,  property  and  honour, 
even  taking  recourse  to  falsehood.  If  enquiry  is  made  to  you 
about  a  secret  thing  of  your  brother  Muslim,  your  can  deny  it  to 
preserve  his  honour.  If  a  man  has  got  more  than  one  wife,  he  can 
tell  a  wife  - 1  love  you  more.  Two  things  should  be  weighed  -  truth 
and  falsehood.  If  harm  is  caused  more  than  benefit  in  case  of 
speaking  the  truth,  it  may  be  avoided.Words  carrying  dual  meanings  may  be  spoken  incasb  of  a 
crisis.  Hazrat  Omar  said:  A  man  by  uttering  a  dual  word  saves 
himself  from  falsehood.  The  following  are  the  illustrations. 
The  sage  Mutarref  was  summoned  once  by  the  tyrant  ruler 
Jiyad.  He  asked  him:  Why  have  you  come  so  late?  He  used  a 
word  conveying  dual  meanings  saying:  After  going  from  your 
Darber,  I  could  not  raise  my  side  from  bed.  God  now  raised  it 
up  for  me.  The  ruler  was  given  to  understand  that  he  was  ill. 
Mu'az-b-Jabal  was  Tahsbilder  of  Hazrat  Omar.  On  his  return 
from  his  station  of  office,  his  wife  asked  him:  Have  you 
brought  anything  as  others  bring  many  things?  He  said:  I 
could  not  bring  anything  as  there  was  guard  with  me.  This 
guard  means  God.  If  any  man  came  to  enquire  about  Ibrahim 
in  his  house  and  if  he  did  not  wish  to  see  him,  he  sent  his  maid 
servant  to  say:  Enquire  about  him  in  the  prostration  place 
(mosque).  The  Prophet  said:  The  greatest  calumny  is  to  claim 
another  as  father  without  his  own  father,  to  say  that  one  has 
seen  what  he  has  not  seen,  or  to  say  'someone  said  what 
nobody  said.  He  also  said:  He  who  narrates  his  dream  in  a  false 
manner  will  be  asked  to  bind  two  seeds  of  wheat  on  the 
Resurrection  Day,  but  he  will  never  be  able  to  do  it.

(15)  Back -biting:  Know,  O  dear  readers,  that  there  came 
numerous  warnings  in  Shariat  regarding  back-biting.  Many 
people  are  accustomed  to  back-biting  and  very  few  men  are  free 
from  it.  God  says:  Don't  back-bite  one  another.  Do  you  like  to  eat 
the  flesh  of  his  dead  brother?  Rather  you  abhor  it  -  49 : 12  Q.

The  Prophet  said:  Wealth,  life  and  honour  of  every  Muslim 
are  unlawful  for  another  Muslim.  God  joins  honour  with  wealth

110The  Prophet  said:  Wealth,  life  and  honour  of  every  Muslim 
are  unlawful  for  another  Muslim.  God  joins  honour  with  wealth

110

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-IH

and  life.  The  Prophet  said:  Beware  of  back-biting  as  it  is  a  more 
heinous  sin  than  fornication.  If  a  man  commits  fornication  and 
makes  repentance,  God  may  accept  his  repentance,  but  the 
repentance  of  back-biting  is  not  accepted  till  the  back-bited  man 
pardons  him.  The  Prophet  said:  Don't  hate  one  another,  don't 
envy  one  another,  don't  sell  over  the  sale  to  another,  don't 
dispute  with  one  another  and  don't  back-bite  one  another.  The 
servants  of  God  are  brethren  to  one  another.  The  Prophet  said:  In 
the  night  in  which  I  was  taken  to  heaven,  I  passed  by  a  pray  of 
men  who  where  scratching  the  flesh  of  their  faces  with  the  ends 
of  their  nails.  I  asked:  O  Gabriel,  who  are  they?  He  said:  They  are 
those  who  used  to  roam  with  slander  of  the  people  and  ruin  theft- 
honour.Solaiman-b-Jaber  said:  I  came  to  the  Prophet  and  asked  him: 
Teach  me  such  a  thing  which  will  benefit  me.  He  said:  Don't 
neglect  a  good  deed  even  though  it  is  small,  even  though  it  is  so 
small  as  to  pour  water  to  the  bucket  of  another  from  your  bucket, 
even  though  it  is  so  small  as  to  meet  with  your  brother  with  a 
good  news  and  even  though  it  is  to  back-bite  one  after  he  has 
gone  from  you.  Bara'a-b-Azeb  said:  One  day  the  Prophet  gave  us 
sermon,  even  the  freed  male  and  female  slaves  heard  it  from  their 
houses.  He  said:  O  people,  don't  back-bite  the  Muslims  -  those 
who  have  brought  faith  by  tongue  but  not  by  heart.  Don't  enquire 
into  their  secret  things,  because  God  will  follow  the  secrets  of  a 
Muslim  who  enquires  into  the  secrets  of  his  brother  Muslim,  God 
dishonours  one  in  his  own  house  in  whose  secrets  God  enquires.Jesus  Christ  got  revelation:  He  who  dies  after  repentance  for 
his  back-biting  will  enter  last  of  all  in  Paradise.  He  who  dies 
without  such  repentance,  will  enter  hell  first  of  all.  Hazrat  Anas 
said:  The  Prophet  once  ordered  all  his  companions  to  fast  and 
said:  Don't  break  your  fast  before  I  order  you.  All  the 
companions  fasted.  When  the  night  came,  a  man  came  there  and 
said:  O  Messenger  of  God,  I  have  fasted.  Now  order  me  to  break 
it.  Thus  one  by  one  came  to  the  Prophet  and  the  Prophet  ordered 
him  to  break  fast.  Then  a  man  came  and  said:  O  Messenger  of 
God,  two  women  in  my  family  fasted  but  they  are  not  coming  to 
you  out  of  shame,  order  them  to  break  fast.  Tire  Prophet  turned 
his  look  from  him  and  he  again  asked  him.  At  this  time  he  said: 
How  have  they  fasted  when  they  ate  the  flesh  of  men  at  day  time? 
Tell  them  that  if  they  fasted,  they  should  vomit  it.  They  then

Ill

Voi-III  Greed  and  sexual  passion

vomited  and  suddenly  a  condensed  clot  of  blood  fell  from  their 
bellies.  The  Prophet  said:  By  One  in  whose  hand  there  is  my  life, 
if  a  drop  of  blood  would  have  remained  in  their  belly.  Hell  fire 
would  have  devoured  them.Hazrat  Anas  reported  that  the  prophet  once  mentioned 
about  interest  and  characterized  it  as  a  great  sin  and  said:  One 
dirham  interest  is  more  heinous  to  God  than  36  fornications,  but 
the  greatest  interest  is  to  destroy  the  honour  of  a  Muslim.  Hazrat 
jaber  said:  I  was  in  a  journey  with  the  Prophet.  He  said  while 
passing  by  two  graves:  These  two  persons  are  punished  not  for 
any  great  sin.  One  is  punished  for  back-biting.  Another  is 
punished  as  he  was  not  accustomed  to  cleanse  after  passing  calls 
of  nature.  Then  he  took  a  fresh  palm  branch,  divided  into  two  and 
fixed  one  to  each  grave  and  said:  So  long  as  this  branch  does  not 
become  dry  and  remain  fresh,  punishment  will  be  light  on  them.The  Prophet  once  ordered  Ma'az  to  be  killed  by  stoning  for 
the  crime  of  fornication.  One  man  present  said  to  another;  Look, 
Ma'az  is  dying  like  a  dog.  The  prophet  then  passed  by  a  dead 
body  with  the  two  men  and  said  to  them:  Eat  the  meat  of  this 
dead  animal.  They  said:  O  Messenger  of  God,  how  can  we  eat  the 
meat  of  a  dead  animal?  He  said:  The  rotten  meat  of  your  brother 
which  you  have  eaten  is  more  rotten  and  strenching  than  this 
flesh.  Hazrat  Abu  Hurairah  said:  He  who  eats  in  this  world  the 
flesh  of  his  brother,  will  eat  that  flesh  in  the  next  world.  He  will 
be  said:  Eat  his  flesh  when  dead  as  you  have  eaten  his  flesh  when 
alive.  Then  he  will  eat  it,  chew  it  and  swallow  it.  Mozahed 
explained  some  words  in  verse  104  -  Homazatf  means  defamers 
among  men  and  Lomajat  means  eaters  of  human  flesh,  that  is  the 
back-biters.  Qatadah  said:  There  are  three  kins  of  punishment  of 
grave--  (1)  one  kind  of  punishment  is  meted  out  for  back-biting, 
the  second  kind  of  punishment  is  for  taking  the  words  of  one  to 
the  ears  of  another,  and  the  third  kind  of  punishment  is  for 
breaking  the  rules  of  the  calls  of  nature.  The  sage  Hasan  Basari 
said:  By  God,  the  effect  of  back-biting  in  the  religion  of  Islam  is 
the  spreading  of  the  boils  of  small-pox  in  body.  A  wise  man  said: 
We  saw  the  former  sages.They  did  not  think  that  fast  and  prayer 
alone  are  divine  service  but  they  considered  not  to  back-bite  also 
as  divine  service.  Hazrat  Ibn  Abbas  said:  When  you  wish  to  tell 
the  people  about  the  fault  of  your  companion,  you  will  first  tell 
them  of  your  own  fault.

112

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vdl-IIl112

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vdl-IIl

The  sage  Malek-b-Dinar  said:  One  day  Jesus  Christ  was 
passing  with  his  companions  by  a  dead  dog.  Then  the  disciples 
said:  What  a  stenchy  smell  of  this  dead  dog!  Then  Jesus  Christ 
said:  How  fine  is  the  line  of  its  teeth.  By  this  he  dpereca'ted  to 
blame  the  dog  and  made  them  understand  that  there  is  nothing 
ugly  in  the  creation  of  Cod.MEANING  OF  BACK-BITING  AND  ITS  LIMITS:  Back-biting 
means  to  say  anything  to  another  about  your  brother  in  his 
absence  which  he  does  not  like.  This  refers  to  physique,  pedigree, 
dress,  house,  religion,  behaviours  and  conduct  and  character.  If 
you  say  of  another  that  he  is  dwarf,  he  is  long-statured  and  it 
gives  him  pain,  then  it  is  back-biting.  If  you  say  that  he  is  a  sinner, 
that  he  is  of  low  birth,  that  he  is  a  weaver  in  his  absence,  it  will  be 
back-biting.  If  you  say:  His  conduct  is  not  good,  he  is  a  miser,  he 
is  proud,  he  is  a  hypocrite,  he  is  prone  to  anger,  he  is  a  coward,  it 
will  be  backbiting.  Mention  was  made  of  a  woman  to  the  Prophet 
that  she  fasts  and  prays  but  she  gives  trouble  to  her  neighbour  by 
her  tongue.  He  said:  This  woman  will  got  to  Hell.  At  another 
time,  it  was  mentioned  to  him  that  a  woman  is  miser.  He  said:  It  is 
not  a  good  talk.  Once  the  Prophet  asked.  Do  you  know  what  is 
back-biting?  The  companions  said:  God  and  His  Apostle  know 
best.  He  said:  To  say  what  your  brother  Muslim  does  not  like  is 
back-biting.  He  was  asked:  If  what  I  say  is  in  my  brother?  He  said: 
If  it  is  in  him,  it  will  yet  be  considered  as  back-biting.  If  it  is  not  in 
him,  that  will  be  slander.  Once  some  companions  said  to  the 
prophet:  He  is  an  unfit  person.  The  prophet  said:  You  have 
back-bited  your  brother.  The  companions  said:  O  Messenger  of 
God,  we  have  said  what  is  in  him.  He  said:  If  what  you  say  is  not 
in  him,  it  will  be  slander.  Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said:  There  are 
three  kinds  of  bad  discussion  about  another  -  (1)  back-biting, 
slander  and  false  narration.  There  is  mention  of  these  guilts  in  the 
Quran.  Back-biting  is  to  say  of  a  guilt  which  is  in  him.  Slander  is 
to  say  of  a  guilt  which  is  not  in  him.  False  narration  is  to  say  what 
reaches  you  about  another.BACK-BITING  BY  MEANS  OTHER  THAN  TONGUE: 
Know.  O  dear  readers,  that  back-biting  can  be  done  not  only  by 
tongue  but  also  by  signs,  gestures,  hints,  movements  of  body  and 
writings.  Every  kind  of  back-biting  is  unlawful.  Hazrat  Ayesha 
said:  To  me  a  woman  came.  When  she  went  away.  I  hinted  with 
my  hand  to  the  prophet  that  she  is  dwarf.  The  prophet  said:  You

113

Voi-iII  Greed  and  sexual  passion

have  back-bited  her.  Pen  is  like  tongue  and  backbiting  can  be 
done  by  writing  by  pen.  If  a  writer  criticizes  a  particular  man  by 
writing/  it  will  be  back-biting  him.  It  can  be  committed  with 
reference  to  a  dead  man  also.  When  any  action  of  a  man  was 
disliking  to  the  Prophet,  he  did  not  particularize  that  person  but 
said  in  a  general  way:  What  will  be  the  condition  of  the  people 
who  do  such  and  such  acts?  The  Prophet  said:0  The  hearer  of 
back-biting  is  included  within  the  back-biters.  If  the  hearer 
protests  by  his  tongue,  he  will  be  exempted  from  its  sin.  If  he 
cannot  do  it,  he  will  think  it  bad  in  his  mind.  If  he  can  shift  from 
that  place  or  change  the  topic,  he  will  be  exempted.  The  Prophet 
said:  If  a  believer  is  dishonoured  before  any  pefson  who  does  not 
help  him  inspite  of  his  ability  to  do  so,  God  will  dishonour  him 
on  the  Resurrection  Day  before  all  creatures.  He  also  said:  He 
who  protects  the  honour  of  a  Muslim  in  his  absence,  it  becomes 
the  duty  of  God  to  perfect  his  honour  on  the  Judgment  Day.  The 
Prophet  said:  If  a  man  saves  the  honour  of  his  brother  Muslim  in 
his  absence,  it  becomes  the  duty  of  God  to  save  him  from 
Hell-fire.CAUSES  OF  BACK-BITING:  The  causes  of  back-biting  are 
many.  We  should  narrate  eleven  causes  out  of  them.  Eight  causes 
are  applicable  to  all  and  three  causes  are  applicable  to  the 
religious  and  special  people.

The  first  cause  is  -  Anger.  If  there  is  cause  of  anger  in 
anybody,  a  man  is  engaged  in  saying  about  his  guilts  and  there 
arises  in  his  mind  hatred  for  him.  This  is  natural  if  he  has  got  no 
religious  connection  with  him.  Sometimes  he  entertains  hatred  in 
his  mind  without  mentioning  it  expressly.  So  anger  stands  as  a 
cause  of  back-biting.  The  second  cause  is  for  pleasing  the  minds 
of  friends  and  companions.  The  third  cause  is  to  shake  off  one's 
own  guilts  by  back-biting  others.  The  fourth  cause  is  to  get 
oneself  free  from  guilt  by  attributing  it  to  others  saying:  I  would 
not  have  done  it  but  for  others.  The  fifth  cause  is  to  express  ;he 
glory  and  praise  of  oneself  thereby  making  another  fool.  He  says: 
He  is  fool  and  powerless.  The  sixth  cause  is  hatred  towards 
another,  the  seventh  cause  is  jests  and  ridicules  and  the  eighth 
cause  is  to  hold  another  in  contempt.

THE  CAUSES  RELATING  TO  RELIGIOUS  MEN.  The  three 
causes  of  back-  biting  in  relation  to  religious  men  are  very  subtle 
and  difficult  and  the  devil  paints  them  in  good  works.  The  first

114

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-Ili114

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-Ili

cause  is  that  when  the  people  see  some  fault  in  the  religious  men 
they  say  that  a  particular  religious  man  has  got  all  qualities  but 
he  has  got  one  fault.  If  they  express  that  fault,  it  will  be  back¬ 
biting.  The  second  cause  is  sympathy  for  the  person  backbited  by 
saying:  The  affair  of  that  unfortunate  man  has  caused  my 
anxiety.  If  he  mentions  his  name,  he  will  be  back-biting  him.  The 
third  cause  is  to  express  anger  for  God's  sake  on  anybody 
mentioning  his  name.  If  his  name  is  not  mentioned,  it  will  riot  be 
back- biting  him.

MEDICINE  TO  RESTRAIN  TONGUE  FROM  BACK-BITING: 
Know,  O  dear  readers,  that  the  medicine  of  back-biting  is 
knowledge  and  action  or  a  mixture  of  knowledge  and  action.  The 
medicine  of  a  disease  is  its  opposite.  There  are  two  kinds  of 
medicines  of  back-biting,  general  medicineand  special  medicine. 
The  general  medicine  is  that  the  backbiter  should  have  this 
knowledge  that  in  case  of  back -biting,  he  will  fall  in  the  wrath  of 
God  and  that  his  virtues  will  be  lost  on  the  Resurrection  Day  for 
this  cause  as  his  virtue  will  go  to  the  back-bited.  Back-biting  has 
been  likened  to  eating  a  dead  animal.  The  Prophet  said: 
Back-biting  consumes  the  virtues  of  a  man  sooner  than  the  fire 
consumes  a  dry  wood.  One  day  a  man  said  to  Hazrat  Hasan 
Basari:  I  heard  that  you  have  back-  bited  me.  He  said:  You  have 
not  acquired  such  rank  that  I  will  give  all  my  virtues  to  you.  The 
Prophet  said:  He  is  blessed  who  cannot  see  the  faults  of  others 
because  he  remains  busy  with  his  own  faults.  A  man  said  to  a 
wise  man:  O  man  of  ugly  face.  He  said  in  reply:  I  would  have 
made  it  unlawful  if  it  were  in  my  head.The  special  medicines  of  back-biting  are  as  follows:  In  order 
to  apply  these  medicines,  the  root  cause  of  backbiting  is  to  be 
searched.  There  are  eight  causes  as  described  above  and  those 
causes  shall  have  to  be  cut  off.  Anger  is  a  cause  which  should  be 
brought  under  complete  control.  If  you  are  determined  to  take 
revenge  upon  a  person  out  of  anger,  know  that  God  will  take 
revenge  upon  you  out  of  anger  for  your  back-biting  as  He  has 
prohibited  you  from  that.  The  Prophet  said:  Hell  has  got  a  door. 
He  who  causes  the  anger  of  God  by  committing  sins  will  enter 
Hell  through  that  door  and  nobody  else.  The  prophet  said:  The 
tongue  of  one  who  fears  God  comes  under  control  and  his  anger 
is  also  brought  under  control.  He  also  said:  If  a  man  appeases 
anger  though  he  has  got  right  to  express  it,  God  will  call  him  on

Greed  and  sexual  passion

115

voi-ni

•  e  Kesurrection  Day  before  all  the  creatures  and  say:  Take 
whichever  Hur  you  like.  God  said  in  one  of  the  earlier  scriptures: 
, q  son  of  Adam,  remember  Me  at  the  time  of  your  wrath,  I  will 
rernember  you  at  the  time  of  My  wrath.  In  other  words,  I  will  not 
destroy  you  along  with  others  who  will  be  destroyed.The  second  cause  of  back-biting  is  to  support  the  opinion  of 
friends.  Its  medicine  is  to  oppose  the  opinion  of  friends  in  the 
matter  of  back-biting  a  man.  You  should  know  that  if  you  incur 
the  displeasure  of  God  by  pleasing  your  friends,  God  will  be 
enraged  on  you.  So  how  can  you  give  up  God  for  pleasing  your 
friends?  The  third  cause  is  to  show  one's  piety  by  back-biting 
another.  The  medicine  is  as  described  above.  You  should  know 
that  in  that  case  God's  wrath  will  fall  on  you  and  that  you  are 
courting  destruction  in  the  next  world  absolving  yourself  from 
guilt  in  this  world.  You  should  also  know  that  you  are  losing  all 
your  virtues  by  back-biting.  The  fourth  cause  of  back-biting  is  to 
consider  oneself  pure  and  disclose  one's  prestige  and  pride.  The 
medicine  of  this  is  to  know  that  your  glory  and  dignity  may 
vanish  and  the  people  may  look  down  upon  you.  The  fifth  cause 
is  envy.  Its  medicine  is  as  follows:  You  should  know  that  if  you 
envy  anybody  for  his  riches  and  honour  in  the  world,  you  will  be 
burnt  by  the  fire  of  envy  in  this  world  in  addition  to  your  being 
burnt  in  Hell-fire.  You  have  taken  thereby  the  punishment  of 
Hell  and  are  bereft  of  riches  and  honour  in  this  world.  You 
should  know  that  his  sins  will  fall  on  you  and  your  virtues  will  go 
to  him.  The  sixth  cause  is  ridicule  and  jest.  You  should  know  that 
you  have  ridiculed  a  man  in  presence  of  some  people,  but  you 
will  be  ridiculed  before  all  the  creatures  in  the  next  world.  The 
seventh  cause  is  express  sympathy  for  the  sin  of  another  and 
thereby  back-biting  him.  The  eighth  reason  is  to  express 
astonishment  at  the  conduct  of  another.  It  is  a  mockery  which  is 
anactofsin.BACK-BITING  BY  MIND:  Know,  O  dear  readers,  that  to 
back-bite  another  by  mind  is  unlawful  like  back-biting  by 
tongue.  This  means  evil  idea  or  thought  about  a  person.  What 
suddenly  arises  in  mind  is  pardonable.  God  says:  O  those  who 
believe,  if  a  transgressor  comes  to  you  with  a  news,  ascertain  its 
truth,  lest  you  do  injury  to  a  people  out  of  ignorance  and  then  be 
repentant  for  what  you  have  done  -  49  :  6Q.  So  to  support  the 
devil  is  unlawful.  The  Prophet  said:  God  has  made  unlawful  the

116

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-iij

life  and  property  of  a  Muslim  and  to  entertain  evil  thought  about 
him.  So  evil  thought  is  unlawful.  It  leads  to  entry  into  his 
secrets  which  is  also  unlawful.  God  says:  Don't  enquire  about 
secrets  -  49 : 14Q.

IN  WHAT  CASES  BACK-BITING  IS  ALLOWED:  The 
following  six  causes  make  back-biting  lawful.  (1)  To  narrate  the 
faults  of  another  in  a  trial.  If  a  man  complains  against  another 
before  a  judge  regarding  the  latter's  oppression,  breach  of  trust 
or  back-biting  or  any  other  fault,  it  is  then  lawful  for  him  to 
narrate  it  before  the  judge.  If  he  is  really  not  oppressed  or 
tortured,  he  will  be  considered  as  a  back-biter  and  consequently 
sinner.  The  Prophet  said:  He  who  has  got  a  right  has  got  right  to 
speak.  He  said:  To  make  delay  on  the  part  of  a  rich  man  for 
payment  of  dues  is  oppression.  He  said:  If  debt  is  not  paid,  it  is 
lawful  to  punish  a  rich  man  and  mark  his  honour.(2)  To  help  to  change  one's  evil  deed.  It  is  lawful  to  narrate 
the  works  of  a  sinner  to  bring  him  to  the  right  path  and  to  change 
his  evil  deed  to  such  a  person  who  is  able  to  prevent  that  evil 
work  by  exercising  power  over  him.  Once  news  reached  Caliph 
Omar  that  Abu  Jandal  began  drinking  wine  in  Syria.  He  wrote  to 
him:  In  the  name  of  God,  the  Most  Compassionate,  the  Most 
Merciful,  Ham  Mim,  this  book  was  revealed  from  the  Almighty, 
the  Wise  etc.  40 :  IQ.  When  he  read  this  letter,  he  repented  for  his 
evil  act.  Hazrat  Omar  did  not  attribute  the  fault  of  back-biting  to 
one  who  gave  him  this  news.

(3)  To  seek  legal  decision.  It  is  lawful  to  narrate  the  deeds  of 
another  to  seek  legal  decision  or  law  for  remedy.  For  instance, 
on&says:  My  father,  my  wife,  or  my  son  treats  me  like  this.  What 
is  the  remedy  of  getting  out  of  it?  Hinda,  daughter  of  Utba, 
complained  to  the  Prophet:  Abu  Sufiyan  is  a  miser.  He  does  not 
bear  necessary  expenses  of  myself  and  my  children.  May  I  spend 
anything  in  his  absence?  The  Prophet  said:  Take  such  things  as 
are  necessary  for  you  and  your  children.  Hinda  mentioned  about 
miserliness  and  oppression  of  Abu  Sufiyan,  but  he  did  not 
blackmail  her  for  back-biting,  as  shp  had  intention  of  taking 
decision.

(4)  To  warn  a  Muslim  about  one's  harmful  things.  It  is 
lawful  to  narrate  the  faults  of  another  to  save  a  Muslim  from  his 
injurious  and  harmful  things.  If  you  see  a  learned  man  to

Vol'lH  *  Greed  and  sexual  passion  117Vol'lH  *  Greed  and  sexual  passion  117

frequent  an  innovator  and  fear  this  influence  on  him,  it  is  lawful 
to  disclosed  his  innovation  and  sin,  but  not  for  any  other  cause. 
Similarly  if  a  man  wants  to  engage  a  servant  or  to  buy  a  slave,  it  is 
lawful  to  disclose  his  innovation  and  sin,  but  not  for  any  other 
cause.  Similarly  if  a  man  wants  to  engage  a  servant  or  to  buy  a 
slave,  it  is  lawful  to  disclose  his  bad  habi  t  of  theft  or  other  crimes. 
If  a  man  is  cited  as  a  witness  by  an  innocent  man,  he  may  disclose 
the  fault  of  his  adversary.  The  prophet  said:  Do  you  consider  bad 
to  disclose  the  faults  of  a  sinner?  Disclose  his  faults  so  that  people 
may  know  them.  Disclose  the  faults  in  him,  so  that  people  may 
take  precaution.  The  ancient  sages  said:  There  is  no  sin  in 
disclosing  the  guilts  of  three  persons  -  (1)  a  tyrant  ruler,  (2)  a 
learned  innovator,  (3)  and  a  shameless  evil  doer.

(5)  To  call  by  a  well-known  surname.  There  is  no  back-biting 
if  a  man  is  called  by  his  well  known  surname,  such  as  a  lame  man, 
a  blind  man.  This  is  for  identification  and  not  from  any  evil 
motive.(6)  To  disclose  bad  deed  of  an  evil  doer.  To  disclose  the 
guilts  of  those  who  are  accustomed  to  evil  deeds  openly  is  no  sin, 
such  as  a  male  wearing  female  dress,  a  drunkard,  a  fornicator,  or 
an  oppressor.  The  Prophet  said  :  There  is  no  sin  in  back-biting  a 
person  who  has  shaken  off  the  screen  of  shame  from  his  face. 
Hazrat  Omar  said  :  There  is  no  honour  for  a  great  sinner 
(meaning  those  who  commit  major  sins  openly).  He  who 
commits  sins  secretly  should  have  the  honour  of  his  fault  being 
kept  secret.  Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said  :  There  is  no  fault  in 
back-biting  three  persons  —  (1)  one  who  is  a  slave  of  passion, 
(2)  an  open  and  well  known  transgressor,  (3)  and  a  tyrant  ruler.

EXPIATION  OF  BACK-BITING:  There  are  two  modes  of 
expitation  of  the  sin  of  back-biting.  (1)  The  back-biter  will  repent 
sincerelyln  mind  and  will  be  sorry  for  that.  (2)  Then  he  will  seek 
pardon  of  the  back-bited  person  being  very  humble.  Hazrat 
Hasan  Basari  said  :  It  is  sufficient  to  seek  forgivenesses  for  the 
back-bited  person.  There  is  no  necessity  to  seek  his  pardon.  He 
gives  its  support  by  the  following  Hadis :  To  seek  forgiveness  for 
one  who  has  been  back-bited  is  expitation  of  back-biting.  The 
sage  Mozahed  said  :  The  expitation  of  eating  rotten  flesh  of  your 
brother  is  to  praise  him  and  to  pray  for  his  good.  To  me,  it  seems 
that  it  is  not  sufficient.  One  is  to  seek  pardon  from  the  back-bited 
man  in  order  to  get  himself  absolved  from  the  sin.  The  Prophet

118

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-Iii118

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-Iii

said  :  He  who  injures  the  honour  or  property  of  his  brother 
Muslim  shall  seek  pardon  from  him  before  the  Judgment  Day 
comes.  On  that  day  his  virtues  will  be  taken.  If  he  has  got  no 
virtues,  the  sins  of  the  back-bited  will  be  mixed  up  with  his  sins 
and  they  will  be  increased.  Hazrat  Ayesha  said  to  another  a  out  a 
woman — her  border  of  cloth  is  long.  It  was  considered  as 
back-biting  and  for  that  she  sought  pardon  of  that  woman.  There 
is  no  alternative  but  to  seek  pardon  if  he  is  alive.  If  he  is  absent  or 
dead,  he  should  seek  forgiveness  for  him.  God  says  :  Take  to 
pardon,  enjoin  good  and  turn  away  from  the  illiterate.  The 
Prophet  asked.  What  is  the  meaning  of  this  pardon.  O  Gabriel  ? 
He  said  :  God  enjoins  :  pardon  him  who  does  wrong  to  you.  Tie 
the  connection  of  blood  with  one  who  severe  it,  give  him  who 
deprives  you.  Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said  that  a  man  said  to  him:  A 
certain  person  back-bited  you.  He  sent  for  him  a  bunch  full  of 
dried  grapes  saying  :  I  heard  that  you  sent  your  virtues  to  me  a 
present.  I  send  you  in  exchange  this  small  present  of  dried 
grapes.  I  seek  your  pardon  and  I  could  notgive  its  full  exchange.

(18)  Cheating  and  slander.  God  says  in  verse  68  :  11 — A 
slanderer,  going  about  will  calumnies,  hindering  all  good, 
transgressing  beyond  bounds  etc.(18)  Cheating  and  slander.  God  says  in  verse  68  :  11 — A 
slanderer,  going  about  will  calumnies,  hindering  all  good, 
transgressing  beyond  bounds  etc.

The  sage  Ibn  Mobarak  said  :  Hammaz  means  an  illegitimate 
issue  who  does  not  keep  words  secret.  This  shows  that  he  who 
does  not  keep  words  secret  and  roams  about  giving  news  to  ears 
is  like  an  illegitimate  son.  God  says  in  verse  104  : 1  Q  —  Woe  to 
every  scandal-monger  and  backbiter.  The  meaning  of  Homazat  is 
one  who  roams  with  slander.  God  says :  Bearer  of  fuel  or  scandal 
monger.  God  says  :  They  broke  trust  with  both.  So  they  got  no 
benefit  from  them  from  God — 66  : 10  Q.  This  verse  was  revealed 
in  connection  with  the  wives  of  Prophet  Lot  and  Noah.  When  any 
guest  came  to  Prophet  Lot,  his  wife  gave  this  news  to  the  people. 
Getting  this  news,  they  satisfied  their  lust  with  the  guest.  The 
wife  of  Noah  said  to  the  people :  Noah  is  insane.  The  Prophet  said 
:  A  slanderer  will  not  enter  Paradise.  There  is  in  another  Hadis  : 
Scandal  monger  will  not  enter  Paradise.  The  Prophet  said  :  To 
God,  the  dearest  are  those  persons  who  ware  best  among  you  in 
conduct,  whose  minds  are  soft,  who  love  and  get  love.  Those  are 
worst  to  God  among  you  who  roam  about  with  slander,  who 
create  disturbance  among  friends  and  who  roam  about  picking 
faults  of  religious  men.  the  Prophet  said  :  Shall  I  not  inform  you

Greed  and  sexual  passion

119

r

Vol'MGreed  and  sexual  passion

119

r

Vol'M

0f  the  worst  of  you  ?  The  companions  asked  :  O  Prophet  of  God, 
te|l  us  that.  The  Prophet  said  :  They  are  those  who  walk  with 
slander,  create  disturbance  among  friends  and  mix  falsehood 
with  the  fulls  of  the  pious  men.  The  Prophet  said  :  If  a  man  gives 
hint  to  disgrace  a  Muslim  unjustly,  God  will  disgrace  him  in  Hell 
on  the  Resurrection  Day.  The  Prophet  said  :  If  a  man  uses  a  word 
in  order  to  disgrace  an  innocent  man  in  the  world,  it  becomes  the 
duty  of  God  to  burn  him  in  Hell  fire  on  the  Resurrection  Day.  The 
prophet  said  :  He  who  bears  witness  against  a  Muslim  which  is 
not  true  in  his  case,  should  enquire  into  his  place  in  Hell.  The 
pious  men  said :  For  this  slander  one  third  of  the  punishment  will 
be  meted  out  in  the  grave.  The  Prophet  sqid  :  When  God  created 
Paradise,  He  said  to  it :  Talk  with  me.  Paradise  said  :  He  who  will 
enter  me  is  fortunate.  The  Almighty  God  said :  By  My  Glory  and 
Honour,  eight  classes  of  men  will  not  find  place  in  you — (1)  a 
habitual  drunkard,  (2)  a  lift-long  fornicator,  (3)  a  slanderer,  (4) 
one  who  encourages  his  own  wife  and  daughter  to  fomication,s 
(5)  an  oppressor,  (6)  one  who  s  wears  blood-tie,  (7)  one  who  swears  in 
the  name  of  God  'I  will  do  this  work',  but  he  does  not  do  it.Once  there  was  a  severe  famine  among  the  children  of  Israil. 
Moses  then  prayed  many  times  for  shower  of  rain,  but  there  was 
no  rain.  God  then  revealed  to  him  :  There  is  a  slanderer  among 
you.  He  always  tells  the  faults  of  one  to  another.  For  that  I  will  not 
accept  your  invocation.  Moses  said  :  O  Lord,  show  me  that 
person,  I  will  now  eject  him  from  our  party.  He  said  :  O  Moses,  I 
prohibited  you  to  make  slander  on  a  person.  They  then  all 
repented  and  there  was  shower  of  rain.

If  has  been  reported  that  a  man  crossed  the  path  of  fourteen 
hundred  miles  in  search’ of  a  wise  pious  man  and  asked  him 
seven  questions — (1)  what  is  heavier  than  sky,  (2)  what  thing  is 
more  spacious  than  the  earth?  (3)  what  thing  is  harden  than  stone? 
(4)  what  thing  is  hotter  than  fire  ?  (5)  what  thing  is  colder  than  ice 
?  (6)  what  is  richer  than  sea  ?  (7)  who  is  more  humiliated  that  an 
orphan  ?  The  wise  man  reported  to  him  serially — (1)  slander  of 
an  innocent  man  is  heavier  than  sky,  (2)  truth  is  wider  than  the 
earth,  (3)  the  heart  of  an  unbeliever  is  harder  than  that  of  a  stone, 
(4)  greed  and  hatred  are  hotter  than  fire,  (5)  the  heart  of  man  who 
does  not  remove  the  wants  of  relatives  is  colder  than  ice,  (6)  a 
contended  heart  is  richer  than  sea  and  (7)  the  slanderer  becomes 
more  humiliated  than  an  orphan  when  his  action  is  disclosed.

120

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III120

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

WHAT  IS  SLANDER?  Know,  O  dear  readers,  that  the 
meaning  of  Namimah  or  slander  is  to  take  the  faults  of  one  to  the 
ears  of  another,  for  instance,  'a  certain  man  is  speaking  thus 
about  you,'  The  man  to  whom  it  is  communicated  and  the  man 
whose  fault  is  communicated  both  dislike  it.  A  third  person  also 
does  not  like  it,  though  it  is  expressed  by  hints,  gestures,  writings 
and  by  other  means.  But  if  benefit  is  done  to  a  Muslim  by 
diclosing  it,  there  is  no  fault  in  it.  For  instance,  if  a  man  sees  a 
thing  of  a  man  being  stolen,  he  should  bear  witness.  The  hearer  of 
this  slander  or  defamation  has  got  six  duties  to  perform.  (1)  He 
should  not  believe  the  slanderer  as  he  is  a  transgressor  and  sinner 
and  his  evidence  is  to  be  rejected.  God  says  :  O  believer,  if  a 
transgressor  comes  to  you  with  a  news,  test  its  correctness,  lest 
you  injure  a  people  out  of  ignorance — 49  :  6  Q.  (2)  He  should 
prevent  him  from  making  defamation,  advise  him  and  say  to  him 
that  it  is  a  great  sin.  God  says :  Enjoin  good,  and  prohibit  evil.  (3) 
He  shall  hate  such  person  within  mind  for  God's  sake,  as  he  is 
hated  by  God.  To  hate  one  whom  God  ha'es  is  compulsory.  (4)  He 
shall  not  entertain  bad  idea  against  his  brother  Muslim,  as  God 
says  :  Give  up  most  conjectures  as  some  conjecture  is  sin.  (5)  He 
shall  not  be  busy  in  seeking  the  truth  of  that  new,  as  God  says  : 
Don't  spy.  (6)  He  shall  not  disclose  his  defamation  and  say :  Such 
a  person  told  me  such  and  such.  It  has  been  narrated  that  a  person 
came  to  Caliph  Omar-b-Abdul  Aziz  and  said  something  to  him 
against  a  person.  The  Caliph  then  said  to  him :  If  you  desire.  I  will 
verify  you  a  statement.  If  you  tell  lie,  you  are  a  great  sinner 
according  to  this  verse  of  God  :  If  anybody  comes  to  you  with  a 
news,  verify  it.  If  you  tell  the  truth,  you  are  a  slanderer  according 
to  this  verse — those  who  roam  with  slander — 68  :  11  If  you 
duster,  I  will  pardon  you.  He  said :  O  Commander  of  the  faithful, 
I  want  pardon.  I  will  never  do  it.Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said  :  H  who  defames  a  man  to  you 
defames  you  also  to  another.  It  appears  from  this  that  wrath 
should  be  shown  to  the  defamer  and  he  should  not  be  believed. 
The  Prophet  said  :  He  is  worst  whose  harms  the  people  fear.  He 
also  said  :  One  whb  severse  the  tie  of  relationship  will  not  enter 
Paradise.  He  was  questioned  :  Who  is  the  severer  of  connection. 
He  said :  He  who  severer  connection  from  the  people  and  he  who 
defames.  A  man  one  day  defamed  a  man  to  Hazrat  Ali.  Hazrat  Ali 
said  to  him :  O  brother,  I  shall  enquire  about  what  you  have  said. 
We  shall  hate  you  if  you  tell  the  truth  and  punish  you  if  you  tell

121

y0].IIl  Greed  and  sexual  passion

falsehood  and  pardon  you  if  you  want  it.  The  man  said  :  O 
Commander  of  the  faithful,  pardon  me.  Muhammad-b-Ka'ab 
was  once  asked  :  Which  conduct  of  a  believer  is  harmful  to  him? 
pfe  said  :  Excessive  talk,  disclose  of  secrets  and  belief  in 
everybody's  words.  Mussb-  b-Jubair  said  :  To  believe  in 
defamation  is  worse  than  defamation,  as  defamation  shows  the 
way  but  belief  in  defamation  gives  permission.  He  who  shows 
the  path  to  a  thing  is  not  equal  to  one  who  admits  it  and  gives 
permission.  So  beware  of  slanderers  and  defamers.Once  a  man  sought  permission  of  Calip's  Solaiman  to  speak. 
Permission  was  granted  and  the  man  said  :  O  Commander  of  the 
faithful,  some  men  defamed  you.  They  purchased  your  world  in 
exchange  of  their  religion  and  gained  your  pleasure  in  earning 
the  displeasure  of  God.  They  fear  you  in  matters  of  God  and  does 
not  fear  God  in  your  matters.  So  don't  trust  them  for  the  trust 
which  God  has  given  you  and  don't  band  over  to  them  the  thing 
which  God  has  given  you  to  protect,  as  they  will  spread  harm  a 
among  the  people  and  will  destroy  you  by  the  help  of  their 
relatives.  Their  aims  are  rebellion  and  slander,  their  means  are 
backbiting  and  defamation.  You  are  responsible  for  their  guilts 
and  they  are  not  responsible  for  your  guilts.  Their  world  will  not 
be  good  if  they  destroy  your  next  world  because  the  worst 
deception  is  that  of  a  man  who  sells  his  next  world  in  exchange  of 
the  world  of  another.

The  wise  Luqman  advised  his  son  :  O  dear  son,  I  am  giving 
you  such  admonitions  which,  if  you  stick  to,  you  will  not  be 
deprived  of  influence  :  Treat  well  with  the  near  and  the  distant 
ones,  don't  express  your  ignorance  to  the  persons  of  honour  and 
dishonou^save  your  friends,  keep  the  tie  of  relationship  with  you 
relatives,  save  them  from  the  deception  of  a  slanderer  and  save 
yourself  from  one  who  wishes  harm  to  you  and  to  play  deceit. 
When  you  part  away  from  your  friends  and  they  part  from  you, 
don't  tell  their  evil  and  they  also  shall  not  tell  your  evil.  A  pious 
man  said  :  The  root  of  slander  is  falsehood,  envy  and  hypocrisy. 
These  three  things  are  the  root  of  disgrace.The  sage  Hammad-b-Salmah  said  :  A  man  purchased  a 
slave.  The  seller  said  to  the  buyer  :  He  has  got  no  fault  in  him 
except  one  which  is  double-dealing.  The  buyer  said  :  I  am 
satisfied.  Then  he  purchased  him.  After  some  days'  stay  with  his 
master,  the  slave  said  to  his  wife  :  Your  husband  does  not  love

122

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

you  and  he  wants  to  purchase  a  slave-girl.  I  am  telling  you  of  a 
spell-  When  he  falls  asleep,  take  some  hairs  of  his  beard  with  a 
razor.  I  shall  prepare  with  them  such  a  spell  that  he  will  love  you. 
He  then  went  to  the  husband  and  said  to  him :  Your  wife  does  not 
love  you  and  fell  in  love  of  another  person.  She  may  kill  you  if 
opportunity  arises.  One  day,  the  master  fell  asleep  and  his  wife 
went  with  a  razor  to  take  some  hairs  of  his  beard.  When  she  was 
about  to  take  them,  he  suddenly  awoke  and  caught  her  with  the 
razor  and  killed  her.  This  news  reached  her  relatives  who  came  at 
once  and  killed  him.  Thus  quarrels  ensued  between  the  triple  of 
the  husband  and  the  tribe  of  the  wife.(17)  Hypocrisy.  Hypocrisy  is  another  evil  of  tongue.  It  is  to 
go  to  two  enemies  and  introduce  to  each  of  them  as  friend  and  to 
hold  one  opinion  with  each  of  them.  The  sage  Ammer-b-Yasar 
said  that  the  Prophet  had  said  :  He  who  has  got  two  tongues  in 
the  world  will  have  two  tongues  in  the  next  world.  The  Prophet 
said  :  You  will  see  on  the  resurrection  day  the  worst  man  near 
God  with  two  faces.  He  will  come  to  one  party  with  one  thing  and 
to  another  party  with  another  thing.  In  another  narration  he  will 
come  with  one  face  to  one  party  and  with  another  face  to  another 
party.  Hazrat  Abu  Hurairah  said  :  A  man  having  two  faces  will 
not  be  enrolled  as  a  faithful  man  to  God.  Malek-b-Dinar  said  :  I 
have  read  in  the  Torah  :  He  who  talks  with  his  friend  with  two 
tongues  and  yet  claims  to  be  a  trustee,  God  will  destroy  that 
tongue.  The  Prophet  said  :  On  the  Resurrection  Day,  the  worst 
men  to  God  will  be  the  liars,  the  proud,  and  those  men  who 
entef  tained  hatred  in  the  need  of  their  friends.  When  they  met  his 
friends,  they  hated  them.  When  they  were  called  towards  God 
and  His  Prophet,  they  came  late  and  when  they  were  called 
towards  the  devil,  they  came  hurriedly.

It  has  been  narrated  that  when  a  companion  of  the  Prophet 
died.  Hazrat  Huzalfa  did  not  say  funeral  prayer  for  him.  Hazrat 
Omar  then  said :  He  is  one  of  the  companions  of  the  Prophet,  but 
you  have  not  said  his  funeral  prayer.  He  said  :  O  Commander  of 
the  faithful,  he  is  one  of  the  hypocrites.  Hazrat  Omar  said  :  I  ask 
you  :  am  I  included  among  them  ?  He  said  :  You  are  not  a 
hypocrite.  Nobody  after  you  can  be  trusted.(18)  Praise.  Another  evil  of  the  tongue  is  to  praise.  In  some 
cases,  praise  is  unlawful  There  are  six  harms  of  praise,  out  of

123

Vol-III  Greed  and  sexual  passion

which  four  harms  fall  on  the  praiser  and  two  harms  fall  on  the 
hearer  of  praise.

(1)  Faleshood  is  the  first  harm.  In  case  of  too  much  priase, 
recourse  must  be  had  to  falsehood.  Khated-b-Medan  said  :  If  a 
man  praises  a  ruler  or  such  man  as  has  not  got  that  quality  in  him, 
God  will  raise  him  in  such  a  way  that  it  will  be  difficult  for  him  to 
talk  to  the  people  with  tongue.

(2)  Show  The  second  harm  at  the  time  of  praise  is  show,  as 
love  is  expressed  by  praise  but  it  may  not  be  in  mind  and  he  may 
not  believe  in  all  he  says.  Thus  he  shows  a  show  or  hypocrisy.

(3)  The  praised  man  is  praised  without  knowing  whether  he 
has  that  quality  in  him.  It  is  reported  that  a  certain  man  praised 
another  before  the  Prophet.  The  Prophet  then  said  to  them  :  You 
have  severed  the  neck  of  your  brother.  If  he  hears  it,  he  will  not 
get  salvation.  Then  he  said :  If  you  are  to  praise  a  man,  say  'I  know 
him  as  such  God  knows  whether  he  is  pure  or  impure.  I  can't  say 
in  excess  of  what  God  knows  of  anybody'  So  it  is  danger  to  say 
that  he  is  a  pious  man,  he  is  God-fear,  he  is  a  pilanthropist.  Once 
Hazrat  Omar  saw  a  man  praising  another.  He  asked  the  praiser : 
Have  you  travelled  with  him  ?  He  said :  No.  He  asked  him :  Have 
you  carried  on  business  with  him  ?  He  said  :  No.  He  asked  him  : 
Are  you  his  neighbour  morning  and  evening  ?  He  said  :  No.  He 
said :  By  God,  I  think  you  have  not  known  him.(4)  The  praised  man  may  be  an  oppressor  or  a  great  sinner.  To 
praise  him  in  such  circumstances  is  unlawful.  The  Prophet  said  : 
When  a  great  sinner  is  praised,  God  then  becomes  displeased. 
Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said  :  He  who  wishes  long  life  of  an 
oppressor,  disobeys  God  in  His  world.  The  praised  man  gets  two 
harms  by  the  praise.  It  gives  pride  in  him  and  he  feels  self  praise. 
These  two  things  are  ruinous.  Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said :  One  day 
Hazrat  Omar  was  seated  with  a  stick  among  the  people,  when  a 
man  Zarat-b-Munzer  came  there.  One  of  those  present  said.  This 
man  is  the  chief  of  Rabiah  tribe.  Hazrat  Omar  and  those  around 
him  heard  it.  When  he  came  near  Hazrat  Omar,  he  was 
brandishing  his  stick  over  his  head.  At  this  the  man  said  :  O 
Commander  of  the  Faithful,  what  sort  of  treatment  is  this  ?  He 
said  :  Have  you  not  heard  what  that  man  said  about  you  ?  He 
said:  Yes,  I  have  heard  it.  Hazrat  Omar  said  :  I  feared  that  praise

124

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

may  grow  in  you  a  sense  of  pride.  For  that  I  destroyed  it  by  the 
show  of  strike  by  this  stick.124

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

may  grow  in  you  a  sense  of  pride.  For  that  I  destroyed  it  by  the 
show  of  strike  by  this  stick.

(2)  The  second  harm  is  that  when  a  man  praises  another,  the 
latter  becomes  pleased  and  finds  solace  and  as  such  gives  up 
self-improvement,  as  he  understand  that  he  has  reached  the  limit 
of  progress.  He  who  understands  that  he  has  got  faults,  tries  for 
improvement  of  his  character.  For  this  rason,  the  Prophet  said  : 
You  have  severed  his  neck.  If  he  possesses  it,  he  will  not  get 
salvation.  The  Prophet  said :  If  you  praise  a  man  in  his  face,  think 
that  you  are  passing  sharp  knife  round  his  neck.  The  Prophet  said 
:  It  is  better  to  attack  a  man  with  sharp  sword  than  to  praise  a  man 
before  his  face.  Hazrat  Omar  said :  Praise  is  like  murdered  as  the 
murdered  person  is  saved  from  the  responsibility  of  actions. 
Praise  grows  idleness  or  self-praise  and  pride.  Both  are 
destructive  like  murder.If  the  prasier  and  the  praised  are  saved  from  these  harms 
then  there  is  no  fault  in  praise.  For  this  reason,  the  Prophet 
praised  his  companions.  He  said  about  Hazrat  Abu  Bakr  :  If  the 
faith  of  Abu  Bakr  is  measured  with  the  faith  of  the  people  of  the 
world,  his  faith  will  be  heavier,  he  said  regarding  Hazrat  Omar : 
If  I  was  not  sent  as  a  Prophet,  Omar  would  have  been  sent  as  a 
Prophet.  By  this  praise,  they  did  not  become  proud.  The  Prophet 
said  :  I  am  the  leader  of  the  children  of  Adam  and  there  is  no  boast 
in  it.  In  other  words,  I  am  not  telling  it  out  of  pride.  When  the 
people  once  were  praising  a  dead  man,  the  Prophet  said :  He  is  fit 
to  receive  praise.  The  sage  Mozahed  said  :  There  are  friends  for 
the  children  of  Adam  from  the  angels.  When  any  Muslim 
mentions  about  the  good  works  of  another  Muslim,  the  angels 
says  :  O  son  of  Adam,  keep  your  mysteries  of  secrets  secret,  be 
pleased  with  your  affairs  and  praise  God  who  has  kept  your 
hidden  things  secret.

DUTIES  OF  THE  PRAISED  MAN:  The  praised  man  must 
save  himself  from  pride,  self-praise  and  idlences.  He  will  not  be 
able  to  save  himself  from  these  evils  unless  he  thinks  about  his 
ultimate  end  and  the  result  of  his  actions.  The  praiser  does  not 
know  what  the  praised  man  knows  about  him.  The  former  will 
surely  not  praise  him  if  he  knows  of  him  what  he  knows  of 
himself.  The  Prophet  said  :  Throw  dust  at  the  face  of  the  praisers. 
The  sage  Sufiyan-b-  Aynah  said  :  He  who  knows  himself  cannot 
beinjured  by  praise.  When  a  religious  man  was  praised,  he  said  :

Vol-IH  Greed  and  sexual  passion  125Vol-IH  Greed  and  sexual  passion  125

O  God,  this  servant  of  yours  has  come  to  me  with  your  hatred.  I 
cite  you  as  a  witness  over  his  hatred.  Another  religious  man  was 
praised  and  he  said  i  OGod,  three  people  do  not  know  me.  Once 
Hazrat  Ali  was  praised  and  he  said:  O  God,  forgive  me  for  what 
they  say.  Make  me  better  than  what  they  think  about  me.  Once 
man  praised  Hazrat  Omar  who  said :  You  are  ruining  me.(19)  Carelessness,  Another  harm  of  tongue  is  carelessness  or 
inattention  in  words,  specially  when  they  are  uttered  in 
connection  with  religious  affairs.  The  Prophet  said  :  Let  none 
among  you  say — what  God  wishes,  and  what  you  wish,  rather 
say — what  God  wishes  and  then  what  you  wish.  Hazrat  Ibn 
Abbas  said  :  One  man  came  to  to  the  Prophet  and  said  in  the 
midst  of  his  talk — what  God  wishes  and  you  wish.  The  Prophet 
said  :  Have  you  made  me  equal  to  God  ?  Rather  say  :  What  the 
Almighty  God  wishes.  The  Prophet  said :  God  has  prohibited  you 
to  take  oath  by  the  name  of  your  father,  let  him  take  oath  in  the 
name  of  God,  or  else  let  him  remain  silent.  Hazrat  Omar  said  : 
Leave  them,  I  did  not  take  oath.  The  Prophet  said  :  Let  nobody 
among  you  say :  My  servant,  my  maid-servant,  as  you  are  all  the 
servants  of  God  and  all  your  women  are  the  maidservants  of 
God.  Rather  says  :  Myboy,  my  girl,  my  son,  my  daughter.  The 
servants  and  maid-servants  shall  not  say  :  My  Lord,  rather  they 
should  say :  My  chief.  All  are  the  servants  of  God  and  God  is  your 
Lord.  The  Prophet  said  :  Never  call  a  great  sinner — My  chief', 
because  if  he  becomes  your  chief,  you  will  incur  displeasure  of 
your  Lord.  The  Prophet  said :  He  who  says :  I  am  free  from  Islam, 
he  becomes  as  he  has  said.  If  he  tells  a  lie,  he  will  not  be  able  to 
return  to  Islam  safely.  For  this  reason,  the  Prophet  said  :  He  who 
remains  silent  has  got  salvation.(20)  Questions  of  ordinary  men  about  God.  Another  evil  of 
tongue  is  the  questions  of  the  ordinary  men  about  God,  His 
attributes.  His  words  and  His  tongue.  These  attributes  of  God  are 
of  two  kinds — uncreated  and  created.  It  is  the  duty  of  ordinary 
men  to  follow  what  is  in  the  Quran  about  commands  and 
prohibitions.  To  understand  the  Quran  is  difficult  to  many.  The 
Prophet  said  :  Leave  to  me  what  I  left  for  you,  because  your 
predecessors  were  destroyed  because  of  their  excessive 
questions  and  owing  to  actue  differences  with  their  prophets. 
Give  up  what  I  prohibited  you.  Translate  into  action  as  far  as  you 
can  what  I  ordered  you  to  do.  Hazrat  Anas  said :  The  people  once

126

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III126

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

asked  the  Prophet  many  questions  to  which  he  was  enraged. 
Then  he  got  up  on  the  pulpit  and  said  :  You  are  questioning  me, 
but  don't  ask  except  what  I  informed  you.  A  man  came  to  him 
and  asked  :  Who  is  my  father  ?  He  said :  Your  father  is  Huzaifah. 
Then  two  young  men  came  and  asked  :  O  Prophet  of  God,  who  is 
our  father  ?  He  said  :  Your  father  is  one  in  whose  name  you  are 
called.  Another  man  got  up  and  said  :  Shall  I  enter  Paradise  or 
Hell  ?  He  said :  You  will  enter  Hell,  and  not  in  Paradise.  When  the 
people  saw  that  the  Prophet  was  enraged,  they  did  not  ask  him 
further  questions.  Hazrat  Omar  then  came  to  his  side  and  said  : 
We  are  pleased  with  God  as  Lord,  Islam  as  religion  and 
Muhammad  as  a  Prophet.  Hazrat  said.  O  Omar,  sit  down,  may 
God  shower  blessings  on  you.  What  you  have  known  is 
sufficient.  The  Prophet  prohibited  arguments  and  excessive 
questions.  The  Prophet  said  :  Soon  the  people  will  put  many 
questions,  even  they  will  ask :  God  created  the  creatures, but  who 
created  God  ?  When  they  will  ask  it,  say  :  God  is  one,  God  is 
above  wants  etc.  (Chapter  Ikhlas).  Then  throw  spit  by  your  left 
side  thrice  and  seek  rebuge  from  the  devil.  Excessive  questions 
were  prohibited  in  the  story  of  Moses  and  Khiza.  So  the  questions 
of  ordinary  men  about  the  subtle  matter  of  religion  are  th  great 
objects  of  danger.  Their  discussions  about  the  language  of  the 
Quran  is  like  the  condition  of  one  to  whom  the  king  wrote  a  letter 
informing  him  many  necessary  things  but  instead  of  paying 
attention  to  these  things,  he  began  to  lose  time  in  seeing  whether 
the  paper  of  the  letter  is  new  or  old,  for  which  he  will  surely  be 
punished.  Similarly  the  ordinary  men  give  up  many  necessary 
things  but  question  about  many  unnecessary  and  subtle  things 
about  God  and  His  attributes.CHAPTER  V

ANGER,  HATRED  AND  ENVY

Anger  is  a  fleak  of  fire.  It  arises  from  the  fire  of  God  in  heart. 
It  is  being  burnt  like  fire  in  the  lowest  part  of  the  heart  like  fire 
under  husk.  The  hidden  pride  in  the  mind  of  every  oppressor  and 
disobedient  man  is  disclosed  by  anger  like  the  fire  that  comes  out 
by  the  rubbing  of  iron  against  stone.  It  appears  to  those  who  see 
with  the  light  of  sure  faith.  The  conduct  of  the  devil  has  found  a 
place  in  the  man  in  whom  anger  has  found  a  place,  as  God  says: 
The  devil  said:  you  have  made  me  from  fire  and  made  him  from 
earth-7:llQ.  Earth  is  steady  and  calm  and  fire  is  unsteady, 
up-rising  and  burning.  The  result  of  anger  is  hatred  on  account  of 
which  a  man  is  ruined.HARMS  OF  ANGER:  God  says:  God  has  created  in  the 
hearts  of  those  who  disbelieve  the  evil  of  ignorance.  He  sent 
down  His  solace  upon  His  Prophet  and  the  believers.  God 
rebuked  the  unbelievers  as  they  expressed  indignation  of  anger 
arising  out  of  untrue  matters.  He  praised  the  believers,  as  God 
sent  down  upon  them  solace  and  consolation.  One  day  a  man 
came  to  the  Prophet  and  said:  O  Prophet  of  God,  give  me  order  to 
do  a  short  auction.  He  said:  Don't  be  angry.  Hazrat  Ibn  Omar 
said:  I  asked  the  Prophet:  Give  me  a  short  advice  by  dint  of  which 
I  may  hope  for  good.  He  said:  Don't  be  angry.  Once  Hazrat 
Abdullah-b-Omar  asked  the  Prophet:  What  thing  will  save  me 
from  the  wrath  of  God?  The  prophet  said:  Don't  express  your 
anger.  The  Prophet  once  asked  some  of  his  companions:  Whom 
do  you  consider  among  you  a  strong  man?  They  said:  That  is  not 
so.  He  is  the  strong  man  who  can  control  his  passion  at  the  time  of 
anger.  The  Prophet  said:  He  who  has  got  physical  strength  is  not 
a  stronger  man  than  one  who  can  control  his  passion.  He  said: 
God  keeps  the  secret  affairs  of  a  man  secret  who  can  swallow 
anger.  Hazrat  Solaiman  said:  O  dear  son,  save  yourself  from 
excessive  anger,  as  excessive  anger  makes  the  heart  of  a  patient 
man  light.  God  says:  He  (Yahya)  is  a  chief  and  of  pure  character. 
Akramah  explained  this  verse  by  saying  that  'chief'  is  the  man 
who  cannot  be  defeated  by  anger.  Abu  Darda'a  said:  I  asked:  O 
Messenger  of  God,  teach  me  such  an  action  which  can  take  me  to 
Paradise.  He  said:  Don't  be  angry,  prophet  Ihya  told  Jesus  Christ: 
Don't  be  angry.  He  said:  I  can't  help  but  be  angry.  I  am  merely  a

128

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III128

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

man.  Then  the  Prophet  Ihya  said:  Don't  amass  wealth.  Jesus 
Christ  said:  yes,  it  may  be  done.  The  Prophet  said:  Anger 
destroys  faith  as  condiment  destroys  honey  He  also  said:  If  a  man 
gets  angry,  he  roams  near  Hfill.  Once  a  man  asked  the  Prophet: 
What  thing  is  hard?  He  said:  Anger.  He  said:  What  thing  will 
keep  me  away  from  God's  wrath?  He  said:  Don't  express  anger. 
Jafar-b-  Muhammad  said:  Anger  is  the  key  to  every  evil.  A  certain 
Ansar  said:  Anger  is  the  key  to  every  evil.  A  certain  Ansar  said: 
Anger  is  the  root  of  foolishness  and  its  guide.

Muzahed  said:  Iblis  said:  The  son  of  Adam  cannot  baffle  me 
in  three  matters.  (1)  When  any  man  is  intoxicated,  we  fix  a  rope  in 
his  nose  and  direct  him  to  whichever  direction  we  like  and  make 
him  do  whatever  we  like.  (2)  When  he  gets  angry,  he  utters  such 
words  which  are  unknown  to  him  and  does  such  works  for  which 
he  becomes  afterwards  repentant.  (3)  When  he  is  miserly  with 
such  a  thing  which  is  under  his  control,  we  engage  him  in  such  a 
work  which  is  beyond  his  strength.“A  wise  man  said:  Appease  your  anger  as  it  may  lead  to  the 
disgrace  of  explanation.  Hazrat  Abdullah-b-Masud  said:  Look  at 
the  patience  of  a  man  at  the  time  of  his  anger  and  at  this  trust  at 
the  time  of  his  greed.  If  he  does  not  get  angry,  what  is  your 
necessity  of  knowing  about  his  patiences?  When  he  does  not 
have  greed,  what  is  your  necessity  of  knowing  about  his  trust? 
Caliph  Omar-b-Abdul  Aziz  wrote  to  one  of  his  governors:  Don't 
punish  at  the  time  of  your  anger.  When  you  get  angry  at  any 
man,  keep  him  in  detention.  When  your  anger  is  appeased,  give 
him  punishment  in  proportion  to  his  crime.  Don't  inflict  on  him 
more  than  15  stripes  at  thee  time  of  punishing  him.

Ali-b-Zayed  said:  A  man  of  the  Quraish  used  harsh  words 
to  Caliph  Omar-b-Abdul  Aziz  who  remained  silent  for  a  long 
time  and  then  said:  You  wish  that  the  devil  rouses  in  me  the  pride 
of  the  Caliph  and  I  treat  you  so  rudely  that  you  can  take  revenge 
tomorrow  on  me.  A  certain  wise  man  said  to  this  son,  O  dear  son, 
wisdom  does  not  remain  safe  at  the  time  of  anger,  just  as  life 
does  not  remain  safe  in  a  burning  fire.  He  who  gets  least  angry  is 
the  most  intelligent  among  them.  If  anger  concerns  any  matter  of 
the  next  world,  it  is  called  wisdom  and  patience,  and  if  it 
concerns  any  matter  of  this  world,  it  is  called  deceit,  because  the 
people  say  that  anger  is  the  enemy  of  intellect  and  anger  is  a 
danger.  Hazrat  Omar  used  to  say  in  his  sermon:  He  who  is  safe

Vol-III

Anger,  hatred  and  envy

129Vol-III

Anger,  hatred  and  envy

129

from  amongst  you  grow  greed  passion  and  anger,  gets  salvation. 
Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said:  The  signs  of  a  Muslim  are  the 
following  -He  will  have  strength  in  religion,  he  will  firmly 
determine  in  easy  matters,  he  will  bring  faith  in  sure  matters,  he 
will  have  knowledge  of  patience,  he  will  pay  his  dues,  he  will 
adopt  middle  course  in  riches,  he  will  have  patience  at  the  time  of 
dangers.  His  anger  will  not  prevail  over  him,  his  excitement  will 
not  throw  him  into  danger,  his  passion  will  not  prevail  over  him, 
his  belly  will  not  disgrace  him,  his  greed  will  not  make  him  light, 
his  intention  will  not  make  him  mean,  he  will  help  the  oppressed 
and  show  kindness  to  the  weak,  he  will  not  be  extravagrnt  in 
expense,  he  will  not  misuse  his  money,  he  will  pardon  if 
oppressed,  he  will  pardon  if  an  illiterate  man  gives  him  trouble 
and  the  people  will  remain  safe  at  his  hands.

A  certain  Prophet  told  his  followers:  Is  there  anybody 
among  you  who  can  promise  with  me  that  he  will  never  get 
angry?  In  that  case,  he  will  gain  my  rank  and  will  reside  with  me 
in  Paradise  and  he  will  be  my  successor.  A  young  man  got  up  and 
said:  He  observed  this  during  his  life  time.  When  the  Prophet 
died,  the  young  man  became  his  successor  and  was  named 
Jul-Kifl  meaning  he  fulfilled  his  promise  truly. 
Wahab-b-Monsabbah  said:  There  are  four  elements  of  infidelity  - 
Anger,  passion,  greed  and  foolishness.WHAT  IS  ANGER?  Know,  O  dear  readers,  that  the  Merciful 
God  first  created  an  animal  in  such  a  way  that  for  some  of  his 
internal  and  external  ingredients,  his  destruction  was  inevitable. 
Then  God  gave  him  such  weapons  for  a  fixed  time  as  can  save 
him  from  that  destruction.  The  internal  ingredients  with  which 
his  body  was  formed  are  heat  and  cold  which  He  set  up  against 
each  other.  In  order  to  save  himself  from  the  external  dangers,  he 
has  been  given  weapons,  one  of  which  is  anger.  It  arises  from  his 
mind  and  removes  the  destructive  elements.  So  God  created  the 
passion  of  anger  from  fire  and  kept  it  concealed  in  human  mind. 
Whenever  anything  stands  against  his  wishes,  anger  is  enhanced 
in  such  a  way  that  the  blood  of  heart  spreads  through  all  of  his 
veins  and  as  a  result  his  eyes  become  red  and  his  face  reddish. 
The  birth  place  of  anger  is  heart.  The  food  of  anger  is  revenge  and 
greed.  Anger  is  not  appeased  without  these  two  things.

THREE  KINDS  OF  MEN:  Mankind  is  divided  into  three 
classes  according  to  the  degree  of  anger-(l)  one  class  have  got  no

130

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-lIITHREE  KINDS  OF  MEN:  Mankind  is  divided  into  three 
classes  according  to  the  degree  of  anger-(l)  one  class  have  got  no

130

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-lII

anger,  (2)  one  class  have  got  extreme  anger  and  (3)  one  class  have 
got  moderate  anger.  Regarding  the  first  class  off  men,  they  are 
not  good  for  absence  of  anger  in  them.  These  persons  are  called 
man  of  impotence.  Imam  Shafeyi  said:  He  whose  anger  cannot  be 
aroused  is  an  ass.  He  who  has  lost  his  strength  of  anger  by  equally  is 
a  man  of  very  short  intellect.  God  praised  the  companions  of  the 
Prophet  They  are  hard  upon  the  unbelievers,  but  sympathetic 
towards  one  another.  God  said  to  His  Prophet  Fight  with  the 
unbelievers  and  the  hypocrites  and  be  hard  on  them.9:73  Q.  This 
hard  treatment  is  the  result  of  excitement  of  anger.

(2)  Excessive  anger  is  harmful.  This  prevails  upon  good 
qualities.  Such  a  man  then  goes  out  of  intellect,  religion  and  divine 
service.  He  then  loses  his  sense  of  right  and  wrong  and  the  power  of 
right  and  good  thinking.  He  then  loses  his  power  of  freedom.  He 
becomes  then  a  man  afflicted  with  danger.  The  cause  of  excessive 
anger  is  an  inborn  nature  and  also  the  result  of  habit.  There  are  men 
who  remain  naturally  prepared  to  get  angry  soon.  They  have  got  a 
sense  of  anger  in  their  in  bom  nature.  The  Prophet  said:  The 
coldness  of  nature  appeases  anger  and  breaks  up  its  nature.ANGER  ARISING  OUT  OF  HABIT:  There  is  such  man 
who  says:  I  shall  not  bear  any  kind  of  deceit.  I  won't  bear  any 
harsh  word.  He  who  hears  it  helps  him  in  rousing  his  anger. 
Thus  when  his  anger  is  aroused,  he  becomes  blind  and 
becomes  deaf  to  advises  and  connsels.  The  man  of  thoughts  is 
brave.  Anger  encompasses  the  man  of  thoughts  as  the  steam  of 
heated  blood  rises  up  to  his  brain.  Sometimes  it  covers  even 
the  mind  of  sight.  As  a  result,  the  eye  becomes  blood  and  to 
him  the  whole  world  becomes  dark.  Fire  bums  in  him.  The 
light  of  intellect  is  extinguished:  As  a  result,  his  figure 
changes,  his  eyes  become  red,  the  hole  of  nose  becomes 
changed.  If  he  could  have  seen  his  body  patiently  at  the  time 
of  anger,  he  would  have  become  ashamed  of  it  he  could  have 
brought  his  anger  under  control.  The  sign  of  anger  upon  his 
tongue  is  to  use  abusive  languages,  upon  his  body  attack, 
assault  and  murder.  He  attacks  any  man  who  comes  in  front. 
His  opponents  flee  from  him.  Out  of  wrath,  he  cuts  his  cloths, 
slaps  his  own  face,  beats  the  ground  with  his  hands  and  feet, 
sometimes  runs  like  a  wild  man  and  breaks  plates  and  utensils. 
The  effect  of  wrath  on  heart  is  hatred,  envy,  to  be  happy  over 
his  adversary's  sorrows  and  sorry  over  his  fortunes.

Vol-III

131

Anger,  hatred  and  envyVol-III

131

Anger,  hatred  and  envy

The  Prophet  said:  Sa'ad  has  got  wrath.  I  have  got  more  wrath 
than  him.  God's  wrath  is  more  than  mine.  He  said:  He  who  is  firm 
in  religion  among  my  followers  is  good.  God  says:  Let  not 
kindness  hold  you  back  in  the  religion  of  God.  He  who  has  got  no 
wrath  is  unable  to  bear  hardships  for  the  progress  of  soul.  Anger 
which  rises  at  the  hint  of  intellect  and  religion  is  good.  Intellect 
arouses  anger  where  it  is  necessary  and  appeases  anger  where 
patience  is  necessary.  The  best  way  is  to  keep  anger  on  the  line  of 
moderation.  God  enjoins  man  to  stand  on  this  border  line.  The 
Prophet  said:  The  middle  way  is  the  best  of  all  actions.  So  the  two 
extremes  must  be  avoided  not  to  be  angry  at  all  and  to  be 
excessively  angry.  This  is  the  straight  path.

IS  IT  POSSIBLE  TO  ROOT  OUT  ANGER?  Man  loves 
something  and  dislikes  something.  So  there  is  no  alternative  for 
him  but  to  be  angry.  Something  occurs  according  to  his  nature 
and  something  opposite  to  his  nature.  What  agree  with  his  natrue 
is  loved  by  him  and  what  disagrees  with  his  nature  is  disliked  by 
him.  When  an  object  of  love  is  snatched  away  from  him,  he 
becomes  angry  and  when  a  disliking  thing  is  given  to  him,  he 
becomes  angry.  So  there  are  three  kinds  of  things  which  a  man 
loves.(1)  What  man  loves  first  is  his  constant  necessary 
things-food,  dress,  habitation,  physical  health  etc.  If  any  man 
wants  to  strike  your  body,  it  is  natural  for  you  to  get  angry  at 
him.  If  anybody  wants  to  take  your  cloth  or  make  you  naked,  it  is 
natural  for  you  to  get  angry  at  him.  (2)  A  man  loves  also  such 
things  of  which  he  has  got  no  necessity,  such  as  fruits,  abundant 
riches,  servants  and  birds  and  beasts  etc.  Gold  and  silver  are 
loved  and  hoarded.  If  any  one  seals  them,  it  is  but  natural  to  get 
angry  at  him.  (3)  The  objects  of  love  of  the  third  kind  are  special 
things  for  special  people,  such  as  books  for  the  learned  man.  He 
loves  them.  If  anybody  takes  away  his  books,  be  becomes  angry 
at  him.  Such  is  the  condition  with  the  implements  of  expert 
industrialists  and  businessmen.  The  Prophet  said  with  regard  to 
the  objects  of  love  of  necessary  things:  He  who  rises  at  morn  with 
safety  at  his  dwelling  place,  with  his  body  sound  and  with 
provisions  of  his  day,  has  been  given  as  it  were  the  world  with  its 
treasures.  Nobody  shall  get  angry  except  for  the  three  kinds  of 
things  enumerated  above.  With  regard  to  these  three  kinds  of 
things,  we  shall  narrate  below  about  the  control  of  anger.

132

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III132

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

Regarding  the  first  kind  of  absolutely  necessary  things,  anger 
should  be  kept  under  control  and  should  be  expressed  according 
to  the  rules  of  Shariat.  To  root  out  anger  from  heart  is  impossible 
and  unnatural.  Regarding  the  second  kind  of  necessary  things,  it 
is  possible  to  get  out  of  anger  by  practice  and  habit  as  it  is 
possible  to  get  out  of  heart  love  of  unnecessary  things.  This  can 
be  done  in  the  following  way.  Think  that  grave  is  your  dwelling 
house  and  the  next  world  is  your  permanent  abode,  this  world  is 
a  resting  place  or  a  bridge  over  whichjjyou  shall  have  to  walk  for 
the  next  world.  So  take  what  is  absolutely  necessary  with  you  to 
cross  the  bridge  and  leave  what  is  not  necessary.  So  you  shall 
have  to  leave  the  world  and  it  is  necessary  to  give  up  its  love. 
Anger  comes  out  of  love  and  if  such  habits  are  formed,  anger  can 
be  brought  under  control.  The  prophet  used  to  have  anger  but  he 
used  to  say:  O  God,  I  am  only  man,  I  have  got  anger  as  a  man  has 
got.  Take  my  anger  as  a  blessings,  purification  and  nearness 
from  me  to  any  Muslim  whom  I  rebuked,  curse  or  assault. 
Abdullah-b-Amr  said:  O  Messenger  of  God,  I  am  writing  it 
although  you  said  it  out  of  anger,  he  said:  By  One  who  sent  me 
with  truth,  write  also  this  that  nothing  but  truth  arises  out  of  my 
tongue.  The  Prophet  did  not  say:  I  have  got  not  wrath.  Rather  he 
said:  Anger  cannot  take  me  out  of  the  limit  of  truth.  Jn  other 
words,  I  donot  do  it  according  to  the  behest  of  anger.Once  Hazrat  Ayesha  got  angry.  The  Prophet  said  to  her: 
What  is  the  matter  with  you?  Hazrat  Ayesha  said:  Does  not  devil 
come  to  you?  He  said:  Yes,  he  comes,  but  as  I  invoked  God  He 
made  me  prevail  over  him  and  he  submitted  to  me.  He  does  not 
enjoin  me  but  good.  He  did  not  say:  The  devil  does  not  come  to 
me  (devil  means  here  anger).  Hazrat  Ali  said:  The  Prophet  did 
not  get  angry  for  any  action  of  the  world.  When  any  true  matter 
charmed  him,  nobody  knew  it  and  nobody  got  up  to  take  revenge 
for  his  anger.  He  got  angry  for  truth.  This  was  found  in  his 
actions.  Once  a  man  rebuked  Hazrat  Solaiman  to  which  he  said:  If 
my  virtues  become  less  in  the  scale,  I  am  more  heinous  than  your 
rebuked.  If,  however,  my  virtues  become  heavy  in  the  scale,  I 
won't  suffer  harm  by  your  rebuked.  He  uttered  it  as  the  affairs  of 
the  next  world  kept  him  engaged.  Once  a  man  rebuked  Hazrat 
Abu  Bakr  to  which  he  said:  What  God  has  kept  secret  from  you 
out  of  my  faults  is  more  heinous  than  your  rebuked.  A  woman 
rebuked  Malek-b-Dinar  as  hypocrite.  He  said  to  the  woman: 
Nobody  recognised  me  more\ljhan  you.  That  did  not  raise  his

Vol-III

133

Anger,  hatred  and  envy

an^er.  Once  a  man  rebuked  the  sage  Shibli  to  which  he  said:  May 
Got^i  pardon  you  if  you  have  spoken  the  truth.  May  God  pardon 
you  if  you  have  spoken  a  lie.an^er.  Once  a  man  rebuked  the  sage  Shibli  to  which  he  said:  May 
Got^i  pardon  you  if  you  have  spoken  the  truth.  May  God  pardon 
you  if  you  have  spoken  a  lie.

These  examples  show  that  the  sages  did  not  get  angry  as  they 
were  engaged  in  the  affairs  of  the  next  world.  There  are  three 
causes  of  not  getting  angry-(l)  the  first  cause  is  that  the  mind  is 
more  engaged  in  more  necessary  things,  (2)  the  second  cause  is 
that  the  mind  is  immerged  in  Tauhid,  (3)  and  the  third  cause  is 
that  he  knows  that  God  does  not  love  anger  and  so  more  love  for 
God  extinguishes  the  fire  of  anger.  This  is  possible  when  the  love 
of  the  world  is  ousted  from  heart.CAUSES  OF  ANGER  AND  ITS  MEDICINE:  Know,  O  dear 
readers,,  that  you  have  known  that  the  medicine  of  a  disease  is  to 
remove  the  root  cause  of  that  disease.  It  is  necessary  to  know  the 
root  cause  anger.  Jesus  Christ  was  once  asked:  What  thing  is 
difficult?  He  said:  God's  wrath.  Prophet  Ihya  then  said:  What 
thing  takes  near  the  wrath  of  God?  He  said:  Anger.  Ihya  asked 
him:  What  thing  grows  and  increases  anger?  Jesus  Christ  said: 
Pride,  prestige,  hope  for  honour  and  haughtiness.  The  causes 
which  grow  anger  are  self-conceit,  self-praise,  jests  and  ridicule, 
argument,  treachery,  too  much  greed  for  to  much  wealth  and 
name  and  fame.  If  these  evils  are  united  in  a  person,  his  conduct 
becomes  bad  and  he  cannot  escape  from  anger.  So  these  things 
should  bee  removed  by  their  opposite  things.  Self-praise  is  to  be 
removed  by  modesty.  Pride  is  to  be  removed  by  knowing  one's 
own  origin  and  birth,  greed  is  to  be  removed  by  remaining 
satisfied  with  necessary  things,  miserliness  by  charity.  The 
Prophet  said:  A  strong  man  is  not  he  who  defeats  his  adversary 
by  wrestle.  But  a  strong  man  is  he  who  controls  himself  at  the 
time  of  anger.

We  are  describing  below  the  medicines  of  anger  after  one  get 
angry.  The  medicine  is  a  mixture  of  knowledge  and  action  The 
medicine  based  on  knowledge  is  of  six  kinds.

(1)  The  first  medicine  of  knowledge  is  to  think  over  the 
rewards  and  punishments  of  appeasing  anger  that  have  come 
from  the  verses  of  Quran  and  sayings  of  the  Prophet.  Your  hope 
for  getting  rewards  of  appeasing  anger  will  restrain  you  to  take 
revenge.  Malek-b-Anas  said:  Hazrat  Omar  once  was  enraged 
upon  a  person  and  ordered  him  to  be  assaulted.  Then  I  said:  O

134

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III134

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

Commander  of  the  Faithful,  pardon  him,  give  advice  for  good 
vvorks  and  keep  away  from  the  illiterate.  Hazrat  Omar  said:  Take 
pardon,  enjoin  good  and  keep  away  from  the  illiterate.  He  was  as 
if  thinking  about  this  verse.  It  was  his  habit  that  whenever  he 
released  the  man.  Once  Caliph  Omar-b-Abdul  Aziz  ordered  a 
man  to  be  whipped.  The  latter  recited  the  verse:  Those  who 
appease  anger  etc.  Then  he  said  to  his  slave:  Leave  him.

(2)  The  second  kind  of  medicine  based  on  knowledge  is  to 
fear  the  punishment  of  God  and  to  think  that  the  punishment  of 
God  upon  me  is  greater  than  my  punishment  upon  him.  If  I  take 
revenge  upon  this  man  for  anger,  God  will  take  revenge  upon  me 
on  the  Judgment  Day.  God  said  in  one  of  the  earlier  scriptures:  O 
son  of  Adam,  when  you  get  angry,  remember  Me.  When  I  get 
angry,  I  will  not  include  you  among  those  whom  I  will  destroy. 
One  day  the  Prophet  sent  a  servant  on  some  work.  When  he 
returned  very  late,  he  said  to  the  servant:  I  would  have  assaulted 
you  if  revenge  would  not  have  been  taken  for  it  in  the  next  world. 
It  is  said  that  there  was  a  king  among  the  children  of  Israil  who 
had  a  minister.  When  the  king  got  angry,  the  minister  showed 
him  a  writing  in  which  it  was  written:  Fear  death  and  remember 
the  next  world.  He  used  to  read  it  till  his  anger  was  appeased.(3)  The  third  kind  of  medicine  of  anger  based  on  knowledge 
is  to  take  precaution  about  punishment  of  enmity  and  revenge  on 
himself.  You  feel  joy  in  having  your  enemy  in  your  presence  in 
his  sorrows.  You  yourself  are  not  free  from  that  danger.  You  will 
fear  that  your  enemy  may  take  revenge  against  you  in  this  world 
and  in  the  next.  (4)  Another  kind  of  medicine  of  anger  based  on 
knowledge  is  to  think  about  the  ugly  face  of  the  angry  man 
which  is  just  like  that  of  a  ferocious  beast.  He  who  appeases 
anger  looks  like  a  sober  and  learned  man.  So  which  figure  do  you 
like  to  take-the  figure  of  a  beast  or  that  of  a  learned  man?  (5)  The 
sixth  mdicine  of  anger  based  on  knowledge  is  to  think  that  the 
devil  will  advise  you  saying:  You  will  be  weak  if  you  do  not  get 
angry.  Don't  listen  to  it.  (6)  The  sixth  medicine  is  to  think:  What 
reason  have  l  got  to  get  angry?  What  God  wished  has  occurred.

MEDINCINE  BASED  ON  ACTION:  When  you  get  angry, 
say:  I  seek  refuge  to  God  from  the  accursed  devil.  The  Prophet 
ordered  us  to  say  thus.  He  also  recited  this  at  the  time  of  his 
anger.  When  Ayesha  got  angry,  he  dragged  her  by  the  nose  and 
said:  O  dear  Ayesha,  say:  O  God,  you  are  the  Lord  of  my  Prophet

VoI-III

Anger,  hatred  and  envy

135

Muhammad,  forgive  my  sins  and  remove  the  anger  of  my  heart 
and  save  me  from  misguidance.  This  is  good.  (2)  If  anger  does  not 
go  by  this  means,  you  will  sit  down  if  you  are  standing,  lie  down 
if. you  are  sitting  and  come  near  earth,  as  you  have  been  created  of 
earth.  Thus  make  yourself  calm  like  the  earth.  The  caused  of 
wrath  is  heat  and  its  opposite  effect  is  to  lie  down  on  the  ground 
and  to  make  the  body  calm  and  cool.The  Prophet  said:  Anger  is  a  burning  coal.  It  bums  in  heart. 
Don't  you  see  your  eye-brows  wide  and  eyes  reddish?  So  when 
one  of  you  feels  like  that ,  let  him  sit  down  if  standing,  and  lie 
down  if  sitting.  If  still  anger  does  not  stop,  make  ablution  with 
cold  water  or  take  bath,  as  if  cannot  be  extinguished  without 
water.  The  Prophet  said:  When  anyone  of  you  gets  angry,  let  him 
make  ablution  with  water  as  anger  arises  out  of  fire.  In  another 
narration  anger  comes  from  the  devil  and  the  devil  is  made  of 
fire.  Fire  can  be  extinguished  by  water.  So  when  anybody 
amongst  you  gets  angry,  he  shall  make  ablution.  He  said:  When 
you  get  angry,  take  to  silence.  Hazrat  Abu  Hurairah  reported  that 
when  the  Prophet  got  angry,  he  sat  down  from  standing  position 
and  lay  down  from  sitting  position  and  then  his  wrath 
appeased.  Hazrat  said:  Become  careful,  anger  is  burning  coal  in 
the  mind  of  the  son  of  Adam.  Have  you  not  looked  at  his  reddish 
eyes  and  wide  eye-brows?  When  you  see  nay  of  it  signs,  let  him 
attach  his  face  to  earth.  He  hinted  at  prostration  by  this  and  said 
to  keep  the  most  honourable  place  among  the  limbs  attached  to 
the  earth  and  to  keep  it  calm.

It  has  been  reported  that  when  Hazrat  Omar  got  angry  one 
day,  he  wanted  cold  water  his  nose  therewith  and  said:  Anger 
comes  from  the  devil  and  water  removes  anger.  When 
Urwa-b-Muhammed  was  appointed  Governor  of  yemen,  Obay 
said  to  him:  When  you  get  angry,  look  to  the  heaven  above  and 
to  the  earth  below  and  consider  the  Creator  of  both  as  supreme.It  has  been  narrated  that  Abu  Zarr  said  to  a  man:  O  son  of  red 
mother  (son  of  a  maid  servant).  This  news  reached  the  Prophet 
who  said:  O  Abu  Zarr,  I  heard  that  you  have  back-bited  your 
brother  Muslim  mentioning  his  mother.  He  said:  Yes.  Abu  Zarr  at 
once  went  to  the  man  to  please  him  but  the  man  came  to  him 
before  and  tendered  salam.  This  news  reached  the  Propht  who 
said:  O  Abu  Zarr,  raise  up  your  head  up  wards  and  look  and  then 
know  that  you  are  not  better  than  a  red  or  a  black  man.

136

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-Ill

Superiority  is  acquired  only  by  action.  Then  he  said:  When  you 
get  angry,  sit  down  from  standing  posture  and  lie  down  straight 
from  sitting  posture.Vol-Ill

Superiority  is  acquired  only  by  action.  Then  he  said:  When  you 
get  angry,  sit  down  from  standing  posture  and  lie  down  straight 
from  sitting  posture.

MERITS  OF  APPEASEMENT  OF  ANGER:  God  says:  Those 
who  appease  their  anger  etc.  He  praised  them.  The  Prophet  said: 
God  lifts  punishment  from  one  who  appeases  anger.  God  pardons 
the  faults  of  one  who  admits  his  guilts  to  his  Lord.  God  conceals  the 
hidden  faults  of  one  who  controls  his  tongue.  The  Prophet  said:  he 
who  comes  victorious  over  has  passions  at  the  time  of  anger  is 
strong  among  you.  He  who  pardons  having  power,  is  more  patient 
among  you.  He  said:  Whose  appeases  anger  though  having  will  to 
translate  his  anger  into  action,  God  will  fill  up  his  heart  with 
contentment  on  the  Resurrection  Day.  In  another  narration-God 
will  fill  up  his  heart  with  belief  and  peace.  He  also  said:  Nobody 
swallows  a  more  bitter  pill  than  that  of  anger  for  the  pleasure  of 
God.  He  said:  There  is  a  special  door  of  Hell  through  which  no 
sinner  other  than  one  who  gets  angry  illegally  will  enter.  The 
Prophet  said:  Who  digests  anger  having  power  to  translate  it  into 
action,  God  will  tell  him  to  select  any  Hur  in  presence  of  all  His 
creatures.  He  said:  The  drought  of  anger  a  man  drinks  is  dear  to 
God .  God  fills  up  his  heart  wi  th  fai  th  who  digests  \t*WISE-SAYINGS:  He  who  fears  God  cannot  commit  sin  by 
his  anger.  He  who  fears  God,  cannot  do  what  he  likes.  If  he  would 
not  have  been  such,  things  would  have  turned  otherwise. 
Luqman  advised  his  son.  O  dear  son,  don't  mark  the  brilliance  of 
your  face  by  begging.  Don't  take  revenge  of  your  anger  by  the 
actions  of  your  hatred.  Take  account  of  your  honour,  your 
passion  will  then  do  you  benefit.  Ayub  said:  Patience  of  one 
moment  removes  many  evils.  Sufiyan  Saori,  Abu  Khuzaa  and 
Fuzail  were  discussing  once  about  renunciation  of  the  world. 
They  said  unanimously  that  patience  at  the  time  of  anger  and 
forbearance  at  the  time  of  greed  are  the  best  divine  service.  The 
faith  of  one  has  become  perfect  in  whom  there  are  these  three 
qualities'(l)  faith  in  God,  (2)  when  he  is  satisfied,  his  satisfaction 
does  not  arise  out  of  any  untrue  matter,  (3)  when  he  is  angry,  it 
cannot  take  him  out  of  truth.  When  he  has  got  strength,  he  does 
not  accept  what  is  not  for  him.

MERITS  OF  PATIENCE:  Know  O  dear  readers,  that  patience 
is  better  than  appeasement  of  anger,  as  patience  is  brought  with 
difficulty  in  appeasing  it.  To  have  patience  is  necessary  for

voi-in

Anger,  hatred  and  envy

137voi-in

Anger,  hatred  and  envy

137

controlling  anger  and  that  requires  great  efforts.  If  one  is 
accustomed  to  control  anger,  it  becomes  a  habit  and  then  anger 
does  not  arises.  If  it  arises,  he  does  not  feel  then  anger  does  not 
arise.  If  it  arises,  he  does  not  feel  much  difficulty  in  controlling  it. 
That  is  the  sign  of  the  perfection  of  intellect.  The  prophet  said: 
Knowledge  is  acquired  by  efforts.  He  who  seeks  good  deeds  gets 
them.  He  who  saves  himself  from  sin  is  secure.  It  appears  from 
above  that  it  is  by  efforts  that  patience  is  gained.  It  is  acquired 
like  the  acquisition  of  knowledge.  The  Prophet  said:  Search  for 
learning  and  with  it  peace  and  patience.  Treat  with  modesty  with 
the. persons  who  acquire  learning  and  from  whom  you  learn. 
Don't  be  included  within  the  haughty  learned  men;  if  so,  your 
ignorance  will  prevail  upon  your  patience.  The  Prophet  used  to 
say  in  his  invocation:  O  God,  make  me  fortunate  with 
knowledge,  adorn  me  with  patience,  honour  me  with  God-fear, 
and  increase  my  dignity  with  tranquillity.  The  Prophet  said: 
Search  for  high  rank  to  God.  The  companions  said:  O  Prophet  of 
God,  what  is  it?  He  said:  Join  the  tie  with  one  who  severs  it  from 
you.  Give  one  who  deprives  you.  The  Prophet  said:  There  are  five 
conducts  of  the  Prophets-shame,  patience,  taking  cupping, 
cleansing  feet  and  using  perfume.  The  Prophet  said:  A  Muslim 
gains  the  rank  of  fasting  all  the  year  and  praying  all  the  nights  by 
dint  of  patience.  A  man  is  enrolled  as  an  oppressor  and  haughty 
man,  but  his  power  does  not  extend  beyond  his  family  members.Hazrat  Abu  Hurairah  said:  A  man  came  to  the  Prophet  and 
said:  O  Prophet  of  God,  I  have  got  relatives  and  I  treat  well  with 
them  but  they  treat  evil  with  me.  I  do  them  good  but  they  do  me 
bad.  They  hold  me  in  contempt  but  I  keep  patience  at  it.  The 
Prophet  said:  If  you  stick  to  what  you  say,  you  are  filling  up  their 
bellies  as  it  were  with  the  fire  of  ashes  and  till  that  fire  remains  in 
them,  there  will  be  a  helper  from  God  for  you.  A  Muslim  prayed: 
O  God,  I  have  got  no  such  money  as  I  can  give  it  in  charity.  If  any 
man  mars  my  honour,  consider  it  as  my  charity.  God  then 
revealed  to  the  Prophet  of  the  age:  Tell  him,  I  have  forgiven  his 
sins.  The  Prophet  once  asked:  Cannot  anybody  amongst  you  like 
Abu  Zam  Zam?  The  companions  asked:  Who  is  Abu  Zam  Zam 
amongst  your  predecessors.  He  used  to  pray  at  dawn:  O  God,  I 
had  given  my  honour  to  one  who  opposes  me.  God  says:  When 
the  illiterate  call  them,  they  say  Salam.  Hazrat  Hasan  Basari 
explained  that  God  has  spoken  here  of  those  who  are  patient,  if 
they  are  held  in  contempt,  they  donot  hold  in  contempt.

138

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

VoI-III138

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

VoI-III

Hazrat  Ali-b-Ali  explained  the  word  'Howna'  ikn  the  verse 
'they  walk  upon  the  earth  with  modesty'  as  patience.  When  they 
pass  by  useless  talks,  they  pass  honorably.  Muzahed  said  in  its 
explanation-when  they  are  given  trouble,  they  forgive.  The 
Prophet  said:  O  God,  let  me  not  reach  the  age,  nor  let  the  age 
reach  me  in  which  the  people  will  not  follow  the  learned,  nor  be 
ashamed  to  be  patient,  whose  hearts  will  be  foreign  but  whose 
tongue  will  be  Arabic.  The  Prophet  said:  There  are  such  persons 
among  you  now  with  me  who  are  patient  and  forbearing,  then 
their  successors  and  then  their  successors.,  Don't  hold  different 
opinions  which  will  separate  your  hearts  and  be  careful  of  the 
dangers  of  markers.  The  Prophet  once  said  to  Ashaz  who  came  as 
a  deputation  to  the  Prophet:  O  Ashaz,  you  have  got  two  conducts 
which  God  and  his  Prophet  love.  He  said:  O  Messenger  of  God, 
my  parents  be  sacrificed  to  you,  what  are  these?  The  Prophet 
said:  patience  and  gravity.  These  two  conducts  God  gave  you. 
The  Prophet  said:  The  Merciful  God  loves  the  patient,  the 
shameful,  those  who  love  freedom,  those  who  refrain  from 
begging  even  though  they  have  large  family  members,  and  the 
God-fearing.  He  hates  the  hard-hearted,  the  beggars  with 
earnestness  and  the  fools.The  Prophet  said:  The  divine  service  of  a  man  who  has  got 
not  one  of  the  three  qualities  will  not  be  accepted-(l)  such 
God-fear  which  restrains  him  from  sinful  acts.  (2)  such  patience 
which  restrains  the  fools  (3)  and  such  conduct  with  which  he  can 
live  among  the  people.  The  Prophet  said:  When  God  will 
assemble  all  the  creatures  on  the  Judgment  Day,  a  proclaimer 
will  proclaim:  Where  are  the  persons  of  rank?  Then  a  party  will 
run  towards  Paradise  hurriedly:  When  questioned  about  the 
reason  by  angels,  they  will  say:  We  kept  patience  being 
oppressed,  we  pardoned  when  held  in  contempt.  Then  they  will 
be  said:  Enter  Paradise.  How  good  are  the  rewards  of  the  doers  of 
good.

Wise  sayings.  Hazrat  Omar  said:  Acquire  learning  and  seek 
peace  of  mind  and  patience  for  learning.  Hazrat  Ali  said:  There  is 
no  good  in  the  increase  of  wealth  and  children,  but  there  is  good 
in  the  increase  if  knowledge,  patience  and  not  to  take  boast  of 
divine  service.  When  you  will  do  good,  praise  God.  When  you 
will  commit  sin,  beg  forgiveness  of  God.  Hazrat  Hasan  Basari 
said:  Acquire  learning  and  adorn  it  with  gravity  and  patience.

Vol-IH  Anger,  hatred  and  envy  139Vol-IH  Anger,  hatred  and  envy  139

Aqsam-b-  Safi  said:  patience  is  the  root  of  wisdom  and  all  affairs. 
Hazrat  Abu  Sarda  said:  I  saw  the  people  as  leaves  without  thorns 
and  now  I  am  seeing  them  as  leaves  with  thorns.  If  you  are 
acquainted  with  them,  they  will  ridicule  you.  If  you  give  them 
up,  they  will  not  give  you  up.  They  asked:  What  treatment  shall 
we  mete  out  to  them?  He  said:  If  anybody  rebukes  you,  don't 
respond  to  him.  When  you  will  be  poor  on  the  Resurrection  Day, 
it  will  benefit  you.  Hazrat  Muwayiah  said:  A  man  will  not  reach 
the  rank  of  Ijtihad  or  giving  opinion  till  his  patience  will  not 
prevail  over  his  ignorance  and  forbearance  over  his  low  desires 
and  he  shall  not  be  able  to  reach  that  rank  without  the  strength  of 
learning.  Hazrat  Muwayiah  asked  Hazrat  Aham:  Who  is  the 
foremost  brave  man?  He  said:  One  who  removed  his  ignorance 
by  his  patience.  He  asked  him:  Who  is  the  most  charitable  man? 
He  said:  He  who  spends  his  world  for  good  of  his  religion.  God 
says:  So  that  the  enemity  which  exists  between  you  and  him  may 
be  removed  as  if  he  is  your  bosom  friend-41 :34Q.  Hazrat  Anas 
explained  this  verse  by  saying:  His  brother  rebuked  him.  Then  he 
said:  If  you  tell  lie,  God  may  forgive  you.  If  you  speak  the  truth, 
God  may  forgive  me.  Hazrat  Muwayuiah  said  to  Hazrat 
Abaabah-b-Eusof:  O  Ahabah,  how  have  you  become  chief  of 
your  people?  He  said:  O  Commander  of  the  Faithful,  I  keep 
patience  at  the  treatment  of  the  illiterate.  I  give  their  beggars 
charity  and  help  them  in  their  needs.  He  who  works  like  me  is 
like  me,  I  am  better  than  him.  Hazrat  Zainal  Abedin  said:  One 
day  a  man  rebuked  me.  I  gave  him  a  cloth  to  put  on  and  ordered 
one  thousand  dirhams  to  be  given  to  him.  Khalil-b-  Ahmed  said: 
It  is  well-known  thatif  you  do  benefit  to  a  man  who  ill-treats  with 
you,  such  thoughts  occur  in  the  mind  of  the  latter  that  prevent 
him  from  doing  further  ill-treatment  with  you.  Hazrat 
Wahab-b-Muhnabbah  said:  He  who  shows  kindness  is  shown 
kindness.  He  who  keeps  silent  remains  safe.  He  who  holds  in 
contempt  is  defeated.  He  who  makes  haste,  commits  mistakes. 
He  who  greeds  to  do  evil  deeds  does  not  remain  safe.  He  who 
does  not  give  up  quarrels  and  disputes  is  rebuked.  He  who  does 
not  hate  sins,  commits  sin.  He  who  hates  sins  becomes  skinless. 
He  who  follows  the  instructions  of  God,  is  safe.  He  who  takes 
God  as  friend,  becomes  the  friend  of  all.  He  who  does  not  invoke 
God.  falls  in  want.  He  who  does  not  fear  the  punishment  of  God, 
falls  into  disgrace.  He  who  invokes  the  help  of  God  gains 
upperhand.140

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

Once  a  man  asked  the  sage  Malek-b-Dinar:  I  heard  that  you 
have  back-bited  me.  He  said:  You  are  then  more  honourable  than 
me.  If  I  have  done  so,  I  presented  my  virtues  to  ydu.  The  wise 
Loqman  said:  Three  qualities  cannot  known  without  three  times-

(1)  A  man  of  patience  is  not  known  except  at  the  time  of  anger,

(2)  a  brave  man  is  not  known  except  at  the  time  of  battle,  (3)  and  a 
friend  is  not  known  except  at  the  time  of  need.

WHEN  REVENGE  PUNISHABLE?  Know,  O  dear  readers,  that 
to  treat  an  oppression  with  oppression  is  unlawful.  To  back-bite  for 
back-  biting,  to  spy  for  spying  and  to  rebuke  for  rebuking  are 
unlawful.  This  is  the  condition  with  all  sins.  But  to  take  revenge  or 
retaliation  is  allowed  according  to  the  rules  of  Shariat.  The  Prophet 
said:  If  anyman  back-bites  you  for  what  is  in  you,  don't  back-bite 
him  in  return  for  the  guilt  in  him.  The  Prophet  said:  If  two  men 
rebuke  each  .other,  the  sin  devolves  upon  one  who  first  rebukes  till 
the  rebuked  man  does  not  exceed  the  limit.  Two  mutual  rebukers 
are  devils,  accusing  each  other  falsely.  One  day  a  man  was  rebuking 
Hazrat  Abu  Bakr  who  remained  silent  for  long.  When  he  began  to 
take  revenge,  the  Prophet  got  up.  Hazrat  Abu  Bakr  said:  O 
Messenger  of  God,  you  were  silent  till  the  man  Was  rebuking  but 
when  I  began  to  take  revenge,  you  stood  up.  The  Prophet  said:  An 
angel  was  replaying  on  your  behalf  till  you  remained  silent,  but 
when  you  began  to  retaliate,  the  angel  went  away  and  the  devil 
came  i  n.  So  I  cannot  remain  where  the  devil  came  in.FOUR  CLASSES  OF  MEN  IN  THE  MATTER  OF  ANGER: 
(1)  Some  men  get  suddenly  angry  and  get  appeased  suddenly.  (2) 
Some  get  angry  late  and  their  anger  goes  late.  (3)  Some  get  angry 
late  and  it  ceases  soon.  This  is  best.  (4)  Some  get  angry  quickly 
and  it  ceases  late.  This  is  the  worst.  The  Prophet  said:  A  believer 
gets  angry  quickly  and  quickly  it  appeases.  Imam  Shafeyi  said: 
He  who  does  not  get  angry  if  it  is  aroused  is  an  ass.  He  who  is 
given  pleasure  but  is  not  pleased  is  a  devil.  The'  Prophet  said: 
Beware  men  have  been  created  of  different  natures.  Some  of  them 
get  angry  late  and  it  stops  quickly.  Some  of  them  get  angry 
quickly  and  it  stops  quickly.  One  compensates  the  other.  Some 
get  angry  quickly  and  it  stops  late.  Beware!  he  who  gets  angry 
late  and  it  stops  quickly  is  best  and  he  who  gets  quickly  angry 
and  it  stops  late  is  worst.  Hazrat  Omar  did  not  punish  a  man  when 
he  found  him  intoxicated  with  wine  as  it  would  have  been  inflicted 
out  of  anger.  He  said:  I  don't  like  to  whip  a  Muslim  out  of  anger.

voi-m

Anger,  hatred  and  envy

141

When  a  man  aroused  the  wrath  of  Caliph  Omar-b-Abdul  Aziz,  he 
said  to  him:  If  you  had  not  grown  my  anger,  I  would  have 
certainly  punished  you.

HATRED:  Know,  O  dear  readers,  that  when  a  man  wishes  to 
take  revenge  at  the  time  of  anger,  it  creates  hatred  in  mind. 
Hatred  means  the  prevalence  of  the  effect  of  anger  in  mind.  The 
Prophet  said:  A  believer  has  got  no  hatred.  There  are  eight  evils 
arising  out  of  hatred-(l)  envy,  happiness  at  the  sorrows  of 
another,  non-  co-operation,  contempt,  back-biting,  ridicule, 
assault,  to  give  no  loan.  If  anybody  is  free  from  hatred,  he  gets 
free  from  all  these  eight  guilts.Muastah  was  a  relative  of  Abu  Bakr  and  was  adopted  by  him. 
He  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Uhud  and  spread  the  rumour  of 
slander  against  the  character  of  Hazrat  Ayesha.  Hazrat  Abu  Bakr 
heard  it  and  took  oath  that  he  won't  spend  further  for  Mustah 
and  help  him.  God  then  sent  this  revelation:  A  man  among  you 
possessing  grace  and  wealth  should  not  take  oath  not  to  spend 
for  relatives,  the  poor  and  the  refugees  in  the  way  of  God.  But  let 
him  pardon  and  forgive.  Don't  you  like  that  God  should  forgive 
you?  24:22Q.  Hazrat  Abu  Bakr  said:  Yes,  we  love  it.  Then  he 
began  to  spend  for  him.  This  is  the  rank  of  the  truthful.

THREE  CONDITIONS  OF  A  MAN  OF  HATRED:  There  are 
three  conditions  of  a  man  of  hatred  at  the  time  of  his  power. 
(1)  His  mind  remains  steady  inspite  of  hatred.  In  other  words, 
the  hated  person  gets  his  kindness  as  he  used  to  get  i  t  before  from 
him.  (2)  The  man  cherishing  hatred  pardons  the  hated  man, 
rather  he  treats  good  with  him.  (3)  The  third  kind  of  man 
oppresses  the  man  of  hatred.  The  first  kind  is  the  condition  of  the 
religious  men ,  the  second  kind  is  the  condition  of  the  faithful  and 
the  third  kind  is  the  condition  of  the  worst  man.

MERITS  OF  GOOD  TREATMENT 
IN  LIEU  OF  EMITY

Pardon  means  not  to  take  revenge  though  one  has  got  power 
to  take  it  and  to  exempt  such  guilty  person  from  enjoin  good  an 
keep  away  from  the  illiterate-17:199Q.  God  says:  your  pardon  is 
near  God  fear.  The  Prophet  said:  By  One  in  whose  hand  there  is 
my  life,  had  I  been  an  oath-taker,  I  would  have  taken  oath  in 
three  matters.  (1)  Wealth  does  not  decrease  by  charity.  So  give 
charity.  (2)  If  a  man  pardons  the  faults  of  another  for  pleasure  of

142142

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

God,  He  will  give  him  more  honour  on  the  Resurrection  Day.  (3) 
If  a  man  opens  the  door  of  begining  for  himself,  God  opens  the 
door  of  poverty  for  him.  The  prophet  said:  Modesty  does  not 
increase  but  progress.  So  take  to  modesty,  God  will  raise  you  up. 
Pardon  does  not  increase  but  honour.  Charity  does  not  increase 
but  wealth.  So  give  charity,  God  will  show  you  mercy.

Hazrat  Ayesha  said:  I  did  not  see  the  Prophet  taking  revenge 
for  any  wrong  till  anybody  did  an  unlawful  thing  ordained  by 
God.  When  he  did  any  unlawful  things  were  presented  before 
him,  he  used  to  select  the  easier  one  till  it  contained  no  sin.  Hazrat 
Oqbah  said:  Once  I  met  the  Prophet  and  handshaked  with  him 
hastily  out  of  respect  and  he  said:  O  Oqbah,  shall  I  not  inform 
you  of  limitless  virtuous  acts  of  the  travellers  of  the  world  and 
the  next?  Join  the  tie  of  relationship  which  is  severed  by  anybody. 
Give  charity  to  one  who  deprives  you  of  something.  Pardon  one 
who  does  any  wrong  to  you.  The  Prophet  said:  When  the 
Merciful  Lord  will  raise  up  all  the  creatures  on  the  Resurrection 
Day,  a  proclaimer  will  proclaim  thrice  from  underneath  the 
Throne:  O  followers  of  Tauhid,  God  has  forgiven  you.  So  forgive 
one  another.Hazrat  Abu  Hurairah  reported:  The  Prophet  prayed  two 
rak'ats  of  prayer  within  theKa'ba  after  Tawaf  after  the  conquest 
of  Mecca.  Then  he  entered  the  Ka'ba  and  placing  his  hand  on  the 
door  of  the  Ka'ba  addressed  the  Quraish:  What  do  you  see  and 
what  treatment  do  you  expect?  The  Quraish  said:  We  are  your 
brothers  and  children  of  the  patient  and  kind  uncle  of  yours. 
They  repeated  it  thrice.  The  Prophet  said:  I  am  telling  you  what 
Eusof  had  said  to  his  brothers:  To-day  there  is  no  reproach 
against  you.  May  God  forgive  you  and  He  is  the  most  Forgiving, 
the  Most  Compassionate.  They  then  went  away  as  if  they  arose 
from  graves.  Afterwards  they  all  accepted  Islam.

Huzail-b-Amr  said:  When  the  Prophet  came  to  Mecca,  he 
placed  his  two  hands  on  the  door  of  the  Ka'ba  and  he  was 
surrounded  by  the  people.  He  said:  There  is  no  deity  but  God.  He 
is  one  there  is  no  partner  for  Him.  He  has  proved  His  promise 
true.  He  has  helped  (lis  servant  and  He  has  also  routed  the 
combined  forces  of  tl)e  enemies.  Then  he  said:  O  assembled 
Quraish,  what  do  you  say  and  what  treatment  do  you  expect?  I 
said:  O  Messenger  of  God,  we  pray  for  good  and  pardon  from 
you.  You  are  our  honoured  brother  and  the  son  of  our  kind  uncle.

voi-m

Anger,  hatred  and  envy

143

jsjovv  all  powers  are  in  your  hands.  The  Prophet  said:  I  say  what 
my  brother  Joseph  said:  To-day  there  is  no  reproach  against  you. 
May  God  forgive  you.143

jsjovv  all  powers  are  in  your  hands.  The  Prophet  said:  I  say  what 
my  brother  Joseph  said:  To-day  there  is  no  reproach  against  you. 
May  God  forgive  you.

The  Prophet  said:  When  all  the  people  will  be  waiting  on  the 
judgment  Day,  a  proclaimer  will  proclaim:  Come  you  all  who 
will  get  rewards  from  God  and  enter  Paradise  those  people  who 
used  to  pardon  men.  Then  thousands  and  thousands  of  people 
will  stand  up.  He  will  admit  them  in  paradise  without  account. 
The  Prophet  said:  When  a  guilty  man  is  brought  before  any 
judge,  he  is  not  bound  to  punish  him.  God  loves  pardon  and  He 
is  forgiving.  Then  he  read  this  verse  -  Pardon  and  forgive.  The 
Prophet  said:  He  who  has  got  three  qualities  with  belief  will  enter 
Paradise  by  whichever  door  he  likes  and  he  will  marry  any 
black-eyed  Hur  he  likes-(l)  He  who  pays  his  dues  secretly,  (2)  he 
who  recites  after  each  compulsory  prayer  eleven  times  chapter 
Ikhlas  (3)  he  who  exempts  his  murderer  from  the  charge  of  his 
murder.  Hazrat  Abu  Bakr  asked:  O  Messenger  of  God,  will  the 
rewards  be  obtained  if  there  is  only  one  quality?  The  Prophet 
said:  yes,  even  if  there  is  only  one  quality  in  him.

WISE  SAYINGSWISE  SAYINGS

Yezid-b-Mysarah  said:  If  you  invoke  against  a  man  who  has 
done  you  wrong,  God  then  says:  One  with  whom  you  did  wrong 
will  also  invoke  against  you.  If  you  wish,  I  will  make  your 
invocation  delayed  for  acceptance  up  to  the  Resurrection  Day  and 
forgiveyou.One  Christian  monk  came  toCaliph  Hashem  who  said 
to  him:  Have  you  thought  over  Alexander?  Was  he  a  Prophet?  The 
hermit  said:  He  was  not  a  prophet  but  he  was  given  four  qualities. 
(1)  He  used  to  pardon  having  had  power.  (2)  He  used  to  fulfill 
promises  when  he  promised.  (3)  He  used  to  speak  the  truth.  (4)  and 
he  used  not  to  put  off  to-day's  work  for  to-morrow.

MERITS  OF  KIND  TREATMENT

Kind  treatment  is  good.  Its  opposite  evil  is  harsh  and  cruel 
treatment.  The  result  of  anger  is  harsh  treatment  and  the  result  of 
good  conduct  is  kind  and  good  treatment.  The  cause  of  cruel 
treatment  is  anger  and  the  cause  of  anger  is  too  much  greed  and 
love  of  influence.  For  this  reason,  the  Prophet  praised  kind 
treatment  highly.  He  said:  O  Ayesha,  he  who  has  been  given  the 
gift  of  kind  treatment  has  been  given  abundant  portion  of  good  of 
this  world  and  the  next  and  he  who  has  been  deprived  of  kind

14  4

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-IIl14  4

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-IIl

treatment  has  been  deprived  of  abundant  portion  of  good  of  this 
world  and  the  next.  The  Prophet  said:  When  God  loves  the 
members  of  a  family.  He  gives  them  the  quality  of  kind 
treatment.  He  also  said:  God  does  not  give  for  benevolence  what 
He  gives  for  kind  treatment.  When  God  loves  a  man.  He  gives 
him  the  quality  of  kind  treatment.  The  members  of  a  family  who 
are  deprived  of  kind  treatment  are  deprived  of  the  love  of  God. 
The  Prophet  said:  God  is  kind  and  loves  kind  treatment.  He  gives 
for  kind  treatment  what  He  does  not  give  for  harsh  treatment. 
The  Prophet  said:  O  Ayesha,  mete  out  kind  treatment,  as  God 
intended  to  give  honour  to  Able  Bait.  So  Show  path  towards  the 
door  of  kind  treatment.  The  Prophet  said:  He  who  has  been 
deprived  of  kind  treatment  has  been  deprived  of  all  good.  The 
Prophet  said:  Do  you  know  for  whom  Hell-fire  would  be 
unlawful?  every  modest  man  of  sweet  tongue,  easy  and  near 
man  (to  God).  The  Prophet  said:  God  will  treat  kindly  with  the 
ruler  on  the  Judgment  Day  who  accorded  kind  treatment  and 
who  was  modes.  He  said:  Kind  treatment  is  the  sign  of  fortune 
and  foolishness  is  the  sign  of  misfortune.  He  said:  Delay  comes 
from  God  and  hastiness  from  the  devil.

The  Prophet  said:  When  you  wish  to  do  a  thing,  think  of  its 
result.  If  it  is  easy,  do  it  or  else  refrain  from  doing  it.  The  Prophet 
said  to  Ayesha:  o  Ayesha,  take  to  kind  treatment,  as  it  adorns  a 
thing  in  which  there  is  kind  treatment  and  it  disgraces  a  thing 
from  which  it  is  taken  off.Wise  sayings.  Hazrat  Omar  once  heard  some  complaints 
against  one  of  his  governors.  He  called  the  people  and  addressed 
them  thus:  O  people,  I  have  got  rights  over  you  that  you  should 
advise  me  in  my  absence  and  help  me  in  my  good  deeds.  I  have 
got  rights  over  you  whoever  he  may  be.  Know  that  there  is 
nothing  so  dear  to  God  as  patience  and  kind  treatment  of  a  ruler 
and  there  is  nothing  so  displeasing  to  God  than  ignorance  and 
foolishness  of  a  ruler.  Know  that  one  who  keeps  the  persons 
under  his  control  in  punishment  will  get  punishment  from  the 
Unseen.  There  is  a  Hadis  that  learning  is  the  friend  of  a  believer, 
patience  is  his  minister,  wisdom  is  his  proof,  divine  service  is  its 
protector,  good  treatment  is  his  father,  modest  treatment  is  his 
brother,  patience  is  the  commander  of  his  forces.  A  wise  man 
said:  How  nice  is  faith?  Learning  makes  it  nice.  How  good  is 
learning?  Action  makes  it  good.  How  good  is  action?  Kind

y0l„ni  Anger,  hatred  and  envy  145y0l„ni  Anger,  hatred  and  envy  145

treatment  makes  it  beautiful.  As  patience  makes  learning 
beautiful,  so  one  thing  makes  another  thing  beautiful.  Hazrat 
Amr-b-As  asked  his  son  Abdullah:  What  is  kind  treatment?  He 
said:  A  ruler's  kind  treatment  with  his  subordinate  officers.  He 
asked:  What  is  foolishness?  He  said:  To  oppose  your  Imam  or 
leader  and  to  be  modest  to  one  who  does  you  harm.  The  sage 
gufiyan  once  said  to  his  disciple.  O  Abu  Muhammad,  describe  it. 
He  said:  To  put  every  thing  in  its  proper  place,  to  mete  out  good 
treatment  in  its  proper  place,  to  use  sword  in  its  proper  place, 
and  to  whip  in  proper  place.  It  appears  from  this  that  it  is 
necessaiy  that  there  should  be  harsh  treatment  with  modesty  and 
kind  treatment  with  harshness.  So  it  is  best  to  take  the  middle 
course  between  kind  and  harsh  treatments.

ENVYENVY

There  are  many  sayings  of  the  Prophet  regarding  envy.  The 
Prophet  said:  As  fire  destroys  fuel,  so  envy  destroys  virtues.  He 
said:  Don't  envy  one  another,  don't  forsake  one  another,  don't 
hate  one  another,  don't  trade  over  the  trade  of  another.  O  the 
servants  of  God,  be  brothers  to  one  another.  Hazrat  Anas  said: 
Once  we  were  seated  near  the  Prophet  who  said:  Jbst  now  one  of 
the  inmates  of  paradise  will  pass  by  this  way.  It  was  then  found 
that  an  Ansar  was  coming  by  that  pathway.  Abdullah-b-Omar 
informed  him  of  the  Prophet's  saying  about  him  alnd  asked  him 
for  what  thing  he  earned  that  rank.  He  said:  I  don't  envy  any 
Muslim  for  any  gift  on  him  from  God.  The  Prophet  said:  No  man 
escapes  from  three  things-(l)  ballon jec ture,  (2)  envy  and  (3)  evil 
sign.  I  am  teaching  you  the  meant  to  get  rid  of  these  things.  If 
there  is  bad  conjecture,  don't  believfcgt.  When  you  find  evil  sign, 
don't  believe  it,  when  you  hate,  don't  inquire  about  it.  The 
Prophet  said:  The  habits  of  earlier  generations  have  attacked  you 
envy  and  hatred.  Hatred  is  sharing.  I  don't  say  that  it  shaves 
hairs  but  it  shaves  the  religion.  By  One  in  whose  hand  there  is  the 
life  of  Muhammad,  you  will  not  enter  paradise  till  you  believe. 
You  will  not  believe  till  you  love  one  another.  Shall  I  not  inform 
you  what  thing  will  establish  you  on  it?  Spread  peace  among 
you.  The  Prophet  said:  Poverty  was  about  to  come  near  infidelity 
and  envy  was  about  to  overcome  Taqdir.  The  Prophet  said:  The 
behaviors  of  the  other  nations  will  soon  attack  my  people.  The 
companions  asked:  What  are  the  behaviors  of  other  nations?  He 
said:  Pleasures  and  enjoyments,  heedlessness,  abundant  wealth.

146

The  Book  of  Destructive  evifs

Vol-IIi146

The  Book  of  Destructive  evifs

Vol-IIi

rivalry  in  the  world  based  on  envy,  to  think  one  another  as 
distant,  to  envy  one  another,  to  raise  rebellion,  and  then  to  live  in 
dangers  and  calamities.  The  Prophet  said:  Don't  expressed  joy  at 
the  sorrows  of  your  brothers,  perchance  God  may  forgive  him 
and  let  you  down  in  that  calamity.

It  is  narrated  that  Moses  went  to  meet  his  Lord  and  found  a 
man  under  His  Throne.  Seeing  his  high  rank,  there  grew  a  spirit 
of  rivalry  in  his  mind  and  he  asked  his  Lord:  What  is  the  name  of 
this  man?  God  did  not ‘communicate  his  name  but  said:  I  will 
inform  you  about  his  three  good  deeds-(l)  he  does  not  envy  for 
nay  gift  of  God  on  man,  (2)  he  does  not  become  disobedient  to  his 
parents,  (3)  he  does  not  roam  with  slander.  Prophet  Zaoharia 
said:  God  says:  An  envious  man  is  enemy  of  My  gifts,  dissatisfied 
with  God's  decree,  and  dissatisfied  with  the  division  of  My  gifts 
which  I  have  distributed  among  My  servants.  The  Prophet  said: 
The  greatest  of  what  I  fear  for  my  followers  is  the  increase  of  their 
wealth  for  which  they  will  envy  one  another  and  quarrel  with 
one  another.  The  Prophet  said:  Pray  for  help  for  fulfillment  of 
secret  necessities,  as  every  wealthy  man  is  an  object  of  envy.  The 
Prophet  said:  Six  persons  will  enter  Hell  before  accounts  are 
taken  each  for  one  sin.  The  companions  asked:  O  Prophet  of  God, 
who  are  they?  He  said:  (1)  A  ruler  for  his  oppression,  (2)  a  desert 
Arab  for  his  unjust  love  for  his  tribe,  (3)  a  rich  man  for  his  pride, 
(4)  a  village  man  for  his  foolishness,  (5)  and  a  learned  man  for  his 
envy.

A  STORY  OF  ENVYA  STORY  OF  ENVY

A  man  approached  a  king  and  said:  Treat  good  with  a 
religious  man  for  his  good  works  and  release  the  wicked  as  his 
evil  deeds  are  sufficient  as  a  punishment  for  him,  A  certain 
courtier  of  the  king  grew  envious  of  another  courtier  seeing  his 
fortunes.  He  complained  against  that  man  to  the  king  saying  that 
he  had  defamed  the  king  as  he  had  a  very  offensive  smell  of 
mouth.  The  king  said:  How  can  I  know  that  it  i9  true?  He  said: 
You  can  know  it  when  the  man  will  place  his  hand  on  his  nose. 
He  then  invited  the  man  to  his  house  and  gave  him  fresh  onion  to 
eat  with  meal.  After  eating,  the  man  went  to  the  king  and  fearing 
bad  adore  of  onion  from  his  mouth  placed  his  hand  on  his  mouth 
and  nose.  The  king  was  then  convinced  of  the  truth  of  the 
statement  of  the  man  and  sent  him  with  a  letter  to  his  governor  to 
put  him  to  deaf  i .  On  the  way  the  envious  man  requested  the

Vol-III

147

Anger,  hatred  and  envyVol-III

147

Anger,  hatred  and  envy

religious  man  to  hand  over  the  letter  to  him  thinking  that  it 
contained  words  of  rewards.  Accordingly,  the  letter  was  handed 
over  to  the  envious  man  who  took  the  letter  to  the  governor. 
When  the  governor  got  the  letter,  he  at  once  put  him  to  death.  The 
religious  man  went  next  day  to  the  king  as  usual,  but  the  latter 
was  surprised  to  see  him  alive  and  asked  him  about  his  letter.  He 
said  that  he  handed  it  over  to  another  man.  The  king  asked  him 
why  he  closed  his  mouth  and  placed  his  hand  over  his  nose  at  the 
time  of  his  interview  with  him.  He  said  that  the  man  had  invited 
him  and  gave  him  meal  with  fresh  onion.  So  for  fear  of  bad  smell, 
he  placed  his  hand  over  his  mouth  and  nose.  The  king  said: 
Sufficient  is  the  wrong  deed  of  a  person  for  his  punishment.

WHAT  IS  ENVY?WHAT  IS  ENVY?

There  is  no  envy  except  for  gifts.  When  God  showers  gifts  on 
any  person,  two  conditions  arise  in  your  mind.  The  first 
condition  is  that  you  do  not  love  those  gifts  for  him  and  like  that 
those  gifts  should  go  away  from  him.  The  second  condition  is 
that  you  do  not  wish  that  the  gifts  should  go  away  from  him  but 
that  those  gifts  may  be  bestowed  on  you  also.  This  is  rivalry  or 
competition  in  good  works  and  gifts.  The  Prophet  said:  A 
believer  makes  efforts  based  on  competition  bout  a  hypocrite 
envies.  Envy  is  unlawful  under  all  circumstances  and  there  is  no 
distinction  between  Muslims  and  non-Muslims  in  matters  of 
envy.  God  distributed  His  gifts  among  His  servants  in  the 
world.  To  envy  it  is  to  express  displeasure  at  the  distribution  of 
God.  So  there  is  no  cause  of  envy.  The  Quran  says:  If  a  good 
thing  reaches  you,  it  grieves  them  and  if  a  disaster  afflicts  you, 
they  become  joyful-9:  50.  The  name  of  this  joy  is  envy  for  the 
well-  being  of  others.  God  says:  A  majority  of  the  people  of  the 
Book  wish  that  you  should  return  to  infidelity  after  you  believed 
-3:  29.  God  mentioned  the  story  of  Joseph  and  also  mentioned 
the  envy  of  his  brothers  towards  Joseph.  They  said  out  of  envy: 
Kill  Joseph  or  throw  him  into  a  well-12:  8Q.  God  says:  Mankind 
was  only  one  Ummat  or  people.  Thereafter  owing  to  envy,  they 
separated  themselves.  God  says:  They  became  separate  after 
knowledge  came  to  them,  being  rebellious.  God  gave  them 
knowledge  in  order  to  unite  mankind  and  united  their  hearts  by 
affection  for  His  divine  service.  But  they  differed  among 
themselves  out  of  envy  and  everyone  of  them  wished  that  he 
alone  would  yield  authority.

148

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III148

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

Hazrat  Ibh  Abbas  said:  When  the  Jews  fought  with  a  people 
before  the  Prophethood  of  Muhammad  (p.h)  they  used  to  pray:  O 
God,  we  invoke  you  in  the  name  of  that  Prophet  whom  you  have 
promised  to  send  and  with  him  a  Book.  As  a  result,  they  used  to 
get  victory.  When  the  Prophet  from  the  descendants  of  Ismail 
was  sent  to  them,  they  could  recognise  him  but  they  did  not 
believe  in  him.  God  says  in  this  connection:  Before  this,  they 
prayed  for  victory  against  the  unbelievers  but  when  he  appeared 
to  them,  they  disbelieved  him.  This  is  out  of  envy.To  have  competition  is  not  unlawful,  rather  it  is 
comjmendable.  It  is  an  effort  towards  further  progress  and 
advancement.  God  says:  And  in  this,  let  those  aspire  who  have 
aspiration-88:  26Q.  God  says:  Complete  one  another  towards 
forgiveness  frbm  your  Lord-57:  21Q.  They  are  like  two  servants 
who  both  try  to  please  their  master  and  hope  to  defeat  the  other 
in  this  matter.  The  Prophet  mentioned  about  them.  He  said: 
There  Is  no  ehvy  for  two  persons-  (1)  God  gave  wealth  to  one 
person  and  also  gave  him  power  to  spend  it  in  the  path  of  truth. 
(2)  God  gave  learning  to  another  who  acts  up’ to  it  and  teaches  it 
to  the  people'  The  Prophet  then  explained  the  words  of  Abu 
Kabsha  Anmari  and  said:  The  example  of  this  people  is  as  the 
example  of  four  persons.  (1)  They  are  like  the  person  whom  God 
gave  wealth  and  learning  and  who  spends  wealth  in  useful  ways 
according  to  his  learning.  (2)  They  are  like  the  person  whom  God 
gave  learning  but  not  wealth  and  yet  he  says:  O  God,  had  I  had 
wealth  like  so  and  so,  I  would  had  spent  it  as  he  spends.  They  will 
get  equal  rewards.  The  rewards  which  a  rich  man  will  get  by 
spending  money  will  be  equal  to  those  which  a  poor  man  will  get 
only  by  cherishing  the  desire  to  spend  it.  (3)  They  are  like  the 
person  whom  God  gave  wealth  but  hot  learning  and  who  spends 
it  in  sinful  acts.  (4)  They  are  like  the  person  whom  God  did  not 
give  learning  and  wealth  and  who  says:  Had  I  had  wealth  like  so 
and  so,  I  would  have  spent  it  in  sinful  acts  like  his  expense.  They 
are  equally  sinners.  The  Prophet  rebuked  the  persons  of  such 
intention  to  commit  sins.  The  Prophet  said:  No  believer  is  saved 
from  three  matters-(l)  envy,  bad  conjecture  and  bad  omen.  These 
are  outlets  from  them.  When  you  feel  envy,  don't  run  after  it.THREE  STAGES  OF  ENVY

Th^re  are  three  stages  of  envy  according  to  status.  (1)  The 
first  stage  is  that  the  envious  person  loves  that  wealth  and  gifts

voi-m

Anger,  hatred  and  envy

149

should  go  away  from  the  person  envied  and  that  they  should  not 
come  to  him  again.  This  is  unlawful  and  worst  condition.  (2)  The 
second  stage  is  that  the  envious  person  wishes  to  have  the  gifts  of 
the  envied  person,  such  as  to  have  beautiful  house  like  his  house, 
to  have  a  beautiful  wife  like  his  wife  and  to  have  power  like  him. 
This  is  lawful  but  not  commendable.  (3)  The  third  stage  is  that  the 
envious  person  does  not  wish  to  have  identical  things  for  himself 
but  to  have  similar  things.  This  is  condemned  in  some  cases  and 
not  in  others.  God  says:  Don't  greed  for  the  gifts  which  God 
bestowed  on  some  of  you.

SEVEN  CAUSES  OF  ENVY

There  are  seven  causes  of  envy  arising  out  of  sight  of  the 
fortunes  of  another.  (1)  Enmity.  This  is  the  wprst  cause.  As  he  is 
your  enemy,  you  don't  wish  that  he  should  have  gifts  and  riches 
and  other  things  of  the  world  and  such  a  person  likes  that  these 
gifts  of  God  should  go  away  from  him-  The  object  of  God-  fearing 
men  is  opposite.  They  don't  envy  anybody  for  these  things.  God 
mentioned  the  envy  of  the  unbelievers  towards  fhe  believers  in 
this  verse:  If  any  good  reaches  you,  jt  grieves  them  and  if  any  evil 
affects  you,  they  become  pleased  3:  J 18.

(2)  Dislike  of  another's  good.  An  envious  man  greatly 
dislikes  the  well-fare  and  good  of  another  and  it  gives  him  too 
much  pain.  He  can't  bear  when  the  person  envied  gets  any 
power,  recognition  and  honour.(3)  Pride.  The  envious  man  takes  pride  over  the  envied  man 
and  holds  him  in  contempt-  God  says  about  the  unbelievers  in 
verse  (43:31Q).  They  say:  Why  has  not  this  Quran  sent  down  to 
some  leading  man  in  either  of  the  two  cities?  Do  they  divide  the 
mercy  of  their  Lord?

(4)  To  express  wonder.  The  unbelievers  say:  Shall  we  believe 
in  a  man  like  us?  They  expressed  wonder  at  the  claim  of  the 
Prophet  of  prophethood.  Thus  they  cherished  hatred  against  the 
Prophet  seeing  his  influence  and  power.

(5)  Fear  of  failure  of  object.  For  instance,  two  men  work  with 
the  same  object,  but  one  of  them  envies  another  fearing  the 
failure  of  his  object.  This  is  like  the  envy  of  two  co-wives.

150

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

(6)  Greed  of  name  and  power.  This  is  also  a  cause  of  envy 
between  two  persons.  This  applies  in  all  spheres  of  life-worship, 
industry,  beauty,  wealth,  power  etc.

(7)  Narrowness  of  mind.  This  is  another  cause  of  envy.  One 
becomes  glad  to  see  the  loss  of  fortune  of  another  and  wishes  that 
all  blessings  and  gifts  should  be  bestowed  on  him  alone.

True  religious  men  have  got  no  envy.  The  real  cause  of  envy 
is  love  of  the  world.  Those  who  love  the  world  envy  one  another 
for  wealth,  riches,  power  and  name  and  fame.  The  religious 
persons  have  got  no  such  greed  and  as  such  they  have  got  no 
envy.  They  desire  the  next  world  and  its  comforts.  There  is  no 
narrowness  in  Mar'fat.  The  religious  persons  also  do  not  envy 
one  another  in  matters  of  religious  advancement.  They  are 
praised  by  God:  I  have  taken  out  of  their  hearts  envy.  They  are 
brethren  sitting  facing  one  another  upon  thrones.

MEDICINE  OF  ENVYMEDICINE  OF  ENVY

(1)  Envy  is  a  very  serious  disease  of  heart.  It  cannot  be  cured 
without  knowledge  and  action.  The  medicine  of  envy  based  on 
knowledge  is  to  know  that  envy  is  injurious  for  this  world  and 
the  next  but  not  harm  reaches  the  envied  person,  rather  it  benefits 
him.  When  you  will  knew  it  by  deep  insight,  you  will  consider  it 
as  your  enemy  and  it  is  injurious  to  you.  (2)  Envy  is  injurious  to 
your  world.  The  fire  pangs  of  envy  bums  your  mind  and  for  that 
your  mind  is  filled  up  with  sorrows  and  difficulties.  (3)  The 
envied  person  suffers  no  harm  in  this  world  and  the  next.  It  is 
clear  that  there  will  be  no  harm  of  the  envied  person.  God  gives 
properties  and  wealth  to  a  person  for  a  certain  term  and  there  is 
decree  for  every  age.  A  certain  Prophet  complained  to  God 
against  the  oppression  of  a  certain  queen's  administration.  God 
then  revealed  to  him:  Till  her  rule  does  not  end,  you  live 
elsewhere  fleeing  away  from  her.  In  other  words,  there  is  no 
alternative  to  change  the  decree  which  I  have  written  for  her.  So 
bear  patience  till  the  end  of  her  time.  If  by  envy,  gifts  would  have 
gone,  God's  gifts  would  not  have  been  bestowed  on  you  or 
anybody  in  the  world.  The  unbelievers  envied  the  Muslims  for 
the  gift  of  faith.  God  says:  Many  people  of  the  Book  like  out  of 
envy  that  you  should  return  to  disbelief  after  you  have  believed.

(4)  The  benefit,  of  envied  person  in  this  world  and  the  next 
world  is  open.  The  envied  person  will  gain  benefit  by  your  envy.

Vol-IH  Anger,  hatred  and  envy  151(4)  The  benefit,  of  envied  person  in  this  world  and  the  next 
world  is  open.  The  envied  person  will  gain  benefit  by  your  envy.

Vol-IH  Anger,  hatred  and  envy  151

but  you  think  that  he  is  oppressed.  The  envied  person  if 
back-bited  will  get  the  various  of  the  envious  person.  The 
worldly  anxieties  of  the  envious  person  are  a  gain  of  the  envied 
person.  A  desert  Arab  asked  the  Prophet:  O  Prophet  of  God,  what 
jS  your  opinion  about  a  person  who  loves  a  people  without 
seeing  them?  The  Prophet  said:  He  is  with  one  whom  he  loves.  A 
desert  Arab  asked  the  Prophet  during  his  sermon:  O  Prophet  of 
God,  when  will  occur  the  Resurrection?  He  said:  How  have  you 
prepared  for  it?  He  said:  I  donot  pray  much  for  it,  nor  fast  much, 
rather  I  love  God  and  His  Prophet.  The  Prophet  said:  You  will  be 
then  with  one  whom  you  love.  Hazrat  Anas  said:, The  Muslims 
did  not  feel  so  much  joy  after  their  conversion  to  Islam  than  that 
of  this  day.It  appears  from  this  that  the  great  matter  of  the  Muslims  was 
to  love  the  Messenger  of  God.  Hazrat  Anas  said:  We  began  to 
love  the  Prophet,  Abu  Bakr  and  Omar  but  we  could  not  do  divine 
service  like  them  but  yet  we  cherished  hope  to  live  with  them. 
Hazrat  Abu  Musa  said:  I  asked,  O  Messenger  of  God,  one  man 
loves  those  who  pray,  but  he  does  not  himself  pray.  He  loves 
those  who  fast  but  does  not  himself  fast.  The  Prophet  said:  He 
will  be  with  one  whom  he  loves.  One  man  said  to  Caliph 
Omar-b- Abdul  Aziz:  Every  man  says  from  the  beginning:  If  you 
can  be  learned,  be  a  learned  man.  I  f  you  cannot  be  a  learned  man, 
be  a  student.  If  you  cannot  be  a  student,  love  him  if  you  cannot 
love  him,  don't  hate  him.  He  said:  Glory  to  God,  God  made  a  way 
for  us.  The  Prophet  said:  Three  classes  of  men  are  inmates  of 
Paradise-(l)  One  who  does  good  deeds,  (2)  one  who  loves  the 
doers  of  good,  (3)  and  one  who  removes  difficulties  from  the 
doers  of  God.  So  you  should  not  get  out  of  these  three  classes  by 
taking  recourse  to  envy  and  hatred.  The  devil  has  entered  your 
mind  and  keeps  you  out  off  these  three  classes.  Evil  returns  to 
you  as  God  says:  'The  evil  machination  falls  on  those  who 
contrive  it.'  Many  a  time  it  happens  that  the  snare  which  is  laid 
for  an  enemy  fallson  the  person  who  contrives  it.

(2)  MEDICINE  OF  ENVY  BASED  ON  ACTION

To  do  an  action  opposite  to  the  cause  for  which  envy  aries  is 
its  medicine,  be  it  with  words  or  with  actions.  If  your  object  is  to 
mention  the  guilts  of  the  envied  person  out  of  envy,  then  the 
medicine  to  remove  it  is  to  praise  him.  If  the  cause  is  pride,  its

152

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

VoI-III152

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

VoI-III

medicine  is  to  treat  with  him  with  humility-  If  envy  advises  you 
to  destroy  another's  property,  its  medicine  is  to  help  him.

To  drive  out  envy  from  mind.  Envy  is  an  evil  of  the  mind  and 
not  °f  any  organ  of  the  body.  Cod  says:  They  do  not  find  in  their 
minds  narrowness  for  What  they  were  given-  God  says:  They 
wish  that  you  should  turn  infidels.  God  says:  When  any  good 
reaches  you,  they  become  soTTy.  The  action  of  envy  is  expressed 
through  back-biting  and  falsehood.  So  he  wjU  be  sinner  for 
entertaining  envy  in  mind.  When  it  is  expressed  in  outer  organs 
of  the  body,  to  seek  pardon  becomes  compulsory  for  it-

The  Revival  of  Religious  Learnings

The  Book  of  Destructive  Evils  -  Part  II

CHAPTER  VI

ATTACHMENT  OF  THE  WORLD

All  praise  is  due  to  God  who  discloses  the  merits  and 
demerits  of  the  world  to  His  friends.  They  weighed  its  benefits 
and  harms  on  the  scale  and  found  that  its  harms  are  greater  than 
its  benefits.  The  world  is  like  a  beautiful  unchaste  woman  who 
attrates  the  people  towards  her  by  her  beauty  but  she  has  got 
such  secret  diseases  which  destroy  one  who  goes  unto  her.  If  you 
do  good  to  the  world  for  one  hour,  it  does  you  harm  for  one  year. 
If  you  carry  on  business  with  the  worldly  people,  you  gain  no 
benefit  but  loss.  He  who  seeks  the  world  faces  many  dangers  and 
difficulties  which  cannot  be  enumerated.  Who  so  wants  it,  it  flees 
away  from  him ;  and  who  so  does  not  want  it,  it  goes  to  him.

THE  WORLD  IS  AN  ENEMY  OF  GODTHE  WORLD  IS  AN  ENEMY  OF  GOD

The  cause  is  that  the  world  cuts  the  ways  of  divine  service. 
For  this  reason,  God  keeps  an  eye  on  it  since  He  created  it.  The 
world  is  an  enemy  of  the  friends  of  God.  The  cause  is  that  it 
presents  itself  with  its  best  grandeurs  just  like  an  unchaste 
woman  dressed  with  various  beautiful  dresses.  The  world  is  also 
an  enemy  of  the  enemies  of  God.  The  cause  is  that  the  world 
entraps  them  in  its  net  of  love  after  deceiving  them  and  opens  its 
door  of  love  for  them.  They  are  deceived  by  its  love  and  get 
attached  to  it.

The  result  is  that  they  are  dishonored  and  disgraced  and  they 
go  away  from  it.  Their  hearts  are  pierced  for  its  separation  and 
fortune  bids  them  adieu  for  ever.  Then  there  is  no  limit  to  their 
remose  and  they  therefore  seek  refuge  to  God.  They  have 
purchased  this  world  in  exchange  of  the  next  world.

When  the  harms  of  the  world  are  many,  we  should  know  its 
snares  and  charms  and  then  save  ourselves  from  its  deceptions 
and  love.

154

Vol-III

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

evils  of  the  world

There  are  innumberable  verses  of  the  Quran  regarding  the 
evils  of  the  world.  The  goal  of  the  Prophet  was  to  turn  away  the 
people  from  the  evils  and  harms  of  the  world  and  so  there  is  no 
necessity  of  collecting  verses  from  the  Quran  about  it.  I  shall 
mention  only  some  Hadis.(1)  It  has'  been  narrated  that  the  Prophet  was  once  passing  by 
a  dead  goat  and  said  to  his  companions  :  Don't  you  look  to  the 
dead  animal  ?  Its  owner  is  now  looking  at  it  with  hate.  By  One  in 
whose  hand  there  is  my  life,  just  as  this  dead  goat  is  more  an 
object  of  hate  to  its  owner,  the  world  is  likewise  more  an  object  of 
hatred  to  God.  If  the  value  of  the  world  would  have  been  like  the 
wing  of  a  mosquito.  He  would  not  have  given  a  drought  of  water 
to  an  unbeliever  to  drink.  (2)  The  Prophet  said  :  The  world  is  a 
prison  to  a  believer  and  a  Paradise  to  an  unbeliever.  (3)  He  said. 
The  world  is  caused  and  all  the  things  in  it  are  cursed.  94)  He  said: 
He  who  loves  the  world  injures  his  hereafter  and  he  who  loves 
his  hereafter  injures  his  world.  So  take  what  will  last  for  ever  by 
giving  up  what  will  not  last.  (5)  He  said  :  Love  of  the  world  is  the 
root  of  all  sins.  (6)  Zaid-b-Akram  reported  :  We  were  once  with 
hazrat  Abu  Bakr.  He  ordered  for  water  and  honey  which  were 
brought  to  him.  He  lifted  them  to  drink  but  began  to  weep.  On 
being  asked  the  reason,  he  said  :  Once  I  was  with  the  Holy 
Prophet  and  saw  that  be  was  wiping  out  something  from  his 
body.  Tasked  him :  O  Prophet  of  God,  what  are  you  throwing  out 
?  He  said  :  This  is  the  world.  It  came  to  me  with  beautiful  face.  I 
said  :  Be  off.  The  world  said  :  You  have  saved  yourself  from  me, 
but  those  who  will  come  after  you  will  not  be  safe  from  my  hand.(7)  the  Prophet  stood  by  a  place  full  of  human  bones  and  said 
to  the  people  :  Do  you  like  to  look  at  the  world  ?  He  then  took  a 
rotten  cloth  and  melted  bone  and  said.  This  is  the  world.  He  said 
that  the  wealth  and  pleasures  of  the  world  will  be  ruined  like  the 
rotten  cloth  and  all  the  people  will  be  melted  like  the  melted 
bone.  (8)  The  Prophet  said  :  This  world  is  sweet  and  fresh  and 
God  made  you  His  representatives  therein.  He  is  looking  how 
you  act  therein.  (9)  When  the  children  of  Israil  were  given 
enormouse  wealth  and  when  they  were  engrossed  therein,  they 
were  attached  to  the  worldly  pleasures,  love  of  women  and 
precious  scents  and  dresses.  (10)  Jesus  Christ  said :  Don't  take  the 
world  as  you  lord.  If  you  do  so,  it  will  make  you  slaves.  Hoard  up

Attachment  of  the  world

155

Vol'IH

your  wealth  with  such  One  who  will  not  destroy  it.  Guards  of 
wealth  of  this  world  cannot  be  relied  on,  but  you  can  rely  on  the 
guards  of  God.  He  also  said  :  O  my  disciples,  I  have  leveled  the 
vyorld  with  earth  for  you.  Don't  take  it  up  after  me.  One  of  the 
evils  of  the  world  is  that  the  people  commit  sins  therein.  Another 
evil  of  the  world  is  that  the  next  world  cannot  be  acquired  unless 
this  world  is  given  up.  So  take  care  and  think  that  the  world  has 
passed  away  and  don't  live  therein  with  happiness.  Know  that 
the  root  of  all  evils  is  attachment  for  the  world.  Many  a  time  the 
present  greed  becomes  the  cause  of  man's  calamities.(11)  Jesus  Christ  also  said  :  The  world  lies  behind  you  and 
you  take  seat  thereon.  Therein  the  kings  and  women  stand  as 
stumbling  blocks  against  you.  Don't  dispute  with  the  kins 
regarding  this  world,  as  they  will  not  stand  in  your  way  if  you 
give  up  connection  with  hem  and  their  affairs.  Save  yourselves 
from  women  with  fastings  and  prayers.  He  also  said  :  The  world 
searches  for  the  people  and  the  people  search  for  the  world.  The 
world  searches  for  one  who  searches  for  the  next  world  till  his 
provision  does  not  become  complete  for  him.  The  next  world 
searches  for  one  who  searches  for  the  world  till  his  death. 
Thereafter  it  catches  his  neck  and  climbs  upon  him.  He  also  said  : 
God  created  nothing  so  obnoxious  than  the  world.  He  did  not 
look  at  it  on  the  day  He  created  it.

(15)  It  has  been  reported  that  Hazrat  Solaiman  was  roaming 
in  air  and  birds  were  giving  him  shade  and  men  and  Jin  were  on 
his  right  and  left  sides.  He  met  a  hermit  of  Banu  Israil  on  the  way 
and  the  hermit  said  to  him  :  O  son  of  David,  the  Almighty  God 
has  given  you  reign  and  power.  At  this,  Solaiman  said  :  One 
Tasbih  (praise  of  God)  in  the  book  of  deeds  of  a  believer  is  more 
superior  than  my  reign,  as  what  has  been  given  to  the  son  of 
David  will  end  but  Tasbih  will  remain,  (16)  The  Prophet  said  : 
Excessive  wealth  has  kept  you  forgetful.  The  son  of  Adam  says  : 
My  wealth,  my  wealth.  Have  you  got  any  other  wealth  than  what 
you  have  eaten  and  ended,  what  you  have  put  on  and  got  old, 
what  you  have  given  in  charity  and  remained  lasting  ?(17)  The  Prophet  said  :  He  who  has  got  no  abode  takes  the 
world  as  his  abode.  He  who  has  got  no  wisdom  makes  enmity  for 
it.  He  who  has  got  no  power  of  doing  justice,  coverts  it.  He  who 
has  got  no  sure  faith  makes  efforts  for  it.  (18)  He  said  :  He  who 
gets  up  at  dawn  with  the  world  as  his  object  of  thought  is  not

156

The  Bqok  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-m

God-fearjng  in  any  matter.  God  gives  him  four  conducts  in  his 
mind — (1 )  such  anxiety  as  has  got  no  end,  (2)  such  engagement  as 
has  got  no  limit,  (3)  such  poverty  as  can  never  make  him  rich.  (4) 
and  such  hope  which  has  got  no  end.

(19)  Hazrat  Abu  Hurairah  reported :  The  Prophet  said  to  me ; 
O  Abu  Hurairah,  shall  I  show  you  what  obnoxious  things  are 
there  in  this  world  ?  I  said  :  O  Prophet  of  God,  show  me.  Then  he 
caught  my  hand  and  took  me  to  a  valley  of  Madina  and  showed 
me  a  place  full  of  carcasses,  stools  and  urine,  rotten  clothes  and 
bones  and  hides.  He  said  :  O  Abu  Hurairah,  there  were  in  their 
heads  greed  like  you  greed  and  hopes  like  you  hopes,  but  to-day 
tjrose  are  with  the  rotten  remains  and  those  will  be  consumed  by 
earth  after  some  days.  All  these  are  of  the  world-  If  you  can  weep 
at  the  sad  plight  of  the  world,  then  weep.  Then  we  began  to  weep.(20)  Hazrat  Daud-b-Hallal  reported  that  it  is  written  in  the 
Scripture  of  Abraham :  O  world,  how  ignoble  you  are  to  religious 
men.  You  have  presented  yourself  to  thern  with  your  grandeurs, 
but  hatred  has  been  cast  at  you  in  their  hearts  and  for  that  they 
have  turned  away  from  you.  Thereis  nothing  so  obnoxious  to  Me 
like  you.  Every  act  of  your  is  mean  and  comes  to  destruction.  I 
have  recorded  for  you  on  the  day  I  created  you  that  you  will  not 
stay  with  anybody  forever  and  that  he  who  loves  you  will  be 
miser.  Thanks  to  those  pious  men  who  seek  Me  with  pleasure  in 
their  hearts,  those  in  whose  hearts  there  is  truth  and  who  stand 
on  right  path-  Happy  are  they  as  they  will  get  rewards  of  what 
their  hands  have  acquired.  When  they  will  come  to  Me  from  the 
graves,  light  will  move  forward  in  front  of  them  and  the  angels 
will  surround  them.  They  will  get  mercy  as  they  all  hoped  it  from 
Me.

(21)  The  Prophet  said :  There  will  appear  such  persons  on  the 
Resurrcetion  Day  whose  merits  will  be  high  like  the  hillock  of 
Tohama  but  they  will  be  ordered  to  go  to  Hell.  The  comapnious 
asked :  O  Prophet  of  Gpd,  did  they  say  prayers  ?  He  replied  :  Yes, 
they  observe  prayers  and  fastings  and  prayed  also  at  night  but 
whenever  anything  of  the  world  came  to  them,  they  jumped 
upon  it.  The  Prophet  said  in  his  sermon :  A  believer  will  live  with 
two  fears.  One  fear  is  for  his  fate  which  is  past  and  he  does  not 
know  what  was  recorded  therein.  Another  fear  is  his  book  of 
deeds  which  yet  remains  and  he  does  not  know  what  has  been 
recorded  by  God  therein  for  him.  So  a  servant  should  gather

Attachment  of  the  world

157

r

Vol-IHAttachment  of  the  world

157

r

Vol-IH

sufficient  provision  for  himself,  from  the  world  for  his  next 
jvorld,  from  his  life  for  his  death,  from  his  youth  for  his  old  age 
because  the  present  world  has  been  created  for  you  good  and  you 
have  been  created  for  the  next  world.  By  One  in  v,  hose  hand  there 
is  my  life,  there  is  no  field  for  labour  except  Paradise  and  Hell  and 
there  is  no  abode  after  the  world.

(22)  Jesus  Christ  said  :  Love  of  both  this  world  and  the  next 
cannot  remain  united  in  the  heart  of  a  believer  just  as  water  and 
fire  cannot  remain  united.  Hazrat  Gabriel  asked  the  Prophet 
Moah  :  O  one  having  a  very  long  life,  how  have  you  found  the 
world  ?  He  said  :  It  is  like  an  abode  having  two  doors.  I  have 
entered  through  one  door  and  come  out  of  another.

(23)  Jesus  Christ  was  asked  :  Why  do  you  not  construct  a 
house  to  live  in  ?  He  said  :  The  abode  of  our  predecessors  is 
sufficient.  The  Prophet  said  :  Beware  of  the  world,  as  it  is  a 
sorcerer  greater  then  Harutand  Marut.(24)  Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said :  Once  the  Prophet  came  out  to 
his  companions  and  said :  Who  is  one  amongst  you  who  does  not 
wish  bright  eye  sight  after  his  blindness  ?  Beware,  the  more  he  is 
attached  to  the  world  and  the  longer  is  his  hopes,  the  more  God 
makes  his  heart  blind  ;  and  the  more  one  gives  up  the  world  and 
the  more  he  curtails  his  hopes,  God  gives  him  more  wisdom 
without  education  and  guides  him  more  without  guidance. 
Beware,  there  will  come  such  a  people  after  you  whose  kingdom 
will  not  be  alright  without  pride  and  miserliness  and  who  will 
not  love  except  for  passion.  Beware,  whoever  reaches  that  age 
and  remains  patient  over  poverty  even  though  he  can  acquire 
wealth  and  remains  patient  over  hatred  even  though  he  can  earn 
love,  and  remains  patient  over  dishonor  even  though  he  can  earn 
honour  and  he  has  got  no  other  object  for  these  things  than  the 
pleasure  of  God,  will  get  rewards  of  fifty  truthful  men.

(25)  It  has  been  reported  that  the  Prophet  Jesus  Christ  began 
to  search  for  regue  having  fallen  in  storm,  lightning  and 
thunders,  til  he  found  a  tent  and  came  to  it,  but  when  he  found  a 
beautiful,  woman  therein  he  returned  from  there.  Thereafter  he 
came  to  a  cave  wherein  there  was  a  tiger.  Then  he  placed  his  hand 
upon  the  ground  and  said  :  O  Lord,  you  have  given  shelter  to 
everything,  but  not  to  me.  God  then  revealed  to  him  :  Your 
shelter  is  God's  mercy.  I  shall  get  you  married  on  the

158

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-IIi158

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-IIi

Resurrection  Day  with  one  hundred  Hurs  whom  I  have  created 
with  My  hands.  Your  marriage  ceremony  will  continue  for  four 
thousand  years,  one  day  of  which  is  equal  to  the  age  of  this 
world.  I  will  order  a  proclaimer  to  proclaim  :  Those  who  were 
religious  and  asectic  will  join  this  marriage  ceremony.

(26)  Jesus  Christ  said  :  Alas  for  one  who  is  addited  to  the 
world.  How  can  he  die  after  leaving  the  world  and  its  fortunes  ? 
How  does  the  world  play  deception  with  him  and  he  puts  trusts 
in  it?  The  world  plays  treachery  withhim  but  he  lives  out  of  its 
fear.  What  he  does  not  love  comes  to  him,  what  he  loves  goes 
away  from  him.  What  has  been  promised  for  them  must  come. 
Alas  for  one  whose  only  object  of  thought  is  this  world  and 
whose  actions  are  sins.  How  can  he  appear  to-morrow  with  sins?

(27)  It  has  been  reported  that  God  revealed  to  Moses  :  O 
Moses,  what  necessity  have  you  got  in  the  abode  of  the  sinners 
(world)  ?  It  is  not  your  abode.  Drive  out  your  thoughts  from  it 
and  remain  aloof  on  the  strength  of  your  wisdom.  What  a  bad 
house  it  is  ?  It  is  a  good  abode  for  one  who  does  good  therein.  O 
Moses,  I  am  searching  for  one  who  commits  therein  oppression 
secretly,  so  that  I  may  take  his  virtues  and  give  them  to  one 
oppressed.(28)  It  has  been  reported  that  the  Prophet  once  sent  Hazrat 
Abu  Obaidah  to  the  province  of  Bahrain.  He  went  there  and 
returned  with  enormous  wealth  from  the  inhabitants  and  placed 
it  before  the  Prophet.  The  Ansars  came  to  know  of  it  and 
assembled  for  morning  prayer  to  the  mosque.  After  prayer  the 
Prophet  said  :  You  have  perhaps  heard  about  the  riches  brought 
by  Abu  Obaidah.  Then  he  said  :  I  don't  fear  for  your  poverty  but  I 
fear  for  your  enormous  wealth  as  our  previous  nations  got  it. 
They  got  enormous  wealth  and  engaged  in  quarrels  with  one 
another.  As  they  were  destroyed  by  this  wealth,  you  will  likewise 
be  destroyed  by  it.

(29)  The  Prophet  said:  1  fear  that  you  will  be  given  the 
plenties  of  the  world.  He  was  asked  :  Who  are  the  plenties  of  the 
world  ?  He  said  :  Riches  and  treasures  of  the  world.  The  Prophet 
said :  Don't  keep  mind  engaged  in  the  thoughts  of  the  world.

(30)  Jesus  Christ  said  to  his  disciples  :  In  order  to  get  peace 
of  this  world  as  well  as  of  the  next,  it  is  more  preferable  to  eat 
bread  with  only  salt,  to  wear  gunny  bag  and  to  sleep  in  stables.

Attachment  of  the  world

159

Vol-IIIAttachment  of  the  world

159

Vol-III

(31)  Hazrat  Anas  reported  that  the  Prophet  had  a  she  camel 
named  Ajwa  which  defeated  all  camels.  A  desert  Arab  came  with 
a  camel  which  defeated  Ajwa.  The  Muslims  were  grieved  to  see 
this  and  the  Prophet  said  :  It  is  a  duty  of  God  that  He  does  not 
raise  up  a  thing  without  lowering  it.  (32)  Jesus  Christ  once  said  : 
YVho  is  there  who  constructs  a  house  in  the  currents  of  sea  ?  It  is 
the  world.  Don't  take  it  as  your  permanent  abode.  (33)  Jesus 
Christ  was  once  asked  :  Give  me  such  short  advice  by  virtue  of 
which  God  will  love  us.  He  said  :  Hate  the  world  and  God  will 
love  you.

(34)  The  Prophet  said:  If  you  had  known  what  I  know,  you 
would  have  laughed  little  and  wept  much.  Hate  the  world  and 
love  the  next  world.  (35)  Abu  Dara's  said :  Had  you  known  what  I 
know  from  the  Prophet,  you  would  have  ccme  out  to  every 
elevated  place  and  wept  for  salvation  of  your  soul,  given  up  the 
riches  and  treasures  of  the  world  except  what  is  essentially 
necessary  for  you.  (36)  Jesus  Christ  said  :  O  my  disciples,  be 
satisfied  with  little  of  worldly  riches  but  with  greater  divine 
service,  as  the  worldly  addicted  man  remains  satisfied  with  little 
of  divine  service  bu  t  greater  worldly  riches.(37)  Jesus  Christ  said:  It  is  of  greater  virtuous  act  to  give  up 
the  world  for  those  who  search  the  world  for  religion.  (38)  The 
Prophet  of  Islam  said  :  The  world  will  be  broadened  for  you  after 
me  but  it  will  consume  your  faith  in  such  a  way  as  fire  consumes  a 
dry  wood.  (39)  God  sent  revelation  to  Moses  :  O  Moses,  don't  be 
addicted  to  the  world,  as  you  will  not  come  to  me  with  a  greater 
sin  than  this.  (40)  Once  Moses  passed  by  a  man  who  was 
weeping.  He  found  the  man  in  the  same  condition  when  he  was 
returning.  Then  Moses  prayed  to  God  :  O  Lord,  your  servant  is 
weeping  for  fear  of  you.  God  said  :  O  son  of  Imran,  if  his  tears 
flow  over  his  head  and  he  keeps  his  hands  raised  up  till  they  fall 
down,  I  shall  not  forgive  him  as  he  loves  the  world.

Wise  sayings  Hazrat  Ali  said  He  who  has  got  six  virtues 
leaves  nothing  for  search  for  Paradise  and  for  salvation  from 
Hell-  obeying  God  after  knowing  Him,  following  truth  after 
knowing  it,  disobeying  the  devil  after  knowing  him,  saving 
himself  from  falsehood  after  knowing  it,  giving  up  the  world 
after  knowing  it,  and  search  for  the  next  world  after  knowing  it. 
Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said  :  God  shows  mercy  on  him  who 
competes  with  another  in  matters  of  religion  and  He  throws  one

160

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-IIl

on  his  neck  who  competes  with  you  in  matters  of  the  world. 
Loqman  advised  his  son  :  O  darling,  the  world  is  a  deep  sea  and 
many  people  are  drowned  therein.  Make  God-fear  as  your  boat, 
Iman  as  your  oar.  God-reliance  as  your  sail,  so  that  you  may  get 
salvation,  or  else  I  don't  see  the  cause  of  your  salvation.The  saint  Fazil  said:  We  should  ponder  deeply  over  the 
Quranic  verse  :  I  have  made  adornments  for  the  world.  I  have 
created  them  with  the  object  that  I  will  see  who  among  them  is 
great  in  good  works.  A  hermit  was  questioned  :  What  do  you 
think  about  time  ?  He  said  :  Time  destroys  the  body,  creates  new 
hopes,  takes  death  near  and  removes  light  distant.  A  certain  sage 
said  :  success  in  the  world  means  failure,  cleanliness  therein 
means  uncleanliness  and  its  dwellers  remain  in  fear  of  loss  of 
wealth,  of  clamity  and  impending  death.  One  man  said  to  the 
saint  Abu  Hazem  :  I  have  got  no  abode  in  the  world,  yet  I 
complain  to  you  about  my  attachment  to  the  world.  He  said  : 
Look  to  what  God  granted  you  regarding  wealth.  Don't  take 
except  what  is  lawful.  Don't  spend  except  for  things  for  which 
you  should  spend.  If  you  conduct  yourself  in  such  a  way, 
attachment  for  the  world  will  not  harm  you.  The  saint  Fazil  said  : 
If  the  transient  world  was  made  of  gold  and  ever-lasting  and  the 
next  world  of  clay,  it  would  have  been  our  duty  to  love  the 
clay-made  next  world  than  the  world  made  of  gold.  How  futile  is 
it  to  love  transient  earth-made  world  than  to  ever-lasting 
gold-made  next  world.The  wise  Loqman  said  to  his  son:  O  darling,  sell  your 
world  in  exchange  of  your  next  world.  You  will  then  get 
benefit  in  both  the  worlds.  Don't  sell  your  next  world  in 
exchange  of  this  world,  you  will  then  be  a  loser  in  both  the 
worlds.  Hazrat  Ibn  Abbas  said  :  God  divided  the  world  into 
three  parts — (1)  one  part  for  the  believers,  (2)  one  part  for  the 
hypocrites  and  (3)  one  part  for  the  infidels.  A  believer  gathers 
his  provision  therein,  a  hypocrite  adorns  it  and  an  infidel 
makes  enjoyments  therein.  Hazrat  Baheli  said  :  After  the 
Prophet  became  the  messenger  of  God,  the  armies  of  the  devil 
came  to  him  and  said  :  One  Prophet  has  appeared  and  one 
nation  has  come  out.  What  shall  we  do  now  ?  The  devil  said  : 
Do  they  love  the  world  ?  They  said  :  Yes.  The  devil  said  :  I  have 
got  no  anxiety  about  them  even  though  they  do  not  worship 
idols  provided  they  love  the  world.  I  will  come  to  them

Attachment  of  the  world

161

Vol-IH

morning  and  evening  with  three  advices — (1)  acquire  wealth 
Unjsutly,(2)  spend  money  in  improper  places  and  (3)  be  miser  in 
places  where  expenditure  is  necessary.  All  sins  arise  out  of  these 
three  matters.Hazrat  Ali  was  once  asked  about  the  world.  He  said  in  short 
that  accounts  will  be  taken  of  lawful  things  in  the  world  and 
punishment  will  be  given  of  unlawful  things.  Abu  Solaiman 
Darani  said :  When  there  is  the  next  world  in  the  mind  of  a  man, 
the  world  stands  before  him.  When  there  is  the  world  in  his  mind, 
the  next  world  does  not  come  in,  as  the  next  world  is  honourable 
but  the  world  is  an  object  of  hatred.  Malek-b-Dinar  said  :  The 
thoughts  of  the  world  will  come  out  of  your  mind  in  proportion 
to  your  sorrows  for  the  next  world.  Hazrat  Ali  said  :  This  world 
and  the  next  world  are  like  two-co-wives.  A  co-wife  will  be 
dissatisfied  in  proportion  to  your  giving  satisfaction  to  another 
co- wife.Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said:  I  saw  such  men  to  whom  this 
world  was  more  an  object  of  hatred  than  the  trodden  mud.  They 
had  no  attention  to  whom  it  went,  to  whom  it  rested  and  from 
whom  it  set  in.  Once  Hazrat  Omar  went  to  visit  Syria  when  Abyu 
Obadah  was  its  governor.  He  came  riding  on  a  she  camel  to 
receive  Hazrat  Omar.  The  she-camel  had  a  rope  tied  with  her 
nose.  Hazrat  Omar  conversed  with  him  and  then  came  to  his 
abode  but  found  nothing  therein  except  a  sword,  a  shield  and  a 
wood  stand  for  placing  the  Quran  therein.  The  Caliph  asked  him : 
Why  have  you  not  kept  other  necessary  things  in  your  house  ? 
The  governor  said  :  O  Commander  of  the  Faithful,  these  things 
will  carry  me  to  the  place  of  questions  and  answers  (grave).  The 
wise  Loqman  said  to  his  son  :  O  darling,  you  are  drifting  away 
from  this  world  from  the  day  in  which  you  were  bom  and  advacning 
towards  the  next  world.  The  abode  to  which  you  are  proceeding  is 
better  than  the  abode  from  which  you  are  drifting  away.

The  saint  Farnil-b-Iyaz  said:  Wonderful  is  the  man  who 
roams  merrily  even  though  the  knows  that  death  is  inevitable. 
Wonderful  is  the  man  who  laughs  even  though  he  knows  that 
Hell  is  a  truth.  Wonderful  is  the  man  who  remains  satisfied  with 
the  world  even  though  he  knows  that  it  is  transient.  Wonderful  is 
the  man  who  keeps  himself  engaged  in  earning  wealth  even 
though  he  knows  that  fate  is  true.

162

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-IIl162

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-IIl

Once  an  old  man  of  200  years  of  age  came  to  the  Caliph 
Muwayiah  who  asked  him  what  he  wanted  from  him.  The  old 
man  said  :  I  wish  to  get  from  you  the  life  that  has  passed  and  to 
remove  death  which  is  near.  He  said  :  I  have  got  no  power  over 
that.  He  said  :  Then  I  have  got  nothing  to  ask  from  you.  Hazrat 
Hasan  basari  said  :  The  life  of  a  man  will  not  go  out  of  the  world 
without  repentance  for  three  things — (1)  he  could  not  enjoy  with 
satisfaction  what  be  hoarded,  (2)  he  could  not  fulfill  what  he 
hoped  for,  (3)  and  he  could  not  do  actions  which  ought  to  have 
been  done  for  the  next  world.  A  certain  sage  was  asked  :  For 
whom  is  this  world  ?  He  said  :  For  those  who  give  up  this  world. 
He  was  asked  :  for  whom  is  the  next  world.  He  said  :  For  those 
who  want  it.The  saint  Ihya-b-Ma'az  said:  The  wise  men  are  three — (1)  he 
who  gives  up  the  world  before  the  world  gives  him  up,  (2)  he 
who  keeps  himself  prepared  for  his  grave  before  he  enters  it,  (3) 
and  he  who  keeps  Cod  satisfied  before  he  meets  Him.  Hazrat  Ali 
said  :  The  following  six  things  are  the  world — (1),  food,  (2)  drink 
.  (3)  dress,  (4)  conveyance,  (5)  woman  and  (6)  scents.  Honey  is  the 
best  of  foods  and  it  comes  from  the  mouths  of  bees.  Water  is  the 
best  of  drinks.  Both  the  virtuous  and  the  sinners  enjoy  it.  Silk 
cloth  is  the  best  of  dresses  and  it  is  the  saliva  of  worms.  Horse  is 
the  best  of  conveyance.  The  Prophet  fought  riding  on  it.  Woman 
is  the  best  of  coveted  things  to  a  man.  He  takes  pleasures  in 
penetrating  his  genital  organ  into  female  vazinal  canal.  Thus 
vazina  is  the  most  coveted  thing  in  a  woman.  Musk  is  the  best  of 
scents  and  it  is  the  blood  of  deer.Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  once  wrote  to  Caliph  Abdul  Aziz :  This 
worlds  is  transient,  not  ever-lasting.  Adam  was  sent  to  the  world 
as  a  sort  of  punishment.  O  Commander  of  the  Faithful,  fear  the 
world.  Giving  up  the  world  means  gathering  provision  from  the 
world  for  the  next  world.  To  remain  in  want  in  the  world  means 
to  posses  wealth  in  the  hereafter.  Every  moment  of  the  world 
destroys  a  man.  He  who  honours  the  world,  is  humiliated  by  it. 
He  who  hoards  up  for  the  world,  is  thrown  into  wants.  The 
condition  of  the  world  is  like  poison.  He  who  does  not  know  it 
eats  it  and  therein  there  lies  his  destruction.  Live  in  the  world  like 
the  person  who  treats  his  wound  and  bears  hardship  for  a  time 
for  fear  of  long  sufferings  and  keeps  patience  of  bitter  pills  for 
fear  of  too  many  medicines.  So  fear  this  abode  of  deception.

Attachment  of  the  world

163

Vol'Dl

deceit  and  treachery.  Treasures  of  the  world  were  presented  to 
0ur  Prophet.  Had  he  accepted  them,  he  would  not  have  received 
honour  like  the  wing  of  a  fly.

There  is  in  Hadis  Qudsi  that  God  said  to  Moses  :  When  you 
$ee  some  wealth  coming  to  you,  tell  it:  Punishment  of  sin  will 
soon  come.  When  you  see  poverty  coming  to  you,  say :  Welcome 
to  you,  thanks  to  the  sign  of  the  religious  men.  If  you  like,  follow 
jesus  Christ  as  he  used  to  say  :  Hunger  is  my  curry.  God-fear  is 
my  sign,  Sufi  cloth  is  my  dress,  sun-rays  in  cold  season  is  my 
provision,  morning  is  my  lamp,  my  feet  are  my  conveyances, 
what  the  earth  grows  is  my  food.  I  pass  nights  having  nothing 
and  I  pass  my  days  having  nothing.  Who  is  a  richer  man  than 
myself?Hazrat  Ohab-b-Munabbah  said  :  When  God  sent  Moses  and 
Haron  to  Pharaoh,  He  said  :  Don't  fear  him,  his  forelock  is  in  my 
hand.  He  cannot  move  his  tongue  without  My  permission  and 
cannot  breathe.  Hazrat  Ali  said  in  his  sermon  :  O  people,  know 
that  you  are  dead  and  you  will  be  raised  up  after  you  are  deal.  Let 
not  the  world's  life  deceive  you.  This  world's  life  is  surrounded 
by  dangers  and  difficulties,  its  destruction  and  its  treachery  are 
well  known  to  all.  What  is  therein  will  pass  away  along  with  the 
world  and  the  world  will  roam  in  the  midst  of  its  votaries.

ILLUSTRATIONS  OF  THE  WORLD

(1)  First  illustration:  The  world  is  moving  towards 
destruction.  The  world  promises  that  it  is  lasting,  but  it  breaks  its 
promise  immediately  after  that.  Look  to  the  world.  It  is 
motionless  and  steady,  but  really  it  is  always  moving.

(2)  Second  illustration:  The  world  is  like  a  shade.  Shade 
seems  to  be  steady  at  its  outward  look,  but  really  it  is  moving  and 
constantly  drifting.

(3)  Third  illustration:  The  world  is  like  dream  of  night  and 
like  the  different  ideas  in  dream.  The  Prophet  said  :  The  world  is 
like  a  dream  and  like  happiness  and  punishment  in  dream. 
Eunus-b-  Obaaid  said  :  I  found  myself  like  a  sleeping  man  in  the 
world.  He  sees  what  he  likes  and  does  not  like  and  then  he  wakes 
up  from  sleep  in  this  condition.  Similarly  the  people  are  asleep 
and  rise  up  at  death.

164

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-nj164

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-nj

(4)  Fourth  illustration:  The  world  is  like  an  unchaste  woman. 
The  world  at  first  treats  well  and  then  leads  to  destruction.  The 
world  dresses  itself  like  an  unchaste  woman  and  calls  the  peopie 
towards  her.  Whenever  she  takes  the  people  to  her  house,  she 
ruins  them.  Jesus  Christ  saw  the  world  in  his  mind's  eye  like  an 
old  woman  dressed  nicely  and  asked  her  :  How  many  husbands 
have  you  taken  ?  She  said  :  There  is  no  limit.  He  asked  :  Have  a]] 
of  them  died  during  your  life  time  or  have  they  divorce  you  once 
after  another  ?  The  woman  said :  1  have  ruined  all  of  them.  Jesus 
Christ  said  :  Woe  to  your  remaining  husbands.  Thy  do  not  take 
lessons  seeing  the  condition  of  your  previous  husbands.  They  do 
not  take  care  even  tough  you  have  runined  them  one  after 
another.

(5)  Fifth  illustration:  The  world  is  like  anugly  old  woman. 
The  outer  form  of  the  world  is  one  kind  and  its  secret  form  is 
another.  Its  outer  form  is  nice  but  its  inner  form  is  ugly  and 
poisonous.  So  the  world  can  well  be  compared  to  an  old  and  ulgy 
woman.  The  saint  Abu  Bakr-b-Iyash  said  :  I  saw  the  world  in 
dream  as  an  ugly  woman  with  dislevelled  hairs.  She  is  beating 
drum  with  her  hands  and  many  people  are  dancing  behind  her. 
When  she  came  forward,  she  said :  If  I  can  win  over  you,  it  will  be 
good.  I  will  deceive  you  as  I  have  deceived  these  people.  Then 
Abu  Bakr  wept :  I  saw  this  woman  before  I  came  to  Bagdad.(6)  Sixth  ill  illustration:  Know,  O  dear  readers,  that  a  man 
has  got  three  conditions — (1)  one  condition  is  that  he  was 
nothing  at  one  time  and  that  was  before  his  birth.  (2)  The  second 
condition  is  that  he  will  not  see  the  world  after  his  death  till 
resurrection.  (3)  The  third  condition  is  the  time  between  these 
two  times — the  time  of  life.  This  is  the  time  of  life's  span.  Now 
compare  this  short  time  with  the  endless  time  before  and  after. 
For  this  reason,  the  Prophet  said  :  'I  am  in  this  world  like  a 
sojourner  who  travels  in  scorching  rays  of  the  sun  and  then 
sleeps  for  a  time  under  the  shade  of  a  tree  on  the  way  and  then 
rises  up  and  walks.  He  who  looks  to  the  world  with  this  angle  of 
vision,  can  not  be  addicted  to  this  world.  He  cannot  look  how  his 
days  pass  by,  whether  in  sorrows  and  difficulties  or  in  joy  and 
happiness.  He  does  not  construct  any  building  or  a  house  of 
wood  up  to  his  death.  One  day  he  saw  a  companion  constructing 
a  house  of  wood  and  said  :  I  am  seeing  that  death  is  faster  than 
this  house.  Jesus  Christ  said  :  The  world  is  like  a  bridge.  Cross  it

Attachment  of  the  world

165

voi-in

(,utdo  not  live  in  it.  This  is  a  clear  illustration  as  this  world's  life 
js  drifting  towards  the  next  world.  The  beginning  of  this  bridge  is 
the  birth  place  and  the  end  is  grave.  To  construct  houses  on  the 
road  an£l to  adorn  them  is  foolishness  in  the  extreme  as  it  shall

havf  to  be  crossed.havf  to  be  crossed.

0  Seventh  illustration:  At  first,  if  seems  that  there  is  joy  and 
happiness  in  the  world  but  it  is  difficult  to  get  out  of  it  safe. 
Hazrat  Ali  wrote  to  Salman  Faresi  :  The  world  is  like  a  snake 
vtfhich  is  smooth  on  touch  but  whose  poison  is  destructive.  So  be 
careful  of  what  seems  therefrom  liking  to  you.  When  you  are 
certain  that  you  shall  have  to  part  from  it,  you  should  give  up  all 
thoughts  about  it.  The  more  you  enjoy  the  objects  of  happiness  in 
the  world,  the  more  it  will  be  the  cause  of  your  sorrows.

(8)  Eight  illustration:  The  Prophet  said  :  The  worldly 
addicted  man  is,  like  one  who  walks  upon  water.  Can  he  walk 
upon  water  without  getting  his  feet  wetted  in  water  ?  This  is  a 
lesson  for  those  who  think  that  their  soul  is  pure  though  their 
body  is  in  worldly  happiness.  Worldly  attachment  becomes  a 
stumbling  block  to  getting  pleasures  in  divine  services.  Jesus 
Christ  said  :  I  tell  you  with  truth,  the  worldly  addicted  man  does 
not  get  pleasure  in  divine  service  as  a  diseased  man  does  not  get 
any  taste  in  delicious  foods.  I  tell  you  with  true  that  if  you  do  not 
hold  under  control  your  riding  animal,  its  nature  will  change  and 
you  will  feel  difficulty  in  riding  on  it.  Similar  is  the  condition  of 
mind.  If  you  cannot  keep  the  mind  under  control  by  constant 
divine  service  and  remembrance  of  death,  it  will  become  hard 
and  harsh.  The  Prophet  said  :  There  are  difficulties  and  danger 
sin  the  world.  The  good  work  of  any  of  you  is  like  a  pot.  If  its 
upper  portion  is  clean,  its  inner  portion  is  also  clean  and  if  its 
upper  portion  is  unclean,  its  inner  portion  also  is  unclean.(9)  Ninth  illustration:  The  Prophet  said  :  The  world  is  like  a 
torn  cloth  from  its  beginning  to  end.  The  end  of  the  cloth  is 
hanging  up  with  a  thread  which  will  soon  be  torn.

(10)  Tenth  illustration:  Jesus  Christ  said  :  The  searcher  for 
the  world  is  like  one  who  drinks  water  of  sea.  The  more  he  will 
drink  the  saltish  water  of  the  sea,  the  more  his  thirst  will  increase 
and  ultimately  he  will  meet  with  his  end.

(11)  Eleventh  illustration:  The  temptations  and  greed  of  the 
world  conduce  to  happiness  as  the  greed  for  food  is  enjoyable  to

166

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-lij

belly.  Everyone  will  see  his  greed  of  the  world  stency  and  an 
object  of  hatred  at  the  time  of  his  death  as  the  delicious  foods 
become  obnoxious  in  stomach.  The  more  the  food  is  delicious 
and  tasteful,  the  more  the  stool  gives  out  obnoxious  smell. 
Similarly  the  more  the  temptations  are  delicious  to  heart,  the 
more  it  will  become  troublesome  at  the  time  of  death.  The  more  a 
man  has  got  wqrldly  riches,  the  more  are  his  pangs  of  separation 
at  the  time  of  his  death.  What  is  the  meaning  of  death  except  the 
leaving  of  the  worldly  riches  ?  The  Prophet  said  :  God  likened  the 
world  to  the  food  of  men  and  likened  the  food  to  the  world.

(12)  Twelveth  illustration:  The  Prophet  said  :  What  is  this 
world  in  comparison  with  the  next  world  ?  This  world  is  like  that 
scanty  water  which  a  finger  catches  when  it  is  put  into  sea.(13)  Thirteenth  illustration:  Know,  O  dear  readers,  that  the 
worldly  men  are  like  the  people  in  their  carelessness  who  got  on  a 
boat  and  the  boatman  held  it  up  with  an  island  and  asked  the 
boarders  to  clear  their  natural  calls.  Some  of  them  returned  soon 
after  their  calls  of  nature  and  some  sat  in  the  island  heartily 
enjoying  the  songs  of  birds,  seeing  the  beautiful  brids  and  beasts 
and  other  charming  things  of  the  island.  They  returned  after 
sometime  only  to  find  their  places  in  the  boat  made  too  narrow. 
Some  of  them  totllay  forgot  the  boat  and  settled  in  the  island 
without  heeding  the  boatman's  words  that  they  should  return 
soon  to  their  boat.  As  a  result  they  stayed  in  the  island  and  died 
soon  after  without  getting  food  and  drink.  This  is  the  illustration 
of  the  world.  Those  who  forgot  their  permanent  abode  and  are 
engrossed  in  worldly  enjoyments,  they  meet  with  spiritual  death 
and  destroy  themselves.  Nothing  will  go  tight  them  at  the  time  of 
their  death  except  good  deeds.

(14)  Fourteenth  illustration:  Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  reported :  I 
heard  that  the  Prophet  gave  advice  to  his  companions :  The  world 
is  like  a  company  of  people  who  were  travelling  through  a  desert. 
Their  provisions  ran  short  and  they  faced  death.  When  they 
where  in  this  this  condition,  they  found  a  man  coming  towards 
them  from  a  distance.  When  he  came,  he  said  to  them  :  If  I  can 
take  you  to  a  fountains  and  a  good  garden,  will  you  obey  me  ? 
they  said :  Yes,  we  shall  not  disobey  you.  We  swear  in  the  name  of 
God.  He  then  took  them  to  a  fountain  and  a  garden  full  of 
vegetables  and  fruits.  Thus  they  saved  their  lives  after  eating 
them.  The  man  said  :  O  people,  now  you  may  go.  Some  of  themAttachment  of  the  world

167

Vol-HI

obeyed  him  and  went  away  from  that  place.  Those  who 
disobeyed  were  soon  caught  by  enemies  and  were  either  killed  or 
made  captives.

(15)  Fifteenth  illustration.  This  world  is  like  guest  or  rest  . 
house  built  for  the  travellers  and  not  for  permanent  residence 
therein.  The  rest  house  is  to  be  enjoyed  only  temporarily.  This 
world  is  similarly  a  rest  house  for  the  travellers  of  the  next  world 
who  will  take  benefit  therefrom  for  their  permanent  residence.

SPECIAL  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  WORLD

What  is  the  world?  Which  portion  of  the  world  is  to  be 
accepted  and  which  to  be  rejected  ?  Which  is  good  in  the  world 
and  which  is  bad  ?  This  world  and  the  next  world  are  two 
conditions  of  your  mind,  everything  before  death  is  world  and 
everything  after  death  is  next  world.  The  thing  which  gives  you 
pleasure  before  death  increases  your  greed  and  gives  you  taste  is 
the  world  for  you  and  the  thing  which  will  give  you  pleasure 
after  death  is  the  next  world.  *THREE  KINDS  OF  THINGS  ARE  NOT  WORLD.— (1)  The 
things  that  will  go  to  the  next  world  with  a  man  and  knowledge 
and  actions.  The  objects  of  knowledge  are  God,  His  attributes. 
His  actions.  His  sovereignty  over  heaven  and  earth,  etc.  Actions 
mean  the  actions  done  for  the  sake  of  God  and  His  pleasure.  The 
learned  man  is  he  who  possesses  these  two  attributes.  To  him 
knowledge  of  the  former  is  greatest,  for  which  he  gives  up  food; 
drink  and  even  marriage,  as  the  happiness  of  the  former  is 
greater  than  that  of  the  latter.  This  knowledge  is  a  portion  of  the 
world,  yet  it  cannot  be  called  world.  It  is  included  within  the  next 
world.  A  certain  sage  said  :  I  fear  death  as  it  will  destroy  my 
might  prayer.  Another  sage  said  :  O  God,  give  me  strength  in  the 
grave  to  pray,  to  bow  and  prostrate.  The  Prophet  said  :  Three 
things  of  the  world  are  dear  to  me-wife,  scent  and  prayer.  Even 
prayer  was  considered  as  belonging  to  the  world.  The  things 
which  can  be  perceived  by  the  five  senses  are  of  this  world. 
Prayer  is  done  by  movements  of  bodily  organs  and  therefore  it  is 
included  within  the  world.

(2)  Things  of  the  second  kind.  These  things  are  also  not 
included  within  the  world  and  these  are  such  things  as  are 
absolutely  necessary  for  a  man  in -this  world.  What  is  not 
absolutely  necessary  is  world.  What  is  not  done  for  the  next

168

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III168

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

world  is  world  and  not  next  world,  just  as  to  enjoy  lawful  things 
in  excess  of  necessity,  to  enjoy  silver  and  gold,  horse,  cattle, 
landed  property,  house?  and  buildings,  dress  and  delicious 
foods  of  various  kinds.  Hazrat  Omar  reported  that  he  had 
appointed  Abu  Darda’a  as  governor  of  the  province  of  Hems. 
The  governor  erected  a  latrine  with  two  dirhams'  expense. 
Hazrat  Omar  wrote  to  him  on  getting  this  news  :  From  Omar, 
Commander  of  the  Faithful,  to  Abu  Darda'a.  You  have  got  ample 
worldly  adornments  in  the  places  of  Chosroes  and  Byzantines, 
but  God  proposes  to  destroy  them.  When  this  letter  of  mine 
reaches  you,  you  and  your  family  must  come  to  Damsscus  and 
stay  there  till  death.  Hazrat  Omar  thought  it  even  unnecessary.

(3)  Things  of  the  third  kind.  The  things  of  the  third  kind  are 
in  the  intermediary  between  the  above  two  classes.  This  is  to 
work  with  the  object  of  doing  next  worldly  actions,  such  as 
taking  food  and  drink  only  to  save  life,  to  wear  coarse  cloth  only 
to  cover  private  parts  and  to  do  such  works  from  which  there  is 
no  escape.  So  what  is  necessary  of  food  and  drink  to  save  life  and 
health  is  not  world.

THREE  THINGS  WILL  GO  WITH  A  MAN 
AT  THE  TIME  OF  HIS  DEATHTHREE  THINGS  WILL  GO  WITH  A  MAN 
AT  THE  TIME  OF  HIS  DEATH

(1)  purity  of  heart,  (2)  satisfaction  arising  out  of  the 
remembrance  of  God  (3)  and  engagement  of  mind  in  divine 
love.  Purity  of  mind  cannot  be  attained  if  one  cannot  control 
himself  from  worldly  passions  and  temptations.  Satisfaction 
cannot  be  gained  unless  there  is  constant  remembrance  of  God 
and  keeping  patience  therein.  These  three  things  will  be  the 
causes  of  satisfaction.  By  death  the  existence  of  man  does  not 
end  but  he  returns  to  God  after  separation  from  his  dear  things 
of  the  world.  From  this,  it  is  known  that  a  traveler  towards  the 
next  world  must  necessarily  possess  three  qualities — Zikr 
(remembrance  of  God),  Fikr  (good  thought)  and  meditation 
and  pious  actions  which  prevent  him  from  worldly  greeds.  To 
such  a  man,  the  enjoyments  of  the  world  are  bitter.  If  there  is 
no  health,  these  qualities  cannot  be  attained  and  dress  and  an 
abode  for  habitations.  So  these  things  are  also  necessary.  If  a 
man  takes  these  things  to  the  proportion  of  necessity  with  the 
object  of  the  next  world,  he  cannot  be  addicted  to  the  world. 
For  him  the  world  is  a  seed  ground  for  the  future.

Vol-III

Attachment  of  the  world

169

There  are  two  classes  of  these  things — Lawful  and  unlawful. 
Unlawful  things  lead  to  the  punishment  in  the  next  world  and 
lawful  things  stand  as  blocks  to  higher  ranks.  To  wait  for 
rendering  account  on  the  Resurrection  Day  is  a  sort  of 
punishment.  The  Prophet  said :  There  are  accounts  for  the  lawful 
things  of  the  world  and  punishment  for  the  unlawful  things.  He 
also  said :  There  is  also  punishment  for  the  lawful  things  but  this 
punishment  is  lighter  than  that  of  unlwful  things.So  everything  in  the  world  is  cursed,  small  or  great,  lawful  or 
unlawful.  The  proportion  of  a  thing  which  helps  God-fear  is  not 
world.  He  whose  Marfat  or  God's  knowledge  is  strong  takes  great 
care  of  the  world.  Jesus  Christ  once  was  sleeping  placing  his  head  on 
a  stone.  The  devil  came  to  him  and  said :  You  have  become  attached 
to  the  world.  At  this,  he  threw  away  the  stone  at  him.  Hazrat 
Solaiman  entertained  his  people  with  various  dishes,  but  himself 
ate  husk  of  wheat.  Our  Prophet  was  pesented  the  treasures  of  the 
world,  but  he  kept  himself  hungry  for  some  days  and  bound  stones 
in  his  belly  to  reduce  the  pangs  of  hunger.  For  this  reason,  the 
prophets  and  friends  of  God  were  given  the  most  severe  trails,  so 
that  they  may  enjoy  entemal  happiness  of  the  next  world.  So  whatis 
not  done  for  the  sake  of  God  is  called  world  and  what  is  done  for  His 
sake  is  not  world.

Question.  What  are  the  things  for  the  sake  of  God?

Answer.  All  things  are  divided  into  three  classes.Question.  What  are  the  things  for  the  sake  of  God?

Answer.  All  things  are  divided  into  three  classes.

(1)  What  is  not  done  for  the  sake  of  God,  such  as  sins, 
prophibited  things  and  unnecessary  .lawful  things.  These 
are  the  things  of  the  world,  (2)  What  is  done  for  the  sake  of 
God.  (3)  Worldly  actions  done  for  the  sake  of  God,  such  as  food 
and  drink,  marriage  etc.  The  second  class  of  things  are 
again  sub-divided  into  three  classes.  (1)  Fikr  or  meditation 
about  the  creatious  of  God,  (2)  Zikr  or  remembrance  of  God 
and  (3)  abstaining  from  worldly  greeds  and  passions.  When 
these  things  are  done  for  the  sake  of  God  and  not  for  show,  they 
appertain  to  the  third  class.  They  are  food,  drink,  marriage  etc.  If 
they  are  done  for  the  sake  of  God,  they  are  next  worldly  actions 
but  if  they  are  done  to  satisfy  just,  they  are  wofldly  actions.  The 
Prophet  said  :  He  who,  searches  lawful  things  of  the  world  to 
show  glory  or  boast  will  meet  with  God  in  His  enraged  condition, 
but  he  who  searches  the  world  to  abstain'from  begging  and  to

170

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

save  him  will  come  on  the  Resurrection  Day  with  face  bright  as 
full  moon.  God  says :  He  who  restrains  himself  from  vain  desires 
will  have  paradise  as  his  destination — 19 : 40Q.FIVE  THINGS  OF  VAIN  DESIRES:  Passion  or  vain  desire  is 
composed  of  five  things.  God  says  of  them  in  the  following  verse : 
Know  that  this  world's  life  is  a  mere  sport,  vain  plays  and 
adornment,  mutual  boast  and  increase  in  wealth  and 
children — 57  :  20Q.  In  another  verse,  seven  things  have  been 
counted  as  vain  desires — 3 : 14  Q. — Men  have  been  given  the  vain 
desires  of  women,  children,  hoarded  wealth  of  silver  and  gold, 
horses  of  good  quality,  quadrupeds  and  crops.  These  are  things 
of  this  world's  life.

Now  you  have  come  to  know  what  is  world  and  what  is  not 
world.  Food,  dress  and  abode  to  the  extent  of  almost  necessity 
and  if  done  to  please  God  are  not  world.  What  is  in  excess  of  these 
things  is  called  world.  There  are  things  which  are  absolutely 
necessary  and  things  which  are  simply  necessary.  There  is  the 
middle  course  between  these  two  kinds  which  is  best  and  the 
middle  course  keeps  near  the  border  line  of  absolute  necessity.The  Saint  Wais  Qarni  was  regarded  by  his  country  men  as  a 
mad  man  as  he  subjected  himself  to  strict  rigours  of  life.  They 
constructed  for  him  a  hut  which  he  visited  once  a  year  or  once  in 
two  or  three  years.  He  used  to  go  out  before  Azan  for  morning 
prayer  and  returned  home  after  Isha  or  night  prayer.  His  food 
were  the  stones  of  dried  grapes  and  he  used  to  put  on  the  torn 
pieces  of  cloth  after  sewing  which  he  gathered  from  heaps  of 
refuges  in  markets.  Often  the  boys  threw  stones  at  him.  He  said  to 
the  body's  :  Throw  small  stones  as  my  ablution  might  break  for 
bleeding  if  large  stones  are  thrown  at  me.  The  Prophet  looked  his 
actions  with  honour  and  said  :  I  am  feeling  the  breath  of  God 
from  the  land  of  Yemen.  This  is  a  hint  at  Wais  Qarni.  Hazrat 
Omar  delivered  this  sermon  to  the  people  after  taking  charge  of 
Khilafat :  O  people,  let  the  inhabitants  of  Iraq  stand  up  and  let 
others  sit  down.  A  party  of  men  stood  up.  Then  he  said  :  Let  the 
inhabitants  of  Kufa  stand  up  and  let  others  sit  down.  When  it  was 
done  he  said  :  Let  the  people  of  Murad  clan  remain  standing  and 
let  others  down.  He  said  afterwards :  Let  the  inhabitants  of  Qam 
remain  standing  and  let  others  sit  down.  Except  one  man,  all 
others  sat  down.  Then  Omar  said  to  him  :  Do  you  know 
Wais-b-Amr  Qarni  ?  He  said  :  I  know,  O  Commander  of  the

Vol-III

Attachment  of  the  world

171

Faithful,  why  do  you  ask  about  him?  By  God,  there  is  nobody 
more  insane,  stupid  and  fool  than  him.  Hazrat  Omar  began  to 
weep  and  said  :  I  heard  from  the  Prophet  that  owing  to  his 
intercession  a  great  many  people  like  the  numbers  of  Rabia  and 
Modar  clans  will  get  salvation.Haran-b-Hayan  said :  When  I  heard  this  from  Hazrat  Omar,  I 
came  to  Kufa  and  searched  for  Wais  Qarni  and  found  him  at  noon 
washing  cloths  in  the  bank  of  the  Tigirs.  I  found  him  strong  and 
stout,  with  hald  head,  thick  beard,  and  broad  face.  I  asked  him  : 
How  are  yoi^O  wais  ?  He  replied  :  O  Haran,  son  of  Hayan,  how 
are  you  ?  Who  did  tell  you  my  address  ?  I  said :  God.  I  wondered 
how  he  came  to  know  my  name  when  he  did  not  see  me  before.  I 
asked  him :  How  have  you  come  to  know  my  name  and  the  name 
of  my  father?  He  said  :  The  Almighty  gave  me  this  information. 
My  soul  recognized  your  soul  when  I  talked  with  you.  Similarly  a 
believer  can  recognise  another  believer.  I  said :  Tell  me  a  Hadis  of 
the  Prophet.  He  said  :  I  never  had  any  companionship  with  the 
Holy  Prophet  but  I  saw  some  of  his  companions  and  heard  some 
traditions  from  them.  Then  he  recited  the  Quranic  verse  :  I  have 
not  created  the  heavens  and  earth  and  what  is  between  them  out 
of  sport.  I  created  them  with  truth,  but  most  people  do  not 
know — 44  : 39  Q.  When  he  read  up  to  this,  he  raised  a  loud  shriek 
and  said :  O  Haran,  your  father  Hayan  has  died  and  you  will  soon 
die.  Hazrat  Adam,  his  wife  Hawa,  prophets  Noah,  Moses,  David 
and  even  Muhammad,  the  world  Prophet,  died.  Hazrat  Abu  Bakr 
died  and  my  friend  Hazrat  Omar  also  has  just  expired.  Alas,  O 
Omar,  alas,  O  Omar.  I  said  :  Hazrat  Omar  has  not  died.  I  saw  him 
alive  when  I  left  him.  He  said  :  My  Lord  has  just  now  given  me  the 
news  that  Omar  has  expired.  Then  he  said  to  Haran  :  Walk  in  the 
path  of  God's  Book  and  the  believers  and  pious  men.  The  news  of 
your  and  my  death  have  come.  Don't  be  unmindful  even  for  a 
twinkling  of  an  eye.  When  you  will  return  to  your  people,  give 
sermons  to  them.  Don't  go  a  single  step  from  the  Jamaat  of  a 
Muslims.  Invoke  for  me  and  for  you.  Haran  I  entrust  you  to  God. 
May  God  shower  mercy  on  you.  You  will  not  see  me  again.  I  am 
going  this  way  and  you  go  that  way.MEANING  OF  THIS  WORLD 
AND  THE  NEXT  WORLD

It  will  be  clear  to  you  from  what  has  been  described  above 
that  the  things  on  which  the  sun  casts  its  rays  and  the  things

172

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

which  the  earth  grows  are  all  included  within  the  limit  of  this 
world/  and  the  things  if  done  for  the  sake  of  God  and  the  things 
contrary  to  the  above  are  the  next  world.  Whatever  is  absolutely 
necessary  to  gain  strength  for  divine  service  is  an  action  of  the 
next  world  if  taken  in  accordance  with  the  wishes  of  God.  If  a 
pilgrim  is  on  his  way  to  pilgrimage  and  takes  care  of  things 
necessary  for  his  pilgrirmage,  such  as  provisions  of  himself  and 
his  conveyance,  pilgrimage  is  not  nulligied  therefore  and  he  is 
engaged  then  in  the  actions  of  pilgrimage.  Similarly  body  is  the 
carrier  of  soul  and  walks  along  the  distance  of  life.  So  efforts  to 
gain  and  preserve  strength  of  body  for  acquiring  knowledge  and 
good  works  are  not  called  world,  but  included  within  the  next 
world.  The  saint  Tanafusi  said  :  I  was  attached  to  the  door  of 
Banu  Shaiba  of  the  Ka'ba  for  seven  days.  On  the  eighth  day,  I 
heard  and  unknown  voice  :  Be  careful,  God  makes  the  internal 
eye  of  one  blind  who  takes  from  the  world  kings  in  excess  of  what 
is  necessary  for  him.

REAL  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  WORLD

Know,  O  dear  readers,  that  the  making  of  the  world  is — (1) 
the  things  which  exist  in  the  world,  (2)  the  things  with  which  man 
have  got  connection,  (3)  and  the  things  for  the  adornment  of 
which  men  are  engaged.(1)  The  things  which  exist  in  the  world  are  the  earth  and  the 
things  that  are  on  it.  God  says  :  I  have  created  whatever  is  in  the 
earth  as  adornment  in  order  to  try  who  among  them  is  best  in 
action.  The  earth  is  a  bed  for  the  children  of  Adam  and  for  their 
rest.  Whatever  is  grown  is  divided  into  three  classes — (1 )  mineral 
substances,  (2)  plants  and  (3)  animals.  Animals  are  men,  birds 
and  beasts.  Man  wants  to  subdue  birds,  beasts  and  even  men 
called  slaves  and  wants  also  women  for  enjoyment.  These  are  the 
world.  Men"  love  women,  children,  gold  and  silver,  crops  and 
quardrnped  animals.  Man  has  got  two  connections  with  these 
things — internal  and  external.  The  meaning  of  internal 
connection  is  to  love  these  things  with  heart,  to  engage  with  them 
in  enjoyment  and  turn  all  thoughts  for  them.  His  heart  then 
becomes  addicted  to  the  world  like  a  slave.  For  this  reason,  all 
evils,  such  as  pride,  treachery,  show,  hatred,  name  and  fame, 
flattery,  love  of  wealth  enter  the  heart.  This  is  the  internal 
connection  with  the  world.  The  meaning  of  outer  connection  so 
that  of  the  body  to  take  recourse  to  business  and  industry.  So

Vol-III

Attachment  of  the  world

173

there  is  the  connection  of  mind  with  love  and  connection  of  body 
with  the  things.  All  the  things  are  for  food  of  the  body,  but  food  of 
the  soul  is  the  intention  with  which  food  is  taken  for  the  sake  of 
God.  The  man  who  forgets  his  goal  and  soul  living  in  the  world  is 
like  the  pilgrim  who  remains  always  engaged  with  his  conveying 
animal  and  forgets  his  pilgrimage.  The  pilgrim  towards  the  next 
world  remembers  his  goal  and  does  only  what  is  necessary  to 
take  him  to  the  destination.CAUSES  OF  ENGAGEMENT  IN  THE  WORLD:  The  three 
causes  are  to  gather  food,  dress  and  abode.  Food  is  for 
preservation  of  the  body,  dress  is  for  protection  of  the  body  from 
heat  and  cold,  and  abode  is  for  protection  of  the  body  and  to  keep 
away  the  causes  of  destruction  of  lives  and  wealth,  God  created 
these  things  for  the  benefit  of  mankind.  There  are  five  necessary 
things  for  man  which  are  the  basis  of  industry  and  main  causes  of 
his  engagement — (1)  cultivation,  (2)  grazing,  (3)  hunting,  (4) 
weaving  and  (5)  construction.  Cvultivation  is  for  growing  crops 
and  food  stuffs.  Grazing  is  for  maintaining  beasts  and 
quardrupeds.  Weaving  is  for  making  cloths  and  dresses  and 
construction  is  for  making  houses  for  habitation.  For  smooth 
•  living,  administrative- works,  judicial  works  and  military  work, 
.  are  necessary.  So  mankind  is  divided  into  three  classes  from  the 
point  of  view  of 'these  wqrks — (1)  cultivators  and  Industrialists, 
.(2)  soldiers,  and  (3)  offices  of  government.''  The  teligious  men  are  of  di/ferent  glasses.  One -class  of 
‘rplig’iou4  men  think  that  jthis  world  is  a  .house  of  -dangers, 
difficijltie&and  labpuranjd'  think  also  that  they  will.be  owners  of 
fortune  id  th^  next  world  irrespective  Of ‘actions  .good  or  bad. 
Another  class  of  religious  men'  think  that  natuial  passions  must 
be  uprooted  for  salvation  and  it  is  not  sufficient  only  to  bring 
them  under  control.  Another  class  think  that  it  is  impossible  to 
observe  religious  rules  and  that  God  has  got  no  necessity  for  the 
divine  service  of  men.  Another  class  think  that  divine  service  is 
not  necessary  as  it  is  sufficient  to  have  knowledge  of  God. 
Another  class  of  men  rightly  think  that  there  is  salvation  in 
following  the  prophets  especially  the  last  Prophet  of  Arabia. 
They  do  hot  give  up  the  world,  nor  uproot  their  passions.  They 
take  from  the  world  whatever  absolutely  necessary  for  them.  The 
Prophet  said  that  out  of  many  parties,  only  one  party  will  get 
salvation.  The  companions  asked  :  O  Prophet  of  God,  who  are

174

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

they  ?  He  said  :  People  of  Sunnatand  Jamaat.  The  Prophet  was 
asked :  Who  are  the  people  of  Sunnat  and  Jamaat  ?  He  said :  Those 
who  tread  my  path  and  the  path  of  my  companions  ?  They  did 
not  take  the  world  for  its  sake  but  for  religion.  They  did  not  give 
up  the  world  but  really  they  renunciated  the  world.  They 
adopted  the  middle  course  in  their  actions  and  did  not  go  to  the 
extremes.

CHAPTER  VII 
LOVE  FOR  WEALTHCHAPTER  VII 
LOVE  FOR  WEALTH

There  are  many  dangers  and  difficulties  in  the  world  and  the 
greatest  danger  is  that  of  wealth.  One  of  the  dangers  of  wealth  is 
that  it  cannot  satisfy  anybody  and  nobody  is  safe  even  if  he 
possesses  enormous  wealth  and  riches.  If  he  loses  his  wealth,  he 
becomes  poor  and  povety  leads  to  infidelity.  If  his  wealth  become 
enormous,  it  leads  him  to  irreligiousness.  Its  ultimate  result  is 
loss.  In  short  wealth  has  got  benefits  and  harms.  Its  benefits  lead 
him  to  salvation  and  its  harms  lead  him  to  destruction.  It  is  very 
difficult  to  distinguish  its  good  and  evil,  its  good  and  bad.  Only 
those  who  are  experienced  know  them.  Man  is  tried  by  two 
conditions,  solvency  and  poverty.  He  who  has  got  no  wealth 
meets  with  two  conditions,  satisfaction  or  greed.  Satisfaction  is 
good  and  greed  is  bad.  Greed  also  has  got  two  conditions-(l)  to 
be  greedy  for  what  people  have  got  and  (2)  to  engage  onesejf  in 
different  businesses  and  industries.  The  rich  man  meets  also  with 
two  conditions,  hoarding  wealth  or  spending  it.  The  former  is 
bad  and  the  latter  is  good.  He  who  spends  wealth  with  two 
conditions,  is  either  extravagant  or  moderate.  The  former  is  bad 
and  the  latter  is  good.  We  shall  describe  below  these  conditions 
in  detail.

CONDEMNATION  OF  LOVE  OF  WEALTHCONDEMNATION  OF  LOVE  OF  WEALTH

God  says:  O  believers,  let  not  your  weath  and  children  divert 
you  from  the  remembrance  of  God.  Those  who  do  that  are  indeed 
the  losers.  God  says  :  Your  riches  and  children  are  a  trial.  God 
says  :  I  will  give  full  rewards  for  the  actions  of  those  who  desire 
the  world's  life  and  its  adornments.  God  says  :  Surely  man  is 
inordinate  as  he  thinks  himself  free  from  wants-96 :  7Q.  God  says 
:  Exessive  wealth  will  destroy  you.  The  Prophet  said  :  Love  for 
wealth  and  greed  for  power  breed  hypocrisy  as  rain  grows  grass 
•  in  the  earth.  He  also  said  :  As  two  hungry  tigers  cause  harms  to 
the  goats  by  entering  their  fold,  so  also  love  of  riches  and  greed 
for  power  and  for  name  and  fame  make  destruction  by  entering 
into  the  religion  of  a  Muslim.  The  Prophet  said:  Those  who  have 
got  enormous  riches  are  ruined,  but  those  who  spend  them  for 
the  good  of  the  people  are  happy.  Their  numbers  are  few.  The 
Prophet  was  once  asked  :  O  Prophet  of  God,  who  among  your 
followers  are  bad?  He  said  :  The  rich.  The  Prophet  said  :  Such

176

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III176

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

people  will  appear  after  you  who  will  eat  various  delicious 
dishes,  ride  on  different  good  conveyances,  marry  beautiful 
women,  put  on  valuable  dreses.  Their  bellies  will  not  be  satisfied' 
with  little  of  food  and  will  not  be  satisfied  even  with  sufficient 
food.  They  will  spend  their  energies  in  earning  and  they  will 
worship  deites  other  than  God  and  they  will  follow  their  low 
desires.  By  Muhammad,  son  of  Abdullah,  if  your  successors  or 
those  who  will  run  after  them  will  meet  them,  they  shall  not 
salute  them,  nor  treat  them  in  their  illness,  nor  attend  their 
funeral  prayer,  nor  honour  their  elders.  He  who  does  the  above 
will  help  the  destruction  of  Islam.

The  Prophet  said  :  Leave  the  world  to  the  worldly  addicted 
man.  He  who  takes  from  the  world  in  excess  of  what  is  necessary 
for  him,  takes  the  path  of  destruction  without  his  knowledge. 
The  Prophet  said:  The  son  of  Adam  says :  My  wealth,  my  wealth. 
What  connection  have  you  got  with  your  wealth?  You  have 
destroyed  what  you  have  eaten.  You  have  rendered  old  what  you 
have  put  on.  What  you  have  given  in  charity  has  gone  and 
became  permanent.  One  day  a  man  said  to  the  Prophet  :  O 
Prophet  of  God,  I  don't  love  wealth.  What  is  its  reason?  He  said 
Have  you  got  any  wealth.  He  said :  O  Prophet  of  God,  I  have  got. 
The  Prophet  said:  Send  your  wealth  in  advance,  as  the  heart  of  a 
believer  keeps  attached  with  his  wealth.  If  he  leaves  that  wealth 
in  this  world,  his  mind  will  wish  to  remain  with  it  in  this  world.The  Prophet  said  :  The  son  of  Adam  has  got  three  kinds  of 
friends-(l)  one  kind  of  friend  remain  with  him  till  his  death,  (2) 
another  kind  of  friend  go  with  him  upto  his  grave,  (3)  and  the 
third  kind  of  friend  remain  with  him  up  to  the  Resurrection  Day. 
The  friend  which  remains  with  him  up  to  his  death  is  his  wealth, 
and  the  friend  who  goes  with  him  upto  his  grave  is  his  relatives 
and  the  friend  which  will  remain  with  him  upto  the  resurrection 
day  is  his  good  works.  The  disciples  of  Jesus  Chirst  asked  him  : 
What  is  the  matter  that  you  can  walk  upon  water?  He  asked  : 
What  value  do*you  attach  to  gold  and  silver?  They  said  :  To  us 
they  are  most  valuable?  He  said  :  To  me  gold  and  silver  are  the 
same  as  earth.

Hazrat  Salman  Faresi  wrote  to  Hazrat  Abu  Darda'a  :  O  dear 
brother,  don't  accumulate  such  thing  from  the  world  for  which 
you  will  not  be  able  to  express  gratefulness,  as  I  have  heard  the 
prophet  say  :  The  worldly  man  who  spends  wealth  in  obedience

Vol-III

Love  of  wealth

177

to  God,  will  be  brought  on  the  Resurrection  Day  with  his  wealth. 
When  he  will  be  hanging  to  and  for  on  the  bridge,  his  wealth  will  tell 
him :  You  may  go  as  you  have  paid  God's  dues.  Then  the  worldly 
man  who  did  not  spend  wealth  according  to  the  injunction  of  God 
will  be  brought  and  his  wealth  will  be  placed  around  his  neck. 
IQfcen  he, will  be  hanging  on  the  bridge,  his  wealth  will  say  to  him : 
Woe  to  you.  You  did  not  pay  God's  dues.  You  will  remain  in  such 
condition.  His  wealth  will  then  lead  him  to  destruction.The  Prophet  said :  When  any  man  dies,  the  angels  say:  What 
wealth  has  he  sent  in  advance?  But  the  people  say:  What  wealth 
has  he  left  behind?  The  Prophet  said:  Don't  acquire  landed 
properties.  If  you  do  it,  you  will  love  the  world.

A  certain  man  treated  badly  with  Hazrat  Abu  Darda'a  who 
said:  O  God,  keep  th&  body  of  the  man  who  illtreats  me  sound, 
give  him  long  life  and  increase  his  wealth.  If  these  three  things 
are  united  in  a  person,  disaster  befalls  an  him.  Hazrat  hasan 
Basari  said:  By  God,  God  makes  him  loud  and  humiliatd  who 
loves  wealth.  He  said:  When  gold  and  silver  are  perpared,  the 
devil  lifted  them,  placed  them  on  his  forehead  and  kissed  them 
out  of  love  and  said:  He  who  loves  you  will  be  truly  my  slave. 
Thya-b-Ma'az  said:  Gold  and  silver  come  to  one  like  a  snake. 
Don't  go  to  catch  it  without  learning  beforehand  its  charms, 
because  when  it  touches  you,  its  poison  will  destroy  you.  He  was 
asked:  What  is  its  charms?  He  said:  Earning  it  in  a  lawful  manner 
and  spending  it  moderately  for  God.Mosallamah,  son  of  Abdullah  Malek,  went  to  the  Caliph 
Omar-b-  Abdul  Aziz  at  the  time  of  his  death  and  said  to  him:  O 
Commander  of  the  Faithful,  you  have  done  such  good  works  as 
nobody  did  before.  You  are  leaving  13  sons  and  daughters  but 
you  have  left  no  property  for  them.  Omar  said:  Bring  them  to  me. 
When  they  came  to  him,  he  said  to  Mosallamah:  You  have  said  to 
me  that  I  am  leaving  no  property  for  my  sons  and  daughters.  I 
have  not  prevented  them  to  take  what  is  their  dues  and  have  not 
given  them  what  is  due  to  others.  My  issues  belong  to  either  of 
the  two  classes.  (1)  If  they  are  obedient  to  God,  God  is  sufficient 
for  them.  God  gives  power  to  the  pious.  (2)  If  they  are 
disobedient  to  God,  I  don't  care  to  whatever  condition  they  fall.

Mohammad-b'Ka'ab  got  once  enormous  wealth,  people 
requested  him  to  leave  it  for  his  sons,  but  he  refused  and  said:  I

178

The  Book  of  Destructive  evils

Vol-III

will  hoard  it  for  myself  with  God  and  leave  God  for  my  sons. 
Ihya-b-Ma'az  said:  Two  conditions  appear  before  a  rich  man  at 
the  time  of  his  death.  The  predecessors  and  successors  will  find 
no  more  danger  than  these  two.  He  was  asked:  What  are  these 
two  calamities?  He  said:  (1)  all  his  wealth  are  separated  from 
him,  (2)  and  he  understands  that  he  shall  have  to  render  accounts 
for  all  his  wealth.BENEFITS  OF  WEALTH:  God  has  mentioned  wealth  in  the 
Quran  in  many  places  as  Khair  (good).  God  says:  If  anybody 
leaves  khair  (weath)-2:  180Q.  God  says:  This  disclosed  their 
secret  wealth  out  of  mercy  of  your  Lord,  he  says:  he  will  help  you 
by  your  wealth  and  children.  The  Prophet  said:  lawful  wealth  is 
good  for  the  pious  people.  He  said:  Poverty  was  about  to  become 
near  infidelity.  Wealth  is  good  from  one  point  and  bad  from 
another  point.  When  it  is  good,  it  is  praiseworthy  and  when  it  is 
bad,  it  is  condemned.  Wealth  is  not  wholly  bad  or  wholly  good, 
but  it  is  an  instrument  of  good  and  bad.  The  Prophet  was  once 
asked:  Who  is  the  most  honourable  and  wise?  He  replied:  he  who  1 
remembers  death  much  and  becomes  most  prepared  for  it.

THREE  MODES  OF  SPIRITUAL  FORTUNE

(1)  Gift  of  soul  is  knowledge  and  good  conduct.  (2)  Gift  of 
body  is  health  and  safety.  (3)  Gift  of  the  world  outside  the  body 
and  soul,  is  wealth,  air,  light  Of  all  the  above  three  gifts,  the  gifts 
of  soul  is  greatest,  the  gift  of  body  is  less  than  that  and  the  gift  of 
the  outer  world  is  bad.  Out  of  these  gifts,  the  worse  is  the  gift  of 
wealth  and  the  still  more  worse  is  the  gift  gold  and  silver  as  they 
are  slaves  and  they  have  got  not  value.  Gold  and  silver  have  got 
no  value  of  their  own.  They  are  utilized  for  gaining  other  gifts. 
Soul  is  the  most  invaluable  gift.  Its  object  is  to  attain  virtues  and 
good  conduct  and  knowledge  of  God.  Body  is  the  carrier  and 
slave  of  soul.  Body  perfects  the  soul  and  the  purity  of  soul  is 
possible  owing  to  knowledge  and  good  conduct.  He  who  knows 
this  mode  knows  the  function  of  wealth  which  is  necessary  forWEALTH  IS  GOOD  AND  BAD  ACCORDING  TO 
INTENTION:  As  is  the  intention,  so  is  the  condition  of  wealth.  If 
the  intention  is  good,  wealth  is  also  good.  If  it  is  bad,  wealth  is 
bad.  The  Prophet  said:  He  who  takes  wealth  in  excess  of  what  in 
necessary  for  him  draws  his  own  destruction,  but  he  does  not

Vol-III

Love  of  wealth

179

know  it'.  Wealth  supplies  materials  to  a  man  who  follows  his  evil 
desires.  For  that  reason,  the  prophets  used  to  seek  refuge  to  Cod 
from  excessive  wealth.  Our  Prophet  used  to  pray:  O  God,  supply 
the  provision  of  the  family  of  Muhammad  according  to  their 
requirements.  He  used  to  pray:  O  God,  keep  me  alive  as  a  poor 
man,  take  my  life  as  a  poor  man  and  resurrect  me  in  the  company 
of  the  poor.

The  Prophet  Abraham  prayed:  O  God,  save  me  and  my 
successors  from  idol  worship-14  :  35Q.  By  this  he  meant  the 
worship  of  gold  and  silver,  as  gold  and  silver  are  deities  of 
people.  The  status  of  prophethood  is  so  high  that  he  had  no  fear 
of  idol  worship  but  it  is  possible  here  of  the  worship  of  gold  and 
silver.  The  Prophet  said  :  The  owners  of  gold  are  ruined  and  the 
owners  of  silver  are  ruined.  So  it  appears  that  he  who  loves  gold 
and  silver,  worships